Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Disclosing and cooling-off: An analysis of insider trading rules✩
Jun Deng a, Huifeng Pan a, Hongjun Yan b, Liyan Yang c,∗
a China School of Banking and Finance, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, 100029, China
b Driehaus College of Business, DePaul University, Chicago, 60604, IL, USA
c Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5S 3E6, Ontario, Canada

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We analyze two insider-trading regulations recently introduced by the Securities and Exchange Commission:
mandatory disclosure and ‘‘cooling-off period’’. The former requires insiders disclose trading plans at adoption,
while the latter mandates a delay period before trading. These policies affect investors’ trading profits,
risk sharing, and hence their welfare. If the insider has sufficiently large hedging needs, in contrast to the
conventional wisdom from ‘‘sunshine trading’’, disclosure reduces the welfare of all investors. In our calibration,
a longer cooling-off period benefits speculators, and its implications for the insider and hedgers depend on
whether the disclosure policy is already in place.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/49799kh6kz/1

JEL classification:
G14
G18
D82

Keywords:
Insider trading
Rule 10b5-1
Sunshine trading
Disclosure
Cooling-off period

1. Introduction

Insider trading has long been at the center of debates among aca-
demics and regulators. Motivated by fairness and market integrity,
existing regulations in most countries prohibit trading on material
nonpublic information (MNPI). Recognizing insiders’ non-informational
trading needs, regulators also set up rules to accommodate those trad-
ing activities. In the U.S., for example, the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) Rule 10b5-1 creates an affirmative defense for a
corporate executive to charges of insider trading if the transactions are

executed according to a predetermined plan that is created before the
person becomes aware of the relevant MNPI.

Soon after the rule’s implementation in 2000, however, researchers
and regulators became concerned about its abuse by corporate insid-
ers (e.g., Jagolinzer, 2009; Larcker et al., 2021). Recent controversies
on the sales by the executives of Covid-19 vaccine developers shortly
after their announcements of breakthroughs, once again, brought the
concern into spotlights.1 As a response, researchers and regulators have

✩

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank our Editor (Toni Whited), an associate editor, and an anonymous referee for many insightful suggestions.
We thank Snehal Banerjee, Tobias Berg, Ing-Haw Cheng, Jérôme Dugast, Thomas Ernst, Sivan Frenkel, Itay Goldstein, Vahid Irani, Chao Jiang, Anastasios Kagkadis,
Xuelin Li, Xiaomeng Lu, Chang Ma, Liang Ma, Roberto Pinto, Francesco Sangiorgi, Zacharias Sautner, Kevin Colby Smith, Sergey Tsyplakov, Grigory Volkov, Brian
Waters, Yao Zeng, Yafei Zhang, Yi Zhou, and participants at the 2023 Chinese Finance Annual Meeting, the 2023 European Finance Association (EFA) Annual
Meeting, the 2023 Midwest Finance Association (MFA) Conference, and the 2024 American Finance Association (AFA) Annual Meeting, and seminar participants
at Alliance Manchester Business School & Lancaster University Management School, Darla Moore School of Business at University of South Carolina, Fanhai
International School of Finance at Fudan University, and Frankfurt School of Finance & Management for constructive comments that have significantly improved
the paper. Yang thanks the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and Bank of Canada for financial support. The research of Jun Deng is
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 72371073); and ‘‘the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities’’ in
UIBE (No. ZD6-01).

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

jundeng@uibe.edu.cn (J. Deng), panhf@uibe.edu.cn (H. Pan), hongjun.yan@depaul.edu (H. Yan), liyan.yang@rotman.utoronto.ca

(L. Yang).

1 See, e.g., Pfizer CEO Joins Host of Executives at Covid-19 Vaccine Makers in Big Stock Sale, Jared S. Hopkins and Gregory Zuckerman, Wall Street Journal,

November 11, 2020.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103913
Received 9 April 2023; Received in revised form 22 July 2024; Accepted 23 July 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)103913Availableonline1August20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).J. Deng et al.

been exploring ways to improve Rule 10b5-1. In February 2022, for
example, the SEC has released a report to discuss various proposals
to regulate Rule 10b5-1 plans, some of which have been adopted
recently.2

Two major rule changes stand out. The first is about the disclosure
of 10b5-1 plans. Before the rule changes, an insider did not need to
pre-disclose his trading plans. Some researchers expressed the concern
that this opacity invites opportunistic insider trading.3 The new rule
requires insiders publicly disclose their trading plans upon adoption,
modification, and cancellation.

The other rule change is a mandatory ‘‘cooling-off period’’, the
minimum waiting period from the initiation of a 10b5-1 plan to the
first trade under that plan. Before the rule changes, there was no SEC
requirement for a cooling-off period. In fact, Larcker et al. (2021) find
that one percent of 10b5-1 plans in their sample begin trading on plan
adoption days. Moreover, their evidence suggests that a short cooling-
off period is a ‘‘red flag’’ associated with opportunistic behavior: trades
with short cooling-off periods earn excess returns while those with long
ones do not. As a response, the new regulation imposes a mandatory
cooling-off period ranging from 30 to 120 days, depending on the
insider’s positions.4

In this paper, we analyze these two new rule changes in a Kyle-
type trading model (Kyle, 1985). A large insider has private information
about a stock and also has a liquidity need. He sets up his 10b5-1 plan
to trade the stock at a future time. Outside investors are price takers
and consist of two types: speculators and hedgers. The former have their
own private information while the latter trade the stock for hedging
purposes. All investors have a constant-absolute-risk-aversion (CARA)
utility function with the same risk aversion coefficient, and submit
market orders. A risk-neutral market maker sets the stock price to its
expected fundamental value.

Mandatory disclosure. The disclosure policy essentially provides
the market maker and outside investors additional information: the
insider’s trading plan. We characterize the equilibria under both the
disclosure and non-disclosure regimes, and compare the two equilibria
to analyze the implications of mandatory disclosure. We first show
analytically that in a limiting case in which the insider’s hedging need
is sufficiently large, the disclosure policy makes all investors worse
off. At the first sight, this result appears contradictory to the standard
intuition from ‘‘sunshine trading’’. Admati and Pfleiderer (1991) show
that if an investor’s trade is mostly informationless, the investor would
receive favorable execution prices from disclosing his trade in advance
(i.e., sunshine trading). Hence, one might expect the insider, who has
a large non-information trading need in this case, to benefit from the
disclosure policy. However, our conclusion is exactly the opposite.

To understand our result, we note that, in general, policies affect in-
vestor welfare both through a profit channel and a risk-sharing channel.
The sunshine trading intuition concerns an investor’s trading profits
and it continues to hold in our setting. Indeed, we show that when
an investor’s hedging need is sufficiently large, disclosure increases
the insider’s expected trading profit. However, the risk-sharing channel

2 Rule 10b5-1 and Insider Trading, https://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/
2022/33-11013.pdf. See the press release of the adoption at https://www.sec.
gov/news/press-release/2022-222.

3 For example, in an interview at Knowledge at Wharton, Daniel Taylor states
that‘‘[b]ad behavior flourishes when there is no sunlight. If you are adopting
one of these plans, just disclose everything. Company insiders are using Rule
105b-1 as a sword to provide legal cover from some of the sketchier trades that
they are conducting’’. ‘‘How Insider Trading Hides Behind a Barely Noticed
Rule’’, Knowledge at Wharton, April 20, 2021.

4 See ‘‘Insider Trading Arrangements and Related Disclosures’’, [SEC Re-
lease Nos. 33-11138; 34-96492; File No. S7-20-21] (https://www.sec.gov/
rules/final/2022/33-11138.pdf) and ‘‘Fact Sheet: Rule 10b5-1: Insider Trading
Arrangements and Related Disclosure’’ (https://www.sec.gov/files/33-11138-
fact-sheet.pdf).

works against the insider in this case. Specifically, disclosure makes
the stock price more informative about the fundamental value. This re-
duces the insider’s risk-sharing opportunities in the market (Hirshleifer,
1971). When the insider has a strong hedging need, the Hirshleifer
effect dominates, and disclosure makes the insider worse off.5 Similarly,
the reduction in risk-sharing opportunities harms hedgers (i.e., out-
side investors whose primary trading goal is risk sharing). Moreover,
disclosure also harms speculators (i.e., informed outside investors)
because their aggregate trades can no longer be mixed with the insider’s
large hedging trades and hence have a higher price impact under the
disclosure regime. Taken together, when the insider’s hedging need is
sufficiently large, disclosure makes all investors worse off.

To calibrate our model, we estimate the trading activities of cor-
porate insiders and institutional investors and use them as proxies
for the trading activities of the insider and speculators in our model,
respectively. We then obtain the estimates of our model parameters to
match those trading activities. Our estimates suggests that the insider’s
hedging need is modest.

Our calibration shows that the welfare implications of mandatory
disclosure for the hedger are the ‘‘mirror image’’ of those for the insider,
i.e., one being better off tends to imply the other being worse off.
The reason is that, since the insider’s hedging need is modest, welfare
implications are dominated by the effect from trading profits. When the
insider is better off, it is at the expense of the hedger, and vice versa.
Hence, the welfare implications for the insider and hedger tend to be
the opposite of each other.

More specifically, when the insider’s information advantage is large,
the insider is worse off under the disclosure regime because it neutral-
izes the insider’s information advantage. When the insider’s informa-
tion advantage is small, however, disclosure makes the insider better
off because, as suggested by the sunshine trading intuition, his trade
has a smaller price impact. This implication is different from the result
in the limiting case because the insider’s hedging need is modest here
and hence the risk-sharing effect does not play a dominant role.

Cooling-off period. The mandatory cooling-off period policy is
predicated on the intuition that by imposing a delay, the policy tends
to reduce the insider’s information advantage. Suppose, for example,
the insider received some private information about his firm. If he
can trade right away, he would have a large advantage over outside
investors. If, however, there is a mandatory waiting period, then, by
the time the insider is allowed to trade, his information advantage is
likely diminished.

This can happen for two reasons. First, the firm’s fundamentals
might have changed during the cooling-off period, and so the insider’s
information becomes obsolete when he trades. Hence, in the baseline
model, we use the amount of the insider’s private information as a
proxy that is inversely related to the length of a cooling-off period.
Second, the insider’s information might have been leaked during the
cooling-off period. Hence, our second formulation is based on the idea
of information leakage: during the cooling-off period, outside investors
obtain a signal about the insider’s information. The longer the cooling-
off period, the higher the signal precision. In our calibrations, the
welfare patterns are qualitatively the same across the two formulations
of a cooling-off period.

Our analysis shows that the welfare implication of the cooling-off
policy depends on whether the disclosure policy is already in place.

5 In general, the insider’s risk-sharing channel works through two effects.
The first is the Hirshleifer effect, which is related to price informativeness
and determines the risk-sharing opportunities available in the market. The
second effect, dubbed ‘‘trading aggressiveness effect’’, is related to the liquidity
faced by the insider, because the insider as a large trader behaves strategically
and hence, market liquidity affects how aggressively he utilizes the existing
risk-sharing opportunities. When the insider’s hedging need is high, the Hir-
shleifer effect dominates. When the insider’s hedging need is low, the trading
aggressiveness effect may dominate.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039132J. Deng et al.

Under the non-disclosure regime, the insider can utilize his information
advantage for trading profits and a longer cooling-off period reduces
this advantage. Under the disclosure regime, however, the insider
cannot exploit his private information for trading profits, leading to
different welfare implications of the cooling-off period.

Similar to mandatory disclosure, the cooling-off period also affects
investor welfare through the two channels: expected trading profit and
risk sharing. In our calibrations, since the insider’s hedging need is
modest, the profit channel tends to dominate. Under the non-disclosure
regime, a longer cooling-off period reduces the insider’s information ad-
vantage, which decreases the insider’s profits and welfare, but increases
the profits and welfare of outside investors (i.e., speculators and the
hedger).

Under the disclosure regime, the insider’s information is partly
revealed through disclosure. A longer cooling-off period means less
information is revealed, and hence speculators are in a better position
to take advantage of hedgers. Therefore, a longer cooling-off period
increases speculators’ expected trading profits and welfare, while the
opposite is true for the hedger. Interestingly, the insider benefits from
a longer cooling-off period under the disclosure regime. The reason
is as follows. The insider’s profit channel is ‘‘shut down’’ in this case
because his ex ante expected trading profit is always zero. Intuitively,
the insider’s trade is public information, and the pricing-rule set by the
risk-neutral market maker implies that the expected net return of any
trading strategy based on public information is zero. Hence, the effect
of the cooling-off period on the insider’s welfare operates through the
risk-sharing channel. A longer cooling-off period reduces the insider’s
information advantage, and hence his order becomes less toxic and has
a lower price impact. In response, the insider trades more aggressively
to better utilize hedging opportunities, which makes the insider better
off from a longer cooling-off period under the disclosure regime.

Related literature. Our analysis of the pre-announcement of insider
trading, one of the newly introduced SEC rules, is related to the exten-
sive theoretical literature on insider trading.6 Most closely, our paper
is related to the studies on disclosure of tradings by insiders. Huddart
et al. (2001), Buffa (2014) and Mele and Sangiorgi (2021) examine
post-trade disclosure, and Medran and Vives (2004) explore disclosure
of the insider’s private information. The new 10b5-1 plan disclosure
rule is about pre-trade disclosure, which is related to the notion of ‘‘pre-
announcement of insiders’ trades’’ and ‘‘advance disclosure of insider
trading’’ in Huddart et al. (2010) and Lenkey (2014). Our paper differs
from and complements these two studies in important ways. First,
our results on market quality and welfare differ from those of Lenkey
(2014), where all outside investors are uninformed. In our analysis, we
differentiate between informed speculators and uninformed hedgers.
The model in Huddart et al. (2010) features exogenous noise trading
but no speculators and hedgers. Thus, it is not suited for a com-
plete welfare analysis, and stays away from the questions we examine
(e.g., welfare implications for different types of outside investors; the
interactions between insider information and outside investors’ infor-
mation in information aggregation). Second, neither study examines the
cooling-off policy, which is a key rule change by the SEC. To the best
of our knowledge, our paper is the first analysis of this rule.

Our study also sheds light on the analysis of sunshine trading, an
intriguing idea that became prominent after the stock market crash in
October 1987. This idea has drawn interest from practitioners, regula-
tors, and researchers (e.g., Hawke Jr et al., 1988; Admati and Pflei-
derer, 1991). The insight identified by the existing sunshine-trading

6 The debates on the pros and cons of insider trading go back at least
to Manne (1966). A partial list of earlier studies includes Dye (1984), Glosten
(1989), Manove (1989), Ausubel (1990), Fishman and Hagerty (1992), Leland
(1992), and DeMarzo et al. (1998). The literature is actively growing and
some recent studies include Lenkey (2014, 2017, 2019, 2021), Kacperczyk and
Pagnotta (2020), Mele and Sangiorgi (2021), and Carré et al. (2022).

literature concerns trading profits and works through market liquidity.
That is, if an investor creditably declares that his trading is uninformed,
then he can avoid adverse selection and get a better trading price,
which lowers his trading losses. Our analysis complements the exist-
ing literature by highlighting two novel insights from a risk-sharing
perspective. First, declaration of uninformed trade necessarily reveals
informed trades (from other investors) in the market, which improves
price informativeness and reduces the ex-ante risk-sharing function of
the market via the Hirshleifer effect. Second, for a large trader such
as a corporate insider, market liquidity not only affects his trading
profits, as highlighted by the existing sunshine-trading literature, but
also affects the effectiveness of his risk-sharing through its effect on
the aggressiveness of his hedging trade. This second insight is one key
driver in determining how a cooling-off period affects the insider’s
welfare in our analysis.

2. Model

We consider an economy with three dates, 𝑡 = 0, 1, 2. There is a risky
asset, a stock, which is a claim to a normally distributed cash flow ̃𝑓
at 𝑡 = 2, where ̃𝑓 ∼ 𝑁( ̄𝑓 , 𝛴𝑓 ) with constants ̄𝑓 ∈ R and 𝛴𝑓 > 0. There
is also a risk-free asset with a net interest rate of 0.

At 𝑡 = 0, a large insider sets up his 10b5-1 plan to trade the stock
at 𝑡 = 1. The trading plan is a market order of 𝐷𝐼 shares of the stock.
The insider has two trading motives. The first is rebalancing (hedging),
̃𝑍 units the
which is modeled as the insider having an endowment of
stock, where ̃𝑍 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝛴𝑧) (with 𝛴𝑧 > 0) and ̃𝑍 and ̃𝑓 are mutually
independent. The insider privately observes the realization of ̃𝑍 before
setting up his trading plan. This formulation is meant to capture the
fact that the insider has a large position in the stock and may need to
adjust the holding for liquidity needs or diversification purposes, which
are not observable to outside investors.

The second motive is based on his private information about the
stock’s fundamental value ̃𝑓 . Specifically, we assume that ̃𝑓 consists of
two mutually independent components ̃𝑓𝑎 and ̃𝑓𝑏:

̃𝑓 = ̄𝑓 + 𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎 +

√

1 − 𝜌2 ̃𝑓𝑏,

(1)

where 𝜌 ∈ [0, 1) is a constant,
The insider observes the value of
𝜌 captures the amount of the insider’s private information.

̃𝑓𝑎 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝛴𝑓 ), and ̃𝑓𝑏 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝛴𝑓 ).
̃𝑓𝑎 at 𝑡 = 0. Hence, the parameter

The insider derives utility from his date-2 wealth according to a

CARA utility function:

𝑈 (𝑊𝐼 ) = −𝑒−𝛾𝑊𝐼 ,

(2)

where 𝛾 is his absolute risk aversion, and 𝑊𝐼 is his total wealth at time
𝑡 = 2:

𝑊𝐼 = 𝐷𝐼 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝) + ̃𝑍 ̃𝑓 ,

(3)

where ̃𝑝 is the stock price that will be determined when the insider’s
trade is executed at 𝑡 = 1. Thus, the insider’s date-0 decision problem
is:

[

E

𝑈 (𝑊𝐼 )|
|
|

]

.

̃𝑓𝑎, ̃𝑍

max
𝐷𝐼

(4)

Outside investors are all price takers and consist of two types: specu-
lators and hedgers. They all have the same preference as the insider.
To examine information aggregation from speculators, we consider
a continuum of differentially informed speculators, indexed on the
interval [0, 1]. At 𝑡 = 1, each speculator 𝑗 possesses a private signal
of the asset value, ̃𝑠𝑗 = ̃𝑓 + ̃𝛿𝑗 , where ̃𝛿𝑗 is normally distributed ( ̃𝛿𝑗 ∼
̃𝑓 , and ̃𝛿𝑙 for 𝑙 ≠ 𝑗.
𝑁(0, 𝛴𝛿) with 𝛴𝛿 > 0) and is independent of
At 𝑡 = 1, speculator 𝑗 trades 𝐷𝑆,𝑗 shares of the stock to maximize the
expected utility over his final wealth:

̃𝑍,

E

max
𝐷𝑆,𝑗

[
𝑈 (𝑊𝑆,𝑗 )|
𝐹𝑆,𝑗
|
|

]

,

(5)

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039133J. Deng et al.

Fig. 1. Timeline.

where 𝑊𝑆,𝑗 is speculator 𝑗’s wealth at time 𝑡 = 2:

𝑊𝑆,𝑗 = 𝐷𝑆,𝑗 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝),

Under the new regime, however, the insider is required to publicly
disclose his trading plan 𝐷𝐼 at 𝑡 = 0. Hence, other market participants’
information sets become:

(6)

and 𝐹𝑆,𝑗 is speculator 𝑗’s information set and will be described in detail
in Section 2.1.

We assume that hedgers are identical and thus we consider a
representative hedger. The representative hedger has an endowment
of ̃𝑢 shares of the stock, where ̃𝑢 is normally distributed ( ̃𝑢 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝛴𝑢)
̃𝑓 , and ̃𝛿𝑗 for all 𝑗. At 𝑡 = 1, the
with 𝛴𝑢 > 0) and is independent of
hedger privately observes the value of ̃𝑢 and purchases 𝐷𝐻 shares of
the stock to maximize his expected utility over his terminal wealth:

̃𝑍,

[

E

max
𝐷𝐻

𝑈 (𝑊𝐻 )|
𝐹𝐻
|
|

]

,

where 𝑊𝐻 is the hedger’s wealth at time 𝑡 = 2:
𝑊𝐻 = 𝐷𝐻 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝) + ̃𝑢 ̃𝑓 ,

(7)

(8)

and 𝐹𝐻 is the hedger’s information set and will be described in detail
in Section 2.1.

As usual, the market marker is risk neutral and at 𝑡 = 1, he sets the

market price to his expected fundamental value:

̃𝑝 = E

]

,

𝐹𝑀

[
̃𝑓 |
|
|

(9)

where 𝐹𝑀 is the market maker’s information set and will be described
in the next subsection. The following figure summarizes the timeline of
events in our model (see Fig. 1).

2.1. Disclosure of the insider’s trading plan

As noted in Larcker et al. (2021), until the recent SEC rule change,
insiders are not required to disclose their 10b5-1 plans. Since April 1,
2023, the newly adopted SEC rule requires insiders to publicly disclose
any initiation, modification, and cancellation of their 10b5-1 plans.7 In
our setup, this policy change alters the information sets of speculators,
the hedger, and the market maker.

Specifically, the disclosure regulation affects the information sets
for forming expectations in (5), (7), and (9). Under the non-disclosure
regime, the insider’s planned trade 𝐷𝐼 is not publicly disclosed and
thus, 𝐷𝐼 is not in the information sets of other market participants:

𝐹𝑆,𝑗 = { ̃𝑠𝑗 }, 𝐹𝐻 = { ̃𝑢},

and 𝐹𝑀 = { ̃𝜔},

where ̃𝜔 is the total order flow

1

̃𝜔 = 𝐷𝐻 + ∫
0

𝐷𝑆,𝑗 𝑑𝑗 + 𝐷𝐼 .

(10)

(11)

7 See, for example, the press release of the SEC proposal in 2021: SEC
Proposes Amendments Regarding Rule 10b5-1 Insider Trading Plans and Related
Disclosures, https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2021-256, and the press
release after the proposal was adopted in 2022 https://www.sec.gov/news/
press-release/2022-222.

𝐹𝑆,𝑗 = { ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷𝐼 }, 𝐹𝐻 = { ̃𝑢, 𝐷𝐼 },

and 𝐹𝑀 = { ̃𝜔, 𝐷𝐼 }.

(12)

2.2. Cooling-off period

Until the recent policy change, there has been no SEC requirement
for a cooling-off period, the period between the initiation of a 10b5-1
plan and the execution of the first trade. Larcker et al. (2021) find that
one percent of the 10b5-1 plans begin trading on the plan adoption
days. Moreover, their evidence suggests that a short cooling-off period
is a ‘‘red flag’’ associated with opportunistic use of 10b5-1 plans: trades
with short cooling-off periods have excess future returns while those
with long ones do not. As a response, the recent regulatory change by
the SEC makes mandatory a cooling-off period of 30 to 120 days.

Given the nature of a corporate insider’s job, it is almost un-
avoidable that, at any given point in time, he has more information
about some aspects of the firm’s fundamental value than most outside
investors. The rule of a mandatory cooling-off period aims to reduce the
insider’s information advantage. In our model, the cooling-off period
corresponds to the period from 𝑡 = 0 (plan adoption time) to 𝑡 = 1
(execution time) and so the way to capture the effect of a cooling-
off period in our setting is to model how the insider’s information
advantage changes between 𝑡 = 0 and 𝑡 = 1. We consider two
approaches in this paper. In the first, the insider’s private information
becomes partially obsolete by the time of execution. In the second, the
insider’s information partially leaks out before the execution time.

Information obsolescence. There are various reasons why a
cooling-off period reduces the insider’s relative information advantage.
One is simply that the firm’s fundamental value changes over time and
so the insider’s private information will naturally become obsolete after
a cooling-off period. This perspective can be captured by the parameter
𝜌 in our model, which directly controls the amount of the insider’s
private information. Intuitively, the longer the cooling-off period is,
the smaller the parameter 𝜌 is. In Appendix A, we provide a stylized
dynamic setting to illustrate how the parameter 𝜌 can serve as a proxy
for the length of the cooling-off period. In that setting, the firm value
evolves according to an AR(1) process, as in Admati and Pfleiderer
(1988). The insider has private information about the current firm
value. If he has to wait some time before trading, his information
becomes less relevant at the trading time since the firm’s value would
have changed by then. This formulation is consistent with the evidence
that insiders tend to have private information about shorter-term news
events as opposed to long-term firm-level measures such as annual
employment or inventory changes (Cohen et al., 2012).

Information leakage. An alternative formulation is based on the
idea that the insider’s private information would leak out during the
cooling-off period. Hence, by the time the insider’ trade is executed,
outside investors may have partially learned about the insider’s in-
formation, which reduces the insider’s information advantage. In Sec-
tion 5, we present a formulation of a cooling-off period from this

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039134J. Deng et al.

information-leakage perspective. In that setting, the amount of insider
information is fixed and outside investors can observe a garbled signal
about the insider’s information. A longer cooling-off period offers more
chances for information leakage. Hence, the precision of the signal can
be viewed as a proxy for the cooling-off period length. The longer the
cooling-off period is, the more precise the signal is.

2.3. Discussions

We make five remarks about our model setup. First, the insider’s
trading plan utilizes his private information ̃𝑓𝑎. To be qualified for an
affirmative defense against litigation of illegal insider trading, a 10b5-1
plan must be adopted at a time when the insider is not aware of MNPI.
However, it is notoriously difficult for regulators to establish in a court
whether a trading plan is based on MNPI. It is almost inevitable that
some of the insider trading is based on MNPI. Indeed, it has been widely
noted that trades under 10b5-1 plans are informed on average (see,
e.g., Jagolinzer, 2009). This feature is captured by the assumption that
the insider’s trading plan is based on his private information ̃𝑓𝑎.

Second, in practice, Rule 10b5-1 potentially grants an insider a
selective termination option, and our analysis abstracts away this fea-
ture. Specifically, Rule 10b5-1 does not obligate an insider to execute
his planned trade and thus, the insider can first establish a plan and
then decides whether to implement it based on the arrival of new
information in the future. In our model, there is only one round of
trading and the insider does not observe new information between
the plan adoption time (𝑡 = 0) and the trading time (𝑡 = 1). So,
the termination option is irrelevant in our model. In a more general
setup with new insider information before the execution time, this
termination-option would play a role. Note, however, that terminating
a planned transaction is costly, because it could affect the defense that
the plan has been ‘‘entered into in good faith and not as part of a plan
or scheme to evade insider trading laws and regulations’’.8

Third, our two formulations of the cooling-off period in Section 2.2
focus on the fact that a longer cooling-off period reduces the insider’s
information advantage. We note that a cooling-off period can also
have an effect on the insider’s hedging need because it makes the
insider’s holding temporarily non-tradable. As suggested by the analysis
in Longstaff (2009), this restriction can potentially impose a substantial
welfare cost. Analyzing this cost and the insider’s potential responses
(e.g., using its holdings as collateral to borrow) is an important research
topic and we leave it for future research.

Fourth, we implicitly assume that the insider does not trade outside
10b5-1 plans. One possible reason is that the insider finds that the
potential litigation is too costly and always prefers to trade under
10b5-1 plans. Alternatively, the firm may have reputation concerns and
requires all senior managers to trade under 10b5-1 plans. An interesting
question is whether the insider or the firm would adjust behaviors after
the policy changes are implemented. For example, if the insider decides
that the new policies make trading under 10b5-1 plans too costly, he
may forgo the benefit of the affirmative defense and trade outside the
plans. We leave this extension for future research.

Finally, there is only one round of trading in our model. This
assumption greatly simplifies our analysis and makes the key intuition
transparent. However, this assumption also rules out the effects of
dynamic considerations by outside investors. For example, one con-
cern about the disclosure of the insider’s trading plan is that outside
investors may ‘‘front run’’ to exploit the insider’s trading. We have an-
alyzed an extension of our baseline model by introducing an additional
round of trading for outside investors at 𝑡 = 0, which gives speculators
an opportunity to front run the insider’s trade at 𝑡 = 1. We show

8 See, Larcker et al. (2021) for more discussion on this cancellable fea-
ture. Lenkey (2019) develops a model to investigate this termination-option
of Rule 10b5-1 trading plan.

that this additional feature of multiple trading rounds does capture the
intuition on front running but makes the analysis substantially more
tedious. Moreover, the welfare implications in this extended model
remain similar to those in the baseline model.

3. Equilibrium and measurement

In this section, we characterize the equilibria and conduct some
analytical analysis. First, we construct the equilibria with and without
disclosure in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, respectively. We then discuss the
measures for policy assessment in Section 3.3. Finally, we present some
analytical results in Section 3.4 for a limiting case in which the insider’s
hedging need is sufficiently large.

3.1. Equilibrium under the non-disclosure regime

Under the non-disclosure regime, the information sets of specula-
tors, the hedger, and the market maker are summarized in Eq. (10). We
conjecture and verify the following linear demand and price functions:

̃𝑍,

̃𝑓𝑎 + 𝛼𝑍
𝐷𝐼 = 𝛼𝑓
𝐷𝑆,𝑗 = 𝛽𝑆 ( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ),
𝐷𝐻 = 𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢,

̃𝑝 = ̄𝑓 + 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔.

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

That is, the equilibrium is determined by five parameters {𝛼𝑓 , 𝛼𝑍 , 𝛽𝑆 ,
𝜙𝐻 , 𝜆𝜔}, which are given in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium Characterization: Non-Disclosure Regime). In
the non-disclosure economy, the coefficients {𝜆𝜔, 𝛼𝑓 , 𝛼𝑍 , 𝛽𝑆 , 𝜙𝐻 } of the
linear equilibrium in Eqs. (13)–(16) are characterized as follows:

𝜆𝜔 = 𝛾(1 − 𝑛)𝑀,
𝛼𝑓 = 𝜆−1
𝜔 (𝑛 − 𝑚)𝜌,
𝛼𝑍 = −𝛼𝑓 𝛾𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)𝜌−1,
𝛽𝑆 = 𝛾 −1𝑀 −1,

𝑚𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓
𝑁 − 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔 − 𝑚𝜌2𝛴𝑓 − 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓

,

𝜙𝐻 =

where

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

𝑀 ≡ 𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝑚𝜌2 − 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)) + 𝛴𝛿,
𝑁 ≡ 𝛴𝑓

)
(𝑚(1 − 𝑚)𝜌2 + 𝑛(1 − 𝑛)(1 − 𝜌2)

− 𝛾 2(1 − 𝜌2)2𝛴2

𝑓 𝛴𝑧(𝑛 − 𝑚)2.

The two constants 𝑚 ∈ (0, 1) and 𝑛 ∈ (0, 1) are determined by the following
equations:

[𝑁 + 2(1 − 𝑛)𝑀 + 𝑛2(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓
(𝑛 − 𝑚)
(1 − 𝑛)2𝛾 2𝑀 2𝛴𝑢(𝑚𝜌2 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2))2𝛴2
𝑓

]

= 𝑛(1 − 𝑛)𝑀,

= 𝑁 (𝑁 − (1 − 𝑛)𝑀 − 𝑚𝜌2𝛴𝑓 − 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓

)2

.

(22)

(23)

The above proposition characterizes all five parameters for the
equilibrium. Its proof, reported in Appendix B, shows that 𝛼𝑓 > 0 and
𝛼𝑍 < 0. That is, the insider’s demand for the stock is higher if his private
information is more positive and has less endowment to hedge. The
signs of other parameters are also intuitive: 𝛽𝑆 > 0, i.e., speculators
increase their demand if their signals are higher; 𝜙𝐻 < 0, i.e., the
hedger demands less of the stock if he already has more of the stock in
his endowments; and 𝜆𝜔 > 0, i.e., when the aggregate order is larger, it
implies a higher fundamental value for the stock and hence the market
maker raises the price.

The proposition shows that the equilibrium is fully determined by
two endogenous constants, 𝑚 and 𝑛, which are the solutions to the two
polynomials (22) and (23). With 𝑚 and 𝑛, we can fully pin down the
equilibrium parameters {𝛼𝑓 , 𝛼𝑍 , 𝛽𝑆 , 𝜙𝐻 , 𝜆𝜔}. Hence, the existence and

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039135J. Deng et al.

uniqueness of the equilibrium are determined by the properties of the
solutions to Eqs. (22) and (23). The following corollary examines this
issue for two special cases.

Corollary 1.

In the non-disclosure economy:

(1) If 𝛴𝑧 or 𝛴𝑢 is sufficiently large, there exists a unique linear equilib-

rium.

(2) If 𝛾 is sufficiently small, there is no linear equilibrium.

Intuitively, 𝛴𝑧 and 𝛴𝑢 represent the hedging needs of the insider
and the hedger, respectively. Due to hedging needs, they are willing to
trade in the stock market, even if they expect informed counterparties
and trading losses on average. If either is large enough, the hedging
needs are strong enough to sustain a linear equilibrium. By the same
logic, if the risk aversion 𝛾 is sufficiently small, there are not enough
risk-sharing motives to sustain a linear equilibrium.

3.2. Equilibrium under the disclosure regime

Under the disclosure regime, the information sets of speculators,
the hedger, and the market maker are given by (12). We conjecture
and verify the following linear demand and price functions in the
equilibrium under the disclosure regime:

𝐷∗

̃𝑍,

𝐷∗

𝐼 = 𝛼∗
𝑓
𝑆,𝑗 = 𝛽∗
𝐻 = 𝜙∗
𝐷∗
̃𝑝∗ = ̄𝑓 + 𝜆∗
𝑂

̃𝑓𝑎 + 𝛼∗
𝑍
𝑆 ( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝛽∗
𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐻 ̃𝑢 + 𝜙∗
𝐼 ,
(
𝑆 ( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝜙∗
𝛽∗

𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 ,

)
𝐻 ̃𝑢

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

+ 𝜆∗

𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 .

𝐼 , 𝜆∗

𝑂, 𝜆∗

𝐻 , 𝜙∗

That is, the equilibrium is determined by eight parameters {𝛼∗
𝐼 , 𝜙∗

𝑓 , 𝛼∗
𝑍 ,
𝑆 , 𝛽∗
𝛽∗
𝐼 }. We use superscript ‘‘∗’’ to denote these param-
eters for the equilibrium with disclosure to distinguish from those for
the equilibrium without disclosure. Relative to the equilibrium without
disclosure, which is determined by five parameters, there are three
additional parameters for the equilibrium with disclosure, because
speculators’ and the hedger’s demand functions and the price function
depend on the insider’s trade size 𝐷∗
𝐼 .
Since the market maker can observe the order from the insider and
the total order from outside investors separately, he sets the stock price
according to both. To see this separation, we can rewrite Eq. (27) as
follows:

(

̃𝑝∗ = ̄𝑓 + 𝜆∗
𝑂

𝐷∗

𝐻 + ∫

)

𝐷∗

𝑆,𝑗 𝑑𝑗

+

1

0

(

𝐼 − 𝜆∗
𝜆∗

𝑂(𝛽∗

)
𝐼 + 𝜙∗
𝐼 )

𝐷∗
𝐼 .

𝑂(𝛽∗

𝐼 − 𝜆∗

That is, 𝜆∗
𝑂 is the stock price sensitivity to the total order flows from the
outside investors and 𝜆∗
𝐼 + 𝜙∗
𝐼 ) is the sensitivity to the insider’s
order. We prefer to write the price function in the form of Eq. (27)
because 𝜆∗
𝐼 captures the overall price impact of the insider’s order. The
direct effect is that the market maker adjusts the stock price to the
𝐼 . Indirectly, the insider’s order 𝐷∗
insider’s order 𝐷∗
𝐼 affects the order
flows 𝐷∗
𝑆,𝑗 and 𝐷∗
𝐻 from speculators and the hedger, which then affect
the price as highlighted in (27).

The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium under the

disclosure regime.

𝑓 , 𝛼∗

𝑆 , 𝛽∗

𝐼 , 𝜙∗

𝑍 , 𝛽∗

𝐻 , 𝜙∗

Proposition 2 (Equilibrium Characterization: Disclosure Regime).
disclosure economy, the coefficients {𝛼∗
𝑂, 𝜆∗
linear equilibrium in Eqs. (24)–(27) are characterized as follows:
𝑓 = 𝛾 −1(𝑘1 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 𝑘𝑛∗)−1 (𝑘 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓
𝛼∗
𝑓 𝛾𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)𝜌−1,
𝑍 = −𝛼∗
𝛼∗
𝑂)−1,
𝑆 = (1 − 𝑛∗)(𝜆∗
𝛽∗
𝐼 = −𝛽∗
𝛽∗

𝑆 𝛾(𝑘1 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 𝑘𝑛∗)(1 + 𝜌−2𝛴−1

𝑓 𝑘)−1 (𝑘 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓

𝐼 , 𝜆∗

) 𝜌,

)−1

,

In the
𝐼 } of the

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

𝐻 = −(𝑛∗)−1 [
𝜙∗
𝜙∗
𝐼 = 0,

1 − 𝑛∗

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢

𝑂 = (𝑛∗)2
𝜆∗

[
𝛴1∕2
𝑢

(𝑛∗

0)−1𝑘

− 1
2
1

𝐼 = −𝑛∗𝛽∗
𝜆∗

𝐼 (𝛽∗

𝑆 )−1,

where

𝛾 −1𝑘−1∕2
1

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

]

1
2

,

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

1

2 − 𝛾 −1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)𝑘−1
1

]−1

,

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

𝑘1 = 𝑘𝛴𝑓 +𝜌2(1−𝜌2)𝛴2
𝑓 ,
0)2)−1, where 𝑛∗

𝑘2 = 𝑘1+(𝑘+𝜌2𝛴𝑓 )𝛴𝛿.

0 is the positive root

𝑘 = 𝛾 2(1−𝜌2)2𝛴2

𝑓 𝛴𝑧,
The constant 𝑛∗ is given by 𝑛∗ = (1 + (𝑛∗
of the following quartic equation for 𝑥:
1 (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)− 1
1 (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

1
2
𝑢 𝑘
1
2
𝑢 𝑘

2 𝑥 + 𝑘1𝑘−1

2 𝛴𝛿𝑘−1

𝑥4 − 𝛾𝛴

− 𝛾𝛴

1
2

1
2

1

2 𝑥3 + (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)𝛴𝛿𝑘−1

2 𝑥2

2 = 0.

(36)

𝑓 , 𝛼∗

The above proposition characterizes all eight parameters for the
equilibrium. For those four that have clear counterparts in the equi-
librium without disclosure, {𝛼∗
𝑍 , 𝛽∗
𝐻 }, their signs are the same
as those of their counterparts. The other four parameters reveal new
intuitions for the economy with disclosure. Appendix B shows that both
𝐼 and 𝜆∗
𝜆∗
𝑂 are positive. That is, the stock price is increasing in both the
insider’s order 𝐷∗
𝐼 and the total order from outside investors, which
is natural since a larger order increases the market maker’s expected
fundamental value.

𝑆 , 𝜙∗

𝐼 < 0 and 𝜙∗

Interestingly, Eqs. (31) and (33) show that 𝛽∗

𝐼 = 0. That
is, a speculator’s demand is decreasing in the insider’s order 𝐷∗
𝐼 and
the hedger’s demand is independent of it. The intuition is as follows.
Suppose the insider discloses a higher demand 𝐷∗
𝐼 . On the one hand,
this increases the hedger’s expected fundamental value and hence his
demand (expectation effect). On the other hand, this also increases the
market maker’s expectation and hence, as shown in Eq. (27), the stock
price (price effect). Note that, relative to the market maker, the hedger
does not have additional information on the fundamental value. Hence,
those two effects cancel out each other, thereby making the hedger’s
demand independent of 𝐷∗
𝐼 . The intuition for a speculator’s demand is
similar. Since a speculator has private information on the fundamental
value, his expectation responds less to the information in 𝐷∗
𝐼 , leading
to a smaller expectation effect. Hence, the price effect dominates and
a higher 𝐷∗

𝐼 leads to a lower demand from speculators.

The above proposition also shows that the entire equilibrium is
fully determined once we obtain the value of constant 𝑛∗. Hence,
the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium is determined by the
properties of Eq. (36), as summarized in the following corollary.

Corollary 2.

In the disclosure economy:

(1) If 𝛴𝑧 > 𝛾 −2𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1

𝑓 and 𝛴𝑢 > 4𝛾 −2𝛴−1

𝛿 , there exists a unique

linear equilibrium.

(2) If 𝛴𝑧

≤ 𝛾 −2𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝑓

equilibrium, where

or 𝛴𝑢

≤ ̂𝛴𝑢, there is no linear

√

(1 − 𝑘1𝑘−1

2 )2 + 16𝑘1𝑘−1
2𝛾 2𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1

2 + 𝑘1𝑘−1

2 − 1

.

̂𝛴𝑢 =

The first result shows that if both the insider and the hedger
have sufficiently large hedging needs, it would sustain a unique linear
equilibrium. The second result offers one example, whereby either the
insider or the hedger’s need is small enough, a linear equilibrium fails
to exist.

3.3. Measures for policy assessment

Our analysis focuses on investor welfare, since one primary goal of
policy interventions is to improve investor welfare. We also analyze
other relevant variables, including price informativeness, market liq-
uidity, and investor profits, which are not only of independent interests

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039136J. Deng et al.

to regulators and academia (see discussions in Easley et al. (2016)), but
also useful for describing the intuitions and highlighting the novelty of
the results.

Investor welfare. Since the market maker always breaks even
in equilibrium, we focus on the welfare of the other three types of
investors. We use 𝐶𝐸𝐼 , 𝐶𝐸𝐻 , and 𝐶𝐸𝑆,𝑗 to denote the certainty equiv-
alents for the insider, the hedger, and speculator 𝑗, respectively, in the
equilibrium under the non-disclosure regime. We obtain those certainty
equivalents from the following:
𝑈 (𝐶𝐸𝐼 ) = E [𝑈 (𝑊𝐼 )|
̃𝑍, ̃𝑓𝑎
𝑈 (𝐶𝐸𝐻 ) = E [𝑈 (𝑊𝐻 )| ̃𝑢] ,
] .
𝑈 (𝐶𝐸𝑆,𝑗 ) = E [𝑈 (𝑊𝑆,𝑗 )| ̃𝑠𝑗
Similarly, we use 𝐶𝐸∗
𝑆,𝑗 to denote the certainty equiv-
alents for the insider, the hedger, and speculator 𝑗, respectively, in the
equilibrium under the disclosure regime:

𝐻 , and 𝐶𝐸∗

𝐼 , 𝐶𝐸∗

(37)

(38)

(39)

] ,

𝑈 (𝐶𝐸∗

𝑈 (𝐶𝐸∗

𝐼 ) = E [𝑈 (𝑊 ∗
̃𝑍, ̃𝑓𝑎
𝐼 )|
𝐻 ) = E [𝑈 (𝑊 ∗
𝐻 )| ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐼
[
𝑆,𝑗 ) = E
𝑆,𝑗 )| ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝑈 (𝑊 ∗
𝐼

] ,
] ,
]

𝑈 (𝐶𝐸∗

.

(40)

(41)

(42)

Note that an investor’s certainty equivalent is a function of his
̃𝑍 and
signals. For example, 𝐶𝐸𝐼 is a function of the insider’s signals:
̃𝑓𝑎. To evaluate an investor’s welfare, we follow Stein (1987) and Van
Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010) and compute the ex ante expec-
tations of those certainty equivalents. Since all speculators are ex ante
identical, we can remove the subscript ‘‘𝑗’’ and use E[𝐶𝐸𝑆 ] and E[𝐶𝐸∗
𝑆 ]
to denote the ex-ante expected certainty equivalents of a speculator in
the economy without and with disclosure, respectively. The expressions
of these welfare variables are presented in the following corollary.

Corollary 3. The ex ante expectations of the certainty equivalents in the
two economies are

E[𝐶𝐸𝐼 ] = −

E[𝐶𝐸∗

E[𝐶𝐸∗

E[𝐶𝐸𝑆 ] =

𝐼 ] = −
1
2
1
2
E[𝐶𝐸𝐻 ] = −
1
2

E[𝐶𝐸∗

𝐻 ] =

𝑆 ] =

𝛾(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 (1 + 𝛼𝑍 𝑛)𝛴𝑧 −

1
2
1
2
(𝑚𝜌2 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2))𝛴𝑓 𝛽𝑆 ,

𝛾(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 (1 + 𝛼∗

1
(1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛾 −1𝜌2𝛼𝑍 𝑛,
2
1
𝑍 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑧 −
2

(1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛾 −1𝜌2𝛼∗

𝑍 𝑛∗,

𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1𝑛∗𝛽∗
𝑆 ,
1
𝛾 [𝛴𝑓 + 𝜙𝐻 (𝑚𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻 )
2
𝛾𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1 [

𝐻 )2(𝑛∗)2 − 1

] 𝛴𝑢.

(𝜙∗

] 𝛴𝑢,

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

Price informativeness. Price informativeness refers to the preci-
sion of the signal about the stock cash flow revealed by the stock price
and thus, it is measured as follows:
𝐼𝑁𝐹 ≡ (𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 | ̃𝑝)
where 𝐼𝑁𝐹 and 𝐼𝑁𝐹 ∗ are price informativeness in the economies with
and without disclosure, respectively. From Propositions 1 and 2, we
obtain the following corollary.

𝐼𝑁𝐹 ∗ ≡ (𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 | ̃𝑝∗)

)−1 ,

and

)−1

Corollary 4. The price informativeness under the two regimes is given by

𝐼𝑁𝐹 = 𝛴−1

𝑓 (𝜌2 𝑚 + (1 − 𝜌2)𝑛)−1 and

𝐼𝑁𝐹 ∗ = (𝑛∗)−1𝑘−1

1 (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘).

Market liquidity. In the economy without disclosure, the stock
market illiquidity (Kyle’s lambda) can be measured by 𝜆𝜔, which is
given by (17). In the economy with disclosure, the stock market illiq-
uidity is captured by two measures, 𝜆∗
𝐼 , which are given by (34)
and (35), respectively. The former is the price sensitivity to the total
order flow from outside investors, while the latter is the price sensitivity
to the insider’s order flow.

𝑂 and 𝜆∗

Investor profit. We use 𝜋𝐼 , 𝜋𝑆 , and 𝜋𝐻 to denote the ex ante
expected trading profits of the insider, speculators, and the hedger,

respectively, in the non-disclosure economy. That is, 𝜋𝐼 = E[𝐷𝐼 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)],
𝜋𝑆 = E[𝐷𝑆,𝑗 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)], and 𝜋𝐻 = E[𝐷𝐻 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)]. Similarly, we can define and
compute the expected trading profits 𝜋∗
𝐻 in the disclosure
economy.

𝑆 , and 𝜋∗

𝐼 , 𝜋∗

Corollary 5. Under the disclosure regime, the insider’s ex ante expected
trading profit is zero; that is, 𝜋∗

𝐼 = 0.

The intuition is as follows. In our model, the stock price is set by a
risk-neutral market maker. Hence, any trading strategy that is observ-
able to the market maker has an expected net return of the risk-free
rate, which is normalized to zero in our model. Under the disclosure
regime, the insider’s trade is public information and hence observable
to the market maker. Therefore, the insider’s ex ante expected trading
profit is zero under the disclosure regime.

3.4. Limiting case

As illustrated in Propositions 1 and 2, both equilibria are highly non-
linear, making analytical analysis of the general case intractable. In this
subsection, we analyze a limiting case in which the insider’s hedging
need 𝛴𝑧 is sufficiently large. This case allows for explicit analytical
results and hence can better illustrate the mechanisms. In Section 4,
we will conduct a calibration exercise for empirically more relevant
parameter regions.

Results. We follow the spirit of Peress (2004) and derive an equilib-
rium based on a first-order approximation for the case with a sufficient
large insider’s hedging need. Formally, suppose that 𝛴𝑧 → ∞, or
equivalently, 1∕𝛴𝑧 → 0. We keep the 1∕𝛴𝑧 terms and neglect higher
order terms when computing an equilibrium. Under this approximation,
the equilibrium coefficients of trading strategies and price function
(𝛼, 𝛽, 𝜙, and 𝜆) are linear in 1∕𝛴𝑧. For the non-disclosure economy,
we can fully compute these coefficients and express them in terms of
exogenous parameters. For the disclosure economy, we can characterize
these coefficients up to one unknown constant, which is a solution to a
quartic equation. The detailed computations and characterizations are
delegated to Appendix C. The comparison between the two equilibria
leads to the following proposition.9

Proposition 3 (Limiting Case). When the insider’s hedging need 𝛴𝑧 is
sufficiently large, disclosure has the following implications:

(1) All investors are worse off under disclosure: E[𝐶𝐸∗

𝐼 ] < E[𝐶𝐸𝐼 ],

E[𝐶𝐸∗

𝑆 ] < E[𝐶𝐸𝑆 ], and E[𝐶𝐸∗

𝐻 ] < E[𝐶𝐸𝐻 ].

(2) Disclosure increases the insider’s expected trading profit but decreases
𝑆 < 𝜋𝑆 , and

outside investors’ expected trading profits: 𝜋∗
𝜋∗
𝐻 < 𝜋𝐻 .

𝐼 > 𝜋𝐼 , 𝜋∗

(3) Disclosure improves the informativeness of the stock price: 𝐼𝑁𝐹 ∗ >

𝐼𝑁𝐹 .

(4) Disclosure decreases the market liquidity for outside investors: 𝜆∗

√

𝑂 >
2, disclosure improves the market

≤ 1∕
𝜆𝜔. Moreover, when |𝜌|
liquidity for the insider: 𝜆𝜔 > 𝜆∗
𝐼 .

The result that a mandatory disclosure policy makes all investors
worse off appears surprising for two reasons. First, the disclosure
partially reveals the insider’s private information and hence one might
expect outside investors (the hedger and speculators) to be better off.
Indeed, this intuition is likely to be the motivation for the SEC’s con-
sideration of the mandatory disclosure policy. However, the proposition

9 The equilibrium quantities under approximation explicitly include 1∕𝛴𝑧
terms. This allows us to illustrate precisely the meaning of 𝛴𝑧 being ‘‘suffi-
ciently large’’ in the limiting case considered in this subsection. Specifically,
in Appendix C, we derive a threshold ̄𝛴𝑧, which is a function of exogenous
parameters, such that the results in Proposition 3 hold if 𝛴𝑧 > ̄𝛴𝑧 in the
approximation equilibrium.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039137J. Deng et al.

shows that this conjecture does not always hold. Second, the result that
the insider also becomes worse off from disclosure is, perhaps, even
more surprising given the insight on sunshine trading from Admati
and Pfleiderer (1991). Specifically, when 𝛴𝑧 is large, the insider’s
overall trade is mostly uninformed due to his large hedging need. As
demonstrated in Admati and Pfleiderer (1991), in this case, disclosing
the insider’s trade tends to reduce his trading cost. Hence, one might
naturally expect the disclosure to improve the insider’s welfare in this
case. However, the conclusion in Proposition 3 is exactly the opposite.
Intuitions. We now explain the intuitions for the surprising welfare
result in Part (1) of Proposition 3. Let us first start with the insider. Note
that the sunshine trading intuition in Admati and Pfleiderer (1991)
concerns trading profits and it continues to hold in our model. Part (2)
of Proposition 3 shows that consistent with the intuition on sunshine
trading, disclosure identifies the insider’s trade as mostly information-
less and hence indeed increases his expected trading profit. Specifically,
under the disclosure regime, the insider’s expected trading profit 𝜋∗
𝐼
equals 0 (see Corollary 5), while under the non-disclosure regime, the
insider’s expected trading profit 𝜋𝐼 is negative for a sufficiently large
hedging need 𝛴𝑧.

How does disclosure decrease the insider’s welfare despite a higher
trading profit? Note that the insider is risk averse in our setting, and
so disclosure affects the insider’s welfare not only through the profit
channel as highlighted by the sunshine trading literature, but also
through a risk-sharing channel. As we mentioned in Footnote 1, for
the insider, we can further decompose the risk-sharing channel into
two effects. The first is the Hirshleifer effect (Hirshleifer, 1971), which
works through price informativeness. More informative prices reduce
risk-sharing opportunities and hence harm the insider. The second
is the trading aggressiveness effect and it operates through market
liquidity. Being a large trader, the insider behaves strategically, and
hence, a higher market liquidity increases his trading aggressiveness in
utilizing hedging opportunities.

When the insider’s hedging need 𝛴𝑧 is large, the risk-sharing
channel—in particular, the Hirshleifer effect—dominates the profit
channel in determining the insider’s welfare. Specifically, as shown in
Part (3) of Proposition 3, disclosure increases the stock price informa-
tiveness. Intuitively, when the insider’s hedging need 𝛴𝑧 is large, the
insider’s order is primarily informationless and works as endogenous
noise trading to the market maker. Under the non-disclosure regime,
the order flows of outside investors, in particular of informed specula-
tors, are mixed with the insider’s uninformed order flow and thus, the
market maker cannot infer much of the fundamental information from
the total order flow. By contrast, under the disclosure regime, outsiders’
order flows can no longer hide behind the insider’s uninformed order
flow, which in turn facilitates the market maker’s inference. Thus,
disclosure improves price informativeness, which harms the insider
through the Hirshleifer effect. Part (4) of Proposition 3 shows that the
insider faces better liquidity under the disclosure regime (i.e., 𝜆∗
𝐼 < 𝜆𝜔),
because disclosure allows the market maker to separate the insider’s
order – which is primarily informationless when 𝛴𝑧 is large – from
outside investors’ orders. This better liquidity improves the insider’s
trading aggressiveness and hence hedging effectiveness. However, this
positive trading aggressiveness effect is dominated by the negative
Hirshleifer effect when the insider’s hedging need 𝛴𝑧 is large.

We next discuss why outside investors also become worse off in
Part (1) of Proposition 3. Again, disclosure affects outside investors’
welfare through both a profit channel and a risk-sharing channel,
and both channels harm outside investors. First, disclosure reduces
outside investors’ profits (i.e., 𝜋∗
𝐻 < 𝜋𝐻 in Part (2) of
Proposition 3). For speculators, this occurs for two reasons: (a) the
more informative price system under the disclosure regime makes it less
effective for speculators to exploit their private information; (b) under
the disclosure regime, speculators’ orders can no longer hide behind
the insider’s – which is mostly uniformed when 𝛴𝑧 is large – and thus,
speculators’ trades in aggregate have a larger price impact (i.e., 𝜆∗
𝑂 > 𝜆𝜔

𝑆 < 𝜋𝑆 and 𝜋∗

in Part (4)), further eroding speculators’ equilibrium profits. For the
hedger, who is uniformed, it is the worsened market liquidity through
which disclosure harms his trading profits. Second, the improvement
in price informativeness due to disclosure further harms the hedger via
the Hirshleifer effect.

Remarks. We conclude this subsection with two remarks. First, al-
though our model is designed to analyze insider trading, it unexpect-
edly reveals new intuitions on sunshine trading, an intriguing idea
that has become prominent after the stock market crash in October
1987. This idea has drawn interest from practitioners, regulators, and
researchers (e.g., Hawke Jr et al., 1988; Admati and Pfleiderer, 1991).
The analysis in the prior literature has focused primarily on the ex-
pected trading profit: if an investor creditably declares that his trading
is uninformed, then he can avoid adverse selection and hence execute
trades at a lower trading cost. Our analysis highlights a new insight
from the ex-ante welfare perspective by showing that disclosure can
reduce risk sharing and harm all risk-averse market participants.

Second, our analysis reveals two effects via which a policy affects
a large trader’s welfare through the risk-sharing channel: one works
via the Hirshleifer effect, which determines how many risk-sharing
opportunities are available in the market; the other works via the
trading aggressiveness effect, which determines how effectively a large
trader can utilize the existing risk-sharing opportunities. When the
insider’s hedging need 𝛴𝑧 is large, as is the case in this subsection, the
Hirshleifer effect dominates. By contrast, when 𝛴𝑧 is relatively small,
as will be the case in our calibrations in Sections 4 and 5, the trading
aggressiveness effect can dominate.

4. Calibration analysis

In this section, we conduct a calibration exercise to evaluate the
recent SEC policy changes for empirically plausible parameter values.
Section 4.1 describes how the parameter values are chosen for our
calibration. Sections 4.2 and 4.3 analyze the effects of the mandatory
disclosure and cooling-off period polices, respectively.

4.1. Parameter values

We interpret the risky asset as an individual stock since insider
trading is typically discussed in the context of a single firm. We
̄𝑓 at 1.
follow Leland (1992) and normalize the expected price level
̃𝑓 as the gross return and
Under this normalization, we can interpret
𝛴𝑓 as the return variance. We interpret the time between dates 0 and
2 in our model as 6 months, since 82% of 10b5-1 plans start trading
within 6 months (Larcker et al., 2021). To set the annualized stock
return volatility to 40%, we set 𝛴𝑓 = 0.42∕2 = 0.08.

As estimated by Dávila and Parlatore (2023), the average infor-
mation signal-to-payoff ratio for a typical U.S. stock in the recent
𝛿 ∕𝛴−1
decade is around 0.07 (i.e., 𝛴−1
𝑓 ≈ 0.07). To match this ratio for
speculators’ private information, we set 𝛴𝛿 = 𝛴𝑓 ∕0.07 ≈ 1.14. We
set the risk aversion 𝛾 = 10 according to the S&P 500 option-implied
risk aversion of Aıt-Sahalia and Lo (2000) and Bliss and Panigirtzoglou
(2004) and the estimation of exponential utility risk aversion of optimal
portfolio allocation in Bodnar et al. (2018) and commodity futures
market in Goldstein and Yang (2022). We set 𝜌 = 0.5, which implies
that the insider observes 25% of the variance of the fundamental value
̃𝑓 . To evaluate the effect of increasing the cooling-off period length
of
(i.e., lowering the value of 𝜌), we vary the value of 𝜌 in the range of
[0.01, 0.55].

The calibration of 𝛴𝑧 and 𝛴𝑢 is as follows. Since the disclosure
policy is not in place until recently, we choose
such that the
model-implied trading activities under the non-disclosure regime match
the data. Specifically, according to Cohen et al. (2012), 45% of the
total insider trading in their sample is classified as ‘‘opportunistic’’ and

(𝛴𝑢, 𝛴𝑧

)

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039138J. Deng et al.

Table 1
Parameter values.

Parameter
̄𝑓
𝛴𝑓
𝛴𝛿
𝛴𝑢
𝛴𝑧
𝛾
𝜌

Description

Mean of asset fundamental
Variance of asset fundamental
Variance of noises in speculators’ information
Variance of the hedger’s endowment
Variance of the insider’s endowment
Absolute risk aversion
Insider’s information advantage

Value

1
0.08
1.14
0.17
0.08
10
[0.01, 0.55]

appears informed, while the rest of the insider trading is ‘‘routine’’ and
uninformed. Note that, under the non-disclosure regime, the insider’s
̃𝑓𝑎, and his uninformed order flow
information-driven order flow is 𝛼𝑓
is 𝛼𝑍
√

̃𝑍. Hence, we obtain the following equation:

=

45%
55%

.

(49)

𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝛼𝑓
𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝛼𝑍

̃𝑓𝑎)
̃𝑍)

=

√𝛴𝑓
√𝛴𝑧

𝛼𝑓
|𝛼𝑍 |

To estimate the insider’s trading activities, we obtain from Thomson
Reuters the transactions by corporate insiders from 1986 to 2021. For
each year, we aggregate the total number of shares traded by all cor-
porate insiders for each stock, normalized by the stock’s total number
of shares outstanding. We then compute the cross-sectional standard
deviation of the aggregate trades across stocks for each year. The
time series average of this cross-sectional standard deviation is 3.11%.
We interpret the institutional investors as informed speculators in our
model. To estimate the aggregate trading activities by institutions, we
obtain the holdings data of all 13f institutions from Thomson Reuters
from 1981 to 2022. For each year, we obtain the aggregate holding
change, as a percentage of the total number of shares outstanding, for
each stock. We then compute the cross-sectional standard deviation
of the aggregate holdings change across stocks for each year. The
time series average of this cross-sectional standard deviation is 9.48%.
Matching these estimates with the model-implied volatility of the trades
by speculators and the insider in Eqs. (13) and (14), we obtain the
following equation:

𝑉 𝑎𝑟(∫ 1

0 𝐷𝑆,𝑗 𝑑𝑗)
)

𝑉 𝑎𝑟 (𝐷𝐼

=

𝛽2
𝑆 𝛴𝑓
𝑓 𝛴𝑓 + 𝛼2
𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧

=

9.48%2
3.11%2

.

(50)

Solving Eqs. (49) and (50), we obtain 𝛴𝑢 = 0.17 and 𝛴𝑧 = 0.08. All
calibration parameters are summarized in Table 1.

4.2. Mandatory disclosure

With the parameter values in Table 1, we use Fig. 2 to illustrate the
welfare implications of mandatory disclosure by varying the insider’s
hedging need, 𝛴𝑧, in a narrow range around its estimate, and his
information amount, 𝜌. In each panel, we compare the welfare for one
type of investor and use red cross ‘‘+’’ (blue circles ‘‘◦’’, respectively)
to mark the region where the investor’s welfare is higher (lower,
respectively) under the disclosure regime than under the non-disclosure
regime.

One pattern that immediately jumps out of this figure is that the
implication for the hedger tends to be the ‘‘mirror image’’ of that for the
insider, i.e., one being better off tends to imply the other being worse
off. The reason is that, under the parameters in our calibration, risk
sharing needs are modest and welfare implications are dominated by
the effect from trading profits. When the insider is better off, it is at the
expense of the hedger, and vice versa. Hence the welfare implications
for the insider and hedger are the opposite of each other.

As shown by the left panel of Fig. 2, when the insider’s information
advantage 𝜌 is large, the insider is worse off under the disclosure
regime (as indicated by the area marked with blue circles ‘‘◦’’) because
disclosure neutralizes the insider’s information advantage. When the
insider’s information advantage is small, however, disclosure makes the

insider better off (as indicated by the area marked with red crosses ‘‘+’’)
because, as suggested by the sunshine trading intuition, his trade has
a smaller price impact under the disclosure regime.10 The right panel
shows that the welfare implication for the hedger is the opposite of that
for the insider. The disclosure makes the hedger worse off if 𝜌 is small
and better off if 𝜌 is large.

Finally, let us look at speculators in the middle panel. Speculators
are better off under the disclosure only when 𝜌 takes intermediate
values. Intuitively, when 𝜌 is small, under the disclosure regime, the
market maker can separate the insider’s not-so-informed order from
the rest. Hence, the speculator’s information is revealed more, making
the speculator worse off. When 𝜌 is large, however, the insider’s infor-
mation has significant overlaps with speculators’. Hence, disclosure of
the insider’s trade neutralizes the speculator’s information advantage,
making the speculator worse off as well. In the intermediate region,
where these two forces are not dominant, the speculator can benefit
from the information revealed from the insider’s trade.

The above results suggest that the welfare effect of the mandatory
disclosure requirement varies according to the information structure.
If information about the firm evolves at a fast pace (e.g., one possible
example is firms in the information technology industry), private infor-
mation decays at a fast pace (𝜌 is small). In this case, disclosure makes
the insider better off and the hedger worse off. However, for a firm in
industries that are more mature and stable (e.g., one possible example
is utility companies), private information decays at a slow pace (𝜌 is
large), disclosure makes the insider worse off and the hedger better
off.

Fig. 2 focuses on the cases in which the insider’s hedging need 𝛴𝑧
is near its estimated value. By increasing the value of 𝛴𝑧, we find that,
consistent with the analytical results in Proposition 3, all three types
of investors are worse off under the disclosure regime if 𝛴𝑧 larger than
5.11

4.3. Cooling-off period

As noted in Section 2.2, 𝜌 can be viewed as a proxy for and is
inversely related to the cooling-off period length. Hence, we conduct
a calibration analysis of the effects of the cooling-off period by varying
𝜌 and setting the rest parameters according to Table 1. We report the
results in Fig. 3.

The first row of Fig. 3 plots the ex ante expected certainty equiva-
lents against 𝜌, one for each type of investors. The certainty equivalents
under the non-disclosure regime are plotted in solid lines, while those
under the disclosure regime are plotted in dashed lines. In the previous
subsection, we compare these two lines to analyze the welfare implica-
tions of mandatory disclosure. In this subsection, instead, we examine
the pattern of each line and focus on how investor welfare changes
with parameter 𝜌 to study the implications of increasing the length of
the cooling-off period (i.e., decreasing the value of 𝜌).

Again, similar to the discussions in Section 3.4, a regulation policy
– increasing the cooling-off period length in this case – affects investor

10 Note that, in this case, the insider’s hedging need is modest and hence the
risk-sharing effect does not play a dominant role. This is why the implication
here is different from that in the limiting case.

11 We note that this is an order of magnitude larger than the estimated value
of 𝛴𝑧. To assess the empirical relevance of the limiting case, we explore the
idea that, due to under-diversification, the insider may have a higher risk
aversion than outside investors. Hence, we set the insider’s risk aversion to
100 and keep the rest of the parameters the same as in Table 1 of the paper.
We find that 𝛴𝑧 needs to be over 0.3 to generate the welfare implication in the
limiting case in Proposition 3. This is still larger than the estimated value of
0.08. Nevertheless, the welfare implication of the limiting case is perhaps no
longer completely infeasible. Interestingly, even in this alternative calibration,
the welfare implications for the region around 𝛴𝑧 = 0.08 remain similar to
those in our baseline calibration.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039139J. Deng et al.

Fig. 2. Disclosure and investor welfare.
This figure plots welfare comparisons under disclosure and non-disclosure regimes against the insider’s information amount 𝜌 and hedging need 𝛴𝑧. The left, middle, and right
panels are for the insider, a representative speculator, and the hedger, respectively. Blue circles ‘‘◦’’ mark the region where the investor is worse off from disclosure, while red
crosses ‘‘+’’ mark the region where the investor is better off from disclosure. Parameter values: 𝛾 = 10, 𝛴𝑢 = 0.17, 𝛴𝛿 = 1.14, and 𝛴𝑓 = 0.08.

Fig. 3. The effects of a cooling-off period.
Panels A and B respectively plot the ex ante expected certainty equivalents and trading profits for each type of investors against the insider’s information amount 𝜌. Panel C plots
market quality in terms of price informativeness and Kyle’s lambda. Parameter values: 𝛾 = 10, 𝛴𝑧 = 0.08, 𝛴𝑢 = 0.17, 𝛴𝛿 = 1.14, and 𝛴𝑓 = 0.08.

welfare through two channels: the profit channel and the risk-sharing
channel. The second row of Fig. 3 plots the expected trading profits
for each type of investors under both regimes. Comparing the first
and second rows, we observe that, under this calibration parameter
configuration, the welfare patterns and the profit patterns are the same
except for the insider under the disclosure regime. So, other than this
exception, the welfare implications can be primarily understood from
the profit channel. The exception is due to the fact that under the
disclosure regime, the insider’s expected trading profit is equal to 0
(see Corollary 5), independent of the value of 𝜌, and thus, any effect of
𝜌 must work through the risk-sharing channel.

We now explain these welfare patterns and start with speculators.
We observe that speculators’ profits and hence welfare decrease with 𝜌

under both the non-disclosure and disclosure regimes. Under the non-
disclosure regime, a higher 𝜌 means that the insider has more private
information. His trading injects more information into the price, lead-
ing to a higher 𝐼𝑁𝐹 in the left plot of Panel C; meanwhile, the market
maker faces stronger adverse selection, generating a higher 𝜆𝜔 in the
middle plot of Panel C. In turn, the increased price informativeness
lowers speculators’ information advantage and the worsened market
liquidity increases speculators’ price impact, both of which reduce
speculators’ profits. Under the disclosure regime, a higher 𝜌 means that
the insider’s information has more overlaps with speculators’ and thus,
the disclosure of the insider’s order reduces speculators’ information
advantage through making the price more informative (i.e., a higher
𝐼𝑁𝐹 ∗ in the left plot of Panel C). Hence, a longer cooling-off period

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391310J. Deng et al.

(a smaller 𝜌) increases speculators’ welfare under both non-disclosure
and disclosure regimes.

is unreported in Fig. 4), all investors are worse off under the disclosure
regime.

The implications for the hedger and insider depend on whether the
disclosure regime is already in place. This is because the cooling-off
period has different information implications under the two regimes.
Under the non-disclosure regime, a larger 𝜌 increases the insider’s
information advantage and hence benefits the insider and hurts the
hedger. As shown in the Panel B of Fig. 3, as 𝜌 increases, the insider’s
expected trading profit increases while the hedger’s decreases.

Under the disclosure regime, however, the insider’s order becomes
public knowledge. Hence, a higher 𝜌 reveals more information to the
hedger and reduces his information disadvantage relative to the hedger.
Consistent with this intuition, the right plot of Panel B shows that the
hedger’s expected trading profit is increasing in 𝜌 under the disclosure
regime.

Interestingly, the insider benefits from a longer cooling-off period
under the disclosure regime (i.e., the dashed line decreases with 𝜌 in the
left plot of Panel A). To see the intuition, note that the profit channel
is ‘‘shut down’’ in this case. Specifically, as shown in Corollary 5 and
the left plot of Panel B, the insider’s expected trading profit under the
disclosure regime is zero, regardless of the value of 𝜌. Hence, we can
focus on the risk-sharing channel in this case. As shown in the right
plot of Panel C, a higher 𝜌 increases the insider’s price impact 𝜆∗
𝐼 .
Facing a larger price impact, the insider cuts back his hedging trades,
making hedging less effective and reducing the insider’s welfare. As a
result, under the disclosure regime, the insider’s welfare decreases with
𝜌 (i.e., the insider benefits from a longer cooling-off period).

5. Information leakage

In this section, we consider an alternative formulation of the
cooling-off period based on the idea that the insider’s information is
partially leaked to outside investors during the cooling-off period.12
Specifically, we consider an extension of the baseline model in Sec-
tion 2. The only modification is that, before time 1, speculators and the
hedger, but not the market maker, observe a signal about the insider’s
private information ̃𝑓𝑎, in the form of ̃𝑦 = ̃𝑓𝑎 + ̃𝜀, where ̃𝜀 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝛴𝜀) and
it is independent of other random shocks. Intuitively, outside investors
(speculators and the hedger) are active traders in the economy and
may also have the ability to acquire information. As the cooling-off
period becomes longer, they may have more chances to learn about the
information observed by the insider. Hence, the parameter 𝛴𝜀 in this
alternative model reflects the cooling-off period length. The smaller the
𝛴𝜀, the longer the cooling-off period. The rest of the model is the same
as the baseline model in Section 2.

In the Online Appendix, we characterize the linear equilibria of this
extension model under the non-disclosure and disclosure regimes. In
these equilibria, the trading strategies and price functions take similar
forms as those in the baseline model, except that the trading strategies
of speculators’ and the hedger are also sensitive to signal ̃𝑦. We then
adopt the parameter values in Table 1 to conduct a similar calibration
analysis as in the previous section to evaluate the two new SEC policy
changes.

Mandatory disclosure. To examine the welfare implications of the
disclosure policy, we compare the welfare measures for each type of
investor across the two regimes by varying 𝛴𝑧 and 𝛴𝜀. The results,
reported in Fig. 4, are qualitatively similar to those in the baseline
model as reported in Fig. 2. First, the welfare implication for the insider
tends to be the ‘‘mirror image’’ of that for the outside hedger. Second,
although the welfare implications for speculators are not exactly the
same across Figs. 2 and 4, disclosure tends to harm speculators when
the cooling off period becomes shorter in both figures (higher 𝜌 in Fig. 2
and higher 𝛴𝜀 in Fig. 4). Finally, when 𝛴𝑧 is sufficiently large (which

Cooling-off period. To examine the effect of cooling off, we re-
generate Fig. 3 in this new model with 𝛴𝜀, instead of 𝜌, as the proxy
for the cooling-off period length. The results are reported in Fig. 5. The
first and second rows of Fig. 5 show that the implications on welfare
and trading profits in this alternative model are qualitatively the same
as those in the baseline model. For example, speculators benefit from a
longer cooling-off period under both regimes. Under the non-disclosure
regime, a longer cooling-off period reduces the insider’s welfare but
increases the hedger’s. The opposite is true under the disclosure regime.
Hence, although this alternative formulation focuses on a different
perspective of the cooling-off period, it captures essentially the same
economic forces and has qualitatively the same implications on welfare
and trading profits in our calibrations.

We also highlight an interesting difference regarding the price-
informativeness implication of increasing the cooling-period length.
Specifically, the left plot of the third row of Fig. 5 shows that a longer
cooling-off period (i.e., a smaller 𝛴𝜀) implies a higher informativeness
in this information-leakage model. This differs from the result in the
baseline model in the previous section. The baseline model focuses
on the perspective that the insider’s information is less relevant after
a longer cooling-off period. This alternative model, however, high-
lights the perspective that during a longer cooling-off period, outside
investors obtain more precise signals about the insider’s private infor-
mation. Hence, these two formulations of the cooling-off period have
opposite implications for price informativeness, offering a way to test
which formulation is more relevant in practice.

Comparing the two formulations further highlights the novel trading
aggressiveness effect for risk sharing. Specifically, under the disclosure
regime, in both formulations, the profit channel is ‘‘shut down’’ for the
insider, because his expected trading profit is zero regardless of the
cooling-off period length. In the baseline model, a longer cooling-off
period reduces price informativeness and improves the insider’s liquid-
ity, which benefit the insider’s risk sharing through both the Hirshleifer
effect and the trading aggressiveness effect. In the information-leakage
model, however, a longer cooling-off period improves both price infor-
mativeness and the insider’s liquidity. The former harms risk sharing
through the Hirshleifer effect while the latter benefits it through the
trading aggressiveness effect. The fact that the insider benefits from a
longer cooling-off period suggests that the novel trading aggressiveness
effect dominates the standard Hirshleifer effect in determining the
insider’s risk sharing.

Both formulations share the common feature that a longer cooling-
off period implies a smaller information advantage for the insider’s
trade. They also have some subtle differences. For example, the baseline
model in Section 2 is perhaps more suitable for industries with a
fast pace (e.g., information technology), where private information
becomes obsolete quickly (𝜌 is small). The information leakage model in
this section is perhaps more suitable for the firms where there are many
investors actively seeking non-public information. Hence, a longer
cooling-off period means more opportunities for information leakage.
For example, in regulated industries (e.g., financial, pharmaceutical,
and utility industries), regulators themselves may serve as a source of
information leakage (Reeb et al., 2014). A longer cooling-off period
reduces the insider’s information advantage relative to the investors
with access to those regulators.

12 We thank the associate editor and an anonymous referee for offering this

alternative setting for formulating a cooling-off period.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391311J. Deng et al.

Fig. 4. Disclosure and investor welfare in the model with information leakage.
This figure plots welfare comparisons under disclosure and non-disclosure regimes against the information variance 𝛴𝜀. The plots in the left, middle, and right columns are for
the insider, a representative speculator, and the hedger, respectively. Blue circles ‘‘◦’’ mark the region where the investor is worse off from disclosure, while red crosses ‘‘+’’ mark
the region where the investor is better off from disclosure. Parameter values: 𝛾 = 10, 𝜌 = 0.5, 𝛴𝑢 = 0.17, 𝛴𝛿 = 1.14, and 𝛴𝑓 = 0.08.

Fig. 5. The effects of a cooling-off period in the information leakage model. Panels A and B respectively plot the ex ante expected certainty equivalents and trading
profits for each type of investors against the information variance 𝛴𝜀. Panel C plots market quality in terms of price informativeness and Kyle’s lambda. Parameter values:
𝛾 = 10, 𝜌 = 0.5, 𝛴𝑧 = 0.08, 𝛴𝑢 = 0.17, 𝛴𝛿 = 1.14, and 𝛴𝑓 = 0.08.

6. Conclusion

We analyze the implications of insider-trading regulations in a
standard Kyle-type model, focusing on two features that are recently
adopted by the SEC: mandatory disclosure and cooling-off period.
The former requires an insider to make a public disclosure upon the
adoption, modification, and cancellation of his 10b5-1 trading plans.

The latter mandates a delay period from the adoption of a 10b5-1 plan
to the first execution under that plan.

We find that these two policies affect investor welfare through two
channels, the profit channel and the risk-sharing channel. If the in-
sider’s hedging need is sufficiently large, in contrast to the conventional
wisdom regarding trader profits from sunshine trading, disclosure may
reduce the welfare of all investors.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391312J. Deng et al.

We also conduct a calibration exercise and find that the insider’s
hedging need tends to be modest in empirically relevant parameter
region. We find that the welfare implication for the insider tends to
be the ‘‘mirror image’’ of that for the outside hedger, i.e., one being
better off tends to imply the other being worse off. The reason is
that, in our calibration, risk sharing needs are modest and welfare
implications are dominated by the effect from trading profits. When the
insider is better off, it is at the expense of the hedger, and vice versa.
Moreover, the implications of a cooling-off period depend on whether
the disclosure policy is already in place. Under the non-disclosure
regime, perhaps consistent with the SEC’s motivation, a longer cooling-
off period benefits outside investors but reduces the insider’s welfare.
Under the disclosure regime, however, a longer cooling-off period
benefits the insider but harms the outside hedger. Our analysis offers
novel insights about insider trading and sunshine trading.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jun Deng: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Huifeng Pan: Validation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Hongjun
Yan: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision,
Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Liyan Yang: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology,
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/49799kh6kz/1.

Appendix A. A dynamic formulation of the cooling-off period

In this appendix, we provide a stylized dynamic setting to illustrate
the idea that the parameter 𝜌 can work as a proxy that inversely
measures the length of a cooling-off period in our baseline model. The
payoff structure in this dynamic setting is similar to that in Admati and
Pfleiderer (1988). The economy lasts for 𝑇 + 1 periods. There is a risky
asset, which is a claim to the liquidation value of ̃𝑣𝑇 +1 at the final date,
𝑇 + 1. The liquidation value evolves according to an AR(1) process as
follows:

̃𝑣𝜏+1 = (1 − 𝑔) ̄𝑓 + 𝑔 ⋅ ̃𝑣𝜏 + ̃𝜀𝜏+1,
)
for 𝜏 = 0, 1, … , 𝑇 , where ̄𝑓 ∈ R, 𝑔 ∈ (0, 1), ̃𝑣0 ∼ 𝑁 ( ̄𝑓 , 𝛴𝑣
, and ̃𝜀𝜏+1 ∼
𝑁 (
is independent over time. We assume that 𝛴𝑣 = 𝛴𝜀∕(1 − 𝑔2),
which implies that ̃𝑣𝜏 is a stationary process, and 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑣𝜏 ) = 𝛴𝑣 for any
𝜏.

0, 𝛴𝜀

(A.1)

)

The economy is still populated by four types of traders: one in-
sider, one representative hedger, a continuum of speculators, and one
risk-neutral market maker. The insider and outsiders (the hedger and
speculators) are still risk averse with a CARA utility function defined
over the total wealth at date 𝑇 + 1. At each date, the market maker sets
the price as the expectation of the asset’s liquidation value conditional
on public information, which is the total order flows received from the
insider and outside investors (and the insider’s order flow in the regime
of disclosure).

At time 0, the insider learns the value of ̃𝑣0. To exploit this infor-
mation, the insider has to set up a trading plan 𝐷𝐼 with a 𝑇 -period
cooling-off period, i.e., his trading cannot start until date 𝑇 . To closely
match the baseline model presented in Section 2, we specify that the

Table A.1
Mapping the dynamic setting to the baseline model.

Baseline model

Dynamic setting

Time

Insider sets up a trading plan
Active trading period
Final outcome realization

𝑡 = 0
𝑡 = 1
𝑡 = 2

𝜏 = 0
𝜏 = 𝑇
𝜏 = 𝑇 + 1

Variables and parameters

Cooling-off period proxy
Total fundamental value
Insider’s information
Remaining uncertainty to the insider

𝜌
̃𝑓
𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎
√

1 − 𝜌2 ̃𝑓𝑏

𝑔𝑇 +1
̃𝑣𝑇 +1
𝑔𝑇 +1 ̃𝑣0
𝑔𝑇 ̃𝜀1 + ... + 𝑔 ̃𝜀𝑇 + ̃𝜀𝑇 +1

interesting trading only occurs at date 𝑇 in this dynamic setting. Specif-
ically, at date 𝑇 , speculator 𝑗 receives private information regarding
the asset’s fundamental at the final date ̃𝑣𝑇 +1 in the form of ̃𝑠𝑗 =
̃𝑣𝑇 +1 + ̃𝛿𝑗 , where ̃𝛿𝑗 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝛴𝛿). Also, at date 𝑇 , the hedger learns
about his hedging need ̃𝑢. Since the market maker is risk neutral and
observes the same information as outside investors at dates before 𝑇 ,
risk-averse outsiders do not participate in the market before date 𝑇 ,
and the market maker simply sets the price as ̃𝑝𝜏 = ̄𝑓 (under the non-
|
disclosure regime) and ̃𝑝𝜏 = E
𝐷𝐼
(under the disclosure regime),
|
|
for 𝜏 = 0, 1, … , 𝑇 − 1.

̃𝑣𝑇 +1

[

]

Hence, this dynamic model resembles the baseline model in the
paper closely as follows. Dates 0, 𝑇 , and 𝑇 + 1 in this dynamic setting
correspond to dates 0, 1, and 2 in our baseline model, respectively.
The asset’s fundamental value ̃𝑣𝑇 +1 in this dynamic setting can be
interpreted as the liquidation value of the asset at date 𝑇 + 1, as
̃𝑣𝑇 +1 corresponds to ̃𝑓 in the
in Admati and Pfleiderer (1988). So,
baseline model. Moreover, the insider’s information structure (and the
notion of cooling-off period) closely resembles that in our baseline
model. Specifically, Eq. (A.1) implies

̃𝑣𝑇 +1 = (1 − 𝑔𝑇 +1) ̄𝑓 + 𝑔𝑇 +1 ̃𝑣0 + 𝑔𝑇 ̃𝜀1 + ⋯ + 𝑔 ̃𝜀𝑇 + ̃𝜀𝑇 +1.
Hence, the insider’s information 𝑔𝑇 +1 ̃𝑣0 corresponds to 𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎 in the
baseline model. The parameter 𝜌 in the baseline model corresponds to
𝑔𝑇 +1 and hence can be viewed as a proxy for the length of a cooling-
off period. The longer the cooling-off period (larger 𝑇 ), the smaller
the parameter 𝜌. The following table summarizes the correspondence
between this dynamic setup and our baseline model (see Table A.1).

Appendix B. Proofs

In the proof, we introduce the following notations:

̃𝑋 = 𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎,

̃𝑌 =

√

1 − 𝜌2 ̃𝑓𝑏, 𝛴𝑋 = 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 , 𝛴𝑌 = (1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 ,

𝑘 = 𝛾 2𝛴2

𝑌 𝛴𝑧.

Proof of Proposition 1. Equilibrium under the Non-disclosure
Regime. Let us denote

𝛼𝑋 = 𝜌−1𝛼𝑓 ,

𝑛 = 1 − 𝜆𝜔𝛽𝑆 , 𝑚 = 1 − 𝜆𝜔(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 ).

(B.1)

Under the postulated linear equilibrium specified by Eqs. (13)–(16), the
total order flow and return are
1

̃𝜔 = 𝐷𝐼 + ∫

𝐷𝑆,𝑗 d𝑗 + 𝐷𝐻 = 𝐷𝐼 + 𝛽𝑆 ( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢

0
= (𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 ) ̃𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆

̃𝑌 + 𝛼𝑍
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 = 𝑛( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) − 𝜆𝜔𝐷𝐼 − 𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢 = 𝑚 ̃𝑋 + 𝑛 ̃𝑌 − 𝜆𝜔𝛼𝑍

̃𝑍 + 𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢,

̃𝑍 − 𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢.

In the following, we solve the insider, speculators and the hedger’s
optimal demands sequentially.

The insider’s optimal demand: Based on the insider’s information
set { ̃𝑓𝑎, ̃𝑍} or equivalently { ̃𝑋, ̃𝑍}, the maximization problem (4) is
equivalent to

max
𝐷𝐼

[

E

𝑊𝐼

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍
|
|
|

]

−

1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊𝐼

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍).

|
|
|

(B.2)

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391313Here, the constant 𝛬𝐼 is given by

𝛬𝐼 = 𝜆𝜔 +

1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝜆𝜔 +
|
|

1
2

The first-order-condition gives

𝐷𝐼 =

̃𝑍

𝑛 ̃𝑋 − 𝛾𝑛𝛴𝑌
2𝛬𝐼

where

= 𝛼𝑋

̃𝑋 + 𝛼𝑍

̃𝑍,

J. Deng et al.

Since ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 = 𝑛( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) − 𝜆𝜔𝐷𝐼 − 𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢, using his information { ̃𝑋, ̃𝑍},
the insider’s inferences on the asset value ̃𝑓 and return ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 are
E [ ̃𝑓 |
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |

= 𝑛 ̃𝑋 − 𝜆𝜔𝐷𝐼 ,
𝜔𝜙2

= ̄𝑓 + ̃𝑋, E [ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 |
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
|
|

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍]
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝛴𝑌 ,

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍]
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝜆2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 ,

𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝑛𝛴𝑌 .
|
|
Since 𝑊𝐼 = 𝐷𝐼 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝) + ̃𝑍 ̃𝑓 , standard calculations yield

E

[
𝑊𝐼

−

= 𝐷𝐼
1
2
= −𝐷2

𝛾

]

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍
|
−
|
|
E [ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 |
{
𝐷2

1
𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊𝐼
2
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍]

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍)
|
|
|
+ ̃𝑍 E [ ̃𝑓 |
𝐼 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) + ̃𝑍 2 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) + 2𝐷𝐼
|
|
|
|
[
{𝑛 ̃𝑋 − 𝛾𝑛𝛴𝑌
̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋
|
|

𝐼 𝛬𝐼 + 𝐷𝐼

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍]

+ ̃𝑍 E

̃𝑍}

1
2

−

]

̃𝑍 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍)
|
|

}

𝛾 ̃𝑍 2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋).
|
|

=

1
2

(𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌

) (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−1 𝛽𝑆 ( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 )2.
(B.7)

The hedger’s optimal demand: The maximization problem (7) of

the hedger given his information ̃𝑢 is equivalent to

E

[
𝑊𝐻

max
𝐷𝐻

]
|
̃𝑢
|
|

−

1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊𝐻

|
̃𝑢)
|
|

= 𝐷𝐻

E

−

{

[
]
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑢
|
|
+2𝐷𝐻 ̃𝑢 ⋅ 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢)
|
|

1
2

𝛾 ⋅

̃𝑢)

= −

1
2
⋅ 𝐷2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
|
|
[
(
]
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑢
|
|
The first-order-condition gives

𝛾 −1E

𝐻 +

𝐻 ⋅ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑢) + ̃𝑢2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
𝐷2
̃𝑢)
|
|
|
|
}

− 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢) ⋅ ̃𝑢
|
|

)

𝛾 ⋅ 𝐷𝐻 −

1
2

𝛾𝛴𝑓 ̃𝑢2.

𝛾 (𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌

) .

𝛾 −1E

𝐷𝐻 =

− 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢) ⋅ ̃𝑢
|
|

]

[
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑢
|
|
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑢)
|
|

.

(B.8)

The hedger’s inference on asset return ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 and its variance are

𝛼𝑋 =

2𝜆𝜔 + 𝛾𝜆2

𝑛
𝜔𝜙2
𝐻 𝛴𝑢 + 𝛾𝑛2𝛴𝑌

,

𝛼𝑍 = −𝛼𝑋 𝛾𝛴𝑌 .

As a result, the optimization problem (B.2) takes the form of

[

E

𝑊𝐼

= (𝛼𝑋

]

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍
|
|
|
̃𝑋 + 𝛼𝑍

−

1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊𝐼

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝐷2
|
|
|

𝐼 𝛬𝐼 + ̃𝑍 E

]

−

[

̃𝑋
̃𝑓 |
|
|

1
2

̃𝑋)
𝛾 ̃𝑍2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
|
|

̃𝑍)2𝛬𝐼 + ̃𝑍( ̃𝑋 + ̄𝑓 ) −

𝛾𝛴𝑌

̃𝑍2

1
2

=

(𝛼𝑋

̃𝑋 + 𝛼𝑍

̃𝑍)2 ⋅ 𝑟𝑍 𝛼−1

𝑍 + ̃𝑍( ̃𝑋 + ̄𝑓 ) −

𝛾𝛴𝑌

̃𝑍 2

=

̃𝑍 2

= −

𝛾𝛴𝑌

𝛾𝛴𝑌 (− ̃𝑋𝛾 −1𝛴−1

( ̃𝑋𝛼𝑋 ∕𝛼𝑍 + ̃𝑍)2 ⋅ 𝑟𝑍 𝛼𝑍 + ̃𝑍( ̃𝑋 + ̄𝑓 ) −
1
2
Speculator 𝑗’s optimal demand: Similar to the insider, the maxi-
mization problem (5) of speculator 𝑗 given his information set { ̃𝑠𝑗 } is
equivalent to

𝑌 + ̃𝑍)2𝑛𝛼𝑍 + ̃𝑍( ̃𝑋 + ̄𝑓 ) −

(B.4)

𝛾𝛴𝑌

̃𝑍 2.

1
2

1
2
1
2

1
2
1
2

(B.3)

E [ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 | ̃𝑢]
𝑉 𝑎𝑟 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 | ̃𝑢)

= −𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢,

= 𝑉 𝑎𝑟

(
𝑚 ̃𝑋 + 𝑛 ̃𝑌 − 𝜆𝜔
𝜔𝛼2
= 𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2

(𝛼𝑍
𝑍 𝛴𝑧,

̃𝑍 + 𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢) |
|
|

𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢) = 𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 .
|
|

Then, the hedger’s optimal demand is

𝜙𝐻 = −1 ⋅

𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻
𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2
𝑍 𝛴𝑧

𝜔𝛼2

.

As a result,

E

[
𝑊𝐻

|
̃𝑢
|
|
= −

]

1
2

1
2

−

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊𝐻

|
̃𝑢) =
|
|
𝛾 [(𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 | ̃𝑢) 𝐷2
𝐻 −
] ̃𝑢2.
) 𝜙𝐻 + 𝛴𝑓

1
2

)

̃𝑢

(B.9)

(B.10)

1
2

𝛾𝛴𝑓 ̃𝑢2

The market maker’s price function: After observing the total
̃𝑍 + 𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢, the risk-neutral market

̃𝑌 + 𝛼𝑍

order flow ̃𝜔 = (𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 ) ̃𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆
maker sets the price by

max
𝐷𝑆,𝑗

𝐷𝑆,𝑗

E

]

[
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑠𝑗
|
|

−

1
2

𝛾𝐷2

𝑆,𝑗 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑠𝑗 ).
|
|

̃𝑝 = E[ ̃𝑓 | ̃𝜔] = ̄𝑓 +

(B.5)

(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )𝛴𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 𝛴𝑌

(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )2𝛴𝑋 + 𝛽2

𝑆 𝛴𝑌 + 𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢

̃𝜔 = ̄𝑓 + 𝜆𝜔 ̃𝜔.

The first-order-condition gives

𝐷𝑆,𝑗 =

E

]

[
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
|
|

̃𝑠𝑗

𝛾 ⋅ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
|
|

̃𝑠𝑗 )

.

Using signal ̃𝑠𝑗 , the speculator 𝑗 updates his belief of values ̃𝑋, ̃𝑌 and
the return ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝 as
𝛴𝑋
𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

𝛴𝑌
𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ),

( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ), E[ ̃𝑌 |
̃𝑠𝑗 ] =
|
|
(𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌

E[ ̃𝑋|
̃𝑠𝑗 ] =
|
|
̃𝑠𝑗 ] + 𝑛E[ ̃𝑌 |
̃𝑠𝑗 ] = 𝑚E[ ̃𝑋|
E[ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑠𝑗 ] =
|
|
|
|
|
|
His inference of the return variance is
(

𝛬𝑆

≡ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝| ̃𝑠𝑗 ) = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝) − 𝑉 𝑎𝑟
= 𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2
𝜔

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢

(𝛼2

)

E[ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝|
̃𝑠𝑗 ]
|
|
[𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌

−

)

) (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−1

( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ).

]2 (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−1 .

Therefore, his optimal demand is

𝐷𝑆,𝑗 = 𝛽𝑆 ( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ), with,

𝛽𝑆 =

(𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌

) (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−1 𝛾 −1𝛬−1
𝑆 .
(B.6)

To get equilibrium parameters (𝛼𝑋 , 𝛼𝑍 , 𝛽𝑆 , 𝜙𝐻 , 𝜆𝜔), we need to solve the
following equations:

𝛼𝑍 = −𝛼𝑋 𝛾𝛴𝑌 ,

𝛼𝑋 =

𝛽𝑆 =

𝜙𝐻 = −1 ⋅

,

𝑛
𝜔𝜙2
𝐻 𝛴𝑢 + 𝛾𝑛2𝛴𝑌
2𝜆𝜔 + 𝛾𝜆2
) (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿
(𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌
𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻
𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2
𝑍 𝛴𝑧
(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )𝛴𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 𝛴𝑌

𝜔𝛼2

,

)−1 𝛾 −1𝛬−1
𝑆 ,

𝜆𝜔 =

(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )2𝛴𝑋 + 𝛽2
From (B.14), we derive

𝑆 𝛴𝑌 + 𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢

.

(B.11)

(B.12)

(B.13)

(B.14)

𝑆 𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2

𝜔𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 = 𝜆𝜔(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )𝛴𝑋 + 𝜆𝜔𝛽𝑆 𝛴𝑌 .

𝜔𝛽2

𝜔(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )2𝛴𝑋 + 𝜆2
𝜆2
⟺
(1 − 𝑚)2𝛴𝑋 + (1 − 𝑛)2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2
⟺
𝜔𝛼2
𝜆2
⟺

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 = 𝜆2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝜔𝛼2

𝜔𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 = (1 − 𝑚)𝛴𝑋 + (1 − 𝑛)𝛴𝑌 .

𝑋 𝑘 + 𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 = (1 − 𝑚)𝑚𝛴𝑋 + (1 − 𝑛)𝑛𝛴𝑌 .

𝜔𝜙2
𝜆2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 = 𝑚(1 − 𝑚)𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛(1 − 𝑛)𝛴𝑌 − 𝑘(𝑛 − 𝑚)2 ≡ 𝑁.

(B.15)

As a result,

[

E

𝑊𝑆

|
̃𝑠𝑗
|
|

]

−

1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊𝑆

|
̃𝑠𝑗 ) =
|
|

1
2

𝛾𝛬𝑆 𝛽2

𝑆 ( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 )2

Therefore,
𝛬𝑆 = 𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 − (𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 )2 (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−1

+ 𝜆2
𝜔

(𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢

)

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391314J. Deng et al.

= 𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 − (𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 )2 (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿
= (𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 )

[𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿 − 𝑚𝛴𝑋 − 𝑛𝛴𝑌

] (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−1 .

)−1

+ (1 − 𝑚)𝑚𝛴𝑋 + (1 − 𝑛)𝑛𝛴𝑌

Plugging 𝛬𝑆 into (B.12) yields
𝛽𝑆 = 𝛾 −1 [𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿 − 𝑚𝛴𝑋 − 𝑛𝛴𝑌
Since 𝜆𝜔 = (1 − 𝑛)𝛽−1
𝑛)−1𝛾 −1𝑀 −1, from (B.11), we get
(𝑛 − 𝑚)−1(1 − 𝑛)𝛾𝑀 = 𝑛−1 [𝛾𝜆2

]−1 ≡ 𝛾 −1𝑀 −1.

𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 + 2𝜆𝜔 + 𝛾𝑛2𝛴𝑌
= 𝑛−1 [𝛾𝑁 + 2(1 − 𝑛)𝛾𝑀 + 𝛾𝑛2𝛴𝑌

] .

]

𝑆 = (1 − 𝑛)𝛾𝑀 and 𝛼𝑋 = (𝑛 − 𝑚)𝜆−1

𝜔 = (𝑛 − 𝑚)(1 −

From (B.13), we obtain

𝜙𝐻 = −1 ⋅

= −1 ⋅

𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2

𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌
𝜔𝛼2
𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌
𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝑘(𝑛 − 𝑚)2 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔

𝑋 𝑘 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔

=

𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌
𝑁 − (1 − 𝑛)𝑀 − 𝑚𝛴𝑋 − 𝑛𝛴𝑌

.

Plugging 𝜙𝐻 into (B.15) gives
(

𝑁 = 𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 = (1 − 𝑛)2𝛾 2𝑀 2

𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌
𝑁 − (1 − 𝑛)𝑀 − 𝑚𝛴𝑋 − 𝑛𝛴𝑌

)2

𝛴𝑢,

which is equivalent to

(1 − 𝑛)2𝛾 2𝑀 2(𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌 )2𝛴𝑢 = 𝑁 (𝑁 − (1 − 𝑛)𝑀 − 𝑚𝛴𝑋 − 𝑛𝛴𝑌

)2 .

(B.17)

Once solving 𝑚 and 𝑛 via two Eqs. (B.16) and (B.17), we could pin down
the remaining parameters. Also note that the second-order-condition
for the insider, speculators and the hedger require that 𝛼𝑓 > 0 and
𝑚, 𝑛 ∈ (0, 1). □

If 𝛴𝑧 or 𝛴𝑢 is sufficiently large, the equation
Proof of Corollary 1.
system composed of (22) and (23) has a unique solution, which pins
down the entire equilibrium. Moreover, if the risk aversion 𝛾 is suffi-
ciently small, the equation system composed of (22) and (23) does not
have a solution. Hence, the equilibrium does not exist. □

Proof of Proposition 2. Equilibrium under the Disclosure Regime.
To ease expressions, we introduce the following notations:

𝑛∗ = 1−𝜆∗

𝑋 = 𝜌−1𝛼∗
𝛼∗
𝑓 ,
where we recall that 𝛴𝑋 = 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 , 𝛴𝑌 = (1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 , 𝑘 = 𝛾 2𝛴2

𝑘1 = 𝑘𝛴𝑓 +𝜌2(1−𝜌2)𝛴2
𝑓 ,

𝑂𝛽∗
𝑆 ,

𝑘2 = 𝑘1 +(𝑘+𝛴𝑋 )𝛴𝛿,

𝑌 𝛴𝑧.

The total order flow and return are

𝐼 + 𝜙∗
𝑋 (1 + 𝛽∗

𝑆 ( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝜙∗
𝜔∗ = (1 + 𝛽∗
𝐼 + 𝛽∗
𝐼 )𝐷∗
[𝛼∗
] ̃𝑋 + 𝛽∗
𝐼 + 𝜙∗
𝐼 ) + 𝛽∗
𝑆
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗ = 𝑛∗( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) − 𝜆∗
𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 − 𝜆∗
𝑂𝜙∗
𝐻 ̃𝑢.

=

𝑆

𝐻 ̃𝑢

̃𝑌 + (1 + 𝛽∗

𝐼 + 𝜙∗

𝐼 )𝛼∗
𝑍

The insider’s optimal demand: Based on the insider’s information
set { ̃𝑋, ̃𝑍}, the insider’s inference on asset value ̃𝑓 is the same as
non-disclosure regime as follows:
E [ ̃𝑓 |
In contrast, the posterior inference of the return variance and covari-
ance change to

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝛴𝑌 .

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |

= ̄𝑓 + ̃𝑋,

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍]

|

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝑛∗ ̃𝑋 − 𝜆∗
𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 ,
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = (𝑛∗)2𝛴𝑌 + (𝜆∗
𝑂)2(𝜙∗
̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = 𝑛∗𝛴𝑌 .

E( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗
|
𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗, ̃𝑓 |
Then, after simplifications, the maximization problem (4) is equivalent
to

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢,

max
𝐷∗
𝐼

[

E

𝑊 ∗
𝐼

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍
|
|
|

]

−

1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊 ∗
𝐼

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍)
|
|
|

= −(𝐷∗

𝐼 )2𝛬∗

𝐼 + 𝐷∗

𝐼

{𝑛∗ ̃𝑋 − 𝛾𝑛∗𝛴𝑌

̃𝑍}

+ ̃𝑍 E

]

[
̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋
|
|

−

1
2

𝛾 ̃𝑍2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋),
|
|

with the parameter 𝛬∗

𝐼 defined as,

𝐼 = 𝜆∗
𝛬∗

𝐼 +

1
2

𝛾 (

(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝑌 + (𝜆∗

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

) .

Then, the first-order-condition gives

𝐷∗

𝐼 =

𝑛∗ ̃𝑋 − 𝛾𝑛∗𝛴𝑌
2𝛬∗
𝐼

̃𝑍

= 𝛼∗
𝑋

̃𝑋 + 𝛼∗
𝑍

̃𝑍,

where

(B.16)

𝛼∗
𝑋 =

2𝜆∗

𝐼 + 𝛾 (

𝑛∗
(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝑌 + (𝜆∗

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

) ,

𝑍 = −𝛼∗
𝛼∗

𝑋 𝛾𝛴𝑌 .

As a result,

E

[
𝑊 ∗
𝐼

]

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍
|
|
|

−

−

=

1
2
1
2
1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊 ∗
𝐼

̃𝑋, ̃𝑍) = (𝐷∗
|
|
|
𝛾 ̃𝑍2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
|
|
𝑍 + ̃𝑍)2𝛼∗
𝑋 ∕𝛼∗

𝑍 ( ̃𝑋𝛼∗
𝑟∗

̃𝑋)

𝐼 )2𝛬∗

𝐼 + ̃𝑍 E

]

[

̃𝑓 |
̃𝑋
|
|

𝑍 + ̃𝑍( ̄𝑓 + ̃𝑋) −

1
2

𝛾 ̃𝑍2𝛴𝑌 .

(B.18)

Speculator 𝑗’s optimal demand: Under disclosure regime, the
𝐼 }. With normal distributions

information set of speculator 𝑗 is { ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
of all random variables, speculator 𝑗’s problem is equivalent to

max
𝐷𝑆,𝑗

𝐷𝑆,𝑗

E

[
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
|
|

̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼

]

−

1
2

𝛾𝐷2

𝑆,𝑗 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
|
|

̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 ).

The first-order-condition gives the optimal demand as

𝐷𝑆,𝑗 =

E

[
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
|
𝐼
|

]

𝛾 ⋅ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|

.

Speculator 𝑗’s estimation of asset value and return are
𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 , ̃𝑠𝑗 )𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝐷∗

𝐼 ) − 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 , 𝐷∗

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑠𝑗 )𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝐷∗

𝐼 )𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
𝐼 ) − 𝐶𝑜𝑣2( ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )

( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 )

E[ ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 |
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
|
|

𝐼 ] =

+

𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 , 𝐷∗

𝐼 )𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑠𝑗 ) − 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 , ̃𝑠𝑗 )𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑠𝑗 )𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝐷∗

𝐼 ) − 𝐶𝑜𝑣2( ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )

𝐷∗
𝐼

E[ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
|
|

= 𝑎𝑠( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝑎𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 ,
𝐼 ] = E[𝑛∗( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) − 𝜆∗
𝐻 ̃𝑢|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 𝐷∗
𝑂𝜙∗
𝐼 − 𝜆∗
𝐼 ]
|
|
𝐼 + 𝑛∗E[ ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 |
𝐼 𝐷∗
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 ]
|
|
𝐼 + 𝑛∗𝑎𝑠( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝑛∗𝑎𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 𝐷∗
(𝑛∗𝑎𝐼 − 𝜆∗
𝐼 + 𝑛∗𝑎𝑠( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ).
Here, the two constants 𝑎𝑠 and 𝑎𝐼 are given by

= −𝜆∗

= −𝜆∗

) 𝐷∗

=

𝐼

𝐼

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
|
|
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
|
|

𝐼 ) = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 ) − 𝑉 𝑎𝑟(E[ ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
|
|
𝐼 ) = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑛∗ ̃𝑓 − 𝜆∗
𝐻 ̃𝑢|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
𝑂)2(𝜙∗
𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢.

𝑂𝜙∗
= (𝑛∗)2𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (𝜆∗

𝐼 ]) = 𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠,

Then,

𝛽∗
𝑆 =

𝑛∗𝑎𝑠
(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (𝜆∗

𝛾 [

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

] ,

𝛽∗
𝐼 =

𝛾 [

𝑛∗𝑎𝐼 − 𝜆∗
𝐼

(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (𝜆∗

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

] .

As a result,

(B.20)

E

=

=

[
𝑊 ∗
𝑆

]

|
|
|

−

̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼

1
2
𝛾 ⋅ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
|
|
𝛾 ⋅ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
|
|

1
2
1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊 ∗
𝑆

̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗

|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
𝐼 ) ⋅ (𝐷∗
(𝛽∗

𝑆,𝑗 )2

̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗

𝐼 ) ⋅

𝑆 ( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝛽∗

𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼

)2

𝑎𝑠 = 𝑘1𝑘−1
2 ,

𝑎𝐼 = (𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 𝛴𝛿𝑘−1
2 .

(B.19)

̃𝑍 + 𝜙∗

𝐻 ̃𝑢,

Speculator 𝑗’s posterior estimation of asset price and return variances
are

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391315J. Deng et al.

=

=

1
2
1
2

𝛾(𝛽∗

𝑆 )2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
|
|
( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 + 𝛽∗

2 𝛽∗

𝑆

𝑛∗𝑘1𝑘−1

𝐼 ) ⋅

𝐼 𝐷∗

𝐼 ∕𝛽∗
𝑆

( ̃𝑠𝑗 − ̄𝑓 + 𝛽∗
)2 .

𝐼 𝐷∗

𝐼 ∕𝛽∗
𝑆

)2

(B.21)

The hedger’s optimal demand: Under disclosure regime, the in-
𝐼 }. Using normality, the hedger’s

formation set of the hedger is { ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
optimal problem is equivalent to

E

[
𝑊 ∗
𝐻

max
𝐷𝐻

]

−

1
2

|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
𝐼
|
E

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊 ∗
𝐻

|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
+ ̃𝑢 ⋅ E

]

]

−

{

𝛾 ⋅

(𝐷∗

= 𝐷∗
𝐻

1
2
+ 2𝐷∗

[
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
𝐼
|

[
̃𝑓 |
𝐷∗
|
𝐼
|
𝐻 )2 ⋅ 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
𝐼 ) + ̃𝑢2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
|
|
}
𝐻 ̃𝑢 ⋅ 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
1
𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐻 )2
𝐼 ) ⋅ (𝐷∗
= −
|
2
|
]
(
− 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
𝛾 −1E
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
|
𝐼
|
|
[
]
̃𝑓 |
−
|
|

𝛾 ̃𝑢2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
|

)
𝐼 ) ⋅ ̃𝑢

+ ̃𝑢 ⋅ E

𝐷∗
𝐼

𝐼 ).

1
2

+

[

𝛾 ⋅ 𝐷∗
𝐻

Then, the first-order-condition gives

[

𝛾 −1E

]

̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
𝐼
|

− 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗, ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
|

𝐼 ) ⋅ ̃𝑢

.

𝐷∗

𝐻 =

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
The hedger’s inference on asset value ̃𝑓 and return ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗ are

𝐷∗

𝐼 = (𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1(1 + 𝛴−1

𝑋 𝑘)−1𝐷∗
𝐼 ,

𝐼

𝐼

𝐼

]

]

]

=

= −𝜆∗

| ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗

= E [ ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 |𝐷∗

E [ ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 | ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
E [ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗

𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝐷∗
𝐼 )
𝐼 + E [𝑛∗( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) | ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝑋 )−1(1 + 𝛴−1
𝐼 + 𝑛∗(𝛼∗
])
𝐼 ) = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 ) − 𝑉 𝑎𝑟 (E [ ̃𝑓 | ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 | ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
[
]
[
̃𝑓 |
̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐷∗
= (𝑛∗)2𝑉 𝑎𝑟
|
|
𝐼
𝐼
|
|
]
[
̃𝑓 |
𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗, ̃𝑓 |
𝐷∗
|
|
𝐼
|
|

𝐼 ) = 𝑛∗𝑉 𝑎𝑟

𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 𝐷∗

= −𝜆∗

̃𝑢, 𝐷∗

𝑉 𝑎𝑟

]

𝐼

𝐼

= (𝑛∗)2𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1,

= 𝑛∗𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1.

]

− 𝜆∗
𝑋 𝑘)−1𝐷∗

𝑂𝜙∗
𝐻 ̃𝑢
𝑂𝜙∗
𝐼 − 𝜆∗
𝐻 ̃𝑢,
= 𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1,

Inserting these moments into the hedger’s optimal demand function
derived above, and comparing with the conjectured hedger’s linear
trading strategy, we find that

𝜙∗
𝐼 = 𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−2(𝑘 + 𝛴𝑋 )𝑘−1
1
𝐻 = −𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−2𝜆∗
𝜙∗

[𝑛∗(𝛼∗
𝐻 (𝑘 + 𝛴𝑋 )𝑘−1

𝑂𝜙∗

𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 (𝑘 + 𝛴𝑋 )−1 − 𝜆∗
𝐼
1 − (𝑛∗)−1.

] ,

In addition, we could also show that

E

1
2
1
2

=

=

]

−

[
𝑊 ∗
𝐻

1
|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
𝐼
2
|
𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
|
|
𝛾𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1 (

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊 ∗
𝐻

|
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
[
̃𝑓 |
𝐻 )2 + ̃𝑢 E
𝐷∗
|
𝐼
|
) ̃𝑢2 + ̃𝑢 E

𝐻 )2 − 1

]

𝐼 )(𝐷∗

(𝑛∗)2(𝜙∗

𝛾 ̃𝑢2𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 |
̃𝑢, 𝐷∗
𝐼 )
|
|
]

−

1
2
[
̃𝑓 |
𝐷∗
|
𝐼
|

.

The market maker’s price function: After observing the total
𝑆,𝑗 𝑑𝑗 and the insider’s trading plan
𝐻 ̃𝑢}), the

order flow ̃𝜔 = 𝐷∗
𝐷∗
risk-neutral market marker sets the price according to

𝐼 + 𝐷∗
𝐼 (equivalent to the information set {𝐷∗

𝑆 ( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝜙∗

𝐻 + ∫ 1

0 𝐷∗

𝐼 , 𝛽∗

̃𝑝∗ = E[ ̃𝑓 | ̃𝜔∗, 𝐷∗

𝐼 ] = E[ ̃𝑓 | 𝛽∗

𝑆 ( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 )+𝜙∗

𝐻 ̃𝑢, 𝐷∗

𝐼 ] = ̄𝑓 +𝜆∗

𝑂

(𝛽∗

𝑆 ( ̃𝑓 − ̄𝑓 ) + 𝜙∗

𝐻 ̃𝑢)

+𝜆∗

𝐼 𝐷∗
𝐼 .

Using normality and projection of conditional expectation, we can
compute

𝜆∗
𝑂 =

𝛽∗
𝑆 𝑘1
𝑆 )2𝑘1 + (𝜙∗
𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

(𝛽∗

,

𝜆∗
𝐼 =

𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 (𝜙∗

(𝛼∗
𝑆 )2𝑘1 + (𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢
𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

(𝛽∗

𝛽∗
𝑆 =

𝛽∗
𝐼 =

𝛾 [

𝛾 [

𝑛∗𝑎𝑠
(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (𝜆∗

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

𝑛∗𝑎𝐼 − 𝜆∗
𝐼
(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (𝜆∗
𝑂)2(𝜙∗
𝑛∗
(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝑌 + (𝜆∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

) ,

] ,

] ,

𝛼∗
𝑋 =

2𝜆∗
𝑍 = −𝛼∗
𝛼∗

𝐼 + 𝛾 (
𝑋 𝛾𝛴𝑌 ,

(𝛽∗

𝜆∗
𝑂 =

𝛽∗
𝑆 𝑘1
𝑆 )2𝑘1 + (𝜙∗
𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)
(𝛼∗
𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢
𝑆 )2𝑘1 + (𝜙∗
𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)
From (B.29) and 𝑛∗ = 1 − 𝜆∗

𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 (𝜙∗

𝜆∗
𝐼 =

(𝛽∗

,

.

𝑂𝛽∗

𝑆 , we have

𝜆∗
𝑂 =

(1 − 𝑛∗)2𝑘1 + (𝜆∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

𝑘1(1 − 𝑛∗)𝜆∗
𝑂
𝑂)2(𝜙∗

which gives

(𝜆∗

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢 = 𝑛∗(1 − 𝑛∗)𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1.

(B.25)

(B.26)

(B.27)

(B.28)

(B.29)

(B.30)

(B.31)

,

Plugging in 𝜙∗
arrive at

𝐻 = −(𝑛∗)−1 [

1 + 𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−2𝜆∗

𝑂(𝑘 + 𝛴𝑋 )𝑘−1
1

]−1

of (B.23), we

(𝜆∗

𝑂)−1 = 𝛴

1
2

𝑢 (𝑛∗)− 3

2 (1−𝑛∗)− 1
2 𝑘

− 1
2
1

(𝛴𝑋 +𝑘)

1

2 −𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−2(𝛴𝑋 +𝑘)𝑘−1

1 . (B.32)

Using (B.25), we have

(1 − 𝑛∗)(𝜆∗

𝑂)−1 =

𝑛∗𝑎𝑠𝛾 −1
(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (𝜆∗
𝑛∗𝑎𝑠𝛾 −1
(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + 𝑛∗(1 − 𝑛∗)𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1

𝑂)2(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢

=

𝑎𝑠𝛾 −1
𝑛∗𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1

(1 − 𝑛∗)

[

𝛴1∕2
𝑢

(𝑛∗)− 3

2 (1 − 𝑛∗)− 1

− 1
2 𝑘
2
1

(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

1

2 − 𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−2(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)𝑘−1
1

]

𝑎𝑠𝛾 −1
𝑛∗𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1

=

⇔

𝛴1∕2
𝑢

(𝑛∗)− 1

2 (1 − 𝑛∗)

− 1
1
2 𝑘
2
1
𝑎𝑠𝛾 −1
𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + (1 − 𝑛∗)(𝑛∗)−1𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1

(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

1

2 − 𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−1(1 − 𝑛∗)(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)𝑘−1
1

=

⇔

=

⇔

𝛴1∕2
𝑢 𝑘

− 1
2
1

(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

Here, 𝑛∗
0 = (𝑛∗)
equation 𝑓 (𝑥):

(B.22)

1

2 ⋅ 𝑛∗

0 − 𝛾 −1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)𝑘−1

1

⋅ (𝑛∗

0)2 =

𝑎𝑠𝛾 −1
𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 + 𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1 ⋅ (𝑛∗

0)2

.

−1
2 (1 − 𝑛∗)

1
2 and it is the root of the following quartic

(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

1
2 𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 ⋅ 𝑥 + 𝑎𝑠

𝑓 (𝑥) ≡ 𝑥4 − 𝛾𝛴1∕2
𝑢 𝑘

+ (𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)𝑘−1

= 𝑥4 − 𝛾𝛴1∕2
𝑢 𝑘

1
2

2 ⋅ 𝑥3

1 (𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)− 1
− 1
1 𝛴𝛿𝑎𝑠 ⋅ 𝑥2 − 𝛾𝛴1∕2
2
𝑢 𝑘
1
1 (𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)− 1
2 ⋅ 𝑥3
1
2

⋅ 𝑥2 − 𝛾𝛴1∕2
𝑢 𝑘

1
2

+ (𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)𝛴𝛿𝑘−1
2
𝑂 > 0 and 𝜙∗

Noting 𝜆∗
𝐻 = −(𝑛∗)−1 [
𝜙∗

1 − 𝑛∗

1 (𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)

1

2 𝛴𝛿𝑘−1
2

⋅ 𝑥 + 𝑘1𝑘−1

2 = 0.

𝐻 < 0, from (B.23) and (B.31), we derive that
0𝛴−1∕2

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

𝛾 −1𝑘−1∕2
1

]

1
2

𝑢

.

.

From (B.25) and (B.26), we have

Taken together, we solve the following equations for the equilibrium
parameters:

𝐼 = 𝑛∗𝑎𝐼 − 𝑛∗𝑎𝑠𝛽∗
𝜆∗

𝐼 (𝛽∗

𝑆 )−1,

Combining with (B.30) and (B.33) gives

(B.33)

𝐻 = −𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−2𝜆∗
𝜙∗

𝑂𝜙∗

𝐻 (𝑘 + 𝛴𝑋 )𝑘−1
[

𝐼 = 𝛾 −1(𝑛∗)−2(𝑘 + 𝛴𝑋 )𝑘−1
𝜙∗
1

𝑛∗(𝛼∗

1 − (𝑛∗)−1,
𝑋 )−1 𝛴𝑋
𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘

]

,

− 𝜆∗
𝐼

(B.23)

(B.24)

𝐼 = (𝛼∗
𝜆∗
= (𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 (𝜙∗
𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 (𝜙∗

𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢𝜆∗
𝐻 )2𝛴𝑢(𝜆∗

𝑆 )−1𝑘−1
𝑂(𝛽∗
1
𝑂)2(1 − 𝑛∗)−1𝑘−1

1 = (𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 𝑛∗(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391316J. Deng et al.

Plugging it into (B.24) yields 𝜙∗

(𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1𝛴𝑋 (𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1 = 𝑎𝐼 − 𝑎𝑠𝛽∗

𝑆 )−1
Using 𝑎𝑠 and 𝑎𝐼 from (B.19), we have

𝐼 = 0. Furthermore,
𝐼 (𝛽∗

(𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1 = −𝛽∗

𝐼 (1 + 𝛴−1

𝑋 𝑘)(𝛽∗

𝑆 )−1,

𝐼 = −𝑛∗𝛽∗
𝜆∗

𝐼 (𝛽∗

𝑆 )−1.

Eq. (B.27) combined with (B.31) gives us

(𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1 = (𝑛∗)−1 ⋅
+ 𝛾 (

[
2(𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1𝑛∗𝛴𝑋 (𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1

(𝑛∗)2𝛴𝑌 + 𝑛∗(1 − 𝑛∗)𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1)] ,

which implies

(𝛼∗

𝑋 )−1 = 𝛾(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘) ⋅

(𝑛∗𝛴𝑌 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝑘1(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1)
)−1 .

(𝑘 − 𝛴𝑋

= 𝛾(𝑘1 − 𝛴𝑋 𝑘𝑛∗)

𝐶𝐸∗

𝑆 =

𝐶𝐸∗

𝐻 =

1
2
1
2

𝑛∗𝛽∗

𝑆 𝑘1𝑘−1

2

̃𝑠𝑗 − (1 + 𝜌−2𝛴−1

(

⋅

𝛾𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1 (

(𝜙∗

𝐻 )2(𝑛∗)2 − 1

𝑓 𝑘)−1(𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎 − ̃𝑍𝛾(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 )
𝑋 𝑘)−1

) ̃𝑢2 + ̃𝑢 (

1 + 𝛴−1

)2

,

( ̃𝑋 − 𝛾𝛴𝑌

̃𝑍).

Then, the proposition follows by taking expectation in the above
equations. □

(B.34)

(B.35)

Proof of Corollary 4. Under the non-disclosure regime, recall that
̃𝜔 = (𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎 + 𝛽𝑆

1 − 𝜌2 ̃𝑓𝑏 + 𝛼𝑍

√

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 | ̃𝑝) = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 | ̃𝜔) = 𝛴𝑓 − 𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 , ̃𝜔)

= (𝜌2 𝑚 + (1 − 𝜌2)𝑛)𝛴𝑓 .

̃𝑍 + 𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢. Then
𝐶𝑜𝑣( ̃𝑓 , ̃𝜔)
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝜔)

(𝑘 − 𝛴𝑋

⋅

)−1

Under the disclosure regime, we have

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 | ̃𝑝∗) = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 ) −

𝐶𝑜𝑣2( ̃𝑓 , ̃𝑝∗)
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑝∗)

.

Therefore, from (B.35), we have

𝐼 = −𝛽∗
𝛽∗

𝑆 𝛾 ⋅ (𝑘1 − 𝛴𝑋 𝑘𝑛∗)(1 + 𝛴−1

𝑋 𝑘)−1 (𝑘 − 𝛴𝑋

)−1 .

The second-order-conditions for the insider and speculators are

0 < 𝜆∗

0 < 𝛼∗

𝑂 ⇔ 𝑛∗
𝑋 ⇔ 𝛽∗

(

0, 𝛾𝛴1∕2

(𝛴𝑋 + 𝑘)−1∕2)
0 ∈
𝐼 < 0 ⇔ 𝑘 > 𝛴𝑋 ⇔ 𝛴𝑧 > 𝛾 −2𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝑓 .

𝑢 𝑘1∕2
1

and

,

This completes the proof of the proposition. □

Proof of Corollary 2. The polynomial (36) can be rewritten as

𝐹 (𝑥) ≡ 𝑥

[

1
2
𝑢 𝑘

𝛴

1
2

1 (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

]
−1
2 − 𝛾 −1𝑥

=

𝛾 −1

𝑘1𝑘−1
2
𝑥2 + (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)𝛴𝛿𝑘−1
2

≡ 𝐺(𝑥).

(B.36)

It is easy to see that the quadratic function 𝐹 (𝑥) satisfies

𝐹 (0) = 𝐹 (𝑥∗)

= 0, where 𝑥∗ = 𝛴

1
2
𝑢 𝑘

1
2

1 (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

−1
2 𝛾,

and its maximum 𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑥 on the interval [0, 𝑥∗] is
𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝛾𝛴𝑢𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1∕4.

Since the function 𝐺(𝑥) is decreasing to 0 as 𝑥 → +∞, 𝐺(𝑥) must
intersect with 𝐹 (𝑥) in the interval [0, 𝑥∗] as long as 𝐺(0) ≤ 𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑥. This
≥ 4𝛾 −2𝛴−1
gives us the condition 𝛴𝑢
𝛿 .
Moreover, if 𝐺(𝑥∗) ≥ 𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑥, there is no solution. This is equivalent

to have

𝛴𝑢

≤ ̂𝛴𝑢 =

=

√

√

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)2𝛴2

2 − (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)𝛴𝛿𝑘−1

2

2 + 16𝑘1𝑘−1
𝛿 𝑘−2
2𝛾 2𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1
2 + 𝑘1𝑘−1

2 − 1

(1 − 𝑘1𝑘−1

2 )2 + 16𝑘1𝑘−1
2𝛾 2𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1

. □

Proof of Corollary 3. From the definitions of certainty equivalents
in (37)–(42), for trader 𝑡 ∈ {𝐼, 𝑆, 𝐻} under his corresponding infor-
mation set 𝐹𝑡, his wealth 𝑊𝑡 is normally distributed and the certainty
equivalent is given by

𝐶𝐸𝑡 = E

[
𝑊𝑡

|
𝐹𝑡
|
|

]

−

1
2

𝛾𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑊𝑡

𝐹𝑡).

|
|
|

From Eqs. (B.4), (B.7), (B.10), (B.18), (B.21), and (B.22) in the proofs
of Propositions 1 and 2, we can show that the certainty equivalents in
the two economies are:

𝐶𝐸𝐼 =

𝐶𝐸𝑆 =

(

(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓
(𝑚𝜌2 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)

̃𝑍 − 𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎𝛾 −1𝛴−1
) 𝛴𝑓

𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)−1)2
)−1 ̃𝑠2
𝑗 ,

(𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

𝛽𝑆

−𝛾
2
1
2

𝛼𝑍 𝑛 + 𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎

̃𝑍 −

𝛾
2

𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2) ̃𝑍2,

𝐶𝐸𝐻 = −

𝛾 [𝛴𝑓 + 𝜙𝐻 (𝑚𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔𝜙𝐻 )

] ̃𝑢2,

(

̃𝑍 − 𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)−1)2

𝑍 𝑛∗ + 𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎
𝛼∗

̃𝑍 −

𝛾
2

𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2) ̃𝑍2,

1
2
−𝛾
(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓
2

𝐶𝐸∗

𝐼 =

After some tedious computations, we can derive
𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 )𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑝∗) − 𝐶𝑜𝑣2( ̃𝑓 , ̃𝑝∗) = 𝑛∗𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1 [

1 − 𝑛∗𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1] ,

𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑝∗) = 1 − 𝑛∗𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1.

Hence, 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 | ̃𝑝∗) = 𝑛∗𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1. □

Proof of Corollary 5.
̃𝑝∗ = E[ ̃𝑓 | ̃𝜔∗, 𝐷∗
𝐼 = E[𝐷∗
𝜋∗
= E [𝐷∗

𝐼 ], we have
𝐼 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗)] = E[E[𝐷∗
𝐼 ] − ̃𝑝∗)]
(E[ ̃𝑓 | ̃𝜔∗, 𝐷∗
This proves this corollary. □

𝐼

Since the market maker sets the price via

𝐼 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗)| ̃𝜔∗, 𝐷∗
= E[𝐷∗
𝐼 0] = 0.

𝐼 ]] = E[𝐷∗

𝐼

E[( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗)| ̃𝜔∗, 𝐷∗
𝐼 ]]

Proof of Proposition 3. Parts (1) and (2) follow from Proposition C.3
in Appendix C.

Part (3): From Corollary 4 and Proposition C.1, we can show that

when 𝛴𝑧 is sufficiently large, we have

𝐼𝑁𝐹 → 1 < 𝐼𝑁𝐹 ∗ → (𝑛∗)−1.

Part (4): When 𝛴𝑧 is sufficiently large, Proposition C.1 in Ap-

pendix C shows

(𝑛∗

𝑢 𝛴−1∕2
𝛴1∕2
𝑓

𝑂 → (𝑛∗)2 [
0)−1 − 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝜆∗
𝑓
𝜆𝜔 → (𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−1 + 𝛴−1
𝛿 𝛴𝑓 )𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝑧 → 0,
𝐼 → 𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−2(1 − 𝜌2𝑛∗)𝑛∗𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝜆∗
𝑧 → 0.

]−1

> 0,

0 is the positive root of Eq. (C.1). When |𝜌|

Here, 𝑛∗
𝜆∗
𝐼 < 𝜆𝜔. □

≤ 1∕

√

2, we have

Appendix C. Equilibrium under first-order approximation

In this appendix, we follow the same spirit as (Peress, 2004) and
compute an equilibrium under the first-order approximation as 1∕𝛴𝑧
approaches 0. In the approximation, we keep all the 1∕𝛴𝑧 terms and
omit higher order terms. Proposition C.1 characterizes the approxima-
tion equilibrium. Corollary C.1 characterizes investors’ profits. Proposi-
tion C.2 characterizes the investors’ profits and welfare in the first-order
approximation equilibria. Proposition C.3 shows that all investors are
worse off under the disclosure regime if 𝛴𝑧 is higher than a certain
threshold that is determined by primitive parameters of the model.

Proposition C.1. When the insider’s hedge need 𝛴𝑧 is sufficiently large,
under the first-order approximation (i.e., when 1∕𝛴2
𝑧 and higher order terms
are ignored), the equilibrium parameters under the non-disclosure regime are
given by

𝛼𝑓 ≈ 𝛾 −1(1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛴−1
𝛿 + 𝑞3𝛴−1
𝛽𝑆 ≈ 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝛿 𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑛 ≈ 1 − 𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛼𝑍 ≈ −1 + 𝑞2𝛴−1
𝑓 𝜌 + 𝑞1𝛴−1
𝑧 ,
𝑧 ,
𝜆𝜔 ≈ 𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑧 , 𝜙𝐻 ≈ −1 + 𝑞4𝛴−1
𝑧 ,
𝑧 ,
𝑓 ]𝑞5𝛴−1
𝛿 + (1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛴−1
𝑧 , 𝑚 ≈ 1 − 𝛾 −1[𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391317J. Deng et al.

𝑛 − 𝑚 ≈ 𝛾 −1(1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛴−1

𝑓 𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑧 .

Here, the constants 𝑞1, 𝑞2, … , 𝑞5 are
𝑞1 = 𝜌((1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
𝑞2 = −(𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)𝛴−1
𝑞3 = −𝛾 −1𝛴−2

𝛿 − 2)𝛾 −2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−2
𝛿 − 2)𝛾 −1(1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛴−1
𝑞4 = 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝑓 𝑞5,

𝛿 𝑞2
5 ,

𝑞5 =

𝑓 𝑞5,
𝑓 𝑞5,
(𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−1 + 𝛴−1

) 𝛾 −1.

𝛿 𝛴𝑓

The equilibrium parameters under the disclosure regime are given by

𝑍 ≈ −(1 − 𝜌2)(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−1 + 𝑞∗
𝛼∗

2 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝐼 ≈ 𝑞∗
𝛽∗

4 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝑓 ≈ 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝛼∗

1 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝑓 (1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−1𝜌 + 𝑞∗
𝛾 −1𝛴−1
1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
𝛿

+ 𝑞∗

𝛿

3 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

1 − 𝑛∗

𝛽∗
𝑆 ≈
𝐻 ≈ −(𝑛∗)−1 [
𝜙∗
𝑂 ≈ (𝑛∗)2 [
𝜆∗
Here, the constants 𝑞∗
1

𝛴1∕2
𝑢

(𝑛∗

𝑓

0)−1𝛴−1∕2
, 𝑞∗
2

, … , 𝑞∗

7 are

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢

𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

]

+ 𝑞∗

5 𝛴−1

𝑧 , 𝜙∗

𝐼 = 0,

]−1

− 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝑓

+ 𝑞∗

6 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝐼 ≈ 𝑞∗
𝜆∗

7 𝛴−1
𝑧 .

1 = 𝛾 −3𝛴−2
𝑞∗
2 = −𝛾 −2𝛴−1
𝑞∗
3 = 𝛾 −3𝜌4𝛴−2
𝑞∗

𝑓 𝜌3(1 − 𝜌2)−2(𝑛∗𝜌2 + 𝜌2 − 2)(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−2,
𝑓 𝜌2(𝑛∗𝜌2 + 𝜌2 − 2)(1 − 𝜌2)−1(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−2,
(
𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)−2(1 − 𝑛∗)(𝛴𝛿 + 𝛴𝑓 − 𝛴𝛿𝛴𝑓 )

(1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−2 ,

𝑞∗
4 = −

(𝑛∗)−1𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝛿
1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1
𝛿 𝛴𝑓

𝑞∗
7 ,

= 𝛾 −1𝛴𝑓

−1 + 𝑛 − 𝜆𝜔𝛼𝑋 𝜌2
(𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿 − 𝑚𝛴𝑋 − 𝑛𝛴𝑌 )𝛴𝛿

𝛿 (𝛼𝑋 𝜌2 + 𝛽𝑆 )𝛴𝑓 ≈ −𝛾 −1𝛴−2
For the hedger’s demand, from Eq. (B.13), we have

≈ −𝜆𝜔𝛾 −1𝛴−2

𝛿 𝑞2

5 𝛴−1
𝑧 .

𝑚𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛𝛴𝑌
𝜔𝛼2

𝜙𝐻 + 1 = 1 −

𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2
−(𝜌2𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 )𝛴𝑓 + 𝛾 −1 + 𝜆𝜔𝛼2
𝑚2𝛴𝑋 + 𝑛2𝛴𝑌 + 𝜆2
Disclosure regime. Recall that

𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔
𝑍 𝛴𝑧
𝑍 𝛴𝑧 + 𝛾 −1𝜆𝜔

= 𝜆𝜔

𝜔𝛼2

≈ 𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝑓 𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑧 .

𝑘 = 𝛾 2(1−𝜌2)2𝛴2

𝑓 𝛴𝑧, 𝑘1 = 𝑘𝛴𝑓 +𝜌2(1−𝜌2)𝛴2

When 𝛴𝑧 goes to infinity, the positive root 𝑛∗
in Proposition 2 reduces to the positive root in (C.1).

𝑓 , 𝑘2 = 𝑘1 +(𝑘+𝛴𝑋 )𝛴𝛿. (C.4)
0 of quartic function (36)

From Eq. (35), the first-order approximation of Kyle’s lambda is

𝐼 = 𝛾𝑛∗(𝑘1 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 𝑘𝑛∗)(1 + 𝜌−2𝛴−1
𝜆∗

= 𝛾𝑛∗(𝑘𝛴𝑓 + 𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴2
≈ 𝛾 −1𝑛∗(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝑧

)−1

𝑓 𝑘)−1 (𝑘 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓
𝑓 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 𝑘𝑛∗)(1 + 𝜌−2𝛴−1
≡ 𝑝7𝛴−1
𝑧 .

𝑓 𝑘)−1 (𝑘 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓

)−1

Since

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)𝑘−1

1 = 𝛴−1

𝑓

(

1 + 𝜌4𝛴2

𝑓 𝑘−1

1

)

,

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)1∕2𝑘−1∕2

1

≈ 𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

(

1 +

1
2

)

𝜌4𝛴2

𝑓 𝑘−1

1

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢

1
2

𝜌4(1 − 𝜌2)−2(𝑛∗)−1𝑛∗

𝛾 −3𝛴−3∕2
𝑞∗
5 =
𝑓
6 = 𝛾 −2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝜌4 (
𝑞∗
7 = 𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−2(1 − 𝜌2𝑛∗)𝑛∗𝛾 −1,
𝑞∗
0)2)−1 and 𝑛∗
where 𝑛∗ = (1 + (𝑛∗

𝛾 −1 −

𝛴1∕2

1
2

𝑓 𝛴1∕2

𝑢

0 is the positive root of

,

from Eq. (34), we derive that

0)−1) [
(𝑛∗

𝛴1∕2

𝑓 𝛴1∕2

𝑢

0)−1 − 𝛾 −1]−2
(𝑛∗

(𝑛∗)2,

𝑂 = (𝑛∗)2
𝜆∗

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

1

𝛴1∕2
𝑢

(𝑛∗

0)−1𝑘

− 1
2
1

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

1

2 − 𝛾 −1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)𝑘−1
1

𝑓 (𝑥) = 𝑥4 − 𝛾𝛴

1
2

𝑢 ⋅ 𝑥3 +

𝛴𝛿
1 + 𝛴𝛿

⋅ 𝑥2 − 𝛾

1
2
𝛴
𝑢 𝛴𝛿
1 + 𝛴𝛿

⋅ 𝑥 +

1
1 + 𝛴𝛿

= 0.

(C.1)

𝛴1∕2
𝑢

≈ (𝑛∗)2

(𝑛∗

0)−1

𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

)

− 𝛾 −1(𝛴−1

𝑓 − (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)𝑘−1
1 )

Proof. We only keep dominating terms and ignore high orders for
approximations below.

Non-disclosure regime. Since the two constants 𝑚 and 𝑛 in Eqs.
(22) and (23) do not admit explicit solutions, we approach the approx-
imation directly from the proof of Proposition 1. Also, in that proof, we
have defined the following notations:

𝛴𝑋 = 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 , 𝛴𝑌 = (1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓 ,
𝛼𝑋 = 𝜌−1𝛼𝑓 ,

𝑛 = 1 − 𝜆𝜔𝛽𝑆 , 𝑚 = 1 − 𝜆𝜔(𝛼𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 ).

𝑘 = 𝛾 2𝛴2

𝑌 𝛴𝑧,

(C.2)

(C.3)

First, we analyze the Kyle’s lambda 𝜆𝜔. Intuitively, when the in-
sider’s hedge motive 𝛴𝑧 goes to infinity, the market becomes infinitely
liquid, i.e., 𝜆𝜔 → 0. This can be seen from (B.14) in the proof of
Proposition 1 since 𝛼𝑍 goes to a non-zero constant. From the definition
in (C.3), this also implies the two constants 𝑚 and 𝑛 both go to one
when 𝛴𝑧 goes to infinity. Then, from (B.11) and (B.12), we obtain that
𝛼𝑋 → 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
as 𝛴𝑧 → +∞. Again from Eq. (B.14),
we compute that the first-order approximation of 𝜆𝜔 is
𝜆𝜔 ≈ (𝛼𝑋 𝛴𝑋 + 𝛽𝑆 𝛴𝑓 )𝛴−1

𝑧 = 𝛾 −1(𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−1 + 𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1

𝑌 and 𝛽𝑆 → 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝛿

≡ 𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑧 .

𝛿 )𝛴−1
𝑧

For the insider’s demand, from Eqs. (B.11) and (C.3), we have

−

𝛴1∕2

𝑢 𝛴−1∕2

𝑓

1
0)−1 − 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
(𝑛∗
(

𝑓

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

− (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)1∕2𝑘−1∕2
(

1

𝛴1∕2

𝑢 𝛴−1∕2

𝑓

)2

𝑓

(𝑛∗
0)−1 − 𝛾 −1𝛴−1
0)−1)
(𝑛∗
≡ 𝑝6𝛴−1
𝑧 .

≈ 𝛾 −2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝜌4 (

[

×

𝛴1∕2

𝑓 𝛴1∕2

𝑢

1
2

𝛾 −1 −
0)−1 − 𝛾 −1]−2
(𝑛∗

𝛴1∕2

𝑓 𝛴1∕2

𝑢

(𝑛∗)2𝛴−1
𝑧

For the insider’s demand, from Eq. (29), we have

𝛼∗
𝑓 −

𝛾 −1𝜌
𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2𝑛∗)

= 𝛾 −1𝜌

= 𝛾 −1𝜌

]

[

−

1
𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2𝑛∗)

𝑘 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓
𝑘1 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 𝑘𝑛∗
𝑘𝛴𝑓 − 𝜌2𝛴2
𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2𝑛∗) − 𝑘1
(𝑘1 − 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 𝑘𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2𝑛∗)
𝑓 𝜌3(1 − 𝜌2)−2(𝑛∗𝜌2 + 𝜌2 − 2)(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝑧 .

≈ 𝛾 −3𝛴−2

𝑍 = −𝛼∗
𝛼∗

𝑓 𝛾(1 − 𝜌2)𝜌−1𝛴𝑓
≈ −(1 − 𝜌2)(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−1
− 𝛾 −2𝛴−1

𝑓 𝜌2(𝑛∗𝜌2 + 𝜌2 − 2)(1 − 𝜌2)−1(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝑧 .
𝑓 𝛴𝛿(𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿)−2𝑘−1, for speculator 𝑗’s

2 ≈ (1 + 𝛴𝛿𝛴−1

Since 𝑘1𝑘−1
demand, from Eqs. (30) and (31), we have
𝑘1𝑘−1
2

𝑓 )−1 − 𝜌4𝛴2

𝛾 −1

𝛽∗
𝑆 −

=

𝛿

𝛾 −1𝛴−1
1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
𝛿
𝛾 −1𝛴−1
1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
𝛿

𝛿

𝑛∗𝛴𝛿𝑘1𝑘−1

2 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝑘1(𝑘 + 𝜌2𝛴𝑓 )−1

𝛼𝑓 − 𝜌𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝑌 = 𝜌

− 𝜌𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝑌

−

1 − 𝜆𝜔𝛽𝑆

𝛾𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 + 2𝜆𝜔 + 𝛾(1 − 𝜆𝜔𝛽𝑆 )2𝛴𝑌
𝛴𝑌 𝛴−1

𝛿 − 2

≈ 𝜌𝜆𝜔

𝛾𝛴𝑌
≈ 𝜌𝜆𝜔(𝛴𝑌 𝛴−1

[
𝛾𝜆2

𝜔𝜙2

𝛿 − 2)𝛾 −2𝛴−2
𝛼𝑍 = −𝛾𝛴𝑌 𝛼𝑋 ≈ −1 + (𝛴𝑌 𝛴−1

𝐻 𝛴𝑢 + 2𝜆𝜔 + 𝛾(1 − 𝜆𝜔𝛽𝑆 )2𝛴𝑌
𝑌 = 𝜌(𝛴𝑌 𝛴−1
𝛿 − 2)𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿 − 2)𝛾 −2𝛴−2
𝑌 𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑧 .

𝑌 𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

For speculator 𝑗’s demand, from Eq. (B.12), we derive

𝛽𝑆 − 𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿 = 𝛾 −1

(

1
𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿 − 𝑚𝛴𝑋 − 𝑛𝛴𝑌

)

− 𝛴−1
𝛿

]

≈ 𝛾 −3𝜌4𝛴−2

𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)−2(1 − 𝑛∗)(𝛴𝛿 + 𝛴𝑓 − 𝛴𝛿𝛴𝑓 )

(

(1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−2 𝛴−1

𝑧

= 𝑝3𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝐼 = −𝜆∗
𝛽∗

𝐼 (𝑛∗)−1𝛽∗

𝑆 ≈ −

(𝑛∗)−1𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝛿 𝑝7
1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1
𝛿 𝛴𝑓

𝛴−1
𝑧 .

For the hedger’s demand, since (𝜌2𝛴𝑓 +𝑘)1∕2𝑘−1∕2
(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝑧 , from Eq. (32), we have
𝐻 = −(𝑛∗)−1 [
𝜙∗

(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)

𝛾 −1𝑘−1∕2
1

0𝛴−1∕2

1 − 𝑛∗

]

1

1
2

𝑢

≈ 𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

+ 1
2

𝜌4𝛴−3∕2
𝑓

𝛾 −2

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391318J. Deng et al.

≈ −(𝑛∗)−1 [

1 − 𝑛∗

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢

𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

]

+

1
2

𝛾 −3𝛴−3∕2
𝑓

𝜌4(1 − 𝜌2)−2(𝑛∗)−1𝑛∗

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢 𝛴−1
𝑧 .

This completes the proof. □

The following corollary presents expected trading profits without

the first order approximation.

Corollary C.1.

Investors’ expected trading profits are given by

𝜋𝐼 = 𝑚𝜌𝛴𝑓 𝛼𝑓 − 𝜆𝜔𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧,

𝜋𝑆 = 𝛽𝑆 (𝑚𝜌2 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2))𝛴𝑓 ,

𝜋𝐻 = −𝜆𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢,

− 𝛾 −2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−2

𝜋𝑆 ≈ 𝛴−1

𝛿 𝛾 −1𝛴𝑓 − 𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝑓 𝜌2𝑞5 − 2𝛾(1 − 𝜌2)𝜌−1𝑞1𝑞5
5 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝛿 )𝑞2

]

𝛴−1
𝑧
𝜋𝐻 ≈ −𝑞5𝛴𝑢𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝜋∗
𝐼 = 0,

𝜋∗
𝑆 ≈

[

+ 𝑛∗

𝑞∗
3 𝛴𝑓 −

𝑛∗𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿 (1 − 𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
𝛿 𝛴𝑓
1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1
𝛿 𝛴𝑓
𝜌4(1 − 𝜌2)2𝛾 −3𝛴−1

]

1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1

𝛿
𝛿 𝛴𝑓

𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝐻 = −𝜋∗
𝜋∗
𝑆 .

𝜋∗
𝐼 = 0,

𝑆 = 𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1𝑛∗𝛽∗
𝜋∗
𝑆 ,

𝐻 = −𝜋∗
𝜋∗
𝑆 .

Proof. Non-disclosure regime: The insider’s trading profit is
𝜋𝐼 = E [𝐷𝐼 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)
]
[
̃𝑓𝑎 + 𝛼𝑍
(𝛼𝑓

]
̃𝑍)( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)
1 − 𝜌2 ̃𝑓𝑏 − 𝜆𝜔𝛼𝑍

= E [
(𝛼𝑓
̃𝑍)(𝑚𝜌 ̃𝑓𝑎 + 𝑛

̃𝑓𝑎 + 𝛼𝑍
√

]
̃𝑍)

= E

= 𝑚𝜌𝛴𝑓 𝛼𝑓 − 𝜆𝜔𝛼2

𝑍 𝛴𝑧.

Speculator 𝑗’s trading profit is
= E [𝐷𝑆,𝑗
]
𝜋𝑆 = E [𝐷𝑆,𝑗 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)
[
𝛽𝑆

(𝑚𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓

= E

E [ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝| ̃𝑠𝑗

]]

) (𝛴𝑓 + 𝛴𝛿

)−1 ̃𝑠2
𝑗

]

= 𝛽𝑆 (𝑚𝜌2 + 𝑛(1 − 𝜌2))𝛴𝑓 .

The hedger’s trading profit is
]
𝜋𝐻 = E [𝐷𝐻 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)

]
= E [𝜙𝐻 ̃𝑢( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝)
Disclosure regime: The insider’s trading profit 𝜋∗

= −𝜆𝜔𝜙2

𝐻 𝛴𝑢.

Corollary 5. Speculator 𝑗’s trading profit is
]
𝑆,𝑗 ( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗)
𝑆,𝑗 )2 𝑉 𝑎𝑟( ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗|
|
|

𝑆 = E
𝜋∗
= E

[
𝐷∗
[
(𝐷∗

]
̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼 )

E [ ̃𝑓 − ̃𝑝∗

[
𝐷∗

= E

𝑆,𝑗

]]

| ̃𝑠𝑗 , 𝐷∗
𝐼

= 𝑘1(𝜌2𝛴𝑓 + 𝑘)−1𝑛∗𝛽∗
𝑆 .

𝐼 = 0 is given in

Since it is a zero-sum game, we know 𝜋∗
proof. □

𝐻 = −𝜋∗

𝑆 . This completes the

In the first-order approximation equilibria, the ex
Proposition C.2.
ante expectations of the certainty equivalents under the non-disclosure and
disclosure regimes are given by

𝛾 −1𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−1 − 𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿 𝛴𝑓

1
E[𝐶𝐸𝐼 ] ≈ −
2
𝛾 −2 [𝛴−1
𝛿 (𝛴𝑓 (1 − 𝜌2)𝛴−1
]

1
2

−

+ 2𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝑓

𝑞5𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

𝛿 − 2)(𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)−1 + 𝛴−1

𝛿 𝛴𝑓 )

E[𝐶𝐸∗

𝐼 ] ≈ −

1
2

𝛾(1 − 𝜌2)𝛴𝑓

1 − 𝑛∗
1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2

𝛴𝑧 −

1
2

𝛾 −1𝑛∗𝜌2(1 − 𝜌2)
(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)2

𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿 𝛴𝑓 −

(
1 + 𝛴−1

𝛿 𝛴𝑓

) 𝑞2

5 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

2 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,
1
𝛾 −1𝛴−1
2
𝛴𝑓 𝑛∗
1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1

𝛿

𝛾 −1(1 − 𝜌2)−1𝜌2𝑛∗𝑞∗

E[𝐶𝐸∗

𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿

−

1
2
E[𝐶𝐸𝑆 ] ≈

1
2
1
2
𝑛∗ [𝛴𝑓 𝑞∗

𝑆 ] ≈

+

1
2

E[𝐶𝐸𝐻 ] ≈ −
1
2
(1 − 𝑛∗

E[𝐶𝐸∗
𝐻 ] ≈
[[

−

𝛾

1
2

𝛿 𝛴𝑓
𝛿 (1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1

3 − 𝜌4𝛾 −3(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
1
[𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
2

𝛴𝑢𝑞5
[
(1 − 𝑛∗

𝛾𝛴𝑓

𝛿 + 1 + (1 − 𝜌2)−1] 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,
]
𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
0𝛴−1∕2
𝑓
]
𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

)2 − 1

𝜌4(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛾 −2

𝑢

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢

)2 − 1
]
)

−2𝛴𝑓 𝑛∗𝑞∗

5 (1 − 𝑛∗

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢

𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

𝛴−1
𝑧 .

𝛿 𝛴𝑓 )−1] 𝛴−1
𝑧 ,

In the first-order approximation equilibria, investors’ trading profits are

𝜋𝐼 ≈ −𝛴−1

𝛿 𝛾 −1𝛴𝑓 +

[

𝜌𝑞1 − 𝜌2𝛾 −2𝛴−1

𝛿 (1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛴−1

𝑓 𝑞5

(C.5)

(C.6)

It follows directly by plugging the first order approxima-
Proof.
tion equilibrium parameters of Proposition C.1 into expected certainty
equivalents of Corollary 3, and trading profits of Corollary C.1. We
omitted the details. □

Proposition C.3.

In the first-order approximation equilibria,

𝐶𝐸𝐼

≥ 𝐶𝐸∗

𝐼 , 𝐶𝐸𝑆

(a) if 𝛴𝑧 > ̄𝛴1, all investors are worse off from disclosure, that is,
𝐻 , where ̄𝛴1 is given by (C.7).
(b) if 𝛴𝑧 > ̄𝛴2, disclosure increases the insider’s expected trading profit
but decreases outside investors’ expected trading profits: 𝜋∗
𝐼 > 𝜋𝐼 ,
𝑆 < 𝜋𝑆 , and 𝜋∗
𝜋∗

𝐻 < 𝜋𝐻 , where ̄𝛴2 is given by (C.8).

𝑆 , 𝐶𝐸𝐻

≥ 𝐶𝐸∗

≥ 𝐶𝐸∗

(a) From Proposition C.2, in the first-order approximation
Proof.
equilibria, we could get the estimations of lower boundaries such that
disclosure is worse off for the insider, speculators and the hedger. That
is, E[𝐶𝐸𝑡] > E[𝐶𝐸∗
𝑧,1 = 𝛾 −2[
𝛴𝐼

(1 − 𝜌2)−1 − 𝑛∗(1 − 𝜌2)(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)−2)

𝑡 ] when 𝛴𝑧 > 𝛴𝑡
𝑧,1

, 𝑡 ∈ {𝐼, 𝑆, 𝐻}, where

+ 2𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿 𝛴𝑓

𝜌2(

]

(1 − 𝑛∗𝜌2)(1 − 𝜌2)−1(1 − 𝑛∗)−1𝛴−1
𝑓 ,
(1 + 𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1

𝑓 (1 − 𝑛∗)−1(1 + 𝛴−1

𝛴𝑆
𝑧,1 = 𝛴−1
+ 𝑛∗𝛾𝛴𝛿
{

𝛴𝐻

𝑧,1 =
[[

𝛴𝑢𝑞5

𝛾

(1 − 𝑛∗

[

𝛿 𝛴𝑓 )−1{
𝛴𝑓 (1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
[
𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
0𝛴−1∕2
5 (1 − 𝑛∗

𝛿 + 1 + (1 − 𝜌2)−1]
𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

0𝛴−1∕2

)2 − 1

]

𝑢

𝑢

−

] }
)

− 2𝛴𝑓 𝑛∗𝑞∗

𝜌4(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛾 −2

𝛿 )(1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1

𝛿 )𝑞2
5

𝛿 )𝑝3 − 𝜌4𝛾 −3(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−1
𝛿

]}

,

𝛾 −1𝛴−1
𝑓

Define

(

̄𝛴1

≡ max

[
(1 − 𝑛∗

0𝛴−1∕2

𝑢

𝛾 −1𝛴−1∕2
𝑓

)2 − 1

]−1

.

𝑧,1, 𝛴𝐻
𝛴𝐼

𝑧,1, 𝛴𝑆

𝑧,1

)

.

(C.7)

Therefore, when 𝛴𝑧 > ̄𝛴1, all investors are worse off from disclosure.
(b) Again, from Proposition C.2, in the first-order approximation
equilibria, we can obtain lower boundaries of 𝛴𝑧 such that disclosure
increase the insider’s expected trading profit but decrease these of
outside investors. That is, 𝜋∗
𝐼 > 𝜋𝐼 , 𝜋∗
𝐻 < 𝜋𝐻 , when
𝛴𝑧 > 𝛴𝑡
, 𝑡 ∈ {𝐼, 𝑆, 𝐻}, where
𝑧,2

𝑆 < 𝜋𝑆 , and 𝜋∗

𝛿 (1 − 𝜌2)−1𝛴−1

𝑓 𝑞5 − 𝛾 −2(1 − 𝜌2)−2𝛴−2

𝑓 𝜌2𝑞5

𝛴𝐼
𝑧,2 = 𝛴𝛿𝛾𝛴−1

[
𝜌𝑞1 − 𝜌2𝛾 −2𝛴−1
] ,

𝑓
− 2𝛾(1 − 𝜌2)𝜌−1𝑞1𝑞5

[

[

𝛴𝑆

𝑧,2 =

𝑛∗

𝑞∗
3 𝛴𝑓 −

𝜌4(1 − 𝜌2)2𝛾 −3𝛴−1

𝛿
𝛿 𝛴𝑓

1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1
𝛿 )𝛴−1

𝛴𝛿𝛾(1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1

[
𝑞5𝛴𝑢 − 𝑛∗

(

𝛴𝐻

𝑧,2 =

𝑞∗
3 𝛴𝑓 −

𝑓 (1 − 𝑛∗)−1(1 + 𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1
𝜌4(1 − 𝜌2)2𝛾 −3𝛴−1

)]

𝛿 )−1,

𝛿
𝛿 𝛴𝑓

1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1
𝛿 𝛴𝑓 )𝛾𝛴𝛿(𝑛∗)−1𝛴−1
𝑓

× (1 + (1 − 𝑛∗)𝛴−1

]

]

+ 𝛾 −1𝛴−1

𝛿 (1 − 𝛴𝑓 𝛴−1

𝛿 )𝑞2
5

Define

(

)

̄𝛴2

≡ max

𝑧,2, 𝛴𝐻
𝛴𝐼
So, when 𝛴𝑧 > ̄𝛴2, we have 𝜋∗

𝑧,2, 𝛴𝑆

𝑧,2

.

𝐼 > 𝜋𝐼 , 𝜋∗

𝑆 < 𝜋𝑆 , and 𝜋∗

𝐻 < 𝜋𝐻 . □

(C.8)

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391319J. Deng et al.

Appendix D. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103913.

References

Admati, A.R., Pfleiderer, P., 1988. A theory of intraday patterns: volume and price

variability. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1 (1), 3–40.

Admati, A.R., Pfleiderer, P., 1991. Sunshine trading and financial market equilibrium.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 4 (3), 443–481.

Aıt-Sahalia, Y., Lo, A.W., 2000. Nonparametric risk management and implied risk

aversion. J. Econometrics 94 (1–2), 9–51.

Ausubel, L.M., 1990. Insider trading in a rational expectations economy. Am. Econ.

Rev. 80, 1022–1041.

Bliss, R.R., Panigirtzoglou, N., 2004. Option-implied risk aversion estimates. J. Finance

59 (1), 407–446.

Bodnar, T., Okhrin, Y., Vitlinskyy, V., Zabolotskyy, T., 2018. Determination and

estimation of risk aversion coefficients. Comput. Manag. Sci. 15, 297–317.

Buffa, A.M., 2014. Insider trade disclosure, market efficiency, and liquidity. Available

at SSRN 1102126.

Carré, S., Collin-Dufresne, P., Gabriel, F., 2022. Insider trading with penalties. J.

Econom. Theory 203, 105461.

Cohen, L., Malloy, C., Pomorski, L., 2012. Decoding inside information. J. Finance 67

(3), 1009–1043.

Dávila, E., Parlatore, C., 2023. Volatility and informativeness. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (3),

550–572.

DeMarzo, P.M., Fishman, M.J., Hagerty, K.M., 1998. The optimal enforcement of insider

trading regulations. J. Polit. Econ. 106 (3), 602–632.

Dye, R.A., 1984. Inside trading and incentives. J. Bus. 57, 295–313.
Easley, D., O’Hara, M., Yang, L., 2016. Differential access to price information in

financial markets. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 51 (4), 1071–1110.

Fishman, M.J., Hagerty, K.M., 1992. Insider trading and the efficiency of stock prices.

Rand J. Econ. 23, 106–122.

Glosten, L.R., 1989. Insider trading, liquidity, and the role of the monopolist specialist.

J. Bus. 62, 211–235.

Goldstein, I., Yang, L., 2022. Commodity financialization and information transmission.

J. Finance 77 (5), 2613–2667.

Hawke Jr, J., Malkiel, B., Miller, M., Scholes, M., 1988. Final Report of the Committee
of Inquiry Appointed by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to Examine the Events
Surrounding October 19, 1987. Committee of Inquiry, Chicago, IL.

Hirshleifer, J., 1971. The private and social value of information and the reward to

inventive activity. Am. Econ. Rev. 69 (4), 561–574.

Huddart, S., Hughes, J.S., Levine, C.B., 2001. Public disclosure and dissimulation of

insider trades. Econometrica 69 (3), 665–681.

Huddart, S.J., Hughes, J.S., Williams, M., 2010. Pre-announcement of insiders’ trades.

Available at SSRN 216168.

Jagolinzer, A.D., 2009. SEC Rule 10b5-1 and insiders’ strategic trade. Manag. Sci. 55

(2), 224–239.

Kacperczyk, M.T., Pagnotta, E., 2020. Becker meets kyle: Legal risk and insider trading.

Available at SSRN 3142006.

Kyle, A.S., 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Larcker, D.F., Lynch, B., Quinn, P., Tayan, B., Taylor, D.J., 2021. Gaming the system:

Three ‘‘red flags’’ of potential 10b5-1 abuse. Available at SSRN 3769567.

Leland, H.E., 1992. Insider trading: Should it be prohibited? J. Polit. Econ. 100 (4),

859–887.

Lenkey, S.L., 2014. Advance disclosure of insider trading. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (8),

2504–2537.

Lenkey, S.L., 2017. Insider trading and the short-swing profit rule. J. Econom. Theory

169, 517–545.

Lenkey, S.L., 2019. Cancellable insider trading plans: an analysis of SEC rule 10b5-1.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 4947–4996.

Lenkey, S.L., 2021. Informed trading with a short-sale prohibition. Manage. Sci. 67 (3),

1803–1824.

Longstaff, F.A., 2009. Portfolio claustrophobia: Asset pricing in markets with illiquid

assets. Amer. Econ. Rev. 99 (4), 1119–1144.

Manne, H.G., 1966. Insider Trading and the Stock Market. Free Press.
Manove, M., 1989. The harm from insider trading and informed speculation. Q. J. Econ.

104 (4), 823–845.

Medran, L.A., Vives, X., 2004. Regulating insider trading when investment matters.

Rev. Finance 8 (2), 199–277.

Mele, A., Sangiorgi, F., 2021. Insider trading regulation and market quality tradeoffs.

Available at SSRN 3886619.

Peress, J., 2004. Wealth, information acquisition, and portfolio choice. Rev. Financ.

Stud. 17 (3), 879–914.

Reeb, D.M., Zhang, Y., Zhao, W., 2014. Insider trading in supervised industries. J. Law

Econ. 57 (3), 529–559.

Stein, J.C., 1987.

Informational externalities and welfare-reducing speculation. J.

Political Econ. 95 (6), 1123–1145.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Veldkamp, L., 2010.

Information acquisition and under-

diversification. Rev. Econ. Stud. 77 (2), 779–805.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391320