Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

From Man vs. Machine to Man + Machine: The art and AI of stock analyses✩
Sean Cao a, Wei Jiang b,∗, Junbo Wang c, Baozhong Yang d
a Robert H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, United States of America
b Goizueta Business School, Emory University, United States of America
c E.J. Ourso College of Business, Louisiana State University, United States of America
d J. Mack Robinson College of Business, Georgia State University, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

An AI analyst trained to digest corporate disclosures, industry trends, and macroeconomic indicators surpasses
most analysts in stock return predictions. Nevertheless, humans win ‘‘Man vs. Machine’’ when institutional
knowledge is crucial, e.g., involving intangible assets and financial distress. AI wins when information is
transparent but voluminous. Humans provide significant incremental value in ‘‘Man + Machine’’, which also
substantially reduces extreme errors. Analysts catch up with machines after ‘‘alternative data’’ become available
if their employers build AI capabilities. Documented synergies between humans and machines inform how
humans can leverage their advantage for better adaptation to the growing AI prowess.

Dataset link: Data_Submit_2.7z (Original data)

JEL classification:
C55
G12
G14
G17
G24
O33

Keywords:
Artificial intelligence
Machine learning
FinTech
Stock analyst
Alternative data
Disruptive innovation

1. Introduction

Since the inception of artificial intelligence (AI) and as it continues
to rise, AI has constantly made human beings rethink their own roles.
While AI is meant to augment human intelligence, concerns abound

that it could replace humans in increasingly skilled tasks and thus
displace jobs currently performed by better paid and highly educated
workers (Muro et al., 2019). Such concern and the associated debates
have motivated a rapidly growing literature. Recent work by Webb

✩

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. The authors are grateful to helpful suggestions from the editor and two anonymous referees. We have
benefited from discussions with Simona Abis (discussant), Jules van Binsbergen (discussant), Francesco D’Acunto (discussant), Svetlana Bryzgalova (discussant),
Si Cheng (discussant), Jungho Choi (discussant), Will Cong, Jin-chuan Duan, Michael Gofman (discussant), Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham (discussant), Jillian Grennan,
Bing Han, Jingyu He (discussant), Gerard Hoberg, Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, Mark Liu (discussant), Bin Li (discussant), Roxana Mihet (discussant), Markus Pelger,
Uday Rajan, Siew Hong Teoh, Paul Tetlock, Cristian Tiu (discussant), Eric Yeung (discussant), Haifeng You (discussant), Rodrigo Verdi, Joe Weber, Michael Weber,
Hong Zhang, Xiaoyan Zhang, Guofu Zhou, Luofeng Zhou, and Christina Zhu (discussant), and comments and suggestions from seminar/conference participants
at the NBER Economics of AI Conference, the Stanford Engineering AI & Big Data in Finance Research Forum (ABFR) webinar, AFA, AllianceBernstein, Bank of
Japan, Baruch, Case Western, CICF, CFEA, CFRC, CFTRC, CKGSB, Copenhagen Business School, CUHK-Shenzhen, Econometric Society China Meetings, ESSEC,
FARS, Fordham, Frankfurt School of Finance & Management, Fintech: Innovation, Inclusion and Risks Conference, HARC, ITAM, Louisiana State University, MIT
Sloan, National University of Singapore, Northern Illinois University, Stockholm School of Economics AI conference, Texas A&M, Tsinghua PBC, University of
Cambridge, University of Florida Machine learning Conference, University of Mississippi, University of New Orleans, the Annual Conference on Digital Economics,
the Quantitative Work Alliance at Boston (QWAFAFEW), the 28th Finance Forum at the Nova School of Business and Economics, NEOMA, the Midwest Finance
Annual Conference, the Northern Finance Association conference, Penn State Empirical Accounting Conference, 3rd Shanghai Financial Forefront Symposium, SFS
Cavalcade Asia, and the UT Dallas Finance Conference. We appreciate the computing resources offered by the Advanced Research Computing Technology and
Innovation Core at GSU, High Performance Computing from LSU and excellent research assistance by Soyun Nam and Meng Wang.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: scao824@umd.edu (S. Cao), wei.jiang@emory.edu (W. Jiang), junbowang@lsu.edu (J. Wang), bzyang@gsu.edu (B. Yang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103910
Received 21 June 2022; Received in revised form 6 July 2024; Accepted 9 July 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)103910Availableonline22July20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.S. Cao et al.

(2020), Acemoglu et al. (2022), Babina et al. (2024), and Jiang et al.
(2023) has all conducted large-sample analyses on the extent of job
exposure and vulnerability to AI-related technology, as well as the
consequences for employment and productivity.

The existing literature has mostly been focusing on characterizing
the type of jobs that are vulnerable to disruption by AI’s evolution,
as well as those it could create. In other words, the sentiment of
existent studies mostly involves a theme of ‘‘Man versus Machine’’,
which characterizes the contest between humans and AI, explores the
ways humans adapt and predicts the resulting job redeployments. In
such settings, human beings are often rendered passive or reactive,
dealing with disruptions and looking for new opportunities defined by
the AI landscape. There has been relatively little research devoted to
prescribing how skilled human workers could tap into higher potential
with enhancement from AI technology, which is presumably the pri-
mary goal for humans to design and develop AI in the first place. This
study aims to connect the contest of ‘‘Man versus Machine’’ (‘‘Man vs.
Machine’’ hereafter) to a potential equilibrium of ‘‘Man plus Machine’’
(‘‘Man + Machine’’ hereafter).

Our study could be motivated by the experience of chess grand-
master Garry Kasparov. The story that IBM’s Deep Blue beat the then
reigning grand master in 1997 is well known. Afterwards, multiple
contests repeated in a similar setting killed any remaining suspense
for the outcome of Man vs. Machine in chess playing. What is far
less known is that humans, despite having lost interest in man-versus-
machine chess contests, have not lost interest in either the game or the
machine. In fact, the encounter with Deep Blue was a catalyst for people
like Kasparov to pioneer the concept of Man + Machine matches, in
which a chess player equipped with AI assistance (a ‘‘centaur’’ player)
competes against AI. Up to today, the centaur has kept an upper hand
against machines; and even more encouragingly, there have been more
and better human chess players with the advent of affordable AI-based
chess programs.1

If AI can help more humans become better chess players, it stands
to reason that it can help more of us become better at many skilled
jobs, including pilots, medical doctors, and investment advisors. In this
study, we zoom in on the profession of stock analysis, whose data
availability allows us to calibrate both Man vs. Machine and Man +
Machine. Stock analysts are among the most important information
intermediaries in the marketplace (e.g., Brav and Lehavy, 2003; Je-
gadeesh et al., 2004; Crane and Crotty, 2020). Their job, which requires
both institutional knowledge and data analytics, has not been spared
by AI, as making powerful and fast predictions at a relatively low cost
is at the heart of the technology (Agrawal and Goldfarb, 2018). More
and more investors have begun to heed AI-powered recommendations
about stock picking and portfolio formation.2

To trace the path from ‘‘Man vs. Machine’’ to ‘‘Man + Machine’’,
we decided to build our own AI model for 12-month stock returns
predictions (inferred from 12-month target prices), to be compared
to analyst forecasts made at the same time on the same stock. Such
a process provides a consistent and time-adapted benchmark for AI
performance that we understand and are able to explain. Earnings
and target prices (from which one could infer stock returns) are the
two most important subjects of analyst forecasts. We choose the latter
as our primary target variable because earnings are more subject to
managerial discretion, often made in the direction to meet (or slightly

1 Source of information: The Inevitable, by Kevin Kelly, Penguin Publishing
Group, 2016. See also ‘‘Defeated chess champ Garry Kasparov has made peace
with AI’’, Wired, February 2020.

2 Sources: ‘‘What machine learning will mean for asset managers’’, Robert
C. Pozen and Jonathan Ruane, Harvard Business Review, December 3, 2019.
‘‘How startup investors can utilize AI to make smarter investments’’, Jia Wertz,
Forbes, January 18, 2019.

beat) consensus analyst forecast,3 making it an unfair comparison for
the AI model for which such a feedback effect is absent.

Our ‘‘AI analyst’’ is built on training a combination of current ma-
chine learning (ML) tool kits using timely, publicly available data and
information. More specifically, we collect firm-level, industry-level, and
macroeconomic variables, as well as textual information from firms’
disclosures, news, and social media (updated to right before the time
of an analyst forecast), as inputs or predictors. We deliberately exclude
information from analyst forecasts (past and current) themselves so that
the AI model does not benefit from analyst insights. Machine learning
models have been shown to outpace traditional economics models (such
as regressions) in such a setting thanks to their advantages in man-
aging high-dimensional and unstructured data, and in their flexibility
in optimizing and fitting unspecified functional forms. More recent
development in the area has made significant progress in mitigating
overfitting and thus improving out-of-sample performance.

We select a set of state-of-the-art machine learning models and
build our AI analyst based on an ensemble model. Our AI analyst
is able to beat human analysts as a whole: the AI analyst outper-
forms in 54.5% of the stock return predictions made by all I/B/E/S
analysts during the sample period of 2001 to 2018. The machine’s
advantage could arise from its superior ability to process information,
or its immunity from predictable human biases due to incentives or
psychological traits (e.g., Abarbanell, 1991; Stickel, 1990). To separate
the two, we compare AI predictions with ‘‘debiased’’ analyst forecasts
where biases are predicted and then removed using machine learning
(henceforth, ‘‘Machine–debiased Man’’ or ‘‘MDM’’ forecasts). Such an
improved version of human analyst still trails the machine (MDM only
outperforms AI in 46.5% of forecasts), suggesting that ‘‘correctable’’
biases explain around 22% of the Man–Machine gap.4

The power of AI aside, we are more interested in knowing the
circumstances under which human analysts retain their advantage, in
that a forecast made by an analyst beats the concurrent AI forecast in
terms of lower squared forecast error relative to the ex post realization
(i.e., the actual 12-month stock price). We find that human analysts
perform better for smaller and more illiquid firms and those with asset-
light business models (i.e., higher intangible assets), consistent with the
notion that such firms are subject to higher information asymmetry
and require better institutional knowledge or industry experience to
decipher. Analysts affiliated with large brokerage houses also stand a
higher chance of beating AI thanks to a combination of their abilities
and the research resources available to them. Analysts are more likely
to have the upper hand when the firm is in a dynamically competitive
environment or is subject to higher distress risk, again revealing AI’s
limitation in analyzing unfamiliar and rapidly evolving situations.5
As expected, AI enjoys a clear advantage in its capacity to process
information and is more likely to outsmart analysts when the volume
of public information is larger.

Just like the centaur chess player which Kasparov pioneered, the
superior performance of an AI analyst does not rule out the value
of human inputs. If humans and machines have relative advantages
in information processing and decision making, then human analysts
can still contribute critically to a ‘‘centaur analyst’’. After we add
analyst forecasts to the information set of the machine learning models

3 A large accounting literature documents such an effect (e.g., Abarbanell
and Lehavy, 2003; Doyle et al., 2013). The cash flow (as opposed to the
accrual) component of the earnings is less discretionary; but unfortunately only
3.9% of the I/B/E/S earnings observations contain separate forecasts on the
cash flow component, making a large sample comparison infeasible.

4 Since analysts outperform AI in 45.5% of the cases, the percentage

attributable to bias correction is (46.5 - 45.5)/(50 - 45.5) = 22%.

5 This is consistent with the limitation of current machine learning and
AI models which still lack reasoning functions to handle unfamiliar situations
well. Source: ‘‘What AI still can’t do’’, Brian Bergstein, MIT Technology Review,
February 19, 2020.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039102S. Cao et al.

underlying our AI analyst, the resulting ‘‘Man + Machine’’ model out-
performs 54.8% of the forecasts of the AI-only model. Furthermore, we
find inputs from analysts are more valuable when covering firms that
are more illiquid and those with more intangible assets. In addition,
analyst input has more incremental value when a firm faces a higher
risk of distress. Importantly, the incremental value of humans does
not decrease as the volume of information (hence the demand for
processing capacity) increases, though this constitutes a disadvantage
for humans working alone.

The synergy between humans and machines is correlated with, but
goes beyond, the incremental information value of the analyst forecast
to that made by AI. An alternative measure for the synergy could be
uncovered from the residuals in forecast errors by Man + Machine that
are not explained by forecast errors by either side alone. Synergies turn
out to be correlated with characteristics that provide human advantage
(trading illiquidity and close to default) as well as those that favor
machine advantage (frequent corporate events and large market cap).
Moreover, man–machine synergies are higher when data is relatively
sparse and situations are fast evolving. Perhaps most importantly, the
Man + Machine model avoids about ninety percent of extreme errors
made by analysts and forty percent of those by the AI (while with
minimal creation of its own large errors). To the extent that large errors
are calamitous in many skilled professions, there is substantial benefit
in combining human and AI capabilities.

Finally, we resort to an event study to sharpen the inference of
the impact of integrating humans and machines in stock analyses. In
recent years, the infrastructure of ‘‘big data’’ has created a new class of
information about companies that is collected and published outside of
the firms, and this information provides unique and timely clues about
investment opportunities. An important and popular type of alternative
data captures ‘‘consumer footprints’’, often in the literal sense, such
as satellite images of retail parking lots. Such data, which must be
processed by machine learning models, have been shown to contain
incremental information on stock prices (Zhu, 2019; Katona et al.,
2024). We build on data from (Katona et al., 2024) on the staggered
introduction of several important alternative databases and conduct a
difference-in-differences test of analysts’ performance versus our own
AI model before and after the availability of the alternative data. The
underlying premise is that analysts who cover firms while using this
alternative data could be in the situation of Man + Machine, as they
have the opportunity to use the additional AI-processed information. In-
deed, we find that post alternative data, analysts covering affected firms
improve their performance relative to the AI model we build, which
serves as a benchmark. Furthermore, such improvement concentrates
on the subset of analysts who are affiliated with brokerage firms with
strong AI capabilities, measured by AI-related hiring using the Burning
Glass U.S. job posting data.

Overall, this study supports the hypothesis that analyst capabilities
could be augmented by AI, and more importantly, that analysts’ work
possesses incremental value to and synergies with AI modeling, espe-
cially in unusual and fast-evolving situations. In high-stake situations,
‘‘centaur players’’ are particularly helpful in subduing severe prediction
errors. This unique finding has important implications for the safety
and robustness of AI assistants while retaining the critical roles of
humans in decision making. If there is some external validity from chess
and stock analysis to skilled workers in general, the inference from
our study provides guidance on how humans can leverage their own
strength and be better adapted in the age of AI.

2. Literature, data construction, and machine learning models

2.1. Relation to the literature

Our work is related to the rapidly growing literature on the com-
petition and threat to human workers posed by new technology in-

cluding robots and AI.6 This literature overall finds that when low-
or intermediate-skill jobs are replaced by machines, humans tend to
move to high-skill jobs that are more difficult to replace (Autor et al.,
2003). While most recent studies highlight how AI innovations disrupt
many high-skill jobs, our study focuses on humans’ relative advantage
over machines and, more importantly, the potential synergies between
humans and machines. We envision a future in which AI and machines
can assist humans with the more tedious and quantitative tasks and
democratize access to information, while allowing humans to be more
creative and productive.7

A few recent and contemporaneous papers also study the impact of
big data and AI in the financial industry. Abis (2022) studies how quan-
titative investment strategies influence mutual fund performance. Abis
and Veldkamp (2024) examine the change in labor shares in the finan-
cial industry driven by the new data management and AI jobs. Coleman
et al. (2022) compare the performance of robot analysts from fintech
companies with that of human analysts. Grennan and Michaely (2020,
2021) study how analysts perform and adjust in response to the advent
of AI-processed recommendations in the markets. Rossi and Utkus
(2021) compare human asset managers with robot advisors. Agrawal
et al. (2019b) discuss the ambiguous impact of AI on labor given the
elements of AI that tend toward automating decisions versus enhancing
human decisions. Jansen et al. (2023) analyze human and machine
decisions in loan underwriting. Cao et al. (2023b) study the impact of
AI readership on corporate disclosure policies. Finally, Pagliaro et al.
(2023) consider human interactions with algorithmic wealth manage-
ment advisors. Our paper differs from the existing literature in that
we explore the internal mechanism of the AI process we constructed
ourselves instead of market-level proxies,8 and aim to identify their
relative advantages to, as well as synergies with, humans using model
inputs and outputs in our own hands.

We also contribute to the literature of building and assessing the
performance of machine learning models in financial applications,
such as in predicting asset prices (Gu et al., 2020, Brogaard and
Zareei, 2022), robo-advising (D’Acunto and Ross, 2019), managing
portfolios (Chen et al., 2023; Cong et al., 2022), estimating values
of artwork (Aubry et al., 2023), forecasting earnings (van Binsbergen
et al., 2023; Cao and You, 2024, de Silva and Thesmar, 2024), making
lending decisions (Liu, 2022), classifying and evaluating innovations
(Chen et al., 2019; Zheng, 2022) and estimating bank risk (Hanley
and Hoberg, 2019).9 While the structure of our analysis shares simi-
larity with some of the papers, notably de Silva and Thesmar (2024)
and van Binsbergen et al. (2023) which calibrate biases in analyst
expectations regarding earnings using author-developed AI model, the
primary research questions of our paper are different from theirs. de
Silva and Thesmar (2024) and van Binsbergen et al. (2023) focus on
the term structure of analyst biases, and link them to corporate actions
such as security issuance, while our ultimate goal is to explore the
complementary value humans can offer in the age of AI once we have
a good understanding of their relative advantage.

6 An incomplete list of recent papers includes Aghion et al. (2019), Ace-
moglu and Restrepo (2018, 2019), Brynjolfsson et al.
(2018), Webb
(2020), Ray and Mookherjee (2022), Cao et al. (2023a), Acemoglu et al.
(2022), and Jiang et al. (2023).

7 Due to the complementary nature of AI and humans, the advent of
AI technologies can potentially create more jobs than they destroy. See
‘‘Artificial intelligence to create 58 million new jobs by 2022, says report’’,
Amit Chowdry, Forbes, September 18, 2018.

8 For example, Grennan and Michaely (2020) resort to the amount of social
media information as a proxy for the AI research intensity for a stock, and
focus on analysts’ response to the AI shock. This study, in contrast, aims at
decipher the nature of the AI shock.

9 See also Cong et al. (2020), Martin and Nagel (2022) and Goldstein et al.

(2021) for surveys and discussions of methodologies.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039103S. Cao et al.

In summary, our study contributes to the emerging literature study-
ing the implications of combining humans and machines in the fi-
nancial markets.10 Given the increasing presence of machines and AI
beyond finance, we also hope that this case study contributes to a
better understanding of how technology can complement and improve
humans, bringing to fruition the original mission of AI development.11

CRSP and Compustat, the final sample consists of 1,153,565 12-month
target price forecasts on 6315 firms issued by 11,890 analysts from 861
brokerage firms, and 5,885,063 1-quarter to 4-quarter earnings pre-
dictions on 8062 firms issued by 14,363 analysts from 926 brokerage
firms.

2.2. Sample of forecasts

2.3. Building the information set for the AI analyst

Stock analysts routinely make forecasts on corporate earnings, price
targets, and much less often, sales and operating profits. We consider
both earnings and stock returns (implied by price target forecasts) in
our analyses but choose the latter as the main forecast objects for
two reasons. First, earnings are more subject to managerial discretion
compared to stock returns. If decomposing earnings into the cash and
accrual components, then managerial discretion is even larger over
the later part. Moreover, management exercises discretion in earnings
formation often in the direction of meeting or slightly beating analyst
forecasts (Abarbanell and Lehavy, 2003; Doyle et al., 2013), creating
a ‘‘feedback effect’’ that draws analyst forecasts closer to the realized
earnings as opposed to the true fundamentals. On the other hand, AI-
issued earnings forecasts (used in our study) are not managerial targets.
For this reason, it will not be a fair comparison between analyst and AI
forecasts in terms of matching announced earnings. In contrast, such a
feedback effect is largely absent for long-term target prices (from which
we could impute returns).

Second, valuation targets have grown in importance over cash flow
projections for investors. Early study by Asquith et al. (2005) finds that
target price forecasts provide important information, and the market
reacts strongly to target price revisions. This trend has been growing
with the ‘‘new economy’’. For example, after Nvidia announced its
financial results in May 2023, dozens of analysts promptly revised their
12-month price targets and made recommendations based on price, but
not nearly as much on earnings revisions. The Nvidia story is not a lone
event. In fact we find that analysts revise price target more frequently
than earnings forecast, and with the gap increasing from 2001 to 2018,
consistent with the argument that real-time information about price
targets receive more attention with investors, and their importance is
growing over time.12

For these reasons, we use analysts’ 12-month price forecasts as the
main target in our analyses. We also present results based earnings
forecasts for all main analyses, and explain the differences accordingly.
Our sample of analyst forecasts builds on the Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S
analyst database using data from 1996 to 2018.13 For target price
forecasts, we choose the 12-month horizon because the target prices
for other horizons are negligible (less than 1%). We consider earnings
predictions from one quarter up to four quarters as those are the most
common horizons for earnings forecasts. After merging I/B/E/S with

10 In different settings, Armour et al. (2022) study the impact of AI and the
associated digital technologies on the law profession. They find that AI-enabled
services will augment the capabilities of human lawyers and also generate
new roles for legal experts to produce such services. Brogaard et al. (2024)
find that human floor traders can complement algorithmic traders in providing
information to the market in complicated environments.

11 This echoes the mission of the Stanford Human-Centered AI Institute, ‘‘to
advance AI research, education, policy and practice to improve the human
condition’’. See https://hai.stanford.edu/about.

12 See ‘‘Nvidia Stock Hits New Closing High as Chip-Maker’s Valuation
Approaches $1 Trillion’’, May 25, 2023, Will Feuer, Wall Street Journal,
available at https://www.wsj.com/articles/nvidia-shares-jump-as-chip-maker-
approaches-1-trillion-valuation-7f8ccd68. See Table IA.7 in the Internet Ap-
pendix for the time series of
frequencies in earnings and price targets
revisions.

13 The I/B/E/S coverage prior to 1996 was limited, with fewer than 2,000

target price forecasts in total.

Given our goal to build an AI analyst to compete with professional
analysts, we need to define the information set available to such
a professional whenever a price forecast is made. We illustrate the
process to forecast the 12-month stock price for firm 𝑖 by human analyst
𝑘 on date 𝑡 (in year 𝑢), while that for earnings follows analogously.
The information set, 
𝑡, would, in an ideal setting, include all publicly
available data and information up to 𝑡−. We assume that professional
analysts do not have access to material nonpublic information, which
is essentially the requirement of Regulation FD.14 We approximate 
𝑡
with firm and industry information from CRSP and Compustat; textual
information from firms’ SEC filings, including annual reports (10-K),
quarterly reports (10-Q), material corporate news and developments
(8-K), and other reports, news sentiment from Ravenpack, and social
media coverage from Twitter and macroeconomic data from the Federal
Reserve Economic Data at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and
recent research papers.

To operationalize time adaptation, we adopt the following rolling-
window approach. For a given forecast made by a human analyst on
date 𝑡 in year 𝑢, all forecasts in the previous three years 𝑢 − 3, 𝑢 − 2, 𝑢 − 1
form the training sample. That is, data up to the dates of those forecasts
(but excluding the forecasts themselves) and the corresponding realized
prices were used to train our machine learning models. Moreover, if the
past three years include a ‘‘distress’’ year (2001, 2008, and 2009), we
expand the training window to the first year after the preceding distress
period or the start year of the dataset. The benefit of this approach is
that human analysts in a recession likely predict future prices based
on information over a full business cycle. Including the years before
distress can mimic the information used by human analysts. Moving
to the estimation sample, we then feed data available up to date
𝑡 − 1 in year 𝑢 into the trained model to make the 12-month-price
prediction at time 𝑡. Our AI analyst makes its first prediction in 2001.
Though we allow (public) information to be updated till 𝑡 − 1, most
of the information inputs came from disclosed quarterly data from the
previous eight quarters.

We considered longer training windows that include all past years
so that the training period covers one or more full business cycles.
Perhaps surprisingly, the longer training period results in slightly worse
performance (e.g., the ratio at which the AI analyst could beat human
analysts in forecasting accuracy). This highlights the trade-off between
more data in training for better fitting and robustness in out-of-sample
prediction, and the importance of a stable information structure from
the training to prediction. A short-rolling window (three-year) ensures
that the relation among firms’ fundamental conditions and external
states remains relatively stable. Perhaps for this reason, the three-
year rolling window has been standard in the asset pricing literature
(e.g., Narasimhan et al., 2019 for stock returns; Elton et al., 1996 for
mutual funds). Therefore, we keep the three-year rolling window as the
default setting, but report results from the long-window specification in
Table IA.1 of the Internet Appendix.

14 Regulation FD (‘‘fair disclosure’’),

implemented in 2000, generally
prohibits public companies from disclosing previously nonpublic, material
information to certain parties unless the information is distributed to the public
first or simultaneously.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039104S. Cao et al.

2.4. Information and variables as inputs to machine learning

Firm characteristics. The firm characteristics fed into machine learning
models are retrieved or processed based on information from standard
databases accessed via WRDS, especially CRSP/Compustat and Thom-
son Reuters Ownership databases. The first set of predictors include
stock prices at the end of the previous month as well as the stock
prices one to four years before the end of the previous month. The 12-
month returns over the past 5 years are also included, together with
the realized earnings within the past 3, 6, 9, 12, 24, and 36 months.
We also include a number of firm characteristics known to predict
cross-sectional differences of the stock prices.15 Variables in this group
are constructed quarterly using information available at the previous
quarter-end.

Industry variables. We compose a set of industry-level variables that
capture competition, industry dynamics, and other factors relevant
for firm valuation based on the existent literature. These variables
include (i) The competition measure from 10-Ks following (Li et al.,
2013), which captures the degree of competition resulting from rivalry
within and across industries as perceived by the management; (ii) the
product market fluidity measure following (Hoberg et al., 2014), which
quantifies the product market poaching threat posed by the movement
of competitors toward the focal firm; (iii) industry affiliation with the
Fama–French 12 industries (12 indicator variables); (iv) industry size,
measured by the number of firms in the Fama–French 12 industry
within the past 3, 6, 9, 12, 24, and 36 months; and (v) equally weighted
industry average earnings per share realized within the past 3, 6, 9, 12,
24, and 36 months.

Macro variables. Macroeconomic and stock market development are
common factors to all firms’ valuation and returns (e.g., Fama and
French, 1989; Chen et al., 1986). We first include the following vari-
ables: (i) Industrial Production Index; (ii) Consumer Price Index; (iii)
Crude oil price (WTI); (iv) three-month treasury bill rate; (v) ten-year
treasury constant-maturity rate; and (vi) The BAA–AAA yield spread,
obtained from the Federal Reserve Economic Data at the Federal Re-
serve Bank of St. Louis on a monthly frequency. We also consider
macro state variables commonly used in the business cycle literature,
including (1) dividend yield (Fama and French, 1989), (2) stock market
illiquidity (Chen et al., 2018), (3) new orders (Jones and Tuzel, 2013);
(4) technical indicators (Neely et al., 2014); (5) average correlation
of largest stocks in the SP500 index (Pollet and Wilson, 2010). These
variables are constructed in Goyal et al. (2024) (and have been shown
to be related to asset prices by Wayne et al. (2024)) at the monthly
frequency.16 While macroeconomic state variables serve as predic-
tors/inputs, our machine-learning model is able to incorporate their
interactions with other variables, effectively making them conditioning
variables as well.

Corporate disclosure, news, social media, patents. One leading strength of
AI over human beings is the former’s ability to digest large volume of
information. One new edge that machine learning models boast over
traditional statistical methods is the capacity to process unstructured
textual data based on firms’ SEC filings (including annual reports
(10-K), quarterly reports (10-Q), corporate news (8-K), and other re-
ports), news articles, and social media. The new developments allow
researchers to quantify information which was considered qualitative
or ‘‘soft’’, commonly termed ‘‘sentiments’’.

Several different sets of sentiment variables from textual data serve
as inputs to our AI analyst. The first is based on the (Loughran and Mc-
Donald, 2011) sentiment, which has been widely used in the academic

literature. We calculate the frequency of positive and negative senti-
ment words from the firm-issued SEC filings following (Loughran and
McDonald, 2011). The second set of machine-learning-based sentiment
variables follow (Cao et al., 2021b), who trained a deep-learning neural
network model to incorporate contextual information and syntactic
relations between performance-related words. The second approach
aims to isolate managerial sentiment related to the firm’s future per-
formance from sentiment regarding other issues (such as location and
weather). The third set of variables are macro and firm-specific news
sentiment variables from Ravenpack, which covers more than 40,000
news media sources globally. Finally, we include Twitter sentiment
variables following (Cao et al., 2021a). Patents filed by firms contain
important information regarding firms’ innovation capacity and future
growth prospects. We thus provide the annual firm-level patent value
following (Kogan et al., 2017) as an additional input for the AI analyst.

2.5. Potential factors for the relative performance of AI and human analysts

A main objective of the study is to assess the factors that contribute
to the relative performance of AI vs. humans as well as the synergy
between the two. We hypothesize that these factors are related to the
information environment of the firm, industry, and analysts. Needless
to say, equity analysts are often evaluated along dimensions other than
forecast accuracy, such as promoting investment banking or trading
businesses, and intermediating between firms and large investors. We
focus on forecast accuracy, not only because it is objective and quan-
tifiable, but also because it represents a primary quality in analyst
evaluation (Stickel, 1992; Desai et al., 2019).

We first consider the following firm-level variables: the Amihud
Illiquidity measure (Amihud, 2002), which is the ratio of absolute daily
stock return to the daily trading volume (in dollars); Log Market Cap,
the logarithm of market capitalization; Number of Information Events,
which is the number of firm-specific information events within 90
days in Capital IQ Key Development data and represents the volume
of available information about the firm; Text Complexity, given by
the Flesch Kincaid Grade Level of corporate filings, that measures the
complexity and difficulty of texts based on U.S. school grade levels;
and Intangible Assets, defined as the first principal component of three
proxies: one minus the ratio of PP&E to total assets, organization capital
scaled by assets, and knowledge capital scaled by assets. The other two
measures, derived from the accumulation of SG&A and R&D expendi-
tures, are constructed following (Ewens et al., 2024) (see e.g., Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou, 2013, 2014; Peters and Taylor, 2017; Falato et al.,
2022 for the modeling and development of these and related measures
of intangible capital).

We further include a number of variables that characterize the
information environment and resources for analysts: Star Analyst is an
analyst with an average forecast accuracy in the top quintile among
all analysts for the past six months; # Analysts in Brokerage Firm
is the number of analysts and proxies for the size and resources of
the brokerage firm; % Institutional Holdings is the 13F institutional
holdings as a percentage of shares outstanding, which can reflect the
prevalence of informative investors; Distance to Default is the distance
to default calculated following (Merton, 1974) and proxies for default
risk for firms;17 Industry Recession is an indicator variable that equals
one if the FF-48 industry return in the previous year is negative and
in the bottom quintile of Fama–French 48 industry returns and zero
otherwise; Fluidity represents the competition firms face in the product
markets by tracing changes in rival firms’ products relative to the firm’s
products (Hoberg et al., 2014); and Time Trend equals the number of
years elapsed from the beginning of the sample (2001). The final set
of variables are related to analysts’ access to alternative data and AI
resources, which will be introduced in Section 5.3. Table 1 presents
the summary statistics of variables.

15 We list all variables serving as inputs into the machine learning models,

their definitions, and sources in Table A.1 in Appendix A.

16 We are grateful to Amit Goyal for sharing the data with us.

17 We thank the National University of Singapore’s Credit Research Initiative

for providing the distance to default data.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039105S. Cao et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics.
This table reports the summary statistics of key variables. The firm-level, industry-level, and macroeconomic variables are defined in Section 2.5.
The AI and alternative data variables AI Hiring, Alt Data Covered, and Post are defined as follows. textitAI Hiring is the ratio of the number of
AI jobs to the total number of job postings. Alt Data Covered is an indicator variable equal to one if alternative data are available for the firm
by the end of the sample, and if the firm is in an industry with retail footprints. Post is an indicator variable equal to one if a ‘‘treated’’ firm
has been covered by alternative data. For ‘‘untreated’’ firms, Post is coded one if the year is after 2014. The mean, median, standard deviation,
25 percentile, 75 percentile, and number of observations for the panel data are reported in the table.

Variables

Mean

Median

Std

P25

P75

N

Panel A. Firm-level, industry-level, and macroeconomic variables

Amihud Illiquidity
Intangible Assets
# Analysts in Brokerage Firm
Star Analysts
Number of Information Events
Distance to Default
Market Cap
% Institutional Holdings
Fluidity
Text Complexity
Industry Recession

0.40
0.01
0.03
0.03
2.64
5.44
8.07
0.66
7.19
16.04
0.11

Panel B. AI and alternative data variables

AI job
Alt data cover
Post

0.01
0.02
0.66

0.00
−0.13
0.04
0.00
2.64
5.20
7.98
0.77
6.48
15.96
0.00

0.00
0.00
1.00

56.10
1.11
0.01
0.16
0.69
2.64
1.68
1.85
3.66
1.22
0.31

0.07
0.40
0.47

0.00
−0.34
0.03
0.00
2.30
3.52
6.87
0.53
4.50
15.40
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.02
−0.04
0.04
0.00
3.00
6.80
9.21
0.90
9.14
16.55
0.00

0.00
0.00
1.00

352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358
352 358

56 697
56 390
56 697

2.6. Machine learning models

There are a number of candidate machine learning models de-
veloped in recent decades to build our AI analyst, including lasso,
elastic-net, support vector machines, random forest, gradient boosting,
and long short-term memory neural networks. Because the machine
learning models are essential tools but not the ultimate objectives of
this study, we provide an overview in Appendix B of the models refer-
enced where we outline the economic intuition of each methodology’s
mechanism and strength without going into in-depth technical details.
For further details, we refer the reader to representative references
in this field; for example, Goodfellow et al. (2016) and James et al.
(2023). Of the models considered, random forest, gradient boosting,
and long short-term memory neural networks are the state-of-art non-
linear models that have been increasingly used and proved of their
advantage over the other methods in the existent literature of computer
sciences, finance, and other disciplines. We note that the long short-
term memory model is a time-series machine learning model which
specializes in learning various time-series patterns, such as momentum
and reversals, from past data. With complementarity, the random forest
and gradient boosting models are adept at learning complex cross-
sectional relations among variables. Our main AI model thus is built as
an ensemble of these three models, i.e., adopts the median prediction
of the three models.

Our candidate machine learning models strive to be at the leading
edge of AI practice in investment management. They are similar to
those covered in two prominent industry reports: The JP Morgan Big
Dada and AI Strategies report and the report on Artificial Intelligence
in Asset Management by the CFA institute, and are also favored in the
current industry practice.18

3. Construction and performance of the AI analyst

While constructing an AI analyst per se is not the ultimate objective
of this study, it remains a crucial milestone for our AI analyst to reach a

18 These reports can be found at the following links: https://www.cognitivefi
nance.ai/single-post/big-data-and-ai-strategiesand https://zonavalue.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/09/CFA-Institute-artificial-intelligence-in-asset-
management.pdf. We have presented and discussed our paper and models
with about half a dozen teams who are leaders in AI-directed investments.
Most importantly, we confirmed with these teams that the rates at which AI
models beat human analysts are on par with the current state-of-art.

level of refinement where it can compete with, or even surpass, human
analysts. This achievement will allow us to investigate both the relative
strengths and the synergistic potential between machines and humans.
This section outlines the methodology employed in developing an AI
analyst of such caliber.

3.1. The predictive models

For each stock 𝑖 at time 𝑡, where 𝑡 is the day when an analyst makes a
forecast, 𝐹 𝑀𝑎𝑛
(wherein 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑡 are indices for the stock, the analyst, and
𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
the date, and the superscript 𝑀𝑎𝑛 indicates human as opposed to AI), of
the 12-month target price, we convert the forecast to the corresponding
12-month return 𝑅𝑀𝑎𝑛
for stationarity and comparability in the cross
𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
section. Because analysts make predictions about future prices, and
do not systematically provide dividend forecasts, the stock returns we
infer from the target prices exclude dividends (Brav and Lehavy, 2003).
Included in the predictive information set is all public information (as
described in Section 2 and Appendix A) up to 𝑡−. We summarize the
prediction model as

𝑅𝑖,𝑡,𝑇 = 𝑅𝐴𝐼

𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡, 𝑅𝐴𝐼

𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑓𝑡−(𝑋𝑖,𝑡−).

(1)

Here, 𝑓𝑡− is the prediction function for all stocks at time 𝑡−. This is
consistent with asset pricing models with conditioning information;
that is, we assume there is a uniform prediction model for every stock
at a given time while allowing the model to be time-varying.

Next, we compare the AI forecast 𝑅𝐴𝐼

𝑖,𝑡 and its human counterpart
𝑅𝑀𝑎𝑛
in terms of their accuracy based on the ex-post realized return
𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡,𝑇 | < |𝑅𝑀𝑎𝑛
𝑅𝑖,𝑡,𝑇 . AI beats human if |𝑅𝐴𝐼
𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡,𝑇 |, and vice versa.
We define 𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑡 to be an indicator variable for human analyst winning
against AI. Fig. 1 shows the relative performance of AI vs. human
analyst forecasts over time. Out of 922,157 forecasts made from 2001 to
2018, human analyst beats AI in 45.5% of the time. The 𝑝-value for the
percentage to be drawn from a distribution with the neutral probability
of half for this sample size is less than 0.01%. However, the human
analyst disadvantage is volatile from year to year, with a weak time
trend of improvement.

3.2. Contribution of variables to the AI prediction

The process of machine learning is often opaque. We mitigate the
opacity by examining the contribution of different groups of input
variables to the predictions of the AI model. Specifically, we divide

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039106S. Cao et al.

Fig. 1. Man vs. machine: the performance of analysts vs. AI.
This figure plots the beat ratio, or the proportion of analysts’ price forecasts that are more accurate than the corresponding AI price forecasts in each year. The blue line in the
middle plots the annual beat ratios, and the surrounding blue-dotted lines indicate the 95% confidence interval of the beat ratio. The red line gives the best linear approximation
of the time-series trend in beat ratios. The shaded gray bars represent the NBER recessions. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

the features into six groups: return-based variables, firm characteristics,
earnings (firm and industry), industry information, macroeconomic
variables, and variables extracted from textual information. We com-
pute the contribution of the groups by taking one set of variables out
at a time. Specifically, we consider a drop-one-set AI model by setting
the values of a given group of variables to their past average values in
the trained AI model. The contribution of each variable group is defined
as the difference between the squared forecast error of the full AI model
and the drop-one-set AI model, scaled by the sum. By construction, the
contributions of all groups of variables sum up to unit. Fig. 2 presents
the composition.

Each group of features contributes substantially to AI prowess.
Macro Variables and firm returns contribute the most (27.6% and
24.4%, respectively), followed by firm characteristic variables (22.0%).
The 9.3% contribution from textual information highlights the im-
portance of qualitative information. It is perhaps not surprising that
information from earnings claims the lowest share (2.0%), as such
information is likely already impounded in past returns and other firm
characteristic variables.

3.3. Debiased analysts vs. AI

It has been well documented that analysts exhibit biases in their
forecasts (e.g., Abarbanell, 1991; Stickel, 1990). There are a multi-
tude of explanations of such biases, including the incentive to issue
more favorable forecasts for corporate clients of the analysts’ affiliated
brokerage firms (Michaely and Womack, 1999), the need to obtain
access to information from the management (Lim, 2002), and human
psychological traits (e.g., De Bondt and Thaler, 1990; Hirshleifer et al.,
2019). A natural question thus arises: Could human underperformance
relative to AI be remedied simply by ‘‘debiasing’’ analyst forecasts
with a machine learning model (henceforth, ‘‘Machine–debiased Man’’
forecasts or ‘‘MDM’’), or will the human shortfall remain after such a

procedure in which case it would be due to the limitation in human
ability to acquire and process information? A comparison of MDM
forecasts with the AI analyst would reveal the nuance regarding the
innate predictive ability of analysts after filtering out their predictable
biases.

In constructing the MDM forecasts, we first predict the analyst fore-
cast errors in the next period with all current information, analogous
to Eq. (1).

log(1 + 𝑅𝑀𝑎𝑛

𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ) − log(1 + 𝑅𝑖,𝑡,𝑇 (𝑡)) = 𝑔(𝑋𝑖,𝑡−, 𝑍𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−) + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡,

(2)

where we include all variables 𝑋𝑖,𝑡− that we have employed to predict
target returns,19 and a set of analyst and brokerage-firm characteris-
tics 𝑍𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−, including the mean and standard error of analysts’ past
prediction biases, analysts’ experiences (number of years covering the
firm, the industry, or any public firm), analysts’ efforts (whether the
analysts provide forecasts of additional information such as sales or
cash flows), and brokerage firm size proxied by the number of analysts.
We use the same procedure as in Section 3.1 to train the same machine
learning model and then estimate (2). The MDM prediction is then the
analyst prediction 𝑅𝑀𝑎𝑛
𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 minus the corresponding bias as predicted by
the machine learning model. To compare the MDM with AI, we plot
the MDM beat ratio, or the frequency of MDM forecasts beating AI
forecasts, in each year from 2001 to 2018 in Fig. 3. As expected, MDM
exhibits better performance than the raw forecasts and beats the AI
more frequently than human analysts alone in most years.

Over the entire sample, MDM beats AI analysts in 46.5% of the
cases, a one percentage-point improvement over humans without debi-
asing. Since pre-debiased analysts outperform AI in 45.5% of the cases,
the enhancement amounts to a 22.2% (= (46.5%–45.5%)∕(50%–45.5%))

19 We estimate forecast errors in the logarithm of returns to alleviate the

influence of outliers in forecast errors.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039107S. Cao et al.

Fig. 2. Contribution of groups of variables to the AI prediction: take-one-out approach.
This figure plots the contribution of each group of features to the AI model’s price prediction. The features are divided into six groups: Firm Returns and Prices (past returns and
prices of stocks), Firm Characteristics, Earnings (past firm and industry earnings), Industry Variables, Macro Variables, and Textual Variables. We employ all variables to train the
model but adjust the predictors for the exclusion group to the past average value over the entire time in our sample. Afterwards, we calculate the squared errors for the predicted
values. We then compute the average squared errors for each year and aggregate them across all years. The contribution of each variable group is expressed by the increase in
the average squared errors of each group relative to the sum of increments across all groups.

closing-up of the Man–Machine gap. Given that analyst characteris-
tics are likely to be correlated with mis-incentives and agency issues
and hence their biases, we also use only analyst-specific variables
𝑍𝑖,𝑡− to predict analyst biases to produce a ‘‘lower-bound MDM’’. The
lower-bound MDM beats Machine 46.2%, implying an improvement
of (46.2%–45.5%)∕(50%–45.5%) = 15.6% over the analysts.20 We believe
both the upper and lower bounds are meaningful to calibrate how much
analyst forecasts could be improved upon if we can predict the biases
therein, since De Bondt and Thaler (1990), Michaely and Womack
(1999), Lim (2002), and Hirshleifer et al. (2019) suggest that both
incentive- and cognitive-driven bias are associated with both firm and
analyst characteristics.

bottom quantiles each year during the past one, two, three, four and
five years. The second specification is more demanding on persistent
skills as only about 7.3% of the analysts are able to stay at the top half
in each year for a five-year period. Table 2 reports the results.

Results in Table 2 show that the AI comfortably beats the analysts
in the low-skill quantiles. It is basically neck and neck to the more
successful analysts and is almost even with analysts (analyst beat ratio
of 49.3%–50.3%) who demonstrated superior performance in each of
the past five years, an excellence only achieved by less than one tenth
of all analysts.

3.5. Performance of portfolio following AI recommendations

3.4. AI vs. Analysts with persistent performance

Analysts are a large group with heterogeneous skill levels such
that forecast performance would be persistent if skills were innate.
Moreover, the market recognizes, at least partially, the relatively more
skilled analysts by responding more strongly to their forecasts or recom-
mendations (Chen et al., 2005; Li, 2005; Mikhail et al., 2007). Thus, a
higher hurdle is for our AI analyst to beat the subset of skilled analysts.
We assess the relative performance with respect to the higher hurdle
with two tests. First, we sort all analysts into the top and bottom halves
based on their average prediction error (normalized by stock prices)
over a past period with length ranging one, two, three, four, and five
years. We then track the percentage of their future forecasts that beat
our AI analyst during each time period. In the second test, we repeat the
same procedure except selecting the analysts that are among top and

20 We thank one referee for suggesting this lower bound of the improvement

brought by de-biasing.

Analysts make forecasts as a way to advise portfolio formation or
turnover. The performance of a portfolio following the analyst’s advice
is thus a natural metric for analyst skill. For the same reason, we
can form portfolios based on the different opinions between the AI
and human analysts. The performance of the resulting portfolio is a
testament of their relative proficiency. Our approach is different from
the usual one that follows analyst directional recommendations as our
model requires a clear investment horizon that is lined up with the
horizon of the signal (i.e., 12-month price target).

In each month, we gather all predictions made by all analysts and
the corresponding AI forecasts in the past 30, 60, 90, 180, and 360 days.
For each pair of predictions, if the Machine’s prediction is greater than
the median of Machine predictions in the prior month and the human’s
prediction is less than the median analyst prediction in the prior month,
we define it as a buy signal. When both conditions are negated, we
define it as a sell signal. During the given time horizon, the portfolio
will long the stock if there are more buy than sell signals and short
the stock otherwise. The portfolio is value-weighted. In a semi-annually
rebalanced portfolio, we hold the position for at least six months or

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039108S. Cao et al.

Fig. 3. Man + Machine: the performance of machine–debiased analyst vs. AI.
This figure plots the proportion of machine–debiased analyst (MDM) price forecasts that are more accurate than the machine recommendations alone on an annual basis. The
blue line in the middle gives the annual machine–debiased analyst beat ratios, the blue-dotted lines above and below are the 95% confidence interval of the beat ratio, the green
line represents the analyst beat ratios, and the red line gives the best linear approximation of the trend in beat ratios. The shaded gray bars represent the NBER recessions. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 2
Persistence of performance of AI analyst.
Each year, analysts are sorted by mean squared prediction errors of log prices based on the past one, past two, and up to
five years. If the mean squared error over the last year is below (above) the median during the specified past period, the
analyst is in the top (bottom) in the current year. In Panel A, the sorting is based on the full period of the past one, two,
… , five years. In Panel B, the sorting requires that an analyst be in the top half in each of the past one, two, … , five years
to be placed in the ‘‘top’’ group. Both panels report the analyst beat ratio, i.e., the number of times analysts beat AI, as a
proportion of total number of predictions.

Panel A: Analyst beat ratio sorted by analysts who are above/below median

Analyst top
Analyst bottom

1 year

49.25%
43.01%

2 years

49.26%
42.95%

3 years

49.11%
43.04%

4 years

49.10%
43.04%

Panel B: Analyst beat ratio sorted by analysts who are above median each of the past years

Analyst Persistent top
Analyst Persistent bottom

1 years

49.25%
43.01%

2 years

50.33%
42.34%

3 years

49.87%
41.39%

4 years

49.63%
40.95%

5 years

49.08%
43.05%

5 years

49.40%
40.79%

until the signals reverse. The results are robust to equal weighting or
a different re-balancing frequency such as one month. The portfolio
contains 420 to 785 stocks with signals from past 30 days to 360 days.21
Table 3 reports the performance of the semi-annually rebalanced long-
short portfolio in terms of average return and alpha estimated using
Fama–French three-factor, Carhart four-factor, Fama–French five-factor
and Fama–French six-factor models.

Results in Table 3 are encouraging in that the AI model is able to
generate superior returns/alpha, relative to analysts, on the order of
50 to 72 basis points monthly, which are also statistically significant
at the 1% level in almost all cases. To the extent that our portfolio
approach compares the AI with the median of all human analysts, our
result implies that the AI forecasts outperform analyst consensus. When
we separately examine the long and short portions of the portfolio,
we discover that the superior returns, while significant on both sides,

21 The average monthly turnover rate of the semi-annually rebalanced

portfolios ranges is around 12%.

are larger in magnitude and more significant for the long side (for
which transaction costs are lower). Such an asymmetry could be driven
by the well-documented positive bias in analyst forecasts (Lim, 2002),
that is, analyst signals tend to be less informative when they are more
optimistic than AI as the latter does not share the positive bias.

To further examine the differences between AI and human predic-
tions, we separately examine the performance of portfolios based on
AI and human forecasts. In Table IA.10 in the Internet Appendix, we
present the quintile-sorted portfolio returns based on the machine-only
and human-only signals, respectively. The results show that portfolio
returns increase monotonically across the quintiles based on machine-
only signals, suggesting a strong performance of our AI model. The
analyst-only signal is not informative, but its underperformance is not
pivotal to the performance of Man vs. Machine as shown in the 5 × 5
double-sorted portfolio returns reported in Table IA.11. The results
show that machine and human predictions are relatively independent:
In each quintile sorted by human signals, the top minus bottom ma-
chine signal-based portfolio exhibits similar abnormal returns. The
same is true if we condition on machine signals first and examine

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039109S. Cao et al.

Table 3
Portfolio performance following machine vs. man recommendations.
At the beginning of each month, we gather all predictions made by all analysts and the corresponding AI forecasts in the past 30, 60, 90,
180, and 360 days. For each pair of predictions, if the Machine’s prediction is greater than the median of Machine predictions in the month
and the human’s prediction is less than the median Machine prediction in the month, we define it as a buy signal. When both conditions are
negated, we define it as a sell signal. During the given time horizon, the portfolio will long the stock if there are more buy than sell signals
and short the stock otherwise. The portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced every six months, i.e., a position is held for six months or till
the signals reverse. The monthly percentage returns of the long-short, long-leg (stocks only with a buy sign) and short-leg portfolios (stocks
only with a short sign), as well as the alphas generated from the FF3, FFC4, FF5, and FF6 models, are presented. The OLS standard error is
used to construct t -stats. The t -stats are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels
(two-tailed), respectively.

Portfolio returns — AI vs. Analyst

Machine vs Human

Long-Short

Monthly returns

Long-Leg

Monthly returns

Short-Leg

Monthly returns

Ret

FF3

FFC4

FF5

FF6

Ret

FF3

FFC4

FF5

FF6

Ret

FF3

FFC4

FF5

FF6

30 day inform

60 day inform

90 day inform

180 day inform

360 day inform

0.64***
(3.06)
0.69***
(3.40)
0.62***
(3.16)
0.51**
(2.54)
0.51***
(2.62)

0.65***
(3.67)
0.72***
(4.19)
0.65***
(3.97)
0.62***
(3.73)
0.63***
(3.92)

0.58***
(3.33)
0.64***
(3.80)
0.58***
(3.57)
0.55***
(3.37)
0.56***
(3.54)

0.60***
(3.79)
0.65***
(4.24)
0.58***
(4.03)
0.55***
(3.72)
0.56***
(4.02)

0.53***
(3.66)
0.61***
(4.45)
0.52***
(4.21)
0.51***
(3.74)
0.50***
(4.09)

30 day inform

60 day inform

90 day inform

180 day inform

360 day inform

0.92***
(2.69)
0.42***
(3.12)
0.39***
(2.93)
0.37***
(2.76)
0.37***
(2.81)

0.97***
(2.96)
0.48***
(4.12)
0.47***
(3.98)
0.46***
(3.90)
0.46***
(3.92)

0.93***
(2.83)
0.44***
(3.99)
0.42***
(3.84)
0.42***
(3.91)
0.42***
(3.94)

0.97***
(3.07)
0.44***
(4.53)
0.41***
(4.34)
0.40***
(4.28)
0.40***
(4.40)

0.98***
(3.32)
0.42***
(5.09)
0.38***
(4.84)
0.37***
(4.43)
0.36***
(4.59)

30 day inform

60 day inform

90 day inform

180 day inform

360 day inform

−0.28
(−0.78)
0.27**
(2.49)
0.23**
(2.22)
0.14
(1.27)
0.14
(1.30)

−0.32
(−0.89)
0.23***
(2.82)
0.18**
(2.51)
0.16**
(2.02)
0.16**
(2.29)

−0.35
(−0.99)
0.20
(2.44)
0.16**
(2.10)
0.13
(1.58)
0.13*
(1.74)

−0.37
(−1.09)
0.21***
(2.83)
0.17**
(2.52)
0.15**
(2.01)
0.15**
(2.27)

−0.44
(−1.33)
0.19***
(2.63)
0.13**
(2.18)
0.14**
(1.98)
0.14**
(2.17)

human signals’ performance. Further, Figure IA.1 shows a roughly
balanced composition of the doubly sorted portfolios, confirming a low
correlation between machine and human selection of stocks.

3.6. Combined wisdom of man + machine

Results from the previous sections suggest that the analyst profes-
sion could be seriously disrupted by AI technology given that analysts
trail AI for a majority of the time. However, the superior performance
of the AI analyst does not rule out the possibility that analyst forecasts
contain valuable information that is incremental to AI-produced fore-
casts. In other words, if analysts possess information that is not picked
up by the AI, then the AI forecast is not sufficient to replace the analyst
forecast, even though analysts lose to AI in forecasting accuracy. An
investor who combines the wisdom of both should attain even better
performance.

To assess the performance of the combined analytical power, we
consider adding the analyst forecasts to the information set for our
machine learning model. That is, the information set 
𝑡 now includes
the analyst forecasts, 𝐹𝑖,𝑗,𝑡, made on the same firm 𝑖 during the 90-
day window ending on date 𝑡. In particular, we obtain analyst and
brokerage-firm characteristics (including analysts’ experiences, ana-
lysts’ efforts, and the number of analysts in the brokerage firm), the
mean forecast and forecast accuracy (mean square error) of each ana-
lyst for the past five years, the mean consensus and forecast accuracy

(mean square errors) of the forecasts by all analysts in the previous 90
days, current analysts’ predictions, Machine–debiased Man predictions,
and stand-alone machine predictions and build a ‘‘Man + Machine’’
hybrid analyst using an ensemble model. We find that the hybrid
analyst outperforms human analysts 57.8% of the time and outperforms
AI-alone forecasts 54.8% of the time.

Fig. 4 illustrates the comparative performance of the hybrid analyst
(Man + Machine) versus the plain AI (Machine). The fact that Man +
Machine outperforms Machine-alone in 15 out of 18 years, and with the
three lagging years having beat ratio close to being neutral (49.98%,
48.28%, and 47.98%), is encouraging evidence for the added value of
analysts. While the future of AI remains uncertain, the parts of human
skills that are incremental to AI, as we document, allow for promising
Man + Machine collaboration and augmentation. We note from the
Figure that the Man + Machine advantage over Machine remains stable
over the 18-year period. Such a result projects a hopeful outlook for
skilled analysts who can be augmented by AI, instead of being replaced
by it.

3.7. Alternative forecast target: earnings

Though stock returns are our primary target variable of forecast,
we nevertheless present the main results with earnings forecasts. Using
the same procedure as outlined in Section 2, we find that human

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391010S. Cao et al.

Fig. 4. Man + Machine: the performance of AI-assisted analysts vs. AI.
This figure plots the proportion of AI-assisted analyst price forecasts that are more accurate than the AI recommendations alone on an annual basis, or the ‘‘beat ratio’’. The blue
line in the middle gives the annual AI-assisted analyst beat ratios, the blue-dotted lines above and below are the 95% confidence interval of the beat ratio, and the red line gives
the best linear approximation of the trend in beat ratios. The shaded gray bars represent the NBER recessions. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend,
the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

analysts beat machine with a probability 69.2%, significantly higher
than the beat ratio corresponding to return forecasts, consistent with
the hypothesis (discussed in Section 2) that analysts benefit from firms’
desire and ability to produce earnings that match market expectation
for which analyst forecasts serve as the most important proxy. How-
ever, the M+M model still comes above both analysts (55.1%) and
stand-alone machine (71.8%), confirming high synergies in information
production between Man and Machine. Therefore, the key thesis of our
study about combining the wisdom of man and machine remains robust
with earnings predictions. We present the results in Table IA.2 in the
Internet Appendix.

Extensive accounting literature suggests that the information con-
tent of earnings varies significantly when they are broken down into
cash flow and accrual components. Since accruals are subject to man-
agement discretion, often utilized to meet earnings targets (Dechow
et al., 1995), we anticipate that AI would enjoy greater predictive
power in forecasting the cash flow component. To this end, we focus
on a subsample of I/B/E/S firm-quarter observations where analysts
provided separate forecasts for the cash flow components. We com-
pare these forecasts to the realized values using the methodology
pioneered (Sloan, 1996). It turns out that the human-beat-machine
ratio is 45.6% when it comes to predicting the cash flow component
of earnings, mirroring the performance observed in 12-month return
prediction. This contrast between total earnings and cash-component
forecasts supports our hypothesis that managerial discretion in earn-
ings management contributes to analysts’ outperformance over AI in
earnings prediction. Because of the limited sample size (only 3.9% of
the I/B/E/S data), we present this analysis, as a robustness check, in
Table IA.3 in the Internet Appendix.

4. Comparative advantages of man vs. machine

4.1. Determinants of relative performance

In this section, we strive to understand when human analysts per-
form better than the AI and when otherwise. Such understanding will

help ‘‘unbox’’ the black box associated with AI or machine learning and
provide intuition and guidance on the applicability of AI for researchers
and investors.

We consider a number of variables at the analyst, firm, and industry
levels that are potentially relevant for the performance of human
analysts and AI. These are defined in Section 2.5. We group these
variables into several classes. First, we consider a number of proxies
for information asymmetry or opacity, including Amihud Illiquidity, Log
Market Cap, and % Institutional Holdings. Second, we include variables
representing the volume of information (# Information Events), read-
ability of corporate filings (Text Complexity), and the tangibility of
information (Intangible Assets and Fluidity). Third, we examine several
variables that affect the information and resources available to the
analyst, such as # Analysts in Brokerage Firm and Star Analyst. Finally,
we consider Distance to Default and Industry Recession, highlighting the
financial exposure of firms to shocks, and Time Trend, which can help
capture temporal patterns.

For each target price forecast, we define two variables that mea-
sure the outcome of relative performance of humans vs AI. First, the
indicator variable Analyst Beats AI equals one if the absolute value of
forecast error of the analyst is smaller than that of the AI, and zero
otherwise. Second, the continuous measure Forecast Error Difference
is the difference between the absolute prediction error (of return as
defined in Eq. (1)) of the AI and that of the analyst, scaled by the
maximum of these two prediction errors. A positive and large value
of Forecast Error Difference is in favor of analyst accuracy.

We estimate the following regression on the panel data of firm 𝑖,
analyst 𝑗, and date 𝑡 to understand the determinants of the relative
strengths of humans and AI,

𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝑋′

𝑖,𝑗,𝑡𝛽 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛼𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑗,𝑡,

(3)

wherein the dependent variable Relative Performance is either Analyst
Beats AI or Forecast Error Difference. The vector of independent vari-
ables, 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡, includes those discussed in Section 2.5, and 𝛼𝑖/𝛼𝑗 and 𝛼𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
represent firm/analyst and year fixed effects, respectively. The results
are reported in Table 4.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391011S. Cao et al.

Table 4
Man vs. Machine: The relative advantage of analyst vs AI.
This table presents the coefficients and t -stats of regressing the Analyst Beats AI indicator (Panel A) and the Forecast Error
Difference: Analyst vs. AI (Panel B) on the firm-level, industry-level, and macroeconomic variables presented in Table 1. Analyst
Beats AI is an indicator variable equal to one if the analyst beats the AI. Forecast Error Difference: Analyst vs. AI is defined as
the difference between absolute prediction errors between the AI and the analysts, divided by the maximum value of these
two prediction errors. The number is positive if the analyst has a smaller absolute forecast error, i.e., the analyst beats AI.
The t -statistics are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level. The t -statistics are based on standard errors clustered
at the firm level. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.

Panel A: Analyst Beats AI

Variables

Amihud Illiquidity

Intangible Assets

# Analysts in Brokerage Firm

Star Analyst

# Information Events

Distance to Default

Market Cap

% Institutional Holdings

Fluidity

Text Complexity

Industry Recession

Time Trend

Year Fixed Effect
Firm Fixed Effect
Analyst Fixed Effect
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.252***
(11.51)
0.027***
(4.09)
0.700***
(5.28)
−0.106
(−0.17)
−0.026***
(−5.81)
−0.009***
(−8.16)
−0.071***
(−15.18)
−0.033**
(−1.99)
0.243*
(1.89)
−0.001
(−0.67)
0.012**
(2.07)
0.010***
(11.90)

No
Yes
No
352,358
0.07

Panel B: Forecast Error Difference: Analyst vs. AI

Variables

Amihud Illiquidity

Intangible Assets

# Analysts in Brokerage Firm

Star Analyst

# Information Events

Distance to Default

Market Cap

% Institutional Holdings

Fluidity

Text Complexity

Industry Recession

Time Trend

Year Fixed Effect
Firm Fixed Effect
Analyst Fixed Effect
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.292***
(8.60)
0.027***
(3.92)
0.762***
(5.47)
0.105
(0.16)
−0.022***
(−4.30)
−0.008***
(−6.41)
−0.068***
(−13.76)
0.031***
(2.77)
0.117
(0.76)
−0.000
(−0.16)
0.014**
(2.00)
0.009***
(9.35)

No
Yes
No
352,358
0.10

0.218***
(6.06)
0.026***
(4.57)
0.931***
(7.14)
−0.290
(−0.48)
−0.012***
(−2.68)
−0.005***
(−3.75)
−0.049***
(−10.84)
−0.011
(−0.58)
−0.273**
(−2.02)
0.001
(0.65)
0.030***
(5.06)

Yes
Yes
No
352,358
0.09

0.263***
(11.03)
0.026***
(4.04)
0.990***
(7.14)
−0.082
(−0.13)
−0.013**
(−2.35)
−0.004***
(−2.82)
−0.047***
(−9.23)
0.050*
(1.83)
−0.383**
(−2.32)
0.002
(0.67)
0.030***
(4.33)

Yes
Yes
No
352,358
0.12

0.200***
(6.39)
0.021**
(2.49)
0.109
(0.29)
0.373
(0.51)
−0.025***
(−5.47)
−0.014***
(−12.55)
−0.085***
(−16.79)
−0.012
(−0.70)
0.529***
(4.13)
−0.003
(−1.25)
0.027***
(4.28)
0.009***
(8.60)

No
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.13

0.205***
(5.52)
0.024***
(3.03)
0.435
(1.07)
0.436
(0.57)
−0.023***
(−4.37)
−0.013***
(−10.09)
−0.077***
(−14.62)
0.056***
(5.71)
0.418***
(2.81)
−0.001
(−0.45)
0.027***
(3.53)
0.008***
(7.02)

No
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.16

0.119**
(2.24)
0.023***
(2.88)
0.501
(1.34)
0.207
(0.29)
−0.010**
(−2.16)
−0.011***
(−8.41)
−0.055***
(−10.79)
−0.004
(−0.43)
0.032
(0.24)
0.000
(0.09)
0.044***
(6.84)

Yes
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.15

0.129***
(3.71)
0.025***
(3.31)
0.787*
(1.95)
0.262
(0.35)
−0.011**
(−2.04)
−0.010***
(−6.91)
−0.049***
(−8.71)
0.061***
(3.81)
−0.080
(−0.50)
0.001
(0.54)
0.042***
(5.56)

Yes
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.17

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391012S. Cao et al.

Fig. 5. Man vs. machine: disagreement.
This figure plots the disagreement between man and machine. The disagreement is defined as the squared difference between the returns predicted by the analysts and the AI.
Each year, the average value of the disagreement is calculated. The blue line in the middle gives this average disagreement, the blue-dotted lines above and below are the 95%
confidence interval of the disagreement, and the red line gives the best linear approximation of the trend. The shaded gray bars represent the NBER recessions. (For interpretation
of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 4 shows that, controlling for year and firm fixed effects,
humans are more likely to outperform when covering illiquid and
small firms and those with higher intangible assets, consistent with
the notion that such firms are subject to higher information asym-
metry and require deeper institutional knowledge to understand. A
one-standard deviation increase in Intangible Assets is associated with
a 3.0% increment on beat ratio. On the other hand, equipped with
vast processing power, AI performs better for firms with a larger
volume of disclosed information, as proxied by # Information Events
each year. A one-standard deviation increase in # Information Events is
associated with a 1.8% decrement on beat ratio. Analysts working for
larger brokerage firms perform better, potentially because of the more
abundant resources and research capacity at such places as well as a
positive match between analyst skill and brokerage house prestige.

Humans perform better when the focal firm is subject to higher
financial distress risk, captured by distance to default and industry
recession, suggesting that the AI has more difficulty handling more
uncertain scenarios. Analysts also perform better for firms with higher
institutional holdings, possibly because analysts are immersed with in-
formation produced and processed by institutional investors, including
brokerage houses. Finally, when year fixed effects are not included, we
are able to uncover the time trend of the comparative performance,
showing that human advantage increases with time. This is probably
due to the fact that human analysts are increasingly assisted by AI
and big data technologies. Perhaps surprisingly, Star Analysts do not
demonstrate significantly superior performance over AI, suggesting that
the superior ability star analysts possess over their peers could be
replicated by the machine.

We also extend the portfolio return analysis in Table IA.8 of the
Internet Appendix to subsamples sorted on the four firm character-
istic variables that are expected to be associated with the relative
performance of man vs. machine: Liquidity, intangibility, number of
information events (voluminous information) and distance to default.
Results show that portfolio performance is more favorable to the AI
model when firms have fewer intangible assets, more voluminous in-
formation, and are far from default. The results for firm illiquidity are

mixed. With 60 and 90-day information, portfolio performance is more
favorable to the machine when firms are more liquid, but not for 30,
180, and 360 days. Overall, most results are consistent with regression
results presented in Table 4.

4.2. Disagreement between man and machine

An equally important question is whom we should trust more if and
when humans and machines disagree to a large extent. To start with,
Fig. 5 plots the annual time series of the average squared differences in
predicted returns between analysts and AI. Interestingly, we find that
the man–machine disagreement has been on a downward trend, possi-
bly because analyst forecasts increasingly incorporate insights from big
data and AI tools. Further, the disagreement tends to be high before
recessions, when high investor sentiment may exert a disproportional
influence on analysts.

We next examine the relative performance of Man vs. Machine pre-
cisely when they disagree to a large degree. Gaining an understanding
into such situations has significant implications for AI-guided decision
making including investment. For each pair of forecasts, we define
an indicator variable, Disagreement, to be one if the magnitude of the
disagreement between the analyst and our AI model, normalized by
the maximum value of these two prediction errors, is above the 90th
percentile among all forecasts on the same firm within three years. Such
benchmarking ensures that the disagreement could be measured on a
similar scale. Conditional on the existence of a Disagreement, we further
define one sub-indicator, Human Wins, equal to one when human has
a lower absolute prediction error than machine. We then relate these
outcome variables to the set of regressors, with results reported in
Table 5. Because the regressions involve high-dimensional fixed effects,
we apply the linear probability model.

The first two columns of Table 5 examine the relation between
the occurrence of Disagreement and the underlying firm and analyst
attributes and economic conditions in the full sample, with firm fixed
effects (column (1)) or double firm/year fixed effects (column (2)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391013S. Cao et al.

Table 5
Disagreement between man and machine.
This table presents the coefficients and t -stats of regressing the Disagreement indicator on the firm-level, industry-level, and
macroeconomic variables presented in Table 1. For each pair of forecasts, we define the indicator variable Disagreement to be
one if the magnitude of the difference between the absolute prediction errors of the analyst and our AI model, normalized
by the maximum value of these two prediction errors, is above the 90th percentile among all forecasts on the same firm
within three years. Conditional on Disagreement being positive, we further a sub-indicator, Human wins, which equals 1 if
human analyst has a lower absolute prediction error. We report regression results with Human wins in the subsample where
Disagreement being positive. To calculate t -statistics, standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * denote statistical
significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.

Dependent variable

Amihud Illiquidity

Intangible Assets

# Analysts in Brokerage Firm

Star Analyst

# Information Events

Distance to Default

Market Cap

% Institutional Holdings

Fluidity

Text Complexity

Industry Recession

Time Trend

Year Fixed Effect
Firm Fixed Effect
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Full sample

Disagreement

(1)

0.034***
(2.78)
0.005***
(3.07)
−0.605***
(−9.15)
−0.332
(−0.93)
−0.007***
(−3.94)
−0.005***
(−12.96)
−0.003**
(−2.04)
−0.083***
(−5.50)
0.138***
(3.56)
0.000
(0.43)
0.018***
(7.03)
−0.000
(−0.18)

No
Yes
352,358
0.01

(2)

0.034***
(2.74)
0.005***
(2.87)
−0.626***
(−9.39)
−0.284
(−0.79)
−0.003
(−1.51)
−0.004***
(−8.55)
−0.005***
(−3.74)
−0.080***
(−5.50)
0.062
(1.59)
0.001
(1.01)
0.018***
(6.75)

Yes
Yes
352,358
0.01

Disagreement sample

Human wins

(3)

0.445***
(12.08)
0.029**
(2.05)
1.055***
(3.32)
4.129
(1.36)
−0.020**
(−2.07)
−0.002
(−0.94)
−0.062***
(−8.26)
−0.618
(−0.30)
0.251
(1.10)
−0.003
(−0.56)
−0.006
(−0.50)
0.007***
(5.34)

No
Yes
42,023
0.10

(4)

0.383***
(8.02)
0.028**
(2.18)
1.209***
(3.86)
5.603*
(1.87)
−0.011
(−1.09)
−0.002
(−0.90)
−0.041***
(−5.16)
2.335
(0.80)
−0.217
(−0.93)
−0.000
(−0.09)
0.014
(1.09)

Yes
Yes
42,023
0.13

Columns (3) and (4) focus on the subsample with Disagreement and
examine when human wins. Results from the first two columns indicate
that large disagreement tends to occur for illiquid, intangible firms with
less abundant information, which are characteristics of firms that are
associated with human comparative advantage. Indeed, the last two
columns confirm that the same set of characteristics are also associated
with human winning conditional on that the two sides disagree.

One exception to the pattern stated above is # Analysts in Brokerage
Firm. Analysts from large brokerage firms are less likely to disagree with
AI. However, conditional on large disagreement, these analysts are also
more likely to beat the machine.

5. Man + Machine: Incremental contributions and synergies

5.1. Incremental value of analysts to man + machine & man–machine
synergies

Acknowledging that Man + Machine is superior to either the human
or machine alone, it is still instructive to understand the respective
incremental values of the human and the machine in the combination.
Analogous to the previous section, we define relative performance mea-
sures of the hybrid analyst vs the AI to capture the incremental value
of humans. We then reestimate Eq. (3) with these relative performance
measures as dependent variables. Table 6 presents the results.

Similar to the previous findings, we find inputs from analysts are
more valuable when covering firms that are less liquid and firms with
more intangible assets and earnings volatility. Moreover, analyst inputs
have more incremental value when firms have higher distress risk. The
institutional holding percentage also helps the hybrid model beat AI

analyst. Finally, the incremental value of human does not decrease
significantly with the volume of information, whereas humans alone
are capacity-constrained as shown in Table 4. This finding supports AI
augmentation of skilled professionals and highlights synergies between
the two sides.

The synergy between humans and machines is correlated with, but
goes beyond, the incremental information value of analyst forecast to
that made by AI. An alternative measure for the synergy could be
uncovered from regressing the squared (or absolute) forecast error of
the Man + Machine model on the Man- and Machine-alone errors.22
The residual term then proxies for the incremental value of Man +
Machine above and beyond Man and Machine alone. We then take the
residual and regress it on various firm and analyst characteristics to
understand what drive this synergy. In this regression, we negate the
sign of the residual so that a positive coefficient conveys a positive
outcome, i.e., being associated with higher Man–Machine synergies.

Table 7 reports the results, showing that synergies could be corre-
lated with characteristics that afford human advantage (trading illiq-
uidity and close to default) as well as those favoring machine advantage
(frequent corporate events and large market cap). Moreover, man–
machine synergies are higher during recessionary times, where data is
relatively sparse and situations are fast evolving. Such a mix suggests
that drivers for synergies are distinct from comparative advantages
between Man and Machine.

22 To mitigate the influence of extreme forecast errors, we take the logarithm
of one plus the squared (or absolute) forecast errors and truncate the top 1%
largest values.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391014S. Cao et al.

Table 6
Man + Machine: The incremental value of analyst.
This table presents the coefficients and t -stats of regressing the Analyst + AI Beats AI indicator (Panel A) and Forecast Error
Difference: Analyst + AI vs. AI (Panel B) on the firm-level, industry-level, and macroeconomic variables presented in Table 1.
Analyst + AI Beats AI is an indicator variable equal to one if Analyst + AI beats AI. Forecast Error Difference: Analyst + AI
vs. AI is defined as the difference between absolute prediction errors between AI and Analyst + AI, divided by the maximum
value of these two prediction errors. The number is positive if the analyst has smaller absolute forecast error, i.e., Analyst +
AI beats AI.

Panel A. Analyst + AI Beats AI

Variables

Amihud Illiquidity

Intangible Assets

# Analysts in Brokerage Firm

Star Analyst

# Information Events

Distance to Default

Market Cap

% Institutional Holdings

Fluidity

Text Complexity

Industry Recession

Time Trend

Year Fixed Effect
Firm Fixed Effect
Analyst Fixed Effect
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.274***
(6.30)
0.021***
(3.39)
0.246*
(1.93)
−0.001
(−0.00)
−0.012***
(−2.80)
−0.010***
(−10.53)
−0.025***
(−6.40)
0.041
(1.25)
0.344***
(3.16)
0.002
(1.23)
0.024***
(4.33)
0.004***
(6.54)

No
Yes
No
352,358
0.04

Panel B: Forecast Error Difference: Analyst + AI vs. AI

Variables

Amihud Illiquidity

Intangible Assets

# Analysts in Brokerage Firm

Star Analyst

# Information Events

Distance to Default

Market Cap

% Institutional Holdings

Fluidity

Text Complexity

Industry Recession

Time Trend

Year Fixed Effect
Firm Fixed Effect
Analyst Fixed Effect
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.233***
(14.38)
0.012***
(2.95)
0.168*
(1.92)
−0.088
(−0.20)
−0.001
(−0.41)
−0.005***
(−7.19)
−0.012***
(−4.52)
−0.007
(−0.44)
0.042
(0.52)
0.002
(1.24)
0.010**
(2.54)
0.002***
(3.89)

No
Yes
No
352,358
0.07

0.256***
(4.31)
0.018***
(3.15)
0.321**
(2.54)
−0.105
(−0.17)
−0.004
(−1.02)
−0.003**
(−2.34)
−0.017***
(−4.37)
0.061***
(3.77)
−0.076
(−0.67)
0.005**
(2.41)
0.030***
(5.20)

Yes
Yes
No
352,358
0.05

0.224***
(14.67)
0.010***
(2.67)
0.229***
(2.61)
−0.150
(−0.35)
−0.002
(−0.60)
−0.002***
(−2.73)
−0.007**
(−2.50)
−0.001
(−0.11)
−0.090
(−1.03)
0.003*
(1.67)
0.013***
(3.01)

Yes
Yes
No
352,358
0.07

0.181***
(4.37)
0.020***
(2.65)
0.471
(1.32)
−0.113
(−0.15)
−0.013***
(−2.89)
−0.013***
(−11.76)
−0.036***
(−7.77)
0.075***
(3.19)
0.618***
(5.27)
0.001
(0.41)
0.031***
(5.03)
0.004***
(4.01)

No
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.09

0.223***
(9.63)
0.012***
(2.71)
0.456*
(1.80)
−0.018
(−0.04)
−0.003
(−0.92)
−0.007***
(−7.74)
−0.016***
(−5.05)
0.002
(0.24)
0.147*
(1.81)
0.002
(1.01)
0.014***
(3.01)
0.002***
(2.66)

No
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.10

0.142**
(2.53)
0.018**
(2.54)
0.417
(1.17)
−0.216
(−0.30)
−0.003
(−0.62)
−0.006***
(−4.35)
−0.023***
(−4.86)
0.089***
(8.06)
0.167
(1.32)
0.004*
(1.69)
0.036***
(5.71)

Yes
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.10

0.207***
(9.29)
0.011**
(2.54)
0.563**
(2.20)
−0.083
(−0.16)
−0.001
(−0.38)
−0.004***
(−4.08)
−0.008**
(−2.34)
0.005
(0.87)
0.023
(0.26)
0.003
(1.55)
0.016***
(3.36)

Yes
Yes
Yes
352,358
0.11

5.2. Can man + machine avoid extreme error?

As in many other skilled professions, extreme forecast errors could
be calamitous to the reputation of the forecasters and to the welfare of

the recipients of investment advice. However, as the common saying
‘‘to err is human; to forgive is divine’’ goes, machine errors are far less
tolerated than human mistakes (Prahl and Swol, 2017). We are thus
interested in the resilience of Man + Machine against extreme errors,

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391015S. Cao et al.

Table 7
Incremental effect of M+M over both man and machine.
This table reports the synergy of Man + Machine over both Man and Machine. The M+M Square Error Residual is defined as follows: We regress the squared forecast error of
M+M on 2 variables: the machine-alone squared forecast error and man-alone squared forecast error. By flipping the sign of residual of the regression, we obtain M+M Square
Error Residual. The M+M Forecast Error Residual is similarly defined using absolute forecast errors instead of squared forecast errors. To calculate t -statistics, standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.

M+M squared error residual

M+M forecast error residual

Amihud Illiquidity

Intangible Assets

# Analysts in Brokerage Firm

Star Analyst

# Information Events

Distance to Default

Market Cap

% Institutional Holdings

Fluidity

Text Complexity

Industry Recession

Time Trend

Year Fixed Effect
Firm Fixed Effect
Analyst Fixed Effect
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.375***
(5.11)
0.001*
(1.71)
−0.060***
(−3.69)
−0.054
(−0.86)
0.001**
(2.25)
−0.001***
(−7.77)
0.006***
(7.81)
−0.010***
(−2.75)
0.010
(0.67)
0.000
(0.03)
0.004***
(4.68)
−0.001***
(−6.32)

No
Yes
No
346,301
0.13

0.371***
(5.22)
0.001
(0.96)
−0.072***
(−4.48)
−0.048
(−0.78)
0.001**
(2.57)
0.000
(0.26)
0.004***
(5.55)
−0.010**
(−2.16)
0.026
(1.52)
0.000
(0.37)
0.003***
(3.23)

Yes
Yes
No
346,301
0.14

0.398***
(3.96)
0.000
(0.02)
0.011
(0.24)
0.005
(0.07)
0.001**
(2.07)
−0.001***
(−5.90)
0.005***
(6.48)
−0.015***
(−6.82)
0.008
(0.50)
0.000
(0.06)
0.004***
(3.95)
−0.000***
(−3.85)

No
Yes
Yes
346,301
0.23

0.398***
(4.24)
−0.000
(−0.36)
−0.004
(−0.08)
0.009
(0.12)
0.001**
(2.41)
0.000
(1.42)
0.004***
(4.65)
−0.014***
(−4.77)
0.020
(1.01)
0.000
(0.44)
0.002***
(2.59)

Yes
Yes
Yes
346,301
0.24

0.218***
(3.34)
−0.000
(−0.16)
−0.061***
(−3.28)
−0.076
(−1.05)
0.002***
(3.14)
−0.001***
(−8.22)
0.005***
(7.83)
−0.009**
(−2.12)
0.007
(0.46)
0.000
(0.53)
0.004***
(4.43)
−0.001***
(−6.23)

No
Yes
No
346,301
0.08

0.215***
(3.70)
−0.001
(−0.88)
−0.074***
(−4.08)
−0.071
(−1.00)
0.002**
(2.54)
−0.000**
(−2.01)
0.003***
(4.79)
−0.009*
(−1.67)
0.040**
(2.24)
0.000
(0.90)
0.002***
(2.60)

Yes
Yes
No
346,301
0.09

0.248***
(2.80)
0.000
(0.23)
0.036
(0.74)
−0.036
(−0.40)
0.002***
(2.80)
−0.001***
(−5.90)
0.005***
(6.78)
−0.011***
(−5.31)
−0.007
(−0.38)
0.000
(0.84)
0.003***
(3.16)
−0.001***
(−4.47)

No
Yes
Yes
346,301
0.15

0.250***
(3.29)
−0.000
(−0.23)
0.026
(0.57)
−0.034
(−0.39)
0.002**
(2.46)
−0.000
(−0.21)
0.003***
(4.19)
−0.011***
(−3.30)
0.025
(1.20)
0.000
(1.12)
0.001
(1.54)

Yes
Yes
Yes
346,301
0.16

a quality which would be crucial for the future of the combination, in
addition to an superior average forecast accuracy.

To set the stage, we benchmark the forecast error of each forecast to
the 90th (or 75th, as a sensitivity check) percentile of squared predic-
tion errors from all analysts on the same firm in the same year. Such a
setup leads to four outcomes with regard to who commit(s) an extreme
error: (1) both the analyst and the AI model (‘‘Both’’); (2) Analyst; (3)
AI; and (4) neither commits an extreme error (‘‘Neither’’). We examine
these four scenarios and compute their empirical frequencies.23 We then
compute the unconditional and conditional probabilities that the Man +
Machine model can avoid the extreme error committed in the first three
scenarios and, equally importantly, the probability that Man + Machine
creates an extreme error in the fourth scenario. All probabilities are
reported in Table 8.

We discover that the analyst and the AI are about equally likely
to make extreme errors (9.3% and 7.8% using the 90th percentile
threshold).24 There is a further probability of 3.5% that both make
lousy forecasts. It turns out that the Man + Machine model can help
avoid 90.7% of extreme errors made by human and 43.6% of those by
AI. Even when both analysts and AI seem to be out of the ballpark,
their combination still manages to bring 4.6% of such cases back to a
reasonable range. Furthermore, Man + Machine only creates its own

23 These four cases are not mutually disjoint, as the ‘‘Analyst’’ (scenario 2)
and ‘‘AI’’ (scenario 3) cases both include the ‘‘Both’’ cases (scenario 1). We
adopt this convention to evaluate how the Man + Machine model performs
in terms of avoiding extreme errors relative to Man/Machine, independent
of the counterparty’s performance. Untabulated, we also conduct the same
analysis for four disjoint scenarios, i.e., ‘‘Both’’, ‘‘Analyst Only’’, ‘‘AI Only’’,
and ‘‘Neither’’, and find qualitatively similar results;
in fact, the Man +
Machine model corrects an even greater fraction of extreme errors committed
by analysts alone.

24 A sensitivity analysis using the 75th percentile yields qualitatively similar

results.

extreme error in 0.1% of the ‘‘Neither’’ scenario. The overall results
present a significant complementary benefit of combining human and
AI capabilities.

This collaborative model emphasizes a crucial aspect of human–
machine synergy, particularly in high-stakes scenarios, encompassing
not only financial markets but also potential applications in healthcare
diagnostics, climate modeling, and emergency response systems. Given
that human and machine errors often stem from different factors, their
combined efforts have the potential to subdue the likelihood of severe
lapses. To the best of our knowledge, this synergy between Man and
Machine has not been empirically documented in the existing literature.

5.3. Impact of man + machine: an event study

In this section, we resort to an event study to sharpen the inference
of the impact of integrating man and machine in stock analyses. In
recent years, the infrastructure of ‘‘big data’’ has created a new class
of information about companies that is collected and published outside
of the firms and which can provide unique and timely clues into
market demand, profit prospects, and investment opportunities. An im-
portant and popular type of such alternative data captures ‘‘consumer
footprints’’, oftentimes in the literal sense such as satellite images of
retail parking lots. Such data, which have to be processed by machine
learning models, have been shown to contain incremental information
for earnings and stock prices conditional on corporate disclosure and
news coverage (Zhu, 2019; Katona et al., 2024). Chi et al. (2024)
show that analysts who use alternative data more frequently have more
precise forecasts.

We build on data from (Katona et al., 2024) on the staggered
introduction of several important alternative databases, and conduct
a difference-in-differences test of analysts’ performance versus our AI
model before and after the availability of the alternative data on
specific firms. The underlying premise is that analysts who cover firms
that are served by the alternative data are potentially in the situation of

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391016S. Cao et al.

Table 8
Probabilities of extreme errors: Man vs. Machine and Man + Machine.
This table presents the probabilities of extreme errors by analysts and the AI and how the Man + Machine model helps to correct such errors.
We benchmark the forecast error of each forecast to the 90th (or 75th, as a sensitivity check) percentile of squared prediction errors from all
analysts on the same firm in the same year. Such a setup leads to four outcomes with regard to who commit(s) an extreme error: (1) both the
analyst and the AI model (‘‘Both’’); (2) Analyst; (3) AI; and (4) neither commits an extreme error (‘‘Neither’’). We examine these four scenarios
and compute their empirical frequencies. We then compute the unconditional and conditional probabilities that the Man + Machine model can
avoid the extreme error committed in the first three scenarios, and equally importantly, the probability that Man + Machine creates an extreme
error in the fourth scenario. Panel A and B show results for extreme errors defined by the 90th percentile and 75th percentile of forecast errors,
respectively.

Panel A: Probabilities of Extreme Errors (90th percentile)

Uncond. Prob.

Both

3.46%

Analyst

9.34%

AI

7.84%

Neither

79.36%

Uncond. Prob.

0.16%

8.47%

3.41%

0.11%

M+M Avoids Both

M+M Avoids Analyst

M+M Avoids AI

M+M Creates EE

M+M Avoids Both/
Both EE

M+M Avoids Analyst/
Analyst EE

M+M Avoids AI/
AI Only

M+M Creates EE/
Neither EE

Conditional Prob.

4.57%

Panel B: Probabilities of Extreme Errors (75th percentile)

Uncond. Prob.

Both

10.60%

90.72%

Analyst

16.82%

43.56%

AI

12.27%

0.13%

Neither

60.32%

Uncond. Prob.

0.47%

14.35%

5.01%

0.16%

M+M Avoids Both

M+M Avoids Analyst

M+M Avoids AI

M+M Creates EE

M+M Avoids Both/
Both EE

M+M Avoids Analyst/
Analyst EE

M+M Avoids AI/
AI Only

M+M Creates EE/
Neither EE

Conditional Prob.

4.39%

85.31%

40.86%

0.26%

Man + Machine, as they have the opportunity to use the additional, AI-
processed information. We define two variables based on the staggered
introduction of alternative data coverage. The first is Alt Data Covered,
which is one if satellite imaging data are available for the firm at any
point in our sample period (based on the list of covered firms and
coverage start dates in Table A1 in Katona et al., 2024), and if the
firm is in an industry with a retail footprint,25 and zero otherwise. The
second variable is Post, which is an indicator variable that is one if
satellite data are currently available (based on coverage start dates in
Table A1 in Katona et al., 2024), or if the firm is not listed in that
table but the date is after 2014,26 and zero otherwise. In our analysis,
a firm is ‘‘treated’’ by the alternative data if it is an 𝐴𝑙𝑡 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎 𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑
firm and the time is 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 the coverage. Moreover, we only include an
observation if the brokerage house with which the analyst is affiliated
is covered by the Burning Glass job posting data any time during the
past five years.27

Alternative data tend to be large in volume and unstructured. Such
data are hard to process with traditional tool kits. Commercial data
vendors may preprocess the alternative data; for example, by convert-
ing satellite imaging data into car counts for each business location.
However, substantial additional analysis is still needed to render such
data useful for stock analysis. Whether analysts covering the alterna-
tive data ‘‘treated’’ firms could capitalize on the novel information
source depends on the AI resources in their workplace. We measure
AI resources that analysts have access to by the variable AI Hiring,
which is the ratio of the number of AI jobs to the total number of job
postings using the Burning Glass U.S. job posting data and following
the classification algorithm developed in Babina et al. (2024).

25 We define industries with retail footprints to be those that rely mainly on
retail traffic, such as the entertainment, healthcare, personal services, retail,
restaurant, and hotel industries. Specifically, these include industries 7, 11, 33,
40, 42, 43, and 46 in the Fama–French 48-industry classification.

26 Based on anecdotal evidence from news and discussion with industry

experts, 2014 is the year most alternative data became widely available.

By its nature, the satellite data covers a segment of the economy,
mostly firms in the business-to-consumer (B2C) sectors. Unlikely earlier
research based on the data that focused on whether the satellite data
help predicting earnings, this research assesses whether the opportunity
to work with AI by some analysts affiliated with AI-capable brokerages
(i.e., the Man + Machine in reality) are able to close the gap with,
or even outperform, AI models. More specifically, we estimate the
following difference-in-differences model,

𝐴𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑦𝑠𝑡 𝐵𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑠 𝐴𝐼𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖,𝑡 × 𝐴𝐼 𝐻𝑖𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑗,𝑡

+ 𝛽2𝐴𝐼 𝐻𝑖𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐴𝑙𝑡 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎 𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖

+ 𝛽4𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡 + 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛼𝑙 + 𝛼𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑗,𝑡.

(4)

Here 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖,𝑡 = 𝐴𝑙𝑡 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎 𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑡 and 𝛼𝑙 represents either firm
or analyst fixed effects. Note that Alt Data Covered and Post are indexed
by firm 𝑖 and date 𝑡 while AI Hiring is indexed by the analyst 𝑗 (or the
brokerage firm associated with the analyst) and date 𝑡. Table 9 reports
the results. The sample here is smaller than those in Tables 4 and 6 due
to the requirement that the AI Hiring be observable.

Columns (1) to (3) of Table 9 show that post alternative data,
analysts covering affected firms improve their performance relative to
the AI model, but only significantly so when interacting with AI Hir-
ing.28 In other words, the improvement of predictive performance post
alternative data concentrates in the subset of analysts who are affiliated
with brokerage firms with strong AI capabilities. Overall results suggest
that augmenting humans with new technologies constitutes a promising
direction for the analyst profession.

6. Concluding remarks

In this paper, we built an AI analyst to digest corporate disclosure
and other information (qualitative and quantitative) and perform fore-
cast tasks similar to those of stock analysts. Our AI analyst is able to
beat the majority of human analysts in stock-return forecasts. In the

27 The reason for this restriction is to ensure that the information about AI
hiring is reasonably accurate, as we cannot infer AI hiring in case of missing
data.

28 In these specifications, we do not simultaneously control for firm and
analyst fixed effects due to insufficient variation in the pairing during the few
years around the event.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391017S. Cao et al.

Table 9
Man + Machine event study: Alternative Data Coverage.
This table presents the coefficients and t -stats of regressing the Analyst Beats AI
indicator on brokerage AI Hiring, Alt Data Covered, Post, and the interactions among
these variables. Analyst Beats AI is an indicator variable equal to one if the analyst beats
the AI. The AI and alternative data variables AI Hiring, Alt Data Covered, and Post are
defined as follows. AI Hiring is the ratio of the number of AI jobs to the total number
of job postings. Alt Data Covered is an indicator variable equal to one if alternative
data are available for the firm by the end of the sample, and if the firm is in an
industry with retail footprints. Post is an indicator variable equal to one if a ‘‘treated’’
firm has been covered by alternative data. For ‘‘untreated’’ firms, Post is coded one
if the year is after 2014. The control variables are the firm-level, industry-level, and
macroeconomic variables presented in Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels
(two-tailed), respectively.

Variables

Treat × AI Hiring

Treat: Alt Data Cover × Post

AI Hiring

Alt Data Cover

Year Fixed Effect
Firm Fixed Effect
Analyst Fixed Effect
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Analyst Beats AI

0.533**
(2.16)
0.002
(0.05)
0.032
(0.90)
0.029
(0.69)

Yes
No
No
56,697
0.03

0.503**
(2.04)
0.028
(0.61)
0.069
(1.52)
−0.007
(−0.17)

Yes
No
Yes
56,697
0.07

0.627***
(2.71)
0.029
(0.64)
0.018
(0.52)

Yes
Yes
No
56,697
0.14

contest of ‘‘Man vs. Machine’’, we find that the relative advantage of
such an AI analyst is stronger when information is more transparent and
voluminous. Human analysts remain competitive when critical informa-
tion requires institutional knowledge (such as the nature of intangible
assets and conditions associated with financial distress). Combining
AI and the art of human experts produces the highest potential in
generating accurate forecasts in settings wherein the two skills are
complementary, with the benefit particularly appealing in dramatically
avoiding extreme mistakes that would have been committed by either
human or machine alone. Synergies between humans and machines
documented in this study provide guidance on how humans can lever-
age their advantages in better adaptation for the future of growing AI
prowess.

Although we have constructed our AI analyst with a rather compre-
hensive set of data inputs and adopted state-of-the-art machine learning
techniques, it is inherently impossible for a model to be inclusive of
all publicly available data and all advanced learning algorithms. We
see ample room for future research in terms of machine capability
and, more importantly, integration of human and machine intelligence.
The following directions might be particularly promising. First, further
studies on how best to exploit the Man + Machine’s potential in
reducing negative tail outcomes can be crucial for risk management
in AI Adoption. Second, better training of machine learning models to
understand business cycles and deal with evolving environments would
critically expand model capability and applicability. Finally, while AI
models become increasingly complex, the interpretability of the models
would be important both for model robustness and human–machine
collaboration.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Sean Cao: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Investigation,
Conceptualization. Wei Jiang: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Method-
ology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Junbo
Wang: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Methodology, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Baozhong Yang: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Resources, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data_Submit_2.7z (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

Appendix A. List of variables

See Table A.1.

Table A.1
List of all variables used in AI Algorithms.
All Variables (and the definition/source) used in the machine learning algorithms are provided.

Firm characteristics

Gross Profits-to-Assets
Return on Assets
Book-to-Market Equity
Debt-to-Market
Earnings-to-Price
Cash Flow-to-Price
Payout Yield
Five-year Sales Growth Rank
Enterprise Multiple
Sales-to-Price
Abnormal Corporate Investment
Investment-to-Assets
Changes in PPE and Inventory/Assets
Investment Growth
Inventory Changes
Operating Accruals
Total Accruals
Net External Finance
Return on Net Operating Assets
Profit Margin
Asset Turnover
Operating Profits-to-Equity
Book Leverage
Advertising Expense-to-Market

Definition and/or source

Novy-Marx (2013)
Fama and French (2006) and Chen et al. (2014)
Rosenberg et al. (1985)
Bhandari (1988)
Basu (1983)
Lakonishok et al. (1994)
Boudoukh et al. (2007)
Lakonishok et al. (1994)
Loughran and Wellman (2011)
Barbee et al. (1996)
Titman et al. (2004)
Cooper et al. (2008)
Lyandres et al. (2008)
Xing (2008)
Thomas and Zhang (2002)
Sloan (1996)
Richardson et al. (2005)
Bradshaw et al. (2006)
Soliman (2008)
Soliman (2008)
Soliman (2008)
Fama and French (2015)
Fama and French (1992)
Chan et al. (2001)

(continued on next page)

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391018S. Cao et al.

Table A.1 (continued).

Firm characteristics

R&D-to-Market
Operating Leverage
Financial Constraints
Asset Liquidity
Asset Liquidity
I/B/E/S Actual Earning
Number of Institutional Owners
Ownership Concentration
Total Institutional Ownership

Industry Variables

Competition Measure from 10-K
Fluidity
Industry Dummies
Industry Size
Industry Earning

Macro Variables

IP
CPI
Oil price
Tbill3
TBond10
Credit Spread
Dividend Yield
Stock Market Illiquidity
New Orders
Technical Indicators
Average Correlation

Definition and/or source

Chan et al. (2001)
Novy-Marx (2011)
Kaplan–Zingales index, Lamont et al. (2001)
Scaled by book assets, Ortiz-Molina and Phillips (2014)
Scaled by market assets, Ortiz-Molina and Phillips (2014)
I/B/E/S actual earning 4 quarter before scaled by adjusted price
Number of 13F institutional investors that own the stock
Herfindahl–Hirschman Index
Percent of shares outstanding owned by 13F investors

Definition and/or Source

Li et al. (2013)
Product market Fluidity, Hoberg et al. (2014)
Dummy variables that indicate Fama–French 12 industries
Industry Size within past 3, 6, 9, 12, 24 and 36 months
Industry earning within past 3, 6, 9, 12, 24 and 36 months

Definition and/or Source

Industrial Production Index
Consumer Price Index
Crude Oil Price
3-month Treasury Bill
10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate
Baa-AAA yield spread
Fama and French (1989)
Chen et al. (2018)
Jones and Tuzel (2013)
Neely et al. (2014)
Average correlation of largest stocks in the SP500 index
Pollet and Wilson (2010)

Filing and SEC Variables

Definition and/or Source

Neg 10KQ
NegPos 10KQ
Neg 8k
NegPos 8K
Neg Other
NegPos Other
ML-based Sentiment

ML-based Neg Sentiment
File size
GF Index
Itemized 8K

Percentage of negative words from 10K/10Q
Percentage of negative minus positive words from 10K/10Q
Percentage of negative words from 8K
Percentage of negative minus positive from 8K
Percentage of negative words from other reports
Percentage of negative minus positive from other reports
ML-based negative tones minus ML-based positive tones scaled
by the length of SEC filings, Cao et al. (2021b)
ML-based negative tones scaled by the length of SEC filings
Size of the filings
Gunning Fog Readability Index
Average percentage of negative minus positive word of
items 1-5, 7, 8, and 12 in 8K over past three months

Ravenpack Variables

Definition and/or Source

ESS
AES
AEV
CSS
PEQ
BEE
BMQ
BAM
BCA
BER

Patent Variables

Xi_real

Twitter Variables

Sentiment and Uncertainty
Sentiments GI
Sentiment HE
Sentiment LM
Sentiment QDAP
Ratio Uncertainty LM

Event Sentiment Score (Firm, US, World)
Aggregate Event Sentiment (Firm, US, World)
Aggregate Event Volume (Firm, US, World)
Composite Sentiment Score (Firm)
Global Equities Sentiment Score (Firm)
Earning Evaluations Sentiment Score (Firm)
Editorials & Commentary Sentiment Score (Firm)
Venture Company Merge and Acquisitions Sentiment Score (Firm)
Report on Corporate Actions Sentiment Score (Firm)
Earnings Releases Sentiment Score (Firm)

Definition and/or Source

Value of innovation deflated to 1982 (million) dollars
from Kogan et al. (2017)

Definition and/or Source

Derived from peer disclosure tweets following (Cao et al., 2021a)
Sentiment: Harvard General Inquirer IV-4 dictionary
Sentiment: (Henry, 2008) financial dictionary
Sentiment: (Loughran and McDonald, 2011) dictionary
Sentiment: (Hu and Bin, 2004) QDAP dictionary
Uncertainty words ratio: (Loughran and McDonald, 2011) dictionary

Appendix B. Details of the machine learning models

B.1. Decision-tree based models

In this section, we briefly describe the basic structure and strengths
of machine learning models considered in our paper. Interested read-
ers are referred to representative references for more details, such
as Goodfellow et al. (2016) and James et al. (2023).

The linear models considered above may not work well if there are
nonlinear relationships among the predictive variables. In this section,
we discuss a class of versatile nonlinear models – decision trees and
derived models.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391019S. Cao et al.

B.1.1. Decision trees

Decision trees are modeled after human decisions. A decision tree is
a series of binary decisions based on cutoffs of independent variables at
each branching point. The tree thus will divide the rectangular feature
space into smaller rectangular blocks. The decision tree regression then
use the sample mean of the dependent variable in each block as the
prediction for any point in the block.

Decision trees have the benefit of being easily interpretable because
it is modeled after human decisions (similar to a step-by-step instruc-
tions) and can also be displayed graphically (as binary trees). Trees are
also a flexible non-linear model that can model a variety of nonlinear
patterns given the large degree of freedom in specifying the sequences
of branching rules.

However, trees do not have a high level of accuracy by themselves
because of the restrictive form of the binary branching process, which
forces the sample to be split into rectangular regions and may not
approximate the real underlying patterns (whether linear or nonlinear)
well. Trees are also non-robust. In addition, a small change in the data
can lead to large changes in the structure of the estimated tree because
the tree structure is discrete, not continuous. Several methods, includ-
ing random forest and gradient boosting, use trees as basic building
blocks to form ensemble predictors and achieve superior performance.

B.1.2. Random forest

A random forest (introduced by Breiman, 2001) proceeds in the fol-
lowing way. First, it involves drawing a bootstrapped sample (drawing
with repetition) from the original sample. Second, on the bootstrapped
sample, one builds a decision tree, selecting a splitting predictor among
only a random 𝑚 features of the total 𝑝 predictors. Third, one repeats
the above two steps to build a number of decision trees, and form the
ensemble predictor by taking the mean predictor of all the trees.

Random forests perform better than simple trees for several reasons.
First, through aggregating predictions over bootstrapped samples, it
reduces the variance and non-robustness of single trees. Second, the
random feature selection in the second step above ensures that the
estimated trees are not too correlated, avoiding relying only on a few
prominent features and further reducing the variance of the model.

B.1.3. Gradient boost

Boosting also combines a number of weak models to generate a
stronger model. In boosting of trees, a number of trees are constructed
sequentially, i.e., each tree is constructed using information based on
the previously constructed trees. In gradient boosting, each decision
tree is fit to the residuals of the model, not to the outcome. Once a
new tree is obtained, it is added to the predictive function to update it,
usually with a learning weight multiplied to the tree predictor to adjust
the rate of learning new information. Then new residuals are obtained
from the updated predictive function and the process is repeated for
a number of times to obtain the final ensemble predictor. Because
boosting models aggregate results of decision trees sequentially, each
component tree does not need to be very precise and can be simple,
i.e., having a low depth.

In a sense, gradient boosting is similar to the Newton’s gradient
algorithm in optimization. It approximates the true underlying function
sequentially by improving on the predicted residuals/errors gradually.
This allows the final predictive function to have a much richer and
more flexible structure and thus much better performance than single
decision trees. It also reduces the non-robustness of single trees through
using an ensemble of trees. For these reasons, gradient boosting is one
of the best off-the-shelf machine learning methods.

B.2. Deep learning model: Long short-term memory neural networks

The neural networks models, initial motivated by the neuron struc-
tures in the brains of humans and animals, blossomed after break-
throughs in algorithms and computing power (LeCun et al., 2015). Neu-
ral networks models, also called deep learning models, have become
some of the most powerful models and achieved near- or super-human
capabilities in a wide variety of applications, such as natural language
processing, speech recognition, computer vision, game playing, and
autonomous driving.

There are many different architectures of neural networks, such as
the simplest Feedforward Neural Networks for straightforward classifi-
cation tasks, the Convolutional Neural Networks for image and pattern
recognition, and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) that can process
sequential data such as speech and text. Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) Neural Networks are a special type of RNN that is the key
to the many successes of RNN, including speech recognition, language
modeling, and translation.

In a neural network, there are nodes (neurons) that are connected
to each other. There are three types of nodes: input nodes that are used
to receive data; output nodes that produce desired outcomes or predic-
tions; and intermediate nodes that process the data from input nodes
and convert them to outputs. The connections of the nodes determine
the structure of the neural network and its features. RNNs are neural
networks with loops, or nodes that are connected to themselves.

LSTM networks are introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
(1997) to solve the problem that standard RNNs have trouble retaining
‘‘memory’’ of the much earlier parts of sequential input data, when
processing the later parts of the data. Since sequential data may have
long-term dependencies, i.e., parts far away in the sequence may be
related, it is important to have ‘‘long-term memory’’ to handle them.
LSTM networks have a sequence of nodes that are specifically designed
to retain long-term information and update it continuously with new
information in a flexible way. As a result, LSTM can capture both short-
term and long-term relations in sequential or time-series data very well,
such as momentum and reversal patterns, supporting its applications in
financial economics, given the abundance of time-series financial data.

B.3. Implementation of models

In the training sample for year 𝑠, when
Standalone machine model.
making predictions in year 𝑠 − 2 or earlier, the target return spans
the cumulative return from the onset of the current month until the
end of 12 months from the present date. When making predictions
in year 𝑠 − 1 in the training sample, the target return consists of the
cumulative return from the start of the current month until the end
of the year. Consequently, the training data for each year only includes
data prior to that specific year, which prevents any look-ahead bias. We
apply the same principle in constructing training samples for earnings
predictions.

We construct our AI model as the ensemble (using the median
value) of three well-established machine learning models: random for-
est, extreme gradient boosting, and LSTM models. The data fed to the
random forest and extreme gradient boosting models do not contain
the time-series history and consist of predictors in the current quarter.
These two models allow us to extract the most important predictors
and their nonlinear interactions from a large number of characteristics
that have the potential to predict stock returns. On the other hand, the
long short-term memory neural network model (LSTM) incorporates
the time series of all predicting variables over eight past quarters. It
contains five layers, with the first layer being a standard LSTM model
and the remaining layers a dense feed-forward neural network model.
This model ensures that time-series patterns that can predict future
stock returns, such as seasonality and momentum, are not ignored.
It also offers insight into economic conditions such as recessions or
expansions. While the eight window could potentially extend further,

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391020S. Cao et al.

it’s worth noting that a commonly accepted definition of a recession
involves two consecutive quarters of real GDP decline, a pattern that
can be captured by the model. The final AI model we used to make pre-
dictions is an ensemble of the three trained models above. Specifically,
we take the median value of the predictions from the three models.

We apply a rolling window approach to train the model. The typical
training window spans three years. However, in instances where the
preceding three years encompass a ‘‘distress’’ year (e.g., 2001, 2008,
and 2009), we extend the training window to the first year after
the preceding distress period or commence from the dataset’s starting
year. For example, for the years 2002 to 2004, the training window
encompasses data from the sample’s inception. For the years 2009 to
2012, the training window starts from 2002, reflecting the preceding
recession in 2001.

The hyperparameters used by our machine learning methods are
reported in Table IA.9 in the Internet Appendix. We also conduct ro-
bustness tests for a wide range of hyperparameters (results are reported
in the same table). The Human vs. AI beat ratios are quantitatively
similar under these scenarios.

In our main results, the predictors are not normalized. However,
we also explore robustness by normalizing the variables. Specifically,
at each analyst announcement date, we normalize all independent vari-
ables (excluding returns and prices) utilized in the ML model training
process. This normalization involves transforming each variable into a
uniformly distributed variable at the unit percentile level. Therefore, all
the independent variables fall in the range between zero and one. The
Human vs. AI beat ratios remain consistent regardless of normalization.

Man + machine (M+M) model. To construct the M+M model, we
proceed in two steps. First, we construct a machine learning model uti-
lizing analyst forecasts and analyst characteristics as inputs, in addition
to all predictors in the standalone machine. Specifically, we include as
predictors the mean forecast and forecast accuracy (mean square error)
of each analyst for the past five years, and the mean consensus and
forecast accuracy (mean square error) of all analysts in the previous 90
days. With this comprehensive set of information, we train the model
and make the prediction. Second, we ensemble this prediction with
three others: the current analyst prediction, the Machine–debiased Man
(MDM) prediction, and the standalone machine prediction, to form the
M+M prediction (as before, the ensemble value is the median value of
these four predictions).

Appendix C. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

Agrawal, Ajay Joshua Gans, Goldfarb, Avi, 2018. Prediction Machines: The Simple

Economics of Artificial Intelligence. Harvard Business Press, Boston.

Amihud, Yakov, 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time series effects.

J. Financial Mark. 5, 31–56.

Armour, John, Parnham, Richard, Sato, Mari, 2022. Augmented Lawyering. University

of Illinois Law Review.

Asquith, Paul, Mikhail, Michael B., Au, Andrea S., 2005. Information content of equity

analyst reports. J. Financ. Econ. 75, 245–282.

Aubry, Mathieu, Kraeussl, Roman, Manso, Gustavo, Spaenjers, Christophe, 2023. Biased

auctioneers. J. Finance 78, 795–833.

Autor, David H., Levy, Frank, Murnane, Richard J., 2003. The skill content of recent
technological change: An empirical exploration. Q. J. Econ. 118, 1279–1333.
Babina, Tania, Fedyk, Anastassia, He, Alex Xi, Hodson, James, 2024. Artificial
intelligence, firm growth, and industry concentration. J. Financ. Econ. forthcoming.
Barbee, William C., Mukherji, Sandip, Raines, Gary A., 1996. Do sales–price and debt–
equity explain stock returns better than book–market and firm size? Financ. Anal.
J. 52, 56–60.

Basu, Sanjoy, 1983. The relationship between earnings’ yield, market value and return

for NYSE common stocks: Further evidence. J. Financ. Econ. 12, 129–156.

Bhandari, Laxmi Chand, 1988. Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock returns:

Empirical evidence. J. Finance 43, 507–528.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Michaely, Roni, Richardson, Matthew, Roberts, Michael, 2007. On
the importance of measuring payout yield: Implications for empirical asset pricing.
J. Finance 62, 877–915.

Bradshaw, Mark T., Richardson, Scott A., Sloan, Richard G., 2006. The relation between
corporate financing activities, analysts’ forecasts and stock returns. J. Account.
Econ. 42, 53–85.

Brav, Alon, Lehavy, Reuven, 2003. An empirical analysis of analysts’ target prices:
Short-term informativeness and long-term dynamics. J. Finance 58, 1933–1967.

Breiman, Leo, 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Ringgenberg, Matthew C., Rösch, Dominik, 2024. Does floor

trading matter? J. Finance forthcoming.

Brogaard, Jonathan, Zareei, Abalfazl, 2022. Machine learning and the stock market. J.

Financ. Quant. Anal. 58, 1431–1472.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Mitchell, Tom, Rock, Daniel, 2018. What can machines learn, and
what does it mean for occupations and the economy? AEA Pap. Proc. 108, 43–47.
Cao, Sean, Cong, Lin William, Yang, Baozhong, 2023a. Financial reporting and

blockchains: audit pricing, misstatements, and regulation. Working paper.

Cao, Sean, Fang, Vivian, Lei, Lijun, 2021a. Negative peer disclosure. J. Financ. Econ.

140, 815–837.

Cao, Sean, Jiang, Wei, Yang, Baozhong, Zhang, Alan L., 2023b. How to talk when a
machine is listening: corporate disclosure in the age of AI. Rev. Financial Stud. 36,
3603–3642.

Cao, Sean, Kim, Yongtae, Wang, Angie, Xiao, Houping, 2021b. Power of deep learning:

quantifying language to explain cross-sectional returns. Working paper.

Cao, Kai, You, Haifeng, 2024. Fundamental analysis via machine learning. Financial

Anal. J. 80, 74–98.

Chan, Louis K.C., Lakonishok, Josef, Sougiannis, Theodore, 2001. The stock market

valuation of research and development expenditures. J. Finance 56, 2431–2456.

Chen, Yong, Eaton, Gregory W., Paye, Bradley S., 2018. Micro(structure) before macro?
The predictive power of aggregate illiquidity for stock returns and economic
activity. J. Financ. Econ. 130, 48–73.

Chen, Qi, Francis, Jennifer, Jiang, Wei, 2005. Investor learning about analyst predictive

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103910.

ability. J. Account. Econ. 39, 3–24.

References

Abarbanell, Jeffrey S., 1991. Do analysts’ earnings forecasts incorporate in-formation

in prior stock price changes? J. Account. Econ. 14, 147–165.

Abarbanell, Jeffery, Lehavy, Reuven, 2003. Biased forecasts or biased earnings? The
role of reported earnings in explaining apparent bias and over/underreaction in
analysts earnings forecasts. J. Account. Econ. 36, 105–146.

Abis, Simona, 2022. Man vs. machine: quantitative and discretionary equity

management. Working paper.

Abis, Simona, Veldkamp, Laura, 2024. The changing economics of knowledge

production. Rev. Financ. Stud. 37, 89–118.

Acemoglu, Daron, Autor, David, Hazell, Jonathon, Restrepo, Pascual, 2022. Artificial
intelligence and jobs: Evidence from online vacancies. J. Labor Econ. 40, 293–340.
Acemoglu, Daron, Restrepo, Pascual, 2018. The race between man and machine:
Implications of technology for growth, factor shares and employment. Amer. Econ.
Rev. 108, 1488–1542.

Acemoglu, Daron, Restrepo, Pascual, 2019. Automation and new tasks: How technology

displaces and reinstates labor. J. Econ. Perspect. 33, 3–30.

Aghion, Philippe, Jones, Benjamin F., Jones, Charles I., 2019. Artificial intelligence and
economic growth, The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Agrawal, Ajay, Gans, Joshua, Goldfarb, Avi, 2019b. Artificial intelligence: The am-
biguous labor market impact of automating prediction. J. Econ. Perspect. 33,
31–50.

Chen, Long, Novy-Marx, Robert, Zhang, Lu, 2014. An alternative three-factor model.

working paper.

Chen, Luyang, Pelger, Markus, Zhu, Jason, 2023. Deep learning in asset pricing.

Manage. Sci. 70, 714–750.

Chen, Nai-Fu, Roll, Richard, Ross, Stephen, 1986. Economic forces and the stock market.

J. Bus. 59, 383–403.

Chen, Mark A., Wu, Qinxi, Yang, Baozhong, 2019. How valuable is FinTech

innovation? Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 2062–2106.

Chi, Feng, Hwang, Byoung-Hyoun, Zheng, Yaping, 2024. The use and usefulness of big
data in finance: Evidence from financial analysts. Manage. Sci. forthcoming.
Coleman, Braiden, Merkley, Kenneth J., Pacelli, Joseph, 2022. Human versus ma-
chine: A comparison of robo-analyst and traditional research analyst investment
recommendations. Account. Rev. 97, 221–244.

Cong, Lin William, Liang, Tengyuan, Yang, Baozhong, Zhang, Xiao, 2020. Analyzing
textual
information at scale. In: Balachandran, Kashi R. (Ed.), Information to
Facilitate Efficient Decision Making: Big Data, Blockchain and Relevance. World
Scientific Publishers, Singapore.

Cong, Lin William, Tang, Ke, Wang, Jingyuan, Zhang, Yang, 2022. Alphaportfolio: direct
construction through reinforcement learning and interpretable AI. Working paper.
Cooper, Michael J., Gulen, Huseyin, Schill, Michael J., 2008. Asset growth and the

cross-section of stock returns. J. Finance 63, 1609–1651.

Crane, Alan, Crotty, Kevin, 2020. How skilled are security analysts. J. Finance 75,

1629–1675.

D’Acunto, Francesco Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Ross, Alberto G., 2019. The promises and

pitfalls of robo-advising. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 1983–2020.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391021S. Cao et al.

De Bondt, Werner, Thaler, Richard, 1990. Do security analysts overreact? Amer. Econ.

LeCun, Yann, Bengio, Yoshua, Hinton, Geoffrey, 2015. Deep learning. Nature 521,

Rev. 80, 52–57.

436–444.

de Silva, Tim, Thesmar, David, 2024. Noise in expectations: Evidence from analyst

Li, Xi, 2005. The persistence of relative performance in stock recommendations of

forecasts. Rev. Financ. Stud. forthcoming.

sell-side financial analysts. J. Account. Econ. 40, 129–152.

Dechow, Patricia M., Sloan, Richard G., Sweeney, Amy P., 1995. Detecting earnings

Li, Feng, Lundholm, Russell, Minnis, Michael, 2013. A measure of competition based

management. Account. Rev. 70, 193–225.

on 10-K filings. J. Account. Res. 51, 399–436.

Desai, Hemang, Liang, Bing, Singh, Ajai K., 2019. Do all-stars shine? Evaluation of

analyst recommendations. Financ. Anal. J. 56, 20–29.

Doyle, Jeffrey T., Jennings, Jared N., Soliman, Mark T., 2013. Do managers define
non-GAAP earnings to meet or beat analyst forecasts? J. Account. Econ. 56, 40–56.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L., Papanikolaou, Dimitris, 2013. Organization capital and the

cross-section of expected returns. J. Finance 68, 1365–1406.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., Papanikolaou, Dimitris, 2014. The value and ownership of

intangible capital. Amer. Econ. Rev. 104, 189–194.

Lim, Terence, 2002. Rationality and analyst forecast bias. J. Finance 56, 369–385.
Liu, Miao, 2022. Assessing human information processing in lending decisions: A

machine learning approach. J. Account. Res. 60, 607–651.

Loughran, Tim, McDonald, Bill, 2011. When is a liability not a liability? Textual

analysis, dictionaries, and 10-Ks. J. Finance 66, 35–65.

Loughran, Tim, Wellman, Jay W., 2011. New evidence on the relation between
the enterprise multiple and average stock returns. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 46,
1629–1650.

Elton, Edwin J., Gruber, Martin J., Blake, Christopher R., 1996. The the persistence of

Lyandres, Evgeny, Sun, Le, Zhang, Lu, 2008. The new issues puzzle: Testing the

risk-adjusted mutual fund performance. J. Bus. 69, 133–157.

investment-based explanation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21, 2825–2855.

Ewens, Michael, Peters, Ryan H., Wang, Sean, 2024. Measuring intangible capital with

Martin, Ian W.R., Nagel, Stefan, 2022. Market efficiency in the age of big data. J.

market prices. Manage. Sci. forthcoming.

Financ. Econ. 145, 154–177.

Falato, Antonio, Kadyrzhanova, Dalida, Sim, Jae, 2022. Rising intangible capital,
shrinking debt capacity, and the US corporate savings glut. J. Finance 77,
2799–2852.

Merton, Robert C., 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest

rates. J. Finance 29, 449–470.

Michaely, Roni, Womack, Kent L., 1999. Conflict of interest and the credibility of

Fama, Eugene F., French, Kenneth R., 1989. Business conditions and expected returns

underwriter analyst recommendations. Rev. Financ. Stud. 12, 653–686.

on stocks and bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 25, 23–49.

Mikhail, Michael, Walther, Beverly, Willis, Richard, 2007. When security analysts talk,

Fama, Eugene F., French, Kenneth R., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns.

who listens? Account. Rev. 82, 1227–1253.

J. Finance 47, 427–465.

Muro, Mark, Maxim, Robert, Whiton, Jacob, 2019. Automation and Artificial

Fama, Eugene F., French, Kenneth R., 2006. Profitability,

investment and average

Intelligence: How Machines are Affecting People and Places. Brookings.

returns. J. Financ. Econ. 82, 491–518.

Fama, Eugene F., French, Kenneth R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ.

Econ. 116, 1–22.

Goldstein, Itay, Spatt, Chester S., Ye, Mao, 2021. Big data in finance. Rev. Financ. Stud.

34, 3213–3225.

Goodfellow, Ian, Bengio, Yoshua, Courville, Aaron, 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press,

Cambridge, MA.

Goyal, Amit, Welch, Ivo, Zafirov, Athanasse, 2024. A comprehensive 2021 look at
the empirical performance of equity premium prediction II. Rev. Financ. Stud.
forthcoming.

Narasimhan,

Jegadeesh, Noh,

Joonki, Pukthuanthong, Kuntara, Roll, Richard,
Wang, Junbo, 2019. Empirical tests of asset pricing models with individual assets:
Resolving the errors-in-variables bias in risk premium estimation. J. Financ. Econ.
133, 273–298.

Neely, Christopher, Rapach, David E., Tu, Jun, Zhou, Guofu, 2014. Forecasting the
equity risk premium: The role of technical indicators. Manage. Sci. 60, 1772–1791.

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2011. Operating leverage. Rev. Finance 15, 103–134.
Novy-Marx, Robert, 2013. The other side of value: The gross profitability premium. J.

Financ. Econ. 108, 1–28.

Ortiz-Molina, Hernan, Phillips, Gordon, 2014. Real asset illiquidity and the cost of

Grennan, Jillian, Michaely, Roni, 2020. Artificial intelligence and high-skilled work:

capital. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 49, 1–32.

evidence from analysts. Working paper.

Grennan, Jillian, Michaely, Roni, 2021. FinTechs and the market for financial analysis.

J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 56, 1877–1907.

Pagliaro, Cynthia, Ramadorai, Tarun, Rossi, Alberto G., Utkus, Stephen, Walther, Ans-
gar, 2023. Algorithm aversion: theory and evidence from robo-advice. Working
Paper.

Gu, Shihao, Kelly, Bryan, Xiu, Dacheng, 2020. Empirical asset pricing via machine

Peters, Ryan H., Taylor, Lucian A., 2017. Intangible capital and the investment-q

learning. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 2223–2273.

relation. J. Financ. Econ. 123, 251–272.

Hanley, Kathleen Weiss, Hoberg, Gerard, 2019. Dynamic interpretation of emerging

Pollet, Joshua M., Wilson, Mungo, 2010. Average correlation and stock market returns.

risks in the financial sector. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 4543–4603.

J. Financ. Econ. 96, 364–380.

Henry, Elain, 2008. Are investors influenced by how earnings press releases are

Prahl, Andrew, Swol, Lyn Van, 2017. Understanding algorithm aversion: when is advice

written? J. Bus. Commun. 45, 363–407.

from automation discounted? J. Forecast. 36, 691–702.

Hirshleifer, David, Yaron, Levi, Ben, Lourie, Siew, Hong Teoh, 2019. Decision fatigue

Ray, Debraj, Mookherjee, Dilip, 2022. Growth, automation and the long run share of

and heuristic analyst forecasts. J. Financ. Econ. 133, 83–98.

labor. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 46, 1–26.

Hoberg, Gerard, Phillips, Gordon, Prabhala, Nagpurnanand, 2014. Product market

Richardson, Scott A., Sloan, Richard G., Soliman, Mark T., Tuna, Irem, 2005. Accrual

threats, payouts, and financial flexibility. J. Finance 69, 293–324.

reliability, earnings persistence and stock prices. J. Account. Econ. 39, 437–485.

Hochreiter, Sepp, Schmidhuber, Jürgen, 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural

Rosenberg, Barr, Reid, Kenneth, Lanstein, Ronald, 1985. Persuasive evidence of market

Comput. 9, 1735–1780.

inefficiency. J. Portf. Manag. 11, 9–16.

Hu, Mingqiu, Bin, Liu, 2004. Mining opinion features in customer reviews. In: AAAI04
Proceedings of the 19th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 4, pp.
755–760.

James, Gareth, Witten, Daniela, Hastie, Trevor, Tibshirani, Robert, Taylor, Jonathan,
2023. Introduction to Statistical Learning: with Applications in Python. Springer,
New York.

Rossi, Alberto G., Utkus, Stephen P., 2021. Who benefits from robo-advising? evidence

from machine learning. Working paper.

Sloan, Richard G., 1996. Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash

flows about future earnings? Account. Rev. 71, 289–315.

Soliman, Mark T., 2008. The use of DuPont analysis by market participants. Account.

Rev. 83, 823–853.

Jansen, Mark, Nguyen, Hieu, Sham, Amin, 2023. Rise of the machines: The impact of

Stickel, Scott, 1990. Predicting individual analyst earnings forecasts. J. Account. Res.

automated underwriting. Manage. Sci. forthcoming.

28, 409–417.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Kim, Joonghyuk, Krische, Susan D., Lee, Charles M.C., 2004.
Analyzing the analysts: When do recommendations add value? J. Finance 59,
1083–1124.

Stickel, Scott, 1992. Reputation and performance among security analysts. J. Finance

47, 1811–1836.

Thomas, Jacob K., Zhang, Huai, 2002. Inventory changes and future returns. Rev.

Jiang, Wei, Tang, Yuehua, Xiao, Rachael Jiqiu, Yao, Vincent, 2023. Surviving the

Account. Stud. 7, 163–187.

fintech disruption. NBER Working paper 28668.

Titman, Sheridan, Wei, K.C. John, Xie, Feixue, 2004. Capital investments and stock

Jones, Christopher S., Tuzel, Selale, 2013. Inventory investment and the cost of capital.

returns. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 39, 677–700.

J. Financial Econ. 107, 557–579.

Katona, Zsolt, Painter, Marcus, Patatoukas, Panos N., Zeng, Jean, 2024. On the capital
market consequences of alternative data: Evidence from outer space. J. Financ.
Quant. Anal. forthcoming.

Kogan, Leonid, Papanikolaou, Dimitris, Seru, Amit, Stoffman, Noah, 2017. Tech-
J. Econ. 132,

resource allocation, and growth. Q.

innovation,

nological
665–712.

van Binsbergen, Jules H., Han, Xiao, Lopez-Lira, Alejandro, 2023. Man vs. machine
learning: The term structure of earnings expectations and conditional biases. Rev.
Financ. Stud. 36, 2361–2396.

Wayne, Ferson, Siegel, Andrew F., Wang, Junbo L., 2024. Factor model comparisons

with conditioning information. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. forthcoming.

Webb, Michael, 2020. The impact of artificial intelligence on the labor market. Working

paper.

Lakonishok, Josef, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1994. Contrarian investment,

Xing, Yuhang, 2008. Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory: An empirical

extrapolation, and risk. J. Finance 49, 1541–1578.

investigation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21, 1767–1795.

Lamont, Owen, Polk, Christopher, Saá-Requejo, Jesús, 2001. Financial constraints and

stock returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 14, 529–554.

Zheng, Xiang, 2022. How can innovation screening be improved? A machine learning
analysis with economic consequences for firm performance. Working paper.
Zhu, Christina, 2019. Big data as a governance mechanism. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32,

2021–2061.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391022