Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The cross-border effects of bank capital regulation✩
Saleem Bahaj a,b,c, Frederic Malherbe a,c,∗
a University College London, London, United Kingdom
b Bank of England, London, United Kingdom
c CEPR, London, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: The Cross-border Effects of Bank C
apital Regulation: Replication Files (Original d
ata)

JEL classification:
G15
G21
G28

Keywords:
CCyB
International coordination
Race to the bottom
Race to the top
Liquidity services

1. Introduction

We study the international coordination of bank capital requirements under a host-country rule: the require-
ment depends on where the borrower, not the bank, is located. In such a regime, countries compete for scarce
bank equity capital. Raising a country’s requirement may generate bank capital outflows as well as inflows. We
pin down the condition for the sign of the capital flow and the associated externality, and highlight the policy
implications. Absent collaboration, overshooting is likely: individual countries have an incentive to increase
Basel III’s Counter-Cyclical Capital Buffer too much in good times and cut it too much in bad times.

International standards for bank capital regulation have evolved
over the past four decades from a simple, common 8% minimum capital
requirement to a broad, complex toolkit. Macroprudential considera-
tions have been a driving force behind this evolution. Prudential risks
and macroeconomic cycles differ across countries, which suggests the
need for heterogeneous and time-varying capital requirements. Under
the current regime (Basel III) the stance of macroprudential regulation
is effectively set at the discretion of national regulators via so-called
countercyclical buffers (CCyBs). These buffers apply to all bank loans
made in the regulator’s jurisdiction, irrespective of which jurisdiction

the bank belongs to. Accordingly, we study a model in which capital
requirements follow a host-country rule: they are set by the country in
which lending takes place.

The existing literature has studied home-country rules under which
the requirement is set by a bank’s home regulator regardless of where
lending takes place. In these circumstances, international competition
for credit market share within a country is a key driver of strategic
incentives: Regulators can give an advantage to banks in their jurisdic-
tion by cutting capital requirements as this allows them to operate at
a cheaper cost than banks from other jurisdictions. So, to the extent
that regulators care about the profits of the banks they regulate, they

✩

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, one anonymous referee, our discussants Toni Anhert, Marc Gabarro, Robert Marquez,
Rustam Jamilov and Esther Segalla, as well as Manuel Amador, Jason Donaldson, Fernando Eguren Martin, Michael McMahon, Marcus Opp, Rafael Repullo,
Javier Suarez, John Thanassoulis, Ansgar Walther, and conference and seminar participants at 2022 IBEFA summer meetings, the Bank of England, the Bank of
Lithuania, the Bank of Spain, the Bank of Portugal, Bonn University, Bristol University, the Bundesbank - Frankfurt School of Finance and Management Regulating
Financial Markets Conference, CEMFI, the CFM macro workshop, 2023 CEBRA Conference, University of Durham, University of Essex, Endless Summer Conference
on Financial Intermediation and Corporate Finance in Athens, the European Central Bank, 2022 European Economic Association Congress, the FTG meeting in
Budapest, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, 2021 GBSE Summer Forum, Higher School of Economics Moscow, London FIT workshops, 2022 QCGBF
annual conference, UCLouvain, UCL, Lund University, Michigan State University, 2022 MMF conference, Nova SBE, and Warwick Business School. The views
expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England, the MPC, the FPC, or the PRC.

∗ Corresponding author at: University College London, London, United Kingdom.

E-mail address:

f.malherbe@ucl.ac.uk (F. Malherbe).

1 Typical concerns associated with higher capital requirements in a given country go from impairing the competitiveness of the domestic financial
system (Osborne, 2015) to a reduction in domestic banks’ foreign exposures, therefore impairing the functioning of foreign financial systems (de Guindos, 2019),
and to cross-border relocation of risk-shifting activities ((ESRB, 2018), page 90).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103912
Received 18 January 2023; Received in revised form 16 July 2024; Accepted 18 July 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)103912Availableonline8August20240304-405X/©2024PublishedbyElsevierB.V.S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

have an incentive to undercut one another in order for their banks to
steal market share (Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2006). Common min-
ima eliminate this market-share externality. But, as we have outlined,
national regulators have discretion over the stance of macropruden-
tial requirements, and regulators and policymakers regularly express
concerns about the international spillovers of capital requirements in
the current regime. Yet there is little agreement on what the relevant
externalities are and a formal framework for assessing them is needed.1
We find that, under a host-country rule, what matters is not com-
petition for market share but competition for bank capital. Key is how
much equity capital is allocated to lending in different jurisdictions.
Changes in capital requirements alter this allocation and effectively
generate bank equity capital flows. We propose a model to study such
capital flows and their implications for strategic interactions between
regulators. The model has two dates and two countries (Home and
Foreign), in which banks finance loans with a mix of insured deposits
and equity capital. Risk-shifting incentives make banks endogenously
specialise in lending in either country (so, we refer to them as Home
or Foreign banks). These banks face capital requirements set by the
regulator of the country in which the lending takes place. Bank equity
capital is mobile and there is global competition for it.

Our contribution is threefold: First, we show that, perhaps against
conventional wisdom, an increase in the capital requirement in a
country does not necessarily generate outflows of bank equity capital
– inflows are possible too. We pin down the conditions under which
either case occurs. Second, as bank equity capital is scarce, changes
to capital requirements in a country impose, through capital flows,
an externality onto the other country. We show that this capital flow
externality is central to the incentive for national regulators to deviate
from a collaborative optimum. If higher requirements generate positive
externality, there is an incentive to deviate downwards, i.e., to undercut
the other country (and vice versa if the externality is negative). Third,
we point out the implications for the coordination of macroprudential
capital regulation. In particular, under a host-country rule and absent
coordination, macroprudential capital requirements are likely to be
raised too much in good times and cut too much in troubled times,
when bank equity capital is particularly scarce.

To understand these results, let us expose the main mechanism of
the model, starting from the perspective of a single country, Home.
There are diminishing returns to capital in the economy, which trans-
lates into a downward sloping demand for loans. Imagine Home bank
equity capital is fixed. Then, an increase in capital requirement will
contract lending and raise its marginal return. If initial quantities are
relatively high, this fall in lending increases profitability. The intuition
is the same as uncompetitive firms in a product market boosting
their profits by reducing quantities. However, if initial quantities are
relatively low a fall in lending reduces profits; in the same way that
collusive firms would lose profit if they reduced quantities past the
point a monopolist would choose. Due to this mechanism, the Home
banks’ profits and their return on equity are hump-shaped in the level
and lending, and hence, in the capital requirement. If the capital
requirement is initially below the return maximising level, then an
increase will raise equity returns (and, vice versa, it will lower returns
if we start above the return maximising level).

Now take a cross-border perspective. In our model, banks issue
equity competitively to investors who supply it at a cost increasing in
the total amount raised across countries. Hence, there is a global supply
curve for equity. Investors face no constraints on where they invest and,
in equilibrium, the return on bank equity is equal across countries (and
to the cost of raising equity). Imagine a change in capital requirements
at Home that increases the Home bank return on equity. Home banks
respond by demanding more equity. This shifts the equilibrium along
the global supply curve. Hence, Foreign banks face an inward shift in
their residual supply curve. There is a higher equilibrium cost of equity,

which results in a contraction in lending in Foreign.2 Such a spillover
is at the heart of our analysis.

We interpret this spillover as a capital flow. To understand why,
consider an extreme case where there is a fixed global supply of capital.
All capital flowing into Home must flow out from Foreign; we have a
100% spillover. Conversely, if the global supply is perfectly elastic, all
capital flowing to Home will be newly raised capital and there is no
spillover. For intermediate cases, part of the equity capital increase in
Home can be seen as being siphoned off from Foreign.

Intuitively, the direction of the equity capital flow following an
increase in the Home capital requirement depends on whether the
Home bank return on equity increases or decreases. If there is an
increase, equity capital flows into Home, if there is a decrease, capital
flows out. We can now link back to the single-country perspective
described above: here too, whether or not the return on equity increases
depends precisely on whether the initial capital requirement is above
or below the return maximising level. If Home capital requirements
are below the return maximising level this implies that the initial level
of lending is relatively high. Then a tighter requirement restrains the
quantity of lending at Home which raises profits and hence the Home
bank return on equity. So capital flows out of Foreign banks. (Vice
versa, if initial requirement is high, lending is low, tighter requirements
lower Home returns and cause a capital flow to Foreign banks).

Having characterised this mechanism for a given set of capital
requirements, we then turn to a policy game in which we endogenise
the requirements. Regulators seek to maximise net output subject to
deadweight losses from financial instability. Bank equity capital is
socially valuable as it alleviates such losses. But banks prefer to operate
with maximum leverage so there is role for capital regulation. As we
have seen, regulation has crossborder effects which generates strategic
incentives. We compare the Nash equilibrium to collaboration. Nash
regulators effectively compete for bank equity capital.

When a tighter capital requirement attracts equity capital to Home,
some of it is siphoned off from Foreign. There is a negative externality;
part of the cost of tighter regulation is borne abroad. In contrast, if
tighter requirements lead to an outflow from Home, Foreign benefits.
Under Nash competition, regulators ignore these effects. As a result,
whether they have an incentive to deviate upwards or downwards from
the collaborative outcome depends on the sign of the capital flows the
deviation would generate.

Which case arises depends on parameter values. When equity capital
is abundant, collaboration can achieve a high level of lending while
preserving financial stability with relatively tight requirements. Given
that the collaborative level of lending is high, we are in the region
where marginally increasing the capital requirement raises profitabil-
ity. Tighter regulation therefore generates inflows, the incentive to
deviate is upward, and the Nash equilibrium corresponds to a race-to-
the-top scenario. In contrast, when equity capital is relatively scarce,
the level of lending is low. Looser requirements therefore generate
inflows and the incentive is to undercut the other regulator. The Nash
equilibrium of the policy game corresponds to a race-to-the-bottom
scenario.

Our analysis suggests that competing regulators will raise the CCyB
too high in normal times (when bank capital is not too scarce).3 In

2 This can be interpreted as the representative Home bank growing its
equity capital while the Foreign bank shrinks. An alternative way to interpret
this is through entry. Banks exit the Foreign credit market and enter the Home
market. Since there is free entry, perfect competition and banks have no fixed
costs, either interpretation is valid.

3 As we discuss in Section 5, the empirical literature is generally consistent
with the notion that banks respond, most of the time, to increases in capital
requirements by partially raising more equity (as well as adjusting assets). In
our model, this happens if and only if higher capital requirements generate
capital inflows. This supports our interpretation of normal times being those
where capital is not too scarce and where the level of lending is larger than
the level that maximises investor revenue.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039122S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

this case, there are gains from coordinating on more modest raises.
However, if bank capital is very scarce (think of bad or troubled times,
for instance after a big negative shock to bank equity capital), then
competing regulators will have an incentive to cut the CCyB by more
than what collaboration requires.

Ceteris paribus, a larger weight put on financial stability in the
welfare function implies a lower collaborative level of lending and
therefore a higher likelihood that it is in the region where the incentive
to deviate is downward. Hence, the race-to-the-bottom scenario be-
comes more likely after a negative shock that would raise the potential
cost of financial instability (for instance, a shock to fiscal capacity).

The reference paper for a home-country rule is Dell’Ariccia and
Marquez (2006). To illustrate how, in such a regime, regulators’ strate-
gic interactions fundamentally differ from those in the one we study,
it is best to highlight a key mechanism in their paper. They have a
representative bank based in each of two countries, but both banks
operate in both countries. Each bank has a fixed amount of equity
capital and faces the capital requirement imposed by their country of
origin. A key point is that a decrease in capital requirement by the
Home regulator decreases the cost of capital for the Home-based bank,
which gives it a competitive advantage in both markets and allows it
to grab market share from its Foreign competitor. This is an externality
that naturally gives incentives for countries to undercut one another.
Adopting a reciprocity regime kills such a market-share externality.4

In a similar international context, a series of papers study the
interaction between capital regulation and other policy levers. Acharya
(2003) looks at how discretion in resolution regimes can undermine
the benefit of coordination in capital regulation. Morrison and White
(2009) examine the link between banking regulation and supervisory
quality. In their set up, capital requirements are a substitute to the regu-
lator’s ability to distinguish sound banks from weak ones. Competition
among regulators creates a selection effect: high quality banks prefer
to be chartered by high ability regulators, which also set lower capital
requirements than low ability regulators.5

In addition, a sequence of papers have focused on international
coordination of bank supervision, rather than capital requirements. Car-
letti et al. (2020) and Colliard both consider the role of central and
local supervision when local supervisors have informational advan-
tages but neglect cross-border externalities. Similarly, Calzolari and
Loranth (2011) and Calzolari et al. (2018) consider how the presence
of multinational banks alter supervisory incentives.

At a more general level, Korinek (2016) identifies conditions under
which there is scope for international policy collaboration. The relevant
one in our paper is the violation of the Tinbergen Principle: Regulators
have a single tool (the capital requirement) and face a policy trade off
(e.g. between economic activity and financial stability). If regulators
could, for instance, directly and costlessly subsidise the allocation of
bank equity to domestic lending, then the trade off could disappear,
and so could the gains from collaboration.

In practice, fiscal policy is mostly separated from macro-prudential
policy. How these policies should be coordinated within and between
countries is a complex, multifaceted question. Government guarantees
generate implicit subsidies that can distort bank behaviour and have
direct fiscal implications that can spillover across borders when banks
fail. Faia and Weder (2016), Bolton and Oehmke (2018) and Segura
and Vicente (2019) study how the resolution of banks should be co-
ordinated between countries. Moreover, monetary policy can directly

4 The Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006) model is more involved and also
embeds a financial stability externality, which reinforces the market share
externality. We also allow for additional externalities but only discuss them
in Section 5 since they are not the focus of our analysis.

5 Other examples include, Buck and Schliephake (2013) and Gersbach
et al. (2020), which respectively focus on capital regulation interactions with
supervision intensity and fiscal policy.

affect bank profitability, which may also call for coordination across
borders.6 Modelling all these different aspects of policy is beyond the
scope of this paper, we focus on a prudential policymaker that only
controls the capital requirement.

Finally, even though our main focus is on strategic interactions
between national regulators, other dimensions of our analysis directly
relate to previous literature on capital requirements. Commonalities
include moral hazard due to government guarantees (Kareken and
Wallace, 1978), incentives for banks to specialise (e.g., Martinez-Miera
and Suarez (2014), Harris et al. (2023), Bahaj and Malherbe (2020)
and Malherbe and McMahon (2024)), and the study of optimal capital
regulation in the face of policy trade offs (e.g., Begenau (2020), Mal-
herbe (2020) and Elenev et al. (2021)).

2. The model

The model has two dates: 0 and 1. Decisions are made at date 0.
At date 1, all stochastic variables are realised, and production and
consumption take place.

We consider two sovereign countries: Home and Foreign. There is
a single, tradeable good which can be consumed or used as physical
capital in production, in which case the goods depreciate fully. This
good is also the numeraire.

In each country, there is a representative firm, a representative
household, a representative investor, and a regulator. There is also a
mass of banks that can operate in both countries. We describe here the
details of the environment in the Home country. The Foreign country
has the same environment (although we do not necessarily impose
symmetry in parameter values); foreign variables are marked with a
′.

Agents and preferences. Private agents only value date-1 consumption,
are risk neutral, and act competitively. We define and discuss regulator
preferences starting in Section 4.

Firms and technology. The representative firm operates a Cobb–Douglas
production technology: 𝐴𝑘𝛼𝑙1−𝛼, where 𝑘 is physical capital, 𝑙 is labour,
0 < 𝛼 < 1, and 𝐴 ≥ 0 is a random variable that captures TFP. The firm
invests in capital at date 0. At date 1, 𝐴 realises and the firm hires
labour and produces.

We normalise E[𝐴] = 1 and assume that 𝐴 is distributed over
[0, 𝐴𝐻 ], with a corresponding density function 𝑔(𝐴), which is smooth,
unless otherwise specified. Our analysis does not require to impose any
specific structure on the dependence between 𝐴 and 𝐴′ but we assume
that the joint distribution has full support over

0, 𝐴𝐻 ]
[

0, 𝐴′𝐻 ]

×

[

.

The firm starts penniless and borrows from banks to invest in
physical capital. In equilibrium, it makes zero profits in all states. We
therefore abstract from firm ownership.

All agents have access to a riskless storage technology with a zero

rate of return.

Households. The representative household is endowed with one unit
of labour, which it supplies inelastically (and, for simplicity, without
disutility) at date 1. It also has an endowment of goods at date 0, which
it initially allocates between insured bank deposits and the storage
technology. We assume that this endowment is sufficiently large that
the storage technology is always used in equilibrium. This pins down a
households’ opportunity cost of funds of unity.

6 From that angle, our paper relates to the wider literature on monetary
policy coordination and currency wars (e.g., Hamada (1976), Corsetti and
Pesenti (2001), Caballero et al. (2021) and Blanchard (2021)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039123S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

Banks. Banks start penniless, issue equity (protected by limited liabil-
ity), take deposits that are insured at no cost, and lend to firms subject
to a capital requirement constraint that we define below. Banks can
potentially lend in both countries. There is free entry, and equity and
deposits can be raised globally (i.e. from investors and households in
either country). Banks can freely choose their country of incorpora-
tion, which determines which taxpayer insures its deposits. Deposit
insurance is funded by ex-post lump-sum taxes on households.

Capital requirements: host country rule. Loans made in Home face a
capital requirement 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1) that is set by the Home regulator.
Likewise, the Foreign regulator sets 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1), which applies to loans
made in Foreign. There is only one type of regulatory capital for banks:
equity. To avoid confusion with physical capital, we henceforth refer
to it as bank equity capital.

Consider a bank 𝑖 and denote 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥′

𝑖 the quantity it lends in Home
and Foreign, respectively, and denote its equity capital 𝑛𝑖. This bank
faces the following constraint,

𝑛𝑖

≥ 𝛾𝑥𝑖 + 𝛾 ′𝑥′
𝑖.

(1)

In Section 3, 𝛾 and 𝛾 ′ are treated as exogenous parameters, but from
Section 4 they are the choice variables of a policy game.

Banks could also invest in storage which would carry a zero capital
requirement. However, raising deposits to invest them in storage would
have no impact on the bank’s net cash flows, so we abstract from this
in what follows.

Investors and the supply of bank equity capital. That bank equity capital
is scarce is a key ingredient of our analysis. For tractability reasons,
many papers in the literature (e.g., Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006))
assume that the supply is fixed. However, that bank equity scarcity
depends on the state of the economy seems the premise for the need of
time varying capital requirements (Kashyap and Stein (2004), Kashyap
et al. (2008), Malherbe (2020)). So, we adopt a more flexible approach
and, following Hellmann et al. (2000), we assume a generally upward
sloping supply curve. We formalise it as follows.

Only the agents that we call investors can invest in bank equity. They
are endowed with some initial wealth and can generate additional date-
0 wealth, at a disutility cost. Specifically, to generate 𝑚 units of wealth,
an investor has to incur a disutility cost 𝑚(1 + 𝑧), with
𝑧 ≡ 𝜅
2

𝑀 2,

(2)

and where 𝜅 > 0 is a parameter and 𝑀 ≥ 0 is the global additional
wealth generated by investors. Investors take the unit disutility cost as
given. Generating additional wealth is costly and investors only poten-
tially do so for the purpose of investing in bank equity, accordingly, we
have:

{

𝑀 ≡

𝑁 + 𝑁 ′ ≤ 𝜔
0
𝑁 + 𝑁 ′ − 𝜔 𝑁 + 𝑁 ′ > 𝜔,

where 𝑁 +𝑁 ′ is the aggregate amount invested in bank equity globally,
and 𝜔 is the initial global endowment of investor wealth. Investors sup-
ply equity competitively and freely across borders. Therefore, function
(2) constitutes the global bank equity inverse supply curve.

The allocation of 𝑁 + 𝑁 ′ between the representative investor in
each country will not play a role in our analysis (and neither does the
initial split of 𝜔). To rule out uninteresting cases where equity is fully
abundant, we impose: 𝜔 < 2𝛼

1
1−𝛼 .

In an equilibrium: given capital requirements 𝛾 and
Market equilibrium.
𝛾 ′, banks and firms maximise expected pure profits (i.e., revenue minus
the total costs, including capital); households and investors maximise
utility (i.e. date-1 consumption less any disutility of wealth generation
in date 0); and markets clear.

Preliminaries. The problems of the firms, the households, and the in-
vestors are trivial. Price taking behaviour implies that, in equilibrium:

• Deposits promise a zero net rate of return.
• The wage is given by: 𝐴(1 − 𝛼)𝐾 𝛼, where 𝐾 is aggregate capital.
Given labour supply is normalised to 1, this corresponds to the
aggregate wage bill.

• The loan gross interest rate is 𝐴𝛼𝑋𝛼−1, where 𝑋 is aggregate

lending.7

• Investors break even in expectation. So, in equilibrium, 𝑀 is such
that the expected return on bank equity equals its marginal cost,
i.e., the unit disutility of generating additional wealth (1 + 𝑧).

Market clearing requires:

• 𝐾 = 𝑋.

The banks’ problem is more involved and is the focus of the next
section. However, parameter restrictions 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ < 1 ensure that banks
will never be 100% safe. This allows us to focus attention on equilibria
where capital requirements have interesting effects.

3. Positive analysis: equity capital flows for given capital require-
ments

In this Section, we focus on the equilibrium behaviour of banks for
a given pair of capital requirements. We treat 𝛾 and 𝛾 ′ as parameters,
and study how a small change in 𝛾 affects the equilibrium allocation.

3.1. The banks’ problem and the market equilibrium

Lemma 1. (i) Banks default with strictly positive probability in equilibrium;
(ii) capital requirements are binding; and (iii) each individual bank perfectly
specialises as either a lender in Home or Foreign.

Proof. All proofs are in Appendix C. □

Bank shareholders break even in expectation. Depositors also break
even, but when a bank defaults they do so at the taxpayer’s expense.
Since deposits are in effect subsidised by the taxpayer, they are seen by
the bank as cheaper than equity. This is why the capital requirement
binds.8

Government guarantees also induce banks, ceteris paribus, to min-
imise diversification. Such guarantees endow the bank with a valuable
put option on their realised net worth (Merton, 1977). The value of
this option is maximised when all of the bank’s loans generate negative
cash flows (net of repayments to depositors) in the same state of the
world (Harris et al., 2023). Hence, in equilibrium, it is optimal for
banks to specialise in lending in just one country.9

7 For simplicity, we consider an interest rate contingent on the realisation of
TFP. Since firm defaults are costless, the realised repayment is exactly identical
to what it would be in an equilibrium under a standard debt contract with face
value 𝐴𝐻 𝛼𝑋𝛼−1 per unit of debt.

8 In practice, capital requirements are not, strictly speaking, binding, as
banks hold voluntary buffers to forestall violations in the event of small shocks.
If these buffers are stationary, banks revert to target buffers after shocks
and ultimately meet a change in requirement with an equivalent change in
the capital ratio. Then, capital requirements are essentially binding, which is
sufficient as a premise for our analysis. There is substantial empirical evidence
that capital regulation influences bank decisions both at the bank-level (Gropp
et al., 2019) and within bank portfolios (Behn et al., 2016). See Bahaj et al.
(2016) for direct evidence supporting the essentially binding requirement
hypothesis.

9 Given free movement of capital and risk-neutrality, the bank’s problem
can be separated in two: (i) optimise lending decision in each country; and
(ii) choose where to operate. Lending in the two countries simultaneously is
dominated as it would reduce the value of the put option derived from the
guarantee.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039124S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

In practical terms, this means banks prefer to lend via separate
balance sheets in each country (i.e. subsidiaries) rather than lend
via branches (or engage in direct cross-border lending), which would
diversify risk in a single balance sheet. Accordingly, one interpretation
of our setup is that banks set up holding companies that operate across
borders through separate subsidiaries in each country. Alternatively, we
can think of individual banks as stand-alone specialised lenders in each
country. The former is closer to how banks operate in reality. However,
for ease of exposition, and to save on notation, we will present our
analysis using the interpretation of banks as stand-alone specialised
lenders in each country.

Additionally, the market for bank equity capital is global, deposits
promise a zero return in both countries, capital requirements follow
a host-country rule, and there are no corporate taxes. Hence, banks
are indifferent regarding their country of incorporation. This plays no
role for their behaviour and so we only distinguish banks along the
dimension of where they lend. We impose a tie-breaking rule that
banks incorporate in, and issue deposits that are insured by, the country
where they lend.

The key object: Equity capital allocated to lending. The key object in
our analysis will be 𝑁, the aggregate quantity of bank equity capital
allocated to banks specialising in lending at Home. A change in 𝛾 causes
a reallocation of equity capital between Home (𝑁) and Foreign (𝑁 ′):
effectively a bank equity capital flow. It turns out that the direction of
this capital flow governs the strategic interactions between regulators.
We will come on to this later. In this section we first look at the
economic mechanisms that pin down the direction of the capital flow
in the market equilibrium.

Bank return on equity. We consider a representative bank specialising
in lending to Home firms. We denote this bank’s equity 𝑛. Since capital
requirements bind, the bank’s lending is 𝑥 = 𝑛
, and the proceeds from
𝛾
lending are given by 𝑛
where the bank takes 𝑋 as given. To
𝛾
lend an amount 𝑛
of deposits on
𝛾
which it pays zero interest. Aggregating across banks we have 𝑋 = 𝑁
.
𝛾
Define 𝐴0 as the realisation of 𝐴 such that the bank just has

, the bank raises a total of (1 − 𝛾) 𝑛
𝛾

(𝐴𝛼𝑋𝛼−1)

sufficient proceeds from its loans to make depositors whole. That is
𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) ≡ (1 − 𝛾)
)𝛼−1

.

( 𝑁
𝛾

𝛼

Given Lemma 1, the problem of the bank boils down to:

max
𝑛,𝑥≥0

𝐴𝐻

) 𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴
(𝛼𝐴 (𝑋)𝛼−1 − (1 − 𝛾)
𝑥 ∫
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
shareholder payout

𝐴0(𝑁,𝛾)

− 𝑛(1 + 𝑧)
⏟⏟⏟
cost of equity

.

(3)

The second term reflects the cost of equity, where banks take 𝑧 as given.
Shareholders are protected by limited liability. So, the first term is their
expected payout.

Shareholders have collectively invested equity capital 𝑛, hence, their

expected return on equity is:

𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) ≡ 1

𝛾 ∫

𝐴𝐻

(

𝐴0(𝑁,𝛾)

)𝛼−1

𝛼𝐴

(

𝑁
𝛾

)

− (1 − 𝛾)

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴.

(4)

Market equilibrium. Let 𝑁 ∗ denote an equilibrium level of Home capi-
tal.

{𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗}
Proposition 1. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1), there exists a unique pair
such that returns on equity in both countries are equal to the investors’
required return. This pair is implicitly defined by:

𝑅(𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) = 𝑅′(𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) = (1 + 𝑧(𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗)),

(5)

For intuition, note that, for a given 𝛾, an increase in 𝑁 implies
more lending and therefore more aggregate physical capital. From
diminishing returns, it directly follows that 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) is decreasing in 𝑁

(and 𝑅′(𝑁 ′, 𝛾 ′) in 𝑁 ′). This leads to the result since 𝑧(𝑁, 𝑁 ′) is weakly
increasing, and strictly from 𝑁 + 𝑁 ′ = 𝜔.10

In our interpretation that banks are stand-alone entities that spe-
cialise in lending in either country, international capital mobility means
that they can raise equity capital from investors in either country. In
the alternative bank holding company interpretation, one can think
of the holding company raising equity (mainly or even exclusively)
where it is incorporated, and then allocating it to its subsidiaries via its
internal capital markets. Either way, Eq. (5) is the relevant indifference
condition. That deposits are mobile internationally plays no role in our
analysis. All results would, for instance, go through if deposits could
only be raised in the country where a bank lends.

3.2. International spillovers

We now turn to how capital requirements alter the allocation of

bank equity capital to either Home or Foreign.

Starting from equilibrium, we now consider the effect of marginal
changes in the Home capital requirement 𝛾. The no-arbitrage condition
in Proposition 1 implicitly defines a function 𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′). From now on,
functions denoted with a ∗ are evaluated at the market equilibrium aris-
and hence have the two capital requirements
ing from a couple
as their arguments. For compactness, we sometimes drop function
dependencies below. We represent partial derivatives with a subscript,
and we write total derivatives in full.

{𝛾, 𝛾 ′}

We first characterise how 𝑁 ∗ adjusts following a change in 𝛾.

Lemma 2. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1),
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

= 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′),

(

where 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) ≡

𝜅𝑀−𝑅′
(

𝑁′
𝑅′
𝑁′ +𝑅𝑁

𝑅𝑁 𝑅′

𝑁′ −𝜅𝑀

(6)

)

)|
|
|
|
|
|𝑁 ∗(𝛾,𝛾′),𝑁 ′∗(𝛾′,𝛾)

> 0. Therefore

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

⋛ 0 ⇔ 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) ⋛ 0.

Eq. (6) states that the response of 𝑁 ∗ to 𝛾 depends on 𝜅 and on
𝑅𝑁 and 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ , the sensitivity of returns to the equity capital invested in
the respective countries. We will elaborate below on the role of these
objects.

The second part of the lemma establishes that 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

and 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)
have the same sign. The intuition is simple: a change in capital re-
quirements will trigger an increase (decrease) in bank equity capital in
Home if, and only if, this change increases (decreases), ceteris paribus,
the Home bank return on equity.

By construction, additional equity capital can only be raised by
Home banks from two different sources: (i) investors can supply ad-
ditional wealth; (ii) there can be a flow of capital from Foreign banks
to Home banks. In general, we get a combination of the two.

The function 𝑅′(𝑁 ′, 𝛾 ′) is the inverse demand curve for 𝑁 ′ and,
hence, can be thought of as an inverse supply curve for 𝑁 arising
from capitals flows. Likewise, 𝑧(𝑁, 𝑁 ′) is the inverse supply curve
from investors generating additional wealth. These two curves have
respective slopes 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ and 𝜅𝑀. With this in mind, the proposition that
expresses the capital flow naturally follows:

Proposition 2. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1),

(

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

= −

𝜅𝑀 ∗ − 𝑅′

𝜅𝑀 ∗
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ∗)

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡SP∗(𝛾,𝛾′)∈[0,1]

)

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

.

(7)

{𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗}

10 While the pair

is unique, the proportion of bank equity capital
sourced from investors in Home or Foreign is indeterminate as investors are
indifferent in equilibrium.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039125S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

That 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

has the opposite sign to 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

indicates that any change in
capital in Home is met by a change of opposite sign in Foreign. The term
which we denote SP∗ (for spillover), determines the relative proportion
of these changes. Intuitively, SP∗ is pinned down by the relative slopes
of the implicit supply curves we mentioned above. Imagine that 𝑀 ∗ >
0. A larger 𝜅 increases the spillover and, as 𝜅 → ∞, SP∗ = 1. In that
case, any increase in 𝑁 ∗ must correspond to an equal decrease in 𝑁 ′∗.
Conversely, as 𝜅 → 0, SP∗ → 0: a change in capital requirements at
Home does not affect the equilibrium cost of bank equity capital: supply
adjusts entirely through raising fresh equity capital, and there is no
spillover. Similarly, if 𝑀 ∗ = 0, there initially is an excess supply of
investor wealth (i.e. 𝜔 > 𝑁 ′∗ + 𝑁 ∗) and we have 𝑧∗ = 0. So investors
can supply more capital to Home without affecting Foreign.

Remark. Strictly speaking, non-zero spillovers require that 𝑀 ∗ > 0,
and not necessarily that 𝑧∗ > 0: What is needed to generate a spillover
is not that capital is costly per se, but that the equilibrium cost of capital
is affected by a change in capital requirements. In a model where 𝑧∗ > 0
(say, due to a tax advantage of debt) but 𝑀 ∗ = 0, there would be no
spillover as a change in the capital requirement at Home would have
no effect on the equilibrium cost of capital in Foreign.

3.3. The direction of international bank equity flows

Lemma 2 and Proposition 2 show that the direction of equity capital
flows hinges on the sign of 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾). We now discuss the economics
of this sign and establish that for any 𝛾 ′ there is a threshold value for
𝛾 that pins down the direction of the capital flow.

3.3.1. An increase in 𝛾 can raise return on equity (𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) > 0)

Given that 𝑅 embeds a subsidy from a government guarantee, which
is decreasing in the capital requirement, it is perhaps natural to as-
sume that 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) is negative and higher capital requirements always
generate capital outflows. However, there is another force via which
increases in 𝛾 can raise bank return on equity. Raising 𝛾 decreases
aggregate lending in Home, which can increase total revenues in the
banking sector, much as if there had been a decrease in competition.
Crucially, increased revenues translate to a higher return on equity. We
first formalise this intuition with a simplified example and then come
on to how things play out in our model.

A simplified problem. Consider our environment, but without uncer-
tainty (set 𝐴 = 1) and consider a fictitious monopolist bank, with
predetermined capital 𝑁, that maximises pure profits. The monopolist’s
optimal level of lending, 𝑋mon, is given by:

𝑋mon ≡ arg max
𝑋

𝛼𝑋𝛼 − 𝑋 − 𝑧𝑁.

(8)

The objective is hump-shaped in 𝑋, which reflects monopoly rents:
starting from low levels, pure profits increase up to 𝑋mon, where they
peak, and then decrease. Profits are hump-shaped in 𝑋, and so is the
return on equity (for given 𝑁):

𝑅 =

1
𝑁

(𝛼𝑋𝛼 − (𝑋 − 𝑁)) ,

(9)

and they are both maximised at the same level of lending, 𝑋mon.

Now, still for a given 𝑁, and assuming capital requirements are
binding (𝑋 = 𝑁
), an increase in 𝛾 plays out in the same way as a
𝛾
decrease in 𝑋. So, the return on equity is also hump-shaped in 𝛾 and
peaks at 𝛾 mon ≡ 𝑁∕𝑋mon. Hence, 𝑅𝛾 is positive when 𝛾 < 𝛾 mon and
turns negative past that threshold. The intuition being that unless the
level of lending is already lower than what a monopolist would choose
(taking 𝑁 as given), an increase in 𝛾 contracts credit and increases
monopoly rents.

3.3.2. There is a threshold for 𝛾 that pins down the sign of the capital flows
in Eq. (9) and adding back uncertainty, we
return to the definition of the return on equity in our model (Eq. (4)):

Substituting 𝑋 = 𝑁
𝛾

𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) = ∫

𝐴𝐻

𝐴0(𝑁,𝛾)

(

𝐴𝑁 𝛼−1𝛼

)𝛼

(

1
𝛾

−

1
𝛾

)

+ 1

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴.

(10)

The presence of uncertainty does not affect the fact that restraining
aggregate quantities can increase total revenue in the banking sector.
The risk of bank failure implies that capital requirements are binding
and banks specialise in equilibrium. From a normative perspective, it
also motivates the use of capital requirements as policy tools. However,
the introduction of uncertainty creates a technical challenge linked to
the truncation in Eq. (10). To deal with this, we introduce the following
condition.

Condition 1 (Regularity - Single Crossing). For all 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1), 𝑅𝛾𝛾 (𝑁, 𝛾) <
0 when 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) = 0.

The fundamental drivers of a hump-shaped return on equity in our
simple example is that: (i) the production function is concave, which
generates a downward sloping and convex loan demand curve; (ii)
capital requirements bind. The regularity condition ensures 𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) ≡
𝑅(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾) is a well-behaved hump shape in 𝛾. This allows us to
streamline the analysis by ignoring knife-edge cases where 𝑅𝛾𝛾 could
be locally positive.11

Theorem 1. Assume Regularity Condition 1 holds. Then, ∀ 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1),
there exists a unique ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′) > 0 such that, ∀𝛾 ∈ (0, 1)

> 0

= 0

< 0

; 𝛾 < ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
; 𝛾 = ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
; 𝛾 > ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′) .

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

The threshold ̂𝛾(𝛾 ′) can be interpreted as the capital requirement
that maximises 𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) ≡ 𝑅(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾) given 𝛾 ′. The broad intuition
for the theorem is in line with that for the fictitious monopolist above.
We convey it graphically in Fig. 1 (using again the simplification 𝐴 =
1). The diminishing marginal return to physical capital translates into a
downward sloping demand for loans (the blue line in the Figure). The
supply of funds is depicted by the dashed black line. If equity capital is
abundant (i.e 𝜔 > 𝑁 + 𝑁 ′), the line is flat. The resulting equilibrium,
with 𝑧∗ = 0, corresponds to the black dot.

Raising 𝛾 will make capital scarce: 𝑀 ∗, and hence 𝑧∗, will become
positive at some point. This amounts to an anticlockwise rotation in
the supply curve. The quantity lent falls and the equilibrium shifts
upwards along the blue demand curve. In line with the intuition for
the monopolist above, the decline in the quantities first raises the
return on equity up to a point and then decreases it. To see this, note
that the bank’s payout to shareholders (net of an opportunity cost of
funds of 1) is 𝛼𝑋𝛼 − 𝑋: this quantity is the rectangle formed by the
equilibrium point, the 𝑧 = 0 supply curve and the 𝑦-axis. The net payout
is maximised at the point 𝛾 = ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
, depicted by the red dot (and the
area by the red rectangle). Maximising the net payout also maximises
the return on equity, so 𝑅∗ also peaks at 𝛾 = ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)

.

𝑑𝑅∗
𝑑𝛾

11 At

= 0, the second derivative of 𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) with respect to 𝛾 is
𝑅𝛾𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)(1 − 𝜉∗𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)). Hence, the second order condition for a maximum
is satisfied given regularity Condition 1. Due to the truncation in 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾),
𝑅𝛾𝛾 < 0 is not always guaranteed. It can be positive if there is a local bump
in the probability density function 𝑔(𝐴) in the direct vicinity of 𝐴0. Then, a
small change in 𝛾 can affect the probability of default in a way that locally
dominates the global force that makes the function hump-shaped in 𝛾. Such
issue is, e.g., ruled out if the equilibrium elasticity of the bank probability
of survival with respect to the capital requirement is smaller than 1 (see the
closed form results of Section 4 for an example).

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039126S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

Fig. 1. Graphical Illustration of Theorem 1.
Notes - This illustration assumes no uncertainty (𝐴 = 1) and hence there is no distortion arising from deposit insurance. The blue line is the loan demand (𝛼𝑋𝛼−1). The black
dashed lines are the supply of funds curve for given levels of the capital requirement 𝛾, that is 1 + 𝛾𝑧. Noting that 𝑁 = 𝛾𝑋, the cost function is increasing and convex in 𝑋, unless
capital is fully abundant (and 𝑧 = 0). Furthermore, an increase in 𝛾 steepens the relationship between 𝑋 and 𝑧. If a cost of funds curve is drawn for the corresponding 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾),
its intersection with the loan demand pins down the equilibrium. The red dot is then the point at which 𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) is maximised, which implicitly defines ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
. The area of the
) 𝑋, and we have seen in the simplified example above (also with 𝐴 = 1), that maximising this object with respect to 𝑋 also maximises return
red rectangle is given by
on equity when 𝐴 = 1.. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

(𝛼𝑋𝛼−1 − 1

We prove the theorem for stochastic 𝐴. When banks are risky,
the implicit subsidy from deposit insurance modifies the shape of the
supply of funds curve in Fig. 1, but its presence does not affect the
fundamental logic: a tighter capital requirement still rotates the supply
curve anticlockwise and 𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) is still hump shaped in 𝛾.
In equilibrium banks cannot benefit from an increase in 𝛾. ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
is the
value of the capital requirement that maximises the equilibrium return
on equity. But, in any equilibrium, the return on equity is equated to
the cost of raising equity (𝑧∗): if a tighter requirement raises returns it
must also raise costs. Investors are always indifferent at the margin.

Put differently, ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)

does not maximise bank pure-profits (𝑅∗−
(1 + 𝑧∗)) 𝑁 ∗, simply because the latter includes the cost of bank equity
capital. In our model, perfect competition implies that banks’ pure
profits are always zero in equilibrium, so a cost increase associated with
a change in 𝛾 just offsets the increase in revenue. Although an increase
in 𝛾 only makes the banks of our model weakly worse off, it would make
them strictly worse off if they had market power (which is the case in
reality). We show this in Appendix B.1.

4. The policy game

From now on, we treat 𝛾 and 𝛾 ′ as the choice variables of national
regulators who take as given that, in equilibrium: (i) capital require-
ments are binding; and (ii) market forces will equate bank return on
equity across countries (per Proposition 1).

4.1. Objective functions and solution concept

To start, our baseline assumption is that the excess cost of equity (𝑧)
is private and is not internalised by regulators. Whether bank capital is
socially costly is a subject of debate in the banking literature (Admati
et al., 2013). In our context, assuming costs are private helps with
tractability and allows us to isolate the key externality that we wish to
focus upon. However, as we will discuss, the presence of this externality
and our main results do not hinge on this assumption.

We endow the Home regulator with the objective function

𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) =

)𝛼

(𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
− 𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected net output

− 𝜆 ∫

0

𝐴0

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) − 𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
liabilities

− 𝐴𝛼 (𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)

)𝛼

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
asset value

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴,

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(11)

where 𝜆 > 0 is a parameter.

With the specification in Eq. (11), we consider a trade off between
economic activity and financial stability. The first term, (𝑋∗)𝛼 − 𝑋∗,
captures the expected economic surplus generated by Home banks’
lending (recall E [𝐴] = 1). To model the financial stability motive, we
impose a deadweight cost of bank defaults in the second term that is
proportional to the expected shortfall between bank liabilities and its
assets in the event of default. In more compact notation, which will be
useful to express partial derivatives, this shortfall reads:

𝐴0

∫
0

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴.

𝑆 (𝑋, 𝑁) ≡

𝑋 − 𝑁
⏟⏟⏟
liabilities

⎞
⎟
− 𝐴𝛼𝑋𝛼
⎟
⏟⏟⏟
⎟
asset value
⎠
The mechanisms we study here do not hinge on the specific form of
𝑆(𝑋, 𝑁). As we shall see, its key features lie in the sign of its partial
derivatives: 𝑆𝑋 (𝑋, 𝑁) ≥ 0 and 𝑆𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) ≤ 0, which we argue are quite
natural.

First, 𝑆𝑋 (𝑋, 𝑁) ≥ 0: at a given 𝑁, an increase in 𝑋 increases social
costs of bank insolvency. This is natural for two reasons: (i) for a given
𝑁, more lending means more leverage; and, ii) lending itself is likely
to exhibit diminishing marginal returns. Hence, average asset quality
goes down too. Second, 𝑆𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) ≤ 0: At a given 𝑋, more bank equity
capital decreases deadweight losses. So, unless banks are completely
safe, bank equity capital is valuable because it decreases the costs of
insolvency.

Expressing the cost of financial instability in such a fashion has
become popular since the global financial crisis. As is discussed in Mal-
herbe (2020), such costs can be seen as stemming from the resolution
process, whose complexity is likely to increase in the shortfall (as is
for instance the case in the costly verification set up of Townsend
(1979)). Other possible micro-foundations include the tax distortions
of associated bailouts (see, e.g., Acharya et al. (2010)): given our tie
breaking rule for incorporation, the shortfall is the deposit insurance
bill at Home and so corresponds to the direct fiscal cost of bank failures.
More generally, the specification could capture any other channel by
which bank financial distress affects the real economy (Hoggarth et al.,
2002). From this point of view, our approach to the cost of bank
financial distress is also similar to many papers in the systemic risk
literature.12

12 Given we have a representative bank, our expression for 𝑆 (𝑋, 𝑁) is
equivalent to the systemic expected shortfall in Acharya et al. (2017), up

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039127S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

The partial derivative, with respect to 𝑋, of the right side of (11),

defines the social net present value of the marginal loan:

NPV ≡ 𝛼 (𝑋)𝛼−1 − 1 − 𝜆𝑆𝑋 .
The intrinsic net present value from lending is 𝛼 (𝑋)𝛼−1 −1: the marginal
product of capital net of an opportunity cost of funds of 1. The social
NPV also accounts for the deadweight losses generated by the marginal
loan, 𝜆𝑆𝑋 . Banks do not internalise deadweight losses, and they benefit
from the implicit subsidy from deposit insurance. This is why the
market equilibrium generally does not implement NPV∗ = 0, and
constitutes a rationale for capital regulation.

Solution concepts. We consider both competition and collaboration
between regulators. When they collaborate, the regulators jointly set
𝛾 = 𝛾 ′ = 𝛾 col to maximise their combined objective such that

𝛾 col ≡ arg max
𝛾=𝛾′

𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) + 𝜋′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾).

(12)

When two regulators compete, we consider a symmetric Nash equi-
librium of the game in which they separately maximise 𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) and
𝜋′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾), setting their capital requirement taking the other’s as given.
Formally, a Nash equilibrium is defined as a fixed point

𝛾 nash = arg max

𝛾

𝜋∗ (𝛾, 𝛾 nash) .

Henceforth, functions with superscripts nash are evaluated at the sym-
metric Nash equilibrium of the competitive regulator game. For exam-
ple, 𝑁 nash ≡ 𝑁 ∗ (𝛾 nash, 𝛾 nash)
. Likewise, functions with superscripts col
are evaluated at the market equilibrium where both capital require-
ments are set at 𝛾 col.

Condition 2 (Regularity - Single Crossing). For all ∀𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ [0, 1]:
𝛾𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) < 0, 𝜋∗
𝜋∗
𝛾𝛾′ (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) < 0, and the same
𝛾 (1, 𝛾 ′) < 0, 𝜋∗
𝛾 (0, 𝛾 ′) > 0, 𝜋∗
holds for 𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) + 𝜋′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾).

Condition 2 ensures that the first order condition to problem (12)
uniquely pins down 𝛾 col . It also ensures the individual competitive
regulators’ first order conditions define well behaved best response
function leading to a unique 𝛾 nash.13

4.2. Race to the top or the bottom?

The main question we are now interested in is whether Nash com-
petition leads to tighter or looser requirements than collaboration. As
we will see, the capital flow described in Section 3 has a key role to
play in determining how competition plays out versus collaboration.

Nash inefficiency: the role of the capital flow externality. The first order
condition for 𝛾 col reads (see the proof of Proposition 3)
)

(

= 0.

(13)

𝜋∗
𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) +

NPV′∗
𝛾 ′ − 𝜆𝑆′∗

𝑁 ′

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛾 (𝛾′,𝛾)

=𝜋′∗

to a shifting constant. Other examples of approaches based on the shortfall
include (Lehar, 2005), Brownlees and Engle (2017), and Indergand et al.
(2023). Additionally, see Duarte and Eisenbach (2021) for the empirical
association between fire sales exposure and such measures.

13 We impose this restriction for the same reason as Condition 1. The
truncation at 𝐴0 means the objective function in (11) may have multiple peaks,
or exhibit jumps or kinks. In these knife-edge cases, there may, for instance, be
either no or several 𝛾 ′𝑠 that solve the first order conditions. This can occur if
there is a large probability mass at 𝐴0. Ignoring these cases enables a first order
approach (Bahaj and Malherbe, 2020): focusing on small increases in 𝛾 helps
build intuition and derive formal results in our propositions. Fundamentally,
the condition is a restriction on 𝑔(𝐴), which we had kept general so far. Below
we derive closed form results when we restrict 𝐴 to a binary distribution,
which ensures Condition 2 is satisfied.

Let us focus on the second term. It captures the effect on Foreign of a
marginal increase in 𝛾. First, consider the case in which a change in 𝛾
attracts equity capital to Home. If 𝑑𝑁 ∗
> 0, it must be that some of this
𝑑𝛾
capital has been siphoned off from Foreign: 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
< 0 (Proposition 2).14
𝑑𝛾
Equity capital is valuable to Foreign. It can be levered up at rate 1∕𝛾 ′ to
fund lending with a marginal social value NPV′∗ > 0.15 Equity capital
also decreases the expected shortfall on Foreign bank assets, that is
𝑆′∗
𝑁 ′ < 0. So the term in parenthesis is positive and the loss of capital
hurts Foreign.

Hence, changes in 𝛾 generate an externality that operates through
capital flows. And, in the case where 𝑑𝑁 ∗
> 0, this externality is nega-
𝑑𝛾
𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) < 0.
tive: Foreign welfare is falling in the Home requirement: 𝜋′∗
𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) >
Now, if Eq. (13) holds and 𝜋′∗
0. But this precisely means that the competitive Home regulator has an
incentive to deviate upwards at the collaborative optimum. Part of the
cost of tighter Home requirements is borne abroad and so regulatory
competition leads to overly tight regulation: as we will see, when
𝑑𝑁 col
> 0, we get 𝛾 nash > 𝛾 col, which we interpret as a race to the
𝑑𝛾
top.

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) < 0, then it must be that 𝜋∗

However, when 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

< 0 the sign of the capital flow externality flips.
We have 𝜋′∗
𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) > 0 because a higher home requirement then leads
to an inflow of equity capital to Foreign. More capital boosts lending
and reduces the expected shortfall, so tighter Home regulation acts as
a positive externality. In this case, at the collaborative optimum, the
positive externality, 𝜋′∗
𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) < 0. The competitive
Home regulator has an incentive to deviate towards looser regulation:
when 𝑑𝑁 col
< 0, we get 𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col, which we interpret as a race to the
𝑑𝛾
bottom.

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) > 0, implies 𝜋∗

Whether competition leads to a race to the top or the bottom
depends on the sign of 𝑑𝑁 col
: the direction of the capital flow following
𝑑𝛾
a unilateral deviation towards tighter regulation (starting from collab-
oration). From Theorem 1, we know that the sign of 𝑑𝑁 col
depends on
𝑑𝛾
whether 𝛾 col is greater than or less than the relevant return maximising
requirement.

We now state this result formally:

Proposition 3. Assume Conditions 1 and 2 hold. Then, there are three
cases

> 0

𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash < ̄𝛾

𝛾 col = 𝛾 nash = ̄𝛾

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
where ̄𝛾 is the fixed point ̄𝛾 = ̂𝛾(̄𝛾), with ̂𝛾(.) defined in Theorem 1.

and 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾
and 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾
and 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾

𝛾 col > 𝛾 nash > ̄𝛾

< 0,

= 0

The broad intuition for the proposition is straightforward. The
relation between 𝛾 nash and 𝛾 col in the three cases follows the reasoning
above: the incentive to deviate from collaboration depends on the sign
of the capital flow. If the collaborative requirement is less than the re-
turn maximising one (𝛾 col < ̄𝛾) a unilateral deviation from collaboration
towards tighter regulation is optimal as a tighter regulation generates
capital inflows ( 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾

> 0). So 𝛾 col < ̄𝛾 ⇔ 𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash and vice versa.

That ̄𝛾 places a bound on how far 𝛾 nash can deviate from 𝛾 col is
perhaps less important but it is also an intuitive result. Take the case

1

14 If 𝜔 ≥ 2𝛼

𝑁 ′ = 0 as banks never default. The restriction 𝜔 < 2𝛼

1−𝛼 , equity capital is plentiful enough to finance all positive NPV
loans solely with equity. So we would have 𝛾 col = 1: under those circumstances
NPV∗ = 0 and 𝑆′∗
1−𝛼 ensures
that this is not the case and that there are spillovers at the collaborative
outcome (i.e., SPcol > 0 and NPV′∗
𝑁 ′
15 At the collaborative optimum, NPV′∗ is positive (this is not guaranteed out
of equilibrium). If it were negative, regulators could costlessly increase capital
requirements. This would reduce negative NPV lending, raise the social NPV on
the marginal loan and decrease deadweight losses. All of which are beneficial.

𝛾 ′ − 𝜆𝑆′∗

≠ 0).

1

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039128S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

𝛾 col < ̄𝛾 and imagine that (out of equilibrium) both regulators picked ̄𝛾.
By definition of ̄𝛾, there is no capital flow externality from a marginal
deviation. So, individual and collective incentives are the same. But
we know that 𝛾 col < ̄𝛾, so the beneficial deviation should be towards
a 𝛾 strictly lower than ̄𝛾. So we have 𝛾 nash < ̄𝛾. Again, the symmetric
reasoning applies to the other case (𝛾 col > ̄𝛾). Finally, that 𝛾 col = 𝛾 nash
when 𝛾 col = ̄𝛾 is clear as the externality is nil at the collaborative
optimum so there is no incentive to deviate.

Now, whether ̄𝛾 is greater or smaller than 𝛾 col depends on the
primitives of the model: parameters 𝛼, 𝜅, 𝜔, 𝜆 and the distribution 𝑔(𝐴).
Making specific assumptions on some of them allows to derive intuition
on the role of the others. This will be our strategy for characterising the
Nash equilibrium further.

Remark. With our specified objective function (11), the capital flow
externality emerges, in part, because a reallocation of equity capital
between countries affects the expected shortfall from bank defaults.
However, regulatory objectives could be modelled in a variety of ways.
We show in Appendix B.2 that objective (11) is a specific case of a more
general class of objective function that still results in Proposition 3.
In particular, for the Proposition to hold, it is sufficient to have an
objective where (i) Foreign capital requirement only matters for Home
welfare through the equity capital of Home banks, 𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), and (ii)
at the collaborative optimum, given 𝑋∗, an additional unit of equity
financing is welfare enhancing.16

The second condition in the remark can be interpreted as the reg-
ulators finding bank equity capital socially valuable. Meaning that an
inflow of equity capital from abroad would lead to an improvement in
welfare at home, whereas siphoning capital off one’s neighbour imposes
a negative externality. In the case of our specific objective, more equity
capital would enable banks to lend the same amount but reduce the
extent of defaults, which is welfare enhancing. The policy debate is
often pitched in these terms so this condition seems to correspond to
the empirically relevant case. However, we discuss a case where the
social value of capital can flip sign in Section 5.3.

The notion that Foreign capital regulation only matters for Home
welfare through the allocation of equity capital abstracts from other
potential sources of spillovers between countries from regulation. We
show in Appendix B.2, that the capital flow externality identified in
this section still exists and has a similar interpretation even if there are
other sources of spillovers (e.g., if 𝑧∗ is perceived as socially costly).

4.3. Characterising the Nash equilibrium: the role of parameters

We now turn to question of whether or not 𝛾 col > ̄𝛾 and explore
the role of the model’s primitives. To do so, we assume 𝜅 → ∞. This
simplifies expressions and allows for sharper intuition from analytical
results, some of which are in closed form.

With 𝜅 → ∞, any allocation with 𝛾 = 𝛾 ′ will result in 𝑁 ∗ = 𝑁 ′∗ =
𝜔∕2. Given capital requirements are binding, we have 𝑋col = 𝜔
2𝛾col and
we can express the collaborative maximisation problem in terms of 𝑋
rather than 𝛾. Hence, the collaborative first order condition is

This condition reflects that collaborative regulators equate the marginal
product of physical capital (MPK) to one plus a positive wedge (𝜆𝑆𝑋 ),
this is equivalent to setting NPV∗ = 0. The reason why collaborative
regulators only focus on NPV∗ in this case (and ignore 𝑆∗
𝑁 ) is that
they cannot affect the equilibrium global allocation of equity capital:
𝑁 ∗ = 𝑁 ′∗ = 𝜔∕2. (Unilateral deviations, however, will still affect its
cross border allocation.)

From Section 3.2, the symmetric return-maximising capital require-
ment ̄𝛾 solves 𝑅𝛾 (𝜔∕2, ̄𝛾) = 0. From this, we can define the return-
maximising level of lending ̄𝑋 ≡ 𝜔∕2
̄𝛾

. It solves

𝐴0

𝛼 ×

(𝛼 ̄𝑋𝛼−1)
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
MPK

+ ∫

0

1 − 𝛼2𝐴 ̄𝑋𝛼−1) 𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴 = 1.
(

(15)

We will come back to the interpretation of condition (15) in a few lines.
For now, it is important to recognise: ̄𝛾 ⋚ 𝛾 col ⇔ ̄𝑋 ⋛ 𝑋col. Whether
𝑋col is greater than or less than ̄𝑋 will tell us which of the three cases
from Proposition 3 arises.

The role of 𝜔. Let us start with highlighting the role of 𝜔.

Proposition 4. Assume 𝜅 → ∞, Conditions 1 and 2 hold, and 𝑔(𝐴) is
continuous for all 𝐴0 > 0, with full support over [0, 𝐴𝐻 ]. Then ∀𝛼, 𝜆, ∃0 ≤
̄𝜔 < 2𝛼

𝛼
1−𝛼 ∶

𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash < ̄𝛾
𝛾 col = 𝛾 nash = ̄𝛾
𝛾 col > 𝛾 nash > ̄𝛾

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

; 𝜔 > ̄𝜔

; 𝜔 = ̄𝜔

; 𝜔 < ̄𝜔.

Broadly speaking, Proposition 4 emerges because 𝑋col is weakly
increasing in 𝜔, whereas ̄𝑋 is weakly decreasing. This means there is
a threshold value ̄𝜔 where the two cross and the competitive outcome
switches between a race to the top and race to the bottom.

To understand why 𝑋col is weakly increasing in 𝜔, first note that
𝐴0 = 𝑋−𝜔∕2
is decreasing in 𝜔. Hence, larger equity capital buffer
𝛼(𝑋)𝛼
decreases the likelihood of default. So, 𝑆col
𝑋 decreases with 𝜔: at the
margin, deadweight losses are lower with a higher 𝜔. This implies
that 𝑋col is increasing in 𝜔. Furthermore, as equity capital becomes
large, the marginal deadweight loss of bank default vanishes. That is,
for 𝜔 large enough, 𝐴0 → 0 and 𝑆col
𝑋 → 0. Then, private and social
NPV coincide and 𝑋col simply maximises the economic surplus from
production: 𝛼 (𝑋col)𝛼−1

→ 1.17

Now, to understand why ̄𝑋 is weakly decreasing in 𝜔, consider
condition (15). The second term, in the integral, is a positive wedge that
reflects the implicit subsidy arising from deposit insurance. This wedge
effectively raises the perceived private marginal return on lending.
Return maximisation takes advantage of banks’ ability to risk shift onto
the taxpayer by taking on marginal loans with relatively low returns
given that the bank does not bear the associated downside (Kareken
and Wallace, 1978). As we explained above, when 𝜔 increases, 𝐴0
decreases. This reduces the wedge, which leads to a reduction in ̄𝑋.

Ultimately, as 𝐴0 → 0, we get18

𝛼 (𝑋col)𝛼−1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
MPK

= 1 + 𝜆 ∫

𝐴0

0

(
1 − 𝛼2𝐴 (𝑋col)𝛼−1)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡𝑆col
𝑋

𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴

≥0

.

(14)

𝛼 ( ̄𝑋)𝛼−1

→

1
𝛼

.

(16)

This limit case exactly corresponds to that of our fictitious monopolist
of Section 3.2, where 1
reflects the markup associated with monopolist
𝛼

16 To see this formally, note the first condition in the remark implies a

welfare function of the following form

𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) = 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾).

𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾), 𝛾) 𝑑𝑁 ′∗

Then the externality on Foreign following a Home requirement increase is
𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) = 𝑉 ′
𝜋′∗
. The second condition in the remark ensures
𝑉 ′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 col, 𝛾 col), 𝛾 col) is positive. So the direction of a profitable deviation at
the collaborative optimum is given by the sign of 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
. This leads to the same
𝑑𝛾
economic intuition discussed when the objective is given by Eq. (11).

𝑑𝛾

1

> 𝛼

17 Note that if 𝜔
2

1−𝛼 there would be more than enough equity capital to
1−𝛼 . So we would have 𝛾 col = 1 instead of 𝛾 col = 𝜔∕2
fully finance such 𝑋col = 𝛼
𝑋col .
In addition, we would also have 𝛾 nash = 1. As already noted, if equity capital
were fully abundant, there would be no capital flow externality. We restricted
the parameter space to 𝜔 < 2𝛼

1−𝛼 to rule this out.

1

1

18 Note that if 𝜔
2

> 𝛼

𝛼
1−𝛼

there is also more than enough equity capital to

fully finance such ̄𝑋. In that case, we have ̄𝛾 > 1. For all 𝜔 < 2𝛼
so 𝛾 col < ̄𝛾. This is why ̄𝜔 must be strictly below 2𝛼

1−𝛼 .

𝛼

1

1−𝛼 , 𝛾 col < 1,

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)1039129S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

marginalisation (this also explains why MPK is marginalised by an
additional factor, 𝛼, in condition (15)).

Given this, it is clear that, when 𝜔 is large enough 𝑋col > ̄𝑋, which is
equivalent to 𝛾 col < ̄𝛾. And, in such a case, regulators have an incentive
to deviate upwards from 𝛾 col and we get a race to the top (𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash,
̄𝑋 increases and 𝑋col decreases.
as per Proposition 4). As 𝜔 decreases,
So, it is more likely that 𝑋col < ̄𝑋 for relatively low 𝜔. Depending on
the value of the other parameters, it can be the case that even at 𝜔 → 0,
we still have 𝑋col > ̄𝑋. Then, only the race to the top is possible ( ̄𝜔 = 0
in this case).19

4.3.1. A closed form case to isolate the role of other parameters

To delve into the role of the other parameters, we now neutralise the
},

marginal effect of 𝜔 on 𝐴0 by assuming that 𝑔(𝐴) is binary: 𝐴 ∈ {0, 1
𝑞
with Pr

= 𝑞. Then the key conditions (14) and (15) reduce to

)

( 1
𝑞

𝛼 (𝑋col)𝛼−1
× 𝛼 ( ̄𝑋)𝛼−1

= 1 + 𝜆 (1 − 𝑞) (Collaborative FOC)

=

1
𝛼

(Return maximising condition)

1
𝑞
which gives us closed-form solutions for both 𝑋col and ̄𝑋 and, in turn,
for the corresponding capital requirements:
( 1 + 𝜆 (1 − 𝑞)
𝛼

and 𝛾 col =

( 𝑞
𝛼2

) 1
𝛼−1

) 1
𝛼−1

𝜔
2

𝜔
2

̄𝛾 =

.

(17)

It directly follows that:

𝛾 col ⋚ 𝛾 nash ⇔ 𝜆 ⋚

𝑞 − 𝛼
(1 − 𝑞) 𝛼

.

We can now run through the intuition for the role played by other
parameters.

The role of 𝜆. The higher 𝜆, the higher are deadweight losses at the
margin. Hence, a higher 𝜆 will lead regulators to choose a more
constrained level of equilibrium lending, which translates to a higher
̄𝑋, the higher 𝜆 the more likely ̄𝑋 > 𝑋col,
𝛾 col. Since 𝜆 does not affect
and therefore 𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col.

The role of bank riskiness. When discussing the role of 𝜔, we stressed
its impact on 𝐴0. If bank equity capital is less scarce, the probability
of bank default goes down. This had two effects: (i) a reduction in
expected deadweight losses; and, (ii) a decrease in the implicit subsidy
from deposit insurance. The two effects are more transparent in the
binary distribution case. The first materialises with the factor 1 − 𝑞 in
the Collaborative FOC, and the second with the factor 1
in the revenue
𝑞
maximising condition. The latter reflects that, with deposit insurance
and limited liability, the return on equity only depends on the upside.
The realised return on equity is always nil when the bank goes bust.
Therefore, the value for 𝑋 that maximises the return on equity only
depends on the value of 𝐴 when the bank survives (rather than its
expectation): namely 1∕𝑞. Holding E[𝐴] = 1, the better the upside
(i.e., the lower 𝑞) the higher ̄𝑋. Together, it is clear that the lower 𝑞
the more likely ̄𝑋 > 𝑋col, and therefore 𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col. This reinforces our
stressing of the role of 𝜔.

The role of 𝛼. We have established in the continuous 𝑔(𝐴) case that, as
̄𝑋 < 𝑋col because banking sector
𝜔 grows large and banks become safe,
return maximisation implies a markup due to monopolist marginalisa-
tion. This feature extends to the case with risky banks and is reflected
by the term 1∕𝛼 on the right side of Eq. (17). The smaller 𝛼 the less
elastic the loan demand, the larger the markup, and the more likely
̄𝑋 < 𝑋col, and therefore 𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash.

19 This will for instance happen if 𝜆 is relatively small. This is because,
then, deadweight losses do not matter much, and there is no reason for the
regulators to constrain lending to levels so low that the capital flow becomes
negative. But if 𝜆 is large enough, then it can be that, at some ̄𝜔 > 0, 𝑋col just
equates ̄𝑋. At such a point, the capital flow is nil, and so is the externality.
Hence 𝛾 col = 𝛾 nash = ̄𝛾. At even lower levels of 𝜔, we then get 𝛾 col > ̄𝛾, the
externality is reversed, and we get a race to the bottom (𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash).

4.4. The case with more than two countries

Our policy game can be extended to more than two countries. Take
the case 𝜅 → ∞ and consider a number of ex-ante identical countries,
each with an initial investor endowment of 𝜔∕2. The collaborative
optimum is then the same as in the corresponding two-country case
(i.e., 𝛾 col and 𝑁 col would be unchanged). In addition, the direction in
which regulators have an incentive to deviate would still depend on
whether increases in capital requirement raise the return on equity at
the collaborative optimum. However, the number of countries affects
𝛾 nash and, in particular, its distance from 𝛾 col.

To save on notation we proceed numerically: the left panel in
Fig. 3 presents an illustration. For the two-country case, it displays
𝛾 col, ̂𝛾(𝛾 col) and 𝛾 nash, which is at the intersection of the best response
curves. In addition, it presents the solution for 𝛾 nash when, rather than
two countries, there is a mass of atomistic countries. The example we
provide is one where 𝛾 col <𝛾 nash.

The more countries the greater the incentive to deviate and the
further the Nash equilibrium from the collaborative optimum (as in-
dicated by the atomistic case in Panel A of Fig. 3). The reason is that
countries become effectively ‘‘smaller’’ on a global scale and, therefore,
face a more elastic inverse supply curve of bank capital. Take the case
where an increase in 𝛾 in a country siphons off capital from abroad.
Capital flows will ensue so as to restore the no-arbitrage condition in
international capital markets. As the capital outflow is spread across
more and more countries, the total inflow into the deviating country
(for an identical deviation) becomes greater. As a result, the deviating
country can achieve an identical financial stability benefit at the cost
of a lower and lower decrease in economic activity.

From a collaborative point of view, each country attempts to overuse
equity capital in the Nash equilibrium. Not unlike in the tragedy of
the commons, this gets worse as the number of users becomes large.
Such an interpretation applies to the case where 𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash, which we
just discussed and can be interpreted as a race to the top. But it also
applies to 𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col. In this case, competition among regulators leads
to a race to the bottom instead. However, this occurs precisely because
cutting capital requirements attracts capital from abroad.

5. Discussion and extensions

Here we discuss how our host-country rule relates to real world
capital regulation under the Basel III Accords. We then turn to policy
implications and empirical predictions, and draw links with the stylised
facts and existing empirical literature. Last, we consider an extension of
the model in which deposits offer households a liquidity service, which
allows us to discuss further the robustness of our analysis.

5.1. Real world capital requirements

The current Basel III regime that coordinates real world capital
regulation across countries can be approximated as a static common
minimum requirement (made up of a variety of different ‘‘buffers’’)
plus a time varying macroprudential requirement called the counter-
cyclical capital buffer (CCyB). Hence, we can model a Basel III capital
requirements for a bank 𝑖 (at time 𝑡) as follows:

𝑡)𝑥′
𝑖𝑡

≥ (𝛾 + CCyB𝑡)𝑥𝑖𝑡 + (𝛾 + CCyB′

𝑛𝑖𝑡
where 𝛾 is the fixed common minimum, and CCyB𝑡, CCyB′
≥ 0 are the
𝑡
time-varying countercyclical buffers. Under Basel III rules, the CCyB is,
in effect, set by the regulator of the borrowers’ country. This is known
as the principle of reciprocity in the Basel Accords. Regardless of where
bank 𝑖 is located it faces the CCyB𝑡 on Home loans (and CCyB′
𝑡 on
Foreign loans).

(18)

In practice, banks have three ways to lend across borders: directly,
through branches, or through subsidiaries incorporated in the country
of the borrower. Direct lending and lending made through branches fall

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391210S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

under the jurisdiction of the country where the bank is incorporated
and so, de jure, the capital requirement on those loans is imposed by the
bank’s local regulator. However, the Accords mandate that countries
impose, on their banks, for their foreign lending, the CCyB chosen by
the corresponding host country (and the host country does the same;
hence reciprocity). So, de facto, branches, subsidiaries, and direct cross-
border loans all face the same capital requirement set by the country
where the lending takes place. This is what motivates the host-country
rule of our model.

Three remarks are in order. First, the CCyB cannot be set at a nega-
tive level. This is something we abstract from in our model but would
be straightforward to incorporate with a constraint 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ≥ 𝛾. Second,
the Accords also stipulate a limit of 2.5% for mandatory reciprocation
of the CCyB (i.e. the legal obligation to reciprocate stops when the
buffer reaches 2.5%). Voluntary reciprocation is still possible and, in
reality, is seen for other relevant macroprudential tools. However, no
country has set the CCyB past 2.5% so far. So, the willingness to vol-
untarily reciprocate larger buffers cannot be judged. Third, reciprocity
requires that the local regulator actually adheres to the principle.
Publicly refusing to implement a policy legally mandated under the
Basel accords is unlikely. A potential concern is that supervisors could
be secretly lax on imposing the additional reciprocated capital require-
ment. But this would come with reputational and legal risks and may
lead to the jurisdiction being deemed Basel non-compliant, leading to
barriers for its banks international operations.20 Such a strategy would
also require collusion with the bank itself. An observed lack of integrity
by supervisors may hinder other interactions with the banking system
with consequences for wider financial stability. (For more detail on the
institutional background, see Appendix A.)

5.2. Empirical predictions and policy implications

A formal empirical analysis of the CCyB regime is beyond the scope
of this paper. The short time frame since the CCyB were introduced and
the relatively infrequent changes in the CCyB are significant hurdles.
Still, we highlight how our model may shed light on the use of such a
policy tool, and we then argue that one can also draw some inference
on the sign of the capital flows based on existing literature.

To set the stage, consider the following thought experiment. Imag-
ine a world in which a race-to-the-bottom is paramount but there is
a common minimum to mitigate it (in our framework, 𝛾 nash < 𝛾). If
countries are symmetric, CCyBs would always be nil. But CCyBs are
used in practice (see Fig. 3, panel B). That a race to the top can arise
in our model provides a potential explanation

Other mechanisms can lead to a race to the top.21 And other reasons
why CCyBs are used may of course exist, especially if countries are
heterogeneous. However, our analysis leads to novel predictions. We
discuss them now.

5.2.1. Implication 1: CCyBs are likely to overshoot

In normal times, when the banking sector is healthy and bank
capital is relatively abundant (𝜔 is relatively high), we are more likely
to be in a situation where national regulators have an incentive to
deviate upward (𝛾 nash > 𝛾 col). Doing so would attract capital from
abroad and impose a negative externality onto other countries; this
follows from Proposition 4. So national regulators have an incentive

20 The Basel Committee has a Regulatory Consistency Assessment Pro-
gramme to judge members adherence to the common rulebook and to identify
deviations.

21 For example, this could be due to a terms of trade externality (as
in Haufler and Maier (2019)) or because of spillovers from bail out costs
(Gersbach et al., 2020) .

to tighten the CCyB too much in good times.22 Hence, there are gains
from coordinating on smaller raises. Conversely, after a negative shock,
when 𝜔 is low (and 𝜆 could be higher too, for instance if deadweight
losses emanate from tax distortions and fiscal capacity has been im-
paired by the shock), regulators have incentives to cut the requirement
too aggressively. Hence, there are gains from coordinating on smaller
cuts.

Consider a version of our model where the single period would be
repeated over time, with exogenous changes in 𝜔. Our model predicts
that 𝛾 col would rise with 𝜔 (in line with conventional wisdom). How-
ever, the lower 𝜔 the more likely 𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col. So, the prediction is
that changes in 𝛾 nash will follow changes in 𝛾 col but with a greater
amplitude. We illustrate this in Fig. 2.

As described, the Basel accords also specify limits to the CCyB.
Interestingly, through the lens of our model, these limits could mitigate
strategic behaviour. In bad times, if we are in the case where 𝛾 nash < 𝛾,
we would have bunching at 𝛾 as the positivity constraint on the CCyB
limits the scope for regulators to undercut one another. Whereas, in
good times, if a national regulator sets the buffer above 2.5%, other
regulators will not be obliged to reciprocate.

5.2.2. Implication 2: Small countries are likely to use CCyBs more

An implication of our model with more than two countries is that
smaller countries should be most active in using the CCyB.23 These
countries have the greatest incentive to deviate upwards during good
times and to cut during bad times as, from their perspective, the supply
of bank equity capital is more elastic. While other forces may be at
work, this is what we have seen in reality. The most active users of
the CCyB have been small economies in Scandinavia, Hong Kong and
the smaller members of the Eurozone. At the time of writing, the U.S.,
China and Japan have not used the buffer while Germany has varied
the buffer by 25bp since its introduction. To illustrate this point more
concretely in the data, the right panel of Fig. 3 plots the May 2023
level of the CCyB across the 28 members of the Basel Committee (and
Norway) against the country’s share in the total of members GDP (log
scale). 2023 represents a period where many countries are increasing
buffers after having cut them during the pandemic and so we would
expect country size to be negatively correlated with CCyB rates. That
is what we see in the data. The evidence is purely suggestive, but
it is worth flagging that country size alone accounts for 16% of the
cross-sectional variation in CCyB rates.

5.2.3. Is there empirical evidence for the sign of the capital flow?

There is a substantial literature identifying the effect of capital
requirements at the bank level by exploiting the heterogeneous impact
of regulatory reforms, stress tests, or supervisory interventions (Francis
and Osborne, 2012; Bahaj et al., 2016; Gropp et al., 2019; Imbierowicz
et al., 2018; Juelsrud and Wold, 2020; De Jonghe et al., 2020). A
message from these papers is that banks facing an increase in capital
requirement increase their equity.24 In some studies, the response is not
significantly different than zero, but we are not aware of evidence that
banks, on average, reduce their levels of capital in response to higher
requirements.

In our model, this bank-level relationship corresponds to 𝑑𝑛
≥
𝑑𝛾
≥ 0 and,

0. Extrapolating at the aggregate level, this suggests 𝑑𝑁
𝑑𝛾

22 There seems to be a consensus in the literature and among policymakers
that capital requirement should be set higher in good times than in bad times.
A key reason is that bank capital is perceived to be scarcer in bad times (see,
e.g., Kashyap and Stein (2004), and Malherbe (2020)).

23 We have not formally considered asymmetries in country size (or along
other dimensions) within our framework. Differences in country size can
generate interesting predictions for the coordination of policies in other
contexts (e.g. see Opp (2010) for an analysis of tariffs). We postpone such
an analysis to future research.

24 See also Bahaj and Malherbe (2020) for a theoretical analysis.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391211S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

Fig. 2. Illustration of 𝛾 nash ⋚ 𝛾 col over the cycle.

Fig. 3. Case with more than 2 countries.
Notes - Parameter choices: 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐴) ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2), 𝜎2 = 0.02, 𝜆 = 5, 𝛼 = 0.75, 𝜔 = 0.05. NB: This violates E(𝐴) = 1 but amounts to a simple rescaling of the return function. Panel A: 𝛾 col
is denoted by the blue circle; 𝛾 nash (for the two-country case) is denoted by the red square at the intersection of the best response curves (i.e. the red dashed lines); 𝛾 nash (for the
atomistic-countries case) is denoted by the green square further away from 𝛾 col; and ̂𝛾(𝛾 col), and its Foreign counterpart, are denoted by the grey diamonds. Panel B: May 2023
CCyB rates against the country’s share of PPP GDP of Basel Committee members (plus Norway) and a line of best fit.

therefore, corresponds to the condition under which regulators have
an incentive to deviate upwards.25 Now, if 𝑑𝑁
> 0, unless bank equity
𝑑𝛾
capital is supplied perfectly elastically (which would correspond to
𝜅 → 0 in our model), it must be that 𝑑𝑁 ′
𝑑𝛾

< 0.

Consistent with this prediction, there is also bank-level evidence
that tightening capital requirements at home causes domestic banks to
cut lending abroad (see Aiyar et al. (2014), Forbes et al. (2017)), which
would also correspond to 𝑑𝑛′
< 0 in our model (and, as above, with an
𝑑𝛾
extrapolation to 𝑑𝑁 ′
> 0). From a broader per-
𝑑𝛾
spective, Buch and Goldberg (2017) provide a meta analysis showing
that, in general, the tightening of prudential policies (including capital
requirements) spill over to generate less lending abroad.

< 0 and, in turn, 𝑑𝑁
𝑑𝛾

25 Interpreting bank-level estimates at the aggregate level may draw a biased
picture (Berg et al., 2021). However, one would typically expect competitive
pressures to result in a single bank raising proportionally less capital following
an idiosyncratic requirement increase than the entire banking sector would do
following a sector-wide increase.

More empirical research is required to determine the direction of
aggregate equity capital flows following sector-wide changes in require-
ments. We also emphasise that our model predicts that the direction
and intensity of the flow will vary with economic conditions. The
existing empirical evidence does suggest that the direction of equity
capital flows is such that higher capital requirements at Home do, on
average, generate a negative externality on Foreign.

5.3. Liquidity service on deposits

In our model, capital requirements bind because deposits are ef-
fectively cheaper than equity. And deposits are cheaper because they
are implicitly subsidised by deposit insurance. In practice, another
reason why deposits are cheaper than equity is because they provide
liquidity services (Drechsler et al., 2021, 2023). This is a source of
rents for banks, and the associated deposit franchise is an important
element of bank decision making. In this subsection, we show that all
the main mechanisms of the model go through if capital requirements
are binding because of deposit liquidity services instead of deposit
insurance.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391212S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

In this liquidity service model, households derive utility from the
quantity of deposits held in domestic banks. This liquidity service is
non-pecuniary, is marginally decreasing, and is independent of the
financial return on deposits. Specifically, in a similar vein to Begenau
(2020), we use the following utility function for the representative
household in Home:
𝐷1−𝜂
1 − 𝜂

𝐸[𝐶] +

,

where 𝜂 > 0, 𝐶 is date-1 consumption and 𝐷 is date-0 deposit holdings;
and similarly for that in Foreign.

These deposits are not insured and there are two segmented deposit
markets: one in Home and one in Foreign. We impose that a bank
raising deposits in a country lends in it. We also impose that the
bank does not invest in storage (we come back to this assumption
below). Hence, banks compete internationally for equity capital, and
then choose in which country to operate.

= 1 − 𝐷−𝜂,

Household maximisation with respect to deposit holding provides a
condition which defines an inverse supply curve for (Home) deposits:
E [𝑅𝑑 ]
where E [𝑅𝑑 ]
is the expected pecuniary gross return.26 Note that the
functional form ensures that, in equilibrium, 𝐷 > 0 and E [𝑅𝑑 ] < 1,
so that deposits are indeed cheaper than equity capital and the capital
requirement binds. Hence, as before, we have 𝐷∗ = (1−𝛾)
𝑁 ∗ and 𝑋∗ =
𝑁 ∗
𝛾
E[𝐴]=1, Home banks’ expected return on equity is now given by
(

. Repeating the steps of our analysis in Section 3.1 and recalling

)−𝜂)

)𝛼−1

𝛾

( 𝑁 ∗
𝛾

𝛼

− (1 − 𝛾)

1 −

( (1−𝛾)
𝛾

𝑁 ∗

.

(19)

𝑅(𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) =

𝛾

The bank’s objective is otherwise identical to Eq. (3) in our model. The
analysis of Section 3.2 is unaffected by this redefinition of the return on
equity. Changes in capital requirements at Home still generate a capital
flow in the form described in Lemma 2 and this generates a spillover
on Foreign as in Proposition 2.27 As a result:

Proposition 5. In the liquidity service model: (i) there also exists a unique
equilibrium as defined in Proposition 1 using the return on equity defined
in Eq. (19) and (ii) Theorem 1 also holds under Condition 1.

Theorem 1 also holds in this setting.28 The economic intuition is
similar to that in Section 3.3, but with an added twist. As in our baseline
model, the concavity of the production function means that banks face
a downward sloping, convex demand curve for loans. Hence, constrain-
ing quantities by tightening the capital requirement (holding the bank’s
cost of funds fixed) will raise the return on equity up to a point after
which returns start to decline. This follows the intuition of the fictitious
monopolist bank outlined previously. However, in the liquidity service
model, the representative bank also faces an upward sloping, concave
supply curve for deposits. So, we can also build intuition by thinking
of a fictitious monopsonist bank. Both the monopolist and monopsonist
rents are concave in quantities. Likewise, both lending and deposits
are shrinking in the capital requirement. Hence, there exists a capital
requirement which maximises the combined rent and hence the return
on equity. As in our baseline model, an increase in 𝛾 beyond this point
causes a fall in the return on equity and hence a capital outflow.

26 Note that deposits are risky but agents are risk neutral and only need to

break even in expectation.

27 The proofs of Lemma 2 and Proposition 2 depend on the partial deriva-
tives of 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) (and 𝑅′(𝑁 ′, 𝛾 ′)) existing and being continuous in their
arguments. This is trivial to verify.

28 This relies on regularity condition 1 being satisfied. If 𝜂 ≤ 1, then
this is always true. But if deposit supply is more elastic the condition is
not guaranteed to hold, so we still need to impose it. Given this condition,
proving the proposition just requires following the same steps as the proofs of
Proposition 1 and Theorem 1 with the modified expression for the return on
equity.

} with Pr(𝐴 = 1
𝑞

The policy game in the liquidity service model. We now embed the liq-
uidity service model into the policy game. For tractability, we consider
the case where 𝜅 → ∞ and 𝐴 follows a binary distribution: 𝐴 ∈
{0, 1
) = 𝑞. As before, welfare is the value added
𝑞
of the banking system less deadweight losses. The difference is that
the banking sector surplus now includes liquidity services. We have:
𝜋 = 𝑋𝛼 − 𝑋 + (𝑋−𝑁)1−𝜂
− 𝜆(1 − 𝑞) (𝑋 − 𝑁). Allowing banks to lever up
generates an additional gain as liquidity service provision expands.

1−𝜂

The problem of the collaborative regulators can be formulated as

𝑋col = arg max
𝑋

𝑋𝛼 − 𝑋 +

(

)1−𝜂

𝑋 − 𝜔
2
1 − 𝜂

− 𝜆(1 − 𝑞)

(

𝑋 −

)

.

𝜔
2

This yields the following first order condition
𝛼 (𝑋col)𝛼−1

− 1 = 𝜆(1 − 𝑞) −

(
𝑋col −

)−𝜂

.

𝜔
2

(20)

Compared to collaborative first order condition (14) in Section 4,
the right side of Eq. (20) has an additional term reflecting that bal-
ance sheet expansion generates greater liquidity service at the margin,
making lending more attractive to the regulators.

Now, under Nash competition, the Home regulator first order con-

dition is

𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) =
𝜋∗

(
𝛼 (𝑋∗)𝛼−1

− 1 +

(

𝑋∗ −

)−𝜂

𝜔
2

− 𝜆 (1 − 𝑞)

) 𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

(

𝜆 (1 − 𝑞) −

+

(
𝑋* −

𝜔
2

)−𝜂) 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

= 0.

So the externality at the collaborative optimum is given by

(𝛾 col, 𝛾 col)

=

𝜋∗
𝛾

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

)−𝜂

(
𝑋col −

⎞
⎟
⎟
𝜆 (1 − 𝑞) −
⎟
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎟
⎟
=𝛼(𝑋col)𝛼−1
⎠
)−𝜂

𝜔
2

−1

(
𝑋col − 𝜔
2

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

.

The term 𝜆 (1 − 𝑞) −
is the marginal social value of bank
capital at the collaborative optimum. From Eq. (20), it is equal to the
net present (private) value of the marginal loan at the collaborative
optimum. For the moment, we will proceed assuming it is positive and
discuss its sign further below.

Under that assumption, the sign of the externality is once again
pinned down by 𝑑𝑁 ∗
and therefore depends on whether 𝑋col is greater
𝑑𝛾
̄𝑋, the return maximising level of lending, where ̄𝑋
than, or less than,
is the level of lending that sets 𝑅𝛾 = 0, that is29

𝛼2 ( ̄𝑋)𝛼−1

+ (1 − 𝜂)

(

̄𝑋 −

)−𝜂

𝜔
2

= 1.

Since 𝜂 > 0, it directly follows that 𝑋col > ̄𝑋 when 𝜆 = 0. As in
the original model, return maximisation is associated with monopolist
̄𝑋.
marginalisation. Hence, the 𝛼2 term appears in the equation for
What changes compared to Section 4.3.1 is that the factor 1
(which
𝑞
emanated from the rents associated with deposit insurance) is replaced
by an additive term associated with monopsonist marginalisation. Since
both monopolistic and monopsonistic marginalisation push in the same
direction (lower quantities than what maximises social welfare), we
have that 𝑋col > ̄𝑋. Deadweight losses still generate a force that
reduces 𝑋col relative to ̄𝑋. Hence, adding a deposit franchise that yields
rents for the banking sector generates similar insights to having rents
from a lending franchise. A reduction in the deposit supply elasticity, 𝜂,

29 This step relies on:

(

(

𝛼2

𝑁
𝛾

−1
𝛾 2

)𝛼−1

− 1 + (1 − 𝜂)

)

)−𝜂

− 1

𝑁 −𝜂

(

1
𝛾

, 𝑋 − 𝜔
2

=

( 1
𝛾

)

− 1

𝑁 in a symmetric equilibrium with fixed equity

𝑅𝛾 (𝑁, 𝛾) =

and 𝑋 = 𝑁
𝛾
supply.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391213< 0, in a similar manner to a reduction

CRediT authorship contribution statement

S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

increases the likelihood that 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
in the loan demand elasticity, 𝛼.

̄𝑋 is
Note also that 𝑋col is increasing in 𝜔 and that, for 𝜂 > 1,
decreasing in 𝜔. Therefore, the same intuition around Proposition 4 still
holds and so higher 𝜔 makes it more likely 𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash and vice versa.30
A difference between our main model and the liquidity service
model is that, in the latter, whether 𝛼 (𝑋col)𝛼−1
− 1 > 0, depends on
parameters. If deposit supply is sufficiently inelastic, the sign can switch
as the regulator sees a high marginal benefit of more deposits. Equity
capital funding is then, at the margin, a welfare reducing source of
funds. Such a situation may however, have limited empirical relevance.
The post-crisis policy debate surrounding capital regulation has focused
on the trade off between tighter regulation and lending, not tighter
regulation and banks ability to provide deposits (see for example BCBS
(2022), Chapter 8). Second, in reality, banks have access to safe as-
sets such as reserves and government bonds that do not generate a
capital charge. Here, we assume banks cannot invest in the storage
technology (which carries a zero capital requirement). If we dropped
this assumption, banks would raise deposits and invest in storage until
any markdown on deposits had been competed away. Capital regula-
tion would then only be relevant for lending. Reintroducing deposit
insurance would take us back to our main model.

The bottom line here is that our findings do not hinge on the reason
why deposits have a funding advantage. However, from a modelling
perspective, the benefit of considering deposit insurance, or govern-
ment guarantees in general, is that they give banks an incentive to
specialise, and so their portfolio choice is determined endogenously.
Absent deposit insurance, we would require the explicit, somewhat
arbitrary, assumption that an individual bank will always raise deposits
and lend in the same country.

6. Conclusion

Under a host-country rule for bank capital regulation, the relevant
strategic interaction becomes competition for scarce bank equity cap-
ital. Depending on economic conditions, a rise in a given country’s
capital requirement can generate capital flows of either sign. Outflows
from that country are associated with a positive externality on other
countries, inflows with a negative one.

A key policy implication of our results is that this capital flow
externality is likely to make CCyBs overshoot relative to what is socially
optimal. Individual regulators raise requirements too much (compared
to collaboration) in normal and good times and cut them too much in
bad times.

An important ingredient in our analysis is that bank equity capital
is supplied somewhat inelastically and equity markets are integrated
between countries. This generates the inflows and outflows described
above. If bank equity capital were supplied perfectly elastically, the
gains from coordination would vanish. The elasticity of the global
bank equity supply is an important object as it governs gains from
coordination. Future research estimating this parameter could prove
fruitful.

Likewise, the gains from collaboration would vanish if we endow
the regulators with as many instruments as target variables (two in our
case, 𝑋∗ and 𝑁 ∗); an application of the Tinbergen (1952) principle. For
instance, if a regulator could subsidise (without additional distortion)
the allocation of bank capital to their country, it could both reduce
leverage (via the capital requirement) and avoid the associated con-
traction in economic activity (via the subsidy). The assumption that
such subsidy is, otherwise, not distortive is however rather extreme,
and unlikely to be satisfied in practice. More generally, this feature of
our model relates to Korinek (2016), which shows that violations of the
Tinbergen principle can create scope for collaboration.31

30 Even if 𝜂 < 1,

̄𝑋 is typically increasing in 𝜔 at a slower rate that 𝑋col

which generates the same insight.

31 Korinek (2016) identifies three conditions under which there are no
gains from international policy cooperation: (i) Regulators are price takers;

Saleem Bahaj: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis,
Conceptualization. Frederic Malherbe: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis,
Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

Nothing to disclose.

Data availability

The Cross-border Effects of Bank Capital Regulation: Replication Files
(Original data) (Mendeley Data)

Appendix A. The Basel III capital framework

In this appendix, we further explain why the Basel III regime can
be approximated as a capital requirement that has a fixed, common
component and a time-varying one set by the country where the lending
takes place. Since the time varying requirement is what matters at the
margin, this maps to the setting we consider in our model.

At the outset, note that the 27 jurisdictions that form the Basel Com-
mittee cover most of the world’s major economic and financial centres
(including the US, EU and China). These jurisdictions are compliant
with Basel III regulations. For the rest of the world, Basel compliance
varies. Our model should be seen as capturing competition between
regulators in developed, integrated economies where capital can flow
freely and so the Committee members are the best real world analogue.

General principles. Basel III prescribes a series of additive capital re-
quirements, often also called buffers. For simplicity, we express capital
requirements in terms of ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets.32
Basel III specifies that all banks must adhere to a minimum 6% capital
requirement at all times, plus an additional 2.5% capital conservation
buffer that the bank can use temporarily to absorb a loss but will
face dividend restrictions as a result. The minimum requirement and
conservation buffer are homogeneous across jurisdictions and lending
location and are not time varying. We view the parameter 𝛾 in Eq. (18)
as jointly capturing these minima.

The CCyB. As described in Section 5.1, the static requirements are sup-
plemented by the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The CCyB has
a macroprudential purpose. It is time varying by design. We elaborate
more on its features here.

The CCyB is set at the discretion of regulators in a particular
jurisdiction. In particular, it is set on lending (or other bank exposures)
to agents within the regulator’s jurisdiction. The regulator can always
impose the requirement on banks within its jurisdiction (domestic

(ii) the Tinbergen Principle is satisfied (for external instruments); and (iii)
International Markets are frictionless. The third condition is satisfied in our
model. The second is not, as we have discussed. Neither is the first, but the
existence of gains from collaboration does not hinge on this violation. In
fact, gains from cooperation increase when regulators are price takers (see
Section 4.4).

32 Tier 1 capital includes some contingent capital instruments beyond com-
mon equity that enable the bank to absorb losses on a going concern basis.
The minimum capital requirement for common equity is 1.5 percentage points
lower. The Basel III framework also contains an additional 2 percentage point
requirement for Tier 2 capital, which can be thought of as gone-concern
loss absorbing liabilities such as subordinated debt. Our model makes no
distinction between common equity and other forms of contingent liabilities
so we abstract from different definitions of capital.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391214S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

banks and subsidiaries of foreign banks). For banks outside the reg-
ulator’s jurisdiction that may lend within it, the framework is based on
obligatory reciprocity: foreign regulators must impose the equivalent
CCyB on the banks they regulate. For members of the Basel committee
the obligation to reciprocate is encoded in the law governing capital
regulation.

In relation to our analysis, reciprocity is a crucial dimension of the
regulatory framework. In short, even though, de jure the rule is home-
country based, de facto it is a host-country rule. This is why we argue
that the Basel III regime can be approximated as a capital requirement
that has a fixed, common component and a time-varying one set by the
country where the lending takes place.

This is what leads to the capital requirement we described in

Eq. (18). We repeat it here for convenience

𝑛𝑖𝑡

≥ (𝛾 + CCyB𝑡)𝑥𝑖𝑡 + (𝛾 + CCyB′

𝑡)𝑥′
𝑖𝑡.

Let us describe how this capital requirement plays out in practice
with an example. Assume Home is the UK and Foreign is Germany.
Imagine a bank, 𝑖, under the UK’s jurisdiction has equity 𝑛𝑖𝑡 and lends 𝑥𝑖𝑡
in the UK and 𝑥′
𝑖𝑡 in Germany. Imagine that UK and German regulators
adhere to a static common capital requirement, 𝛾, representing the
minimum requirement and conservation buffer. The UK regulator sets
CCyB𝑡 on lending in the UK. This is the marginal requirement where
regulators have discretion. The German regulator sets CCyB′
𝑡 on German
lending. This means per unit of UK lending the UK regulator ensures
bank 𝑖 must have at least (𝛾+CCyB𝑡) of equity capital. Reciprocity means
that when the German regulator announces CCyB′
𝑡, the UK regulator as
part of its supervision of bank 𝑖 also ensures it has at least (𝛾 + CCyB′
𝑡)
equity capital per unit of German lending.

This regulatory arrangement maps into that of our model if one sets
𝛾 = 𝛾 +CCyB𝑡, except that we are abstracting from the bounds: in reality
the CCyB cannot be negative and mandatory reciprocation only applies
up to 2.5%; thereafter it is voluntary. We explain in Section 5.2 how
this affects the implications of our model.

Bank-specific requirements. Regulators also have the option to set bank
specific capital requirements (that apply to all the loans the bank
makes, irrespective of the location of the borrower). To fix ideas, one
can incorporate these into Eq. (18) in the following manner

𝑛𝑖𝑡

𝑡)𝑥′

≥ (𝛾 + CCyB𝑡)𝑥𝑖𝑡 + (𝛾 + CCyB′

𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾𝑖(𝑥𝑖 + 𝑥′
𝑖),
≥ 0. These requirements may be used because the bank is
with 𝛾𝑖
viewed as systemic or has raised a regulatory flag (e.g. failing a stress
test). The banks in our model are ex-ante identical and where they lend
is the only way in which they differ in equilibrium. Hence there is no
role for a bank specific capital requirement.

We believe there are two reasons why that abstracting from bank
specific requirements in the context of our analysis is a valid ap-
proach. First, from the perspective of international coordination, the
most relevant bank specific capital requirements is the buffer imposed
on Globally Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs). This buffer is,
technically, implemented by the national regulator but the calcula-
tion for the size of the buffer is formulaic and agreed by the Basel
Committee eliminating regulators’ discretion. Since G-SIB buffers are
coordinated there is a good case for thinking of it as part of the
common standard, meaning that we return to a situation approaching
Eq. (18). The loss of tractability from considering coordinated but bank-
specific requirements is unlikely to be worth the increase in generality.
Second, 𝛾𝑖 is bounded below by 0. If other bank-specific capital require-
ments, with regulatory discretion, suffer from a race-to-the-bottom (as
in Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006)), one could expect these to be set
to 0 anyway, again returning to Eq. (18).33 More generally, we argue

that there is no reason to believe that the presence of bank specific
requirements eliminates the potential for strategic behaviour regarding
the setting of the CCyB.

Sector-specific requirements. Regulators have scope to set additional
capital requirements on specific types of lending for macroprudential
purposes. These are known as sectoral capital requirements. So for
example, a regulator could raise the capital requirement on a particular
type of mortgage lending within its jurisdiction. There is no mandatory
reciprocation of sectoral requirements. Interestingly, some jurisdictions
or groups of jurisdictions have set up voluntary reciprocation regimes.
The ESRB is a particular example of this: see here for a description of
their regime. Voluntary reciprocation is not codified in the same way as
the mandatory reciprocation of the CCyB. Nonetheless, moral suasion,
reputational costs and repeated game aspects appear to sustain equi-
libria where regulators do agree to reciprocate sectoral requirements
in practice. In our model, each country has a single sector, so there
would be no role for sector-specific requirements.

Implementation: supervisory capture.
Implementing a capital require-
ment also requires supervisors to calculate 𝑛𝑖𝑡 (raising issues regarding
the definition of regulatory capital or the rate of bank loss recognition)
and 𝑥𝑖𝑡 (involving the calculation of risk weights or the treatment of
off-balance sheet exposures). These calculations are complex and there
is potential for interpretation. One can imagine scenarios in which
supervisors are captured by the domestic banking sector lobby. In
such a case, national supervisors may choose to be lenient (e.g., by
letting banks in its jurisdictions have artificially low risk weights),
which could lead to a scenario reminiscent of the race to the bottom
in Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006). Studying the interaction between
supervisory forbearance and our mechanisms is potentially interesting,
but is beyond the scope of this paper.

Appendix B. Additional theoretical results

B.1. Higher capital requirements make banks strictly worse off

Here we relax the perfect competition assumption and extend the
model in Section 3 to allow banks to have market power in the loan
market. In particular, we assume that there are 𝜈 identical banks
specialising in lending each country and compete a la Cournot to supply
loans to penniless firms.34 Banks still act as price takers in the markets
for deposits and equity capital. We focus on banks specialising in Home
lending and abstract from the Foreign country (function dependen-
cies on 𝛾 ′ are omitted). Our goal is to show that a rise in capital
requirements strictly decreases the pure profits of banks in equilibrium.
To briefly summarise the environment: as before, banks fund their
lending by raising a mix of deposits and equity. Deposits are insured
and are raised elastically from households that have an opportunity
cost of funds of one. For the purposes of this extension we assume each
bank has a vanishingly small endowment of inside equity. The bank
can raise new outside equity from the global capital market. As in the
main text, outside equity must return in expectation, 1 + 𝑧 = 1 + 𝜅
𝑀 2
2
per unit raised, where 𝑀 is the total amount of new outside equity
raised both in Home and Foreign. Banks take 𝑧 as given. The regulator
sets the minimum share of equity financing (inside and outside) in the
form of the capital requirement, 𝛾. This requirement always binds in
equilibrium and is taken as a parameter in the spirit of Section 3.

As in the baseline model, firms borrow from banks to invest in
physical capital that is used to produce consumption goods using an

33 In practice, there is a degree of coordination on most bank specific capital
requirements. For instance, the most systemic banks within the EU have their
domestic systemic institution buffers set by the union-wide regulator rather
than national regulators. If all bank specific requirements were coordinated
this would bring us back to the G-SIB case.

34 From Schliephake and Kirstein (2013) this is equivalent to banks first
raising equity to generate lending capacity and then, holding fixed the liability
side of the balance sheet, competing a la Bertrand (see also Kreps and
Scheinkman (1983)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391215S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

𝛾

aggregate Cobb–Douglas technology with curvature parameter 0 < 𝛼 <
1. For simplicity, we assume that aggregate TFP is binary: it is zero with
probability (1 − 𝑞) and equal to 1
𝑞

with probability 𝑞.

Consider bank 𝑖 that makes loans 𝑥𝑖 = 𝑛𝑖

, where 𝑛𝑖 is the value of
the firms equity. Since firms are penniless all the returns on physical
capital are captured by the bank. Hence, bank expected revenues are
given by 𝛼
𝑥𝑖. Imposing binding capital requirements,
the bank’s problem can be framed as a choice of how much equity to
raise in order to maximise pure profits or, equivalently, the cash flows
that accrue to inside equity:
( 𝑛𝑖 + ∑
𝛾

(
𝑥𝑖 + ∑

− 𝑛𝑖(1 + 𝑧).

𝑗≠𝑖 𝑥𝑗

𝑗≠𝑖 𝑛𝑗

)𝛼−1

max
𝑛𝑖

)𝛼−1

𝑛𝑖
𝛾

⎞
− 𝑞(1 − 𝛾)
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎛
𝛼
⎜
⎜
⎝

The first order condition is given by

1
𝛾

⎛
𝛼
⎜
⎜
⎝

+

)𝛼−1

𝑗≠𝑖 𝑛𝑗

( 𝑛𝑖 + ∑
𝛾

𝑛𝑖
𝛾

𝛼

1
𝛾

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

(𝛼 − 1)

( 𝑛𝑖 + ∑
𝛾

⎞
− 𝑞(1 − 𝛾)
⎟
⎟
⎠
)𝛼−2

𝑗≠𝑖 𝑛𝑗

= (1 + 𝑧).

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

In equilibrium banks are symmetric so 𝑛𝑖 = 𝑛𝑗 = 𝑛∗(𝛾). Hence, we obtain
the standard result that banks demand a return on loans that is a fixed
markup over a term that can be interpreted as a marginal cost:

𝛼

)𝛼−1

( 𝜈𝑛∗(𝛾)
𝛾
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
return on loans

=

⎛
⎜
⎜
1 +
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
1 − 𝛼
⎟
⎟
𝛼 + (𝜈 − 1)
⎟
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎟
markup≡𝜇
⎠

(𝛾(1 + 𝑧∗(𝛾)) + (1 − 𝛾)𝑞)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
marginal cost≡MC∗(𝛾)

(B.1)

In Eq. (B.1), 1 + 𝑧∗(𝛾) is the equilibrium cost of outside equity. At the
same time, deposits are only repaid by the bank with probability 𝑞 at
a gross rate of unity. Given 𝛾 is the portion of equity (versus deposit)
finance, this leads to the intuitive expression for marginal cost of funds:
MC∗(𝛾) = 𝛾(1 + 𝑧∗(𝛾)) + (1 − 𝛾)𝑞.

Given this markup, pure profits for an individual bank are

𝜋∗(𝛾) = 𝜇MC∗(𝛾)𝑥∗(𝛾),

where 𝑥∗(𝛾) is the equilibrium level of lending. We can now show that
𝜋∗ decreases with 𝛾. We have that

(

MC∗(𝛾) +

= 𝜇

𝑑𝜋∗
𝑑𝑥∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑑𝛾
Noting 𝑥∗(𝛾) = 𝑛∗(𝛾)
𝛾
to Eq. (B.1) we obtain

)

𝑥∗(𝛾)

.

𝑑MC∗
𝑑𝛾

and applying the implicit function theorem

𝑑𝑥∗
𝑑𝛾

=

𝑑MC∗
𝑑𝛾

𝑥∗(𝛾)

(𝛼 − 1)MC∗(𝛾)

.

Hence
𝑑𝜋∗
𝑑𝛾

= 𝜇

𝑑MC∗
𝑑𝛾

𝑥∗(𝛾)

.

( 𝛼

)

𝛼 − 1
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
<0

So, it is sufficient to show that 𝑑MC∗
𝑑𝛾

is always positive. Now,

𝑑MC∗
𝑑𝛾

= 1 + 𝑧∗(𝛾) − 𝑞 + 𝜅𝛾𝑀 ∗(𝛾)

𝑑𝑀 ∗
𝑑𝛾

.

Using Proposition 2 and noting that 𝑁 ∗(𝛾) = 𝜈𝛾𝑥∗, we have

𝑑𝑀 ∗
𝑑𝛾

=

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

+

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

= 𝜈 (

1 − SP∗)

(

𝑥∗(𝛾) + 𝛾

)

.

𝑑𝑥∗
𝑑𝛾

As a result, we have that

𝑑MC∗
𝑑𝛾

= 1 + 𝑧∗(𝛾)

− 𝑞 + 𝜅𝛾𝜈𝑀 ∗ (

1 − SP∗)

(

𝑥∗ + 𝛾

)

,

𝑑𝑥∗
𝑑𝛾

or

𝑑MC∗
𝑑𝛾

(

=

1 +

𝜅𝛾 2𝜈𝑀 ∗ (

1 − SP∗)

)−1

(1 − 𝛼)MC∗(𝛾)

− 𝑞 + 𝜅𝛾𝜈𝑀 ∗ (

1 − SP∗) 𝑥∗) .

(
1 + 𝑧∗(𝛾)

Inspecting terms it is straightforward to verify that MC∗ is always
increasing in 𝛾.

To give the intuition for this result, note that an increase in 𝛾 affects
MC∗ through two channels. First, it causes a switch in the composition
of liabilities from deposits to capital. As the latter is a more expensive
form of finance from the Bank’s point of view this raises marginal
cost. Second, the change in the capital requirement generates a change
in the demand for equity capital. When the increase in requirements
causes banks to raise more equity, this simply causes a further increase
in marginal cost. When the increase in requirements causes banks to
raise less equity, this mitigates the increase in MC∗ associated with
the composition effect, but cannot overturn it, otherwise we would
get a contradiction: there would be higher capital requirements, higher
lending, yet less equity in equilibrium (this also follows from the proof
of Lemma C.3 below).

In turn, this implies Bank pure profits are strictly decreasing in
the capital requirement. The markup means that while higher costs
can be offset by higher revenues, the offset can never be complete.
Moreover, the decline in profits is increasing in the markup hence a
less competitive banking sector would be more averse to an increase in
capital requirements.

B.2. Generalising the welfare analysis

In the main text, we considered a welfare function 𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) with a
specific functional form. Here we first generalise to the following class
of objective functions
𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) = 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾) .

(B.2)

This specification says that Home capital requirements can affect Home
welfare in an arbitrary way. However, Foreign capital requirements
matter only to the extent they affect 𝑁, which, along with 𝛾, pins down
the volume of credit at Home.

The capital flow externality on Foreign following a Home capital

requirement change can be expressed as:

𝜋′∗
𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) =

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

𝑉 ′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′).

(B.3)

Eq. (B.3) can be interpreted as the equilibrium marginal social value
of capital in Foreign, 𝑉 ′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) > 0, multiplied by the capital flow
from Foreign following a change in the Home requirement, 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
. So,
𝑑𝛾
the main logic of our analysis goes through if in equilibrium equity
capital is valuable at the margin (specifically, 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 col, 𝛾 col) > 0 and
𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 nash, 𝛾 nash) > 0). This will be the case for a broad range of
objective functions:

Proposition 6. For any objective 𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) = 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾)
𝛾 nash) > 0, then Proposition 3 holds.

, if 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 nash,

Note that to appeal to Proposition 2, we just require that investors in
outside equity equate the return on outside equity to 1 + 𝑧 in both
countries. We do not need to specify the competitive environment in
Foreign.

A sufficient condition for 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 nash, 𝛾 nash) > 0 is that, given a level
of lending 𝑋, reducing leverage improves social welfare. This is the
case in our policy game since 𝑆𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) > 0 as long as banks default
with positive probability. We can generalise this as follows:

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391216S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

Proposition 7. Define ̃𝑉 (𝑋, 𝑁) ≡ 𝑉 (𝑁, 𝛾 = 𝑁∕𝑋). Then ̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) >
0, ∀𝑁 < 𝑋 is a sufficient condition for Proposition 3 to hold under general
objective (B.2).

The intuition for Proposition 7 is that if the regulator always bene-
fits from a reduction in leverage holding lending fixed, then lending
must be socially valuable at the regulator’s optimum (otherwise the
regulator would reduce leverage). Therefore, an increase in 𝑁 holding
𝛾 fixed is welfare enhancing in equilibrium as it would lead to an
expansion of lending. And so we have 𝑉 ′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) > 0. The net result is
that a capital inflow is always socially valuable at the relevant optima.

B.2.1. Generalising further

We now put our results in a broader perspective by considering how
regulatory incentives change in our model when the objective function
allows for changes in 𝛾 to affect 𝜋′ in other ways than through its
effect on 𝑁 ′∗. To capture this, we rewrite the objective as 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
where the final argument captures all mechanisms via which the capital
requirements in foreign directly affect welfare in Home (that is, beyond
its impact on 𝑁 ∗).

The generalised externality then takes the form:

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) =
𝜋′∗

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′, 𝛾) + 𝑉 ′
𝑉 ′

𝛾 (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′, 𝛾).

(B.4)

Three points are in order. First, generalising the objective function does
not affect the existence of the capital flow externality: the first term in
the right hand side of the above equation is essentially identical to that
in our model. Furthermore, the sign of 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
still hinges here on whether
𝑑𝛾
𝛾 ⋛ ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
: if 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) is positive, an increase in 𝛾 siphons off capital
from Foreign. As long as 𝑉 ′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′, 𝛾) is positive this constitutes a
negative externality.

Second, that an increase in bank capital, holding lending fixed,
increases welfare (i.e., the counterpart to our condition ̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) > 0
in Proposition 7) would no longer be a sufficient condition for 𝑉 col
𝑁 > 0.
Third, there also is a ‘‘direct’’ capital requirement externality 𝑉 ′
𝛾
(𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′, 𝛾). For instance this could capture that a decrease in Home
bank’s probability of default has a positive impact on welfare in For-
eign. Obviously, in the presence of this additional term, the sign of
the total externality no longer hinges on that of 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
. The additional
𝑑𝛾
externality may either reinforce, mitigate, or even offset the bank
equity capital flow externality.

One case where the objective is of this form is when regulators treat

equity capital as socially costly. We sketch this case next.

B.2.2. The externality when regulators treat equity capital as socially costly
Adding the cost of equity capital to our welfare function requires
making an assumption on how the initial wealth 𝜔 is allocated across
countries. For simplicity, we assume it is split equally. Adapting Eq. (11)
accordingly yields
𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) ≡ (𝑋∗)𝛼

− 𝑋∗ − 𝜆𝑆(𝑋∗, 𝑁 ∗) − 𝑧 (𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗) (

𝑁 ∗ −

)

,
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
total cost of equity

𝜔
2

)

𝑁 ∗ − 𝜔
2

where the term 𝑧 (𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗) (
reflects the excess cost of the
equity used by the banks specialising in Home lending, less the ex-
cess return Home investors receive on their initial wealth. Recalling,
𝑧(𝑁 ∗) = 𝜅
𝑁 =
2
𝜅𝑀 ∗, and 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

{𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) + 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾) − 𝜔, 0
= SP∗ 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

,the collaborative FOC becomes

, so that 𝑧∗

𝑁 ′ = 𝑧∗

(
max

})2

)

−

𝜔
2

(
𝑁 ∗ −

+ 𝑧∗ + 𝜆𝑆∗
𝑁 ′

(
𝜅𝑀 ∗(1 − SP∗)

NPV∗ 𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛾 (𝛾,𝛾′)
) (

NPV′∗ 𝑑𝑋′∗
𝑑𝛾
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛾 (𝛾′,𝛾)

+ 𝑧∗ + 𝜆𝑆′∗
𝑁 ′

) 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

) 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

𝜅𝑀 ∗ (

1
SP∗

𝑁 ′∗ −

𝜔
2

1 −

=𝜋′∗

=𝜋∗

−

+

)

(

= 0,

where for compactness we retain the notation NPV∗ = 𝛼 (𝑋*)𝛼−1
− 1 −
𝜆𝑆∗
𝑋 (note, the economic interpretation of this object is not the same as
in Section 4 since the true NPV computation would require discounting
at a different rate). Since capital requirements bind we have

𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

=

1
𝛾

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

−

𝑋∗
𝛾

&

𝑑𝑋′∗
𝑑𝛾

=

1
𝛾 ′

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

.

Hence, the externality is given by

(

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) =
𝜋′∗

)

NPV′∗
𝛾 ′ − 𝜆𝑆′∗
(

𝑁 ′

− 𝜅𝑀 ∗ ×

SP∗ − 1
SP∗

−

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾
)

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

𝑧∗

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾
(

×

𝑁 ′∗ −

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑𝛾 + 𝑑𝑁∗

≡ 𝑑𝑁′∗

𝑑𝛾

)

.

𝜔
2

(B.5)

Now we see that externality has three terms each containing a
factor 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
. The first term corresponds exactly to the externality of
𝑑𝛾
our main analysis, that is with an objective given by Eq. (11). That
𝑧∗ is internalised does not alter that
is positive at the
collaborative optimum.

𝛾′ − 𝜆𝑆′∗
𝑁 ′

( NPV′∗

)

The second and third term captures all additional effects running
through the cost of equity. The second term reflects that a marginal
unit of new equity has an excess cost 𝑧∗; so if 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
is positive there is
𝑑𝛾
a direct negative consequence on Foreign. The third term reflects that,
in equilibrium, investing a marginal unit in Foreign in response to a
change in 𝛾 would require global demand for new equity to fall by a
factor 1−SP∗
; this lowers 𝑧∗, benefiting Foreign. On balance then, these
SP∗
additional forces are ambiguous in sign.

It turns out the extent of spillovers ends up governing this sign. To
at any symmetric

see this, recall that 𝜅
𝑀 ∗2 = 𝑧∗ and that 𝑁 ′∗ − 𝜔
2
2
point. So, the externality at the collaborative optimum boils down to
)

= 𝑀 ∗
2

(

𝜋′∗
𝛾 (𝛾 col, 𝛾 col) =

NPV′col
𝛾 ′

− 𝜆𝑆′col
𝑁 ′

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾
1 − 2SPcol)
SPcol

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

.

(

+

𝜅
2

(𝑀 col)

The additional terms relating to the cost of equity reinforce the capital
flow externality whenever SPcol < 1
, otherwise they are a countervail-
2
ing force, which can potentially dominate. We do know, however, that
when capital is relatively abundant, i.e. 𝜔 is large, spillovers are smaller
as less equity is being raised and the equilibrium is on a more elastic
portion of the global supply curve. We also know that the larger 𝜔 the
more likely 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
< 0 (see Proposition 4). So internalising the cost of
𝑑𝛾
equity would reinforce the race to the top when capital is abundant.
(In contrast, there may be a moderation in the race to the bottom when
there is capital scarcity).

While analysing the case where the cost of equity is internalised
yields economic forces and expressions that are interpretable, it is
challenging to map the mechanisms into real world counterparts. For
example, the third term in Eq. (B.5) captures that the Home regulator
internalises the cost of equity and acts like a monopsonist in the
global equity market to lower this cost. However, Foreign benefits
from lower costs too and so the competitive Home regulator ends up
demanding too much capital in the Nash equilibrium. This generates
a force towards a race to the top. But the manipulation of global
equity markets is not in line with regulatory behaviour in practice. To
fully understand the implications of regulators internalising the cost of
equity, microfoundations on the source of the cost would be needed.
These are beyond the scope of this paper.

Overall, the key point that emerges from this analysis is that the
mechanisms described in Section 4 under objective (11) are still present
even when the regulator internalises the cost of equity. In this case,
what we see are additional forces that may mitigate or reinforce the
externality arising from capital flows identified in the main text.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391217S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

Appendix C. Proofs

Remark. When proofs are identical for Home and Foreign, we only
provide the former.

Lemma 1. (i) Banks default with strictly positive probability in equilibrium;
(ii) capital requirements are binding; and (iii) each individual bank perfectly
specialises as either a lender in Home or Foreign.

Proof. Consider a bank 𝑖 with equity capital 𝑛𝑖 and for which 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥′
denotes lending in Home and Foreign respectively. The bank defaults
if
𝛼𝐴𝑋𝛼−1𝑥𝑖 + 𝛼𝐴′ (𝑋′)𝛼−1 𝑥′

𝑖 + 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑛𝑖,

𝑖 < 𝑥′

This means we can define two functions that both represent the default
boundary: points in the state space where the Bank just has sufficient
resources to make depositors whole.35
𝑖 + 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑛𝑖 − 𝛼𝐴′ (𝑋′)𝛼−1 𝑥′
𝑥′
𝛼𝑋𝛼−1𝑥𝑖

𝑖 (𝐴′) =
𝑎0

,

𝑖

𝑎′0
𝑖 (𝐴) =

𝑖 + 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑛𝑖 − 𝛼𝐴𝑋𝛼−1𝑥𝑖
𝑥′
𝛼 (𝑋′)𝛼−1 𝑥′
𝑖

.

Given this, we can write the bank’s problem as the following Lagrangian
(ignoring non-negativity constraints, and noting that E[𝐴] = E[𝐴′] = 1)
(
𝛼𝑋𝛼−1𝑥𝑖 + 𝛼 (𝑋′)𝛼−1 𝑥′

𝑖 − 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥′

+

)

𝑖

max
𝑛𝑖,𝑥𝑖,𝑥′
𝑖

𝑎0
𝑖 (0)

𝑎′0
𝑖 (𝐴)

∫

0

∫

0

(

𝑖 + 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑛𝑖 − 𝛼𝐴𝑋𝛼−1𝑥𝑖 − 𝛼𝐴′ (𝑋′)𝛼−1 𝑥′
𝑥′

𝑖

)

ℎ(𝐴, 𝐴′)𝑑𝐴′𝑑𝐴+

𝜓 (𝑛𝑖 − 𝛾𝑥𝑖 − 𝛾 ′𝑥′

𝑖

)

− 𝑛𝑖𝑧(𝑁, 𝑁 ′),

where ℎ(𝐴, 𝐴′) is the joint density of 𝐴 and 𝐴′. The first row corre-
sponds to the economic surplus generated by the bank’s lending. The
second row is strictly positive when the bank defaults with strictly
positive probability (zero otherwise) and captures the implicit subsidy
to the bank arising from the government’s guarantee. The third row
captures constraints arising from the capital requirements, with corre-
sponding multiplier 𝜓, and the excess cost to the bank of the capital
raised.

We first prove by contradiction that capital requirements must be
binding in equilibrium. Imagine they are not and the multiplier is nil.
Then the bank can reduce 𝑛𝑖 holding 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥′
𝑖 fixed. Since 𝑥𝑖 and
𝑥′
𝑖 are fixed, the surplus from lending (the first line) is unaffected.
However, the implicit subsidy can be increased by decreasing 𝑛𝑖. When
the subsidy is positive a marginal increase in 𝑛𝑖 both reduces the
integrand and shifts the default boundary inwards. If the subsidy is
initially nil, a sufficiently large decrease in 𝑛𝑖 will render it positive.
So, the deviation is profitable. Hence, capital requirements must bind
in equilibrium, (ii).

We do not consider 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ = 1, coupled with binding capital require-
ments this implies in equilibrium 𝑛𝑖 < 𝑥𝑖 + 𝑥′
𝑖 (0) and
𝑎′0
𝑖 (0) are strictly positive in equilibrium. Since 𝐴 and 𝐴′ can both be
nil, banks default with strictly positive probability in equilibrium, (i).
We also prove part (iii) by contradiction. Consider a hypothetical
equilibrium where banks do not perfectly specialise; that is, there is
an interior solution at the bank level for both 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥′
𝑖. Define the
following function

𝑖. This means 𝑎0

rc(𝐴, 𝛾) = 𝛼𝐴𝑋𝛼−1 − (1 − 𝛾).

For given 𝐴 and 𝛾, the term rc is the residual cash flows available
to the bank’s shareholders from lending in Home. It corresponds to

bank revenue, net of repayments to depositors, per unit of lending in
home. We can write the return, for this bank, of a unit of equity being
allocated to a loan in Home as:

rc(1, 𝛾)
𝛾

− ∫
0

𝑎0
𝑖 (0)

𝑎′0
𝑖 (𝐴)

∫
0

)

( rc(𝐴, 𝛾)
𝛾

and similarly for a loan in Foreign.

ℎ(𝐴, 𝐴′)𝑑𝐴𝑑𝐴′;

If both 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥′

𝑖 are strictly positive in equilibrium, the bank must

be indifferent at the margin. Then,
∫ 𝑎′0
0
∫ 𝑎′0
0

( rc(𝐴,𝛾)
𝛾
( rc′(𝐴,𝛾′)
𝛾′

− ∫ 𝑎0
− ∫ 𝑎0

rc(1,𝛾)
𝛾
rc′(1,𝛾)
𝛾

𝑖 (𝐴)

𝑖 (𝐴)

𝑖 (0)

𝑖 (0)

)

0

0

ℎ(𝐴, 𝐴′)𝑑𝐴′ =
)

ℎ(𝐴, 𝐴′)𝑑𝐴′.

We now show that an individual bank can profitably deviate by lend-
ing entirely in the Home country. To see this first note that the
after-deviation revenues of such a bank is:

(

𝑛𝑖

rc(1, 𝛾)
𝛾

− ∫

0

𝐴0

)

( rc(𝐴, 𝛾)
𝛾

)

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴

,

where, as in the text, 𝐴0 is the default boundary for a bank that
specialises in lending at Home. Making use of the fact that returns
are equalised across countries allows us to compute the benefit from
deviating as

(

𝑛𝑖

∫
0

𝑎0
𝑖 (0)

𝑎′0
𝑖 (𝐴)

∫
0

)

( rc(𝐴, 𝛾)
𝛾

ℎ(𝐴, 𝐴′)𝑑𝐴′ − ∫

0

𝐴0

)

( rc(𝐴, 𝛾)
𝛾

)

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴

.

By definition, rc(𝐴, 𝛾) < 0 for all 𝐴 ∈ [0, 𝐴0]. Hence, this benefit
is strictly positive so long as there exists 𝐴 ∈ [0, 𝑎0
𝑖 (0)] such that
rc(𝐴, 𝛾) > 0. This is guaranteed by ℎ(𝐴, 𝐴′) having full support over
[0, 𝐴𝐻 ] × [0, 𝐴′𝐻 ]. Since a profitable deviation exists, an individual
bank will never choose for both 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥′
𝑖 to be interior at the same
time. Hence, the only possible equilibrium is one where individual
banks perfectly specialise in either country and aggregate returns are
equated by the aggregate amount of equity capital allocated to each
country. □

For further reference, we prove the following two Lemmas.

Lemma C.1. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1), and all 𝑁, 𝑁 ′ > 0, the partial derivatives
𝑅𝑁 (𝑁, 𝛾) and 𝑅′

𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′, 𝛾 ′) exist and are continuous in their arguments.

Proof. First note that from the smoothness of 𝑔(𝐴) we have that 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾)
is continuous in 𝑁. The derivative reads:

𝑅𝑁 (𝑁, 𝛾) =

1
𝛾2

0

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

(

∫ 𝐴𝐻
𝐴0(𝑁,𝛾)

𝛼(𝛼 − 1)𝐴

)𝛼−2)

( 𝑁
𝛾

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) ≤ 𝐴𝐻

𝐴𝐻 ≤ 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾).

Continuity directly follows as the integral is continuous, and the two
possible values coincide at 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) = 𝐴𝐻 . (Note that 𝛾 > 0 ensures
𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) > 0 so we do not need to consider the lower bound for 𝐴). □

Lemma C.2. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1), and all 𝑁, 𝑁 ′ > 0, the partial derivatives
𝑅𝛾 (𝑁, 𝛾) and 𝑅′
𝛾′ (𝑁 ′, 𝛾 ′) exist and are continuous in 𝛾 and 𝛾 ′, respectively.

Proof. First note that from the smoothness of 𝑔(𝐴) we have that 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾)
is continuous in 𝛾. The derivative reads:

𝑅𝛾 (𝑁, 𝛾) =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

−1
𝛾2

∫ 𝐴𝐻
𝐴0(𝑁,𝛾)

(

𝛼2𝐴

( 𝑁
𝛾

)𝛼−1

)

− 1

𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) ≤ 𝐴𝐻

0

𝐴𝐻 ≤ 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾).

Continuity directly follows as the integral is continuous, and the two
possible values coincide at 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) = 𝐴𝐻 . □

35 Note that if 𝐴′ is such that 𝑎0(𝐴′) < 0, the bank simply cannot default for

this value of 𝐴′.

{𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗}
Proposition 1. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1), there exists a unique pair
such that returns on equity in both countries are equal to the investors’

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391218S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

required return. This pair is implicitly defined by:

𝑅(𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) = 𝑅′(𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) = (1 + 𝑧(𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗)).

Proof. First, let us establish that the double equality necessarily holds
in equilibrium. If 𝑅(𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) > (1 + 𝑧(𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗)), the representative bank
will scale up infinitely but this cannot be the case since 𝑧 ≥ 0,
lim𝑁→∞ 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) = 0 and, in equilibrium, 𝑛 = 𝑁. Likewise, If 𝑅(𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) <
(1 + 𝑧(𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗)) banks will choose 𝑛 = 0, which is inconsistent with
𝑛 = 𝑁 and lim𝑁→0 𝑅(𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) = ∞. Hence, in equilibrium we must have
that 𝑅(𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) = 1 + 𝑧(𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗) and, with the same logic, 𝑅′(𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) =
1 + 𝑧(𝑁 ∗, 𝑁 ′∗).

It is straightforward to show that, for a given 𝑧, there is a single,
interior 𝑁 that solves 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) = 1 + 𝑧. But 𝑧 depends on the global
}) 2. So,
demand for bank equity capital: 𝑧 = 𝜅
2
the question is whether there is a unique pair (𝑁, 𝑁 ′) that solves the
system:
{

{𝑁 + 𝑁 ′ − 𝜔, 0

(
max

𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) = 1 + 𝑧(𝑁, 𝑁 ′)
𝑅′(𝑁 ′, 𝛾 ′) = 1 + 𝑧(𝑁, 𝑁 ′).

By construction, 𝑧 ≥ 0. So, if the left-hand-side functions in system (C.1)
are invertible for 𝑁 and 𝑁 ′ for values of 𝑅, 𝑅′ ≥ 1 (which we prove
later), we can write the bank capital demand functions for Home and
Foreign implicitly (and for a given pair {𝛾, 𝛾 ′}) as:
{

(C.1)

(C.2)

𝑁(𝑧) = 𝑅−1(1 + 𝑧)
𝑁 ′(𝑧) = 𝑅′−1(1 + 𝑧).

Lemma 2. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1),
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

= 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′),

(

where 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) ≡

𝑁′ −𝜅𝑀
Therefore, it is the case that

𝑅𝑁 𝑅′

𝜅𝑀−𝑅′
(

𝑁′
𝑅′
𝑁′ +𝑅𝑁

(C.3)

)

)|
|
|
|
|
|𝑁 ∗(𝛾,𝛾′),𝑁 ′∗(𝛾′,𝛾)

> 0.

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

⋛ 0 ⇔ 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) ⋛ 0.

Proof. From the no-arbitrage condition

𝑅(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾) − 𝑅′(𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) = 0.

So, given Lemmas C.1, C.2, and Corollary C.1, we can apply the implicit
function theorem to obtain

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

=

𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) + 𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′)

𝑅′

𝑑𝛾

.

(C.4)

Consider the case when 𝑧∗ > 0. We have
𝑅′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′)

(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) + 𝑁 ′∗ − 𝜔)2 − 1 = 0.

−

𝜅
2

So, given Lemma C.1, and Corollary C.1, we obtain

=

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

𝜅𝑀 ∗ 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) − 𝜅𝑀 ∗
Combining Eqs. (C.4) and (C.5) yields

𝑅′

.

(C.5)

And we can aggregate them to write an implicit global demand function
for bank capital: 𝑁 𝐷(𝑧) = 𝑅−1(1 + 𝑧) + 𝑅′−1(1 + 𝑧).

(max

}
{𝑁 + 𝑁 ′ − 𝜔, 0

)2, we have an explicit global

From 𝑧 = 𝜅
2
supply function:

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

= 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)
(

𝑁 𝑆 (𝑧) ≡

{ √
2𝑧
𝜅
𝜔

+ 𝜔 , 𝑧 ≥ 0
, 𝑧 = 0.

×

𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)𝑅′

𝜅𝑀 ∗ − 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) − 𝜅𝑀 ∗ (𝑅′

𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′)

)
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) + 𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡𝜉∗(𝛾,𝛾 ′)

)

.

If 𝑁 𝐷(0) ≤ 𝜔, there is excess supply,36 and we simply have 𝑧∗ = 0 and
𝑁 ∗ and 𝑁 ′∗ pinned down by their respective demand functions (C.2).
To complete the proof, we first show that (i) 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) and 𝑅′(𝑁 ′, 𝛾 ′)
are respectively invertible for 𝑁 and 𝑁 ′ for values of 𝑅, 𝑅′ ≥ 1; and
that (ii) 𝑁 𝐷(𝑧) and 𝑁 𝑆 (𝑧) always cross exactly once when 𝑁 𝐷(0) > 𝜔,
with 𝑧∗ > 0. Then, unique corresponding values of 𝑁 and 𝑁 ′∗ arise
from Eqs. (C.1).

(i) From Lemma C.1, we have

𝑅𝑁 (𝑁, 𝛾)

=

1
𝛾2

0

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

∫ 𝐴𝐻
𝐴0(𝑁,𝛾)

(

𝛼(𝛼 − 1)𝐴

)𝛼−2)

( 𝑁
𝛾

𝑔(𝐴)𝑑𝐴 0 ≤ 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) < 𝐴𝐻

𝐴𝐻 ≤ 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾).

Since 𝑅𝑁 < 0 when 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) < 𝐴𝐻 , 𝑅(𝑁, 𝛾) is invertible for 𝑁 over the
corresponding range of values such that 𝐴0(𝑁, 𝛾) < 𝐴𝐻 . The function is
therefore invertible for the relevant range of values where 𝑅 ≥ 1. (Note
that 𝑅 < 1 cannot be an equilibrium as shareholders would always
prefer to invest their wealth in the storage technology.)

(ii) 𝑁 𝑆 (𝑧) is strictly increasing starting from the point 𝑁 𝑆 (0) = 𝜔.
Given (i), we know that 𝑅−1 and 𝑅′−1 are decreasing in 𝑧. Hence, 𝑁 𝐷(𝑧)
is decreasing too. If 𝑁 𝐷(0) > 𝜔, this ensures single crossing at a point
𝑧∗ > 0. □

For further reference, we can now state:

Corollary C.1. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1) and associated {𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾)},
we have 𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) < 0 and 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) < 0.

36 Strictly speaking, it is investors’ wealth which is in excess of the demand
for bank equity. Since they can use a storage technology with unit gross return,
their supply is actually perfectly elastic in this region.

which is well defined and continuous for all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1) and associated
{𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾)}. Since 𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾), 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) < 0 (Corollary C.1),
and 𝜅𝑀 ∗ ≥ 0, this means 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) > 0.

In the case where 𝑧∗ = 0, we have 𝑅 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) − 1 = 0, hence

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

= −

𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)
𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)

.

The left hand side is equivalent to 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) when 𝑀 ∗ = 0
(which is an implication of 𝑧∗ = 0). Since 𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) < 0 (Corollary C.1),
𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) > 0 when 𝑀 ∗ = 0. Therefore the result holds for all 𝑧∗ ≥ 0.

To conclude, since 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) > 0 is always positive, the sign of 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

is the same as the sign of 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾). □

Proposition 2. For all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1),
)

(

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

= −

𝜅𝑀 ∗ − 𝑅′

𝜅𝑀 ∗
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ∗)

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡SP∗(𝛾,𝛾′)∈[0,1]

.

(C.6)

Proof. The result directly follows from Eq. (C.5) in the proof above,
together with 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) < 0 (Corollary C.1). If 𝑧∗ = 0, then 𝑀 ∗ = 0,
and 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
= 0. □
𝑑𝛾

Theorem 1. Assume Regularity Condition 1 holds. Then, ∀ 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1),
there exists a ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′) > 0 such that, ∀𝛾 ∈ (0, 1)

> 0

= 0

< 0

; 𝛾 < ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
; 𝛾 = ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)
; 𝛾 > ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′) .

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391219S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

𝑑𝛾

(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾)

is the same as
. Based on this, the proof proceeds in steps to

Proof. From Lemma 2 we know that the sign of 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
that of 𝑅𝛾
show the following:
(i) 𝑑𝑅∗(𝛾,𝛾′)
(ii) The sign of 𝑅𝛾
they are nil at the same 𝛾).

exists and is continuous in 𝛾, for all 𝛾, 𝛾 ′ ∈ (0, 1).
is the same as that of 𝑑𝑅∗(𝛾,𝛾′)

(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾)

is positive, so 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾)
(iii) At low values of 𝛾, 𝑅𝛾
Then, given regularity Condition 1, for each 𝛾 ′, either 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) is
positive for all 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1), in which case ̂𝛾(𝛾 ′) = 1 ensures that the Theo-
rem holds, or there exists a ̂𝛾(𝛾 ′) < 1, for which 𝑅𝛾
=
0. But then, since regularity Condition 1 implies single crossing, it must
(𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾) < 0, for all 𝛾 > ̂𝛾(𝛾 ′); ensuring that ̂𝛾(𝛾 ′) is
be that 𝑅𝛾
indeed unique. And, by Lemma 2, it must be the case that 𝑑𝑁 ∗
flips
𝑑𝛾
sign at 𝛾 = ̂𝛾 (𝛾 ′)

)
(𝑁 ∗(̂𝛾(𝛾 ′), 𝛾 ′), ̂𝛾(𝛾 ′)

, as per the Theorem.

(and

> 0.

𝑑𝛾

We now proceed with the details of the three steps.
Step (i) Note that

𝑑𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
𝑑𝛾

= 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) +

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾).

(C.7)

From Lemmas C.1, C.2, and 2 we know that all three elements of the
right hand side exist and are continuous in 𝛾.

Step (ii) From Lemma 2, we have

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

= 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′).

Substituting in Eq. (C.7) gives:

𝑑𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
𝑑𝛾

= 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)

(
1 + 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)

) .

But, we have

1 + 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) =

1 +

(

𝜅𝑀𝑅𝑁 − 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ − 𝜅𝑀 (𝑅′

𝑁 ′ 𝑅𝑁
𝑁 ′ + 𝑅𝑁

𝑅𝑁 𝑅′

)|
|
|
|
|
|𝑁 ∗(𝛾,𝛾 ′),𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′,𝛾)

.

)

Hence

1 + 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) =

(

−𝜅𝑀𝑅′
𝑁 ′
𝑁 ′ + 𝑅𝑁 𝑅′
𝑁 ′ − 𝜅𝑀𝑅𝑁

−𝜅𝑀𝑅′

and, given that 𝜅𝑀 ∗ ≥ 0, and that 𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) < 0, 𝑅′
(Corollary C.1), it is the case that

,

)|
|
|
|
|𝑁 ∗(𝛾,𝛾 ′),𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′,𝛾)
𝑁 ′ (𝑁 ′∗, 𝛾 ′) < 0

1 + 𝜉∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) ∈ [0, 1],

and, therefore, that
( 𝑑𝑅∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
𝑑𝛾

sign

)

= sign

(𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)

) .

Proof. First, we show that 𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾
have

̌𝑅(𝑋∗, 𝛾) −

1 + ̌𝑧 (𝑋∗, 𝛾, 𝛾 ′))
(

= 0.

From which we get

𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

= −

̌𝑅𝛾 − ̌𝑧𝛾
̌𝑅𝑋 − ̌𝑧𝑋

.

< 0. Using a change of variable, we

(C.9)

Because of the diminishing marginal product of physical capital, we
have ̌𝑅𝑋 < 0. Furthermore, even though 𝑅𝛾 can be positive (as we show
̌𝑅𝛾 cannot: an increase in 𝛾 keeping 𝑋 constant can only
in Section 3),
decrease the return on bank capital, as this decreases the value of the
implicit subsidy from the government guarantee without altering the
gross revenues through changes in aggregate lending.

If 𝑧∗ > 0, we have that ̌𝑧 (𝑋∗, 𝛾, 𝛾 ′)

denominator in Eq. (C.9) are strictly negative and, therefore, 𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

If 𝑧∗ = 0, we have ̌𝑧𝛾 , ̌𝑧𝑋 = 0. So both the numerator and the
< 0.
(𝑋∗𝛾+𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾)−𝜔)2, so ̌𝑧𝑋 >
0: keeping 𝛾 constant, an increase in 𝑋∗ other variable increases 𝑁 ∗
and therefore the equilibrium cost of bank capital. So the denominator
in Eq. (C.9) is still negative.

= 𝜅
2

Now

̌𝑧𝛾 = 𝜅(𝑋∗𝛾 + 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾) − 𝜔)

(

𝑋∗ +

)

.

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

Appealing to Proposition 2, we know that

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

= −SP∗ 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

= −SP∗

(

𝑋∗ +

)

.

𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

Hence, we can write

̌𝑧𝛾 = 𝜅(𝑋∗𝛾 + 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾) − 𝜔)

(
(1 − SP∗)𝑋∗ − 𝛾SP∗ 𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

)

.

Substituting this expression into Eq. (C.9) and rearranging, we have,
when 𝑧∗ > 0, the following expression:

𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

= −

( ̌𝑅𝛾 − 𝜅(𝑋∗𝛾 + 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾) − 𝜔)(1 − SP∗)𝑋∗
̌𝑅𝑋 − ̌𝑧𝑋

)

(

×

1 −

)−1

.

𝛾SP∗
̌𝑅𝑋 − ̌𝑧𝑋

(C.10)

( ̌𝑅𝑋 − ̌𝑧𝑋

It is the case that 𝜅(𝑋∗𝛾 + 𝑁 ′∗(𝛾 ′, 𝛾) − 𝜔)(1 − SP∗)𝑋∗ is strictly positive
and ̌𝑅𝛾 are both negative, the first
when 𝑧∗ > 0. Since
) < 0 also implies that
( ̌𝑅𝑋 − ̌𝑧𝑋
parenthesis is strictly positive. And
the second parenthesis is positive. Hence, 𝑑𝑋∗
< 0;which proves (a).
𝑑𝛾
≡ 𝑋∗ + 𝛾 𝑑𝑋∗
Then, since 𝑁 ∗ = 𝛾𝑋∗, we have 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑑𝛾

, and 𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

< 0

)

implies that 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

< 𝑋∗; which proves (b). □

Step (iii) We start from

𝑅𝛾 (𝑁, 𝛾) =

𝐴𝐻

(

𝐴0(𝑁,𝛾)

𝛼2𝐴

(

𝑁
𝛾

−1
𝛾 2 ∫

)𝛼−1

)

− 1

𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴.

(C.8)

and consider the limit as 𝛾 tends to 0 from above. It is positive if

(

𝐴𝐻

lim
𝛾⟶0+ ∫

𝐴0

𝛼2𝐴

(

𝑁
𝛾

)𝛼−1

)

− 1

𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴 < 0.

It turns out that it must be the case in equilibrium. To see why, consider
𝑋 such that 𝛼 (𝑋) 𝛼−1 = 1. At such 𝑋, as 𝛾 tends to 0, banks make strictly
positive profits (lending just breaks even in expectation, but banks have
no equity, so they only pick the upside, i.e., 𝐴0 > 0). This cannot be true
in equilibrium. Instead, it must be the case that 𝛼 (𝑋∗) 𝛼−1 < 1. Since
𝛼 < 1, this is also true for 𝛼2 (𝑋∗) 𝛼−1 < 1. So, 𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) is positive at
low enough values of 𝛾. □

The next two lemmas will be useful for subsequent proofs.

Lemma C.3. (a) 𝑑𝑋∗
𝑑𝛾

< 0 and (b) 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

< 𝑋∗.

Lemma C.4.

(a) Under Condition 2, 𝛾 nash and 𝛾 col exist and are unique.
(b) Write the regulator’s objective as 𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) = 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾). Use a
) ≡ 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾). Then,

change of variable to define ̃𝑉 (𝑋(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)
̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) > 0 ensures that 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 nash, 𝛾 nash) > 0.

Proof. (a) is straightforward. (b) First, we prove 𝑉 nash
the competitive regulator’s first order condition is:
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

𝜋∗
𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) = 𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) +

𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) = 0.

𝑁

> 0. Given 𝛾 ′,

(C.11)

With the change of variable, we obtain:
𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)
𝑋∗

̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋∗, 𝑁 ∗) ≡

+ 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾).

Substituting 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) in the first order condition gives:

𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) +

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

(

̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋∗, 𝑁 ∗) −

)

𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)
𝑋∗

= 0

or
𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋∗, 𝑁 ∗) = 𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)

(

1
𝑋∗

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

)

− 1

.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391220S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

( 1
𝑋∗

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

)

From Lemma C.3, we know that
that ̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋∗, 𝑁 ∗) > 0 implies that 𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) and 𝑑𝑁 ∗
have opposite
signs along the best response function. But then, from the first order
condition (C.11), it must be that 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) > 0. If this is true along the
best response function, it is true at the Nash equilibrium: 𝑉 nash

< 0. So, we have

> 0.

− 1

𝑑𝛾

For completeness, we can also prove that 𝑉 col
collaborative regulator first order condition for 𝛾 is:

𝑁
𝑁 > 0. Given 𝛾 ′, the

𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) + (1 − SP∗)

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾) = 0.

(C.12)

Following the same steps as above, we get

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋∗, 𝑁 ∗) = 𝑉𝛾 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛾)

(

(1 − SP∗)

1
𝑋∗

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛾

)

− 1

.

And noting that SP∗ ∈ [0, 1] yields, by the same logic as with the 𝑉 nash
𝑁 ,
the result: 𝑉 col

𝑁 > 0. □

Proposition 3. Assume Conditions 1 and 2 hold. Then, there are three
cases

> 0

𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash < ̄𝛾

𝛾 col = 𝛾 nash = ̄𝛾

and 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾
and 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾
and 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
where if ̄𝛾 ∈ (0, 1), it is the fixed point ̄𝛾 = ̂𝛾(̄𝛾), with ̂𝛾(.) defined in
Theorem 1, otherwise ̄𝛾 = 1.

𝛾 col > 𝛾 nash > ̄𝛾

< 0,

= 0

Proof. The proof proceeds in three steps to show the following

(i) We prove that if a fixed point ̄𝛾 = ̂𝛾(̄𝛾) exists for values 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1),
at any symmetric choice 𝛾 = 𝛾 ′

it is unique. So, the sign of any 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾
only depends on whether 𝛾 ⋚ ̄𝛾. Hence, the sign of 𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾
𝛾 ⋚ ̄𝛾, as per Theorem 1.

depends on

(ii) We derive first order conditions (Nash and collaborative). And
we construct a function 𝐿(𝛾) that gives the collaborative marginal
benefit of a change in 𝛾, at a point where 𝛾 ′ = 𝛾.

(iii) We evaluate 𝐿(𝛾) at 𝛾 nash and ̄𝛾, and show by contradiction

that only the three cases can occur.

Finally, for completeness, we also provide the derivations for Eq.

(13) in the text.
Step (i)
We prove that if a fixed point ̄𝛾 = ̂𝛾(̄𝛾) exists for values 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1),
it is unique. Denote 𝛤 a common capital requirement for Home and
Foreign.

Our strategy is to show that the properties of 𝑅 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾 ′)
with
respect to 𝛾 used in the proof of Theorem 1 also apply to 𝑅 (𝑁 ∗(𝛤 , 𝛤 ), 𝛤 )
with respect to 𝛤 . By the same reasoning as in Theorem 1 this is
sufficient to prove that either there exists a unique ̄𝛾 ∈ (0, 1) that
maximises 𝑅 (𝑁 ∗(𝛤 , 𝛤 ), 𝛤 ), or that
> 0 at 𝛤 = 1 and
𝑅 (𝑁 ∗(𝛤 , 𝛤 ), 𝛤 ) < 𝑅 (𝑁 ∗(1, 1), 1) for all 𝛤 < 1.

𝑅(𝑁 ∗(𝛤 ,𝛤 ),𝛤 )
𝑑𝛤

At {𝛤 , 𝛤 } we have the equilibrium condition

𝑅 (𝑁 ∗, 𝛤 )

−

𝜅
2

(2𝑁 ∗ − 𝜔)2 − 1 = 0.

We then obtain 𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛤

So

=

𝑅𝛾 (𝑁 ∗,𝛾)
2𝜅𝑀 ∗−𝑅𝑁 (𝑁 ∗,𝛾)

.

𝑑𝑅 (𝑁 ∗(𝛤 , 𝛤 ), 𝛤 )
𝑑𝛤

= 𝑅∗

𝛾 +

𝑑𝑁 ∗
𝑑𝛤

𝑅∗

𝑁 =

2𝜅𝑀 ∗
2𝜅𝑀 ∗ − 𝑅∗
𝑁

𝑅∗
𝛾 .

(𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)

)𝛼

=

− 𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) − 𝜆𝑆(𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′)).

This can be reexpressed as:

𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) ≡ 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾) ≡

)𝛼

(

𝑁 ∗
𝛾

−

𝑁 ∗
𝛾

− 𝜆𝑆(

𝑁 ∗
𝛾

, 𝑁 ∗).

The Nash first order condition is
𝑑𝑁 nash
𝑑𝛾

+ 𝑉 nash
𝑁

𝑉 nash
𝛾

= 0,

(C.13)

and the collaborative first order condition (13) is

𝛾 + 𝑉 col
𝑉 col
𝑁

𝑑𝑁 col
𝑑𝛾

+ 𝑉 ′col
𝑁 ′

𝑑𝑁 ′col
𝑑𝛾

= 0.

Define 𝐿(𝛾) as the function equal to the left hand side of the collab-
orative first order condition (13) when both countries play 𝛾. We can
rewrite the collaborative first order condition (13)

𝐿(𝛾 col) ≡ 𝜋∗

𝛾 (𝛾 col, 𝛾 col) + 𝜋′∗

𝛾 (𝛾 col, 𝛾 col) = 0.

Substituting the function 𝐿(𝛾) into condition (C.13), we obtain

𝐿(𝛾 nash) − 𝑉 ′nash

𝑁 ′

𝑑𝑁 ′nash
𝑑𝛾

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡𝜋′∗
𝛾 (𝛾nash,𝛾nash)

≡ 𝜋∗

𝛾 (𝛾 nash, 𝛾 nash) = 0.

(C.14)

𝑁 ′

Now, from the properties of the shortfall function we have ̃𝑉𝑁 > 0.
Hence, from Lemma C.4 𝑉 ′nash

> 0.

Step (iii)
We now confirm that only three different cases are possible.
First, assume 𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col. Condition 2 guarantees 𝐿𝛾 (𝛾) < 0. So
𝐿(𝛾 nash ) > 𝐿(𝛾 col) = 0 as increasing 𝛾 from 𝛾 nash towards 𝛾 col would
increase social welfare. Since 𝑉 ′nash
> 0, for (C.14) to hold, it must be
that 𝑑𝑁 ′nash
< 0. Hence, 𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col is only compatible with 𝛾 col > ̄𝛾.
In addition, 𝛾 col > ̄𝛾 implies 𝐿(𝛾) > 0 for all 𝛾 ≤ ̄𝛾. But 𝛾 ≤ ̄𝛾 also
implies 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾) > 0,
𝑑𝛾
for all 𝛾 ≤ ̄𝛾, and so there is no solution to Eq. (C.14), and hence no
Nash equilibrium, in the range 𝛾 ≤ ̄𝛾. This rules out 𝛾 nash < ̄𝛾. Hence,
𝛾 nash < 𝛾 col ⇔ ̄𝛾 < 𝛾 nash .

≥ 0 (by step (i) above), so it must be that 𝜋∗

𝑁 ′

𝑑𝛾

Second, assume 𝛾 col > 𝛾 nash . Then, 𝐿(𝛾) < 𝐿(𝛾 col) = 0 as decreasing
𝛾 from 𝛾 nash towards 𝛾 col would increase social welfare. Since 𝑉 ′nash
>
0, for (C.14) to hold, it must be that 𝑑𝑁 ′nash
> 0. Hence, 𝛾 nash > 𝛾 col
is only compatible with 𝛾 col < ̄𝛾. In addition, 𝛾 col < ̄𝛾 implies 𝐿(𝛾) < 0
for all 𝛾 ≥ ̄𝛾. But 𝛾 ≥ ̄𝛾 also implies 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
≤ 0 (by step (i) above), so
𝑑𝛾
𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾) < 0 for all 𝛾 ≥ ̄𝛾, and so there is no solution
it must be that 𝜋∗
to Eq. (C.14), and hence no Nash equilibrium, in the range ̄𝛾 ≤ 𝛾. This
rules out 𝛾 nash > ̄𝛾. Hence, 𝛾 nash > 𝛾 col ⇔ ̄𝛾 > 𝛾 nash .

𝑁 ′

𝑑𝛾

Finally, assume 𝛾 col = ̄𝛾. Then the Nash (C.13) and Collaborative
(13) first order conditions coincide, and it must be that 𝛾 col = 𝛾 nash .
Which concludes the proof.
Additional derivation
We want to show that the collaborative first order condition can be

written

(

𝜋∗
𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) +

NPV′∗
𝛾 ′ − 𝜆𝑆′∗

𝑁 ′

)

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛾 (𝛾′,𝛾)

=𝜋′∗

= 0,

as it is in the main text (13).

By construction, the Collaborative FOC is

From here it is obvious that the first two properties in the proof of Theo-
𝛾 (𝑁 ∗(𝛤 , 𝛤 ), 𝛤 )
rem 1 apply to 𝑅 (𝑁 ∗(𝛤 , 𝛤 ), 𝛤 ). The third property, that 𝑅∗
is positive for low values of 𝛤 , applies following the reasoning in the
proof in Theorem 1. Hence, the sign of 𝑑𝑁 ′∗
at any symmetric choice
𝑑𝛾
𝛾 = 𝛾 ′ only depends on whether 𝛾 ⋚ ̄𝛾.

𝛾 (𝛾, 𝛾 ′) + 𝜋′∗
𝜋∗

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) = 0.

Let us derive the second term

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) =
𝜋′∗

(

𝛼 (𝑋′∗)𝛼−1

− 1 − 𝜆𝑆′∗
𝑋′

) (

)

𝑑𝑋′∗
𝑑𝛾

− 𝜆𝑆′∗
𝑁 ′

(

)

.

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

Step (ii)
We endowed the regulator with the objective

𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) ≡ ̃𝑉 (𝑋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′))

Since 𝑋′∗ = 𝑁 ′*∕𝛾 ′, we have
𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝑋′∗
𝑑𝛾
𝑑𝛾

1
𝛾 ′

=

.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391221)

but then 𝑋col = 𝛼

1
1−𝛼 > 𝜔∕2; a contradiction. Hence, 𝛾 col < 1.

(c) Finally, we have 𝛾 col = 𝜔∕2

𝑋col . Assume 𝑋col ≤ 𝜔∕2, then 𝐴0 = 0,

S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

Recalling NPV∗ = 𝛼 (𝑋*)𝛼−1

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) =
𝜋′∗

NPV′∗)
(

(

1
𝛾 ′

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾
)

(

𝛾 (𝛾 ′, 𝛾) =
𝜋′∗

NPV′∗
𝛾 ′ − 𝜆𝑆′∗

𝑁 ′

𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

− 1 − 𝜆𝑆∗
)

− 𝜆𝑆′∗
𝑁 ′

(

𝑋 , we get
𝑑𝑁 ′∗
𝑑𝛾

which corresponds to the above. □

Proposition 4. Assume 𝜅 → ∞, Conditions 1 and 2 hold, and 𝑔(𝐴) is
continuous for all 𝐴0 > 0 with full support over [0, 𝐴𝐻 ]. Then ∀𝛼, 𝜆, ∃0 ≤
̄𝜔 < 2𝛼

𝛼
1−𝛼 ∶

𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash < ̄𝛾
𝛾 col = 𝛾 nash = ̄𝛾
𝛾 col > 𝛾 nash > ̄𝛾

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

; 𝜔 > ̄𝜔

; 𝜔 = ̄𝜔

; 𝜔 < ̄𝜔.

Proof. To begin let us first outline our strategy for the proof.

1. Step 1

(a) Show 𝑁 col = 𝜔∕2
(b) Show 𝑋col is increasing in 𝜔.
(c) Show, given 𝜔 < 2𝛼

1

1−𝛼 , 𝛾 col = 𝜔∕2

𝑋col < 1

2. Step 2

increasing in 𝜔, there are two cases.

̄𝑋 then ̄𝜔 = 0.
i. If lim𝜔→0 𝑋col > lim𝜔→0
ii. Otherwise, there exists an 0 < ̄𝜔 < 𝛼
̄𝑋 = 𝑋col and ̄𝑋 > 𝑋col for all 𝜔 < ̄𝜔.

𝛼
1−𝛼 such that

3. Step 3: Given 𝑁 col = ̄𝑁 = 𝜔∕2, we have 𝑋col ⋚ ̄𝑋 ⇔ 𝛾 col ⋛ ̄𝛾

Step 1

We start from (14)

𝛼 (𝑋col)𝛼−1

= 1 + 𝜆 ∫

𝐴0

1 − 𝛼2𝐴 (𝑋col)𝛼−1)
(
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡𝑆∗
𝑋

𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴

0

(a) Show 𝑁 ∗(̄𝛾, ̄𝛾) ≡ ̄𝑁 = 𝜔∕2.
𝛼
(b) Show for all 𝜔∕2 ≥ 𝛼
1−𝛼 ,
𝛼
1−𝛼 = ̄𝑋
have 𝑋col > 𝜔∕2 ≥ 𝛼
𝛼
1−𝛼 .

(c) Show for all 𝜔 < 𝛼

̄𝑋 = 𝛼

𝛼
1−𝛼 . Given 𝛾 col < 1, we

𝑋col(𝜔) > 𝜔∕2 ≥ 𝛼
𝛾 col.

̄𝑋 is decreasing in 𝜔. Since 𝑋col is

Step 2
̄𝑁 < 𝜔∕2, 𝑅 ( ̄𝑁, ̄𝛾)
(a) Define ̄𝑁 ≡ 𝑁 ∗(̄𝛾, ̄𝛾). If
= 1. But from Step
1(a) 𝑅 (𝜔∕2, 𝛾 col) > 1. Hence,
̄𝑁 < 𝜔∕2 cannot be the case, as ̄𝛾 would
not maximise banks RoE. Hence, we must have 𝑅 (𝜔∕2, ̄𝛾) > 1 and
̄𝑁 = 𝜔∕2.

(b) Define ̄𝑋(𝜔) the value for 𝑋 that solves 𝑅𝛾

is,

𝐴𝐻

∫

𝐴0

(𝛼2𝐴 ̄𝑋𝛼−1 − 1

) 𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴 = 0

(
𝜔∕2, 𝜔∕2
̄𝑋

)

= 0. That

(C.16)

where 𝐴0 =

for all

̄𝑋 > 𝜔∕2 and 𝐴0 = 0 otherwise.

Condition (C.16) can be rewritten:

̄𝑋−𝜔∕2
𝛼( ̄𝑋)𝛼

𝐴0

𝛼2 ̄𝑋𝛼−1 + ∫

0

1 − 𝛼2𝐴 ̄𝑋𝛼−1) 𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴
(
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡𝑆∗
𝑋

= 1

Here, 𝑆∗

𝑋 reflects the implicit subsidy from government guarantees.
≥ 0. Hence, the maximum value ̄𝑋 can possibly take
As noted above 𝑆∗
𝑋
𝑋 = 0. This happens when ̄𝑋(𝜔) < 𝜔∕2. Then, 𝐴0 = 0
corresponds to 𝑆∗
𝛼
and 𝛼 ( ̄𝑋(𝜔)
= 1
1−𝛼 (and corresponds to
𝛼
𝑋mon in Section 3.2).
So, for all 𝜔∕2 ≥ 𝛼

, which yields,

̄𝑋(𝜔) = 𝛼

̄𝑋(𝜔) = 𝛼

𝛼
1−𝛼 ,

)𝛼−1

𝛼
1−𝛼 and, given 𝛾 col < 1, we have
> 1 >

𝛼
1−𝛼

)

(

𝛼

1−𝛼 = ̄𝑋(𝜔). Equivalently, ̄𝛾 = (𝜔∕2) ∕

𝛼

(c) Now, consider 𝜔 < 𝛼

𝛼
1−𝛼 . For all such 𝜔, we know that decreasing

𝜔 increases ̄𝑋 and decreases 𝑋col. So there are two cases.

If

lim
𝜔→0

𝛼 ( ̄𝑋(𝜔)

)𝛼−1 > 1 + lim
𝜔→0

𝐴0

𝜆 ∫

0

(
1 − 𝛼2𝐴 ( ̄𝑋(𝜔)

)𝛼−1)

𝑔 (𝐴) 𝑑𝐴,

̄𝑋(0). Then only 𝛾 col < 𝛾 nash <
this means that lim𝜔→0 𝑋col(𝜔) > lim𝜔→0
̄𝛾 can arise. Since 𝜔 > 0, setting ̄𝜔 = 0 ensures that the proposition
holds.

𝛼
1−𝛼 such that

̄𝑋( ̄𝜔) = 𝑋col( ̄𝜔)

Otherwise, there exists an 0 < ̄𝜔 < 𝛼

and ̄𝑋(𝜔) > 𝑋col(𝜔) for all 𝜔 < ̄𝜔.

(C.15)

Step 3
Given 𝑁 col = ̄𝑁 = 𝜔∕2, we have 𝑋col ⋚ ̄𝑋 ⇔ 𝛾 col ⋛ ̄𝛾, which

concludes the proof. □

where 𝐴0 = 𝑋col−𝑁 col
𝛼(𝑋col)𝛼

for 𝑋col > 𝑁 col and 𝐴0 = 0 otherwise.

≥ 0. If 𝑆∗

𝑋 = 0, then 𝑋col = 𝛼

(a) First, note that 𝑆∗
𝑋

1
1−𝛼 and this is
an upper bound (it cannot be optimal for regulators to allow for loans
that have a negative NPV even before taking deadweight losses into
1
account). Now, assume 𝑁 col < 𝜔∕2. Given we have imposed: 𝜔 < 2𝛼
1−𝛼 ,
1
this means that 𝑋col < 𝛼
1−𝛼 . But then, loans must have strictly positive
NPV, which means that the return on bank equity must be strictly
greater than 1. But, given Proposition 1, this implies 𝑧∗ > 0, which
is a contradiction with 𝑁 col < 𝜔∕2. Hence 𝑁 col = 𝜔∕2.

(b) The left side of (C.15) is infinite at 𝑋col = 0, decreasing in 𝑋col
𝑋 = 0 for 𝑋col ≤ 𝜔∕2 and
and tends to 𝛼 < 1 as 𝑋col grows large. Now 𝑆∗
is strictly increasing for 𝑋col > 𝜔∕2 (the integrand is always positive
for 𝐴 ≤ 𝐴0). Hence, there exists a unique 𝑋col that solves (14). Denote
such implicit function 𝑋col(𝜔).

Then,

𝑆∗

𝑋𝜔 =

𝜕𝐴0
𝜕𝜔
⏟⏟⏟
≤0

⎞
⎛
1 − 𝛼2𝐴0 (𝑋col)𝛼−1
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎟
⎜
⎠
⎝
>0

𝑓 (𝐴0).

So, 𝑑𝑋col
≥ 0, strictly if 𝐴0 > 0 (Since 𝑔(𝐴) is continuous for all 𝐴0 > 0,
𝑑𝜔
and has full support over [0, 𝐴𝐻 ]). Next, we show that 𝛾 col < 1, so that
𝑑𝑋col
𝑑𝜔

> 0 for all 𝜔 < 𝛼

1
1−𝛼 .

Proposition 6. For any objective 𝜋∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′) = 𝑉 (𝑁 ∗(𝛾, 𝛾 ′), 𝛾)
(𝑁 nash, 𝛾 nash) > 0, then Proposition 3 holds.

, if 𝑉𝑁

Proof. This follows directly from the proof of Proposition 3. □

Proposition 7. Define ̃𝑉 (𝑋, 𝑁) ≡ 𝑉 (𝑁, 𝛾 = 𝑁∕𝑋). Then ̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) >
0, ∀𝑁 < 𝑋 is a sufficient condition for Proposition 3 to hold under general
objective (B.2).

Proof. From Proposition 6, we just need to prove that 𝑉𝑁 (𝑁 nash, 𝛾 nash)
> 0 if ̃𝑉𝑁 (𝑋, 𝑁) > 0. This is true from Lemma C.4. □

References

Acharya, V.V., 2003. Is the international convergence of capital adequacy regulation

desirable? J. Finance 58 (6), 2745–2782.

Acharya, V.V., Pedersen, L.H., Philippon, T., Richardson, M., 2017. Measuring systemic

risk. rev. financial stud. 30 (1), 2–47.

Acharya, V., Santos, J., Yorulmazer, T., 2010. Systemic risk and deposit insurance

premiums. Econ. Policy Rev. 16 (Aug), 89–99.

Admati, A., DeMarzo, P., Hellwig, M., Pfleiderer, P., 2013. Fallacies, irrelevant facts,
and myths in the discussion of capital regulation: Why bank equity is not expensive.
Stanford Graduate School of Business, Working Paper No. 2065.

Aiyar, S., Calomiris, C., Hooley, J., Korniyenko, Y., Wieladek, T., 2014. The interna-
tional transmission of bank capital requirements: Evidence from the UK. J. Financ.
Econ. 113 (3), 368–382.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391222S. Bahaj and F. Malherbe

Bahaj, S., Bridges, J., Malherbe, F., O’Neill, C., 2016. What determines how banks
respond to changes in capital requirements? Bank of England Staff Working Paper
No. 593.

Francis, W.B., Osborne, M., 2012. Capital requirements and bank behavior in the UK:
Are there lessons for international capital standards? J. Bank. Financ. 36 (3),
803–816.

Bahaj, S., Malherbe, F., 2020. The Forced Safety Effect: How Higher Capital

Gersbach, H., Haller, H., Papageorgiou, S., 2020. Regulatory competition in banking:

Requirements Can Increase Bank Lending. J. Finance 75 (6), 3013–3053.

Curse or blessing? J. Bank. Financ. 121 (C).

BCBS, 2022. Evaluation of the Impact and Efficacy of the Basel III Reforms. Technical

Report, Bank for International Settlements.

Begenau, J., 2020. Capital requirements, risk choice, and liquidity provision in a

business-cycle model. J. Financ. Econ. 136 (2), 355–378.

Gropp, R., Mosk, T., Ongena, S., Wix, C., 2019. Banks response to higher capital
requirements: Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (1),
266–299.

Hamada, K., 1976. A strategic analysis of monetary interdependence. J. Polit. Econ. 84

Behn, M., Haselmann, R., Wachtel, P., 2016. Procyclical capital regulation and lending.

(4, Part 1), 677–700.

J. Finance 71 (2), 919–956.

Harris, M., Opp, C.C., Opp, M.M., 2023. Intermediary capital and the credit market.

Berg, T., Reisinger, M., Streitz, D., 2021. Spillover effects in empirical corporate finance.

Mimeo.

J. Financ. Econ. 142 (3), 1109–1127.

Haufler, A., Maier, U., 2019. Regulatory competition in capital standards: a race to the

Blanchard, O., 2021. Currency wars, coordination, and capital controls.

In: THE
Asian Monetary Policy Forum: Insights for Central Banking. World Scientific, pp.
134–157.

Bolton, P., Oehmke, M., 2018. Bank resolution and the structure of global banks. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 32 (6), 2384–2421.

top result. J. Bank. Financ. 106, 180–194.

Hellmann, T.F., Murdock, K.C., Stiglitz, J.E., 2000. Liberalization, moral hazard in
banking, and prudential regulation: Are capital requirements enough? Amer. Econ.
Rev. 90 (1), 147–165.

Hoggarth, G., Reis, R., Saporta, V., 2002. Costs of banking system instability: Some

Brownlees, C., Engle, R.F., 2017. SRISK: A conditional capital shortfall measure of

empirical evidence. J. Bank. Financ. 26 (5), 825–855.

systemic risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (1), 48–79.

Buch, C.M., Goldberg, L.S., 2017. Cross-border prudential policy spillovers: How much?
How important? Evidence from the international banking research network. Int. J.
Central Bank. 13 (2), 505–558.

Imbierowicz, B., Kragh, J., Rangvid, J., 2018. Time-varying capital requirements and
disclosure rules: Effects on capitalization and lending decisions. J. Money Credit
Bank. 50 (4), 573–602.

Indergand, M., Jondeau, E., Fuster, A., Malherbe, F., 2023. Improving Market-Based

Buck, F., Schliephake, E., 2013. The regulator’s trade-off: Bank supervision vs. Minimum

Systemic Risk Measures. Technical Report, UCL, mimeo.

capital. J. Bank. Financ. 37 (11), 4584–4598.

Juelsrud, R.E., Wold, E.G., 2020. Risk-weighted capital requirements and portfolio

Caballero, R.J., Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P.-O., 2021. Global imbalances and policy wars

at the zero lower bound. Rev. Econ. Stud. 88 (6), 2570–2621.

Calzolari, G., Colliard, J.-E., Loranth, G., 2018. Multinational banks and supranational

Kareken,

rebalancing. J. Financial Intermed. 41, 100806.
J., Wallace, N., 1978. Deposit
partial-equilibrium exposition. J. Bus. 413–438.

insurance and bank regulation: A

supervision. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (8), 2997–3035.

Kashyap, A., Rajan, R., Stein, J., 2008. Rethinking capital regulation. In: Proceedings

Calzolari, G., Loranth, G., 2011. Regulation of Multinational Banks: A Theoretical

- Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole. pp. 431–471.

Inquiry. J. Financial Intermediat. 20 (2), 178–198.

Kashyap, A., Stein, J., 2004. Cyclical implications of the Basel II capital standards.

Carletti, E., Dell’Ariccia, G., Marquez, R., 2020. Supervisory incentives in a banking

Econ. Perspect. Federal Reserve Bank Chicago 28 (1), 18–33.

union. Manage. Sci. 67.

Colliard, J.-E., Optimal supervisory architecture and financial integration in a banking

union. Rev. Finance.

Korinek, A., 2016. Currency Wars or Efficient Spillovers? A General Theory of Inter-
national Policy Cooperation. Working Paper 23004, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Corsetti, G., Pesenti, P., 2001. Welfare and macroeconomic interdependence. Q. J. Econ.

Kreps, D.M., Scheinkman, J.A., 1983. Quantity precommitment and Bertrand

116 (2), 421–445.

de Guindos, L., 2019. International spillovers of monetary policy and financial stability
concerns. In: Speech at The ECB and Its Watchers XXth Conference. European
Central Bank.

competition yield cournot outcomes. Bell J. Econ. 14 (2), 326–337.

Lehar, A., 2005. Measuring systemic risk: A risk management approach. J. Bank. Financ.

29 (10), 2577–2603.

Malherbe, F., 2020. Optimal capital requirements over the business and financial cycles.

De Jonghe, O., Dewachter, H., Ongena, S., 2020. Bank capital (requirements) and credit

Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 12 (3), 139–174.

supply: Evidence from pillar 2 decisions. J. Corpor. Finance 60, 101518.

Malherbe, F., McMahon, M., 2024. Beyond pangloss:

financial sector origins of

Dell’Ariccia, G., Marquez, R., 2006. Competition among regulators and credit market

inefficient economic booms. J. Monetary Econ. 145, 103558.

integration. J. Financ. Econ. 79 (2), 401–430.

Martinez-Miera, D., Suarez, J., 2014. A macroeconomic model of endogenous systemic

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2021. Banking on deposits: Maturity transformation

risk taking. mimeo, CEMFI.

without interest rate risk. J. Finance 76 (3), 1091–1143.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., Wang, O., 2023. Banking on Uninsured Deposits.

Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Merton, R., 1977. An analytic derivation of the cost of deposit insurance and loan
guarantees an application of modern option pricing theory. J. Bank. Financ. 1,
3–11.

Duarte, F., Eisenbach, T.M., 2021. Fire-sale spillovers and systemic risk. J. Finance 76

Morrison, A., White, L., 2009. Level playing fields in international financial regulation.

(3), 1251–1294.

J. Finance 64 (3), 1099–1142.

Elenev, V., Landvoigt, T., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. A macroeconomic model
with financially constrained producers and intermediaries. Econometrica 89 (3),
1361–1418.

Opp, M.M., 2010. Tariff wars in the Ricardian model with a continuum of goods. J.

Int. Econ. 80 (2), 212–225.

Osborne, G., 2015. Remit and Recommendations for the Financial Policy Committee.

ESRB, 2018. The ESRB handbook on operationalising macroprudential policy in the

HM Treasury.

banking sector.

Faia, E., Weder, B., 2016. Cross-Border Resolution of Global Banks: Bail in under Single
Point of Entry versus Multiple Points of Entry. CEPR Discussion Papers 11171,
C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Forbes, K., Reinhardt, D., Wieladek, T., 2017. The spillovers,

interactions, and
(un)intended consequences of monetary and regulatory policies. J. Monetary Econ.
85, 1–22, Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference Series on Public Policy ‘‘Monetary
Policy: Globalization in the Aftermath of the Crisis’’.

Schliephake, E., Kirstein, R., 2013. Strategic effects of regulatory capital requirements

in imperfect banking competition. J. Money Credit Bank. 45 (4), 675–700.

Segura, A., Vicente, S., 2019. Bank Resolution and Public Backstop in an Asymmetric
Banking Union. Temi di discussione (Economic working papers) 1212, Bank of
Italy, Economic Research and International Relations Area.

Tinbergen, J., 1952. On the Theory of Economic Policy. Books (Jan Tinbergen).
Townsend, R.M., 1979. Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state

verification. J. Econ. Theory 21 (2), 265–293.

JournalofFinancialEconomics160(2024)10391223