Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Can everyone tap into the housing piggy bank? Racial disparities in access to 
home equity(cid:73)
James N. Conklin a, Kristopher Gerardi b,∗, Lauren Lambie-Hanson c
a Terry College of Business, University of Georgia, 600 S Lumpkin St, Athens, GA 30605, United States
b Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 1000 Peachtree St., N.E. Atlanta, GA 30309, United States
c Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Ten Independence Mall, Philadelphia, PA 19106, United States

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Code for Conklin, Gerardi, Lambie
-Hanson Home Equity Racial Disparities (Origi
nal data)
JEL classification:
G51
E52
D14

Keywords:
Mortgage
Refinance
Race
Monetary policy
Interest rate

1. Introduction

We document large racial disparities in the ability of homeowners to access their accumulated housing wealth. 
Minority homeowners are significantly more likely to have their mortgage equity withdrawal (MEW) product 
applications rejected than White homeowners, and the unconditional disparities are significantly larger than 
those found in prior studies that focused on purchase and rate/term refinance loans. Had Black homeowners 
faced the same MEW denial rate as White homeowners in our sample period we show they would have 
extracted an additional $11.2 billion in housing equity, or almost 25% of the total amount of actual equity 
extracted. Controlling for key underwriting variables significantly narrows the racial disparities, with the Black–
White gap falling by nearly 85%, and the Hispanic-White gap falling by more than 75%. Credit scores and 
debt-to-income ratios are the most important factors explaining the gaps, while differences in loan-to-value 
ratios contribute only modestly. ‘‘Residual’’ disparities after conditioning on observable underwriting factors 
are large and vary significantly across lenders. A battery of tests suggests that differences in unobserved 
underwriting factors are unlikely to fully explain the residual disparities, which tend to be larger in geographic 
areas characterized by more racial animus.

U.S. house prices have increased at an historical rate in recent times, 
growing by almost 60% over the five year period from April 2019 to 
April 2024 according to the Federal Housing Finance Administration’s 
home price index, and outpacing even the growth experienced during 
the early-mid-2000s housing boom. This unprecedented rise has re-
sulted in an enormous increase in housing wealth for U.S. homeowners. 
According to data from the Flow of Funds, at the end of the first quarter 
in 2024, U.S. households had gained more than 75% in housing equity 
over the previous five years and were sitting on almost $33 trillion in 

aggregate housing wealth.

This wealth windfall is likely to be a boon for homeowners and 
the overall economy as housing equity plays a crucial role in many 
important financial decisions that households make over the course 
of  their  lifetimes.  It  is  used  to  finance  consumption  expenditures, 
especially large durable goods purchases like cars (Pence, 2015), large 
home improvement projects and educational expenses (Greenspan and 
Kennedy, 2008; Canner et al., 2002), and even down payments for 
children who are purchasing their first home (Benetton et al., 2022). It 
is also used as a means of smoothing consumption in the face of adverse 
income/employment shocks (Hurst and Stafford, 2004).

(cid:73)

We thank the editor Toni Whited, and an anonymous referee for constructive feedback during the review process. We thank Stephanie Sezen for excellent 
research assistance and Bob Avery for sharing his HMDA Lender File and suggestions for our work. We also are grateful to Neil Bhutta, Julia Cheney, Hajime 
Hadeishi, Bob Hunt, Jake Krimmel, Tesia Lemelle, Kevin Park, Dan Ringo, Dubravka Ritter, Amanda Roberts, Anna Tranfaglia, Athena Tsouderou, and audience 
participants at the American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association National Conference, the FDIC Consumer Research Symposium, the Florida State 
University/University of Florida Critical Issues in Real Estate Symposium, the Wisconsin Real Estate Research Conference, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York for providing helpful comments and suggestions. Barbara Brynko provided outstanding editorial assistance. An earlier version of this paper was posted as 
Atlanta Fed Working Paper 2022–17. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal Reserve System. No statements here should be treated as legal advice. Philadelphia Fed working papers are 
free to download at https://philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/publications/working-papers.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  jnc152@uga.edu (J.N. Conklin), Kristopher.Gerardi@atl.frb.org (K. Gerardi), Lauren.Lambie-Hanson@phil.frb.org (L. Lambie-Hanson).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104038
Received 12 June 2024; Received in revised form 23 February 2025; Accepted 25 February 2025
Available online 15 March 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Fig. 1.  Application denial rates. Note: Denial rates conditional on credit decision, 2018–2021. Non-MEW includes first-lien purchase loans and rate/term refinances.
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

Additionally, a rapidly expanding finance literature has found that 
home equity plays a crucial role in driving entrepreneurship and busi-
ness formation (Schmalz et al., 2017; Adelino et al., 2015; Corradin 
and  Popov,  2015;  Jensen  et  al.,  2022;  Kerr  et  al.,  2022;  Lastrapes 
et al., 2022), and that these startups have a disproportionate impact on 
overall job creation and productivity growth (Haltiwanger et al., 2013; 
Adelino et al., 2017). Using data from the 2007 Survey of Business 
Owners (SBO), Kerr et al. (2022) document that approximately 12% of 
new businesses with at least one employee used home equity financing, 
comparable to the 16% that relied on bank finance for start-up capital.
However,  for  many  households  housing  wealth  can  be  difficult 
to extract. Although homeowners can access their equity by selling, 
doing so entails moving and paying significant transaction costs. Most 
homeowners who desire to tap into their housing wealth would likely 
prefer to stay in their homes, but to do so they must turn to credit 
markets and obtain a mortgage. There are three main types of mortgage 
products that allow existing homeowners to tap into their accumulated 
housing equity: home equity loans (HELoans); home equity lines of 
credit (HELOCs); and cash-out refinances. These loans, which we will 
refer to throughout as mortgage equity withdrawal (MEW) products are 
the focus of this paper.

Racial disparities in the ability to access mortgage markets have 
been  previously  documented  in  the  literature  (Black  et  al.,  1978; 
Munnell et al., 1996; Ladd, 1998; Charles and Hurst, 2002). But the 
primary focus of that literature has been on mortgages used to purchase 
a home rather than MEW products. The reason for this is likely two-
fold. First, access to homeownership is widely considered to play a key 
role in household wealth accumulation, especially for low-income and 
minority households.1 If minority households do not have the same 

1 See  Goodman  and  Mayer  (2018),  Charles  and  Hurst  (2002),  Shapiro 
(2006),  Boehm  and  Schlottmann  (2008).  Wainer  and  Zabel  (2020), 
and Killewald et al. (2017) for examples.

opportunities to build wealth through homeownership, then closing the 
large gaps in wealth across racial groups that characterize our current 
economy will be very difficult. Second, while high-quality, micro data 
on purchase mortgages have been available to researchers for several 
decades, data on MEW products have not.

While ensuring equal access to homeownership is critically impor-
tant from a policy perspective, ensuring equal access to MEW products 
is similarly important so that homeowners of all races and ethnicities 
can  use  their  housing  equity  to  improve  their  economic  status.  In 
this paper we conduct the first nationwide analysis of this issue using 
confidential Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data from 2018 
through 2021, which contains extensive information on applications 
for  MEW  products  not  present  in  other  commonly  used  mortgage 
datasets. In particular, the dataset has broad geographic coverage from 
many financial institutions and includes key underwriting factors used 
by lenders in making credit decisions, enabling us to systematically 
look at racial disparities in housing wealth extraction in a way that 
was not previously possible. Although the empirical evidence on race 
and housing wealth extraction is scant, there is anecdotal evidence 
suggesting that minority homeowners have a harder time accessing 
MEW products (Chiwaya and Ross, 2020).

We show that the data are, in fact, consistent with the anecdotal 
evidence.  Minority  households  are  much  more  likely  to  have  their 
applications for MEW products denied compared to White households. 
Furthermore,  we  show  that  the  differences  in  denial  rates  between 
minority and White households are significantly larger for MEW ap-
plications compared to the differences for non-MEW applications. Fig. 
1  shows  that  for  non-MEW  applications,  Black  homeowners  are  9 
percentage points more likely than White borrowers to be denied, while 
Hispanic and Asian borrowers are 4 percentage points and 1 percentage 
point more likely to be denied than White borrowers, respectively. 
For MEW products, the Black–White, Hispanic-White, and Asian-White 
denial rate gaps widen to 21, 9, and 7 percentage points, respectively 

2 

J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Table 1
Descriptive statistics for MEW products.
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

Black

White

Hispanic

Asian
147.8  
  Income (thousands $)
  DTI (%)
40.3
  Credit Score
745
  CLTV (%)
63.4
264,885 
  Loan Amount
  Units
1.0
  Loan Term (months)
315
  Second Home (d)
0.02
  Investment Property (d)
0.10
  No Co-applicant (d)
0.53
  Home Improvement (d)
0.23
  Second Lien (d)
0.35
  Prepayment Penalty (d)
0.13
  Interest Only (d)
0.15
  Other Nonamortizing Features (d)
0.03
0.009  
  Application to Minority-Owned Bank (d)
  Application Denied (d)
0.30
  Cash-Out Refinance (d)
0.51
  Home Equity Loan (HEloan) (d)
0.10
  Home Equity Line of Credit (HELOC) (d)
0.39
  # Observations
870,398 
9,572,670
Note: This table reports mean values for observations populated on the variable in question. The sample 
includes MEW products (cash-out refinances, HELoans, and HELOCs) for which a credit decision was made. 
See the Table A.3 of the Online Appendix for data on the rate at which these fields are missing by loan 
type and racial/ethnic group. Dichotomous variables are signified by (d).

118.1
36.5
735
65.2
185,529
1.0
301
0.02
0.04
0.53
0.22
0.30
0.08
0.16
0.02
0.001
0.23
0.55
0.12
0.33

93.1
41.2
688
68.4
166,378
1.1
311
0.01
0.06
0.72
0.23
0.27
0.08
0.09
0.02
0.001
0.44
0.59
0.12
0.29

102.3
40.7
715
64.9
195,211
1.1
310
0.01
0.06
0.54
0.21
0.28
0.08
0.11
0.03
0.002
0.32
0.59
0.12
0.29

1,011,791

1,184,479

equity, but were denied $23 billion. We show that if Black applicants 
experienced the unconditional denial rate of White applicants, they 
would  have  been  denied  only  $11.8  billion  and  thus,  would  have 
extracted  an  additional  $11.2  billion  in  housing  equity.  A  similar 
calculation shows that Hispanic applicants would have extracted an 
additional $8.8 billion and Asian applicants an additional $8.5 billion.
In  order  to  understand  what  drives  these  large  disparities  and 
determine the appropriate policy response, it is important to introduce 
controls for loan and borrower risk factors that are commonly used by 
lenders in the underwriting process. Using standard regression methods 
as  well  as  Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca  decompositions,  we  show  that 
nearly two-thirds of the Black–White and Hispanic-White disparities in 
MEW product denial rates can be explained by differences in home-
owners’ credit scores and debt-to-income (DTI) ratios alone. Including 
additional controls, such as the requested loan amount and the level of 
the applicant’s income, further reduces MEW rejection rate disparities. 
Notably, controlling for the applicant’s combined loan-to-value (CLTV) 
ratio  does  not  have  a  material  effect  on  the  estimated  denial  rate 
gaps, which suggests that minority borrowers are not being rejected 
for having insufficient levels of housing equity.

For  all  three  MEW  products  (cash-out  refinances,  HELoans,  and 
HELOCs), accounting for standard borrower and loan characteristics 
used in mortgage underwriting significantly reduces – but does not fully 
eliminate – the gap in denial rates across borrowers. Black and Asian 
borrowers remain about 4 percentage points more likely to be denied 
for MEW products than White borrowers, and Hispanic borrowers are 
about 2 percentage points more likely to be denied (relative to White 
borrowers) after accounting for these observable factors. These residual 
racial disparities are non-trivial and are larger than the conditional 
denial rate disparities documented in Bhutta et al. (2024) for purchase 
and refinance mortgage applications. To be clear, they are consistent 
with,  but  certainly  not  proof  of,  racial  discrimination  as  there  are 
additional  factors,  such  as  liquid  assets  and  information  about  an 
applicant’s employment history, that lenders take into consideration in 
the underwriting process but are not included in the HMDA data.

With that said, lender discrimination might play a larger role in 
home equity lending than in purchase and refinance lending because 
the underwriting processes for HELOCs and HELoans, in particular, are 
less automated. Since most purchase loans and rate/term and cash-out 
refinances are sold to the government-sponsored enterprises (Fannie 

Fig. 2.  Decomposition of denial rate differences by product type.
Note: Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca decomposition of Black–White denial rate differences 
by product type, 2018–2021. Independent variables are the same as in Table  2 column 
(5).
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

(Table  1). These differences are striking — the unconditional minority-
White  denial  disparities  are  2  to  7  times  larger  for  MEW  products 
than non-MEW mortgages. These large unconditional differences show 
that, on average, minority homeowners do not have the same ability 
as  White  homeowners  to  access  their  accumulated  housing  wealth 
to improve their overall economic and financial well-being. In other 
words, the results suggest that even if policymakers are able to close 
the large gap in the minority-White homeownership rate, there would 
still be an important source of racial inequality stemming from the 
differential ability to access the financial benefits of owning a home. 

To determine the aggregate credit implications of these minority-
White MEW application denial rate disparities we perform a simple 
back-of-the-envelope calculation. Between 2018 and 2021 Black home-
owners applied for more than $46 billion in credit to extract their home 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Mae  and  Freddie  Mac)  or  are  insured  by  the  Federal  Housing  Ad-
ministration or Veterans Affairs, these mortgages undergo rigid review 
using automated underwriting systems and scorecards prepared by the 
agencies (see Bhutta et al., 2024). In contrast, HELOCs and HELoans 
are often held by lenders in portfolio, who typically use internally de-
veloped underwriting models rather than the standardized automated 
underwriting  models  (like  Desktop  Underwriter©)  that  were  estab-
lished for secondary market sales. Likewise, as we explain in a technical 
note in Section A.1 of our Online Appendix, cash-out refinances are less 
likely to be approved by automated underwriting systems (AUS), thus 
triggering manual underwriting. Less reliance on AUS may have the 
effect of making loan decisions somewhat more subjective for HELOCs, 
HELoans, and cash-out refinances. Furthermore, we present evidence 
showing that HELOC and HELoan applicants are more likely to interact 
face-to-face with loan officers, whereas lender/borrower interactions 
for purchase and refinance applications are more likely to be online or 
over the phone (see Section A.1.1 in the Online Appendix).2

In the remaining analysis, we turn our attention to the underlying 
mechanisms driving the residual MEW denial rate disparities. Specifi-
cally, we try to determine the extent to which the residual disparities 
between White and minority applicants are due to racial discrimination 
versus other explanations such as omitted variables that lenders legally 
use in their approval process but that are unavailable in our data. While 
we do not have a direct test for discrimination or a precise way to 
discern between different mechanisms, we conduct four additional em-
pirical exercises to dig deeper into the issue. In each case, the patterns 
we observe are consistent with – although not proof of – discrimination. 
First, we estimate Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca decompositions separately 
by lender and show that the size of the unexplained denial disparities 
varies significantly across firms. Importantly, the size of lender-level 
unexplained denial disparities is not strongly correlated with the size of 
the explained disparities, which suggests that denial gaps are unlikely 
to be driven solely by unobserved underwriting factors. Second, for 
applications that are put through an automated underwriting system, 
significant residual racial disparities remain even after we account for 
the AUS decision. This helps indirectly control for borrower underwrit-
ing characteristics not included in HMDA data but that are used by 
an AUS. Third, we use a technique developed by Bhutta et al. (2024) 
to test whether racial gaps are larger at ‘‘stricter’’ lenders (those who 
base denial decisions more heavily on factors not included in HMDA 
data). In contrast to their findings based on purchase and refinance 
mortgage  applications,  we  do  not  observe  larger  racial  denial  gaps 
for MEW applications at stricter lenders, casting further doubt on the 
argument that unobservable underwriting characteristics fully explain 
the racial gaps we measure. Fourth, we show that there is a positive 
correlation between the level of racial animus in a metropolitan sta-
tistical area and the size of the residual Black–White denial rate gaps, 
which suggests that discrimination may be partially driving conditional 
racial disparities in MEW rejection rates.

While the bulk of our analysis focuses on denial rate disparities, 
we also explore the relationship between MEW product pricing and 
borrower race. We use the interest rate spread on originated loans 
as our measure of price. Large unconditional minority-White pricing 
gaps  exist  across  all  MEW  products,  but  similar  to  our  results  on 
application denials, the gaps are significantly reduced, and in some 
cases, eliminated, once we include a host of control variables. To our 
knowledge, ours is the first paper to examine the relationship between 
race and mortgage pricing on MEW products.

In the next section we review the relevant literature, before turning 

to a description of the data and our analysis.

2 The types of loan officers who handle these applications may also differ, 
even within the same firm. Only 45% of loan officers who worked for lenders 
that make both MEW and non-MEW loans handled both types of applications in 
a given year. The other 55% of loan officers at these firms exclusively handled 
applications for one type or the other.

2. Literature review

Our findings contribute to the broad literature on racial dispari-
ties in homeownership experiences. A number of studies examine the 
relationship between race and homeownership transitions (Dawkins, 
2005; Boehm and Schlottmann, 2004; Hall and Crowder, 2011); race 
and gaps in homeownership rates (Coulson and Dalton, 2010; Gabriel 
and Painter, 2003; Gabriel and Rosenthal, 2005; Gyourko et al., 1999; 
Hilber and Liu, 2008; Deng et al., 2003); and race and the financial 
returns  to  homeownership  (Diamond  and  Diamond,  2024;  Flippen, 
2004;  Kahn,  2021;  Kermani  and  Wong,  2021;  Krivo  and  Kaufman, 
2004). We study a related, but distinct question: After transitioning into 
homeownership, are there racial differences in the ability to access (and 
the cost of accessing) housing wealth via MEW products?

Our paper is also closely related to the literature examining racial 
disparities  in  access  to  mortgage  credit  (Black  et  al.,  1978;  Bhutta 
et al., 2024; Munnell et al., 1996; Park, 2021; Frame et al., 2022) and 
mortgage pricing (Ambrose et al., 2021; Bartlett et al., 2022; Bhutta and 
Hizmo, 2021; Ghent et al., 2014; Kau et al., 2012; Willen and Zhang, 
2021).3 In contrast with these previous studies that focus on first-lien 
mortgage products, we examine racial disparities in denial rates and 
mortgage pricing for MEW products (which often are not first liens), 
including two product types that are excluded from earlier studies: 
HELOCs and HELoans.

Finally, we contribute to the literature on home equity withdrawal 
and MEW products (Agarwal et al., 2006, 2011; Benito, 2009; Canner 
et al., 1998; Chen and Jensen, 1985; Duca and Kumar, 2014; Hurst and 
Stafford, 2004). To our knowledge, there are only two studies that focus 
on the relationship between MEW and race. In the first of these, Do 
(2012) uses American Community Survey (ACS) data to show that Black 
homeowners are less likely than White homeowners to extract equity 
using MEW products. However, it is not clear whether the difference in 
equity extraction is due to differences in underlying demand for MEW 
products or due to differences in the rate at which lenders accept or 
reject MEW applications. By focusing on MEW applications, we study 
racial disparities in MEW denials and pricing among individuals who 
actually wanted a MEW product.

The second study examining MEW and race, Carlin and Divringi 
(2018), focuses on mortgage equity withdrawals for a very specific 
purpose – home improvements. The authors use HMDA application data 
from 2015 through 2017 located in the Third Federal Reserve District, 
which covers Delaware, southern New Jersey, and eastern and central 
Pennsylvania. Among applications where the stated purpose of the loan 
is for home improvements, minority homeowners are approximately 
twice as likely to be denied credit after controlling for a number of 
factors. In contrast to their paper, our sample includes applications 
from all 50 states and a broader range of loan purposes, as only about 
20%  of  our  sample  reported  home  improvement  as  the  reason  for 
attempting to extract housing equity. Finally, it is important to note 
that Carlin and Divringi (2018) are unable to control for the credit risk 
factors used in our study because those fields were unavailable in the 
HMDA data before 2018. As we show below, these underwriting factors 
have a large impact on the size of estimated racial disparities in MEW 
denials and pricing.

3. Data description and sample construction

We use Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) loan/application 
register data, which are the most comprehensive publicly available 
source of mortgage lending application activity in the U.S., with over 
90% coverage of the U.S. mortgage market (Consumer Financial Pro-
tection Bureau, 2019; Bhutta et al., 2017).4

3 See Ross and Yinger (2002) for a review of the early (pre-2000) literature 

and methodologies.

4 

J.N. Conklin et al.

For  each  application  contained  in  the  public  version  of  HMDA 
data, the lender reports the race and ethnicity of the applicant and 
co-applicant (if applicable), along with other characteristics, such as 
their income, the census tract in which the home serving as collat-
eral is located, and various traits of the loan, including its purpose 
(purchase, home improvement, rate/term refinance, cash-out refinance, 
other purpose) and lien priority (first or second lien).

An important feature of HMDA data is that firms report the outcome 
of each loan application (loan originated, application denied, applica-
tion approved but not accepted, application withdrawn by applicant, 
or file closed for incompleteness), known as the ‘‘action’’ on the appli-
cation. Thus, one can examine the correlates of loan outcomes, with 
application denials (rejections) being the primary outcome of interest. 
However, historically HMDA data did not include key underwriting 
variables that lenders use to make credit approval and pricing deci-
sions. Starting in 2018, the HMDA data collection was expanded to 
include several new variables related to underwriting risk, including 
but not limited to, CLTV, DTI, and borrower credit scores, the last of 
which is available only in the confidential version of the data available 
to regulatory agencies. The availability of these fields has sparked re-
newed interest in using HMDA data to analyze the relationship between 
race and mortgage application outcomes (Bhutta et al., 2024; Frame 
et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2021). Another important change to the data 
in 2018 is critical for our research: HELOC reporting became mandatory 
for institutions that originate 500 or more HELOCs per year.

Not  all  inquiries  consumers  make  to  lenders  become  HMDA-
reportable applications, so one important limitation of any study using 
HMDA data is that interested applicants who become discouraged from 
applying may be missing from the data. This can be problematic for 
studies of racial differences in lending patterns if minority applicants 
are more likely to be discouraged and thus excluded from the analysis. 
Although there is no way to directly count these missing applications, 
we test for differences between racial groups in the ‘‘missing mass’’ 
of  applications  along  the  dimension  of  credit  scores.  We  describe 
this exercise (applied comparing Black and White applicants) and the 
results in Section A.8 of the Online Appendix. We find no evidence of 
systematic differences in missing applications from Black as compared 
to  White  applicants,  which  suggests  that  discouragement  based  on 
credit scores is similar between these groups. However, this should 
not be interpreted as proof that minority applicants experience the 
same amount of overall discouragement as White borrowers. As with 
all studies that use HMDA data, our results should be interpreted as the 
outcomes consumers experience conditional on applying.

We use the confidential version of HMDA data from 2018 to 2021. 
Our  primary  interest  lies  in  products  used  for  extracting  mortgage 
equity,  so  our  main  sample  includes  cash-out  refinances,  HELoans, 
and  HELOCs,  and  it  excludes  applications  for  rate/term  refinances 
and applications for home purchase mortgages.5 Since we focus on 
credit approval and pricing outcomes, we omit observations where the 
financial institution purchased the loan from another lender or the 

4 Coverage  is  not  100%  because  there  are  some  reporting  exemptions. 
Financial institutions that are exclusively rural or that originated fewer than 
100 closed-end mortgages in either of the last two years are not required 
to report closed-end mortgage applications. See Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council (2019), Bhutta et al. (2017), and Frame et al. (2022) for 
a more detailed discussion on HMDA reporting requirements. Open-end line 
of credit (HELOC) reporting exemptions are discussed in further detail below. 
Note that both the publicly available data and the confidential data available 
to financial regulators are anonymized.

5 At times we use rate/term refinances and purchase mortgage applications 
for comparison purposes. However, our main analysis excludes these loan 
types.  We  also  exclude  reverse  mortgages,  a  special  kind  of  home  equity 
mortgage  product  available  only  to  borrowers  who  are  62  or  older  and 
which have very different underwriting rules compared to ‘‘forward’’ equity 
withdrawal products (Mayer and Moulton, 2022).

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

application was a preapproval request. We also exclude applications 
with loan amounts less than $5,000 or greater than $1,000,000. We 
further restrict our sample to non-Hispanic White (hereafter ‘‘White’’), 
Black, Hispanic White (‘‘Hispanic’’), and Asian applicants.6 Our final 
MEW sample includes over 16 million observations across the 50 states 
and Washington, DC.

4. Results

We first look at mortgage denial rates by race and product type. We 
begin by exploring unconditional denial rate gaps and then explore how 
much of the gaps remain after taking into account typical underwriting 
criteria  used  in  making  these  loans.  Throughout  the  paper,  unless 
otherwise noted, we focus on applications where a credit decision was 
made, which includes originated loans, applications approved but for 
which the borrower did not accept the lender’s offer, and applications 
denied by the lender. We exclude applications where the file is closed 
for incompleteness or the application is withdrawn prior to a credit 
decision. We show summary statistics by race for all of the possible 
application outcomes in HMDA for each product type in Table A.2 in 
the Online Appendix.

4.1. Unconditional denial rates

Fig.  1 reports unconditional denial rates (among those with a credit 
decision) by race for each MEW product. For the purposes of compari-
son, we also report denial rates for non-MEW mortgages in the bottom 
right panel of the figure. A number of interesting facts are documented 
in Fig.  1. First, relative to non-MEW products (purchases and rate/term 
refinances), denial rates for MEW products are significantly higher for 
all racial groups. For example, White applicants are denied credit on 
only 8% of non-MEW applications; however, this number doubles to 
16% on cash-out refinances, 29% on HELoans, and 32% on HELOCs. 
This pattern holds within each of the other races as well; denial rates 
are highest on HELOCs, followed by HELoans, cash-out refinances, and 
non-MEW products, respectively.

Second, minority-White denial rate gaps are larger for MEW prod-
ucts relative to non-MEW products. As an example, Black applicants 
are 9 percentage points (that is, 17% minus 8%) more likely than White 
applicants to be denied non-MEW products. On cash-out refinances, the 
Black–White gap increases to 16 percentage points. The gap is even 
larger for HELoans (26 percentage points) and HELOCs (30 percentage 
points). This is notable as HELoans and HELOCs have relatively low 
transaction costs, and thus are generally regarded as low-cost methods 
of extracting home equity (Greenspan and Kennedy, 2008).

Third, although they are smaller than the Black–White gaps, the 
Hispanic- and Asian-White denial gaps are also large for HELoans and 
HELOCs.  Hispanic  applicants  are  11  percentage  points  more  likely 
to be denied than White applicants for HELoans and 22 percentage 
points more likely for HELOCs. The corresponding Asian-White gaps 
for HELoans and HELOCs are 8 and 14 percentage points, respectively.
Overall, these comparisons suggest very different levels of access to 
MEW products for different racial groups and that minority homeown-
ers, in particular, may have an especially difficult time tapping into 

6 For each applicant and co-applicant, we apply a waterfall to code the 
loans into mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories. Loans are classified 
as having an applicant who is Black if either the applicant or co-applicant is 
listed as Black in the first or second reported race field for that applicant. 
If not, then the observation moves on to the next phase of the waterfall, 
which identifies loans by Asian applicants. The third step of the waterfall looks 
for Hispanic White applicants. In the fourth step, remaining observations (for 
White applicants) are coded as non-Hispanic White if neither the applicant nor 
the co-applicant is coded as having a first or second race as Black or Asian 
and neither is coded as having ethnicity of Hispanic. All other observations 
(such as those with no race reported) are excluded from our analysis.

5 

J.N. Conklin et al.

Fig. 3.  Decomposition of denial rate differences by lender.
Note: Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca decomposition of Black–White denial rate differences 
by product type, 2018–2021. Each panel includes separate decompositions for the top 
50 largest lenders in that product type. Independent variables are the same as in Table 
2 column (5).
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

their accumulated housing wealth. We can borrow a framework from 
the 1978 federal Uniform Guidelines for Employee Selection Procedures 
to assess the magnitude of these differences—the ‘‘four-fifths rule,’’ 
used  for  measuring  disparities  in  hiring  rates  between  groups  with 
the highest acceptance rates (usually White men) and a comparison 

6 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

group (usually a protected class). In this framework, one divides the 
acceptance rate for a minority group’s job applications by the White 
male  acceptance  rate  to  generate  an  ‘‘adverse  impact  ratio’’  (AIR). 
If the ratio is less than 0.8, then there is evidence that the hiring 
practices have an adverse impact on the minority group (Newman and 
Lyon, 2009). Using this as a heuristic for acceptance rates in mortgage 
applications, non-MEW products meet the four-fifths rule (with AIRs 
ranging from 0.90 to 0.99), whereas for HELOCs Black, Hispanic, and 
Asian applicants all have acceptance rates less than 80% of the White 
acceptance rate, indicating adverse impact.7

Although the unconditional denial rates exhibit large differences 
across race in Fig.  1, significant differences in observable borrower 
and  loan  characteristics  exist  across  racial  groups  as  well.  Table   1 
reports average borrower and loan characteristics for MEW applications 
separately by race. Loan amounts and credit scores, in particular, vary 
considerably  across  racial  groups.  In  the  next  section,  we  examine 
conditional  correlations  between  race  and  MEW  application  denial 
rates.

4.2. Conditional denial rates

In the previous section, we documented large, unconditional differ-
ences in MEW product denial rates across races. But, as Table  1 shows, 
there are borrower and loan characteristics that likely covary with both 
race and the likelihood of an application being denied. To examine this 
possibility, we next estimate a series of loan application-level linear 
probability models (LPMs) of the following form8: 

𝑌𝑖 = 𝛽1𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 + 𝛽2𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑖 + 𝛽3𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑖 + 𝑿𝒊𝛾 + 𝜂𝑡 + 𝜆𝑙 + 𝜔𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖,

(1)

where 𝑌𝑖 is an indicator for whether borrower 𝑖’s mortgage application 
is denied. 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖, 𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑖, and 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑖 are indicator variables set to 
one if the applicant is Black, Hispanic, or Asian, respectively. White is 
the excluded category in the econometric model, so the 𝛽 coefficients 
should be interpreted relative to a White applicant. 𝑋𝑖 is a vector of 
covariates that varies across models. 𝜂𝑡 and 𝜆𝑙 are application year and 
lender fixed effects, respectively. State fixed effects are represented by 
𝜔𝑠. Finally, 𝜖𝑖 is an error term.

4.2.1. Decomposition of denial rate differences

Our empirical approach is to sequentially expand the covariates 
included in our regression models to determine whether the inclusion 
of additional controls reduces (in absolute magnitude) the 𝛽 coefficients 
in Eq.  (1). In other words, are the racial gaps smaller once we control 
for factors used by lenders in mortgage underwriting (such as credit 
score)?

Table  2 reports coefficient estimates from Eq.  (1) using the sample 
of MEW applications where a credit decision was made. We pool all 
MEW  products  together  in  this  table,  but  we  estimate  our  models 
separately  for  each  loan  product  type  later  in  the  analysis.  Unless 
otherwise  noted,  standard  errors  are  double-clustered  at  the  lender 
and state levels. In the interest of concision, we only report the race 
coefficients9; however, the full set of coefficient estimates are available 
in Table A.4 in the Online Appendix. As a baseline, column (1) only 
controls for applicant race so the coefficients can be interpreted as 
unconditional differences in denial rates relative to White applicants. 

7 Among HELoan applications, the AIR is 0.63 for Black applicants but 
0.85 and 0.89 for Hispanic and Asian applicants, respectively. For cash-out 
refinances, the AIR is just above the borderline, at 0.81 for Black applicants.

8 The average marginal effects of race from logit models are similar to the 

LPM coefficient estimates (Online Appendix Table A.5).

9 When an underwriting characteristic is not used to make a credit decision 
on a specific application, it is reported as ‘‘not applicable’’ in HMDA data. This 
applies to a small share of our sample (see Online Appendix Table A.3). We 
include ‘‘not applicable’’ indicators in our regression models.

J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Table 2
Applicant race and likelihood of denial on MEW products.
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.
  Dependent Var:Loan Denied (d)
(1)

(2)

  Black (d)

  Hispanic (d)

  Asian (d)

0.212***
(0.022)

0.095***
(0.025)

0.076***
(0.018)

0.192***
(0.019)

0.092***
(0.015)

0.087***
(0.013)

(3)

0.058***
(0.007)

0.027**
(0.009)

0.060***
(0.010)

(4)

0.055***
(0.007)

0.027**
(0.009)

0.062***
(0.010)

(5)

0.047***
(0.005)

0.022**
(0.007)

0.049***
(0.007)

(6)
0.036***  
(0.003)
0.024***  
(0.004)
0.036***  
(0.005)

Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N

N
N
N
N
N
N
N

  Year FE
  State FE
  DTI Buckets
  Credit Score Buckets
  CLTV Buckets
  Other Controls
  Lender FE
  # Observations
12,638,969
  Adjusted R2
0.319
  Mean Denial Rate
0.26
Note: This table reports coefficient estimates from linear probability models where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the 
application was denied. The sample includes MEW products (cash-out refinances, HELoans, HELOCs) for which a credit decision was made. 
Dichotomous variables are signified by (d). Standard errors, clustered at the state and lender levels, are in parentheses. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, 
* p<0.05.

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
12,638,969 
0.431
0.26

12,638,969
0.020
0.26

12,638,969
0.047
0.26

12,638,969
0.334
0.26

12,638,969
0.375
0.26

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

Black applicants are 21.2 percentage points more likely than White 
applicants to be denied credit, while Hispanic applicants and Asian 
applicants are 9.5 and 7.6 percentage points more likely to be denied, 
respectively. These racial gaps are large relative to the mean denial rate 
of 26%, reported at the bottom of the table.

In  column  (2),  we  include  application  year  fixed  effects  to  ac-
count for temporal changes in economic conditions and denial rates 
at the national level. Because mortgage regulations vary across states, 
particularly with respect to foreclosure, we also include state fixed 
effects. Adding these controls has a marginal impact on the racial gaps. 
Likewise, estimating the models separately by year shows that the racial 
gaps persist throughout time in our sample, as discussed in Section 
A.2.7 of the Online Appendix.

In column (3), we add controls for DTI and credit score, two key 
factors used by lenders in mortgage underwriting. More specifically, 
we flexibly control for these variables by creating DTI and credit score 
bin dummies.10 Adding DTI and credit score bins reduces the racial gap 
for Black and Hispanic applicants to 5.8 and 2.7 percentage points, re-
spectively, reductions on the order of 72% relative to the unconditional 
gaps. The Asian gap declines somewhat less to 6.0 percentage points, 
but this still represents an 18% reduction.

In column (4), we add dummies for the following CLTV bins: (0,60], 
(60,70], (70,75], (75,80], (80,85] (85,90], (90,95], (95,98], (98,100], 
and CLTV missing. Including these dummies has a minimal effect on 
the estimated racial gaps. Thus, underwriting factors associated with 
the borrower’s ability and willingness to pay (DTI, credit score) explain 
more of the racial gaps than the collateral-based factor of CLTV.11

10 The  DTI  bins  are  (0,25],  (25,35],  (35,45],  (45,50],  (50,55],  (55,60], 
(60,101], and DTI missing because it was reported as ‘‘not applicable.’’ Credit 
score is binned as [300,620], [620,639), [640,660), [660,680), [680,700), 
[700,720), [720,740), [740,851), and credit score not applicable.
11 There are a few caveats that are worth noting about the small effect of 
CLTV on the size of the minority-White denial disparities. First, the CLTV 
measure for denied applications in HMDA data may reflect the applied-for 
CLTV rather than the ‘‘actual’’ CLTV, since a loan might reach a rejection 
decision before it receives an appraisal (which comes later in the underwriting 
process). Second, the sample period (2018–2021) was characterized by strong 
house price growth across the entire country, which somewhat mitigates cross-
sectional variation in how much equity would be a binding constraint between 
racial groups. Thus, it is not clear that this result is generalizable to periods 
with less robust house price growth.

In column (5), we add a host of other application-level controls: loan 
amount bins, applicant income buckets, loan term bins, and product 
type dummies (HELoan, HELOC). We also include dummies indicating 
whether the proceeds are used for home improvements, the existence 
of a prepayment penalty, second-lien loan, FHA and VA loans, interest-
only payments, other non-amortizing features, a second home purchase, 
an investment property purchase, the absence of a co-applicant, and 
number of units (1–4) dummies. The Black, Hispanic, and Asian gaps 
are reduced to 4.7, 2.2, and 4.9 percentage points, respectively.

Two recent studies document that minorities tend to sort into high-
cost lenders and brokers (Bayer et al., 2018; Ambrose et al., 2021). A 
similar type of sorting could occur with respect to denials. For example, 
if minority homeowners tend to apply to lenders with conservative 
underwriting guidelines, this could explain the observed racial gaps in 
denials. After adding lender fixed effects in column (6) to account for 
this possibility, we indeed see sizable reductions in the Black–White 
and Asian-White denial gaps. Throughout the remainder of the paper, 
we refer to the specification in column (6) as ‘‘the saturated model.’’12
Overall, Table  2 shows that the large, unconditional minority-White 
denial  rate  gaps  are  reduced  considerably  after  including  standard 
control variables. Yet, even after including these controls, the residual 
disparities are non-trivial (2–4 percentage points). We caution against 
interpreting the relationship between race and application denial as 
causal. There are underwriting factors that likely covary with both race 
and denial that are not included in HMDA data, such as an applicant’s 
liquid assets and employment type (salaried or self-employed). We do 
note, however, that when lenders deny an application, they report the 
reason(s) for the rejection, which can help capture information on risk 
factors beyond what the credit score, DTI, income, and CLTV fields 
can measure. As we discuss in Section A.3 of the Online Appendix, we 
see no evidence that these other factors are driving the racial denial 

12 Online Appendix Table A.6 explores the robustness of our results to al-
ternative fixed effects specifications. The race coefficient estimates are similar 
when we include lender by location (census tract) fixed effects and location 
by time (county-year) fixed effects. Likewise, the results are similar when we 
restrict the sample to applications with collateral property located in census 
tracts with predominantly non-Hispanic white populations (90th percentile or 
higher), as well as when we exclude from the sample the 6.5% of applications 
in which the applicant’s race and/or ethnicity is imputed by the lender based 
on visual observation or surname. Those results are displayed in Table A.7 in 
the Online Appendix.

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

gaps.  Instead,  the  denial  reasons  provided  by  lenders  confirm  that 
credit history is of critical importance in explaining the Black–White 
disparities, and DTI is disproportionately cited as a reason that Hispanic 
and Asian applicants are denied, relative to White applicants, consistent 
with Table  2.

One  might  also  be  tempted  to  interpret  the  reduction  in  racial 
disparities as we add controls in Table  2 to be evidence of only minor 
racial differences in access to MEW products. We are careful not to 
make this claim, as differences in control variables that affect access 
to  MEW  products  may  themselves  be  the  result  of  systemic  racial 
inequities. With these limitations in mind, the fact that controlling for 
basic underwriting variables reduces most of the minority-White gaps 
in denial rates suggests that taste-based discrimination is unlikely to 
explain most of those unconditional disparities.

4.2.2. Product type

In Table  3, we estimate our denial rate models separately for each 
MEW product type. The sample in Panels A, B, and C include cash-out 
refinances, HELoans, and HELOCs, respectively. Most of the MEW ap-
plications are for cash-out refinances (7 million), with the next largest 
group being HELOCs (4 million applications). Column (1) includes only 
applicant race controls, while column (2) reports estimates from the 
saturated specification (column (6) in Table  2).13 Column (1) shows 
that unconditional minority-White denial rate disparities exist for all 
three product types, but the gaps are much larger in our sample of 
HELoans and HELOCs. For example, Black applicants are 16.8 percent-
age points more likely than White applicants to be denied on a cash-out 
refinance, but this Black–White gap increases to 25.9 percentage points 
for HELoans and 30.1 percentage points for HELOCs. Similar patterns 
hold for the Hispanic-White and Asian-White gaps. Note, though, that 
the mean denial rates for HELoans (33%) and HELOCs (37%) are also 
significantly higher than the mean for cash-out refinances (18%).

For cash-out refinances in Panel A, moving to the saturated model 
in column (2) reduces the Black coefficient from 16.8 to 3.4 percentage 
points, a reduction of 80%. The Hispanic coefficient declines by 67% in 
the saturated model, relative to its value in column (1). In contrast, the 
Asian coefficient increases from 1.7 percentage points in column (1) to 
2.4 percentage points in column (2). Panel B on HELoans and Panel C 
on HELOCs also show large coefficient reductions when adding the full 
set of controls in the saturated model.

Next we use an alternative methodology – Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca 
decompositions  –  to  study  differences  in  rejection  rates  (Kitagawa, 
1955;  Blinder,  1973;  Oaxaca,  1973).  This  approach  decomposes
minority-White denial rate gaps into a part that is explained by group 
differences in characteristics, and a residual, or unexplained, compo-
nent.14 The unexplained component is often taken to be an estimate 
of the extent of discrimination, but we caution against such an inter-
pretation in this context due to omitted factors like liquid wealth and 
employment history that lenders may take into account.

The  following  equations  illustrate  the  decomposition.  We  want 
to  determine  how  much  of  the  mean  difference  in  rejection  rates 
between  two  groups,  A  and  B,  can  be  attributed  to  explained  and 
unexplained components. We begin with separate application-level OLS 
(LPM) denial models for each group: 

𝑌𝐴 = 𝑋′

𝐴𝛽𝐴 + 𝜖𝐴,

(2)

13 Columns (1) and (2) in Table  3 are comparable to columns (1) and (6) 
in Table  2. Appendix Table A.8 shows the full build-out table by product type 
where we include additional controls sequentially, while Table A.9 shows that 
the results are consistent when we instead pool all the applications and interact 
race and product type.
14 See Jones and Kelley (1984), Jann (2008), and Blau and Kahn (2017) for 
more detailed discussions of the methodology. Blascak and Tranfaglia (2021) 
use this approach to study gender differences in bankcard credit limits. We 
use the ‘‘twofold’’ decomposition, but results are similar using the ‘‘threefold’’ 
approach.

Table 3
Applicant race and likelihood of denial by product type.
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.
  Panel A: Cash-Out Refinances

  Black

  Hispanic

  Asian

(1)

0.168***
(0.023)
0.045**
(0.014)
0.017*
(0.007)

  # Observations
  Adjusted R2
  Mean Denial Rate
  Panel B: Home Equity Loans (HELoans)
  Black

7,030,943
0.015
0.18

0.259***
(0.026)
0.112***
(0.017)
0.085***
(0.024)

  Hispanic

  Asian

1,479,900
0.027
0.33

  # Observations
  Adjusted R2
  Mean Denial Rate
  Panel C: Home Equity Lines of Credit (HELOCs)
  Black
0.301***
(0.012)
0.213***
(0.021)
0.133***
(0.018)

  Hispanic

  Asian

(2)

0.034***
(0.003)
0.015***
(0.003)
0.024***
(0.002)

7,030,943
0.345
0.18

0.045***
(0.004)
0.030***
(0.003)
0.042***
(0.005)

1,479,900
0.471
0.33

0.036***
(0.004)
0.037***
(0.005)
0.042***
(0.007)

4,128,076
0.039
0.37

4,128,076
0.512
0.37

  # Observations
  Adjusted R2
  Mean Denial Rate
  Year FE
  State FE
  DTI Buckets
  Credit Score Buckets
  CLTV Buckets
  Other Controls
  Lender FE
Note: This table reports coefficient estimates from linear probability models where the 
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the application was denied. The sample 
in Panels A, B, and C are cash-out refinances, HELoans, and HELOCs, respectively, for 
which a credit decision was made. Standard errors, clustered at the state and lender 
levels, are in parentheses. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05.

N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

and 
𝑌𝐵 = 𝑋′

𝐵𝛽𝐵 + 𝜖𝐵,

(3)

where  Y  is  an  indicator  for  whether  an  individual’s  application  is 
denied (we suppress 𝑖 subscripts to simplify notation). 𝑋 is a vector 
of explanatory variables that affect denial.

Let  ̂𝛽𝐴 and  ̂𝛽𝐵 be the OLS estimates of 𝛽𝐴 and 𝛽𝐵, respectively. Mean 
values are denoted with a bar over the variable. Assuming that there 
is no discrimination against group A (only against group B), we can 
decompose the group difference in denial rates as follows: 
′
𝑌 𝐴 − 𝑌 𝐵 = (𝑋𝐴 − 𝑋𝐵)′ ̂𝛽𝐴 + 𝑋

𝐵( ̂𝛽𝐴 − ̂𝛽𝐵).
The first term on the right-hand side is the explained component; the 
amount of the mean difference in rejection rates that is due to the 
groups having different characteristics (𝑋s), on average. The second 
term, the unexplained component, captures that the two groups are 
treated differently in underwriting, as indicated by the difference in 
̂𝛽𝑠.

(4)

In  our  context,  we  will  focus  on  denial  rate  gaps  between  two 
groups: Black and White applicants. The decomposition approach has 
a few useful properties in our setting. First, it tells us what share of the 
rejection gaps are explained by differences in observed characteristics 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J.N. Conklin et al.

(e.g., credit score, DTI, CLTV) between Black and White applicants. 
Second,  the  difference  can  further  be  decomposed  to  measure  the 
detailed contributions of single predictors (or groups of predictors) on 
minority-White denial gaps. For example, it can tell us how much of the 
Black–White rejection gap is due to differences in credit scores across 
groups, and how much is due to DTI differences.15 We perform the 
decompositions separately by product type and display the results in 
Fig.  2. The included controls are the same as in column (5) of Table 
2, i.e., the main model but excluding lender fixed effects. The total 
height of the bars in each product type is the mean difference in denial 
rates between Black and White applicants. The shading indicates how 
much of the overall denial rate difference is attributed to different 
factors. Across each of the three product types, 4 to 5 percentage points 
of the Black–White denial gap remains unexplained. However, large 
portions of the overall gap are explained by differences in character-
istics between Black and White applicants. For example, the largest 
contributor to denial gaps across all three loan products is differences in 
credit scores between the two groups. DTI and other control differences 
also explain a sizable portion of the denial gaps in both HELoans and 
HELOCs. In contrast, there appears to be little difference in CLTV ratios 
between Black and White applicants in all products.

In  summary,  Fig.   2  shows  that  a  large  portion  of  Black–White 
denial gaps is explained by differences in observable characteristics 
across the two groups of applicants, and that credit scores are the 
most  important  underwriting  factor.  However,  a  sizable  portion  of 
the denial gaps remain unexplained, even after determinants of credit 
decisions are taken into account. Finally, while the unexplained gaps 
in the Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca decompositions are consistent with 
discrimination, it is important to note that they may also be due to 
omitted factors in the underlying group-specific denial regressions used 
to create the decompositions.

4.3. Denials by lender type and MEW pricing

The different MEW products we examine tend to be handled by 
different types of financial institutions. For example, HELOCs generally 
are offered by banks and credit unions, while a large share of cash-
out  refinances  is  originated  by  nonbank  lenders.  The  underwriting 
criteria may vary across different types of financial institutions, and 
thus, disparities in access to MEW may also vary across lender types. 
We explore this possibility in detail in Online Appendix Section A.4 
and find that across all MEW product types and lender types (banks, 
nonbanks, and credit unions), minorities are more likely to be denied 
credit relative to comparable White applicants.

In Online Appendix Section A.4 we also examine whether racial 
disparities in mortgage denials vary between majority- and minority-
owned banks. We show that Hispanic-White and Asian applicants have 
lower denial rates than their White counterparts at Hispanic- and Asian-
owned banks, respectively, which is consistent with minority applicants 
receiving more favorable treatment at minority-owned banks. However, 
we caution against interpreting these results too strongly because ap-
plications to minority-owned banks represent a small share (0.65%) of 
the sample, and a borrower’s choice of which type of lender to apply 
to may be endogenous.

Finally, in Online Appendix Section A.5 we test whether mortgage 
pricing for MEW products varies by race. There is limited research on 
MEW product pricing, and to our knowledge, this paper is the first to 
examine racial pricing disparities in this market. Consistent with the 

15 This  is  similar  in  spirit  to  our  approach  in  Section  4.2.1,  where  we 
sequentially expanded the covariates in our regression model and observed 
changes  in  the  race  coefficients  after  adding  controls,  although  the  order 
in which controls are added can impact the magnitude of the subsequent 
changes in coefficient estimates. In contrast, the Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca 
decompositions do not have this ‘‘ordering’’ issue.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

findings on MEW application denials, unconditional minority pricing 
gaps are large for all MEW products, however, most of the disparities 
are significantly reduced after including control variables. For Hispanic 
borrowers, residual pricing gaps are effectively zero across all MEW 
products, while Black borrowers face similar costs to White borrowers 
for cash-out refinances and HELoans, but pay around 10 basis points 
more for HELOCs. Asian borrowers pay less than comparable White 
borrowers across all MEW products. It is important to note that while 
equilibrium mortgage prices reflect credit risk, they are also influenced 
by factors such as shopping behavior, financial literacy, and bargaining 
power (Bartlett et al., 2022; Woodward and Hall, 2012). Therefore, 
residual racial disparities in MEW pricing may be attributed to racial 
differences in these non-credit risk factors.

5. Discussion

We have documented large, unconditional differences in average 
denial  rates  for  mortgage  equity  withdrawal  products  across  racial 
groups. Similarly, we also find large unconditional differences in MEW 
pricing across racial groups in a sample of originated loans. In both 
cases, the racial disparities significantly decline when we control for 
differences  in  observable  loan  and  borrower  characteristics  as  well 
as lender fixed effects. In this section, we begin by discussing a few 
ways one might interpret these patterns. We implement four additional 
pieces of analysis to shed light on the extent to which discrimination 
could explain our results. We then conduct a back-of-the-envelope cal-
culation to try to determine how much racial differences in denial rates 
translate into differences in the amount of housing wealth accessed by 
minority vs. White homeowners.

5.1. Interpretation and mechanisms

One may be tempted to interpret the small, conditional denial rate 
disparities as evidence that racial discrimination in the MEW product 
market is quantitatively unimportant. However, we believe that this 
would be a naïve interpretation, as it is unclear exactly what factors 
some of our controls are picking up. For example, while controlling for 
credit scores, DTI ratios, and CLTV ratios significantly lowers denial 
rate disparities between Black and White applicants by approximately 
two-thirds (columns (1) vs. (3) in Table  2), the differences in the levels 
of  these  controls  across  racial  groups  may  themselves  be  reflective 
of structural discrimination against minority applicants. For example, 
the large differences in average credit scores and DTI ratios between 
White and minority individuals documented in Table  1 may be due 
to historical lending practices that were discriminatory. Alternatively, 
discrimination in other markets (e.g., labor markets) may cause racial 
disparities  in  factors  used  in  underwriting.  Although  incorporating 
these factors into credit decisions may be justified in terms of credit 
risk, by doing so, credit markets may ‘‘import’’ structural discrimina-
tion from other markets. Regardless of the source of minority-White 
disparities in underwriting factors, credit markets have the potential to 
serve as a mechanism for perpetuating disparities through differential 
access to MEW products.

Similarly, it may be tempting to interpret the remaining, small, but 
statistically significant conditional disparities in MEW product denial 
rates and prices as arising from racially discriminatory practices on 
the part of lenders. However, while the existence of such disparities 
is consistent with the presence of racial discrimination, it is also con-
sistent with more benign explanations. One such explanation is the 
absence of information in the HMDA data about variables that may 
play a significant role in the underwriting process for certain lenders. 
For example, the HMDA data do not include any information on an ap-
plicant’s liquid assets. Many mortgage lenders require that a potential 
borrower have sufficient liquid assets (i.e., funds in a checking/savings 
account) to be able to cover a certain number of mortgage payments 
in the event of an adverse financial shock. Additionally, the HMDA 

9 

J.N. Conklin et al.

data do not include any information about an applicant’s employment 
history. Many lenders require proof that a potential borrower has held 
a stable job for a certain amount of time prior to approval. If minority 
applicants have lower amounts of liquid assets and higher employment 
volatility compared to White applicants, then we would expect to see 
disparities in denial rates that would reflect those differences.

Although we cannot definitively say whether unobserved underwrit-
ing factors or racial discrimination explain the residual denial rate gaps, 
we perform four types of additional analysis that provide suggestive 
evidence on this front. First, we exploit lender-level heterogeneity in 
our Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca decomposition. Second, we examine the 
relationship between race, AUS decisions, and lender denials. Third, 
we  implement  an  exercise  that  correlates  residual  denial  rate  gaps 
with a lender-specific measure of ‘‘strictness’’ on unobservable under-
writing factors. All three of these exercises speak to the unobservable 
underwriting factors hypothesis. Finally, we examine whether racial 
disparities are more pronounced in geographic areas that are charac-
terized by high levels of racial animus, which would be consistent with 
discrimination playing a role in MEW product markets.

5.1.1. Lender-level decompositions

We begin by separately estimating the Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca 
decompositions of Black–White denial rate gaps for each of the 50 
largest lenders (in terms of volume) in each product type. The results 
are displayed in Fig.  3. In a given panel (product type), each vertical 
bar represents a different lender. The height of the bar, marked with a 
black dot, is the total (unconditional) Black–White denial rate gap for 
that lender, with the gray and red portions indicating the explained and 
unexplained components, respectively. For each product type, lenders 
are ordered by the size of the explained component. This means that 
Black and White applicants are observably similar at a lender that 
falls on the left-hand side of the figure. Conversely, Black and White 
applicants are very different on observable dimensions at lenders that 
lie on the right-hand side of the panels.

The first notable observation from Fig.  3 is that all of the black 
dots have positive values, meaning that Black applicants have higher 
unconditional rejection rates at every single lender in all product types. 
Within each product type, however, significant heterogeneity exists 
across lenders in the overall Black–White denial gap, the explained 
component, and the unexplained portion of the gap. For example, there 
is almost no difference in denial rates for the leftmost lender in the bot-
tom panel, but other HELOC lenders have Black–White gaps of nearly 
40 percentage points. For several of those high-gap HELOC lenders, 
though,  virtually  all  of  the  gap  is  due  to  differences  in  observable 
characteristics between Black and White applicants. In a few cases, 
the unexplained component is actually negative, suggesting that Black 
applicants may actually get more favorable treatment at those lenders.
Although the heterogeneity across lenders and product types in Fig. 
3 is interesting in its own right, the results may also speak to whether 
unobservable underwriting factors drive residual racial disparities in re-
jection rates. To see this, let us assume that if a specific lender receives 
applications from Black and White applicants that are very different 
on observable underwriting variables, those same borrowers likely also 
differ significantly along underwriting factors that are observable to 
the  lender,  but  not  included  in  the  HMDA  data.  For  example,  if  a 
lender’s Black and White applicants have very different credit scores, 
DTIs, and CLTVs, we might expect the applicants to also have very 
different levels of liquid assets and employment histories. Conversely, 
if a lender’s Black and White applicants are similar in terms of HMDA 
variables, they may also be similar in terms of underwriting factors 
that are unobservable to the econometrician. Under this assumption, 
if unobservable underwriting factors are driving most of the variation 
in  unexplained  denial  gaps,  then  we  would  expect  to  see  a  strong 
correlation between the size of explained (gray) and unexplained (red) 
components of the denial gap across lenders. However, this is not borne 
out in Fig.  3, which shows that the size of the unexplained denial 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

disparities between Black and White applicants is not highly correlated 
with the size of the explained disparities. The correlation coefficient 
for the explained and unexplained components is actually negative for 
HELoans (r = −0.10, p = .474) and HELOCs (r = −0.37, p = 0.008). 
The correlation is positive but weak and marginally significant for cash-
out refinances (r = 0.26, p = 0.070). This provides suggestive evidence 
that residual Black–White denial rate gaps are not purely driven by 
underwriting factors that we do not observe in the HMDA data.

In Section A.6 of the Online Appendix, we provide a more detailed 
discussion of the lender-level decomposition exercise in this section, 
including a more formal description of the test and its key underlying 
assumption  that  differences  in  observable  underwriting  factors  are 
positively correlated with differences in unobservable factors across 
lenders. We also present indirect evidence supporting the validity of 
this assumption.

5.1.2. AUS decisions and lender denials

As an additional test of whether unobserved credit risk factors drive 
minority-White denial gaps, we follow the approach of Bhutta et al. 
(2024) by focusing on a subset of mortgage applications that received 
an Automated Underwriting System (AUS) recommendation. Applicant 
information for most of the cash-out refinances in our sample was en-
tered into an AUS, which scores the loans for credit risk using statistical 
models and ultimately provides a recommendation for whether the 
application may be approved. Importantly, the AUS recommendation 
is based not only on the credit risk factors observed in HMDA, but also 
on a set of other credit-relevant information. For example, Fannie Mae’s 
Desktop  Underwriter  (DU),  one  of  the  most  commonly  used  AUSs, 
considers the risk factors observed in HMDA as well as characteristics 
including, but not limited to, the borrower’s liquid reserves, public 
record information, length of credit history, and income variability. 
Note that AUSs are explicitly forbidden from considering race, other 
prohibited factors, and neighborhood location, and regulators review 
these systems to ensure that they are race-blind (Bhutta et al., 2024).
If inherently race-blind AUS denial recommendations are condition-
ally correlated with applicant race, this would suggest that unobserved 
risk factors vary across racial groups. To test this, we estimate our fully 
saturated model (column 2, Panel A of Table  3) using the AUS denial 
recommendation indicator as the dependent variable. This indicator 
takes a value of one for applications that did not receive an ‘‘accept/el-
igible’’ or equivalent AUS decision. Our sample here includes cash-out 
refinance applications where an AUS decision is observed. Column (1) 
of Table  4 shows that minority applicants are more likely to receive an 
AUS denial recommendation. Because AUSs are race-blind, this implies 
that race is correlated with unobserved credit risk factors.

Note, though, that an AUS decision is only a recommendation. A 
lender can still deny an application that receives an AUS approval 
recommendation, and it can originate a loan that had a negative AUS 
recommendation.  This  enables  estimation  of  our  application  denial 
regression after conditioning on the AUS decision, which will largely 
account for quantifiable credit risk factors that are correlated with race, 
but unobserved in HMDA. Column (3) of Table  4 shows that compared 
to column (2) (which does not include the AUS denial indicator), racial 
denial rate gaps decline after controlling for the AUS recommendation. 
However, significant residual racial denial rate gaps persist in column 
(3). Black, Hispanic, and Asian applicants are still 2.5, 1.0, and 1.9 
percentage points more likely to be denied after conditioning on AUS 
recommendation. These results echo the first-lien mortgage application 
findings of Bhutta et al. (2024). The fact that residual disparities only 
marginally decline when we condition on the AUS recommendation is 
consistent with other unobserved factors, such as discriminatory be-
havior, playing an important role in MEW lending decisions. However, 
it is important to note that the results displayed in Table  4 do not 
completely rule out the possibility that unobserved credit risk factors
fully explain residual racial denial rate gaps, because the binary AUS 
decision is a noisy proxy for these factors.

10 

J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Fig. 4.  Lender strictness and unexplained racial gaps.
Note: Includes cash-out refinance, home equity loan, and home equity line of credit applications from Black and White consumers reported by financial institutions in 2018–2021. 
Sample is restricted to the top 50 lenders by application within each product type. ‘‘Strictness’’ (x-axis) reflects lender fixed effects from the fully saturated denial rate model, 
estimated on White applicants only. ‘‘Unexplained racial gap’’ (y-axis) is the unexplained Black–White denial rate gap from the decompositions reported in Fig.  3.
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

5.1.3. Lender ‘‘strictness’’

In  this  section  we  implement  an  additional  exercise,  developed 
in  Bhutta  et  al.  (2024),  to  test  whether  unobservable  underwriting 
factors explain variation in the residual denial rate gaps. The exercise 
involves two steps. First, we estimate our fully saturated denial rate 
model  by  product  type  (column  2,  Table   3)  on  our  sample  of  the 
top 50 lenders (within each product type). The models are estimated 
using only applications from White borrowers. We extract the estimated 
lender  fixed  effects  from  the  regression  output  and  interpret  them 
as a measure of lender ‘‘strictness’’ in underwriting with respect to 
variables that are omitted from the HMDA dataset. The measure is 
constructed using only White applicants in order to isolate differences 
across lenders in strictness that are not contaminated by differential 
treatment of minority applicants. Positive values indicate lenders that 
impose tougher underwriting standards than average on White appli-
cants, while a value of zero means a lender’s rejection rate of White 
borrowers is average, conditional on observable factors.

The second step of the exercise involves estimating the correlation 
across lenders between the strictness measure and residual Black–White 
denial gap disparities. If those disparities are due to differences in how 
lenders account for unobservable factors that differ between Black and 
White applicants in their underwriting processes, then we should expect 
a positive correlation between the strictness measures and the residual 
disparities.  Bhutta  et  al.  (2024)  find  a  strong,  positive  correlation 
for both purchase mortgages and refinance loans and conclude that 
residual denial gaps for those mortgage products are ‘‘at least partly 
a result of tight lender standards on unobservable factors,’’ (p. 16).

Fig.  4 displays scatter plots of residual Black–White denial gaps (y-
axis) against the lender strictness measures (x-axis) for each of the three 
MEW product types in our sample. We show two plots for cash-out 
refinances in the upper panel of the figure. The upper left plot includes 
in the lender fixed effect regressions a control for the AUS decision, 
while the upper right plot does not. Comparing the two plots suggests 

that the AUS control, which is not available for HELOCs and HELoans, 
does not have a significant impact on this analysis.

In  contrast  to  the  results  in  Bhutta  et  al.  (2024)  corresponding 
to  purchase  and  refinance  mortgages,  the  correlations  between  the 
lender strictness measures and the residual Black–White denial gaps 
for MEW products are weak. The correlation is essentially zero for 
cash-out refinances and HELoans and is slightly negative for HELOCs. 
These patterns are consistent with the results from the lender-level 
Kitagawa–Blinder–Oaxaca decompositions in Section 5.1.1 and suggest 
that underwriting factors that are not observed in HMDA are unlikely 
to explain all of the residual denial rate gaps.

5.1.4. Media market racial animus

To shed light on whether the racial disparities in denial rates might 
be the result of discrimination, we exploit geographic variation in racial 
animus and test whether the size of racial disparities in rejection rates 
positively covaries with the level of racial animus across metropolitan 
statistical areas (MSAs). Intuitively, are the minority-White denial gaps 
more pronounced in areas with more prejudiced populations? To proxy 
for  racial  animus,  we  employ  the  Racial  Animus  Index  developed 
by  Stephens-Davidowitz  (2014),  which  relies  on  the  percentage  of 
Google search queries containing racially charged language.16 Higher 
levels of the index represent greater racial bias against Black individ-
uals. Stephens-Davidowitz’s racial animus measure has been used to 

16 Stephens-Davidowitz’s animus measure is available for 196 media mar-
kets in the United States. The measure was calculated using data from the 
2004–2007 period and may not accurately reflect geographic differences in 
the extent of racial animus during our sample period. Since HMDA data do 
not include a media market identifier, we manually match loans’ counties 
to their MSAs and then to media markets. There are 184 separate media 
markets represented in our mortgage data. Also, the measure is based on 
racially charged terms related to the Black population. This may not be a good 
indicator of the level of racial animus toward other minority groups.

11 

J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Table 4
AUS decisions in cash-out refinances.
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

  Black

  Hispanic

  Asian

  AUS ‘‘Denial’’

(1)
‘‘AUS Denial’’

0.017***
(0.003)
0.006***
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)

(2)
Application Denial
without AUS Outcome Control
0.031***
(0.003)
0.012***
(0.003)
0.021***
(0.002)

(3)
Application Denial
with AUS Outcome Control 
0.025***
(0.003)
0.010***
(0.002)
0.019***
(0.002)
0.398***
(0.024)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

  Year FE
  State FE
  DTI Buckets
  Credit Score Buckets
  CLTV Buckets
  Other Controls
  Lender FE
  AUS ‘‘Denial’’
  # Observations
  Adjusted R2
  Mean Outcome
Note: Includes cash-out refinance applications. Standard errors, clustered at the state and lender levels, are in parentheses. 
*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05.

6,138,491
0.344
0.13

6,138,491
0.272
0.13

6,138,491
0.254
0.08

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Table 5
Estimated aggregate dollars of loan proceeds to borrowers denied.
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

  [1]

  [2]
  [3]
  [4]
  [5]
  [6]
  [7]
  [8]

  [9]

  [10]
  [11]
  [12]
  [13]
  [14]
  [15]
  [16]

  [17]

  [18]
  [19]
  [20]
  [21]
  [22]
  [23]
  [24]

  [25]
  [26]
  [27]
  [28]

Cash-out
Average estimated cash to borrower per application
Estimated aggregate loan proceeds (in billions)
   All applications with credit decision
   Denial Rate
   Denied $, [2] * [3]
   Denied $, given White denial rate [2] * [3, White]
   Unconditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [4] – [5]
   Table 3, model 2 coefficient
   Conditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [2] * [7]
HELoan
Average estimated cash to borrower per application
Estimated aggregate loan proceeds (in billions)
   All applications with credit decision
   Denial Rate
   Denied $, [10] * [11]
   Denied $, given White denial rate [10] * [11, White]
   Unconditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [12] – [13]
   Table 3, model 2 coefficient
   Conditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [10] * [15]
HELOC
Average estimated cash to borrower per application
Estimated aggregate loan proceeds (in billions)
   All applications with credit decision
   Denial Rate
   Denied $, [18] * [19]
   Denied $, given White denial rate [18] * [19, White]
   Unconditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [20] – [21]
   Table 3, model 2 coefficient
   Conditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [18] * [23]
Total MEW
Estimated aggregate loan proceeds (in billions)
   All applications with credit decision
   Denied $, [4] +[12] + [20]
   Unconditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [6] + [14] + [22]
   Conditional ‘‘excess’’ denied $, [8] + [16] + [24]

White

Black

Hispanic

Asian

$34,197

$28,807

$35,649

$180.9
15.6%
$28.2
$28.2

$17.1
32.4%
$5.5
$2.7
$2.9
0.034
$0.6

$24.9
20.1%
$5.0
$3.9
$1.1
0.015
$0.4

$111,257

$86,718

$106,033

$124.9
28.9%
$36.1
$36.1

$10.9
54.8%
$6.0
$3.2
$2.8
0.045
$0.5

$15.3
40.1%
$6.1
$4.4
$1.7
0.030
$0.5

$92,870

$62,865

$82,600

$293.3
32.3%
$94.7
$94.7

$599.1
$159.0

$18.4
62.4%
$11.5
$5.9
$5.5
0.036
$0.7

$46.4
$23.0
$11.2
$1.7

$28.2
53.5%
$15.1
$9.1
$6.0
0.037
$1.0

$68.4
$26.2
$8.8
$1.9

$50,755  

$22.7
17.3%  
$3.9
$3.5
$0.4
0.024
$0.5

$181,452 

$15.9
37.4%  
$5.9
$4.6
$1.3
0.042
$0.7

$150,726 

$50.6
45.6%  
$23.1
$16.4
$6.7
0.042
$2.1

$89.2
$32.9
$8.5
$3.3

study income mobility (Chetty et al., 2019) and discrimination in labor 
markets (Kline et al., 2022) and higher education bond markets (Dougal 
et al., 2019). For the markets covered in our data, the mean (median) 
of the index is 63 (60), while the standard deviation is 19.

We estimate our main regression model separately for each of the 
184 media markets and collect the Asian, Black, and Hispanic coeffi-
cients from each regression. Fig.  5 displays binned scatter plots of the 
race coefficients by the media market’s level of racial animus. All three 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J.N. Conklin et al.

Fig. 5.  Denial rate differences and racial animus.
Note: Minority-White difference, 2018–2021. Each panel represents a binned scatterplot 
of minority coefficients obtained from separate regressions for each of the 184 media 
markets in our sample. Media market level racial animus is from Stephens-Davidowitz 
(2014). Independent variables are the same as in Table  2 column (5).
Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data.

panels show that minority-White gaps are elevated in areas character-
ized by greater racial animus. The correlation between racial animus 
and the Black, Hispanic, and Asian coefficients is 0.32, 0.21, and 0.30, 
respectively, all statistically significantly at the 1% confidence level.

Furthermore, by incorporating it into our main model as a con-
trol, we find that a one-standard-deviation increase in media market 
racial animus leads to a statistically and economically significant 0.9 
percentage point increase in the Black–White denial gap and a 0.8 
percentage point increase in the Asian-White gap (see column (2) in 
Table A.15). The increase in the Hispanic-White gap (0.4 percentage 
point)  is  smaller  and  only  marginally  significant.  These  results  are 
consistent with discrimination partially driving the racial disparities 

13 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

in MEW denial rates, however, they may also reflect greater minority-
White differences in unobservable risk factors in these areas. We discuss 
this in Section A.7 of the Online Appendix and explain that differences 
in factors unobserved in HMDA but used in AUS models do not seem to 
be fully driving the higher disparities in mortgage approvals for MEW 
products in areas with greater racial animus.

Taken together, our results are consistent with discrimination par-
tially driving the conditional racial disparities in MEW denial rates, 
however, they are by no means proof that discrimination is playing 
an important role in restricting access to MEW products. A stronger 
measure of animosity, especially one more targeted to picking up bias 
against Hispanic and Asian people, might have greater explanatory 
power.

5.2. Aggregate differences in MEW amounts by race

The high denial rates for MEW products apparent in Fig.  1 sug-
gest  considerable  unmet  demand  for  these  products.  Moreover,  the 
significantly higher minority denial rates that we have documented in 
this paper imply that the unmet demand is much higher for minority 
homeowners. In this section, we perform a simple back-of-the-envelope 
calculation to estimate the differences in the amount of housing equity 
accessed by minority and White homeowners. We perform the exercise 
using both conditional and unconditional denial rate differences, since 
as we discussed previously, both measures are relevant from a policy 
perspective. Although this exercise is informative and relevant to policy 
discussions, it should not be interpreted as a welfare analysis because 
we are unable to measure the full benefits and costs (e.g., higher default 
rates) of increased access to MEW products.

Table  5 presents the results of these calculations for all four racial 
groups we study. We estimate that, in total between 2018 and 2021, 
Black homeowners in our sample applied to extract $46.4 billion in 
home equity, but were denied $23 billion.17 Had they experienced the 
denial rate of White applicants (ignoring underwriting factors), they 
would have only been denied $11.8 billion, or about half as much 
demand would have gone unmet.18

‘‘Excess’’ denials conditional on borrower and mortgage characteris-
tics are much smaller but still reflect a large amount of locked-up home 
equity that borrowers were unable to access. A back-of-the-envelope 
calculation using our regression model results in Table  3 suggests that 
the ‘‘excess’’ denials for Black borrowers, controlling for observable 
loan and borrower characteristics, was $1.7 billion over this 4-year 
period.19 Hispanic and Asian applicants were denied the ability to cash 
out about $2.2 billion and $3.9 billion in equity more than White 

17 We estimate the amount of loan proceeds that each product application, 
if successful, would yield using a simple formula: Loan proceeds for HELOCs 
and HELoans are equal to 97.5% of the applied-for loan amount. (We assume 
2.5% closing costs, which represent equity withdrawn but not received as cash 
by the borrower.) Because cash-out refinances include paying off the existing 
mortgage lien(s), a smaller portion of the loan amount becomes cash to the 
borrower. Gross loan proceeds for cash-out refinances are estimated as 16% 
of the loan amount for conventional loans and 11% for FHA/VA loans in the 
data used by Gerardi et al. (2022), with net proceeds subtracting $2,000 and 
1% of the total loan amount.
18 For example, Black HELOC applicants had an unconditional denial rate 
of 62.4%, vs. 32.3% for White applicants. They were denied $11.5 billion 
in equity withdrawal via these HELOCs, an estimated $5.5 billion ‘‘excess’’ 
relative to the rate at which White applicants were denied ($18.4 billion * 
(0.624-0.323)).
19 We can calculate this by multiplying the estimated total loan proceeds 
applied for by Black homeowners ($18.4 billion in the case of HELOCs) by 
the corresponding Black coefficient (0.036) in Table 3’s Model 2. Calculations 
are very similar if we instead use loan proceeds-weighted denial rates and 
weighted regression coefficients. Some applicants apply more than once. In 
Section A.9, we make an adjustment to the calculation so as to not overesti-
mate the total amount of equity that could realistically be extracted if more 

J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

borrowers, respectively, after controlling for these factors. Although 
excess denials are smaller after accounting for underwriting factors, 
they are still large, at 15%, 22%, and 39% of the unconditional excess 
denials for Black, Hispanic, and Asian applicants, respectively. Or in 
other words, observable underwriting factors can explain only about 
four-fifths of the Black–White gap, three-quarters of the Hispanic-White 
gap, and a bit over half of the Asian-White gap.

6. Conclusion

Scrutiny of the racial homeownership gap has led to initiatives to 
help address purchase lending disparities, such as Fannie Mae and Fred-
die Mac’s Equitable Housing Finance Plans announced in June 2022. 
Likewise, recent studies have documented lower rates of rate/term re-
financing among Black and Hispanic consumers in periods of falling in-
terest rates, calling for the consideration of ratchet mortgages and other 
interventions that would better ensure that lower mortgage interest 
rates get passed on to borrowers in a more equitable manner (Gerardi 
et al., 2023, 2022). But far less attention has been paid to date about 
the  barriers  to  accessing  mortgage  financing  to  help  a  homeowner 
withdraw the housing wealth he or she has accumulated.

Lenders offering home equity products often advertise to homeown-
ers using messages such as ‘‘Don’t borrow from a bank! Borrow from 
yourself.’’ Indeed, home equity products generally offer lower interest 
rates than credit cards or other products, and they can be a useful tool 
for borrowers who need cash to complete home repairs or improve-
ments, pay medical debt, or send a child to college. But as we show 
in this paper, MEW products have very high denial rates, especially 
for minority homeowners. Much of the minority-White gap in denial 
rates can be explained by borrower characteristics such as credit score, 
signaling that the underwriting system for these loans has a particularly 
large  impact  on  these  consumers.  Americans  hold  record  levels  of 
home equity, following the historic house price increases of 2020–2021. 
Policymakers and researchers should not assume this newfound housing 
wealth will be equally liquid among all homeowners.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

James N. Conklin: Writing – review & editing, Writing – origi-
nal draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization. Kristopher Gerardi: Writing – review & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology, 
Investigation,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization.  Lauren  Lambie-
Hanson: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project 
administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cu-
ration, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104038.

than one of a borrower’s applications was approved. When these adjustments 
are applied, the total estimated equity extraction foregone for Black borrowers 
falls from $1.7 billion to $1.6 billion.

14 

Data availability

Code for Conklin, Gerardi, Lambie-Hanson Home Equity Racial Dispar
ities (Original data) (Mendeley Data).

References

Adelino, M., Ma, S., Robinson, D., 2017. Firm age, investment opportunities, and job 

creation. J. Financ. 72 (3), 999–1038.

Adelino,  M.,  Schoar,  A.,  Severino,  F.,  2015.  House  prices,  collateral,  and 

self-employment. J. Financ. Econ. 117 (2), 288–306.

Agarwal,  S.,  Ambrose,  B.W.,  Chomsisengphet,  S.,  Liu,  C.,  2011.  The  role  of  soft 
information in a dynamic contract setting: Evidence from the home equity credit 
market. J. Money, Credit. Bank. 43 (4), 633–655.

Agarwal, S., Ambrose, B.W., Liu, C., 2006. Credit lines and credit utilization. J. Money, 

Credit. Bank. 1–22.

Ambrose, B.W., Conklin, J.N., Lopez, L.A., 2021. Does borrower and broker race affect 

the cost of mortgage credit? Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (2), 790–826.

Bartlett, R., Morse, A., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2022. Consumer-lending discrimination 

in the FinTech era. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 30–56.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., Ross, S.L., 2018. What drives racial and ethnic differences 
in high-cost mortgages? The role of high-risk lenders. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (1), 
175–205.

Benetton, M., Kudlyak, M., Mondragon, J., 2022. Dynastic Home Equity. Technical 

Report, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Benito, A., 2009. Who withdraws housing equity and why? Economica 76 (301), 51–70.
Bhutta, N., Hizmo, A., 2021. Do minorities pay more for mortgages? Rev. Financ. Stud. 

34 (2), 763–789.

Bhutta, N., Hizmo, A., Ringo, D., 2024. How much does racial bias affect mortgage 
lending decisions? Evidence from data on Human and algorithmic decisions. J. 
Financ. (forthcoming).

Bhutta,  N.,  Laufer,  S.,  Ringo,  D.R.,  2017.  Residential  mortgage  lending  in  2016: 
Evidence from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. Fed. Reserv. Bull. 103 
(6), 1–27.

Black, H., Schweitzer, R.L., Mandell, L., 1978. Discrimination in mortgage lending. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 68 (2), 186–191.

Blascak, N., Tranfaglia, A., 2021. Decomposing Gender Differences in Bankcard Credit 

Limits. Technical Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Blau, F.D., Kahn, L.M., 2017. The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations. 

Blinder, A.S., 1973. Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural estimates. J. 

Boehm, T., Schlottmann, A., 2004. The dynamics of race, income, and homeownership. 

Boehm,  T.P.,  Schlottmann,  A.,  2008.  Wealth  accumulation  and  homeownership: 

Evidence for low-income households. Cityscape 10, 225–256.

Canner, G.B., Durkin, T.A., Luckett, C.A., 1998. Recent developments in home equity 

lending. Fed. Reserv. Bull. 84, 241–251.

Canner, G., Dynan, K., Passmore, W., 2002. Mortgage refinancing in 2001 and early 

2002. Fed. Res. Bull. 88, 469–481.

Carlin, A., Divringi, E., 2018. Home improvement lending in the Third Federal Reserve 

District: Patterns by income, race, and gender. Cascade Focus. 1–19.

Charles, K.K., Hurst, E., 2002. The transition to home ownership and the Black-White 

wealth gap. Rev. Econ. Stat. 84 (2), 281–297.

Chen, A., Jensen, H.H., 1985. Home equity use and the life cycle hypothesis. J. Consum. 

Aff. 19 (1), 37–56.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Jones, M.R., Porter, S.R., 2019. Race and economic opportunity 
in  the  United  States:  An  intergenerational  perspective.  Q.  J.  Econ.  135  (2), 
711–783.

Chiwaya, N., Ross, J., 2020. The American dream while Black: ‘Locked in a vicious 
cycle’. NBC News URL https://www.nbcnews.com/news/nbcblk/american-dream-w
hile-black-locked-vicious-cycle-n1235619.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2019. Data Point: 2018 Mortage Market Activity 

and Trends. Technical Report.

Corradin,  S.,  Popov,  A.,  2015.  House  prices,  home  equity  borrowing,  and 

entrepreneurship. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (8), 2399–2428.

Coulson,  N.E.,  Dalton,  M.,  2010.  Temporal  and  ethnic  decompositions  of  home-
ownership rates: Synthetic cohorts across five censuses. J. Hous. Econ. 19 (3), 
155–166.

Dawkins, C., 2005. Racial gaps in the transition to first-time homeownership: The role 

of residential location.  J. Urban Econ. 58 (3), 537–554.

Deng, Y., Ross, S.L., Wachter, S.M., 2003. Racial differences in homeownership: The 

effect of residential location. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 33 (5), 517–556.

Diamond, R., Diamond, W.F., 2024. Racial Differences in the Total Rate of Return 
on  Owner-Occupied  Housing.  Technical  Report,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research.

J. Econ. Lit. 55 (3), 789–865.

Hum. Resour. 436–455.

J. Urban Econ. 55 (1), 113–130.

J.N. Conklin et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104038 

Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, 2019. A Guide to HMDA Reporting: 

Kermani, A., Wong, F., 2021. Racial Disparities in Housing Returns. Technical Report, 

Do, C., 2012. Withdrawing home equity: Differences across race and ethnicity. Hous. 

Stud. 27 (3), 299–323.

Dougal, C., Gao, P., Mayew, W.J., Parsons, C.A., 2019. What’s in a (school) name? 
Racial discrimination in higher education bond markets. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (3), 
570–590.

Duca, J.V., Kumar, A., 2014. Financial literacy and mortgage equity withdrawals. J. 

Urban Econ. 80, 62–75.

Getting it Right!. Technical Report.

Flippen, C., 2004. Unequal returns to housing investments? A study of real housing 
appreciation among Black, White, and Hispanic households.  Soc. Forces 82 (4), 
1523–1551.

Frame, W.S., Huang, R., Mayer, E.J., Sunderam, A., 2022. The Impact of Minority Rep-
resentation at Mortgage Lenders. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Gabriel,  S.,  Painter,  G.,  2003.  Pathways  to  homeownership:  An  analysis  of  the 
residential location and homeownership choices of black households in Los Angeles. 
J. Real Estate Financ. Econ. 27 (1), 87–109.

Gabriel, S.A., Rosenthal, S.S., 2005. Homeownership in the 1980s and 1990s: Aggregate 

trends and racial gaps. J. Urban Econ. 57 (1), 101–127.

Gerardi, K., Lambie-Hanson, L., Willen, P., 2022. Housing policy: Part I. Mortgage-
borrowers. In: Edelberg, W., Sheiner, L., Wessel, D. (Eds.), Recession Remedies: 
Lessons Learned from the U.S. Economic Policy Response To COVID-19. Brookings 
Institution Press, pp. 166–191.

Gerardi, K., Willen, P.S., Zhang, D.H., 2023. Mortgage prepayment, race, and monetary 

policy. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (3), 498–524.

Ghent, A.C., Hernandez-Murillo, R., Owyang, M.T., 2014. Differences in subprime loan 
pricing across races and neighborhoods. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 48, 199–215.
Goodman, L.S., Mayer, C., 2018. Homeownership and the American dream. J. Econ. 

Perspect. 32 (1), 31–58.

Greenspan, A., Kennedy, J., 2008. Sources and uses of equity extracted from homes. 

Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 24 (1), 120–144.

Gyourko, J., Linneman, P., Wachter, S., 1999. Analyzing the relationships among race, 

wealth, and home ownership in America. J. Hous. Econ. 8 (2), 63–89.

Hall, M., Crowder, K., 2011. Extended-family resources and racial inequality in the 

transition to homeownership. Soc. Sci. Res. 40 (6), 1534–1546.

Jones, F.L., Kelley, J., 1984. Decomposing differences between groups: A cautionary 

note on measuring discrimination. Sociol. Methods Res. 12 (3), 323–343.

Kahn, M.E., 2021. Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Financial Returns to Home 
Purchases from 2007 to 2020. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Kau, J.B., Keenan, D.C., Munneke, H.J., 2012. Racial discrimination and mortgage 

lending. J. Real Estate Financ. Econ. 45 (2), 289–304.

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kerr,  S.P.,  Kerr,  W.R.,  Nanda,  R.,  2022.  House  prices,  home  equity  and  en-
trepreneurship:  Evidence  from  US  Census  micro  data.  J.  Monet.  Econ.  130, 
103–119.

Killewald, A., Pfeffer, F.T., Schachner, J.N., 2017. Wealth inequality and accumulation. 

Kitagawa, E.M., 1955. Components of a difference between two rates. J. Amer. Statist. 

Annu. Rev. Sociol. 43, 379–404.

Assoc. 50 (272), 1168–1194.

Kline, P., Rose, E.K., Walters, C.R., 2022. Systemic Discrimination Among Large U.S. 

Employers. Q. J. Econ. 137 (4), 1963–2036.

Krivo, L., Kaufman, R., 2004. Housing and wealth inequality: Racial-ethnic differences 

in home equity in the United States.  Demogr. 41 (3), 585–605.

Ladd, H.F., 1998. Evidence on discrimination in mortgage lending. J. Econ. Perspect. 

12 (2), 41–62.

Lastrapes, W.D., Schmutte, I., Watson, T., 2022. Home equity lending, credit constraints 

and small business in the US. Econ. Inq. 60 (1), 43–63.

Mayer, C., Moulton, S., 2022. The market for reverse mortgages among older Amer-
icans. In: Mitchell, O.S. (Ed.), New Models for Managing Longevity Risk. Oxford 
University Press.

Munnell, A.H., Tootell, G.M., Browne, L.E., McEneaney, J., 1996. Mortgage lending in 

Boston: Interpreting HMDA data. Am. Econ. Rev. 25–53.

Newman, D.A., Lyon, J.S., 2009. Recruitment efforts to reduce adverse impact: Targeted 
recruiting for personality, cognitive ability, and diversity. J. Appl. Psychol. 94, 
298–317.

Oaxaca, R., 1973. Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets. Internat. 

Econom. Rev. 693–709.

Park, K.A., 2021. Measuring risk and access to mortgage credit with new disclosure 

data. J. Struct. Financ. 26 (4), 53–72.

Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R.S., Miranda, J., 2013. Who creates jobs? Small versus large 

Pence, K., 2015. Discussion of brown, stein, and zafar. J. Money, Credit. Bank. 47 (S1), 

versus young. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95 (2), 347–361.

Hilber, C.A., Liu, Y., 2008. Explaining the Black-White homeownership gap: The role 
of own wealth, parental externalities and locational preferences. J. Hous. Econ. 17 
(2), 152–174.

Hurst, E., Stafford, F., 2004. Home is where the equity is: Mortgage refinancing and 

household consumption. J. Money, Credit. Bank. 985–1014.

215–220.

Ross, S.L., Yinger, J., 2002. The Color of Credit: Mortgage Discrimination, Research 

Methodology, and Fair-Lending Enforcement. MIT Press.

Schmalz, M.C., Sraer, D.A., Thesmar, D., 2017. Housing collateral and entrepreneurship. 

J. Financ. 72 (1), 99–132.

Shapiro, T.M., 2006. Race, homeownership and wealth. Wash. Univ. J. Law & Policy 

Jann, B., 2008. The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition for linear regression models. Stata 

20, 53–74.

J. 8 (4), 453–479.

Jensen, T.L., Leth-Petersen, S., Nanda, R., 2022. Financing constraints, home equity 

and selection into entrepreneurship. J. Financ. Econ. 145 (2), 318–337.

Jiang, E.X., Lee, Y., Liu, W.S., 2021. Disparities in Consumer Credit: The Role of Loan 

Officers in the FinTech Era. Technical Report, SSRN No. 4035764.

Stephens-Davidowitz, S., 2014. The cost of racial animus on a Black candidate: Evidence 

using Google search data. J. Public Econ. 118, 26–40.

Wainer, A., Zabel, J., 2020. Homeownership and wealth accumulation for low-income 

households. J. Hous. Econ. 47, 101624–101644.

Willen, P.S., Zhang, D.H., 2021. Do Lenders Still Discriminate? A Robust Approach for 
Assessing Differences in Menus. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Woodward, S.E., Hall, R.E., 2012. Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-optimal 
shopping effort: Theory and mortgage-market evidence. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (7), 
3249–3276.

15 

