Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Central bank liquidity reallocation and bank lending: Evidence from the 
tiering system

☆

Carlo Altavilla a, Miguel Boucinha b, Lorenzo Burlon b, Mariassunta Giannetti c,*,  
Julian Schumacher b
a European Central Bank and CEPR, Germany
b European Central Bank, Germany
c Stockholm School of Economics, the Swedish House of Finance, CEPR, and ECGI, Sweden

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We document that the reallocation of central bank reserves towards banks with higher liquidity needs fosters 
credit  supply.  Exploiting  the  ECB’s  tiered  reserve  remuneration  system  for  identification,  we  show  that  this 
system  encouraged  banks  with  low  reserve  holdings  to  obtain  more  reserves  through  the  money  market. 
Concomitantly, these banks reduced their securities holdings and extended more credit. We estimate that the 
reallocation of one euro of reserves towards banks with ex ante low reserve holdings resulted in an increase in 
credit supply of about 15 cents.

Dataset link:  Central Bank Liquidity 
Reallocation and Bank Lending: Evidence from 
the Tiering System (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G2
E5 

Keywords:
Money market
Excess reserves
Transmission mechanism
Bank lending
Negative interest rate policy

1. Introduction

(Logan, 2023; Friedman, 1969).

Central bank reserves represent the ultimate safe asset for banks due 
to  their unwavering  domestic value, even in times  of  crisis. No other 
asset in the economy offers the same level of safety and liquidity. Even 
highly rated government bonds carry market risk, as highlighted by the 
recent collapse of Silicon Valley Bank and the resulting tensions in the 
US banking system. Since central banks can issue reserves nearly cost- 
free,  some  argue  that  they  should  be  created  in  ample  quantities 

However, the effects of central bank reserves on bank lending remain 
widely debated and are particularly important to study as central banks 
pursue quantitative tightening, which will significantly reduce the re-
serves held by financial institutions. On the one hand, the exceptional 
liquidity  insurance  provided  by  reserves  may  encourage  lenders  to 
expand  credit  supply  .  On  the  other  hand,  the  risk-free  income  from 
remunerated reserves could crowd-out lending. Which of these effects 
prevails in practice remains an open question.

☆

Philipp Schnabl was  the editor  for this article.  We  thank the editor, an  anonymous referee, Adrien  d’Avernas,  Will Diamond, Durrell  Duffie, Diana  Bonfim, 
Guillaume Horny, Amy Wang Huber, and seminar and conference participants at the American Economic Association Annual Meeting, the American Finance As-
sociation Annual Meeting, the 17th New York Fed / NYU Stern Conference on Financial Intermediation, the BIS Conference on Banks’  liquidity in volatile mac-
roeconomic and market environments, the European Finance Association, the Banque de France Workshop on New challenges for monetary policy and financial 
stability, the Banca d’Italia Conference on Monetary Policy in Exceptional Times, the ECB Conference on Money Markets, the Bank of Greece, EPFL/HEC Lausanne, 
the Bank of Portugal, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, the National Bank of Belgium, the Riksbanken, the Swiss National Bank, the University of Luxembourg, 
and the University of Southampton for comments. Giannetti gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation and the 
Riksbankens  Jubileumsfond.  Lorenzo  Ferrante  and  Marc  Agustí  I  Torres  provided  helpful  research  assistance.  This  paper  was  initially  distributed  with  the  title 
“Money Markets and Bank Lending”. The opinions in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Central Bank or the 
Eurosystem.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: mariassunta.giannetti@hhs.se (M. Giannetti). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104058
Received 9 March 2024; Received in revised form 25 March 2025; Accepted 30 March 2025  
Available online 3 April 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

This paper contributes to this emerging debate by showing that the 
relationship between reserves and credit supply depends on their dis-
tribution  within  the  banking  system.  Specifically,  we  find  that  excess 
reserves stimulate bank lending if they are held by banks with ex ante 
low reserve holdings, as the increased liquidity enhances their ability to 
insure against liquidity shocks.1

We  exploit  a  quasi-natural  experiment  related  to  a  policy  of  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  that  introduced  a  tiering  system  for 
remunerating excess reserve holdings. The policy increased the marginal 
return  on  reserves  for  banks  with  ex  ante  low  reserve  holdings.  This 
specific  feature  of  the  policy  led  banks  with  previously  low  excess 
reserve  holdings  to  accumulate  more  liquidity  for  reasons  that  were 
orthogonal to shocks to their clients’ credit demand. Controlling for the 
potential effects of concurrent policies and credit demand, we show that 
banks receiving reserves expanded their credit supply more than those 
transferring  reserves,  whose  loan  supply  remained  unchanged.  We 
conjecture that banks with ex ante high reserve holdings had reached 
their  reserve  satiation  point.  As  a  result,  they  transferred  reserves 
without demanding higher interest rates or reducing credit supply to the 
corporate sector. Under this assumption, we estimate that the realloca-
tion of reserves towards banks with higher liquidity needs, driven by the 
tiering system, boosted the aggregate supply of credit.

Our  analysis  proceeds  in  two  steps.  First,  we  document  that  the 
tiering  system  created  plausibly  exogenous  incentives  for  a  subset  of 
banks to increase their reserve holdings. Specifically, the tiering system 
exempted a share of excess liquidity (reserve) holdings from the appli-
cation of the negative deposit facility rate (DFR) with the aim of sup-
porting the bank-based monetary policy transmission while preserving 
the positive contribution of the negative interest rate policies (NIRPs) to 
the accommodative policy stance. Crucially, the allocation of these ex-
emptions was unrelated to banks’  individual ex ante reserve holdings. 
This allows us to study an exogenous increase in the marginal value of 
excess reserves for banks with “unused allowances” (i.e., banks that ex 
ante held less liquidity than they could exempt from negative rates). By 
design,  these  banks  had  lower  ex  ante  reserves  holdings  but  began 
accumulating more reserves due to the tiering system. As a result, the 
ECB intervention facilitated a reallocation of excess liquidity from banks 
with high reserve holdings towards those with greater liquidity needs.

We show that the reserve reallocation primarily took place through 
the money market. Following the implementation of the tiering system, 
banks  with  unused  allowances  increased  their  net  borrowing  in  the 
money  market  without  facing  a  higher  interest  rate  or  maturity  ra-
tioning. Meanwhile, banks with high excess liquidity holdings dispro-
portionately increased their money market loans to banks with unused 
exemptions, relative to other banks.

In the second step of our analysis, we show that banks that increased 
their  reserve  holdings  to  fill  their  unused  exemptions  increased  the 
supply of credit to the real sector. They also granted loans at lower rates 
and  with  longer  maturity.  These  results  are  obtained  controlling  for 
credit demand shocks by either using interactions of firm and time fixed 
effects,  following  Khwaja  and  Mian  (2008),  or  interacting  industry, 
location, borrower size, and time fixed effects. In addition, significant 
differences  in  the  behavior  of  banks  with  unused  exemptions  emerge 
after the tiering implementation. The granularity of our data also allows 
us  to  evaluate  alternative  mechanisms  associated  with  the  tiering 
adoption and the response of banks with high excess liquidity and high 
tiering savings, and to control for the effects of other policy measures, 
such  as  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  (NIRP),  the  exposure  to  the 
ECB’s  asset  purchase  program  (APP),  and  the  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTROs). We find no evidence that these alter-
native channels confound the impact of reserve reallocation on credit 

supply. Furthermore, we show that banks without unused exemptions, 
including  those  with  ex  ante  high  excess  liquidity  and  higher  tiering 
savings, did not alter their lending policies.

Taken  together,  our  results  suggest  that  reallocating  liquidity  to-
wards  banks  with  higher  liquidity  needs  increases  the  willingness  of 
previously  liquidity-constrained  banks  to  extend  loans.  We  provide 
several additional pieces of evidence supporting this hypothesis. First, 
with the help of a simple framework, we show that if the uneven dis-
tribution of reserves had indeed reduced the credit supply, the banks 
with  unused  exemptions  that  responded  more  to  the  tiering  imple-
mentation should have had ex ante higher cost of funding. We show that 
our results are indeed driven by banks with unused allowances and high 
funding  costs.  Before  the  implementation  of  the  tiering  system,  high- 
funding-cost  banks  optimally  held  less  reserves  because  the  reserve 
returns were too low compared to their cost of capital. Consequently, 
high-funding-cost banks (including banks with higher borrowing rates 
prior to the implementation of the system, banks with low capitaliza-
tions, and banks with high CDS spreads) remained less insured against 
liquidity shocks through their reserve holdings and extended less credit.
Second,  we  show  that  financially  constrained  banks  with  unused 
exemptions  committed  more  credit  lines  in  response  to  the  increased 
liquidity. Since credit lines involve hard-to-predict liquidity needs for 
the  lender  (Cooperman  et  al.,  2022),  this  result  suggests  that  banks’ 
precautionary behavior diminished thanks to higher reserve holdings. 
Furthermore, we show that banks with unused allowances also reduced 
their government bond holdings.2 Since sovereign bonds can be mobi-
lized as collateral in secured money market transactions and are more 
liquid than bank loans, but are not as liquid as reserves, net bond sales 
indicate that these banks were hoarding less collateral. This behavior is 
consistent  with  improved  liquidity  insurance  associated  with  higher 
reserve holdings.

Finally, we explore whether the increased propensity to take risk of 
banks  that  obtained  more  reserves  led  them  not  only  to  expand  the 
supply of credit but also to misallocate credit by lending to riskier bor-
rowers. We find no evidence that this is the case.

the 

transmission  mechanism 

We  contribute  to  a  growing  literature  exploring  the  transmission 
mechanism of central banks’ large-scale asset purchases. Existing liter-
ature has mainly explored the general equilibrium effects of quantitative 
easing by focusing on the reaction of asset prices (Krishnamurthy and 
Vissing-Jorgensen  2011), 
through 
long-term  interest  rates  and  mortgage  origination  (e.g.,  Chakraborty 
et al., 2020; Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer, 2020; Drechsler et al., 
2024), or the effects of the capital gains generated by banks’  security 
holdings (e.g., Acharya et al., 2019). An emerging strand of this litera-
ture explores whether the reserves created by central banks’ large-scale 
asset purchases crowd in or crowd out bank lending, with mixed find-
ings. During periods of quantitative easing, Acharya et al. (2023) find 
that banks with higher excess reserve holdings grant more credit lines 
and  take  excess  risk  (see  also  Acharya  and  Rajan,  2023).  Relatedly, 
Rodnyansky and Darmouni (2017) and Kandrac and Schlusche (2021)
show  that  banks  that  increased  their  reserve  holdings,  following  the 
third  round  of  quantitative  easing  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Board, 
increased lending. Much of the existing literature focuses on changes in 
the  outstanding  amount  of  reserves,  which  may  influence  lending  by 
affecting the valuations of banks’ security holdings, which rise when the 
central  bank  purchases  securities  and  creates  reserves.  To  focus  on 
reserve holdings, Diamond, Jiang, and Ma (2024) estimate a model for 
deposit and loan demand exploiting exogenous variation from natural 
disasters. Given the estimated elasticities of loan and deposit demand, 
their counterfactual analysis implies that an increase in reserve holdings 

1 Concerns about the consequences of uneven distribution of excess liquidity 
across banks in the euro area have been raised also in the policy discourse (see 
e.g., Lane 2023).

2 In  work  that  was  distributed  subsequently  to  our  paper  and  using  less 
granular data that do not allow to identify the demand and supply for reserves, 
Baldo et al. (2022) study how banks adjusted their balance sheets to achieve 
higher liquidity holdings and provide evidence consistent with our findings.

2 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

crowds out lending. Thanks to the tiering system, we are able to focus on 
changes in the distribution of reserve holdings while controlling for the 
general equilibrium effects highlighted in previous literature. In addi-
tion, we benefit from plausibly exogenous variation in the reserve de-
mand. Consistent with our theoretical framework, we find that banks 
increasing their reserve holdings tend to reduce their security holdings. 
Consequently,  they  can  supply  more  credit  without  expanding  their 
assets  and  facing  a  higher  interest  rate  in  the  money  market.  We 
therefore  estimate  that  reserve  holdings  have  a  positive  effect  on 
lending.3 More importantly, we show that the distribution of reserves is 
as important as the aggregate amount of reserves for bank lending, even 
when reserves are abundant and policy rates are low.

2. Data sources

We rely on a wide array of data sources. Our main source to explore 
bank lending in the euro area is Anacredit, a credit register maintained 
by the European System of Central Banks, which includes harmonized 
transaction-level  data  for  euro  area  banks.  All  banks  report  any  loan 
provided to firms if the exposure to the borrower exceeds EUR 25,000.
From Anacredit, we obtain information on banks, their outstanding 
exposures  to  borrowers,  as  well  as  loan  characteristics.  The  sample 
consists  of  a  panel  of  122  banks  and  2,624,856  firms,  for  a  total  of 
3,439,580 bank-firm relations, from September 2018 to February 2020 
(18  months).  Firms  are  distributed  across  19  countries  (Austria, 
Belgium,  Cyprus,  Germany,  Estonia,  Spain,  Finland,  France,  Greece, 
Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, The Netherlands, 
Portugal, Slovenia, and Slovakia), 89 2-digit NACE industries, and 1055 
NUTS2 locations. We further partition borrowers into size deciles based 
on  their  outstanding  bank  liabilities  during  the  previous  month.  This 
provides us with 3,087,276 industry-location-size-month clusters. The 
large  number  of  clusters  available,  together  with  the  fact  that  many 
borrowers have multiple bank relationships, helps us in the identifica-
tion of the credit supply.

We  complement  Anacredit  with  bank  level  information  from  the 
Individual Balance Sheet Indicators (IBSI), another proprietary database 
maintained by the ECB, which allows us to follow the main asset and 
liability  items  of  128  banks  resident  in  the  euro  area  at  monthly  fre-
quency. This dataset provides information on the amount of outstanding 
loans, household and corporate deposits, and other relevant bank bal-
ance sheet information. Information on each bank’s borrowing in tar-
geted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) is collected from the 
ECB’s proprietary liquidity data. We also obtain banks’ stock prices and 
CDS spreads from Thomson Reuters.

In addition, we explore bank behavior in the money market using the 
Money  Market  Statistical  Reporting  (MMSR)  data.  These  data  are 
collected to provide information on the transmission of monetary policy 
to the money market. Around 50 large banks from across the euro area 
are required to submit a detailed list of all money market transactions 
daily.  The  dataset  has  been  collected  since  July  2016  and  covers  all 
secured and unsecured transactions by the reporting banks with banks 
and  non-banks  with  maturity  of  up  to  twelve  months.  It  comprises 
around 30 million transactions in the secured (repo) market and around 
12  million  transactions  in  the  unsecured  market  during  our  sample 
period.  In  our  empirical  analysis,  we  aggregate  the  individual 
outstanding transactions at the reporting-bank level or at the reporting- 
bank and counterparty (relationship) level to create a daily panel of the 
stock of outstanding money market transactions.

Table 1 provides variable definitions and summary statistics.

3 In addition, we focus on a period with abundant liquidity in which shocks 
to liquidity demand are not expected to affect money market rates (e.g., Afonso 
et al. 2024). Diamond et al. (2024) consider a long time series, including pe-
riods with scarce reserves, which may influence their estimate of the changes in 
banks’ balance sheet size on their cost of capital.

3 

3. Implementation of the tiering

Tiering systems insulate a part of a bank’s reserve holdings from the 
level of a central bank’s main policy rate and are most often introduced 
when  policy  rates  are  negative.4 In  other  words,  a  tiering  system  for 
reserve  remuneration  exempts  some  proportion  of  banks’  excess 
liquidity from negative rates and can introduce substantial savings for 
the banking system.

The possible adoption of a tiering system in the euro area was first 
hinted at on March 27, 2019, in a speech by then-ECB president Mario 
Draghi. After almost five years of negative interest rates, analysts had 
increasingly voiced concerns about the possible adverse side effects on 
bank profitability. The speech by Draghi represented the first mention of 
specific measures to contain the potential side effects of the NIRP by an 
ECB policymaker: “if necessary, we need to reflect on possible measures that 
can preserve the favourable implications of negative rates for the economy, 
while mitigating the side effects, if any” (Draghi, 2019).

A news report published a few hours after the speech further buoyed 
market expectations by claiming that the ECB was preparing to intro-
duce a tiering system.5 This information triggered a sharp market re-
action: As shown in Fig. 1 using high-frequency data, euro area bank 
stocks jumped by almost 3 % upon the news release, considerably out-
performing a broader market index.

The ECB’s Governing Council formally decided on the introduction 
of a tiering system and the actual size of the exemptions on September 
12, 2019, together with an interest rate cut from (cid:0) 0.40 % to (cid:0) 0.50 %. 
The tiering system exempted excess liquidity holdings of up to six times 
banks’  minimum reserve requirements (MRR) from the application of 
the negative DFR. This design recognized that banks’ needs for liquidity 
are proportional to their deposits, which in turn determine minimum 
reserve  requirements.  Thus,  the  banks  with  unused  exemptions  were 
banks with low excess reserves ex ante. Importantly, the relevant cut-off 
dates for determining the minimum reserve requirements (and therefore 
the tiering allowances) until October 2019 were July 2019 (for banks 
reporting monthly) or June 2019 (for banks reporting quarterly). The 
dates were, therefore, predetermined relative to the announcement.

To avoid an unintended tightening in bank funding conditions, the 
tiering system was calibrated such that the “non-exempted tier”  –  the 
amount  of  excess  liquidity  that  remained  subject  to  negative  interest 
rates – was sufficiently large to avoid upward pressure on money market 
rates, thus ensuring that the monetary policy stance was not tightened.
The ECB’s tiering system started operating on October 30, 2019, in 
accordance with the September announcement and remained in place 
until the  ECB  lifted interest  rates  into  positive territory  in  September 
2022.

In what follows, we examine how a change in the marginal rate on 
excess  reserves  holdings  affects  banks’  asset  composition  and  credit 
supply with the introduction of the tiering. In Section 6, we discuss how 
we control for the fact that the tiering announcements coincided with 
other policy measures –  notably a further interest rate cut –  and were 
interpreted by market participants as a signal to maintain or lower in-
terest rates for an extended period.

4 Switzerland  has  maintained  a  tiering  system  also  after  abandoning  the 
NIRP. Concurrent work by Fuster, Schelling and Towbin (2021) shows that in 
Switzerland  after  the  introduction  of  the  tiering,  banks  that  benefitted  most 
from the increase in the exemption threshold charged higher loan spreads, took 
less  risk,  and  obtained  liquidity  by  increasing  the  interest  rate  on  deposits, 
effectively lowering the pass-through of policy easing. Our paper focuses on the 
larger and heterogenous money market of the euro area and shows that when 
the distribution of reserves is ex ante skewed towards banks that are likely to 
have reached their satiation point, tiering systems, by increasing the benefits of 
trading, can stimulate bank lending.

5 Reuters, “ECB studying tiered deposit rate to alleviate banks’ plight”, March 

27, 2019, released at 13h25.

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 1 
Summary statistics
Panel A summarizes the bank level dataset. We report observations at the bank and month level. Our sample consists of a panel of 128 banks from January 2014 to 
February 2020 (74 months). Panel B summarizes the Anacredit sample. We report observations at the bank, firm and month level. The Anacredit sample consists of a 
panel of 122 banks and 2,624,856 firms, for a total of 3,439,580 bank-firm relations, from September 2018 to February 2020 (18 months). Firms are distributed across 
19 countries (AT, BE, CY, DE, EE, ES, FI, FR, GR, IE, IT, LT, LU, LV, MT, NL, PT, SI, SK), 89 2-digit NACE industries and 1,055 NUTS2 locations, providing 3,087,276 
industry-location-size-month fixed effects. Panel C summarizes the MMSR sample.

Panel A. Bank-month level sample

Variable name

Units

Definition

Monthly change in NFC loans
Monthly change in excess liquidity

Monthly change in holdings of 

government securities

Exposure(Feb 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)

Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)
Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 

2020)

CDS

p.p.
p.p.

p.p.

%

%

Cat.
Cat.

Monthly change in ratio of NFC loans over assets.
Monthly change in ratio of excess liquidity (current account plus deposit facility minus minimum 
reserve requirements) over assets
Monthly change in ratio of holdings of government bonds over assets.

Unused exemption allowance, i.e., difference of 6 fold the minimum reserve requirement and the 
excess liquidity holdings of bank in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. 
It is expressed in percentage of main assets.
Unused exemption allowance, i.e., difference of 6 fold the minimum reserve requirement and the 
excess liquidity holdings of bank in October 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. It 
is expressed in percentage of main assets.
Dummy variable equal to 1 if t is between March 2019 and October 2019, 0 otherwise.
Dummy variable equal to 1 if t is between November 2019 and February 2020, 0 otherwise.

p.p.

5-years credit default swaps, in percentage points. One month lag.

9325

1.356

2.072

Panel B. Bank-firm-month level sample

Variable name

Units

Definition

Volume of NFC loans

Exposure(Feb 2019)

log(EUR 
mln)
p.p.

Exposure(Oct 2019)

p.p.

Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)
Implementation(Nov 
2019-Feb 2020)
Tiering Benefits (Feb 

2019)

0/1
0/1

p.p.

Tiering Benefits (Oct 

p.p.

2019)

CDS
Excess liquidity

p.p.
%

Holdings of government 

%

securities
Deposit ratio
TLTRO funds
Lending rate

Maturity
Drawn credit lines

Undrawn credit lines

Overall credit lines

%
%
% p.a.

Days
log(EUR 
mln)
log(EUR 
mln)
log(EUR 
mln)

Logarithm of outstanding amounts (in EUR million) of loans between a bank and a firm in a given 
month.
Unused exemption allowance, i.e., difference of 6-fold the minimum reserve requirement and the 
excess liquidity holdings of a bank in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and zero 
otherwise. It is expressed in percentage of main assets.
Unused exemption allowance, i.e., difference of 6-fold the minimum reserve requirement and the 
excess liquidity holdings of a bank in October 2019 if such difference is positive, and zero otherwise. 
It is expressed in percentage of main assets.
Dummy variable equal to 1 between March 2019 and October 2019, 0 otherwise.
Dummy variable equal to 1 between November 2019 and February 2020, 0 otherwise.

Savings that would have stemmed from holdings of excess liquidity in February 2019 under the 
tiering, expressed as a ratio of assets, that is, 100 × [min{0, DFR × (EL (cid:0) MRR × 6)} (cid:0) DFR ×
EL]/Assets.
Savings that would have stemmed from holdings of excess liquidity in October 2019 under the 
tiering, expressed as a ratio of assets, that is, 100 × [min{0, DFR × (EL (cid:0) MRR × 6)} (cid:0) DFR ×
EL]/Assets.
5-years credit default swaps, in percentage points. One month lag.
Ratio of excess liquidity (current account + deposit facility - minimum reserve requirements) over 
main assets. One month lag.
Ratio of holdings of securities issued by general governments over main assets. One month lag.

Ratio of deposits from NFCs and households over main liabilities. One month lag.
Ratio of TLTRO uptake over main liabilities. One month lag.
Lending rate on outstanding amounts (in % per annum) on loans between a bank and a firm in a 
given month.
Residual maturity of loans between a bank and a firm in a given month.
Logarithm of drawn credit lines (in EUR million) between a bank and a firm in a given month.

Logarithm of granted but undrawn credit lines (in EUR million) between a bank and a firm in a 
given month.
Logarithm of granted (drawn and undrawn) credit lines (in EUR million) between a bank and a firm 
in a given month.

Panel C. Bank daily panel of the money market transactions

Variable name

Units

Definition

Stock of outstanding secured borrowing 

Ratio

transactions / MRR

Stock of outstanding secured lending 

Ratio

transactions / MRR

Stock of outstanding secured net 
borrowing transactions / MRR
Stock of outstanding unsecured 
borrowing transactions / MRR

Ratio

Ratio

Stock of outstanding borrowing in the secured money market relative to a bank’s minimum 
reserve requirement.
Stock of outstanding lending in the secured money market relative to a bank’s minimum 
reserve requirement.
Stock of net borrowing in the secured money market, defined as gross borrowing minus gross 
lending, relative to a bank’s minimum reserve requirement.
Stock of outstanding borrowing in the unsecured money market relative to a bank’s minimum 
reserve requirement.

4 

Obs.

Mean

9325
9325

(cid:0) 0.004
0.103

St. 
Dev.

0.878
1.333

9325

(cid:0) 0.012

0.418

9325

0.879

1.480

9325

0.841

1.446

9325
9325

0.110
0.055

0.313
0.227

Obs.

Mean

St. 
Dev.

36,163,821

(cid:0) 2.318

1.954

52,814,649

0.648

1.130

52,814,649

0.520

0.913

52,814,649
52,814,649

0.438
0.228

0.496
0.420

52,814,649

0.023

0.021

52,814,649

0.024

0.019

52,814,649
52,814,649

1.050
4.705

1.182
3.754

52,814,649

6.613

4.826

52,814,649
52,814,649
36,163,821

37.724
4.212
3.129

21.050
4.169
3.729

36,163,821
21,321,876

1316
(cid:0) 3.707

1665
2.674

18,085,424

(cid:0) 4.032

2.546

25,174,025

(cid:0) 3.003

2.362

Obs.

Mean

St. 
Dev.

44,269

11.976

16.613

44,269

9.776

17.967

44,269

2.200

13.076

44,269

9.168

12.338

(continued on next page)

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 1 (continued )

Panel C. Bank daily panel of the money market transactions

Variable name 

Units 

Definition 

Stock of outstanding unsecured lending 

Ratio

transactions / MRR

Stock of outstanding unsecured net 
borrowing transactions / MRR

CDS spread

Ratio

p.p.

Interim period (26 Mar 2019 - 29 Oct 

0/1

2019)

Stock of outstanding lending in the unsecured money market relative to a bank’s minimum 
reserve requirement.
Stock of net borrowing in the unsecured money market, defined as gross borrowing minus gross 
lending, relative to a bank’s minimum reserve requirement.
5-years credit default swaps, in percentage points. Equal to domestic sovereign CDS spread for 
state-owned banks without issuer-specific CDS.
Dummy variable equal to 1 between 26 March 2019 and 29 October 2019, 0 otherwise.

Obs. 

Mean 

St. 
Dev.

44,269

1.912

4.684

44,269

7.257

13.375

44,269

1.017

1.719

44,269

0.197

0.398

Implementation (30 Oct 2019 - 28 Jan 

0/1

Dummy variable equal to 1 between 30 October 2019 and 28 January 2019, 0 otherwise.

44,269

0.082

0.275

2020)

Exposure in Feb 2019

Exposure in Oct 2019

p.p.

p.p.

Unused exemption allowance, i.e., difference of 6-fold the minimum reserve requirement and 
the excess liquidity holdings of a bank between 30 January and 12 March 2019 if such 
difference is positive, and zero otherwise. It is expressed in percentage of total assets.
Unused exemption allowance, i.e., difference of 6-fold the minimum reserve requirement and 
the excess liquidity holdings of a bank between 18 September and 29 October 2019 if such 
difference is positive, and zero otherwise. It is expressed in percentage of main total.

44,269

0.493

1.013

44,269

0.426

0.828

focus on a period with vast amounts of excess liquidity, in which the ECB 
was  ready  to  meet  any  demand  for  liquidity  through  its  refinancing 
operations, the supply of liquidity can be thought as perfectly elastic. 
Therefore, we cast our conceptual framework focusing on the demand 
for reserves.

We  think  of  reserves  as  providing  unique  liquidity  services  to  the 
bank,  similarly  to  Lopez-Salido  and  Vissing-Jorgensen  (2023).  There-
fore, we assume that there is a complementarity between credit supply 
and reserves. The complementarity arises from the fact that loans are 
relatively illiquid, and additional illiquidity arising from more lending is 
mitigated by extra liquidity on the rest of the asset side when a bank 
holds  more  excess  reserves  (Rodnyansky  and  Darmouni  2017).  This 
captures the idea that reserves may render bank runs less likely or at 
least reduce their costs. Consistent with Afonso et al. (2023), we also 
assume that there is a satiation point beyond which the marginal benefit 
of holding reserves is zero (or constant at a very low level).

Thus,  excess  reserves,  besides  yielding  an  interest  rate  r(reserves), 
increase a bank’s expected profits according to the following function, 
which  can  be  thought  as  capturing  the  benefits  of  insuring  expected 
liquidity shocks: v(reserves, loans) > 0, where vR > 0, vRR ≤ 0, vL < 0,
vLL < 0, and vRL > 0. Specifically, the function v must be thought as a 
bank’s  profits  from  extending  credit,  holding  constant  the  quality  of 
borrowers and their demand for credit (as we will do in the empirical 
analysis).  While  more  loans  can  decrease  a  bank’s  expected  profits 
because they expose  it  to higher  expected  costs  from funding  shocks, 
vRL > 0 captures that reserves allow the bank to extend credit with lower 
expected  costs  arising  from  funding  shocks.  Because  of  the  satiation 
point, vRR = vRL = 0 if R > R.

For similar reasons to those discussed above, securities, which are far 
more liquid than loans, are second-best substitutes for reserves. Differ-
ently  from  reserves  that  can  be  used  directly  to  fulfill  cash  demand 
needs,  even  safe  securities  –  such  as  Treasuries  or  other  highly-rated 
government  bonds  –  need to  be  sold  or  pledged  to  be converted  into 
cash. The tensions in the US banking system in 2023 are a stark reminder 
that even the highest quality assets cannot rival central bank reserves in 
that:  u(reserves,
liquidity  value.  To  capture 
securities) > 0, where 0 < uR < vR, uRR ≤ 0, uS > 0, uSS ≤ 0, and uRS <
0 as long as if R < R; uRR = uRS = 0 if R > R. While more illiquid than 
reserves, securities have higher yields, and for this reason, they may be 
preferred by banks with high cost of capital.
A bank’s profits can be written as: 

this,  we  assume 

π = r(reserves) Reserves + r(securities) Securities + r(loans) Loans
+ v(reserves, loans) + u(reserves, securities) (cid:0) cost of capital
∗ Liabilities 

Fig. 1. Stock market reaction to the first mention of a tiering system 
The chart shows the intraday development in the broad EuroStoxx50 index, as 
well as the narrow EuroStoxx Banks index on March 27, 2019, normalised to 
100  at  the  start  of  trading  at  9am.  Former  ECB  president  Draghi’s  speech 
containing  a  reference  to  “mitigating  measures”  to  address  the  possible  side 
effects of negative interest rates on bank profitability was released at 9:00 am in 
the morning and followed by an uptick in the EuroStoxx banks index of around 
1  %,  while  the  broader  index  remained  largely  unchanged.  The  release  of  a 
news bulletin reporting that the ECB was working on a tiering system at 13:25 
was followed by an additional increase in banks’ equity prices by around 2.5 %, 
compared to a rise of 0.7 % in the broader equity index.

4. Hypotheses on the effects of the tiering on bank asset 
composition

We  describe  a  simple  framework  explaining  how  an  asymmetric 
distribution of reserves can constrain the loan supply of banks with the 
lowest  excess  reserve  holdings,  without  favoring  credit  extension  by 
banks with high reserve holdings. To conceptualize this, we model the 
profit  maximization  of  a  bank  that  can  hold  reserves,  securities,  and 
loans and has a cost of capital that is determined outside the model.

Whether the distribution of reserves becomes more even because of 
changes in the demand or supply is immaterial for the effect on bank 
lending we aim to capture in our empirical analysis. However, since we 

5 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

where Liabilities = Reserves + Securities + Loans.

The first-order conditions are: 

r(reserves) + vR + uR (cid:0) cost of capital = 0,

r(loans) + vL (cid:0) cost of capital = 0,

r(securities) + uS (cid:0) cost of capital = 0.

Consider a bank with relatively high cost of capital. From the first- 
order condition for reserves, assuming that the return on reserves and 
the  cost of capital are exogenously given,  it follows that such a bank 
finds it optimal to have relatively lower reserves (higher vR). Also, for a 
given return on bank loans outstanding, such a bank will have a higher 
vL  and therefore fewer loans to satisfy the second first-order condition.
The introduction of the tiering system for a bank with low reserve 
holdings  and  unused  exemptions  is  equivalent  to  an  increase  in  the 
marginal interest rate on reserves, r(reserves). Given the properties of v 
and u, and for given cost of capital, such a bank will increase its reserve 
holdings  to  satisfy  its  first-order  condition  (lower  vR).  An  increase  in 
reserves implies an increase in the marginal benefit of issuing loans and 
a decrease in the marginal benefit of holding securities (vL↑ uS↓). Thus, 
given our assumptions on v and u, the first-order conditions imply that a 
bank  with  ex  ante  low  reserve  holdings  and  unused  exemptions  will 
reduce its security holdings and increase the supply of credit.

While securities can be held by unregulated financial intermediaries, 
reserves  must  be  obtained  from  other  banks  that  have  high  reserve 
holdings  and  have  presumably  reached  their  satiation  point,  which, 
consistently with the design of the policy, we assume to be well above 
the  exemptions granted by the  tiering. Banks  that have reached their 
satiation point are indifferent on the amount of reserves (and securities) 
to hold (vR and uS do not depend on the level of reserves). They will thus 
be willing to transfer reserves to banks with ex ante low reserve holdings 
and unused exemptions.

Note that the simple framework also implies that banks that have 
high  reserve  holdings  and  have  reached  their  satiation  point  are  ex-
pected to have low (marginal) cost of capital, which makes it optimal for 
them to hold excess reserves even if they have low returns and marginal 
benefits.

In what follows, we test whether banks whose marginal return on 
reserves increases indeed decrease their security holdings and expand 
the supply of credit.

5. The redistribution of reserves following the tiering system

5.1. Ex ante distribution of reserves and changes in reserve holdings

Changes in a bank’s liquidity holdings are typically endogenous and 
reflect bank-specific shocks, complicating any empirical assessment of 
the role of reserve holdings on banks’ behavior. This section shows that 
the  tiering  system,  however,  introduced  exogenous  variation  in  the 
reallocation of reserves across banks.

To maximize the value of the exemptions introduced with the tiering 
system, all banks needed to hold at least as much liquidity as is exempt 
from  paying  negative  rates.  The  marginal  value  of  liquidity  thus 
increased  only  for  banks  with  unused  exemptions,  which  became  in-
clined to hold more reserves even if they faced higher cost of capital. The 
marginal returns on reserves did not change for banks with ex ante high 
liquidity holdings.

Table  IA.1  describes  the  characteristics  of  banks  with  unused  ex-
emptions above and below the median, which corresponds to banks that 
fulfill all their exemptions. Panel A considers a bank’s unused exemp-
tions relative to its total assets as of October 2019, when the policy was 
about to be implemented (October 2019 Exposure). Panel B considers a 
notional  exposure  to  the  policy  in  February  2019,  shortly  before  the 
possibility of the tiering was first hinted, when the size of the exemptions 

and the actual implementation of the tiering were still uncertain. The 
determinants are the same for both variables and are consistent with our 
conceptual framework. Specifically, banks with high unused exemptions 
have, by construction, lower excess liquidity holdings relative to their 
assets. More importantly, they have ex ante higher CDS spreads, which is 
consistent with a higher cost of capital depressing the demand for low- 
return assets, like reserves. Facing a higher interest rate in the money 
market, high-exemption banks make less use of wholesale funding, as 
indicated by a higher deposit ratio and higher use of the targeted long- 
term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO  funds).  As  our  model  implies, 
before  the  policy  implementation,  high-exposure  banks  have  higher 
securities holdings, which are an imperfect substitute for excess reserves 
in insuring against adverse liquidity shocks. We observe no statistically 
significant  differences  in  bank  capital  and  assets  between  banks  with 
unused exemptions and other banks. Overall, our conceptual framework 
in Section 4 provides a realistic representation of why some banks chose 
to  have  low  reserve  holdings  before  the  tiering  implementation  and 
confirms  that  differences  in  creditworthiness  and  cost  of  capital  are 
important determinants.

Fig. 2 provides evidence that unused allowances are indeed associ-
ated with an increase in banks’  reserve holdings following the tiering 
implementation.  It  describes  how  the  distribution  of  excess  liquidity 
relative to exemptions changed. Unused exemption allowances declined 
swiftly to low levels as banks attracted sufficient reserves from banks 
over-fulfilling the allowance.6 Since the exemptions are a multiple of the 
required reserve holdings, they reflect the liquidity needs of banks with 
different sizes and capital structure. The figure thus shows that after the 
tiering  adoption  the  reserve  distribution  became  more  even,  because 
reserves  were  reallocated  towards  banks  with  higher  liquidity  needs. 
Importantly, changes in the distribution of liquidity before November 
2019  were  minimal,  indicating  that  banks’  unused  exemptions  in 
October 2019 largely reflect their excess liquidity holdings before the 
tiering system was announced.

The descriptive evidence holds up when we control for banks’ CDS 
spread, bank fixed effects and country specific shocks. We estimate the 
following equation: 

Δ Excess Liquidityict
Assetsict

(cid:0)

= β1

Interimt × ExposureFeb 2019
(cid:0)

i

)

Implementationt × ExposureOct 2019

+ β2
+ β3CDSit + αi + αct + uict,

i

)

(1) 

(

where the dependent variable is the monthly change in excess liquidity 
of bank i from country c, which we normalize by assets to abstract from 
the effect of bank size. The variable ExposureOct 2019
captures that banks 
with less excess liquidity than their tiering allowance in October 2019, 
when the tiering was introduced, are more exposed to the tiering system 
because they have a higher  marginal return on reserve holdings than 
other banks and therefore stronger incentives to acquire liquidity. It is 
defined  as  bank  i’s  unused  allowance,  relative  to  total  assets, 

i 

i

max

Allowancei(cid:0) Excess liquidityi
We also compute a notional exposure in 
Total assetsi
, when the tiering was first discussed to 
March 2019, ExposureFeb 2019
evaluate to what extent banks started to adapt earlier. Specifically, since 
the  amount  of  excess  reserves  that  were  exempt  from  negative  rates 
under the tiering system were evaluated based on the average reserve 
holdings between the monetary policy meetings of the ECB’s Governing 
Council, the so-called maintenance periods, we compute excess liquidity 
holdings during the maintenance periods preceding President Draghi’s 
speech in March 2019 (from 30 January to 12 March) as well as the one 

)
, 0

6 Banks “compliance” with the tiering system was near-universal. At the end 
of the first maintenance period after the implementation of the tiering, banks’ 
unused allowances were only 0.9%, an amount that declined to 0.8% at the end 
of the subsequent maintenance period.

6 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Fig. 2. The distribution of excess liquidity between banks before and after the tiering 
The figure plots the distribution of the ratio of a bank’s excess liquidity relative to the bank’s exemptions equal to six times the MMR in the two maintenance periods 
before (MP5 and MP6) the tiering implementation in November 2019 and the two after (MP7 and MP8). MP5 goes between July 31, 2019 and September 17, 2019; 
MP6 between September 18, 2019 and October 29, 2019; MP7 between October 30, 2019 and December 17, 2019; and MP8 between  December 18, 2019 and 
January 28, 2020.

before the actual implementation of the tiering system as of the end of 
October 2019 (from 18 September to 29 October). Implementationt  is an 
indicator  variable  that  captures  the  period  during  which  the  tiering 
system has been in place, and Interimt  is equal to one between March 
and September 2019.

We include banks’ CDSit  spreads to control for credit risk and allow 

for bank (αi) as well as country-month (αc,t) fixed effects.

i

By  including  the  notional  exposure  to  the  hypothetical  tiering 
ExposureFeb 2019
, along with the actual ExposureOct 2019
, we capture any 
adjustment in bank policies after the tiering was first hinted, before its 
implementation. Naturally, since a bank’s reserve holdings depend not 
only on borrowing and lending decisions, but also on deposits and re-
demptions, which are outside its control, there is variation in reserve 
holdings  between  February  and  October  2019  even  if,  as  shown  by 
Figure IA.1, the correlation between the two exposures is high.

i

Table 2 shows the estimates of Eq. (1). Banks with lower liquidity 
holdings  and  consequently  higher  unused  exemptions  in  expectation 
increase  their  holdings  of  excess  liquidity  during  the  period  between 
March  and  October  2019.  A  one-standard-deviation  (1.5  percentage 
points,  pp)  increase  in  (prospective)  unused  exemptions  is  associated 
with an increase in excess liquidity holdings by close to 12 bps of total 
assets. The increase in holdings of excess liquidity is three times larger 
after the tiering system was finally implemented in November 2019. The 
minimal  adjustment  of  reserve  policies  during  the  interim  period  is 
rational for banks. Since this was a period with high excess liquidity in 
which it was easy to obtain liquidity, including from the ECB, banks had 
no  reason  to  adopt  pre-emptive  behaviors,  which  would  have  been 
costly  because  of  the  negative  rates  before  the  actual  phase-in  of  the 
tiering.

This  evidence  suggests  that  unused  exemptions  granting  a  higher 
marginal return on liquidity exogenously increased the demand for re-
serves of banks with ex ante low reserve holdings. In what follows, we 
shed more light on how the banks with unused allowances attracted the 
additional reserves using money market data. We also show that banks 
decreased their security holdings, as is consistent with our conceptual 
framework.

5.2. Reserve holdings and the money market

This section shows that after the introduction of the tiering, banks 

7 

Table 2 
Changes in excess liquidity
The  table  shows  results  from  difference-in-differences  regressions  of  banks’ 
excess liquidity on exposure to the tiering system. The dependent variable in all 
columns is the bank’s monthly change in the ratio of excess liquidity over assets. 
“Exposure(Feb 2019)”  is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a per-
centage of main assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, 
and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as 
of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an indicator for the 
time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in 
which he hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the 
eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation 
(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)”  is an indicator variable for the time after October 30, 
2019, i.e., the time since the tiering system has been in place. “CDS” represents 
banks’ CDS spread (in percentage points); for state-owned banks in the sample, 
this  is  measured  as  the  domestic  sovereign  CDS  spread.  The  observation  fre-
quency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges from January 
2014 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and country- 
time level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote 
significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Monthly change in excess liquidity

Exposure(Feb 2019)

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 

2019-Feb 2020)

CDS

Country-month FE
Bank FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(cid:0) 0.059*
(0.031)
0.078**
(0.030)
0.035
(0.038)
0.224***

0.078**
(0.030)

0.078**
(0.030)

0.224***

0.224***

(0.066)

(0.066)

Yes
–

9325
0.166

Yes
Yes
9325
0.178

(0.066)
0.023
(0.015)
Yes
Yes
9325
0.178

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

with  low  reserve  holdings  filled  their  unused  exemptions  (also)  by 
borrowing through the money market. We consider both the secured and 
the unsecured money market segments.7

Before  the  introduction of the  tiering,  excess liquidity  was  largely 
held  by  banks  in  Germany,  France,  and  The  Netherlands.  There  was 
sporadic trading with the banks with lower liquidity holdings, mostly 
located in countries that were more affected by the sovereign debt crisis 
(Baldo  et  al.,  2017;  Eisenschmidt,  Kedan,  and  Tietz,  2018).  Facing 
relatively higher interest rates, low-excess-liquidity banks had limited 
ability to insure against liquidity risks through the money market.

5.2.1. Descriptive evidence

Fig.  3 shows  how  net  borrowing  in  the  money  market  changed 
following the tiering-related announcements distinguishing between the 
secured  (Panel  A)  and  unsecured  (Panel  B)  market  segments.  The 
announcement of a new series of TLTROs as well as expectations for a 
restart of net asset purchases over the course of 2019 had reduced banks’ 
need to trade in the money market for funding purposes (ECB 2021) and 
had led to a decline in trading activity in the secured market over the 
summer  of  2019.  Activity  in  both  the  secured  and  unsecured  money 
market  segments  increased  markedly  in  the  period leading  up  to and 
following the actual implementation of the tiering system at the end of 
October 2019. While net borrowing by banks with unused allowances in 
the unsecured market increased gradually following the announcement 
of the tiering system in September, there was a much sharper increase in 
the secured market around October 30, when the exemptions became 
effective.8

Relating  the  increase  in  banks’  money  market  borrowing  to  the 
change  in  their  reserve  holdings  shows  that  the  redistribution  of 
liquidity  was  primarily  intermediated  through  the  secured  and  unse-
cured markets. Fig. 4 illustrates the change in banks’ reserve holdings, 
distinguishing  between  banks  with  and  without  unused  allowances, 
computed as of October 2019. Banks with unused allowances increased 
their reserve holdings by 55 % in November 2019 (the first month of the 
introduction  of  the  tiering  system)  compared  to  August  (the  month 
before its announcement). 71 % of that increase was matched by higher 
net  money  market  borrowing,  especially  in  the  secured  segment.  In 
contrast, banks without unused allowances shed around 14 % of their 
reserve holdings, 62 % of which can be linked to additional net lending 
in  the  money  market.  Neither  group  of  banks  significantly  raised  or 
lowered their borrowing from the ECB over the same period, suggesting 
that the money market was the primary conduit for the reallocation of 
liquidity following the introduction of the tiering system.

The  redistribution  of  reserves  and  the  increase  in  money  market 
borrowing by banks with unused exemptions did not go along with a 
notable increase in money market interest rates. At the aggregate level, 
this reflected the ECB’s intention to keep a sufficient amount of excess 
liquidity  subject  to  the  DFR  to  ensure  that  key  money  market  rates 
would continue to be firmly anchored. But also at the individual bank 
level,  interest  rates  on  the  flow  of  money  market  transactions  hardly 

7 Since the global financial crisis, trading in the euro area had shifted from 
the  unsecured  to  the  secured  money  market  segment  reflecting  the  greater 
regulatory  costs of  unsecured  transactions as  well  as  a stronger  sensitivity to 
counterparty risk.

8 Banks with unused allowances, on average, more than quadrupled their net 
borrowing in the secured segment from EUR 1 billion (bn) to EUR 4.5bn be-
tween  October  and  November  2019.  In  aggregate  terms,  this  amounted  to 
additional  net  borrowing  of  EUR  44.8bn  by  this  group  of  banks.  In  contrast, 
banks  without  unused  exemptions  increased  their  net  lending  in  the  secured 
money market from EUR 2.4bn to EUR 4.2bn on average, or by EUR 56.9bn in 
aggregate  terms.  In  the  unsecured  market,  banks  with  unused  allowances 
increased  their  net  exposure  from  EUR  9.2bn  to  EUR  9.6bn  on  average  from 
October to November, or by around EUR 5.6bn in the aggregate; banks without 
unused exemptions reduced their net borrowing marginally from EUR 9.5bn to 
EUR 9.2bn, or around EUR 11bn in the aggregate.

budged  in  response  to  the  expansion  in  trading  volumes,  neither  for 
banks with nor for banks without unused tiering allowances (Fig. 5). It 
appears that banks with unused exemptions, which were facing higher 
interest rates in the money market, optimally held low levels of reserves 
before the tiering introduction. These banks became more inclined to 
borrow  from  banks  with  high  excess  liquidity,  thanks  to  the  higher 
returns on the excess reserves guaranteed by the exemptions. Thus, the 
tiering, by increasing the marginal returns on reserves for banks with 
unused exemptions, favored the reallocation of liquidity from banks that 
had  presumably  reached  their  satiation  point  to  banks  with  higher 
liquidity needs.

5.2.2. Multivariate analysis

To  provide  systematic  evidence  on  how  banks  adjusted  their 
liquidity  positions  in  the  money  market,  we  analyse  a  daily  panel  of 
banks’  money  market  activity,  based  on  the  transaction-level  MMSR 
dataset. Specifically, we estimate the following specification: 
(cid:0)

)

Money Market Activityictm

= β1

Interimt × ExposureFeb 2019
(cid:0)

i
Implementationt × ExposureOct 2019

+ β2
+ β3CDSit + αi + αcm + uictm

i

)

(2) 

where  Money Market Activityictm  represents  one  of  six  alternative 
measures of bank i’s from country c trading in the money market on day t 
in  maintenance  period  m:  gross  borrowing,  gross  lending,  or  net 
borrowing,  in  either  the  secured  or  unsecured  segment.  Each  of  the 
variables is scaled by banks’ minimum reserve requirements to express 
the coefficients in terms of the units of the tiering allowance. Interimt,
Implementationt, ExposureFeb 2019
are defined as in 
the  previous  section.  We  include  banks’  CDSit  spreads  to  control  for 
credit risk and allow for bank (αi) as well as country-maintenance period 
(αcm)  fixed  effects.  Given  the  frequency  at  which  the  tiering  benefits 
accrue, we expect correlation in the average money market activity of 
banks  during  a  maintenance  period  and,  for  this  reason,  we  cluster 
standard errors at the bank and maintenance period level.

, and ExposureOct 2019

i

i

In line with the descriptive evidence, Table 3, Panel A shows that 
banks with unused tiering allowances started to borrow more once the 
system was implemented. Specifically, in column (3), a one-percentage 
point larger unused allowance as of October 2019 (expressed as a share 
of total assets) is associated with an increase in net secured borrowing 
amounting to 1.7 times the banks’ reserve requirements after the actual 
implementation of the system. We do not observe significant changes in 
gross borrowing, and the adjustment in gross lending is significant only 
at  the  10  percent  level,  indicating  that  different  banks  achieved  the 
desired increase in excess liquidity by adjusting on different margins. 
Consequently,  the  tiering  system  was  not  associated  with  significant 
changes in banks’ capital structure and wholesale borrowing, mitigating 
concerns about financial stability.

Importantly, we observe no changes in net borrowing in the secured 
market  for  banks  with  more  unused  allowances  during  the  interim 
period. Columns (4)-(6) show that similar developments took place in 
the  unsecured  market,  albeit  at  somewhat  smaller  magnitude,  in  line 
with the descriptive evidence in Fig. 3.

The effects we document are economically meaningful. As outlined 
in Section 3, each eligible bank received a tiering allowance exempting 
excess liquidity holdings up to six times their MRR from the application 
of the negative DFR. The average treatment effect of between 0.7–1.7 
times banks’ MRR thus implies that banks with a one percentage point 
higher unused exemptions increased their net borrowing in the money 
market by around one-sixth of their total allowance more than banks 
without  unused  allowances.  The  average  treatment  effect  is  also  sub-
stantial relative to the stock of outstanding money market transactions 
during the sample period, which amounts to around 2.2 times MRR in 
the  secured  segment  and  around  7.3  times  MRR  in  the  unsecured 

8 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Fig. 3. Net borrowing in the money market 
The  figure shows  the average outstanding  stock of  net borrowing by banks in  EUR billion.  The stock of  net borrowing  is defined  as the volume  of outstanding 
borrowing transactions at the end of the day minus the volume of outstanding lending transactions. Panel A is based on transactions in the secured money market 
segment, and Panel B is based on transactions in the unsecured segment. The data is split between banks with unused tiering allowances (red line, left-hand side axis) 
and without (grey line, right-hand side axis) during the maintenance period immediately preceding the start of the tiering system at the end of October 2019. Vertical 
lines mark the speech by President Draghi on March 27, 2019, which first referred to the possibility of introducing a tiering system, as well as to the eventual start of 
the system on October 30, 2019.

segment (see Table 1, panel C).

Panel B suggests that the additional borrowing by banks with unused 
exemptions was met by an elastic supply of liquidity because it carried 
neither systematically higher interest rates (columns 1 and 2), nor did it 
lead to meaningful maturity rationing (columns 3 and 4). These findings 
hold both in the secured and in the unsecured segment of the money 
market.

Overall,  these  results  suggest  that  following  the  tiering  imple-
mentation, the willingness and ability to borrow reserves increased for 
banks with unused exemptions, due to their ability to store liquidity at a 
non-negative rate. The results also support our framework assumption 
that banks with high reserve holdings had reached a satiation point and, 
therefore,  did  not  require  a  higher  interest  rate  to  transfer  reserves 
through the money market.

To  sharpen  the  identification  of  the  demand  for  reserves,  we 
construct a relationship level daily dataset of money market transactions 
and  focus  on  the  unsecured  market,  because  the  prevalence  of  trans-
actions  with  central  counterparties  in  the  secured  market  limits  our 
ability  to  observe  bilateral  flows.  In  this  context,  we  can  use  high- 
dimensional fixed effects to control for shocks that may have affected 
the supply of credit of banks’ counterparties (Khwaja and Mian, 2008).
Panel C controls for the supply of short-term funding by including 
interactions of lender (counterparty) and maintenance period fixed ef-
fects. The results show that unsecured borrowing from the same coun-
terparty rose significantly more for banks with more unused exemptions 
than for banks without unused exemptions. This finding is robust if we 
control for characteristics of the relationships by including the interac-
tion between borrowing bank and lending counterparty fixed effects or 

9 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Fig. 4. Change in reserve holdings, money market net borrowing, and central bank borrowing 
The figure shows the change in reserve holdings, net borrowing in the money market, and borrowing from the central bank by banks with (left panel) and without 
(right panel) unused allowances as of October 2019, right before the tiering implementation. The relevant cut-off date for determining the minimum reserve re-
quirements (and therefore the tiering allowance) for the maintenance period ending on October 2019 were July 2019 (for banks reporting monthly) or June 2019 (for 
banks reporting quarterly). All series are normalized to banks’ reserve holdings on September 12, 2019, the date at which the introduction of the two-tier system was 
formally announced (first vertical dashed line). The second vertical line indicates the start of the tiering system implementation (October 30, 2019). The residual 
change in reserve holdings can be attributed to other sources of banks’ liquidity management, such as the purchase or sale of securities.

shocks to the country of the borrowers that may drive the demand for 
liquidity. In line with the results in Panel B, the additional borrowing 
volumes did not require a significantly higher borrowing rate, as shown 
in  column  (4),  further  supporting  the  conclusion  that  the  supply  of 
liquidity was elastic for banks with unused exemptions.

We  also  explore  which  counterparties  provided  more  liquidity  to 
banks with unused exemptions for the subset of transactions in the bank- 
to-bank market. To do so, we include in the specification in column 3 of 
Panel  C,  a  triple  interaction  term  between  Implementationt,  a  bank’s 
, and the counterparty’s 
exposure to the tiering system, ExposureOct 2019
excess liquidity holdings above its allowance relative to its total assets 
during the maintenance period before the implementation of the tier-
ing.9 Fig. 6 shows how the net borrowing of a bank with positive average 
unused exemptions varied with the counterparty’s excess liquidity. The 
increasing  slope  of  the  coefficient  implies  that  banks  with  unused  al-
lowances borrowed more from banks with higher excess liquidity. This 
finding  supports  the  interpretation  that  liquidity  flowed  from  high 
excess liquidity banks to banks with high unused exemptions and led to a 
more even distribution of reserves.

i

Table IA.2 further considers bank balance sheet data to evaluate how 
the tiering affected other bank liabilities and the size of their balance 
sheets. We observe no changes in deposits for banks with higher unused 
exemptions, further indicating that the reallocation of liquidity occurred 
largely through the money market. Together with the evidence that the 
size of banks with higher unused exemptions did not change after the 
implementation of the tiering, this suggests that an increase in excess 
liquidity  holdings  was  not  accompanied  by  a  more  fragile  capital 
structure.

5.3. Bond holdings and bank lending

Our  conceptual  framework  implies  that  banks  that  can  more  effi-
ciently insure against liquidity shocks with higher reserve holdings have 

9 This  restricts  the  sample  to  the  interbank  market,  i.e.,  to  transactions  in 
which  both  the  borrowing  and  lending  counterparties  can  hold  central  bank 
reserves.

incentives to rebalance away from securities, such as government bonds. 
By  doing  so,  they  can  also  generate  liquidity,  complementing  their 
money market borrowing. We, therefore, apply the empirical framework 
outlined above to explore our empirical prediction on banks’  govern-
ment securities holdings.

Table 4, Panel A shows that consistent with our simple framework, 
banks with unused allowances decreased their holdings of government 
securities relative to their assets after the tiering implementation. A one- 
standard-deviation  increase  in  a  bank’s  ex  ante  unused  allowances  is 
associated with a decrease in the holdings of government securities by 
close to 4 bps of total assets (corresponding to just under 10 % of the 
standard deviation of this variable).

Our  framework  also  implies  that  facing  higher  interest  rates,  low 
excess liquidity banks had limited ability to insure against liquidity risks 
through the money market. We ask whether synergies on banks’ balance 
sheets  are  such  that  this  constrained  lending  by  considering  banks’ 
outstanding  loans.  In  Panel  B,  we  do  not  observe  an  increase  in  the 
amount of credit outstanding for banks with unused exemptions after 
the implementation of the tiering. However, using bank level data, we 
cannot control for potential changes to credit demand. This is particu-
larly important in our context because the tiering was adopted when all 
banks, and banks with unused exemptions to an even larger extent, were 
facing  a decrease  in credit  demand.  This  is  evident  from Figure  IA.2, 
which, using data from the ECB’s Bank Lending Survey, shows that the 
share  of  banks  reporting  increasing  loan  demand  was  decreasing  and 
even  more  so  for  banks  with  unused  exemptions.  This  finding  is 
consistent with the evidence in Panel B that the outstanding credit of 
banks  with  unused  exemptions  was  decreasing  during  the  interim 
period.

Yet, an increase in excess liquidity by banks with unused exemptions 
could have led to a rightward shift in their supply of bank loans, holding 
constant the quality of potential borrowers and the demand for credit 
(see e.g., Bernanke and Lown, 1991, for such a definition). Since based 
on  Figure  IA.2,  the  borrowers  of  banks  with  low  excess  liquidity  are 
likely to have experienced stronger contemporaneous negative demand 
shocks than the clients of other banks, we are unable to identify whether 
the tiering sustained the supply of credit using bank balance sheet data. 
For this reason, in the next section, we revisit this question considering 

10 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Fig. 5. Money market interest rates 
The figure shows the volume-weighted average interest rates on the flow of new money market transactions by reporting banks per day, expressed as a spread over 
the prevailing DFR. The average is computed across all reporting banks and maturities. The red line indicates the values for banks with unused allowances, and the 
grey line banks without unused allowances under the tiering system. The vertical lines indicate the date when the reduction of the DFR took effect (September 18, 
2019) and the start of the tiering system implementation (October 30, 2019).

banks’  outstanding  credit  to  different  borrowers and  controlling  non-
parametrically for credit demand.

(cid:0)

Loanf,i,t = β1

6. The effects of the tiering system on loan supply

6.1. Methodology and main results

Our objective is to explore whether the increase in excess liquidity 
holdings  by  banks  with  ex  ante low  reserves fosters  bank  lending. To 
achieve this and to control for the demand for credit of the customers of 
different banks, we use Anacredit, which allows us to observe a bank’s 
exposure 
for  borrower 
heterogeneity.

to  each  single  borrower  and  control 

As  in  our  earlier  tests,  we  exploit  banks’  exposure  to  the  tiering 
system  through  unused  exemptions  to  test  whether  a  reallocation  of 
reserves  towards  banks  with  higher  liquidity  needs  increases  credit 
supply. Specifically, we estimate the following equation: 

Interimt × ExposureFeb 2019
(cid:0)

i
Implementationt × ExposureOct 2019

i

)

+ β2
+ εf,i,t,

)

+ β3Xi,t + γf,t

+ δi,f

(4) 

where the dependent variable is the outstanding credit of bank i to firm f 
during month t. In determining the credit exposure of bank i to firm f, we 
aggregate  all  outstanding  credit  facilities  that  bank  i  has  extended  to 
firm f as of time t, including drawn credit lines.10 The indicator variables 
Interimt  and Implementationt  capture the different phases of the process 
that  led to  the  introduction of  the  tiering.  As  in  our  earlier  tests, the 

10 If anything, our results are stronger if we exclude drawn credit lines, which 
we include to be in line with standard statistics on the volume of credit. Bor-
rowers started to abnormally draw down credit lines only after the end of our 
sample period, when the Covid pandemic erupted.

11 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 3 
Money market volumes around the tiering introduction.

Panel A. Bank-level regressions
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of banks’ money market activities on the exposure to the tiering system. The dependent variable in all columns is the 
banks’ stock of borrowing, lending, or net borrowing, scaled by their minimum reserve requirements. “Exposure (Feb 2019)” is equal to the maximum of the unused exemption 
allowance (as a percentage of total assets) of bank i and zero between January 30 and March 12, 2019, the last maintenance period before the speech by former ECB President Draghi on 
March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first time. “Exposure (Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but for the period between September 18 
and October 29, 2019, the last maintenance period before the actual implementation of the tiering system. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between 
the Draghi’s speech and the eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for the time between 
October 30, 2019 and January 28, 2020, i.e., the maintenance periods in which the tiering system was implemented but before the pandemic accelerated in early 2020. “CDS” 
represents banks’ CDS spread (in percentage points); for state-owned banks in the sample, this is measured as the domestic sovereign CDS spread. All regressions include bank fixed 
effects as well as country-maintenance period fixed effects. The observation frequency in all regressions is daily, and the sample period ranges from January 1, 2017 to January 28, 
2020. Robust standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the bank and maintenance period level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % 
level, respectively.

Unsecured

Exposure (Feb 2019) x Interim (Mar-Oct
2019)
Exposure (Oct 2019) x Implementation
(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)
CDS

Country-MP fixed effects
Bank fixed effects
Observations
No. Banks
R2
R2 (within)

Secured

Lending
(2)

(cid:0) 0.635
(0.394)
(cid:0) 1.136*
(0.583)
(cid:0) 0.412
(0.672)
Y
Y
44,269
42
0.910
0.002

Borrowing
(1)

(cid:0) 0.195
(0.466)
0.588
(0.429)
(cid:0) 0.766
(0.592)
Y
Y
44,269
42
0.920
0.002

Net
(3)

0.440
(0.498)
1.724**
(0.658)
(cid:0) 0.354
(0.996)
Y
Y
44,269
42
0.878
0.004

Borrowing
(4)

Lending
(5)

Net
(6)

(cid:0) 0.030
(0.207)
0.551*
(0.321)
1.707
(1.765)
Y
Y
44,269
42
0.802
0.006

(cid:0) 0.039
(0.053)
(cid:0) 0.135
(0.100)
0.067
(0.090)
Y
Y
44,269
42
0.939
0.001

0.009
(0.202)
0.687**
(0.272)
1.641
(1.696)
Y
Y
44,269
42
0.837
0.005

Panel B. Bank-level regressions on money market borrowing’ contractual features
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of banks’ money market activities on the exposure to the tiering system. The dependent variable in columns (1) and 
(2) is the volume-weighted average interest rate on banks’ borrowing in the secured and unsecured money market, respectively, expressed as a spread over the prevailing DFR. In 
columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is the volume-weighted average maturity of the outstanding borrowing in the secured and unsecured segment, respectively. All other 
variables are defined as explained in notes to Panel A. All regressions include bank fixed effects as well as country-maintenance period fixed effects. The observation frequency in all 
regressions is daily, and the sample period ranges from January 1, 2017 to January 28, 2020. Robust standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the bank and 
maintenance period level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Borrowing rate

Borrowing maturity

Exposure (Feb 2019) x Interim (Mar-Oct
2019)
Exposure (Oct 2019) x Implementation
(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)
CDS

Country-MP fixed effects
Bank fixed effects
Observations
No. Banks
R2
R2 (within)

Secured
(1)

Unsecured
(2)

Secured
(3)

Unsecured
(4)

(cid:0) 0.006
(0.007)
0.001
(0.012)
0.032
(0.020)
Y
Y
42,527
42
0.696
0.003

0.014
(0.023)
0.042
(0.027)
0.004
(0.018)
Y
Y
44,016
42
0.938
0.010

3.981
(2.670)
1.885
(1.759)
8.685
(6.213)
Y
Y
42,527
42
0.767
0.025

(cid:0) 2.787
(3.803)
(cid:0) 4.815
(5.380)
(cid:0) 0.574
(4.218)
Y
Y
44,016
42
0.714
0.002

Panel C. Relationship-level regressions
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of banks’ unsecured net borrowing on exposure to the tiering system at the bank-counterparty level. The dependent 
variable in columns (1)-(3) is the banks’ stock of outstanding net borrowing per counterparty, and in column (4) the volume-weighted borrowing rate on the outstanding stock of 
borrowing per counterparty. Variables are defined as explained in notes to Panel A. Column (1) includes bank fixed effects as well as bank’s country-maintenance period fixed effects. 
Column (2) includes bank fixed effects and counterparty-maintenance period fixed effects. Column (3) contains bank-counterparty fixed effects, counterparty-maintenance period fixed 
effects, and lender’s country-maintenance period fixed effects. The observation frequency in all regressions is daily, and the sample period ranges from January 1, 2017 to January 28, 
2020. Robust standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the bank and maintenance period level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % 
level, respectively.

Dependent variable:

Unsecured net borrowing volumes

Unsecured borrowing rate

(1)

(2)

(3)

Exposure (Feb 2019) x Interim (Mar-Oct
2019)
Exposure (Oct 2019) x Implementation
(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)
CDS

Bank’s country-MP fixed effects
Bank fixed effects
Counterparty-MP fixed effects
Bank-counterparty fixed effects
Observations

(cid:0) 0.002*
(0.001)
0.002*
(0.001)
0.007
(0.006)
Y
Y
–
–

0.0199*
(0.011)
0.016*
(0.008)
0.009
(0.011)
–

Y
Y
–

23,337,146

23,333,780

0.012
(0.009)
0.009***
(0.003)
0.018
(0.016)
Y
–

(4)

(cid:0) 0.003
(0.004)
(cid:0) 0.005
(0.003)
0.002
(0.004)
Y
–

Y
Y
23,333,780

Y
Y
2,450,325

12 

(continued on next page)

​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 3 (continued )

Panel C. Relationship-level regressions
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of banks’ unsecured net borrowing on exposure to the tiering system at the bank-counterparty level. The dependent 
variable in columns (1)-(3) is the banks’ stock of outstanding net borrowing per counterparty, and in column (4) the volume-weighted borrowing rate on the outstanding stock of 
borrowing per counterparty. Variables are defined as explained in notes to Panel A. Column (1) includes bank fixed effects as well as bank’s country-maintenance period fixed effects. 
Column (2) includes bank fixed effects and counterparty-maintenance period fixed effects. Column (3) contains bank-counterparty fixed effects, counterparty-maintenance period fixed 
effects, and lender’s country-maintenance period fixed effects. The observation frequency in all regressions is daily, and the sample period ranges from January 1, 2017 to January 28, 
2020. Robust standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the bank and maintenance period level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % 
level, respectively.

Dependent variable: 

Unsecured net borrowing volumes 

Unsecured borrowing rate

No. Banks
R2
R2 (within)

(1) 

42
0.021
0.001

(2) 

42
0.231
0.001

(3) 

42
0.761
0.001

(4)

42
0.976
0.001

Fig. 6. Increase in net unsecured borrowing conditional on unused allowances and counterparty’ excess liquidity 
The figure shows the effect of the two-tier system on banks’  bilateral net borrowing in the unsecured market, conditional on the borrowing bank having unused 
allowances equal to the sample average, and conditional on the counterparty having liquidity holdings in excess of its tiering allowance as indicated on the horizontal 
axis. Specifically, the chart plots the change in net borrowing of a bank with average unused exemptions above zero after the implementation of the tiering as a 
function  of  the  excess  liquidity  of  the  counterparty  (above  the  tiering  allowance  and  in  percent  of  total  assets):  β2ExposureOct 2019 + β4ExposureOct 2019 ×
. We vary the counterparty’s excess tiering allowances ranging from 0 % to 50 % of total assets. Dashed lines indicate the 90 % 
Counterparty Excess Liquidityjt
confidence interval, dotted lines the 95 % confidence interval.

exposure variables are defined as the unused exemptions in the main-
tenance  periods  just  before  the  first  mentioning  of  tiering  in  then- 
President  Draghi’s  speech  and  before  the  tiering  implementation, 
respectively,  and  are  expressed in  percentage  of  a  bank’s assets.  Spe-
cifically,  the  October  2019  exposure  variable  captures  an  increase  in 
excess liquidity driven by the unused exemptions because the unused 
exemptions were nearly entirely filled after the implementation of the 
tiering system. The February 2019 exposure variable captures any ad-
justments occurring in the interim period, which, as shown by the evi-
dence on the money market, were limited because no banks were yet to 
experience an increase in the marginal return of reserves.

The matrix Xi,t  consists of bank level controls including the bank’s 
CDS  spread,  (contemporaneous)  excess  liquidity,  holdings  of  govern-
ment bonds, deposit ratio, and use of TLTRO funds. In the most stringent 
specifications,  we  include  interactions  of  bank  and  firm  fixed  effects, 
capturing time-invariant aspects of the relationships.

The granularity of Anacredit allows us to control for loan demand 
and identify the supply of credit by including either interactions of firm 
and time fixed effects (Khwaja and Mian, 2008) or interactions of in-
dustry, location, size decile, and time fixed effects (Acharya et al., 2019; 
Degryse et al., 2019). In practice, we test the extent to which banks with 
different exposures to the tiering supply credit to the same borrower or 

to  borrowers  that  are  expected  to  experience  similar  demand  shocks 
because they are in the same cluster defined by their city, industry, and 
size group.

The estimates in Panel A of Table 5 show that banks with unused 
exemptions  extended  more  credit  than  other  banks  after  the  imple-
mentation of the tiering system. The estimated effects are qualitatively 
similar  when  we  absorb  shocks  to  the  demand  for  credit  using  in-
teractions of country and time effects in column (1), interactions of in-
dustry,  location,  size  decile,  and  time  fixed  effects  in  column  (2), 
interactions of firm and time fixed effects in column (3), and when we 
add  interactions of  bank  and firm  fixed effects  in  column (4). A one- 
percentage-point  increase  in  exemption  allowances  (which  is  close  to 
a one standard deviation of this variable) corresponds to an increase in 
credit to a given firm by 4–7 %, depending on the fixed effects included.
Importantly,  we  find  that  differences  in  lending  before  the  imple-
mentation  period  are  limited  as  the  interaction  between  the  Interim 
dummy  and  the  Exposure  proxy  is  not  statistically  significant  across 
different  specifications.  This  indicates  that  the  actual  reallocation  of 
liquidity is an important driver of the cross-sectional differences in bank 
lending  and  that  our  estimates  are  unlikely  to  capture  pre-existing 
trends.

Fig. 7 provides further evidence to address concerns that pre-existing 

13 

C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 4 
Changes in bank asset composition.

Panel A. Government bond holdings

The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of banks’ 
government bond holdings on exposure to the tiering system. The dependent variable 
in all columns is the bank’s monthly change in the ratio of government bonds over 
assets. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a 
percentage of main assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and 
to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 
2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between the 
speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the 
introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the eventual implementation of 
the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an 
indicator variable for the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., the time when the tiering 
system took effect. “CDS” represents banks’ CDS spread (in percentage points); for 
state-owned banks in the sample, this is measured as the domestic sovereign CDS 
spread. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period 
ranges from January 2014 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank 
and country-time level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * 
denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Monthly change in holdings of government 
securities

Exposure(Feb 2019)

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 

2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 

2019-Feb 2020)

CDS

Country-month FE
Bank FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.006
(0.005)
(cid:0) 0.021

(0.012)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.005)
(cid:0) 0.026**

(cid:0) 0.020

(cid:0) 0.021

(0.013)

(0.013)

(cid:0) 0.026**

(cid:0) 0.026**

(0.012)

(0.012)

Yes
–

9,325
0.208

Yes
Yes
9,325
0.217

(0.012)
(cid:0) 0.016
(0.012)
Yes
Yes
9,325
0.217

Panel B. Loan volumes
The table shows how bank loan volumes to firms changed after the announcement and 
implementation of the tiering depending on the banks’ exposure to the tiering system. 
The dependent variable in all columns is the bank’s monthly change in the ratio of the 
stock of outstanding loans to all non-financial corporations over assets. “Exposure(Feb 
2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of main assets) of 
bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure 
(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 
2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB 
President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the introduction of a 
tiering system for the first time, and the eventual implementation of the system as of 
October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for 
the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., the time when the tiering system took effect. 
“CDS” represents banks’ CDS spread (in percentage points); for state-owned banks in 
the sample, this is measured as the domestic sovereign CDS spread. The observation 
frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges from January 
2014 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank and country-time 
level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at 
the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Monthly change in NFC loans

Exposure(Feb 2019)

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 

2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 

2019-Feb 2020)

CDS

Country-month FE
Bank FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.017*
(0.009)
(cid:0) 0.052**

(0.022)
(cid:0) 0.008
(0.007)
0.015

(cid:0) 0.052**

(cid:0) 0.052**

(0.023)

(0.023)

0.015

0.015

(0.047)

(0.048)

Yes
–

9,325
0.173

Yes
Yes
9,325
0.182

(0.048)
0.000
(0.012)
Yes
Yes
9,325
0.182

differences in lending of banks with unused exemptions may be driving 
our findings. We plot how the coefficient on ExposureOct 2019
varies over 
our sample period. The coefficient is positive and statistically significant 
only in the months following the implementation of the tiering system, 
confirming the importance of the actual reallocation of liquidity.

i 

Our  dependent variable  in Panel  A is  the exposure  of  a  bank to  a 
given  borrower  during  a  month.  Thus,  its  changes  capture  both  new 
loans and the size of new loans, reflecting both the extensive and the 
intensive margin of bank lending as far as existing borrowers are con-
cerned.  Panel  B  of  Table  5 focuses  on  the  extensive  margin  of  bank 
lending, considering new relationships (columns 1 to 4), defined as new 
loans to borrowers to which the bank did not have a preexisting expo-
sure,  and  terminated  relationships  (columns  5  to  8),  defined  as  re-
lationships  with  firms  with  which  a  bank  stops  having  a  positive 
exposure. It appears that banks which after October 2019 increased their 
liquidity holdings as a result of the tiering are more likely to grant loans 
to new borrowers. A one-standard-deviation increase in exposure to the 
tiering in October 2019 results in a 3 % increase in the probability that 
the bank establishes a new relationship, corresponding to more than a 
third of the unconditional probability of a new relationship (equal to 8.7 
%).  In  columns  5  to  8,  we  observe  no  difference  in  propensity  to 
terminate  relationships  with  existing  borrowers  between  banks.  This 
suggests that banks that transferred their excess liquidity holdings did 
not cut the supply of credit.

Overall,  Table  5 supports  our  hypothesis  that  banks  with  unused 
exemptions increased the supply of credit thanks to the insurance pro-
vided  by  their  higher  excess  liquidity  holdings.  Table  6 considers 
whether  the  tiering  introduction  may  have  affected  bank  lending 
through  alternative  mechanisms.  Specifically,  the  tiering  was  intro-
duced to alleviate the effects of negative rates on banks’ profitability. In 
the  aggregate,  according  to  the  ECB’s  estimates,  the  tiering  system 
introduced savings equivalent to 20 basis points of banks’ ROE, an effect 
that  is  probably  quantitatively  too  small  to  affect  bank  lending 
(Boucinha  et  al.  2022).  Nevertheless,  to  evaluate  whether  this  is  the 
case,  we  consider  banks’  tiering  savings.  If  high-unused-exemption 
banks  had  simply benefitted  from a  higher  return  on  their  assets,  we 
should  observe  that  banks  that  had  enough  liquidity  to  fill  their  ex-
emptions in October 2019 also benefited from higher returns on their 
reserves  and  extended  more  loans.  In  order  test  the  relevance  of  this 
[min 
effect,  we  compute 
{0, DFR ×(ExcessLiquidity (cid:0) MRR ×6)} (cid:0) DFR ×ExcessLiquidity]/Assets 
upon the introduction of the tiering system and before the redistribution 
of reserves.

the  Tiering  Benefits(Oct  2019)  as 

Column 1 shows that the coefficient on Tiering Benefits(Oct 2019) 
*Implementation(Nov  2019-Feb  2020)  is  statistically  insignificant, 
casting doubt on the relevance of the profit channel.11

This finding also indicates that the lending policies of banks with ex 
ante  high  excess  reserves,  which  transferred  their  excess  liquidity  to 
other banks, are unaffected by a drop in reserves. Similarly, in column 2, 
we find no differences in lending between banks with different ex ante 
levels of excess liquidity. Also in this case, we do not find that banks with 
high excess liquidity lent less after the introduction of the tiering, sup-
porting  our  conjecture that  banks  with  high  excess liquidity  holdings 
had reached their satiation point for reserves and consequently do not 
lend  less  when  they  transfer  their  reserves  to  banks  with  unused 
exemptions.

In Table  7,  we consider that the  tiering  system  was announced in 
September 2019 at the same time as several other policy changes. Spe-
cifically, the interest rate on the deposit facility was decreased by 10 

11 In Table IA.3, we also consider banks that had a more favorable price re-
action in March 2019, when the possibility of the tiering was first hinted at. We 
use the price reaction as a proxy for the profit/net wealth channel. The inter-
action between the price reaction, which captures the positive wealth effect due 
to the tiering, and the implementation dummy is not statistically significant.

14 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 5 
The effects of unused exemptions on bank lending.

Panel A. Outstanding loan volumes
The table shows how banks’ lending to firms changes after the announcement and implementation of the tiering depending on the banks’ exposure to the tiering system. The dependent 
variable is the logarithm of loans by bank i to a non-financial corporation f in month t. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of main 
assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 
2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first 
time, and the eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., 
the time when the tiering system took effect. Control variables are as defined in Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges 
from September 2018 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at 
the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Volume of NFC loans

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

CDS

Excess liquidity

Holdings of government securities

Deposit ratio

TLTRO funds

Bank FE
Country-Month FE
Industry-Location-Size-Month FE
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE

Observations
R-squared

(1)
Log

0.012
(0.011)
0.066***
(0.025)
(cid:0) 0.049
(0.040)
0.010**
(0.005)
0.055***
(0.016)
0.000
(0.000)
0.005*
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
–
–
–

(2)
Log

0.007
(0.006)
0.040***
(0.012)
(cid:0) 0.021
(0.020)
0.002
(0.002)
0.026***
(0.009)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.000)
0.002*
(0.001)

Yes
-
Yes
–
–

(3)
Log

0.013
(0.010)
0.074***
(0.017)
(cid:0) 0.034
(0.032)
0.009**
(0.005)
0.047***
(0.016)
0.000
(0.000)
0.004**
(0.002)

Yes
-
–

Yes
–

(4)
Log

0.011
(0.009)
0.066***
(0.019)
(cid:0) 0.045
(0.033)
0.006
(0.004)
0.038**
(0.016)
0.000
(0.000)
0.003**
(0.001)

–

-
–

Yes
Yes

35,356,355
0.084

34,338,371
0.719

10,353,666
0.697

10,256,326
0.935

Panel B. New and terminated lending relationships
The table shows how banks’ lending relationships with firms change after the announcement and implementation of the tiering depending on the banks’ exposure to the tiering system. 
In columns (1) to (4), the dependent variable is a dummy that takes the value of 1 if a relation between bank i and firm f in month t exists (i.e., the volume of outstanding loans is a 
strictly positive) but it did not exist in month t-1, 0 otherwise. For columns (5) to (8), the dependent variable is a dummy that takes value 1 if a relation between bank i and firm f in 
month t does not exist but it existed in month t-1, 0 otherwise. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of main assets) of bank i in February 
2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an 
indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the 
eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., the time when 
the tiering system took effect. Control variables are as defined in Table 1Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges from 
September 2018 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 %, 
5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 

2020)

CDS

Excess liquidity

Holdings of government securities

Deposit ratio

TLTRO funds

Bank FE
Country-Month FE
Industry-Location-Size-Month FE
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE

Observations
R-squared

(1)

0/1

0.011
(0.009)
0.027**

(0.012)
0.052*
(0.029)
(cid:0) 0.006
(0.005)
(cid:0) 0.016
(0.010)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.005
(0.007)

Yes
Yes
–
–
–

(2)
Dummy(New Relationship)

(3)

0/1

0/1

0.012
(0.009)
0.031**

(0.014)
0.065*
(0.034)
(cid:0) 0.007
(0.006)
(cid:0) 0.016
(0.012)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.004
(0.008)

Yes
-
Yes
–
–

0.016
(0.010)
0.035**

(0.017)
0.054*
(0.031)
(cid:0) 0.007
(0.009)
(cid:0) 0.014
(0.013)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.003
(0.010)

Yes
-
–

Yes
–

(4)

0/1

0.016*
(0.010)
0.035**

(0.017)
0.054*
(0.032)
(cid:0) 0.008
(0.009)
(cid:0) 0.015
(0.014)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.003
(0.010)

–

-
–

Yes
Yes

(5)

0/1

(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
0.003

(0.003)
0.005
(0.005)
0.002*
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.001
(0.002)
(cid:0) 0.000***
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)

Yes
Yes
–
–
–

(6)

(7)

Dummy(Terminated Relationship)

0/1

(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
0.001

(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.001*
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.000***
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)

Yes
-
Yes
–
–

0/1

(cid:0) 0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.001

(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.000***
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)

Yes
-
–

Yes
–

(8)

0/1

(cid:0) 0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.001

(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.000***
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)

–

-
–

Yes
Yes

52,814,649
0.254

41,330,058
0.362

17,903,543
0.516

17,903,543
0.565

52,814,649
0.034

41,330,058
0.177

17,903,543
0.432

17,903,543
0.481

15 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 6 
Alternative channels
The table shows how banks’ lending to firms changes after the announcement 
and  implementation  of  the  tiering  depending  on  the  banks’  exposure  to  the 
tiering system. The dependent variable in all columns is the logarithm of loans 
by bank i to a non-financial corporation f in month t. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is 
equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of main assets) of 
bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. 
“Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The 
“Interim  (Mar-Oct  2019)”  variable  is  an  indicator  for  the  time  between  the 
speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at 
the introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the eventual imple-
mentation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019- 
Feb  2020)”  is  an  indicator  variable  for  the  time  after  October  30,  2019,  i.e., 
the  time  when  the  tiering  system  took  effect.  Tiering  benefits  in  February 
(October)  2019  are  defined  as  [min{0, DFR × (EL (cid:0) MRR × 6)} (cid:0) DFR ×
EL]/Assets)  in  February  (October)  2019.  Control  variables  are  as  defined  in 
Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and 
the  sample  period  ranges  from  September  2018  to  February  2020.  Standard 
errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported 
in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, 
respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Volume of NFC loans

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 

2020)

Tiering Benefits(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Tiering Benefits(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 

2019-Feb 2020)

Excess liquidity(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Excess liquidity(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 

2019-Feb 2020)

CDS

Excess liquidity

Holdings of government securities

Deposit ratio

TLTRO funds

Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Log

0.012
(0.010)
0.069***

(0.020)
0.553
(0.578)
0.970

(0.819)

(cid:0) 0.043
(0.033)
0.006
(0.004)
0.037**
(0.016)
0.000
(0.000)
0.003**
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
10,256,326
0.935

(2)
Log

0.015
(0.012)
0.075***

(0.023)

0.003
(0.003)
0.005

(0.004)
(cid:0) 0.043
(0.033)
0.006
(0.004)
0.037**
(0.016)
0.000
(0.000)
0.003**
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
10,256,326
0.935

(3) confirms that the differences in lending behavior between banks are 
statistically significant. We also find some evidence that all banks with 
unused exemptions, regardless of the interest rate they faced, may have 
expanded the credit supply already when the tiering was first hinted in 
March 2019, albeit to a lower extent. This effect is not consistent across 
specifications (as seen in Table 9) but could suggest that reallocation of 
liquidity had slowly started when the introduction of the tiering became 
more likely.

Table  9 provides  additional evidence  on the  cross-sectional differ-
ences in bank lending after the introduction of the tiering. In columns (1) 
and (2), we consider two alternative proxies for banks’ ex ante funding 
costs, specifically bank capitalization and CDS spreads. Consistent with 
our earlier findings, the positive effects of the tiering system on bank 
lending appear to be driven by banks that had unused exemptions and 
low capitalizations or high CDS spreads. These findings further support 
our hypothesis that the tiering, by increasing the return of holding re-
serves,  increased  low-excess-liquidity  banks’  ability  to  withstand 

Fig. 7. Dynamic effects of unused exemptions on bank loan supply 
In order to test whether our results may be driven by pre-existing trends, we 
estimate  a  specification  analogous  to  that  in  column  3  of  Table  7,  in  which 
instead of including the terms Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019) and 
Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020), we interact Expo-
sure(Oct  2019)  with  time  dummies.  The  figure  reports  the  estimated  co-
efficients on each of these interactions and the 95 % confidence interval.

basis points to (cid:0) 0.50 % and the widely expected continuation of the APP 
as well as an easing of the TLTRO conditions were announced. A po-
tential concern for our identification strategy would be that banks with 
unused  exemptions  were  more  exposed  to  these  policy  changes.  We 
therefore control for the exposures to these policies by including in our 
specifications a bank’s excess liquidity and deposit ratio, which account 
for  the  exposure  to  the  interest  rate  cut  below  the  zero  lower  bound 
(Bottero et al. 2022; Heider et al., 2019); the holdings of government 
bonds, which account for a bank’s direct exposure to the security price 
appreciation driven by the APP (Acharya et al., 2019), and the use of 
TLTRO funds. In addition, we show that our results are robust to the 
inclusion of interactions of bank and time fixed effects. Furthermore, in 
Table 7, our results are qualitatively and quantitatively invariant if we 
interact all bank level controls with the post implementation dummy. 
This  is  the  case  even  if  we  consider  interactions  with  bank  size  and 
capital in columns (5) and (6).

Taken  together,  these  results  suggest  that  banks  with  unused  ex-
emptions  were  more  willing  to  extend  credit  after  increasing  their 
reserve  holdings,  while  the  lending  behavior  of  banks  with  ex  ante 
higher excess liquidity holdings was unaffected. Such an interpretation 
is also consistent with the finding that the supply of credit by banks with 
high unused allowances increased only after October 2019, when the 
money markets started to reallocate liquidity.

6.2. Additional evidence on the mechanism

Table  8 provides  more  direct  evidence  on  our  conjecture  that  the 
redistribution of reserves was the driving force behind the increase in 
credit  supply.  Our  conceptual  framework  implies  that  if  the  positive 
effect of high unused tiering allowances on the supply of credit reflected 
banks’  incentives  to  increase  their  reserve  holdings  in  the  post- 
implementation period, the increase in credit supply should be driven 
by banks with higher financing costs. We identify these banks as those 
that faced higher borrowing interest rates in the secured money market 
before the tiering implementation. In columns (1) and (2), we split the 
sample  considering  banks  with  borrowing  rates  above  and  below  the 
median.  The  estimates  show  that  banks  with  unused  exemptions  lent 
more  only  if  they  faced  an  interest  rate  above  the  median  when 
borrowing in the money market. This finding supports our conjecture 
that the tiering system facilitates monetary transmission through banks 
that ex ante found it too costly to have higher reserve holdings. Column 

16 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 7 
Bank exposure to concurrent policies
The table shows a robustness check on how banks’  lending to firms changes after the announcement and implementation of the tiering depending on the banks’ 
exposure to the tiering system, considering changes in the relation between lending and other control variables. The dependent variable is the logarithm of loans by 
bank i to a non-financial corporation f in month t . “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of main assets) of bank i in 
February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 
2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the introduction of a tiering 
system for the first time, and the eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for the 
time after October 30, 2019, i.e., the time when the tiering system took effect. Control variables are as defined in Table 1, Panel B. Assets are reported in logs of € 
million. CET1 ratio is in percentage points. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges from September 2018 to February 
2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 
% level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Volume of NFC loans

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

CDS

Excess liquidity

Government securities

Deposit ratio

TLTRO funds

Assets

CET1 ratio

CDS*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Excess liquidity*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Government securities*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Deposit ratio*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

TLTRO funds*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Assets*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

CET1 ratio*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

CDS*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Excess liquidity*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Government securities*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Deposit ratio*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

TLTRO funds*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Assets*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

CET1 ratio*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Bank FE
Country-Month FE
Industry-Location-Size-Month FE
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Log

0.014
(0.018)
0.061*
(0.033)
(cid:0) 0.051
(0.045)
0.011
(0.007)
0.057***
(0.017)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
0.003
(0.003)

(cid:0) 0.012
(0.013)
(cid:0) 0.006
(0.007)
(cid:0) 0.004
(0.006)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.004)

(cid:0) 0.036
(0.067)
(cid:0) 0.006
(0.010)
(cid:0) 0.004
(0.011)
0.002*
(0.001)
0.010
(0.007)

Yes
Yes
–
–
–

(2)
Log

0.014
(0.009)
0.045***
(0.016)
(cid:0) 0.018
(0.021)
(cid:0) 0.002
(0.002)
0.024***
(0.009)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.001)

(cid:0) 0.007
(0.007)
0.005**
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
0.000
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.001
(0.002)

(cid:0) 0.022
(0.029)
0.009**
(0.004)
0.002
(0.005)
0.001**
(0.000)
0.002
(0.003)

Yes
-
Yes
–
–

(3)
Log

0.020
(0.017)
0.070***
(0.025)
(cid:0) 0.039
(0.038)
0.005
(0.005)
0.043***
(0.016)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)

(cid:0) 0.004
(0.012)
0.005
(0.004)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.005)
0.000
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.002
(0.004)

(cid:0) 0.067
(0.066)
0.003
(0.006)
0.007
(0.010)
0.000
(0.001)
0.009*
(0.005)

Yes
-
–

Yes
–

35,356,355
0.084

34,338,371
0.719

10,353,666
0.697

(4)
Log

0.018
(0.016)
0.072**
(0.028)
(cid:0) 0.050
(0.039)
0.002
(0.004)
0.035**
(0.016)
0.001
(0.001)
0.004*
(0.002)

(cid:0) 0.005
(0.010)
0.007*
(0.004)
0.002
(0.005)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.003
(0.004)

(cid:0) 0.065
(0.067)
0.009
(0.006)
0.007
(0.011)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.001)
0.006
(0.005)

(5)
Log

0.020
(0.017)
0.074***
(0.027)
(cid:0) 0.011
(0.015)
0.003
(0.004)
0.028**
(0.013)
(cid:0) 0.000
(0.000)
0.004
(0.003)
(cid:0) 0.561
(0.453)

(cid:0) 0.004
(0.016)
0.005**
(0.002)
0.001
(0.005)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.001
(0.003)
0.000
(0.011)

(cid:0) 0.082
(0.068)
0.005
(0.004)
0.008
(0.009)
(cid:0) 0.001
(0.001)
0.013*
(0.008)
(cid:0) 0.038*
(0.020)

–

-
–

Yes
Yes
10,256,326
0.935

–

-
–

Yes
Yes
9,574,874
0.936

(6)
Log

0.023
(0.018)
0.081***
(0.028)
(cid:0) 0.014
(0.016)
0.003
(0.004)
0.031**
(0.014)
0.000
(0.000)
0.003
(0.003)
(cid:0) 0.625
(0.456)
(cid:0) 0.033**
(0.015)
(cid:0) 0.002
(0.016)
0.005*
(0.002)
0.000
(0.005)
0.001
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.011)
0.005
(0.006)
(cid:0) 0.083
(0.068)
0.005
(0.004)
0.005
(0.008)
(cid:0) 0.001
(0.001)
0.014*
(0.008)
(cid:0) 0.032
(0.020)
0.019*
(0.011)
–

-
–

Yes
Yes
9,539,179
0.936

liquidity shocks, which in turn made them more inclined to lend.

Concerns have been raised that high reserves holdings may lead to 
excessive risk  taking (Acharya  and Rajan,  2023). In  the remainder of 
Table 9, we thus explore whether high risk or less efficient borrowers 
obtained  more  credit.  We  observe  that  the  increase  in  the  supply  of 
credit by banks with high unused exemptions was similarly distributed 
across borrowers with different risk, size, profitability, and productivity, 

even though firms with high leverage may have benefitted more (col-
umn (6)). Overall, the increase in credit does not seem to have brought 
about excessive risk-taking or inefficient allocation of credit.

6.3. Loan characteristics

Anacredit allows us to explore other aspects of loan supply. Table 10

17 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 8 
Changes in lending and banks’ ex ante money market borrowing rates
The  table  shows  results  from  difference-in-differences  regressions  of  banks’ 
lending to firms on exposure to the tiering system. In columns (1) and (2), banks 
are  split  depending  on  whether  their  borrowing  rate  in  the  secured  money 
market in October 2019 was above or below the median. In column (3), we test 
for differences in lending behavior for banks with borrowing rates above and 
below  the  median  in  a  pooled  sample.  “Exposure(Feb  2019)”  is  equal  to  the 
unused  exemption  allowance  (as  a  percentage  of  main  assets)  of  bank  i  in 
February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure 
(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The “Interim 
(Mar-Oct  2019)”  variable  is an  indicator  for the  time  between  the  speech  by 
former  ECB  President  Draghi  on  March  27,  2019,  in  which  he  hinted  at  the 
introduction  of  a  tiering  system  for  the  first  time,  and  the  eventual  imple-
mentation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019- 
Feb  2020)”  is  an  indicator  variable  for  the  time  after  October  30,  2019,  i.e., 
the  time  when  the  tiering  system  took  effect.  Control  variables  include  CDS, 
excess  liquidity,  holdings  of  government  securities,  deposit  ratio  and  TLTRO 
funds, and are as defined in Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all 
regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges from September 2018 to 
February  2020.  Standard  errors  are  clustered  at  the  bank-time-period  level. 
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at 
the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:

(1)

(2)

(3)

Subsample 
Banks with borrowing 
rates

Volume of NFC loans

Above 
median

Below 
median

Pooled

Above median money market rate (Oct- 

2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar- 
Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019) 
*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 
2020)

Below median money market rate (Oct- 

2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar- 
Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019) 
*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 
2020)

Controls
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE
Observations
R-squared

0.010***

(0.002)
0.152***

0.008**

(0.003)
0.148***

(0.016)

(0.009)

0.056*

0.044*

(0.031)
(cid:0) 0.005

(0.025)
(cid:0) 0.015

Yes
Yes
Yes
1,453,670
0.938

(0.028)
Yes
Yes
Yes
232,868
0.957

(0.026)
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,001,748
0.942

shows that on average, the introduction of the two-tier system did not 
have a significant impact on lending rates, suggesting that banks largely 
internalised the change in the average remuneration of their liquidity 
holdings rather than passing it onto clients. However, there are impor-
tant differences between banks. Banks with high unused exemptions that 
faced high ex ante interest rates in the money market not only increased 
the supply of credit, but also decreased loan rates.

Furthermore,  in  Table  11,  we find  that the  implementation  of the 
system translated into an increase in the maturity of bank loans by banks 
with more unused exemptions. The impact is expressed in days, so that 
every percentage point increase in unused exemptions translates into 25 
days longer loan maturity. This is consistent with an improvement of the 
transmission  mechanism  associated  with  expectations  of  a  prolonged 
low interest rate environment, which in turn enabled banks to lengthen 
the  maturity  of  their  loan  portfolio,  despite  the  low  margins.  Impor-
tantly, the effect is driven by banks with ex ante more unused exemp-
tions,  suggesting  that  more  reserves  and  the  consequent  ability  to 
withstand potential cash shortfalls made banks more inclined to commit 

to lend for longer periods. Also the increase in loan maturity is driven by 
banks with unused exemptions that faced higher borrowing rates in the 
money  market  in  October  2019,  before  the  tiering  implementation. 
These ex ante financially constrained banks with high unused exemp-
tions  not  only  increased  the  supply  of  credit,  but  also  extended  their 
average  loan  maturity  and  decreased  loan  rates.  Banks  that  faced 
borrowing rates below the median in October 2019 and whose demand 
for reserves was unlikely to be depressed by high funding costs before 
the tiering introduction, if anything, decreased their loan maturity.

If the tiering system, by increasing reserve holdings for banks that 
would  potentially  make  use  of  them,  indeed  allowed  banks  to  hold 
illiquid assets, it should also allow them to provide more insurance. We 
should thus observe that banks with unused exemptions, incentivised to 
hold more excess reserves, are also more inclined to take liquidity risk by 
extending credit lines after the implementation of the tiering system (in 
line with the conjecture by Acharya et al., 2023). Table 12 shows that 
banks with unused exemptions indeed extended more credit lines after 
the implementation of the tiering system. Both drawn (column (1)) and 
undrawn (column (2)) credit lines increased, leading to an overall in-
crease in granted credit lines (column (3)). This increase was driven by 
banks  with  unused  exemptions,  which  had  stronger  incentives  to  in-
crease their reserve holdings, as captured by the interest rate these banks 
faced in the money market before the implementation period (columns 
(4) to (6)). As larger credit lines are associated with more and unpre-
dictable future liquidity needs for a lender, this evidence is in line with 
our  conjecture  that  the  transmission  mechanism  is  enhanced  by  the 
implementation of the tiering system because higher reserves reduced 
banks’ precautionary behavior.

6.4. Firm-level borrowing and aggregate effects

Our  conceptual  framework  assumes  that  banks  with  ex  ante  high 
excess  liquidity  and  no  unused  exemptions  have  reached  a  satiation 
point  and  consequently  do  not  change  their  lending  policies  after 
transferring liquidity through the money market. The evidence that the 
increase in the demand for reserves was not associated with higher rates 
in the money market and that high excess liquidity banks in Table 7 do 
not lend less supports our assumption.

To  provide  more  direct  evidence  on  the  extent  to  which  negative 
spillovers to the supply of credit of banks that transferred liquidity may 
have decreased the aggregate credit supply, we analyze the total amount 
of loans outstanding at the firm level. Table 13 shows that the amount of 
bank loans on the balance sheets of firms associated with banks more 
exposed to the policy increased. Importantly, the economic magnitudes 
for the increase in bank loan usage at the firm level are comparable with 
those reported in Table 5. Specifically, in column (1), a one-standard- 
deviation 
in  the  firm-level  exposure  to  high-unused- 
exemption banks (equal to 1.95 in the firm-year panel) corresponds to 
an 8 percentage point increase in the (firm level) logarithm of the vol-
ume of outstanding loans, which is the same order of magnitude as the 
estimated effect in Table 5, where – depending on the specification – we 
estimate  a  relationship-level  increase  in  exposure  between  6  and  9.5 
percentage points.

increase 

This evidence further supports the conclusion that the reallocation of 
liquidity  towards  banks  with  ex  ante  low  reserve  holdings  occurred 
without a reduction in lending by the ex ante high excess liquidity banks 
that transferred reserves.

The impact of the increase in excess liquidity for banks with unused 
allowances on aggregate credit growth is therefore sizeable. The tiering 
led  to  an  increase  in  the  reserve  holdings  of  low  liquidity  banks  of 
around  EUR  190bn  (see  Fig.  4).  Using  the  conservative  estimates  in 
column  (2) of  Table  5,  Panel  A,  a  one-standard-deviation  increase  in 
unused exemptions (computed from the standard deviation of exposure 
in Table 1, Panel B) implies an increase in loan growth of 3.7%, which in 
turn  translates  into  an  increase  in  credit  of  about  EUR  25bn,  when 
applied to the credit to non-financial corporations of euro area banks in 

18 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 9 
Bank and borrower cross-sectional differences
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of banks’ lending to firms on the banks’ exposure to the tiering system. Each column reports two 
separate regressions. We report estimates for the subsamples above and below the median of the characteristic indicated in each column. The third panel in each 
column reports the value of the F test for the significance of the differences (resulting significance is indicated by the asterisks) between the coefficients in the re-
gressions reported above. “Exposure(Feb 2019)”  is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of main assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such 
difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an 
indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first 
time, and the eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for the time after October 
30, 2019, i.e., the time when the tiering system took effect. Control variables include CDS, excess liquidity, holdings of government securities, deposit ratio and TLTRO 
funds, and are as defined in Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges from September 2018 to February 
2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 
% level, respectively.

Dependent Variable: Volume of NFC loans

Sample splits by:

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

High:

Low:

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

F-test: High = Low

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)
Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Controls
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE

(1)

Bank  
capital

(cid:0) 0.005
(0.004)
0.003
(0.007)

0.009
(0.007)
0.068***
(0.023)

3.19*
7.61***
Yes
Yes
Yes

(2)

Bank  
CDS

(3)

Firm  
PD

(4)

Firm  
size

(5)

Firm  
ROA

(6)

(7)

Firm leverage

Firm productivity

0.015
(0.012)
0.081***
(0.022)

0.002
(0.011)
0.006
(0.018)

0.71
7.04***
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.001
(0.012)
0.051***
(0.017)

0.017
(0.012)
0.072**
(0.029)

2.34
0.88
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.009
(0.008)
0.058***
(0.020)

0.003
(0.008)
0.070**
(0.029)

2.62
0.98
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.008
(0.008)
0.067**
(0.028)

0.006
(0.007)
0.059***
(0.019)

0.56
0.79
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.009
(0.008)
0.071***
(0.022)

0.005
(0.008)
0.052**
(0.023)

1.45
12.56***
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.013
(0.008)
0.064***
(0.022)

(cid:0) 0.000
(0.008)
0.062**
(0.026)

5.51**
0.04
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 10 
Changes in lending rates
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of the lending rates on banks’ exposure to the tiering system. The dependent variable is the average 
lending rate for loans from bank i to non-financial corporation f in month t. In columns (2) to (4), banks are split depending on whether their borrowing rate in the 
money market in October 2019 was above or below the median across banks. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of 
main assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. 
The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the 
introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an 
indicator variable for the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., the time when the tiering system took effect. Control variables include CDS, excess liquidity, holdings of 
government securities, deposit ratio and TLTRO funds, and are as defined in Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample 
period ranges from September 2018 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, 
and * denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

(2)
Above median

(3)
Below median

(4)
Pooled

Dependent Variable:
Interest rate on NFC loans

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Above median money market rate (Oct-2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Below median money market rate (Oct-2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

(1)
Overall

(cid:0) 0.017
(0.031)
0.041
(0.066)

Controls
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE
Observations

Yes
Yes
Yes
10,256,326
0.849

Yes
Yes
Yes
1,453,670
0.907

19 

(cid:0) 0.013***
(0.003)
(cid:0) 0.048***
(0.011)

(cid:0) 0.015**
(0.006)
(cid:0) 0.046***
(0.012)

0.156
(0.159)
0.312
(0.315)
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,001,748
0.915

0.195
(0.235)
0.372
(0.401)
Yes
Yes
Yes
232,868
0.918

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 11 
Changes in loan maturity
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of the loan maturity on banks’ exposure to the tiering system. The dependent variable is the average 
residual maturity expressed in days for loans from bank i to non-financial corporation f in month t. In columns (2) and (3), banks are split depending on whether their 
borrowing rate in the money market in October 2019 was above or below the median across banks. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance 
(as a percentage of main assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as 
of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which 
he hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019- 
Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., the time when the tiering system took effect. Control variables include CDS, excess liquidity, 
holdings of government securities, deposit ratio and TLTRO funds, and are as defined in Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and 
the sample period ranges from September 2018 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported in pa-
rentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

Dependent Variable:
Maturity

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Above median money market rate (Oct-2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Below median money market rate (Oct-2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Controls
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Overall

3.029
(3.925)
24.789***
(6.306)

Yes
Yes
Yes
10,256,326
0.966

(2)
Above median

(3)
Below median

(4)
Pooled

(cid:0) 4.593**
(1.804)
23.562***
(1.820)

Yes
Yes
Yes
1,453,670
0.907

(cid:0) 22.346
(18.546)
(cid:0) 30.895*
(17.645)
Yes
Yes
Yes
232,868
0.918

(cid:0) 4.142***
(1.541)
26.843***
(2.196)

(cid:0) 18.934
(11.534)
(cid:0) 34.745**
(13.077)
Yes
Yes
Yes
2,001,748
0.915

Table 12 
Credit lines
The table shows results from difference-in-differences regressions of banks’ credit lines (drawn in columns (1) and (4), undrawn in columns (2) and (5), and overall in 
columns (3) and (6)) to firms on the banks’ exposure to the tiering system. In columns (4) to (6), we distinguish between banks depending on whether their borrowing 
rate in the money market in October 2019 was above or below the median across banks. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a 
percentage of main assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such difference is positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of 
October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an indicator for the time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he 
hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 
2020)” is an indicator variable for the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., the time when the tiering system took effect. Control variables include CDS, excess liquidity, 
holdings of government securities, deposit ratio and TLTRO funds, and are as defined in Table 1, Panel B. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and 
the sample period ranges from September 2018 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the bank-time-period level. Standard errors are reported in pa-
rentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

(1)
Drawn  
credit lines

(cid:0) 0.003
(0.007)
0.025**
(0.010)

(2)
Undrawn  
credit lines

(cid:0) 0.009
(0.008)
0.020*
(0.012)

(3)
Overall 
credit lines

(cid:0) 0.000
(0.006)
0.031***
(0.010)

(4)
Drawn  
credit lines

(5)
Undrawn  
credit lines

(6)
Overall 
credit lines

Dependent Variable:

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Above median money market rate (Oct-2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Below median money market rate (Oct-2019):

Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

0.006*
(0.003)
0.018**
(0.007)

(cid:0) 0.016
(0.053)
(cid:0) 0.041
(0.056)
Yes
Yes
Yes
929,340
0.944

(cid:0) 0.004
(0.006)
0.020**
(0.008)

0.099
(0.119)
0.186
(0.125)
Yes
Yes
Yes
724,860
0.937

0.002
(0.005)
0.027***
(0.008)

(cid:0) 0.013
(0.036)
0.046
(0.031)
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,143,426
0.965

Controls
Firm-Month FE
Bank-Firm FE
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
Yes
4,936,816
0.934

Yes
Yes
Yes
3,910,966
0.913

Yes
Yes
Yes
5,779,814
0.954

20 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Table 13 
Firm level borrowing
The table shows how loan volumes borrowed by firms changed after the announcement and implementation of the tiering depending on the firms’ exposure to banks 
exposed to the tiering system. The dependent variable is the logarithm of loan volume borrowed by firm f in month t from all banks. All dependent variables are 
obtained by averaging the corresponding firm-bank-month level variables at the firm-month level, with weights equal to the exposures of each firm to each bank the 
month before, and are labeled with the prefix avg. In columns (1), (2) and (3), all firms are considered in the regression. In Columns (4) and (5), firms are split 
depending on whether the average borrowing rate in the secured money market in October 2019 of the banks each firm had exposures with the month before was above 
or below the median. “Exposure(Feb 2019)” is equal to the unused exemption allowance (as a percentage of main assets) of bank i in February 2019 if such difference is 
positive, and to zero otherwise. “Exposure(Oct 2019)” is defined in the same way, but as of October 2019. The “Interim (Mar-Oct 2019)” variable is an indicator for the 
time between the speech by former ECB President Draghi on March 27, 2019, in which he hinted at the introduction of a tiering system for the first time, and the 
eventual implementation of the system as of October 30, 2019. “Implementation (Nov 2019-Feb 2020)” is an indicator variable for the time after October 30, 2019, i.e., 
the time when the tiering system took effect. Control variables include CDS, excess liquidity, holdings of government securities, deposit ratio and TLTRO funds and are 
as defined in Table 1, Panel B. Observations are at the firm level. The observation frequency in all regressions is monthly, and the sample period ranges from September 
2018 to February 2020. Standard errors are clustered at the main bank-time-period level, where the main bank for each firm is the one with the largest outstanding 
loan. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 %, 5 %, and 10 % level, respectively.

(4)

(5)

Banks with above 
median money market rate

Banks with below 
median money market rate

Dependent Variable: Volume of NFC loans

Avg Exposure(Feb 2019)*Interim(Mar-Oct 2019)

Avg Exposure(Oct 2019)*Implementation(Nov 2019-Feb 2020)

Avg CDS spread

Avg Excess liquidity

Avg Holdings of government securities

Avg Deposit ratio

Avg TLTRO funds

Firm FE
Country-Month FE
Main Bank-Month FE, Sector-Month FE, Location-Month FE
Main Bank-Industry-Location FE
Observations
R-squared

(1)

Full  
sample

0.007
(0.010)
0.043**
(0.019)
(cid:0) 0.003
(0.013)
0.003
(0.002)
0.021***
(0.008)
0.000**
(0.000)
0.001
(0.001)
Yes
Yes

(2)

Full  
sample

0.020
(0.017)
0.056***
(0.019)
0.044***
(0.016)
0.008*
(0.005)
0.022***
(0.006)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.003*
(0.001)
Yes

Yes

(3)

Full  
sample

0.017
(0.020)
0.055***
(0.039)
0.046***
(0.016)
0.010**
(0.004)
0.023***
(0.005)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.003**
(0.001)
Yes

0.011
(0.016)
0.141***
(0.016)
(cid:0) 0.060
(0.045)
0.017***
(0.007)
0.026**
(0.010)
0.002***
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.004
(0.003)
Yes
Yes

26,206,015
0.910

26,205,638
0.915

Yes
25,237,538
0.923

8,357,258
0.903

(cid:0) 0.003
(0.016)
0.031*
(0.016)
0.041
(0.028)
(cid:0) 0.005
(0.004)
0.014
(0.010)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.002)
Yes
Yes

6,865,878
0.903

our  sample  exposed  to  the  policy  (around  EUR  662bn).  Thus,  reallo-
cating one euro of reserves from banks with high reserve holdings to 
banks  with  low  reserve  holdings  increases  lending  by  about  EUR  15 
cents.

shrinking central banks’ balance sheets difficult to predict.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

7. Conclusions

We  show  that  central  bank  liquidity  affects  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy. Specifically, a policy that incentivizes a redistribution 
of excess reserves towards banks with higher liquidity needs can effec-
tively  strengthen  monetary  policy  transmission.  The  ECB’s  tiered 
reserve remuneration systems increased the gains from trading excess 
liquidity which led to a redistribution of reserves towards banks with 
higher liquidity needs. These banks became subsequently more likely to 
use their reserve holdings to support credit creation.

Our results imply that banks’ decisions to hold low levels of liquidity, 
even if optimally taken at the individual level, may have undesirable 
aggregate effects. Banks that find it too costly to hold excess reserves 
may end up having uninsured future liquidity needs and may choose to 
limit lending. The tiering system, by increasing banks’ incentives to hold 
liquidity,  decreased  their  precautionary  behavior,  thereby  benefitting 
the supply of credit to the real economy.

Our  findings  highlight  the  challenges  faced  by  central  banks 
engaging in quantitative tightening, particularly when liquidity is un-
evenly  distributed  across  banks.  While  a  reduction  of  reserves  that 
mostly affects banks that have high liquidity holdings and have reached 
their satiation point is unlikely to have sizable negative effects on bank 
lending,  a  similar  decrease  in  reserves  affecting  less  liquid  banks  can 
have  large  contractionary  effects.  This  makes  the  consequences  of 

21 

Carlo Altavilla: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Concep-
tualization. Miguel Boucinha: Data curation. Lorenzo Burlon: Writing 
–  review  &  editing,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Data  curation. 
Mariassunta Giannetti: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft,  Supervision,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisition, 
Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Julian Schumacher: Writing – re-
view  &  editing,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal  analysis,  Data 
curation.

Declaration of competing interest

Carlo Altavilla declares that he has no relevant conflicts or material 

financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

Miguel Boucinha declares that he has no relevant conflicts or mate-
rial financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.
Lorenzo Burlon declares that he has no relevant conflicts or material 

financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

Mariassunta Giannetti declares that she has no relevant conflicts or 
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this 
paper.

Julian  Schumacher  declares  that  he  has  no  relevant  conflicts  or 
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this 
paper.

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
C. Altavilla et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104058 

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 

Boucinha, M., Burlon, L., Corsi, M., Della Valle, G., Eisenschmidt, J., Marmara, I., 

Pool, S., Schumacher, J., Vergote, O., 2022. Two-tier system for remunerating excess 
reserve holdings. In: ECB Occasional Paper No. 302.

Chakraborty, I., Goldstein, I., MacKinlay, A., 2020. Monetary stimulus and bank lending. 

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104058.

J. Financ. Econ. 136 (1), 189–218.

Data availability

Central  Bank  Liquidity  Reallocation  and  Bank  Lending:  Evidence 

from the Tiering System (Reference data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Acharya, V.V., Eisert, T., Eufinger, C., Hirsch, C.W., 2019. Whatever it takes: the real 
effects of unconventional monetary policy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 3366–341. 
Acharya, V.V., Chauhan, R.S., Rajan, R.G., Steffen, S., 2023. Liquidity Dependence and 
the Waxing and Waning of Central Bank Balance Sheets. New York University. 
Working Paper. 

Acharya, V.V., Rajan, R.G., 2023. Liquidity, Liquidity Everywhere, Not a Drop to Use - 
Why Flooding Banks With Central Bank Reserves May Not Expand Liquidity. New 
York University.

Afonso, G., Giannone, D., Spada, G.L., Williams, J.C., 2023. Scarce, Abundant, or Ample? 
A Time-Varying Model of the Reserve Demand Curve. Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York. Working Paper. 

Afonso, Gara, Giannone, Domenico, Spada, Gabriele La, Williams, John C., 2024. When 

Are Central Bank Reserves Ample? Liberty Street, August 13. 

Baldo, L., Hallinger, B., Helmus, C., Herrala, N., Martins, D., Mohing, F., Petroulakis, F., 
Resinek, M., Vergote, O., Usciati, B., Wang, Y., 2017. The distribution of excess 
liquidity in the euro area. In: ECB Occasional Paper No. 200.

Baldo, L., Heider, F., Hoffmann, P., Sigaux, J., Vergote, O., 2022. How do banks manage 

liquidity. In: ECB Working Paper No. 2732.

Bernanke, B.S., Lown, C.S., 1991. The credit crunch. Brookings Pap. Econ. Activity (2), 

205–239.

Bottero, M., Minoiu, C., Peydr´o, J.-L., Polo, A., Presbitero, A., Sette, E., 2022. Negative 
monetary policy rates and portfolio rebalancing: evidence from credit register data. 
J. Financ. Econ. 146, 754–778.

Cooperman, H., Duffie, J.D., Luck, S., Wang, Z., Yang, Y.D., 2022. Bank Funding Risk, 

Reference Rates, and Credit Supply. Stanford University. Working Paper. 

Degryse, H., De Jonghe, O., Jakovljevi´c, S., Mulier, K., Schepens, G., 2019. Identifying 
credit supply shocks with bank-firm data: methods and applications. J. Financ. 
Intermed. 40, 1–15.

Diamond, W., Jiang, Z., Ma, Y., 2024. The reserve supply channel of unconventional 

monetary policy. J. Financ. Econ. 159, 103887.

Di Maggio, M.D., Kermani, A., Palmer, C.J., 2020. How quantitative easing works: 

evidence on the refinancing channel. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87, 1498–1528.

Draghi, M., 2019. In: Monetary policy in the euro area. Speech at the conference ‘The 

ECB and Its Watchers XX. Frankfurt am Main, 27 March. 

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., Supera, D., 2024. Monetary policy and the mortgage 

market. In: Paper presented at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium.

ECB, 2021. Euro Money Market Study 2020.
Eisenschmidt, J., Kedan, D., Tietz, R.D., 2018. Measuring fragmentation in the euro area 
unsecured overnight interbank money market. Econ. Bull. Articles 5 number 2. 
Friedman, F., 1969. The optimum quantity of money. The Optimum Quantity of Money 

and Other Essays. Aldine, Chicago. 

Fuster, A., Schelling, T., Towbin, P., 2021. Tiers of joy? Reserve Tiering and Bank 

Behavior in a Negative-Rate Environment, Working Papers 2021-10. Swiss National 
Bank.

Heider, F., Saidi, F., Schepens, G., 2019. Life below zero: bank lending under negative 

policy rates. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (10), 3728–3761.

Kandrac, J., Schlusche, B., 2021. Quantitative easing and bank risk taking: evidence from 

lending. J. Money, Credit Bank. 53 (4), 635–676.

Khwaja, A., Mian, A., 2008. Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: evidence from 

an emerging market. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (4), 1413–1442.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. The effects of quantitative easing on 

interest rates: channels and implications for policy. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 215.
Lane, P., 2023. Central bank liquidity: a macroeconomic perspective. In: Speech at the 

ECB Conference on Money Markets. November 9. 

Logan, L. (2023). Ample reserves and the Friedman rule, November 10.
Lopez-Salido, D., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2023. Reserve Demand, Interest Rate Control, 

and Quantitative Tightening. Federal Reserve Board. Working Paper. 

Rodnyansky, A., Darmouni, O.M., 2017. The effects of quantitative easing on bank 

lending behavior. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (11), 3858–3887.

22 

