Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Fintech entry, lending market competition, and welfare(cid:73)
Xavier Vives a,∗, Zhiqiang Ye b
a IESE Business School, Av. de Pearson, 21, Barcelona, 08034, Spain
b School of Economics, Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Rd, Hangzhou, 310058, China

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We provide a spatial framework to study competition between banks and fintechs in the lending market 
and  examine  the  impact  on  investment  and  welfare.  Based  on  the  key  differences  between  banks  and 
fintechs, we derive results consistent with the empirical evidence available. We find that fintechs with inferior 
monitoring efficiency can successfully enter because of their superior flexibility in pricing and that higher 
bank concentration leads to higher fintech loan volume. If fintechs and banks have similar funding costs, 
fintech borrowers pay lower loan rates and have higher default rates than bank borrowers with similar 
characteristics; however, the result will flip if fintechs have much higher funding costs than banks. The 
advantage of fintechs in offering convenience can also induce them to charge higher loan rates than banks. 
Fintech entry will improve welfare if fintechs have high monitoring efficiency and inter-fintech competition 
intensity is intermediate. Fintech entry may induce banks’ exit and reduce investment; however, it will increase 
investment if inter-fintech competition is intense enough.

Dataset link: Source data files of the article "Fint
ech Entry, Lending Market Competition, and W
elfare" (Original data)

JEL classification:
G21
G23
I31

Keywords:
Digital technology
Monitoring
Credit
Artificial intelligence
Big data
Price discrimination

1. Introduction

In recent years, FinTech and BigTech companies have played an 
increasingly significant role in the lending market. FinTech lenders 
have made inroads in lending to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 
in developed economies. In emerging and developing markets, BigTech 
companies have a relevant penetration.1

What  are  the  determinants  of  the  entry  of  Fin/BigTech  lenders 
(‘‘fintechs’’ hereafter)? How does fintech entry affect lending competi-
tion, the behavior of traditional banks, and entrepreneurs’ investment? 
What are the welfare implications? To answer those questions and to 
help explain some facts about fintech lending, we build a model of 

spatial competition in which incumbent banks and entering fintechs 
compete to provide loans to entrepreneurs. We highlight three potential 
key  differences  between  incumbent  banks  and  fintechs,  concerning 
pricing flexibility, monitoring efficiency depending on specialization, 
and cost of funding. We also look at the effect of convenience for fintech 
customers.

We model the lending market as a circular city à la Salop (1979) 
where several banks, located equidistantly, and two potential fintechs, 
located (virtually) at the center of the circle, compete for entrepreneurs 
distributed along the city. By incurring opportunity costs, entrepreneurs 
can undertake risky investment projects, which may either succeed or

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank Andreas Fuster (the guest editor) and an anonymous referee for their helpful comments. We are 
also grateful to the participants at the DNB-Riksbank-Bundesbank Macroprudential Conference of June 2022, MadBar Workshop 2022, SAEe 2022, 15th Digital 
Economics Conference, 12th MoFiR Workshop on Banking, 2024 BSE Summer Forum, 2nd School of Finance Alumni Forum at RUC, CRESSE 2024 (in particular to 
our discussants John Vickers, Kathrin Petralia, Sergio Vicente, Matthieu Bouvard, David Pothier, and Georges Siotis), and at seminars at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City, NYU Stern, Peking University, and Bank of Spain for helpful comments. Xavier Vives is grateful to Joan Freixa for excellent research assistance and 
acknowledges the financial support of Grant Ref. PID2021-123113NB-I00 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and ‘‘ERDF A way of making Europe’’ 
by the European Union.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  xvives@iese.edu (X. Vives), zhiqiangye@zju.edu.cn (Z. Ye).

1 In the US, the Federal Reserve’s Small Business Credit Survey (2019) reports that almost one-third of SMEs that sought financing applied with a FinTech firm 
or online lender, up from 19% in 2016. The annual growth rate of FinTech business lending volume in the US was over 40% from 2016 to 2020 (Berg et al., 
2022). In China, Ant Financial and WeBank provide lending to millions of SMEs (Frost et al., 2019). The COVID-19 pandemic likely accelerated the penetration 
of FinTech/BigTech firms because of government support (e.g., cooperation with SBA to distribute PPP loans) and the increasing demand for digital services 
(Demirgüç-Kunt et al., 2021).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104040
Received 22 March 2024; Received in revised form 28 February 2025; Accepted 2 March 2025
Available online 19 March 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
X. Vives and Z. Ye

fail. Entrepreneurs do not have initial capital, so they require funding 
from lenders when undertaking investment projects. Lenders (banks 
and fintechs) have no direct access to investment projects, so their 
profits are derived from providing loans to entrepreneurs. In addition 
to financing entrepreneurs, lenders monitor entrepreneurs to increase 
the success probabilities of their projects. Monitoring is more costly for 
a bank if there is more ‘‘distance’’ between the bank and the monitored 
entrepreneur.  This  distance  can  be  physical2  or  in  a  characteristics 
space from the expertise of the bank in certain sectors or industries.3 
Fintechs, however, are equidistant from all entrepreneurs, which cap-
tures the idea that the use of digital technology by a fintech lender 
makes its monitoring efficiency independent of the physical lender–
borrower  distance  or  its  expertise  in  certain  sectors  or  industries. 
Banks are incumbents and post uniform loan rates first in the lending 
competition, while fintechs are entrants, moving second and posting 
discriminatory loan rate schedules based on entrepreneurs’ locations.

Fintechs  can  price  more  flexibly  for  two  reasons.  First,  fintechs 
are better able to fine-tune pricing to borrowers’ characteristics due 
to their higher capacity to process data and less rigid internal proce-
dures. For example, Buchak et al. (2018) find that standard variables 
for predicting interest rates explain less variation in mortgage inter-
est rates of fintech lenders relative to non-fintech lenders, indicating 
that technology-based pricing uses non-standard methods and is more 
dispersed. Jagtiani and Lemieux (2019) show that fintechs adopt alter-
native data to price credit and that fintech pricing (for borrowers with 
different FICO scores) is more dispersed than bank pricing. Fuster et al. 
(2022), in a hypothetical exercise, show that using machine learning 
increases  the  loan  rate  disparity  among  borrowers.4 Johnson  et  al. 
(2023) find that in the US personal loan market, fintechs charge much 
higher interest rates for nonprime borrowers than for prime borrowers 
with similar default risk, indicating significant discrimination that is 
unrelated to credit risk.5

Second, lenders face regulations about discrimination, and different 
types of lenders may vary in their risk aversion with respect to these 
regulations.6 In particular, banks may be more cautious about price 
discrimination than fintechs because the former are more scrutinized 
and have more to lose (e.g., deposit franchise) after customer or regu-
latory complaints. In addition, banks must curb the flexibility of local 
branches’ (or officers’) behavior to avoid operational and legal risks.7 
However, fintechs typically do not have physical branches and use more 
opaque technologies, making enforcing compliance with regulations 
more difficult.8 We model this situation in a stark way by assuming 
that a bank can only offer a uniform loan rate to all entrepreneurs it 

2 There  is  evidence  that  firm–bank  physical  distance  matters  for  bank 

lending. See Petersen and Rajan (2002) and Brevoort and Wolken (2009).

3 Blickle et al. (2025) find that a bank ‘‘specializes’’ by concentrating its 
lending into one industry about which the bank has better knowledge. Par-
avisini et al. (2023) document that exporters to a given country are more 
likely to be financed by a bank that has better expertise in the country.

4 De Roure et al. (2022) shows that Auxmoney – the largest P2P lender in 
Germany – has a higher standard deviation of risk-adjusted interest rates than 
banks. Ueda et al. (2023) find that fintechs charge higher (resp. lower) loan 
rates than banks for subprime (resp. prime) borrowers, indicating that fintech 
pricing is more dispersed.

5 Note, however, that Johnson et al. (2023) consider fintech pricing to be 
‘‘LowTech’’ as it remains heavily based on FICO scores. Di Maggio and Yao 
(2021) also find that in the US personal loan market, fintech pricing heavily 
relies on traditional hard information, rather than alternative data.

6 US Courts have established that practices aimed at statistical discrimina-
tion that go beyond credit risk assessment are not legal (Morse and Pence, 
2021). In our model, lenders have a profit motive but not a credit assessment 
motive to price discriminate. Discrimination is based on firm characteristics 
that are not directly related to credit risk.

7 In a related vein, Begenau and Stafford (2023) show that US banks – 
in particular large ones – adopt uniform deposit rate setting policy across 
different branches.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

lends to. However, in Section 7, we also analyze what would happen if 
banks could discriminate as fintechs.

With  the  setup  just  described,  we  study  how  the  emergence  of 
fintech lenders affects competition in the lending market and obtain 
results  consistent  with  available  empirical  evidence.  Our  model  is 
best attuned to the SME lending market. We find that three types of 
equilibria may arise depending on the monitoring efficiency of fintechs: 
blockaded entry (BE), potential entry (PE), and actual entry (AE). In the 
BE regime, which occurs when fintech monitoring efficiency is very 
low, fintechs cannot make any difference to the lending market. If 
fintech monitoring efficiency is at an intermediate level, the PE regime 
will be obtained, where banks decrease their loan rates to protect their 
market  areas  from  fintech  penetration.  As  a  result,  fintechs  do  not 
serve any entrepreneur. Finally, if fintech monitoring efficiency is good 
enough, banks cannot fully protect their market areas, so fintechs can 
lend to a positive mass of entrepreneurs, giving rise to the AE regime.
When actual entry occurs, fintechs lend to entrepreneurs sufficiently 
far from all banks. Fintechs will serve larger market areas and have 
higher lending volumes when the bank concentration is higher because 
there are more locations distant from all banks. A borrower will receive 
a (weakly) lower fintech loan rate if she is closer to banks.

The competitive advantage of fintechs will increase if their moni-
toring efficiency improves relative to that of banks. Then, fintechs will 
serve larger market areas and force banks to lower loan rates. When 
fintech monitoring efficiency is sufficiently high, a bank’s uniform loan 
rate will be so low that serving distant locations is unprofitable. In this 
case, banks are unwilling to serve locations far from them, so fintechs 
can potentially gain augmented market power and charge very high 
loan rates at those locations.

Fintechs’  ability  to  price  discriminate  contributes  to  their  com-
petitive advantage. In bank-fintech competition, a bank worries that 
lowering its loan rate at one location will decrease its profits from all 
other locations. In contrast, the fintech does not have such concerns 
since it can offer discriminatory loan rates based on location. Therefore, 
fintechs can penetrate the credit market by offering very low loan rates 
at specific locations, implying that actual fintech entry can occur even 
if fintechs have no advantage over banks in monitoring efficiency or 
funding costs.

When a bank and a fintech have the same funding cost and serve 
borrowers at close locations, the fintech’s advantage in discrimination 
allows it to offer lower loan rates and exert less monitoring effort than 
the bank. Therefore, fintech borrowers have lower success probabilities 
(i.e., higher default rates) than bank borrowers with similar charac-
teristics. However, if the fintech has much higher funding costs than 
the bank, the result will flip: The fintech will increase its loan rate 
above the bank rate, concentrate on smaller market areas, and do more 
monitoring than the bank.

If fintech lending can provide borrowers with significant conve-
nience benefits, banks will face higher competitive pressure and con-
centrate on serving nearby market areas where they have high moni-
toring efficiency. As a result, banks will charge lower loan rates and do 
more monitoring than fintechs when serving entrepreneurs of similar 
characteristics.

Potential fintech entry forces banks to protect their market areas 
with a lower loan rate, which benefits all entrepreneurs and thereby 
increases their investment. However, actual fintech entry need not spur 
entrepreneurs’ investment. On the one hand, the competitiveness of 
fintechs forces banks to provide higher utility to entrepreneurs, which 
tends to spur investment. On the other hand, actual entry decreases 

8 Gillis and Spiess (2019), using a simulation exercise based on real-world 
credit data, find that the existing legal rules are not so effective in reducing the 
discrimination of algorithm-based credit pricing because (a) these rules were 
developed to regulate human-based decision-making and (b) the complexity 
of machine learning hinders the application of existing law.

2 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

banks’ uniform loan rate, potentially making it unprofitable for banks 
to serve distant locations. At such locations, banks’ competitive threat 
disappears, so fintechs may gain elevated market power, hurting en-
trepreneurs and reducing their investment. Therefore, the net effect 
of  actual  entry  on  investment  is  ambiguous.  However,  if  competi-
tion among fintechs is sufficiently intense, actual entry will increase 
entrepreneurs’ investment.

Social welfare equals the net expected value of implemented projects, 
which  is  determined  by  (a)  the  mass  of  projects  implemented  by 
entrepreneurs  (i.e.,  total  investment),  (b)  their  success  probabilities 
(determined by lender monitoring), and (c) the social costs (monitor-
ing, funding, and opportunity costs). If a fintech has high monitoring 
efficiency  (compared  to  banks),  its  actual  entry  will  improve  the 
monitoring efficiency of the market, generating a cost-saving effect. 
Social welfare may either increase because of the cost-saving effect 
or decrease if entry substantially reduces entrepreneurs’ investment or 
lenders’ monitoring. If the inter-fintech competition intensity is at an 
intermediate level, the entry of fintechs with high monitoring efficiency 
will  increase  social  welfare  because  it  generates  a  significant  cost-
saving effect while balancing entrepreneurs’ investment and lenders’ 
monitoring incentives.

If  banks  can  also  discriminate,  some  results  will  change.  First, 
actual fintech entry will not occur if fintechs have no advantage over 
banks in monitoring efficiency or funding cost. Second, the market 
areas served by fintechs will be smaller because allowing banks to 
price discriminate increases their competitive advantage over fintechs. 
Third, potential or actual fintech entry always makes entrepreneurs 
better off and increases their investment. The reason is that banks’ 
competitive threat will not disappear at any location if they can break 
the uniform-pricing constraint; hence, fintech entry always increases 
the competition intensity among lenders. Finally, we find that allowing 
banks to price discriminate has ambiguous welfare consequences. In 
any case, lenders’ equilibrium discriminatory pricing cannot achieve 
optimal welfare. Rates by banks or fintechs will be too high from the 
social point of view when either of them wields a high degree of market 
power and may be too low otherwise.

In the long run, fintech entry can induce banks to leave the market 
and recover their salvage values, which reduces banks’ competitive 
threat and makes actual fintech entry easier to occur. If such a re-
duction in banks’ threat substantially raises fintechs’ market power, 
entrepreneurs’ utility and investment will decrease. However, if compe-
tition among fintechs is sufficiently intense, fintech entry will increase 
investment.

Related literature. Our work belongs to the theoretical research on 
lending competition (see, e.g., Hauswald and Marquez, 2003, 2006) but 
has a focus on monitoring and how a new entrant affects competition.
He et al. (2023) and Goldstein et al. (2023) study how ‘‘open bank-
ing’’ – an information sharing mechanism that enables borrowers to 
share their customer data stored in a bank with a fintech lender – affects 
the intensity of lending competition and social welfare. Unlike those 
two papers, we focus on what drives fintech entry and its equilibrium 
consequences.

Several papers study competition between lenders with different 
characteristics (e.g., Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2004; Bouvard et al., 
2022; Blickle et al., 2024).9 Unlike those papers, our model considers 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

bank-fintech  differences  in  the  flexibility  of  pricing,  funding  costs, 
monitoring technology, and the ability to provide convenience.

Vives and Ye (2025) analyze the impact of information technol-
ogy on lender competition, investment, and welfare, and show that 
the  effects  depend  on  whether  it  weakens  the  influence  of  lender–
borrower distance on monitoring efficiency. That paper follows Holm-
strom  and  Tirole  (1997)  with  monitoring  reducing  borrowers’  pri-
vate benefits from shirking.  The present paper – building on Allen 
et al. (2011) and Martinez-Miera and Repullo (2017), assumes that 
lender monitoring can increase the success probability of entrepreneurs’ 
projects.

Our paper is related to the thriving empirical literature on the rise 
of fintech in lending (see Vives, 2019 and Thakor, 2020 for surveys). 
There is considerable evidence showing that fintech lenders can use 
digital technology and non-traditional data to enter the lending mar-
ket.10 Our model captures this by assuming that fintechs’ monitoring 
efficiency is not affected by lending distance or lender expertise in a 
certain industry. Another stylized fact is that fintechs extend more loans 
in markets with a less competitive (or more concentrated) banking 
sector (Claessens et al., 2018; Jagtiani and Lemieux, 2018; Frost et al., 
2019), which is consistent with our model prediction.

Buchak et al. (2018), Fuster et al. (2019), and Liu et al. (2024) find 
that fin/big tech lenders’ advantage in offering convenience is a key 
reason for their popularity. We find that a large advantage in offering 
convenience induces fintechs to charge higher loan rates than banks 
(controlling for borrowers’ characteristics), which is consistent with the 
empirical evidence.11

Some empirical studies look at the relationship between bank lend-
ing and fintech credit. Gopal and Schnabl (2022) and Eça et al. (2022) 
find  a  substitute  relationship  between  bank  and  fintech  credit.  In 
contrast, Hau et al. (2024) and Cornelli et al. (2024) document that 
fintech lending complements traditional lending by extending credit to 
SMEs that were less likely to receive credit from banks. Our model 
shows  that  actual  fintech  entry  will  erode  the  market  area  served 
by banks, indicating a substitution relation; however, if banks have 
local monopolies, fintechs will complement banks by lending to those 
previously underserved borrowers.

Whether or not fintech loans are riskier is an important question in 
the literature. Di Maggio and Yao (2021) find that fintech borrowers 
are more likely to default than bank borrowers after controlling for 
observable characteristics.12 However, Buchak et al. (2018) document 
that fintech borrowers have very similar default rates as traditional 
bank borrowers. Fuster et al. (2019) find that fintech-originated loans 
have  lower  delinquency  rates  than  bank  loans  in  the  US  mortgage 
market. Liu et al. (2024) find that the overdue rate of bigtech loans is 
substantially lower than that of regular loans taken out by the same set 
of borrowers. Our model shows that the relationship between fintech 
loan risk and bank loan risk (controlling for borrower characteristics) 
is ambiguous and depends on the interplay of fintechs’ advantage to 
discriminate and offer convenience and their disadvantage in funding 
costs, thus providing a way to reconcile mixed empirical findings.

The rest of our paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents the 
model set-up. In Section 3, we examine lenders’ monitoring choices 

9 Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2004) study the competition between an in-
formed lender and an uninformed one with lower funding costs. Bouvard 
et al. (2022) study what drives the entry of a BigTech platform into a fully 
competitive lending market. Parlour et al. (2022) study how a bank competes 
with competitive fintechs for payment flows that contain borrowers’ credit 
information. Huang (2023) studies credit market competition where banks 
and fintechs differ in their lending technologies: fintechs learn from data, 
while banks rely on physical collateral. Hu and Zryumov (2024) study bank-
fintech competition and collaboration when banks can provide funding to 
fintechs. Blickle et al. (2024) analyze the competition between a general lender 
and a specialized one.

10 Such as soft information (Iyer et al., 2016), contract terms (Kawai et al., 
2022) digital footprints (Berg et al., 2020) and cashless payment information 
(Ghosh et al., 2022)  – to assess the quality of borrowers.
11 Fuster et al. (2019) find that fintechs charge lower interest rates than 
non-fintech lenders, but the difference is small in magnitude. This finding is 
also compatible with our model since we can show that fintechs, with their 
advantage in pricing flexibly, will charge lower loan rates than banks if the 
convenience benefits offered by fintechs are not large enough.
12 Beaumont et al. (2024) document that in the French SME market, fintech 
borrowers are more likely than bank borrowers to enter a bankruptcy proce-
dure. Therefore, they claim that superior information processing technology 
itself cannot explain the rise of fintech lending.

3 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Fig. 1.  The Economy.

and entrepreneurs’ decisions. Section 4 characterizes the different equi-
librium regimes. Section 5 compares banks and fintechs with respect 
to monitoring, funding costs, and convenience. Section 6 provides a 
welfare analysis. Section 7 considers the case where banks can also 
price discriminate. In Section 8, we check the long-run effect of fintech 
entry  by  allowing  banks  to  exit.  We  conclude  in  Section  9  with  a 
summary of our findings. Appendix  A presents all the proofs. Online 
appendices provide supplementary analyses and extensions.

2. The model

The economy and players. The economy is represented by a circu-
lar “city”of circumference 1, inhabited by entrepreneurs and lenders. 
A point on the circumference represents the characteristics of an en-
trepreneur (type of project, technology, geographical position, or in-
dustry) at this location.

The economy has two types of lenders: 𝑁 ≥ 2 banks and two 
fintechs. The banks are located equidistantly around the city, so the 
arc-distance between two adjacent banks is 1∕𝑁. A bank is closer to 
some entrepreneurs than to others. For example, banks are specialized 
in different sectors of the economy.13 Throughout the paper, we use 
bank 𝑖 to denote an arbitrary bank on the circle, and bank 𝑖 + 1 to 
represent the bank to the right and adjacent to bank 𝑖. On the arc 
between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1, we say that an entrepreneur is at (location) 
𝑧𝑖 if the arc-distance between the entrepreneur and bank 𝑖 is 𝑧𝑖. Hence, 
the arc-distance between location 𝑧𝑖 and bank 𝑖 + 1 is 1∕𝑁 − 𝑧𝑖. From 
Section 2 to 7, we take 𝑁 as given. In Section 8, banks may exit, so 𝑁
is endogenous there.

Different from banks, the two fintechs (indexed by 1 and 2 re-
spectively) are located at the center of the circle and thus equidistant 
from all entrepreneurs. This assumption captures the idea that a fin-
tech has a uniform expertise/ability in dealing with different types of 
entrepreneurs: In a physical interpretation, a fintech connects digitally 
with entrepreneurs of different geographic locations; in a characteris-
tics interpretation, a fintech has a uniform ability to collect and process 
information of entrepreneurs with different characteristics (e.g., those 
in different industries) due to its highly digitized information infras-
tructure (based on big data and machine learning techniques). Fig.  1 
gives a graphic illustration of the economy.

A  second  difference  is  that  fintechs  –  which  adopt  information 
technology more rapidly and have fewer concerns using price discrim-
ination – price more flexibly than banks. To capture this difference 
starkly, we assume that a bank must offer a uniform loan rate to all 
locations it serves, while a fintech’s loan rates can be contingent on 
locations. Specifically, we denote fintech 𝑗’s (𝑗 ∈ {1, 2}) loan rate by 

13 See Paravisini et al., 2023 for export-related lending, Duquerroy et al., 
2022  for  SME  lending  and  Giometti  and  Pietrosanti,  2023  for  syndicated 
corporate loans.

(𝑧𝑖

)
, which is a function of 𝑧𝑖. In Section 7, we allow banks to price 

𝑟𝐹 𝑗
discriminate to see how results will change.

Entrepreneurs and monitoring intensity.  At each location (e.g., lo-
cation  𝑧𝑖),  there  is  a  potential  mass  𝑀  of  entrepreneurs.  Each  en-
trepreneur has no initial capital but is endowed with a risky investment 
project that requires a unit of funding.  To undertake a project, an 
entrepreneur requires funding from a lender, which can be a bank or a 
fintech. The project of an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 yields the following risky 
return:

{

̃𝑅(𝑧𝑖) =

𝑅 with probability 𝑚(𝑧𝑖),
0 with probability 1 − 𝑚(𝑧𝑖).

In the event of success (resp. failure), the entrepreneur’s investment 
yields 𝑅 (resp. 0). The probability of success is 𝑚(𝑧𝑖) ∈ [0, 1], which 
represents how intensely the entrepreneur is monitored by the lender 
that provides the loan (i.e., monitoring intensity). Project returns of 
different entrepreneurs are independent.14

Entrepreneurs’ investment decisions and funding demand. An en-
trepreneur  at  location  𝑧𝑖  can  borrow  and  invest  at  most  1  unit  of 
funding.  If  an  entrepreneur  at  𝑧𝑖  borrows  at  loan  rate  𝑟(𝑧𝑖)  and  is 
monitored  with  intensity  𝑚(𝑧𝑖),  her  expected  utility  on  the  invest-
ment is 𝜋𝑒(𝑧𝑖) ≡ (𝑅 − 𝑟(𝑧𝑖))𝑚(𝑧𝑖). We assume that the entrepreneur 
derives  net  utility  𝜋𝑒(𝑧𝑖) − 𝑢  by  implementing  the  risky  project,  so 
she seeks funding if and only if 𝜋𝑒(𝑧𝑖) > 𝑢. Here 𝑢 is the reservation 
utility (i.e., opportunity cost) of the entrepreneur’s alternative activ-
ities. For each entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖, 𝑢 is independently and uniformly 
distributed on [0, 𝑀]. The total funding demand (which is also the mass 
of entrepreneurs who undertake projects) at location 𝑧𝑖 is therefore 

𝐷(𝑧𝑖) ≡ 𝑀 ∫

𝑀

0

1
𝑀

1{𝜋𝑒(𝑧𝑖)≥𝑢} 𝑑𝑢 = 𝜋𝑒(𝑧𝑖).

(1)

The funding costs of lenders. For simplicity, we abstract from the 
capital structure of lenders and assume that they can provide loans at 
given marginal funding costs. Specifically, banks’ marginal funding cost 
is 𝜄𝐵, while fintechs’ is 𝜄𝐹 .

Monitoring cost. If a bank monitors an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 with inten-
sity 𝑚(𝑧𝑖), the monitoring cost it needs to incur is:

𝐶𝐵

(𝑚(𝑧𝑖), 𝑑)

=

(𝑚(𝑧𝑖))2,

𝑐𝐵
2 (1 − 𝑞𝑑)
√

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑞 ∈ (0, 2) and 𝑑 ≥ 0.15 Variable 𝑑 is the 
with 𝑐𝐵 > 𝑅, 𝑅 >
arc-distance between the bank and the monitored entrepreneur (for 

14 We can relax this assumption by letting project returns be correlated 
(i.e., affected by a common factor) at the same location, while independent 
across locations.
15 The restriction 𝑞 < 2 ensures that 1 − 𝑞𝑑 > 0 always holds because the 
arc-distance between a bank and location 𝑧𝑖 is at most 1∕2. The constraint 
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵 must hold to guarantee that banks are willing to provide loans to 
𝑅 >

√

4 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Fig. 2.  Timeline.

bank 𝑖 /resp. bank 𝑖 + 1, 𝑑 = 𝑧𝑖 /resp. 𝑑 = 1∕𝑁 − 𝑧𝑖). Parameters 
𝑐𝐵 and 𝑞 are inverse measures of the efficiency of banks’ monitoring 
technology. Parameter 𝑐𝐵 is the slope of marginal monitoring costs 
when the bank-borrower distance 𝑑 is zero. Parameter 𝑞 measures the 
negative effect of the distance on banks’ monitoring efficiency. A bank 
has lower efficiency in monitoring entrepreneurs farther away from the 
bank’s expertise or location (see Giometti and Pietrosanti, 2023).

If fintech 𝑗 (with 𝑗 ∈ {1, 2}) monitors an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 with 

intensity 𝑚(𝑧𝑖), the monitoring cost is:

𝐶𝐹 𝑗

)
(𝑚(𝑧𝑖)

=

𝑐𝐹 𝑗
2

(𝑚(𝑧𝑖))2,

where  𝑐𝐹 𝑗  (with  𝑐𝐹 𝑗 > 𝑅)  inversely  measures  the  monitoring  effi-
) is not affected by the 
ciency of the fintech.16 Note that 𝐶𝐹 𝑗
entrepreneur’s location for a given 𝑚(𝑧𝑖), which corresponds to the 
fintech’s location at the center of the circle as explained above.
Without loss of generality, throughout the paper we let 𝑐𝐹 1

≤ 𝑐𝐹 2
hold; that is, fintech 1 has a weakly better monitoring efficiency than 
the other fintech.

(𝑚(𝑧𝑖)

Timeline. The following events take place in sequence. The incumbent 
banks post their uniform loan rates first, and fintechs move second 
posting  their  discriminatory  loan  rates  after  observing  banks’  loan 
rates.17 After lenders’ loan rates are chosen and hence observable, each 
entrepreneur decides (a) whether or not to implement her project and 
(b) which lender to approach for funding if she decides to undertake 
her project. Given lenders’ loan rates and entrepreneurs’ decisions, each 
lender decides whether to provide funding to its loan applicants. After 
providing loans, each lender chooses its optimal monitoring intensity 
as a function of borrowers’ locations (see Fig.  2).

Parameter  assumptions.  To  focus  our  analyses  on  interesting  and 
realistic scenarios, we make some assumptions on parameters. First, we 
assume the following inequality, which ensures that there is effective 
competition between adjacent banks when there are no fintechs, holds: 

)

2𝑁

− 𝜄𝐵 > 0,

𝐵)2(1 − 𝑞
(𝑟𝑚
2𝑐𝐵
where 𝑟𝑚
𝐵 is the (monopolistic) loan rate a bank will offer when it faces 
no competition from any other lender.18 If Inequality (2) does not hold 
– a case analyzed in Online Appendix B – a bank does not compete with 
other lenders when there is no fintech entry.

(2)

Second, we assume: 

𝑅 ≤ min{2

√

√

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 , 2

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵},

(3)

a positive mass of entrepreneurs in the market. The constraint 𝑐𝐵 > 𝑅 ensures 
that a bank’s monitoring intensity – which is equal to the success probability 
of monitored entrepreneurs – is always smaller than 1.
16 The constraint 𝑐𝐹 𝑗 > 𝑅 ensures that the fintech’s monitoring intensity is 
always smaller than 1.
17 As in Thisse and Vives (1988), a pure-strategy equilibrium may not exist 
if a uniform-pricing firm and a price-discriminating one simultaneously post 
prices.
18 See the proof of Proposition  1 (in Appendix  A) for the derivation of 𝑟𝑚
which is determined by Eq.  (A.1).

𝐵, 

5 

<

√

√

√

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 )

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 (𝑅 −
𝑐𝐹 1

which ensures that entrepreneurs always want lenders to decrease their 
loan rates. As a result, intensifying competition will gradually drive 
lenders’ profits to zero.
Finally, we assume: 
√

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵(𝑅 −
𝑐𝐵
which implies that at 𝑧𝑖 = 0, bank 𝑖 can provide entrepreneurs with 
higher expected utility than fintechs. As a result, banks still maintain 
positive market shares after fintech entry. Condition (4) is reduced to 
𝑐𝐹 1 > 𝑐𝐵 when 𝜄𝐹 = 𝜄𝐵.19 If Inequality (4) does not hold, then fintechs 
will completely drive banks out of the market. Actually, the banking 
sector plays an important role in the lending market, so we focus on 
the more interesting case that fintech entry does not drive out banks.

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵)

(4)

,

Interpretation of monitoring.  Monitoring creates value for lenders 
and entrepreneurs through expertise-based advising, mentoring or/and 
information production helpful for entrepreneurs.20 Lenders can collect 
entrepreneurs’ data (e.g., by frequently requesting information) and as-
sess how the business is doing (Minnis and Sutherland, 2017; Gustafson 
et al., 2021; Branzoli and Fringuellotti, 2022). If borrowers are not 
acting  appropriately,  lenders  can  provide  warnings  and  advice,  po-
tentially improving their behavior. If the collected information shows 
a breach of covenants, lenders can obtain control rights and directly 
intervene to fix borrowers’ behavior. Such intervention is easier for 
BigTech lenders since they have advantages in information collection 
and contract enforcement in their ecosystems (Liu et al., 2024).

Lenders’ monitoring efficiency can be facilitated by advancements 
in  technology.  Improvements  in  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  make  it 
easier for bank officers to process the information of firms they do 
not specialize in, decreasing 𝑞. Developments of AI, machine learning 
(ML), and Big Data help codify soft information into hard information, 
allowing fintechs to get rid of human-based decisions and distance 
friction. Those technologies also improve the basic efficiency in infor-
mation processing for banks and fintechs (i.e., decrease 𝑐𝐵 and 𝑐𝐹 𝑗 in 
the model).21

3. Fintech threat and possible equilibrium regimes

In this section, we deal with lenders’ monitoring choices and en-
trepreneurs’ decisions first. Then, we define the different possible equi-
librium regimes. Throughout the paper, we concentrate our analysis on 
symmetric equilibria.

19 The inequality 𝑐𝐹 1 > 𝑐𝐵 means that banks have higher basic monitoring 
efficiency than fintechs when the distance is zero. This makes sense since 
banks have an advantage in accumulating data about customers, which is 
the rationale of the Open Banking initiative launched by several governments. 
See He et al. (2023) and Babina et al. (2024).
20 There is evidence that borrowers value lenders’ expertise. Paravisini et al. 
(2023)  find  that  an  exporter  prefers  borrowing  from  a  bank  with  better 
expertise in the target market. Lee and Sharpe (2009) find that more intense 
lender monitoring leads to higher stock returns of borrowers; similarly, Dass 
and Massa (2011) shows that lender monitoring can improve the corporate 
governance of borrowers, increasing their firm values.
21 Vives and Ye (2025) provide a more comprehensive discussion of the 
effects of information technology improvements.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

A standard feature of this class of spatial competition models is 
that symmetric equilibria can be fully characterized by studying the 
competition among neighbors. Hence, it suffices to concentrate our 
analyses on the arc between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1.

Note that whether Condition (6) holds can be anticipated by all market 
participants once 𝑟𝐵 is observable. Reasoning in the same way, fintech 
) ≥ 0, 
𝑗 will provide a loan to an applicant at 𝑧𝑖 if and only if 𝜋𝐹 𝑗
with 𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖) given in Lemma  1.

(𝑧𝑖

3.1. Monitoring intensity and entrepreneurs’ decisions

According  to  the  timeline,  an  entrepreneur  has  decided  which 
lender to approach for funding before lenders choose their monitoring 
intensities. If an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 (on the arc between banks 𝑖 and 
𝑖 + 1) approaches a bank (say, bank 𝑗) and gets a loan at rate 𝑟𝐵, the 
bank’s expected profit from financing the entrepreneur is: 

(𝑧𝑖

) ≡ 𝑟𝐵𝑚𝐵

)

(𝑧𝑖

𝜋𝐵

− 𝜄𝐵 −

𝑐𝐵
2 (1 − 𝑞𝑑)

(𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖))2,

(5)

where 𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) is the bank’s monitoring intensity at 𝑧𝑖 and 𝑑 is the arc-
) is the 
distance between bank 𝑗 and location 𝑧𝑖. The first term of 𝜋𝐵
expected loan repayment the bank receives from an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖, 
the second is the bank’s marginal funding cost, and the third is the cost 
of monitoring the entrepreneur.

(𝑧𝑖

𝜋𝐹 𝑗

(𝑧𝑖

Reasoning in a similar way, if an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 approaches 
a fintech (say, fintech 𝑗) and gets a loan at rate 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖), the fintech’s 
expected profit from financing the entrepreneur is:
(𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖
) ≡ 𝑟𝐹 𝑗
(𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖))2,
(𝑧𝑖
) is the fintech’s monitoring intensity at 𝑧𝑖. The first term 
where 𝑚𝐹 𝑗
) is the expected loan repayment the fintech receives from the 
(𝑧𝑖
of 𝜋𝐹 𝑗
entrepreneur, the second term is the fintech’s marginal funding cost, 
and the third term is the monitoring cost.

) 𝑚𝐹 𝑗

𝑐𝐹 𝑗
2

− 𝜄𝐹 −

)

After providing loans, a lender (a bank or a fintech) chooses mon-
itoring  intensities  to  maximize  its  expected  profits,  taking  as  given 
the loan rates, entrepreneurs’ choices, and the marginal funding cost. 
Lemma  1 presents the result.

Lemma 1.   At location 𝑧𝑖, if a bank provides loans at the loan rate 𝑟𝐵, its 
optimal monitoring intensity is given by

𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) =

𝑟𝐵
𝑐𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞𝑑)

,

where 𝑑 is the arc-distance between the bank and location 𝑧𝑖.

At location 𝑧𝑖, if fintech 𝑗 provides loans at the loan rate 𝑟𝐹 𝑗

(𝑧𝑖

)
, its 

optimal monitoring intensity is given by

𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖) =

𝑟𝐹 𝑗

(𝑧𝑖
𝑐𝐹 𝑗

)

.

As 𝑐𝐵 or/and 𝑞 increase, monitoring becomes more costly, reducing 
a bank’s monitoring intensity 𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) (except if 𝑑 = 0). Furthermore, 
𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) is decreasing in 𝑑 since it is more costly for a bank to monitor 
entrepreneurs farther away. The slope of the marginal monitoring cost 
𝑐𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞𝑑) is an inverse measure of the bank’s monitoring efficiency 
with distance 𝑑. Finally, 𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) is increasing in 𝑟𝐵 since a higher 𝑟𝐵
implies a larger skin in the game (i.e., higher monitoring incentive) for 
the bank.

A fintech’s monitoring intensity 𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖) is increasing in 𝑟𝐹 𝑗

) and 
decreasing in 𝑐𝐹 𝑗 because of similar considerations. The only difference 
)
is that for a given loan rate 𝑟𝐹 𝑗
, the fintech’s monitoring intensity 
𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖) does not rely on entrepreneurs’ locations.

(𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖

When  do  lenders  provide  loans  to  their  applicants?  If  an  en-
trepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 applies for a loan from a bank (with lending distance 
𝑑 and loan rate 𝑟𝐵), the bank will provide the loan if and only if 
) ≥ 0 (see Eq. (5)). According to Lemma  1, 𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) is a function of 
(𝑧𝑖
𝜋𝐵
𝑟𝐵, so 𝜋𝐵

) ≥ 0 is equivalent to: 

(𝑧𝑖

(1 − 𝑞𝑑)𝑟2
𝐵
2𝑐𝐵

− 𝜄𝐵

≥ 0

(6)

6 

Entrepreneurs’ decisions. An entrepreneur will approach the lender 
that can provide the highest expected utility. Suppose that in equilib-
rium, all lenders are willing to provide loans at 𝑧𝑖. Then, entrepreneurs 
at 𝑧𝑖 will approach bank 𝑘 – whose loan rate and (anticipated) moni-
toring intensity are 𝑟𝑘 and 𝑚𝑘(𝑧𝑖) respectively – for loans only if:
{

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖))𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖), (𝑅 − 𝑟ℎ)𝑚ℎ(𝑧𝑖)

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑘)𝑚𝑘(𝑧𝑖) =

} ,

max
ℎ∈{1,2,…,𝑁},𝑗∈{1,2}

where 𝑟ℎ (resp. 𝑚ℎ(𝑧𝑖)) is the loan rate (resp. monitoring intensity) 
of bank ℎ; 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖) (resp. 𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖)) is the loan rate (resp. monitoring 
intensity) of fintech 𝑗. If the highest utility is provided by more than 
one lender at 𝑧𝑖 in equilibrium, we make the standard assumption that 
entrepreneurs at 𝑧𝑖 will choose the lender that is willing to marginally 
cut price and provide higher utility. Note that entrepreneurs do not 
simply choose the lender with the lowest loan rate since they also care 
about monitoring intensities.

3.2. Equilibrium regimes

The following lemma characterizes the maximum utility a fintech 

can provide, which represents its competitiveness.

Lemma 2.   At any location, the fintech 𝑗’s loan rate that maximizes 
entrepreneurs’ expected utility is given by

√

≡

𝑟𝐹 𝑗

2𝑐𝐹 𝑗 𝜄𝐹 ,

which implies the following entrepreneurial utility from investment:
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 𝑗
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
return from success

(𝑟𝐹 𝑗 ∕𝑐𝐹 𝑗 )
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
monitoring intensity

𝑈 𝐹 𝑗

≡

×

)

,

with 𝑈 𝐹 1

≥ 𝑈 𝐹 2 holding. We call 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 the ‘‘best loan rate’’ of fintech 𝑗.

To provide higher utility to an entrepreneur, fintech 𝑗 needs to 
decrease its loan rate. When the loan rate is as low as 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 , fintech 𝑗
will make zero profit and cannot decrease the rate anymore. Therefore, 
𝑟𝐹 𝑗 is the best loan rate fintech 𝑗 can offer entrepreneurs, which implies 
utility 𝑈 𝐹 𝑗 . As 𝑐𝐹 𝑗 or 𝜄𝐹  increases, monitoring or funding becomes more 
costly for fintech 𝑗, so it needs a higher 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 to break even, thus reducing 
𝑈 𝐹 𝑗 .

Note that 𝑈 𝐹 𝑗 is not a function of 𝑧𝑖 because a fintech is equidistant 
from  all  locations.  Since  fintech  1  has  a  weakly  better  monitoring 
≥ 𝑈 𝐹 2 must hold, meaning that the 
efficiency than fintech 2, 𝑈 𝐹 1
competitiveness of fintechs depends on that of fintech 1.

We define different types of equilibria based on the status of fintech 

entry. 

Definition  1.    There  is  blockaded  fintech  entry  (BE  for  short)  if 
entrepreneurs and incumbent banks behave as if there were no fintechs. 
There is potential fintech entry (PE for short) if fintechs do not lend to 
any entrepreneur because of banks’ behavior. There is actual fintech 
entry (AE for short) if fintechs lend to a positive mass of entrepreneurs.

In the BE regime, fintechs cannot make any difference to the lending 
market and banks’ pricing strategies are independent of fintechs’ char-
acteristics. In the PE regime, banks modify their pricing to protect their 
market areas from fintechs’ penetration; although fintechs do not serve 
any entrepreneur, they are effective potential competitors that banks 
cannot ignore. In the AE regime, banks give up fully protecting their 
market areas, and fintechs lend to a positive mass of entrepreneurs.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Fig. 3.  Banks’ Coverage and Pricing under Different Regimes of Fintech Entry. This figure plots banks’ equilibrium loan rate against the entrepreneurial location on the arc between 
banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1. The parameter values are 𝑅 = 20, 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 = 1, 𝑐𝐵 = 70, 𝑞 = 0.8, 𝑁 = 2.

4. Characterizing equilibria

In this section, we first provide the conditions for the three types of 
equilibria (see Definition  1) to arise, and then characterize loan rates 
focusing on the PE and AE regimes. The BE regime is relegated to 
Online Appendix C. The section ends with the impact of fintech entry 
on total investment.

4.1. Fintech monitoring efficiency and equilibrium regimes

The following proposition shows how fintech 1’s monitoring effi-

ciency determines the equilibrium regime.

Proposition 1.  A unique symmetric equilibrium exists. There exist 𝑐𝐹  and 
𝑐𝐹  (< 𝑐𝐹 ) such that:

≥ 𝑐𝐹 , there is blockaded fintech entry (BE); banks’ loan rate 

≤ 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 , there is potential fintech entry (PE); banks’ loan 
𝐵 ). At location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁), banks’ rate 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  exactly provides 

𝐵  (< 𝑟𝑏𝑒

(i) If 𝑐𝐹 1
is 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 .
(ii) If 𝑐𝐹

rate is 𝑟𝑝𝑒
utility 𝑈 𝐹 1: 
𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵 (1 − 𝑞
2𝑁
𝑐𝐵

)(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵 )

= 𝑈 𝐹 1.

(7)

(iii) If 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 , there is actual fintech entry (AE); banks’ loan rate is 

𝐵  (< 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 ).

In the BE or PE regime, bank 𝑖 (resp. bank 𝑖 + 1) serves locations 𝑧𝑖 ∈
[
0, 1∕2𝑁] (resp. 𝑧𝑖 ∈ (1∕2𝑁, 1∕𝑁]
) on the arc between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1. 
In the AE regime, there exists an 𝑥𝑎𝑒 ∈ (0, 1∕(2𝑁)) such that fintechs serve 
[𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒]
entrepreneurs at 𝑧𝑖 ∈
, while bank 𝑖 (resp. bank 𝑖+1) serves 
entrepreneurs at 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑥𝑎𝑒)(resp. 𝑧𝑖 ∈ (1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁]

).

From the perspective of banks, the competitiveness of fintechs is 
equivalent to that of fintech 1 since it has a (weakly) better monitoring 
efficiency than fintech 2. Therefore, the type of the equilibrium depends 
on the value of 𝑐𝐹 1.

If the monitoring efficiency of fintech 1 is low (i.e., 𝑐𝐹 1

≥ 𝑐𝐹 ), bor-
rowing from fintechs implies very low monitoring intensities (i.e., suc-
cess probabilities), so banks and entrepreneurs need not consider the 
presence  of  fintechs.  In  this  BE  regime,  an  entrepreneur  will  seek 
funding from the nearest bank since a bank’s monitoring efficiency is 
decreasing in its lending distance. Panel 1 of Fig.  3 illustrates banks’ 
coverage and loan rate in the BE regime.

𝐵  to 𝑟𝑝𝑒

If the monitoring efficiency of fintech 1 is at an intermediate level 
≤ 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 ), fintech 1 will bring effective competitive pressure 
(i.e., 𝑐𝐹
to banks. Then, banks decrease their loan rate (from 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 ) to protect 
their market areas, giving rise to the PE regime. Fintechs cannot serve 
any entrepreneur due to banks’ reaction to the fintech threat. Again, an 
entrepreneur seeks funding from the nearest bank. See Panel 2 of Fig. 
3. The entrepreneurial utility provided by banks is lowest when the 
bank-borrower distance reaches the maximum value 1∕(2𝑁) (i.e., the 
distance between bank 𝑖 and 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁)). To fully protect banks’ 
market areas, 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  must be so low that the lowest utility provided by 
banks can match 𝑈 𝐹 1.

7 

[𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒]

If the monitoring efficiency of fintech 1 is sufficiently good (i.e.,
𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 ), banks cannot prevent fintech penetration and the AE regime 
occurs. Fintechs’ monitoring efficiency does not vary with locations, 
so they gain a competitive advantage and serve entrepreneurs in the 
middle area 𝑧𝑖 ∈
, which is far from all banks. Bank 
𝑖 (resp. bank 𝑖 + 1) serves its nearby entrepreneurs at 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑥𝑎𝑒)
(resp.  𝑧𝑖 ∈ (1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁]
).  As  a  result,  the  interaction  between 
adjacent banks is cut off in the AE regime. The point 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 (resp. 
𝑧𝑖 = 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒) is the indifference location where the utility provided 
by bank 𝑖 (resp. bank 𝑖 + 1) exactly matches the maximum utility 𝑈 𝐹 1
fintech 1 can provide. Panel 3 of Fig.  3 illustrates this regime.

Corollary 1.   Monitoring efficiency thresholds 𝑐𝐹  and 𝑐𝐹  are increasing 
in 𝑐𝐵, 𝑞 and 𝜄𝐵, and decreasing in 𝜄𝐹 . A numerical study finds that 𝑐𝐹  and 
𝑐𝐹  are increasing in 𝑅.

Decreasing 𝑐𝐵 and/or 𝑞 (i.e., higher bank monitoring efficiency) will 
increase the utility banks can provide, thereby making it harder for 
fintech 1 to change the equilibrium regime (i.e., 𝑐𝐹  and 𝑐𝐹  become 
lower). Similarly, decreasing 𝜄𝐵 reduces banks’ funding costs, enabling 
them to use lower loan rates to protect market areas and thus reducing 
𝑐𝐹  and 𝑐𝐹 .

In contrast, as 𝜄𝐹  decreases, fintech 1 is able to offer a lower best 
loan rate (see Lemma  2), implying a higher 𝑈 𝐹 1. As a result, fintech 1’s 
competitiveness increases, making it harder for banks to maintain the 
BE or PE regime (i.e., 𝑐𝐹  and 𝑐𝐹  will increase).

Decreasing  𝑅  lowers  the  profitability  of  entrepreneurs’  projects, 
thus  reducing  the  utility  provided  by  banks  and  fintechs.  We  find 
numerically  that  decreasing  𝑅  reduces  𝑐𝐹   and  𝑐𝐹 .  As  𝑅  decreases, 
incumbent banks – which make positive profits before fintech entry – 
will offer lower loan rates. In contrast, fintech 1, as an entrant, uses its 
best loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1 to penetrate the market and cannot reduce it anymore 
following a lower 𝑅. As a result, the utility provided by the entering 
fintech decreases faster than that provided by incumbent banks, making 
it harder for fintech 1 to change the equilibrium regime.22

4.2. Equilibrium loan rates

In this section, we characterize lenders’ loan pricing, focusing on 
the PE and the AE regimes (see Online Appendix C for the BE regime).

Proposition 2 (Bank Pricing in the PE Regime).  In the PE regime, banks’ 
loan rate 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  is increasing in 𝑐𝐹 1, 𝜄𝐹  and 𝑁, decreasing in 𝑐𝐵 and 𝑞, and 
independent of 𝜄𝐵.

A  decrease  in  𝑐𝐹 1  or  𝜄𝐹   increases  the  fintech’s  competitiveness 
𝐵  to protect 

(i.e., increases 𝑈 𝐹 1) and hence forces banks to decrease 𝑟𝑝𝑒

22 To confirm that banks’ loan rate reduction in response to a lower 𝑅 drives 
the result, we did a counterfactual analysis by fixing banks’ loan rate and 
decreasing 𝑅. In this case, a lower 𝑅 increases 𝑐𝐹  and 𝑐𝐹  when 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 .

X. Vives and Z. Ye

their market areas from potential fintech entry. Reasoning in a sym-
metric way, a lower 𝑐𝐵 and/or 𝑞 increase the competitiveness of banks, 
allowing them to post a higher loan rate.

As 𝑁 decreases, the arc-distance between adjacent banks will be 
larger, increasing the maximal bank-borrower distance 1∕(2𝑁). There-
fore,  fully  protecting  banks’  market  areas  from  fintech  penetration 
becomes harder, forcing banks to decrease 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  to keep Eq. (7) holding.
Note that 𝜄𝐵 does not play a role in Eq.  (7) since the utility provided 
by  a  bank  does  not  directly  depend  on  its  marginal  funding  cost. 
As a result, 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  is independent of 𝜄𝐵. However, 𝜄𝐵 does affect banks’ 
competitiveness  since  Corollary   1  shows  that  a  higher  𝜄𝐵  makes  it 
harder for banks to maintain the BE or PE regime.

Proposition 3 (Bank Pricing in the AE Regime).  In the AE regime, banks’ 
equilibrium loan rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  is increasing in 𝑐𝐹 1, 𝜄𝐵, and 𝜄𝐹 , and independent 
of 𝑁.

In the AE regime, every bank competes with fintech 1. Changing 𝑁
has no effect on a bank’s loan rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  because fintech 1’s competitive 
pressure on a bank – represented by 𝑈 𝐹 1 – is not affected by the number 
of banks. A lower 𝑐𝐹 1 or 𝜄𝐹  will increase fintech 1’s competitiveness, 
forcing banks to reduce 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵  to mitigate fintech expansion.

As 𝜄𝐵 increases, a bank’s expected profit from serving an individual 
entrepreneur will decrease for a given loan rate. This outcome reduces 
a bank’s marginal benefit of enlarging lending volume, inducing the 
bank to raise its loan rate.

Changing  𝑞  does  not  affect  𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵   is 
ambiguous (see Table  1). We explain the results in Online Appendix 
C.

𝐵 ,  while  the  effect  of  𝑐𝐵  on  𝑟𝑎𝑒

Next, we analyze fintechs’ pricing. If 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 2 holds, fintech 1 can 
always provide strictly higher entrepreneurial utility than fintech 2, 
so  the  latter  cannot  serve  any  entrepreneur.  When  𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2,  the 
two fintechs are identical; in this case, we also let fintech 1 serve 
all borrowers in the region [𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒] for convenience. Then, for 
the rest of the paper, we need only focus on fintech 1 when studying 
fintechs’ behavior. The following lemma characterizes the upper bound
of fintech 1’s loan rate.

Lemma 3.   If fintech 1 faces no competition from banks at 𝑧𝑖, its optimal 
loan rate at this location is independent of 𝑧𝑖 and equals

𝑟∗
𝐹 1

≡ min

𝑅 +

𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1,

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

√

𝑅2 − 4𝑐𝐹 1𝑈 𝐹 2

2

,

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

where  𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1 ∈ (𝑟𝐹 1, 𝑅)  is  fintech  1’s  monopolistic  loan  rate  (derived  in 
Appendix  A) and (𝑅 +
𝑅2 − 4𝑐𝐹 1𝑈 𝐹 2)∕2 is the loan rate of fintech 1 that 
provides the maximum utility 𝑈 𝐹 2 fintech 2 can offer. If fintech 1 faces 
competition from banks at 𝑧𝑖, 𝑟∗

𝐹 1 is the upper bound of its loan rate.

√

With no bank threat, fintech 1’s optimal loan rate is determined by: 
(a) its monopolistic loan rate 𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1 and (b) the competitiveness of fintech 
2. Increasing the loan rate above 𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1 will reduce fintech 1’s profit at 𝑧𝑖
since entrepreneurs’ funding demand will decrease rapidly. Fintech 1 
must also ensure that entrepreneurs will not choose fintech 2, which 
can provide utility 𝑈 𝐹 2. To match the utility 𝑈 𝐹 2, fintech 1’s loan rate 
cannot exceed (𝑅 +

𝑅2 − 4𝑐𝐹 1𝑈 𝐹 2)∕2.

√

Therefore, when fintech 1 faces no competition from banks, its op-
𝐹 1 is the minimum of 𝑟𝑚
timal loan rate 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 and (𝑅 +
𝑅2 − 4𝑐𝐹 1𝑈 𝐹 2)∕2. 
Fintech 1’s pricing will never exceed 𝑟∗
𝐹 1, so it is the upper bound when 
fintech  1  faces  competition  from  banks.  Since  fintechs’  monitoring 
efficiency does not vary with locations, 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 is independent of 𝑧𝑖. With 
Lemma  3, we can characterize fintech 1’s equilibrium loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1(𝑧𝑖).

√

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Proposition 4 (Fintech Pricing in the AE Regime.).  Fintech 1’s loan rate 
at 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒] is given by

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

min

𝑟𝐹 1(𝑧𝑖) =

with

𝑟∗
𝐹 1
{𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵

𝐹 1

(𝑧𝑖

if

if

(𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 )2(1−𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)
2𝑐𝐵
(𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 )2(1−𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)
2𝑐𝐵

− 𝜄𝐵 < 0
≥ 0

− 𝜄𝐵

[𝐍𝐁𝐓 𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑒]

[𝐁𝐓 𝑐𝑎𝑠𝑒]

}

) , 𝑟∗

𝐹 1

𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
𝐹 1

(𝑧𝑖

) ≡ 𝑅
2

+

√

𝑅2
4

−

)

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑐𝐹 1𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
𝐵
𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)

 and 𝑑𝑎𝑒 ≡ min

{𝑧𝑖, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑧𝑖

} .

The No Bank Threat NBT  case occurs for some locations if 𝑐𝐹 1 is suffi-
ciently low.

The pricing strategy of fintech 1 at 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒] maximizes 
its  profit  while  ensuring  that  entrepreneurs  at  this  location  do  not 
approach rival lenders (i.e., banks or fintech 2).

Two cases may arise when fintech 1 implements this strategy. In the 
first case (No Bank Threat NBT), no bank is willing to serve location 𝑧𝑖
with the uniform rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  because it is too low to ensure a non-negative 
profit. Thus, there is no bank competitive threat at 𝑧𝑖, allowing fintech 1 
to choose the upper bound loan rate 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 (Lemma  3). The NBT case 
will arise at 𝑧𝑖 if and only if (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 )2(1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵) < 𝜄𝐵 holds, meaning 
that at location 𝑧𝑖, even the nearest bank (with the distance 𝑑𝑎𝑒) cannot 
make a non-negative profit with the loan rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  (see Condition (6)). 
Otherwise, we are in the Bank Threat BT case.

𝐹 1

(𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖

In the BT case, if fintech 1’s upper bound rate 𝑟∗

𝐹 1 provides lower utility than banks’ rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐹 1 can provide higher 
𝐵 , banks’ threat will not be effective for 
𝐹 1 at 𝑧𝑖 as in the NBT case. 
𝐵  at 𝑧𝑖, banks’ 
) (< 𝑟∗
𝐹 1) at 𝑧𝑖 to 
𝐵 . The superscript ‘‘𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵’’ 

utility at 𝑧𝑖 than banks’ rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
the fintech; as a result, fintech 1 will post 𝑟∗
However, if 𝑟∗
threat will be effective; then, fintech 1 offers 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
match the utility provided by banks’ rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
) means ‘‘competition with banks’’.
of 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
𝐹 1
The NBT case will occur for some locations when 𝑐𝐹 1 is very low 
(i.e., fintech 1 is very competitive). This follows since a low 𝑐𝐹 1 will 
force bank 𝑖 to price low (Proposition  3), making it unwilling to serve 
locations near 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁) with the rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 .

Fig.  4 provides a graphic illustration of equilibrium loan rates on 
the arc between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1. In Panels 1 to 3, 𝑐𝐹 1 is not very low, 
so banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 are willing to serve location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁) with the 
rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 . Thus, fintech 1 faces banks’ threat at all locations. In Panel 1, 
fintech 2 has no threat (since 𝑐𝐹 2 is high), so fintech 1 offers 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
(𝑧𝑖)
at 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒] to compete with banks. In Panel 2, 𝑐𝐹 2 is at 
an intermediate level, so 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 takes an intermediate value that provides 
higher utility than banks’ rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  at locations near 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁). For 
such locations, fintech 1 offers 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 to compete with fintech 2 (banks’ 
threat exists but is not effective). Panel 3 illustrates the boundary case 
𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2, in which fintech 1 always offers its best loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1 since 
the competition between the two identical fintechs is unbounded. In 
Panel 4, however, 𝑐𝐹 1 is very low – which drives down 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  by a lot – so 
banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 are unwilling to serve location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁) with the 
rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 . Therefore, the NBT case arises at locations near 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁), 
which is far from all banks. In the NBT area, banks’ threat suddenly 
disappears, so fintech 1’s loan rates discontinuously jump up to the 
upper bound 𝑟∗

𝐹 1

𝐹 1.

Corollary 2.   Fintech 1’s equilibrium loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1
ing  (resp.  decreasing)  in  𝑧𝑖  if  𝑧𝑖
𝑧𝑖 ∈ (1∕(2𝑁), 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒]
)
𝑧𝑖 = 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒), 𝑟𝐹 1

) is weakly increas-
]  (resp.
).  At  the  indifference  location  𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒  (or 
= 𝑟𝐹 1.

(𝑧𝑖
[𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕(2𝑁)

(𝑧𝑖

∈

]
As  𝑧𝑖  increases  in  [𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕(2𝑁)
,  the  utility  an  entrepreneur  can 
derive by approaching bank 𝑖 (the bank nearest to this location) will 
decrease. Hence, fintech 1’s competitive advantage over bank 𝑖 will 
)
increase, allowing the fintech to choose a higher 𝑟𝐹 1
) 
when banks’ threat is effective. If banks’ threat is not effective (or if it 
does not exist), fintech 1’s loan rate is 𝑟∗
𝐹 1, which is independent of 𝑧𝑖. 

) (= 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵

(𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖

𝐹 1

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Fig. 4.  Loan Rates on the Arc between Banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 in AE with 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 . This figure plots the equilibrium loan rate against the entrepreneurial location on the arc between 
banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 in the AE regime. Fintechs can price discriminate, while banks cannot. Location 𝑧𝑖 belongs to the NBT area if (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 )2(1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵 ) < 𝜄𝐵 holds at 𝑧𝑖, where 
𝑑𝑎𝑒 ≡ min

}
; otherwise, location 𝑧𝑖 belongs to the BT area. The parameter values are 𝑅 = 20, 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 = 1, 𝑞 = 0.8, 𝑐𝐵 = 70, 𝑁 = 2.

{𝑧𝑖, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖

) is weakly increasing 
Overall, fintech 1’s equilibrium loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1
in 𝑧𝑖 in the area [𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕(2𝑁)
]
. At the indifference location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 
bank 𝑖’s equilibrium loan rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  can provide utility 𝑈 𝐹 1, so fintech 1 
must offer its best loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1 at this location to compete with the 
) reaches its maximum at (or around) the mid 
bank.23 Note that 𝑟𝐹 1
location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁) where banks’ threat to fintech 1 is at the lowest 
level (see Fig.  4).

(𝑧𝑖

For  a  bank,  an  entrepreneur  who  is  farther  away  is  harder  to 
monitor and has a lower success probability (i.e., lower credit quality. 
See Lemma  1). Therefore, Proposition  4 and Corollary  2 imply that 
fintechs often target riskier borrowers (from the point of view of banks) 
and adjust their loan rates based on borrowers’ characteristics (see Di 
Maggio and Yao, 2021; Ueda et al., 2023; Johnson et al., 2023).

Comparative statics with actual entry. Table  1 summarizes the re-
sults and some explanations follow (and others are relegated to Online 
Appendix C).

Decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 will enhance fintech 1’s monitoring efficiency and 
competitiveness, thereby increasing its loan quality and market areas 
while reducing banks’.24 As banks become more specialized with higher 
𝑞, they serve a smaller area (i.e., 𝑥𝑎𝑒 decreases), and fintech 1 increases 
its loan rate (under bank threat). Reducing 𝑁 widens the region served 
by fintech 1 and enhances its market power around the mid location 
𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁),  hence  increasing  its  loan  volume  and  quality.  This 
result predicts that fintechs extend more loans in markets with a less 
competitive (or more concentrated) banking sector (Claessens et al., 

𝑁  
- - 
↓  

Table 1
Summary of comparative statics (Actual entry)

𝑞

𝑐𝐵

𝑐𝐹 1

𝜄𝐵

𝜄𝐹

↑

↑

↓

↑

↑

↑

↑

↑

↓

↑

↓

↑

↓

↓

↑

↑

𝐹 1

(𝑧𝑖)

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

↓𝑛𝑢𝑚

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

ambig.

ambig.

- -
↑

  𝑥𝑎𝑒
  Fintech market area 
(i.e., 1 − 2𝑁𝑥𝑎𝑒)
  Banks’ loan rate (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 )
  𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
  Fintech 1’s average 
loan quality (i.e., average 
monitoring intensity)
- - 
  Banks’ average loan quality
↓𝑛𝑢𝑚
This table summarizes how endogenous variables (in the first column) is affected 
by parameters (in the first row) in the AE regime. ‘‘↑‘‘ (resp. ‘‘↓’’) means that an 
endogenous variable is increasing or weakly increasing (resp. decreasing or weakly 
decreasing) in the corresponding parameter. ‘‘- -‘‘ means that an endogenous variable 
is independent of the corresponding parameter. ‘‘↑𝑛𝑢𝑚’’ (resp. ‘‘↓𝑛𝑢𝑚‘‘) means that an 
endogenous variable is increasing or weakly increasing (resp. decreasing or weakly 
decreasing)  in  the  corresponding  parameter  based  on  numerical  studies.  ‘‘Ambig.’’ 
means that the effect of a parameter can be positive or negative based on numerical 
studies.

- - 
↓  
↓  

ambig.

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

↑𝑛𝑢𝑚

↓𝑛𝑢𝑚

2018; Jagtiani and Lemieux, 2018; Frost et al., 2019). In contrast, re-
ducing 𝑁 does not change banks’ loan rate and quality since fintech 1’s 
threat to each bank – represented by 𝑈 𝐹 1 – is not affected by 𝑁.

4.3. Fintech entry and entrepreneurs’ investment

(𝑧𝑖

23 Reasoning symmetrically, as 𝑧𝑖 increases in the region (1∕(2𝑁), 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒]
, 
fintech 1’s competitive advantage (over bank 𝑖 + 1) will decrease, which forces 
) if banks’ threat is effective. At the indifference 
the fintech to reduce 𝑟𝐹 1
location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒, fintech 1 must offer its best loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1 to compete 
with bank 𝑖 + 1.
24 This is consistent with Babina et al. (2024) which documents that open 
banking – which improves fintechs’ access to information and hence can be 
viewed as a decrease in 𝑐𝐹 1 – makes SMEs more likely to form new lending 
relationships with non-bank lenders.

Entrepreneurs’ investment, denoted by 𝐼, is measured by the ag-
gregate mass of entrepreneurs undertaking investment projects: 𝐼 ≡
𝑁 ∫ 1∕𝑁
𝐷(𝑧𝑖)𝑑𝑧𝑖, where 𝐷(𝑧𝑖), defined in Eq.  (1), is the funding demand 
0
at 𝑧𝑖.

Proposition 5.   With respect to the BE regime, PE increases total in-
vestment  𝐼,  while  AE  does  it  also  if  𝑐𝐹 2  (≥ 𝑐𝐹 1)  is  sufficiently  close 
to 𝑐𝐹 1.

9 

 
X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Fig. 5.  Entrepreneurs’ Total Investment. This figure plots entrepreneurs’ total investment 𝐼 (i.e., the mass of entrepreneurs undertaking investment projects) against 𝑐𝐹 1. Panel 1 
plots the case with 𝑐𝐹 2 = +∞, while Panel 2 plots the case with 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2. The other parameter values are: 𝑅 = 20, 𝑞 = 1.8, 𝑐𝐵 = 95, 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 = 1, 𝑁 = 30. When 𝑐𝐹 1 is in the shaded 
region, NBT areas will arise (i.e., banks are not willing to serve sufficiently far-away locations). In the shaded region, NBT areas will grow larger as 𝑐𝐹 1 decreases.

In the PE regime, the fintech threat forces banks to provide higher 
utility  to  all  entrepreneurs  and  hence  spur  their  funding  demand 
(i.e., investment).

In contrast, AE may not increase total investment because NBT areas 
may arise in such a regime (Proposition  4). We consider first the case 
that 𝑐𝐹 2 (≥ 𝑐𝐹 1) is not close to 𝑐𝐹 1. Then, for a location outside NBT
areas, entrepreneurs’ utility and investment in the AE regime must be 
higher than in BE because fintech entry intensifies competition and 
forces lenders to provide higher utility. However, at a location in NBT
area, banks’ threat disappears, so fintech 1 offers the upper bound loan 
rate 𝑟∗
𝐹 1, which can hurt entrepreneurs and reduce investment (with 
respect to BE) if 𝑐𝐹 2 is high. When such investment-reducing NBT areas 
are large enough, total investment in the AE regime will be lower than 
in BE. See Panel 1 (with 𝑐𝐹 2 = +∞) of Fig.  5.

If 𝑐𝐹 2 (≥ 𝑐𝐹 1) is sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐹 1, the competition between 
the two fintechs will make fintech 1’s upper bound loan rate 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 quite 
low. In this case, even if AE generates NBT areas, the competitiveness 
of fintech 2 will ensure that entrepreneurs in those areas can derive 
sufficiently high utility. See Panel 2 (with 𝑐𝐹 2 = 𝑐𝐹 1) of Fig.  5, where 
investment increases as 𝑐𝐹 1 decreases, despite the growth of NBT areas.
Note that Proposition  5 does not mean that marginally lowering 𝑐𝐹 1
may marginally reduce the investment of a NBT location when 𝑐𝐹 2 is 
high. In fact, for any location – be it in BT or NBT areas – lowering 𝑐𝐹 1
always marginally increases its investment unless the location switches 
from  BT  to  NBT  case.  For  a  BT  location,  lowering  𝑐𝐹 1  intensifies 
competition and hence spurs investment; for a NBT location, lowering 
𝑐𝐹 1 also increases investment since fintech 1’s monitoring efficiency 
improves. Investment at a location may decrease only if it switches from
BT to NBT case, discontinuously increasing fintech market power at 
the location. As lowering 𝑐𝐹 1 reduces banks’ loan rate, more and more 
locations will switch from BT to NBT case, which may drive down total 
investment (see Panel 1 of Fig.  5).

5. Banks versus fintechs: monitoring, funding costs, and conve-
nience

In this section, we analyze what drives actual fintech entry first, the 
effects of banks’ funding cost advantage second, and the convenience 
advantage of fintechs third.

5.1. Determinants of actual fintech entry

Proposition 6.   Let 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹  and 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹  hold (the AE regime occurs 
and all lenders have the same marginal funding cost). At the indifference 
location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒, fintech 1 has lower monitoring efficiency and intensity, 
and loan rate than bank 𝑖:

< 𝑐𝐹 1, 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) > 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒),  and 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑐𝐵
1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒
where 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) (resp. 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒)) is bank 𝑖’s (resp. fintech 1’s) monitoring 
intensity at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒.

𝐵 > 𝑟𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐹 1,

(𝑧𝑖

) from 𝑟𝐹 1 (the lower bound) to 𝑟∗

This result follows because fintechs can price discriminate, while 
banks cannot. When fintech 1 competes with bank 𝑖 at location 𝑧𝑖, the 
fintech can choose 𝑟𝐹 1
𝐹 1 (the upper 
) would reduce its profits 
bound) without worrying that lowering 𝑟𝐹 1
from other locations. As a consequence, the fintech offers its best loan 
rate 𝑟𝐹 1 at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒. In contrast, bank 𝑖 has the concern that decreasing 
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  will reduce its profits from all locations it serves. Therefore, bank 
𝑖’s pricing at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 will be higher (i.e., less aggressive) than fintech 1 
if they have the same funding cost. The advantage of fintech 1’s lower 
pricing allows it to reach locations where bank 𝑖 has higher monitoring 
efficiency, implying 𝑐𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒) < 𝑐𝐹 1. Fig.  4 illustrates the result.

(𝑧𝑖

Bank 𝑖’s higher loan rate and better monitoring efficiency at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒
lead to 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) > 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) (Lemma  1). Note that around location 𝑧𝑖 =
𝑥𝑎𝑒, bank borrowers and fintech borrowers have similar characteristics 
since their locations are almost the same. Hence, this result predicts 
that when banks and fintechs have similar funding costs, bank bor-
rowers have higher success probabilities than fintech borrowers with 
similar characteristics.

Corollary 3.   The AE regime can occur even if fintech 1 has no ad-
vantage in either monitoring efficiency or funding cost (i.e., even if both 
𝑐𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞∕(2𝑁)) < 𝑐𝐹 1 and 𝜄𝐵 < 𝜄𝐹  hold).

Corollary  3 implies that fintech 1 can serve location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁)
even if its monitoring efficiency (resp. funding cost) is lower (resp. 
higher) than that of banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 at this location. The reason is 
that price discrimination is fintechs’ competitive advantage, allowing 
them to penetrate the market with low pricing.

5.2. Banks’ funding cost advantage

In practice, fintechs are likely to have higher marginal funding costs 
than banks (i.e., 𝜄𝐹 > 𝜄𝐵 is likely to hold) because the latter can access 
cheap deposits (see Drechsler et al., 2021). Considering 𝜄𝐹 > 𝜄𝐵 can flip 
the implication of Proposition  6. 

Proposition 7.   Let 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹  hold (i.e., the AE regime occurs). If 𝜄𝐹  is 
sufficiently higher than 𝜄𝐵, fintech 1 has higher monitoring efficiency and 
intensity, and loan rate than bank 𝑖 at the indifference location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒: 

𝑐𝐵
1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒

> 𝑐𝐹 1, 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) < 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒),  and 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵 < 𝑟𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐹 1.

(8)

According to Lemma  2, a higher 𝜄𝐹  will force fintech 1 to post a 
higher rate 𝑟𝐹 1 at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 and serve smaller market areas (i.e., 𝑥𝑎𝑒 will 
increase). A higher 𝑥𝑎𝑒 implies that bank 𝑖’s monitoring efficiency at 
𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 – which is measured by (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)∕𝑐𝐵 – will decrease. Therefore, 
when 𝜄𝐹  is high enough (i.e., sufficiently higher than 𝜄𝐵), fintech 1 
will have a higher loan rate and monitoring efficiency than bank 𝑖
at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒, leading to 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) < 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒). That is, fintech borrowers 

10 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Fig. 6.  The Effects of Funding Costs on Equilibrium Loan Rates in AE with 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2. This figure plots the equilibrium loan rate against the entrepreneurial location on the arc 
between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 when there is actual fintech entry and 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2 holds. Fintechs can price discriminate, while banks cannot. The parameter values are 𝑅 = 20, 𝜄𝐵 = 1, 
𝑐𝐵 = 100, 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2 = 102, 𝑞 = 0.2, and 𝑁 = 2 for both panels. 𝜄𝐹 = 1 in Panel 1, while 𝜄𝐹 = 1.1 in Panel 2. .

have lower default risks than bank borrowers (controlling for borrower 
characteristics).

Fig.  6 illustrates how funding costs affect the relationship between 
banks’ pricing and fintech 1’s at the indifference location. To clearly 
show the difference, the figure adopts 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2, so fintech 1 always 
offers its best loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1. In Panel 1, 𝜄𝐹 = 𝜄𝐵 holds, so banks’ loan 
rate is higher than fintech 1’s at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 (see Proposition  6). In Panel 2, 
however, fintechs have much higher funding costs, forcing fintech 1 to 
price higher than bank 𝑖 and serve smaller market areas.

Note that Propositions  6 and 7 provide opposite predictions, mean-
ing that the relationship between fintech loan risk and bank loan risk 
(controlling for borrower characteristics) is ambiguous and depends 
on the extent of fintechs’ funding cost disadvantage. The empirical 
evidence is indeed consistent with the mixed predictions (Buchak et al., 
2018; Fuster et al., 2019; Di Maggio and Yao, 2021; Liu et al., 2024).

5.3. Convenience benefit of fintech loans

In practice, an important advantage of fin/big techs is that they can 
offer more convenience to borrowers (see Buchak et al., 2018, Fuster 
et al., 2019, and Liu et al., 2024). This subsection extends the model by 
assuming that an entrepreneur will derive a non-pecuniary convenience 
benefit 𝜃 when borrowing from a fintech. Then, in this subsection, the 
maximum entrepreneurial utility 𝑈 𝐹 𝑗 provided by fintech 𝑗 becomes:

𝑈 𝐹 𝑗 =

(𝑟𝐹 𝑗 ∕𝑐𝐹 𝑗 )
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
monitoring intensity

×

)

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 𝑗
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
return from success

+

𝜃
⏟⏟⏟
convenience benefit

,

with 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 defined in Lemma  2. We modify Condition (4) to the general 
version  𝑈 𝐹 1 <
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵)∕𝑐𝐵,  which  again  ensures  that 
banks maintain positive market shares after fintech entry. All the other 
assumptions in Section 2 still apply here.

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵(𝑅 −

√

√

If AE occurs when 𝜃 = 0, it must also occur when 𝜃 > 0 since a 
higher 𝜃 increases fintechs’ competitiveness. For the same reason, a 
higher 𝜃 will increase fintech 1’s market areas (i.e., 𝑥𝑎𝑒 will decrease) 
and  decrease  banks’  loan  rate  𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵   in  the  AE  regime.  The  following 
proposition  shows  how  convenience  benefits  affect  the  relationship 
between banks’ pricing and fintech 1’s.

Proposition 8.   In the AE regime with 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 , if 𝜃 is large enough, 
fintech 1 has lower monitoring efficiency and intensity, and a higher loan 
rate than bank 𝑖 at the indifference location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒:

𝑐𝐵
1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒

< 𝑐𝐹 1, 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) > 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) and 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵 < 𝑟𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐹 1.

A higher 𝜃 will increase fintech 1’s competitiveness and force banks 
to lower loan rates and serve smaller market areas (i.e., reduce 𝑥𝑎𝑒), 
thus increasing bank 𝑖’s monitoring efficiency at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 (measured by 
(1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)∕𝑐𝐵). Fintech 1’s monitoring efficiency and best loan rate at 
𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 do not vary with 𝜃. Therefore, a sufficiently high 𝜃 will induce 
bank 𝑖 to price lower and have a higher monitoring efficiency than 
fintech 1 at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 (controlling for lenders’ funding costs). Bank 𝑖’s 
higher monitoring efficiency at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 will lead to 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) > 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒), 
implying that bank loans have lower default rates than fintech loans 
after controlling for entrepreneurs’ characteristics.

We can put together Propositions  6, 7, 8 and make a summary. 
Fintechs’ exclusive ability to discriminate tends to induce fintech 1 to 
price lower and have a higher loan default rate than bank 𝑖 (controlling 
for entrepreneurs’ characteristics). However, the higher funding costs 
of  fintechs  can  overturn  the  result.  Fintechs’  advantage  in  offering 
convenience can also explain why fintech 1 may price higher bank 𝑖, 
but it cannot explain why fintech loans may have lower default rates 
than bank loans.

6. Welfare analysis

In this section, we analyze how the decrease in 𝑐𝐹 1 – which induces 
different regimes of fintech entry – affects social welfare, focusing on 
the benchmark case 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 . In this case, Condition (4) – which ensures 
that fintech entry cannot drive out banks – reduces to 𝑐𝐹 1 > 𝑐𝐵.

On the arc between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1, we denote the loan rate 
and monitoring intensity at 𝑧𝑖 by 𝑟(𝑧𝑖) and 𝑚(𝑧𝑖), denote the marginal 
funding cost of the lender serving location 𝑧𝑖 by 𝜄 (𝑧𝑖
) (= 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 ), and 
finally denote the lender’s costs of monitoring an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 by 
)
𝐶 (𝑧𝑖
. In a symmetric equilibrium, social welfare is given by: 

𝑑𝑧𝑖.

(9)

1∕𝑁

𝑊 = 𝑁 ∫
0

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

(𝑚(𝑧𝑖)𝑅 − 𝜄 (𝑧𝑖

)

− 𝐶 (𝑧𝑖

))

𝐷(𝑧𝑖)
⏟⏟⏟
investment at 𝑧𝑖

𝐷(𝑧𝑖)

𝑢 𝑑𝑢

− ∫

0

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
opportunity cost at 𝑧𝑖
Social welfare equals the expected value of all undertaken projects (net 
of all social costs), which is determined by (a) the mass of projects 
implemented by entrepreneurs (i.e., total investment), (b) the success 
probabilities of implemented projects (i.e., monitoring intensities) and 
(c) the social costs, including funding, monitoring, and opportunity 
costs. Based on (9), we can decompose the welfare effects of fintech 
entry (driven by the decrease in 𝑐𝐹 1) as follows:

This proposition implies that fintechs’ advantage in providing con-
venience can induce them to price higher than banks (controlling for 
entrepreneurs’ characteristics), which is consistent with the findings 
of Buchak et al. (2018) and Liu et al. (2024).

• Investment effect. By changing entrepreneurs’ utility from in-
vestment, fintech entry affects the mass of projects implemented. 
The effect is welfare-improving if fintech entry increases the mass 
of undertaken projects (i.e., investment).

11 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

The direction of the investment effect is ambiguous. On the one 
hand,  the  regimes  PE  or  AE  force  banks  to  provide  higher  utility, 
tending to increase investment with respect to BE. On the other hand,
BT areas may switch to NBT ones (as 𝑐𝐹 1 decreases) in the AE regime, 
which  can  reduce  investment  unless  fintech  2’s  competitiveness  is 
sufficiently high (see Proposition  5).

• Monitoring effect. By changing lenders’ loan rates, fintech entry 
affects lenders’ monitoring incentives and the success probabil-
ities  of  projects.  The  monitoring  effect  is  welfare-reducing  if 
fintech entry induces lenders to post lower loan rates, decreasing 
the success probabilities of implemented projects.25

The monitoring effect also has an ambiguous direction. Lowering 
𝑐𝐹 1 in the PE or AE regime will decrease banks’ loan rates, reducing 
their  monitoring  intensities.  However,  after  eroding  banks’  market 
areas,  fintech  1  may  gain  market  power  and  post  high  loan  rates, 
potentially generating a welfare-improving monitoring effect.26

• Cost-saving effect. Decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 renders monitoring cheaper 
for fintech 1, improving the lending efficiency of the credit market 
and social welfare.

The cost-saving effect works only for locations served by fintech 1, 
so it arises only in the AE regime. As fintech 1’s market areas grow, the 
cost-saving effect of decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 will be stronger since monitoring 
efficiency  improves  for  larger  areas.  When  𝑐𝐹 1  is  very  close  to  𝑐𝐵, 
fintech 1 will have higher monitoring efficiency than banks at most 
locations of the market since the fintech does not suffer from distance 
friction (i.e., 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖) holds for a large range of 𝑧𝑖). In this 
case, fintech 1 will serve very large market areas and bring a significant 
cost-saving effect.

Generally speaking, the net welfare effect of fintech entry is ambigu-
ous and depends on which effect(s) dominate. Figs.  7 and 8 illustrate 
the results.

Social welfare in the PE regime is higher than in the BE regime 
if 𝑐𝐵 and 𝑞 are sufficiently large. Potential fintech entry forces banks 
to reduce their loan rate, bringing a positive investment and a nega-
tive monitoring effect. When 𝑐𝐵 and 𝑞 are sufficiently large, serving 
distant locations brings banks very low profits, so banks have very low 
incentives to compete (by pricing aggressively) and extend their market 
areas. As a result, banks offer quite high loan rates in the BE regime, im-
plying very low competition intensity and entrepreneurial investment. 
Then in the PE regime, as banks decrease rates, the positive investment 
effect will dominate the negative monitoring effect, increasing social 
welfare (Panel 1 of Fig.  7). In contrast, if 𝑐𝐵 or 𝑞 is not sufficiently 
large (Panels 2 and 3 of Fig.  7), there is already enough competition 
intensity in the BE regime, so social welfare is lower in the PE regime.
Social welfare in the AE regime is determined by the interplay of 
cost-saving, investment, and monitoring effects. When 𝑐𝐹 1 is close to 
𝑐𝐵 such that fintech 1 serves very large market areas, fintech entry will 
generate a significant cost-saving effect since fintechs do not face dis-
tance friction. However, social welfare in the AE regime (with 𝑐𝐹 1 close 
to 𝑐𝐵) may still be lower than that in the BE regime (see Panels 2 and 
3 of Fig.  8). The reason is that, depending on the value of 𝑐𝐹 2, AE can 
significantly reduce entrepreneurs’ investment or lenders’ monitoring 
incentives, potentially hurting welfare despite the cost-saving effect.

Recall that NBT areas will arise when 𝑐𝐹 1 is small enough (see 
Proposition  4 and the shaded regions in Fig.  8). If 𝑐𝐹 2 is very high, 

25 From  the  social  point  of  view,  lenders’  monitoring  intensities  are  al-
ways insufficient since each lender cares only about its lending profit when 
choosing monitoring intensities, which underestimates the marginal benefit of 
monitoring to the total expected value of implemented projects.
26 In the PE regime, fintech 1 serves no entrepreneur, so the monitoring 
effect of fintech entry is welfare-reducing since banks decrease their loan rate 
in response to PE.

fintech 1 will charge quite high loan rates in NBT areas. In this case, 
decreasing  𝑐𝐹 1  will  gradually  turn  BT  areas  into  NBT  ones,  hence 
increasing lenders’ (especially fintech 1’s) profits while rapidly reduc-
ing the utility and investment of entrepreneurs. With such a strong 
investment-reducing effect, decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 – despite a cost-saving effect 
and an increase in lender profit – may not be able to make the welfare 
in the AE regime higher than that in BE (see Panel 2 of Fig.  8).27

If 𝑐𝐹 2 is very low (i.e., 𝑟∗

𝐹 1 is very low), fintech 1 must always 
charge quite low loan rates because of fintech 2’s threat. Then, as 
fintech 1 erodes banks’ market areas, banks’ relatively high loan rates 
will be replaced by fintech 1’s low rates. Meanwhile, banks will reduce 
their loan rates in response to fintech entry. As a result, fintech entry 
lowers  lenders’  pricing  (and  their  skin  in  the  game)  in  the  credit 
market, decreasing their profits and monitoring incentives.28 With such 
a negative monitoring effect, decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 – despite a cost-saving 
effect and an increase in entrepreneurs’ utility – may not be able to 
make the welfare in the AE regime higher than that in BE (see Panel 3 
of Fig.  8).

An intermediate 𝑐𝐹 2 is needed to ensure a welfare-enhancing AE. 

Proposition 9.   Welfare in the AE regime. Let 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 . Social welfare 
in the AE regime is higher than in BE if the following conditions hold:

(i) 𝑐𝐹 1 is sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐵, and
(ii) 𝑐𝐹 2 is sufficiently close to 𝑐∗

𝐹 2 ∈ (𝑐𝐹 1, +∞), the value of 𝑐𝐹 2 that 
induces  an  intermediate  intensity  of  competition  between  fintechs, 
balancing the investment and the monitoring effects of entry.29

The first condition ensures that fintech entry generates a significant 
cost-saving effect since fintechs do not suffer from distance friction. The 
second condition means that 𝑐𝐹 2 should take an intermediate value, 
ensuring that the competition between fintechs 1 and 2 balances well 
entrepreneurs’ investment and lenders’ monitoring incentives. Specif-
ically,  if  𝑐𝐹 2 = 𝑐∗
𝐹 1  – 
which is the fintech’s pricing in NBT areas – exactly maximizes the 
sum  of  entrepreneurs’  utility  and  fintech  1’s  lending  profit.  In  this 
case, fintech 2’s threat, on the one hand, ensures that fintech 1 cannot 
set very high loan rates (even in NBT areas), which avoids a strong 
investment-reducing effect.30 On the other hand, it is not so competitive 
to  force  fintech  1  to  always  price  very  low,  thus  avoiding  a  large 
reduction in lenders’ monitoring incentives.31

𝐹 2,  then  fintech  1’s  upper  bound  loan  rate  𝑟∗

With  both  conditions,  AE  will  generate  a  significant  cost-saving 
effect while balancing the changes in entrepreneurs’ investment and 
lenders’ monitoring incentives well, thereby improving welfare with 
respect to the BE regime. See Panel 1 of Fig.  8 for an illustration.

Remark (Pre-entry Local Monopoly). In this case, banks do not compete 
with each other and will set quite high monopolistic loan rates if there 
are no fintechs. Some locations are too far from all banks and hence 
have no access to bank finance. Fintech entry, on the one hand, substi-
tutes bank lending by eroding banks’ market areas and on the other 
hand, complements it by extending the market to locations with no 

27 Before NBT areas begin to arise, decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 in the AE regime increases 
competition intensity and entrepreneurs’ utility since banks offer lower loan 
rates and are still willing to serve all locations.
28 This case is illustrated by Panel 3 of Fig.  8 (with 𝑐𝐹 2 = 𝑐𝐹 1), where 
decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 always increases entrepreneurs’ utility and decreases lenders’ 
profit – even after NBT areas arise – because fintech 1 always posts its best 
loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1 due to fintech 2’s threat.
𝐹 2 and its derivation.
29 See the proof of Proposition  9 for the expression for 𝑐∗
30 This can be seen by comparing Panels 1 and 2 of Fig.  8. In Panel 1, 
decreasing 𝑐𝐹 1 in the shaded region reduces entrepreneurs’ utility at a slower 
rate than in Panel 2.
31 This can be seen by comparing Panels 1 and 3 of Fig.  8. When 𝑐𝐹 1 is 
very low, lenders’ profits (and hence monitoring incentives) in Panel 1 are 
significantly higher than in Panel 3.

12 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Fig. 7.  Welfare Effect of 𝑐𝐹 1 (from BE to PE). This figure plots social welfare (solid curve) and entrepreneurial utility (dashed curve) against 𝑐𝐹 1. The parameter values are: 𝑅 = 20, 
𝑁 = 30, and 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 = 1. .

Fig. 8.  Welfare Effect of 𝑐𝐹 1 (from BE to AE). This figure plots social welfare (solid curve), entrepreneurial utility (dashed curve), and lenders’ profits (dotted curve) against 𝑐𝐹 1. 
The parameter values are: 𝑅 = 20, 𝑞 = 1.8, 𝑐𝐵 = 95, 𝑁 = 30, and 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 = 1. When 𝑐𝐹 1 is in the shaded region, NBT areas will arise (i.e., banks are not willing to serve sufficiently 
distant locations). In the shaded region, NBT areas will grow larger as 𝑐𝐹 1 decreases. .

access to banks (Gopal and Schnabl, 2022; Eça et al., 2022; Hau et al., 
2024; Cornelli et al., 2024; Alok et al., 2024). Based on a numerical 
study, fintech entry increases social welfare (with respect to the BE 
regime) for any 𝑐𝐹 2 (≥ 𝑐𝐹 1) if banks have a pre-entry local monopoly. 
See Online Appendix B for detailed analysis and explanations.

7. Price-discriminating banks

By exploiting private soft information (see Liberti, 2018; Agarwal 
and  Ben-David,  2018;  He  et  al.,  2024),  banks  may  be  able  to  dis-
criminate against borrowers to some extent. If banks can also price 
discriminate (i.e., set loan rates based on entrepreneurs’ locations) as 
fintechs, we can still show that three possible equilibria may arise: 
blockaded entry (BE), potential entry (PE), and actual entry (AE). See 
Online  Appendix  D  for  a  detailed  analysis.  Here,  we  focus  on  the 
AE regime. Consistent with Proposition  1, actual entry also cuts off 
direct competition between banks: There exists an indifference location 
̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 ∈ (0, 1∕(2𝑁))  such  that  fintech  1  serves  entrepreneurs  at  𝑧𝑖 ∈
[ ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒] on the arc between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1, while bank 𝑖
(resp. bank 𝑖 + 1) serves entrepreneurs at 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [0, ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) (resp. 𝑧𝑖 ∈
(1∕𝑁 − ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁]

).

In this section, a variable with a ‘‘hat’’ is an equilibrium outcome 
when  banks  can  price  discriminate.  For  example,  𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒  is  the 
indifference location when banks can price discriminate, while 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒
when banks cannot. When able to discriminate, a bank can change its 
loan rate for one location without affecting its lending profits from 
other locations. Hence the bank can offer its best loan rate to compete 
with other lenders at each location.

Lemma 4.   At location 𝑧𝑖, a bank’s loan rate that maximizes an en-
trepreneur’s utility is 𝑟𝐵 (𝑑) ≡ √
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞𝑑), where 𝑑 is the arc-distance 
between the bank and location 𝑧𝑖. We call 𝑟𝐵 (𝑑) the “best loan rate’’ of 
the bank when its lending distance is 𝑑.

Note that a bank’s best loan rate 𝑟𝐵 (𝑑) has the same structure as a 
fintech’s (see Lemma  2). A bank (with a distance 𝑑) makes zero profit at 
𝑧𝑖 by offering 𝑟𝐵 (𝑑) and cannot reduce the rate anymore. As 𝑐𝐵∕(1−𝑞𝑑)
or 𝜄𝐵 increases, the bank needs a higher loan rate to beak even at 𝑧𝑖, 
hence increasing 𝑟𝐵 (𝑑).

Proposition 10.   Suppose that banks can price discriminate. In the AE 
regime with 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 , fintech 1 has the same monitoring efficiency and 
intensity, and loan rate as bank 𝑖 at the indifference location 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒:

𝑐𝐵

1 − 𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 = 𝑐𝐹 1,
𝐵 ( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐵( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = ̂𝑟𝐹 1 ( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐹 1.
̂𝑟𝑎𝑒

̂𝑚𝐵( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = ̂𝑚𝐹 1( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒),  and 

(10)

In the AE regime with 𝜄𝐵 < 𝜄𝐹 , fintech 1 has higher monitoring efficiency and 
intensity, and loan rate than bank 𝑖 at the indifference location 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒:

> 𝑐𝐹 1,

𝑐𝐵
1 − 𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒
𝐵 ( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐵 ( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) < ̂𝑟𝐹 1( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐹 1.
̂𝑟𝑎𝑒

̂𝑚𝐵( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) < ̂𝑚𝐹 1( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒),  and 

(11)

When banks can also discriminate, both bank 𝑖 and fintech 1 will 
offer their best loan rates and provide the same utility at 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒, 
implying that they have the same monitoring efficiency and loan rate 
at 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 if 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 . As a result, fintech 1 and bank 𝑖 have the same 
monitoring intensity at 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 according to Lemma  1.

The story differs when 𝜄𝐹 > 𝜄𝐵. A higher 𝜄𝐹  increases fintech 1’s best 
loan rate and reduces its market area (i.e.,  ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 increases), so bank 𝑖’s 
monitoring efficiency at 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 will decrease and become lower than 
fintech 1’s. Then, although fintech 1 and bank 𝑖 still provide the same 
utility at 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒, their advantages are different: Fintech 1’s higher 
monitoring efficiency at 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 allows it to carry out more monitoring, 
while bank 𝑖 offers a lower loan rate due to its funding cost advantage. 
The second part of Proposition  10 repeats the implication of Proposition 
7: fintechs’ funding cost disadvantage can explain why fintech loans can 
have higher interest rates and lower delinquency rates than bank loans. 
Several results follow.

Corollary 4.   Suppose 𝜄𝐵
Then:

≤ 𝜄𝐹  and that banks can price discriminate. 

(i) The AE regime will not occur if 𝑐𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞∕(2𝑁)) < 𝑐𝐹 1 and 𝜄𝐵 < 𝜄𝐹

both hold.

(ii) In the AE regime, 𝑥𝑎𝑒 < ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒 holds: allowing banks to discriminate 

reduces the market areas served by fintech 1.

(iii) With respect to the BE regime, PE and AE always increase total 

investment 𝐼.

13 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Item (i) of Corollary  4 means that Corollary  3 will be overturned if 
banks can price discriminate. Now, banks are willing to use their best 
loan rates to protect market areas, so actual entry occurs if and only 
if fintech 1 has an advantage over banks in monitoring efficiency at 
some location(s) or/and in funding cost. Item (ii) follows since allowing 
banks to discriminate increases their competitiveness.

In contrast to Proposition  5, Item (iii) of Corollary  4 does not need a 
sufficiently low 𝑐𝐹 2 to ensure that the AE regime increases investment. 
The reason is that now banks are no longer constrained by a uniform 
pricing policy, so at each location, fintech 1 always faces the threat of 
banks willing to offer their best loan rates (i.e., NBT areas never arise).
As for the welfare effect of fintech entry with 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 , Item (iii) of 
Corollary  4 implies that the PE and AE regimes always bring a positive 
investment effect when banks can price discriminate. Therefore, even if 
𝑐𝐹 2 is very high, actual entry will never generate NBT areas and reduce 
investment. As a result, our numerical study finds that AE (with 𝑐𝐹 1
sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐵) increases social welfare with respect to the BE 
regime if 𝑐𝐹 2 is not very low (i.e., is intermediate or high) because in 
this case, it generates a significant cost-saving effect while avoiding a 
strong negative monitoring effect.

Remark (Price Discrimination and Social Welfare). For a given location 
(e.g., 𝑧𝑖), a lender’s socially optimal loan rate should maximize the 
total surplus at this location (i.e., the sum of entrepreneurial utility and 
lender profit), balancing entrepreneurs’ investment and lenders’ moni-
toring incentives. We find that a lender’s socially optimal loan rate is 
decreasing in its monitoring efficiency.32 Therefore, a fintech’s socially 
optimal rate is uniform for all locations (i.e., independent of 𝑧𝑖), indi-
cating that fintechs’ discriminatory pricing in general cannot achieve 
optimal welfare. A bank’s socially optimal loan rate is increasing in its 
lending distance since a larger distance implies lower bank monitoring 
efficiency; in contrast, the bank’s competitive discriminatory loan rate 
is  decreasing  in  the  distance  since  a  larger  distance  implies  lower 
competitiveness and market power in lending competition, indicating 
that banks’ equilibrium discriminatory pricing cannot achieve optimal 
welfare either. Rates by banks or fintechs will be too high from the 
social point of view when either of them wields a high degree of market 
power.

Another question is whether allowing banks to discriminate im-
proves welfare or not. The result is ambiguous. When banks can dis-
criminate, fintech 1 will face more competitive pressure from banks, 
and NBT areas will disappear. This will improve (resp. hurt) welfare 
if fintech 1 serves large market areas and charges very high (resp. 
intermediate or very low) loan rates for its entrepreneurs, which tends 
to happen when 𝑐𝐹 2 is very high (resp. intermediate or very low).33

8. Long-run effect of fintech entry: banks’ exit

In the long run, some banks may exit the market and recover salvage 
(liquidation) values as fintech entry decreases their profitability. Online 
Appendix E presents the model setup with banks’ exit and analyzes the 
equilibrium in detail. We provide the main results and their intuitions 
in this section.

32 If the lender’s monitoring efficiency at 𝑧𝑖 improves, the surplus generated 
by one individual project – the entrepreneur’s surplus plus the lender’s profit 
from the project – will be higher at 𝑧𝑖. Then, the marginal social benefit of 
increasing the mass of implemented projects (i.e., investment) will be higher 
at 𝑧𝑖, hence lowering the socially optimal rate to spur investment. See Online 
Appendix  D  (Proposition  D.1  and  Figure  D.2)  comparing  lenders’  socially 
optimal loan rates with the equilibrium discriminatory rates.
33 If banks have a pre-entry local monopoly, allowing discrimination will 
induce them to serve more distant locations and hence improve financial in-
clusion, thereby increasing welfare in the BE regime, according to a numerical 
study.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

There still exist thresholds 𝑐𝐹  and 𝑐𝐹  for 𝑐𝐹 1, which can induce 
three types of equilibria: blockaded entry (BE), potential entry (PE), 
and actual entry (AE). PE and AE regimes reduce banks’ profitability 
and can induce their exit (i.e., 𝑁 gradually decreases as 𝑐𝐹 1 decreases 
in  the  PE  or  AE  regime).  The  properties  of  banks’  and  fintech  1’s 
pricing strategies, monitoring intensities, and market areas discussed 
in Sections 4 and 5 still hold when banks can exit. However, allowing 
banks to exit brings about some changes.

• Banks’ exit makes the AE regime and NBT areas easier to arise.

As the fintech threat drives some banks to exit, the distance between 
banks will increase, so it is harder for banks to prevent fintech 1 from 
serving the mid location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁). Therefore, it is easier for actual 
entry to occur. In addition, a longer distance between adjacent banks 
reduces bank 𝑖’s profitability of serving the mid location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁), so
NBT areas become easier to arise (i.e., arise at a higher 𝑐𝐹 1). Figure E.4 
of Online Appendix E illustrates the results: Allowing banks to exit 
reduces PE regions (i.e., decreases 𝑐𝐹 − 𝑐𝐹 ) and widens the regions 
where NBT areas exist.

• Allowing banks to exit enlarges the potential negative effect of 

fintech entry on entrepreneurs’ investment.

As the potential or actual entry reduces 𝑁, the arc distance between 
adjacent banks will increase, reducing banks’ threat to fintech 1. Such a 
decrease in banks’ threat will translate into lower entrepreneurial util-
ity and investment unless fintech 2 puts sufficient competitive pressure 
on fintech 1. See Figure E.3 of Online Appendix E.

• When banks have the option to exit, the PE and AE regimes will 
generate an option value effect, meaning that banks can protect 
themselves by executing the option to exit and recover salvage 
values as fintech entry decreases their profitability.

The option value effect is welfare-improving because potential or 
actual entry transfers bank profit to other parties (entrepreneurs or/and 
fintech 1) and lets banks exit with their option values. Due to the option 
value effect, actual entry (with 𝑐𝐹 1 sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐵) is more 
likely to improve social welfare with respect to the BE regime. See 
Figure E.4 of Online Appendix E for an illustration.

9. Conclusion

Three types of equilibria may arise depending on the monitoring 
efficiency of fintechs: blockaded entry (BE), potential entry (PE), and 
actual entry (AE). A fintech with no advantage in monitoring efficiency 
or funding cost can actually enter the credit market if it can price more 
flexibly than banks. This prediction sheds light on the issue of whether 
fintech entry is driven by superior information technology. If banks can 
also price discriminate, a fintech’s advantage in monitoring efficiency 
or funding cost is a necessary condition for its successful entry.

Another consequence of fintechs’ superior flexibility in pricing is 
that if fintechs and banks have the same funding costs, fintechs perform 
less monitoring and charge lower loan rates than banks (for borrowers 
with similar characteristics). However, the result will flip if fintechs 
have significantly higher funding costs than banks. In addition, fintechs’ 
advantage in offering convenience can induce them to charge higher 
loan rates than banks. Therefore, our model predicts an ambiguous 
relationship between the loan rates and risks of fintechs and those of 
banks, which is consistent with the empirical evidence received.

Our model predicts that higher bank concentration (e.g., exogenous 
bank closures) will lead to higher fintech lending volume. Fintechs 
will have a higher competitive advantage and hence serve larger mar-
ket areas if their monitoring efficiency improves. The implication is 
that fintechs’ information technology development or policies that in-
crease fintechs’ information advantage over banks (e.g., open banking) 

14 

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

will induce fintech lenders to penetrate more industries and provide 
more credit. Allowing banks to price more flexibly (e.g., with pricing 
algorithms) will reduce the market areas served by fintechs.

If  there  is  sufficiently  intense  competition  among  fintechs,  our 
model predicts that fintech entry will make entrepreneurs better off 
and hence increase total investment. The welfare effect of fintech entry 
is  ambiguous  in  general.  Actual  fintech  entry  (with  a  high  fintech 
monitoring efficiency) will increase social welfare when the intensity 
of competition among fintechs is at an intermediate level.

Since potential or actual fintech entry decreases banks’ profitability, 
banks  can  exit  and  recover  salvage  values  in  the  long  run,  which 
may hurt entrepreneurs (and reduce investment) but will generate a 
welfare-improving option value effect.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Xavier Vives: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Zhiqiang Ye: Writing – review & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Proofs

)
Proof of Lemma  1. A bank chooses 𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) to maximize 𝜋𝐵
, yield-
ing the first order condition (FOC): 𝑚𝐵(𝑧𝑖) = 𝑟𝐵 (1 − 𝑞𝑑)∕𝑐𝐵. In the same 
way, we can show that 𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖) = 𝑟𝐹 𝑗

∕𝑐𝐹 𝑗 .

(𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖

)

(𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 𝑗

) ≡ 𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖)

Proof of Lemma  2. For an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖, the expected utility from 
)) if she secures a loan 
investment equals 𝑈𝐹 𝑗
)
from fintech 𝑗 with the loan rate (resp. monitoring intensity) 𝑟𝐹 𝑗
(𝑧𝑖
(resp. 𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖)). By Lemma  1, we know 𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖) = 𝑟𝐹 𝑗
∕𝑐𝐹 𝑗 . Hence, 
)
(𝑧𝑖
) by choosing 𝑟𝐹 𝑗
if the fintech maximizes 𝑈𝐹 𝑗
, the resulting 
loan rate is 𝑅∕2. However, 𝑅∕2 is not feasible for the fintech because 
its expected profit from serving location 𝑧𝑖 must be non-negative. The 
non-negative profit requirement implies the following condition:

(𝑧𝑖

(𝑧𝑖

)

𝜋𝐹 𝑗

)

(𝑧𝑖

= 𝑟𝐹 𝑗

(𝑧𝑖

) 𝑚𝐹 𝑗

)

(𝑧𝑖

𝑐𝐹 𝑗
2

(𝑚𝐹 𝑗 (𝑧𝑖))2 ≥ 0,

− 𝜄𝐹 −
(𝑧𝑖

) ≥ √2𝑐𝐹 𝑗 𝜄𝐹 > 𝑅∕2  (according  to 
which  is  equivalent  to  𝑟𝐹 𝑗
Inequality (3)). Hence, the feasible fintech loan rate that maximizes 
entrepreneurs’ utility is 𝑟𝐹 𝑗 = √2𝑐𝐹 𝑗 𝜄𝐹 ; the corresponding maximum 
entrepreneurial utility from investment is 𝑈 𝐹 𝑗 .

Proof of Proposition  1.  First, we need to derive and characterize a 
bank’s monopolistic loan rate (denoted by 𝑟𝑚
𝐵) that the bank will offer 
when it faces no competition from any other lenders.
Deriving a bank’s monopolistic loan rate 𝑟𝑚
𝐵. Suppose that bank 𝑖 of-
fers the loan rate 𝑟𝑖. Based on Lemma  1 and Eq.  (5), the bank’s expected 
profit from serving an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 equals (𝑟𝑖
−
𝜄𝐵.

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

(
2𝑐𝐵

)2 (

∕

)

)

If bank 𝑖 faces no competition from any other lenders, the farthest 
location (denoted by 𝑥↑) the bank is willing to serve on the arc between 
banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 is determined by the equation (𝑟𝑖
∕(2𝑐𝐵) −
𝜄𝐵 = 0. We need only consider the case that 𝑟𝑖 is so high that 𝑥↑ > 0; 
otherwise bank 𝑖 serves no entrepreneurs and makes zero profits, which 
is never optimal. 𝑥↑ > 0 implies that 𝑟𝑖 >
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵. Therefore, the lower 
bound for 𝑟𝑖 is √
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, which is higher than 𝑅∕2.
) ((𝑟𝑖
𝑑𝑧𝑖 when there is no competition. Obviously, (𝑟𝑖

)
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
)
∕(2𝑐𝐵)−𝜄𝐵 >
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

The bank’s aggregate profit is 2 ∫ 𝑥↑

0 𝐷 (𝑧𝑖

1 − 𝑞𝑥↑)

)2 (

)2 (

)2 (

√

)

15 

0, 𝑥↑)
[

.  𝐷 (𝑧𝑖

(
0  for  𝑧𝑖 ∈
∕𝑐𝐵  is  the  funding 
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
demand  at  𝑧𝑖.  Maximizing  the  bank’s  profit  implies  the  following 
(simplified) FOC with respect to 𝑟𝑖: 

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖

) 𝑟𝑖

=

)

)

𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑖

) ≡

)

2𝑟𝑖

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖
3
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
positive

+

(

)2

−

1
3

1 −

2𝑐𝐵 𝜄𝐵
)2
(𝑟𝑖

𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
)2
(𝑟𝑖

⎞
⎛
⎟
⎜
) 𝑟𝑖
(𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑖
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎟
⎜
negative
⎠
⎝
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
denoted by 𝑦; positive
) (

2𝑐𝐵 𝜄𝐵
)2
(𝑟𝑖

1 −

)3

(

= 0. (A.1)

((𝑟𝑖

0

)2 (

lim
√

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

0, 𝑥↑)

). Note that 

)
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵

)2 (
𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑖

Here  𝑦  equals  ∫ 𝑥↑
) 𝑑𝑧𝑖  multiplied 
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
by a positive value, and hence must be positive (since (𝑟𝑖
)
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
∕
) > 0 and 
[
(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵 > 0 holds for 𝑧𝑖 ∈
𝑓 𝑚 (𝑅) ≤ 0 hold. Meanwhile, it is easy to show that 𝑦 is increasing in 
]
) is decreasing in 𝑟𝑖 when 𝑟𝑖 ∈
𝑟𝑖, so 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑖
. This means the 
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅
FOC 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑖
)
= 0 has a unique solution, denoted by 𝑟𝑚
𝐵, in the interval 
]
[√
; such a solution 𝑟𝑚
𝐵 is the optimal loan rate of the bank 
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅
when it faces no competition from any other lenders. If 𝑟𝑖 = 𝑟𝑚
𝐵 and 
Condition (2) hold, 𝑥↑ must be larger than 1∕(2𝑁). Hence, there exist 
locations that both banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 are willing to serve, implying that 
effective competition between the two banks exists.

[√

2𝑐𝐵 𝜄𝐵

𝑟𝑖→

Deriving a bank’s equilibrium loan rate under competition. Next, 
we  derive  the  first-order  condition  of  a  bank’s  pricing  for  the  BE 
equilibrium. Since we look only at symmetric equilibria, we can focus 
on the arc between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1. Assume that bank 𝑖 offers the 
loan rate 𝑟𝑖 while the other banks offer 𝑟𝑖+1. The indifference location 
𝑥𝑏𝑒, where entrepreneurs are indifferent between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1, is 
determined by

𝑟𝑖

1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑏𝑒)
(
𝑐𝐵

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖

)

=

(

𝑟𝑖+1

1 − 𝑞( 1
𝑁
𝑐𝐵

)

− 𝑥𝑏𝑒)

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖+1

) .

)

)

)2 (

) 𝑟𝑖

) ((𝑟𝑖
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
∕𝑐𝐵. Note that 𝑟𝑖

Then bank 𝑖’s total profit is 2 ∫ 𝑥𝑏𝑒
0 𝐷 (𝑧𝑖
𝑑𝑧𝑖, 
where 𝐷 (𝑧𝑖
)
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑖
(
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵 must 
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
=
hold to ensure that bank 𝑖’s total profit is non-negative (i.e., √
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵 is 
√
the lower bound for a bank’s pricing). For a given 𝑟𝑖+1 ∈ [
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅], 
we can show that bank 𝑖’s marginal benefit of increasing 𝑟𝑖 is decreasing 
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅]. Denoting the symmetric equilibrium 
in 𝑟𝑖 in the interval [
[√
, the following FOC must hold for 𝑟𝑏𝑒
loan rate by 𝑟𝑏𝑒

)
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵
≥ √

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅

√

]

𝐵 ∈

𝐵 : 

𝑔𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

) ≡

( (𝑟𝑖
)

)2(

)

)

1−𝑞𝑧𝑖

𝜕𝐷(𝑧𝑖

2𝑐𝐵

−𝜄𝐵

∫ 𝑥𝑏𝑒
0

⎞
⎛
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
𝜕𝑟𝑖
1−𝑞𝑥𝑏𝑒)
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
2𝑐𝐵
⎠
⎝
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

+𝐷 (𝑥𝑏𝑒)

𝑑𝑧𝑖
)

𝜕𝑥𝑏𝑒
𝜕𝑟𝑖

( (𝑟𝑖

− 𝜄𝐵

)2(

Take derivative first, and then let 𝑟𝑖=𝑟𝑖+1=𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵  and 𝑥𝑏𝑒= 1

2𝑁

= 0.

(A.2)

.

In a symmetric equilibrium, we have 𝑟𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖+1 = 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝑥𝑏𝑒 = 1∕ (2𝑁) and 

𝐵 , which means 

𝜕𝑥𝑏𝑒
𝜕𝑟𝑖

|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖=𝑟𝑖+1=𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

=

(2𝑁 − 𝑞)
4𝑁𝑞 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑏𝑒

(𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
) 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

𝐵

)

.

(A.3)

𝐵   must  be  high  enough  to  ensure  that  (𝑟𝑏𝑒
In  equilibrium,  𝑟𝑏𝑒
)
(
≥ 0.  If  not,  bank  𝑖  will  be  unwilling  to 
(1 − 𝑞∕ (2𝑁)) ∕
2𝑐𝐵
serve an entrepreneur at 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕ (2𝑁). Therefore, the lower bound 
of 𝑟𝑏𝑒
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞∕ (2𝑁)) > 𝑅∕2 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵  is 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵  is the solution of 
)2
(𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

(1 − 𝑞∕ (2𝑁)) ∕

−𝜄𝐵 = 0).

(
2𝑐𝐵

≡ √

−𝜄𝐵

)2

)

𝐵

𝐵

X. Vives and Z. Ye

The FOC (A.2) can be reduced to 
(
𝑅−𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

)

2𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
3
(
1 − 𝑞
2𝑁
(

+𝑦2

+ 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
) (
2 − 𝑞
𝑁

(𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵

) 𝑦1
) (𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑏𝑒
)3)

𝐵

)

2

1 −

(
1 − 𝑞
2𝑁
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
negative

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

) ≡

with

= 0.

(A.4)

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

fintech’s best loan rate. Then, 𝑥𝑎𝑒 is determined by 

𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

(1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)
𝑐𝐵

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖

)

= 𝑈 𝐹 1 ⇔ 𝑥𝑎𝑒 =

(

1 − 𝑐𝐵 𝑈 𝐹 1
(𝑅−𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖
𝑖

𝑞

)

)

.

(A.6)

Bank 𝑖 serves locations 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑥𝑎𝑒] when competing with fintech 1. 
Since banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 are symmetric, the AE regime can arise only 
if 𝑥𝑎𝑒 < 1∕(2𝑁) holds in equilibrium; otherwise, bank 𝑖 will touch and 
compete directly with bank 𝑖 + 1.

(

)2
)3 > 0

.

2

0

(

𝐵

𝐵

1−

)2

𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

1−
)

> 0

)2 (

) (

𝑦2 =

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

≥ 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 .

𝑦1 = 1
3

1− 𝑞
2𝑁
1− 𝑞
2𝑁

(1 − 𝑞∕ (2𝑁)) ∕

)
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵

− 𝑐𝐵 𝜄𝐵
)2
(
𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
(
1− 𝑞
2𝑁

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
) 𝑑𝑧𝑖 multi-
Here 𝑦1 equals ∫ 1∕(2𝑁)
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
≥ 𝑟𝑏𝑒
plied by a positive value and is thus positive (since 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 ). 𝑦2
𝐵
equals a positive value times (𝑟𝑏𝑒
−𝜄𝐵, which is 
non-negative since 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

− 𝑐𝐵 𝜄𝐵
𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
((𝑟𝑏𝑒

) (see Eq. (A.1)). Then, 
= 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
It is easy to notice that 𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
= 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 ); otherwise 𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
≠ 𝑟𝑏𝑒
we can show 𝑦2
= 0
𝐵
would hold, which means: (a) 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵  is bank 𝑖 ’s monopolistic loan rate 
)
(i.e.,  𝑟𝑏𝑒
− 𝜄𝐵 = 0  holds. 
(1 − 𝑞∕ (2𝑁)) ∕
However,  this  contradicts  Condition  (2)  which  we  assume  to  hold. 
Therefore, 𝑦2 > 0 must hold (meaning that 𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵 > 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 ,  so  𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
) >
) must hold. Meanwhile, 𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑅) < 0 holds, and 𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (⋅) is 
0 = 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑚
a decreasing function in the interval [𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 , 𝑅]
. Therefore, there exists a 
)
𝐵 , 𝑅) that solves 𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
(𝑟𝑏𝑒
unique 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵  is the unique 
symmetric equilibrium loan rate in the BE regime.

Condition  (2)  also  ensures  𝑟𝑚

𝐵)  and  (b)  (𝑟𝑚

𝐵  must hold).

= 0; such a 𝑟𝑏𝑒

≠ 0 (i.e., 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

= 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵 = 𝑟𝑚

𝐵 > 𝑟𝑏𝑒

(
2𝑐𝐵

(
2𝑐𝐵

𝐵 ∈

)2

)

)

)

)

)

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

Next, we show that 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝑚
implies 1 − 𝑞∕ (2𝑁) > 2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵∕(𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵, which is useful for other proofs. 𝑦2 > 0
𝐵 )2, which means

𝐵

)

𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

) >

2𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑏𝑒
3
𝐵 must hold since 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑖
𝐵 < 𝑟𝑚
𝐵 in the interval 
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅

(𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑏𝑒

+ 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

Therefore, 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝑟𝑖 = 𝑟𝑚

[√

]
.

𝐵

) 𝑦1 > 𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵

)

= 0

)

= 0 has a unique solution 

The existence of 𝑐𝐹 . In the BE equilibrium, entrepreneurial utility is 
lowest at location 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕ (2𝑁), so fintech entry is blockaded if
𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 (1 − 𝑞∕(2𝑁))

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝑟𝐹 1

)

)

𝐵

≥ 𝑈 𝐹 1 =

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 1
𝑐𝐹 1

,

𝑐𝐵

where 𝑈 𝐹 1 and 𝑟𝐹 1 are defined in Lemma  2. Since 𝑟𝐹 1 is a function 
) to highlight 
of 𝑐𝐹 1, in the proof we sometimes write 𝑟𝐹 1 as 𝑟𝐹 1
that 𝑟𝐹 1 is not independent of 𝑐𝐹 1. Therefore, 𝑐𝐹  is determined by the 
following equation: 
) (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑏𝑒
(
1 − 𝑞
2𝑁
𝑐𝐵

) (𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 1
𝑐𝐹

(𝑐𝐹 1

(𝑐𝐹

(𝑐𝐹

(A.5)

𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

𝑟𝐹 1

))

=

)

𝐵

.

If 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 , the BE equilibrium cannot be sustained.

[

Lending competition in the AE regime. Consider the case 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 . 
If AE occurs, bank 𝑖 no longer competes with bank 𝑖 + 1. To see this, 
0, 1∕𝑁] be a location served by fintech 1. This means, at 
let 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑧𝐹 ∈
𝑧𝑖 = 𝑧𝐹  fintech 1 can provide the highest utility among all lenders. Since 
a bank’s monitoring efficiency is decreasing in its lending distance, at 
] fintech 1 can still provide higher utility than bank 𝑖 + 1, 
𝑧𝑖 ∈
]
. Reasoning 
so bank 𝑖 need only compete with fintech 1 at 𝑧𝑖 ∈
[𝑧𝐹 , 1∕𝑁]
symmetrically, bank 𝑖 + 1 competes with the fintech at 𝑧𝑖 ∈
.
We examine the competition between bank 𝑖 and fintech 1 in the AE 
regime. Let 𝑥𝑎𝑒 denote the indifference location where an entrepreneur 
is  indifferent  between  bank  𝑖’s  loan  rate,  denoted  by  𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖 ,  and  the 

[
0, 𝑧𝐹

0, 𝑧𝐹

[

16 

Next, we derive the FOC of bank 𝑖 in the AE regime. We need only 
consider 𝑥𝑎𝑒 > 0; otherwise, 𝑥𝑎𝑒 = 0 holds and bank 𝑖 makes zero profit, 
which is not optimal for the bank. According to Condition (4), if bank 
𝑖 offers a loan rate slightly higher √
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, then it can serve a positive 
mass of locations (close to 𝑧𝑖 = 0) and make positive profits. Hence, in 
the AE regime, 𝑥𝑎𝑒 > 0 indeed must hold in equilibrium.

Bank 𝑖’s total profit is 2 ∫ 𝑥𝑎𝑒

)2 (
𝑑𝑧𝑖 in 
the AE regime. Note that in equilibrium, (𝑟𝑎𝑒
≥ 0
must hold for 𝑧𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑥𝑎𝑒] to ensure that the bank is willing to serve the 
locations in [0, 𝑥𝑎𝑒]. Maximizing the profit yields the following FOC: 

)
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵

)
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
)2 (

0 𝐷(𝑧𝑖)

((𝑟𝑎𝑒

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

)

𝑖

𝑖

𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

) ≡

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝜕𝐷(𝑧𝑖

)⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
( (𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖

∫ 𝑥𝑎𝑒
0

+𝐷 (𝑥𝑎𝑒)

(

)2 (

1−𝑞𝑧𝑖

)

𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

2𝑐𝐵

−𝜄𝐵

)2

𝜕𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖
(1−𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)
2𝑐𝐵

− 𝜄𝐵

𝜕𝑥𝑎𝑒
𝜕𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑑𝑧𝑖
)

Simplifying Eq. (A.7) using Eq.  (A.6) yields:

= 0.

(A.7)

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

) ≡

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
= 0,

𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

(𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖

2𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

)

(𝑅−𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖
3

+

−

1
3

𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
)2
(𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

1 − 𝑦2
𝑎𝑒
1 − 𝑦3
𝑎𝑒

⎞
) ⎛
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎠
⎝
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
positive; increasing in 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖
)𝑐𝐵 𝑦2

)

𝑎𝑒

(𝑅−2𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖
1−𝑦3
𝑎𝑒

(

+2

𝑈 𝐹 1
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

2

) −

𝜄𝐵
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

𝑖
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
non-negative

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(A.8)

𝑖

(√

𝐵 ∈

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅

where 𝑦𝑎𝑒
(note that 𝑥𝑎𝑒 =

≡ 𝑐𝐵𝑈 𝐹 1∕(𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖
(
1 − 𝑦𝑎𝑒

)
); 𝑦𝑎𝑒 < 1 must hold because of 𝑥𝑎𝑒 > 0
𝑦𝑎𝑒 =

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒
)
∕𝑞). According to Condition (4) and  lim
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖 →𝑅
𝑥𝑎𝑒 = 0. This 

)
 such that  lim
𝑖 →𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

+∞, there must exist a 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  is the upper bound of bank 𝑖’s loan rate, because the bank will serve 
no location (and make zero profit) if its loan rate is above 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 . In Eq. 
)2
(A.8), 1∕3 − 𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵(1 − 𝑦2
(1 − 𝑦3
𝑎𝑒)) is equal to a positive value 
) (
((𝑟𝑎𝑒
times ∫ 𝑥𝑎𝑒
) 𝑑𝑧𝑖, which is positive 
𝑖
)2 (
since  (𝑟𝑎𝑒
≥ 0  must  hold  for  𝑧𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑥𝑎𝑒]. 
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
)2
)
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒
) − 𝜄𝐵∕𝑟𝑎𝑒
(1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵) −
𝑈 𝐹 1∕(2
𝑖
𝜄𝐵, which is non-negative.

(𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑎𝑒)∕(
𝑖
)
1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵
)
∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵

𝑖  has the same sign as (𝑟𝑎𝑒

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

)2 (

0

𝑖

𝑖

To ensure bank 𝑖 a non-negative profit at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖  must have the 

following restriction:
(𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

)2

− 𝜄𝐵

≥ 0 ⇔

(1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)
2𝑐𝐵

2𝜄𝐵𝑅
𝑈 𝐹 1 + 2𝜄𝐵
This  means  the  lower  bound  of  bank  𝑖’s  loan  rate  is  𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
2𝜄𝐵𝑅∕(𝑈 𝐹 1 + 2𝜄𝐵).

𝑈 𝐹 1
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

≥ 0 ⇔ 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

𝜄𝐵
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

) −

≥

2

𝑖

.

≡

𝐵

Next  we  show  that  𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒

) > 0  holds.   Note  that  𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒

=
𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
)  holds  (see  Eq.  (A.1)).  Suppose  that  location  𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥↑  is 
𝐵
the location where bank 𝑖 makes zero profit with the loan rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖
(i.e., (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 , then bank 𝑖 provides 
the utility 𝑈 𝐹 1 at location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥↑. In contrast, if 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑚
𝐵, then at 
location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥↑, the utility provided by bank 𝑖 is smaller than 𝑈 𝐹 1

∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵 = 0). If 𝑟𝑎𝑒

1 − 𝑞𝑥↑)

𝑖 = 𝑟𝑎𝑒

)2 (

)

𝐵

𝑖

X. Vives and Z. Ye

because

𝑟𝑚
𝐵

) (

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑚
𝐵
𝑐𝐵

1 − 𝑞𝑥↑)

𝑟𝑚
𝐵

<

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑚

) (

1 − 𝑞
2𝑁

)

< 𝑈 𝐹 1,

𝐵
𝑐𝐵

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

because 𝑥↑>1∕(2𝑁) when 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖 = 𝑟𝑚

𝐵 ; see Condition (2)

)

𝐵 < 𝑟𝑚

= 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑎𝑒

where  the  second  inequality  holds  because  𝑅∕2 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵  and 
𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹  (i.e., fintech entry is not blockaded). Since the utility provided 
) – 
(𝑟𝑎𝑒
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒
by bank 𝑖 at location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥↑ is equal to 2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
𝑖
which is decreasing in 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖  – it must hold that 𝑟𝑚
𝐵 > 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 . As a result, 
𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
= 0  holds.  Meanwhile,  it  is  easy 
𝐵
𝐵
)  is  decreasing  in 
) < 0,  and  that  𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
to  find  that lim
𝑖
𝑖 →𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
) is decreasing in 𝑦𝑎𝑒 ) in the interval 
𝑖  (because (
(
)
𝑟𝑎𝑒
1 − 𝑦2
1 − 𝑦3
∕
𝑎𝑒
𝑎𝑒
(𝑟𝑎𝑒
) there exists a unique 𝑟𝑎𝑒
. Therefore, in this interval (𝑟𝑎𝑒
)
𝐵 , 𝑟𝑎𝑒
that solves 𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
= 0. Such a loan rate is the equilibrium bank loan 
rate in the AE regime.

) > 𝑓 𝑚 (𝑟𝑚
𝐵

𝐵 , 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖 𝑐𝐵

∕

)

)

)

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝑖

In the AE regime, fintech 1 must serve a positive mass of locations, 
which  means  𝑥𝑎𝑒
< 1∕(2𝑁)  is  a  necessary  condition  for  AE 
to  occur.  Symmetrically,  bank  𝑖 + 1  serves  entrepreneurs  at  𝑧𝑖 ∈
[𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒]
(1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁]
. Fintechs serve entrepreneurs at 𝑧𝑖 ∈
.

𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

The existence of the PE regime. Next we show that AE cannot occur 
if 𝑐𝐹 1 is smaller than but sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐹 . According to the 
formulae of 𝑐𝐹  and 𝑥𝑎𝑒 (see Eqs.  (A.5) and (A.6)), if 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹  holds 
and if AE occurs (which means bank 𝑖 competes only with fintech 1), 
the indifference location 𝑥𝑎𝑒 is equal to 1∕ (2𝑁) when bank 𝑖 chooses 
𝐵 . Then, according to FOC Eqs. (A.2) and (A.7), 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
<
𝑔𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
)|
|
𝐵
|𝑐𝐹 1=𝑐𝐹
𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 , and (b) according to Eq.  (A.3), we have:

𝐵
= 1∕(2𝑁) holds when 

= 0 holds because (a)  𝑥𝑎𝑒

)|
|
|𝑐𝐹 1=𝑐𝐹

𝑖 =𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝜕𝑥𝑎𝑒
𝜕𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖

=

|
|
|
|
|𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖 =𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
The inequality  𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒

,𝑥𝑎𝑒=1∕(2𝑁)

(2𝑁 − 𝑞)
2𝑁𝑞 (𝑅 − 𝑟𝑏𝑒

(𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵
) 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

𝐵

)

<

𝜕𝑥𝑏𝑒
𝜕𝑟𝑖

|
|
|
|𝑟𝑖=𝑟𝑖+1=𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

< 0.

𝐵

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖 =𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

)|
|
|𝑐𝐹 1=𝑐𝐹

)|
|
|𝑐𝐹 1=𝑐𝐹

< 0 implies  𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒

< 0, 
𝐵
which means that in AE regime, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  must hold if 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 . Since 
= 1∕(2𝑁), the relation 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑥𝑎𝑒
>
|𝑟𝑎𝑒
1∕ (2𝑁),  which  contradicts  the  fact  that  𝑥𝑎𝑒
< 1∕(2𝑁)  is  a 
necessary condition for actual entry to occur. If 𝑐𝐹 1 is smaller than but 
sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐹 ,  𝑥𝑎𝑒
> 1∕ (2𝑁) must still hold because 
𝑔𝑎𝑒 (⋅) and 𝑔𝑏𝑒 (⋅) are continuous functions. As a result, actual fintech 
entry cannot occur if 𝑐𝐹 1 is smaller than but sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐹 .

𝐵  will lead to  𝑥𝑎𝑒
𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

[√

𝐵 ∈

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, 𝑅

𝐵 (1 − 𝑞∕(2𝑁))

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  holds because 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 . Note that  lim
𝑐𝐹 1→𝑐𝐹

Meanwhile, fintech entry cannot be blockaded when 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 , so 
there must be another type of entry (neither BE nor AE) if 𝑐𝐹 1 is smaller 
than but sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐹 . In this case (named as the PE regime), 
]
we will show that bank 𝑖’s loan rate (denoted by 𝑟𝑝𝑒
) 
in the symmetric equilibrium exactly prevents fintech penetration at 
)
𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁), that is: 𝑟𝑝𝑒
∕𝑐𝐵 = 𝑈 𝐹 1 (i.e., Eq.  (7)). 
Obviously 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 =
) ≤ 0 must hold when 𝑐𝐹 1 is smaller than but 
𝐵 . Therefore, 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝑟𝑏𝑒
)|
sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐹 , because 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑏𝑒
) ≤ 0
< 0. When 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
|
|𝑐𝐹 1=𝑐𝐹
) ≤ 0), bank 𝑖 has no incentive 
holds (which is equivalent to 𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
to increase its loan rate above 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  to compete directly with fintech 1. 
Meanwhile, the relation 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵  implies that bank 𝑖 has no incentive 
) > 0 must hold 
𝐵 , because 𝑓 𝑏𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
to decrease its loan rate below 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵
(which means, if fintech entry is blockaded and banks compete with 
each other, then both banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1 have incentives to increase their 
loan rates above 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵 ). In sum, if 𝑐𝐹 1 is smaller than but sufficiently close 
) ≤ 0 holds), banks have no incentives to deviate 
to 𝑐𝐹  (such that 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
from offering 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵 .
The existence of 𝑐𝐹 . Next, we show the existence of 𝑐𝐹 . When 𝑐𝐹 1 <
) > 0, which means bank 𝑖 has 
𝑐𝐹 , AE will occur if and only if 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
an incentive to increase its loan rate above 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  to compete directly with 
fintech 1. Note that 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
< 1∕(2𝑁). 
𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

) > 0 is equivalent to  𝑥𝑎𝑒

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

𝐵

17 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

≥ 1∕(2𝑁) and 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹  hold (i.e., when 
Therefore, if both  𝑥𝑎𝑒
𝑐𝐹 1 is smaller than but sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐹 ), there is potential entry; 
if 𝑥𝑎𝑒
< 1∕(2𝑁), actual fintech entry occurs. If 𝑐𝐹 1 is sufficiently 
) holds, the utility provided 
(
low such that 𝑈 𝐹 1 > 𝑅2 (1 − 𝑞∕(2𝑁)) ∕
4𝑐𝐵
by bank 𝑖 at 𝑧𝑖 = 1∕(2𝑁) must be lower than 𝑈 𝐹 1 (no matter what 
loan rate the bank sets); therefore, fintech 1 will serve location 𝑧𝑖 =
1∕(2𝑁) (i.e., AE will occur), indicating  𝑥𝑎𝑒
< 1∕ (2𝑁) and the 
existence of threshold 𝑐𝐹 . The fact that  𝑥𝑎𝑒
 is increasing in 𝑐𝐹 1
in the AE regime is shown in the proof of Proposition 3. Therefore, 
such a threshold 𝑐𝐹  is unique. When 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 ,  𝑥𝑎𝑒
= 1∕ (2𝑁)
𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
(i.e., 𝑔𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵 . In the proof 
of Proposition 3, we will show that 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  is increasing in 𝑐𝐹 1 in the AE 
regime, so 𝑟𝑎𝑒

= 0) holds, in which case 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵  always holds when 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐹 .

|𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒

|𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
|𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

𝐵 = 𝑟𝑝𝑒

𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒

)

𝐵

𝐵  (which is higher than 𝑟𝑏𝑒

Proof of Corollary  1.  𝑐𝐹  is determined by Eq.  (A.5). According to 
FOC (A.4), 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 ) must increase as 𝑞, 𝑐𝐵 and 
𝜄𝐵 increase. Then, the left hand side (LHS) of Eq.  (A.5) will decrease. 
To keep Eq. (A.5) holding, 𝑐𝐹  must increase. Increasing 𝜄𝐹  reduces the 
right hand side (RHS) of Eq.  (A.5) without changing 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵 , so 𝑐𝐹  must 
decrease to keep Eq. (A.5) holding.

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

Next we look at 𝑐𝐹 . AE occurs if and only if  𝑥𝑎𝑒

< 1∕(2𝑁)
holds.  In  the  proof  of  Proposition   3,  we  will  show  that  𝑥𝑎𝑒
𝑖 =𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
(hereafter, written as 𝑥𝑎𝑒 for simplicity) is increasing in 𝑐𝐹 1 in the AE 
regime. Therefore, 𝑐𝐹  is the highest value of the 𝑐𝐹 1 ensuring 𝑥𝑎𝑒 <
1∕ (2𝑁). If 𝑞, 𝑐𝐵 and/or 𝜄𝐵 increase, or if 𝜄𝐹  decreases, then 𝑥𝑎𝑒 will 
decrease (see the proof of Proposition  3), which makes 𝑥𝑎𝑒 < 1∕ (2𝑁)
easier to hold. Therefore, 𝑐𝐹  will increase as 𝑞, 𝑐𝐵 or 𝜄𝐵 increases, or as 
𝜄𝐹  decreases.

|𝑟𝑎𝑒

Proof of Proposition  2.  In the PE regime, 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  is determined by Eq.  (7). 
If 𝑐𝐵 or 𝑞 increases, or if 𝑁 decreases, the left hand side (LHS) of Eq. 
(7) will decrease for a given 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  must decrease to ensure 
that Eq.  (7) holds. If 𝑐𝐹 1 or 𝜄𝐹  increases, the right-hand side (RHS) of 
(7) will decrease. As a result, 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  must increase to ensure Eq. (7) holds. 
Obviously, 𝜄𝐵 does not play a role in Eq.  (7).

𝐵 . As a result, 𝑟𝑝𝑒

Proof of Proposition  3.  In this proof, we will show how 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  and 𝑥𝑎𝑒
are affected by parameters in the AE regime (The effects of parameters 
on 𝑥𝑎𝑒 are useful for the proof of Corollary  1.). According to Eq.  (A.8), 
a bank’s loan rate 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  in the AE regime satisfies: 
)

𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

)

=

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

2𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

(
𝑅−𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

+
3
term A; negative
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞

𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

(𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵

+2

( 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
2

𝑦𝑎𝑒 −

−

1
3

) ⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

1 − 𝑦2
⎞
𝑎𝑒
⎟
1 − 𝑦3
⎟
𝑎𝑒
⎠
) 𝑦2
𝑎𝑒

𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
(𝑟𝑎𝑒
)2
𝐵
) (𝑅 − 2𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
1 − 𝑦3
𝑎𝑒

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
term B; negative
))
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

(𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

= 0

(A.9)

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝐵

with 𝑦𝑎𝑒
and 𝑁, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
in 𝑞 and independent of 𝑁 according to Eq.  (A.6).

≡ 𝑐𝐵𝑈 𝐹 1∕
. Since Eq.  (A.9) is independent of 𝑞
𝐵  must also be independent of 𝑞 and 𝑁. Then 𝑥𝑎𝑒 is decreasing 

𝐵 ; terms 
𝐵 . As a 
𝐵  must increase to keep Eq. (A.9) holding (Note that increasing 

If 𝑐𝐹 1 or 𝜄𝐹  increases, then 𝑦𝑎𝑒 will decrease for a given 𝑟𝑎𝑒
A and B will increase (i.e., become less negative) for a given 𝑟𝑎𝑒
result, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  will increase 𝑦𝑎𝑒).

𝐵 . Then, 𝑟𝑎𝑒

If  𝜄𝐵  increases,  terms  A  and  B  will  increase  (i.e.,  become  less 
negative) for a given 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  must increase to keep Eq. (A.9) 
holding. This implies that 𝑥𝑎𝑒 is decreasing in 𝜄𝐵 according to Eq.  (A.6).
Next we look at how 𝑐𝐹 1 and 𝜄𝐹  affect 𝑥𝑎𝑒. According to Eq.  (A.6), 
𝑥𝑎𝑒 =
∕𝑞. If 𝑐𝐹 1 increases but 𝑦𝑎𝑒 does not adjust, terms A 
and B in Eq.  (A.9) will decrease (i.e., become more negative) because 
𝐵  is increasing in 𝑐𝐹 1. Meanwhile, 2𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝑟𝑎𝑒
∕3 will also decrease 

(
1 − 𝑦𝑎𝑒

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

)

)

𝐵

𝐵

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

(i.e., become less positive) because 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 > 𝑅∕2. Hence, 𝑦𝑎𝑒 must 
decrease (i.e., 𝑥𝑎𝑒 increases) to keep Eq. (A.9) holding. Reasoning in 
the same way, 𝑥𝑎𝑒 will increase if 𝜄𝐹  increases.

𝐵 > 𝑟𝑎𝑒

Finally, we look at how 𝑐𝐵 affects 𝑥𝑎𝑒. If 𝑐𝐵 increases, two cases 
may arise. In the first case, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  increases or does not change; then 𝑥𝑎𝑒
decreases according to Eq.  (A.6). In the second case, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  decreases; 
then terms A and B will increase (i.e., become less negative) for a 
)
given 𝑦𝑎𝑒. Meanwhile, 2𝑟𝑎𝑒
∕3 will increase (i.e., become more 
𝐵
positive) because 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 > 𝑅∕2. As a result, 𝑦𝑎𝑒 must increase (i.e., 𝑥𝑎𝑒 must 
decrease) to keep Eq. (A.9) holding. Overall, no matter how 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  changes 
with 𝑐𝐵, 𝑥𝑎𝑒 is decreasing in 𝑐𝐵.

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵

Proof of Lemma  3.  To prove this lemma, we need the following lemma 
first.

Lemma 5.   In the AE regime, if fintech 1 faces no competition from any 
other lender at 𝑧𝑖, the fintech will provide entrepreneurs at this location with 
the monopolistic loan rate 𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1, which is the largest solution of the following 
equation: 

𝑔𝑚
𝐹 1

(𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1

) ≡

𝐹 1)2(3𝑅 − 4𝑟𝑚
(𝑟𝑚
2𝑐𝐹 1

𝐹 1)

+ (2𝑟𝑚

𝐹 1 − 𝑅)𝜄𝐹 = 0.

(A.10)

)

)

))2 (

(𝑧𝑖

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

)
∕(2𝑐𝐹 1) − 𝜄𝐹

The monopolistic loan rate 𝑟𝑚

𝐹 1 is smaller than 𝑅.
First, we prove Lemma  5. If fintech 1 faces no competition from 
)  to  max-
any  other  lender  at  𝑧𝑖,  it  will  choose  a  loan  rate  𝑟𝐹 1
imize its lending profit at this location. The lending profit at 𝑧𝑖 is 
((𝑟𝐹 1
(𝑧𝑖
. Maximizing this profit yields 
𝐷(𝑧𝑖)
(𝑧𝑖
𝐹 1, which is determined by Eq.  (A.10). Note that 𝑔𝑚
= 𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1 (−∞) >
𝑟𝐹 1
𝐹 1 (𝑅) = −𝑅 (𝑅2∕(2𝑐𝐹 1) − 𝜄𝐹
) < 0
0, 𝑔𝑚
𝐹 1 (0) < 0, 𝑔𝑚
2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹
(√
> 0 and 𝑔𝑚
hold. 𝑔𝑚
𝐹 1 (𝑅) < 0 holds because 𝑈 𝐹 1 > 0 in 
𝐹 1
the AE regime, which means 𝑅2∕(2𝑐𝐹 1) − 𝜄𝐹 > (𝑟𝐹 1
∕(2𝑐𝐹 1) − 𝜄𝐹 >
)
(√
0. Therefore, 𝑔𝑚
. 
2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 , 𝑅
𝐹 1
Such a solution is the fintech’s monopolistic loan rate. Eq. (A.10) is 
independent of 𝑧𝑖, so is 𝑟𝑚

= 0 has a unique solution in 

𝐹 1
2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹

> 0 and 𝑔𝑚

(√
)

(𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1

)2

)

)

Next, we prove Lemma  3. If fintech 1 need only consider the threat 
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑚
≥ 𝑈 𝐹 2, 
of fintech 2, then two cases may arise. First, if 𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1
𝐹 1
then fintech 1 can still offer 𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1. If not, fintech 1’s loan rate must 
provide  utility  𝑈 𝐹 2  to  ensure  that  entrepreneurs  will  not  approach 
fintech 2. This leads to the following loan rate

)
∕𝑐𝐹 1

𝐹 1.

𝑟𝐹 1

(𝑧𝑖

))

(𝑧𝑖

) (𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 1
𝑐𝐹 1

= 𝑈 𝐹 2 ⇒ 𝑟𝐹 1

)

(𝑧𝑖

=

√

𝑅2 − 4𝑐𝐹 1𝑈 𝐹 2

𝑅 +

2

,

which is independent of 𝑧𝑖. Therefore, the upper bound loan rate of 
fintech 1 is 𝑟∗

𝐹 1.

Proof of Proposition  4.  At location 𝑧𝑖 ∈
, the nearest 
bank is bank 𝑖, whose lending distance is 𝑧𝑖. Symmetrically, at 𝑧𝑖 ∈
(1∕(2𝑁), 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒]
,  the  nearest  bank  is  bank  𝑖 + 1,  whose  lending 
} can represent 
distance is 1∕𝑁 − 𝑧𝑖. Overall, 𝑑𝑎𝑒 ≡ min
[𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒]
the lending distance of the nearest bank at 𝑧𝑖 ∈
.

{𝑧𝑖, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑧𝑖

]
[𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕(2𝑁)

If (𝑟𝑎𝑒

[𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑥𝑎𝑒] equals (𝑟𝑎𝑒

The lending profit of the nearest bank by serving an entrepreneur 
𝐵 )2(1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵. If this profit is 
at 𝑧𝑖 ∈
negative, then no bank is willing to serve location 𝑧𝑖. In such a location 
fintech 1 will offer 𝑟∗

𝐹 1 according to Lemma 3.

𝐵 )2(1−𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵)−𝜄𝐵

≥ 0 holds at 𝑧𝑖, the nearest bank is willing 
to serve location 𝑧𝑖, so fintech 1 must ensure that entrepreneurs at this 
location will not approach the nearest bank. The loan rate that exactly 
ensures this is determined by the equation 𝑟𝑎𝑒
∕𝑐𝐵 =
]
(𝑧𝑖
) 
𝑟𝐹 1
is 𝑟𝐹 1

𝐵 (1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)
(𝑧𝑖
))
∕𝑐𝐹 1. The solution (in the interval 
)
(𝑧𝑖
.
) may be higher than 𝑟∗
(𝑧𝑖

𝐹 1; if so, then fintech 1 still 
𝐹 1, which can also ensure that entrepreneurs will not approach 

) (𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 1
(𝑧𝑖
= 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
𝐹 1
However, 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒
[√

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 , 𝑅

offers 𝑟∗

𝐹 1

)

)

𝐵

18 

{𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
𝐹 1

(𝑧𝑖

) , 𝑟∗
𝐹 1

} in the 

any bank. In sum, fintech 1’s loan rate is min
case (𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵 )2(1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵) ≥ 𝜄𝐵.

(

)

both  𝑟𝑎𝑒
√

When 𝑐𝐹 1 is so low that 𝑈 𝐹 1 approaches √

∕𝑐𝐵, 
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
𝑅 −
𝐵   –  which  equals  2𝜄𝐵𝑅∕(𝑈 𝐹 1 + 2𝜄𝐵)  –  and  𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵   will  approach 
𝐵  will also approach √
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, implying that 𝑟𝑎𝑒
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵 (see the proof of 
𝐵 )2(1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵) ≥ 𝜄𝐵 holds 
Proposition  1). When 𝑟𝑎𝑒
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 →
only if 𝑑𝑎𝑒 is very close to 0, indicating that the NBT case will arise 
when 𝑑𝑎𝑒 is large enough.

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

√

√

Proof of Corollary  2.  We focus on the region [𝑥𝑎𝑒, 1∕(2𝑁)
] on the arc 
between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1. In this region, the nearest bank is bank 𝑖, so 
) is increasing in 𝑧𝑖 when 𝑑𝑎𝑒 = 𝑧𝑖. Fintech 
𝑑𝑎𝑒 = 𝑧𝑖. Obviously, 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑚𝐵
) is weakly increasing in 𝑧𝑖 in this region because (a) 
(𝑧𝑖
1’s loan rate 𝑟𝐹 1
𝐹 1 is independent of 𝑧𝑖 and (b) (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 )2(1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵) − 𝜄𝐵 is decreasing 
𝑟∗
(𝑧𝑖
in 𝑧𝑖. At the indifference location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 𝑟𝐹
= 𝑟𝐹 1 holds because 
fintech 1 offers utility 𝑈 𝐹 1 there (see Eq. (A.6)).

(𝑧𝑖

𝐹 1

)

Proof of Proposition  5.  When PE occurs, 𝑅∕2 ≤ 𝑟𝑝𝑒
𝐵  hold. Then, at 
each location, entrepreneurs will derive higher expected utility, which 
implies a larger mass of entrepreneurs implementing their projects.

𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒

Next, we consider the effect of AE, assuming that 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2 holds. 

In the BE regime, total investment (denoted by 𝐼 𝑏𝑒 ) is:

1∕(2𝑁)

𝐼 𝑏𝑒 = 2𝑁 ∫

0

𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵

) (

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

)
∕𝑐𝐵𝑑𝑧𝑖.

In AE with 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2, total investment is

𝐼 𝑎𝑒 ≡ 2𝑁

(

𝑥𝑎𝑒

∫

0

𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵

) (

1 − 𝑞𝑧𝑖

1∕(2𝑁)

)
∕𝑐𝐵𝑑𝑧𝑖 + ∫

𝑥𝑎𝑒

)

𝑈 𝐹 1𝑑𝑧𝑖

.

In the proof of Proposition  1 we have shown that 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝑏𝑒
𝐵  in AE, so 
𝐼 𝑎𝑒 > 𝐼 𝑏𝑒 holds when 𝑐𝐹 1 = 𝑐𝐹 2. Since 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 changes continuously with 
𝑐𝐹 2, 𝐼 𝑎𝑒 > 𝐼 𝑏𝑒 must also hold when 𝑐𝐹 2 is sufficiently close to (and 
higher than) 𝑐𝐹 1.

𝐵

√

Proof of Proposition  6 and Corollary  3.  First we consider the case 
) > 0, 
𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 . In the proof of Proposition  1 we have shown 𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
which means 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 > 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  holds and bank 𝑖’s profit at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒 is positive 
𝐵  is higher than √
in the AE equilibrium. Therefore, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒). 
2𝑐𝐵𝑥𝜄𝐵. At 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 
Defining 𝑐𝐵𝑥
)
we have 𝑟𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐹 1. Eq. (A.6) can be written as 𝑟𝑎𝑒
∕𝑐𝐵𝑥 =
𝐵
𝐵
(𝑅 − 𝑟𝐹 1
𝐵 > 𝑟𝐹 1 must hold 
𝑟𝐹 1
because 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 >

)
∕𝑐𝐹 1, which means 𝑐𝐵𝑥 < 𝑐𝐹 1 and 𝑟𝑎𝑒
√

≡ 𝑐𝐵∕(1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒), we have that 𝑟𝑎𝑒

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 , and 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹  hold.

2𝑐𝐵𝑥𝜄𝐵, 𝑟𝐹 1 =

(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑎𝑒

Next,  we  prove  Corollary   3.  Proposition   6  implies  that
𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞∕(2𝑁)) < 𝑐𝐹 1 must hold in the AE regime if 𝑐𝐹 1 → 𝑐𝐹  and 
if 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 . By letting 𝜄𝐹  marginally increase from being equal to 𝜄𝐵, 
and 𝑐𝐹 1 marginally decrease from being equal to 𝑐𝐹 , AE can still occur 
without changing the relation 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞∕(2𝑁)) < 𝑐𝐹 1, because 𝑓 𝑎𝑒 (𝑟𝑎𝑒
)
and 𝑥𝑎𝑒 vary continuously with 𝑐𝐹 1, 𝜄𝐵, and 𝜄𝐹 .

𝐵 >

√

𝐵

√

≥ 𝑟𝑏𝑒

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹

𝐵  hold (since 𝑟𝑏𝑒

Proof of Proposition  7.  Starting from the case 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 , we can increase 
𝜄𝐹  to make √
𝐵  is not affected by 𝜄𝐹 ). Then, in 
the AE regime – which can still occur if 𝑐𝐹 1 is small enough – it must 
𝐵 < 𝑟𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑟𝐹 1
hold that 𝑟𝐹 1 =
must hold since fintech 1 offers its best loan rate at 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒. Since 
bank 𝑖 exactly provides utility 𝑈 𝐹 1 at location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒)
must implies 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒) > 𝑐𝐹 1. Therefore, 𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) < 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) holds 
according to Lemma  1.

𝐵 . Then, 𝑟𝑎𝑒

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 > 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵  since 𝑟𝑏𝑒

𝐵 > 𝑟𝑎𝑒

≤ √

(

√

)

𝑅 −

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

∕𝑐𝐵 must imply 
Proof of Proposition  8.  𝑈 𝐹 1
𝑐𝐵 < 𝑐𝐹 1 when 𝜃 > 0 and 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹  hold. In the AE regime, if 𝜃 is so 
high that 𝑈 𝐹 1 is very close to √
∕𝑐𝐵, 𝑥𝑎𝑒 will be 
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
very close to 0 since √
√
∕𝑐𝐵 is the highest utility 
𝑅 −
bank 𝑖 can provide at location 𝑧𝑖 = 0. When 𝑥𝑎𝑒 is very close to 0 
(and 𝜃 is positive), 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒) < 𝑐𝐹 1 must hold since 𝑐𝐵 < 𝑐𝐹 1. 

𝑅 −
)

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

√

)

(

(

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

(

)

√

∕𝑐𝐵, both 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝑅 −
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
𝐵  will approach √

Meanwhile, according to the proof of Proposition 1, as 𝑈 𝐹 1 approaches 
√
𝐵  – which equals 2𝜄𝐵𝑅∕(𝑈 𝐹 1 + 2𝜄𝐵)
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵
– and 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵  will also approach 
(but is higher than) √
√
2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹  must hold 
since 𝑐𝐵 < 𝑐𝐹 1 and 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹  hold. When 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒) < 𝑐𝐹 1 holds, 
𝑚𝐵(𝑥𝑎𝑒) > 𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒) must hold since
√

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵, implying that 𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 < 𝑟𝐹 1 =

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵. Then, 𝑟𝑎𝑒

√

𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
=𝑚𝐵 (𝑥𝑎𝑒)

≥

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)
𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)

>

,

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹
𝑐𝐹 1
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
=𝑚𝐹 1(𝑥𝑎𝑒)

where  the  first  inequality  holds  because  𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵
(i.e., bank 𝑖 makes a non-negative profit at location 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑥𝑎𝑒).

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑥𝑎𝑒)

≥ √

(

)

√

√

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵

∕𝑐𝐵, so both 𝑟𝑎𝑒

Proof of Proposition  9.  Consider the case 𝑐𝐹 1 → 𝑐𝐵 and 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 . 
Then, 𝑈 𝐹 1 approaches √
𝐵  – which 
𝑅 −
𝐵   will  approach  √
equals  2𝜄𝐵𝑅∕(𝑈 𝐹 1 + 2𝜄𝐵)  –  and  𝑟𝑎𝑒
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵,  implying 
𝑟𝑎𝑒
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵. In this case, bank 𝑖 can match utility 𝑈 𝐹 1 only at location 
𝐵 →
𝑧𝑖 = 0; all locations in (0, 1∕𝑁) (on the arc between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖+1) will 
be served by fintech 1. In addition, 𝑟𝑎𝑒
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵 implies that bank 𝑖 is 
willing to serve only location 𝑧𝑖 = 0 since (𝑟𝑎𝑒
𝐵 )2(1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)∕(2𝑐𝐵) < 𝜄𝐵
{𝑧𝑖, 1∕𝑁 − 𝑧𝑖
holds for 𝑑𝑎𝑒 > 0 (with 𝑑𝑎𝑒 ≡ min
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵. 
𝐵 →
Therefore, all locations in (0, 1∕𝑁) belong to the NBT area, implying 
𝐹 1 at those locations. Note that 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)
that fintech 1 posts 𝑟∗
holds for any 𝑧𝑖 ∈ (0, 1∕𝑁) if 𝑐𝐹 1 → 𝑐𝐵. Therefore, if 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 maximizes the 
welfare at locations served by fintech 1, social welfare of the entire 
market in the AE regime – where fintech 1 (with 𝑐𝐹 1 < 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞𝑑𝑎𝑒)
for any 𝑧𝑖 ∈ (0, 1∕𝑁)) serves almost all locations – must be higher than 
in the BE regime, where banks serve all locations.

}
) if 𝑟𝑎𝑒

𝐵 →

√

√

When fintech 1 serves 𝑧𝑖 ∈ (0, 1∕𝑁) with the rate 𝑟∗

𝐹 1, Eq. (9) reduces 

to

𝑊 =

(𝑅 − 𝑟∗
𝐹 1)𝑟∗
𝐹 1
𝑐𝐹 1

(

𝑟∗
𝑅
𝐹 1
𝑐𝐹 1

1
2

)

− 𝜄𝐹

.

𝐹 1 (within the interval 

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 , 𝑅

[√

Then, maximizing 𝑊  by choosing 𝑟∗
yields 𝑟∗
𝐹 1, with
√

𝐹 1 = 𝑟𝑜

𝑅2 + 2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 +

𝑅4 − 2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 𝑅2 +

𝑟𝑜
𝐹 1

≡

3𝑅

(
2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹

)2

.

𝐹 1 = 𝑟𝑜
(√

Therefore, if 𝑟∗
𝐹 1 and 𝑐𝐹 1 → 𝑐𝐵 hold, social welfare in the AE 
regime must be strictly higher than that in the BE regime. It is easy 
to check 𝑟𝑜
hold. Specifically, such a 𝑐𝐹 2 should satisfy

, so there exists a 𝑐𝐹 2 making 𝑟∗

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 , 𝑟𝑚
𝐹 1

𝐹 1 = 𝑟𝑜

𝐹 1 ∈

𝐹 1

)

√

𝑅2 − 4𝑐𝐹 1𝑈 𝐹 2

𝑅 +

2
which yields 𝑐𝐹 2 = 𝑐∗

= 𝑟𝑜

𝐹 1,

𝐹 2, with

𝑐∗
𝐹 2

≡

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

(3𝑅)2 (𝑅2 + 8𝜄𝐹 𝑐𝐹 1

)

−

36
(

√

2𝜄𝐹 𝑅3𝑐𝐹 1
√
2

𝑅4 − 2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 𝑅2 +
+4𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹 − 𝑅2

(
2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹

2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

.

)2

)2

Since  social  welfare  is  a  continuous  function  of  parameters,  social 
welfare in the AE regime must be strictly higher than that in the BE 
regime if 𝑐𝐹 1 is sufficiently close to 𝑐𝐵 and 𝑐𝐹 2 is sufficiently close to 
𝑐∗
𝐹 2.

Proof of Lemma  4.  The proof of this lemma directly follows that of 
Lemma  2.

Proof of Proposition  10.  We look at the arc between banks 𝑖 and 
𝑖 + 1.  At  location  𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒,  bank  𝑖  will  offer  its  best  loan  rate 

19 

√
2𝑐𝐵𝜄𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒), which exactly provides utility 𝑈 𝐹 1. With 𝜄𝐵 = 𝜄𝐹 , 
this implies 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = 𝑐𝐹 1, 𝑟𝐹 1 = 𝑟𝐵 ( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒), and  ̂𝑚𝐵( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) = ̂𝑚𝐹 1( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒).
If 𝜄𝐵 < 𝜄𝐹 , still, bank 𝑖 and fintech 1 both offer their best loan rates 

and provide the same utility at 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒, implying
)
√ 2𝑐𝐵 𝜄𝐵
1−𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒

√ 2𝑐𝐵 𝜄𝐵
1−𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒

𝑅 −

𝑅 −

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹

2𝑐𝐹 1𝜄𝐹

√

√

(

(

𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒)

=

𝑐𝐹 1

)

.

This equation holds (with 𝜄𝐵 < 𝜄𝐹 ) if and only if 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞 ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) > 𝑐𝐹 1, so 
̂𝑚𝐵( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) < ̂𝑚𝐹 1( ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒) holds according to Lemma 1.

Proof of Corollary  4.  Item (i): If 𝑐𝐵∕ (1 − 𝑞∕ (2𝑁)) < 𝑐𝐹 1 and 𝜄𝐵 < 𝜄𝐹
both hold, then 𝑟𝐵(1∕ (2𝑁)) is lower than 𝑟𝐹 1. Then, at location 𝑧𝑖 =
1∕ (2𝑁), the highest utility bank 𝑖 can provide is higher than 𝑈 𝐹 1. 
]
[
Therefore, AE cannot occur at locations 𝑧𝑖 ∈
. Reasoning 
0, 1∕(2𝑁)
symmetrically, AE cannot occur at locations 𝑧𝑖 ∈ (1∕(2𝑁), 1∕𝑁] because 
of bank 𝑖 + 1’s competitiveness. Item (ii) holds because bank 𝑖 offers its 
best loan rate at the indifference location 𝑧𝑖 = ̂𝑥𝑎𝑒.

Item (iii): When all lenders can price discriminate, at each location, 
there is an independent localized Bertrand competition. On the arc 
between banks 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1, fintech entry implies that at each location 
(e.g., location 𝑧𝑖), the competitors of the Bertrand game change from 
banks (𝑖 and 𝑖 + 1) to banks and fintechs, which will unambiguously 
intensify  lending  competition  and  make  entrepreneurs  better  off  if 
fintech entry changes banks’ behavior (i.e., PE or AE occurs).

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104040.

Data availability

Source data files of the article "Fintech Entry, Lending Market Compet
ition, and Welfare" (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

]
) 

References

Agarwal, S., Ben-David, I., 2018. Loan prospecting and the loss of soft information. J. 

Financ. Econ. 129 (3), 608–628.

Allen,  F.,  Carletti,  E.,  Marquez,  R.,  2011.  Credit  market  competition  and  capital 

regulation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (4), 983–1018.

Alok, S., Ghosh, P., Kulkarni, N., Puri, M., 2024. Open Banking and Digital Payments: 
Implications  for  Credit  Access.  Working  Paper,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research.

Babina, T., Bahaj, S.A., Buchak, G., De Marco, F., Foulis, A.K., Gornall, W., Mazzola, F., 
Yu, T., 2024. Customer Data Access and Fintech Entry: Early Evidence from Open 
Banking. Working Paper.

Beaumont, P., Tang, H., Vansteenberghe, E., 2024. Collateral Effects: The Role of 

FinTech in Small Business Lending. Working Paper.

Begenau, J., Stafford, E., 2023. Uniform Rate Setting and the Deposit Channel. Working 

Paper.

Berg, T., Burg, V., Gombović, A., Puri, M., 2020. On the rise of fintechs: Credit scoring 

using digital footprints. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (7), 2845–2897.

Berg, T., Fuster, A., Puri, M., 2022. Fintech lending. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 14, 

187–207.

Blickle,  K.,  He,  Z.,  Huang,  J.,  Parlatore,  C.,  2024.  Information-Based  Pricing  in 
Specialized Lending. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Blickle, K., Parlatore, C., Saunders, A., 2025. Specialization in banking. J. Financ. 

(forthcoming).

Bouvard, M., Casamatta, C., Xiong, R., 2022. Lending and Monitoring: Big Tech vs 

Banks. Working Paper.

Branzoli, N., Fringuellotti, F., 2022. The Effect of Bank Monitoring on Loan Repayment. 

FRB of New York Staff Report, (923).

Brevoort, K.P., Wolken, J.D., 2009. Does distance matter in banking? In: The Changing 

Geography of Banking and Finance. Springer, pp. 27–56.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and 

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Claessens, S., Frost, J., Turner, G., Zhu, F., 2018. Fintech credit markets around the 

world: size, drivers and policy issues. BIS Q. Rev. September.

X. Vives and Z. Ye

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104040 

Cornelli, G., Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Jagtiani, J., 2024. The impact of fintech lending 

He, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2023. Open banking: Credit market competition when 

on credit access for us small businesses. J. Financ. Stab. 101290.

borrowers own the data. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 449–474.

Dass, N., Massa, M., 2011. The impact of a strong bank-firm relationship on the 

Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real 

borrowing firm. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (4), 1204–1260.

sector. Q. J. Econ. 112 (3), 663–691.

De Roure, C., Pelizzon, L., Thakor, A., 2022. P2P lenders versus banks: Cream skimming 

Hu, Y., Zryumov, P., 2024. Lending Competition and Funding Collaboration. Working 

or bottom fishing? Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 11 (2), 213–262.

Dell’Ariccia, G., Marquez, R., 2004. Information and bank credit allocation. J. Financ. 

Paper.

Econ. 72 (1), 185–214.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Klapper, L., Singer, D., Ansar, S., 2021. Financial inclusion, digital 
payments, and resilience in the age of COVID-19. Glob. Findex Database 225.
Di  Maggio,  M.,  Yao,  V.,  2021.  FinTech  borrowers:  Lax  screening  or  cream-

skimming? Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (10), 4565–4618.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2021. Banking on deposits: Maturity transformation 

without interest rate risk. J. Financ. 76 (3), 1091–1143.

Duquerroy, A., Mazet-Sonilhac, C., Mésonnier, J.-S., Paravisini, D., et al., 2022. Bank 

Local Specialization. Working Paper.

Eça, A., Ferreira, M.A., Prado, M.P., Rizzo, A.E., 2022. The Real Effects of Fintech 

Lending on Smes: Evidence from Loan Applications. CEPR Working Paper.

Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Huang, Y., Shin, H.S., Zbinden, P., 2019. BigTech and the 

changing structure of financial intermediation. Econ. Policy.

Fuster,  A.,  Goldsmith-Pinkham,  P.,  Ramadorai,  T.,  Walther,  A.,  2022.  Predictably 
unequal? The effects of machine learning on credit markets. J. Financ. 77 (1), 
5–47.

Fuster,  A.,  Plosser,  M.,  Schnabl,  P.,  Vickery,  J.,  2019.  The  role  of  technology  in 

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1854–1899.

Ghosh, P., Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2022. FinTech Lending and Cashless Payments. Working 

Gillis, T.B., Spiess, J.L., 2019. Big data and discrimination. Univ. Chic. Law Rev. 86 

Giometti,  M.,  Pietrosanti,  S.,  2023.  Bank  Specialization  and  the  Design  of  Loan 

Paper.

(2), 459–488.

Contracts. Working Paper.

Working Paper.

Huang, J., 2023. Fintech Expansion. Working Paper.
Iyer, R., Khwaja, A.I., Luttmer, E.F., Shue, K., 2016. Screening peers softly: Inferring 

the quality of small borrowers. Manag. Sci. 62 (6), 1554–1577.

Jagtiani, J., Lemieux, C., 2018. Do fintech lenders penetrate areas that are underserved 

by traditional banks? J. Econ. Bus. 100, 43–54.

Jagtiani, J., Lemieux, C., 2019. The roles of alternative data and machine learning in 
fintech lending: evidence from the LendingClub consumer platform. Financ. Manag. 
48 (4), 1009–1029.

Johnson, M.J., Ben-David, I., Lee, J., Yao, V., 2023. Fintech Lending with Lowtech 

Kawai, K., Onishi, K., Uetake, K., 2022. Signaling in online credit markets. J. Political 

Lee, K.-W., Sharpe, I.G., 2009. Does a bank’s loan screening and monitoring matter? J. 

Liberti, J.M., 2018. Initiative, incentives, and soft information. Manag. Sci. 64 (8), 

Pricing. Working Paper.

Econ. 130 (6), 1585–1629.

Financ. Serv. Res. 35 (1), 33–52.

3714–3734.

Liu, L., Lu, G., Xiong, W., 2024. The Big Tech Lending Model. Working Paper.
Martinez-Miera, D., Repullo, R., 2017. Search for yield. Econometrica 85 (2), 351–378.
Minnis, M., Sutherland, A., 2017. Financial statements as monitoring mechanisms: 

Evidence from small commercial loans. J. Account. Res. 55 (1), 197–233.

Morse, A., Pence, K., 2021. Technological innovation and discrimination in household 
finance.  In:  The  Palgrave  Handbook  of  Technological  Finance.  Springer,  pp. 
783–808.

Paravisini,  D.,  Rappoport,  V.,  Schnabl,  P.,  2023.  Specialization  in  bank  lending: 

Evidence from exporting firms. J. Financ. 78 (4), 2049–2085.

Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4985–5024.

Goldstein, I., Huang, C., Yang, L., 2023. Open Banking Under Maturity Transformation. 

Parlour, C.A., Rajan, U., Zhu, H., 2022. When fintech competes for payment flows. Rev. 

Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2022. The rise of finance companies and FinTech lenders in 

Petersen,  M.A.,  Rajan,  R.G.,  2002.  Does  distance  still  matter?  The  information 

small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4859–4901.

Gustafson, M.T., Ivanov, I.T., Meisenzahl, R.R., 2021. Bank monitoring: Evidence from 

syndicated loans. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (2), 452–477.

revolution in small business lending. J. Financ. 57 (6), 2533–2570.

Salop, S.C., 1979. Monopolistic competition with outside goods. Bell J. Econ. 141–156.
Thakor, A.V., 2020. Fintech and banking: What do we know? J. Financ. Intermediation 

Hau, H., Huang, Y., Lin, C., Shan, H., Sheng, Z., Wei, L., 2024. FinTech credit and 

41, 100833.

entrepreneurial growth. J. Financ. 79 (21–47), 3309–3359.

Thisse, J.-F., Vives, X., 1988. On the strategic choice of spatial price policy. Am. Econ. 

Hauswald,  R.,  Marquez,  R.,  2003.  Information  technology  and  financial  services 

Rev. 78 (1), 122–137.

competition. Rev. Financ. Stud. 16 (3), 921–948.

Hauswald, R., Marquez, R., 2006. Competition and strategic information acquisition in 

credit markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 19 (3), 967–1000.

He, Z., Huang, J., Parlatore, C., 2024. Information Span and Credit Market Competition. 

Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ueda, K., Zhang, Y., Zhao, X.S., 2023. Do Fintech Firms Bring Lower Borrowing Costs? 

Evidence from the Us Unsecured Personal Loan Market. Working Paper.

Vives, X., 2019. Digital disruption in banking. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 11, 243–272.
Vives, X., Ye, Z., 2025. Information technology and lender competition. J. Financ. Econ. 

163, 103957.

20 

