Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Investor demand, firm investment, and capital misallocation(cid:73)
Jaewon Choi a, Xu Tian b,∗, Yufeng Wu c, Mahyar Kargar d
a Department of Economics, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
b Terry College of Business, University of Georgia, United States of America
c Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University, United States of America
d Gies College of Business, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, United States of America

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Fluctuations in investor demand significantly affect firms’ valuation and access to capital. To quantify their real 
effects, we develop a dynamic investment model, incorporating both the demand and supply sides of capital. 
Strong investor demand relaxes financial constraints and facilitates equity issuance and investment, while weak 
demand encourages opportunistic share repurchases, crowding out investment. We estimate the model using 
indirect inference, matching the endogenous relationship between investor demand and firm policies. Our 
estimation reveals that demand fluctuations are important drivers of firm-level investment and economy-wide 
capital misallocation, accounting for 26.9% of dispersion in MPK and 23.4% of productivity losses.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/473zwkxnpw/1

JEL classification:
G30
G10
G20
E22

Keywords:
Investor demand
Firm investment
Capital misallocation
Structural estimation
Market timing

1. Introduction

The history of the U.S. stock market is marked by striking booms 
and busts. During the Nasdaq bubble of the 1990s, for example, in-
ternet stocks traded at price levels that defied most rational pricing 
explanations.  In  the  more  recent  ‘‘meme  stocks’’  episode  of  2021, 
prices of GameStop and many other stocks skyrocketed, opening up 
financing opportunities that would have otherwise been unavailable to 
these firms. These dramatic valuation episodes are often attributed to 
demand from investors who favor those stocks despite the mismatch 
between valuations and fundamentals. How does this type of demand 
affect the allocation of capital across firms? Does it promote investment 
in firms that are more productive and have greater financial needs? 
If not, what is the magnitude of the distortion in capital allocation 
resulting from investor demand? These questions speak directly to the 
central role of financial markets for efficient capital allocation.

In this paper, we tackle these questions by developing and estimat-
ing a dynamic model in which firms make investment and financing 

decisions  while  facing  capital  provision  driven  by  investor  demand 
for their equity. The distinctive feature of our setting, compared to 
standard investment models, is the direct incorporation of time-varying 
demand from investors, which we discipline using detailed data on 
investor  portfolios.  Our  model  embeds  the  endogenous  relationship 
between investor demand and firms’ optimal investment and financing 
decisions. Using the estimated model, we uncover significant responses 
of firms’ financial policies to investor demand. We also examine invest-
ment policies, enabling us to evaluate the impact of investor demand 
on the efficiency of capital allocation in U.S. public firms.

Our demand-side model builds on the framework introduced by Koi-
jen and Yogo (2019), which models investor demand using firm char-
acteristics and fluctuations in a latent component in excess of firm 
fundamentals. While their study addresses asset pricing implications, 
our focus is on the firm side. We document that these demand-driven 
effects also have important implications for aggregate productivity and 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank Jules van Binsbergen, Antonio Falato, Itay Goldstein, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Lukas Schmid, 
Dejanir Silva, Şelale Tüzel, Brian Waters, Toni M. Whited, Yao Zeng; an anonymous referee; conference participants at WFA 2022, AFA 2023, EFA 2023, ITAM 
Finance Conference, MFA 2023; and seminar participants at Chung-Ang University, the Federal Reserve Board, Indiana University, KAIST, Korea University, Seoul 
National University, Texas A&M University, University of Florida, Columbia University SIPA, and Chinese University of Hong Kong for their helpful comments 
and suggestions. Tian gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Business, Systems, and Technology Innovation Research Grant and Terry-Sanford Award.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  jaewchoi@snu.ac.kr (J. Choi), xu.tian@uga.edu (X. Tian), wu.6251@osu.edu (Y. Wu), kargar@illinois.edu (M. Kargar).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104039
Received 15 November 2023; Received in revised form 1 March 2025; Accepted 2 March 2025
Available online 17 March 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
J. Choi et al.

the  efficiency  of  allocation  of  capital  in  the  economy.  Eliminating 
excess  demand  alleviates  the  misallocation  of  capital  across  firms, 
reducing the dispersion in the marginal product of capital by 26.9% 
and decreasing productivity losses by 23.4%.

The  focus  of  our  model  is  on  the  interplay  between  firms  and 
investors. Firms make financing and investment decisions after con-
sidering the equilibrium prices shaped by investor demand, and these 
decisions,  in  turn,  feed  back  into  investors’  demand  functions.  The 
direct effect of investor demand lies in its influence on firms’ financ-
ing decisions. High demand incentivizes firms to issue more shares, 
while weak demand induces firms to strategically buy back shares at 
favorable prices. Firms also adjust their leverage and cash decisions, 
all of which subsequently influence firm value, operational decisions, 
and  capital  accumulation.  Because  our  characteristic-based  demand 
system depends on firm attributes, this coordinated evolution of firm 
characteristics further affects investors’ demand for the firm’s stock. As 
such, our approach integrates the endogenous supply of capital from 
investors into a standard neoclassical investment model.

Our model embeds two key channels through which investor de-
mand impacts firms’ real investment decisions. First, fluctuations in 
investor demand create opportunities for market timing, enabling firms 
to capitalize on financial transactions. This additional source of profit 
alleviates financial constraints for firms and helps their investments 
converge to an unconstrained level (the constraint-easing effect). Sec-
ond, firms’ engagement in financial transactions can have heteroge-
neous effects on their investment capacity, depending on realized ex-
cess demand (the dispersion effect). Positive excess demand encourages 
firms to issue equity, providing them with additional funds to invest. 
Negative  excess  demand  prompts  firms  to  reduce  investments  and 
prioritize profitable financial transactions in the equity market over in-
vestment efficiency. Contrary to the former effect, the dispersion effect 
can introduce an additional wedge in the cross section of the marginal 
product of capital, potentially harming capital allocation efficiency in 
the economy.

To quantify these effects of investor demand, we estimate the pa-
rameters of our dynamic model using the simulated method of moments 
(SMM). The model parameters are divided into two groups: one describ-
ing investors’ demand system and the other governing firm dynamics. 
When estimating the demand parameters, it is crucial to consider the 
feedback effects of firm decisions. Therefore, we identify the key pa-
rameters of the demand system through an indirect inference approach, 
employing an auxiliary model that approximates the endogenous rela-
tionship between firm characteristics and latent excess demand, without
resorting  to  the  instrumental  variables  in  Koijen  and  Yogo  (2019). 
This indirect inference approach yields a set of coefficients that dictate 
investor demand based on observable firm characteristics, as well as 
variations in residual demand in excess of these observed features. 
Turning to firm dynamics, we match model-generated moments to real-
data moments, identifying the set of parameters that shape firm policies 
and  dynamics.  Our  estimated  model  parameters  generate  simulated 
data that closely match the key features of the actual data. Furthermore, 
we demonstrate our model’s external validity by showing its ability to 
replicate data features not directly targeted in the estimation, including 
firms’ overvaluation during seasoned equity offerings (SEOs).

Using our estimated model, we conduct analyses to evaluate how 
firms respond to excess investor demand. First, we examine the flow 
of funds within firms and find that they allocate a substantial portion 
of their resources to timing excess investor demand, regardless of their 
financial constraints. However, this behavior crowds out investments, 
primarily in financially constrained firms, while less constrained firms 
use the proceeds from financial transactions largely to distribute div-
idends  to  existing  shareholders.  Second,  we  perform  counterfactual 
analyses  to  assess  the  impact  of  sudden  shifts  in  investor  demand, 
resembling  a  surge  in  ‘‘meme’’  stock  investors.  We  find  that  firms 
increase their equity issuance by more than tenfold, which leads to 
higher capital investments, though these projects tend to have low 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

marginal returns. Overall, our findings highlight that excess investor 
demand can drive significant variation in firms’ real actions in the 
cross-section.

We further examine how these firm-level effects of investor demand 
aggregate in the economy by quantifying the magnitude of demand-
driven capital misallocation. Our analyses compare the allocation of 
physical capital under our baseline model with that under a coun-
terfactual  scenario  where  excess  demand  from  investors  is  absent. 
Capital misallocation is measured using the variance of the marginal 
product of capital (MPK) in the cross section of firms and the average 
loss in the total factor productivity (TFP) in the economy, both of 
which capture deviations from efficient capital allocation across firms 
(Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). We find that excess investor demand results 
in significant increases in capital misallocation among firms, as the 
dispersion effect of investor demand outweighs the constraint-easing 
effect. In the counterfactual economy where excess investor demand is 
turned off, we observe a 26.9% reduction in the dispersion of MPK and 
a 23.4% decrease in TFP loss. These results suggest that fluctuations in 
investor demand can hinder the efficient allocation of capital in the real 
economy, as firms’ tendency to engage in financial market transactions 
creates conflicting incentives for the allocation of capital resources for 
investment efficiency.

Our  estimation  provides  additional  interesting  results.  First,  we 
compare our baseline model with an alternative model where we shut 
down the feedback loop between investor demand and firm policies. 
The baseline model aligns more closely with the data, matching the ob-
served correlation between firms’ equity issuance and other characteris-
tics. Second, fluctuations in investor demand are an important driver of 
misallocation, compared to other sources of misallocation established 
in previous studies (Midrigan and Xu, 2014; Moll, 2014; David et al., 
2022). In particular, the impact of investor demand is more substantial 
than that arising from debt market and capital adjustment frictions, and 
it is comparable in magnitude to the risk considerations, which is a key 
driver of measured capital misallocation among US firms (David et al., 
2022).

Finally, we examine the sources of fluctuations in latent excess de-
mand, which Koijen and Yogo (2019) attribute to investor sentiment—
excess  demand  is  unobservable  to  econometricians  and  not  linked 
to firm-specific characteristics. Our findings show that model-implied 
latent demand correlates more strongly with non-fundamental asset 
pricing factors than with fundamental ones and is positively associ-
ated with sentiment indicators commonly used in the literature, such 
as those based on news releases, order imbalances, and the tone of 
earnings conference calls. This finding supports the sentiment-driven 
interpretation. Additionally, subsample estimations reveal that firms 
with higher household ownership and greater sentiment volatility face 
larger fluctuations in latent demand, leading to greater distortions in 
capital allocation.

Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, it adds 
to the growing literature on the allocation of capital in the real and 
financial markets. Following the seminal work of Hsieh and Klenow 
(2009)  which  documents  substantial  gaps  in  resource  misallocation 
across  firms  in  China  and  India,  prior  studies  have  quantitatively 
evaluated various real and financial frictions that can contribute to such 
misallocation, including debt constraints (Midrigan and Xu, 2014; Bai 
et al., 2018), capital adjustment costs, technology dispersion, and infor-
mation frictions (David and Venkateswaran, 2019), and taxes (Glover 
and Levine, 2021). We contribute to this literature by focusing on a 
new source of capital misallocation driven by investor demand. Using 
a tightly disciplined dynamic corporate finance model, we study this 
demand-driven channel and document its large quantitative effect on 
capital allocation efficiency. Our modeling framework is closely related 
to those used in several recent studies that quantify sources of misallo-
cation in the economy. David et al. (2022) develop a dynamic model, 
linking misallocation to firms’ exposure to macroeconomic risk. Relat-
edly, Kilic and Tuzel (2023) demonstrate that firms’ exposure to growth 

2 

J. Choi et al.

Table 1
Variable definitions.
  Variable
  Asset growth
  Book equity
  DACCR
  Debt issuance
  Dividend yield
  ED
  Equity issuance
  FF
  Firm size
  Gross investment
  Income-to-assets ratio
  Investment universe
  KZ
  Leverage
  Market-to-book ratio
  Market equity
  Operating profitability
  Outside asset
  Portfolio weight
  Price changes
  Share repurchase

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

Construction
Change in total assets from the previous year divided by total assets in the previous year
Book value of stockholders’ equity, plus deferred taxes and investment tax credits (if available), minus the book value of preferred stock 
Discretionary accruals as in Polk and Sapienza (2008) and Chan et al. (2001)
Change in total debt divided by total assets (if greater than 2%)
Dividends on common and preferred stock divided by market equity
The difference between the average equity issuance-to-asset ratio and the debt issuance-to-asset ratio over the past five years
Sale of common and preferred stock (if greater than 2% following the algorithm in McKeon (2015)) divided by total assets
Financial flexibility index as in Doidge et al. (2009)
Log of total assets
Capital expenditures minus sales of property, divided by gross plant, property and equipment
Operating income before depreciation and amortization divided by total assets
Stocks held in the current quarter and the previous 12 quarters, following Koijen and Yogo (2019)
The four-variable version of KZ-index (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997) following Baker et al. (2003)
Total debt divided by total assets
Total assets minus book equity plus market equity, divided by total assets
Price times shares outstanding
Revenues minus the cost of goods sold, interest expenses, and selling, general, and administrative expenses divided by book equity
Stocks with missing characteristics or returns or stocks with CRSP share codes other than 10 or 11, following Koijen and Yogo (2019)  
The ratio of the dollar amount invested in a given stock to the total dollar amount invested in all stocks held by an institution
Changes in stock prices divided by stock price in the previous year
Purchase of common and preferred stock divided by total assets

spurts  also  helps  explain  significant  variations  in  their  MPK.  Zhao 
and  Whited  (2021)  estimate  the  real  losses  arising  from  the  cross-
sectional misallocation of financial liabilities, revealing a much higher 
distortionary cost among Chinese firms than among U.S. firms.

Second, our paper contributes to the large body of literature ex-
ploring how investor misvaluation affects corporate policies (Graham 
and Harvey, 2001; Baker and Wurgler, 2002; Khan et al., 2012). Our 
paper  belongs  to  the  growing  body  of  research  that  quantifies  the 
real consequence of such equity misvaluation. Warusawitharana and 
Whited  (2016)  study  a  dynamic  investment  model  to  estimate  the 
extent to which mispricing, reflected in firms’ market-to-book ratios, 
drives investment and financing. Dessaint et al. (2019) document that 
firms adjust their investment to stock market noise induced by mutual 
fund flows. Binsbergen and Opp (2019) investigate the implications of 
cross-sectional asset pricing anomalies for asset allocation. Our study 
is distinct in that we directly model the interaction between firms and 
the demand of equity investors. We use detailed institutional holdings 
data combined with a demand estimation strategy that is flexible to 
match  features  in  the  data.  Our  estimation  yields  realistic  demand 
elasticity and variations of demand across investors and time, making 
it well-suited for quantitatively analyzing misallocation effects.

Third, our paper also contributes to the growing body of literature 
on the demand-based approach in asset pricing, à la Koijen and Yogo 
(2019). Existing papers in the literature focus primarily on the asset 
pricing implications of investor demand, treating firms’ financing and 
investment  decisions  as  exogenous.  We  contribute  to  this  literature 
by embedding investors’ demand into a classical dynamic investment 
model of heterogeneous firms with rich real and financial frictions. This 
approach allows us to endogenize the evolution of firm characteristics 
and  the  supply  of  firm  equity.  We  jointly  estimate  the  supply  and 
demand side of the model using firm balance sheet information and 
detailed investor holdings data.

Methodologically, our paper belongs to the growing literature that 
employs  structural  model  calibration  or  estimation  to  address  cor-
porate finance questions in capital investment, leverage, and valua-
tion  (e.g.,  Hennessy  and  Whited,  2005;  Rampini  and  Viswanathan, 
2010;  Korteweg,  2010;  Morellec  et  al.,  2012;  Glover  and  Levine, 
2017; Corhay et al., 2020; Terry, 2023). We contribute to the literature 
by developing a framework that can be applied to explore a wide range 
of questions pertaining to the real effects of investor demand and its 
macroeconomic implications.

2. Motivating empirical facts

Using annual data from CRSP and Compustat, we begin by sum-
marizing several stylized facts regarding firms’ investment behavior, 
equity issuance, share repurchases, and stock market valuation. The 
sample period spans from 1980 to 2021, with 1980 serving as the 
starting point to align with the availability of institutional holdings 
data.1

First, equity issuance is less frequent than debt issuance; however, 
when it does occur, it serves as a more substantial source of financing. 
In our sample period, the probability of a firm issuing equity in a 
given year is 14.4%, compared to 42.4% for debt issuance.2 Conditional 
on  equity  issuance,  the  average  amount  raised  is  18.8%  of  firms’ 
assets, with issuances at the 75th percentile reaching as high as 23.9%. 
In  contrast,  conditional  on  positive  debt  issuance,  the  average  and 
75th percentile figures are lower, at 12.4% and 15.2%, respectively. 
Therefore, while equity issuance is less common, it can still serve as 
a substantial source of financing. In contrast, share repurchases are 
more frequent, occurring 48.6% of the time, and they tend to follow 
a smoother pattern. When firms repurchase shares, they typically buy 
back  an  average  of  3.6%  of  their  assets.  We  summarize  these  key 
statistics of equity issuance, debt issuance, and repurchases in Table 
G.6 in the Internet Appendices.

Second, firms are more likely to issue equity when their valuation 
is  high,  as  previously  documented  in  the  market  timing  literature 
(e.g.,  Baker  and  Wurgler 2002,  Baker  et  al. 2003).  In  Panel  A  of 
Table  2, we confirm this empirical relationship by regressing firms’ 
equity issuance on several proxies for mispricing, including Tobin’s Q, 
discretionary accruals3, and stock price changes. The results remain 
significant after we control for firm characteristics and the firm and 
year fixed effects.

1 Variable descriptions are provided in Table  1.
2 This calculation excludes equity issuances smaller than 2% of firm market 
equity,  as  most  of  these  issuances  are  related  to  employee  stock  option 
exercises (see e.g., McKeon, 2015).

3 Discretionary  accruals  is  widely  used  to  measure  stock  mispricing, 
(see  Sloan 1996,  Teoh  et  al. 1998,  Chan  et  al. 2001,  Polk  and  Sapienza
2008).  Discretionary  accruals  are  calculated  following  Polk  and  Sapienza 
(2008)  and  Chan  et  al.  (2001).  Accruals  are  measured  as  the  change  in 
noncash current assets minus depreciation and the change in other current 
liabilities. Discretionary accruals equal the difference between accruals and 
normal accruals. See more details about the construction in Section C.3 in the 
Internet Appendices.

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Choi et al.

Table 2
Motivating empirical facts.
  Panel A: Equity issuance
  Q

  DACCR

  Price changes

  Other firm controls
  Year FE
  Firm FE
  Adjusted 𝑅2
  Panel B: Investment
  Equity issuance

  Equity issuance  ×  KZ

  Equity issuance  ×  FF

  Equity issuance  ×  ED

(1)

0.019***
(0.001)

NO
YES
YES
0.391

(1)

0.204***
(0.016)

(2)

0.017***
(0.002)

YES
YES
YES
0.403

(2)

0.154***
(0.018)

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.060***
(0.009)

NO
YES
YES
0.370

(3)

0.274***
(0.017)

0.064***
(0.010)

YES
YES
YES
0.384

(4)

0.170***
(0.020)
0.015**
(0.008)

0.018***
(0.002)

NO
YES
YES
0.377

(5)

0.293***
(0.028)

−0.116***
(0.016)

0.018***
(0.002)

YES
YES
YES
0.390

(6)

0.125***
(0.018)

0.239**
(0.109)

NO
YES
YES
0.322

  Other firm controls
  Year FE
  Firm FE
  Adjusted 𝑅2
This table reports the relationship between firms’ investment, equity issuance, and mispricing measures including Tobin’s Q, discretionary accruals (DACCR), and price changes. 
In Panel A, the dependent variable is the equity issuance to asset ratio. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the firm investment rate. The sample period is 1980–2021. We 
exclude firms in the utility (SIC 4900-4999) and financial (SIC 6000-6999) sectors. Other firm controls include firm size, firm age, cash flow to asset ratio, and debt issuance. KZ 
is the four-variable version of the KZ-index (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997), following the methodology of Baker et al. (2003). FF represents the Financial Flexibility index as defined 
in Doidge et al. (2009). ED is the difference between the average equity issuance-to-asset ratio and the debt issuance-to-asset ratio over the past five years. Standard errors are 
clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

YES
YES
NO
0.166

YES
YES
YES
0.375

YES
YES
YES
0.397

YES
YES
YES
0.367

YES
YES
YES
0.374

P5

P75

P95

P50

P25

Mean

0.1428
0.2239
5.8632
5.1676
5.6276
0.0000
0.0000
0.0926
0.0608
1.5085
0.0138
0.0012

−0.0611
0.0858
0.0902
0.0000
4.3891
2.5859
3.7365
1.8776
4.0313
2.2739
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0536
0.0096
−0.1793 −0.0152
1.0430
0.6633
0.0004
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000

Table 3
Summary statistics.
  Variable
  Income-to-assets ratio
0.2053 0.3343
0.1367
  Leverage
0.3521 0.5611
0.2367
  Firm size
7.4630 9.6650
5.9623
  Log book equity
6.6785 8.7439
5.2192
  Log market equity
7.3136 9.6885
5.7482
  Pct. of equity issuance
0.0000 0.1812
0.0268
  Pct. of share repurchase
0.0106 0.0803
0.0178
  Gross investment
0.1555 0.3786
0.1312
  Asset growth
0.1637 0.6052
0.1199
  Market-to-book ratio
2.6510 8.0230
2.4504
  Dividend yield
0.0296 0.0680
0.0231
  Portfolio weight
0.0046
0.0041 0.0151
  KZ
−0.2549 −2.5001 −0.8103 −0.0962 0.5625 1.4222
  FF
0.7165
1.0000 2.0000
  ED
−0.0189 −0.1235 −0.0469 −0.0155 0.0000 0.0782
  Debt issuance
0.0467 0.2172
0.0423
  DACCR
0.0406 0.1409
0.0001
  Price changes
0.2822 0.9286
0.0670
This table reports summary statistics for our sample. The sample period is 1980–2021. 
We exclude firms in the utility (SIC 4900–4999) and financial (SIC 6000–6999) sectors. 
The balance-sheet variables are obtained from Compustat, stock prices are obtained 
from CSRP, and portfolio weights are calculated using the Form 13F data. All variables 
are defined in Table  1.

0.0000
0.0000
−0.1513 −0.0370
−0.5194 −0.1932

0.0000
0.0034
0.0336

0.0000

1.0000

0.0000

Third, the proceeds from equity issuance are positively associated 
with firms’ investments. Panel B of Table  2 presents results based on 
the  regressions  of  firms’  investment  on  equity  issuance,  showing  a 
significant positive relationship across all specifications. Quantitatively, 
column (2) indicates that a one percent increase in equity issuance is 
associated with a 15.4 basis point rise in investment. By comparison, 
a one percent increase in debt issuance is associated with a compa-
rable increase of 25.7 basis points in investment. These findings are 
consistent with prior literature. Baker et al. (2003) demonstrate that 
firms’ investment decisions can be quite sensitive to non-fundamental 
moves  in  stock  prices  through  the  equity  financing  channel.  Farhi 
and Panageas (2004) and Gilchrist et al. (2005) provide evidence that 

4 

investment both at the firm and aggregate level is responsive to mis-
pricing indicators. Leveraging the bubble in Japanese equity markets 
from 1987 to 1989, Chirinko and Schaller (2001) observe that it led to 
a 6%–9% increase in business fixed investment.

Importantly, the real effect of equity issuance varies significantly 
across  firms,  depending  on  their  reliance  on  equity  financing.  We 
construct three indices to proxy for firms’ ex-ante equity dependence. 
The first is the KZ-index (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997), originally used 
in Baker et al. (2003) as a measure of equity dependence. The sec-
ond  measure  is  the  financial  flexibility  index,  as  in  Doidge  et  al. 
(2009). This index is calculated by awarding one point for each of 
the  following  conditions:  the  firm  has  high  cash  and  liquid  assets, 
it  pays  high  dividends,  and  it  maintains  low  capital  expenditures.4 
Firms with lower FF scores are considered less financially flexible and, 
therefore, more equity-dependent. The third is a more direct measure 
based on the firm’s historical financing patterns—the ED (equity minus 
debt) index, which is calculated as the difference between the average 
equity issuance-to-asset ratio and the debt issuance-to-asset ratio over 
the  past  rolling  five-year  window  for  each  firm.  We  interact  each 
of these indices with our main variable of interest, 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒. 
Our results in columns (4) through (6) reveal that the positive link 
between investment and equity issuance is strengthened for firms that 
are more equity-dependent, as indicated by the coefficient estimates on 
the interaction terms. This cross-sectional variation reflects substantial 
economic magnitudes. According to the results in column (6), when a 
firm’s equity dependence, measured by its historical equity issuance, 
increases from the bottom to the top 5th percentile (these percentiles 
are reported in Table  3), the corresponding investment-issuance rela-
tionship increases by 0.048, an around 40% increase relative to the 
base value of 0.125. Using other equity dependence proxies also yields 
similar quantitative effects. Taken together, our results suggest that for 

4 In  particular,  firms’  cash  and  liquid  assets  are  considered  ‘‘high’’  if 
they exceed the 75th percentile among firms. The same threshold applies to 
dividends, while capital expenditures are classified as ‘‘low’’ if they fall below 
the 25th percentile.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Choi et al.

average firms, the sensitivity of investment to equity issuance proceeds 
may  be  modest,  but  for  firms  that  rely  more  on  equity  financing, 
the  proceeds  from  equity  are  associated  with  a  significant  increase 
in investment. All results presented in Table  2 remain robust when 
we adopt an alternative specification that employs a dummy variable 
for equity issuance instead of the continuous equity issuance-to-asset 
ratio. The robustness results are reported in Tables G.9 and G.10 in the 
Internet Appendix.

Recent anecdotes from the 2021 ‘‘meme stock’’ episode also provide 
an intriguing case in which sentiment-driven stock price surges lead to 
financing and investment opportunities that might not have otherwise 
been available. During 2021, six stocks frequently referred to as ‘‘meme 
stock’’ – GameStop, AMC, Bed Bath & Beyond, National Beverage, Koss, 
and Tesla – experienced, on average, a 73% increase in equity issuance 
and a 43% increase in investment.

While our analysis in this section does not aim to establish causal re-
lationships, it highlights the potentially important interactions between 
firms’ market timing incentives and their real decisions. Importantly, 
the relationship exhibits significant heterogeneity across firms, suggest-
ing that the proceeds from equity issuance benefit some firms more 
than others, which could bear important implications for the capital 
allocation efficiency in the economy.

3. Model

In this section, we build a model that endogenizes the demand and 
supply sides of equity capital. In our model, firms face capital provision 
that arises from time-varying investor demand; in response, they make 
optimal decisions on share issuance and repurchase, dividend payout, 
leverage,  and  investment.  These  decisions,  in  turn,  feed  back  into 
investors’ demand functions.

3.1. Firm’s cash flows

We consider heterogeneous firms, indexed by 𝑛, that face a decreas-
ing return-to-scale technology and use capital, 𝐾𝑛,𝑡, as the input to 
generate per period pre-tax profits: 
𝑌𝑛,𝑡 = 𝑎𝜁𝑛

𝑡 𝑧𝑛,𝑡𝐾 𝛼
𝑛,𝑡.

(1)

Firm productivity (in logs) equals 𝜁𝑛 log(𝑎𝑡) + log(𝑧𝑛,𝑡), where log(𝑎𝑡)
captures an aggregate component of productivity that is common across 
firms, and log(𝑧𝑛,𝑡) denotes an idiosyncratic component of productivity. 
𝜁𝑛 captures the exposure of the productivity of firm 𝑛 to aggregate 
conditions. We assume 𝜁𝑛 is heterogeneously distributed across firms 
as  𝜁𝑛 ∼  (1, 𝜎2
𝜁 ).  Both  the  macro-  and  firm-level  components  of 
productivity follow AR(1) processes:

log(𝑎𝑡+1) = 𝜌𝑎 log(𝑎𝑡) + 𝜈𝑎
log(𝑧𝑛,𝑡+1) = 𝜌𝑧 log(𝑧𝑛,𝑡) + 𝜈𝑧

𝑡+1, with 𝜈𝑎
𝑛,𝑡+1, with 𝜈𝑧

𝑡+1 ∼  (0, 𝜎2
𝑎 ),
𝑛,𝑡+1 ∼  (0, 𝜎2
𝑧 ).

(2)

(3)

For ease of notation, we drop subscript 𝑛 when the meaning is clear. 

The law of motion for 𝐾𝑡 is given by: 

𝐾𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿)𝐾𝑡 + 𝐼𝑡,

(4)

where  𝐼𝑡  is  the  capital  investment  at  time  𝑡  and  𝛿  is  the  capital 
depreciation rate.

A firm making investment 𝐼𝑡 incurs a quadratic capital adjustment 

cost: 

𝛯(𝐼𝑡, 𝐾𝑡) ≡ 𝜉

𝐼 2
𝑡
𝐾𝑡

,

(5)

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

that the firm carries net debt on its balance sheet. The firm’s debt is 
subject to a collateral constraint: 

−𝐶𝑡

≤ 𝜃𝐾𝑡,

(6)

[

(8)

𝑡 𝑧𝑡𝐾 𝛼

− ̊𝐶𝑡 − 𝑓 ,

]
1 + 𝑟(1 − 𝜏𝑐 )

where 𝜃 is the pledgeability parameter and can be interpreted as the 
fraction of tangible assets that the firm can pledge to a lender. The firm 
can finance its investments via internal cash or by issuing new debt: 
𝐼𝑡 + 𝛯(𝐼𝑡, 𝐾𝑡) = (1 − 𝜏𝑐 )𝑎𝜁
𝑡 + 𝛿𝜏𝑐 𝐾𝑡 + 𝐶𝑡
(7)
where  ̊𝐶𝑡 denotes the firm’s cash reserves before any equity issuance or 
payout, 𝜏𝑐 is the corporate tax rate, and 𝑓 represents fixed operating 
costs. The firm can draw down its cash reserve by making payments to 
equity holders or increase it by floating new shares: 
𝐶𝑡+1 = ̊𝐶𝑡 + 𝐸𝑡 − 𝛹 (𝐸𝑡) − 𝐷𝑡,
where we allow the dollar amount of equity flow, 𝐸𝑡, to be either pos-
itive or negative, with a positive number indicating equity issuance and 
a negative number indicating share repurchase. 𝐷𝑡 represents dividend 
payments. When the firm issues new equity (i.e., when 𝐸 > 0), it incurs 
an equity issuance cost: 
𝛹 (𝐸𝑡) = (𝜙0𝐾𝑡 + 𝜙1𝐸𝑡) × 1{𝐸𝑡>0
where 𝜙0 and 𝜙1 are the equity issuance cost parameters, 𝐸𝑡 represents 
the  dollar  amount  of  equity  issuance,  and  𝐾𝑡  is  the  firm’s  capital 
stock. When the firm issues equity, it incurs a fixed cost, 𝜙0𝐾𝑡, which 
is independent of the size of the issuance, as well as a linear cost, 
𝜙1𝐸𝑡. The equity issuance costs are motivated by underwriting fees and 
adverse selection costs. To keep the model tractable, we do not model 
the costs of external equity as the outcome of an asymmetric informa-
tion problem. Following Cooley and Quadrini (2001) and Gomes and 
Schmid (2021), we capture adverse selection costs and underwriting 
fees in a reduced form using a linear equity issuance cost, 𝜙1, multiplied 
by the dollar amount of equity issuance. The fixed equity issuance cost 
is introduced to better capture additional characteristics of seasoned 
equity offerings (SEOs), such as their frequency and lumpiness.5

(9)

},

3.2. Investors’ portfolio choices

There are 𝐼 investors indexed by 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝐼, each endowed with 
wealth 𝐴𝑖. Assets are indexed by 𝑛 = 0, 1, … , 𝑁, with asset 𝑛 ≥ 1
corresponding to firm 𝑛’s stock and 𝑛 = 0 corresponding to the outside 
asset (i.e., assets other than equities of the 𝑁 firms). Each investor 
allocates wealth 𝐴𝑖 across the assets in her investment universe  𝑖 ⊆
{0, 1, … , 𝑁}. Investor 𝑖’s portfolio weight on asset 𝑛 at time 𝑡 is denoted 
by 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛), with ∑

𝑛∈ 𝑖 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) = 1.

Following the characteristics-based demand system of Koijen and 
Yogo (2019), we model investor 𝑖’s portfolio weight on asset 𝑛 ∈  𝑖 ⧵
{0} as a logit function of the asset’s observed characteristics, 𝒙𝑡(𝑛) =
{𝑥1,𝑡(𝑛), 𝑥2,𝑡(𝑛), … , 𝑥𝐾,𝑡(𝑛)}, and unobserved latent demand, 𝜖𝑖,𝑡(𝑛)6: 

exp

{∑𝐾

𝑘=1 𝛽𝑘,𝑖 𝑥𝑘,𝑡(𝑛) + 𝛽0,𝑖

}

⋅ 𝜖𝑖,𝑡(𝑛)
}

𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) =

1 + ∑

𝑚∈ 𝑖⧵{0} exp

{∑𝐾

𝑘=1 𝛽𝑘,𝑖 𝑥𝑘,𝑡(𝑚) + 𝛽0,𝑖

.

(10)

⋅ 𝜖𝑖,𝑡(𝑚)

As shown by Koijen and Yogo (2019), this formulation aligns with 
the optimal portfolio weights of investors who pursue mean–variance 
optimization and hold long-only portfolios, assuming that the expected 
returns and factor loadings of assets are expressed as polynomial func-
tions of observable characteristics. Koijen and Yogo (2019) also demon-
strate the empirical relevance of this characteristic-based demand sys-
tem. To implement this approach, we use the same set of 𝐾 charac-
teristics as Koijen and Yogo (2019), which includes log market equity, 

where 𝜉 denotes the capital adjustment cost parameter.

We use 𝐶𝑡 to denote a firm’s net cash. When 𝐶𝑡 > 0, the firm is 
holding more cash than its debt outstanding, and hence it is earning the 
risk-free interest rate, 𝑟, on the net cash balance, while 𝐶𝑡 < 0 indicates 

5 We further consider quadratic equity issuance cost in Section 8.
6 Latent demand for the outside asset, 𝜖𝑖,𝑡(0), is normalized to one, and 
hence investor 𝑖’s portfolio weight on the outside asset, 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(0), equals one 
divided by the denominator in Eq.  (10).

5 

J. Choi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

log book equity, investment, profitability, dividends, and market beta.7 
The first element in 𝒙𝑡 represents log market equity, and the demand 
parameter 𝛽𝑘,𝑖 captures how investor’s demand varies with respect to 
firm characteristic 𝑥𝑘,𝑡.

The latent demand component in Eq.  (10), 𝜖𝑖,𝑡(𝑛), which we also 
refer to as excess demand, represents investor 𝑖’s demand in excess 
of the observed firm characteristics. We normalize the mean of latent 
demand  for  each  investor  𝑖  and  time  𝑡  to  one,  such  that  its  cross-
sectional  distribution  captures  the  investor’s  excess  demand  across 
assets. When high 𝜖𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) is concentrated in asset 𝑛 across investors, it 
indicates strong aggregate demand for that asset that is unexplained 
by  observed  characteristics,  which  can  coincide  with,  for  example, 
heightened investor sentiment.

3.3. Investor demand, equity issuance, and price impacts

In this section, we explore the interaction between firms’ decisions 
to  issue  and  repurchase  stocks  and  investor  demand  for  the  firms’ 
equity. We also discuss how such decisions influence the equilibrium 
equity price.

We use 𝑠𝑡(𝑛) to denote the logarithm of a firm’s outstanding shares 
so that 𝛥𝑠𝑡(𝑛) represents the percentage of new equity issuance in a 
given year if it is greater than zero and share repurchases if is less than 
zero. Let 𝑝𝑡(𝑛) denote the log of the equilibrium market price of firm 
𝑛’s stock, which satisfies the market-clearing condition similar to that 
in Koijen and Yogo (2019): 
]
[𝐴(𝑛) ⋅ 𝑊𝑡(𝑛)

𝑝𝑡(𝑛) + 𝑠𝑡(𝑛) − log

(11)

= 0.

In the market-clearing condition (11), 𝐴(𝑛) ≡ ∑

𝑛∈𝑖  is 
the  total  dollar  amount  of  investable  wealth  on  firm  𝑛,  and  𝑊𝑡(𝑛)
is  the  aggregate  portfolio  weight  investors  place  on  firm  𝑛’s  stock, 
characterized by: 

𝑖∈𝐼 𝐴𝑖 ⋅ 1

)
𝑊𝑡(𝑛) ≡ 𝑊 (𝒙𝑡(𝑛), 𝜖𝑡(𝑛)

=

exp

}
{𝜷 𝒙𝑡(𝑛)
⋅ 𝜖𝑡(𝑛)
}
{𝜷 𝒙𝑡(𝑚)
𝑚∈ 𝑛⧵{0} exp

1 + ∑

⋅ 𝜖𝑡(𝑚)

.

(12)

The  aggregate  portfolio  weight  depends  on  firm  𝑛’s  characteristics, 
𝒙𝑡(𝑛), and investors’ excess demand for firm 𝑛’s equity, 𝜖𝑡(𝑛).  𝑛 ≡
⋃
𝑛∈ 𝑖  𝑖 includes all other securities that firm 𝑛’s investors might 
also consider holding. Intuitively, Eq. (12) represents the firm-level 
counterpart  of  individual  investor’s  demand  in  Eq.   (10),  describing 
the aggregate portfolio share of firm 𝑛 among its investors. Similarly, 
𝜖𝑡(𝑛) captures firm-level excess investor demand, which can be derived 
by aggregating individual investors’ excess demand weighted by their 
wealth, 𝐴𝑖, as shown in Internet Appendix A.2.

The market-clearing condition, as expressed in Eq.  (11), is pivotal 
for analyzing how changes in firm-level excess demand and the firm’s 
decision to issue or repurchase shares would affect the equilibrium 
price.  Taking  derivatives  of  Eq.   (11)  with  respect  to  log  firm-level 
excess demand and log shares outstanding, we can define the price 
impacts of excess demand, 𝛶 𝜖, and equity issuance, 𝛶 𝑠:
𝛶 𝜖 (𝒙𝑡(𝑛), 𝜖𝑡(𝑛)
{

}−1

) ≡

{

𝜕 log

𝜕𝑝𝑡(𝑛)
𝜕 log 𝜖𝑡(𝑛)
}
[𝑊𝑡(𝑛) 𝐴(𝑛)
]
𝜕 log 𝜖𝑡(𝑛)
[

⋅

]
[
1 − 𝑊𝑡(𝑛)

1 + 𝜖𝑡(𝑛)𝜷

= −

= −

𝜕 log

[𝑊𝑡(𝑛) 𝐴(𝑛)
]
𝜕𝑝𝑡(𝑛)
{

⋅

𝜷

𝜕𝒙𝑡(𝑛)
𝜕𝑝𝑡(𝑛)

]

𝜕𝒙𝑡(𝑛)
𝜕𝜖𝑡(𝑛)

− 1

]
[
1 − 𝑊𝑡(𝑛)

}−1

− 1

,

(13)

𝛶 𝑠 (𝒙𝑡(𝑛), 𝜖𝑡(𝑛)
{

𝜕 log

= −

) ≡

𝜕𝑝𝑡(𝑛)
𝜕𝑠𝑡(𝑛)
]
[𝑊𝑡(𝑛) 𝐴(𝑛)
𝜕𝑠𝑡(𝑛)

}

{

− 1

⋅

𝜕 log

}−1

]
[𝑊𝑡(𝑛) 𝐴(𝑛)
𝜕𝑝𝑡(𝑛)

− 1

{

= −

𝜷

𝜕𝒙𝑡(𝑛)
𝜕𝑠𝑡(𝑛)

]
[
1 − 𝑊𝑡(𝑛)

}

{

− 1

⋅

𝜷

𝜕𝒙𝑡(𝑛)
𝜕𝑝𝑡(𝑛)

[

]
1 − 𝑊𝑡(𝑛)

− 1

}−1

.

(14)

Eq.  (13)  measures  the  percent  change  in  the  stock  price  when 
underlying excess demand changes by one percent, capturing the price 
impact of excess demand. Eq. (14) represents the percent change in the 
stock price when the firm issues one percent of new equity, capturing 
the price impact of net share issuance.

Notably, there are two key differences between the price impacts 
discussed above and those in Koijen and Yogo (2019). First, in Koijen 
and  Yogo  (2019),  firm  characteristics  are  taken  as  given,  whereas, 
in our framework, firms optimally choose their policies based on the 
realization of their excess demand. These policies, which represent the 
firm’s characteristics, in turn, feed back into the investors’ demand 
system. As a result,  𝜕𝒙𝑡(𝑛)
𝜕𝜖𝑡(𝑛)  shows up in the price impact equations.8 
Second, while Koijen and Yogo (2019) assume a fixed supply of shares, 
we  account  for  firms’  endogenous  issuance  decisions.  When  a  firm 
issues non-zero percentages of stocks, variations in the market price 
also affect the dollar value the firm can receive from the issuance, 
which  can  trigger  further  changes  in  firm  characteristics,  affecting 
investors’ demand for the firm’s shares. These price impacts of excess 
demand and equity issuance, therefore, capture the interaction between 
investors and firms.

3.4. The firm’s optimization problem

At the beginning of each period, firms observe the aggregate produc-
tivity of the economy, 𝑎𝑡, specified in Eq.  (2), and 𝛤𝑡, which denotes the 
distribution of firms in the economy. This distribution is relevant for the 
firm’s decision-making because investors’ portfolio weights depend not 
only on the firm’s own characteristics but also on the joint distribution 
of characteristics across other firms in their portfolios, as outlined in Eq. 
(12). Therefore, 𝛤𝑡 influences the price at which the firm can issue or 
repurchase shares through the investor demand channel discussed in 
Section 3.3.

In addition to the aggregate productivity shocks, firms also face id-
iosyncratic productivity shocks, 𝑧, defined in Eq.  (3), and idiosyncratic 
excess demand shocks, 𝜖. We model the logarithm of 𝜖 as an AR(1) 
process: 

log(𝜖𝑡+1) = 𝜌𝜖 log(𝜖𝑡) + 𝜈𝜖

𝑡+1, with 𝜈𝜖

𝑡+1 ∼  (0, 𝜎2
𝜖 ).

(15)

Firms  then  produce  and  simultaneously  announce  their  current-
period investment, debt, and dividend policies. They can also tap the 
capital market to issue or repurchase additional shares; the price at 
which these transactions take place is determined in equilibrium by 
both firms’ actions and investors’ demand. When the equity market 
transaction prices deviate from a firm’s fundamental value, it results in 
a transfer of wealth from investors who trade with the firm to those 
who do not. Firm managers design their market-timing strategies to 
maximize the value of their controlling shareholders who do not engage 
directly in equity transactions with the firm. This means that, when 
the firm issues equity, the managers will aim to maximize the value of 
the existing shareholders, while in the event of a share repurchase, the 
managers will maximize the value of the retaining shareholders. The 
setup closely follows that in Warusawitharana and Whited (2016), who 

7 We construct investment and profitability based on the variable defi-
nitions  in  Fama  and  French  (2015),  i.e.,  investment  as  asset  growth  and 
profitability as operating profitability. Market beta is estimated through a 60-
month rolling regression of past monthly excess returns, ensuring at least 24 
months of nonmissing returns.

8 This approach is consistent with either investors rationally forecasting 
firms’  reactions  or  investors  responding  to  firms’  announced  policies.  We 
include further discussion of the microfoundations in Internet Appendix A.3, 
which also provides more details on Eqs. (13) and (14).

6 

J. Choi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

provide detailed discussions on incorporating managers’ market-timing 
incentives into an otherwise standard neoclassical model of investment.
The Bellman equation for the firm’s controlling shareholder can be 
written recursively as follows (for simplicity, we drop the time subscript 
and firm indexing):

𝑉 (𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ) =

max
{𝛥𝑠,𝐸,𝐷,𝐼,𝐶′}

{

(1 − 𝜏𝑑 )𝐷

+

1
1 + 𝛥𝑠

E

𝑧,𝜖,𝑎

[𝑚(𝑎, 𝑎′)𝑉 (𝐾 ′, 𝐶 ′, 𝑧′, 𝜖′; 𝑎′, 𝛤 ′)

]}

,

(16)

where 𝐾 and 𝐶 represent the existing level of physical capital and 
the cash balance, 𝐼 represents investments, 𝛥𝑠 and 𝐸 are the fraction 
and dollar amount of equity issuance, respectively, 𝐷 is the dividend 
payment, and 𝜏𝑑 denotes the dividend tax rate. Any variable with a 
prime denotes its value in the next period. We multiply the continuation 
value of the firm by  1
1+𝛥𝑠  to capture the dilution effect from new equity 
issuance.

We  denote  𝑚(⋅)  as  the  stochastic  discount  factor  (SDF)  for  the 
controlling shareholders.9 Following Zhang (2005) and David et al. 
(2022), we specify the law of motion for the SDF as:

log

(𝑚𝑡+1

)

= log 𝜂 − 𝛾𝑡𝜈𝑎

𝑡+1 −

1
2

𝑡 𝜎2
𝛾 2
𝑎 ,

𝛾𝑡 = 𝛾0 + 𝛾1 log(𝑎𝑡),

(17)

(18)

where 𝜈𝑎
𝑡+1 is the time 𝑡 + 1 innovation to the aggregate productivity 
shock, and 𝜎2
𝑎 captures the variance of the innovation, defined in Eq. 
≤ 0 are constants that 
(2). Parameters 0 < 𝜂 < 1, 𝛾0 > 0, and 𝛾1
govern the relationship between the SDF and aggregate productivity. 
This formulation allows us to capture, in a simple manner, a time-
varying and countercyclical price of risk as observed in the data. Similar 
to Warusawitharana and Whited (2016), controlling shareholders value 
the firm using this SDF, which represents the marginal utility of their 
equity wealth. The equity wealth of the controlling holders is measured 
using the intrinsic value of equity. This is consistent with the notion 
that these controlling shareholders do not directly engage in any equity 
transactions with the firm. Given the firms’ market timing incentive via 
issuing and repurchasing shares, it would be disadvantageous for any of 
the controlling shareholders to participate in such share transactions.

The firm optimizes Eq. (16) subject to the laws of motion in Eqs. (2), 
(3), (15), (17), and constraints in Eqs. (4), (6), (7), and (8). In addition, 
the firm’s dollar amount of equity issuance (𝐸) and the fraction of new 
shares issued (𝛥𝑠) satisfy the following condition:

{

[

log(𝜖)

𝐸 = 𝛥𝑠

1 +

∫

log( ̃𝜖)=0

𝛶 𝜖(𝒙𝛥𝑠=0, ̃𝜖)𝑑 log( ̃𝜖) + ∫

̃𝑠=0

𝛥𝑠

]}

𝛶 𝑠(𝒙, 𝜖)𝑑 ̃𝑠

×

[𝑉 (𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ) − (1 − 𝜏𝑑 )𝐷] ,

(19)

which states that the dollar amount of equity issuance should equal the 
fraction of shares issued multiplied by the market price. Functions 𝛶 𝜖(⋅)
and 𝛶 𝑠 (⋅) capture the price impacts of excess demand and the firm’s 
equity issuance, as specified in Eqs. (13) and (14).10 𝑉 (𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 )
is the value of the firm from the controlling shareholders’ perspective, 
defined  in  Eq.   (16),  to  which  we  also  refer  as  the  firm’s  intrinsic 
value.  𝐸
𝛥𝑠  equals the firm’s market value, which is the forward-looking 
intrinsic  value,  adjusted  for  any  price  pressure  arising  from  either 
investor demand or the firm’s equity issuance.

9 Note that this SDF may not necessarily align with the marginal utility of 
investors, as their portfolio preferences depend on both firm characteristics 
and their latent demand. Our approach is akin to the one in Warusawitharana 
and Whited (2016), where the firm’s SDF represents the marginal utility of 
wealth for the controlling shareholders.
10 Note that price pressure function 𝛶 𝜖(⋅) is evaluated at the point where no 
equity is issued (𝛥𝑠 = 0).

7 

3.5. Recursive competitive equilibrium

Given an initial firm distribution, a recursive competitive equilib-
rium consists of the value function 𝑉 (𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ); firm policy func-
tions  𝐾 ′(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  𝐶 ′(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  𝛥𝑠(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  𝐸(𝐾, 𝐶,
𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ), and 𝐷(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ); investors’ policy function for the port-
folio choices 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛); and a bounded sequence of firm measures {𝛤𝑡
}∞
𝑡=1, 
such that for all 𝑡 ≥ 0:

1. Firm  policy  functions  𝐾 ′(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  𝐶 ′(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  𝛥𝑠
(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  𝐸(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  𝐷(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ),  and  value 
function 𝑉 (𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ) solve the firm’ optimization problem 
(Eq. (16)).

2. All investors choose their portfolio weights 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) following the 

demand function specified in Eq.  (10).

3. The asset market clears, as specified in Eq.  (11).
4. For all Borel sets  ×  ×  ×  ⊂ + ×  × + × + and ∀ 𝑡 ≥ 0, 

𝛤𝑡+1( ×  ×  × ) = ∫ ∫ ∫(,,)

𝑑𝛤𝑡(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖)𝑑𝐺(𝜖′

|𝜖)𝑑𝐻(𝑧′

|𝑧),

{

where (, , ) =
(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖) 𝑠.𝑡. 𝐾 ′(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ) ∈ , 𝐶 ′
(𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖; 𝑎, 𝛤 ) ∈ }, and 𝐺(𝜖) and 𝐻(𝑧) denote the distribution 
of excess demand and productivity shocks, respectively.

(20)

We detail the algorithm for computing the equilibrium in Internet 

Appendix B.1.

4. Estimation

In this section, we first outline our strategy for identifying the pa-
rameters that govern investor demand and firm optimization. We then 
present the estimation results and follow with a battery of validation 
tests to evaluate the reliability of both our model and the indirect 
inference approach.

4.1. Data

Our analysis uses data on stock prices from the Center for Research 
in Security Prices (CRSP) and accounting data from Compustat, which 
we describe in Section 2.

To identify parameters that pertain to investor demand, we draw in-
stitutional stock holdings data from the Thompson Reuters Institutional 
Holdings Database, which is based on Form 13F filings. All US-based 
institutions  with  assets  under  management  exceeding  $100  million 
dollars are required to report their long-side holdings in the 13F filings 
if their holding in a publicly listed stock is greater than 10,000 shares 
or $200,000. The sample contains 173,238 firm-year observations and 
17,130 distinct firms. We merge these institutional holdings data with 
the  CRSP-Compustat  data  and  filter  out  any  holdings  data  that  do 
not match with the CRSP-Compustat database. We compute portfolio 
weights for common stocks (i.e., CRSP share code 10 or 11) held by 
a 13F institution as the ratio of the dollar amount held to the total 
dollar amount of all stocks held by the institution. Stocks with missing 
characteristics or returns and those with CRSP share code 12 or 18 
(foreign companies or real estate investment trusts) are classified as 
the outside asset (i.e., 𝑛 = 0), consistent with the methodology outlined 
in Koijen and Yogo (2019). Using available data, we construct the key 
variables used in our estimation. Table  3 presents summary statistics 
for our sample.

J. Choi et al.

4.2. Identification

Our  estimation  starts  by  identifying  parameters  that  pertain  to 
investor demand, including 𝜷 =
, which 
captures how demand responds to log market equity, log book equity, 
investment, profitability, dividends, and market beta, respectively, and 
{𝜌𝜖, 𝜎𝜖
,  which  captures  the  persistence  and  standard  deviation  of 
latent excess demand that firms face.

{𝛽𝑚𝑒, 𝛽𝑏𝑒, 𝛽𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓 , 𝛽𝑖𝑛𝑣, 𝛽𝑑𝑖𝑣, 𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎

}

}

We estimate the demand-side parameters using an indirect inference 
approach, which involves first running the following regression in the 
data11:

log 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) ∼ 𝛾𝑚𝑒 ⋅ 𝑚𝑒𝑛,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑏𝑒 ⋅ 𝑏𝑒𝑛,𝑡

+ 𝛾𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓 ⋅ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑛,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑖𝑛𝑣 ⋅ 𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑛,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑑𝑖𝑣 ⋅ 𝑑𝑖𝑣𝑛,𝑡

+ 𝛾𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎 ⋅ 𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑛,𝑡 + 𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛).
If latent demand is exogenous, i.e., {𝜖𝑖,𝑡(𝑛)

(21)
} in Eq.  (10) is uncor-
related with the firm characteristics, such as market and book equity 
and investment, then the vector of coefficient estimates, ̂𝜸, should be 
an  unbiased  estimate  of  the  true  structural  demand  parameters,  𝜷, 
allowing us to equate the estimated residuals in the regression, {𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛)
}
to the log of latent excess demand. This condition is, however, likely 
to be violated because of inherent endogeneity in market equity and 
other supply-side policies.

To tackle this challenge, we run the same regression of investor port-
folio holdings 𝑤(𝑛) on firm characteristics 𝒙(𝑛), using the simulated data 
from the model. Note first that the estimated regression coefficients 
from the actual data, ̂𝜸, in Eq.  (21) can be viewed as the true param-
eters, 𝜷, plus a bias that arises from the feedback effect of demand 
shocks on supply-side policies. Thus, the regression coefficients can 
provide useful information on the underlying preference parameters 
and serve as effective identifying moments. Furthermore, our model 
endogenizes firms’ investment and financing policies based on their 
information set, including their knowledge of the latent demand, as 
specified in Eq.  (16). Therefore, the regression coefficients obtained 
using our simulated data also capture similar endogenous feedback be-
tween latent demand and the observed firm characteristics that should 
be present in the data, leading to a consistent mapping between the 
model and data moments. By matching these regression coefficients, ̂𝜸, 
which capture feedback from the supply-side effects, we can effectively 
back out the underlying structural demand parameters, 𝜷. Next, we 
identify the autocorrelation and standard deviation of latent demand 
that firms face, {𝜌𝜖, 𝜎𝜖
, by matching the autocorrelation and standard 
deviation of the residual in the auxiliary Eq. (21).

}

This identification strategy for structural parameters 𝜷 follows the 
indirect inference approach employed in a large body of literature, 
wherein the complexity of the setup rules out a direct inference ap-
proach to match the deep structural parameters (Gourieroux et al., 
1993;  Cooper  and  Haltiwanger,  2006).  An  alternative  approach  to 
indirect inference is to use instrumental variables (IVs) for firm char-
acteristics (Koijen and Yogo, 2019). We later provide a more detailed 
discussion of our approach vis-à-vis the IV approach in Section 4.5.

Our  estimation  of  the  firm-side  parameters  relies  on  the  SMM, 
through which we seek to identify the set of parameter values that 
enables the simulated firm behaviors to track the actual data as closely 
as possible. The success of SMM estimation hinges critically on select-
ing moments that are sensitive to variations in underlying structural 
parameters, which we explain below.

We use the autocorrelation and standard deviation of firms’ income-
to-assets  ratios  to  identify  the  law  of  motion  for  the  idiosyncratic 
productivity process, {𝜌𝑧, 𝜎𝑧
}
. We include in our set of moments the 

11 For actual data, we run regressions at each institution-quarter level similar 
to that in Koijen and Yogo (2019). Details on the moment construction can be 
found in Internet Appendix C.1.

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

mean  of  investment  to  determine  the  depreciation  rate,  𝛿,  and  the 
standard deviation of investment to determine the cost of capital ad-
justment, 𝜉. To identify the linear equity issuance cost parameter, 𝜙1, 
we use the mean and standard deviation of firms’ percentage of equity 
issuance, while the fixed issuance cost parameter, 𝜙0, is identified using 
the observed frequency of equity issuance in the data. We include the 
mean  and  standard  deviation  of  firms’  share  repurchases  to  ensure 
that we can also match the net changes in firms’ outstanding shares 
over time. Our estimation aims to match the levels and volatilities of 
the issuance and repurchase decisions as they reflect firms’ optimal 
reactions to investors’ excess demand, which is the key focus of our 
model. We further include firms’ average dividend payout in our set of 
moments as dividends and share repurchases are substitutable ways of 
redistributing cash, and matching firms’ tendency to pay dividends is 
important to ensure that our model can capture this substitution. We 
use firms’ average leverage to pin down the pledgeability parameter, 
𝜃. Lastly, we use firms’ average income-to-assets ratio and the market-
to-book ratio to identify the fixed operating cost parameter, 𝑓 , and the 
curvature of firms’ production function, 𝛼.

In addition to the firm-level parameters, we also need to estimate 
the aggregate parameters that govern the stochastic discount factor, 
including {𝛾0, 𝛾1, 𝜎𝜁 }. These parameters are identified using aggregate 
stock  market  moments,  such  as  the  Sharp  Ratio.  Importantly,  the 
aggregate moments predicted by the model are influenced by the firm-
level parameters we discuss above, creating interdependence. To deal 
with the interdependence, we adopt an iterative approach. First, we 
fix  the  values  of  {𝛾0, 𝛾1, 𝜎𝜁 }  and  estimate  the  remaining  firm-level 
parameters in the over-identified SMM system. Next, we hold the firm-
level  parameters  at  their  estimated  values  and  calibrate  {𝛾0, 𝛾1, 𝜎𝜁 }
to match the aggregate stock market moments. We iterate the above 
process to ensure that the parameters converge, accounting for the 
interdependence of these parameters in generating the firm-level and 
aggregate moments. Specifically, we calibrate 𝛾0 and 𝛾1 in Eq.  (18) to 
match the average annual excess return of 7.69% and average Sharpe 
ratio of 0.174. The standard deviation of exposure to aggregate shocks, 
𝜎𝜁 , is calibrated to match the dispersion in expected stock returns, 
which is 0.221.12

4.3. Estimation results

Table   4  shows  the  parameter  estimates  for  our  model.  Panel  A 
presents the calibrated parameters, which are less model-specific, and 
thus are calibrated outside of the SMM estimation to ensure that our 
choices are consistent with observed data characteristics and conven-
tions from prior literature. Specifically, the corporate tax rate, 𝜏𝑐 , is set 
to 35%; the dividend tax rate, 𝜏𝑑 , is set to 15%; and the number of 
holdings per investor, 𝐽 , is set to 1000, to match that an average stock 
in our sample has a portfolio weight of 0.0012.13 We set 𝜂 = 0.98 to 
approximate an average risk-free rate of 2%. The annual autocorrela-
tion and standard deviation of aggregate productivity shocks, 𝜌𝑎 and 𝜎𝑎, 
are set to 0.815 and 0.014, respectively, corresponding to the quarterly 
values of 0.950 and 0.007, as in Cooley and Prescott (1995).

In Panel B of Table  4, we report the structural model parameters 
estimated by matching the coefficients and the moments of residuals 
in  the  demand  auxiliary  Eq.  (21).  Our  estimated  𝛽𝑚𝑒  suggests  that 
investors exhibit fairly inelastic demand. In many traditional macro-
finance models, investor demand curves are virtually flat, implying 

12 We construct the firm’s Sharpe ratio as the firm’s excess stock return 
divided by its time-series standard deviation. We calculate each firm’s annual 
expected return using the Fama–French three-factor model. We report the 
average excess return, the average Sharpe ratio, and the standard deviation 
of expected returns across all firms in our sample. See more details about the 
estimation procedure in Section B.2 in the Internet Appendix.
13 Following Koijen and Yogo (2019), in the data, we pool all investors with 
fewer than 1000 stock holdings in a quarter by their size and institution type.

J. Choi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

Value

0.35
0.15
1000
0.98
0.2264
−12.5511
0.8145
0.0140
0.2187

Corporate tax rate
Dividend tax rate
Number of holdings
SDF parameter
SDF parameter
SDF parameter
Persistence of aggregate productivity shocks
Standard deviation of aggregate productivity shocks
Standard deviation of exposure to aggregate productivity shocks

Table 4
Parameter estimates.
  Panel A: Calibrated parameters
  𝜏𝑐
  𝜏𝑑
  𝐽
  𝜂
  𝛾0
  𝛾1
  𝜌𝑎
  𝜎𝑎
  𝜎𝜁
Std. Err. 
  Panel B: Parameters governing investors’ demand
0.0060  
  𝛽𝑚𝑒
0.0029  
  𝛽𝑏𝑒
0.0213  
  𝛽𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓
0.0056  
  𝛽𝑖𝑛𝑣
0.0097  
  𝛽𝑑𝑖𝑣
0.0050  
  𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎
0.0092  
  𝜌𝜖
0.0011  
  𝜎𝜖
Std. Err. 
  Panel C. Parameters governing firms’ operations
0.0038  
  𝛼
0.0218  
  𝜌𝑧
0.0064  
  𝜎𝑧
0.0005  
  𝛿
0.0197  
  𝜉
0.0178  
  𝜃
0.0069  
  𝜙1
0.0008  
  𝜙0
0.0407  
  𝑓
This table reports the model parameter estimates. Panel A presents calibrated parameters, Panel B presents parameter estimates for investor 
demand, and Panel C presents parameter estimates for firms’ operations. Standard errors for the estimated parameters are clustered at the firm 
level and reported in the last column.

Curvature of production function
Persistence of idiosyncratic productivity shocks
Standard deviation of idiosyncratic productivity shocks
Depreciation rate
Capital adjustment cost
Collateral constraint
Linear equity issuance cost
Fixed equity issuance cost
Fixed operating cost

Demand coefficient on log market equity
Demand coefficient on log book equity
Demand coefficient on profitability
Demand coefficient on investment rate
Demand coefficient on dividend
Demand coefficient on market beta
Auto-correlation of excess demand
Standard deviation of excess demand

0.3416
0.1134
0.1780
0.0194
0.3255
−0.0348
0.8068
0.0931

0.6203
0.8307
0.0904
0.1509
0.3774
0.8299
0.0968
0.0109
1.7484

Value

Value

Table 5
Moment conditions.

Actual

Simulated

  (1) 𝛾𝑚𝑒 in the auxiliary equation
  (2) 𝛾𝑏𝑒 in the auxiliary equation
  (3) 𝛾𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓  in the auxiliary equation
  (4) 𝛾𝑖𝑛𝑣 in the auxiliary equation
  (5) 𝛾𝑑𝑖𝑣 in the auxiliary equation
  (6) 𝛾𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎 in the auxiliary equation
  (7) Auto-correlation of residual in the auxiliary equation
  (8) Std. dev. of residual in the auxiliary equation
  (9) Auto-correlation of income-to-assets ratio
  (10) Std. dev. of income-to-assets ratios
  (11) Percentage of equity issuance
  (12) Std. dev. of equity issuance
  (13) Frequency of equity issuance
  (14) Percentage of share repurchase
  (15) Std. dev. of share repurchase
  (16) Mean investment
  (17) Std. dev. of investment
  (18) Mean leverage
  (19) Mean income-to-assets ratio
  (20) Mean market-to-book ratio
  (21) Mean dividend yield
This table reports the empirical (Actual) and simulated (Simulated) moments that we use in our SMM estimation. Moments (1)–(6) are the 
regression coefficients of the auxiliary model in Eq.  (21). Moments (7) and (8) are the autocorrelation and standard deviation of residuals 
of Eq.  (21). Moments (9)–(21) correspond to autocorrelation, averages, and standard deviations of firms’ balance-sheet variables. In the last 
column (Std. Err.), we report standard errors of the moment conditions.

0.8256
0.0207
0.1161
0.0996
0.3669
−0.0541
0.7555
0.0925
0.7961
0.0894
0.0268
0.0659
0.1443
0.0178
0.0494
0.1312
0.1263
0.2367
0.1367
2.4504
0.0231

0.7458
0.0255
0.1142
0.1049
0.4069
−0.0761
0.8932
0.0769
0.8550
0.0648
0.0310
0.0787
0.1726
0.0141
0.0414
0.1554
0.0967
0.2461
0.1577
3.1366
0.0326

Std. Err.
0.0175
0.0013
0.0025
0.0028
0.0276
0.0012
0.0361
0.0014
0.0155
0.0066
0.0013
0.0063
0.0038
0.0005
0.0044
0.0019
0.0056
0.0023
0.0021
0.0242
0.0004

highly elastic demand. However, empirical elasticity estimates for in-
dividual stocks typically fall within the range of 0.3 to 1.6, as noted 
by Gabaix and Koijen (2021). Our model, which leverages granular 
investor  portfolio  data,  is  consistent  with  these  elasticity  estimates 
in  the  literature.  The  estimated  inelastic  demand  implies  that  our 
model can generate sizable price impacts without requiring excessively 
volatile 𝜖. Our estimated 𝜎𝜖 is 0.0931, comparable to the volatility 
of  firms-level  idiosyncratic  productivity  shocks.  By  building  on  the 
strengths of the demand estimation approach from Koijen and Yogo 

(2019), our model produces plausible estimates for investor demand 
characteristics,  making  it  well-suited  for  quantifying  the  associated 
misallocation effects. Our estimation results also suggest that investors’ 
demand loads significantly positively on market equity, book equity, 
profitability, investment, and dividends, while showing a significant 
negative relationship with market beta.

In Panel C, we report the firm-side parameters. For example, the 
curvature of the production function is close to two-thirds, physical 
capital depreciates at a rate of approximately 15% per year, and firms 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Choi et al.

Table 6
Untargeted moments.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

Data
(1)

Baseline model
(2)

Counterfactual
(3)

−0.1222
0.1031
0.0970

  Net issuance on
    Income-to-assets ratio
    Beginning-of period market-to-book ratio
    Beginning-of period leverage
  Investment on
    Income-to-assets ratio
    Beginning-of period market-to-book ratio
    Beginning-of period leverage
This table presents the fit of the model’s empirical policy functions, which describe the relationship between the (transformed) firm state 
variables and the optimal policies in that state following Bazdresch et al. (2018). The observable state variables include firm income-to-assets 
ratio, market-to-book ratio, and leverage. We focus on firms’ investment and equity issuance policies. Following Bazdresch et al. (2018), we first 
transform the raw variables into quartiles based on their ranking within a given year and then estimate the regression coefficients using these 
quartile variables as inputs. Column (1) presents the results calculated using the actual data, column (2) contains that from the simulation of 
the baseline model, and column (3) contains the results from a counterfactual model where we set the mean and standard deviation of log(𝜖)
to zero.

−0.0646
−0.2264
0.0352

−0.1366
0.0564
0.0802

0.0590
0.1912
−0.1090

0.2712
−0.0848
0.0810

0.0692
0.0446
−0.1022

can collateralize about 80% of their assets. These estimates are largely 
consistent with those documented in the literature (see, e.g., Nikolov 
et al., 2021).

Table   5  presents  the  moment  conditions  used  in  our  SMM  es-
timation.  The  first  eight  moment  conditions  involve  the  regression 
coefficients and the residuals from the auxiliary demand equation (21), 
while the remaining 13 moment conditions correspond to characteris-
tics of firms’ balance sheet variables. We find that all the simulated 
moments stay reasonably close to their real data counterparts. The 
model’s close fit is not mechanical, as we have an over-identified system 
with more moment conditions than parameters.

4.4. Model validation

To further validate our model, we proceed to investigate moments 

that we do not directly target in our estimation.

First, we analyze firms’ empirical policy functions (Bazdresch et al., 
2018),  which  demonstrate  how  firms’  optimal  policies,  specifically 
equity issuance and investment decisions, vary in response to changes 
in their underlying state variables, which we summarize by a quadru-
ple, {𝐾, 𝐶, 𝑧, 𝜖}. Since a firm’s productivity shock, 𝑧, and its excess 
demand, 𝜖, are unobservable, we use observable transformations of 
these unobservable state variables. In particular, we rely on the firm’s 
current-period income-to-assets ratio, driven by the realization of its 
TFP  shock,  and  its  beginning-of-period  market-to-book  ratio,  which 
reflects how the market valuation varies relative to the size of book 
equity, potentially influenced by the investors’ demand. We regress a 
firm’s investment and equity issuance on these variables, along with its 
beginning-of-period leverage while controlling for firm size, the firm 
and year fixed effects. The coefficients thus reflect, on average, how 
changes in a firm’s state variables are associated with variations in 
its observed optimal decisions. Following Bazdresch et al. (2018), we 
first transform the raw variables into quartiles based on their ranking 
within a given year and then estimate the regression coefficients using 
these quartile variables as moments. The results of this regression are 
presented in column (1) of Table  6.

We run the same regression using simulated data from the model, 
and the coefficients are reported in column (2). Notably, our model 
can closely match the empirical policy functions, both qualitatively 
and quantitatively. In particular, the regression coefficients reported 
in columns (1) and (2) have the same signs and are of comparable 
magnitudes. Using Monte Carlo simulations, Bazdresch et al. (2018) 
show that benchmarks based on firms’ policy functions are powerful in 
detecting model mis-specifications. The close match on the untargeted 
moments hence further validates that our model realistically captures 
key aspects in firms’ decision-making process.

To further highlight the significance of the investor-firm interface, 
we  compare  the  predictions  of  the  baseline  model  with  those  of  a 

counterfactual scenario where the impact of investors’ excess demand 
on firm policies is removed by setting the mean and standard deviation 
of log(𝜖) to zero. The regression coefficients under this counterfactual 
scenario are presented in column (3). The results indicate a signif-
icant  deterioration  in  the  overall  fit  of  the  policy-based  moments. 
Specifically, the counterfactual model fails to match the relationship 
between the firm’s equity issuance and both its market-to-book ratio 
and leverage. Moreover, the counterfactual model performs consider-
ably worse in matching firms’ investment responses to the transformed 
state variables.

Second,  we  directly  examine  the  connection  between  investors’ 
excess demand and firms’ decisions to issue shares. Empirical investi-
gation of this connection requires constructing a measure for investors’ 
excess demand, which is unobservable. Therefore, we rely on a model-
implied measure. In particular, we infer the implied excess demand 
for each investor-firm-quarter such that the model-predicted portfolio 
weight (specified in Eq.  (12)) based on the observed firm characteristics 
and our demand estimates from Table  4, matches the actual portfolio 
weight observed for each stock in the data.14

Our findings indicate a strong positive correlation between excess 
demand and firms’ equity issuance decisions—an interquartile change 
in 𝜖 is associated with 1.46% increase in equity issuance in the model, 
compared with 1.12% in the data. In addition, the increased equity 
issuance does translate into higher investments, as we show in Sec-
tion  2.  Based  on  the  results  in  column  (1),  Panel  B  of  Table   2,  a 
one-percentage-point increase in equity issuance is associated with a 
20.4-basis-point change investment rate. Our model simulation predicts 
a change of 23.7 basis points, closely matching the magnitude.

Finally, as a further external validity test of the model, we perform 
a separate back-of-the-envelope check by comparing the model-implied 
misvaluation at seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) with the empirical 
evidence documented in the literature. Loughran and Ritter (2000) 
note that firms undertaking SEOs experience a three-year abnormal 
return  of  −22%.  By  tracking  the  five-year  stock  performance  post-
issuance, Loughran and Ritter (1995) conclude that SEO firms issue 
at an average overvaluation of 30%. In our model simulation, firms 
that issue equity face an average mispricing, as defined in Eq.  (19), 
of 33.85%. The magnitude aligns closely with the findings from prior 
studies. The success of our model in capturing realistic mispricing can 
be  attributed  to  its  inelastic  investor  demand  estimates,  which  can 
generate sizeable price impacts without the need for extreme swings in 
excess demand. As reported in Table  5, our model also closely matches 
the share of new issuance and stock repurchases. Taken together, these 
results suggest that our model can generate realistic profit opportunities 
from firms’ market timing.

14 First, we infer the excess demand for each stock within the investor’s 
portfolio. Then, we compute the investors’ AUM-weighted excess demand for 
each firm-quarter.

10 

 
 
J. Choi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

Fig. 1.  Excess demand and price impact.
This  figure  presents  the  model-predicted  relationship  between  excess  demand  and 
the price impact on stocks. The solution is calculated using the parameter estimates 
reported in Table  4. Price impact is defined as the percentage difference between a 
firm’s market price and its intrinsic value ex-dividend, 𝑉 − (1 − 𝜏𝑑 )𝐷, with 𝑉  as defined 
in Eq.  (16). We calculate the average price impact across all state variables (except 𝜖) 
using the ergodic distribution.

4.5. Comparison with alternative estimation strategies

In this section, we discuss the implications of our estimated investor 
demand parameters and compare them with those based on alternative 
approaches.  We  begin  by  showing  that  the  investor-firm  feedback 
mechanism is operating in our model. Specifically, we compare the 
deep structural parameter estimates for the investor demand system, 
{𝜷, 𝜌𝜖, 𝜎𝜖

, with the estimates from the auxiliary Eq. (21).

}

Columns (1) and (2) of Table  7 present these results. In principle, 
if latent demand is orthogonal to firm characteristics, the parameter 
estimates  in  these  two  columns  should  be  equal.  However,  Fig.   2 
demonstrates that firms’ optimal policies in a given period depend on 
latent excess demand. This endogeneity, arising from the interaction be-
tween investor demand and firm policies, creates a wedge between the 
structural parameters and the regression coefficients from the auxiliary 
equation.

We also compare our results with estimates obtained using an alter-
native instrumental variable (IV) approach, as described in Koijen and 
Yogo (2019). Their approach addresses the endogenous determination 
of market-clearing prices by exploiting variation in the investment uni-
verse and assets under management across investors. Following Koijen 
and Yogo (2019), we first construct the instrument variable for market 
equity for each firm using the actual data, assuming that all investors 
hold equal-weighted portfolios in their investment universes. We then 
estimate the demand parameters, 𝜷, using the counterfactual market 
equity, which is orthogonal to the realized shocks to investor demand, 
as an instrument for the firms’ market-clearing equity valuation.

Koijen and Yogo’s (2019) IV approach and our indirect inference 
method both aim to address the endogeneity of latent demand and 
market prices. Koijen and Yogo (2019) correct the bias arising from 
endogeneity by isolating changes along the demand curve to estimate 
the slope of investor demand. Our approach, however, incorporates 
firms’ endogenous supply of shares into the model, resulting in the 
endogenous determination of market-clearing prices through the inter-
action of supply and demand forces in both the simulated data from 
the model and the actual data. This ensures that the mapping between 
the simulated and actual data is consistent, allowing us to back out the 
underlying structural demand parameters.

Table  7 demonstrates that, despite the methodological differences 
between our approach and that of Koijen and Yogo (2019), both meth-
ods correct the bias in the same direction. The estimates of 𝛽𝑚𝑒 from 

11 

Fig. 2.  Excess demand, firm value, and optimal policies.
This figure illustrates the model-predicted relationships among excess demand, a firm’s 
intrinsic value as defined in Eq.  (16), and its optimal investment and financing policies. 
The solution is calculated using the parameter estimates reported in Table  4. For the 
firm value and policies, we calculate the average across all state variables (except 𝜖) 
using the ergodic distribution.

both approaches (columns 2 and 3) are substantially lower than the 
OLS coefficient estimate obtained directly from the auxiliary equation 
(column 1). Additionally, both approaches yield larger 𝛽𝑏𝑒 compared to 
the estimate from the auxiliary equation.

Despite these similarities, there are important differences between 
our approach and that of Koijen and Yogo (2019). On the one hand, 
our  method  accounts  for  the  endogenous  determination  of  market 
equity and other firm characteristics. As illustrated in Fig.  2, investor 
demand influences firms’ policies, creating further wedges between the 
regression coefficients and the structural demand parameters. On the 
other hand, our model abstracts from certain firm-level heterogeneity 
in  the  data.  In  Internet  Appendix  C.2,  we  discuss  ways  to  address 
unobserved heterogeneity when constructing moments.

van der Beck (2022) proposes an alternative method for identifying 
investors’ demand elasticity by analyzing the time-series relationship 
between changes in investor portfolio holdings (flows) and stock price 
fluctuations.  How  would  adopting  this  approach  affect  our  model’s 
predictions quantitatively? To address this question, we first assume 
that the true data-generating process for investors’ portfolio holdings 
follows Eq. (12). Based on this assumption, we regress model-simulated 
flows on stock price changes, yielding a coefficient of 0.2871. This 
estimate  closely  aligns  with  the  demand  elasticity  in  van  der  Beck 
(2022) (Figure 3, without IV). Next, we re-estimate our model using 
the demand moments from the flow-based estimates, with the results 
reported in Table E.2 of the Internet Appendix. Notably, this alternative 
approach produces demand and firm-level parameter estimates that are 
closely aligned with the baseline. Using the new estimates, we also 
verify that our model can recover a holdings-level based 𝛾𝑚𝑒 of 0.7433, 
which is almost identical to our baseline estimate.

In  reality,  investor  demand  can  exhibit  greater  complexity  than 
what is captured by the data-generating process we consider. Hence, 
a crucial question is how different estimation strategies would lead to 
varying conclusions when the true data-generating process is unknown. 
A  side-by-side  comparison  of  demand  coefficients  under  alternative 
strategies  in  Table   7  reveals  two  key  observations.  First,  all  three 
methods consistently produce significantly lower coefficient on mar-
ket equity and, as a result, higher price elasticities compared to the 
plain OLS approach, which does not account for endogenous pricing. 
Second, our estimated structural demand coefficient on market equity 

J. Choi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

Table 7
Comparison of alternative estimation strategies.

OLS Reg
(1)

Baseline
(2)

IV-holding based
(3)

IV-flow based
(4)

  Relationship btw demand and:
    Market equity
    Book equity
    Profit
    Investment
    Dividends
    Market beta
    Auto-correlation of residual
    Stdev. of residual
This table reports demand-side parameter estimates using three different approaches. In column (1), we report the regression coefficient, 𝜸, 
by estimating the auxiliary Equation (21) via OLS; in column (2), we report the estimated structural parameters, 𝜷 in Eq.  (10), using the 
indirect inference method described in Section 4.2; in column (3), we report the coefficient estimates using the instrumental variable approach 
of Koijen and Yogo (2019) based on cross-sectional regression of investors’ holdings; in column (4) we report the parameter estimates using 
the flow-based approach of van der Beck (2022).

0.6508
0.1572
0.1331
0.2487
2.0878
−0.0127
0.6617
0.1472

0.8256
0.0207
0.1161
0.0996
0.3669
−0.0541
0.7555
0.0925

0.3416
0.1134
0.1780
0.0194
0.3255
−0.0348
0.8068
0.0931

0.3500
0.3058
0.1279
0.4676
4.4616
−0.0093
0.7773
0.1746

Table 8
Investor demand, financial constraints, and the flow of funds.

Constrained

Low 𝜖
(1)

High 𝜖
(2)

Less constrained
High 𝜖
(4)

Low 𝜖
(3)

0.7386
0.0907
0.0309
0.1397

0.8252
0.1512
0.0001
0.0235

0.7187
0.2069
0.0449
0.0294

0.6398
0.0507
0.0677
0.2418

  Sources
    Profit
    Net cash reduction
    Interest income
    Equity issuance
  Uses
    Investment
    Adjustment cost
    Taxes
    Cash increase
    Interest payment
    Dividends
    Repurchases
    Fixed operating costs
This table presents the decomposition of the sources and uses of funds for simulated 
firms based on our model. We calculate the fraction of each source (top four rows) or 
use (bottom eight rows) relative to the total and report the average values within each 
subsample of firms. Firms are first divided into ‘‘High’’ or ‘‘Low’’ 𝜖 based on whether 
their current period 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝜖) is above or below zero. Within each group, firms are further 
split based on whether their distance to the collateral constraint (𝜃 − −𝐶
) is above or 
below the median. We classify firms as ‘‘Constrained’’ if their distance to the collateral 
constraint is below the median and ‘‘Less Constrained’’ if otherwise. Model simulations 
are based on parameter values reported in Table  4.

0.3819
0.0245
0.1179
0.0934
0.0002
0.2422
0.0000
0.1401

0.3968
0.0277
0.1299
0.1120
0.0123
0.1500
0.0000
0.1714

0.3781
0.0247
0.1315
0.0529
0.0040
0.0955
0.1373
0.1760

0.3271
0.0240
0.1373
0.1077
0.0386
0.0632
0.0816
0.2204

𝐾

Table 9
Investor clientele and firm policies.
  𝛥 Investors

Mkt cap
(1)

Net Issuance
(2)

Investment
(3)

MPK
(4)

 0.1509 

 0.0169 

 1.0000 

 0.1783 

0.1545
0.1582
0.1618
0.1654
0.1691
0.1727
0.1764
0.1800
0.1837

1.0921
1.1842
1.2766
1.3687
1.4613
1.5535
1.6457
1.7380
1.8304

0.1767
0.1751
0.1734
0.1718
0.1701
0.1685
0.1669
0.1652
0.1636

  𝑋 = 0%
  (Baseline)
  X=10%
0.0427
  20%
0.0685
  30%
0.0944
  40%
0.1202
  50%
0.1461
  60%
0.1719
  70%
0.1977
  80%
0.2236
  90%
0.2494
This table presents how market valuation, equity issuance, and return on investment 
would change for firms in our model as their investor clientele changes. In the first row, 
we present the results of the baseline economy without changes in investor clientele. 
For each of the remaining rows, we randomly select a subsample of firms and swap 
𝑋 percent of their investors with ‘‘meme stock’’ investors, whose 𝜖 matches that of 
GameStop, AMC, Bed, Bath & Beyond, National Beverage, Koss, and Tesla during 2021. 
We report firms’ average market capitalization (scaled by that in the baseline model) 
in column (1), the average percentage of net equity issuance (equity issuance minus 
share repurchases) in reported column (2), and firms’ average investment (scaled by 
the level of capital stock in the baseline model) is in column (3), and the return of 
investment (MPK) is in column (4).

(0.34) falls between the estimates in Koijen and Yogo (2019) (0.65) 
and  van  der  Beck  (2022)  (0.3–0.35),  and  aligns  more  closely  with 
the latter. Third, our approach yields significantly lower coefficients 
on  dividends  and  investment,  which  are  direct  choices  of  firms  in 
our model. Although we do not intend to conclude which method is 
superior, we believe valuable insights can be gained by comparing 
different methodologies, particularly by examining the consistency in 
findings across various estimation approaches.

5. Investor demand and firm policies

In this section, we quantify the impact of investor demand on firm 
policies. To this end, we begin by illustrating the model mechanisms. 
Then, using the parameter estimates from our model, we investigate 
how fluctuations in latent demand can influence the sources and uses 
of funds across firms. Finally, we consider changes in a firm’s investor 
composition, with a particular focus on ‘‘meme’’ stock investors, assess-
ing how these shifts could affect firms’ optimal policies and their return 
on investments.

5.1. Firm policies and valuations

We first verify, in Fig.  1, that there exists a monotonic relationship 
between investor demand and the price impact on a firm’s stock. The 
price impact represents the premium/discount in market prices over 
intrinsic values that arises from investors’ demand and firms’ issuance 
decisions. Thus, stocks that experience positive excess demand shocks 
trade at higher prices than their fundamental values, facilitating firms 
to issue additional equity shares, while firms that face negative demand 
experience price discounts.

We  now  analyze  how  price  impacts  from  latent  excess  demand 
influence  a  firm’s  intrinsic  value,  as  defined  in  Bellman  Eq.  (16). 
Panel A of Fig.  2 shows that the intrinsic value follows a U-shape 
with excess demand, indicating that both large positive and negative 
demand benefit the firm. With significant negative demand, the firm 
can repurchase shares at favorable prices. However, as log 𝜖 approaches 
zero, this advantage declines. As log 𝜖 further increases, the firm is 
incentivized to issue shares instead. We formally derive this result in 
Internet Appendix A.4 and illustrate it graphically in Panel B of Fig.  2.
Excess demand also affects a firm’s cash holdings. Panel C reveals a 
positive relationship between cash holdings and latent excess demand, 
which  we  formally  derived  in  Internet  Appendices  A.4  and  A.5  by 
examining the firm’s Lagrangian for optimal cash policy. Our analysis 
indicates that with positive excess demand, firms issue more equity 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Choi et al.

to capitalize on favorable price impacts, easing financial constraints 
and  lowering  the  marginal  value  of  internal  liquidity.  Conversely, 
with negative excess demand, firms rely on internal cash to finance 
both their investments and repurchases, which tightens their financial 
constraints, leading to a higher marginal value of cash.

Panel D shows a positive relationship between excess demand and 
firm investment, formally derived in Internet Appendix A.6 by ana-
lyzing the firm’s Lagrangian with respect to optimal investment. Our 
analysis suggests that negative excess demand could induce firms to 
cut investments and compromise investment efficiency to capitalize on 
profitable financial transactions in the equity market. As excess demand 
increases and becomes more positive, there is no longer competition for 
the use of funds between share repurchases and capital investments. 
Firms can benefit from more relaxed financial conditions by making 
more investments. Notably, change in investment can also feed back to 
investors’ demand, as investment is a characteristic in the investors’ de-
mand system. Therefore, when firms choose their optimal investment, 
they need to take into account how it impacts investor demand for their 
stocks, both now and in the next period. This feedback loop between 
investor demand and firm investment is unique to our setting and is 
absent in more traditional dynamic investment models.

5.2. Financial constraints and flows of funds

Expanding  on  the  implications  from  Fig.   2,  we  now  investigate 
how the effect of investors’ demand varies across firms with varying 
financial constraints, focusing on how these firms generate and utilize 
cash flows.

Table  8 presents the average sources and uses of funds (as per-
centages of each firm’s total funds) for four subgroups of simulated 
firms, categorized by their latent demand (𝜖) and their distance to 
the collateral constraint (𝜃 − −𝐶
). Firms with a distance to collateral 
𝐾
constraint below the median are labeled ‘‘Constrained’’ firms, while 
those above the median are classified as ‘‘Less Constrained’’.

Our results reveal several interesting findings. First, we confirm 
that low demand (low 𝜖) incentivizes firms to repurchase shares while 
high 𝜖 encourages equity issuance for both the constrained and less 
constrained subsamples. Second, we find that the incentive to engage in 
financial transactions significantly decreases the proportion of funding 
allocated  to  investment  among  more  financially  constrained  firms. 
Columns  (1)  and  (2)  show  that  low  𝜖  firms  allocate  only  32.71% 
of  their  funds  to  investments,  while  high  𝜖  firms  allocate  39.68%. 
The results show a sharp contrast to the less financially constrained 
group—investment percentages show little change despite fluctuations 
in underlying investor demand. These less constrained firms mainly use 
the cash proceeds from equity market transactions on dividends and 
cash retention.

5.3. The effects of changing investor clientele

In this section, we further quantify the impact of investor demand 
on firm investment. In particular, we consider a scenario where firms 
see a surge in investor demand that is unrelated to the fundamentals of 
firms. This exercise is particularly relevant in light of the ‘‘meme stock’’ 
frenzy of 2021, which created profits and financing opportunities for 
these firms. To capture the effect of such investor demand, we first 
compute the average realized 𝜖 faced by the meme stocks from Eq. 
(10), using the actual investor holdings data in 2021 and the estimated 
demand parameters reported in Table  4.15 The average meme stock has 
a log 𝜖meme over 4 standard deviations above the sample mean, which is 
consistent with our prior that these stocks are held by overly optimistic 
investors with excessively high demand. Next, we randomly select a 

15 We  specifically  use  GameStop,  AMC,  Bed,  Bath  &  Beyond,  National 
Beverage, Koss, and Tesla in this calculation.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

subsample  of  firms  in  our  simulated  economy  and  counterfactually 
change their investor clientele by replacing a fraction 𝑋 of their existing 
investors with those who invest in meme stocks and have an 𝜖meme. 
In this counterfactual analysis, we keep all other aspects of the firms 
unchanged,  especially  their  productivity.  This  setting  allows  us  to 
attribute any resulting variations in firm characteristics to changes in 
investor clientele. We explore a range of values for 𝑋 from 10% to 90% 
and assess the impact of these changes in investor clientele on observed 
firm policies.

The  results  of  this  exercise,  reported  in  Table   9,  suggest  that, 
first, firms with a high presence of meme-stock investors experience 
elevated share prices, which can be over 80% higher compared with 
the baseline firms that experience no changes in investor clientele. 
Second, and intuitively, high stock prices incentivize these firms to 
issue substantially more shares. Third, the increased financial resources 
facilitate  investments  by  those  firms—firms  with  90%  meme  stock 
investors make 21.7% (= 0.1837∕0.1509 − 1) more investments than the 
baseline firms. On the one hand, the influx of equity financing relaxes 
the financial constraints these firms face, enabling them to undertake 
profitable  investments  that  they  may  have  been  unable  to  pursue 
otherwise. On the other hand, managers may view the sentiment-driven 
equity capital provided by meme stock investors as a heavily subsidized 
source of funding, which could lead them to invest in projects with low 
marginal returns.16 Consistent with this mechanism, the average MPK 
also declines from its baseline level of 0.1783 to 0.1636 among firms 
with the highest concentration of meme stock investors. Notably, this 
MPK is also slightly below the sum of the capital depreciation rate and 
the firms’ discount rate.

6. Investor demand and capital misallocation

Our previous results suggest that fluctuations in investor demand 
can have a substantial impact on firms’ optimal policies and invest-
ment returns. Naturally, one might wonder how these effects aggregate 
across firms. In this section, we explore this by showing that the impacts 
from investor demand do not simply wash out at the aggregate level; 
rather, they play a significant role in shaping the efficiency of capital 
allocation in the economy. We also compare the magnitude of these 
effects with other misallocation factors highlighted in prior research.

6.1. Measuring capital misallocation

Using the equilibrium distribution of firms based on our model sim-
ulation, we next examine how the presence of investor excess demand 
affects the allocation of capital across firms. We focus on two measures: 
the variance of MPK and the TFP loss, both of which aim to capture 
the degree of capital allocation inefficiency for a cross section of firms 
in a given time period. We therefore drop the time subscript when 
describing these cross-sectional measures. We then calculate the time-
series average of the measures to gauge the overall capital allocation 
efficiency for a model economy.

Consider a model economy populated by heterogeneous firms with 
𝑛 . From the definition of MPK, we 

production function 𝑌𝑛 = 𝑎𝜁𝑛 𝑧𝑛𝐾 𝛼
have: 

𝐾𝑛 =

( MPK𝑛
𝛼𝑎𝜁𝑛 𝑧𝑛

) 1
𝛼−1

.

(22)

16 For example, after strategically issuing shares at inflated prices in 2021, 
AMC raised nearly $2 billion, and a substantial fraction of those funds was 
invested  in  shareholder  perks  (including  free  popcorn),  theater  upgrades, 
new cinema leases, etc. Source: https://www.cnbc.com/2021/08/10/amc-ceo-
adam-aron-says-theater-chain-is-going-on-offense.html.

13 

J. Choi et al.

Table 10
Investor demand and capital misallocation.
  Panel A: baseline 𝜷

  (1) Var(log(MPK))
  (2) TFP loss
  Panel B: 50% passive investor 𝜷

  (1) Var(log(MPK))
  (2) TFP loss
  Panel C: 90% passive investor 𝜷

log(𝜖) = baseline
0.0296
2.28%

log(𝜖) = baseline
0.0362
2.75%

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

log(𝜖) = 50% × baseline

0.0258
2.06%

log(𝜖) = 50% × baseline

0.0297
2.30%

log(𝜖) = 0

0.0217
1.75%

log(𝜖) = 0

0.0217
1.75%

log(𝜖) = 50% × baseline

log(𝜖) = 0

Percent change
(from baseline to 0)
−26.90%
−23.36%

Percent change
(from baseline to 0)
−40.22%
−36.42%

Percent change
(from baseline to 0)
−47.04%
−41.30%

log(𝜖) = baseline
0.0409
2.98%

  (1) Var(log(MPK))
  (2) TFP loss
This table presents the variance of the log(MPK) and the TFP loss for firms simulated under various scenarios based on different values of demand parameters (𝜷) and excess 
demand shocks. In Panel A, investors’ demand parameters 𝜷 are maintained at the baseline estimates reported in Table  4. We consider counterfactual scenarios where the mean 
(in logs) and standard deviation of excess demand shocks are set to either 50% of the baseline estimate or 0. The last column calculates the percentage differences in the variables 
of interest. We repeat the exercise in Panel B, where we set 𝜷 to the average between the baseline estimates and that of passive investors, and in Panel C where we set 𝜷 as a 
convex combination of 90% of passive investors’ 𝜷 and 10% of the baseline estimates. Passive investors have 𝜷 equal to 1 for market equity and 0 for all other characteristics.

0.0346
2.63%

0.0217
1.75%

We sum 𝐾𝑛 and 𝑌𝑛 across firms to define the aggregate capital and 
output, 𝐾 and 𝑌 , respectively. We then can calculate the aggregate TFP 
in our baseline model as: 

TFP =

𝑌
𝐾 𝛼 =

( MPK𝑛
𝛼𝑎𝜁𝑛 𝑧𝑛
) 1

∫

𝑛 𝑎𝜁𝑛 𝑧𝑛
[
∫

𝑛

( MPK𝑛
𝛼𝑎𝜁𝑛 𝑧𝑛

) 𝛼

𝛼−1 𝑑𝑛
]𝛼 .

𝛼−1 𝑑𝑛

In an efficient allocation without aggregate risk, capital can flow 
freely to its most productive user without any friction, maximizing 
static  production.  In  this  case,  the  MPK  is  equalized  across  firms. 
Denote the aggregate TFP in the efficient allocations as TFP𝑒. We can 
define TFP loss as the difference between aggregate TFP in the efficient 
allocations and the baseline model: 
TFP𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 = log (TFP𝑒) − log (TFP) .

(24)

(
log MPK𝑛

Hsieh and Klenow (2009) show that when 𝑧𝑛 and MPK𝑛 are jointly 
)
log-normally distributed, TFP𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 will be linear in var
, im-
plying that TFP loss depends only on the dispersion of MPK and hence 
) is a sufficient statistic for TFP losses. However, when 
var
log-normality  does  not  hold,  the  variance  of  MPK  might  not  be  a 
sufficient statistic for capital misallocation. Therefore, we employ both 
measures—the  variance  of  MPK  and  the  TFP  loss—to  gauge  firms’ 
aggregate investment efficiency and the degree of misallocation.

(
log MPK𝑛

In Table  10, we present results indicating how investment efficiency 
measures change with investors’ excess demand. In panel A, we coun-
terfactually  vary  excess  demand  by  setting  the  mean  (in  logs)  and 
standard deviation of excess demand shocks to 50% of the baseline 
value or zero, while holding all other parameters fixed at the estimated 
baseline values. Our results in rows (1) and (2) of Panel A suggest that 
excess demand plays a significant role in exacerbating capital misal-
location across firms. When we counterfactually shut down investors’ 
excess demand, the dispersion of firms’ MPK becomes 26.9% less than 
that of the baseline model, and the TFP loss also declines by 23.36%. 
These findings indicate that investors’ excess demand imposes another 
friction on the efficient allocation of capital across firms. It provides 
firms with profit opportunities through financial transactions, which 
can create a conflicting incentive regarding how firms, especially the 
financially constrained ones, allocate their resources for investment 
efficiency.

The results in Panel A are based on the assumption that all other 
parameters, including the relationship between investor demand and 
firm characteristics, are held fixed at the baseline estimates. In Panels 
B and C, we examine how the results differ if we also allow investors’ 

Table 11
Comparing sources of capital misallocation.
  Panel A: Effect of latent demand
Baseline

(23)

  (1) Var(log(MPK))
  (2) TFP loss
  Panel B: Effect of debt market frictions

0.0296
2.28%

No excess demand
0.0217
1.75%

  (1) Var(log(MPK))
  (2) TFP loss
  Panel C: Effect of capital adjustment cost

Reduced debt frictions
0.0276
2.22%

Percentage change
−26.90%
−23.36%

Percentage change
−6.91%
−2.74%

  (1) Var(log(MPK))
  (2) TFP loss
  Panel D: Effect of risk premium

No adjustment costs
0.0287
2.17%

Percentage change
−3.04%
−5.14%

No risk premium
0.0253
2.02%

Percentage change
−14.56%
−11.35%

  (1) Var(log(MPK))
  (2) TFP loss
This table presents the variance of the log(MPK) and the TFP loss for firms under 
the baseline model and several counterfactual scenarios. Panel A reports the results 
from the baseline model and the counterfactual scenario where we switch off excess 
demand shocks by setting the mean (in logs) and standard deviation of excess demand 
shocks to 0 while keeping the value of other parameters the same as the baseline case. 
Panel B reports the results from the counterfactual exercise where we reduce debt 
market frictions by setting the collateral constraint parameter 𝜃 to 3. Panel C reports 
the results from the counterfactual exercise where we set the capital adjustment cost 
parameter 𝜉 to 0. Panel D reports the results from the counterfactual exercise where 
we remove firms’ exposure to the aggregate risk. Column ‘‘Percentage change’’ reports 
the percentage changes in our variables of interest from the baseline model to the 
respective counterfactual cases.

demand parameters 𝜷 to vary. In particular, we consider cases where 
investors’ 𝜷 is a convex combination of the estimated values in the base-
line model and those of passive investors, whose demand depends only 
on market equity (i.e., 𝛽𝑚𝑒 = 1) and not on other firm characteristics 
(𝛽𝑘 = 0 for 𝑘 ≠ 𝑚𝑒). This exercise is particularly relevant given the 
increased presence of passive investors in the market. Our results in 
Panels B and C of Table  10 indicate that when investors’ 𝜷 become more 
closely aligned with that of passive investors, excess demand triggers an 
even more substantial misallocation effect. In Panel C, for example, the 
dispersion of MPK and the TFP loss are 47.04% and 41.3% lower in the 
counterfactual economy without excess demand. Intuitively, holding all 
else constant, when 𝛽𝑚𝑒 is closer to one, any excess demand translates 
into a larger price impact (as shown in Eq.  (13)), thus providing firms 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Choi et al.

Table 12
Subsample estimation.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

  Panel A: Parameters governing investors’ demand

Low SR
(1)

High SR
(2)

Low HH
(3)

High HH
(4)

Std. Err.
0.0280
0.0026
0.0463
0.0078
0.0293
0.0240
0.0069
0.0045

Std. Err.
0.0076
0.0018
0.0107
0.0022
0.0106
0.0209
0.0059
0.0014

Std. Err.
0.0193
0.0048
0.0086
0.0026
0.0136
0.0206
0.0141
0.0059

Std. Err.
0.0122
0.0041
0.0191
0.0022
0.0390
0.0096
0.0060
0.0012

Value

Value

Value

Value

0.6223
0.8262
0.0904
0.1527
0.3800
0.8340
0.0964
0.0109
1.7461

0.3466
0.1158
0.1763
0.0195
0.3284
−0.0348
0.8102
0.0908

0.3453
0.1132
0.1786
0.0195
0.3271
−0.0349
0.8147
0.0920

0.3193
0.1135
0.1796
0.0193
0.3231
−0.0345
0.8154
0.1017

0.3142
0.1152
0.1750
0.0194
0.3262
−0.0350
0.8138
0.1028

  𝛽𝑚𝑒
  𝛽𝑏𝑒
  𝛽𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓
  𝛽𝑖𝑛𝑣
  𝛽𝑑𝑖𝑣
  𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎
  𝜌𝜖
  𝜎𝜖
  Panel B. Parameters governing firms’ operation
  𝛼
  𝜌𝑧
  𝜎𝑧
  𝛿
  𝜉
  𝜃
  𝜙1
  𝜙0
  𝑓
  Panel C. Price impacts
  𝜕𝑝
  𝜕𝑝
  Panel D. Effect of shutting down excess demand
  𝛥%Var(log(MPK))
  𝛥%TFP loss
This table presents the model parameter estimates, price impacts, and percentage changes in capital misallocation measures when we shut down investors’ excess demand in 
different subsamples of firms. ‘‘High SR’’ (‘‘Low SR’’) is the subsample of firms with above (below) median sentiment risk, and ‘‘High HH’’ (‘‘Low HH’’) is the subsample of firms 
with above (below) median percentages of household holdings. Panels A and B present results for parameters that dictate investor demand and firms’ operations, respectively. The 
definitions of these parameters are provided in Table  4. Panel C reports the average elasticities of price to excess demand and equity issuance as defined in Eqs. (13) and (14). 
Panel D reports the percentage changes in the variance of log(MPK) and the TFP loss when we remove excess demand by setting the mean (in logs) and standard deviation of 
excess demand shocks to zero while keeping all other parameters at the estimated levels specific to each subsample.

0.0084
0.0364
0.0035
0.0012
0.0429
0.0344
0.0073
0.0019
0.0619

0.0024
0.0257
0.0030
0.0005
0.0110
0.0109
0.0079
0.0011
0.0275

0.0047
0.0664
0.0040
0.0010
0.0607
0.0535
0.0062
0.0018
0.0502

0.6221
0.8276
0.0900
0.1514
0.3769
0.8311
0.0972
0.0109
1.7029

0.6223
0.8193
0.0913
0.1521
0.3784
0.8155
0.0967
0.0108
1.7735

0.6191
0.8338
0.0912
0.1531
0.3807
0.8261
0.0964
0.0109
1.6815

0.0041
0.0132
0.0024
0.0005
0.0209
0.0146
0.0024
0.0007
0.0142

−25.60%
−21.73%

−31.88%
−27.64%

−23.98%
−19.77%

−29.23%
−24.99%

−0.3322

−0.3290

−0.3447

−0.3184

1.6171

1.5381

1.6199

1.5206

𝜕 log 𝜖

𝜕𝑠

with greater opportunities to profit from the price deviation. As a result, 
the misallocation effect is amplified.

Our results in Table  10 also offer a more nuanced view regarding 
how the increased presence of passive investors would influence the 
efficiency of capital allocation. Our analysis identifies two opposing 
effects of passive investing on capital allocation, which operate through 
𝜷 and 𝜖. On the one hand, increased passive investing with inelas-
tic demand (i.e., 𝛽𝑚𝑒 close to one) implies that given fluctuations in 
excess demand (𝜖) will translate into more significant deviations in 
equilibrium prices, which may take longer to converge, resulting in 
large dispersion in firms’ real investment returns. On the other hand, 
passive investors’ portfolio decisions are more likely to be shaped by 
firms’ fundamental characteristics, which leads to smaller variations in 
𝜖 and reduced misallocation effects. Our results show that this latter 
effect is substantial.

6.2. Comparison with other sources of misallocation

How significant are the effects of excess demand on capital mis-
allocation compared with those of other financial and real frictions 
previously studied in the literature? To answer this question, we con-
sider three such distortions: (1) the debt market frictions, (2) the real 
investment frictions, and (3) time-varying heterogeneous risk premia. 
To quantify the relative importance of each source, we perform three 
additional sets of counterfactual exercises by eliminating these frictions 
from our model one at a time. We then compare the resulting misal-
location effects with those from investors’ excess demand, which we 
calculate in Section 6.1 and reproduce in Panel A of Table  11.

In Panel B of Table  11, we conduct the first counterfactual exercise 
where we reduce debt market frictions by setting collateral constraint 
parameter 𝜃 to 3, allowing firms to borrow up to roughly their market 

value. The results provided in Panel B show that relaxing debt market 
frictions reduces the variance of MPK by 6.91% and the TFP losses by 
2.74%.17 Midrigan and Xu (2014) and Moll (2014) find relatively lim-
ited impacts of collateral constraint on capital misallocation. Our model 
shares the same mechanism with those studies, wherein firms can save 
to alleviate the impact of collateral constraints. One unique feature of 
our model is that firms have heterogeneous capacities to accumulate 
savings  due  to  their  investors’  demand  shocks.  Quantitatively,  the 
misallocation effects of relaxing collateral constraints are much smaller 
compared to those resulting from investors’ demand fluctuations. This 
is because the latter not only influences firms’ financial constraints but 
also directly provides them with subsidized equity capital. Additionally, 
firms are incentivized to adjust their investment and other policies to 
influence their characteristics, 𝒙, which directly affect investor demand 
and, thus, their ability to time the market in the current and future 
periods, leading to an amplified misallocation effect.

Panel C of Table  11 presents the results of a counterfactual analysis 
in which we eliminate real investment frictions by setting the capital 
adjustment  cost  parameter  to  zero.  Doing  so  reduces  the  variance 
of MPK by 3.04% and the TFP losses by 5.14%, both of which are 
smaller  in  magnitude  compared  to  the  effects  of  investors’  excess 
demand shocks. These findings are consistent with those of David and 
Venkateswaran (2019), highlighting that technological frictions, such 
as adjustment costs, account for only a limited portion of the observed 
misallocation.

Panel  D  of  Table   11  corresponds  to  a  counterfactual  exercise
wherein  we  eliminate  firms’  exposure  to  aggregate  risk.  According 
to David et al. (2022), firms’ heterogeneous exposure to time-varying 

17 Further increasing 𝜃 beyond 3 does not further increase the quantitative 
effects.

15 

 
 
 
J. Choi et al.

aggregate risk is a key determinant of MPK, explaining around 25% 
of its dispersion. Our results in Panel D suggest that the variance of 
MPK and the TFP loss fall by 14.56% and 11.35%, respectively, when 
we eliminate firms’ exposure to aggregate risk. Quantitatively, these 
effects are smaller than those reported in David et al. (2022) since 
we explicitly model investors’ heterogeneous demand for firms’ equity 
based on their characteristics, including market beta. Therefore, the 
effect of heterogeneous risk exposure can be partially absorbed by the 
demand system. Based on the results in Panel D and those from David 
et al. (2022) as benchmarks, we conclude that the misallocation effect 
resulting from variations in investor demand is comparable to that from 
firms’ heterogeneous risk exposure.

Overall, our findings indicate that fluctuations in investor demand 
can create significant barriers to efficient capital flows, leading to a 
sizeable misallocation effect.

7. Heterogeneous effects of excess demand

In  this  section,  we  examine  the  heterogeneous  effects  of  excess 
demand. To motivate our analysis, we start by exploring the drivers 
underlying  variations  in  investor  demand,  relating  it  to  sentiment 
fluctuations not accounted for by the firm’s underlying fundamentals. 
Based on the results, we then perform subsample estimations to trace 
the extent to which the real impact of excess demand can vary across 
firms.

7.1. Sources of excess demand

To shed light on the potential drivers of the variation in excess 
demand, we start by relating it to a multitude of well-established asset 
pricing factors. We consider 203 of these factors identified by Chen 
and Zimmermann (2022) and group them into two primary classifi-
cations: fundamental and non-fundamental. Fundamental factors are 
derived from firm-level accounting data, reflecting the company’s core 
business activities and financial well-being.18 This class encompasses 
signals  such  as  accruals,  asset  growth,  firm  age,  governance  index, 
inventory growth, returns on assets, etc., totaling 102 distinct factors. 
Non-fundamental factors, on the other hand, do not stem directly from 
these intrinsic financial indicators. Instead, they tend to reflect human 
behavior  and  psychological  tendencies  that  pervade  the  investment 
world. We identify non-fundamental factors as the universe of Chen 
and Zimmermann’s factors, excluding those we previously classified as 
fundamental. Our classification yields 101 non-fundamental factors.

For the dependent variable in our regression, we construct model-
implied  𝜖  by  matching  the  model-predicted  portfolio  weight  in  Eq. 
(12) to the actual portfolio weight we observe for each stock in the 
data, backing out what 𝜖 the model calls for to match the data (as 
also discussed in Section 4.4). We compute the investor AUM-weighted 
excess demand for every firm quarter.

Given the abundance of potential predictors and their substantial 
correlations, we use LASSO to address potential multicollinearity and 
overfitting and help with factor selection. After the LASSO shrinkage, 
we are left with 65 non-fundamental factors, which include signals 
such as analyst EPS forecast, maximum daily return over the month, 
option to stock volume, days with zero trades, short interest, etc. These 
non-fundamental factors collectively account for a significant 76.8% of 
the variation in our estimated 𝜖. Further incorporating 86 fundamental 
factors after shrinkage only elevates the within-adjusted R-squared of 

18 Chen and Zimmermann (2022) classify the asset pricing predictors they 
study into eight categories: 13F, accounting, analyst, event, options, price, 
trading, and other. We start by labeling signals classified under the ‘‘account-
ing’’ category as fundamental. Subsequently, we review predictors from other 
categories and incorporate signals such as firm age, governance, employment 
growth, etc. The fundamental factors in our study reflect the application of 
fundamental analysis in accounting.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

the LASSO regression modestly to 79.8%. In Internet Appendix D.1, we 
further validate this result using the first 20 principal components of 
the fundamental and non-fundamental factors.

After establishing the importance of non-fundamental factors, we 
next bring in more direct measures of investor sentiment to further 
demonstrate their relevance in driving excess demand. Our first mea-
sure is RavenPack’s Composite Sentiment Score (CSS) for news events, 
which calculates a score by averaging the CSS for all relevant news 
in each firm-quarter. Our second measure, Aggregate Event Volume 
(AEV), also from RavenPack, reflects the number of sentiment-based 
events per firm-quarter. Additionally, we include two more indicators: 
OIB, an investor sentiment measure based on retail investor buy-sell 
imbalances from the TAQ database following Kumar and Lee (2006), 
and ECC, a sentiment measure based on the tone of earnings conference 
calls as per Hassan et al. (2019). Our results in Internet Appendix D.1 
show that all measures strongly predict excess demand, with statistical 
significance below 1%, jointly explaining more than 40% of cross-firm 
variation in model-implied excess demand.

7.2. Subsample estimation

Our  previous  findings  imply  that  variations  in  investors’  excess 
demand are likely to stem from factors unrelated to firm fundamentals. 
They  can  mirror  investor  sentiment,  as  noted  by  Koijen  and  Yogo 
(2019). In this section, we trace the heterogeneous real impact of such 
variations in excess demand to study how the economic mechanism 
behind our model differs across subsamples of firms.

To this end, we first split firms into subsamples based on their 
susceptibility to sentiment-driven investment behaviors. We consider 
two splits. The first is based on firm-level variations in the Composite 
Sentiment Score (CSS), which we refer to as ‘‘sentiment risk’’ (Dumas 
et al., 2009). Firms are classified as having high sentiment risk (‘‘High 
SR’’)  if  the  time-series  volatility  of  their  CSS  is  above  the  sample 
median. The second split is based on the percentage of the shares held 
by household investors. Different types of investors tend to exhibit 
distinct patterns in sentiment-driven demand (Koijen and Yogo, 2019), 
and the household sector is arguably the most sensitive to sentiment 
fluctuation.  Following  this  idea,  we  rank  firms  into  deciles  by  the 
percentage  of  household  holdings  each  quarter.  Firms  are  assigned 
to the high household holdings (‘‘High HH’’) group if their average 
ranking is above the median.

We re-estimate our model to match data moments calculated using 
each  subsample.  The  purpose  of  our  exercise  is  three-fold.  First,  it 
helps ascertain whether our estimation strategy can detect variations 
in demand from different types of investors, thus serving as informal 
‘‘out-of-sample’’ validation tests of our model. Second, by comparing 
the properties of our parameter estimates across subsamples, we gain 
a  better  understanding  of  the  sources  of  excess  demand  shocks.  In 
particular, we confirm that excess demand can reflect investor senti-
ment by showing that fluctuation in estimated latent demand is indeed 
greater in subsamples dominated by investors whose portfolio choices 
are  more  likely  to  be  sentiment-driven.  Finally,  while  our  baseline 
estimates allow us to gauge the aggregate impact of excess demand on 
firms’ returns on investment, the subsample analysis demonstrates the 
dispersion of such effects.

The re-estimation results are reported in Table  12. Panel A confirms 
that firms with a higher fraction of household ownership and greater 
sentiment risk indeed experience significantly more volatile excess de-
mand. The estimated 𝜎𝜖 for ‘‘High SR’’ firms is 13.2% (= 0.1028∕0.0908−
1) larger than that for ‘‘Low SR’’ firms, with similar increases also seen 
between ‘‘Low HH’’ and ‘‘High HH’’ groups.

Does more volatile investor demand lead to higher capital allocative 
inefficiency in these firms? The answer is ex-ante unclear. Panel B 
shows that the ‘‘High SR’’ and ‘‘High HH’’ firms also face different 
production technologies and financial frictions. Additionally, Panel C 
indicates they experience varying price elasticity in response to excess 

16 

J. Choi et al.

demand, meaning that a given level of excess demand causes smaller 
price increases for these firms. Moreover, these firms face a more neg-
ative price elasticity to equity issuance, meaning their share issuance 
creates greater price pressure, leading to a faster reversion of market 
prices  to  fundamental  levels.  These  price  impacts  may  limit  high-
sentiment firms’ ability to profit from financial transactions, dampening 
the effects of volatile investor demand.

To account for the previously mentioned channels and assess their 
overall impact on firms’ investment efficiency, we repeat the analysis 
in Table  11 using estimates for each subsample. The results, shown in 
Panel D, indicate that variations in investors’ excess demand play a 
dominant role in shaping the efficiency of capital allocation. Columns 
(1) and (2) suggest that if all firms behave like those in the ‘‘High 
SR’’ subsample, eliminating investor excess demand would reduce the 
dispersion of MPK by 31.88% and TFP loss by 27.64%. These numbers 
capture the misallocative effect of investor demand among ‘‘High SR’’ 
firms, which is larger than that for the ‘‘Low SR’’ subsample. A sim-
ilar pattern emerges when focusing on firms with varying household 
ownership shares.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

and finance equity market transactions. This leads to even more con-
strained investment decisions among these firms, further amplifying the 
distortive effects.

Finally, we consider situations where a firm’s excess demand and its 

⋅

]

]

]

]

+

=

(26)

0
𝜎𝜖

𝜀𝑡+1,

𝜌𝑧𝜖
𝜌𝜖

[𝜎𝑧
0

[ 𝜌𝑧
𝜌𝜖𝑧

TFP shocks can be correlated. Specifically, we model: 
[ln 𝑧𝑡
[ln 𝑧𝑡+1
ln 𝜖𝑡
ln 𝜖𝑡+1
where  the  correlation  coefficients  𝜌𝜖𝑧  and  𝜌𝑧𝜖  can  capture  over-
extrapolation of investors or reflect their superior private information, 
which can predict the firm’s future realizations of TFP. We calibrate 
these correlation coefficients by matching them to the lead–lag cor-
relations  between  the  model-implied  𝜖  and  firms’  TFP  constructed 
following Foster et al. (2008). We find both correlations are modest, 
with 𝜌𝑧𝜖 = 0.041 and 𝜌𝜖𝑧 = 0.024. The extended model with corre-
lated shocks reveals slightly smaller misallocation effects. As shown 
in column (6) in Table G.2 in the Internet Appendix, removing excess 
demand would reduce the firms’ MPK dispersion by 24.47% and the 
TPF loss by 20.80%.

8. Robustness and discussion

9. Conclusion

In this section, we further examine the robustness of our counterfac-
tual experiment results to alternative estimation strategies and model 
specifications.

First,  we  examine  how  the  model-predicted  misallocation  effect 
changes when using demand parameters estimated through Koijen and 
Yogo’s IV approach, as reported in column (3) of Table  7. We conduct 
a counterfactual analysis similar to that in Panel A of Table  11, where 
we eliminate excess investor demand and assess the resulting impact 
on  the  variance  of  MPK  and  TPF  loss  in  the  economy.  The  effect 
may differ from our baseline for three reasons. First, their approach 
estimates more volatile excess demand; second, it generates a higher 
𝛽𝑚𝑒,  which  leads  to  lower  price  elasticity;  and  third,  the  loadings 
on other firm characteristics differ, implying a distinct feedback loop 
between investor demand and firm decisions. The result of this exercise 
is reported in column (2) of Table G.2 in the Internet Appendix, where 
the overall misallocation effect remains comparable to the baseline 
results. We also conduct a similar analysis using demand parameters 
estimated via the flow-based approach, and the results remain in line 
with our baseline findings, as shown in column (3) of Table G.2.

Next, we explore an alternative model with a linear-quadratic and 
weakly convex equity issuance cost. When a firm issues new equity 
(𝐸 > 0),  we  assume  it  incurs  an  equity  issuance  cost  of  𝛹 (𝐸𝑡) =
𝑡 ) × 1{𝐸𝑡 > 0}.  We  reestimate  this  alternative 
(𝜙0𝐾𝑡 + 𝜙1𝐸𝑡 + 𝜙2𝐸2
model. As shown in Table G.5 in the Internet Appendix, the estimation 
yields a modest 𝜙2 because our baseline model already endogenizes a 
negative price impact from equity issuance (Eq. (14)), which has similar 
effects as a convex issuance cost. Our results, reported in column (4) 
of Table G.2, suggest that investors’ excess demand triggers a similar 
capital misallocation effect in this alternative model compared with our 
baseline.

We also consider non-convex capital adjustment costs, which take 

In  this  paper,  we  develop  a  dynamic  model  where  firms  make 
investment and financing decisions while facing capital provision from 
investors. The model endogenizes both the demand and supply sides 
of  equity  capital,  enabling  us  to  capture  the  equilibrium  effects  of 
investors’  demand  alongside  firms’  decisions  to  issue  or  repurchase 
shares.  We  tightly  discipline  the  parameters  governing  investors’
characteristics-based, time-varying demand and firms’ optimal policies. 
Our results reveal significant interactions between investors’ and firms’ 
decisions. At the aggregate level, variations in demand across firms 
amplify the disparities in cross-sectional investment returns, reducing 
the efficiency of capital allocation in the economy.

While the primary focus of this paper is on physical investment, 
our framework is highly adaptable and can be extended to explore a 
wide range of questions concerning the real effects of investor demand 
on firm-level decisions, including governance, innovation, and social 
responsibility practices, as well as to assess the broader macroeconomic 
implications.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial 

interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104039.

Data availability

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/473zwkxnpw/1 (Mendeley Data).

the form: 

(

𝛯(𝐼𝑡, 𝐾𝑡) ≡

𝛶 +𝐾𝑡 + 𝜉+

)

𝐼 2
𝑡
𝐾𝑡

(

× 1{𝐼𝑡

≥ 0} +

𝛶 −𝐾𝑡 + 𝜉−

)

𝐼 2
𝑡
𝐾𝑡

× 1{𝐼𝑡 < 0}.

(25)

References

We choose 𝛶 + = 0.01 and 𝛶 − = 0.03, following Lin and Zhang (2013). 
We keep 𝜉+ at the baseline estimate of 0.3774 and set 𝜉− = 1.2𝜉+, so 
that adjusting capital downward is more costly. As shown in column (5) 
of Table G.2 in the Internet Appendix, we find that investors’ excess 
demand causes even greater misallocation in this alternative model. 
Due to the asymmetric adjustment costs, firms that experience negative 
shocks have to pay higher transaction costs to reduce their investments 

17 

Bai, Yan, Lu, Dan, Tian, Xu, 2018. Do financial frictions explain Chinese firms’ saving 
and misallocation?. Working Paper 24436, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Baker, Malcolm, Stein, Jeremy C., Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2003. When does the market 
matter? Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms. Q. J. Econ. 
118 (3), 969–1005.

Baker, Malcolm, Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2002. Market timing and capital structure. J. Financ. 

57 (1), 1–32.

Bazdresch, Santiago, Kahn, R. Jay, Whited, Toni M., 2018. Estimating and testing 

dynamic corporate finance models. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (1), 322–361.

J. Choi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104039 

van der Beck, Philippe, 2022. On the estimation of demand-based asset pricing models. 

Graham, John R., Harvey, Campbell R., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate 

Working Paper, Harvard Business School.

Binsbergen, Jules H. van, Opp, Christian C., 2019. Real anomalies. J. Financ. 74 (4), 

Chan, Konan, Chan, Louis, Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Lakonishok, Josef, 2001. Earnings 

1659–1706.

quality and stock returns.

Crit. Financ. Rev. 27 (2), 207–264.

finance: Evidence from the field. J. Financ. Econ. 60 (2–3), 187–243.

Hassan, Tarek A., Hollander, Stephan, Van Lent, Laurence, Tahoun, Ahmed, 2019. 
Firm-level political risk: Measurement and effects. Q. J. Econ. 134 (4), 2135–2202.
Hennessy, Christopher, Whited, Toni M., 2005. Debt dynamics. J. Financ. 60 (3), 

1129–1165.

Chen, Andrew Y., Zimmermann, Tom, 2022. Open source cross-sectional asset pricing. 

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Klenow, Peter J., 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in 

Chirinko, Robert S., Schaller, Huntley, 2001. Business fixed investment and ‘‘bubbles’’: 

The Japanese case. Am. Econ. Rev. 91 (3), 663–680.

Cooley, Thomas F., Prescott, Edward C., 1995. Frontiers of business cycle research, vol. 

3, Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ, pp. 1–38.

Cooley, Thomas F., Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2001. Financial markets and firm dynamics. 

Kaplan, Steven N., Zingales, Luigi, 1997. Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide 

useful measures of financing constraints? Q. J. Econ. 112 (1), 169–215.

Khan, Mozaffar, Kogan, Leonid, Serafeim, George, 2012. Mutual fund trading pressure: 
Firm-level stock price impact and timing of SEOs. J. Financ. 67 (4), 1371–1395.
Kilic, Mete, Tuzel, Selale, 2023. Investing in misallocation. Working Paper, University 

China and India. Q. J. Econ. 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Am. Econ. Rev. 91 (5), 1286–1310.

costs. Rev. Econ. Stud. 73 (3), 611–633.

Cooper, Russell W., Haltiwanger, John C., 2006. On the nature of capital adjustment 

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Yogo, Motohiro, 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. 

Corhay,  Alexandre,  Kung,  Howard,  Schmid,  Lukas,  2020.  Q:  Risk,  rents,  or 

growth? Working Paper, University of Southern California.

Korteweg, Arthur, 2010. The net benefits to leverage. J. Financ. 65 (6), 2137–2170.
Kumar,  Alok,  Lee,  Charles  M.C.,  2006.  Retail  investor  sentiment  and  return 

David, Joel M., Schmid, Lukas, Zeke, David, 2022. Risk-adjusted capital allocation and 

comovements. J. Financ. 61 (5), 2451–2486.

misallocation. J. Financ. Econ. 145 (3), 684–705.

Lin,  Xiaoji,  Zhang,  Lu,  2013.  The  investment  manifesto.  J.  Monet.  Econ.  60  (3), 

David, Joel M., Venkateswaran, Venky, 2019. The sources of capital misallocation. Am. 

351–366.

of Southern California.

J. Political Econ. 127 (4), 1475–1515.

Econ. Rev. 109 (7), 2531–2567.

Dessaint, Olivier, Foucault, Thierry, Frésard, Laurent, Matray, Adrien, 2019. Noisy stock 

prices and corporate investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (7), 2625–2672.

Doidge, Craig, Karolyi, G. Andrew, Lins, Karl V., Miller, Darius P., Stulz, René M., 2009. 
Private benefits of control, ownership, and the cross-listing decision. J. Financ. 64 
(1), 425–466.

Dumas,  Bernard,  Kurshev,  Alexander,  Uppal,  Raman,  2009.  Equilibrium  portfolio 
strategies in the presence of sentiment risk and excess volatility. J. Financ. 64 
(2), 579–629.

Fama, Eugene F., French, Kenneth R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. 

Econ. 116 (1), 1–22.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Panageas, Stavros, 2004. The real effects of stock market mispric-
ing at the aggregate: Theory and empirical evidence. Working paper, Harvard 
University.

Foster, Lucia, Haltiwanger, John, Syverson, Chad, 2008. Reallocation, firm turnover, 
and efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability? Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (1), 
394–425.

Gabaix, Xavier, Koijen, Ralph S.J., 2021. In search of the origins of financial fluc-
tuations: The inelastic markets hypothesis. Working Paper Series 28967, National 
Bureau of Economic Research.

Gilchrist, Simon, Himmelberg, Charles P., Huberman, Gur, 2005. Do stock price bubbles 

influence corporate investment? J. Monet. Econ. 52 (4), 805–827.

Glover, Brent, Levine, Oliver, 2017. Idiosyncratic risk and the manager. J. Financ. Econ. 

126 (2), 320–341.

Glover, Brent, Levine, Oliver, 2021. Corporate tax avoidance, firm size, and capital 

misallocation. Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon.

Gomes, João F., Schmid, Lukas, 2021. Equilibrium asset pricing with leverage and 

Gourieroux, Christian, Monfort, Alain, Renault, Eric, 1993. Indirect inference. J. Appl. 

default. J. Financ. 76 (2), 977–1018.

Econometrics 8 (S1), S85–S118.

Loughran, Tim, Ritter, Jay R., 1995. The new issues puzzle. J. Financ. 50 (1), 23–51.
Loughran, Tim, Ritter, Jay R., 2000. Uniformly least powerful tests of market efficiency. 

McKeon, Stephen B., 2015. Employee option exercise and equity issuance motives. 

J. Financ. Econ. 55 (3), 361–389.

Working Paper, University of Oregon.

Midrigan, Virgiliu, Xu, Daniel Yi, 2014. Finance and misallocation: Evidence from 

plant-level data. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (2), 422–458.

Moll, Benjamin, 2014. Productivity losses from financial frictions: Can self-financing 

undo capital misallocation? Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (10), 3186–3221.

Morellec, Erwan, Nikolov, Boris, Schurhoff, Norman, 2012. Corporate governance and 

capital structure dynamics. J. Financ. 67 (3), 803–848.

Nikolov,  Boris,  Schmid,  Lukas,  Steri,  Roberto,  2021.  The  sources  of  financing 

constraints. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (2), 478–501.

Polk, Christopher, Sapienza, Paola, 2008. The stock market and corporate investment: 

A test of catering theory. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (1), 187–217.

Rampini, Adriano A., Viswanathan, S., 2010. Collateral, risk management, and the 

distribution of debt capacity. J. Financ. 65, 2293–2322.

Sloan, Richard G., 1996. Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash 

flows about future earnings? Account. Rev. 289–315.

Teoh,  Siew  Hong,  Welch,  Ivo,  Wong,  Tak  J.,  1998.  Earnings  management  and 
the long-run market performance of initial public offerings. J. Financ. 53 (6), 
1935–1974.

Terry, Stephen J., 2023. The macro impact of short-termism. Econometrica 91 (5), 

1881–1912.

Warusawitharana,  Missaka,  Whited,  Toni  M.,  2016.  Equity  market  misvaluation, 

financing, and investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (3), 603–654.

Zhang, Lu, 2005. The value premium. J. Financ. 60 (1), 67–103.
Zhao, Jake, Whited, Toni M., 2021. The misallocation of finance. J. Financ. 76 (5), 

2359–2407.

18 

