Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Reaching for yield: Evidence from households(cid:73)
,∗, Cameron Peng b
Francisco Gomes a
, Oksana Smirnova a
a London Business School, Regent’s Park, London, NW1 4SA, UK
b London School of Economics, 44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London, WC2A 3LY, UK
c Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 211 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai, 200030, China

, Ning Zhu c

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

The literature has documented ‘‘reaching for yield’’—the phenomenon of investing more in risky assets when 
interest rates drop—among institutional investors. We analyze detailed transaction data from a large brokerage 
firm to provide direct field evidence that individual investors also exhibit this behavior. Consistent with models 
of portfolio choice with labor income, reaching for yield is more pronounced among younger and less-wealthy 
individuals. Consistent with prospect theory, reaching for yield is more pronounced when investors are trading 
at a loss. Finally, we observe and discuss the phenomenon of ‘‘reverse reaching for yield.’’

Dataset link: Code and Data for Reaching for Yi
eld (Original data)

JEL classification:
G11
G40
G50

Keywords:
Reaching for yield
Portfolio choice
Retail investors
Prospect theory

1. Introduction

The previous decade has witnessed an unprecedented decline in 
interest  rates,  followed  by  a  recent  strong  reversal.  The  prolonged 
regime  of  low  interest  rates  has  prompted  an  important  debate  on 
whether it induced investors to take on more risk and, as a result, 
stimulated higher stock market valuations. There is indeed growing 
evidence that movements in interest rates reshape portfolio decisions 
for both intermediaries and institutional investors, including banks, 
mutual  funds,  pension  funds,  and  insurance  companies  (Chodorow-
Reich, 2014; Becker and Ivashina, 2015; Ioannidou et al., 2015; Di 
Maggio and Kacperczyk, 2017; Choi and Kronlund, 2018; Ioannidou 
et al., 2022; Begenau et al., 2024). In particular, these investors tend 
to increase their exposure to risky assets when the real interest rate 
drops, a phenomenon sometimes labeled ‘‘reaching for yield’’. Expla-
nations based on institutional frictions and agency issues have been 
proposed. Drechsler et al. (2018), Campbell and Sigalov (2022).

However, it remains an open question whether retail investors, who 
do not face the same set of frictions or constraints, would similarly 
reallocate their portfolios in response to interest rate movement. There 

is experimental evidence that, in a lab setting—in which most insti-
tutional frictions are absent—individuals still increase their exposure 
to risky shares when interest rates drop (Lian et al., 2019). As a result, 
theories based on portfolio optimization with constraints or biases have 
been proposed to generate reaching for yield by retail investors (Lian 
et al., 2019; Campbell and Sigalov, 2022).

In this paper, using detailed transaction data of almost two million 
Chinese investors over an 11-year period, we present direct field evi-
dence of reaching for yield amongst retail investors. We document how 
retail investors both rebalance their portfolios within their brokerage 
accounts and move money in and out of these accounts in response 
to  changes  in  the  prevailing  interest  rate.  We  further  exploit  our 
data to test different theories of reaching for yield by examining the 
heterogeneity in investors’ responses.

We start by discussing how existing theories of portfolio choice 
can generate reaching for yield. In the classic Merton portfolio choice 
model (Merton, 1969) portfolios should respond to interest rate move-
ment  unless  investors  expect  the  raw  equity  return  to  change  one-
for-one with the riskless rate. This one-for-one relationship is a po-
tentially  strong  assumption  to  make  about  household  expectations,

(cid:73)

Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We thank Alexander Barbu, Daniel Barth, Lorenzo Bretscher, Joao Cocco, David Laibson, Martin Meeuwis, 
Michaela Pagel, Anna Pavlova, Alessandro Previtero, Nick Roussanov (the editor), Changcheng Song, Andrea Vedolin, Nancy Xu, Stephen Zeldes, seminar 
participants at FIRS, Lapland Household Finance Conference, LBS, NBER Summer Institute, and the University of Nottingham, and an anonymous referee for 
their helpful comments; and Fajer Alrafai for research assistance.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  fgomes@london.edu (F. Gomes), c.peng9@lse.ac.uk (C. Peng), osmirnova@london.edu (O. Smirnova), nzhu@saif.sjtu.edu.cn (N. Zhu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104057
Received 20 September 2023; Received in revised form 25 March 2025; Accepted 26 March 2025
Available online 3 April 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

even from a rational perspective, and empirical evidence on this re-
lationship has been mixed. For example, Campbell and Yogo (2006) 
and Ang and Bekaert (2007) find that interest rates negatively predict 
future expected returns over the next month to next quarter. Focusing 
on monetary policy surprises, Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) show that 
positive  interest  rate  surprises  lead  to  a  reduction  in  equity  excess 
returns in the short run but an increase over the longer run.1

An extended model of portfolio choice with labor income (Merton, 
1971) produces an additional prediction: reaching for yield should be 
more pronounced among younger and less-wealthy households. This is 
because, in the model, the elasticity of the risky share to the interest 
rate increases in the ratio of human capital to financial wealth, which is 
typically higher for both younger and less-wealthy individuals. Prospect 
theory can also generate ‘‘reaching for yield’’ (Lian et al., 2019). When 
interest rates drop, investors who were used to the previous high rates 
would feel like they are losing money. This would encourage more risk-
taking and result in ‘‘reaching for yield’’. Moreover, prospect theory 
suggests that reaching for yield should be more (less) pronounced when 
investors are trading at a loss (gain) since, when the current interest 
rate drops, it moves the investor further away from (closer to) the 
break-even point, thus reducing (increasing) their risk aversion.

In our empirical analysis we construct three measures of portfolio 
reallocation. As discussed in the literature (e.g., Calvet et al., 2009), the 
change in the risky share does not fully reflect portfolio reoptimization 
since it is also a function of return realizations. Therefore, our first 
measure  is  the  active  change  in  the  risky  share,  computed  as  the 
difference between the actual risky share and the counterfactual risky 
share to be observed if the investor did not trade (e.g., Calvet et al., 
2009). The second measure we consider is the ratio of total net equity 
flows to total account balance.

While the first two measures focus on portfolio rebalancing within 
the brokerage account, the third captures flows into and out of the 
account. When interest rates change, investors may reallocate money 
between their brokerage account and alternatives such as bank ac-
counts and money market mutual funds. To capture such behaviors, we 
compute net withdrawals as a percentage of the total account balance.
Our  three  measures  examine  both  trading  within  the  brokerage 
account and trading into and out of  the account. Our analysis is there-
fore robust to the additional consideration of the potential impact of 
interest rate changes on investor expenditures requirements. Consider, 
for  example,  that  following  an  interest  rate  increase,  investors  are 
facing higher expenditure requirements; for example, due to higher 
mortgage payments.2 This can force them to increase their withdrawals 
from the brokerage account and could create a mechanical relationship 
between interest rate changes and our third measure. However, there is 
no mechanical impact on asset allocation within the account, captured 
by the first two measures.

Our  analysis  covers  the  period  from  2006  to  2016.  During  this 
11-year window, the prevailing interest rates in the Chinese markets 
experienced substantial variation over time, making it an ideal period 
for  our  study.  While  different  interest  rates  are  available  to  retail 
investors, arguably the most relevant for household portfolio decisions 
is the Shanghai Interbank Offered Rate (SHIBOR)—the rate offered by 
many wealth management products.

It is important to clarify that we are studying how investors respond 
not to interest rate shocks (namely monetary policy shocks), but to 
changes in interest rates, taking into account that such changes might 
reflect or respond to specific economic conditions. This approach is 

1 Recent work by Nagel and Xu (2024) finds that the stock market response 
to these shocks is mostly driven by changes in the default-free term structure 
of yields, not by changes in the equity premium.

2 As discussed later in the paper, the institutional setting in China makes 
this scenario less relevant. Nonetheless, there still could be an increase in other 
interest expenses or other living costs.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

analogous to those regressing portfolio holdings or trading behavior 
on past stock returns to identify, for example, whether investors are 
contrarians or momentum traders or whether they exhibit disposition 
effects. Such studies do not try to isolate specific shocks to past returns. 
Likewise, we want to understand how investors respond to changes in 
interest rates in general, not just to changes in interest rates that are 
orthogonal to specific variables.3 In extensions discussed below, we 
show that our results are robust to controls for expected returns and 
macroeconomic conditions, albeit the interpretation changes slightly. 
We also study responses to changes in the monetary policy rate only, for 
which the results are also robust and, if anything, economically larger.
Based on the previous discussion, our first measure of interest rate 
innovation is simply the change in interest rates over the period; we 
specifically call it an innovation rather than a shock, to clarify that 
important difference. As an alternative, we consider the residual from 
an  AR(1)  regression  of  interest  rates.  Likewise,  this  should  not  be 
interpreted as a shock. The goal here is to control, in a relatively simple 
way, for agents’ interest rate expectations. Finally, we use changes 
in the real interest rate, finding even stronger results. Although these 
measures should not be interpreted as pure interest rate shocks, they 
are predetermined relative to investors’ portfolio decisions, given the 
timing of our regressions. For example, we regress the active change in 
risky share during month 𝑡 on the change in interest rates at the start 
of that same month; that is, from the first day of month 𝑡 − 1 to the first 
day of month 𝑡.

Across all three measures of portfolio rebalancing and both mea-
sures of changes in interest rates, the evidence supports reaching for 
yield. When interest rates increase, retail investors have a negative 
active change in their risky share and, on average, decrease their equity 
flows. They are also more likely to withdraw funds from their brokerage 
accounts. The magnitude of these effects is nontrivial. Consider a 100-
basis-point increase in the interest rate. First, this is associated with an 
average active reduction in risk exposure within the brokerage account 
of 5 to 36 basis points, as measured by the active risky share or net 
equity flows, respectively. In addition, we observe a 14.5–37.5-basis-
points increase, depending on the interest variable considered, in funds 
transferred out of the brokerage account (likely to other money market 
mutual funds). Remarkably, these portfolio elasticities are close to those 
found  in  Giglio  et  al.  (2021),  which  studies  portfolio  responses  to 
expectations of future stock returns. Furthermore, these averages hide 
significant heterogeneity in investor responses, as discussed next.

Having documented that, on average, retail investors ‘‘reach for 
yield’’, we next examine how this behavior differs in the cross-section of 
individuals. In particular, we focus on the dimensions of heterogeneity 
implied by different theoretical channels; namely, wealth (proxied by 
account  size),  age,  and  past  gains  and  losses.  Consistent  with  the 
portfolio-choice model with riskless labor income (e.g., Merton, 1971), 
we  find  that  less-wealthy  investors  are  substantially  more  likely  to 
reach for yield. Those in the bottom decile of the wealth distribution 
rebalance their portfolios up to three times more than those in the 
third decile, and up to seven times more than those in the sixth decile, 
depending on the specific portfolio rebalancing measure that we con-
sider. The wealthiest are even less responsive to interest rate changes. 
For most measures of portfolio rebalancing, they have essentially a 
zero response, implying that the average effect documented above for 
the investor population is fully driven by those with medium and low 
account balances.

We also find age effects consistent with the predictions of life-cycle 
models in which labor income is a close substitute for bonds (e.g., Cocco 
et al., 2005): young investors, who have a higher ratio of human capital 

3 In  the  same  spirit,  the  forecasting  regressions  in  Campbell  and  Yogo 
(2006)  and  Ang  and  Bekaert  (2007)  study  the  unconditional  relationship 
between interest rates and the equity premium, as opposed to a relationship 
conditional on holding other variables constant.

2 

F. Gomes et al.

to financial wealth, are more likely to reach for yield. The differences 
across age deciles are economically large and similar to those obtained 
when studying the impact of wealth.

Interestingly, our cross-sectional results also show that both wealth-
ier and older individuals can sometimes engage in ‘‘reverse reaching for 
yield’’ by increasing their allocation to risky assets when interest rates 
rise. We discuss how this behavior is a possible outcome of a Merton 
model with labor income. If an increase in interest rates changes asset 
prices  in  such  a  way  that  the  investor’s  wealth  actually  falls,  then 
the present value of his future labor income becomes relatively more 
important, and therefore the optimal risky share is now higher.4

We also find evidence supporting prospect theory as an explanation 
for ‘‘reaching for yield’’. In particular, we test whether investors trading 
at  a  loss  exhibit  stronger  tendencies  to  reach  for  yield  than  those 
trading at a gain, after controlling for other individual characteristics. 
Consistent with prospect theory, reaching for yield is more pronounced 
when investors are currently experiencing losses. This result is robust 
to the two measures of interest rate innovation we consider and to all 
three measures of portfolio rebalancing activities.

Importantly, our conclusions are robust to the inclusion of controls 
for proxies of future expected returns, such as the lagged dividend 
yield, past stock market returns, and past returns on the investors’ own 
portfolios, and for macroeconomic conditions such as lagged GDP and 
consumption growth, inflation and house price growth, and exchange 
rate fluctuations. Consistent with the hypothesis that reaching for yield 
is partially driven by revisions in expectations of the equity premium, 
these additional results of ‘‘reaching for yield’’ are smaller in magni-
tude. However, the fact that, in virtually all regressions, the coefficients 
on interest rates remain both economically important and statistically 
significant suggests that the other channels we examine (wealth, human 
capital, and prospect theory) are also at work.

Having studied portfolio rebalancing across asset classes, we explore 
whether investors reallocate their portfolio of risky assets in response to
changes in interest rates. More precisely, we consider whether investors 
either reinforce or partially offset the previously documented reaching 
for yield behavior by increasing or decreasing their risk-taking within 
their risky asset portfolios. We explore this possibility by constructing 
an average-weighted beta for each investor in each month and consider-
ing the change in this beta as our dependent variable. Under the Merton 
model (Merton, 1969), we would not expect to find any effect unless 
high- and low-beta assets respond differently to changes in interest 
rates. Consistent with this, although we find a statistically significant 
coefficient, its economic magnitude is negligible.

Many papers have documented the phenomenon of ‘‘reaching for 
yield’’ and studied its underlying mechanisms (e.g., Chodorow-Reich, 
2014; Becker and Ivashina, 2015; Ioannidou et al., 2015; Di Maggio 
and Kacperczyk, 2017; Choi and Kronlund, 2018; Lian et al., 2019). The 
key innovation of our paper is to document retail investors reaching 
for yield. We not only document this phenomenon in a field setting, 
but also examine competing theories that can generate this behavior 
and find support for both models of portfolio choice with riskless labor 
income and prospect theory. Concurrent work by Agarwal et al. (2023) 
studies consumption responses and portfolio rebalancing in response to 
changes in monetary policy rates.5 Korevaar (2023) and Boddin et al. 
(2024) study reaching for yield in the housing market.

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section  2,  we 
discuss theories that can explain reaching for yield by retail investors. 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

In Section 3, we present our data and methodology. Section 4 contains 
our baseline empirical results. In Section 5, we study heterogeneity 
in behavior across investors and relate these results to the theoretical 
channels discussed in Section 2. We conclude in Section 6.

2. Theories

In this section, we study the potential explanations for reaching for 
yield behavior by retail investors. Existing theories of reaching for yield 
apply to different types of institutional investors, resulting from specific 
institutional or regulatory frictions that they face (see Chodorow-Reich, 
2014; Hau and Lai, 2016; Di Maggio and Kacperczyk, 2017; Drechsler 
et al., 2018; Acharya and Naqvi, 2019; Barbu et al., 2021). In general, 
these models do not make predictions about reaching for yield behavior 
for households. One exception is Campbell and Sigalov (2022). They 
show that reaching for yield can result from imposing a sustainable 
spending  constraint  to  an  otherwise  standard  Merton  model.  Their 
theory  mostly  applies  to  endowments  and  sovereign  wealth  funds, 
but it can also characterize trusts or households with a consumption 
commitment.6

2.1. Alternative theories of reaching for yield

In this subsection, we first discuss existing theories of reaching for 
yield behavior by retail investors. Later we discuss several testable 
implications generated by these theories.

2.1.1. Portfolio-choice model without labor income

We start with the two-asset Merton model with i.i.d. returns (Mer-
ton, 1969). In this model, the share of wealth invested in the stocks (𝛼) 
is given by 
𝜇 − 𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

𝛼 =

(1)

,

where  𝜇  is  the  expected  equity  return,  𝑟  is  the  risk-free  rate,  𝜎  is 
the volatility of stock returns, and 𝛾 is the coefficient of relative risk 
aversion.

From Eq.  (1) we see that changes in the risk-free rate can affect 
the investor’s portfolio share under three conditions: first, when the 
expected return on stocks (𝜇) does not move one-for-one with 𝑟; second 
and third, when interest rate movement is correlated with either the 
expected volatility of stock returns (𝜎) or risk aversion (𝛾).

For simplicity, we first consider the case in which 𝜎 and 𝛾 are 
independent of 𝑟.7 The impact of changes in the riskless rate on the 
risky share is given by 

𝜕𝛼
𝜕𝑟

=

𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)
𝜕𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

.

(2)

𝜕𝑟

The  derivative  𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)

  equals  −1  if  investors  expect  𝜇  to  remain 
constant  and  0  if  they  instead  expect  the  risk  premium  (𝜇 − 𝑟)  to 
remain  constant.  So,  in  this  model,  if  𝜇  responds  less  (more)  than 
one-for-one with interest rates: the risky asset becomes a more (less) 
appealing investment when the riskless rate goes down, because its 
relative yield, measured by (𝜇 − 𝑟), has increased. Only in the limiting 
case of one-for-one response will the risky share remain unchanged.

Only under special cases of relatively frictionless economies would 
the expected stock return move exactly one-for-one with the risk-free 

4 Alternatively, the same result can arise if increases in interest rates are 
associated with increases in the present value of future labor income. We 
discuss both possibilities in the paper.

5 They only observe flows to and from the brokerage account, while we also 
have the actual portfolios holdings and total balance within the account. On 
the other hand, their data allow them to study consumption responses, which 
we do not observe.

6 Since we only have access to brokerage account data, we cannot directly 
test if these predictions also apply to our setting, as this would require data 
or evidence on consumption commitments.

7 We do not explore the role of a potential correlation between stock return 
volatility  and  interest  rate  changes,  but  we  will  consider  changes  in  risk 
aversion; namely, in the context of both habit formation and loss aversion 
(as in the case of prospect theory preferences).

3 

F. Gomes et al.

rate.8 Empirically, the evidence is mixed. For instance, Bernanke and 
Kuttner (2005) find that positive (negative) interest rate surprises lead 
to a statistically and economically significant reduction (increase) in 
equity excess returns over the next two months.9 Campbell and Yogo 
(2006) find that higher interest rates (three-month T-bills) negatively 
predict excess returns at both the monthly and quarterly horizons.10 
Likewise,  Ang  and  Bekaert  (2007)  find  that  ‘‘for  the  post-Treasury 
Accord  1952–2001  sample,  a  1%  increase  in  the  annualized  short 
rate decreases the equity premium by about 2.16%’’. Theoretically, 
models of countercyclical risk and risk aversion would similarly imply 
a negative relationship.

Importantly, the relevant return expectations to include in Eq.  (1) 
are the subjective expectations of each investor, which can easily devi-
ate from fully rational expectations. Assuming that those move exactly 
one-for-one with interest rates is a particularly strong assumption to 
make about household expectations.

2.1.2. Portfolio-choice model with labor income

In the previous section, we showed that reaching for yield can be 
obtained in the Merton model if investor expectations about the excess 
market return are not neutral to interest rate movement. The model, 
however, does not provide much guidance on the cross-sectional vari-
ation in reaching for yield among investors.11 In the next sections, we 
discuss models that can generate heterogeneous responses to interest 
rates.

We first extend the model to include riskless labor income, while 
maintaining the assumption of complete markets (Merton, 1971). In 
this setting, the portfolio rule depends on the ratio of the present value 
of future labor income (human capital) to current financial wealth: 

[

𝛼 =

1 +

𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )
𝑊

] 𝜇 − 𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

,

(3)

where 𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 ) denotes the present value of future labor income (𝑌 ). The 
Merton model assumes the limit case of riskless labor income. Viceira 
(2001) and Cocco et al. (2005) show that this result extends to a model 
with risky labor income, as long as human capital remains a closer 
substitute for bonds than for stocks.

In this model, the derivative of the risky share with respect to the 
riskless rate, assuming again that both 𝜎 and 𝛾 are independent of 𝑟, 
is12

[

=

1 +

𝜕𝛼
𝜕𝑟

𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )
𝑊

] 𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)
𝜕𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

.

(4)

This is higher than the response obtained in the model without labor 
income in Eq. (2), particularly if the ratio of the present value of labor 
income to financial wealth is high. For an investor with a ratio of 
present value of labor income to financial wealth of three, for example, 
the portfolio share response is four times larger than in the model 
without labor income.

8 If we consider a consumption-based asset-pricing model, this essentially 
assumes that the interest rate has no impact on consumption growth. This 
condition may be valid in simpler models, but can easily break down as 
we introduce different constraints, either on the household side or on the 
production side.

9 The result reverts at longer horizons but in our empirical specifications 

we consider a monthly frequency.
10 In Appendix  G, we repeat the analysis in Campbell and Yogo (2006) for 
the Chinese stock market and obtain similar conclusions.
11 The  model  has  cross-sectional  predictions  as  a  function  of  both  risk 
aversion and expectations, but our data does not include direct information 
on those.
12 This particular derivation imposes two additional assumptions: constant 
wealth and constant present-value of future labor income. We relax both of 
these below, as they provide additional testable implications from the model.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

2.1.3. Portfolio-choice model with decreasing relative risk aversion (DRRA)
Another potential channel driving reaching for yield is a combina-
tion of preferences that deviate from constant relative aversion and 
changes in asset valuations resulting from changes in interest rates. 
Deviations from constant relative risk aversion can result, for example, 
from a consumption floor/commitment (e.g., Chetty and Szeidl, 2007)), 
habit formation (e.g., Abel, 1990; Constantinides, 1990; Campbell and 
Cochrane, 1999), or loss aversion (e.g., Barberis and Huang, 2001; 
Gomes,  2005;  Barberis  and  Xiong,  2009).  Under  such  preferences, 
fluctuations in asset prices, such as those induced by interest rate move-
ment, have a direct impact on investors’ risk aversion and consequently 
on their optimal risky share.

For simplicity, we restrict our attention to the case without labor 
income. Under certain conditions (e.g., Campbell and Viceira, 2002; 
Calvet and Sodini, 2014), it can be shown that Eq.  (1) becomes 

𝛼 =

[ 𝜇 − 𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

] [

1 −

]

,

𝜆𝐻
𝑊

(5)

where 𝐻 is a habit or subsistence level and 𝜆 is a positive constant such 
that the product of the two represents the present value of maintaining 
the habit over the agent’s life time. Since risk aversion increases with 
the habit level, the optimal risky share falls when the habit increases.

In this context, suppose that a drop in interest rates raises asset 
prices.  This  would  increase  investors’  financial  wealth,  resulting  in 
lower  risk  aversion  and  a  lower  risky  share.13  Therefore,  when  in-
vestors have DRRA preferences, there is an additional reaching for yield 
channel, through the wealth effects of interest change changes. Since 
wealth also appears in the portfolio-choice model with labor income, 
as in Eq.  (3), we discuss both channels simultaneously in Section 2.2 
when presenting the different testable hypothesis.

2.1.4. Prospect theory

Under prospect theory, investors evaluate the current interest rate 
by comparing it to a reference level, such as the average historical level. 
When the current interest rate is below the historical level, investors 
feel that they are in the loss region; they become more risk-tolerant 
and increase their risky shares. Conversely, when the current interest 
rate goes above the historical level, investors become more risk-averse 
and reduce their risky shares (Lian et al., 2019). Therefore, even with 
the same current interest rate, investors will be more risk-averse when 
past interests have been low and more risk-taking when past interest 
rates have been high.

At the same time, prospect theory, especially the loss-aversion com-
ponent, suggests that the way investors react to interest rate movement 
will also depend on whether they are in a gain or loss region. To 
understand the intuition, we start with two observations. First, under 
prospect theory, investors are less risk-averse with a bigger gain and 
less risk-loving with a bigger loss—that is, their utility function exhibits 
diminishing sensitivity. Second, the most risk-averse point along the 
utility function is the origin, the point where investors break even in 
their returns.

Suppose  that  an  investor  is  in  the  gain  region.  Then  a  drop  in 
interest rates will reduce the gain, moving this investor closer to the 
kink, increasing effective risk aversion. This makes it less likely that the 
investor will invest in risky assets. By contrast, if an investor is in the 
loss region, then the same drop in interest rates will increase the loss, 
making this investor more risk-averse (less risk-loving). At the same 
time, because of the investor is further away from the kink, this force 
will induce lower risk aversion. In most parameterizations of prospect 
theory, the second channel dominates and the investor becomes less 
risk-averse and more likely to invest in risky assets (Barberis and Xiong, 
2009). Therefore, according to prospect theory, investors currently in 
the loss region are more likely to ‘‘reach for yield’’.

13 The  reverse  would  happen  if  investors’  preferences  exhibit  increasing 
relative risk aversion.

4 

F. Gomes et al.

2.2. Testable predictions

2.2.1. Age and wealth levels

We now discuss the testable implications that will guide our empir-
ical analysis. A first clear prediction from Eq.  (4) is that, everything 
else  equal  (especially  when  future  labor  income  is  held  constant), 
richer individuals should respond less (in absolute terms) to changes 
in interests rates, since 𝑊  appears in the denominator.14

Hypothesis 1. |𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟| is a decreasing function of 𝑊

The derivation is provided in Appendix  A.
Considering Eq. (4) in a life-cycle context yields a second testable 
implication.  In  a  life-cycle  model  (e.g.,  Cocco  et  al.,  2005),  young 
agents have substantial wealth in the form of their future labor in-
come, but have accumulated only limited financial wealth. As they get 
older and approach retirement, they accumulate more wealth, and the 
present value of their future labor income is naturally decreasing.15 
Therefore, younger investors have a higher ratio of human capital to 
financial wealth and, according to Eq.  (4), they should respond more 
to changes in interest rates.

Hypothesis 2. |𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟| is a decreasing function of age.

In our empirical analysis we will directly test both hypotheses.

2.2.2. Changes in wealth

Eq. (4) was obtained under the assumption that 𝜇 and 𝜎 do not 
respond to changes in interest rates. Another implicit assumption is 
that current wealth remains unchanged. However, when interest rates 
increase, bond prices should decrease, lowering the wealth of investors 
with bond portfolios. Stock holdings may also be affected. In fact, under 
the assumption that the equity premium does not change with interest 
rates, equity prices should also decrease as the present-discount value 
of dividends is now smaller.16 In general, unless we consider the other 
extreme case, in which it is the stock return that remains constant 
(instead of the equity premium), or unless we have an exactly offsetting 
effect in expected dividends, then equity prices should also change in 
response to interest rate movement.

If we take this effect into account then Eq. (4) is replaced with17

[

=

1 +

𝜕𝛼
𝜕𝑟

𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )
𝑊

] 𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)
𝜕𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

−

𝜇 − 𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 ) 𝜕𝑊
𝜕𝑟

𝑊 2

.

(7)

Intuitively, if an increase in interest rates decreases wealth, then 
the ratio of human capital to financial wealth increases. This increase 

14 Naturally the equation implies the opposite prediction for the present 
value of future labor income, but unfortunately we do not observe income 
in our data.
15 After retirement, wealth will typically start decreasing as well.
16 This is the assumption required for ruling out reaching for yield in the 
context of the Merton model without labor income. So, even though that 
condition rules out reaching for yield in that model, it implies reaching for 
yield in the model with labor income, as discussed next.
17 A further implicit assumption in deriving Eq. (4) is that the present value 
of  future  labor  income  also  remains  constant  when  interest  rates  change. 
However, to the extent that changes in interest rates affect economic activity, 
they are also likely to affect future labor income. In that case, the derivative 
becomes: 
[

𝜕𝛼
𝜕𝑟
This equation provides one additional testable implication: individuals whose 
future labor income is more negatively correlated with interest rates should 
change their portfolios more in response to changes in interest rates. Unfortu-
nately, our data does not include individual income and therefore we cannot 
estimate 𝜕𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )∕𝜕𝑟 for each investor. Therefore we leave this as an untested 
hypothesis and only mention it for completeness.

] 𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)
𝜕𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

𝜕𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )
𝜕𝑟
𝑊

𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )
𝑊

𝜇 − 𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

(6)

1 +

=

+

.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

in the investor’s implicit bond holdings leads to a higher optimal risky 
share. Therefore this second term adds to the impact of the first term in 
the equation, thus increasing the investor’s response to change in the 
interest rate.18

Eq. (7) provides a further testable implication from the portfolio-
choice model with riskless labor income: individuals whose wealth is 
more adversely affected by increases in interest rates should decrease 
their risky share by less in response to these changes.

Hypothesis 3. 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 is a decreasing function of 𝜕𝑊 ∕𝜕𝑟 (human capital 
channel).

We label Hypothesis  3 as the ‘‘human capital channel’’ to distinguish 
it from the next hypothesis, which is also about the sign of 𝜕𝑊 ∕𝜕𝑟 and 
arises if investors have decreasing relative risk aversion, as discussed 
in Section 2.1.3. Working from Eq.  (5), we have 

𝜕𝛼
𝜕𝑟

=

𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)
𝜕𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

[

1 −

𝜆𝐻
𝑊

]

+

[ 𝜇 − 𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

] [

1 −

𝜆𝐻
𝑊

] [

𝜕𝑊
𝜕𝑟

𝜆𝐻
𝑊 2

]

.

(8)

Eq. (8) shows that, if increases in interest rates reduce investor 
wealth, then this is another channel that can generate reaching for 
yield. In this context, a more negative 𝜕𝑊 ∕𝜕𝑟 leads to a more negative 
𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 (i.e., more reaching for yield). Therefore, the DRRA channel gives 
rise to a prediction exactly opposite to that of the riskless labor income 
model with CRRA preferences:19

Hypothesis 4. 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 is an increasing function of 𝜕𝑊 ∕𝜕𝑟 (DRRA chan-
nel).

The discussion so far has considered the impact of interest rate 
changes—the focus of our paper. However, the two channels—human 
capital  and  DRRA—are  present  whenever  current  financial  wealth 
changes  and  for  whatever  reason.  Therefore,  they  also  imply  more 
general versions of Hypotheses 3 and 4, which we will refer to as 
Hypotheses 3b and 4b:

Hypothesis 3b. 𝛥𝛼 is a decreasing function of 𝛥𝑊  (Human capital 
channel).

Hypothesis 4b. 𝛥𝛼 is an increasing function of 𝛥𝑊  (DRRA channel).

Even  though  Hypotheses  3b  and  4b  are  in  direct  conflict  with 
each other, they highlight the importance of including a measure of 
(exogenous) 𝛥𝑊  in the regressions, since it will affect the portfolio 
rebalancing behavior through these two channels. The estimated re-
gression coefficient will effectively reveal the relative importance of 
one channel (ratio of human capital to financial wealth) versus the 
other (DRRA).

2.2.3. Previous gains or losses

As discussed in Section 2.1.4, under prospect theory, investors are 
more likely to reach for yield when they are already in the loss region. 
Conversely, if an investor is at a gain and the interest rate has just 
dropped, this would bring the investor closer to the origin—the point of 
highest risk aversion—and the investor will become more risk-averse. 
Therefore, prospect theory makes the following prediction regarding 
reaching for yield under gains and losses:

Hypothesis 5. Reaching for yield is more prominent among investors 
at a loss than among those at a gain.

18 In fact, due to this channel, that is, under Eq. (7), 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 can now also take 
positive values. We discuss this possibility in more detail later in this section.
19 Naturally the prediction of a DRRA model with labor income would be 
ambiguous, depending on the relative importance of the two effects.

5 

F. Gomes et al.

2.2.4. Reverse reaching for yield

As discussed, under the Merton model we can observe either reach-
ing  for  yield  or  reverse  reaching  for  yield,  depending  on  whether, 
following changes in the interest rate, investors adjust their expected 
stock return by less or more than one-for-one.

One interesting implication of Eqs. (6) and (7) is that, under certain 
conditions,  the  optimal  portfolio  response  in  the  model  with  labor 
income  also  leads  to  reverse  reaching  for  yield.  From  Eq.   (6),  this 
can happen when a higher riskless rate is associated with a significant 
increase in the investor’s human capital. Since human capital is a sub-
stitute for bonds, this implies a higher optimal risky share in financial 
wealth,  potentially  offsetting  the  other  channels.  From  Eq.   (7),  we 
obtain the same logic but now when higher interest rates are associated 
with a sufficiently large decrease in investor wealth. As wealth falls, the 
relative importance of human capital increases and we have the same 
logic as before.

It is important to note that, in both Equations, the second term 
is not very large: it is divided by wealth in Eq.  (6) and by the ratio 
of human capital to wealth squared in Eq.  (7). However, if the first 
term is also particularly small, which can happen for investors who 
expect the equity premium to remain (almost) unchanged, then the 
second effect can indeed dominate, thus leading to ‘‘reverse reaching 
for yield’’. This is naturally also more likely to happen when the two 
channels (decrease in wealth and increase in human capital) operate 
simultaneously (i.e., when combining both Equations).

3. Data and methodology

In this section, we first describe the data we use to analyze investor 
behavior. We then discuss how we measure both investor behavior and 
changes in interest rates.

3.1. Data

Our dataset includes account-level transaction data from a large 
national  brokerage  firm  in  China.20  The  company  has  branches  in 
almost  all  of  China’s  provincial  districts  and  is  a  market  leader  in 
several regions. Moreover, it provides comprehensive capital market 
services, making all exchange-listed securities available to its clients. 
This enables us to observe the trades of all exchange-listed assets. The 
dataset includes every transaction record from 2006 to 2016, for a 
total of 2,002,777 investors, and the structure is similar to that used 
by Odean (1998), for example. Each observation specifies the account, 
date, time, price, quantity, and security code. Before 2015, we know 
that  this  is  the  only  brokerage  account  of  a  person,  following  the 
‘‘one account per investor’’ regulation.21 In addition, the data also have 
records of cash holdings, allowing us to calculate total account balance. 
For a large number of investors, we have some additional information, 
including their age and education and for how long the account has 
been opened.

A few limitations of the data are worth noting. First, we do not 
observe holdings of mutual funds (except ETFs and other exchange-
traded assets). However, ownership of mutual funds was quite small in 
the Chinese markets during the sample period (An et al., 2022). Second, 
the cash balance of the account is updated only whenever an investor 
makes a transaction. Therefore, if an investor deposits or withdraws 
cash but does not trade, the cash balance will not be updated. This 
concern, however, is largely mitigated by the fact that average Chinese 
retail investors trade a lot, with a monthly turnover (total transaction 
volume  divided  the  average  balance  in  a  month)  of  around  100%. 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Third, while we observe the cash balance in the brokerage account, 
we do not observe bank accounts and therefore our data does not fully 
capture investors’ holdings of risk-free assets. We use withdrawals and 
additions to the brokerage account to infer the potential reallocation of 
funds to this additional safe asset category, as discussed below.

3.2. Measuring household behavior

Our  objective  is  to  study  portfolio  reallocation  in  response  to 
changes in interest rates. In this section, we discuss four candidate 
measures of portfolio rebalancing behavior.

3.2.1. Change in risky share

The simplest measure of portfolio rebalancing is the change in the 
total risky share in the portfolio. We define risky share 𝜔𝑗𝑡 as the value 
of equity holdings in investor 𝑗’s portfolio by the end of month 𝑡 (𝐴𝑗𝑡) 
over the sum of her equity holdings and cash holdings by the end of 
month 𝑡 (𝐶𝑗𝑡):22

𝜔𝑗𝑡 =

𝐴𝑗𝑡
𝐴𝑗𝑡 + 𝐶𝑗𝑡

.

(9)

To obtain the value of equity holdings 𝐴𝑗𝑡, we first calculate the value 
of the holdings in each particular stock 𝑖, then sum over all stocks: 

𝐴𝑗𝑡 =

∑

𝑖

𝑄𝑖

𝑗𝑡𝑃 𝑖
𝑡 ,

(10)

where 𝑄 is the number of shares and 𝑃  is the share price. The change in 
the risky share 𝛥𝜔𝑗𝑡 is then simply the difference between the current 
and previous period’s risky share: 

𝛥𝜔𝑗𝑡 = 𝜔𝑗𝑡 − 𝜔𝑗𝑡−1.

(11)

The main advantage of this measure is its simplicity. However, as 
discussed  below,  it  can  be  distorted  by  movements  in  asset  prices. 
Therefore, in our main analysis we consider the three measures pre-
sented next. In Appendix  D, we report consistent results obtained with 
the (simpler) change in risky share.

3.2.2. Active change in risky share

One potential issue with the change in risky share Eq. (11) is that it 
also reflects movements in asset prices. Therefore, it can take on non-
zero values, even in the absence of rebalancing. To isolate the effect 
of an investor’s active rebalancing decisions from the effect of changes 
in stock prices, we follow Calvet et al. (2009) and compute the active 
change in risky share. First, we compute the value of stock holdings 
under the counterfactual that there were no trades between 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡
(which we denote as 𝐴𝑝

𝑗𝑡): 

𝐴𝑝

𝑗𝑡 =

∑

𝑖

𝑗𝑡−1𝑃 𝑖
𝑄𝑖
𝑡 .

(12)

We can then compute the passive risky share—the risky share that we 
would have observed in the absence of any trades—as 

𝜔𝑝

𝑗𝑡 =

𝐴𝑝
𝑗𝑡
𝑗𝑡 + 𝐶𝑗𝑡

𝐴𝑝

.

(13)

Finally, we can compute the active change in risky share from: 
𝑗𝑡 = 𝜔𝑗𝑡 − 𝜔𝑝
𝜔𝑎
𝑗𝑡,
where 𝜔𝑗𝑡 is risky share in the account 𝑗 in month 𝑡, as defined in the 
previous section.

(14)

As the right-hand–side of Eq.  (14) shows, the active change in risky 
share isolates the changes that are due to actual portfolio rebalancing, 
as opposed to movements in asset prices.

20 This is the same data used in Gao et al. (2024) and Liao et al. (2022).
21 The rule was lifted in April 2015 to allow investors to have up to 20 
accounts at different brokerage firms. However, in 2016, the regulator has 
tightened the rule again to allow three accounts per investor.

22 We exclude bond and currency ETFs to avoid classifying them as either 
risky or riskless assets. In any case, only 0.01% (0.04%) of our observations 
have positive bond (currency) ETF positions.

6 

F. Gomes et al.

3.2.3. Net flow to equity

Our  second  measure  is  the  total  net  flow  to  equity  (scaled  by 
account balance). If investors are reaching for yield, then we would 
expect an increase (decrease) in the net flows to equity when interest 
rates fall (increase). Our detailed data on investors’ accounts include 
quantity and execution price for each transaction, allowing us to cal-
culate these flows. We can therefore compute the cumulative buys and 
sells for each account 𝑗 in each month 𝑡 by summing up the value of 
transactions on all stocks during the month: 

𝐵𝑢𝑦𝑠𝑗𝑡 =

𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑗𝑡 =

∑

∑

𝑑∈𝑡
∑

𝑖
∑

𝑑∈𝑡

𝑖

𝑗 𝑃 𝑖𝑑 ;
𝐵𝑖𝑑

𝑗 𝑃 𝑖𝑑 ,
𝑆𝑖𝑑

(15)

(16)

where 𝑑 is a given day in month 𝑡, 𝑖 is the stock, and 𝐵 and 𝑆 denote 
the number of shares bought and sold, respectively.

The net flow into equity for account 𝑗 in month 𝑡 can then be 

computed from the difference between total 𝐵𝑢𝑦𝑠 and 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠: 

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗𝑡 = 𝐵𝑢𝑦𝑠𝑗𝑡 − 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑗𝑡.

(17)

Finally, we scale the net flow by the account balance at the end of the 
previous month (𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝
𝑗𝑡 ): 
𝐵𝑢𝑦𝑠𝑗𝑡 − 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑗𝑡
𝐴𝑗𝑡−1 + 𝐶𝑗𝑡−1

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

𝑗𝑡 =

(18)

.

3.2.4. Withdrawals

Our previous two measures capture portfolio rebalancing within the 
brokerage account. If these investors reach for yield, then they are also 
more (less) likely to withdraw funds from the account when interest 
rates increase (decrease) in order to increase (decrease) their riskless 
asset holdings outside the brokerage account. To capture this behavior, 
we consider a third measure of portfolio activity: the (net) withdrawal 
amount from the brokerage account (𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟).

As discussed above, in our data, the broker records the cash position 
before and after each transaction. We use these recorded cash positions 
to backfill daily/monthly cash holdings and corresponding additions 
and  withdrawals  of  funds  in  the  account.  We  then  scale  these  net 
withdrawals by the account value in the previous period to obtain our 
measure: 

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

𝑗𝑡 =

∑

𝑑∈𝑡 𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑗𝑑
𝐴𝑗𝑡−1 + 𝐶𝑗𝑡−1

.

(19)

3.3. Interest rate

3.3.1. Interest rate variable

For a retail investor in the Chinese market, there are three main 
relevant interest rates: the bank deposit rate, the government bond 
yield, and the SHIBOR (Shanghai Interbank Offered Rate). Investors 
earn the first two types of rates by placing their money in banks either 
as deposits or by holding government bonds. The first option is more 
commonly used than the second.

With the arrival of mobile payments and associated wealth manage-
ment products, the most relevant benchmark rate for retail investors 
has arguably become the SHIBOR rate. For instance, Alipay’s flagship 
service, called Yu’ebao, is effectively a money market mutual fund that 
offers  the  SHIBOR  rate  and  can  be  used  for  consumption  purposes 
immediately. Because Yu’ebao has become the largest money market 
mutual fund, we use the SHIBOR as our measure of interest rates.23
Fig.  1 shows the time-series plot of the (annualized) 1-month SHIBOR 
from October 2006 to December 2016.

23 See,  for  example,  ‘‘Meet  the  Earth’s  Largest  Money-Market  Fund’’ 
(https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-an-alibaba-spinoff-created-the-worlds-
largest-money-market-fund-1505295000), The Wall Street Journal, September 
13, 2017.

7 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Throughout our sample period, there is significant variation in the 
SHIBOR.  There  was  a  sharp  decline—from  around  3.5%  to  around 
1%—in late 2008 following the Global Financial Crisis and the stock 
market crash. Once the economy began to recover, the SHIBOR steadily 
rose  and  peaked  around  7%.  Then,  in  2015,  following  yet  another 
stock market crash, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) cut the interest 
rate and, as a result, the SHIBOR fell to around 3%. Such substantial 
variation  in  SHIBOR  makes  our  period  particularly  well  suited  for 
studying the impact of interest rate changes on portfolio allocation.

3.3.2. Interest rate innovation

In our regressions we consider two measures of interest rate move-
ment. As discussed, we are not interested in capturing interest rate 
shocks (e.g., monetary policy shocks). Our goal is to study how in-
vestors respond to changes in interest rates, taking into account that 
those changes might be related to past/current economic conditions 
and/or expectations of future economic conditions.24 In fact, those are 
some of the channels discussed in Section 2.

Therefore,  the  first  measure  of  interest  rate  innovation  that  we 
consider is the simple change in interest rate over the month. For the 
second measure, we fit an AR(1) process to the interest rate and use 
the error term as the innovation: 

𝑟𝑡 = 𝑎𝑟 + 𝜌𝑟𝑟𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 .

(20)

Fig.  2 plots the two measures of interest rate innovation over the 

sample period.

We can see these two series are very highly correlated and exhibit 
very similar volatility. Consistent with this, our empirical results are 
very similar when we consider one measure or the other.

3.4. Other explanatory variables

In addition to the interest rates innovation, we include other vari-
ables in our regressions, either as controls or to test our hypothesis. 
In some cases, these variables appear as interactions with the change 
in  interest  rates,  consistent  with  the  theoretical  predictions  and  as 
described below.

3.4.1. Age

Hypothesis  2 states that reaching for yield should be a decreasing 
function of age. Our data include age information for roughly a half the 
sample and we consider all investors aged from 30 to 80 in our analysis. 
We define 10 age groups: the first group is ages 30–35 and the others 
have a five-year step (36–40, 41–45, etc.). Table  B.11 in Appendix  B 
reports the distribution of investors across those age groups. 72.7% of 
our sample are in the five group between 36 and 60; the most populated 
is 46–50 (17.8% of sample). The 30–35 group comprises 9.4% of the 
sample while only 18% are older than 61.

3.4.2. Wealth

Hypothesis  1 states that reaching for yield should be a decreasing 
function of wealth. Our measure of investor wealth is the total account 
balance at the beginning of the month; we consider 10 wealth groups. 
Since wealth has a very right-skewed distribution, if we considered 
equal-sized  deciles,  the  first  would  capture  very  limited  variation, 
particularly when compared to the tenth. We instead set specific break 
points for each group, such that each of them captures a different 
segment of the wealth distribution and none is particularly small. Our 
break points (all in CNY) are 10K, 25K, 50K, 100K, 200K, 300K, 400K, 
500K, and 1M.

24 And these would, in turn, have an impact on expectations of future asset 
prices.

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. 1.  Historical 1-month SHIBOR. Fig.  1 shows the time-series plot of the (annualized) 1-month SHIBOR over the period from October 2006 to December 2016.

Fig. 2.  Interest rate innovation.
Fig.  2 shows the time-series plot of two measures of interest rate innovation. The first is the simple change in interest rate (𝛥SHIBOR). To obtain the second measure (𝜀𝑟
an AR(1) process to the interest rate and use the error term as the innovation: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝑎𝑟 + 𝜌𝑟𝑟𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 .

𝑡 ), we fit 

We assign investors to a wealth group each month, based on current 
account value, and repeat the assignment procedure for every cross-
section in the data. Therefore, an investor can switch wealth groups 
over time. Table  B.12 in Appendix  B provides the full distribution of 
investors across wealth groups. Around 20% have an account balance 
of less than 10K CNY, 18% have between 10K and 25K; 87% have less 
than 200K.

3.4.3. Passive change in wealth

As highlighted by Hypotheses 3b and 4b, another important variable 
implied by both models with riskless labor income and models with 
DRRA preferences is the change in investor’s wealth. We obtain our 
measure of change in wealth induced by financial markets in three 

steps. First, for all assets that each investor holds at the start of the 
month, we compute the change in value over that month. Second, we 
aggregate these for each account to obtain the total change in portfolio 
value that would have resulted from these price movements. We call 
this measure the passive change in wealth (𝛥𝑊 𝑝), since it will be equal 
to the actual change in account value if the investor has remained 
passive—that is has not executed any trades or moved any funds into 
our out of the account: 

𝛥𝑊 𝑝

𝑗𝑡 = 𝐴𝑝

𝑗𝑡−1 − 𝐴𝑗𝑡−1 =

∑

𝑖

𝑗𝑡−1(𝑃 𝑖
𝑄𝑖

𝑡 − 𝑃 𝑖

𝑡−1).

(21)

Finally,  we  scale  the  passive  change  in  wealth  by  the  account 
balance in the previous month and convert it into a percentage value 

8 

F. Gomes et al.

by taking the log: 

(

log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

𝑗𝑡 = ln

1 +

𝐴𝑝

𝑗𝑡−1 − 𝐴𝑗𝑡−1
𝐴𝑗𝑡−1 + 𝐶𝑗𝑡−1

)

.

(22)

Naturally these changes in wealth are not necessarily the result of 
changes in interest rates. However, according to both the DRRA channel 
and the human capital channel, we should control for them in our 
regressions, regardless of the underlying mechanism responsible for the 
movements in asset prices.

3.4.4. Previous gains and losses

Hypothesis  5 states that reaching for yield should be more pro-
nounced for investors with previous losses versus those with previous 
gains.  We  calculate  gains  and  losses  as  the  difference  between  the 
current  market  value  of  open  positions  and  a  reference  price.  We 
further scale gains by account value: 
𝑗𝑡(𝑃 𝑖
𝑖 𝑄𝑖
𝐴𝑗𝑡 + 𝐶𝑗𝑡

𝑡 − ̄𝑃 𝑖
𝑗𝑡)

𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑝

𝑗𝑡 =

(23)

∑

,

where  ̄𝑃 𝑖
𝑗𝑡  represents  the  individual-specific  reference  price,  so  that 
𝑡 − ̄𝑃 𝑖
(𝑃 𝑖
𝑗𝑡) measures the gain or loss relative to that reference point. In 
the regression analysis, we use an indicator function for positive gains 
𝟏{Gain > 0}, which equals 1 if 𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑗𝑡−1 is positive and 0 otherwise.

Since we do not observe the investors’ actual reference point, we 
consider the price at the start of the previous month as the reference 
point. In this case, our measure (‘‘monthly gains’’) corresponds to the 
gain or loss over the previous month. Under this specification, reference 
prices are reset every month. This assumption is particularly well suited 
for Chinese retail investors, whose average monthly turnover is around 
100%. Fig.  A.1 in Appendix  C plots the series of monthly gains, while 
Column 8 in Table  1 provides detailed descriptive statistics.

3.4.5. Aggregate variables

Our specifications include aggregate variables as additional con-
trols; namely, aggregate stock returns, the dividend-price ratio, and 
a set of macroeconomic indicators detailed below. We also consider 
the monetary policy rate as an alternative to our interest rate vari-
able. Specifically, to control for macroeconomic conditions, we use the 
quarterly GDP growth series (seasonally adjusted quarterly GDP by 
expenditure series, retrieved from the National Bureau of Statistics of 
China), the monthly change in the consumer price index (seasonally 
adjusted as in Higgins et al. (2016)), the monthly consumption growth 
(seasonally adjusted monthly series of retail sales of consumer goods 
from Higgins et al. (2016)), the monthly percent change in the ex-
change rate with respect to the dollar (based on not seasonally adjusted 
monthly averages of the daily data of Chinese Yuan Renminbi to U.S. 
Dollar spot exchange rate series retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis), and the quarterly house price growth (the quarterly 
not seasonally adjusted index is provided by Bank for International 
Settlements and it is based on the prices of new dwellings in 70 cities 
in China).

3.5. Descriptive statistics

Table  1 reports summary statistics for several variables in our data: 
account balance, risky share, the three measures of rebalancing behav-
ior (active change in risky share, net equity flow, and withdrawal rate), 
passive wealth change, and monthly gains.25 In an average month, the 
average investor in our sample holds around 168K RMB (approximately 
23.5K  US  dollars)  in  her  account.  However,  this  is  a  very  skewed 
distribution, as previously discussed, with a median value of 40K RMB 
(approximately 6K US dollars). For comparison, the average annual 
per-capita disposable income of Chinese households in 2016 (the latest 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

year  in  our  sample)  was  23K  RMB  and  was  significantly  lower  in 
the subsample covering the first few years of trading. Therefore, the 
median balance in the sample corresponds to about two years’ worth 
of household income.

The average risky share in the sample is 75%. The average active
equity change in Eq.  (14) is around 0.98%, indicating that investors’ 
active trading has actually increased their equity exposure over the 
sample. Consistent with this, the mean monthly net equity flow as 
a percentage of account balance in Eq. (18) is 1.8%.26 In any given 
month, there is both a significant fraction of investors who trade and a 
significant fraction who do not, with the 25th and 75th percentiles of 
the active risky share change being zero.

The mean withdrawal rate in Eq. (19) over the sample is −3.54%, 
revealing that investors are, on average, transferring more money into 
their brokerage accounts than they are taking out. As with the active 
risky share change and the net equity flows measure, here too we 
observe a nontrivial percentage of zeros. In any given month, many 
investors neither invest new money into their account nor withdraw 
any.

The mean passive change in wealth as a percentage of the account 
value (see Eq. (22)) is close to zero (−0.05%), indicating that asset 
valuations have remained fairly constant during the sample period. 
There is, however, a significant dispersion around this mean. The 10th 
percentile is −11.63%, while the 90th percentile of 11.45%. Naturally 
this dispersion reflects both time-series and cross-sectional variation in 
our sample.

The  final  variable  in  Table   1  is  monthly  gains  and  losses  as  a 
percentage of the account value in the previous month (see Eq. (23)). 
The  mean  is  slightly  negative  (−0.6%),  indicating  that,  on  average, 
investors’ portfolios are at a loss. At the same time, the variation of 
gains and losses in the portfolios is quite high (the standard deviation 
is 11.57%).

4. Reaching for yield

4.1. Baseline results

As previously discussed, our empirical analysis considers three mea-
sures of household portfolio rebalancing: active change in risky share 
(𝜔𝑎), net equity flow (𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝), and (net) withdrawals (𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝). 
Our baseline specifications regress each of these variables (denoted 
below as 𝑦) against either changes in interest rates (𝛥𝑟) or the residuals 
from the AR(1) process (𝜖𝑟, from Eq.  (20)). The regressions also include 
additional  controls  (denoted  by  𝑋)  and  account-level  fixed  effects 
(denoted by 𝑓 ). More precisely, we estimate the following Equations: 

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑓𝑗 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1;

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟

𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑓𝑗 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1,

(24)

(25)

where 𝑗 is each individual investor and 𝑡 is calendar time (in months).
It is important to clarify the timing of the variables in the regres-
sions. The left-hand–side variable measures changes over the current 
month, while the explanatory variables are computed at the start of 
that month. So, for example, we regress the change in risky share from 
January 1, 2010, to January 31, 2010, on the change in interest rates 
from December 1, 2009, to December 31, 2009. All other explanatory 
variables that capture changes are also measured over the same period 
(December 1, 2009, to December 31, 2009, in the previous example), 
and those that capture values at a point in time are evaluated at the 
start of the month (so January 1, 2010, in the previous example).

Crucially, we do not assume that changes in interest rate are ex-
ogenous  to  household  behavior.  In  that  respect  we  take  the  same 

25 Summary statistics for age and wealth are reported in Appendix  B.

26 The maximum and minimum values of net equity flows can exceed 100% 
and −100% depending on the amount of cash additions and/or capital gains.

9 

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

𝜔, %
(3)

𝜔𝑎, %
(4)

log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, %
(7)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝, %
(6)

Acc. balance
(2)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝, %
(5)

Table 1
Descriptive statistics.
  Stats
  (1)
  N
  Mean
  SD
  Min
  p5
  p10
  p25
  p50
  p75
  p90
  p95
  Max
  N (ID)
  # of months
This table reports summary statistics for the data. Column 2 reports total account balance in millions of CNY. Column 3 reports the risky share while Column 4 display active change 
in risky share (Eq. (14)) respectively. In Column 5 and 6, we include our two other measures of portfolio rebalancing, respectively net equity flows (Eq. (18)) and withdrawal 
rates (Eq. (19)). In Column 7, we report the passive change in wealth (Eq. (22)). Finally in Column 8 we show account gains and losses (Eq.  (23)). For each variable we provide 
the total number of account-month observations in millions (N), the mean, the standard deviation (SD), minimum and maximum values, key percentiles of the distribution, the 
number of unique account observations in millions (N (ID)), and the average number of months we observe for each investor.

𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑝, %  
(8)
116,603,018 
−0.60
11.57
−42.79
−21.34
−13.26
−4.74
0.00
4.54
11.35
16.58
36.45
1.93
60.29

118,536,384
0.98
17.32
−49.81
−14.17
−1.79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.98
9.60
97.63
2.00
59.22

118,556,263
75.00
33.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
62.21
93.35
98.85
99.75
99.91
100.00
2.00
59.22

118,613,350
0.168
0.40
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.13
0.39
0.75
2.85
2.00
59.22

116,920,015
1.80
32.20
−100.07
−43.20
−14.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
18.32
49.72
174.87
1.94
60.41

116,920,015
−3.54
30.23
−215.33
−30.50
−1.62
0.00
0.00
0.06
1.49
15.07
69.26
1.94
60.40

116,920,015
−0.05
10.40
−37.66
−18.88
−11.63
−3.87
0.00
4.84
11.45
16.24
29.30
1.94
60.40

Table 2
Results for baseline regression with account fixed effects.
𝜔𝑎

(1)

(2)

  𝛥𝑟𝑡

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

−0.0468***
(0.00156)

−0.0660***
(0.0134)

−0.0911***
(0.00161)

−0.0663***
(0.0134)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.199***
(0.00323)

−0.165***
(0.0242)

(4)

−0.363***
(0.00338)

−0.166**
(0.0243)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

0.145***
(0.00291)

−0.0597***
(0.0250)

(6)

0.375***
(0.00312)
−0.0588**  
(0.0252)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

116,166,277
0.010

  Account FE
  Wealth dummies
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the three 
dependent variables, the regression specifications are 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 1, 3, and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest 
rate) and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes 
the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, Eq. (22)), account-level fixed effects, and dummy variables for 10 wealth groups. Statistical significance 
is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟

𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 2, 4, and 6 (where 𝜀𝑟

YES
YES
116,554,658 
0.048

𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝.

116,487,592
0.010

116,554,658
0.017

116,232,207
0.017

116,232,207
0.048

YES
YES

YES
YES

approach as studies that test whether investors are momentum traders 
or contrarians or whether they exhibit a disposition effect. Such studies 
regress current trading behavior on past stock returns. Naturally those 
past movements in prices were determined by changes in investors’ 
expectations of future dividends, in their risk assessments, or in their 
risk preferences. In the same spirit, our goal here is to understand 
investors’  responses  to  changes  in  interest  rates,  with  the  full  un-
derstanding that those changes have an impact on future economic 
conditions and/or can result from changes in expectations about those 
economic conditions. Later in Section 4.4, we will also consider re-
gression  specifications  which  include  financial  and  macroeconomic 
variables as controls.

4.1.1. Regressions with account-level fixed effects

In Table  2, we report regressions in which the vector 𝑋 includes the 
passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, thus capturing Hypotheses 3b and 
4b) and the dummies for current wealth (proxied by account balance).27 
The standard errors on the interest rate innovation are clustered at the 
account level, since it only has time-series variation, while the standard 
errors on the passive change in wealth are time-clustered.

Table  2 shows that, on average, retail investors reach for yield. This 
conclusion is reached under all three measures of rebalancing behavior 
that we consider, and for both measures of interest rate innovation.28

Focusing first on the trading behavior inside the brokerage account, 
we find that, following a one-percentage-point increase in the interest 
rate (SHIBOR), the average investor decreases her active risky share 
by  5  to  9  basis  points,  depending  on  the  measure  of  interest  rate 
innovation.  Similarly,  net  equity  flows  decrease  by  20  to  36  basis 
points. In addition to rebalancing her portfolio within the brokerage 
account, the investor also withdraws funds from the account. More 
specifically, we observe an increase in account withdrawals of 14.5 
basis points to 37.5 basis points, depending on the interest rate variable 
being considered. Since these withdrawals are likely to be invested in 
money market mutual funds, the total reduction in risk exposure is 
nontrivial.

Withdrawals from the brokerage account could also be a response 
to  higher  expenditure  requirements  due  to  the  increase  in  interest 
rates; for example, higher mortgage expenses. This, however, would not 
affect the two measures of portfolio rebalancing within the brokerage 
account. In fact, to the extent that investors are more likely to withdraw 

27 In this specification, the wealth dummies are included only as controls. 
Later, we will interact them with the interest rate variable to test the wealth 
channel implied by Hypothesis  1.

28 Results for the simple change in risky share (𝛥𝜔, Eq. (11)) are reported 
in Appendix  D (Table  D.13) and yield the same conclusions.

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

their cash balances and leave their investments unchanged, such with-
drawals would actually mechanically increase their risky share within 
the account.29

The portfolio elasticities documented above are remarkably simi-
lar to those estimated in Giglio et al. (2021). They find that a one 
percentage-point increase in expected stock returns is associated with 
a 70-basis-point increase in equity share. Comparing our results with 
their elasticity requires making an assumption about how investors’ 
expectations of future stock returns change when the interest changes. 
Suppose that, following a 1% increase in interest rates, investors ex-
pected that the stock return would increase by 50 basis points.30 Then, 
our regressions imply an elasticity of the brokerage account portfolio 
to the expected return of between 10 to 72 basis points, depending 
on the measures of portfolio rebalancing and interest rate innovation. 
Additionally, we have portfolio rebalancing outside the account, as 
captured by account withdrawals. Our overall effect is therefore similar 
to the estimates obtained by Giglio et al. (2021). Furthermore, we 
later show that these average responses mask substantial heterogeneity 
across investors.

Motivated by Hypotheses 3b and 4b, we have also included the 
passive  change  in  wealth  (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝,  Eq.  (22))  in  the  regressions.  If 
investors  have  DRRA,  then  an  increase  in  wealth  should  lead  to  a 
higher  risky  share,  since  risk  aversion  is  now  lower.  On  the  other 
hand, the human capital channel implies the opposite: higher wealth 
decreases the ratio of human capital to financial wealth and therefore 
the investor’s implicit bond holdings are now a smaller fraction of her 
portfolio, lowering the optimal risky share. The negative coefficient for 
log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝 in the first four regressions indicates that the human capital 
channel is the dominating effect here. This does not, however, rule 
out DRRA in preferences. Our coefficient can only estimate the net 
effect of the two channels. In fact, when we consider the effect on 
withdrawals, the coefficient is again negative. This result, however, is 
consistent with the DRRA channel dominating in this context, since for 
this left-hand–side variable the prediction is reversed.

Since our data include some periods of significant stock market 
movement (‘‘bubbles and crashes’’), in Appendix  E we report results 
using data from January 2009 to December 2014 only, thus excluding 
those periods. The conclusions remain unchanged.

4.1.2. A simple calibration

It is interesting to consider what our estimation results imply in the 

context of the portfolio-choice models discussed in Section 2.

If we consider the Merton model without labor income, the implied 
change in risky share is given by Eq.  (2). Let us assume an investor with 
a risk aversion of 5 and an expected return volatility of 20%. A −0.5%
change in the risky share implies a value of  𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)
 of −0.1.31 So, when 
interest rates increase by 1%, investors expect that the return on stocks 

𝜕𝑟

29 Furthermore,  as  shown  in  Appendix   F,  surveys  suggest  that  no  more 
than 20% of stockholders have a mortgage. In China, mortgage rates are 
typically only fixed for two or five years, which means that some investors 
are exposed to interest rate risk. The rates are, however, only re-set once a 
year (in January). Therefore, we do not expect this to have a large impact on 
the regressions results, since our regression specification is based on monthly 
observations.
30 This is halfway between the full increase which would imply no reaching 
for yield—and no adjustment in the expectation of future stock returns. If we 
instead assume that investors expect the stock return to move almost one-
for-one with interest rates, then our implied portfolio elasticities are even 
larger.
31 As discussed, the full change in risky share includes the portfolio reallo-
cation within the brokerage account and (likely) also the withdrawals from 
that account. For the purposes of this illustration we are combining those two 
effects into an approximate total response of −0.5%.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

will  increase  by  0.9%.32  This  highlights  the  underlying  assumption 
behind ‘‘reaching for yield’’ in the context of the Merton model: it will 
occur as long as investors do not expect the return on stock to move 
exactly one-for-one with the riskess rate.

If we repeat this calculation in the context of the Merton model with 
labor income (Eq. (4)), then for a ratio of human capital to financial 
wealth of 3, for example, the implied value of  𝜕(𝜇−𝑟)
 is even smaller: 
−0.025. This is enough to generate the nontrivial portfolio rebalancing 
that we observe in the data.

𝜕𝑟

As mentioned above, Giglio et al. (2021) document that retail in-
vestors adjust their portfolios only moderately in response to changes in 
their expectations of future returns. Their results therefore suggest that 
the underlying changes in expectations are larger than those implied 
by our simple calibration exercise.

4.1.3. Regressions with age dummies

In  the  previous  regressions,  we  did  not  control  for  age  because 
we included account-level fixed effects. In Table  3, we consider an 
alternative specification that replaces the fixed effects with the age 
dummies constructed from the 10 age groups defined in Section 3. Both 
age and wealth are included here as controls. In the next subsections, 
we specifically consider Hypotheses 1 and 2 and study how these two 
variables affect reaching for yield directly.

The  number  of  observations  in  these  regressions  is  reduced  to 
approximately 40% of the original sample (about 42 million compared 
with about 116 million before), reflecting the availability of the age 
variable  in  our  data.  Nevertheless,  the  results  in  Table   3  are  very 
similar  to  those  obtained  in  Table   2.  The  point  estimates  for  the 
coefficients are very close to the previous ones. The more substantial 
differences are in the regressions for withdrawals; the coefficients are 
now slightly smaller than those in the previous regressions, but still 
strongly significant.

4.2. Reaching for yield within risky assets

In our baseline results, we consider portfolio reallocation between 
risky and riskless assets. In this section, we explore whether investors 
also reallocate their portfolios of risky assets in response to movements 
in the interest rate.

One possibility is that, when interest rates increase, investors de-
crease  their  risk  taking  further  by  reducing  the  beta  of  their  risky 
investment. An alternative possibility is that agents (partially) com-
pensate for the reduction in total risky investments by increasing their 
beta exposure. The Merton model, however, produces neither of those 
predictions.  The  multiple  risky  asset  version  of  the  (Merton,  1969) 
model yields the following equation for the optimal risky share: 

𝛼 =

1
𝛾

(𝜇 − 𝑟)𝛴−1,

(26)

where 𝛼 is now a vector with the share of wealth invested on each 
individual  risky  asset,  𝜇  is  the  vector  of  expected  returns  on  the 
different assets, 𝑟 is a vector in which all elements are equal to the 
riskless rate, and 𝛴 is the variance–covariance matrix of returns.

Eq. (26) defines the efficient portfolio—the tangency portfolio in 
a CAPM setting. Changes in the riskless rate will affect the allocation 
between riskless assets and the efficient portfolio, but will not change 
the optimal allocation among risky assets, unless those assets exhibit 
different levels of correlation with the interest rate.33

32 Naturally, this is an average belief. In the extreme, it could arise if 90% 
of investors expect the equity premium to remain constant, while the other 
10% expect return on stocks to remain constant.
33 More  precisely,  unless  there  is  a  change  in  the  efficient  portfolio. 
From  Eq.   (26),  this  will  happen  only  if  there  is  a  differential  impact  on 
the expected returns of the different assets, or on the different terms in the 
variance–covariance matrix.

11 

F. Gomes et al.

Table 3
Results for baseline regression with age dummies.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

  𝛥𝑟𝑡

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

𝜔𝑎

(1)

−0.0444***
(0.00276)

−0.0573***
(0.0140)

(2)

−0.0796***
(0.00285)

−0.0574***
(0.0140)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.222***
(0.00589)

−0.148***
(0.0244)

(4)

−0.350***
(0.00613)

−0.149***
(0.0244)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

0.126***
(0.00543)

−0.102***
(0.0219)

(6)

0.322***  
(0.00576)  
−0.101***  
(0.0220)

YES
YES

YES
YES

  Age dummies
  Wealth dummies
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the three the dependent variables, the 
regression specifications are 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 1, 3, and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest rate), and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 2, 4 and 
6 (where 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, Eq. (22)), age dummies, and dummy variables for 10 
wealth groups. Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟

YES
YES
41,757,002 
0.009

𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝.

41,654,841
0.004

41,748,668
0.004

41,662,949
0.006

41,757,002
0.006

41,662,949
0.009

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

Table 4
Regression results for change in account beta with account fixed effects.

  𝛥𝑟𝑡

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

𝛥𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡

(1)

0.000432***
(0.0000166)

−0.000570***
(0.000211)

(2)

0.000577***  
(0.0000173)  
−0.000564*** 
(0.000212)

YES
YES

YES
YES

99,255,059
−0.008

  Account FE
  Wealth dummies
  Observations
98,977,533
  Adjusted 𝑅2
−0.008
Robust clustered standard errors in parentheses * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our estimations for the change in average value-
weighted account 𝛽 with account-level fixed effects. The dependent variable measures 
the risk within the portfolio of stocks and is calculated with respect to the SSE Index 
, Eq. (27)). Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote the dependent variable, the regression specification is 
(𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡
𝑗𝑡
(as before) 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Column 1 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest 
rate), and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) 
model for interest rate). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, 
Eq. (22)), account-level fixed effects and dummy variables for 10 wealth groups. Statistical 
𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs for 
significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟
log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝.

𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Column 2 (where 𝜀𝑟

4.2.1. Investor portfolio betas

In  order  to  investigate  the  possibility  of  risk-shifting  within  the 
portfolio of risky assets, we compute a (value-weighted) average beta 
for each investor. More precisely, we first compute, for each asset, its 
beta with respect to the Chinese market, proxied by the Shanghai Stock 
Exchange (SSE) Composite Index. We estimate betas on a 12-month 
rolling basis by regressing daily stock return on market excess return.

We then use the individual asset betas 𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡

average beta for each investor 𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡
given by the investor’s portfolio holdings in that same month: 

 to compute a weighted 
𝑗𝑡  in each month, with the weights 

𝑖𝑡

𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡
𝑗𝑡 =

𝐴𝑖
𝑗𝑡
𝐴𝑗𝑡

∑

𝑖

𝛽𝑚𝑘𝑡
𝑖𝑡

,

(27)

where, as before, 𝑗, 𝑖, and 𝑡 denote an investor, a stock, and a month, 
respectively. 𝐴𝑖
𝑗𝑡 is thus the value of stock 𝑖 in period 𝑡 and 𝐴𝑗𝑡 is the 
total value of equity of the portfolio, and the ratio of the two is the 
share of this stock in the investor’s portfolio.

In both regressions, we find a positive and statistically significant 
coefficient, but their magnitude is negligible. A one-percentage-point 
increase in the interest rates leads to an increase in the average beta of 
the risky asset portfolio of less than 0.001.

These regressions answer the question of whether, when interest 
rates change, investors adjust the beta of their risky investment in order 
to either reinforce or compensate the portfolio rebalancing across asset 
classes. We conclude that, on average, neither of these is happening 
and the portfolio beta remains almost unchanged. As discussed, this 
is largely consistent with the predictions of the simple Merton model, 
under which we should observe a change in the composition of the 
risky  portfolio  only  if  changes  in  the  interest  rate  are  expected  to 
have a differential impact on different risky assets. In particular, we 
should observe an increase or decrease in portfolio beta only if investors 
expected that high-and low-beta stocks would be differentially affected.

4.3. Results with changes in real interest rate

4.2.2. Results

We now replicate the previous regressions (Eqs. (24) and (25)) with 
the change in (value-weighted) beta as our left-hand–side variable. The 
results are reported in Table  4.

We have so far considered changes in the nominal interest rate 
as  our  main  explanatory  variable,  consistent  with  the  literature  on 
‘‘reaching for yield’’. However, in the simple Merton model (in Eq. (1)), 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. 3.  Historical 1-month SHIBOR.
Fig.  3 plots the change in both the nominal (red) and real (blue) SHIBOR rates. Our inflation measure is computed using data for the Consumer Price Index in China from St. 
Louis FRED. We compute the growth rate over the previous year for each month to obtain the corresponding annual inflation rate. We obtain the real interest rate by subtracting 
the inflation rate from the SHIBOR rate.

the relevant moments are those referring to the real asset returns.34 
Therefore, in this section we repeat our previous analysis with changes 
in the real interest rate as our main explanatory variable.

4.3.1. Real interest rate

We construct the real SHIBOR rate by subtracting the corresponding 
inflation rate in China over the same period. Our measure of inflation is 
constructed from the Consumer Price Index in China obtained from St. 
Louis FRED. Fig.  3 plots changes in both the nominal and real SHIBOR 
rates over time.

Although the two series track each other very closely for most of the 
sample, there are some periods with noticeable differences, particularly 
in the first half of the sample.

4.3.2. Results

We now repeat our baseline regressions (Eqs. (24) and (25)) but 
with changes in the real rate as our main right-hand–side variable. The 
results are reported in Table  5.

Consistent with our previous results, we find evidence in favor of 
reaching for yield across all six specifications; that is, for all three 
measures of portfolio rebalancing and the two measures of interest rate 
change. Comparing the results in Table  5 with those in Table  2, the 
estimated coefficients are now larger (in absolute value) in all cases. 
Therefore, by considering changes in the real (as opposed to nominal) 
riskless rate, in line with the theory, we obtain stronger results.

4.4. Results with additional control variables

In this section, we extend the baseline regressions to include con-
trols for subjective expected returns. The two sets of results—those 
without  controlling  for  expected  returns  and  these—have  different 
implications for the determinants of reaching for yield. In the first 

34 If we write the Merton model in nominal terms, inflation drops out since 
it subtracts from both terms on the numerator. There is only a role for inflation 
if it correlates differently with the returns on the risky and riskless assets, in 
which case we obtain an additional hedging term in the portfolio rule.

set, we allow changes in interest rates to affect the optimal portfolio 
allocation by changing investors’ beliefs about the equity risk premium. 
In the second set, to the extent that we can control for investor beliefs, 
we shut down the belief channel while allowing for other channels of 
reaching for yield.

In other words, if changes in interest rates affect optimal portfo-
lios only through the belief channel and we fully control for these 
beliefs, then changes in interest rates should have no effect on portfolio 
decisions in the second specification. We also note that expectations 
of the equity premium may fluctuate for reasons other than changes 
in interest rates. If such fluctuations are correlated with changes in 
interest rates within our sample period, then the second specification 
has the advantage of controlling for that correlation. Ideally, we would 
like a middle ground, in which we control only for changes in expected 
returns which are not driven by the change in interest rate. Since that 
is not possible in our setting, we report and compare both set of results.

4.4.1. Proxies for subjective return expectations

In the US market, various predictors of excess equity returns have 
been proposed, including the dividend yield (e.g., Campbell and Shiller, 
1988), the riskless rate (e.g., Campbell and Yogo, 2006), cay (e.g., 
Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), and the volatility risk premium (e.g., 
Bollerslev et al., 2009). The riskless rate is the main variable of interest 
is our analysis. Computing the volatility risk premium requires implied 
volatility data, which is not available for the Chinese market during 
our sample period. For cay, to the best of our knowledge, no paper 
has constructed this variable for the Chinese market, possibly because 
high-quality data on consumption and wealth are hard to acquire. This 
leaves us with the dividend-price ratio.

We also explore past stock market returns as a potential measure of 
subjective beliefs about future returns, based on the mounting empirical 
evidence on return extrapolation (Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014; Da 
et al., 2021), which also holds true in the Chinese market (Liao et al., 
2022). As a further alternative, we consider the return on the investor’s 
own portfolio, in the spirit of the experience effect (Malmendier and 
Nagel, 2011). This is arguably a better proxy for investor expectations 
than the market return, if investors pay more attention to the returns on 
the assets they actually own. In addition, it is a more relevant measure 

13 

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Table 5
Regression results for baseline specification with account fixed effects and change in real interest rate.

  𝛥𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙

𝑡

  𝜀𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

𝜔𝑎

(1)

−0.177***
(0.00148)

−0.0669***
(0.0193)

(2)

−0.175***
(0.00151)

−0.0662***
(0.0192)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.639***
(0.00307)

−0.168***
(0.0263)

(4)

−0.759***
(0.00317)

−0.166***
(0.0261)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

0.666***
(0.00277)

−0.0563**
(0.0255)

(6)

0.808***
(0.00292)
−0.0590**  
(0.0255)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

116,166,277
0.010

  Account FE
  Wealth dummies
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from estimations using change in real interest rate with account-level fixed effects. The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, 
net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑐
𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙
𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1
for Columns 1, 3, and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙
 is residual from the AR(1) 
𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙
model for real interest rate). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, Eq. (22)), account-level fixed effects and dummy variables for 10 different wealth 
groups. Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙
 and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝. To proxy the inflation level, we use the monthly data 
for Consumer Price Index in China from St. Louis FRED. We subtract the CPI from SHIBOR to get the real rate and obtain the change in SHIBOR and AR(1) residuals as explained 
in Section 3.3.2.

𝑗𝑡 denote each of the three the dependent variables (conditional), the regression specifications are 𝑦𝑐
𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 2, 4, and 6 (where 𝜀𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙

YES
YES
116,554,658 
0.048

 is the change in real interest rate) and 𝑦𝑐

116,487,592
0.010

116,232,207
0.017

116,554,658
0.017

116,232,207
0.048

 and 𝜀𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙

YES
YES

YES
YES

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

(6)

−0.0118***  
(0.00311)
−0.0791***  
(0.0175)
−0.118***  
(0.0333)

7.432***
(0.841)
116,554,658 
0.056

Table 6
Results for baseline regression with account fixed effects, controlling for market return and dividend yield.

  𝛥𝑟𝑡

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

  𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝑡

  log 𝐷𝑃𝑡

𝜔𝑎

(1)

−0.0151***
(0.00156)

−0.0634***
(0.0138)
0.0220***
(0.00711)

−1.093***
(0.168)

(2)

−0.0276***
(0.00162)

−0.0635***
(0.0138)
0.0215***
(0.00716)

−1.091***
(0.166)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.0695***
(0.00323)

−0.151***
(0.0231)
0.0887***
(0.0264)

−5.449***
(0.688)

(4)

−0.0778***
(0.00337)

−0.151***
(0.0232)
0.0883***
(0.0265)

−5.411***
(0.677)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

−0.0291***
(0.00291)

−0.0794***
(0.0175)
−0.118***
(0.0331)

7.477***
(0.845)

116,166,277
0.011

116,487,592
0.011

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our baseline estimations with account-level fixed effects as in Table  2 in the paper, but appended with past market return and dividend yield as 
additional factor. The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the three the dependent 
variables, the regression specifications are 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 1, 3 and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest rate), and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for 
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝), account-level fixed effects, and 
Columns 2, 4, and 6 (where 𝜀𝑟
), and dividend yield (log 𝐷𝑃𝑡)—a logarithm of the ratio of the summation 
dummy variables for 10 wealth groups, market return in previous month proxied by SSE index (𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸
of the dividends paid on the stock portfolio over the past 12 months over price. Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs 
for 𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸

, log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝 and log 𝐷𝑃𝑡.

116,232,207
0.021

116,554,658
0.021

116,232,207
0.056

𝑡

𝑡

of expectations if it captures the expected return on the assets in which 
they actually invest.

In Appendix  H, we report estimation results based on forecasting 
regressions of stock market returns on the lagged dividend yield and 
the lagged stock market return, in the context of the Chinese market. 
In both cases, we find weak (and marginally significant) predictability.

4.4.2. Results with lagged dividend yield and stock market returns

Table  6 reports results from extending the baseline regression by 
including the lagged return on the SSE index and the lagged divided 
yield.  The  coefficient  on  the  SSE  index  is  positive  and  statistically 
significant in the first four regressions (those for the active risky share 
and net equity flows) and negative and statistically significant in the 
last two (those for withdrawals). These results are consistent with the 
notion that retail investors are, on average, trend-chasing.

In Columns (1) to (4), we again find that an increase (decrease) in 
interest rates is associated with a decrease (increase) in the risky share 
within the brokerage account, measured by either the active risky share 
or the net equity flow. Therefore, on average, retail investors reach for 
yield, after controlling for the dividend yield and past returns. Rela-
tive to the baseline regressions, the coefficients are about two-thirds 

smaller, suggesting that part of the effect in the baseline regressions 
was due to a revision in investors’ risk premium expectations. However, 
the fact that the coefficients remain statistically significant suggests that 
there is still a nontrivial effect from the other channels.

In Columns (5) and (6), the coefficient on account withdrawals is 
negative. Later, we show that the coefficient turns positive under most 
of the alternative specifications we consider. Arguably, account with-
drawal is likely to be a more noisy measure of portfolio rebalancing, 
since money taken out of the account can be used for a variety of other 
purposes, such as consumption or paying debt.

4.4.3. Results with lagged dividend yield and portfolio returns

In Table  7, we report results of including the investor’s lagged port-
folio return (𝑟𝑝𝑗𝑡) instead of the lagged market return as a control for 
subjective beliefs. In Columns (1) and (4), the interest rate coefficients 
remain negative and significant. Furthermore, in Columns (5) and (6), 
the interest rate coefficients remain positive and significant, as in our 
baseline regressions. Quantitatively, we again observe a reduction in 
the estimated coefficients, with those in the new regressions being on 
average 60% smaller (in absolute value) than those in the baseline 
regressions. The coefficient on the lagged portfolio return is positive 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

(6)

0.159***
(0.00315)
−0.0857***  
(0.0191)

−0.00855
(0.01000)

7.702***
(0.873)
116,554,658 
0.055

Table 7
Results for baseline regression with account fixed effects, controlling for investors’ portfolio return and dividend yield.

  𝛥𝑟𝑡

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

  𝑟𝑝𝑗𝑡

  log 𝐷𝑃𝑡

𝜔𝑎

(1)

−0.00274*
(0.00158)

−0.0624***
(0.0137)

0.0252***
(0.00559)

−1.132***
(0.179)

(2)

−0.0167***
(0.00164)

−0.0626***
(0.0137)

0.0249***
(0.00560)

−1.129***
(0.176)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.0950***
(0.00327)

−0.146***
(0.0232)

0.0567***
(0.0105)

−5.641***
(0.712)

(4)

−0.116***
(0.00341)

−0.147***
(0.0233)

0.0562***
(0.0105)

−5.588***
(0.699)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

0.116***
(0.00295)

−0.0861***
(0.0191)

−0.00894
(0.00996)

7.783***
(0.883)

116,166,277
0.011

116,487,592
0.011

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our baseline estimations with account-level fixed effects as in Table  2 in the paper, but appended with past investors’ return and dividend yield 
as additional factor. The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the three the dependent 
variables, the regression specifications are 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 1, 3 and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest rate), and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for 
Columns 2, 4 and 6 (where 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝), account-level fixed effects and 
dummy variables for 10 different wealth groups, investors’ return in previous month (𝑟𝑝𝑗𝑡) calculated as difference between the current market value of open positions and the 
value of the position at the start of the previous month scaled by account value in the previous month, and dividend yield (log 𝐷𝑃𝑡) is a logarithm of the ratio of the summation 
𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs 
of the dividends paid on the stock portfolio over the past 12 months over price. Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟
for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝 and log 𝐷𝑃𝑡.

116,232,207
0.055

116,232,207
0.021

116,554,658
0.021

in the first four regressions and negative in the last two. This again 
suggests that, on average, investors behave as momentum traders.

4.4.4. Results  with  lagged  dividend  yield,  returns,  and  macroeconomic 
variables

As a final extension, we control for macroeconomic expectations 
and conditions by including lagged GDP growth, consumption growth, 
inflation rate, changes in the exchange rate, and changes in the real 
estate price index. For the variables with a quarterly frequency (lagged 
GDP growth and the real estate price index), we use the most recent 
quarterly data available for each month in the sample (denoted by 𝑡∗). 
The results are reported in Table  8.

In all regressions, the coefficients on lagged interest rate, passive 
changes  in  wealth,  past  market  returns,  and  lagged  dividend  yield 
all have magnitude and statistical significance similar to our previous 
results.35 We again conclude that, on average, Chinese investors reach 
for  yield.  In  Table   8,  the  coefficient  on  GDP  growth  is  positive  in 
Columns (1)–(4) and negative in Columns (5)–(6). This indicates that, 
following  a  period  of  higher  GDP  growth,  retail  investors  tend  to 
increase investment in risky assets.

In  general,  it  is  hard  to  interpret  the  coefficients  on  the  vari-
ous macroeconomic variables due to their collinearity. For our main 
variable of interest, however, the coefficient on interest rate changes re-
mains statistically significant in all regression, with a similar economic 
magnitude to before. Likewise, the coefficients on the other controls, 
including dividend yield, past market return and passive change in 
wealth, all remain significant and largely unchanged.

Most of the times, deposit and lending interest rates were adjusted 
simultaneously and by the same magnitude, so the two are virtually 
equivalent. In our analysis, we use changes in monetary policy rates 
and not monetary policy shocks, such as those constructed in Bernanke 
and Kuttner (2005) from Federal funds futures data.37

Interest rates can change for reasons other than monetary policy 
shocks; namely, in response to technology shocks or demand shocks. 
Fig.  4 shows the time-series plot of the (annualized) one-month SHI-
BOR, compared with benchmark lending and deposit rates over the 
period from October 2006 to December 2016. The SHIBOR tracks the 
deposit rate very closely, but is much more volatile. The main goal 
of  our  paper  is  to  study  portfolio  responses  to  changes  in  interest 
rates in general, not just those driven by monetary policy decisions. 
Nonetheless, it is interesting to study the latter in isolation. We have 
re-estimated our previous regressions, replacing SHIBOR rate innova-
tion with changes in the benchmark PBC policy rate. The results are 
reported in Table  9 below.

We again find evidence in favor of reaching for yield. The interest 
rate coefficient is negative in the regressions for the risky share and 
net equity flows and for withdrawals. The magnitude of the estimated 
coefficients is in fact more than one order of magnitude larger than 
the one obtained in the previous regressions (with changes in SHIBOR). 
The coefficients on most other variables are the same as in the previous 
regressions.38 Thus, when we focus on changes in the monetary policy 
rate, we obtain the same conclusions as before, with the results actually 
becoming quantitatively larger.

4.5. Results with changes in monetary policy rates

5. Heterogeneous responses

In  this  section,  we  study  the  portfolio  reallocation  behavior  of 
retail investors in response to changes in monetary policy rates. The 
benchmark lending rate (BLR) and benchmark deposit rate (BDR) were 
the main instruments for People’s Bank of China (PBC) monetary policy 
before October 2015—the so-called regulated-retail-interest-rate era.36 

Having established that, on average, investors in our sample reach 
for yield, we now explore heterogeneity in responses along the different 
dimensions of data suggested by the theoretical channels discussed in 
Section  2.  The  results  in  this  section  build  on  the  baseline  specifi-
cation from Section 4.1. Results for the extended specifications from 

35 We get similar results when we include the investor’s lagged portfolio 
return (𝑟𝑝𝑗𝑡), instead of the lagged market return, as a control for subjective 
beliefs.
36 Since interest rates were liberalized in 2015, the central bank has de-
emphasized benchmark rates and focused on using its growing arsenal of 
quasi-monetary policy tools to fine tune liquidity and interest rates.

37 We cannot replicate their methodology in our setting. The shortest matu-
rity bond futures in China is two years and, moreover, this market was shut 
down between 1995 until 2013.
38 The coefficient on some of the macroeconomic variables are now changed 
relative to the previous regressions but, as argued before, these variables are 
highly collinear and are included primarily as controls.

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Table 8
Results for baseline regression with account fixed effects, controlling for past market return, dividend yield and lagged macroeconomic indicators.
𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

𝜔𝑎

  𝛥𝑟𝑡

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

  𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝑡

  log 𝐷𝑃𝑡

  𝑔𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡∗

  𝛥𝐶𝑃 𝐼𝑡

  𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡

  𝛥𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑡

  𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡∗

(1)

−0.0131***
(0.00162)

−0.0670***
(0.0143)

0.0169**
(0.00704)

−1.201***
(0.170)

0.000533***
(0.000129)

−0.0798***
(0.000767)

0.0315***
(0.00133)

−0.191***
(0.00257)

−0.0664***
(0.000852)

(2)

−0.0137***
(0.00171)

−0.0671***
(0.0143)

0.0166**
(0.00703)

−1.199***
(0.168)

0.000429***
(0.000130)

−0.0795***
(0.000777)

0.0314***
(0.00133)

−0.191***
(0.00255)

−0.0663***
(0.000846)

(3)

−0.0723***
(0.00335)

−0.158***
(0.0228)

0.0835***
(0.0264)

−5.455***
(0.748)

0.0210***
(0.000284)

−0.0956***
(0.00169)

0.194***
(0.00275)

−0.578***
(0.00556)

−0.373***
(0.00197)

(4)

−0.128***
(0.00356)

−0.159***
(0.0227)

0.0830***
(0.0261)

−5.394***
(0.721)

0.0216***
(0.000287)

−0.0887***
(0.00171)

0.191***
(0.00275)

−0.586***
(0.00554)

−0.372***
(0.00196)

(5)

0.0104***
(0.00300)

−0.0676***
(0.0173)

−0.107***
(0.0332)

7.724***
(0.920)

−0.0394***
(0.000288)

0.216***
(0.00197)

−0.157***
(0.00247)

0.811***
(0.00554)

0.482***
(0.00214)

(6)

0.0574***  
(0.00328)
−0.0673***  
(0.0173)
−0.107***  
(0.0331)

7.659***
(0.919)
−0.0398***  
(0.000290)  
0.213***
(0.00198)
−0.154***  
(0.00247)

0.825***
(0.00553)

0.476***
(0.00212)
116,554,658 
0.057

116,232,207
0.021

116,166,277
0.011

116,487,592
0.011

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our baseline estimations with account-level fixed effects as in Table  2 in the paper, but appended with past market return, dividend yield 
and growth rate of GDP as additional factors. The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote 
each of the three the dependent variables, the regression specifications are 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 1, 3, and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest rate), and 
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝), 
𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
account-level fixed effects and dummy variables for 10 wealth groups, returns for SSE index (𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸
), and dividend yield (log 𝐷𝑃𝑡)—a logarithm of the ratio of the summation of the 
dividends paid on the stock portfolio over the past 12 months over price. Regression additionally includes the most recent quarterly growth rate of nominal gross domestic product 
(𝑔𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡∗ ), the change in consumer price index (𝛥𝐶𝑃 𝐼𝑡), the growth rate of (nominal) consumption (𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡), the monthly percent change in the exchange rate with respect to the 
dollar (𝛥𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑡), and the most recent quarterly house price growth (𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡∗ ). Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡, 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 and all macroeconomic 
indicators and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, 𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 2, 4, and 6 (where 𝜀𝑟

116,554,658
0.021

116,232,207
0.057

 and log 𝐷𝑃𝑡.

𝑡

𝑡

Section 4.4 are presented in Appendices 9, 10 and 11, and provide the 
same conclusions.

5.1. Heterogeneous responses: Wealth

We  first  consider  one  of  the  predictions  of  the  portfolio-choice 
model with riskless labor income.39 More precisely, we focus on Hy-
pothesis  1: reaching for yield is a decreasing function of wealth.40

Note that Hypothesis  1 results from Eq.  (3), in which the relevant 
state variable is not financial wealth but rather the ratio of human 
capital  to  financial  wealth.  Since  we  do  not  observe  labor  income 
in  our  data,  we  can  only  control  for  wealth.  However,  to  the  ex-
tent  that  wealthier  individuals  are  also  more  likely  to  have  higher 
income/human capital, then that will work against finding effect in the 
data.41 Furthermore, Giglio et al. (2021) show that wealthier investors 
reallocate their portfolios more in response to changes in expectations, 
which will also work against finding our prediction confirmed in the 
data.

39 As discussed, this prediction extends to models with risky labor income, 
as long as human remains a closer substitute for bonds than for stocks (e.g., 
Viceira, 2001; Cocco et al., 2005).
40 Note that this refers to the level of wealth, so it is a different prediction 
from the role of changes in wealth, which is captured by the passive wealth 
change variable.
41 Conditional on the age, we would expect a high correlation between 
wealth  and  income,  but  this  should  be  much  weaker  unconditionally.  As 
individuals age, their wealth tends to increase while their human capital is 
falling. Hypothesis  2, which we test below, tries to capture fluctuations in the 
ratio of human capital to financial wealth by exploiting these typical life-cycle 
patterns.

To test Hypothesis  1, we extend the previous regressions (Eqs. (24) 
and (25)) to include interaction terms between the interest rate inno-
vation and dummy variables for the wealth groups (𝐼𝑊𝑗𝑡

): 

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽𝑊 (𝛥𝑟𝑡𝐼𝑊𝑗𝑡

) + 𝛾𝐼𝑊𝑗𝑡

+ 𝜙𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝑓𝑗 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1,

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟

𝑡 + 𝛽𝑊 (𝜀𝑟𝐼𝑊𝑗𝑡

) + 𝛾𝐼𝑊𝑗𝑡

+ 𝜙𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝑓𝑗 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1,

(28)

(29)

where,  as  before,  𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1  is  one  of  our  four  measures  of  household 
portfolio rebalancing, 𝑋𝑖𝑡 includes passive change in wealth, and the 
𝑓𝑗  are  account-level  fixed  effects.  The  dummy  variables  for  wealth 
correspond to the 10 wealth groups described in Section 3.

To facilitate the exposition, we present the implied portfolio re-

sponses for the 10 wealth groups in Figs.  5 and 6.

Fig.  5 reports the results obtained when interest rate innovation are 
measured as the AR(1) residual, whereas Fig.  6 plots the results when 
interest rate innovation are measured as the simple first difference. 
For each figure, Panel (a) plots results for (net) withdrawal rate (for 
which we expect mostly positive coefficients) and Panel (b) plots the 
results for the other two variables (for which we expect mostly negative 
coefficients).

5.1.1. Withdrawal rates

In both Figs.  5 and 6, Panel (a) reveals a strong decreasing pattern 
for the response of (net) withdrawal rates to interest rate movement 
as a function of wealth. Consistent with Hypothesis  1, the response is 
much more significant among less-wealthy investors and approaches 
zero for those in wealth groups 6 and above.

The differences across wealth groups are economically large. Con-
sider Fig.  5: while investors in wealth group 1 increase their with-
drawals by 72 basis points in response to a 100-basis-point movement 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Table 9
Results for regression with benchmark lending rate changes and account fixed effects, controlling for dividend yield, past returns, and lagged macroeconomic indicators.

  𝛥𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

  log 𝐷𝑃𝑡

  𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝑡

  𝑟𝑝𝑗𝑡

  𝑔𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡∗

  𝛥𝐶𝑃 𝐼𝑡

  𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡

  𝛥𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑡

  𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡∗

𝜔𝑎

(1)

−0.430***
(0.0112)

−0.0675***
(0.0142)

−1.092***
(0.166)

0.0271***
(0.00745)

−0.0000454
(0.000127)

0.195***
(0.00473)

−0.00384***
(0.00146)

−0.121***
(0.00272)

−0.00341***
(0.000957)

(2)

−0.307***
(0.0111)

−0.0661***
(0.0141)

−1.123***
(0.174)

0.0262***
(0.00663)

−0.00133***
(0.000127)

0.215***
(0.00473)

−0.00868***
(0.00146)

−0.116***
(0.00272)

−0.0139***
(0.000957)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−3.007***
(0.0246)

−0.154***
(0.0266)

−5.363***
(0.619)

0.118***
(0.0255)

−0.0112***
(0.000279)

0.852***
(0.00993)

0.0895***
(0.00302)

−1.012***
(0.00599)

−0.00324
(0.00218)

(4)

−2.251***
(0.0243)

−0.147***
(0.0269)

−5.531***
(0.656)

0.0651***
(0.0121)

−0.0172***
(0.000281)

0.879***
(0.00994)

0.0611***
(0.00302)

−0.990***
(0.00599)

−0.0665***
(0.00218)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

4.017***
(0.0239)

−0.0770***
(0.0176)

7.742***
(0.802)

−0.154***
(0.0309)

0.00612***
(0.000282)

−0.479***
(0.00917)

−0.0654***
(0.00269)

1.107***
(0.00609)

0.0936***
(0.00232)

99,901,698
0.026

99,839,679
0.012

99,523,838
0.012

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our estimations with account-level fixed effects replacing interest rate innovation with benchmark interest rate changes resulting from policy 
announcements, appended with past returns, market or investor-portfolio, dividend yield. The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and 
withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the three the dependent variables, the regression specifications are 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 (where 𝛥𝐵𝐿𝑅𝑡 is the change in 
benchmark lending rate). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝), account-level fixed effects and dummy variables for 10 wealth groups, dividend yield 
(log 𝐷𝑃𝑡) is a logarithm of the ratio of the summation of the dividends paid on the stock portfolio over the past 12 months over price. Returns for SSE index for Columns 1, 3, 
and 5 (𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸
) or investors’ return in previous month (𝑟𝑝𝑗𝑡) calculated as difference between the current market value of open positions and the value of the position at the start 
of the previous month scaled by account value in the previous month for Columns 2, 4, and 6. Regression additionally includes the most recent quarterly growth rate of nominal 
gross domestic product (𝑔𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡∗ ), the change in consumer price index (𝛥𝐶𝑃 𝐼𝑡), the growth rate of (nominal) consumption (𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡), the monthly percent change in the exchange 
rate with respect to the dollar (𝛥𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑡), and the most recent quarterly house price growth (𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑡∗ ). Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡, 
𝑡 and all macroeconomic indicators and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, 𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸
𝜀𝑟

, 𝑟𝑝𝑗𝑡 and log 𝐷𝑃𝑡.

99,584,503
0.025

99,901,698
0.065

𝑡

𝑡

(6)

2.707***
(0.0238)
−0.0885*** 
(0.0198)

7.973***
(0.861)

−0.0187*  
(0.00998)  
0.0147***  
(0.000284)  
−0.439***  
(0.00918)  
−0.0194*** 
(0.00269)  
1.086***
(0.00611)  
0.199***
(0.00233)  
99,584,503  
0.064

Fig. 4.  Historical interest rates.
Fig.  4 shows the time-series plot of the (annualized) 1-month SHIBOR and benchmark lending and deposit rates from October 2006 to December 2016.

in interest rates, the change in withdrawal rates for those in wealth 
group 3 is half of that (38 basis points). Further up the wealth distribu-
tion, investors are even less responsive and, as we reach wealth group 
7, the change in withdrawal rate is essentially zero (4 basis points).

This  pattern  is  strikingly  consistent  with  the  predictions  of  the 
Merton model with labor income (Eq. (4)). In addition to the monotonic 
decay with wealth, the model also predicts a convex relationship such 
as that obtained in Fig.  5: as we move up in the wealth distribution 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. 5.  Effect of AR(1) interest rate innovation on investor behavior by wealth group.
Fig.  5 plots the result from regressions of investor behavior proxies on change in interest rate interacted with wealth group dummies. Investor behavior proxies are active change in 
risky share, net flow into equity, and withdrawals (the latter two as share of previous balance). The interest rate innovation correspond to the residuals from an AR(1) process for 
SHIBOR. Each line reflects the values of the interaction effect of change in SHIBOR and wealth group. All regressions also include the passive change in wealth, wealth dummies, 
and account fixed effects.

the ratio of human capital to financial wealth becomes negligible and, 
consequently, a further increase in wealth does not change its value by 
as much as it does for less-wealthy individuals.42

Giglio et al. (2021) show that wealthier investors reallocate their 
portfolios more in response to changes in expectations. In the absence 
of the channel implied by Hypothesis  1, we would expect to find exactly 
the opposite result. Therefore, the isolated effect resulting from our 
channel is likely to be even stronger than in our baseline specification. 
Note that, in the specification with changes in interest rate (Fig.  6), 
the implied responses for the more-wealthy investors, although small, 
are actually positive; these investors are doing the exact opposite of 
reaching for yield. This result was discussed as a possible outcome in 
Section 2.2.4.

5.1.2. Changes in risky share and net equity flows

In Panel (b) of Figs.  5 and 6, we report results for the other two 
measures of portfolio rebalancing (active change in risky share and net 
equity flows), for which we expect mostly negative changes. Indeed, 
for both figures, for both measures, and across all 10 wealth groups, 
the responses to interest rate movement are negative, consistent with 
reaching for yield.

As we compare the behavior of different investors, we again find 
strong support for Hypothesis  1: less-wealthy investors are more re-
sponsive  to  interest  rate  movement.  Interestingly,  the  tendency  of 

42 Another  way  to  see  the  same  result  is  that,  as  wealth  increases,  the 
portfolio allocation converges to the Merton solution without labor income. 
Hence the change in interest rate converges to one implied by Eq.  (2).

reaching for yield is decreasing (in absolute value) from wealth group 
1 to wealth group 7 and essentially flat after that. As discussed before, 
this convex function of wealth is exactly predicted by Eq.  (4). The 
magnitudes are larger when we consider the residuals from the AR(1) 
process as opposed to the simple changes in interest rates. From Panel 
(b)  of  Fig.   5,  a  100-basis-point  interest  rate  innovation  leads  to  a 
reduction  in  net  equity  flows  as  a  percentage  of  the  total  account 
balance, of 54-basis-point for the first wealth group, compared with 
35 basis points for the third wealth group and 21 basis points for the 
sixth.

5.2. Heterogeneous responses: Age

We now consider Hypothesis  2: reaching for yield should be more 
pronounced among young investors, as implied by taking the portfolio-
choice model with labor income into a life-cycle context (e.g., Cocco 
et al., 2005). Intuitively, because the ratio of human capital to financial 
wealth is particularly higher for young investors, they should have a 
strong portfolio response to interest rate changes. As they get older, 
their human capital decreases and they accumulate more wealth, so 
the ratio of the two (and therefore the elasticity of the portfolio rule to 
interest rate fluctuations) falls.

We  test  this  hypothesis  by  adding,  to  our  baseline  regressions 
(Eqs. (24) and (25)) interaction terms between interest rate innovation 
and dummy variables for the age groups: 

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽𝑎𝑔𝑒(𝛥𝑟𝑡𝐼𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑗𝑡

) + 𝛾𝐼𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑗𝑡

+ 𝜙𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1,

(30)

18 

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. 6.  Effect of interest rate changes on investor behavior by wealth group.
Fig.  6 plots the result from regressions of investor behavior proxies on change in interest rate interacted with wealth group dummies. Investor behavior proxies are active change 
in risky share, net flow into equity and withdrawals (both as share of previous balance). The change in interest rate is the change in 1-month SHIBOR at the beginning of each 
month. Each line reflects the values of the interaction effect of change in SHIBOR and wealth group. All regressions also include the passive change in wealth, wealth dummies 
and account fixed effects.

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟

𝑡 + 𝛽𝑎𝑔𝑒(𝜀𝑟

𝑡 𝐼𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑗𝑡

) + 𝛾𝐼𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑗𝑡

+ 𝜙𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1,

(31)

where, as before, (a) we omit account-level fixed effects because we 
are including age as a separate regressor and (b) 𝑋𝑖𝑡 includes passive 
change in wealth.

The  implied  portfolio  responses  for  each  of  the  age  groups  are 
presented in Figs.  7 and 8 for the specification with the AR(1) interest 
rate innovation and the one with interest rate changes, respectively.

Just as we did in the previous subsection (when studying wealth 
effects), we separate the results for withdrawal rates (Panel (a)), for 
which we expect positive coefficients, from those for the other two 
dependent variables (Panel (b)), for which we expect negative coeffi-
cients.

5.2.1. Withdrawal rates

Consistent  with  Hypothesis   2,  Panel  (a)  of  Fig.   8  shows  a  pro-
nounced decreasing pattern of withdrawal rates as a function of age. 
In fact, withdrawal rates decrease monotonically across all age groups. 
While the youngest investors (age group 30–35) withdraw 54 basis 
points of their account value in response to a 100 basis points increase 
in interest rates, those in the age group 50–55 (group 5) withdraw only 
3 basis points of their account balance.

Interestingly,  the  results  in  Fig.   8  suggest  that  investors  above 
age 56 (group 6 and higher), actually engage in reverse reaching for 
yield: they transfer more money into their brokerage accounts (negative 
withdrawal rate) when interest rates increase. However, this pattern is 
not present in Panel (a) of Fig.  7. In both cases, we observe a perfectly 
monotonic decreasing pattern, as predicted by the theory.

19 

5.2.2. Changes in risky share and net equity flows

In Panel (b) of Figs.  7 and 8, we report the responses for the other 
two measures of portfolio rebalancing: active change in risky share 
and net equity flows. Consistent with Hypothesis  2, the age pattern 
for net equity flows (as a percentage of account balance) is essentially 
the opposite of the pattern observed in Panel (a) for withdrawal rates: 
following increases in interest rates, young households decrease equity 
flows by more than older households do. The differences are again 
economically significant and the patterns are monotonic across all age 
groups, with the exception of the first age group in Fig.  7 (i.e., when 
considering AR(1) residuals as the interest innovation).

When considering active changes in the risky share, the age pattern 
is less clear. From age 41, the behavior of the active risky share is 
consistent with Hypothesis  2, with older investors responding less to 
changes in interest rates, but the differences are much less pronounced 
than for net equity flows. However, for first two age groups, we now 
observe an increasing pattern (in absolute value).

Overall, across the three measures of portfolio rebalancing, we find 
supporting evidence for Hypothesis  2: young investors reallocate their 
portfolios by more in response to interest rate changes than older ones 
do.

5.3. Prospect theory

We now consider Hypothesis  5, which states that reaching for yield 
should be more prevalent among investors trading at a loss than at a 
gain. As discussed, under prospect theory, the most risk-averse point is 
the origin (or the kink), where investors break even in their portfolio 
return. For someone trading at a gain, a (small) drop in interest rates 

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. 7.  Effect of AR(1) interest rate innovation on investor behavior by age groups.
Fig.  7 shows the result from regressions of investor behavior proxies on change in interest rate interacted with age group dummies. Investor behavior proxies are active change in 
risky share, net flow into equity and withdrawals (both as share of previous balance). The interest rate innovation correspond to the residuals from an AR(1) process for SHIBOR. 
Each line reflects the values of coefficients for the interaction effect of change in interest rate and age group. All regressions also include the passive change in wealth and age 
dummies.

pulls them closer to the kink and makes them more risk-averse. For 
someone trading at a loss, the same interest rate drop will pull them 
further away from the kink and can make them more risk-taking (under 
certain parameterizations). Therefore, we test how reaching for yield is 
correlated with an investor’s gain/loss position.

Specifically, we test this hypothesis by running the following regres-

sions: 

Columns (3)–(6) report results for the other two measures of port-
folio rebalancing—(net) flows into equities and (net) withdrawals from 
the account—under the two specifications of interest rate innovation. 
For both dependent variables and both measures of interest rate inno-
vation, reaching for yield is larger when investors are trading following 
losses.  These  results  again  support  prospect  theory  as  a  driver  of 
reaching for yield by retail investors.

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝛥𝑟𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain < 0} + 𝛽2𝛥𝑟𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain > 0} + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1,

(32)

6. Conclusion

𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain > 0} + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1,

𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain < 0} + 𝛽2𝛥𝜀𝑟

𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝜀𝑟
where Gain is given by Eq.  (23) and measures the individual’s (net) 
gains. In our analysis, we measure gains relative to the stock price at 
the end of the preceding month, consistent with the very high turnover 
rates observed among our investors. Table  10 shows the estimation 
results.

(33)

Columns (1) and (2) report results for the active change in risky 
share. Consistent with prospect theory, conditional on passive changes 
in wealth, investors trading at a loss become more risk-seeking after 
an  interest  rate  drop.  In  Column  (1),  only  those  trading  at  a  loss 
reach for yield: a 100-basis-point interest rate innovation leads to a 
14-basis-point decrease in active risky shares holding. Interestingly, 
those trading at a gain exhibit reverse reaching for yield. Among these 
investors, a 100-basis-point interest rate innovation is associated with 
a 7.5-basis-point increase in active risky shares holding. Similarly, in 
Column (2), in which we measure interest rate innovation using the 
AR(1) residual, those trading at a loss exhibit a much stronger tendency 
to reach for yield.

20 

The literature has documented the existence of reaching for yield 
among institutional investors. We present new field evidence to doc-
ument it among retail investors. Our results show that reaching for 
yield does not need to stem from the institutional frictions on which 
the literature has typically focused.

We discuss and test different theories of portfolio choice that gen-
erate  heterogeneous  responses  among  households.  Overall,  we  find 
that  younger,  less-wealthy  individuals  display  stronger  reaching  for 
yield, which provides empirical support for life-cycle models and for 
portfolio-choice models in which labor income is a close substitute for 
bonds. We also find stronger reaching for yield when investors are 
trading at a loss, which provides empirical support for prospect theory 
as a further explanation of reaching for yield. These results are robust 
to adding controls for both future expected returns and macroeconomic 
conditions.

In  this  paper,  we  measure  portfolio  reallocation  in  response  to 
interest rate changes in general. We do not try to isolate specific interest 
rate shocks, instead we want to understand how investors react when 

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. 8.  Effect of interest rate changes on investor behavior by age group.
Fig.  8 shows the result from regressions of investor behavior proxies on change in interest rate interacted with age group dummies. Investor behavior proxies are active change in 
risky share, net flow into equity and withdrawals (both as share of previous balance). The change in interest rate is change in 1-month SHIBOR at the beginning of each month. 
Each line reflects the values of coefficients for the interaction effect of change in interest rate and age group. All regressions also include the passive change in wealth and age 
dummies.

Table 10
Results for regression controlling for past gains (monthly gains) and account fixed effects.

  𝛥𝑟𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain < 0}

  𝛥𝑟𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain > 0}

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain < 0}

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain > 0}

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

𝜔𝑎

(1)

−0.140***
(0.00203)

0.0752***
(0.00232)

−0.0658***
(0.0135)

(2)

−0.180***
(0.00208)

0.0346***
(0.00253)
−0.0660***
(0.0134)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.304***
(0.00409)

−0.0623***
(0.00511)

−0.165***
(0.0243)

(4)

−0.476***
(0.00422)

−0.204***
(0.00555)
−0.165***
(0.0243)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

0.183***
(0.00390)

0.0939***
(0.00447)

−0.0598**
(0.0251)

(6)

0.453***
(0.00406)

0.265***
(0.00490)
−0.0591**  
(0.0254)

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

116,166,277
0.011

  Account FE
  Wealth dummies
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our regression estimations including interactions of interest rate change with gains and losses dummy. The three dependent variables 
are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the four the dependent variables, the regression specifications are 
𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼+𝛽1𝛥𝑟𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain < 0}+𝛽2𝛥𝑟𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain > 0}+𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 1, 3, and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest rate), and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼+𝛽1𝜀𝑟
𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain > 0}+𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1
for Columns 2, 4, and 6 (where 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). Gain < 0 (Gain > 0) is a dummy equal to one if account experiences losses (gains), where account 
performance is computed from Eq.  (23), with the price at the start of the month as the reference price. log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝 represents the passive change in wealth. The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes 
the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, Eq. (22)), account-level fixed effects, and dummy variables for 10 wealth groups. Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs 
for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟

YES
YES
116,554,658 
0.048

𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝.

𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain < 0}+𝛽2𝛥𝜀𝑟

116,487,592
0.010

116,232,207
0.017

116,554,658
0.017

116,232,207
0.048

YES
YES

YES
YES

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

interest rates increase or decrease. It would be interesting, however, to 
also study the response to monetary policy shocks.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Francisco  Gomes:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  origi-
nal draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, 
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, 
Conceptualization. Cameron Peng: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, 
Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Conceptualization. Oksana Smirnova: Writing – review & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, 
Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investiga-
tion, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Ning Zhu: Resources, Data 
curation.

N
(2)

Minimum age
(3)

Maximum age 
(4)

Table B.11
Age distribution of investors.
  Age group
  (1)
  1
30
  2
36
  3
41
  4
46
  5
51
  6
56
  7
61
  8
66
  9
71
  10
76
  Total
30
This table shows age distribution of investors in the sample across age groups. Column 
2 reports the number of investors in each category, in millions. Columns 3 and 4 report 
the corresponding minimum and maximum ages, respectively.

3.77
6.12
6.55
7.60
6.07
4.50
3.56
2.24
1.23
0.74
42.36

35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
80

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have nothing to disclose.

Appendix A. Derivation of Hypothesis  1

To simplify the notation, we first define 

𝛤 ≡

𝜕(𝜇 − 𝑟)∕𝜕𝑟
𝛾𝜎2

so that we can rewrite Eq. (4): 

[

=

1 +

]

𝛤 .

𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )
𝑊

𝜕𝛼
𝜕𝑟

𝛤 .

= −

𝑃 𝑉 (𝑌 )
𝑊 2

From this, 
𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟
𝜕𝑊
So the sign of 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟
{ 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 is a negative function of 𝑊 if 𝛤 > 0,
𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 is a positive function of 𝑊 if 𝛤 < 0.

𝜕𝑊  is the opposite of the sign of 𝛤 , that is,

(34)

(35)

(36)

From Eq.  (36), the sign of 𝛤  is also the sign of 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟, so we can rewrite 
the previous result as
{ 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 is a negative function of 𝑊 if 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 > 0,
𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 is a positive function of 𝑊 if 𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟 < 0.

Combining these two terms, |𝜕𝛼∕𝜕𝑟| is a negative function of 𝑊 .

Appendix B. Summary statistics for age and wealth groups

Table  B.11 shows the distribution of investors in the sample, across 
the age groups. The vast majority of investors are younger than 60, 
with the largest age group being 46–50, followed by 41–45.

Table  B.12 shows the distribution of investors in the sample, across 
the wealth groups. Wealth is proxied by the individual’s account bal-
ance. The first wealth group is the largest, but all others are quite 
sizeable as well, which was an important criterion for defining the 
cutoff points.

Appendix C. Descriptive statistics for gains and loses

In  this  Appendix  we  plot  the  time  series  of  average  monthly
portfolio gains (Eq.  (23)) across all investors in our sample. This is 
the variable that we use in the regression testing the loss aversion
channel.

22 

Min(CNY)
(3)

Max(CNY)  
(4)

Table B.12
Wealth distribution of investors.
  Wealth group
N
  (1)
(2)
  1
9999.99
24 999.99  
  2
49 999.99  
  3
99 999.98  
  4
199 999.98 
  5
299 999.88 
  6
399 999.88 
  7
499 999.94 
  8
999 999.88 
  9
2.85E+06  
  10
  Total
2.85E+06  
This table shows the distribution of investors in the sample across wealth groups. 
Column 2 reports the number of investors in each category, in millions. Columns 3 
and 4 report the corresponding minimum and maximum account balance, respectively.

0.01
10 000
25 000
50 000
100 000
200 000
300 000
400 000
500 000
1 000 000
0.01

24.41
20.98
18.53
17.79
14.13
6.21
3.53
2.29
4.87
4.19
116.92

Appendix D. Baseline regressions for risky share

In this appendix we repeat our baseline ‘‘reaching for yield’’ regres-
sions with the (simple) risky share as the left-hand-side variables. We 
obtain the same conclusions as when we consider the other measures.

Appendix E. Baseline regression estimated with data from 2009 to 
2014

In this appendix we repeat our baseline ‘‘reaching for yield’’ regres-
sions excluding the ‘‘boom-bust’’ periods in the Chinese stock market. 
We obtain the same conclusions as when we consider the full sample. 
(See Table  E.14).

Appendix F. Institutional details and descriptive statistics for mort-
gages in China

In China, mortgages are exclusively adjustable rate mortgages. Any 
interest rate changes announced by the central bank are applied to 
all existing mortgages with a maturity exceeding one year, starting 
January in the following year. The maximum mortgage term is 30 years 
for newly built residential properties and 20 years for secondhand res-
idential properties, with an additional requirement that the borrower’s 
age plus mortgage term should not exceed 65 years. Moreover, second 
mortgages are not easily obtainable, as all mortgages are for property 
purchases only.

To gain insight about home ownership and mortgage utilization, 
we  use  the  data  from  the  China  Family  Panel  Studies  (CFPS),  an 
annual longitudinal survey conducted by Peking University. It collects 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. A.1.  Average monthly account gains and losses.
Fig.  A.1 plots the sample average of monthly account gains, computed from Eq.  (23), with the price at the start of the month as the reference price. The gains are weighted by 
account balance.

Table D.13
Results for baseline regression for 𝛥𝜔.
  (1)
  𝛥𝑟𝑡

(2)

−0.0979***
(0.00252)

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

−0.111***
(0.0280)

(3)

−0.140***
(0.00258)

−0.112***
(0.0280)

(4)

−0.117***
(0.00451)

−0.119***
(0.0283)

(5)

−0.156***  
(0.00460)  
−0.120***  
(0.0283)

YES
NO
YES

NO
YES
YES

YES
NO
YES

116,178,891
−0.007

  Account FE
  Age dummies
  Wealth dummies
  Observations
116,501,010
  Adjusted 𝑅2
−0.007
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our baseline regressions when the dependent variable is the change in 
risky share (Eq. (11)). The specification in Columns 2 and 4 is 𝛥𝜔𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡
𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for 
is the change in interest rate), while Columns 3 and 5 report results for 𝛥𝜔𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
Columns 3, 5 and 7 (where 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝 represents the passive 
change in wealth and all specifications include dummies for the 10 age groups. The first two regressions 
include account-level fixed effects while the other two include age fixed effects. Statistical significance is 
based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟

NO
YES
YES
41,752,048 
0.003

𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝.

41,658,032
0.003

Table E.14
Results for baseline regression using the data from 2009 to 2014.
𝜔𝑎

  𝛥𝑟

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

(1)

−0.0293***
(0.00159)

−0.0872***
(0.0150)

(2)

−0.104***
(0.00167)

−0.0872***
(0.0150)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.107***
(0.00324)

−0.223***
(0.0274)

(4)

−0.358***
(0.00343)

−0.223***
(0.0276)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

0.0206***
(0.00282)

−0.0675**
(0.0286)

(6)

0.302***  
(0.00306)  
−0.0675**  
(0.0287)

YES
YES

YES
YES

  Account FE
  Wealth dummies
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
The three dependent variables are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the three the dependent variables, the 
regression specifications are 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 2, 4 and 6 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest rate), and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝜀𝑟
𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗𝑡 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 3, 5 
and 7 (where 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, Eq. (22)), account-level fixed effects and dummy 
variables for the 10 wealth groups. Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟

YES
YES
70,406,551 
0.056

𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝.

70,406,551
0.002

70,406,551
0.002

70,406,551
0.017

70,406,551
0.018

70,406,551
0.055

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Table F.15
Mortgage ownership in China in 2010–2016, CFPS.
  Year

Owners, %

Mortgage, %
All
(3)

Stockholders 
(4)

(2)

86.44%
87.85%
82.09%
84.25%

  (1)
  2010
  2012
  2014
  2016
  Total
Table  F.15 presents data from the China Family Panel Studies on home ownership 
and mortgages in China from 2010 to 2016. Column (2) indicates the percentage of 
households that own a house in China in each year. Column (3) shows the percentage 
of all households with a mortgage. Lastly, Column (4) provides the percentage of stock 
owners with a mortgage.

13.41%
9.29%
13.89%
19.65%

3.19%
4.23%
7.18%
9.12%

84.03%

16.42%

7.08%

comprehensive longitudinal data on individuals and families in China, 
with a particular focus on both economic and non-economic wellbeing.
Column (2) of Table  F.15 shows that the percentage of households 
that own a house in China was high and relatively stable over the 
sample, with an average of 84.03%. Nevertheless, even with the high 
rate of home ownership, there is not a significant demand for mortgages 
as a financial instrument in China.

Based on Column (3) of Table  F.15, only 3.19% of surveyed house-
holds had a mortgage in 2010. Even though mortgage ownership in 
China has shown some growth over the years, as evidenced by the 
increasing  percentages  of  households  with  a  mortgage,  the  rate  of 
growth appears to be moderate, with the percentage of homeowners 
with a mortgage increasing only to 9.12% by 2016.

Note that the percentage of stock owners with a mortgage (Column 
(4))  is  moderate  and  remained  relatively  stable  at  around  13–14% 
between 2010 and 2014, before increasing to 19.65% in 2016.

Overall, the data suggests that while there has been some growth in 
mortgage ownership in China, the rate of growth has been moderate, 
and the percentage of homeowners with a mortgage remains relatively 
low compared to the US. At the same time no more than a fifth of stock 
owners simultaneously hold a mortgage.

Appendix G. Stock returns and lagged interest rate in the Chinese 
stock market

In this appendix we replicate the analysis in Campbell and Yogo 
(2006), using data on the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) Index and 
the CSMAR value-weighted index return as proxies for the Chinese 
stock market and the SHIBOR rate as our interest rate variable. More 
precisely, we estimate 
log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ⋅ log 𝑆𝐻𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅3𝑚
𝑡−1 + 𝑢𝑡
where log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 is the logarithm of market excess returns, calculated 
by subtracting the one-month SHIBOR from either the SSE Index or 
the  CSMAR  value-weighted  index  in  current  month  (month  𝑡),  and 
log 𝑆𝐻𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅3𝑚
𝑡−1 is the logarithm of the three-month SHIBOR in the 
previous month (𝑡−1). We first estimate this regression for the period of 
2006 to 2016, the same period considered in our paper, at the monthly 
frequency. The results are shown in Table  G.16.

(37)

We find that, similar to Campbell and Yogo (2006), interest rates 
predict excess stock returns negatively and significantly, with  ̂𝛽 equal 
to  −2.11  (−2.36)  for  the  SSE  Index  (CSMAR  value-weighted  index). 
In terms of magnitude, Campbell and Yogo (2006) report normalized 
coefficients  ̃𝛽 (Table  5 in their paper), computed as 

̃𝛽 = ̂𝛽 ⋅

̂𝜎𝑒
̂𝜎𝑢

,

(38)

where ̂𝜎𝑢 is the standard deviation of the residuals from Eq.  (37) and ̂𝜎𝑒
is the standard deviation of the residuals from the following regression: 

log 𝑆𝐻𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅3𝑚

𝑡−1 = 𝛾 +𝛿1 ⋅log 𝑆𝐻𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅3𝑚

𝑡−2 +𝛿2 ⋅log 𝑆𝐻𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅3𝑚

𝑡−3 +𝑒𝑡. (39)

Table G.16
Predictive performance of lagged interest rate.
  Dev. var.
(1)
Full sample
  log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡

(2)
2009–2014

SSE Index

(3)
Full sample

(4)
2009–2014

CSMAR

  log 𝑆𝐻𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅3𝑚

𝑡−1

−2.11***
(0.625)

−1.62**
(0.67)

−2.36***
(0.668)

122
0.072
12.52

122
0.068
11.36

71
0.0931
5.82

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
  F
Standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from a univariate predictive regression of stock excess 
returns on lagged stock excess returns: log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ⋅ log 𝑆𝐻𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅3𝑚
𝑡−1 + 𝑢𝑡, where 
𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 is market excess return, that is, the difference between a return for the SSE-index 
(Columns (1) and (2)) or CSMAR value-weighted index with dividends reinvested in 
current month (Columns (3) and (4)) and the risk-free return (1-month SHIBOR). The 
sample covers the period from 2006 to 2018 at monthly frequency. Columns (1) and 
(3) use the full sample, while Columns (2) and (4) are based on the subsample spanning 
January 2009 to December 2014 and excludes boom and bust periods.

−1.78**  
(0.704)  
71
0.101
6.4

Table H.17
Predictive performance of dividend-price ratios.
  Dev.var.
  log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡
  log(𝐷∕𝑃 )𝑡

(1)
Full sample
0.0544*
(0.0290)

(2)
2006–2008

0.0994
(0.0626)

(3)
2009–2016

0.0239
(0.0333)

27
0.055
2.518

123
0.020
3.520

95
−0.005
0.516

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
  F
Standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from a univariate predictive regression of stock 
excess returns on dividend-price ratio: log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ⋅ log 𝐷𝑃𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑡, where 
𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 is market excess return, that is a return for aggregate equal-weighted mar-
ket portfolio with dividends reinvested over risk free return (1-month SHIBOR) 
and 𝐷𝑃𝑡−1 is dividend-price ratio calculated as the ratio of the summation of the 
dividends paid on the stock portfolio over the past 12 months (log
). Both 
variables are in logarithms. The sample covers the period from 2006–2018 at 
monthly frequency. Column (1) uses the full sample, while Columns (2) and (3) 
are based on the subsamples before and after 2009.

𝐷12
𝑡
𝑃𝑡

Table H.18
Predictive performance of lagged market return.
  Dev.Var.
  log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡
  log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡−1

(1)
Full sample
0.201**
(0.0911)

  Constant

−0.0154
(0.0108)

(2)
2009–2014

0.150
(0.115)

−0.0195*
(0.0109)

71
0.009
1.714

  Observations
122
  Adjusted 𝑅2
0.032
  F
4.860
Standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from a univariate predictive regression 
of  stock  excess  returns  on  lagged  stock  excess  returns:  log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 =
𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ⋅ log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑡, where 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 is market excess return, that is 
a return for aggregate equal-weighted market portfolio with dividends 
reinvested over risk-free return (1-month SHIBOR). The sample period 
is 2006–2018 at monthly frequency. Column (1) uses the full sample, 
while Column (2) is based on the subsample spanning January 2009 to 
December 2014 and excludes boom and bust periods.

The normalized coefficients can be interpreted as the standard devia-
tion of the change in expected returns relative to the standard deviation 
of the innovation to returns. We estimate a normalized coefficient of 
−0.086 (−0.089) for the SSE (CSMAR) regression (this compares with 
−0.017 in Campbell and Yogo (2006))

As previously discussed, our data include periods of dramatic mar-
ket movement (‘‘bubbles and crashes’’). Therefore, we repeat the previ-
ous regression for the more stable period (January 2009 to December 
2014) and obtain similar results: the estimated  ̂𝛽 is −1.62 for the SSE 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

(6)

0.265***
(0.00405)
−0.406***  
(0.00493)
−0.0802***  
(0.0175)

7.495***
(0.844)
−0.118***  
(0.0331)
116,554,658 
0.056

Table K.19
Results for regression controlling for past gains (monthly gains), account fixed effects, dividend yield, and past market return.

  𝛥𝑟𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain < 0}

  𝛥𝑟𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain > 0}

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain < 0}

  𝜀𝑟

𝑡 × 𝟏 {Gain > 0}

  log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝

  log 𝐷𝑃𝑡

  𝑚𝑘𝑡𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝑡

𝜔𝑎

(1)

−0.138***
(0.00205)

0.145***
(0.00233)

−0.0629***
(0.0139)

−1.126***
(0.174)

0.0217***
(0.00709)

(2)

−0.146***
(0.00209)

0.141***
(0.00256)
−0.0630***
(0.0139)

−1.118***
(0.170)

0.0215***
(0.00714)

𝑁𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑝𝑝

(3)

−0.320***
(0.00411)

0.258***
(0.00511)

−0.150***
(0.0232)

−5.515***
(0.700)

0.0882***
(0.0262)

(4)

−0.336***
(0.00422)

0.289***
(0.00559)
−0.150***
(0.0232)

−5.470***
(0.688)

0.0883***
(0.0263)

𝑊 𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑝𝑝

(5)

0.210***
(0.00391)

−0.341***
(0.00447)

−0.0803***
(0.0175)

7.540***
(0.846)

−0.118***
(0.0329)

116,487,592
0.011

116,166,277
0.011

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
Robust account-clustered or time-clustered standard errors in parentheses; * 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
This table reports the results from our regression estimations including interactions of interest rate change with gains and losses dummy. The three dependent variables 
are the active change in risky share, net equity flows, and withdrawal rates. Letting 𝑦𝑗𝑡 denote each of the four the dependent variables, the regression specifications are 
𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼+𝛽1𝛥𝑟𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain < 0}+𝛽2𝛥𝑟𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain > 0}+𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1 for Columns 1, 3, and 5 (where 𝛥𝑟𝑡 is the change in interest rate), and 𝑦𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼+𝛽1𝜀𝑟
𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain > 0}+𝑢𝑗,𝑡+1
for Columns 2, 4, and 6 (where 𝜀𝑟
𝑡 is residual from the AR(1) interest rate model). Gain < 0 (Gain > 0) is a dummy equal to one if account experiences losses (gains), where account 
performance is computed from Eq. (23), with the price at the start of the month as the reference price. log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝 represents the passive change in wealth. The vector 𝑋𝑗𝑡 includes 
the passive change in wealth (log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝, Eq. (22)), account-level fixed effects, and dummy variables for 10 wealth groups. Statistical significance is based on account-clustered SEs 
for 𝛥𝑟𝑡 and 𝜀𝑟

𝑡 and on time-clustered SEs for log 𝛥𝑊 𝑝.

𝑡 ×𝟏 {Gain < 0}+𝛽2𝛥𝜀𝑟

116,232,207
0.021

116,554,658
0.021

116,232,207
0.056

Index and −1.78 for the CSMAR value-weighted index. The correspond-
ing  implied  ̃𝛽  coefficients  are  −0.066  and  −0.067,  respectively,  and 
the regression coefficients are again statistically significant at the 1% 
confidence level.

Appendix H. Forecasting regressions in the Chinese stock market

In this appendix we first estimate predictive regressions for stock 
returns using the lagged dividend yield as the predicting variable. More 
precisely, we estimate: 

log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ⋅ (𝐷∕𝑃 )𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑡.

(40)

This has been studied, in the context of the Chinese stock market, 
by Nie and Yin (2022). They argue that an institutional change in 2008 
produced a distinct influence on the dividends policy of Chinese-listed 
firms and affected the information conveyed by dividends.43 Motivated 
by this finding, they estimate the predictive regression separately for 
the pre- and post-2008 periods and, consistent with the regime shift 
hypothesis, find a statistically significant coefficient on the dividend-
price ratio for the pre-2008 period, but not for the post-2008 period. 
Our estimation results are reported in Table  H.17.

Our full sample period is 2006–2016 and, in our analysis, the 𝛽
coefficient is only marginally significant. After splitting the sample as 
in Nie and Yin (2022), we similarly find a larger coefficient for the 
pre-2009 sample, but it is insignificant.

We next consider the lagged stock market return as a predictor by 

estimating the following regression: 

log 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ⋅ log(𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑋)𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑡.

(41)

43 More precisely, the Chinese stock market operated under the unique Semi-
Mandatory Dividend Rule, which was later revised significantly in 2008. In 
2004, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) announced that 
listed firms that have not paid a dividend to shareholders for three years 
cannot  apply  for  seasoned  equity  offerings  (SEOs).  Furthermore,  the  Rule 
strictly  stipulated  in  2006  that  SEOs  must  be  preceded  by  cash  dividend 
payments equal to at least 20% of the issuing firm’s net profits for the previous 
three years—and as a result, this proportion subsequently rose to 30% in 2008.

The results are shown in Table  H.18.

For  the  full  sample  (Column(1)),  we  obtain  a  positive  and  sta-
tistically significant coefficient (0.201). However, if we exclude the 
‘‘bubble-and-crash’’ episodes (Column(2)), the coefficient is no longer 
statistically significant.

Appendix I. Wealth effects from regressions with controls for ex-
pected returns

In this appendix we repeat the analysis in Section 5.1, in which we 
study heterogeneity in portfolio responses to interest rate changes as a 
function of wealth-but in the context of the regressions with controls 
for expected returns (Section 4.4). As before, for past returns, we use 
either the lagged market return or the investor’s past portfolio return. 
The results are shown in Fig.  A.2.

Under these specifications, we again find a monotonic relationship 
between wealth and reaching for yield, as predicted by the theory: 
investors  with  less  wealth  will  more  for  yield  more  strongly.  As  a 
reminder, the prediction of the theory is a negative relationship with 
the ratio of wealth to the present value of future labor income. Since 
these two variables are likely positively correlated in the data, the fact 
that we only observe the former actually makes it more striking that 
we are still able to uncover this relationship.

The results in Fig.  A.2 reveal a large number of wealth groups that 
exhibit reverse reaching for yield. It may, therefore, be tempting to 
deduce that investors, on average, would also show such a behavior. 
However, note that the wealth groups are not equally populated, as we 
have instead used to economically relevant wealth cutoffs. As a result, 
almost two-thirds (63.92%) of our investors are in the bottom three 
groups. These investors are responsible for reaching for yield at the 
aggregate level.

Appendix J. Age  effects  from  regressions  with  controls  for  ex-
pected returns

In this appendix, we repeat the analysis in Section 5.2, in which 
we study heterogeneity in portfolio responses to interest rate changes 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. A.2.  Effect of interest rate changes on investor behavior by wealth group, controlling for past stock market returns.
Fig.  A.2 plots the result from regressions of investor behavior proxies on change in interest rate interacted with wealth group dummies. Investor behavior proxies are active 
change in risky share, net flow into equity and withdrawals (both as share of previous balance). The interest rate innovation correspond to the residuals from an AR(1) process for 
SHIBOR. Each line reflects the values of the interaction effect of change in SHIBOR and wealth group. All regressions also include the passive change in wealth, wealth dummies 
and account fixed effects. Regressions additionally control for dividend-price ratio in combination with either investor’s past return or previous month stock market returns (SSE 
Index).

as a function of age in the context of the regressions with controls for 
expected returns (Section 4.4). As before, for past returns, we use either 
the lagged market return or the investor’s past portfolio return. The 
results are shown in Fig.  A.3

We  find  the  same  patterns  as  in  baseline  specification:  younger 
agents are more actively reaching for yield.44 This, again, aligns well 
with the theory. In terms of the overall magnitude, consistent with the 
results in Section 4.4, the inclusion of additional controls reduces the 
size of reaching for yield. This also coincides with more cases showing 
the opposite; namely, reverse reaching for yield.

Appendix K. Prospect theory channel with controls for expected 
returns

In this Appendix, we repeat the analysis in Section 5.3, in which we 
study heterogeneity in portfolio responses to interest rate changes as a 
function of previous gains and losses, in the context of the regressions 
with controls for expected returns (Section 4.4). The results are shown 
in Table  K.19.45

We obtain the same patterns of reaching for yield as in Section 5.3: 
investors trading at a loss reach for yield, while those trading at a 
gain engage in reverse reaching for yield. As in all previous cases, 

44 As in the baseline results, the first age group is an exception to, otherwise, 
perfectly monotonic relationship.

45 Results when controlling for the lagged own portfolio return are similar 
and available upon request.

26 

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Fig. A.3.  Effect of AR(1) interest rate innovation on investor behavior by age group, controlling for past stock market returns.
Fig.  A.3 shows the result from regressions of investor behavior proxies on change in interest rate interacted with age group dummies. Investor behavior proxies are active change in 
risky share, net flow into equity and withdrawals (both as share of previous balance). The interest rate innovation correspond to the residuals from an AR(1) process for SHIBOR. 
Each line reflects the values of coefficient for the interaction effect of change in interest rate and age group. All regressions also include the passive change in wealth and wealth 
dummies. Regressions additionally control for dividend-price ratio combination with either investor’s past return or previous month stock market returns (SSE Index).

the coefficient on the lagged market return is positive in the first four 
specifications (those for the active risk share and for net equity flows) 
and negative in the other two (withdrawals), while the coefficient on 
the dividend yield has the opposite sign, consistent with retail investors 
behaving as trend-chasers.

Data availability

Code and Data for Reaching for Yield (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Abel, A.B., 1990. Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses. 

National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass, USA.

27 

Acharya, V., Naqvi, H., 2019. On reaching for yield and the coexistence of bubbles and 

negative bubbles. J. Financial Intermediation 38, 1–10.

Agarwal, S., Hwee Chua, Y., Ghosh, P., Song, C., 2023. Portfolio rebalancing and 
consumption response of households to monetary policy shocks. Working Paper.
An, L., Lou, D., Shi, D., 2022. Wealth redistribution in bubbles and crashes. J. Monet. 

Econ. 

20 (3), 651–707.

Ang, A., Bekaert, G., 2007. Stock return predictability: Is it there? Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Barberis, N., Huang, M., 2001. Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual stock 

returns. J. Financ. 56 (4), 1247–1292.

Barberis, N., Xiong, W., 2009. What drives the disposition effect? An analysis of a 

long-standing preference-based explanation. J. Financ. 64 (2), 751–784.

Barbu, A., Fricke, C., Moench, E., 2021. Procyclical asset management and bond risk 

premia. ESRB: Working Paper Series 2021/116.

Becker, B., Ivashina, V., 2015. Reaching for yield in the bond market. J. Financ. 70 

(5), 1863–1902.

Begenau,  J.,  Liang,  P.,  Siriwardane,  E.,  2024.  The  Rise  in  Alternatives.  Stanford 

University Graduate School of Business Research Paper.

Bernanke, B.S., Kuttner, K.N., 2005. What explains the stock market’s reaction to 

Federal Reserve policy? J. Financ. 60 (3), 1221–1257.

F. Gomes et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104057 

Boddin, D., te Kaat, D., Ma, C., Rebucci, A., 2024. A housing portfolio channel of QE 

Giglio, S., Maggiori, M., Stroebel, J., Utkus, S., 2021. Five facts about beliefs and 

transmission. National Bureau of Economic Research. No. w32211.

portfolios. Am. Econ. Rev. 111 (5), 1481–1522.

Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G., Zhou, H., 2009. Expected stock returns and variance risk 

Gomes, F.J., 2005. Portfolio choice and trading volume with loss-averse investors. J. 

Calvet, L.E., Campbell, J.Y., Sodini, P., 2009. Fight or flight? Portfolio rebalancing by 

Greenwood, R., Shleifer, A., 2014. Expectations of returns and expected returns. Rev. 

premia. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (11), 4463–4492.

individual investors. Q. J. Econ. 124 (1), 301–348.

Bus. 78 (2), 675–706.

Financ. Stud. 27 (3), 714–746.

Calvet, L.E., Sodini, P., 2014. Twin picks: Disentangling the determinants of risk-taking 

Hau,  H.,  Lai,  S.,  2016.  Asset  allocation  and  monetary  policy:  evidence  from  the 

in household portfolios. J. Financ. 69 (2), 867–906.

Campbell,  J.Y.,  Cochrane,  J.H.,  1999.  By  force  of  habit:  A  consumption-based 
explanation  of  aggregate  stock  market  behavior.  J.  Political  Econ.  107  (2), 
205–251.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future 

dividends and discount factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1 (3), 195–228.

Campbell, J.Y., Sigalov, R., 2022. Portfolio choice with sustainable spending: A model 

of reaching for yield. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 188–206.

eurozone. J. Financial Economics 120 (2), 309–329.

Higgins,  P.,  Zha,  T.,  Zhong,  W.,  2016.  Forecasting  China’s  economic  growth  and 

inflation. China Econ. Rev. 41, 46–61.

Ioannidou, V., Ongena, S., Peydró, J.-L., 2015. Monetary policy, risk-taking, and pricing: 

Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment. Rev. Financ. 19 (1), 95–144.

Ioannidou, V., Pinto, R., Wang, Z., 2022. Corporate pension risk-taking in a low interest 

rate environment. Available at SSRN.

Korevaar,  M.,  2023.  Reaching  for  yield  and  the  housing  market:  Evidence  from 

Campbell, J.Y., Viceira, L.M., 2002. Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for 

18th-century Amsterdam. J. Financ. Econ. 148 (3), 273–296.

Long-Term Investors. Oxford University Press.

Campbell, J.Y., Yogo, M., 2006. Efficient tests of stock return predictability. J. Financ. 

Chetty, R., Szeidl, A., 2007. Consumption commitments and risk preferences. Q. J. 

Econ. 81 (1), 27–60.

Econ. 122 (2), 831–877.

Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2001. Resurrecting the (C) CAPM: A cross-sectional test when 

risk premia are time-varying. J. Political Econ. 109 (6), 1238–1287.

Lian, C., Ma, Y., Wang, C., 2019. Low interest rates and risk-taking: Evidence from 

individual investment decisions. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (6), 2107–2148.

Liao, J., Peng, C., Zhu, N., 2022. Extrapolative bubbles and trading volume. Rev. Financ. 

Chodorow-Reich, G., 2014. Effects of unconventional monetary policy on financial 

Stud. 35 (4), 1682–1722.

institutions. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 155–204.

Malmendier, U., Nagel, S., 2011. Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences 

Choi, J., Kronlund, M., 2018. Reaching for yield in corporate bond mutual funds. Rev. 

affect risk taking? Q. J. Econ. 126 (1), 373–416.

Financ. Stud. 31 (5), 1930–1965.

Merton, R.C., 1969. Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time 

Cocco, J.F., Gomes, F.J., Maenhout, P.J., 2005. Consumption and portfolio choice over 

case. Rev. Econ. Stat. 247–257.

the life cycle. Rev. Financ. Stud. 18 (2), 491–533.

Merton, R.C., 1971. Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time 

Constantinides, G.M., 1990. Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle. 

model. J. Econom. Theory 3 (4), 373–413.

J. Political Econ. 98 (3), 519–543.

Nagel, S., Xu, Z., 2024. Movements in yields, not the equity premium: Bernanke-Kuttner 

Da, Z., Huang, X., Jin, L.J., 2021. Extrapolative beliefs in the cross-section: What can 

redux.

we learn from the crowds? J. Financ. Econ. 140 (1), 175–196.

Di Maggio, M., Kacperczyk, M., 2017. The unintended consequences of the zero lower 

Anal. 82, 102123.

bound policy. J. Financ. Econ. 123 (1), 59–80.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2018. A model of monetary policy and risk premia. 

Gao, P., Hu, A., Kelly, P., Peng, C., Zhu, N., 2024. Asset complexity and the return 

J. Financ. 73 (1), 317–373.

gap. Rev. Financ. 28 (2), 511–550.

Nie, J., Yin, L., 2022. Do dividends signal safety? Evidence from China. Int. Rev. Financ. 

Odean, T., 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? J. Financ. 53 (5), 

1775–1798.

Viceira,  L.M.,  2001.  Optimal  portfolio  choice  for  long-horizon  investors  with 

nontradable labor income. J. Financ. 56 (2), 433–470.

28 

