Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Understanding the strength of the dollar(cid:73)
Zhengyang Jiang a,b, Robert J. Richmond c,b, Tony Zhang d,∗
a Northwestern University, Kellogg School of Management, 2211 Campus Drive, Evanston, 60208, IL, USA
b NBER, USA
c New York University, Stern School of Business, 44 West 4th Street, New York, 10012, NY, USA
d Federal Reserve Board, 20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W., Washington, 20551, DC, USA

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Replication Package for Understan
ding the Strength of the Dollar (Original data)

Keywords:
Dollar
Exchange rate
Capital flows
Asset demand system

We attribute variation in the strength of the U.S. dollar and its covariance with other currencies to economic 
primitives using a global asset demand system. We take global investor savings, asset supply, and monetary 
policy as exogenous primitives, and show how these variables explain dollar exchange rate behavior. Prior to 
the global financial crisis, global savings and demand shifts explain dollar depreciation, whereas post-crisis 
they explain dollar appreciation. Interest rates and cross-border bank loans explain short-term fluctuations in 
the dollar, but decline in significance over longer horizons. When explaining the dollar factor structure, we 
find that global savings explain common variations across dollar exchange rates, whereas investor demand 
shifts account for cross-sectional heterogeneity in dollar betas.

Variation in the value of the U.S. dollar has far-reaching conse-
quences for global trade, asset prices, as well as global economic and 
financial conditions. Since the break-down of the Bretton Woods system 
in the early 1970s, the dollar has experienced several episodes of appre-
ciation and depreciation, sometimes sharp and other times sustained. 
The top panel of Fig.  1 plots the trade-weighted index of the dollar rel-
ative to advanced foreign economies (the dollar AFE index) from 2002 
to 2021, the period studied in this paper.1 Fluctuations of the dollar 
exchange rate are often accompanied by narratives of their underlying 
economic sources. For example, the dollar’s sustained depreciation in 
early 2000s have been attributed to large capital outflows from the U.S. 
to emerging market economies, driven by the desire to invest in the 
rapid growth of these markets. When the 2008 global financial crisis 
hit, this trend reversed and the dollar appreciated sharply as global 
investors sought the safety of U.S. assets. After the panic subsided, the 
dollar weakened and again reached its lowest pre-crisis level. Finally, 
starting in 2012, the dollar experienced a decade-long appreciation, 
which has been partly attributed to the divergence of monetary policies 
between the U.S. and the rest of the world.

While these are useful narratives about the economic drivers of the 
dollar, they are rarely quantified with data. In this paper, we provide 

an economically motivated decomposition of how the strength of the 
U.S. dollar and its covariance with other currencies are related to a 
set of primitive economic factors. To do so, we use a model of supply 
and  demand  for  international  financial  assets  to  attribute  variation 
in dollar exchange rates to a set primitive economic factors, which 
we take as exogenous. The model disciplines the equilibrium relation 
between exchange rates and the primitive economic factors, therefore 
allowing us to answer a number of key questions. First, do primitive 
economic factors explain the dollar’s strength in systematic ways across 
business cycles? Second, do different factors reinforce or offset one 
another? Third, do different factors’ relative contributions vary over 
time? Fourth, which set of economic primitives are most important 
for explaining systematic variation in the dollar and for explaining 
the heterogeneity in foreign currencies’ exposures to this systematic 
variation?

We employ the demand system approach to asset pricing (Koijen 
and  Yogo,  2019,  2024;  Koijen  et  al.,  2019,  2021)  by  adopting  the 
model of Jiang et al. (2022). In the model, capital flows, asset prices, 
and exchange rates are driven by a set of primitive economic factors. 

(cid:73)

Nikolai L. Roussanov was the editor for this article. For comments and discussions, we would like to thank Ralph Koijen, Andreas Stathopoulos, Alexi Savov, 
seminar participants at UC Berkeley, University of Colorado, Dartmouth, the Federal Reserve Board, George Washington University, University of Mannheim, 
Rutgers, NYU Stern, SFS Cavalcade, Tsinghua University, and Stanford GSB. Cody Wan provided excellent research assistance. The views in this paper are solely 
the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or any other 
person associated with the Federal Reserve System.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:  tony.zhang@frb.gov (T. Zhang).

1 The dollar AFE index contains currencies of seven countries/regions (average weights over this period in parentheses): Europe (36%), Canada (30%), Japan 

(14%), United Kingdom (11%), Switzerland (4%), Australia (3%), and Sweden (1%).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104052
Received 31 May 2023; Received in revised form 17 March 2025; Accepted 20 March 2025
Available online 3 April 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
Z. Jiang et al.

Fig. 1.  Trend Decomposition of Dollar AFE Index
Notes: The top panel presents the nominal level of the dollar AFE index with December 
2001 indexed to 100. The dollar AFE index is a trade-weighted basket comprising the 
euro, the Canadian dollar, the Japanese yen, the British pound, the Swiss franc and the 
Swedish kroner. The bottom panel presents the contribution of each block of economic 
primitives to the percent change in the dollar AFE index over the four sub-periods of 
our analysis. The total change within a sub-period is marked by a black dot.

This approach requires us to make a number of assumptions related 
to identification, structural forms, and exogeneity of certain variables, 
but allows us to trace out how the dollar exchange rate responds to 
variations in asset supply and demand. For example, an increase in 
foreign demand for U.S. assets leads to a capital inflow to the U.S. and a 
dollar appreciation, whereas a decrease in the U.S. short-term interest 
rate leads to capital outflows and a dollar depreciation. We estimate 
our model using a comprehensive dataset of bilateral equity and debt 
portfolio positions between 2002 and 2021.

We divide the model’s primitive economic factors into three cat-
egories:  (i)  investor  savings  and  asset  issuances,  (ii)  central  banks’ 
monetary policies, including interest rates and reserve holdings, and 
(iii) investor demand. These supply and demand factors, which we 
treat as exogenous, jointly explain the endogenous variables: exchange 
rates,  asset  prices,  and  portfolio  allocations.  From  one  year  to  the 
next,  had  all  of  the  exogenous  variables  remained  unchanged,  the 
endogenous variables would have also remained constant. We attribute 

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

exchange rate variation to these primitive factors by using our model 
to decompose how changes in each of the exogenous variables impact 
equilibrium  exchange  rates.  Using  this  decomposition  approach  we 
study three key moments of the U.S. dollar: (i) variation in its level 
versus other currencies varies over time, (ii) the variance of the dollar 
factor, and (iii) the covariance of different foreign exchange rates with 
the dollar factor.

We first provide a decomposition of which factors explain the level 
of the U.S. dollar AFE index over time. We report our results in the 
bottom panel of Fig.  1. The contribution of each factor is depicted by 
a different color in the four bars measuring different sub-periods. In 
the pre-crisis period, 2002–2007, the dollar’s depreciation is mainly 
explained by shifts in investors’ demand, specifically from U.S. assets 
towards foreign assets. Shifts in investor demand alone explain a 25 
percentage points (pp) depreciation of the dollar index. Investor savings 
and asset issuances explain an additional 11 pp dollar depreciation. 
This  depreciation  was  largely  due  to  savings  from  foreign  regions, 
such as Europe, being directed towards their domestic assets due to 
home  bias.  Increasing  investor  savings  flowing  to  foreign  countries 
appreciates their currencies relative to the dollar. Finally, increasing 
U.S. interest rates relative to foreign interest rates offset the dollar 
depreciation due to other factors by 5 pp.

In  2008,  the  dollar  appreciated  10%  against  the  basket  of  AFE 
currencies. This appreciation in 2008 is partially explained by investor 
savings and asset issuances and partially explained by investor demand 
which shifted back to the U.S. assets in a flight to safety. As the panic 
from the financial crisis subsided in 2009, the demand shift towards 
U.S. safe assets reversed and led to a dollar depreciation. Changes in 
central bank reserves led to further depreciation. As the Fed engaged in 
quantitative easing, the dollar depreciated further, which is consistent 
with the recent theoretical works that show that quantitative easing 
can lead to a currency depreciation by lowering bond and currency risk 
premia (Gourinchas et al., 2022; Greenwood et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 
2024).

In the post-crisis period, 2010–2021, our model primarily attributes 
the decade-long appreciation of the dollar to investor savings and de-
mand shifts. Investor savings in this period explain 14 pp of the dollar’s 
appreciation, and demand shifts towards U.S. assets explain another 
11 pp. We find two notable patterns about these demand shifts. First, 
foreign investor demand for U.S. assets increased. This shift in demand 
towards U.S. financial assets, particularly towards U.S. equities, was 
also instrumental in explaining the returns on U.S. financial assets in 
the post-crisis period and the disappearance of U.S. exorbitant privi-
lege (Atkeson et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2022). Second, U.S. investors’ 
demand for foreign assets declined over this period, putting downward 
pressure on foreign currencies relative to the dollar. Finally, the dollar 
appreciation due to savings and demand was partially offset by the 
Fed’s quantitative easing.

Perhaps surprisingly, our model does not attribute long-term vari-
ation in the dollar AFE index to changes in interest rate policies. The 
reason is that, within each of the sub-samples we study, interest rates 
mostly converged between the U.S. and foreign countries. That said, the 
interest rate differential between the U.S. and foreign countries does 
drive the dollar exchange rate from one year to the next, consistent 
with the literature on the global financial cycle (Rey, 2013; Miranda-
Agrippino and Rey, 2020). Notably, our estimates imply that a 1pp U.S. 
interest rate increase appreciates the dollar by 3.3%, which is consistent 
with research using high-frequency identification strategies (Curcuru 
et al., 2017).

We learn a number of important economic lessons from our decom-
position of the level of the dollar over these four periods. First, our 
results highlight how the specialness of U.S. financial assets interacts 
with changes in the supply of U.S. assets. This specialness of U.S. assets 
manifests itself as investors having a measurably stronger preference 
for U.S. assets. When the supply of U.S. financial assets increases, these 
assets become cheaper and hence more desirable to foreign investors 

Z. Jiang et al.

who are disproportionately more willing to shift their portfolios to-
wards U.S. assets given their specialness. As a result, net issuances 
of U.S. financial assets tend to explain dollar appreciation over our 
sample. Absent this U.S. specialness, increases in the net supply of U.S. 
financial assets would have faced weaker global investor demand and 
their relationship with the dollar exchange rate would have been less 
clear.

Second,  our  results  on  investor  demand  point  to  an  important 
regime shift: During the ‘‘risk-on’’ period in the early 2000s, demand 
for foreign risky assets, including those in emerging markets, increased. 
However, in another ‘‘risk-on’’ period in the 2010s after the Global 
Financial Crisis, investors instead found U.S. risky assets much more 
desirable.  As  a  result,  the  demand  for  risky  assets  led  to  a  dollar 
depreciation in the early 2000s, while it led to a dollar appreciation 
in the 2010s, fundamentally shifting the dollar’s cyclicality over our 
sample.

Third, we also incorporate cross-border bank lending as additional 
capital flows into our demand system. Similar to interest rates, we find 
that the bank lending flows do not have strong influence on the dollar’s 
strength over longer horizons. The reason is that, despite the fact that 
the bank flows are quite volatile at the annual frequency, they tend to 
offset each other over longer horizons.

After presenting our decomposition of the strength of the dollar, 
we next study the sources of the variance of the dollar factor as well 
as foreign currencies’ loadings on the dollar factor. This analysis is 
motivated by the international asset pricing literature that identifies 
the average dollar exchange rate as a systematic factor, which explains 
a large fraction of the variation in other exchange rates (Verdelhan, 
2018). Using the same decomposition steps, we study how the model’s 
primitive economic factors relate to this factor structure in exchange 
rates.

We find that savings and issuances and investor demand shifts also 
explain large shares (36% and 55%) of the dollar factor’s variance, 
whereas monetary policy rates and reserve accumulation play a minor 
role. Therefore, global investor savings and demand shocks contribute 
to not only the long-term trend in the dollar exchange rate, but also the 
short-term fluctuations in the dollar factor.

When studying foreign currencies’ loadings on the dollar factor, 
i.e., their dollar betas, we find that savings and issuances only explain 
why foreign currencies have a positive loading on the dollar factor, 
whereas demand shifts explain why certain foreign currencies have a 
higher loading than others. In particular, when demand shifts drive 
capital towards the U.S. and appreciate the dollar, Japan tends to be 
on the receiving end of capital flows driven by demand shifts, which 
also strengthens the yen. This is in contrast to Australia which tends 
to  experience  capital  outflows  during  these  periods,  weakening  the 
Australian dollar. This result further differentiates the roles played by 
savings  and  demand  shifts  in  driving  exchange  rate  dynamics,  and 
could help shed light on the origins of the cross-country variations in 
currency risk premia.

Finally, motivated by our findings of the importance of demand 
shifts for explaining the dollar, in the last part of the paper we study 
the consequences of hypothetical large-scale shifts in demand for U.S. 
financial assets on the value of the dollar. These results clarify the 
mechanism through which demand for U.S. assets impacts the dollar 
exchange rate within the model. We find that even if a large economy, 
such as China, unilaterally sells all of its holdings of U.S. assets for 
idiosyncratic reasons, the impact on the dollar’s value is surprisingly 
modest within the model. The reason is that, assuming U.S. fundamen-
tals remain stable, sales of U.S. financial assets by any single country 
are met by purchases by the other countries, as foreign investors are 
willing to substitute towards U.S. assets with only slight discounts. On 
the other hand, a large correlated demand shock for dollar assets could 
lead to a much more significant depreciation of the dollar.

Underlying  our  novel  quantification  of  the  economic  sources  of 
variation in the dollar exchange rate are a number of assumptions. 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

We highlight these assumptions here and discuss them further in the 
relevant places throughout the paper. First, our approach requires a 
key assumption regarding our estimates of investor countries’ price 
elasticity of demand. We estimate this price elasticity in a manner 
that measures how investors substitute across countries in response 
to  shocks  to  the  cross-section  of  prices.  We  assume  that  this  price 
elasticity also measures how investors will substitute in response to 
time-series shocks to prices. This is a potentially strong assumption 
that we hope future work on identification in international finance can 
improve upon. Second, we assume that our estimated demand curve 
coefficients are time-invariant. Third, we assume that exchange rates 
are  determined  as  specified  in  the  model.  Finally,  we  assume  that 
supply of equity and long-term bond assets is exogenous and does not 
respond to prices. Given the nascent stage of the literature on demand 
system asset pricing in international finance and on exchange rates, we 
believe that future research can make substantial progress in relaxing 
these assumptions.

Literature.  We provide a new perspective on variation in U.S. dollar 
based  exchange  rates,  which  play  a  critical  role  in  trade  and  the 
international financial system (Maggiori, 2017; Maggiori et al., 2020; 
Jiang et al., 2023; Gopinath and Stein, 2021; Gourinchas et al., 2019). 
One  literature  views  the  dollar’s  strength  as  a  barometer  of  global 
risks,  driving  the  global  financial  cycle  (Rey,  2013;  Avdjiev  et  al., 
2019; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020). As a result, the dollar is a 
priced risk factor in the currency market (Lustig et al., 2014; Verdelhan, 
2018). Complementary to this risk-based view, another literature re-
lates the dollar’s value to the demand for safe assets (Du and Schreger, 
2022; Jiang et al., 2021; Jiang, 2021). Our approach relates the dollar’s 
strength to demand and supply factors in the international financial 
markets.

Our paper builds on works that connect exchange rates to inter-
national capital flows (Kouri, 1977; Kouri et al., 1978). Gabaix and 
Maggiori (2015) present a model for how exchange rates and capital 
flows are related in segmented financial markets. Lilley et al. (2022) 
document that after the global financial crisis, the dollar’s value is 
closely tied to measures of global risk appetite and to U.S. foreign 
bond purchases. Hau and Rey (2006) present an equilibrium model of 
exchange rates and capital flows and show that changes in exchange 
rates are correlated with capital flows. Camanho et al. (2022) study 
mutual fund rebalancing and exchange rates. Our paper contributes to 
this literature by quantifying how factors that drive capital flows can 
jointly explain the dynamics of the dollar. Evans and Lyons (2002), 
Froot and Ramadorai (2005) provide empirical evidence on the relation 
between exchange rates and flows. Gabaix and Koijen (2021) provide 
evidence of inelastic financial markets and show how flows can have a 
substantial impact on asset prices.

Finally, our paper contributes to the literature on reserve currencies 
and the dollar. Maggiori (2017) studies the emergence of and properties 
of a reserve currency in a model with countries with varying degrees 
of financial development. Farhi and Maggiori (2017), He et al. (2019) 
study models of the international financial system and the implications 
of  supply  and  demand  for  reserve  assets.  Our  study  highlights  the 
stability of the dollar regime based on the asset substitution patterns 
of global investors.

1. A portfolio approach to explaining the dollar

We now present the model of international asset demand which 
we use to decompose dollar exchange rate variation. The model is 
designed to discipline how exchange rates respond to numerous supply 
and demand factors, which we take as exogenous. With this structure, 
we are able to analyze how different forces affect key variation in dollar 
exchange rates.

Our  model  follows  Jiang  et  al.  (2022),  which  builds  on  Koijen 
and Yogo (2024). There are three key ingredients: (1) investors’ as-
set demand curves, (2) investors’ wealth dynamics, and (3) market 

3 

Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

clearing.  These  ingredients  constitute  an  asset  demand  system  that 
relates exchange rates and asset prices to the demand for and supply of 
financial assets. The characteristics based demand curve used in the 
model can be microfounded as the outcome of an optimal portfolio 
choice problem in the presence of a factor structure in returns (Koijen 
and Yogo, 2019) or cash flows (Koijen et al., 2019).

Expected returns.  Investors care about expected returns in their own 
currency. We measure expected excess returns in dollars and convert 
them to each investor’s local currency. Let 𝑟𝑡+1(𝑛, 𝓁) = log(𝑅𝑡+1(𝑛, 𝓁))
denote the log return in dollars on asset class 𝓁 in country 𝑛 from time 
𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1. To measure expected returns, we use a forecasting regression 
as in Koijen and Yogo (2024): 

1.1. International asset demand system

𝑟𝑡+1(𝑛, 𝓁) − 𝑟𝑡+1(𝑈 𝑆, 1) = 𝜙𝓁 ⋅ 𝑝𝑏𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) + 𝜓𝓁 ⋅ (𝑒𝑡(𝑛) − 𝑧𝑡(𝑛)) + 𝜒𝑛,𝓁 + 𝜈𝑡+1(𝑛, 𝓁).

Time is discrete. There are 𝐼 investor countries that each contain 
a representative investor who allocates wealth across assets globally. 
There are 𝑁 countries that issue assets. These sets of countries can be 
overlapping. Issuer countries supply assets in asset classes indexed by 
𝓁: short-term debt (𝓁 = 1), long-term debt (𝓁 = 2), and equity (𝓁 = 3). 
Each asset class contains 𝑁 +1 assets — one for each issuer country plus 
an ‘‘outside’’ asset indexed 𝑛 = 0. This outside asset contains holdings in 
small countries that are not in our main sample due to data limitations.
We denote investor country 𝑖’s portfolio weight on issuer country 𝑛

in asset class 𝓁 by 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), which can be decomposed as: 

𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) = 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|𝓁) ⋅ 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝓁),

(1)

where 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|𝓁) is investor country 𝑖’s portfolio weight on issuer country 
𝑛 within asset class 𝓁, and 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝓁) is investor country 𝑖’s total portfolio 
weight on asset class 𝓁. For concreteness, consider the U.S. represen-
tative investor deciding on their portfolio allocation to long-term debt 
and within long-term debt to Germany as an issuer country. Thus, 𝑖 is 
the U.S., 𝑛 is Germany, and 𝓁 = 2 represents long-term debt. As a result, 
𝑤𝑖,𝑡(2) will be the overall U.S. portfolio weight on long-term debt and 
𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|2) will be the allocation to German long-term debt, conditional 
on the overall share invested in long-term debt.

Demand within asset class.  Within an asset class 𝓁, the portfolio weight 
for investor 𝑖 at time 𝑡 in country 𝑛 is a logistic function2: 

𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|𝓁) =

𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)
𝑘=1 𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑘, 𝓁)

1 + ∑𝑁

,

(2)

where 𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) captures the relative desirability of a country’s asset in 
this asset class: 

(3)

𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) = exp(𝛽𝓁𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) + 𝜽′

𝓁𝐱𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) + 𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)).
This  desirability  has  three  components.  First,  𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)  denotes  the 
expected return at time 𝑡 for country 𝑖’s investor in country 𝑛’s asset of 
class 𝓁. Second, 𝐱𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) denotes a set of observable asset characteristics 
that can be country-specific or bilateral in nature. The loadings, 𝜽𝓁, cap-
ture the weight investors place on the characteristics within each asset 
class. By assumption, the loadings on characteristics are the same across 
investors within an asset class, although some of the characteristics 
can be investor country specific. Third, 𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), denotes latent demand 
and represents additional variation in the portfolio weights that is not 
captured by the expected return or observable asset characteristics.3

Again considering the U.S. representative investor deciding on their 
portfolio  weight  on  German  long-term  debt.  The  variable  𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)
captures the local currency (U.S. Dollar) return the U.S. investor expects 
to earn on German long-term debt. The vector 𝐱𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) captures charac-
teristics such as the size (GDP) of Germany and the geographic distance 
between the U.S. and Germany. Finally, the loadings 𝜽𝓁 capture how 
characteristics matter for the long-term bond portfolio allocation.

2 By  construction,  the  total  weight  in  each  asset  class  equals  1, 
𝑛=0 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|𝓁) = 1. The portfolio weight in the outside asset in asset class 𝓁

∑𝑁
is therefore 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(0|𝓁) = 1∕(1 + ∑𝑁

𝑛=1 𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)).

3 Koijen and Yogo (2019) provides a micro-foundation for this functional 
form of the characteristics-based demand curve as the outcome of a portfolio 
choice problem.

4 

(4)

This regression projects the excess return at time 𝑡+1 for a U.S. investor 
onto its log market-to-book ratio 𝑝𝑏𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) at time 𝑡 and the log real 
exchange rate (𝑒𝑡(𝑛)−𝑧𝑡(𝑛)) between country 𝑛 and the dollars. The book 
value in the market-to-book ratio is equity book value for equity and 
par value for debt. The log real exchange rate is the difference between 
the log nominal exchange rate 𝑒𝑡(𝑛) = log 𝐸𝑡(𝑛) and the log consumer 
price index 𝑧𝑡(𝑛). The exchange rate, 𝐸𝑡(𝑛), is in dollars per unit of 
foreign currency. The regression coefficients 𝜙𝓁 and 𝜓𝓁 are specific to 
each asset class 𝓁. Based on this regression, the expected log excess 
return on asset 𝑛 in investor 𝑖’s currency (converting from U.S. dollars) 
is

𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) = E

𝑡[𝑟𝑡+1(𝑛, 𝓁) − 𝑟𝑡+1(𝑖, 1)]

= 𝜙𝓁𝑝𝑏𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) + 𝜓𝓁(𝑒𝑡(𝑛) − 𝑧𝑡(𝑛)) + 𝜒𝑛,𝓁 − 𝜙1𝑝𝑏𝑡(𝑖, 1)

− 𝜓1(𝑒𝑡(𝑖) − 𝑧𝑡(𝑖)) − 𝜒𝑖,1.

(5)

Demand  across  asset  classes.  To  allow  for  substitution  across  asset 
classes, the asset class portfolio weight is specified as a nested logit. 
The portfolio weight for investor 𝑖 at time 𝑡 in asset class 𝓁 is 

𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝓁) =

(1 + ∑𝑁
𝑚=1(1 + ∑𝑁

∑3

𝑘=1 𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁))𝜆𝓁 exp(𝛼𝓁 + 𝜉𝑖,𝑡(𝓁))

,

(6)

𝑘=1 𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑘, 𝑚))𝜆𝑚 exp(𝛼𝑚 + 𝜉𝑖,𝑡(𝑚))
where 𝛼𝓁 captures asset class fixed effects and 𝜉𝑖,𝑡(𝓁) captures asset class 
latent demand.4 The terms (1+∑𝑁
𝑘=1 𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)) are referred to as inclusive 
values for a given asset class 𝓁, which capture the relative attractiveness 
of  investing  in  each  asset  class.  For  example,  when  relative  prices 
of assets within an asset class increase, the asset class becomes less 
desirable as a whole, and investors may substitute away from the asset 
class accordingly.

Investor  wealth  dynamics.  Investor  wealth  evolves  according  to  the 
returns on the assets the investor holds. The law of motion for the assets 
under management (AUM) for investor 𝑖 in dollars is: 

𝐴𝑖,𝑡 = 𝐴𝑖,𝑡−1

3
∑

𝑁
∑

𝓁=1

𝑛=0

𝑤𝑖,𝑡−1(𝓁)𝑤𝑖,𝑡−1(𝑛|𝓁)𝑅𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) + 𝐹𝑖,𝑡,

(7)

where 𝑅𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) is the capital gains on asset 𝑛 in asset class 𝓁 in time 𝑡 in 
dollars, and 𝐹𝑖,𝑡 is investor 𝑖’s net financial savings in dollars, including 
dividend yield.5

Central banks.  We differentiate between demand of private investors 
and  central  banks  through  their  reserve  holdings.  We  use  𝐵𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)
to denote the quantity of country 𝑛’s assets held by country 𝑖’s cen-
tral bank in local currency book value. We assume that central bank 
policy  is  exogenous  and  does  not  respond  to  the  components  with 
the demand system. Endogeneity of central bank reserve policy (for 
example, through QE) may have important implications for exchange 
rate dynamics, which we leave for future research.

4 Jiang et al. (2022) show how this nested logit form can also be derived 

as the outcome of a portfolio choice problem.

5 The capital gain 𝑅𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) is specified in the standard way, as a function of 
the market-to-book ratio of assets and the exchange rate. We provide details 
in Appendix A.1.

Z. Jiang et al.

Market  clearing.  Let  𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)  denote  the  book  quantity  supplied  by 
country 𝑛 in asset class 𝓁 in its local currency. Specifically, 𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) is 
the total book value in local currency for equity, and the par value in lo-
cal currency for long-term and short-term debt. For the purposes of our 
decompositions of the dollar, we make the assumption that the quantity 
of assets outstanding in each period is exogenously determined. In some 
cases, this may be a fairly strong assumption, though we leave fully 
endogenizing  the  production  side  in  the  presence  of  heterogeneous 
asset demand for future work. Nevertheless, the dollar book value, 
𝐸𝑡(𝑛)𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁),  and  the  dollar  market  value,  𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)𝐸𝑡(𝑛)𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁),  of 
any asset are endogenous, because exchange rates and market-to-book 
ratios are endogenously determined.

The market clearing condition for asset (𝑛, 𝓁) in dollars is

𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)𝐸𝑡(𝑛)𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) =

𝑁
∑

𝑖=1

𝐴𝑖,𝑡𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝓁)𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|𝓁)

+ 𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)𝐸𝑡(𝑛)

𝑁
∑

𝑖=1

𝐵𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁).

(8)

The left-hand side is the total market value, and the right-hand side is 
the sum of the dollar value of investors’ portfolio holdings of the asset 
plus the sum of the dollar value of central banks’ reserve holdings.

Exchange rate determination.  We assume the short-term interest rate is 
exogenously adjusted by each country’s monetary authority so its price 
𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 1) is also exogenous. When there is a shock to investor demand 
on the right-hand side of Eq.  (8), the exchange rate 𝐸𝑡(𝑛) adjusts.6 
Intuitively, if demand for country 𝑛 short-term debt increases in dollar 
terms, country 𝑛’s currency appreciates to clear the short-term debt 
market (𝐸𝑡(𝑛) increases). In this sense, exchange rates are determined 
by market clearing for short-term debt. Demand for equity and long-
term debt also affect exchange rates due to substitution across asset 
classes.

In sum, there are 3 asset classes with 𝑁 assets each, which leads to 
3𝑁 market clearing conditions. Taking short-term bond prices as given, 
there are 𝑁 long-term bond prices, 𝑁 equity prices, 𝑁 − 1 exchange 
rates with respect to the dollar, and the U.S. short-term bond supply. 
This leads to an exactly determined system.

1.2. Data

We employ three types of data: (1) cross-country bilateral portfolio 
holdings, (2) asset and country characteristics, and (3) asset returns. 
At each stage of our data construction, we combine the best available 
data to get an accurate representation of cross-border portfolio holdings 
and asset returns. We summarize our data here and provide details in 
Appendix B.1.

Our cross-border holdings data are based upon IMF Coordinated 
Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) and the Treasury International Cap-
ital (TIC) databases. Our approach relies on market clearing and there-
fore requires relatively comprehensive coverage. As a result, we focus 
on bilateral country-level positions aggregated across currencies and 
issuing sectors. While disaggregating the data by issuing sector or by 
currency would potentially uncover interesting heterogeneity, coverage 
of the currency denomination of the cross-border holdings is limited. 
Therefore, we use total cross-border holdings and assume all cross-
border holdings are denominated in the local currency of the issuer. 
In section Section 2 we also introduce data on cross-border banking 
assets and liabilities from the BIS International Banking Statistics to 
understand how they impact the strength of the dollar.

We improve the quality of the cross-border holdings and returns 
data in three ways. First, we use the reallocation matrices from Coppola 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

et  al.  (2021)  to  account  for  mis-attributed  investments  in  offshore 
financial centers. Second, we estimate the U.S. dollar reserve holdings 
of individual central banks whenever possible to disaggregate the quan-
tities attributed to official asset purchases at the region level. Third, we 
use detailed estimates of asset returns from the TIC data to construct 
reliable estimates of capital gains and net savings.

We measure asset characteristics, 𝐱𝑖,𝑡(𝑛), that investors would use 
to proxy for expected returns and their riskiness. These characteristics 
include the market-to-book value of equity and the yields on short-
term and long-term debt. We use yields on 3-month government debt 
to  capture  the  yield  on  short-term  debt,  and  the  yield  on  10-year 
government debt for long-term debt. The issuer country characteristics 
are its log GDP, log population, trade network centrality (Richmond, 
2016), sovereign default risk, volatility, real exchange rate, and in-
flation. Bilateral characteristics are import and export exposures and 
distance.7 We also include fixed effects for domestic investment, U.S. 
issuer, investor country, and year.

Our sample runs from 2002 to 2021, and consists of 21 investor 
regions and 29 issuer countries. We pool EMU countries into a single 
investor region due to the complexity of attributing EMU investments 
to specific origins (Beck et al., 2023). Holdings in issuer countries for 
which we do not observe a complete panel of characteristics and asset 
price data are aggregated into an ‘‘outside’’ asset.

1.3. Estimation and identification

We now describe how we estimate investors’ demand curves. Eqs.

(2) and (3) imply 
( 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|𝓁)
𝑤𝑖,𝑡(0|𝓁)

log

)

= 𝛽𝓁𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) + 𝜽′

𝓁𝐱𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) + 𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁).

(9)

This  equation  determines  the  within-asset-class  demand,  which  we 
estimate separately for each asset class 𝓁. We obtain the estimation 
equation for cross-asset-class demand by dividing Eq. (6) for short-term 
(𝓁 = 1) and long-term debt (𝓁 = 2) by the equation for equity (𝓁 = 3):

log

)

( 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝓁)
𝑤𝑖,𝑡(3)

(

= 𝜆𝓁 log

1 +

)

𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

(

− 𝜆3 log

1 +

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

)

𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 3)

+ 𝛼𝓁 + 𝜉𝑖,𝑡(𝓁).

(10)

The main challenge to estimating Eqs. (9) and (10) is that expected 
returns may be endogenous to latent demand. Consider the estimation 
of the within-asset-class demand curves, Eq. (9). By construction, latent 
demand  is  any  residual  variation  in  the  investor’s  demand  that  is 
unexplained by expected returns and the observable characteristics in 
𝑥𝑖,𝑡(𝑛). If investors have high latent demand for a particular issuer’s asset 
due to some unobservable asset characteristic, the price of this asset 
will be higher. This higher price will impact the asset’s expected return 
and bias the estimated coefficient on expected returns, 𝛽𝓁, due to the 
correlation between the regressor, 𝜇𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), and the residual, 𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁). 
Similarly, for the cross-asset-class demand curves in Eq.  (10) — if a 
particular asset class has high latent demand, this will increase the price 
of this asset class and potentially bias the estimation since the inclusive 
value, 1 + ∑𝑁

𝑛=1 𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), contains the price.

We address this identification problem in two ways. First, we em-
ploy an instrumental variables approach for cross-sectional differences 
in country-level expected returns for Eq.  (9) and asset-class level de-
sirabilities for Eq.  (10). We construct these instruments for the en-
dogenous components of both estimation equations by building on the 
identification strategy in Koijen and Yogo (2024). Second, we conduct 

6 Pegged exchange rates (CHN, HKG, DNK) are cleared by assuming that the 
country’s central bank maintains the peg by adjusting the supply of short-term 
debt.

7 Lustig and Richmond (2020) show how the factor structure in exchange 
rates is related to measures of distance, which may arise due to their relation 
with portfolio flows as shown in this paper. Bailey et al. (2021) show how 
social distance between countries influences global trade patterns.

5 

Z. Jiang et al.

sensitivity analysis in Section 2.4 where we vary the elasticities across a 
range of plausible values from the literature and study how this affects 
our key findings.

The baseline identifying assumption which we use is that asset char-
acteristics, asset supply, and investment in outside assets are exogenous 
to latent demand: 

[

E

𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)
𝜉𝑖,𝑡(𝓁)

|
|
|
|
|

]

𝐱𝑡, 𝐐𝑡, 𝐎𝑡

= 𝟎.

(11)

In this equation, 𝐱𝑡 is a matrix of characteristics for all countries, 𝐐𝑡
is the vector of asset supplies, and 𝐎𝑡 is the vector of holdings of 
outside assets. The identification approach uses the exogeneity of asset 
characteristics, supply, and investor wealth to construct instruments 
for  prices.  We  can  use  the  instruments  for  prices  when  estimating 
the within-asset-class demand curve, because expected returns are a 
function of prices.

The  instruments  we  construct  are  counterfactual  prices,  accord-
ing to our model, under the assumption that investor portfolios are 
determined  solely  by  the  exogenous  characteristics  and  not  by  ex-
pected returns. These instruments are simply non-linear functions of 
the exogenous variables. The identification strategy draws on a large 
industrial organization literature that (i) models demand as a linear 
function of a product’s characteristics and then (ii) uses characteristics 
of competing products as instruments (Reiss and Wolak, 2007). More 
recently, Gandhi and Houde (2020) argue that using characteristics of 
competing products as instruments in demand estimation provides a 
class of strong instruments as long as the characteristics provide an 
exogenous degree of product differentiation. We also note that, since 
the instruments which we construct are non-linear functions of the 
conditioning variables in Eq.  (11), they will not be correlated with 
latent demand itself. This is because latent demand is any residual 
variation in demand after controlling the observable characteristics.

Details of the Estimation Procedure. We now turn to the de-
tails of the estimation procedure, proceeding in four steps. First, we 
construct a set of exogenous asset weights which are log-linear com-
binations of exogenous characteristics. Second, we aggregate the ex-
ogenous  asset  weights  to  the  asset-class  level,  which  generates  in-
struments for estimating the cross-asset-class demand equation. Third, 
after estimating the cross-asset-class demand equation, we construct 
a  set  of  hypothetical  portfolio  weights  under  the  assumption  that 
investor countries’ portfolio weights are entirely functions of the ex-
ogenous characteristics. Finally, we construct instruments for exchange 
rates and prices using market clearing with the exogenous component 
of portfolio weights. We then use these instruments to estimate the 
within-asset-class demand curves.

We begin by constructing exogenous portfolio weights by estimating 
a version of the within-asset-class demand which omits the endogenous 
expected returns: 
( 𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)
𝑤𝑖,𝑡(0, 𝓁)

𝓁𝐱𝑖,𝑡(𝑛) + 𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁).

= 𝜽′

(12)

log

)

For simplicity, we use the following characteristics: bilateral distance 
between countries, issuer country population, an own country dummy, 
and investor fixed effects.8 By including investor fixed effects we con-
trol for the cross-sectional variation in investor’s weights in the outside 
asset, which uses the assumption that outside asset holdings are ex-
ogenous. We use the exponential of the predicted values from (12) to 
construct predicted desirabilities,  ̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), which are functions of the 
exogenous characteristics.

8 While distance and population are clearly exogenous in this setting, it is 
possible that a characteristic like GDP, which is included in the final demand 
curve estimate, is endogenous to asset prices. To alleviate this concern, Jiang 
et al. (2022) show that endogenizing GDP does not substantially impact the 
demand elasticity estimates.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Next, we estimate the cross-asset-class demand curves. To estimate 
the  parameters  governing  the  elasticity  of  substitution  across  asset 
classes, 𝜆𝓁, we need exogenous variation in the overall desirability of 
each asset class. We compute instruments for the overall asset level de-
sirabilities in Eq.  (10) by aggregating the exogenous asset desirabilities, 
̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁):

1 +

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁).

Using this instrument, we are able to identify the parameters in the 
cross-asset-class demand curve, Eq. (10).

The full estimates for Eq.  (10) are reported in Appendix B.2 and 
Table A5. We note that all 𝜆𝓁 values are between 0 and 1, which implies 
that there is some substitution between asset classes when the relative 
value of an asset class varies. This is in contrast to the case when 𝜆𝓁 = 0, 
in which the allocations across asset classes are independent of the 
relative desirabilities of individual assets. When 𝜆𝓁 = 1, the substitution 
between asset classes only depends on the desirabilities of individual 
issuer countries’ assets, and the demand system collapses to one tier.

The next step is to estimate the within-asset-class demand curves, 
as given by Eq.  (9). To do so, we use the estimated cross-asset demand 
parameters, the exogenous desirabilities, and market clearing to con-
struct instruments for prices and exchange rates. Given exogenous asset 
desirabilities ̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), and estimated cross-asset demand parameters, ̂𝜆𝓁
and ̂𝛼𝓁, we compute the model-implied portfolio weights: 

̂𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) =

̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)

1 + ∑𝑁
𝑛=1

̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)

) ̂𝜆𝓁

̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)

exp

)

( ̂𝛼𝓁

(
1 + ∑𝑁
𝑛=1
((

∑3

𝑚=1

1 + ∑𝑁
𝑛=1

) ̂𝜆𝑚

̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝑚)

exp

( ̂𝛼𝑚

) .
)

(13)

These constructed weights are exogenous to latent demand and are 
calculated using Eqs. (1), (2), (3), and (6) using the exogenous as-
set desirabilities. These weights can be thought of as counterfactual 
portfolio weights for issuer country 𝑛’s asset in class 𝓁 if portfolios 
were  determined  by  the  distance  between  countries,  issuer  country 
population, and home bias. We also note that the characteristics of 
all countries enter into these model implied portfolio weights, which 
is the result of the term 1 + ∑𝑁
̂𝛿𝑖,𝑡(𝑘, 𝓁) summing over all of the 
𝑘=1
exogenous desirabilities. As a result, our instruments are a non-linear 
function of all issuer country’s characteristics, based upon the structure 
of our model. These instruments are in the spirit of a large literature in 
industrial organization that uses characteristics of competing products 
to instrument for a given product price (Reiss and Wolak, 2007; Gandhi 
and Houde, 2020). Therefore, our instruments still remain valid, despite 
the fact that we control for each issuer country’s characteristics in the 
estimation of investor countries’ demand curves.

Given these exogenous portfolio weights, we use the market clearing 
Eq. (8) to calculate implied asset prices and exchange rates, which 
we then use as instruments to estimate the within-asset-class demand 
curve. Specifically, we assume each investor country’s total assets under 
management is

̂𝐴𝑖,𝑡 =

𝑂𝑖,𝑡
∑𝑁
𝑚=1 ̂𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑚, 𝑘)

,

1 − ∑3

𝑘=1

where 𝑂𝑖,𝑡 is investor 𝑖’s total investment into outside assets.

Market clearing in the short-term debt market yields our instru-

ments for exchange rates:

̂𝐸𝑡(𝑛) =

1
𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 1)

𝑁
∑

𝑖=1

̂𝐴𝑖,𝑡 ̂𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁).

There are two things to note about this equation. First, in our instru-
ment construction, we assume that supply and the levels of outside 

6 

Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

assets are exogenous.9 Second, we omit price-to-book ratios in this 
specific market clearing equation as we are taking short-term interest 
rates as determined by countries’ monetary policy — for example by 
following a Taylor rule.

direction for future research is to fully endogenize model elements like 
asset supply, monetary policy, and reserves policy in order to jointly 
study asset demand and the production side of the global economy.

We use the instruments for exchange rates and market clearing in 
long-term bonds and equities to derive our instruments for prices of 
equity and long-term debt:
𝑁
∑

̂𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) =

1
̂𝐸𝑡(𝑛) ̂𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)

𝑖=1

̂𝐴𝑖,𝑡 ̂𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁).

This procedure identifies differences in prices and, therefore, expected 
returns that arise due to the fact that asset prices are higher in coun-
tries  that  are  geographically  closer  to  large  investor  countries,  and 
to countries that tend to issue fewer assets. In this way, we obtain 
instruments  for  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices,  which  we  use  to 
identify the within-asset-class demand curve, Eq. (9). For short-term 
debt, we instrument expected returns with  ̂𝐸𝑡(𝑛). For long-term debt 
and equity we instrument expected returns with  ̂𝐸𝑡(𝑛) and  ̂𝑃𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) for 
𝓁 = 2, 3.

The  full  estimates  for  within-asset-class  demand  curves  are  pre-
sented in Appendix Table A6. Here we discuss the key implications of 
these estimates. First, our estimates imply average demand elasticities 
of 313 for short-term debt, 4.3 for long-term debt, and 2.7 for equities.10 
Second, conditional on price and other characteristics, investor coun-
tries have a large home bias. Third, investors have a higher preference 
for debt issued by the U.S. and for countries with higher GDPs. This tilt 
of investor demand towards U.S. assets has significant implications for 
variation in the U.S. dollar, which we detail in the next section.

Discussion of assumptions and identification. To estimate the 
demand system and to use it to study the dollar, we need to make 
a  number  of  assumptions.  First,  the  above  identification  procedure 
imposed time fixed effects and used cross-sectional variation to identify 
the price elasticity of demand. As a result, the identified elasticities 
measure how investors substitute across countries in response to cross-
sectional variations to asset prices. We make the assumption that these 
price elasticities also measure substitution patterns in response to time-
series shocks to prices. One important example that is absorbed by the 
time-fixed effects in our estimation would be an aggregate global sav-
ings glut. Our assumption is that demand responses to this type of shock 
will be governed by the elasticities which we identify cross-sectionally. 
In equities, there is an emerging literature which is making progress 
on  the  measurement  of  price  elasticities  with  respect  to  aggregate 
equity market shocks (Gabaix and Koijen, 2021). Given this emerging 
literature, we hope that future work can make further progress on the 
identification and measurement of elasticities in international financial 
markets and for exchange rates in particular.

Second,  we  assume  in  our  decompositions  that  asset  supply  is 
exogenous and does not respond to prices. For example, the savings glut 
mentioned above has been used in narratives to explain the large is-
suance of MBS issuance prior to the global financial crisis. An important 

9 A substantial portion of the variation in both supply and assets is a func-
tion of country-level populations, which are likely to have been determined 
long before asset prices. It is possible to obtain exogenous cross-sectional 
variation in both supply and assets under management using country-level 
population (see Jiang et al., 2022). Using this exogenous variation in the 
instrument construction does not significantly alter estimated cross-sectional 
elasticities.
10 Appendix B.4 discusses the details of this conversion. These numbers are 
comparable to those found in Koijen and Yogo (2024) and Jiang et al. (2022), 
which also presents a number of variants on this estimation methodology and 
finds similar estimates. For short-term debt with a maturity of 3 months, this 
elasticity implies that a 1% increase in annualized yield increases demand for 
short-term debt by 78%. For long-term debt with a maturity of 10 years this 
demand elasticity implies that a 1% increase in annualized yield increases 
demand for long-term debt by 43%.

2. A decomposition of dollar exchange rates

In this section, we use our estimated demand system to provide 
a  model-based  decomposition  of  key  moments  of  U.S.  dollar-based 
exchange rates. We take savings, asset supply, and monetary policy 
as exogenous primitives, and trace out how these forces explain the 
dollar’s  dynamics  through  market  clearing  in  global  asset  markets. 
Specifically, we use the model to provide a decomposition from 2002 
to 2021 of the dollar’s strength versus other currencies, the variance 
of the dollar factor, and its covariance with other major currencies. 
We describe our decomposition methodology in Section 2.1, and then 
present the main results in Section 2.2 and Section 2.3. We present 
robustness in Section 2.4 where we study how our results vary with 
the underlying demand elasticities in the model.

2.1. Decomposition overview

We decompose changes in exchange rates between year 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡
by first setting all primitive exogenous variables in our model to their 
values in year 𝑡 − 1. We refer to this equilibrium as the baseline step and 
index it with 𝑗 = 1. By construction, the exogenous and endogenous 
variables, including exchange rates, in the baseline step are simply their 
𝑡 − 1 values. We then sequentially restore each primitive variable to its 
year-𝑡 value, and recompute exchange rates at each step using market 
clearing.11 At each step 𝑗 we denote the equilibrium dollar exchange 
rate for country 𝑛 by 𝐸𝑗
𝑡 (𝑛). After restoring all primitive variables, we 
arrive  at  the  actual  observed  year-𝑡  values  for  the  variables  in  the 
system, which we refer to as the observed step (𝑗 = 𝐽 ). In this manner, 
we attribute variation in exchange rates to the observed changes in 
the primitive variables. By construction, our model attributes 100% of 
the variation in exchange rates to the primitive exogenous variables, so 
any predictability of these variables implies predictability of exchange 
rates in the demand system. We use this decomposition of dollar-based 
exchange rates to study the level of the dollar AFE index, variance 
of the dollar factor, and covariance of exchange rates with the dollar 
factor in the following section.

Before  reporting  the  decomposition  results,  we  describe  the  se-
quence  of  steps  we  use.  Our  labeling  of  the  primitive  variables  is 
motivated by various literatures that study the drivers of exchange rate 
movements and international capital flows. Broadly, these variables 
measure (1) investor savings and asset issuances, (2) monetary policies, 
and (3) shifts in investor demand and asset characteristics.

Savings and issuances.  We start by measuring the contribution of in-
vestors’ net savings, 𝐹𝑖,𝑡, and asset issuances, 𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), in various ge-
ographic regions. In each step, we restore investors’ savings and is-
suances simultaneously for a given geographic region. In doing so, we 
are able to study the effects of the excess savings that are not satiated 
by local investment opportunities (i.e. savings gluts, Bernanke, 2005).
When we restore changes in investor savings from year to year, 
these  additional  assets  under  management  are  allocated  according 
to  the  investors’  existing  demand  curves.  Thus,  the  savings  and  is-
suances component also informs us about how much of variation in 
the dollar is explained by the more permanent, unconditional country 
characteristics.

11 Appendix B.3 provides computational details.

7 

Z. Jiang et al.

Monetary  policies.  Next,  we  account  for  two  forms  of  central  bank 
monetary policies: (i) reserve accumulation and (ii) changes in nominal 
short-term interest rates. Reserve accumulation includes both official 
reserve holdings, which are each country’s central bank holdings of 
foreign assets, and U.S. quantitative easing, which is the U.S. central 
bank’s holdings of its domestic assets. We split these two forms of 
monetary policies into two separate blocks.

Demand shifts.  Finally, we restore changes in variables that shift in-
vestors’  asset  demand  curves  year  by  year.  These  variables  include 
country characteristics 𝐱𝑖,𝑡(𝑛), within-asset-class latent demand 𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁), 
and  across-asset-class  latent  demand  𝜉𝑖,𝑡(𝓁).  This  step  accounts  for 
changes in the relative desirability of assets that arise from changes 
in country asset fundamentals (such as economic growth), as well as 
changes in the taste for assets and asset classes that are not captured 
by observed characteristics (latent demand).

Cross-border bank loans and deposits.  After presenting our main decom-
position of the impact of portfolio flows on the dollar AFE index, we 
augment our analysis with cross-border bank balance sheet data and 
study the impact of cross-border bank flows. We do not include the 
analysis of the banking flows in the main analysis, because the bank 
balance sheet data is limited to a shorter sample. We provide details of 
how we account for bank holdings data at the end of Section 2.2.

2.2. Decomposition of the strength of the dollar

We begin by studying the model-based decomposition of the level of 
dollar exchange rate over the last two decades. We report cumulative 
log  changes  in  the  dollar  advanced  foreign  economy  (AFE)  index, 
denoted by 𝛥𝑒𝑡, at each step of the decomposition. The dollar AFE index 
weights are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) and our 
weighting scheme follows that of the FRB. While our main results focus 
on the dollar AFE index; we also provide a decomposition of the dollar 
emerging economy (EME) index in Appendix section B.5.

𝑡  denote the difference in the log of the implied dollar index 

𝑡

.

𝑡 = 𝑒𝑗

between the (𝑗 − 1)-th decomposition step and the 𝑗th step: 
𝛥𝑒𝑗

𝑡 − 𝑒𝑗−1
The sum of 𝛥𝑒𝑗
dollar in period 𝑡: ∑𝐽
contribution over various sub-periods (e.g. 2002–2007): 

𝑡  across all 𝐽 steps is equal to the actual log change in the 
𝑡 = 𝛥𝑒𝑡. We aggregate each step’s incremental 

𝑗=1 𝛥𝑒𝑗

(14)

Let 𝛥𝑒𝑗

𝛥𝑒𝑗 =

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑡 .

(15)

We also present results for individual countries’ exchange rates vis-à-vis 
the dollar using the same methodology.

We present our decomposition in Fig.  1. We split our 2002–2021 
sample into 4 sub-periods: the pre-crisis period (2002–2007), the Global 
Financial Crisis part 1 (2008) and part 2 (2009), and the post-crisis 
period (2010–2021). The dollar AFE index depreciated by 31.7% in the 
pre-crisis period, appreciated by 9.3% in 2008, depreciated by 7.4% in 
2009, and appreciated by 19.3% in the post-crisis period.

The bottom panel of Fig.  1 attributes dollar exchange rate move-
ments to four blocks of primitive variables: Investor savings and asset 
issuances, reserve accumulation, monetary policy rates, and shifts in 
investor demand. We also report these results numerically in Table  1, 
along with additional breakdowns within each block. Based on these 
results, we describe how each set of variables contributed to the dollar’s 
exchange rate movement over time.

Savings and issuances.  Starting with the block capturing investor sav-
ings and asset issuances, we find that savings and issuances explain 
notable dollar depreciation before the financial crisis, but these factors 
explain  dollar  appreciation  during  and  after  the  crisis.  Recall  that 
changes in investor savings between year 𝑡 − 1 and year 𝑡 are allocated 
towards different countries based on the year 𝑡 − 1 demand curves. 

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Table 1
Decomposition of dollar AFE index.
Pre-Crisis

2002–2007

Crisis

2008

2009

Post-Crisis
2010–2021 

5.8
0.2
6.1

7.7
6.0
13.7

3.4
−0.3
3.0

−9.9
−0.7
−10.6

0.1
0.1
−1.5
−1.3

0.1
−0.0
−0.7
−0.7

−3.2
0.0
−0.4
−3.5

−4.7
0.0
−1.3
−6.0

  Savings and Issuances
    DM Savings
    EM Savings
    Total Savings
  Monetary Policies (Reserves)
    US Reserves
    DM Reserves
    EM Reserves
    Total Reserves
  Monetary Policies (Rates)
    US Rates
    EM/DM Rates
    Total Rates
  Demand Shifts
    DM Demand
    EM Demand
    Total Demand
  Total
Notes: This table presents a detailed decomposition of the dollar AFE index over the four 
sub-periods of our analysis. All numbers represent the dollar’s exchange rate movement 
in percentage units. We group the economic factors explaining dollar appreciation into 
four blocks — the last row within each block presents the contribution of all variables 
within that block. The last row of the table presents the aggregate dollar appreciation 
(e.g., the dollar appreciated 19.3 percent against the trade-weighted basked of AFE 
currencies between 2010 and 2021). ‘‘DM’’ refers to the developed market economies 
and ‘‘EM’’ refers to the emerging market economies.

−24.6
−0.2
−24.8

−1.4
2.3
0.9

−5.9
0.6
−5.3

−5.4
4.8
−0.7

−9.5
7.9
−1.6

10.8
−5.7
5.1

9.2
1.5
10.7

3.9
0.7
4.6

−31.7

−7.4

19.3

9.3

Shifts in the contribution of savings and issuances to the dollar AFE 
index often capture changes in the savings rates of different countries. 
Thus, to understand the shift in the explanatory power of savings and 
issuances, we plot the contributions of the savings and issuances of 
individual regions in Fig.  2.

Over the full sample period, the U.S. consistently issued more finan-
cial assets than it saved. This increasing asset supply generates a decline 
in the prices of U.S. financial assets, which attracted foreign investors to 
allocate their wealth towards U.S. issued assets. Global investor demand 
for U.S. assets is particularly strong given the unique characteristics 
U.S. financial assets (e.g., that they are often safer and more liquid than 
assets issued elsewhere). These capital flows towards U.S. assets led to 
U.S. dollar appreciation over all four periods. In this way, our model 
consistently attributes dollar appreciation to the observed changes in 
U.S. investor savings and U.S. issuances.

By contrast, foreign countries’ savings and issuances explain differ-
ent dollar AFE index behaviors before and after the crisis, with Europe 
demonstrating a particularly stark shift. This change in the role of Eu-
ropean savings and issuances largely accounts for the time variation in 
the aggregate contribution of the savings and issuances block to dollar 
exchange rates. Prior to the crisis, Europe had high savings relative to 
their issuance. Given that investors exhibit home bias in their demand 
curve, high European savings rates generated high demand for euro-
denominated short-term debt. This high demand for euro-denominated 
financial assets accounts for dollar depreciation against the euro. After 
the Global Financial Crisis, the European sovereign debt crisis had a 
substantial  and  volatile  impact  on  European  savings  and  issuances, 
which, on average, led to little impact on the dollar/euro exchange rate. 
Consistent with this observation, Fig.  2 shows that European savings 
and issuances contributed to dollar depreciation before the crisis, but 
had little impact on the dollar after the crisis.

In Table  1, we also split investor savings and asset issuances into 
those  coming  from  developed  markets  (DM)  and  emerging  markets 
(EM)  and  find  that  the  savings  and  issuances  of  developed  market 
economies always explain more of the variation in dollar exchange 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Z. Jiang et al.

Fig. 2.  Decomposition of Savings and Issuances Contribution to Dollar AFE Index By 
Regions
Notes: This figure presents the contribution of the savings and issuances from specific 
currency regions to the dollar AFE index over the four sub-periods of our analysis.

rates when compared to emerging market economies. Emerging mar-
kets only became relevant in the post-crisis sample, in which they con-
tributed almost 50% of the total effect of savings and issuances in this 
sub-period. Consistent with this observation, Fig.  2 shows that Chinese 
savings and issuances started to have an impact on the appreciation of 
the dollar AFE index after the crisis.

Central bank reserves.  Fig.  1 shows central banks’ reserve accumulation 
account for moderate dollar depreciation during and after the financial 
crisis, but only had a minor role before the crisis. The reserves com-
ponent of the post-crisis dollar depreciation was predominantly driven 
by the Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing (QE), which increased the 
price of U.S. long-term debt assets. As a result, private investors within 
our model substituted away from holding U.S. financial assets, leading 
to a depreciation of the U.S. dollar. In this way, quantitative easing 
behaves like a negative issuance shock to the U.S. assets. This result 
is consistent with recent exchange rate theories, which show that the 
quantitative easing can lower the local bond yield and depreciate the 
local currency by making the local bond less attractive (Gourinchas 
et al., 2022; Greenwood et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024).

Monetary policy rates.  Monetary policy rates explain dollar apprecia-
tion before the crisis, but they played a minor role during and after the 
crisis. This is because the U.S. policy rate increased more than foreign 
policy rates before the crisis, whereas the U.S. and foreign rates tended 
to converge during and after the crisis.

However, this does not mean that U.S. policy rates had no effect on 
dollar exchange rates from one year to the next. The top-left panel of 
Fig.  3 plots the change in the U.S. monetary policy rate in each year 
against the model-implied dollar exchange rate movement attributed 
to the policy rate change alone. Increases in U.S. monetary policy rates 
relative foreign policy rates appreciate the dollar, because higher U.S. 
interest rates make U.S. assets more attractive to foreign investors and 
attract inflows to the U.S. The model implies an almost perfect relation-
ship, suggesting that a 1 pp rate hike leads to an approximately 3.3% 
dollar exchange rate movement. Notably, our model-implied dollar re-
sponse is consistent with research using a high-frequency identification 

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

strategy which also shows that the dollar appreciates around 3% against 
the basket of trade-weighted AFE currencies in response to a 1 pp U.S. 
monetary policy shock (Curcuru et al., 2017).

Thus, changes in the U.S. policy rate account for dollar appreciation 
from 2010 to 2018 and dollar depreciation from 2018 to 2021, which 
is consistent with the U.S. rate rising faster in the early part of the post-
crisis period and being caught up by the foreign rates in the later part of 
the post-crisis period. We present this pattern more clearly in Appendix 
Figure A3 where we report the decomposition year-by-year.

Demand shifts.  The role of investor demand shifts has the most dynamic 
pattern according to our model. Changes in demand curves explain 
dollar depreciation before the crisis, dollar appreciation in 2008, dollar 
depreciation in 2009, and finally dollar appreciation after the crisis. 
Most of these demand shifts were driven by developed market (DM) 
investors, as we would expect given their large shares in the global 
distribution of financial wealth.

Specifically, our decomposition attributes the dollar depreciation 
before the crisis to a strong demand for foreign assets in this ‘‘risk-on’’ 
period, which is consistent with large capital flows into riskier assets 
in foreign countries (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2022). This trend 
reversed when the global financial crisis hit in 2008, when a strong 
flight-to-safety motive led to dollar appreciation. This strong demand 
for safety was relatively short-lived. As the panic subsided in 2009, 
dollar  exchange  rates  reverted.  In  these  three  sub-periods,  demand 
shifts played a major role in the dollar’s exchange rate movements, 
and the direction of their contribution was consistent with that of the 
overall movement in the dollar index.

Finally,  the  dollar  appreciated  after  the  crisis,  even  though  this 
period was characterized by relatively high asset prices and risk ap-
petites. This pattern, which is very different from the demand shifts 
in the pre-crisis period, is explained by an increase in demand for 
U.S. risky assets (Atkeson et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2022). Specifically, 
as U.S. risky assets became more attractive to foreign investors, the 
U.S. experienced capital inflows which appreciated the dollar, even in 
good times. This pattern is very different from the traditional view of 
the dollar as the safe haven currency. In other words, the preference 
for U.S. assets over foreign assets dominated the preference for risky 
currencies over safe currencies in this period, which was characterized 
by high asset prices and high risk appetites.

Fig.  3 presents model-implied exchange rate movement attributed 
to shifts in U.S. and foreign investor demand from one year to further 
clarify how changes in demand explain dollar exchange rates. In the 
top-right panel of Fig.  3, we plot shifts in the U.S. investors’ demand 
for advanced foreign economies’ assets against the model-implied dollar 
exchange rate movements. In the bottom-left panel, we plot the shifts 
in  the  advanced  foreign  economies’  demand  for  U.S.  assets  against 
the  implied  dollar  exchange  rate  movements.  As  expected,  weaker 
U.S. demand for foreign assets explains a depreciation of foreign cur-
rencies and therefore an appreciation of the dollar, whereas stronger 
foreign demand for U.S. assets explains dollar appreciation. Notably, 
in the post-crisis period, U.S. demand shifted away from foreign assets 
while foreign demand shifted towards U.S. assets. Both demand shifts 
contributed to the dollar appreciation in this period.

Cross-border bank loans and deposits.  For some countries, cross-border 
loans and deposits in banking sector can account for a large share of 
their external positions. Similar to the cross-border portfolio flows we 
study above, they can also be an important determinant of exchange 
rates. Unfortunately, the data on cross-border bank loans are not as 
complete as the data on portfolio flows, as data coverage is sparse 
before 2010. Thus, in this section, we evaluate the role of bank lending 
in explaining the long-run trend of dollar appreciation from 2010 to 
2021.

We obtain cross-border bank assets and liabilities denominated in 
various  currencies  for  as  many  countries  as  possible  from  the  BIS 
International Banking Statistics. For the most part, these bank loan 

Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Fig. 3.  Dollar AFE Index Appreciation Mechanisms
Notes: This figure presents the various mechanisms captured by our framework that jointly explain movements in the dollar AFE index. In each panel, we plot changes in the dollar 
computed within our model (y-axis) against changes in various data inputs (x-axis). The top-left panel presents dollar appreciation explained by changes in the U.S. short-term 
interest rate. The top-right panel presents dollar appreciation explained by shifts in U.S. investor demand towards AFE financial assets, and the bottom-left panel presents dollar 
appreciation explained by shifts in AFE investor demand towards U.S. financial assets. The 𝑦-axis is in percentage points.

data are provided at face value, and we therefore treat the data as 
measurements of the quantities of loans supplied and demanded rather 
than market values. We classify the asset classes of the loans based on 
their destination sectors: we assume that the loans to banks are short-
term debt and are cleared with other short-term debt assets, and we 
assume that the loans to non-banks are long-term debt and are cleared 
with other long-term debt assets.

We allocate assets and liabilities to destination countries based on 
the loans’ currency of denomination. For example, loans that are made 
in U.S. dollars are cleared with other debt assets issued by the U.S. 
Although  the  BIS  does  provide  bilateral  banking  statistics,  the  vast 
majority of loans are made in very few currencies, and we believe 
this treatment of the data provides a more accurate accounting of the 
demand for currencies across countries.

In our model, we add the net external position of each country’s 

banking sector to the market clearing condition (8): 

𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)𝐸𝑡(𝑛)𝑄𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) =

𝑁
∑

𝑖=1

𝐴𝑖,𝑡𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝓁)𝑤𝑖,𝑡(𝑛|𝓁) + 𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)𝐸𝑡(𝑛)

+ 𝑃 𝐵𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)𝐸𝑡(𝑛)

𝑁
∑

𝑖=1
𝑁
∑

𝑖=0

𝐵𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)

̃𝐵𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁),

(16)

where  ̃𝐵𝑖,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁)  represents  the  net  external  position  of  the  banking 
sector  of  country  𝑖  denominated  in  the  currency  of  country  𝑛.  We 
further add an ‘‘outside’’ country represented by ̃𝐵0,𝑡(𝑛, 𝓁) that nets out 
the aggregate external positions of all banks in the BIS data in order 
for Eq. (16) to hold in equilibrium.

10 

Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Table 2
Decomposition of variance of dollar factor.

Share of variance 

0.40
−0.05
0.36

0.02
0.00
0.00
0.02

  Savings and Issuances
    DM Savings
    EM Savings
    Total Savings
  Monetary Policies (Reserves)
    US Reserves
    DM Reserves
    EM Reserves
    Total Reserves
  Monetary Policies (Rates)
    US Rates
    EM/DM Rates
    Total Rates
  Demand Shifts
    DM Demand
    EM Demand
    Total Demand
Notes: This table presents a detailed decomposition of the variance of the dollar factor. 
We follow Verdelhan (2018) to define the dollar factor 𝛥𝑒𝑡 as the equal-weighted 
average of the dollar exchange rate movements against the currencies of both advanced 
foreign economies (AFE) and emerging market economies (EME). All numbers are in 
percentage units. We group economic factors into four blocks — the last row within 
each block presents the contribution of all variables within that block. The sum of 
the last rows of each block equals 100 percent. ‘‘DM’’ refers to the developed market 
economies and ‘‘EM’’ refers to the emerging market economies.

0.42
0.13
0.55

0.06
0.01
0.07

2.3. Decomposition of the Dollar’s variance and factor loadings

Up until this point, we used our model to study changes in the level 
of the dollar, which was motivated by its historic rise in the decade 
following the Global Financial Crisis. In this section, we study features 
of the U.S. dollar that relate to its importance in international asset 
pricing.

The dollar is particularly important in the foreign exchange markets 
because its systematic variation explains a substantial portion of the 
variation in other currencies (Verdelhan, 2018). Given this, we study 
two key questions: First, what drives the systematic variation in the 
dollar? Second, what explains the heterogeneous exposures that differ-
ent foreign currencies have on this systematic variation in the dollar? 
To study these questions, we follow Lustig et al. (2011) and Verdelhan 
(2018) and define the dollar factor 𝛥𝑒𝑡 as the equal-weighted average 
of the dollar exchange rate movements against the currencies of both 
advanced foreign economies (AFE) and emerging market economies 
(EME).

Dollar variance.  We begin by asking which primitive variables in our 
model explain the variance of the dollar factor. Here, 𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑡  denotes the 
log change in the equal-weighted dollar factor from step 𝑗 − 1 to step 
𝑗: 𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑡  across all 𝐽 steps is equal to the 
actual dollar factor in period 𝑡: ∑
𝑡 = 𝛥𝑒𝑡. We therefore decompose 
the dollar factor’s variance as

, and the sum of 𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑗 𝛥𝑒𝑗

𝑡 − 𝑒𝑗−1

𝑡 = 𝑒𝑗

𝑡

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝛥𝑒𝑡) = 𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝛥𝑒𝑡,

∑

𝑗

𝛥𝑒𝑗

𝑡 ) =

∑

𝑗

𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝛥𝑒𝑡, 𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑡 ).

We attribute the dollar factor’s variance to the 𝐽 steps explained by 

different primitive variables:
𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝛥𝑒𝑡, 𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑡 )
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝛥𝑒𝑡)

1 =

∑

.

𝑗

By construction, the contributions of all steps sum to one. If a given 
step 𝑗 has a large contribution then variation in the primitive variables 
associated with that step generate dollar exchange rate movements that 
are aligned with the actual dollar factor.

11 

Fig. 4.  Contribution of Bank Loans to Dollar AFE Index 2010–2021
Notes: This figure presents the contribution of individual countries’ bank flows to 
changes in the dollar AFE index from 2010 to 2021. The 𝑦-axis values are in percentage 
points. Each bar represents the contribution of changes to a given country’s net external 
loan position to the dollar AFE index over the 2010 to 2021 period. The countries 
explicitly shown are the ones with the largest contributions over the sample period. 
The ‘‘ROW’’ bar captures the aggregate impact of banking sectors of countries not 
explicitly shown.

In our counterfactual analysis, we treat the banking sector’s net 
external  positions  like  we  treat  central  bank  reserve  positions.  We 
simply reset all banking sectors’ net positions from their year 𝑡 values to 
their year 𝑡 − 1 values, and iteratively restore changes in each country’s 
banking sector net external position to evaluate its impact on the dollar 
AFE index.

Fig.  4 shows the contribution of changes in the net positions of 
countries’ banking sectors on the dollar AFE index from 2010 to 2021. 
Strikingly,  the  aggregate  impact  of  the  changes  in  banking  sector 
positions are relatively small. For example, changes in the net external 
positions of the German banking sector only explain around 2.5 percent 
appreciation  of  the  dollar  AFE  index  over  the  sample  period.  The 
contribution of most countries’ banking sectors is less than 1 percent. 
These numbers are small relative to the 19.3 percent dollar apprecia-
tion relative to the trade-weighted basket of AFE currencies over this
period.

The main reason for the lack of long-term explanatory power of 
banking sector flows on the dollar is because the banking sector’s posi-
tions tend to mean-revert. Fig.  5 shows the contribution of individual 
countries’ banking positions to the dollar AFE index year by year. For 
any given country, changes in bank external positions tend to explain 
dollar appreciation in one year and dollar depreciation in the following 
year, indicating that changes in external positions tend to fluctuate 
around long-run averages in the data. Thus, when we aggregate these 
contributions up over the full sample period, the overall effects tend to 
be small.

To conclude, these results do not imply that banking sector flows 
do not impact exchange rates in any single year. Instead, changes in 
banking sector net external positions seem to revolve around their long-
run averages and therefore do not have a large aggregate effect over 
time.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Fig. 5.  Contribution of Bank Loans to Dollar AFE Index By Year
Notes: This figure presents the contribution of individual countries’ bank flows to changes in the dollar AFE index year-by-year over the period 2010 to 2021. The 𝑦-axis values 
are in percent.

Table  2 reports the results of this decomposition. The salient feature 
of this decomposition is that savings and issuances (from developed 
markets in particular) and investor demand account for the largest 
shares of the dollar factor’s variance over time. Monetary policy rates 
and reserve accumulation play a relatively minor role. Therefore, global 
investor’s savings and demand shocks contribute to not only the long-
term trend in the dollar exchange rate, but also the short-term variation 
in the dollar factor.

Dollar  betas.  Next,  we  study  which  primitive  variables  account  for 
foreign currencies’ exposures to the dollar factor, as well as to the 
dispersion in these exposures. In Panel A of Table  3, we regress log 
changes in dollar-based exchange rates on the dollar factor and report 
the slope coefficient and the R-squared.12 As Verdelhan (2018) shows, 
there is substantial heterogeneity in the loadings and R-squared values, 
even  across  developed  markets.  Furthermore,  Lustig  and  Richmond 
(2020) show that variation in these dollar factor loadings are related 
to measures of physical and cultural distance between countries. For 
example, while Japan has a dollar beta of 0.18, Australia has a dollar 
beta  of  1.97.  As  a  result,  when  the  dollar  factor  strengthens,  the 
Japanese yen also tends to appreciate against the Australian dollar. 
In this sense, the dollar factor also explains bilateral exchange rate 
movements between two foreign currencies.

We use our model’s decomposition to shed light on the origins of 
this heterogeneity in dollar betas. The dollar beta for a given exchange 
rate is defined as the slope coefficient in the regression of each for-
eign currency’s log exchange rate change against the dollar 𝛥𝑒𝑡(𝑛) =
𝛥 log 𝐸𝑡(𝑛) on the dollar factor 𝛥𝑒𝑡. We use 𝛥𝑒𝑗
(𝑛) to 
denote the bilateral exchange rate movement in the 𝑗th step of our 
decomposition. Then, we decompose the factor loading as
𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝛥𝑒𝑡, ∑

𝑡 (𝑛) − 𝑒𝑗−1

𝑡 (𝑛) = 𝑒𝑗

𝑡

𝑡 (𝑛))

∑

𝑡 (𝑛))

𝑗 𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝛥𝑒𝑡)

𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝛥𝑒𝑡, 𝛥𝑒𝑗
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝛥𝑒𝑡)

=

𝑗

.

𝛽(𝑛) =

𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝛥𝑒𝑡, 𝛥𝑒𝑡(𝑛))
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝛥𝑒𝑡)

=

Table 3
Decomposition of covariance with dollar factor.

Average AUS CAN CHE

DEU

GBR

JPN

1.16
0.59

1.40
0.56

0.18
0.01

1.97
0.73

1.24
0.53

  Panel A: Dollar Base Factor Regressions
    Loading
1.41
    R-squared
0.64
  Panel B: Decomposition of Dollar Factor Loadings
  Savings and Issuances
DM Savings
EM Savings
Total Savings

0.52
0.06
0.58

0.50
0.06
0.56

0.41
0.06
0.47

0.46
0.06
0.53

0.68
0.40

0.48
0.07
0.55

0.50
0.07
0.57

  Monetary Policies (Reserves)

US Reserves
DM Reserves
EM Reserves
Total Reserves
  Monetary Policies (Rates)

0.03
0.00
0.00
0.02

0.02
0.00
0.00
0.02

0.03
0.00

0.03
0.00

0.02
0.00
0.01 −0.01 −0.01 −0.01
0.03

0.02
0.00

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.06
0.12
0.18

0.05
0.22
0.27

0.09
0.05
0.15

0.03
0.33
0.36

0.04
−0.07
−0.02

0.07
0.06
0.12

0.24
0.07
0.32

0.04
0.00
0.00
0.04

0.08
0.05
0.13

SWE 

1.84 
0.82 

0.57 
0.06 
0.63 

0.02 
0.00 
0.01 
0.04 

0.05 
0.22 
0.27 

0.00

0.48
0.03
0.50

0.67
0.03
0.69

0.60
0.02
0.61

1.02
0.10
1.12

−0.30
−0.01
−0.30

0.63 −0.18
0.02
0.65 −0.17

0.89 
0.02 
0.91 
Notes:  Panel  A  presents  the  loading  of  each  currency  on  the  dollar  factor  along 
with the share of variation in the currency explained by the dollar factor. Panel B 
presents a detailed decomposition of the factor loadings. The first column presents 
the average loading of the seven major currencies in our sample on the dollar factor 
and the decomposition into the economic primitives. The remaining columns show the 
decomposition of the individual currencies. We group economic factors into four blocks 
— the last row within each block presents the contribution of all variables within that 
block. The sum of the last rows of each block equals the factor loading from Panel 
A. ‘‘DM’’ refers to the developed market economies and ‘‘EM’’ refers to the emerging 
market economies.

US Rates
EM/DM Rates
Total Rates
  Demand Shifts
DM Demand
EM Demand
Total Demand

Panel B of Table  3 reports the contribution to the factor loading 
 where the first column represents the 

at each step, i.e.,  𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝛥𝑒𝑡,𝛥𝑒𝑗

𝑡 (𝑛))

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝛥𝑒𝑡)

12 When studying the exposure of a given country’s exchange rate to the 
dollar factor, we always omit that currency in the construction of the dollar 
factor itself, including in the following decompositions.

12 

average contribution to the seven major foreign currencies we consider. 
This column shows that savings and issuances explain a loading of 
0.53 on the dollar factor on average, reserve accumulation explains an 
increase in this loading by 0.03, monetary policy rates by 0.18, and 
demand shifts by 0.50. Similar to what we learned about the dollar’s 

 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Z. Jiang et al.

strength and the dollar factor’s variance, savings and issuances and 
demand shifts most closely relate to the average loadings on the dollar 
factor.

When we focus on accounting for the cross-sectional dispersion in 
foreign currencies’ exposures to the dollar factor, the demand shifts 
stand out. The demand shifts increase the Australian dollar’s exposure 
to  the  dollar  factor  by  1.12,  but  they  decrease  the  Japanese  yen’s 
exposure to the dollar factor by 0.30. Intuitively, the demand for U.S. 
assets tends to increase during global recessions, which tend to coincide 
with  capital  outflows  from  Australia  and  capital  retrenchment  into 
Japan. As a result, when the dollar factor strengthens, the Australian 
dollar tends to depreciate against the dollar, whereas the Japanese yen 
tends to stay flat against the dollar.

Our results help to clarify potential origins of the factor structure in 
exchange rates. This factor structure has been studied under different 
theoretical frameworks such as size (Hassan, 2013), export composi-
tion (Ready et al., 2017), trade centrality (Richmond, 2016), and fiscal 
condition (Jiang, 2021). Using a more reduced-form approach, Has-
san and Mano (2019) shows the special role played by the dollar in 
understanding the currency factor structure.

Our decomposition highlights differences in which economic prim-
itives are related to the average loading on the dollar factor versus 
the cross-sectional dispersion in these loadings. Specifically, the savings 
and issuances step takes the demand curve as given, and measures 
how the exchange rate varies as investors’ saving behavior varies over 
the  business  cycle.  Our  decomposition  shows  that  this  step  largely 
explains the U.S. dollar moves against the average foreign currency. 
On the other hand, shifts in demand curves are largely responsible for 
the heterogeneity in different foreign countries’ loadings on the dollar 
factor. In this way, Table  3 shows how the static and the time-varying 
features of the asset demand curve contribute to the level and the cross-
country heterogeneity of the dollar beta. We believe this methodology 
provides a starting point for future research to clarify how components 
of the international asset demand system can explain different features 
of currency risk.

2.4. Decompositions with varying demand elasticities

In this section, we study how our findings vary as we scale the 
underlying  demand  elasticities  in  the  model.  These  results  provide 
further insight into the mechanism through which our model decompo-
sitions operate and help to alleviate potential concerns about estimation 
and identification procedure we detail in Section 1.3. To study how 
variation  in  the  underlying  demand  elasticities  impact  our  results, 
we perturb the coefficient on expected returns systematically up and 
down, and then we recompute each of our decompositions of the dollar 
AFE  index.  For  each  perturbed  coefficient  on  expected  returns,  we 
re-estimate the remaining demand curve parameters.

The top panel of Fig.  6 presents the decomposition of the dollar 
exchange rate movement under different demand elasticities, while the 
bottom panel presents corresponding coefficients on expected returns 
in the demand curves (top 3 figures) along with the implied demand 
elasticities (bottom 3 figures).13 Each bar corresponds to estimates from 
our baseline model, along with 6 alternative elasticities that are con-
sistent with the ranges found in the literature on asset demand Koijen 
and Yogo (2024), Gabaix and Koijen (2021), Jiang et al. (2022). The 
top 4 panels (one for each time period) show how our decomposition 
varies as we increase and decrease the demand elasticities. Broadly 
speaking,  the  qualitative  features  of  the  results  are  similar  to  our 
baseline estimates.

As we increase the elasticity of demand, our decomposition tends 
to attribute more of the changes in the dollar AFE index to changes in 
demand (yellow bars) and less to changes in savings (purple bars). An 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

increase in the demand elasticity means small changes in prices explain 
larger changes in portfolio weights. When global investors have more 
elastic demand curves, only small price movements are needed to clear 
financial markets after changes in savings and issuances. As a result, 
savings and issuances tend to explain a small share of the changes in 
the dollar exchange rate. However, the difference in the amount of 
variation explained by savings and issuances between the most and the 
least elastic demand curves is small over the whole sample period, and 
we conclude that changes in savings and issuances across countries play 
an important role in determining the value of the dollar.

Fig.  7 presents the results for our variance decomposition of the 
dollar factor where we scale the elasticity of demand and show how 
the share of the variance in the dollar factor explained by each set of 
variables changes. Similar to the exercise decomposing the dollar AFE 
index, Fig.  7 shows the share of variation explained by savings and 
issuances decreases in magnitude as demand becomes more elastic. The 
share of variation explained by shifts in the demand curve increases. 
Nevertheless, the factors that explain the largest share of variation in 
the dollar factor continue to be savings and issuances and shifts in 
demand.

Finally,  Fig.   8  shows  how  different  factors  explain  the  average 
loading of the seven major currencies we considered in Table  3. Similar 
to the other exercises, the contribution of savings and issuances declines 
as we systematically increase the elasticity of demand and the role 
of demand shifts increases. Nevertheless, global investor savings and 
changes in demand curves continue to explain the bulk of the average 
covariance between the exchange rates of the seven major currencies 
in our sample and the dollar factor.

3. What if the demand for U.S. assets changes?

Our  results  so  far  suggest  that  investors’  demand  shifts  play  an 
important role in the dollar’s exchange rate dynamics, even after we 
account  for  investor  savings,  asset  issuances,  and  monetary  policy 
stances. While our approach does not allow us to trace out the origins 
of these demand shifts, we can further shed light on how counterfactual 
changes in demand for U.S. assets impacts the dollar exchange rate 
within the context of our stylized model. Studying these hypothetical 
demand shifts through the lens of our model provides a benchmark for 
understanding the magnitude of demand shifts needed to potentially 
influence the dollar. We conduct two counterfactual exercises in this 
section.

The first hypothetical scenario we consider is one in which a large 
country, such as China, unilaterally sells all of its U.S. assets because it 
finds the U.S. assets unappealing relative to other assets. Importantly, 
we assume that this shift in demand is for idiosyncratic reasons. Start-
ing with our end-of-sample data from 𝑡 = 2021, we compute equilibrium 
portfolio holdings and exchange rates assuming one country’s investors 
and central bank reallocate their entire U.S. asset holdings to other 
countries’ assets. To do so, we set country 𝑖’s latent demand for all U.S. 
assets, 𝜅𝑖,𝑡(𝑈 𝑆, 𝓁), to a large negative number. We further assume that 
the country’s central bank liquidates its reserve holdings of U.S. assets 
and distributes the wealth to its domestic investors, who will reallocate 
this wealth towards non-U.S. assets. As a result, this country’s private 
and official sectors will sell all its U.S. assets, which are absorbed by 
the investors in other countries.

The  top  panel  of  Fig.   9  shows  the  change  in  the  value  of  the 
AFE dollar index according to our model as each country liquidates 
their dollar asset holdings. China and the European Monetary Union 
(EMU) stand out. If either China or the EMU disposes of its U.S. assets, 
the  dollar  will  depreciate  by  around  2.5%.14  If  Japan,  Canada,  or 

13 Appendix B.4 discusses the details of this conversion.

14 In this counterfactual exercise, we assume that China unpegs from the 
U.S. dollar.

13 

Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Fig. 6.  Trend Decomposition of AFE Index for Different Demand Elasticities
Notes: This figure shows the robustness of our decomposition to variation in estimates of asset demand elasticities. The top panel presents the decomposition of the change in 
the dollar AFE index in each sub-period across the different parameterizations for demand elasticities. The ‘‘Baseline’’ specification re-iterates the results shown in Fig.  1. The six 
alternative parameterizations scale the demand elasticities in all asset classes up and down as shown in the bottom panel.

Switzerland disposes of its U.S. assets, the dollar will depreciate by less 
than 1%.

These impacts on the dollar AFE exchange rate are surprisingly 
small,  which  highlights  an  important  feature  of  our  model:  Under 
our  estimates  of  demand  curves,  the  demand  for  U.S.  assets  from 
international investors is strong enough to absorb large unilateral sales 
in this market. For example, if the European Monetary Union offloads 
its entire portfolio holdings of U.S. assets, other countries within the 
model will increase their positions in U.S. assets by 10 to 30 percent.

shift is the key. For example, China’s decision to sell its U.S. assets 
could be driven by underlying economic or political factors that could 
also impact the saving patterns, the monetary policy stances, and the 
demand shifts for countries all over the world. In reality, China’s sell-off 
might not happen in isolation, but could be accompanied or followed 
by actions from other countries. What we report here in this exercise is 
the impact of this unilateral sale in isolation, which, in our opinion, is 
more about shedding light on the nature of the investors’ substitution 
patterns than about providing a realistic policy scenario.

While it is appealing to draw policy conclusions from this result, 
we caution that understanding the underlying driver of the demand 

In order for our model to generate a large dollar depreciation due 
to demand shifts, we need to induce correlated sales of U.S. assets. 

14 

Z. Jiang et al.

Fig. 7.  Variance Decomposition of the Dollar Factor for Different Demand Elasticities
Notes: This figure shows the robustness of our decomposition of the variance of the 
dollar factor to variation in estimates of asset demand elasticities. Each panel shows 
how the share of explained variation changes as we systematically increase the demand 
elasticities. The ‘‘Baseline’’ specification re-iterates the results shown in Table  2. The 
six alternative parameterizations scale the demand elasticities in all asset classes up 
and down as shown in the bottom panel.

Fig. 8.  Decomposition of Covariance with the Dollar Factor for Different Demand 
Elasticities
Notes: This figure shows the robustness of our decomposition of the average covariance 
of  the  seven  major  currencies  in  our  sample  with  the  dollar  factor  to  variation 
in estimates of asset demand elasticities. Each panel shows how the share of ex-
plained covariance changes as we systematically increase the demand elasticities. The 
‘‘Baseline’’ specification re-iterates the results shown in Table  3. The six alternative 
parameterizations scale the demand elasticities in all asset classes up and down as 
shown in the bottom panel.

Our results in Section 2.2 show that demand shifts away from U.S. 
assets in the pre-crisis period explain a 25% depreciation of the U.S. 
dollar from 2002 to 2007. A natural question is what would happen 
to the current dollar’s value if it experiences demand shifts similar to 
those in the pre-crisis period. In our second counterfactual exercise, 
we adjust the investors’ demand curves as of 𝑡 = 2021 by subtracting 
the changes in demand (both characteristics and latent demand) from 
the pre-crisis period. While the previous counterfactual scenario studies 
one  foreign  country’s  unilateral  action,  this  counterfactual  scenario 
studies a correlated change in the relative desirabilities of the U.S. 

15 

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

assets across investor countries. These correlated demand shifts away 
from U.S. assets across many countries result in a depreciation of the 
U.S. dollar of more than 25 percent according to our model.

The results of these two counterfactuals show that our model main-
tains a relatively stable value of the U.S. dollar under idiosyncratic 
shifts in demand while allowing for larger exchange rate fluctuations 
when shifts in demand are correlated across countries. From a broader 
theoretical perspective, the ability for global investors to absorb U.S. 
assets under idiosyncratic demand shifts is precisely what is required 
to maintain a stable reserve currency (e.g., Farhi and Maggiori, 2017; 
He et al., 2019).

4. Conclusion

In this paper, we use a portfolio-based demand system to relate 
key moments of dollar exchange rates to primitive economic factors. 
Our  estimates  uncover  significant  structural  changes  in  the  nature 
of the investors’ excess savings and demand shifts before and after 
the financial crisis. As a result, the decade-long appreciation of the 
dollar after the crisis is driven by different factors than the standard 
safety features that made the dollar a safe currency during the crisis. 
Importantly, the dollar’s strength in the recent past hinges on investors’ 
willingness to save in financial markets as well as their willingness to 
invest in risky U.S. assets.

While our results confirm some of the existing narratives about the 
dollar’s strength and specialness, they also highlight the importance 
of further studying investors’ portfolio decisions and their underlying 
drivers in different economic environments. Furthermore, our results 
rely on assumptions regarding exogenous asset supply and monetary 
policy, as well as assumptions about how investors substitute in re-
sponse to cross-sectional and time-series shocks to prices. We hope that 
future work can relax these assumptions in order to shine additional 
light on the drivers of the dollar exchange rate.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Zhengyang  Jiang:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  origi-
nal draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, 
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisi-
tion,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization.  Robert  J. 
Richmond: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Vi-
sualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization.  Tony  Zhang:  Writing  – 
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, 
Investigation,  Funding  acquisition,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation, 
Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104052.

Data availability

Replication Package for Understanding the Strength of the Dollar (Ori
ginal data) (Mendeley Data)

Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Fig. 9.  Change in Dollar AFE Index in Counterfactual Scenarios
Notes: This figure presents changes in the value of the dollar AFE index under two counterfactual scenarios using end-of-sample data and estimates from 2021. The top panel 
presents the changes in the dollar AFE index as each country unilaterally liquidates their dollar asset holdings. The bottom panel presents changes in the dollar AFE index given 
a shift in global demand curves scaled to what was observed globally from 2002 and 2007.

References

Atkeson, A., Heathcote, J., Perri, F., 2021. The end of privilege: A reexamination of 

the net foreign asset position of the United States. Working paper. UCLA.

Avdjiev, S., Du, W., Koch, C., Shin, H.S., 2019. The dollar, bank leverage, and deviations 

from covered interest parity. Am. Econ. Review: Insights 1 (2), 193–208.

Bailey, M., Gupta, A., Hillenbrand, S., Kuchler, T., Richmond, R., Stroebel, J., 2021. 

International trade and social connectedness. J. Int. Econ. 129, 103418.

Beck, R., Coppola, A., Lewis, A., Maggiori, M., Schmitz, M., Schreger, J., 2023. The 
geography of capital allocation in the Euro area. Available at SSRN 4398898.
Bernanke, B., 2005. The global saving glut and the US current account deficit. Board 

of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US).

Camanho, N., Hau, H., Rey, H., 2022. Global portfolio rebalancing and exchange rates. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 5228–5274.

Coppola, A., Maggiori, M., Neiman, B., Schreger, J., 2021. Redrawing the map of global 
capital flows: The role of cross-border financing and tax havens. Q. J. Econ. 136 
(3), 1499–1556.

Curcuru, S., et al., 2017. The sensitivity of the US dollar exchange rate to changes 
in monetary policy expectations. IFDP Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, September.

Du, W., Schreger, J., 2022. CIP deviations, the dollar, and frictions in international 

capital markets. Handb. Int. Econ. 6, 147–197.

16 

Evans, M.D., Lyons, R.K., 2002. Order flow and exchange rate dynamics. J. Political 

Farhi, E., Maggiori, M., 2017. A model of the international monetary system. Q. J. 

Econ. 110 (1), 170–180.

Econ. 133 (1), 295–355.

Froot, K.A., Ramadorai, T., 2005. Currency returns, intrinsic value, and institutional-

investor flows. J. Financ. 60 (3), 1535–1566.

Gabaix, X., Koijen, R.S., 2021. In Search of the Origins of Financial Fluctuations: 
The Inelastic Markets Hypothesis. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Gabaix, X., Maggiori, M., 2015. International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. Q. 

J. Econ. 130 (3), 1369–1420.

Gandhi,  A.,  Houde,  J.-F.,  2020.  Measuring  substitution  patterns  in  differentiated-

products industries. NBER Working Paper Series No. 26375.

Gopinath, G., Stein, J.C., 2021. Banking, trade, and the making of a dominant currency. 

Q. J. Econ. 136 (2), 783–830.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Ray, W.D., Vayanos, D., 2022. A preferred-habitat model of term 
premia, exchange rates, and monetary policy spillovers. NBER Working Paper Series 
No. 29875.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Rey, H., Sauzet, M., 2019. The international monetary and financial 

system. Annu. Rev. Econ. 11, 859–893.

Greenwood, R., Hanson, S.G., Stein, J.C., Sunderam, A., 2023. A quantity-driven theory 

of term premia and exchange rates. Q. J. Econ. 138 (4), 2327–2389.

Hassan, T.A., 2013. Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns. J. 

Financ. 68 (6), 2269–2308.

Z. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 168 (2025) 104052 

Hassan, T.A., Mano, R., 2019. Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-currency 

Lilley, A., Maggiori, M., Neiman, B., Schreger, J., 2022. Exchange rate reconnect. Rev. 

Hau, H., Rey, H., 2006. Exchange rates, equity prices, and capital flows. Rev. Financ. 

Lustig, H., Richmond, R.J., 2020. Gravity in the exchange rate factor structure. Rev. 

world. Q. J. Econ. 134 (1), 397–450.

Stud. 19 (1), 273–317.

Econ. Stat. 104 (4), 845–855.

Financ. Stud. 33 (8), 3492–3540.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., Milbradt, K., 2019. A model of safe asset determination. 

Lustig,  H.,  Roussanov,  N.,  Verdelhan,  A.,  2011.  Common  risk  factors  in  currency 

Am. Econ. Rev. 109 (4), 1230–1262.

Jiang, Z., 2021. US fiscal cycle and the dollar. J. Monet. Econ. 124, 91–106.
Jiang, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., Lustig, H., 2021. Foreign safe asset demand and the dollar 

exchange rate. J. Financ. 76 (3), 1049–1089.

markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (11), 3731–3777.

Lustig, H., Roussanov, N., Verdelhan, A., 2014. Countercyclical currency risk premia. 

J. Financ. Econ. 111 (3), 527–553.

Maggiori, M., 2017. Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve 

Jiang, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., Lustig, H., 2023. Dollar safety and the global financial 

currencies. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (10), 3038–3071.

cycle. Rev. Econ. Stud. rdad108.

Maggiori, M., Neiman, B., Schreger, J., 2020. International currencies and capital 

Jiang, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., Lustig, H.N., Sun, J., 2024. Convenience yields and 

allocation. J. Political Econ. 128 (6), 2019–2066.

exchange rate puzzles. NBER Working Paper Series No. 32092.

Miranda-Agrippino, S., Rey, H., 2020. US monetary policy and the global financial 

Jiang, Z., Richmond, R.J., Zhang, T., 2022. A portfolio approach to global imbalances. 

cycle. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87 (6), 2754–2776.

J. Financ. 79 (3), 2025–2076.

Koijen, R.S., Koulischer, F., Nguyen, B., Yogo, M., 2021. Inspecting the mechanism of 

quantitative easing in the Euro area. J. Financ. Econ. 140 (1), 1–20.

Koijen, R., Richmond, R., Yogo, M., 2019. Which investors matter for equity valuations 

and expected returns? Rev. Econ. Stud. 91 (4), 2387–2424.

Koijen, R.S., Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. J. Political 

Econ. 127 (4), 1475–1515.

Koijen, R.S., Yogo, M., 2024. Exchange rates and asset prices in a global demand system. 

NBER Working Paper Series No. 27342.

Kouri, P.J., 1977. The exchange rate and the balance of payments in the short run and 
in the long run: A monetary approach. In: Flexible Exchange Rates and Stabilization 
Policy. Springer, pp. 148–172.

Kouri, P.J., De Macedo, J.B., Salant, W.S., v. N. Whitman, M., 1978. Exchange rates and 
the international adjustment process. pp. 111–157, Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity.

Miranda-Agrippino, S., Rey, H., 2022. The global financial cycle. In: Handbook of 

International Economics, vol. 6, Elsevier, pp. 1–43.

Ready, R., Roussanov, N., Ward, C., 2017. Commodity trade and the carry trade: a tale 

of two countries. J. Financ. 72 (6), 2629–2684.

Reiss,  P.C.,  Wolak,  F.A.,  2007.  Structural  econometric  modeling:  Rationales  and 

examples from industrial organization. Handb. Econ. 6, 4277–4415.

Rey,  H.,  2013.  Dilemma  not  trilemma:  the  global  financial  cycle  and  monetary 
policy independence. In: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy 
Symposium.

Richmond, R.J., 2016. Trade network centrality and currency risk premia. J. Financ. 
Verdelhan, A., 2018. The share of systematic variation in bilateral exchange rates. J. 

Financ. 73 (1), 375–418.

17 

