Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Discrimination in the payments chain✩
Anna M. Costello a,∗, Michael Minnis a, Irina Rabinovich b
a University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, United States of America
b Billtrust, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

JEL classification:
D22
G01
G30
J16

Keywords:
Discrimination
Trade credit
Supply chain

1. Introduction

We examine whether discrimination affects customers’ willingness to pay their suppliers. Using a dataset of
detailed trade credit networks, we find that when facing a macroeconomic shock, customers delay payments to
their suppliers with female or black trade credit officers at a 10%–20% higher rate relative to their payments to
non-minorities. These results hold after controlling for a host of economic differences between minority groups
and non-minority groups. In particular, we exploit the complexity of the supply chain network – wherein
suppliers transact with multiple customers in each month and customers transact with multiple suppliers in
each month – to estimate within-relationship changes in payment behavior during periods of financial hardship.
Results indicate that the largest increases in payment delays are between customers that are classified as having
racial or gender biases and suppliers that have minority lead credit officers. The results suggest that biased
beliefs and preferences play a critical role in trade credit.

Understanding the role of discrimination in the marketplace is of
critical importance from both social and economic perspectives. There
is significant disparity in hiring, compensation, and promotion across
minority versus non-minority groups. For example, in the U.S., women
earn 77 cents for every dollar earned by men; the divide is similar
along racial minorities, with blacks earning 76 cents for every dol-
lar earned by whites.1 These disparities have been shown to hinder
economic growth (Hsieh et al., 2019), and thus there is a growing
interest in uncovering the potential role that discrimination plays in
differential outcomes for minority groups. Understanding the scope and
types of discrimination can help guide interventions aimed at closing
performance gaps.

We seek to identify the role of discrimination in supply chain
relationships. Discrimination can impact multiple aspects of the sup-
ply chain including partner selection (choosing which suppliers or
customers to transact with), pricing strategies, and other contractual
features. We focus on the potential role of discrimination in the pay-
ment behavior of customers. Trade credit – wherein a supplier provides

temporary financing to a customer purchasing a product or service –
is common practice in business-to-business transactions. Up to 90% of
inter-firm trade is supported by trade finance (Auboin, 2009), and prior
work shows that trade credit helps to ease a multitude of transactional
frictions (e.g., Giannetti et al. (2011), Costello (2019) and Love et al.
(2007)). Suppliers rely on the timely collection of their receivables to
meet working capital demands, execute planned expenditures on labor
and capital, and manage other cash flow needs. However, there may be
variation in a supplier’s ability to collect their accounts receivable. We
ask whether demographic characteristics of the supplier’s trade credit
officer – specifically whether they are female or Black – impacts their
collection of payments due from customers.

An important aspect of our setting is that the suppliers and cus-
tomers are in long-established relationships; the average relationship
‘‘age’’ in our sample is 12.5 years. One view may be that long-run
relationships should filter out bias, since parties have already cho-
sen to select into the relationship, they have a long track record
of observing their partner’s performance, and their transactions are
more relational than arms-length.2 Therefore, it is an open question

✩

This article was accepted by Toni Whited. We thank Ray Ball, John Barrios, Hans Christensen, Christian Leuz, Mihir Mehta, Canice Prendergast, and Cathy
Schrand for helpful feedback. We also appreciate feedback from participants at Boston College, Lancaster University, Ohio State University, Stanford University,
Temple University, University of Miami, University of New South Wales, University of Pennsylvania (The Wharton School), University of Texas, and Washington
University at St. Louis. We also acknowledge support from an anonymous data provider.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: anna.costello@chicagobooth.edu (A.M. Costello).
1 U.S. Department of Labor Bureau Statistics, 2018 (Report 1064).
2 Indeed, trade creditors are known to be relationship lenders because of the frequency and personal touch of interaction (Biais and Gollier, 1997; Costello

et al., 2020).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103872
Received 16 December 2022; Received in revised form 21 May 2024; Accepted 22 May 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)103872Availableonline4June20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.A.M. Costello et al.

whether discriminatory preferences can persist even after a relationship
is long-established.

A priori, it is not clear that discrimination manifests in differential
economic outcomes for minority groups versus non-minority groups.
Market forces should serve a disciplining role in mitigating discrimi-
natory actions. For example, Becker (1957) and Arrow (1973) point
out that discrimination should not impact wages under conditions of
perfect competition, since a less-prejudiced employer can earn higher
profits by hiring cheaper minority laborers. Similarly, suppliers in com-
petitive markets may punish non-paying customers by rationing supply.
Thus, we expect that discrimination should play a more prominent
role in customers’ payment choices in settings where market-based
punishments for non-payment are weakened.

As a setting to capture discrimination, we rely on the immediate
onset of COVID-19 in March of 2020. The pandemic is an appealing
setting to empirically capture the effects of discrimination for two
primary reasons. First, it represents a large, economy-wide shock in
customers’ ability to pay their bills. The onset of the crisis marked
unprecedented losses in the corporate sector, when mandatory stay-at-
home orders necessitated that many businesses temporarily shut down.
This large economic shock likely forced customers to make decisions
on which invoices to pay, and which suppliers landed lower in the
pecking order. Second, suppliers faced widespread uncertainty about
customer demand and their ability to sell products downstream, leading
to a reduction in suppliers’ ability to punish non-paying customers
by, e.g., dropping those customers or rationing supply. Thus, the con-
fluence of customers having to make strategic liquidity decisions in
addition to weakened suppliers’ ability to punish those decisions likely
facilitated a substantive increase in discriminatory behavior, relative to
the pre-COVID period.

To capture decisions in the payments chain, we rely on a proprietary
database of detailed trade transactions between buyers and sellers. The
data not only provides the identity of buyer–supplier company pairs,
but it also provides information on the current and overdue accounts
receivable. For each buyer–supplier pair, the information is updated on
a monthly basis, which allows us to track customer payment behavior
in a tight window around the onset of the pandemic.

The data includes the identity of the primary contact that the
customer paying the bill will interact with: the supplier’s lead credit
officer. The credit officer screens customers at the onset of the relation-
ship to approve trade credit loans, monitors the customer throughout
the relationship to make adjustments to the customer’s credit line, and
is responsible for collecting payment on each invoice. The trade credit
officer and the paying customer often know each other and correspond
frequently on the phone or via email. Thus, the supplier’s lead credit
officer is the customer’s main point of contact when making payments
on outstanding invoices. If discrimination plays a role in the customer’s
payment decision, the supplier’s lead credit officer is likely to be the
target. We code the names of the lead credit officer by matching them
against U.S. census data, which allows us to classify them along two
important dimensions: (1) gender, and (2) race, whereby we classify
female and black officers as minorities.3

Fig. 1 provides visual support for the differential trends in payment
behavior. Note the substantial increase in delayed payments to minority
suppliers, relative to non-minority suppliers at the onset of COVID. We
rely on a differences-in-differences estimation to measure differential
changes in overdue accounts for suppliers with minority credit officers
after the onset of COVID. In our baseline analyses, we find that suppli-
ers with minority lead credit officers suffer a 10 to 20% larger increase
in overdue accounts, relative to suppliers with non-minority lead credit
officers.

3 There is significant noise in assignment to these groups based on names.
We do not expect that noisy assignment to treatment should bias in favor of
identifying discrimination.

As with all studies on discrimination, the key challenge is to rule
out differences in fundamentals between firms that employ minority
lead credit officers (‘‘minority suppliers’’) versus those that employ non-
minority lead credit officers (‘‘non-minority suppliers’’). For example,
one may be concerned that minority suppliers may be more financially
constrained or may be concentrated in certain industries, such as retail
or services, and it is these economic differences that result in differ-
ential payments, rather than customers’ discriminatory preferences per
se.

The granularity of the transactions in our data provides several key
advantages in addressing this concern. Buyers and sellers in the data
transact frequently — often with repeated transactions each month.
Further, in a given month, each supplier in the dataset transacts with
multiple customers while, concurrently in that same month, each cus-
tomer purchases from multiple suppliers. The resulting dataset is a
rich, time-series of trade credit transactions for a complex buyer-
seller network. This allows for rigorous empirical specifications that
allow us to simultaneously absorb time-varying supplier characteristics
(since each supplier transacts with multiple customers in a month),
time-varying customer characteristics (since each customer transacts
with multiple suppliers in a month), and time invariant relationship
characteristics (since each buyer and seller pair transact in multiple
months). The remaining variation that we are able to exploit is the time-
varying payment behavior within a given buyer–supplier relationship
(a specification we refer to as the within-relationship estimator). This
allows us to explore how trade credit payments change at the onset
of COVID, within the supplier-customer relationship. Note that our
within-relationship estimator allows us to abstract away from many
alternative, economics-based, explanations for variation in trade credit
payments during COVID. For example, it helps to rule out concerns
that minority suppliers may be concentrated in industries that faced
supply constraints and/or demand shrinkage; minority suppliers may
have been disproportionally impacted by changes in childcare during
COVID, making it more difficult for them to exert collection effort;
and/or minority suppliers are disproportionally ‘‘matched’’ with certain
customer types that more harshly responded to COVID.

Our within-relationship estimator allows us to target differential
payment behavior in the relationships we expect to face the highest
degree of discrimination: namely, when ‘‘biased’’ customers are paired
with minority suppliers. In other words, controlling for much of the
economic factors that drive payment behavior, our within-relationship
analysis helps to more convincingly speak to the potential effects of
discrimination in the relationships where it should play the strongest
role.4 To identify these relationships, we need an empirical construct
that captures customers’ biased preferences. To capture customers that
have a higher propensity to discriminate, we use five proxies of discrim-
inatory preferences that are measured at the customer’s location-level:
(1) whether they are located in a county with high rates of racial terror
lynchings during the period 1877–1950; (2) whether they are located in
a city classified as a ‘‘Sundown Town’’ – a city that has historical laws
or ordinances designed to keep Black individuals out of the community;
(3) whether they have ‘‘universalist’’ attitudes as measured by surveys
capturing their preference for care and fairness to others; (4) whether
they show implicit biases against women as measured by the Implicit
Attitude Test; and (5) whether they are located in a state with a
high female wage gap. To capture customer bias in a parsimonious
fashion, we conduct principal component analyses to obtain a measure
of general biased preferences, a measure of biases on the basis of
gender, and a measure of biases on the basis of race. Consistent with our

4 We note that the selection decision (i.e., which supplier to source from)
is largely exogenous to the individuals making payment decisions. This is
because a sales transaction occurs between a sales team and a sourcing team,
whereas the payment decision is made between an accounts payable team and
an accounts receivable team. This is discussed further in Section 2.3.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038722A.M. Costello et al.

Fig. 1. Payment delays through COVID-19. This figure displays the average monthly dollar amount of credit that is overdue to a supplier from a single customer, split by whether
the lead credit manager for the seller is a Minority or a non-Minority. Minority suppliers are classified as either female or Black.

hypothesis, we find the largest increases in delayed payments occur in
the relationships between biased customers and suppliers with minority
lead credit officers. Our within-relationship estimator brings us closer
to ruling out alternative stories, in that the only remaining source of
variation in our regression model is time-varying payment behavior
between a specific customer–supplier pair. However, we recognize
that this specification is not bullet-proof. For example, some supplier-
customer relationships may be less economically important than others;
those less important relationships may see larger increases in payment
delays at the onset of COVID simply because the customer did not
prioritize supply from that particular seller when the pandemic hit. If,
in fact, the least important bilateral relationships are those between
biased customers and suppliers with minority lead credit officers, our
inferences may be threatened. As a way to account for this, we control
for various measures of bilateral relationship importance, including the
number of years a particular buyer and seller have been transacting,
the pre-COVID dollar volume of sales between pair, and the distance
between the buyer and seller. Indeed, we show that the least impor-
tant relationships face larger payment delays at the onset of COVID.
However, we find that even after controlling for various measures of
relationship-level economic importance, our inferences remain. That is,
we continue to find that the largest increases in payment delays flow
from biased customers to minority suppliers.

Finally, to bolster our understanding of the potential role of pun-
ishment, we explore the consequences to customers of making late
payments to their suppliers. Specifically, the prior literature suggests
that discrimination should be ‘‘punished’’ in well-functioning markets;
in equilibrium, it is this threat of market-based punishment that keeps
discriminatory behavior in check (Becker, 1957; Arrow, 1973). By con-
trast, when more substantive market-based frictions arise, the ability
of the discriminatee to punish the discriminator is weakened, which is
why we may see an increase in discriminatory behavior. To explore the
role of punishment in our setting, we examine relationship terminations
(customer ‘‘firing’’) after defaults. We show that in the pre-COVID
period, defaulting customers are much more likely to get fired in the
six month period following default, relative to customers that are timely
in their payments. By contrast, during the COVID period we find that
defaulting customers are no more likely to get fired by their suppliers.
The evidence illustrates that market conditions – through their impact
on discriminatees’ ability to punish – impact discriminatory behavior.
Our study contributes to the growing literature on discrimination.
Our contribution to this literature is threefold. First, our setting allows

for within-relationship estimation, which controls for much of the
confounding factors that influence minority outcomes; thus, while we
cannot prove that our results are a manifestation of discrimination be-
yond doubt, we get closer to ruling out alternative explanations based
on economic fundamentals. Second, we explore discrimination in long-
established relationships, whereas much of the prior literature studies
the role of discrimination in a selection decision when there is high
information asymmetry about a candidate’s type (e.g., Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2004) and Fisman et al. (2017)).5 Showing that discrim-
inatory behavior impacts trade credit payments well-after the selection
stage suggests that preferences can persist and have longer-term effects.
Third, we explore discrimination in a new and economically signif-
icant setting – supply chain relationships. Identifying discriminatory
behavior in various settings helps guide potential interventions aimed
at addressing inequities.

We also contribute to the growing literature which aims to under-
stand how customer defaults impact payment chains. Understanding
discrimination in the trade credit setting is important, because trade
credit plays a substantial and well documented role in financing inter-
firm trade. The Bank for International Settlements (2014) estimates that
two thirds of global trade is supported by trade credit, and many firms
rely on trade credit as an important source of financing (Demirguc-Kunt
and Maksimovic, 2001). Given the economic significance of this source
of lending, it is important to understand all of the risk factors contribut-
ing to the supplier’s probability of collection. Further, understanding
factors that contribute to collection is important because credit risk can
propagate through networks of linked firms (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997;
Gabaix, 2011; Atalay et al., 2011; Costello, 2020). Prior work tends
to focus on why suppliers lend (e.g., Giannetti et al. (2021), Fabbri
and Menichini (2010) and Costello (2019)), but few studies explore the
determinants of customers willingness to pay. Further, to this point, the
literature has not explored the role of discrimination during adverse
credit events. Our study highlights an important determinant of the
supplier’s ability to collect: the demographic characteristics of their
lead credit officer.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our conceptual
framework and predictions, Section 3 provides a description of our

5 A notable exception is Egan et al. (2017), who explore the role of
discrimination in firing employees, where information asymmetry is largely
resolved.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038723A.M. Costello et al.

data, and Section 4 provides a framework for our empirical anal-
yses. Section 5 discusses our main results and Section 6 explores
within-relationship variation. In Section 7 we explore punishment for
delinquent customers, and in Section 8 we discuss several robustness
analyses. Finally, Section 9 concludes.

2. Conceptual framework and setting

As outlined in the introduction, we argue that COVID is a good
setting to test for increases in discriminatory behavior for two primary
reasons. The first is that COVID represents a large economic shock
that pushes customers into considerations of strategic liquidity manage-
ment. The second is that COVID represents a decline in suppliers’ ability
to punish defaulting customers. Next, we outline these two facets of our
setting.

2.1. COVID as a liquidity shock

Prior work shows that liquidity shocks can propagate through sup-
ply chain networks through trade credit (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997;
Jacobson and von Schedvin, 2015). Specifically, when a customer faces
distress they are typically faced with a decision of strategic liquidity
management, which often translates to delayed payments to some or all
of their suppliers. When faced with such decisions, customers take into
account several factors, based on both ‘‘hard’’ data about a particular
supplier and softer information like judgements and preferences. For
instance, Costello (2020) shows that suppliers faced with a banking
liquidity shock shrink the trade credit provided to some of their down-
stream customers but not to all of them. Thus, a large macroeconomic
liquidity shock, combined with the discretionary judgement involved
in making payment decisions, could give rise to discrimination – either
implicit or explicit – playing a more substantive role in customer
payment behavior.

COVID indeed represents a substantial market-wide economic shock
to liquidity. Seasonally adjusted initial unemployment claims were
just over 200,000 per week through the first 11 weeks of 2020 and
then jumped to over 3 million in the 12th week. By the end of April
continuing unemployment claims surpassed 22 million. With respect
to GDP, the consensus estimate for second quarter U.S. GDP provided
by the Federal Reserve Board of Atlanta was an annualized decline
of 35%. These economic effects of the pandemic on consumers led to
a sharp fall in the demand for goods (Coibion et al., 2020). All of
these factors likely gave rise to customers’ strategic liquidity choices
we outline above. Though we use COVID as a setting, one can imagine
alternative market-wide shocks to test our predictions, such as the Great
Recession of 2008-2009.6

2.2. COVID and market-based punishments

2.2.1. Discrimination in equilibrium

In the Becker (1957) model of taste-based discrimination, the dis-
criminating employer has a disutility from hiring black workers, thus
the marginal cost of black labor is higher than an otherwise equivalent
white worker. A discriminating employer only hires white workers,
and the market wage for black employees falls. This is referred to
as the ‘‘wage gap’’ between the white and black employees. However
several studies, including Becker (1957) and Arrow (1973), point out
that discrimination’s impact on the wage gap should not hold in the
long-run under conditions of perfect competition. This is because a
less-prejudiced employer can earn higher profits than the discriminator
who chooses to employ more expensive white employees, driving dis-
criminators out of the market. In that case, market-based punishment

should reduce the impact of discrimination on wages in the long-run.
These studies argue that, to observe the effects of discrimination, there
needs to be a market failure: something that reduces the market-based
punishments observed in perfectly competitive markets.

In line with these arguments, if one were to assume perfectly
competitive markets then non-paying customers should face market-
based punishments like rationed supply. In other words, in conditions
of perfect competition discriminatory actions should be competed away
making it difficult for researchers to capture.

2.2.2. Discrimination with market frictions

As highlighted above, capturing discrimination in equilibrium re-
quires relaxing assumptions of perfectly competitive markets. We note
that market frictions are common and thus discrimination may persist
in certain sectors, geographic regions, or relationships that require
specific investments. However, we argue that the COVID-19 pandemic
presented unprecedented frictions to the supply chain; these substantial
frictions may have allowed for a measurable increase in discrimina-
tory behavior, relative to the pre-COVID period. Moreover, from an
empirical perspective it may be easier to capture discrimination on-
average during COVID, because the supply chain frictions and customer
liquidity concerns were aligned for many sectors in event-time.

We posit that the COVID-19 pandemic introduced at least two
frictions to the supplier’s ability to use market-based forces to discipline
non-paying customers. First, the sharp and unexpected onset of the
pandemic left suppliers with imperfect information about customers’
ability to pay. The economic effects of the pandemic were widespread
across industries. For example, while some industries had more se-
vere effects (e.g., restaurants), all major sectors of the economy had
substantial increases in unemployment rates by June of 2020. The
pervasive adverse effects of the pandemic meant that suppliers expected
across-the-board lapses in payment, with limited information about the
payment behavior offered by outside customers. Imperfect information
about outside options made it more difficult for a supplier to punish a
discriminating customer.

Second, the pandemic resulted in a sharp fall in the demand for
goods and services. In the short-run, if demand fell faster than supply,
existing customers likely had bargaining power over their suppliers.
That is, a shortage of customers that continued to purchase through the
pandemic means that suppliers had fewer outside options and a more
limited ability to punish non-paying customers.

2.3. Setting: The trade creditor

We explore the role of discrimination in the market for trade
credit payments. Trade credit arises when a supplier provides tempo-
rary financing to a customer for a product or service exchanged in
a business-to-business transaction. In a typical organization, a sales
agreement is reached first, and then trade credit is allocated, moni-
tored, and collected. Thus, the sales function within a firm is distinct
from the credit function within a firm.7 First, a supplier and customer
agree to transact during the sales decision — when a procurement
officer at the customer firm is choosing among potential suppliers and
when a member of the supplier’s sales team is identifying a set of
customers to target. After a potential buyer–supplier ‘‘match’’ is made
between the procurement officer and the salesperson, the transaction is
passed to the individuals at each firm that are involved in trade credit.
Trade credit payments are usually handled by the credit team on the
supplier side and the accounts payable team on the customer side. In
other words, individuals involved in the trade credit decision are rarely
involved in selection of trading partners; rather, they ‘‘inherit’’ their
trade credit relationships based on the match that was made during
the sales process. Our setting explores the effect of discrimination in the

6 Our data, specifically the identities of the lead credit officer, does not

cover the financial crisis period.

7 An exception is very small firms and/or sole proprietorships.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038724A.M. Costello et al.

Fig. 2. Snapshot of anonymized data. This figure provides an example of the raw receivables data, where identifying information has been removed to preserve anonymity.

decision of a customer to pay a trade credit invoice. Thus, the parties
we focus on are (1) a member of the customer’s account payable team
(the potential discriminator) and (2) an individual managing the credit
team at the supplier firm (the potential discriminatee).

3. Data

3.1. Sample construction

We rely on a novel and proprietary dataset that contains granular
data on accounts receivable for supplier-buyer pairs. These data are
obtained from a third party credit aggregation and prediction platform
(henceforth, the platform) that produces risk scores for millions of
customers worldwide, based on trade payment data, credit bureau
information, financial filings, industry trends, and other innovative
data sources. Suppliers are required to produce a monthly report dis-
closing all transactions with customers; the report contains the current
receivables and past due balances for their universe of buyers. In other
words, all members must make a monthly upload of every transaction
made with every customer.8 The data also includes receivables aging
reports, which detail past due balances at the transaction-month-level,
broken into 30 day buckets. The platform relies on this data to produce
time-varying customer risk scores, which are shared with all member
firms.

We use the transaction-level data to build a panel of matched
supplier-buyer pairs over the period October 2019 through May 2020.
We apply a number of standard filters to the sample, removing suppliers
flagged as factoring or other financial companies in the platform’s
database. Our data span both public and privately held companies,
represent thirty-two two-digit SIC industries, and range in size from
small mom-and-pop stores to Fortune 500 companies. Anonymity is
required by our data provider. Fig. 2 provides a snapshot of the
data, where identifying information (including the last names of credit
officers) have been omitted or anonymized. This data provides the
basis for calculating late payments from customers to their suppliers;
we calculate late payments based on two sub-samples. First, we use
all supplier-customer pairs in the database and calculate the log of
one plus the total amount of past due receivables (the last column in
Fig. 2). We henceforth refer to this sample as the ‘‘full sample’’. This
full sample allows us to analyze the payment behavior for a large set
of accounts, including transactions that were executed before the onset
of the pandemic but that have gone unpaid. Take, for example, the
final two rows in Fig. 2. Supplier S3 did not make any current sales to
customer C1 during the pandemic, but customer C1 still has overdue
bills to S3. Our full sample includes customers who do not continue to
purchase throughout COVID, but who have outstanding bills.

One concern with using the full sample of buyer-seller pairs is that
it mixes the effects of non-payment with the effects of a demand-side
shock. In our illustrative example, the decline in past-dues from C1
to S3 are due to both slower payment of existing bills and due to a

8 The aggregator strictly enforces a rule that all member firms must upload
receivables data at a minimum monthly frequency, and it must include all
existing customers. If suppliers violate this rule, they lose access to all credit
information provided by the platform.

decline in new credit sales (which may lapse to the past due bucket).
Therefore, we create a second measure of past-due balances that relies
only on the sample of supplier-customer pairs that continue to transact
through COVID. For this subsample, our measure of past due accounts
is the percentage of the most recent credit sale that becomes past due
in the subsequent month, % Past 30 days. We henceforth refer to this
sample as the ‘‘COVID subsample’’.

3.2. Assignment to treatment

Included in the platform data are the identities of the individuals
in each suppliers’ credit departments. The credit department is tasked
with decisions related to trade credit. Specifically, they screen cus-
tomers at the onset of the relationship to approve trade credit loans,
monitor the customer throughout the relationship to make adjustments
to the customer’s credit line, and they are responsible for collecting
payment on each invoice. Though credit departments have a team of
credit officers, the lead credit manager manages the workflow and
is often the point person for personally following up with clients.
Specifically, the lead credit officer will correspond with the customer
on the phone or via email if a payment is overdue. Thus, the lead credit
officer is the customer’s main point of contact when making payments
on outstanding invoices. If discrimination plays a role in the customer’s
payment decision, the supplier’s lead credit officer is likely to be a
target. We first record the credit officers’ positions through the title
that is listed in the database. Lead credit officers are identified through
keyword searches of the title.9

Our data report the first and last names of the suppliers’ lead credit
officers, which we use to assign suppliers to the treatment group. We
follow the methodology in Tzioumis (2018) to identify demographic
aspects – specifically race and gender – of the credit officer’s name. To
record gender, we use Genderize.io, which identifies gender based on
first names using governmental sources and data from social media. To
record the lead credit officer’s race, we use the ethnicolr package in
Python which exploits U.S. census data, the Florida voting registration
data, and Wikipedia data to predict race and ethnicity based on first
and last name.10 The treatment group, Minority, is set equal to one if
the lead credit officer is either female or Black.11

3.3. Descriptive statistics

Though our setting focuses on trade creditors, one may be interested
in how our sample compares to other firms in the economy. Table 1

9 Titles are sometimes not provided; those suppliers are omitted from our
analyses. For the suppliers that record titles, we assign the credit manager
to the ‘‘lead’’ position in a stepwise fashion. Specifically, if we first search
for the term ‘‘lead credit officer’’. If the supplier does not use this naming
convention, we search for the following terms, in chronological order, to assign
lead: manager, senior, director, president.

10 Specifically, ethnicolr assigns a probability that person is non-Hispanic

White, non-Hispanic Black, Asian, or Hispanic.

11 We verify our assignment to treatment using a different classification from
NamSor Applied Onomastics. Results are robust to this alternative treatment
assignment.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038725A.M. Costello et al.

Table 1
Descriptive statistics and compustat benchmark.

Total assets ($M)
Long-Term debt ($M)
Cash ($M)
Total current liabilities ($M)
Total accounts receivable ($M)

Sample
mean

13,563
3867
1164
677
1310

Sample
Q1

Sample
median

1680
387
96
14
168

4844
1506
275
76
530

Sample
Q3

13,294
4013
906
412
1302

Compustat
mean

Difference
in means

11,596
2164
849
475
1933

−1967
−1703
−315
−202
623

T-Statistic

−0.5143
−2.9628**
−1.2602
−1.1814
0.9136

This table presents the sample summary statistics, along with a comparison to the Compustat population. To make this comparison, suppliers
in the sample are matched to Compustat by name and location. Thus, the statistics are presented only for the subsample of publicly listed
suppliers, rather than the whole sample. Total Assets, Long-Term Debt, Cash, Total Current Liabilities and Total Accounts Receivable are obtained
from Compustat and are denoted in millions of dollars. The Difference column calculates the difference in means between our sample and
Compustat. *** , **, and * represent significant differences in the treatment and control groups at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

provides a comparison of our sample of suppliers relative to the Com-
pustat universe. To do so, we first match suppliers in our sample to
Compustat based on name and location; thus, Table 1 only reports
descriptive statistics for the subset of publicly listed suppliers in our
sample. On average, the public suppliers in our sample are similar, if
not slightly larger (across all dimensions) than the average Compustat
firm; however, the only statistically significant difference to note is
in long-term debt, where our sample of public suppliers hold a larger
balance of debt than the average firm in Compustat. We point out that
the private suppliers in our sample are likely to be smaller on average
than the public suppliers, which would bring our sample averages
down.12

4. Empirical framework

We use a difference-in-differences (DD) setting to analyze how the
pandemic changed payments to suppliers with minority credit officers,
relative to suppliers with non-minority credit officers. To reiterate we
do not suggest that discrimination in payments is nonexistent in the
pre-COVID period, but rather that substantial changes in market con-
ditions led to an increase in discrimination during the COVID period.
Thus, the DD specification is appropriate to capture such changes. In
the baseline specification, a supplier assigned to the treatment group
if their lead credit officer is female or Black. The treatment period
corresponds to the onset of COVID-19 stay-at-home restrictions in the
United States: March of 2020.

One key concern is that suppliers with minority lead credit officers
may differ from the control group along some dimensions, which might
be correlated with the outcome variables and would bias the DD
estimation. We take multiple approaches to address this issue. First,
we control for firms’ size and industry, as well as their interaction with
the After indicator. Specifically, we split suppliers into quartiles of size
based on the prior year’s (2019) aggregate volume of credit sales, and
we include the size quartile interacted with After in our regressions. We
also include the supplier’s industry category, based on two-digit SIC
codes, interacted with After. These controls help address the concern
that suppliers with minority credit officers respond differently to the
pandemic than suppliers with non-minority credit officers.

The DD approach compares the proportion of the supplier’s late
trade credit accounts during the pandemic to the proportion of late
accounts pre-pandemic, for both treatment and control firms. The DD
is estimated by OLS using the following specification:

𝑦𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 ∗ 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑖 ∗ 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑡 + 𝛼𝑖,𝑗 + 𝛼𝑡,𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝑡

(1)

where 𝑦 is the portion of overdue trade credit owed to supplier 𝑖
from customer 𝑗 in month 𝑡. After is a dummy variable equal to one
from the beginning of pandemic through May 2020, and Minority is
a dummy indicating whether the supplier’s lead trade credit officer is

female or Black. As mentioned above, we include time-invariant control
variables, interacted with the After indicator.13 We also include an ex-
haustive set of fixed effects to capture time invariant characteristics of
the supplier and buyer as well as bilateral supplier-buyer relationships.
The control variables, After indicator, and Minority indicator do not
enter into the regression separately because they are absorbed by the
fixed effects.

We also follow Khwaja and Mian (2008) and include a specification
with buyerXmonth fixed effects. This specification can be interpreted
as the change in the timeliness of payments from a particular customer
in a given month to a minority supplier, relative to the change in the
timeliness of payments from the same customer in that month to other
suppliers. Including these fixed effects requires that the downstream
buyer has multiple suppliers, and it should absorb buyer-specific id-
iosyncratic shocks and the associated changes in the demand for goods
and trade credit.

5. Baseline results

5.1. Minority suppliers versus control firms

Fig. 1 displays the time-series trend over the period October 2019
through May 2020. Suppliers with minority lead credit officers and sup-
pliers with non-minority lead credit officers experience similar overdue
payments in the period leading up to COVID, and pre-treatment trends
appear to be parallel. The increase begins at the onset of stay-at-home
orders but rises much more sharply for the treatment group in April
of 2020. The slight decline in overdue amounts for both the treatment
and control groups in May of 2020 is due to the coinciding decline in
orders; in other words, total amounts due (current and past) declined
because new orders slowed. We account for this decline in orders in
our regression analyses.

A key concern with studies on discrimination is that minorities
differ from non-minorities along many economic dimensions that could
explain different outcomes of interest. To provide further evidence on
the characteristics of these two groups, we examine covariate balance
in the pre-period across multiple observable dimensions. Table 2 re-
ports the differences in the average pre-period characteristics of the
treatment and control groups. We split the characteristics into three
groups: supplier characteristics, customer characteristics, and relation-
ship characteristics. Each of the characteristics are averaged at the
supplier level. That is, customer characteristics represent the average
characteristic for the customers in each supplier’s portfolio. Similarly,
relationship characteristics represent the average characteristic of the
relationships for each supplier. First, we assess balance on the basis
of supplier characteristics. Eighteen percent of our sample of suppliers
have a minority lead credit officer. Suppliers with minority lead credit

12 Due to data restrictions related to proprietary concerns, the total number

of public suppliers in our sample cannot be disclosed.

13 Using time invariant controls helps to absorb the treatment effect that
would be attributable to factors that are expected to generate a selection
problem (i.e., size and industry).

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038726A.M. Costello et al.

Table 2
Covariate balance.

Non-minority supplier

Minority supplier

Difference

T-Statistic

N

Mean

N

Mean

Supplier characteristics

Minority
New Monthly Credit Sales ($M Per Month)
Total Monthly Credit Outstanding ($M Per Month)
% Past 30 Days
Log (1+Past Due)

Customer characteristics

Customer BiasPCA
Customer Minority Status
Customer Size (Employees)
Public Customer
Customer Age (Years)

Relationship characteristics

Relationship Age
Sales Volume
Distance between customer and supplier
Supplier-Customer within 10 miles

1167
1167
1167
1167

1167
1167
1167
1167
1167

1167
1167
1167
1167

15.467
17.221
0.214
3.9

0.221
0.072
9456
0.013
59.290

12.434
0.018
731.933
0.042

257
257
257
257

257
257
257
257
257

257
257
257
257

0.18
17.847
19.6
0.162
3.8

0.216
0.066
7849
0.011
55.559

16.497
0.012
785.601
0.033

−2.38
−2.379
0.052
0.100

0.005
0.006
1607
.0.002
3.731

−4.063
0.006
−53.669
0.009

−0.717
−0.858
2.821**
0.4371

0.420
1.017
1.269
1.411
1.584

−2.324**
1.345
−0.718
0.477

This table reports the covariate balance between the suppliers with minority lead credit officers and the suppliers with non-minority lead credit officers, in the period before
COVID19 hit. Variables are split into three categories: supplier characteristics, customer characteristics, and relationship characteristics. All variables are averaged at the supplier
level. New Monthly Credit Sales capture the supplier’s average aggregate monthly credit sales; Total Credit Outstanding captures the supplier’s average aggregate monthly total credit
outstanding — both current and past-due; % Past 30 Days captures the supplier’s average proportion of monthly (30 day) past due sales; Log (1+Past Due) calculates supplier’s
average monthly total past due from customers (calculated as a log of one plus the total monthly past due). CustomerBiasPCA captures the average bias of the suppliers’ customer
base; Customer Minority Status is an indicator variable equal to one if the supplier’s customer is female or Black, defined based on their name; Customer Size is the number of
employees from Dun and Bradstreet; Public Customer is an indicator variable equal to one if the supplier’s customer is publicly listed; Customer Age is the supplier’s customer age
in years from Dun and Bradstreet. Relationship Age is the number of years that the supplier and the customer have been transacting; Sales Volume is the proportion of the supplier’s
2019 total sales that are made to the customer; Distance is the distance between the supplier and customer, in miles; Within 10 miles is an indicator variable set equal to one if
the customer and supplier are located within ten miles of each other. The Difference column calculates the difference in means for the treatment and the control group. *** , **,
and * represent significant differences in the treatment and control groups at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

officers are similar to suppliers with non-minority lead credit officers
along most dimensions, with the exception of the average percentage
past due accounts. Specifically, suppliers with minority lead credit
officers have lower past due accounts than suppliers with non-minority
lead credit officers. Though the two groups of suppliers are similar on
most dimensions, we will nevertheless want to control for differences
in supplier traits in our regression specifications.

A second concern may be that suppliers with minority lead credit
officers are matched with different types of customers (e.g., different
industries, sizes, age, etc.), which may have responded differentially
to the COVID shock. Thus, in Table 2 we assess differences in the
traits of customers matched to the treatment suppliers versus customers
matched to the control suppliers. We note that we are limited in the
descriptive information that we have about customers in our sample.
In particular, the ‘‘members’’ of the data platform that we rely on are
supplier firms, who upload a feed from their accounts receivable system
which typically includes a transaction number and a customer name,
and in some cases, the name of the customer in charge of making pay-
ments. The data provider then supplements this with information about
the customer’s location and other traits gathered in partnership with
other data sources (e.g., Dun and Bradstreet). We obtain the minority
status of the customer’s payment clerk for a limited number of suppliers
that voluntarily provide the name of the individual that they transact
with at the customer firm. We obtain the customers size and age from
those customers that have been matched to Dun and Bradstreet data.
Finally, we obtain the customer’s filing status through a fuzzy match
to Compustat. Overall, there are no significant differences in customer
traits across minority versus non-minority suppliers. Based on this set of
observable traits, we fail to document any differences in these customer
groups. Nevertheless, in our main regression analyses we will control
for time-varying traits of the customer through a customer*month fixed
effect, in an effort to more robustly control for customer-level matching
concerns.

The third set of traits we explore are defined at the bilateral,
customer–supplier relationship level. Relationship age is calculated
as the number of years that a particular buyer-seller pair has been

transacting; sales volume is the percentage of the supplier’s total annual
volume of sales in the pre-period that are made to a particular cus-
tomer; the distance between a customer and supplier pair is measured
in miles, using the zip codes of the respective parties; and finally,
we define an indicator variable equal to one if the matched pair is
located within 10 miles of each other. Table 2 reports that across these
dimensions, non-minority suppliers have very similar relationships with
respect to minority suppliers. All relationship-level variables are statis-
tically similar with the exception of relationship age, whereby minority
suppliers have older relationships than non-minority suppliers. Though
the results of our covariate balance provide us some comfort, we further
control for these relationship traits in our regression analyses.

5.2. Multiple regression results

To test whether the demographics of the supplier’s lead credit
officer impact the supplier’s ability to collect trade credit payments, we
estimate Eq. (1) using ordinary least squares. The dependent variable
is the suppliers’ overdue accounts receivable. The level of observation
is a unique buyer–supplier-transaction. The primary coefficient of in-
terest is the 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 term, which captures the effect of the
difference-in-differences. Standard errors are clustered at the supplier
and customer level.

As discussed in Section 3.1, we estimate our main regression on
two subsamples, and correspondingly, we have two different dependent
variables. The first sample takes advantage of all suppliers reporting to
the platform (the full sample). For this sample, the dependent variable
is the log of one plus the total past due amount on each account.14
The results from estimating Eq. (1) on the full sample are reported in
Table 3, panel A. Note that a customer need not have a new credit sale

14 We add one to the total past due amount to retain observations with zero
dollars past due. In robustness analyses, we also replace the dependent variable
with the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the total past due. Results
are quantitatively and qualitatively similar.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038727A.M. Costello et al.

Table 3
Payments to minority suppliers.

(a) Panel A

increase in the percentage of past due accounts, relative to the control
group.

Log (1+Past Due)

5.2.1. Baseline results split by female and black credit officers

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖

0.337**
(0.122)

0.346**
(0.135)

0.351**
(0.135)

0.335**
(0.141)

0.205*
(0.109)

8,041,593
Observations
Adj. 𝑅2
0.112
Y
Seller FE
Y
Month FE
After ∗ Industry
N
After ∗ Size
N
Seller ∗ Buyer FE
N
Buyer ∗ Month FE N

8,041,593
0.112
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

7,958,305
0.098
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

7,491,462
0.550
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

4,291,165
0.680
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(b) Panel B

% Past 30 Days

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖

0.153***
(0.021)

0.155***
(0.021)

0.155***
(0.022)

0.118***
(0.024)

0.091***
(0.014)

2,019,951
Observations
Adj. 𝑅2
0.094
Y
Seller FE
Y
Month FE
After ∗ Industry
N
After ∗ Size
N
Seller ∗ Buyer FE
N
Buyer ∗ Month FE N

2,019,951
0.095
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

2,019,951
0.095
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

1,637,164
0.439
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

307,934
0.351
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

This table reports the results of testing the impact of COVID19 on delayed payments
to vendors. The dependent variable in Panel A is the log of one plus the total dollars
past due between a buyer and seller each month. The dependent variable in Panel
B is the percentage of the most recent purchase that is past due. Thus, the sample
in Panel A includes all buyers and sellers with data in the database, whereas the
sample in Panel B requires that the buyer and the seller had a new sales transaction
in the previous month (i.e., throughout COVID). Regressions are run at the transaction
(supplier-customer-month) level. Minority equals one if the lead credit manager for the
seller is a woman or is Black. After equals one if the transaction occurred after March
2020. All other variables are as previously defined. Standard errors are clustered at the
supplier and customer level and are reported in parentheses. *** significant at 1%, **
significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

to carry an overdue balance. Moving from column 1 to column 5, we
incrementally add more control variables and fixed effects. For exam-
ple, in column 2 we control for the time-varying effects of the suppliers
industry, and in column 3 we include controls for the time-varying
effects of size quartiles. In column 4, we include a seller-by-buyer fixed
effect, to account for the fact that relationship-level characteristics may
impact payment behavior. Finally, in column 5, we include a buyer-by-
month fixed effect to absorb time-varying characteristics of the buyer
(i.e., demand for goods). In all specifications, we find a positive and
significant coefficient on the 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 term, suggesting that
suppliers with minority lead credit officers have a larger increase in
overdue accounts after the onset of COVID-19, relative to suppliers with
non-minority lead credit officers. The result is economically significant;
the coefficient in column 5 of Table 3 suggests that minority suppliers
have a 21 percent larger increase in overdue accounts, relative to the
control group.

In panel B of Table 3, we use the subsample of suppliers that
continue to sell through COVID-19. We note that this is a much smaller
subset of the data. For this subsample we are able to calculate the past
due accounts as a percentage of the most recent credit sale, % Past 30
days. As in panel A, we incrementally add controls and fixed effects as
we move from column 1 through 5. We find that, for those suppliers
and customers that continue to transact through COVID, suppliers with
minority lead credit officers have a larger increase in the portion of
past due accounts after the onset of COVID-19, relative to suppliers
with non-minority lead credit officers. The results are economically
significant, suggesting that minority suppliers have a 9%–15% larger

The results in Table 3 highlight that the demographic characteristics
of the supplier’s lead credit officer influence their ability to collect
overdue accounts during COVID. However, our treatment variable
commingles the effects of gender and race. Therefore, we explore the
demographic variable further by splitting our treatment variable into
Female and Black. Table 4 reports the results. Similar to Table 3, we
perform two analyses. Panel A uses the full sample and estimates the
effects of demographics on the log of one plus the total past due
accounts. We find a positive and significant coefficient on both the
𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒 term as well as the 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘 term, suggesting
that the effects documented in Table 3 are coming through both gender
and race. However, across most specifications the magnitude of the
coefficient on 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘 is more than twice that of 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒.
This suggests that suppliers with Black lead credit officers see past due
accounts increasing by substantially more than other groups.

Panel B of Table 4 uses the subsample of suppliers and customers
that continue to transact throughout COVID. The dependent variable is
the percentage of past due accounts from the most recent credit sale.
While we find a consistently positive coefficient on 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒,
the coefficient on 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘 is not statistically significant in any
specification. We note, however, that the subset of suppliers with Black
lead credit officers who continue to transact through COVID is very
small; thus, power is likely an issue in these analyses.

6. Within-relationship estimation

Our estimations thus far account for much of the variation driving
differences in payment behavior to minority lead credit officers versus
non-minority groups. Specifically, in our most rigorous specifications
we absorb time-varying customer characteristics (like changes in de-
mand), and we control for supplier-firm size and industry. However, the
remaining concern is an omitted economic factor that is time-varying
at the supplier level. One such possibility is that minorities face larger
increases in constraints during COVID, leading to larger declines in
their collection effort.

While controlling for time-varying supplier characteristics is helpful
in addressing some concerns, it does not fully rule out the possi-
bility of an omitted, time-varying supplier characteristic that drives
differential changes in collection. To account for time-varying sup-
plier characteristics, we next move to a within-relationship estimation.
Specifically, because suppliers have multiple customers in a given
month and customers also have multiple suppliers in a given month,
we simultaneously absorb time-varying supplier characteristics (using
supplier*month fixed effects) and time-varying customer character-
istics (customer*month fixed effects). Thus, we are able to exam-
ine how trade credit payments change during COVID within each
supplier-customer relationship using the within-relationship estimator.
In identifying discrimination at the relationship-level, our hypoth-
esis is that the largest increases in payment delays should flow from
customers with a greater inclination to discriminate toward suppliers
with minority lead credit officers.

We use location-based proxies to capture potential customer biases,
consistent with Howell et al. (2022).15 In the platform’s database,

15 We note that an alternative way to capture inclination to discrimination
would be at the individual-level, for instance by noting the customer’s own
race or gender. However, it is not clear that women or black people are
less likely to discriminate against minorities. Ayres and Siegelman (1995) use
a randomized trial to show that black and female customers fare worse (in
terms of higher prices) when negotiating at car dealerships, even when the car
salesperson themself is a minority; specifically, black customers fared equally
worse whether they were matched with a black or a white salesperson. Thus,
prior work overwhelmingly suggests that individual-level traits like race and
gender may not be indicative of an individual’s propensity to discriminate.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038728A.M. Costello et al.

Table 4
Payments to minority suppliers: Split on female and black.

(a) Panel A

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖

Observations
Adj. 𝑅2
Seller FE
Month FE
After ∗ Industry
After ∗ Size
Seller ∗ Buyer FE
Buyer ∗ Month FE

(b) Panel B

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖

Observations
Adj. 𝑅2
Seller FE
Month FE
After ∗ Industry
After ∗ Size
Seller ∗ Buyer FE
Buyer ∗ Month FE

(1)

0.283**
(0.132)
0.409**
(0.177)

7,169,992
0.114
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

(1)

0.153***
(0.026)
0.009
(0.022)

1,822,965
0.089
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

(2)

0.242**
(0.112)
0.509**
(0.195)

7,169,991
0.115
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

(2)

0.161***
(0.028)
0.026
(0.029)

1,822,965
0.091
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

Log (1+Past Due)

(3)

0.249**
(0.114)
0.505**
(0.195)

7,088,124
0.099
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

% Past 30 Days

(3)

0.161***
(0.028)
0.026
(0.029)

1,822,965
0.091
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N

(4)

0.199**
(0.096)
0.434*
(0.228)

6,687,438
0.547
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

(4)

0.119***
(0.027)
0.031
(0.036)

1,472,013
0.438
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N

(5)

0.189**
(0.090)
0.435**
(0.207)

3,800,875
0.694
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

(5)

0.090***
(0.016)
0.016
(0.025)

232,073
0.292
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

This table reports the results of testing the impact of COVID19 on delayed payments to vendors, where the Minority variable is split into its two
components: Female and Black. The dependent variable in Panel A is the log of one plus the total dollars past due between a buyer and seller
each month. The dependent variable in Panel B is the percentage of the most recent purchase that is past due. Thus, the sample in Panel A
includes all buyers and sellers with data in the database, whereas the sample in Panel B requires that the buyer and the seller had a new sales
transaction in the previous month (i.e., throughout COVID). Regressions are run at the transaction level. Woman equals one if the lead credit
manager for the seller is a woman, and Black equals one if the lead credit manager for the seller is Black. After equals one if the transaction
occurred after March 2020. All other variables are as previously defined. Standard errors are clustered at the supplier and the customer level
and are reported in parentheses. *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

we know the identity of the customer-firm and the location of the
customer-firm. Thus, we match the zip code of the customer’s estab-
lishment to county-level or city-level proxies for bias.

6.1. Empirical proxies for customers’ bias

Our first proxy for discriminatory bias is based on county-level
historical lynchings over the period 1877–1950. We obtain this data
from the Equal Justice Initiative, who collect historical information on
the number of lynchings of Black people in each county.16 Our proxy
is the number of historical lynchings in the county, Lynchings. Our
assumption is that customers located in counties with more historical
lynchings are more likely to exhibit bias, particularly against Blacks.
This assumption is guided by extant literature showing that historical
lynchings can have lasting economic effects and can influence racial
biases well after the lynching event (e.g., Cook (2014)).

Our second proxy for discriminatory bias is based on city-level
classifications of ‘‘Sundown Towns’’. Sundown towns are cities or coun-
ties in the U.S. that have practiced some form of racial segregation
through laws, ordinances, or violence. Towns are typically confirmed
as Sundown towns in one of three ways: (1) Census figures reveal an
absence of black people over multiple periods; (2) newspaper articles
or historical records indicate laws or ordinances designed to keep black
people out of the town; (3) oral history from experts indicates the
town restricted people of color. James W. Loewen researched Sundown

Towns and wrote the book: ‘‘Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of
American Racism’’. We gathered information on Sundown Towns from
https://sundown.tougaloo.edu/sundowntowns.php. Specifically, we as-
signed an indicator variable, Sundown, equal to one if the customer was
located in a zip code classified as a Sundown town, zero otherwise.

Our third proxy for discriminatory bias is based on individuals’
responses to the Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ). The MFQ is a
psychological questionnaire that includes Likert scale questions, aimed
at eliciting an individual’s weight on universalist attitudes like ‘‘treating
people equally’’ and ‘‘caring for the weak’’. Enke (2020) aggregates the
individuals’ survey responses to the county level to obtain a continuous
measure of morality; more positive values represent counties with more
universalist attitudes, whereas negative values represent counties with
more ‘‘loyalist’’ attitudes (i.e., a focus on loyalty their own group, and
a respect for tradition). He shows that universalist values are strongly
predictive of economic behaviors such as the extent to which people
donate money or volunteer time to charitable causes, and are strongly
related to individuals’ voting patterns. We use the data from Enke
(2020), provided on his website which indicates the county-level of
Universalist attitudes. Our hypothesis is that individuals located in more
universalist counties are less likely to discriminate against minority
groups.

Our fourth proxy for bias is based on Harvard’s Project Implicit As-
sociation Test.17 The implicit association test (IAT) was developed and
validated to measure implicit biases by measuring the speed with which

16 https://eji.org/reports/lynching-in-america/.

17 https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/index.jsp.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038729A.M. Costello et al.

the respondent matches concepts to genders. Specifically, respondents
are asked to sort male names and career-based words to one side of
the screen and female names and family-based words to the other side
of the screen. The reaction times for these tasks are used as a measure
of the strength of an individual’s implicit associations. In other words,
if one is faster at pairing male with career and female with family,
relative to their pairing of male with family and female with career,
that individual would be classified as having higher implicit gender-
career bias. The gender-career IAT hosted on the Project Implicit site
has been taken by over 954,000 individuals over the last 13 years, and
responses are aggregated at the county level. Project Implicit aggregates
individual test results to the county-level, which we obtain from their
website. Our assumption is that customers located in counties with
higher gender-career implicit biases (indicated by higher IAT scores)
are more likely to discriminate against female lead credit officers.

Our fifth and final proxy for bias is the customers’ state-level
difference in men’s and women’s median earnings; specifically, the
measure is calculated as the women’s earnings as a percentage of men’s
(RelativeEarnings). We obtain information on the state-level median pay
rates for men and women from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.18 Note
that unlike our previous proxies, we do not have information on the
pay gap at the county-level. We predict that customers located in states
with higher relative female earnings hold less gender-based biases than
those in states with lower relative female earnings.

6.2. Aggregation of bias proxies: Principal component analysis

To construct a summary measure of customers’ discriminatory pref-
erences, we aggregate the five empirical proxies using principal compo-
nent analyses. Specifically, each of the five proxies is normalized, and
we then conduct a principal component analysis to obtain a summary
measure of customers’ biases. BiasPCA is the first principal component
of the following bias proxies: Lynchings, Sundown, Universalist, IAT, and
RelativeEarnings. The first principal component is the only component
with an eigenvalue that is larger than one (1.288), and the weights
on each component enter as we expect. Specifically, Lynchings, Sun-
down, and IAT enter with positive weights, consistent with greater
values indicating higher biases. Universalist and RelativeEarnings enter
with negative weights, consistent with greater values indicating lower
biases.

To better capture the type of customers’ biases, we split the PCA
analysis into the constructs measuring discrimination on the basis of
gender and, separately, discrimination on the basis of race. Gender-
BiasPCA is the first principal component of the following normal-
ized bias proxies: IAT, RelativeEarnings, and Universalist. IAT and Rela-
tiveEarnings are more clearly targeted toward gender-based discrimina-
tion. However, we also include Universalist, since it is likely to capture
the likelihood of general biases, including gender-based discrimination.
The first principal component explains 37% of the variance in the three
proxies and is the only component with an eigenvalue that is larger
than one (1.119).

RaceBiasPCA is the first principal component of the following nor-
malized bias proxies: Lynchings, Sundown, and Universalist. Lynchings
and Sundown are more clearly targeted toward race-based discrimina-
tion. However, we also include Universalist, since it is likely to capture
the likelihood of general biases, including race-based discrimination.
The first principal component explains 38% of the variance in the three
proxies and is the only component with an eigenvalue that is larger
than one (1.163).

6.3. Within-relationship tests

To test whether minorities suffer greater increases in payment de-
lays from their more biased customers, we supplement the DD spec-
ification with a triple-interaction term that captures the customer’s
discriminatory biases. Specifically, we use the following specification:

𝑦𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 ∗ 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑡 ∗ 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 + 𝛾𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑖,𝑗 ∗ 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑡

+ 𝛼𝑖,𝑗 + 𝛼𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝑡

(2)

We now include supplier-month fixed effects in these specifications,
which will absorb any time-varying changes in supplier characteristics
at the onset of COVID, in addition to customer-month fixed effects,
which absorb any time-varying changes in customer demand. We also
include time-invariant relationship fixed effects (supplier-customer).
Customer bias is captured by the three summary measures from our
principal component analyses, discussed in Section 6.2.19

Results are reported in Table 5. In panel A, we measure the cus-
tomer’s county-level bias using the general bias proxy, 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 . The
dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is one plus the log of the total
dollars past due between a buyer and seller each month, and the depen-
dent variable in columns 3 and 4 is the percentage of the most recent
purchase that is past due. The results show that biased customers signif-
icantly increase their delayed payments to suppliers with minority lead
credit officers. Specifically, in column 1, the results can be interpreted
as a one standard deviation increase in customers’ biases increases their
delayed payments to minority suppliers by 10%; likewise, the results in
column 3 can be interpreted as, for those relationships that continue to
transact during COVID, a one standard deviation increase in customers’
biases increases their delayed payments to minority suppliers by 3.6%.
We note that these specifications take advantage of the granular-
ity of our data by including a rigorous set of fixed effects, which
allows us to control for undesirable variation. Specifically, we include
a time-invariant relationship fixed effect (supplier*customer), which
will absorb the interactive effect of 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 ∗ 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗; we also
include a time-varying customer fixed effect (customer*month), which
will absorb the interactive effect of 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑡 ∗ 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 , and a time-
varying supplier fixed effect (supplier*month), which will absorb the
interactive effect of 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 ∗ 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑡. Importantly, the only remaining
source of variation in our regression model is time-varying payment
behavior between a specific customer–supplier pair.

We think that showing that payment delays increase at the onset of
COVID for matched pairs of biased customers and minority suppliers
provides a strong case for the role of discrimination in the payments
chain. However, there could exist an omitted, bi-lateral relationship
variable that also impacts changes in payments from ‘‘biased’’ cus-
tomers to minority suppliers at the onset of COVID. For instance, a
key concern is an omitted factor capturing the relative importance of a
given supplier to a specific customer. Say, for example, that at the onset
of COVID customers create a list of economically critical suppliers, and
that the pecking order of payments follows that list. If all customers
have similar lists, such that certain suppliers are always critical and
others are always unimportant, this concern would be absorbed by
the supplier*month fixed effect. However, if there is some variation in
importance at the relationship level (certain suppliers are critical to
some customers and unimportant to others) and these least important
economic relationships are also those between biased customers and
minority suppliers, then our inferences would be flawed.

First, we assess the potential threat of a relationship-level omitted
variable by creating four proxies for bi-lateral relationship importance.
The first is the buyer-seller relationship ‘‘age’’, with the idea that
longer-duration relationships may be more economically important
ones. The platform’s database includes a variable that identifies the first

18 https://www.bls.gov/opub/reports/womens-earnings/2018/home.htm.

See Table 3.

19 Each measure is tabulated separately in the Online Appendix.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387210A.M. Costello et al.

Table 5
Payments to minority suppliers from biased customers.

(a) Panel A: Payments to minority suppliers from biased customers

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 ∗ 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑉 𝑜𝑙.𝑖,𝑗;𝑞2

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑉 𝑜𝑙.𝑖,𝑗;𝑞3

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑉 𝑜𝑙.𝑖,𝑗;𝑞4

𝑁
Adj. 𝑅2
Seller ∗ BuyerFE
Seller ∗ MonthFE
Buyer ∗ MonthFE

Log (1+Past Due)

% Past 30 Days

(1)

0.100**
(0.037)

2,641,125
0.686
Y
Y
Y

(2)

0.101**
(0.037)
−0.016**
(0.007)
−0.029**
(0.014)
−0.033
(0.068)

2,641,125
0.693
Y
Y
Y

(3)

0.036**
(0.014)

163,190
0.336
Y
Y
Y

(4)

0.036*
(0.016)
−0.000
(0.002)
−0.003
(0.006)
−0.011**
(0.005)

163,190
0.337
Y
Y
Y

(b) Panel B: Payments to minority suppliers from gender-biased customers

Log (1+Past Due)

% Past 30 Days

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖 ∗ 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 ∗ 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗;𝑞2

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗;𝑞3

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗;𝑞4

𝑁
Adj. 𝑅2
Seller ∗ BuyerFE
Seller ∗ MonthFE
Buyer ∗ MonthFE

(1)

0.079*
(0.046)
0.046
(0.147)

2,641,125
0.699
Y
Y
Y

(2)

0.0789*
(0.0460)
0.047
(0.147)
−0.011**
(0.007)
−0.024*
(0.014)
−0.028**
(0.012)

2,641,125
0.699
Y
Y
Y

(3)

0.020**
(0.008)
0.004
(0.027)

163,190
0.280
Y
Y
Y

(4)

0.020**
(0.008)
0.004
(0.027)
−0.000
(0.000)
−0.007
(0.006)
−0.012
(0.025)

163,190
0.280
Y
Y
Y

(c) Panel C: Payments to minority suppliers from race-biased customers

Log (1+Past Due)

% Past 30 Days

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑐𝑒𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑐𝑒𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗;𝑞2

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗;𝑞3

𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗;𝑞4

𝑁
Adj. 𝑅2
After ∗ Importance
Seller ∗ BuyerFE
Seller ∗ MonthFE
Buyer ∗ MonthFE

(1)

0.097
(0.177)
0.088**
(0.042)

2 641 125
0.699
N
Y
Y
Y

(2)

0.097
(0.178)
0.088**
(0.042)
−0.011**
(0.007)
−0.019
(0.014)
−0.027**
(0.012)

2 641 125
0.686
Y
Y
Y
Y

(3)

0.004*
(0.002)
0.014*
(0.008)

163 190
0.280
N
Y
Y
Y

(4)

0.004*
(0.002)
0.014*
(0.008)
−0.000
(0.001)
−0.003
(0.006)
−0.013
(0.029)

163 190
0.280
Y
Y
Y
Y

This table reports the results of testing the impact of COVID19 on delayed payments to minority vendors, based on whether the customer is
located in counties more associated with bias. In panel A, we measure the customer’s county-level bias as the first principal component of all five
bias variables: lynchings, sundown, universalist, IAT, and RelativeEarnings. The first principal component is measured at the customer-county
level, and is labeled 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 . In panel B, we measure the customer’s county-level bias as the first principal component of the subset of
gender-based bias variables: universalist, IAT, and RelativeEarnings. The first principal component is labeled 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 . In panel C, we
measure the customer’s county-level bias as the first principal component of the subset of race-based bias variables: lynchings, sundown, and
universalist. The first principal component is labeled 𝑅𝑎𝑐𝑒𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 . In all three panels, the dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the
log of one plus the total dollars past due between a buyer and seller each month, and the dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is the
percentage of the most recent purchase that is past due. Regressions are run at the transaction level. Minority equals one if the lead credit
manager for the seller is either a woman or is Black; Female equals one if the lead credit manager for the seller is a woman and Black equals
one if the lead credit manager for the seller is Black. After equals one if the transaction occurred after March 2020. In columns 2 and 4 of each
panel, we include a control for the importance of the relationship, defined as the percentage of the suppliers total sales that go to a particular
customer, calculated in the year before COVID. The importance variable is split into quartiles and interacted with After. All other variables are
as previously defined. Standard errors are clustered at the supplier and customer level, and are reported in parentheses. *** significant at 1%,
** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387211A.M. Costello et al.

sale date, even if that date preceded the date that supplier joined the
platform. We calculate the relationship age as the number of months
between the first sale date and March 2020. Second, we calculate the
volume of transactions between the buyer-seller pair in the year before
the onset of COVID, as a proxy for how critical the supplier is to a
particular customer. Sales Volume is calculated as the percentage of
the supplier’s total annual sales made to each customer. Third, we
calculate the distance between a buyer and seller pair. If customers
prefer to buy local during the pandemic, we may see that they prioritize
closer suppliers. Relatedly, we create a fourth variable to more precisely
capture localization; that is, we define an indicator variable equal to
one if the customer–supplier pair are both within 10 miles of each
other. Note that all four of these variables vary at the supplier-customer
(pair) level. As reported in Table 2, relationships between non-minority
suppliers and their customers are similar to the relationships between
minority suppliers and their customers along all dimensions except for
relationship age, whereby minority suppliers have older (e.g., more
important) relationships with customers than non-minority suppliers
do.

Though we find that bilateral relationships are largely similar across
the treatment and control groups in the univariate, we still want to
account for this threat in our regression framework. However, the
potential omitted relationship-level ‘‘importance’’ variable lines up at
exactly the level of variation we use to capture discrimination (Minority
supplier * Biased customer * After); thus we cannot use fixed effects to
address this time-varying economic importance concern. Instead, we in-
teract the proxies for relationship importance, defined above, with the
After indicator to account for the fact that relationship importance may
differentially impact payments at the onset of COVID. For parsimony,
we only tabulate the results of controlling for importance using sales
volume, but results are similar when controlling for the other measures
of relationship importance (tabulated in the Online Appendix). We split
the pre-COVID relationship sales percentage into quartiles, where the
lowest quartile represents the relationships with the lowest percentage
of pre-COVID sales, and the highest quartile represents the relationships
with the highest percentage of pre-COVID sales.

In columns 2 and 4 of Table 5, we include the quartile of relation-
ship importance, interacted with the After indicator. Consistent with
importance playing a role in payments at the onset of COVID, we find
that more important relationships have lower payment delays (relative
to the least important relationships) during COVID. Interestingly, as we
move from the second quartile of importance to the fourth quartile
of importance, the absolute magnitude of the coefficients increases,
consistent with economic predictions. Nonetheless, the coefficients on
our main interaction terms, 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 ∗ 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 remain
statistically significant and economically similar to the coefficients in
columns 1 and 3. These tests provide some comfort that variation
in a relationship’s economic importance does not solely explain our
results. That said, we urge readers to interpret our results with caution,
given our proxies cannot perfectly capture all omitted time-varying,
relationship-level concerns.

To more clearly narrow in on the role of the customer’s specific
type of bias, in panel B, we focus on the customer’s gender-based bias,
𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 and in panel C, we focus on the customer’s race-based
bias, 𝑅𝑎𝑐𝑒𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 . We expect that gender-biased customers will
delay payments more to females trade credit officers than to Black trade
credit officers, and we expect that race-biased customers will delay
payments more to Black officers than to females. Results reported in
panel B indeed indicate that the largest increases in payment delays at
the onset of COVID are from gender biased customers to suppliers with
female lead credit officers. By contrast, gender biased customers do not
appear to increase their payment delays to suppliers with Black lead
credit officers; the coefficient on 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 ∗ 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗
is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Like panel A,
controlling for relationship importance in columns 2 and 4 does not
appear to explain our main result.

Results reported in panel C show that the largest increases in
payment delays at the onset of COVID are from race biased customers
to suppliers with Black lead credit officers. Race-biased customers also
appear to increase their payment delays to suppliers with female credit
officers (in columns 3 and 4), which could be due to the fact that our
measures of bias do not perfectly orthogonalize race- or gender-based
preferences. However, it is notable that the magnitude of the coefficient
on 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑐𝑒𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 is twice the size of the coefficient
on 𝐴𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∗ 𝐹 𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑐𝑒𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑃 𝐶𝐴𝑗 .

7. Punishment

A key argument in motivating the COVID-19 setting is that it
presents substantial increases in market-based frictions, making it more
difficult for suppliers to punish a defaulting customer. That is, when
markets are relatively more competitive, a supplier with outside op-
tions may simply cut-off a customer or significantly ration supply to
punish a customer that lapses on their trade credit payment. However,
COVID made it relatively more difficult for suppliers to punish their
customers, both because there was significantly more uncertainty in
the marketplace and because it was more costly to find alternative
customers willing to buy the supplier’s goods and services.

To provide some evidence on punishment, we explore relationship
termination after defaults (we label this customer ‘‘firing’’). A relation-
ship as terminated if the buyer-seller pair ceases to do business at some
point in the 6 month period following a customer default. For each
month, t, we define a customer as defaulting if any portion of the
payment between the supplier-customer pair is late, zero otherwise.
We then measure whether the customer–supplier pair ceases to transact
during the t+6 month time-frame. Though we call this a customer
‘‘firing’’, we should caveat that we cannot observe the reason behind the
relationship break, nor can we observe which party initiated the break.
For instance, relationships cease for many other reasons including shifts
in supply/demand and other relationship- and market-specific condi-
tions. Thus, we compare the average level of ‘‘firing’’ for defaulters,
relative to a baseline level of relationship breakage for non-defaulting
customers.

We expand our sample to the earliest date that we have trading
data (2014) through the last date that we have trading data (the end
of 2020).20 Table 6 reports the results, split into the pre-COVID sample
period and the post-COVID sample period. In the pre-COVID period,
we do indeed find that suppliers (both minority and non-minority)
are more likely to stop transacting with defaulting customers, relative
to the baseline sample of relationships with non-defaulting customers;
however, we do not find evidence of punishment during the COVID
period; suppliers are equally likely to stop doing business with default-
ing and non-defaulting customers.21 This pattern is consistent with the
story that the COVID period relaxed market-based discipline for non-
payment. However, we cannot say with certainty that suppliers did not
punish in some other fashion (i.e., pricing), or whether they punished
these non-paying customers at a later date after the COVID pandemic
eased. Note that our data source does not extend beyond December
2020 so longer-run effects are not captured.

20 The pre-period includes transactions up to August of 2019, so that we
measure retention or firing in the six month period that ends before COVID
(February 2020).

21 Note that the average probability of relationship breakage is higher during
COVID relative to non-COVID. This is likely due to significant shifts in market
supply and demand. However, the notable result is that in the COVID period,
non-defaulters are statistically of equal likelihood to be terminated relative to
defaulting customers.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387212A.M. Costello et al.

Table 6
Punishment.

Probability that supplier ‘‘fires’’ customer within 6 months

Pre-COVID

COVID

Non-minority supplier

Minority supplier

Non-minority supplier

Minority supplier

𝑇 𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑙𝑦𝐶𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐,𝑠,𝑡
𝐷𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝐶𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑐,𝑠,𝑡
Difference

0.038
0.092
−0.054***

0.038
0.119
−0.081***

0.290
0.293
−0.003

0.282
0.280
0.002

This table evaluates whether customers lose their supplier within 6 months (t+6) after either defaulting or being timely in their period t
payments to that supplier. Customers are defined as timely in month t to supplier s if they make full payment on their previous month’s
receivable due to supplier s, and they are defined as defaulting in month t to supplier s if they lapse on at least some portion of the previous
month’s receivable due to supplier s. We define future relationship loss between supplier s and customer t if they no longer transact with that
supplier in the t+6 timeframe (‘‘firing’’). *** , **, and * represent significant differences in the treatment and control groups at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.

8. Robustness analyses

We perform several additional tests to assess the robustness of our
key results. First, one may be concerned that our results are an arti-
fact of profit-maximizing customers paying the people that they have
more information about. For instance, Fisman et al. (2017) find that
similar religious and cultural beliefs increases lending from bankers
to their like-minded borrowers in India. They find that their results
are not due to discrimination (e.g., in-group preference), but rather
due to mitigated information frictions in lending (e.g., a purely profit-
maximizing story). Since our research question relates to discrimina-
tion, we wanted to rule out this profit-maximizing, information-based
story. The information-based story would predict that customers pay
the people that are in their same demographic group first. By contrast,
theories of discrimination based on dominant-group preference predict
that all people regardless of their racial or gender group discriminate
against the minority group (see, e.g., Jost and Banaji (1994)). For in-
stance, Ayres and Siegelman (1995) use a randomized trial to show that
black and female customers fare worse (in terms of higher prices) when
negotiating at car dealerships, even when the car salesperson themself is
a minority; specifically, black customers fared equally worse whether
they were matched with a black or a white salesperson.

Thus, a way to disentangle the information-based rationale versus
the discrimination story, we collect the race and gender of the customer
in charge of making payments. The information on the identity of
this customer is only available for a small subsample of firms in the
data. We characterize customers according to their race and gender
in the same way we classified lead trade credit officers. Specifically,
we use Genderize.io to characterize this individual’s gender and the
Ethnicolr package to assess race. Our results, tabulated in the online
appendix, show that everyone, including female and black payment
personnel, pay minority lead credit officers slower. The evidence is
consistent with Ayres and Siegelman (1995), and is inconsistent with a
profit-maximizing information-based story.

The second robustness test we do is aimed at addressing the differ-
ence between statistical discrimination and preferences or biased be-
liefs. Statistical discrimination occurs when there is uncertainty about
an agent’s type, and thus a decision maker draws inferences from a
true, group-wide statistic. Schwab (1986) highlights that for statistical
discrimination to contribute to decision-making, the stereotype must
be true — rational agents make decisions supported by statistical
fact. Bordalo et al. (2016) argue that this type of stereotype contains
a ‘‘kernel of truth’’ because it is rooted in true differences between
groups.

To assess whether our results are due to true statistical differences
between minority lead credit officers and non-minority lead credit
officers (e.g., true differences in their ability to collect payments), we
assess collection statistics in the period before the Pandemic. We show
that for both high bias customers and low bias customers, their sample
of minority suppliers exhibit faster collections than their sample non-
minority suppliers in the pre-COVID period. Thus, it does not appear

that true statistical differences in collections quality can explain our
results.

Third, though we use the Khwaja and Mian (2008) within-firm
estimator, which requires the customer to be matched to multiple
suppliers in the same month, one may still be concerned that certain
types of customers are only matched to suppliers in the treatment
group, and other types of customers are only matched to suppliers in
the control group. Thus, while the customer*month fixed effects require
each customer to transact with multiple suppliers in a given month, we
further restrict the sample to ensure that each customer transacts with at
least one minority supplier and at least one non-minority supplier in the
same month. In this restricted sample, the within-customer estimator
then allows us to compare how a given customer pays non-minority
suppliers relative to how that same customer pays minority suppliers
in the same month. Results from this most restrictive specification are
tabulated in the Online Appendix and are nearly identical to those
presented in the paper.

Fourth, though our main analyses primarily rely on changes in
payments at the intensive margin, we asses these changes at the exten-
sive margin by creating a fully balanced panel of buyer–supplier pairs.
Results, tabulated in the Online Appendix show that the largest effects
flow through the intensive margin of payments, with smaller effects
coming from the exit of certain buyer-seller pairs from the sample.

Finally, we note that our primary identification concern comes from
an omitted, time-varying relationship trait like economic ‘‘importance’’.
In the Online Appendix we supplement our control variables with
additional proxies for relationship-level importance, including the num-
ber of years a particular buyer and seller have been transacting and
the distance between the buyer and seller; results and inferences are
unchanged. Nevertheless, we urge readers to interpret our paper with
caution for at least two reasons. First, we recognize that our identi-
fication strategy, while compelling, does not fully rule out correlated
omitted variables, particularly related to time-varying relationship level
traits. Second, our setting exploits a narrow set of trade creditors and
further places significant restrictions on the data through the complex-
ity of our fixed effects. In doing so, we trade off the ability to more
tightly identify potentially biased payment behavior, but we do so at a
potential cost of limited generalizability.

9. Conclusion

We find evidence consistent with discrimination in the supply chain.
In particular, we show that customers repay the trade credit to their
suppliers with minority lead credit officers later than they pay their
suppliers with credit officers that are white men. As with all studies
on discrimination, a main concern is that minorities differ from non-
minorities along important economic dimensions; thus, it is difficult to
pinpoint the effects of discrimination per se. The novelty of our setting
is the complex, interconnected web of supply chain relationships. Our
within-relationship estimation allows us to simultaneously control for

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387213A.M. Costello et al.

time-varying supplier characteristics and time-varying customer char-
acteristics. The remaining variation – within the relationship – indicates
that the greatest payment delays flow from biased customers toward
minority suppliers.

As an important caveat, bias is difficult to observe and measure. In
fact, people are often unaware of biases that they may hold (Bertrand
et al., 2005). Thus, we are forced to infer bias from economic choices.
Our results in the paper indicate discrimination is at play; however
despite our best efforts, other economic forces may explain more than
what we are able to control for in our empirical tests.

Our findings provide new insights into how discrimination mani-
fests in economic effects for corporations. Specifically, by highlighting
the role of discrimination in pre-established supplier relationships,
we show that discrimination can play a long-lasting and economi-
cally significant role in firm level outcomes. We think that this has
important implications for policy aimed at closing gaps between mi-
norities and non-minorities. Addressing individuals’ biases and pref-
erences (e.g., changing belief systems) may involve more substantial
interventions than those addressing purely statistical beliefs.

We also provide evidence on the types of discrimination that are
prevalent in the United States; specifically, discrimination on gender
and race both seem to explain customers’ payment behavior. Our find-
ings are not only relevant to the academic literature on discrimination,
but also to recent social movements highlighting the importance of
minority group rights.

Credit authorship contribution statement

Anna M. Costello: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization. Michael Minnis:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Con-
ceptualization. Irina Rabinovich: Validation, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103872.

References

Arrow, K., 1973. The theory of discrimination. Discrim. Labor Mark. 3 (10), 3–33.
Atalay, E., Hortacsu, A., Roberts, J., Syverson, C., 2011. Network structure of

production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108 (13), 5199–5202.

Auboin, M., 2009. Boosting the availability of trade finance in the current crisis:
background analysis for a substantial G20 package. CEPR Policy Insight 35.
Ayres, I., Siegelman, P., 1995. Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new

car. Am. Econ. Rev. 304–321.

Bank for International Settlements, 2014. Trade Finance: Developments and Issues.

CGFS Papers 50.

Becker, G., 1957. The Economics of Discrimination: An Economic View of Racial

Discrimination. University of Chicago.

Bertrand, M., Chugh, D., Mullainathan, S., 2005. Implicit discrimination. Amer. Econ.

Rev. 95 (2), 94–98.

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., 2004. Are Emily and Greg more employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination. Am. Econ.
Rev. 94 (4), 991–1013.

Biais, B., Gollier, C., 1997. Trade credit and credit rationing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 10 (4),

903–937.

Bordalo, P., Coffman, K., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2016. Stereotypes. Q. J. Econ. 131

(4), 1753–1794.

Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Weber, M., 2020. The Cost of the Covid-19 Crisis:
Lockdowns, Macroeconomic Expectations, and Consumer Spending. Tech. Rep.,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cook, L.D., 2014. Violence and economic activity: evidence from African American

patents, 1870–1940. J. Econ. Growth 19 (2), 221–257.

Costello, A.M., 2019. The value of collateral in trade finance. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (1),

70–90.

Costello, A.M., 2020. Credit market disruptions and liquidity spillover effects in the

supply chain. J. Polit. Econ. 128 (9), 3434–3468.

Costello, A.M., Down, A.K., Mehta, M.N., 2020. Machine+ Man: A field experiment on
the role of discretion in augmenting AI-based lending models. J. Account. Econ.
101360.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2001. Firms as Financial Intermediaries: Evidence

from Trade Credit Data. World bank, washington, dc.

Egan, M.L., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2017. When Harry fired Sally: The Double Standard
in Punishing Misconduct. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Enke, B., 2020. Moral values and voting. J. Polit. Econ. 128 (10), 3679–3729.
Fabbri, D., Menichini, A.M.C., 2010. Trade credit, collateral liquidation, and borrowing

constraints. J. Financ. Econ. 96 (3), 413–432.

Fisman, R., Paravisini, D., Vig, V., 2017. Cultural proximity and loan outcomes. Amer.

Econ. Rev. 107 (2), 457–492.

Gabaix, X., 2011. The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79 (3),

733–772.

Giannetti, M., Burkart, M., Ellingsen, T., 2011. What you sell

is what you lend?

Explaining trade credit contracts. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (4), 1261–1298.

Giannetti, M., Serrano-Velarde, N., Tarantino, E., 2021. Cheap trade credit and

competition in downstream markets. J. Polit. Econ. 129 (6), 1744–1796.

Howell, S.T., Kuchler, T., Snitkof, D., Stroebel, J., Wong, J., 2022. Lender Automation

and Racial Disparities in Credit Access. Wiley Online Library.

Hsieh, C.-T., Hurst, E., Jones, C.I., Klenow, P.J., 2019. The allocation of talent and us

economic growth. Econometrica 87 (5), 1439–1474.

Jacobson, T., von Schedvin, E., 2015. Trade credit and the propagation of corporate

failure: An empirical analysis. Econometrica 83 (4), 1315–1371.

Jost, J.T., Banaji, M.R., 1994. The role of stereotyping in system-justification and the

production of false consciousness. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 33 (1), 1–27.

Khwaja, A.I., Mian, A., 2008. Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: Evidence

from an emerging market. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (4), 1413–1442.

Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit chains. Discussion Paper 118, Edinburgh School

of Economics, 1315, 1316, 1318, 1322, 1326, 1356.

Love, I., Preve, L.A., Sarria-Allende, V., 2007. Trade credit and bank credit: Evidence

from recent financial crises. J. Financ. Econ. 83 (2), 453–469.

Schwab, S., 1986. Is statistical discrimination efficient? Am. Econ. Rev. 76 (1), 228–234.
Tzioumis, K., 2018. Demographic aspects of first names. Sci. Data 5, 180025.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387214