Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

How do Treasury dealers manage their positions?✩
Michael Fleming a,∗, Giang Nguyen b, Joshua Rosenberg c
a Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, New York, 10045, NY, USA
b Smeal College of Business, Pennsylvania State University, 352 Business Building, University Park, 16802, PA, USA
c United Texas Bank, 13101 Preston Road, Suite 200, Dallas, 75240, TX, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Using 31 years of data (1990–2020) on U.S. Treasury dealer positions, we find that Treasury issuance is
the main driver of dealers’ weekly inventory changes. Such inventory fluctuations are only partially offset
in adjacent weeks and not significantly hedged with futures. Dealers are compensated for inventory risk by
means of subsequent price appreciation of their holdings. Amid increased balance sheet costs attributable to
post-crisis regulatory changes, dealers significantly reduce their position taking and layoff inventory faster.
Moreover, the increased participation of non-dealers (investment funds) in the primary market contributes to
diminishing compensation for inventory risk taken on at auctions.

Dataset link: How Do Treasury Dealers Manage
Their Positions? (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G12
G24
G28

Keywords:
Treasury market
Dealers
Issuance
Positions
Inventory risk
Hedging

1. Introduction

This paper examines the inventory dynamics of U.S. government
securities dealers and how they manage the intermediation of new
Treasury supply. As Madhavan (2000) notes: ‘‘...just as physical market
places consolidate buyers and sellers in space, the market maker can
be seen as an institution to bring buyers and sellers together in time
through the use of inventory.’’ It is well established that intermediaries
are critical to the proper functioning of financial markets and that how
they manage their inventory has important implications for market
liquidity and asset prices.1

This importance takes on a new level when it comes to the U.S. Trea-
sury securities market. It is the ‘‘single most important financial market
in the world’’ (Group of Thirty, 2021), with $20.9 trillion in marketable
securities outstanding as of the end of 2020. Treasury securities fulfill
many vital functions, including financing the U.S. government, pro-
viding a pricing benchmark for other financial assets, functioning as
instruments for monetary policy implementation, and serving as a safe
haven for investors. Therefore, having a well-functioning and efficient
market for these securities is critical.

The primary government securities dealers are the backbone of the
Treasury market. They underwrite issuance of new Treasury security

✩

Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We are grateful to the editor and an anonymous referee for their valuable feedback. We thank Bruno Biais,
Charles Jones, and participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta System Finance Conference, the 2007 Financial Management Association annual meeting,
the 2008 American Finance Association annual meeting, the 2022 CMU–Pitt–PSU Finance conference, as well as seminar participants at the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for helpful comments. We thank Anh Le for providing Fama-Bliss Treasury yield curve
data used in this paper. We also thank April Bang, Neel Krishnan, Isabel Krogh, Michal Lementowski, Katherine Lewis, Samuel Maurer, and Claire Nelson for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York or the Federal Reserve System.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: michael.fleming@ny.frb.org (M. Fleming).

1 Early and influential papers such as Garman (1976), Stoll (1978), and Amihud and Mendelson (1980) provide models in which dealers adjust prices to
control inventory changes. Hendershott and Seasholes (2007) show that liquidity-supplier inventory has significant effects on contemporaneous and future stock
returns. Comerton-Forde et al. (2010) show that the time variation in market liquidity is attributable to market makers’ inventories with financing constraints.
More recent work by Chung and Huh (2016) shows that the inventory-related component of transaction costs is more strongly correlated with stock returns than
the adverse-selection component, underscoring the importance of inventory effects on asset prices.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103885
Received 29 July 2022; Received in revised form 28 May 2024; Accepted 29 May 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)103885Availableonline7June20240304-405X/©2024PublishedbyElsevierB.V.M. Fleming et al.

supply, make secondary markets in these securities, including to the
Federal Reserve (the Fed) in its implementation of monetary policy,
and are key intermediaries in the multi-trillion dollar market for re-
purchase agreements (repos). Pertinent to the Treasury market is that
issuance is frequent and sizable, subjecting dealer inventories to large
and frequently repeated shocks. Because dealers’ capital is limited, a
question of public interest and policy relevance is how dealers manage
to absorb such supply shocks in addition to their regular secondary
market making activities. This question becomes even more important
as the size of the Treasury market continues to grow (from $2.1 trillion
outstanding in 1990 to $5.8 trillion in 2008 to $21 trillion in 2020)
while the balance sheets of the intermediaries stagnated following the
2007–09 global financial crisis (see Adrian et al., 2017b; Duffie, 2020).
These trends imply that dealer capital constraints become more binding
over time, potentially resulting in greater price pressures associated
with issuance-related intermediation activities, unless alternative liq-
uidity providers take dealers’ place. As Lou et al. (2013) point out, these
issuance-related price pressures are costs borne by the U.S. Treasury,
and ultimately, taxpayers.

Numerous empirical papers have assessed the inventory manage-
ment behavior of dealers in equity markets, futures markets, and the
foreign exchange market.2 However, as of the first draft of this paper,
there were far fewer studies examining dealer inventory management in
fixed income securities despite the size and importance of such markets;
the Naik and Yadav (2003b) study of U.K. government bond dealers is
one exception. The literature on fixed income market structure flour-
ished only recently, especially following the 2007–09 financial crisis
when the role of the intermediary sector came under greater scrutiny
(see Adrian et al., 2017b for a review).3

Our paper is the first to analyze how dealers in the U.S. Treasury
market manage their positions.4 In particular, we examine how dealer
positions respond to issuance and redemptions of Treasury securities—
factors affecting dealer inventories not yet well studied in the literature.
Our analysis thus offers some insights into the key components that
drive dealer inventory dynamics. Extant studies also largely ignore
how dealers hedge position changes resulting from primary market
intermediation.5 We fill this gap by studying the extent to which dealers
engage in intertemporal smoothing and/or use futures to hedge inven-
tory shocks. Lastly, we investigate whether dealers are compensated for
taking on inventory risk associated with Treasury issuance.

Our analysis is based on the weekly net positions of the primary
dealers over the July 1990 to December 2020 period, published by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Given the scarcity of public data on
individual dealers’ inventories, the aggregate dealer positions data offer
valuable information, allowing us to investigate how the dealer sector
absorbs Treasury supply shocks and the asset pricing consequences of

2 See Hasbrouck and Sofianos (1993), Madhavan and Smidt (1993),
and Madhavan and Sofianos (1998) for the New York Stock Exchange, Hansch
et al. (1998), Reiss and Werner (1998), and Naik and Yadav (2003a) for
the London Stock Exchange, Manaster and Mann (1996) for futures markets,
and Lyons (1995) and Cao et al. (2006) for the foreign exchange market.

3 Transaction data in corporate bonds only became publicly available in
the early 2000’s. Even among studies of corporate bond dealers’ inventory,
researchers mainly rely on transaction data to arrive at inventory changes over
a given time interval rather than direct data on the level of dealers’ inventory
at any given point in time.

4 We use the terms ‘‘positions’’ and ‘‘inventory’’ interchangeably throughout

the paper.

5 Naik and Yadav (2003b) find that U.K. gilt dealers use futures to take
directional bets and also selectively hedge spot position changes. They also
find that dealers offset changes in their spot risk to a greater extent when the
cost of hedging is lower, when capital constraint pressures are greater, and
when economic uncertainty is higher. When Naik and Yadav (2003b) examine
the profitability of dealer trading strategies, they find no evidence that dealer
positions appreciate in value.

such intermediation. Furthermore, the long sample period – spanning
a variety of market conditions, including the 2007–09 financial crisis
and the sweeping post-crisis regulatory reforms – allows us to examine
whether and how the role of dealers in the intermediation of Treasuries
has changed over time.

We find evidence of a significant role for dealers in intertemporal
intermediation. Specifically, dealers absorb a large share of new Trea-
sury supply so that dealer positions increase during auction weeks.
The inventory impact seems to be fairly persistent, lasting at least a
week. Furthermore, dealer positions decline at redemptions of Treasury
securities, suggesting that dealers buy and hold many securities from
issuance through maturity and/or that redemptions result in increased
demand for other Treasuries from customers that need to reinvest the
funds. Our analysis shows that Treasury issuance and redemptions by
themselves explain a large share of the variation in Treasury dealer
position changes, far exceeding the explanatory power of other determi-
nants. Even though dealers evidently smooth auction-induced inventory
shocks by taking offsetting positions in adjacent weeks, these offsetting
positions are small in magnitude compared to activities during auction
weeks. These results highlight a key challenge facing Treasury dealers
compared to dealers in other markets: absorbing and carrying frequent,
sizable supply shocks over extended periods.

Our analysis also considers how dealers manage their Treasury
inventory in relation to their activities in the multi-trillion-dollar repo
market. As discussed in depth in Yadav and Yadav (2024), primary
dealers are the central gatekeepers of the supply of Treasuries as col-
lateral for secured lending transactions. Thus, how they manage their
Treasury inventory has crucial implications for the stability of both
the cash and repo markets. We find that dealers’ Treasury inventory
changes are positively correlated with dealers’ net financing activity in
the repo market. More importantly, our evidence suggests that dealers
engage in repo market activities to support their Treasury inventory
management, as opposed to repo market activity leading Treasury
inventory changes. Our results thus provide some empirical clarity to
the discussion in Yadav and Yadav (2024) of whether primary dealers,
being intermediaries in both the cash and repo markets, prioritize one
market over the other when faced with scarcity.

We next investigate how dealers hedge their inventory exposure
taken on at auction. With a shorter but valuable and unique sample of
data on dealers’ derivatives positions, we uncover several key results.
First, dealers are more likely to hedge exposure associated with coupon
securities (‘‘coupons’’) than with bills, which is consistent with the
former’s higher interest rate risk. Second, dealers appear to engage in
selective hedging depending on the nature of the inventory flow. By
separating inventory changes into a component driven by auctions and
another driven by dealers’ other activities (e.g., speculative trading and
secondary market making), we find that dealers are less concerned with
hedging auction-related inventory changes than with hedging inventory
changes driven by other factors. Because the U.S. Treasury Depart-
ment is committed to regular and predictable auctions, there is little
asymmetric information associated with auction-driven inventory flow,
whereas adverse selection is potentially present in the inventory flow
due to trades with customers or proprietary trading. That dealers use
futures to hedge a much smaller share of the former than they do the
latter is consistent with dealers wanting to mitigate adverse selection
risk (see Naik and Yadav, 2003b for similar evidence concerning U.K.
government bond dealers).

Next, we examine whether dealers are compensated for taking
on inventory risk, especially that acquired at auction. We find that
auction-induced inventory changes are slightly negatively correlated
with contemporaneous Treasury returns but strongly positively corre-
lated with Treasury returns the following week. These results suggest
that dealers buy Treasuries during auction weeks when prices are
depressed and then resell these securities later after prices have appre-
ciated. We therefore identify and explain a microstructure component

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038852M. Fleming et al.

of Treasury yield predictability surrounding Treasury auctions not pre-
viously explored. Moreover, our findings add to the evidence from
equity markets (Hendershott and Seasholes, 2007) that maker-maker
inventories have significant asset pricing effects at a multi-day horizon,
and show that such effects can exist even when the inventory changes
are common knowledge.

Subsequent to the first draft of this paper, other authors have
provided further evidence on the general asset pricing effects of Trea-
sury auction cycles. Lou et al. (2013) find that U.S. Treasury security
prices decrease in the days leading up to Treasury auctions and then
recover. Fleming and Liu (2017) document the same pattern at the
intraday level on auction dates. Beetsma et al. (2016) find similar
evidence around auctions of Italian public debt. The temporary price
pressures around auctions documented in these studies and ours point
to dealers’ limited risk-bearing capacity being the most plausible expla-
nation. Together, our results contribute to the larger literature on the
price impact of demand/supply shocks and the role of frictions arising
from limited (and slow-moving) capital that are present even in the
most liquid and transparent market settings (see Duffie, 2010).

Our paper further contributes new evidence on changes related
to dealers’ inventory management and inventory risk compensation
amid important market developments since the 2007–09 financial cri-
sis. Specifically, dealers’ share of purchases at auction, especially for
coupon securities, has declined steadily in the post-crisis period, and is
roughly offset by the growing role of investment funds (while the col-
lective share of other investor classes remains quite stable). Moreover,
dealers lay off inventory faster within the auction week, especially for
bills, thereby having to carry less inventory over the subsequent weeks.
The reduced position taking and capital commitment are consistent
with increased balance sheet costs attributed to post-crisis regulatory
changes and more stringent capital requirements (see e.g., Du et al.,
2023).

Surprisingly, compensation for taking on inventory risk at auctions
has also declined. We show that the diminished post-auction price
appreciation is related to the increasing participation of investment
funds in the primary market in the post-crisis period. The greater
competition from these new liquidity providers, which traditionally
buy securities from dealers in the secondary market, drives down the
compensation for intermediation. This helps overcome the decline in
dealers’ position taking and reduces issuance costs for the Treasury, but
increases the primary market’s dependence on non-obligatory liquidity
providers. Given the current fast growth rate of U.S. borrowing needs,
it is prudent to ensure that primary dealers – given their obligations to
underwrite Treasury issuance – remain an important part of the primary
market.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the
role of Treasury dealers and institutional features of the market. We
detail the data used and variable construction in Section 3. We model
dealer inventory dynamics in Section 4 and analyze how dealers hedge
inventory shocks in Section 5. We next examine the asset pricing effects
of dealer inventory management and evaluate the general auction-cycle
price effects in Section 6. In Section 7, we analyze how dealer inventory
management and compensation have changed over time. Section 8
concludes.

2. The role of Treasury dealers

U.S. Treasury securities trade in a multiple-dealer over-the-counter
market. The predominant market makers are the primary government
securities dealers, which are banks and securities broker-dealers that
trade with the New York Fed in the course of its open market op-
erations. The dealers also buy securities at auction, make markets
for their customers, and take positions for hedging and speculative
purposes. In recent years, dealers’ roles have evolved with the entry of
new participants and tighter regulatory constraints since the 2007–09
financial crisis. We discuss dealers’ roles, and how they have changed
over time, below.

2.1. Participating in auctions

Certain features of the Treasury market make it a good laboratory
for examining how dealers manage their inventory. The primary dealers
have a special obligation ‘‘to bid on a pro-rata basis in all Treasury
auctions at reasonably competitive prices’’.6 This underwriting function
is somewhat analogous to the ‘‘firm commitment’’ underwriting of
an initial public offering, e.g., Ritter (1987). Dealers can consolidate
advance customer orders and act as a broker for customer orders
at auction (see e.g., Boyarchenko et al., 2021). However, they are
expected to place competitive bids for their own account and at a range
of prices to ensure that the entire issue is sold at a reasonable price.

Because of this underwriting role, primary dealer inventories are
subject to large, predictable changes associated with the Treasury
auction cycle. These auction purchases cause dealer positions to deviate
from desired levels. While this creates pure inventory risk for dealers,
adverse selection risk from trading with counterparties with superior
information is small. This is because the Treasury Department commits
itself to a ‘‘regular and predictable’’ issuance schedule (Garbade, 2007),
explicitly minimizing strategic behavior based on private information.
Dealers can hedge the risk of new inventory acquired at auction by
selling Treasuries prior to the auction in the when-issued market,
selling after the auction in the secondary market, or taking offsetting
positions in other Treasury securities or derivatives markets.

2.2. Making markets

Another role of dealers is to make secondary markets, meeting the
transaction needs of customers and other dealers by buying and selling
securities for their own account. Primary dealers, in particular, are
expected to ‘‘demonstrate a substantial presence as a market maker
that provides two-way liquidity in U.S. government securities’’ and
‘‘maintain a share of Treasury market making activity of at least 0.25
percent’’. In the last quarter of 2020, primary dealers reported average
daily volume (ADV) of $372 billion with customers and $157 billion
with other dealers, compared to the $596 billion ADV of the whole
market published by SIFMA for 2020.7 Dealers can hedge positions
acquired through market making using the same methods described in
the previous section.

2.3. Taking speculative positions

To the extent that dealers have a perceived informational advantage
over other market participants, they may take on or maintain interest
rate exposure by initiating transactions or by opportunistically hedging
positions acquired through market making. For example, a dealer that
expects interest rates to fall in the near future might accumulate a long
Treasury securities position. If interest rates do indeed fall, the dealer
can sell the securities at a higher price.

Given that there is no asymmetric information about Treasury secu-
rity cash flows, the ability of market participants to forecast future price

6 Primary dealers are also expected to ‘‘participate in open market opera-
tions consistently and competitively’’, ‘‘make markets for the New York Fed on
behalf of its official accountholders’’, and ‘‘provide ongoing insight into market
developments’’. Dealer expectations and requirements are posted on the New
York Fed’s website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealers.
html.

7 Primary dealer statistics are from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/counterparties/primary-
dealers-statistics. SIFMA’s US Treasury securities statistics are available at
https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/us-Treasury-securities-statistics/.
Starting from 2019, SIFMA’s ADV statistics are sourced from FINRA TRACE
for Treasury data and include trades by dealers (primary and non-primary)
that are FINRA members.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038853M. Fleming et al.

changes is probably limited. Nonetheless, it is possible that some mar-
ket participants are better able to forecast future price changes because
they have better information about discount rates. Such information
might emanate from fundamentals, such as a superior ability to eval-
uate the state of the economy, or from technical considerations, such
as knowledge of customer order flow or security ownership. Evidence
from the literature indicates that order flow of U.S. Treasury dealers
is informative for prices (e.g., Fleming, 2003; Brandt and Kavajecz,
2004; Green, 2004; Pasquariello and Vega, 2007).

2.4. New entry and regulatory changes

New entry and regulatory changes since the 2007–09 financial crisis
have affected dealers’ roles. Even before the crisis, interdealer brokers
(IDBs) opened their electronic trading platforms to hedge funds and
high-frequency trading firms (HFTs). HFTs employ automated trading
strategies in which speed is a key element, usually invest for their own
account, employ limited capital, and tend to close the trading day close
to flat. The Joint Staff Report (2015) finds that HFTs account for 56%
of trading volume in the on-the-run 10-year note compared to bank-
dealers’ share of 35%, with the remaining 9% split among non-bank
dealers and hedge funds.8

The effects of new entry by HFTs on primary dealers are likely mod-
est and indirect. In the primary market, HFTs are not active at auction,
given the importance of speed to their trading strategies, and their
limited capital makes their strategies ill-suited for the inter-day inter-
mediation needed around auctions. In the secondary market, HFTs do
not transact with customers given the bifurcated structure of the Trea-
sury market between the interdealer and dealer-to-customer segments.
Moreover, even within the interdealer segment, HFTs’ participation is
limited to the electronic IDBs, which trade only on-the-run coupon
securities (Duffie, 2020). HFTs do not trade via the voice-assisted IDBs,
which facilitate interdealer trades in all Treasuries, including bills and
off-the-run coupon securities (which do not trade electronically).

This is not to say that HFTs do not affect dealer behavior. HFTs
likely improve liquidity of the on-the-run coupon securities (which are
the Treasuries that do trade electronically). This decreases dealers’ costs
of trading on-the-run coupons, thereby lowering dealers’ costs of mak-
ing markets (because they can hedge customer trades more cheaply)
and taking speculative positions. The effect on dealer position taking at
a weekly level is ambiguous, however, as the improved liquidity lowers
dealers’ cost of taking offsetting positions, which should decrease their
net positions, all else equal, but also increases dealers’ incentives to
make markets, which could increase their net positions.

In contrast, regulatory changes since the 2007–09 financial cri-
sis and increased participation of investment funds have likely had
meaningful direct effects on dealer behavior. Basel III’s higher risk-
weighted capital requirements and the supplementary leverage ratio,
in particular, have reduced dealers’ liquidity provision and risk-taking
capacity more generally (see e.g., Adrian et al., 2017a). At the same
time, increased participation by hedge funds has likely both reduced
the demand for dealer liquidity provision and increased the supply of
competing liquidity provision. In Section 7, we discuss these changes
in more detail and test several hypotheses on how the changes affect
the intermediation of primary market issuance and the compensation
for providing such intermediation.

3. Data

3.1. Treasury dealer positions

Our data on dealer positions come from the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York’s FR 2004A statistical release. The Fed collects positions

8 On-the-run securities are the most recently auctioned securities of a
given maturity. The mentioned statistics are based on trading activity on the
BrokerTec platform from April 2–17, 2014.

data from the primary dealers on U.S. Treasury securities, agency debt
securities, mortgage-backed securities (MBS), corporate debt securities,
and municipal debt securities. While our main variable of interest is
dealer positions in Treasury securities, positions in the other fixed
income securities contribute to a more complete understanding of
dealer position management across different fixed income instruments.
The data are reported to the Fed on a weekly basis, as of the close
of business each Wednesday. The Fed then publishes the data netted
and aggregated across dealers with a one-week lag.9 The data are only
available for broad categories of securities (except on-the-run Treasury
coupon securities for which security-specific data are available starting
from April 3, 2013).10

We analyze dealer Treasury positions over the weeks ending July 4,
1990 to December 30, 2020. Spot positions data are available for the
full sample period, whereas futures and options data are only available
until June 27, 2001.11 Spot and futures positions are reported in terms
of market value.12 Options positions are reported in terms of the delta-
weighted value of the security underlying the option. In our analyses,
we combine the options and futures positions and refer to the combined
positions as futures positions for brevity.

Summary statistics in Table 1 show that, on average, primary deal-
ers are $15.86 billion net long in bills but $9.96 billion net short in
coupon securities. Coupon positions also seem to be more volatile than
bill positions, with a standard deviation of $76.6 billion for coupons
versus $17.5 billion for bills. In terms of weekly changes, the average
coupon inventory flow exceeds that for bills ($0.11 billion vs. $0.04
billion), but both pale in comparison to the corresponding inventory
levels.

These full-sample averages mask drastically different inventory lev-
els over time. As seen in Panel A of Fig. 1, whereas bill positions
are mostly positive over the entire sample (fluctuating in the $0–50
billion range for the most part), net positions in coupons exhibit a

9 The positions data were released with a four-week lag until January 15,

2004.

10 Bills are reported as a distinct category for our entire sample. Coupon
securities are reported in several buckets, but bucket definitions change a few
times during our sample. The maturity buckets as of the end of our sample
period are: 2 years or less, greater than 2 but less than or equal to 3 years,
greater than 3 but less than or equal to 6 years, greater than 6 but less than or
equal to 7 years, greater than 7 but less than or equal to 11 years, and greater
than 11 years. Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) and floating rate
notes (FRNs) are each reported in their own buckets and are excluded from
the paper (the data we retain reflects positions in TIPS from their introduction
in January 1997 until a February 1998 reporting change separated out these
positions, and positions in FRNs from their introduction in January 2014 until
a January 2015 reporting change separated out these positions).

11 Spot positions include securities transacted for immediate or forward
delivery. For part of our sample, futures and options positions are reported as
separate categories, and for part of our sample futures positions are reported
together with longer-term forward positions. For Treasuries and agencies, we
group longer-term forward positions with futures positions when reported
together. Longer-term forwards are a minimal part of the Treasury or agency
debt markets, so our processing results in fairly consistent Treasury and agency
spot and futures series. For MBS, we group longer-term forward positions with
spot positions when forwards and futures are reported together. Longer-term
forwards are important in the MBS market, and there has never been a large
market for MBS futures, so our processing results in a consistent MBS spot
series.

12 Spot position changes are almost entirely determined by changes in
portfolio composition as opposed to valuation effects. For bills and coupon
securities, the overall standard deviations of weekly position changes are $9.49
and $9.36 billion, respectively, with valuation effects producing standard de-
viations of $0.01 billion and $0.40 billion. The valuation effects are estimated
as the weekly price change of the 6-month bill (for bills) or 5-year note (for
coupon securities) times dealer positions at the beginning of the week. The
paper’s findings are essentially unchanged when position changes are adjusted
for valuation effects.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038854M. Fleming et al.

Table 1
Descriptive statistics. This table reports descriptive statistics of key variables used in the paper. All variables are in billions of dollars. The
sample period is from July 1990 to December 2020, but some variables are not available for the whole sample period. Positions and financing
data are from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Treasury auctions and redemptions data are from the U.S. Department of Treasury.
Central bank holdings are from the Federal Reserve. Corporate and municipal issuance data are from Mergent.

Bill positions
Bill position changes
Coupon positions
Coupon position changes
Bill issuance
Bill redemptions
Coupon issuance
Coupon redemptions
Broker-dealer bill auction purchases
Broker-dealer coupon auction purchases
Bill futures positions
Bill futures position changes
Coupon futures positions
Coupon futures position changes
Changes in Fed’s bill holdings
Changes in Fed’s coupon holdings
Changes in foreign central banks’ holdings
Agency position changes
MBS position changes
Corporate bond issuance
Municipal bond issuance
Net financing
Net financing changes

N

1592
1591
1592
1591
1592
1592
1592
1592
1014
1014
574
573
574
573
1591
1591
1591
1591
1591
1592
1592
1592
1591

Mean

15.86
0.04
−9.96
0.11
82.92
79.94
23.18
15.38
70.31
13.44
−3.67
0.01
−4.94
0.02
0.14
2.44
1.77
0.00
0.04
10.53
7.16
166.37
0.20

Median

13.87
−0.34
−18.91
−0.35
68.40
67.38
14.84
0.00
66.23
9.88
−2.14
0.00
−4.00
0.05
0.00
0.00
1.20
0.02
0.01
7.91
6.53
154.60
−0.35

StDev

17.51
9.49
76.62
9.36
66.25
57.52
28.18
25.05
37.16
13.45
5.25
1.63
12.03
3.25
2.99
15.30
9.63
5.30
5.34
9.97
4.38
129.37
24.98

Min

−29.77
−50.90
−178.61
−36.92
12.55
15.83
0.00
−0.00
18.15
0.00
−23.55
−6.17
−42.53
−12.24
−38.27
−30.05
−104.53
−25.08
−31.07
0.00
0.23
−36.95
−106.65

Max

105.82
51.10
227.06
40.99
604.79
366.89
202.78
116.12
300.05
70.74
8.42
8.71
27.06
10.74
22.50
335.74
62.93
28.31
30.85
91.22
36.61
642.52
127.23

Fig. 1. Dealer net positions in Treasury and other fixed income securities 1990–2020. Panel A shows primary dealers’ net spot positions in U.S. Treasury bills and coupon-bearing
securities by week. Panel B compares primary dealers’ net positions in Treasury coupon-bearing securities with those in other fixed income securities (agency MBS, agency debt,
corporate debt, and municipal debt), with correlations reported in the legend. The data is from July 4, 1990 to December 30, 2020.

structural break around the 2007–09 financial crisis, changing sign
from mostly net short to net long. The changed sign of Treasury coupon
positions coincides with dealers’ declining net long inventory positions
in other fixed income securities, most notably corporate bonds, as seen
in Panel B of Fig. 1. After the crisis and following post-crisis regulatory
changes, dealers significantly cut back their inventory positions in these
other fixed income assets (see e.g., Bessembinder et al., 2018), likely
lessening the need to hold short positions in Treasury coupon securities
as a hedge.

An important consideration in analyzing dealers’ inventory fluctu-
ations is whether to scale such fluctuations by the prevailing level
of trading activity in the market. Because trading volume fluctuates
widely with market conditions, scaling positions by volume would in-
troduce additional variation to weekly changes in dealers’ positions and
complicate interpretation of results. We thus choose to include trading
volume as a control variable in various inventory model specifications.
Weekly trading volume data are also from the FR 2004 statistical
release.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038855M. Fleming et al.

Fig. 2. Dealer Treasury spot and futures positions 1990–2001. This figure compares spot and futures net positions of primary dealers in U.S. Treasury bills (Panel A) and
coupon-bearing securities (Panel B) by week from July 4, 1990 to June 27, 2001.

We also examine dealers’ use of Treasury futures in relation to spot
Treasury positions. Fig. 2 compares dealers’ Treasury spot positions
with futures positions over the sample period for which futures posi-
tions data are available (1990–2001). In both panels of Fig. 2, there
appears to be a negative correlation between spot and futures positions,
with a stronger correlation for coupons (−0.50) than for bills (−0.13).
This is consistent with dealers using futures to hedge spot exposures,
although the magnitude of futures positions is visibly smaller than that
of spot positions (see also Table 1) and the use of bill futures largely
fades away after 1995.

account for the vast majority.14 These data allow us to gauge the speed
at which dealers lay off their auction-driven inventory, controlling for
the variation in the share of issuance purchased by dealers over time.

3.2.2. Treasury redemptions

We collect the maturity date, size, and term to maturity (at auction)
of every Treasury security from the same auction history data described
above.15 Most securities are redeemed at maturity, but some were
called or bought back in debt buyback operations over our sample
period.16 We collect data on calls and buybacks and adjust the weekly
redemption amounts accordingly.17 Over our sample period, 24 bonds

3.2. Explanatory variables

3.2.1. Treasury issuance

Our issuance data are from the U.S. Treasury Department.13 We
identify the auction date, issuance size (in terms of par value), and
term to maturity of every marketable Treasury security issued over our
sample period. Panel A of Fig. 3 plots the average weekly issuance by
quarter and shows that bill issuance is about four times greater than
coupon issuance, partly due to the fact that bills mature much more
quickly than coupons. As reported in Table 1, average weekly issuance
amounts to $82.9 billion for bills but only $23.2 billion for coupons
(the latter includes weeks when there was no coupon issuance). It
is also clear from the figure that issuance increases over time, most
noticeably in late 2001, mid 2008, and early 2020 corresponding to
Treasury’s increased borrowing needs following September 11, the
2007–09 financial crisis, and the Covid-19 pandemic.

We also use data on investor class allotment (also from the Treasury
Department) to compute the specific amounts of Treasury securities
purchased at auctions by broker-dealers, of which the primary dealers

13 http://www.Treasurydirect.gov/instit/annceresult/query/query.htm.

14 Investor class allotment data is available for coupon auctions from Jan-
uary 18, 2000 and for bill auctions from August 1, 2001. Broker-dealers
include both primary and non-primary dealers, but primary dealers account for
nearly all broker-dealers’ purchases: 87.3% for bills and 89.8% for coupons.
These statistics rely on data on primary dealers’ purchases at auctions,
available from April 23, 2008 onward.

15 Auction data start from 1980 and thus contain information on only
securities issued since 1980. For the 26 securities issued prior to 1980 that
matured during our sample period, we manually collect their issue date,
maturity date, and outstanding amount as of December 31, 1979 from Table
III of the Monthly Statement of Public Debt (‘‘MSPD’’) for December 1979
(https://www.Treasurydirect.gov/ftp/opd/opdm121979.pdf).

16 See Longstaff (1992) for an analysis of callable bonds and Han et al.
(2007) for an analysis of debt buyback operations. Our sample also contains
five ‘‘flower’’ bonds, which could be effectively redeemed before maturity by
being used in lieu of cash to pay estate taxes (see Mayers and Smith, 1987 for
an analysis of flower bonds). Maturing amounts of flower bonds are based on
the amounts outstanding at the end of the month preceding maturity (the last
of which was in 1998).

17 Data on called bonds are collected from various MSPDs for bonds is-
sued before 1980, and from the auction history data described above for
bonds issued since 1980. Data on buybacks are available at http://www.
Treasurydirect.gov/auctions/announcements-data-results/buy-backs/.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038856M. Fleming et al.

Fig. 3. Treasury issuance and redemptions 1990–2020. Panel A (B) plots average weekly auction amounts (average weekly redemptions) of U.S. Treasury bills and coupon-bearing
securities by quarter for the weeks ending July 4, 1990 to December 30, 2020.

with a total par value of $93 billion were called. All of these bonds
were originally issued between 1963 and 1984; the Treasury does not
currently issue callable securities. Bonds with a market value of $87
billion were bought back in 45 operations between March 9, 2000 and
April 25, 2002.18 Panel B of Fig. 3 plots average weekly redemptions by
quarter and shows that called and bought back amounts are dwarfed
by maturing amounts. Overall, bill redemptions in our sample average
$79.9 billion per week and coupon redemptions $15.4 billion per week.

3.2.3. Central bank purchases

We control for the possible effects of central bank purchases on
dealer positions using data on Treasury security holdings of the Federal
Reserve and foreign central banks.19 The holdings data are reported by
the Fed on a weekly basis as of the close of business each Wednesday,
and thus match the timing of the dealer data. Note that while the Fed
data are comprehensive, the foreign central bank data only include
holdings held in custody at the Fed and not holdings held through other
financial institutions. Over our sample, Fed holdings of bills and coupon
securities average $128.9 billion and $930.1 billion, respectively. In
the period since the 2007–09 financial crisis, Fed holdings of coupon
securities go up significantly (as a result of large-scale asset purchases)
from a pre-crisis (1990–2006) average of $274.7 billion to a post-crisis
(2007–2020) average of $1,702 billion, while Fed holdings of bills
decrease from $193.4 billion to $52.9 billion. Foreign central bank
holdings of all Treasuries average $1,496.7 billion (the split between
bills and coupons is not reported for foreign central banks), likewise
driven by holdings in the post-crisis period (averaging $2,563.6 billion
compared to $590.9 billion before the crisis). We use the weekly

changes of the Fed’s and foreign central banks’ holdings to control for
central bank purchases in our empirical analysis of dealer Treasury
inventory management.

3.2.4. Dealer positions in other fixed income securities

To control for changes in dealer Treasury positions due to activity
in other debt securities, we collect data on dealers’ positions in agency
MBS, agency debt, corporate debt, and municipal debt. These positions
are also reported in the FR 2004A release, although data on corporate
and municipal debt positions are not available for the full sample
period.20 Over our full sample period, agency MBS positions average
$44.9 billion and agency debt positions $50.9 billion. Over the shorter
periods for which data on corporate and muni positions are available,
corporate debt positions average $96.8 billion and municipal debt
positions $17.7 billion. Because of the incomplete data for corporate
and muni positions, we instead use data on weekly corporate and muni
bond issuance to substitute for positions changes in these instruments.
Corporate and muni issuance data are from Mergent. For corporate
bonds, we exclude convertible issues, private placements, issues de-
nominated in foreign currencies, and issues of financial institutions.
We aggregate issuance amounts by week (ending on Wednesdays) to
correspond with our other data. Over our sample, corporate issuance
averages $10.5 billion per week and muni issuance $7.2 billion per
week.

3.2.5. Dealer repo market activities and financing costs

We collect information on primary dealers’ sale and repurchase
market (‘‘repo market’’) activities, also from the FR 2004A statistical

18 Buyback operations resume in October 2014, but these are operational
readiness exercises in small amounts. Only $218 million in market value of
Treasury coupons and $25 million of Treasury bills were bought back between
2014 and 2020.

19 The data are available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41/.

20 Data on corporate debt positions are available from July 4, 2001 and
municipal debt positions from April 3, 2013. The corporate debt series includes
non-agency MBS from July 2001 to March 2013. Non-agency MBS are split into
their own series from April 2013, but we include them with corporate debt
for consistency.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038857M. Fleming et al.

release. Specifically, dealers report ‘‘Securities In’’ (‘‘Securities Out’’)
for the amount of funds lent (borrowed) in exchange for receiving
(pledging) securities as collateral. Starting with the week ending July
4, 2001, the FR 2004A data also contain ‘‘Treasuries In’’ and ‘‘Treasury
Out’’ to reflect lending and borrowing specifically collateralized by
Treasury securities, which on average account for about 76% and 65%
of ‘‘Securities In’’ and Securities Out’’ respectively. We use ‘‘Securities
In/Out’’ for their long sample coverage, and because they capture
more completely dealers’ financing as explained in Adrian and Fleming
(2005). For ease of exposition, we refer to such financing as ‘‘repo mar-
ket financing’’ even though it includes other short-term borrowing and
lending activity as well.21 We measure dealers’ net financing (𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝐹 𝑖𝑛)
as securities out minus securities in.

Data on repo and other relevant rates are from various sources.
Daily overnight repo rates and effective fed funds rates for the early
part of our sample (from May 21, 1991 to May 29, 2009) are collected
from Bloomberg. Because the repo rates are no longer available from
Bloomberg, we use repo rates provided by the Depository Trust and
Clearing Corporation (available from 2005) for the rest of our sample
period.22 We collect the daily effective fed funds rate for the later part
of our sample from the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York. We also collect the 3-month Treasury bill and 5-year Treasury
rates from the St. Louis Fed’s website for the purpose of computing
the spreads between the repo rate and the yields on Treasuries held
in inventory. Lastly, interest rate volatility as measured by the MOVE
index is from Bloomberg. We convert all daily data to the weekly
frequency (ending on Wednesdays) by using the last observation for
each week.

3.3. Treasury security risk and return

To assess how position changes are related to contemporaneous
and future Treasury returns, we use daily Treasury price data from
the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP). We extract weekly
prices and accrued interest (sampled every Wednesday to correspond
with our other data) for the on-the-run 3- and 6-month bills and 2-, 5-,
and 10-year notes.23 We also aggregate any paid interest by week. The
weekly returns are then computed as:

𝑅𝑡 =

𝑃𝑡 + 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑡 + 𝑃 𝑎𝑖𝑑𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑡
𝑃𝑡−1 + 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑡−1

− 1,

where 𝑃𝑡 is the last price of week 𝑡, 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑡 is the accrued interest as of
the end of week 𝑡, and 𝑃 𝑎𝑖𝑑𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑡 is the amount of paid interest during
week 𝑡. Weekly excess returns, denoted by 𝑟𝑡, are then calculated as
the actual returns 𝑅𝑡 minus the expected risk-free returns implied by
the secondary market rate on the 3-month Treasury bill prevailing at
the beginning of the week.

21 This slight abuse of terminology is justified by the fact that repos/reverse
repos account for the vast majority of collateralized short-term borrowing and
lending activities and because the repo/reverse repo terminology is often used
to refer to short-term collateralized borrowing/lending arrangements gener-
ally, even for financing transactions that are not technically repos/reverse
repos. For the period when data on Treasury repo and reverse repo financing
are available, starting from the week ending April 3, 2013, such financing
accounts for about 94% and nearly 80% of Treasury-collateralized borrowing
and lending by dealers.

22 We verify using the overlap period between the two repo series that they

are nearly identical to one another.

23 When the weekly return for an on-the-run security is missing, we use the
return for the first off-the-run security. This is most likely to happen when a
security is auctioned on a Wednesday or later in the week (or on a Tuesday
before a holiday) and thus the first week’s Wednesday-to-Wednesday return is
not computable. The data can also be missing as flagged by CRSP. CRSP data
are completely missing from September 11–20, 2001, so we exclude from our
returns analysis the weeks ending September 12, 19, and 26, 2001.

For our analysis of Treasury returns, we also control for the Treasury
return forecasting factor in the spirit of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).
The Cochrane–Piazzesi factor is derived from a predictive regression
of monthly Treasury bond excess returns (at the one-year horizon) on
five forward rates. Because our study examines one-week returns, the
Cochrane–Piazzesi return forecasting factor is not directly applicable;
instead, we control for the return predictability by including lagged
forward rates directly in our regression models of excess returns. As
in Cochrane–Piazzesi, we use the five forward rates corresponding to
years 1 through 5. We compute these forward rates from continuously
compounded zero yields provided by Gurkaynak et al. (2007).

Lastly, in our analysis of auction cycle effects, we use daily yield
changes around auctions. Daily Treasury yields are from the same CRSP
data. Auction date, security term, and other security pertinent informa-
tion are from the Treasury auction history data described earlier.

4. Treasury dealer inventory management

To study what drives dealer inventory fluctuations, we build on the
basic inventory adjustment model that is standard in the literature (see
e.g., Naik and Yadav, 2003b or Schultz, 2017):

𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡−1 + 𝜖𝑡,

(1)

where 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 is the change in net positions over week 𝑡 and 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡−1 is the
net positions at the end of the previous week 𝑡 − 1. The coefficient 𝛽1
captures the extent to which dealers adjust their inventory in a given
week based on the beginning-of-week inventory level. A negative coef-
ficient indicates that an elevated inventory level prompts a subsequent
decrease in inventory, reflecting inventory management around some
target level.

From this baseline model, we then consider the effects of Treasury
auctions and redemptions. Unique to the primary dealers is the obliga-
tion ‘‘to bid on a pro-rata basis in all Treasury auctions at reasonably
competitive prices’’. This means that primary dealers have to absorb
sizable Treasury supply shocks on a regular basis, and conversely, have
their inventory significantly reduced when the securities in their inven-
tories mature. Adding Treasury issuance and redemptions to Eq. (1)
allows us to quantify the effects of dealers’ primary market activity on
their net positions. One key advantage of our empirical setting is the
exogeneity of these supply shocks: Treasury issuance and redemptions
are exogenous to dealers’ existing positions and risk preferences. Thus,
the effects we document truly reflect the extent to which these supply
shocks cause the dealers’ inventory to change.

In addition to supply shocks related to Treasury securities’ life cycle,
we also examine several other important drivers of Treasury dealer
inventory. First, due to primary dealers’ role as counterparties to the
Federal Reserve in monetary policy implementation (or in making
markets on behalf of its official accountholders), changes in the Fed’s
Treasury holdings (and those of foreign central banks) can contribute to
dealers’ inventory changes. After the 2007–09 financial crisis, the Fed
conducted large-scale asset purchases as part of its quantitative easing
(QE). It unwound many of these purchases in subsequent years, but
then initiated market functioning purchases in March 2020 in response
to Covid-related disruptions. Quantifying the effects of these actions on
dealer inventory enables a better understanding of the role dealers play
in facilitating monetary policy actions.

Second, intertwined with their outright Treasury market activities
are dealers’ activities in the repo market. Specifically, dealers can
finance long Treasury positions by borrowing the funds through a repo,
using the securities as collateral. Likewise, to take short positions,
dealers can borrow the securities through a reverse repo, using cash
as collateral. Thus, it is natural to expect dealer repo activities to have
some bearing on their Treasury inventory. In particular, the amount of
collateralized borrowing net of lending reflects the funding available to
support Treasury inventory and is thus expected to be positively corre-
lated with the latter. Coupled with the amount of financing available,

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038858M. Fleming et al.

we also consider the role of the relevant Treasury/repo spread. The
spread is a proxy for the return on inventory holdings net of financing
costs, and is expected to be positively correlated with dealer inventory.
In this analysis, we also account for changes in interest rates (the fed
funds rate) and interest rate volatility.

Finally, it is important to control for other variables that are po-
tentially related to Treasury inventory fluctuations in any given week.
To the extent that dealers also trade and make markets in other fixed
income securities, it is possible that fluctuations in these other secu-
rities’ positions also help explain Treasury inventory changes (due to
hedging or arbitrage trading motives, or because inventory is managed
at the portfolio level). For this reason, we include in the model changes
in dealers’ agency debt positions, changes in dealers’ agency MBS
positions, and the weekly amounts of corporate and municipal bond
issuance. In addition, we control for the level of dealer trading activ-
ity, although the relationship between trading volume and inventory
changes is ambiguous (as it depends on whether the trade flow is
balanced or one-sided).

The expanded regression model is thus:

𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡−1 + 𝛽2 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡 + 𝛽3 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡 + 𝛾 ′ 𝑍𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,

(2)

where 𝑍𝑡 denotes the variables discussed above.

We estimate the above regression separately for bills and coupons
because the dynamics of bill inventory are likely different from those
of coupons. Bill auctions occur every week, with an average weekly is-
suance amount of roughly $83 billion. In contrast, there are no coupon
auctions in nearly 40% of the weeks in our sample and the average
weekly issuance amount conditional on an auction taking place is only
about half of the average weekly bill issuance amount. Moreover, as
short-dated securities with minimal interest rate risk, bills are not
actively traded like coupons for hedging and speculative purposes.24

For estimation, some variables are specific to each security type
(i.e., issuance, redemptions, changes in Federal Reserve holdings, trad-
ing volume, and the Treasury/repo spread variables).25 All other vari-
ables are only defined in aggregate (e.g., changes in foreign central
bank holdings, changes in other fixed income positions, and net fi-
nancing) or reflect overall market conditions (e.g., the fed funds rate
and interest rate volatility) and thus do not vary between the bill and
coupon regressions. We report various specifications in Table 2 and
discuss our key findings below.

4.1. Inventory mean reversion

The baseline inventory adjustment model presented in Table 2
(column (1) for bills and column (4) for coupons) shows that dealer
inventory is mean-reverting and that this mean reversion is stronger
for bills (−0.146) than coupons (−0.006). Furthermore, such mean-
reverting adjustment explains a far greater fraction of bill inventory
fluctuations than coupon inventory fluctuations (based on the 𝑅2 of
7.1% in the bill regression in column (1) compared to 0.2% in the
coupon regression in column (4)). Evidence from other securities mar-
kets shows that there is substantial variability in dealer willingness to
hold new inventory.26 Here, even among the same class of securities

24 Brain et al. (2018) report average daily trading volume in the on-the-
run 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury notes of $52 billion, $115 billion, and $93
billion, respectively, but only $8 billion and $6 billion in the on-the-run 3-
and 6-month bills over the August 2017–July 2018 sample period.

25 For the Treasury/repo spread, we use the 3-month Treasury bill rate
in regressions for bill inventory changes and the 5-year Treasury yield in
regressions for coupon inventory changes.

26 For example,

in the foreign exchange and futures markets, dealers
typically close out their positions by the end of the trading day (Lyons,
1995; Manaster and Mann, 1996). In contrast, inventory adjustment of NYSE
specialists seems to be much slower, lasting from several days to as long as one
or two months (Hasbrouck and Sofianos, 1993; Madhavan and Smidt, 1993).

(Treasuries), dealers’ inventory strategy differs markedly between bills
and coupons.

What can explain the difference in mean reverting behavior of bill
and coupon inventory? On the one hand, bills are much less risky
than coupons, so dealers should be more willing to hold them. On the
other hand, bills are primarily traded by dealers for market making
purposes and not speculative or hedging purposes. In contrast, coupons
are traded by dealers for all three purposes. As a result, when bill
positions deviate significantly from their average level, it is likely
because dealers are making markets (primary or secondary) and they
naturally want to subsequently close out or offset those positions. When
coupon inventory deviates, however, it might reflect dealer market
making, or it might reflect a deliberate shift for hedging/speculative
reasons, resulting in weaker mean reversion behavior. Nevertheless, the
low explanatory power on weekly inventory changes observed for both
bills and coupons indicate that the mean-reverting adjustment is only
a small part of Treasury dealer inventory management.

4.2. The role of Treasury auctions and redemptions

Adding Treasury issuance and redemptions markedly increases the
ability of the models to explain the variation in dealer inventory fluctu-
ations from week to week. As seen in columns (2) and (5) of Table 2, the
𝑅2 jumps to about 26% for bills and 28% for coupons. Moreover, when
adding other control variables (reported in columns (3) and (6)), the 𝑅2
further increases only marginally to around 29% and 32%, respectively.
The changes in explanatory power across different specifications clearly
point to issuance and redemptions as the main drivers of Treasury
dealer inventory fluctuations.

The issuance and redemptions coefficients indicate the average
change in dealer positions over the week relative to the total amount
of issuance and redemptions during the week. Using the estimates from
the most comprehensive specification (shown in columns 3 and 6),
dealers on average finish the week with an extra $126 million in bill
inventory and $165 million in coupon inventory per $1 billion of bill
and coupon issuance, respectively. Conversely, bill positions decline
by an average of $85 million and coupon positions by an average
of $79 million per $1 billion of redemptions of these securities. As
Treasury securities mature, it is natural to see a reduction in dealers’
inventory, because either the dealers themselves hold some securities
through maturity (most likely the case with bills) or investors buy other
securities from dealer inventory to replace the redeemed ones.

The above estimates quantify the overall effects of Treasury auctions
on dealer inventory at the end of the week. We also estimate the model
using the actual amount dealers purchase at auction in place of the
total issuance amount so that the coefficient on this variable reflects the
portion of auction purchases that still remains on dealer balance sheets
at the end of the week. As shown in Internet Appendix Table A1, the
coefficient estimate is 0.286 for bills and 0.331 for coupons, implying
that dealers shed roughly 71% and 67%, respectively, of inventory
acquired at auction within the same week.

Still, roughly 29% and 33% of auction purchases remain on dealer
balance sheets at the end of the week, requiring considerable capital
commitment.27 Given that broker-dealers purchase about $70 billion
of newly issued bills and over $13 billion of newly issued coupons per
week, on average, Treasury auctions cause dealer inventory to swell,
with about $20 billion in bills and nearly $5 billion in coupons carried
over to the following week. These estimates underscore the important
role of primary dealers and the significant capital they commit in
underwriting Treasury issuance.

27 These estimates may be overstated to the extent that dealers pre-hedge
auction shocks by shedding inventory in the preceding week. We study dealers’
activities in adjacent weeks in Section 5.1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038859M. Fleming et al.

Table 2
Treasury dealer inventory management. This table reports the results from the regression model 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡−1 + 𝛽2 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡 + 𝛽3 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡 + 𝛾 ′ 𝑍𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,
where 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 is the change in dealer inventory over week 𝑡, 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡−1 is the beginning-of-week inventory level, and 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 and 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 are the amount of
Treasury issuance and redemptions, respectively. 𝑍𝑡 is a vector of control variables, including central banks’ purchases, inventory changes in other fixed income
securities, changes in dealers’ financing activity, changes in the fed funds rate, changes in the Treasury/repo spread (using 3-month Treasury bill and 5-year
Treasury yields, respectively, in the bill and coupon inventory regression models), changes in interest rate volatility, and dealers’ trading volume (logged). The
regression model is estimated separately for bills (Panel A) and coupons (Panel B). The full sample period is from July 4, 1990 to December 30, 2020, with
shorter sample periods in some specifications due to data availability. The following variables are defined separately for bills and coupons: beginning inventory,
issuance, redemptions, change in the Fed’s holdings, change in Treasury/repo spread, and trading volume. All other variables are common between Panels A and
B. Coefficients are reported with heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent (Newey–West) standard errors in parentheses. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

Independent variable

Panel A: Bill position changes

Panel B: Coupon position changes

(1)

0.031
(0.222)
−0.146∗∗∗
(0.017)

(2)

0.030
(0.205)
−0.200∗∗∗
(0.021)
0.121∗∗∗
(0.018)
−0.096∗∗∗
(0.018)

Constant

Beginning inventory ($B)

Issuance ($B)

Redemptions ($B)

𝛥 Fed holdings ($B)

𝛥 Foreign CB holdings ($B)

𝛥 Agency positions ($B)

𝛥 MBS positions ($B)

Corporate issuance ($B)

Municipal issuance ($B)

𝛥 Net financing ($B)

𝛥 Fed funds rate (%)

𝛥 Treasury/repo spread (%)

𝛥 Interest rate volatility

Log trading volume

Adjusted 𝑅2 (%)
# Observations

7.1
1591

25.8
1591

4.3. The effects of monetary policy actions

The inventory model in Eq. (2) also enables us to assess how dealer
inventory changes due to dealers’ obligation to serve as counterparties
to the Federal Reserve and make markets on behalf of its official
accountholders. Similar to issuance and redemptions, central bank
purchases are also exogenous to dealer inventory changes (for the most
part), thereby allowing a causal interpretation of the coefficients of
these variables. The coefficients reported in columns (3) and (6) of Ta-
ble 2 indicate that purchases by both the Fed and foreign central banks
significantly reduce dealers’ coupon inventory, but unsurprisingly not
bill inventory. This is consistent with central banks’ post-crisis large-
scale asset purchases (and the subsequent unwinding of such purchases)
being primarily focused on longer-term Treasuries. For every $1 billion
increase in the Fed’s (foreign central banks’) holdings of Treasury
coupon securities, dealer inventory at the end of the week is lower by
about $91 million ($59 million) (and vice versa).

It is important to note that the above estimates reflect average
effects over the whole sample period. However, QE purchases by the
Fed (and the subsequent unwinding of such purchases) occurred mainly
during and following the 2007–09 financial crisis. Thus, to have a more
precise estimate of the effects of the Fed’s monetary policy actions on
dealers’ balance sheets, we re-estimate the regression in Eq. (2) using
data only from 2009 (when QE purchases of Treasury securities started)
to 2019, carefully excluding 2020 because the Fed’s intervention at the
height of the Covid-19 pandemic is of a different nature (an issue we
will discuss below). As reported in Internet Appendix Table A2, the

(3)

0.045
(0.214)
−0.201∗∗∗
(0.021)
0.126∗∗∗
(0.018)
−0.085∗∗∗
(0.016)
−0.025
(0.068)
0.004
(0.027)
0.135∗∗∗
(0.041)
−0.114∗∗∗
(0.040)
−0.087∗∗
(0.037)
−0.175∗∗
(0.074)
0.038∗∗∗
(0.012)
−0.187
(0.720)
0.015
(0.938)
4.416
(2.960)
−0.176
(0.933)

29.1
1545

(4)

0.105
(0.186)
−0.006∗
(0.003)

(5)

0.101
(0.194)
−0.018∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.145∗∗∗
(0.009)
−0.094∗∗∗
(0.010)

0.2
1591

27.8
1591

(6)

0.444∗∗
(0.184)
−0.020∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.165∗∗∗
(0.010)
−0.079∗∗∗
(0.011)
−0.091∗∗∗
(0.012)
−0.059∗∗
(0.025)
0.021
(0.044)
−0.087∗
(0.045)
0.037
(0.028)
−0.084
(0.064)
0.049∗∗∗
(0.010)
−0.262
(0.908)
−0.263
(0.993)
4.298
(2.934)
−1.226∗∗
(0.609)

32.2
1545

coefficient on changes in Fed holdings is −0.166, meaning that for each
$1 billion increase (decrease) in the Fed’s holdings of coupon securities
during a week, dealers’ positions are $166 million lower (higher) at the
end of the week.

Does the effect differ when the Fed implemented its QE purchases
from when the Fed unwound its balance sheet? To answer this question,
we estimate the coefficient on the Fed’s actions separately for positive
changes (purchases) and negative changes (sales or redemptions) and
find that the former has a strong negative effect on dealer balance
sheets whereas the effect of the latter is insignificant (see column (2)
of Internet Appendix Table A2). Specifically, for every $1 billion of
Fed coupon security purchases, dealers have to carry on their balance
sheets a $241 million short position over the following week. Given
that the average weekly purchases by the Fed over this 2009–2019
period are about $4.6 billion, such operations require substantial dealer
capital commitment to intermediate. On the other hand, the unwinding
of the Fed’s balance sheet has no effect on dealers’ inventory. This is
because the QE unwinding occurs exclusively through the natural run-
off of securities in the Fed’s portfolio, rather than through the sale of
such securities. Indeed, data on the Fed’s open market transactions in
the 2009–2019 period show that there are no Fed sales, except for
a short period from October 2011 to November 2012 during which
the Fed conducted its Maturity Extension Program (selling shorter-term
securities and replacing them with longer-term securities).28

28 https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/desk-operations/Treasury-

securities.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388510M. Fleming et al.

The Fed’s purchases in March 2020 deserve a separate discussion,
because such transactions are not exogenous to dealers’ net positions,
unlike earlier QE-related transactions. As shown in studies of the Covid
crisis (see Duffie, 2023 for a review of the evidence), dealers were
overwhelmed by extraordinary customer selling pressure in Treasuries,
threatening market functionality and prompting the Fed to step in
as ‘‘dealer of last resort’’. The Fed purchased nearly $1 trillion of
Treasuries in late March–early April of 2020, in addition to providing
new financing facilities, to relieve the pressure on the dealer sector
and help restore market functioning. For this episode only, the Fed’s
purchases are endogenous to and in the same direction as dealers’
positions. Including 2020 in the full sample estimation thus underes-
timates the role dealers normally play as counterparties to the Fed in
its implementation of monetary policy.

4.4. The link between repo market activity and Treasury inventory

The results reported in Table 2 for the inventory model in Eq. (2)
also offer a first look into the contemporaneous correlation between
dealer repo market activity and Treasury inventory fluctuations, hold-
ing all else constant. Changes in the amount of net financing dealers
obtain through repo market activities are positively correlated with
changes in Treasury positions. The coefficient estimates are 0.038 and
0.049 in the bill and coupon regressions, respectively, with both statis-
tically significant at the 1% level. Notably, we observe no significant
contemporaneous relationship between dealer inventory fluctuations
and the changes in the interest rate level, the spreads between relevant
Treasury yields and repo rates, nor interest rate volatility. It is possible
that the amount of net financing dealers can raise already reflects
these market movements. Thus, once we control for net financing,
these variables do not have incremental explanatory power for dealer
inventory.

It is important to emphasize that we do not ascribe a causal inter-
pretation to the net financing coefficients, because the amount of net
financing is not exogenous to dealer Treasury holdings. It is entirely
possible that an increase in inventory requires financing to carry, or
that the increased supply of collateral enables dealers to borrow more
in the repo market. Such dynamics would not be satisfactorily captured
by the inventory adjustment model specified in Eq. (2). Instead, we
employ a bivariate vector autoregression (VAR) of changes in Treasury
inventory holdings and repo financing to gain a better understanding
of the dynamic interrelationship of dealer activity in the two markets:

𝐲𝑡 = 𝜶 +

𝑝
∑

𝑗=1

𝝓𝑗 𝐲𝑡−𝑗 + 𝜼 𝐳𝑡 + 𝝐𝑡,

(3)

where 𝐲𝑡 is a vector variable consisting of changes in Treasury inventory
(𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣) and net financing (𝛥𝐹 𝑖𝑛), and 𝐳𝑡 includes important variables
exogeneous to both 𝐼𝑛𝑣 and 𝐹 𝑖𝑛, namely Treasury issuance, redemp-
tions, and changes in central banks’ holdings. We rely on the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) to select the optimal lag length 𝑝 for the
VAR model. It is 13 for the VAR of bill positions and net financing
and 14 for the VAR of coupon positions and net financing (see Internet
Appendix Tables A3 and A4 for parameter estimates of these models).29
The estimated VAR model provides important evidence on the di-
rection of effects between dealers’ Treasury inventory changes and the
financing obtained through the repo market. Do fluctuations in dealer
inventory predict subsequent changes in net financing? If so, that would
suggest that dealers’ repo activity is undertaken to support Treasury
inventory management by providing the needed financing. On the other
hand, if net financing changes lead dealer inventory fluctuations, that
would be consistent with the idea that changes to Treasury inventory
are undertaken to provide collateral to support repo market activities.

Table 3
Granger causality tests. This table reports the F-test results of whether the row
variable Granger-causes the column variable. This is based on the vector autoregression
(VAR) model of Treasury inventory and net financing changes with exogenous control
variables (Treasury issuance, redemptions, changes in the Fed’s holdings, and changes
in foreign central banks’ holdings). The optimal lag length is chosen by the Bayesian
Information Criterion (13 lags for the VAR model of bill inventory and net financing,
and 14 lags for that of coupon inventory and net financing). The sample period is from
July 4, 1990 to December 30, 2020. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

Panel A: Bill positions and net financing

𝛥 Bill positions

𝛥 Net financing

𝛥 Bill positions
𝛥 Net financing

1.335

4.600∗∗∗

Panel B: Coupon positions and net financing

𝛥 Coupon positions

𝛥 Net financing

𝛥 Coupon positions
𝛥 Net financing

0.589

5.139∗∗∗

We formally test the above hypotheses by employing Granger
causality tests. In Table 3 we tabulate the F-test statistics, which
indicate whether the lagged values of one variable can significantly
predict the value of the other variable over and above the latter’s
own lags and other control variables. The evidence strongly suggests
a one-way direction of Granger causality: changes to net Treasury
inventory (for both bills and coupons) significantly predict subsequent
changes to net repo financing, but not vice versa. This result is further
corroborated by visual inspection of the generalized impulse response
functions, shown in Fig. 4. Plots in the left column reveal an increase in
net financing in the same week (week 0) and the following week (week
1) after a shock to Treasury inventory in week 0. In contrast, as shown
in the right-hand-side plots, following a one-standard-deviation shock
to net financing, Treasury inventory increases only mildly (despite the
much larger standard deviation of net financing shocks) and only in the
same week (week 0) without any further response thereafter.30

The lack of response of dealers’ Treasury inventory to fluctuations
in dealers’ repo market activity could be partly due to the common
practice of collateral reuse in the repo market. That is, the same col-
lateral can be used in multiple secured financing transactions. Infante
et al. (2018) estimate that 85% of primary dealers’ incoming collateral
immediately flows out, and that a Treasury security can be re-used
between six and nine times, on average. This implies that repo market
activity can contract or expand without necessitating commensurate
changes in the available amount of collateral. Nevertheless, to the
extent that our analysis focuses on the net financing amount (securities
out minus securities in), the collateral re-use phenomenon is not of first
order importance in driving our results.

In sum, our evidence on the positive relationship between dealer
Treasury inventory and dealer repo market financing supports the view
that dealers use the repo market to support their market making and
other activities (and the resultant inventory) in the Treasury market.
In contrast, shocks in dealer repo market financing are far less con-
sequential to Treasury inventory fluctuations, especially in comparison
to the much more influential drivers of Treasury inventory documented
earlier (i.e., auctions and redemptions).

4.5. Managing inventory interest rate risk

Thus far, our analysis of dealer inventory management is based on
the dollar market value of inventory and its determinants. Recognizing
that the most significant risks associated with Treasury dealer inventory
are the changes in the level and the slope of the yield curve, we also

29 VAR estimation is performed with the VAR Toolbox by Ambrogio

Cesa-Bianchi, available at sites.google.com/site/ambropo/.

30 Unreported impulse responses per unitary shock expose even greater
contrast in the responses of Treasury inventory and net financing to shocks
in the other.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388511M. Fleming et al.

Fig. 4. Impulse response functions of Treasury inventory and net financing. This figure plots the generalized impulse response functions (GIRF) of Treasury inventory and net
financing based on the vector autoregression (VAR) model of Treasury inventory and net financing changes with exogenous control variables (Treasury issuance, redemptions,
changes in Federal Reserve holdings, and changes in foreign central banks’ holdings). The optimal lag length is chosen by the Bayesian Information Criterion (13 lags for the VAR
model of bill inventory and net financing, and 14 lags for that of coupon inventory and net financing). The sample period is from July 4, 1990 to December 30, 2020. The GIRF
is computed using a one-standard-deviation shock in the shocked variable.

model the inventory adjustment process through the lens of these risk
exposures. We measure the risk to yield curve level changes by DV01
(i.e., the change in security value due to a one basis point change in
yield, or modified duration × 0.0001). We measure the risk to yield
curve slope changes by computing the change in security value in
response to a one basis point increase in the yield curve slope (defined
as the difference between the 2- and 10-year yields), similar to the
‘‘Twist’’ factor in Chaumeton et al. (1996).31

We then compute inventory, inventory changes, and issuance in
these risk terms, while redemptions become largely irrelevant with
respect to interest rate risk. It is important to note that while we can
accurately compute duration and twist risks of auctioned securities for
the 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 variable, we do not have security-level positions data to
precisely compute these risks for dealer inventory (nor any other vari-
ables). The available positions data are aggregated to broadly defined
maturity buckets, thereby requiring us to make assumptions on the
representative security for each bucket with which to approximate the
interest rate risk exposure of the bucket.32

31 We compute this ‘‘twist’’ risk for a given representative bond as follows.
We price a bond’s cash flows whereby the yield applicable to each specific
cash flow equals a level component plus a prorated term premium based on
the prevailing slope. Using the market price of the bond, we solve for the level
component of the yield for the bond. We then increase the slope by one basis
point and compute the new price, and hence the change in price of the bond.
32 For bills, we use the average duration of the on-the-run 3- and 6-month
bills, while the twist risk of bills is negligible. For coupons, the maturity bucket
definitions change over time. To reduce the effects of measurement error, we
use positions data only for the period from July 4, 2001, when coupons are
reported in four or more maturity buckets (versus just two before this time).
When coupons are reported in four maturity buckets, we multiply the market
value of each bucket by the DV01 or twist measure of the corresponding
representative on-the-run security, be it the 2-, 5-, 10-, or 30-year security.
From April 3, 2013, coupons are reported in six maturity buckets, so we use the
risk measures of the corresponding on-the-run 2-, 3-, 5-, 7-, 10-, and 30-year
security accordingly.

Using the above risk measures, we estimate the following regression:

𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑡−1 + 𝛽2 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑡 + 𝛾 ′ 𝑍𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,

(4)

where 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 is dealers’ inventory risk and 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 is the total
amount of risk supplied at the auctions in a given week. In this
regression, all relevant variables combine bills and coupons, after their
respective market values have been weighted by the corresponding
appropriate risk measure. The control variables are as in Eq. (2).
We estimate the regression separately for level change risk and slope
change risk and report the results in Table 4.

The results here are largely consistent with the main results in Ta-
ble 2. Treasury issuance results in a significant increase in the interest
rate risk exposure of dealers’ inventory. On average, 19% of total level
change risk and roughly 31% of total slope change risk supplied at
auction remains on dealers’ balance sheets at the end of the week. This
sizable warehousing of risk once again underscores the important role
of dealers in intermediating new Treasury supply.

5. Hedging repeated supply shocks

Evidence from the main inventory model in Eq. (2) discussed above
suggests that supply shocks due to Treasury issuance weigh heavily
on dealer inventory. In this subsection, we investigate the question of
how dealers hedge such shocks. We examine two specific channels: (1)
intertemporal smoothing (e.g., selling the to-be-auctioned securities in
the when-issued market or similar securities in the secondary market)
and (2) using derivatives.

5.1. Intertemporal inventory adjustment

One way for dealers to reduce the impact of supply shocks on their
inventory is to engage in intertemporal smoothing of their inventory
around Treasury auctions. If they do this, we should observe a decrease
of inventory prior to the auction week and likewise, a downward ad-
justment of inventory after the auction week. To explore this question,

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388512M. Fleming et al.

Table 4
Interest rate risk management. This table reports the results from the regression
𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑡−1 + 𝛽2 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑡 + 𝛾 ′ 𝑍𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡, where 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 is dealers’
inventory and 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 is the weekly issuance amount, both measured in risk
terms (separately for level and slope risks). Yield curve level risk exposure is the
dollar value change in response to a one basis point change in yield. Yield curve
slope risk exposure is the dollar value change in response to a one basis point change
in the slope of the yield curve (defined as the difference between the 2- and 10-year
yields). 𝑍𝑡 is a vector of control variables, including central banks’ purchases (bills
and coupons combined), inventory changes in other fixed income securities, changes in
dealers’ financing activity, changes in the fed funds rate, changes in the Treasury/repo
spreads (using 3-month Treasury bill and 5-year Treasury yields), changes in interest
rate volatility, and dealers’ trading volume (logged). The sample period is from July
4, 2001 to December 30, 2020. Coefficients are reported with heteroskedasticity-
and autocorrelation-consistent (Newey–West) standard errors in parentheses. *𝑝 < .1;
**𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

Independent variable

Level risk

Constant

Beginning Inventory

Issuance

𝛥 Fed holdings ($B)

𝛥 Foreign CB holdings ($B)

𝛥 Agency positions ($B)

𝛥 MBS positions ($B)

Corporate issuance ($B)

Municipal issuance ($B)

𝛥 Net financing ($B)

𝛥 Fed funds rate (%)

𝛥 3-month Treasury/repo spread (%)

𝛥 5-year Treasury/repo spread (%)

𝛥 Interest rate volatility

Log bill trading volume

Log coupon trading volume

Adjusted 𝑅2 (%)
# Observations

0.724∗∗∗
(0.165)
−0.027∗∗∗
(0.008)
0.190∗∗∗
(0.018)
−0.046∗∗∗
(0.011)
−0.044∗∗
(0.019)
−0.019
(0.025)
0.011
(0.030)
−0.011
(0.024)
−0.002
(0.044)
0.024∗∗∗
(0.007)
0.890
(1.306)
4.565∗∗
(1.928)
2.818∗∗
(1.356)
5.128∗∗∗
(1.902)
−0.897
(0.715)
−1.190
(0.859)

19.7
1194

Slope risk

−1.199∗∗∗
(0.391)
−0.052∗∗
(0.025)
0.305∗∗∗
(0.068)
0.063∗∗
(0.028)
0.080
(0.061)
0.064
(0.050)
−0.089
(0.078)
0.029
(0.068)
−0.050
(0.088)
0.000
(0.020)
−0.745
(2.407)
−7.149
(4.732)
−6.411∗∗
(2.697)
−10.279∗∗∗
(3.775)
−0.843
(2.023)
3.058
(2.521)

25.9
1194

we add to the inventory adjustment model in Eq. (2) the previous-week
and next-week issuance amounts as follows:

𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑣∗

𝑡−1 + 𝛽2 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑎 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡−1

+ 𝛽2𝑏 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡+1 + 𝛽3 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡 + 𝛾 ′ 𝑍𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡.

(5)

The model contains the same set of control variables previously
discussed, except that the starting inventory level 𝐼𝑛𝑣∗
𝑡−1 excludes the
𝑡−1 = 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡−1 − ̂𝛽2 × 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡−1, where
effects of 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡−1. That is, 𝐼𝑛𝑣∗
̂𝛽2 is estimated from the main inventory model in Eq. (2) (reported in
column 3 and column 6 of Table 2 for bills and coupons, respectively).
This way, we can isolate the effects of 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡−1 on inventory changes
in week 𝑡 without it being subsumed by the starting inventory level.
Thus, 𝛽2𝑎 reflects the extent to which dealers continue to sell the
inventory acquired at the previous week’s auctions and 𝛽2𝑏 reflects
the extent to which dealers preemptively adjust their inventory in
preparation for auctions in the upcoming week (or pre-hedge).33 We

run the regression using two alternative 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 variables. The first is
the total issuance amount, while the second is just the portion of total
issuance purchased by broker-dealers. We report 𝛽2, 𝛽2𝑎, and 𝛽2𝑏 of the
former in Panel A of Table 5 and of the latter in Panel B.

Panel A indicates that dealers indeed engage in intertemporal
smoothing of their auction-driven inventory shocks, with positions
declining in both the week before and the week after a given auction
week. Specifically, dealers’ bill positions decline by about $78 million
in the week before and about $42 million in the week after, partially
offsetting the auction-week inventory increase, per each $1 billion of
bill auction amount. Intertemporal inventory adjustment of coupons
appears weaker, with significant effects observed only in the week after
the auction week (a decrease of $29 million). Consistent across bills and
coupons, the adjacent weeks’ inventory adjustment pales in comparison
to the increase in inventory in the auction week, indicating that these
inventory shocks take time (more than three weeks starting from the
week before) to fade from dealers’ inventory. Adding these coefficients
together, we approximate that for each $1 billion of new Treasury
issuance, roughly $75 million in bill inventory and $129 million in
coupon inventory remain on dealer balance sheets a full week following
the auction week. With average weekly bill and coupon issuance
amounts of $82.9 billion and $23.2 billion respectively, our estimates
indicate that Treasury dealers carry roughly $9.2 billion additional
inventory on their balance sheets beyond the studied horizon. These
results illustrate significant capital commitments by primary dealers
over multiple-week horizons in underwriting newly issued Treasury
securities.

Panel B zooms in on the issuance amounts purchased by dealers
(as opposed to the total issuance amounts) and shows a qualitatively
similar but statistically much stronger pattern than in Panel A. Panel B
affords us a more accurate estimate of the speed at which dealers lay
off their auction-driven inventory. The same-week coefficient of 0.34
(0.31) for bills (coupons) indicates that dealers are able to immediately
lay off about 66% (69%) of their auction purchases within the same
week. The 34% (31%) unsold inventory at the end of the auction week
is partially offset by preemptive selling in the preceding week (8.7% for
bills and 4.7% for coupons) and by continued selling in the week after
(7.2% for bills and 8.4% for coupons), leaving roughly 18% of dealers’
auction purchases being intermediated over a longer time frame.

5.2. Hedging with derivatives

Another way to hedge inventory shocks is through the use of deriva-
tives. Naik and Yadav (2003b) find that U.K. government bond dealers
hedge spot positions with futures. Do U.S. primary dealers similarly
hedge their inventory shocks by taking offsetting positions in Treasury
futures? If so, there should be a negative relationship between changes
in dealers’ spot and futures positions. Furthermore, because hedging
reduces risk, we should observe greater hedging for positions deemed
riskier. More specifically, we expect the correlation between futures
and spot position changes to be more negative for coupons compared
to bills, and more negative for inventory changes that are subject to
greater adverse selection.

We shed light on this question using the subsample of FR 2004 data
on dealers’ futures and options positions (1990–2001), with the obvious
caveat that dealers’ use of derivatives for managing inventory shocks
might have changed since 2001. To proceed, we first regress weekly
changes in futures positions on changes in spot positions, separately
for bills and coupons, and report the results in columns (1) and (3)
of Table 6. Supporting our hypothesis, we find that Treasury futures
and spot position changes indeed tend to move in opposite directions.

33 Dealers can pre-hedge by selling from inventory securities similar to
those expected to be acquired at auction or by selling securities in the when-
issued market. FR 2004A data includes when-issued positions. Because auction

schedules and offering amounts are announced well in advance, the amount
of next-week’s issuance 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡+1 is known during week 𝑡 and therefore can
be included in the regression to explain dealers’ position changes in week 𝑡.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388513M. Fleming et al.

Table 5
Intertemporal inventory adjustment. This table reports the results from the regression 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑣∗
𝑡−1 + 𝛽2 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑎 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡−1 +
𝛽2𝑏 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡+1 + 𝛽3 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡 + 𝛾 ′ 𝑍𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡, where 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 is the change in dealer net positions over week 𝑡, 𝐼𝑛𝑣∗
𝑡−1 is the net positions at the
end of the previous week excluding the effects of the previous week’s issuance. 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 and 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 are the amount of issuance and
redemptions of Treasury securities, respectively. 𝑍𝑡 is a vector of control variables, including central banks’ purchases, inventory changes in
other fixed income securities, changes in dealers’ financing activity, changes in the fed funds rate, changes in the Treasury/repo spread (using
3-month Treasury bill and 5-year Treasury yields, respectively, in the bill and coupon inventory regression models), changes in interest rate
volatility, and dealers’ trading volume (logged). The regression model is estimated separately for bills and coupons. Panel A shows the regression
in which the 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 variable is the total issuance amount, with data available from May 22, 1991 (when data on some control variables
became available) to December 30, 2020. Panel B shows the regression in which the 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 variable is the issuance amount purchased by
broker-dealers (BDs), with data available from August 1, 2001 to December 30, 2020. Coefficients are reported with heteroskedasticity- and
autocorrelation-consistent (Newey–West) standard errors in parentheses. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

Panel A: Total issuance

Panel B: Issuance purchased by BDs

Next-week’s issuance

Same-week’s issuance

Previous-week’s issuance

Adjusted 𝑅2 (%)
# Observations

Bills

−0.078∗∗∗
(0.013)
0.195∗∗∗
(0.018)
−0.042∗∗∗
(0.015)

33.0
1544

Coupons

−0.005
(0.010)
0.163∗∗∗
(0.010)
−0.029∗∗
(0.013)

32.6
1544

Bills

−0.087∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.341∗∗∗
(0.027)
−0.072∗∗∗
(0.021)

37.3
1012

Coupons

−0.047∗
(0.024)
0.310∗∗∗
(0.023)
−0.084∗∗∗
(0.028)

32.4
1012

The coefficient on bill spot position changes is small and marginally
significant: bill futures positions decrease (increase) by $15 million
for every $1 billion increase (decrease) in bill spot positions. In con-
trast, the coefficient for coupon positions is both sizable in magnitude
and highly significant. On average, coupon futures positions decrease
(increase) by $232 million for every $1 billion increase (decrease) in
coupon spot positions. The 𝑅2 in columns (1) and (4) (0% and 19% for
bills and coupons respectively) clearly show that dealers use futures to
hedge mainly coupon spot positions. Nevertheless, even for coupons,
the hedge ratio is significantly less than one, suggesting that dealers
still leave a significant amount of risk unhedged.

Next, we examine whether dealers selectively hedge certain compo-
nents of their inventory flow. Naik and Yadav (2003b) find that U.K.
gilt dealers hedge more when perceived informational asymmetry is
high, such as on days before major macroeconomic announcements.
Thus, we expect to see greater hedging from the component of inven-
tory flow with greater adverse selection. Using our inventory model,
we separate position changes into components attributable to issuance,
redemptions, and other factors (which may reflect speculative, hedging,
or customer flows). Because auctions are designed to have minimal
adverse selection (e.g., due to Treasury’s commitment to a regular
and predictable auction schedule), the auction-driven inventory flow
should have little adverse selection risk. In contrast, position changes
due to market-making activities or speculative trading might emanate
from trades that are based on private information. These are the types
of inventory changes that a dealer would prefer to hedge. Therefore,
we hypothesize that the use of derivatives to hedge auction-related
inventory changes is lower than that to hedge inventory changes driven
by other factors. We also predict no hedging need for position changes
due to redemptions, because securities that are about to mature have
very low price risk and high redemption liquidity (they are about to be
turned into cash), obviating the need for hedging.

For the decomposition of inventory changes, we first estimate the
regression model specified in Eq. (2) (again separately for bills and
coupons) using data over the shorter sample period used in this section.
Thus, the auction-driven component of inventory changes is computed
as 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 𝛽2 × 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 and the redemptions-driven component
as 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 = 𝛽3 × 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠. Position changes due to other
factors are thus 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 = 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣 − 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 − 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠. To test
for selective hedging, we regress futures position changes on all three
components of spot position changes and report the results in columns
(2) and (4) of Table 6:

𝛥𝐹 𝑢𝑡𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 + 𝛽2𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 + 𝛽3𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 + 𝜖𝑡.

(6)

The results reveal that futures are mainly used to hedge spot po-
sition changes driven by other factors, not issuance nor redemptions,

consistent with our hypothesis of selective hedging to mitigate adverse
selection risk. For bills, the coefficient on spot position changes due
to other factors is a significant −0.042, while the ones due to issuance
and redemptions are not significant. Bills have low duration risk, which
likely explains the lack of hedging for inventory changes due to their is-
suance. For coupons, the coefficient on position changes due to issuance
is significantly negative (−0.140), but much smaller in magnitude than
the coefficient on position changes due to other factors (−0.282).

Overall, the results show that dealers use futures to hedge their
Treasury spot position changes only to a limited extent, and mainly
for coupons rather than bills. Even for coupons, the focus of hedging
is on position changes that are susceptible to adverse selection risk
rather than position changes related to the auction-redemption cycle.
We conclude that even though issuance is the main driver of dealers’
weekly inventory changes, dealers appear to leave issuance-driven
inventory changes largely unhedged.

6. Compensation for intermediating Treasury supply shocks

In their underwriting and market-making roles, dealers accumulate
undesired inventory. This inventory is costly to dealers because it
generates both price risk (i.e., the risk that the value of inventory
holdings fluctuates with price changes) and asymmetric information
risk (i.e., the risk that dealers are stuck with informationally undesir-
able holdings). In this section, we investigate whether and how much
dealers are compensated for taking on such inventory risk, specifically
in the form of price appreciation following inventory acquisition. For
this, we conduct two complementary analyses. First, we specifically
examine the link between dealer inventory flow and Treasury excess
returns. Second, we study the general price patterns around Treasury
auctions following the approach of Lou et al. (2013) by testing for
systematic price depreciation in advance of auctions and price ap-
preciation following auctions. The idea is that compensation for risk
need not only be received by dealers. Other market participants who
provide liquidity services (e.g., hedge funds and proprietary trading
desks) would also receive such compensation.

6.1. Dealer compensation for inventory risk

The existing literature addresses several closely related questions.
First, a number of studies have shown that dealers are compensated
for participating in the primary market in that Treasuries tend to
be auctioned at prices lower than those in the secondary market;
e.g., Cammack (1991), Spindt and Stolz (1992), and Simon (1994).
These analyses of auction underpricing focus on contemporaneous
differentials between primary and secondary market prices. In contrast,

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388514M. Fleming et al.

Table 6
Use of derivatives for inventory management. This table reports results from regressions of weekly changes in primary dealers’ net futures
positions in U.S. Treasury securities on changes in their net spot positions in Treasury securities in whole and in parts. Changes in net spot
positions are decomposed into three parts: (1) due to issuance, (2) due to redemptions, and (3) due to other factors, based on the full
inventory model specified in Eq. (2). The sample period is July 4, 1990 to June 27, 2001. The regressions are estimated separately for bills and
coupons and the independent variables are defined accordingly. Coefficients are reported with heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent
(Newey–West) standard errors in parentheses. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

Dependent variable: Futures position changes

Independent variable

Constant

Spot position changes — total

Spot position changes — due to issuance

Spot position changes — due to redemptions

Spot position changes — due to other factors

Adjusted 𝑅2 (%)
# Observations

Bills

(1)

−0.135
(0.185)
−0.015∗
(0.008)

−0.0
573

(2)

0.698∗
(0.393)

0.016
(0.013)
−0.008
(0.036)
−0.042∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.8
573

Coupons

(3)

0.527∗∗
(0.255)
−0.232∗∗∗
(0.023)

19.0
573

(4)

0.753∗∗
(0.336)

−0.140∗∗∗
(0.044)
0.157
(0.225)
−0.282∗∗∗
(0.030)

21.0
573

we examine changes in secondary market prices around auctions. If
such prices systematically increase following auctions, dealers gain
through the appreciating value of their inventory, which serves as
compensation for holding such positions. Thus, the compensation we
document is separate and in addition to any underpricing dealers obtain
at auctions.

Second, many studies have documented a negative relationship be-
tween Treasury supply and prices. Simon (1991, 1994), Duffee (1996),
and Fleming (2002) examine the effects of individual issue sizes. Green-
wood and Vayanos (2014) study the effects of long- versus short-
term supply, while Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) ana-
lyze overall outstanding Treasury supply. Different from these studies,
which identify permanent price effects of Treasury supply, we exam-
ine the transitory price impact associated with frequent and publicly
known supply shocks and the reallocation of such shocks from a small
group of intermediaries to a broader set of market participants.

Our analysis is most similar to Hendershott and Seasholes (2007)
in that we explore whether there is a transitory but somewhat persis-
tent price effect of shocks to market-maker inventories. However, an
interesting difference is that Hendershott and Seasholes (2007) focus on
price effects of private-knowledge inventory shocks measured using in-
dividual NYSE specialist inventories. In contrast, our analysis measures
price effects of predictable, publicly known inventory changes; namely,
those due to Treasury issuance. The fact that the size and timing of the
issuance inventory changes is common knowledge does not preclude a
price effect to the extent that such an effect is fair compensation for
bearing inventory risk.34 The existence of a price effect around known
and repeated supply shocks is also consistent with the idea that investor
capital is not mobile enough to immediately absorb these sizable supply
shocks (as in Duffie, 2010).

Thus, the main hypothesis we seek to test in this section is whether
dealers acquire positions at prices below their long-run expected value,
implying that such positions should subsequently appreciate in value.35
However, it is also important to recognize that dealers’ order flow
might contain information that moves prices, especially for the order
flow originating from the dealers themselves (e.g., due to proprietary

34 As noted, since the first draft of this paper, Lou et al. (2013) find that U.S.
Treasury security prices decrease in the days leading up to Treasury auctions
and then recover.

35 As explained in Hendershott and Seasholes (2007, p. 210), ‘‘Empirical
studies linking liquidity provision to asset prices follow naturally from inven-
tory models... [L]iquidity suppliers/arbitrageurs are willing to accommodate
trades – and, therefore, hold suboptimal portfolios – only if they are able to
buy (sell) at a discount (premium) relative to future prices’’.

trading). Earlier studies (e.g., Fleming, 2003; Brandt and Kavajecz,
2004) show that dealer order flow is informative for U.S. Treasury secu-
rity prices. Thus, an increase in dealer positions – implying dealers are
buying – might be accompanied by a contemporaneous price increase,
which is opposite to the prediction of a negative contemporaneous
relationship under the inventory risk compensation channel discussed
above.

Without detailed data on different types of order flow in and out
of dealers’ inventory, it is challenging to separate the inventory risk
compensation effects of order flow from the informational price impact
of order flow. However, our empirical analysis allows us to distinguish
between these competing channels. Specifically, based on our inventory
adjustment model in Eq. (2), we decompose dealers’ position changes
into a component driven by Treasury auctions and a component due
to other factors. This decomposition is important because of the very
different informational content of the components. The first component
– an important part of dealer inventory fluctuations as demonstrated by
our earlier results – is arguably free from information. This is because
Treasury auctions are on a regular schedule and details are announced
in advance, intentionally designed to minimize any adverse selection.
Thus, any price effects observed for issuance-driven inventory changes
can be cleanly attributed to compensation for bearing inventory risk,
free of informational effects.

On the other hand, the second component of dealers’ inventory
changes captures dealers’ order flow due to their trading with cus-
tomers in the secondary market, as well as any hedging and speculative
trading activity by the dealers. As a result, this component is likely in-
formative, based on evidence from the literature discussed above. Thus,
a contemporaneous and positive relationship between this component
of dealer inventory flow with price (without reversal) would provide
supporting evidence for the informational content of dealer order flow
separately from the inventory risk compensation channel.

To formally test the above hypotheses, we regress weekly excess
returns on contemporaneous and lagged values of the two components
of dealer inventory changes. To control for the Treasury return pre-
dictability documented by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), we include
five forward rates as in their model. Thus, the regression model is:

𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,𝑡 + 𝛽2𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠,𝑡 + 𝛽3𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,𝑡−1

+ 𝛽4𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠,𝑡−1 + 𝛾1𝑓 (1)

𝑡−1 + ⋯ + 𝛾5𝑓 (5)
where 𝑟𝑡 is the weekly excess return on a given Treasury security.
𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 is dealers’ weekly position change due to Treasury auctions,
𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠 is dealers’ weekly position change due to other factors,

𝑡−1 + 𝜖𝑡,

(7)

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388515M. Fleming et al.

and 𝑓 (𝑖) are forward rates for years 1 through 5.36 We estimate this
regression using excess returns for the on-the-run 3- and 6-month bills,
and the 2-, 5-, and 10-year notes. Bill returns are regressed on changes
in bill positions and coupon returns on changes in coupon positions. To
assess the incremental predictive power of dealers’ position changes,
we also report the increases in 𝑅2 relative to Cochrane–Piazzesi styled
regressions with just the five forward rates.

Based on the hypotheses outlined above, a negative 𝛽1 and positive
𝛽3 would provide support for the idea that dealers are compensated for
taking on inventory risk. The negative 𝛽1 would imply that dealers are
taking on long positions when the price is declining. The positive 𝛽3
would imply that the price subsequently increases the week after the
inventory acquisition. On the other hand, a positive 𝛽2 would indicate
that dealer inventory flow due to non-issuance factors is informative,
consistent with the literature. If this information content takes time
to be incorporated into prices (beyond the current week), we should
observe a positive 𝛽4 as well.

We tabulate the results in Table 7. We first discuss the results
pertaining to the inventory risk compensation channel. 𝛽1 is not sig-
nificant for most securities, but 𝛽3 is positive and significant across all
of them. These results support the hypothesis that dealers are compen-
sated for taking on informationally-free inventory risk. Moreover, this
compensation manifests mainly through the subsequent appreciation
of the acquired inventory, rather than through price cheapening at
the time of taking on inventory positions. The compensation appears
to scale up with the duration of the securities, consistent with the
increasing risk associated with holding longer maturities. For example,
a $1 billion increase in issuance-driven inventory changes predicts a
0.18 bps increase in the 6-month bill’s excess return, but a 3.23 bps
increase in the 10-year note’s excess return the following week. For
comparison, studies of underpricing in Treasury auctions using data
over the 1990’s and 2000’s identify a primary versus secondary market
yield differential of about 1/2 to 1 basis point (Simon, 1994; Nyborg
and Sundaresan, 1996; and Goldreich, 2007). This yield differential –
when adjusted for duration – is similar in magnitude to our estimates
of return attributable to auction-driven price pressures. Our results thus
imply that a good portion of the return to dealers from underwriting
Treasury auctions comes from dealers’ intertemporal intermediation of
supply across weeks.

Turning to the pricing effects of non-issuance-driven inventory
changes, we find evidence supporting the conjecture that dealers’ order
flow due to their secondary market and proprietary trading activities
is informative for Treasury security returns, especially among coupon
securities. In particular, 𝛽2 is significant and positive for all Treasury
notes. For example, a $1 billion increase in dealers’ non-issuance-
related order flow is accompanied by a contemporaneous 1.74 basis
point increase in excess returns for the 10-year note. The fact that this
informational effect shows up significantly and positively in the coupon
securities is consistent with the idea that coupons are more likely to
be used for speculation and proprietary trading than bills. Notably,
this information appears to be incorporated on a timely basis, with no
significant effect after the current week (as shown by the insignificant
𝛽4 across all securities). This result further corroborates the conclusion
that non-issuance order flow has an immediate price impact due to ad-
verse selection and that such price impact does not subsequently revert.
Lastly, we find that dealers’ position changes add considerable
power to explaining Treasury excess returns. Without dealers’ posi-
tion changes, the Cochrane–Piazzesi-styled regression models explain

36 The decomposition of dealers’ weekly position changes into an issuance-
and non-issuance-driven components is based on our coefficient estimates from
the regression in Eq. (2) as reported in columns (3) and (6) in Table 2. For
bills, 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,𝑡 = 0.126 × 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡. For coupons, 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,𝑡 = 0.165 ×
𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑡. The non-issuance component is then computed as 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠,𝑡 =
𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑡 − 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,𝑡 respectively for bills and coupons.

between 0.1% to 3.4% of the variation in excess returns.37 Adding
dealer position changes increases the regression 𝑅2s by 2.1%–3.2%. The
incremental 𝑅2s are generally higher for coupons than for bills, consis-
tent with our earlier finding that dealers’ coupon inventory changes
are slightly more informative for future Treasury excess returns than
dealers’ bill inventory changes.

In sum, we uncover evidence that dealers are compensated for
inventory risk associated with Treasury supply changes via subsequent
appreciation of the positions they hold. Despite the Treasury market’s
liquidity, new Treasury issues are large enough to temporarily depress
prices. Dealers absorb these large supply shocks into their inventory
and then resell them to other market participants over time. Such in-
tertemporal intermediation is facilitated by the Treasury’s commitment
to not use private information, but also by the compensation dealers
receive through the subsequent price appreciation of securities bought
at auction.

6.2. Auction-cycle pricing effects

Our results so far focus on the pricing effects of dealers’ position
changes driven by Treasury issuance and other factors. To the extent
that the compensation for absorbing supply shocks is obtainable not
only by the primary dealers studied in this paper but also by other
liquidity providers who participate in the primary market, we should
observe similar price patterns in general and not just in relation to
primary dealers’ inventory flow.

Following Lou et al. (2013), we track the changes in the secondary
market yields of three key on-the-run notes (2-, 5-, and 10-year) starting
from 10 trading days before the auction date of the next issue (in the
same maturity term) to 10 days after. That is, we capture the evolution
of the yield of the same security as it transitions from being an on-the-
run security to being the first off-the-run following the auction date
of the next issue (except when the auction is a reopening, in which
case the security continues to be on-the-run after the reopening). An
important advantage of this analysis is that we can zoom in on the price
behavior at the daily interval, allowing a more granular look into how
prices change around auctions.

One important consideration in designing our analysis of auction-
cycle effects is that the benchmark Treasury securities we examine are
auctioned once per month at around the same time of month. As shown
in Internet Appendix Figure A1, the 2- and 5-year notes are mostly
auctioned toward the end of the month whereas the 10-year note is
auctioned early in the month. Thus, the evolution of yields around
these auctions might be confounded by the general patterns of Treasury
returns around the turn of the month due to factors such as institutional
cash needs (documented in Etula et al., 2020) or investor demand for
specific securities due to window dressing and portfolio rebalancing
(documented in Hartley and Schwarz, 2019). Accordingly, we adjust
yields for day-of-month effects before quantifying the auction-cycle
effects.

Specifically, we regress daily yields on day-of-month dummies and
collect the residuals, which reflect the component of yields not pre-
dicted by the day-of-month effects.38 This is the adjusted yield 𝑦(𝑡) that

37 In Treasury return predictability regressions, Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) document explanatory power ranging from 9% to 16% for forward
versus spot spreads, from 22% to 26% for slope, level, and curvature factors,
from 15% to 33% for combinations of one-, four-, and five-year spot yields,
and from 36% to 39% for one- to five-year forward rates. Our regressions have
much lower 𝑅2 because they predict one-week returns, which are much less
predictable than annual returns.

38 The day of month ranges from −9 to N-10, where 𝑁 is the number of days
in a given month. Negative values are for the last ten days of the month, while
positive values indicate the number of days into the month. For example, for
a month with 22 trading days, the day of month goes from 1 to 12 for the
first 12 days of the month then switches to −9, -8, . . . , 0 for the last 10 days

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388516M. Fleming et al.

𝑡−1 + ... + 𝛾5𝑓 (5)

Table 7
Dealer compensation for inventory risk and other factors. This table reports results from the regression 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,𝑡 + 𝛽2𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠,𝑡 +
𝛽3𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,𝑡−1 + 𝛽4𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠,𝑡−1 + 𝛾1𝑓 (1)
𝑡−1 + 𝜖𝑡, where 𝑟𝑡 is the weekly excess returns on a given Treasury security, 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 is dealers’
weekly position changes due to Treasury auctions, 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠 is dealers’ weekly position changes due to other factors, and 𝑓 (𝑖) are forward rates
for years 1 through 5. The decomposition of position changes into issuance-driven and non-issuance-driven components is based on coefficient
estimates from the full inventory model reported in Table 2 (column 3 for bills and column 6 for coupons). Bill returns are regressed on changes
in bill positions and coupon returns are regressed on changes in coupon positions. Incremental 𝑅2 refers to the increase in explanatory power
when position change variables are added to the predictive regression of excess returns on the five forward rates. The sample period is from
July 4, 1990 to December 30, 2020. Coefficients are reported with heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent (Newey–West) standard
errors in parentheses. Returns are in basis points and position changes are in billions of dollars. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

3-month bill

6-month bill

2-year note

5-year note

10-year note

Same-week position change:

Due to issuance

Due to other factors

Previous-week position change:

Due to issuance

Due to other factors

# Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2 (%)
Incremental 𝑅2 (%)

−0.066∗
(0.038)
−0.029∗∗
(0.014)

0.066∗
(0.034)
0.006
(0.007)

1587
5.8
2.4

−0.145∗∗
(0.066)
−0.021
(0.020)

0.179∗∗∗
(0.067)
0.005
(0.012)

1587
5.0
2.1

0.007
(0.120)
0.329∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.645∗∗∗
(0.123)
0.002
(0.057)

1587
2.8
2.3

0.121
(0.352)
1.037∗∗∗
(0.191)

2.078∗∗∗
(0.366)
−0.044
(0.172)

1587
3.4
3.2

0.165
(0.634)
1.743∗∗∗
(0.353)

3.225∗∗∗
(0.655)
−0.247
(0.337)

1587
2.9
2.8

we use in our analysis of auction-cycle effects. For each day in the
auction cycle (ranging from −10 to 10, with 0 representing the auction
date), we compute the difference in adjusted yield between that given
day and the auction date, i.e., 𝛥𝑦(𝑡) = 𝑦(𝑡) − 𝑦(0). We then take the
average of 𝛥𝑦(𝑡) across all auctions in the relevant sample and compute
the standard errors for these averages using Newey–West adjustment
with 12 lags (as in Lou et al., 2013).

As shown in Table 8, we find significant auction-cycle effects (es-
pecially in the 2- and 5-year notes), qualitatively similar to the results
in Lou et al. (2013) even though we adjust for day-of-month effects
in yields.39 Yields exhibit an inverted V-shaped patterns, with the
yields both before and after the auction day being lower than the
yields on the auction day. This is equivalent to a V-shaped pattern in
prices, indicating that Treasury securities tend to cheapen in the run
up to auctions and then appreciate in value after the auctions. This
general price pattern is consistent with our earlier evidence of dealers’
inventory positions appreciating in value following auctions. Together,
the results point to price appreciation as a means of compensating
intermediaries who absorb a large supply shock and redistribute supply
to investors over time.

7. The evolution of inventory management and compensation

As Fig. 1 shows, there appear to be structural changes in dealers’
positions over time, especially with respect to Treasury coupons and
other fixed income securities and especially after the 2007–09 financial
crisis. In this section, we provide a time series perspective on dealer
inventory management and compensation for inventory risk in the
broader context of significant market developments, especially the
crisis and the sweeping regulatory reforms thereafter.40 As discussed
in Adrian et al. (2017b), regulations affecting the dealer sector tight-
ened markedly after the crisis. These regulations are intended to make

of the month. Our day-of-month assignment ensures that the day of month is
properly anchored to either the first or last day of the month with no double
counting of the days in the middle of the month despite varying month lengths.
39 The pattern around the 10-year note’s auctions is weak even in Lou et al.
(2013) using raw yields. Once we control for day-of-month effects, the 10-
year note does not exhibit any significant effects in advance of auctions. The
expected post-auction effects (a decrease in yield, or a price appreciation) only
start to become significant after five days.

40 We also examine how the rise of HFTs in the secondary market has
affected dealer inventory dynamics but find that their impact is statistically
insignificant. See Internet Appendix Table A5 for detailed results.

Table 8
Auction cycle pricing effects. This table reports the time-series average of the change
in yields (in basis points) between day t and auction day (day 0), with t ranging from
−10 to 10, for the 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury notes. Each given note is on-the-run
before the auction (of the next security) and off-the-run after the auction, except for
reopenings (mostly for the 10-year note) after which the security continues to be on-
the-run. The sample period is from July 4, 1990 to December 30, 2020. Daily yields
are pre-adjusted for day-of-month effects. The standard errors for reported estimates
are calculated using Newey–West standard errors (with 12 lags). *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05;
***𝑝 < .01.

t

−10
−9
−8
−7
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

# Auctions

2-year note

5-year note

10-year note

−1.40∗
−2.72∗∗∗
−2.46∗∗∗
−1.28
−0.98
−1.77∗∗∗
−2.29∗∗∗
−1.37∗∗∗
−0.54
−0.35
0.00
−0.21
−0.72∗
−0.97∗
−1.73∗∗∗
−2.00∗∗∗
−1.89∗∗∗
−0.61
−0.53
−2.29∗∗
−4.82∗∗∗

366

−1.14
−2.41∗∗
−3.26∗∗∗
−1.30
−1.43∗
−2.33∗∗∗
−1.28∗∗
−0.17
0.62
−0.01
0.00
−0.48
−1.61∗∗∗
−1.55∗∗∗
−1.83∗∗∗
−2.57∗∗∗
−1.96∗∗
−0.25
−0.20
−1.12
−2.75∗∗∗

322

1.30
0.12
0.26
0.87
0.17
0.30
−0.29
−0.01
−0.11
−0.11
0.00
1.14∗∗∗
3.25∗∗∗
3.43∗∗∗
1.51
−0.01
−2.17∗
−3.92∗∗∗
−1.96∗∗
−2.78∗∗∗
−2.26∗∗

245

the global financial system more resilient to shocks, but also increase
the cost of market making by raising the cost of capital and restricting
dealer risk taking.

The literature has focused primarily on how these trends affect
market liquidity, especially in the corporate bond market (see Adrian
et al., 2017a for a review). We contribute to this literature by investigat-
ing how inventory management of Treasury dealers changes with the
regulatory environment and whether increased balance sheet costs and
restricted position taking adversely affect dealers’ ability to fulfill their
critical underwriting function in the primary market. The U.S. public
debt has grown rapidly in recent years (and will continue to do so in the
foreseeable future). Whether new Treasury securities can be issued at
competitive rates and intermediated smoothly depends on the primary

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388517M. Fleming et al.

dealers and how they handle these sizable and repeated supply shocks
in light of their more constrained capacity.

7.1. Regulatory changes

Following the 2007–09 financial crisis, which exposed solvency and
liquidity problems in the global financial system, extensive regulatory
reforms took place in the U.S. and internationally. In the U.S., Congress
passed the Dodd-Frank Act in July 2010 to strengthen the regulation
of financial institutions and make the financial system safer. Interna-
tionally, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision finalized Basel
III in December 2010, which is a new set of standards on capital and
liquidity levels that are applicable to internationally active banks. The
implementation of both the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III standards
occurred over a period of several years following their passage, with
specific rules concerning various provisions being written and adopted.
Altogether, the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III form a new regulatory
framework for banking institutions, that now includes tighter bank
capital requirements, leverage ratios, and liquidity requirements. In
response, dealer banks cut back their trading-related exposures, re-
duced the willingness and/or scope of their liquidity provision, and
scaled down their risk-taking capacity (see CGFS, 2016). According
to a survey of market participants conducted by CGFS (2016), Basel
III’s higher risk-weighted capital requirements and the supplemental
leverage ratio (SLR, finalized in September 2014) have the largest
impact on government bond dealers’ profits and are therefore the most
likely drivers of changes to their business models. One such business
model change, as suggested by the majority of survey respondents, is an
increase in inventory turnover and a shift away from principal trading
toward agency trading, with the goal of sustaining trading activities on
a more constrained balance sheet.

7.2. Changes to intermediation of primary market issuance?

Amid the broad trends brought about by the post-crisis regulatory
framework, a key question is whether primary dealers have changed
the way they intermediate primary market issuance. As committed un-
derwriters of Treasury auctions, primary dealers absorb issuance supply
shocks using their balance sheets and redistribute supply to investors
over time. How they manage this important function amid tighter
balance sheets and the fast growing U.S. public debt has important
implications for the ability of the U.S. Treasury to issue new debt at
the lowest possible cost going forward. Indeed, Duffie (2020) expresses
the concern that tighter regulations, combined with the rapid growth
in Treasury debt outstanding, mean that the market’s size may have
outgrown the capacity of dealers to safely intermediate the market on
their own.

In this section, we investigate two important aspects of dealer
intermediation in the primary market. First, are dealers reducing their
position taking at auction? Second, given the amount purchased at
auction, how fast are dealers laying off such inventory? Based on the
perspective of market participants discussed in CGFS (2016) and the
vast literature on the effects of post-crisis regulations on fixed income
markets (reviewed in Adrian et al., 2017a), we expect the following: (1)
dealers are reducing their purchases at auction (in line with the reduc-
tion in risk-taking capacity and more constrained balance sheets), and
(2) dealers are laying off acquired inventory faster (consistent with the
new reality of having to make do with reduced capital commitments).
To formally test the above hypotheses, an event study empirical
design would be ideal. However, the literature devoted to studying
the effects of post-crisis regulation has recognized that this approach
is not feasible (see Trebbi and Xiao, 2019 for an in-depth discussion
of the issues). The key challenge is that regulatory changes occur over
an extended period of time. This makes it unclear when dealers might
have changed their business models as a result and hence difficult, if
not impossible, to determine the correct ‘‘event date’’. For example,

financial system reform was first proposed by President Obama in 2009,
passed by Congress as the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010, then followed
by several years of rule making to formalize the implementation of
various provisions of the Act before these rules were finally adopted.
An additional consideration is that different rules come into effect
at different times, and affect different entities differently, making it
challenging to cleanly identify the effects of any particular rule.

We thus follow the standard approach in the literature in our
empirical investigation (see e.g., Schultz, 2017; Bessembinder et al.,
2018; Adrian et al., 2017a). That is, we compare the outcome variables
of interest across subsamples defined by key regulatory milestones and
test whether they differ significantly across subsamples and in the
hypothesized direction. We adopt the same cutoff dates as in Adrian
et al. (2017a) except that we start the rule implementation period from
January 1, 2015. This is because the SLR, which is most consequential
for Treasury dealers, was not finalized until the last quarter of 2014.
Thus, the four subsample periods are: (1) pre-crisis period (start of
sample period to December 31, 2006), (2) crisis period (from January
1, 2007 to December 31, 2009), (3) rule development period (from
January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2014), and (4) rule implementation
period (from January 1, 2015 to the end of the sample).

We construct three measures of dealers’ intermediation of new
issuance. First, we use the amounts purchased by broker-dealers at
auction to capture the extent of position taking by primary dealers.
Second, we compute the fraction of new issuance purchased by broker-
dealers as a proxy for the importance of primary dealers in the primary
market. Third, we estimate the fraction of dealers’ auction purchases
that remains unsold at the end of the auction week by using the inven-
tory model specified in Eq. (2) in which the issuance variable is the
issuance amount purchased by dealers. Thus, the obtained coefficient
𝛽2 directly reflects how fast dealers lay off auction inventory within
the same week and is not affected by the changing share of dealers’
purchases at auction.

Table 9 reports our estimates of the three outcome variables across
the four subsample periods. We provide the tests of significant change
between any two subsample periods in the lower panel of the table.
The reduction in position taking after regulatory changes shows up
most strongly in the intermediation of coupon issuance. For example,
dealers buy nearly $21 billion of coupon securities weekly at auctions
during the rule making period, but only around $13 billion after the
applicable rules have been implemented despite the fast growth in
coupon issuance. Their share of coupon auction purchases plummets
to about 30%, whereas they had consistently taken in more than 50%
prior to the implementation of tighter regulations.

We also observe a somewhat reduced importance of primary dealers
at bill auctions in the post-regulatory change period, although dealers
still purchase a large fraction of bill issuance (over 60%). Because bill
issuance grows faster than the drop in dealers’ purchase share, the
dollar value of dealers’ bill positions taken on at auction still increases
over time. Given the large quantity of weekly bill purchases compared
to coupon purchases (e.g., $99 billion versus $13 billion in the latest
subsample period), it is not surprising to find that dealers manage to
unload their bill auction inventory faster compared to coupons (with
only 22% remaining unsold compared to 39%) and also compared to
the rule development period (22% versus 43%). Meanwhile, the rate of
coupon inventory layoff does not exhibit significant change when the
rules go into effect.

We supplement the findings in Table 9 with a time series plot of the
position taking at auction and the fraction of auction inventory that
remains unsold at the end of the auction week in Internet Appendix
Figure A2. For each year, the auction purchases amount (share) is the
average weekly amount (share) for the year, whereas the effect on
dealer inventory is estimated using data from the noted year and the
two preceding years. Consistent with the subsample analysis above,
dealers have substantially curtailed their position taking in coupon
securities since the 2007–09 crisis (in both dollar amount and share

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388518M. Fleming et al.

Table 9
How do dealers manage auction inventory shocks over time? This table compares dealers’ position taking at auctions and auction inventory intermediation rate across four subsample
periods: (1) pre-crisis period (start of sample period to December 31, 2006), (2) crisis period (from January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2009), (3) rule development period (from
January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2014), and (4) rule implementation period (from January 1, 2015 to the end of the sample). The sample period is from August 1, 2001 (the
first week with available investment class allotment data for both bills and coupons) to December 30, 2020. The estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. The
data for weekly auction amount and the amount purchased by broker-dealers are from TreasuryDirect. The fraction of unsold inventory is the coefficient of broker-dealer auction
purchase amount on dealers’ weekly position changes, controlling for other explanatory variables as specified in Eq. (2). The lower panel of the table shows the Welsh-Satterthwaite
𝑡-statistics for tests of significant difference between subsample periods. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

Bills

Coupons

Amount purchased
at auction

Fraction purchased
at auction

Fraction of
unsold inventory

Amount purchased
at auction

Fraction purchased
at auction

Fraction of
unsold inventory

Pre-crisis

Crisis

Rule development

Rule implementation

𝐻𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠=𝑝𝑟𝑒−𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠
𝐻𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡=𝑝𝑟𝑒−𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠
𝐻𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛=𝑝𝑟𝑒−𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠
𝐻𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡=𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠
𝐻𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛=𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠
𝐻𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛=𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡

40.3∗∗∗
(0.688)
61.2∗∗∗
(2.379)
74.4∗∗∗
(0.957)
98.7∗∗∗
(2.550)

8.431∗∗∗
28.916∗∗∗
22.108∗∗∗
5.156∗∗∗
10.759∗∗∗
8.921∗∗∗

0.593∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.598∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.700∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.619∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.551∗∗∗
(0.057)
0.348∗∗∗
(0.058)
0.426∗∗∗
(0.041)
0.220∗∗∗
(0.032)

7.0∗∗∗
(0.484)
13.2∗∗∗
(1.073)
20.7∗∗∗
(1.023)
13.3∗∗∗
(0.637)

Tests of significant change between subsample periods

0.613
18.825∗∗∗
4.707∗∗∗
13.704∗∗∗
2.891∗∗∗
−14.806∗∗∗

−2.495∗∗
−1.764∗
−5.067∗∗∗
1.101
−1.958∗
−3.971∗∗∗

5.327∗∗∗
12.175∗∗∗
7.922∗∗∗
5.062∗∗∗
0.052
−6.174∗∗∗

0.563∗∗∗
(0.011)
0.580∗∗∗
(0.012)
0.519∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.298∗∗∗
(0.005)

1.052
−3.522∗∗∗
−21.558∗∗∗
−4.740∗∗∗
−22.193∗∗∗
−31.508∗∗∗

0.423∗∗∗
(0.054)
0.272∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.386∗∗∗
(0.039)
0.390∗∗∗
(0.055)

−1.928∗
−0.550
−0.416
1.667∗
1.516
0.071

of auction purchases, especially the latter), whereas the decrease in
position taking in bills is only modest (as shown by the slight decline
in the share of purchases and even an increase in the dollar amount).
However, the acceleration of bill inventory unloading is notable.

Overall, the results reveal significant differences in dealers’ interme-
diation of Treasury supply shocks across the subsample periods, with
the changes also differing between bills and coupons. It appears that
dealers cope with tighter balance sheets by drastically cutting position
taking at auctions for coupons but by speeding up the unloading of
acquired auction inventory for bills.

7.3. Compensation for intermediating new issuance

With stricter capital and liquidity requirements raising the cost of
using balance sheet to warehouse new issuance, it is not surprising
to observe evidence of reduced position taking at auctions. How does
this affect the compensation for intermediating new issuance? Given
that investor capital is not perfectly mobile (Duffie, 2010) and that
issuance supply shocks keep growing, dealers’ reduced willingness to
intermediate these supply shocks should increase intermediary compen-
sation. However, that is not what we observe. We tabulate in Table 10
our subsample analysis of the price effects of issuance-driven inventory
flow based on the regression specified in Eq. (7). Similar to the full
sample results in Table 7, there is no clear evidence of dealers being
compensated through declining prices during inventory acquisition, as
shown in the upper panel of the table. The more important source of
intermediary compensation – the post-auction appreciation of acquired
inventory reported in the lower panel of the table – is significant in the
earlier periods (mainly for the coupon securities) but insignificant after
the crisis.

What explains the attenuation of compensation for intermediating
new issuance precisely when key underwriters play a progressively
reduced role at auctions? The literature on the effects of regulations on
fixed income markets has documented the emergence of new liquidity
providers amid the contraction of dealers’ balance sheets and market
making capacity. For example, Choi et al. (2024) find that customers
(likely big asset managers) increasingly provide liquidity to other cus-
tomers in the corporate bond market. Likewise, evidence from Kruttli
et al. (2021) and Barth and Kahn (2021) suggests that hedge funds now
provide significant liquidity in the Treasury market. If these players
increasingly participate in the primary market, they can fill the void
left by the primary dealers in absorbing new supply.

Indeed, as discussed in the preceding subsection, dealers’ share of
purchases at auction steadily decreases after the crisis, especially for
coupon securities. Notably, as revealed in Fig. 5, the steep decline in
dealers’ share of coupon auction purchases is almost exactly offset by
the increasing share purchased by investment funds, while all other
investor classes collectively purchase a relatively stable share of new
issuance over time. More importantly, if these investment funds used
to be liquidity demanders and buy Treasury securities from dealers
after auction, their increasing participation in the primary market
would depress intermediary compensation through both an increase
in the competition for liquidity provision and a decrease in the post-
auction demand underpinning the post-auction price appreciation. We
hypothesize that it is this transformation of liquidity demanders to
liquidity providers that contributes to the dissipation of compensation
for intermediating new issuance.

To test this hypothesis, we use the more granular auction-level data
so that we can directly link the post-auction price appreciation to the
level of participation by investment funds at auction. For this test,
our measure of post-auction price appreciation (𝛥𝑝) is the negative of
the five-day change in yield 𝛥𝑦(5) as used in our analysis of auction-
cycle pricing effects in Section 6.2; i.e., 𝛥𝑝 ∝ −𝛥𝑦(5). We thus run the
following panel regression:

𝛥𝑝𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑣𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑃 𝑡𝑐𝑝𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐵𝑖𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑡

+ 𝛽4𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝐹 𝐸𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡.

(8)

In this regression, 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑡 and 𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑃 𝑡𝑐𝑝𝑖,𝑡 are the shares of
auction purchases by investment funds and other non-dealer participant
types, respectively. 𝐵𝑖𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 is the bid-to-cover ratio, capturing how
oversubscribed an auction is. It thus serves as a proxy for the overall
market demand for the auctioned security. 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒 is the issuance
amount, which proxies for the size of the supply shock intermedi-
aries have to absorb. The larger the issuance, the greater the capital
commitment, and thus the greater the compensation expected for inter-
mediaries. We estimate this regression using the auction data available
for all nominal coupons (2-, 3-, 5-, 7-, 10-, and 30-year), starting from
the week of August 1, 2001 when investor class allotment data became
available for both bill and coupon auctions. We include security-by-
period fixed effects to control for differences in auction-cycle effects
across securities and time. Thus, we are able to identify the effect of
the variation in investment funds’ participation in the same security

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388519M. Fleming et al.

Table 10
Compensation for intermediating auction inventory shocks across subsample periods. This table compares measures of compensation for positions
taken at auction across four subsample periods: (1) pre-crisis period (start of sample period to December 31, 2006), (2) crisis period (from
January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2009), (3) rule development period (from January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2014), and (4) rule implementation
period (from January 1, 2015 to the end of the sample). The sample period is from August 1, 2001 (the first week with available investment
class allotment data for both bills and coupons) to December 30, 2020. Panel A reports the change in excess return due to auction positions
taken during the same week. Panel B reports the change in excess return due to auction positions taken in the previous week. All estimates
are from the regression specified in Eq. (7) except that the total issuance amount is replaced by the amount purchased by broker-dealers. The
estimates are reported with Newey–West standard errors in parentheses. The data for weekly auction amount and the amount purchased by
broker-dealers are from TreasuryDirect. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

3-month bill

6-month bill

2-year note

5-year note

10-year note

Panel A: Do dealers acquire auction inventory while price declines?

Pre-crisis

Crisis

Rule development

Rule implementation

Pre-crisis

Crisis

Rule development

Rule implementation

−0.003
(0.009)
−0.138
(0.087)
−0.006
(0.004)
−0.070∗∗
(0.029)

0.016
(0.020)
−0.198
(0.142)
−0.012
(0.007)
−0.123∗∗
(0.060)

0.054
(0.435)
−0.978
(0.639)
−0.178∗∗
(0.085)
0.145
(0.222)

0.819
(1.164)
−3.402∗
(1.752)
−0.626
(0.474)
0.238
(0.674)

Panel B: Does price appreciate subsequent to auction inventory acquisition?

0.018
(0.012)
0.068
(0.059)
0.004
(0.004)
0.004
(0.014)

0.004
(0.031)
0.196∗
(0.107)
−0.003
(0.008)
0.010
(0.030)

0.973∗∗
(0.402)
1.118∗
(0.670)
0.178
(0.110)
0.461
(0.295)

2.788∗∗
(1.140)
4.759∗∗
(1.832)
0.440
(0.586)
0.939
(0.772)

1.213
(1.871)
−4.599
(2.998)
−1.481
(1.080)
−0.126
(1.355)

4.640∗∗
(2.004)
7.210∗∗
(3.169)
0.461
(1.193)
0.922
(1.461)

Fig. 5. Coupon auction purchases by investor class 2001–2020. This figure plots the 13-week moving average of the fraction of weekly coupon auction amounts purchased by
broker-dealers, investment funds, and other investor classes as reported in the investor class allotment data from the Department of the Treasury.

in the same subsample period on the post-auction price appreciation.
Standard errors are clustered at the security level.

Based on our hypothesis, we expect to observe a negative 𝛽1,
indicating that an increase in investment funds’ participation dampens
the post-auction price appreciation. This is what we find, as shown in
Table 11 in which 𝛽1 is significantly negative across various model spec-
ifications. This result is consistent with prior evidence that investment
funds have increasingly provided liquidity in fixed income markets in
recent years. The increased competition for liquidity provision thus
contributes to eroding the compensation for such activity. On the
other hand, participation by other investor types (such as depository
institutions, pension funds, and individual investors) – who are not
known to engage in significant liquidity provision in the post-crisis
period – exhibits no significant effect on post-auction price patterns.

Overall, our analysis in this section provides several important
policy implications. On the one hand, the increased role of non-dealer
liquidity providers in the primary market helps ease the concern that
the aggregate balance sheet capacity of the dealer sector, already

constrained by regulatory changes, is not keeping pace with the growth
of Treasury issuance, which could consequently harm market liquidity.
It seems that investment funds are adequately filling the void left
by increasingly constrained dealers, at least up to now. Moreover,
the diminished compensation for intermediation means issuance cost
savings for the U.S. Treasury; Lou et al. (2013) estimate that auction-
cycle price effects cost taxpayers over half a billion dollars in 2007—a
cost that would be in the billions if projected on today’s issuance.

On the other hand, there is no guarantee that alternative liquidity
providers will always be present to provide liquidity, unlike primary
dealers which are obligated to bid competitively in all auctions. A
financial stability concern is that non-obligatory liquidity providers
stop providing liquidity in crisis times, precisely when it is needed
most. This may have happened in the secondary market for Trea-
sury securities: the emergence of HFTs increases liquidity provision
in normal times but may adversely affect liquidity stability in volatile
times (see Joint Staff Report, 2015). In the primary market, the sud-
den withdrawal of liquidity providers could adversely affect the U.S.
government’s ability to borrow at low costs.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388520M. Fleming et al.

Table 11
The rise of alternative liquidity providers and attenuation of auction price effects. This table reports the result of the panel regression 𝛥𝑝𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑣𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑡 +
𝛽2𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑃 𝑡𝑐𝑝𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐵𝑖𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝐹 𝐸𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡, where 𝛥𝑝𝑖,𝑡 is the five-day post-auction price appreciation measure (equal to the negative of the change
in yield between day 5 and auction day) following the auction of security 𝑖 at time 𝑡. 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 is the share of issuance purchased by investment funds at the
auction. 𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑃 𝑡𝑐𝑝 is the share of issuance purchased by other participants (i.e., excluding broker-dealers and investment funds). 𝐵𝑖𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 is the bid-to-cover-ratio
of the auction. 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒 is the total amount issued at the auction. All explanatory variables are standardized to have a zero mean and unit standard deviation
at the security level. The model includes security-by-subsample fixed effects (FEs) and is estimated using data on six Treasury nominal coupon securities (2-, 3-,
5-, 7-, 10-, and 30-year). The sample period is from August 1, 2001 (the first week with available investment class allotment data for both bills and coupons)
to December 30, 2020. It consists of four subsample periods: (1) pre-crisis period (start of sample period to December 31, 2006), (2) crisis period (from January
1, 2007 to December 31, 2009), (3) rule development period (from January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2014), and (4) rule implementation period (from January
1, 2015 to the end of the sample). Robust standard errors are clustered at the security level and reported in parentheses. *𝑝 < .1; **𝑝 < .05; ***𝑝 < .01.

Investment fund share

Other participant share

Bid-to-cover ratio

Issue size

Security × subsample FEs
Observations
𝑅2 (%)

Yes
1,134
4.9

(2)

(3)

(4)

(1)

−2.018***
(0.465)

0.636
(0.370)

Yes
1,134
4.6

−1.236
(0.933)

Yes
1,134
4.8

0.793*
(0.351)

Yes
1,134
4.6

(5)

−1.878**
(0.480)
0.434
(0.381)

Yes
1,134
5.0

(6)

−1.630*
(0.647)
0.787
(0.456)
−1.421
(0.937)

Yes
1,134
5.5

(7)

−1.624*
(0.658)
0.735
(0.491)
−1.301
(1.055)
0.423
(0.534)

Yes
1,134
5.5

That said, the ‘‘one-to-all’’ market structure and the regular and
predictable nature of Treasury issuance may make the primary market
more amenable to intermediation by non-dealers and more immune to
sudden liquidity withdrawal than the secondary market. Even during
the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, when the secondary market
experienced massive disruptions due to extraordinary selling pressure
from customers (see Duffie, 2020), auction data indicate that the pri-
mary market functioned largely as usual. Thus, the evidence gives us
reason to believe that the greater diversity and competition of liquidity
providers in the primary market is beneficial on balance.

8. Conclusion

The regular issuance and redemptions of Treasury securities create a
different inventory management problem for government bond dealers
versus equity or foreign exchange dealers. In this paper, we examine
how U.S. Treasury dealers manage their positions and in fact find
that underwriting plays a key role. Specifically, we find that Treasury
dealers absorb a large share of new Treasury supply and retain signif-
icant exposure for at least a week, offsetting only small shares of their
auction purchases in adjacent weeks. Further results show that dealer
positions decline at redemptions of Treasury securities, suggesting that
dealers buy and hold many securities from issuance through maturity
and/or that redemptions result in increased demand for other Treasury
securities from customers who need to reinvest the funds.

Examining the use of derivatives to hedge inventory risk, we find
that dealers engage in selective hedging. They are more likely to hedge
exposure associated with coupon securities than with bills, likely due
to coupon securities’ higher interest rate risk, and also more likely
to hedge position changes perceived to be prone to greater adverse
selection risk. Dealers offset a much smaller share of spot position
changes in the futures market when such changes are explained by
issuance and redemptions, presumably because such position changes
are not information-based. Such behavior is consistent with that of U.K.
government bond dealers who also adjust their hedging depending on
the perceived level of asymmetric information as documented in Naik
and Yadav (2003b).

As dealers intermediate new Treasury supply intertemporally
through the use of inventory, and inventory is costly to hold, a natural
question is how dealers get compensated for their services. We find
that this compensation is by means of price appreciation subsequent
to auction inventory acquisition—a result consistent with the auction-
cycle effects found in Lou et al. (2013). Our results therefore add to
the evidence from equity markets (Hendershott and Seasholes, 2007)
that market-maker inventories have significant asset pricing effects at

a multi-day horizon, and show that such effects can exist even when
the inventory changes are publicly known. Furthermore, our results
explain a microstructure component of Treasury yield predictability
related to dealer intermediation of frequent Treasury supply shocks,
a result subsequently corroborated by other papers such as Lou et al.
(2013).

Lastly, we contribute additional evidence on changes related to
dealers’ inventory management and inventory risk compensation amid
many important market developments since the 2007–09 financial
crisis, coupled with the changing structure of the Treasury market. We
find that dealers significantly reduce their position taking at auctions,
especially for coupons, and turn around inventory faster. This finding is
consistent with increased inventory holding costs that result from post-
crisis regulatory changes and more stringent capital requirements. We
also find that investment funds have stepped in to offset the declining
share of dealer purchases at auction in recent years. Their increased
role in the primary market correlates with diminished price effects
surrounding auctions. Our evidence suggests that the transition of many
investment funds from being liquidity demanders to liquidity providers
increases the competition for liquidity provision in the primary market
while weakening the post-auction demand for Treasury securities in the
secondary market, thereby driving down the compensation for taking
inventory risk at auctions.

Overall, we conclude that Treasury dealers play an important role in
underwriting and intermediating Treasury securities, but that they op-
erate somewhat differently in the post-crisis period. Regulatory changes
and the rise of new participants in the primary market point to a
new environment in which dealers cut back on their position taking
and tighten their inventory turnover to cope with increased balance
sheet costs while obtaining less compensation for bearing inventory
risk. Nonetheless, primary dealers are still critical to the functioning
of the market. With their committed underwriting and market making
roles, the importance of primary dealers becomes clearer at times
of stress when non-obligatory liquidity suppliers may step back from
the market. Having a robust dealer sector despite the trend toward
disintermediation remains crucial to financial stability.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Michael Fleming: Writing – review & editing, Writing – orig-
inal draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Giang
Nguyen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Method-
ology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Joshua Rosenberg: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal
analysis, Conceptualization.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388521M. Fleming et al.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

How Do Treasury Dealers Manage Their Positions? (Reference data
) (Mendeley Data).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Garbade, K.D., 2007. The emergence of

‘‘regular and predictable’’ as a Treasury
debt management strategy. Vol. 13, (March), Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Economic Policy Review, pp. 53–71.

Garman, M.B., 1976. Market microstructure. J. Financ. Econ. 3, 257–275.
Goldreich, D., 2007. Underpricing in discriminatory and uniform-price Treasury

auctions. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 42, 443–466.

Green, T.C., 2004. Economic news and the impact of trading on bond prices. J. Finance

59, 1201–1233.

Greenwood, R., Vayanos, D., 2014. Bond supply and excess bond returns. Rev. Financ.

Stud. 27, 663–713.

Group of Thirty, 2021. U.S. Treasury market: Steps toward increased resilience. Group
of Thirty Working Group on Treasury Market Liquidity (https://group30.org/publ
ications/detail/4950).

Gurkaynak, R.S., Sack, B., Wright, J.H., 2007. The U.S. Treasury yield curve: 1961 to

the present. J. Monetary Econ. 54, 2291–2304.

Han, B., Longstaff, F.A., Merrill, C., 2007. The U.S. Treasury buyback auctions: The

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

cost of retiring illiquid bonds. J. Finance 62, 2673–2693.

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103885.

References

Hansch, O., Naik, N.Y., Viswanathan, S., 1998. Do inventories matter in dealership

markets? Evidence from the London Stock Exchange. J. Finance 53, 1623–1656.

Hartley, J., Schwarz, K., 2019. Predictable end-of-month Treasury returns. Working

Paper, available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440417.

Hasbrouck, J., Sofianos, G., 1993. The trades of market makers: An empirical analysis

Adrian, T., Boyarchenko, N., Shachar, O., 2017a. Dealer balance sheets and bond

of NYSE specialists. J. Finance 48, 1565–1593.

liquidity provision. J. Monetary Econ. 89, 92–109.

Hendershott, T., Seasholes, M.S., 2007. Market maker inventories and stock prices. Am.

Adrian, T., Fleming, M.J., 2005. What financing data reveal about dealer leverage.

Econ. Rev. (Pap. Proc.) 97, 210–214.

Curr. Issues Econ. Finance 11, 1–7.

Adrian, T., Fleming, M., Shachar, O., Vogt, E., 2017b. Market liquidity after the

financial crisis. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ. 9, 43–83.

Amihud, Y., Mendelson, H., 1980. Dealership market: Market making with inventory.

J. Financ. Econ. 8, 31–53.

Barth, D., Kahn, R.J., 2021. Hedge funds and the Treasury cash-futures disconnect.

Working Paper.

Beetsma, R., Giuliodori, M., de Jong, F., Widijanto, D., 2016. Price effects of sovereign
debt auctions in the euro-zone: The role of the crisis. J. Financial Intermediat. 25,
30–53.

Bessembinder, H., Jacobsen, S., Maxwell, W., Venkataraman, K., 2018. Capital

commitment and illiquidity in corporate bonds. J. Finance 73, 1615–1661.

Boyarchenko, N., Lucca, D., Veldkamp, L., 2021. Taking orders and taking notes: Dealer

information sharing in financial markets. J. Polit. Econ. 129, 607–645.

Brain, D., De Pooter, M., Dobrev, D., Fleming, M.J., Johansson, P., Keane, F.M.,
Puglia, M., Rodrigues, A.P., Shachar, O., 2018. Breaking down TRACE volumes
further. Liberty Street Economics Blog, November 29, 2018.

Brandt, M.W., Kavajecz, K.A., 2004. Price discovery in the U.S. Treasury market: The

impact of orderflow and liquidity on the yield curve. J. Finance 59, 2623–2654.

Cammack, E.B., 1991. Evidence on bidding strategies and the information in Treasury

bill auctions. J. Polit. Econ. 99, 100–130.

Cao, H., Evans, M., Lyons, R., 2006. Inventory information. J. Bus. 79, 325–364.
CGFS, 2016. Fixed Income Market Liquidity. Committee on the Global Financial System

CGFS Papers No 55.

Infante, S., Press, C., Strauss, J., 2018. The ins and outs of collateral re-use. FEDS
Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December
21, 2018, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2298.

Joint Staff Report, 2015. The U.S. Treasury market on October 15, 2014. U.S.
Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and
U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The aggregate demand for Treasury

debt. J. Polit. Econ. 120, 233–267.

Kruttli, M.S., Monin, P.J., Petrasek, L., Watugala, S.W., 2021. LTCM redux? Hedge fund
Treasury trading and funding fragility during the COVID-19 crisis. Working Paper.
Longstaff, F.A., 1992. Are negative option prices possible? The callable U.S.

Treasury-bond puzzle. J. Bus. 65, 571–592.

Lou, D., Yan, H., Zhang, J., 2013. Anticipated and repeated shocks in liquid markets.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 26, 1891–1912.

Lyons, R.K., 1995. Tests of microstructural hypotheses in the foreign exchange market.

J. Financ. Econ. 39, 321–351.

Madhavan, A., 2000. Market microstructure: A survey. J. Financial Mark. 3, 205–258.
Madhavan, A., Smidt, S., 1993. An analysis of changes in specialist inventories and

quotations. J. Finance 48, 1595–1623.

Madhavan, A., Sofianos, G., 1998. An empirical analysis of NYSE specialist trading. J.

Financ. Econ. 48, 189–210.

Manaster, S., Mann, S.C., 1996. Life in the pits: Competitive market making and

inventory control. Rev. Financ. Stud. 9, 953–975.

Chaumeton, L., Connor, G., Curds, R., 1996. A global stock and bond model. Financial

Mayers, D., Smith, C.W.J., 1987. Death and taxes: The market for flower bonds. J.

Anal. J. November/December 1996, 65–74.

Finance 42, 685–698.

Choi, J., Huh, Y., Shin, S.S., 2024. Customer liquidity provision: Implications for

Naik, N.Y., Yadav, P.K., 2003a. Do dealer firms manage inventory on a stock-by-stock

corporate bond transaction costs. Manag. Sci. 70, 187–206.

Chung, K.H., Huh, S.-W., 2016. The noninformation cost of trading and its relative

importance in asset pricing. Rev. Asset Pric. Stud. 6, 261–302.

Cochrane, J.H., Piazzesi, M., 2005. Bond risk premia. Amer. Econ. Rev. 95, 138–160.
Comerton-Forde, C., Hendershott, T., Jones, C.M., Moulton, P.C., Seasholes, M.S., 2010.
Time variation in liquidity: The role of market-maker inventories and revenues. J.
Finance 65, 295–331.

Du, W., Hebert, B., Li, W., 2023. Intermediary balance sheets and the Treasury yield

curve. J. Financ. Econ. 150 (3), 103722.

Duffee, G.R., 1996. Idiosyncratic variation of Treasury bill yields. J. Finance 51,

527–551.

or a portfolio basis? J. Financ. Econ. 69, 325–353.

Naik, N.Y., Yadav, P.K., 2003b. Risk management with derivatives by dealers and

market quality in government bond markets. J. Finance 58, 1873–1904.

Nyborg, K.G., Sundaresan, S., 1996. Discriminatory versus uniform Treasury auctions:

Evidence from when-issued transactions. J. Financ. Econ. 42, 63–104.

Pasquariello, P., Vega, C., 2007. Informed and strategic order flow in the bond markets.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 20, 1975–2019.

Reiss, P.C., Werner, I.M., 1998. Does risk sharing motivate interdealer trading? J.

Finance 53, 1657–1703.

Ritter, J.R., 1987. The costs of going public. J. Financ. Econ. 19, 269–281.
Schultz, P., 2017. Inventory management by corporate bond dealers. University of Notre

Duffie, D., 2010. Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital.

Dame Working Paper.

J. Finance 65, 1237–1267.

Duffie, D., 2020. Still the world’s safe haven? Redesigning the U.S. Treasury market
after the COVID–19 crisis. Working Paper # 62, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and
Monetary Policy at Brookings.

Duffie, D., 2023. Resilience redux in the US Treasury market. Working Paper, Stanford

University.

Etula, E., Rinne, K., Suominen, M., Vaittinen, L., 2020. Dash for cash: Monthly market

impact of institutional liquidity needs. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 75–111.

Fleming, M.J., 2002. Are larger issues more liquid? Evidence from bill reopenings. J.

Money Credit Bank. 34, 707–735.

Simon, D.P., 1991. Segmentation in the Treasury bill market: Evidence from cash

management bills. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 26, 97–108.

Simon, D.P., 1994. Markups, quantity risk, and bidding strategies at Treasury coupon

auctions. J. Financ. Econ. 35, 43–62.

Spindt, P.A., Stolz, R.W., 1992. Are US Treasury bills underpriced in the primary

market? J. Bank. Financ. 16, 891–908.

Stoll, H.R., 1978. The supply of dealer services in securities markets. J. Finance 33,

1133–1151.

Trebbi, F., Xiao, K., 2019. Regulation and market liquidity. Manage. Sci. 65, 1949–1968.
Yadav, P.K., Yadav, Y., 2024. The failed promise of Treasuries in financial regulation.

Fleming, M.J., 2003. Measuring Treasury market liquidity. Vol. 9, (September), Federal

Southern California Law Rev. (forthcoming).

Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, pp. 83–108.

Fleming, M.J., Liu, W., 2017. Intraday pricing and liquidity effects of U.S. Treasury

auctions. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working Paper.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10388522