Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Intermediation frictions in debt relief: Evidence from CARES Act
forbearance✩
You Suk Kim a, Donghoon Lee b, Tess Scharlemann a, James Vickery c,∗
a Federal Reserve Board, 2051 Constitution Ave NW, Washington, 20418, DC, USA
b Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty St, New York, 10045, NY, USA
c Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 Independence Mall, Philadelphia, 19106, PA, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We study how intermediaries – mortgage servicers – shaped the implementation of mortgage forbearance
during the COVID-19 pandemic and use servicer-level variation to trace out the causal effects of forbearance
on borrowers. Forbearance provision varied widely across servicers. Small servicers, nonbanks, and especially
nonbanks with small liquidity buffers, facilitated fewer forbearances and saw a higher incidence of forbearance-
related complaints. Easier access to forbearance substantially increased mortgage nonpayment but also reduced
delinquencies outside of forbearance. Part of the liquidity from forbearance was used to reduce credit card
debt, but most was saved or used for nondurable consumption.

Dataset link: Replication package

JEL classification:
G21
G23
G28

Keywords:
Mortgage
Forbearance
Liquidity
Nonbank
CARES Act
COVID-19

1. Introduction

Financial intermediaries are often crucial for implementing public
policy, particularly in the case of debt relief and emergency lending
programs.1 Intermediaries have valuable data, technology, systems,
and relationships that can help ensure successful policy outcomes. On
the other hand, misaligned incentives or other frictions may prevent
policies from being implemented as intended ‘‘on the ground’’.

In this paper we study the role of a particular type of intermediary
– mortgage servicers – in implementing a large debt relief program
providing forbearance to mortgage borrowers during the COVID-19
pandemic. We find that servicers significantly influenced forbearance
outcomes, and that variation in servicer behavior is systematically
related to servicer liquidity constraints, size and organizational form.

We also use servicer variation to trace out the causal effects of forbear-
ance for households. Easier access to forbearance increased household
liquidity by inducing borrowers to pause their payments. Part of this
liquidity infusion was used to pay down high-cost credit card debt,
but funds were primarily used for precautionary saving or nondurable
consumption.

The forbearance program, authorized by the CARES Act in March
2020, allowed borrowers with federally-backed mortgages to temporar-
ily pause their mortgage payments without incurring fees, penalties or
additional interest and without negative consequences for their credit
history. The borrower simply needed to attest to a pandemic-related
hardship to qualify for forbearance; no documentation of income loss
was required.

✩

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We also thank an anonymous referee; seminar participants at the Central Bank of Ireland, Korea Development
Institute, Yonsei University, 2022 SFS Cavalcade, 2022 Fed System Micro Conference, Federal Housing Finance Agency, Federal Reserve Board, AREUEA Virtual
Seminar, FDIC Consumer Research Conference, 2022 ASSA meetings, 2021 Philadelphia Fed Conference on Consumer Behavior in Credit and Payments Markets
and 2021 AREUEA National Meetings; our discussants Gene Amromin, Neil Bhutta, Meta Brown, Jan Brueckner, Greg Buchak, Susan Cherry, Lara Loewenstein
and Kyle Mangum; as well as Larry Cordell, Arpit Gupta, Ben Iverson, Joe Nichols, and numerous other Federal Reserve colleagues and industry practitioners
for comments and insights about institutional details. Opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the opinions of the Federal
Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York or Philadelphia, or the Federal Reserve System.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: James.Vickery@phil.frb.org (J. Vickery).

1 Examples include emergency business loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (Granja et al., 2020), mortgage modifications under the Home Affordable

Modification Program (HAMP) (Agarwal et al., 2017a), and streamlined refinancing under the Home Affordable Refinance Program (Agarwal et al., 2022).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103873
Received 12 August 2022; Received in revised form 22 May 2024; Accepted 23 May 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)103873Availableonline7June20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.Y.S. Kim et al.

Despite this universal eligibility, a quarter of the mortgages in our
sample that became past-due during the pandemic did not successfully
enter into forbearance. Furthermore, the frequency of these ‘‘missing’’
forbearances varied significantly across mortgage servicers for other-
wise equivalent loans. Our analysis focuses on mortgages securitized
via Ginnie Mae, the part of the mortgage market which serves the
highest-risk borrowers and which, because of institutional factors, poses
the greatest liquidity risk to servicers.

Specifically, using loan-level data we estimate that the conditional
probability that a past-due borrower failed to enter forbearance varies
between 10% and 60% across servicers, with a weighted interquartile
range of 15 percentage points. These estimated ‘‘servicer effects’’ are
robust to a variety of estimation approaches, including conditioning
on lender fixed effects so that servicer effects are identified via post-
origination servicing transfers. Several pieces of evidence indicate that
this variation in forbearance outcomes reflects servicer behavior rather
than unobserved borrower characteristics; for example borrowers at
high- and low-forbearance servicers have similar ex ante characteristics
and delinquency rates. The effects of servicers are also heterogeneous
across borrowers, with older and low-credit score borrowers appearing
‘‘hard to reach’’ in the sense that they are both less likely to enter into
forbearance and also not especially responsive to being matched with
a ‘‘high-forbearance’’ servicer.

These findings are consistent with qualitative evidence that ser-
vicers had significant leeway to influence forbearance takeup. As we
discuss in Section 2.2, reports from media and financial regulators in-
dicate that servicers varied significantly in terms of responsiveness and
frequency of communication with borrowers, the information provided,
and their systems for evaluating and processing forbearance applica-
tions (e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2021a). In short,
despite the forbearance program’s streamlined design, intermediaries
still played an important role in how it was implemented.

Investigating these cross-servicer differences, we find that small
servicers, nonbanks, and in particular nonbanks with low cash buffers,
were significantly less likely to facilitate forbearance. These facts sug-
gest that liquidity constraints, as well as some combination of scale
economies and regulatory risk, were important in shaping servicer
behavior. Liquidity constraints are important in our setting because
Ginnie Mae servicers must finance payments to investors and other
parties when the borrower stops paying. This liquidity risk is most
relevant for nonbank servicers, which rely on short-term wholesale debt
and cannot typically access government liquidity backstops.

The clear benefits of forbearance for borrowers suggest that ser-
vicer practices limiting forbearance uptake also reduced borrower wel-
fare. Consistent with this interpretation, we show that borrowers were
less satisfied with servicers that facilitated fewer forbearances, based
on complaints filed with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB).

We then use servicer-level variation in forbearance availability to
study the causal effect of forbearance on borrowers. We sort ser-
vicers into high (above median) and low (below median) forbearance-
availability groups based on the likelihood a past-due loan received
forbearance conditional on loan and borrower characteristics. Then we
compare borrower outcomes between these groups before and after
the CARES Act in a difference-in-differences framework using dynamic
mortgage data linked to borrower credit reports.

Studying payment outcomes, we find that assignment to a high-
forbearance servicer reduced the likelihood of the borrower being
past-due but not in forbearance by up to one-quarter (or 0.4 percentage
points), with the largest effects early in the pandemic. However it
also caused a much larger number of borrowers to stop making their
payments. Quantitatively, the fraction of past-due borrowers increased
twice as much at high forbearance-servicers shortly after the passage
of the CARES Act, with the difference in the past-due rate peaking
at 5 percentage points. (There was no difference prior to COVID-19.)
This finding, that easier access to debt relief induced nonpayment, is

reminiscent of research on strategic mortgage default, especially Mayer
et al. (2014), although in our setting, several pieces of evidence suggest
that these marginal nonpayers were mainly motivated by precautionary
liquidity concerns rather than strategic considerations.

Our results therefore indicate that forbearance provided significant
liquidity to households by enabling borrowers to pause their pay-
ments. Furthermore the cross-servicer variation in effective program
generosity is quantitatively important. We estimate that borrowers
at high-forbearance servicers deferred an additional $300 in mort-
gage payments from April–November 2020, equivalent to $6000 per
marginal forbearance. In aggregate, switching all Ginnie Mae borrowers
from low-to-high forbearance servicers would increase deferred pay-
ments over this short period by $3.1 billion, equivalent to an effect
of ≈ $10 billion if generalizing our estimates to the entire mortgage
market.

Part of this liquidity infusion from payment deferral was used by
borrowers to reduce credit card debt, although the effect is limited to
less liquidity-constrained households, defined as a below-median credit
card utilization rate. For this group, credit card paydown accounts for
about one-fifth of deferred mortgage payments. There is no evidence
that funds were used to establish new auto tradelines, a proxy for
auto purchases. We therefore conclude that, at least for borrowers
on the margin, funds from payment deferral were mainly used for
precautionary saving or nondurable consumption. We also confirm
that the CARES forbearance program worked as intended to shield
borrowers’ credit from adverse consequences of nonpayment, finding a
precisely-estimated effect of forbearance on credit scores close to zero.
We conclude by considering policy implications of our results. Our
findings, and those of other researchers, suggest that the CARES Act
forbearance program successfully reached most borrowers in need with-
out inducing widespread strategic behavior or other serious unintended
consequences. However, our results also indicate that there is scope to
improve access and reduce variation in forbearance outcomes unrelated
to borrower fundamentals. Our results also speak to the policy debate
about the systemic risk posed by nonbank mortgage intermediaries, and
the debate about the costs and benefits of large banks. Specifically,
we find that exposure to liquidity risk reduced nonbank servicers’
willingness to provide liquidity to borrowers. Conversely, large banks
had the highest propensity to facilitate forbearance, likely reflecting
tight post-crisis regulation, scale economies, and ample liquidity due to
deposit inflows and access to the lender of last resort. These findings
imply that forbearance policy design should take into account the
liquidity position of servicers and the availability of nonbank liquidity
backstops.

1.1. Related literature

We contribute to several strands of literature. First, a number of
papers study the behavior and incentives of mortgage servicers, in par-
ticular analyzing the 2008 crisis and its aftermath. Among these, Aiello
(2022) finds that financial constraints distorted servicers’ loan modifi-
cation decisions, while Agarwal et al. (2017a) document that servicers
offered modifications at divergent rates.2 We bring new data to bear
and study a streamlined debt relief program designed to overcome
the frictions that plagued mortgage modification following the Great
Recession. Nevertheless, our central finding is that servicers still played
a key role in the implementation of debt relief and that financial fric-
tions and organizational factors shaped servicer behavior and borrower
outcomes.

2 Also studying the 2008 crisis period, Agarwal et al. (2011) and Kruger
(2018) find that servicers were more likely to modify mortgages retained in
portfolio than serviced for investors. Bandyopadhyay et al. (2022) find that
mortgage servicing generates private information which influences Ginnie Mae
early buyouts.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038732Y.S. Kim et al.

Second, we add to research on forbearance and other financial
assistance programs implemented in response to COVID-19. Cherry
et al. (2021), An et al. (2022) and Zhao et al. (2020) present a wealth
of information on patterns of forbearance takeup (e.g., forbearance
rates were higher for vulnerable borrowers and those facing negative
income shocks). Like us, Cherry et al. (2021) find that nonbanks pro-
vided mortgage forbearance at lower rates, while Cherry et al. (2022)
find higher forbearance provision among better-capitalized nonbanks.
Research on other pandemic relief programs also finds variation in
outcomes across financial intermediaries (e.g., Granja et al., 2020).
New work by Lee and Maghzian (2023) studies the macroeconomic
effects of forbearance, finding a positive impact on local employment
growth. Relative to this other work, we provide a much more detailed
analysis of the role of mortgage servicers and also use cross-servicer
variation and credit bureau data to study the effects of forbearance on
borrowers.

Third, we contribute to work on the effects of mortgage debt re-
lief and payment size changes. Our finding that forbearance induces
nonpayment is related to Mayer et al. (2014), who find borrowers
strategically defaulted to qualify for debt relief during the 2008 crisis
(see Section 6.6 for discussion). Several papers find that permanent
or persistent reductions in mortgage payments due to modifications
or interest rate resets reduce default and boost consumption, among
other effects (Scharlemann and Shore, 2022; Abel and Fuster, 2021;
Ganong and Noel, 2020; Agarwal et al., 2017a; Di Maggio et al., 2017;
Fuster and Willen, 2017).3 We instead study a setting where payments
were temporarily deferred but with no permanent cut in payment size,
finding that part of the liquidity from forbearance was used to pay
down credit cards but most was saved or consumed.

Finally, our results shed light on the behavior of nonbank mort-
gage companies (for other contributions see Buchak et al., 2020; Gete
and Reher, 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Buchak et al., 2018) and large
banks (see e.g., Huber, 2021). We also contribute to a wider literature
studying how financial constraints, size, and organizational frictions
affect product quality and firm outcomes (e.g., Matsa, 2011; Kugler and
Verhoogen, 2011; Rose, 1990).

2. Forbearance and the CARES Act

The CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020, and
included significant relief for mortgage borrowers.4 Homeowners with
federally-backed mortgages became eligible for up to 180 days of
forbearance, renewable for an additional 180 days upon request. (The
program was extended in 2021; see Federal Housing Finance Agency
2021, The White House 2021.) Borrowers in forbearance could skip
mortgage payments without accruing unscheduled interest, late fees

3 Several of these papers study HAMP, the mortgage modification program
launched in 2009. HAMP’s design differed quite significantly from forbearance;
e.g., HAMP modifications provided a permanent or long-lived reduction in
payment size, thereby significantly reducing the present value of mortgage
payments, and HAMP required borrowers to document income and financial
hardship. Payment deferral was part of the HAMP modification toolkit, but
it took a more permanent form: payment was deferred until mortgage ter-
mination. Deferral was also just one of several tools available to servicers,
along with rate reductions, term extensions, and in some cases, principal
forgiveness (Scharlemann and Shore, 2016, 2022). CARES Act forbearance
instead mirrored mortgage debt relief previously used for natural disasters:
a temporary payment holiday. This in part reflected that COVID-19 was a
significant temporary liquidity shock for many households but did not induce
a home price crash or widespread negative equity.

4 The CARES Act applies directly to ‘‘agency’’ mortgages backed by Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac, the FHA, VA, and other federal agencies, which make up
about 70% of US mortgage debt. Many nonagency borrowers were still able
to obtain forbearance from their servicers, but Cherry et al. (2021) find that
the nonagency forbearance rate was about 25% lower, by studying loans on
either side of the conforming loan limit.

or penalties, or risking foreclosure. Missed payments were also not re-
ported as delinquencies to credit bureaus, protecting borrowers’ credit
scores.

Eligibility under the CARES Act was very broad, extending to any
agency mortgage borrower experiencing a direct or indirect financial
hardship related to the pandemic. Importantly, the borrower simply
needed to attest to a hardship — no documentation or other proof of
income loss was required. Forbearance was not automatic, however;
the borrower had to request and obtain it from their servicer.

The CARES Act is silent about what should occur at the end of
forbearance, but in the weeks after its passage, regulators and the
mortgage agencies stated that a range of options would be available
and that a lump-sum repayment of skipped payments would not be
required (e.g., Freddie Mac, 2020). In April 2020, the FHA announced
a ‘‘partial claim’’ program for borrowers exiting forbearance in which
accumulated missed payments could be transferred into a subordinate
interest-free note due at mortgage payoff (Department of Housing and
Urban Development, 2020a,b). Borrowers not able to resume pay-
ments would be eligible instead for a modification. Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac announced a similar payment deferral option in May (Fed-
eral Housing Finance Agency, 2020). Payments skipped in forbearance
were not forgiven but did not accrue interest; therefore the program
effectively provided an interest-free loan.

Despite these public assurances, there was significant uncertainty
and confusion among borrowers and servicers about post-forbearance
options, particularly in the early months of the pandemic (e.g., Wall
Street Journal, 2020; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2021a,b).
For example, some servicers incorrectly told borrowers that a lump-sum
repayment would be required upon forbearance exit.

Our analysis focuses on the $2 trillion of ‘‘government’’ mortgages
insured by the FHA and VA, all of which were covered by the CARES
Act. This segment of the mortgage market is of particular interest
because it disproportionately serves low-income and high-risk borrow-
ers, and because FHA loans in particular experienced a much higher
forbearance and nonpayment rate than the market as a whole. It is also
the segment where intermediation frictions are likely to be most severe,
because FHA and VA loans are much riskier for mortgage servicers due
to institutional factors (see Section 5 for detailed discussion).

2.1. Forbearance trends

Fig. 1 plots the evolution of mortgage forbearance and nonpayment
over 2020. The top panel based on credit bureau data shows that
forbearance was rare prior to the pandemic but rose sharply starting in
April, just after the CARES Act was passed. The aggregate forbearance
rate peaked in May at 7.3 percent, falling to 5.2 percent by December.5
The share of past-due loans also rose and fell along similar lines (bottom
panel, and figure A.1 of the Internet Appendix). Note: ‘‘past-due’’ in
this context includes both borrowers who paused their payments in a
forbearance plan and delinquent mortgages not in forbearance. In prac-
tice not all past-due borrowers obtained forbearance, and conversely
some borrowers entered forbearance as a precaution but kept making
scheduled payments.

As Fig. 1 shows, the FHA forbearance and nonpayment rate was
much higher than for the market as a whole, reflecting the lower-
income FHA borrower population and high share of first-time home-
buyers. VA mortgages behaved similarly to the overall market, while
forbearance and nonpayment was relatively low for the typically prime
loans securitized by government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac.

5 Other data sources paint a similar picture but show a somewhat higher
incidence of forbearance. Survey data from Mortgage Bankers Association
(2020) indicate a peak forbearance rate of 8.55% in June 2020, while Black
Knight (2020) reports a peak forbearance rate of 8.8%, also in June.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038733Y.S. Kim et al.

Fig. 1. Share of mortgages in forbearance and past-due. ‘‘Past-due’’ is defined as
any loan behind schedule, including mortgages in forbearance where the borrower has
paused their payments with the lender’s consent. Dollar-weighted aggregate statistics
constructed using data from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) Consumer
Credit Panel/Equifax (panel a) and Black Knight McDash (panel b). Aggregate statistics
reflect agency mortgages covered by the CARES Act as well as mortgages held in
portfolio by banks and other investors and loans securitized through the nonagency
market.

2.2. Forbearance implementation and the role of servicers

One might assume that servicers played a limited and passive
role in implementing the CARES Act forbearance program, given its
streamlined design and the fact that borrowers were not required to
document hardship. But in practice, qualitative evidence suggests that
servicers varied widely in their communication with borrowers and
the information provided, as well as their systems for receiving and
processing forbearance applications.

For example, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2021a) details
forbearance-related servicing deficiencies observed by CFPB supervi-
sors, including: (1) Providing incomplete or false information, e.g., that
only delinquent borrowers qualified for forbearance, that a fee must be
paid, or that lump-sum repayment was required; (2) Incorrectly sending
collection or default notices, assessing fees, or initiating foreclosures
for loans in forbearance; (3) Changing preauthorized funds transfers
without consent, or failing to implement requests to freeze payments;
(4) Failure to process forbearance requests in a timely way; (5) En-
rolling borrowers in forbearance without consent; (6) Failure to set

up an appropriate post-forbearance plan. We heard similar anecdotes
in meetings with credit counseling agencies arranged as background
for this project. Media reports highlighted similar issues and described
how the wave of forbearance requests early in the pandemic over-
whelmed many servicers’ capacity, leading to long telephone hold
times, non-operational servicer websites, and misinformation given to
borrowers (e.g. Wall Street Journal, 2020).

These servicing issues are also evident in a sharp rise in forbearance
complaints. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2021b) calculates
that complaints to the CFPB related to forbearance spiked from 3%–
4% of all mortgage complaints in January and February 2020 to a
peak of 21% in April, remaining persistently high at 12%–15% over the
rest of 2020 and early 2021. Complaints most commonly highlighted
communication failures, confusing or incorrect information about post-
forbearance options, problems in payment and forbearance reporting
on borrowers’ monthly statements, and delays and denials in putting
the borrower in a post-forbearance repayment plan.6

At the other end of the scale, many servicers took significant steps
to streamline the forbearance process, such as providing a prominent
button or link on their website to a simple online application, and
following up with delinquent borrowers frequently to make them aware
of forbearance (e.g., one practitioner told us of a large bank servicer
making such calls at a daily frequency). We quantify the cross-servicer
variation in forbearance policies and outcomes more systematically in
the following section.

3. Data and summary statistics

To measure the effects of servicers on forbearance outcomes, we as-
semble a novel dataset combining loan-level data on mortgage charac-
teristics and performance, Ginnie Mae forbearance records, regulatory
data on bank and nonbank servicers, complaints data, and credit bureau
data on borrower liabilities and credit performance. We in fact utilize
two different matches between these underlying datasets, as described
below. Further details on each data source can be found in section A
of the Internet Appendix.

Loan-level mortgage data are drawn from eMBS. The data include
the universe of securitized FHA and VA mortgages and report the ser-
vicer for each loan as well as loan characteristics and performance. We
append data on each loan’s forbearance status and forbearance terms
from Ginnie Mae’s forbearance register. We also match each servicer
by name to servicer-level characteristics (e.g., size, liquidity ratio).
For independent mortgage banks (‘‘nonbanks’’) these characteristics are
drawn from the mortgage call report (MCR) collected by the Conference
of State Bank Supervisors, while for banks, they are drawn from FR Y-
9C and call reports. eMBS itself is also used to calculate some servicer
characteristics (e.g., aggregate servicing volume). We also match ser-
vicer data to borrower complaints from the CFPB complaints database
(see Section 5.2 for details).

For the analysis in Section 6 using servicer variation to trace out the
effects of forbearance on borrowers, we instead use a merge between
eMBS, Black Knight McDash, and the Equifax Credit Risk Insight Servic-
ing and McDash (CRISM) dataset. This allows us to study nonmortgage

6 To give a sense of the issues, the following are three complaints taken
from the public CFPB database: (1) ‘‘I tried to reach out to <XXX> to request a
forbearance ... Unfortunately, I was hung up on two times. I spent almost 3 hours
on hold’’.; (2) ‘‘My initial 6 month forbearance has been approved, but I have been
unable to make contact with the servicer to extend the forbearance. I have sent
emails, left voice messages and tried online to extend the forbearance. They do not
respond. I am scared and I need help’’.; (3) ‘‘I have been trying for over a month
to apply for a 6-month mortgage forbearance plan (as allowed under the Federal
Cares Act) with <XXX>. If you go to their website to apply, it does not matter
if you are on a mobile device OR hard wired laptop OR desktop computer, it will
not actually let you apply for a forbearance. When you submit, it says ‘‘CRITICAL
ERROR’’.’’

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038734Y.S. Kim et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics. Loan-level summary statistics for the eMBS sample. Reflects the population of FHA and VA loans securitized into Ginnie
Mae MBS as of January 2020.

A. Ex-ante loan characteristics:
Unpaid mortgage balance ($, as of Jan 2020)
Original loan-to-value (LTV) (%)
Original debt-to-income (DTI) (%)
Original credit score
Loan age (years, as of Jan 2020)
30+ days past-due in Jan 2020
60+ days past-due in Jan 2020

B. Forbearance & past-due rates during pandemic (Mar–Nov 2020):
Ever 30+ days past due
Ever 60+ days past-due
Ever paid off
Ever in forbearance

(1)
FHA

150,580
92.93
41.08
682.18
5.46
0.06
0.02

0.21
0.15
0.19
0.16

C. Conditional forbearance & past-due rates during pandemic (Mar–Nov 2020):
Forbearance | nonpayment (for loans current in Jan 2020):

Ever in forbearance among loans ever 30+ days past-due
Ever in forbearance among loans ever 60+ days past due

Nonpayment | forbearance (for loans current in Jan 2020):

Ever 30+ days past-due among loans ever in forbearance
Ever 60+ days past due among loans ever in forbearance

0.74
0.91

0.84
0.71

(2)
VA

207,148
94.71
38.45
714.80
4.05
0.03
0.01

0.11
0.08
0.34
0.08

0.70
0.88

0.84
0.72

(3)
All

167,304
93.42
40.23
692.69
5.02
0.05
0.02

0.18
0.13
0.24
0.14

0.74
0.91

0.84
0.71

N. Obs.

6,943,846

3,185,050

10,128,896

outcomes such as credit card debt and a proxy for auto purchases. We
match eMBS and McDash/CRISM on loan characteristics (for match
details, see Internet Appendix section A.1.) From eMBS, we retain
the loan’s forbearance status and an anonymized servicer identifier.
(Due to data use restrictions, we cannot merge servicer characteristics
into CRISM.) From CRISM, we draw payment behavior, updated credit
score, geographic data, and data on debt balances. From McDash, we
draw mortgage-level information including loan and borrower controls
not available in eMBS (e.g., property location is available at the zip
code rather than state level).

3.1. Summary statistics

Table 1 presents loan-level summary statistics from eMBS, reflecting
the population of FHA and VA loans securitized into Ginnie Mae MBS
pools as of January 2020. The dataset includes 10.1 million mortgages,
of which about 70% are FHA loans. FHA loans have higher loan-to-
value (LTV) ratios, higher debt-to-income (DTI) and lower average
credit scores, reflecting the lower-income, higher-risk FHA borrower
population.

About 5% of loans were at least 30 days past due just prior to
the pandemic. Nonpayment then increased sharply, with 18% of loans
being 30 days or more past-due at some point between March and
November 2020 (21% of FHA loans and 11% of VA loans). 16% of FHA
loans entered forbearance during this period, compared to 8% of VA
loans. 24% of loans were paid off, primarily from refinancing due to
falling mortgage rates. (Note: we use the term ‘‘past-due’’ to refer to
any loan in arrears relative to its contractual repayment schedule. This
includes loans in forbearance where payments were paused with the
servicer’s consent, as well as delinquent mortgages not in forbearance.)
Panel C of Table 1 reports forbearance and nonpayment statistics
for mortgages that were current as of January 2020. Notably, 26% of
loans that became past-due during the pandemic failed to enter into
a forbearance plan. This is quite striking given that any FHA or VA
borrower experiencing financial stress related to the pandemic was
eligible for forbearance, and given that forbearance effectively provided
a modest subsidy because no interest was charged on deferred balances.
This fraction of ‘‘missing’’ forbearances is significantly lower – 9% –
for loans entering serious delinquency (60+ days past due), but still
well above zero. Conversely, 16% of borrowers remained current on
their payments despite entering into forbearance. Most borrowers in
forbearance skipped multiple payments, however, with 71% becoming
at least 60 days past due.

4. Servicer-level variation in forbearance outcomes

We measure cross-servicer variation in forbearance outcomes by
estimating the following cross-sectional linear probability model using
eMBS loan-level data:

forbearance𝑖 = 𝛽𝑋𝑖 + 𝜉𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖.

(1)

The dependent variable is an indicator for whether mortgage i en-
tered forbearance from March–November 2020, 𝜉𝑠 is a vector of servicer
fixed effects, and 𝑋𝑖 is a set of loan controls (e.g., LTV and credit
score bins) to account for forbearance demand. (Coefficient estimates
on these controls are reported in table A.2 of the Internet Appendix.)
Our baseline model estimates Eq. (1) on the sample of borrowers
that were current prior to the onset of the pandemic (January 2020)
but missed at least one payment from March to November. This set
of borrowers would unambiguously benefit from forbearance, but as
we have discussed, around a quarter of them became past-due without
successfully entering into a forbearance plan.

Fig. 2 plots the distribution of servicer effects ( ̂𝜉𝑠), showing very
wide cross-servicer variation in forbearance outcomes for observably
similar loans.7 The figure normalizes the fixed effects to show the prob-
ability that a past-due loan with sample average characteristics fails to
enter forbearance. The likelihood that the borrower ‘‘falls through the
cracks’’ ranges from under 10% to almost 60%. This variation is not just
due to disparate outcomes among very small servicers. Weighting by
loan count, the ‘‘no forbearance’’ probability is 38% for a servicer at the
90th percentile of the distribution compared to only 12% at the 10th
percentile, with an interquartile range of 15 percentage points (pp).

The bottom panel of Fig. 2 presents the same histogram condition-
ing on more serious nonpayment (60+ days past due). The share of
‘‘missing’’ forbearances is significantly smaller for this group, but in
proportionate terms the cross-servicer variation is even more stark —
the likelihood of not receiving forbearance is six times higher for a
‘‘low-forbearance’’ servicer at the 90th percentile of the distribution
compared to a ‘‘high-forbearance’’ servicer at the 10th percentile (18%
compared to 3%).

7 These estimated servicer fixed effects are highly jointly statistically signif-
icant (F-statistic = 435). Moreover, including the servicer fixed effects doubles
the R2 of our model (comparing columns 1 and 2 in Internet Appendix table
A.2).

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038735Y.S. Kim et al.

Fig. 2. P(no forbearance | COVID nonpayment). Cross-servicer variation in proba-
bility that a loan did not enter forbearance conditional on becoming past due. Based
on servicer fixed effects estimated using eMBS data conditional on loan and borrower
characteristics (e.g. bins of LTV, credit score, DTI, log of loan balance, transformations
of loan age etc.). Bars are unweighted counts of servicers in each bin. Dashed vertical
lines show weighted percentiles, weighted by the number of loans that became past
due between March and November 2020.

These estimated servicer effects are robust to alternative modeling

choices, including:

1. Using the eMBS-CRISM matched sample, which allows us to
control more finely for geography and include controls from
borrower credit reports such as bins of borrower age, updated
credit score and nonmortgage debt.8

2. Varying the set of eMBS-CRISM controls, comparing models with
(i) no controls, (ii) only controls available in eMBS, and (iii) all
eMBS-CRISM controls. Servicer effects from these three models
are highly correlated (figure A.3 of the Internet Appendix).

8 For histogram, see figure A.2 of the Internet Appendix. Coefficients on
loan and borrower controls for this model are reported in table A.3. Terms-
of-use restrictions on the CRISM dataset prevent us from retaining servicer
information in the merged eMBS-CRISM dataset; we are however permitted to
retain anonymous servicer identifiers, which is what we use to estimate the
servicer fixed effects.

3. Three other specifications: (i) retaining all mortgages in the sam-
ple, rather than just loans that became past due during COVID; (ii)
restricting to loans that became past-due in February or March,
prior to the CARES Act; (iii) including lender fixed effects, so
that servicer effects are identified only from loans where servicing
was transferred. This third approach is motivated by the fact that
borrowers do select their lender, in ways that may be correlated
with unobservables, but do not control whether servicing is later
sold to a third party. These alternative sets of fixed effects are
highly correlated with our main estimates (Internet Appendix
figure A.4).9

4.1. Servicer behavior or omitted borrower characteristics?

We interpret these striking differences in forbearance outcomes
as being due to variation in servicer policies and practices. But an
alternative explanation is that they reflect unobserved differences in
forbearance demand. For instance, borrowers at ‘‘high-forbearance’’
servicers may happen to be more liquidity constrained and therefore
benefit more from a payment holiday, or may be more financially
literate. Although we include a rich set of controls, we of course cannot
account for all factors that may affect forbearance demand.

However, three additional types of evidence suggest the servicer
fixed effects we measure are not driven by unobserved borrower het-
erogeneity:

1. Loans managed by high- vs low-forbearance servicers have similar
average ex ante characteristics (Internet Appendix tables A.5–
A.7); e.g., LTV is within 0.5%, and auto, credit card and student
loan balances are each within 10%. Loans managed by low-
forbearance servicers are somewhat younger (4.5 vs 6.0 years in
eMBS-CRISM; marginally significant), but within age bins mort-
gages look similar on observables, and our regressions also always
include loan age controls. The two sets of loans also experienced
similar macroeconomic conditions during the pandemic: the 12-
month change in the county unemployment rate differs by only
0.2pp. The historical path of unemployment back to 2006 is also
similar in areas serviced by high- vs low-forbearance servicers as
of 2020 (Internet Appendix figure A.5) suggesting the two sets of
loans are geographically similarly exposed to the business cycle.
2. There is little difference in mortgage nonpayment rates, or credit
card and auto delinquencies, between high- and low-forbearance
servicers in the months prior to the pandemic (Internet Appendix
figure A.6 and table A.8).10

9 The approach controlling for lender fixed effects is conceptually quite
appealing, but there are two reasons why we do not use it as our primary
method for estimating servicer effects. First, some lenders are not active in
trading FHA and VA servicing rights; in these cases the method cannot estimate
a servicer effect because the servicer and lender are collinear. E.g., we lose
60 out of 152 servicers from the cross-sectional sample used in Section 5.1,
including several very large servicers. Second, this method is not a panacea
from an identification point of view, because servicers may still choose which
servicing rights to trade in a way that is correlated with unobservables
(see Bandyopadhyay et al., 2022 and Mayock and Shi, 2022 for evidence that
Ginnie Mae servicers have private information about borrowers). However, we
do show that our main results look similar if using the ‘‘lender fixed effects’’
approach; see table A.11 and figures A.10 and A.11 in the Internet Appendix.
10 We estimate account-level delinquency models where the dependent
variable equals 1 if a borrower current at t-1 is delinquent in month t.
Studying transitions into delinquency is preferable to analyzing the stock of
delinquencies because servicer quality can affect how long a mortgage remains
delinquent, e.g., better servicers may help the borrower cure or modify. Also,
servicers can purchase seriously delinquent loans out of Ginnie Mae pools and
we do not observe loan performance in eMBS after repurchase; this could
create a selection effect e.g., since banks are more likely than nonbanks to
buy back loans.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038736Y.S. Kim et al.

Table 2
Heterogeneity in servicer effects. Matched eMBS-CRISM sample, restricted to borrowers who were current in January 2020 but missed at least one payment between March
and November. High-forbearance servicer is defined as a servicer with an above-median estimated fixed effect; similarly other explanatory variables are dummies equal to 1 if the
variable exceeds its sample median. Standard errors are clustered at the servicer level. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

Dependent variable = 1 if mortgage received forbearance, = 0 otherwise

High-forbearance servicer

High-forbearance servicer:

× High unpaid mortgage balance

× High 𝛥 unemp rate (yoy)

× High updated credit score (FICO V5)

× High borrower age

High unpaid mortgage balance

High 𝛥 unemp rate (yoy)

High updated credit score (FICO V5)

High borrower age

Zipcode fixed effects
Other controls

N. Obs.
Adj. 𝑅2

(1)

0.136∗∗∗
(0.021)

N
N

431,478
0.02

(2)

0.182∗∗∗
(0.024)

−0.054∗∗∗
(0.010)

0.123∗∗∗
(0.009)

N
N

411,939
0.04

(3)

0.147∗∗∗
(0.024)

−0.021∗∗
(0.009)

0.061∗∗∗
(0.006)

N
N

431,083
0.03

(4)

0.120∗∗∗
(0.022)

(5)

0.137∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.020
(0.013)

0.057∗∗∗
(0.012)

N
N

431,478
0.03

−0.003
(0.009)

−0.020∗∗∗
(0.007)

N
N

431,008
0.03

(6)

0.189∗∗∗
(0.029)

−0.044∗∗∗
(0.009)
−0.015∗∗
(0.006)
0.003
(0.011)
0.002
(0.008)
0.069∗∗∗
(0.010)

0.068∗∗∗
(0.009)
−0.013∗
(0.007)

Y
Y

405,464
0.09

We also show using McDash that the historical paths of mort-
gage delinquency in areas serviced by high- and low-forbearance
servicers are similar, implying similar sensitivity of delinquency
to the business cycle (Internet Appendix table A.7). In contrast,
following the passage of the CARES Act, borrowers matched
to high-forbearance servicers became much more likely to stop
paying (see Section 6 and Internet Appendix figure A.6).
These findings speak against the hypothesis that borrowers at
high-forbearance servicers were riskier on unobservables, because
such an explanation would also predict higher nonpayment prior
to the pandemic. They also speak against the story that high-
forbearance-servicer borrowers were more financially literate,
because this would be expected to reduce pre-COVID delinquency
as shown by Gerardi et al. (2013) and Agarwal et al. (2017b).
Finally, they show that variation in forbearance outcomes is not
due to differences in macro shocks or business-cycle risk.

3. Estimated servicer fixed effects are insensitive to the set of bor-
rower and loan controls used, as discussed above, including the
inclusion of lender fixed effects. In other words, there is little
evidence of selection on observables.

4.2. Heterogeneity

Do servicers affect the behavior of all borrowers equally? Table 2
uses the eMBS-CRISM sample to study outcomes across borrowers with
different characteristics, finding evidence of significant heterogeneity.
Column 1 shows that, overall, a past-due borrower is 13.6 pp more
likely to enter into forbearance when matched to a ‘‘high-forbearance’’
servicer, defined as a servicer fixed effect that exceeds the median.
Columns 2–6 then interact this ‘‘high-forbearance’’ dummy with various
borrower characteristics. Our prior is that servicer assignment would
matter more for borrowers with a low propensity to seek forbearance,
where there is more scope for behavior to change. This is what we
see in columns 2 and 3; borrowers with low mortgage balances and
in locations economically less-hard hit by COVID as measured by the
local change in unemployment are both less likely to obtain forbearance
overall and more sensitive to being matched with a high-forbearance
servicer.

We observe a different pattern, however, for two relatively vulner-
able groups: older borrowers and borrowers in poor financial health
measured by a low updated credit score just prior to the pandemic
(columns 4 and 5). These two groups have low overall forbearance
takeup, but their behavior is either less responsive to mortgage servicer
assignment, or at least no more responsive, than the sample as a whole.
(Results look similar in the multivariate specification in column 6.)

These results speak to the idea that some groups of borrowers are
‘‘hard to reach’’ — they are less likely to seek forbearance and also
relatively unresponsive to servicer efforts to make forbearance easier
to obtain. This is apparent in our later results too: easier access to
forbearance only moderately reduces the number of past-due borrow-
ers outside the forbearance safety net. Finally, although we do find
significant heterogeneity, the overall effect of servicers on forbearance
outcomes is broadly based, as seen by the fact that the uninteracted
‘‘high-forbearance’’ dummy is positive and large in each column of
Table 2.

5. Servicer characteristics and forbearance outcomes

Next we examine the economic forces shaping servicer behavior
by studying how a servicer’s propensity to provide forbearance, as
measured by its fixed effect, varies with servicer characteristics such
as size, liquidity and organizational form. Specifically, we consider the
following factors:

1. Liquidity constraints. When a borrower stops making payments,
the mortgage servicer is required to temporarily finance and advance
payments on the borrower’s behalf, including principal, interest, taxes
and insurance. Servicers facing binding liquidity constraints there-
fore may wish to discourage borrowers from entering forbearance, to
limit these cash outflows (given that forbearance and nonpayment are
closely linked, as we show empirically below).

This liquidity risk is particularly significant for FHA loans, because
FHA servicers must forward payments for a much longer period and
face significant delays and costs before being reimbursed, and also
because FHA borrowers have higher default risk (Pence, 2022; Kim

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038737Y.S. Kim et al.

et al., 2018).11 Nonbank mortgage companies are typically much more
exposed to liquidity risk than banks, because they rely on short-term
wholesale funding rather than insured deposits and do not typically
have access to government liquidity backstops such as Federal Home
Loan Bank advances or the discount window (Jiang et al., 2020). Re-
flecting this fragility, there were widespread fears in the early months
of the pandemic about nonbank liquidity and the possibility of runs and
a wave of nonbank failures (Pence, 2022; Loewenstein, 2021).

2. Regulatory and legal risk. Mortgage intermediaries were forced
to pay out large legal settlements after the Great Recession, and to-
day face much stricter regulation.12 It therefore seems plausible that
legal, regulatory and reputational risk could induce servicers to adopt
‘‘borrower-friendly’’ practices that make forbearance easier to obtain.
Large commercial bank servicers are likely to be most concerned about
these risks, because these firms are highly visible, face the toughest
regulatory scrutiny, and were subject to the largest post-crisis legal
settlements (Buchak et al., 2018).

3. Capitalization and risk-shifting. Servicers face a tradeoff in
the sense that improving servicing quality and customer satisfaction is
costly in the short run but may reduce legal risk and improve retention
in the long run. Undercapitalized servicers may thus have weaker
incentives to streamline access to forbearance, in line with the classic
risk-shifting hypothesis of Jensen and Meckling (1976).

4. Size, scale and technology. Prior research shows that size
and organizational form play key roles in shaping financial interme-
diary behavior (e.g., Berger et al., 2005). In our setting, e.g., scale
economies may have enabled large servicers to develop sophisticated
servicing platforms, facilitating communication and faster processing
of forbearance requests. Or conversely, small, nimble servicers may
have been able to adjust practices more quickly than large bureaucratic
organizations with several layers of management.

5.1. Empirical analysis

To investigate which factors are most relevant empirically, we
regress the servicer fixed effects estimated previously on servicer char-
acteristics drawn from mortgage call reports (for nonbank mortgage
companies), Y-9C and bank call reports (for banks, or nonbanks con-
trolled by a bank), and servicer-level aggregations of eMBS loan-level
data.13

Estimates are reported in Table 3 and reveal several patterns. First,
borrowers at large servicers are significantly more likely to enter into
a forbearance plan, whether size is measured by the log of servicing
assets or balance sheet assets. Second, organizational form matters.
Nonbank mortgage companies are about 8 pp less likely than banks
to provide forbearance to a past-due borrower, while credit unions are

11 FHA servicers must typically forward payments until loan termination or
modification or until the loan is repurchased by the servicer using its own
funds, unlike GSE loans where advances are capped at four months. FHA
servicers also face significant delays before being reimbursed for payment
shortfalls, and Tozer (2019) estimates they are also typically not compensated
for about $10,000 in costs per FHA claim.

12 Additional post-crisis regulation includes national servicing standards,
higher bank capital requirements on servicing rights, and supervisory oversight
from the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). Legal risk is also
much more salient given the scale of post-crisis settlements (Buchak et al.,
2018). In related work, Fuster et al. (2021) find that CFPB supervision and
enforcement result in more consumer-friendly mortgage servicing practices.

13 We match financial institutions by name across these data sources. Data
on financial structure from the National Information Center and other sources
is used to cross-validate the accuracy of the match. Our analysis focuses on
banks, credit unions and nonbank mortgage companies, and excludes govern-
ment and government-sponsored enterprises such as state housing authorities
and Federal Home Loan Banks. Summary statistics for servicer characteristics
are reported in section E of the Internet Appendix.

about 19 pp more likely. Third, internal liquidity at the start of the
pandemic, measured by the ratio of cash to total assets, is strongly
positively correlated with forbearance provision, but only for nonbanks.
Together these servicer characteristics account for a significant share of
the variation in servicer practices; the adjusted 𝑅2 is between 0.4–0.5
in most of the specifications.

These results support the view that liquidity constraints shaped
servicer behavior. As discussed above, nonbanks were highly exposed to
liquidity risk early in the pandemic when most forbearance applications
were received. We find that nonbank servicers were significantly less
likely to provide forbearance, particularly for small nonbanks with
low cash balances that faced the greatest liquidity risk. Banks in con-
trast were not liquidity-constrained because they have access to ample
backstop sources of funding for mortgages and also experienced large
deposit inflows after the onset of COVID-19 (Li et al., 2020).

The high forbearance rate for large servicers, both banks and non-
banks, is also striking. Although it is difficult to pinpoint the mechanism
underlying this result, large servicers may benefit from scale economies
in technology investments (e.g., a well-designed online platform), may
have better access to capital markets and more resources to train
servicing staff, or may take a ‘‘borrower-friendly’’ approach because
they are more likely to be targeted by financial regulators, particularly
in the case of large banks.14

5.2. Servicing quality: evidence from CFPB complaints

Given the program’s design, it seems clear that past-due FHA and VA
borrowers would have benefited from forbearance; this implies that ser-
vicer practices limiting forbearance uptake reduced borrower welfare
for our sample. To investigate further, we study whether borrow-
ers were less satisfied with ‘‘low-forbearance’’ servicers based on the
frequency of forbearance-related complaints for government loans sub-
mitted to the CFPB complaint platform. (For details of data construction
see Internet Appendix section A.2.)

Results are presented in Table 4. The dependent variable is the
frequency of forbearance-related complaints per thousand Ginnie Mae
mortgages serviced. We find that the complaint rate is significantly
higher for low-forbearance servicers. This is direct evidence of poorer
servicing quality for these firms. The inverse relationship between
forbearance provision and complaints is more pronounced among non-
banks (column 5).

When we replace the servicer fixed effects with servicer charac-
teristics (columns 3, 4 and 6), we find again that liquidity matters
— servicers with lower cash and securities balances were subject to
more complaints. Again, these relationships are concentrated among
nonbank servicers. These results and those from Table 3 show that
liquidity constraints may reduce servicing quality, consistent with prior
evidence on foreclosures and modifications from the Great Recession
period (Aiello, 2022).

6. Effects of forbearance on borrowers

In this section we use cross-servicer variation to estimate the causal
effect of forbearance access on borrower outcomes such as delinquency,
nonmortgage debt, credit scores, and auto purchases. We then draw out
broader implications and lessons from our findings.

14 Results in Table 3 are related to contemporaneous analysis of the rela-
tionship between forbearance provision and servicer characteristics by Cherry
et al. (2022) using a different but overlapping sample. Cherry et al. (2022) do
not study the role of liquidity constraints, which is particularly important for
our sample given the liquidity risk associated with Ginnie Mae mortgages (as
discussed in Section 5.1). In other respects our results and Cherry et al. (2022)
are generally consistent; e.g., both studies find that large servicers and bank
servicers are more likely to provide forbearance.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038738Y.S. Kim et al.

Table 3
Determinants of servicer effects. Servicer-level regression of servicer forbearance fixed effects on characteristics drawn from bank and nonbank call reports and eMBS. Column
1 is based on all servicers including banks, credit unions and nonbanks. Columns 2–4 reflect nonbank mortgage company servicers only. Columns 5–7 reflect bank servicers only.
Weighted least squares, weighted by number of borrowers that were current in January 2020 but past due between March and November. Robust standard errors. ***, ** and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

Dependent variable: servicer fixed effect. (Higher value ⇔ higher P(forbear | nonpay))
Nonbank mtg companies
All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Servicer characteristics
log(Servicing assets)

0.035∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.030∗∗∗
(0.008)

0.027∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.919∗∗∗
(0.185)
0.100
(0.085)
0.032
(0.104)
−0.002
(0.048)

0.019∗∗∗
(0.005)
1.047∗∗∗
(0.191)
0.186∗∗
(0.090)
0.080
(0.113)
−0.019
(0.048)

−0.003
(0.058)

Banks

(5)

0.038∗∗∗
(0.009)

−0.118
(0.076)

(6)

(7)

0.039∗∗∗
(0.010)

−0.657
(0.511)
0.244
(0.360)
1.068
(0.703)
−0.084
(0.085)

0.025∗
(0.014)
−0.886
(0.653)
0.448
(0.319)
0.753
(0.802)
−0.102
(0.082)

log(Assets)

Cash/assets

Securities/assets

Capital/assets

Servicing growth

Servicer type
Nonbank mortgage company

Credit union

N. Obs.
Adj. 𝑅2

−0.045
(0.049)

−0.084∗∗∗
(0.025)
0.186∗∗∗
(0.032)

152
0.53

98
0.29

98
0.48

98
0.41

45
0.47

45
0.46

45
0.27

Table 4
Servicer forbearance practices and CFPB complaints. Servicer-level regression of relationship between volume of forbearance-related CFPB complaints and servicer forbearance
practices (as measured by servicer fixed effects). Outcome variable is the number of forbearance-related mortgage complaints for government loans per thousand Ginnie Mae
mortgages serviced. Weighted least squares, weighted by size of Ginnie Mae servicing portfolio as of January 2020. Robust standard errors. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

Dependent variable: Forbearance complaints per thousand loans serviced

All lenders

(1)

−0.222∗∗∗
(0.073)

(2)

−0.235∗∗∗
(0.077)

(3)

(4)

Nonbanks only

(5)

−0.622∗∗
(0.303)

−0.016∗∗
(0.007)

0.079
(0.060)
0.072∗∗
(0.036)

0.012
(0.022)
0.000
(0.025)

129
−0.01

−0.006
(0.008)
−0.409∗
(0.229)
−0.355∗∗
(0.174)
−0.020
(0.139)
0.094
(0.060)
0.089
(0.077)

−0.033
(0.033)

125
−0.00

0.069∗∗
(0.032)

0.002
(0.020)
0.070∗∗
(0.028)

129
−0.01

129
0.01

(6)

−0.031
(0.041)
−1.090∗∗
(0.485)
−0.891∗∗∗
(0.301)
0.440
(0.524)
0.731∗
(0.409)
−0.486
(0.562)

−0.337
(0.503)

92
−0.01

92
0.12

Servicer forbearance propensity

Servicer characteristics
log(Servicing assets)

Cash/assets

Securities/assets

Capital/assets

Servicing growth

Frac. govt. loans that are FHA

Servicer type
Nonbank mortgage company

Credit union

N. Obs.
Adj. 𝑅2

6.1. Empirical strategy

We use a difference-in-differences approach to study the borrower
effects of being matched with a ‘‘high-forbearance’’ servicer, again
defined as a servicer with an above-median fixed effect. The sample
period is October 2019 to December 2020. We use the six months up to
March 2020 to establish the absence of differential pre-trends between
high- and low-forbearance servicers, and attribute differential changes
in borrower outcomes after March 2020 as being due to variation in
access to forbearance. For this section we rely on the CRISM-eMBS
matched sample, which allows us to (i) observe outcomes from credit

reports, (ii) measure geography more finely, (iii) include a richer set
of controls, and (iv) track payment status even for loans repurchased
from MBS pools.15

We trace out the effects of servicers dynamically by regressing bor-
rower outcomes (e.g., payment status) on a high-forbearance servicer

15 Ginnie Mae issuers may repurchase a nonperforming loan from an MBS
pool at par if the borrower misses 3+ payments. Buyouts were attractive in
2020 due to low yields. eMBS does not report loan performance after loans are
repurchased, but we do observe performance on such loans in the CRISM-eMBS
sample.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038739Y.S. Kim et al.

dummy interacted with a set of time dummies, controlling for borrower
and loan characteristics, static servicer dummies, and geography by
time fixed effects. Specifically we estimate:

𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽𝑡𝑆𝐻

𝑖 + 𝛾𝑍𝑖𝑡 + 𝛼𝑠 + 𝛼𝑧𝑡𝜏 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(2)

where 𝑌𝑖𝑡 is a borrower outcome for loan i in month t ; 𝛽𝑡 are coefficients
on a vector of time dummies interacted with the high-forbearance-
servicer dummy 𝑆𝐻
; 𝑍𝑖𝑡 is a vector of loan controls including charac-
𝑖
teristics at origination (e.g., loan amount, LTV, credit score), updated
credit score as of January 2020 (measured by the Equifax Risk Score),
updated principal balance, loan age, and borrower age; 𝛼𝑠 is a vector
of non-time varying servicer dummies; and 𝛼𝑧𝑡𝜏 is a vector of zipcode
× month × origination year (𝜏) fixed effects to account for the time-
varying geographic effects of the pandemic for different loan cohorts.
We omit the dummy for March 2020 from 𝛽𝑡, therefore normalizing
outcomes to be equal between high- and low-forbearance servicers just
prior to the CARES Act. As before, the sample consists of loans that were
active and current in January 2020; we also exclude loans originated
after October 2019. Standard errors are clustered by servicer.

6.2. Nonpayment

Fig. 3 presents effects on mortgage payment behavior based on our
estimates of ̂𝛽𝑡. The top panel shows that easier access to forbearance
significantly increased the overall mortgage nonpayment rate. The
fraction of past-due borrowers at high- vs low-forbearance servicers
track each other closely through March 2020, but then diverge sharply
— the probability that a borrower becomes past-due increases about
twice as quickly at high-forbearance servicers after the passage of the
CARES Act. In levels, the difference in the nonpayment rate peaks as
high as 5 pp in May 2020. In contrast, the number of borrowers that
are past-due but not in a forbearance plan is significantly lower at high-
forbearance servicers (bottom panel of Fig. 3), particularly early in the
pandemic.

Table 5 summarizes and further unpacks these effects. The table
reports average coefficients on the high-forbearance × time dummies
during three phases of the pandemic for five different forbearance and
payment outcomes.

The first row of Table 5 reports the effect on the forbearance rate it-
self. From April to July 2020, assignment to a high-forbearance servicer
increases the forbearance rate by 5.6 pp, a quantitatively important
effect compared to the base forbearance rate of 8.1 percent at low-
forbearance servicers. The effect declines slightly to 4.5 percent later
in 2020.

The second and third rows report estimates for nonpayment and
nonpayment outside of forbearance, summarizing the visual evidence
from Fig. 3. Here, a key takeaway point is that the effects on nonpay-
ment are almost as large as the effects on forbearance itself (e.g., 4.9 pp
compared to 5.6 pp for the April–July period). In other words, easier
forbearance access induced a large number of borrowers to stop making
their mortgage payments. We discuss this finding further in Section 6.6.
Easier forbearance access also reduces the number of past-due bor-
rowers not in a forbearance plan by 0.4 pp. This is a much smaller
absolute effect, but in proportionate terms it represents a significant
20–25 percent drop in the number of ‘‘missing’’ forbearances.

The fourth row of Table 5 shows that the share of borrowers who
entered forbearance purely as a precaution but continued making their
scheduled payments does not differ systematically between low- and
high-forbearance servicers. The final row of estimates confirms that the
primary effect of easier forbearance access is to increase the number of
borrowers who both skipped payments and entered forbearance.

These results show that servicer policies significantly affected liq-
uidity provision to households. Based on our estimates and some
auxiliary assumptions, we calculate that borrowers matched to high-
forbearance servicers deferred an additional ≈ $300 in cumulative

Fig. 3. Forbearance access and mortgage payment behavior. Estimated effect of
assignment to a ‘‘high-forbearance’’ servicer on the overall probability of being past
due (top panel) and probability of being past due and not in forbearance (bottom
panel). Blue line shows the unconditional average monthly rate of nonpayment at
low-forbearance servicers. Red line shows the additional effect of assignment to a
high-forbearance servicer, by adjusting the unconditional average by the estimated 𝛽s
from Eq. (3). 95% confidence intervals shown. Standard errors clustered at the servicer
level. Sample includes loans that were current and active as of January 2020.

mortgage payments by November 2020 compared to equivalent bor-
rowers at low-forbearance servicers (see Internet Appendix figure A.9
for details). Since the treatment effect on the forbearance rate itself is
about 5pp, this implies, on the margin, deferred payments of $6,000
per additional forbearance, a significant sum. In aggregate, switching
all Ginnie Mae borrowers from low-to-high forbearance servicers would
increase deferred payments just over the April-November 2020 period
by $3.1 billion, equivalent to an effect of ≈ $10 billion if generalizing
our estimates to the entire mortgage market.16 Next we study how this
liquidity was used by borrowers.

16 The estimate of $3.1 billion is computed by multiplying the estimate of
the cumulative deferred payment from figure A.9 in the Internet Appendix
by the number of FHA and VA mortgages outstanding as reported in our
table of summary statistics. Our estimate of the aggregate effect of ≈ $10
billion is computed by then grossing up this estimate by the fraction of all
forbearances that were in the FHA/VA segment as of the peak in June 2020,
taken from Black Knight (2020).

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387310Y.S. Kim et al.

Table 5
Forbearance and nonpayment outcomes. Estimates of the average effect of assignment to a high-forbearance servicer on five different payment and forbearance
outcomes. Estimates reported in columns (1), (3) and (5) are the average coefficient on the high-forbearance-servicer × time dummies (estimates of 𝛽𝑡 from Eq. (3)),
over three phases of the pandemic: a pre-pandemic period (October 2019–February 2020); early pandemic (April–July 2020) and later pandemic (August–November
2020), along with the associated standard error of each mean. March 2020 dummy is omitted; thus effect is normalized to zero in that month. For context,
columns (2), (4) and (6) report the unconditional mean of the dependent variable at low-forbearance servicers during the period referenced. Standard errors are
clustered at the servicer level. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively.

Outcome variable:

Pre-pandemic

Pandemic

2019:m10–2020:m2

2020:m4 to 2020:m7

2020:m8 to 2020:m11

Forbearance

Missed payment

Missed payment, no forbearance

Forbearance, no missed payment

Forbearance, missed payment

(1)
Coeff.

0.002
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
−0.001
(0.002)
−0.001
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)

(2)
Mean

0.001

0.016

0.016

0.000

0.000

(3)
Coeff.

0.056∗∗∗
(0.009)
0.049∗∗∗
(0.007)
−0.004∗∗
(0.002)
0.003
(0.005)
0.053∗∗∗
(0.007)

(4)
Mean

0.081

0.069

0.017

0.029

0.052

(5)
Coeff.

0.045∗∗∗
(0.010)
0.037∗∗∗
(0.007)
−0.004∗∗
(0.002)
0.005
(0.006)
0.041∗∗∗
(0.008)

(6)
Mean

0.091

0.083

0.022

0.029

0.061

6.3. Nonmortgage debt

We start by studying the effect of forbearance on credit card debt,
an alternative form of borrowing often used during periods of finan-
cial stress. Liquidity constraints likely play a key role in determining
whether funds from forbearance are used to reduce debt rather than
more immediate needs like nondurable consumption (e.g., Telyukova,
2013; Gross and Souleles, 2002; Zeldes, 1989). Correspondingly in the
spirit of Gross and Souleles (2002) we split the borrower sample into
high- and low-credit card utilization groups based on the ratio of total
drawn balance to total credit limit summed across cards (measured ex
ante over the six months to March 2020) and estimate separate results
by group.17

To begin, we document several pieces of evidence indicating that
utilization is in fact a reasonable proxy for liquidity constraints, rather
than simply being a measure of card transaction volume. First, in aggre-
gate, about three-quarters of credit card balances are in fact revolving
balances that accrue interest, rather than transaction balances paid off
each month (Adams et al., 2022). Second, high utilization is strongly
associated with low household income at the zip-code level (Internet
Appendix table A.12). Third, individuals with high utilization have
much lower credit scores; and fourth, such individuals are significantly
more likely to be in default not only on their credit cards but also
on mortgage and auto debt, both before and during the pandemic
(Internet Appendix table A.13). Taken together this evidence supports
the interpretation that high-utilization individuals are indeed more
likely to be liquidity constrained.

Turning to our results, Fig. 4 shows that liquidity from forbear-
ance did indeed allow some borrowers to reduce credit card balances,
with the effect concentrated among less liquidity-constrained (i.e., low
utilization) households. The figure presents estimated ̂𝛽𝑡s from our
difference-in-difference equation using log(credit card debt) as the
outcome variable. (Results are comparable if we instead use the level
of credit card debt; see figure A.8 in the Internet Appendix.) For
the low-utilization group, assignment to a high-forbearance servicer
reduces credit card debt by 1.2 percent between April and July and
1.4 percent between August and November (top panel of Fig. 4). This
is an average effect across all borrowers; scaled by the treatment effect

on the forbearance rate of around 5pp, it represents a 20–30 percent
reduction in credit card debt for marginal borrowers induced to enter
into forbearance, accounting for about one-fifth of the forbearance
liquidity infusion for the low-utilization group.18 In contrast, we find
little or no effect on credit card debt for high-utilization borrowers
(bottom panel of Fig. 4).

We find no evidence that borrowers used forbearance to pay down
other forms of debt like auto loans, student debt, or home equity liens
(table A.9 in the Internet Appendix), perhaps because these debts have
lower interest rates than credit cards, making them a lower priority
for payoff. We also do not find discernible effects on nonmortgage
delinquency. This may in part reflect the availability of forbearance for
these other debt types.

6.4. Other borrower outcomes

Credit scores. Using the same methodology, Fig. 5 shows that easier
access to forbearance did not impair the credit scores of borrowers at
high-forbearance servicers, despite the high nonpayment rate for this
group.19 This outcome is consistent with the intended design of the
CARES Act forbearance program, which stipulated that nonpayment in
forbearance should not be reported as a delinquency to credit bureaus.
The point estimate is in fact slightly positive, which could be possible
if, e.g., forbearance reduced nonmortgage delinquency, although it is
not close to statistical significance.

Auto purchases. How much of the liquidity provided by forbear-
ance was used for consumption? Credit bureau data do not typically
measure consumption directly, but we do study a proxy for durable
goods purchases often used in the literature, namely the establish-
ment of new auto credit trade lines as a measure of automobile pur-
chases (e.g., Abel and Fuster, 2021; Di Maggio et al., 2017). Borrowers
at high-forbearance servicers are not more likely to buy an automobile
— the point estimate is near zero and tightly enough estimated to
rule out large effects (table A.9 of the Internet Appendix). This stands
in contrast to Di Maggio et al. (2017), who study mortgage payment
changes due to interest-rate resets, also using mortgage data linked
to credit reports. Two plausible reasons for these differences are: (i)

17 Note: the card balance is the total outstanding balance at calendar-
month end, reflecting unpaid balances from prior billing cycles as well as
transactions incurred during the month. Equifax does not report the size of
the borrower’s payment or whether they just make their minimum payment,
variables that would arguably be cleaner measures of financial constraints
than the utilization rate. Even so, several pieces of evidence do suggest that
utilization is a reasonable proxy for liquidity constraints, as we now discuss.

18 Given the average credit card balance of $3910 for low-utilization bor-
rowers, a 1.4% paydown amounts to $55 per borrower. By comparison,
we estimate that assignment to a high-forbearance servicer results in an
additional ≈ $300 in total cumulative deferred mortgage-related payments up
to November 2020 (figure A.9 of the Internet Appendix), 5–6 times larger than
the estimated effect on credit card balances.

19 Credit score is measured by FICO score version 5. FICO is a registered

trademark of Fair Isaac Corporation.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387311Y.S. Kim et al.

Fig. 5. Effects of forbearance availability on updated credit score. Estimates and
95% confidence intervals of the effects of assignment to a high-forbearance servicer on
the borrower’s updated credit score (FICO score version 5), based on the eMBS-CRISM
matched sample. Standard errors are clustered at the servicer level.

however that servicing practices significantly affected bankruptcy out-
comes; the difference in bankruptcy (including bankruptcy of any type)
between high-and-low forbearance servicers is only about 1 percent of
the sample mean, and quite tightly estimated (Internet Appendix table
A.9). This may seem surprising in light of evidence that bankruptcy
filings are very sensitive to cash-on-hand (Indarte, 2023). A plausi-
ble explanation however is that borrowers in sufficient distress to be
near bankruptcy likely had strong incentives to file for forbearance
regardless of their servicer, particularly considering the much greater
complexity of the bankruptcy process.

6.5. Crowding-out effects?

Aside from borrowers, forbearance provision might also affect lenders.

Specifically, by draining liquidity, forbearance might limit servicers’ ca-
pacity to originate new loans, particularly for nonbanks without access
to deposits or the lender of last resort. (This hypothesis is reminiscent
of Chakraborty et al. 2018, who find that higher mortgage lending
during the 2000s housing boom crowded out commercial lending.)

We test for crowding-out effects using a difference-in-differences ap-
proach, tracing out how lending by high- vs low-forbearance servicers
evolved after the CARES Act was passed using eMBS data aggregated
by servicer-month as well as quarterly data from bank and nonbank
call reports. We use a Poisson model, which has better econometric
properties than the log-linear models often used in finance applica-
tions (Cohn et al., 2022; Correia et al., 2020). Specifically we assume
that loan volume for servicer s in month or quarter t follows a Poisson
distribution with conditional mean 𝜆𝑠𝑡 given by:

𝜆𝑠𝑡 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽𝑡𝑆𝐻

𝑠 + 𝛿𝑡𝑋𝑠 + 𝛼𝑠 + 𝛾𝑡)

(3)

where 𝛽𝑡 are coefficients on time dummies interacted with the high-
forbearance-servicer dummy 𝑆𝐻
𝑠 ; 𝛿𝑡 are coefficients on time dummies
interacted with servicer characteristics 𝑋𝑠 (for the eMBS regressions
𝑋𝑠 includes a nonbank dummy and log of servicing assets); and 𝛼𝑠 and
𝛾𝑡 are servicer and time dummies. 𝛿𝑡𝑋𝑠 controls dynamically for other
factors that may affect lending; e.g., Fuster et al. (2023) show that the
nonbank share of mortgage lending fell temporarily at the start of the
pandemic, perhaps due to funding issues.

Results are reported in the Internet Appendix. Figure A.12 presents
𝛽𝑡 estimates for total agency mortgage lending and for Ginnie Mae
lending based on eMBS data aggregated by servicer-month. Agency
lending by high-forbearance servicers does drop post-CARES in April

Fig. 4. Forbearance access and log of credit card balances. Estimates and 95%
confidence intervals of the effects of assignment to a high-forbearance servicer on
log(total credit card debt). The top (bottom) panel shows estimates for borrowers with
below (above) median credit card utilization (measured ex ante between October 2019
and March 2020). The median average utilization is calculated separately for each
cohort of borrowers based on mortgage origination year. Standard errors are clustered
at the servicer level. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels respectively.

forbearance is primarily a means to defer payments, whereas payment
reductions due to interest rate resets do not have to be repaid; (ii)
borrowers induced on the margin to enter forbearance were likely
experiencing financial uncertainty and stress, reducing their demand
for expensive, illiquid, durable goods.

Prepayment. Internet Appendix table A.9 also reports estimates
of the effect of forbearance on mortgage prepayment, an important
outcome given that our study period featured a refinancing boom
due to low interest rates (Fuster et al., 2023). It is possible that
easier access to forbearance could have limited prepayment, because
lenders required borrowers to exit forbearance first before refinancing.
In practice however, we find little or no effect on prepayment. This
implies that borrowers assigned to high-forbearance servicers were not
diverted from refinancing into forbearance, an outcome that would
have complicated an assessment of the program’s welfare effects for
participating borrowers.

Bankruptcy. Wang et al. (2020) document a striking decline in con-
sumer bankruptcy during the COVID pandemic. We find no evidence

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387312Y.S. Kim et al.

and May 2020, statistically significantly in April. But thereafter, we
find no general decline in lending by high-forbearance servicers. Figure
A.13 repeats the exercise just for nonbanks using quarterly mortgage
originations from nonbank call reports; this includes both agency and
non-agency lending, unlike eMBS. Lending by high-forbearance ser-
vicers drops in relative terms from the first to second quarter of 2020
but the effects are not statistically significant. Figure A.14 reports
results for banks using call and FR Y-9C data. Since these filings do not
report originations we instead focus on outstanding loans on balance
sheet (total loans or commercial and industrial loans). Unsurprisingly
given banks’ strong liquidity position during this period (Li et al.,
2020), we find no evidence of crowding-out; estimates if anything have
the opposite sign. Finally figure A.15 estimates an alternative Ginnie
Mae specification at the loan level; results are similar to figure A.12.

To summarize, we find little robust evidence of crowding out effects.
The lack of such effects may be surprising, particularly for nonbank
mortgage companies given their limited access to external finance. We
believe this reflects a combination of factors. First, confidence bounds
on our estimates are quite wide; we lack power to identify moderate
lending effects. Second, although nonbank liquidity stress was signifi-
cant early in the pandemic when most forbearance applications were
received, liquidity constraints later eased as nonbanks enjoyed a cash
infusion from the flood of mortgage prepayments (Pence, 2022; Fuster
et al., 2023). (Consistent with this narrative, we do find some evidence
of a lending effect in April 2020, as discussed earlier.) Third, although
nonbank lending does require some internal liquidity, originations are
primarily funded by bank warehouse lines; these credit lines mostly
remained intact during the pandemic (Pence, 2022). Finally we caution
that estimates here are less-cleanly identified than elsewhere in our
paper, since forbearance and lending policies may be co-determined
(e.g., a nonbank with strong warehouse lender relationships may have
more capacity to provide forbearance and to expand lending). Such
omitted variable biases may attenuate our estimates.

We conclude that forbearance did not appear to significantly crowd
out lending during the COVID episode, but that such effects may still be
important during a future forbearance event, particularly if it involves
a prolonged servicer liquidity crunch.

6.6. Broader implications

Stepping back, what can our results teach us about the overall
design and effectiveness of the CARES Act forbearance program? Was
the program too generous, resulting in widespread moral hazard and
strategic default by borrowers not facing liquidity problems? Or al-
ternatively was the program not streamlined enough, as indicated by
the many borrowers who became delinquent without obtaining for-
bearance? Cross-servicer variation helps shed light on these questions
because, as we have shown, it produced some quasi-random variation
in program generosity on the margin.

Our finding that access to forbearance induced nonpayment is rem-
iniscent of the strategic default literature, in particular Mayer et al.
(2014), who find that mortgage borrowers defaulted in order to qualify
for generous modifications from subprime lender Countrywide during
the 2008 financial crisis. There are some notable differences between
their setting and ours, however, and several pieces of evidence de-
scribed below suggest that the marginal nonpayers in our sample
primarily entered forbearance due to genuine liquidity concerns rather
than a strategic decision to obtain an interest-free loan.

First, unlike Mayer et al. (2014) we find that marginal nonpayers
look similar on observables to ‘‘control group’’ borrowers who obtained
forbearance from low-forbearance servicers (see table A.10 in the In-
ternet Appendix). If moral hazard was the main driver of nonpayment,
we might instead expect marginal nonpayers to be financially literate
and higher-income, as Mayer et al. (2014) do find in their setting.
Furthermore, although borrowers at high-forbearance servicers stay
in forbearance slightly longer and are less likely to exit, the effects

are small (e.g., the probability of forbearance exit is 0.31 at high-
forbearance servicers compared to 0.35 at low-forbearance servicers).
In other words there is little evidence that borrowers that obtained for-
bearance on the margin acted to ‘‘max out’’ the zero-interest financing
provided by payment deferral.

Second, liquidity from forbearance was generally not used to pay
down debt or to purchase automobiles, suggesting deferred payments
were primarily used for precautionary savings or nondurable consump-
tion. This interpretation is consistent with Lee and Maghzian (2023),
and with a survey from April 2020 studied in Anderson et al. (2022).
Households were asked how they would use funds from forbearance;
the top response was ‘‘necessary’’ consumption, followed by saving,
then debt consolidation. Although we do find evidence of credit card
debt paydown, it is limited to less liquidity-constrained households and
even for this group accounts for only one-fifth of deferred payments.

Third, other research finds that forbearance was mostly used by bor-
rowers experiencing negative income or expenditure shocks. Lambie-
Hanson et al. (2021) present survey data that at least three-quarters
of borrowers entering forbearance had experienced a job disruption or
income loss. Zhao et al. (2020) document using rich administrative
data that borrowers in forbearance had experienced larger income
declines, and were more likely to have lost their jobs or to have
received unemployment benefits. Further, in aggregate less than one in
ten borrowers made use of forbearance, despite the easy qualification
requirements. This suggests opportunistic behavior was relatively rare.
Finally, in our context the benefits of strategic default are fairly
modest because forbearance is only an interest-free payment deferral; it
is not debt forgiveness. Consistent with this point, An et al. (2022) find
that less than one-in-ten borrowers exiting forbearance maximized the
zero-interest benefit of payment deferral by rolling skipped payments
into a long-term ‘‘partial claim’’ due at mortgage payoff. Requiring even
a simple attestation of economic hardship may have limited strategic
behavior, in line with experimental evidence in Anderson et al. (2022).
Aside from the question of strategic default, our results show that
the forbearance program worked as intended to allow borrowers to
pause their payments without negative effects on their credit scores.
Furthermore, it did not inadvertently prevent borrowers from refinanc-
ing, and did not appear to crowd out new lending. More broadly, the
program reached a high share of vulnerable borrowers — three-quarters
of FHA and VA borrowers who became past-due obtained forbearance,
rising to nine-tenths for seriously past-due borrowers, a high takeup
rate compared to many government programs.

Against these positives, our results also highlight several program
limitations. While takeup was high, not all past-due borrowers obtained
forbearance and wide cross-servicer variation unrelated to borrower
fundamentals indicates that forbearance was not implemented uni-
formly. Furthermore, our results show that debt relief was connected
to servicers’ financial health and organizational form. Nonbanks, less
regulated and subject to significant liquidity risk (Pence, 2022; Cherry
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2018), facilitated fewer forbearances partic-
ularly when the nonbank was small or had low liquid asset buffers.
In contrast, large banks and credit unions had the most ‘‘borrower-
friendly’’ outcomes, likely reflecting tighter regulation and secure ac-
cess to funding. Finally, although we find little evidence of significant
strategic default, forbearance did provide a subsidy in that interest was
not charged on deferred balances; it is not clear that such a feature is
necessary in order to simply provide temporary liquidity to households.
These shortcomings could have more serious consequences in a
future event involving a more prolonged economic and housing down-
turn. In designing debt relief policies, policymakers may therefore
wish to consider ways to standardize servicer practices (e.g., more
detailed guidelines about borrower outreach) or implement forbear-
ance auto-enrollment for borrowers observably in distress (e.g., tied
to unemployment insurance claims). Auto-enrollment may be most
useful for ‘‘hard-to-reach’’ borrowers identified in our analysis such as
those with low credit scores. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have indeed

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387313Y.S. Kim et al.

taken some recent steps to streamline forbearance enrollment (e.g.,
Fannie Mae, 2020). That said, such policies could also have unintended
consequences by undermining the liquidity position of servicers; this in
turn could reduce credit supply, amplifying the downturn. Therefore,
forbearance policy design should take into account the financial condi-
tion of servicers and the availability of nonbank liquidity backstops like
the Ginnie Mae Pass-Through Assistance Program (Ginnie Mae, 2020)
set up during the pandemic.

7. Conclusion

We show that mortgage intermediaries played a key role in shaping
the implementation of the CARES Act mortgage forbearance program.
Forbearance outcomes varied widely across servicers for otherwise sim-
ilar loans. Small servicers, nonbanks, and particularly nonbanks with
low liquid asset buffers facilitated fewer forbearances and saw a higher
volume of forbearance-related borrower complaints. Servicer effects
are heterogeneous across borrowers, with older and low credit-score
borrowers seemingly ‘‘hard to reach’’.

We also use cross-servicer variation to trace out the causal effects
of forbearance for borrowers. We show that easier access to forbear-
ance increased household liquidity by inducing borrowers to pause
their mortgage payments. Several pieces of evidence suggest that these
‘‘marginal’’ nonpayers generally paused their payments due to liquidity
concerns, although some used the funds to consolidate debt by paying
down credit cards.

Overall, we interpret our results as evidence that the CARES Act for-
bearance program successfully reached most borrowers in need without
inducing widespread strategic behavior or other unintended conse-
quences, thereby balancing the tradeoffs inherent in any social in-
surance program (e.g., see Chetty, 2008 on unemployment insurance
or Indarte, 2023 on bankruptcy). That said, our results also highlight
program limitations which may be mitigated through design changes.
Further research on forbearance design is warranted since forbearance
is likely to be an important debt-relief tool in the future.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

You Suk Kim: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project admin-
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Donghoon Lee: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources,
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. Tess Scharlemann: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Super-
vision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation,
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. James Vickery:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Val-
idation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Replication package (Mendeley Data)

Appendix A. Supplementary data

References

Abel, J., Fuster, A., 2021. How do mortgage refinances affect debt, default, and
spending? Evidence from HARP. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 13 (2), 254–291.
Adams, R., Bord, V.M., Katcher, B., 2022. Credit card profitability. In: FEDS Notes.

Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Agarwal, S., Amromin, G., Ben-David, I., Chomsisengphet, S., Evanoff, D., 2011. The
role of securitization in mortgage renegotiation. J. Financ. Econ. 102 (3), 559–578.
Agarwal, S., Amromin, G., Ben-David, I., Chomsisengphet, S., Piskorski, T., Seru, A.,
2017a. Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from the Home
Affordable Modification Program. J. Polit. Econ. 125 (3), 654–712.

Agarwal, S., Amromin, G., Chomsisengphet, S., Landvoigt, T., Piskorski, T., Seru, A.,
Yao, V., 2022. Mortgage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Competition:
Evidence from the Home Affordable Refinance Program. Rev. Econ. Stud. 90 (2),
499–537.

Agarwal, S., Chomsisengphet, S., Zhang, Y., 2017b. How does working in a finance

profession affect mortgage delinquency? J. Bank. Financ. 78, 1–13.

Aiello, D.J., 2022. Financially constrained mortgage servicers. J. Financ. Econ. 144 (2),

590–610.

An, X., Cordell, L., Geng, L., Lee, K., 2022. Inequality in the Time of COVID-19:

Evidence from Mortgage Delinquency and Forbearance. Tech. rep..

Anderson, J., Harrison, D., Seiler, M., 2022. Reducing strategic forbearance under the
CARES act: An experimental approach utilizing recourse attestation. J. Real Estate
Finance Econ. 65, 230–262.

Bandyopadhyay, A., Kim, D., Smith, P.S., 2022. Adverse selection in mortgage markets:

Evidence from Ginnie Mae early buyouts. Working Paper.

Berger, A.N., Miller, N.H., Petersen, M.A., Rajan, R.G., Stein, J.C., 2005. Does function
follow organizational form? Evidence from the lending practices of large and small
banks. J. Financ. Econ. 76 (2), 237–269.

Black Knight, 2020. Forbearances rise after three weeks of declines. McDash Flash Blog

June 26.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2020. Beyond the balance sheet
model of banking: Implications for bank regulation and monetary policy. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3386/w25149, NBER Working Paper 25149, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Chakraborty,

I., Goldstein,

I., MacKinlay, A., 2018. Housing Price Booms and

Crowding-Out Effects in Bank Lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (7), 2806–2853.
Cherry, S.F., Jiang, E.X., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2021. Government and
Private Household Debt Relief during COVID-19. NBER Working Papers 28357,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cherry, S., Jiang, E., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2022. Shadow bank distress and
household debt relief: Evidence from the cares act. In: AEA Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 112, pp. 509–515.

Chetty, R., 2008. Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance.

J. Polit. Econ. 116 (2), 173–234.

Cohn, J.B., Liu, Z., Wardlaw, M.I., 2022. Count (and count-like) data in finance. J.

Financ. Econ. 146 (2), 529–551.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2021a. COVID-19 prioritized assessments,

special edition. Supervisory Highlights 23.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2021b. Mortgage forbearance issues described

in consumer complaints. Complaint Bulletin, April.

Correia, S., Guimarães, P., Zylkin, T., 2020. Fast Poisson estimation with

high-dimensional fixed effects. Stata J. 20 (1), 95–115.

Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2020a. Fha’s COVID-19 loss mitigation

options. Mortgagee Letter 2020-22, July 8.

Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2020b. HUD issues new CARES act
mortgage payment relief for FHA single family homeowners. Press Release, April
1.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Keys, B., Piskorski, T., Ramcharan, R., Seru, A., Yao, V.,
2017. Monetary policy pass-through: Mortgage rates, household consumption, and
voluntary deleveraging. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (11), 3550–3588.

Fannie Mae, 2020. Servicing Guide: Section D2-3.2-01: Forbearance Plan (09/09/2020).

Tech. Rep. September 9.

Federal Housing Finance Agency, 2020. FHFA announces payment deferral as new
repayment option for homeowners in COVID-19 forbearance plans. News release,
May 13.

Federal Housing Finance Agency, 2021. FHFA extends COVID-19 forbearance period

and foreclosure and reo eviction moratoriums. Press release, February 25.

Freddie Mac, 2020. Freddie mac: Lump sum repayment is not required in forbearance.

Homeownership blog, April 16.

Fuster, A., Hizmo, A., Lambie-Hanson, L., Vickery, J., Willen, P., 2023. How Resilient is
Mortgage Credit Supply? Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic. Working Paper.
Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Vickery, J., 2021. Does CFPB Oversight Crimp Credit?. CEPR

Discussion Paper 15681.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103873. This material consists
of an internet appendix with additional empirical results and robustness
checks.

Fuster, A., Willen, P.S., 2017. Payment size, negative equity, and mortgage default.

Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 9 (4), 167–191.

Ganong, P., Noel, P., 2020. Liquidity versus wealth in household debt obligations:
Evidence from housing policy in the great recession. Amer. Econ. Rev. 110 (10),
3100–3138.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387314Y.S. Kim et al.

Gerardi, K., Goette, L., Meier, S., 2013. Numerical ability predicts mortgage default.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110 (28), 11267–11271.

Gete, P., Reher, M., 2020. Mortgage Securitization and Shadow Bank Lending. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 34 (5), 2236–2274.

Ginnie Mae, 2020. Availability of pass-through assistance program for participants in
ginnie mae’s single-family MBS program. All Participants Memo APM 20-03.
Granja, J., Makridis, C., Yannelis, C., Zwick, E., 2020. Did the Paycheck Protection
Program Hit the Target?. NBER Working Paper 27095, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Gross, D.B., Souleles, N.S., 2002. Do liquidity constraints and interest rates matter for
consumer behavior? Evidence from credit card data. Q. J. Econ. 117 (1), 149–185.
Huber, K., 2021. Are bigger banks better? Firm-level evidence from Germany. J. Polit.

Econ. 129 (7), 2023–2066.

Indarte, S., 2023. Moral hazard versus liquidity in household bankruptcy. J. Finance

78 (5), 2421–2464.

Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency

costs and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3 (4), 305–360.

Jiang, E., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2020. Banking without deposits: Evidence
from shadow bank call reports. http://dx.doi.org/10.3386/w26903, Working Paper
26903, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kim, Y.S., Laufer, S.M., Pence, K., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2018. Liquidity Crises in

the Mortgage Market. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 49 (1 (Spring)), 347–428.

Mayer, C., Morrison, E., Piskorski, T., Gupta, A., 2014. Mortgage modification and
strategic behavior: Evidence from a legal settlement with countrywide. Amer. Econ.
Rev. 104 (9), 2830–2857.

Mayock, T., Shi, L., 2022. Adverse selection in the market for mortgage servicing rights.

J. Hous. Econ. 58, 101858.

Mortgage Bankers Association, 2020. Share of mortgage loans in forbearance increases

to 8.55%. Press Release June 15.

Pence, K., 2022. Liquidity in the mortgage market: How does the COVID-19 crisis
compare with the global financial crisis? Real Estate Econ. 50 (6), 1405–1424.
Rose, N.L., 1990. Profitability and Product Quality: Economic Determinants of Airline

Safety Performance. J. Polit. Econ. 98 (5), 944–964.

Scharlemann, T.C., Shore, S.H., 2016. The Effect of Negative Equity on Mortgage
Default: Evidence From HAMP’s Principal Reduction Alternative. Rev. Financ. Stud.
29 (10), 2850–2883.

Scharlemann, T.C., Shore, S.H., 2022. The effect of changing mortgage payments on
default and prepayment: Evidence from HAMP resets. Real Estate Econ. 50 (5),
1231–1256.

Telyukova, I.A., 2013. Household Need for Liquidity and the Credit Card Debt Puzzle.

Rev. Econ. Stud. 80 (3), 1148–1177.

The White House, 2021. Fact sheet: Biden administration announces extension of
COVID-19 forbearance and foreclosure protections for homeowners. Release,
February 16.

Kruger, S., 2018. The effect of mortgage securitization on foreclosure and modification.

Tozer, T., 2019. A primer and perspective on ginnie mae. Milken Institute Discussion

J. Financ. Econ. 129 (3), 586–607.

Paper.

Kugler, M., Verhoogen, E., 2011. Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality. Rev. Econ.

Wall Street Journal, 2020. Struggling Borrowers Want To Pause Their Mortgage

Stud. 79 (1), 307–339.

Lambie-Hanson, L., Vickery, J., Akana, T., 2021. Recent Data on Mortgage Forbearance:
Borrower Uptake and Understanding of Lender Accommodations. In: Research Brief.
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Payments. It Hasn’t Been Easy. Tech. Rep. April 16.

Wang, J., Yang, J., Iverson, B.C., Kluender, R., 2020. Bankruptcy and the COVID-19

crisis. Available at SSRN 3690398.

Zeldes, S.P., 1989. Consumption and liquidity constraints: An empirical investigation.

Lee, S.C., Maghzian, O., 2023. Household Liquidity and Macroeconomic Stabilization:

J. Polit. Econ. 97 (2), 305–346.

Evidence from Mortgage Forbearance. Working Paper, Harvard University.

Li, L., Strahan, P.E., Zhang, S., 2020. Banks as Lenders of First Resort: Evidence from

the COVID-19 Crisis. Rev. Corp. Finance Stud. 9 (3), 472–500.

Loewenstein, L., 2021. Why wasn’t

there a nonbank mortgage servicer liquidity

crisis? Econ. Comment. (2021–15).

Matsa, D.A., 2011. Running on empty? Financial leverage and product quality in the

supermarket industry. Am. Econ. J. Microecon. 3 (1), 137–173.

Zhao, C., Farrell, D., Greig, F., 2020. Did Mortgage Forbearance Reach the Right
Homeowners? Income and Liquid Assets Trends for Homeowners during the
COVID-19 Pandemic. Policy Brief, J.P. Morgan Chase Institute.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387315