Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Refinancing cross-subsidies in the mortgage market
Jack Fisher a,1, Alessandro Gavazza b,c,1, Lu Liu d,1, Tarun Ramadorai e,c,∗,1, Jagdish Tripathy f,1
a Harvard Business School, United States
b London School of Economics, United Kingdom
c CEPR, United Kingdom
d The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, United States
e Imperial College London, United Kingdom
f Bank of England, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

In household finance markets, inactive households can implicitly cross-subsidize active households who
promptly respond to financial incentives. We assess the magnitude and distribution of cross-subsidies in the
mortgage market. To do so, we build a structural model of household mortgage refinancing and estimate
it on rich administrative data covering the stock of outstanding mortgages in the UK. We estimate sizeable
cross-subsidies that flow from relatively poorer households and those located in less-wealthy areas towards
richer households and those located in wealthier areas. Our work highlights how the design of household
finance markets can contribute to wealth inequality.

Dataset link: Refinancing Cross-Subsidies Repos
itory (Original data)

JEL classification:
G21
G50
N20
R21
R31
L51

Keywords:
Mortgages
Refinancing
Cross-subsidies
Wealth inequality
Household inaction and inertia
Household finance

1. Introduction

In retail financial markets, households often face complex contracts
that require prompt action in response to changing financial incentives.
Households who do not swiftly respond to these incentives can unwit-
tingly provide revenues to financial firms. Conversely, such products
can be beneficial to more sophisticated customers who are quicker to
take appropriate action. This can result in regressive cross-subsidies in
financial markets that flow from less sophisticated customers, who are
often poorer and less educated, to those who are more sophisticated,
wealthy, or educated. In this way, the design of household finance
products can be a powerful contributor to wealth inequality.

Our paper provides a new approach to quantify such household
finance cross-subsidies and to identify how they are distributed across
the population. We apply the method in the setting of residential mort-
gage refinancing. Mortgages are the largest household liability (Camp-
bell, 2006; Badarinza et al., 2016; Goetzmann et al., 2021), but despite
their importance in their budgets, many households do not appro-
priately manage this debt. A crucial determinant of sound mortgage
management is timely refinancing in response to financial incentives,
and evidence has built up that lower-income and less-educated house-
holds fall short on this dimension (Agarwal et al., 2016; Keys et al.,
2016; Andersen et al., 2020; Byrne et al., 2023).

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

jfisher@hbs.edu (J. Fisher), a.gavazza@lse.ac.uk (A. Gavazza), lliu1@wharton.upenn.edu (L. Liu), t.ramadorai@imperial.ac.uk

(T. Ramadorai), jagdish.tripathy@bankofengland.co.uk (J. Tripathy).

1 Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, an anonymous referee, and Steffen Andersen, Elliot Anenberg, Nuno Clara, Mikhail Golosov,
Gregor Matvos, Pascal Noel, Otto Toivanen, and numerous seminar and workshop participants for useful comments and discussions. Alessandro Gavazza gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (under Consolidator Grant Agreement No. 771004). Any views expressed in this article are
not meant to represent the views of the Bank of England, members of its Financial or Monetary Policy Committee, or the Financial Conduct Authority. This work
was supported in part through the NYU IT High Performance Computing resources, services, and staff expertise. All errors are our own.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103876
Received 12 July 2023; Received in revised form 27 May 2024; Accepted 27 May 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)103876Availableonline4June20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NClicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).J. Fisher et al.

We assess the magnitude of these cross-subsidies in the UK, which
is an environment uniquely suited to this purpose. Crucially, as in
many other countries, the dominant UK mortgage form is a ‘‘dual-
rate’’ mortgage contract.2 At origination, borrowers fix their mortgage
rate for a short initial period at a low ‘‘discounted rate’’. To fully
take advantage of such contracts, it is imperative to swiftly refinance
when the initial fixation period ends, to avoid being rolled on to a
significantly more expensive ‘‘reset rate’’.3 Households who fail to do
so pay these higher reset rates, and these higher payments benefit those
who quickly refinance back into lower discounted rates.

Our strategy to uncover cross-subsidies in this market addresses a
range of empirical and conceptual challenges. We set out to measure
the difference between the total costs and benefits of a mortgage in
the current dual-rate regime versus that in a single-rate counterfactual.
This requires accounting for how different mortgage contracts affect
decisions to participate in homeownership, mortgage payments, and
any associated tangible or psychological costs incurred for contract
management. To do so, we pursue a structural approach – rather than
a reduced-form approach such as a counterfactual comparison based
solely on observational data – for at least three reasons. First, the deci-
sion of whether or not to refinance is driven by both financial incentives
(i.e., it is less beneficial to refinance mortgages with low outstanding
balances or short remaining time to maturity), as well as tangible and
psychological costs attached to refinancing. A reduced-form approach
cannot separate the contribution of these different drivers to observed
refinancing behavior, which can lead to very different conclusions
about both the level and distribution of welfare under alternative
mortgage contracts. Second, loan demand and optimal mortgage size
may also change as households re-optimize when faced with alternative
mortgage contracts. For richer predictions of such responses, we need
to model household valuations for housing alongside mortgage costs
and benefits. Third, unlike reduced-form approaches, structural models
are well suited to evaluating non-marginal counterfactuals, such as a
change in mortgage contract structure. Practically, we can evaluate
households’ potentially non-linear responses to changes in incentives
in the single-rate counterfactual across a range of plausible alternative
interest rates.

The first step of our approach is therefore to build and estimate the
structural parameters of a model of household refinancing by matching
a broad set of moments from high-quality administrative data on the
entire stock of mortgages in the UK. To address the conceptual chal-
lenges outlined above, we model households as heterogeneous along
two dimensions. The first dimension is households’ valuation for owned
housing (we model renting as an outside option), which allows us to
match the loan size distribution in the stock of outstanding mortgages.
The second dimension is the costs that households face at the point of
refinancing. To imbue the exercise with greater realism, we model these
costs as comprised of both a persistent component, as well as temporary
fluctuations or shocks around this persistent component. Households in
the model optimize subject to these costs, and thus this setup allows us
to capture household inertia and inattention to beneficial refinancing
opportunities through a realized high refinancing cost shock in any
given period. Moreover, at the point of deciding whether to buy a
house (and, if they do so decide, their mortgage size), households have
only noisy information about their future costs of promptly refinancing,
thereby capturing potentially imperfect ‘‘self-knowledge’’.

Households face a dual-rate structure in the model, and all house-
holds are initially on the discounted rate. When the initial fixation
period ends, households choose to refinance when the benefits of re-
financing, driven mainly by the difference between the discounted and

the reset rates and loan size, outweigh the costs of refinancing whose
structure is described above. Larger loans are therefore more likely to
pay discounted rates: in the cross-section, these loans correspond to
households with a greater valuation for housing; in the time-series,
these loans correspond to households who recently originated their
mortgages.

The model makes it easy to aggregate loans, thus generating in-
tuitive expressions for aggregate mortgage loan balances on the dis-
counted rate and on the reset rate. This allows us to estimate the
model’s parameters to match a rich set of moments in granular and
comprehensive data from the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)
which track the stock of all outstanding UK mortgage loans issued by
all regulated financial institutions in the country at a semi-annual fre-
quency between 2015H1 and 2017H2.4 The granular nature of the data
means that we observe household-level mortgage refinancing behavior;
and the comprehensive coverage of the entire mortgage stock allows us
to compute cross-subsidies.

The second step in our approach is to then use the estimates of the
structural parameters of our model to compare household outcomes in
the status quo with outcomes under a counterfactual scenario. In this
counterfactual, borrowers face a simpler contract that pays a single
rate until mortgage maturity, with no refinancing required. We conduct
these counterfactual comparisons for households across the income
distribution and regions of the UK. This procedure allows us to make
the invisible cross-subsidies in the current system visible, and to assess
their distribution across the population. The approach can be more
widely applied to uncover and analyze cross-subsidies in other market
settings.

Our analysis mainly focuses on the stock in 2015H1, when the total
stock of household mortgage debt in our sample equals £470 billion.
The majority of this stock (65 percent) pays the discounted rate, but the
remaining 35 percent pays the reset rate, with a weighted average rate
spread of 52 basis points (bps). Hence, there is an appreciable spread
between reset rates and discounted rates, and many households pay
these different rates.

We estimate the model parameters assuming that the market is
in steady state and match the data well. Our estimates imply that
average refinancing costs equal £4042 among mortgage borrowers, with
a standard deviation equal to £15, 102; we later discuss how these
money-metric estimates relate to the broader literature on mortgage
refinancing.

In the counterfactual single-rate economy, households adjust both
their individual loan sizes (intensive margin) as well as their partic-
ipation in the housing and mortgage markets (extensive margin), in
response to the different paths of mortgage rates and to the elimination
of refinancing costs. Assuming that the interest rate in the single-rate
economy equals the weighted average rate in our sample, aggregate
mortgage debt increases by 3.55 percent relative to that in the baseline
dual-rate economy.5 High-refinancing-cost households mostly account
for the increase in aggregate debt; as they no longer pay either the
punitive reset rate or refinancing costs, they are more likely to enter
the market, raising the total number of mortgages in the counterfactual
economy. However, the mean initial loan balance falls in the coun-
terfactual economy by 2.85 percent of the baseline average loan size,
because the composition of borrowers changes: marginal households
who enter the mortgage market in the single-rate economy have smaller
loan sizes than inframarginal households whose participation does not
change.

The richer versions of the model, in which we allow all parame-
ters to vary separately for 12 income groups as well as for different

2 Such dual-rate contracts are also ubiquitous in other retail markets,
including in credit cards, and cellphone and electricity plans (Armstrong and
Vickers, 2012).

4 In what follows, we denote the first and second observations in each year

of our sample by H1 and H2 respectively to denote ‘‘half-years’’.

3 This feature of the UK mortgage market has prompted prominent calls for

5 As we later discuss, the interest rate elasticity of mortgage loans in our

reform which highlight the implicit cross-subsidy (Miles, 2004).

setup is comparable to other estimates in the literature.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038762J. Fisher et al.

geographical regions in the UK, feature considerable differences in re-
financing propensities across income groups and regions. These differ-
ences presage significant variation across both the income distribution
and regions in cross-subsidies that are paid and received. Most notably,
we find clear evidence that higher-income households (and households
in the richer South-West of the UK) would pay higher rates under the
single-rate structure, and lower-income households (and households in
the relatively poorer North-East and North-West of the UK) would pay
lower mortgage rates under the counterfactual single-rate scenario than
they do in the dual-rate economy.

The counterfactual single-rate economy also displays striking dif-
ferences across groups in their endogenous adjustments to mortgage
takeup and mortgage sizes. Average mortgage debt shrinks for higher-
income groups and wealthier regions in response to the counterfactual
single rate, since they no longer have access to the discounted rate.
In contrast, the counterfactual single-interest rate economy induces
lower-income households to enter the mortgage market because they
expect to pay lower rates and incur no refinancing costs. This is
evident in increases in the home-ownership rate, mainly driven by low-
income households. This ‘‘democratization’’ of mortgage takeup under
the counterfactual is another important indicator of the regressive
effect of cross-subsidies in the dual-rate economy.

Finally, on aggregate, consumer surplus increases by 4.14 percent
in the single-rate economy relative to the dual-rate economy, with
larger surplus increases among low-income households, who benefit
from lower interest rates and increased participation, and smaller in-
creases among high-income households, who nonetheless benefit from
the elimination of high refinancing costs. This makes our findings quite
nuanced: Low-income households are penalized in the status quo dual-
rate economy largely because they have smaller loan balances and
thus lower incentives to refinance, whereas high-income households
refinance more frequently due to greater loan balances, although they
actually incur higher refinancing costs from doing so. On net, our
counterfactual suggests that the removal of refinancing costs more than
compensates high-income households for the increase in paid rates and
associated reductions in loan balances. Overall, this leads to a positive
increase in consumer surplus across all household groups.

The remainder of this section discusses related literature. Section 2
describes the administrative data and the UK institutional setting.
Section 3 lays out the model and describes the computation of cross-
subsidies. Section 4 discusses parameter estimation and model fit. Sec-
tion 5 discusses counterfactual analysis and the flow of cross-subsidies
across income groups and regions. Section 6 concludes. The Appendices
include additional analyses.

1.1. Related literature

Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, our
work complements many empirical papers that document switching
costs, inertia, and inattention in insurance and household finance mar-
kets, such as health insurance (e.g., Handel, 2013), car insurance (e.g.,
Honka, 2014), retirement plans (e.g., Luco, 2019; Illanes, 2016), credit
cards (e.g., Ausubel, 1991; Stango and Zinman, 2016; Nelson, 2022),
pension contributions (e.g., Choi et al., 2002), and portfolio rebalanc-
ing (e.g., Brunnermeier and Nagel, 2008), among others.6 However,
none of these papers focuses on documenting regressive cross-subsidies,
though this possibility has been raised in theory (e.g., Gabaix and
Laibson, 2006; Armstrong and Vickers, 2012).

The papers that document inaction and frictions in mortgage refi-
nancing (e.g., Agarwal et al., 2016; Keys et al., 2016; Scharfstein and

6 Farrell and Klemperer (2007) present a survey of the literature on
switching costs, with a theoretical focus; Heidhues and Kőszegi (2018) survey
the literature on behavioral industrial organization; and Gavazza and Lizzeri
(2021) the literature on markets with frictions.

Sunderam, 2016; DeFusco and Mondragon, 2020; Byrne et al., 2023;
Berger et al., 2023) are more directly related to our work. We advance
this literature, developing a novel framework that relies on counter-
factual analysis to quantify the magnitudes of cross-subsidies across
households arising from refinancing. This approach differs from Ander-
sen et al. (2020), who model a fixed refinancing cost (‘‘state-dependent
inaction’’), but with intervals of ‘‘time-dependent inaction’’ where refi-
nancing is not possible, using a periodic ‘‘Calvo’’ shock to borrowers,
and Berger et al. (2021), who adopt a similar approach in their analysis
of US refinancing behavior. These approaches imply that the costs of
refinancing are always higher than the benefits during periods of time-
dependent inaction, but do not quantify these costs. In contrast, our
model features a household-specific fixed refinancing cost with a time-
varying shock; thus our estimation recovers the full distribution of
the costs of inaction across households and over time. Apart from the
differences in setting, this different modeling approach explains why
the average refinancing costs that we estimate are higher than those
in Andersen et al. (2020) and Berger et al. (2021).7

Complementary work by Zhang (2022) and Berger et al. (2023)
studies the distributional effects of refinancing frictions in the US. Using
a lifecycle model, Zhang (2022) highlights that US borrowers that do
not pay upfront ‘‘points’’ (i.e., closing costs) to reduce mortgage rates
are worst affected under the status quo. Intuitively, such borrowers pay
higher interest rates for longer, thereby contributing more to lender
revenues. Berger et al. (2023) also study the US market, and endoge-
nize mortgage rates under simplifying assumptions on the behavior of
mortgage borrowers and investors. They consider counterfactuals that
include alternative contracts as well as policies that reduce borrowers’
frictions. In contrast with these papers, our paper features a more
detailed model of household inaction alongside a more stripped-down
supply side. Moreover, we document the redistributive consequences of
cross-subsidies across income groups and regions. Finally, our focus on
the UK market reduces confounds arising from unobservable moving
propensities, and enables a simple calculation of refinancing inaction
based on the dual-rate structure. The UK setting bears similarities with
many mortgage markets outside of the US, making our work also
broadly applicable to such markets.

Second, our paper is connected to a growing body of work on
the design of mortgage markets around the world (Campbell, 2013;
Piskorski and Seru, 2018). For example, several mortgage markets
also feature fixed rates for a shorter interval than the maturity of the
mortgage. Allen and Li (2020) study borrower refinancing and lender
pricing in the Canadian mortgage market; similarly, Thiel (2021) stud-
ies a ban on price discrimination between new and existing customers
in the Dutch mortgage market. We focus on implicit cross-subsidies
across borrowers in the cross-section, whereas Allen and Li (2020)
and Thiel (2021) focus on intertemporal price discrimination within
borrowers.8

Finally, our structural model provides a money-metric assessment of
cross-subsidies in an important household finance market, and shows
that these cross-subsidies are regressive. This showcases how the de-
sign of the financial system can contribute to inequality, connecting
our work to the growing literature on wealth inequality (Alvaredo
et al., 2017; Benhabib and Bisin, 2018; Fagereng et al., 2020; Hubmer
et al., 2020) and, more specifically, to that on inequality in financial

7 Andersen et al. (2020) estimate an average total psychological plus fixed
refinancing cost of £1,852 in the Danish mortgage market. Berger et al. (2021)
estimate an average refinancing cost of $1,934 in the US mortgage market.
These are lower than our estimate of the average cost across both refinancing
and non-refinancing borrowers, which equals £4042.

8 Our paper also contributes to the growing literature on UK mortgage mar-
kets, including Benetton (2021), Robles-Garcia (2022), Cloyne et al. (2019),
Best et al. (2020), Belgibayeva et al. (2020), Benetton et al. (2023), Liu (2022).
Most of these studies focus on the flow of newly originated mortgages, whereas
we focus on the stock of mortgages.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038763J. Fisher et al.

wealth (Campbell et al., 2019; Greenwald et al., 2021). We also show
that cross-subsidies vary across the UK, demonstrating that regional
redistribution can occur directly as a result of differential efficiency in
the use of financial products, a novel channel for such redistribution in
mortgage markets (Hurst et al., 2016; Beraja et al., 2019).

2. Institutional setting and data moments

This section describes the UK dual-rate mortgage rate environment,
and introduces the data and targeted data moments that we match
when estimating the structural model.

2.1. UK mortgage market: Institutional features

Several features of the UK mortgage market make it ideal for our
analysis. First, this market features posted prices at the national level,
with no variation across regions, as Cloyne et al. (2019), Benetton
(2021), Robles-Garcia (2022), and Benetton et al. (2023) document,
among others. Borrower-specific pricing, common in US mortgage mar-
kets, is virtually non-existent in the UK.

Second (and crucial for our purposes), the vast majority of UK
mortgages are issued with discounted interest rates that are fixed for a
set time period, usually between one and five years (the modal fixation
period is two years), depending on the contract chosen by the borrower.
During the discounted period, households typically incur substantial
prepayment penalties (between 3–5 percent of the loan balance), which
means that households typically refinance after the end of the fixed
period (Cloyne et al., 2019; Belgibayeva et al., 2020). At the end
of the discounted period, the mortgage rate automatically rolls over
into a higher reset rate known as the ‘‘standard variable rate’’, unless
borrowers refinance the mortgage into another discounted rate (for a
detailed treatment of the characteristics of the UK mortgage market see
Miles, 2004).9

This ‘‘dual-rate’’ structure is a feature of many mortgage systems,
including Canada, Australia, India, Ireland, Germany, and Spain, mean-
ing that our study is more broadly applicable around the world.10
We do not study the origins of this rate structure, which likely re-
flects mortgage lenders’ funding structures and price-discrimination
strategies between active and inactive borrowers (Ellison, 2005; Gabaix
and Laibson, 2006; DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006), and we focus
instead on its implications for borrowers’ refinancing. That said, in
Appendix D, we follow and extend the analysis of Cloyne et al. (2019),
who perform a thorough comparison between borrowers who pay the
discounted and the reset rates, suggesting that the dual-rate structure
does not seem designed for lenders to screen borrowers based on their
default risk.11

This dual-rate contract structure provides strong incentives for
households to refinance at the expiration of the fixation period. UK
households are free to take advantage of these incentives to refinance,
as there are no further credit checks when households refinance with
their existing lender, and any upfront fees can be rolled into the loan
balance, meaning that liquidity constraints do not inhibit refinanc-
ing (Best et al., 2020). In Appendix F, we also rule out the possibility

9 There is a third type of interest rate known as a tracker rate, paid on
around 15 percent of all mortgages outstanding, which is a floating rate
linked to the Bank of England base rate. We exclude such mortgages from our
analysis because such mortgages are subject to rate fluctuations, and there are
rarely transitions from the rest and discounted rate category into this category.
Appendix A.1 reports further details.

10 Badarinza et al. (2018) provide information on mortgage interest-rate
fixation periods across a broad set of countries and show that many large
economies have similar average mortgage-rate fixation periods to the UK.

11 This pricing structure with a discount for new or active customers is
common in many other retail markets, including electricity, telecoms, and
magazines, in which default concerns play a negligible role.

that borrowers rationally stay on the reset rate to exploit the real option
of timing their refinancing to coincide with interest rate declines.

Third, UK mortgages are portable, meaning that households can
retain their existing mortgage contract when they move, subject to the
new collateral being verified.12 This feature stands in contrast with
the US, where the lack of portability means that moving probabilities
are a more important driver of prepayment/refinancing and contract
choice (Stanton, 1995; Stanton and Wallace, 1998; Zhang, 2022).

2.2. Dataset description

Our primary data source is the FCA, which comprehensively tracks
the stock of outstanding mortgage loans issued by all regulated finan-
cial institutions in the UK. The specific FCA dataset that we use is
the Product Sales Database 007 (henceforth PSD007), which reports
information about the stock of mortgage loans between June 2015
(henceforth 2015H1), and December 2017 (2017H2) at a semi-annual
frequency.13

At each reporting date, PSD007 records the original loan amount,
outstanding balance, original loan term, remaining term to maturity,
current interest rate, current monthly payment, and performance status
(i.e., whether the loan is in arrears and if so, for how long this has been
the case) for each outstanding mortgage. The database also includes
information on the property location at the most granular level in the
UK (6-digit postcode), and borrower characteristics such as date of
birth and the opening date for the bank account associated with the
mortgage. Table A.1 in Appendix 2 provides more detailed descriptions
of the main variables from the PSD007 dataset used in this paper.

The PSD007 dataset does not include information on borrower
incomes. We therefore merge borrowers in the stock data with com-
prehensive loan-level data on borrower characteristics, including their
income, shared with lenders at the time of loan origination. We also
measure the current loan-to-value (LTV) ratio on each outstanding loan
following a common approach in the literature, dividing the outstand-
ing loan balance by the scaled house price at mortgage origination,
using Local Authority district-level house price indices. Appendix A.2
provides details of the procedure used to merge borrower and house
characteristics at loan origination to our stock data.

We further complement the PSD007 dataset with data on UK home-
ownership rates sourced from the Office for National Statistics (ONS)
dataset Dwelling stock by tenure. These homeownership data allow us
to measure households’ extensive margin decision of whether to buy a
house and take a mortgage, or rent.

Using rich data on the stock of mortgages offers several advantages
over using the flow of originations. Notably, the stock allows us to
accurately capture refinancing behavior across all mortgage maturities,
including mortgages originated in the past. Moreover, the structural pa-
rameters of a model estimated using the stock of mortgages rather than
the flow depend less on changes in refinancing behavior or refinancing
waves over short periods of time. Finally, using the mortgage stock
facilitates computing average mortgage rates and aggregate lender
revenues, which proves useful in our counterfactual analyses.

12 Among other countries, Australia, Canada, and Germany share this

feature (Lea, 2010).

13 Regulated financial institutions in the UK are legally required to report
these details within 30 working days following the end of each calendar
half-year. The group of regulated financial institutions in the UK includes
deposit-taking institutions (including building societies), as well as some non-
bank financial institutions. Our sample focuses on the owner–occupier segment
of the mortgage borrowing population, and excludes ‘‘buy-to-let’’ mortgages
which are issued to landlords on rental properties.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038764J. Fisher et al.

2.3. Sample selection: Borrowers ineligible to refinance

One potential challenge to our empirical analysis and our cross-
subsidy calculations is to distinguish between households who can
refinance, but do not do so promptly, from households who are con-
strained and unable to take advantage of refinancing opportunities. To
address this potential confounding effect, we filter our data to remove
borrowers who are potentially ineligible for refinancing—i.e., borrow-
ers who are ‘‘involuntarily’’ on the reset rate, but who would potentially
like to switch if they were allowed to do so.

To identify these ineligible borrowers, we follow studies by the
FCA (Financial Conduct Authority, 2019, 2021) and a 2018 indus-
try agreement that unified and codified refinancing eligibility criteria
across 65 UK lenders, with a market share of around 95 percent. Passing
these eligibility criteria means that a mortgage borrower can refinance
into a new contract with their lender, without any affordability assess-
ment, meaning no additional credit or income checks.14 The criteria are
that the borrowers are first-charge owner–occupiers that are existing
borrowers of an active lender, up to date with their payments, with
a minimum remaining term of 2 years, and a minimum outstanding
balance of £10,000 (Financial Conduct Authority, 2019). We broaden
out these eligibility criteria to filter out borrowers potentially ineligible
for refinancing, under the assumption that the 2018 agreement ratified
pre-existing practice that was prevalent in the 2015H1 stock.

Table A.6 in Appendix A shows the exact proportion of loans that
are potentially ineligible for refinancing using these criteria as well as
broader definitions of ineligibility. Borrowers who have LTVs greater
than 95 percent comprise approximately 2 percent of the sample. These
borrowers may find it difficult to refinance, even though they are
strictly eligible under the industry agreement if they fulfill all the other
criteria. Borrowers with remaining loan balances smaller than £30,000
constitute approximately 6 percent of the total sample. And about 5
percent of loans are non-performing (in arrears, or under forbearance
or possession orders). Applying these filters together removes around
14 percent of the mortgage stock in 2015H1–2017H2.

We note here that we estimated our model on both unfiltered
and filtered samples. Filtering does not materially affect our main
qualitative results on the regressive nature of cross-subsidies, for two
main reasons. First, in the filtered sample the share of mortgage debt
paying the reset rate is still quite large, and lower-income borrowers
are more likely to pay the reset rate than higher-income borrowers.
Second, the largest fraction of excluded borrowers are those with small
loan balances, for whom refinancing benefits are small, because the
refinancing benefit is proportional to the loan balance. Appendix A.4
provides more information on these filtered borrowers.15

2.4. Mortgage stock and data moments

Our analysis focuses on the 2015H1 mortgage stock, which com-
prises 3.59 million mortgages of borrowers eligible to refinance and

for whom we have estimates of current income; 65 percent of these
mortgages pay discounted rates in this 2015H1 sample. In addition to
using cross-sectional moments from 2015H1, we are also able to track
mortgages across the reporting snapshots. We discuss below the key
features from the cross-sectional and panel dimensions of our data.16

Table 1 shows summary statistics for variables in the filtered 2015H1
sample, most of which serve as moments that we target when we
estimate our model. On average, the mean outstanding loan balances
on the discounted and reset rate equal £140,647 and £112,692, re-
spectively. The mean loan balance at origination across all loans is
£142,333 (the difference is attributable mainly to amortization over
time). This aggregates to a total stock of outstanding mortgage debt of
£470 billion.

Households pay a weighted average discounted rate of 320 bps,
and a weighted average reset rate of 372 bps, implying a difference
of 52 bps, which reflects the refinancing incentive.17 Mortgages on the
discounted rate have an average remaining term to maturity of 20.6
years, whereas mortgages on the reset rate have a remaining term of
16.8 years, consistent with the intuition that older loans with shorter
remaining terms typically have smaller loan balances, and so provide
less of an incentive to refinance back into the discounted rate. The
average remaining discounted period equals 2.1 years.

Table 1 also reveals considerable cross-sectional variation in these
variables, most notably in the outstanding loan balance and the re-
maining mortgage term. When the outstanding loan balance and/or the
remaining term are low, borrowers should be less likely to refinance
given the lower financial incentive from any interest rate reduction
associated with doing so. Furthermore, there is considerable overlap
between the distributions of these variables across rate types, which
suggests that substantial variation in underlying refinancing cost may
be needed to justify different behaviors observed even conditional on
a given loan balance and loan term. The difference in average loan
balances could be driven by both cross-sectional variation in the initial
loan balance, as well as time-series variation in the remaining term of
the loan, which we reflect in the model. Table 1 also shows that there
is substantial variation in the age of borrowers, which lines up with
variation in the remaining term of the loan, so we do not match this
dimension separately in the model.

Two additional statistics not reported in Table 1 constitute impor-
tant targets for our model. First, the ONS dwelling data report that 63
percent of households are homeowners in 2015. Second, rate types are
highly persistent.

The panel dimension of our data allows us to track mortgages
over time and highlight both within- and across-borrower variation
in refinancing patterns. Figure B.2 in Appendix B shows the transi-
tion probabilities between discounted and reset rates for our sample.
Households on a reset or discounted rate are much more likely to
stay on the same rate type over the next 24 months than to switch—
i.e., 76.2 percent of 2015H1 borrowers pay the same rate type in

14 The UK is somewhere between the US and Denmark in this respect. In the
US, refinancing triggers a credit check (Keys et al., 2016), whereas in Denmark,
even delinquent borrowers are able to refinance as long as there is no cash
out (Andersen et al., 2020). The UK system does not trigger a credit check at
the point of refinancing as long as the borrower satisfies the eligibility criteria.
15 A 2018 FCA report of the mortgage market (Financial Conduct Authority,
2019) studied 2 million reset rate mortgages using the same data that we
employ and concluded that only approximately 30,000 of these mortgages
were unable to switch despite being up to date with payments. The report
finds that two-thirds of these mortgages were associated with an inactive,
failed lender (e.g., Northern Rock, famously subject to a run during the
financial crisis); and the remainder were either interest-only mortgages that
were subject to changes in lending standards following the financial crisis,
or in negative home equity. We expect that our filters catch many of these
mortgages.

16 The main statistics of the mortgage stock are quite stable between 2015H1
and 2017H2, consistent with the idea that short-run changes have small effects
on the stock of long-term debt contracts. Appendix B describes the evolution
of the mortgage stock between 2015H1 and 2017H2, which exhibits two main
patterns: (1) the fraction of mortgage debt paying the reset rate decreases by
2017H2, and (2) the spread between the average reset rate and the discounted
rate increases over the same period. While the first pattern should decrease the
magnitude of cross-subsidies across borrowers, the second one should increase
them, with a small net effect.

17 Our dataset includes mortgages by two large lenders who offered to cap
reset rates at 250 bps for mortgages issued up to and during the 2007–09
financial crisis. Excluding these lenders (around 900k observations) pushes
up the average rate for reset rate mortgages substantially (with no change in
the average rate for discounted mortgages), increasing the spread to 110 bps.
We have kept mortgages by these two large lenders in our sample to provide
conservative cross-subsidy estimates.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038765J. Fisher et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics for the mortgage stock in 2015H1.

Current Loan Balance, Discounted Rate (£)
Current Loan Balance, Reset Rate (£)
Interest Rate, Discounted (%)
Interest Rate, Reset (%)
Original Loan Balance (£)
Original Term (Years)
Remaining Term, Discounted Rate (Years)
Remaining Term, Reset Rate (Years)
Remaining Discounted Period (Years)
Borrower Age (Years)

Observations

Mean

140,647
112,692
3.20
3.72
142,333
23.32
20.57
16.84
2.11
41.97

3,590,228

SD

105,062
79,684
0.95
0.98
100,661
7.07
7.73
6.95
1.52
10.02

Median

114,953
93,916
3.14
3.99
118,399
25.00
20.92
16.50
1.83
41.00

Notes: The table above shows summary statistics of mortgages from the stock data reported in 2015H1.
The sample includes mortgages in two categories, namely, those paying discounted interest rates, and those
paying the reset rate (‘‘Standard Variable Rate’’). The total sample comprises around 3.59 million mortgages,
of which 65 percent are discounted rate mortgages at this point in time. Table A.1 in Appendix A contains
a description of the underlying variables.

Table 2
Summary statistics for the mortgage stock in 2015H1, by income quantiles.

Quantiles

0–10
10–20
20–30
30–40
40–50
50–60
60–70
70–80
80–85
85–90
90–95
95–100

Income
(£)

24,604
30,504
35,631
40,701
46,198
52,687
60,974
73,154
82,349
96,616
126,236
214,486

Homeowners
(%)

0.50
0.61
0.64
0.68
0.72
0.75
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.91
0.96

Balance
(£)

61,522
76,141
86,894
96,752
107,326
118,920
132,885
152,206
173,235
195,018
232,354
351,530

Discounted
(%)

0.65
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.65
0.66
0.66
0.67
0.68
0.69

Notes: The table above shows summary statistics of mortgages from the stock data
reported in 2015H1, split by income quantiles of borrowers. Table A.1 in Appendix A
contains a description of the underlying variables.

2017H1. However, some borrowers do switch over time. Switches from
the lower discounted to the higher reset rate may reflect inattention
and inertia, or more generally, refinancing costs, while refinancing
benefits decline as the loans amortize. Against this backdrop, switches
from the reset to the discounted rate suggest that these costs vary
over time within households. In Appendix Figure B.3, the propensity
to switch from reset to discounted rates changes non-monotonically
with income, suggesting that refinancing costs are higher for higher-
income borrowers. Taken together, these switching patterns suggest
that a combination of household-specific fixed refinancing costs and
time-varying stochastic shocks may capture the high persistence of rate
types, as well as the occasional switches across rate types over time.

Table 2 shows summary statistics across quantiles of the income
distribution of borrowers; this is the main dimension along which we
later evaluate cross-subsidies. The third column of the table shows
that the homeownership rate rises monotonically with the level of
income—it equals 50 percent in the lowest-income group and attains 96
percent in the highest-income group. The remaining columns refer to
borrowers. Their loan balance increases with their income, as expected.
More importantly, the share of mortgages on the discounted rate (fifth
column) also tends to increase with borrower income. These patterns
document that lower-income borrowers are less likely to refinance
than higher-income borrowers, hinting at the likely direction of cross-
subsidies. Table C.1 in Appendix C provides a similar table across UK
regions, confirming that borrowers in higher-income regions are more
likely to pay discounted rates than those in lower-income regions.

In Appendix D, we look for empirical evidence on the two main
reasons that could explain why higher-income households are more
likely to refinance and pay the discounted rate than lower-income

households, namely: (1) higher-income borrowers tend to have higher
loan balances, which increases the benefit of refinancing, and (2)
higher-income borrowers could have lower unobserved refinancing
costs.

More specifically, Table D.1 provides a descriptive analysis of the
observables associated with prompt refinancing behavior. As expected,
higher-income borrowers with larger loan balances are more likely
to refinance promptly. However, emphasizing the complexity of this
issue, Table D.2 shows that in the stock of mortgages, for loans with
comparable sizes, borrowers paying the reset rates tend to have larger
incomes. This last observation hints at the possibility that higher-
income borrowers pay higher costs to refinance. Taken together, these
stylized facts further motivate the need to carefully model variation in
both the benefits and costs of refinancing. This is to ensure that we
correctly estimate cross-subsidies resulting from refinancing behavior
across income groups.

Overall, the summary statistics reported in Tables 1 and 2 document
that the UK mortgage market comprises a mix of borrowers paying
discounted rates and reset rates. While mortgages on discounted rates
constitute the main share, a large fraction of the outstanding mortgage
stock (35 percent of all loans) pays the reset rate, at an average
spread of 52 bps over the discounted rate. In the next Section, we
develop a model that we map to these data features in our structural
estimation. We use the model to quantitatively assess the benefits and
costs of refinancing, as well as the magnitude of the cross-subsidies
that the dual-rate structure embeds and how they are distributed across
borrowers.

3. Model

We model a mortgage market in which a measure 𝑀 of households
enters in each period. When they enter the market, households choose
whether to buy a house with a mortgage or rent a property. If a
household 𝑖 chooses to buy, they pay a one-time origination cost 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 and
obtain per-period flow utility from their house equal to 𝑣𝑖ℎ𝛼
𝑖 −𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟, 𝑇 ),
where 𝑣𝑖 is household 𝑖’s per-period valuation for housing, ℎ𝑖 is the
size of the house that the household 𝑖 chooses, and 0 < 𝛼 < 1 is a
parameter governing the utility from housing. 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟, 𝑠) is the per-period
mortgage payment of a household with a mortgage with current loan
balance 𝑙𝑖, interest rate 𝑟, and remaining term 𝑠, which follows from
the amortization of the loan:

𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟, 𝑠) = 𝑙𝑖

𝑟(1 + 𝑟)𝑠
(1 + 𝑟)𝑠 − 1

.

(1)

Renting a property yields per-period utility ̄𝑢, which we assume is
common to all households and fixed over time. All households discount
the future at the common rate 𝛽.

Mortgages are long-term contracts for 𝑇 periods that pay a dis-
counted rate 𝑟𝑑 for an initial time interval 𝑇𝑑 , and subsequently pay

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038766J. Fisher et al.

a reset rate 𝑅 > 𝑟𝑑 following this interval, unless the household
refinances back into the discounted rate. To simplify and facilitate
evaluating counterfactuals, we take both rates as given constant values.
We also assume that 𝑇 ∕𝑇𝑑 is a (positive) integer and we normalize by
the length of this initial fixation period, treating it as a single time unit,
i.e., we assume 𝑇𝑑 = 1 and 𝑇 = 15, and all rates are computed over the
period 𝑇𝑑 . Moreover, we assume that households do not change their
loan balance (i.e., we rule out ‘‘cash-out refinancing’’), and rule out
maturity extensions (i.e., households in the model do not change the
maturity of their loan at the point of refinancing). Households receive
the loan amount at time 𝑡 = 0, but make the first repayment at 𝑡 = 1,
which is also the first refinancing period. Hence, the loan balance of a
mortgage with interest rate 𝑟 evolves over time as follows:

𝑙𝑖,𝑡+1(𝑟, 𝑙𝑖,𝑡) = 𝑙𝑖,𝑡(1 + 𝑟) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖,𝑡, 𝑟, 𝑠).

(2)

Mortgages are fully repaid after 𝑇 periods. Thus, each household makes
𝑇 payments over the life of the loan, the same as the duration of the
mortgage contract.

At time 𝑡 = 0, if they choose to buy a house, households choose
the size of their mortgage loan 𝑙𝑖,0 to finance their house ℎ𝑖, where
𝜔𝑖 = ℎ𝑖∕𝑙𝑖,0 denotes the inverse of the loan-to-value at origination.
In each subsequent period, households can refinance their mortgage
at the discounted rate 𝑟𝑑 ; to do so, they have to pay refinancing
costs equal to 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑘𝑖𝜀𝑖,𝑡, where 𝑘𝑖 is a persistent component of the
refinancing cost for household 𝑖 and 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 is a transitory component.
We assume that 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 is a non-negative random variable, independent
and identically distributed across households and over time, with mean
equal to one, with cumulative distribution function 𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑡) and density
𝑓 (𝜀𝑖,𝑡). Hence, each household’s average refinancing costs equal their
persistent component of refinancing costs, i.e., 𝐸(𝑘𝑖,𝑡) = 𝑘𝑖.

Households are heterogeneous in their per-period valuation for
housing 𝑣𝑖 (to capture the heterogeneity of initially chosen loan sizes
seen in the data) and in their persistent component 𝑘𝑖 of the cost of
refinancing (to capture the household heterogeneity in refinancing for a
given loan balance). We assume that, at the time of originating a mort-
gage, households perfectly know their valuation for owned housing 𝑣𝑖,
but only receive a signal of their persistent component 𝑘𝑖 of refinancing
costs and thus of their average refinancing costs over time. Specifically,
we assume that 𝑘𝑖 is correlated with the origination cost 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 according to
𝑘𝑖 = 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 𝜀𝑖,0, where 𝜀𝑖,0 is a non-negative random variable that is realized
after the origination of the mortgage and before the first refinancing
opportunity. Thus, the precision of the signal negatively depends on
the variance of 𝜀𝑖,0. We assume that 𝜀𝑖,0 is independent and identically
distributed across households, with mean equal to one, with cumulative
distribution function 𝐹0(𝜀𝑖,0) and density 𝑓0(𝜀𝑖,0).

Valuations and origination costs are distributed according to the
cumulative joint distribution function 𝐺𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ) with density 𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ).
Hence, the joint density of valuations and persistent refinancing costs
equals 𝑔(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑖) = ∫ +∞

𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑖∕𝜀𝑖,0)𝑓0(𝜀𝑖,0) 1
𝜀𝑖,0

𝑑𝜀𝑖,0.

0

Intuitively, in the model, households learn about their persistent
ongoing mortgage refinancing costs from the costs/hassle that they
experience during the process of mortgage origination. The variance
of 𝜀𝑖,0 determines how informative is the origination process about
ongoing mortgage refinancing costs. If this variance is zero, the initial
process of mortgage origination perfectly informs households about
the future persistent cost of refinancing. Alternatively, if this variance
is high, households learn little about the future process of refinanc-
ing from their experience during origination, since 𝑘𝑖 is likely quite
different from 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 .

We now solve the model to determine two household choices: (1)
whether or not to refinance at each opportunity; and (2) the optimal
size of the initial loan 𝑙∗

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ).

3.1. Optimal refinancing

Households refinance when their refinancing costs are below a
threshold that depends on their loan size. Hence, households with
larger loans are more likely to refinance. Similarly, because the loan is
amortizing, each household’s incentives to refinance decline over time
as the outstanding balance decreases; notably, some households (al-
most) always refinance because they have a low value of the persistent
component 𝑘𝑖 of the cost of refinancing.

We solve for the optimal refinancing path by backward induction.
Consider period 𝑇 , which is the last refinancing period, and households
with a beginning-of-period (i.e., before making a payment) loan bal-
ance 𝑙𝑖 (we suppress the subscript 𝑡 for simplicity). Such households
refinance if their refinancing cost 𝑘𝑖,𝑇 is below the benefit of refinancing
𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 ):
𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 ) =𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 1) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 1)

=𝑙𝑖(𝑅 − 𝑟𝑑 ).

The benefit of refinancing depends on the difference between the
interest rates 𝑅 − 𝑟𝑑 , as well as on the loan balance 𝑙𝑖.

We can define the expected (i.e., prior to the realization of the
transitory component 𝜀𝑖,𝑡) value function 𝑉𝑇 (𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖) of a household with
persistent cost 𝑘𝑖 as the expected payment:

𝑉𝑇 (𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖) = ∫

= ∫

0

0

+∞

min

(𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 1) + 𝑘𝑖𝜀𝑖,𝑇 , 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 1)

) 𝑑𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑇 )

𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 )∕𝑘𝑖

(𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 1) + 𝑘𝑖𝜀𝑖,𝑇

) 𝑑𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑇 )

+∞

+ ∫

𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 )∕𝑘𝑖

𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 1)𝑑𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑇 ),

(3)

where 𝑘∗
component 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 that determines household refinancing.18

𝑖 (𝑇 )∕𝑘𝑖 is the cutoff point in the distribution of the transitory

Similarly, in the previous period 𝑇 − 1, households’ expected value

function equals the discounted sum of expected future payments:

𝑉𝑇 −1(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖) = ∫

+∞

min

(𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 2) + 𝑘𝑖𝜀𝑖,𝑇 −1 + 𝛽𝑉𝑇

(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑟𝑑 ) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 2)

) , …

0
𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 2) + 𝛽𝑉𝑇
𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 −1)∕𝑘𝑖

(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑅) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 2)

)) 𝑑𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑇 −1)

= ∫

0
+ 𝛽𝑉𝑇
+∞

(𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 2) + 𝑘𝑖𝜀𝑖,𝑇 −1
(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑟𝑑 ) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 2)
(𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 2) + 𝛽𝑉𝑇

)) 𝑑𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑇 −1)+
(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑅) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 2)

)) 𝑑𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑇 −1),

∫

where

𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 −1)∕𝑘𝑖

𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 − 1) =𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 2) + 𝛽𝑉𝑇

− 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 2) − 𝛽𝑉𝑇

)
(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑅) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 2)

+
(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑟𝑑 ) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 2)

)

defines the monetary benefits of refinancing, such that households with
𝑖 (𝑇 − 1) do not.
𝑘𝑖,𝑡

≤ 𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑇 − 1) refinance, and households with 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 > 𝑘∗
In a generic period 𝑡, the expected value function equals:

𝑉𝑡(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖) = ∫

+∞

min

(𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 𝑇 − 𝑡 + 1) + 𝑘𝑖𝜀𝑖,𝑡
(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑟𝑑 ) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑟𝑑 , 𝑇 − 𝑡 + 1)

0
+ 𝛽𝑉𝑡+1

𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 𝑇 − 𝑡 + 1) + 𝛽𝑉𝑡+1

) , …
(𝑘𝑖, 𝑙𝑖(1 + 𝑅) − 𝑚(𝑙𝑖, 𝑅, 𝑇 − 𝑡 + 1)

)) 𝑑𝐹 (𝜀𝑖,𝑡),

and the benefits 𝑘∗
that characterizes household refinancing decisions.

𝑖 (𝑡) determine the cutoff point in the cost distribution

Therefore, we can describe the optimal refinancing policy as fol-

lows:

𝑟(𝑙𝑖, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡) =

{

≤ 𝑘∗
if 𝑘𝑖,𝑡
𝑟𝑑
𝑅 otherwise.

𝑖 (𝑡)

(4)

18 When 𝜀𝑖,𝑇 equals 𝑘∗

𝑖 (𝑇 )∕𝑘𝑖, then 𝑘𝑖 ⋅𝜀𝑖,𝑇 equals 𝑘∗

𝑖 (𝑇 ) and the cost is exactly

equal to the benefit of refinancing.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038767J. Fisher et al.

Hence, households with a lower persistent component 𝑘𝑖 are more likely
to refinance and pay the discounted rate 𝑟𝑑 than households with a
higher 𝑘𝑖. Moreover, the refinancing behavior of each household varies
over time depending on the realization of the transitory shock 𝜀𝑖,𝑡.
Because the transitory shock 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 is multiplicative, its realization has a
smaller effect on the refinancing activity of borrowers with low 𝑘𝑖, and
a larger effect on that of borrowers with high 𝑘𝑖.

households’ information at origination, captured by the variance of 𝜀𝑖,0,
critically affects this adjustment. This condition will play an important
role in our counterfactual analysis as it determines how initial home-
ownership and mortgage takeup change. We return to these issues in
greater detail when evaluating counterfactuals.

3.3. Aggregation: Mortgage stocks in steady-state

3.2. Optimal loan size

Households choose the loan size that maximizes their value function
at origination, given their valuation for housing 𝑣𝑖 and origination cost
𝑘𝑜
𝑖 . The value at origination equals:
+∞
∑

+∞

𝑉1(𝑘𝑜

𝑖 𝜀𝑖,0, 𝑙𝑖,0)𝑑𝐹0

(𝜀𝑖,0

) , (5)

𝑊0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 ) = max
𝑙𝑖,0

𝛽𝑡𝑣𝑖(𝜔𝑖𝑙𝑖,0)𝛼 −𝑘𝑜

𝑖 −𝛽 ∫

0

𝑡=0

where the loan-to-value at origination equals 𝑙𝑖,0∕ℎ𝑖 = 1∕𝜔𝑖 and 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 is the
mortgage origination cost described above. Households do not know
the exact value of their future refinancing cost and thus they form their
expectations based on the available signal, which is their origination
cost.

The optimal loan size 𝑙∗

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 ) satisfies the first-order condition

𝑖,0)𝛼−1

𝛼𝜔𝑖𝑣𝑖(𝜔𝑖𝑙∗
1 − 𝛽

+∞

− 𝛽

𝜕
𝜕𝑙𝑖,0

∫

0

𝑉1(𝑘𝑜

𝑖 𝜀𝑖,0, 𝑙∗

𝑖,0)𝑑𝐹0

)

(𝜀𝑖,0

= 0.

(6)

Hence, the optimal loan size depends directly on the household valua-
tion for housing 𝑣𝑖, and indirectly on the origination costs 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 , because it
is correlated with the expected future mortgage payments through the
optimal refinancing policy 𝑟(𝑙𝑖,𝑡−1, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡) described above. The refinancing
policy in (4) highlights that refinancing costs determine the extent to
which households make mortgage payments at the higher reset rate
rather than at the lower discounted rate. This is because obtaining
the cheaper discounted rate in a greater number of periods requires
incurring the refinancing cost 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 across a greater expected number of
refinancing opportunities.

Given the optimal loan size, we define 𝑣∗

𝑖 ) as the valuation for
housing of a household that is indifferent between buying a house and
getting a mortgage or renting a property:

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜

𝑊0(𝑣∗

𝑖 , 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 ) =

̄𝑢
1 − 𝛽

,

(7)

where ̄𝑢 is a per-period utility of the outside rental option. This
extensive-margin condition determines whether or not households en-
ter the housing market rather than rent: households with a high
valuation 𝑣𝑖 and a low cost 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 enter the housing and mortgage market.
The precision of information that households have about their fu-
ture refinancing costs plays into both optimal loan size (the intensive
margin described in Eq. (6)) and whether or not households enter
the housing market in the first place (the extensive margin described
in Eq. (7)). On the intensive margin, a higher 𝑘𝑖 generates an incentive
to scale back the size of the initial loan, and on the extensive margin,
a higher 𝑘𝑖 may be a deterrent to entering the mortgage market in
the first place. Conditional on the other parameters including their
housing valuation 𝑣𝑖, the extent to which this effect operates depends
on the variance of 𝜀𝑖,0. If this variance is small, households choose an
initial loan size that is strongly correlated with the origination costs
𝑘𝑜
𝑖 and thus with the persistent component 𝑘𝑖 of refinancing costs. If
the variance of 𝜀𝑖,0 is larger, households have less precise information
at origination to evaluate their future mortgage costs. Hence, their
initial loan size will be weakly correlated with the cost 𝑘𝑖. The variance
of the transitory component 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 of refinancing costs similarly affects
households’ optimal initial loan size, because a larger variance of 𝜀𝑖,𝑡
makes it more difficult for households to predict their refinancing
activity, and thus the rates of their future mortgage payments.

Eq. (7) shows that origination costs 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 also capture any household
constraints to becoming homeowners. Once again, the precision of

We calculate the total stock of mortgages that pay the discounted

rate and the reset rate, assuming that the economy is in steady state.

It is useful in this calculation to recursively define the endogenous
cumulative distribution function 𝐻𝑡(⋅) and its associated density ℎ𝑡(⋅)
of loan balances 𝑡 periods after origination, given the evolution of the
loan balances in (2), and the refinancing policy described in (4). This
distribution evolves as follows:

𝐻0(𝑧) = ∬

{(𝑣𝑖,𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )∶𝑣𝑖≥𝑣∗

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )∩𝑙∗
𝑖,0

𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ,

(𝑣𝑖,𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )≤𝑧}

𝐻𝑡(𝑧) = ∫

{𝑙𝑖,𝑡−1∶𝑙𝑖,𝑡(𝑟,𝑙𝑖,𝑡−1)≤𝑧}

ℎ𝑡−1(𝑙𝑖,𝑡−1)𝑑𝑙𝑖,𝑡−1.

We next define three groups (0, 1, 2) of mortgages. Group 0 com-
prises the mortgages of households who took a mortgage of initial
size 𝑙∗
𝑖 ) and are on their initial discount period. Their aggregate
number 𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) and aggregate balance 𝑄0(𝑟𝑑 ) of mortgages equal:

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

+∞

+∞

𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) = 𝑀 ∫

−∞

∫

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜
𝑣∗
𝑖 )
+∞

𝑔(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ,

+∞

+∞

𝑄0(𝑟𝑑 ) = 𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) ∫

0

𝑧ℎ0(𝑧)𝑑𝑧 = 𝑀 ∫

−∞

∫

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜
𝑣∗
𝑖 )

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑙∗

𝑖 )𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑘𝑜
𝑖 .

(8)

(9)

To gain an intuition for Eq. (8), recall that a mass 𝑀 of households
enters the market in each time period. (Discounted) mortgage takeup
among these households is determined by whether or not they satisfy
the extensive margin condition 𝑣𝑖
𝑖 ), with the outer integral
integrating across the 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 distribution. Eq. (9) follows by weighting these
mortgages by their initial loan sizes.

≥ 𝑣∗

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜

The second group comprises the mortgages of all households who
refinanced and pay the discounted rate. In each period 𝑡 ∈ {1, … , 𝑇 −1},
the number 𝑁1,𝑡(𝑟𝑑 ) of mortgages in this group equals:

𝑁1,𝑡(𝑟𝑑 ) = 𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) ∫

{𝑙𝑖,𝑡∶𝑟(𝑙𝑖,𝑡,𝑘𝑖,𝑡)=𝑟𝑑 }

ℎ𝑡(𝑙𝑖,𝑡)𝑑𝑙𝑖,𝑡

(10)

Eq. (10) combines all borrowers who have refinancing costs 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 lower
than the benefits 𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑡+1), and thus have policy functions 𝑟(𝑙𝑖,𝑡, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡) = 𝑟𝑑 .
Thus, the aggregate number 𝑁1(𝑟𝑑 ) of mortgages of this group equals:

𝑁1(𝑟𝑑 ) =

𝑇 −1
∑

𝑡=1

𝑁1,𝑡(𝑟𝑑 ).

(11)

The aggregate balance 𝑄1 of this group is the sum of the bal-
ances 𝑄1,𝑡(𝑟𝑑 ) of the different cohorts who pay the discounted rate 𝑟𝑑 :
𝑄1(𝑟𝑑 ) = ∑𝑇 −1
𝑡=1 𝑄1,𝑡(𝑟𝑑 ), where 𝑄1,𝑡(𝑟𝑑 ) evolves as follows:

𝑄1,𝑡(𝑟𝑑 ) = 𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) ∫

{𝑙𝑖,𝑡∶𝑟(𝑙𝑖,𝑡,𝑘𝑖,𝑡)=𝑟𝑑 }

𝑙𝑖,𝑡ℎ𝑡(𝑙𝑖,𝑡)𝑑𝑙𝑖,𝑡.

The third group comprises the mortgages of all households who did
not refinance, and pay the reset rate. In each period 𝑡 ∈ {1, … , 𝑇 − 1},
the number 𝑁2,𝑡(𝑅) of mortgages in this group equals:

𝑁2,𝑡(𝑅) = 𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) ∫

{𝑙𝑖,𝑡∶𝑟(𝑙𝑖,𝑡,𝑘𝑖,𝑡)=𝑅}

ℎ𝑡(𝑙𝑖,𝑡)𝑑𝑙𝑖,𝑡,

(12)

which is the set of borrowers who have refinancing costs above the
benefits 𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑡 + 1), and thus have policy functions 𝑟(𝑙𝑖,𝑡, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡) = 𝑅. Thus,
the aggregate number of households who pay the reset rate equals

𝑁2(𝑅) =

𝑇 −1
∑

𝑡=1

𝑁2,𝑡(𝑅).

(13)

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038768J. Fisher et al.

The aggregate balance 𝑄2(𝑅) of this group is the sum of the balances
𝑡=2 𝑄2,𝑡(𝑅),

of the different cohorts who pay the reset rate 𝑅: 𝑄2(𝑅) = ∑𝑇
where 𝑄2,𝑡(𝑅) evolves as follows:

𝑄2,𝑡(𝑅) = 𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) ∫

{𝑙𝑖,𝑡∶𝑟(𝑙𝑖,𝑡,𝑘𝑖,𝑡)=𝑅}

𝑙𝑖,𝑡ℎ𝑡(𝑙𝑖,𝑡)𝑑𝑙𝑖,𝑡.

The above expressions can be directly mapped to the empirically
observed stock of mortgages in each category, under the assumption
that the market is in steady state.

3.4. Cross-subsidy

To calculate the cross-subsidy across different households, we con-
sider a benchmark case in which all mortgages have a constant interest
rate 𝑟𝑐 for their entire duration. In Section 5, we consider several values
of this constant interest rate.

Under the constant interest rate 𝑟𝑐 , households do not need to
refinance and their mortgage payments are constant over time. Hence,
their optimal loan size 𝑙∗∗
𝑖 ) maximizes the value function at orig-
ination (5) evaluated at 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 = 0 for all 𝑡 > 0, with a constant payment
stream 𝑚(𝑙𝑖,0, 𝑟𝑐, 𝑇 ). The expression for optimal loan size simplifies to:

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑙∗∗

𝑖 ) =

=

1
𝜔𝑖

1
𝜔𝑖

(

1 − 𝛽
𝛼𝜔𝑖𝑣𝑖

( 𝑇
∑

)) 1
𝛼−1

𝛽𝑡

𝜕𝑚(𝑙𝑖,0, 𝑟𝑐 , 𝑇 )
𝜕𝑙𝑖,0

𝑡=1
( 𝛽(1 − 𝛽𝑇 )
𝛼𝜔𝑖𝑣𝑖

𝑟𝑐(1 + 𝑟𝑐 )𝑇
(1 + 𝑟𝑐)𝑇 − 1

) 1
𝛼−1

.

(14)

The aggregate number 𝑁(𝑟𝑐) and aggregate balance 𝑄(𝑟𝑐 ) of mort-

gages then equal:

+∞

+∞

𝑁(𝑟𝑐 ) = 𝑀𝑇 ∫

−∞

∫

𝑣∗∗
𝑖

(𝑘𝑜
𝑖 )

𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ,

𝑄(𝑟𝑐 ) = 𝑀

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛾𝑟𝑐

(𝑡 − 1) ∫

+∞

+∞

−∞

∫

𝑣∗∗
𝑖

(𝑘𝑜
𝑖 )

where we define

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑙∗∗

𝑖 )𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ,

𝛾𝑟𝑐

(𝑡 − 1) =

𝑙𝑖,𝑡(𝑟𝑐, 𝑙𝑖,0)
𝑙𝑖,0

=

(1 + 𝑟𝑐)𝑇 − (1 + 𝑟𝑐 )𝑡
(1 + 𝑟𝑐 )𝑇 − 1

,

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜

as the beginning-of-period-𝑡 share of the initial loan still to be repaid,
and 𝑣∗∗
𝑖 ) is the valuation of a household that is indifferent between
buying a house and getting a mortgage, or renting a property in this
constant rate scenario. Thus, households still face the origination cost
𝑘𝑜
𝑖 that, as we recount above, includes additional household constraints
to homeownership, but no subsequent refinancing costs, i.e., 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 = 0 for
𝑡 > 0.

Based on the estimated parameters, the observed discounted rate
𝑟𝑑 and reset rate 𝑅, and this counterfactual constant rate 𝑟𝑐 , we can
calculate the differences in mortgage market outcomes between the
current and counterfactual scenarios for each household (𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ). These
outcomes include differences in loan sizes and mortgage payments
between current and counterfactual scenarios. They also include a
measure of the lifetime cross-subsidy paid or received by the household,
measured as the household-level reduction or increase (when compar-
ing current and counterfactual scenarios) in the interest rate. These
household-level calculations can be aggregated up at the group level
using the baseline model, or indeed, using an extended version of the
model in which we estimate group-specific parameters. We describe
this extended model next.

3.5. Multiple groups

The richness of our data allows us to calculate subsidies across
different groups based on observable demographic characteristics. We
focus on two specific household groupings: The first groups households
by income deciles, and the second by UK regions.

Understanding variation in the extent of cross-subsidies paid or
received along the income distribution helps us to understand how the
design of the financial system contributes to the inequality of financial
wealth, to the extent that wealth and income are correlated. We also
look at the extent of regional variation in mortgage cross-subsidies
given the importance of regional re-distribution through the mortgage
market.

We extend the model to accommodate and interpret such hetero-
geneity. We index different groups based on observable character-
istics by 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝐽 . Let 𝑀𝑗 and 𝐺𝑜𝑗 (𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ) be the measure and
the cumulative distribution function of household housing prefer-
ences 𝑣𝑖 and origination costs 𝑘𝑜
in group 𝑗, respectively. Follow-
𝑖
ing the analysis of previous subsections, we can define the variables
𝑁0,𝑗 (𝑟𝑑 ), 𝑄0,𝑗 (𝑟𝑑 ), … , 𝑄2,𝑗 (𝑅) for each group 𝑗, and proceed with our
counterfactual comparisons as before using this extended model.

We next turn to acquire quantitative estimates of the model’s param-
eters and an assessment of the model-implied cross-subsidy by mapping
the model to the data.

4. Quantitative analysis

The model does not admit an analytic solution for all endogenous
outcomes. As a result, we choose the parameters that best match
moments of the data with the corresponding moments computed from
the numerical solution of the model in steady state. We then study
the quantitative implications of the model evaluated at the estimated
parameters.

4.1. Estimation

We fix a subset of parameters, often reading them directly from the
data, and we estimate the remaining parameters of the model to best
match key moments of the mortgage data.

Specifically, we set the unit of time in the model to be 𝑇𝑑 = 2 years,
which is the modal initial fixation period in the UK mortgage market
over the sample period; we then set the mortgage maturity at 𝑇 = 15
periods, to give us the modal mortgage origination maturity of 30 years.
We set the discount rate at 𝛽 = 0.952 = 0.9025 to correspond to our
assumption on the unit of time.

We read the annual interest rates on discounted and reset rate mort-
gages directly from the underlying data, using value-weighted averages
of the corresponding rates in the 2015H1 sample, and compound them
to correspond to 𝑇𝑑 = 2 years. Annual average discounted and reset
rates equal 320 bps and 372 bps in our sample, meaning 𝑟𝑑 = 650 bps
and 𝑅 = 759 bps over two years.

We set the loan-to-value ratio at origination common across house-
holds at 80 percent, close to the modal value in our data, so 𝜔 =
1.25.

We read market size 𝑀 from the data, as follows. The total number

of mortgages in the model equals:

𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) + 𝑁1(𝑟𝑑 ) + 𝑁2(𝑅) = 𝑀𝑇 ∫

+∞

+∞

−∞

∫

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜
𝑣∗
𝑖 )

𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 )𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑘𝑜
𝑖 .

(15)

∫ +∞
𝑖 (𝑘𝑜
𝑣∗

𝑖 )𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑘𝑜
𝑖 .

𝑖 ) 𝑔𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

Hence, we compute the market size 𝑀 by dividing the total number of
mortgages 𝑁0(𝑟𝑑 ) + 𝑁1(𝑟𝑑 ) + 𝑁2(𝑅) by their maturity 𝑇 and by the share
of households who own a property ∫ +∞
−∞
We estimate all remaining parameters by applying some assump-
tions about distributions. We assume that households’ valuation 𝑣𝑖
follows a lognormal distribution, i.e., log(𝑣𝑖) follows a normal distri-
bution with mean 𝜇𝑣 and standard deviation 𝜎𝑣. We assume that the
origination cost 𝑘𝑜
follows a mixture distribution of two lognormal
𝑖
distributions, which allows for a bimodal distribution of origination
costs. We model the persistent component of refinancing costs as 𝑘𝑖 =
𝑘𝑜
𝑖 𝜀𝑖,0, which is correlated with the origination cost. As a result, the
distribution of refinancing costs could be bimodal as well, with some
households with low refinancing costs and others with high refinancing

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)1038769J. Fisher et al.

costs, and heterogeneity within these two household groups. With
probability 𝜂, log(𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ) follows a normal distribution with mean 𝜇𝑘1 and
standard deviation 𝜎𝑘1; with probability 1 − 𝜂, log(𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ) follows a normal
distribution with mean 𝜇𝑘2 and standard deviation 𝜎𝑘2.

Without loss of generality, we denote type-1 as households whose
average cost is lower than the average cost of type-2 households—

(

i.e., exp

𝜇𝑘1 +

)

𝜎2
𝑘1
2

(

≤ exp

𝜇𝑘2 +

)

𝜎2
𝑘2
2

. We do not restrict the vari-

ances of these distributions, and thus the type-2 distribution does not
necessarily first-order stochastically dominate the type-1 distribution.
Clearly, the assumption of lognormality implies that some type-1 house-
holds have higher costs than some type-2 households. We set 𝜂 = 0.5,
and the correlation between 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 to zero, because the empirical
moments that we employ in the estimation do not allow us to separately
identify these parameters, as we explain in more detail below.

We further assume that 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 follows a lognormal distribution with
parameters 𝜇𝜀 and 𝜎𝜀. We set the mean of 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 equal to one, meaning
that 𝐸(𝑘𝑖,𝑡) = 𝑘𝑖, and hence 𝜇𝜀 = −𝜎2

𝜀 ∕2.
We assume that 𝜀𝑖,0 is governed by the same distribution as 𝜀𝑖,𝑡. In
other words, if shocks to household attention/distraction (i.e., tempo-
rary refinancing costs shocks) are drawn from a high-variance distri-
bution, this also means that households learn less from their mortgage
origination costs about their persistent refinancing costs and vice versa.
Hence, households obtain a noisy signal of the persistent component
of their refinancing costs (and thus of their average refinancing costs)
at the point of mortgage origination. Therefore, their loan size and
participation decisions will exhibit a weaker correlation with their
refinancing costs than in the case in which households know their
refinancing costs.

Finally, our estimation recovers the parameter 𝛼 of the utility func-

tion and the level of the outside option ̄𝑢.

We search for the vector of 9 parameters 𝜓 = (𝜇𝑣, 𝜎𝑣, 𝜇𝑘1, 𝜎𝑘1, 𝜇𝑘2, 𝜎𝑘2,
𝜎𝜀, 𝛼, ̄𝑢) that minimizes the distance between selected moments in the
data and the corresponding moments of the model. More specifically,
for each combination of these unknown parameters, we solve the model
shown in Section 3 to find households’ optimal policies, characterized
by their choice between buying a house with a mortgage or renting a
property, and, if they choose to participate in the mortgage market,
their mortgage loans at origination 𝑙∗
𝑖 ) and their optimal se-
quence of refinancing. Based on these household policies, we compute
the following aggregate moments:

𝑖,0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜

1. the average loan balance for mortgages on the discounted rate;
2. the standard deviation of the loan balance of mortgages on the

discounted rate;

3. the average loan balance for mortgages on the reset rate;
4. the standard deviation of the loan balance of mortgages on the

reset rate;

5. the average remaining maturity of mortgages on the discounted

rate;

6. the standard deviation of the remaining maturity of mortgages

on the discounted rate;

7. the average remaining maturity of mortgages on the reset rate;
8. the standard deviation of the remaining maturity of mortgages

on the reset rate;

9–14. the shares of mortgages on the discounted rate for the follow-
ing partition of the loan balance distribution: [0–5] percentile,
(5–25] percentile, (25–50] percentile, (50–75] percentile, (75–95]
percentile, and (95–100] percentile;

15. the share of mortgages on the reset rate in 2015H1 that paid the

discounted rate in 2017H1;

16. the share of homeowners, i.e., the fraction of households that
enter the housing market and choose to purchase a house and
take on a mortgage.

Section 2 outlines several filters that we apply to the data. One of
these filters is that the outstanding mortgage balance exceeds £30,000,
and for consistency, we apply the same filter when computing simu-
lated moments 1 to 15 in the model.

The minimum-distance estimator chooses the parameters that min-

imize the criterion function:
)′ 𝛺 (𝐦 (𝜓) − 𝐦𝑆
(𝐦 (𝜓) − 𝐦𝑆

) ,

where 𝐦 (𝜓) is the vector of moments computed from the model at
the parameter vector 𝜓, 𝐦𝑆 is the vector of corresponding sample
moments, and 𝛺 is the inverse of the covariance matrix of our sample
moments, which is the optimal weighting matrix (Hansen, 1982) that
we compute by stacking influence functions (Erickson and Whited,
2002).

We estimate three versions of the model. In the baseline version, we
pool together all mortgages in our data and assume that all households
can be characterized by a single distribution 𝐺𝑜(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ), as well as
common 𝜎𝜀, 𝛼, and ̄𝑢 parameters. This entails estimating 9 parameters
using the 16 moments listed above.

We also pursue the estimation in versions with richer borrower
heterogeneity. The first one estimates the model separately for different
income groups, and the second one estimates the model separately
for different geographic areas of the UK. In each case, we set group-
specific market sizes 𝑀𝑗 and to estimate group-specific parameters
of the distributions 𝐺𝑜𝑗 (𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
for each
group 𝑗 (denoting either income groups or geographical areas). This
gives us additional flexibility to capture heterogeneity across groups
in preferences, costs, and thus refinancing activities. Of course, when
we estimate these parameters, we do so using an expanded set of
group-specific moments in each case.

𝑖 ), as well as 𝜎𝜀𝑗

, 𝛼𝑗 , and ̄𝑢𝑗

We consider 12 income groups based on the following percentiles
of the distribution of reported incomes in the PSD: 0–10, 10–20, 20–
30, 30–40, 40–50, 50–60, 70–80, 80–85, 85–90, 90–95, and 95–100.
We also consider 12 broad regions and devolved administrations of the
UK, namely North-East, North-West, Yorkshire and the Humber, East
Midlands, West Midlands, East of England, Greater London, South East,
South West, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland.19 Hence, in each
case, we estimate a total of 108 parameters (9 parameters for each of
the 12 groups) using a total of 192 moments (16 moments listed above
for each of the 12 groups).

4.2. Sources of identification

The model is highly nonlinear, so (almost) all parameters affect all
outcomes. That said, the identification of certain parameters does rely
more heavily on particular data moments.

More specifically, moments characterizing the distributions of loan
sizes on the discounted and the reset rate, those characterizing the dis-
tributions of remaining maturities in each mortgage category, and the
shares of mortgages in the two categories together identify the parame-
ter 𝛼, and the parameters of the distributions of household preferences
𝑣𝑖 and the persistent component of costs 𝑘𝑖. Notably, households’ initial
loan amounts – and, thus over time, their loan balances – depend
on their housing preferences 𝑣𝑖, as well as their expected refinancing
costs which on average equal 𝑘𝑖. Moreover, for every mortgage, the
parameter 𝛼 affects the sensitivity of the initial loan size to expected
mortgage payments, and thus to interest rates, as Eqs. (6) and (14)
show.

If the cost 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 was prohibitively high for all borrowers, almost
all mortgages would be on the reset rate, and conversely, if 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 was
extremely low for all borrowers, all mortgages would be on the dis-
counted rate. Hence, the shares of mortgages on the reset rate are

19 These are the 12 NUTS-1 regions of the UK, where NUTS stands for

Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387610J. Fisher et al.

informative about the parameters of the distribution of the refinancing
cost 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 and its components.

Given a value of 𝑘𝑖,𝑡, borrowers have stronger financial incentives
to refinance if they have a large loan balance, meaning that the share
of mortgages on the discounted rate should be increasing in the loan
balance. The rate of change of the share of mortgages on each rate as
loan size changes is informative about the heterogeneity in 𝑘𝑖,𝑡. The
increase is fast if the heterogeneity across households is small, whereas
it is slow if the heterogeneity is large. Our assumption that 𝑘𝑖 follows
a mixture distribution allows us to flexibly capture different rates of
increase in the share of mortgages on the discounted rate at different
percentiles of the loan balance distribution. This means that the change
in the share in the two categories of mortgages at different levels of
the loan balance contributes to the identification of the refinancing
cost heterogeneity parameters 𝜎𝑘1 and 𝜎𝑘2 of the mixing distribution.
Because we allow the support of the two 𝑘𝑖 distributions to overlap,
it is difficult to separately identify the mixing probability 𝜂; therefore,
we set it to 𝜂 = 0.5. Moreover, identifying any correlation between 𝑣𝑖
and 𝑘𝑖 would require rich within-borrower moments; our mapping to
the stock means that all our moments are cross-sectional (except for the
share of mortgages on the reset rate that later pays the discounted rate,
moment 15 above), so we set this correlation to zero by assumption.

The share of mortgages that transition from paying the reset rate to
paying the discounted rate is informative about the within-borrower
heterogeneity in refinancing costs, and thus identifies the parame-
ter 𝜎𝜀. If refinancing costs were fixed over time for each borrower,
because loan balances decline over time, borrowers’ optimal refinanc-
ing policy would be deterministic: it would be characterized by a
borrower-specific cutoff date 𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑖), such that a (𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑖)-borrower
always refinances before 𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑖) and never does after 𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑖).
Transitions from the reset rate to the discounted rate violate this deter-
ministic refinancing policy, and thus identify the transitory component
of refinancing costs governed by 𝜎𝜀.

Moreover, our data does not allow us to identify households’ beliefs
at origination about their future refinancing costs, captured by the
variance of 𝜀𝑖,0. Hence, we set it to equal 𝜎𝜀.20

Finally, the share of owners versus renters identifies the level of

outside option utility ̄𝑢.

4.3. Parameters, model fit, and refinancing behavior

Table 3 reports the parameters of the model for the three cases of
the estimated model: aggregate, income group-specific, and geography-
specific. The top of the table reports the fixed parameters, which are
common across cases and across groups.

The main body of the table reports the estimated parameters. Col-
umn (1) reports the parameter estimates for the baseline versions
that use UK-wide moments, and their asymptotic standard errors in
parentheses. Columns (2) and (3) report the estimates for the case that
uses separate moments for each income group and for each region
and devolved administration, respectively. In columns (2) and (3), we
report the weighted averages of the parameters across groups, as well
as the weighted standard deviations of the parameters across groups (in
parentheses), where the weights are the estimated market sizes 𝑀𝑗 .

The bottom of Table 3 reports the calibrated market size 𝑀 com-
puted using Eq. (15); in columns (2)-(3), they correspond to the un-
weighted averages and standard deviations of 𝑀𝑗 across groups. Note
that several parameters are not easily comparable across columns. For
example, the outside options ̄𝑢 differ across groups in columns (2)
and (3), and affect the estimated parameters of the valuation distribu-
tion. Other parameters, such as 𝛼, are more easily comparable across
columns.

4.3.1. UK-wide

The estimated parameters in column (1) imply that households’
valuation 𝑣𝑖 has a median equal to 1.001, a mean equal to 1.013 and
a standard deviation equal to 0.160 in the full population of borrowers
(homeowners) and non-borrowers (renters). In the model, households
with the lowest valuations are less likely to participate in the mortgage
market, choosing instead to rent a property. This means that, among
borrowers, valuations are higher, with median 𝑣𝑖 equaling 1.069, mean
1.083, and standard deviation 0.135.

The estimate of the parameter 𝛼 = 0.786 implies modest concavity
in household utility from housing. This value implies that a household
with average 𝑣𝑖 enjoys a utility flow of 𝑣𝑖ℎ𝛼 equal to £10, 232 over a
two-year period from a house worth £125, 000. This translates into an
annual yield of 4.012%, which is slightly lower than the UK average
rental yield, but broadly in line with average rental yields in London
in this period (see, for example, Savills, 2015).

Among homeowners/borrowers, the median origination cost 𝑘𝑜
𝑖
equals £1294, its mean equals £4321, and its standard deviation equals
£7190. However, households with the highest origination are less likely
to participate in the mortgage market and choose to rent a property.
Because our moments do not report any information on households who
do not borrow (except for their share in the population), we obtain the
distribution of origination costs 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 (as well as that of preferences 𝑣𝑖) in
the full population by extrapolating those of borrowers out of sample.
This leads us to estimate origination costs and refinancing costs across
all households, including those that do not borrow, with a median that
equals £3837, a mean of £13, 135, and a standard deviation of £243, 229
in the full population. It is worth noting that in the counterfactual
exercises, we retain origination costs 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 , but remove refinancing costs
𝑘𝑖,𝑡. This results in a relatively small effect on our calculations of the
large 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 values estimated for non-participants in the baseline dual-rate
economy.21

Interestingly, while we assume that preferences 𝑣𝑖 and costs 𝑘𝑜
𝑖
are uncorrelated in the population of households, they are correlated
among borrowers because of households’ endogenous selection into the
mortgage market—borrowers with high 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 enter the market only if
their 𝑣𝑖 is sufficiently high. The correlation coefficient among borrowers
equals 0.352, suggesting that the effect of selection is appreciable.

In turn, the estimates in column (1) of Table 3 imply that median
refinancing cost of borrowers 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 equals £456, its mean equals £4042,
and its standard deviation equals £15, 102. Moreover, The estimate of
𝜎𝜀 = 0.925 means that the standard deviation of 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 equals 1.164,
which implies that the within-household variation in refinancing costs
equals 0.65 in the population and
is non-trivial: The ratio
0.64 among borrowers—that is, the persistent household component 𝑘𝑖
(cross-household variation) accounts for a larger share of the standard
deviation of the refinancing costs 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 than the transitory component
𝜀𝑖,𝑡 (within-household variation). Below, we provide more statistics on
borrower refinancing costs 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 and compare them to the benefits of
refinancing.

𝑆𝑡.𝐷𝑒𝑣.(𝑘𝑖)
𝑆𝑡.𝐷𝑒𝑣.(𝑘𝑖,𝑡)

The value of the per-period outside option utility ̄𝑢 equals £1062,
1+𝛽1∕2 =£544.
which implies an annual net utility from renting equal to
Households with a net utility value (over and above all mortgage
payments and refinancing costs) greater than this level from purchasing
a house enter the mortgage market.

̄𝑢

Table 4 presents a comparison between the empirical moments and
the moments calculated from the model at the estimated parameters
reported in column (1) of Table 3. Overall, the model seems to fit the
data well, successfully matching two crucial features of the data that
underscore refinancing incentives across households and over time: on
average, mortgages on the discounted rate have higher balances and

20 Of course, we could set the value of 𝜀𝑖,0 to alternative values than the one

that we choose.

21 We could reduce the large standard deviation by setting an upper bound

to 𝑘𝑜

𝑖 equal to the maximum forgone refinancing benefits in the data.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387611J. Fisher et al.

Table 3
Parameters.

𝑟
𝛽

𝜇𝑣

𝜎𝑣

𝜇𝑘1

𝜎𝑘1

𝜇𝑘2

𝜎𝑘2

𝜎𝜖

𝛼

̄𝑢

𝑀

650
0.9025

UK-wide
(1)

0.0008
(0.0000)
0.1566
(0.0002)
5.7454
(0.0076)
2.6460
(0.0304)
9.1875
(0.0178)
0.9868
(0.0002)
0.9253
(0.0010)
0.7856
(0.0000)
1062
(4.0946)

379,145

𝑅
𝜔

759
1.2500

Income Groups
(2)

𝑇
𝜂

15
0.5000

Regions
(3)

0.0007
(0.0002)
0.2193
(0.0119)
5.1239
(0.7421)
1.7335
(0.2466)
9.3004
(0.1201)
0.9547
(0.0794)
0.8995
(0.0470)
0.7896
(0.0076)
1,564
(590.5706)

28,164
(11,890)

0.0009
(0.0006)
0.3427
(0.0268)
5.1073
(0.5263)
1.5336
(0.9701)
9.1938
(0.0643)
0.9754
(0.0969)
0.8104
(0.0690)
0.7879
(0.0026)
1556
(430.2231)

31,894
(15,298)

Notes: This table reports the estimated parameters. In column (1), the numbers in parentheses refer to
asymptotic standard errors of the parameter estimates. In columns (2) and (3), the numbers in parentheses
refer to standard deviations of the parameter estimates across income and region groups, respectively.

Table 4
Model fit.

Mean Loan Balance, Discounted Rate
Standard Deviation Loan Balance, Discounted Rate
Mean Loan Balance, Reset Rate
Standard Deviation Loan Balance, Reset Rate
Mean Remaining Years, Discounted Rate
Standard Deviation Remaining Years, Discounted Rate
Mean Remaining Years, Reset Rate
Standard Deviation Remaining Years, Reset Rate
Share of Mortgages on Discounted Rate, 0–5 Percentile
Share of Mortgages on Discounted Rate, 5–25 Percentile
Share of Mortgages on Discounted Rate, 25–50 Percentile
Share of Mortgages on Discounted Rate, 50–75 Percentile
Share of Mortgages on Discounted Rate, 75–95 Percentile
Share of Mortgages on Discounted Rate, 95–100 Percentile
Transition from Reset Rate to Discounted Rate
Share of Owners

Data

140,647
105,062
112,692
79,684
20.57
7.73
16.84
6.95
52.72
56.36
61.48
67.76
73.77
81.19
16.52
63.13

Model

141,240
107,233
111,688
78,120
18.82
7.85
15.51
7.39
52.88
57.62
59.95
63.97
71.88
81.93
18.01
63.12

t -statistic

−8.63
−11.49
14.12
6.65
28.96
−3.30
17.95
−8.67
−1.39
−21.53
29.80
76.82
36.55
−8.02
−45.10
0.97

Notes: This table reports the values of the empirical moments and of the moments calculated at the estimated parameters
reported in column (1) of Table 3.

are closer to issuance (have greater remaining maturity) than those
on the reset rate. However, the absolute value of most t -statistics
exceed standard critical values, because our sample size of 3.59 million
mortgages is extremely large and thus the standard errors of the data
moments are tiny.

Refinancing: Benefits and costs. The parameters of column (1) in Table 3
have some interesting implications for borrowers’ refinancing behavior.
The left panel of Fig. 1 displays the distribution of the net benefits
of refinancing 𝑘∗
𝑖 (𝑡) − 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 of all borrowers in the model (i.e., including
also those with a simulated loan balance of less than £30,000 that
we excluded from the computation of the moments used in the esti-
mation). The heterogeneity of net benefits is striking: borrowers have
positive net benefits in 59 percent of refinancing opportunities, which
corresponds to the share of all mortgages on the discounted rate.22
The median estimated net benefit is positive (it equals £264), but the

average net benefit is negative (it equals −£2827), driven by the long
left tail (the standard deviation equals £15, 067). Some borrowers have
extremely low measured net benefits, reflecting the fact that the model
requires high costs to rationalize the non-refinancing behavior of a
small group of borrowers with high loan balances and long maturities
that would otherwise be expected to refinance.

The distribution of gross benefits of borrowers who refinance has
a median of £1003, an average of £1329, and a standard deviation of
£1099; their costs have a median of £73, an average of £266, and a
standard deviation of £472. The corresponding distribution of gross
benefits of borrowers who do not refinance has a median of £836,
an average of £1049, and a standard deviation of £854; the costs of
these non-refinancing borrowers have a median of £3704, an average
of £9554, and a standard deviation of £22, 572. The comparison of these
statistics between borrowers who refinance and borrowers who do not

22 Because the mortgages excluded from the estimation have small balances
and thus small gross refinancing benefits, the share of mortgages on the

discounted rate in the full distribution, equal to 59 percent, is lower than that
in the truncated distribution, equal to 64 percent.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387612J. Fisher et al.

Fig. 1. Distribution of net benefits of refinancing.
Notes: The left panel displays the histogram of the net benefits of refinancing. The right panel displays the histograms of the number of periods in which borrowers pay the
discounted rate.

Fig. 2. Transition probabilities by loan balance.
Notes: This figure displays the shares of mortgages that pay reset rates in 2015H1 and discounted rates in 2017H1 across loan balance deciles in the data (red squares) and in
the model (blue dots). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

shows that the difference in their respective costs is larger than that
in their benefits. Hence, heterogeneity in refinancing costs 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 is the
main driver in the model of the heterogeneity in refinancing behavior
observed across borrowers.

The heterogeneity of refinancing behavior is also apparent in the
right panel of Fig. 1, which displays the distribution of the number of
periods on the discounted rate across individuals. No borrower always
pays the reset rate because all of them receive the discounted rate at
origination, in period 𝑡 = 0. Thereafter, 14 percent of borrowers never
refinance, many borrowers refinance occasionally, and 33 percent of
borrowers always refinance. This heterogeneous distribution obtains
because borrowers with low values of their persistent component 𝑘𝑖 of
refinancing costs (almost) always refinance, whereas borrowers with
high values of 𝑘𝑖 refinance only when they receive a temporary shock
𝜀𝑖,𝑡 that is low enough.

Fig. 2 provides further insights into refinancing behavior. It displays
the shares of mortgages that transition from paying reset rates in
2015H1 to paying discounted rates in 2017H1 across loan balance
deciles in the data (red squares) and in the model (blue dots). Our esti-
mation targets (and successfully matches) the aggregate transition rate
in the sample, but the rates across loan balance deciles are untargeted
moments. The figure shows that our model reproduces the feature that
the probability of switching from the reset rate to the discounted rate
increases with the size of the loan balance. This is useful validation that

our model is well able to capture important variation across income
groups in refinancing incentives.

Whereas our primary focus is to model refinancing behavior, we
note that the heterogeneity of borrower refinancing propagates into
substantial heterogeneity in borrowers’ elasticities of loan demand with
respect to discounted and reset rates. We estimate that the mean
borrower elasticity with respect to the discounted rate 𝑟𝑑 equals −1.624
and its standard deviation equals 0.551. These magnitudes are close
to those reported by other papers that use UK mortgage origination
data: Benetton et al. (2023) estimate an average elasticity of the
mortgage loan demand to the initial rate equal to 1.23 percent among
first-time buyers and home movers in 2010–2014, and Taburet (2023)
estimates a semi-elasticity to the initial interest rate of 0.52 with an
average interest rate of 250 bps in 2018 data, corresponding to an
average elasticity of loan demand equal to 1.3 percent.

Borrowers with a lower 𝑘𝑖 are more elastic to the discounted rate
and less elastic to the reset rate than borrowers with a higher 𝑘𝑖 because
they are more likely to refinance regularly and thus pay the discounted
rate. The elasticities to the discounted rate of the lowest- and highest-𝑘𝑖
borrowers equal −2.461 and −0.300, respectively. The mean borrower
elasticity with respect to the reset rate 𝑅 equals −0.402 and its standard
deviation equals 0.629. Interestingly, in our setting some borrowers
display a positive elasticity with respect to the reset rate, because if
the reset rate increases (while keeping the discounted rate fixed), the

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387613J. Fisher et al.

Fig. 3. Refinancing costs across groups. Notes: This figure displays the average refinancing cost 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 of households with a mortgage in each income group.

benefits of refinancing increase, and thus some borrowers are more
likely to refinance. This leads to a lower average interest rate, meaning
that such borrowers will increase their initial loan size in response to
a higher reset rate.

4.3.2. Multiple groups

Columns (2) and (3) in Table 3 report parameters for the model
estimated on the 12 different income groups and on the 12 UK regions
and devolved administrations, respectively. As discussed above, some
parameters are not easily comparable between columns (1)–(3), though
many are similar in magnitudes. The parameters in column (2) for the
different income groups exhibit some differences from those in column
(3) because the heterogeneity across and within income groups differs
from the heterogeneity across and within regional groups, which in turn
affects the average and the standard deviations of some parameters.

The parameters that exhibit the most interesting heterogeneity
across groups are those that determine the distribution of refinancing
costs 𝑘𝑖,𝑡. Fig. 3 displays borrowers’ average refinancing cost across
income groups: Perhaps surprisingly, but consistent with findings in An-
dersen et al. (2020), they increase with income, from £1896 among the
lowest-income borrowers to £6515 among the highest-income borrow-
ers. Our analysis of devolved administrations also displays a similar
pattern in that more deprived regions tend to have lower refinancing
costs than less deprived regions.

This finding is pertinent to our understanding of household refinanc-
ing behavior because it implies that the relatively prompt refinancing
of higher-income groups, shown in Table 2, follows from their greater
financial incentives due to larger loan sizes, and not because they
have lower refinancing costs.23 These estimated refinancing costs have
consequences for our study of counterfactuals below. In particular,
replacing the dual rate structure of mortgages with a constant interest
rate allows borrowers to save these recurring refinancing costs, which
needs to be taken into account as a benefit even for those borrowers
who end up paying higher average interest rates.

Moreover, the outside option ̄𝑢 also displays significant heterogene-
ity in the population. This parameter is a key input into the ‘‘extensive
margin’’ decision of households, i.e., whether or not they enter the
mortgage market. The heterogeneity in this parameter across groups
means that there are different sensitivities across groups of this exten-
sive margin decision to changes in interest rates. This factor contributes

to differences between the sensitivity of household participation de-
cisions to interest rates in the multiple-group model and that in the
baseline model.

Although we do not report measures of goodness-of-fit across groups,
we note that the model fits the group-specific moments well. This
is perhaps not surprising given that Table 4 shows that the UK-wide
model fits the aggregate data well; the same model might therefore be
expected to fit as well or better at a lower level of aggregation.

5. Counterfactual analyses: Constant interest rate

We compare the outcomes for households in our estimated mod-
els under the dual rate structure, with a counterfactual in which all
households pay a constant interest rate and have no need to refinance.
We present these comparisons for a constant interest rate equal to the
weighted average of the discounted and the reset rates, i.e.,

𝑟𝑐 =

𝑟𝑑 (𝑄0(𝑟𝑑 ) + 𝑄1(𝑟𝑑 )) + 𝑅𝑄2(𝑅)
𝑄0(𝑟𝑑 ) + 𝑄1(𝑟𝑑 ) + 𝑄2(𝑅)

.

(16)

We calculate this weighted average using the aggregate balances in the
data and obtain 𝑟𝑐 = 683 bps. Appendix G reports counterfactual results
for alternative values of this common interest rate.

We note here that our model focuses on cross-household differences
in borrowers’ inaction—i.e., the demand side of the mortgage market.
Clearly, changes in the profile of interest rates affect lender profits and
revenues as well, and their supply-side responses could constitute an
important ingredient for further analysis.24 Furthermore, households
make optimal loan size decisions for a given interest rate based on their
own valuation of housing and total costs of originating mortgages. We
do not separately consider financial origination fees; as we show in Ap-
pendix E, such fees and costs vary only very slightly with loan size, and
more importantly, and similar to prior literature (e.g., Andersen et al.,
2020), are an order of magnitude smaller than the total costs (including
all financial as well as psychological/behavioral costs) estimated using
the model.

Table 5 reports the results of the counterfactual mortgage market
outcomes for the different estimated models (in different columns) as
ratios of their respective baseline values (i.e., in the dual-rate econ-
omy). We first describe the changes for the UK-wide case, and then for
the multiple-group cases.

23 In Figure H.1 in the Appendix, we also show the variance of the refi-
nancing cost shock across groups, which is relatively stable across the income
distribution, meaning it is not the principal driver of cross-income-group
differences in refinancing behavior.

24 Among others, Gurun et al. (2016), Guiso et al. (2022), Benetton et al.
(2023), Allen and Li (2020), and Thiel (2021) study supply-side incentives in
mortgage markets.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387614J. Fisher et al.

Table 5
Market outcomes with constant interest rates.

Constant Interest Rate=683 bps

Number of Mortgages
Mean Initial Loan Amount
Standard Deviation Initial Loan Amount
Mean Loan Balance
Standard Deviation Loan Balance
Consumer Surplus

UK-wide

Income groups

Regions

1.06
0.97
0.96
0.97
0.96
1.04

1.09
0.97
0.93
0.97
0.94
1.03

1.07
0.97
0.94
0.97
0.95
1.03

Notes: This table reports the statistics on the mortgage market in counterfactual markets with constant interest
rates, as ratios of those of the estimated market with dual interest rates. The statistics are calculated using a
constant interest rate equal to the average interest rate equal to (16).

Fig. 4. Change in loan size at origination.
Notes: The left panel displays the distribution of the changes in loan sizes at origination between the counterfactual economy with constant interest rates and the baseline economy
with discounted and reset rates. The right panel displays the average change in loan sizes for households with different values of their origination costs (in bins of £2500). All
statistics displayed are computed including only households who either participate in the mortgage market in the baseline dual-rate economy, or in the counterfactual single-rate
economy, or in both.

UK-wide case. Table 5 reports that the change in the profile of interest
rates to a single-rate structure yields two main aggregate adjustments in
opposite directions: the number of mortgages increases, but the average
loan size decreases.

𝑖 (𝑘𝑜

More precisely, the first row of Table 5 reports that the number of
mortgages increases by 6.44 percent relative to the number of mort-
gages in the baseline economy. The reason for this increase is that there
are many households with valuation 𝑣𝑖 and with moderate or high costs
𝑘𝑜
𝑖 just below the entry threshold 𝑣∗
𝑖 ) in the baseline economy who
switch from renting a property in the dual-rate economy to taking a
mortgage to buy a house in the counterfactual single-rate economy.
These households would rarely refinance, and thus expect to pay an
average rate close to the reset rate in the baseline dual-rate economy,
which raises the costs of taking on a mortgage. These households,
therefore, choose to rent in the dual-rate world, but since they pay a
lower rate in the counterfactual single-rate economy, they choose to
buy a house by taking on a mortgage in the counterfactual. The mass
of these households, on net, is greater than the mass of households
with low 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 who pay an average rate close to the discounted rate in
the baseline economy but pay a higher rate in the single-rate economy.
Such low-𝑘𝑜
𝑖 households switch from owning with a mortgage in the
dual-rate economy to renting a property in the counterfactual single-
rate economy, but their exit is more than offset by new entrants in the
single-rate mortgage market.

The second row shows that the average initial loan size decreases by
2.85 percent of the average loan size in the baseline case, corresponding
to a mortgage size reduction of £5465. The main reason for this decline
is the change in the composition of borrowers: marginal households
who enter the mortgage market in the single-rate economy have smaller

loan sizes than inframarginal households whose participation does not
change.

More generally, the change in the average loan size combines
borrowers who increase their mortgage amounts with borrowers who
decrease them. The left panel of Fig. 4 shows the full distribution of
the changes in mortgage amounts of those households who participate
in the mortgage market in the baseline dual-rate economy, in the
counterfactual single-rate economy, or both. The heterogeneity of the
changes in mortgage amounts at origination is apparent, with decreases
in mortgage amounts more concentrated than increases.

The right panel of Fig. 4 helps to rationalize the asymmetric adjust-
ment in loan sizes. It displays how the average change in mortgage size
varies with the origination cost 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 , which is correlated with refinancing
costs. Borrowers with the lowest 𝑘𝑜
likely pay an interest rate close
𝑖
to 650 bps in the estimated mortgage market, because they almost
always refinance, but they pay 683 bps in the counterfactual market
with a constant interest rate. This higher rate induces them to reduce
their loan sizes. In contrast, borrowers with the highest 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 likely pay
an interest rate close to 759 bps in the baseline market, because they
never refinance, but pay 683 bps in the counterfactual market. As a
result, these borrowers increase their loan sizes. The increases in loan
sizes are more dispersed than the decreases, because there is a bigger
difference between the rates in the dual- and single-rate worlds paid
by households with high 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 than that between the interest rates in the
economies paid by those with low 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 .
The third row in Table 5 reports that the standard deviation of
initial loan sizes declines quite substantially, by 4.34 percent of the
standard deviation of the initial loan size (corresponding to £5440)
in the estimated baseline model. The reason is that one dimension of

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387615J. Fisher et al.

household heterogeneity, namely 𝑘𝑖, contributes to the determination
of the loan size in the baseline model with refinancing. However, this
dimension of heterogeneity becomes irrelevant when interest rates are
constant. More specifically, the previous arguments suggest – and Fig. 4
shows – that borrowers with larger loans in the baseline economy
decrease their loan sizes in the counterfactual, whereas borrowers with
smaller loans in the baseline economy increase their loan sizes in
the counterfactual with constant interest rates and no refinancing. A
common interest rate thus pushes loan sizes to be more homogeneous.
The decline in initial loan size and the increase in the number of
mortgages together combine to increase aggregate mortgage debt by
3.55 percent relative to the model with dual rates. Cross-subsidies are
eliminated in the counterfactual, and one consequence of this change
is that the mortgage market increases in size, although the effect
is tempered by the opposing effects on the extensive and intensive
margins.

The fourth and fifth rows of Table 5 report that the patterns in
the initial loan size distribution described above transfer to the ag-
gregate loan balance distribution (i.e., including different cohorts of
mortgages), with one additional subtle effect. In the baseline economy,
on average, borrowers who originate large loans pay lower rates than
borrowers with small loans. Hence, as loans amortize over time, the
loan balances of borrowers with large loans tend to decline at a faster
rate than the loan balances of borrowers with small loans, which com-
presses the distribution of loan balances over time. This force is absent
in the counterfactual single-rate economy as all borrowers pay the same
rate. Hence, the standard deviation of loan balances (normalized by
that observed in the baseline economy) reported in the last row is
slightly larger than the standard deviation of initial loan balances (also
normalized with respect to the baseline economy) reported in the third
row.

Finally, the last row summarizes all the changes in a single money-
metric ex-ante measure of consumer surplus, calculated for each house-
. Consumer surplus increases by 4.14 per-
hold as max
cent in the single-rate economy relative to the dual-rate economy.

(
𝑊0(𝑣𝑖, 𝑘𝑜
𝑖 ),

̄𝑢
1−𝛽

)

Income groups. The cases with multiple groups allow us to explain
some of the observable heterogeneity in refinancing rates across income
groups and geographies of the UK with heterogeneity in preferences 𝑣𝑖
and costs 𝑘𝑖. These richer cases help us to evaluate whether and how
the shift to a single mortgage rate structure leads to different outcomes
for households in these groups.

Column (2) of Table 5 reports aggregated counterfactual estimates
when the model is estimated using moments for different income
groups. When we compare these aggregate statistics with those of the
UK-wide model in column (1), the differences appear small. The main
difference is that column (2) exhibits a slightly larger adjustment in the
extensive margin (i.e., the number of mortgages) than column (1). We
now analyze how the results differ across income groups.

Fig. 5 plots selected changes to mortgage market outcomes for
each income group. The top-left panel shows that interest rates (in
bps) are lower in the counterfactual economy for income groups up to
roughly the 80th percentile of the income distribution in the sample,
and are higher for the very highest income groups. This pattern is
consistent with the regressive nature of the cross-subsidies in the dual-
rate economy. The highest income group pays higher interest rates in
the single-rate economy than the average rates they pay in the dual-
rate economy. This is primarily because high-income households have
larger loans, which gives them greater incentives to refinance promptly
in the dual-rate economy.

The top-right panel shows that these changes in interest rates trans-
late into an aggregate increase in the share of households with mort-
gages. Critically, the percentage-point increase is larger for lower-
income groups, and minimal for the highest-income groups. Table 2
reports that the homeownership rate among low-income households
equals 50 percent and rises steeply with income, and our model suggests

that the design of the mortgage market may be a contributing factor to
these patterns. In the single-rate market, there is a greater entry of these
low-income households into the housing and mortgage markets.

The bottom-left panel plots the average percent differences between
initial loan sizes in the single-rate economy and those in the dual-rate
economy. While there are also important changes within groups, the
across-group comparison highlights that higher-income groups adjust
loan size downward more than lower-income
their average initial
groups. The adjustment in the average initial loan size of the highest-
income group is sizable, because many of these borrowers – i.e., a larger
fraction than among lower-income groups – almost always refinance
and thus suffer a substantial increase in the interest rate that they pay,
from 𝑟𝑑 = 650 to 𝑟𝑐 = 683 bps.

Finally, the bottom-right panel summarizes all changes into changes
in consumer surplus, confirming that all income groups would benefit
in the single-rate economy relative to the dual-rate economy, because
they either pay lower interest rates or they save the refinancing costs
𝑘𝑖,𝑡. Lower-income groups attain larger percentage-change increases in
consumer surplus than higher-income groups. This makes our findings
quite nuanced: Low-income households are penalized in the status quo
dual-rate economy largely because they have smaller loan balances and
thus lower incentives to refinance, whereas high-income households
refinance more frequently due to greater loan balances, although they
actually incur higher refinancing costs from doing so. On net, our
counterfactual suggests that the removal of refinancing costs more than
compensates high-income households for the increase in paid rates and
associated reductions in loan balances. Overall, this leads to a positive
increase in consumer surplus across all household groups.

Overall, these panels suggest that the richer model with greater
household heterogeneity across the income distribution implies that
higher-income households pay lower rates and enjoy greater benefits
than lower-income households in the current dual-rate structure. These
patterns are consistent with the idea that the dual-rate structure fosters
regressive cross-subsidies. The panels of Fig. 5 suggest that different
income groups would respond to a single-rate structure with different
types and levels of adjustments on both the intensive and extensive
margins. In particular, raising participation in the mortgage market is
the main adjustment for lower-income groups, whereas lowering initial
loan sizes is the main adjustment for higher-income groups.

Regions. Column (3) of Table 5 reports aggregated counterfactual esti-
mates when we estimate the model with parameters and moments for
different UK regions. Once again, as with the model which incorporates
greater heterogeneity across income groups, the aggregate statistics
reported in column (3) are remarkably similar to those of the UK-wide
estimation reported in column (1).

Fig. 6 presents maps that display some of the changes to mortgage
market outcomes across different UK regions. In each panel, darker
colors indicate larger (positive) changes in the counterfactual market
with constant interest rates when compared with the baseline dual-rate
economy with discounted and reset rates.

The top-left map displays the change in average interest rates paid
on mortgages, reported in bps. Households in the more prosperous
regions of Greater London, the South East of England, and the East
of England experience the largest increases in mortgage rates, whereas
households in relatively less well-off regions and devolved administra-
tions such as Northern Ireland, Wales, and the North East of England
would experience the largest decreases in rates when moving to a single
rate. These regional patterns are consistent with the dual-rate structure
featuring regressive cross-subsidies across UK regions.

In the counterfactual scenario, as seen earlier in the case of income
groups, households endogenously adjust their mortgage market partici-
pation as well as their mortgage amounts. The top-right plot shows the
change in the number of mortgages, which broadly increases the most
in regions and devolved administrations that experience the largest
decrease in mortgage rates, such as Scotland and Northern Ireland. In

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387616J. Fisher et al.

Fig. 5. Changes in market outcomes by income groups.
Notes: The top-left panel displays the change in interest rates (in bps); the top-right panel displays the percentage-point change in the share of households with mortgages; the
bottom-left panel displays the percentage change in the average initial loan size; and the bottom-right panel displays the percentage change in average consumer surplus for each
income group in the counterfactual case with a constant interest rate equal to 𝑟𝑐 = 683 bps relative to the baseline case.

contrast, southern regions of the UK experience smaller adjustments to
mortgage market participation.

The bottom-left map displays the changes in the average initial loan
size rate across regions. The differences in these averages when moving
to the single-rate world mask larger within-region changes. That said,
once again, southern regions’ average initial loan sizes do shrink more
than less well-off regions’ average initial loan sizes in the counterfactual
single-rate world. Overall, the top-right and bottom-left maps confirm
the pattern that the change in the profile of interest rates affects mostly
the extensive margin in lower-income regions, and mostly the intensive
margin in higher-income regions.

Finally, the bottom-right map shows that all regions would en-
joy higher consumer surplus in the single-rate economy than in the
dual-rate economy, because they either pay lower interest rates or
they save the refinancing costs 𝑘𝑖,𝑡, with lower-income regions expe-
riencing higher percentage-change increases in consumer surplus than
higher-income regions.

6. Conclusion

We develop a model of mortgage refinancing and estimate it using
rich data from the UK mortgage market. Our model matches broad fea-
tures of the data, and the parameters reveal considerable heterogeneity
in mortgage refinancing benefits and costs across households, echoing
findings in prior literature. Our estimates imply that the current dual-
rate structure penalizes households with small loan balances, such as
low-income households; hence, they are more likely to pay the high
reset rate than high-income households.

We use the estimated parameters to uncover and quantify regressive
cross-subsidies in this market by conducting a counterfactual compar-
ison with an alternative mortgage contract that features a constant
interest rate and no need for refinancing. Using 2015 data, we set

annual interest rates in our main counterfactual single-rate scenario to
lie 16 bps above the average discounted rate and 36 bps below the
average reset rate that borrowers are rolled on to at the expiration of
the discounted rate fixation period. These are material changes given
the importance of mortgages to household budgets.

The counterfactual scenario features different adjustments by low-
and high-income groups. Low-income households enter the mortgage
market in greater numbers in response to the lower interest rates that
they would pay and the elimination of refinancing costs. In contrast,
high-income households mainly take on smaller loans in the single-rate
counterfactual economy in response to their inability to take advantage
of the discounted rate.

Our results suggest that simplifying the design of mortgage refinanc-
ing and eliminating the costs associated with refinancing can induce
households (most notably those with lower incomes) to participate
more extensively in the mortgage market, even if they do not have
perfect foresight about their ongoing refinancing costs at origination.
These findings highlight an important and novel dimension of inequal-
ity that would be invisible without our approach: Changes in mortgage
rates make entry and participation in the housing market more equal
across the income distribution; they also tend to push loan sizes to be
more uniform across high- and low-income households.

Our work has both methodological and economic contributions
beyond the specific context that we study. We believe that our ap-
proach to estimating financial cross-subsidies by comparing the current
and counterfactual market structures is a useful way to provide a
money-metric assessment of the impacts of heterogeneity in house-
hold inaction. This has potentially wider implications for the field of
household finance, where such heterogeneity is widely prevalent in
many markets including credit and insurance. Our findings on the
regressive nature of these cross-subsidies highlight that other household
finance settings where high-income households benefit more due to

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387617J. Fisher et al.

Fig. 6. Regional changes.

their larger stakes and their greater propensity to take action may also
contribute to inequality. In a broader sense, our results on the distri-
bution of financial cross-subsidies in this important market show that

studying household finance is helpful for the agenda of identifying the
sources and consequences of wealth inequality, a continuing concern
for society.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387618J. Fisher et al.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jack Fisher: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. Alessan-
dro Gavazza: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Method-
ology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Lu Liu: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal
analysis, Data curation. Tarun Ramadorai: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Jagdish Tripathy: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Project administration, Investigation, Formal
analysis, Data curation.

Declaration of competing interest

I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests
that relate to the research described in the paper, and I hold no paid
or unpaid positions as officer, director, or board member of relevant
organizations.

Byrne, S., Devine, K., King, M., McCarthy, Y., Palmer, C., 2023. The last mile of
monetary policy: Inattention, reminders, and the refinancing channel. Working
Paper Series 31043, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Campbell, J.Y., 2006. Household finance. J. Finance 61 (4), 1553–1604.
Campbell, J.Y., 2013. Mortgage market design. Rev. Finance 17 (1), 1–33.
Campbell, J.Y., Ramadorai, T., Ranish, B., 2019. Do the rich get richer in the stock

market? Evidence from India. Am. Econ. Rev. Insights 1 (2), 225–240.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., Metrick, A., 2002. Defined contribution pensions:
Plan rules, participant choices, and the path of least resistance. Tax Policy Econ.
16, 67–113.

Cloyne, J., Huber, K., Ilzetzki, E., Kleven, H., 2019. The effect of house prices on
household borrowing: A new approach. Amer. Econ. Rev. 109 (6), 2104–2136.
DeFusco, A.A., Mondragon, J., 2020. No Job, No Money, No Refi: Frictions to

refinancing in a recession. J. Finance 75 (5), 2327–2376.

DellaVigna, S., Malmendier, U., 2006. Paying not to go to the gym. Amer. Econ. Rev.

96 (3), 694–719.

Ellison, G., 2005. A model of add-on pricing. Q. J. Econ. 120 (2), 585–637.
Erickson, T., Whited, T.M., 2002. Two-step GMM estimation of the errors-in-variables

model using high-order moments. Econometric Theory 18 (3), 776–799.

Fagereng, A., Guiso, L., Malacrino, D., Pistaferri, L., 2020. Heterogeneity and persistence

in returns to wealth. Econometrica 88 (1), 115–170.

Farrell, J., Klemperer, P., 2007. Coordination and lock-in: Competition with switching
costs and network effects. In: Armstrong, M., Porter, R. (Eds.), In: Handbook of
Industrial Organization, vol. 3, Elsevier, pp. 1967–2072.

This paper did not involve collection of data on human subjects, so

Financial Conduct Authority, 2019. Mortgage Market Study: Final Report. Financial

the project was considered exempt from IRB.

Conduct Authority, Market Study MS 16/2.3.

Data availability

Refinancing Cross-Subsidies Repository (Original data) (Mendeley
Data)

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103876.

References

Agarwal, S., Rosen, R.J., Yao, V., 2016. Why do borrowers make mortgage refinancing

mistakes? Manage. Sci. 62 (12), 3494–3509.

Allen, J., Li, S., 2020. Dynamic competition in negotiated price markets. Staff Working

Paper 2020–22, Bank of Canada.

Alvaredo, F., Chancel, L., Piketty, T., Saez, E., Zucman, G., 2017. Global inequality
dynamics: New findings from WID.world. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (5), 404–409.
Andersen, S., Campbell, J.Y., Nielsen, K.M., Ramadorai, T., 2020. Sources of inaction in
household finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage market. Amer. Econ. Rev.
110 (10), 3184–3230.

Armstrong, M., Vickers, J., 2012. Consumer protection and contingent charges. J. Econ.

Lit. 50 (2), 477–493.

Ausubel, L.M., 1991. The failure of competition in the credit card market. Amer. Econ.

Rev. 81 (1), 50–81.

Badarinza, C., Campbell, J.Y., Ramadorai, T., 2016.
household finance. Annu. Rev. Econ. 8, 111–144.

International comparative

Badarinza, C., Campbell, J.Y., Ramadorai, T., 2018. What calls to ARMs? International
evidence on interest rates and the choice of adjustable-rate mortgages. Manage.
Sci. 64 (5), 2275–2288.

Belgibayeva, A., Bono, T., Bracke, P., Cocco, J., Majer, T., 2020. When discounted
rates end: The cost of a taking action in the mortgage market. Occasional Paper
54, Financial Conduct Authority.

Benetton, M., 2021. Leverage regulation and market structure: An empirical model of

the UK mortgage market. J. Finance 76 (6), 2297–3053.

Benetton, M., Gavazza, A., Surico, P., 2023. Mortgage pricing and monetary policy.

Discussion Paper 16456, Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., 2018. Skewed wealth distributions: Theory and empirics. J.

Econ. Lit. 56 (4), 1261–1291.

Beraja, M., Fuster, A., Hurst, E., Vavra, J., 2019. Regional heterogeneity and the

refinancing channel of monetary policy. Q. J. Econ. 134 (1), 109–183.

Berger, D., Milbradt, K., Tourre, F., Vavra, J., 2021. Mortgage prepayment and
path-dependent effects of monetary policy. Amer. Econ. Rev. 111 (9), 2829–2878.
Berger, D., Milbradt, K., Tourre, F., Vavra, J., 2023. Refinancing frictions, mortgage

Financial Conduct Authority, 2021. Mortgage Prisoners Review. Financial Conduct

Authority, Policy Paper CP 576.

Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., 2006. Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information

Suppression in Competitive Markets. Q. J. Econ. 121 (2), 505–540.

Gavazza, A., Lizzeri, A., 2021. Frictions in product markets. In: Ho, K., Hortaçsu, A.,
Lizzeri, A. (Eds.), In: Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 4, Elsevier, pp.
433–484.

Goetzmann, W.N., Spaenjers, C., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. Real and private-value

assets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (8), 3497–3526.

Greenwald, D.L., Leombroni, M., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. Financial and
total wealth inequality with declining interest rates. Working Paper Series 28613,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Guiso, L., Pozzi, A., Tsoy, A., Gambacorta, L., Mistrulli, P.E., 2022. The cost of steering
in financial markets: Evidence from the mortgage market. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (3),
1209–1226.

Gurun, U.G., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2016. Advertising expensive mortgages. J. Finance

71 (5), 2371–2416.

Handel, B.R., 2013. Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When

nudging hurts. Amer. Econ. Rev. 103 (7), 2643–2682.

Hansen, L.P., 1982. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments

estimators. Econometrica 1029–1054.

Heidhues, P., Kőszegi, B., 2018. Behavioral industrial organization. In: Bernheim, B.D.,
Vigna, S.D., Laibson, D. (Eds.), In: Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations
and Applications 1, vol. 1, Elsevier, pp. 517–612.

Honka, E., 2014. Quantifying search and switching costs in the US auto insurance

industry. Rand J. Econ. 45 (4), 847–884.

Hubmer, J., Krusell, P., Smith Jr., A.A., 2020. Sources of US wealth inequality: Past,
present, and future. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2020, vol. 35, University of
Chicago Press.

Hurst, E., Keys, B.J., Seru, A., Vavra, J., 2016. Regional redistribution through the US

mortgage market. Amer. Econ. Rev. 106 (10), 2982–3028.

Illanes, G., 2016. Switching costs in pension plan choice. Working Paper, Northwestern

University.

Keys, B.J., Pope, D.G., Pope, J.C., 2016. Failure to refinance. J. Financ. Econ. 122 (3),

482–499.

Lea, M., 2010. International Comparison of Mortgage Product Offerings. Technical

Report, Research Institute for Housing America.

Liu, L., 2022. The demand for long-term mortgage contracts and the role of collateral.

Working Paper, Imperial College London.

Luco, F., 2019. Switching costs and competition in retirement investment. Am. Econ.

J. Microecon. 11 (2), 26–54.

Miles, D., 2004. The UK mortgage market: Taking a longer-term view. Working Paper,

Imperial College London.

Nelson, S., 2022. Private information and price regulation in the US credit card market.

Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Mortgage market design: Lessons from the great recession.

Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 2018 (1), 429–513.

pricing and redistribution. Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Robles-Garcia, C., 2022. Competition and incentives in mortgage markets: The role of

Best, M.C., Cloyne, J.S., Ilzetzki, E., Kleven, H.J., 2020. Estimating the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution using mortgage notches. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87 (2),
656–690.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Nagel, S., 2008. Do wealth fluctuations generate time-varying risk
aversion? Micro-evidence on individuals. Amer. Econ. Rev. 98 (3), 713–736.

brokers. Working Paper, Stanford University.

Savills, 2015. Rents and returns. Available at https://www.savills.co.uk/research_articl

es/229130/193120-0.

Scharfstein, D., Sunderam, A., 2016. Market power in mortgage lending and the

transmission of monetary policy. Working Paper, Harvard University.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387619J. Fisher et al.

Stango, V., Zinman, J., 2016. Borrowing high versus borrowing higher: Price dispersion
and shopping behavior in the US credit card market. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (4),
979–1006.

Taburet, A., 2023. Screening using a menu of contracts: A structural model for lending

markets. Working Paper, Duke University.

Thiel, J., 2021. Price discrimination, switching costs and welfare: Evidence from the

Stanton, R., 1995. Rational prepayment and the valuation of mortgage-backed

dutch mortgage market. Working Paper, Copenaghen Business School.

securities. Rev. Financ. Stud. 8 (3), 677–708.

Zhang, D., 2022. Closing costs, refinancing, and inefficiencies in the mortgage market.

Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 1998. Mortgage choice: What’s the point? Real Estate Econ.

Working Paper, Harvard University.

26 (2), 173–205.

JournalofFinancialEconomics158(2024)10387620