Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Back to the 1980s or not? The drivers of inflation and real risks in Treasury
bonds✩
Carolin Pflueger
University of Chicago, Harris School of Public Policy, NBER, and CEPR, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

This paper shows that supply shock uncertainty interacts with the monetary policy rule to drive bond risks in
a New Keynesian asset pricing model. In my model, positive nominal bond-stock betas emerge as the result of
volatile supply shocks but only if the monetary policy rule features a high inflation weight. Habit formation
preferences generate endogenously time-varying risk premia, explaining the volatility and predictability of
bond and stock excess returns in the data, and implying that bond-stock betas price the expected equilibrium
mix of shocks rather than realized shocks. The model explains the change from positive nominal and real
bond-stock betas in the 1980s to negative nominal and real bond-stock betas in the 2000s with a shift from
dominant supply shocks and an inflation-focused monetary policy rule, to demand shocks in the 2000s. Post-
pandemic nominal and real bond-stock betas are explained with dominant supply shocks and a late increase
in the monetary policy inflation coefficient.

Dataset link: Pflueger "Back to the 1980s or No
t" - Data and Code (Original data)

JEL classification:
E43
E52
E58

Keywords:
Bond betas
Stagflation
Soft landing
Supply shocks
Demand shocks
Monetary policy
New Keynesian
Time-varying risk premia

1.  Introduction

What do nominal and real Treasury bond risks tell us about supply
shocks  and  stagflation  or,  conversely,  the  Fed’s  ability  to  engineer
a  ‘‘soft  landing’’?  Nominal  and  inflation-indexed  bonds  have  differ-
ent  inflation  exposures,  so  nominal  bond-stock  betas  are  intuitively
informative about inflation dynamics, whereas inflation-indexed bond-
stock betas are informative about the dynamics of real rates. Fig. 1
shows that during the 1980s nominal bond betas were positive and
significantly  larger  than  inflation-indexed  bond  betas,  as  one  would
expect  if  inflation  expectations  rise  during  recessions  and  investors
worry about stagflation.1 Nominal bond betas changed sign and the gap

between  nominal  and  inflation-indexed  bond  betas  narrowed  during
the 2000s, as one would expect if inflation is less volatile and tends
to  rise  in  expansions.  Maybe  surprisingly, Fig.  1 newly  shows  that
nominal  bond-stock  betas  remained  negative  for  much  of  the  post-
pandemic  period.  This  raises  the  question  why  –  different  from  the
1980s – nominal bond-stock betas did not rise during the recent spike
in inflation, despite perceived macroeconomic similarities.

Calibrating  a  New  Keynesian  equilibrium  model  for  asset  prices
separately to the 1980s and the 2000s, I find that over the past 30 years
monetary policy and the real side of the economy have changed suffi-
ciently that reverting either set of parameters is insufficient to revert

✩
Toni Whited was the editor for this article. I thank Adrien Auclert, Francesco Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, Stefania D’Amico, John Campbell, Anna Cieslak, Wioletta
Dziuda, Mark Gertler, Simon Gilchrist, Joshua Gottlieb, Francois Gourio, Emi Nakamura, Anil Kashyap, Moritz Lenel, Martin Lettau, Sydney Ludvigson, Xiaoji
Lin, Dongho Song, Harald Uhlig, Rosen Valchev, Luis Viceira, Min Wei, Gianluca Rinaldi, Jón Steinsson, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago,
Princeton, Harvard, Notre Dame University, NYU, Cornell, the Bank of Canada, the San Francisco Fed Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy Conference, NBER
Summer Institute Monetary Economics 2023, NBER DSGE Workshop, and the Minnesota Macro-Finance conference for valuable comments, and Valeria Morales
and Luis Yépez for excellent research assistance. Funding from the National Science Foundation, United States (NSF 2149193) ‘‘Monetary Policy as a Driver of
Financial Markets’’ is gratefully acknowledged.
E-mail address: cpflueger@uchicago.edu.

1 Fig. 1 depicts five-year rolling nominal and inflation-indexed bond-stock return betas from 1979.Q4 through 2022. I use UK inflation-linked bond yields
prior to 1999 and yields on US Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) after 1999, when TIPS data becomes available. Campbell et al. (2009) find similar
changes in US and UK nominal and inflation-indexed bond-stock betas.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104027
Received 21 February 2024; Received in revised form 11 February 2025; Accepted 13 February 2025

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)104027Availableonline27February20250304-405X/©2025ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.C. Pflueger

Fig. 1. Rolling nominal and real bond-stock betas.
Note: This figure shows betas from regressing quarterly ten-year Treasury bond excess returns onto quarterly US equity excess returns over five-year rolling windows for the period
1979.Q4-2023.Q4. Quarterly excess returns are in excess of three-month T-bills. Prior to 1999, I replace US Treasury Inflation-Protected (TIPS) returns with UK ten-year linker
returns. Bond excess returns are computed from changes in yields. Zero-coupon yield curves are from Gürkaynak et al. (2007, 2010) and the Bank of England. Vertical lines
indicate 2001.Q2 and the start of the pandemic 2020.Q1.

bond  risks  to  their  levels  in  the  1980s.  Instead,  a  ‘‘perfect  storm’’
consisting of a change towards more volatile supply shocks and a more
hawkish monetary policy rule is needed to generate a reversion back
to the risky bond markets of the 1980s. The model hence explains the
different  bond-stock  betas  during  the  recent  period  with  substantial
supply shock uncertainty and an initially low but increasing monetary
policy inflation coefficient.

Despite the substantial literature studying historical bond-stock co-
movements (e.g. David and Veronesi (2013), Song (2017), Campbell
et al. (2017), Campbell et al. (2020, CPV)), the link to monetary policy
and macroeconomic shocks within a general equilibrium asset pricing
framework has still been elusive. The habit formation preferences in
this paper build on CPV and Pflueger and Rinaldi (2022, PR), giving
rise to countercyclical risk premia, volatile and predictable stock re-
turns, and a log-linear macroeconomic Euler equation linking output,
consumption,  and  the  monetary  policy  rate.  However,  the  model  in
this paper contains several innovations over CPV and PR, in particular
demand and supply shocks and adaptive inflation expectations. These
innovations give it a unique ability to conduct counterfactual exercises
to assess the impact of changes in the macroeconomic shock volatilities
and Taylor rule coefficients on bond-stock betas. Different from CPV
and  PR,  a  bond  preference  shock  gives  rise  to  a  negative  demand
shock,  lowering  real  consumption  at  a  given  policy  rate,  similar  to
the safety shock that has been increasingly successful in international
finance.2 The supply side of the model features adaptive wage-setter
inflation expectations and sticky wages in the manner of Rotemberg
(1982). Wage markup shocks give rise to supply shocks to the wage
Phillips  curve.  Monetary  policy  is  modeled  as  a Taylor (1993)-type
rule, whereby the nominal monetary policy rate increases with inflation
and the output gap and has an inertial weight on the lagged policy
rate. Stocks in the model represent a levered claim to firm profits, and
investors are assumed to have rational inflation expectations. Demand,
supply, and monetary policy shocks are assumed to be uncorrelated, as
is standard for structural shocks.

I calibrate the model separately to macroeconomic data from the
1980s and 2000s, thereby using the well-understood changes in the
macroeconomy  over  these  decades  as  a  laboratory  for  my  model  of
bond-stock betas. The model matches the changing bond-stock betas
from the 1980s to the 2000s with a change from a supply-shock driven
economy in the 1980s to a demand-shock driven one in the 2000s, and

2 E.g. Bianchi and Lorenzoni (2021), Kekre and Lenel (2021), Jiang et al.

(2021).

a  change  from  a  quick-acting  and  inflation-focused  monetary  policy
rule  in  the  1980s  to  an  inertial  and  more  output-focused  monetary
policy rule in the 2000s. The volatilities of shocks and monetary policy
parameters for each subperiod target inflation-output gap, fed funds
rate-output gap, and inflation-fed funds rate relationships, as well as the
volatilities  of  consumption  growth,  long-term  inflation  expectations,
and the fed funds rate. I set the adaptiveness of wage-setters’ inflation
expectations  to  match  the  well-known  predictability  of  bond  excess
returns of Campbell and Shiller (1991). I use a break date of 2001.Q2,
when  the  correlation  between  inflation  and  the  output  gap  turned
from  negative  (i.e.  stagflations)  to  positive  (Campbell  et  al., 2020),
and Goodfriend (2007)  argues  monetary  policy  changed  to  a  ‘‘new
consensus’’.

The calibrated changes in the monetary policy rule and the nature
of macroeconomic shocks are consistent with anecdotal evidence. For
example, in recent decades central bankers have tended to move in in-
cremental policy steps, and have shown substantial concern for output.3
Since it has been argued that monetary policy opened up the economy
to self-fulfilling sunspots or ‘‘inflation scares’’ during the 1970s (Clarida
et al. (2000), Goodfriend (2007)), I refrain from calibrating my model
for the 1970s and instead focus on the 1980s and 1990s as an example
of a supply-shock dominated economy. Examples of supply-type shocks
during my first calibration period include the sudden drop in oil prices
in 1986 (Gately, 1986) and the ‘‘New Economy’’ of the 1990s.4

I next use the calibrated model for a series of counterfactual anal-
yses. The first counterfactual shows that combining 1980s-style shocks
with  a  2000s-style  monetary  policy  rule  implies  negative  nominal
bond betas but positive real bond-stock betas, thereby explaining the
empirical pattern of nominal and real bond-stock betas during 2021
and  2022.  Intuitively,  when  the  systematic  component  of  monetary
policy allows the real rate to fall in response to an inflationary supply

3 See Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2021), Bauer and Swanson (2023),
and Bauer et al. (2024a) for direct empirical evidence of the Fed’s output
concern after the mid-1990s.

4 In my model the volatility of shocks matters for bond-stock betas, but
not  the  sign  of  the  realized  shocks.  Different  from  the  1970s,  the  supply
shocks  of  the  1980s  and  1990s  were  often  positive  rather  than  negative.
Greg Mankiw noted these supply shocks during the 1980s and 1990s in a
Fortune article arguing: ‘‘Greenspan has been more fortunate. Shortly before he
was appointed Fed chairman in 1987, world oil prices plummeted, improving
the  inflation-unemployment  tradeoff.  Over  the  past  two  years,  the  foreign-
exchange  market  has  provided  a  similar  benefit  (...)’’ N.GregoryMankiw,
‘‘AlanGreenspan’sTradeoff’’,Fortune,December8,1997.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040272C. Pflueger

shock, the recession is mitigated and a ‘‘soft landing’’ ensues. Nominal
bond prices fall with higher inflation expectations, while stocks do not
fall due to the accommodative monetary policy response, implying a
slightly negative nominal bond-stock beta. The drop in the real rate
boosts real bond prices, as well as the economy and stock prices, and
a positive real bond-stock beta ensues. Nominal bond-stock betas in
the model do not depend strongly on the adaptiveness of wage-setters’
inflation expectations, but the predictability of nominal bond excess
returns does.

The  second  counterfactual  shows  that  prevalent  shocks  –  or  the
expected mix of shocks going forward – are priced in bond-stock betas,
whereas realized shocks matter little. I show that model nominal bond-
stock betas remain positive as long as the 1980s calibration is priced
in equilibrium, even if the realized shocks are drawn from the 2000s
distribution.  The  mechanism  relies  on  habit  formation  preferences,
which  generate  endogenous  time-varying  risk  premia.  Intuitively,  in
the 1980s equilibrium nominal bonds are priced as risky assets because
they are expected to pay out in low marginal utility states. An increase
in risk aversion – whether caused by realizations of demand, supply, or
monetary policy shocks – causes investors to have a lower willingness
to pay for risky nominal bonds and stocks, driving down nominal bond
and stock prices simultaneously. Bond betas in the model should hence
be interpreted as forward-looking indicators.

The third counterfactual computes the changes in parameters nec-
essary  to  replicate  1980s  bond-stock  betas  starting  from  the  2000s
calibration. I find that a high volatility of supply shocks is necessary
to  reverse-engineer  the  bond-stock  betas  observed  during  the  first
subperiod. Consistent with the notion that a ‘‘perfect storm’’ is needed
to make bonds risky again, a high supply shock volatility is necessary
but  not  sufficient  to  replicate  the  high  nominal  bond-stock  betas  of
the 1980s. A high monetary policy inflation coefficient and low mon-
etary policy inertia are also needed. This counterfactual hence further
supports a high supply shock volatility for the first calibration period.
Finally,  I  show  that  the  model  gives  an  intuitive  account  of  the
recent  period,  which  was  characterized  by  high  inflation  not  seen
since  the  1980s.  For  this,  I  turn  to  bond-stock  betas  from  daily  re-
turns  to  measure  the  risks  of  Treasury  bonds  at  higher  frequency.
The model can explain negative nominal bond-stock betas and slightly
positive real bond-stock betas from daily returns during the early post-
pandemic (until 2023.Q2), and positive nominal, real, and breakeven
(i.e. nominal-minus-real) bond betas from daily returns during the later
post-pandemic (2023.Q3-Q4). It does so by selecting a low monetary
policy  inflation  coefficient  for  the  early  post-pandemic  and  a  high
monetary  policy  inflation  coefficient  for  the  later  post-pandemic,  as
well  as  1980s-style  shocks  for  the  entire  post-pandemic  period.  The
late model-implied change towards a more inflation-focused monetary
policy rule is consistent with the timeline of events, as inflation rose
already in 2021, well before the Fed started lifting interest rates. The
delayed  change  in  the  model-implied  monetary  policy  rule  is  also
consistent with evidence from rich survey data (Bauer et al. (2024b)).
Taken together, the framework in this paper is a useful tool for under-
standing the monetary policy stance and macroeconomic shocks priced
by nominal and real bond-stock betas during the recent inflationary
spike.

This paper contains distinct contributions over the literature study-
ing  changing  bond-stock  comovements.  Various  channels  have  been
proposed  in  the  literature  to  explain  the  changes  in  bond-stock  be-
tas  over  the  past  four  decades,  including  changing  inflation  risks
(Piazzesi  and  Schneider (2006), David  and  Veronesi (2013), Song
(2017), Campbell et al. (2017), Campbell et al. (2017), Gourio and Ngo
(2020), and Fang et al. (2022)); liquidity, flight-to-safety, and time-
varying risk aversion (Baele et al. (2010), Kozak and Santosh (2020),
and Laarits (2022));  permanent-transitory  compositional  changes  of
consumption  growth  (Chernov  et  al. (2021));  and  changes  in  the
monetary–fiscal  mix  regimes  (Li  et  al. (2022)).  The  model  in  this
paper incorporates these channels in a relatively parsimonious setup,

where inflation risk and the permanent-transitory decomposition arise
endogenously from the nature of macroeconomic shocks and monetary
policy, and habit formation preferences give rise to time-varying risk
aversion and hence endogenous ‘‘flight-to-safety’’.

Compared  to  CPV,  PR,  and Song (2017),  the  ability  to  perform
counterfactual exercises assessing how changes in Taylor rule coeffi-
cients and macroeconomic volatilities impact bond-stock betas within
a general equilibrium model sets this paper apart. In contrast to this
paper, in CPV the monetary policy rule is not specified. CPV’s reduced-
form equation for interest rate dynamics cannot be interpreted as a
structural monetary policy rule because its innovations are correlated
with inflation innovations, and it has a negative coefficient on lagged
inflation.  The model in Pflueger and Rinaldi (2022) is more similar
to  the  one  in  this  paper,  containing  a  structural  Phillips  curve  and
Taylor-type monetary policy rule. The calibration of the model for two
distinct subperiods sets the current paper apart from PR. The model
in  this  paper  also  contains  innovations  that  are  crucial  to  reach  its
conclusion, such as demand and supply shocks (PR has neither), and
adaptive inflation expectations. Another closely related paper is Song
(2017), which however considers an endowment economy.

The  model  in  this  paper  is  also  distinct  from  prior  work  that
models  the  impact  of  changes  to  the  volatilities  of  macroeconomic
shocks or to monetary policy separately, whereas it is central to the
conclusion in this paper to model these changes jointly. Different from
the current paper, the production-based models of Fang et al. (2022),
and Kozak (2022)  do  not  incorporate  changes  in  monetary  policy.
Conversely, Gourio and Ngo (2020) and Li et al. (2022) model changes
in monetary policy but do not incorporate changes in the composition
of macroeconomic shocks. Finally, Gourio and Ngo (2022) consider a
model where the only macroeconomic shocks, technology shocks, have
constant volatility and bond-stock comovements are closely linked to
the level of inflation. Because of the close link between the level of
inflation  and  bond-stock  comovements,  their  model  is  not  suited  to
understanding the key empirical finding in this paper that bond-stock
betas remained negative even as inflation surged during 2021–2022.
Hence, none of those previous papers are sufficient to reach the key
conclusion that a ‘‘perfect storm’’ is needed to revert bond risks to the
levels of the 1980s.

The  paper  is  also  complementary  to  a  long-standing  macroeco-
nomics  literature  on  DSGE  models  with  regime  switches  in  policy
and/or the volatility of shocks, such as Liu et al. (2011) and Bianchi
and Ilut (2017). Using samples that start and end substantially earlier
than  mine,  these  two  papers  detect  a  change  from  a  high-volatility
to  a  low-volatility  regime  around  1980,  i.e.  the  start  of  my  sample
period. The more reduced form approach to regime switches of Sims
and Zha (2006) and the macro-asset pricing approach of Bianchi et al.
(2022a) also detect breaks around 2000, consistent with the start of
my second subperiod. Consistent with the recent macroeconomics and
inflation literature, I find that bond-stock betas support a combination
of  volatile  supply  shocks  with  initially  easy  monetary  policy  during
the post-pandemic period (e.g. Gagliardone and Gertler (2023), Rubbo
(2022), Hazell and Hobler (2024), Bocola et al. (2024), Cieslak et al.
(2024)).

Finally, this paper more broadly contributes to the literatures jointly
modeling  term  premia within  New  Keynesian  models  (Kung (2015),
Rudebusch and Swanson (2012), Kekre et al. (2024)), stock and credit
risk premia within New Keynesian models (Kekre and Lenel (2022),
Swanson (2021), Bianchi et al. (2022a), Bianchi et al. (2022c)), and
optimal monetary policy with time-varying risk premia (e.g. Gilchrist
and Leahy (2002), Caballero and Simsek (2022)). Complementary to
this paper, Bauer et al. (2024a,b) cannot speak to the role of supply
shocks and contain no general equilibrium asset pricing model, so they
are insufficient to reach the key conclusion of the present paper that a
‘‘perfect storm’’ is needed to turn bonds risky. Bond-stock betas stud-
ied here are informative about monetary policy and economic shocks
over the lifetime of the assets, and matter separately, for example for
portfolio allocation and Treasury debt issuance.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040273C. Pflueger

2.  Model

I use lower-case letters to denote logs throughout, 𝜋𝑡 to denote log
to denote log wage inflation. I refer to price

price inflation, and 𝜋𝑤
𝑡
inflation and inflation interchangeably.

2.1.  Preferences

and Kuttner (2005), Pflueger and Rinaldi (2022)). However, the mecha-
nism more broadly relies on countercyclical risk premia, whether they
are generated from the price of risk as here, the quantity of risk as
in Jurado  et  al. (2015),  or  heterogeneous  agents  with  different  risk
aversion (Chan and Kogan (2002), Kekre and Lenel (2022), Caballero
and Simsek (2020), Drechsler et al. (2018)).

2.2.  Asset pricing equations and bond preference shock

A  representative  agent  derives  utility  from  real  consumption 𝐶𝑡

relative to a slowly moving habit level 𝐻𝑡:

The stochastic discount factor (SDF) 𝑀𝑡+1 is derived from (1):

− 1

.

(1)

𝑀𝑡+1 = 𝛽

= 𝛽 exp

(
−𝛾(𝛥𝑠𝑡+1 + 𝛥𝑐𝑡+1)

) .

(8)

𝑈𝑡 =

(𝐶𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡

)1−𝛾

1 − 𝛾

𝜕 𝑈𝑡+1
𝜕 𝐶
𝜕 𝑈𝑡
𝜕 𝐶

Habits are external, meaning that they are shaped by aggregate con-
sumption and households do not internalize how habits might respond
to their personal consumption choices. The parameter 𝛾 is a curvature
parameter.  Relative  risk  aversion  equals −𝑈𝐶 𝐶 𝐶∕𝑈𝐶 = 𝛾∕𝑆𝑡,  where
surplus consumption is the share of consumption available to generate
utility:

𝑆𝑡 =

𝐶𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡
𝐶𝑡

.

(2)

Risk aversion therefore increases when consumption has fallen close
to habit. As Eq. (2) makes clear, a model for market habit implies a
model for surplus consumption and vice versa. As in Campbell et al.
(2020), I model market consumption habit implicitly by assuming that
log surplus consumption, 𝑠𝑡, satisfies:
𝑠𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜃0) ̄𝑠 + 𝜃0𝑠𝑡 + 𝜃1𝑥𝑡 + 𝜃2𝑥𝑡−1 + 𝜆(𝑠𝑡)𝜀𝑐 ,𝑡+1,
𝜀𝑐 ,𝑡+1 = 𝑐𝑡+1 − E𝑡𝑐𝑡+1.
Here, 𝑥𝑡 equals the log output gap, defined as log real output minus
log  potential  real  output  at  perfectly  flexible  prices  and  wages.  In
Section 2.4, potential depends on a moving average of past output and
there  is  no  real  investment,  yielding  a  useful  expression  linking  the
output gap and consumption (up to a constant):

(4)

(3)

𝑥𝑡 = 𝑐𝑡 − (1 − 𝜙)

∞
∑

𝑗=0

𝜙𝑗 𝑐𝑡−1−𝑗 .

(5)

Here, 𝜙 is a smoothing parameter. Expression (5) implies that log con-
sumption growth is stationary – as is standard in asset pricing – but the
output gap is stationary in levels – as is standard in macroeconomics.
It is also consistent with the smoothing embedded in typical empirical
proxies of potential. Provided that the parameter 𝜙 is close to one, asset
price dynamics are relatively insensitive to its precise value.

The  sensitivity  function 𝜆(𝑠𝑡) takes  the  form  as  in Campbell  and

Cochrane (1999)

{ 1
̄𝑆

𝜆(𝑠𝑡) =

√

1 − 2(𝑠𝑡 − ̄𝑠) − 1

0

≤ 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑠𝑡
𝑠𝑡 > 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑥

,

̄𝑆 = 𝜎𝑐

√ 𝛾

1 − 𝜃0

,  ̄𝑠 = log( ̄𝑆),  𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑥 = ̄𝑠 + 0.5(1 − ̄𝑆2).

(6)

(7)

This  function  is  decreasing  in  log  surplus  consumption,  so  marginal
utility becomes more sensitive to consumption surprises when surplus
consumption  is  already  low,  as  would  be  the  case  after  a  sequence
of  bad  shocks.  Here, 𝜎𝑐 denotes  the  standard  deviation  of  the  con-
sumption surprise 𝜀𝑐 ,𝑡+1, and ̄𝑠 is the steady-state value for log surplus
consumption. Both consumption and the output gap are equilibrium
objects that depend on fundamental shocks, and in equilibrium they
are conditionally homoskedastic and lognormal. As shown in Campbell
et  al. (2020),  implied  log  habit  follows  approximately  a  weighted
average of lagged consumption and lagged consumption expectations.
The  asset  pricing  habit  formation  preferences  used  here  are  known
to capture a wide range of asset pricing moments, including the high
volatility of stock returns, their high Sharpe ratio, the predictability
of stock excess returns (Campbell and Cochrane (1999)), and the risk
premium effect of high-frequency monetary policy surprises (Bernanke

I  model  stocks  as  a  levered  claim  on  consumption  or  equivalently
firm  profits,  while  preserving  the  cointegration  of  consumption  and
dividends. The asset pricing recursion for a claim paying consumption
at time 𝑡 + 𝑛 and zero otherwise takes the following form
]
𝑃 𝑐
𝑛,𝑡
𝐶𝑡

𝑛−1,𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡+1

𝐶𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡

𝑀𝑡+1

= 𝐸𝑡

(9)

𝑃 𝑐

[

.

The price-consumption ratio for a claim to all future consumption then
equals
𝑃 𝑐
𝑡
𝐶𝑡

𝑃𝑛,𝑡
𝐶𝑡

∞
∑

(10)

=

.

𝑛=1

At time 𝑡 the aggregate levered firm buys 𝑃 𝑐
𝑡 and sells equity worth 𝛿 𝑃 𝑐
𝑡 ,
with the remainder of the firm’s position financed by one-period risk-
free debt worth (1 −𝛿)𝑃 𝑐
𝑡 , so the price of the levered equity claim equals
𝑃 𝛿
𝑡 = 𝛿 𝑃 𝑐
𝑡 . Log zero coupon yields are defined by 𝑦𝑛,𝑡 = − log 𝑃𝑛,𝑡 and
𝑦$
𝑛,𝑡 = − log 𝑃 $
𝑛,𝑡, and log excess returns in excess of the corresponding
1-quarter rate from 𝑡 to 𝑡 + ℎ are denoted by 𝑥𝑟$

𝑛,𝑡→𝑡+ℎ and 𝑥𝑟𝑛,𝑡→𝑡+ℎ.

The bond asset pricing recursions are subject to a bond preference
shock 𝜉𝑡. The Euler equation for the one-period risk-free rate is given
by:

1 = 𝐸𝑡

[𝑀𝑡+1𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝑟𝑡 − 𝜉𝑡

)] ,

(11)

and one-period real and nominal interest rates are linked via the Fisher
equation

𝑖𝑡 = 𝐸𝑡𝜋𝑡+1 + 𝑟𝑡.

(12)

Eq. (12) is an approximation, effectively assuming that the inflation risk
premium in one-period nominal bonds is zero. Longer-term bond prices
do not use this approximation and are given by the recursions:
𝑃 $
1,𝑡 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝑖𝑡),  𝑃1,𝑡 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝑟𝑡),
𝑃 $
𝑛,𝑡 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝜉𝑡)𝐸𝑡

(13)

]

,

𝑛−1,𝑡+1

[
𝑀𝑡+1𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝜋𝑡+1)𝑃 $
[𝑀𝑡+1𝑃𝑛−1,𝑡+1

] ,

𝑃𝑛,𝑡 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝜉𝑡)𝐸𝑡

(14)

where all expectations are rational. Because all bonds are priced with
the  preference  shock 𝜉𝑡,  the  expectations  hypothesis  holds  when  in-
vestors are risk-neutral.

Fundamentally, the shock 𝜉𝑡 corresponds to a disconnect between
the bond and the stock markets, as for example documented empirically
during  March  2020  by He  et  al. (2022).  A  positive  shock 𝜉𝑡 acts
like a decline in Treasury bond convenience, analogous to the time-
varying intermediation capacity that has been successful at reconciling
several empirical puzzles in international finance, and may reflect that
households do not have direct access to the government bond market.5
Alternatively,  the  shock 𝜉𝑡 can  be  microfounded  as  an  optimism  or

5 See  e.g. Krishnamurthy  and  Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Du  et  al.
(2018), Bernanke and Gertler (2001), Bianchi and Lorenzoni (2021), Gabaix
and Maggiori (2015), Jiang et al. (2021), Itskhoki and Mukhin (2021). Pflueger
et al. (2020) provide US evidence that preference for safety not immediately
driven by aggregate risk aversion can forecast business cycle variables.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040274C. Pflueger

growth shock, similar to expectations-based demand shocks in Beaudry
and Portier (2006), Bordalo et al. (2022) and Caballero and Simsek
(2022)’s ‘‘traditional financial forces’’ shock. For microfoundations see
Appendix D.

2.3.  Macroeconomic Euler equation from preferences

I  next  show  that  the  bond  preference  shock  enters  equilibrium
macroeconomic dynamics just like a demand shock in the Euler equa-
tion. Starting from the asset pricing equation for a one-period risk-free
bond (11),  and  substituting  for  the  SDF  and  surplus  consumption
dynamics gives (up to a constant):

𝑟𝑡 = 𝛾E𝑡𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 + 𝛾E𝑡𝛥𝑠𝑡+1 −

𝛾 2
2

(
1 + 𝜆(𝑠𝑡)

)2 𝜎2

= 𝛾E𝑡𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 +𝛾 𝜃1𝑥𝑡 + 𝛾 𝜃2𝑥𝑡−1 + 𝛾(𝜃0 − 1)𝑠𝑡 −

𝑐 + 𝜉𝑡,
𝛾 2
2

)2 𝜎2
𝑐
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
=0

(
1 + 𝜆(𝑠𝑡)

(15)

+ 𝜉𝑡. (16)

The  sensitivity  function (6) through (7) has  the  advantageous  prop-
erty  that  the  two  bracketed  terms  drop  out  because  intertemporal
substitution and precautionary savings terms cancel. The real risk-free
rate has the familiar log-linear form, and much lower volatility than
the  stock  market.  Substituting (5) then  gives  the  exactly  log-linear
macroeconomic Euler equation:
𝑥𝑡 = 𝑓 𝑥𝐸𝑡𝑥𝑡+1 + 𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑡−1 − 𝜓 𝑟𝑡 + 𝑣𝑥,𝑡.
Imposing the restriction that the forward- and backward-looking terms
in the Euler equation add up to one, the Euler equation parameters are
given by
𝜃2
𝜙 − 𝜃1

1
𝛾(𝜙 − 𝜃1)
Non-zero  values  for  the  habit  parameters, 𝜃1 and 𝜃2,  are  therefore
needed to generate the standard New Keynesian block with forward-
and  backward-looking  coefficients.  The  demand  shock  in  the  Euler
equation equals
𝑣𝑥,𝑡 = 𝜓 𝜉𝑡.

, 𝜃2 = 𝜙 − 1 − 𝜃1.

1
𝜙 − 𝜃1

, 𝑓 𝑥 =

, 𝜓 =

𝜌𝑥 =

(17)

(18)

(19)

Because consumption is endogenous, a decrease in the preference for
government  bonds  (𝜉𝑡 ↑)  tends  to  raise  both  consumption  and  the
real rate through (17). Higher consumption, in turn, raises dividends
and lowers risk aversion. The preference shock 𝜉𝑡 hence raises stock
prices, even though it does not appear directly in the Euler equation
for  consumption  claims.  The  demand  shock 𝑣𝑥,𝑡 is  conditionally  ho-
moskedastic, serially uncorrelated, and uncorrelated with supply and
monetary policy shocks because 𝜉𝑡 is. Its standard deviation is denoted
by 𝜎𝑥.6

2.4.  Supply side

I keep the supply side as simple as possible to generate a standard
log-linearized Phillips curve, and the link between consumption and
the output gap. Details are relegated to the Appendix. There is no real
investment, and the aggregate resource constraint simply states that
aggregate consumption equals aggregate output, i.e. 𝐶𝑡 = 𝑌𝑡. Follow-
ing Lucas (1988) I assume that productivity depends on past economic
activity.  Potential  output  is  defined  as  the  level  of  real  output  that
would obtain with flexible prices and wages taking current productivity
as given. The log output gap is the difference between log real output

6 While  a  shock  to  the  discount  factor  shared  by  bonds  and  stocks
(Albuquerque  et  al. (2016))  also  generates  a  demand  shock  in  the  Euler
equation, a joint discount rate shock tends to move bonds and stocks in the
same direction unless the endogenous cash flow effect is very strong. Different
from a bond preference shock, a joint discount rate shock hence cannot explain
the negative real bond-stock beta observed during the pre-pandemic 2000s.

and log potential real output and in equilibrium satisfies (5).

Wage  unions  charge  sticky  wages  but  firms’  product  prices  are
flexible. Specifically, I assume that wage-setters face a quadratic cost
as in Rotemberg (1982) if they raise wages faster than past inflation.
The indexing to past inflation is analogous to the indexing assumption
in Smets and Wouters (2007) and Christiano et al. (2005). I assume that
households experience disutility of working outside the home due to
the opportunity cost of home production as in Greenwood et al. (1988),
with external home production habit defined so that home production
drops  out  of  the  intertemporal  consumption  decision  and  the  asset
pricing  stochastic  discount  factor.  Log-linearizing  the  intratemporal
first-order condition of wage-setting unions gives the Phillips curve:
𝑡 = 𝑓 𝜋𝐸𝑡𝜋𝑤
𝜋𝑤
for  constants 𝜌𝜋, 𝑓 𝜋,  and 𝜅.  The  parameter 𝜅 is  a  wage-flexibility
parameter. The supply or Phillips curve shock 𝑣𝜋 ,𝑡 is assumed to be
conditionally homoskedastic with standard deviation 𝜎𝜋 ,𝑡, serially un-
correlated, and uncorrelated with other shocks. This supply shock can
arise  from  a  variety  of  sources,  such  as  variation  in  optimal  wage
markups charged by unions or shocks to the marginal utility of leisure.7
Following (Fuhrer, 1997) wage-setters have partially adaptive sub-

𝑡−1 + 𝜅 𝑥𝑡 + 𝑣𝜋 ,𝑡,

𝑡+1 + 𝜌𝜋𝜋𝑤

(20)

(21)

𝑡−1,

𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜁)𝐸𝑡𝜋𝑤

jective inflation expectations
̃𝐸𝑡𝜋𝑤
𝑡+1 + 𝜁 𝜋𝑤
where 𝐸𝑡 denotes the rational expectation conditional on state variables
at the end of period 𝑡. Hence, while financial assets are priced with ra-
tional inflation expectations, wage-setters’ expectations are more slug-
gish, capturing the idea that markets are more sophisticated and at-
tentive  to  macroeconomic  dynamics  than  individual  wage-setters.  A
similar assumption has been used by Bianchi et al. (2022a). A long-
standing  Phillips  curve  literature  has  found  that  adaptive  inflation
expectations and a strongly backward-looking Phillips curve are needed
to  capture  the  empirical  persistence  of  inflation  (Fuhrer  and  Moore
(1995), Fuhrer (1997)).8 If 𝜌𝜋 ,0 is  the  backward-looking  component
under  rational  inflation  expectations  (𝜁 =  0),  the  backward-  and
forward-looking Phillips curve parameters equal:
𝜌𝜋 = 𝜌𝜋 ,0 + 𝜁 − 𝜌𝜋 ,0𝜁 ,  𝑓 𝜋 = 1 − 𝜌𝜋.
Ten-year  survey  inflation  expectations  are  modeled  similarly  as  a
weighted average of a moving average of inflation over the past ten
years and the rational forecast, with the weight on past inflation given
by 𝜁.

(22)

Equilibrium price inflation equals wage inflation minus productivity

𝑡 − (1 − 𝜙)𝑥𝑡−1.

growth, which depends on the output gap:
𝜋𝑡 = 𝜋𝑤
In the calibrated model, 𝜙 is close to one, and price and wage inflation
are very similar.9 The reason to assume sticky wages rather than sticky
prices is simply that with these assumptions a consumption claim (Abel
(1990)) is identical to a claim to firm profits.10

(23)

7 While I do not model fiscal sources of inflation, under certain conditions
a shock to inflation expectations due to fiscal policy can act similarly to a
shift to the Phillips curve (Hazell et al. (2022), Bianchi et al. (2023)). Up
to the distinction between wage and price inflation, supply shocks are also
isomorphic to shifts to potential output unrecognized by the central bank, in
which case 𝑥𝑡 is the output gap perceived by consumers and the central bank,
and the actual output gap is 𝑥𝑡 + 1

8 Consistent  with  this  older  literature,  a  quickly  growing  literature
has  documented  deviations  from  rationality  (Coibion  and  Gorodnichenko
(2015), Bianchi  et  al. (2022b))  and  excess  dependence  of  expectations  on
lagged inflation (Malmendier and Nagel (2016)).

9 In reality, the link between price and wage inflation is arguably less close
than in the model. Appendix G solves a model extension with an additional
shock to the price-wage dynamics (23), showing that the results are unchanged
even when the volatility of this shock is set to a high value. For parsimony, I
hence abstract from shocks to wage-price dynamics in the baseline version of
the model.

𝑣𝜋 ,𝑡.

𝜅

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040275C. Pflueger

2.5.  Monetary policy

Let 𝑖𝑡 denote the log nominal risk-free rate available from time 𝑡
to 𝑡 + 1. Monetary policy is described by the following rule (ignoring
constants):
𝑖𝑡 = 𝜌𝑖𝑖𝑡−1 +
𝑣𝑡 ∼ 𝑁 (
0, 𝜎2
𝑖

1 − 𝜌𝑖) (𝛾 𝑥𝑥𝑡 + 𝛾 𝜋 𝜋𝑡
) .

+ 𝑣𝑖,𝑡,

(24)

(25)

)

(

While  there  is  an  active  debate  to  what  extent  monetary  policy
can  be  described  by  rules  versus  discretion,  rules  such  as (24) are
often  found  to  provide  a  good  description  of  historical  policy  rates
(Taylor (1993), Clarida et al. (2000)). The monetary policy shock in
(24) can be interpreted to represent the discretionary component of
monetary  policy.11 The  term 𝛾 𝑥𝑥𝑡 + 𝛾 𝜋 𝜋𝑡 denotes  the  central  bank’s
interest rate target, to which it adjusts slowly. The parameters 𝛾 𝑥 and 𝛾 𝜋
represent monetary policy’s long-term output gap and inflation weights.
The monetary policy shock, 𝑣𝑖,𝑡, is assumed to be uncorrelated with
supply  and  demand  shocks,  serially  uncorrelated,  and  conditionally
homoskedastic. A positive monetary policy shock represents a surprise
tightening of the short-term nominal policy rate, which mean-reverts
at rate 𝜌𝑖.

2.6.  Model solution

The solution proceeds in two steps. Different from Campbell et al.
(2020), I need 𝑥𝑡−1 as an additional state variable because it enters the
surplus consumption ratio dynamics (3), and the new demand shock
means that it is no longer spanned by the other state variables. First, I
solve for log-linear macroeconomic dynamics. Second, I use numerical
methods to solve for highly non-linear asset prices. This is aided by the
particular tractability of the surplus consumption dynamics, implying
that the surplus consumption ratio is a state variable for asset prices
but not for macroeconomic dynamics. I solve for the dynamics of the
log-linear state vector
𝑌𝑡 = [𝑥𝑡, 𝜋𝑤
𝑡 , 𝑖𝑡]′.

(26)

The dynamics of these equilibrium objects are driven by the vector of
exogenous shocks
𝑣𝑡 = [𝑣𝑥,𝑡, 𝑣𝜋 ,𝑡, 𝑣𝑖,𝑡],
according to the consumption Euler Eq. (17), the Phillips curve (20),
the monetary policy rule (24), and the wage-price inflation link (23). I
solve for a minimum state variable equilibrium of the form
𝑌𝑡 = 𝐵 𝑌𝑡−1 + 𝛴 𝑣𝑡,

(28)

(27)

where 𝐵 and 𝛴 are [3 × 3] and [3 × 3] matrices, and 𝑣𝑡 is the vector of
structural shocks. I solve for the matrix 𝐵 using Uhlig (1999)’s formu-
lation of the Blanchard and Kahn (1980) method. In both calibrations,
there exists a unique equilibrium of the form (28) with non-explosive
eigenvalues.  I  acknowledge  that,  as  in  most  New  Keynesian  mod-
els, there may be further equilibria with additional state variables or

10 It  is  also  in  line  with Christiano  et  al. (1999)  who  find  that  sticky
wages are more important for aggregate inflation dynamics than sticky prices.
See  also Favilukis  and  Lin (2016)  who  find  that  wage-setting  frictions  are
important to ensure that a claim to firm profits behaves similarly to a claim
to  consumption  in  an  asset  pricing  sense.  Appendix  E.4  shows  that  model
implications are robust to setting wage and price inflation equal through 𝜙 = 1.
11 I do not model the zero lower bound, because I am interested in longer-
term regimes, and a substantial portion of the zero lower bound period appears
to have been governed by expectations of a swift return to normal (Swanson
and Williams (2014)). The zero-lower-bound may however be important for
more cyclical changes in bond-stock betas, as emphasized by Gourio and Ngo
(2020), and I leave this to future research.

sunspots (Cochrane (2011)), but resolving these issues is beyond the
scope  of  this  paper.  Note  that  Eq.  (28) implies  that  macroeconomic
dynamics  are  conditionally  lognormal.  The  output  gap-consumption
link (5) therefore implies that equilibrium consumption surprises 𝜀𝑐 ,𝑡+1
are conditionally lognormal, as previously conjectured.

The key properties of endogenously time-varying risk premia can
be illustrated with a simple analytic expression. Consider a one-period
claim  with  log  real  payoff 𝛼 𝑐𝑡.  For  illustrative  purposes  consider 𝛼
to  be  an  exogenous  constant,  though  in  the  full  model  it  depends
on  the  macroeconomic  equilibrium.  Denoting  the  log  return  on  the
one-period claim by 𝑟𝑐 ,𝛼
1,𝑡+1, the risk premium—adjusted for a standard
Jensen’s inequality term—equals the conditional covariance between
the negative log SDF and the log real asset payoff:
𝑟𝑐 ,𝛼

(
−𝑚𝑡+1, 𝑥𝑡+1

1 + 𝜆 (𝑠𝑡

= 𝛼 𝛾 (

= Cov𝑡

𝑟𝑐 ,𝛼
1,𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑡

)) 𝜎2
𝑐 .

𝑉 𝑎𝑟

1,𝑡+1

𝐸𝑡

+

)

(

)

[

]

1
2

(29)

This  expression  shows  that  assets  with  risky  real  cash  flows  (𝛼  >
0) require positive risk premia. Since 𝜆(𝑠𝑡) is downward-sloping, risk
premia on risky assets increase further after a series of bad consumption
surprises. Conversely, assets with safe real cash flows (𝛼 < 0) require
negative risk premia that decrease after a series of bad consumption
surprises.  Because  real  cash  flows  on  nominal  bonds  are  inversely
related to inflation, nominal bonds resemble a risky asset (𝛼  > 0) if
inflation is countercyclical (i.e. stagflations) but a safe asset (𝛼 < 0) if
inflation falls in bad times.

Because full asset prices are not one-period claims, I use numerical
value function iteration to solve the recursions (13) through (10) while
accounting for the new demand shock and the link between wage and
price inflation (23). Asset prices have five state variables: three state
variables in 𝑌𝑡, the lagged output gap 𝑥𝑡−1, and the surplus consumption
ratio 𝑠𝑡.

3.  Empirical analysis and calibration strategy

Table 1 lists the parameters for the calibrations and how they vary

across subperiods.

3.1.  Calibration strategy

I calibrate the model separately for two subperiods, where I choose
the 2001.Q2 break date from Campbell et al. (2020). This date was
chosen by testing for a break in the inflation-output gap relationship
and  did  not  use  asset  prices.  I  start  the  sample  in  1979.Q4,  when
Paul  Volcker  was  appointed  as  Fed  chairman.  I  end  the  sample  in
2019.Q4  prior  to  the  pandemic,  leaving  the  analysis  of  how  shocks
changed during the pandemic period for a separate discussion. I do not
account for the possibility that agents might have anticipated a change
in regime.12 The model is calibrated to macroeconomic moments, with
only the inflation expectations parameter set to match Campbell and
Shiller (1991)-type bond excess return predictability. The calibration
does not match bond-stock betas directly but uses them as additional
moments, because the solution for macroeconomic dynamics is much
faster than the solution for asset prices. Section 4.4 provides a simple
reverse-engineering exercise showing that a high supply shock volatility
is needed to explain the bond-stock betas in the first subperiod starting
from the calibration for the second subperiod.

12 Cogley  and  Sargent (2008)  show  that  an  approximation  with  constant
transition probabilities often provides a good approximation of fully Bayesian
decision rules.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040276C. Pflueger

Table 1
Calibration parameters.
Panel A: Period-Specific Parameters
MP Inflation Coefficient
𝛾 𝜋

MP Output Coefficient

MP Persistence

Vol. Demand Shock

Vol. PC Shock

Vol. MP Shock

Adaptive Inflation Expectations

Leverage

𝛾 𝑥

𝜌𝑖

𝜎𝑥

𝜎𝜋

𝜎𝑖

𝜁

𝛿

1979.Q4-2001.Q1

2001.Q2-2019.Q4

1.35
(0.53)
0.50
(0.74)
0.54
(0.18)
0.01
(0.32)
0.58
(0.04)
0.55
(0.14)
0.6
(0.51)
0.50

1.10
(0.05)
1.00
(0.28)
0.80
(0.04)
0.54
(0.02)
0.06
(0.00)
0.06
(0.05)
0.0
(9.69)
0.66

𝑔
𝛾
̄𝑟
𝜃0
𝜃1
𝜅
𝜙

Panel B: Invariant Parameters
Consumption Growth
Utility Curvature
Risk-Free Rate
Persistence Surplus Cons.
Backward-Looking Habit
PC slope
Consumption–output gap
Consumption growth and the real risk-free rate are in annualized percent. The standard
deviation 𝜎𝑥 is in percent, and the standard deviations 𝜎𝜋 and 𝜎𝑖 are in annualized
percent. The Phillips curve slope 𝜅 and the monetary policy parameters 𝛾 𝜋 , 𝛾 𝑥 and
𝜌𝑖 are in units corresponding to the output gap in percent, and inflation and interest
rates in annualized percent. Standard errors are computed using the delta method with
details given in Appendix F.

1.89
2
0.94
0.87
−0.84
0.0062
0.99

3.2.  Invariant parameters

The calibration proceeds in three steps. First, I set some parameters
to invariant values following the literature, shown in Panel B of Table 1.
The  expected  consumption  growth  rate,  utility  curvature,  the  risk-
free  rate,  and  the  persistence  of  the  surplus  consumption  ratio  (𝜃0)
are  from Campbell  and  Cochrane (1999),  who  found  that  a  utility
curvature  of 𝛾 =  2 gives  an  empirically  reasonable  equity  Sharpe
ratio and set 𝜃0 to match the quarterly persistence of the equity price–
dividend ratio in the data. The output gap-consumption link parameter
𝜙 =  0.99 is  chosen  to  maximize  the  empirical  correlation  between
stochastically detrended real GDP and the output gap from the Bureau
of  Economic  Analysis.  I  choose  a  slightly  higher  value  because  the
correlation between the output gap and stochastically detrended real
GDP is flat over a range of values (𝑐 𝑜𝑟𝑟 = 76% at 𝜙 = 0.93 vs. 𝑐 𝑜𝑟𝑟 = 73%
at 𝜙 = 0.99), and higher 𝜙 minimizes the gap between price and wage
inflation and hence simplifies the model. I calibrate 𝜃1 − 𝜙 and hence
the Euler equation exactly as in Pflueger and Rinaldi (2022), where
the  habit  parameters 𝜃1 and 𝜃2 were  chosen  to  replicate  the  hump-
shaped response of output to an identified monetary policy shock in the
data. The second habit parameter, 𝜃2 is implied and set to ensure that
the backward- and forward-looking components in the Euler equation
sum up to one. Because the model impulse responses to a monetary
policy shock are invariant to the shock volatilities and vary little with
monetary  policy  and  Phillips  curve  parameters,  I  effectively  match
habit  preferences  to  the  output  response  to  an  identified  monetary
policy shock. I set the slope of the Phillips curve to 𝜅 = 0.0062 based
on Hazell et al. (2022), who also find it to be stable over time. Appendix
Table A4 shows that asset pricing implications are robust to choosing
a  different  utility  curvature 𝛾,  consumption–output  gap  link 𝜙,  and
Phillips curve slope 𝜅.

3.3.  Period-specific shock volatilities and monetary policy

The second step chooses period-specific monetary policy parameters
and shock volatilities through Simulated Methods of Moments. Let ̂𝛹

.

(30)

2
‖
‖
‖
‖
‖

denote  the  vector  of  twelve  (13  for  the  second  subperiod)  empiri-
cal target moments, and 𝛹 (𝜎𝑥, 𝜎𝜋, 𝜎𝑖, 𝛾 𝑥, 𝛾 𝜋 , 𝜌𝑖; 𝜁) the vector of model
moments  computed  analogously  on  model-simulated  data.  I  choose
subperiod-specific monetary policy parameters 𝛾 𝑥, 𝛾 𝜋 , and 𝜌𝑖 and shock
volatilities 𝜎𝑥, 𝜎𝜋,  and 𝜎𝑖 while  holding  the  inflation  expectations
parameter constant at 𝜁 = 0 to minimize the objective function:
̂𝛹 − 𝛹 (𝜎𝑥, 𝜎𝜋, 𝜎𝑖, 𝛾 𝑥, 𝛾 𝜋 , 𝜌𝑖; 𝜁 = 0)
‖
‖
‖
𝑆 𝐸( ̂𝛹 )
‖
‖
The vector of target moments ̂𝛹 includes the moments shown in Fig. 2,
plus the standard deviations of annual real consumption growth, the
annual change in the fed funds rate, and the annual change in survey
ten-year inflation expectations shown in the bottom panel of Table 2.13
The  vector  of  empirical  standard  errors 𝑆 𝐸( ̂𝛹 ) is  computed  via  the
delta method and Newey–West standard errors with ℎ lags. I match
many  more  empirical  moments  than  I  have  parameters,  so  this  is  a
demanding  calibration  objective.  The  rationale  for  including  several
lags from Fig. 2 is that, for example, the negative empirical inflation-
output gap relationship (i.e. stagflation) in the top-left panel is clearest
at a 6–8 quarter lag horizon. Rather than picking different lags for dif-
ferent variables I include all lags for all variables, effectively averaging
across different lead and lag horizons. Because the model is relatively
parsimonious, the model cross-correlations should be expected to be
matched on average but not at every lag.

The resulting subperiod calibrations shown in Table 1 are intuitive.
The 1980s calibration features volatile supply shocks, volatile monetary
policy shocks, and small demand shocks. The monetary policy rule in
this period is characterized by a high inflation weight, a low output
gap weight, and low inertia. Conversely, the 2000s calibration features
volatile demand shocks, small supply and monetary policy shocks, and
a  less  inflation-centric  but  more  inertial  monetary  policy  rule.  The
changing  volatility  of  supply  shocks  across  calibrations  is  primarily
pinned down by the changing empirical inflation-output comovement
in Panel A of Fig. 2. The volatility of monetary policy shocks is roughly
determined by the output-policy rate comovement shown in Panel B,
with a higher monetary policy shock volatility making this relationship
more negative in the 1980s calibration. The monetary policy inflation
weight and inertia parameter are mostly determined by the empirical
inflation-policy rate relationship in Panel C, which became flatter and
more inertial during the second subperiod.

The change in the shock volatilities in Table 1 is consistent with the
long-standing macroeconomics DSGE literature with regime switches.
Liu et al. (2011) and Bianchi and Ilut (2017) estimate regime-switching
DSGE models with two volatility regimes with samples that start sig-
nificantly earlier and end earlier than the one in this paper, and detect
a shift towards a lower volatility of all shocks around 1980. My first
subperiod starts at the time of this shift, which is why naturally my
approach does not pick up on their shift in volatility regimes. The more

1,ℎ − 𝑎𝑥,𝜋𝑤

13 Because  I  match  three  cross-relationships  (output-inflation,  output-fed
funds, inflation-fed funds) at three different horizons (one, three, and seven
quarters) and three volatilities, this step of the calibration procedure effectively
chooses six parameters to fit 3 × 3 + 3  =  12 (13 for the second subperiod)
moments.  For  the  second  calibration  period  when  wage  inflation  data  is
𝑡 ) and target
easily available, I also estimate the specification (𝑧𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = (𝑥𝑡, 𝜋𝑤
1,ℎ . I include only one horizon for wage inflation to
the difference 𝑎𝑥,𝜋
avoid over-weighting inflation moments by including many nearly identical
moments. The grid search procedure is relatively simple and draws 50 random
values for (𝛾 𝑥, 𝛾 𝜋 , 𝜌𝑖, 𝜎𝑥, 𝜎𝜋 , 𝜎𝑖) and picks the combination with the lowest
objective function. I repeat this algorithm until convergence, meaning that
the grid search result no longer changes starting from the calibrated values
for  each  subperiod  calibration.  The  only  parameter  value  that  reaches  the
externally set upper bound is 𝛾 𝑥 = 1 for the 2000s calibration. I regard this as
a plausible upper bound based on economic priors. Empirical ten-year CPI
inflation  expectations  are  from  the  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  after
1990 and from Blue Chip before that, available from the Philadelphia Fed.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040277C. Pflueger

Fig. 2. Local projections for inflation, output gap, and fed funds rate.
This figure shows quarterly regressions of the form 𝑧𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎0,ℎ + 𝑎1,ℎ𝑦𝑡 + 𝑎2,ℎ𝑦𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑡+ℎ and plots the regression coefficient 𝑎1,ℎ on the 𝑦-axis against horizon ℎ on the 𝑥-axis in the
model vs. the data. Panel A uses the output gap on the left-hand side and GDP deflator inflation on the right-hand side, i.e. 𝑧𝑡 = 𝑥𝑡 and 𝑦𝑡 = 𝜋𝑡. Panel B uses the output gap
on the left-hand side and the fed funds rate on the right-hand side, i.e. 𝑧𝑡 = 𝑥𝑡 and 𝑦𝑡 = 𝑖𝑡. Panel C uses the fed funds rate on the left-hand side and inflation on the right-hand
side, i.e. 𝑧𝑡 = 𝑖𝑡 and 𝑦𝑡 = 𝜋𝑡. Black dashed lines show the regression coefficients in the data. Thin dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals for the data coefficients based on
Newey–West standard errors with ℎ lags. Blue solid lines show the corresponding model regression coefficients averaged across 100 independent simulations of length 1000. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

reduced-form  approach  of Sims  and  Zha (2006)  allows  for  multiple
regime switches and also detects a shift in relative volatilities in 2000,
supporting the break date and shock calibrations in Table 1.

A  simple  newspaper  count  exercise  supports  the  high  perceived
volatility of supply shocks for the 1980s calibration and a much smaller
volatility  of  supply  shocks  for  the  2000s  calibration.14 Whether  one

interprets the demand shock as an increase in financial frictions or as
an expected growth shock, it is empirically plausible that its volatil-
ity  increased  from  the  first  subperiod  to  the  second  subperiod.  The
standard deviation of the Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) credit spread
doubled between the first and the second subperiods in the data (0.54%
vs. 1.06%). The standard deviation of expectations of one-year earnings
growth similarly more than doubled.15 The decline in the volatility of

14 For details of the newspaper count exercise see Appendix Figure A1. Fed
Chairman Alan Greenspan argued in favor of supply shocks in 1996 saying
‘‘(...)  powerful  forces  have  evolved  in  the  past  few  years  to  help  contain
inflationary  tendencies.  An  ever-increasing  share  of  our  nation’s  workforce
uses the tools of new technologies. Microchips embodied in physical capital
make it work more efficiently, and sophisticated software adds to intellectual
capital’’,Semiannualmonetarypolicyreport,U.S.SenateJuly18,1996.

15 Quarter-end  credit  spread  data  from https://www.federalreserve.gov/
econres/notes/feds-notes/updating-the-recession-risk-and-the-excess-bond-
premium-20161006.html Quarterly  data  on  one-year  earnings  growth
expectations  from De  La’O  and  Myers (2021)  ends  in  2015.Q3  and  was
obtained from https://www.ricardodelao.com/data (accessed 12/12/2022).

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040278C. Pflueger

Table 2
Quarterly asset prices and macro volatilities.

Asset Prices: Stocks

Equity Premium
Equity Vol
Equity SR
AR(1) pd
1 YR Excess Returns on pd
1 YR Excess Returns on pd (R2)

Asset Prices: Bonds

Expected Bond Exc. Return
Return Vol.
Nominal Bond-Stock Beta
Real Bond-Stock Beta
1 YR Excess Return on Yield Spread*
1 YR Excess Return on Yield Spread (R2)

Macroeconomic Volatilities

Std. Annual Cons. Growth*
Std Annual Change Fed Funds Rate*
Std. Annual Change 10-Year Subj. Infl. Forecast*

1979.Q4-2001.Q1

2001.Q2-2019.Q4

Model

7.33
14.95
0.49
0.96
−0.38
0.06

4.26
15.82
0.86
0.05
1.26
0.01

0.76
1.64
0.62

Data

7.96
16.42
0.48
1.00
−0.01
0.00

2.45
14.81
0.24
0.08
2.55
0.07

1.15
2.26
0.47

Model

8.78
18.46
0.48
0.93
−0.37
0.14

−0.76
1.91
−0.09
−0.08
−0.32
0.01

1.46
0.59
0.10

Data

7.64
16.80
0.45
0.84
−0.50
0.28

−0.55
9.28
−0.31
−0.06
0.86
0.02

1.15
1.40
0.09

Moments that are explicitly targeted in the calibration procedure are noted with an asterisk. The expected bond excess return
in the data starts in 1985 and is defined as the one-year expected return on an 11-year par bond with no Jensen’s inequality
adjustment using Blue Chip financial forecasters’ 4-quarter forecast of 10-year bond yields following Piazzesi, Salomao, and
Schneider (2015) and Nagel and Xu (2022). The model bond excess return is the steady-state excess return for a zero-coupon
ten-year bond. Ten-year CPI inflation expectations are from the Survey of Professional Forecasters after 1990 and from Blue
Chip before that. Long-term inflation forecast available from the Philadelphia Fed research website. Model ten-year inflation
expectations are computed as.

̃𝐸𝑡𝜋𝑡→𝑡+40 = 𝜁 𝜋𝑡−41→𝑡−1 + (1 − 𝜁)𝐸𝑡𝜋𝑡→𝑡+40, where 𝐸𝑡 denotes rational expectations.

long-term inflation expectations from the 1980s to the 2000s is well-
matched by the model, and the consumption growth and fed funds rate
volatilities are roughly in line with the data.16

3.4.  Adaptiveness of inflation expectations and leverage

I choose the adaptive inflation expectations parameter 𝜁 ∈ {0, 0.6}
to match the empirical evidence on bond excess return predictability
for each subperiod, while holding all other parameters constant at their
values chosen in the second step. This step is kept separate because
solving for asset prices is orders of magnitude slower than solving for
macroeconomic dynamics.17

Fig. 3 shows the predictability of bond excess returns from the yield
spread at different values for the inflation expectations parameter, 𝜁.
The model-implied Campbell-Shiller coefficients in Fig. 3 for the 1980s
subperiod indicate that fully rational inflation expectations (i.e. 𝜁 = 0)
are outside the 90% confidence interval of the data moment, and hence
rejected by the data.18 Of course, the distance to the macroeconomic
dynamics  is  affected  by  varying 𝜁 in  this  separate  step.  However,
viewed  more  broadly  within  the  econometric  literature  on  inflation
dynamics the macroeconomic fit improves, as setting 𝜁 =  0.6 in the

16 The  model  somewhat  undershoots  the  volatility  of  changes  in  the  fed
funds rate in both periods, potentially due to monetary policy timing decisions
about the very short-term that the model does not aim to capture and that are
empirically less important for long-term asset prices (Bernanke and Kuttner,
2005).
17 The objective function minimized in this step is Eq. (30) plus the squared
standardized difference between the model and data Campbell-Shiller bond
return predictability coefficient with a weight of 100. Inflation forecast error
regressions  along  the  lines  of Coibion  and  Gorodnichenko (2015)  further
support  partially  adaptive  inflation  expectations  in  the  1980s  and  rational
inflation expectations in the 2000s (see Appendix Table A3).
18 The  delta  method  standard  errors  in Table  1 for 𝜁 are  larger,  but
also a less reliable indicator of the true confidence interval. Whereas delta
method standard errors linearize the relationship between 𝜁 and model mo-
ments, Fig. 3 accounts for the full non-linear relationship between 𝜁 and the
Campbell-Shiller coefficient in the model.

1980s calibration makes the policy rate response in the left plot of Panel
C more persistent, in line with empirical evidence of a strong persistent
inflation  component  during  the  1980s  (Stock  and  Watson (2007)).
Appendix Figure A2 shows the macroeconomic model fit with 𝜁 = 0 vs.
𝜁 = 0.6. Intuitively, when inflation is highly persistent the expectations
hypothesis term in the yield spread cancels, the yield spread predicts
future  bond  excess  returns,  and  the  Campbell-Shiller  coefficient  is
positive. The link between bond excess return predictability and the
persistence of inflation is reminiscent of an older empirical literature
that has documented that the expectations hypothesis holds in time
periods and countries where interest rates are less persistent (Mankiw
et al. (1987), Hardouvelis (1994)). It is also consistent with Cieslak and
Povala (2015)’s evidence that removing trend inflation uncovers time-
varying risk premia in the yield curve. Bond risks therefore contribute
to the understanding of forward- vs. backward-looking Phillips curves
(Fuhrer (1997)) and expectations in New Keynesian models (Gabaix
(2020)).

The leverage parameter effectively scales up stock returns but leaves
all other model implications unchanged. I set it to roughly match the
volatility  of  equity  returns  in  the  data.  The  model  does  not  require
high leverage, with 𝛿 =  0.5 for the 1980s calibration corresponding
to a debt-to-assets ratio of 50%, and 𝛿 = 0.66 for the 2000s calibration
corresponding to a debt-to-assets ratio of 33%.

3.5.  Asset pricing implications

The  top  panels  of Table  2 show  that  asset  pricing  habit  prefer-
ences generate quantitatively plausible time-varying risk premia and
volatilities in stocks and bonds. The model matches the high equity
Sharpe ratio, equity volatility, stock excess return predictability, and
the persistence of price–dividend ratios, which would not be possible
in  a  model  with  constant  risk  aversion  (Mehra  and  Prescott, 1985).
Appendix Tables A1 and A2 show that time-varying risk premia are
responsible for the vast majority of model bond-stock covariances.

The  middle  panel  in Table  2 shows  that  the  model  explains  the
key pattern of bond-stock betas, even though they were not explicitly
targeted in the calibration. The model-implied nominal bond beta is
strongly  positive  and  much  larger  than  the  real  bond  beta  in  the

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)1040279C. Pflueger

Fig. 3. Model Campbell-Shiller predictability by inflation expectations.
This figure shows the model Campbell-Shiller bond excess return predictability regression coefficient 𝑏 from a regression of the form 𝑥𝑟$
+ 𝜀𝑡 using quarterly
overlapping observations and 𝑛 = 40 quarters in the model and in the data. On the 𝑥-axis is the parameter determining the adaptiveness of inflation expectations, 𝜁, which
determines the backward-looking component of the PC through (22) in the model. All other parameters are as in Table 1. The data coefficient is shown as a black dashed line
with 90% confidence intervals based on Newey–West standard errors with 4 lags. The blue solid line shows the model coefficient at each parameter value.  (For interpretation of
the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

𝑛,𝑡→𝑡+4 = 𝑎 + 𝑏

𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑦$
𝑦$
1,𝑡

)

(

1980s  calibration,  but  negative  and  close  to  the  real  bond  beta  in
the  2000s  calibration,  similar  to  the  data.19 Model-implied  nominal
Treasury bond excess returns are volatile in the 1980s calibration and
much less volatile in the 2000s calibration, again similar to the data.20
Steady-state  expected  bond  excess  returns  in  the  model  are  closely
related to betas, and switch sign from positive in the 1980s calibration
to  negative  in  the  2000s  calibration.  This  pattern  is  consistent  with
empirical expected bond excess returns based on professional survey
forecasts, constructed following Piazzesi et al. (2015) and Nagel and
Xu (2022).

The 1980s calibration generates a positive regression coefficient of
ten-year nominal bond excess returns with respect to the lagged slope
of the yield curve, as in the data and targeted in the calibration. On
the other hand, the 2000s calibration does not generate any such bond
excess return predictability, which is also in line with a much weaker
and  statistically  insignificant  relationship  in  the  data.  In  unreported
results, I find that the model does not generate return predictability
in real bond excess returns. This is broadly in line with the empirical
findings of Pflueger and Viceira (2016), who find stronger evidence for
predictability in nominal than real bond excess returns after adjusting
for time-varying liquidity.

4.  Counterfactual analysis and economic mechanism

What would it take for bonds to become similarly risky as in the
stagflationary  1980s,  and  what  would  this  tell  us  about  the  econ-
omy and monetary policy? In this Section, I show how nominal and
real  bond  betas  change  in  the  model  as  I  vary  the  uncertainty  of
macroeconomic shocks and the monetary policy rule. The adaptiveness
of  wage-setters’  inflation  expectations  is  found  to  matter  little  for
bond-stock betas.

4.1.  Counterfactual betas 1980s vs. 2000s

Fig. 4 shows that nominal bond betas remain negative but real bond
betas increase in the presence of shock volatilities similar to the 1980s,
provided that the monetary policy framework is more output-focused,
less inflation-focused, and more inertial than during the 1980s.

Panel A starts from the 1980s calibration and shows that changing
either the shock volatilities or the monetary policy rule towards the
2000s calibration flips nominal bonds from risky (i.e. positive nominal
bond beta) to safe (i.e. zero or negative nominal bond beta).21 Said
differently, the model does not imply positive nominal bond-stock betas
unless  it  has  both:  1980s-style  shock  volatilities  and  a  1980s-style
monetary policy rule. However, different from the 2000s calibration,
the  real  bond-stock  beta  in  the  ‘‘MP  All’’  counterfactual  in  Panel  A
is positive. The real bond-stock beta in this counterfactual is positive
because  supply  and  monetary  policy  shocks  dominate,  moving  the
output gap inversely to the real rate along the Euler Eq. (17). The next
two columns in Panel A show that changes in monetary policy inertia
(𝜌𝑖) and the long-term inflation and output weights (𝛾 𝑥, 𝛾 𝜋 ) both act in
the same direction, but that the output and inflation weights are more
important quantitatively. The last column shows that the adaptiveness
of wage-setters inflation expectations (𝜁) has little effect on bond-stock
betas.

Panel B of Fig. 4 shows the central result: Starting from the 2000s
calibration none of the changes to individual parameter groups have
the power to flip the sign of nominal bond betas. Most tellingly, the
‘‘Shocks’’ column implies that even if the shock volatilities were to re-
semble the 1980s, an inertial and more output-focused monetary policy
rule as in the 2000s would keep nominal bond-stock betas negative.
Real bond-stock betas in this counterfactual are pushed up by more
volatile supply and monetary policy shocks. This is directionally similar
to the ‘‘MP All’’ column in Panel A, which combines even more volatile
supply and monetary policy shocks with a 2000s-style monetary policy
rule. Overall, these counterfactuals indicate that positive nominal bond-
stock betas and stagflations are not the result of fundamental economic
shocks or monetary policy in isolation, but instead require the interac-
tion to create a ‘‘perfect storm’’. This interpretation is reminiscent of the
macroeconomics literature (Bernanke et al. (1997), Primiceri (2006)),
though this prior literature did not consider bond-stock betas. The last
column in Panel B again shows that the adaptiveness of wage-setters
inflation expectations is not priced in bond-stock betas.

My  counterfactuals  differ  from Rudebusch  and  Swanson (2012)’s
counterfactuals for term premia. In their long-run risks model nominal
term premia tend to be positive and are largest (i.e. nominal bonds

19 Fig. 8 shows that exactly matching the nominal bond-stock beta in the first
subperiod starting from the second subperiod also requires a high volatility of
supply shocks, further supporting that a high volatility of supply shocks is
consistent with financial moments in the first subperiod.
20 My model is consistent with Duffee (2011)’s evidence of low volatility
of inflation expectations relative to bond yields (‘‘inflation variance ratios’’),

as he also finds that habit models give reasonable implications due to their
volatile risk premia. Inflation variance ratios in my model range between 1∕3
to 1∕2.
21 In some cases, the equilibrium may not exist if I move a parameter group
all the way to the other calibration, so for comparability I move all parameter
groups to the average of the 1980s and 2000s calibrations.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402710C. Pflueger

Fig. 4. Counterfactual bond-stock betas.
This figure shows model-implied nominal and real bond betas while changing parameter groups one at a time. Panel A sets all parameters to the 1979.Q4-2001.Q1 calibration
unless stated otherwise. It reports bond betas while setting the following parameters to their averages of the 1979.Q4-2001.Q1 and 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 calibrations: ‘‘Shocks’’ (𝜎𝑥,
𝜎𝜋 , and 𝜎𝑖), ‘‘MP All’’ (𝜌𝑖, 𝛾 𝑥 and 𝛾 𝜋 ), ‘‘MP Inertia’’ (𝜌𝑖), ‘‘MP Output/Inflation Weights’’ (𝛾 𝑥 and 𝛾 𝜋 ), and ‘‘Inflation Expectations’’ (𝜁). Panel B does the reverse exercise, holding
all parameter values constant at the 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 baseline.

are riskiest) when monetary policy price level targeting is weak. By
contrast,  here  bond-stock  betas  can  be  positive  or  negative,  in  line
with  the  data,  and  are  highest  when  the  monetary  policy  inflation
coefficient is high. While resolving the debate between leading asset

pricing models is beyond this paper, a perspective based on cyclical
risk-bearing capacity seems useful as monetary policy has strong and
immediate  risk  premium  effects  in  the  data  (Bernanke  and  Kuttner
(2005), Boyd et al. (2005)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402711C. Pflueger

Fig. 5. Model macroeconomic impulse responses.
This figure shows model impulse responses for the output gap (%,), inflation (ann %), nominal policy rate (ann. %), and real one-quarter interest rate (ann. %). The impulse in the
left column is a one-percentage-point demand shock, in the middle column is a one-percentage-point Phillips curve or supply shock, and in the right column is a one-percentage-point
monetary policy shock. Impulse responses for the 1979.Q4-2001.Q1 calibration are shown in black, while the impulse responses for the 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 calibration are shown
in red dashed. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

4.2.  Mechanism

I now illustrate the mechanism through impulse response functions

for the macroeconomy and asset prices.

4.2.1.  Macroeconomic impulse responses

Fig. 5 shows model impulse responses for the output gap, nomi-
nal policy rate, and wage inflation to one-percentage-point demand,
supply, and monetary policy shocks. Because of the structure of the
model,  the  macroeconomic  impulse  responses  preserve  the  intuition
of a standard log-linearized three-equation New Keynesian model for
given  parameter  values,  but  parameter  values  are  partly  chosen  to
match evidence on bond excess return predictability.

The  first  column  in Fig.  5 shows  that  demand  shocks  move  the
output gap, the policy rate, and inflation in the same direction, as if
the economy moves along a stable Phillips curve. The responses are
similar for the 1980s and 2000s calibrations, though of course demand
shocks are more important in the 2000s calibration.

The middle column shows the interaction between supply shocks
and systematic monetary policy. For the 1980s calibration, a positive
supply shock leads to an immediate and persistent jump in inflation,
a rapid increase in the nominal policy rate, and a large and persistent
decline in the output gap—a stagflation. The inflation response is more
persistent  in  the  1980s  calibration  due  to  backward-looking  wage-
setter  inflation  expectations.  By  contrast,  for  the  2000s  calibration,
a monetary policy rule that prescribes little immediate tightening in
response to such a shock implies a real rate substantially below steady-
state for several quarters. As a result, the output gap follows a much
more moderate s-shaped path—a ‘‘soft landing’’. There is, however, a
trade-off, as can be seen from the higher peak inflation response in the
2000s calibration.

Finally, the third column in Fig. 5 shows intuitive responses to mon-
etary policy shocks. A positive monetary policy shock tends to lower the
output gap in a hump-shaped fashion and leads to a small and delayed
fall  in  inflation,  in  line  with  the  empirical  evidence  from  identified
monetary policy shocks (Ramey (2016)). The responses to a monetary
policy shock are similar across the 1980s and 2000s calibrations.

Taken together, the macroeconomic impulse responses show that
both supply shock uncertainty and a high monetary policy inflation
coefficient are needed to generate stagflations and negative inflation-
output  gap  comovement.  By  contrast,  inflation  and  the  output  gap
comove  little  if  monetary  policy  engineers  a  ‘‘soft  landing’’  after  an
inflationary  supply  shock.  Positive  inflation-output  gap  comovement
results after demand or monetary policy shocks. I next show how these
macroeconomic dynamics shape bonds and stocks with endogenously
time-varying risk premia.

4.2.2.  Asset price impulse responses

Since  time-varying  risk  premia  dominate  the  volatilities  of  asset
prices in the model, risk premia are crucial for the responses of bonds
and  stocks  to  shocks.  As  a  result,  the  responses  of  long-term  bond
yields in the model may even differ in sign from the expected path of
policy rates. The macroeconomic equilibrium is nonetheless at the root
of bond-stock comovements by determining whether bonds benefit or
suffer from ‘‘flight-to-safety’’ when risk aversion rises.

Fig. 6 shows impulse responses for the dividend yield of levered
stocks (top row), ten-year nominal bond yield (middle row), and ten-
year  real  bond  yield  (bottom  row).  Because  dividend  yields  are  in-
versely related to stock prices and bond yields are inversely related to
bond prices, a shock that moves stock dividend yields and bond yields
in the same direction tends to induce a positive bond-stock beta and
vice versa.

The stock dividend yield in Fig. 6 responds in the opposite direction
from the output gap depicted in the top row of Fig. 5. Adverse output
gap and consumption news lower expected dividends and the surplus
consumption ratio, raising risk aversion. The dividend yield hence rises,
and stock prices fall more than the expected discounted value of future
dividends. The top-middle panel shows that the dividend yield falls and
stock prices rise in response to an adverse supply shock in the 2000s
calibration, mirroring the initial output gap increase when monetary
policy generates a ‘‘soft landing’’ after an adverse supply shock. This
sign change in the model stock response is consistent with the empirical
finding that ‘‘bad news’’ for the macroeconomy is often ‘‘good news’’ for
the stock market, if investors price an accommodative monetary policy
response (Boyd et al. (2005), Elenev et al. (2024)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402712C. Pflueger

Fig. 6. Model asset price impulse responses.
This figure shows model impulse responses for the stock dividend yield, 10-year zero-coupon nominal bond yield, and 10-year zero-coupon real bond yield (all in ann. %).
The 1979.Q4-2001.Q1 calibration is shown with black solid lines and the 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 calibration is shown with red dashed lines. The impulse in the left column is a
one-percentage-point demand shock, in the middle column is a one-percentage-point Phillips curve or supply shock, and in the right column is a one-percentage-point monetary
policy shock. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The responses of long-term nominal and real bond yields in Fig. 6
differ  substantially  from  their  short-term  counterparts  in Fig.  5 due
to the endogenous nature of time-varying risk premia. For example,
the left column in Fig. 6 shows that long-term nominal bond yields
decrease following a positive demand shock in the 1980s calibration
but increase in the 2000s calibration, even though the corresponding
policy rate paths in Fig. 5 are very similar. This sign flip in the nominal
bond yield response occurs because the mix of shocks and monetary
policy makes nominal bonds resemble positive-𝛼 assets in Eq. (29) for
the 1980s calibration, but negative 𝛼 assets for the 2000s calibration. A
positive demand shock raises consumption relative to habit, lowering
risk aversion, and thereby making investors willing to pay more for
risky nominal bonds in the 1980s calibration. However, nominal bonds
have  hedging  value  in  the  2000s  calibration,  so  lower  risk  aversion
leads  investors  to  be  willing  to  pay  less  for  nominal  bonds  after  a
positive demand shock.

One might wonder whether ‘‘sentiment’’ shocks could turn bond-
stock  betas  negative  –  if  bonds  benefit  from  ‘‘flight-to-safety’’  –  or
positive – if bonds are viewed as risky similar to stocks. One advan-
tage  of  the  present  framework  is  that  such  ‘‘sentiment’’  shocks  are
endogenously linked to macroeconomic factors, reducing the degrees
of freedom that the model has to understand changes in bond risks. In-
tuitively, bonds benefit from ‘‘flight-to-safety’’ only if monetary policy
and the macroeconomic shock volatilities render their real cash flows
safe, i.e. if bonds pay out when investors’ marginal utility is high, such
as in the 2000s calibration. In this case, a decrease in consumption and
an increase in risk aversion lead investors to reduce their valuations of
risky stocks, but raise the amount they are willing to pay for safe bonds.
Conversely, if bonds’ real cash flows are risky, such as in the 1980s
calibration, an increase in investor risk aversion lowers the valuations
of both bonds and stocks through risk premia, amplifying the positive
bond-stock comovement. As a result, time-varying risk aversion is a
quantitatively important driver of bond-stock betas within the model
and turns bond-stock betas into forward-looking measures, but does not
change the sign of bond-stock betas in equilibrium.

4.3.  Counterfactual bond betas prevalent vs. realized shocks

Fig. 7 shows counterfactual nominal bond-stock betas when out-of-
equilibrium shocks are realized. The main finding is that the priced
equilibrium (or prevalent shocks) is more important for bond-stock be-
tas than realized shocks, due to time-varying risk premia. The first col-
umn in Fig. 7 shows nominal bond stock betas in the 1980s calibration
next to their risk-neutral counterpart, computed as the model regres-
sion coefficient of risk-neutral nominal bond excess returns (i.e. with
constant  nominal  bond  risk  premia)  onto  stock  excess  returns.  The
second column shows that moving the distributions of both prevalent
and realized shocks to the 2000s calibration generates negative nominal
bond-stock betas, similar to the 2000s calibration.22 The picture looks
different  in  the  third  column,  where  the  equilibrium  is  priced  as  if
future  shocks  follow  the  1980s  distribution  but  realized  shocks  are
drawn from the 2000s distribution. Different from the second column,
in  the  third  column  the  nominal  bond-stock  beta  remains  strongly
positive. However, similar to the second column, the risk-neutral nom-
inal  bond  beta  in  the  third  column  is  slightly  negative.  This  figure
hence suggests that overall nominal bond-stock betas reflect prevalent
shocks that are priced in equilibrium, while risk-neutral nominal bond-
stock betas tend to reflect realized shocks. The mechanism goes back
to the asset price impulse responses shown in left column of Fig. 6,
where time-varying risk premia lead long-term nominal bond yields to
comove positively with dividend yields following a demand shock when
the  1980s  calibration  is  priced  in  equilibrium,  but  not  if  the  2000s
calibration  is  priced  in  equilibrium.  Endogenously  time-varying  risk
premia therefore matter and imply that the macroeconomic equilibrium
is priced in bond-stock betas.

4.4.  Replicating 1980s bond-stock betas in the model

One might wonder whether the high volatility of supply shocks in
the 1980s calibration is supported by asset pricing moments during this

22 All other parameters, including the monetary policy parameters, are held
constant at the 1980s calibration.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402713C. Pflueger

Fig. 7. Nominal bond betas by prevalent vs. realized shocks.
This figure shows model-implied nominal bond betas (solid) and the betas of risk-neutral nominal bond returns with respect to the stock market (dashed) across prevalent and
realized shock distributions. The leftmost bars set all parameter values to the 1979.Q4-2001.Q1 calibration. The middle bars change both the realized and prevalent shock volatilities
to the 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 values, i.e. the equilibrium is recomputed at the 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 shock volatilities. The rightmost bars change only the realized but not the prevalent
shock volatilities to their 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 values, i.e. equilibrium asset prices are not recomputed and only the simulated shocks drawn from the 2001.Q2-2019.Q4 distribution.

Fig. 8. Model-implied nominal bond-stock beta vs. 1980s bond-stock beta.
Note: This figure shows model ten-year nominal bond-stock betas (blue circles) against the standard deviation of supply shocks 𝜎𝜋 on the 𝑥-axis and the MP inflation weight 𝛾 𝜋
on the 𝑦-axis while holding the monetary policy inertia coefficient constant at 𝜌𝑖 = 0.54 (Panel A) and 𝜌𝑖 = 0.80 (Panel B), respectively. All other parameters are set to their values
in the 2000s calibration in Table 1. The orange plane indicates the empirical ten-year nominal bond-stock beta for the 1979.Q4-2001.Q1 subperiod. (For interpretation of the
references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

period. Fig. 8 shows that a high supply shock volatility is indeed needed
to replicate the bond-stock betas observed in the first subperiod starting
from the model calibration for the second subperiod. In addition, it
shows that a monetary policy rule with a high inflation weight and low
inertia – similar to the rule in the 1980s calibration – is also necessary.
Fig. 8 plots nominal bond-stock betas implied by the model starting
from the 2000s calibration against an increasing supply shock standard
deviation 𝜎𝜋 on the 𝑥-axis, and the monetary policy weight 𝛾 𝜋 on the
𝑦-axis.  The  model-implied  nominal  bond-stock  beta  is  depicted  with
blue circles on the 𝑧-axis, with a plane indicating the empirical 1980s
nominal bond-stock beta. Dependence on the monetary policy inertia
coefficient 𝜌𝑖 is also depicted, with 𝜌𝑖 = 0.54 in Panel A and 𝜌𝑖 = 0.80
in Panel B.

Fig.  8 shows  that  a  high  volatility  of  supply  shocks  is  necessary
to explain the empirically observed nominal bond-stock betas within
the model. Consistent with the notion that a ‘‘perfect storm’’ is needed
to make bonds risky again, it further shows that a high supply shock

volatility  is  necessary  but  not  sufficient  to  replicate  the  high  nom-
inal  bond-stock  betas  of  the  1980s.  In  both  Panels  A  and  B,  the
model-implied  bond-stock  beta  is  highest  in  the  back-right  corner,
corresponding to a high monetary policy inflation weight and a high
volatility of supply shocks. In Panel A, where the monetary policy rule
is assumed to have only moderate inertia as plausible for the 1980s,
the model can replicate the 1980s bond-stock beta if the supply shock
≥ 0.9 and the monetary policy inflation weight
volatility is high at 𝜎𝜋
is also high at 𝛾 𝜋 ≥ 2.0.23 The model nominal bond-stock betas in Panel
B are smaller than the observed nominal bond-stock betas during the

23 Because Fig. 8 starts from the 2000s calibration and hence includes a
volatile demand shock, this pushes nominal bond-stock betas downwards. As
a result, the supply shock volatility required to explain the positive nominal
bond-stock beta in Fig. 8 is even larger than the supply shock volatility for
the 1980s calibration, which features negligible demand shock volatility.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402714C. Pflueger

Fig. 9. Timeline of post-pandemic inflation and monetary policy.
Note: This figure shows CPI headline inflation for all urban consumers (CPIAUCSL) over the past twelve months (ann, %) and the effective federal funds rate (DFF, ann, %) for
the sample 01/01/2018 through 31/12/2023. Monthly data is from the St. Louis Fred. A vertical line indicates March 11, 2020 (Covid).

1980s, indicating that lower monetary policy inertia is also necessary
to explain bond risks in this earlier period. Overall, reverse-engineering
the  nominal  bond-stock  betas  observed  during  the  1980s  from  the
model calibration for the second subperiod provides additional support
to the notion that investors viewed supply shocks as highly volatile
during this period.

5.  Post-pandemic bond risks and monetary policy

This Section applies the model to analyze bond-stock betas from
daily returns during the recent post-pandemic period. This period was
marked by heightened concerns over supply shocks and an inflation-
ary  surge  not  seen  since  the  1980s.  Dividing  the  analysis  into  an
early post-pandemic (until 2023.Q2) and a late post-pandemic period
(2023.Q3-Q4), I find that the model can explain negative nominal and
positive real bond-stock betas during the early post-pandemic with a
low inflation coefficient and 1980s-style shocks. However, for the later
post-pandemic  the  model  requires  a  high  monetary  policy  inflation
coefficient with 1980s-style shocks, explaining positive nominal, real,
and breakeven (i.e. nominal-minus-real) bond betas during this last part
of the sample.

Fig. 9 depicts the timeline of inflation and the federal funds rate
from  2018  to  2023.  Inflation  began  to  accelerate  sharply  in  2021.
However, monetary policy initially remained passive, with the federal
funds rate held at the zero-lower-bound.24 The Fed lifted off from the
zero-lower-bound in March 2022, with the hiking cycle plateauing in
July  2023  at  a  policy  rate  of  5.25–5.5%. Bauer  et  al. (2024b)  use
rich survey data to argue that this late rise in the policy rate led to
a late rise in the monetary policy inflation coefficient as perceived by
professional forecasters, with the perceived monetary policy inflation
coefficient peaking in the second half of 2023.25 Macroeconomic de-
velopments hence suggest dividing the post-pandemic period into two
distinct phases: An early post-pandemic phase characterized by a low
Fed response and a later phase featuring a substantially more active
Fed response to inflation.

24 For example, Fed Chairman Powell reiterated the Fed’s commitment to a
near-zero rate, despite headline CPI running at 5%–6% annually in his 2021
Jackson Hole speech. Jerome Powell, ‘‘Monetary Policy in the Time of COVID’’,
Speech at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium, August 27, 2021.
25 Since the forecast horizon in Bauer et al. (2024b) is shorter, the mag-
nitudes  of  the  estimated  perceived  inflation  coefficients  are  not  directly
comparable  to  those  priced  in  bond-stock  betas  over  the  lifetime  of  the
bond. Bocola et al. (2024) also provide evidence that the perceived monetary
policy inflation coefficient was low during the earlier post-pandemic period
2021–2022.

Fig. 10 shows rolling bond-stock betas computed using daily returns
for the post-pandemic period. It shows that despite parallels between
the 1980s and 2020s inflation, bond risks evolved differently during the
recent post-pandemic period.26 Panel A shows that throughout 2021
and  2022,  nominal  bond  betas  broadly  remained  negative,  even  at
the inflationary peak, while real bond betas turned slightly positive.
Panel B shows that during this period nominal bond-stock betas were
either  significantly  lower  than  real  bond-stock  betas  or  at  least  not
statistically significantly different. Since breakeven (or nominal-minus-
real bond) returns are inversely related to inflation expectations, this
indicates that the inflationary dynamics priced in bond-stock betas were
still procyclical. This outcome aligns with the counterfactual combining
1980s  shock  volatilities  with  a  monetary  policy  rule  reflecting  the
1980s–2000s average (see Fig. 4 Panel A, ‘‘Shocks’’ column).

However, in the second half of 2023, Fig. 1, Panel B shows that
breakeven  betas  did  turn  significantly  positive,  suggesting  that  the
priced  cyclicality  of  inflation  expectations  had  changed.  I  interpret
these  patterns  as  providing  out-of-sample  confirmation  of  the  key
model predictions if supply shocks were a significant concern through-
out  the  post-pandemic  period,  but  the  priced  monetary  policy  rule
changed from a low inflation coefficient in the early post-pandemic to
a high inflation coefficient in the later post-pandemic.

Table  3 reports  nominal  and  real  bond-stock  betas  using  daily
log  returns  for  the  early  and  late  post-pandemic  periods,  and  the
best fit from the model starting from the 2000s calibration. I divide
the  post-pandemic  period  into  two  distinct  phases:  An  early  post-
pandemic phase (2020.Q2–2023.Q2) characterized by a low or negative
breakeven  beta,  and  a  later  phase  (2023.Q3–2023.Q4)  featuring  a
significantly positive breakeven-stock beta. As discussed, this segmen-
tation also lines up roughly with the increase in the monetary policy
inflation coefficient as perceived by professionals and investors. I use
the model to find the monetary policy inflation weight and the macroe-
conomic shocks that provide the closest fit for the empirically observed
bond-stock betas. To account for strongly anchored long-term inflation
expectations  during  the  recent  period  and  to  stack  the  deck  against
finding a role for volatile long-term inflation expectations, wage-setters’
inflation expectations are assumed to be rational in Table 3.27 I vary

26 To isolate variation in bond risk over shorter time intervals, bond-stock
betas are computed using 120-day rolling window regressions of daily log bond
returns onto daily log stock returns. The estimates in Panel A are roughly
consistent with the lower-frequency estimates in Fig. 1, though of course betas
from daily data are more volatile.
27 I minimize an objective function that is the sum of squared differences
between the data and model moments listed in the top panel in Table 3. To

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402715C. Pflueger

Fig. 10. Post-pandemic bond-stock betas from daily data.
Note: Panel A shows betas from regressing daily ten-year nominal and TIPS bond log returns onto daily US S&P 500 log returns over 120-trading day backward-looking rolling
windows for the sample 01/01/2018 through 31/12/2023. Daily log bond returns are computed from zero-coupon yield curves, available from Gürkaynak et al. (2007, 2010). A
vertical line indicates March 11, 2020 (Covid). 90% confidence intervals based on heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are shown in dashed. Panel B shows the difference
between the nominal and real (TIPS) bond-stock beta with 90% confidence intervals based on Huber-White heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.

Table 3
Model-implied Post-pandemic monetary policy and shocks.

Bond-Stock Betas

Nominal Bond-Stock Beta
Real Bond-Stock Beta

Model Parameters

Early Post-Pandemic
2020.Q2-2023.Q2

Data

−0.01
0.05

Model

−0.04
0.12

Late Post-Pandemic
2023.Q3-2023.Q4

Data

0.49
0.39

Model

0.42
0.14

MP Inflation Coefficient 𝛾 𝜋
Shocks

1.3
1979.Q4-2001.Q1
Note: This table shows nominal and real bond-stock betas from daily data for the early and late post-pandemic periods,
together with the best fit from the model. Daily log stock and bond return data sources are as in Fig. 10. The monetary
policy inflation weight is allowed to vary over 𝛾 𝜋 ∈ [1.1, 1.2, … , 2.0]. The shock volatilities are allowed to vary over the 1980s
calibration, the 2000s calibration, or (𝜎𝑥, 𝜎𝜋 , 𝜎𝑖) = (0.00, 0.00, 1.19). The following parameters are held constant: 𝜁 = 0, 𝛾 𝑥 = 0.5,
and 𝜌𝑖 = 0.8. All other parameter values are as Table 1. Nominal and real bond betas in the data are computed from daily
bond and stock log returns.

2
1979.Q4-2001.Q1

save on computational complexity the shock volatilities are allowed to take
only three sets of possible values, the 1980s calibration, the 2000s calibration,
or dominant monetary policy shocks. I set (𝜎𝑥, 𝜎𝜋 , 𝜎𝑖) = (0.00, 0.00, 1.19) for the
third set of shock volatilities. However, the precise magnitude of the volatility
of monetary policy shocks is not crucial here, since bond-stock betas are a ratio

and therefore reflect the relative volatility of monetary policy shocks compared
to other shocks. Monetary policy parameters other than 𝛾 𝜋 are held constant
at conventional values, 𝛾 𝑥 = 0.5, and 𝜌𝑖 = 0.8. Scatter plots of model nominal
and real bond-stock betas for all considered shock volatilities and monetary
policy parameters are shown in Appendix Figure A5.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402716C. Pflueger

only  the  monetary  policy  inflation  weight 𝛾 𝜋 for  this  exercise,  as  a
higher value of 𝛾 𝜋 in the presence of supply shocks acts similarly to
lower inertia 𝜌𝑖 or a lower output gap weight 𝛾 𝑥, and varying all three
monetary policy parameters would not necessarily be identified. The
implied 𝛾 𝜋 in Table 3 hence should be interpreted broadly as monetary
policy ‘‘hawkishness’’.

I  find  that  the  model  matches  the  changes  in  nominal  and  real
bond-stock betas with a shift from a low to a high inflation coefficient
in  monetary  policy.  For  the  entire  post-pandemic  period,  the  model
requires  that  investors  priced  similar  shock  volatilities  to  the  1980s
calibration, in line with anecdotal evidence of significant supply shock
concerns.28 The  1980s  shock  volatilities  also  feature  highly  volatile
monetary policy shocks, complementing high supply shock uncertainty
by  further  driving  up  nominal  and  real  bond-stock  betas.  However,
monetary  policy  shocks  by  themselves  cannot  explain  the  negative
nominal  bond  stock  beta  in  the  early  post-pandemic  period,  or  the
positive breakeven beta in the late post-pandemic period, and therefore
the model favors the 1980s mix of shocks with both volatile supply and
monetary policy shocks.

Overall,  the  model’s  implied  sequence  of  monetary  policy  coeffi-
cients and macroeconomic uncertainty aligns well with the timeline
of post-pandemic events. The post-pandemic period therefore provides
out-of-sample evidence that supply shock uncertainty combined with
inflation-focused monetary policy are both essential to turn bonds into
a risky asset class as in the 1980s.

The  framework  in  this  paper  provides  an  intuitive  interpretation
of  post-pandemic  developments  in  bond-stock  betas,  implying  that
investors  initially  priced  a  low  monetary  policy  inflation  coefficient
during the initial inflation run-up, but a much higher inflation coef-
ficient towards the peak of the latest hiking cycle. More broadly, when
the economy is driven by volatile supply shocks, nominal bond stock
betas in the model emerge as a forward-looking indicator of ‘‘soft land-
ings’’. This analysis suggests that further research on financial market
comovements and their connection to drivers of the macroeconomy is
likely to be fruitful.

Declaration of competing interest

I have nothing to disclose.

Appendix A.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104027.

Data availability

Pflueger "Back to the 1980s or Not" - Data and Code (Original data)
(Mendeley Data)

6.  Conclusion

References

A  New  Keynesian  asset  pricing  model  with  countercyclical  risk-
bearing  capacity  shows  that  the  interaction  between  supply  shocks
and inflation-focused monetary policy leads to positive nominal bond-
stock betas, as observed during the stagflationary 1980s. Conversely, a
combination of 1980s-style shocks with a more output-focused and in-
ertial monetary policy rule leads to a ‘‘soft landing’’, which is priced in
negative nominal bond-stock betas, and positive real bond-stock betas.
However, bond-stock betas do not price realized shocks in this model,
but instead the expected equilibrium mix of shocks going forward.

The mechanism works through the monetary policy trade-off be-
tween  inflation  and  output  after  a  supply  shock  and  endogenously
time-varying risk premia. An adverse supply shock in the model gener-
ally moves inflation expectations up and output down, which leads to
simultaneous falls in nominal bond and stock prices. However, mone-
tary policy can alter these implications and engineer a ‘‘soft landing’’ if
the central bank keeps nominal rates sufficiently steady and allows the
real rate to fall. A less inflation-focused or inertial monetary policy rule
mitigates the positive bond-stock comovement that would otherwise
result from supply shocks. By contrast, demand shocks move output and
inflation up and down together independently of the monetary policy
rule, implying negative nominal and real bond-stock betas, as observed
during the pre-pandemic 2000s.

Time-varying  risk  premia  generate  predictability  in  stocks  and
bonds, and imply that bond-stock betas price the distribution of shocks
in  equilibrium  rather  than  past  realized  shocks.  When  investors  are
surprised by realized demand shocks but bonds and stocks are priced
as if 1980s shocks are prevalent, the model nominal bond-stock beta
is similarly positive as in the 1980s calibration. Intuitively, bond and
stock  returns  are  dominated  by  time-varying  risk  premia,  and  in  a
1980s-type equilibrium nominal bonds’ real cash flows are stock-like,
so risk premia in nominal bonds and stocks also move together.

28 The  similarities  in  supply  shock  concerns  between  the  1980s  and  the
recent period are evident in Appendix Figure A1, which shows related article
counts in the Wall Street Journal. The literature on recent inflation dynamics
also attributes a significant role to supply shocks (Reis (2022), Di Giovanni
et al. (2022), Gagliardone and Gertler (2023), Rubbo (2022)).

Abel, A.B., 1990. Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses.

Am. Econ. Rev. 80, 38–42.

Albuquerque, R., Eichenbaum, M., Luo, V.X., Rebelo, S., 2016. Valuation risk and asset

pricing. J. Financ. 71 (6), 2861–2904.

Baele, L., Bekaert, G., Inghelbrecht, K., 2010. The determinants of stock and bond

return comovements. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (6), 2374–2428.

Bauer, M.D., Pflueger, C.E., Sunderam, A., 2024a. Perceptions about monetary policy.

Q. J. Econ. 139 (4), 2227–2278.

Bauer, M., Pflueger, C., Sunderam, A., 2024b. Changing perceptions and post-pandemic
monetary  policy.  In:  Proceedings  of  2024  Jackson  Hole  Economic  Symposium.
(forthcoming).

Bauer, M.D., Swanson, E.T., 2023. A reassessment of monetary policy surprises and

high-frequency identification. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 37 (1), 87–155.

Beaudry, P., Portier, F., 2006. Stock prices, news, and economic fluctuations. Am. Econ.

Rev. 96 (4), 1293–1307.

Bernanke, B.S., Gertler, M., 2001. Should central banks respond to movements in asset

prices? Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. Proc. 91 (2), 253–257.

Bernanke, B.S., Gertler, M., Watson, M., 1997. Systematic monetary policy and the

effects of oil price shocks. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 1997 (1), 91–157.

Bernanke,  B.S.,  Kuttner,  K.N.,  2005.  What  explains  the  stock  market’s  reaction  to

Federal Reserve policy? J. Financ. 60 (3), 1221–1257.

Bianchi, F., Faccini, R., Melosi, L., 2023. A fiscal theory of trend inflation. Q. J. Econ.

Bianchi, F., Ilut, C., 2017. Monetary/fiscal policy mix and agents’ beliefs. Rev. Econ.

(forthcoming).

Dyn. 26, 113–139.

Bianchi, F., Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S.C., 2022a. Monetary policy and asset valuation.

J. Financ. 77 (2), 967–1017.

Bianchi, J., Lorenzoni, G., 2021. The prudential use of capital controls and foreign

currency reserves. Handb. Int. Econ. Vol. V.

Bianchi,  F.,  Ludvigson,  S.C.,  Ma,  S.,  2022b.  Belief  distortions  and  macroeconomic

fluctuations. Am. Econ. Rev. 112 (7), 2269–2315.

Bianchi,  F.,  Ludvigson,  S.C.,  Ma,  S.,  2022c.  Monetary-based  asset  pricing:  A
mixed-frequency  structural  approach.  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research
wp30072.

Blanchard,  O.J.,  Kahn,  C.M.,  1980.  The  solution  of  linear  difference  models  under

rational expectations. Econometrica 1305–1311.

Bocola, L., Dovis, A., Jørgensen, K., Kirpalani, R., 2024. Bond market views of the Fed.

NBER Working Paper wp32620.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., LaPorta, R., Shleifer, A., 2022. Belief overreaction and stock
market puzzles. Working paper, Oxford, Bocconi, Brown University, and Harvard
University.

Boyd, J.H., Hu, J., Jagannathan, R., 2005. The stock market’s reaction to unemployment
news: Why bad news is usually good for stocks. J. Financ. 60 (2), 649–672.
Caballero,  R.J.,  Simsek,  A.,  2020.  A  risk-centric  model  of  demand  recessions  and

macroprudential policy. Q. J. Econ. (forthcoming).

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402717Caballero, R.J., Simsek, A., 2022. A monetary policy asset pricing model. NBER Working

Gürkaynak, R.S., Sack, B., Wright, J.H., 2007. The US Treasury yield curve: 1961 to

C. Pflueger

Paper wp30132.

Campbell,  J.Y.,  Cochrane,  J.H.,  1999.  By  force  of  habit:  A  consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. J. Political Econ. 107, 205–251.
Campbell, J.Y., Pflueger, C., Viceira, L.M., 2020. Macroeconomic drivers of bond and

equity risks. J. Political Econ. 128 (8), 3148–3185.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1991. Yield spreads and interest rate movements: A bird’s

eye view. Rev. Econ. Stud. 58 (3), 495–514.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., Viceira, L.M., 2009. Understanding inflation-indexed bond

markets. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 79–138.

Campbell, J.Y., Sunderam, A., Viceira, L.M., 2017. Inflation bets or deflation hedges?

The changing risks of nominal bonds. Crit. Financ. Rev. 6 (2), 263–301.

Chan, Y.L., Kogan, L., 2002. Catching up with the Joneses: Heterogeneous preferences

and the dynamics of asset prices. J. Political Econ. 110 (6), 1255–1285.

Chernov,  M.,  Lochstoer,  L.A.,  Song,  D.,  2021.  The  real  explanation  of  nominal
bond-stock  puzzles.  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper,  wp
29085.

Christiano, L.J., Eichenbaum, M., Evans, C.L., 1999. Monetary policy shocks: What have

we learned and to what end? Handb. Macroecon. 1, 65–148.

Christiano, L.H., Eichenbaum, M., Evans, C.L., 2005. Nominal rigidities and the dynamic

effects of a shock to monetary policy. J. Political Econ. 113 (1), 1–45.

Cieslak, A., McMahon, M., Pang, H., 2024. Did I make myself clear? The Fed and the

market in the post-2020 framework period. Working Paper.

Cieslak, A., Povala, P., 2015. Expected returns in Treasury bonds. Rev. Financ. Stud.

28 (10), 2859–2901.

Stud. 34 (9), 4045–4089.

Cieslak, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2021. The economics of the Fed put. Rev. Financ.

Clarida,  R.,  Gali,  J.,  Gertler,  M.,  2000.  Monetary  policy  rules  and  macroeconomic

stability: Evidence and some theory. Q. J. Econ. 115 (1), 147–180.

Cochrane, J.H., 2011. Determinacy and identification with Taylor rules. J. Political

Econ. 119 (3), 565–615.

Cogley,  T.,  Sargent,  T.J.,  2008.  Anticipated  utility  and  rational  expectations  as
approximations  of  Bayesian  decision  making.  Internat.  Econom.  Rev.  49  (1),
185–221.

Coibion,  O.,  Gorodnichenko,  Y.,  2015.  Information  rigidity  and  the  expectations
formation process: A simple framework and new facts. Am. Econ. Rev. 105 (8),
2644–2678.

David, A., Veronesi, P., 2013. What ties return volatilities to fundamentals and price

valuations? J. Political Econ. 121, 682–746.

De La’O, R., Myers, S., 2021. Subjective cash flow and discount rate expectations. J.

Financ. 76 (3), 1339–1387.

Di Giovanni, J., Kalemli-Özcan, S., Silva, A., Yildirim, M.A., 2022. Global supply chain
pressures, international trade, and inflation. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper, wp30240.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2018. A model of monetary policy and risk premia.

J. Financ. 73 (1), 317–373.

167–181.

24 (9), 2895–2934.

Duffee, G.R., 2011. Information in (and not in) the term structure. Rev. Financ. Stud.

Elenev, V., Law, T.H., Song, D., Yaron, A., 2024. Fearing the Fed: How Wall Street

reads Main Street. J. Financ. Econ. 153, 103790.

Fang,  X.,  Liu,  Y.,  Roussanov,  N.,  2022.  Getting  to  the  core:  Inflation  risks  within
and across asset classes. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
wp30169.

Favilukis, J., Lin, X., 2016. Wage rigidity: A quantitative solution to several asset pricing

puzzles. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (1), 148–192.

Fuhrer,  J.C.,  1997.  The  (un)  importance  of  forward-looking  behavior  in  price

specifications. J. Money, Credit. Bank. 29, 338–350.

Fuhrer, J., Moore, G., 1995. Inflation persistence. Q. J. Econ. 110 (1), 127–159.
Gabaix,  X.,  2020.  A  behavioral  New  Keynesian  model.  Am.  Econ.  Rev.  110  (8),

Gabaix, X., Maggiori, M., 2015. International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. Q.

2271–2327.

J. Econ. 130 (3), 1369–1420.

the present. J. Monet. Econ. 54 (8), 2291–2304.

Gürkaynak,  R.S.,  Sack,  B.,  Wright,  J.H.,  2010.  The  TIPS  yield  curve  and  inflation

compensation. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 2 (1), 70–92.

Hardouvelis, G.A., 1994. The term structure spread and future changes in long and short
rates in the G7 countries: Is there a puzzle? J. Monet. Econ. 33 (2), 255–283.
Hazell, J., Herreno, J., Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2022. The slope of the Phillips

curve: Evidence from US states. Q. J. Econ. 137, 1299–1344.

Hazell, J., Hobler, S., 2024. Do deficits cause inflation? A high frequency narrative

approach.

He, Z., Nagel, S., Song, Z., 2022. Treasury inconvenience yields during the COVID-19

Itskhoki, O., Mukhin, D., 2021. Exchange rate disconnect in general equilibrium. J.

crisis. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 57–79.

Political Econ. 129 (8), 2183–2232.

Jiang, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., Lustig, H., 2021. Foreign safe asset demand and the dollar

exchange rate. J. Financ. 76 (3), 1049–1089.

Jurado, K., Ludvigson, S.C., Ng, S., 2015. Measuring uncertainty. Am. Econ. Rev. 105

(3), 1177–1216.

Kekre, R., Lenel, M., 2021. The flight to safety and international risk sharing. National

Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper wp29238.

Kekre,  R.,  Lenel,  M.,  2022.  Monetary  policy,  redistribution,  and  risk  premia.

Econometrica 90 (5), 2249–2282.

Kekre, R., Lenel, M., Mainardi, F., 2024. Monetary policy, segmentation, and the term

structure. NBER Working Paper wp32324.

Kozak, S., 2022. Dynamics of bond and stock returns. J. Monet. Econ. 126, 188–209.
Kozak, S., Santosh, S., 2020. Why do discount rates vary? J. Financ. Econ. 137 (3),

740–751.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The aggregate demand for Treasury

debt. J. Political Econ. 120 (2), 233–267.

Kung,  H.,  2015.  Macroeconomic  linkages  between  monetary  policy  and  the  term

structure of interest rates. J. Financ. Econ. 115 (1), 42–57.

Laarits, T., 2022. Precautionary savings and the stock-bond covariance. Working Paper,

NYU Stern School of Business.

Li, E.X., Zha, T., Zhang, J., Zhou, H., 2022. Does fiscal policy matter for stock-bond

return correlation? J. Monet. Econ. 128, 20–34.

Liu,  Z.,  Waggoner,  D.F.,  Zha,  T.,  2011.  Sources  of  macroeconomic  fluctuations:  A

regime-switching DSGE approach. Quant. Econ. 2 (2), 251–301.

Lucas, R.E.J., 1988. On the mechanics of economic development. J. Monet. Econ. 22,

3–42.

(1), 53–87.

Malmendier, U., Nagel, S., 2016. Learning from inflation experiences. Q. J. Econ. 131

Mankiw,  N.G.,  Miron,  J.A.,  Weil,  D.N.,  1987.  The  adjustment  of  expectations  to  a
change in regime: A study of the founding of the federal reserve. Am. Econ. Rev.
77, 358–374.

Mehra, R., Prescott, E.C., 1985. The equity premium: A puzzle. J. Monet. Econ. 15 (2),

Nagel,  S.,  Xu,  Z.,  2022.  Dynamics  of  subjective  risk  premia.  National  Bureau  of

Economic Research working paper wp29803.

Pflueger, C., Rinaldi, G., 2022. Why does the Fed move markets so much? A model of
monetary policy and time-varying risk aversion. J. Financ. Econ. 146, 71–89.
Pflueger, C., Siriwardane, E., Sunderam, A., 2020. Financial market risk perceptions

and the macroeconomy. Q. J. Econ. 135 (3), 1443–1491.

Pflueger, C.E., Viceira, L.M., 2016. Return predictability in the Treasury market: Real
rates, inflation, and liquidity. In: Veronesi, P. (Ed.), Handbook in Fixed-Income
Securities. Wiley, New Jersey.

Piazzesi,  M.,  Salomao,  J.,  Schneider,  M.,  2015.  Trend  and  cycle  in  bond  premia.

Working Paper, Stanford University and University of Minnesota.

Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., 2006. Equilibrium yield curves. NBER Macroecon. Annu.

Primiceri, G.E., 2006. Why inflation rose and fell: Policy-makers’ beliefs and US postwar

stabilization policy. Q. J. Econ. 121 (3), 867–901.

Ramey, V.A., 2016. Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation. Handb. Macroecon.

21, 389–472.

2, 71–162.

Du,  W.,  Im,  J.,  Schreger,  J.,  2018.  The  US  Treasury  premium.  J.  Int.  Econ.  112,

145–161.

1986 (2), 237–284.

(1), 75–97.

Econ. Rev. 102 (4), 1692–1720.

Perspect. 21 (4), 47–68.

Gagliardone, L., Gertler, M., 2023. Oil prices, monetary policy and inflation surges.

National Bureau of Economic Research wp31263.

Gately, D., 1986. Lessons from the 1986 oil price collapse. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act.

Reis, R., 2022. The burst of high inflation in 2021–22: How and why did we get here?.

Working paper, London School of Economics.

Rotemberg, J.J., 1982. Monopolistic price adjustment and aggregate output. Rev. Econ.

Gilchrist, S., Leahy, J.V., 2002. Monetary policy and asset prices. J. Monet. Econ. 49

Rubbo,  E.,  2022.  Networks,  phillips  curves,  and  monetary  policy.  Working  Paper,

Stud. 49 (4), 517–531.

University of Chicago.

Gilchrist, S., Zakrajšek, E., 2012. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. Am.

Goodfriend, M., 2007. How the world achieved consensus on monetary policy. J. Econ.

Rudebusch,  G.D.,  Swanson,  E.T.,  2012.  The  bond  premium  in  a  DSGE  model  with
long-run real and nominal risks. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 4 (1), 105–143.
Sims, C.A., Zha, T., 2006. Were there regime switches in US monetary policy? Am.

Econ. Rev. 96 (1), 54–81.

Gourio, F., Ngo, P., 2020. Risk premia at the ZLB: A macroeconomic interpretation.

Smets, F., Wouters, R., 2007. Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: A Bayesian

Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

DSGE approach. Am. Econ. Rev. 97, 586–606.

Gourio, F., Ngo, P., 2022. Downward nominal rigidities and term premia. Working

Song, D., 2017. Bond market exposures to macroeconomic and monetary policy risks.

Paper, Chicago Federal Reserve and Cleveland State University.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (8), 2761–2817.

Greenwood, J., Hercowitz, Z., Huffman, G.W., 1988. Investment, capacity utilization,

Stock, J.H., Watson, M.W., 2007. Why has US inflation become harder to forecast? J.

and the real business cycle. Am. Econ. Rev. 402–417.

Money Credit. Bank. 39, 3–33.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402718C. Pflueger

Swanson,  E.T.,  2021.  A  macroeconomic  model  of  equities  and  real,  nominal,  and

defaultable debt. Working paper, University of California, Irvine.

Swanson, E.T., Williams, J.C., 2014. Measuring the effect of the zero lower bound on
medium-and longer-term interest rates. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (10), 3154–3185.
Taylor, J.B., 1993. Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carnegie- Rochester Conf.

Ser. Public Policy 39, 195–214.

Uhlig, H., 1999. A toolkit for analysing nonlinear dynamic stochastic models easily. In:
Marimon, R., Scott, A. (Eds.), Computational Methods for the Study of Dynamic
Economics. Oxford University Press, pp. 30–61.

JournalofFinancialEconomics167(2025)10402719