Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Distributed ledgers and the governance of money✩
Raphael Auer a, Cyril Monnet b
a Bank for International Settlement, Switzerland
b University of Bern and Study Center Gerzensee, Switzerland

,∗, Hyun Song Shin a

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Distributed ledgers promise to enable the classical vision of money as a universal transaction record. But is
it ever optimal to update a ledger through decentralized consensus? Analyzing an exchange economy with
credit, we show that centralized updating is optimal when long-term rewards are more valued, minimizing
redundant validation costs and maximizing economic surplus. Decentralization becomes preferable under
weaker intertemporal incentives and when validators are drawn from market participants. We show how
competing ledgers – anonymous or identified, permissioned or permissionless – can achieve socially optimal
outcomes even in low-trust environments. Our framework provides a foundation for designing robust and
efficient ledger systems.

JEL classification:
C72
C73
D4
E42
G2
L86

Keywords:
Market design
Money
Distributed ledger technology
DLT blockchain
Cryptocurrencies
Decentralized finance (DeFi)
Global game
Consensus
Stablecoins

1.  Introduction

Money, whether in the form of clay pots, metal coins, or banknotes,
is a social convention that serves as a record of goods sold or services
rendered  in  the  past.  In  seminal  contributions  to  monetary  theory,
Kocherlakota (1998) and Kocherlakota and Wallace (1998) show that
the social convention of money can replicate many of the allocations
that are feasible in a universal ledger of all previous transactions in the
economy.

In practice, trusted intermediaries, such as central banks and com-
mercial banks, sustain money by maintaining and transferring balances
among  depositors.  This  centralized  record-keeping  system  has  been
the  mainstay  of  today’s  monetary  system.  Recently,  the  advent  of
blockchain technology suggests that the authority to update the ledger
can  also  be  delegated  to  a  decentralized  network  of  validators  that
can  function  ‘‘without  the  need  for  a  trusted  third  party’’  (e.g.  see
Nakamoto, 2008, Buterin, 2014a or Auer et al., 2024). This raises the

broader research question of whether and under what circumstances
it is economically efficient to implement market designs in which the
updating of the ledger is to some extent decentralized (i.e., there is
more than one authority in charge of updating the ledger).

We  address  these  questions  in  a  credit  economy  in  which  some
agents produce early for some other agents and expect these benefi-
ciaries to reciprocate at a later date. However, when the latter ‘‘late’’
producers cannot commit to reciprocating, trade cannot be sustained
in  equilibrium.  In  similar  contexts, Kocherlakota (1998)  shows  that
trustless  exchange  can  be  sustained  as  an  equilibrium  when  agents
can freely consult a record-keeping device tracking the default history
of the beneficiaries, as long as the device automatically updates itself
according to the behavior of the beneficiaries (see also Rocheteau and
Nosal, 2017). However, Kocherlakota (1998) sidesteps the questions of
who should be responsible for ensuring the legitimacy of the ledger
and how to guarantee that the authorities in charge have the proper

✩
Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, the referee, Joseph Abadi, Aleksander Berentsen, Aldar Chan, Francesca Carapella, Jon
Frost, Rod Garratt, Piero Gottardi, Hans Gersbach, Hanna Halaburda, Ricardo Lagos, Jacob Leshno, Dirk Niepelt, Jean-Charles Rochet, Harald Uhlig, participants of
the 2021 CBER Forum, CB&DC Virtual Seminar Series, 2020 CEBRA annual meeting, the 2020 Summer Workshop on Money and Payments, the 2020 ETH-Zurich
Workshop on Future Money and seminar participants at the BIS, Yale University and the University of Zurich for comments. The views presented in this paper
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Bank for International Settlements.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: raphael.auer@bis.org (R. Auer), cyril.monnet@unibe.ch (C. Monnet), hyunsong.shin@bis.org (H.S. Shin).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104026
Received 13 February 2023; Received in revised form 4 February 2025; Accepted 9 February 2025
Available online 22 February 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

incentives to ensure its integrity and consistency.

Our contribution is to address these questions by focusing on the
economic principles underlying the validation protocol. In doing so,
we revisit Juvenal’s analysis of who – or what mechanism – should
guard  the  guardians  of  the  ledger  in  such  a  setting1:  the  agents  in
charge of managing the ledger – the ‘‘validators’’ – should accurately
verify transactions and correctly update the ledger. The ledger could
be  centrally  managed  by  a  single  authority,  by  committees  formed
of  a  limited  number  of  privileged  agents,2 or  could  be  managed  by
every  participant  of  a  decentralized  economy.3 There  are  two  basic
frictions in our setup that determine the optimal number of validators.
First, there is no technical way to force a validator to sign any given
transaction. Validation may be costly, especially if this involves costly
monitoring of off-chain events.4 Validators, therefore, need incentives
to actively verify and take part in the validation of transactions. Second,
nothing can technically prevent a validator from endorsing two or more
ledgers  with  conflicting  histories.5 In  this  context,  we  analyze  how
incentives for validators can address the two frictions that technology
alone cannot solve.

As  in Abadi  and  Brunnermeier (2018), Amoussou-Guénou  et  al.
(2019), and Halaburda et al. (2021), ensuring the integrity and consis-
tency of the ledger is a quintessential design issue because our economy
cannot generate value without it. We examine theoretically how the
optimal validation protocol deals with the frictions embedded in the
consensus mechanism underlying the monetary system and derive the
optimal number of validators, their compensation, and the optimal vot-
ing rule among validators. In turn, we can determine how the optimal
validation protocol impacts the level of trade and hence the realized
surplus in the economy. We endogenize the validation of records on
the ledger and how consensus on actual transactions is reached as an
equilibrium outcome in a repeated game setting. We assume validators
are  in  charge  of  reading  and  updating  the  ledger  of  trade  histories,
and the consensus mechanism relies on supermajority voting.6 Since
verification and communication are costly activities, validators must be
compensated for their efforts. And since validators cannot be trusted to
work, or to refuse bribes to falsify an entry, reaching consensus as an
equilibrium actually requires that validators be compensated in excess
of costs; i.e. they are paid rents.

We analyze the optimal design of the trade and validation mecha-
nisms as the solution to a fictitious planner’s problem, where optimality

1 See also Hurwicz (2008) and Rahman (2012).
2 Several  versions  of  so-called  ‘‘permissioned  distributed  ledgers’’  have
been proposed as a way to implement decentralized consensus mechanisms
for practical applications in settings with known users. Three permissioned
distributed ledger systems currently in use are Corda, Hyperledger Fabric, and
Quorum. Technically, Corda, like Bitcoin, follows a UTXO model in which
verification of a transaction involves tracking a token all the way back to its
origin. In contrast, Hyperledger Fabric and Quorum – similar to the Ethereum
cryptocurrency – utilize an account-based system where transactions include
updates on the balance of accounts. Tokens are not native units of Hyperledger
Fabric or Quorum but can be constructed or emulated on them.

3 Recently, a sizeable literature has examined the economics of Bitcoin and
other anonymous  cryptocurrencies (see, e.g., Abadi and Brunnermeier, 2021,
Biais et al. (2019), and Schilling and Uhlig, 2018). These are ‘‘permissionless’’,
meaning  that  they  are  available  for  inspection  by  all  and  can  possibly  be
updated by anybody. However, they are inherently limited in their economic
efficiency, are energy intensive and slow (see, e.g., Budish (2025), Chiu and
Koeppl (2022), Abadi and Brunnermeier (2018).

4 The  underlying  difficulties  of  writing  real-world  information  into  the
ledger is known as the ‘‘oracle problem’’ in the cryptocurrency industry. See
Caldarelli (2020) and Xu et al. (2016) for an introduction to oracles.

5 This  opens  up  the  possibility  of  a  ‘‘history-reversion  attack’’  (see

i.e. Shanaev et al. (2019)).

6 To be precise, we do not seek to model the technical subtleties of the
ledger and remain general on these aspects. Nor do we analyze whether a
universal ledger does better than fiat money.

is defined in terms of maximizing the surplus from the trade net of
the validation costs. The optimal mechanism chooses the number of
validators, the supermajority threshold, the compensation of validators,
and the trade allocation that maximize the gains from trade, subject
to incentive compatibility conditions. We consider internal validation,
where  validators  are  also  users  of  the  system,  as  well  as external
validation, where they are not. We analyze variants of the technology,
where users are identified or remain anonymous. We also examine how
competing ledgers can implement the optimal design.

We find that decentralizing record-keeping (i.e. having more than
a single validator) can be more efficient than relying on a single inter-
mediary. However, such improved governance does not come for free;
ensuring incentives for the validators is costly and requires giving up
unanimity and therefore possibly uses only a weaker form of consensus.
Intertemporal incentives are key in determining the optimal solu-
tion. Validators’ incentives are enhanced by the reward they receive for
validating transactions, and that reward should be high enough to deter
them from ever falsifying the ledger. When intertemporal incentives
are  strong  in  the  sense  that  the  present  value  of  future  rewards  is
high, validators would have much to lose from misbehaving. In this
case, a single validator who earns a large rent can be entrusted with
managing the ledger.7 But precisely when intertemporal incentives are
weak, it becomes prohibitively costly to prevent a single validator from
misbehaving. The optimal design increases the number of validators
and reduces the size of each transaction to lower the incentives for
bribing.

The many validators play a consensus game that has attributes of
a public good provision game – consensus is deemed to be reached if
and only if a supermajority of validators agree – which we proceed to
solve using global game methods (see Carlsson and van Damme (1993)
and Morris and Shin (1998, 2003)). Validators reach a given level of
consensus as a unique, dominance solvable equilibrium if and only if
the reward they earn is above a certain threshold.8

We also show that decentralization naturally leads to a ‘‘stakeholder
economy’’ in which the participants of the system manage the record-
keeping themselves: only internal validation can support trade as an
equilibrium with more than one validator. There are hence economies
of  scope  in  trading  and  validation.  Achieving  good  governance  and
honest record-keeping is made easier by having validators who also
participate in the market themselves and thus have an intrinsic interest
in ensuring it goes smoothly.

We consider both permissionless and permissioned variants of the
technology, as well as identified and anonymous versions, focusing on
the  economic  principles  underlying  the  validation  protocol.  We  also
model  the  coexistence  of  multiple  ledgers.  In  the  model  presented
in  the  main  section,  ledgers  are  set  up  with  a  fixed  one-time  cost.
In  Online  Appendix  1,  we  consider  the  case  where  the  identity  of
validators is known and there is no cost to be a validator.9 In both cases,
the  mechanism  decides  whether  validation  should  be  permissioned
or permissionless. Also on the side of the users, there can be either
complete identification or complete (pseudo)anonymity. In all cases,
users can switch between multiple ledgers.

We show that competing ledgers can implement the social planner’s
(constrained) optimal design. This is natural because competing ledgers
will  seek  to  maximize  the  expected  utility  of  their  users,  and  they
charge a non-distortive lump-sum fee to cover the setup cost.10

7 This validator can be drawn from the participants of the credit system,

and the size of each transaction is at the first-best level.

8 Our  model  has  the  feature  that  consensus  cannot  be  reached  without

validators earning rents (see also Abadi and Brunnermeier (2018)).

9 For  an  analysis  of  why  it  is  important  to  distinguish  individuals  from

accounts, see Li and Wang (2019).
10 Brunnermeier  and  Payne (2023)  consider  the  problem  of  competing
ledgers that bundle the functionalities of a ledger and a trading technology.

2 

R. Auer et al.

We  examine  potentially  anonymous  settings  where  users  of  the
ledger  (be  it  validators  or  normal  users)  open  accounts  at  a  cost.
Only the account and its activities are recorded on the ledger, but the
underlying identity of the account holder is not known. This implies
that while an account can be closed (as punishment when the owner
defaults),  it  is  not  possible  to  prevent  users  from  opening  another
account  to  conduct  trades  in  the  future.  We  show  that  also  in  this
setup, anonymous validators verify transactions and maintain ledger
integrity to safeguard the value of their good standing on the ledger. For
validators who earn rents, the cost of becoming a validator (by opening
a validator’s account), which is part of the mechanism, needs to be high
enough to remove their incentive to accepting a bribe. The underlying
mechanism  shows  some  similarity  of  this  case  in  the  model  to  the
literature  examining  the  set  of  consensus  mechanisms  based  on  so-
called ‘‘proof of stake’’, the process of achieving agreement on the state
of the ledger by pledging collateral on an outcome (see, e.g., Abadi and
Brunnermeier, 2021 and Saleh, 2020). The cost to open a validator’s
account is similar to the opportunity cost of staked coins.11

In addition to studying the general question of the optimality of
decentralized record-keeping, our approach also helps us understand
the so-called ‘‘oracle problem’’, which relates to the challenge of in-
corporating off-chain information onto a blockchain. Blockchains rely
on  oracles  because  they  are  inherently  blind  to  the  outside  world,
as emphasized in Caldarelli (2020). On platforms such as Ethereum,
oracles serve as reference points for external information – such as asset
prices, interest rate benchmarks, or other relevant variables such as
the official inflation rate (see Xu et al. (2016) for an introduction to
oracles). Such oracles – centralized and dependable third parties – act
as a link between blockchain technology and the outside world.12 In
one interpretation of our model, trade and production can be viewed as
off-chain events, and validators function as the oracles who confirm the
validity of these events. However, since validators provide information
used as an input to calculate the payouts of self-executing (i.e. smart)
financial contracts, as oracles, they are easy targets for manipulation.13
These  oracles  must  be  compensated  for  integrating  off-chain  data,
particularly  because  verifying  this  information  is  costly.  To  ensure
the accuracy of the data they provide, it is crucial that oracles earn
sufficient rent.

Relation to the literature. A sizeable literature analyzes the incentives
of  miners  in  Bitcoin  and  similar  cryptocurrencies  that  are  based  on
a ‘‘proof-of-work’’ protocol.14 Kroll et al. (2013) and Prat and Walter
(2018) examine free entry and the dynamics of the ‘‘mining’’ market,15
while Easley et al. (2019) and Huberman et al. (2021) examine the
economics of the transaction market. Budish (forthcoming) and Chiu
and Koeppl (2022) show that ensuring the finality of transactions in
Bitcoin  is  very  costly,  as  so-called  ‘‘majority’’  or  ‘‘history  reversion’’
attacks are inherently profitable, while Auer (2019) examines whether

11 A difference from proof of stake in our setup is that the funds used for
purchasing new identities are redistributed to existing validators. Buterin et al.
(2022) have argued that a one-time cost rather than staking coins could be
used directly in a decentralized system.
12 Garratt  and  Monnet (2023)  show  that,  without  oracles,  there  is  no
decentralized  mechanism  that  can  always  onboard  the  correct  information
onto a blockchain, thus pointing to a fundamental problem of decentralized
systems.
13 See, e.g., Luu et al. (2016) and Froewis and Boehme (2017).
14 The  variant  that  requires  staking  cryptocurrency  holding  on  the  truth
instead  of  costly  computation,  i.e.  proof  of  stake,  is  attracting  increased
attention (see Abadi and Brunnermeier (2018), Saleh (2021), and Fanti et al.
(2021)). However, proof of stake can also be attacked via so-called ‘‘long-run
attacks’’ (see Deirmentzoglou et al. (2019) for a survey). Therefore, proof of
stake implicitly assumes the existence of some overarching social coordination
(see Buterin (2014a)).
15 See also Cong et al. (2021) for an analysis of the concentration of mining
and efficiency.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

the transaction market can generate sufficient miner income to ensure
finality.16 Further to this, even in the absence of incentives to reverse
history, sunspot equilibria can arise in proof-of work-based blockchains
(Biais et al., 2019).17

The  literature  on  validator  incentives  and  the  design  of  permis-
sioned  versions  of  distributed  ledgers  is  more  sparse.18 Townsend
(2020) focuses on an economics-based approach to the issue of dis-
tributed ledgers, exploring novel contracting possibilities enabled by
DLT. Most closely related to our analysis are Abadi and Brunnermeier
(2018), Halaburda et al. (2021), and Amoussou-Guénou et al. (2019).
The latter authors first modeled the interaction between validators as
a game entailing non-observable effort to check transactions and costly
voting. They also analyzed this game in terms of moral hazard and
public good provision. Closely related, Abadi and Brunnermeier (2018)
and Halaburda et al. (2021) examine the incentives to reach consensus
using communication games and their robustness if rational nodes can
freely send messages to selected recipients only.

Relative  to  their  analysis,  our  focus  is  not  on  the  specific  steps
of the communication game needed to reach consensus. Rather, our
contribution  is  to  link  the  ledger  validation  game  to  monetary  ex-
change in a repeated game setting. We establish the uniqueness of the
equilibrium via a global game approach, and characterize the optimal
mechanism design, in particular in terms of the number of validators,
size of transactions, and optimal supermajority voting threshold. In our
work, all validators are profit-seeking, and the issue at heart is how
the market can be designed so that profit-seeking validators actually
verify  the  ledger  and  validate  only  correct  histories.19 The  focus  on
dealing  with  free-riding  and  coordination  relates  to  several  classical
strands of papers on the coordination with many actors. Reminiscent
of Grossman and Stiglitz (1976), free-riding can prevail in the case of
multiple validators. Consistent with Biais et al. (2019) and Amoussou-
Guénou et al. (2019), we also derive a folk theorem in Online Appendix
3: in this extension, validators have an incentive to pretend to verify
without exerting the actual monitoring effort, which jeopardizes the
legitimacy  of  the  whole  ledger.  As  validators  become  more  patient,
the  free-rider  problem  has  no  bite  and  any  allocation  satisfying  the
validators’ participation constraint can be implemented in our strategic
setup.

Our paper also has ramifications in the banking literature, starting
with Diamond (1984)  or Williamson (1986, 1987)  where  banks  are
modeled as a way to save on monitoring costs.20 Another approach,

16 Such attacks are outlined in Nakamoto (2008). See Eyal and E.G. (2014)
and Gervais et al. (2016) for other attacks. Boehme et al. (2015), Schilling
and Uhlig (2019), Garratt and van Oordt (2020) and Leshno and Strack (2020)
present more general analyses of the economics of Bitcoin.
17 See Carlsten et al. (2016) for a related argument based on simulations
and Pagnotta (2021) for an examination of multiple equilibria in the presence
of a feedback loop between blockchain security and cryptocurrency valuation.
Halaburda et al. (2021) recently examined possible equilibria and their ro-
bustness if rational validators can send messages to selected recipients only or
even send conflicting messages to different recipients.
18 Applications  of  permissioned  distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT)  are
being explored for securities settlement systems, trade finance solutions, ‘‘sta-
blecoins’’, and central bank digital currencies. See also Baudet et al. (2020),
Auer et al. (2020), and Chiu and Koeppl (2019).
19 Note that Amoussou-Guénou et al. (2019) do not examine history rever-
sion attacks; rather, byzantine attackers are assumed to attempt to bring the
system to a halt for exogenous reasons. In a related context, Halaburda et al.
(2021) examine the incentives to reach consensus using communication games
and their robustness if rational nodes can freely send messages to selected
recipients  only.  Consensus  can  be  reached  but  not  necessarily  on  the  true
outcome.
20 While it is costly to duplicate verification and communication across many
validators, we find conditions under which many validators are better than
one. To use Aymanns et al.’s (2020) terminology, we find conditions under
which a (trading) ledger should be vertically disintegrated – a group of agents

3 

R. Auer et al.

pioneered  by Leland  and  Pyle (1977)  and  developed  by Boyd  and
Prescott (1986) models banks as information-sharing coalitions. Gu
et  al. (2013)  show  that  higher  rents  can  discipline  intermediaries,
while Huang (2019) uses that model to study the optimal number of
intermediaries when they have an incentive to divert deposits. A related
analysis that focuses on the optimal composition of the money stock
between inside and outside money can be found in Monnet (2006),
Cavalcanti and Wallace (1999a,b), and Wallace (2005). Global games
techniques have also been introduced in the banking literature to study
the probability of a bank run occurring, e.g. by Rochet and Vives (2004)
and Goldstein and Pauzner (2005).

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays
down the basic setup and characterizes benchmark allocations absent
a record-keeping device and a freely accessible one. Section 3 defines
incentive-feasible  allocation  with  DLT  and  characterizes  the  optimal
allocation including the optimal number of validators.

2.  The model

Our model builds on Gu et al. (2013).21 Time is discrete and infinite.
The  discount  factor  is ̃𝛽 ∈  (0, 1).  Each  period  is  divided  into  two
distinct production/consumption stages, early and late, with one good
per stage, the ‘‘early good’’ and the ‘‘late good’’. Goods are non-storable
across stages or across periods. There is a continuum of agents with two
permanent types. There is a unit mass of early producers and another
unit mass of late producers.22 Early producers can produce the early
good that late producers like to consume. Late producers can produce
the  late  good  that  early  producers  like  to  consume.  Early  and  late
producers have a survival probability 𝜎 at the end of a period. They
learn whether they survive at the very end of the period so that their
effective discount factor is 𝛽 = 𝜎 ̃𝛽. Exiting agents are replaced by new
agents of the same type so that the distribution of types is stationary.
Preferences  of  early  and  late  producers  are  represented  by  the

following utility functions, respectively:23
𝑈𝑒(𝑥𝑒, 𝑦𝑒) = 𝑥𝑒 − 𝑦𝑒,
𝑈𝓁(𝑥𝓁, 𝑦𝓁) = 𝑢(𝑥𝓁) − 𝑦𝓁,

where 𝑥𝑒 (𝑥𝓁) is the consumption of early (late) producers, and 𝑦𝑒 (𝑦𝓁) is
the production of early (late) producers. The function 𝑢(.) is continuous,
increasing,  concave,  and 𝑢(0)  =  0.  We  assume  that  there  are  gains
from trade between early and late producers: there exists 𝑥 such that
𝑢(𝑥) > 𝑥. We denote by 𝑥∗ the efficient allocation that solves 𝑢′(𝑥∗) = 1.
Early  and  late  producers  meet  pairwise  at  the  start  of  the  early
production stage. The matching technology is such that nature selects
a measure 𝛼 of early and late producers and matches one with another
pairwise. All other producers remain unmatched for the period. There-
fore, the probability of a match for any producer is 𝛼. The match is
maintained across both stages, but it dissolves at the end of the later
stage.

Feasibility and efficiency require that production equals consump-
tion, i.e. 𝑥𝑒 = 𝑦𝓁 and 𝑥𝓁 = 𝑦𝑒. Therefore, we can conveniently drop
indices and use 𝑥 ≡ 𝑥𝓁 = 𝑦𝑒 and 𝑦 ≡ 𝑥𝑒 = 𝑦𝓁. Hence, an allocation is
(𝑥, 𝑦) where 𝑥 denotes the production of early producers (consumption
of  late  producers),  and 𝑦 denotes  the  production  of  late  producers
(consumption of early producers). We concentrate on symmetric and
stationary allocations. Fig. 1 sketches the timeline of our economy.

should handle the interaction between users – rather than vertically integrated,
when a single intermediary has the monopoly over managing the interaction
of the ledger users.
21 Gu et al. (2013) borrows methodological elements from Lagos and Wright
(2005).  See  also Williamson  and  Wright (2011)  and Lagos  et  al. (2017).
Berentsen  and  Schaer (2020)  presents  a  very  clear  exposition  of  the  link
between monetary theory and ledgers.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

We restrict trading mechanisms to be in the class of coordination
games.  For  each  match  between  an  early  and  late  producer,  each
producer announces a pair ( ̃𝑥, ̃𝑦) ∈ R2
+. If both announcements coincide,
the  early  producer  produces 𝑥 = ̃𝑥 in  the  early  stage  and  the  late
producer produces 𝑦 = ̃𝑦 in the late stage. In this case we say that the
allocation (𝑥, 𝑦) can be implemented.

We assume late producers have only a limited ability to commit.24
Absent commitment and any record-keeping technology, it is routine to
show that late producers will never produce for early producers, and
the only implementable allocation is autarky (𝑥, 𝑦) = (0, 0).

A ledger technology

To discipline late producers it is necessary to record their history of
trades in a ledger. Only then can late producers face the threat of losing
future  consumption  if  they  do  not  produce  today  (see Kocherlakota
(1998)). The ledger records ∅ if producers have no match. Histories
of producers can be conveniently summarized using two labels: good
(G)  or  bad  (B),  as  late  producers  can  be  in  good  or  bad  standing.
Producers will be assigned label B whenever their actions differ from
their announcements some time in the past, irrespective of how long
ago this has happened. Otherwise, they will be assigned label G. Notice
that label B is an absorbing label, and an agent carrying label B will
never consume or produce.25

Then, an allocation (𝑥, 𝑦) is implementable if it is incentive feasible
(IF): it satisfies participation constraints and late producers produce for
the early producer. The two participation constraints are 𝑢(𝑥) ≥ 𝑦 and
𝑦 ≥ 𝑥, while late producers will have the incentive to produce for early
producers if their ‘‘repayment constraint’’ holds,

−𝑦 + 𝛽 𝛼

𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑦
1 − 𝛽

≥ 0.

If late producers do not produce, they are excluded from the economy,
so the right-hand side of the constraint is zero. If they produce, they
incur the production cost −𝑦 and are assigned a good label so they can
trade in the future. The expected value of having a good label is equal to
the discounted lifetime gains from trade times the probability of trading
𝛼. Setting 𝑦 = 𝑥, the set of IF allocations is characterized by all 𝑥 that
satisfy

𝛽 𝛼 𝑢(𝑥) ≥ (1 − 𝛽(1 − 𝛼))𝑥.

The efficient allocation 𝑥∗ is implementable if 𝛽 and 𝛼 are large enough.

3.  Trustless ledgers

So far, our analysis has been routine because we have taken the
functioning of the ledger as a given. The objective of our paper is to
endogenize the ledger updating process, without the help of a trusted
central authority, and explain the incentive problem arising from the
mechanism used to update the ledger.

22 In Online Appendix 3 we also consider the case where a mass 𝑓 of late
producers have a faulty production technology and can never produce, but
they can mimic the productive late producers.
23 A linear utility function for one of the agents (here early producers) allows
us to get clean comparative statics, as would quasi-linear utility functions like
𝑥𝑒 − 𝑣(𝑦𝑒).
24 For the sake of symmetry, we can also assume that early producers are
unable to commit, but their incentive problem is straightforward because, if
they do not produce, the late producer will immediately retaliate and will not
produce either.
25 When  a  late  producer  has  label  B,  early  producers  rationally  expect
that the late producer has defaulted in the past, and the late one therefore
announces ( ̃𝑥, ̃𝑦) = (0, 0) in the coordination game. Anticipating that all agents
in the future will announce ( ̃𝑥, ̃𝑦) = (0, 0), a late producer with label B will not
produce.

4 

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

Fig. 1. Timeline.

To endogenize the updating process of the ledger, we assume the
ledger  is  managed  by  a  measure 𝑉 of  ‘‘validators’’.  Validators  are
rational agents who need incentives to verify transactions and update
the ledger honestly. The resulting history should be trustworthy to all
producers.

We  consider  two  types  of  validators:  In  period  0,  a  measure 𝑉
of validators can be selected from the set of late producers (internal
validation)  or  from  a  set  of  agents  who  are  indifferent  as  to  which
good they consume (external validation).26 Each period, all 𝑉 validators
work on validating each of the 𝛼 matches.27 We assume a validator uses
the same strategy across all matches, as described below. Therefore,
a  validator  either  works  on  validating  all  matches  or  none.  Exiting
validators are replaced by new validators in a way we specify below.
For symmetry we assume that external validators are also subject to a
survival shock.

There is a private cost to opening an account on the ledger (we
show below that this is optimal):28 Late producers pay 𝛾 to open an
account,29 while the cost to open an account eligible for validation is 𝛾𝑣,
where 𝑣 = 𝐼 𝑉 when there is internal validation and 𝑣 = 𝐸 𝑉 when there
is external validation. Once an account is open, validators verify only
the standing of that account, that is, whether the holder of an account
defaulted in the past on the liabilities generated with that account.30
If late producers default on an account, that account is assigned label
𝐵 and trade is no longer possible with it. Since the full identity of the
holder of the account is not known, he or she can open another account.
Opening a new account does not give information as to the reasons why
that account is opened because there are always new agents who seek

26 The latter could include early producers. Internal validators can trade, but
they cannot validate their own trades.
27 When validators are selected from late producers, 𝑉 ≤ 1. Since there is a
continuum of validators, there is also a measure 𝑉 that will work on validating
the trade involving a validator. In this sense, all statements should be qualified
with ‘‘almost surely’’.
28 Below, we also allow for the possibility that there is a technological cost
𝐾, 𝐾𝑣 to opening an account, but the planner may decide that the private
costs 𝛾 , 𝛾𝑣 to producers and validators differ from that. The only assumption
we implicitly make (and solve explicitly below) is that 𝐾 is low enough so
that setting up a ledger is profitable.
29 Only the account and its activities are recorded on the ledger, but the
underlying identity of the person controlling the account is not known.
30 See Schneider and Taudien (2023) for a model of reputation when agents
use pseudonyms.

to use the ledger.

Each period, the ledger collects 𝑇𝓁 from new late producers who
are  opening  accounts  and 𝑇𝑣 from  new  validators  who  are  opening
accounts. These collections are redistributed in a lump sum to, respec-
tively, (continuing) late producers and (continuing) validators.31 Since
there is no reason for a producer to open more than one account at
a time, and for brevity, we will sometimes refer to the ‘‘standing of
producer 𝑖’’  when  referring  to  the  ‘‘standing  of  the  account  held  by
producer 𝑖’’.

To simplify the analysis, we assume early producers can read the
account label of late producers in the ledger, but they cannot write the
outcome of the match on the ledger. Therefore, the validation process
takes place in the late stage only.32

The validation process consists of validators (1) verifying that late
producers  have  produced  according  to  plan,  i.e.
̃𝑦 = 𝑦,33 and  (2)
sending a message to the ledger — if production took place according
to  plan  and  the  late  producer’s  account  has  label 𝐺,  validators  will
communicate 𝐺, but 𝐵 otherwise. Consensus is reached on the new
label,  which  is  recorded  on  the  ledger  whenever  at  least  a  fraction
𝜏 ∈ [0, 1] of the 𝑉 validators communicate the same label, i.e. cast the
same vote. We emphasize that 𝜏 is a choice variable when designing
the consensus protocol.34

Validators incur verification and communication costs. Validators
≥ 0 to verify a late producer’s action and an
incur a utility cost 𝑐𝑣
idiosyncratic additional utility cost 𝑐𝑠,𝑖 to send a message to the ledger
(or to enter their information on the ledger). Since it is costly to send
messages, we assume validators send a message only when they want
to communicate that the late producer’s label is 𝐺.35

31 In equilibrium, 𝑇𝓁 = (1 − 𝜎)(1 − 𝑉 )𝛾 and 𝑇𝑣 = (1 − 𝜎)𝑉 𝛾𝑣. Therefore the
𝜎(1 − 𝑉 ) late producers who do not exit the ledger will receive 𝑇𝓁∕(𝜎(1 − 𝑉 )) =
(1 − 𝜎)𝛾∕𝜎, while the 𝜎 𝑉 validators who do not exit will receive (1 − 𝜎)𝛾𝑣∕𝜎.
32 We also worked  out a version of the  model in which early producers
cannot  read  the  ledger.  In  this  case,  validators  inform  the  early  producers
about the late producer’s label. The changes are only cosmetic.
33 In practice, this is when double-spending can happen.
34 We assume the threshold 𝜏 is the same in the first and second stage, but
our analysis extends to cases where it differs across the stages.
35 For tractability, we allow the communication costs to be negative so that
we can use symmetric distributions with no mass point. We would also obtain
these results when using distributions with a mass point at zero. We assume
validators do not incur costs in the second stage. It is straightforward to extend
the model to analyze this case too.

5 

R. Auer et al.

In order to model the possibility of computer glitches and opera-
tional failures, we assume that the private cost of communicating a
label 𝑐𝑠,𝑖 takes the form
𝑐𝑠,𝑖 = 𝑐𝑠 + 𝜇𝑖,
where 𝑐𝑠 is a common component to all validators uniformly distributed
]
, while 𝜇𝑖 is the idiosyncratic element for validator 𝑖 that
over
is uniformly distributed over the interval [−𝜀, 𝜀], where 𝜀 is a small
positive number. For any two distinct validators 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗, 𝜇𝑖 is independent
of 𝜇𝑗 . Validators learn their costs ahead of the verification game and so
ahead of verifying the label.

[𝑐𝑠, ̄𝑐𝑠

(1)

To induce agents to become validators, they must make a positive
expected  profit  from  the  validation  process.  Sending  a  message  is
verifiable, so validators who correctly sent message 𝐺 are entitled to 𝑧
units of the late good whenever enough validators agree that the label
is 𝐺. Validators receive nothing if they do not cast a vote. Validators
value these transfers in an additive and linear way.36 When a fraction
𝑤 ≥ 𝜏 of validators send label 𝐺 at the end of stage 2, the late producer
has to produce 𝑤𝑉 𝑧 to compensate these validators. These validators
then update the ledger.37

Notice that validators play a game that is similar to a public good
contribution  game:  they  get  a  reward  only  if  a  sufficient  number
of  validators  confirm  a  trade.  Given  the  structure  of  the  validation
costs,  we  solve  this  game  using  tools  from  the  literature  on  global
games. As Morris and Shin (2003) show, the key to the analysis is the
characterization of the strategic uncertainty faced by players. Even if
the idiosyncratic component is small relative to the other payoff pa-
rameters in the frame, the relative ranking of the costs injects strategic
uncertainty in the coordination game. Although remote, the possibility
of  computer  glitches  will  imply  that  validation  should  not  rely  on
unanimous agreement when there are many validators. In particular,
the equilibrium in the limiting case as 𝜀 → 0 gives rise to some degree
of coordination failure and associated inefficiencies, in contrast to the
(common knowledge) case when 𝜀 = 0, which is typically associated
with multiple equilibria. Moving forward, we focus our attention to the
limiting case of 𝜀 → 0.

We  assume  late  producers  can  bribe  validators  to  send  a  false
message. A late producer whose account has the label 𝐺 when starting
the period may get away with not repaying the early producer while
keeping the label by ‘‘bribing’’, i.e. making a side payment to 𝜏 𝑉 val-
idators in the late stage (after consuming in the first stage).38 Validators
who accept a bribe are caught with probability 𝜋, in which case their
current account loses the privilege to trade and validate.39 However,
those validators can open a new account, allowing them to trade and/or
validate in the future.

Finally, we assume late producers, including validators, have the
option to switch to another ledger. We assume the benefit from trading

36 A linear utility function allows us to abstract from a possible insurance
mechanism among validators. Also, at the cost of simplicity, we could assume
that the utility of validators is 𝑢(𝑥 + 𝑧). Finally, we could assume that only a
share 𝜏 of validators receive a reward since only this number is necessary to
reach an agreement.
37 We do not explicitly model the updating process. An intuitive narrative
is that each validator updates their own copy of the ledger and sends it to all
other validators. Validators compare all copies and coordinate on adopting the
copy that has been sent the most times and at least a number 𝜏 of times.
38 A late producer who misbehaved at some time in the past and enters a
period with a label 𝐵 can bribe validators so as to obtain label 𝐺 that enable
them to consume. However, validators will not agree to a bribe in the early
stage because they would have to trust the late producer to pay the bribe in
the late stage. As well, if validators accept the bribe, the late producer has no
incentive to make good on it. Bribing could be interpreted as the attempt to
coordinate a sufficient mass of users on a fork or on restarting the ledger.
39 We assume there is no cost for late producers to bribe validators because
if the latter reject it, late producers can always revert to paying early producers
as planned.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

on the other ledger is a fraction 𝜂 ≤ 𝛽 of their current expected payoff.
This is similar to assuming that it is costly or it takes time to switch
to another ledger, and that the role of the agent on the new ledger
is the same as the one on the current ledger.40 Conveniently, setting
𝜂 =  0 takes us back to the baseline framework where agents cannot
switch  ledgers.  We  assume  that  information  is  not  portable  across
ledgers. As a result, agents who are switching ledgers cannot distinguish
themselves from new agents. Allowing agents to share their histories
would complicate the analysis because the ledger pricing policy could
be history-dependent, possibly leading to a different equilibrium, with
history  as  a  coordination  device  across  ledgers.  In  Online  Appendix
6  we  consider  an  extension  where  the  outside  option  is  not  related
to the current expected payoff, and agents can choose between being
validators  or  just  late  producers.  These  changes  do  not  affect  the
qualitative results.

We proceed with analyzing the model as follows. First, we define the
expected utility of early and late producers as well as of the validators,
given  some  allocations  in  Section 3.1.  Then  we  characterize  the  set
of stationary and symmetric allocations that satisfy the participation
and incentive constraints of all agents, i.e. the incentive feasible allo-
cations. These allocations must be such that late producers have the
incentive to produce for early producers, which imposes a ‘‘repayment
constraint’’. Further, late producers must not have an interest in bribing
validators  to  record  a  false  entry  in  the  ledger,  which  imposes  a
‘‘no-bribing  constraint’’.  Additionally,  these  allocations  should  make
sure enough validators have the incentives to verify and validate the
outcome in each match despite the private information regarding the
communication  cost.  As  is  standard,  in  Section 3.2 we  characterize
incentive feasible allocations when the private information vanishes.
This  allows  us  to  consider  a  fictitious  planner’s  choice  of  the  best
allocation among the set of incentive feasible allocations in Section 3.3.
The planner’s objective function is to maximize the gains from trade
between producers net of the validation costs. Therefore, this planner
can be seen as a coalition of agents maximizing their expected utility
under  the  veil  of  ignorance  regarding  their  (future)  type.  Our  main
result is the characterization of the best incentive feasible allocation,
i.e.  the  constrained  optimal  allocation.  Since  this  allocation  implies
the  number  of  validators,  the  validation  threshold,  the  payment  to
validators, the production/consumption, and the fees, it describes the
best design for the ledger. In Section 4, we show that an economy with
competing ledgers designed by early producers implements the same
allocation (or design) as the one chosen by the planner.

3.1.  Payoffs and incentive feasible allocations

Given  a  threshold 𝜏 and  a  measure  of  validators 𝑉 assigned  to
validate each match, a stationary allocation is a list of account fees
and  production/consumption (𝛾 , 𝛾𝑣, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧).  An  allocation  is  incentive
feasible if it is feasible, it satisfies the incentive constraints of early
and late consumers (given 𝜏), the labels of late producers’ accounts are
correctly communicated to the ledger, and validators have no incentive
to tamper with the record of labels.

Given a stationary incentive feasible allocation (𝛾 , 𝛾𝑣, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧), 𝑈𝑖 is
the expected discounted lifetime utility of late producer 𝑖 with label 𝐺,
satisfying
𝑈𝑖 = 𝑇𝓁 + E

[
𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑦 + I

−𝑤𝑖𝑉 𝑧 + 𝛽 𝑈𝑖

+ (1 − 𝛼)𝛽 𝑈𝑖

}]

{

}

{

𝛼

,

𝑖

𝑤𝑖≥𝜏

where E
𝑖 is the expectation operator of late producer 𝑖 over 𝑤𝑖, the
share of working validators. The late producer is entitled to the transfer

40 A validator remains a validator, maybe thanks to a prior technological
investment. Setting 𝜂 = 0 means that the option to switch is not available. The
fraction 𝜂 is similar to severance pay. Muthoo (1999) provides many other
examples where the outside option is a fraction of the current players’ payoff
or total output.

6 

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

𝑇𝓁.  In  addition  they  gain 𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑦 from  trading  with  probability 𝛼.
≥ 𝜏 validators
The late producer’s account retains label 𝐺 only if 𝑤𝑖
validate  the  trade.  In  this  case,  the  late  producer  pays 𝑤𝑖𝑉 𝑧 to  the
working validators and can trade in the future. With probability 1 − 𝛼,
the late producer does not trade but retains their label into next period.
The expected discounted lifetime utility of an internal validator 𝑖 with
private communication cost 𝑐𝑠,𝑖 is 𝑈𝐼 𝑉 (𝑐𝑠,𝑖) and satisfies
{
−𝑤𝑖𝑉 𝑧 + 𝛽E𝑈𝐼 𝑉
𝑈𝐼 𝑉 (𝑐𝑠,𝑖) = 𝑇𝐼 𝑉 + E

[
𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑦 + I

}]

𝑤𝑖≥𝜏

{

𝛼

𝑖

+(1 − 𝛼)𝛽E𝑈𝐼 𝑉 ∣ 𝑐𝑠,𝑖
0; E
−𝑐𝑣 +
+𝛼 max

{

[

𝑖

}

(I

𝑤≥𝜏 𝑧 − 𝑐𝑠,𝑖

)

]} ,

∣ 𝑐𝑠,𝑖

(2)

(3)

where E(⋅
∣ 𝑐𝑠,𝑖) is the expectation operator over the common com-
munication cost 𝑐𝑠 of validator 𝑖 conditional on receiving signal 𝑐𝑠,𝑖.41
Internal validators receive transfer 𝑇𝐼 𝑉 . Since internal validators are
selected from the set of late producers, they also obtain the expected
payoff  of  late  producers.  In  addition  they  get  the  expected  payoff
from  validating  trades.  Given  their  signal 𝑐𝑠,𝑖,  validators  can  choose
to work or not. If they do not work, they get nothing. If they work,
validators incur the verification cost 𝑐𝑣. If they communicate that late
producers have produced according to their announcements, they incur
the communication cost 𝑐𝑠,𝑖, and get the reward 𝑧, but only when the
trade is validated (I
𝑤≥𝜏 = 1). Otherwise they do not get the reward 𝑧.
Similarly, the expected discounted lifetime utility of an external val-
idator 𝑖 with private communication cost 𝑐𝑠,𝑖 is 𝑈𝐸 𝑉 (𝑐𝑠,𝑖) and satisfies,
+ 𝛽E𝑈𝐸 𝑉 , (4)
𝑈𝐸 𝑉 (𝑐𝑠,𝑖) = 𝑇𝐸 𝑉 + 𝛼 max
𝑤≥𝜏 𝑧 − 𝑐𝑠,𝑖
where 𝑇𝐸 𝑉 is the transfer to external validators.

Participation constraints. An allocation (𝛾 , 𝛾𝑣, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) satisfies the
participation  constraints  of  validators  and  early  and  late  producers
whenever,

[
−𝑐𝑣 +

0; E
𝑖

∣ 𝑐𝑠,𝑖

(I

]}

{

)

−𝛾 + 𝑈 ≥ 𝜂 𝑈 ,
≥ 𝜂 𝑈𝑣,

−𝛾𝑣 + 𝑈𝑣

𝑦 − 𝑥 ≥ 0,
≥ 0.

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

𝑤≥𝜏∣𝑐𝑠,𝑖

𝑧 − 𝑐𝑠,𝑖

−𝑐𝑣 + E
Constraints (5) and (6) require that late producers and validators are
better off paying the account fee to use that ledger rather than using
the competing ledger offering them 𝜂 𝑈 . Constraint (7) is the (simpli-
fied) participation constraint of the early producers. Finally, since late
producers can shirk from validation, (8) requires that validators expect
to  make  a  positive  expected  profit  from  the  validation  process.  The
expectation operator in (8) applies to the share of working validators
𝑤.

Repayment constraints. Using a ledger, in equilibrium late pro-
ducers who do not produce the announced amount 𝑦 are detected by
validators and their account is thus assigned a label 𝐵. As a conse-
quence,  this  account  is  permanently  blocked  from  all  economic  ac-
tivities.  Similarly,  an  internal  validator  whose  account  is  in  default
loses their future right to validate and their account is also blocked.
Agents whose account has been blocked can open a new late producer’s
account at cost 𝛾 or a validator’s account at cost 𝛾𝑣, or obtain the payoff
𝜂 𝑈 by using the competing ledger (or opening a different account on
the  same  ledger).  Therefore,  given  the  share  of  working  validators
is 𝑤 ≥ 𝜏,  the  repayment  constraint  of  late  producers  and  internal
validators is, respectively,

− (𝑦 + 𝑤𝑉 𝑧) + 𝛽 𝑈 ≥ 𝛽 max{−𝛾 + 𝑈 ; −𝛾𝑣 + E𝑈𝐼 𝑉 ; 𝜂 𝑈 },
≥ 𝛽 max{−𝛾 + 𝑈 ; −𝛾𝑣 + E𝑈𝐼 𝑉 ; 𝜂 𝑈 }.

− (𝑦 + 𝑤𝑉 𝑧) + 𝛽E𝑈𝐼 𝑉

(9)

(10)

No bribe. If a validator accepts a bribe, we assume they are caught
with probability 𝜋 ∈ [0, 1]. In this case they lose their right to validate
future transactions and to consume as a late producer using their old
account. Yet again, they can open a new account. A validator prefers
recording the truth to a false record when the late producer offers ̄𝑧 iff

41 Validators have more information concerning the fundamental communi-
cation cost 𝑐𝑠, which they use to compute the probability that the trade be
validated.

7 

𝛽E𝑈𝑠

≥

̄𝑧
⏟⏟⏟
𝑏𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑒

+(1 − 𝜋)𝛽E𝑈𝑠 + 𝜋 𝛽 max{I

𝑠=𝐼 𝑉 (−𝛾 + 𝑈 ) ; −𝛾𝑠 + 𝑈𝑠; 𝜂 𝑈𝑠},

where 𝑠 = 𝐼 𝑉 , 𝐸 𝑉 to denote internal of external validation, respec-
tively. When a share 𝑤 of validators are working on a match, the late
producer in this match is willing to pay at most a total of 𝑦+𝑤𝑉 𝑧 to get
away with production. Given that the ledger requires the agreement of
at least 𝜏 𝑉 validators to validate a (fake) transaction, the cheating late
producer will pay ̄𝑧 = (𝑦 + 𝑤𝑉 𝑧)∕(𝜏 𝑉 ) to 𝜏 𝑉 validators. Therefore, a
validator rejects the bribe whenever42
𝜋 𝛽E𝑈𝑠

𝑠=𝐼 𝑉 (−𝛾 + 𝑈 ) ; −𝛾𝑠 + 𝑈𝑠; 𝜂 𝑈𝑠}.

(𝑦 + 𝑤𝑉 𝑧) + 𝜋 𝛽 max{I

(11)

≥ 1
𝜏 𝑉

Finally, we need to identify a condition such that, given a threshold 𝜏,
the allocation allows for a truthful record of the ledger.

Validation threshold. Suppose there is a positive measure of val-
idators  in  charge  of  verifying  each  match.  Then  the  decision  of  an
arbitrary validator to work or to shirk depends on the subjective prob-
ability this validator assigns to other validators working or shirking.
Therefore, there are many possible equilibria depending on the original
beliefs of validators. In other words, the uncertainty about the cost to
other validators of communicating a label to the ledger may reverberate
throughout the system and may jeopardize the validation process.

We assume the continuation payoff of validators is independent of
the current validation results.43 Also if validators do not work, they do
not send any messages, thus eliminating a possible free-rider problem.
We relax these assumptions in Online Appendix 3, where we examine
an extension that also specifies the voting game that validators play,
and we state conditions under which validators do not send a message
without working.

Now suppose the validation process requires unanimity. As soon as
validators expect a positive measure to abstain from validating, they
will  also  abstain  even  though  they  may  have  received  a  signal  that
the  communication  cost  is  small.  We  show  that,  as  a  consequence,
validation occurs correctly only when the validation rule is based on a
supermajority, unless payments to validators are arbitrarily large. The
higher the supermajority threshold, the more rents should accrue to
validators in order to guarantee the integrity of the ledger. We show
the following result in Appendix A.

Proposition 1. Given 𝜏, in the limit as 𝜀 → 0, there is a unique dominance-
solvable equilibrium where validators work if and only if the allocation 𝑧
satisfies

𝑧 ≥

𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣
1 − 𝜏

.

(12)

The  proof  follows  two  steps.  In  the  first  step,  we  characterize
equilibria  when,  for  some  common  threshold 𝑐∗
𝑠 ,  validators  employ
switching strategies whereby they work if their cost 𝑐𝑠,𝑖 is below the
𝑠 and they shirk otherwise. A validator receiving a cost at
threshold 𝑐∗
threshold level 𝑐∗

𝑠 is indifferent to working and shirking.
It is well known from the global game literature (e.g. Morris and
Shin (2003)) that, for the marginal player whose cost is exactly equal
to the threshold value 𝑐∗
𝑠 , the density over the share of working agents
is uniform over [0, 1]. Hence, the validator assigns a probability 𝑞 to the
event that a fraction 𝑞 of the 𝑉 validators will work. Since this validator
is indifferent between working or not, and her subjective beliefs of the
share of working validators is uniform, i.e. 𝑔(𝜏 ∣ 𝑐∗

𝑠 ) = 1, 𝑐∗

𝑠 solves

42 We assume validators act in unison: they either all accept the bribe, or
they all reject it.
43 For example, it is difficult to distinguish whether a validator shirked or
their  message  technically  failed  to  reach  other  validators.  However, Green
and Porter (1984) and Monnet and Quintin (2021) show how punishments
followed by forgiveness may discipline agents who can hide behind the veil
of ‘‘bad luck’’.

R. Auer et al.

−𝑐𝑣 +

[

(1 − 𝜏)

(𝑧 − 𝑐∗

𝑠

)

+ 𝜏 (

−𝑐∗
𝑠

)]

= 0.

When the noise vanishes, all individual costs necessarily converge to
the common value 𝑐𝑠. Therefore, when 𝑐𝑠
𝑠 , all validators will work
to validate a trade and the ledger will record labels correctly, while
𝑠 , none of them will. The allocation 𝑧 logically affects the
when 𝑐𝑠 > 𝑐∗
threshold value 𝑐∗
𝑠 : by increasing the validators’ rents 𝑧, the validation
protocol can ensure that validation happens for higher levels of the
communication cost.

≤ 𝑐∗

Hence, the first step of the proof establishes that the validation game
has a unique equilibrium in switching strategies. The second step of the
proof establishes that this unique equilibrium in switching strategies is
also the only strategy profile of the players that survives the iterated
deletion of strictly dominated strategies. In other words, the game is
dominance solvable.44

As a corollary, notice that the payment 𝑧 to validators is positively
linked  to  the  supermajority  level 𝜏 when  there  are  validation  costs.
Therefore,  the  ledger  can  retain  integrity  only  when  unanimity  is
required if payments to validators are arbitrarily large. Finally, given
𝜏, the probability that the trade will go through when 𝑐𝑠 is uniformly
distributed is the probability that

𝑐𝑠

≤ (1 − 𝜏)𝑧 − 𝑐𝑣

≡ 𝑐∗
𝑠 .

If  the  ledger  is  required  to  allow all legitimate  trades  involving  a
producer with label G to always go through, then 𝑧 should be set to
𝑧 ≥ 𝑍(𝜏) ≡ 1
1 − 𝜏

( ̄𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣

) ≡ 𝐶

1 − 𝜏

(13)

,

where ̄𝑐𝑠 is the maximum possible communication cost. In this case,
and given 𝜏, validators will always work. Below, we assume this is the
case. In Online Appendix 4, we relax this assumption and analyze the
𝑠 , letting the designer
optimal validation protocol for any thresholds 𝑐∗
𝑠 should be. Also, we derive sufficient conditions under
choose what 𝑐∗
which 𝑐∗

𝑠 = ̄𝑐𝑠 is optimal.

We can now define incentive feasible allocations.

Definition 2. Given 𝜏 and 𝑉 , an incentive feasible allocation is a list
(𝛾 , 𝛾𝑣, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) that satisfies (5)–(11) and (13).

In what follows we solve for the optimal design of the validation
protocol and how it affects incentive feasible allocations. We simplify
matters further by assuming that the distribution for the communica-
tion cost 𝑐𝑠 converges to the degenerate distribution that gives all the
mass to just one point ̄𝑐𝑠.

3.2.  Limiting distribution of communication costs

For  the  remainder  of  the  analysis  we  consider  the  global  game-
limiting case where 𝜀 → 0, and (13) holds. In this limit, all validators
face the same communication cost equal to ̄𝑐𝑠. So unless they are bribed,
all  validators  always  verify  that  production  took  place  according  to
plans, and they always cast the right vote to the ledger. Therefore, the
share of working validators 𝑤 is equal to one and we can write (5)–(12)
with 𝑤𝑖 = 1. We can further simplify the set of IF allocations by setting
the participation constraint of early producers (7) at equality.

In  this  section,  we  consider  the  incentives  of  a  late  producer  to
make side payments to validators so that they record a false trade, and
we analyze the incentives of validators to accept that bribe. Since the
payment to validators should be minimized, (13) binds so validators
earn 𝑍(𝜏) and the participation constraint of validators (8) is always

44 Morris and Shin (2003) show that a sufficient condition for dominance
solvability in our setting is that the payoffs satisfy strategic complementarity –
that is, the payoff to working is weakly increasing in proportion to the number
of other validators who work. Since this condition is satisfied in our game, we
can apply the global game results in Morris and Shin (2003) to conclude that
our game is dominance solvable.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

satisfied. Also, the incentive constraints of late producers and validators
are  relaxed  when  the  cost  of  opening  an  account  is  set  as  high  as
possible, that is 𝛾 = (1 −𝜂)𝑈 and 𝛾𝑣 = (1 −𝜂)𝑈𝑣. Then denote the expected
rent of validators as 𝑅(𝜏),

𝑅(𝜏) = 𝜏 𝑍(𝜏).

(14)

Define the default factor as (recall that the effective discount factor is
𝛽 = 𝜎 ̃𝛽)

𝛿 ≡

𝜋 𝜎 ̃𝛽(1 − 𝜂)𝛼
1 − 𝜎 ̃𝛽 − (1 − 𝜂)(1 − 𝜎)∕𝜎

,

and  replace  the  expressions  for  the  transfers,  to  find  the  set  of  IF
allocations characterized by45

𝛿
𝜋

[𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)] ≥ 𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏),

𝛿 [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏) + 𝑅(𝜏)] ≥ 1
𝜏 𝑉

(𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)) .

(15)

(16)

The higher 𝛿 is, the weaker the incentives of validators to accept a
bribe are, because they would lose a lot of trading opportunities (as
captured  by  a  large 𝛼),  they  would  very  likely  be  caught  cheating
(as captured by a high 𝜋) or they care a lot about future income (as
captured  by  a  high ̃𝛽),  or  because  the  outside  option  is  really  poor
(𝜂 is low). Also, the default factor can be increasing or decreasing in
the survival rate 𝜎. There are two counteracting effects from a higher
survival  rate:  on  one  hand,  agents  effectively  become  more  patient,
which improves incentives; but on the other hand, a higher survival rate
decreases the transfer that surviving agents get from the ledger, which
weakens discipline. Which effect dominates depends on the strength of
the outside option: if 𝜂 is low enough, the default factor falls with a
higher 𝜎.

According to constraint (15), late producers are better off retaining
their good label by repaying 𝑥 to early producers and 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏) to valida-
tors than getting a bad label and losing the expected lifetime discounted
payoff from trading net of the payment to validators. Constraint (16)
states the condition for validators to reject a bribe: the payoff from
accepting the maximum bribe a late producer offers, (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏))∕𝜏 𝑉 ,
must be lower than the expected loss of accepting such a bribe, given
they are caught with probability 𝜋. In addition to losing the expected
lifetime discounted payoff from trading net of compensating validators,
validators  would  also  lose  the  expected  rents  they  earn 𝑅(𝜏).  With
external validation, (16) simplifies to
𝛿 𝑅(𝜏) ≥ 1
𝜏 𝑉

(𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)) ,

(17)

Inequality (17) requires that losing future validation rents with proba-
bility 𝜋 should be a larger cost to external validators than the benefit
of accepting the largest bribe a late producer would offer.46

We focus next on the number of validators 𝑉 . The more validators
there are, the higher the overall payment for validation — this is the
term 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏) on  the  left-hand  side  of (15).  However,  given 𝜏,  more
validators also means a lower bribe for each validator, thus relaxing
their incentive constraint as shown on the right-hand side of (16) or
(17).  The  optimal  number  of  validators  will  trade  off  both  effects.
When  the  measure  of  validators  is  large,  the  repayment  constraint
of  late  producers  becomes  the  binding  one  when 𝜋 → 1,  so  that
validators  never  accept  a  bribe.  This  is  intuitive:  when 𝑉 is  large,

45 Since  we  set  the  participation  constraint  for  early  producers (7) at
equality, we can use 𝑦 = 𝑥. Also, since validators earn a rent, 𝑈𝐼 𝑉
≥ 𝑈 and
(10) is satisfied whenever (9) is.
46 Our  mechanism  that  requires  a  supermajority 𝜏 of all validators  im-
plies that producers can offer a smaller bribe relative to a mechanism that
would base consensus on a supermajority of voting validators (instead of all
validators). Also, using a mechanism relying only on voting validators may
be  problematic  because  validators  cannot  be  induced  to  vote  when  some
producers are faulty, as we consider in Online Appendix 3, because then they
do not expect any rewards.

8 

R. Auer et al.

no validator gets a very large bribe; but when the mechanism almost
surely observes when they accept a bribe, they almost certainly lose
the expected lifetime payoff from trading. Then, only the incentives of
the late producer matter. However, note that if (15) is binding while
(16) is slack, 𝑉 can be reduced up to the point where (16) binds. We
summarize the discussion above in the following result.

Lemma 3.
bribe.

If 𝜋 and 𝑉 are large enough, validators will never accept a

3.3.  Optimal design

The objective of a planner is to maximize the gains from trade net
of the validation costs. A planner chooses the costs to open accounts 𝛾
and 𝛾𝑣, the trading size 𝑥, the type of validation (internal or external),
the number of validators, and the threshold 𝜏 to solve

𝛼

max
𝛾 ,𝑥,𝑉 ≥0,𝜏∈[0,1]

{𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝐶} ,

(18)

subject  to (15) and (16) for  internal  validation  or (17) for  external
validation. These constraints have been simplified by using 𝛾 = (1 −𝜂)𝑈
and 𝛾𝑣 = (1 −𝜂)𝑈𝑣. But this is without loss of generality: the cost to open
the account is the redistributed lump sum to all agents in the same
period it is levied on late producers. Since this is a mere redistribution,
it does not affect the objective of the planner. Also the higher the lump
sum transferred to agents, the more relaxed their incentive constraints.
Therefore, as we guessed above, the cost to open an account can be set
as high as possible, that is as high as the lifetime benefit of trading
on  the  ledger  net  of  the  available  outside  option.  Conveniently,  the
size  of  the  payment  to  validators 𝑍(𝜏) only  matters  for  incentives
but has no impact on the objective function because it is a transfer
between producers and validators. Also note that whether validation
is  internal  or  external  does  not  affect  the  social  planner’s  objective
function (18). However, comparing (16) and (17) shows that as long as
trade is sufficiently beneficial, or 𝑢(𝑥) > (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍), then (16) is always
satisfied whenever (17) is. In other words, the set of incentive feasible
allocations is larger with internal validation, and internal validation
weakly dominates external validation. But not only this. As we show
below, whenever trade can be supported, centralization is optimal with
external validation. Next, we start by considering the optimal design
with external validation.

Optimal  design  with  external  validation. With  external  validation,  the
only  relevant  constraints  are (15) and (17),  which  we  can  write,
respectively, as

𝛿 𝑢(𝑥) ≥ (𝛿 + 𝜋)
(1 − 𝜏)𝑥 ≤ (𝛿 𝜏2 − 1

[
𝑥 + 𝑉
) 𝑉 𝐶 .

]

,

𝐶
1 − 𝜏

(19)

(20)

It is easy to show that the validators’ incentive constraint (20) always
binds,47 so  we  can  use  it  to  replace  for  the  total  cost  of  validation,
𝑉 𝐶, in the late producer’s repayment constraint (19) and the objective
function. The problem of the planner then becomes

{

𝛼 max
𝑥,𝜏∈[ ̄𝜏 ,1]

𝑢(𝑥) −

(𝛿 𝜏2 − 𝜏)
) 𝑥
(𝛿 𝜏2 − 1

}

,

subject to

𝛿 𝑢(𝑥) ≥ (𝛿 + 𝜋)

𝛿 𝜏2
(𝛿 𝜏2 − 1

) 𝑥.

Inspecting (20),  notice  that  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  for
the existence of external validation is that intertemporal incentives are

47 Suppose it does not bind at the solution ( ̃𝑥, ̃𝜏 , ̃𝑉 ). Then reduce 𝑉 until it
does. This increases the objective function (18), while relaxing the participa-
tion constraint of late producers. So ( ̃𝑥, ̃𝜏 , ̃𝑉 ) could not be the solution, showing
a contradiction.

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

strong enough, in the sense that 𝛿 ≥ 1. Otherwise, the only incentive
feasible allocation is autarky with 𝑉 = 0. With 𝛿 > 1, it is straightfor-
ward to verify that the constraint is relaxed when 𝜏 is highest. Also, the
objective function is maximized when 𝜏 = 1. Therefore, with external
validation, the solution is 𝜏 = 1 and 𝑉 → 0, and the optimal trading
size ̃𝑥(𝛿) ≤ 𝑥∗, where ̃𝑥(𝛿) = 𝑥∗ if 𝛿 ≥ 𝛿∗ > 1, so that the constraint is not
binding or it is defined as the solution to 𝑢( ̃𝑥) = ̃𝑥(𝛿+𝜋)∕(𝛿− 1) otherwise,
with ̃𝑥(𝛿) → 0 as 𝛿 decreases to 1. The payment to the validator is
𝑉 𝑍 → ̃𝑥(𝛿)∕(𝛿 − 1).

Optimal design with internal validation. Next, consider the optimal de-
sign with internal validation. As we show in the Appendix, the social
planner’s objective function (18) is decreasing in 𝑉 , and so we obtain
the following.

Lemma 4. With internal validation, the incentive constraint of validators
(16) always  binds,  while  the  incentive  constraint  of  late  producers (15)
never binds.

Replacing the expression for the validation rent (14) in (16), and

rearranging, we obtain:
𝐶
𝛿 [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥] ≥ 𝑥
1 − 𝜏
𝜏 𝑉

+

[1 − 𝛿(1 − 𝑉 )𝜏] + 𝛿 𝐶 .

(21)

Since  the  objective  function (18) is  independent  of 𝜏,  the  planner
chooses 𝜏 to minimize the right-hand side of (21). Two forces are at
play. On one hand, increasing 𝜏 reduces the maximum bribe size per
validator. On the other hand, increasing 𝜏 increases the payment to
validators 𝑍(𝜏) to ensure that validators indeed verify and validate.
When intertemporal incentives are strong, so that 1 ≤ 𝛿 (1 − 𝑉 ), this
second effect reduces the right-hand side of (21): validators have much
to lose by accepting a bribe. In this case, as with external validation,
it is optimal to set 𝜏 =  1, even if 𝑍(𝜏) → ∞. Alternatively, suppose
intertemporal  incentives  are  weak, 1 >  𝛿 (1 − 𝑉 ),  then  the  optimal
̂𝜏 trades  off  the  smaller  bribe  size  with  the  higher  payment  to  the
validator, and it solves48
1 − ̂𝜏
̂𝜏

[1 − 𝛿 (1 − 𝑉 )] 𝑉 𝐶
𝑥 + 𝑉 𝐶

(22)

√

=

.

The optimal threshold ̂𝜏 is decreasing in 𝑉 but increasing in 𝑥. ̂𝜏 is also
increasing in 𝜋, 𝛽, or 𝛼, as captured by 𝛿. The intuition is apparent from
(15): when 𝜋, 𝛽, or 𝛼 increase, the net rent 𝑅(𝜏) −𝑉 𝑍(𝜏) > 0 of validators
becomes more important for the incentives of validators relative to the
bribe size (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍)∕𝜏 𝑉 , either because they have a higher chance of
losing it – when 𝜋 increases – or because they have a higher lifetime
discounted value – when 𝛽 or 𝛼 increases. So following an increase in 𝛿,
the planner gives more net rent to validators by increasing 𝜏. So unlike
in traditional models of limited commitment, higher trustworthiness as
captured by a higher 𝛿 implies more rents to validators.

Importantly,  while  external  validation  implements  autarky  only
when  intertemporal  incentives  are  weak,  internal  validation  can  do
much more. This is intuitive: with internal validation, the planner can
use  the  value  of  trading  in  the  future  to  discipline  validators,  thus
allowing  the  planner  to  choose  lower  rents  (and  therefore  a  lower
feasible bribe) that validators obtain from being able to manage the
ledger.

The optimal choice of 𝑥 and 𝑉 trades off several effects. First, in-
creasing 𝑥 toward 𝑥∗ brings additional gains from trade, but at the cost
of increasing the bribe size per validator, which tightens their incentive
constraint.  Second,  increasing 𝑉 relaxes  the  incentive  constraint  of
validators, but increases the cost of validation. We can now summarize
these considerations in our main result.

48 It is easy to verify that when 1 > 𝛿 (1 − 𝑉 ), the second order condition for
a minimum is satisfied.

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

𝛿−1

. Welfare is higher with internal validation.

Proposition 5. The constrained optimal solution ( ̂𝑥, ̂𝑉 , ̂𝜏) solves (21) at
equality and (22)–(26) and is characterized by four regions:
1a. [centralized system - efficient trade size] If 𝛿 ≥ 𝛿∗ > 1, external
and internal validations are characterized by ̂𝑉 → 0, ̂𝜏 → 1 and ̂𝑥 →
𝑥∗. Validation requires arbitrarily large payments, i.e. 𝑍( ̂𝜏) → ∞, while
lim ̂𝜏→1 𝑉 ( ̂𝜏)𝑍( ̂𝜏) = 𝑥∗
1b. [centralized system - inefficient trade size] If 1 ≤ 𝛿 ≤ 𝛿∗, external
validation is characterized by ̂𝑉 → 0, ̂𝜏 → 1 and ̂𝑥 → ̃𝑥(𝛿) ≤ 𝑥∗. Internal
validation is characterized by ̂𝑉  > 0, ̂𝜏 < 1 and ̂𝑥 < 𝑥∗. Welfare is higher
with internal validation.
2. [partially distributed system] If ̄𝛿 < 𝛿 ≤ 1, only internal validation can
decentralize trade. The constrained optimal number of validators is ̂𝑉  > 0,
and only a supermajority ̂𝜏 < 1 is optimal. Each validator receives a finite
payment 𝑍( ̂𝜏) < ∞. The constrained optimal allocation is ̂𝑥 < 𝑥∗.
3.  [fully  distributed  system] If 𝛿0 <  𝛿 ≤ ̄𝛿,  only  internal  validation
can decentralize trade. All late producers are validators ̂𝑉 = 1, and ̂𝜏 =
(

)−1

. The constrained optimal allocation is ̂𝑥 < 𝑥∗.

1 +

√ 𝐶
𝑥+𝐶

4. [no trade] If 𝛿 ≤ 𝛿0, there is no validation protocol that can decentralize
trade.

Proposition 5 states that the optimal design of the ledger requires
centralized validation by a single validator only when validators are
sufficiently trustworthy. However, moving toward centrality necessar-
ily imposes a move toward unanimity. In the limit, an arbitrarily large
payment must be made to the single authority managing the ledger. In
reality, feasible payments may be limited and, in such a case, a single
validator will never be optimal. Still, the single validator case offers a
useful benchmark that illustrates the forces driving the solution toward
centrality.  When  intertemporal  incentives  become  weak,  the  single
authority can be more easily convinced to do wrong and the optimal
validation protocol moves away from centrality. The centrifugal forces
also manifest themselves in a reduction in trade size and a departure
from unanimity or a high supermajority rule. Both margins reduce the
feasible bribe to validators and therefore their incentives to do wrong.49
Underlying the results in Proposition 5 are the following compar-
ative statistics (details of the calculations are in the Appendix): 𝑥 and
𝜏 are (weakly) increasing with 𝛿 (i.e. 𝛽, 𝜋, and 𝛼) but decreasing with
validation costs 𝐶. 𝑉 is (weakly) decreasing with 𝛿 but increasing with
validation costs 𝐶.

As the level of patience or frequency of trading among validators
increases (represented by a higher 𝛿), the optimal number of validators
(𝑉 ) decreases while the optimal trade size (𝑥) increases. This is intuitive
because when validators are more patient or trade more frequently,
they have more to lose from any misdeeds. Therefore, as 𝛿 increases
the planner can increase the size of each trade and reduce the number
of validators needed. This choice of 𝑉 and 𝑥 indirectly affects 𝜏 and
reinforces the planner’s decision to increase the net rent for validators
by choosing a larger threshold, as we already explained above. All in
all, these effects work together to increase the threshold 𝜏 with 𝛿.50

Centrifugal forces also include the cost of validation 𝐶. This may
be surprising, as increasing the number of validators also increases du-
plication costs to the detriment of welfare. However, higher validation
costs reduce the overall lifetime discounted surplus of validators, who
as a result are more easily convinced to do wrong. To control this effect,
the planner reduces the feasible bribe (given 𝑥) that a later producer

can pay by increasing the number of validators.

Reaching consensus with a higher number of validators however
does not come for free: as validation cost 𝐶 is higher, validators are
more likely to believe that fewer other validators will work. Hence,
maintaining the same level of consensus requires that each validator
receives a larger rent, as Proposition 1 shows. Therefore, to maintain
the legitimacy of the ledger while keeping costs in check, the threshold
𝜏 should fall.

Fig. 2 illustrates Proposition 5 setting 𝜂 = 0 so that the value of the
outside option is zero. Given some 𝑥 ≤ 𝑥∗ and the default factor 𝛿, Fig. 2
shows the set of (𝑉 , 𝜏) for which the IC of validators (21) is satisfied.
When 𝛿 is relatively high, 𝑥 = 𝑥∗ and (𝑉 , 𝜏) = (0, 1) satisfy (21) and this
is the best design for the system. In this case, the solution is given by
the black dot in the lower right corner of Fig. 2(a). In contrast, Fig. 2(b)
shows incentive feasible allocations when 𝛿 is relatively smaller: then
the allocation 𝑥 = 𝑥∗ and (𝑉 , 𝜏) = (0, 1) is no longer incentive feasible.
The figure shows that implementing 𝑥 = 𝑥∗ is feasible for some (𝑉 , 𝜏),
but only for relatively large 𝑉 . This is costly and the planner does better
by choosing a lower 𝑥 which decreases the bribe size and allows it to
select fewer validators (lower the number of validators 𝑉 ), as shown
by the red area in Fig. 2(b). Reducing 𝑥 slightly below 𝑥∗, the planner
only makes a second order loss, but realizes a first order gain as 𝑉
decreases, thus reducing the overall validation costs. Therefore, as 𝛿
decreases, 𝑥 declines and (𝑉 , 𝜏) moves up along the black curve, as
shown in Fig. 2(c). As 𝛿 falls below the threshold ̄𝛿 toward 𝛿0, 𝑉 = 1
and 𝜏 moves westward on the black line until it reaches 1∕2 and 𝑥 = 0.
For levels of 𝛿 below 𝛿0, there is no equilibrium with trade. Finally, as
we move to the left along the black curve, the trade size 𝑥 decreases
toward zero.

4.  Implementation with competing ledgers

In this section we show that competing ledgers can implement the

planner’s allocation analyzed above.51

One issue when considering competing ledgers is that, to be prof-
itable, the ledgers must attract both early and late producers. This is
a  typical  two-sided  market  problem,  where  the  participation  of  one
side (early producers) encourages the participation of the other side
(late  producers).  The  pricing  can  be  complex,  as  one  side  could  be
subsidized at the cost of the other (see Rochet and Tirole, 2006). We
sidestep this issue by assuming that coalitions of early producers are
setting up ledgers. We also do not take a stand on how these coalitions
are formed. Instead, we show that competing ledgers can implement
the social planner’s optimal design for any number of ledgers. Suppose
there are 𝑁 coalitions consisting of a measure 1∕𝑁 of early producers,
competing for the membership of late producers. We assume that each
coalition can set up only one ledger so that there are 𝑁 possible ledgers
indexed by 𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑁. We suppose it costs 𝐾 to set up any account
on any of the ledgers.52

To compensate for the cost of setting up an account on a ledger,
the coalition charges a fee to late producers. Late producers apply to a
ledger before knowing if they will be selected as validators. If they are
selected as validators, they pay 𝛾𝑣 to the ledger; if they are not, they
pay 𝛾. As before, we use 𝑉 to denote the fraction of late producers
selected to be validators (for any measure of producers) on a particular
ledger. Notice that competing on account fees is not the only thing that

49 Put another way, the safeguards necessary for the ledger’s integrity make
decentralized consensus expensive and reduce trade size. In short, the ledger
is hard to scale. This conundrum introduces trade-offs sometimes known as
the ledger’s ‘‘scalability trilemma’’ (see i.e. Buterin (2021)). The trilemma is
posed in terms of the challenge of attaining a ledger that is simultaneously
decentralized, secure, and scalable.
50 It is also worth noting that as the system becomes fully distributed with
only one validator (𝑉 = 1), the supermajority threshold will converge to simple
majority (𝜏 approaching 1∕2) as the trade size approaches zero, even though
there is no constraint requiring 𝜏 to be greater than or equal to 1∕2.

51 We thank the referee for requesting this material.
52 Another way to model competition is using contestable markets. Suppose
there is one ledger operating, but there is ‘‘free’’ entry with a cost of entry 𝐾,
so that a ledger enters only if the profit is greater than 𝐾. This means that a
ledger is not created if the lifetime discounted expected profit of doing so is
less that 𝐾, that is (1 − 𝜂)[𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝑍 + 𝑉 (𝑍 − 𝐶)] ≤ (1 − 𝛽)𝐾. Therefore,
the ledger sets 𝜂 (which determines the surplus of ‘‘members’’) such that this
holds with equality. Making the market contestable disciplines the ledger such
that it will not extract all the surplus from users.

10 

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

Fig. 2. Incentive feasible choice of (𝑉 , 𝜏).

ledgers do because, depending on their design, ledgers offer different
lifetime utility to their users. However, below we show that there is a
clear relationship between account fees and the utility of users.

Ledgers are competing as follows. Suppose the design of ledger 𝑛
offers expected lifetime utility 𝑈 to a late producer and 𝑈𝑣 to a validator
and charges the respective fees 𝛾 and 𝛾𝑣. Then, after a late producer
learns his role on ledger 𝑛 but before he pays the fee to ledger 𝑛, he
receives an offer from ledger 𝑖 ≠ 𝑛 that gives him 𝜂𝑖𝑈 as a late producer
and 𝜂𝑖𝑈𝑣 as a validator. We require that the offer 𝜂𝑖 be feasible given
the design of ledger 𝑖: if ledger 𝑖 offers a fee 𝛾𝑖 and an expected utility
𝑈𝑖, then 𝜂𝑖𝑈 ≤ 𝑈𝑖 − 𝛾𝑖. Let ̄𝜂𝑛 = max𝑖≠𝑛 𝜂𝑖 be the highest competing offer
faced by users of ledger 𝑛.

Then the objective of ledger 𝑛 is to choose 𝛾, 𝛾𝑣, and 𝑉 to maximize

the lifetime discounted value of these transfers,53
[

1 +

𝛽
1 − 𝛽

]
(1 − 𝜎)

[
(1 − 𝑉 )𝛾 + 𝑉 𝛾𝑣

] ,

subject to the account setup costs (1 − 𝑉 )𝛾 + 𝑉 𝛾𝑣
participation constraints of producers and validators are satisfied,

≥ 𝐾 and where the

−𝛾 + 𝑈 ≥ ̄𝜂𝑛𝑈 ,

53 The ledger collects (1 − 𝑉 )𝛾 + 𝑉 𝛾𝑣 in the first period. Since 1 − 𝜎 agents
]
[
exit and are replaced by new agents, the ledger collects (1 − 𝜎)
(1 − 𝑉 )𝛾 + 𝑉 𝛾𝑣
in all subsequent periods.

11 

R. Auer et al.

−𝛾𝑣 + 𝑈𝑣

≥ ̄𝜂𝑛𝑈𝑣,

where, as before, 𝑈 and 𝑈𝑣 are the expected lifetime utility of a late
producer and a validator. Notice that if ledger 𝑛 chooses 𝑉 validators
and  a  design  that  guarantees  utility 𝑈 to  late  producers  and 𝑈𝑣 to
validators, with costs 𝛾 and 𝛾𝑣, then the net expected utility of a late
]
producer applying to ledger 𝑛 is 𝑈𝑛
.
Inspecting the ledger’s problem, it should be clear that the participation
constraints will hold with equality, so the objective function of ledger 𝑛
is proportional to (1 − 𝑉 )𝑈 + 𝑉 𝑈𝑣. Therefore, the objective of the ledger
is proportional to

≡ (1 − 𝑉 ) [−𝛾 + 𝑈 ] + 𝑉 [

−𝛾𝑣 + 𝑈𝑣

(1 − 𝑉 )(𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝑍) + 𝑉 [(𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝑍) + (𝑍 − 𝐶)] =

𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝐶 ,

where we have used the same steps as in the main text to simplify
the expected utilities. Therefore, the objective function of any ledger
is the same as the planner’s. This implies that all ledgers always adopt
the planner’s optimal design (𝑥, 𝑉 , 𝑍) that maximizes the net trading
surplus given ̄𝜂𝑛.

Next we specify how ledgers compete over the promised expected
utility to late producers, 𝑈𝑛 for all 𝑛. The game is as follows: Ledgers 𝑛 =
1, … , 𝑁 simultaneously announce an expected utility ̄𝑈𝑛 and a factor
{𝜂𝑖}𝑖≠𝑛. Following the announcement, late producers select the ledger
that offers the highest expected utility. If late producers are indifferent
between 𝑛 ledgers,  we  assume  that  each  of  the 𝑛 ledgers  serves  a
fraction 1∕𝑛 of them. A symmetric Nash equilibrium of this game is
( ̄𝑈 , ̄𝜂)
defined as a pair
given
. The promise ̄𝑈 has to
they expect all other ledgers to announce
≥ 𝐾
be feasible, that is, there are fees 𝛾 and 𝛾𝑣 such that (1 − 𝑉 )𝛾 + 𝑉 𝛾𝑣
as well as −𝛾 + 𝑈 ≥ ̄𝜂 𝑈 and −𝛾𝑣 + 𝑈𝑣
≥ ̄𝜂 𝑈𝑣, where 𝑈 and 𝑈𝑣 are the
expected utility of late producers and validators given ̄𝜂.

such that all ledgers announce

( ̄𝑈 , ̄𝜂)

( ̄𝑈 , ̄𝜂)

In a symmetric Nash equilibrium, ̄𝑈𝑛 = ̄𝑈 for all 𝑛, all ledgers choose
the  optimal  design (𝑥, 𝑉 , 𝑍) and  therefore  offer  the  same  expected
utility to late producers (𝑈 ) and to validators (𝑈𝑣). Given this, we show
that a Nash equilibrium is characterized by ̄𝑈 = (1 − 𝑉 )𝑈 + 𝑉 𝑈𝑣 − 𝐴𝐾.
The fees 𝛾 and 𝛾𝑣 are set such that 𝛾 = (1 − ̄𝜂)𝑈 , 𝛾𝑣 = (1 − ̄𝜂)𝑈𝑣, and ̄𝜂
= 𝐾 (where 𝑉 , 𝑈 , and 𝑈𝑣 are functions
solves (1 − ̄𝜂)
of ̄𝜂).

[
(1 − 𝑉 )𝑈 + 𝑉 𝑈𝑣

]

[

+ 𝑉 [

( ̄𝑈 , ̄𝜂)

−𝛾1 + 𝑈 ]

To show this result, consider the strategy of ledger 1, given all other
. If 𝑈1 < ̄𝑈 , ledger 1 does not get any late
ledgers are posting
producers, which cannot be optimal. Can 𝑈1 > ̄𝑈 ? If it was, there would
] > (1 − 𝑉 )𝑈 +
be fees (𝛾1, 𝛾𝑣,1) such that (1 − 𝑉 )
𝑉 𝑈𝑣 − 𝐾, which is not feasible, as this implies 𝐾 > (1 − 𝑉 )𝛾1 + 𝑉 𝛾𝑣,1.
Therefore, the only feasible/optimal choice is 𝑈1 = ̄𝑈 . Next, consider
the choice of ̄𝜂. If ledger 1 sets 𝜂 < ̄𝜂, then it is not competing because
all other ledgers offer the higher share ̄𝜂. Now consider ledger 1 offering
𝜂 > ̄𝜂. Given that all other ledgers offer ̄𝜂, ledger 1’s optimal design is
(𝑈 , 𝛾) and (𝑈𝑣, 𝛾𝑣) such that
−𝛾 + 𝑈 = ̄𝜂 𝑈 , −𝛾𝑣 + 𝑈𝑣 = ̄𝜂 𝑈𝑣.

−𝛾𝑣,1 + 𝑈𝑣

Therefore, 𝜂 > ̄𝜂 is not consistent with the design of ledger 1.54

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

and  characterizes  the  optimal  supermajority  voting  rule,  number  of
validators, and size of transactions.

We believe our analysis is timely, as DLT is rapidly becoming an
industry standard for digital currencies and in other applications. In
particular, our results can shed light on the burgeoning literature on
central bank digital currency (CBDC) and stablecoins insofar as it gives
conditions under which a central authority should manage the ledger
of transactions.55 The discussion of technology and the economics of
central bank digital money has thus far centered on the balance sheet
effects  and  related  systemic  implications.56 Here,  we  focus  not  on
balance sheets and the issue of how the value of a currency can be
guaranteed (central backing is of the essence for a CBDC irrespective
of our analysis), but on the governance of a societal record-keeping
device used as a substitute for money.

Of course, we have made simplifying assumptions in order to better
grasp the basic economics of money as memory. Future work should
relax  some  of  these.  For  instance  –  to  simplify  the  analysis  –  we
have assumed that validators all agree to accept bribes in unison. It
would  be  interesting  to  also  study  the  cooperative  games  between
validators  in  more  detail.  We  have  also  taken  as  given  that  agents
use  a  private  ledger,  as  they  want  to  preserve  their  anonymity  in
trades. Tirole (2020) and Chiu and Koeppl (2020) make progress on this
front. In order to better compare the different types of ledger, future
work should also include the benefit from preserving anonymity. Also
our mechanism design approach implies that we have ignored every
industrial organization aspect of DLT, which might be significant if this
technology were to be widely adopted in the future.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Raphael Auer: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Cyril Monnet: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Hyun Song Shin: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A

In this Appendix containing all proofs, we assume that there is a
fraction 𝑓 of late producers who do not have the ability to produce
any goods. We refer to these producers as ‘‘faulty’’ producers. They are
only necessary to eliminate the free-rider problem facing validators that
we consider in section 3. Otherwise, all other results go through with
𝑓 = 0. For completeness we have written the proof with 𝑓 > 0.

5.  Conclusion

A.1.  Proof of Proposition 1

In this paper, we have presented an economic analysis of decentral-
ized ledger technology in an economy where money is essential. To our
knowledge, our analysis is the first economic analysis of DLT in such a
context. It links a ledger validation game to monetary exchange, estab-
lishes the uniqueness of the equilibrium via a global game approach,

Proposition (Proposition 1). Given 𝜏, in the limit as 𝜀 → 0, there is a
unique dominance-solvable equilibrium where validators work if and only if
the allocation 𝑧 satisfies
𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣∕(1 − 𝑓 )
𝑧

1 − 𝜏 ≥

(23)

.

54 The maximum ̄𝜂 that ledgers can offer is such that the feasibility constraint
binds, so that
[
(1 − 𝑉 )𝑈 + 𝑉 𝑈𝑣
𝐾 = (1 − ̄𝜂)

] .

Since

(𝑉 , 𝑈 , 𝑈𝑣

)

are all function of ̄𝜂, this equation gives the maximum ̄𝜂.

55 See the stock-taking exercise of pursued technological designs in Auer
et al. (2020).
56 See, among others, Andolfatto (2020), Brunnermeier and Niepelt (2019),
Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2020), Keister and Monnet (2020).

12 

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

Assume that each validator receives private cost

𝑐𝑠,𝑖 = 𝑐𝑠 + 𝜀𝑖

where 𝜀𝑖 is independently and uniformly distributed over [−𝜀, 𝜀]. Given
a validation threshold 𝜏, the expected payoff of validator 𝑖 is
)

{

(1 − 𝑓 )
(1 − 𝑓 )

(
−𝑐𝑠,𝑖 + 𝑧 + 𝛽 𝑈𝑉
(
−𝑐𝑠,𝑖

+ 𝛽 𝑈𝑉

)

+ 𝑓 𝛽 𝑈𝑉 ,

I

if ∫ 𝑉
𝑖=1 𝑚𝑖
otherwise,

𝑚𝑖≠∅𝑑 𝑖 > 𝜏 𝑉

−𝑐𝑣 +

where 𝑚𝑖 = 1 if validator 𝑖 sends label 𝐺 (recall that validators do not
send a message when the account label is 𝐵). The expected payoff of a
validator is given by Eq. (6) when the measure of validators sending a
message is higher than 𝜏 𝑉 . We can rewrite the expected payoff as

𝛽 𝑈𝑉 + (1 − 𝑓 )𝑧 ×

̃𝑐1
𝑣
1−𝑓
̃𝑐1
𝑣
1−𝑓

− ̃𝑐𝑠,𝑖 + 1,

− ̃𝑐𝑠,𝑖

I

if ∫ 𝑉

𝑖=1 𝑚𝑖
otherwise,

𝑚𝑖≠∅𝑑 𝑖 > 𝜏 𝑉

(24)

−

−

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

I

I

where we have normalized the cost by the validator’s rent, as ̃𝑐⋅,𝑖 =
𝑐⋅,𝑖∕𝑧. This normalized cost is necessarily lower than 1, and it is uni-
formly distributed since the common cost component 𝑐𝑠 is uniformly
distributed. Note that if a validator expects ∫ 𝑉
𝑚𝑖≠∅𝑑 𝑖  <  𝜏 𝑉 , this
validator will not verify the label in the first place. The structure of the
above payoff is the same as the one in the public good game analyzed
in Morris and Shin (2002) and their results extend almost directly. We
repeat their argument here for completeness.

𝑖=1 𝑚𝑖

𝑖=1 𝑚𝑖

Let 𝑤 be the random variable ∫ 𝑉

𝑚𝑖≠∅𝑑 𝑖∕𝑉 measuring the frac-
tion  of  working  validators.  This  is  a  random  variable  because  the
communication strategy 𝑚𝑖 of each validator 𝑖 depends on their com-
munication cost. Also this random variable belongs to the interval [0, 1].
The distribution of 𝑤 gives the probability that a trader with label 𝐺
is able to trade and compensate validators and of whether it is worth
it  in  expected  terms  for  a  validator  to  verify  and  communicate  the
label  to  the  ledger.  Let 𝑔(𝑤 ∣
̃𝑐𝑠,𝑖) be  the  subjective  density  over 𝑤
for a validator with private information ̃𝑐𝑠,𝑖 and the total verification
and  communication  cost − ̃𝑐𝑣
− ̃𝑐𝑠,𝑖.  We  conjecture  that  validators
1−𝑓
adopt  a  switching  strategy  whereby  they  work  whenever  their  total
cost is lower than some level 𝐶 ∗ ≡ ̃𝑐𝑣
𝑠 . Since the normalized
+ ̃𝑐∗
1−𝑓
, 𝛾𝑠+𝜀
cost ̃𝑐𝑠 is uniformly distributed over the interval
, the total
𝑧

]

cost is also uniformly distributed over

. Since all

[ 𝛾𝑠−𝜀
𝑧
𝑐1
𝑣
1−𝑓 +𝛾𝑠+𝜀
𝑧

,

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

𝑐1
𝑣
1−𝑓 +𝛾𝑠−𝜀
𝑧

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

validators with 𝐶𝑖 < 𝐶 ∗ are working, the measure of working validators
is

𝑐1
𝑣
(1−𝑓 )

+𝑐𝑠−𝜀
𝑧

̃𝑐1
𝑣
1−𝑓

𝑤 =

+ ̃𝑐∗

𝑠 −
2 𝜀
𝑧

𝑐∗
𝑠 −

=

(𝑐𝑠 − 𝜀)
2𝜀

.

So for some 𝑞 ∈ [0, 1], there is a value for the common communication
cost 𝑐𝑠(𝑞) such that 𝑤 = 𝑞. This is
𝑐𝑠(𝑞) = 𝑐∗

𝑠 + 𝜀 − 2𝜀𝑞 .

Hence, 𝑤 < 𝑞 iff 𝑐𝑠 > 𝑐𝑠(𝑞). We now need to find the probability that 𝑐𝑠 >
𝑐𝑠(𝑞). Considering the validator with total cost 𝐶 ∗, the posterior density
over 𝑐𝑠 conditional on his communication cost being 𝑐∗
𝑠 is uniform over
the interval
𝑐∗
𝑠 + 𝜀 − 𝑐𝑠(𝑞)
2𝜀

𝑠 + 𝜀]
. Hence, the probability that 𝑐𝑠 > 𝑐𝑠(𝑞) is
(𝑐∗
𝑠 + 𝜀 − 2𝜀𝑞)
2𝜀

𝑠 − 𝜀, 𝑐∗
𝑐∗
𝑠 + 𝜀 −

= 𝑞 .

[𝑐∗

=

Therefore,

𝐺(𝑤 < 𝑞 ∣ 𝑐∗

𝑠 ) = 𝑞 ,

so that by differentiation, for all 𝑤

𝑔(𝑤 ∣ 𝑐∗

𝑠 ) = 1,

and the density over 𝑤 is uniform at the switching point ̃𝑐∗
probability that the validation process will fail is

𝑠 . Hence, the

13 

𝜏

𝐺(𝜏) = ∫

0

𝑔(𝑤 ∣ ̃𝑐∗

𝑠 )𝑑 𝑤 = 𝜏 .

The validator with private cost 𝑐∗
shirking. Therefore, the switching point ̃𝑐∗
𝑠 solves
(
− ̃𝑐∗
𝑠

) 𝑔(𝜏 ∣ ̃𝑐∗

(
1 − ̃𝑐∗
𝑠

𝑠 )𝑑 𝜏 + ∫

+ ∫

−

𝑐𝑣
(1 − 𝑓 )𝑧

1

𝜏

𝜏

0

) 𝑔(𝜏 ∣ ̃𝑐∗

𝑠 )𝑑 𝜏 = 0,

𝑠 is indifferent between working and

𝑐∗
𝑠
𝑧

.

𝑠 =

= ̃𝑐∗

1 − 𝜏 −

𝑐𝑣
(1 − 𝑓 )𝑧
Hence,  as 𝜀 → 0,  all  validators  with  private  signal 𝑐𝑠,𝑖
𝑠 will
work  while  all  other  validators  will  shirk.  The  probability  that  the
validation  process  succeeds  is 1 − 𝜏.  Then,  as 𝜀 → 0,  all  validators
𝑠 and  they  will  all  shirk  whenever 𝑐𝑠 >
will  work  whenever 𝑐𝑠
𝑠 .  The  argument  to  show  uniqueness  is  standard  from Morris  and
𝑐∗
Shin (2003) given the payoff of any validators (24) to communicating
with  the  ledger  increases  with  the  measure  of  validators  who  also
communicate with the ledger. Therefore, the probability that a trade
validation process goes through is the probability that 𝑐𝑠

≤ 𝑐∗

≤ 𝑐∗

≤ 𝑐∗

𝑠 , or

∫

𝑐∗
𝑠

𝑑 𝑐𝑠
̄𝑐𝑠 − 𝑐𝑠

(1 − 𝜏)𝑧 − 𝑐𝑣
(1−𝑓 )
̄𝑐𝑠 − 𝑐𝑠
𝑐𝑠
and validation will always go through whenever

− 𝑐𝑠

=

,

1 − 𝜏 ≥

̄𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣∕(1 − 𝑓 )
𝑧

.

A.2.  Proof of Lemma 4

Proof. We first show that (16) must bind. Suppose it does not. The
objective function is decreasing in 𝑉 and (15) is relaxed with lower 𝑉 .
So if (16) does not bind, it is optimal to set 𝑉 = 0, and the solution
is ̃𝑥 > 0, which is the solution to max [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥] subject to 𝛿 [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥] ≥
𝜋 𝑥+ (1−𝛽)
𝛿 ̄𝑈 . However, since ̃𝑥 > 0 and 𝜏 ≤ 1, it is clear that (16) cannot
be satisfied when 𝑉 = 0. Therefore, (16) must bind. Suppose now both
(15) and (16) bind. Then, given 𝜏, the solution is given by

𝛼

𝛽 𝛼
1 − 𝛽

𝜏 𝑉 𝜋

𝛽 𝛼
1 − 𝛽

[𝑢(𝑥) − (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏))] = (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)) ,

[𝑢(𝑥) − (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)) + 𝑅(𝜏)] = (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)) .

Using these two equations we can write the objective function of the
planner, as

𝛼 {𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 (𝑍(𝜏) − 𝑅(𝜏))} = 𝛼

{

𝜋

𝜏
1 − 𝜏 𝑉

}

+ 1

𝑉 𝜏

( ̄𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣
1 − 𝜏

)

.

This  is  strictly  increasing  in  both 𝑉 and 𝜏.  Hence,  the  solution  is
𝑉 =  1 and 𝜏 =  1. However, this implies 𝑢(𝑥) → ∞ and 𝑥 → ±∞. If
𝑥 → −∞, we get a contradiction. If 𝑥 → +∞, the planner’s objective
function is 𝛼 {𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 ( ̄𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣
)}
→ −∞, which cannot be optimal.
Therefore, both (15) and (16) cannot be binding. This shows that only
(16) binds. □

A.3.  Proof of Proposition 5

Proof. First we show that internal validation does at least as well as
external validation. Both problems have the same objective function.
The constraints for external validation are
𝛿 [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝑧] ≥ 𝜋 (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑧) ,
𝛿 𝑅(𝜏) ≥ 1
𝜏 𝑉

(𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑧) ,

while the constraint for internal validation is
𝛿 [𝑢(𝑥) − (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑧) + 𝑅(𝜏)] ≥ 1
𝜏 𝑉

(𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑧) ,

since 𝑢(𝑥) − (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑧) ≥ 0, and 𝜋 < 1∕(𝜏 𝑉 ), the constraint set for internal
validation is weaker than the one for external validation. This shows
the claim.

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

Next we concentrate on the results for internal validation (the one
for external validation is in the text). The first order conditions with
respect to 𝑥 (25) and the one with respect to 𝑉 (26) are
]
[𝑢′(𝑥) − 1

(1 + 𝛿 𝜆) − 𝜆

= 0,

(25)

1
̂𝜏 𝑉

[ 𝑅( ̂𝜏)
1 − 𝑓

]
− 𝑍( ̂𝜏)

+ 𝜆

𝑥
̂𝜏 𝑉 2

− 𝛿 𝜆𝑍( ̂𝜏) + 𝜆0 − 𝜆1−𝑓 = 0,

(26)

where 𝜆 is the Lagrange multiplier on the validators’ IC constraint, and
𝜆1−𝑓 is the one on 𝑉 ≤ 1 − 𝑓 and 𝜆0 is the one on 𝑉 ≥ 0.

We first consider the solution when ̂𝜏 → 1. Then 𝑍( ̂𝜏) → +∞ and

)

−

𝑐𝑣.

𝑓
1 − 𝑓

( ̄𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣

− 𝑍( ̂𝜏) = −

𝑅( ̂𝜏)
1 − 𝑓
We now show that 𝜆 and 𝑉 both converge to zero. To the contrary,
suppose 𝑉  > 0 (𝜆0 = 0) and 𝜆 > 0. Since 𝑍( ̂𝜏) → +∞ as ̂𝜏 → 1, the left-
hand side of (26) is necessarily negative as ̂𝜏 → 1. Hence 𝜆0 > 0 and/or
either 𝜆 → 0 to re-establish the equality, which contradicts 𝑉  > 0 and
𝜆 > 0. Hence, either 𝑉 = 0 or 𝜆 = 0 or both. Starting with 𝑉 ∈ (0, 1 − 𝑓 ),
we can rewrite (26) as
( ̄𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣
+ 𝑓
1−𝑓
[ 𝑥
̂𝜏 𝑉 2 − 𝛿 𝑍( ̂𝜏)

𝑐𝑣
] = 𝜆.

)

Since 𝜆 ≥ 0, we obtain 𝑥 ≥ 𝜏 𝛿 𝑉 2𝑍( ̂𝜏). Since 𝑥 is bounded from above
but 𝑍( ̂𝜏) → ∞, we must have 𝑉 → 0 as ̂𝜏 → 1. Further, since (15) never
binds, it must be that 𝑉 𝑍( ̂𝜏) converges to a positive constant, so that
𝑉 2𝑍( ̂𝜏) → 0. Therefore,
𝑐𝑣
] 𝑉

+ 𝑓
1−𝑓

̂𝜏→1
→ 0,

=

)

𝜆
𝑉

( ̄𝑐𝑠 + 𝑐𝑣
[ 𝑥
̂𝜏

− 𝛿 𝑉 2𝑍( ̂𝜏)

[𝑢(𝑥∗) − 𝑥∗ − 𝑉 𝑧] ≥ 𝑥∗ + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏),

so that 𝜆 → 0. Then (25) implies 𝑥 → 𝑥∗. The positive constant 𝑉 𝑍 is
such that the incentive constraint of late producers is satisfied, that is
𝛿
𝜋
and using 𝑧 = 𝑍(𝜏), this is
𝑢(𝑥∗) − 𝑥∗ ≥ 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏).

𝛿
𝛿 + 𝜋

solves (25) and (26) when (21) holds with equality. ̂𝜏 is given by (22).
Consider the case where 𝑉 = 1 − 𝑓 . Using (22), it is easy to check
. Also, when 𝑉 = 1 − 𝑓 so that 𝜆1−𝑓 > 0,

√ (1−𝛿 𝑓 )(1−𝑓 )𝐶
𝑥+(1−𝑓 )𝐶

(
1 +

)−1

that 𝜏 =
the first order condition gives

]
[𝑢′(𝑥) − 1
]
− 𝑍( ̂𝜏)

+ 𝜆

(1 + 𝛿 𝜆) − 𝜆

= 0,

1
̂𝜏 𝑉
− 𝛿 𝜆𝑍( ̂𝜏) > 0.

𝑥
̂𝜏 𝑉 2

[ 𝑅( ̂𝜏)
1 − 𝑓

(27)

(28)

Using (27) to eliminate 𝜆, the definition of 𝑅(𝜏)  =  (1 − 𝑓 )𝜏 𝑍(𝜏) and
𝑍(𝜏) = 𝐶∕(1 − 𝜏), as well as the expression for 𝜏, (28) becomes
√ (1−𝛿 𝑓 )(1−𝑓 )𝐶
𝑥+(1−𝑓 )𝐶

1 +

√

[

]

(1 − 𝑓 )

𝑥
(1 − 𝑓 )𝐶

−

1
[𝑢′(𝑥) − 1]

> 𝛿 ,

(1 − 𝛿 𝑓 )(1 − 𝑓 )𝐶
𝑥 + (1 − 𝑓 )𝐶

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

where 𝑥 is given by the incentive constraint of validators holding at
equality, which we can write as

(29)

𝛿 [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − (1 − 𝑓 )𝐶] =𝐶

√

⎛
1 +
⎜
⎜
⎝

(1 − 𝛿 𝑓 )(1 − 𝑓 )𝐶
𝑥 + (1 − 𝑓 )𝐶

(

1 − 𝛿 𝑓 +

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
√ (1−𝛿 𝑓 )(1−𝑓 )𝐶
𝑥+(1−𝑓 )𝐶

√ (1−𝛿 𝑓 )(1−𝑓 )𝐶
𝑥+(1−𝑓 )𝐶

)

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

𝑥
(1 − 𝑓 )𝐶

×

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
≡𝐻(𝑥).

+

It is tedious to check that 𝐻 ′(𝑥) > 0 and, using the implicit function
theorem, that 𝑑 𝑥∕𝑑 𝛿 > 0 (when 𝑓 → 0). The left-hand side of (29) is
decreasing in 𝑥 if

√ 𝜌

+

𝑥𝑢′(𝑥)

(1 − 𝑓 )𝐶 < 1,

1
𝑢′(𝑥)
where 𝜌 = −𝑢′′(𝑥)𝑥∕𝑢′(𝑥). This will hold if 𝐶 and 𝑥 are small enough
and 𝜌 ≥ 1 so that 𝑥𝑢′(𝑥) is decreasing in 𝑥. Assuming this is the case,
since 𝑑 𝑥∕𝑑 𝛿 > 0, 𝑥 declines as 𝛿 decreases. So the left-hand side of (29)
increases when 𝛿 decreases and the condition will be satisfied for 𝛿 low
enough and below some ̄𝛿. □

Also, the positive constant 𝑉 𝑍 is such that the incentive constraint

of validators is satisfied, that is
𝛿 [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥 − 𝑉 𝑍 + 𝜏 𝑍] ≥ 1
𝜏 𝑉

(𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)) ,

or

𝛿 𝜏 𝑉 [𝑢(𝑥) − 𝑥] − 𝛿 𝜏 𝑉 2𝑍 + 𝛿 𝜏2𝑉 𝑍 ≥ (𝑥 + 𝑉 𝑍(𝜏)) .

Appendix B.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104026.

References

As 𝜏 → 1, 𝑉 → 0 and 𝑉 𝑍 → 𝑐 𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡, therefore the inequality above
tends to
𝛿 𝑉 𝑍 ≥ 𝑥∗ + 𝑉 𝑍 ,
which requires 𝛿 > 1, and we obtain in the limit 𝑉 𝑍 ≥ 𝑥∗
𝛿−1
that last restriction on 𝑉 𝑍 with the IC of late producers, we find
𝛿 ≥ 𝑢(𝑥∗) + 𝜋 𝑥∗
𝑢(𝑥∗) − 𝑥∗

. Combining

> 1.

]

When the solution for ̂𝑉 is interior, we can simplify (25) and (26) to
obtain
[
𝑍( ̂𝜏) − 𝑅( ̂𝜏)
1−𝑓
[ 𝑥
̂𝜏 𝑉 2 − 𝛿 𝑍( ̂𝜏)
and

] = 𝜆,

𝑢′(𝑥) − 1 =

𝜆
1 + 𝛿 𝜆

1
̂𝜏 𝑉

,

or

𝑢′(𝑥) = 1 +

𝑉 𝑍( ̂𝜏)
𝑥

−

𝑅( ̂𝜏)𝑉
𝑥(1 − 𝑓 ) (1 + 𝛿 𝜆)

.

The right-hand side of the above equation is always higher than 1, so
that generically 𝑥 ≤ 𝑥∗. The constrained optimal solution is ( ̂𝑥, ̂𝑉 ) that

14 

Abadi,  Joseph,  Brunnermeier,  Markus,  2018.  Blockchain  economics.  NBER  Working

Papers 25407.

Amoussou-Guénou,  Yackolley,  Biais,  Bruno,  Potop-Butucaru,  Maria,  Tucci-
Piergiovanni, Sara, 2019. Rationals Vs Byzantines in Concensus-Based Blockchains.
Research report, HAL ID: hal-02043331.

Andolfatto,  David,  2020.  Assessing  the  impact  of  central  bank  digital  currency  on

private banks. Econ. J. ueaa073.

Auer,  Raphael,  2019.  Beyond  the  doomsday  economics  of  ‘proof-of-work’  in

cryptocurrencies. BIS Working Papers, no. 765 January.

Auer,  Raphael,  Cornelli,  Giulio,  Frost,  Jon,  2020.  Rise  of  the  central  bank  digital
currencies:  drivers,  approaches  and  technologies.  BIS  Working  Papers,  no.  880,
August.

Auer, R., Haslhofer, B., Kitzler, S., Saggese, P., Victor, F., 2024. The technology of

decentralized finance (DeFi). Digit. Financ. 6 (1), 55–95.

Aymanns, Christoph, Dewatripont, Mathias, Roukny, Tarik, 2020. Vertically disinte-

grated platforms SSRN, February.

Baudet, Mathieu, Danezis, George, Sonnino, Alberto, 2020. FastPay: High-performance

Byzantine fault tolerant settlement. arXiv:2003.11506v2 [cs.CR].

Berentsen, Aleksander, Schaer, Fabian, 2020. Bitcoin, Blockchain, and Cryptoassets: A

Comprehensive Introduction. MIT-Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Biais, Bruno, Bisière, Christophe, Bouvard, Matthieu, Casamatta, Catherine, 2019. The

blockchain folk theorem. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1662–1715, 2019.

Boehme, R., Christin, N., Edelman, B., Moore, T., 2015. Bitcoin: Economics. Technol.

Gov. J. Econ. Perspect. 29 (2), 213–238.

Boyd,  John,  Prescott,  Edward,  1986.  Financial  intermediary  coalitions.  J.  Econom.

Theory 38, 211–232.

R. Auer et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104026 

Carlsson, Hans, van Damme, Eric E., 1993. Global games and equilibrium selection.

policy analysis. J. Political Econ. 113, 463–484.

Brunnermeier, Markus, Niepelt, Dirk, 2019. On the equivalence of private and public

Brunnermeier,  Markus,  Payne,  Jonathan,  2023.  Strategic  money  and  credit  ledgers.

Budish,  Eric,  2025.  Trust  at  scale:  The  economic  limits  of  cryptocurrencies  and

money. J. Monet. Econ. 106, 27–41.

NBER Working Paper 31561.

blockchains. Q. J. Econ. 140, 1–62.

blog.ethereum.org, 25 November.

Buterin,  V.,  2014a.  Proof  of  stake:  how  I  learned  to  love  weak  subjectivity.

Buterin, Vitalik, 2021. Why sharding is great: demystifying the technical properties.

available at https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/04/07/sharding.html.

Buterin, Vitalik, Weyl, Eric Glen, Ohlhaver, Puja, 2022. Decentralized society: Finding
web3’s soul. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4105763.
Caldarelli, Giulio, 2020. Understanding the blockchain oracle problem: A call for action.

Information 11 (509), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/info11110509.

Econometrica 61, 989–1018.

Carlsten, M., Kalodner, H., Weinberg, S.M., Narayanan, A., 2016. On the instability
of bitcoin without the block reward. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security. pp. 154–167.

Cavalcanti, Ricardo, Wallace, Neil, 1999a. A model of private bank note issue. Rev.

Econ. Dyn. 2, 104–136.

Cavalcanti,  Ricardo,  Wallace,  Neil,  1999b.  Inside  and  outside  money  as  alternative

media of exchange. J. Money, Credit. Bank. 31, 443–457.

Chiu, Jonathan, Koeppl, Thorsten, 2019. Blockchain-based settlement for asset trading.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 1716–1753.

Chiu, Jonathan, Koeppl, Thorsten, 2020. Payments and the D(ata) N(etwork) A(ctivities)

of BigTech Platforms. Mimeo Queen’s University.

Chiu, Jonathan, Koeppl, Thorsten, 2022. The economics of cryptocurrencies - Bitcoin
and  beyond.  Can.  J.  Econ.  55  (4),  1762–1798. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/caje.
12625.

Cong,  Lin  William,  He,  Zhiguo,  Li,  Jiasun,  2021.  Decentralized  mining  in  central-
ized pools. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (3), 1191–1235. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/
hhaa040, hhaa040.

Deirmentzoglou, E., Papakyriakopoulos, G., Patsakis, C., 2019. A survey on long-range

attacks for proof of stake protocols. IEEE Access 7, 28712–28725.

Diamond, Doug, 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Rev. Econ.

Stud. 51, 393–414.

Easley, D., O’Hara, M., Basu, S., 2019. From mining to markets: the evolution of bitcoin

transaction fees. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (1), 91–109.

Eyal,  I.,  E.G.,  Sirer,  2014.  Majority  is  not  enough:  Bitcoin  mining  is  vulnerable.
In: R., Christin N. Safavi-Naini (Ed.), Financial Cryptography and Data Security.
FC  2014.  In:  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer  Science,  vol.  8437,  Springer,  Berlin,
Heidelberg.

Fanti, Giulia, Kogan, Leonid, Viswanath, Pramod, 2021. Economics of proof-of-stake

payment systems. MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5845-19.

Fernandez-Villaverde,  Jesus,  Sanches,  Daniel,  Schilling,  Linda,  Uhlig,  Harald,  2020.
Central  bank  digital  currency:  Central  banking  for  all?  NBER  Working  Papers
26753.

Froewis, Michael, Boehme, Rainer, 2017. In code we trust? Measuring the control flow
immutability of all smart contracts deployed in ethereum. In: Garcia-Alfaro, J.,
Navarro-Arribas, G., Hartenstein, H., Herrera-Joancomarti, J. (Eds.), Data Privacy
Management. In: Cryptocurrency and Blockchain Technology, vol. 35, Springer, pp.
7–72.

Garratt, Rodney, Monnet, Cyril, 2023. An impossibility theorem on truth-telling in fully
decentralized systems. Bank for International Settlements Working Paper 1117.
Garratt,  Rodney,  van  Oordt,  Maarten  R.C.,  2020.  Why  fixed  costs  matter  for
proof-of-work based cryptocurrencies. Bank of Canada Working Paper 2020-27.
Gervais, Arthur, Karame, Ghassan O., Wuest, Karl, Glykantzis, Vasileios, Ritzdorf, Hu-
bert, Capkun, Srdjan, 2016. On the security and performance of proof of work
blockchains,  CCS.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  2016  ACM  SIGSAC  Conference  on
Computer and Communications Security, October.

Goldstein, Itay, Pauzner, Ady, 2005. Demand–deposit contracts and the probability of

Huberman,  Gur,  Leshno,  Jacob,  Moallemi,  Ciamac  C.,  2021.  Monopoly  without  a
monopolist: An economic analysis of the bitcoin payment system. Rev. Econ. Stud.
88, 3011–3040.

Hurwicz, Leonid, 2008. But who will guard the guardians? Am. Econ. Rev. 98, 577–585.
Keister,  Todd,  Monnet,  Cyril,  2020.  Central  bank  digital  currency:  Stability  and

information. Mimeo, Rutgers University.

Kocherlakota, Narayana, 1998. Money is memory. J. Econom. Theory 81, 232–251.
Kocherlakota, Narayana, Wallace, Neil, 1998. Incomplete record-keeping and optimal

payment arrangements. J. Econom. Theory 81 (2), 272–289.

Kroll, Joshua A., Davey, Ian C., Felten, Edward W., 2013. The economics of bitcoin
mining, or bitcoin in the presence of adversaries. In: ÊProceedings of WEIS. 2013.
Lagos,  Ricardo,  Rocheteau,  Guillaume,  Wright,  Randall,  2017.  Liquidity:  A  new

monetarist perspective. J. Econ. Lit. 55, 371–440.

Lagos, Ricardo, Wright, Randall, 2005. A unified framework for monetary theory and

Leland,  H.E,  Pyle,  D.H.,  1977.  Informational  asymmetries,  financial  structure  and

financial intermediation. J. Financ. 32, 371–387.

Leshno,  Jacob,  Strack,  Philipp,  2020.  Bitcoin:  An  axiomatic  approach  and  an

impossibility theorem. Am. Econ. Review: Insights 2, 269–286.

Li,  Yiting,  Wang,  Chien-Chiang,  2019.  Cryptocurrency,  imperfect  information,  and

fraud. Munich Personal RePEc Archive (MPRA) Paper No. 94309.

Luu, Loi, Chu, Duc-Hiep, Olickel, Hrishi, Saxena, Prateek, Hobor, Aquinas, 2016. Mak-
ing smart contracts smarter. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security. pp. 254–269.

Monnet, Cyril, 2006. Private vs public money. Internat. Econom. Rev. 47 (3), 951–960.
Monnet, Cyril, Quintin, Erwan, 2021. Optimal financial exclusion. Am. Econ. Journal:

Microeconomics 13, 101–134.

Morris, Stephen, Shin, Hyun Song, 1998. Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling

currency attacks. Am. Econ. Rev. 88, 587–597.

Morris, Stephen, Shin, Hyun Song, 2002. Measuring strategic uncertainty. manuscript

London School of Economics.

Morris, Stephen, Shin, Hyun Song, 2003. Global games: Theory and applications. In:
Dewatripont, Matthias, Hansen, Lars P., Turnovsky, Stephen J. (Eds.), In: Advances
in Economics and Econometrics: Proceedings of the Eighth World Congress of the
Econometric Society, vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, pp. 56–114, chap 3.
Muthoo, Abhinay, 1999. Bargaining Theory with Applications. Cambridge University

Press, http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511607950.

Nakamoto, Satoshi, 2008. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. https://bitcoin.

Pagnotta, Emiliano, 2021. Decentralizing money: bitcoin prices and blockchain security.

org/bitcoin.pdf.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 35, 866–907.

Prat, Julien, Walter, Benjamin, 2018. An equilibrium model of the market for bitcoin

mining. CESifo Group Munich No. 6865.

Rahman,  David,  2012.  But  who  will  monitor  the  monitor?  Am.  Econ.  Rev.  102,

2767–2797.

J. Econ. 37, 645–667.

Rochet, Jean-Charles, Tirole, Jean, 2006. Two-sided markets: a progress report. RAND

Rochet, Jean-Charles, Vives, Xavier, 2004. Coordination failures and the lender of last

resort. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 2, 1116–1147.

Rocheteau, Guillaume, Nosal, Ed, 2017. Money, Payments, and Liquidity. MIT Press.
Saleh,  Fahad,  2021.  Blockchain  without  waste:  Proof-of-stake.  Rev.  Financ.  Stud.

(forthcoming).

106, 16–26.

Schilling, Linda, Uhlig, Harald, 2019. Some simple bitcoin economics. J. Monet. Econ.

Shanaev, Savva Arina Shuraeva, Vasenin, Mikhail, Kuznetsov, Maksim, 2019. Cryptocur-
rency value and 51% attacks: Evidence from event studies. J. Altern. Investments
22, 65–77.

Tirole, Jean, 2020. Public and private spheres and the authentic self. Mimeo, Toulouse

School of Economics.

Townsend,  Robert  M.,  2020.  Distributed  Ledgers:  Design  and  Regulation  of  Fi-
nancial  Infrastructure  and  Payment  Systems.  MIT  Press,  2020.  ISBN  electronic:
9780262361194.

Williamson, Stephen, 1986. Costly monitoring, financial intermediation and equilibrium

Williamson, Stephen, 1987. Financial intermediation. Financial Intermediation, Business

Williamson, Stephen, Wright, Randall, 2011. New monetarist economics: models. In:
Friedman, B., Woodford, M. (Eds.), In: Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3A,
Elsevier, pp. 25–96.

Xu, Xiwei, Pautasso, Cesare, Zhu, Liming, Gramoli, Vincent, Ponomarev, Alexander,
Tran, An.Binh, Chen, Shiping, 2016. The blockchain as a software connector. In:
Proceedings of the 13th Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture.
WICSA, pp. 182–191.

15 

Green, Edward, Porter, Robert, 1984. Noncooperative collusion under imperfect price

credit rationing. J. Monet. Econ. 18, 159–179.

Grossman,  Sanford  J.,  Stiglitz,  Joseph  E.,  1976.  Information  and  competitive  price

Failures, and Real Business Cycles 95, 1196–1216.

bank runs. J. Financ. 60, 1293–1327.

information. Econometrica 52, 87–100.

systems. Am. Econ. Rev. 66, 246–253.

Gu, Chao, Mattesini, Fabrizio, Monnet, Cyril, Wright, Randall, 2013. Banking: A new

monetarist approach. Rev. Econ. Stud. 80, 636–662.

Halaburda, Hanna, He, Zhiguo, Li, Jiasun, 2021. An economic model of consensus on

distributed ledgers. mimeo University of Chicago.

Huang, Angela, 2019. On the number and size of banks: Efficiency and equilibrium.

Mimeo, National University of Singapore.

