Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Growing the efficient frontier on panel trees✩
,∗, Jingyu He b
Lin William Cong a,d,e
a SC Johnson College of Business, Cornell University, United States of America
b City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
c International Institute of Finance, Faculty of Business for Science and Technology, School of Management, University of Science and Technology of China, China
d Fudan University FISF, China
e NBER, United States of America

, Guanhao Feng b

, Xin He c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We introduce a new class of tree-based models, P-Trees, for analyzing (unbalanced) panel of individual asset
returns, generalizing high-dimensional sorting with economic guidance and interpretability. Under the mean–
variance efficient framework, P-Trees construct test assets that significantly advance the efficient frontier
compared to commonly used test assets, with alphas unexplained by benchmark pricing models. P-Tree
tangency portfolios also constitute traded factors, recovering the pricing kernel and outperforming popular
observable and latent factor models for investments and cross-sectional pricing. Finally, P-Trees capture the
complexity of asset returns with sparsity, achieving out-of-sample Sharpe ratios close to those attained only
by over-parameterized large models.

Dataset link: Growing the Efficient Frontier on P
anel Trees (Original data)

JEL classification:
C1
G11
G12

Keywords:
Decision tree
Factors
Generative models
Interpretable AI
Test assets

1.  Introduction

Estimating  the  mean–variance  efficient  (MVE)  frontier  is  crucial
for  asset  pricing  and  investment  management.  Yet,  estimating  the
tangency portfolio (Markowitz, 1952) using the unbalanced panel of
thousands of individual asset returns proves impracticable. Empirical

studies typically consider a ‘‘diversified’’ set of test assets (e.g., ME-
BM  25  portfolios)  to  estimate  and  evaluate  factor  models,  hoping
these test assets or a few common factors can span the same efficient
frontier as individual assets. However, popular factor models hardly
explain the cross section of conventional pre-specified test assets (e.g.,
Kozak et al., 2018; Lopez-Lira and Roussanov, 2020), not to mention

✩
We are grateful to Fahiz Baba-Yara (discussant), Svetlana Bryzgalova (discussant), John Campbell, Vic Chien, Andrei Goncalves, Bing Han, Kewei Hou, Bob
Jarrow, Ron Kaniel, Chris Malloy, Alberto Rossi (discussant), Gideon Saar, Shrihari Santosh (discussant), Artem Streltsov, Ziying Sun (discussant), Peixuan Yuan
(discussant), and Guofu Zhou for detailed comments and suggestions. We also thank Doron Avramov, Jie Cao, Zhanhui Chen, Eric Ghysels, P. Richard Hahn,
Dashan Huang, Sophia Zhengzi Li, Asaf Manela, Stefan Nagel, Adam Reed, Artem Streltsov, Yinan Su, Fred Sun, Yaki Tsaig, Mao Ye, Dacheng Xiu, Bobby Yu, and
seminar and conference participants at ArrowStreet Capital, 2024 AsianFA Annual Meeting, Baylor University, BUAA, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Cambridge
University Algorithmic Trading Society Quant Conference, CFTRC 2022, CityUHK, CKGSB, Conference on FinTech, Innovation and Development at Hangzhou
(2nd), Cornell University, 2024 EFMA Annual Meeting, Goethe University Frankfurt, GSU-RFS FinTech Conference 2022, HKAIFT-Columbia joint seminar, Hunan
University, INFORMS Annual Meeting 2021, 4th International FinTech Research Forum (RUC), 2023 Mid-South DATA Conference (Memphis), KAIST Digital
Finance Conference, NFA 2022, University of Oxford SML-Fin Seminar, OSU, PHBS, PKU Guanghua, PKU-NSD, PKU-NUS Annual International Conference on
Quantitative Finance and Economics, Qube Research and Technology, Reichman University (IDC Herzliya), Schroders Investments, Shanghai Financial Forefront
Symposium (3rd), SHUFE, NUS, SMU, SUSTech, TAMU, Tsinghua SEM, UNC, University of Bath, University of Hawai’i, USC, USTC, University of Macau, World
Online Seminars on Machine Learning in Finance, WFA 2022, and 2023 XJTLU AI and Big Data in Accounting and Finance Conference for constructive discussions
and feedback. Feng’s research is partly supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (GRF-11502721, GRF-11502023) and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC-72203190). He J.’s research is partly supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (ECS-21504921, GRF-11507022, GRF-
11509224) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-72403214). Feng and He J. are partly supported by the InnoHK initiative and the
Laboratory for AI-Powered Financial Technologies. The authors also acknowledge research awards from INQUIRE Europe and IQAM Research.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: will.cong@cornell.edu (L.W. Cong), gavin.feng@cityu.edu.hk (G. Feng), jingyuhe@cityu.edu.hk (J. He), xin.he@ustc.edu.cn (X. He).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104024
Received 20 November 2023; Received in revised form 4 February 2025; Accepted 5 February 2025
Available online 18 February 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

the  ad  hoc  nature  of  these  test  assets  hampers  the  effectiveness  of
model estimations and evaluations (Lewellen et al., 2010; Ang et al.,
2020). For example, characteristics-based test assets are often limited
to univariate- and bivariate-sorted portfolios due to the challenges of
high-dimensional  sorting  (Cochrane, 2011),  overlooking  nonlinearity
and asymmetric interactions (that do not uniformly apply to all assets),
even  with  dependent  sorting  (Daniel  et  al., 1997).  These  problems
cannot be fully addressed by evaluating different test assets separately
for  robustness  checks  (e.g., Fama  and  French, 1996),  selecting  test
assets (Daniel et al., 2020; Giglio et al., 2023; Bryzgalova et al., 2023),
or combining test assets (e.g., Feng et al., 2020).

The  evaluation  of  factor  models  and  test  assets  is  about  mean–
variance diversification and, therefore, the performance of the tangency
portfolio constructed using these test assets or factors. Cochrane (2011)
states  that  expected  returns,  variances,  and  covariances  are  stable
functions  of  asset  characteristics  (e.g.,  size,  value),  and Kelly  et  al.
(2019) further show return-factor covariances are associated with char-
acteristics. The key to bridging the gap between the ultimate efficient
frontier and tangency portfolios of test assets or factors spanning the
SDF therefore lies in systematically utilizing the high-dimensional asset
characteristics, which contain rich information on the joint distribution
of asset returns dynamics (e.g., Kozak and Nagel, 2022).

To achieve this, we propose a new approach that integrates nonlin-
earity and asymmetric interactions with the high-dimensional charac-
teristics to create test assets that span the efficient frontier of individual
asset returns. The Panel Tree (P-Tree) framework is inspired by modern
AI  and  constitutes  a  versatile  family  of  models  that  cluster  panel
observations to achieve given economic objectives. Creating test assets
requires  clustering  individual  assets  into  groups  to  form  portfolios.1
Under  a  global  split  criterion  for  goal-oriented  search,  P-Tree  clus-
ters  individual  asset  returns  and  creates  basis  portfolios.  It  utilizes
high-dimensional characteristics under the MVE framework to jointly
generate test assets and a latent factor, which is the MVE portfolio of
test assets, and recovers the stochastic discount factor (SDF). Therefore,
P-Tree extends the scope of regression tree models beyond pure predic-
tion tasks, particularly generating diversified test assets that reach the
ultimate efficient frontier.2

Specifically, P-Tree employs a ‘‘top-down’’ approach (typical trees
are  drawn  with  the  root  at  the  top),  splitting  the  cross  section  of
thousands of individual assets and grouping them into a small number
of  clusters  based  on  characteristic  values  to  form  (value-weighted)
portfolios. Guided by asset pricing considerations, we grow a P-Tree to
iteratively construct test assets and latent factors for the SDF, following
the baseline specification of the global split criterion that maximizes
the Sharpe ratio of the SDF. The high Sharpe ratio of the constructed
SDF reflects the high MVE frontier spanned by the generated leaf basis
portfolios. The resulting leaf basis portfolios and latent factors provide
researchers  with  a  diversified  set  of  test  assets  and  the  SDF  model.
Furthermore, P-Trees are intuitive and transparent, allowing economic
interpretation and identifying a sparse set of useful characteristics that
interact to generate test assets and latent factors jointly.

Fundamentally, P-Tree is a greedy search algorithm guided by asset
pricing  goals  for  optimal  clustering  based  on  similar  characteristic
values within a large modeling space. In empirical asset pricing, basis
portfolios are usually formed by grouping assets based on classifications
such  as  countries  or  industries,  or  through  unsupervised  clustering

1 The commonly used security sorting in empirical research is one type of
unsupervised clustering based on firm characteristics, similar to the decision
tree (Bryzgalova et al., 2023). However, no unified method has been developed
for sorting securities and generating test assets.

2 Tree-based  models  excel  in  predicting  complex  data  with  high  dimen-
sionality, nonlinearity, and variable interactions, even in low signal-to-noise
environments and small sample sizes (e.g., Sorensen et al., 2000; Rossi and
Timmermann, 2015; Gu et al., 2020; Bianchi et al., 2021; Capponi and Yu,
2024).

(e.g., security sorting) based on return correlations or characteristics.
In contrast, P-Tree generates characteristics-managed leaf basis port-
folios to maximize the Sharpe ratio of their MVE portfolios, without
being either supervised or unsupervised. The objective can be flexibly
specified, making the P-Tree framework applicable for a wide range of
panel data analyses.3

Methodological  innovations. Our  asset  pricing  application  effectively
demonstrates the key methodological innovations. First, off-the-shelf
ML  methods,  including  the  famous  Classification  and  Regression
Trees (CART, Breiman et al., 1984), typically assume that observations
are i.i.d., and not designed for analyzing panel data. Though naively
fitting  CART  or  tree  ensembles  (boosted  trees  or  random  forest)  on
characteristics-return data shows positive predictive performance (e.g.,
Gu et al., 2020), they ignore the panel data structure. Alternatively,
P-Tree  fully  embraces  the  panel  data  structure  and  incorporates  a
time-invariant tree structure for multi-period observations. The time-
invariant  P-Tree  allows  for  economic  interpretability  when  building
ML models on panel data. For example, similar to security sorting, the
time-invariant P-Tree allows the same set of characteristics-managed
leaf basis portfolios for all periods.

Second,  the  standard  tree-based  models  in  ML,  including  CART,
focus  purely  on  prediction.  Furthermore,  CART-based  models  grow
recursively, optimizing the quadratic loss of prediction. These models
optimize locally at each node without considering sibling nodes, mainly
for  computational  efficiency.  However,  this  ‘‘myopic’’  strategy  often
leads to overfitting, because it operates on fewer observations in each
node as the tree grows. By contrast, P-Trees broaden the applications
beyond  prediction,  encompassing  the  generation  of  test  assets  and
latent  factors.  The  iterative  growth  of  P-Trees  is  designed  to  utilize
data  from  the  entire  cross  section  to  guard  against  the  overfitting
that afflicts conventional trees grown using local split criteria. P-Trees
combine economic principles and nonlinear ML algorithms while en-
suring the interpretability of the graphical tree diagram, providing a
unified approach for splitting the cross section and growing the efficient
frontier.

Third, the P-Tree framework can integrate the boosting or bagging
strategy of ML, enabling multiple P-Trees to form a multi-factor model.
On the one hand, the Boosted P-Tree grows additional P-Trees based
on  the  previous  ones,  providing  a  unified  framework  for  a  multi-
factor model, such that additional factors and test assets must provide
an  incremental  contribution.  The  ensemble  approach  makes  P-Tree
a  versatile  tool  that  can  enhance  the  performance  of  any  predeter-
mined factor model by exploiting the unspanned efficient frontier under
the  MVE  framework.  When  boosted  to  generate  multiple  factors,  P-
Trees offer an alternative to principal component analysis (PCA) and
deep neural networks, with greater interpretability and sparsity, while
capturing (asymmetric) interactions.4 On the other hand, the random
P-Forest  generates  additional  P-Trees  on  random  bootstrap  samples,
offering a unified framework to create multiple sets of uncorrelated
factors and test assets, which can be used to assess characteristic impor-
tance. A large random P-Forest is also connected to the recent literature
of large and over-parameterized models (e.g., Didisheim et al., 2024).

Empirical  findings. First,  we  study  monthly  U.S.  equity  returns  from
1981 to 2020 using 61 firm characteristics. The P-Tree tangency port-
folios  are  constructed  as  traded  factors,  significantly  advancing  the
efficient frontier with high annualized Sharpe ratios, ranging from 6.37
for  a  single  P-Tree  (with  10  portfolios)  to  15.63  for  20  boosted  P-
Trees  (with  200  portfolios).  These  numbers  are  substantially  higher

3 We have developed and shared the P-Tree package, PTree, in a public
repository  in R for  other  researchers  to  explore  (see https://github.com/
Quantactix/PTree).

4 Other recent studies explore latent factors on PCA (Kelly et al., 2019;
Lettau  and  Pelger, 2020; Kim  et  al., 2021; He  et  al., 2023)  and  deep
learning (e.g., Gu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2024).

2 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

than  those  constructed  by  conventional  basis  portfolios  (univariate-
or bivariate-sorted portfolios) or commonly used factor models. These
findings  provide  strong  evidence  of  a  significant  gap  between  the
current empirical literature and the potential limits of the efficient fron-
tier. Moreover, generated under the unified MVE framework, boosted
P-Trees  produce  multi-factor  models  that  effectively  price  the  cross-
sectional returns. Also, P-Tree factors offer annualized Sharpe ratios
over  3  and  significantly  positive  alphas  in  OOS  analyses  for  past-
predicting-future and future-predicting-past tests.5

Second, these diversified P-Tree test assets span the efficient frontier
and  pose  a  significant  challenge  for  alternative  factor  models,  high-
lighting the importance of test assets. We identify many economically
and  statistically  unexplained  test  assets,  indicated  by  most  monthly
alphas  larger  than  1%,  and  an  extremely  high  GRS  test  statistic  of
141.27 (aggregated weighted pricing error) for the first P-Tree against
the Fama–French five-factor model (Fama and French, 2015). These
asymmetric,  interactive,  and  nonlinear  characteristics-managed  leaf
basis portfolios are difficult to explain using other well-known observ-
able factor models (e.g., Hou et al., 2021) and ML-based latent factor
models (e.g., Kelly et al., 2019; Lettau and Pelger, 2020). Given the
insufficient MVE spanning and low hurdles of univariate- or bivariate-
sorted  portfolios  for  model  testing,  we  recommend  including  these
multi-characteristic, systematically sorted P-Tree test assets in future
model evaluations.

Finally,  we  design  a  random  P-Forest  with  bagging  to  evaluate
characteristic importance, account for variable selection risk, and val-
idate  transparent  and  interpretable  P-Tree  models.  We  confirm  that
the same small set of characteristics (e.g., SUE, DOLVOL, and BM_IA)
selected  by  P-Trees  are  likely  proxies  for  the  true  fundamental  risk
inherent in the SDF, which may be overlooked in a linear factor model
with ad hoc selected factors. In addition, the random P-Forest SDF as
a large regularized model has an excellent OOS Sharpe ratio, which
shows similar patterns to the random split SDF but is significantly more
efficient in computation. In a sense, goal-oriented search improves upon
brute-force large models with statistical and economic regularizations,
effectively combining economic objectives with ML models. Finally, P-
Trees display all split rules, aiding researchers in understanding feature
interactions.6

Literature. P-Trees constitute the first goal-oriented, systematic cluster-
ing of individual securities and generation of leaf basis portfolios under
the MVE framework. Hoberg and Welch (2009) propose constructing
factors  and  test  assets  by  optimizing  objective  functions  instead  of
sorting. For unsupervised clustering, Ahn et al. (2009) model within-
and between-group return correlations to form portfolio groups, Chen
et al. (2017) evaluate the performance by grouping hedge fund alpha
values,  and Patton  and  Weller (2022)  group  assets  based  on  their
heterogeneous risk premia on risk factors. We join Cong et al. (2023)
as the earliest studies that iteratively cluster panel data by maximizing
specific economic objectives.

Our latent factor model is related to but different from the recent
regularized portfolio (or SDF) literature (e.g., Ao et al., 2019; Kozak
et al., 2020; Bryzgalova et al., 2023), which typically estimate their
regularized portfolio (or SDF) on a large number of prespecified test
assets.  In  contrast,  the  SDF  and  test  assets  are  generated  iteratively
in  our  unified  P-Tree  framework  by  maximizing  the  Sharpe  ratio.

5 There  is  a  gap  between  the  in-  and  out-of-sample  Sharpe  ratios.  The
paragraph ‘‘limits to learning’’ in Internet Appendix I, ‘‘Simulation’’, provides
more discussion on this gap.

6 P-Trees allow the long and short legs of a long-short portfolio to interact
with different characteristics, thereby loading the portfolio on different leaf
basis portfolios. This asymmetric interactive sorting contrasts with the tradi-
tional treatment of a long-short portfolio as a single asset and complements the
pioneering work of Jarrow et al. (2023) in modeling the two legs of anomaly
portfolios separately.

Notably, Bryzgalova et al. (2023) shrink useless assets when estimating
the optimal portfolio and describe this process as pruning or regular-
izing  a  decision  tree  (instead  of  growing  it)  working  from  potential
leaf portfolios. They highlight the resemblance between the decision
tree and security sorting but do not specify a split criterion for tree
growth. Their paper manually specifies a small set of split candidates
and  a  shallow  depth  for  initial  trees.  P-Trees  differ  by  growing  the
tree from the root to provide a goal-oriented clustering approach and
efficiently scanning the large space of generalized sequential sorting on
high-dimensional characteristics.

Moreover, our study contributes to the growing literature on latent
factor  models  in  asset  pricing.  For  recent  developments  of  PCA,  in
addition  to  the  projected  PCA  (Kim  et  al., 2021)  and  reduced-rank
approach (He et al., 2023), the instrumental PCA (IPCA, Kelly et al.,
2019) uses characteristics to model the time-varying factor loadings
and estimate principal components, and the risk premia PCA (RPPCA,
Lettau and Pelger, 2020) adds asset pricing regularization in the ob-
jective.  Recent  studies,  such  as  the  auto-encoder  (Gu  et  al., 2021),
generative  adversarial  network  (Chen  et  al., 2024),  characteristics-
sorted factor approximation (Feng et al., 2023, 2024), and structural
neural network (Fan et al., 2022), have also developed customized deep
learning models for nonlinear latent factor modeling. Following these
developments, P-Trees provide a graphical representation for variable
nonlinearity and asymmetric interactions, which PCA or deep learning
methods do not offer.

While ML and tree-based methods are widely adopted in finance
due  to  their  powerful  nonlinear  modeling  capabilities  using  high-
dimensional characteristics (e.g., Gu et al., 2020; Bianchi et al., 2021;
Bali et al., 2023), most studies either apply off-the-shelf ML models
for prediction without considering the panel data structure or incor-
porating economic guidance, or focus on supervised or unsupervised
learning  and  prediction  tasks.  We  add  to  several  recent  exceptions
involving  generative  models,  including  (Cong  et  al., 2023),  which
combines  Bayesian  spike-and-slab  priors  and  Panel  Trees  for  asset
pricing with uncommon factors, Cong et al. (2021), which develops
the  first  ‘‘large’’  model  in  finance  for  portfolio  management  using
reinforcement learning, Creal and Kim (2023), which adapts Bayesian
trees to currency returns, and Cong et al. (2024), which studies hetero-
geneity in return predictability and links that to trading profitability of
a predictability-based anomaly.

The P-Tree framework has a notable extension, the random P-Forest,
which connects to recent discussions on ‘‘benign overfitting’’ and ‘‘high-
dimensional interpolation’’ (e.g., Belkin et al., 2019; Hastie et al., 2022)
in  statistics,  as  well  as  the  corresponding  ‘‘virtue  of  complexity’’  in
financial  contexts  (e.g., Kelly  et  al., 2022, 2024; Didisheim  et  al.,
2024). We corroborate these studies by showing that large tree-based
models  for  which  the  number  of  parameters  exceeds  the  number  of
observations perform well OOS, provided that appropriate statistical
regularization is applied. Moreover, we contribute to recent research
that supports incorporating economic restrictions when estimating and
evaluating machine learning or factor models (e.g., Gagliardini et al.,
2016; Avramov et al., 2023; Jensen et al., 2024).

Finally, our tree-based greedy algorithm demonstrates human-like
intelligence through a ‘‘divide-and-conquer’’ strategy, offering a sparse,
interpretable,  and  computationally  efficient  modeling  alternative  to
modern AI, distinct from deep reinforcement learning.

The remainder of the article is as follows: Section 2 introduces the P-
Tree models. Section 3 illustrates the empirical applications of a single
P-Tree  to  split  the  cross-section  and  generate  test  assets.  Section 4
demonstrates the empirical results of the boosted and multi-factor P-
Trees. Section 5 discusses the random P-Forest and P-Tree’s robustness
to  macro  regimes.  Section 6 concludes,  and  the  internet  appendix
includes simulation and additional empirical discussions.

3 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Fig. 1. Example of a decision tree.
Left: A decision tree has two splits, three leaf nodes, and three leaf parameters. Right: The corresponding partition plot is generated for the sample of predictor space on value
and size.

2.  Panel tree for asset pricing

Section 2.1 describes how P-Tree innovates over standard tree-based
models. Section 2.2 delves into the growth of P-Trees, and Section 2.3
introduces boosted P-Trees for multi-factor models. Section 2.4 presents
simulation results.

2.1.  CART and P-Tree innovations

Designed for predictions, the standard CART (Breiman et al., 1984)
model and its variants partition the predictor space into distinct, non-
overlapping regions of leaf nodes and assign a constant leaf parame-
ter to each region.7 It searches and records the partition as follows:
Suppose the data constitute 𝐾 predictors, and the 𝑖th observation is
denoted by 𝐳𝑖 = (𝑧𝑖,1, … , 𝑧𝑖,𝐾 ). The 𝑗th split rule of the decision tree is
denoted by ̃𝐜(𝑗) = (𝑧⋅,𝑘, 𝑐𝑗 ), which partitions data by checking whether
the value of the 𝑘th predictor 𝑧⋅,𝑘 is greater or smaller than cutoff 𝑐𝑗 .
CART considers only binary splits, since any multiway-split tree can be
represented as one with multiple binary splits. The optimal split rule is
chosen to minimize the prediction error.

After 𝐽 splits,  CART  partitions  the  predictor  space  into 𝐽 + 1
leaf  nodes  denoted  by {
𝑛=1 and  assigns  a  constant  leaf  parame-
ter 𝜇𝑛 to  each  node.  The  regression  tree  ,  with  parameters 𝛩𝐽 =
{{̃𝐜(𝑗)}𝐽

𝑛=1 }, constitutes a high-dimensional step function:

𝑛}𝐽 +1

𝑗=1

 (𝐳𝑖 ∣ 𝛩𝐽 ) =

I {𝐳𝑖 ∈ 

𝑗

} .

(1)

𝜇𝑛

𝑛=1
The  indicator I{𝐳𝑖 ∈ 
𝑗 } takes 1 for  one  leaf  node  and 0 for  oth-
ers.  The  leaf  parameters  in  the  step  function  are  estimated  by  av-
eraging the training data within each leaf node. This nonparametric
approach adapts CART to low signal-to-noise environments and small
sample  sizes.  The  tree  model  predicts  new  observations  by  locating
the corresponding leaf and using its parameter as the prediction after
training.

Fig. 1 illustrates how conventional tree-based models (e.g., CART)
are applied to predict stock returns with firm characteristics, through
recursively partitioning the characteristic space into clusters (small-cap,
large-cap growth, and large-cap value). The bottom nodes, often called
leaf nodes, are associated with constant leaf parameters, meaning assets
within the same node share the same return forecast.

However, due to multiple limitations, these methods are unsuitable
for  economic  or  financial  panel  data  and  for  generating  test  assets
or pricing kernels. First, they treat the panel of asset returns as i.i.d
observations. Second, they focus on predictions using statistical local
split criteria, such as minimizing the sum of squared error objectives

, {𝜇𝑛}𝐽 +1
𝐽 +1
∑

in the child nodes of a particular split. Thus, they do not incorporate
panel structure or economic restrictions. As the tree grows, the number
of observations in each node decreases, and idiosyncratic noise causes
overfitting. While tree ensembles help mitigate overfitting, they are less
interpretable than a single decision tree.

P-Tree addresses both issues by (i) utilizing a time-invariant tree
structure  and  (ii)  employing  economic  objectives  that  consider  all
observations,  rather  than  just  those  in  a  parent  node,  to  guide  the
tree  growth.  This  (i)  enables  thorough  extraction  of  panel  data  to
construct leaf basis portfolios and (ii) iteratively builds P-Trees using
global split criteria to prevent overfitting, extending the scope of trees
from pure prediction to goal-oriented clustering for test asset and factor
generation.

2.2.  Growing a P-Tree

individual  assets 

P-Tree  partitions 

the  universe  of 
into
non-overlapping leaf nodes based on the values of ranked character-
istics  with  a  time-invariant  structure  over 𝑇 periods.  The  leaf  basis
portfolios  are  (value-weighted)  portfolios  of  stocks  within  each  leaf
node from the time-invariant tree structure. P-Tree splits sequentially
from the root node and generates one extra leaf basis portfolio after
each additional split. Specifically, it produces 𝑗 + 1 leaf basis portfolios
after the 𝑗th split, reducing the dimension from thousands of individual
assets  to 𝑗 + 1 portfolios.  These  characteristics-managed  leaf  basis
portfolios expand on characteristics-sorted portfolios to accommodate
asymmetric interactions of multiple characteristics.

Let 𝐑(𝑗)
𝑡

, … , 𝑅(𝑗)

𝑛,𝑡 , … , 𝑅(𝑗)

𝑡 =  [𝑅(𝑗)

denote  all  excess  return  vectors  of  leaf  basis  portfolios
after the 𝑗th split of the tree, and let 𝑓 (𝑗)
denote the factor spanned
by 𝐑(𝑗)
. The tree has 𝑗 + 1 basis portfolios in all leaf nodes, denoted
𝑡
by 𝐑(𝑗)
𝑗+1,𝑡],  where 𝑅(𝑗)
𝑛,𝑡 represents  a  length-𝑇
vector  of  returns  over 𝑇 periods  for  the 𝑛th  leaf  node.  To  find  the
first split, we begin with a portfolio of all assets, denoted as 𝐑(0)
𝑡 =
]
[
𝑅(0)
, which serves as the root node for P-Tree. The tree is expanded
𝑡
}
, 𝑓 (𝑗)
. First, the leaf basis portfolios
through iterative updates of
𝑡
𝐑(𝑗)
are expanded as the tree grows. Second, using the expanded leaf
𝑡
basis portfolios, we re-estimate the P-Tree factor 𝑓 (𝑗)
. Being a greedy
algorithm,  the  sequential  growth  of  the  tree  ensures  computational
feasibility compared to a full enumeration of possible sortings.

𝐑(𝑗)
𝑡

{

1,𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

First split. The root node contains all assets corresponding to the value-
weighted market factor. Firm characteristics are uniformly normalized
cross-sectionally to the range of [−1, 1] within each period. We assess
different  split  threshold  options 𝑐𝑚 for  characteristics 𝑧⋅,𝑘,  such  as
quintile  splits 𝑐𝑚 ∈  [−0.6, −0.2, 0.2, 0.6].8 Consider  a  candidate  split

7 CART  is  a  binary  decision  tree  model  and  serves  as  the  foundation
for ensemble methods such as random forest (Breiman, 2001) and boosting
trees (Freund and Schapire, 1997). Other notable Bayesian tree models include
BART (Chipman et al., 2010) and XBART (He et al., 2019; He and Hahn, 2023).

8 Quintile splitting efficiently reduces the search space with only about four
thousand stocks and many highly correlated characteristics for growing a P-
Tree with 10 leaves. Decile or denser splitting may lead to overfitting and
non-diversified test assets due to some portfolios having few stocks.

4 

L.W. Cong et al.

Fig. 2. Illustration of the first split.
To  determine  the  optimal  characteristic  and  cutpoint  value,  we  evaluate  a  list  of
candidate splits (i.e., standardized unexpected quarterly earnings (SUE) ≤ −0.2; 40%
percentile) for calculating the split criterion value.

̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚 = (𝑧⋅,𝑘, 𝑐𝑚) as in Fig. 2. The candidate partitions the root node into
left and right child nodes based on whether 𝑧⋅,𝑘 is less than or equal to
𝑐𝑚.

1,𝑡 and 𝑅(1)

The observations of stock returns within each potential child leaf
form  a  leaf  basis  portfolio,  with  vectors  of  return 𝑅(1)
2,𝑡 ,  re-
spectively. Note they are vectors of returns, thus maintaining the panel
structure of asset returns. The P-Tree factor is estimated as the MVE
portfolio of all leaf basis portfolios,
𝑡 = 𝐰(1)′𝐑(1)
𝑡 𝐑(1)′
𝑓 (1)
where 𝐑(1)
is  the  matrix  of  returns  of  two  leaf  basis
𝑡
𝑡 𝐑(1)′
portfolios after the first split,
] are the sample
mean and second moment matrix of leaf basis portfolios.9 Generating
latent factors aligns with the P-Tree split criteria, as the P-Tree factor
represents the MVE portfolio of all leaf basis portfolios.

, 𝐰(1) ∝ ̂𝐸[𝐑(1)
[
𝑅(1)
1,𝑡

̂𝐸[𝐑(1)] and ̂𝐸[𝐑(1)

]−1 ̂𝐸[𝐑(1)
𝑡

, 𝑅(1)
2,𝑡

(2)

=

],

]

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

In the baseline specification, our split criterion therefore aims to

maximize the Sharpe ratio of the MVE portfolio:

√

̂𝜮

−1
̂𝝁′
(̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚) =
𝐅 ̂𝝁𝐅,
𝐅
where 𝐅 = 𝑓 (1)
is the generated latent factor, with the sample mean ̂𝝁𝐹
and covariance matrix ̂𝜮𝐅. The criterion allows P-Tree to construct and
estimate basis portfolios, latent factors, and efficient portfolio weights
simultaneously,  for  the  global  objective  of  constructing  the  efficient
frontier.

(4)

𝑡

Each candidate split ̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚 generates a different partition of the data,
resulting in unique leaf basis portfolios, corresponding P-Tree factors,
and  ultimately,  varying  valuations  of  the  split  criteria  in (4).  Con-
sequently,  we  loop  over  all  candidate  splits  and  select  the  one  that
maximizes the split criteria as our initial split rule.

Second split. The second split can occur at the root’s left or right child
node. We assess the split criteria for all candidate splits for both leaf
nodes and choose the split that maximize the criteria as in (4). Fig. 3
depicts the tree of the candidates for the second split. In either scenario,
one leaf node splits, becoming an internal node and generating two new
leaf nodes. The P-Tree factor is then constructed based on all three leaf
basis portfolios (thus global):
, 𝐰(2) ∝ ̂𝐸[𝐑(2)
𝑡 = 𝐰(2)′𝐑(2)
𝑓 (2)
𝑡
where ̂𝐸[𝐑(2)] and ̂𝐸[𝐑(2)
𝑡 𝐑(2)′
matrix of leaf basis portfolios 𝐑(2)

𝑡 𝐑(2)′
] are the sample mean and second moment
, 𝑅(2)
after the second
3,𝑡

]−1 ̂𝐸[𝐑(2)
𝑡

[
𝑅(2)
1,𝑡

, 𝑅(2)
2,𝑡

𝑡 =

(5)

],

]

𝑡

𝑡

9 Portfolio  weights 𝐰(𝑗) are  normalized  such  that  the  sum  of  absolute
weights equals one. Following the regularization approaches in Kozak et al.
(2020), Bryzgalova et al. (2023), Didisheim et al. (2024), we utilize small
shrinkage  parameters, 𝛾 =  10−4,  for  robustly  estimating  efficient  portfolio
weights:

(

)−1

𝑡

̂𝐸[𝐑(𝑗)

̂𝐸[𝐑(𝑗)

𝑡 𝐑(𝑗)′

] + 𝛾𝐈𝑘+1

𝐰(𝑗) =
(3)
where 𝐈𝑘+1 is  the  identity  matrix.  Shrinkage  parameters  stabilize  portfolio
weight  estimation  and  prevent  over-leveraging,  which  can  be  adjusted  to
control the degree of regularization.

𝑡 ],

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

split. The construction of the three basis portfolios depends on which
node the candidate splits, as shown in Fig. 3. The updated P-Tree factor
is plugged in to maximize the Sharpe ratio in (4), where 𝐅 = 𝑓 (2)
is the
updated P-Tree factor.

𝑡

Notably, our proposed objective is a global split criterion, because
it considers all leaf basis portfolios when constructing 𝐅 (the global
MVE portfolio). Unlike CART, which focuses on a specific leaf node,
our model explores all candidate splits in all leaf nodes to find the one
with the largest investment improvement.

Growth termination. All subsequent splits proceed similarly. The tree-
growing procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1. Determining the number
of leaves is a natural turning point in tree growth, and it is also the
only tuning parameter needed for P-Tree. We consider P-Trees with
𝐽 + 1  =  10 leaf nodes in the baseline specification. Furthermore, we
mandate a minimum leaf size of 20 for growing the tree because the
leaf  needs  to  serve  as  a  basis  portfolio,  and  any  leaves  that  do  not
meet this criterion are not subjected to further splitting. Once the tree
growing process terminates, it outputs the P-Tree split sequence, leaf
basis portfolios 𝐑(𝐽 )
. Note
each leaf portfolio can be interpreted through economic fundamentals
revealed by the sequential splits.

𝐽 +1,𝑡], and the P-Tree factor 𝑓 (𝐽 )

𝑡 = [𝑅(𝐽 )

, … , 𝑅(𝐽 )

1,𝑡

𝑡

Possible extensions. The P-Tree framework is flexible to accommodate
alternative objectives to the global split criteria in (4) for estimating the
MVE portfolio using individual asset returns. For example, one might
aim to create the minimum-variance portfolio or develop latent factors
explaining  test  assets,  such  as  individual  or  basis  portfolio  returns.
The  crucial  aspect  is  defining  a  clear  economic  goal  and  utilizing
the  greedy  growth  algorithm  within  trees  to  explore  the  extensive
observation clustering space and optimize the objective. P-Trees also
allow  for  flexible  greediness,  enabling  the  consideration  of  multiple
splits  in  each  iteration  instead  of  the  conventional  single  split,  or
simultaneous splits along multiple characteristics by partitioning along
some  linear  combinations  of  the  characteristics.  We  leave  these  for
future exploration.

2.3.  Boosted P-Trees

Boosting is an ML technique that combines weak learners to form
a strong learner (e.g., Freund and Schapire, 1997; Rossi and Timmer-
mann, 2015; Capponi and Yu, 2024). Boosted P-Trees sequentially grow
a  list  of  additive  trees  that  augment  previous  trees  under  the  MVE
framework, which helps further span the efficient frontier with addi-
tional basis portfolios and generate multi-factor models. Considering
existing factors, the boosting procedure seamlessly integrates into the
P-Tree framework by creating additional P-Tree factors to maximize
the  collective  Sharpe  ratio  of  the  tangency  portfolio.  The  boosting
procedure is outlined below.

1. The initial factor, denoted as 𝑓1,𝑡, can be either generated by the
first single P-Tree or benchmark factors selected by researchers
(e.g., the market factor).

2. The  second  factor 𝑓2,𝑡

is  generated  by  the  second  P-Tree  to
complement the first factor. The second tree growth follows the
split criterion in (4), but 𝐅 =  [𝑓1,𝑡, 𝑓2,𝑡]. The MVE portfolio is
generated directly from all the factors.10

3. Repeat Step 2 to sequentially generate 𝑃 factors 𝐅𝑡 = [𝑓1,𝑡, … ,

𝑓𝑃 ,𝑡] until the stopping criteria are triggered.

10 We  use  a  small  shrinkage  parameter, 𝛾𝑓 =  10−5,  for  estimating  MVE
portfolio weights on factors.

5 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Fig. 3. Illustration of the second split.
There are two potential candidates for the second split, each splitting one of the original leaf nodes. After the second split, three leaf basis portfolios are produced to update the
latent factor.

Block structure in boosted P-Trees. The boosted P-Tree utilizes a two-
step process to produce either the MVE portfolio or the SDF by incor-
porating multiple sets of leaf basis portfolios. Initially, the tree-specific
MVE portfolio of all leaf basis portfolios within each P-Tree is computed
to  determine  the  current  P-Tree  factor.  Subsequently,  this  factor  is
merged with all previous P-Tree factors or benchmarks to create an all-
tree MVE portfolio for the multi-factor P-Tree model. Boosted P-Trees
indirectly impose regularization on the all-tree MVE portfolio weights
through the sequential tree block structure, even though the resulting
Sharpe ratio may not surpass the one generated directly from all basis
portfolios in all P-Trees. This avoids high-dimensional estimation issues
and, in turn, leads to robust estimation and OOS performance.

2.4.  Simulation

Simulation  exercises  in  this  section  highlight  the  importance  of
using out-of-sample tests and of including most available observable
features when applying P-Tree, as well as demonstrate the ability of P-
Tree to capture true underlying characteristics generating the data and
their non-linear interactions. For more details, please refer to Internet
Appendix I.

We  introduce  three  true  underlying  characteristics,  their  interac-
tions, and nonlinear terms (detailed in Internet Appendix I). We cal-
ibrate the return-generating process on historical data (introduced in
the next section) and include a large set of redundant characteristics
correlated with the true characteristics generating the data, but do not
drive returns. We then conduct the following four sets of exercises.

First,  we  compare  the  Sharpe  ratios  and  alphas  of  P-Tree  test
assets with conventional characteristics-sorted portfolios, which do not
incorporate characteristic interactions. The single P-Tree and boosted
P-Trees consistently produce leaf basis portfolios with higher Sharpe
ratios and larger unexplained pricing errors under various signal-to-
noise-ratio  levels,  both  in-  and  out-of-sample.  Even  when  sorting  is
performed on the true characteristics directly, univariate- and bivariate-
sorted  portfolios  still  underperform  P-Tree  test  assets  generated  on
high-dimensional characteristics. This result is corroborated later in our
empirical findings that P-Tree test assets achieve better mean–variance
efficiency than sorted portfolios (Section 4.2). P-Tree indeed captures
important interactions in the data-generating process.

Second, the interpretability of one P-Tree or a few P-Trees relies
on their ability to select variables that matter. P-Tree helps distinguish
sparse characteristics underlying the true data generation from a large
number of redundant or useless ones. With repeated simulations, P-
Tree  selects  the  true  characteristics  in  the  first  few  splits  with  high
probabilities. These improved selection rates are particularly evident
in scenarios with a high signal-to-noise ratio. This discovery can only

be discerned through simulations, as real-world data’s sparse charac-
teristics are still unknown. The consistent selection behavior relates to
assessing characteristic importance in Section 5.1.

Third, we break down the difference between the in- and out-of-
sample performance of P-Tree models into two components: overfitting
and limits to learning, as discussed by Didisheim et al. (2024). Estimating
the true predictability is challenging in real data due to the unknown
market data-generating process. In our simulation, however, the true
predictability is defined as the OOS Sharpe ratio achieved by P-Trees
with oracle characteristics. We find positive values for overfitting and
limits  to  learning,  which  increase  with  more  boosted  P-Trees,  sup-
porting the conclusion in Didisheim et al. (2024) that overfitting and
limits  to  learning  become  more  problematic  with  additional  model
parameters and a limited number of observations. Later in empirical
analyses,  we  observe  again  the  large  gap  between  the  in-  and  out-
of-sample performance of P-Tree models, justifying our focus on OOS
metrics.

Fourth, we evaluate the efficiency loss when a P-Tree misses some
true  characteristics  among  input  features  (but  redundant  or  useless
characteristics  abound).  This  exercise  evaluates  the  model’s  perfor-
mance with incomplete or useless information, which may occur for
various  reasons.  Under  our  calibrated  return-generating  process,  the
Sharpe ratios and CAPM alphas decline substantially, and P-Tree selects
redundant  or  useless  characteristics  more  frequently.  Therefore,  we
should include all available predictors. In our later analyses of historical
data, we indeed use all firm characteristics available in the dataset.

3.  Splitting the cross section of U.S. equities

The P-Tree framework easily applies to public equities or corporate
bonds. We focus on U.S. equities for an illustrative application. No-
tably, against the backdrop of emergent large models, P-Tree offers an
interpretable alternative that does not require excessive computation
resources.11

3.1.  Data on U.S. public equities

Equity data and characteristics. The standard filters (e.g., same as in
Fama–French factor construction) are applied to the universe of U.S.
equities. This universe includes only stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, or
NASDAQ for more than one year and uses those observations for firms
with a CRSP share code of 10 or 11. We exclude stocks with negative

11 The baseline single P-Tree model trained on U.S. data runs about 20 min
on a server with an Intel Xeon Gold 6230 CPU, for a training dataset with 61
characteristics and 2.2 million observations.

6 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Table 1
Equity characteristics.
This table lists the description of 61 characteristics used in the empirical study.
No. Char.

Category

Momentum
Investment
Intangibles
Investment
Intangibles
Profitability
Frictions
Frictions
Value-versus-growth
Value-versus-growth
Value-versus-growth
Value-versus-growth
Value-versus-growth
Investment
Profitability
Momentum
Investment
Momentum
Frictions
Value-versus-growth
Value-versus-growth
Investment
Investment
Intangibles
Intangibles
Frictions
Value-versus-growth
Investment
Frictions
Frictions
Frictions

ABR
1
ACC
2
ADM
3
AGR
4
ALM
5
ATO
6
BASPREAD
7
BETA
8
9
BM
10 BM_IA
11 CASH
12 CASHDEBT
13 CFP
14 CHCSHO
15 CHPM
16 CHTX
17 CINVEST
18 DEPR
19 DOLVOL
20 DY
21 EP
22 GMA
23 GRLTNOA
24 HERF
25 HIRE
ILL
26
LEV
27
28
LGR
29 MAXRET
30 ME
31 ME_IA
32 MOM12M
33 MOM1M
34 MOM36M
35 MOM60M
36 MOM6M
37 NI
38 NINCR
39 NOA
40 OP
PCTACC
41
PM
42
43
PS
44 RD_SALE
45 RDM
46 RE
47 RNA
48 ROA
49 ROE
50 RSUP
51 RVAR_CAPM Idiosyncratic volatility - CAPM (3 months)
52 RVAR_FF3
SVAR
53
SEAS1A
54
SGR
55
SP
56
STD_DOLVOL Std of dollar trading volume (3 months)
57
STD_TURN
58
59
SUE
60 TURN
61

Description
Abnormal returns around earnings announ.
Operating accruals
Advertising expense-to-market
Asset growth
Quarterly asset liquidity
Asset turnover
Bid–ask spread (3 months)
Beta (3 months)
Book-to-market equity
Industry-adjusted book to market
Cash holdings
Cash to debt
Cashflow-to-price
Change in shares outstanding
Change in Profit margin
Change in tax expense
Corporate investment
Depreciation/PP&E
Dollar trading volume
Dividend yield
Earnings-to-price
Gross profitability
Growth in long-term net operating assets
Industry sales concentration
Employee growth rate
Illiquidity rolling (3 months)
Leverage
Growth in long-term debt
Maximum daily returns (3 months)
Market equity
Industry-adjusted size
Cumulative returns in the past (2-12) months Momentum
Previous month return
Momentum
Cumulative returns in the past (13-35) months Momentum
Cumulative returns in the past (13-60) months Momentum
Cumulative returns in the past (2-6) months
Momentum
Net equity issue
Investment
Number of earnings increases
Momentum
Net operating assets
Investment
Operating profitability
Profitability
Percent operating accruals
Investment
Profit margin
Profitability
Performance Score
Profitability
Intangibles
R&D-to-sales
Intangibles
R&D-to-market
Revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts
Intangibles
Return on net operating assets
Profitability
Return on assets
Profitability
Return on equity
Profitability
Revenue surprise
Momentum
Frictions
Frictions
Frictions
Intangibles
Value-versus-growth
Value-versus-growth
Frictions
Frictions
Momentum
Frictions
Frictions

Res. var. - Fama–French 3 factors (3 months)
Return variance (3 months)
1-Year Seasonality
Sales growth
Sales-to-price

Std. of Share turnover (3 months)
Standardized unexpected quarterly earnings
Shares turnover

ZEROTRADE Number of zero-trading days (3 months)

book equity or lag market equity. We use 61 firm characteristics with
monthly  observations  for  each  stock,  covering  six  major  categories:
momentum,  value,  investment,  profitability,  frictions  (or  size),  and
intangibles.  Characteristics  are  standardized  cross-sectionally  to  the
range [−1, 1]. Table 1 lists these input variables.12

The  monthly  data  ranges  from  1981  to  2020.  The  average  and
median  monthly  stock  observations  are  5265  and  4925  for  the  first

12 For example, market equity values in Dec. 2020 are uniformly standard-
ized into [−1, 1]. The firm with the lowest value is -1, and the highest is 1. All
others are distributed uniformly in between. Missing values of characteristics
are imputed as 0, which implies the firm is neutral in the security sorting.

7 

Table 2
Macroeconomic variables.
This table lists the description of macro variables used in the empirical study.
No.

Variable name

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

DFY
DY
EP
ILL
INFL
LEV
NI
SMVAR
TBL
TMS

Description
Default yield
Dividend yield of S&P 500
Earnings-to-price of S&P 500
Pastor-Stambaugh illiquidity
Inflation
Leverage of S&P 500
Net equity issuance of S&P 500
Stock Market (S&P 500) Volatility
Three-month treasury bill rate
Term spread

20 years, and 4110 and 3837 for the latter 20 years. We apply cross-
sectional  winsorization  at  1%  and  99%  to  mitigate  the  impact  of
outliers on individual stock returns. The entire 40-year sample is used
for benchmark analysis. The sample is split into two parts – the first
20 years from 1981 to 2000 and the recent 20 years from 2001 to 2020
– for a subsample robustness check and as training and test samples.

Macroeconomic  variables.
In  addition,  we  use  10  macro  variables  to
capture  potential  regime  switches. Table  2 summarizes  the  macro
variables, which include market timing macro predictors, bond market
predictors, and aggregate characteristics for S&P 500. We standardize
these  macro  predictor  data  by  the  historical  percentile  numbers  for
the past 10 years.13 This rolling-window data standardization is useful
when comparing the predictor level to detect different macroeconomic
regimes.

3.2.  Visualizing a single P-Tree

Fig. 4 plots the P-Tree diagram. In each leaf node, S# represents
the  order  of  sequential  splits,  and  N#  is  the  node  index.  We  pro-
vide  the  numbers  in  the  terminal  leaves  for  the  portfolio  size:  the
monthly median number of stock observations. The split rules are the
selected splitting characteristics and cross-sectional quintile cutpoints
[−0.6, −0.2, 0.2, 0.6]. Before the first split, the tree grows from the root
node  (N1),  whose  leaf  basis  portfolio  represents  the  value-weighted
market portfolio.

The  data-driven  P-Tree  first  splits  along  the  standardized  unex-
pected quarterly earnings (SUE, Rendleman et al., 1982) at −0.2 (40%
percentile). After this split, 40% of the stocks go to the left leaf (labeled
N2), and 60% go to the right (N3). Then, the second split is on the
dollar trading volume (DOLVOL, Chordia et al., 2001) at −0.6 of the
right leaf (N3), and the third split is also on DOLVOL at −0.6 of the
left  leaf  (N2).  Furthermore,  subsequent  splits  include  the  industry-
adjusted book-to-market ratio (BM_IA), return-on-equity (ROA), zero
trade (ZEROTRADE), and market equity (ME). After nine splits, we stop
the P-Tree growth and obtain 10 leaf basis portfolios.

Clustering patterns and asymmetric interactions. P-Tree clusters similar
assets based on underlying characteristics, revealing sources of mean–
variance diversification. Fig. 4 shows the (asymmetric) interactions of
characteristics  for  splitting  the  cross  section.  By  jointly  defining  the
partition corresponding to the leaf node, P-Tree learns the interaction of
characteristics appearing in the same path. For instance, ZEROTRADE
of  liquidity  (Liu, 2006)  is  a  valuable  indicator  for  further  splitting
low-SUE low-DOLVOL stocks. However, for low-SUE non-low-DOLVOL
stocks, ME of size (Banz, 1981) might be a better indicator for a further
split under the MVE framework.

13 For example, inflation greater than 0.7 implies the current inflation level
is higher than 70% of observations during the past decade.

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Fig. 4. Panel tree from 1981 to 2020.
We provide splitting characteristics, cutpoint values for each parent node, and their respective node and splitting indexes. For example, node N1 is split by SUE at -0.2 (40%
percentile) as the first split S1, and the second split S2 is on node N3 by DOLVOL at -0.6 (20% percentile). The median monthly number of assets in the terminal leaf basis
portfolios is also included. For example, node N8 has 134 stocks by monthly median. Table 1 describes equity characteristics. Fig. A.1 reports the P-Tree diagrams for subsamples.

Fig. 5. Visualizing nonlinear interactions with partition plots.
This diagram illustrates the partitions for the first few splits of the tree structure in Fig. 4. The first split (S1) occurs at 40% of SUE on the entire stock universe, and the second
split occurs at 80% of DOLVOL on the high SUE partition. The portfolio results for each partition are provided (monthly average excess returns (AVG) and annualized Sharpe
ratios (SR)). The arrows indicate the next split is implemented on the partitioned area from the previous one.

8 

L.W. Cong et al.

The  current  literature  has  recognized  interactions  between  two
characteristics,  but  a  more  systematic  investigation  is  needed.  For
instance, Lee and Swaminathan (2000) enhance momentum strategies
by  interacting  with  trading  volume,  and Da  et  al. (2014)  find  that
the momentum effect is stronger for firms with continuous informa-
tion than firms with discrete information. Our framework allows for
exploring  interactions  among  multiple  characteristics,  going  beyond
the typical bivariate relations. This is demonstrated in Fig. 4, where
interaction paths involving at least four characteristics, such as SUE,
DOLVOL, ME, and ZEROTRADE, can be identified.

The partition plot in Fig. 5 is an alternative way to visualize the
clustering  and  asymmetric  patterns.  We  report  each  leaf’s  monthly
average excess returns and annualized Sharpe ratios. First, P-Tree splits
on SUE at −0.2, which yields a low-SUE portfolio including 40% of the
stocks and a high-SUE portfolio constituted by 60% of the stocks in the
cross section. The spread of monthly expected returns between N2 and
N3 is 0.46%, and the Sharpe ratios range from 0.25 to 0.64.

Second, we split on DOLVOL at −0.6 on N3 to harvest N6 and N7,
where the low-DOLVOL portfolio N6 has higher expected returns and
Sharpe ratio than N7. Third, we split on DOLVOL at −0.6 on N2 to
harvest  N4  and  N5,  where  the  low-DOLVOL portfolio  N4  has lower
expected returns and Sharpe ratio than N5. We find DOLVOL has differ-
ent impacts on N2 and N3. On the high-SUE side, DOLVOL positively
correlates to asset returns. However, on the low-SUE side, DOLVOL neg-
atively correlates with asset returns. This is an example of asymmetric
interaction between SUE and DOLVOL. A simple trading strategy that
shorts N4 (Low-SUE -Low-DOLVOL portfolio) and longs N6 (High-SUE
- Low-DOLVOL portfolio) makes over 2% monthly expected return. The
return gaps among the leaves show the usefulness of splitting the cross
section via the asymmetric interaction of characteristics.

3.3.  P-Tree leaf basis portfolios

Asset  clustering. P-Tree  generates  leaves,  a.k.a.,  leaf  basis  portfolios.
Unlike the scalar output in CART for pure prediction, a leaf of P-Tree
represents a time series of portfolio returns from a time-invariant P-
Tree structure. These leaf basis portfolios are nonlinear, interactive, and
high-dimensional characteristics-managed portfolios. Table 3, panel A,
summarizes leaf basis portfolios generated by the first P-Tree in Fig. 4:
the index of nodes, median number of stocks in the leaf basis portfolio,
average returns, CAPM 𝛼 (%), 𝛽, time series regression 𝑅2, and alphas
with respect to FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA five-factor models (Fama
and  French, 2015; Hou  et  al., 2021; Kelly  et  al., 2019; Lettau  and
Pelger, 2020).

We observe two large leaves: N11 containing 900 stocks and N15
containing over 1700 stocks by monthly median. Their CAPM 𝑅2 are
over 90%, and the 𝛽 are close to one, meaning their return time series
are  highly  correlated  with  the  market  returns.  No  further  splitting
results in higher Sharpe ratios on these two leaves, yet other leaves
offer higher investment improvement under the MVE framework. For
instance,  N21  represents  the  low-SUE,  high-DOLVOL,  low-ME,  and
high-ZEROTRADE leaf, which has −1.14% average return and −1.83%
CAPM 𝛼,  and  N27  is  the  high-SUE,  low-DOLVOL,  high-BM_IA,  and
high-ROA leaf, which has 2.46% average returns and 1.97% CAPM 𝛼.
By employing a simple monthly rebalanced strategy of buying N27 and
selling short N21, one can expect an average return of 3.6%.

These leaf basis portfolios are generated via interactive and nonlin-
ear splits on 61 characteristics. We expect them to be very hard to price
using the prevalent linear factor models. Nine leaves have significant
CAPM alphas among the 10 leaf basis portfolios. At a confidence level
of 10%, the number of statistically significant non-zero alphas for FF5,
Q5, RP-PCA 5, and IPCA 5 factor models are 9, 9, 9, and 7, respectively.
P-Tree is a goal-oriented clustering algorithm that maximizes the
Sharpe ratio in the baseline specification. Therefore, we anticipate these
test assets having economically large and statistically significant alphas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

against those ‘‘inadequate’’ benchmark factor models. With such dis-
tinct basis portfolios, we expect them to achieve higher mean–variance
efficiency, spanning an efficient frontier that benchmark factor models
fail to span. Panels B and C of Table 3 provide subsample analysis for
the first and the latter 20 years. Although the tree structure and leaf
identity change because of refitting, we still find similar patterns. For
example, pricing these portfolios based on leaf factors remains difficult
using benchmark factor models.

Diversified test assets. Fig. 6, Panel A, depicts the performance statistics
of P-Tree test assets. Subfigure A1 shows the mean-standard-deviation
scatter plot for leaf basis portfolios of the first P-Tree on the 40-year
sample from 1981 to 2020 in black circles. The expected returns are
in  the  range  of −2%  to  3%,  and  the  standard  deviations  are  in  the
range of 4% to 9%. We observe large variations in these portfolios’
expected  returns  and  risks,  which  means  they  are  diversified  under
the MVE framework. Significant variations exist among the portfolios
in Panels A2 and A3 for subsample analysis, with the earlier sample
showing more diversification and the latter sample being more concen-
trated. By contrast, the 5 × 5 ME-BM portfolios in light-red triangles
cluster around the same level of average returns, which are much less
diversified than those of P-Tree test assets. This finding indicates that
P-Tree test assets are more diversified under the MVE framework than
the ME-BM portfolios.

Panel B of Fig. 6 shows the CAPM model-implied alpha-beta plots.
In subfigure B1’s 40-year sample, we find CAPM 𝛽s of P-Tree test assets
are scattered around one in the range of 0.6 to 1.6. CAPM alphas are
around zero, ranging from −2% to 2%. These basis portfolios have a
lot of variations in CAPM alphas and 𝛽s. The alpha and beta ranges
were  larger  in  the  first  20  years  in  B1,  whereas  the  variation  was
smaller  in  the  second  20  years  in  B2.  The  5 × 5  ME-BM  portfolios
are more easily explained for the CAPM model than P-Tree test assets
because  they  align  closely  with  the  vertical  line  of  zero  alpha  with
more negligible diversification in all figures. In summary, this is highly
positive evidence for P-Tree test assets’ better-diversified patterns than
conventional ones, even when priced by CAPM.

4.  Boosted P-Trees for multiple factors and test assets

4.1.  Growing the efficient frontier

Our investigation focuses on the efficient frontiers spanned by test
assets generated using (boosted) P-Tree. Many P-Tree test assets have
significant alphas over multiple well-known benchmark factor models,
indicating  those  factor  models  cannot  effectively  span  the  efficient
frontier. The boosting technique enhances our ability to generate more
effective  test  assets  that  expand  the  efficient  frontier  better,  that  is,
‘‘growing the efficient frontiers on P-Trees’’.

Unspanned efficient frontier. Fig. 7 shows the MVE frontiers of P-Trees
and boosted P-Trees in gradient color from blue to red for the sample
period  from  1981  to  2020.  Benchmark  factor  models  are  printed  in
black, and benchmark test assets in purple. Notably, the P-Tree1 fron-
tier (generated by the first P-Tree test assets) is already more efficient
than any frontier spanned by the benchmark factor models and test
assets. Among the benchmark test assets, 285 bivariate-sorted portfolios
span a frontier very close to our P-Tree1 frontier. However, P-Tree1
contains only 10 portfolios, much smaller than 285. Among the factor
models, the IPCA five-factor model is a strong candidate but still less
efficient than the P-Tree1 frontier. Overall, these 10 leaf basis portfolios
consist  of  promising  test  assets  to  span  the  efficient  frontier,  which
is more efficient than the benchmarks under the MVE framework. In
other words, the listed benchmark factor models and test assets are
insufficient to span the real efficient frontier.

9 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

𝑅2

𝛼𝑄5

STD

𝛼𝑅𝑃 5

𝛼𝐼 𝑃 5

𝛼𝐹 𝐹 5

𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀

𝛽𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀

𝛼𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀

5.76
4.14
8.89
5.90
4.81
4.63
6.04
4.55
6.88
4.41

0.42
0.47
0.53
0.58
0.93
0.54
0.43
0.49
0.59
0.98

0.84
0.63
1.45
1.00
1.04
0.76
0.88
0.71
1.18
0.98

134
210
178
227
900
210
157
112
658
1768

−0.58*
−0.36*
−1.78***
−1.19***
0.16
1.17***
1.40***
2.18***
0.06
0.29

−1.51***
−1.84***
−1.55***
−2.34***
−0.29***
−0.22
0.40**
1.18***
−0.33**
−0.26***

−0.91***
−1.46***
−1.10
−1.83***
−0.30***
0.29**
1.08***
1.80***
0.32*
0.10***

−0.97***
−1.35***
−1.34***
−1.83***
−0.35***
0.42**
1.16***
1.97***
0.21
0.14***

−0.66***
−1.25***
−0.49*
−1.56***
−0.15**
0.48***
1.37***
2.00***
0.64***
0.03

Table 3
Evaluation for leaf basis portfolios.
This table reports the properties of 10 leaf basis portfolios generated by the first P-Tree: the median number of stocks (leaf size), average returns, CAPM 𝛼 (%), 𝛽, 𝑅2, and the
alphas (%) with respect to FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA five-factor models. Panel A corresponds to Fig. 4, and Panels B and C correspond respectively to (a) and (b) in Fig. A.1.
# Median
ID
AVG
Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
−0.40
N8
−0.92***
N9
−0.34
N20
−1.14***
N21
0.36*
N11
0.94***
N12
1.77***
N26
2.46***
N27
1.03***
N14
N15
0.81***
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
0.25
N16
−0.74***
N17
1.72***
N18
2.91***
N19
0.76***
N5
−3.53***
N24
−2.82***
N25
−1.75***
N13
−1.21*
N14
N15
1.23*
Panel C: 20 Years (2001–2020)
−0.20
N8
−0.31
N18
−0.90***
N19
0.35
N5
0.94**
N24
2.44***
N25
1.68***
N52
3.53***
N53
1.79***
N27
N7
0.76***
*, **, and *** represent significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

−0.63**
−0.93***
−1.39***
−0.27***
0.31
1.88***
1.17***
2.88***
1.31***
0.10**

−0.46**
−0.53*
−1.31***
−0.25***
0.57**
2.17***
1.45***
3.10***
1.37***
0.09**

−0.93***
−1.36***
−1.89***
−0.21***
−0.13
1.16***
0.52**
2.24***
0.92***
−0.05

−0.63**
−0.96***
−1.39***
−0.38***
0.26
1.79***
1.17***
2.97***
1.36***
0.16***

−0.10
−0.88**
−0.93***
0.37*
0.59**
1.43***
1.56***
3.19***
1.6***
0.63***

−0.08
−1.17***
1.27***
2.50***
−0.04***
−3.29***
−2.54***
−1.19***
−0.63
1.52***

−0.34
−1.16***
1.17***
2.44***
0.03*
−4.36***
−3.58***
−2.86***
−2.21***
0.16

−0.27
−1.36***
1.07***
2.13***
−0.02*
−3.90***
−3.20***
−1.58***
−1.16***
1.12***

−0.27
−1.56***
0.84**
2.36***
−0.49***
−3.58***
−1.89***
−1.29***
−0.09
1.39**

−0.02
−1.47***
0.03
1.87***
1.34***
0.79
1.55*
2.22**
4.52**
3.58

5.99
4.40
5.72
4.97
4.39
7.75
6.85
9.94
9.60
10.07

153
58
112
1206
171
104
47
76
76
1896

97
256
95
48
3443
160
250
286
217
116

0.45
0.44
0.53
0.95
0.53
0.45
0.46
0.54
0.53
0.98

0.67
1.01
0.76
1.13
1.05
1.02
0.79
0.86
0.66
0.94

4.44
6.82
4.72
5.23
6.47
6.80
5.28
5.27
4.05
4.27

0.36
0.33
0.34
0.33
1.00
0.42
0.45
0.46
0.40
0.41

0.81
0.57
0.75
0.64
0.99
1.13
1.04
1.52
1.37
1.46

Boosting the empirical frontier. Beyond the first P-Tree, boosted P-Trees
improve portfolio efficiency from one factor to 20 factors. In Fig. 7, the
spanned frontiers move toward the top left corner of the mean–variance
diagram.  Our  approach  consistently  advances  the  efficient  frontier
throughout the 20 P-Trees. Combining 200 assets in one MVE portfolio
is challenging because of the curse of dimensionality. Unlike Ait-Sahalia
and Xiu (2017), who use exogenous industry classifications to construct
block-diagonal patterns, our boosted P-Trees entertain an endogenous
block-diagonal structure in the return covariance. We combine the 10
leaf basis portfolios of each P-Tree into a single P-Tree factor and then
estimate the tangency portfolio of the boosted P-Tree factors. As such,
we  can  generate  multiple  factors  and  combine  multiple  sets  of  test
assets in one frontier under the MVE framework.

Moving from a single P-Tree to 20 P-Trees results in more efficient
frontiers, allowing investors to achieve higher expected returns while
bearing the same level of risk. Although a significant difference exists
between the frontiers of P-Tree1 and P-Tree10, the frontier lines in-
crease slowly after P-Tree10, indicating a more negligible improvement
in mean–variance efficiency with each subsequent boosting.

We employ asset pricing tests to demonstrate the incremental ef-
ficiency of boosted P-Trees. First, we show the Sharpe ratios of each
boosted P-Tree factor and the multi-factor model. Second, we evaluate
each boosted factor with CAPM and FF5 by checking for a significant
alpha. As we know from Table 3, P-Tree test assets are hard to price,
and we expect the P-Tree factors to pass the CAPM test and FF5 test.
Third,  we  regress  each  P-Tree  factor  on  all  the  previous  boosted  P-
Tree factors generated for the expanding factor tests. The efficiency

of the frontier increases if the previous P-Tree factors do not span the
additional P-Tree factor.

The test results are presented in Table 4. The Sharpe ratios of each
boosted factor are above 1, even for the 20-th factor. Meanwhile, the
cumulative multi-factor Sharpe ratio increases monotonically from 6
to  15,  which  means  that  the  test  assets  of  the  boosted  P-Tree  add
incremental pricing information to the existing test assets. Furthermore,
all CAPM and FF5 alphas are positive and highly significant, indicating
that all the boosted P-Tree factors cannot be explained by CAPM or
FF5.  In  the  expanding  factor  test,  we  find  significant  alphas,  large
𝑡-statistics,  and  high  time  series 𝑅2.  After  applying  the  nested  asset
pricing test (Barillas and Shanken, 2017), we do not find any evidence
that  supports  a  sufficient  factor  model  to  explain  the  assets  in  the
boosted P-Tree test.14 In summary, Table 4 shows that boosted P-Trees
generate unexplained alphas, and their leaf portfolios thus better span
the efficient frontier. By contrast, conventional univariate- or bivariate-
sorted test assets used for testing asset pricing models do not fully cover
the efficient frontier.

4.2.  Generating test assets via boosted P-Trees

First,  we  show  the  pricing  performance  of  leaf  basis  portfolios,
implying they serve as diversified test assets and are challenging against

14 The first row contains ‘‘-’’ signs, which indicate that the expanding factor
and BS tests are not applicable for the single factor case.

10 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Fig. 6. Diversified P-Tree test assets.
This figure reports the performance of P-Tree test assets (presented in Table 3) and the 5 × 5 ME-BM portfolios. The 10 black circles represent P-Tree test assets, and the 25
light-red triangles represent ME-BM portfolios. Panel A shows the scatter plots of the mean and standard deviation for portfolio returns in percentage. Panel B shows the scatter
plots of CAPM alpha and beta, with alphas in percentage.

the FF5 model. Then, we utilize boosted P-Trees that generate multiple
sets of basis portfolios. Empirically, we grow up to 20 P-Trees, yielding
200 leaf basis portfolios.

P-Tree test assets. Table 5, Panel A, lists the number of portfolios, the
GRS test statistic and its 𝑝-value, the 𝑝-value of PY test,15 the average
absolute 𝛼, the root mean squared 𝛼, the average time series regression
𝑅2, and the percentage of significant alphas with respect to 10%, 5%,
and 1% confidence levels. In the rows, P-Tree1 represents a set of test
assets comprising 10 leaf basis portfolios in the first P-Tree. P-Tree1-5
combines all the leaf basis portfolios generated by the first five P-Trees,
and P-Tree6-10 contains the 6-th to the 10-th P-Trees. Similarly, we
define P-Tree11-15, P-Tree16-20, and P-Tree1-20.

We find the GRS test and PY test always reject the null hypothesis
that the alphas of test assets are jointly zero for all specifications of P-
Tree test assets, which means the expected returns of P-Tree test assets
can hardly be explained by the FF5 model. Furthermore, the last three
columns show that many assets have statistically significant alphas. For
comparison, we include four sets of test assets that are commonly used
in literature:  150 10 × 1 univariate-sorted  portfolios,  285 bivariate-
sorted portfolios, 5 × 5 ME-BM portfolios, and 49 industry portfolios,
all of which can be downloaded from Ken French’s website. P-Tree test
assets have larger GRS test statistics and alphas than these benchmark
test assets.

Furthermore,  we  observe  the  decline  of  alphas  from  the  first  P-
Tree  to  the  subsequently  boosted  P-Trees  as  anticipated,  indicating
diminishing marginal convergence to the limit of the efficient frontier.
The  test  assets  of  the  first  P-Tree  have  larger  GRS  statistics,  higher
average alphas, and higher proportions of significant alphas than the
test  assets  generated  by  the  follow-up  P-Trees.  In  addition,  we  see

an evident decline in GRS statistics and alphas from P-Tree1-5 to P-
Tree6-10,  P-Tree11-15,  and  P-Tree16-20.  P-Tree  generates  the  most
informative  test  assets  in  the  first  P-Tree,  whereas  the  incremental
information in the boosted P-Trees is complementary and declining.
Although the alphas decline along boosting, the test assets generated by
P-Tree16-20 cannot be explained by FF5, with a 4.21 GRS test statistic,
0.31%  mean  absolute  alpha,  and  52%  test  assets  having  significant
alphas at the 10% level. The test assets of P-Tree16-20 are still harder
to price than univariate- and bivariate-sorted portfolios.

Overall,  these  200  test  assets  created  by  20  P-Trees  on  high-
dimensional characteristics challenge the FF5 model. They are more
difficult to price than benchmark test assets, setting a high standard
for testing factor models, which respond to the concerns in empirical
studies (Lewellen et al., 2010; Ang et al., 2020).

For robustness, Table 5, Panels B and C, report the first and the
latter 20-year subsamples. In the recent 20 years, FF5 has performed
well in pricing the benchmark test asset; that is, the GRS and PY tests
cannot be rejected at the 10% level, and less significant alphas testing
on 49 industry portfolios and univariate-sorted portfolios. However, the
P-Tree test assets always reject the null hypothesis for GRS and PY tests
and are consistently challenging to price in both subsamples.16

Advantages of P-Tree clustering. P-Tree has two advantages that make
these  test  assets  efficient.  First,  P-Tree  is  a  goal-oriented  clustering
algorithm tailored for spanning the efficient frontier iteratively. Each
leaf  clusters  individual  asset  returns  based  on  similar  characteristic
values, aggregating as a time series of portfolio returns. The goal is
to maximize the collective Sharpe ratio of the MVE portfolio spanned
by the leaf basis portfolios. The economic objective of P-Tree is vastly
different from the CART and other off-the-shelf ML models, which focus
on statistical return prediction without economic utilities and cannot

15 Pesaran and Yamagata (2023) adapts to cases where the number of assets
being tested is larger than the number of periods, which Gibbons et al. (1989)
cannot address.

16 The GRS test is not applicable in the presence of more test assets than
observations, as is the case for Bi-Sort in Panels B and C, marked with ‘‘-’’.

11 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Fig. 7. Characterizing the efficient frontier with P-Trees.
This figure shows the MVE frontiers of the first P-Tree, the sequence of boosted P-Tree factor models, benchmark factor models, and benchmark test assets. The dots on the
frontiers represent the tangency portfolios. The mean and standard deviation are on a monthly scale. The sample period is from 1981 to 2020.

ever tackle the task of growing an efficient frontier.

Second, P-Tree exploits the complex asymmetric interactions and
nonlinearities on high-dimensional characteristics. The commonly used
test assets are characteristics-sorted portfolios, such as univariate- and
bivariate-sorted portfolios, which only consider decile or quintile sort-
ing,  along  with  up  to  three  characteristics  chosen  ad  hoc  or  based
on researchers’ domain expertise. In contrast, P-Tree is more flexible,
allowing  for  general  sequential  and  simultaneous  sorting  with  more
characteristics and asymmetric interactions in a unified framework. P-
Trees enable the inclusion of large leaves, like N15, as shown in Fig. 4,
where further splitting does not result in a higher Sharpe ratio, as well
as small leaves, such as N8. The asymmetric splitting allows P-Trees
to focus on the finer clusters of informative assets while paying less
attention to non-informative assets under the MVE framework.

4.3.  P-Tree factors and asset pricing performance

Using the findings from the previous analysis, we have established
that P-Tree test assets are distinct from conventional test assets. Moving
forward, we proceed with cross-examining P-Tree factors and various
benchmark factor models on different sets of test assets, including P-
Tree leaf basis portfolios. We adopt the cross-sectional 𝑅2 to evaluate
the asset pricing performance:
(
̄𝑅𝑖 − ̂̄𝑅𝑖
)2
( ̄𝑅𝑖

Cross-sectional 𝑅2 = 1 −

∑𝑁
𝑖=1

(6)

)2

,

∑𝑁
𝑖=1

loadings are estimated from time series regressions. The cross-sectional
𝑅2 represents the faction of assets’ average returns explained by the
model-implied expected returns. Various test assets, including P-Tree
test assets, conventional sorted portfolios, and industry portfolios, are
used to test the factor models. In Table 6, we display the factor models
in the columns to explain the expected return of test assets in the rows.
Panel A provides the asset pricing performances for the 40-year sample,
and Panels B and C report for the 20-year subsamples.17

First, the P-Tree1 factor (from the first P-Tree) explains 98.3% of
the cross-sectional return variation of the P-Tree1 leaf basis portfolios
(10 assets), whereas the benchmark factor models provide much lower
performance. This finding is not surprising, since the first P-Tree factor
is constructed jointly with these test assets. However, the FF5, Q5, and
RP-PCA five-factor models have much smaller 𝑅2s than the P-Tree1
factor, indicating large pricing errors in explaining the expected returns
of the highly diversified P-Tree1 test assets. One exception is that the
IPCA five-factor model performs well in pricing the P-Tree1 test assets,
with a 73.5% 𝑅2.

Second, the P-Tree five-factor model (P-Tree1-5, read as a model
containing from the first to the fifth factors), which includes five P-
Tree factors from the first five P-Trees, demonstrates tremendous asset
pricing performance. It outperforms the benchmark five-factor models
in  pricing  the  first  10  P-Trees’  (P-Tree1-10)  test  assets  and  5 × 5
ME-BM  portfolios.  For  other  specifications  of  test  assets,  P-Tree1-5
shows comparable levels of cross-sectional 𝑅2 among all the five-factor

′̃𝝀 is  the  factor
where ̄𝑅𝑖 denotes  the  average  return  and ̂̄𝑅𝑖 = ̂𝜷𝑖
model implied average return of asset 𝑖. The risk premium estimation
adopts  the  cross-sectional  regression  estimates  of  factors,  and  factor

17 The  first  row  contains  two  ‘‘–,’’,  which  indicate  the  number  of  assets
𝑁 = 10 is equal to or smaller than the number of factors (10 or 20). Thus, the
cross-sectional regression is not applicable.

12 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Table 4
Testing the boosted P-Tree growth.
This table shows the performance of each sequentially generated boosted P-Tree factor, including the Sharpe ratio, CAPM test, FF5 test, expanding factors test, and the (Barillas
and Shanken, 2017) test. Panels A, B, and C report for different sample periods. The ‘‘Single’’ column displays the Sharpe ratio of the single factor, and the ‘‘Cumu.’’ (cumulative)
column shows the Sharpe ratio of the MVE spanned by multiple factors from the first to the current P-Tree factors. The columns report the 𝛼 (%) and 𝑡-statistic for CAPM and
FF5 spanning regression tests. For the expanding factor tests, we regress each P-Tree factor on all previously boosted P-Tree factors and report the 𝛼 (%), 𝑡-statistic, and 𝑅2.

Sharpe ratio

CAPM test

FF5 test

Expanding factors test

Single

Cumu.

𝛼 (%)

𝑡-stat

𝛼 (%)

𝑡-stat

𝛼 (%)

𝑡-stat

𝑅2

BS test

𝑝-value

6.37
3.20
1.18
2.06
1.99
1.01
1.42
1.32
1.83
1.48
1.78
1.02
1.37
1.37
1.37
1.24
1.54
1.64
1.48
1.35

Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Panel C: 20 Years (2001–2020)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

7.12
1.09
2.26
6.48
1.59
1.65
1.72
1.52
3.02
1.93
1.34
2.22
1.51
2.11
2.39
2.53
1.50
1.63
1.84
2.70

5.82
2.14
0.91
1.35
1.08
2.63
1.39
1.60
1.04
1.64
1.69
1.58
1.48
1.39
1.48
1.40
1.27
1.44
1.58
1.88

6.37
7.35
7.80
8.46
9.18
9.57
10.11
10.40
10.88
11.20
11.72
12.06
12.57
13.01
13.81
14.28
14.60
14.92
15.43
15.63

7.12
7.75
9.45
11.35
12.71
13.67
14.94
15.78
17.90
19.18
20.72
22.89
24.14
25.71
28.37
30.37
32.42
33.89
35.78
37.94

5.82
6.64
7.53
8.60
9.30
10.36
11.30
11.93
12.73
14.32
15.73
16.82
18.06
19.46
20.60
21.91
23.41
24.36
25.45
26.52

1.39
0.52
0.34
0.44
0.48
0.18
0.28
0.28
0.53
0.44
0.38
0.20
0.29
0.48
0.31
0.28
0.46
0.32
0.43
0.33

1.86
0.25
0.39
1.80
0.33
0.37
0.33
0.39
1.03
0.83
0.38
0.36
0.35
0.58
0.87
0.53
0.30
0.37
0.47
0.89

1.51
0.58
0.18
0.29
0.31
0.60
0.29
0.40
0.21
0.30
0.36
0.60
0.41
0.32
0.35
0.34
0.39
0.34
0.33
0.58

35.36
17.65
5.25
11.22
10.25
4.24
7.62
7.14
10.11
7.35
10.33
4.68
8.38
5.93
6.58
6.23
8.16
8.43
8.63
7.38

29.62
3.66
9.72
26.96
6.50
5.87
6.99
6.10
14.00
8.12
4.93
9.38
4.88
7.80
10.14
9.58
5.66
5.95
7.04
9.85

24.22
8.74
3.28
6.18
4.14
12.15
5.53
5.76
4.53
5.96
6.73
6.08
5.29
5.22
5.51
5.84
4.82
5.16
6.59
7.12

35.81
15.27
3.28
9.56
9.25
2.94
6.67
4.95
9.38
7.30
8.62
2.99
6.48
5.86
5.66
4.11
7.52
7.78
7.47
6.19

30.22
1.91
8.48
27.06
5.77
4.57
6.17
4.93
13.08
7.14
2.76
8.03
3.69
7.57
8.70
7.91
5.08
4.99
5.93
9.06

24.26
8.26
2.01
6.04
3.88
11.11
5.16
5.47
3.83
5.31
6.20
5.36
4.47
4.62
4.34
4.82
3.46
4.72
6.08
6.53

1.37
0.48
0.18
0.38
0.41
0.08
0.22
0.20
0.43
0.30
0.31
0.10
0.22
0.32
0.21
0.17
0.40
0.27
0.36
0.23

1.78
0.11
0.34
1.76
0.28
0.26
0.32
0.31
0.93
0.67
0.19
0.31
0.23
0.48
0.76
0.44
0.31
0.28
0.37
0.79

1.47
0.52
0.09
0.31
0.26
0.56
0.26
0.30
0.18
0.25
0.30
0.51
0.29
0.26
0.21
0.27
0.25
0.28
0.28
0.50

13 

–
0.62
−0.86
0.69
0.84
−0.50
0.63
−0.50
0.85
−0.68
0.72
−0.55
0.76
−0.91
0.97
−0.74
−0.89
−0.65
1.18
−0.59

–
−0.83
0.92
1.75
1.11
−1.03
1.25
−1.32
2.69
−2.41
−2.18
1.46
1.82
−2.43
3.69
2.40
2.65
−2.79
3.54
−4.67

–
0.91
−0.86
1.00
−1.02
1.04
1.00
−0.85
−1.01
1.11
1.43
2.48
−1.77
1.68
−1.38
1.84
−2.55
−1.61
−1.74
−2.76

–
9.55
−5.43
7.63
5.61
−5.47
7.03
−5.33
6.88
−5.49
6.70
−5.76
6.01
−5.68
7.11
−6.24
−4.80
−5.43
5.86
−4.19

–
−4.80
8.19
10.16
6.85
−5.34
5.67
−5.12
8.42
−6.27
−7.33
7.36
6.06
−5.93
7.64
7.12
7.18
−5.64
7.35
−6.91

–
6.44
−5.82
8.65
−6.38
7.61
7.23
−5.62
−7.44
7.80
6.79
5.72
−5.52
6.05
−6.25
6.29
−6.99
−4.97
−5.20
−4.96

–
0.01
0.26
0.16
0.21
0.45
0.36
0.41
0.34
0.46
0.30
0.55
0.33
0.60
0.48
0.54
0.40
0.34
0.34
0.44

–
0.28
0.17
0.03
0.36
0.40
0.20
0.35
0.26
0.52
0.45
0.39
0.43
0.40
0.52
0.31
0.35
0.37
0.30
0.44

–
0.03
0.36
0.17
0.42
0.12
0.28
0.44
0.36
0.44
0.33
0.24
0.47
0.40
0.58
0.46
0.51
0.48
0.42
0.39

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Table 5
Comparing test assets.
The table displays performance statistics of P-Tree test assets and others for comparison, including P-Tree1, which consists of 10 portfolios in the first P-Tree. P-Tree1-5, P-Tree6-10,
P-Tree11-15, P-Tree16-20, and P-Tree1-20 are sets of test assets that combine leaf basis portfolios generated by the first 5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 1-20 P-Trees, respectively.
‘‘Uni-Sort‘‘ has 150 univariate-sorted portfolios, ‘‘Bi-Sort’’ has 285 bivariate-sorted portfolios, ME/BE has 25 portfolios, and ‘‘Ind49" includes 49 industry portfolios. The reported
statistics include the number of test assets, GRS test statistics and p-values (Gibbons et al., 1989), 𝑝-values of PY test (Pesaran and Yamagata, 2023), average absolute 𝛼 (%), root
mean squared 𝛼 (%), average 𝑅2 (%) of regressing the portfolios on Fama–French five factors, and the proportion of test assets with unexplained significant alphas under 10%,
5%, and 1% significance levels. The three panels report on the re-trained models for different sample periods.
√

N

GRS

𝑝-GRS

𝑝-PY

Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree6–10
P-Tree11–15
P-Tree16–20
P-Tree1–20

10
50
50
50
50
200

150
285
25
49

Uni-Sort
Bi-Sort
ME-BM
Ind49
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree6–10
P-Tree11–15
P-Tree16–20
P-Tree1–20

10
50
50
50
50
200

150
285
25
49

Uni-Sort
Bi-Sort
ME-BM
Ind49
Panel C: 20 Years (2001–2020)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree6–10
P-Tree11–15
P-Tree16–20
P-Tree1–20

10
50
50
50
50
200

Uni-Sort
Bi-Sort
ME-BM
Ind49

150
285
25
49

141.27
60.32
4.60
4.74
4.21
41.31

1.62
2.50
5.01
1.99

84.36
50.84
7.27
6.39
8.42
112.90

1.94
–
4.75
2.44

56.76
30.35
5.17
2.20
2.52
83.91

1.46
–
2.58
1.29

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
–
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.03
–
0.00
0.11

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.94
0.01
0.10
0.36

|𝛼|

0.92
0.44
0.29
0.20
0.31
0.31

0.10
0.12
0.12
0.28

1.58
0.79
0.58
0.55
0.52
0.61

0.17
0.21
0.21
0.52

1.09
0.43
0.29
0.27
0.31
0.33

0.09
0.11
0.11
0.25

𝛼2

1.11
0.61
0.37
0.26
0.42
0.43

0.14
0.17
0.16
0.35

1.95
1.26
0.87
0.82
0.74
0.95

0.23
0.30
0.25
0.61

1.35
0.68
0.37
0.35
0.40
0.47

0.12
0.15
0.14
0.32

𝑅2

75
80
79
80
77
79

88
89
92
60

70
76
75
76
76
76

88
89
91
61

68
76
75
75
76
76

89
91
93
62

%𝛼10%

%𝛼5%

%𝛼1%

100
70
56
38
52
54

25
30
36
39

90
62
56
66
62
62

35
42
56
59

90
52
34
30
42
40

12
21
24
18

90
62
50
36
44
48

18
23
28
31

80
60
44
60
54
55

27
33
48
49

90
38
28
22
28
29

7
15
8
8

80
44
34
24
30
33

7
15
20
18

80
52
38
42
50
46

19
21
32
27

90
24
14
10
10
14

0
6
8
2

models for a fair comparison. The superior pricing performance remains
consistent across Panels A to C for the entire sample and subsample
analysis.

Third, these endogenously generated P-Tree test assets better ex-
pand the MVE frontier and raise the bar for testing asset pricing models.
The commonly used test assets set a low bar for testing factor models,
so  benchmark  factor  models  seem  sufficient  to  price  them.  As  we
see from Panel A of Table 6, the listed benchmark five-factor models
have over 90% cross-sectional 𝑅2s on the benchmark test assets, and
these numbers are consistently large in Panels B and C for subsample
analyses. However, their 𝑅2s decline dramatically when tested against
P-Tree  test  assets.  P-Tree  test  assets  use  nonlinear  and  asymmetric
interactions among a large set of characteristics, whereas benchmark
test assets involve only up to two characteristics.18

In summary, P-Tree factor models accurately price P-Tree test assets,
while benchmark factors do not, and perform similarly or better than
benchmark factor models in pricing benchmark test assets. P-Tree test
assets set a high standard for testing asset pricing models, surpassing
common sorted and industry portfolios.

18 Industry portfolios are an exception because they are not sorted based on
characteristics.

4.4.  P-Tree factors for investment

The P-Tree framework clusters thousands of assets into several leaf
basis portfolios, reducing portfolio optimization complexity. These P-
Tree test assets can be used as factors directly or as building blocks
toward MVE portfolios for investment. Additionally, the frequency of
rebalancing P-Tree investment strategies can be reduced to quarterly
or annually to decrease transaction costs.

Full-sample evaluation. We evaluate the investment performance of P-
Tree  factors  by  combining  them  into  one  —  the  tangency  portfolio
of  P-Tree  factors. Table  7,  Panel  A,  reports  the  P-Tree  investment
strategy’s annualized Sharpe ratios and monthly alphas in the 40-year
sample. The Sharpe ratio increases from 6.37 to 9.19, 11.21, 13.83,
and  15.64  for  the  one-factor  strategy  to  5,  10,  15,  and  20  factors,
respectively.  To  assess  their  additional  investment  information,  we
further  evaluate  these  P-Tree  investment  strategies  over  benchmark
factor models. These model-adjusted alphas are all greater than 0.80%
and highly statistically significant.

The existing research finds that P-Tree investment strategies have
highly  competitive  Sharpe  ratios.  The  correlation-based  clustering
in Ahn  et  al. (2009)  generates  basis  portfolios  that  underperform
bivariate-sorted portfolios on ME and BM. Furthermore, Daniel et al.
(2020)  nearly  doubles  the  Sharpe  ratio  of  the  characteristics-sorted

14 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Table 6
Asset pricing performance: Cross-sectional 𝑅2.
This table displays the cross-sectional 𝑅2 (%) of pricing different sets of test assets by the P-Tree factor models and benchmark factor models. The factor models are listed in the
columns, and the different specifications of test assets are listed in the rows. Specifically, the table includes 1, 5, 10, and 20 P-Tree factor models and FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA
five-factor models in the columns. In the rows, the test assets are from the top 1, 5, 10, and 20 P-Trees, univariate-sorted portfolios, bivariate-sorted portfolios, ME-BM 5 × 5
portfolios, and 49 industry portfolios.

P-Tree1F

P-Tree5F

P-Tree10F

P-Tree20F

FF5

Q5

RP5

IP5

Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–20

Uni-Sort
Bi-Sort
ME-BM
Ind49
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–20

Uni-Sort
Bi-Sort
ME-BM
Ind49
Panel C: 20 Year (2001–2020)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–20

Uni-Sort
Bi-Sort
ME-BM
Ind49

98.3
65.0
68.5
72.1

92.7
88.7
88.4
82.0

99.3
49.2
47.7
42.8

80.4
66.4
66.6
60.9

99.2
71.4
70.4
70.5

87.5
93.0
92.9
75.3

99.2
82.6
74.0
77.9

97.3
97.2
98.6
92.9

99.3
88.5
59.7
54.0

96.5
92.1
94.0
86.5

99.7
87.6
78.1
76.4

96.6
97.2
95.7
92.6

–
90.2
87.9
84.3

98.5
98.0
98.8
95.3

–
92.6
77.8
70.2

96.9
93.9
96.2
87.9

–
92.3
86.4
79.8

97.6
97.9
98.6
94.8

–
95.9
92.1
88.9

98.7
98.5
99.4
97.8

–
96.0
82.3
74.5

97.6
94.9
99.0
95.0

–
94.3
88.4
82.8

97.9
98.4
99.3
97.7

36.8
54.3
66.9
73.8

97.0
96.1
96.8
96.1

54.9
25.8
37.7
42.2

94.6
89.1
93.4
91.0

52.2
60.0
66.4
71.7

97.3
97.9
97.5
90.2

33.9
55.9
70.0
76.8

97.9
97.5
97.4
95.9

59.7
31.8
40.5
45.6

95.9
91.5
95.3
89.7

43.6
60.7
65.7
69.9

97.2
97.5
97.5
90.8

51.1
56.8
69.1
77.8

98.0
97.3
97.0
95.7

37.6
41.1
47.8
52.5

97.0
92.7
96.4
92.1

69.7
64.9
69.8
75.4

97.4
98.0
97.4
92.8

73.5
49.6
62.4
68.6

95.3
92.9
96.6
91.1

79.5
48.6
46.8
50.2

94.5
91.1
94.5
84.1

53.9
61.3
65.4
65.2

95.7
96.9
96.1
86.0

portfolio  from  1.17  to  2.13  by  constructing  the  corresponding
characteristic-efficient portfolios. However, a single P-Tree delivers a
6.37  Sharpe  ratio  over  40  years  from  1981  to  2020,  representing  a
significant improvement over Ahn et al. (2009) and Daniel et al. (2020),
although the empirical samples differ.

Out-of-sample evaluation. The results in Panel A of Table 7 are based
on a full-sample analysis, which may raise concerns about in-sample
overfitting.  Therefore,  we  provide  two  exercises  on  OOS  investment
strategies. We follow Kozak et al. (2020) and perform a half-half split
to construct the training and test samples. It suffices to demonstrate the
OOS performance when the past and future samples predict each other.
This approach further mitigates concerns regarding the look-ahead bias
when models trained by the future sample predict the past.

On  the  one  hand,  the  past-predicting-future  results  are  reported
in  Panels  B1  and  B2.  The  first  twenty-year  in-sample  Sharpe  ratios
are  even  higher  than  the  forty-year  ones  in  Panel  A,  and  the  OOS
Sharpe ratios are over 3. Despite decreasing performance, many OOS
alphas, adjusted by benchmark models, are still close to 1% and highly
significant. On the other hand, for the future-predicting-past result, the
OOS Sharpe ratios are larger than 3.87, and the model-adjusted alphas
are over 0.80%. These findings demonstrate strong OOS evidence for
P-Tree test assets and factors for spanning the MVE frontier.

The OOS investment performance results reported here are similar
to those in recent studies. The deep reinforcement learning strategy
in Cong  et  al. (2021)  achieves  a  Sharpe  ratio  consistently  above  2
from 1990 to 2021 even after excluding small stocks. Based on sorted
portfolios on size, operating profitability, and investment in Bryzgalova
et al. (2023), the regularized portfolio achieves an annualized Sharpe
ratio of 2.39 from 2004 to 2016. The deep neural network approach
in Feng et al. (2024) reports Sharpe ratios ranging from 2.95 to 3.00
from 2002 to 2021. P-Tree strategies stand out for their transparency,

ease of computation, and flexibility as an all-around framework for test
asset generation, asset pricing, and investment management.

5.  Model extensions and discussion

We  extend  the  P-Tree  framework  and  applications  along  several
directions, covering interpretability, model complexity, characteristic
utility, and macroeconomic regimes.

5.1.  Random P-Forest and P-Tree interpretability

Random forest (Breiman, 2001) grows multiple ‘‘decorrelated’’ trees
on bootstrap training samples, which are random samples of observa-
tions with replacement and a subset of variables from the complete
training set. This is called bagging, which helps mitigate model over-
fitting and quantify the uncertainty of model estimation. We can adopt
this  ensemble  scheme  and  grow  multiple  ‘‘decorrelated’’  P-Trees  on
bootstrap training samples to form a random P-Forest. Consequently,
there are two direct applications for the random P-Forest: assessing the
characteristic importance and recovering a robust SDF using the large
number of ‘‘decorrelated’’ P-Trees.

Characteristic  importance. The  simulation  evidence  in  Internet
Appendix I shows how the nonlinear and interactive P-Tree can recover
the true set of characteristics, despite redundant or useless characteris-
tics, leading to improved risk proxies for efficient frontier estimation.
This contrasts with a linear factor model with ad hoc factors that might
disregard these characteristics. The traditional sequential or indepen-
dent asset sorting scheme usually focuses on up to three characteristics.
Enumerating all possible sorting cases with multiple characteristics is
NP-hard, but P-Tree’s iterative growth algorithm efficiently overcomes

15 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Table 7
Factor investing by boosted P-Trees.
This table presents the investment performance of the initial factors produced by P-Tree and the MVE portfolio of multi-factors generated by boosted P-Trees. The reported statistics
include the annualized Sharpe ratio and alphas with respect to CAPM, FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA five-factor models. Panel A shows the 40-year sample from 1981 to 2020.
Panels B1 and B2 present in- and out-of-sample results from 1981 to 2000 and 2001 to 2020, respectively. Panels C1 and C2 display in- and out-of-sample results from 2001 to
2020 and 1981 to 2000, respectively. We find all the 𝛼’s are significant at 1% confidence level.

6.37
9.19
11.21
13.83
15.64

7.13
12.74
19.22
28.43
38.01

SR
Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–15
P-Tree1–20
Panel B1: 20 Years In-Sample (1981–2000)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–15
P-Tree1–20
Panel B2: 20 Years Out-of-Sample (2001–2020)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–15
P-Tree1–20
Panel C1: 20 Years In-Sample (2001–2020)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–15
P-Tree1–20
Panel C2: 20 Years Out-of-Sample (1981–2000)
P-Tree1
P-Tree1–5
P-Tree1–10
P-Tree1–15
P-Tree1–20

5.83
9.32
14.35
20.64
26.57

4.35
3.87
4.29
4.03
3.88

3.23
3.41
3.21
3.12
3.13

𝛼𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀

1.39
0.97
1.01
0.95
0.97

1.86
1.54
1.51
1.42
1.36

1.35
1.02
0.95
0.89
0.85

1.51
1.30
1.12
1.08
1.09

1.50
1.18
1.02
0.96
0.96

𝛼𝐹 𝐹 5

1.37
0.95
1.00
0.94
0.96

1.78
1.51
1.49
1.41
1.35

1.31
1.00
0.94
0.89
0.84

1.47
1.29
1.11
1.07
1.08

1.42
1.05
0.93
0.86
0.87

𝛼𝑄5

1.36
0.93
0.98
0.93
0.95

1.72
1.48
1.49
1.40
1.34

1.23
0.95
0.89
0.83
0.78

1.50
1.28
1.11
1.08
1.08

1.35
0.96
0.85
0.80
0.81

𝛼𝑅𝑃 5

1.28
0.87
0.93
0.90
0.93

1.62
1.37
1.43
1.37
1.32

1.04
0.77
0.74
0.69
0.66

1.52
1.30
1.11
1.10
1.10

1.60
1.23
1.14
1.07
1.08

𝛼𝐼 𝑃 5

1.12
0.82
0.89
0.87
0.90

1.59
1.41
1.43
1.39
1.34

0.93
0.62
0.56
0.48
0.49

1.69
1.31
1.09
1.05
1.11

1.58
1.24
1.10
1.02
1.03

this problem, making computation feasible.

The  ensemble  steps  for  constructing  the  random  P-Forest  are  as
follows: (i) Bootstrap the data on the time-series horizon with replace-
ment and preserve the complete cross section of the panel data for the
selected time periods to exploit the low serial correlations among asset
returns. (ii) Randomly select 20 characteristics and independently grow
P-Trees on each bootstrap sample. These two steps are repeated 1000
times to create a forest of 1000 P-Trees.

We  study  how  often  a  characteristic  is  chosen  for  a  split  in  the
random P-Forest. A characteristic selected more often is seen as more
important for maximizing mean–variance efficiency. In each bootstrap
sample, 20 characteristics are randomly drawn to grow the tree, with
only  some  chosen  as  split  variables.  We  count  the  number  of  times
is  used  in  the  first 𝐽 splits  and  the
a  specific 𝑙th  characteristic 𝑧𝑙
total number of appearances. We define the measure of characteristic
importance as follows:

Select. Prob.

)

(𝑧𝑙

=

#

#

(𝑧𝑙 is selected at first 𝐽 splits
(𝑧𝑙 appears in all bootstrap subsamples

)

) .

(7)

Table 8 summarizes the selection probabilities (7) of characteristics
for 𝐽 = 1, 2, 3. The selection probability increases as 𝐽 grows from 1 to
3, so we must compare within the row. For each row, we list the top
five selected characteristics.

The earnings surprise (SUE), one of the most important fundamen-
tals, has a 50% chance of being the first splitting characteristic and
a 66% chance of being one of the top two splitting characteristics in
the bootstrap sample. While not incorporated into linear factor models
like FF5 and Q5, SUE is most valuable in nonlinear interactive mod-
eling for maximizing the mean–variance efficiency. Other frequently

16 

Table 8
Characteristic importance by selection probability.
This table reports the most frequently selected characteristics from the random P-Forest
of 1000 trees. The ‘‘Top 1’’ rows only count the first split for 1000 trees. The ‘‘Top 2’’
or ‘‘Top 3’’ rows only count the first two or three splits. The numbers reported are the
selection frequency for these top characteristics selected out of the 1000 ensembles.
The descriptions of characteristics are listed in Table 1.
4

2

1

5

3

Top1

Top2

Top3

SUE
0.51
SUE
0.66
SUE
0.71

SVAR
0.34
SVAR
0.38
DOLVOL
0.53

CHPM
0.25
DOLVOL
0.34
BM_IA
0.48

RVAR_CAPM
0.23
CHPM
0.31
SVAR
0.41

BASPREAD
0.21
BM_IA
0.31
ME_IA
0.41

selected characteristics are return volatility (SVAR), dollar trading vol-
ume (DOLVOL), idiosyncratic volatility (RVAR_CAPM), change in profit
margin (CHPM), and industry-adjusted book-to-market ratio (BM_IA).
The characteristics in Table 8 cover four major categories – momentum,
frictions, profitability, value – in the top splits. Note that characteristics
not selected do not necessarily mean they are useless, as this table only
shows the top three splits.

Interpretability  V.  S.  overfitting. The  random  P-Forest  may  be  over-
parameterized  and  challenging  for  visualization  and  interpretation,
but it offers several advantages. (i) Random P-Forest addresses model
uncertainty  and  can  evaluate  characteristic  importance  by  multiple
bootstrap samples. In other words, the single P-Tree is readily inter-
pretable  as  it  visually  depicts  characteristics  for  non-linearities  and

L.W. Cong et al.

Fig. 8. OOS Performance of Random P-Forest SDF.
This figure reports the Sharpe ratio, and pricing error (HJD) of the realized OOS SDF
portfolio. Each P-Tree in the Random P-Forest is fed with 10 characteristics, randomly
drawn  without  replacement  from  61  ones,  and  generates  10  leaf  basis  portfolios.
These P-Trees are independently trained. P-Trees are split with goal-oriented criteria to
maximize the collective Sharpe ratio of leaf basis portfolios. The total number of leaf
basis portfolios is denoted 𝑃 . The horizontal axis shows model complexity 𝑐 = 𝑃 ∕𝑇 ,
with 𝑐 ranging from 0.1 to 100 and 𝑇 = 240 months. We report five specifications with
shrinkage parameter 𝛾 in [10−5, 10−1, 1, 10, 1000].

asymmetric  interactions,  but  the  model’s  efficacy  may  be  limited  if
we cannot demonstrate that it does not overfit. In contrast, random
P-Forest utilizes multiple random bootstrap samples, which helps mit-
igate the risk of overfitting. (ii) Random P-Forest offers an alternative
to  boosting  for  creating  multiple  test  assets.  Unlike  boosting,  which
generates assets sequentially, random P-Forest independently creates
assets across P-Trees.

In addition to the OOS evaluation in Table 7 for assessing model
overfitting, we also compare key characteristics between the random
P-Forest  and  the  single  P-Tree.  The  selected  characteristics  of  the
single  P-Tree  are  also  shown  as  important  by  the  random  P-Forest,
suggesting that the single P-Tree is not overfitted. The consistent results
may be attributed to the P-Tree’s global split criteria, which prevent
overfitting, similar to ML ensemble methods, while providing greater
interpretability and transparent insights into non-linearities and asym-
metric interactions. The significant characteristics obtained from the

17 

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

random P-Forest, such as earning surprise (SUE), dollar trading volume
(DOLVOL),  and  industry-adjusted  book-to-market  ratio  (BM_IA),  are
also chosen in the top splits of P-Tree for the 40 years, as illustrated
in Fig. 4. In addition, the important characteristics listed in Table 8 are
also selected in the top splits displayed in the P-Tree diagram for the
subsample analysis (refer to Fig. A.1).

5.2.  Random P-Forest and complexity

Our random P-Forest also relates to the growing popularity of large
models in finance. In this recent literature, researchers usually question
whether  model  performance  improves  as  the  model  size  increases,
which  joins  the  recent  statistical  literature  on  ‘‘Benign  Overfitting’’
and ‘‘High-Dimensional Interpolation’’ (e.g., Belkin et al., 2019; Hastie
et  al., 2022)  and  ‘‘the  Virtue  of  Complexity’’  in  financial  applica-
tions  (e.g., Kelly  et  al., 2022, 2024; Didisheim  et  al., 2024).  This
literature  shows  that  large  regularized  models,  which  have  a  large
number of parameters relative to the number of observations, can also
perform well out-of-sample, and their performance even improves as
the number of parameters increases. This goes against the traditional
wisdom of using parsimonious modeling in statistics and finance.

Random P-Forest constructs numerous uncorrelated P-Trees inde-
pendently  on  randomly  bootstrapped  samples,  allowing  it  to  be  ex-
panded as a large model with both statistical and economic regulariza-
tions. These hundreds of P-Trees and thousands of leaf basis portfolios
are similar to the randomly generated portfolios in Didisheim et al.
(2024).  We  can  estimate  the  SDF  (tangency  portfolio)  using  all  the
leaf basis portfolios in the forest and report their OOS performances
to demonstrate the large model performance.

We create this random P-Forest SDF by (i) randomly selecting 𝐿
characteristics for a P-Tree, growing P-Tree with split criteria (4). (ii)
repeating the procedure (i) for 𝐵 times to form a forest of 𝐵 P-Trees
with parallel computing. (iii) estimating the SDF weight on all the leaf
basis portfolios in the random P-Forest with (8) based on in-sample
data. We adopt the ridge (ridgeless) SDF estimator in Didisheim et al.
(2024) to estimate the SDF weights ̂𝑤 on leaf basis portfolios19:

̂𝑤(𝛾) = arg min

𝑤

[(

1 − 𝑤′𝐑𝑡

)2

+ 𝛾‖𝑤‖

2]

,

𝐸

(8)

where 𝛾 is a shrinkage parameter. We also investigate the large model
performance and define 𝑐 = 𝑃 ∕𝑇 as the degree of parameterization or
complexity, where 𝑃 is the number of leaf basis portfolios, and 𝑇 =
240 is the fixed estimation rolling window. We examine the effects of
extensive parameterization and shrinkage estimation on the random P-
Forest SDF across various values for 𝑐 and 𝛾. In addition to the OOS
Sharpe ratio, we also report the OOS Pricing Error = 𝐸𝑂 𝑂 𝑆 [(1 − ̂𝑤′𝐑𝑡)2].
The Pricing Error is the OOS HJ distance (Hansen and Jagannathan,
1997), which has the above expression when 𝑃  > 𝑇𝑂 𝑂 𝑆 and both are
sufficiently large.

Fig. 8 displays the OOS performances of the random P-Forest SDF
with 𝐿 = 10 random characteristics from 2001 to 2020. As 𝑐 increases,
we find (i) the Sharpe ratio exhibits double ascent for low shrinkage
cases  and  permanent  ascent  for  high  shrinkage  cases,  and  (ii)  the
pricing error decreases for high shrinkage cases, with a spike around
𝑐 =  1 for  low  shrinkage  cases.  These  patterns  are  similar  to  those
in Didisheim et al. (2024), demonstrating the benefit of randomness
and large model size in the OOS performance of the random P-Forest
SDF. For 𝑐 = 10, the Sharpe ratio is about 4.0, and the pricing error is
below 0.44. For 𝑐 = 100, the Sharpe ratio becomes about 4.5, and the
pricing error is below 0.38.

19 Britten-Jones (1999) introduces a regression approach to estimate the tan-
gency portfolio and Ao et al. (2019) extend the framework to the regularized
portfolio by allowing a large number of assets.

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Fig. 9. Demonstration for ME baseline and ME-BM baseline P-Trees.

Fig. 10. Evaluating a characteristic with P-Tree.
This figure shows the Sharpe ratio of P-Tree basis portfolios after splitting on a characteristic, based on either ME or ME-BM baseline P-Trees. Sub-figures (a) and (b) display the
results for ME and ME-BM baseline P-Trees, respectively. We sort the characteristics by their Sharpe ratios in ascending order. The red lines show the Sharpe ratios of P-Tree basis
portfolios after splitting one step further on the controlling characteristics. A bar above the red line indicates incremental information against the benchmark characteristics and
is colored black. Otherwise, the gray bar indicates the characteristic does not provide incremental information. The characteristics are listed in Table 1.

Goal-oriented P-Tree v.s. random split P-Tree. The random P-Forest SDF
involves randomness as a subset of characteristics is randomly drawn
for  each  P-Tree,  but  split  decisions  are  not  made  randomly.  Goal-
oriented search in P-Tree helps the leaf basis portfolios to maximize
the collective Sharpe ratio efficiently. However, Didisheim et al. (2024)
show that random portfolios can also generate the SDF with excellent
OOS performances if the number of portfolios is large enough. We show
the significance of goal-oriented search in maximizing mean–variance
efficiency in an over-parameterized setting by presenting an alternative
SDF specification for comparison. Specifically, the random split SDF uses
random split criteria to create leaf basis portfolios, with no specific split

criterion and characteristics and splitting values being randomly chosen
for each decision to generate ten leaf basis portfolios.

The random P-Forest SDF exhibits comparable patterns to the ran-
dom split SDF, but the random P-Forest is significantly more efficient
regarding parameterization and computational expense. Specifically, it
requires less complexity to achieve the same level of Sharpe ratio and
pricing error as the random split SDF. Therefore, goal-oriented search
improves the efficiency of large models with both statistical and eco-
nomic regularizations, aligning with the idea of combining economic
objectives with ML models in finance research. Internet Appendix III
elaborates further.

18 

L.W. Cong et al.

Finally,  from  the  test  asset  construction  perspective,  the  goal-
oriented P-Tree provides practically useful test assets for asset pricing
model estimation and evaluation. The number of test assets is typically
less than 100 because the statistical power of the asset pricing test is
low when this number is large (Fan et al., 2015).

5.3.  Evaluating a characteristic with P-Tree.

As  an  alternative  pricing  kernel,  P-Tree  can  directly  evaluate  a
new characteristic’s incremental (and nonlinear) contribution over a
benchmark  to  complement  the  literature.  Researchers  develop  new
factors by sorting based on specific characteristics in empirical studies
and then test their independent information by controlling benchmark
models through spanning regression. However, empirical studies rarely
examine whether the associated characteristics provide new informa-
tion  and  may  cause  information  loss.  To  address  this  issue,  P-Tree
provides a new perspective for evaluating the usefulness of character-
istics in generating test assets and latent factor models, given a set of
benchmark characteristics, such as ME and BM.

In Fig. 9, we show two baseline P-Trees: a three-layer ME baseline
P-Tree with all splits based on ME and a 3-layer ME-BM baseline P-
Tree with the first layer split on ME and the second layer split on BM.
To assess the incremental utility of estimating the efficient frontier of
a  characteristic  against ME,  we  extend  the  ME  baseline  P-Tree  with
an additional split on the characteristic of interest or ME. One might
expect a split to increase the Sharpe ratio of an MVE portfolio for a
shallow P-Tree. Therefore, We only assess if a characteristic offers new
information by comparing the Sharpe ratio improvement when adding
it to the baseline P-Tree over a split on ME. This method helps us gauge
the incremental impact of the characteristic in question.

In Fig. 10, subfigure (a) shows the incremental Sharpe ratio of each
characteristic on the ME baseline P-Tree. We highlight characteristics
outperforming ME in black and those underperforming ME in gray. We
also sort the characteristics by their Sharpe ratios. Even for a shallow P-
Tree, 24 characteristics do not provide incremental information against
the  ME  baseline  P-Tree.  Further,  we  identify  categories  other  than
size, including momentum (SUE, ABR, NINCR), value (BM_IA, BM,
CFP, EP),  profitability  (CHPM, ROA, ROE),  and  frictions/volatility
(MAXRET, SVAR), that vastly improve investment performance by a
simple further split on the ME baseline P-Tree.

In summary, we assess each characteristic on a benchmark P-Tree
by  controlling ME and/or BM for  its  marginal  contribution  to  the
investment objective. We can expect these marginal contributions to
be smaller when considering a deeper tree as the benchmark. The rel-
ative importance of a characteristic may change when the benchmark
P-Tree or controlling characteristics are altered, highlighting the adapt-
able nature of P-Tree evaluation. This evaluation can complement the
conventional factor-spanning regression in evaluating characteristics.
Similarly, we assess each characteristic using the ME-BM baseline P-
Tree shown in subfigure (b) of Fig. 9. This P-Tree has three layers and is
based on ME and BM. With a stronger benchmark, some characteristics,
such  as RDM,  ILL,  HIRE,  MOM6M,  CINVEST,  SP,  do  not  pro-
vide additional information on this upgraded ME-BM baseline P-Tree.
Against the ME-BM baseline P-Tree, we find that 30 characteristics do
not offer incremental information for estimating the efficient frontier.
Consistent  with  the  ME  baseline  P-Tree  results,  momentum,  value,
and profitability characteristics are useful in the nonlinear interactive
model.

5.4.  P-Tree with macroeconomic regimes

Increasing empirical evidence indicates factor risk premia and load-
ings can vary significantly under various macroeconomic conditions.
Given  that  the  cross-sectional  driving  forces  may  change  over  time,
examining how P-Tree performs in different states and which charac-
teristics are selected for the mean–variance diversification is valuable.
This subsection presents the subsample analysis for implementing P-
Trees  under  various  macro  regimes  and  demonstrates  their  robust
performance.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Characteristics evaluation under regimes. We conduct robustness checks
by analyzing ten macro variables from Table 2 for subsample analysis
in  different  regimes.  The  empirical  results  of  P-Tree  models  under
various regimes are shown in Table 9. We divide the sample into top
and bottom regimes using the 50% 10-year rolling-window percentiles
and fit a separate model for each regime. This allows us to assess the
effectiveness of P-Tree in both positive and negative macroeconomic
environments. 20

First,  the  useful  characteristics  may  vary  depending  on  different
macroeconomic conditions. P-Tree performs well, adjusts to macroeco-
nomic changes, and chooses different characteristics for the top three
splits. For example, when the term spread is low, or market volatility
is high, the roles of SUE and DOVOL for firm fundamentals and trading
volume are more important for cross-sectional mean–variance diversifi-
cation. However, characteristics such as BASPREAD and RVAR_CAPM,
representing frictions for liquidity and volatility, are often chosen for
scenarios  involving  high  net  equity  issuance,  low  default  yield,  low
market liquidity, or low inflation.

Second, P-Tree test assets consistently provide informative results
for asset pricing considerations: the GRS tests against Fama–French five
factors are rejected for each regime, and the Sharpe ratios of the MVE
portfolios spanned by P-Tree test assets are all greater than 7. Inter-
estingly, the GRS statistics (weighted pricing errors) are significantly
larger for scenarios that involve low inflation or a low t-bill rate, which
implies the weakest moments of commonly used factors capturing the
cross-sectional signals. The average alphas are larger than those of ‘‘P-
Tree1’’  in Table  7,  Panel  A,  implying  the  test  assets  under  extreme
macro regimes are even more challenging to price by common factors.
Finally, we combine the P-Tree factors in two regimes and find the
‘‘Com’’ (Combined) factor has larger Sharpe ratios than the first P-Tree
factor in Table 7, Panel A, which implements an unconditional model.

6.  Conclusion

empirical 

constitute 

Estimating  the  mean–variance  efficient  frontier  using  individual
asset returns and creating diversified test assets for asset pricing model
longstanding 
evaluations 
challenges
(e.g., Markowitz, 1952; Lewellen et al., 2010; Daniel et al., 2020). Our
paper introduces a new class of tree-based models, Panel Tree (P-Tree),
that effectively addresses these empirical challenges and analyzes the
(unbalanced) panel of individual asset returns by generalizing multi-
characteristics security sorting and splitting the cross section. Under
the  global  criteria  of  mean–variance  efficiency,  P-Tree  utilizes  high-
dimensional  characteristics,  which  contain  rich  information  on  the
joint distribution of asset returns, to generate characteristics-managed
portfolios and recover the stochastic discount factor. More generally, P-
Trees expand tree-based and other ML models beyond pure prediction,
effectively analyzing panel data by economic-guided objectives, while
maintaining  interpretability  and  handling  asymmetric  and  nonlinear
interactions in low signal-to-noise environments.

Our empirical study of U.S. equities shows that P-Tree test assets
significantly advance the efficient frontier compared to that spanned
by  those  commonly  used  test  assets  (e.g.,  bivariate-  or  univariate-
sorted  portfolios)  and  exhibit  significant  unexplained  alphas  against
benchmark  models  (e.g.,  Fama–French  factors),  highlighting  the  im-
portance  of  test  assets.  These  findings  remain  consistent  and  robust
for  the  out-of-sample  evaluation  in  the  recent  two  decades.  Second,
the P-Tree tangency portfolio is constructed as traded factor models,
outperforming  popular  observable  and  ML  latent  factor  models  for
factor investment and cross-sectional pricing performance. Third, we
demonstrate the versatility and utility of sparse tree-based models for
economic interpretation. For example, we identify SUE, DOLVOL, and

20 For identifying macro regime shifts through time-series splits, Feng et al.
(2025) adapt the P-Tree framework for currency return dynamics.

19 

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Table 9
P-Tree performance under regime switches.
This table shows the performance of P-Tree models across various macroeconomic states. The time series of each macro variable is split into ‘‘Top’’ and ‘‘Btm’’ regimes using the
50% 10-year rolling-window percentiles. A simple P-Tree is then built for each regime, and similar performance statistics are reported in Table 5, along with the top three splitting
characteristics. The rows labeled ‘‘Com’’ report the average return and Sharpe ratio of the combined P-Tree factor of the ‘‘Top’’ and ‘‘Btm’’ regimes.

Regime

AVG

SR

DFY

DY

EP

ILL

INFL

LEV

NI

SVAR

TBL

TMS

Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com
Top
Btm
Com

1.78
1.21
1.49
1.45
1.30
1.35
0.99
1.34
1.24
1.10
1.50
1.24
1.16
1.29
1.25
1.33
1.39
1.37
1.37
1.51
1.45
1.24
1.23
1.23
1.09
1.30
1.24
1.17
1.23
1.20

6.14
4.56
5.16
5.84
6.21
6.03
5.51
6.04
5.76
5.90
7.44
6.21
4.83
6.61
5.89
5.10
5.36
5.26
5.05
6.71
5.81
6.22
4.78
5.36
7.15
7.05
6.97
6.01
5.82
5.91

GRS

71.84
40.01

43.17
101.56

34.85
98.62

89.15
72.13

30.10
107.40

38.77
66.94

45.70
93.02

72.03
43.92

59.53
134.30

67.58
70.00

𝑝-value

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

|𝛼|
1.27
1.08

1.03
1.05

0.94
0.94

0.81
1.03

0.99
0.93

0.89
1.23

1.67
1.18

0.94
1.18

0.75
0.93

0.99
0.86

BM_IA as key characteristics that interact to explain the cross-section
of asset returns. Finally, P-Tree captures the complexity of panel stock
returns with sparsity, achieving exceptional OOS Sharpe ratios close
to  those  of  over-parameterized  large  models.  Beyond  asset  pricing,
our  framework  offers  an  interpretable  and  computationally  efficient
alternative to deep-learning-based AI for goal-oriented search in large
modeling spaces.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Lin  William  Cong: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  origi-
nal draft, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Formal analysis, Con-
ceptualization. Guanhao  Feng: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources,  Project administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jingyu
He: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization,
Validation,  Supervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project  administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization. Xin He: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation.

Declaration of competing interest

None.

Appendix A

See Algorithm 1 and Fig. A.1.

20 

√

𝛼2

𝑅2

Top three characteristics

1.57
1.44

1.30
1.21

1.28
1.18

1.04
1.30

1.29
1.26

1.14
1.46

2.16
1.38

1.24
1.38

0.91
1.10

1.28
1.17

52.69
60.05

73.16
51.45

78.21
56.89

62.31
59.38

75.20
57.67

65.03
52.23

53.03
61.79

62.66
59.41

61.98
63.44

63.45
52.52

SUE
ABR

CHPM
ABR

DOLVOL
RVAR_CAPM

CFP
STD_DOLVOL

BM_IA
ZEROTRADE

ME
DOLVOL

RVAR_CAPM
SUE

ME_IA
DOLVOL

ME
BM_IA

RVAR_CAPM
SUE

SUE
DOLVOL

STD_DOLVOL
SP

CFP
SUE

CFP
NI

ATO
DOLVOL

ME
CFP

ALM
MOM12M

STD_DOLVOL
BM_IA

RVAR_CAPM
ROA

ME_IA
DOLVOL

RD_SALE
SUE

SUE
ROA

DOLVOL
ZEROTRADE

CFP
ABR

CHCSHO
SUE

SUE
DOLVOL

DOLVOL
CFP

EP
SUE

STD_DOLVOL
DOLVOL

SUE
BM_IA

Fig. A.1. Panel tree diagram for subsamples.
Format follows Fig. 4. Subfigure (a) shows P-Tree in the sample from 1981–2000.
Subfigure (b) shows P-Tree in the sample from 2001–2020.

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Algorithm  Growing a Single P-Tree
1: procedure GrowTree(root)
2: Input Asset returns 𝐫𝑖,𝑡 and ranked characteristics 𝐳𝑖,𝑡
3: outcome Grow P-Tree from the root node, form leaf basis portfolios
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:

Search the tree, find all leaf nodes 
for each leaf node 𝑁 in  do

if current depth ≥ 𝑑max then

for 𝑗 from 1 to 𝐽 do

return.

⊳ Loop over number of iterations

⊳ Loop over all current leaf

else

nodes

leaf size then

for each candidate split ̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 in 

𝑁 do

Partition data temporally in 𝑁 according to ̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 .
if Either left or right child of 𝑁 does not satisfy minimal

(̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 ) = −∞.

else

Calculate leaf basis portfolios.
Estimate  tangency  portfolio  using all

leaf  basis

Calculate the split criteria (̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 ) in (4).

end for
Find the best leaf node and split rule that maximize split criteria

̃𝐜𝑗 = argmax
𝑁∈ ,̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 ∈
𝑁

{(̃𝐜𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 )}

Split the node selected with the 𝑗-th split rule of the tree ̃𝐜𝑗 .

10:
11:
12:

13:
14:
15:
16:

17:
18:
19:
20:
21:

portfolios as in (2).

end if

end for

end if

22:
23:
end for
24:
{
𝐑(𝐽 )
25:
return
𝑡
26: end procedure

}

, 𝑓 (𝐽 )
𝑡

Appendix B.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104024.

Data availability

Growing the Efficient Frontier on Panel Trees (Original data) (Mendeley
Data)

References

Ahn, D.-H., Conrad, J., Dittmar, R.F., 2009. Basis assets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (12),

5133–5174.

Ait-Sahalia, Y., Xiu, D., 2017. Using principal component analysis to estimate a high
dimensional  factor  model  with  high-frequency  data.  J.  Econometrics  201  (2),
384–399.

Ang, A., Liu, J., Schwarz, K., 2020. Using Stocks or Portfolios in Tests of Factor Models.

J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 55, 709–750.

Ao, M., Yingying, L., Zheng, X., 2019. Approaching mean-variance efficiency for large

portfolios. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (7), 2890–2919.

Avramov, D., Cheng, S., Metzker, L., 2023. Machine learning vs. economic restrictions:

Evidence from stock return predictability. Manag. Sci. 69 (5), 2587–2619.

Bali, T.G., Beckmeyer, H., Moerke, M., Weigert, F., 2023. Option return predictability
with machine learning and big data. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (9), 3548–3602.
Banz, R.W., 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.

J. Financ. Econ. 9 (1), 3–18.

Barillas, F., Shanken, J., 2017. Which alpha? Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (4), 1316–1338.
Belkin, M., Hsu, D., Ma, S., Mandal, S., 2019. Reconciling modern machine-learning
practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 (32),
15849–15854.

Bianchi, D., Büchner, M., Tamoni, A., 2021. Bond risk premiums with machine learning.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (2), 1046–1089.

Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45 (1), 5–32.
Breiman,  L.,  Friedman,  J.H.,  Olshen,  R.A.,  Stone,  C.J.,  1984.  Classification  and

Regression Trees. Routledge.

21 

Britten-Jones, M., 1999. The sampling error in estimates of mean-variance efficient

portfolio weights. J. Financ. 54 (2), 655–671.

Bryzgalova,  S.,  Pelger,  M.,  Zhu,  J.,  2023.  Forest  through  the  trees:  Building

cross-sections of stock returns. J. Financ. Forthcom..

Capponi, A., Yu, S., 2024. Price Discovery in the Machine Learning Age. Technical

report, Columbia University.

Chen, Y., Cliff, M., Zhao, H., 2017. Hedge funds: The good, the bad, and the lucky. J.

Financ. Quant. Anal. 52 (3), 1081–1109.

Chen, L., Pelger, M., Zhu, J., 2024. Deep learning in asset pricing. Manag. Sci. 70 (2),

714–750.

Chipman, H.A., George, E.I., McCulloch, R.E., 2010. BART: Bayesian additive regression

trees. Ann. Appl. Stat. 4, 266–298.

Chordia, T., Subrahmanyam, A., Anshuman, V.R., 2001. Trading activity and expected

stock returns. J. Financ. Econ. 59 (1), 3–32.

Cochrane, J.H., 2011. Presidential address: Discount rates. J. Financ. 66 (4), 1047–1108.
Cong, L.W., Feng, G., He, J., Li, J., 2023. Uncommon Factors and Asset Heterogeneity
in the Cross Section and Time Series. Technical report, City University of Hong
Kong.

Cong, L.W., Feng, G., He, J., Wang, Y., 2024. Mosaics of Predictability. Technical report,

City University of Hong Kong.

Cong, L.W., Tang, K., Wang, J., Zhang, Y., 2021. AlphaPortfolio: Direct Construction
Trough  Deep  Reinforcement  Learning  and  Interpretable  AI.  Technical  report,
Cornell University.

Creal,  D.,  Kim,  J.,  2023.  Empirical  Asset  Pricing  with  Bayesian  Regression  Trees.

Technical report, University of Notre Dame.

Da, Z., Gurun, U.G., Warachka, M., 2014. Frog in the pan: Continuous information and

momentum. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (7), 2171–2218.

Daniel,  K.,  Grinblatt,  M.,  Titman,  S.,  Wermers,  R.,  1997.  Measuring  mutual  fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. J. Financ. 52 (3), 1035–1058.
Daniel, K., Mota, L., Rottke, S., Santos, T., 2020. The cross-section of risk and returns.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 1927–1979.

Didisheim, A., Ke, S., Kelly, B., Malamud, S., 2024. APT or ‘‘AIPT’’? The Surprising

Dominance of Large Factor Models. Technical report, Yale University.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1996. Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies. J.

Financ. 51 (1), 55–84.

(1), 1–22.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116

Fan, J., Ke, Z.T., Liao, Y., Neuhierl, A., 2022. Structural Deep Learning in Conditional

Asset Pricing. Technical report, Princeton University.

Fan, J., Liao, Y., Yao, J., 2015. Power enhancement in high-dimensional cross-sectional

tests. Econometrica 83 (4), 1497–1541.

Feng, G., Giglio, S., Xiu, D., 2020. Taming the factor zoo: A test of new factors. J.

Financ. 75 (3), 1327–1370.

Feng, G., He, J., Li, J., Sarno, L., Zhang, Q., 2025. Currency Return Dynamics: What
Is the Role of U.S. Macroeconomic Regimes?. Technical report, City University of
Hong Kong.

Feng, G., He, J., Polson, N.G., Xu, J., 2024. Deep Learning in Characteristics-Sorted

Factor Models. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 59 (7), 3001–3036.

Feng, G., Jiang, L., Li, J., Song, Y., 2023. Deep Tangency Portfolio. Technical report,

City University of Hong Kong.

Freund, Y., Schapire, R.E., 1997. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning

and an application to boosting. J. Comput. System Sci. 55 (1), 119–139.

Gagliardini,  P.,  Ossola,  E.,  Scaillet,  O.,  2016.  Time-varying  risk  premium  in  large

cross-sectional equity data sets. Econometrica 84 (3), 985–1046.

Gibbons, M.R., Ross, S.A., Shanken, J., 1989. A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio.

Econometrica 1121–1152.

Giglio, S., Xiu, D., Zhang, D., 2023. Test Assets and Weak Factors. J. Financ. Forthcom..
Gu, S., Kelly, B., Xiu, D., 2020. Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 2223–2273.

Gu, S., Kelly, B., Xiu, D., 2021. Autoencoder asset pricing models. J. Econometrics 222

(1), 429–450.

Hansen,  L.P.,  Jagannathan,  R.,  1997.  Assessing  specification  errors  in  stochastic

discount factor models. J. Financ. 52 (2), 557–590.

Hastie,  T.,  Montanari,  A.,  Rosset,  S.,  Tibshirani,  R.J.,  2022.  Surprises  in
high-dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. Ann. Stat. 50 (2), 949.
He, J., Hahn, P.R., 2023. Stochastic tree ensembles for regularized nonlinear regression.

J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 118 (541), 551–570.

He, A., Huang, D., Li, J., Zhou, G., 2023. Shrinking factor dimension: A reduced-rank

approach. Manag. Sci. 69 (9), 5501–5522.

He, J., Yalov, S., Hahn, P.R., 2019. XBART: Accelerated Bayesian additive regression
trees. In: The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
pp. 1130–1138.

Hoberg,  G.,  Welch,  I.,  2009.  Optimized  vs.  Sort-Based  Portfolios.  Technical  report,

Hou, K., Mo, H., Xue, C., Zhang, L., 2021. An augmented q-factor model with expected

University of Southern California.

growth. Rev. Financ. 25 (1), 1–41.

Jarrow, R.A., Murataj, R., Wells, M.T., Zhu, L., 2023. The low-volatility anomaly and
the adaptive multi-factor model. Int. J. Theor. Appl. Finance 26 (04n05), 2350020.
Jensen, T.I., Kelly, B.T., Malamud, S., Pedersen, L.H., 2024. Machine learning and the

implementable efficient frontier. Rev. Financ. Stud. Forthcom..

L.W. Cong et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Kelly, B., Malamud, S., Zhou, K., 2022. The virtue of complexity everywhere. Yale

Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., Shanken, J., 2010. A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests.

Kelly, B., Malamud, S., Zhou, K., 2024. The virtue of complexity in return prediction.

Liu, W., 2006. A liquidity-augmented capital asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 82

J. Financ. Econ. 96 (2), 175–194.

(3), 631–671.

Universtiy.

J. Financ. (1), 459–503.

Kelly, B., Pruitt, S., Su, Y., 2019. Characteristics are covariances: A unified model of

risk and return. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (3), 501–524.

Kim, S., Korajczyk, R.A., Neuhierl, A., 2021. Arbitrage portfolios. Rev. Financ. Stud.

34 (6), 2813–2856.

Kozak, S., Nagel, S., 2022. When Do Cross-Sectional Asset Pricing Factors Span the

Stochastic Discount Factor?. Technical report, University of Michigan.

Kozak, S., Nagel, S., Santosh, S., 2018. Interpreting factor models. J. Financ. 73 (3),

Kozak, S., Nagel, S., Santosh, S., 2020. Shrinking the cross-section. J. Financ. Econ.

Lee, C.M., Swaminathan, B., 2000. Price momentum and trading volume. J. Financ. 55

1183–1223.

135 (2), 271–292.

(5), 2017–2069.

returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 2274–2325.

Lopez-Lira,  A.,  Roussanov,  N.L.,  2020.  Do  Common  Factors  Really  Explain  the
Cross-Section of Stock Returns?. Technical report, University of Pennsylvania.

Markowitz, H., 1952. Portfolio selection. J. Financ. 7, 77–99.
Patton, A.J., Weller, B.M., 2022. Risk price variation: The missing half of empirical

asset pricing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 5127–5184.

Pesaran, M.H., Yamagata, T., 2023. Testing for alpha in linear factor pricing models

with a large number of securities. J. Financ. Econ..

Rendleman, Jr., R.J., Jones, C.P., Latane, H.A., 1982. Empirical anomalies based on
unexpected earnings and the importance of risk adjustments. J. Financ. Econ. 10
(3), 269–287.

Rossi, A.G., Timmermann, A., 2015. Modeling covariance risk in Merton’s ICAPM. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 28 (5), 1428–1461.

selection. J. Portf. Manag. 27 (1), 42–52.

Lettau, M., Pelger, M., 2020. Factors that fit the time series and cross-section of stock

Sorensen,  E.H.,  Miller,  K.L.,  Ooi,  C.K.,  2000.  The  decision  tree  approach  to  stock

22 

