Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Intermediary financing without commitment✩
Yunzhi Hu a,∗, Felipe Varas b
a Kenan-Flagler Business School, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Campus Box 3490, 4103 McColl Building, Chapel Hill, 27599, NC, USA
b Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, 800 W Campbell Rd, Richardson, 75080, TX, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Replication Code (Reference data)

Keywords:
Commitment
Durable-goods monopoly
Financial intermediaries
Monitoring
Dynamic games
Optimal control in stratified domains

1.  Introduction

Intermediaries reduce agency problems through monitoring, but credible monitoring requires sufficient
retention until the loan matures. We study credit markets when intermediaries cannot commit to retention.
Two structures are examined: investors lending alongside an all-equity bank and investors lending through
the bank via short-term debt. With a commitment to retention, they are equivalent. Without commitment, the
all-equity bank sells loans and reduces monitoring over time. Short-term debt encourages the intermediary to
retain loans and incentivizes monitoring. Our analysis provides a novel mechanism for intermediaries’ reliance
on short-term debt—the constant repricing of debt creates incentives that resolve the commitment problem in
loan retention and monitoring.

Financial intermediaries conduct valuable services and, therefore,
benefit  the  real  economy.  To  appropriately  align  intermediaries’  in-
centives,  the  optimal  financing  arrangement  typically  involves  them
retaining a fraction of loans as the skin in the game; otherwise, the
incentives can be misaligned. With the development of the secondary
loan  market,  intermediaries’  commitment  to  loan  retentions  is  lim-
ited  (Drucker  and  Puri, 2009).  This  paper  studies  the  equilibrium
dynamics  in  loan  sales  and  monitoring  when  intermediaries cannot
commit  to  their  retentions.  We  show  that  short-term  debt  can  re-
solve the bank’s lack of commitment problem and, therefore, align the
incentives for monitoring and loan sales.

We  build  on  the  classic  model  of Holmstrom  and  Tirole (1997)
in which banks can monitor to increase an entrepreneur’s borrowing
capacity. To maintain incentives for monitoring, the bank is required
to  retain  a  sufficient  fraction  of  loans  on  its  balance  sheet.  We  as-
sume the bank has no commitment to hold the loan, but rather has
the option to sell loans. Given this, we study two types of financial
intermediaries: a bank with all equity financing (E-bank) and a bank
with access to short-term debt markets (S-bank). The first regime aligns
with the certification structure, while the second corresponds to the

intermediation structure as described (Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997).
As shown in Fig. 1, in the all-equity bank regime, the bank lends its
own  funding  alongside  other  investors.  In  the  case  of  a  short-term
debt bank, the bank borrows short-term debt from investors and then
lends a collection of its own funds and those from investors. The E-
bank does not internalize the positive effect that its monitoring has on
other investors. Therefore, the lack of commitment induces the bank
to sell its loans gradually, and the bank’s monitoring intensity declines
over time. By contrast, the S-bank does not sell ex-post, because selling
would  immediately  increase  the  interest  rate  charged  on  short-term
debt. Hence, the short-term debt leads the bank to internalize the full
value of its monitoring.

More  specifically,  we  model  an  entrepreneur  endowed  with  an
investment opportunity, which requires a fixed-size of investment and
pays  off  some  final  cash  flows  at  a  random  time  in  the  future.  She
has  limited  personal  wealth  and  needs  to  borrow  to  make  up  the
investment shortfall. Due to moral hazard in effort choices, she can
only pledge a fraction of the final output to outside creditors, including
banks and investors. Banks have a higher cost of capital, but only they
can  monitor  to  reduce  the  entrepreneur’s  private  benefits.  Although
monitoring increases the project’s pledgeable income and enables the

✩
Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. The authors would like to thank Douglas Diamond and Raghuram Rajan for very detailed feedback, comments
and suggestions. The authors are also grateful to comments from Philip Bond, Brendan Daley, Peter DeMarzo, Darrell Duffie, Michael Fishman, William Fuchs,
Thomas Geelen, Brett Green, Denis Gromb, Abhinav Gupta, Zhiguo He, Andrey Malenko, Daniel Neuhann, Christine Parlour, Stefano Pegoraro, Adriano Rampini,
Michael Sockin, Anjan Thakor, Sheridan Titman, Jessie Wang, Victoria Vanasco, Vish Viswanathan, Shengxing Zhang, Jing Zeng, as well as participants at UNC,
Chicago Booth, Duke, Kellogg, NUS, Cambridge, Virtual Finance Seminar Series, UT Austin, AFBC, FTWebinar, MoFiR, MFA, Minnesota Carlson, the Third PHBS
Workshop in Macroeconomics and Finance, the FTG at University of Washington, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, CICF, and Cambridge Corporate Finance Theory
Symposium. Nanhui Zhu and Yifan Ji provided valuable research assistance during the revision, which is deeply appreciated.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: Yunzhi_Hu@kenan-flagler.unc.edu (Y. Hu), felipe.varas@utdallas.edu (F. Varas).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104025
Received 6 September 2022; Received in revised form 6 February 2025; Accepted 9 February 2025
Available online 24 February 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Fig. 1. All-equity vs. Short-term debt bank.

entrepreneur to borrow more, it also entails a physical cost. Therefore,
a credible monitor needs to retain a sufficient fraction of loans as its
skin in the game.

We  depart  from Holmstrom  and  Tirole (1997)  by  introducing  a
competitive financial market, in which the bank is allowed to trade
its loans and issue short-term debt against the loans. The bank’s loan
retention will be the state variable in our model. Loans are rationally
priced, and therefore, the prices depend on the bank’s incentives to
monitor both contemporaneously and in the future. If the bank has sold
or is expected to sell a large fraction of the loans, it will monitor less,
and consequently, the price of loans will fall. This price impact deters
the bank from selling the loans too aggressively.

Although loan sales and debt issuance are equivalent in a model
under the bank’s commitment to its retention, they lead to different
dynamics in loan sales and monitoring if there is no such commitment.
An E-bank has incentives to sell loans because it faces a higher cost of
capital than investors, making it the inefficient loan holder. The price
of  the  loan  will  drop  when  the  bank  tries  to  sell  because  investors
anticipate reduced retention and monitoring. However, the price im-
pact is insufficient to deter loan sales, because the bank has multiple
future selling opportunities and cannot commit to not exploiting them.
Since selling a small loan fraction only slightly reduces monitoring, the
initial price impact will be minimal, and the bank will be incentivized
to sell a positive amount. However, after this initial sale, the bank faces
increased incentives to sell more loans. This is because the price impact
from diminished monitoring now applies to only the remaining loan
fraction  retained  by  the  bank,  which  is  smaller.  In  equilibrium,  the
bank trades off the immediate trading gains versus the drop in its future
payoff, including the drop in the loan’s valuation as well as the decline
in  the  expected  payments  it  can  collect  upon  the  project  maturing.
The price of the loan is such that the E-bank does not benefit from its
ability to trade loans at all. The driving force is the time-inconsistency
problem—the bank cannot credibly commit to maintaining the loan’s
value through monitoring in the future with the opportunities to sell.
Each loan sale makes the bank’s remaining stake smaller, reducing its
incentive to internalize monitoring externalities. This dynamic leads to
a gradual loan sales and less monitoring over time.

In  contrast,  an  S-bank  that  issues  short-term  debt  does  not  have
incentives  to  sell  its  loans.  This  is  because  if  the  bank  tries  to  sell,
it would not only depress the loan’s price, but more importantly, it
would increase the interest rate on the short-term debt that was used
to  finance  the  loan,  making  it  more  costly  for  the  bank.  Since  the
bank  constantly  needs  to  roll  over  or  refinance  its  short-term  debt,
an  elevated  interest  rate  acts  as  a  punishment  against  loan  sales.
Consequently, despite having no explicit contractual commitment to
retain loans, the bank finds it optimal to keep the entire loan portfolio

on its balance sheet.

The different results across the two regimes relate to a monitoring
externality.  Monitoring  benefits  investors,  but  banks  bear  the  costs,
leading  to  sub-optimal  monitoring  (the  free-rider  problem).  For  the
E-bank, this externality, combined with a lack of commitment to re-
tention, causes it to sell loans and reduce monitoring probability over
time. However, for an S-bank, the externality is internalized by short-
term debt. Short-term debt pricing immediately reflects any reduction
in monitoring by the bank attempting to sell loans. This forces the bank
to maintain monitoring incentives as both it and investors share the
costs and benefits.

Our  paper  provides  an  explanation  for  why  intermediaries  rely
on short-term debt. We show that an S-bank issuing long-term debt
behaves  like  an  E-bank,  selling  off  loans  over  time.  Crucially,  our
mechanism requires that the intermediary’s short-term debt is exposed
to credit risk and this risk is fairly priced by markets. If, instead, the
bank issues riskless short-term debt, or if its risky short-term debt is not
fairly priced, then the S-bank exhibits the same loan sale behavior as
an E-bank. We also study the model in which the bank issues long-term
debt. Results show that such bank behaves similarly to an E-bank and
gradually sells its loans over time, leading to a reduction in monitoring
intensity.  This  occurs  because  long-term  debt  does  not  provide  the
constant repricing mechanism that short-term debt offers.

2.  A two-period example

Before proceeding to the main model, we present a simplified exam-
ple illustrating the basic economic tradeoff. The detailed calculations in
this example can be found in Appendix A.

2.1.  Model setup

There  are  three  dates,  and  the  model  has  one  entrepreneur,  one
bank, and a competitive set of investors. All parties are risk-neutral and
have limited liability. We assume investors do not discount the future,
whereas the bank and the entrepreneur discount the payoff one period
ahead by 𝛿 < 1. We analyze two types of banks: one where the bank
is entirely financed by equity (referred to as an E-bank), and another
where the bank can issue short-term debt (referred to as an S-bank).

Fig.  2 describes  the  timing.  The  entrepreneur  has  a  project  that
requires her effort at 𝑡 = 3, after which the outcome is realized. The
project produces 𝑅 with probability 𝑝𝐻 = 1 if the entrepreneur works
but with probability 𝑝𝐿 = 0 if the entrepreneur shirks. There are two
shirking options: the high option brings private benefits 𝐵 > 0, whereas

2 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Fig. 2. Timing in the two-period model.

the low brings 𝑏 = 0.1 At 𝑡 = 3, before the entrepreneur chooses her
effort, the bank can monitor and eliminate the high shirking option by
paying a private cost ̃𝜅. This cost follows the uniform distribution on
[0, ̄𝜅] and is realized at the beginning of 𝑡 = 3. For illustrative purposes,
we assume that the entrepreneur does not have any skin in the game
and has pledged all the cash flows 𝑅 as a loan to the bank and investors.
The financial market is open at 𝑡 = 1 and 𝑡 = 2, when the bank can
trade the loan and the S-bank can additionally issue debt. We normalize
the total share of the loan to one. Let 𝜃0 be the share of the loan retained
by the bank at the beginning of 𝑡 = 1 and 1 − 𝜃0 be that retained by
investors. In particular, our results hold for 𝜃0 = 1. After trading, the
bank retains a share 𝜃1 and 𝜃2 of the loan at the end of 𝑡 = 1 and 𝑡 = 2,
respectively. An E-bank does not issue any debt, whereas an S-bank
can issue one-period debt 𝐷1 and 𝐷2 at 𝑡 = 1 and 𝑡 = 2 in the financial
market.

2.2.  All-equity financed bank

We  solve  the  model  via  backward  induction.  At 𝑡 =  3,  given  a
realization of the monitoring cost 𝜅, the bank’s IC in monitoring and
the implied the probability of bank monitoring are

𝜅 ≤ 𝜃2𝑅 ⇒ 𝑝2(𝜃2) =

𝜃2𝑅
̄𝜅

,

Under 𝑝𝐻 = 1, and 𝑝𝐿 = 0, 𝑝2(𝜃2) is also the probability that the project
generates 𝑅. At 𝑡 = 2, the E-bank chooses loan sales 𝜃1 − 𝜃2 to maximize
its expected payoff, so

𝛱 𝐸

2 (𝜃1) =  max
𝜃2∈[0,1]

𝛿

(

𝑝2(𝜃2)𝜃2𝑅 − ∫

𝜃2𝑅

)

𝜅
̄𝜅

𝑑 𝜅

0

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loan payment - monitoring cost

,
+ 𝑞2(𝜃2)(𝜃1 − 𝜃2)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loan sales

where 𝑞2(𝜃2) = 𝑝2(𝜃2)𝑅 is the price of the loan. It is easily shown that
the bank sells loans

𝜃2 =

𝜃1
2 − 𝛿

< 𝜃1.

At 𝑡 = 1 given any 𝜃0, the E-bank’s expected payoff is
𝛱 𝐸

+ 𝛿 𝛱 𝐸

.

1 (𝜃0) =  max
𝜃1∈[0,1]

𝑞1(𝜃1)(𝜃0 − 𝜃1)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loan sales

2 (𝜃1)
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
payoff at 𝑡=2

When investors buy the loan at 𝑡 = 1, they anticipate the bank to sell
loans at 𝑡 = 2, and such anticipation is reflected in the loan price 𝑞1 so
that 𝑞1(𝜃1) = 𝑞2(𝜃2(𝜃1)). We show the bank sells loans

𝜃1 =

𝜃0
2 − 𝛿

< 𝜃0

at a price 𝑞1(𝜃1) = 𝑅2
𝑅2
2 ̄𝜅

𝜃2
0
(2−𝛿)2 .

̄𝜅

𝜃1
2−𝛿

, and the bank’s expected payoff is 𝛱 𝐸

1 (𝜃0) =

1 Therefore, the entrepreneur is indifferent between working and the low
shirking option. In this case, we assume that she chooses to work. The low
shirking option is redundant in this illustrative example but not in the main
model with 𝑏 ≥ 0.

3 

2.3.  Short-term debt financed bank

At 𝑡 = 3, the bank’s IC in monitoring and the implied probability of

bank monitoring are
𝜅 ≤ 𝜃2𝑅 − 𝐷2 ⇒ 𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2) =

𝜃2𝑅 − 𝐷2
̄𝜅

.

At 𝑡 = 2, given that investors do not discount the future, 𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2) is
also the price they are willing to pay per unit of debt 𝐷2. For a given
𝜃1, an S-bank chooses 𝜃1 − 𝜃2 and 𝐷2 to maximize
(

)

𝛱 𝑆

2 (𝜃1) =  max
𝜃2∈[0,1],𝐷2

≥0

𝛿

𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)(𝜃2𝑅 − 𝐷2) − ∫

0

(𝜃2𝑅−𝐷2)

𝜅
̄𝜅

𝑑 𝜅

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loan payment - debt repayment - monitoring cost
+ 𝑞2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)(𝜃1 − 𝜃2)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loan sales

+ 𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)𝐷2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
debt issuance
≤ 𝜃2𝑅.

s.t. 𝐷2

≤ 𝜃2𝑅 arises because if 𝐷2 exceeds 𝜃2𝑅,
This issuance constraint 𝐷2
the bank will always default: it can never pay off the debt at 𝑡 = 3. It is
easily derived that the first-order condition on 𝜃2 and 𝐷2 are linearly
dependent  so  that  the  choice  between 𝜃2 and 𝐷2 is  undetermined.2
Therefore, for the S-bank, loan sales and debt issuance are equivalent
at 𝑡 = 2. This equivalence also implies
𝛱 𝑆

2 (𝜃1) = 𝛱 𝐸

2 (𝜃1).

𝛱 𝑆

At 𝑡 = 1, the S-bank’s payoff from loan sales and debt issuance is
+ 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1)(𝜃0 − 𝜃1)
1 (𝜃0) = max
𝜃1,𝐷1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
loan sales

2 (𝜃1) − 𝐷1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
payoff at 𝑡=2

+ 𝛿 (𝛱 𝑆

)

𝐷1
⏟⏟⏟
debt issuance
2 (𝜃1).

𝑠.𝑡. 𝐷1

≤ 𝛱 𝑆

𝐷1 = 𝛱 𝑆

Note that the one-period debt 𝐷1 will be paid with certainty at 𝑡 = 2
and is therefore riskless. As in the case of an all-equity bank, investors
anticipate that the bank can sell loans or issue debt at 𝑡 = 2, so the loan
price is 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1) = 𝑞2(𝜃2(𝜃1), 𝐷2(𝜃1)).3 We prove in the appendix that
𝜃1 = 𝜃0, 
In other words, the S-bank finds it optimal to refrain from selling loans
but instead borrow the maximum possible amount of short-term debt.
In contrast to the results at 𝑡 = 2, loan sales and debt issuance are no
longer equivalent at 𝑡 = 1. The bank prefers debt issuance strictly over
loan sales: it does not sell any loan but issues the maximum amount of
debt against it. The bank’s expected payoff in this case is given by

2 (𝜃1).

𝛱 𝑆

1 (𝜃0) =

𝑅2
2 ̄𝜅

𝜃2
0
2 − 𝛿

> 𝛱 𝐸

1 (𝜃0).

2 In particular, as the derivative of the objective function with respect to
𝜃2 is proportional to the derivative with respect to 𝐷2, there is a continuum
of combinations of 𝜃2 and 𝐷2 achieving the maximum. The bank is indifferent
between any pair 𝜃2 and 𝐷2 that provides the optimal exposure, that is, that
satisfies 𝜃2𝑅−𝐷2

.

3 Note that even though the optimal solution {𝜃2, 𝐷2} for a given 𝜃1 is not
unique, any solution will generate the same default probability so there is a
unique loan price.

= 𝑅
̄𝜅

𝜃1
2−𝛿

̄𝜅

Y. Hu and F. Varas

2.4.  Results summary

Due to the lack of commitment, an E-bank has incentives to sell
loans at both 𝑡 =  1 and 𝑡 =  2. These loan sales result in diminished
monitoring incentives for the E-bank. For an S-bank at 𝑡 = 2, issuing
short-term debt and selling loans are perfect substitutes. This equiv-
alence occurs because the financial market will not open again after
𝑡 =  2,  eliminating  further  opportunities  for  the  bank  to  dilute  the
investors. Consequently, the commitment problem no longer exists. In
this case, loan sales and debt issuance become equivalent methods for
the bank to reduce its skin in the game, a result that generally holds in
static settings.

The 𝑡 = 1 results for an S-bank show that the equivalence breaks
down  in  dynamic  settings.  This  happens  because  investors  at 𝑡 =  1
anticipate  that  the  financial  market  will  open  at 𝑡 =  2 so  that  the
commitment problem will emerge. The 𝑡 = 1 loan buyers are concerned
with the bank’s decisions of loan sales and debt issuance at 𝑡 = 2 and
anticipate to be diluted. In contrast, 𝑡 = 1 creditors are not concerned
with the bank’s 𝑡 =  2 decisions, as they will be fully repaid before
the bank sells loans or issues debt again. Therefore, the S-bank strictly
prefers debt issuance to loan issuance.

2 (𝜃1)  = 𝛱 𝐸

2 (𝜃1) and 𝛱 𝑆

Below, we show that all these results continue to hold in a fully-
dynamic  model.  The  comparisons 𝛱 𝑆
1 (𝜃0) >
𝛱 𝐸
1 (𝜃0) suggest that the payoff difference between an S-bank and an
E-bank  increases  as  opportunities  for  loan  sales  and  debt  issuance
grow. However, a two-period model is insufficient to fully characterize
this comparison, and extending the discrete-time model beyond two
periods becomes intractable.4 Therefore, we develop the fully-dynamic
model in continuous time, which allows for a clear characterization
of the equilibrium and associated trading dynamics. In addition, the
tractability associated with the continuous-time formulation enables us
to explore several extensions to the baseline model.

The bank’s problem, with multiple opportunities for loan sales and
debt issuance, resembles the durable-goods monopoly problem intro-
duced by Coase (1972). In our context, the bank can be viewed as the
monopolist, with claims to the entrepreneur’s project cash flows repre-
senting the durable goods. This literature demonstrates that Coasian
forces  prevent  the  monopoly  from  reaping  any  gains.  Similarly,  we
show in the continuous-time model that our E-bank derives no benefit
from its loan-selling ability. The literature also reveals that a monop-
olist can overcome the commitment problem by renting rather than
selling goods (Bulow, 1982). In our model, the short-term debt of the
S-bank resembles the leasing solution to the durable goods monopoly
problem.

3.  The model

3.1.  Agents and technology

Time is continuous and goes to infinity: 𝑡 ∈ [0, ∞). There are three
groups  of  agents:  one  entrepreneur  (she)  –  the  borrower;  one  bank;
and  investors.  All  agents  are  risk-neutral  and  have  limited  liability.
The entrepreneur starts out with cash level 𝐴, whereas the bank and
investors  have  deep  pockets.  We  assume  investors  do  not  discount
future cash flows, whereas the entrepreneur and the bank discount the
future at a rate 𝜌  > 0. Investors in our model should be interpreted
as institutional investors such as sovereign wealth funds, hedge funds,
insurance companies, and cash-rich companies.

At time 0, the entrepreneur has access to a project that requires
a  fixed  investment  size 𝐼  >  𝐴.  Thus,  she  needs  to  borrow  at  least
𝐼 − 𝐴. The project matures at a random time 𝜏, which arrives upon

4 Even in this two-period example, we are only able to obtain closed-form
solutions in the special case of 𝑝𝐻 = 1, 𝑝𝐿 = 0, 𝑏 = 0, and 𝐹 (⋅) follows the
uniform distribution.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

a Poisson event with intensity 𝜙 > 0. Define 𝛷 = 𝜙
as the effective
𝜌+𝜙
time discount the entrepreneur and the bank apply to the project’s final
cash flows. At 𝜏, the project generates the final cash flows 𝑅 in the case
of success and 0 in the case of failure. The probability of success is 𝑝𝐻
if the entrepreneur works at 𝜏, and 𝑝𝐿 = 𝑝𝐻 − 𝛥 if she shirks. Two
options of shirking are available: the high option brings private benefit
𝐵, which exceeds 𝑏, the private benefit of the low option. We assume
the project’s expected payoff is always higher if the entrepreneur works;
that is, 𝑝𝐻 𝑅 > 𝑝𝐿𝑅 + 𝐵.

3.2.  Monitoring, financial structures, and contracts

At 𝑡 =  0, the entrepreneur contracts with the bank. Banks in the
model should be broadly interpreted as any lender that is capable of
costly  reducing  the  agency  frictions.  At 𝜏,  the  project  matures,  and
the  bank  can  monitor  to  eliminate  the  high  shirking  option.  To  do
so, it needs to pay private monitoring cost ̃𝜅  > 0, where ̃𝜅 ∈ [0, ̄𝜅]
has a distribution with 𝐹 (⋅) and 𝑓 (⋅) being the cumulative distribution
function  (CDF)  and  probability  density  function  (PDF),  respectively.
The stochastic-cost assumption smooths the bank’s equilibrium mon-
itoring  decisions,  which  become  a  continuous  function  of  its  loan
retention. Stochastic costs can be interpreted as variations in legal and
enforcement costs, or simply fluctuations in the costs of hiring loan
officers.5 Fig. 3 describes the timing.

We study two financial regimes. In the first regime, the bank is all
equity financed (henceforward referred to as an E-bank) and puts its
own funds in the entrepreneur’s venture to certify it will monitor, which
then attracts investors to invest in the venture as well. One example of
this type of bank is the lead investment bank in loan syndication. Under
limited liability, no agent receives anything if the project fails. If the
project succeeds, let 𝑅𝑓 be the cash flows retained by the entrepreneur,
and 𝑅𝑜 = 𝑅 − 𝑅𝑓 be  the  scheduled  payments  to  outside  creditors,
namely, the bank and investors. For the remainder of this paper, we
also refer to 𝑅𝑜 as loans.

In  the  second  regime,  investors  do  not  directly  invest  in  the  en-
trepreneur’s project. Instead, they lend to the bank, which then lends
to the entrepreneur a collection of its own funds and the money from
investors.6 One example of this type of bank is a shadow bank, which
borrows short-term debt from lenders. The bank offers short-term debt
to investors over time (henceforward referred to as an
contracts
S-bank), where 𝐷𝑡 is the amount of debt and 𝑦𝑡 is the associated interest
rate. We model short-term debt as one with instant maturity. Debt with
instant maturity is the continuous time analogous to one-period debt in
discrete time. The only difference between an S-bank and an E-bank is
that the former can issue short-term debt dynamically.

{𝐷𝑡, 𝑦𝑡

}

Given that the entrepreneur has (weakly) the highest cost of capital
among  all  the  agents,  she  should  retain  as  little  stake  as  possible.
Therefore, in both regimes, it is optimal to let the entrepreneur retain
𝑅𝑓 = 𝑏∕𝛥,  which  guarantees  she  will  work  if  the  bank  monitors.
Therefore, 𝑅𝑜 = 𝑅 − 𝑏∕𝛥.7

5 Two alternative formulations will generate results equivalent to that of a
stochastic monitoring cost: The first is to introduce a continuous distribution
of  private  benefits,  and  the  second  one  is  to  assume  that  monitoring  is
only  effective  with  some  probability.  This  probability  is  assumed  to  vary
continuously with the bank’s monitoring effort.

6 The  money  from  investors  should  not  be  interpreted  as  FDIC-insured
deposits. Instead, it comes from investors who are sensitive to new information
regarding the bank’s underlying business. These investors put their money in
the bank in the form of short-term debt. In practice, one can interpret short-
term  debt  as  brokered  deposits,  repurchase  agreements,  wholesale  lending,
and commercial papers. More broadly, they can be interpreted as ‘‘money-
market preferred stock’’, which carries a floating dividend rate that is reset
periodically  to  maintain  the  stock’s  market  value  at  par.  The  distinction
between equity and debt is unimportant in our setup when cash flows are
binary, with one realization being zero. As we show below, the crucial feature
is that current information about the bank promptly becomes impounded into
the rate it pays to capital suppliers.

4 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

3.3.  Trading and pricing in the financial market

4.  Equilibrium

Fig. 3. Timing.

A competitive financial market is open after time 0 in which loans
can be traded.8 We normalize the total share of loans outstanding to one
and use 𝜃𝑡 to denote the bank’s retention at time 𝑡. In our model, 𝜃𝑡 will
be the payoff-relevant state variable in the Markov perfect equilibrium
introduced later. Sometimes 𝜃𝑡 is also referred to as the bank’s skin
in the game, which is publicly observable. Before trading starts, the
bank’s initial retention is 𝜃0 = 1 in both regimes. We consider trading
strategies  that  admit  both  smooth  and  atomistic  trading,  as  well  as
mixed strategies over the time of atomistic trades. A Markov trading
strategy is defined as (𝜃𝑡)𝑡≥0 being a Markov process.

The price of loans depends on whether the entrepreneur works or
shirks, which in turn depends on the probability of bank monitoring
and, therefore, its net exposure. Let (𝜃𝑡, 𝐷𝑡) = (𝜃 , 𝐷). Conditional on the
project maturing, let 𝑝 (𝜃 , 𝐷) be the equilibrium probability of success;
investors of the loan receive
𝑑 (𝜃 , 𝐷) = 𝑝 (𝜃 , 𝐷) 𝑅𝑜
per share. Let 𝑞 (𝜃 , 𝐷) be the price of the loan per share. In a competitive
financial market, the price is given by the expected present value:
𝑞 (𝜃 , 𝐷) = E

[
𝑑 (𝜃𝜏 , 𝐷𝜏

𝜃𝑡 = 𝜃 , 𝐷𝑡 = 𝐷

(1)

(2)

]

,

) |
|
|

}

𝑡≤𝑠≤𝜏 .

where the expectation operator is taken with respect to the equilibrium
path of

{𝜃𝑠, 𝐷𝑠

The probability of success 𝑝 (𝜃 , 𝐷) differs in the two regimes. Let 𝜅
be the realization of the stochastic monitoring cost ̃𝜅 at 𝜏. An E-bank
has 𝐷 = 0, and with retention 𝜃, it chooses to monitor if and only if
𝑝𝐻 𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝜅 ≥ 𝑝𝐿𝜃 𝑅𝑜 ⇒ 𝜅 ≤ 𝜅𝐸 ∶= 𝛥𝑅𝑜𝜃 ,
where 𝛥 ∶= 𝑝𝐻 − 𝑝𝐿. An S-bank with retention 𝜃 and short-term debt 𝐷
monitors if and only if
𝑝𝐻 (𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷) − 𝜅 ≥ 𝑝𝐿(𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷) ⇒ 𝜅 ≤ 𝜅𝑆 ∶= 𝛥 (𝑅𝑜𝜃 − 𝐷) .
From  now  on,  we  use  subscripts 𝐸 and 𝑆 to  differentiate  the  two
regimes.

(3)

(4)

Assumption 1 restricts the (expected) monitoring cost to be suffi-

ciently low.

Assumption 1.
𝛥𝑅−𝑏

𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅) ≤ 𝛷 𝐹 (𝛥𝑅 − 𝑏) (𝛥𝑅 − 𝑏) − (1 − 𝛷) 𝑝𝐿 (𝛥𝑅 − 𝑏) .

∫

0

This assumption leads to the following result. If the bank always
≡ 1, ∀𝑡 ≤ 𝜏), the bank’s payoff exceeds
retains the entire loan (i.e., 𝜃𝑡
that if it immediately sells the entire loan and never monitors. If this
assumption is violated, the expected monitoring cost will be too high,
so the bank never monitors in equilibrium.

7 The  entrepreneur  can  also  borrow  directly  from  investors,  but  the

borrowing capacity is (weakly) lower.

8 We  assume  the  entrepreneur’s  retention 𝑅𝑓 is  not  tradable,  or  equiv-
alently,  the  entrepreneur  can  commit  to  holding  onto 𝑅𝑓 on  the  balance
sheet.

Section 4.1 examines the equilibrium of an equity-funded bank (E-
bank).  Our  analysis  shows  that  due  to  a  commitment  problem,  the
E-bank  gradually  sells  its  loans,  resulting  in  diminished  monitoring
incentives.  This  exercise  serves  as  a  useful  benchmark.  In  addition,
as  we  will  show  in  Section 5.3,  a  bank  relying  on  long-term  debt
behaves similarly to an E-bank. Recent literature suggests that deposits,
despite  their  demandable  nature,  share  more  similarities  with  long-
term  debt  (Drechsler  et  al., 2021).  In  light  of  the  recent  regional
banking  crisis,  the  FDIC  has  proposed  to  impose  a  long-term  debt
requirement for certain insured depository institutions.9 Our findings
indicate that such a reform could exacerbate the commitment problem
and  further  reduce  the  bank’s  monitoring  incentives.  Furthermore,
there  are  episodes  where  banks’  access  to  short-term  debt  markets
are  significantly  impaired,  with  the  most  recent  example  being  the
financial  crisis  (Gorton  et  al., 2020).  Our  analysis  of  the  all-equity
financed bank scenario can provide insights into bank behavior during
such  periods  of  stress  when  short-term  funding  becomes  distressed.
Section 4.2 explores the equilibrium of a bank funded by short-term
debt (S-bank). We demonstrate that the ability to issue short-term debt
serves as a disciplining mechanism, mitigating the bank’s commitment
problem.

4.1.  E-bank equilibrium

Given that 𝐷 ≡ 0, we write all relevant valuation and prices as
functions of 𝜃. If the project matures at time 𝑡, the bank receives loan
payments net of the monitoring cost

𝜅𝐸

𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅) ,

𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝑝𝐸 (𝜃) 𝑅𝑜𝜃 − ∫
0
where the project succeeds with probability
) 𝛥,
𝑝𝐸 (𝜃) ∶= 𝑝𝐿 + 𝐹 (𝜅𝐸
upon which the bank receives 𝑅𝑜𝜃. Following the Envelope Theorem,
it is easily shown that

(5)

(6)

𝜋′
𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝑝𝐸 (𝜃)𝑅𝑜 +

𝜕 𝑝𝐸 (𝜃)
𝜕 𝜃

𝜕 𝜅𝐸
𝑅𝑜𝜃 − 𝜅𝐸 𝑓 (𝜅𝐸 )
𝜕 𝜃
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
=0

= 𝑑𝐸 (𝜃).

(7)

Let 𝐺 (𝜃) be the bank’s cumulative trading gains. In the case of atomistic
trading,  the  bank’s  holding  jumps  from 𝜃 to 𝜃+ and  the  associated
trading gain is 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃) = 𝑞 (𝜃+) (𝜃 − 𝜃+)
. Note that trading is settled at a
price 𝑞 (𝜃+)
to reflect the price impact. In the case of continuous trad-
ing, 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃) = −𝑞 (𝜃) ̇𝜃 𝑑 𝑡. The bank maximizes the sum of its payoff upon
and  the  cumulative  trading
the  project’s  maturation 𝑒−𝜌(𝜏−𝑡)𝜋𝐸
)
gains ∫ 𝜏
. Because 𝜏 follows the exponential distribution,
the bank’s problem can be equivalently written as

0 𝑒−𝜌(𝑠−𝑡)𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃𝑠

(𝜃𝜏

)

E

max
{𝜃𝑡}𝑡≥0

∞

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

∫

0

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡

(

𝜙𝜋𝐸

(𝜃𝑡

) 𝑑 𝑡 + 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃𝑡

,

)⎤
)
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

(8)

9 https://www.fdic.gov/news/financial-institution-letters/2023/fil23045.

html

5 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

where the expectation operator also allows for mixed strategies in
Let 𝑉𝐸 be the entrepreneur’s expected payoff:
{
𝑉𝐸 = E

1{𝜅≤𝜅𝐸 }𝑝𝐻 𝑅𝑓 + 1{𝜅 >𝜅𝐸 }(𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑓 + 𝐵)

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝜙

𝑑 𝑡

}

∞

]

[

.

∫
0

{𝜃𝑡

}
.

(9)

If the realized monitoring cost is lower than the threshold 𝜅𝐸 defined in
(3), the bank monitors, and the entrepreneur receives 𝑝𝐻 𝑅𝑓 in expecta-
tion. Otherwise, the bank chooses not to monitor, and the entrepreneur
receives the expected return 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑓 together with the private benefits 𝐵.
We consider a Markov perfect equilibrium in which the state vari-

able is the bank’s retention 𝜃, henceforth, the E-bank equilibrium.10

Definition 1. An E-bank equilibrium is a Markov perfect equilibrium
consisting of a price function 𝑞𝐸 ∶ [0, 1] → R
+ and a trading strategy
(𝜃𝑡)𝑡≥0 that satisfy the following:

1. Given 𝜃0 ∈  [0, 1], (𝜃𝑡)𝑡≥0 is  a  Markov  trading  strategy  that

maximizes (8).

2. For all 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1], the price 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) satisfies the break-even condi-

tion (2).

In general, the bank can trade loans smoothly or atomistically. We
show  both  types  of  trading  can  occur  in  equilibrium.  Let 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃) be
the  bank’s  value  function  with  retention 𝜃.11 In  the  smooth-trading
region, 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃) satisfies the following Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB)
equation:

[
𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) − 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃)

]

[

]
𝐸 (𝜃) − 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃)

𝛱 ′

+ ̇𝜃

.

(10)

𝜌𝛱𝐸 (𝜃) = max

̇𝜃

𝜙

Whereas the left-hand side stands for the bank’s required return, the
first term on the right-hand side represents the event of the project
maturing, in which case the bank receives 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) defined in (5). The
second  term  captures  the  overall  benefit  of  trading,  which  includes
the change to the bank’s continuation value and the trading gain. A
necessary condition for smooth trading is
𝛱 ′

(11)

𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) ,

so that the bank is indifferent between trading or not: the per-share
trading gain 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) is offset by the drop in the bank’s continuation value
𝐸 (𝜃). Substituting the indifference condition (11) into (10), we get
𝛱 ′
that in the region of smooth trading,

𝛱𝐸 (𝜃) =

𝜙
𝜌 + 𝜙

𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) .

(12)

Given that 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) is also the bank’s continuation value if it never sells
any loan until the project matures, (12) implies that in equilibrium,
the  bank  does  not  benefit  from  its  ability  to  trade  these  loans  in
the financial market at all. The observation that lack of commitment
fully offsets the trading gains has been noted in previous models on
bargaining (Fuchs and Skrzypacz, 2010; Daley and Green, 2020) and
in other corporate finance settings (DeMarzo and Urošević (2006) in
trading by a large shareholder, and DeMarzo and He (2021) in leverage
dynamics).

Even though the bank’s equilibrium payoff is identical to if it always
retained the entire loan, this does not imply the bank will never trade
loans on the equilibrium path. In fact, the price of loans if the bank
followed  a  strict  no-trade  strategy  would  be  too  high,  incentivizing

}

{𝜃𝑡

is not restricted to the class of Markov processes, one may construct
10 If
equilibria  that  are  close  to  the  commitment  solution.  In  the  context  of  a
durable-goods monopoly, Ausubel and Deneckere (1989) show that in the no-
gap case, non-Markov equilibria exist in which the seller can achieve payoffs
close to the commitment solution. The logic behind the construction is similar
to the one in the folk theorem for repeated games. The no-gap case corresponds
to the version of our model under 𝑝𝐿 = 0. At 𝜃 = 0, the marginal valuation of
investors coincides with the bank’s under 𝑝𝐿 = 0.
11 An E-bank does not issue debt, so there is no distinction between the bank
value and the equity value.

the  bank  to  sell.  The  bank  sells  loans  for  two  reasons:  First,  due
to  its  higher  cost  of  capital,  the  bank’s  marginal  valuation  is  below
investors’, making it the inefficient holder of the loan. Selling a small
loan  fraction  only  slightly  reduces  monitoring  incentives  while  the
initial price impact is minimal, incentivizing some sales. Second, after
the initial sale, the bank is willing to sell more because the price impact
only accrues to its remaining retention stake, which gets smaller. We
characterize the bank’s equilibrium trading strategy, which comes from
the  determination  of  the  equilibrium  loan  prices.  Because  investors
do  not  discount  future  cash  flows, 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) must  satisfy  the  investors’
zero-profit equation whenever the bank trades smoothly:

[
0 = 𝜙

]
𝑑𝐸 (𝜃) − 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃)

+ ̇𝜃 𝑞′

𝐸 (𝜃) .

(13)

[

]
𝑑𝐸 (𝜃)−𝑞𝐸 (𝜃)

The left-hand side is the investors’ required rate return, which is zero.
stands for the event of project
On the right-hand side, 𝜙
maturing, in which case investors receive 𝑑𝐸 (𝜃) per share, whereas the
last term is the change in the loan price due to trading.12 Combining
(11), (12), and (13), and using the relation 𝑑𝐸 (𝜃)  = 𝜋′
𝐸 (𝜃), one can
derive the following equilibrium trading strategies:

̇𝜃 = −𝜙

𝐸 (𝜃)

(1 − 𝛷) 𝜋′
𝛷 𝜋′′
𝐸 (𝜃)

< 0.

(14)

In the smooth-trading region, the bank sells loans over time and its
retention declines continuously. Intuitively, the equilibrium loan price
is forward-looking and therefore takes into account the bank’s monitor-
ing decisions in the future. To satisfy the bank’s indifference condition,
the equilibrium price of the loan cannot be too high. The only trading
strategy consistent with this price requires the bank to sell its loans
over time.

)
, and 𝜃 𝑞𝐸 (0) > 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) if and only if 𝜃 < 𝜃∗.

So far, we have only considered the case of smooth trading. Mean-
while, the bank also has the option to sell an atom of loans. In general,
the bank can sell either a fraction or all the remaining loans. Lemma 4
in the appendix proves the bank will never sell a fraction. This result
follows the intuition in standard Coasian dynamic models. Atomistic
trading  arises  whenever  the  bank  has  strict  incentives  to  sell.  If  so,
it prefers to sell as fast as possible. Given this result, we are left to
check when the bank decides to sell off all the remaining loans at a
price 𝑞𝐸 (0), where 𝑞𝐸 (0) = 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜 is the per-share loan price without
monitoring. We show that a unique 𝜃∗ exists below which the bank
finds it optimal to sell off all the remaining loans; that is, 𝜃∗𝑞𝐸 (0) =
𝛷 𝜋𝐸

(𝜃∗
Next, we derive the trading strategy at 𝜃 = 𝜃∗. On the one hand,
the  bank  cannot  hold  onto  the  remaining  loans  forever  because  the
resulting loan price will be too high to induce the bank to sell. On
the  other  hand,  the  bank  cannot  sell  smoothly  either;  if  so,  shortly
afterward, 𝜃 will drop below 𝜃∗, and the bank will have strict incentives
to sell off the rest of the loan. Furthermore, it cannot be that the bank
sells off all the remaining loan immediately after 𝜃𝑡 reaches 𝜃∗, because
if so, the price of the loan will experience a deterministic downward
jump, inconsistent with Eq. (2). The only (stationary) trading strategy
at 𝜃∗ consistent with (2) is for the bank to adopt a mixed strategy:13
the bank sells off all its remaining loans at time 𝜈, which arrives upon
a Poisson event at intensity 𝜆 that satisfies
𝑞𝐸 (𝜃∗) = E [𝑑𝐸 (𝜃𝜏 )|𝜃𝑡 = 𝜃∗

𝑑𝐸 (0) +

𝑑𝐸 (𝜃∗).

(15)

=

]

𝜙
𝜙 + 𝜆

𝜆
𝜙 + 𝜆

Proposition  1 summarizes  the  previous  discussion  and  describes
the equilibrium outcome. The formal proof requires verification that
the bank’s trading strategy is optimal, which is supplemented in the
appendix using results from the theory of optimal control in stratified
domains.14

12 The terms without subscripts 𝑐 have been defined in Eqs. (1) and (2).
13 The  delay  can  also  be  deterministic,  but  the  equilibrium  is  no  longer
within the class of a Markov perfect equilibrium. The equilibrium would also
depend on the time since the bank’s retention reached 𝜃∗. The price 𝑞𝑡 would
not be stationary, and it would depend on the trading history before time 𝑡.

6 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Proposition 1 (E-bank Equilibrium). A unique E-bank equilibrium exists.
With 𝜃0 = 1, the bank sells its loans smoothly at a rate given by Eq. (14)
, after which it sells off its remaining loans
until 𝑇∗ ∶= inf
at some Poisson rate 𝜆 that satisfies (15). The equilibrium loan price is

{𝑡 > 0 ∶ 𝜃𝑡 = 𝜃∗

}

𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) =

)
(
𝑝𝐿 + 𝐹 (𝛥𝑅𝑜𝜃) 𝛥
𝛷
(
𝐹 (𝛥𝑅𝑜𝜃∗
𝑝𝐿 + 𝜙
𝜆+𝜙
𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜

𝑅𝑜
)
) 𝛥

𝑅𝑜

𝜃 > 𝜃∗
𝜃 = 𝜃∗
𝜃 < 𝜃∗.

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

(16)

If 𝛱𝐸 (1) < 𝐼 − 𝐴, the entrepreneur cannot borrow enough to invest at 𝑡 = 0.

4.2.  S-bank equilibrium

Given this result, we can suppress the problem’s dependence on 𝐷𝑡
and  use 𝜃𝑡 as  the  state  variable.  Note  that  in (21),  debt  issuance  is
bounded by the endogenous constraint 𝐷 ≤ 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃), which arises from
the bank’s limited liability.16 In (22), the left-hand side 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) includes
𝐸 (𝜃 , 𝐷), the value to the bank’s equity holders, and 𝐷, the value of
short-term debt. One implication of (22) is that even though the bank’s
equity holders decide its trading strategy, maximizing the bank’s equity
value is equivalent to maximizing the total bank value, because debt 𝐷
is continuously repriced.

We use 𝑉𝑆 to denote the entrepreneur’s expected payoff:
}

{

∞

[

1{𝜅≤𝜅𝑆 }𝑝𝐻 𝑅𝑓 + 1{𝜅 >𝜅𝑆 }(𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑓 + 𝐵)

𝑉𝑆 = E

∫
0

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝜙

]

.

𝑑 𝑡

Let 𝐷𝑡 = 𝐷 be the outstanding debt of an S-bank at time 𝑡. If the
project matures, the bank’s equity holders receive loan payments net
of debt repayments and monitoring cost:

The expression differs from (9) in that the threshold cost for monitoring
is replaced by 𝜅𝑆 . We look for a Markov perfect equilibrium in state
variable 𝜃𝑡, henceforth, the S-bank equilibrium.

̂𝜋𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) = ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷)

(𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷)

𝜅𝑆

− ∫

0

𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅) ,

(17)

(18)

) 𝛥,

where the project succeeds with probability
̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) ∶= 𝑝𝐿 + 𝐹 (𝜅𝑆
upon which the bank’s equity holder receives max{𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷 , 0}. Besides
trading gains, an S-bank also receives income from issuing short-term
debt. In particular, the bank’s net income from debt issuance at time 𝑡
is 𝑑 𝐷𝑡 − 𝑦𝑡𝐷𝑡𝑑 𝑡, where
𝑦𝑡 = ̂𝑦 (𝜃 , 𝐷) = 𝜙 (
compensates the default risk borne by creditors.15 The bank trades loans
and issues short-term debt to maximize the expected payoff upon the
project maturing, together with the cash flows from short-term debt
issuance and trading gains 𝑑 𝐺(𝜃𝑡); that is,
𝐸(𝜃 , 𝐷) =  max
{𝜃𝑡, 𝐷𝑡}
∞

)
1 − ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷)

(19)

(

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡

𝜙 ̂𝜋𝑆

(𝜃𝑡, 𝐷𝑡

) 𝑑 𝑡+ [𝑑 𝐷𝑡 − ̂𝑦 (𝜃𝑡, 𝐷𝑡

) 𝐷𝑡𝑑 𝑡] + 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃𝑡

)]
)

×E

[
∫

0

The choice of 𝐷𝑡 in (20) is restricted by the bank’s limited liability,
which  imposes  an  issuance  constraint  as  illustrated  below  in (21).
Lemma 1 shows that we can solve short-term debt issuance and loan
trading separately.

(20)

Lemma 1. The maximization problem (20) is equivalent to solving

{

[

𝜙

𝜅𝑆

̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷)𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − ∫

0

]
𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅)

}

+ 𝜌𝐷

,

(21)

𝜙𝜋𝑆 (𝜃) ∶=  max

𝐷≤𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

where

𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝐸(𝜃 , 𝐷) + 𝐷

∞

E

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡(
[

𝜙𝜋𝑆 (𝜃𝑡)𝑑 𝑡 + 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃𝑡

))

|𝜃0 = 𝜃 , 𝐷0 = 𝐷

]

.

(22)

=  max

(𝜃𝑡)𝑡≥0 ∫

0

Definition 2. An S-Bank Equilibrium is a Markov perfect equilibrium
consisting of a price function 𝑞𝑆 ∶ [0, 1] → R
+, a trading strategy (𝜃𝑡)𝑡≥0,
a debt-issuance policy 𝐷∗ ∶ [0, 1] → 𝐑+, and the interest-rate function
𝑦 ∶ [0, 1] → 𝐑+ that satisfy the following:

1. For all 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1], the debt-issuance policy 𝐷∗(𝜃) solves (21).
2. Given 𝜃0 = 1, (𝜃𝑡)𝑡≥0 is Markov trading strategy that maximizes

(22).

3. For all 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1], the price 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃) satisfies the break-even condi-

tion (2).

4. For all 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1], the interest rate 𝑦 (𝜃) ∶= ̂𝑦 (𝜃 , 𝐷∗(𝜃)) satisfies

(19).

The analysis of the S-bank equilibrium has two steps: debt issuance

and loan trading.

4.2.1.  Short-term debt issuance

Dividing both sides of (21) by 𝜌 + 𝜙, we can define

.

(𝐷 , 𝜃) ∶= 𝛷 𝜋𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝛷

[

̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) 𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − ∫

𝜅𝑆

0

]
𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅)

+ (1 − 𝛷) 𝐷 . (23)

The term in the bracket is the net payoff to the bank and its creditors:
with probability ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷), the project succeeds so that they receive 𝜃 𝑅𝑜;
∫ 𝜅𝑆
𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅) is the expected monitoring cost. The last term in (23) is the
0
value from issuing debt. An increase in 𝐷 reduces the bank’s monitoring
incentive and therefore reduces the first term. Meanwhile, an increase
in 𝐷 also reduces the bank’s funding cost and therefore increases the
last term. The optimal 𝐷 balances the two effects.

We introduce the following assumption, whose only role is to guar-
antee  that  for  all  retention  levels 𝜃,  the  S-bank’s  payoff  is  globally
concave in the amount of short-term debt issuance.

Assumption 2. The distribution function 𝑓 ( ̃𝜅) satisfies the following
for ∀𝜅 ∈ [0, ̄𝜅]

1. −𝛷 [(𝑝𝐿 + 𝐹 (𝜅)𝛥) 𝑓 (𝜅) + 𝑓 2 (𝜅) 𝛥2𝐷] < 𝛥𝑓 ′ (𝜅) 𝐷  < 𝑓 (𝜅) , ∀𝐷 ∈

[0, 𝑝𝐻 𝑅𝑜𝜃], ∀𝜃 ∈ [0, 1].
𝑓 2 < 𝛷
𝛥.

1−𝛷

2. 𝑓 ′

14 Due to the discontinuity in the price function 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃), the HJB Eq. (10)
is  discontinuous  at 𝜃∗.  This  technical  problem  can  be  sidestepped  using
(discontinuous) viscosity solution methods.
15 A heuristic derivation of (19) goes as follows. The approximate probability
that the project matures over a period of length 𝑑 𝑡 is 𝜙𝑑 𝑡, and the default
probability is 1 − ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃𝑡, 𝐷𝑡) within this period. Given there is zero recovery
upon default, the promised payoff to creditors 1 + 𝑦𝑡𝑑 𝑡 needs to satisfy the
break-even condition
1 = (1 − 𝜙𝑑 𝑡)(1 + 𝑦𝑑 𝑡) + ̂𝑝𝑆 𝜙𝑑 𝑡(1 + 𝑦𝑑 𝑡) + (1 − ̂𝑝𝑆 )𝜙𝑑 𝑡 × 0.
The expression for 𝑦𝑡 follows by ignoring higher-order terms.

Assumption 2 is sufficient but not necessary for concavity. It simpli-
fies the analysis by allowing us to rely on the first-order condition to
characterize the short-term debt issuance policy.17 It holds for various
probability  distributions,  including  the  uniform  distribution  and  the

16 Here, 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) is the bank’s value function given its retention 𝜃, which im-
plicitly assumes debt issuance has been chosen at the optimal level. Therefore,
this constraint involves a fixed point for the value function 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃). Hu et al.
(2021) use the same technique to reduce the problem’s dimensions. A similar
problem is analyzed in Abel (2018).

7 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

log(1 + 𝛷 𝛥).18

truncated exponential distribution where the rate parameter is bounded
above by 1
̄𝜅

Under Assumption 2, (𝐷 , 𝜃) is concave in 𝐷. Meanwhile, the bank’s
equity holders’ limited liability constraint requires that for any 𝜃, 𝐷 ≤
𝛱𝑆 (𝜃). We have the following result.

Lemma 2.
Let 𝐷∗ (𝜃) be the optimal choice of short-term debt. There
exists a threshold 𝜃𝐷 where 𝐷∗ (𝜃) = 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) if 𝜃 ≤ 𝜃𝐷. If 𝜃  >  𝜃𝐷, then
𝐷∗ (𝜃) < 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃), and the bank finances the remaining loan 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝐷∗ (𝜃)
using its own capital.

According  to Lemma  2,  the  bank  finances  the  loan  using  both
short-term debt and bank capital when 𝜃 is relatively high. When 𝜃
is relatively low, the loan is only financed via short-term debt. This
result  implies  that  higher  levels  of  bank  capital  are  associated  with
more retention and monitoring.

4.2.2.  Trading

Next,  we  turn  to  the  maximization  problem (22) and  study  how
an  S-bank  trades  its  loans  over  time.  Following  similar  steps  in  the
E-bank  equilibrium,  the  term ̇𝜃 (𝛱 ′
must  vanish  in  the
smooth-trading region, so the bank’s continuation value satisfies the
HJB:

𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃)

)

𝜌𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝜙

[

]
𝜋𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Proposition 2 (S-bank Equilibrium). There is a unique S-bank equilib-
rium:

• For all 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1), there exists a unique optimal debt issuance policy

𝐷∗(𝜃), where 𝐷∗(𝜃) < 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) if and only if 𝜃 > 𝜃𝐷.

• For all 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1], the interest rate is 𝑦 (𝜃) = 𝜙 (

1 − 𝑝𝐿 − 𝐹 (𝛥 (𝑅𝑜𝜃−

𝐷∗(𝜃)

)) 𝛥)
.

• For 𝜃 ∈ [𝜃†, 1), the bank buys loans following (27) until 𝜃𝑡 reaches
one. For 𝜃 ∈  (0, 𝜃†), the bank immediately sells all the remaining
loans.

• The equilibrium loan price is
𝛷 𝜋′
𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜

𝜃 ≥ 𝜃†
𝜃 < 𝜃†,

𝑞𝑆 (𝜃) =

𝑆 (𝜃)

{

(28)

where 𝜋′

𝑆 (𝜃) is defined in (26).

The bank initially lends 𝛱𝑆 (1). On the equilibrium path, the bank retains
𝜃 = 1 until the project matures, and issues short-term debt 𝐷 = 𝐷∗(1).

Proposition 2 shows that an S-bank finds it optimal to retain the
loan and issues short-term debt against it. In other words, the bank
prefers issuing short-term debt against the loan over directly selling
it. The reason is that investors would increase the interest rate on the
short-term debt had the bank reduced its retention.

,

(24)

5.  Equilibria comparison, mechanism, and discussion

and  the  equilibrium  price  is  determined  by  the  indifference  condi-
𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃). The trading strategy follows from the investors’
tion 𝛱 ′
zero-profit condition that is similar to (13):
]
𝑆 (𝜃) ⟹ ̇𝜃 = −𝜙
𝑑𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃)

[
0 = 𝜙

+ ̇𝜃 𝑞′

(25)

.

𝑑𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃)
𝑞′
𝑆 (𝜃)

Applying the Envelope Theorem in Milgrom and Segal (2002), we

get

𝜋′
𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝑑𝑆 (𝜃) +

[

𝑓 (𝜅𝑆

]

𝛥

) 𝜕 𝜅𝑆
𝜕 𝜃

𝐷∗(𝜃) + 𝑧(𝜃)𝛱 ′

𝑆 (𝜃),

(26)

where 𝑧(𝜃) is the Lagrange multiplier of the debt-issuance constraint
𝐷 ≤ 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃).19 The equilibrium trading rate becomes

̇𝜃 = 𝜙

(1 − 𝛷)(1 − 𝑝 (𝜃))𝑅𝑜 + 𝛷 𝑧(𝜃)

𝛷 𝜋′′

𝑆 (𝜃)

(𝛱 ′

𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑅𝑜

)

.

(27)

Lemma 3.
issuance policy 𝐷 (𝜃) = 𝐷∗ (𝜃).

For any 𝜃,

̇𝜃  > 0 holds under the optimal short-term debt

To  complete  the  characterization  of  the  equilibrium,  we  need  to
consider the case in which the bank trades an atom of loans. Similar to
the E-bank equilibrium, we can show a unique 𝜃† exists such that the
bank sells off all the remaining loans at a price 𝑞 (0) = 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜 if 𝜃 < 𝜃†.
However, when 𝜃 = 𝜃†, unlike in the E-bank equilibrium, the mixed
strategy is no longer needed. Instead, the bank buys the loan smoothly
so that 𝜃 will increase towards 𝜃 = 1. Therefore, the price of the loan
𝑆 (𝜃†).20 The following proposition describes the
satisfies 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃†)  = 𝛷 𝜋′
results.

17 All the results go through as long as the first-order condition (together
with  the  respective  complementary  slackness  condition)  is  necessary  and
sufficient for the optimality of the short-term debt issuance policy. When this is
not the case, the optimal short-term debt issuance policy may be discontinuous
as a function of retention 𝜃.
18 Note  that  when 𝑓 ′ < 0,  the  only  condition  that  we  need  to
check  is −𝛷 [(𝑝𝐿 + 𝐹 (𝜅𝑆 )𝛥) 𝑓 (𝜅) + 𝑓 2 (𝜅) 𝛥2𝐷] <  𝛥𝑓 ′ (𝜅) 𝐷,  which  becomes
> 𝛥𝛽 𝐷. A sufficient condition is that 𝛷 𝑝𝐿 >
𝛷
1−𝑒−𝛽 ̄𝜅 . It suffices to

+ 𝛽 𝑒−𝛽 𝜅
1−𝑒−𝛽 ̄𝜅 𝛥2𝐷
, which is necessarily satisfied if 1 < 𝛷 𝛥 𝑒−𝛽 𝜅

𝛥𝐷 𝛽
check the condition at 𝜅 = ̄𝜅, which requires that 𝛽 < 1
log (1 + 𝛷 𝛥)..
̄𝜅
19 The expression for 𝑧(𝜃) is available in Eq. (C.1) of the appendix.

𝑝𝐿 + 1−𝑒−𝛽 𝜅
)
1−𝑒−𝛽 ̄𝜅 𝛥
1 − 𝛷 𝛥 𝑒−𝛽 𝜅
1−𝑒−𝛽 ̄𝜅

[(

]

]

[

5.1.  Comparing retention and monitoring

Fig. 4 compares the bank’s loan retention and the implied monitor-
ing intensity after a loan is originated. In both panels, the blue lines
describe the E-bank equilibrium, whereas the red ones describe the S-
bank equilibrium. In the E-bank equilibrium, the bank first sells the
loan smoothly. After 𝜃𝑡 reaches 𝜃∗, the bank sells off all the remaining
loans at time 𝜈, following a stochastic delay. By contrast, an S-bank
starts with 𝜃0 = 1 and always retains the loan until the project matures.
The different patterns in retention also imply different probabili-
ties of monitoring. Specifically, a comparison between the threshold
monitoring costs 𝜅𝐸 in (3) and 𝜅𝑆 in (4) shows that under the same
level  of  retention 𝜃,  an  S-bank  monitors  less  due  to  its  outstanding
debt 𝐷. Meanwhile, an S-bank could have higher retention 𝜃, so the
overall  comparison  of  monitoring  is  ambiguous.  The  right  panel  of
)
.  A  higher
Fig.  4 plots  the  monitoring  threshold 𝜅𝐸
threshold is associated with a higher probability of monitoring if the
project matures at time 𝑡. Early on, 𝜅𝐸 is higher, but eventually, 𝜅𝐸
falls below 𝜅𝑆 . Our model thus predicts that a E-bank conducts more
monitoring if the loan matures early, whereas an S-bank conducts more
monitoring if the loan matures late.

and 𝜅𝑆

(𝜃𝑡

(𝜃𝑡

)

To  understand  the  different  retention  patterns  between  the  two
structures, we compare the marginal value of retention to the bank’s
payoff  in  the  smooth  trading  region.  Given 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃)  = 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) and
𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝛷 𝜋𝑆 (𝜃), we directly compare 𝜋′
𝑆 (𝜃). In the E-bank
𝐸 (𝜃) with 𝜋′
𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝑑𝐸 (𝜃), so the marginal value equals ex-
equilibrium, (7) shows 𝜋′
pected cash flows per share of the loan. However, 𝛷 𝜋′
𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝛷 𝑑𝐸 (𝜃) falls
below investors’ valuation (without trade) 𝑑𝐸 (𝜃), due to discount rate
differences, making the bank an inefficient loan holder and creating
gains from trade. While all creditors benefit from monitoring, the bank
alone bears the cost. This monitoring externality implies when selling,
the  bank  does  not  internalize  the  reduced  the  value  of  others’  loan
stakes, leading to suboptimal monitoring over time under an E-bank.

20 In  both  regimes,  the  price  function 𝑞(𝜃) is  discontinuous.  Whereas  in
the  E-bank  equilibrium,  the  bank  trades  towards  the  discontinuity  point
̇𝜃(𝜃∗+) < 0), in the S-bank equilibrium, the bank trades away from the
(i.e.,
discontinuity point (i.e.,
̇𝜃(𝜃†+) > 0). The construction of the equilibrium (and
the analysis of the bank’s optimal control problem) is simpler in this latter
case because the trajectory of 𝜃𝑡 does not ‘‘see’’ the discontinuity.

8 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Fig. 4. Retention and Monitoring Dynamics.

]

) 𝜕 𝜅𝑆
𝜕 𝜃
) 𝜕 𝜅𝑆
𝜕 𝜃

In  the  S-bank  equilibrium, (26) shows  an  increase  in 𝜃 leads  to
two additional benefits. The first benefit is characterized by the term
[
𝑓 (𝜅𝑆
𝐷∗, which shows the marginal effect of retention 𝜃 on
𝛥
𝑓 (𝜅𝑆
𝛥, the incremental probability that debt will be repaid. As
a result, more retention enables the bank to issue cheaper debt. The
𝑆 (𝜃), where 𝑧(𝜃) > 0 if
second benefit is captured by the last term 𝑧(𝜃)𝛱 ′
𝐷∗ (𝜃) = 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃). Here, an increase in 𝜃 relaxes the constraint on debt
issuance  so  that  the  bank  can  issue more debt.  Note  that Lemma  3
continues to hold even if this second benefit disappears, that is, even if
𝑧(𝜃) = 0 so that the debt-issuance constraint is slack. The two additional
benefits associated with an increase in 𝜃 lead to the different result in
the S-bank equilibrium when compared to the E-bank equilibrium. The
bank wants to increase its retention because more retention enables an
S-bank to issue cheaper and more short-term debt. The role of short-
term debt is to help the bank internalize the monitoring externality.
Indeed, the interest rate of short-term debt reflects the probability of
monitoring so that the bank and its creditors share both the benefits and
costs of monitoring. In other words, short-term debt creates a market
for the services offered by the bank, that is, monitoring, to be fairly
priced and constantly repriced.

5.2.  A linear–quadratic example

This subsection presents a Linear–Quadratic example that allows us
to obtain closed-form solutions for the initial payoffs. In particular, we
specialize the analysis to the case in which the probability of success
is 𝑝𝐿 = 0 if the entrepreneur shirks and the monitoring cost ̃𝜅 follows
the uniform distribution on [0, ̄𝜅]. In addition, we assume ̄𝜅 ≥ 𝛷 𝛥2𝑅𝑜,
which guarantees the bank never monitors with probability one. Under
these parameters, the bank will never sell off all its loans atomistically
(that is, 𝜃∗ = 0 and 𝑇∗ → ∞ in the E-bank equilibrium), because the
resulting price will be zero. This example is solved following steps in
Section 4. We only describe the main results here, leaving the details
to the appendix.

With an E-bank, the amount that the entrepreneur can borrow at

𝑡 = 0 and her payoff from the project maturing are
)2

𝐿𝐸 = 𝛱𝐸 (1) =

𝛷
2 ̄𝜅
𝛷
2 − 𝛷

(𝛥𝑅𝑜
𝛥𝑅𝑜
̄𝜅

𝑉𝐸 (1) = 𝛷 𝐵 −

(𝐵 − 𝑏) .

With  an  S-bank,  the  uniform  distribution  leads  to  a  result  that  the
optimal  amount  of  short-term  debt  without  the  issuance  constraint
𝐷 ≤ 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) is a constant 1−𝛷
𝛷
{
√
( ̄𝜅
𝛥2

𝛥2 . The optimal debt issuance is

𝐷∗(𝜃) = min

1 − 𝛷
𝛷

(𝑅𝑜𝜃)2

̄𝜅
𝛥2

̄𝜅
𝛥2

}

)2

+

−

̄𝜅

,

.

The constraint binds at 𝜃 =  1 if and only if 𝛷  <

( ̄𝜅∕𝛥2)2
𝑜 +( ̄𝜅∕𝛥2)2 . The
amount that the entrepreneur is able to borrow at 𝑡 = 0 and her payoff
from the project maturing are

𝑅2

√

𝐿𝑆 = 𝛱𝑆 (1) = 𝛷

+ (1 − 𝛷)𝐷∗(1)

𝛥2

𝑜 − (𝐷∗(1))2]
[
𝑅2

2 ̄𝜅
𝛥 (𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷∗(1)
̄𝜅

)

(𝐵 − 𝑏) .

𝑉𝑆 (1) = 𝛷 𝐵 − 𝛷

Initial surplus

We proceed to compare the initial surplus in the two equilibrium

regimes.

Proposition 3. The entrepreneur is always able to borrow more with an
(𝛱𝐸 (1) + 𝑉𝐸 (1)
)
S-bank, i.e., 𝐿𝑆 > 𝐿𝐸 . Define 𝛥𝑊 =
−
.
( ̄𝜅∕𝛥2)2
Under uniform distribution and 𝑝𝐿 = 0, if 𝛷 >
𝑜 +( ̄𝜅∕𝛥2)2 so that the
debt issuance constraint is slack at 𝜃 = 1, then 𝛥𝑊  > 0, and the S-bank
equilibrium has a higher surplus.

)
(𝛱𝑆 (1) + 𝑉𝑆 (1)
√

𝑅2

Proposition 3 shows that the borrowing capacity is always higher in
the S-bank regime. If the debt issuance constraint is slack, the S-bank
equilibrium always generates a higher initial surplus for the bank and
the entrepreneur. However, this is not necessarily true if this constraint
binds;  in  this  case,  the  S-bank’s  ability  to  issue  deposits  is  limited,
and the E-bank equilibrium may potentially generate a higher initial
surplus. Fig.  5 considers  numerical  examples  illustrating  these  two
cases. In the left panel, we see that the surplus in E-bank equilibrium is
higher when 𝛥 is low, whereas the right panel shows similar patterns
when ̄𝜅 is high. A lower 𝛥 implies reduced benefits from monitoring,
while a higher ̄𝜅 corresponds to a higher cost of monitoring.

5.3.  Long-term debt

Our analysis has thus far highlighted the crucial feature of short-
term debt: that the interest rate can adjust as soon as the bank changes
its retention to reflect the credit risks borne by creditors. By doing so,
short-term debt resolves the free-riding problem in bank monitoring.
This subsection further explores the mechanism by studying long-term
debt.

Perpetual debt financed bank

Drechsler et al. (2021) argue that for traditional banks, even though
deposits are nominally short-term, they effectively constitute long-term
financing. We solve the equilibrium in which the bank can issue only

9 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Fig. 5. Effect of monitoring technology on initial surplus. Proposition 3 provides sufficient conditions for 𝛥𝑊 > 0. This corresponds to the case in which either 𝛥 is high or ̄𝜅 is
low in the figures. Note that these examples also illustrate that sometimes 𝛥𝑊 < 0 when these conditions are not satisfied.

long-term debt 𝐷0 = 𝐷 at 𝑡 =  0 (henceforward referred to as a P-
bank), that is, debt that only matures with the project at 𝜏. After 𝑡 = 0,
the bank is no longer allowed to issue any further debt. The bank’s
incentive compatibility constraint continues to be characterized by (4),
captured by 𝜅𝑃 ∶= 𝛥 (𝑅𝑜𝜃 − 𝐷)
The definition of ̂𝑝𝑃 (𝜃 , 𝐷) is the same
as (18). Similarly, ̂𝜋𝑃 (𝜃 , 𝐷) is defined as in (17). However, note that in
these equations, 𝐷 is now chosen at time 𝑡 = 0. Given so, we suppress
these functions’ dependence on 𝐷, and therefore refer to 𝜅𝑃 (𝜃), 𝑝𝑃 (𝜃),
and 𝜋𝑃 (𝜃), respectively. After 𝑡 = 0, the bank only chooses its trading
strategy and solves
[
∫

) 𝑑 𝑡 + 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃𝑡

)]
)
,

max
{𝜃𝑡}𝑡≥0

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡

(𝜃𝑡

𝜙𝜋𝑃

(

E

∞

0

which is isomorphic to the E-bank’s problem in (8). Therefore, the
solution method, as well as the equilibrium outcomes, follow the E-
bank equilibrium in Section 4.1. The HJB Eq. (10) and the zero-profit
Eq. (13) continue to hold, implying that after 𝑡 =  0, the bank sells
its  loans  and  reduces  its  retention  over  time.  Under  the  parameter
conditions  presented  in  the  Linear–Quadratic  example,  we  get  the
following payoff and pricing functions (details in appendix):

𝐵 − (𝐵 − 𝑏)

𝛥𝜙
̄𝜅

𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷
2𝜌 + 𝜙

𝑉𝑃 (𝐷) =

𝛱𝑃 (𝐷) =

𝑞𝐷(𝐷) =

𝜙
𝜌 + 𝜙
𝛷 𝛥2
2 ̄𝜅
𝛷 𝛥2
̄𝜅

(𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷)2

(𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷),

(29)

(30)

(31)

where subscripts 𝑃 stand for perpetual debt, 𝑉𝑃 (𝐷) is the entrepreneur’s
payoff, 𝛱𝑃 (𝐷) the P-bank’s payoff, and 𝑞𝐷(𝐷) the price of debt at 𝑡 = 0.
The optimal long-term debt 𝐷∗ is chosen to maximize the initial surplus

max
𝐷

𝑊𝑃 (𝐷) = 𝑉𝑃 (𝐷) + 𝛱𝑃 (𝐷) + 𝐷 𝑞𝐷(𝐷),

.

𝛥(2−𝛷)

with the optimal solution being 𝐷∗

𝑃 = 𝐵−𝑏
We  have  examined  the  use  of  long-term  debt  in  the  absence  of
lender dispersion (i.e., 𝜃0 = 1). When considering the combination of
long-term debt 𝐷 and 𝜃0 that maximizes initial surplus, we find that
the solution is indeterminate. This happens because loans and perpetual
debt have similar maturity characteristics, resulting in only the optimal
net  exposure  being  determined.  This  indeterminacy  implies  that  the
welfare under a bank issuing perpetual long-term debt (but not short-
term debt) is equivalent to that under an E-Bank with 𝜃0 endogenously
chosen. This outcome is reminiscent of the equivalence observed in the
two-period example. Given the earlier result that the S-bank prefers
issuing short-term debt to selling loans, this equivalence also implies
that short-term debt is preferable to long-term debt.

Adjustment of long-term debt

The previous analysis considers the case where long-term debt is
only issued at time zero. One could consider the situation when banks
issue and adjust long-term debt over time dynamically. Also, instead
of considering perpetual debt, we could follow the literature on debt
rollover and consider exponentially maturing long-term debt. However,
such an extension would require a significant detour from our current
analysis, greatly increasing the model’s complexity due to the need to
keep track of two state variables: the bank’s retention and the amount
of outstanding debt.21

That being said, some recent developments in the literature may
offer insights into the potential equilibrium dynamics of such a model.
In our current setting, if the bank could issue both instantly maturing
short-term debt and long-term debt, it would likely opt to issue short-
term debt exclusively. The reason is that long-term debt suffers from
a  similar  commitment  problem  as  loan  sales  suffer  in  our  setting.
In Hu  et  al. (2021),  we  have  considered  a  related  model  to  study
dynamic  capital  structure.  There  we  show  that  in  the  absence  of  a
hedging benefit, the equity holders of a firm would exclusively rely on
short-term debt rather than issue long-term debt.

Generally speaking, in the absence of commitment, long-term debt
is not expected to impose a significant disciplinary effect on the bor-
rower  because  the  constant  repricing  has  a  smaller  impact  (only  a
fraction of the debt is rolled over), and can also be diluted by new debt
issuance. Once long-term debt has been issued, banks have incentives to
dilute the value held by long-term creditors. This can be achieved either
by selling loans or by issuing additional long-term debt. A key finding
in this literature is that, given the lack of commitment, borrowers in
equilibrium achieve the same payoff as if they had never issued long-
term debt, rendering debt maturity essentially irrelevant (see DeMarzo
and He (2021), for example).

6.  Extensions and empirical relevance

6.1.  Extensions

Lender dispersion

The  benchmark  model  assumes  the  bank  is  the  only  lender.  We
now show that our results in both regimes extend to multiple lenders.
Specifically, an E-bank gradually sells its loans over time, whereas an
S-bank never trades. The exercises here relate to Bolton and Scharfstein
(1996), who highlight one benefit of having dispersed lenders. They

21 Given that monitoring incurs a fixed cost, our setting is not homogeneous
of degree one, so we cannot scale by assets to reduce the problem’s dimension
to a single variable.

10 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Fig. 6. Initial surplus under lender dispersion.

show  that  borrowing  from  multiple  creditors  can  discipline  a  firm’s
manager by reducing the rents to renegotiation after a strategic default.
In our model, the bank has a commitment problem that reduces the
ex-post incentives in monitoring, but lender dispersion is not the key
reason that resolves the commitment problem.

First, let us consider the model in which the E-bank is one of many
lenders. This corresponds to the model in Section 4.1 with 𝜃0 being
optimally chosen. For ∀𝜃0 ∈ (𝜃∗, 1], the equilibrium dynamics in loan
sales, retention, monitoring, and pricing stay qualitatively unchanged:
the E-bank starts with 𝜃0, sells the loan gradually until 𝜃𝑡 reaches 𝜃∗,
after which the bank sells the remaining loans at a Poisson rate 𝜆. With
a competitive set of lenders, the entrepreneur chooses 𝜃0 at 𝑡 = 0 to
maximize 𝑉𝐸 (𝜃0) + 𝐿𝐸 (𝜃0), subject to the borrowing constraint
𝐿𝐸 (𝜃0) = 𝛱𝐸

≥ 𝐼 − 𝐴.

)

(𝜃0
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
bank lending

+ (1 − 𝜃0)𝑞𝐸 (𝜃0)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
investors’ lending

We show in the appendix that 𝐿𝐸 (𝜃0) increases monotonically so that
𝜃0 =  1 maximizes the entrepreneur’s initial borrowing. However, as
shown  by  the  solid  line  of Fig.  6,  the  total  surplus 𝑉𝐸 (𝜃0) + 𝐿𝐸 (𝜃0)
reaches its maximum at an interior point 𝜃∗
0 . In the Linear–Quadratic
example, we get
)

)2

)

𝛷
2 ̄𝜅

(𝛥𝑅𝑜𝜃0

+

𝛷
̄𝜅

(𝛥𝑅𝑜

)2 𝜃0

(
1 − 𝜃0

= 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃0) + 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃0)(1 − 𝜃0) =

𝐿𝐸

𝑉𝐸

(𝜃0
(𝜃0

)

= 𝛷 𝐵 −

𝛷
2 − 𝛷

𝛥𝑅𝑜𝜃0
̄𝜅

(𝐵 − 𝑏)

𝐵−𝑏
𝛥𝑅𝑜

1
2−𝛷

.

0 =

𝐵−𝑏
𝛥𝑅𝑜

< 1, in which case 𝜃∗

The optimal solution is interior if
1 − 1
2−𝛷
Second, let us consider the model in which the S-bank can borrow
from multiple lenders. This corresponds to the model in Section 4.2, but
𝜃0 ∈  [0, 1] is optimally chosen by the entrepreneur. The equilibrium
is numerically solved (details in appendix). As shown by the dashed
line of Fig. 6, the optimal solution can also be interior 𝜃0 ∈ (0, 1). For
𝜃0 ∈ (𝜃†, 1], as shown in Lemma 3, the S-bank will buy loans over time
until 𝜃𝑡 reaches one, after which it retains the loan until the project
matures.

the implicit guarantee from a government bailout.22 We show that once
the guarantee becomes sufficiently large, an S-bank no longer retains
but instead sells loans over time, just as an E-bank. This exercise reveals
that for short-term debt to help the bank overcome the commitment
problem, a crucial feature is its fair pricing by the market.

Specifically, we assume the bank only needs to pay a fraction 𝜉 of

1 − ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷)

the interest rate so that Eq. (19) becomes
𝑦𝑡 = 𝜙𝜉 (
) ,
where 𝜉 ∈ (0, 1). Following the analysis in Section 4.2, we define , the
bank’s objective function without trading gains as

(𝐷 , 𝜃) ∶= 𝛷

[
̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) 𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − ∫

𝜅𝑆

]
𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅)

0

+ (1 − 𝛷) 𝐷 + 𝛷 (

)
1 − ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷)

(1 − 𝜉) 𝐷 ,

)
1 − ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷)

where the new term 𝛷 (
(1 − 𝜉) 𝐷 stands for the benefit of
the government subsidy. The optimal short-term debt issuance can be
solved by taking the first-order condition of  with respect to 𝐷. As in
Lemma 3, the issuance constraint is slack when 𝜃 is sufficiently high.
In this case, the HJB equation implies

̇𝜃 = 𝜙

𝑅𝑜𝜉 (1−𝛷)−𝛷(1−𝑝(𝜃))(1−𝜉)
1−(1−𝑝(𝜃))(1−𝜉)
𝛷 𝜋′′
𝑆 (𝜃)

− (1 − 𝛷) 𝑝(𝜃)𝑅𝑜

.

When 𝜉 = 1, we get the results in Section 4.2 that ̇𝜃 = 𝜙 𝑅𝑜(1−𝛷)(1−𝑝(𝜃))
>
0. Moreover, when 𝜉 = 0 so that the entire interest rate is subsidized
by the government,
< 0, implying the bank sells loans
𝑆 (𝜃)
over time. We have the following.

̇𝜃 = 𝜙 −(1−𝛷)𝑝(𝜃)𝑅𝑜

𝛷 𝜋′′

𝛷 𝜋′′

𝑆 (𝜃)

Proposition 4. A 𝜉† exists such that in the S-bank equilibrium,
𝜉 < 𝜉† for 𝜃 sufficiently large.

̇𝜃 < 0 if

Continuous monitoring technology

In our model, the monitoring decision is only made when the project
matures. A more realistic model would require the monitoring decision
to  be  made  continuously.  We  consider  such  an  extension  and  show

Short-term debt pricing

In our model, short-term debt is fairly priced. In practice, however,
short-term  bank  debt  benefits  from  explicit  or  implicit  guarantees
(e.g., FDIC insurance) and is not fairly priced (Drechsler et al., 2021).
We consider an extension where the bank only partially passes through
interest rates to their main short-term debt holders due to these guar-
antees. One can think of these guarantees as either deposit insurance or

22 In the U.S., deposit insurance takes the form of a maximum guaranteed
amount that has been $250,000 since 2010. There is a one-to-one mapping
between the maximum insurance amount and the parameter 𝜉 introduced later
on. To see this, note one can think about the interest rate as 𝑦𝑡 = 0 for deposits
below $250, 000 but following (19) for deposits above the limit. Our parameter
𝜉 captures the fraction of deposits that are above the limit.

11 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

that our main result—that short-term debt helps the bank overcome
the commitment problem—remains valid in this setup.23

Suppose  the  project  still  matures  at  a  rate  of 𝜙.  At  maturity,  it
produces a payoff of 𝑅 with a probability of 1 unless it fails before that
maturity event occurs. The failure probability depends on the bank’s
monitoring effort: before maturity, the project fails with an arrival rate
𝜂(1 − 𝑚𝑡), where 𝑚𝑡 is the bank’s monitoring effort chosen at time 𝑡. The
cost of monitoring is given by a convex function ℎ(𝑚𝑡) = 1
𝑡 . Note
2
that in this model, monitoring directly affects the arrival rate of the
cash flows.

𝑘𝑚2

For the E-bank, the HJB equation is
[

(𝜌 + 𝜂) 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃) = max
̇𝜃 ,𝑚
[

𝜙

+ ̇𝜃

𝛱 ′

]
𝑅𝑜𝜃 − 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃)
]
,
𝐸 (𝜃) − 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃)

+ 𝜂 𝑚𝛱𝐸 (𝜃) − ℎ(𝑚)

which leads to the first-order conditions 𝛱 ′
𝜂 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃). The loan price is

𝜂(1 − 𝑚(𝜃))𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝜙

[

]
𝑅𝑜 − 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃)

+ ̇𝜃 𝑞′

𝐸 (𝜃) ,

𝐸 (𝜃) = 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) and ℎ′(𝑚) =

where 𝑚(𝜃) = (ℎ′)−1 [𝜂 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃)
]
. These two equations have similar inter-
pretations as (10) and (13) in Section 4.1. Following similar steps there,
we get

̇𝜃 = −𝜌

𝑞𝐸 (𝜃)
𝑞′
𝐸 (𝜃)

= −𝜌

𝛱 ′
𝛱 ′′

𝐸 (𝜃)
𝐸 (𝜃)

< 0.

For the S-bank, we have the following problem for short-term debt

issuance:

𝜙𝜋𝑆 (𝜃) ∶=  max

𝐷≤𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

{𝜙𝜃 𝑅𝑜 + 𝜌𝐷}

The constraint is 𝐷 ≤ 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) is always binding so we get 𝜙𝜋𝑆 (𝜃)  =
𝜙𝜃 𝑅𝑜 + 𝜌𝛱𝑆 (𝜃). The bank’s continuation value satisfies the HJB:

[
]
𝜋𝑆 (𝜃)−𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

+𝜂 𝑚𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)−ℎ(𝑚) + ̇𝜃 [𝛱 ′

]
𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃)

(𝜌+𝜂)𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) = max
̇𝜃 ,𝑚

𝜙

𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃) and ℎ′(𝜃) = 𝜂 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃).

where the first order conditions are 𝛱 ′
From the loan pricing equation,
)
𝜂(1 − 𝑚(𝜃))𝑞𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝜙 (𝑅𝑜 − 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃)
we plug in 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝛱 ′
𝑆 (𝜃) and 𝑞′
̇𝜃 = 0.

+ ̇𝜃 𝑞𝑆 (𝜃),
𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝛱 ′′

𝑆 (𝜃) to get that

Clearly,  the  main  results  in  our  main  model  carry  over  to  this
extension. Specifically, an E-bank will gradually sell its loans over time,
whereas an S-bank never trades. The reason, again, is due to the role
of short-term debt, which gets constantly repriced. Detailed analysis is
supplemented in Internet Appendix 2.3.

S-bank with loss-absorbing equity and riskless debt

We  now  extend  the  model  by  introducing  loss-absorbing  equity
to  the  S-bank.  This  allows  the  S-bank  to  issue  riskless  short-term
debt. Our analysis reveals that when constrained to issue only riskless
short-term debt, the S-bank behaves similarly to the E-bank, gradually
selling loans over time. However, given the choice, the S-bank always
optimally selects a level of short-term debt that is exposed to credit
risks,  rather  than  opting  for  riskless  debt.  Under  optimal  short-term
debt, the S-bank overcomes the commitment and never sells the loan.
These results demonstrate that short-term debt can effectively resolve
the commitment problem only when it is exposed to credit risks.

We assume if the project fails and generates nothing, the bank is
able to pay the creditors up to 𝑋 ∈ (0, 𝐷). One can think about 𝑋 as
the level of the bank’s risk-absorbing equity or the liquidity required

23 We are grateful to an anonymous referee for this suggestion.

12 

to put aside in case of bank failure. Therefore, the bank’s incentive
compatibility constraint in monitoring becomes
𝑝𝐻 (𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷) + (1 − 𝑝𝐻 )(−𝑋) − 𝜅 ≥ 𝑝𝐿(𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷) + (1 − 𝑝𝐿)(−𝑋)
⇒ 𝜅 ≤ 𝜅𝑆 ∶= 𝛥(𝑅𝑜𝜃 + 𝑋 − 𝐷).
̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) stays  unchanged  from (18),  whereas

The  definition  for
̂𝜋𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) becomes
̂𝜋𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) = ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷) (𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷) +

)
(
1 − ̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , 𝐷)

(−𝑋) − ∫

0

𝜅𝑆

𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅)

to include equity holders’ losses when the project fails. If the bank is
mandated to issue riskless short-term debt so that a constraint 𝐷 ≤ 𝑋
is imposed, then ̂𝑦(𝜃 , 𝐷) = 0. In equilibrium, equity holders will always
issue up to the limit so that 𝐷∗(𝜃)  = 𝑋. The rest of the equilibrium
follows exactly the E-bank equilibrium.

Without the constraint of 𝐷 ≤ 𝑋, it is never optimal for the bank
to issue riskless debt. In other words, the endogenous choice of debt
always satisfies 𝐷 > 𝑋, with an interest rate ̂𝑦(𝜃 , 𝐷) = 𝜙(
1 − ̂𝑝(𝜃 , 𝐷 −
. To see this, let us define ̃𝐷 ≡ 𝐷 − 𝑋. Following the same
𝑋)
step as in the derivation of Eq. (23), we can write the bank’s payoff
function in terms of net debt ̃𝐷 ≡ 𝐷 − 𝑋:

1 − 𝑋
𝐷

) (

)

( ̃𝐷 , 𝜃) ∶= 𝑋 + 𝛷

̂𝑝𝑆 (𝜃 , ̃𝐷)𝜃 𝑅𝑜 − ∫

[

𝜅𝑆

]
𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅)

+ (1 − 𝛷) ̃𝐷 .

0
The rest  of the  problem becomes  similar to the S-bank equilibrium,
except that the bank chooses ̃𝐷 as opposed to 𝐷. Therefore, the equi-
librium is similar to that in Proposition 2.

6.2.  Related literature

Short-term debt.
In our paper, short-term debt resolves the commitment
issue  through  a  repricing  mechanism  whereby  the  bank’s  retention
choice directly affects the cost (and also the amount) of short-term debt.
The role of short-term debt in aligning a bank’s incentives has been dis-
cussed by the previous literature in banking (Calomiris and Kahn, 1991;
Diamond and Rajan, 2001), which emphasizes the demandable feature
of debt and the externalities from depositor runs. Calomiris and Kahn
(1991) is about stopping a crime in progress through a run, and the
prospect of a run creates a reward for information acquisition. In our
paper, there is no run and, hence, no need to reward information acqui-
sition. In Diamond and Rajan (2001), there is no crime in progress to
be stopped. Instead, uninformed depositors just have to run when being
held up — they are solving a severe incentive/rent extraction problem.
Our paper is similar in that it also solves the incentive problems by
bankers, but different in that repricing with no runs also gives the bank
enough incentives to monitor. Our results are also related to Flannery
(1994),  which  emphasizes  the  timing  between  investment  and  debt
issuance. By contrast, the mechanism in our model relies crucially on
the mismatch of liabilities and assets. The repricing of short-term debt
prevents reduced monitoring by the financial intermediary.24

Our model’s role of short-term debt is closely related to the leasing
solution  to  the  durable  goods  monopoly  problem.  In  particular,  a
monopolist can overcome the commitment problem by renting the good
rather than selling it (Bulow, 1982). Intuitively, the short-term nature
of the rental contract does not allow the monopolist to take advantage
of  early  buyers.  Instead,  any  change  in  rental  prices  simultaneously
affects all buyers, eliminating the monopolist’s temptation to discrim-
inate against buyers over time. The associated commitment problem
is, therefore, resolved. In our context, an S-bank that issues short-term
debt against the project’s cash flows can be thought of as a rentor of the
claims. The short-term nature of the contract implies that any change
in retention is immediately priced by all investors, which eliminates the
bank’s incentives to sell loans.

24 We  are  particularly  grateful  to  Raghuram  Rajan  for  pointing  out  and
interpreting  the  differences  between  the  three  papers  discussed  in  this
paragraph.

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Loan  sales  and  securitization  in  banking. This  paper  is  also  related
to  a  large  literature  on  bank  monitoring,  loan  sales,  and  securitiza-
tion. Parlour and Plantin (2008) show that the informational advantage
acquired via bank screening could lead to illiquidity in the secondary
market.  Our  paper  is  dynamic,  and  the  source  of  illiquidity  comes
from the lack of commitment rather than information asymmetry. The
commitment  problem  is  also  mitigated  when  claims  are  collateral-
ized. Rampini  and  Viswanathan (2019)  emphasize  the  advantage  of
intermediaries in collateralizing claims. In their paper, the two regimes
studied in our paper are equivalent.

Durable-goods monopoly. The lack of commitment problem was initially
recognized by Coase (1972) in the context of durable goods monopoly.
This paper belongs to the more recent literature that applies the related
insights to corporate finance and banking. The E-bank equilibrium in
our  model  is  closely  related  to DeMarzo  and  Urošević (2006),  who
study a large shareholder’s tradeoff between monitoring and diversifi-
cation without commitment. Admati et al. (2018) and DeMarzo and He
(2021) study the problem when a borrower cannot commit to its debt
level, which leads to the leverage-ratchet effect. A main insight of this
literature is that the Coasian force leads to no gains at all, which has
also been shown in the context of bargaining by Fuchs and Skrzypacz
(2010) and Daley and Green (2020).

6.3.  Empirical relevance

Next, we provide a discussion of the paper’s empirical relevance.
Our study is based on the empirical finding that there exists a strong
correlation between bank monitoring activities and the bank’s reten-
tion. Gustafson et al. (2021) use site visits, third-party evaluations, and
demands for loan-specific information as proxies for bank monitoring.
They  show  that  in  syndicated  loans,  monitoring  increases  with  the
lead bank’s retention. Moreover, they observe an inverse relationship
between  bank monitoring  intensity  and loan interest  rates. Focarelli
et al. (2008) present evidence of a certification effect: syndicated loans
tend to have lower interest rates when a greater portion of the loan
facility is held by the arranger. In addition, Wang and Xia (2014) banks
tend to exert less effort in post-loan monitoring when they have the
option to securitize loans.

Our  model  predicts  that  the  price  of  the  loan  in  the  secondary
market is negatively correlated with banks’ skin in the game. Empir-
ically, Irani et al. (2021) collect data on secondary market pricing of
loan sales and show that syndicated loans with higher nonbank funding
experienced  greater  downward  pressure  on  secondary  market  prices
during the recent financial crisis.

Our model predicts banks that do not face constant capital market
discipline, such as those from short-term creditors, will sell their loans
and  reduce  monitoring.  In  practice,  a  bank  typically  has  multiple
outstanding loan facilities to a single borrower (Term Loan A, Term
Loan B, and revolver). Therefore, one should interpret the one loan
in our model as the combination of the bank’s credit exposure to a
borrower. Our model predicts that an E-bank without any commitment
to  retention  will  gradually  reduce  its  overall  exposure  to  the  bor-
rower. Meanwhile, S-banks, i.e., those with short-term debt constantly
repriced, are subject to discipline. Therefore, the S-bank should not be
interpreted as a traditional commercial bank that relies on uninformed
and insured retail deposits. Rather, this bank could be interpreted as
institutions such as shadow banks, asset-backed commercial paper con-
duits (ABCP Conduit), or structured investment vehicles (SIV), which
rely largely on short-term funding from institutional investors. Relat-
edly, one should not interpret investors as traditional retail depositors
protected  by  FDIC  insurance.  Instead,  they  should  be  considered  as
institutional investors, such as non-banks or short-term wholesale fund-
ing. Our paper, therefore, emphasizes the role of informed creditors’
discipline in bank lending. Irani and Meisenzahl (2017) find that when
banks  are  more  exposed  to  disruptions  in  the  short-term  wholesale

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

funding market in the crisis, they have a higher probability of selling
loan shares, and this depressed loan prices in the secondary market.
Specifically, they show that the result is driven by the bank’s exposure
to short-term funds, including repos and interbank borrowing.

Our  paper  provides  an  explanation  for  why  intermediaries  rely
on short-term debt. Jiang et al. (2020) document that shadow banks
originate long-term loans by issuing short-term debt to a few informed
lenders. In our model, banks should be more broadly interpreted as any
financial institution capable of lending and monitoring. In that case,
our paper can be related to the recent empirical studies that document
the role of non-bank lenders and their substitution for bank lending.
Specifically, Gopal and Schnabl (2022) study the borrowing decisions
by small businesses and document the importance of nonbank lenders
such as finance companies. Chernenko et al. (2022) study borrowing
decisions  by  middle-market  firms  and  document  the  prevalence  of
nonbank  financial  intermediaries  in  this  market.  To  the  best  of  our
knowledge, no empirical research has studied the ex-post performance
of  loans  extended  by  non-bank  lenders  and  how  it  relates  to  these
lenders’ monitoring intensities. Our paper predicts that the performance
crucially depends on the liability structure of these non-bank lenders,
a hypothesis to be tested in the future.

7.  Final remarks

This paper develops a theory of intermediary financing when banks
cannot commit to the retentions on the balance sheet. Our main mes-
sage is that the intermediary’s liability structure impacts the dynamics
of lending and monitoring. A bank that finances using long-term claims,
such as long-term debt and equity, has incentives to sell loans over
time,  leading  to  a  gradual  reduction  in  monitoring.  By  contrast,  an
S-bank  that  finances  itself  by  issuing  short-term  debt  does  not  have
incentives to sell loans. As a result, the E-bank lends less than the S-
bank. The E-bank has more monitoring during the early periods after
loan origination, whereas the S-bank has more monitoring during the
later periods.

Throughout the paper, we follow Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) by
assuming that all projects financed by an intermediary are perfectly
correlated and thus abstract from the bank’s ability to pool assets and
diversify the risk (Diamond, 1984; DeMarzo, 2005). In the case of many
loans, we can interpret the monitoring decision as the bank’s invest-
ment in its monitoring technology (which might include the adoption of
advanced information technology, the hiring of qualified loan officers,
more efficient internal governance, etc.). Such investments improve the
bank’s ability to control bank-specific risk in its portfolio, which cannot
be eliminated by diversification.

In our model, informed investors monitor the bank’s balance sheet.
It is important, though, that investors cannot write binding contracts
based  on  their  assessments  of  the  riskiness  of  the  bank.  As  argued
by Flannery (1994),  banks  specialize  in  financing  non-marketable,
informationally intensive assets, and the composition of these assets
changes  rapidly  with  new  business  opportunities.  As  a  result,  these
assets do not have contractible, easily described risk properties.

Our main focus has been on the bank’s ex-post monitoring rather
than  ex-ante  screening  (Ramakrishnan  and  Thakor, 1984). Hu  and
Varas (2021) shows how zombie lending will emerge in this context
when screening takes time, as a relationship bank can signal through
either dynamic retention or debt issuance.25 Given that our focus is on
how the bank’s liability structure enables commitment to retention, we
chose to stay away from these complications introduced by screening.
By  focusing  on  Markov  equilibria,  we  ignore  the  intermediary’s
concern  for  reputation  (see Winton  and  Yerramilli (2021)  for  some
recent work on the role of reputation concerns). While reputation does

25 See Leland and Pyle (1977) and Ross (1977) for related issues in the static
environment.

13 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

not directly affect the return to monitoring in our model, it can have
an important effect on the dynamics of loan sales. In particular, one
can  construct  an  equilibrium  in  which  the  commitment  problem  is
mitigated if the intermediary has a long-run reputation (see Ausubel
and  Deneckere (1989)  for  a  study  of  the  impact  of  durable  good
monopolist’s reputation concerns and Malenko and Tsoy (2020) in the
context of a corporate borrower who cannot commit to its debt level).

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Yunzhi Hu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Felipe
Varas: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial

interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

Appendix A.  Discrete-time model

We solve a more general version of the model where 𝑝𝐻 , 𝑝𝐿 ∈ [0, 1],
𝑝𝐻 >  𝑝𝐿, and 𝑏 ≥ 0. For convenience, we define 𝛥 ≡ 𝑝𝐻 − 𝑝𝐿 and
𝑅𝑜 = 𝑅 − 𝑏∕𝛥 because the entrepreneur needs to retain 𝑅𝑓 = 𝑏∕𝛥.
Moreover, we assume that the monitoring cost ̃𝜅 follows a distribution
𝐹 (⋅) over the interval [0, ̄𝜅]. The analysis in Section 2 focuses specifically
on the case of 𝑝𝐻 = 1, 𝑝𝐿 = 0, 𝑏 = 0, and the distribution 𝐹 (⋅) is uniform.
The model is solved using backward induction. The model is first
solved with general 𝐷2 and 𝐷1. Then, we specialize to the case where
𝐷2 = 𝐷1 = 0, corresponding to the E-bank.

At 𝑡 = 2, the bank can either sell the loan 𝜃1 − 𝜃2 or issue debt 𝐷2

against it. The bank’s payoff at 𝑡 = 2 is
(

̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1) = 𝛿

𝑝(𝜃2, 𝐷2)(𝜃2𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷2) − ∫

𝛥(𝜃2𝑅𝑜−𝐷2)

)

𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅)

0

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
bank equity value
+ 𝑞(𝜃2, 𝐷2)(𝜃1 − 𝜃2)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
trading gains

+ 𝑝(𝜃2, 𝐷2)𝐷2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
debt issuance

.

The bank’s problem is
𝛱2(𝜃1) =  max
𝜃2∈[0,1],𝐷2

≥0
≤ 𝜃2𝑅𝑜.

s.t. 𝐷2

̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1)

The price of debt and loans is given by
𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2) = 𝑝𝐿 + 𝛥𝐹 (𝛥(𝜃2𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷2)
)
𝑞2(𝜃2, 𝐷2) = 𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)𝑅𝑜 =
𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2,𝐷2)
𝜕 𝜃2

[𝑝𝐿 + 𝛥𝐹 (𝛥(𝜃2𝑅𝑜 − 𝐷2)
𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2,𝐷2)
𝜕 𝐷2

)] 𝑅𝑜,

. From here, we get that the
so it follows that
derivative of the bank’s objective function with respect to 𝜃2 and 𝐷2
are

= −𝑅𝑜

= (𝛿 − 1)𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)𝑅𝑜 +

[𝑅𝑜(𝜃1 − 𝜃2) + 𝐷2

]

= (1 − 𝛿)𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2) +

[𝑅𝑜(𝜃1 − 𝜃2) + 𝐷2

𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)
𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)
𝜕 𝐷2

𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝐷2
𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃2

.

⇒

= −𝑅𝑜

𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝐷2
By formulating the Lagrangian of the bank’s problem, we get
𝜕
2
𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕
2
𝜕 𝐷2

𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 𝐷2, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝐷2

+ 𝜂2𝑅𝑜 = 0

− 𝜂2 = 0,

=

=

]

14 

2

𝜕
𝜕 𝜃2

≤ 𝜃2𝑅𝑜. It
where 𝜂2 is the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint 𝐷2
follows that
, so any pair (𝜃2, 𝐷2) that solves the first order
condition for 𝜃2 also satisfies the first order condition for 𝐷2. Therefore,
the choice of (𝜃2, 𝐷2) is undetermined. If we restrict attention 𝐷2 = 0,
then the first order condition becomes

∝ 𝜕
𝜕 𝐷2

2

(1 − 𝛿)𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)𝑅𝑜 =

𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)
𝜕 𝜃2

𝑅𝑜(𝜃1 − 𝜃2).

𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2,𝐷2)
𝜕 𝜃2

> 0, 𝜃2 < 𝜃1. In general, there is no closed-form solution
Given
for 𝜃2 as a function of 𝜃1. If 𝑏 = 0 and 𝜅 ∼ 𝑈 [0, ̄𝜅] we get that the price
of the loan given 𝜃2 is
𝑞2(𝜃2, 0) = 𝜃2

,

𝑅2
̄𝜅

so the first-order condition becomes
𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 0, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃2

= −(1 − 𝛿)𝑞(𝜃2, 0) +

𝜕 𝑞(𝜃2, 0)
𝜕 𝜃2

(𝜃1 − 𝜃2)

= −(1 − 𝛿)𝜃2

𝑅2
̄𝜅

+

𝑅2
̄𝜅

(𝜃1 − 𝜃2) = 0.

From here, we get

𝜃2 =

𝜃1
2 − 𝛿

.

Substituting in the bank’s objective function, we get

𝛱 𝐸

2 (𝜃1) =

𝑅2
2 ̄𝜅(2 − 𝛿)

𝜃2
1 .

Notice that because the solution for the S-bank is undetermined, we
have that 𝛱 𝑆

2 (𝜃1) = 𝛱 𝐸

2 (𝜃1)

First trading period

Now we move back and consider the bank financing at 𝑡 = 1. Given
any 𝜃0, the bank’s payoff from loan trading and issuing one-period debt
at 𝑡 = 1 is
̂𝛱1(𝜃1, 𝐷1, 𝜃0) = 𝐷1 + 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1)(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) + 𝛿 (𝛱2(𝜃1) − 𝐷1
The bank’s problem at 𝑡 = 1 is
𝛱1(𝜃0) =  max
𝜃1∈[0,1],𝐷1

̂𝛱1(𝜃1, 𝐷1, 𝜃0)

) .

≥0
≤ 𝛱2(𝜃1).

s.t. 𝐷1

All equity-financed bank. We set 𝐷1 = 0 so 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1) = 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0). The
first-order condition for 𝜃1 is
𝜕 ̂𝛱1(𝜃1, 0, 𝜃0)
𝜕 𝜃1

𝜕 𝛱 𝐸
2 (𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃1

= −𝑞1(𝜃1, 0) +

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) + 𝛿

= −𝑞1(𝜃1, 0) +

𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0)
𝜕 𝜃1
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0)
𝜕 𝜃1
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0)
𝜕 𝜃1
= −(1 − 𝛿)𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1) +

= −𝑞1(𝜃1, 0) +

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) + 𝛿 𝑞2(𝜃2(𝜃1), 0)

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) + 𝛿 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0)
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0)
𝜕 𝜃1

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1),

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) = (1 − 𝛿)𝑞1(𝜃1, 0) > 0,

where  the  second  line  follows  the  envelope  condition.  Hence,  the
first-order condition for 𝜃1 can be written as
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0)
𝜕 𝜃1
where
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0)
𝜕 𝜃1

(𝑅𝑜𝛥)2 𝑓 (𝛥(𝜃2𝑅𝑜)

) 𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕 𝜃1

𝜕 𝑞2
𝜕 𝜃2

𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕 𝜃1

=

=

.

𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕 𝜃1
= (𝛿 − 1)𝑝2(𝜃2, 0)𝑅𝑜 +

It remains to derive the sign of
𝜕 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 0, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃2
we get
𝜕2 ̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 0, 𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃2𝜕 𝜃1

𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2, 0)
𝜕 𝜃2

𝑅𝑜 > 0,

=

. Noticing that
𝜕 𝑝2(𝜃2, 0)
𝜕 𝜃2

𝑅𝑜(𝜃1 − 𝜃2),

Y. Hu and F. Varas

̂𝛱2(𝜃2, 0, 𝜃1) satisfies the single crossing property in
which means that
(𝜃1, 𝜃2). It follows from the monotone comparative results in Milgrom
≥ 0. We can find a closed-form solution if
and Shannon (1994) that
𝑏 = 0 and 𝜅 ∼ 𝑈 [0, ̄𝜅]. In this case, the price of the loans at 𝑡 = 1 given
𝜃1 is
𝑞1(𝜃1, 0) = 𝑞(𝜃2(𝜃1), 0) =

𝜕 𝜃2
𝜕 𝜃1

𝜃1,

𝑅2
̄𝜅(2 − 𝛿)

so we get that
𝜃0
2 − 𝛿

𝜃1 =

.

Substituting 𝜃1 in ̂𝛱1(𝜃1, 0, 𝜃0) and 𝑞1(𝜃1, 0), we get that

𝑅2
2 ̄𝜅

𝜃2
0
(2 − 𝛿)2

.

𝛱 𝐸

1 (𝜃0) =

and

𝑞0(𝜃0) = 𝑞1(𝜃1(𝜃0), 0) =

𝑅2
̄𝜅

𝜃0
(2 − 𝛿)2

In sum, the equilibrium loan selling strategy and loan prices at time
𝑡 = 1, 2 are

𝜃𝑡 =

𝜃𝑡−1
2 − 𝛿

𝑞𝐸
𝑡 (𝜃𝑡) =

𝑅2
̄𝜅(2 − 𝛿)2−𝑡

𝜃𝑡

Short-term  debt  financed  bank. With 𝐷1 > 0,  we  formulate  the  La-
grangian and get the following first-order conditions for 𝜃1 and 𝐷1:
𝜕
1
𝜕 𝐷1
𝜕
1
𝜕 𝜃1

= 1 − 𝛿 − 𝜂 = 0 ⇒ 𝜂 = 1 − 𝛿 .

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) + (𝛿 + 𝜂)

𝜕 𝛱2(𝜃1)
𝜕 𝜃1

= −𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1) +

𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1)
𝜕 𝜃1
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1)
𝜕 𝜃1
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1)
𝜕 𝜃1

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1),

= −𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1) +

= −𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1) +
𝜕 𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1)
𝜕 𝜃1

=

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) + (𝛿 + 𝜂)𝑞2(𝜃2, 𝐷2)

(𝜃0 − 𝜃1) + (𝛿 + 𝜂)𝑞1(𝜃1, 𝐷1)

where the second line follows the envelope condition. From
= 0,
we know 𝜃1 = 𝜃0. Moreover, as 𝜂  > 0, we find that the constraint
≤ 𝛱2(𝜃1) always binds. Therefore, given any 𝜃0, it is always the
𝐷1
case that 𝜃1 = 𝜃0 and 𝐷1 = 𝛱1(𝜃1). The bank payoff is
)
𝛱 𝑆

= 𝛱 𝑆

1

(𝜃0, 𝛱 𝑆

2 (𝜃1), 𝜃0

1 (𝜃0) = ̂𝛱1

2 (𝜃1),

𝜕
𝜕 𝜃1

so in the example with 𝑏 = 0 and 𝜅 ∼ 𝑈 [0, ̄𝜅] we get

𝛱 𝑆

1 (𝜃0) =

𝑅2
2 ̄𝜅

𝜃2
0
(2 − 𝛿)

.

Appendix B.  E-bank equilibrium

In this section, we prove Proposition 1.

Lemma 4. The bank with retention 𝜃 never sells a fraction of the loans.

(𝜃+)

Proof. Suppose the bank with retention 𝜃 sells 𝜃−𝜃+, where 𝜃+ > 0, and
that after this it continues to trade smoothly. Multiple jumps are ruled
out without loss of generality. In this case, the overall trading gains
(𝜃+)
are 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃) + 𝛱𝐸
− 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃),
+ 𝛱𝐸
where 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃) is the instant trading gain and 𝛱 (𝜃+)
−𝛱 (𝜃) are the gains
(negative loss) in its continuation value. Block trading is suboptimal as
long as
𝜃 = ar g max
𝜃+

𝛱𝐸 (𝜃+) + (𝜃 − 𝜃+)𝑞𝐸 (𝜃+)

(𝜃 − 𝜃+) 𝑞𝐸

− 𝛱𝐸 (𝜃) =

(𝜃+)

(B.1)

{

}

.

It is easy to verify that the first order condition is always satisfied at
𝜃+ = 𝜃, thus it suffice to show that the second order condition for global
optimality is satisfied. □

=

+

15 

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Verification of optimality trading strategy

In this section, we complete the characterization of the equilibrium
by verifying that the equilibrium trading strategy maximizes the bank’s
payoff given the price function 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃). Throughout this section, we omit
the subscript 𝐸 to simplify notation. Hence, we denote the functions
𝛱𝐸 (𝜃), 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃), 𝑞𝐸 (𝜃) by 𝛱(𝜃), 𝜋(𝜃), 𝑞(𝜃), respectively. Because the payoff
in  a  mixed  strategy  equilibrium  is  given  by  the  payoff  of  any  pure
strategy in its support, we can restrict attention to pure strategies in
the verification of optimality. A trading strategy for the bank is given
by the right continuous function with left limits. A trading strategy is
admissible if it can be decomposed as

𝜃𝑡 = ∫

0

𝑡

̇𝜃𝑐
𝑠 𝑑 𝑠 +

∑

𝑘≥0

(𝜃𝑑
𝑡𝑘

− 𝜃𝑑

𝑡𝑘−),

for some bounded function ̇𝜃𝑐
𝑡 . We denote the set of admissible trading
strategies by 𝛩. The bank’s optimization problem is to choose 𝜃 ∈ 𝛩 to
maximize its payoff

∞

𝛱 ∗(𝜃0) = sup
𝜃∈𝛩

∫
0

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡(𝜙𝜋(𝜃𝑡)− ̇𝜃𝑐

𝑡 𝑞(𝜃𝑡)

)𝑑 𝑡−

∑

𝑘≥0

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑘 𝑞(𝜃𝑡𝑘

)(𝜃𝑑
𝑡𝑘

−𝜃𝑑

𝑡𝑘−).

(B.2)

Due to the discontinuity in the price function 𝑞(𝜃), the Hamilton–
Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) equation is discontinuous at 𝜃∗, so we need to
resort to the theory of viscosity solutions for the analysis of the bank’s
problem. Our problem is a particular case of the general class of optimal
control problems in stratified domains studied by Barles et al. (2018).
Our proof relies on their characterization of the value function using
viscosity solution methods. The analysis in Barles et al. (2018) does
not  consider  the  case  in  which  the  trajectory  of  the  state  variable
can be discontinuous (impulse control). However, as we show below,
we  can  approximate  a  trading 𝜃𝑡 ∈ 𝛩 by  an  absolutely  continuous
̇𝜃𝑡|
≤ 𝑁 for some 𝑁 large enough (the
trading strategy with derivative |
approximation is in the sense that it yields a similar payoff). Thus, we
can consider a sequence of optimization problems

𝛱 ∗

𝑁 (𝜃0) =  sup
≤𝑁

̇𝜃𝑡|

|

∞

∫
0

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡(𝜙𝜋(𝜃𝑡) − ̇𝜃𝑡𝑞(𝜃𝑡)

)𝑑 𝑡,

(B.3)

and verify that, for any 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1], 𝛱 ∗

𝑁 (𝜃) → 𝛱(𝜃), where

{

𝛱(𝜃) =

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃)
𝑞(0)𝜃

if 𝜃 ∈ [𝜃∗, 1]
if 𝜃 ∈ [0, 𝜃∗).

The following Lemma establishes that we can indeed consider the limit
of bounded absolutely continuous strategies.

Lemma 5. For any 𝜃0 ∈ [0, 1], lim𝑁→∞ 𝛱 ∗

𝑁 (𝜃0) = 𝛱 ∗(𝜃0).

≡ inf {𝛥  > 0  ∶ 𝜃𝜖∗

Proof. Let 𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡 be  and 𝜖-optimal  policy  (at  this  point  in  the  proof,
we have not established the existence of an optimal policy). For any
𝑘 ≥ 0,  let 𝛥𝑘
𝑡𝑘−)𝑁 𝛥 = 𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘−𝛥 + sgn(𝜃𝜖∗
}
𝑡𝑘
𝑡𝑘
≤ 𝑀 for some finite
(we can find 𝛥𝑘 if 𝑁 is large enough as |
𝑀). Consider the policy ̂𝜃𝑁
𝑡 =
𝜃𝜖∗
+ sgn(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘−)𝑁(𝑡 − 𝑡𝑘 + 𝛥𝑘) if 𝑡 ∈ ∪𝑘≥0(𝑡𝑘 − 𝛥𝑘, 𝑡𝑘). The difference
𝑡𝑘
𝑡𝑘−𝛥𝑘
between the payoff of 𝜃𝜖∗
𝛱 𝜖∗(𝜃0) − ̂𝛱𝑁
{
𝑡𝑘

if 𝑡 ∉  ∪𝑘≥0(𝑡𝑘 − 𝛥𝑘, 𝑡𝑘), and ̂𝜃𝑁

𝑡 and ̂𝜃𝑁

𝑡 = 𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡

− 𝜃𝜖∗

− 𝜃𝜖∗

̇𝜃𝜖 𝑐∗

is

|

𝑡

𝑡

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡(𝜙𝜋(𝜃𝜖∗

𝑡 ) − ̇𝜃𝜖 𝑐∗

𝑡 𝑞(𝜃𝜖∗

𝑡 ) − 𝜙𝜋( ̂𝜃𝑁
𝑡 )

)𝑑 𝑡

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡sgn(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘

− 𝜃𝜖∗

𝑡𝑘−)𝑁 𝑞( ̂𝜃𝑁

𝑡 )𝑑 𝑡 − 𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑘 𝑞(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘

)(𝜃𝜖 𝑑∗
𝑡𝑘

}

− 𝜃𝜖 𝑑∗
𝑡𝑘− )

− 𝜖

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡(𝜙𝜋(𝜃∗

𝑡 ) − ̇𝜃𝜖 𝑐∗

𝑡 𝑞(𝜃∗

𝑡 ) − 𝜙𝜋( ̂𝜃𝑁
𝑡 )

)𝑑 𝑡

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑞( ̂𝜃𝑁

𝑡 )𝑑 𝑡 − 𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑘 𝑞(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘

)(𝜃𝜖 𝑑∗
𝑡𝑘

}

− 𝜃𝜖 𝑑∗
𝑡𝑘− )

− 𝜖 .

𝑡𝑘

∫

𝑡𝑘−𝛥𝑘

∫

𝑡𝑘−𝛥𝑘

∑

=

𝑘≥0
𝑡𝑘

+ ∫

𝑡𝑘−𝛥𝑘
{

∑

𝑡𝑘

∫

𝑡𝑘−𝛥𝑘

− 𝜃𝜖∗

𝑡𝑘−𝛥𝑘

𝑘≥0
𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘

𝛥𝑘

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

For all 𝑘 ≥ 0, we have that 𝛥𝑘 ↓ 0 as 𝑁 → ∞. It follows that

lim
𝛥𝑘↓0

1
𝛥𝑘

𝑡𝑘

∫

𝑡𝑘−𝛥𝑘

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑞( ̂𝜃𝑁

𝑡 )𝑑 𝑡 =

{

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑘 𝑞(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘
𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑘 𝑞(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘

−)

+)

The  price  function  is  right  continuous  so 𝑞(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘
conclude that

if 𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘
if 𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘
+)  = 𝑞(𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘

> 𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘−
< 𝜃𝜖∗
𝑡𝑘−.
).  We  can

lim
𝑁→∞
∑

(𝛱 𝜖∗(𝜃0) − ̂𝛱𝑁 (𝜃0)) =
)
𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝑘 (𝑞(0) − 𝑞(𝜃∗)
(𝜃∗
𝑡𝑘

𝑘≥0

− 𝜃∗

𝑡𝑘−)+𝟏{𝜃∗

𝑡𝑘

=𝜃∗} − 𝜖 ≤ 0.

Because this holds for any 𝜖 > 0, we can conclude that lim𝑁→∞(𝛱 ∗(𝜃0) −
̂𝛱𝑁 (𝜃0)) ≤ 0, and given that 𝛱 ∗(𝜃0) ≥ ̂𝛱𝑁 (𝜃0), we get lim𝑁→∞
̂𝛱𝑁 (𝜃0) =
𝛱 ∗(𝜃0). For 𝑁 large enough, the policy ̂𝜃𝑁
≤ 𝑁 (this can
satisfies |
𝑡
≤ 𝑀), so its
be guarantee because for any 𝜖 there is 𝑀 such that |
|
̂𝛱𝑁 (𝜃0) provides a lower bound to 𝛱 ∗
𝑁 (𝜃0), which means that
payoff,
lim𝑁→∞ 𝛱 ∗

𝑁 (𝜃0) = 𝛱 ∗(𝜃0). □

̇̂𝜃𝑁
𝑡 |
̇𝜃𝜖 𝑐∗

𝑡

This  shows  that  the  value  function  converges  (pointwise)  to  the
one in the equilibrium under consideration. Hence, we can verify the
optimality  of  the  bank’s  strategy  by  analyzing  the  control  problem
(B.3). For future reference, recall that the price function in the control
problem (B.3) is given by
𝛷 𝜋′(𝜃)
𝑝𝐿𝑅 (1 − 𝛼)

if 𝜃 ≥ 𝜃∗
if 𝜃 < 𝜃∗,

𝑞(𝜃) =

(B.4)

{

where the threshold 𝜃∗ is given by 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗)  = 𝑞(0)𝜃∗. Notice that we
are not computing the equilibrium in a model in which the bank is
restricted to use absolutely continuous trading strategies with bounded
derivative ̇𝜃𝑡,  but  rather  considering  the  equilibrium  price  function
in  the  general  case,  and  then  considering  a  sequence  of  auxiliary
optimization  problems  to  construct  the  value  function.  Because  the
expected payoff of the candidate equilibrium strategy is equal to the
value function, it is necessarily optimal.

The Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman equation (HJB) for the optimization

problem (B.3) is

(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) − 𝐻(𝜃 , 𝛱 ′

𝑁 (𝜃)) = 0,

where 𝐻

𝐻(𝜃 , 𝛱 ′

𝑁 ) ≡ 𝜙𝜋(𝜃) + max
≤𝑁

̇𝜃|

|

{

̇𝜃(𝛱 ′

𝑁 − 𝑞(𝜃)

)}

(B.5)

(B.6)

.

We guess and verify that, for 𝑁 large enough, the solution (in the

viscosity sense) of the previous equation is

𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) =

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃)
𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁

if 𝜃 ∈ [𝜃∗, 1]
(𝜃∗−𝜃)𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) + (𝜌+𝜙)
if 𝜃 ∈ [ ̃𝜃𝑁 , 𝜃∗)
𝜃)

(
1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

𝑁

𝑁
𝜌+𝜙

if 𝜃 ∈ [0, ̃𝜃𝑁 ),

𝜃 𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙
∫ 𝜃∗

𝑁

(𝑦−𝜃) (

𝛷 𝜋(𝑦) − 𝑁
𝜌+𝜙

𝑞(0)

)

𝑑 𝑦

𝑞(0) + (𝜌+𝜙)
𝑁

0 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)
∫ 𝜃

𝑁

(𝜃−𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦

where ̃𝜃𝑁 is the unique solution on [0, 1] to the equation

(

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

̃𝜃𝑁

)

𝑞(0) +

̃𝜃𝑁

(𝜌 + 𝜙)

𝑁 ∫

0

𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦

= 𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁 (𝜃∗− ̃𝜃𝑁 )𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗)
(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝜃∗

𝑁 ∫

̃𝜃𝑁

+

𝑁 (𝑦− ̃𝜃𝑁 )

(

𝛷 𝜋(𝑦) −

)

𝑞(0)

𝑑 𝑦

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

(B.7)

(B.8)

B.1.  Auxiliary lemmas

Before proceeding with the verification theorem, we provide several
Lemmas providing properties of our candidate value function 𝛱𝑁 (𝜃)
that will be later used in the verification

If 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (1) > 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜 > 0, then there exists a unique 𝜃∗ ∈ (0, 1)

Lemma 6.
solving the equation
)
(𝜃∗
𝜃∗𝑞𝐸 (0) = 𝛷 𝜋𝐸

(B.9)

If 𝑝𝐿 = 0, then 𝜃∗ = 0 is the unique solution to (B.9) on [0, 1].

Proof. As 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (0)  =  0, Eq. (B.9) is trivially satisfied at 𝜃∗ =  0, we
want to show that if 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (1) > 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜 = 𝑞𝐸 (0), then there is a non trivial
solution 𝜃∗ > 0 that also satisfies Eq. (B.9). First, if 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (1) > 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜,
then the right hand side of Eq. (B.9) is strictly larger than its left hand
side evaluated at 𝜃∗ = 1. Second, as 𝛷 𝜋′
𝐸 (0) < 𝑞𝐸 (0) it follows that for
𝜀 small enough 𝜀𝑞𝐸 (0) > 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜀). Thus, it follows from continuity that
a nontrivial solution exists on (0, 1). Uniqueness follows because

𝑞𝐸 (0) − 𝛷 𝜋′
𝐸
[

= 𝛷

𝑝𝐸

)

(𝜃∗

=

)

(𝜃∗
𝛷 𝜋𝐸
𝜃∗

𝜅𝐸(𝜃∗)

(𝜃∗

) 𝑅𝑜 −

1
𝜃∗

∫

0

− 𝛷 𝑝𝐸

(𝜃∗

) 𝑅𝑜
]

𝜅 𝑑 𝐹 (𝜅)

− 𝛷 𝑝𝐸

(𝜃∗

) 𝑅𝑜 < 0,

so the function 𝜃 𝑞𝐸 (0) − 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) single crosses 0 from above, which
)
(
and 𝜃 𝑞𝐸 (0) <  𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) on
implies 𝜃 𝑞𝐸 (0) >  𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) on 𝜃 ∈
0, 𝜃∗
𝜃 ∈  (𝜃∗, 1]. Finally, if 𝑝𝐿 =  0, then 𝛷 𝜋′
𝐸 (0)  = 𝑞𝐸 (0)  =  0. It follows
then from the convexity of 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) that 𝜃∗ = 0 is a global maximum of
𝜃 𝑞𝐸 (0) − 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃), which means that 𝜃 𝑞𝐸 (0) < 𝛷 𝜋𝐸 (𝜃) for all 𝜃 > 0. □

Lemma 7. There is a unique solution ̃𝜃𝑁 ∈ (0, 𝜃∗) to Eq. (B.8).

Proof. First, we show existence. Given the definition of 𝜃∗ and the
convexity of 𝜋(𝜃) we have that 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) < 𝜃 𝑞(0) for all 𝜃 < 𝜃∗. Hence,

(

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

𝜃∗

)

𝑞(0) +

(𝜌 + 𝜙)

𝑁 ∫
0

𝜃∗

𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁 (𝜃−𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦 < 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗).

We also have that
𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙
𝜃∗ 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) +

𝑁

(𝜌 + 𝜙)

≤ 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) −

𝑁 ∫
0
(
1 − 𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁

𝑁
(𝜌 + 𝜙)

)

𝜃∗

𝑞(0)

≤ 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) − 𝜃∗𝑞(0) = 0.

𝜃∗

𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁

(

𝑦

𝛷 𝜋(𝑦) −

)

𝑞(0)

𝑑 𝑦

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

The existence of a solution follows from the intermediate value theo-
rem. To show uniqueness, we consider the derivative of the difference
between the left and the right-hand sides of Eq. (B.8) evaluated at 𝜃,
which we denote by 𝐺′(𝜃).
𝐺′(𝜃) = 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁 (𝜃−𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) −

𝜃𝑞(0) +

𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

𝜃

(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁

∫
0

(𝜌 + 𝜙)2
𝑁 2
(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁

(

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) −

)

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

𝑞(0)

−

−

(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁
(𝜌 + 𝜙)2
𝑁 2

𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁 (𝜃∗−𝜃)𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) +
(

𝜃∗

𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁 (𝑦−𝜃)

∫

𝜃

𝛷 𝜋(𝑦) −

)

𝑞(0)

𝑑 𝑦

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗)

From here we get that
(
1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)
𝐺′(𝜃∗) = −

𝑁

𝜃∗

)

𝑞(0)

𝐺′(0) = −

𝜃∗

𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁 (𝜃∗−𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦 +

−

(𝜌 + 𝜙)2
𝑁 2
≤ (𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁
(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁
(𝜌 + 𝜙)2
𝑁 2
(𝜌 + 𝜙)
≥ −
𝑁
≥ (𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁

−

∫
0
)
(𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) − 𝜃∗𝑞(0)
𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁

𝜃∗ 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗)
(

𝜃∗

= 0

𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁

𝑦

𝛷 𝜋(𝑦) −

∫
0
𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) +
)
(𝜃∗𝑞(0) − 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗)

(
1 − 𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁

= 0

𝜃∗

)

𝑞(0)

𝑑 𝑦

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙
)

𝑞(0)

Moreover, we get that, for any 𝜃 ∈ (0, 𝜃∗), 𝐺(𝜃) = 0 implies

16 

)

𝜃

𝑞(0)

B.2.  Verification of optimality

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

𝐺′(𝜃) =

[

2(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) −

(

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

(𝜌 + 𝜙)

𝜃

+

𝑁 ∫
0
≤ 2(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁

𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁 (𝜃−𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦

[𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) − 𝜃 𝑞(0)] < 0.

(
1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)
)]

𝑁

It follows that 𝐺(𝜃) single crosses 0, so there is a unique solution to the
equation 𝐺(𝜃) = 0. □

Lemma 8. There is ̃𝑁 such that, for all 𝑁 > ̃𝑁, 𝛱 ′
and 𝛱 ′

𝑁 (𝜃) > 𝑞(0) on ( ̃𝜃𝑁 , 𝜃∗).

𝑁 (𝜃) < 𝑞(0) on (0, ̃𝜃𝑁 )

𝑁 (𝜃) < 𝑞(0) on (0, ̃𝜃𝑁 ). The derivative of
(

)

1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

𝜃

𝑞(0)

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) −

𝑁 (𝜃) − 𝑞(0) =

Proof. First, we very that 𝛱 ′
𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) − 𝜃 𝑞(0) on (0, ̃𝜃𝑁 ) is given by
𝜌 + 𝜙
𝛱 ′
𝑁
(𝜌 + 𝜙)2
𝑁 2
≤ 𝜌 + 𝜙
𝑁
≤ 𝜌 + 𝜙
𝑁

𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)
(

𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) −

−

∫

0

𝜃

(𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) − 𝜃 𝑞(0)) < 0.

𝑁 (𝜃−𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦

1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

)

𝜃

𝑞(0)

The derivative of 𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) − 𝜃 𝑞(0) on ( ̃𝜃𝑁 , 𝜃∗) is given by
𝛱 ′

𝑁 (𝜃∗−𝜃)𝛷 𝜋(𝜃∗) − 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃)

𝑁 (𝜃) − 𝑞(0) =

[
𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝜌 + 𝜙
𝑁
(𝜌 + 𝜙)

+

𝑁 ∫
𝜃

𝜃∗

𝑒− 𝜌+𝜙

𝑁 (𝑦−𝜃)

(

𝛷 𝜋(𝑦) −

)

𝑞(0)

]
𝑑 𝑦

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

Differentiating the HJB equation, we get that
𝛱 ′′

)
𝑁 (𝜃) − 𝛷 𝜋′(𝜃)

(𝛱 ′

𝛱 ′′′

𝑁 (𝜃) =

𝑁 (𝜃) =

(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁
(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁
From here we get that 𝛱 ′′
𝛱 ′

(𝛱 ′′

𝑁 (𝜃) − 𝛷 𝜋′′(𝜃)

) .

𝑁 (𝜃) = 0 ⟹ 𝛱 ′′′

𝑁 (𝜃) < 0, so we the function

𝑁 (𝜃) is quasi-concave on ( ̃𝜃𝑁 , 𝜃∗). Moreover, 𝛱 ′
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) = 𝑞(0) +

(𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) − 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 )

(𝜌 + 𝜙)
𝑁

𝛱 ′

) > 𝑞(0),

𝑁 (𝜃∗−) = 𝑞(0), and

𝑁 (𝜃) > 𝑞(0) on ( ̃𝜃𝑁 , 𝜃∗) as long as 𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) >

so we can conclude that 𝛱 ′
𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ), which follows from
𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) − 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) = 𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −) − 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 )
̃𝜃𝑁

(

1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

=

𝑁
𝜌 + 𝜙

)

𝑞(0) − 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 )

(𝜌 + 𝜙)

+

𝑁 ∫
(

̃𝜃𝑁

0

≥ 𝑁

𝜌 + 𝜙

1 − 𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)

𝑁

̃𝜃𝑁

𝑒− (𝜌+𝜙)
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −𝑦)𝛷 𝜋(𝑦)𝑑 𝑦
)

𝑞(0) − 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 )

= ̃𝜃𝑁 𝑞0 −

(𝜌 + 𝜙) ̃𝜃2
𝑁
𝑁

− 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) + 𝑂(

1∕𝑁 2).

̃𝜃𝑁 𝑞0 > 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) because 𝜃 𝑞0 single crosses 𝛷 𝜋(𝜃) at 𝜃∗
≥ ̃𝜃𝑁 . Hence,
there is ̃𝑁 such that, for all 𝑁 ≥ ̃𝑁, we have 𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) > 𝛷 𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ). □

Lemma 9. Let
{
𝛷 𝜋(𝜃)
𝑞(0)𝜃

𝛱(𝜃) =

if 𝜃 ∈ [𝜃∗, 1]
if 𝜃 ∈ [0, 𝜃∗).

Then, for any 𝜃 ∈ [0, 1]
𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) = 𝛱(𝜃).

lim
𝑁→0

For  all 𝜃 ≥ 𝜃∗, 𝛱𝑁 (𝜃)  = 𝛱(𝜃),  and,  for  any 𝜃  <  𝜃∗,

Proof.
lim𝑁→∞ 𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) = 𝜃 𝑞(0) = 𝛱(𝜃) by L’Hopital’s rule. □

We  start  providing  the  necessary  definitions  from  the  theory  of
viscosity solutions, together with the relevant results from the theory
of  optimal  control  in  stratified  domains  in Barles  et  al. (2018).  We
make some changes in notation to make it consistent with our setting,
and to translate their minimization problem into a maximization one.
While Barles et al. (2018) considers the state space to be the complete
real line, the state space in our case is [0, 1]. However, we can extend
the state space by letting the payoff on the complement of [0, 1] be
sufficiently low. This can be achieved by adding a penalization term
and setting the flow payoff equal to 𝜙𝜋(1) − ̇𝜃 𝑞(1) − 𝑘|𝜃 − 1| for 𝜃 > 1,
and 𝜙𝜋(0) − ̇𝜃 𝑞(0) − 𝑘|𝜃| for 𝜃 < 0. By choosing 𝑘 large enough, we can
ensure that the optimal solution never exits the interval [0, 1]. Due to
the discontinuity in the Hamiltonian at 𝜃∗, a viscosity solution might
fail to be unique. In order to fully characterize the value function we
need to specify its behavior at 𝜃∗. This is done in Barles et al. (2018) by
considering the concept of Flux-limited sub- and supersolutions. Letting
𝛺0 = (−∞, 𝜃∗) and 𝛺1 = (𝜃∗, ∞), we consider the equation
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱 − 𝐻0(𝜃 , 𝛱) = 0
⎧
⎪
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱 − 𝐻1(𝜃 , 𝛱) = 0
⎨
⎪
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱 − 𝜙𝜋(𝜃∗) = 0
⎩

in 𝛺0
in 𝛺1
in {𝜃∗},

(B.10)

where
𝐻0(𝜃 , 𝛱 ′) = 𝜙𝜋(𝜃) + 𝑘 min{0, 𝜃} + max
≤𝑁

̇𝜃|

|

𝐻1(𝜃 , 𝛱 ′) = 𝜙𝜋(𝜃) − 𝑘 max{0, 𝜃 − 1} + max
≤𝑁

̇𝜃|

|

{

̇𝜃(𝛱 ′ − 𝑞(0)

)}

{

̇𝜃(𝛱 ′ − 𝑞(𝜃)

)}

In 𝛺0 ∪ 𝛺1,  the  definitions  are  just  classical  viscosity  sub-  and

supersolution, which we provide next for completeness.

Definition 3 (Bardi and Capuzzo-Dolcetta, 2008, Definition 1.1). A func-
tion 𝑢 ∈ 𝐶(R) is  a  viscosity  subsolution  of (B.5) if,  for  any 𝜑 ∈
𝐶 1(R),
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝑢(𝜃0) − 𝐻(𝜃0, 𝜑′(𝜃0)) ≤ 0,

(B.11)

at any local maximum point 𝜃0 ∈ R of 𝑢 − 𝜑. Similarly, 𝑢 ∈ 𝐶(R) is a
viscosity supersolution of (B.5) if, for any 𝜑 ∈ 𝐶 1(R),
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝑢(𝜃1) − 𝐻(𝜃1, 𝜑′(𝜃1)) ≥ 0,

(B.12)

at  any  local  minimum  point 𝜃1 ∈ R of 𝑢 − 𝜑.  Finally, 𝑢 is  a  vis-
cosity  solution  of (B.5) if  it  is  simultaneously  a  viscosity  sub-  and
supersolution.

Before providing the definition of sub- and supersolution on {𝜃∗},
we introduce the following space ℑ of real valued test functions: 𝜑 ∈ ℑ
if 𝜑 ∈ 𝐶(R) and there exist 𝜑0 ∈ 𝐶 1(𝛺0) and 𝜑1 ∈ 𝐶 1(𝛺1) such that
𝜑 = 𝜑0 in 𝛺0, and 𝜑 = 𝜑1 in 𝛺1. Next, we introduce two Hamiltonians
that are needed to define a flux-limited sub- and supersolution at {𝜃∗}.
̇𝜃(𝛱 ′ − 𝑞(𝜃∗)
𝐻 +
{
̇𝜃(𝛱 ′ − 𝑞(0)

1 (𝜃∗, 𝛱 ′) ≡ 𝜙𝜋(𝜃) +  sup
0< ̇𝜃≤𝑁
0 (𝜃∗, 𝛱 ′) ≡ 𝜙𝜋(𝜃) +  sup
0> ̇𝜃≥−𝑁

𝐻 −

)}

)}

{

.

Definition  4 (Barles  et  al., 2018,  Definition  2.1). An  upper  semi-
continuous, bounded function 𝑢 ∶ R → R is a flux-limited subsolution on
{𝜃∗} if for any test function 𝜑 ∈ ℑ such that 𝑢 − 𝜑 has a local maximum
at 𝜃∗, we have
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝑢(𝜃∗) − max{𝜙𝜋(𝜃∗), 𝐻 −

1(𝜃∗))} ≤ 0.

0(𝜃∗)), 𝐻 +

0 (𝜃∗, 𝜑′

1 (𝜃∗, 𝜑′

(B.13)

A lower semi-continuous, bounded function 𝑣 ∶ R → R is a flux-limited
supersolution on {𝜃∗} if for any test function 𝜑 ∈ ℑ such that 𝑢 − 𝜑 has

17 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

a local minimum at 𝜃∗, we have
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝑣(𝜃∗) − max{𝜙𝜋(𝜃∗), 𝐻 −

0 (𝜃∗, 𝜑′

0(𝜃∗)), 𝐻 +

1 (𝜃∗, 𝜑′

1(𝜃∗))} ≥ 0.

Appendix C.  S-bank equilibrium

(B.14)

Proof of Lemma 1

0 and 𝐻 +

The Hamiltonians 𝐻 −

1 are needed to express the optimality
conditions at the discontinuity 𝜃∗. 𝐻 +
1 consider controls that starting
at 𝜃∗ take 𝜃𝑡 towards  the  interior  of [𝜃∗, 1],  and 𝐻 −
0 considers  con-
trols  that  starting  at 𝜃∗ take 𝜃𝑡 towards  the  interior  of [0, 𝜃∗].  The
0 and 𝐻 +
1 at {𝜃∗},  instead  of 𝐻0 and
use  of  the  Hamiltonians 𝐻 −
𝐻1,  distinguishes flux-limited viscosity  solutions  from  the  traditional
(discontinuous) viscosity solutions.

We consider the following control problem, equivalent to the one

defined in (B.3),

̃𝛱 ∗

𝑁 (𝜃0) =  sup
≤𝑁

∞

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡 (

∫

0

|𝜃𝑡|
− 𝑘(

𝜙 ̃𝜋(𝜃𝑡) − 𝜃𝑡 ̃𝑞(𝜃𝑡)𝟏{𝜃𝑡≠𝜃∗}
) )

max{0, 𝜃𝑡 − 1} − min{0, 𝜃𝑡}
̃𝜋(𝜃) = 𝜋(0)𝟏{𝜃 <0} + 𝜋(𝜃)𝟏{𝜃∈[0,1]} + 𝜋(1)𝟏{𝜃 >1}
̃𝑞(𝜃) = 𝑞(0)𝟏{𝜃 <0} + 𝑞(𝜃)𝟏{𝜃∈[0,1]} + 𝑞(1)𝟏{𝜃 >1}.

𝑑 𝑡

The following Theorem characterizes the value function ̃𝛱 ∗
of flux-limited viscosity solutions.

𝑁 in terms

Theorem 1 (Barles et al., 2018, Theorem 2.9). The value function ̃𝛱 ∗
the unique flux-limited viscosity solution to Eq. (B.10).

𝑁 is

We can now proceed to apply Theorem 1 to verify that 𝛱𝑁 defined

in (B.7) is the value function of the control problem (B.3).

)
(𝜃∗, 𝜑′(𝜃∗)

is nondecreasing in 𝜑′(𝜃∗) and 𝐻 −
0

Verification. Lemmas 7 and 8 imply that 𝛱𝑁 is a classical solution on
𝛺 ⧵ { ̃𝜃𝑁 , 𝜃∗} so we only need to verify the conditions for a viscosity
solution  on { ̃𝜃𝑁 , 𝜃∗}. 𝛱𝑁 defined  in (B.7) is  a  classical  solution  on
(𝜃∗, 1). At 𝜃 = 𝜃∗, 𝛱𝑁 has a convex kink, so we only need to verify the
supersolution property. That is, that for any 𝜑′(𝜃∗) in the subdifferential
𝑁 (𝜃∗+)],  inequality (B.14) is
𝑁 (𝜃∗−), 𝛱 ′
of 𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) at 𝜃∗,  which  is [𝛱 ′
)
(𝜃∗, 𝜑′(𝜃∗)
satisfied. 𝐻 +
1
is nonincreasing in 𝜑′(𝜃∗); thus, the supersolution property follows from
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱𝑁 (𝜃∗) − 𝐻 +
1
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱𝑁 (𝜃∗) − 𝐻 −
0

= (𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱𝑁 (𝜃∗) − 𝜙𝜋(𝜃∗) = 0
𝑁 (𝜃∗+)
= (𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱𝑁 (𝜃∗) − 𝜙𝜋(𝜃∗) = 0.
𝑁 (𝜃∗−)
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +), 𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) has a convex kink at ̃𝜃𝑁 , we
As 𝛱 ′
only need to verify the property for a supersolution. Thus, we need to
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +)], inequality (B.12) is
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −), 𝛱 ′
verify that for any 𝜑′( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) ∈ [𝛱 ′
satisfied. This amounts to verifying that
(𝜌+𝜙)𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) −𝜙𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) ≥ 𝑁 max

(𝜃∗, 𝛱 ′
(𝜃∗, 𝛱 ′
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −) < 𝑞(0) < 𝛱 ′

𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −) − 𝑞(0)|
, |
𝛱 ′
|
|
|
|

𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) − 𝑞(0)|
|
|

|
𝛱 ′
|
|

{

}

)

)

)
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) − 𝑞(0)

= 𝑁(𝑞(0) − 𝛱 ′

),
𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −)

By definition of ̃𝜃𝑁 , we have
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) − 𝜙𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) = 𝑁(𝛱 ′
so it follows that
(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝛱𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) − 𝜙𝜋( ̃𝜃𝑁 ) = 𝑁|
𝛱 ′
|
|

𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 −) − 𝑞(0)|
|
|

= 𝑁|
𝛱 ′
|
|

𝑁 ( ̃𝜃𝑁 +) − 𝑞(0)|
|
|

.

Finally,  at 𝜃 =  1,  by  choosing 𝑘 large  enough,  we  have  that  the
solution of the HJB equation on {𝜃 > 1} entails ̇𝜃(𝜃) = −𝑁. Moreover,
𝛱 ′(1−) = 𝑞(1) implies that the value function is differentiable at 𝜃 = 1
̇𝜃(1) ≤ 0 is  optimal.  Thus,  the
(in  the  extended  problem)  and  that
state  constraint  is  satisfied  at 𝜃 =  1.  A  similar  argument  applies  at
𝜃 =  0. Thus, we can conclude that 𝛱𝑁 (𝜃) is a flux-limited viscosity
solution,  so,  by Theorem  1,  it  is  the  value  function  of  the  optimal
control problem.

The  uniqueness  proof  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  HJB  has  a
unique solution in the smooth trading region, under the given boundary
conditions.  In  the  region [0, 𝜃∗),  smooth  trading  and  no  trading  are
both  ruled  out.  This  implies  that  trading  must  be  atomistic.  Under
atomistic trading, the price must be at least 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜, but the bank will
sell everything, even below this price. The solution 𝜃∗ is easily verified
as being unique.

Proof. Using  integration  by  parts  and  a  Transversality  condition
lim𝑡→∞ 𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑡𝐷𝑡 = 0, we have

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑠(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝐷𝑠𝑑 𝑠 − 𝐷0.

∞

∞

∫

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑠𝑑 𝐷𝑠 = ∫

0
(20) can be rewritten as

0

∞

[

E

max
(𝐷𝑡,𝜃𝑡)𝑡≥0

∫

0

𝑒−(𝜌+𝜙)𝑠 [(𝜙 ̂𝜋𝑆 (𝜃𝑠, 𝐷𝑠) − 𝑦 (𝜃𝑠, 𝐷𝑠

) 𝐷𝑠

+(𝜌 + 𝜙)𝐷𝑠

) 𝑑 𝑠 + 𝑑 𝐺 (𝜃𝑠

)]

]

−𝐷0

The optimization in the lemma follows directly from the definition of
𝜙𝜋(𝜃) □

Proof of Lemmas 2 and 3

Let  =  (𝐷 , 𝜃) + 𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃)

,  where 𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃) is  the
Proof.
Lagrange multiplier of the debt issuance constraint. From the first order
condition, 
𝜙 [𝑓 (𝜅𝑆 )𝛥2] 𝐷∗(𝜃) = 𝜌 − 𝜙𝑧(𝜃) ⇒ 𝑧(𝜃) =

𝐷 = 0, we get that the optimal solution 𝐷∗(𝜃) solves
)+

[𝑓 (𝜅𝑆 )𝛥2] 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

. (C.1)

−

[𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝐷]

( 𝜌
𝜙

To finish the derivation of optimal debt choice 𝐷∗ (𝜃), we need one
more assumption to guarantee that the second-order condition of the
constrained maximization problem is satisfied. Assumption 2 imposes
lower and upper bounds on 𝑓 ′ (𝜅), and will be satisfied in the uniform-
distribution case. The upper bound guarantees that, for any given 𝜃, the
second-order partial derivative of (23) will satisfy 
𝐷 𝐷 < 0. The lower
bound guarantees that, in the region where the equity holders’ limited
liability binds, the value function 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) will be convex in 𝜃.

Lemma 2 follows from the fact that 𝑧′ (𝜃) < 0, which is necessarily
the case given Assumption 2 and Eq. (C.1). Moreover, the constraint
clearly binds at 𝜃 = 0 with 𝐷∗ (0) = 𝛱𝑆 (0) = 0.

There  are  two  cases  to  be  considered:  when  the  borrowing  con-
straint is binding and when it is not. When the borrowing constraint is
slack, then 𝑧 (𝜃) = 0, so the conclusion follows directly. Thus, we only
need to verify the case in which the borrowing constraint, 𝐷 ≤ 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃),
is binding.

Note that from the solution to 𝐷∗ (𝜃), it is immediately clear that
. Using the

. In the constrained region, 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) =  (𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) , 𝜃)

𝑧 (𝜃) ≤ 𝜌
𝜙
Envelope Theorem to solve for 𝛱 ′
𝑑 (𝛱𝑆 (𝜃), 𝜃)
𝑑 𝜃

𝑆 (𝜃) =

𝛱 ′

𝑆 (𝜃), we get

=

=

𝜕
𝜕 𝜃

|
|
|
|𝐷=𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)
𝛷
1 − 𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃)

[𝑝 (𝜃) 𝑅𝑜 + 𝑓 (𝜅𝑆

] .
) 𝛥2𝑅𝑜𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

Since the 𝐹 .𝑂 .𝐶. implies
𝜌 − 𝜙𝑧 (𝜃)
𝜙

) 𝛥2𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) =

𝑓 (𝜅𝑆

,

we can show

𝛱 ′

𝑆 (𝜃) =

𝛷
1 − 𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃)

[

𝑝 (𝜃) +

𝜌 − 𝜙𝑧 (𝜃)
𝜙

]

𝑅𝑜.

Substituting this expression in Eq. (27), we get
)
𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑅𝑜

(1 − 𝛷) (1 − 𝑝 (𝜃)) 𝑅𝑜 + 𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃)

(𝛱 ′

̇𝜃 = 𝜙

𝑆 (𝜃)
(1 − 𝛷) (1 − 𝑝 (𝜃)) + 𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃)

𝛷 𝜋′′

(

𝛷 𝜋′′

𝑆 (𝜃)

)

𝜙 𝑝(𝜃)−1

(𝜌+𝜙)−𝜙𝑧(𝜃)

𝑅𝑜

= 𝜙

18 

Y. Hu and F. Varas

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104025 

= 𝜙

Clearly,

(1 − 𝛷) − 𝛷 𝑧(𝜃)𝜙
𝛷 𝜋′′

(𝜌+𝜙)−𝜙𝑧(𝜃)
𝑆 (𝜃)
̇𝜃 > 0 if and only if
𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃) 𝜙
(𝜌 + 𝜙) − 𝜙𝑧 (𝜃)

(1 − 𝑝 (𝜃)) 𝑅𝑜.

(1 − 𝛷) −

𝜌
𝜙
which  always  holds  because  of  the  upper  bound  on  the  Lagrange
multiplier, 𝑧 (𝜃) ≤ 𝜌
𝜙

𝜙
(𝜌 + 𝜙) − 𝜙𝑧 (𝜃)

> 0 ⟹

𝑧 (𝜃) ,

. □

>

Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. The convexity of 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) in the unconstrained region 𝐷∗ (𝜃) <
𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) follows under Assumption 2. In the constrained region where
𝐷∗ (𝜃) = 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃), we differentiate 𝛱 ′
(𝛱 ′
𝛱 ′′

𝑆 (𝜃) and get
)] .
𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑅𝑜

𝑆 (𝜃) + 𝑧′(𝜃)

𝑆 (𝜃) =

[𝑑′

𝛷
1 − 𝛷 𝑧(𝜃)

Substituting the first order condition for 𝐷 in 𝛱 ′
𝛱 ′

(1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) < 0.

𝑆 (𝜃) − 𝑅𝑜 = −

𝛷
1 − 𝛷 𝑧(𝜃)

𝑆 (𝜃), we get that

Hence, it suffices to show that 𝑧′(𝜃) ≤ 0. Note that (C.1) implies

𝑧′ (𝜃) = −

Note that 𝛱 ′
𝛱 ′
𝑆 (𝜃) =

[

+ 𝑓 𝛥2𝛱 ′

𝑓 ′𝛥2𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

𝜕 𝜅𝑆
𝜕 𝜃
𝑆 (𝜃), so that
𝑆 (𝜃) = 𝛷 𝜋′
𝛷
1 − 𝛷 𝑧 (𝜃)

]
𝑆 (𝜃)

.

] .
[𝑝 (𝜃) 𝑅𝑜 + 𝑓 𝛥2𝑅𝑜𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)

[𝑝 (𝜃) +
] > 0, which always holds under the lower bound imposes by

Therefore, for 𝑧′ (𝜃) < 0, it suffices to have 𝛥𝑓 ′𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) +
𝑓 𝛥2𝛱𝑆 (𝜃)
Assumption 2.

𝛷
1−𝛷 𝑧(𝜃)

Next, at the boundary 𝜃𝐷 where the equity holder’s limited liability
𝑆 (𝜃) is continuous, which follows from (26), and
𝑧 (𝜃) =
= 0. Therefore, we conclude that 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃), the value function in

constraint binds, 𝛱 ′
the continuity of 𝑑𝑆 (𝜃), 𝐷∗ (𝜃), as well as the fact that lim𝜃↑𝜃𝐷
𝑧 (𝜃𝐷
the smooth-trading case is globally convex.

)

Finally, note that at 𝜃 = 0, 𝛱 ′

𝑆 (𝜃) < 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜. At 𝜃 = 1, 𝛱𝑆 (1) > 𝛱𝐸 (1),
where 𝛱𝐸 (1) > 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜 follows from Assumption 1. The intersection be-
tween 𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) and 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜𝜃 then admits the unique solution 𝜃†. Moreover,
𝛱𝑆 (𝜃) < 𝑝𝐿𝑅𝑜𝜃 if and only if 𝜃 < 𝜃†. □

Appendix D.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104025. The online supple-
mentary  material  include  codes  to  generate  numerical  examples  in
Figures 5 and 6.

Data availability

Replication Code (Reference data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Admati, A.R., DeMarzo, P.M., Hellwig, M.F., Pfleiderer, P., 2018. The leverage ratchet

Ausubel,  L.M.,  Deneckere,  R.J.,  1989.  Reputation  in  bargaining  and  durable  goods

(1), 95–143.

effect. J. Financ. 73 (1), 145–198.

monopoly. Econometrica 511–531.

Bardi,  M.,  Capuzzo-Dolcetta,  I.,  2008.  Optimal  Control  and  Viscosity  Solutions  of

Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equations. Springer Science.

Barles,  G.,  Briani,  A.,  Chasseigne,  E.,  Imbert,  C.,  2018.  Flux-limited  and  classical
viscosity solutions for regional control problems. ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var.
24 (4), 1881–1906.

Bolton, P., Scharfstein, D.S., 1996. Optimal debt structure and the number of creditors.

J. Polit. Econ. 104 (1), 1–25.

Bulow, J.I., 1982. Durable-goods monopolists. J. Polit. Econ. 90 (2), 314–332.
Calomiris, C.W., Kahn, C.M., 1991. The role of demandable debt in structuring optimal

banking arrangements. Am. Econ. Rev. 497–513.

Chernenko,  S.,  Erel,  I.,  Prilmeier,  R.,  2022.  Why  do  firms  borrow  directly  from

nonbanks? Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4902–4947.

Coase, R.H., 1972. Durability and monopoly. J. Law Econ. 15 (1), 143–149.
Daley, B., Green, B., 2020. Bargaining and news. Am. Econ. Rev. 110 (2), 428–474.
DeMarzo, P.M., 2005. The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed

intermediation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 18 (1), 1–35.

DeMarzo, P.M., He, Z., 2021. Leverage dynamics without commitment. J. Financ. 76

(3), 1195–1250.

DeMarzo, P.M., Urošević, B., 2006. Ownership dynamics and asset pricing with a large

shareholder. J. Polit. Econ. 114 (4), 774–815.

Diamond, D.W., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Rev. Econ.

Stud. 51 (3), 393–414.

Diamond,  D.W.,  Rajan,  R.G.,  2001.  Liquidity  risk,  liquidity  creation,  and  financial

fragility: A theory of banking. J. Polit. Econ. 109 (2), 287–327.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2021. Banking on deposits: Maturity transformation

without interest rate risk. J. Financ. 76 (3), 1091–1143.

Drucker, S., Puri, M., 2009. On loan sales, loan contracting, and lending relationships.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (7), 2835–2872.

Flannery, M.J., 1994. Debt maturity and the deadweight cost of leverage: Optimally

financing banking firms. Am. Econ. Rev. 84 (1), 320–331.

Focarelli, D., Pozzolo, A.F., Casolaro, L., 2008. The pricing effect of certification on

syndicated loans. J. Monet. Econ. 55 (2), 335–349.

Fuchs, W., Skrzypacz, A., 2010. Bargaining with arrival of new traders. Am. Econ. Rev.

100 (3), 802–836.

Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2022. The rise of finance companies and fintech lenders in

small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4859–4901.

Gorton, G.B., Metrick, A., Ross, C.P., 2020. Who ran on repo? In: AEA Papers and
Proceedings, vol. 110, American Economic Association 2014 Broadway, Suite 305,
Nashville, TN 37203, pp. 487–492.

Gustafson, M.T., Ivanov, I.T., Meisenzahl, R.R., 2021. Bank monitoring: Evidence from

syndicated loans. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (2), 452–477.

Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real

sector. Q. J. Econ. 112 (3), 663–691.

Hu, Y., Varas, F., 2021. A dynamic theory of learning and relationship lending. J.

Financ. 76 (4), 1813–1867.

Hu, Y., Varas, F., Ying, C., 2021. Debt Maturity Management. Tech. Rep.
Irani, R.M., Iyer, R., Meisenzahl, R.R., Peydro, J.-L., 2021. The rise of shadow banking:

Evidence from capital regulation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (5), 2181–2235.

Irani,  R.M.,  Meisenzahl,  R.R.,  2017.  Loan  sales  and  bank  liquidity  management:
Evidence from a US credit register. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (10), 3455–3501.
Jiang, E., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2020. Banking Without Deposits: Evidence
from Shadow Bank Call Reports. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Leland,  H.E.,  Pyle,  D.H.,  1977.  Informational  asymmetries,  financial  structure,  and

financial intermediation. J. Financ. 32 (2), 371–387.

Malenko, A., Tsoy, A., 2020. Optimal time-consistent debt policies. Available at SSRN

3588163.

70 (2), 583–601.

Soc. 157–180.

1291–1314.

Milgrom, P., Segal, I., 2002. Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets. Econometrica

Milgrom, P., Shannon, C., 1994. Monotone comparative statics. Econometrica: J. Econ.

Parlour, C.A., Plantin, G., 2008. Loan sales and relationship banking. J. Financ. 63 (3),

Ramakrishnan,  R.T.,  Thakor,  A.V.,  1984.  Information  reliability  and  a  theory  of

financial intermediation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 51 (3), 415–432.

Rampini, A.A., Viswanathan, S., 2019. Financial intermediary capital. Rev. Econ. Stud.

Ross,  S.A.,  1977.  The  determination  of  financial  structure:  the  incentive-signalling

86 (1), 413–455.

approach. Bell J. Econ. 23–40.

Financ. Stud. 27 (8), 2354–2391.

Winton,  A.,  Yerramilli,  V.,  2021.  Monitoring  in  originate-to-distribute  lending:

reputation versus skin in the game. Rev. Financ. Stud.

Abel, A.B., 2018. Optimal debt and profitability in the trade-off theory. J. Financ. 73

Wang, Y., Xia, H., 2014. Do lenders still monitor when they can securitize loans? Rev.

19 

