Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Warp speed price moves: Jumps after earnings announcements✩
Kim Christensen a,b, Allan Timmermann c,∗, Bezirgen Veliyev a,b
a Department of Economics and Business Economics, Aarhus University, Fuglesangs Allé 4, 8210 Aarhus V, Denmark
b Research fellow at Danish Finance Institute (DFI), Denmark
c Rady School of Management and Department of Economics, UCSD, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Corporate earnings announcements unpack large bundles of public information that should, in efficient
markets, trigger jumps in stock prices. Testing this implication is difficult in practice, as it requires noisy high-
frequency data from after-hours markets, where most earnings announcements are released. Using a unique
dataset and a new microstructure noise-robust jump test, we show that earnings announcements almost always
induce jumps in the stock price of announcing firms. They also significantly raise the probability of price
co-jumps in non-announcing firms and the market. We find that returns from a post-announcement trading
strategy are consistent with efficient price formation after 2016.

Dataset link: Warp speed (Original data)

JEL classification:
C10
C80

Keywords:
After-hours trading
Earnings announcements
Jump testing
Spillover effects
High-frequency data
Market efficiency

1.  Introduction

Earnings  announcements  constitute  perhaps  the  single  most  im-
portant source of firm-level information. They are the key occasions
on which firms release audited results and communicate their views
on economic prospects to stock market investors. With several head-
line numbers being released simultaneously, earnings announcements
can  be  thought  of  as  points  in  time  where  draws  from  the  public
news process have a very high variance which, in all likelihood, leads
investors  to  materially  revise  their  estimates  of  firm  values.  In  an
efficient market where trading frictions are not prohibitively large, the

widespread prevalence of high-frequency trading for the most liquid
stocks therefore implies that earnings announcements should – almost
surely  –  trigger  jumps  in  prices.  Effectively,  a  very  high  propensity
of jumps in stock prices immediately after earnings announcements is
a necessary condition  for  markets  to  efficiently  incorporate  the  new
information.1 Building on this idea, we propose to use jump tests based
on  high-frequency  tick-by-tick  price  data  as  a  way  to  study  market
efficiency.

In recent years, the vast majority of publicly traded U.S. companies
have  made  their  earnings  announcements  in  the  after-hours  market
outside the regular trading session (9:30 am–4:00 pm).2 After-hours

✩
Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We thank an anonymous reviewer for insightful and constructive referee reports during the revision process.
We also thank Andrew Patton, Federico Bandi, Hashem Pesaran, Marcelo Moreira, Pete Kyle, Peter Hansen, Roberto Renò, Shuping Shi, Thomas Chemmanur,
Tim Bollerslev, Torben G. Andersen, Viktor Torodov, Yunus Topbas, and participants at the 33rd (EC)2 conference at ESSEC, France, the Advances in Financial
Econometrics conference at Copenhagen Business School, Denmark, the 15th annual SoFiE conference at Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea, the Volatility
conference at Singapore Management University, Singapore, the 32nd annual conference on Pacific Basin Finance, Economics, Accounting, and Management at
Rutgers Business School, USA, and in invited seminars at the Advanced Financial Technologies Laboratory (AFTLab) at Stanford University, Lancaster University
Management School (LUMS), University of Houston, University of Maryland, University of Nottingham, and University of Southern California for helpful comments.
We are grateful to research assistance from Hanbo Wang, who calculated the constituent members’ weights in the S&P 500 index. Christensen appreciates funding
from the Independent Research Fund Denmark (DFF 1028–00030B). This work was also supported by the Center for Research in Econometric Analysis of Time
Series (CREATES). In addition, Christensen and Veliyev are affiliated with the Danish Finance Institute (DFI), which financially supports researchers in Finance.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: atimmermann@ucsd.edu (A. Timmermann).

1 The condition that prices jump after earnings announcements is, however, not sufficient because the price could systematically over- or undershoot, thus

introducing predictable dynamics in the post-announcement returns. We explore this issue in Section 6.

2 Jiang et al. (2012), Lyle et al. (2024), and Michaely et al. (2013) report that more than 95% of U.S. firms announce earnings outside the regular exchange
trading session. This fraction is as high as 99.1% in the recent analysis by Grégoire and Martineau (2022) which studies companies belonging to the S&P 1500
stock index between 2011 and 2015.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104010
Received 28 May 2024; Received in revised form 20 January 2025; Accepted 23 January 2025
Available online 24 February 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

K. Christensen et al.

trading on days with earnings announcements are therefore central to
the  price  discovery  process  and  it  is  important  to  understand  price
dynamics  in  these  markets.  We  do  so  by  studying  price  discovery
and return predictability at a much higher tick-by-tick frequency than
in previous studies of earnings announcements. All told, we examine
almost 90 billion after-hours quotes and nearly 8 billion after-hours
transactions for 50 stocks over a twelve-year sample. Our analysis pro-
vides the most complete analysis of price formation in the after-hours
market for these stocks to date.

Unfortunately,  high-frequency  data  from  the  after-hours  trading
session are severely affected by market microstructure noise. The ir-
regular format of such data poses important challenges as it distorts
standard jump test procedures. Empirical work has therefore resorted
to testing for jumps during the regular trading session, which does not
include most earnings announcements.3 To overcome this shortcoming,
we  develop  a  new  jump  test  that  is  suitable  for  illiquid  and  noisy
markets by generalizing the classical bipower variation-based jump test
of Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2006). We construct a noise-robust
version of their test statistic that relies on a pre-averaging technique to
lessen the detrimental impact of the noise (see, e.g., Aït-Sahalia et al.,
2012; Jacod et al., 2009; Lee and Mykland, 2012; Podolskij and Vetter,
2009a,b) allowing for both heteroscedasticity and serial dependence in
the microstructure noise process. We also show how to estimate the
asymptotic variance of the test statistic, which is itself a non-trivial
problem.4 Through simulations and empirical results, we demonstrate
that  the  conventional  jump  test  is  severely  distorted  by  the  type  of
market microstructure noise that is prevalent in after-hours markets,
leading both to too many false positives and false negatives.

Using our new noise-robust test statistic, we find strong empirical
evidence  in  support  of  the  hypothesis  that  earnings  announcements
trigger jumps in prices. Specifically, the probability that the stock price
of announcing firms jumps in after-hours sessions with earnings an-
nouncements exceeds 90% while the corresponding jump probabilities
for the regular trading session and after-hours sessions without earnings
announcements  are  2.95%  and  3.67%.  In  a  nutshell,  prices  almost
always jump after earnings announcements, but rarely jump otherwise.
If  earnings  announcements  contain  industry-  and  economy-wide
news components, we should expect an increase in the jump probability
of non-announcing firms’ stock price as well as in the market index
on announcement days (Patton and Verardo, 2012; Savor and Wilson,
2016).  We  test  these  implications  and  find  compelling  support  for
their presence. Jump spillover effects are strongly related to industry
proximity and after-hours market liquidity with the probability of a
price jump more than doubling for a high-liquidity, non-announcing
firm in the same industry as the announcing firm compared to a low-
liquidity,  non-announcing  firm  from  other  industries.  The  spillover
effect is more potent early versus late in the earnings season, consistent
with Savor and Wilson (2016). Moreover, there is a significant increase
in the jump probability of the market index when many firms announce
together after controlling for the mechanical price effect resulting from
the announcing firms often being constituent members of the market
index.5

We  next  study  whether  prices  adjust sufficiently fast  and  by  an
appropriate  amount  to  efficiently  incorporate  the  new  information.
Our analysis inspects all trades and quotes, using a more detailed and

3 See, e.g., Aït-Sahalia and Jacod (2009), Aït-Sahalia et al. (2012), Andersen
et al. (2007), Caporin et al. (2017), Christensen et al. (2014), Corsi et al.
(2010) and Jiang and Oomen (2008).

4 We propose a jump- and noise-robust version of the subsampling approach
studied in Christensen et al. (2017), which delivers a consistent estimator with
desirable finite sample properties.

5 This finding suggests that the ‘‘information spillover’’ effect dominates
the ‘‘distraction’’ effect identified by Hirshleifer et al. (2009) who find that
the price response to earnings surprises is significantly weaker on days when
multiple firms announce their earnings.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

complete data set than previously examined. This means that we can
pinpoint exactly how long it takes for the price discovery process to
impound the news as well as identify the factors – including earnings
surprises, market liquidity and analyst coverage – determining price
movements in the immediate aftermath of earnings announcements.

We follow the approach of Patell and Wolfson (1984) by examining
a simple trading rule based on the earnings response model of Ball and
Brown (1968). That is, we compute return forecasts off the surprise
component in earnings announcements to decide whether to take a long
or short position in the stock. Over the twelve-year sample (2008–2020)
we earn a highly significant mean return of 1.80% per transaction in
a ‘‘no-friction’’ scenario where investors enter at the first transaction
price after the announcement. Executing trades instead at the midquote
of the bid–ask spread, mean returns drop to (a highly significant) 1.50%
per trade. This finding continues to hold for trades executed at the ac-
tual spreads obtained from the bid–ask quotes after the announcement
(mean return of 0.72%). Delaying trades by five seconds reduces mean
returns to 0.41% per trade, which remains significant. Further delays
beyond five seconds lead to mean returns that are no longer statistically
significant.

To  track  how  market  efficiency  has  evolved  over  time,  we  split
our data into two sub-samples chosen to reflect structural changes in
market  design,  as  explained  in  Section 6.2.  In  the  early  sub-sample
(2008–2015), mean returns are a highly significant 2.30% and 2.00%
per trade in the frictionless and midquote scenarios, respectively, and
remain  significant  and  large  (0.80%  per  trade)  even  with  a  trading
delay of 10 s. Conversely, in the second sub-sample (2016–2020), mean
returns are only significantly positive in the frictionless and midquote
scenarios, becoming small and insignificant in the presence of bid–ask
spreads  or  even  negative  with  timing  delays.  This  suggests  that  the
post-earnings announcement price discovery process in the after-hours
market has become extremely fast and increasingly efficient over time
for the most liquid U.S. stocks.6

The  theoretical  foundation  based  on  jump  testing  with  high-
frequency data is fundamentally different from conventional approaches
that  examine  how  news  releases  get  processed.  Existing  work  typi-
cally  looks  at  return  predictability,  usually  in  terms  of  serial  corre-
lation,  in  one-  or  five-minute  intervals  after  news  announcements,
see, e.g., Ederington and Lee (1993). While these time intervals are
relatively  short  in  an  absolute  sense,  they  are  excessively  long  in
modern markets with fast-paced, low-latency trading that can process
thousands  of  orders  within  a  few  milliseconds  after  news  releases
(see Fig.  1 for  an  illustrative  example).  In  markets  where  a  minute
can be an eternity, jump tests conducted at the tick-by-tick level are
arguably better at revealing whether prices react efficiently to news
announcements.

Our paper contributes to a burgeoning literature on how stock prices
react to earnings announcements, starting with Ball and Brown (1968)
and Beaver (1968).  The  vast  majority  of  the  research  in  this  field
has refrained from studying the instantaneous price change after an
earnings announcement and instead uncovers evidence of post-earnings
announcement drift (PEAD), see Bernard and Thomas (1989, 1990).
The  PEAD  can  be  interpreted  as  an  indirect  test  for  efficient  price
responses to earnings announcements because over- or underreaction in
the immediate post-announcement price change induces a subsequent
drift in the stock price. Tests for PEAD tend to exhibit low power and
lead to conflicting evidence, however, since it is difficult to accurately
estimate mean returns over a long post-event window that often spans

6 This  conclusion  agrees  with Chordia  et  al. (2018),  who  study  price
formation in the composite equity market around macroeconomic news. As in
our paper, they show that the speed of information processing has increased
in  recent  years  and  that  profits  from  proprietary  trading  are  economically
small. Brogaard et al. (2014) document how high-frequency traders aid with
price discovery through their trading.

2 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Fig. 1. Apple’s third-quarter 2020 earnings announcement on 07/30/2020.
Note. The figure shows the post-announcement price (left 𝑦-axis) and cumulative transaction count in 1,000s (right 𝑦-axis) for Apple’s third-quarter 2020 earnings announcement,
which was released at 4:30 pm on 07/30/2020. In Panel A, we plot the data from the first 60 s since the announcement, whereas Panel B zooms further in on the first 100 ms
since the announcement.

several days (or even months). Indeed, while Martineau (2022) con-
cludes  that  the  PEAD  is  notably  weaker  after  the  early  2000s, Fink
(2021) reaches the opposite conclusion that it has not vanished.7

Far  fewer  studies  analyze  ultra  short-term  stock  price  dynamics
after  earnings  announcements  and  none  comes  close  to  the  level  of
resolution used here. The most closely related article is Grégoire and
Martineau (2022), who examine how earnings announcement news get
transmitted to stock prices in the after-hours market. They examine a
broader set of stocks than we do but look at the dynamics of price
formation for each firm in far less detail, aggregating price changes into
one-minute intervals. They conclude that bid–ask spreads are so wide
that investors cannot cover their round-trip trading costs even if they
knew the post-announcement closing price in advance.8 We arrive at an
entirely different result for our sample of liquid firms: The post-earnings
transaction price at 6:30 pm (at the time where we close out our trading
strategy) is outside the pre-announcement quoted spread for 92.66%
of  the  earnings  announcements.  So  the  post-earnings  announcement
price dynamics are rather distinctive for the most liquid stocks that
exhibit the lowest bid–ask spreads and account for the vast majority
of after-hours trading volume.

Our analysis is also connected to a more general stream of work
that  examines  price  discovery  and  trading  in  the  after-hours  mar-
ket,  notably Barclay  and  Hendershott (2003)  who  find  evidence  of
inefficient  price  formation  in  those  markets.  Our  results  show  that
after-hours  trading  activity  (and,  hence,  price  discovery)  is  really  a
tale of two markets. Even for the vastly liquid stocks examined here,

7 More  recently, Chan  and  Marsh (2024)  argue  that  although  there  is
scant evidence of a daily (close-to-close) PEAD, a significant overnight effect
remains, particularly for firms with extreme earnings misses.

8 Specifically, Grégoire  and  Martineau

(2022)  write  that  ‘‘pre-
announcement  bid–ask  spreads  are  wide  enough  to  include  the
post-announcement closing price, eliminating the profits of informed liquidity
takers’’.

after-hours trading volume is almost entirely dormant on days without
earnings  announcements  (or  other  important  company-specific  news
releases).  In  contrast,  on  days  with  earnings  announcements,  after-
hours  trading  activity  explodes.  Average  after-hours  trading  volume
on days with earnings announcements exceeds its counterpart on days
without earnings announcements by almost two orders of magnitude.9
Other articles also study the link between jumps in stock prices and
news effects. Andersen et al. (2003) study price discovery in foreign
exchange markets around the dissemination of macroeconomic news.
As in our paper, they show that changes in exchange rates are deter-
mined by the sign and magnitude of the standardized announcement
surprise  but  restrict  attention  to  high-frequency  data  sampled  at  5-
min frequency. This is further documented in Jeon et al. (2022), who
base their analysis on general news and daily data. Aït-Sahalia et al.
(2024) relate stock price jumps extracted from 5-s intraday log-returns
to firm-level, industry and macroeconomic news. In contrast, we exam-
ine earnings announcements and high-frequency data sampled at the
tick-by-tick level, which is the highest possible degree of granularity.
Our finding that stock prices predominantly jump on earnings an-
nouncements days and induce jump spillover effects for other stocks
and the market index has important implications also for the pricing of
contingent claims affected by earnings announcement risk (Dubinsky
et  al., 2019; Bandi  et  al., 2022; Todorov  and  Zhang, 2025).  More-
over, Bollerslev et al. (2016) find significantly positive risk premia for
jump and overnight risk, but not for continuous variation. This suggests
that investors command a risk premium for exposure to discontinuous
or overnight variation in the aggregate market. In addition to this, Lou
et  al. (2019)  show  that  most  of  the  equity  risk  premium  accrues
overnight. Our findings can help to shed further light on this issue,
including  the  extent  to  which  the  equity  risk  premium  is  driven  by
earnings announcements.

9 Averaged over firms and years, this ratio equals 93.57 over our sample.

3 

K. Christensen et al.

The  outline  of  the  paper  is  as  follows.  Section 2 establishes  the
link  between  price  jumps  and  market  efficiency  before  introducing
our new noise-robust jump test statistic. Section 3 explains our data
sources. Section 4 implements the jump test statistic on a unique set
of  high-frequency  data  that  includes  information  about  the  transac-
tion record from outside the official opening hours of the exchange.
Section 5 examines jump spillover effects, and Section 6 studies price
dynamics after earnings announcements and analyzes returns from a
simple trading strategy. Section 7 concludes. Supplemental appendices
available online at the publisher’s website provide additional results
and technical analysis.

2.  Market efficiency and price jumps

We begin by motivating why, in efficient markets, we should expect
stock prices to jump immediately after earnings announcements. Next,
to test this implication we introduce a new jump test that is robust
to the high levels of market microstructure noise typical in after-hours
trading sessions. We finish the section by reporting results from Monte
Carlo simulations comparing the performance of our new noise-robust
test to existing jump tests.

2.1.  Earnings announcements

𝑡

𝑡

Earnings  announcements  unpack  large  bundles  of  information  to
the public. The timing of their release is typically known in advance,
giving  investors  ample  opportunity  to  prepare  and  respond  more  or
less instantaneously.10 Since the main research question of our paper is
to analyze the process by which stock market participants incorporate
such public information into prices, we begin by defining what is meant
by efficient price and price discovery processes. To this end, let public
be the public information set at time 𝑡. The efficient price at time 𝑡, 𝑃𝑡,
is defined as the expectation of some equilibrium price, 𝑣𝑡, conditional
on this information:
],
𝑃𝑡 = EQ[𝑣𝑡 ∣ public
where Q is the risk-neutral probability measure (we ignore the time-
discounting  effect,  or  assume  interest  rates  are  zero,  for  notational
convenience). Here, 𝑣𝑡 can be thought of as the liquidation value of
the stock or, more broadly, the conditional expectation of its future
cash flow (FCF𝑡) given the collective private information of investors,
private
, it follows
𝑡
]
by the dominance of the coarser filtration that 𝑃𝑡 = EQ[
.
If, at each point in time, the efficient price is determined in ac-
cordance  with (1),  we  expect  the  release  of  large  amounts  of  new
public information to trigger large, and essentially instantaneous, price
changes (i.e., a jump). We take price discovery to represent the process
by  which  new  public  information  gets  impounded  into  the  efficient
price; a common definition in the literature (e.g., Andersen et al., 2003;
Hasbrouck, 1991).

, that is, 𝑣𝑡 = EQ[

]
. Since public

FCF𝑡 ∣ private
𝑡

FCF𝑡 ∣ public

⊆ private
𝑡

(1)

𝑡

𝑡

In a second strand of the literature, price discovery refers to how
private information gets incorporated into the efficient price (e.g. Biais
et  al., 1999; Vives, 1995)  through  a  tatonnement  process  in  which
the  trades  of  informed  parties  reveal  their  private  information  (e.g.
Glosten and Milgrom, 1985; Kyle, 1985). In that setting, 𝑃𝑡 converges
toward 𝑣𝑡 (a  moving  target  in  practice).  This  definition  is  ill-suited
for studying the pricing implications of earnings announcements as we
do not expect the release of previously-private now-public information
to alter the equilibrium price which depends on the firm’s underlying

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

business activity, the state of the economy, etc. In contrast, the efficient
price determined according to (1) is highly likely to change.11

Changing to the physical probability measure, (1) can be rewritten

(2)

as
𝑃𝑡 = E[𝑣𝑡 ∣ public
where 𝑚𝑡 is the stochastic discount factor.

[𝑣𝑡, 𝑚𝑡 ∣ public

+ cov

],

]

𝑡

𝑡

The  covariance  term  in (2) represents  a  risk  premium  that  can
trigger a jump in the price even for an average earnings announcement
(i.e., one equal to its expectation) that does not change the first term.
This  requires  a  preference  function  that  demands  compensation  for
information when it is realized, not when the actual risk is materialized,
which is not possible in standard expected utility models. Ai and Bansal
(2018) develop a revealed preference theory under non-expected util-
ity. In their model, low-utility states are overweighed and high-utility
states underweighed relative to their physical probabilities. Effectively,
the pre-announcement price is computed using distorted probabilities,
which can be interpreted as a stochastic discount factor for announce-
ment returns that is embedded in the second term in (2). This leads to
an upward jump in the price after a ‘‘no surprise’’ announcement which
rules out very poor earnings results and reduces the overweighing of
low-utility  states. Ai  and  Bansal (2018)  show  that Epstein  and  Zin
(1989) utility favoring early resolution of uncertainty can generate this
effect,  but  it  extends  to  a  wider  class  of  generalized  risk  sensitivity
preferences, including robust control (see, e.g., Hansen, 2021).

This discussion suggests the following hypothesis.

Hypothesis 1. Necessary conditions for market efficiency after an
earnings announcement include that, for the most liquid stocks,

1. The  stock  price  of  the  announcing  firm  almost  always  jumps

immediately after the earnings announcement.

2. The stock price of the announcing firm is more likely to jump
up than down following an earnings announcement in line with
analyst expectations.

Earnings announcements may contain firm-, industry-, and market-
wide  components.  Therefore,  investors  revise  their  expectations  not
only  about  the  prospects  of  the  announcing  firm  but  also  of  other
firms and the broader economy (Patton and Verardo, 2012; Savor and
Wilson, 2016). We therefore expect earnings announcements to induce
spillover effects that increase the likelihood of jumps in the prices of
non-announcing  firms  and  the  market  index.  This  effect  is  arguably
stronger for non-announcing firms with a closer industry proximity and
high after-hours market trading activity, where the latter is required to
facilitate the price discovery process. We also expect the information
effect – and hence the jump spillover – to be enhanced for companies
that announce their fiscal results early in the earnings season, since
investors revise their beliefs the most in the beginning of the cycle, as
documented in Savor and Wilson (2016).

Hypothesis 2.
Information and learning-induced spillover effects in
jump probabilities from the announcing to non-announcing firms and
the broader market index imply that:

1. The prices of other (non-announcing) firms are more likely to

jump on days with earnings announcements.

2. The increase in the jump probability for a non-announcing firm
is higher if (i) the non-announcing firm is closer to the announc-
ing firm (in terms of industry proximity); (ii) the announcing
firm is early in the news announcement cycle; and (iii) the an-
nouncing and non-announcing firm are more liquid with higher
after-hours market trading activity.

10 Most large-cap companies inform markets in advance about their intention
to release a financial report either Before Market Open (BMO), during Regular
Trading Hours (RTH), or After Market Close (AMC), see, e.g., https://www.
nasdaq.com/market-activity/earnings.

11 Although we are not measuring how far the efficient price is from the
equilibrium price, we do expect the post-announcement price to be closer to
the equilibrium price than the pre-announcement price.

4 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

3. The market index is more likely to jump on days with earnings
announcements  and  the  jump  probability  is  higher  on  days
where multiple firms announce their earnings.

Higher  jump  probabilities  in  stock  prices  after  an  earnings  an-
nouncement are a weak implication in the sense that it is a necessary
but not sufficient condition for market efficiency. This holds because
stock  prices  could  over-  or  undershoot.  For  example,  prices  could
jump  too  far,  giving  rise  to  a  mean-reverting  component  that  drifts
toward the pre-announcement price in the aftermath of the jump. If
instead prices do not jump far enough, we should expect to see post-
announcement prices drift in the direction of the jump, as evident in
the post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD) literature (Bernard and
Thomas, 1989, 1990).

These examples suggest that a sufficient condition for market ef-
ficiency after earnings announcements is that investors cannot detect
return predictability at any point on the post-announcement price path
and exploit such predictability after accounting for trading costs:12

Hypothesis 3. A sufficient condition for market efficiency after an
earnings  announcement  is  that,  at  each  point  in  time  of  the  post-
announcement price path:

1. Post-announcement returns of the announcing firm do not dis-
play any predictive patterns large enough to allow investors to
earn abnormal returns after accounting for transaction costs.
2. Post-announcement returns of the non-announcing firms and the
market index do not display any predictive patterns large enough
to allow investors to earn abnormal returns after accounting for
transaction costs.

Hypothesis 3 does not mean that the price discovery process is set-
tled instantaneously. We expect elevated volatility of the price process
to  last  several  minutes  after  the  release  of  the  news  as  information
gets processed and trading positions are adjusted. However, the price
discovery process should not leave any (local) biases allowing investors
to predict future price movements.

The condition that return predictability should not be exploitable is
important and goes back to Jensen (1978).13 Trading costs and bid–ask
spreads may induce negative autocorrelation in returns, but this should
not generate abnormal profits after accounting for round-trip transac-
tion costs. Time-varying risk premia may induce predictability in the
price  process  but  they  are  unlikely  to  matter  at  the  high  resolution
studied here.

Testing  the  sufficient  conditions  in Hypothesis  3 is  challenging
because it has to hold for all possible trading rules that condition on
the prevailing information. Short of inspecting the profitability of all
possible trading rules based on the released information, it is difficult
to  conduct  an  exhaustive  test  of  the  condition.  In  practice,  analysis
typically examines simple strategies based on news measures such as
earnings surprises. Conclusions about market efficiency are therefore
limited to the class of trading rules being examined.

2.2.  Comparison to existing tests of market efficiency

Our approach to testing market efficiency by examining the pres-
ence  of  jumps  after  the  disclosure  of  public  information  is  funda-
mentally different from common practice in the finance literature on

12 Efficient prices are only determined up to the marginal cost of acquiring
and processing information and executing transactions (Grossman and Stiglitz,
1980; Pedersen, 2015). In principle, we should also account for risk premia,
but since the returns from our proposed trading strategy are accrued over very
short horizons, we do not expect such a correction to alter the results much.
13 He defines market efficiency as follows: ‘‘A market is efficient with respect
to information set 𝜃𝑡 if it is impossible to make economic profits by trading
on the basis of information set 𝜃𝑡’’.

testing  market  efficiency  in  the  aftermath  of  macroeconomic  news
announcements (e.g., Ederington and Lee, 1993; Andersen et al., 2003)
or corporate earnings announcements (e.g., Beaver, 1968; Chambers
and Penman, 1984; Jiang et al., 2012; Grégoire and Martineau, 2022;
Lyle et al., 2024).

This literature typically studies predictability in post-announcement
returns  over  fixed  time  intervals  such  as  one  or  five  minutes.  For
example, Ederington and Lee (1993) conclude that ‘‘Following an an-
nouncement, traders with immediate access to the market apparently form
an estimate of the release’s implication for market prices almost immedi-
ately, and the actual price adjusts to this level within one minute. The price
level at the end of one minute of trading is a relatively unbiased estimate of
the final equilibrium price.’’ Andersen et al. (2003) observe that ‘‘The gen-
eral pattern is one of very quick exchange-rate conditional mean adjustment,
characterized by a jump immediately following the announcement, and little
movement thereafter.’’ Importantly, the evidence of jumps presented by
the  latter  relies  on  inspection  of  price  movements  over  five-minute
intervals and their sampling scheme does not allow them to formally
test for instantaneous jumps in exchange rates.

In contrast, our hypotheses explicitly do not reference time inter-
vals, such as one or five minutes. Rather, jumps must occur as close
to instantaneously as trading technology allows (Hypotheses 1 and 2)
and the sufficient conditions in Hypothesis 3 must hold at each point
in time, i.e., on the entire price path, regardless of whether we are
studying fixed or varying intervals in calendar or trading time. This
is an important advantage because any choice of time interval used in
conventional market efficiency tests is arbitrary.

More  importantly,  in  the  current  fast-paced  markets  transactions
can occur at high frequency where it is possible to execute thousands
of trades at very short intervals measured in milliseconds or less. The
absence of serial correlation in, e.g., one-minute returns is therefore
no  guarantee  that  prices  move  efficiently.  In  a  world  dominated  by
algorithmic  trading  with  latency  delays  shrinking  ever  closer  to  the
lower bound imposed by the speed of light, only jump tests can reveal
whether markets react efficiently to big news events.

To illustrate the extreme speed with which transactions occur in the
immediate aftermath of an announcement, Panel A of Fig. 1 shows tick-
by-tick evidence on the price movement and transaction count from the
announcement (time 0) to 60 s after Apple (AAPL) released its earnings
report on 07/30/2020; Panel B zooms further in on the first 100 ms.
Transactions begin 15 ms after the announcement and their toll exceeds
more than 800 in the first post-announcement second. The fastest trades
can possibly be attributed to algorithmic traders sniping stale quotes
in the limit order book, while the flat spots can appear when a large
amount of passive resting volume (e.g., an iceberg order) is executed
against a sequence of smaller trades. Trading activity then lies dormant
for  a  few  seconds  before  picking  up  significant  steam  again  around
the time where slower financial intermediaries are likely to enter the
market. On average, in the first ten seconds 300 trades execute per
second, while in the one-minute post-announcement window more than
165 trades get executed per second.14

This example highlights the speed with which prices of the most
liquid stocks adjust after earnings announcements. It also motivates the
need for new market efficiency tests that account for such extremely
fast trading, yet possess robustness to the high levels of noise typically
encountered in after-hours markets. This is the topic we next turn to.

14 Toward the end of our sample, trading activity in the after-hours market
is much higher than in the early years with high-speed electronic trading often
exceeding 200 trades per second right after an earnings announcement.

5 

K. Christensen et al.

2.3.  A noise-robust jump test

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Quadratic variation can equivalently be defined as follows:

The vast majority of corporate earnings announcements occur in
the  after-hours  market.15 Here,  the  trading  volume  is  typically  far
lower and bid–ask spreads much wider compared to the regular trading
session. As we demonstrate below, in the presence of such microstruc-
ture frictions, conventional jump tests tend to spuriously identify false
jumps, while often failing to detect true jumps. This shortcoming makes
it important to have tests that are robust to the noised-up features of
high-frequency data from the after-hours market.16

Given the popularity in empirical work of the jump test of Barndorff-
Nielsen and Shephard (2006), we develop a noise-robust generalization
which retains the intuitive nature of their test. We state the main results
below with detailed definitions and formal proofs provided in Appendix
A.

2.3.1.  The efficient price

We start by introducing a general continuous-time setup for mod-
eling noisy high-frequency data. Consider a security price observed on
the time interval [0,1] which we interpret as a complete daily trading
session as described in Section 3. The fundamental theorem of asset
pricing  implies  that  in  an  efficient  market  without  frictions  and  no
arbitrage the price process, 𝑃 = (𝑃𝑡)𝑡≥0, must be a semimartingale (e.g.,
Delbaen and Schachermayer, 1994). Starting with the log-price process
𝑝 =  (𝑝𝑡)𝑡≥0,  where 𝑝𝑡 =  log(𝑃𝑡),  we  can  decompose  the  cumulative
intraday log-return at time 𝑡, 𝑟𝑡 = 𝑝𝑡 − 𝑝0, into a continuous part and a
jump, or discontinuous, part:
𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑐

(3)

𝑡 + 𝑟𝑑
𝑡 .

In  Appendix  A,  we  introduce  a  general  but  succinct  mathematical
definition  of  these  two  separate  sources  of  risk.  Our  framework  is
nonparametric and model-free, since we do not constrain the dynamics
of the efficient price process, and is compatible with salient features
of high-frequency financial data such as time-varying expected returns,
stochastic volatility, leverage effects, and jumps in the price and volatil-
ity. Furthermore, the price jump component can be infinitely active and
of infinite variation.

The null hypothesis that we wish to test is that 𝑃 is continuous. This

0 ∶ 𝜔 ∈ 𝛺0, where 𝛺0 ⊆ 𝛺 is the subset:

can be formulated as 
𝛺0 = {𝜔 ∈ 𝛺 ∶ 𝑡 ⟼ 𝑃𝑡(𝜔) is continuous on [0, 1]}.
We test this null, which is equivalent to the restriction 𝑟𝑑
against the alternative 
𝛺0.

𝑎 ∶ 𝜔 ∈ 𝛺1 with 𝛺1 = 𝛺∁
0

𝑡 = 0 for all 𝑡,
, the complement of

(4)

To  develop  a  test  of 

0,  we  examine  the  composition  of  the

quadratic return variation:

[𝑟]1 = ∫

1

0

𝜎2
𝑠 d𝑠 +

∑

0≤𝑠≤1

(𝛥𝑟𝑑

𝑠 )2,

(5)

where 𝜎𝑠 is the instantaneous volatility at time 𝑠, 𝛥𝑟𝑑
𝑠 = 𝑟𝑑
𝑠− is
the associated jump size, and 𝑟𝑑
𝑡 . The first term in (5) is
the quadratic variation of the continuous log-return, also known as the
integrated variance. The second term represents the quadratic variation
of the jump process, which is zero under 

𝑠− =  lim𝑡↑𝑠 𝑟𝑑

𝑠 − 𝑟𝑑

0.

15 Perhaps for this reason, existing empirical work based on high-frequency
data  from  the  regular  trading  session  is  somewhat  inconclusive  about  the
importance of jumps relative to the diffusive volatility (as often modeled by
the inclusion of a Brownian motion in the price process), see, e.g., Christensen
et al. (2014).
16 Aït-Sahalia et al. (2012) construct a noise-robust jump test from power
variations  sampled  at  different  frequencies,  but  it  is  not  evident  how  one
should  implement  such  sampling  in  the  after-hours  market  that  is  typi-
cally illiquid with limited trading. In the simulation analysis, we show that
our noise-robust bipower variation-based jump test is on par with or even
outperforms their test statistic.

[𝑟]1 = plim
𝑛→∞

𝑛
∑

𝑟2
𝑖 ,

(6)

− 𝑝𝑡𝑖−1

𝑖=1
is the log-return over [𝑡𝑖−1, 𝑡𝑖] and the convergence
where 𝑟𝑖 = 𝑝𝑡𝑖
in probability holds for every partition 0 = 𝑡0 < 𝑡1 < ⋯ < 𝑡𝑛 = 1 such
𝑝
⟶ 0 as 𝑛 → ∞, motivating why tick-by-tick
that max1≤𝑖≤𝑛(𝑡𝑖 − 𝑡𝑖−1)
high-frequency data is used to estimate quadratic variation.

2.3.2.  The observed price

In practice, the efficient market hypothesis is violated because of
market frictions – or microstructure noise – such as price discreteness
and bid–ask spreads. In addition, even though the price process evolves
in continuous-time, trading is discrete. In this section, we suppose for
notational convenience that the observed log-price is recorded regularly
at equidistant time points 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑖𝛥𝑛, for 𝑖 = 0, 1, … , 𝑛, where 𝛥𝑛 = 1∕𝑛 is
the time gap, which we collect in 𝑝∗ = (𝑝∗
𝑖𝛥𝑛

To account for microstructure noise, we follow Hasbrouck (1995)

)𝑛
𝑖=0

.17

as

and model 𝑝∗
𝑖𝛥𝑛
+ 𝜖𝑖𝛥𝑛
is the microstructure effect.

𝑝∗
𝑖𝛥𝑛
where 𝜖𝑖𝛥𝑛

= 𝑝𝑖𝛥𝑛

,

The key challenge is to draw inference about the presence of jumps
in  the  efficient  price  from  a  high-frequency  record  of  noisy  prices.
To see this, note from (7) that the observed log-return measures the
efficient log-return with error due to the microstructure component:
𝑖 = 𝑝∗
𝑟∗
𝑖𝛥𝑛

= 𝑟𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖𝛥𝑛

− 𝜖(𝑖−1)𝛥𝑛

− 𝑝∗

(𝑖−1)𝛥𝑛

(8)

.

(7)

2.3.3.  The pre-averaging approach

To mitigate the effect of microstructure noise, we adopt the pre-
averaging procedure of Jacod et al. (2009) and Podolskij and Vetter
(2009a,b). Specifically, we replace the observed noisy log-return by a
pre-averaged log-return:

̄𝑟∗
𝑖 =

𝑘𝑛−1
∑

𝑗=1

𝑔𝑛
𝑗 𝑟∗

𝑖+𝑗 ,

for 𝑖 = 0, … , 𝑛 − 𝑘𝑛 + 1,

(9)

where 𝑔𝑛
averaging horizon, and 𝜃 > 0 is a tuning parameter.

𝑗 = 𝑔(𝑗∕𝑘𝑛) is  a  weight  function, 𝑘𝑛 = ⌊𝜃

√

𝑛⌋ is  the  pre-

The averaging in (9) attenuates the microstructure noise and en-
hances the efficient log-return. If 𝑘𝑛 is even and 𝑔(𝑥) = min(𝑥, 1 − 𝑥), (9)
can be rewritten as

̄𝑟∗
𝑖 =

1
𝑘𝑛

𝑘𝑛∑

𝑗=𝑘𝑛∕2+1

𝑝∗
(𝑖+𝑗)𝛥𝑛

−

1
𝑘𝑛

𝑘𝑛∕2
∑

𝑗=1

𝑝∗
(𝑖+𝑗)𝛥𝑛

.

(10)

𝑛−𝑘𝑛+1
𝑖=0

constitutes a sequence of log-returns constructed by
Thus, (̄𝑟∗
𝑖 )
simple  averaging  of  the  noisy  log-price.  With  minor  modifications,
standard estimators of quadratic variation can therefore be tweaked
to exploit the pre-averaged log-return series. We next define the pre-
averaged realized variance and pre-averaged bipower variation as fol-
lows:

|̄𝑟∗
𝑖 |

2 − 𝑐𝑛
2

̂𝜔2
𝑛 ,

𝑅𝑉 ∗

𝑛 = 𝑐𝑛
1

𝐵 𝑉 ∗

𝑛 = 𝑐𝑛

1

𝑛−2𝑘𝑛+1
∑

𝑖=0
𝑛−2𝑘𝑛+1
∑

𝑖=0

𝜋
2

𝑖 ||̄𝑟∗
|̄𝑟∗

𝑖+𝑘𝑛 | − 𝑐𝑛

2

̂𝜔2
𝑛 ,

(11)

17 In the empirical application, we employ tick time sampling, which leads to
irregularly and randomly spaced observation times. We elaborate on the details
in that section. However, it is important to note that the pre-averaging theory
presented below remains compatible with such data, as long as max1≤𝑖≤𝑛(𝑡𝑖 −
𝑡𝑖−1)

𝑝
⟶ 0 as 𝑛 → ∞.

6 

K. Christensen et al.

where

̂𝜔2
𝑛 = 𝜌𝑛(0) + 2

𝓁𝑛∑

𝑚=1

𝜌𝑛(𝑚),

(12)

(𝑝∗
𝑖𝛥𝑛

− ̃𝑝∗

(𝑖+2ℎ𝑛)𝛥𝑛

)(𝑝∗

(𝑖+𝑚)𝛥𝑛

− ̃𝑝∗

(𝑖+4ℎ𝑛)𝛥𝑛

),

(13)

 inf.
𝑛 =

)

𝑑

⟶ 𝑁(0, 1),

(17)

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

𝑛 and 𝐵 𝑉 ∗

𝑛 as estimators of integrated variance under

Applying the delta rule to (16), it follows from Theorem 1 that,

distribution of 𝑅𝑉 ∗


0.

under 

0:
𝑛1∕4(𝑅𝑉 ∗
√

𝑛 − 𝐵 𝑉 ∗
𝑛
𝑣⊤𝛴 𝑣

where 𝑣 = [1, −1]⊤. In contrast,  inf.
𝑎,
𝑛
so large values of the test statistic point toward the presence of price
jumps.

𝑝
⟶ ∞ under the alternative, 

(14)

𝑛−5ℎ𝑛∑

𝜌𝑛(𝑚) =

1
𝑛 − 5ℎ𝑛 + 1

𝑖=0
for 𝑚 = 0, 1, … , 𝓁𝑛, and
ℎ𝑛−1
∑

̃𝑝∗
𝑖𝛥𝑛

=

1
ℎ𝑛

𝑝∗
(𝑖+𝑗)𝛥𝑛

.

𝑗=0

𝑛 is the sum of squared pre-averaged returns, whereas 𝐵 𝑉 ∗

𝑛 is based
𝑅𝑉 ∗
on cross-products that are 𝑘𝑛 terms apart. As we prove in Theorem 1,
𝑛 is asymptotically jump-robust,
the extra distancing ensures that 𝐵 𝑉 ∗
and 𝑐𝑛
is not. The scalars 𝑐𝑛
are defined in Appendix
whereas 𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛
2
1
A and depend on the weight function, 𝑔, and pre-averaging window,
𝑘𝑛.

In the above, both estimators are normalized for the effect of pre-
averaging  and  bias-corrected  for  residual  microstructure  noise.  The
bias-correction  employs  the  estimator  in (12) due  to Jacod  et  al.
(2019). It was designed to estimate the long-run noise variance un-
der endogeneity, heteroscedasticity, and a mixing condition allowing
the autocovariances of the noise to decay at a polynomial rate (see
Assumption (N) in Appendix A). The calculation involves a second pre-
averaging parameter, ℎ𝑛. The intuition is that in order to construct the
sample autocovariances of the noise, we need to purge the efficient
log-price component from (7). Hence, demeaning of 𝑝∗
is done with
𝑖𝛥𝑛
). In the
a local average of the noisy log-price process (a proxy of 𝑝𝑖𝛥𝑛
empirical application, we follow the implementation from Jacod et al.
(2019), adopting a data-driven choice of lag length, 𝓁𝑛.

𝑛 − 𝐵 𝑉 ∗

It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  since  the  main  tool  for  jump  iden-
tification  is  going  to  be  based  on 𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛 ,  the  bias-correction
in (11) cancels  out  in  the  construction  of  our  jump  test  statistic.  It
therefore has no impact on the testing procedure but merely affects
those parts of the analysis, where a pre-averaged realized measure is
employed on a stand-alone basis. Even there, however, its magnitude
is  negligible.  In  our  sample,  the  bias-correction  term  is  an  order  of
magnitude smaller than the uncorrected pre-averaging statistic, which
is  consistent  with Christensen  et  al. (2018).  This  suggests  that  our
empirical findings are not in any way driven by the concrete choice of
long-run noise variance estimator adopted for the bias-correction term.

2.3.4.  Asymptotic theory

We next develop the theoretical foundation for the construction of

our noise-robust jump test procedure.

Theorem 1. Assume that 𝑟 follows the process in (3) and that Assumptions
(V) and (N) in Appendix A hold. Then, as 𝑛 → ∞,

𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛

𝑝
⟶ [𝑟]1

and

𝐵 𝑉 ∗
𝑛

𝑝
⟶ ∫

1

𝜎2
𝑠 d𝑠.

(

)

𝑛1∕4

𝑅𝑉 ∗

0 𝜎2
0 𝜎2

0
0 is true, as 𝑛 → ∞,
𝑑𝑠
⟶ 𝑁(0, 𝛴),

Moreover, provided that 
𝑛 − ∫ 1
𝑛 − ∫ 1
𝑑𝑠
⟶’’ denotes convergence in law stably (e.g. Jacod and Protter,
where ‘‘
2012, Section 2.2.1) and 𝛴 is the 2 × 2 random asymptotic covariance
matrix defined in (A.4) in Appendix A.

𝑠 d𝑠
𝑠 d𝑠

𝐵 𝑉 ∗

(16)

Theorem 1 establishes a weak law of large numbers for the pre-
averaged realized variance and pre-averaged bipower variation in the
noisy  jump-diffusion  model  under 
is  consis-
tent for the quadratic variation, including the jump part, while 𝐵 𝑉 ∗
𝑛
converges to the integrated variance, excluding the jump part. Their
difference  therefore  estimates  the  quadratic  jump  variation, 𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛 −
𝐵 𝑉 ∗
𝑠 )2 which  is  zero  in  the  absence  of  jumps.  The
𝑛
last part of Theorem 1 establishes a bivariate asymptotic mixed normal

𝑎.  It  shows  that 𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛

0≤𝑠≤1(𝛥𝑟𝑑

𝑝
⟶ ∑

7 

2.3.5.  A noise- and jump-robust covariance estimator

𝑛

The test statistic  inf.

is not feasible since it depends on the co-
variance  matrix 𝛴,  which  is  a  function  of  the  latent  volatility  and
microstructure noise processes. We therefore next develop a noise- and
jump-robust plug-in estimator of 𝛴.18 Specifically, we propose to set
∗
𝑛(2, 0)
∗
𝑛(1, 1)
])⊤

𝑙 (2, 0) − ̌𝐵 𝑉
𝑙 (1, 1) − ̌𝐵 𝑉

𝑛1∕4
√

𝑙=1
(

𝐿
∑

𝑛 =

1
𝐿

])

𝛴∗

(

∗

∗

[ ̌𝐵 𝑉
̌𝐵 𝑉
∗
𝑙 (2, 0) − ̌𝐵 𝑉
𝑙 (1, 1) − ̌𝐵 𝑉

∗

𝐿
[ ̌𝐵 𝑉
̌𝐵 𝑉

∗
𝑛(2, 0)
∗
𝑛(1, 1)

,

(18)

×

𝑛1∕4
√

𝐿

where ̌𝐵 𝑉
et al. (2018). The details are in Appendix A.

∗
𝑛(𝑞 , 𝑟) is a truncated pre-averaged bipower variation of Christensen

𝛴∗

𝑛 is the sample covariance matrix of truncated subsampled pre-
∗
averaged bipower variation estimators,
𝑙 (𝑞 , 𝑟), calculated on small
batches of high-frequency data covering blocks of length 𝑝𝑘𝑛, for 𝑙 =
1, … , 𝐿, where 𝑝 ≥ 2 is an integer, and 𝐿 is the number of subsam-
∗
ples. They are centered around the full sample statistic,
𝑛(𝑞 , 𝑟), and
suitably normalized.

̌𝐵 𝑉

̌𝐵 𝑉

Theorem 2. Assume that 𝑟 follows the process in (3), that Assumptions
(V) and (N) in Appendix A hold, as do the conditions listed in Theorem A.2
therein. Then, as 𝑛 → ∞,
𝛴∗
𝑛

𝑝
⟶ 𝛴 .

(19)

Theorem  2 shows  that 𝛴∗

𝑛 is  consistent  both  under  the  null  and
alternative. Our proof confines attention to jump processes of bounded
variation, which is standard when inference is based on the continuous
part of the process.

By Slutsky’ theorem, we obtain the feasible jump test statistic:

𝑛1∕4(𝑅𝑉 ∗
√

𝑛 − 𝐵 𝑉 ∗
𝑛

)



𝑛 =

.

(20)

𝑣⊤𝛴∗
𝑛 𝑣
The finite sample properties of 
𝑛 under the alternative can be further
improved  if  we  also  replace 𝐵 𝑉 ∗
in  the  numerator  of (20) with  a
𝑛
truncated version.19 Thus, with a slight abuse of notation, we redefine:

(21)

𝑎.

0 is true. However,
18 In principle, we only need to estimate 𝛴 given that 
by using a jump-robust estimator of the asymptotic covariance matrix we avoid
losing power under 
19 On the one hand, ‘‘big’’ jumps induce an upward bias in 𝐵 𝑉 ∗
𝑛 for realistic
sample sizes, causing a downward bias in the estimated jump variation and
reducing the power of the jump test. However, such biases can readily be
handled through truncation. On the other hand, the bipower mechanism –
multiplication of adjacent log-returns – is an effective tool to get rid of ‘‘small’’
jumps that survive any truncation. This approach of cracking down twice on
the jump component was proposed by Corsi et al. (2010) for bipower variation
in the noise-free setting. In Appendix A, we show that the substitution of 𝐵 𝑉 ∗
𝑛
𝑛 in the numerator does not alter the asymptotic theory in Theorem 1.
with ̌𝐵 𝑉

∗

(15)

𝑛1∕4(𝑅𝑉 ∗
√



𝑛 =

)

∗
𝑛

,

𝑛 − ̌𝐵 𝑉
𝑣⊤𝛴∗
𝑛 𝑣
∗
𝑛(1, 1).

≡ ̌𝐵 𝑉

where ̌𝐵 𝑉

∗
𝑛

K. Christensen et al.

The final form of 

𝑛 in (21) serves as our noise-robust jump test
statistic.20 A one-sided test procedure is appropriate here, so the deci-
0 at significance level 𝛼 if 
sion rule is to reject 
𝑛 > 𝛷−1(1 − 𝛼), where
𝛷(𝑥) is the standard normal distribution function. This implies that:
(

{

P

)

𝑛 > 𝛷−1(1 − 𝛼)

→

(22)

𝛼 , under 
1, under 

0,
𝑎,

so our test is asymptotically unbiased and consistent.

2.4.  Monte Carlo study

In Appendix B, we conduct a thorough Monte Carlo investigation
of the finite-sample properties of our jump test. We simulate from a
general jump-diffusion process which gets affected by different forms
of microstructure noise with an extreme magnitude matching what we
observe empirically in the after-hours trading session. Moreover, we in-
vestigate the robustness of our test to various degrees of pre-averaging,
subsampling, and jump-truncation.

We compare our approach to the noise-robust test of Aït-Sahalia
et  al. (2012)  and  the  noise-free  version  from Barndorff-Nielsen  and
Shephard (2006). The former is also based on pre-averaging to com-
press the noise but the building block in the test statistic is the ratio
of power variation estimators sampled at different frequencies, in con-
trast to the difference of multipower variation estimators sampled at
identical frequencies as advocated here.21

The key findings can be summarized as follows.

1. Our test has correct size and does not systematically over- or
under-reject 
0. The sole exception occurs when the noise is fat-
tailed and the pre-averaging window is too short to adequately
accommodate this which leads to a modest overrejection. Under

𝑎, our test has good power properties and correctly identifies
the jump component.

0, leading to loss of power under 

2. The Aït-Sahalia et al. (2012) test is slightly more sensitive to
the structure of microstructure noise. In particular, their test is
very conservative under 
𝑎,
with conditionally autocorrelated noise. We emphasize that this
setting was not allowed in their theoretical framework. We do
expect that their test statistic can be modified to exhibit good
properties also in that setting, though this version remains to be
developed. Otherwise, the conclusion of their test is often close
to ours.

20 Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2006) advocate a log- and ratio-based
transformation  of  the  noise-free  version  of (21) via  the  delta  method.  We
implemented  both  these  alternative  versions  of  the  noise-robust  jump  test
statistic, which does not impact any of our conclusions.
21 In Appendix D, we inspect the jump test of Lee and Mykland (2008, 2012).
Whereas our test (and Aït-Sahalia et al., 2012) targets the cumulative return
variation over a discrete time interval, i.e., quadratic variation and integrated
variance, the latter is a point-in time test based on spot volatility. In principle,
a local jump test over a short post-announcement window is more appropriate
for analyzing price responses to earnings announcements because we know the
announcement time (up to minimal rounding). However, the regime-switching
nature of post-market high-frequency data – in particular, the complete lack
of  liquidity  on  non-announcement  days  –  renders  their  test  unsuited  for
the  empirical  analysis  conducted  in  this  paper.  Our  reliance  on  integrated
measures of return variation over the regular and extended trading session
leads to a direct measure of incremental volatility in the after-hours market
(typically large on announcement days and close to zero on non-announcement
days), which can be further dissected into a continuous variation and jump
component. In the appendix, we adapt the noise-free Lee and Mykland (2008)
testing approach by designing a close-to-open return-based jump test that can
be applied to the overnight period even when high-frequency data for the
extended  trading  session  is  not  available.  We  implemented  this  version  of
their test on a much larger cross-section of generally less liquid stocks. The
conclusion from this exercise supports the corresponding evidence below.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

3. In  sharp  contrast,  the Barndorff-Nielsen  and  Shephard (2006)
test  based  on  5-min  realized  variance  and  bipower  variation
degrades in the presence of the high level of microstructure noise
typical  for  after-hours  trading.  In  particular,  it  identifies  too
many spurious jumps, falsely rejecting the null when no jumps
are present. Conversely, this test frequently fails to identify true
jumps,  falsely  accepting  the  null  when  jumps  are  genuinely
present.

In  summary,  our  simulations  demonstrate  both  the  need  for  and
benefits from utilizing our noise-robust jump test on the high-frequency
after-hours transaction price data examined in our empirical applica-
tion, which we next proceed to.

3.  Data description

Earnings  announcements  should  trigger  jumps  in  stock  prices  if
investors efficiently and instantaneously process the new earnings in-
formation. In this section, we introduce the data sources employed to
study if this prediction is supported empirically.

3.1.  Transaction and quotation data

Jump tests benefit crucially from having data at the highest possible
resolution, so our analysis employs tick-by-tick transaction and quota-
tion data on individual firms’ stock prices to track their response to
corporate earnings announcements.

U.S. stock exchanges are only open for trading on normal business
days  from  9:30  am–4:00  pm  Eastern  time.22 On  most  days,  official
pre-market trading is available from 4:00 am–9:30 am, while the after-
hours market runs from 4:00 pm–8:00 pm.23 Orders can additionally be
submitted and trades executed at any time via private trading systems
such as electronic communication networks (ECNs) or dark pools. The
consolidated  tape  collates  such  real-time  tick-by-tick  data,  which  is
made available for purchase via the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
Trade and Quote (TAQ) database. In practice, there is usually limited
trading activity before 6:00 am or after 6:30 pm, so we exclude this
part of the day.

As noted earlier, the vast majority of U.S. companies publish their
financial results outside the regular trading session. They may prefer to
announce at these times because these markets are mostly comprised of
professional investors and informed traders, speeding up the price dis-
covery process (see Jiang et al., 2012). In Appendix C, we examine the
trading activity in the pre-market (6:00 am–9:30 am) and after-hours
market (4:00 pm–6:30 pm). We find that trading volume is much lower
in the pre-market, even on announcement days (as consistent with Lyle
et al., 2024). This impairs the implementation of our jump test so our
analysis focuses on the after-hours market. Following Dubinsky et al.
(2019), we look at the 50 firms with the largest after-hours trading
volume on announcement days.24 This is appropriate not only because
individual transaction counts are prohibitively large, but also because
liquidity evaporates fast as we descend to stocks with lower after-hours

22 The major national stock exchanges close at 1:00 pm the day before big
public holidays, such as July 4th, Thanksgiving, and Christmas.
23 The  trading  schedule  of  NASDAQ-  and  NYSE-listed  securities  can  be
gauged  at https://www.nasdaq.com/stock-market-trading-hours-for-nasdaq
and https://www.nyse.com/markets/nyse-arca/market-info.
24 To identify these firms, we sort the constituents of the S&P 500 index
as of 12/31/2020 by their post-close (4:00 pm–6:30 pm) transaction volume
on quarterly earnings announcement days, averaged over the five-year period
from 01/01/2015–31/12/2019. We further require that the firms report at
least  75%  of  their  earnings  announcements  after  the  close  of  the  regular
trading session during our full sample period 06/02/2008–12/31/2020. We
exclude Xilinx (XLNX, ranked 43th) from the original list since the analyst in-
formation is missing in the I/B/E/S database and replace it by CSX corporation
(CSX).

8 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

market liquidity. The selected stocks account for a sizeable fraction of
trading activity in the after-hours market among all firms in the S&P
500 index during our sample (46.89% of the total transaction count vs.
21.31% in the regular trading session).

We download high-frequency data from the NYSE TAQ database for
the stocks over the sample period 06/02/2008 through 12/31/2020, a
total of 𝑇 = 3,169 business days. The data is cleaned using state-of-the-
art procedures (e.g. Barndorff-Nielsen et al., 2009; Christensen et al.,
2014). The main distinction here is that we retain observations with a
timestamp outside the official exchange trading hours if they otherwise
fulfill the conditions required to be tagged non-erroneous.25 In total, we
preserve almost ninety billion (89,640,467,708) quotations and nearly
eight billion (7,985,202,326) transactions.

We employ tick time sampling, whereby the transaction price pro-
cess is sampled with every price change, as advocated by Griffin and
Oomen (2008). Apart from rendering the log-return series potentially
more homogeneous, this approach has the convenient effect of remov-
ing transactions that merely repeat the previous price. Thus, we purge
zero  returns  that  are  known  to  be  detrimental  for  jump  identifica-
tion (e.g., Bandi et al., 2023; Kolokolov and Renò, 2024). Hence, our
tick data are inevitably irregularly spaced, but the pre-averaging theory
readily conforms with such an extension.26 Finally, we aggregate any
remaining  observations  with  identical  timestamps  and  replace  them
with an average price, a procedure that is known to further alleviate
microstructure noise.

Table 1 reports descriptive statistics about the after-hours trading
volume of stocks 1–25, while Table E.1 in Appendix E contains the
information of stocks 26–50.27 We show the sample average, standard
deviation, and the 25th, 50th, 75th and 99th percentiles of the trans-
action  count  distribution  for  days  without  earnings  announcements
(columns  2–8)  and  days  with  earnings  announcements  (columns  9–
15). For many firms, the after-hours transaction count is two orders
of magnitude larger on days with earnings announcements relative to
days without them. For example, Facebook (FB) averaged 76,129 after-
hours  transactions  on  earnings  announcement  days,  compared  with
only 891 transactions on days with no such announcements. It is clearly
uncommon for individual firms to exhibit high transaction counts in the
after-hours trading session on days without earnings announcements.
Transaction volume in the after-hours market has grown substan-
tially between 2008 and 2020 with more than a ninefold increase for
the stocks we analyze in our paper. The fraction of after-hours trading
has  also  grown,  quadrupling  from  0.17%  to  0.71%,  as  a  proportion
of  the  total  transaction  volume  (including  trades  from  the  regular
trading session). On days with earnings announcements this fraction
is  substantially  higher  at  the  firm-level,  frequently  exceeding  10%.
Appendix F summarizes trading volume and spreads in the after-hours
market over time.

25 A complete list of sale conditions that can be associated with a transaction
is available in the documentation of the Daily TAQ Client Specification man-
ual available for download at: http://www.nyxdata.com/Data-Products/Daily-
TAQ. In particular, the label ‘‘T’’ identifies pre-market and after-hours trades.
These are virtually always ignored in the high-frequency volatility literature,
since the first rule of the widely used Barndorff-Nielsen et al. (2009) filtering
algorithm instructs researchers to ‘‘P1. Delete entries with a time stamp outside
the 9:30 am–4:00 pm window when the exchange is open’’.
26 Whether  the  sampling  scheme  is  equidistant  or  irregular,  the  effective
sampling  is  random,  as  pointed  out  by Bandi  et  al. (2023).  Pre-averaging
complies with sampling random observation times that can be endogenous
(i.e. dependent on the price process and microstructure noise), see Jacod et al.
(2019) and Mykland and Zhang (2016). In practice, transaction times are likely
endogenous (e.g. Kolokolov et al., 2022). This is almost unavoidable when
studying  price  movements  after  an  earnings  announcement.  The  impact  of
endogenous sampling times on realized variance has been studied by Li et al.
(2014) in the noise-free setting.
27 The corresponding table for the pre-market trading activity can be found
in Appendix C.

3.2.  Announcement timing

While most companies announce their financial results at a fixed
time,  for  others  the  timing  can  vary  quarter-by-quarter.  Even  slight
inaccuracies in the recording of the announcement time can impede our
calculation of the post-announcement price reaction, so accurate timing
is imperative and we spend considerable effort on double checking the
time stamps.

We begin by gathering announcement times from a data set pro-
vided  by  Wall  Street  Horizon  (https://www.wallstreethorizon.com/)
that  offers  a  comprehensive  suite  of  corporate  events  data,  includ-
ing  detailed  information  on  the  timing  of  earnings  announcements.
Wall  Street  Horizon  stores  the  timestamp  included  with  the  press
release issued by the company when it publicly announces its quarterly
results.28

As a double-check, we hand collect a separate set of announcement
times from the Factiva news archive by searching on the announcement
day  for  press  releases  marked  with  the  company  ticker  code  and  a
designated ‘‘Earnings’’ subject.29

Comparing the merged set of announcement times with the audit
trail  of  the  complete  tick-by-tick  transaction  price  history  suggests
that occasionally both Wall Street Horizon and Factiva get it wrong.
To correct seemingly erroneous timestamps, we design a conservative
screening algorithm that infers the announcement time based on the
price  volatility.  In  particular,  we  calculate  the  log-return  for  each
minute  from  4:00  pm–6:30  pm.  If  the  largest  absolute  one-minute
log-return  exceeds  2.5%  and  precedes  the  announcement  time  from
both Wall Street Horizon and Factiva, we assume the earnings were
released  at  the  earlier  time.  The  filter  affects  only  a  very  limited
number of announcements (77 in total, or 3.5%). The median change
is one minute, suggesting that the algorithm primarily captures small
rounding effects for some of the most important earnings reports that
lead to substantial revisions of the security price.30

The third-to-last column in Table 1 shows the modal announcement
time for each firm, which ranges from as early as 4:00 pm for reports
released immediately after the close of the regular exchange-trading
session  to  as  late  as  4:30  pm,  with  many  firms  announcing  around
4:05 pm.

28 A publicly traded company with classes of securities registered in Section
12 or subject to Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is legally
required to file regular reports with the SEC, including an annual form 10-K
and quarterly form 10-Q’s, in addition to proxy reports and other reporting
requirements. Most companies file form 10-Q either 40 or 45 days after the
end of the fiscal quarter, but many large corporations choose to summarize
their financial statements at an earlier date by issuing a press release and
filing a form 8-K.
29 A limitation of both data sets is that announcement times are rounded
to the nearest minute. However, most of the earnings reports in our sample
are released to the public through professional dissemination services, such
as  Business  Wire  or  PR  Newswire,  which  are  under  strict  requirements  to
ensure immediate and equal access to company information as noted by the
SEC’s Regulation Fair Disclosure. The audit-trail information left from the high-
frequency  data  after  each  announcement  suggests  that  these  vendors  often
publish announcements close to a whole minute such that the rounding effect
is typically negligible.
30 Importantly, our noise-robust jump test statistic does not depend on the
announcement time and so is unaltered by the screening algorithm. Moreover,
employing only Wall Street Horizon and Factive information does not cause
any  discernible  change  in  the  post-announcement  return  regression  (Sec-
tion 6.1). Only the returns from our trading strategy (Section 6.2) deteriorate
slightly, but remain significant with the removal of the inferred announcement
time.

9 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Table 1
S&P 500 companies by after-hours (4:00 pm–6:30 pm) trading activity.
Ticker

SIC

Conditional on no announcement
Mean Fraction Std.

Quantile

Conditional on announcement
Fraction Std.
Mean

Quantile

Announcement information
𝑟EA
#EA Time
1𝑚

𝑧EPS

0.25 0.50 0.75

0.99

0.25

0.50

0.75

0.99

FB

7370

891

0.52

1,258

307

526 1000

5,380

76,129

20.80 29,991 59,075 70,024 88,936 211,431

AAPL

3571

1552

0.61

3,950

386

649 1235 18,311

51,346

15.94 29,927 32,891 44,509 56,832 194,220

NFLX

7841

367

0.55

606

AMZN 5961

808

0.82

1,442

NVDA 3674

405

0.36

860

TSLA

3711

2156

0.86 10,399

AMD

3674

579

0.38

1,486

MU

3674

251

0.21

480

52

74

39

25

40

53

128

434

2,732

33,328

20.89 26,447 14,460 25,303 46,619 122,817

152

866

6,751

33,612

22.16 18,872 22,063 28,423 38,523

94,020

74

428

3,912

16,909

8.45 20,656

1,903

4,456 36,972

68,790

195

824 32,536

27,210

15.41 35,016

1,287 15,304 30,270 139,936

80

612

5,722

15,417

7.37 21,607

1,711

4,849 25,714

86,880

102

280

1,959

13,508

6.89 13,340

1,990 11,078 21,868

59,740

MSFT

7372

609

0.27

1,425

112

195

479

6,460

20,152

7.31 17,196

9,919 16,144 24,788 104,119

GOOG 7370

198

INTC

3674

278

DIS

7990

328

CRM

7372

102

NKE

3021

98

CSCO

3576

194

SBUX

5810

145

IBM

3570

CMG

5812

79

47

PYPL

7389

205

ORCL

7372

102

ADBE

7372

84

QCOM 3663

145

EBAY

7389

77

0.60

0.20

0.38

0.24

0.23

0.17

0.24

0.21

0.45

0.28

0.11

0.24

0.18

0.13

370

549

898

296

171

239

314

124

157

273

554

202

581

86

GILD

2836

208

0.23

2,014

AMAT 3674

88

0.15

106

61

92

26

18

16

74

39

30

9

51

39

26

49

38

46

37

100

201

1,524

15,221

20.81

7,253

9,630 14,043 19,716

30,074

159

281

2,029

22,705

9.72 17,642 12,198 17,908 27,180 102,918

57

34

33

276

3,666

10,043

7.87 12,298

2,116

5,545 11,760

56,136

90

1,066

10,131

12.71 13,701

4,216

6,285 10,431

86,704

120

715

7,339

10.79

6,527

2,679

5,947

9,337

36,950

124

219

1,210

20,912

10.00 16,488 11,140 17,694 24,999

91,696

61

49

24

153

1,269

6,607

7.46

4,012

3,670

5,691

9,331

16,886

87

53

469

263

8,385

11.85

5,432

5,161

7,474

9,924

30,725

4,695

18.30

4,002

1,222

3,821

7,024

16,027

125

216

1,297

10,836

8.74 10,650

4,104

6,680 13,351

47,021

61

40

74

55

69

59

96

81

130

85

612

624

947

374

8,994

6.34

5,863

4,131

8,979 11,217

26,529

5,389

9.51

4,273

2,675

4,628

6,477

23,037

9,695

8.21

7,473

5,000

7,594 12,302

33,231

8,664

8.15

7,007

4,180

7,488 11,404

42,753

112

1,685

4,125

4.07

5,449

566

1,830

7,064

25,630

101

476

3,368

3.85

3,221

666

2,268

4,998

12,834

34

40

47

50

48

40

47

50

46

49

42

48

46

48

50

50

48

48

21

49

49

49

49

48

48

4:05pm 1.750
(1.252)
4:30pm 1.669
(1.584)
4:05pm 1.028
(1.621)
4:01pm 0.687
(1.790)
4:20pm 1.626
(1.787)
4:05pm 0.355
(1.696)
4:15pm 0.746
(1.342)
4:01pm 0.262
(1.259)
4:03pm 2.257
(2.698)
4:01pm 0.930
(1.849)
4:01pm 2.320
(2.250)
4:15pm 1.263
(2.192)
4:05pm 1.761
(1.728)
4:15pm 2.309
(2.632)
4:05pm 2.331
(1.428)
4:05pm 1.126
(1.872)
4:08pm 1.203
(1.337)
4:10pm 1.231
(2.324)
4:15pm 2.159
(1.944)
4:00pm 1.757
(2.804)
4:05pm 2.235
(2.084)
4:00pm 1.355
(1.444)
4:15pm 1.624
(1.518)
4:05pm 0.671
(1.703)
4:01pm 1.573
(1.878)

0.336
(4.446)
0.806
(3.395)
−0.236
(6.769)
−0.369
(5.714)
0.714
(3.988)
1.248
(3.422)
−0.859
(4.201)
0.196
(2.927)
−0.148
(1.787)
0.347
(2.973)
−0.034
(2.425)
−0.194
(2.200)
0.874
(3.484)
0.421
(2.903)
−0.109
(2.588)
−0.347
(2.998)
0.030
(2.058)
−0.443
(4.224)
0.116
(2.525)
−0.220
(2.402)
0.102
(2.856)
0.500
(2.639)
−0.489
(3.514)
0.081
(1.362)
0.324
(2.278)

Note. In the left-hand side, we show descriptive statistics of the most liquid companies from the S&P 500 index based on their after-hours market (4:00pm–6:30pm) trading volume,
which is separated into no announcement days (columns 2–8) and announcement days (columns 9–15). Ticker is the stock listing symbol. SIC is the standard industrial classification
code. Mean and Std. are the transaction count sample average and standard deviation. Quantile are selected quantiles from the empirical transaction count distribution. Fraction
is the number of transactions executed in the after-hours session divided by the total transaction count for the extended trading session from 9:30am–6:30pm. In the right-hand
side, we report announcement information. #EA is the number of earnings announcements. Time is the modal announcement time (Eastern Standard Time). 𝑧EPS and 𝑟EA
1𝑚 are the
sample average standardized unexpected earnings and one-minute post-announcement return (standard deviation across announcements reported below in parenthesis).

3.3.  Earnings surprises

Earnings announcements contain a wealth of information but the
most important part is arguably the headline earnings figure. To com-
pute the surprise element in earnings announcements, we employ the
Institutional Brokers Estimate System (I/B/E/S) database available via
subscription to Refinitiv (https://www.refinitiv.com/), formerly a part
of Thomson Reuters. I/B/E/S aggregates earnings information for over
22,000 companies. In addition to storing the actual reported earnings
per  share  (EPS),  adjusted  for  non-recurring  items  and  stock  option
expenses, prior to each announcement I/B/E/S surveys earnings fore-
casts from leading professional analysts covering individual companies.
We  compile  this  information  into  a  consensus  estimate  (𝜇EPS)  and
a  standard  deviation  of  that  estimate  calculated  over  the  distribu-
tion  of  analyst  expectations  (𝜎EPS).  Following Berkman  and  Truong
(2009) and Michaely et al. (2013), among others, our measure of the

standardized unexpected earnings is given by31

𝑧EPS =

Act ual EPS − 𝜇EPS
𝜎EPS

.

(23)

We purge announcements with no analyst forecasts and those where
𝜎EPS is less than 0.001 (one tenth of a cent) which result in an unstable
𝑧EPS measure.  This  removes  five  announcements  from  Ulta  Beauty
(ULTA) that was still a relatively overlooked small-cap stock with lim-
ited broker coverage at the beginning of our sample. A single announce-
ment from Broadcom (AVGO) is also eliminated. We further exclude

31 Some  studies  employ  the  median  analyst  estimate  instead  of  the  sam-
ple  average  (Dellavigna  and  Pollet, 2009; Grégoire  and  Martineau, 2022;
Hartzmark and Shue, 2018). Others replace the standard deviation with the
lagged closing price of the stock, e.g. from a week before the announcement or
at the end of the previous quarter (Grégoire and Martineau, 2022; Lyle et al.,
2024). Our main findings are not altered by adopting these alternative ways
of defining the standardized unexpected earnings.

10 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Table 2
Sample average of realized variance, bipower variation, and jump proportion.

Panel A: Regular trading session (9:30 am–4:00 pm)
no EA
RV

RV

BV

BV

EA

JP

JF

JP

16.2
FB
20.3
AAPL
NFLX
30.5
AMZN 23.0
29.1
NVDA
27.9
TSLA
38.0
AMD
35.6
MU
MSFT
18.7
GOOG 17.5
20.6
INTC
17.4
DIS
23.6
CRM
17.5
NKE
18.9
CSCO
19.3
SBUX
15.0
IBM
18.2
CMG
10.1
PYPL
17.8
ORCL
19.8
ADBE
QCOM 20.7
21.5
EBAY
21.0
GILD
23.6
AMAT

16.1
20.0
29.9
22.9
28.3
27.5
33.1
33.3
18.1
17.4
19.8
16.9
22.9
16.9
17.9
18.7
14.7
17.2
9.9
17.0
19.2
20.1
20.6
20.2
22.4

0.6
1.6
0.8
0.0
3.8
0.2
14.8
7.6
6.4
0.6
7.8
4.3
3.7
4.5
9.9
4.6
3.2
2.7
3.7
7.7
3.8
5.2
7.0
5.1
7.8

1.0
1.6
1.3
0.5
1.9
0.5
10.9
4.5
5.3
0.8
6.4
2.7
1.5
2.1
8.7
2.6
1.6
1.6
1.1
5.2
1.9
3.5
3.9
3.6
4.2

26.0
19.8
35.5
27.4
34.4
37.6
40.9
40.4
20.9
20.5
24.4
21.8
32.3
21.3
22.1
23.7
17.4
23.5
25.4
23.7
24.3
23.2
27.9
24.8
26.5

25.9
19.3
35.2
27.1
33.7
36.9
34.8
37.3
20.2
20.5
23.6
21.2
31.2
20.7
21.0
22.8
17.1
22.8
25.1
22.2
23.7
22.5
26.7
23.8
25.2

1.6
4.1
0.9
1.2
3.4
0.2
16.7
7.8
6.1
0.4
7.1
5.9
5.0
5.3
9.9
6.5
2.9
3.1
3.0
9.5
4.0
5.7
7.2
6.0
8.7

Panel B: Extended trading session (9:30 am–6:30 pm)
no EA
RV

RV

BV

BV

EA

JP

JF

16.5
20.6
30.7
23.2
29.4
28.4
38.4
35.8
18.9
17.7
20.8
17.5
23.7
17.5
19.0
19.4
15.0
18.2
10.1
17.8
19.9
20.8
21.6
21.1
23.6

16.2
20.2
30.0
23.0
28.3
27.8
33.1
33.2
18.1
17.4
19.8
16.9
22.7
16.9
17.9
18.6
14.7
17.1
9.9
17.0
19.2
20.0
20.5
20.2
22.3

1.6
2.2
1.2
0.7
4.5
0.9
15.3
8.4
6.9
1.1
8.4
4.5
4.0
4.5
10.3
4.9
3.3
2.8
4.1
7.7
4.0
5.6
7.0
5.4
8.1

3.1
3.3
2.4
2.4
3.5
2.0
12.6
6.3
7.0
2.2
8.3
3.0
2.1
2.2
9.9
3.3
1.8
1.8
1.6
5.3
2.4
4.5
4.0
4.4
4.7

94.0
61.1
132.2
103.2
92.4
100.0
95.7
83.6
54.8
69.9
66.6
52.0
80.3
60.3
67.1
62.1
47.3
76.1
80.2
61.2
68.7
69.7
83.9
45.3
56.1

66.2
37.9
68.1
59.1
46.9
69.9
50.3
56.0
35.1
38.8
42.5
24.7
34.5
21.6
44.1
32.1
20.9
17.8
47.6
27.2
31.2
35.3
40.6
25.4
29.9

JP

42.6
51.7
57.3
50.4
54.2
37.7
49.0
40.7
49.8
51.1
50.6
61.6
59.0
63.5
47.5
52.7
62.5
60.5
53.5
60.2
54.2
58.2
57.5
46.7
46.9

JF

97.1
100.0
97.9
100.0
97.9
90.0
93.6
96.0
100.0
93.9
100.0
97.9
95.7
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
87.5
90.5
93.9
98.0
95.9
95.9
81.2
83.3

JF

0.0
5.0
2.1
0.0
2.1
5.0
19.1
2.0
4.3
0.0
0.0
4.2
2.2
8.3
14.0
2.0
2.1
0.0
0.0
10.2
2.0
4.1
4.1
4.2
4.2

3.2

4.7

25.6

26.6

20.8

Average 21.7
Note. This table reports the pre-averaged realized variance (RV) and pre-averaged bipower variation (BV). We also construct the jump proportion (JP),
which is defined as Jump Proportion = 1 - Bipower variation/Realized Variance. We further compute the jump frequency (JF), which is derived from
the jump indicator in (26). The realized variance and bipower variation are converted to annualized standard deviation in percent for convenience. The
full sample is split into days without (no EA) and with (EA) earnings announcements. The measures are then averaged across subsamples by company.
In Panel A, we report the analysis for the regular trading session (9:30am–4:00pm), whereas Panel B displays the associated results for the extended
trading session (9:30am–6:30am). The bottom row reports the grand mean (‘‘Average’’) over all stock-days.

21.8

20.8

74.5

40.1

52.8

95.4

5.3

4.0

5.1

4.2

announcements  where  share  trading  was  temporarily  suspended  by
the exchange as it leads to a disconnected trade sequence.32 Finally,
following Grégoire and Martineau (2022) we discard announcements
where 𝑧EPS exceeds ten in absolute value. Such outliers are often caused
by extraordinary items in the profit statement.33 The last step removes
40 observations (about 1.7% of the sample).34

The number of quarterly earnings announcements retained for each
company is shown in the fourth-to-last column in Table 1. We report
summary statistics of 𝑧EPS in the second-to-last column. Standardized
unexpected  earnings  are  substantially  higher  than  zero  on  average,
consistent with the notion that managers engage in earnings smoothing
to avoid negative surprises.

4.  Empirical results

32 Trading halts are registered in the daily TAQ master files that contain
static information for securities traded by participants of the Consolidated Tape
Association (CTA), mainly stocks with NYSE as primary exchange, and Unlisted
Trading Privileges (UTP), or NASDAQ-listed issues. The file has a letter code in
the ‘‘Halt Delay Reason’’ if trading was paused (blank otherwise). Resumption
of trading is flagged in the transaction data with a sale condition ‘‘5’’ defined
as ‘‘Market Center Re-Opening Trade’’ (CTA) or ‘‘Re-opening Prints’’ (UTP).
33 For example, on 08/25/2020 Salesforce (CRM) posted a quarterly EPS
of $1.44 after adjusting for non-recurrent items. With a consensus estimate
of $0.66 and a standard deviation of about four cents, this yields a twenty-
sigma event. The surprise was motivated by mark-to-market accounting for the
company’s investments in nCino, which saw a $617 million unrealized gain in
the quarter.
34 The I/B/E/S database incorrectly puts the EPS of Akamai Technologies
(AKAM) as 0.31, 0.29, 0.28, and 0.34 for the Q1–Q4 earnings announcement
of the fiscal year 2009. This induces a −9.64, −2.12, −8.86, and −7.80 unex-
pected standardized earnings surprise, despite the company meeting or beating
expectations  at  all  occasions.  This  is  possibly  caused  by  AKAM  employing
non-GAAP  financial  metrics  in  their  accounting  system,  in  particular  a  so-
called  normalized  net  income,  which  eliminates  the  effects  of  events  that
are  either  not  part  of  the  company’s  core  operations  or  are  non-cash.  We
replaced the wrong EPS numbers with the correct ones, i.e. 0.43, 0.40, 0.38,
and 0.46, which were extracted directly from the PDF files containing the
financial  statements,  available  at  the  company’s  investor  relations  website
(www.ir.akamai.com).

We next proceed with our empirical investigation. Price dynamics
and  trading  activity  in  the  after-hours  market  is  not  as  thoroughly
studied and understood as that in the regular trading session and it
has  evolved  significantly  since  the  seminal  analysis  of Barclay  and
Hendershott (2003). We therefore begin by briefly summarizing some
of the key features of the after-hours market, emphasizing the contrast
between days with and without earnings announcements. We start by
analyzing the pattern in trading volumes and bid–ask spreads in a short
interval around earnings announcements before turning to the evidence
on the presence of price jumps.

4.1.  Trading volume and bid–ask spread

To get a broad picture of post-announcement trades, for each five-
second interval in a one-hour window centered around the announce-
ment  time,  we  calculate  transaction  counts  and  bid–ask  spreads  (in
basis points) relative to the midquot e = (bid + ask )∕2 as

Spread = 10000 ×

ask − bid
midquot e

,

(24)

As  a  control  sample,  for  each  announcement  we  select  a  non-
announcement  date  at  random  and  calculate  transaction  counts  and
Spread on a corresponding window.

11 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Fig. 2. Trading volume and bid–ask spread in the after-hours market.
Note. In Panel A, we show the cross-sectional sample average trading volume (measured by transaction counts) for each five-second interval in a one-hour window centered
around the earnings announcement, which occurs at time 0. In Panel B, we report the associated median bid–ask spread (in basis points), which is computed as Spreadbps =
10000 × (ask − bid)∕midquote, where midquote = (bid + ask)∕2. As a control sample, for each announcement we select a random non-announcement date without replacement and
calculate trading volume and Spreadbps on the corresponding time interval. The modal announcement time across companies is 4:05 pm. Hence, the exchange typically closes five
minutes prior to an announcement (highlighted by a circle on the 𝑥-axis).

Panel  A  in Fig.  2 reports  the  transaction  count  per  five-second
interval on days with and without earnings announcements. The modal
announcement time across companies is 4:05 pm so the market typi-
cally closes five minutes prior to the announcement (labeled time 0),
as highlighted in the figure. The transaction volume right before the
regular market close is notably higher on days with announcements
than  on  days  without  announcements,  but  both  drop  sharply  at  the
close.  From  this  point  onward,  the  graphs  evolve  very  differently.
Whereas the after-hours transaction count remains close to zero on non-
announcement days, it spikes to more than five contracts shortly after
the announcement time on days with earnings announcements before
gradually tailoring off over the next 30 min.

In Panel B of Fig. 2, we compare bid–ask spreads in the after-hours
market on days with and without earnings announcements. Again, we
see distinct differences. On non-announcement days, the median quoted
spread starts at 5 bps at the end of the regular trading session before
rising to 30–35 bps within the first five minutes of the post-trading
session. It then gradually inclines for the duration of the after-hours
session as we approach the overnight period. On announcement days,
the median quoted spread goes from 5 bps at close (4:00 pm) before
quickly rising to 60 bps at the time of the announcement, then drops
to 30 bps within 10–20 min of the announcement.

For comparison, the average quoted spread during post-close trad-
ing is 58.1 bps, while the average spread in regular trading equals 8.4
bps, implying that the bid–ask spread on average is about seven times
greater in the after-hours session compared with the regular trading
session.35

35 See  Appendix  F,  which  reports  summary  statistics  on  the  after-hours
trading volume and bid–ask spreads.

12 

4.2.  Jump proportion

The theoretical analysis in Section 2 highlights that jumps in prices
increase  the  realized  variance  without  affecting  the  bipower  varia-
tion. This insight suggests an intuitive way to check whether earnings
announcements cause jumps.

First,  since  earnings  announcements  almost  exclusively  fall  out-
side  the  hours  of  the  exchange-traded  session,  in  Panel  A  of Fig.  3
we plot the pre-averaged realized variance computed for the regular
trading  session  (9:30  am–4:00  pm)  against  its  corresponding  value
computed for the extended trading session (9:30 am–6:30 pm), both
converted to annualized standard deviations. Their difference measures
the incremental volatility observed in the after-hours market (4:00 pm–
6:30 pm). On non-announcement days (indicated by a dot) the extra
volatility during after-hours trading is typically minuscule and has a
negligible  impact  on  the  cumulative  pre-averaged  realized  variance
measure.  Except  for  a  few  outliers,  the  vast  majority  of  these  ob-
servations  form  a  cloud  close  to  the  45-degree  line.  Conversely,  on
days with a quarterly earnings announcement (indicated by a cross),
differences  are  much  greater  with  the  extended  trading  session  pre-
averaged  realized  variance  substantially  exceeding  its  corresponding
value from the regular trading session. Earnings releases clearly trigger
substantial price volatility in the after-hours market, which is otherwise
dormant.

Second, and more directly related to our jump test, in Panel B of
Fig.  3 we  plot  the  pre-averaged  bipower  variation  against  the  pre-
averaged realized variance, both based on high-frequency data from
the extended trading session (9:30 am–6:30 pm). Realized variance less
bipower variation isolates the contribution of jumps to return variation,
which is zero (up to sampling error) if the price path is continuous
but is strictly positive if there are price jumps. Hence, the farther to
the right of the 45-degree line a data point is, the more it indicates
the  presence  of  jumps.  Consistent  with  this  interpretation,  the  pre-
averaged  realized  variance  and  bipower  variation  are  more  or  less
perfectly aligned on non-announcement days. Conversely, on days with

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Fig. 3. Pre-averaged realized variance and bipower variation.
Note. We show point estimates of the pre-averaged realized variance and pre-averaged bipower variation, converted to an annualized standard deviation. The axis label shows
which estimator is plotted. In parenthesis, we further indicate for which part of the day high-frequency data are employed to calculate the estimate.

earnings announcements we observe large differences indicating jumps
in price movements at these times. Table 2 provides further stock-level
details on realized variance and bipower variation for the regular and
extended trading session broken into days with and without earnings
announcements. Appendix G provides an even more detailed analysis
for Apple (AAPL) which is perhaps the most prominent stock in our
sample.

Third, an alternative approach to gauge the relative importance of
jumps  is  to  examine  the  jump  proportion  which  estimates  the  frac-
tion  of  the  return  variation  originating  from  the  jump  component.
Following Christensen et al. (2014), this is defined as36

Jump proportion = 1 −

Bipower variation
Realized variance

.

(25)

Fig. 4 plots kernel density estimates of the distribution of the jump
proportion. As indicated by the peak near zero for the graphs based
on  our  noise-robust  pre-averaging  estimators,  on  most  days  without
announcements (Panel A) the jump component accounts for none of
the variation in the stock price. Note that small negative numbers can
be observed due to estimation error. Conversely, on days with earnings
announcements (Panel B) more than fifty percent of the total variation
in price movements stems from the jump component.37

In contrast, the jump proportion extracted with five-minute sam-
pling peaks near 10%, regardless of whether there is an announcement
or not. Although the jump proportion for the five-minute measure is
slightly  more  right-skewed  on  days  with  announcements,  in  general

36 The  jump  proportion  is  computed  without  pre-averaging  if  sampling
at  a  5-min  frequency  or  with  pre-averaging  if  sampling  at  the  tick-by-tick
frequency.
37 The slight attenuation observed with 𝜃 = 1 is consistent with our Monte
Carlo evidence in Appendix B, where we note that excessive pre-averaging
tends to deflate the power of our microstructure noise-robust jump test.

it overestimates the importance of jumps on days with no announce-
ments and underestimates it on days with announcements. These find-
ings are consistent with the biases in the conventional jump measure
documented in our Monte Carlo simulation results.

4.3.  Jump frequency

Figs. 3–4 shows that the jump component is important in after-hours
trading  sessions  on  days  with  earnings  announcements  but  largely
absent on days without announcements. To examine this point more
closely and formally test Hypothesis 1.1, we compute the jump indica-
tor:

{

𝐽𝑖𝑡 =

𝑛,𝑖𝑡 > 𝑞 ,

1, 
0, otherwise.

(26)

where 
𝑛,𝑖𝑡 is the noise-robust jump test statistic in (21) for company
𝑖 on day 𝑡. We set the critical value 𝑞 in a way that reduces the like-
lihood of identifying false jumps by applying a Bonferroni correction
to account for multiple testing and keep the family-wise error rate at
1%.38

Table 2 reports the jump frequency for stock 1–25 in our sample,
while Table E.2 in Appendix E contains the information for stock 26–
50.  Panel  A  is  for  the  regular  trading  session,  while  Panel  B  is  for
the  extended  trading  session.  The  sample  is  further  split  into  days
with and without an earnings announcement. For the regular trading
session,  we  estimate  a  jump  frequency  of  2.95%.  While  jumps  do
occur  at  a  higher  frequency  than  expected  by  random  chance,  they
are  relatively  rare  during  the  regular  trading  session.  This  result  is
consistent with Christensen et al. (2014). For after-hours trading ses-
sions  without  earnings  announcements,  we  obtain  a  slightly  higher

38 Bajgrowicz et al. (2016) report that up to 90% of jumps identified with
the five-minute jump test are spurious due to multiple hypothesis testing.

13 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Fig. 4. Distribution of the estimated jump proportion.
Note. This figure shows kernel smoothed densities of the proportion of quadratic return variation from the jump component, which is estimated by: Jump proportion = 1 - Bipower
variation/Realized variance. The latter are computed without pre-averaging if sampling at a 5-minute frequency (5 m) or with pre-averaging if sampling at the tick-by-tick frequency
(rest). 𝜃 controls the size of the pre-averaging horizon 𝑘𝑛 = ⌊𝜃
𝑛⌋ for calculating pre-averaged returns. 𝑛 is the number of tick-by-tick data. The sample is split into days without
earnings announcements (in Panel A) and with earnings announcements (in Panel B).

√

jump frequency of 3.67%. Finally, for after-hours trading sessions with
earnings announcements, our jump frequency estimate is 91.06% which
is far higher than the previous values. Moreover, though very high on
average, the jump frequency is even higher after 2016 (95.84%) versus
before (87.49%).

In essence, while it is rare to identify a jump during regular trad-
ing sessions or in extended trading sessions with no announcements,
it  is  rare not
to  find  a  jump  in  extended  sessions  with  earnings
announcements.  This  finding  provides  strong  empirical  support  for
Hypothesis 1.1.

The corresponding jump frequency rates for the five-minute jump
test statistic of Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2006) are 5.46% in
regular trading sessions, 14.38% in extended trading sessions without
earnings announcements, and 40.40% in extended trading sessions with
earnings  announcements.  Recall  that  our  simulations  in  Appendix  B
show  that  the  five-minute  jump  test  overrejects  in  the  presence  of
little  or  no  microstructure  noise  (as  in  the  regular  trading  sessions)
but lacks power (underrejects) in the presence of high levels of noise
contamination  (as  in  the  after-hours  market).  Hence,  our  estimates
illustrate  that  the  conventional  jump  test  identifies  too  many  jumps
(false positives) during regular trading sessions and extended trading
sessions  without  earnings  announcements  but  too  few  jumps  (false
negatives) during extended trading with earnings announcements.

Table 2 suggests that failure to find jumps after earnings announce-
ments is associated with the trading activity in the after-hours market.
As  this  has  increased  over  time,  the  lower  average  jump  frequency
prior to 2016 is therefore largely a result of fewer trades and weaker
power  in  detecting  jumps.  If  trading  is  too  sparse,  there  are  often
relatively  few  post-announcement  observations  to  base  the  analysis
on, rendering it problematic for our noise-robust test statistic to work
as  intended.  The  other  main  reason  why  we  sometimes  fail  to  de-
tect a post-announcement price jump is that although our jump test
has  excellent  power,  it  is  not  bullet  proof.  This  is  particularly  rele-
vant for announcements that are succeeded by severe whipsawing in
the price. Intuitively, a jump is less likely to be detected when it is
surrounded  by  extremely  high  diffusive  volatility  which  reduces  the
relative contribution of the jump to return variation.

Table 3
Logit estimates for the stock price jump probability.
Variable

(1)

−2.970
(0.012)

Intercept

𝐸 𝐴

|𝑧+

EPS|

|𝑧−
EPS|
√𝑅𝑉 ∗

𝑛

(2)

−3.268
(0.013)

5.589
(0.076)

(3)

−3.268
(0.013)

3.172
(0.328)

0.059
(0.042)

0.616
(0.233)

−0.179
(0.069)

√

𝑅𝑉 ∗

0.1831

EPS,𝑖𝑡| + 𝑏3|𝑧−

0.110
(0.011)
0.1853

𝑁𝐴
Pseudo 𝑅2
Note. We estimate the logit regression: 𝑃 (𝐽𝑖𝑡 = 1) = 𝐹 (𝑎 + 𝑏1𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2|𝑧+
EPS,𝑖𝑡| +
𝑛,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏5𝑁𝐴,𝑖𝑡), where 𝐹 is the logistic distribution function. 𝐽𝑖𝑡 is equal to one
𝑏4
if there is a jump in the price of company 𝑖’s stock on day 𝑡, zero otherwise. 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡
is equal to one if there is an earnings announcement for company 𝑖 on day 𝑡, zero
EPS,𝑖𝑡) is the standardized unexpected earnings for positive (negative)
otherwise. 𝑧+
EPS,𝑖𝑡 (𝑧−
√
is  the  pre-averaged  realized  volatility  calculated  over  the
𝑅𝑉 ∗
announcements,
𝑛,𝑖𝑡
regular trading session on the announcement day, and 𝑁𝐴,𝑖𝑡 is the number of analyst
earnings forecasts for the announcement. The other covariates are interacted with 𝐸 𝐴
and  take  a  value  of  zero  on  non-announcement  days.  The  table  reports  parameter
estimates of the full model in column (3) and of restricted versions in column (1)–(2).
Standard errors are shown in parenthesis below the parameter estimate. The number of
observations is 158,279 of which 156,086 are non-announcement days and 2,193 are
announcements days. Pseudo 𝑅2 is the likelihood ratio index, 𝑅2 = 1 − 𝐿1∕𝐿0, where
𝐿0 is the log-likelihood of the constant model in (1) and 𝐿1 is the log-likelihood of
the models in (2)–(3).

4.4.  Determinants of the jump probability

To more extensively test Hypothesis 1, we next develop a regression
framework to examine the determinants of price jumps. We begin by
inspecting the role of earnings surprises since this is the measure most
directly related to earnings announcements.

To  capture  the  relation  between  the  jump  probability  versus  the
sign and magnitude of earnings surprises, we sort announcements by

14 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Fig. 5. Jump frequency and post-announcement return against standardized earnings surprise.
Note. We sort our earnings announcements by the value of the standardized unexpected earnings, 𝑧EPS, and form decile portfolios from lowest to highest values of the earnings
surprise. In Panel A, we then plot the corresponding announcement jump frequency implied by our noise-robust jump test (averaged within decile). In Panel B, we report the
one-minute post-announcement return (averaged within decile). The median value of 𝑧EPS within each decile is plotted against the right-hand 𝑦-axis.

the value of the earnings surprise, form decile portfolios, and plot the
corresponding average jump frequencies implied by our noise-robust
jump test in Panel A of Fig. 5. The jump probability mostly exceeds
90% across deciles, and does not depend systematically on the size of
the earnings surprise.

Our finding that prices jump even when investors are not surprised
by the reported earnings per share is consistent with Hypothesis 1.2 and
can be explained as follows. First, information other than the headline
earnings figure is typically released (e.g., forward guidance on future
earnings) and this may trigger a jump.39 While this helps explain why
prices can jump  even  on  days  where  markets  do  not  get  surprised
by  the  earnings  figure,  we  would  still  expect  a  lower average jump
probability on such days. This points to the second explanation, namely
that  prices  jump  because  of  the  resolution  of  uncertainty  associated
with the earnings announcement (Ai and Bansal, 2018). An implication
of this story is that prices are more likely to move up (due to the lower
post-announcement  risk  premium)  than  down  following  an  earnings
announcement that is close to investor expectations. We explore this
prediction in Section 6.1.

To  establish  a  more  formal  connection  between  price  jumps  and
earnings  announcements  and  examine  whether  other  factors  affect
jump  probabilities,  we  next  estimate  logit  regressions.  Our  analysis
includes up to five regressors. To estimate the effect of an earnings
announcement  on  the  jump  probability  and  test Hypothesis  1.1,  we
consider an announcement dummy variable:
1, on announcement days,
0, otherwise.

𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 =

(27)

{

39 For example, on 10/24/2011 Netflix (NFLX) reported third-quarter EPS
of $1.16 which beat the consensus expectation of $0.94, corresponding to a
modest 1.6 standard deviation surprise. However, the company also signifi-
cantly lowered its forward guidance, and the stock crashed more than 20% in
after-hours trading.

15 

Since 𝑧EPS proxies for the magnitude of the news component in the
announcement, we expect this to matter for the jump probability, even
though  the  evidence  from  Panel  A  of Fig.  5 is  a  bit  weak.  As  our
second and third covariates, we therefore include the absolute value
of the earnings surprise, measured separately for positive and negative
EPS,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡𝐸 𝐴+
surprises, i.e., we define 𝑧+
EPS,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡𝐸 𝐴−
𝑖𝑡 ,
where 𝐸 𝐴+
𝑖𝑡 = 1(𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡 < 0) are indicator
variables that capture the direction of the earnings surprise.

𝑖𝑡 = 1(𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡 > 0) and 𝐸 𝐴−

𝑖𝑡 and 𝑧−

Fourth,  to  see  whether  high  volatility  in  prices  prior  to  the  an-
nouncement  makes  it  more  or  less  likely  to  find  jumps,  we  include
the pre-averaged realized volatility, √𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛 , computed over the regular
trading session from 9:30 am–4:00 pm on the day of the announcement.
We expect to find a negative effect since high volatility makes it harder
for our noise-robust jump test to detect jumps.

Fifth, as a measure of the resources available to facilitate the price
discovery  process,  we  include  the  number  of  analysts  covering  the
stock, 𝑁𝐴.40 We would expect to find a positive coefficient since the
price discovery process, and thus the speed of price adjustments, should
be more efficient for stocks with the greatest analyst coverage.

In  summary,  we  estimate  the  logit  model  using  observations  for

stock 𝑖 on day 𝑡:
𝑃 (𝐽𝑖𝑡 = 1) = 𝐹 (𝑎 + 𝑏1𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2|𝑧+
√

+ 𝑏4

𝑅𝑉 ∗

𝑛,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏5𝑁𝐴,𝑖𝑡),

EPS,𝑖𝑡| + 𝑏3|𝑧−

EPS,𝑖𝑡|

(28)

where 𝐹 is the logistic distribution function.41

40 We also considered the dispersion in EPS forecasts across analysts, 𝜎EPS,
to get a measure of subjective uncertainty surrounding a particular earnings
announcement.  However,  this  measure  fails  to  be  significant  in  our  logit
regression.
41 The coefficients in (28) are estimated on the entire sample of days with
and without earnings announcements. Hence, the extra explanatory variables
in the model should implicitly be understood as being interacted with the 𝐸 𝐴

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Table 3 reports estimation results for the logit regression applied
to the extended trading session.42 The estimated intercept in column
(2) with only the announcement dummy yields a jump probability on
days without announcements (𝐸 𝐴 = 0) of 3.67% compared to 91.06%
for announcement days (𝐸 𝐴 = 1), which agrees with the results in
Section 4.3. Further, and consistent with Hypothesis 1.1 and Fig. 5, the
earnings announcement dummy is highly statistically significant and
positive, showing that the likelihood of a jump increases by a huge
amount and is near unity in the wake of an earnings announcement.

𝑛

EPS|) and negative (|𝑧−

As reported in column (3), the estimated coefficients on both posi-
tive (|𝑧+
EPS|) earnings surprises are positive. While
the former is small and insignificant, the much larger coefficient esti-
mate for negative surprises is significant, suggesting that disappointing
earnings news is particularly likely to trigger a jump.

The  effect  of √𝑅𝑉 ∗

is  significantly  negative  so  higher  pre-
announcement return volatility reduces the jump probability. For ex-
ample, setting the pre-averaged realized volatility at its 10th and 90th
percentiles while keeping the number of analysts fixed at its average
value our coefficient estimates imply a conditional jump probability
of 98.17% and 97.51% (93.43% and 89.87%) for an average negative
(positive) announcement. A plausible explanation is that it is harder to
detect a post-announcement price jump amid high levels of volatility
which weakens the testing power. Moreover, a high level of volatility
can act as a substitute for price jumps, since it widens the dispersion
of the return distribution and enables the price to move rapidly, albeit
continuously, in response to earnings announcements.

The effect of the number of analysts covering a stock, 𝑁𝐴, is signif-
icantly positive, so jumps are more likely on earnings announcement
days for those stocks covered by the largest number of analysts. For
example, the coefficient estimates imply a conditional jump probability
of 93.96% and 99.37% (77.90% and 98.01%) for an average negative
(positive) announcement when the number of analysts is at its 10th and
90th percentiles while keeping pre-averaged realized volatility fixed at
its average value. Broader analyst coverage may speed up the price
discovery process and increase the chance of observing jumps.

5.  Jump spillover effects

Earnings  announcements  reveal  important  information  about  the
cash  flow  prospects  of  the  announcing  firm,  but  it  may  also  affect
other firms or even the broader economy. Patton and Verardo (2012)
and Savor  and  Wilson (2016)  develop  theoretical  models  in  which
investors  use  earnings  of  announcing  firms  (AFs)  to  revise  their  ex-
pectations of earnings for non-announcing firms (NAFs), generating a
covariance between firm-specific and market-wide cash flow news. As
suggested in Hypothesis 2, it is natural to expect that such learning
effects can induce spillovers in the form of an earnings announcement
from the AF triggering co-jumps in the prices of NAFs and the market
portfolio.43 In this section, we examine if these predictions hold true
and test Hypothesis 2.

5.1.  Jump spillover frequency

We begin by matching announcement days for the AFs with non-
announcement days in the NAFs. Any evidence of co-jump spillover
effects should show up as a higher conditional jump probability for the
NAFs, given an earnings release from the AF, compared to the jump
probability when no firms announce.

Table 4 reports the proportion of extended trading sessions with a
jump in the NAF (listed in columns) when the individual AFs (in rows)
report their financial results. To preserve space, we narrow down our
examination to the 25 most liquid stocks. This suffices to highlight the
importance of industry proximity and differences in the size of firms’
idiosyncratic and market-wide earnings components.

We find compelling evidence that industry proximity plays a crucial
role in determining the co-jump probability. For example, conditional
on a Facebook (FB) announcement, the price of Apple (AAPL), Amazon
(AMZN), and Google (GOOG) jump on 13.3%, 25.8%, and 28.1% of
their  non-announcement  days.  Thus,  conditional  on  the  AF  being  a
tech firm the jump frequency generally rises for companies within that
sector  and  is  much  lower  for  companies  from  other  sectors.  This  is
consistent  with  the  presence  of  a  common  jump  factor  for  the  tech
industry. Moreover, on days where Intel (INTC) is the AF, we record
a  conditional  jump  frequency  of  20.0%,  44.0%,  and  30.0%  in  the
price of Nvidia (NVDA), Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), and Micron
Technology  (MU),  pointing  to  a  common  jump  component  tracking
the microconductor industry. These numbers are much higher than the
common non-announcement jump frequency of 4.18%, calculated as
the  average  jump  frequency  on  days  where  there  are  no  announce-
ments among any of our firms.44 Our analysis therefore provides strong
support for Hypothesis 2.1.

Conversely, there is scant evidence of spillover effects from some
of the other companies in our sample without obvious industry peers.
For example, conditional on an announcement from Walt Disney (DIS),
the jump frequency in the other stocks is always less than 10% and
often close to zero, which suggests that the jump component is tracking
idiosyncratic news.45

In  the  right-most  column  of Table  4,  we  compute  the  jump  fre-
quency in the S&P 500 index (proxied by the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust,
SPY) over the extended trading session in which the firm announces its
earnings. This can be interpreted as the conditional jump probability
in the market index given that a particular firm releases its financial
statement.  If  earnings  announcements  contain  systematic  news,  we
should expect this number to be higher than the comparable jump fre-
quency in the S&P 500 in the absence of any earnings announcement.46
Furthermore, we expect the effect to be stronger for businesses that are
more central to the economy.

The  table  offers  strong  backing  for  the  presence  of  a  systematic
‘‘market’’  factor  in  individual  stocks’  price  jumps.  For  instance,  the
frequency  of  jumps  in  the  S&P  500  index  is  very  high  conditional
on  an  announcement  from  important  stocks  such  as  Apple  (AAPL),
Facebook  (FB),  Amazon  (AMZN),  Microsoft  (MSFT),  Oracle  (ORCL),
and Starbucks (SBUX). Notably, the market index jumps 30% of the
time Apple makes its earnings announcements, which is an order of

variable and assume a value of zero on non-announcement days. With this
design, all covariates measure the marginal effect (or the logarithm of the
odds ratio) on the jump probability conditional on an announcement.
42 The  results  of  our  logistic  jump  probability  regressions  and  the  linear
return regression in the next subsection are robust to the inclusion of stock
fixed effects.
43 Existing  empirical  work  on  co-jumps  include Bollerslev  et  al.
(2008), Caporin et al. (2017), and Li et al. (2017). However, these studies
mainly examine jump dependence between individual equity prices and the
stock index around macroeconomic announcements, where systematic news
are expected to arrive.

44 The conditional jump frequency on common non-announcement days is
slightly  lower  than  the  conditional  non-announcement  day  jump  frequency
reported in Table 2, since the latter does not discriminate between days where
other firms are or are not announcing.
45 Disney may of course exert influence on the conditional jump probability
of related companies not included in our sample such as Hasbro (HAS) or
Mattel (MAT).
46 To rule out that a jump in the S&P 500 is a mechanical effect following
from the AF being an index constituent, we remove the AF’s price effect from
the index by subtracting its price times its weight in the S&P 500 index from
the SPY before we implement the jump test. We are grateful to Andrew Patton
for raising this point.

16 

K. Christensen et al.

Table 4
Co-jump analysis.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

16.1

0.0
2.5
2.1
0.0
2.2

17.6
15.0
6.4
12.0

3.0 25.8
2.6 19.4
33.3

5.9
12.8
15.2
11.9
10.4
15.0
19.1
12.0
17.1
13.6

0.0 0.0
0.0 2.5
0.0 2.1
6.0 2.0
2.6 0.0
5.0 0.0
2.1 0.0
2.0 4.0
6.5 2.2
8.2 0.0
2.4 4.8
2.1

8.8 10.3 28.1
12.5
5.4
17.6 20.0 18.4
15.6
8.5 8.9 19.1
20.0 18.0 11.1 35.1
0.0
35.4 10.4 0.0
7.5
5.0 6.1
15.4
6.7
19.1 15.8
0.0
8.0
20.0

Non-announcing firm (NAF)
FB AAPL NFLX AMZN NVDA TSLA AMD MU MSFT GOOG INTC DIS CRM NKE CSCO SBUX IBM CMG ORCL ADBE QCOM EBAY GILD AMAT ULTA MKT
14.7
30.0
6.4
12.0
2.1
5.0
8.5
6.0
10.9
8.2
7.1
2.1
2.2
6.2
4.0
10.0
4.2
6.2
12.8
4.3
10.2
8.2
8.3
2.1
4.9

FB
AAPL 24.3
NFLX 13.0 6.7
AMZN 17.0 6.5 12.5
2.1
NVDA 0.0 6.2
0.0
0.0 12.5
TSLA
6.1 5.0
2.2 12.8
AMD 13.3 9.8
2.0
MU
0.0
0.0 2.0
4.5 31.2
MSFT 17.1 6.8
2.0 27.8
GOOG 31.917.4
5.9
4.9
9.5 7.3
INTC
0.0
2.1
4.2 0.0
DIS
0.0
0.0
2.2 2.2
CRM
0.0
4.2
2.1 6.2
NKE
0.0
CSCO
2.0
0.0 4.0
8.6
4.3
SBUX 13.0 4.5
IBM
2.6 14.6
4.2 8.3
CMG 13.014.0 11.1 25.6
2.0
2.0 6.1
ORCL
2.0
4.1
ADBE
0.0
4.110.2
4.4 12.5
QCOM 0.0 8.3
2.3 30.6
9.3 4.5
EBAY
4.3 10.5
GILD 19.012.8
0.0
0.0
0.0 4.2
AMAT
2.4
0.0
2.4 0.0
ULTA

20.0
13.5 15.2
15.6 10.2 10.5
38.1 26.2 24.3 10.8
0.0
4.2 4.2
8.3
0.0
8.7 2.2
10.9
4.2
7.9 8.3
14.6
18.0
0.0
2.0 8.0
22.7 22.0 9.5 11.6
7.3
7.3 18.8 15.2
9.5
21.1 18.8 18.4
2.0
8.2 10.4 4.1
0.0
8.2 6.1
6.1
10.6 12.2 10.9 12.2
6.1
17.8 14.3 17.4
11.6 14.6 8.7 11.9
0.0
14.6 10.4 6.2
2.4
4.9 7.3

8.8
0.0 10.7
7.5
8.6 16.1
6.4
2.4 10.9
8.0
2.5
4.0
0.0
4.2
2.8
2.5 10.3
0.0
4.8
4.7
0.0
6.0 16.0
4.0
0.0 13.0
2.3
2.0
2.3
2.0
5.0 14.3
2.6
6.8 10.4
2.1
0.0
6.5
2.2
4.2
6.2 10.4
2.4
4.0
2.0
6.0
4.3
2.3
2.1
2.3
4.2
0.0 10.4
4.5
6.1
6.1 10.2
2.0
4.1
4.3 10.2
8.2
4.2
4.2

0.0 17.6 0.0
5.0 20.0 5.9
4.3 19.1 6.8
0.0 16.0 5.7
4.2
8.9 4.3
2.5 16.2 0.0
0.0 10.6 4.9
2.5 10.0 2.0
0.0 13.0 2.6
8.2 4.8
0.0
9.5 5.9
2.4
2.1
8.5 2.1
0.0 13.3 2.2
16.7 8.3
4.0

6.2
6.5
8.7
0.0 4.2
8.3
4.1 0.0
4.0
2.0 4.0
9.5
0.0 4.2
16.3
19.1
4.5 0.0
10.2 10.2 4.1
4.1 0.0
10.2
2.1 4.1
12.8
2.0 4.1
10.9
4.5 4.2
8.7
0.0 4.5
12.5
9.8 0.0
4.9

5.9 2.9
2.5 5.0
4.3 2.1
2.0 8.0
2.1 0.0
2.5 0.0
6.4 2.1
10.2 4.0
2.2 2.2
6.1 8.2
2.4 2.4
2.1 0.0
4.3 0.0
13.3 2.1
6.0 2.0
0.0 4.0
2.1 0.0
4.2 4.2
7.3

4.0
8.0
2.0
2.1 18.8 0.0
0.0 16.7 4.4
8.2 6.1
4.3
8.2 2.0
4.1
2.0
4.2 0.0
8.2 14.3 0.0
2.1 18.8 4.5
4.2 12.5 6.2
4.9 19.5 9.8

2.9 0.0
5.0 2.9
2.6 2.3
6.0 2.4
0.0 0.0
0.0 2.7
0.0 0.0
2.0 2.0
2.3 5.6
4.8 0.0
2.7 0.0
0.0 0.0
2.2 0.0
6.2 2.1
4.0 0.0
0.0 0.0
0.0

10.5
19.1
8.0
6.5
8.2
11.9
0.0
4.3
4.2
0.0
10.2
6.2
8.3
0.0
0.0
6.2
4.1
12.5
2.8
2.4

16.7
23.1
7.0
16.3
4.3
2.9
6.7
0.0
7.0
8.2
10.0
2.1
2.2
6.2
2.0
15.2
8.5
4.8
6.1
2.0

2.9
5.0
0.0
2.0
0.0
0.0
6.4
0.0
2.2
4.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.2
0.0
2.0
4.2
2.1
0.0
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.1
4.2

4.3
8.2 2.0
2.0 4.1
2.1 2.3
4.5 6.7
6.2 2.4
2.1 0.0
0.0 0.0

2.2
2.0
0.0
2.0
2.4
0.0
4.3
2.1
4.3
0.0
2.1
0.0
2.0
2.0
2.3
6.4
2.1
2.1
2.4

4.9
2.0 2.0
4.1 6.1
6.2 6.2
8.3 2.1
5.1 0.0

5.7
10.9
4.2
9.8

2.1
4.2
2.4

12.2
2.9

4.2
4.9

7.3

9.8

)
F
A
(

m

r
i
f

g
n
i
c
n
u
o
n
n
A

Note. We report the proportion of extended trading sessions with a jump in the non-announcing firm (NAF, in columns) when an announcing firm (AF, in rows) report financial
results. The column MKT reports the jump frequency of the equity market (as proxied by SPY), conditional on the various firms’ announcement days.

Table 5
Logit estimates for the co-jump probability.
Variable
(1)
Panel A: Firm-level
Intercept
𝐼 𝑃

−2.960
(0.015)

−3.020
(0.017)
0.354
(0.048)

(2)

log(𝑉 NAF)

log(𝑉 AF)

𝐷EARLY

𝐷LATE
Panel B: Market-index
Intercept

−2.910
(0.137)

𝐷#AF
log(𝐶 𝑉 AF)

−3.063
(0.153)
1.287
(0.360)

(3)

(4)

(5)

−3.595
(0.043)

−2.900
(0.019)

0.060
(0.036)
−0.372
(0.041)

0.132
(0.009)
0.063
(0.010)

−4.036
(0.363)

0.359
(0.098)

−3.611
(0.046)
0.368
(0.049)
0.148
(0.009)
0.046
(0.010)
0.117
(0.036)
−0.417
(0.041)

−3.941
(0.364)
0.958
(0.381)
0.293
(0.103)

𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

)

𝑗 𝑡

) + 𝑏4𝐷EARLY

Note. In  Panel  A,  we  estimate  the  logit  regression: 𝑃 (𝐽 NAF
= 1 ∣ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 = 1
𝑗 𝑡
=
𝐹 (𝑎 + 𝑏1𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 + 𝑏2 log(𝑉 NAF
)
, where 𝐹 is the logistic
) + 𝑏3 log(𝑉 AF
+ 𝑏5𝐷LATE
is  equal  to  one  if  there  is  a  jump  in  the  price  of  the
distribution  function. 𝐽 NAF
𝑗 𝑡
non-announcing  firm  (NAF) 𝑗 on  day 𝑡,  zero  otherwise. 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡
is  equal  to  one  if
the  announcing  firm  (AF) 𝑖 releases  its  quarterly  earnings  report  on  day 𝑡,  zero
otherwise. 𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 is an industry proximity score between 0 (no overlap) and 1 (perfect
overlap) calculated from the SIC codes of company 𝑖 and 𝑗 following Wang and Zajac
(2007). 𝑉 NAF and 𝑉 AF are the average number of transactions in the NAF and AF
in the after-hours market in the month prior to 𝑡. 𝐷EARLY
are indicator
variables of whether the AF discloses its fiscal statement early or late in the earnings
cycle.  In  Panel  B,  we  estimate  the  logit  regression: 𝑃 (𝐽 SPY
≥ 1)  =
𝐹 (𝑎 + 𝑏1𝐷#AF
is  equal  to  one  if  there  is  a  jump  in  the
is  equal
market  index  (proxied  by  SPY)  on  day 𝑡,  zero  otherwise.  Moreover, 𝐷#AF
to one if #AF𝑡
𝑖 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 is the number of AFs on
day 𝑡. 𝐶 𝑉 AF
is the cumulative average number of transactions in the
AFs in the after-hours market in the month prior to 𝑡. The table reports parameter
estimates of the full model in column (5) and of restricted versions in column (1)–(4).
Standard errors are shown in parenthesis below the parameter estimate. The number
of observations is 97,811 in Panel A and 1084 in Panel B.

≥ 5, zero otherwise, where #AF𝑡 = ∑
𝑖 ∶ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 =1 𝑉 AF

𝑡 + 𝑏2 log(𝐶 𝑉 AF

)
.  Here, 𝐽 SPY
)

= 1 ∣  #AF𝑡

𝑡 = ∑

and 𝐷LATE

𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

magnitude higher than the jump probability in the market index on
common  non-announcement  days  (3.60%).  By  contrast,  the  market
jump probability is much lower when firms such as Tesla (TSLA) and

Salesforce (CRM) announce earnings, suggesting that price movements
in both of these stocks are to a larger extent driven by idiosyncratic
news unrelated to the broader economy.

In our sample, there are between a minimum of zero and a max-
imum of nine earnings announcements on any given day. The condi-
tional jump frequency in the market index is increasing in the num-
ber  of  announcements.  On  average,  the  rate  at  which  the  market
index  jumps  rises  from  the  3.60%  on  common  non-announcement
days [0 announcements] to 4.82% [1–2 announcements], 3.02% [3–4
announcements], 12.28% [5–6 announcements], and 21.05% [7–9 an-
nouncements]. These observations are consistent with Hypothesis 2.3.
Furthermore,  this  finding  suggests  that  the  ‘‘information  spillover’’
effect dominates the ‘‘distraction’’ effect, as identified by Hirshleifer
et al. (2009), who show that the immediate price response to earnings
surprises is significantly weaker on days when multiple firms announce
their earnings.

5.2.  Determinants of the jump spillover probability

Our empirical results on co-jump frequencies are particularly inter-
esting because it is often difficult to detect jumps in the market index
even when the price of the underlying stocks jump. This is because
individual firms typically only take up a small part of the index basket,
so  their  price  jumps  are  attenuated.  Our  findings  point  toward  an
information channel that leads investors to revise their earnings ex-
pectations for the broader economy after individual firms’ earnings an-
nouncements. We next examine key determinants of this transmission
mechanism  and  estimate  their  importance  for  jump  spillover  effects
with a view toward Hypothesis 2.2.

𝑗 𝑡

We let 𝐽 NAF

be an indicator variable that equals one if the price of
NAF 𝑗 jumps on day 𝑡, zero otherwise. We then estimate a logit model
for the conditional jump probability of stock 𝑗’s price, given that AF 𝑖
releases its fiscal results on day 𝑡 (𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 by construction):
(
𝑎 + 𝑏1𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 + 𝑏2 log(𝑉 NAF

)
𝐽 NAF
𝑗 𝑡 = 1 ∣ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 = 1

) + 𝑏3 log(𝑉 AF
𝑖𝑡

= 𝐹

𝑃

(

)

𝑗 𝑡
) .

(29)

+𝑏4𝐷EARLY
𝑖𝑡

+ 𝑏5𝐷LATE
𝑖𝑡

17 

 
 
K. Christensen et al.

We include an intercept, a measure of industry proximity, 𝐼 𝑃 , the nat-
ural logarithm of the transaction volume of the AF and NAF, log(𝑉 NAF)
and log(𝑉 AF), and indicator variables for whether the AF is disclosing
its fiscal statement early or late in the earnings season, 𝐷EARLY and
𝐷LATE.47 Following Wang and Zajac (2007), we define industry prox-
imity as the proportion of common consecutive digits (starting with
leading digit and going down) in their SIC code shown in Table 1.48
𝑉 NAF and 𝑉 AF are the average number of transactions in the NAF and
AF in the after-hours market in the month prior to 𝑡. We log-transform
the  latter  to  make  them  less  right-skewed  and  closer  to  Gaussian.
Following Savor and Wilson (2016), we define early (late) announcers
as those firms that release their financial results in the 1st (4th) quartile
of the earnings season. The latter is assumed to start two weeks and stop
two months after the end of a quarter (e.g., the earnings season for Q1
starts on April 15 and ends on May 31).

The results are reported in Panel A of Table 5. We expect a positive
relationship with the first three covariates since greater industry prox-
imity should induce a positive jump spillover effect, higher liquidity
facilitates a bigger and more rapid transmission of information from
the AF to the NAF, and companies that announce early in the cycle are
more likely to disclose new information relevant to other companies.
This is confirmed by the fitted model. Industry proximity is associated
with  a  positive  and  highly  significant  marginal  effect  on  the  jump
spillover probability (t-statistic of 7.16). The liquidity of both the NAF
and AF in the after-hours market are also positive and significant with
the coefficient estimate on 𝑉 NAF being twice as large and significant as
that on 𝑉 AF (t-statistics of 7.16 and 14.56). In addition, the spillover
from early announcers is positive and significant (t-statistic of 3.28),
and vice versa for late announcers (t-statistic of −10.11). These findings
are all consistent with Hypothesis 2.2.

To convert these estimates into an implied co-jump probability, we
again change the covariates one at a time, while holding the others
fixed. For example, early in the earnings cycle (𝐷EARLY = 1) and for
firms  with  no  industry  overlap  (𝐼 𝑃 = 0),  the  coefficient  estimates
imply that the conditional jump probability for the NAF is 4.02% and
7.19% (4.96% and 5.80%) when 𝑉 NAF (𝑉 AF) is assumed to be at its
10th and 90th percentile while holding 𝑉 AF (𝑉 NAF) fixed at its average
value.  Late  in  the  earnings  cycle  (𝐷LATE = 1),  those  numbers  drop
notably to 2.39% and 4.34% (2.97% and 3.48%). Furthermore, early
in the earnings cycle and for firms with identical industry classification
(𝐼 𝑃 = 1), the conditional jump probability for the NAF is shifted up
to 5.70% and 10.06% (7.01% and 8.17%) when 𝑉 NAF (𝑉 AF) is at its
10th and 90th percentile while holding 𝑉 AF (𝑉 NAF) fixed at its average
value. Those numbers again drop late in the earnings cycle to 3.42%
and 6.15% (4.23% and 4.96%).

To uncover any jump spillover effects on the market portfolio, we

estimate the following model:
𝑃 (𝐽 SPY
𝑡

= 1 ∣ #AF𝑡

)
≥ 1

= 𝐹 (𝑎 + 𝑏1𝐷#AF

𝑡 + 𝑏2 log

where

𝐷#AF
𝑡

=

{

1,

≥ 5,
if #AF𝑡
0, otherwise,

(𝐶 𝑉 AF

𝑡

)) ,

(30)

(31)

and #AF𝑡 = ∑
𝑖 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡 is the number of AFs on a given day. The dummy
variable  separates  days  with  ‘‘few’’  or  ‘‘many’’  announcements.  We
further include the natural logarithm of the cumulative average number
of transactions in the AFs in the after-hours market in the month prior
to day 𝑡, 𝐶 𝑉 AF

.

𝑡 = ∑

𝑖 ∶ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡=1 𝑉 AF

𝑖𝑡

47 We  also  included  the  jump  indicator  of  the  AF, 𝐽 AF
,  as  a  covariate.
𝑖𝑡
However, since the probability of a jump for an AF is near unity and varies
little over our sample, this variable has little-to-no explanatory power.
48 𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 is discrete with range 0.00, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00, where 𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 = 0
means no industry overlap (leading digit in SIC code differs), while 𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 = 1
is perfect overlap (SIC codes are identical).

18 

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Panel B of Table 5 shows that the jump probability for the market
portfolio is significantly higher on days where many firms announce
their results. Moreover, there is also a positive relationship with the
.  These  findings  make  sense
after-hours  liquidity  of  the  AFs, 𝐶 𝑉 AF
because a larger pool of company announcements implies that more
market-related  information  is  being  released  to  investors  and  larger
liquidity  among  the  AFs  facilitates  a  faster  price  discovery  process,
which feeds into the market index, consistent with Hypothesis 2.3.49

𝑡

6.  Price dynamics after earnings announcements

Our results so far provide insights into price jump dynamics in the
immediate  aftermath  of  earnings  announcements.  However,  they  do
not address if the jumps in prices over- or undershoot. In this section,
we  explore  whether  post-announcement  returns  are  predictable  and
whether this can be exploited in simple trading strategies to generate
abnormal returns. Both points help us better understand the efficiency
of the post-announcement price formation and test the ‘‘sufficiency’’
part of conditions for market efficiency in Hypothesis 3.

6.1.  Determinants of the jump size

While our noise-robust jump test statistic speaks to the presence (or
absence) of a jump, it does not reveal by how much the price jumps. We
therefore next construct a proxy for the jump size based on returns mea-
sured over a small time interval following the earnings announcement.
In particular, we compute the one-minute post-announcement return
1𝑚) as the log-price a minute after the earnings release less the latest
(𝑟EA
log-price prior to the announcement.

The  last  column  of Table  1 reports  summary  statistics  for  the
one-minute post-announcement returns for each company. While the
cross-sectional sample average of 0.15% is rather large, the standard
deviation  of  3.50%  is  even  bigger,  indicating  that  one-minute  post-
announcement returns, while positive on average, are highly dispersed.
One-minute returns are slightly negatively skewed (−0.48), although
this is mainly driven by a few extremely negative return observations
in our sample as evidenced by a large coefficient of kurtosis (5.76).

In  Panel  B  of Fig.  5,  we  plot  the  average  one-minute  post-
announcement return against the standardized earnings surprise. We
observe a near-monotonic relationship between the sign and magni-
tude of earnings surprises and subsequent returns. Specifically, large
negative (positive) earnings surprises are associated with large negative
(positive) post-announcement returns.

More than 85% of earnings announcements surprise positively in
our  sample,  so  firms  are  expected  to  beat  consensus  estimates.  The
average value of the standardized unexpected earnings is ̄𝑧EPS = 1.73
(median value of 1.37), which is located in the sixth decile in Fig. 5. The
average one-minute post-announcement return in that decile is 0.46%
(median value of 0.37%), which is consistent with Hypothesis 1.2, that
earnings  announcements  in  line  with  expectations  generate  positive
returns due to uncertainty resolution.

We next examine the determinants of the change in stock prices in
the aftermath of earnings announcements. To understand which factors
drive post-announcement returns, we estimate a regression model that
includes the predictor variables from the logit model in (28) except
the 𝐸 𝐴 dummy  variable,  which  is  captured  by  the  intercept  here.
In  addition,  we  add  the  cumulative  net  order  imbalance,  which  we
construct following Grégoire and Martineau (2022):

𝑂 𝐼𝑖𝑡 =

𝐵𝑖𝑡 − 𝑆𝑖𝑡
𝐵𝑖𝑡 + 𝑆𝑖𝑡

,

(32)

49 Again, we account for the mechanical effect of a constituent members’
price jump on the market index by subtracting its price component from the
SPY.

K. Christensen et al.

Table 6
Post-announcement return regression.
Variable

(1)

0.145
(0.075)

Intercept

𝑧+
EPS

𝑧−
EPS
√𝑅𝑉 ∗

𝑛

𝑁𝐴
𝑂 𝐼
̄𝑅2
𝑃 -value

(2)

−0.370
(0.108)
0.345
(0.037)
0.784
(0.157)

0.0682
0.0016

(3)

−0.745
(0.132)
0.281
(0.037)
0.327
(0.155)
0.165
(0.074)
0.014
(0.006)

0.0795
0.7682

(4)

−0.731
(0.131)
0.267
(0.037)
0.330
(0.149)
0.159
(0.074)
0.013
(0.006)
1.394
(0.188)

0.0960
0.6811

√

1 𝑚,𝑖𝑡

𝑅𝑉 ∗

𝑛,𝑖𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑡 +

EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏3

EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2𝑧−

1 𝑚,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏1𝑧+

is  the  one-minute  post-announcement  return, 𝑧+

Note. We estimate the linear regression: 𝑟EA
𝑏4𝑁𝐴,𝑖𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏5𝑂 𝐼𝑖𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡. 𝑟EA
EPS,𝑖𝑡) is the standardized unexpected earnings for positive (negative) announcements,
(𝑧−
√
is  the  pre-averaged  realized  volatility  calculated  over  the  regular  trading
𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛,𝑖𝑡
session on the announcement day, 𝑁𝐴,𝑖𝑡 is the number of analyst earnings forecasts
for the announcement, 𝑂 𝐼𝑖𝑡 is the one-minute post-announcement cumulative net order
imbalance,  and 𝐷𝑖𝑡 = sign(𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡) is  the  sign  function.  The  table  reports  parameter
estimates of the full model in column (4) and of restricted versions in column (1)–(3).
Standard errors are shown in parenthesis below the parameter estimate. The number
of observations is 2193.
̄𝑅2 is the adjusted coefficient of multiple determination. The
𝑃 -value is for testing the hypothesis 𝐻0 ∶ 𝑏1 = 𝑏2 against 𝐻1 ∶ 𝑏1

≠ 𝑏2.

EPS,𝑖𝑡

where 𝐵𝑖𝑡 and 𝑆𝑖𝑡 correspond to the buyer- and seller-initiated trading
volume over the one-minute post-announcement window. To get signed
trade volume, we assign an aggressiveness indicator to each transaction
based on whether it was buyer- or seller-initiated. We employ a ‘‘level-
1 algorithm’’ known as the tick rule (e.g. Chakrabarty et al., 2015).50
Note that in contrast to the other variables, the net order imbalance is
not known ahead of the announcement.

We  then  estimate  a  pooled  panel  regression  for  the  one-minute

√

𝑅𝑉 ∗

1𝑚,𝑖𝑡:

EPS,𝑖𝑡+𝑏3

EPS,𝑖𝑡+𝑏2𝑧−

post-announcement return for stock 𝑖 on day 𝑡, 𝑟EA
1𝑚,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑎+𝑏1𝑧+
𝑟EA
𝑛,𝑖𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑡+𝑏4𝑁𝐴,𝑖𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑡+𝑏5𝑂 𝐼𝑖𝑡+𝜖𝑖𝑡, (33)
where 𝐷𝑖𝑡 = sign(𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡) is the sign function. We interact the sign of
𝑧EPS with pre-averaged realized volatility and the number of analysts
because the latter are non-negative and merely capture the speed with
which information gets impounded into stock prices whereas earnings
surprises are directional. The bigger the return volatility and number of
analysts, the more we expect positive news (a positive sign indicator) to
move returns upwards and negative news (a negative sign indicator) to
move returns downwards. A priori, we therefore expect all coefficients
to be positive in (33).

EPS

and 𝑧−

Table 6 reports our estimation results. In the restricted model in
column (2) with only 𝑧+
EPS,𝑖𝑡 but no additional controls, the
estimates of 𝑏1 and 𝑏2 are both positive, implying that larger earnings
surprises  translate  into  larger  announcement  returns.  The  marginal
effect  of  negative  earnings  surprises  is  more  than  twice  as  large  as
that  of  positive  earnings  surprises.  Negative  earnings  surprises  thus
trigger a much larger drop in the stock price than the rise in prices
for comparable positive surprises. In this regression, the coefficients are
also significantly different from each other (𝑃 -value of 0.0016). Adding
controls  in  column  (3)  and  (4),  the  estimates  of 𝑏1 and 𝑏2 remain
positive and 𝑏2 > 𝑏1, but they are nearly identical and the hypothesis
𝐻0 ∶ 𝑏1 = 𝑏2 is no longer rejected.

The slope estimate on the pre-averaged realized volatility, √𝑅𝑉 ∗
𝑛 ,
is positive and borderline statistically significant. Higher volatility is

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

therefore weakly associated with wider dispersion in returns as post-
announcement prices move further away from their initial value during
periods of higher volatility.

The coefficient estimate on the number of analysts, 𝑁𝐴, is positive
and significant. Hence, a larger number of analysts monitoring a com-
pany leads to larger one-minute post-announcement returns following
positive  surprises  and  smaller  (more  negative)  returns  for  negative
surprises.

Finally, we consider the order imbalance variable, 𝑂 𝐼. While the
other  variables  in  the  regression  are  known  ex-ante  (at  or  before
the earnings announcement), order imbalance is only known ex-post.
Bearing  this  in  mind,  our  estimates  on 𝑂 𝐼 are  positive  and  highly
significant for both positive and negative earnings surprises, implying
that larger net order imbalances are associated with bigger movements
in returns. Intuitively, buying pressure (positive OI) pushes prices up,
while selling pressure (negative OI) reduces prices.51

We conclude from this evidence that both small and large earnings
surprises almost always trigger a jump in the stock price. However,
while small earnings surprises are associated with small returns, large
earnings surprises tend to move prices by a bigger amount in a direction
that  is  consistent  with  the  sign  of  the  earnings  surprise.  This  effect
is stronger for negative earnings surprises. Moreover, prices move by
more, the more analysts cover a given stock and the magnitude of price
movements is also affected by the pre-announcement price volatility.52

6.2.  Trading strategy

We next examine if the one-minute post-announcement return can
be predicted and, if so, whether the resulting forecasts can be exploited
in  a  simple  trading  strategy.  We  employ  the  parsimonious  earnings
response model of Ball and Brown (1968) by using the pooled panel
regression in (33) based on the standardized earnings surprise as the
only conditioning information:
1𝑚,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏1𝑧+
𝑟EA
We recursively estimate the parameters in (34) using an initial warm-
up sample of one month of announcement days, adding new data as it
becomes available. This ensures our forecasts are available in real time
and do not suffer from look-ahead bias.

EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2𝑧−

EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡.

(34)

Our trading strategy follows Patell and Wolfson (1984). It opens a
long (short) position if the predicted return in (34) is positive (neg-
ative). In our baseline scenario the position is held until the end of
the trading day (6:30 pm, or EOD) and closed at the last observation.
In  contrast  to Patell  and  Wolfson (1984),  there  is  little  evidence  of
elevated returns during the overnight period following the release or
at the opening of trading on the next day, see Appendix F. Thus, our
results are robust to leaving the position on the book until the exchange
opens the next morning. To avoid chasing too small profits, we set an
entrance barrier of 0.75% in absolute value for the predicted return,
which is a 25% markup of the immediate post-announcement bid–ask
spread observed in Panel B of Fig. 2. However, our results are robust
to  using  a  range  of  other  threshold  values.  With  a  0.75%  required
return, the strategy generates 826 trading signals from 2,193 earnings
announcements, of which 664 are long and 162 are short.

To gauge the importance of transaction costs, we implement four
versions of our trading strategy. The first sets the entry level of the
trade equal to the first post-announcement transaction price (Trade).

50 Quoting from their paper: ‘‘The tick rule classifies a trade as buyer-initiated
if the trade price is above the preceding trade price (an uptick trade) and as seller-
initiated if the trade price is below the preceding trade price (a downtick trade). If
the trade price is identical to the previous trade price (a zero-tick trade), the rule
looks for the closest prior price that differs from the current trade price. Zero-uptick
trades are classified as buys, and zero-downtick trades are classified as sells’’.

51 As a robustness check, we reestimated the return regression in (33) based
on 5-, 10-, 30-, and 60-min post-announcement returns. Although some of the
marginal effects were found to be larger simply because the longer-horizon
returns tend to be larger than one-minute returns, none of the conclusions
regarding the sign and significance of the coefficient estimates changed.
52 We also examined our data for a pre-earnings announcement drift but
failed to identify any significant effect.

19 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Table 7
Average return from trading strategy.
Panel A: Baseline termination rule

Terminate at 6:30pm (EOD).
Full sample
1.80 (8.88)
1.50 (7.67)
0.72 (3.68)
0.41 (2.18)
0.28 (1.51)

Trade
Midquote
BBO
BBO+5s
BBO+10s
Panel B: Alternative termination rules

2008–2015
2.30 (8.77)
2.00 (7.87)
1.23 (4.84)
0.93 (3.88)
0.80 (3.32)

Trade
Midquote
BBO
BBO+5s
BBO+10s

Trade
Midquote
BBO
BBO+5s
BBO+10s

Trade
Midquote
BBO
BBO+5s
BBO+10s

Trade
Midquote
BBO
BBO+5s
BBO+10s

2008–2015

0.82 (7.13)
0.66 (5.35)
−0.35 (−2.60)
−0.65 (−6.31)
−0.78 (−8.00)

1.26 (8.53)
1.04 (7.09)
0.07 (0.46)
−0.23 (−1.81)
−0.36 (−2.86)

Terminate after fixed number of minutes.
Full sample
Panel B.1: Stop after 30 s
0.74 (8.28)
0.56 (6.31)
−0.47 (−4.75)
−0.79 (−9.72)
−0.91 (−12.11)
Panel B.2: Stop after 1 min
1.05 (9.36)
0.85 (7.97)
−0.17 (−1.43)
−0.48 (−4.86)
−0.61 (−6.29)
Panel B.3: Stop after 2 min
1.25 (9.97)
0.98 (8.08)
0.02 (0.13)
−0.30 (−2.64)
−0.42 (−3.84)
Panel B.4: Stop after 3 min
1.34 (9.78)
1.08 (8.13)
0.17 (1.24)
−0.14 (−1.16)
−0.27 (−2.20)
Panel B.5: Stop after 5 min
1.58 (10.82)
1.27 (8.95)
0.41 (2.81)
0.09 (0.69)
−0.03 (−0.25)

1.55 (9.73)
1.25 (7.83)
0.32 (1.87)
0.01 (0.09)
−0.12 (−0.82)

1.89 (10.39)
1.60 (8.70)
0.78 (4.18)
0.48 (2.84)
0.35 (2.05)

1.64 (9.57)
1.39 (8.04)
0.50 (2.82)
0.19 (1.27)
0.06 (0.42)

2016–2020
1.11 (3.49)
0.80 (2.65)
0.01 (0.03)
−0.32 (−1.09)
−0.44 (−1.48)

2016–2020

0.62 (4.43)
0.43 (3.39)
−0.64 (−4.42)
−0.97 (−7.57)
−1.09 (−9.34)

0.76 (4.42)
0.59 (3.86)
−0.50 (−2.96)
−0.83 (−5.43)
−0.95 (−6.48)

0.82 (4.14)
0.59 (3.23)
−0.40 (−2.08)
−0.74 (−4.18)
−0.85 (−5.06)

0.92 (4.12)
0.66 (3.16)
−0.29 (−1.31)
−0.62 (−3.03)
−0.74 (−3.73)

2008–2015

1.34 (8.21)
0.98 (6.93)
0.07 (0.47)
−0.24 (−1.70)
−0.37 (−2.70)

1.44 (8.34)
1.23 (7.06)
0.35 (1.99)
0.04 (0.28)
−0.09 (−0.59)

Terminate after fixed number of ticks.
Full sample
Panel B.6: Stop after 50 ticks
1.14 (9.84)
0.85 (8.04)
−0.11 (−1.03)
−0.43 (−4.13)
−0.56 (−5.45)
Panel B.7: Stop after 100 ticks
1.20 (9.43)
0.98 (7.61)
0.08 (0.61)
−0.24 (−2.00)
−0.36 (−3.18)
Panel B.8: Stop after 250 ticks
1.30 (9.07)
1.07 (7.63)
0.19 (1.33)
−0.13 (−0.99)
−0.25 (−2.02)
Panel B.9: Stop after 500 ticks
1.42 (9.33)
1.12 (7.56)
0.29 (1.94)
−0.02 (−0.18)
−0.15 (−1.11)
Panel B.10: Stop after 1,000 ticks
1.46 (8.90)
1.24 (7.88)
0.44 (2.76)
0.12 (0.84)
−0.00 (−0.01)

1.74 (8.56)
1.40 (7.29)
0.59 (3.03)
0.28 (1.62)
0.15 (0.87)

1.93 (9.03)
1.56 (7.62)
0.78 (3.78)
0.48 (2.55)
0.35 (1.85)

1.53 (8.14)
1.33 (7.34)
0.47 (2.59)
0.17 (1.03)
0.03 (0.22)

2016–2020

0.86 (5.47)
0.67 (4.23)
−0.37 (−2.17)
−0.70 (−4.48)
−0.82 (−5.35)

0.88 (4.68)
0.63 (3.35)
−0.29 (−1.51)
−0.63 (−3.43)
−0.74 (−4.29)

0.98 (4.44)
0.69 (3.19)
−0.21 (−0.92)
−0.54 (−2.58)
−0.65 (−3.27)

0.96 (4.28)
0.72 (3.14)
−0.12 (−0.53)
−0.46 (−2.06)
−0.57 (−2.69)

0.79 (3.17)
Trade
0.78 (3.22)
Midquote
−0.04 (−0.16)
BBO
−0.37 (−1.57)
BBO+5s
−0.49 (−2.11)
BBO+10s
Note. The table shows the average return in percent from a trading strategy that employs the standardized earnings surprise to predict the one-minute post-announcement return:
EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡. A long (short) position in the stock is opened if the predicted excess return is greater (smaller) than 0.5% (−0.5%). In the baseline termination
1 𝑚,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏1𝑧+
𝑟EA
rule in Panel A, the position is held until 6:30pm (EOD). In Panel B, alternative termination rules are inspected. In Panels B.1–B.5, the position is closed after a fixed number of
minutes, whereas in Panels B.6–B.10 the position is closed after a fixed number of tick updates. ‘‘Trade’’ employs the transaction price, ‘‘Midquote’’ the midquote, and ‘‘BBO’’ the
best bid and offer. ‘‘+Xs’’ enforces a latency delay of X seconds before entrance. The test statistic for testing that the average return is zero, based on robust standard errors, is
reported in parenthesis.

1.15 (4.80)
0.81 (3.68)
−0.12 (−0.52)
−0.45 (−2.11)
−0.57 (−2.76)

EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2𝑧−

Our second approach employs the midquote (Midquote). We expect the
transaction price to be in the direction of the announcement surprise,
but it is possible that it is on the other side of the strategy (e.g., a
sale following a positive announcement surprise, or vice versa). More-
over, whereas the Trade strategy can snipe stale quotes resting in the
limit  order  book  prior  to  the  announcement,  the  Midquote  strategy
employs an updated quote that incorporates the information from the
announcement.53 Trading at the midquote is often possible for large
institutional  traders,  but  may  not  be  feasible  for  other  entities.  Our
third strategy therefore incorporates the quoted bid–ask spread (Best
Bid and Offer, or BBO). It initiates a buy order at the prevailing best
ask, whereas a sell order is initiated at the prevailing best bid. The
latter therefore incorporates a full spread in the returns generated from
the  trading  strategy.54 Finally,  our  fourth  approach  makes  the  odds
even more unfavorable by introducing a latency delay, which is the
minimum number of seconds an investor must wait before entering a
position (BBO+Xs). Such trading delays cause investors to miss out on

53 Baldauf and Mollner (2022) document the importance of stale quotes in
generating jumps in the transaction price.
54 We do not control for market impact since our data is not rich enough
to include such information. Hence, our results are mostly relevant for small
trading sizes.

the initial reaction in the stock price. In principle, it could be beneficial
to wait a few seconds before starting a trade because spreads narrow
following an announcement.

Fig. 6 shows the evolution over time in the cumulative returns based
on payoffs from individual trades. The slope of the graph reflects the
rate  at  which  returns  accrue:  The  steeper  the  curve,  the  larger  the
returns. Conversely, flat spots or a declining curve indicate that the
trading strategy fails to earn, or outright loses, money.

The figure highlights that the transaction price and midquote ap-
proaches yield positive returns throughout our sample with no notable
periods  of  inferior  performance  (full  blue  and  dashed  red  lines).  As
expected, introducing execution costs or latency delays reduces the rate
of accumulation. In particular, from 2016 onward the strategy that pays
the bid–ask spread (dashed-dotted line) is flatlining. Adding a further
5- or 10-s latency delay (dashed lines) reduces returns even more and
the  strategy  loses  money  after  2016.  This  indicates  that  the  speed
with which earnings announcement information gets incorporated into
prices has increased in the second part of our sample.

To inspect the profitability of our trading strategy, Fig. 6 also reports
(in parenthesis) the sample average return and a test statistic examining
if the mean return is different from zero. In frictionless markets where
investors can enter the position at the first post-announcement trans-
action price, a highly significant return of 1.80% per trade (t-statistic

20 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

of 8.88) is earned over the full sample. Trading at the midquote, the
average return drops to a highly significant 1.50% per trade (t-statistic
of 7.67). Even if trading is executed at the bid–ask spreads, the average
return of 0.72% continues to be significant (t-statistic of 3.68). A 5-
s latency delay reduces the return to 0.41% per trade, which is only
borderline significant (t-statistic of 2.18). Forcing a 10-s delay on trade
entrance, the average return is still positive at 0.28% per trade, which
is now insignificant (t-statistic of 1.51).55

Panel A of Table 7 reports a more comprehensive set of summary
statistics. On top of the full sample (2008–2020) results, we also do
the analysis separately for the period 2008–2015 and 2016–2020. In
this way, we can examine if the price discovery process has changed
over time. We choose the subsample splits based on major structural
changes  in  market  design.  First,  the  last  electronic  communication
network (ECN) in the U.S., as defined by Rule 600(b)(23) of Regulation
NMS, closed in 2015. The disappearance of ECNs implies that during
our  sample  an  increased  amount  of  liquidity  has  been  rerouted  to
alternative after-hours trading venues, such as dark pools.56 The latter
provide anonymous trading and, in general, do not display quotes to
the public. On the one hand, this can impede price discovery, because
order flow contains valuable information.57 On the other hand, less pre-
trade transparency can facilitate price discovery because investors can
conceal their trading activity, which increases the incentive to collect
private information. Moreover, as earnings announcement news is ar-
guably short-lived, it encourages faster and more aggressive trading on
such information (e.g. Brogaard and Pan, 2021; Flood et al., 1999). Sec-
ond, stricter legislation approved by the SEC means that from April 4,
2016 a greater number of broker-dealers are required to disclose stock-
by-stock aggregate volume and transaction count information to the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) on a weekly basis.58
Post-trade transparency helps investors locate more liquid platforms,
which accelerates the matching process. Furthermore, the reduction in
the number of trading venues makes the market less fragmented, which
further enhances this process.

Across the board, average returns are both larger and more signif-
icant in the first subsample (2008–2015) compared to the full sample.
For  example,  the  average  return  per  trade  in  the  transaction  price
setting is 2.30% (t-statistic of 8.77) over 2008–2015 but only 1.11%
(t-statistic  of  3.49)  over  2016–2020.  Moreover,  the  average  return
inferred from the midquote strategy drops to 0.80% (t-statistic of 2.65)
in the second subsample — more than a full percentage point lower
than  its  early  subsample  counterpart  (2.00%).  Trading  at  the  bid–
ask  spread  further  reduces  the  average  return  and  adding  a  latency
delay even renders them slightly negative, though not significant, in
the second subsample. These findings are consistent with a more effi-
cient price discovery process over time with average returns declining

𝑗

𝑡,𝑖

𝑡,𝑖(𝑃 𝑗
∑

𝑡,6∶30 − 𝑃 𝑗
∑
𝑖 𝜋𝑗
#𝐸 𝐴𝑗

55 We can estimate how much money investors leave on the table after an
earnings announcement using transaction information between the announce-
ment and 6:30 pm. Denote by 𝑃 𝑗
𝑡,𝑖 the price and number of shares
𝑡,𝑖 and 𝑛𝑗
of the 𝑖th transaction in stock 𝑗 after the announcement at time 𝑡. Also, let
𝑡,6∶30 be the price at 6:30 pm. The dollar profit made by an investor buying
𝑃 𝑗
in  the 𝑖th  post-announcement  trade  and  closing  it  out  at  6:30  pm  is  then
𝑡,𝑖). Cumulative dollar profits across the whole sample are
𝜋𝑗
𝑡,𝑖 = 𝑛𝑗
𝜋$ = ∑
𝑡,𝑖 is the signal from the trading strategy (1 =
𝑡,𝑖, where 𝑗
𝑗
long, −1 = short, 0 = no position). We estimate a total profit of $418,783,007,
or  0.3209%  of  turnover.  The  average  profit  is  $507,001  with  a  standard
deviation of $189,115, or a z-score of 2.68. We thank Lasse Heje Pedersen
for suggesting this calculation.
56 Traditional  floor  trading  is  available,  but  it  is  not  anonymous  and
probably also not fast enough.
57 Hendershott and Jones (2003) find evidence of a deterioration in price
discovery, when the Island ECN transitioned into a dark pool following stricter
display requirements pursuant of Regulation ATS.
58 See, for example, https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/NoticeDocum
ent/p446087.pdf and https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/Regulatory-No
tice-15-48.pdf.

to  the  point  where  they  are  no  longer  significantly  different  from
zero after accounting for bid–ask spreads or latency delays. They also
concur with Martineau (2022), who finds that most stock prices are
significantly  more  responsive  to  earnings  surprises  during  the  latest
subsample (2016–2019) compared to the earliest (1984–1990).

Patell and Wolfson (1984) found that excess returns in their sample
ceased to exist within 10- to 15-min following an earnings announce-
ment.  In  Panel  B  of Table  7,  we  show  the  effect  of  changing  the
investment horizon with more recent data. Instead of closing positions
at  6:30  pm,  the  duration  of  the  position  is  now  measured  either  in
minutes (physical time) or by the number of tick updates (tick time)
after the announcement.59

In Panels B.1–B.5, we maintain the position from 30 s to 5 min.
In the full sample, average returns from the no-friction strategy based
on transaction prices increase monotonically from 0.74% (t-statistic of
8.28) for positions closed after 30 s to 1.58% (t-statistic of 10.82) per
trade for positions closed after five minutes. In the midquote strategy,
the average return is slightly compressed but continues to be positive
and  statistically  significant.  Trades  executed  at  the  BBO  reduce  the
average return which becomes slightly negative at −0.47% (t-statistic
of −4.75) for the 30-s termination rule but rises to 0.41% at the 5-min
mark (t-statistic of 2.81). Latency delays lead to further reductions in
trading performance as none of the approaches generate positive and
significant average returns. Once again the results change meaningfully
between the first and second subsamples. As the price discovery process
improves,  average  returns  become  lower  and  less  significant  in  the
second subsample compared to the earlier subsample. Interestingly, the
average return over the 2016–2020 sample for the baseline scenario in
Panel A is close to the corresponding value for the 5-min stopping rule
in Panel B.5. This suggests that, in the most recent subsample, the price
discovery process has more or less been completed at that time.

Next, we consider what happens to trading performance in trans-
action time if we close the position after between 50 and 1,000 tick
updates. As shown in Panels B.6–B.10, we continue to generate positive
and significant average returns for trades executed at the transaction
price  or  midquote.  However,  executing  at  the  BBO  again  produces
insignificant mean returns in the latest subsample. Interestingly, trades
stopped  after  1,000  tick  updates  in  Panel  B.10  yield  mean  returns
nearly identical to those from the positions held until 6:30 pm (Panel
A) in the first subsample, but not in the second. This reflects the lower
trading  activity  in  the  early  parts  of  our  sample,  which  means  that
1,000 tick updates cover a much longer time interval.

Fig. 7 summarizes these results by plotting the cumulative return
from trading strategies that close out the position after a fixed number
of tick updates (Panels A–C) or after a fixed number of seconds (Panels
D–F), employing either the transaction price, midquote, or BBO. The
figure illustrates both how fast the price adjusts in the very short period
after an earnings announcement (both in trade time and in physical
time) and also that the price settles at its new level even faster in the
second subsample.

Overall, our results demonstrate that price discovery in the post-
announcement window has gotten far speedier during our twelve-year
sample. Prior to 2016, investors were able to reap significant profits
from  post-earnings  announcement  trades  executed  at  the  BBO  even
with a latency delay of 10 s. In contrast, during the last subsample,
after-hours  prices  move  so  fast  after  earnings  announcements  that
it  is  no  longer  possible  to  generate  significant  outperformance  after

59 We  also  estimated  the  predictive  return  regression  with  the  post-
announcement return (dependent variable) measured over a 5-, 10-, 30-, and
60-min horizon. Average trading returns decline monotonically as the length
of the measurement window is extended, suggesting that the price response to
earnings surprises is very rapid and the ‘‘signal’’ is strongest for the one-minute
post-announcement return. For example, compared to the number in Table 7,
moving from a one-minute to a 60-min horizon causes a decline of 48 basis
points in average return for the transaction price approach.

21 

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

quoted with wide spreads in excess of 20% while the spreads for our
firms are narrow(er) and often less than 50 basis points, on average, as
shown in Fig. 2. Finally, the time-aggregation is different: We sample
at tick frequency, while they sample at a 1-min frequency.

Proving that the sufficiency condition for market efficiency holds
ultimately  requires  us  to  inspect  a  much  broader  class  of  trading
strategies. However, the evidence presented here for the most recent
subsample is consistent with Hypothesis 3.1 and with trading in the
after-hours market becoming notably more efficient over time, so we
do not pursue this point further here.

6.3.  Spillover effects on returns of non-announcing firms

Our  jump  spillover  analysis  shows  that  the  release  of  financial
statements  by  an  announcing  firm  (AF)  increases  the  likelihood  of
jumps in a non-announcing firm (NAF), particularly when the two firms
have a close industry proximity and high after-hours trading volumes.
These  results  do  not,  however,  show  the  extent  to  which  earnings
surprises of AFs affect the returns of NAFs and whether the information
dissemination is fully efficient as stipulated by Hypothesis 3.2.

To shed light on this, we estimate a return regression equivalent to

EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2𝑧−

Fig. 6. Cumulative return from trading strategy.
Note. The figure shows the cumulative return from a trading strategy that employs the
standardized earnings surprise to predict the one-minute post-announcement return:
EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡. A long (short) position in the stock is entered if the
1𝑚,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏1𝑧+
𝑟EA
predicted return is greater (smaller) than 0.5% (−0.5%) and held until 6:30 pm. The
sample average return and test statistic for testing that the mean return is zero, based
on robust standard errors, is reported in parenthesis. ‘‘Trade’’ employs the transaction
price, ‘‘Midquote’’ the midquote, and ‘‘BBO’’ the best bid and offer. ‘‘+Xs’’ enforces a
latency delay of X seconds before entrance.

accounting for bid–ask spreads. This suggests that the positive effects
of  decreased  pre-trade  transparency  and  improved  post-trade  trans-
parency  outweigh  the  negative  effects  of  decreased  pre-trade  trans-
parency, leading to better price discovery around corporate earnings
announcements.

We can gain additional insights by comparing our results with Grégoire

and Martineau (2022). They find that for ‘‘most’’ announcements in
their  sample,  the  post-announcement  closing  price  at  4:00  pm  the
following day is within the bid–ask spread prior to the announcement,
so even a liquidity taker who was informed about the upcoming unex-
pected earnings surprise could not trade profitably on the information.
We  achieve  the  reverse  finding  for  our  sample:  The  post-earnings
transaction  price  at  6:30  pm  –  where  we  close  our  trading  strategy
– is outside the pre-announcement quoted spread for 92.66% of the
earnings announcements.

This, and several other points, help to explain the differences be-
tween our findings and those in Grégoire and Martineau (2022). First,
the data used in their paper cover the shorter and earlier period 2012–
2015. This is important, because we document a shift in after-hours
price  dynamics  after  2016  following  the  change  in  market  design.
Second, and most importantly, while we analyze the 50 most liquid
constituents of the S&P 100 index, they study the after-hours behavior
of  the  1500  stocks  included  in  the  S&P  500,  S&P  400,  or  S&P  600
indexes corresponding to the large-, medium- and small-cap segment
of the U.S. stock market. Many of the firms in their sample are very
illiquid:  The  median  number  of  trades  in  the  after-hours  market  on
earnings announcement days is 70, 10, and 7 for S&P 500, S&P 400,
and S&P 600 stocks, and 20% of the included stocks do not trade at
all. In contrast, as seen in Table E.1 in Appendix E, for our selection of
stocks the smallest average number of trades on announcement days is
1,072, and even on non-announcement days many of our firms are more
actively traded than those studied by Grégoire and Martineau (2022)
are on announcement days. Third, the firms in their sample are often

22 

(33):
1𝑚,𝑗 𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏1𝑧+
𝑟NAF

EPS,𝑖𝑡

EPS,𝑖𝑡𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 + 𝑏3𝐷𝑖𝑡 log(𝑉 NAF

𝑗 𝑡

)

𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 + 𝑏2𝑧−
) + 𝜖𝑗 𝑡,

(35)

+ 𝑏4𝐷𝑖𝑡 log(𝑉 AF
𝑖𝑡
1𝑚,𝑗 𝑡 is the one-minute post-announcement return of NAF 𝑗 after
where 𝑟NAF
the announcement of AF 𝑖 on day 𝑡. The other variables are unchanged.
The  industry  proximity  interaction  terms  allow  us  to  attenuate  the
effect of earnings surprises on the post-announcement return of NAFs
in more distant industries. Similarly, we interact the sign of 𝑧EPS with
), allowing the liquidity measures to reinforce
log(𝑉 NAF
𝑗 𝑡
an expected negative price movement after a bad announcement. We
find  that  none  of  the  estimated  coefficients  in (35) are  statistically
significant and their explanatory power is close to zero.

) and log(𝑉 AF

𝑖𝑡

Fig. 8 explains this finding. In the left panel, we show a box plot
of the distribution of one-minute returns of NAFs in three settings: (i)
NAFs on common non-announcement days; (ii) NAFs in other industries
(𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 = 0); and (iii) NAFs in the same industry (𝐼 𝑃𝑖𝑗 = 1). Results in
(ii) and (iii) are based on days with at least one announcement.60

While  the  median  one-minute  return  is  close  to  zero  and  nearly
identical  across  the  three  distributions,  there  is  a  clear  ranking  of
their spread. The dispersion is smallest on common non-announcement
days, where the one-minute return mostly reflects the bid–ask spread
since no information is being released. The spread is slightly wider on
announcement days for NAFs in other industries and much wider for
NAFs in the same industry as the AF. However, the spillover effects on
the NAFs pale in comparison to the impact of the AF on itself shown in
the right panel. Thus, although we can detect co-jump spillover effects,
the magnitude of the price impact is much smaller than the impact on
the announcing firm itself.

We  next  implement  the  earlier  trading  strategies  on  the  post-
announcement  returns  of  NAFs.  Absent  any  trading  frictions,  and
assuming  we  do  not  impose  a  threshold  on  the  magnitude  of  the
predicted return, the trading strategy produces a small, positive, and
marginally  significant  average  return  on  the  order  of  3–4  bps  per
trade.61 This  is  consistent  with  the  volatility  of  NAF  returns  being
minuscule. Indeed, any profits completely vanish and turn into severe

60 We construct (i) by taking for each announcement of an AF a common
non-announcement day at random and measuring the stock price movement of
the AF over the one-minute window aligned with its associated announcement
time.
61 The return forecasts of NAFs rarely exceed more than a few basis points,
so imposing a threshold on expected return often prevents the trading strategy
from entering a position, which renders the mean return insignificant.

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Fig. 7. Cumulative returns from trading strategy.
Note. The figure shows the cumulative return in percent from a trading strategy that employs the standardized earnings surprise to predict the one-minute post-announcement
EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡. A long (short) position in the stock is entered if the predicted excess return is greater (smaller) than 0.5% (−0.5%). The cumulative return
return: 𝑟EA
is based on closing out the position after a fixed number of tick updates. ‘‘Trade’’ employs the transaction price, ‘‘Midquote’’ the midquote, and ‘‘BBO’’ the best bid and offer.

1𝑚,𝑖𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏1𝑧+

EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2𝑧−

losses once trading frictions and latency delays are introduced.

We also inspect whether AFs affect one-minute returns on the mar-
1𝑚,𝑡, again after correcting for the mechanical price impact

ket index, 𝑟SPY
from the announcement, through the regression:
𝑟SPY
1𝑚,𝑡 = 𝑎 + 𝑏1

𝑤𝑖𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡 + 𝑏2

̄𝐷𝑖𝑡

log(𝑉 AF

𝑖𝑡

) + 𝜖𝑡,

(36)

∑
𝑖 ∶ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡=1

∑
𝑖 ∶ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡=1

where

̄𝐷𝑖𝑡 = sign

(

∑
𝑖 ∶ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡=1

)

𝑤𝑖𝑧EPS,𝑖𝑡

and 𝑤𝑖 =

∑

)

log(𝑉 AF
𝑖 ∶ 𝐸 𝐴𝑖𝑡=1 log(𝑉 AF

𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

(37)

.

)

In this model, when more than one firm is announcing on a given day,
we weight the earnings surprises by the respective after-hour trading
volume of the companies.

The  coefficient  estimates  are  both  significant  and  of  the  correct
sign, i.e 100 × ̂𝑏1 = 0.15 (t-statistic of 2.26) and 100 × ̂𝑏2 = 0.09 (t-
statistic  of 2.49), but the  predictive  power of the  regression  is  very
small.  Moreover,  the  slope  estimates  are  economically  small  with  a
marginal effect around one-tenth of a basis point for a unit change in
the explanatory variables. Consequently, the predicted market return
only  rarely  exceeds  a  full  basis  point  which  cannot  be  exploited  in
practice.

Taken together, the analysis in this subsection is consistent with

Hypothesis 3.2.

7.  Conclusion

High-frequency trading is widespread in today’s financial markets.
This suggests that, at least for the most liquid stocks, information from
public announcements should be incorporated into prices almost instan-
taneously after the news release. In an efficient market without large
trading frictions, stock prices should therefore jump, almost surely, in
the immediate aftermath of releases of large bundles of information
such as firms’ earnings announcements. This suggests employing jump
tests  on  highly  granular  tick-by-tick  data  as  a  way  to  test  a  neces-
sary (but not sufficient) condition for market efficiency. This strategy
is very different from the conventional practice of scrutinizing post-
announcement returns defined over a fixed time intervals, such as one
or five minutes, which can be almost an eternity in a modern fast-paced
market environment.

23 

The vast majority of earnings announcements occur outside the reg-
ular  exchange  trading  hours,  so  such  an  analysis  of  the  post-
announcement  price  discovery  process  requires  that  we  examine  a
relatively unexplored set of high-frequency data that includes quotation
and transaction records from the after-hours trading session. The irreg-
ular trading activity combined with pronounced levels of microstruc-
ture noise in this market pose serious challenges to conventional jump
tests that can severely distort the inference.

To  address  these  critical  shortcomings,  we  develop  a  new  jump
test that is robust to the unusually noisy price data observed in after-
hours  markets.  Our  noise-robust  generalization  extends  the  classical
bipower variation-based jump test of Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard
(2006) to a pre-averaged version that can be implemented on noisy
high-frequency data. Moreover, we develop a subsample estimator of
the asymptotic variance–covariance matrix that is jump-robust under
the  alternative,  extending  earlier  work  of Christensen  et  al. (2017).
Equipped with these tools, we show that prices of the stocks with the
highest after-hours trading volume almost always jump after earnings
announcements. Conversely, jumps in stock prices are rare both during
the  regular  trading  session  and  during  after-hours  trading  sessions
without earnings announcements.

We document a strong jump spillover effect. Conditional on an an-
nouncement from a firm, there is a significantly higher probability that
prices of non-announcing firms, both within and outside the industry
of the announcing firm, as well as the market index, jumps in the same
after-hours trading session. The effect is larger for companies with a
closer industry proximity to the announcing firm. Moreover, early an-
nouncers induce a much stronger spillover effect than late announcers.
This finding is consistent with investors learning about industry- and
economy-wide news components from earnings announcements.

That stock prices in the after-hours market nearly always jump after
the  release  of  earnings  announcements  is  indicative  of  a  very  rapid
price  discovery  process  and,  thus,  consistent  with  efficient  markets.
However, the price jump in the immediate aftermath of an earnings
release may be too big or too small, potentially introducing profitable
trading opportunities. We examine if in fact prices are unbiased predic-
tors of their future steady-state values by studying the performance of
a trading rule subject to different degrees of trading frictions.

In  the  absence  of  transaction  costs,  we  find  that  investors  could
have earned highly significant, positive average returns in the early

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Fig. 8. One-minute return distribution.
Note. The box plots in the left panel show the one-minute return distribution of (i) non-announcing firms (NAFs) on common non-announcement days (no EA), (ii) NAFs outside
the industry of the announcing firm (AF), NAF(IP = 0), and (iii) NAFs within the industry of the AF, NAF(IP = 1). The cross measures the median, the box is the interquartile
range, and the whisker marks the 0.10 (lower) and 0.90 (upper) percentile. While (i) is based on days when none of our firms are announcing, (ii) and (iii) are based on days with
at least one announcement. We construct (i) by taking for each announcement of an AF a common non-announcement day at random and measuring the stock price movement of
the AF over the one-minute window aligned with its associated announcement time. In Panel B, we add the one-minute post-announcement return distribution of the AFs in our
sample.

years of our sample (2008–2015). Conversely, in the second part of
our sample (2016–2020), even minor trading frictions, such as bid–ask
spreads, reduce average returns to the point where they are no longer
statistically significant. We conclude from this analysis that the after-
hours market incorporates information on the earnings announcements
of the largest U.S. firms extremely fast, particularly after 2016.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kim  Christensen: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  orig-
inal  draft,  Software,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation.
Allan  Timmermann: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  orig-
inal  draft,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Conceptualization. Bezirgen
Veliyev: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis.

Declaration of competing interest

Authors have nothing to disclose.

Appendix A.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104010.

Data availability

Warp speed (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

24 

References

Ai,  H.,  Bansal,  R.,  2018.  Risk  preferences  and  the  macroeconomic  announcement

premium. Econometrica 86 (4), 1383–1430.

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Jacod, J., 2009. Testing for jumps in a discretely observed process. Ann.

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Jacod, J., Li, J., 2012. Testing for jumps in noisy high frequency data.

Statist. 37 (1), 184–222.

J. Econometrics 168 (2), 207–222.

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Li, C.X., Li, C., 2024. So many jumps, so few news. Working paper.
Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., Vega, C., 2003. Micro effects of macro
announcements: Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange. Amer. Econ. Rev.
93 (1), 38–62.

Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Dobrev, D., 2007. No-arbitrage semi-martingale restric-
tions for continuous-time volatility models subject to leverage effects, jumps and
i.i.d. noise: Theory and testable distributional implications. J. Econometrics 138
(1), 125–180.

Bajgrowicz, P., Scaillet, O., Treccani, A., 2016. Jumps in high-frequency data: Spurious

detections, dynamics, and news. Manage. Sci. 62 (8), 2198–2217.

Baldauf, M., Mollner, J., 2022. Fast traders make a quick buck: The role of speed in

liquidity provision. J. Financial Mark. 58 (100621), 1–22.

Ball, R., Brown, P., 1968. An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers. J.

Account. Res. 6 (2), 159–178.

Bandi, F.M., Fusari, N., Renò, R., 2022. Structural stochastic volatility. Working paper.
Bandi,  F.M.,  Kolokolov,  A.,  Pirino,  D.E.,  Renò,  R.,  2023.  Discontinuous  trading  in

continuous-time econometrics. Working paper.

Barclay,  M.J.,  Hendershott,  T.,  2003.  Price  discovery  and  trading  after  hours.  Rev.

Financ. Stud. 16 (4), 1041–1073.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O.E., Hansen, P.R., Lunde, A., Shephard, N., 2009. Realized kernels

in practice: trades and quotes. Econom. J. 12 (3), 1–32.

Barndorff-Nielsen,  O.E.,  Shephard,  N.,  2006.  Econometrics  of  testing  for  jumps  in
financial economics using bipower variation. J. Financ. Econom. 4 (1), 1–30.
Beaver, W.H., 1968. The information content of annual earnings announcements. J.

Account. Res. 6, 67–92.

Account. Res. 47 (1), 71–103.

Berkman, H., Truong, C., 2009. Event day 0? After-hours earnings announcements. J.

Bernard,  V.L.,  Thomas,  J.K.,  1989.  Post-earnings-announcement  drift:  Delayed  price

response or risk premium? J. Account. Res. 27 (1), 1–36.

Bernard, V.L., Thomas, J.K., 1990. Evidence that stock prices do not fully reflect the
implications  of  current  earnings  for  future  earnings.  J.  Account.  Econ.  13  (4),
305–340.

K. Christensen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104010 

Biais, B., Hillion, P., Spatt, C., 1999. Price discovery and learning during the preopening

Hendershott, T., Jones, C.M., 2003. Island goes dark: Transparency, fragmentation, and

period in the Paris bourse. J. Polit. Econ. 107 (6), 1218–1248.

regulation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 18 (3), 743–793.

Bollerslev,  T.,  Law,  T.H.,  Tauchen,  G.,  2008.  Risk,  jumps,  and  diversification.  J.

Hirshleifer, D., Lim, S.S., Teoh, S.H., 2009. Driven to distraction: Extraneous events

Econometrics 144 (1), 234–256.

Bollerslev,  T.,  Li,  S.Z.,  Todorov,  V.,  2016.  Roughing  up  beta:  Continuous  versus
discontinuous  betas  and  the  cross  section  of  expected  stock  returns.  J.  Financ.
Econ. 120 (3), 464–490.

Brogaard,  J.,  Hendershott,  T.,  Riordan,  R.,  2014.  High-frequency  trading  and  price

discovery. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (6), 2267–2306.

Brogaard, J., Pan, J., 2021. Dark pool trading and information acquisition. Rev. Financ.

Caporin, M., Kolokolov, A., Renò, R., 2017. Systemic co-jumps. J. Financ. Econ. 126

Econ. 6 (2–3), 95–101.

Stud. 35 (5), 2625–2666.

(3), 563–591.

Chakrabarty, B., Pascual, R., Shkilko, A., 2015. Evaluating trade classification algo-
rithms: Bulk volume classification versus the tick rule and the lee-ready algorithm.
J. Financial Mark. 25 (1), 52–79.

Chambers,  A.E.,  Penman,  S.H.,  1984.  Timeliness  of  reporting  and  the  stock  price

reaction to earnings announcements. J. Account. Res. 22 (1), 21–47.

Chan, K.F., Marsh, T., 2024. Overnight post-earnings announcement drift and SEC Form

8-K disclosures. Working paper.

Chordia, T., Green, T.C., Kottimukkalur, B., 2018. Rent seeking by low-latency traders:
Evidence from trading on macroeconomic announcements. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31
(12), 4650–4687.

Christensen, K., Hounyo, U., Podolskij, M., 2018. Is the diurnal pattern sufficient to ex-
plain intraday variation in volatility? A nonparametric assessment. J. Econometrics
205 (2), 336–362.

Christensen, K., Oomen, R.C.A., Podolskij, M., 2014. Fact or friction: Jumps at ultra

high frequency. J. Financ. Econ. 114 (3), 576–599.

Christensen,  K.,  Podolskij,  M.,  Thamrongrat,  N.,  Veliyev,  B.,  2017.  Inference  from
high-frequency data: A subsampling approach. J. Econometrics 197 (2), 245–272.
Corsi, F., Pirino, D.E., Renò, R., 2010. Threshold bipower variation and the impact of

jumps on volatility forecasting. J. Econometrics 159 (2), 276–288.

Delbaen, F., Schachermayer, W., 1994. A general version of the fundamental theorem

of asset pricing. Math. Ann. 300 (1), 463–520.

and underreaction to earnings news. J. Finance 64 (5), 2289–2325.

Jacod, J., Li, Y., Mykland, P.A., Podolskij, M., Vetter, M., 2009. Microstructure noise
in the continuous case: The pre-averaging approach. Stochastic Process. Appl. 119
(7), 2249–2276.

Jacod,  J.,  Li,  Y.,  Zheng,  X.,  2019.  Estimating  the  integrated  volatility  with  tick

observations. J. Econometrics 208 (1), 80–100.

Jacod, J., Protter, P.E., 2012. Discretization of Processes, second ed. Springer, Berlin.
Jensen, M.C., 1978. Some anomalous evidence regarding market efficiency. J. Financ.

Jeon, Y., McCurdy, T.H., Zhao, X., 2022. News as sources of jumps in stock returns:
Evidence from 21 million news articles for 9000 companies. J. Financ. Econ. 145
(2), 1–17.

Jiang, C.X., Likitapiwat, T., McInish, T., 2012. Information content of earnings an-
nouncements: Evidence from after-hours trading. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 47 (6),
1303–1330.

Jiang, G.J., Oomen, R.C.A., 2008. Testing for jumps when asset prices are observed
with noise – a "swap variance" approach. J. Econometrics 144 (2), 352–370.
Kolokolov, A., Livieri, G., Pirino, D., 2022. Testing for endogeneity of irregular sampling

schemes. Working paper.

Kolokolov, A., Renò, R., 2024. Jumps or staleness? J. Bus. Econom. Statist. 42 (2),

516–532.

Kyle,  A.S.,  1985.  Continuous  auctions  and  insider  trading.  Econometrica  53  (6),

1315–1335.

Lee, S.S., Mykland, P.A., 2008. Jumps in financial markets: A new nonparametric test

and jump dynamics. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (6), 2535–2563.

Lee, S.S., Mykland, P.A., 2012. Jumps in equilibrium prices and market microstructure

noise. J. Econometrics 168 (2), 396–406.

Li, Y., Mykland, P.A., Renault, E., Zhang, L., Zheng, X., 2014. Realized volatility when
sampling times are possibly endogenous. Econometric Theory 30 (3), 580–605.
Li, J., Todorov, V., Tauchen, G., 2017. Jump regressions. Econometrica 85 (1), 173–195.
Lou, D., Polk, C., Skouras, S., 2019. A tug of war: Overnight versus intraday expected

Dellavigna,  S.,  Pollet,  J.M.,  2009.  Investor  inattention  and  friday  earnings

returns. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (1), 192–213.

announcements. J. Finance 64 (2), 709–749.

Lyle, M.R., Stephan, A., Yohn, T.L., 2024. Do investors need time to process earnings

Dubinsky, A., Johannes, M., Kaeck, A., Seeger, N.J., 2019. Option pricing of earnings

news before markets open?. Working paper.

announcement risks. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (2), 646–687.

Martineau, C., 2022. Rest in peace post-earnings announcement drift. Crit. Financ. Rev.

Ederington, L.H., Lee, J.H., 1993. How markets process information: News releases and

11 (3–4), 613–646.

volatility. J. Finance 48 (4), 1161–1191.

Epstein, L.G., Zin, S.E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57 (4),
937–969.

Fink, J., 2021. A review of the post-earnings-announcement drift. J. Behav. Exp. Financ.

29 (1), 100446.

Flood, M.D., Huisman, R., Koedijk, K.G., Mahieu, R.J., 1999. Quote disclosure and price
discovery in multiple-dealer financial markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 12 (1), 37–59.
Glosten, L.R., Milgrom, P.R., 1985. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market

with heterogeneously informed traders. J. Financ. Econ. 14 (1), 71–100.

Grégoire, V., Martineau, C., 2022. How is earnings news transmitted to stock prices.

J. Account. Res. 60 (1), 261–297.

Michaely, R., Rubin, A., Vedrashko, A., 2013. Corporate governance and the timings

of earnings announcements. Rev. Financ. 18 (6), 2003–2044.

Mykland, P.A., Zhang, L., 2016. Between data cleaning and inference: Pre-averaging
and robust estimators of the efficient price. J. Econometrics 194 (2), 242–262.
Patell, J.M., Wolfson, M.A., 1984. The intraday speed of adjustment of stock prices to

earnings and dividend announcements. J. Financ. Econ. 13 (2), 223–252.

Patton, A.J., Verardo, M., 2012. Does beta move with news? Firm-specific information
flows and learning about profitability. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (9), 2789–2839.
Pedersen, L.H., 2015. Efficiently Inefficient – How Smart Money Invests and Market

Prices Are Determined, first ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Podolskij, M., Vetter, M., 2009a. Bipower-type estimation in a noisy diffusion setting.

Stochastic Process. Appl. 119 (9), 2803–2831.

Griffin, J.E., Oomen, R.C.A., 2008. Sampling returns for realized variance calculations:

Tick time or transaction time? Econometric Rev. 27 (1–3), 230–253.

Grossman, S.J., Stiglitz, J.E., 1980. On the impossibility of informationally efficient

Podolskij, M., Vetter, M., 2009b. Estimation of volatility functionals in the simultaneous

presence of microstructure noise and jumps. Bernoulli 15 (3), 634–658.

Savor, P., Wilson, M., 2016. Earnings announcements and systematic risk. J. Finance

markets. Amer. Econ. Rev. 70 (3), 393–408.

71 (1), 83–138.

Hansen, L.P., 2021. Uncertainty spillovers for markets and policy. Annu. Rev. Econ. 13

Todorov, V., Zhang, Y., 2025. Testing for anticipated changes in spot volatility at event

(1), 371–396.

markets. J. Finance 73 (4), 1567–1613.

Hartzmark, S.M., Shue, K., 2018. A tough act to follow: Contrast effects in financial

Vives, X., 1995. The speed of information revelation in a financial market mechanism.

Hasbrouck, J., 1991. The summary informativeness of stock trades: An econometric

Wang, L., Zajac, E.J., 2007. Alliance or acquisition? A dyadic perspective on interfirm

resource combinations. Strat. Manag. J. 28 (13), 1291–1317.

analysis. Rev. Financ. Stud. 4 (3), 571–595.

Hasbrouck, J., 1995. One security, many markets: Determining the contributions to

price discovery. J. Finance 50 (4), 1175–1199.

times. Econometric Theory 41 (1), 1–34.

J. Econom. Theory 67 (1), 178–204.

25 

