Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Systemic bank runs without aggregate risk: How a misallocation of liquidity
may trigger a solvency crisis✩
Lukas Altermatt a, Hugo van Buggenum b, Lukas Voellmy c,∗
a University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, CO43SQ, Colchester, UK
b KOF-ETH Zürich, Leonhardstrasse 21, 8092, Zürich, Switzerland
c Swiss National Bank, Börsenstrasse 15, 8022, Zürich, Switzerland

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We develop a general equilibrium model of self-fulfilling bank runs. The key novelty is the way in which the
banking system’s assets and liabilities are connected. Banks issue loans to entrepreneurs who sell goods to
households, which in turn pay for the goods by redeeming bank deposits. The return on bank assets is thus
contingent on households being able to withdraw their deposits. In a run, not all households that wish to
consume manage to withdraw, since part of banks’ cash reserves end up in the hands of households without
consumption needs. This misallocation of liquidity lowers revenues of entrepreneurs and bank asset returns,
thereby rationalising the run. Interventions that restrict redemptions in a run can be self-defeating due to their
negative effect on demand in goods markets. We show how runs can sometimes be prevented with combinations
of deposit freezes and redemption penalties as well as with the provision of emergency liquidity.

Dataset link: Replication Package: Systemic Ban
k Runs without Aggregate Risk: How a Misallo
cation of Liquidity May Trigger a Solvency Cris
is (Original data)

JEL classification:
E4
E5
G2

Keywords:
Fragility
Deposit freezes
Emergency liquidity

1. Introduction

While systemic bank runs have long been an important topic in
macro-financial economic research, we believe that the understanding
of how systemic runs affect the real economy, how they may trigger
solvency crises, and what this implies for the prevention of runs is
still incomplete. Empirical observations show that systemic bank runs
usually occur simultaneously with downturns in economic activity.1
While a recession might increase the probability of a bank run, we
argue that causality may also go the other way: a systemic run can
lead to a misallocation of liquidity, which hinders economic activity
and causes the downturn. The fact that returns on bank assets decrease
in the downturn can then rationalise the run in the first place. Thus,
financial crises and recessions may arise endogenously and reinforce
each other.

In this paper, we provide new insights into the link between bank
runs, misallocations of liquidity and bank insolvencies by incorporating

bank deposits’ role in the payment system into a general equilibrium
banking model. The key feature of our model is that households redeem
bank deposits to buy goods from entrepreneurs which in turn obtain
loans from banks. The return on bank assets is thus endogenous and
depends on aggregate demand, which itself depends on whether house-
holds with consumption needs (impatient households) can withdraw
their deposits to buy goods. In a run, some households without con-
sumption needs (patient households) redeem their deposits and store
the money. Since part of banks’ cash reserves end up in the hands of
patient households, some impatient households cannot withdraw their
deposits and, as a result, have to curtail their consumption. This misal-
location of liquidity reduces aggregate demand in the goods market and
leads some entrepreneurs to default on their loans obtained from banks.
These losses on bank loans rationalise the run: patient households who
keep their money invested receive less than the promised payout and
are thus better off withdrawing early.

✩

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank him and the anonymous referee for comments and guidance that greatly improved the paper.
We also thank Toni Ahnert, Mohammed Aït Lahcen, Aleksander Berentsen, Matt Darst (discussant), Hans Gersbach, Piero Gottardi, Allen Head, Hyeyoon Jung
(discussant), Todd Keister, Cyril Monnet, Bruno Sultanum, Alex Vardoulakis and Randall Wright. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect those of the Swiss National Bank.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

l.altermatt@essex.ac.uk (L. Altermatt), hvanbuggenum@ethz.ch (H. van Buggenum), lukas.voellmy@snb.ch (L. Voellmy).

1 See for example Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) or Gorton (1988).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103929
Received 5 May 2023; Received in revised form 16 August 2024; Accepted 18 August 2024

Available online 31 August 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

A key implication of our model is that restrictions on deposit with-
drawals may not eliminate run equilibria even if one assumes – as we
do in our model – that there is no (fundamental) aggregate uncertainty.
Therefore, linking the return on bank assets to the conditions in the real
economy overturns the result from the literature following Diamond
and Dybvig (1983) that suspension of deposit convertibility eliminates
belief-driven runs if there are no fundamental shocks. In our model,
deposit freezes do not eliminate runs because they do not resolve the
misallocation of liquidity caused by runs. If banks impose a freeze,
this prevents some impatient households from withdrawing, which
reduces aggregate demand and thereby leads to lower revenues for
bank borrowers and higher losses on bank loans. The anticipation of
these losses in turn induces patient households to withdraw early. Here,
it is important to point out the difference between stopping ongoing
runs and preventing runs from starting in the first place. By definition,
a full deposit freeze always stops a run since no further withdrawals are
allowed. However, the negative consequences of a freeze for aggregate
demand and banks’ solvency mean that the incentive to run on the
banks before the freeze is imposed may not be eliminated.

While the notion that restricting deposit withdrawals can impair
economic activity is not new, explicitly modelling bank deposits’ role
in the payment system within a general equilibrium framework allows
us to determine more precisely under which conditions the banking
system is prone to runs due to this mechanism and how such runs
may be prevented. We first show that the misallocation of liquidity
created (ex post) by a run makes the banking system (ex ante) prone to
runs unless the supply of assets unaffected by the shortfall in aggregate
demand (e.g. government bonds) is high enough. We then analyse
whether banks can prevent runs by imposing redemption penalties
and partial deposit freezes once they observe a run. Such withdrawal
restrictions can prevent runs if they satisfy three criteria: (i) it must be
optimal for patient depositors to stop running once the restrictions are
imposed; (ii) to limit the fall in aggregate demand, it must be optimal
for impatient depositors to continue withdrawing when the restrictions
are in place; (iii) the anticipation of withdrawal restrictions in case of a
run must make it suboptimal for patient depositors to run ex ante. We
show that for certain model parameters, no such policy exists, even if
banks observe a run immediately.

Finally, we show that runs may be prevented by a central bank that
buys illiquid assets from banks in case of a run. If such provision of
emergency liquidity stabilises real spending of impatient households,
then defaults by entrepreneurs are prevented, and the incentive to run
on banks is eliminated. A sufficient condition to eliminate runs is that
assets are purchased at face value and the intervention is not inflation-
ary. However, this is only feasible if the central bank is sufficiently
efficient in collecting loan repayments, since otherwise buying loans
at face value will be loss-making for the central bank and inflationary.
If assets are bought at a significant discount, some demand shortfall
and thus some default by entrepreneurs is inevitable, in which case
the intervention fails to eliminate runs. If the central bank instead
purchases assets at face value despite the resulting rise in inflation,
runs may or may not be eliminated depending on how inflation affects
entrepreneurs’ incentives to repay loans. Our result that runs can only
be prevented if the central bank purchases assets at high enough prices
can be seen as contradicting Bagehot (1873), who advocated for central
banks that lend to solvent but illiquid banks at a high rate of interest.2
Although Bagehot’s policy prescription seems natural, in our model, the
banking system’s liquidity problem turns into a solvency problem only
if the central bank charges a sufficiently high penalty on emergency
liquidity.

While our paper is primarily a theoretical contribution, we also
discuss the empirical relevance of the underlying mechanism. In our

2 Bagehot’s dictum refers to central bank lending while we study the
provision of liquidity through asset purchases. However, we show that the
results are equivalent for collateralised lending.

model, a bank run disrupts economic activity by hindering impatient
depositors from obtaining the cash needed to buy goods. Therefore,
our model might be most relevant for cash intensive economies. In this
context, we provide anecdotal evidence suggesting that our mechanism
was at work in historical banking panics in the U.S. and may also have
played a role in the systemic run on Argentinian banks in 2001/02.
We also discuss how a version of our mechanism could play out in
economies in which payments can be made by direct deposit transfers
without going through cash, for instance, if doubts about bank solvency
in a crisis cause sellers to refuse payments in non-convertible deposits.

Related literature. Our model combines elements from Diamond and
Dybvig (1983) and Aruoba et al. (2011), with the latter being it-
self based on the New Monetarist framework (Kiyotaki and Wright,
1989; Lagos and Wright, 2005). Similarly to Aruoba et al. (2011),
entrepreneurs in our model use a neoclassical production technology
(with capital and labour as inputs) to produce goods which they sell
against fiat money to households. As in Diamond and Dybvig (1983),
households face uncertainty regarding their future consumption needs,
and they can form banking coalitions that provide insurance against
idiosyncratic liquidity needs by pooling assets and issuing demand
deposits. Our model shares many similarities with Geromichalos and
Herrenbrueck (2022), who also introduce Diamond–Dybvig type liq-
uidity shocks into a setting based on Aruoba et al. (2011). Rather than
focusing on the role of banks as we do, Geromichalos and Herrenbrueck
(2022) study the role of secondary asset markets (from which we
abstract) in providing liquidity insurance.

Our paper contributes to a literature studying how banks can (or
cannot) eliminate panic equilibria, in particular with regard to the role
of deposit freezes. A key result of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) is that in
the absence of aggregate uncertainty, runs can be prevented at no cost
if banks fully freeze deposits after a certain number of depositors have
withdrawn.3 Up to this point, two main objections to this result have
been raised in the theoretical literature. First, Engineer (1989) showed
that in a riskfree Diamond–Dybvig setting with more periods, deposit
freezes can give rise to run equilibria in which depositors withdraw
preemptively out of fear of not being able to access their deposits
when needed. Second, Ennis and Keister (2009) showed that Diamond
and Dybvig’s result hinges crucially on the assumption that banks can
commit to freeze deposits even if this severely hurts some of their
depositors ex post.4 Our paper adds a third, distinct reason why deposit
freezes may not eliminate panic equilibria in settings without aggregate
uncertainty, even if banks can commit to any payout policy. Specifi-
cally, we highlight a general equilibrium effect of freezing deposits: by
restricting access to cash for households that wish to consume, deposit
freezes have a negative effect on aggregate demand, which – through its
effect on bank asset returns – can rationalise the run in the first place.
The idea that early withdrawals negatively affect the long-run re-
turn on bank assets is shared by Andolfatto and Nosal (2020) and
Kashyap et al. (2024), although for different reasons than in our paper.
In Andolfatto and Nosal (2020), operating a bank entails a fixed cost,
which means the return earned by those who remain invested falls
when a bank downsizes due to early withdrawals. In Kashyap et al.
(2024), early withdrawals negatively affect bank profitability, which

3 It is well known that full deposit freezes are generally not desirable in the
presence of aggregate uncertainty, i.e. if either the investment technology is
risky or liquidity needs of depositors are stochastic. Wallace (1990) provides a
detailed discussion of full and partial deposit freezes in a model with random
liquidity needs and a riskfree investment technology. Matta and Perotti (2024)
show that full deposit freezes are generally not optimal when depositors’
liquidity needs are known but the investment technology is risky.

4 Relatedly, even if not explicitly focusing on deposit freezes, Keister and
Mitkov (2023) show that it may be privately optimal for banks to refrain from
imposing measures that stop a run if they expect to receive a government
bailout when hit by a run.

2 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

in turn reduces bankers’ incentive to monitor loans. While these papers
follow different modelling approaches and do not deal with exactly the
same questions as we do, it is clear that they have different implications
regarding the prevention of runs. In particular, unlike in our model,
putting an upper bound on early withdrawals will tend to protect the
return on bank assets by limiting the potential decrease in banks’ size
and monitoring incentives, respectively.

Our paper is also related to a broader literature studying self-
fulfilling systemic bank panics in general equilibrium. The previous
literature on the topic, starting with the seminal contribution by Gertler
and Kiyotaki (2015), has mostly focused on the case where general
equilibrium effects of bank runs occur through the effect of runs on
asset prices.5 In these models, banks that are hit by runs liquidate
assets, which depresses asset prices and has repercussions on the entire
economy and financial system. The present paper does not feature fire
sales but instead focuses on a different type of general equilibrium
effect of bank runs, namely the misallocation of cash caused by runs.
Two closely related papers are Robatto (2019) and Carapella (2015),
both of which study general equilibrium effects of runs that are similar
to our paper. In both papers, runs reduce the amount of liquid assets
(cash or deposits) in the hands of those who wish to consume, which
has deflationary effects and thus reduces banks’ net worth. Similarly
to our paper, the feedback effect from impaired liquidity provision by
banks to asset prices can lead to self-fulfilling run equilibria. As both
of these papers study endowment economies, they cannot speak to
the mutually reinforcing effects of financial crises and real downturns,
and they also do not examine the role of withdrawal restrictions in
eliminating run equilibria.

Further, our contribution is part of a literature that studies the role
of banks in providing liquidity insurance – and the fragility of these
arrangements – within the New Monetarist framework. In our model,
banks issue interest-paying demand deposits, which allows to insure
depositors against random liquidity needs in a way that is reminiscent
of Berentsen et al. (2007) and of Williamson (2012).6 As we do in
our paper, both Sanches (2018) and Andolfatto et al. (2020) combine
the Lagos-Wright and Diamond-Dybvig frameworks. In Sanches (2018),
a bank run impairs the use of bank deposits as a means of payment
in DM trades, which can lead to a persistent negative effect on DM
activity. Andolfatto et al. (2020) study a model in which banks and
markets coexist and examine how the presence of markets affects banks’
ability to provide liquidity insurance, a topic that is not the focus of our
paper. Gu et al. (2023) highlight the inherent fragility of various aspects
of banking in a wide variety of models, including one where banks act
as a provider of a means of payment in a Lagos-Wright setting.

Finally, our paper is related to a theoretical literature studying the
public sector’s role in providing emergency liquidity in a run. The
previous literature on the topic (e.g. Farhi and Tirole, 2020; Gorton
and Huang, 2006; Martin, 2006; Rochet and Vives, 2004) has largely
focused on the trade-off between preventing runs on the one hand and
avoiding the creation of moral hazard on the other. Compared to these
papers, we highlight banks’ role in providing a means of payment and
how this affects the way in which emergency liquidity needs to be
provided in order to eliminate self-fulfilling panics.

Outline. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2
presents the environment. Section 3 briefly describes the planner’s
solution and the steady-state equilibrium without banks. Section 4
introduces banks and describes the steady-state banking equilibrium.
Section 5 discusses bank runs, Section 6 examines whether redemp-
tion restrictions can stop or prevent runs, and Section 7 studies how

government-provided emergency liquidity may eliminate runs. Finally,
Section 8 discusses the empirical relevance of our model, and Section 9
concludes.

2. Environment

Time is discrete, indexed by 𝑡 = 0, 1, 2, .., and continues forever.
Each period 𝑡 is divided into two subperiods, called CM and DM.7 The
CM opens at the beginning of each period, and once it closes, the
DM opens and remains open until the period ends. Both markets are
competitive. There are two types of agents in the economy: a measure
one of households and a measure 𝑛 of entrepreneurs. Households are
infinitely-lived, whereas entrepreneurs live for one period, from the CM
until the CM next period, at which point they are replaced by a new
generation of entrepreneurs. In the CM, a good 𝑥 can be produced by
households at linear disutility 𝑙, where one unit of 𝑙 yields one unit of 𝑥.
Good 𝑥 cannot be stored, but it can be converted into capital 𝑘 by young
entrepreneurs one to one in order to produce another nonstorable good
𝑞 in the DM. This DM good is produced according to

𝑞 = 𝑓 (𝑘, ℎ),

(1)

where 𝑘 denotes the amount of capital owned by the entrepreneur,
ℎ denotes his labour effort, and 𝑓 (𝑘, ℎ) has constant returns to scale
(CRS). Capital fully depreciates after production. We assume that
𝑓𝑘(𝑘, ℎ) > 0, 𝑓𝑘𝑘(𝑘, ℎ) < 0, 𝑓ℎ(𝑘, ℎ) > 0, 𝑓ℎℎ(𝑘, ℎ) < 0, 𝑓𝑘ℎ > 0 and
𝑓 (0, ℎ) = 𝑓 (𝑘, 0) = 0. By inverting 𝑓 (𝑘, ℎ), we can rewrite it as

ℎ = 𝑐(𝑞, 𝑘),

(2)

where 𝑐(𝑞, 𝑘) is the amount of labour required to produce 𝑞 units of the
consumption good given 𝑘. From our assumptions on 𝑓 (𝑘, ℎ) it follows
that 𝑐(𝑞, 𝑘) is homogeneous of degree one, and we have 𝑐𝑞(𝑞, 𝑘) > 0,
𝑐𝑞𝑞(𝑞, 𝑘) > 0, 𝑐𝑘(𝑞, 𝑘) < 0, 𝑐𝑘𝑘(𝑞, 𝑘) > 0 and 𝑐𝑞𝑘(𝑞, 𝑘) < 0.

During the DM, a fraction 𝜃 of households get utility 𝑢(𝑞) from
consuming the good 𝑞. We call these agents impatient households. The
remaining fraction 1 − 𝜃 get no utility from consumption during the
DM, and we call these agents patient households. Households privately
learn their type for the current period at the beginning of the DM. The
realisation of types is i.i.d. across periods and households. In the CM, all
households get utility 𝑈 (𝑥) from consuming the CM good. The expected
lifetime payoff of households is

E0

∞
∑

𝑡=0

𝛽𝑡 {𝑈 (𝑥𝑡) − 𝑙𝑡 + 𝜃𝑢(𝑞𝑡)

} ,

(3)

where 𝑈 (𝑥) and 𝑢(𝑞) are both strictly increasing, concave functions
satisfying the Inada conditions. Additionally, we impose 𝑢(0) = 0.

Entrepreneurs get linear disutility from working during the DM and
linear utility 𝑥 from consuming during the CM when they are old. They
have the same discount factor as households, such that the expected
lifetime payoff of entrepreneurs born in period 𝑡 equals

{

E𝑡

−ℎ𝑡 + 𝛽𝑥𝑡+1

} .

(4)

As is standard in the literature, we assume that agents are anony-
mous during the DM, that there is no record-keeping technology,
and that households cannot credibly commit to any future payments.
These assumptions rule out unsecured credit, which means households
need liquid assets in order to purchase consumption goods from en-
trepreneurs during the DM. We assume that the only liquid asset in
the sense that entrepreneurs can recognise it and distinguish it from
counterfeited assets is intrinsically worthless fiat money 𝑚, which is

5 See also Liu (2019) and Goldstein et al. (2020) for models of systemic

bank panics with fire sales.

6 In Berentsen et al. (2007), banks intermediate cash between agents with
and without consumption needs. In our model, as in Williamson (2012), banks
pool agents’ cash and assets and issue demand deposits.

7 This terminology follows standard conventions in the literature, whereby
each time period is usually divided into two submarkets, a frictionless CM
(which may stand for ‘centralised market’) and a DM (which may stand for
‘decentralised market’) in which trades need to be settled with fiat money.

3 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

issued by the government. Thus, households who want to consume in
the DM are subject to the constraint

𝑝𝑡𝑞𝑡

≤ 𝑚𝑡,

(5)

where 𝑝𝑡 denotes the price of the DM good in period 𝑡. We denote 𝜙𝑡 as
the value of money during the CM of period 𝑡 in terms of CM good, i.e.
𝑚𝑡 units of fiat money buy 𝜙𝑡𝑚𝑡 units of good 𝑥. We denote the gross
inflation rate by 1 + 𝜋𝑡+1

≡ 𝜙𝑡∕𝜙𝑡+1.

Since young entrepreneurs do not have resources of their own, they
need to borrow from households to invest in capital. We denote by 𝓁𝑡
nominal loans extended by households to entrepreneurs. To purchase
𝑘𝑡 units of capital in the CM of period 𝑡, a young entrepreneur needs
to take out a nominal loan of 𝓁𝑡 = 𝑘𝑡∕𝜙𝑡. We denote ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1 as the net
nominal interest rate on loans extended in period 𝑡, i.e. an entrepreneur
receiving a nominal loan of 𝓁𝑡 in the CM of period 𝑡 is due to repay
(1 + ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1)𝓁𝑡 units of money in the CM of period 𝑡 + 1. We assume
entrepreneurs are able to commit to repayment, in the sense that they
always repay their loan if they have the funds to do so. If entrepreneurs
have insufficient funds to repay the loan in full, they will repay all they
have. Notice, however, that entrepreneurs cannot be forced to work in
the DM; in particular, they can always choose not to work at all in the
DM, in which case they receive zero revenue and default on their entire
loan.

In addition to fiat money 𝑀, the government issues nominal bonds
𝐵 in the CM. A government bond issued in period 𝑡 pays 1 + 𝑖𝑏,𝑡+1 units
of money in the CM of period 𝑡 + 1, such that the government’s budget
constraint writes

𝜙𝑡(𝐵𝑡 + 𝑀𝑡) + 𝛥𝑡 = 𝜙𝑡(𝑀𝑡−1 + (1 + 𝑖𝑏,𝑡)𝐵𝑡−1),

(6)

where 𝛥𝑡 denote lump-sum taxes (or subsidies if 𝛥𝑡 < 0) imposed on
households in the CM of period 𝑡. We assume that the money supply 𝑀𝑡
grows at a constant net rate 𝜇, that the government targets a constant
real debt level  = 𝜙𝑡𝐵𝑡
≥ 0, and that lump-sum taxes 𝛥𝑡 adjust such
that the budget constraint holds given these targets.

For future reference, we denote 1 + 𝜄𝑡+1

≡ (1 + 𝜋𝑡+1)∕𝛽 as the Fisher
rate, i.e. the nominal interest rate that fully compensates households
for inflation and discounting.

3. Planner’s problem and equilibrium without banks

Consider the problem of a social planner that maximises the ex-
pected lifetime utility of households and entrepreneurs, giving equal
weight to all agents. We denote 𝑥𝑡 and 𝑥𝑒
𝑡 as CM consumption of
households and entrepreneurs, respectively, in period 𝑡. DM production
per entrepreneur is denoted by 𝑞𝑒
𝑡 , while 𝑞𝑡 denotes DM consumption
per (impatient) household. The planner’s problem then writes:

∞
∑

max

{𝑙𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑞𝑡,𝑥𝑡,𝑥𝑒

𝑡 }∞
𝑡=0
𝑡=0
𝑙𝑡 = 𝑥𝑡 + 𝑛𝑥𝑒

𝑠.𝑡.

𝛽𝑡{𝑈 (𝑥𝑡) − 𝑙𝑡 + 𝜃𝑢(𝑞𝑡) + 𝑛(−ℎ𝑡 + 𝑥𝑒

𝑡 )}

𝑡 + 𝑛𝑘𝑡,

𝜃𝑞𝑡 = 𝑛𝑞𝑒
𝑡 ,

ℎ𝑡 = 𝑐(𝑞𝑒

𝑡 , 𝑘𝑡).

≡
𝑡 as capital per DM good produced, we obtain the first-order

Inserting the constraints into the objective function and denoting 𝜅𝑡
𝑘𝑡∕𝑞𝑒
conditions

𝑈 ′(𝑥∗) = 1,

𝑢′(𝑞∗) = 𝑐𝑞

1, 𝜅∗) ,
(
1, 𝜅∗) ,
(

1 = −𝑐𝑘

(7)

(8)

(9)

where the (unique) first-best quantities are denoted with an asterisk
(∗).8 Condition (7) equates households’ marginal utility of CM consump-
tion with the marginal disutility of CM production, (8) is the analogous

8 The optimal value of 𝑥𝑒 is indeterminate since both the marginal utility
of CM consumption of entrepreneurs as well as the marginal disutility of
producing the CM good are equal to 1.

4 

condition for DM output, and (9) equates the marginal benefit of capital
(through reduced hours worked in the DM) with the marginal disutility
of producing capital.

Next, we will briefly describe the decentralised equilibrium in the
economy without banks. In this and the next section, we will restrict
attention to monetary steady-state equilibria, i.e. equilibria in which
𝜙𝑡 > 0 for all 𝑡 and in which all real quantities are constant.9 In
a monetary steady state, inflation equals the money growth rate, i.e.
𝜋 = 𝜇, such that the Fisher rate equals 1 + 𝜄 = (1 + 𝜇)∕𝛽.

In the economy without banks, each household chooses its portfolio
of money, bonds and loans (𝑚𝑡, 𝓁𝑡, 𝑏𝑡) in the CM. It is a standard result
that households never choose to carry more money than what is needed
to finance DM consumption if 𝜄𝑡+1 > 0 (which is the relevant case for
us), and we thus take it as given that 𝑞𝑡 = 𝑚𝑡∕𝑝𝑡. Furthermore, we
assume that each household holds a diversified loan portfolio, such that
all households earn the same net return 𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1 on their loans. We can
then express households’ problem as

max
{𝑥𝑡,𝑚𝑡,𝓁𝑡,𝑏𝑡}

𝑈 (𝑥𝑡) − 𝑥𝑡 + 𝜃𝑢(𝑚𝑡∕𝑝𝑡) + [𝛽(1 − 𝜃)𝜙𝑡+1 − 𝜙𝑡]𝑚𝑡

+ [𝛽𝜙𝑡+1(1 + 𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1) − 𝜙𝑡]𝓁𝑡

+ [𝛽𝜙𝑡+1(1 + 𝑖𝑏,𝑡+1) − 𝜙𝑡]𝑏𝑡,

(10)

where the last three terms capture the net benefit of carrying money,
loans and bonds into the next CM (households only carry money into
the next CM if they turn out to be patient).10 From the first-order
condition for 𝑚𝑡, we obtain

𝑢′(𝑞𝑡) = 𝜌𝑡

(

1 +

)

,

𝜄𝑡+1
𝜃

(11)

≡ 𝛽𝜙𝑡+1𝑝𝑡 denotes the real price of the DM good in period 𝑡,
where 𝜌𝑡
and the term 𝜄𝑡+1∕𝜃 represents the opportunity cost of holding money.
Due to quasilinear preferences, interior solutions for 𝓁𝑡 and 𝑏𝑡 are only
possible if 𝑖𝑏,𝑡+1 = 𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1 = 𝜄𝑡+1: households’ demand for an illiquid asset
paying less (more) than 𝜄𝑡+1 would be zero (infinite). Market clearing
thus implies that the equilibrium rate on loans and bonds equals the
Fisher rate whenever these assets are in positive supply.

Next, entrepreneurs born in the CM of period 𝑡 choose how much
to invest in capital (𝑘𝑡) and how much to work in the DM (ℎ𝑡). Since
investing 𝑘𝑡 requires taking out a nominal loan 𝑘𝑡∕𝜙𝑡, and since ℎ𝑡 =
𝑐(𝑞𝑒

𝑡 , 𝑘𝑡), we can express the entrepreneurs’ problem as

{−𝑐(𝑞𝑒

𝑡 , 𝑘𝑡)+𝛽𝑥𝑒

𝑡+1}

max
{𝑘𝑡,𝑞𝑒
𝑡 }

s.t. 𝑥𝑒

𝑡+1 = 𝜙𝑡+1

[𝑝𝑡𝑞𝑒

𝑡 −(1+̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1)(𝑘𝑡∕𝜙𝑡)

]. (12)

Using our definitions of 𝜅𝑡 and 𝜌𝑡, we obtain from the first-order
conditions that

−𝑐𝑘(1, 𝜅𝑡) =

1 + ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1
1 + 𝜄𝑡+1
𝜌𝑡 = 𝑐𝑞(1, 𝜅𝑡),

,

(13)

(14)

i.e. the optimal 𝜅𝑡 is decreasing in the loan rate ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1, and given 𝜅𝑡,
optimal DM production increases in 𝜌𝑡. We verify in Appendix A.2
that, given entrepreneurs’ optimal investment choice, their equilibrium
revenue is just sufficient to cover the cost of the loan and the disutility
of working in the DM.

Since there is no uncertainty regarding the demand for DM good in
the steady state, there are no defaults, which means that the effective
loan rate equals the contractual rate, i.e. 𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1 = ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1. Market clearing
for loans then requires 𝑛𝑘𝑡 = 𝜙𝑡𝓁𝑡, while DM market clearing requires
𝑡 = 𝜃𝑞𝑡. Finally, using (11)–(14) together with the fact that ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1 =
𝑛𝑞𝑒

9 There is always an equilibrium with 𝜙𝑡 = 0 for all 𝑡 in this class of models.
In this equilibrium, 𝑞 = 𝑘 = 0 due to the lack of an accepted means of payment
to settle DM transactions.

10 Since the households’ problem is standard for models based on Lagos and
Wright (2005), we keep the exposition brief here and refer to Appendix A.1
for the details.

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

𝜄𝑡+1 in equilibrium, we obtain that the steady-state levels of 𝑞 and 𝜅 are
determined by

𝑢′(𝑞)
𝑐𝑞 (1, 𝜅)

= 1 +

𝜄
𝜃

,

−𝑐𝑘 (1, 𝜅) = 1.

(15)

(16)

Comparing (15)–(16) with (8)–(9), we see that the Friedman rule (𝜄 = 0)
implements the first-best allocation, while DM output 𝑞 is inefficiently
low away from the Friedman rule. Furthermore, 𝜅 is always at its first-
best level, i.e. a given 𝑞 is produced with the socially optimal mix of
capital and labour.

4. Banking equilibrium

To overcome the uncertainty about their consumption preferences,
households can form coalitions during the CM, which we call banks,
à la Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Banking coalitions maximise the
expected utility of their participating households, which we call depos-
itors, with each depositor depositing an identical amount in the bank
when it is formed. Banks act as price takers in the sense that they take
equilibrium loan and bond rates, the value of money, and the price of
the DM good as given. Banks exist for one period, from the CM until
the CM next period, at which point they are dissolved and replaced by
a new set of banks.

In this section, we solve for steady-state banking equilibria. In
the subsequent sections, we then investigate whether the steady-state
equilibria we find are prone to unexpected runs.

≡ 𝓁𝑏

𝑡 + 𝑏𝑏

𝑡 ), loans (𝓁𝑏

𝑡 ) and government bonds (𝑏𝑏

Banks issue deposits in the CM when they are formed and invest the
proceeds in cash (𝑚𝑏
𝑡 ), where
we use the superscript 𝑏 to denote portfolio choices made by banks.
We denote by 𝑎𝑏
𝑡 a bank’s total holdings of illiquid assets.
𝑡
Since expected loan defaults are zero in the steady state, the nominal
return on loans and bonds must be the same in equilibrium, i.e. 𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1 =
≡ 𝑖𝑡+1 for all 𝑡. Thus, when we refer to the interest rate, this covers
𝑖𝑏,𝑡+1
both of these rates.11 A bank formed in the CM of period 𝑡 promises to
pay 𝑑𝐼
𝑡 units of money to impatient depositors in the following DM and
𝑑𝑃
𝑡+1 units of money to patient depositors in CM next period. We have
𝑑𝐼
𝑡 = 𝑝𝑡𝑞𝑡, i.e. choosing the DM payout 𝑑𝐼
is equivalent to choosing the
𝑡
DM consumption 𝑞𝑡 of impatient households.12 The bank’s problem can
then be expressed as

max
𝑡 ,𝑑𝐼

𝑡 ,𝑑𝑃
𝑡+1

𝑡 ,𝑎𝑏
𝑚𝑏

𝜃𝑢(𝑑𝐼

𝑡 ∕𝑝𝑡) + 𝛽(1 − 𝜃)𝜙𝑡+1𝑑𝑃

𝑡+1 − 𝜙(𝑚𝑏

𝑡 + 𝑎𝑏
𝑡 )

subject to:

𝑚𝑏
𝑡

≥ 𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑡 ,

(𝛽𝜙𝑡+1𝜁𝑡)

liquidity const.

𝑡 + 𝑎𝑏
𝑚𝑏

𝑡 (1 + 𝑖𝑡+1) ≥ 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑡 + (1 − 𝜃)𝑑𝑃

𝑡+1,

(𝛽𝜙𝑡+1𝜉𝑡)

solvency const.

(17)

(18)

𝑑𝑃
𝑡+1

≥ 𝑑𝐼
𝑡 ,

(𝛽𝜙𝑡+1(1 − 𝜃)𝜓𝑡) patient IC const.

(19)

𝑢(𝑞𝑡) − 𝑢(0) ≥ 𝛽𝜙𝑡+1𝑑𝑃

𝑡+1,

impatient IC const. (20)

where the terms in brackets denote the Lagrange multipliers on the
constraints. Condition (17) states that the bank must hold enough

11 From Section 3, we know that households are only willing to hold illiquid
assets outside of banks if they pay the Fisher rate. As we will see, banks might
≠ 𝑖𝑏,𝑡+1, they would
be willing to hold illiquid assets at lower rates, but if 𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1
strictly prefer to hold whichever asset pays the higher interest rate. Recall also
that asset returns cannot exceed the Fisher rate since demand from households
for such an asset would be infinite.

12 We assume here that households hold no money outside of banks; this is
without loss of generality since households would never find it optimal to do
so.

money to make payments to early withdrawers. Condition (18) states
that the total value of the bank’s assets must be at least as high as the
total promises it makes to depositors. Condition (19) is an incentive
compatibility (IC) constraint for patient depositors, which states that
DM payouts cannot exceed CM payouts. Finally, condition (20) is an IC
constraint for impatient depositors, which states that the difference in
utility from consuming 𝑞𝑡 in the DM instead of nothing should exceed
the utility impatient depositors obtain from withdrawing in the CM. We
will ignore this constraint for now and check later whether it binds.

Before moving on, we want to briefly elaborate on the nature of
liquidity insurance that banks provide in our model. Different to the Di-
amond and Dybvig (1983) model, the purpose of liquidity insurance is
not to smooth consumption between impatient and patient households.
Instead, liquidity insurance ensures that households receive money in
the DM if and only if they need it. While in autarky all households hold
some money to self-insure against the risk of being impatient, banks
efficiently distribute the available money to those households who need
it, allowing impatient depositors to consume more than they would in
autarky. In our setup, ‘full insurance’ against liquidity risk means that
the real amount of money that impatient households receive from banks
in the DM equals the amount that households would bring into the DM
if they lived in autarky and knew their type beforehand.13 Note also that
the sole reason why banks hold illiquid assets in our model is to satisfy
patient depositors’ IC constraint. If types were observable, banks could
just invest in money and distribute it to impatient depositors in the DM;
but since types are private information, banks must hold illiquid assets
to make payments to patient depositors that are large enough to satisfy
incentive compatibility.14

We refer to Appendix A.3 for the derivation of the optimality
conditions of the bank’s problem. For the Lagrange multipliers, we
obtain

𝜁𝑡 =

𝑖𝑡+1(1 + 𝜄𝑡+1)
1 + 𝑖𝑡+1

,

𝜉𝑡 =

1 + 𝜄𝑡+1
1 + 𝑖𝑡+1

and 𝜓𝑡 =

𝜄𝑡+1 − 𝑖𝑡+1
1 + 𝑖𝑡+1

,

(21)

i.e. the liquidity constraint binds unless the nominal rate is zero, the
solvency constraint always binds (which just means that banks make
zero profits) and patient depositors’ IC constraint binds unless the
nominal rate equals the Fisher rate. Intuitively, the latter is the case
because if assets pay the Fisher rate, buying additional assets in order to
increase CM payouts and relax patient depositors’ IC constraint entails
no opportunity cost for banks. Further, we obtain that DM consumption
satisfies

[

1 +

𝑢′(𝑞𝑡) = 𝜌𝑡

𝜃𝜄𝑡+1(1 + 𝑖𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝜃)(𝜄𝑡+1 − 𝑖𝑡+1)
𝜃(1 + 𝑖𝑡+1)
and banks’ asset demand schedule is

]

,

𝑚𝑏
≥ 𝜃𝑝𝑡𝑞𝑡,
𝑡
𝑡 (1 + 𝑖𝑡+1) ≥ 𝑝𝑡𝑞𝑡,

𝑚𝑏
𝑡 + 𝑎𝑏

with equality if 𝑖𝑡+1 > 0,

with equality if 𝑖𝑡+1 < 𝜄𝑡+1.

(22)

(23)

(24)

Condition (23) implies that banks only hold excess cash if the nominal
interest rate is zero, and condition (24) means that DM payouts cannot
exceed the bank’s nominal portfolio return, which results from patient
depositors’ IC constraint.

The presence of banks does not change entrepreneurs’ optimisa-
tion problem relative to the economy without banks, such that the
equilibrium conditions (13)–(14) are still valid.

full

13 In other words,

liquidity insurance is equivalent to eliminating
uncertainty about types. This is different from the Diamond–Dybvig model,
where liquidity insurance entails a redistribution between types. See Voellmy
(2024) for a detailed discussion of the nature of liquidity insurance in different
banking models.

14 Our finding that incentive compatibility for patient households may limit
banks’ ability to provide liquidity insurance is similar to Peck and Setayesh
(2023). In their model, banks can only provide optimal liquidity insurance if
households deposit a large enough share of their endowment in the bank.

5 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

Market clearing in the markets for loans, bonds and DM good,

respectively, requires

𝑛𝑘𝑡 = 𝜙𝑡(𝓁𝑡 + 𝓁𝑏

𝑡 ), 𝐵𝑡 = 𝑏𝑡 + 𝑏𝑏
𝑡 ,

and 𝑛𝑞𝑒

𝑡 = 𝜃𝑞𝑡.

Combining (13), (14) and (22), and using the fact that there are no
defaults in the steady state (which means ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1 = 𝑖𝑡+1), we obtain that
the steady-state values of 𝑞 and 𝜅 satisfy

𝑢′(𝑞)
𝑐𝑞 (1, 𝜅)

= 1 +

𝜃𝜄(1 + 𝑖) + (1 − 𝜃)(𝜄 − 𝑖)
𝜃(1 + 𝑖)

,

−𝑐𝑘(1, 𝜅) =

1 + 𝑖
1 + 𝜄

.

(25)

(26)

For given nominal rates 𝑖 and 𝜄, this system has a unique solution.
Eq. (26) shows that 𝜅 decreases in 𝑖. Inspecting Eq. (25) reveals that
changes in 𝑖 have two opposing effects on DM output 𝑞. On the one
hand, an increase in 𝑖 allows banks to pay a higher deposit rate, thereby
decreasing the effective cost of liquidity, which taken by itself has a
positive effect on 𝑞. On the other hand, the fall in 𝜅 caused by an
increase in 𝑖 leads to an increase in the real DM price 𝜌 = 𝑐𝑞(1, 𝜅) (see
(14)), which taken by itself has a negative effect on 𝑞.

Next, we denote by  the real aggregate asset supply, which equals

the aggregate capital stock plus real government debt:

 ≡ 𝜙𝑡𝑎𝑡 = 𝑛𝑘 + .

(27)

Combining (27) with the representative bank’s asset demand schedule
(23)–(24), and using the fact that all assets are held by banks if 𝑖 < 𝜄,
we obtain that asset market clearing requires:

≥ (1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑞

=

1 + 𝜄
1 + 𝑖

(1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑞

≤ (1 + 𝜄)(1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑞



⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

if

if

if

𝑖 = 𝜄

𝑖 ∈ (0, 𝜄)

𝑖 = 0.

(28)

Definition 1. A stationary monetary equilibrium (SME) in the banking
economy is given by (𝑞, 𝜅, 𝜌, 𝑖, ) satisfying (14) and (25)–(28).

The existence proof for SME is given in Appendix A.4:

Proposition 1. A stationary monetary equilibrium in the banking econ-
omy exists.

In the following, we will distinguish between three equilibrium
cases: (i) full liquidity insurance equilibria (FLI), defined as equilibria in
which 𝑖 = 𝜄; (ii) zero lower bound equilibria (ZLB), defined as equilibria
in which 𝑖 = 0 and (iii) partial liquidity insurance equilibria (PLI), defined
as equilibria in which 𝑖 ∈ (0, 𝜄). Roughly speaking, condition (28) states
that an FLI equilibrium exists if the aggregate asset supply is plentiful,
a ZLB equilibrium exists if assets are scarce, and a PLI equilibrium
exists if the asset supply is within an intermediate range. In a separate
paper (Altermatt et al., 2024), we discuss in more detail the steady-
state results in a model similar to this one, and we show that all three
equilibrium cases may coexist for certain parameters. However, this
coexistence is immaterial for the purposes of the present paper, and
we will only very briefly characterise the equilibrium cases here before
moving on to bank runs.

In an FLI equilibrium, banks are saturated with assets, such that
asset prices fall to the point where assets pay the Fisher rate. We have
𝜅 = 𝜅∗ in an FLI equilibrium, and DM output 𝑞 satisfies 𝑢′(𝑞)∕𝜌 = 1 + 𝜄,
i.e. 𝑞 is higher than in an economy without banks and is unaffected
by the probability of being impatient (𝜃). In an FLI equilibrium, banks
fully insure depositors against liquidity risk in the sense that DM
consumption is the same as it would be in an economy in which
households know their type beforehand. Consider next ZLB equilibria,
in which banks’ demand for assets drives the interest rate down to the
zero lower bound. Then, banks are indifferent between holding illiquid
assets and cash, and the nominal deposit return is zero. DM output

in a ZLB equilibrium satisfies 𝑢′(𝑞)∕𝜌 = 1 + (𝜄∕𝜃), which is the same
condition as in the economy without banks. However, the depressed
loan rate implies 𝜅 > 𝜅∗ in a ZLB equilibrium, which in turn implies
that 𝜌 is lower and 𝑞 is higher than in the economy without banks.
Finally, PLI equilibria represent an intermediate case between FLI and
ZLB equilibria.

Let us now return to the question whether the IC constraint for
impatient depositors (condition (20)) is indeed fulfilled in equilibrium,
as we have assumed so far. We know from (21) that in ZLB and PLI
equilibria, the IC constraint for patient depositors binds, which makes
it straightforward to show that the IC constraint for impatient depositors
is slack. In an FLI equilibrium, the IC constraint for impatient depositors
is satisfied as long as

𝜙𝑎𝑏 ≤ ̄ ≡ (1 − 𝜃)𝑢(𝑞),

(29)

i.e. as long as banks’ holdings of illiquid assets do not exceed the
threshold ̄. For FLI equilibria to exist for some parameters, the lower
bound on  for which an FLI equilibrium can exist (see (28)) needs to
be below the upper bound in (29). This is the case if

𝑢′(𝑞)𝑞 ≤ 𝑢(𝑞),

1
1 + 𝜄
which is always strictly satisfied given the properties of 𝑢(𝑞). From here
on, we will assume that banks hold all illiquid assets if  ≤ ̄ and that
they hold ̄ if  > ̄.

5. Bank runs

We now study whether steady-state banking equilibria are prone
to self-fulfilling runs. We treat runs as zero-probability events, which
therefore have no effect on the steady-state allocations studied previ-
ously. From now on, we will use subscript 𝑆 to denote the steady-state
values of variables.

A run denotes a situation where all depositors, both patient and
impatient, rush to the banks in order to withdraw their deposits in the
DM. Following Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and much of the banking
literature, we assume sequential service, i.e. depositors arrive at their
bank in random order in the DM and need to be paid out on the
spot. Depositors who wish to redeem in the DM form a queue, with
each depositor being assigned each place in the queue with identical
probability. Patient depositors run if and only if they expect that
withdrawing in the DM gives them a strictly higher payout compared
to not withdrawing.15 We will say that the banking system is fragile if
steady-state DM payouts (𝑑𝐼
𝑆 ) are strictly higher than CM payouts in a
situation where all depositors run.

In a run, some cash ends up in the hands of patient depositors,
who will not spend it until the next CM. This means that impatient
depositors hold less cash in aggregate than in the steady state. We
denote by 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 the total cash paid out to impatient depositors in the
DM in a run, with 0 < 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 ≤ 𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆 equals the total cash
paid out to impatient depositors in the steady state.

𝑆 , where 𝜃𝑑𝐼

If a run occurs, each entrepreneur will either repay his loan in full or
not produce at all in the DM and default on his entire loan. To see this,
recall that if an entrepreneur produces in the DM but fails to repay his
loan in full, he will hand over his entire revenue to the creditors; since
production entails a utility cost, this leads to a strictly negative payoff
for the entrepreneur, meaning the entrepreneur would have been better
off not producing at all.

We denote by 𝜒 the share of entrepreneurs that choose to produce
in the DM and thus repay their loan in a run. Active (i.e. producing)
entrepreneurs choose their supply, 𝑞𝑒, to maximise real profits before
loan repayments, 𝜌𝑞𝑒 − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒, 𝑘𝑆 ). Supply by an active entrepreneur is

15 We assume patient depositors do not redeem in the DM (they ‘stay home’)

in case of indifference.

6 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

therefore set according to 𝑞𝑒 = 𝑞𝑒(𝜌) ≡ 𝑐−1
𝑞𝑒(𝜌) is strictly increasing in 𝜌.

𝑞 (𝜌, 𝑘𝑆 ), which implies that

Market clearing in the DM requires that aggregate real spending on
the DM good by impatient depositors equals aggregate real revenues of
entrepreneurs:
1 + 𝜋𝑆
1 + 𝜋

𝜒𝜌𝑞𝑒(𝜌)
𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑒(𝜌𝑆 )

(30)

=

.

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

The LHS in Eq. (30) equals impatient depositors’ aggregate real cash
holdings in a run relative to the steady state, and the RHS equals
entrepreneurs’ aggregate real revenues relative to the steady state.

As long as no additional money is injected in a run, the inflation
rate is not affected by the run, and we obtain a particularly simple
expression for the share of active entrepreneurs:

If the amount of money in circulation does not change
Proposition 2.
when a run occurs, the real purchasing power of money remains unchanged
(𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 ). Then,

(i) the real price of the DM good remains at the steady-state level (𝜌 =

𝜌𝑆 ), and

(ii) the share of active entrepreneurs equals 𝜒 =

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

.

Proof. The fact that 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 if the money supply does not deviate from
its steady-state value follows from the fact that steady-state inflation is
determined through the money growth rate, and the economy reverts
to the steady state after a run. To see why 𝜌 cannot deviate from
𝜌𝑆 , note first that entrepreneurs make zero profits in the steady state,
in the sense that their payoff-maximising DM labour effort given 𝑘𝑆
and 𝜌𝑆 yields them a payoff of zero (see Appendix A.2). If 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 ,
the real indebtedness of entrepreneurs stays the same, which implies
that 𝜌 cannot fall below 𝜌𝑆 : a decrease in 𝜌 shifts the payoff schedule
downwards, such that 𝜌 < 𝜌𝑆 implies a strictly negative payoff for
entrepreneurs for any production level 𝑞𝑒 > 0. Therefore, 𝜌 < 𝜌𝑆 implies
zero production in the DM, which violates market clearing (30). Next,
𝜌 > 𝜌𝑆 cannot be consistent with market clearing (30) either, as it
would lead to an increase in the aggregate supply of the DM good
while the aggregate demand for the DM good decreases. Finally, given
𝜌 = 𝜌𝑆 and 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 , item (ii) in Proposition 2 follows immediately from
(30). ■

For banks, the effective gross nominal return on loans in a run
equals 𝜒(1 + 𝑖𝑆 ). Notice that the return to an individual bank’s portfolio
depends on the redemption behaviour of depositors at all banks, mak-
ing runs inherently systemic events. We want to highlight here that the
link between the occurrence of a run and the return on illiquid assets
captured by item (ii) in Proposition 2 is the main innovation in our
model compared to the existing literature.16

Consider now the more general case where a run may affect the
price level and hence the real price of the DM good, 𝜌. This is only
relevant for the analysis in Section 7, where we study the injection of
emergency liquidity by the government.

Proposition 3. Given any real price 𝜌 of the DM good in a run, the share
of active entrepreneurs equals

𝜒 = min

{

𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

}

, 1

,

(31)

where

𝛼(𝜌) =

𝜌𝑞𝑒(𝜌) − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒(𝜌), 𝑘𝑆 )
𝜌𝑞𝑒(𝜌)

(32)

denotes the capital share, i.e. the share of an active entrepreneur’s rev-
enue left after compensating the entrepreneur for his labour disutility of
production.

Proof. An entrepreneur is willing to produce and repay his loan if and
only if

{𝜌𝑞𝑒 − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒, 𝑘𝑆 )} ≡ 𝜌𝑞𝑒(𝜌) − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒(𝜌), 𝑘𝑆 ) = 𝜌𝛼(𝜌)𝑞𝑒(𝜌) ≥ 𝛽

max
𝑞𝑒

1 + 𝑖𝑆
1 + 𝜋

𝑘𝑆 ,

(33)

i.e. if and only if the maximised real profits before repayment weakly
exceed the real debt burden. Exploiting that (33) holds with equality
in the steady state (see Appendix A.2), we find

≥

1 + 𝜋𝑆
1 + 𝜋

, with equality if 𝜒 < 1,

𝜌𝛼(𝜌)𝑞𝑒(𝜌)
𝜌𝑆 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )𝑞𝑒(𝜌𝑆 )
i.e. to incentivise entrepreneurs to produce in the DM, their real rev-
enue left after compensating them for their labour disutility cannot
decrease by more than the reduction in the real debt burden caused
by an increase in inflation. Combining (30) and (34) then leads to the
result in Proposition 3. ■

(34)

Whether the banking system is fragile ex ante depends on the banks’
and the government’s ex post reaction to runs. In Section 6, we study
withdrawal restrictions imposed by banks, which can be interpreted
as partial deposit freezes and redemption penalties. In Section 7, we
widen the scope of our analysis by also considering public provision of
emergency liquidity, where the government stands ready to purchase
illiquid assets from banks. In line with the bulk of the bank run
literature, we assume the banking system reacts to runs as a single,
consolidated entity.17 The speed at which the queue is served is the
same at all banks, i.e. whenever a bank has served some fraction of
queuing depositors in the DM, all other banks will have served the same
fraction of their queue.

We assume for the remainder of the paper that all banks and
the government realise simultaneously that a run is underway after
a fraction 𝜆 ∈ [0, 𝜃] of depositors have withdrawn in the DM, at
which point banks may jointly impose redemption restrictions or the
government starts to inject emergency liquidity. Since the share of
impatient depositors equals 𝜃, banks always know that a run is going
on if more than a fraction 𝜃 of depositors wish to redeem in the DM.
𝜆 = 0 means that the run is immediately spotted, i.e. after a measure
zero of patient depositors have withdrawn. Note also that since banks
cannot liquidate assets in the DM, they necessarily implement a full
deposit freeze once they run out of cash unless the government provides
emergency liquidity.

In case banks impose a partial freeze or redemption penalties after
realising that a run is underway, depositors who were not among the
first 𝜆 to show up can choose whether they still want to redeem in the
DM or whether they want to leave the queue and be paid out in the
CM instead. If patient depositors leave the queue once the redemption
restrictions are in place, we say that these measures stop runs. If the
banking system is not fragile given that banks impose redemption

16 Note that we do not allow entrepreneurs to renegotiate their debt con-
tracts. If entrepreneurs could renegotiate, Proposition 2 would not necessarily
hold anymore, as entrepreneurs might be willing to sell DM goods at lower
prices if their repayment burden is reduced. While this could mitigate the
macroeconomic effects of a bank run, it would not help the banking system
in stopping or preventing runs, since as long as entrepreneurs repay less than
was initially promised, run incentives for patient depositors remain intact.

17 One interpretation of this is that banks jointly commit to reacting in a cer-
tain way if they realise that a run is underway. Ennis and Keister (2009, 2010)
interpret the concerted action by banks as the result of a centralised banking
authority stepping in once a systemic run has started, where the banking
authority could be regarded as a reduced-form representation of the banking
system together with the relevant regulatory agencies. Importantly, unlike the
banking authority in Ennis and Keister (2009, 2010), the consolidated banking
system does not suffer from limited commitment in our model.

7 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

restrictions and/or the government provides emergency liquidity after
observing a run (off the equilibrium path), we say that these measures
prevent runs.

6. Deposit freezes and redemption penalties

We first consider deposit freezes and then introduce redemption
penalties. Suppose banks can freeze any fraction 1−𝜂 ∈ (0, 1] of deposits
upon realising that a run is underway. If deposits are (partially) frozen,
depositors can only redeem a fraction 𝜂 of their deposit in the DM, thus
receiving a DM payout of 𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆 , while the remaining part of the deposit is
locked in until the CM. In the CM, depositors are paid out pro-rata, i.e.
if depositors who did not withdraw anything in the DM receive some
amount 𝑑 in the CM, then depositors who redeemed fraction 𝜂 of their
deposit in the DM receive (1 − 𝜂)𝑑 in the CM. The standard full deposit
freeze studied by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and others corresponds
to 𝜂 = 0 and 𝜆 = 𝜃.

Recall that at the point in time when banks impose a deposit freeze,
a fraction 𝜆 of depositors have already withdrawn. Denoting 𝜔 as the
share of depositors that redeem in the DM after a partial freeze with
𝜂 > 0 has been imposed, the banks’ liquidity constraint implies

{

𝜔 ≤ 𝜔(𝜂) ≡ min

1 − 𝜆,

}

.

𝑚𝑏
𝑆 − 𝜆𝑑𝐼
𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑆

For future reference, we define
𝑆 − 𝜆𝑑𝐼
𝑆
(1 − 𝜆)𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝜂 ≡ min

{ 𝑚𝑏

}

, 1

and 𝜂 ≡ min

(35)

(36)

}

, 1

,

{ 𝜂
𝜃

)

(
𝜂

such that 𝜔(𝜂) = 1 − 𝜆 and 𝜔
= 𝜃(1 − 𝜆). That is, after realising that
a run is underway, banks’ cash reserves are just sufficient to convert
a fraction 𝜂 of all remaining deposits into cash in the DM; and cash
reserves are just sufficient to convert a fraction 𝜂 > 𝜂 of all remaining
deposits held by impatient depositors into cash.

Suppose now that, in addition to partially freezing deposits, banks
can impose a penalty on DM redemptions, which we denote by 𝜎.
Depositors who redeem the allowed fraction 𝜂 of their deposit in the DM
then forgo a fraction 𝜎 ∈ [0, 1 − 𝜂] of their deposit. That is, if depositors
who do not redeem in the DM receive some amount 𝑑 in the CM, those
redeeming fraction 𝜂 of their deposit receive (1 − 𝜂 − 𝜎)𝑑 in the CM.

Banks’ solvency constraint in case of a run writes

𝑆 + 𝜒𝓁𝑏

𝑆 ) = 𝜆𝑑𝐼

𝑚𝑏
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
where 𝑑𝑃
in the DM. From (37), we obtain that CM payouts after a run equal

𝑅 denotes the CM payout to depositors who do not withdraw

𝑅 ) + (1 − 𝜆 − 𝜔)𝑑𝑃

𝑆 + (1 − 𝜂 − 𝜎)𝑑𝑃

𝑆 + 𝜔(𝜂𝑑𝐼

𝑅 , (37)

𝑑𝑃
𝑅 (𝜒, 𝜔; 𝜂, 𝜎) =

[𝑚𝑏

𝑆 − (𝜆 + 𝜂𝜔)𝑑𝐼

𝑆 ] + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + 𝜒𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )

1 − 𝜆 − 𝜔(𝜂 + 𝜎)

.

(38)

The numerator in (38) equals the total resources of a bank in the CM
given that a run occurred in the DM; the first term in the numerator
equals left-over cash not paid out in the DM, and the second term equals
the proceeds from a bank’s portfolio of government bonds and loans.
The denominator is the measure of outstanding deposits in the CM.

6.1. Deposit freezes

In this subsection, we focus on pure deposit freezes without redemp-
tion penalties, i.e. we set 𝜎 = 0. Findings in the previous literature sug-
gest that deposit freezes are effective in preventing runs in economies
without aggregate uncertainty and with full commitment. We show that
this is not the case once general equilibrium effects of deposit freezes
are taken into account.

We start by noting that a partial deposit freeze with 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1)
cannot stop a run that has already started, in the following sense: if
redeeming the entire deposit is patient depositors’ best response, then
so is redeeming any fraction 𝜂 > 0 of the deposit. To see this, note that

𝑆 > 𝑑𝑃

𝑅 (⋅) > 𝑑𝑃

𝑆 + (1 − 𝜂)𝑑𝑃

𝑅 (⋅), which is equivalent to 𝑑𝐼

redeeming the allowed fraction 𝜂 is patient depositors’ best response if
and only if 𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑅 (⋅).
To understand whether the banking system is fragile, we need to
determine how many entrepreneurs default in a run. Consider deposit
freezes with 𝜂 ≥ 𝜂, in which case banks pay out their entire cash
holdings to withdrawing depositors in a run. Then, a fraction 𝜆 of de-
positors manages to withdraw in full in a run, a fraction 𝜔(𝜂) manages
to withdraw a share 𝜂 of their deposit, while the remaining fraction
1 − 𝜆 − 𝜔(𝜂) of depositors cannot redeem anything in the DM. By a law
of large numbers, a share 𝜃 of the depositors who manage to withdraw
in the DM will be impatient, which implies that the total cash paid out
to impatient depositors equals 𝜃𝑚𝑏

𝑆 . By Proposition 2, we then have

𝜒 =

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

∈ (0, 1)

(39)

for 𝜂 ≥ 𝜂. Combining (38) and (39), we obtain that the banking system
is fragile under any deposit freeze satisfying 𝜂 ≥ 𝜂 if and only if
)

)

(

𝑆 > 𝑑𝑃
𝑑𝐼

𝑅

, 𝜔(𝜂); 𝜂, 0

⇔ 𝑑𝐼

𝑆 > 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 +(1+𝑖𝑆 )

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

. (40)

( 𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

In words, the banking system is fragile if the steady-state DM payouts
are higher than the value of banks’ portfolios after taking into account
loan defaults caused by a run. Notice that a freeze with 𝜂 < 𝜂 would
exacerbate incentives to run compared to a freeze with 𝜂 ≥ 𝜂 since the
total cash paid out to impatient depositors would then be strictly below
𝜃𝑚𝑏
𝑆 , such that 𝜒 would be lower than in (39). Therefore, condition (40)
is a sufficient condition for the banking system to be fragile under any
deposit freeze 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1], which leads to the following result:

For any 𝜆 ∈ [0, 𝜃] and any deposit freeze 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1],
Proposition 4.
the banking system is fragile in all zero lower bound (ZLB) and partial
liquidity insurance (PLI) equilibria, as well as in full liquidity insurance
(FLI) equilibria in which the real aggregate asset supply satisfies 
𝑆 <
min{ ̄,

̄𝐹 }, where ̄𝐹 ≡ (1 − 𝜃)𝑞𝑆 (𝜌𝑆 + 𝜃𝜅∗).

𝑆 ∕𝑑𝐼

𝑆 = 𝑑𝑃

𝑆 = 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 ). Since 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏

Proof. Consider first ZLB and PLI equilibria. In these equilibria, we
𝑆 + 𝓁𝑏
have 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 < 1, it follows
immediately from condition (40) that the banking system is fragile in
ZLB and PLI equilibria. Consider next FLI equilibria. In FLI equilibria,
𝑆 . Substituting this and 𝑑𝐼
we have 𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆 = 𝑝𝑆 𝑞𝑆 into condition (40)
and rearranging yields the condition (1 − 𝜃)𝑝𝑆 𝑞𝑆 > (1 + 𝚤)(𝑏𝑏
𝑆 ).
Substituting 𝜌 ≡ [𝜙∕(1 + 𝜄)]𝑝, 𝜙𝓁𝑏 = 𝜃𝑞𝜅,  ≡ 𝜙(𝑏𝑏 + 𝓁𝑏) and using the
fact that 𝜅 = 𝜅∗ in an FLI equilibrium yields that, assuming banks hold
≤ ̄), they are fragile
all assets in the economy (which is the case if 
𝑆
iff 
𝑆

≤ ̄𝐹 .18 ■

𝑆 + 𝜃𝓁𝑏

𝑆 = 𝑚𝑏

The fragility of the banking system in ZLB and PLI equilibria is
closely related to the fact that the IC constraint for patient depositors
binds in these equilibria. Even slight losses on banks’ investments then
cause CM payouts to fall below DM payouts, making it optimal for
patient depositors to run. In FLI equilibria, patient depositors receive
strictly higher payouts than impatient depositors in the steady state,
such that banks have a buffer to absorb a certain amount of losses on
their loans.

A remarkable result of Proposition 4 is that if banks’ buffer to
absorb losses is small, deposit freezes can neither prevent runs nor
stop them from starting, no matter how quickly banks react to runs
and what fraction of deposits they freeze. Even if banks can impose a
(partial) deposit freeze immediately after a run has started, the fact
that impatient depositors can withdraw less cash due to the freeze

18 If  > ̄ then not all assets in the economy are held by banks. Whether
banks are fragile then depends additionally on how illiquid assets are allocated
between households and banks; the larger the share of government bonds
(loans) in banks’ portfolios is, the less (more) likely it is that banks are fragile.

8 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

makes it optimal for patient depositors to run. This latter point is the
major difference between our paper and other papers in the literature in
which the return on bank assets can be protected by freezing deposits,
as this prevents banks from incurring liquidation losses. In our model,
the return on bank assets is tied to the conditions in the real economy;
a deposit freeze implies that less cash ends up in the hands of impatient
depositors, which hurts aggregate demand and thereby lowers the
return on bank assets.

The reason that, for any 𝜂 ≥ 𝜂, the exact values of 𝜆 and 𝜂 have no
effect on whether deposit freezes can prevent runs is that DM output
and loan defaults depend only on the total amount of cash paid out
to impatient depositors. However, different values of 𝜆 and 𝜂 do affect
the distribution of cash among impatient depositors in a run. Keeping
all else the same, a higher 𝜆 makes payouts to impatient depositors
in a run more unequal since a larger share of depositors manages to
redeem their deposit in full, which means less cash will be left for
those impatient depositors not among the first 𝜆 to arrive. Similarly,
keeping 𝜆 fixed, ex post payouts in a run become more unequal as banks
increase 𝜂: while those (relatively) early in line can withdraw a larger
amount, a larger share of depositors cannot withdraw anything in the
DM since banks run out of cash before all depositors are served.

Assuming that preventing runs with deposit freezes is not feasible,
how should banks set 𝜂 in order to minimise ex post welfare losses
caused by a run? Given that aggregate DM output and loan defaults
are the same for all 𝜂 ≥ 𝜂, and given that DM preferences are strictly
concave, it is straightforward that the best banks can do is to distribute
the cash as evenly as possible among the impatient depositors who did
not manage to withdraw their deposit in full. This leads to the following
proposition, which we state without separate proof:

Proposition 5. With pure deposit freezes, the ex post welfare loss of a run
is minimised if banks impose a deposit freeze with 𝜂 = 𝜂 once they realise
that a run is underway.

6.2. Redemption penalties

We now turn to the case where, in addition to freezing part of
deposits, banks can impose penalties on DM redemptions once they
realise that a run is underway. To streamline the exposition, we will
take it as given that banks set 𝜂 ∈ [𝜂, 𝜂] in the remainder of this
section.19

A given mix of deposit freezes and redemption penalties (𝜂, 𝜎)
stops a run if a patient depositor (who is not among the first 𝜆 of
depositors in the queue) is better off not withdrawing in the DM even if
(hypothetically) all other depositors continue running after banks have
imposed (𝜂, 𝜎).20 If all depositors continue withdrawing in the DM after
banks have imposed (𝜂, 𝜎), then we have 𝜔 = 𝜔(𝜂) and 𝜒 = 𝑚𝑏
𝑆 (for
the latter, see the discussion in the previous subsection). From (38), we
obtain that CM payouts in such a situation equal

𝑆 ∕𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑃
𝑅

( 𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

)

, 𝜔(𝜂); 𝜂, 𝜎

≡ 𝑑𝑃

𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎).

Banks’ reaction to a run thus stops the run if and only if

𝜂𝑑𝐼

𝑆 + (1 − 𝜂 − 𝜎)𝑑𝑃

𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎) ≤ 𝑑𝑃

𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎).

(41)

(42)

19 If 𝜂 < 𝜂, banks do not pay out all their cash during a run, which,
as discussed above, exacerbates the incentive to run. If 𝜂 > 𝜂, banks’ cash
reserves are not sufficient to pay out all impatient depositors in the DM, even
if patient depositors stop running after banks impose the partial freeze. Banks
could then always adjust (𝜂, 𝜎) in such a way that CM payouts and hence run
incentives are not affected but the available cash is distributed more evenly
among impatient depositors in a run.

20 Since withdrawal decisions of patient depositors are strategic comple-
𝑆 in the DM must

ments, this is the same as saying that not withdrawing 𝜂𝑑𝐼
be the dominant strategy for patient depositors.

9 

Proposition 6. There always exists a policy (𝜂, 𝜎) with 𝜂 > 𝜂 that stops
a run.

Proposition 6 states that banks can always stop a run without com-
pletely freezing deposits (which trivially stops the run). Specifically,
banks can stop runs by setting 𝜂 low enough and 𝜎 high enough. We
prove Proposition 6 by showing in Appendix A.5.1 that condition (42)
can be reformulated as a lower bound on the redemption penalty,
𝜎 ≥ 𝜎(𝜂), and that there exists a value ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 > 𝜂 such that 𝜎(𝜂) ∈ [0, 1−𝜂]
for all 𝜂 ∈ [𝜂, ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥]. Therefore, any policy with 𝜂 ∈ [𝜂, ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥] and 𝜎 ≥ 𝜎(𝜂)
stops a run.

Banks’ reaction to runs prevents a run if the prospect that banks will
impose (𝜂, 𝜎) once they realise a run is underway eliminates patient
depositors’ incentive to withdraw their entire deposit before restrictions
are imposed. While stopping a run ex post is necessary to prevent a run
ex ante, it is not sufficient. Unlike with pure deposit freezes, stopping
and preventing runs are thus not equivalent with redemption penalties.
Suppose banks’ reaction to runs satisfies condition (42), such that it
stops the run. Suppose also for the moment that all remaining impatient
depositors withdraw in the DM after banks have imposed (𝜂, 𝜎). Then,
we have 𝜔 = 𝜃(1 − 𝜆) and 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 = 𝜃 [𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜂] 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 . By Proposition 2,
the share of non-defaulting entrepreneurs then equals

𝜒 = 𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜂

and, by (38), CM payouts equal
(𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜂, 𝜃(1 − 𝜆); 𝜂, 𝜎) ≡ 𝑑

𝑑𝑃
𝑅

𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎).

(43)

(44)

Of course, impatient depositors must be willing to withdraw in the DM
and incur the redemption penalty rather than to wait until the CM,
which requires

𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) + 𝛽𝜙+(1 − 𝜂 − 𝜎)𝑑

𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎) ≥ 𝛽𝜙+𝑑

𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎),

(45)

where 𝜙+ denotes the value of money next period.21 In Appendix A.5.2,
we show that condition (45) can be rewritten as an upper bound on the
redemption penalty, 𝜎 ≤ 𝜎(𝜂). Finally, given that banks’ reaction to runs
satisfies conditions (42) and (45), patient depositors’ incentive to run
in the first place is eliminated if and only if

𝑑𝐼
𝑆

≤ 𝑑

𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎).

(46)

In Appendix A.5.3, we show that condition (46) can be rewritten as a
lower bound on the redemption penalty, 𝜎 ≥ ̂𝜎(𝜂). Note that the lower
bounds on the redemption penalty resulting from conditions (42) and
(46) are distinct. The former states that the redemption penalty must be
high enough to deter patient depositors from running after the penalty
has been imposed; the latter states that the redemption penalty incurred
by impatient depositors must be high enough to deter patient depositors
from running in the first place.

In sum, in order to prevent runs, banks’ reaction to runs must satisfy

conditions (42), (45) and (46).

Proposition 7.
prevents a run.

Even with 𝜆 = 0, there may be no policy (𝜂, 𝜎) that

We prove Proposition 7 by providing in Appendix A.7 an example
where there is no (𝜂, 𝜎) preventing runs even if 𝜆 = 0. However, in many
cases, banks can prevent runs by setting (𝜂, 𝜎) appropriately as long as
𝜆 is low enough; we provide an example for this case below. Note in
particular that the redemption penalty 𝜎 has a redistributive function,
in the sense that it redistributes funds from (impatient) depositors who

21 Since loan defaults are decreasing in the number of impatient depositors
who redeem in the DM, withdrawal decisions of impatient depositors in the
DM are strategic substitutes. Condition (45) is thus the same as saying that
withdrawing in the DM after banks have imposed the redemption penalty must
be the dominant strategy for impatient depositors.

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

redeem in the DM to (patient) depositors who redeem in the CM. If
(𝜂, 𝜎) is such that defaults caused by a run are kept sufficiently low,
and the redistribution towards patient depositors implemented by the
redemption penalty in the event of a run is sufficiently large, then
patient depositors’ incentives to participate in the run in the first place
is eliminated.

6.3. Minimising welfare losses caused by runs

As with pure deposit freezes, we can ask how banks should set (𝜂, 𝜎)
so as to minimise ex post losses caused by runs, assuming preventing
runs is not feasible. Note first that if banks fail to stop the run, then the
situation is equivalent to the one with pure deposit freezes: as long as
𝜂 ≥ 𝜂, the total cash paid out to impatient depositors in a run equals
𝜃𝑚𝑏
𝑆 , which in turn pins down DM output and loan defaults. However,
with redemption penalties, banks can do better by deterring patient
depositors from withdrawing once the run has been detected, which
allows to increase the aggregate amount of cash paid out to impatient
depositors.

Given 𝜂 ≤ 𝜂, all impatient depositors who are not among the first 𝜆
of depositors to arrive in a run receive identical DM payouts whenever
(𝜂, 𝜎) is such that the run is stopped once it is detected. Minimising
welfare losses caused by a run is then equivalent to maximising DM
output in a run, which is achieved by maximising the cash paid out
to impatient depositors (i.e. maximising 𝜂) subject to the relevant
constraints (42) and (45). Specifically, DM output in a run is maximised
by setting 𝜂 to the highest level within (𝜂, 𝜂] consistent with stopping
the run while at the same time ensuring that impatient depositors are
willing to withdraw. We denote this level with 𝜂max.

Suppose 𝜆 < 𝜃. Let 𝜂max ≡ min{𝜂, ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥, ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥}, where
Proposition 8.
̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the unique value of 𝜂 solving 𝜎(𝜂) = 1 − 𝜂, and ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the unique
strictly positive value of 𝜂 solving 𝜎(𝜂) = 𝜎(𝜂). We have 𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 ∈ (𝜂, 1), and
the ex post welfare loss of a run is minimised if banks set 𝜂 = 𝜂max and
𝜎 ∈ [𝜎(𝜂max), 𝜎(𝜂max)].

We refer to Appendix A.6 for the proof and the derivations related
to Proposition 8. Intuitively, the maximum amount of money that can
be paid out to impatient depositors in the DM in case of a run can
be constrained for three different reasons. It can be constrained by the
fact that banks have limited cash left once they notice that a run is
underway (in which case 𝜂max = 𝜂), it can be constrained by the fact
that patient depositors must be deterred from continuing running while
the redemption penalty cannot exceed the fraction of frozen deposits
(in which case 𝜂max = ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥), or it can be constrained because patient
depositors must be deterred from continuing running while impatient
depositors must still find it attractive to withdraw (in which case 𝜂max =
̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥).

6.4. Numerical example (where runs can be prevented)

Fig. 1 provides a numerical example illustrating how (𝜂, 𝜎) needs
be set in order to both stop and prevent runs. We assume that the
DM utility function equals 𝑢(𝑞) = 𝑞𝜈 and that DM production follows
a Cobb–Douglas technology, i.e.

𝑓 (𝑘, ℎ) = 𝑘𝛼ℎ1−𝛼.

(47)

The parameters used for this example are summarised in Table 1; they
are such that the economy is in a ZLB equilibrium. The grey area in
Fig. 1 depicts the set of (𝜎, 𝜂) that both stop and prevent runs. The fact
that 𝜎(𝜂) is strictly increasing in 𝜂 while ̂𝜎(𝜂) is strictly decreasing in 𝜂 is
not specific to the example at hand; as we show in Appendix A.5, this is
always the case if banks are fragile under pure deposit freezes. Higher
DM payouts 𝜂 increase the incentive for patient depositors to continue
running, which is why the redemption penalty required to stop the
run increases in 𝜂. Furthermore, given that the redemption penalty

Table 1
Parameter values for Fig. 1.

𝛼

0.6

𝜈

𝜃

𝑛

𝜆

𝜄

0.65

0.6

0.6

0.45

0.05



0

𝑞𝑆

𝜌𝑆

𝜅𝑆

0.037

1.904

1.199

stops runs, higher DM payouts to impatient depositors lead to more
DM activity and less defaults, thereby decreasing patient depositors’
incentives to participate in the run in the first place. For this reason, the
minimum redemption penalty necessary to prevent a run is decreasing
in 𝜂. This is a characteristic property of our model: increasing payouts
to impatient depositors can lower patient depositors’ incentives to run
due to the tight connection between banks’ liquidity provision and the
return on bank assets.

7. Emergency liquidity

We now turn to the role of policy in stopping and preventing runs.
For expositional convenience, we assume the government provides
emergency liquidity by purchasing assets from banks. We show in Ap-
pendix A.13 how the intervention can be reinterpreted as the provision
of collateralised loans to banks without changing any of the results. We
refer to Appendices A.8–A.12 for the proofs in this section that are not
contained in the main text.

To provide emergency liquidity, the government stands ready to
convert bonds and loans with a gross face value (i.e. principal plus
interest) of one dollar into 𝛿𝑏 and 𝛿𝓁 dollars of cash, respectively,
≤ 1. Here, 𝛿𝑏 < 1 and 𝛿𝓁 < 1 can
where we assume 𝛿𝓁
be interpreted as discounts on bond and loan purchases, with lower
values of 𝛿𝑏 and 𝛿𝓁 representing higher discounts. For simplicity, we
assume throughout this section that 𝜆 = 𝜃, i.e. the government provides
emergency liquidity after a measure 𝜃 of depositors has withdrawn.

≤ 𝛿𝑏

We allow for the possibility that the government is less efficient than
banks in collecting loan repayments from entrepreneurs. Specifically,
when the government purchases an amount 𝓁 of loans and the default
rate is 1 − 𝜒, the government earns 𝜁𝜒(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁 from its loan portfolio,
where 𝜁 ∈ (0, 1] captures the government’s efficiency relative to banks
in collecting loan repayments.

Furthermore, we assume that the government cannot increase its
real indebtedness, which restricts the ability to provide liquidity in real
terms.22 Specifically, we have

𝑀 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝐵
𝑀𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝐵𝑆

≤ 1 + 𝜋
1 + 𝜋𝑆

,

(48)

where 𝑀 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝐵 denotes the government’s nominal liabilities at the
beginning of the next CM after entrepreneurs have repaid loans, and
1 + 𝜋 = 𝜙𝑡∕𝜙𝑡+1 is the inflation rate given the government’s provision of
emergency liquidity. Condition (48) implies that the provision of emer-
gency liquidity will be inflationary whenever it leads to an increase in
nominal government liabilities beyond the point at which the assets
purchased by the government mature.

Consider now the provision of emergency liquidity from the point
of view of banks. With emergency liquidity, the total amount of money
banks can access once the run is detected is

𝑆 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑚𝑏

𝑆 + 𝛿𝑏(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + 𝛿𝓁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 .

(49)

Following the results in Section 6, we assume that once banks notice a
run is underway, they charge a redemption penalty that reflects the dis-
counts imposed on asset purchases and thus ensures that withdrawing

22 This constraint can be motivated in various ways. For instance, it may
capture the central bank’s inability to raise taxes, or it may capture political
constraints such as a limit on real government debt.

10 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

Fig. 1. Example where runs can be prevented.

depositors internalise the cost that banks incur when selling assets:23
𝑆 + 𝛿𝑏(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏
(1 − 𝜃)𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑆 + 𝛿𝓁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏

𝜂 = 1 − 𝜎 = min

𝑆 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼

{ 𝑚𝑏

}

, 1

𝑆

.

(50)

depositors after a run in the DM is then given by

𝑚𝑏
𝑆 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
1 − 𝜃

𝑆 + 𝜒𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )

.

(54)

In ZLB and PLI equilibria, banks charge a redemption penalty
Lemma 1.
if and only if 𝛿𝓁 < 1, i.e. if and only if the government imposes a discount
on its asset purchases. In FLI equilibria, banks charge a redemption penalty
if and only if discounts are sufficiently high.

Using (54), we can now derive the conditions under which emergency
liquidity (i) stops a run once it has been detected and (ii) prevents runs
from starting in the first place. A run stops once it has been detected if
and only if

Proof. From (50), we get

𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆

≤

𝑚𝑏
𝑆 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
1 − 𝜃

𝑆 + 𝜒𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )

,

(55)

𝜂 < 1 ⇔ 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝛿𝓁𝓁𝑏
𝑆 = 𝑚𝑏
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝓁𝑏

𝑆 + 𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝓁𝑏
𝑆 + 𝑏𝑏

𝑆 ) < 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 .
𝑆 + 𝑏𝑏

Recall that 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 ) in ZLB and PLI equilibria and
≤ 𝑚𝑏
𝑑𝐼
𝑆 ) in FLI equilibria, with strict inequality
𝑆
except for a knife-edge case. Together with condition (51) and the fact
that 𝛿𝑏

≥ 𝛿𝓁, the result in Lemma 1 follows. ■

(51)

The redemption penalty in (50) ensures that even if patient de-
positors continue withdrawing after the penalty is imposed, banks can
pay out all remaining 1 − 𝜃 depositors without running out of funds.
Therefore, regardless of whether the run stops once the penalty is
imposed, the aggregate amount of cash paid out to impatient depositors
in a run equals24

𝑀 𝑅𝐸 = 𝜃 [𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)] 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 .

(52)

i.e. if and only if patient depositors are better off not withdrawing in
the DM once the redemption penalty is imposed. Next, the provision of
emergency liquidity prevents runs from starting in the first place if and
only if

≤

𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑚𝑏
𝑆 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
1 − 𝜃

𝑆 + 𝜒𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )

,

(56)

i.e. if and only if patient depositors are better off not withdrawing their
entire deposit in the DM before a redemption penalty is imposed, given
that emergency liquidity will be provided in a run. As is clear from
condition (56), whether emergency liquidity prevents runs boils down
to whether it prevents a (too large) drop in loan repayments, 𝜒, in case
of a run.

Next, we denote 𝜏𝑏 and 𝜏𝓁 as the share of banks’ bond and loan
holdings sold to the government, and we let  ∈ {0, 1} be an indicator
variable that equals one if the run continues after a measure 𝜃 of
depositors has withdrawn. Banks’ asset sales are such that

In ZLB and PLI equilibria, emergency liquidity prevents runs
Lemma 2.
if and only if 𝜒 = 1, i.e. if and only if loan defaults in case of a run are
avoided completely. In FLI equilibria, emergency liquidity prevents runs if
and only if 𝜒 is sufficiently high.

𝜂(1−𝜃) [𝜃 + (1 − 𝜃)] 𝑑𝐼

𝑆 = (𝑚𝑏

𝑆 −𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 )+𝜏𝑏𝛿𝑏(1+𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏

𝑆 +𝜏𝓁𝛿𝓁(1+𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏

𝑆 , (53)

where the LHS equals the money needed to meet additional with-
drawals once the run has been detected, and the RHS equals excess
reserves plus the money obtained from selling assets to the government.
In the following, we assume without loss of generality that 𝜏𝑏 = 𝜏𝓁 =
𝜃 + (1 − 𝜃), i.e. the fraction of bonds and loans sold to the government
equals the fraction of remaining depositors that continue withdraw-
ing once the run is detected. Banks’ CM payout to non-withdrawing

23 The penalty in (50) is the lowest one that may potentially stop the run.
If banks set a lower 𝜎 (i.e. a higher 𝜂), then a run cannot be stopped once
it has started since the depositors at the end of the queue receive nothing in
the DM and also nothing in the CM (the bank has sold all its assets before all
depositors are served).

24 We limit our attention to cases where the discounts, and hence the
redemption penalty, are sufficiently small that impatient depositors prefer to
withdraw in the DM even if they are subject to the penalty.

Proof. The result in Lemma 2 follows directly from condition (56)
together with the fact that in ZLB and PLI equilibria, we have 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 =
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝓁𝑏
𝑚𝑏
𝑆 + (1 +
𝑆 + 𝑏𝑏
𝑖𝑆 )(𝓁𝑏

𝑆 ), while in FLI equilibria, we have 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 ), with strict inequality except for a knife-edge case. ■

𝑆 + 𝑏𝑏

≤ 𝑚𝑏

𝑆

The degree to which emergency liquidity stabilises loan repayments
in a run depends on the degree to which it stabilises impatient de-
positors’ purchasing power in the DM relative to the steady state. As
is rather obvious, we get from (50) and (52) that the government
can always prevent a fall in impatient depositors’ nominal purchasing
power by buying assets from banks at face value (i.e. 𝛿𝑏 = 𝛿𝓁 =
1), in which case banks can repay all outstanding deposits in a run
without charging a redemption penalty. However, since the injection
of emergency liquidity may be inflationary, this does not guarantee
that impatient depositors’ real purchasing power is maintained. A fall
in impatient depositors’ real purchasing power, in turn, can mean that
some entrepreneurs prefer not to work in the DM and default on their

11 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

loans. The effect of emergency liquidity on inflation is thus key, and
we will turn to this question next.

Emergency liquidity and inflation. To find out how emergency liq-
uidity affects inflation, we need to determine its effect on the govern-
ment’s total nominal liabilities. At the beginning of the CM following
the intervention in the DM, after entrepreneurs have repaid their loans,
the government’s outstanding nominal liabilities equal

𝑀𝑆 + [𝜏𝑏𝛿𝑏(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏
+(1 − 𝜏𝑏)(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + 𝜏𝓁𝛿𝓁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 ] − 𝜏𝓁𝜁𝜒(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝐵𝑆 − 𝑏𝑏
𝑆 ).

𝑆

(57)

The first two terms in (57) are the total money in circulation after
the injection of emergency liquidity in the DM, the third term is the
money that the government receives back in the beginning of the CM
from maturing loans purchased in the DM, and the last two terms
are government bonds held by banks and households, respectively.
Combining (57) with (48), we obtain25

{

= max

1 +

1 + 𝜋
1 + 𝜋𝑆

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝛿𝓁 − 𝜁𝜒)𝜏𝓁𝓁𝑏

𝑆 − (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(1 − 𝛿𝑏)𝜏𝑏𝑏𝑏

𝑆

𝑀𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝐵𝑆

}

, 1

.

(58)

It is immediate from (58) that the provision of emergency liquidity can
only be inflationary if 𝜁𝜒 < 𝛿𝓁, i.e. if the money that the government
receives back from maturing loans is less than what it paid for these
loans. Put differently, emergency liquidity can only be inflationary if
the government makes a loss with its intervention. If the intervention is
not loss-making, then the amount of money withdrawn from circulation
when assets mature is at least as large as the amount injected in the
run, and the provision of emergency liquidity does not lead to a lasting
increase in nominal government liabilities.

A result that will be useful in the following analysis is that in
equilibrium, an increase in inflation – with its associated decrease in
impatient depositors’ real purchasing power – goes in hand with a
decrease in the real price of the DM good:

Lemma 3. The real DM price, 𝜌, is a strictly decreasing function of 𝜋.

The next result states that there is a critical threshold for 𝛿𝓁 above
which the government makes a loss with its loan purchases, and the
threshold is increasing in the government’s efficiency in collecting loan
repayments:

Proposition 9. There exists a threshold 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ∈ (0, 1] such that 𝜁𝜒 < 𝛿𝓁
if and only if 𝛿𝓁 > 𝛿𝓁(𝜁). The threshold 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) is strictly increasing in 𝜁,
≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁), then 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 , i.e. emergency liquidity is
with 𝛿𝓁(1) = 1. If 𝛿𝓁
non-inflationary.

One implication of Proposition 9 is that the government never
makes a loss with its intervention if it is as efficient as banks in
collecting loan repayments. The result that the provision of emergency
liquidity is never loss-making when 𝛿𝓁 is set sufficiently low is not
obvious a priori. While reducing 𝛿𝓁 means that the government buys
loans at a lower price, it can also mean that banks need to impose
a higher redemption penalty, which causes a fall in aggregate DM
spending and thereby leads to more defaults on the loans purchased
by the government. However, note that in the steady state, only a
fraction of entrepreneurs’ DM revenue goes towards loan repayments
since entrepreneurs keep a share of their revenue as compensation for
their labour effort. Therefore, as long as the share of entrepreneurs’
revenue going to loan repayments remains constant (which is the case
when inflation remains constant), a given decrease in aggregate DM

25 In case the government makes a profit with its intervention, we assume
it puts these profits back into circulation as money, which prevents the
intervention from being deflationary.

spending translates into a smaller decrease in aggregate loan repay-
ments. As a result, setting 𝛿𝓁 below 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) never leads to net losses for
the government.

Non-inflationary emergency liquidity. We now consider the case
≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁), which means the provision
where the government sets 𝛿𝓁
of emergency liquidity is not inflationary. Whether non-inflationary
emergency liquidity stops and prevents runs depends on its effect on
loan repayments in a run, 𝜒. From (52) together with our result in
Proposition 2, we have that with non-inflationary emergency liquidity,

𝜒 =

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

= 𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃),

(59)

i.e. the higher the penalty on DM redemptions, the more defaults occur.
Defaults are avoided only if banks do not charge a penalty (𝜂 = 1).
The following result shows that runs can always be stopped with the
provision of non-inflationary emergency liquidity:

Proposition 10. Emergency liquidity with 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) stops runs.

≤ 𝑚𝑏

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) and 𝛿𝑏 are such that
Proof. Suppose first that the discounts 𝛿𝓁
banks do not need to impose a redemption penalty, i.e. 𝜂 = 1. By (59),
this implies 𝜒 = 1, in which case condition (55) is evidently fulfilled
since 𝑑𝐼
𝑆 ). Suppose next that the discounts are such
𝑆
that banks need to impose a redemption penalty, i.e. 𝜂 < 1. Substituting
for 𝜂 using (50), condition (55) then becomes 𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏
𝑆 + 𝜒𝓁𝑏
𝑆 .
≤ 1, a sufficient condition that runs are stopped is that 𝜒 ≥ 𝛿𝓁,
Since 𝛿𝑏
which, by Proposition 9, is the case when 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁). ■

𝑆 +(1+𝑖𝑆 )(𝓁𝑏

𝑆 + 𝛿𝓁𝓁𝑏

𝑆 +𝑏𝑏

≤ 𝑏𝑏

𝑆

The result in Proposition 10 is closely related to the fact that, as
already discussed above, a given decrease in DM spending translates
into a smaller decrease in loan repayments when inflation remains
constant. Therefore, even if the discounts are such that banks need
to impose a redemption penalty – which leaves impatient depositors
with less cash to spend and thereby causes a certain amount of loan
defaults – the losses on the loans held by banks are always smaller than
the redemption penalty. This in turn means that patient depositors are
better off withdrawing in the CM than paying the redemption penalty
in the DM.

Let us now turn to the question whether non-inflationary emergency
liquidity can prevent runs from starting in the first place. From (59), we
know that defaults in a run increase in the redemption penalty, which
in turn increases in the discounts charged by the government on its
asset purchases. Therefore, to minimise the incentive to run with non-
inflationary emergency liquidity, discounts should be set to the lowest
levels consistent with preventing losses, i.e. 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) and 𝛿𝑏 = 1. This
leads to the following result:

In ZLB and PLI equilibria, non-inflationary emergency
Proposition 11.
liquidity can prevent runs if and only if 𝜁 = 1. In FLI equilibria with
≤ ̄, non-inflationary emergency liquidity can prevent runs if and only

𝑆
if,26

𝜁 ≥ 𝜁 , where 𝜁 solves

𝛿𝓁(𝜁) = 1 −

𝜃𝜅∗ + 𝜌𝑆
(𝜃𝜅∗)2𝑞𝑆

[

𝑆 − (1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆

] . (60)

Let us briefly elaborate on the result in Proposition 11. Consider first
ZLB and PLI equilibria, for which we know from Lemma 2 that runs
are only prevented if emergency liquidity avoids any loan defaults. We
also know from Lemma 1 that in ZLB and PLI equilibria, any strictly

26 Recall that if 

𝑆 > ̄, not all assets in the economy are held by banks. As
in Proposition 4 whether banks are fragile then depends additionally on how
illiquid assets are allocated between households and banks; for a given 𝜁, banks
are more (less) likely to be fragile if they hold a large share of outstanding
loans (bonds).

12 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

positive discounts on asset purchases force banks to charge a redemp-
tion penalty, which, by (59), means that there will be defaults. As a
result, non-inflationary liquidity can only prevent runs in ZLB in PLI
equilibria if the government purchases assets at face value (𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1).
From (58), we know that this is only non-inflationary if the government
makes no losses on its loan purchases, which, by Proposition 9, requires
that the government be as efficient as banks in collecting loan repay-
ments (𝜁 = 1). Consider next FLI equilibria, for which Proposition 11
states that runs can be prevented with non-inflationary emergency
liquidity as long as the government is sufficiently efficient in collecting
loan repayments.27 In FLI equilibria, banks have a buffer allowing them
to absorb some discounts on asset purchases without having to charge
a redemption penalty, and also to absorb some loan defaults without
becoming susceptible to runs. It is therefore possible for the government
to impose strictly positive discounts on loan purchases in FLI equilibria
without making the banking system fragile, as long as the discounts are
not too high.

Inflationary emergency liquidity. We now turn to the case where the
government sets 𝛿𝓁 > 𝛿𝓁(𝜁), which means the provision of emergency
liquidity can be inflationary. In particular, the question arises whether
inflationary emergency liquidity can prevent runs in cases where non-
inflationary emergency liquidity fails to do so due to the required
discount on loan purchases.

Recall that whether emergency liquidity prevents runs comes down
to whether it averts a (too large) fall in loan repayments, 𝜒, in case of a
run. From (31), we know that 𝜒 depends on (i) the total nominal spend-
ing of impatient depositors, 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 , and (ii) the share of entrepreneurs’
revenue available for loan repayments, 𝛼, which in turn is a function
of the real DM price, 𝜌. Since emergency liquidity can always stabilise
nominal spending of impatient depositors by setting 𝛿𝑏 = 𝛿𝓁 = 1, the
key question is how inflation affects 𝛼. From Lemma 3, we know that
an increase in inflation implies a fall in 𝜌. We then obtain the following
result:

If the capital share 𝛼(𝜌) is non-increasing in 𝜌, then
Proposition 12.
emergency liquidity with 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1 ensures 𝜒 = 1 and thus prevents runs.
If 𝛼(𝜌) is strictly increasing in 𝜌, then emergency liquidity cannot prevent
runs if 𝜁 < 1 and the economy is in a ZLB or PLI equilibrium.

Proposition 12 tells us that stabilising nominal DM demand is suf-
ficient to eliminate loan defaults as long as an increase in inflation
– with the attendant decrease in 𝜌 – does not lead to a fall in the
capital share.28 What is key for this result is that inflation is a double-
edged sword for entrepreneurs: on the one hand, inflation reduces
impatient depositors’ real purchasing power, but on the other hand, it
also reduces entrepreneurs’ real debt burden. Since these two effects
are proportional, inflation does not negatively affect entrepreneurs’
incentives to produce in the DM and repay debt as long as it does not
lead to a decrease in 𝛼. Conversely, if inflation does lead to a decrease
in 𝛼, then inflation inevitably goes in hand with some loan defaults; and
if banks have no buffer to absorb such losses, as is the case in ZLB and
PLI equilibria, inflationary emergency liquidity cannot prevent runs.29
To see how 𝛼 moves with changes in 𝜌 (and hence with changes in
𝜋), recall first from Section 5 that a fall in 𝜌 implies a fall in DM output

27 From (28), we have 

𝑆 > (1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆 and hence 𝜁 < 1 in FLI equilibria

except for a knife-edge case where 𝜁 = 1.

28 The notion that preventing runs may require the central bank to commit
to an inflationary policy in the event of a run (off the equilibrium path) is also
found in Schilling et al. (2024). They highlight that such policies may not be
credible if increases in inflation negatively enter the central bank’s objective
function.

29 In FLI equilibria, banks have some buffer to absorb losses on their loans;
runs may then be prevented with inflationary emergency liquidity even if
inflation leads to a decrease in 𝛼, as long as the decrease is not too large.

13 

per active entrepreneur, 𝑞𝑒. Since entrepreneurs’ capital stock is fixed
at 𝑘𝑆 , any change in 𝑞𝑒 is entirely due to a change in entrepreneurs’
hours worked, ℎ. How 𝛼 changes with 𝜌 thus depends on how 𝛼 changes
when entrepreneurs alter production by varying ℎ given 𝑘𝑆 . This in
turn depends on the properties of the DM production function; with a
Cobb–Douglas production function, for instance, 𝛼 is constant.30

Real loan contracts. To derive the above result that inflationary
emergency liquidity can eliminate runs if 𝛼(𝜌) is weakly decreasing, it
was important that inflation reduces entrepreneurs’ real debt burden.
This raises the question whether inflationary emergency liquidity can
still prevent runs if loan contracts are denominated in real terms, in
which case the gross nominal repayment on a loan 𝓁 equals 1+𝜋
(1 +
1+𝜋𝑆
𝑖𝑆 )𝓁. Somewhat counterintuitively, inflationary emergency liquidity is
more effective in preventing runs when loan contracts are real, in the
sense that stabilising nominal DM demand is sufficient to eliminate runs
regardless of the details of the DM production function:

Proposition 13.
gency liquidity with 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1 prevents runs.

If loan contracts are denominated in real terms, emer-

To understand this surprising result, recall that (as we showed in the
proof of Proposition 2) the equilibrium real DM price cannot deviate
from its steady state value, 𝜌𝑆 , when entrepreneurs’ real debt burden
is fixed: 𝜌 < 𝜌𝑆 would imply that entrepreneurs’ payoff from producing
any amount 𝑞𝑒 > 0 is negative, while 𝜌 > 𝜌𝑆 is not possible either,
since this would imply higher DM production than in the steady state,
which violates DM market clearing given that impatient depositors’ real
purchasing power cannot increase in a run. Therefore, with real loan
contracts, any fall in DM output caused by inflation occurs entirely
on the extensive margin, while production of each non-defaulting
entrepreneur remains the same as in the steady state. This means that
inflation does not affect the capital share 𝛼(𝜌), which in turn implies
that banks’ total revenue on their loan portfolio does not suffer as long
as policy stabilises aggregate nominal DM spending; any decrease in
nominal repayments by non-producing entrepreneurs is exactly offset
by an increase in nominal repayments of producing entrepreneurs. The
fact that policy prevents losses on banks’ loan portfolios then removes
any incentive to run on the banks in the first place.

8. Empirical relevance

Even though we view our paper primarily as a theoretical contri-
bution, we also want to discuss briefly how we interpret the relevance
of our mechanism in the empirical context. In our model, depositors
withdraw cash from banks in a run, which hinders economic activity
in sectors relying on cash transactions. Therefore, our model may be
particularly relevant to cash intensive economies. In line with that, we
think there is ample anecdotal evidence for the mechanism highlighted
in our paper during the three major financial crises in the U.S. National
Banking Era (1864-1913) in 1873, 1893 and 1907.31

During each of these episodes, New York City banks suspended
convertibility of deposits into cash, which quickly led to suspension
throughout the country. In all three crises, the suspension lasted for
several weeks and in the case of 1907 for two months. Contemporary
reports on the negative effect of suspension on real economic activity
abound. In his classic study on the National Banking Era crises, Sprague
(1910) lists for 1873 numerous excerpts from local newspapers report-
ing that firms had to temporarily curtail production after suspension

30 More generally, it can be shown that if 𝑓 (𝑘, ℎ) is a constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) production function with elasticity of substitution 𝜖, then
𝛼′(𝜌) > 0 if and only if 𝜖 < 1.

31 Although many transactions could be settled with bank checks and
for wage payments and retail

the time, cash was dominant

drafts at
transactions (James et al., 2013).

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

was imposed, in large part due to their inability of obtaining cash
for wage payments (pp. 71–74).32 For 1893 as well, Sprague (1910,
pp. 199–203) describes the deleterious effects of suspension, includ-
ing a steep drop in railway earnings after suspension was imposed
(which Sprague attributes in large part to the paralysing effects of
the cash shortage) and newspaper reports of temporary factory clo-
sures due to an inability to make collections and obtain cash to meet
payrolls. Sprague (1910) concludes that ‘There is [..] evidence that
suspension was a potent factor accentuating the depression in trade
in the month of August [1893].’ (p.200) and reports a rapid business
recovery once the restrictions were lifted, which in his view ‘[..] affords
striking evidence of the disturbing effect which had been brought about
by suspension.’ (p.203). Similar accounts can be found for 1907. For
instance, the Comptroller of the Currency (1907) states with regard
to the 1907 suspension that ‘The result was to at once precipitate a
most serious bank crisis and a famine of currency for pay rolls and
other necessary cash transactions.’ (p.70) and notes further that ‘The
greatest hardship to business generally has been the derangement of
the machinery for making collections and remittances. As can readily
be seen, this has interfered with every kind and class of business and led
to great curtailment of business operations of every kind. Factories have
suspended, workmen have been thrown out of employment, orders
have been cancelled, the moving of crops has been greatly retarded
and interfered with and exports have fallen off at a time of the year
when they should be at their highest.’ (pp. 70–71).33

Furthermore, Sprague (1910) provides evidence that many indi-
viduals and businesses stored money in safes or deposit boxes during
the National Banking Era panics. The Comptroller of the Currency
(1907) states with regard to the 1907 crisis that ‘Money has been
withdrawn and hoarded by individuals, corporations, and [..] by the
banks themselves, all of whom at once drew and held all the money of
any kind they could obtain, often really in larger sums than needed.’
(p.70).34 These accounts of currency hoarding on the one hand and of
widespread cash shortages on the other hand are consistent with the
mechanism in our model, in which a run leads patient depositors to
withdraw money and store it, while impatient depositors curtail their
consumption due to the difficulty of obtaining cash from banks.

Our model predicts that this misallocation of liquidity has negative
effects on output, which in turn leads to losses on bank assets. As
described in Friedman and Schwartz (1963, pp. 163–164) and James
et al. (2013), contemporary observers during the National Banking
Era overall had a very negative view of restrictions on cash with-
drawals and often considered this measure to make the situation worse
rather than better. Nevertheless, how severe the effect of suspension
on economic activity was is difficult to assess due to a lack of relevant
high-frequency data (see, e.g. Wicker (2000) on this point). To the
best of our knowledge, the most ambitious attempt to estimate the
effect of the restriction on cash payouts on economic activity during
the National Banking Era crises was undertaken by James et al. (2013).

32 To give just one example, the October 13, 1873 issue of the New York
Tribune reports that ‘A number of Frankford cotton mills are running on half
time in consequence of falling off of orders and difficulty of procuring currency
to pay wages.’

33 Similarly, in their account of the 1907 crisis, Friedman and Schwartz
(1963, p.156) write: ‘Simultaneously with this suspension, the contraction
became more severe. Production, freight car loadings, bank clearings and the
like all declined sharply and the liabilities of commercial failures increased
sharply. Restriction of payments by banks was lifted in early 1908, and a few
months later recovery got underway.’ Despite these negative effects, Friedman
and Schwartz famously argued that suspension of cash withdrawals was less
bad than the large scale asset liquidations undertaken by banks during the
Great Depression (which is not inconsistent with our model).

34 ‘Hoarding’ by banks refers to the fact that many (country) banks increased
their excess reserves during the panic. For a detailed account of currency
hoarding by the public during the 1907 panic, see Andrew (1908).

They show that various proxies for economic activity display a clear
drop after cash withdrawals were restricted, and once restrictions were
lifted, they indicate a recovery or at least stabilisation. The econometric
analysis in James et al. (2013) finds an independent negative effect
of suspension on economic activity, consistent with the qualitative
accounts of earlier writers. Finally, regarding the effect of suspension
of deposit convertibility on bank health, Wicker (2000, Chapter 4)
documents a high incidence of bank failures in 1893 even after con-
vertibility was suspended, which he contrasts (on p.82) with Friedman
and Schwartz’s view that suspension of cash withdrawals should put
a halt to bank failures. Jaremski and Wheelock (2023) document that
the 1907 panic with its prolonged period of suspension was followed –
with some delay – by a significant increase in bank closures. Overall,
the historical discussion and more recent analysis of these episodes
indicate that the suspensions adversely affected economic activity and
correspondingly bank health, precisely as in our model.

We believe that our model can be relevant in a modern context
as well for several reasons. First, even in modern times there are
economies, including some of the larger emerging markets, that still
operate to a significant degree on a cash basis (Bech et al., 2018;
World Bank, 2021). A relatively recent example is Argentina, where
a partial suspension of cash withdrawals from banks (dubbed the cor-
ralito) was introduced in 2001 in response to a countrywide bank run.35
Many observers considered the suspension to be highly disruptive to the
Argentinian economy. For instance, Kiguel (2011) states that ‘Under
this system [of partial suspension], people could only transfer funds
within the banking system but they were not allowed to get cash, except
in small amounts. This measure resulted in a monetary crunch and led
to a collapse of economic activity – especially in the informal sector
which mainly works on cash [..]’ (p.7). Similarly, Saxton (2003) states
with reference to the Argentinian deposit freeze that ‘The economy
turned from recession to depression as people and businesses could not
make payments.’ (p.12). Daseking et al. (2004) document a veritable
collapse of economic activity in the month after the freeze was imposed
and (together with some other measures taken) consider the corralito
to ‘have exacerbated the macroeconomic consequences of the crisis
and complicated its resolution.’ (p. 42). The Argentinian case suggests
that even in a more modern context, restricting deposit convertibility
can disrupt economic activity in a similar way to how we model it in
our paper. It is not too far-fetched to assume that this has negative
ramifications for bank assets, in which case the main ingredients of
our mechanism would be present. Indeed, Gutierrez and Montes-Negret
(2004) connect the negative effects of the corralito directly to bank
health, writing: ‘[..] the deposit freeze not only jammed the payment
system, but also destroyed the chain of payments in the economy,
leading to an additional deterioration of the banks’ loan portfolios.’
(p.16).

Even in present-day economies in which the financial infrastructure
allows almost all payments to be made directly via deposit transfers
without going through cash, a version of our mechanism might still
apply. In principle, one might think that a suspension of deposit con-
vertibility into cash should have little effect on economic activity in
such a financial system as long as deposit transfers are still possible.
However, this is based on the assumption that sellers accept payments
in deposits whose convertibility is suspended; and in a situation in
which the banking system’s health is in question, this may not be the
case. If sufficiently many sellers refuse to be paid in deposits, then
the misallocation of cash caused by a bank run may lead to a drop
in economic activity, which in turn leads to losses on bank loans,
justifying both the run by patient depositors and sellers’ reluctance to
accept payment in non-convertible deposits. While a full analysis of this
case is beyond the scope of this paper, this shows how our mechanism

35 For a detailed description of the Argentinian deposit freeze, see Gutierrez

and Montes-Negret (2004).

14 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

could also play out in a setting where payments via deposit transfers
are feasible.

An additional reason why we think our model could be relevant in
the future is Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC), the introduction
of which is currently pondered by many of the leading central banks.
If CBDC replaces other (electronic) payment methods and becomes the
sole widely accepted final means of payment, and households routinely
convert bank deposits into CBDC to make payments, then one can
simply reinterpret the money in our model as CBDC. And if CBDC
coexists with other payment methods that allow transactions to be
settled directly via deposit transfers, then a self-fulfilling process like
the one described above, where doubts about bank solvency lead sellers
to insist on payment in CBDC, may still be possible; indeed, one may
speculate that CBDC makes this somewhat more likely due to low
transaction costs for sellers of switching to a CBDC-only policy in a
crisis.

Finally, we also want to highlight situations where our mechanism
may not apply, even if we take it as given that most transactions are
settled with cash. First, in our model, it is crucial that bank depositors
and the receivers of bank loans operate in the same real markets; only
in this case can restrictions on deposit withdrawals have a significant
negative effect on the revenues of bank borrowers. Hence, if there is
a disconnect between the origin of depositors and bank assets, our
mechanism becomes less relevant, e.g. if banks have an international
depositor base but invest primarily in the domestic economy or vice
versa.36 Second, our model is arguably most relevant for runs that are
truly systemic in nature. When only a subset of banks is hit by a run,
and both depositors and borrowers of the affected banks constitute a
relatively small part of the economy, then it is less likely that the neg-
ative repercussions of withdrawal restrictions imposed by the affected
banks on the revenues of borrowers from the same banks are strong
enough to trigger the self-fulfilling process described in our model.

9. Conclusion

In this paper, we have studied systemic bank runs in a general
equilibrium banking model in which the return on bank assets depends
on banks’ liquidity provision to households. In our setup, households
redeem bank deposits to purchase goods from entrepreneurs, which in
turn obtain loans from banks. A run leads to a misallocation of liquidity
in the sense that money is withdrawn by patient households who store
it, which means less money is available for impatient households to
buy goods. The fact that impatient households have less money to
spend then reduces demand in the goods market, which causes some
entrepreneurs to default on their bank loans, rationalising the run by
patient households. A key insight is that deposit freezes do not protect
the value of bank assets in a run: a freeze reduces consumption demand
by impatient households, leading to an economic downturn and losses
on bank assets. For this reason, deposit freezes may not be a suitable
means to eliminate run equilibria, even in the absence of aggregate
uncertainty and commitment problems.

While our model highlights the limitations of redemption restric-
tions as tools to prevent runs, we have also shown that in some cases,
run equilibria can be eliminated by properly calibrated redemption
penalties combined with partial deposit freezes. Intuitively, the diffi-
culty when calibrating these measures is that on the one hand, they
need to be strict enough to deter patient households from withdrawing,
but on the other hand, they should allow sufficient withdrawals by im-
patient households so that economic activity does not fall too sharply.
Furthermore, we have shown that government-provided emergency

36 A possible example of this is Cyprus, where a deposit freeze was imposed
in 2013. At the time, a large part of deposits in Cypriot banks were held by
non-eurozone residents, while bank borrowers were predominantly domestic
and Greek residents (European Commission, 2013).

liquidity can eliminate runs if it averts a fall in the real purchasing
power of impatient households in a run. Even if the intervention is
inflationary, it can in some cases still prevent runs, depending on how
inflation affects entrepreneurs’ incentives to produce and repay their
bank loans.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Lukas Altermatt: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Hugo van Buggenum: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Lukas Voellmy: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Replication Package: Systemic Bank Runs without Aggregate Risk: Ho
w a Misallocation of Liquidity May Trigger a Solvency Crisis (Original
data) (Mendeley Data)

Appendix. Additional derivations and proofs

A.1. Deriving households’ problem in the economy without banks

Denoting 𝑉𝑡(𝑚, 𝓁, 𝑏) as the households’ CM value function in period

𝑡, and taking it as given that 𝑝𝑡𝑞𝑡 = 𝑚𝑡, we have:
{

𝑉𝑡(𝑚, 𝓁, 𝑏) =

max
𝑡 ,𝑙𝑡,𝑚𝑡,𝓁𝑡,𝑏𝑡}

{𝑥ℎ

𝑈 (𝑥ℎ

]
𝑡 ) − 𝑙𝑡 + 𝜃 [𝑢(𝑚𝑡∕𝑝𝑡) + 𝛽𝑉𝑡+1(0, 𝓁𝑡, 𝑏𝑡)
}

+ (1 − 𝜃)𝛽𝑉𝑡+1(𝑚𝑡, 𝓁𝑡, 𝑏𝑡)
𝑙𝑡 = 𝑥ℎ
(𝑚𝑡 − 𝑚) + (𝓁𝑡 − (1 + 𝑖𝓁,𝑡)𝓁)
].
+ (𝑏𝑡 − (1 + 𝑖𝑏,𝑡)𝑏)

𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡 + 𝜙𝑡

[

𝑠.𝑡.

Inserting the households’ flow budget constraint into the objective
function, we can rewrite the value function as:

𝑉𝑡(𝑚, 𝓁, 𝑏) = 𝜙𝑡

+

[𝑚 + (1 + 𝑖𝓁,𝑡)𝓁 + (1 + 𝑖𝑏,𝑡)𝑏]
𝑈 (𝑥ℎ

𝑡 ) − 𝑥ℎ

{

max
𝑡 ,𝑚𝑡,𝓁𝑡,𝑏𝑡}

{𝑥ℎ

− 𝛥𝑡

𝑡 − 𝜙𝑡(𝑚𝑡 + 𝓁𝑡 + 𝑏𝑡)

+ 𝜃𝑢(𝑚𝑡∕𝑝𝑡) + 𝛽[𝜃𝑉𝑡+1(0, 𝓁𝑡, 𝑏𝑡) + (1 − 𝜃)𝑉𝑡+1(𝑚𝑡, 𝓁𝑡, 𝑏𝑡)

]}
.

By the usual envelope result, quasilinear preferences in the CM imply
that CM value functions are linear in asset holdings:

𝜕𝑉𝑡(𝑚, 𝓁, 𝑏)
𝜕𝑚

= 𝜙𝑡,

𝜕𝑉𝑡(𝑚, 𝓁, 𝑏)
𝜕𝓁

= 𝜙𝑡(1 + 𝑖𝓁,𝑡),

𝜕𝑉𝑡(𝑚, 𝓁, 𝑏)
𝜕𝑏

= 𝜙𝑡(1 + 𝑖𝑏,𝑡).

Moving these one period forward and plugging them back into the
above equation allows to rewrite households’ problem as (10).

A.2. Confirming that entrepreneurs repay loans in the steady state

In the entrepreneurs’ problem (12), we have implicitly taken it as
given that entrepreneurs choose to work in the DM and repay their
loans; we will now verify that this is indeed the case. Inserting the
constraint into the objective function, we can reformulate problem (12)
as

𝜌𝑡𝑞𝑒

𝑡 − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒

𝑡 , 𝑘𝑡) −

1 + ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1
1 + 𝜄𝑡+1

𝑘𝑡.

max
{𝑘𝑡,𝑞𝑒
𝑡 }

15 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

Given that entrepreneurs have invested 𝑘𝑡 in the CM, they are willing
to work in the DM and repay their loan if and only if
1 + ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1
1 + 𝜄𝑡+1

𝑡 − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒

𝑡 , 𝑘𝑡) −

max
𝑞𝑒
𝑡

𝜌𝑡𝑞𝑒

(A.1)

≥ 0,

𝑘𝑡

i.e. if and only if the maximised return from production is enough
to cover the cost of the loan and the disutility of working. If (A.1)
is violated, entrepreneurs are better of not working at all in the DM
and defaulting on their entire loan. To confirm that (A.1) is slack in
equilibrium, recall first that since 𝑓 is homogeneous of degree one, 𝑐 is
also homogeneous of degree one. Using 𝜅𝑡
𝑡 , we can thus rewrite
entrepreneurs’ objective function as

≡ 𝑘𝑡∕𝑞𝑒

)

]

−

𝑞𝑒
𝑡

[
𝜌𝑡 − 𝑐 (

1, 𝜅𝑡

1 + ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1
1 + 𝜄𝑡+1
and we can rewrite entrepreneurs’ FOC for 𝑞𝑒
𝜌𝑡 = 𝑐 (

(
1, 𝜅𝑡

− 𝜅𝑡𝑐𝑘

1, 𝜅𝑡

) .

𝜅𝑡

)

,

𝑡 , (14), as

Inserting the FOCs (13) and (A.3) into the objective function (A.2), we
obtain that the optimised value of the objective function equals zero.
Given that 𝑘𝑡 is chosen optimally, we thus have

{

max
𝑞𝑒
𝑡

𝜌𝑡𝑞𝑒

𝑡 − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒

𝑡 , 𝑘𝑡) −

}

1 + ̃𝑖𝓁,𝑡+1
1 + 𝜄𝑡+1

𝑘𝑡

= 0,

which confirms our initial conjecture that (A.1) is slack. More precisely,
(A.1) is just slack, with the Lagrange multiplier being zero while the
constraint holds at equality. This reflects the fact that entrepreneurs
make zero profits in equilibrium, which in turn results from the CRS
property of 𝑓 (𝑘, ℎ).

A.3. The optimality conditions of the bank’s problem

The Lagrangian of the bank’s problem writes:

 = 𝜃𝑢

)

(

𝑑𝐼
𝑡
𝑝𝑡

+ 𝛽(1 − 𝜃)𝜙𝑡+1𝑑𝑃

𝑡+1 − 𝜙𝑡(𝑚𝑏

𝑡 + 𝑎𝑏
𝑡 )

+ 𝛽𝜙𝑡+1
+ (1 − 𝜃)𝜓𝑡(𝑑𝑃

[ 𝜁𝑡(𝑚𝑡 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑡 ) + 𝜉𝑡(𝑚𝑡 + 𝑎𝑏
𝑡+1 − 𝑑𝐼
𝑡 )

] .

𝑡 (1 + 𝑖𝑡+1) − 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑡 − (1 − 𝜃)𝑑𝑃

𝑡+1)

The first-order conditions are

= 𝛽𝜙𝑡+1

(

𝜁𝑡 + 𝜉𝑡 +

( 1
𝜃

)

)

,

𝜓𝑡

− 1

𝑑𝐼
𝑡 ∶

𝑢′(𝑞𝑡)
𝑝𝑡
𝑑𝑃
𝑡+1 ∶ 𝜉𝑡 − 𝜓𝑡 = 1,
𝑚𝑏

𝑡 ∶ 1 + 𝜄𝑡 = 𝜁𝑡 + 𝜉𝑡,
1 + 𝜄𝑡
1 + 𝑖𝑡+1

𝑎𝑏
𝑡 ∶ 𝜉𝑡

=

,

(A.4)

(A.5)

(A.6)

(A.7)

≡ 𝜙𝑡∕(𝛽𝜙𝑡+1). From (A.5)–(A.7), we obtain
where we have used 1 + 𝜄𝑡
the expressions for the Lagrange multipliers in (21). Inserting the
expressions for the multipliers into (A.4) yields Eq. (22). Finally, the
bank’s asset demand schedule (24) follows from the complementary
slackness conditions 𝜁𝑡(𝑚𝑏

𝑡 ) = 0 and 𝜓𝑡(𝑑𝑃

𝑡 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑡 ) = 0.

𝑡+1 − 𝑑𝐼

A.4. Proof that a stationary monetary equilibrium exists

As shown in the main text, 𝑖 pins down 𝜅, which in turn pins down 𝜌.
Furthermore, 𝜌 and 𝑖 together pin down 𝑞. To show that an SME in the
banking economy always exists, it remains to show that there always
exists an 𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝜄] such that condition (28) is fulfilled. Note that , 𝜌
and 𝑞 can all be expressed as continuous functions of 𝑖. From (28), we
have that an equilibrium with 𝑖 ∈ (0, 𝜄) exists iff:

𝑄(𝑖) = 1 + 𝑖 −

(1 − 𝜃)(1 + 𝜄)𝜌(𝑖)𝑞(𝑖)
(𝑖)

= 0.

(A.8)

We also have from (28) that 𝑄(0) > 0 and 𝑄(𝜄) < 0 if neither an
equilibrium with 𝑖 = 0 nor one with 𝑖 = 𝜄 exists. From the intermediate

value theorem, we then know that if there exists neither an equilibrium
with 𝑖 = 0 nor one with 𝑖 = 𝜄, then an equilibrium with 𝑖 ∈ (0, 𝜄) exists,
which proves that an equilibrium with 𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝜄] exists. As a side note,
we have that 𝑄(0) < 0 and 𝑄(𝜄) > 0 if both an equilibrium with 𝑖 = 0 and
one with 𝑖 = 𝜄 exist. It then follows again from the intermediate value
theorem that there also exists (at least one) equilibrium with 𝑖 ∈ (0, 𝜄).

A.5. Derivations of the thresholds for the penalty on early redemptions

A.5.1. Threshold to stop a run

Rewriting the condition in (42) gives

𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆

≤ (𝜂 + 𝜎)𝑑𝑃

𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎).

(A.9)

(A.2)

(A.3)

Since the right-hand side of (A.9) is strictly increasing in 𝜎 while the
left-hand side does not change in 𝜎, there is a unique threshold, denoted
𝜎(𝜂), such that condition (A.9) is fulfilled iff 𝜎 ≥ 𝜎(𝜂). Substituting for
𝑑𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎) we can rewrite condition (A.9) as:

≤ (𝜂 + 𝜎)

𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆
]

)

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

(

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

)

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

1 − 𝜆 − 𝜔(𝜂)(𝜂 + 𝜎)

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

+ 𝜔(𝜂)𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆

≥ (1 − 𝜆)𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆

[

(

⇔ 𝜎

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

[

(

− 𝜂

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

)

]

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

+ 𝜔(𝜂)𝜂𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆
(

⇔ 𝜎 ≥

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝑆 − 𝑚𝑏
𝑑𝐼

𝑆 − (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

𝑚𝑏
𝑆 − 𝜆𝑑𝐼

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

(

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

)

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

)

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆
𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

𝜂 ≡ 𝜎(𝜂).

(A.10)

Notice that 𝜎(0) = 0. Also, 𝜎(𝜂) is strictly increasing in 𝜂 iff 𝑑𝐼
𝑆

≥

(

)

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

𝓁𝑏
(1+𝑖𝑆 )
𝑆
under pure deposit freezes (see (40)).

+𝑚𝑏

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑆 , which is the condition for banks to be fragile

Furthermore, the fact that we must have 𝜎 ≤ 1 − 𝜂 means there is
an upper bound on 𝜂, denoted ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥, defined as the unique value of 𝜂
solving 𝜎(𝜂) = 1 − 𝜂. Note that setting 𝜂 ≤ ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 is a necessary condition
to stop a run. Solving for ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 gives

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 =

+ 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 − 𝜆𝑑𝐼

𝑆

(

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

)

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆
(1 − 𝜆)𝑑𝐼
𝑆
(
𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

(1 − 𝜆)𝑑𝐼
𝑆

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

= 𝜂 +

)

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

∈ (𝜂, 1),

(A.11)

where ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 < 1 follows from the fact that 𝑑𝐼
+
𝑆
𝑚𝑏
𝑆 . It follows that a run is stopped if (𝜂, 𝜎) satisfies 𝜂 ∈ [𝜂, ̃𝜂max] and
𝜎 ∈ [𝜎(𝜂), 1 − 𝜂].

≥ (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

(

)

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

A.5.2. Threshold to satisfy impatient depositors’ incentive constraint

Note first that we can reformulate condition (45) as

𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) ≥ 𝜙
1 + 𝜄

(𝜂 + 𝜎)𝑑

𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎).

(A.12)

Since the right-hand side of (A.12) is strictly increasing in 𝜎 while the
left-hand side does not change in 𝜎, there exists a unique threshold,
denoted 𝜎(𝜂), such that condition (A.12) is fulfilled iff 𝜎 ≤ 𝜎(𝜂). It will
be useful to define:
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
𝑚𝑏

𝑆 ) − (𝜆 + 𝜃(1 − 𝜆)𝜂)𝑑𝐼

𝑆 + (𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜂)𝓁𝑏

𝑆

.

(A.13)

𝑇 (𝜂) ≡

1 − 𝜆

In words, 𝑇 (𝜂) denotes banks’ per capita CM revenue in a run, given
that the run is stopped and given that the impatient depositors who
were not among the first 𝜆 to arrive withdraw fraction 𝜂 of their deposit.
‘Per capita’ means that the total revenue is divided by the measure of
depositors who did not manage to redeem before the bank imposed the

16 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

redemption penalty. Notice that we have 𝑇 ′(𝜂) = (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
Substituting for 𝑑

𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎), we can rewrite condition (A.12) as:

𝑆 − 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 < 0.37

(𝜂 + 𝜎)
(1 − 𝜃(𝜂 + 𝜎))

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝑇 (𝜂)

𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) ≥
]
𝑇 (𝜂)

[

⇔ 𝜎

𝜃𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) +

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

≤ (1 − 𝜃𝜂)𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) −

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝜂𝑇 (𝜂)

(A.14)

A.5.3. Threshold to prevent a run

Substituting for 𝑑

(1 − 𝜆)(1 − 𝜃(𝜂 + 𝜎))𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝑃
𝑅(𝜂, 𝜎) we can rewrite condition (46) as:
≤ 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 + (𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜂)𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
− ((𝜆 + 𝜃(1 − 𝜆)𝜂)𝑑𝐼
𝑆 )
[𝑚𝑏
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏
]

≥ (𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆))𝑑𝐼

𝑆 −

𝑆

⇔ 𝜎𝜃(1 − 𝜆)𝑑𝐼
𝑆

⇔ 𝜎 ≤

𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 )
𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝜃𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) +

𝑇 (𝜂)

− 𝜂 ≡ 𝜎(𝜂).

⇔ 𝜎 ≥

Note that we have 𝜎(0) = 0 and

]

(A.17)

𝑆 + 𝜆𝓁𝑏

𝑆 ))

+ (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝜆 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜂)𝓁𝑏
𝑆
[ 𝑑𝐼

𝑆 − (𝑚𝑏

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
(1 − 𝜆)𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

−

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝜂 ≡ ̂𝜎(𝜂).

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝜎′(𝜂) =

)
(𝑞𝑆 𝑇 (𝜂)𝑢′(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) − 𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 )𝑇 ′(𝜂)
(

)2

𝜃𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) +

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝑇 (𝜂)

− 1,

(A.15)

𝑞𝑆 𝑢′(0)
𝜙
𝑇 (0)
1+𝜄

with lim𝜂→0 𝜎′(𝜂) =

− 1 = +∞, which results from the fact that

𝑢(𝑞) satisfies the Inada conditions. Notice that 𝜎′(𝜂) need not be positive
everywhere on 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1). The reason is that the return to banks’ asset
portfolio increases in 𝜂 due to lower loan defaults, which makes it more
costly to give up a given share of the deposit. If this effect is strong
enough, the redemption penalty which impatient depositors are willing
to pay may decrease in 𝜂.

Next, we will show that 𝜎′′(𝜂) < 0, i.e. 𝜎(𝜂) is strictly concave on
, where 𝑓 and 𝑔 are defined by

𝑓 ′𝑔 − 𝑓 𝑔′
𝑔2

− 1, and 𝑓 ′ and 𝑔′ denote the derivatives of 𝑓 and 𝑔 w.r.t. 𝜂.

𝜂 ∈ [0, 1]. We have 𝜎′′(𝜂) =
𝜎′(𝜂) ≡ 𝑓
𝑔
We have

Note that we have ̂𝜎(0) ∈ (0, 1) and ̂𝜎′(𝜂) = −

̂𝜎′(𝜂)|
|
|
|

< 1.38

A.6. Proof of Proposition 8

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

< 0, with

Given that banks set (𝜂, 𝜎) such as to stop the run, DM output in
a run is maximised by setting 𝜂 as high as possible subject to the
relevant constraints. Since we start from the premise that runs cannot
be prevented, we can disregard constraint (46). The relevant constraints
– besides banks’ liquidity constraint – are thus (42) and (45). We
are therefore looking for values (𝜂, 𝜎) that maximise 𝜂 subject to the
constraint that 𝜎(𝜂) ≤ 𝜎 ≤ 𝜎(𝜂) with 𝜎 ∈ [0, 1 − 𝜂], and subject to the
liquidity constraint 𝜂 ≤ 𝜂.

Recall from Appendices A.5.1 and A.5.2 that 𝜎(0) = 𝜎(0) = 0, where
𝜎(𝜂) is linearly increasing in 𝜂, while 𝜎(𝜂) is strictly concave on 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1]
with lim𝜂→0 𝜎′(𝜂) = +∞. This implies that whenever there exist values
𝜂 ∈ [0, 1] for which 𝜎(𝜂) < 𝜎(𝜂), then there exists a unique strictly
positive value ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 such that 𝜎(𝜂) ≥ 𝜎(𝜂) iff 𝜂 ≤ ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥. If 𝜎(𝜂) ≥ 𝜎(𝜂)
for all 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1], we define ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 1. Next, we will show that ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 > 𝜂.
We have

𝑓 ′ =

𝜙
𝑞2
𝑆 𝑇 (𝜂)
1 + 𝜄
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
>0

[
𝜃𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) +

< 0 and

𝑢′′(𝜂𝑞𝑆 )
⏟⏟⏟
<0

𝑔′ = 2

[

]
𝑇 (𝜂)

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

]
𝑇 ′(𝜂)

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝑢′(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) +
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
>0 for 𝜂∈[0,1]

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
>0

> 0,

𝜎(𝜂) > 𝜎(𝜂)

⇔

1

𝜃 +

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝑇 (𝜂)
𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 )

>

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

(

𝜂(1 − 𝜆)𝑑𝐼
𝑆
)

𝑚𝑏
𝑆
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝓁𝑏
𝑆

𝑏𝑏
𝑆 +

+ 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 − 𝜆𝑑𝐼

𝑆

(A.18)

from which it follows that 𝜎′′(𝜂) < 0. To see why 𝑔′ > 0, note that

𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝑢′(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) +

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝑇 ′(𝜂) > 0

⇔ 𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝑢′(𝜂𝑞𝑆 ) >

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

⇔

𝑢′(𝜂𝑞𝑆 )
𝜌𝑆

> 1 −

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

(𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 − (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )
(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆
𝜃𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆

,

where we used 𝑇 ′(𝜂) = −(𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 −(1+𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏

𝑆 ), 𝑑𝐼

𝑆 = 𝑝𝑆 𝑞𝑆 and 𝜌𝑆

(A.16)

≡ 𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝑝𝑆 .

Since

> 1 in the steady state (see (14) and (25)), we know that

𝑢′(𝑞𝑆 )
𝜌𝑆

condition (A.16) is fulfilled for any 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1].

37 To see why the derivative is negative, recall that 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 equals the total
steady state DM revenue of entrepreneurs while (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏 equals their total
loan repayment in steady state. Since entrepreneurs keep part of their revenue
as compensation for their labour effort, we have 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 > (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 .

⇔ 𝑇 (𝜂) >

𝜙
1 + 𝜄

𝜂𝑑𝐼

𝑆 𝑇 (𝜂)
𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 )

𝑢(𝜂𝑞𝑆 )
𝜂𝑞𝑆

> 𝜌𝑆 ,

𝑆 = 𝑝𝑆 𝑞𝑆

where we used 𝑑𝐼
𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆 in the last step. Since 𝑢(𝑞) is
strictly concave and 𝑢(0) = 0, we have 𝑢(𝑞)∕𝑞 > 𝑢′(𝑞). Since 𝑢′(𝑞𝑆 ) > 𝜌𝑆
(see (14) and (25)), condition (A.18) is fulfilled, from which it follows
that ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 > 𝜂.

≡ 1 + 𝜄
𝜙

Finally, from Appendix A.5.1, we know that the highest value of 𝜂
consistent with 𝜎(𝜂) ≤ 1 − 𝜂, i.e. consistent with stopping a run, equals
̃𝜂max, with ̃𝜂max ∈ (𝜂, 1). It then follows that constraints (42) and (45)
can only be jointly satisfied if 𝜂 ≤ min{ ̃𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥, ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥} ∈ (𝜂, 1). The fact that
banks’ liquidity constraint requires additionally that 𝜂 ≤ 𝜂 then leads
to the result in Proposition 8.

A.7. Example with 𝝀 = 𝟎 where runs cannot be prevented

Fig. 2 shows an example where there exists no (𝜂, 𝜎) that prevents
runs, despite the fact that banks can react to runs immediately (𝜆 = 0).
The functional forms used here are the same as in the example shown in

38 See Footnote for why the absolute value of the derivative is less than

one.

17 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

Fig. 2. Example where runs cannot be prevented.

Table 2
Parameter values for Fig. 2.

𝛼

𝜈

𝜃

𝑛

0.65

0.95

0.6

0.6

𝜆

0

𝜄

0.02



0

𝑞𝑆
5.725 ∗ 10−7

𝜌𝑆

𝜅𝑆

1.886

1.251

where we used (50) to substitute for 𝜂 and made explicit the depen-
dence of 𝜂 on (𝛿𝓁, 𝛿𝑏). Denote

̂𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ≡

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏
𝜁[𝑚𝑏
𝑆 ]
𝑆 − 𝜁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑑𝐼

𝑆

(A.21)

Fig. 1, and the parameter values are given in Table 2. As in the example
of Fig. 1, parameters imply that the economy is in a ZLB equilibrium.
We can see graphically that the set of values (𝜂, 𝜎) satisfying con-
straints (42), (45) and (46) is empty. Notice that the banks’ liquidity
constraint is fulfilled for any 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1] since banks can react to runs
without delay. What is key is that impatient depositors’ willingness
to pay a redemption penalty is low, which results from the fact that
the DM utility function is close to linear. In particular, the redemption
penalty cannot be set high enough to deter patient depositors from
running, since impatient depositors would not be willing to incur
such a penalty. Nevertheless, banks can stop runs by partially freezing
deposits and charging a modest penalty on redemptions once a run
has started (grey area). DM output in a run is maximised by setting
(𝜂, 𝜎) = ( ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝜎( ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥)), where ̂𝜂𝑚𝑎𝑥 corresponds to the highest DM
payout consistent with stopping the run.

A.8. Proof of Lemma 3

From DM market clearing (30), we have that

1 + 𝜋𝑆
1 + 𝜋

[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)] = min

{ 𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)], 1

} 𝜌𝑞𝑒(𝜌)
𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑒(𝜌𝑆 )

,

(A.19)

where we used (31) to substitute for 𝜒 and (52) to substitute for
𝑀 𝑅𝐸 . Recall that 𝜂 is fixed given the discounts (𝛿𝑏, 𝛿𝓁) (see (50)). Next,
as seen in Section 5, 𝑞𝑒(𝜌) is continuous and strictly increasing in 𝜌.
}
{𝜌𝑞𝑒 − 𝑐(𝑞𝑒, 𝑘𝑆 )
Furthermore, from (33), we have 𝜌𝛼(𝜌)𝑞𝑒(𝜌) = max𝑞𝑒
,
and hence, by the envelope condition, 𝜕[𝜌𝛼(𝜌)𝑞𝑒(𝜌)]∕𝜕𝜌 = 𝑞𝑒(𝜌) > 0.
It follows from this that the RHS of (A.19) is continuous and strictly
increasing in 𝜌 (with a kink at 𝛼(𝜌)[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)]∕𝛼(𝜌𝑆 ) = 1), which
in turn means that (A.19) implicitly defines 𝜌 as a strictly decreasing
function of 𝜋.

A.9. Proof of Proposition 9

We start by defining and characterising the threshold 𝛿𝓁. To do so,

consider first the equality

𝛿𝓁 = 𝜁 [𝜃 + (1 − 𝜃)𝜂(𝛿𝓁, 𝛿𝑏)

]

{

= 𝜁 min

1,

𝑆 )]∕𝑑𝐼

𝑆 +𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏

as the unique, strictly positive value of 𝛿𝓁 solving 𝛿𝓁 = 𝜁[𝑚𝑏
𝑖𝑆 )(𝛿𝓁𝓁𝑏
in (A.21) are strictly positive since (i) 𝑚𝑏
repayments in the steady state, (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
spending in the steady state, 𝜃𝑑𝐼
of 𝛿𝓁 solving (A.20), which equals:

𝑆 + (1 +
𝑆 . Note that both the numerator and the denominator
𝑆 > 0 and (ii) total loan
𝑆 , cannot exceed total DM
𝑆 . We then define 𝛿𝓁 as the unique value

𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ≡

{ ̂𝛿𝓁(𝜁)
𝜁

if ̂𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ≤ 𝜁
if ̂𝛿𝓁(𝜁) > 𝜁.

(A.22)

Notice that 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) is strictly increasing in 𝜁, and that we have 𝛿𝓁 < 𝛿𝓁 ⇔
𝛿𝓁 < 𝜁[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)] as well as 𝛿𝓁 > 𝛿𝓁 ⇔ 𝛿𝓁 > 𝜁[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)].

To show that 𝛿𝓁(1) = 1, note first that we have from (A.21) that

̂𝛿𝓁(1) =

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏
𝑚𝑏
𝑆 − (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑑𝐼

𝑆

𝑆

≥

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 ) ̂𝛿𝓁(1) 𝑏𝑏
𝑚𝑏
𝑆 − (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑑𝐼

𝑆

𝑆

,

(A.23)

where the second inequality results from the fact that 𝛿𝑏
(A.23) for ̂𝛿𝓁(1) yields

≥ 𝛿𝓁. Solving

̂𝛿𝓁(1) ≥

𝑚𝑏
𝑆

≥ 1,

(A.24)

𝑆 − (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝓁𝑏
𝑑𝐼

𝑆 + 𝑏𝑏
𝑆 )
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝑏𝑏
where the last inequality is due to the fact that 𝑑𝐼
𝑆
𝓁𝑏
𝑆 ), which in turn follows from patient depositors’ IC constraint, 𝑑𝐼
𝑑𝑃
𝑆 . From (A.22) and (A.24), it follows that 𝛿𝓁(1) = 1.

≤ 𝑚𝑏

𝑆 +
≤
𝑆

The next step is to show that 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) rules out a decrease in the

capital share, 𝛼(𝜌), relative to the steady state:

Show that 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ⇒ 𝛼(𝜌) ≥ 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 ). We proceed with a proof
≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) but 𝛼(𝜌) < 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 ). Note
by contradiction and suppose that 𝛿𝓁
first that entrepreneurs’ real revenue, 𝜌𝑞𝑒(𝜌), is strictly decreasing in 𝜋
since 𝜌 is strictly decreasing in 𝜋 (see Lemma 3) while 𝑞𝑒(𝜌) is strictly
increasing in 𝜌 (see Section 5). It then follows from (34) that

≤ 1 + 𝜋
1 + 𝜋𝑆

𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )
𝛼(𝜌)
for any 𝜋 ≥ 𝜋𝑆 . Next, we use (31), (52) and (58) to obtain:
1 + 𝜋
1 + 𝜋𝑆

= 1 + max

(A.25)

𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝛿𝓁𝓁𝑏
𝑚𝑏

𝑆 + 𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏
𝑆 )

𝑑𝐼
𝑆

}

,

×

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )

(
𝛿𝓁 − 𝜁 min

{ 𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)], 1

})

𝑀𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝐵𝑆

(A.20)

18 

𝜏𝓁 𝓁𝑏

𝑆 − (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(1 − 𝛿𝑏)𝜏𝑏𝑏𝑏

𝑆

.

, 0

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
(A.26)

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

Taking the derivative of the RHS in (A.26) with respect to 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )∕𝛼(𝜌)
yields

𝜕[(1 + 𝜋)∕(1 + 𝜋𝑆 )]
𝜕[𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )∕𝛼(𝜌)]

∈

{ 𝜁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝜏𝓁𝓁𝑏
𝑀𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝐵𝑆

𝑆

( 𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

)2

}

(𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)), 0

.

(A.27)

Note that we have (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 < 𝑀𝑆 , i.e. aggregate nominal loan repay-
ments in the steady state are strictly lower than the steady state money
stock since entrepreneurs keep part of their revenue as compensation
for their labour effort. Since we have 𝜁 ≤ 1, 𝜏𝓁
≤ 1 and 𝜂 ≤ 1, we obtain
from (A.27) that
𝜕[(1 + 𝜋)∕(1 + 𝜋𝑆 )]
𝜕[𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )∕𝛼(𝜌)]

𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )
𝛼(𝜌)

< 1 for

(A.28)

≥ 1.

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁), which as seen above is equivalent
Furthermore, for any 𝛿𝓁
≤ 𝜁[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)], we obtain from (A.26) that 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 if 𝛼(𝜌) =
to 𝛿𝓁
≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁), then (A.25) holds at equality if
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 ). This means that if 𝛿𝓁
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )∕𝛼(𝜌) = 1. It then follows immediately from (A.28) that (A.25)
≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) and
is violated for any 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )∕𝛼(𝜌) > 1. Thus, assuming 𝛿𝓁
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )∕𝛼(𝜌) > 1 leads to a contradiction.

Intuitively, condition (A.25) states that to maintain entrepreneurs’
incentives to produce in the DM, a decrease in the capital share (the
share of entrepreneurs’ revenue left after compensating them for their
labour effort) must go in hand with a sufficiently strong increase in
inflation reducing entrepreneurs’ real debt burden. At the same time,
(A.28) says that a fall in the capital share by itself does not lead to
sufficiently large losses for the government to create such an increase
in inflation. Put differently, a fall in the capital share can only occur
in equilibrium if the government’s losses on its loan purchases are such
that inflation increases even without a fall in the capital share.

To show that 𝛿𝓁 > 𝜁𝜒 if and only if 𝛿𝓁 > 𝛿𝓁(𝜁), we first prove the

‘if’ statement and then the ‘only if’ statement:

Show that 𝛿𝓁 > 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ⇒ 𝛿𝓁 > 𝜁𝜒. We proceed with a proof by
≤ 𝜁𝜒. From (58), we
≤ 𝜁𝜒 implies 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 and hence, by Lemma 3, 𝜌 = 𝜌𝑆 .
≤ 𝜁𝜒
≤ 𝛿𝓁

contradiction and suppose that 𝛿𝓁 > 𝛿𝓁 but 𝛿𝓁
have that 𝛿𝓁
From (31) and (52), we then have 𝜒 = 𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃). Therefore, 𝛿𝓁
≤ 𝜁[𝜃 +𝜂(1−𝜃)], which, as seen further above, means 𝛿𝓁
implies 𝛿𝓁
and thus leads to a contradiction.

Show that 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ⇒ 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝜁𝜒. We again proceed with a proof by
≤ 𝛿𝓁 but 𝛿𝓁 > 𝜁𝜒. Note first that if
≤ 𝜁, which implies

≤ 𝛿𝓁 and 𝛿𝓁 > 𝜁𝜒, then we have 𝜁𝜒 < 𝛿𝓁

contradiction and suppose that 𝛿𝓁
𝛿𝓁
𝜒 < 1. Using (31) to substitute for 𝜒 in 𝛿𝓁 > 𝜁𝜒 then yields
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )
𝛼(𝜌)

𝜁[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)]
𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁

𝜁
𝛿𝓁

>

=

,

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

(A.29)

≤ 𝛿𝓁 implies
where we used (52) to substitute for 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 . Since 𝛿𝓁
≤ 𝜁[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)], we have from (A.29) that 𝛼(𝜌) < 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 ), which
𝛿𝓁
leads to a contradiction because, as seen above, 𝛼(𝜌) < 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 ) cannot
occur when 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁).

Finally, given that 𝛿𝓁 > 𝜁𝜒 ⇔ 𝛿𝓁 > 𝛿𝓁(𝜁), it follows immediately

from (58) that 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 if 𝛿𝓁

≤ 𝛿𝓁(𝜁).

A.10. Proof of Proposition 11

The proof of the first part of Proposition 11 about ZLB and PLI
equilibria is contained in the main text. Consider now FLI equilibria.
Suppose for the moment that 𝜂 < 1, in which case we have from (50)
and (59) that
𝑆 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏
𝑚𝑏

𝑆 + 𝛿𝓁𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )

𝜒 =

.

𝑑𝐼
𝑆

Inserting this into condition (56), and using the fact that 𝑚𝑏
𝑖𝑆 = 𝜄 in FLI equilibria, yields
(

)

𝑆 = 𝜃𝑑𝐼

𝑆 and

(1 − 𝜃)𝑑𝐼
𝑆

≤ (1 + 𝜄)𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + (1 + 𝜄)

𝜃 +

(1 + 𝜄)(𝛿𝑏𝑏𝑏
𝑆 + 𝛿𝓁𝓁𝑏
𝑆 )
𝑑𝐼
𝑆

𝓁𝑏
𝑆 .

(A.30)

19 

≡ (1 + 𝜄)𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆 , 𝜙𝑏𝑏
Substituting 𝜙𝑑𝐼
𝑆 = 𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝜅𝑆
in condition (A.30) (the latter two equations follow from the fact that
banks hold all assets in the economy if 

𝑆 =  and 𝜙𝓁𝑏

𝑆 = 𝜙𝑝𝑆 𝑞𝑆

≤ ) gives

𝑆

(1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆

≤  + 𝜃2𝑞𝑆 𝜅𝑆 +

𝜃𝜅𝑆
𝜌𝑆

(𝛿𝑏

 + 𝛿𝓁𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝜅𝑆 ).

(A.31)

Using 
condition (A.31) can then further be rewritten as

𝑆 =  + 𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝜅𝑆 and the fact that 𝜅𝑆 = 𝜅∗ in FLI equilibria,

(𝛿𝓁 − 1)𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝜅∗ + (𝛿𝑏 − 1) ≥ −

(

1 +

𝜌𝑆
𝜃𝜅

∗) (

𝑆 − (1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆

) .

(A.32)

So far we have taken it as given that 𝜂 < 1, i.e. the discounts are
high enough such that banks impose a redemption penalty in the DM.
𝑆 , 𝓁𝑏
Inserting 𝑚𝑏
𝑆 and
𝑏𝑏
𝑆 in the same manner as above yields that in an FLI equilibrium
𝜂 < 1 ⇔ (𝛿𝓁 − 1)𝜃𝑞𝑆 𝜅∗ + (𝛿𝑏 − 1) < −[

𝑆 into condition (51) and substituting for 𝑑𝐼

𝑆 − (1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆 ].

𝑆 = 𝜃𝑑𝐼

We can see immediately that 𝜂 < 1 whenever condition (A.32) is
violated, which means that (A.32) is both necessary and sufficient for
emergency liquidity to prevent runs.

Finally, inserting 𝛿𝑏 = 1 and 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝓁(𝜁) into condition (A.32) and

rearranging terms yields

𝛿𝓁(𝜁) ≥ 1 −

𝜃𝜅∗ + 𝜌𝑆
(𝜃𝜅∗)2𝑞𝑆

[

𝑆 − (1 − 𝜃)𝜌𝑆 𝑞𝑆

] .

(A.33)

The result in (60) then follows from (A.33) together with the fact that
𝛿𝓁(𝜁) is strictly increasing in 𝜁.

A.11. Proof of Proposition 12

We first show that if 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1 and 𝛼′(𝜌) ≤ 0, then 𝜒 = 1. We
proceed with a proof by contradiction and suppose that 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1,
𝛼′(𝜌) ≤ 0 and 𝜒 < 1. From (31), we then have that

𝜒 =

𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

=

𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)] =

𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

,

(A.34)

where we used (52) to substitute for 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 , and we used the fact that
𝜂 = 1 when 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1 (see (50)). Since 𝜌 is strictly decreasing in 𝜋
(see Lemma 3), we have 𝛼(𝜌) ≥ 𝛼(𝜌𝑆 ) for any 𝜋 ≥ 𝜋𝑆 if 𝛼(𝜌) is weakly
decreasing in 𝜌. Therefore, we have from (A.34) that 𝜒 ≥ 1, which
leads to a contradiction. Since we know from Lemma 2 that runs are
prevented if 𝜒 = 1, this proves the first part of Proposition 12.

We now prove the second part of Proposition 12, which states that
runs cannot be prevented if 𝛼′(𝜌) > 0, 𝜁 < 1 and the economy is in a
ZLB or PLI equilibrium. From Lemma 2, we know that runs are only
prevented in ZLB and PLI equilibria if defaults in a run are avoided
completely (𝜒 = 1). We show with a proof by contradiction that this
is not possible. Suppose 𝛼′(𝜌) > 0, 𝜁 < 1, the economy is a ZLB or PLI
equilibrium, and 𝜒 = 1. From (31), we have that 𝜒 = 1 requires

𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

≥ 1 ⇔

𝛼(𝜌)
𝛼(𝜌𝑆 )

[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)] ≥ 1,

(A.35)

where we used (52) to substitute for 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 . Since 𝜂 ≤ 1, and 𝜌 is strictly
decreasing in 𝜋 (see Lemma 3), condition (A.35) can only be fulfilled
if 𝜋 = 𝜋𝑆 and 𝜂 = 1, given that 𝛼′(𝜌) > 0. We know from Lemma 1
that 𝜂 = 1 requires 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1 in ZLB and PLI equilibria, and we know
from Proposition 9 that 𝜁𝜒 < 1 if 𝜁 < 1. It then follows from (58) that
if 𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1, we have 𝜋 > 𝜋𝑆 , such that we arrive at a contradiction.

A.12. Proof of Proposition 13

With real loan contracts, entrepreneurs’ real debt burden is fixed at
its steady state level, which, as shown in the proof of Proposition 2,
means that we must have 𝜌 = 𝜌𝑆 . Suppose now the government sets
𝛿𝓁 = 𝛿𝑏 = 1, in which case we have 𝜂 = 1 (see (50)). Given 𝜌 = 𝜌𝑆 , we
then have from DM market clearing (30) that
1 + 𝜋𝑆
1 + 𝜋

[𝜃 + 𝜂(1 − 𝜃)] =

1 + 𝜋𝑆
1 + 𝜋

1 + 𝜋𝑆
1 + 𝜋

(A.36)

𝜒 =

=

,

𝑀 𝑅𝐸
𝜃𝑑𝐼
𝑆

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

where we have used (52) to substitute for 𝑀 𝑅𝐸 . Eq. (A.36) states
that an increase in inflation – with the associated fall in impatient
depositors’ real purchasing power – will lead to some defaults when
loan contracts are real. Next, we have that

𝜒

1 + 𝜋
1 + 𝜋𝑆

(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏

𝑆 = (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 ,

(A.37)

where the LHS equals the nominal return on banks’ loan portfolio
with real loan contracts, and we have used (A.36) to substitute for
𝜒. Eq. (A.37) shows that the nominal return which banks earn on
their loan portfolio in case of a run is the same as in the steady state.
This means that banks can always pay the promised amount to those
withdrawing in the CM, such that patient depositors have no incentive
to run on the banks in the first place.

The government’s net profit or loss from the provision of emergency
loans equals

𝛱 = 𝜏𝑏(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(1 − 𝛿𝑏)𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + 𝜏𝓁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )(𝜒 − 𝛿𝓁)𝓁𝑏

𝑆 − 𝜏𝓁(1 − 𝜁)𝜒(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 ,

where the last term is the cost incurred by managing the pledged loans.
The government’s nominal liabilities after the provision of emergency
liquidity equal 𝑀𝑆 +(1+𝑖𝑆 )𝐵𝑆 −𝛱, which is the same as (57). It follows
that inflation created by the government’s intervention is still given by
(58), which means that all further results derived in Section 7 remain
the same. Note in particular that a bank’s CM payouts – and hence the
incentives to run for patient depositors – do not depend on whether
the bank sells a given amount of assets in the DM or pledges them as
collateral.

A.13. Reinterpreting the government’s intervention as secured lending

References

≤ 𝛿𝑏

Suppose that, instead of purchasing assets outright, the government
stands ready to provide emergency credit at a gross interest rate of 1∕𝛿𝑏
when the loan is secured by government bonds and at gross interest
rate of 1∕𝛿𝓁 when it is secured by loans, where we continue assuming
≤ 1. Banks need to post collateral with a gross face value (i.e.
𝛿𝓁
principal plus interest) equal to the gross face value of the emergency
loan. That is, to obtain one unit of money in the DM, banks need to post
either bonds with a gross face value of 1∕𝛿𝑏 or loans with a gross face
value of 1∕𝛿𝓁 (or any combination thereof). Analogous to Section 7, 𝜏𝑏
and 𝜏𝓁 denote the fraction of bonds and loans, respectively, that banks
pledge as collateral. Emergency loans extended to banks are due in the
next CM. If banks fail to repay the due amount in full, the government
seizes the collateral.

As before, we assume an inefficiency on the side of the government
when it comes to emergency loans that are collateralised by loans.
Specifically, we reinterpret 𝜁 as reflecting a cost incurred by the gov-
ernment when managing the loans pledged as collateral, with the cost
being proportional to the realised value of the pledged loans. That is, if
banks post an amount 𝓁 of loans as collateral, the government incurs a
cost of (1−𝜁)𝜒(1+𝑖𝑆 )𝓁. We also continue assuming that the government
cannot increase its real indebtedness, i.e. constraint (48) applies. In
said constraint, 𝑀 + (1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝐵 now denotes the government’s nominal
liabilities at the beginning of the next CM, just after entrepreneurs
have repaid loans and banks have repaid their emergency credit. The
provision of emergency liquidity will then be inflationary whenever it
leads to an increase in nominal government liabilities beyond the point
at which the assets pledged as collateral mature.

It is easy to see that the total amount of liquidity a bank can access
by pledging all its assets as collateral is still given by (49). This implies
that the redemption penalty banks need to charge in order to stop a
run is still given by (50), and the aggregate cash held by impatient
depositors in a run equals (52). Eq. (53) remains the same as well,
with the RHS now denoting excess reserves plus the total money a bank
raises by obtaining a secured credit from the government. As before, we
assume 𝜏𝑏 = 𝜏𝓁 = 𝜃 + (1 − 𝜃), i.e. banks pledge proportional amounts
of bonds and loans when obtaining an emergency credit. To consider
the effect of emergency liquidity on net nominal government liabilities,
note first that the gross face value of the emergency loan equals the
gross face value of the pledged collateral,

𝜏𝑏(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + 𝜏𝓁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 ,

while the amount lent by the government in the DM is

𝜏𝑏𝛿𝑏(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + 𝜏𝓁𝛿𝓁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 .

Banks will default on their emergency loans whenever 𝜒 < 1 as the
value of the pledged collateral is then lower than the amount due on
the emergency loans. The government’s CM revenue from its emergency
loan is therefore

𝜏𝑏(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝑏𝑏

𝑆 + 𝜒𝜏𝓁(1 + 𝑖𝑆 )𝓁𝑏
𝑆 .

Altermatt, L., van Buggenum, H., Voellmy, L., 2024. Money creation in a neoclassical
economy: Equilibrium multiplicity and the liquidity trap. KOF Working Paper No.
516.

Andolfatto, D., Berentsen, A., Martin, F., 2020. Money, banking and financial markets.

Rev. Econ. Stud. 87 (5), 2049–2086.

Andolfatto, D., Nosal, E., 2020. Shadow bank runs. FRB Atlanta Working Paper No.

2020-14.

Andrew, A.P., 1908. Hoarding in the panic of 1907. Q. J. Econ. 22 (2), 290–299.
Aruoba, S.B., Waller, C., Wright, R., 2011. Money and capital. J. Monetary Econ. 58

(2), 98–116.

Bagehot, W., 1873. Lombard Street. Henry S. King & Co.
Bech, M., Faruqui, U., Ougaard, F., Picillo, C., 2018. Payments are a-changin’ but cash

still rules. BIS Q. Rev. 67–80.

Berentsen, A., Camera, G., Waller, C., 2007. Money, credit and banking. J. Econom.

Theory 135 (1), 171–195.

Carapella, F., 2015. Banking panics and deflation in dynamic general equilibrium.
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-018. Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.

Comptroller of the Currency, 1907. Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency.

Washington Government Printing Office.

Daseking, C., Ghosh, A., Lane, T., Thomas, A., 2004. Lessons from the crisis in

Argentina. IMF Occasional Paper 236.

Diamond, D.W., Dybvig, P.H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. J.

Polit. Econ. 91 (3), 401–419.

Engineer, M., 1989. Bank runs and the suspension of deposit convertibility. J. Monetary

Econ. 24 (3), 443–454.

Ennis, H., Keister, T., 2009. Bank runs and institutions: The perils of intervention. Amer.

Econ. Rev. 99 (4), 1588–1607.

Ennis, H.M., Keister, T., 2010. Banking panics and policy responses. J. Monetary Econ.

57 (4), 404–419.

European Commission, 2013. The economic adjustment programme for cyprus.

European Economy Occasional Papers 149.

Farhi, E., Tirole, J., 2020. Shadow banking and the four pillars of traditional financial

intermediation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 88 (6), 2622–2653.

Friedman, M., Schwartz, A.J., 1963. A Monetary History of the United States. Princeton

University Press.

Geromichalos, A., Herrenbrueck, L., 2022. The liquidity-augmented model of macroe-
conomic aggregates: A new monetarist DSGE approach. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 45,
134–167.

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2015. Banking, liquidity, and bank runs in an infinite horizon

economy. Amer. Econ. Rev. 105 (7), 2011–2043.

Goldstein, I., Kopytov, A., Shen, L., Xiang, H., 2020. Bank heterogeneity and financial

stability. NBER Working Paper 27376.

Gorton, G., 1988. Banking panics and business cycles. Oxford Econ. Pap. 40 (4),

751–781.

Gorton, G., Huang, L., 2006. Bank panics and the endogeneity of central banking. J.

Monetary Econ. 53 (7), 1613–1629.

Gu, C., Monnet, C., Nosal, E., Wright, R., 2023. Diamond-Dybvig and beyond: On the

instability of banking. Eur. Econ. Rev. 154.

Gutierrez, J.G., Montes-Negret, F., 2004. Argentina’s banking system: Restoring financial

viability. World Bank Working Paper N.2/04.

James, J.A., McAndrews, J., Weiman, D.F., 2013. Wall Street and Main Street:
the macroeconomic consequences of New York bank suspensions, 1866–1914.
Cliometrica 7, 99–130.

Jaremski, M.S., Wheelock, D.C., 2023.

Interbank networks and the interregional
transmission of financial crises: Evidence from the panic of 1907. NBER Working
Paper 31270.

Kashyap, A.K., Tsomocos, D.P., Vardoulakis, A.P., 2024. Optimal bank regulation in the

presence of credit and run-risk. J. Polit. Econ. 132 (3), 772–823.

Keister, T., Mitkov, Y., 2023. Allocating losses: Bail-ins, bailouts and bank regulation.

J. Econom. Theory 210 (C), 1–29.

20 

L. Altermatt et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103929 

Kiguel, M., 2011. Argentina’s 2001 economic and financial crisis: Lessons for Europe.
In: Think Tank 20: Beyond Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Discussions in the
G-20. Brookings Institution, (Chapter 2).

Kiyotaki, N., Wright, R., 1989. On money as a medium of exchange. J. Polit. Econ. 97

Rochet, J., Vives, X., 2004. Coordination failures and the lender of last resort: Was

bagehot right after all? J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 2 (6), 1116–1147.

Sanches, D., 2018. Banking panics and output dynamics. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 29, 148–171.
Saxton, J., 2003. Argentina’s economic crisis: Causes and cures. Joint Economic

(4), 927–954.

Committee United States Congress.

Lagos, R., Wright, R., 2005. A unified framework for monetary theory and policy

Schilling, L., Fernandez-Villaverde, J., Uhlig, H., 2024. Central bank digital currency:

analysis. J. Polit. Econ. 113 (3), 463–484.

When price and bank stability collide. J. Monetary Econ. 145.

Liu, X., 2019. Diversification and systemic bank runs. mimeo.
Martin, A., 2006. Liquidity provision vs. deposit insurance: Preventing bank panics

Sprague, O.M.W., 1910. History of Crises Under the National Banking System. US

Government Printing Office.

without moral hazard. Econom. Theory 28 (1), 197–211.

Voellmy, L., 2024. Decomposing liquidity risk in banking models. SNB Working Paper

Matta, R., Perotti, E.C., 2024. Pay, stay, or delay? How to settle a run. Rev. Financ.

2024-03.

Stud. 37 (4), 1368–1407.

Wallace, N., 1990. A banking model in which partial suspension is best. Fed. Reserve

Peck, J., Setayesh, A., 2023. Bank runs and the optimality of limited banking. Rev.

Bank St. Louis Q. Rev. 14 (4), 11–23.

Econ. Dyn. 47, 100–110.

Reinhart, C.M., Rogoff, K.S., 2008. Is the 2007 US sub-prime financial crisis so different?
An international historical comparison. Am. Econ. Rev.: Pap. Proc. 98 (2), 339–344.
Robatto, R., 2019. Systemic bank panics, liquidity risk, and monetary policy. Rev. Econ.

Dyn. 34, 20–42.

Wicker, E., 2000. Banking Panics of the Gilded Age. Cambridge University Press.
Williamson, S., 2012. Liquidity, monetary policy, and the financial crisis: A new

monetarist approach. Amer. Econ. Rev. 102 (6), 2570–2605.

World Bank, 2021. The Global Findex Database 2021: Financial Inclusion, Digital

Payments, and Resilience in the Age of COVID-19.

21 

