Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The risk and return of impact investing funds
Jessica Jeffers a,∗, Tianshu Lyu b, Kelly Posenau c
a HEC Paris, 1 rue de la Libération, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France
b Yale School of Management, 165 Whitney Avenue, 06511-3729, New Haven, CT, United States
c Cornell University Johnson Graduate School of Management, Ithaca, NY, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We provide the first analysis of the risk exposure and risk-adjusted performance of impact investing funds,
private market funds with dual financial and social goals. We introduce a dataset of impact fund cash flows
and exploit distortions in VC performance measures to characterize risk profiles. Impact funds have a lower
market 𝛽 than comparable private market strategies. Accounting for 𝛽, impact funds underperform the public
market, though not necessarily more so than comparable strategies. We consider alternative pricing models,
accounting for sustainability and emerging markets risk. We show investors’ wealth portfolios and taste change
the perceived financial merit of impact investing.

Dataset link: Replication Package for: The Risk
and Return of Impact Investing Funds (Origina
l data)

JEL classification:
G11
G24
H41
M14

Keywords:
Impact investing
Sustainable investing
Risk
Venture capital
ESG

1. Introduction

Impact investing has attracted a growing amount of investor capital
over the last decade by promising to target both financial returns and a
social or environmental goal. It has simultaneously attracted substantial
debate, especially over its financial merit. Critics argue that constrained
strategies like impact investing must have lower risk-adjusted returns
than unconstrained strategies under standard assumptions (e.g. perfect
and complete capital markets, rational and informed investors) (Brest
et al., 2018; Barber et al., 2021). Others challenge the validity of
these assumptions, especially in private markets (Cole et al., 2021).1
Crucially missing from the debate in private markets is an understand-
ing of impact investing’s risk exposure, which has the potential to
reconcile concessionary absolute returns with a profitable strategy for
some investors, depending on the risks they wish to hedge.

This paper fills the gap in the literature by providing the first
analysis of the risk properties of impact investing relative to other

strategies and the corresponding risk-adjusted return. Using new data
and methodology, we find impact investing has lower exposure to mar-
ket risk relative to other private market strategies, providing support
to the hedging view of ESG. After accounting for the high market
risk exposure of most private market funds, returns are closer between
impact investing and non-impact investing. Still, if investors care only
about total returns, impact funds will represent a financial return con-
cession. The reference point matters too: the financial return concession
can be larger for investors who hold different wealth portfolios than
the market. Not only do our findings demonstrate when a constrained
strategy like impact investing can extract value, but they also illuminate
the role that impact can play in modifying the risk profile of investors’
portfolios.

Studying the risk and return of impact investing presents several
empirical challenges. First, there is no publicly available dataset of

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

jeffers@hec.fr (J. Jeffers), tianshu.lyu@yale.edu (T. Lyu), kposenau@cornell.edu (K. Posenau).

1 There are arguments that private markets provide better opportunities to address societal challenges while generating financial returns, given the types of
projects they finance. Private markets dominate early-stage and growth transactions, and by definition cater to firms without access to public markets. Capital
providers in private markets exert more influence on both deal sourcing and governance than what they would be able to achieve in public markets (Phalippou,
2017; Gompers et al., 2020). Early evidence on impact investing in private markets suggests that they not only contract explicitly on impact goals (Geczy et al.,
2021), but also invest in projects that would not have been invested in competitive markets (Cole et al., 2021). For simplicity, we refer to this private market
strategy as ‘‘impact investing’’.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103928
Received 11 December 2022; Received in revised form 17 August 2024; Accepted 18 August 2024

Available online 30 August 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

impact fund cash flows. Second, private market funds (e.g., venture
capital (VC), buyout, etc.) tend to have infrequent and highly skewed
payoffs, making traditional linear factor modeling techniques tricky.
Small sample sizes and young funds in the impact investing space
exacerbate these problems.

We address the data challenge by creating a new dataset of impact
investing cash flows, combining data from the Impact Finance Research
Consortium (IFRC) and Preqin.2 First, as part of the IFRC effort, we
collect annual and quarterly financial statements directly from im-
pact funds and convert them into a standardized database covering
contributions and distributions net of fees, as well as net asset value
(NAV), among other variables. This dataset will be made available to
researchers through application to the IFRC.3 Second, we leverage the
comprehensive list of past and existing impact funds created by the
IFRC, and search for these funds in Preqin. Our final sample consists
of 94 funds covering vintage years 1999 through 2015, with cash flow
data from 1999 to 2021.

We address the methodological challenges by proposing a new
statistic to infer beta from only cash flows. Our methodology does not
suffer from the common critiques of NAV-based return measures (Ko-
rteweg, 2019) and relies on few assumptions. We leverage the Gen-
eralized Public Market Equivalent of Korteweg and Nagel (2016), an
extension of the Public Market Equivalent (PME) first proposed by Ka-
plan and Schoar (2005). As Korteweg and Nagel (2016) show, although
the PME has many useful features for assessing the performance of VC,
it systematically overestimates the performance of high-beta assets in
times of rising public equity markets relative to a one-factor CAPM
model. Our key insight is to use the fact that this bias grows with
the asset’s market 𝛽: the distance between PME and GPME (the ‘‘PME
wedge’’) thus informs us about the market 𝛽 of the underlying asset. If
impact investing has a positive PME wedge, it implies that the market
𝛽 of impact investing is greater than one, and the greater the wedge,
the greater the implied 𝛽. We further extend the approach to two other
factors relevant to impact investing, a public sustainability factor and
an emerging markets factor.

A remaining challenge is that any PME wedge we estimate for
impact investing may be driven by general private market trends,
asset class, or timing, in addition to the impact component. To solve
this problem, we construct benchmark fund groups using non-impact
fund cash flows from Preqin in our main analysis, and non-impact
fund cash flows from Burgiss in the Online Appendix. We first match
each impact fund in our sample to a benchmark fund with the same
vintage, asset type, and closest size. Perfectly controlling for every-
thing outside impact is not possible, but this set of matched funds
helps us to address the effect of characteristics known to influence
risk exposure. To provide context from a well-understood asset class,
we also benchmark to US-based VC funds, because VC is the asset
class most representative of impact funds overall4 and its risk and
return properties have been studied extensively (Korteweg, 2019). A
limitation of this second benchmark is that the comparison to VC funds
is not apples-to-apples and may be influenced by asset class, vintage,
and size.

We document three main findings about the risk and return prop-
erties of impact investing. First, impact investing is less sensitive to
movements in public equity markets than matched funds, and much less
sensitive when compared to VC funds. Our results still imply a market 𝛽
greater than one, as the PME overestimates impact performance relative

2 The IFRC is a collaboration between the Wharton School, Harvard Busi-
ness School, and the Chicago Booth School of Business to build data on
impact investing. More information on the data and initiative can be found
at https://impactfinanceresearchconsortium.org/.

3 Interested researchers may email the corresponding author at jeffers@hec.

fr for more information.

4 VC is the modal asset class in our sample. Moreover, impact funds favor

equity and minority stakes, like VC funds (Geczy et al., 2021).

to the GPME in our time period. When we artificially lever up our
impact fund cash flows, the PME wedge increases, also consistent with
a positive 𝛽 that grows as the strategy is levered up. However, this
wedge grows more slowly for impact funds than for matched or VC
funds. A portfolio that goes long $1 in matched or VC funds and short
$1 in impact still has a positive 𝛽, providing further evidence of greater
market risk exposure for matched and VC funds than for impact. Our
results indicate that shifting comparable private market investments to
impact would reduce an investor’s overall market risk exposure.

Second, we find impact funds have lower total returns than bench-
mark non-impact funds, but the gap in financial performance is smaller
after accounting for market risk exposure. Our estimates imply that
impact funds underperform the public market on a risk-adjusted basis
by −$0.47 per $1 invested, compared to −$0.33 per $1 invested for
matched funds. A value-weighted portfolio long in matched funds and
short impact yields a market risk-adjusted return of −$0.015, not
statistically different from zero. The negative returns of both strategies
reflect in part the general underperformance of VC-type funds relative
to public markets in recent decades (Harris et al., 2014; Gupta and
Van Nieuwerburgh, 2021). Our VC benchmark underperforms the pub-
lic market by an average $0.43 per $1 invested over the same time
period, again after removing the component of performance explained
by 𝛽, and a value-weighted portfolio long $1 in VC and short $1 in
impact funds has a negative market risk-adjusted return of −$0.16
during our sample. Our results imply that if investors care about market
risk-adjusted returns, impact funds are not necessarily concessionary
relative to other private market funds.

Third, we characterize how investor taste and alternative wealth
portfolios affect our assessment of impact investing’s role in investor
portfolios. We start by building on Pastor et al. (2021) and explore
the extent to which ESG ‘‘taste’’ in the market can help explain the
returns to impact investing. Adding a public sustainability factor to
our model improves our ability to explain returns for impact funds,
but not for matched or VC funds. Next, we consider alternatives to the
public market as the best representation of investors’ wealth portfolios.
For investors whose return on wealth is best represented by the return
on a public sustainability index or by the return on an emerging
markets index, impact funds yield a larger financial return concession
relative to non-impact benchmarks. Both impact and matched funds
appear to have relatively low risk exposure to the public sustainability
index. However, impact funds are much more exposed to the emerging
markets factor than matched funds. Our findings paint a more compre-
hensive picture of impact investing risk and performance for investors
with a potentially different wealth portfolio than the market portfolio,
and suggest that the financial merit of impact investing will be different
for different types of investors.

Our work contributes to the broader understanding of socially re-
sponsible investing (SRI) and environmental, social, and governance
(ESG) factors. Most existing work has focused on public markets, ex-
ploring investor taste for ‘‘green’’ strategies (Hartzmark and Sussman,
2019; Krueger et al., 2020; Pastor et al., 2021; Fama and French,
2007) and the pricing of ESG factors (Ilhan et al., 2021; Bansal et al.,
2022). Renneboog et al. (2008) provide an overview of SRI in mu-
tual funds. We extend this work to private markets, which present a
different set of challenges and opportunities for sustainability-minded
investors. Companies seeking capital in the impact investing market
are typically orders of magnitude smaller than public companies, with
completely different expected growth paths and risk considerations.
The potential for impact is also distinct from public market invest-
ments. Investors, via funds, have substantially more influence over
the development of portfolio companies than they would in public
companies.

In the public market literature, the covariance of SRI and ESG
strategies with the market is ambiguous. Bansal et al. (2022) find
that SRI is highly pro-cyclical; however, Nofsinger and Varma (2014)
and Pastor and Vorsatz (2020) find evidence that sustainable mutual

2 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

funds outperform during market crises. Dunn et al. (2018) suggest that
stocks with higher ESG exposure have lower risk. We show that impact
investing in private markets is pro-cyclical, but less so than comparable
non-impact strategies. We document impact investing’s distinct risk
characteristics along other dimensions as well, such as relative to a
public sustainability factor and an emerging markets factor.

Data limitations have kept the literature on impact investing sparse,
but this paper joins a few others in the burgeoning literature on
impact investing in private markets. On the descriptive side, Bur-
ton et al. (2021) introduce a new database on investor and firm
characteristics in impact investing, and provide essential statistics to
understand this emerging space; Geczy et al. (2021) detail the contract-
ing and governance practices of impact investing funds.5 On the theory
side, Chowdhry et al. (2019), Oehmke and Opp (2022), Green and Roth
(2021), and Gupta et al. (2022) propose models for the existence and
usefulness of impact investing. Two other papers study the financial
performance of private impact investing funds, without explicitly ad-
dressing risk exposure: Barber et al. (2021) use a willingness-to-pay
model to show that investors accept 2.5%–3.7% lower internal rates
of return (IRRs) for impact funds, and Cole et al. (2021) find that a
large impact investor’s long-run returns outperformed the market by
15% over nearly seven decades of investing activity. We provide a
new perspective to these two papers by addressing the risk exposure
behind these performance measures, decomposing the component of
impact returns that can be explained by systematic risk, a public sus-
tainability factor, and an emerging market index. In our sample, impact
underperforms relative to public markets, but not always more so
than comparable strategies after accounting for market risk exposure.
Another advantage of our data is that we differentiate impact funds
that are explicitly concessionary from funds that state their intention
to achieve market-rate returns. Our results pertain to the latter fund
type only.

Last, this paper contributes to a rich asset pricing literature on
the risk and return of PE and VC cash flows, starting with Cochrane
(2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010). More recently, Ang et al.
(2018) estimate a PE-specific return series using a Bayesian approach
and assuming a linear factor structure. Gupta and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2021) propose a new method to risk-adjust PE returns and estimate
factor risk exposures for each cash flow horizon. We build heavily
on the GPME approach introduced by Korteweg and Nagel (2016),
leveraging the distortions that they document to back out the risk
properties of impact and VC funds. This approach allows us to directly
compare VC and impact funds in an intuitive way. A key difference
between this method and Gupta and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021) is that
the latter uses expectations of stochastic discount factors (SDFs) from
dividend strip prices, while we rely on a realized SDF.

2. Data

One of the challenges in studying impact investing is the lack of
data. We overcome this challenge by creating a new dataset of impact
investing cash flows from new and preexisting data sources, which
we describe below. We then describe the non-impact funds we use
to benchmark our results, and provide summary statistics for both
impact and benchmark funds. We also describe the data for the public
market replicating portfolios used in the GPME approach. More details
regarding the sample and construction are in Appendix A.

5 Both projects are related to the Impact Finance Database introduced in
this paper: Geczy et al. (2021) leverage the contract data portion of the IFD,
and several of the individuals involved in the Impact Investment Database
described in Burton et al. (2021) also contribute actively to the IFRC.

3 

2.1. Impact investing funds

We start with a list of impact investing funds compiled by members
of the IFRC, a collaboration across the Wharton School of Business,
Harvard Business School, and the University of Chicago’s Booth School
of Business. The list of funds comes from multiple databases, cross-
checked with industry experts, published reports, and other indepen-
dent research (Burton et al., 2021). From this list, we obtain financial
data in two ways: directly from funds via the IFRC’s data collection
(‘‘IFD funds’’), and indirectly from funds on the list, which we match to
cash flow data from Preqin (‘‘Preqin impact funds’’). We describe each
source in detail in Online Appendix I.B.1. Here we provide descriptive
statistics for the combined sample, followed by a discussion of potential
selection issues and differences between the two groups that make up
our sample.

Impact funds include funds that target market-rate returns, as well
as funds that target a positive but below-market return. For this paper,
we focus exclusively on market rate-seeking funds, so as not to bias
the results towards finding below market returns (Cole et al., 2021).6
We also limit our analysis to funds operating for at least three years,
and with no data gaps at the annual level. Finally, we conduct an
independent check to verify that all funds in this sample state a clear
impact goal, either on their websites or through legal documents they
have shared with the IFRC. Our final analysis sample consists of 94
funds, of which 48 are IFD funds and 46 Preqin impact funds.7

Our fund sample covers vintage years 1999 through 2015, with cash
flow data through the end of 2021. We use quarterly data if available
(87 funds), otherwise annual data (7 funds) (using annual rather than
quarterly cash flows does not substantially alter results). Cash flows
reflect returns to LPs net of fees, except for the final distribution when
funds are not fully liquidated at the end of our sample. Because impact
fund term lengths are typically ten years, like other private market
funds, we follow Harris et al. (2014) and Korteweg and Nagel (2016)
and use the last period NAV as the final distribution for funds that are
not fully liquidated, with the caveat that this final cash flow does not
account for future fees. We address the concerns of using last-period
NAV as final distribution in Section 2.3.

Funds in our sample target both social and environmental objec-
tives, often in line with the United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goals (Table 1).8 Funds often have multiple goals, as evidenced in
Panel A by the fact that environmental objectives are frequently paired
with social objectives, but we assign each fund to a primary focus for
simplicity. We present the summary of these stated impact goals in
Panel B of Table 1. The modal mission focus is economic development,
where funds aim to ‘‘mobilize capital to help improve the socioeco-
nomic condition of underserved people’’. Another common focus is
sustainable practices, where funds incorporate both environmental and
social considerations in their sourcing and governance of portfolio
companies. Clean technology and energy is the third most common
focus.

The focus on economic development is comparable to the most
commonly stated impact goals of the funds studied in Barber et al.

6 Including funds targeting below market returns, of which only seven
satisfy our other data requirements, does not significantly change our findings
on risk or risk-adjusted returns.

7 Only one of the impact funds in our sample has data from both the IFD
and Preqin, so we cannot do a systematic comparison of cash flows in IFD
and Preqin. For the one fund in both, we find that the difference in quarterly
net cash flows between these two sources is on average $0.00000464 per $1
of capital committed (the median difference is 0). We use audited financials
from IFD as the true data for this fund.

8 Geczy et al. (2021) also analyze the legal documents of IFD funds and
show that virtually all IFD funds display commitments to impact in their
contracts, and that many of the fund documents have explicit terms around
measuring and reporting on impact.

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Table 1
Mission focus for sample impact funds.
We collect information on mission focus from a combination of sustainability reports,
prospectuses, and websites. In Panel A, we provide the breakdown across social,
environmental, and combination social/environmental mission focus. In Panel B, we
provide further detail on the primary mission focus of the fund. Funds often have
multiple goals; for example, funds whose primary mission is economic development
often have sustainable practices or diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) as a secondary
focus. For this table, we assign each fund to a single primary focus. Primary mission
focus labels are defined as follows: economic development refers to a primary objective
of improving economic conditions and employment in underserved regions; sustainable
practices incorporate both environmental and social considerations in the sourcing
and governance of portfolio companies; clean technology and energy funds invest
primarily in clean technology and renewable energy companies; social services funds
invest primarily in sectors that provide social goods to underserved populations,
such as healthcare, education, or real estate; other environment includes sustainable
infrastructure, water, and more general green innovation; DEI focuses on supporting
women and underrepresented minorities; and food and agriculture focuses on food
security and sustainable agriculture.

Panel A: Mission category

Environmental
Social
Social and environmental

Total

Panel B: Primary mission focus

Clean technology and renewable energy
Diversity, equity, and inclusion
Economic development
Financial inclusion and microfinance
Food and agriculture
Other environment
Social services
Sustainable practices

Total

Num. funds

18
48
28

94

Num. funds

14
4
31
9
2
5
8
21

94

(2021), particularly small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) funding
and regional development. Similarly, they also find about a quarter of
their impact funds include a focus on environmental impact. Among our
funds, environmentally-focused funds are about 20% of the sample.

The Online Appendix summarizes differences in characteristics and
absolute performance measures between IFD and Preqin impact funds.
One concern with IFD funds is that they could be positively selected,
with successful funds more likely to share their documents with the
IFRC. IRRs are higher for IFD than Preqin impact funds, but multiples
and PME are similar for both samples. We also note that when com-
pared to Burgiss, an alternative source of private market data, Preqin
VC funds appear to be somewhat negatively selected. We anticipate that
the combination of Preqin and IFD impact funds balances out potential
selection biases in either direction, though of course we cannot demon-
strate this without observing the full universe of data. Since our main
results focus on risk profiles, our most important challenge is potential
selection bias on 𝛽. Given the difficulty in calculating 𝛽 and the fact that
this is not something funds report to investors or regularly measure for
themselves, it seems unlikely that funds self-select on this measure.

2.2. Non-impact funds

We contrast impact investing funds with a set of private market
funds matched to impact funds on asset class, vintage, and size. This
benchmarking aims to isolate the influence of the impact component
on the risk–return relationship as much as possible, by controlling for
salient characteristics that could affect the risk–return relationship. Our
thought experiment is: if an investor has a choice between investing $1
in an impact fund and $1 in an otherwise comparable non-impact fund,
what are the implications of this choice for risk and return?

4 

In addition to the matched funds, we also report results for non-
impact VC funds in the US (including generalist, early stage, and late
stage). The purpose of this second benchmark is to contextualize results
relative to a well-documented asset class that is also the most com-
monly occurring fund type in the broader universe of impact funds. Not
only does VC represent 43% of impact funds raised since 2007 (Wiek
et al., 2022), but VC is also the most commonly occurring asset class in
our sample of impact funds (at around 40% of funds, discussed in the
next section). VC funds also share salient characteristics with impact
funds, such as a focus on equity investments and minority stakes. These
features are why VC has been used as a benchmark for impact funds in
other work instead of asset classes like buyout (Cole et al., 2022; Geczy
et al., 2021).

Brown et al. (2015) document strengths and limitations of different
commercially available data sets for private market cash flows. We
present our main results using benchmark cash flows from Preqin. A
strength of Preqin is its accessibility, but a potential weakness is that its
sample can be prone to survivorship bias and selection issues (Preqin
VC funds tend to display worse performance than Burgiss funds, for
example (Brown et al., 2015)). Since we draw on Preqin for part of
our impact sample, we use Preqin as our main benchmark, but we
show our results are robust to using benchmark cash flows from Burgiss
in Online Appendix I.B.2.1. Burgiss provides information management
services to institutional investors, and makes anonymized data from
these funds accessible to researchers. Burgiss data therefore tends to be
less sensitive to survivorship bias and has broader representation. We
find matched and VC funds in Burgiss tend to perform slightly better
than their counterparts in Preqin. We cannot use Burgiss to augment
our sample of impact funds because Burgiss anonymizes funds, and we
cannot identify impact funds in their sample.9

We construct our matched fund benchmark by matching each im-
pact fund to a different fund in Preqin based on general asset class,
vintage, and closest size. Because Preqin asset classes are slightly
different than the asset classes in the impact sample, we make the
following adjustments: we match generalist equity impact funds to
balanced Preqin funds and impact generalist, debt, and real estate funds
to Preqin general venture funds. We allow for funds with a non-US fund
focus, but find that most of the matched sample has a focus on the US.
We cut off cash flows for each matched fund based on the final cash
flow date for the matching impact fund. We convert the cash flows to
quarterly frequency to better match the structure of the impact fund
data.

To construct the general VC benchmark, we follow Korteweg and
Nagel (2016) and restrict the sample of Preqin funds to funds with at
least $5 million in assets and with a US focus. We also remove any
impact funds that we can identify. To mirror the time period of our
impact fund sample, we include VC funds with vintages from 1999
through 2015 and cut off cash flows after 2021. We also drop funds
with less than three years of data.

2.3. Descriptive statistics for impact and benchmark funds

Impact funds invest across a diverse array of geographies, industries,
and even asset classes, more so than other comparable private market
funds. Fig. 1 compares the distribution of portfolio company headquar-
ter regions between impact, matched, and VC funds. The prevalence of
impact investments in emerging market economies is a distinguishing
feature of impact, and likely contributes to the difference in risk profile
from matched and VC funds. This fact motivates our analysis of the
EME risk factor in Section 5. Fig. 2 reports on the industry focus of
the impact funds in our sample.10 Both figures demonstrate substantial
variety across our sample, especially when compared to matched and
VC funds.

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Table 2
Summary statistics.
Impact fund data comes from the IFD and Preqin. VC and matched fund data come from Preqin, where matched funds are paired to impact
funds using asset class, vintage, and size. All samples cover vintages from 1999 through 2015 with transaction dates from 1999 to 2021. Impact
fund statistics are reported in columns 1–3, matched fund statistics are in columns 4–6, and VC fund statistics are in columns 7–9. We report
the mean and median for each sample of funds. The vintage year is the year of fund inception and fund size is the total committed capital
raised by the fund, reported in millions USD. The KS PME is the Kaplan and Schoar (2005) ratio described in Equation A.1, where 𝑅𝑚𝑡 is the
returns on the S&P 500 total return index:

𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝐾𝑆 =

∑

𝑡

∑
𝑡

𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡
1+𝑅𝑚𝑡
𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡
1+𝑅𝑚𝑡

We calculate the KS PME using quarterly data when available and annual data for the remaining impact funds. VC and matched PMEs are all
calculated using quarterly data. We report other absolute measures of performance, the cash flow multiple and IRR in percentage points. All
three absolute performance measures are winsorized by 2.5% on both sides. Finally, we report characteristics about the cash flow profile of
each set of funds. Effective years is the number of years funds in each sample are operating. We also report the number of total cash flows
per fund, as well as the number of contributions and distributions separately.

Vintage
Fund Size (Mill $)
KS PME
Multiple
IRR (%)
Effective Years
# Cash Flows per Fund
# Contributions
# Distributions

Impact

Matched

N

94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94

Mean

2009.1
428.9
0.743
1.154
−0.325
7.8
25.6
17.3
8.3

Median

2009.5
143.2
0.731
1.083
3.395
7.7
25.5
17
6

N

94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94
94

Mean

2009.1
419.8
0.994
1.529
9.935
7.8
29.2
17.8
11.4

Median

2009.5
160
0.923
1.335
9.037
7.8
27
17
10

VC

N

484
484
484
484
480
484
484
484
484

Mean

2006.1
372.7
0.914
1.568
5.374
11.9
33.8
20
13.8

Median

2006
280
0.823
1.327
5.185
12.4
32
19
12

Fig. 1. Impact and Benchmark Fund Geographic Focus.
We plot the share of investments by company headquarter region for impact, matched,
and VC funds. This figure plots the count of investments per region as a share of total
number of investments in a particular fund type aggregated portfolio. Data is pulled
from Pitchbook.

Fig. 2. Impact and Benchmark Fund Industries.
We plot the share of investments by industry for impact, matched, and VC funds.
This figure is created by counting the number of times one of the Fama–French 12
industries appears in a particular fund type aggregated portfolio, divided by the total
number of portfolio companies for each fund type. All fund-investment level data is
from Pitchbook.

Additionally, impact funds invest across private market asset classes.
We plot the frequencies of asset classes for the impact fund sample in
Fig. 3. The most common asset class in our sample of impact funds
is VC, followed by expansion capital, buyout, and generalist equity.
Mezzanine, real assets, and other funds are also represented in the
sample, but in much smaller numbers. Lastly, Fig. 4 shows the sequence
number of the funds in our sample. First-time funds represent about
40% of our sample, second-time funds 32%, third-time funds 16%, and
the remaining 12% are later follow-ons.

Table 2 provides summary statistics for our sample of impact and
benchmark funds. By construction, impact and matched funds have
identical moments for vintage year, and are similar in terms of size,
with a median size of $143 million for impact funds compared to $160

9 In 2023, Burgiss was acquired by MSCI.
10 Headquarter geography is collected at the portfolio company level us-
ing Pitchbook. Industry focus is collected from Pitchbook data on portfolio
companies.

million for matched funds. This is substantially lower than the VC
median of $280 million, though a handful of outliers bring the average
size of impact funds higher. We have fewer early vintage years for
our impact and matched funds than for VC funds, and correspondingly
fewer cash flows.

Both absolute performance measures (IRR and multiple) and the
PME ratio suggest impact underperforms relative to the benchmarks.
For descriptive purposes, we construct PMEs following Kaplan and
Schoar (2005), using the S&P 500 total return index for the market
return (see Online Appendix I.A.1 for more detail). On average, all of
the funds have PMEs less than one, indicating that the funds underper-
form the market. Impact as an asset class is the worst performing group
of funds by this measure, with an average PME of 0.74. Matched funds
have a PME of 0.99 and VC funds have a PME of 0.91.

Online Appendix I.B provides more detail on comparative statistics
between impact and other funds, including a comparison of unadjusted
performance by vintage, timing of cash flows, and analysis of Burgiss
funds. We address fund liquidation status by matching on vintage: both

5 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Global ESG scores. The index is also one of the oldest sustainability
benchmarks, beginning in 1999 at the start of our sample. The MSCI
Emerging Markets Investable Market Index includes small, large, and
mid-cap companies from 24 emerging market economies. The T-bill
rate and CRSP value-weighted index are from Ken French’s website.
The DJSI World is extracted from the Bloomberg terminal. The MSCI
Emerging Markets IMI index is from FactSet.

3. Characterizing risk and return in private markets

A key issue in measuring risk in private equity is that cash flows
are irregularly spaced, making regression factor analysis difficult. We
leverage two different models of stochastic discount factors implied by
existing measures of performance in the private equity literature. Our
insight is to use the gap between these performance measures to create
a statistic that captures risk exposure from cash flows. We call this
statistic the PME wedge.

3.1. Public Market Equivalent (PME)

We start with the discount rate implied by the PME, which is equiv-
alently the SDF for an investor with log-utility preferences (Kaplan and
Schoar, 2005; Sorensen and Jagannathan, 2015). Online Appendix I.A.1
provides a detailed review of the PME for readers less familiar with the
measure. The PME discount rate from time 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1 can be represented
as a stochastic discount factor of the following form:

Fig. 3. Impact Funds by Asset Class.
We plot the number of impact funds in our sample by asset class. VC funds are equity
funds that invest with an early stage focus. Other equity funds include late stage and
more generalist funds. Buyout funds are equity funds with a buyout focus that use
leverage. Debt funds are private funds that originate loans to portfolio companies. Real
asset funds invest in physical assets. The remainder of impact funds are generalist, that
invest with a variety of styles in companies at various stages.

𝑡+1)

𝑀𝑡+1 = exp(− log 𝑅𝑚
where 𝑅𝑚
𝑡+1 is the gross return on the market portfolio. When the cash
flows of a fund are discounted using this SDF, the PME has the inter-
pretation of an excess return relative to the market. The market return
is a proxy for the return on the investor’s overall wealth portfolio.

(1)

While the PME has many useful features, it also has limitations,
which we leverage for our purposes. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) orig-
inally note that the PME implicitly assumes that systematic risk 𝛽
is equal to one.11 Korteweg and Nagel (2016) show that under the
assumption of jointly log-normal returns, the SDF of the PME implies
the following risk–return relationship:

log 𝐸[𝑅𝑡+1] = log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝜎2

𝑚 + 𝛽𝜎2
𝑚

(2)

𝑚 and the (log) risk-free rate to log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1]−𝜎2

This SDF restricts the equity premium to the variance of log market
return 𝜎2
𝑚. Korteweg and
Nagel (2016)’s observation is that this relationship is inconsequential
for assets with 𝛽 = 1, for which the risk–return relationship reduces to
log 𝐸[𝑅𝑡+1] = log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1]. However, for assets with 𝛽 different from
one, PME can be distortionary. Korteweg and Nagel (2016) argue this
is particularly a concern during times of strongly rising equity markets,
when log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − log 𝑅𝑓 > 𝜎2
𝑚. The SDF will then not accurately
adjust for market risk exposure, leading PME estimates to be excessively
high for high 𝛽 assets when equity markets are rising.

3.2. Generalized Public Market Equivalent (GPME)

We create a new statistic by comparing the PME with the Gener-
alized PME (GPME) from Korteweg and Nagel (2016). The GPME is
conceptually similar to the PME, but the single-period SDF used to
discount PE fund cash flows takes the more flexible form:

𝑀 ∗

𝑡+1 = exp(𝑎 − 𝑏𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1)

where 𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1 is the log market return at 𝑡 + 1.

(3)

11 Alternatively, Sorensen and Jagannathan (2015) show that the assumption
on 𝛽 can be relaxed if one takes the perspective of the dynamic CAPM of
Rubinstein (1976).

Fig. 4. Impact Funds by Sequence Number.
We plot the number of impact funds in our sample by sequence number, i.e. whether
the fund is first, second, or further along in a series.

impact and matched funds that are not fully liquidated have NAV as
their final period distribution payout. We show that while NAV does
tend to overestimate future cash flows, this overestimation is similar
across impact, matched, and VC samples. Based on this analysis, we
conclude that the use of NAV as a final distribution for young funds
will not affect the conclusions we make about the relative risk and
performance between the three samples. We further check that our
main results are not driven by young funds’ final NAV distribution, by
limiting analysis to funds with at least seven years of data.

2.4. Public market replicating portfolios

To compute the GPME, we require public market portfolios that
replicate the timing of capital accumulations and payouts of our private
market funds. We use the one-month T-bill for the risk free rate and
the CRSP value-weighted index for the market return. For additional
factors, we use the Dow-Jones Sustainability World Index (DJSI World)
and the MSCI Emerging Markets IMI index. The DJSI World represents
the top 10% of companies in the S&P Global BMI based on their S&P

6 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Under this flexible SDF, the PME is a special case when 𝑎 = 0 and
𝑏 = 1. When 𝑎 and 𝑏 are estimated to reflect the market return and
risk-free rate, assuming jointly log-normal returns, this SDF implies the
following log-linear 𝛽 pricing relationship that appropriately accounts
for market risk exposure.

log 𝐸[𝑅𝑡+1] = 𝑟𝑓 + 𝛽(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 )

(4)

We provide more details on GPME and describe the estimation

procedure for parameters 𝑎 and 𝑏 in Section 4.1 and Appendix A.

The GPME takes a benchmarking perspective, asking how an invest-
ment adds value to an investor’s portfolio that would not be attainable
from the market. Instead of using a ratio as in the classic PME formu-
lation in Kaplan and Schoar (2005), the GPME in Korteweg and Nagel
(2016) is defined as the sum of discounted distributions minus the sum
of discounted contributions, using the multi-period discount rate:

𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖 =

𝐽
∑

𝑗=1

𝑀 ∗,ℎ(𝑗)

𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)Distributions𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) −

𝐽
∑

𝑗=1

𝑀 ∗,ℎ(𝑗)

𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)Calls𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)

(5)

Each cash flow is discounted to time 𝑡, including the initial invest-
ment. Moreover, each cash flow is normalized by the size of the fund.
Because of this, the GPME can be described as the NPV of $1 invested
in the fund. Under the null hypothesis of no abnormal performance,
𝐸[𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖] = 0.

The GPME has its own limitations. Gredil et al. (2020) show that
an NPV-based estimator of fund performance may suffer more bias
for samples with longer fund life, something we confirm in Online
Appendix I.C.3. Nonetheless, we show in Online Appendix I.B.2.4 that
our results are not due to different fund lives for our benchmark funds.
We also show in Online Appendix I.C.1 and I.C.2 that our approach is
robust to concerns about finite sample performance and number of cash
flows.

Another limitation is the noisiness of individual fund GPME es-
timates. To solve this statistical issue, Korteweg and Nagel (2022)
propose a new performance measure, 𝛼, which is less sensitive to
noise in individual fund cash flows while still preserving the aggregate
pricing implications of GPME. However, this approach imposes stronger
assumptions which make it ill-suited to comparing risk exposure across
strategies. We discuss this approach in Appendix B and show that it
results in 𝛽 estimates that are consistent with our wedge approach.
We also use this approach to plot the dispersion of individual asset
performance for different asset classes in Section 4.1.

3.3. The PME wedge intuition

We use the difference between the PME and GPME (the ‘‘PME
wedge’’) to inform us about the 𝛽 of an underlying asset, where 𝛽 is
the covariance with a factor representing an investor’s wealth portfolio,
such as the public market. For this purpose, the GPME is defined as
in Eq. (5), and the PME is defined as the special case of the GPME
where the SDF parameters in Eq. (3) are restricted to 𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1.

𝐸[PME wedge𝑖] ≡ 𝐸[𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖] − 𝐸[𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖]

(6)

One of the advantages of this approach is that it requires relatively few
assumptions. The PME wedge does not rely on either of the models
being the true model of expected returns. The only assumption needed
for our statistic to adequately capture 𝛽 is that private equity returns
and factor returns are jointly log-normal.

Assuming that the public market and the private fund gross returns
are jointly log-normal, the PME SDF in expression (1) implies a pricing
model with a log expected return as in expression (2). Our sample
measure of 𝐸[𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖] is then the pricing error of this log-utility model.
Similarly, the GPME SDF formulation (3) implies a pricing model with
log expected return in expression (4). Our sample measure 𝐸[𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖]
is the pricing error for a log-linear CAPM model.

In the case of the PME, a non-zero pricing error reflects two com-
ponents: one is a true 𝛼, which may not be captured by the expected

return of a CAPM model, and the other is the expected return difference
between the PME (as in expression (2)) and GPME (as in expression
(4)). The PME wedge, which takes the difference between 𝐸[𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖]
and 𝐸[𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖], removes any true 𝛼 component not captured by either
model, and only implies an expected return difference between the PME
and GPME.

Both models can have mispricing in terms of pricing error, but by
taking the difference between the two pricing errors, our wedge esti-
mate is one-to-one with the following expression under log-normality,
where 𝛽 =

:

𝐶𝑜𝑣(𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1,𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1)
𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1)

(𝛽 − 1)(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2
𝑚)

(7)

Since we do not need either SDF to be the true SDF, our approach
creates a model-free statistic. The exponential affine SDF format is
useful for our purposes because it directly relates the PME wedge to
𝛽, but it is not a modeling assumption. In particular, whenever we
𝑚) ≠ 0,
measure this wedge over a period when (log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2
the wedge is roughly proportional to the deviation of 𝛽 from a value of
1. Because 𝑎 and 𝑏 are chosen to exactly price the market and risk-free
asset, the wedge recovers the 𝛽 of private market fund cash flows with
the market return.

The ideal way to assess risk exposure and market 𝛽 would be to run
factor regressions and directly measure covariances. However, in the
face of data challenges from private market cash flows, we prefer to
use our PME wedge to infer the risk exposure for the following reasons.
First, the PME wedge is easy to compute in the sense that it compares
the net present value of cash flows with two different discount rates.
Furthermore, assessing risk using only one of these net present values
is impossible; we need two measures that behave in reliably consistent
ways (see Section 3.4). Second, this approach backs out risk exposure
using only fund cash flows data, avoiding the many issues caused by
irregularly spaced cash flows or using NAVs to form a consistent return
series.12 Third, the measure only relies on the assumption that public
market index and private equity log returns are jointly normal, which
is a standard assumption in SDF-based asset pricing.

3.4. Prediction development

We now explain how we can characterize risk and performance
properties of different asset classes using the properties of the PME
wedge. We start with predictions regarding market risk, then move to
covariance with other factors. Again, GPME is defined as in Eq. (5),
and the PME is the special case of the GPME where the SDF parameters
in Eq. (3) are restricted to 𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1.

3.4.1. Market risk predictions

In periods of rising equity markets (i.e., states of the world when
the equity premium is higher than what is assumed under the PME),
the PME systematically overestimates the performance of high-𝛽 assets
when compared to the GPME, and underestimates the performance of
low-𝛽 assets.

Assuming jointly log-normal private-equity and market returns, the
difference between PME and GPME, the ‘‘PME wedge’’, directly reflects
a sample estimate of the estimator in expression (7). This flows directly
from rearranging Eqs. (2) and (4).13 Notice that this difference reduces

12 For example, NAVs are stale (leading to downward bias in 𝛽), can be
manipulated, mix pre-fee with post-fee cash flows, and often do not reflect
market values for portfolio companies (Korteweg, 2019). Recent papers have
tried various ways to solve the issues with NAV, such as estimating Dimson 𝛽s
(Anson, 2007; Woodward, 2009; Ewens et al., 2013) or unsmoothing NAVs
(Goetzmann et al., 2018; Couts et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2023). These
methods solve the staleness problems of NAVs, but do not address remaining
issues.

13 A full derivation of these expressions can be found in the Online Appendix

of Korteweg and Nagel (2016).

7 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

to zero when 𝛽 is one. When 𝛽 is different than one, our predictions
depend on the magnitude of the equity premium.

We say the market equity premium is sufficiently high if

(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2

𝑚) > 0

(8)

where log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] is the log expected gross return of the market
portfolio and 𝜎2
𝑚 is the variance of the log gross returns of the market
portfolio. While this is derived under the assumption of jointly log-
normal returns, it should be approximately true in the data. This
definition characterizes how much the equity premium observed ex
post deviates from what is assumed by the log-utility PME model. Our
first prediction formalizes the behavior of the SDF when the equity
premium is sufficiently high.

Prediction 4 (P4). Levered 𝛽. When the market equity premium is
sufficiently high, the PME wedge increases with 𝑘 if 𝛽𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 > 0. The wedge
decreases with 𝑘 if 𝛽𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 < 0. Also, the relative slope of PME wedge
with 𝑘 reflects the relative magnitude of the asset’s 𝛽. If Slope𝐵𝑒𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘 >
Slope𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡, then 𝛽𝐵𝑒𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘 > 𝛽𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡.

Combining P2 and P4, we can back out ranges for 𝛽 by looking at
the plot of the PME wedge against the leverage factor 𝑘. If the wedge
is decreasing, 𝛽 < 0; if the wedge is increasing but less than 0 at 𝑘 = 0,
then 0 < 𝛽 < 1; and if the wedge is increasing and greater than 0 at
𝑘 = 0, then 𝛽 > 1. Moreover, if the slope with respect to leverage is
steeper for one asset than for another, the 𝛽 for the underlying asset
is higher. We use these predictions to determine the pro-cyclicality of
impact investing in Section 4.

Prediction 1 (P1). SDF. When the equity premium is sufficiently high,
the parameters of the SDF will not be those of the log-utility SDF. That is,
for an SDF of the form 𝑀 ∗
𝑡+1 = exp(𝑎 − 𝑏𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1), 𝑏 > 1. When the equity
premium is sufficiently low, 𝑏 < 1. 𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1 only holds when
log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1).

We provide the proof in Appendix I.A.5. When Prediction 1 is true,
then the distortions of the PME will be relevant for assets with a 𝛽
different from one.

If 𝛽 is greater than one, then the PME understates the market equity
premium and overestimates the abnormal return of the asset. The
GPME corrects for this effect. Thus, when the PME overstates abnormal
performance (𝑃 𝑀𝐸 > 𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸) in a one-factor model, we can conclude
that 𝛽 is greater than one and the asset is pro-cyclical. More formally
from Eq. (7), we derive the following prediction.

Prediction 2 (P2). 𝛽. When the market equity premium is sufficiently
high, PME overstates abnormal performance for high-𝛽 (𝛽> 1) assets and
understates abnormal performance for low-𝛽 (𝛽< 1) assets in a one-factor
model. If 𝑃 𝑀𝐸 = 𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸, then 𝛽 = 1.

We use our predictions to compare the 𝛽 of impact to the 𝛽 of a set
of benchmark funds. From Eq. (7), within the same time period, the
gap between PME and GPME depends on the magnitude of 𝛽. Defining
the PME wedge as 𝑃 𝑀𝐸 − 𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸, we make the following prediction.

Prediction 3 (P3). Relative 𝛽. When the market equity premium is suffi-
ciently high, and all else equal, the relative magnitude of the PME wedge re-
flects the relative magnitude of the asset’s 𝛽. If (𝑃 𝑀𝐸 −𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸)𝐵𝑒𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘 >
(𝑃 𝑀𝐸 − 𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸)𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡, then 𝛽𝐵𝑒𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘 > 𝛽𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡.

We also use artificially levered cash flows to provide additional
information on the magnitude of 𝛽. This exercise was first developed
in Korteweg and Nagel (2016) as a robustness test for confirming the
sign of 𝛽. We simulate increasing 𝛽 by increasing a leverage factor 𝑘
applied to fund cash flows and then estimating the PME and GPME of
the levered cash flows using the original SDFs.

The levered PME wedge is a direct amplification of the unlev-
ered wedge plus an additional pricing error of PME on the risk-free
replicating portfolios. We provide details for the properties of these
cash flows and the corresponding wedge in Online Appendix I.A.3.
Assuming jointly log-normal returns, the levered PME wedge reflects
a sample estimate of the following estimator, which depends on 𝛽 and
the leverage factor 𝑘:

(𝛽𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 − 1)(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2

𝑚) + 𝑘𝛽𝑢𝑛𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 (log 𝐸[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2
𝑚)
(9)

3.4.2. Predictions for covariance with other factors

So far we have limited ourselves to a CAPM model where the
return on the market portfolio represents the return on a representative
investor’s wealth portfolio. We may care about covariance with other
factors, for example a public sustainability factor or an emerging mar-
ket factor. We can use the same intuition for different public market
indices that may reasonably capture alternative assets that constitute a
representative investor’s wealth portfolio.

We start by generalizing Eq. (7), which is reflected in the PME

wedge under log-normal returns, to any public-market factor 𝑋.

(𝛽 − 1)(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑋,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2
𝑋 )

(10)

We can also generalize Eq. (9), which is defined by the PME wedge

at leverage factor 𝑘 under lognormal returns:

(𝛽 − 1)(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑋,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2

𝑋 ) + 𝑘𝛽(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑋,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2
𝑋 )

(11)

Our predictions now depend on the magnitude of the equity pre-
mium for 𝑋. The equity premium of public-market factor 𝑋 is suffi-
ciently high if

(log 𝐸[𝑅𝑋,𝑡+1] − 𝑟𝑓 − 𝜎2

𝑋 ) > 0

(12)

Prediction 5 (P5). 𝛽 for factor 𝑋. If the equity premium is sufficiently
high for a public market factor 𝑋, then a positive PME wedge implies a
𝛽𝑋 > 1 for that factor.

Similarly, we can apply the logic of P4 and use artificial leveraging
to back out the covariance structure of impact investing returns relative
to public market factor 𝑋.

Prediction 6 (P6). Levered 𝛽 for factor 𝑋. If the equity premium is
sufficiently high for a public market factor 𝑋, then a positive relationship
between the PME wedge and the leverage factor 𝑘 indicates a 𝛽𝑋 > 0 for
that factor.

Finally, we can examine the risk profile of impact investing cash
flows more generally using multifactor models, which might better
reflect the tastes of investors. In these exercises, we examine what
publicly traded factors span impact investing returns. To undertake
this analysis, we test whether impact and benchmark cash flows have
abnormal performance when discounted with SDFs that account for
different risk factors.

Prediction 7 (P7). Multifactor GPME. If impact investing returns are
spanned by public market factors, then the GPME with respect to these
factors is zero when cash flows are discounted with a multifactor SDF.

A significant non-zero GPME with a multifactor SDF indicates that

impact investing cannot be replicated with these public market factors.

Therefore, the artificial leverage approach helps us generate the

We use these predictions to determine the exposure of private

following predictions.

market impact investing to alternative factors in Section 5.

8 

J. Jeffers et al.

4. Impact investing funds and market risk

Our first step for assessing the financial merits of impact investing
is to measure impact investing strategies’ exposure to public market
risk and their market risk-adjusted return. This analysis considers the
case where the return on a representative investor’s wealth portfolio is
approximated by the return on the market. We first examine private
fund performance through the PME and GPME, then build on these
results to examine the market risk exposure, or 𝛽, of each strategy.
Lastly, we build long-short portfolios to sharpen the comparison across
impact investing and benchmark funds.

4.1. PME and GPME estimation with market factor

We use two SDFs to price impact and PE cash flows: the GPME is
abnormal performance when the SDF 𝑀 ∗
𝑡+1 = exp(𝑎 − 𝑏𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1) is used to
price cash flows, and the PME restricts this SDF to a special case where
𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1.

We begin by estimating the parameters for 𝑀 ∗

𝑡+1. We follow Ko-
rteweg and Nagel (2016) and create public market replicating portfolios
of the risk-free rate and the gross market return, for each impact,
matched, and VC fund in our sample. The purpose of these public mar-
ket replicating portfolios is to create a cash flow series for an investor
that invests in and receives distributions from public assets at roughly
the same time intervals as the fund cash flow series we are interested
in pricing. We then use GMM to find the parameters of the SDF such
that the expected sum of discounted cash flows across all replicating
portfolios is equal to zero. In order to create a consistent measure of
performance, we price public market portfolios that replicate all of our
sample fund cash flows (impact, matched, and VC funds together), and
use the one set of parameters throughout our analysis. More details on
the estimation method and the relevant assumptions can be found in
Appendix A.

The results of our estimation of SDF parameters are in Table 3.
In the first column, the PME implicitly assumes that the coefficient
associated with the risk-free rate (𝑎) is 0 and the slope coefficient on the
market return (𝑏) is 1. Our estimates in the second column demonstrate
that the ex-post SDF is very different from the PME assumptions. Using
the procedure described above to estimate the realized SDF, we find
the slope coefficient on the log market return (𝑏) is 3.913 and the co-
efficient associated with the risk-free rate (𝑎) is 0.199. These estimates
are consistent with relatively ‘‘hot’’ equity markets in Prediction 1.14

We now examine how the SDFs from Table 3 price the impact and
matched fund cash flows. From Eq. (5), fund-level GPME is given by:

𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖 =

𝐽
∑

𝑗=1

𝑀 ∗,ℎ(𝑗)
𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)

𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)

for fund 𝑖, cash flow time 𝑗, cash flow horizon ℎ(𝑗), and cash flows 𝐶.
Fund-level PME is given as:

𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑖 =

𝐽
∑

𝑗=1

𝑀 ℎ(𝑗),𝑃 𝑀𝐸
𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)

𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)

In Table 4, we report the average performance of impact and
matched funds under the PME and the market risk GPME SDF, using the
SDF parameters from Table 3. We report standard errors in parentheses
and p-values of the J-test of whether (𝐺)𝑃 𝑀𝐸 = 0 in brackets. For our
J-test, we take a conservative approach and adjust the spectral density
matrix for correlation between pricing errors and for estimation errors

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

in subsamples with unequal lengths (to the best of our knowledge, this
is new to our paper, and we provide details in Appendix A).

Panel (a) presents our results for impact funds. We find a negative
impact PME of −$0.21 per $1 of capital committed. The 𝑝-value is
small, but this in part reflects the fact that the SDF parameters for
the PME are assumed (𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1) rather than estimated.
We also find that the market risk GPME of impact funds is negative
and statistically different from zero. After accounting for market risk
and the equity premium environment, impact funds underperform the
market index by $0.47 per $1. Using the direct alpha approach of Gredil
et al. (2023) with our quarterly cash flows and estimated SDF, this
GPME corresponds to an average quarterly risk-adjusted excess return
of −8.8%. The overestimation of the PME relative to the GPME suggests
that impact has a market 𝛽 greater than one, in line with Prediction 2.
The underperformance of impact investing relative to public markets is
consistent with the general underperformance of constrained strategies,
and the positive PME wedge with a pro-cyclical profile.

We report the results for the matched benchmark funds in panel
(b). Matched funds’ PME and GPME estimates are also negative, but
less so than for impact funds: the PME of matched funds is −$0.01
per $1 capital committed and GPME is −$0.33, and we reject zero
pricing errors for GPME with 10% significance. As in the impact fund
sample, the PME overestimates the performance of matched funds
relative to GPME. The PME wedge is larger for matched funds than for
impact funds, suggesting that matched funds have larger market risk
exposure. A public market equity investor would seem to do slightly
better investing in the matched group of funds than in impact, but not
significantly so. In line with this, we estimate an average direct alpha
for matched funds of −4.4% per quarter. We evaluate the difference
between impact and matched funds more directly through long-short
portfolios in Section 4.3.

In panel (c), we provide the same analysis for US VC funds. Impact
and matched funds’ underperformance relative to the market appears to
reflect the broader underperformance of VC over the same time period.
The VC PME is also negative but less so than the impact PME, showing
an abnormal loss of −$0.07 per $1 of capital committed. However,
the VC GPME is close to the impact GPME, at a risk-adjusted loss of
−$0.43 per $1 of capital committed. We can reject zero pricing errors
for GPME. This GPME corresponds to a direct alpha estimate of −6.4%
per quarter for VC funds.15 The results are consistent with previous
literature in indicating a 𝛽 of VC larger than one (Prediction 2) (Boyer
et al., 2019; Cochrane, 2005). Our results suggest that an investor’s
portfolio would perform about equally poorly by adding either impact
or VC, if she cares about market risk exposure. We return to this claim
in Section 4.3.

The results in Table 4 represent averages for each strategy over a
wide range of funds. Yet investors may be driven by the performance of
top quartile funds (Harris et al., 2014; Korteweg and Sorensen, 2017).
To understand the dispersion underlying our results, we compute fund-
level 𝛼 following Korteweg and Nagel (2022) for each of the three asset
classes. As discussed in Appendix B, this approach requires different
SDFs for each asset class, so comparisons should be taken with caution.
We report the results in Table B.1 and Fig. B.1. Impact funds have
a greater standard deviation than matched funds, and in particular a
slightly longer right tail relative to matched funds. VC funds, which
are much more numerous, have the largest standard deviation and right
tail. In terms of market risk exposure, the 𝛼 approach implies a 𝛽 of 0.6
for impact funds and 1.8 for matched funds. The 𝛽 for VC funds is even
higher, at 2.5. These results are consistent with the ordering implied
by the PME wedge and illustrated in Fig. 5.

14 The estimates are different from those of Korteweg and Nagel (2016),
who measure a risk-free rate coefficient of 0.062 and a log market return
slope coefficient of 2.361 for funds with post-1998 vintages. These differences
primarily reflect differences in cash flow timings: our sample extends the
Korteweg and Nagel cash flows by nine years to 2021.

15 While direct alpha tends to reduce the high sensitivity of IRR-based
measures to early distributions, the inflation of VC’s direct alpha relative to
impact in this context is likely related to the strongly negative public market
returns early in the life of our sample of VC funds, which have a mean vintage
of 2006. This highlights the importance of our matched fund comparison.

9 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Table 4
Estimated performance relative to market risk.
We compute PME and GPME relative to the market risk factor using the SDF parameters
from Table 3. We report the standard error in parentheses below the estimate, and the
𝑝-value of the J-test of whether the estimate is zero in brackets on the third line. Panel
(a) estimates performance for impact funds, Panel (b) for nonimpact funds matched to
the impact fund sample using asset class, vintage, and size, and Panel (c) for VC funds.

Panel (a): Impact funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (b): Matched funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (c): VC funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

PME

−0.206
(0.041)
[0.000]

PME

−0.013
(0.033)
[0.707]

PME

−0.070
(0.088)
[0.424]

GPME

−0.470
(0.186)
[0.012]

GPME

−0.330
(0.184)
[0.073]

GPME

−0.433
(0.120)
[0.000]

Table 5
Estimated performance of value-weighted long-short portfolios relative to market risk.
We compute PME and GPME relative to the market risk factor for two sets of value-
weighted vintage portfolios: Panel (a) estimates performance for the portfolios that are
long matched funds and short impact funds, where matched funds are paired to impact
funds using asset class, vintage, and size, and Panel (b) for the portfolios that are long
VC funds and short impact funds. We report the standard error in parentheses below
the estimate, and the 𝑝-value of the J-test of whether the estimate is zero in brackets
on the third line. Both panels use the SDF parameters from Table 3.

Panel (a): Match-impact

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (b): VC-impact

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

PME

0.060
(0.054)
[0.265]

PME

0.138
(0.079)
[0.080]

GPME

−0.015
(0.099)
[0.881]

GPME

−0.159
(0.069)
[0.022]

wedge should become negative as levered 𝛽 falls below one and the
PME begins to understate performance.

The dashed line for matched funds is consistent with Prediction 4
for a high-𝛽 asset: the PME wedge increases as the leverage factor
increases. The solid line for impact funds also increases, but is flatter
across leverage factors 𝑘 than the matched fund line. We can reject a
zero wedge at 𝑘 = 0 with 95% confidence, suggesting that 𝛽 must be
at least one, but the relatively flat slope of the wedge line indicates
that 𝛽 is not much higher than one. The higher sensitivity of the
matched benchmark to leverage factors shows that impact’s lower 𝛽
is not entirely explained by size, asset class, or vintage.

To provide further context to this figure, we also plot a dotted line
for the PME wedge of VC funds. The rapidly increasing line for VC is in
line with literature estimates that place VC 𝛽 substantially above one.16
This provides some reassurance that our approach yields reasonable
estimates. The figure also shows that both matched and impact funds
have significantly lower market risk exposure than VC funds. Although
impact’s lower 𝛽 is not entirely explained by size, asset class, or vintage,
it seems that it is partly explained by these characteristics, underlining
the importance of the matched fund comparison.

16 E.g. Cochrane (2005) (1.9), Woodward (2009) (2.2), and Ang et al. (2018)

(1.8).

10 

Fig. 5. PME-GPME Wedge Using Market Risk SDF.
We plot the PME-GPME wedge of artificially levered funds with different leverage 𝑘.
We create artificially levered fund cash flows 𝐿𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) using impact funds, VC funds, or
funds matched to our impact sample on asset class, vintage, and size, 𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗), as well
as the corresponding T-bill funds, 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗):

𝐿𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) = 𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) + 𝑘(𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) − 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗))

The SDF for the GPME is the market risk SDF from Table 3, and the SDF for the PME
is the log-utility CAPM SDF from the same table. The wedge is the difference between
PME and GPME point estimates. The error bars are 95% confidence intervals using
bootstrap standard errors from 1000 bootstrap samples of impact or benchmark funds.

Table 3
Estimated SDF with market risk.
The SDF for both PME and GPME relative to market
risk is given by 𝑀 ∗
𝑡+1 = exp(𝑎 − 𝑏𝑟𝑡+1), where 𝑟𝑡+1
is the log of the return on the market. The SDF
corresponding to the PME is the SDF for a log-utility
model, where 𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1. The SDF corresponding
to the GPME relaxes this assumption. We use the CRSP
value-weighted index on Kenneth French website as
the market. We estimate this SDF using public asset
portfolios to replicate pooled VC, matched, and impact
fund cash flows, as described in Appendix A.

PME SDF

GPME SDF

𝑎

𝑏

0

1

0.199
(0.066)
3.913
(0.719)

4.2. Backing out market risk exposure using artificial leverage

The relatively small PME wedge of impact when compared to the
other private market strategies suggests that impact funds have a low
𝛽 with public markets. In this section, we use artificial leverage to
bound the 𝛽 of impact relative to non-impact options. We use the SDF
estimates in Table 3 to price levered cash flows given in equation A.4,
comparing PME and GPME estimates at each leverage point.

We plot the PME wedge for impact, matched funds, and VC funds in
Fig. 5. We create 95% confidence intervals by bootstrapping the wedge
estimates 1000 times. At 𝑘 = 0, there is no additional leverage and
the wedge is the difference between the PME and GPME estimates as
in Section 4.1. As we increase 𝑘 to a leverage factor of one and two,
we artificially increase the 𝛽 of the cash flows. Thus, for any asset
with a positive 𝛽, we expect an increasing wedge with the addition
of more leverage (Prediction 4). A 𝛽 of zero would yield a constant
wedge (horizontal line), as additional leverage does not affect the
wedge magnitude. We can also apply negative leverage to the cash
flows, replicating a decrease in 𝛽. As 𝑘 approaches negative one, the

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

We do not find impact is absolutely countercyclical: impact 𝛽 is
positive, and appears to be greater than one. Nonetheless, our results
indicate impact fund returns are relatively less cyclical than those
of comparable private market strategies. This finding is important as
more investors consider adding impact to their portfolios, not only
among VC investors but also among institutional investors like pension
funds.17 The difference in 𝛽 across the three strategies is economically
meaningful. Looking at the PME in Table 4, matched funds appear to
have almost zero pricing errors while impact funds have a significant
negative return. Yet when we adjust for 𝛽 using GPME, both strategies
have significant negative returns, even if impact funds still yield a
relatively lower return. The economic importance of adjusting for 𝛽 is
even more salient when we contrast impact with VC funds. VC funds
clearly outperform impact funds on total returns (PME), but not so
clearly on risk-adjusted returns (GPME). In the next section, we test
the difference in risk exposure and risk-adjusted returns by constructing
long-short portfolios.

4.3. Comparing risk and return through long-short portfolios

We directly test the performance and risk of impact relative to
benchmark funds by creating portfolios of cash flows that go long $1 in
benchmark funds and short $1 in impact funds. This is not a replicable
strategy, but is meant to test relative differences in performance and
risk between benchmark and impact funds. In this section, we look at
value-weighted long-short portfolios to give us a better picture of the
performance of the asset class as a whole. In Appendix I.B.2.2, we also
provide results for equal-weighted long-short portfolios as statistical
tests of the PME and GPME differences in Table 4. In addition to
reporting returns, we artificially lever up the long-short portfolios to
determine whether the strategies have a net positive or negative market
𝛽.

4.3.1. Value-weighted long-short portfolios

We price value-weighted long-short portfolios in order to better
measure relative performance differences between a marginal dollar
invested in non-impact and impact strategies. Conceptually, we invest
$1 in the basket of benchmark funds available in our time period, and
sell $1 in the basket of impact funds available during the same time.

We create fund size-weighted portfolios of fund cash flows for
each vintage year in the sample. These portfolios are constructed as
a short portfolio of impact funds’ size-weighted cash flows subtracted
from a long portfolio of benchmark funds’ size-weighted cash flows.
The result is 14 weighted long-short portfolios of cash flows, one for
each vintage year in the impact sample. We normalize each of the 14
portfolios such that the cash flows reflect that vintage’s size relative to
other vintages. This is especially important for VC funds which have a
different distribution of vintages relative to the impact fund sample.

Table 5 presents the PME and GPME estimates of our value-weighted
portfolios, using SDF estimates from Table 3. Panel (a) presents results
using matched funds on the long side. The first column contains
the PME estimates that assume the strategy has 𝛽 = 0, effectively
discounting the long-short cash flows by the risk-free rate. The second
column contains the GPME estimates. The PME estimate for a portfolio
going long in matched funds and short impact funds is positive, $0.06
per $1 of committed capital, though we cannot reject zero pricing
errors. When we adjust for market risk exposure with the GPME, the
returns of going long matched funds and shorting impact are negative,
−$0.02 per $1 of committed capital, but again we cannot reject zero
pricing errors.18

17 Financial Times, July 7, 2019.

‘‘Pension funds join impact investing

campaign for a better world’’.

18 When replicating the results in Burgiss (Appendix I.B.2.1), we find bench-
mark funds in Burgiss perform better than their peers in Preqin and better than
impact as an asset class. For the Burgiss version of the long-short portfolio, we
can reject zero pricing errors with the PME but not with the GPME.

In Panel (b), we report the benchmark using VC funds on the long
side. The PME results are positive, like those using matched funds, but
the GPME results show VC funds actually perform worse than impact
funds as a strategy during this period once we adjust for market risk
exposure.19 Combining these results with the matched-impact compar-
ison in panel (a) indicates that characteristics such as asset class and
vintage play a role in impact’s performance over the time period.

For an investor who cares about market risk exposure, impact’s
performance as an asset class in our sample period is close to that of
matched funds, and possibly better than that of US-focused VC funds.
This finding is surprising, given that impact funds have an additional
constraint relative to non-impact funds: their investments need to
generate a social return in addition to a financial return. If investors
can achieve similar returns by investing in impact opportunities, why
not do that?

One possibility is that private market investors care about absolute
and not risk-adjusted returns. We normally think of a dollar being
more valuable in downturns than expansions for most investors, but
this may not reflect the preferences of investors in private markets,
either because their wealth portfolio is different than the market, or
because preferences are influenced by other factors than the marginal
propensity to consume. We return to these questions in Section 5.

Another possibility is that, given information frictions in private
markets, investors are not fully informed about the opportunity set in
impact investing. Cole et al. (2021) propose that impact funds’ access
to certain markets, and imperfect integration of these with traditional
markets, provide the possibility for impact funds to outperform. More
broadly, market frictions like information barriers, investor biases,
and imperfect competition (in capital or product markets) could be
possible factors in impact’s relatively strong performance compared to
benchmarks. Deal flow funnels for investors in matched and VC funds
may be as restrictive as those for impact funds. For example, Gompers
et al. (2020) find in their survey of VCs that healthcare VCs tend to
consider fewer deals per investment than other VCs, reflecting both a
smaller universe of healthcare entrepreneurs with domain expertise and
larger fixed costs for evaluating healthcare deals. A VC may be a health
fund which is constrained to only healthcare deals, while an impact
fund may invest in any broadly defined environmental and socially
responsible projects.

4.3.2. Long short portfolio wedges

To supplement this analysis, we also apply artificial leverage to
the value-weighted long-short cash flow portfolios. Applying artificial
leverage to the net cash flows is another way to test both whether the
𝛽 of the benchmarks and impact are different and whether the 𝛽 of
the benchmarks are greater than the 𝛽 of impact. If a benchmark and
impact 𝛽 are the same, then the 𝛽 of that long-short portfolio should
be zero, and the PME wedge should stay constant as we increase 𝑘. We
formalize this intuition in Appendix I.A.6.

What we observe in Fig. 6 is a wedge that is increasing in artificial
leverage 𝑘 for both long-short portfolios constructed in the previous sec-
tion. The positive slopes of both the matched-impact LS portfolio (solid
line) and the VC-impact LS portfolio (dashed line) indicate that the 𝛽
of the net cash flows are positive: as 𝑘 increases, the GPME becomes
more negative and the wedge increases. This is further evidence that
the 𝛽 of both benchmarks is greater than the 𝛽 of impact, although we
note that our confidence intervals are too large to statistically reject a
zero wedge at any value of the leverage factor. We see these results as
an additional indication that impact investing provides lower market
exposure than other private market strategies, including compared to
matched funds.

19 We find similar results in the Burgiss data but cannot reject zero pricing

errors.

11 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

with 𝑓 = 2 to test whether impact, matched, and VC fund returns
can be spanned by additional risk factors. We proxy for the public
sustainability factor by using the Dow-Jones Sustainability World Index
(DJSI World).

Our main results are in Table 6. As in Table 4, Panel (a) provides
estimates for impact funds, Panel (b) for matched funds, and Panel (c)
for VC funds. In the first column, we repeat the GPME estimates from
the one-factor market risk model as a reference. The second column
corresponds to the GPME estimates for the two-factor SDF with the
market and public sustainability index. In both columns, we report
standard errors in parentheses and p-values for the J-test of whether
the GPME=0 in brackets. To test whether the multifactor models span
returns, we focus on whether the J-test implies that we cannot reject
zero pricing errors.

Our first observation is that the GPME estimate for impact funds
moves closer to zero when we add the public sustainability index to the
market factor. In the single market factor model, we reject zero pricing
errors, finding an abnormal loss of −$0.47 relative to the market. In
the two-factor model with public sustainability, the estimate goes up
to −$0.38. We can still reject zero pricing errors but only at a 10%
significance level.

Our second observation is that in contrast to the results for impact
funds, adding the public sustainability index does not seem to improve
the model for matched funds. Matched funds lose −$0.33 per $1 of
capital committed relative to the market; this loss moves to −$0.34 per
$1 committed when we risk-adjust using the market and sustainability
multifactor model. For VC funds, the GPME estimate moves to −$0.40
lost per $1 of capital committed compared to −$0.43 in the single-factor
CAPM model.

We conclude that the additional explanatory power of the public
sustainability factor for impact funds is not the mechanical result of
adding a factor. Instead, impact funds appear to have a distinct risk
exposure from benchmark funds, that is captured by adding the public
sustainability index to the market factor. We explore this in further
detail in the next section.

5.2. Alternative wealth portfolios

Alternative models of impact risk and return may also take the
form of one-factor models with different single factors, corresponding
to different investor wealth portfolios. For example, the portfolios of
sustainability-motivated individuals may be constructed so that the
return on their wealth portfolio is best approximated by the return on a
public sustainability index, rather than the return on the market. In that
case, it is important to consider the performance of impact investing
(and benchmark strategies) relative to the factor that best represents
investors’ wealth portfolios (Sorensen and Jagannathan, 2015). Alterna-
tive one-factor models also allow us to paint a richer picture of the risk
properties of impact investing by providing alternative 𝛽s, estimates of
comovement with other factors.

We measure the exposure of impact funds to two separate factors
that may be relevant financial risks for impact investor limited partners,
public sustainability and emerging markets. We show that impact in-
vesting has distinct risk characteristics along these dimensions as well,
and that alternative wealth portfolios can imply different assessments
of whether impact is concessionary.

5.2.1. Public sustainability

We first consider a scenario where the alternative wealth port-
folio for investors is not the market, but the publicly traded sus-
tainability index. We imagine this to be an appropriate portfolio for
some sustainability-motivated high-income individuals. This alternative
model with the public sustainability index (DJSI World) as the single
factor overlaps to some extent with the CAPM model because we do not
partial out the market. The difference is that this allows for a wealth

Fig. 6. PME-GPME Wedge of Value-Weighted Long-Short Portfolio.
We create two sets of vintage portfolios, one that is long VC funds and short impact
funds, and the other that is long matched funds and short impact funds, where matched
funds are paired to impact funds using asset class, vintage, and size. Both portfolios
presented here are value-weighted. We create artificially levered cash flows 𝐿𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) of
each strategy similar to Fig. 5, using the cash flows from long-short vintage portfolios,
𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗), as well as the corresponding T-bill funds, 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗):

𝐿𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) = 𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) + 𝑘(𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) − 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗))

leverage 𝑘, we plot the difference between the PME
For each level of artificial
and GPME point estimate of the long-short portfolio. The error bars are 95% confi-
dence intervals using bootstrap standard errors from 1000 bootstrap samples of the
value-weighted long-short portfolios.

5. Alternative models of risk and return

In this section, we discuss alternative models of risk and return
in impact investing. First, we incorporate investor taste for public
sustainable assets into the analysis of the risk and return of impact
investing. Although sustainable investing is often discussed without
distinguishing between public and private markets, investment oppor-
tunities in both markets are very different. We explore the extent
to which adding a public sustainability factor can help explain the
returns to impact investing. Next, we consider whether private market
impact investing comoves with alternative benchmarks corresponding
to different investor wealth portfolios, such as public sustainability and
emerging markets.

5.1. Taste for sustainability

Our results so far document negative GPMEs for impact, matched,
and VC funds, which equivalently means that all fund returns have
negative CAPM 𝛼s. However, demand for sustainable assets in public
markets might imply a different model of the risk–return trade-off for
assets than the CAPM. Recent literature finds that when some investors
have a preference for ESG, asset prices can be explained by a two-factor
model that includes the market and an ESG factor, which captures
unexpected changes in ESG concerns (Pastor et al., 2021). We therefore
consider whether adding a public sustainability factor helps to explain
the returns of private market impact and benchmark funds in our
sample.

We extend the one-factor GPME model to incorporate multiple

factors (Prediction 7). The SDF in this case is

𝑀 𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸
𝑡+1

= exp(𝑎 − 𝑏′ log(𝐹𝑡+1))

where 𝑓 is the number of public market factors, 𝑏 is an 𝑓 × 1 vector
of factor loadings, and log(𝐹𝑡+1) is 𝑓 × 1 vector of public market factor
returns at time 𝑡 + 1. Our analysis uses the simplest multi-factor GPME

12 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Table 6
GPME with Multi-Factor SDF.
We compute the GPME for the one-factor model with market factor only and for
the two-factor model with market and sustainability index. We report the standard
error in parentheses below the estimate, and the 𝑝-value of the J-test of whether the
estimate is zero in brackets on the third line. Panel (a) estimates performance for
impact funds, Panel (b) for nonimpact funds matched to the impact fund sample using
asset class, vintage, and size, and Panel (c) for VC funds. All three panels use the same
SDF parameters; each column has its own set of SDF parameters corresponding to the
relevant model.

Panel (a): Impact funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (b): Matched funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (c): VC funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Market Factor
Only

−0.470
(0.186)
[0.012]

Market Factor
Only

−0.330
(0.184)
[0.073]

Market Factor
Only

−0.433
(0.120)
[0.000]

Market and
Sustainability

−0.377
(0.193)
[0.050]

Market and
Sustainability

−0.341
(0.188)
[0.070]

Market and
Sustainability

−0.397
(0.121)
[0.001]

Table 7
Estimated SDF with sustainability index.
The SDF relative to the sustainability index is given by 𝑀 ∗
𝑡+1 = exp(𝑎 − 𝑏𝑟𝑡+1), where 𝑟𝑡+1
is the log of the return on the sustainability index. The SDF corresponding to the PME
is the SDF for a log-utility model, where 𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1. The SDF corresponding to the
GPME relaxes this assumption. We use the Dow Jones Sustainability World total return
index as the sustainability index. We estimate this SDF using public asset portfolios to
replicate pooled VC, matched, and impact fund cash flows, as described in Appendix A.

𝑎

𝑏

PME SDF

0

1

GPME SDF

0.202
(0.071)
4.275
(0.948)

portfolio that emphasizes companies with strong economic, environ-
mental and social practices. While the two-factor model accounts for
the correlation between the market and public sustainability index, the
one-factor model allows us to evaluate the risk exposure to the public
sustainability factor directly, as well as decompose performance in a
different way.

Table 7 reports the one-factor SDF estimate using the sustainability
index as the public market return of interest. The estimates show that
the ex-post SDF using public sustainability as the public market alter-
native (column 2) is different from the SDF with log-utility assumptions
(column 1). The fact that 𝑏 is greater than one indicates that the return
premium is ‘‘sufficiently high’’ (Prediction 1). The wedge between PME
and GPME informs us about comovements with the model’s factor, and
a positive wedge corresponds with positive comovement.

Table 8 provides the PME and GPME estimates from this alternative
one-factor model. Both PME and GPME estimates differ widely among
impact, matched, and VC funds. With risk adjustment relative to the
public sustainability index, matched funds gain $0.23 per $1 capital
committed, while VC funds lose $0.08 and impact funds lose $0.51
per $1 capital committed (we can only reject zero pricing errors for
the latter). For an investor whose wealth portfolio is captured by the
public sustainability index, impact funds are not financially profitable
portfolio additions.

Looking at the gap between PME and GPME estimates, we observe
that the 𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑆𝐼 overestimates impact and VC fund performance and

13 

Table 8
Estimated Performance Relative to Sustainability Index.
We compute the PME and GPME relative to the sustainability index using the SDF
parameters from Table 7. We report the standard error in parentheses below the
estimate, and the 𝑝-value of the J-test of whether the estimate is zero in brackets on the
third line. Panel (a) estimates performance for impact funds, Panel (b) for nonimpact
funds matched to the impact fund sample using asset class, vintage, and size, and Panel
(c) for VC funds. All three panels use the same SDF parameters; each column has its
own set of SDF parameters corresponding to the relevant model.

Panel (a): Impact funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (b): Matched funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (c): VC funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

PME

−0.123
(0.044)
[0.005]

PME

0.159
(0.040)
[0.000]

PME

0.107
(0.129)
[0.404]

GPME

−0.513
(0.289)
[0.075]

GPME

0.225
(0.270)
[0.405]

GPME

−0.077
(0.140)
[0.584]

underestimates matched fund performance relative to the 𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑆𝐼 .
However, given the wide error bands on the GPME estimates especially
for matched funds, we cannot draw conclusions on public sustainability
𝛽𝑆𝐼 by looking at the wedge with zero leverage.

We repeat our artificial leverage approach in order to gain addi-
tional information on the relative magnitude of 𝛽𝑆𝐼 . In Fig. 7, the line
associated with impact funds is increasing but fairly flat, indicating
that impact funds have relatively low risk exposure to the public sus-
tainability index. The line associated with matched funds is decreasing
but likewise fairly flat, also indicating relatively low risk exposure
to the public sustainability index. Only VC funds have a 𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑆𝐼 −
𝐺𝑃 𝑀𝐸𝑆𝐼 wedge that is rapidly rising with leverage, consistent with
high exposure to the public sustainability factor.

The bounds on these estimates are large and the results should be
taken with caution, but they highlight that sustainability in private
markets, for example via impact investing, is distinct from sustain-
ability in public markets. While public market sustainable investing
strategies typically target public companies with high scores in a broad
set of ESG categories, impact investing strategies target a handful of
small portfolio companies with particular impact goals. Impact goals
tend to be more specific than broad ESG measures and can include any-
thing from expanding social goods in underserved areas to developing
a new clean technology.

5.2.2. Emerging markets

We repeat the one-factor exercise in order to assess impact investing
performance relative to emerging markets, using the MSCI Emerging
Markets Investable Market total return index as our proxy for investors’
wealth portfolio. By using the Investable Market index, we include
small cap emerging markets companies, in addition to large and mid
cap. This wealth portfolio is relevant for investors that are exposed
to emerging market economies rather than to the US market, such as
foundations, which are common investors in impact funds.

We report the one-factor SDF estimates for the emerging markets
index in Table 9. Not only do the EME SDF estimates differ from the
parameters implied by a log-utility model, but the magnitude of the
difference in this model is notable and related to the high performance
of emerging markets over our time period. We are in a situation where
the return premium is more than sufficiently high (Eq. (8) holds). As a
caveat, our standard errors are also quite large in this estimation, which
will affect the precision of our GPME estimates.

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Table 9
Estimated SDF with emerging markets index.
The SDF relative to the emerging markets index is given by 𝑀 ∗
𝑡+1 = exp(𝑎−𝑏𝑟𝑡+1), where
𝑟𝑡+1 is the log of the return on the emerging markets index. The SDF corresponding
to the PME is the SDF for a log-utility model, where 𝑎 = 0 and 𝑏 = 1. The SDF
corresponding to the GPME relaxes this assumption. We use the MSCI Emerging Markets
Investable Market total return index as the emerging markets index. We estimate this
SDF using public asset portfolios to replicate pooled VC, matched, and impact fund
cash flows, as described in Appendix A.

𝑎

𝑏

PME SDF

0

1

GPME SDF

0.402
(0.081)
6.229
(1.120)

Table 10
Estimated performance relative to emerging markets index.
We compute the PME and GPME relative to the Emerging Markets Index using the
SDF parameters from Table 9. We report the standard error in parentheses below the
estimate, and the 𝑝-value of the J-test of whether the estimate is zero in brackets on the
third line. Panel (a) estimates performance for impact funds, Panel (b) for nonimpact
funds matched to the impact fund sample using asset class, vintage, and size, and Panel
(c) for VC funds. All three panels use the same SDF parameters; each column has its
own set of SDF parameters corresponding to the relevant model.

Panel (a): Impact funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (b): Matched funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

Panel (c): VC funds

Estimate
(sd)
[J-stat p-value]

PME

−0.068
(0.061)
[0.270]

PME

0.271
(0.075)
[0.000]

PME

0.172
(0.196)
[0.380]

GPME

−0.018
(4.233)
[0.997]

GPME

6.458
(6.010)
[0.283]

GPME

2.343
(2.348)
[0.318]

are much larger. Matched funds gain $6.46 per $1 capital committed.
Meanwhile, impact funds lose $0.02 per $1 capital committed.

In Fig. 8, we find evidence that impact’s 𝛽𝐸𝑀𝐸 is greater than 0,
demonstrated by the combination of the upward sloping curve and
the large and positive emerging markets equity premium. Matched
and VC funds have a downward sloping curve, indicating that these
funds have negative covariance with the emerging market factor. In
this case, impact appears to increase the risk exposure of an investor
who is already exposed to emerging market risk compared to investing
in matched non-impact funds.

6. Conclusion

In this paper, we provide a characterization of the risk profile and
risk-adjusted performance of impact investing. To do this we develop a
new statistic to derive risk properties of private market asset classes, the
‘‘PME wedge’’, building on insights from Korteweg and Nagel (2016).
While we apply it to impact investing in this paper, our approach can
easily be extended to examining other private market strategies in the
future.

Our finding that the 𝛽 of impact is lower than the 𝛽 of benchmark
private market funds is consistent with a less cyclical interpretation
of impact strategies. As more investors consider incorporating impact
funds into their portfolios, it will matter how these funds contribute to
investors’ overall investment strategies. Our results show that adding
impact investing to a portfolio adds less market risk exposure than

Fig. 7. PME-GPME Wedge with Sustainability Index.
We plot the PME-GPME wedge of artificially levered funds with different leverage 𝑘.
We create artificially levered funds as in Fig. 5, using impact funds, VC funds, or funds
matched to our impact sample on asset class, vintage, and size, 𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗), as well as the
corresponding T-bill funds, 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗):

𝐿𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) = 𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) + 𝑘(𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) − 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗))

The SDF for the GPME is the sustainability risk SDF from Table 7, and the SDF for the
PME is the log-utility SDF from the same table. The wedge is the difference between
PME and GPME point estimates. The error bars are 95% confidence intervals using
bootstrap standard errors from 1000 bootstrap samples of impact or benchmark funds.

Fig. 8. PME-GPME Wedge with Emerging Markets Index.
We plot the PME-GPME wedge of artificially levered funds with different leverage 𝑘.
We create artificially levered funds as in Fig. 5, using impact funds, VC funds, or funds
matched to our impact sample on asset class, vintage, and size, 𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗), as well as the
corresponding T-bill funds, 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗):

𝐿𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) = 𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) + 𝑘(𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) − 𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗))

The SDF for the GPME is the emerging markets risk SDF from Table 9, and the SDF
for the PME is the log-utility SDF from the same table. The wedge is the difference
between PME and GPME point estimates. The error bars are 95% confidence intervals
using bootstrap standard errors from 1000 bootstrap samples of impact or benchmark
funds.

Turning our attention to Table 10, we report the PME and GPME
estimates from a model where the investor wealth portfolio is approxi-
mated by the emerging markets index. Like Table 8, we report the PME
in the first column and the GPME, adjusting for emerging markets risk,
in the second column. Like the sustainability results, matched funds
gain relative to this portfolio, but the magnitudes (and standard errors)

14 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

adding comparable private market strategies (funds matched on asset
class, size, and vintage).

For investors who care about market risk exposure, our results also
have implications for performance. Although matched and VC funds
have higher absolute performance than impact funds, once we account
for market risk exposure, we find risk-adjusted performance across the
strategies is closer. Value-weighted portfolios long in matched funds
and short impact have returns that cannot be statistically distinguished
from zero after removing the component attributable to market risk
exposure.

Lastly, we provide evidence that impact investing performance de-
pends on investor tastes and their wealth portfolios. Adding a public
sustainability index to the market in a two-factor model improves our
ability to explain impact fund returns, but does not change results for
matched or VC funds. At the same time, a one-factor model with the
public sustainability factor alone shows that impact funds have low
covariance with public sustainability. Additionally, impact funds have
positive exposure to emerging markets, while benchmark funds have
a negative covariance with an emerging markets index. These findings
help us paint a richer picture of impact investing as a strategy with its
own financial risk profile.

Our results can also be understood as a decomposition of total
returns. Total returns using IRRs or multiples are highest for matched
funds, followed by VC funds, and with impact funds last. We show that
a large part of that difference can be attributed to different market risk
exposure: after accounting for market risk, the residual performance
is much more similar across the three sets of funds. Adding a public
sustainability factor to the market factor further helps to explain the
returns of impact investing funds, though it does not improve the
pricing model for benchmark funds. On the other hand, decomposing
returns around a sustainability factor alone or around an emerging
markets factor does not reduce return differences between impact and
benchmark funds. Our findings highlight the importance of reference
points in the debate over impact investing performance. We hope in
future work to further explore the distinctiveness of the impact profile
achievable in private markets, and how it connects to the financial risk
and return of impact investing funds.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jessica Jeffers: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tianshu Lyu: Writing –
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Kelly
Posenau: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visu-
alization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project admin-
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization.

Data availability

Replication Package for: The Risk and Return of Impact Investing Fun
ds (Original data) (Zenodo).

Acknowledgments

Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. The authors
thank Shawn Cole, Shaun Davies, Peter Dunbar, Michael Ewens, Arpit
Gupta, Wendy Hu, Arthur Korteweg, Kevin Mullally, Steve Kaplan,
Song Ma, Stefan Nagel, Lubos Pastor, Veronika Pool, Tristan Reed,
Enrique Schroth, Morten Sorensen, Katharina Warg, Ayako Yasuda,
and conference and seminar participants where we have presented

this paper. This work was supported by the David G. Booth Endow-
ment, United States and the Fama-Miller Center at the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business, United States. We are also grateful
to IPC/PERC and MSCI for access to Burgiss data, and to the Impact
Finance Research Consortium (IFRC) and funds participating in its
Impact Finance Database.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Estimation method

A.1. Pricing cash flows for public market replicating portfolios

We follow Korteweg and Nagel (2016) in the construction and
pricing of public market replicating cash flows. We pay into the repli-
cating fund at the same time and with the same magnitude as PE fund
contributions. When the PE fund makes a distribution at time 𝑡 + ℎ(𝑗),
we assume that public market replicating funds make a payout equal
to the sum of

1. Return accumulated since 𝑡 + ℎ(𝑗 − 1)
2. A fraction 𝜋𝑗 of capital in the fund since 𝑡 + ℎ(𝑗 − 1):

𝜋𝑗 = min

( ℎ(𝑗) − 𝑝
10 − 𝑝

)

, 1

Where 𝑝 is time since last payout in years.

This second piece constrains the effective life of the replicating funds
to 10 years. In robustness tests, we found little change in results when
we extended the effective life of replicating funds beyond 10 years. The
final period NAV is treated as a distribution in this set up. This opens
our analysis up to potential issues related to the manipulation of NAV
by fund managers, as discussed in Brown et al. (2019). We also rely
heavily on this single period distribution for very young funds, that
have not had many distributions.

We thus have cash flows for PE funds, risk-free rate funds 𝑓 , and
market funds 𝑀 for the set of both benchmark funds (𝑁𝐵 funds) and
impact funds (𝑁𝐼𝑚𝑝 funds). As in Korteweg and Nagel (2016), we form
the following matrix of cash flows with dimensions (𝑁𝐵 + 𝑁𝐼𝑚𝑝) × 3 × 𝐽 :

𝑌𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗) =

𝐶𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)
⎛
𝐶𝑖𝑓 ,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)
⎜
⎜
𝐶𝑖𝑀,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

Pricing errors for each 𝑖 of the 𝑁𝐵 + 𝑁𝐼𝑚𝑝 funds are:

𝑢𝑖(𝜃) =

𝐽
∑

𝑗=1

𝑀 ℎ(𝑗)

𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)(𝜃)𝑌𝑖,𝑡+ℎ(𝑗)

We form the GMM estimator as:

̂𝜃 = arg min𝜃

(

1
𝑁

∑

𝑖

𝑢𝑖(𝜃)

)′ ⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

0
0
0

0
1
0

(

0
⎤
0
⎥
⎥
1
⎦

1
𝑁

∑

𝑖

)

𝑢𝑖(𝜃)

Where we put positive weight only on the replicating funds to ensure
that our SDF perfectly prices these cash flows. Importantly, the set of
𝑢𝑖 is for all 𝑁𝐵 + 𝑁𝐼𝑚𝑝 funds. We pool the cash flows together in order
to have a consistent SDF for comparing benchmark and impact funds.
Additionally, the GMM procedure requires both a large number of funds
and non-overlapping time periods.

Estimating the SDF from the pooled set of replicating funds requires
an assumption that our replicating funds’ cash flow profiles are rela-
tively similar to the original set of benchmark and impact funds. This
assumption is also present in Korteweg and Nagel (2016). On top of

15 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

this assumption, we also need to assume that the timing of cash flows
between VC, matched, and impact funds are similar. This assumption
allows us to use the same SDF to price VC, matched, and impact
fund cash flows, attributing differences in performance to group-level
differences rather than to bias in the timing of cash flows. Because we
have more VC replicating funds in our SDF estimation, a violation of
this assumption will result in a GPME that reflects differences in the
realization of the SDF for each set of cash flows more than it reflects
differences in performance between VC, matched, and impact funds.
Fortunately, Figure I.B.7 provides evidence in favor of the similarity of
cash flow profiles: distributions are steady between years 3 and 10.

With the parameters of the SDF that correctly prices the benchmark
cash flows, we discount cash flows of impact, VC, and matched funds
separately. We use a J-statistic to test whether the pricing errors of
each set of funds are jointly zero. Thus we test whether the GPME
estimates for 𝑖 ∈ 𝑁𝑉 𝐶 are jointly zero separately from whether the
GPME estimates for 𝑖 ∈ 𝑁𝐼𝑚𝑝 are jointly zero, and likewise for 𝑖 ∈
𝑁𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ.

A.2. Spectral density matrix adjustments

There is potentially substantial correlation between the 𝑢𝑖 from the
previous section if they are measured over overlapping time periods.
We follow Korteweg and Nagel (2016) and correct for this correlation
using the following spectral density matrix in our tests:

̂𝑆 = ̂𝛬

1
2 ̂𝛤 ̂𝛬

1
2

Where the matrix of correlations is given by:

̂𝛤 =

[

1
𝑁

∑

𝑖

]− 1

2 (

diag(𝑢𝑖◦𝑢𝑖)

1
𝑁

∑

𝑖

𝑢𝑖𝑢′
𝑖

)[

1
𝑁

∑

𝑖

]− 1
2

diag(𝑢𝑖◦𝑢𝑖)

And the diagonal matrix of variances is given by:

̂𝛬 =

1
𝑁

∑

∑

𝑘

𝑖

max(1 − 𝑑(𝑖, 𝑘)∕ ̄𝑑, 0)diag(𝑢𝑖◦𝑢𝑘)

where 𝑑(𝑖, 𝑘) = 1 −

min[𝑡(𝑖) + ℎ(𝑖), 𝑡(𝑘) + ℎ(𝑘)] − max[𝑡(𝑖), 𝑡(𝑘)]
max[𝑡(𝑖) + ℎ(𝑖), 𝑡(𝑘) + ℎ(𝑘)] − min[𝑡(𝑖), 𝑡(𝑘)]

Our analysis extends Korteweg and Nagel (2016) by estimating the
SDF on a set of benchmark funds that are a superset of the funds that are
ultimately used to construct group-level GPME estimates. Specifically,
we estimate SDF using the pooled sample (long sample) and incorporate
the SDF point estimate and standard error in predicting GPME estimates
on the impact, matched, and VC fund sample respectively (limited
sample). We therefore adjust the spectral density matrix to account
for estimation error, following the methods developed in Stambaugh
(1997) and Lynch and Wachter (2013):
̂𝑆11
̂𝛴 + ̂𝐵21

̂𝑆11
̂𝐵21

̂𝐵𝑇
21
̂𝑆11

̂𝑆 =

̂𝑆11

]

[

̂𝐵𝑇
21

where ̂𝑆11 is the (𝐾 + 1) × (𝐾 + 1) spectral density matrix estimated
from the pooled-sample pricing errors using the Korteweg and Nagel
(2016) method, where 𝐾 is the number of benchmark funds for the
̂𝐵21 is the coefficients of a multivariate
corresponding VC payoffs.
regression of the limited sample moments on the long sample moments
and ̂𝛴 is the residual matrix of the moment regressions.

The final spectral density matrix,

̂𝑆 also needs to account for the
difference in sample length, so we further adjust the block entries as
follows:

̂𝑆 =

[ 𝜆 ̂𝑆11
̂𝑆11
𝜆 ̂𝐵21

]

𝜆 ̂𝑆11
̂𝛴 + ̂𝐵21

̂𝐵𝑇
21
̂𝑆11

̂𝐵𝑇
21

where 𝜆 is the ratio of the sample length of the limited and long sample,

𝜆 =

𝑁𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑑
𝑁

16 

Table B.1
Performance estimates with separate SDF.
This table reports the distribution of abnormal return measure, 𝛼, using the methodol-
ogy of Korteweg and Nagel (2022), as well as the parameter estimates of the SDF and
the discount rate. Since Korteweg and Nagel (2022) assume that the beta is constant
within each asset class, we estimate a separate SDF for impact, matched, and VC, and
then estimate a different market beta for each asset class.

Mean
Percentiles:
10th
25th
Median
75th
90th

St.Dev.
Skewness
Kurtosis

𝛽

SDF Parameters
𝛿

𝛾

Impact

−0.097

−0.754
−0.354
−0.071
0.069
0.444
0.487
1.284
8.419

0.576

0.439
(0.097)
5.787
(0.845)

Matched

−0.192

−0.520
−0.349
−0.163
−0.055
0.041
0.349
0.827
7.970

1.769

0.297
(0.074)
4.581
(0.666)

VC

−0.439

−1.095
−0.672
−0.410
−0.183
0.026
0.554
1.768
20.217

2.537

0.170
(0.062)
3.647
(0.715)

In our case, the limited-sample moments are exactly the same as the
subset of corresponding long-sample moments, since the long sample
is the super-set of funds in the limited sample. Therefore, we have

̂𝐵21 =

1
0
0

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

0
1
0

0
⎤
0
⎥
⎥
1
⎦

The resulting adjusted spectral density matrix ̂𝑆 is a (2𝐾 + 2) × (2𝐾 + 2)
matrix, including the moments from VC payoff and benchmark payoffs
from both the long and limited sample.

Note that, we do not need to use the efficient estimators developed
by Lynch and Wachter (2013) as we are using a pre-specified weighting
matrix instead of the optimal weighting matrix 𝑊 = 𝑆−1. Thus, the
variance of moment conditions is

𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑔) = (𝐼 − 𝑑(𝑑′𝑊 𝑑)−1𝑑′𝑊 ) ̂𝑆(𝐼 − 𝑊 𝑑(𝑑′𝑊 𝑑)−1𝑑′)

where 𝑊 is a (2𝐾 + 2) × (2𝐾 + 2) zero matrix with diagonal entries of 1
for corresponding benchmark fund payoffs of the pooled sample, which
are the only moments used to estimate the SDF. And a J-test on GPME
is

𝑔𝑉 𝐶 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑔𝑉 𝐶 )−1𝑔𝑉 𝐶 ∼ 𝜒 2(1)

Appendix B. Korteweg and Nagel 𝜶

A limitation of the GPME approach is the noisiness of individual
fund GPME estimates. To solve this statistical issue, Korteweg and
Nagel (2022) propose a new performance measure, 𝛼, which is less
sensitive to noise in individual fund cash flows but still preserves
the aggregate pricing implications of GPME. This new measure more
accurately compares individual asset performance within an asset class,
but it imposes stronger assumptions, specifically, a constant 𝛽 within
asset class and joint lognormality of market and fund payoffs.

The constant 𝛽 assumption makes the 𝛼 approach ill-suited for
comparing risk exposure across strategies, which is the focus of our
paper. Under this approach, obtaining different 𝛽 by asset class requires
assuming different SDFs for each asset class. But comparing 𝛽 when
SDFs are different is problematic, because then it is not just the asset
but the underlying model that is different in each group. Moreover,
this new approach does not help us gain power when comparing risk-
adjusted performance across asset classes, despite imposing stronger
assumptions.

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Anson, M.J., 2007. Performance measurement in private equity: Another look. J. Priv.

Equity 10 (3), 7–22.

Bansal, R., Wu, D., Yaron, A., 2022. Socially responsible investing in good and bad

times. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (4), 2067–2099.

Barber, B.M., Morse, A., Yasuda, A., 2021. Impact investing. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (1),

162–185.

Boyer, B., Nadauld, T.D., Vorkink, K.P., Weisbach, M.S., 2019. Private Equity Indices

Based on Secondary Market Transactions. Working Paper.

Brest, P., Gilson, R.J., Wolfson, M.A., 2018. How investors can (and can’t) create social

value. J. Corp. L. 44, 205.

Brown, G.W., Ghysels, E., Gredil, O., 2023. Nowcasting net asset values: The case of

private equity. The Review of Financial Studies 36 (3), 945–986.

Brown, G.W., Gredil, O.R., Kaplan, S.N., 2019. Do private equity funds manipulate

reported returns?. Journal of Financial Economics 132 (2), 267–297.

Brown, G.W., Harris, R.S., Jenkinson, T., Kaplan, S.N., Robinson, D.T., 2015. What Do
Different Commercial Data Sets Tell Us About Private Equity Performance? Working
Paper.

Burton, M.D., Cole, S.A., Dev, A., Jarymowycz, C., Jeng, L., Lerner, J., Mashwama, F.,
Xu, C., Zochowski, R., 2021. The project on impact investments’ impact investment
database. Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 20-117.

Chowdhry, B., Davies, S.W., Waters, B., 2019. Investing for impact. Rev. Financ. Stud.

32 (3), 864–904.

Cochrane, J.H., 2005. The risk and return of venture capital. J. Financ. Econ. 75 (1),

3–52.

Cole, S.A., Jeng, L., Lerner, J., Rigol, N., Roth, B., 2022. What Do Impact Investors Do

Differently? Working Paper.

Cole, S., Melecky, M., Mölders, F., Reed, T., 2021. Long-run Returns to Impact Investing

in Emerging Market and Developing Economies. Working Paper.

Couts, S., Gonçalves, A., Rossi, A., 2020. Unsmoothing returns of illiquid funds. Working

Paper.

Dunn, J., Fitzgibbons, S., Pomorski, L., 2018. Assessing risk through environmental,

social and governance exposures. J. Invest. Manag. 16 (1), 4–17.

Ewens, M., Jones, C.M., Rhodes-Kropf, M., 2013. The price of diversifiable risk in

venture capital and private equity. Rev. Financ. Stud. 26 (8), 1853–1889.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2007. Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices. J. Financ. Econ.

83 (3), 667–689.

Geczy, C., Jeffers, J., Musto, D.K., Tucker, A.M., 2021. Contracts with (social) benefits:
the implementation of impact investing. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 697–718.
Goetzmann, W.N., Gourier, E., Phalippou, L., 2018. How Alternative are Private

Markets? Working Paper.

Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S.N., Strebulaev,

I.A., 2020. How do venture

capitalists make decisions? J. Financ. Econ. 135 (1), 169–190.

Gredil, O.R., Griffiths, B., Stucke, R., 2023. Benchmarking private equity: The direct

alpha method. J. Corp. Finance.

Gredil, O., Sorensen, M., Waller, W., 2020. Evaluating Private Equity Performance Using

Stochastic Discount Factors. Working Paper.

Green, D., Roth, B., 2021. The Allocation of Socially Responsible Capital. Working

Paper.

Gupta, D., Kopytov, A., Starmans, J., 2022. The pace of change: Socially responsible

investing in private markets. Available at SSRN 3896511.

Gupta, A., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. Valuing private equity investments strip by

strip. J. Finance 76 (6), 3255–3307.

Harris, R.S., Jenkinson, T., Kaplan, S.N., 2014. Private equity performance: What do

we know? J. Finance 69 (5), 1851–1882.

Hartzmark, S.M., Sussman, A.B., 2019. Do investors value sustainability? A natural
experiment examining ranking and fund flows. J. Finance 74 (6), 2789–2837.
Ilhan, E., Sautner, Z., Vilkov, G., 2021. Carbon tail risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (3),

1540–1571.

Kaplan, S.N., Schoar, A., 2005. Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and

capital flows. J. Finance 60 (4), 1791–1823.

Korteweg, A.G., 2019. Risk adjustment in private equity returns. Annu. Rev. Finan.

Econ. 11, 131–152.

Korteweg, A., Nagel, S., 2016. Risk-adjusting the returns to venture capital. J. Finance

71 (3), 1437–1470.

Korteweg, A.G., Nagel, S., 2022. Risk-Adjusted Returns of Private Equity Funds: A New

Approach. Working paper.

Korteweg, A., Sorensen, M., 2010. Risk and return characteristics of venture
capital-backed entrepreneurial companies. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (10), 3738–3772.
Korteweg, A., Sorensen, M., 2017. Skill and luck in private equity performance. J.

Financ. Econ. 124 (3), 535–562.

Krueger, P., Sautner, Z., Starks, L.T., 2020. The importance of climate risks for
institutional investors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (3), 1067–1111. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/rfs/hhz137.

Lynch, A.W., Wachter, J.A., 2013. Using samples of unequal length in generalized

method of moments estimation. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 48 (1), 277–307.

Nofsinger, J., Varma, A., 2014. Socially responsible funds and market crises. J. Bank.

Financ. 48, 180–193.

Oehmke, M., Opp, M.M., 2022. A theory of socially responsible investment.
Pastor, L., Stambaugh, R.F., Taylor, L.A., 2021. Sustainable investing in equilibrium. J.

Fig. B.1. Distribution of Fund-Level PME and 𝛼 Measure.
We create kernel density plots for fund-level PME estimates and 𝛼 measure by Korteweg
and Nagel (2022). PMEs are estimated by discounting net cash flows using a log utility
SDF following Section 4.1. We compute the fund-level 𝛼 measure by estimating a
different SDF for the three asset classes to take into account the difference in betas.
Although VC 𝛼’s are on par with impact performance on average, it is more spread
out, with a longer right tail than impact funds. Matched funds have slightly shorter
right tail and are more concentrated.

For these reasons, we focus on the PME wedge approach in the pa-
per. However, it can be helpful to show that a different approach yields
results that are consistent with ours. In this appendix, we show that the
𝛼 methodology results in 𝛽 estimates that are consistent with our wedge
approach, with the caveat that the comparison is not well-defined when
SDFs differ across asset classes.

Appendix C. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103928.

References

Ang, A., Chen, B., Goetzmann, W.N., Phalippou, L., 2018. Estimating private equity

returns from limited partner cash flows. J. Finance 73 (4), 1751–1783.

Financ. Econ. 142, 550–571.

17 

J. Jeffers et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103928 

Pastor, L., Vorsatz, B., 2020. Mutual fund performance and flows during the COVID-19

Sorensen, M., Jagannathan, R., 2015. The public market equivalent and private equity

crisis. Rev. Asset Pric. Stud. 10 (4), 791–833.

performance. Financ. Anal. J. 71 (4), 43–50.

Phalippou, L., 2017. Private Equity Laid Bare. CreateSpace Independent Publishing

Stambaugh, R.F., 1997. Analyzing investments whose histories differ in length. Journal

Platform.

of Financial Economics 45 (3), 285–331.

Renneboog, L., Ter Horst, J., Zhang, C., 2008. Socially responsible investments:
Institutional aspects, performance, and investor behavior. J. Bank. Financ. 32 (9),
1723–1742.

Wiek, H., Le, V., Mei, T., 2022. Pitchbook Analyst Note: Impact Investing Update.

Technical Report, Pitchbook Data, Inc., pp. 1–17.

Woodward, S.E., 2009. Measuring Risk for Venture Capital and Private Equity

Rubinstein, M., 1976. The strong case for the generalized logarithmic utility model as

Portfolios. Working paper.

the premier model of financial markets. J. Finance 31 (2), 551–571.

18 

