Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The risk and return of equity and credit index options✩
Hitesh Doshi a, Jan Ericsson b,∗, Mathieu Fournier c,d, Sang Byung Seo e
a Bauer College of Business, University of Houston, United States of America
b Desautels Faculty of Management at McGill University, Canada
c UNSW Business School, Australia
d Canadian Derivatives Institute, Canada
e Wisconsin School of Business, University of Wisconsin-Madison, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We develop a structural credit risk model, which allows us to price equity/credit indices and their options
through the asset dynamics of index constituents. We estimate the model via MLE and find that equity and
credit index option prices are well explained out-of-sample. Contrary to recent empirical findings, the two
option markets are not inconsistently priced through the lens of our model. Returns on both options, while
extreme, do not indicate any evidence of mispricing. Our analysis suggests that jointly addressing the pricing
of various instruments requires properly attributing three different sources of systematic risk: asset, variance,
and jump risks.

Dataset link: Code (Original data)

JEL classification:
G12
G13

Keywords:
Structural credit risk model
Compound options
Credit index options
Pricing consistency

1. Introduction

Option pricing theory, after its emergence in the seventies, not
only spawned a new field of research on derivatives pricing but also
a new approach to valuing corporate securities. Set forth by Merton
(1974), structural credit risk models view corporate securities as option
contracts on the issuing firm’s assets. Equity can be seen as a long call
and debt as a short put. By extension, options written on corporate
securities, such as equity options, can be seen as options on options or
compound options (Geske, 1979). This simple idea provides us with a
general framework to study the prices of corporate securities and their
options jointly.

Recently, the introduction of novel credit derivatives has opened up
opportunities to expand the research scope of this compound frame-
work. CDX options – swaption contracts written on a broad credit

market index called the CDX North American Investment Grade Index
(in short, CDX) – have gained popularity and actively traded since
2012. The significance of these instruments is that they can be viewed
as options on debt securities (Chen et al., 2023). Until now, the tradi-
tional option pricing literature has predominantly focused on the equity
side, mainly through options on the S&P 500 Index (in short, SPX), due
to the lack of traded corporate bond options. Coupled with SPX options,
CDX options now offer an opportunity to study and relate both equity
and debt derivatives markets.

In this paper, we develop a rich structural credit risk model that en-
ables us to consistently price equity, credit, and associated derivatives
from the ground up. Firms’ asset dynamics feature stochastic variance
and Poisson jumps that are priced in the stochastic discount factor.

✩

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for their valuable feedback and suggestions. We
are also grateful to Patrick Augustin, Gurdip Bakshi, Ravi Bansal, Hank Bessembinder, Nicole Branger, Christian Dorion, Jefferson Duarte, Young Ho Eom,
Bjørn Eraker, Fotis Grigoris, Zhiguo He, Kris Jacobs, Mete Kilic, Liangyi Mu, Philippe Mueller, Chay Ornthanalai, Nick Pan, Neil Pearson, Paola Pederzoli, Mirela
Sandulescu, Olivier Scaillet, Ivan Shaliastovich, Petra Sinagl, Anders Trolle, Aurelio Vasquez, Xiaoyan Zhang, and participants at the AFA Annual Meeting, Annual
SoFiE Meeting, Bloomberg Conference, Derivatives and Asset Pricing Conference, European FMA Conference, ITAM/HEC Montreal Cancun Derivatives Workshop,
Risk Management and Financial Innovation Conference Mont Tremblant, TBEAR Workshop, Tsinghua Finance Workshop, Virtual Derivatives Workshop, Arizona
State University, Federal Reserve Board, McGill University, PBCSF Tsinghua University, Peking University HSBC Business School, Southern Methodist University,
Temple University, University of Houston, University of Iowa, University of Oklahoma, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Yonsei University. We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support from the Canadian Derivatives Institute. An earlier version of this paper was circulated with the title ‘‘Asset Variance Risk and
Compound Option Prices’’.
∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: hdoshi@bauer.uh.edu (H. Doshi), jan.ericsson@mcgill.ca (J. Ericsson), m.fournier@unsw.edu.au (M. Fournier), sang.seo@wisc.edu

(S.B. Seo).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103932
Received 21 January 2024; Received in revised form 22 August 2024; Accepted 23 August 2024

Available online 30 August 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

We introduce unpriced idiosyncratic shocks to obtain a cross-section
of firms and construct equity and credit indices, which are the model
counterparts of the SPX and CDX. Not only does our model link the
pricing of equity and credit indices via the asset dynamics of their
constituents, but it also endogenously relates the two indices with their
options.

We then bring the model to the data. In the benchmark setup, we
follow the literature and approximate the index with a homogeneous
pool of ex-ante identical firms. This so-called large homogeneous pool
approximation alleviates computational burden and requires only two
state variables governing the prices of the indices and their options:
(i) the asset value of the representative firm and (ii) systematic asset
variance. We filter out the time series of these two state variables and
estimate the model parameters via maximum likelihood. The estimation
procedure takes the time series of CDX spread term structures and
physical SPX volatility as sole inputs. We observe that the model fits
these variables well in-sample. Moreover, the signs and magnitudes of
the estimated parameters are economically plausible, as are the time
series patterns of the filtered state variables. We also confirm that the
estimated model implies reasonable physical metrics such as market
leverage, asset Sharpe ratios, and cumulative default probabilities,
which provides further confidence in our estimation results.

Based on the estimated parameters and filtered state variables, we
examine SPX and CDX options as an out-of-sample exercise. Although
our estimation procedure does not rely on any option data, the em-
pirical implied volatilities are explained well out-of-sample. The model
successfully captures the levels of implied volatilities in both option
markets. In the moneyness dimension, the model generates a negative
volatility skew for SPX options and a positive volatility skew for CDX
options that are similar to their empirical counterparts. In both cases,
the model-implied volatilities closely track the time series fluctuations
in the data, resulting in relatively small pricing errors. The correlations
between the data and the model are also high, around 80% or higher
across the board. Importantly, we do not find any significant evidence
of absolute or relative mispricing across the two option markets. This
conclusion is robust to relaxing the benchmark assumption of firm
homogeneity and introducing five separate asset value dynamics, each
of which represents one of the five industry subindices of the CDX.

Intriguingly, contemporaneous work by Collin-Dufresne et al.
(2024) (henceforth, CDJT) reaches a completely different conclusion
based on a similar model with identical risk-neutral asset dynamics.1
They argue that it is difficult to reconcile the pricing of SPX and CDX
options. Specifically, their model generates too low implied volatilities
for CDX options when fitted to match implied volatilities for SPX
options. Based on this relative pricing puzzle, CDJT conclude that
equity and credit markets are not fully integrated, a striking assertion
given the significant body of work suggesting a close link between
equity options and various credit instruments.2

In an effort to reconcile these conflicting results, we perform a
fitting exercise similar to that in CDJT using our model. When we
apply CDJT’s parameters and search for the values of the two state vari-
ables that match the median CDX spread and at-the-money SPX implied
volatility, the model does reproduce the underpricing issue. However,

1 The asset dynamics of the two models were initially quite different.
Originally, CDJT’s model assumed constant variance. Our model assumed
stochastic variance but abstracted away from systematic jumps to focus on the
variance risk channel. Through revisions, the asset dynamics converged: CDJT
adopted stochastic variance, and we adopted systematic jumps. Note that the
two models still differ in the precise assumptions about capital structure and
default.

2 See, among others, Cremers et al. (2008), Carr and Wu (2011), Collin-
Dufresne et al. (2012), Culp et al. (2018), and Cao et al. (2023). On a slightly
different but related note, Sandulescu (2022) proposes a model-free measure
of relative market integration and documents that equity and corporate bond
markets are non-trivially integrated.

when we repeat the fitting exercise under our own parametrization, no
underpricing obtains; the model generates a CDX implied volatility that
is close to and even slightly larger than its data counterpart.

This suggests that differences in parametrization, arising from dif-
ferent estimation approaches, play a central role. In our model, we
specify the physical dynamics of firms together with the risk-neutral
ones, allowing us to filter out the state variables using the physical
information embedded in the time series. In contrast, CDJT exclusively
model risk-neutral dynamics. The state variables are treated as extra
parameters in their estimation, and their values are freely chosen
to fit asset prices for each weekly trading day.3 Nothing enforces
time series consistency between estimation results from different pe-
riods, and this seems to produce counterintuitive results, particularly
for asset variance dynamics. We believe that modeling both physical
and risk-neutral dynamics, while properly exploiting the time series
information, reduces the risk of overfitting.

To pinpoint the source of the discrepancy between our results, we
gradually adjust the values of the parameters and state variables until
we reach those of CDJT. We find that the key parametric difference
is the default threshold. While CDJT choose a default threshold that
is based on total debt, our estimation yields a threshold that is more
consistent with total liabilities. To be clear, we do not make a value
judgment on the choice between total debt vs. total liabilities. The
literature does not have a consensus on which definition of leverage
to use for models of credit risk or capital structure — whether it be
financial leverage based on total debt or balance sheet leverage based
on total liabilities (see Welch, 2011, for a detailed discussion). In fact,
both definitions have coexisted in the literature for some time.4 Our
main point is that there exists at least one economically and statistically
plausible set of parameters that delivers consistent pricing across the
different markets. Hence, rejection of market integration should be
approached more cautiously.

Beyond estimation, an important advantage of specifying both phys-
ical and risk-neutral dynamics is that it can speak to returns and risk
premia. In our model, the expected excess return on any instrument
can be decomposed into compensation for three sources of systematic
risk: asset growth risk, variance risk, and jump risk. The resulting
three risk premia are directly determined by three risk exposures,
which capture how the instrument responds when asset value grows,
systematic variance rises, and a systematic jump occurs. Such analysis
would be impossible if we only worked with a risk-neutral framework
(like CDJT’s), where expected returns always equal the risk-free rate.
We conduct two exercises to better understand the quantities and prices
of risk in our model.

First, we study how exposures to the three sources of systematic risk
vary across different instruments. Consider exposures to asset growth
risk. Both the SPX and CDX have a positive exposure to asset growth
risk because the values of equity and debt rise with the firm’s asset
value. In terms of magnitude, the SPX exhibits a greater exposure than
the CDX, as equity, being more junior than debt, is more leveraged and
thus more sensitive to asset fluctuations. In the case of options, SPX
calls and CDX puts load positively on asset growth risk, whereas SPX
puts and CDX calls load negatively. This is intuitive. Since a negative
shock to the equity market (low equity return) is likely to coincide with
a positive shock to credit spreads, SPX puts (calls) and CDX calls (puts)
pay off in similar states of the world. The signs of exposures to jump

3 The parameters governing the dynamics of the state variables are kept

constant for six months at a time (for each on-the-run CDX series).

4 Examples of studies based on total debt include, but are not limited
to, Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001), Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008), Bon-
gaerts et al. (2011), Strebulaev and Yang (2013), Graham et al. (2015),
and Feldhütter and Schaefer (2018); whereas Crosbie and Bohn (2002), Eom
et al. (2004), Leland (2004), Campbell et al. (2008), Huang and Huang
(2012), Ericsson et al. (2015), and Huang et al. (2020) use total liabilities.

2 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

risk are exactly opposite to those of asset growth risk because jumps
are on average negative in our model, reducing the firm’s assets.

More noteworthy are exposures to variance risk. Perhaps surpris-
ingly, we find that the exposure of the CDX to variance risk is sig-
nificantly more negative than that of the SPX. This is a result of the
interplay between two channels. (i) A rise in asset variance leads to
higher discount rates, pushing down the values of both equity and debt.
(ii) At the same time, a rise in asset variance raises the values of options
written on the firm’s assets, regardless of whether they are calls or puts,
through a ‘‘vega effect’’. Thus, equity (long call) increases and debt
(short put) decreases in value. In the case of the SPX, the two channels
work in opposite directions, offsetting each other. In the case of debt,
the two channels lead in the same direction, making the exposure
heavily negative. This rationalizes the seemingly puzzling empirical
finding documented by CDJT that selling CDX straddles provides much
higher returns than selling SPX straddles. CDJT report this as potential
evidence supporting mispricing, but it is well justified by the intuition
behind the compound framework: the CDX is simply more sensitive to
variance risk than the SPX. This property is inherited by CDX options,
resulting in interesting patterns in their exposures to variance risk.

For our second exercise, we investigate how we can contribute
to the debate about the magnitude of option returns: are high op-
tion returns evidence of mispricing? Bondarenko (2014) documents
remarkably high returns from writing SPX put options and argues that
these indicate mispricing.5 Subsequent work by Broadie et al. (2009)
calls into question the interpretation that options are mispriced on the
basis of their high returns and highlights the importance of jump and
volatility risk premia. Building on this work, Chambers et al. (2014)
argue, in the same setting but with a longer sample, that put returns
are too large to be explained by standard models after all. On top of
the seemingly conflicting results for SPX options, which have been the
primary focus of the literature to date, our knowledge about the returns
on other derivatives, such as CDX options, remains limited.

Through the lens of our model, we find that realized option returns,
while very large, do not appear to suggest any systematic bias or mis-
pricing. Granted, the gap between the data and the model can be quite
large in terms of economic magnitudes, even exceeding 100% points for
some options. However, due to the high skewness and kurtosis of option
returns, we cannot statistically distinguish the data estimates from the
model predictions for any option class. Given the low statistical power
(as in any previous work with option returns), we consider our tests
as establishing a minimum benchmark. The specific contribution we
make here is twofold. Our analysis with SPX options supports and
corroborates an earlier conclusion of no mispricing from Broadie et al.
(2009), using a richer model featuring priced variance and jump risks.
Furthermore, we confirm the same finding for CDX options, whose re-
alized and predicted returns are even higher in absolute terms. We note
that in this market, prior evidence on returns is virtually non-existent.
Overall, our analysis suggests that jointly addressing the pricing of
the CDX, SPX options, and CDX options requires properly attributing
the sources of risk in estimation. There are two tensions at play. The
first is between systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk, whose shares of
total risk have important implications for index options but have less
to do with the CDX spread. The second tension exists among different
sources of systematic risk, as asset growth risk, variance risk, and
jump risk asymmetrically affect different instruments based on their
exposures. In conclusion, the way in which the model is configured
with different sources of risk is pivotal for capturing the joint pricing
of various market instruments.

Our work is related to several strands of literature. The first consists
of recent studies that link credit and equity derivative markets. Cremers
et al. (2008) use equity and option prices to estimate jump risk premia

5 This paper became public in 2003, although it was eventually published

in 2014.

in order to predict credit spreads. Collin-Dufresne et al. (2012) use a
model fitted to long-dated SPX options and CDX term structures to
value CDX tranches out-of-sample. Culp et al. (2018) convert option
prices into credit spreads by hypothesizing pseudo firms in a model-
free setting. What all of these papers have in common is that they
price corporate credit instruments out-of-sample using a model esti-
mated from the data on other markets. There are at least two key
differences between this prior work and ours. First, our estimation goes
in a different direction in the sense that we use the data on credit
spreads (CDX term structures) to obtain out-of-sample predictions for
options. Second, we link four markets consistently: the SPX and CDX
markets together with their corresponding option markets. Like much
of previous research, we find that the four markets are closely related.
Our paper contributes to the extensive literature on option pricing.
The empirical option literature has primarily been based on a reduced-
form approach, which exogenously specifies the underlying process and
focuses on modeling the joint dynamics of the underlying and deriva-
tive prices. Notable examples include, but are not limited to, Bakshi
et al. (1997), Pan (2002), Bates (2003), Eraker (2004), and Christof-
fersen et al. (2008). Our approach significantly differs from theirs as
we rely on a structural framework à la Geske (1979) where both the
underlying and derivative prices endogenously derive from the firm’s
asset dynamics. A benefit of using a structural approach in our paper
is that the indices that underlie SPX and CDX options are themselves
contingent claims. For example, the CDX is, just like CDX options, a
contingent claim on the assets of the constituent firms. Hence, using
the time series of CDX spreads in the estimation is informative not
just for the physical dynamics but also for the risk-neutral dynamics.
This allows us to estimate our model without using any option-based
information and study the two option markets out-of-sample. Achieving
this is difficult, if not impossible, in a standard reduced-form model
where the underlying dynamics are specified exogenously. In such
cases, realizations of the underlying are only informative about the
physical measure, and thus the use of option data is necessary for
estimating the risk-neutral dynamics.

Several studies demonstrate that more general non-affine option
pricing models provide a better fit to the cross-section of equity op-
tion prices. See, for instance, Jones (2006) who develops a non-affine
stochastic volatility model to study index option prices, and Eraker
and Wang (2015) who develop a nonlinear model of the variance
premium. Related, Medvedev and Scaillet (2007) show that a con-
ventional option pricing model, in which the equity price follows an
affine jump-diffusion process with square-root stochastic volatility, is
rejected by equity option data. In our model, the asset dynamics do
follow an affine process, but the equity dynamics are highly nonlinear
and display non-affine features due to leverage and default risk. The
main distinction from previous studies is that nonlinearities within our
structural framework arise endogenously as a function of leverage and
unlevered asset dynamics.

Lastly, our work concerns the literature studying the magnitudes
and properties of variance, jump, and tail risk premia in financial
securities. For seminal contributions to this literature, see, among oth-
ers, Bates (2000), Coval and Shumway (2001), Pan (2002), Eraker et al.
(2003), Carr and Wu (2009), Todorov (2010), Andersen et al. (2020),
and Andersen et al. (2021). Most existing studies in this literature
focus on equity index and index option markets. Our contribution is to
broaden the study of variance and jump risk premia to multiple markets
simultaneously and to trace the sources of risk premia in these markets
back to those of the underlying assets of the firm.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our
model. Section 3 details the data and estimation approach. Section 4
provides comparative statics to help understand the model mecha-
nism. Importantly, the relative pricing puzzle of CDJT is replicated
and resolved. Section 5 reports on our model’s empirical validation
in-sample and out-of-sample, and Section 6 provides implications for
option returns. Section 7 concludes.

3 

H. Doshi et al.

2. Model

In this section, we develop a structural credit risk model, which
allows us to consistently price equity, credit, and associated derivatives
from the ground up. We first introduce the asset dynamics for individ-
ual firms and the economy’s stochastic discount factor (Section 2.1).
The pricing of corporate securities follows (Section 2.2). We then
construct the equity and credit indices and study the pricing of index
options (Section 2.3). Lastly, we show that the expected returns on
these indices and options can be decomposed into compensation for
the three systematic risk exposures in our model (Section 2.4).

2.1. Asset and variance risk

We consider a cross-section of firms 𝑗 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁} whose asset
dynamics under the physical measure P are driven by the systematic
asset factor 𝐴𝑚

𝑡 as well as two types of idiosyncratic shocks:

𝑑𝐴𝑗
𝑡
𝐴𝑗
𝑡

=

𝑑𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝐴𝑚
𝑡

+ 𝜎𝑗 𝑑𝑊 𝑗

𝑡 + 𝜈𝑗 𝑑𝑁 𝑗

𝑡 − 𝜆𝑗 𝜈𝑗 𝑑𝑡,

(1)

where 𝑑𝑊 𝑗
is a standard Brownian motion and 𝑑𝑁 𝑗
is a Poisson
𝑡
𝑡
process. We use 𝜎𝑗 to denote the time-invariant volatility parameter
for diffusive idiosyncratic risk. The idiosyncratic jump intensity is also,
in the interests of parsimony, constant with E
𝑡[⋅]
denotes a time-𝑡 conditional physical expectation. The relative change
in asset value caused by the occurrence of an idiosyncratic jump is
deterministic with a value of 𝜈𝑗 = (𝑒𝑧𝑗 − 1).

𝑡 ] = 𝜆𝑗 𝑑𝑡, where E

𝑡[𝑑𝑁 𝑗

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

literature on variance and jump risks, we assume that the SDF is
exponentially affine in aggregate risks:

𝑑𝜙𝑡
𝜙𝑡

= −𝑟𝑓 𝑑𝑡 − 𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉

√

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝐴⟂𝑉
𝑡

− 𝜉𝑉

√

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝑉
𝑡

(
𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚

𝑡 − 1

)

+

𝑑𝑁 𝑚

𝑡 − 𝜆𝑚

𝑡 ̄𝜈𝜉𝑚 𝑑𝑡,

(4)

where 𝑟𝑓 is the risk-free rate and 𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 , 𝜉𝑉 , and 𝜉𝑚 represent the market
prices of diffusive asset growth, variance, and jump risks, respectively.
The expected jump size of the SDF is denoted by ̄𝜈𝜉𝑚 = E
𝑡 − 1].
Note that firms’ idiosyncratic risks are deliberately not priced in the
model.

𝑍𝑚 [𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚

According to Girsanov’s theorem, this SDF implies the following
𝑡 and 𝑉𝑡 under the risk-neutral measure Q:

dynamics of 𝐴𝑚

𝑡

𝑡

,

=

√

(5)

̄𝜈𝑚,Q𝑑𝑡,

+ 𝜈𝑚,Q
𝑡

− 𝜆𝑚,Q
𝑡

𝑑𝑁 𝑚,Q
𝑡

(𝑟𝑓 − 𝑞) 𝑑𝑡 +

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝑉 ,Q
√

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝐴,Q
√

𝑡
1 − 𝜌2𝑑𝑊 𝐴⟂𝑉 ,Q

𝑑𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝑑𝑉𝑡 = 𝜅Q(𝜃Q − 𝑉𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝜎
where 𝑑𝑊 𝐴,Q
= 𝜌𝑑𝑊 𝑉 ,Q
, 𝜅Q = 𝜅 + 𝛿𝜉𝑉 , and
𝜃Q = 𝜅𝜃∕𝜅Q.8 When systematic jump risk is priced, it simultaneously
shifts the intensity and the mean of systematic jumps under Q. Specif-
ically, the risk-neutral jump intensity becomes EQ
𝑑𝑡 =
𝑡 𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑧𝑚+ 1
𝑚 𝑑𝑡 and the random jump size is 𝜈𝑚,Q
𝜆𝑚
𝑍𝑚,Q
Q
𝑚 = 𝑧𝑚+𝜉𝑚𝛾 2
𝑚) for which 𝑧
𝑡
is not priced, the risk-neutral dynamics of 𝐴𝑗
Eqs. (5) and (6) into Eq. (1).

] = 𝜆𝑚,Q
𝑡
= (𝑒𝑍𝑚,Q
𝑡 − 1) with
𝑚. Given that idiosyncratic risk
𝑡 are obtained by inserting

(𝜉𝑚)2𝛾2
Q
𝑚 , 𝛾 2

𝑡 [𝑑𝑁 𝑚,Q

2
∼ 𝑁(𝑧

(6)

+

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

Given Eqs. (2) and (5), the unlevered asset risk premium, or the

As in Du et al. (2019), the dynamics of the systematic asset factor
𝑡 and its stochastic variance 𝑉𝑡 are characterized by the following

𝐴𝑚
equations under P:
𝑑𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝑑𝑉𝑡 = 𝜅(𝜃 − 𝑉𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝛿

(𝜇𝑡 − 𝑞) 𝑑𝑡 +

=

√

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝐴

𝑡 + 𝜈𝑚

𝑡 𝑑𝑁 𝑚

𝑡 − 𝜆𝑚

𝑡 ̄𝜈𝑚𝑑𝑡,

√

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝑉
𝑡

,

(2)

(3)

where 𝜇𝑡 is the expected return on the unlevered ‘‘market’’ and 𝑞 is
the corresponding payout rate.6 The systematic diffusive variance 𝑉𝑡
follows a square-root process where 𝜅, 𝜃, and 𝛿 represent the mean-
reversion speed, long-run mean, and volatility of variance, respectively.
To model the correlation between systematic asset return and variance
where 𝑑𝑊 𝑉
shocks, we assume that 𝑑𝑊 𝐴
𝑡
and 𝑑𝑊 𝐴⟂𝑉
are two mutually independent Brownian motions. If 𝜌 < 0,
systematic asset variance is high when systematic asset return is low.
This case implies a negative skewness in the distribution of unlevered
market returns, consistent with empirical evidence.7

𝑡 = 𝜌𝑑𝑊 𝑉

1 − 𝜌2𝑑𝑊 𝐴⟂𝑉

𝑡 +

√

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡 𝑑𝑁 𝑚

𝑡 , where 𝑑𝑁 𝑚
𝑡

In addition to systematic diffusive risk, we allow for systematic
jumps captured by the jump process 𝜈𝑚
is another
Poisson process counting the occurrence of systematic jumps. Its inten-
sity, E
𝑡 ] ≡ 𝜆𝑚
𝑡[𝑑𝑁 𝑚
𝑡 𝑑𝑡, is time-varying and assumed to be proportional
to 𝑉𝑡 such that 𝜆𝑚
𝑡 = 𝜂𝑚𝑉𝑡. As a result, systematic jumps are more
likely to occur during market downturns when systematic variance is
relatively high. Conditional on a systematic jump, the relative change
in asset value is a random variable defined as 𝜈𝑚
𝑡 − 1). We
𝑡
assume that 𝑍𝑗
𝑡 is normally distributed with time-invariant parameters
𝑍𝑚
𝑡 ∼ 𝑁(𝑧𝑚, 𝛾 2
𝑚). Accordingly, the expected systematic jump size is
calculated as ̄𝜈𝑚 = E
𝑍𝑚 [⋅] represents an expectation
taken with respect to the time-invariant distribution of 𝑍𝑚
𝑡 .

𝑡 −1], where E

𝑍𝑚 [𝑒𝑍𝑚

≡ (𝑒𝑍𝑚

In the absence of arbitrage, there exists a stochastic discount factor
(SDF), which allows us to price firms’ financial claims. Following the

6 The asset dynamics in our model belong to the affine jump-diffusion class
of Duffie et al. (2000). While this specification imposes strong parametric
restrictions, it is popular and commonly used in the literature due to its
analytical tractability and computational convenience.

7 For discussions on the presence of negative skewness in the distribution

of systematic risks, see Berger et al. (2020), among others.

4 

difference between the P- and Q-expected asset return, is given by:
(𝜇𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓

) 𝑑𝑡 =

(√

)

1 − 𝜌2𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 + 𝜌𝜉𝑉
1 − 𝑒𝑍𝑚

[(

E

𝑡

𝑍𝑚

) (

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑡
𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚

+ 𝜆𝑚
𝑡

)]

𝑑𝑡.

(7)

𝑡 − 1

The first term captures the compensation for diffusive asset growth
and variance risks while the second corresponds to the systematic asset
jump risk premium.

2.2. Pricing of corporate securities

Following Leland (1994), we assume that each firm issues a consol
bond. Firm 𝑗 declares bankruptcy when the firm’s asset value falls to
a certain threshold. In the model, the timing of the firm’s default 𝜏𝑗
corresponds to the first time at which the asset value 𝐴𝑗
𝑡 in Eq. (1) hits
the default barrier 𝐴𝐷: 𝜏𝑗 = inf{𝑠 ≥ 𝑡|𝐴𝑗

𝑠 ≤ 𝐴𝐷}.

Prices of a firm’s securities and contingent claims depend on the
risk-neutral distribution of 𝜏𝑗 and are a function of two key quantities:
(i) the present value of a dollar received at default 𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) =
EQ
𝑡 [𝑒−𝑟𝑓 (𝜏𝑗 −𝑡)] and (ii) the cumulative risk-neutral default probability
𝐺(𝐴𝑗
𝜏𝑗 ≤𝑇 ] over the next 𝑇 years. Using these two
quantities, we are able to price any security issued by the firm as well as
associated derivative contracts. The Internet Appendix contains details
about the estimation of 𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ) for a given set of
structural parameters in our setup.9

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ) = EQ

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) and 𝐺(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 [1

To begin, we calculate the firm’s debt value 𝐷(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) as the present
value of future coupon payments plus the recovery value of the firm
upon default:

𝐷(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) =

𝑐
𝑟𝑓

[
1 − 𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

]
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡)

+ (1 − 𝛼)𝐴𝐷𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡),

(8)

8 Applying Girsanov’s theorem, we have 𝑑𝑊 𝐴⟂𝑉

= 𝑑𝑊 𝐴⟂𝑉 ,Q
𝑡

− 𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉

√

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑡

𝑡

and 𝑑𝑊 𝑉

𝑡 = 𝑑𝑊 𝑉 ,Q

𝑡

− 𝜉𝑉

√

𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑡.

9 More precisely, our estimation strategy builds on Du et al. (2019) who
develop a simulation approach to obtain the smooth mapping from a given pair
of state variables (𝐴𝑗
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) to 𝑃𝐷(⋅) and 𝐺(⋅, 𝑇 ) using two-dimensional Chebyshev
polynomials.

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

where 𝑐 is the coupon and 𝛼 is the liquidation cost. For simplicity,
we assume that firms have the same coupon, liquidation cost, default
barrier, and idiosyncratic diffusive/jump risk parameters. With lever-
age, a firm’s value deviates from its unlevered counterpart 𝐴𝑗
𝑡 for two
reasons. First, the firm enjoys tax benefits arising from its debt. If the
]
tax rate is 𝜁, the present value of future tax shields is 𝜁𝑐
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡)
.
𝑟𝑓
However, this benefit comes with a cost. The debt exposes the firm to
the risk of default, and the present value of future bankruptcy costs is
𝛼𝐴𝐷𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡). Hence, the levered firm value can be expressed as:

1 − 𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

[

𝐿(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) = 𝐴𝑗

𝑡 +

[
1 − 𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

]
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡)

− 𝛼𝐴𝐷𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡).

𝜁𝑐
𝑟𝑓

Since the firm’s equity is a residual claim, its value is calculated as
the difference between the levered firm value and the debt value,
𝐿(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) − 𝐷(𝐴𝑗

𝐸(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) = 𝐴𝑗

𝑡 −

− 𝐴𝐷𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡).

(9)

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡). It is given by:
[
1 − 𝑃𝐷(𝐴𝑗

(1 − 𝜁)𝑐
𝑟𝑓

]
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡)

We also consider the pricing of a CDS contract, which involves two
parties: the protection buyer and the protection seller. The protection
buyer makes quarterly premium payments to the protection seller until
the maturity of the contract (𝑇 ) or until the firm’s default, whichever
comes first. Upon default, the protection seller must buy the defaulted
bond at par from the protection buyer, thus absorbing the default loss.10
For every basis point (bp) spread per annum, the present value
of future premium payments (or premium leg) is known as the risky
PV01, or RPV01. In exchange for making premium payments, the
protection buyer acquires a promise to make him whole in the event of
losses arising in default. We denote the present value of a contingent
protection payment (or protection leg), ProtLeg. By definition, the CDS
spread is the fair market spread that equates the premium leg with the
protection leg. It satisfies
ProtLeg(𝐴𝑗
RPV01(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ) =

𝑆(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 )
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 )

(10)

.

require keeping track of 501 state variables over time (i.e., 𝐴𝑗
𝑡
𝑗 = 1, … , 500 and 𝑉𝑡).

for

To alleviate this computational challenge, we follow the literature
and approximate the index with a homogeneous pool of ex-ante iden-
tical firms (see, e.g., Vasicek, 2002; Collin-Dufresne et al., 2012; Seo
and Wachter, 2018; CDJT). We hypothesize a firm that represents the
average of the firms in the index and denote it by superscript 𝑟, instead
of 𝑗. Like other firms, its asset dynamics are described by Eq. (1).
At each pricing date 𝑡, the homogeneity assumption, 𝐴𝑗
𝑡 for all
∑𝑁
𝑗 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁}, implies that the index satisfies 𝐼𝑡 = 1
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) =
𝑁
𝑓 (𝐴𝑟
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡). This leaves us with only two state variables to keep track of:
the representative asset value 𝐴𝑟
𝑡 and the common factor variance 𝑉𝑡.
It is important to note the distinction between levels and dynamics.
The representative asset value dynamics are obtained from Eq. (1) with
𝑗 = 𝑟 and are impacted by idiosyncratic shocks. However, the dynamics
of the index will see idiosyncratic shocks diversified away. See the
Internet Appendix for further details about index dynamics.13

𝑡 = 𝐴𝑟
𝑗=1 𝑓 (𝐴𝑟

In our empirical analysis below, we use call and put option contracts
on the SPX and the CDX. The values of calls and puts written on one
of these indices can be calculated as:

𝑐(𝐴𝑟

𝑝(𝐴𝑟

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝐾, 𝑇 ) = 𝑒−𝑟𝑓 𝑇 EQ
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝐾, 𝑇 ) = 𝑒−𝑟𝑓 𝑇 EQ

𝑡

𝑡

] ,
[𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐼𝑡+𝑇 − 𝐾, 0)
] ,
[𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐾 − 𝐼𝑡+𝑇 , 0)

(12)

(13)

where 𝐼𝑡 represents either the SPX or the CDX. To calculate option
prices at time 𝑡, we simulate forward 5000 paths of 500 ex-ante homo-
geneous firms and systematic variance under the risk-neutral measure.
While all of the firms are given the same initial value (𝐴𝑗
𝑡 for
𝑗 = 1, … , 500), their simulated asset values in the future can deviate
from one another due to distinct idiosyncratic shocks (𝑊 𝑗 and 𝑁 𝑗 ).
For each path, we obtain 500 simulated asset values 𝐴𝑗
𝑡+𝑇 together
with the simulated systematic variance 𝑉𝑡+𝑇 , from which a given index
value is determined using Eq. (11). We then calculate the conditional
expectations in Eqs. (12) and (13) as the averages across the simulated
paths.

𝑡 = 𝐴𝑟

We refer the reader to Appendix A.1 for details about the computation
of the premium leg, protection leg, and fair market CDS spread.

2.4. Expected returns and risk premia

2.3. Equity and credit indices and their options

So far, we have defined the dynamics of a firm’s asset value and
described the valuation of corporate securities and CDS contracts.
Ultimately, our goal is to value equity and credit indices as well as
option contracts written on them. To this end, we first define the value
of an index and then discuss how it can be mapped to study the SPX or
the CDX.11 We then elaborate on the pricing of SPX and CDX options.
Consider an equally weighted index 𝐼𝑡 with 𝑁 constituents, which

is defined as

𝐼𝑡

≡ 𝐼(𝐴1

𝑡 , … , 𝐴𝑁
𝑡

, 𝑉𝑡) =

1
𝑁

𝑁
∑

𝑗=1

𝑓 (𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡),

(11)

where 𝑓 is defined by Eq. (9) for the SPX and by Eq. (10) for the
CDX. In our implementation, we consider a cross-section of 500 firms
(𝑁 = 500), constituting each index.12 Without any further assumptions,
modeling the dynamics of an index composed of 500 firms would

10 In practice, this settlement is often done instead as a cash payment based

on a post-default market value determined by a third party.
11 The CDX tracks an equally-weighted basket of

investment-grade

single-name CDS contracts.

12 We make an implicit assumption that the equity index and the credit index
are both based on the same pool of underlying firms. In practice, the SPX
consists of 500 firms while the CDX is composed of 125 firms. However, CDJT
show by comparing various key characteristics, such as ratings, leverage, and
total/idiosyncratic asset volatility, that modeling the two indices assuming the
same number of constituents is relatively innocuous in a setting such as ours.

Our valuation framework enables us to derive how exposures to
asset, variance, and jump risks determine expected returns on corporate
securities and options. As we argue next, jointly analyzing credit and
equity index options will prove to be informative about how the three
sources of systematic risk drive derivatives returns across the two
markets.

≡ 𝑔(𝐴𝑟

To lay out the main prediction of our model, consider an arbitrary
instrument 𝑔𝑡
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡). This could be a tradeable unit of an index
(𝑔 = 𝐼) or an option contract written on such an index (𝑔 = 𝑐 or 𝑝). By
Ito’s lemma, we can show that
[ 𝑑𝑔𝑡
𝑔𝑡

(𝛿𝜉𝑉 𝑉𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

[ 𝑑𝑔𝑡
𝑔𝑡

+ 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡

= 𝛥𝐴,𝑡

− 𝐸

E
𝑡

Q
𝑡

𝑑𝑡

𝑑𝑡

]

]

)

)

(𝜇𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Asset risk premium

Variance risk premium
]
𝑑𝑡,

+ 𝜆𝑚
𝑡

E

𝑍𝑚

[
‧𝛥𝑁,𝑡(𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚
𝑡 − 1)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Jump risk premium

(14)

≡ 𝜕𝑔𝑡∕𝑔𝑡
𝜕𝑁𝑡

≡ 𝜕𝑔𝑡∕𝑔𝑡
𝜕𝑉𝑡

≡ 𝜕𝑔𝑡∕𝑔𝑡
𝜕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 ∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡

=

, 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡

, and 𝛥𝑁,𝑡

where 𝛥𝐴,𝑡
are the exposures of the instrument to asset, variance, and jump risks,
respectively. Under the risk-neutral measure, the total expected return
Q
+ 𝑞𝑔𝑑𝑡 =
on any tradeable instrument equals the risk-free rate: 𝐸
𝑡
𝑟𝑓 𝑑𝑡 where 𝑞𝑔 is a dividend/income yield from the instrument, if any.
Hence, the left-hand side of Eq. (14) equals E
+𝑞𝑔𝑑𝑡−𝑟𝑓 𝑑𝑡, which
represents the instantaneous expected excess return or risk premium on

[ 𝑑𝑔𝑡
𝑔𝑡

[ 𝑑𝑔𝑡
𝑔𝑡

]

]

𝑡

,𝑉𝑡)−𝑔𝑡

𝑔(𝐴𝑟

𝑡

𝑡 𝑒𝑍𝑚
𝑔𝑡

13 We consider a model extension with firm heterogeneity in Section 5.3.

5 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

𝑔. Note that 𝛥𝑁,𝑡 is a random variable, which depends on the random
jump size 𝑍𝑚
𝑡 . The expectation in the last term is thus taken with respect
to the time-invariant distribution of 𝑍𝑚
𝑡 . For notational convenience, we
denote E

]

by ̄𝛥𝑁,𝑡.

[𝛥𝑁,𝑡

𝑍𝑚

Eq. (14) reveals that the expected excess return can be decomposed
into three terms, which correspond to the three sources of systematic
risk. The first term, which we label as asset risk premium, captures the
compensation for the instrument’s exposure to asset value fluctuations.
is the elasticity of the instrument price 𝑔𝑡 with
By definition, 𝛥𝐴,𝑡
respect to the asset value 𝐴𝑟
𝑡 . When the asset value moves by 1%, the
instrument price moves by 𝛥𝐴,𝑡%. If the instrument price increases with
the asset value (𝛥𝐴,𝑡 > 0), the instrument earns a positive asset risk
premium 𝛥𝐴,𝑡(𝜇𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓 ) given 𝜇𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓 > 0.

The second term, which we call variance risk premium, arises due
to the instrument’s exposure to variance risk. Since investors’ marginal
utility (i.e., the SDF in Eq. (4)) rises in bad times with high variance, the
market price of variance risk 𝜉𝑉 is typically negative. Consequently, an
instrument that is positively exposed to variance risk (𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡 > 0) bears a
negative variance risk premium (𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡(𝛿𝜉𝑉 𝑉𝑡) < 0). This is intuitive. An
instrument that pays more in high SDF periods (when 𝑉𝑡 is high) serves
as a hedge. Hence, investors are willing to pay a premium to hold such
an instrument, leading to a negative variance risk premium.

The third and last term contributing to the expected excess return
is referred to as jump risk premium. Like any risk premium, this term
originates from the comovement between the instrument price and
the SDF. In fact, the two variables simultaneously change when a
systematic jump occurs: the relative decrease in the instrument price is
‧𝛥𝑁,𝑡 whereas the relative increase in the SDF is (𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚
𝑡 − 1). Therefore,
conditional on the occurrence of a jump, the tendency of the two vari-
ables to move together is captured by E
𝑡 − 1)]. The jump
risk premium in Eq. (14) is obtained from this expression multiplied
by the jump intensity 𝜆𝑚
𝑡 , taking into account the likelihood of a jump.
In a typical setup where investors dislike on-average negative jumps
(𝜉𝑚 < 0), the jump risk premium is positive for an instrument with a
negative exposure (𝛥𝑁,𝑡 < 0). An instrument that performs poorly in
high SDF periods (with systematic jump realizations) makes investors
more exposed to business cycle fluctuations. Investors are reluctant to
hold such an instrument, inducing a positive risk premium.

𝑍𝑚 [‧𝛥𝑁,𝑡(𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚

3. Data and estimation

3.1. Data

The model estimation is based on the daily time series of the
following five variables: the CDX spreads with 3-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year
maturities and the physical SPX volatility. The data on the CDX are
obtained from Markit. The physical volatilities of the SPX are proxied
by the conditional volatilities obtained from fitting an NGARCH model
(with a skewed student t-distribution) to daily SPX returns.14 The daily
time series of the SPX are from the CRSP dataset. For estimation
purposes, our sample period begins in June 2004, from which the CDX
data become available, and ends in November 2020.

We also collect pricing data on 1-month SPX options and CDX
options. These data serve two purposes: (i) to conduct an out-of-sample
analysis of model performance and (ii) to revisit the puzzle documented
by CDJT that the two option markets are inconsistently priced. SPX
options are quoted in terms of Black–Scholes implied volatilities. We
directly download the interpolated implied volatility surface data from
OptionMetrics and keep 30-day volatilities at 95, 100, and 105% mon-
eyness values as measured by the ratio of strike price to the underlying

14 Our estimation results are robust to using different proxies for the
conditional SPX volatility. For instance, we obtain similar results when the con-
ditional SPX volatility is estimated by smoothing realized variance measures
based on high-frequency return time series.

SPX. The sample period for SPX options spans the same period covered
by our estimation, beginning in June 2004 and ending in November
2020. The quotes on CDX options are provided by Markit. CDX options
are essentially credit swaptions, which provide the holder the right
to enter into an index credit default swap (i.e., CDX) either as the
protection buyer (payer swaptions or CDX calls) or as the protection
seller (receiver swaptions or CDX puts).15 These options are quoted in
terms of Black-implied volatilities. We construct the implied volatility
surface via polynomial interpolation/extrapolation and extract 30-day
volatilities whose strikes correspond to 85, 100, and 115% of the
current CDX spread.16 CDX options in our data are based on the 5-year
CDX. The sample period for CDX options starts in March 2012, which
is when these contracts begin to trade in meaningful volumes.

3.2. Estimation strategy

In total, the model features 20 structural parameters and two latent
variables. To reduce the dimensionality of the parameter space, we
fix the values of some parameters following Feldhütter and Schaefer
(2018) and Du et al. (2019), among others. More precisely, we set the
bankruptcy cost 𝛼 to 25%, corporate tax rate 𝜁 to 20%, and CDS/bond-
specific recovery rate 𝑅 to 51% when computing the protection leg of
a CDS contract (see Appendix A.1). Considering our sample period, we
choose the risk-free rate to be 1% and the asset payout ratio to be 2%.
We normalize the amount of book liabilities to 25 and set the coupon
𝑐 to 𝑟𝑓 × 25 = 0.25. Consistent with evidence that the default threshold
is located significantly below the book value of liabilities, the default
barrier 𝐴𝐷 is chosen to be 78% of 25, or 19.50.17

In an attempt to further reduce the estimation dimensionality, we fix
the idiosyncratic jump intensity 𝜆𝑗 to 1%, as simultaneously identifying
the jump intensity and jump size is often challenging. This idiosyncratic
jump intensity implies that, in expectation, about one idiosyncratic
jump happens every 100 years per firm. Idiosyncratic jumps in the
model are thus infrequent, but their size will be estimated to be very
large, making a default highly likely when they occur. We also set the
systematic jump intensity parameter 𝜂𝑚 equal to 1∕𝜃. Given that the
physical jump intensity is defined by 𝜆𝑚
𝑡 = 𝜂𝑚𝑉𝑡, this value implies
that about one systematic jump occurs on average per year. While
idiosyncratic jumps are assumed to be rare in the model, systematic
jumps on the other hand are assumed to be more frequent. This way,
their expected size will be estimated to be less consequential for firms’
defaults. Panel A of Table 1 summarizes and reports our calibration
choices.

This leaves us with 11 structural parameters 𝛩 ≡

{𝜅, 𝜃, 𝛿, 𝜌, 𝑧𝑚, 𝛾𝑚, 𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 , 𝜉𝑉 , 𝜉𝑚, 𝜎𝑗 , 𝑧𝑗 } to estimate and two latent variables
(𝐴𝑟
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) to filter. To do so, we adopt a daily observation frequency and
assume that the 5-year CDX spread (𝑆 CDX
5,𝑡 ) and the physical conditional
SPX volatility (𝜎SPX
) are observed without errors (see, e.g., Duffee,

𝑡

15 For details on the pricing and market conventions about CDX options, we

refer to Chen et al. (2023) and CDJT.

16 Following Dumas et al.

(1998), Goncalves and Guidolin (2006),
and Christoffersen et al. (2009), we run the following regression with the
quoted Black-implied volatility 𝜎(𝑇 , 𝑀):

log 𝜎(𝑇 , 𝑀) = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1𝑇 + 𝑏2𝑀 + 𝑏3𝑇 2 + 𝑏4𝑀 2 + 𝑎5𝑇 × 𝑀 + 𝑒,

where 𝑇 denotes the maturity and 𝑀 represents the moneyness scaled by
𝑇 .
Note that we consider a wider moneyness range for CDX options (100 ± 15%)
to ensure that it is comparable to the moneyness range for SPX options
(100 ± 5%). The monthly standard deviation of the log CDX is about three
times larger than that of the log SPX (13.76 vs. 4.27%). Regressing the log
CDX on the log SPX also results in a slope coefficient of −2.41, suggesting
that a 5% increase in the SPX is associated with about a 12% decrease in the
CDX.

√

17 This number is broadly consistent with the estimates in Davydenko

(2012).

6 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Table 1
Structural parameters. The table reports the calibrated and estimated values for the
structural model parameters. Panel A presents the parameters that are calibrated, and
Panel B presents the parameters that are obtained via maximum likelihood estimation.
Reported together in square brackets are robust standard errors calculated using the Huber
sandwich estimator. The standard errors are expressed in the same units as the corresponding
parameter estimates. The estimation sample period is from June 2004 to November 2020.

(A) Calibrated parameters

1-Distress costs (𝛼)
2-Corporate tax rate (𝜁)
3-Recovery rate (𝑅)
4-Risk-free interest rate (𝑟𝑓 )
5-Asset payout rate (𝑞)
6-Coupon (𝑐)
7-Systematic jump intensity loading (𝜂𝑚: 𝜆𝑚
8-Idiosyncratic jump intensity (𝜆𝑗 )
9-Default barrier (𝐴𝐷)

𝑡 = 𝜂𝑚𝑉𝑡)

(B) Estimated parameters

1-Mean reversion speed ( ̂𝜅)
2-Long run mean ( ̂𝜃)
3-Volatility parameter for asset variance ( ̂𝛿)
4-Correlation between asset value and variance shocks ( ̂𝜌)
5-Market price of asset specific risk ( ̂𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 )
6-Market price of variance risk ( ̂𝜉𝑉 )
7-Systematic jump size mean ( ̂𝑧𝑚)
8-Systematic jump size standard deviation (̂𝛾𝑚)
9-Market price of systematic jump risk( ̂𝜉𝑚)
10-Idiosyncratic volatility ( ̂𝜎𝑗 )
11-Idiosyncratic jump size ( ̂𝑧𝑗 )

25.00%
20.00%
51.00%
1.00%
2.00%
0.25
112.92
1.00%
19.50

2.6637
0.0089
21.49%
−0.6004
0.4759
−6.1029
−3.24%
1.17%
−3.0010
9.08%
−77.01%

[0.0584]
[0.0004]
[1.5191]
[0.0635]
[16.822]
[0.4439]
[0.4992]
[0.1923]
[0.1398]
[0.5506]
[0.9759]

2002; Aït-Sahalia and Kimmel, 2010). We then filter out ̂𝐴𝑟
5,𝑡 and 𝜎SPX
𝑆 CDX

𝑡 and ̂𝑉𝑡 from
, on each day 𝑡, by solving the following two equations:

𝑡

𝑡 , ̂𝑉𝑡, 5, 𝛩) and 𝜎SPX

5,𝑡 = 𝑆( ̂𝐴𝑟
𝑆 CDX
where 𝑆 is defined by Eq. (10) and the expression for 𝜎2
by

𝑡 , ̂𝑉𝑡, 𝛩),

𝐸 ( ̂𝐴𝑟
𝜎2

𝑡 =

(15)

𝐸 is provided

√

𝜎2
𝐸,𝑡 =

[( 𝐴𝑟
𝑡
𝐸𝑡

)2

+

𝜕𝐸𝑡
𝜕𝐴𝑟
𝑡
[

(

𝛿
𝐸𝑡
𝑡 𝑒𝑍𝑚
𝐸𝑡

+ 𝜆𝑚
𝑡

E

𝑍𝑚

𝐸(𝐴𝑟

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡)

]2

− 1

.

)2

𝜕𝐸𝑡
𝜕𝑉𝑡

+ 2𝜌𝛿

𝐴𝑟
𝑡
(𝐸𝑡)2

𝜕𝐸𝑡
𝜕𝐴𝑟
𝑡

𝜕𝐸𝑡
𝜕𝑉𝑡

]

𝑉𝑡

We provide the detailed derivation in the Internet Appendix. On the
one hand, risk-neutral pricing implies that the term structure of CDX
spreads embeds relevant information about the model’s Q-dynamics.
On the other hand, the time series of the conditional SPX volatility
and CDX spreads help us identify the model’s P-dynamics. Since there
are inherent differences in the payoffs of the claims constituting the
SPX and CDX, diffusive and jump risks impact the pricing of credit
and equity indices differently. Thus, fitting the CDX level jointly with
the physical SPX volatility is not only informative about P- and Q-
dynamics but also about the decomposition of the total asset risk into
its respective components.

Our estimation strategy further postulates that the relative pricing
errors on 3-, 7-, and 10-year CDX spreads are observed with Gaussian
errors such that
𝑇 ,𝑡 − 𝑆(𝐴𝑟
𝑆 CDX
𝑆 CDX
𝑇 ,𝑡

for 𝑇 = 3, 7, 10,

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 , 𝛩)

= 𝑒𝑇 ,𝑡,

(16)

is the 𝑇 -year maturity quoted spread at time 𝑡 and 𝑒𝑇 ,𝑡 ∼
𝑒 ). Based on these assumptions, we estimate 𝛩 via maximum

where 𝑆 CDX
𝑇 ,𝑡
𝑁(0, 𝜎2
likelihood by solving the following maximization problem

̂𝛩 ≡ argmax log (𝛩) = argmax

𝑇
∑

𝑡=2

log P (𝑌𝑡 ∣ 𝑌𝑡−1; 𝛩) ,

(17)

{

}

𝑆 CDX
3,𝑡

where 𝑌𝑡 =
is the vector of observables
on day 𝑡. Note that the distribution of the filtered state variables and
𝑡 , ̂𝑉𝑡} to the vector of observables 𝑌𝑡 are taken into
the mapping from { ̂𝐴𝑟

, 𝑆 CDX
5,𝑡

, 𝑆 CDX
10,𝑡

, 𝑆 CDX
7,𝑡

, 𝜎SPX
𝑡

account when computing P (𝑌𝑡 ∣ 𝑌𝑡−1; 𝛩)
. Details about the construction
and computation of the likelihood function in our framework are
provided in the Internet Appendix.

3.3. Parameter estimates

Panel B of Table 1 presents the 11 structural parameters that are
obtained via maximum likelihood estimation following the strategy out-
lined in the previous section. Reported together in square brackets are
robust standard errors calculated using the Huber sandwich estimator.
The panel shows that the standard errors are generally very small,
indicating that most parameters are highly significant.18

The first four rows of Panel B report the parameters governing
systematic asset variance dynamics. The estimated mean reversion
speed ( ̂𝜅) is 2.6637. This value corresponds to a daily persistence of 1 −
2.6637∕365 = 0.9927, which is comparable to the persistence of variance
reported for large equity indices (see, e.g., Bates, 2000; Pan, 2002).
The long-run mean of systematic variance ̂𝜃 is 0.0089, which translates
√
0.0089 = 9.41%. The volatility of
into a yearly volatility level of
variance parameter is 21.49% and the correlation ̂𝜌 between the two
is ‧0.6004. Apart from the
systematic Brownian motions 𝑊 𝐴⟂𝑉
level of systematic asset variance, which is lower than that of an equity
index due to the firms’ financial leverage, the remaining estimates for
systematic asset variance are comparable to the parameters reported
in Bates (2000), Pan (2002), and Christoffersen et al. (2018) for the
dynamics of the SPX variance.

and 𝑊 𝑉
𝑡

𝑡

The next two parameters reported in rows 5–6 capture diffusive
risk compensation. The estimated market price of asset diffusive risk
( ̂𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 ) is equal to 0.4759 while the market price of variance risk ( ̂𝜉𝑉 )
̂𝜌, ̂𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 , and ̂𝜉𝑉 imply that the estimated risk
is ‧6.1029. Combined,
(√
𝑉𝑡 =
premium attributable to diffusive risk is

1 − ̂𝜌2 ̂𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 + ̂𝜌 ̂𝜉𝑉

)

18 The only parameter that is insignificant is the market price of asset-
specific risk 𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 , which is notoriously difficult to estimate. While the other
two market prices of risk 𝜉𝑉 and 𝜉𝑚 are key determinants of the term structure
of CDX spreads and hence are accurately estimated, 𝜉𝐴⟂𝑉 is less important for
the term structure and only weakly identified through the time series data. Aït-
Sahalia and Kimmel (2007) and others also find the same parameter to be
statistically insignificant and estimated with less accuracy.

7 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Table 2
Likelihood ratio tests. The table performs likelihood ratio tests for two nested versions of our model:
no systematic variance risk and no systematic jump risk. For each case, the log-likelihood ratio test (LRT)
]
[(𝛩full)∕(𝛩nested)
statistic is defined as 2 × log
, and the p-value is calculated based on the chi-square
distribution. The degrees of freedom are determined to be the number of model restrictions.

Log-likelihood
LRT statistic
Degrees of freedom
Chi-square p-value

(A) Full model

46197.57

(B) Nested models

No systematic variance risk

No systematic jump risk

41510.48
9374.19
4
0.00

45630.07
1135.01
4
0.00

4.0449 × 𝑉𝑡 in Eq. (7). Unconditionally, this corresponds to 4.0449 × ̂𝜃 =
3.58% annually. Moreover, the estimated risk-neutral mean reversion
speed and unconditional variance are ̂𝜅Q = ̂𝜅 + ̂𝛿 ̂𝜉𝑉 = 1.3522 and ̂𝜃Q =
̂𝜅 ̂𝜃∕ ̂𝜅Q = 0.0174, respectively. The negative ̂𝜉𝑉 estimate thus translates
into a more persistent variance process and a higher unconditional
level of variance under Q than under P. This finding is consistent
with a wealth of evidence on the presence of a negative variance risk
premium.19

The parameters reported in rows 7–9 govern the systematic jump
distribution and the market price of systematic jump risk. The mean
( ̂𝑧𝑚) and volatility (̂𝛾𝑚) of systematic jumps are ‧3.24% and 1.17%,
respectively. The market price of systematic jump risk ̂𝜉𝑚 is negative
and equals ‧3.0010. This estimate implies that the average systematic
Q
jump size is more negative under Q than under P. We have ̂𝑧
𝑚 =
̂𝑧𝑚 + ̂𝜉𝑚 ̂𝛾 2
𝑚 = ‧3.28%.20 In terms of contribution to the total asset
risk premium (𝜇𝑡 − 𝑟), the unconditional systematic jump component,
̂𝜃 in 𝜆𝑚
obtained by setting 𝜆𝑚
𝑡 − 1)], is equal
𝑡
𝑡
to 0.37%. This number amounts to a 9.37% relative contribution to
the total asset risk premium of (3.58% + 0.37%) = 3.95%. Finally,
in rows 10–11, we report two idiosyncratic/firm-specific parameters.
The estimated diffusive idiosyncratic volatility ̂𝜎𝑗
is 9.08% and the
estimated idiosyncratic jump size ̂𝑧𝑗 is ‧77.01%.

E[(1 − 𝑒𝑍𝑚

𝑡 )(𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚

to ̂𝜂𝑚

A well-known shortcoming of a misspecified structural model is that
it implies an excessive asset Sharpe ratio or market leverage when
it is estimated to fit the data (in particular, the credit spread). In
the same spirit, the estimated level of asset volatility gains economic
relevance only if the model implies a reasonable asset Sharpe ratio and
market leverage; a low level of asset volatility could be compensated by
excessive leverage or other sources of risk, leading to an unrealistically
large asset Sharpe ratio. Thus, it is important to check if the two
aforementioned measures are reasonable in our model. First, the asset
Sharpe ratio of the representative firm is 23% under our parametriza-
tion, which compares well with other values reported in the literature.
For instance, Chen et al. (2009) discuss the importance of the asset
Sharpe ratio in structural models and obtain a 22% asset Sharpe ratio
estimate for a representative Baa firm. Second, the market leverage of
the representative firm implied by the model is 44.18%, which is of
the same order of magnitude as the empirical estimates for our sample
of firms. According to Choi et al. (2020), the market leverage of CDX
firms, measured as the ratio of total liabilities (Compustat item LTQ)
to market equity plus total liabilities, ranges from 44.9% to 63.1% on
average across firms.21 These results establish consistency between our
model and the data and provide further confidence in our estimated
parameters.

19 See, among many others, Carr and Wu (2009) or Todorov (2010).
20 The systematic jump intensity 𝜆𝑚,Q
is also higher under the
𝑡
risk-neutral measure. There are two reasons. First, the risk-neutral loading
𝑚 = 𝜂𝑚𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑧𝑚+ 1
𝜂Q
𝑚 is larger than the physical loading 𝜂𝑚 (124.51 vs. 112.92).
Second, the level of 𝑉𝑡 under the risk-neutral measure 𝜃Q = 𝜅𝜃∕(𝜅 + 𝛿𝜉𝑉 ) is
larger than its physical counterpart 𝜃 (0.0174 vs. 0.0089).

= 𝜂Q

(𝜉𝑚)2𝛾 2

𝑚 𝑉𝑡

2

21 In the Internet Appendix, we provide the empirical distribution of market
leverage for the firms constituting the CDX as well as for the average CDX
firm.

8 

Lastly, Table 2 considers two nested versions of our model: no
systematic variance risk (𝜅 = 𝛿 = 𝜌 = 𝜉𝑉 = 0) and no systematic
jump risk (𝑧𝑚 = 𝛾𝑚 = 𝜂𝑚 = 𝜉𝑚 = 0). For each case, we re-estimate
the model with the restrictions and report the resulting log-likelihood.
Intuitively, if the model restrictions are well supported by the data,
the log-likelihood from the nested model and the one from the full
model should be very close, as their gap only reflects sampling errors.
In fact, under the null hypothesis of 𝛩full = 𝛩nested, the likelihood
]
[(𝛩full)∕(𝛩nested)
ratio test statistic 2 × log
should follow a chi-square
distribution whose degrees of freedom equal the number of restrictions.
The table shows that the log-likelihood significantly falls when we
impose either set of restrictions. The chi-square p-value is virtually zero.
This demonstrates that both systematic variance risk and systematic
jump risk are important model ingredients for improving the model’s
goodness of fit to the data.

4. Understanding the model mechanisms

Before presenting the filtered state variables and discussing the
model’s time series implications, we seek to provide insights into
the mechanisms at play in our model. We first examine the relation
between the state variables and key model quantities (Section 4.1). We
then study how the exposures to the three sources of systematic risk
vary across indices and derivative instruments (Section 4.2). Lastly,
we show that our estimated model can consistently price the CDX,
SPX options, and CDX options, addressing the puzzle posed by CDJT
(Section 4.3).

4.1. The role of the state variables

Equipped with the parameter estimates from Section 3, we evaluate
the model at various combinations of the state variables (𝐴𝑟
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) to
understand how it operates. In our model, the first state variable 𝐴𝑟
𝑡
is only identified up to its ratio with the default barrier 𝐴𝐷. So, we
select the following levels for the relative default barrier:

{

}

∈

0.35022, 0.38244, 0.49218

.

𝐴𝐷
𝐴𝑟
𝑡

The three values above are selected based on empirical estimates of
market leverage. Specifically, the lower value of 0.35022, the mid value
of 0.38244, and the upper value of 0.49218 correspond to 78% of
the lower bound, time series mean, and upper bound of the average
leverage for CDX firms documented by Choi et al. (2020). See the
Internet Appendix for further details.

We also choose three values of the second state variable 𝑉𝑡 based

on its stationary distribution under the physical measure:

{

}

𝑉𝑡 ∈

0.00097, 0.00619, 0.02028

,

which correspond to the 10th, 50th (median), and 90th percentile
values. Note that since 𝑉𝑡 follows a Cox et al. (1985) process, its
stationary distribution is gamma with shape parameter 2𝜅𝜃∕𝛿2 and
scale parameter 𝛿2∕(2𝜅).

We calculate the 5-year CDX spread as well as 1-month SPX/CDX
implied volatilities based on the 3 × 3 = 9 pairs of the state variables.

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Table 3
Model results as functions of the state variables. The table reports the 5-year CDX spread (Panel A) and 1-month SPX and CDX implied
volatilities (Panels B and C) from the model. We evaluate the model at the following nine combinations of the two state variables:
( 𝐴𝐷
, 𝑉𝑡) ∈ {0.35022, 0.38244, 0.49218} × {0.00097, 0.00619, 0.02028}. The CDX spread is expressed in basis points. The implied volatilities are
𝐴𝑟
𝑡
expressed in percentages and are calculated at 95, 100, and 105% moneyness values for SPX options and at 85, 100, and 115% for CDX
options. Since we evaluate the model at extreme state values in this exercise, we increase the number of simulations to 100,000 paths ×500
firms for accuracy.

(A) CDX

41.65
43.78
50.67

58.38
64.36
73.71

141.38
148.64
161.89

(B) SPX options

(C) CDX options

95%

100%

105%

85%

100%

115%

Low relative default barrier 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡

10.12
15.50
24.52

6.52
13.10
22.92

5.78
11.20
21.50

Mid relative default barrier 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡

10.49
16.21
25.75

6.86
13.79
24.13

6.01
11.84
22.67

High relative default barrier 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡

12.06
19.27
31.09

8.32
16.76
29.33

7.08
14.64
27.73

18.41
41.98
82.83

17.26
41.42
71.52

14.51
28.05
53.56

25.80
50.98
84.82

27.49
48.18
71.62

19.59
34.95
57.28

35.67
57.46
86.61

35.97
52.06
72.81

27.79
41.11
62.58

𝑉𝑡

𝑉𝑡

𝑉𝑡

10th
Median
90th

10th
Median
90th

10th
Median
90th

Table 3 reports the results obtained. Panel A shows that the CDX spread
sharply increases with the relative default barrier. At the median 𝑉𝑡,
the CDX spread is only 43.78 bp for the low level of 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 but rises to
64.36 bp and to 148.64 bp for the mid and high values. This is intuitive.
A higher default barrier corresponds to a shorter distance to default,
leading to a larger default probability and CDX spread. We observe that
the CDX spread is also monotonically increasing with asset variance
𝑉𝑡, independent of the level of the relative default barrier. If the asset
dynamics become more volatile, the asset value is more likely to hit
the default barrier and trigger a default. Consistent with this intuition,
for the middle value of 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 , the CDX spread goes up from 58.38 to
73.71 as 𝑉𝑡 moves from its lowest to highest decile.

Panel B finds similar monotonic patterns for the SPX implied volatil-
ity, which unambiguously rises with both state variables. In a structural
credit risk model, equity is a residual claim on the issuing firm’s asset.
Thus, both higher asset variance and financial leverage translate into
higher equity volatility. If financial leverage (equivalently, the relative
default barrier) rises, the sensitivity of the equity to assets increases,
making the equity return more volatile. This, in turn, makes equity
options more valuable, as reflected in the increasing patterns of the
SPX implied volatility. Additionally, our model generates a pronounced
negative volatility skew consistent with stylized facts; at any given com-
bination of the two state variables, the SPX implied volatility decreases
with moneyness (𝐾∕𝐼𝑡). The negative skewness in SPX returns, which
results in a downward sloping implied-volatility skew, is induced by:
(i) asymmetric asset volatility generated through a negative correlation
coefficient 𝜌 and (ii) downward systematic asset jumps 𝜈𝑚
𝑡 . In
addition, the asymmetry in unlevered asset risk implied by (i) and (ii)
endogenously generates a higher market leverage of constituting firms
in bad times, further increasing index volatility in the left tail.

𝑡 𝑑𝑁 𝑚

Panel C, however, presents quite different patterns for the CDX im-
plied volatility. A few remarks are in order. First, the model generates a
positive volatility skew. Intuitively, a left tail event in the equity market
(low equity return) is associated with a right tail event in the credit
market (high credit spread). Hence, a downward sloping volatility skew
for SPX options is consistent with an upward sloping volatility skew
for CDX options. Second, the CDX implied volatility does not vary
monotonically with the relative default barrier 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 . For example,
for the low 𝑉𝑡 value, at-the-money volatilities display a hump-shaped
pattern (25.80, 27.49, and 19.59 bp) as 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟

𝑡 increases.

To understand this, it is important to note that the CDX implied
volatility captures the volatility of the relative change in the CDX
spread through the Black (1976) formula. Thus, all else equal, the
CDX implied volatility tends to decline when the level of the CDX
spread rises. Simply put, a 40 bp standard deviation in the CDX spread

corresponds to a 100% volatility when the CDX spread is 40 bp but
corresponds to a 50% volatility when the CDX spread is 80 bp. This
makes it clear that the hump-shaped pattern is the result of two oppo-
site forces. (i) On the one hand, higher market leverage leads to higher
default risk, raising the CDX implied volatility. (ii) On the other hand,
higher market leverage boosts the level of the CDX spread, decreasing
the CDX implied volatility. Depending on which force dominates the
other, the CDX implied volatility can go up or down.

Interestingly, we do not observe any non-monotonicity when chang-
ing 𝑉𝑡 for a given relative default barrier: the CDX implied volatility
always rises with asset variance 𝑉𝑡, similar to the SPX implied volatility
case. When we increase asset variance, the CDX spread rises with a
relatively small magnitude (Panel A). As a result, the negative force
(through the spread level) is always dominated by the positive force,
preserving the monotonicity in the CDX implied volatility along 𝑉𝑡.

4.2. Systematic risk exposures

In our model, the expected return on a given corporate security
is determined by the product of aggregate risk premia times its risk
exposures (see Eq. (14)). As a result, cross-sectional differences in
expected returns are entirely driven by heterogeneity in the three
systematic risk exposures 𝛥𝐴,𝑡, 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡, and 𝛥𝑁,𝑡 across different securities.
In this section, we develop economic insights into how these exposures
differ across the two market indices and their option contracts.

To estimate exposures for the CDX, we consider a fully collateralized
contract from the protection seller’s point of view. In this case, the
value of the CDX contract is equivalent to the value of a synthetic
corporate bond (Chen et al., 2023). Putting down the collateral cor-
responds to paying for the bond, the premium leg captures the value
of receiving a credit spread on the bond, and the protection leg reflects
the loss in the event of default. In what follows in this section, we refer
to this fully collateralized CDX position when we use the term CDX or
CDX value. See Appendix A.1 for details.

Fig. 1 graphs the exposures to the three sources of risk implied by
the model for the SPX/CDX (Panels A, B, and C), for SPX options (Panels
D, E, and F), and for CDX options (Panels G, H, and I). To facilitate
comparison, we normalize the exposures so that they capture the
response to a one standard deviation change in one of the three sources
of systematic risk. Specifically, the left panels plot the normalized asset
√𝑉𝑡, the center panels plot the
risk exposure 𝛥𝐴,𝑡 × Std𝑡( 𝑑𝐴𝑡
) = 𝛥𝐴,𝑡
𝐴𝑡
normalized variance risk exposure 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡 × Std𝑡(𝑑𝑉𝑡) = 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡𝛿√𝑉𝑡, and the
right panels plot the normalized jump risk exposure ̄𝛥𝑁,𝑡 × Std𝑡(𝑑𝑁𝑡) =
√𝜆𝑚
̄𝛥𝑁,𝑡
𝑡 . The results are produced by setting the two state variables
(𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) to their mid values selected in Section 4.1.

9 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Fig. 1. Exposures to three sources of systematic risk. The figure graphs the three exposures implied by the model for the SPX/CDX (Panels A, B, and C), for SPX options
(Panels D, E, and F), and for CDX options (Panels G, H, and I). We consider 1-month calls and puts with moneyness of 95, 100, and 105% for SPX options and 85, 100, and
115% for CDX options. To facilitate comparison, we normalize the exposures so that they capture the response to a one standard deviation change in one of the three sources
√
of systematic risk. Specifically, the left panels plot 𝛥𝐴,𝑡
𝑡 . The results are produced by setting the two state
variables at (𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟

𝑉𝑡, the center panels plot 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡𝛿

𝑉𝑡, and the right panels plot

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) = (0.38244, 0.00619).

√𝜆𝑚

̄𝛥𝑁,𝑡

√

𝑡 ∕𝐴𝑟

Panel A shows that the SPX and CDX values are both positively
exposed to asset growth risk. This is intuitive. When the firm’s asset
value increases (i.e., 𝜕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 > 0), equity (SPX) and debt (CDX), both
claims on the firm’s assets, should also increase in value. Notably,
the SPX has a greater exposure than the CDX. This is due to inherent
disparities in cash flow contingencies between equity vs. debt; equity
is a more junior claim than debt, offering more upside and embedded
leverage.

Moving on to options, we observe from Panel D that SPX calls
load positively and SPX puts load negatively on asset growth risk, as
expected. We also find that out-of-the-money options (105% for calls
and 95% for puts) have generally larger exposures than at-the-money
or in-the-money options because of their higher embedded leverage.
For CDX options in Panel G, intuitively, calls load negatively and puts
load positively on asset growth risk. Since the credit spread generally
rises in bad times and falls in good times, CDX calls (puts) are similar
to SPX puts (calls) with respect to the economic states they span.

The exposures to jump risk in Panels C, F, and I show exactly
opposite signs to those for asset growth risk. This is because systematic
jumps are on average negative in our model, reducing the firm’s asset
value. Naturally, the exposure to jump risk ̄𝛥𝑁,𝑡 takes the opposite sign
compared to 𝛥𝐴,𝑡. Therefore, while the SPX still has a greater exposure
in magnitude than the CDX, both are negatively exposed. SPX calls and
CDX puts load negatively on jump risk whereas SPX puts and CDX calls
load positively.

An intriguing prediction of our model is that exposures to variance
risk 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡 vary, in both magnitude and sign, across markets and instru-
ments. In Panel B, we see that the exposure of the CDX to variance risk
is significantly larger in size than that of the SPX, although both are

negative. Why do the two indices exhibit such a drastic difference in
exposures? There are two channels at play here. (i) When asset variance
𝑉𝑡 rises, investors’ marginal utility or the SDF goes up. Consequently,
the values of corporate securities decline due to higher discount rates.
Thus, under this channel, equity and debt values fall together. (ii) In
a structural credit risk model like ours, corporate securities are option
contracts on the firm’s assets: equity is a long call whereas debt embeds
a short put. When asset variance 𝑉𝑡 rises, the value of an option,
regardless of whether it is a call or a put, also rises as the chance of
expiring in-the-money increases. This so-called ‘‘vega effect’’ raises the
equity value (i.e., long call) but lowers the debt value (i.e., short put).
As a result, the exposures of the SPX and CDX to variance risk
in Panel B are determined by the net effect of these two channels.
In the case of the SPX, which is an equity index, channels (i) and
(ii) have opposite effects, partially offsetting each other. At the given
state variables, channel (i) slightly dominates channel (ii), leading to a
marginally negative exposure. However, in the case of the CDX, which
is based on debt securities, channels (i) and (ii) go in the same direction,
making the CDX exposure heavily negative. The CDX is thus much more
sensitive to variance risk than the SPX.

Understanding the intuition behind Panel B, it is clear how the
exposures of options to variance risk in Panels E and H are determined.
Again, we need to consider the interplay of two channels. Starting with
SPX options in Panel E, consider a situation where asset variance 𝑉𝑡
rises. On the one hand, the value of the underlying (i.e., SPX) slightly
falls, as can be seen in Panel B, making SPX calls less valuable and
SPX puts more valuable (underlying channel). On the other hand, an
increase in asset variance leads to an increase in SPX variance, and due
to options’ inherent positive exposure to volatility, both SPX calls and

10 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

puts become more valuable (vega channel). The underlying channel is
weak for the SPX and is dominated by the vega channel. This explains
why we have positive exposures to variance risk for all SPX options.

In contrast, Panel H reveals that CDX calls and puts carry exposures
with opposite signs. Specifically, the exposures of CDX puts turn neg-
ative. To illustrate why, recall that the value of the CDX falls more
substantially than the SPX in Panel B. This implies that for CDX options,
the underlying channel can dominate the vega channel, depending on
the contract. For CDX calls, when asset variance 𝑉𝑡 rises, the CDX value
falls, and equivalently, the CDX spread rises. Thus, both the underlying
and vega channels go in the same direction, making CDX calls heavily
and positively exposed to variance risk. For CDX puts, the underlying
channel reduces the put value and goes against the vega channel. In
fact, for CDX puts, the underlying channel dominates the vega channel
under our parametrization, resulting in negative exposures, as can be
seen in Panel H.

Comparing the magnitudes of at-the-money exposures to variance
risk, we see that CDX calls offer the largest exposures among all
options by an order of magnitude. Thus, although CDX put options are
negatively exposed to variance risk, the substantially large positive ex-
posures of CDX calls imply that selling at-the-money CDX straddles can
generate high average returns. This rationalizes the empirical finding
documented by CDJT that selling at-the-money CDX straddles produces
much higher returns than selling at-the-money SPX straddles.22 The key
economic intuition is clear. As evident in Panel B, the CDX is simply
more sensitive to variance risk than the SPX.

4.3. Comparison with Collin-Dufresne et al. (2024)

An important aspect of our model is that it can shed light on the
puzzle suggested by CDJT. The authors argue that even with a state-
of-the-art structural model of credit risk, it is difficult to reconcile the
pricing of SPX and CDX options. Specifically, they find that when their
model is fitted to match the CDX spread and implied volatilities for
SPX options, it generates too low implied volatilities for CDX options.23
Based on this inherent inconsistency between the two types of option
contracts, CDJT conclude that equity and credit option markets are not
fully integrated.

Before we investigate this issue through the lens of our model,
it is worth highlighting that our paper takes a different empirical
approach compared to CDJT. In our model, we specify both the physical
and risk-neutral firm dynamics and estimate them not only by using
the risk-neutral information from asset prices but also by exploiting
the physical information from the time series. The state variables are
filtered so as to preserve the assumed dynamics of our model. In
contrast, CDJT exclusively model risk-neutral dynamics; the model
state variables are treated as extra parameters and fitted to asset
prices along with other parameters every six months. This approach
does not enforce time series consistency between estimation results
from different periods, and we find it leads to less intuitive results.
For example, CDJT estimate that the long-run mean of asset variance
fluctuates in a wide range from 0.0021 (4.58% in terms of annual
volatility) to 0.0400 (20% in terms of annual volatility). Moreover,
according to their Internet Appendix, this parameter is estimated to
be 0.0400 for the majority of the sample period (10 out of 18 on-
the-run CDX series). This level of unlevered asset volatility (20% per
annum) is counterintuitive because it is higher than the historical time

22 Shorting straddles, or selling volatility insurance, generates a positive
premium arising from a negative exposure to (negatively priced) variance risk.
Our model predicts that CDX straddle returns should be about twice as high as
SPX straddle returns. This is broadly in line with the empirical ratio between
the two returns reported by CDJT.

23 Equivalently, when their model is fitted to match the CDX spread and
implied volatilities for CDX options, it implies too high implied volatilities for
SPX options.

series average of the VIX (about 19.50%), a proxy for the risk-neutral
levered index volatility. In our view, incorporating both physical and
risk-neutral dynamics allows us to better match reality by leveraging
the physical information embedded in the time series data, mitigating
potential overfitting.

With these differences in mind, we revisit the fitting exercise in the
spirit of CDJT using our model. The formal empirical results based on
the filtered state variables are provided in Section 5. Table 4 shows
the results from our fitting exercise. In Panel A, we report the data
median for the CDX spread as well as for the at-the-money SPX and
CDX implied volatilities. The sample period is from March 2012 to
November 2020, during which the data on both options are available.
In Panel B, we search for the values of the two state variables so that
our estimated model generates the same CDX spread (67.50 bp) and
SPX implied volatility (13.27%) as in the data. The fitted values of the
state variables are (𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡) = (0.3880, 0.0056), which are within the
range discussed in Section 4.1. Surprisingly, the panel shows that our
model, together with the fitted state variables, implies a CDX implied
volatility of 46.35%. The model value is close to and even slightly
larger than the data value of 43.39%. Unlike the findings of CDJT,
the model does not underprice CDX options under our benchmark
parametrization, although the model is fitted to perfectly match the
CDX spread and SPX implied volatility.

Why do not we reproduce the relative pricing puzzle posed by CDJT?
Our model differs from CDJT’s in two dimensions. First, the two models
make different assumptions about capital structure and firms’ defaults.
In our model, firms issue console bonds and go bankrupt when the asset
value falls below an exogenously specified default boundary (i.e., first-
passage-time model in the spirit of Black and Cox, 1976). In CDJT’s
model, however, firms maintain a lumpy debt structure by issuing a
1-year short-term bond and a 5-year longer-term bond. At year 1, the
default boundary is endogenously determined based on the continua-
tion value of equity. At year 5, the default boundary is simply set to
be the face value of the 5-year bond as in the standard Merton (1974)
setup. Despite these differences, the two models are still comparable
because they share identical asset dynamics with stochastic variance
and jump risks. In fact, we are able to map the parameters associated
with firms’ asset dynamics under CDJT’s model exactly into ours. This
naturally points toward the second difference between the two models:
parameter values.

To understand the impact of differences in parametrization, Panel C
now evaluates our model with the parameters reported by CDJT.24
Like in Panel B, the values of the two state variables are found to
match the CDX spread and SPX implied volatility. In this case, the
model leads to only a 33.44% CDX implied volatility, nearly 10%
points (or 23% in relative terms) lower than the data. Hence, we do
recover the underpricing issue documented by CDJT if we use their
parametrization.25

Then, why do the two parametrizations deliver such different re-
sults? In Panel B, we begin with our benchmark parametrization and
gradually change the values of the parameters and state variables until
we reach CDJT’s parametrization. Most noticeably, CDJT adopt a lower
relative default threshold 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 (0.1712 vs. 0.3880) but instead a

24 Since they estimate their model every six months, we use the average
parameter estimates. Also, note that CDJT only specify risk-neutral dynamics,
and their parameters should be interpreted as risk-neutral ones. We correctly
map their parameters into the risk-neutral parameters of our model. The
Internet Appendix reports the CDJT parameters used in this exercise along
with our benchmark parametrization for comparison purposes.

25 This degree of underpricing is somewhat smaller than what CDJT report
(around 30% in relative terms). This small discrepancy could potentially
be due to (i) other differences between the two models such as capital
structure and default assumptions, or (ii) larger model pricing errors outside
of ‘‘average’’ market conditions.

11 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Table 4
Pricing consistency. The table revisits the relative pricing puzzle posed by CDJT based on our model. Panel A reports the data
median for the CDX spread as well as for the at-the-money SPX and CDX implied volatilities. The sample period is from March 2012
to November 2020, during which the data on both options are available. The other two panels calculate the CDX implied volatility from
the model when the two state variables are chosen to exactly fit the CDX spread and the SPX implied volatility from the data under
our benchmark parametrization (Panel B) and under CDJT’s parametrization (Panel C). Reported together are three key model inputs.
To understand why the two parametrizations produce different results, in Panel B, we begin with our benchmark parametrization and
gradually change the values of the parameters and state variables until we reach CDJT’s parametrization.
Target
CDX
67.50
67.50
67.50
67.50
67.50
67.50

Implied volatility
CDX
SPX
43.39
13.27
46.35
13.27
25.81
9.90
32.62
13.42
33.44
13.27
33.44
13.27

+ (1) Lower 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
+ (2) Higher asset variance 𝑉𝑡
+ (3) Other changes to reach CDJT

(A) Data median (Mar 2012 - Nov 2020)
(B) Our benchmark parametrization

0.3880
0.1712
0.1712
0.1712
0.1712

0.0980
0.3204
0.3178
0.2840
0.2840

0.0056
0.0056
0.0108
0.0108
0.0108

Model inputs
𝑉𝑡

(C) CDJT parametrization

𝑡 but higher 𝜎𝑗

𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡

𝜎𝑗

larger idiosyncratic volatility 𝜎𝑗 (28.40% vs. 9.80%).26 In row (1) of
Panel B, we set 𝐴𝐷∕𝐴𝑟
𝑡 to 0.1712 and increase 𝜎𝑗 to match the CDX
spread. Although the total credit risk remains the same (i.e., identical
CDX spread), the proportion of idiosyncratic (diversifiable) risk rises.
Consequently, the implied volatilities for both index options fall signif-
icantly. In row (2) of Panel B, we additionally raise the asset variance
𝑉𝑡 from 0.0056 to 0.0108, the average systematic variance reported
in CDJT. At the same time, we slightly lower 𝜎𝑗 to keep the CDX
spread unaffected. We observe that the SPX implied volatility goes up
to 13.42% as a result, returning to the data level. However, the CDX
implied volatility, at 32.62%, remains lower than the data value of
43.39%. Note that row (2) already closely replicates the results from
the CDJT parametrization in Panel C. In fact, other parameter differ-
ences, such as the frequency/severity of jumps or persistence/long-run
mean of asset variance, cancel one another and generate little net effect.
This exercise demonstrates that jointly explaining the pricing of
the CDX, SPX options, and CDX options requires properly attributing
different sources of risk. There are two tensions to be considered.
The first tension is between systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk. The
relative contribution of systematic vs. idiosyncratic risk does not affect
the level of the CDX spread, as it only depends on the total risk of
the constituent firms. However, through diversification, this relative
contribution matters for index dynamics and therefore influences index
option prices. The second tension comes from different origins of
systematic risk. As explored in Section 4.2, asset risk, variance risk,
and jump risk have differential impacts on SPX and CDX options.
Therefore, depending on their relative contributions, the three sources
of systematic risk can lead to different pricing implications.

5. Empirical evaluation of the model

The empirical evaluation of our model’s goodness-of-fit is composed
of three parts. In Section 5.1, we examine the model’s in-sample fit for
the term structure of CDX spreads and the conditional SPX volatility.
We then turn to the out-of-sample analysis. In Section 5.2, we analyze
the performance of the model in jointly explaining the pricing of
SPX and CDX options. A model extension with firm heterogeneity is
considered in Section 5.3.

5.1. In-sample fit

Recall that we filter the state variables from the 5-year CDX spread
(𝑆 CDX
solving
5,𝑡 )
by
𝑡 and ̂𝑉𝑡.
̂𝐴𝑟

the
physical
𝑡 , ̂𝑉𝑡, 5, ̂𝛩) and 𝜎SPX

SPX volatility
√
𝐸 ( ̂𝐴𝑟
𝜎2

(𝜎SPX
𝑡
𝑡 , ̂𝑉𝑡, ̂𝛩) for

and
= 𝑆( ̂𝐴𝑟

𝑆 CDX
5,𝑡

=

)

𝑡

26 The noticeable gap in the relative default threshold between the two
parametrizations stems from different definitions of leverage. While CDJT
define leverage based on total debt, we define it based on total liabilities.
As highlighted by Welch (2011), the literature remains divided, with both
definitions in common use.

12 

Fig. 2 presents the filtered time series of the relative default barrier
𝑡 and systematic asset variance ̂𝑉𝑡 backed out by our estimation
𝐴𝐷∕ ̂𝐴𝑟
procedure. From the figure, we see that the two state variables behave
as expected. The asset value ̂𝐴𝑟
𝑡 displays procyclical patterns, making
the relative default barrier 𝐴𝐷∕ ̂𝐴𝑟
𝑡 in Panel A countercyclical. Panel B
shows that the filtered asset variance ̂𝑉𝑡 also displays countercyclicality.
Notably, the relative default barrier rises at the onset of the Global
Financial Crisis. Around the same period, asset variance increases
abruptly, reflecting the adverse economic climate during the crisis; the
5-year CDX spread increased as high as 250 bp and the SPX volatility
shot up to nearly 75%. In 2020, we observe similar patterns for the
two state variables at the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis, which is
sensible.

We now examine the in-sample fit of our model implied by the
filtered state variables and parameter estimates. In Fig. 3, we plot the
time series of the 3-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year CDX spreads and the physical
SPX volatility in the data (yellow solid lines) and in the model (blue
dotted lines). Since the model is estimated to exactly match the 5-year
CDX spread and the SPX volatility, the data and model series perfectly
coincide for these two variables in Panels B and E. Thus, the main
variables of interest to assess the quality of in-sample model fit are the
CDX spreads with 3-, 7-, and 10-year maturities. Panels A, C, and D
show that the model captures time variation in the CDX spreads well
for these maturities. The figure reveals that most pricing errors cluster
around the Global Financial Crisis period, which is not surprising.
Outside of this period, the model tracks the data quite closely.

More formally, Panels A and B of Table 5 compare the means
and standard deviations of the variables calculated from the data and
model. From Panel A, we see that the empirical term structure of CDX
spreads is upward sloping on average. The spread monotonically rises
from 56.25 bp for the 3-year maturity to 108.45 bp for the 10-year
maturity. Another interesting observation is that long-term spreads are
less volatile than short-term spreads. While the standard deviation is
42.66 bp for the 3-year maturity, the 10-year spread has a volatility
of 25.95 bp. Our model captures these stylized facts relatively well, as
can be seen from Panel B. The model implied averages and standard
deviations are close to their data counterparts. The 3-year CDX spread
is 48.84 bp on average in the model, which is slightly lower than the
empirical average of 56.25 bp. For the long end of the term structure,
the model values are slightly higher than in the data (e.g., 118.37 vs.
108.45 bp for the 10-year maturity). In terms of standard deviations,
the model estimates are of the same order of magnitude as the empirical
values, but their term structure is somewhat flatter in the model than
in the data.

To provide further insight into our model’s goodness of fit, Panel C
of Table 5 provides two diagnostic metrics: the correlation between the
data and the model as well as the root mean square error (RMSE). First
of all, the data and model series are highly correlated. The correlation
estimates range from 0.86 to 0.97, which indicates that the model is
able to capture time series fluctuations well. In terms of pricing errors,
the RMSEs range from 12.68 to 20.11 bp. Considering the structural

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Fig. 2. Filtered state variables. The figure presents the time series of the two filtered state variables: the relative default barrier 𝐴𝐷∕ ̂𝐴𝑟
𝑡 (Panel A) and systematic asset variance
̂𝑉𝑡 (Panel B). The measurement frequency is monthly, where the values of the two filtered state variables are sampled at the end of each month. The sample period is from June
2004 to November 2020.

Fig. 3. CDX spreads and SPX physical volatility. The figure plots the monthly time series of the 3-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year CDX spreads and the physical SPX volatility in the data
(yellow solid lines) and in the model (blue dotted lines). The CDX spreads are expressed in basis points. The SPX volatility is expressed in percentages. The sample period is from
June 2004 to November 2020.

nature of our approach, these estimates are reasonable and comparable
to the magnitude of pricing errors reported in the literature.27

It is worth emphasizing that our in-sample results are only mean-
ingful if the model implies reasonable P-dynamics for defaults. If the
model were to generate large CDX spreads while predicting excessively
high physical default probabilities, then, the model would fall into
the trap of the credit spread puzzle. In-sample, the average 10-year
cumulative physical default probability generated by the model is
4.55%, which is close to the historical 10-year default rate for the Baa
grade entities reported in Moody’s credit report (3.70% for 1970–2018
and 5.50% for 1920–2018). This result, combined with the fact that
the fitted asset Sharpe ratio and market leverage are reasonable (see
Section 3.3), provides evidence that our model is able to match not
only the risk-neutral dynamics but also the physical dynamics and risk
premia individually.

Table 5
In-sample model goodness of fit. The table examines the in-sample model goodness
of fit. Panels A and B report the sample means and standard deviations of the 3-,
5-, 7-, and 10-year CDX spreads and the physical SPX volatility in the data and in the
model. In Panel C, we present two goodness of fit metrics to assess model performance:
the time-series correlation between the data and the model as well as the root mean
squared error (RMSE). The measurement frequency is monthly, where the data and
model values are sampled at the end of each month. The sample period is from June
2004 to November 2020.

(A) Data

(B) Model

(C) Fit

Mean

56.25
79.85
94.93
108.45
15.46

Std.

42.66
35.77
29.62
25.95
10.40

Mean

48.84
79.85
99.83
118.37
15.46

Std.

36.31
35.77
36.48
33.91
10.40

Corr.

RMSE

0.97
–
0.96
0.86
–

13.23
–
12.68
20.11
–

CDX 3-year
CDX 5-year
CDX 7-year
CDX 10-year
SPX volatility

27 Unlike reduced-form frameworks where price dynamics are exogenously
specified to fit the data best, our structural approach is relatively less flex-
ible, as price dynamics are endogenously determined from the firm’s asset
dynamics.

We now turn to a much more stringent test of model performance:
the analysis of goodness-of-fit for equity and credit index derivative
markets out-of-sample.

5.2. Out-of-sample fit

13 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Fig. 4. SPX implied volatilities. The figure compares the Black–Scholes-implied volatilities for SPX options in the data and in the model. Panel A plots the time series of
at-the-money SPX implied volatilities in the data (yellow solid line) and in the model (blue dotted line). Panel B presents the average SPX implied volatilities with moneyness
of 95, 100, and 105% in the data (yellow bars) and in the model (blue bars). The data frequency is monthly, where the data and model values are sampled at the end of each
month. The implied volatilities are expressed in percentages. The sample period is from June 2004 to November 2020.

5.2.1. SPX options

Most approaches in the option literature consist of fitting reduced-
form option pricing models directly to the data, on which they are
subsequently evaluated. In contrast, our model is estimated using the
term structure of CDX spreads and physical SPX volatility, without
any price information from options. It is thus natural to ask how well
the model performs in pricing SPX options. The out-of-sample nature
of this exercise contrasts with the standard approach, and a strong
performance here could be seen as a contribution in itself.

We calculate the prices of SPX options using our estimated model
with the filtered state variables displayed in Fig. 2. For comparison with
the data, the model prices are converted into Black–Scholes-implied
volatilities. Panel A of Fig. 4 plots the time series of at-the-money
implied volatilities in the data (yellow solid line) and in the model (blue
dotted line). It is clear that the model-implied volatilities match the
overall magnitude of the data-implied volatilities well. Paying closer
attention, we see that the model-implied volatilities also closely track
empirical time series fluctuations. The timings of the spikes in implied
volatilities predicted by the model during the Global Financial Crisis,
the European sovereign debt crisis, and the COVID-19 crisis coincide
almost perfectly with the data. There are a few observations where the
magnitudes of the model and data estimates diverge. Yet, the results
suggest that our model is able to address not only the level but also the
overall time series variation of SPX option prices.

Next, we check if our model can explain the cross-section of SPX
implied volatilities across different moneyness values, which is com-
monly referred to as the implied volatility skew. In Panel B of Fig. 4,
we juxtapose the average implied volatilities for SPX options with
moneyness of 95, 100, and 105% in the data (yellow bars) and in the
model (blue bars).28 Granted, the model fit is not perfect, which is to be
expected given the out-of-sample nature of the exercise; the predicted
slope is slightly less steep than what is observed empirically. However,
the model generates a negative volatility skew that is close to the data.
The economic magnitude of the discrepancy between the data and the
model is relatively small on average.

To quantify model performance, Table 6 reports the means and
standard deviations of SPX implied volatilities in the data (Panel A)
and in the model (Panel B). The magnitude of the pricing errors varies
across moneyness. The model tends to underprice out-of-the-money
puts, contracts that are notoriously hard to explain. Yet, the model
fits at-the-money options and in-the-money options well. The standard
deviations of the model-implied volatilities are also fairly close to
those found in the data. This observation is reinforced by the high
correlations between the data and the model and the small RMSEs
reported in Panel C.

28 The results for a wider moneyness range from 90 to 110% are provided

in the Internet Appendix.

Table 6
Out-of-sample model fit for SPX options. The table examines the out-of-sample fit
for SPX options. Panels A and B report the sample means and standard deviations of
Black–Scholes-implied volatilities for SPX options with moneyness of 95, 100, and 105%
in the data and in the model. In Panel C, we present two goodness of fit metrics to
assess model performance: the time-series correlation between the data and the model
as well as the root mean squared error (RMSE). The measurement frequency is monthly,
where the data and model values are sampled at the end of each month. The sample
period is from June 2004 to November 2020.

(A) Data

(B) Model

(C) Fit

𝐾∕𝐼𝑡
95%
100%
105%

Mean
21.91
16.74
13.96

Std.
7.55
7.87
7.15

Mean
18.32
15.79
14.08

Std.
9.56
9.99
10.03

Corr.
0.84
0.87
0.86

RMSE
6.29
5.14
5.30

One might conjecture that our model has a good fit to SPX implied
volatilities, perhaps because our model is estimated to match the phys-
ical SPX volatility. Option-implied volatility reflects the risk-neutral
SPX volatility, which is determined by both the physical SPX volatility
and the associated risk premium. Even if a model were not able to
capture the risk premium component correctly, it would be possible
for this model to fit the data well because the risk premium component
occupies a relatively small part of the entire implied volatility. While
our focus remains on the level of implied volatilities, the gap between
the risk-neutral and physical measures would be an interesting quantity
to examine.

Hence, we calculate the difference between the at-the-money im-
plied volatility and the physical SPX volatility, which can be loosely
defined as the volatility risk premium. Panel A of Fig. 5 plots the time
series of the resulting 1-month volatility risk premium both in the data
and in the model. While the model matches the level of the volatility
risk premium fairly well, it struggles to generate the high degrees of
time series fluctuations observed in the data. The model does capture
the timing of upward and downward fluctuations in the data if we
zoom into Panel A; the correlation between the data and model series
is sizable at 0.63. However, the volatility of the volatility risk premium
implied by the model is too small. Compared to the data series, the
model series almost looks like a flat line.

This result is not surprising. Our model adopts the simplest stochas-
tic volatility structure with a square-root process. It is well known in the
literature that over a short horizon, the square-root volatility dynamics
are near Gaussian and thus generate a small volatility risk premium
with little variation, as illustrated in Panel A. However, when extending
the horizon to 3 months (Panel B) and 6 months (Panel C), the volatility
risk premium exhibits increased volatility, more accurately reflecting
the time series patterns in the data. The correlation between the
data and the model increases to 0.76 and 0.84, respectively. Notably,
Panel C shows that for the 6-month volatility risk premium, the data
and model time series align closely, except during the extreme spikes
observed around the two prominent crises of 2008 and 2020.

14 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Fig. 5. Volatility risk premium. The figure plots the time series of the difference between the at-the-money SPX implied volatility and the physical SPX volatility, which is a
proxy for the volatility risk premium, in the data (yellow solid lines) and in the model (blue dotted lines). Panels A, B, and C show the results for the 1-, 3-, and 6-month option
maturities. The sample period is from March 2012 to November 2020.

To properly address the volatility risk premium over a short horizon,
the literature extends the volatility dynamics in two directions: (i)
introducing a separate volatility-of-volatility process (e.g., Bollerslev
et al., 2009) and (ii) incorporating jumps in volatility (e.g., Drechsler
and Yaron, 2011). Neither of these elements is incorporated into our
asset variance dynamics: 𝑑𝑉𝑡 = 𝜅(𝜃 − 𝑉𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝛿√𝑉𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝑉
. Following the
literature, we could extend the dynamics as follows:
𝑑𝑉𝑡 = 𝜅(𝜃 − 𝑉𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝛿√𝑞𝑡𝑑𝑊 𝑉

𝑡 + 𝑑𝐽 𝑉
𝑡

,

𝑡

where 𝑞𝑡 is a separate mean-reverting variance-of-variance process and
𝑑𝐽 𝑉
represents jumps in variance whose intensity is potentially corre-
𝑡
lated with 𝑉𝑡 and/or 𝑞𝑡. While this extension can improve our model fit,
it is beyond the scope of the paper. We note that this extension could
be an interesting avenue for future research.

5.2.2. CDX options

Our second out-of-sample exercise is to test whether the estimated
model can predict the prices of CDX options. This is of particular
interest, given that the model captures the price patterns of SPX options
well. CDJT argue that the pricing of CDX and SPX options are hard to
reconcile, potentially due to a lack of market integration. However, the
exercise in Section 4.3 shows that our model can generate reasonable
CDX implied volatilities when the two state variables are freely chosen
to fit the CDX spread and SPX implied volatility, in the spirit of CDJT’s
empirical design. This only provides a partial resolution to the relative
pricing puzzle. In our setup, the state variables are stochastic processes
with their own dynamics. Thus, analyzing the model performance in
the time series using the filtered state variables as input could lead to
a different conclusion than what we found in the static case.

To visualize the model’s prediction over time, Panel A of Fig. 6
plots the time series of at-the-money Black-implied volatilities for CDX
options in the data (yellow solid lines) and in the model (blue dotted
lines). As discussed in Section 3.1, these option contracts are relatively
new financial instruments that began trading with significant volumes
in 2012. Accordingly, the sample for this exercise is shorter, spanning
the period from March 2012 to November 2020. While the model
tracks the time series patterns in the data fairly well, we do see a
few more outliers than for the SPX. These correspond to episodes
with sharp volatility spikes in the equity market. Our model correctly
translates these spikes into abrupt increases in CDX implied volatilities
but somewhat exaggerates their magnitude. Apart from these outliers,
the model fit is generally good.

Table 7
Out-of-sample model fit for CDX options. The table examines the out-of-sample fit
for CDX options. Panels A and B report the sample means and standard deviations of
Black-implied volatilities for CDX options with moneyness of 85, 100, and 115% in the
data and in the model. In Panel C, we present two goodness of fit metrics to assess
model performance: the time-series correlation between the data and the model as well
as the root mean squared error (RMSE). The measurement frequency is monthly, where
the data and model values are sampled at the end of each month. The sample period
is from March 2012 to November 2020.

(A) Data

(B) Model

(C) Fit

𝐾∕𝐼𝑡

85%
100%
115%

Mean

39.75
46.74
55.02

Std.

15.16
13.99
13.10

Mean

37.72
45.49
50.20

Std.

22.10
18.20
16.72

Corr.

0.74
0.77
0.78

RMSE

14.92
11.63
11.39

pervasive mispricing is apparent. This is also clear from Panel B of
Fig. 6 where we plot the average implied volatilities for CDX options
with moneyness of 85, 100, and 115%.29 The model produces a positive
volatility skew that lines up fairly well with the data.

Table 7 investigates the pricing performance of our model in further
detail. Comparing Panels A and B, we can see that the errors in
implied volatilities are relatively small in magnitude. The standard
deviations of the model-implied volatilities are larger in magnitude
than their empirical counterparts, as the model time series occasionally
exaggerates extreme movements relative to the data (Panel A of Fig. 6).
Panel C examines the quality of model fit. The time series fit for CDX
options is comparable to that for SPX options but delivers slightly lower
correlations with the data. Still, considering that the predictions are
out-of-sample, the correlations between the data and the model for
CDX options are high (0.74–0.78) and the RMSEs are moderate (around
11%–15%). As a point of reference, the pricing errors for CDX options
reported in CDJT when fitting their model to CDX options are about
30% in relative terms (see Table 5 in CDJT).

Overall, the CDX implied volatilities from the model match their
empirical counterparts well unconditionally and in the time series. We
do not observe clear disparities nor mispricing, contrary to CDJT’s
findings.30

29 The Internet Appendix provides the results over a more refined moneyness

grid with 5% intervals.

Most importantly, Panel A suggests that the model successfully
captures the level of CDX implied volatilities in the data and that no

30 Although our model underprices out-of-the-money SPX puts and CDX
calls, this does not imply relative mispricing between the two option classes.

15 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Fig. 6. CDX implied volatilities. The figure compares the Black-implied volatilities for CDX options in the data and in the model. Panel A plots the time series of at-the-money
CDX implied volatilities in the data (yellow solid line) and in the model (blue dotted line). Panel B presents the average CDX implied volatilities with moneyness of 85, 100, and
115% in the data (yellow bars) and in the model (blue bars). The data frequency is monthly, where the data and model values are sampled at the end of each month. The implied
volatilities are expressed in percentages. The sample period is from March 2012 to November 2020.

5.3. Extension with firm heterogeneity

Our empirical analysis is thus far predicated on the simplifying
assumption that firms are homogeneous. In this section, we show how
we can relax this assumption and introduce heterogeneity. As the first
step, we extend Eq. (1), which implicitly assumes that all firms have
a unit exposure to the systematic asset factor. Instead, we now adopt
a CAPM-like structure (e.g., Collin-Dufresne et al., 2012) where each
firm 𝑗 has a firm-specific exposure 𝛽𝑗 :
𝑑𝐴𝑗
𝑡
𝐴𝑗
𝑡

𝑡 + 𝜈𝑗 𝑑𝑁 𝑗

𝑡 − 𝜆𝑗 𝜈𝑗 𝑑𝑡.

+ 𝜎𝑗 𝑑𝑊 𝑗

𝑑𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝐴𝑚
𝑡

= 𝛽𝑗

(18)

∑𝑁

Without loss of generality, we normalize the common component so
that 1
𝑗=1 𝛽𝑗 = 1. When 𝑁 is large, averaging Eq. (18) across all 𝑁
𝑁
firms then leads to
𝑑𝐴𝑗
𝑡
𝐴𝑗
𝑡

𝑑𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝐴𝑚
𝑡

𝑑𝐴𝑚
𝑡
𝐴𝑚
𝑡

𝑁
∑

𝑁
∑

1
𝑁

1
𝑁

𝑗=1

𝑗=1

𝛽𝑗

≃

=

[

]

,

𝑡 ∕𝐴𝑚

as idiosyncratic shocks are diversified away due to the law of large
numbers.31 This implies that the dynamics of the systematic asset factor
𝑑𝐴𝑚
𝑡 can still be captured by the average asset dynamics across
individual firms, just like in the case with homogeneity. Hence, we
}𝑁
focus on the firm-specific parameters
𝑗=1; other parameters
associated with the systematic asset factor are taken from the homoge-
neous benchmark in Table 1. We provide details about the estimation
procedure in the Internet Appendix.

{𝛽𝑗 , 𝜎𝑗 , 𝑧𝑗

We explore the implications of heterogeneity by introducing five
types of firms.32 Each CDX constituent belongs to one of the five in-
dustry subindices: consumer cyclical (CONS); energy (ENRG); financials
(FIN); industrial (INDU); telecom, media, and technology (TMT). Like

Since the CDX spread tends to rise in bad times and fall in good times, out-
of-the-money SPX puts and CDX calls span similar economic states. Hence, if
the model underprices SPX puts, it would also have to underprice CDX calls
to some degree for consistency.
31 Note that both the Brownian shocks (𝜎𝑗 𝑑𝑊 𝑗
𝑡 ) and the compensated
Poisson shocks (𝜈𝑗 𝑑𝑁 𝑗
𝑡 − 𝜆𝑗 𝜈𝑗 𝑑𝑡) are not identically distributed across 𝑗.
Kolmogorov’s strong law of large numbers, however, does not require random
variables to be identically distributed as long as a few conditions are met. To
be concrete, suppose that
represents independent random variables with
zero means. The average of these random variables converges to zero almost
surely, if they have finite second moments and satisfy ∑∞
32 Full heterogeneity at the individual firm level is difficult due to both
computational constraints and data limitations. While the CDX is an index,
it is an instrument traded separately from its constituents. In fact, the CDX
is the most actively traded credit derivative, far more liquid than the single-
name contracts in the index. Consequently, it is not uncommon to find missing
observations for CDS spreads for some constituents, particularly for 3- and
7-year maturities, although the CDX spread is always available.

𝑗=1 Var(𝑋𝑗 )∕𝑗2 < ∞.

{𝑋𝑗

}

the CDX, these subindices are traded as separate contracts, and their
spreads are available from Markit for 3-, 5-, 7-, and 10-year maturities
starting March 2007.

Panels A to E of Fig. 7 present the time series of the 5-year CDX
subindex spreads. In addition, Panel F calculates the weighted average
spread among the five subindices (blue dotted line) and compares
it with the CDX spread (yellow solid line).33 In theory, no arbitrage
suggests that the weighted average spread should be identical to the
CDX spread with a zero basis. In reality, they are very close most of the
time but occasionally deviate from each other, especially during bad
economic times, noticeably in 2008 and 2020 (Junge and Trolle, 2015;
Boyarchenko et al., 2018). For a controlled comparison between firm
homogeneity vs. heterogeneity, we uniformly scale up and down the
five subindex spreads so that their weighted average is exactly matched
with the CDX spread at each point in time in the estimation.

The estimated parameters {𝛽𝑗 , 𝜎𝑗 , 𝑧𝑗 } for each CDX subindex are
reported in the corresponding panel in Fig. 7. It is worth noting that
what we refer to as asset beta 𝛽𝑗 is different from what is commonly
known as unlevered beta. While unlevered beta measures the slope
coefficient for unlevered asset returns regressed against equity market
returns, asset beta under our definition measures the slope coefficient
against market asset-level returns (see Eq. (18)).34 What catches the eye
the most is the CDX FIN in Panel C. Its spread went up as high as 600 bp
around 2008–2009 when the financial sector became a major source
of systematic risk, triggering a widespread crisis. Reflecting this, 𝛽𝑗 is
estimated to be very large for the CDX FIN at 1.62. The estimated 𝜎𝑗
and 𝑧𝑗 are relatively high. In contrast, the CDX CONS, INDU, and TMT
(Panels A, D, and E), whose spreads are smaller and less volatile than
the entire CDX, feature lower 𝛽𝑗 , 𝜎𝑗 , and 𝑧𝑗 . The CDX ENRG in Panel B
has a 𝛽𝑗 value of 1.05, fairly close to 1.

Armed with this heterogeneous setup, we re-calculate the prices of
SPX and CDX options. Fig. 8 juxtaposes the average implied volatility
skews under heterogeneity (lighter blue bars) and those under homo-
geneity (darker blue bars), along with the data (yellow bars). Relative
to the homogeneous benchmark, we need to consider two channels of
heterogeneity. On the one hand, heterogeneity makes it possible to
generate more extreme outcomes. This leads to a wider distribution
of the index, increasing implied volatilities. On the other hand, firm
heterogeneity allows us to match a given credit spread with a lower
level of risk due to convexity (Feldhütter and Schaefer, 2018). Since

33 The number of constituents in each subindex varies by the CDX series. We
hand-collect these numbers and correctly take into account the time-varying
weights when calculating the weighted average.

34 Unlevered beta is smaller in magnitude than (levered) equity beta due
to de-levering. However, asset beta can be smaller than, similar to, or larger
than equity beta, as de-levering applies to both the firm and the market. In
fact, asset beta and equity beta should be similar for firms whose elasticity of
equity with respect to assets is close to the market counterpart.

16 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Fig. 7. CDX industry subindices. The figure plots the monthly time series of the 5-year CDX subindex spreads. There are five industry subindices: consumer cyclical (CONS,
Panel A); energy (ENRG, Panel B); financials (FIN, Panel C); industrial (INDU, Panel D); telecom, media, and technology (TMT, Panel E). In addition, Panel F calculates the
weighted average spread among the five subindices (blue dotted line) and compares it with the CDX spread (yellow solid line). The spreads are expressed in basis points. The
sample period is from March 2007 to November 2020.

Fig. 8. Firm homogeneity vs. heterogeneity. The figure juxtaposes the average implied volatility skews under heterogeneity (lighter blue bars) and those under homogeneity
(darker blue bars), along with the data (yellow bars). Panel A presents the average SPX implied volatilities with moneyness of 95, 100, and 105%, and the sample period is from
March 2007 to November 2020. Panel B presents the average CDX implied volatilities with moneyness of 85, 100, and 115%, and the sample period is from March 2012 to
November 2020. The data frequency is monthly, where the data and model values are sampled at the end of each month. The implied volatilities are expressed in percentages.

the model with heterogeneity is estimated to match the same CDX
spread as the homogeneous benchmark, this leads to lower overall
risk, decreasing implied volatilities. The two channels roughly cancel
each other out, resulting in implied volatilities that barely change. This
confirms that our benchmark results in Section 5.2 are fairly robust to
relaxing the simplifying assumption of homogeneity.

6. Implications for option returns and risk premia

Having validated our model’s performance for pricing the CDX and
SPX/CDX options, we can now turn to its implications for returns and
risk premia. Unlike CDJT, we specify both the physical and risk-neutral
asset dynamics and estimate them using time series and term structure
data. As a result, the estimated model is capable of determining not
only price levels but also returns and risk premia. A setup that only
features risk-neutral dynamics, like CDJT’s, can determine the former

but not the latter; under the risk-neutral measure, expected returns on
all instruments are always simply equal to the risk-free rate.

With the aid of our model, we are able to contribute to the literature
on option returns. Previous studies have examined the returns on SPX
options, yet the question of whether their levels are reasonable or
suggest instances of mispricing remains a topic of debate. Moreover,
there is very little work on CDX options, let alone their returns. In
addition to studying option returns in two markets jointly and out-of-
sample, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to do so with a
structural model.

In Table 8, we compare the average excess returns calculated from
the data with the expected excess returns implied by the benchmark
model. For the model, we calculate the instantaneous expected excess
returns on 1-month calls and puts by evaluating Eq. (14) at the average
filtered state variables. The moneyness values are 95, 100, and 105%
for SPX options and 85, 100, and 115% for CDX options. For the
data counterparts, we construct the portfolios of calls and puts based

17 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Table 8
Average excess returns vs. expected excess returns. The table compares the average excess returns calculated from
the data and the expected excess returns implied by the model. Panel A presents the results for SPX options, whereas
Panel B presents the results for CDX options. For the model, we calculate the instantaneous expected excess returns
on 1-month calls and puts by evaluating Eq. (14) at the average filtered state variables. The moneyness values are 95,
100, and 105% for SPX options and 85, 100, and 115% for CDX options. For the data counterparts, we construct the
portfolios of calls and puts based on moneyness and maturity buckets. Each portfolio is formed by collecting quoted
calls/puts whose moneyness values are within ±2.5% of the target and whose maturities range from 15 to 60 days. We
then calculate the annualized sample mean of daily excess returns on each option portfolio. The p-values are calculated
by simulating the model-implied finite-sample distribution of the average excess return. All returns are annualized and
expressed in percentages. The sample period is from June 2004 to November 2020 for SPX options and from March
2012 to November 2020 for CDX options.

(A) SPX options

(B) CDX options

Call ITM
Call ATM
Call OTM
Put OTM
Put ATM
Put ITM

Data
98.25
191.55
170.81
−462.81
−283.80
−151.57

Model
89.67
138.22
278.76
−474.90
−214.92
−115.74

p-value
0.90
0.59
0.41
0.93
0.53
0.64

Data
−174.00
−372.62
−716.07
437.60
161.91
104.90

Model
−166.52
−275.11
−440.65
328.68
181.57
124.50

p-value
0.94
0.51
0.13
0.54
0.87
0.82

on moneyness and maturity buckets, following Coval and Shumway
(2001), Bakshi and Kapadia (2003), and Fournier et al. (2024).35 In
particular, each portfolio is formed by collecting quoted calls/puts
whose moneyness values are within ±2.5% of the target and whose
maturities range from 15 to 60 days. We then calculate the annualized
sample mean of daily excess returns on each option portfolio. Reported
together are the p-values of the null hypothesis that the model is
correct. We compute them by simulating the model-implied finite-
sample distribution of the average excess return in a similar spirit
to Broadie et al. (2009). If the average excess returns from the data
are unlikely to be obtained from the model simulation, the p-values
are determined to be small and the model is rejected.

Panel A presents the results for SPX options. As previously docu-
mented, average option returns are very large in absolute value. Bon-
darenko (2014) finds in a sample over 1987–2000 that 1-month at-
the-money puts have an annual return of −468%. In an overlapping
sample from 1987 to 2005, Broadie et al. (2009) calculate the average
1-month at-the-money put return to be −360%. During our sample
period, the average return is −284%, whereas our model predicts it
to be −215%. The return on the corresponding call contracts is on
average 192% compared to the predicted value of 138%. The panel
also shows that the average and predicted returns vary systematically
across contracts and moneyness. Calls experience positive returns while
average put returns are negative. Out-of-the-money contracts for both
calls and puts have higher returns in absolute value than in-the-money
contracts. For example, the average return on out-of-the-money calls
is almost twice that of in-the-money calls. The model captures these
qualitative patterns fairly well, although the quantitative fit does not
seem to be perfect.

It is important to bear in mind that the empirical estimates in
Table 8 correspond to the average returns from one particular realized
path of the economy. To discuss the model fit, we need to take into
account the sampling distribution of the average excess return. Since
options returns are extreme with high skewness and kurtosis, the
apparent gap between the data and the model may not be statistically
significant. The p-values reported in Panel A confirm this intuition. All
of the p-values well exceed 0.1, implying that we cannot statistically
distinguish the data estimates from the model predictions for any
option class, not just at the 5% but also at the 10% significance level.
Put differently, it is not too unlikely to observe average excess returns
that are similar to the empirical ones when we simulate the model.

Hence, we find no evidence of a systematic bias in terms of SPX
option returns. This echoes Broadie et al. (2009) but in the context
of a structural model that accounts for risk premia for both stochastic
volatility and systematic jumps. They test whether the data deviate

35 In this exercise, we use the prices of quoted calls and puts in both markets

without interpolation.

from simulated option returns in the model of Black and Scholes (1973)
or Heston (1993) and find no significant evidence of mispricing. More
recently, however, Chambers et al. (2014) revisit their study with a
longer sample and document more mixed results. Our analysis with
SPX options can be seen as supporting and corroborating the results
from Broadie et al. (2009): allowing for priced variance risk and jump
risk, we find no support for systematic mispricing.

Now we turn to the results for CDX options in Panel B. As discussed
in Section 4.2, CDX calls and SPX puts are downmarket instruments,
whereas CDX puts and SPX calls pay out in good economic states. In
line with this intuition, we can see that the average excess returns on
CDX calls, like on SPX puts, are negative whereas those on CDX puts
and SPX calls are positive. Empirically, we find that out-of-the-money
CDX calls have higher average excess returns (in absolute value) than
out-of-the-money CDX puts. Our model captures these relative patterns
across option classes and markets well.

The p-values reported in Panel B indicate, again, that we cannot
reject the model quantitatively. The average excess returns on out-of-
the-money calls and puts are −716% and 438% in the data, which is
quite a bit higher than the model predictions of −441% and 329%,
respectively. Nevertheless, the data values are not statistically differ-
ent from the model estimates, considering the sampling distribution.
Overall, this points to a conclusion similar to the case for SPX options:
there is no strong evidence of CDX option mispricing.36

Table 9 now decomposes model expected excess returns into risk
premia associated with the three sources of systematic risk. We observe
that the signs of individual risk premia are consistent with our intuition.
First, consider the asset risk premium. On the one hand, SPX calls and
CDX puts are instruments that pay out more in good economic times
with higher asset values and pay out less in bad economic times with
lower asset values (𝛥𝐴,𝑡 > 0 in Fig. 1). In other words, these instruments
make good times better but bad times worse. All else equal, investors
dislike such instruments, demanding a positive risk premium as extra
compensation. On the other hand, SPX puts and CDX calls pay out
more when asset values fall and pay out less when asset values rise
(i.e., 𝛥𝐴,𝑡 < 0 in Fig. 1). Since they serve as a hedge, investors are eager
to hold them, inducing a negative asset risk premium.

Similarly, the sign of the variance risk premium depends on the
sign of the variance risk exposure 𝛥𝑉 ,𝑡 in Fig. 1. Instruments that are
positively exposed to variance risk, such as SPX calls and puts as well as
CDX calls, provide a hedge against variance risk, as they pay out more
in bad times with high asset variance. Hence, investors are willing to

36 One needs to be cautious in interpreting our findings. While our model is
not rejected based on high p-values, this should not be taken as strong evidence
of excellent model performance. Due to the high skewness and kurtosis of
option returns, the average excess return is very noisy, resulting in low test
power. We rather consider our tests as establishing a minimum benchmark.

18 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Table 9
Risk premium decomposition. The table decomposes the expected excess returns from the model into three risk
premia: asset risk premium, variance risk premium, and jump risk premium. Panel A presents the results for the SPX
and SPX options, whereas Panel B presents the results for the CDX and CDX options. Reported together in square
brackets are percentage shares of individual risk premia to the total risk premium. The decomposition is obtained
by evaluating Eq. (14) at the average filtered state variables. All returns are annual and expressed in percentages.

Call ITM
Call ATM
Call OTM
Put OTM
Put ATM
Put ITM

Call ITM
Call ATM
Call OTM
Put OTM
Put ATM
Put ITM

Total

=

89.67 [100%]
138.22 [100%]
278.76 [100%]
−474.90 [100%]
−214.92 [100%]
−115.74 [100%]

Total
−166.52 [100%]
−275.11 [100%]
−440.65 [100%]
328.68 [100%]
181.57 [100%]
124.50 [100%]

=

(A) SPX options

+

Asset risk
97.69 [109%]
165.38 [120%]
330.17 [118%]
−339.10 [71%]
−157.48 [73%]
−92.65 [80%]

Variance risk
−15.70 [-18%]
−39.33 [-28%]
−74.34 [-27%]
−94.63 [20%]
−39.21 [18%]
−12.93 [11%]

(B) CDX options

+

Asset risk
−78.15 [47%]
−128.12 [47%]
−218.88 [50%]
269.61 [82%]
118.59 [65%]
70.74 [57%]

Variance risk
−79.80 [48%]
−131.96 [48%]
−194.38 [44%]
39.80 [12%]
53.81 [30%]
47.83 [38%]

+

Jump risk

7.68 [9%]
12.16 [9%]
22.94 [8%]
−41.16 [9%]
−18.23 [8%]
−10.16 [9%]

Jump risk
−8.57 [5%]
−15.03 [5%]
−27.39 [6%]
19.27 [6%]
9.17 [5%]
5.93 [5%]

+

accept a negative variance risk premium for holding these instruments.
In contrast, for CDX puts, the variance risk premium is positive as they
are negatively exposed to variance risk.

Note that the jump risk premium has the same sign as the asset
risk premium for all options. This is not a coincidence. Jumps directly
impact the level of assets. For instance, large negative jumps result in
lower asset value. Thus, instruments whose prices decrease in tandem
with a firm’s assets will command a positive jump premium. Therefore,
the signs of the jump risk premium 𝜆𝑚
and the
𝑡
asset risk premium 𝛥𝐴,𝑡

in Eq. (14) are the same.

[
‧𝛥𝑁,𝑡(𝑒𝜉𝑚𝑍𝑚

(𝜇𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓

𝑡 − 1)

𝑍𝑚

E

)

]

In terms of magnitudes, Table 9 shows that the relative importance
of each risk premium component varies depending on the option.
We report the percentage contribution of individual risk premia to
the total risk premium in square brackets. For SPX options, the asset
risk premium accounts for the lion’s share of total risk premia. This
component even exceeds 100% of the total risk premium for SPX calls,
as the variance risk premium is negative. For CDX options, variance risk
becomes more prominent. For CDX calls, the variance risk premium is
at par with the asset risk premium. This is because the CDX is more
sensitive to variance risk than the SPX, as discussed in Section 4.2.
Across different options, the jump risk premium explains about 5%–9%
of the total risk premium.

In summary, our model predicts returns that are broadly consistent
with what we observe empirically for both SPX and CDX options. It
also provides valuable insights into the relative importance of the three
sources of risk in determining expected option returns.

7. Conclusion

In this paper, we build an internally consistent model for the valua-
tion of corporate securities, market indices, and index options. We find
that our model can address the level and time variation of the implied
volatilities for equity and credit index options well out-of-sample. Our
results are relevant in light of recent work suggesting that prices of
equity and credit index options are hard to reconcile. Our analysis
indicates that credit index options are not significantly overpriced nor
systematically misaligned with equity index options. Within our model
framework, both option markets are very much consistent in terms of
their pricing.

After validating our model’s ability to match empirical option
prices, we examine its implications for option returns. The model does
well in explaining average returns on both equity and credit index
options, and a statistical analysis fails to reject its predictions. Although
average options returns are strikingly high in absolute value, our model
suggests these average returns are fair compensation for the relevant
sources of risk.

The structural nature of our model enables us to capture three key
sources of systematic risk, which play a critical role in establishing
pricing consistency across the two markets. For each instrument, we
analyze risk exposures and discuss the way they impact price dynam-
ics. We provide insights on how the expected return on credit and
equity derivative products can be decomposed into asset, variance, and
jump risk premia. We show that heterogeneity in exposures to the
three sources of risk drives the cross-sectional variation in prices and
expected returns observed across the two option markets.

Overall, our analysis demonstrates that a structural compound op-
tion framework like ours offers a promising avenue for deepening our
understanding of derivative markets and the relevant sources of risk
driving their dynamics and return compensations.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Hitesh Doshi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Software, Project administration, Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Jan Ericsson: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Supervision, Software, Project administration, Investiga-
tion, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Mathieu Fournier: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software,
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. Sang Byung Seo: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software,
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Code(Originaldata) (Mendeley Data).

Appendix A

A.1. CDS pricing and returns

Consider a CDS contract that is written on firm 𝑗. The risky PV01
is defined as the present value of future premium payments when the

19 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

running spread paid by the protection seller is 1 bp per annum. This is
computed in our model as

References

RPV01(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ) = 0.0001 ×

4𝑇
∑

𝑖=1

𝑒−𝑟𝑓 (𝑡𝑖−𝑡) [

1 − 𝐺(𝐴𝑗

]
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑡𝑖)

∕4,

{𝑡1, 𝑡2, … , 𝑡4𝑇
where 𝑇 is the maturity of the given CDS contract and
denote quarterly premium payment dates. As defined earlier,
𝐺(𝐴𝑗
represents the cumulative risk-neutral default
probability.

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑡𝑖) = EQ

[
1

𝜏𝑗 ≤𝑡𝑖

}

]

𝑡

Similarly, the protection leg is defined as the present value of
a contingent protection payment. We calculate this in our model as
follows:

ProtLeg(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ) = (1 − 𝑅)

4𝑇
∑

𝑖=1

𝑒−𝑟𝑓 (𝑡𝑖−𝑡) [

𝐺(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑡𝑖) − 𝐺(𝐴𝑗

]
𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑡𝑖−1)

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Kimmel, R., 2007. Maximum likelihood estimation of stochastic

volatility models. J. Financ. Econ. 83 (2), 413–452.

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Kimmel, R.L., 2010. Estimating affine multifactor term structure models

using closed-form likelihood expansions. J. Financ. Econ. 98 (1), 113–144.

Andersen, T.G., Fusari, N., Todorov, V., 2020. The pricing of tail risk and the equity
premium: Evidence from international option markets. J. Bus. Econom. Statist. 38
(3), 662–678.

Andersen, T.G., Todorov, V., Ubukata, M., 2021. Tail risk and return predictability for

the Japanese equity market. J. Econometrics 222 (1), 344–363.

Bakshi, G., Cao, C., Chen, Z., 1997. Empirical performance of alternative option pricing

models. J. Finance 52 (5), 2003–2049.

Bakshi, G., Kapadia, N., 2003. Delta-hedged gains and the negative market volatility

risk premium. Rev. Financ. Stud. 16 (2), 527–566.

Bates, D.S., 2000. Post-’87 crash fears in the S&P 500 futures option market. J.

.

Econometrics 94 (1–2), 181–238.

Bates, D.S., 2003. Empirical option pricing: A retrospection. J. Econometrics 116 (1–2),

Here, 𝑅 represents the recovery rate, measured as a fraction of the CDS
notional value.

𝑡 ∕RPV01𝑗

While the fair market spread (or CDS spread) is determined by 𝑆𝑗

𝑡 =
ProtLeg𝑗
𝑡 , as in Eq. (10), in practice, a standard CDS contract is
traded with a fixed coupon of 100 bp. Instead, the protection buyer and
seller exchange an upfront fee 𝑈 𝑗
𝑡 at the beginning of the contract. This
fee is a required side payment to compensate the difference between the
fair market spread and the standardized coupon: 𝑈 𝑗
𝑡 =
ProtLeg𝑗
𝑡 . Therefore, the upfront fee is obtained in our model using the
following equation:

𝑡 + 100 × RPV01𝑗

𝑈 (𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ) = ProtLeg(𝐴𝑗

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ) − 100 × RPV01(𝐴𝑗
While the CDS spread and the upfront fee are two different trad-
they are in fact equivalent. Combining
ing/quoting conventions,
Eqs. (A.1) and (10) results in a simple relation: 𝑈 𝑗
×
RPV01𝑗
vention.

𝑡 . The distinction between the two is merely a matter of con-

𝑡 , 𝑉𝑡, 𝑇 ).

𝑡 − 100

[
𝑆𝑗

(A.1)

𝑡 =

]

We define the return on a CDS contract by hypothesizing a fully
collateralized contract with a dollar notional value. When entering
into this contract at time 𝑡, the protection seller earns the upfront
fee 𝑈 𝑗
𝑡 . Thus, the protection seller needs to make a payment of 1 −
𝑈 𝑗
𝑡 at inception to put a dollar collateral. Assuming that the dollar
collateral earns the risk-free rate 𝑟𝑓 , the payoff of the contract at time
𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡 consists of the following three components: (i) receiving the
original collateral back with interest (i.e., 1 + 𝑟𝑓 𝛥𝑡), (ii) collecting the
standardized CDS premium, which is fixed at 100 bp (i.e., 0.01𝛥𝑡), and
(iii) paying the cost of unwinding the protection sell position at time
𝑡 + 𝛥𝑡 (i.e., −𝑈 𝑗
𝑡+𝛥𝑡). This implies that from the protection seller’s point
of view, the excess return on the CDS contract can be calculated by
1 + 𝑟𝑓 𝛥𝑡 + 0.01𝛥𝑡 − 𝑈 𝑗
1 − 𝑈 𝑗
𝑡

− 𝑟𝑓 𝛥𝑡 =

𝑡+𝛥𝑡

+

𝑡

𝛥𝑡

0.01
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡
⏟⏟⏟
Premium yield
)

𝑡+𝛥𝑡 − 𝑃 𝑗
𝑃 𝑗
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
Capital gains
(

1
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡

+ 𝑟𝑓

− 1

𝛥𝑡

,

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Net opportunity cost

𝑡 and 𝑃 𝑗

𝑡 = 1 − 𝑈 𝑗

where 𝑃 𝑗
𝑡+𝛥𝑡 = 1 − 𝑈 𝑗
𝑡+𝛥𝑡 are often referred to as
the CDS prices. By taking the limit of 𝛥𝑡 → 0, the expression for the
instantaneous excess return, which is useful for our continuous-time
setup, is given by
[
𝑑𝑃 𝑗
𝑡
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡

0.01
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡

1
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡

+ 𝑟𝑓

)]

− 1

𝑑𝑡.

(

+

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

387–404.

Berger, D., Dew-Becker, I., Giglio, S., 2020. Uncertainty shocks as second-moment news

shocks. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87 (1), 40–76.

Black, F., 1976. Studies of stock price volatility changes. In: Proceedings of the 1976
Meetings of the American Statistical Association, Business and Economic Statistics
Section. American Statistical Association, Washington, pp. 177–181.

Black, F., Cox, J.C., 1976. Valuing corporate securities: Some effects of bond indenture

provisions. J. Finance 31 (2), 351–367.

Black, F., Scholes, M., 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. J. Polit.

Econ. 81 (3), 637–654.

Bollerslev, T., Tauchen, G., Zhou, H., 2009. Expected stock returns and variance risk

premia. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (11), 4463–4492.

Bondarenko, O., 2014. Why are put options so expensive? Q. J. Financ. 4 (3), 1–50.
Bongaerts, D., De Jong, F., Driessen, J., 2011. Derivative pricing with liquidity risk:
Theory and evidence from the credit default swap market. J. Finance 66 (1),
203–240.

Boyarchenko, N., Gupta, P., Steele, N., Yen, J., 2018. Trends in credit basis spreads.

Econ. Policy Rev. 24 (2), 1–23.

Broadie, M., Chernov, M., Johannes, M., 2009. Understanding index option returns.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (11), 4493–4529.

Campbell, J.Y., Hilscher, J., Szilagyi, J., 2008. In search of distress risk. J. Finance 63

(6), 2899–2939.

Cao, J., Goyal, A., Xiao, X., Zhan, X., 2023. Implied volatility changes and corporate

bond returns. Manage. Sci. 69 (3), 1375–1397.

Carr, P., Wu, L., 2009. Variance risk premiums. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (3), 1311–1341.
Carr, P., Wu, L., 2011. A simple robust link between American puts and credit

protection. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (2), 473–505.

Chambers, D.R., Foy, M., Liebner, J., Lu, Q., 2014. Index option returns: Still puzzling.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (6), 1915–1928.

Chen, L., Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S., 2009. On the relation between the
credit spread puzzle and the equity premium puzzle. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (9),
3367–3409.

Chen, S.S.-H., Doshi, H., Seo, S.B., 2023. Synthetic options and implied volatility for

the corporate bond market. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 58 (3), 1295–1325.

Choi, Y.S., Doshi, H., Jacobs, K., Turnbull, S.M., 2020. Pricing structured products with

economic covariates. J. Financ. Econ. 135 (3), 754–773.

Christoffersen, P., Fournier, M., Jacobs, K., 2018. The factor structure in equity options.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (2), 595–637.

Christoffersen, P., Heston, S., Jacobs, K., 2009. The shape and term structure of the
index option smirk: Why multifactor stochastic volatility models work so well.
Manage. Sci. 55 (12), 1914–1932.

Christoffersen, P., Jacobs, K., Ornthanalai, C., Wang, Y., 2008. Option valuation with
long-run and short-run volatility components. J. Financ. Econ. 90 (3), 272–297.
Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S., Martin, J.S., 2001. The determinants of credit

spread changes. J. Finance 56 (6), 2177–2207.

Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S., Yang, F., 2012. On the relative pricing of long-
maturity index options and collateralized debt obligations. J. Finance 67 (6),
1983–2014.

Collin-Dufresne, P., Junge, B., Trolle, A.B., 2024. How integrated are credit and equity

markets? Evidence from index options. J. Finance 79 (2), 949–992.

Coval, J.D., Shumway, T., 2001. Expected option returns. J. Finance 56 (3), 983–1009.
Cox, J.C., Ingersoll, J.C., Ross, S.A., 1985. A theory of the term structure of interest

rates. Econometrica 53, 385–408.

Cremers, K.J.M., Driessen, J., Maenhout, P., 2008. Explaining the level of credit spreads:
Option-implied jump risk premia in a firm value model. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (5),
2209–2242.

Crosbie, P., Bohn, J., 2002. Modeling Default Risk. Technical Report, KMV, LLC.
Culp, C.L., Nozawa, Y., Veronesi, P., 2018. Option-based credit spreads. Amer. Econ.

Rev. 108 (2), 454–488.

Davydenko, S., 2012. When do firms default? A study of the default boundary. Working

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103932.

Paper, University of Toronto.

20 

H. Doshi et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 161 (2024) 103932 

Drechsler, I., Yaron, A., 2011. What’s vol got to do with it. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (1),

Huang, J.-Z., Huang, M., 2012. How much of the corporate-treasury yield spread is

1–45.

due to credit risk? Rev. Asset Pricing Stud. 2 (2), 153–202.

Du, D., Elkamhi, R., Ericsson, J., 2019. Time-varying asset volatility and the credit

Huang, J.-Z., Shi, Z., Zhou, H., 2020. Specification analysis of structural credit risk

spread puzzle. J. Finance 74 (4), 1841–1885.

models. Rev. Financ. 24 (1), 45–98.

Duffee, G.R., 2002. Term premia and interest rate forecasts in affine models. J. Finance

Jones, C.S., 2006. A nonlinear factor analysis of S&P 500 index option returns. J.

57, 369–443.

Finance 61 (5), 2325–2363.

Duffie, D., Pan, J., Singleton, K., 2000. Transform analysis and asset pricing for affine

Junge, B., Trolle, A., 2015. Liquidity risk in credit default swap markets. Working

jump-diffusions. Econometrica 68 (6), 1343–1376.

paper, HEC Paris.

Dumas, B., Fleming, J., Whaley, R.E., 1998. Implied volatility functions: Empirical tests.

Leland, H.E., 1994. Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure.

J. Finance 53 (6), 2059–2106.

J. Finance 49 (4), 1213–1252.

Eom, Y.H., Helwege, J., Huang, J.-Z., 2004. Structural models of corporate bond pricing:

Leland, H.E., 2004. Predictions of default probabilities in structural models of debt. J.

An empirical analysis. Rev. Financ. Stud. 17 (2), 499–544.

Invest. Manag. 2 (2), 5–20.

Eraker, B., 2004. Do stock prices and volatility jump? Reconciling evidence from spot

and option prices. J. Finance 59 (3), 1367–1404.

Eraker, B., Johannes, M., Polson, N., 2003. The impact of jumps in volatility and

returns. J. Finance 58 (3), 1269–1300.

Medvedev, A., Scaillet, O., 2007. Approximation and calibration of short-term implied
volatilities under jump-diffusion stochastic volatility. Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (2),
427–459.

Merton, R.C., 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest

Eraker, B., Wang, J., 2015. A non-linear dynamic model of the variance risk premium.

rates. In: J. Finance. J. Finance 29 (2), 449–470.

J. Econometrics 187 (2), 547–556.

Pan, J., 2002. The jump-risk premia implicit in options: Evidence from an integrated

Ericsson, J., Reneby, J., Wang, H., 2015. Can structural models price default risk?
Evidence from bond and credit derivative markets. Q. J. Financ. 5 (03), 1550007.
Feldhütter, P., Schaefer, S.M., 2018. The myth of the credit spread puzzle. Rev. Financ.

time-series study. J. Financ. Econ. 63 (1), 3–50.

Sandulescu, M., 2022. How integrated are corporate bond and stock markets?. Working

paper, Michigan Ross School of Business.

Stud. 31 (8), 2897–2942.

Fournier, M., Jacobs, K., Orłowski, P., 2024. Modeling conditional factor risk premia

implied by index option returns. J. Finance 79 (3), 2289–2338.

Geske, R., 1979. The valuation of compound options. J. Financ. Econ. 7 (1), 63–81.
Goncalves, S., Guidolin, M., 2006. Predictable dynamics in the S&P 500 index options

Schaefer, S.M., Strebulaev, I.A., 2008. Structural models of credit risk are useful:
Evidence from hedge ratios on corporate bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 90 (1), 1–19.
Seo, S.B., Wachter, J.A., 2018. Do rare events explain CDX tranche spreads? J. Finance

73 (5), 2343–2383.

Strebulaev, I.A., Yang, B., 2013. The mystery of zero-leverage firms. J. Financ. Econ.

implied volatility surface. J. Bus. 79 (3), 1591–1635.

109 (1), 1–23.

Graham, J.R., Leary, M.T., Roberts, M.R., 2015. A century of capital structure: The

Todorov, V., 2010. Variance risk-premium dynamics: The role of jumps. Rev. Financ.

leveraging of corporate America. J. Financ. Econ. 118 (3), 658–683.

Stud. 23 (1), 345–383.

Heston, S.L., 1993. A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with
applications to bond and currency options. Rev. Financ. Stud. 6 (2), 327–343.

Vasicek, O., 2002. The distribution of loan portfolio value. Risk 15 (12), 160–162.
Welch, I., 2011. Two common problems in capital structure research: The financial-
debt-to-asset ratio and issuing activity versus leverage changes. Int. Rev. Financ.
11 (1), 1–17.

21 

