Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Demand-and-supply imbalance risk and long-term swap spreads ✩
Samuel G. Hanson a,∗, Aytek Malkhozov b, Gyuri Venter c
a Harvard Business School, Baker Library, Soldiers Field, Boston, MA 02163, USA
b Queen Mary University of London, School of Economics and Finance, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK
c The University of Warwick, Warwick Business School, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

We develop and test a model in which swap spreads are determined by end users’ demand for and constrained 
intermediaries’ supply of long-term interest rate swaps. Swap spreads reﬂect compensation both for using scarce 
intermediary capital and for bearing convergence risk—i.e., the risk spreads will widen due to a future demand-
and-supply imbalance. We show that a proxy for the intermediated quantity of swaps—dealers’ net position in 
Treasuries—ﬂipped sign during the Global Financial Crisis when swap spreads turned negative and that this 
variable predicts the excess returns on swap spread trades. Exploiting our model’s sign restrictions, we identify 
shifts in demand and supply and ﬁnd that both contribute signiﬁcantly to the volatility of swap spreads.

Dataset link: Replication kit for
‘‘Demand -and -Supply Imbalance Risk and
Long -Term Swap Spreads ’’ (2024 ) by Samuel
G . Hanson , Aytek Malkhozov , Gyuri Venter
(Original Data)

JEL classiﬁcation:
G12
E43

Keywords:
Swap spreads
Limits to arbitrage
Intermediary capital
Constraints

1.  Introduction

An interest rate swap is an agreement to exchange a series of ﬁxed 
interest payments for a series of ﬂoating interest payments based on the 
future realizations of a short-term reference rate. End users, including 
both ﬁnancial institutions and non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms, use these derivatives 
to manage their exposure to interest-rate risk. With an estimated $115 
trillion of outstanding notional value as of 2020, the market for interest 
rate swaps is the largest derivatives market in the U.S.

From their advent in the 1980s until 2008, the ﬁxed rates on swaps 
had always remained above the corresponding rates on like-maturity 
government bonds. In other words, swap spreads—the diﬀerence be-
tween swap rates and like-maturity government bond yields—had been 
uniformly positive. However, beginning in the 2008 Global Financial 
Crisis  (GFC),  the  ﬁxed  rates  on  long-term  (e.g.,  30-year)  swaps  fell 
below government bond yields, resulting in negative long-term swap 
spreads. Negative swap spreads seemingly represent a pure arbitrage 

opportunity, a puzzle in such a large and liquid market (Boyarchenko 
et al., 2018). Negative swap spreads have been alternately attributed 
to large increases in end-user demand for long-dated swaps or to rising 
balance-sheet costs at the ﬁnancial intermediaries that supply swaps. 
See Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) and Jermann (2020) for, respec-
tively, a demand and a supply perspective on negative swap spreads. 
Of course, both demand and supply forces may have contributed to the 
negative long-term swap spreads observed in recent years. And, disen-
tangling these forces can help us understand whether a given movement 
in spreads is due to a shift in end-user demand or intermediary supply 
(or both).

In this paper, we develop a tractable theoretical framework to study 
the joint eﬀects of end-user demand and intermediary supply on swap 
spreads. We show how data on prices and intermediated quantities can 
be used to separately identify end users’ net demand for and intermedi-
aries’ supply of swaps. We can then decompose the observed variation 
in swap spreads into the contributions of these two forces. We highlight 

✩ Nikolai L. Roussanov was the editor for this article. We thank Benjamin Hébert, Urban Jermann, Andrei Kirilenko, Sven Klingler, Yoshio Nozawa, Nikolai 
Roussanov, Ajay Subramanian, Fabrice Tourre, Dimitri Vayanos, Paul Whelan, and participants at numerous seminars and conferences for helpful comments. We 
are grateful to Chris Anderson, Zhiguo He, and Sven Klingler for sharing their data.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: shanson@hbs.edu (S.G. Hanson), a.malkhozov@qmul.ac.uk (A. Malkhozov), gyuri.venter@wbs.ac.uk (G. Venter).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103814
Received 12 December 2022; Received in revised form 22 February 2024; Accepted 23 February 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)103814Availableonline1March20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

a key determinant of long-dated swap spreads that has been overlooked 
in the recent literature: intermediaries need to be compensated for the 
risk that spreads may temporarily widen because of future shocks to 
demand or supply. We argue that compensation for such demand-and-
supply imbalance risk explains a signiﬁcant fraction of the returns to 
swap spread arbitrage. Thus, our paper hearkens back to the earlier 
literature pioneered by De Long et al. (1990), emphasizing that “con-
vergence risk” is a signiﬁcant limit to arbitrage.

We begin by building an equilibrium model of the interest rate swap 
market in the tradition of Vayanos and Vila (2021). In our model, the 
demand  of  end  users  such  as  pension  funds  and  non-ﬁnancial  ﬁrms 
to  receive  the  ﬁxed  rate  on  long-term  swaps  is  not  naturally  oﬀset 
by opposing demands from other end users. Since swaps are in zero 
net supply, this time-varying net end-user demand must be absorbed 
in equilibrium by risk-averse and leverage-constrained intermediaries. 
Motivated  by  the  evidence  in  Siriwardane  et  al.  (2021),  we  adopt  a 
“segmented-markets” view and assume that the relevant intermediaries 
are quite specialized in the swap market. In practice, we associate the 
intermediaries in our model with swap desks at broker-dealers or swap 
traders at ﬁxed-income hedge funds. These specialized intermediaries 
hedge  the  interest-rate  risk  arising  from  their  swap  positions  in  the 
Treasury market. As a result, they are only concerned with the rela-
tive valuation of swaps and Treasuries, namely, with the level of swap 
spreads and the short-rate diﬀerential—i.e., the diﬀerence between the 
short-term ﬂoating rate referenced by the swap and the short-term ﬁ-
nancing rate applicable to Treasuries.

In our model, intermediaries’ willingness and ability to intermedi-
ate between the swap and Treasury markets is limited by two factors. 
First, intermediaries are risk averse, so the risk that they may suﬀer 
short-term, mark-to-market losses limits their willingness to engage in 
the swap spread trade. Second, intermediaries face a potentially bind-
ing  balance-sheet  constraint  that  can  limit  their  ability  to  undertake 
even riskless trades. Furthermore, the amount of capital intermediaries 
have to deploy ﬂuctuates over time. Thus, relative to other Vayanos and 
Vila (2021)-style models where intermediaries must absorb end-user de-
mand shocks, our model adds an intermediary balance-sheet constraint 
and the possibility of independent intermediary supply shocks.

If the short-rate diﬀerential is non-zero, which is the case for swaps 
whose ﬂoating leg is tied to the 3-month London Interbank Oﬀer Rate 
(LIBOR), a non-zero swap spread is consistent with the absence of ar-
bitrage. Furthermore, when the short-rate diﬀerential ﬂuctuates over 
time, swap spread trades expose intermediaries to a form of fundamen-
tal risk. Prior to the 2008 GFC, our model suggests that LIBOR swap 
spreads were positive because (i) the short-rate diﬀerential for LIBOR 
swaps was always positive and (ii) intermediaries had to accommodate 
a net demand by end users to pay the ﬁxed swap rate and were “long” 
swap spreads.

While  we  allow  for  a  non-zero  short-rate  diﬀerential  to  speak  to 
the LIBOR swaps that historically dominated the market, we will regu-
larly emphasize the case where the short-rate diﬀerential is always zero, 
which is the case for swaps whose ﬂoating leg is tied to the Secured 
Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) for Treasuries. A non-zero SOFR swap 
spread represents a failure of the Law of One Price (LoOP) and cannot 
survive in our model’s stable equilibrium in the absence of intermedi-
ary balance-sheet constraints. However, the spreads on both long-dated 
LIBOR swaps and SOFR swaps turned negative in late 2008 and have 
remained negative since.

How can we understand the highly negative swap spreads witnessed 
since 2008? The potential for binding intermediary balance-sheet con-
straints opens the door to non-zero SOFR swap spreads in as in Gâr-
leanu and Pedersen (2011). When balance-sheet constraints bind, swap 
spreads  are  driven  by  shocks  to  end-user  demand  and  intermediary 
wealth, both of which aﬀect the tightness of intermediaries’ leverage 
constraint and hence their ability to supply swaps. Moreover, our model 
suggests that convergence risk is a key determinant of long-dated swap 
spreads. Arbitraging long-dated swap spreads not only consumes scarce 

capital, but is also risky for specialized intermediaries: future shocks to 
either demand or supply may lead spreads to widen in magnitude, trig-
gering short-term losses for intermediaries. Intermediaries will require 
compensation for bearing such demand-and-supply imbalance risk, which 
increases the magnitude of swap spreads, particularly at longer matu-
rities.1 The presence of convergence risk further implies that the size 
of intermediaries’ positions in the swap spread trade should predict the 
returns to this trade, even after controlling for intermediaries’ current 
balance sheet costs.

As discussed in the Treasury Borrowing Advisory Committee’s recent 
report on the swap market (TBAC, 2021) and documented below, there 
are strong indications that there was a major regime shift in end-user 
net demand in late 2008, with net demand swinging from a desire to 
pay the ﬁxed swap rate to a desire to receive the ﬁxed swap rate. As a re-
sult, intermediaries’ net position in the swap spread trade and hence the 
compensation they require for holding this position—both the compen-
sation for consuming scarce capital and that for bearing convergence 
risk—also likely ﬂipped signs during the GFC. Seen through our model, 
this shift in end-user demand and intermediaries’ net position explains 
why swap spreads turned negative in late 2008 and have remained neg-
ative since. By contrast, while a rise in intermediary balance-sheet costs 
following  the  GFC  may  have  raised  the  absolute  magnitude  of  swap 
spreads, our model suggests that, a rise in balance-sheet costs by itself 
cannot explain why swap spreads ﬂipped signs.

Naturally,  demand  shocks  and  supply  shocks  induce  diﬀerent  co-
movement  patterns  between  swap  spreads  and  intermediaries’  swap 
positions  in  our  model.  Speciﬁcally,  positive  shocks  to  end-user  de-
mand increase the magnitude of both swap spreads and intermediaries’ 
swap positions in equilibrium. By contrast, positive shocks to intermedi-
aries’ supply of swaps—i.e., positive shocks to intermediaries’ wealth—
decrease the magnitude of swap spreads but increase the magnitude 
of swap positions. Under certain linearity-generating assumptions, we 
show that our model admits a linear equilibrium in which swap spreads 
are an aﬃne function of three exogenous state variables that govern 
the short-rate diﬀerential, the level of end-user demand, and the level 
of intermediary wealth, respectively. In this case, our model’s linear 
equilibrium has a representation as a structural vector auto-regression 
(VAR) in which demand and supply shocks can be identiﬁed using sign 
restrictions on the responses of swap spreads and intermediary posi-
tions to these shocks. We also show the main qualitative predictions 
of our model hold even if we do not impose these linearity-generating 
assumptions, although the model naturally loses its structural VAR rep-
resentation in this case.

To take our model to the data, we need a proxy for intermediaries’ 
net position in the swap spread trade. Our proxy for intermediaries’ 
net  position  in  the  receive-ﬁxed  swap  spread  trade  is  negative  one 
times  primary  dealers’  net  long  position  in  Treasuries  (−1×PD-UST-
Net𝑡).  Equivalently,  by  market  clearing,  our  proxy  for  end-users’  net 
position in receive-ﬁxed swaps is PD-UST-Net𝑡. The intuition is as fol-
lows.  Dealers  are  critical  intermediaries  in  the  swap  market  (TBAC, 
2021). However, they seek to have minimal net exposure to changes 
in the overall level of long-term rates. As a result, dealers’ net posi-
tion in Treasuries—especially in Treasuries maturing in more than one 
year—is a hedge that partially mirrors their net position in interest rate 
swaps

Admittedly, this proxy is far from perfect; a variety of factors other 
than the scale of their net position in swaps aﬀect dealers’ net Treasury 
position. For instance, dealers play a role in intermediating Treasury 
auctions, absorbing some portion of new issuance into short-term in-
ventory  and  distributing  these  securities  to  end  investors  over  time 
(Fleming and Rosenberg, 2008). Furthermore, dealers use Treasuries to 

1 This observation is related to the ideas in Du et al. (2023), who argue 
that asset price ﬂuctuations stemming from time variation in intermediary con-
straints command a positive risk premium.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038142S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

hedge their inventories of a variety of other ﬁxed-income instruments 
beyond swaps—e.g., corporate bonds. We discuss these issues in greater 
detail below, but our overall conclusion is that PD-UST-Net𝑡 is a use-
ful, albeit noisy, proxy for the scale of end-users’ net position. Since 
we use PD-UST-Net𝑡 as an independent variable in our regression spec-
iﬁcations, this measurement error will attenuate our ﬁndings, biasing 
us against ﬁnding a signiﬁcant relationship between PD-UST-Net𝑡 and 
swap spreads or swap spread trade returns.

To validate our use of PD-UST-Net𝑡 as proxy for end-users’ net posi-
tion in receive-ﬁxed swaps, we begin by showing that long-dated swap 
spreads and PD-UST-Net𝑡 move inversely over time. Furthermore, con-
sistent with the regime change in end-user demand referenced above, 
both long-dated swap spreads and PD-UST-Net𝑡 simultaneously ﬂipped 
signs in early 2009. Speciﬁcally, PD-UST-Net𝑡 moved from negative to 
positive in early 2009 at the same time that swap spreads went from 
positive to negative; see Panel A of Fig. 1.

Focusing on the post-GFC data, we next show that PD-UST-Net𝑡 neg-
atively predicts the future returns on long-dated swap spread positions, 
even controlling for balance-sheet costs. Speciﬁcally, when PD-UST-Net𝑡
is higher, the future returns on long-dated swap spread positions tend 
to be lower on average. Interpreted through the lens of our model, the 
idea is that a higher level of PD-UST-Net𝑡 signals that end-users have 
a larger net position in receive-ﬁxed swaps. To induce risk averse in-
termediaries to take the short side of this trade—i.e., to take a large 
net position in pay-ﬁxed swap spread trade, the expected returns on 
the receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade must decline. We show that this 
predictability is strongest when we control for other factors—e.g., the 
gross quantity of Treasury issuance—that are unrelated to the scale of 
dealers’ swap spread positions but that independently aﬀect PD-UST-
Net𝑡.

Having validated PD-UST-Net𝑡 as a useful proxy for end-users’ net 
position, we estimate the structural VAR implied by our linear model 
during the post-GFC period. Speciﬁcally, we set-identify the parame-
ters of our structural VAR using the sign restrictions approach of Uhlig 
(2005). Using these VAR estimates, we then extract the latent under-
lying demand and supply factors from swap spreads and PD-UST-Net𝑡
and decompose swap spreads into the respective contributions of these 
factors. Looking over our entire post-GFC sample, we ﬁnd that demand 
and supply shocks play roughly equal roles in explaining the time-series 
variation in long-term swap spreads. At the same time, our decomposi-
tion sheds light on whether a given historical movement in spreads was 
due to a shift in demand, in supply, or in both. For instance, our de-
composition suggests that a large inward shift in intermediary supply 
from late-2014 until late-2015 pushed swap spreads far into negative 
territory.  This  estimated  inward  supply  shift  coincides  with  a  series 
of regulatory changes that arguably increased the balance-sheet costs 
faced by intermediaries, including the ﬁnalization of the Supplemen-
tary Leverage Ratio in September 2014 and the implementation of the 
Volcker Rule in July 2015 (Boyarchenko et al., 2020). However, the 
period of highly negative swap spreads between late 2014 and 2018 
cannot be solely attributed to the shift in intermediary supply. Indeed, 
from mid-2016, our estimates suggest that rising end-user demand to 
receive the ﬁxed rate pushed swap spreads even further below zero.

Going  further,  this  decomposition  allows  us  to  shed  light  on  the 
primitive factors that drive swap spreads by examining the time-series 
correlates of our estimated demand and supply factors. Echoing Feld-
hütter and Lando (2008) and Hanson (2014), our analysis suggests that 
hedging demand from mortgage investors is the most signiﬁcant driver 
of time variation in net end-user demand for swaps. However, consis-
tent with Klingler and Sundaresan (2019), asset-liability management 
by pension funds also plays a role in shaping the demand for swaps. 
We also ﬁnd more modest evidence that intermediary supply is smaller 
when proxies for intermediary balance-sheet capacity are depressed.

Finally, we examine the respective roles of end-user demand and in-
termediary supply in shaping the expected returns to swap arbitrage. 
While  demand  and  supply  both  play  important  roles  in  driving  the 

Fig. 1. Swap spreads and primary dealer’s net Treasury position: Panel 
A  shows  the  30-year  LIBOR  swap  spread  and  primary  dealers’  net  position 
in coupon-bearing Treasury securities (PD-UST-Net𝑡). Panel B shows 30-year 
SOFR, 30-year OIS, and 30-year LIBOR swap spreads. Panel C shows 2-year LI-
BOR, 10-year LIBOR, and 30-year LIBOR swap spreads. Data are weekly and 
run from July 2001 to June 2020.

variation  in  swap  spreads,  we  should  expect  end-user  demand  to  be 
a stronger predictor of the returns to swap arbitrage than supply. In-
tuitively, positive demand shocks simultaneously increase the compen-
sation intermediaries require for committing their scarce balance-sheet 
capacity to swap arbitrage as well as the required compensation for 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038143S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

bearing swap spread risk. By contrast, a negative supply shock—i.e., a 
negative shock to intermediaries’ wealth—reduces intermediaries’ ex-
posure  to  swap  spread  risk  and  the  associated  risk  premium  while 
increasing the required compensation for using scarce balance sheet. 
Because these two eﬀects partially oﬀset each other, supply shocks have 
a smaller impact on the returns to swap arbitrage than demand shocks. 
We ﬁnd some evidence of this asymmetry in the data, providing further 
support for the demand-and-supply imbalance risk channel.

While our model and empirical analysis focus on the interest rate 
swap market, our insights are more general and our model could be 
readily  applied  to  a  host  of  other  long-dated  near-arbitrage  spreads, 
including deviations from covered interest rate parity (CIP) in foreign 
exchange markets and the CDS-bond basis in credit markets. Indeed, 
we believe that our model—an intermediary-based pricing model with 
separate shocks to end-user demand and intermediary supply—is a use-
ful contribution in its own right. This is because models with demand 
eﬀects generally abstract away from intermediary wealth eﬀects—i.e., 
supply shocks.

Our  model  builds  on  Vayanos  and  Vila  (2021) and,  as  a  result, 
is  related  to  the  growing  literature  on  demand  factors  in  the  gov-
ernment  bond  market;  see  Greenwood  and  Vayanos  (2014),  Hanson 
(2014),  Malkhozov  et  al.  (2016),  Haddad  and  Sraer  (2020),  Gourin-
chas  et  al.  (2020),  and  Greenwood  et  al.  (2022),  among  others.  We 
depart from this prior literature along two dimensions. First, we con-
sider long-maturity swap spreads rather than long-maturity bond yields. 
Second, we allow for the variation in both end-user demand and inter-
mediary supply in the swap market—in this way, our work is related 
to the model of the government bond market developed in Kekre et al. 
(2022)—and use our model to empirically disentangle these two forces.
Our work is also related to De Long et al. (1990), who show that 
noise trader demand shocks can create a form of convergence risk that 
deters rational arbitrageurs from aggressively betting against a LoOP 
violation. In their model, an equilibrium where the LoOP fails and ar-
bitrage is limited by convergence risk exists alongside a more standard 
equilibrium in which arbitrageurs enforce the LoOP. By contrast, we 
show that LoOP violations do not have to rely on the unstable type of 
equilibrium considered in De Long et al. (1990). LoOP violations arise in 
our model’s unique stable equilibrium because intermediaries are sub-
ject to a binding balance-sheet constraint as in Gârleanu and Pedersen 
(2011). Once these primitive LoOP violations arise, they are ampliﬁed 
by convergence risk arising from demand and supply shocks.

Swap  rates  and  Treasury  yields  have  been  extensively  studied  in 
the previous literature. One strand of this literature calibrates dynamic 
term structure models to understand the dynamics of swap spreads; see, 
for instance, Duﬃe and Singleton (1997), Lang et al. (1998), Collin-
Dufresne and Solnik (2001), Liu et al. (2006), Feldhütter and Lando 
(2008), and Augustin et al. (2021), among others. Two recent papers 
that are important precursors to our study are Klingler and Sundare-
san (2019) and Jermann (2020) who focus on, respectively, the role 
of end-user demand and constrained intermediary supply in explaining 
the emergence of negative swap spreads during the GFC. Klingler and 
Sundaresan (2019) argue that changes in pension underfunding lead to 
shifts in the demand to receive the ﬁxed swap rate and that the rise in 
aggregate underfunding during the GFC helps explain the emergence of 
negative swap spreads. We ﬁnd evidence consistent with this channel. 
Jermann (2020) emphasizes the role of constrained intermediary sup-
ply and argues that equilibrium swap spreads can be negative even if 
intermediaries do not have to absorb any net end-user demand in the 
swap market.2 Our emphasis on intermediary balance sheet constraints 
builds heavily on Jermann (2020). Relative to these important precur-
sors, however, our framework allows us to highlight, both theoretically 

2 Jermann (2020) assumes intermediaries want to hold long-term Treasuries 
to capture a positive term premium, only intermediaries can arbitrage between 
Treasuries and swaps, and intermediaries face greater balance sheet costs from 
taking positions in Treasuries than swaps. Under these assumptions, equilibrium 

and empirically, how shifts in both end-user demand and intermediary 
supply contribute to movements in swap spreads and the negative swap 
spreads observed since the GFC.

In contemporaneous work, Du et al. (2022) also draw a connection 
between the regime shift in swap spreads and the regime shift in deal-
ers’ net Treasury position after the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. Taking 
swap yields as given, they use an aﬃne term structure model to com-
pute the yields at which a leverage-constrained dealer should be willing 
to go net short or net long Treasuries: the net-short yield is below the 
swap yield and the net-long yield is above. They note that Treasuries 
yields moved from the net-short yield they compute to their net-long 
yield  in  late  2008  and  early  2009—i.e.,  that  swap  spreads  changed 
sign—at the same time PD-UST-Net𝑡 moved from negative to positive. 
We believe the two papers are complementary. Our focus is on disen-
tangling the role of end-user demand and intermediary supply shocks in 
shaping the level of swap spreads and documenting the importance of 
demand-and-supply imbalance risk. By contrast, Du et al. (2022) are pri-
marily interested in understanding the regime shift that occurred during 
the GFC.

Finally, our work is also related to Cohen et al. (2007), Chen et al. 
(2018), Goldberg and Nozawa (2021), and Fontaine et al. (2023), who 
identify demand and supply shifts in shorting, index option, and cor-
porate bond markets, and intermediary leverage, respectively. We also 
build on Cieslak and Pang (2021), who use sign restrictions to identify 
latent factors that drive time-variation in asset prices.

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section 2 provides 
background  on  the  interest  rate  swap  market.  Section 3 presents  a 
theoretical framework to study the impact of end-user demand and in-
termediary  supply  on  swap  spreads  and  derives  testable  predictions. 
Section 4 describes our data and presents our main empirical results. 
Section 5 concludes. An Internet Appendix presents a range of addi-
tional theoretical and empirical results.

2.  Background on interest rate swaps

This section provides the necessary background on the interest rate 
swap market and can be skipped by readers who are well-versed in the 
swap literature. After explaining the mechanics of these derivative con-
tracts, we discuss the participants in the swap market, dividing them 
into “end users” and specialized “intermediaries.” We then review the 
no-arbitrage logic that makes both non-zero SOFR swap spreads and 
negative LIBOR swap spreads so surprising. Finally, we describe the ma-
jor changes this market has undergone since the 2008 Global Financial 
Crisis.

2.1.  Swap mechanics

An interest rate swap is an agreement between two counterparties 
to exchange a series of interest payments over time based on some no-
tional principal amount. In a plain-vanilla swap, the ﬁrst counterparty 
pays the second a series of pre-determined payments based on the ﬁxed 
swap rate set at the contract’s inception; the second counterparty pays 
the ﬁrst a series of ﬂoating and initially unknown payments based on 
the future realizations of some short-term reference rate. As a result, the 
counterparty who is receiving (paying) the ﬁxed rate acquires a ﬁnan-
cial exposure similar to that obtained by borrowing (investing) cash at 
the short-term interest rate and taking a long (short) position in long-
term bonds. The ﬁxed swap rate is set so that the swap has zero value 
at inception. Thus, the ﬁxed swap rate is akin to a par coupon yield 
derived from the underlying reference curve. A par swap spread is the 
diﬀerence between the ﬁxed swap rate and the par coupon yield of a 
Treasury bond with the same maturity.

swap spreads can be negative even if there is zero net end-user demand for 
swaps and intermediaries have zero net exposure to swap spreads.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038144S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Historically,  the  ﬂoating  leg  on  most  swaps  was  tied  to  the  3-
month London Interbank Oﬀer Rate. LIBOR is an indicative, unsecured 
borrowing  rate  for  major  global  banks  and  the  3-month  LIBOR  em-
beds some small amount of credit risk. In recent years, swaps tied to 
overnight unsecured interbank borrowing rates and overnight secured 
borrowing rates—which embed virtually no credit risk—have been re-
placing LIBOR-based swaps and LIBOR was discontinued at the end of 
2021. Speciﬁcally, Overnight Index Swaps (OIS) are tied to the eﬀec-
tive federal funds rates (the volume-weighted median rate on overnight 
unsecured  interbank  loans)  and  SOFR  swaps  are  tied  to  the  Secured 
Overnight  Financing  Rate  (the  volume-weighted  median  rate  in  the 
market for overnight repurchase agreements backed by Treasuries).

The swap market is the largest U.S. derivatives market with over 
$115 trillion of outstanding notional value and an estimated gross mar-
ket value of $2.3 trillion in 2020.3 The market is extremely liquid with 
an average daily volume of roughly $500 billion in 2020.4 Based on 
Bloomberg data, the typical bid-ask yield spread for 10-year swaps is 
0.5 basis points whereas the typical bid-ask spread for the on-the-run 
10-year Treasury note is 0.25 basis points.

2.2.  Swap market participants

It is useful to group swap market participants into “end users” and 
specialized “intermediaries.” End users use swaps to manage their pre-
existing  exposures  to  interest-rate  risk.  To  clear  the  market,  special-
ized intermediaries—primarily swap desks at broker-dealers and swap 
traders at ﬁxed-income hedge funds—must accommodate the net end-
user demand to either receive or pay the ﬁxed swap rate. These interme-
diaries hedge the interest-rate risk associated with their swap positions 
in the Treasury market (TBAC, 2021). As a result, intermediaries are 
only concerned with the relative valuation of swaps and Treasuries—
i.e., with the level of swap spreads and any diﬀerential between the 
short-term  rate  referenced  by  swaps  and  the  short-term  Treasury  ﬁ-
nancing rate. In addition to the P&L on their swap spread positions, 
intermediaries must also weigh the fact that these positions consume 
scarce risk-bearing capital.

Swap  end  users  are  agents  who  want  long  or  short  exposure  to 
long-term bonds, but who for regulatory, accounting, or other frictional 
reasons prefer to obtain this exposure using swaps rather than Trea-
suries. As explained in the Treasury Borrowing Advisory Committee’s 
report on the swap market (TBAC, 2021), there are several important 
groups of end users:

• Insurers  and  pensions use  swaps  to  manage  their  exposure  to 
interest-rate risk. Insurers and pensions typically receive the ﬁxed 
swap rate on net—using swaps to add duration—because the du-
ration  of  their  liabilities  exceeds  that  of  their  on-balance  sheet 
assets. Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) argue that pensions’ desire 
to receive ﬁxed increases when they become more underfunded. 
Furthermore, since the convexity of their liabilities exceeds that 
of their assets, insurers and pensions tend to enter into additional 
receive-ﬁxed swaps when long-term rates fall to dynamically man-
age their interest-rate exposure (Domanski et al., 2017).

• Commercial  banks typically  receive  ﬁxed  on  net  (Begenau  et 
al., 2020). Although banks borrow short-term and lend long-term, 
banks’ net income is typically hurt by declining interest rates be-
cause their loans reprice more quickly than their deposits (Driscoll 
and Judson, 2013; Drechsler et al., 2021). To oﬀset these expo-
sures, banks generally receive ﬁxed.

• Non-ﬁnancial corporations typically receive ﬁxed on net to con-
vert ﬁxed-rate bond issues into synthetic ﬂoating-rate funding.

• Relative-value mortgage investors pay the ﬁxed swap rate on 
net.  These  investors—most  prominently  Fannie  Mae  and  Fred-
die Mac—attempt to exploit the fact that pass-through mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) sometimes trade cheap relative to a dy-
namic  replicating  portfolio.  Mortgage  investors  prefer  to  hedge 
MBS with swaps instead of Treasuries for regulatory and account-
ing reasons and because swaps have historically been a more eﬀec-
tive hedge. When long-term rates fall, expected mortgage prepay-
ments rise, causing MBS duration to decline (i.e., MBS have nega-
tive convexity). This prompts mortgage investors to enter receive-
ﬁxed swaps to reduce the size of their pay-ﬁxed hedge positions 
(Perli and Sack, 2003; Feldhütter and Lando, 2008; Hanson, 2014; 
Malkhozov et al., 2016).

• Mortgage servicers are institutions that earn a stream of fees to 
process mortgage payments; they collect monthly mortgage-related 
payments from homeowners and pass them along to MBS investors, 
local  tax  authorities,  and  property  insurers.  Mortgage  servicers 
have an exposure similar to the holder of an interest-only (IO) MBS 
strip, which typically has a negative duration. To oﬀset the negative 
duration of their assets, servicers are typically net ﬁxed receivers. 
Further, since IO strips are negatively convex just like pass-through 
MBS, servicers tend to increase their receive-ﬁxed positions when 
rates fall.

• Fixed-income money managers use swaps to adjust the duration 
of  their  portfolios  and  are  generally  net  ﬁxed  payers.  These  in-
vestors typically hold cash bonds and prefer to use pay-ﬁxed swap 
positions to attain their duration targets.

In summary, most major groups of end users are typically net ﬁxed 
receivers.  The  main  net  ﬁxed  payers  are  relative-value  mortgage  in-
vestors  and  other  money  managers.  Furthermore,  due  to  convexity-
driven  hedging,  net  end-user  demand  to  receive  ﬁxed  typically  rises 
when rates decline.

2.3.  No-arbitrage pricing of swaps

To begin, note that a non-zero SOFR swap spread constitutes a fail-
ure of the Law of One Price and implies the existence of a feasible, 
zero-cost portfolio that generates a riskless stream of positive cashﬂows 
at all dates prior to maturity. This is because a SOFR swap’s ﬂoating 
leg is tied to the overnight SOFR reference rate published by the Fed-
eral Bank of New York and perfectly tracks the short-term rate at which 
intermediaries can ﬁnance their Treasury positions.5 Speciﬁcally, if the 
SOFR swap spread is positive, entering a receive-ﬁxed SOFR swap and 
taking an oﬀsetting short position in like-maturity Treasuries (and in-
vesting the proceeds at SOFR) generates a stream of riskless cashﬂows 
equal to the swap spread. Conversely, if the SOFR swap spread is neg-
ative, entering a pay-ﬁxed SOFR swap and taking a long position in 
Treasuries (ﬁnanced at SOFR) generates a stream of riskless cashﬂows 
equal to the negative one times the swap spread. Thus, absent frictions, 
no arbitrage logic implies that SOFR swap spreads must be zero.

By contrast, since the 3-month LIBOR exceeds the secured ﬁnanc-
ing rate for Treasuries, a positive spread on a LIBOR swap does not 
represent a failure of no arbitrage. This is because the cashﬂows from 
receiving ﬁxed on a LIBOR swap and shorting Treasuries can be neg-
ative if the LIBOR minus SOFR short-rate diﬀerential is large enough. 

3 See https://stats .bis .org /statx /srs /table /d5 .1. Gross market value is the ab-
solute value of the market value of all outstanding receive-ﬁxed swaps. There 
were $21 trillion of outstanding U.S. Treasures at 2020 year-end.
4 See 
https://www .clarusft .com /2020 -ccp -volumes -and -market -share -in -
ird/. By way of comparison, SIFMA reports that the average daily volume in 
Treasuries was roughly $600 billion in 2020.

5 Technically, SOFR swaps deviate ever so slightly from this theoretical limit: 
due to frictions in the repo market, individual intermediaries typically ﬁnance 
their Treasury holdings at rates that diﬀer slightly from SOFR (the volume-
weighted median ﬁnancing rate). However, spreads within the Treasury repo 
market are very small—an order of magnitude smaller than the spread between 
LIBOR and repo rates—and appear to be quite stable, so we ignore this detail 
in the remainder of the paper.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038145S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

However, assuming that LIBOR exceeds SOFR in all possible states, a 
negative LIBOR swap spread is a violation of no arbitrage. In this case, 
paying ﬁxed on a LIBOR swap and taking a long position in Treasuries 
is a zero-cost portfolio with strictly positive cashﬂows in all possible 
states.

In sum, the negative LIBOR swap spreads and non-zero SOFR swap 
spreads  witnessed  since  2008  are  inconsistent  with  frictionless,  no-
arbitrage pricing. Thus, it makes sense to build a model where inter-
mediaries  face  constraints  that  prevent  them  from  eliminating  these 
opportunities.

2.4.  The evolution of the swap market

From the inception of the swap market in the 1980s until the height 
of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) in late 2008, LIBOR-based swap 
spreads  had  always  been  positive—i.e.,  swap  yields  had  always  ex-
ceeded like-maturity Treasury yields. The most straightforward expla-
nation for positive swap spreads is that LIBOR always exceeds Treasury 
repo rates because (i) LIBOR is an unsecured 3-month bank borrow-
ing rate that includes compensation for credit risk (Collin-Dufresne and 
Solnik, 2001) and (ii) Treasury yields and repo rates are depressed by 
a money-like convenience premium that is speciﬁc to these extremely 
safe and liquid assets (Feldhütter and Lando, 2008; Krishnamurthy and 
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012).

However, there is evidence that demand-and-supply forces played a 
role in supporting the level of swap spreads already before 2008. Pre-
GFC, hedged mortgage investors played a dominant role in the swap 
market and there was generally net demand from end users to pay ﬁxed 
(TBAC, 2021). To accommodate this demand, dealers and ﬁxed-income 
hedge funds were “long swap spreads,” receiving the ﬁxed swap rate 
and taking oﬀsetting short positions in Treasuries (Duarte et al., 2006). 
Indeed, the 1998 Long Term Capital Management crisis revealed that 
many intermediaries had substantial long positions in this swap spread 
trade (Lowenstein, 2000).

This pattern is illustrated in Panel A of Fig. 1, which plots 30-year 
swap spreads alongside primary dealers’ net position in U.S. Treasuries 
from 2001 to 2020. The ﬁgure shows that dealers were net short Trea-
suries during the pre-2008 period when swap spreads were positive. 
Our interpretation is that this net short Treasury position was driven, to 
a signiﬁcant extent, by dealers’ long position in the swap spread trade: 
dealers were receiving the ﬁxed swap rate on net and had a net short 
position in Treasuries to hedge the resulting interest-rate risk.

In late 2008, long-dated LIBOR swap spreads turned negative and 
have remained negative ever since, leading to an apparent arbitrage. 
Spreads’ move into negative territory occurred against the backdrop of 
three major changes in the swap market. First, there was a signiﬁcant 
shift in the end-user demand, with net end-user demand swinging from 
a desire to pay ﬁxed to one to receive ﬁxed (TBAC, 2021). Second, in-
termediaries became far more concerned with husbanding their capital. 
The resulting rise in the shadow value of intermediary capital has led 
to a noteworthy rise in LoOP deviations in a number of intermediated 
markets. Finally, there was a substantial increase in outstanding Trea-
sury debt during the GFC and, historically, increases in Treasury supply 
have tended to reduce the money-like convenience premium in Trea-
sury yields and hence swap spreads. We now detail these three forces 
in turn.

First, as shown in Panel A of Fig. 1, primary dealers’ position in 
Treasuries swung from net short to net long in early 2009—just around 
the time when 30-year swap spreads turned negative. Our interpreta-
tion is that net end-user demand swung from a desire to pay ﬁxed to 
a desire to receive ﬁxed. Thus, dealers’ growing net long position in 
Treasuries was driven by the growing short position they were taking 
in the swap spread trade. What led to this swing in end-user net de-
mand at the height of the GFC? TBAC (2021) points to a large decline 
in the demand to pay ﬁxed from hedged mortgage investors. A comple-
mentary explanation comes from Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) who 

argue that a rise in pension underfunding during the GFC led pensions 
to increasingly receive ﬁxed to manage their duration gaps.

Second, during the GFC, many intermediaries suﬀered large losses 
and began husbanding their scarce risk-bearing capital. Motivated by 
a desire to safeguard ﬁnancial stability in the aftermath of the GFC, 
regulators have subjected large dealer banks to more stringent capital 
regulations. Because it is expensive for dealer banks to ﬁnance them-
selves  with  equity  instead  of  debt  (Boyarchenko  et  al.,  2020),  these 
heightened capital requirements have increased the cost of intermedia-
tion. As a result, the shadow value of intermediary capital has increas-
ingly been impounded into market prices since the GFC, leading to a 
rise in persistent deviations from the LoOP in a range of intermediated 
markets.6 (Although the rising shadow value of capital shapes the mag-
nitude of LoOP violations, the sign of these violations is naturally linked 
to the sign of intermediaries’ positions.) Most importantly, U.S. regula-
tors introduced the Supplementary Leverage Ratio (SLR) in early 2014 
after six years of public discussion. The SLR requires large dealer banks 
to have Tier 1 capital equal to 6% of their “total leverage exposure,” 
deﬁned as the sum of on-balance-sheet assets plus an adjustment for 
oﬀ-balance-sheet exposures. Unlike traditional forms of risk-based cap-
ital regulation, the SLR depends only on the notional scale of dealers’ 
exposures and not on their assessed risk. The SLR has become the bind-
ing capital constraint for most large dealers (Duﬃe, 2017; Greenwood 
et al., 2017; Boyarchenko et al., 2020).

Finally,  there  was  a  substantial  increase  in  outstanding  Treasury 
debt following the onset of the GFC. Speciﬁcally, the ratio of marketable 
Treasury debt to GDP rose from 31% at the end of 2007 to 59% at 
the end of 2010. Historically, increases in Treasury supply have tended 
to reduce swap spreads, arguably because this reduces the money-like 
safety or liquidity premium commanded by Treasuries (Cortes, 2003; 
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012). As a result, the large post-
GFC expansion in Treasury supply may have sated this special demand 
for Treasuries, largely eliminating the convenience premium on Trea-
suries and leading to a decline in swap spreads.

3.  Theory

In our model, end users demand long-term interest rate swaps that 
are  supplied  by  risk-averse  and  leverage-constrained  intermediaries 
who specialize in the swap market. Fluctuations in swap spreads re-
ﬂect the interplay between end-user demand and intermediary supply. 
Because intermediaries face binding leverage constraints, this remains 
true even if the short-rate diﬀerential is always zero and non-zero swap 
spreads are a failure of the LoOP.

3.1.  Setting

Time is discrete, inﬁnite, and is indexed by 𝑡. We begin by consid-
ering a perpetual interest rate swap and a perpetual Treasury bond that 
have the same duration. After exploring the determinants of the result-
ing perpetual swap spread, we extend the model to consider the entire 
term structure of swap spreads. To maintain tractability, we substitute 
log returns for ordinary returns throughout and use the Campbell and 
Shiller (1988) linearization of log returns. These linearity-generating 
modeling devices do not aﬀect our economic conclusions.

The swap spread trade. Let 𝑦𝑆
petual swap at time 𝑡 and 𝑖𝑆
𝑡

𝑡 denote the log ﬁxed rate on this per-
the log short-term rate referenced by this 

6 See Gârleanu and Pedersen (2011) for a theoretical analysis of how binding 
intermediary leverage constraints can lead to LoOP violations; Du et al. (2018)
for a detailed study of one prominent post-GFC LoOP violation, namely the de-
viations from covered interest parity observed in the foreign exchange market; 
and Siriwardane et al. (2021) for an investigation of the commonalities in vari-
ous LoOP violations.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038146S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

swap—e.g., the London Interbank Oﬀer Rate for a LIBOR swap or the 
Secured Overnight Financing Rate for a SOFR swap. The log excess re-
turn on a receive-ﬁxed interest rate swap from 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1 is approximately
)

)

𝑟𝑆
𝑡+1

≡

(
𝑡 − 𝑖𝑆
𝑦𝑆
𝑡

−

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

(
𝑡+1 − 𝑦𝑆
𝑦𝑆

𝑡

,

(1)

𝑡 and a capital gain term − (𝛿∕ (1 − 𝛿))

where 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1) and 1∕ (1 − 𝛿) represents the duration of the swap.7
The excess return on this receive-ﬁxed swap consists of a carry term 
𝑡 − 𝑖𝑆
𝑦𝑆
that arises 
from any change in the swap rate from 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1. Similarly, the log 
excess return on a position in perpetual Treasury bonds of the same 
duration with log yield 𝑦𝑇
that is ﬁnanced at the secured short-term 
𝑡
ﬁnancing rate applicable to Treasuries 𝑖𝑇
𝑡 —i.e., the rate on repurchase 
agreements backed by Treasury bonds—is approximately

𝑡+1 − 𝑦𝑆
𝑦𝑆

)

(

𝑡

𝑟𝑇
𝑡+1

≡

(
𝑡 − 𝑖𝑇
𝑦𝑇
𝑡

)

−

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

(
𝑡+1 − 𝑦𝑇
𝑦𝑇

𝑡

)

.

(2)

The perpetual swap spread is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the 
ﬁxed rate on perpetual interest rate swaps and the yield on perpetual 
Treasury bonds: 𝑠𝑡 ≡ 𝑦𝑆
𝑡 . The log excess return from 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1 on 
the receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade that receives the ﬁxed swap rate and 
hedges the associated interest-rate risk by going short Treasury bonds 
is

𝑡 − 𝑦𝑇

)

(
𝑠𝑡 − 𝑚𝑡

)

(

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

,

]

[

−

(3)

≡ 𝑟𝑆

𝑡 , 𝑖𝑇

𝑡 − 𝑖𝑇

𝑠𝑡+1 − 𝑠𝑡

𝑡+1 =
𝑡 − 𝑖𝑇
𝑡

𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑇
𝑡+1
where 𝑚𝑡 ≡ 𝑖𝑆
is the short-rate diﬀerential—i.e., the spread between 
the short-term rate referenced by the swap 𝑖𝑆
𝑡 and the short-term Trea-
sury ﬁnancing rate 𝑖𝑇
𝑡 .8 Our focus is on the relative valuation of swaps 
and Treasuries—i.e., on the equilibrium level of swap spreads, 𝑠𝑡, and 
the expected returns on the receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade, E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1]. 
Thus, we think of 𝑖𝑆
𝑡 , and the general level of long-term rates as 
summarized by  𝑦𝑇
𝑡 as being exogenously given and pinned down by 
forces outside of our model.9

The short-rate diﬀerential, 𝑚𝑡 ≡ 𝑖𝑆

𝑡 , governs the fundamental 
component (if any) of swap spreads. We assume that 𝑚𝑡 = 𝑚 + 𝑧𝑚
𝑡 , where 
𝑚 ≡ E
≥ 0 is the unconditional mean of the short rate diﬀerential 
𝑚𝑡
and  𝑧𝑚
is  a  mean-zero  state  variable  that  captures  time-variation  in 
𝑡
the short rate diﬀerential. A non-zero 𝑚𝑡 might either derive from the 
fact that (i) the short-term interest rate referenced by the swap 𝑖𝑆
𝑡 con-
tains compensation for credit risk—as with 3-month LIBOR—or that (ii) 
short-term Treasury rates embed a special money-like convenience pre-
mium relative to other money-market rates. In both cases, 𝑚𝑡 would 
ﬂuctuate over time and we would have 𝑚𝑡 ≡ 𝑖𝑆
𝑡 ≥ 0 almost surely, 
as indeed has been the case historically.

While we allow the cashﬂow fundamental 𝑚𝑡 ≡ 𝑖𝑆

𝑡 to diﬀer from 
zero and to ﬂuctuate stochastically, we will often emphasize the case 
where 𝑚𝑡 = 0 for all 𝑡 almost surely, as would (approximately) be the 
case for a SOFR swap. In this limiting 𝑚𝑡 = 0 case and in the absence of 
balance-sheet frictions, the equilibrium swap spread would be zero by 
the LoOP.

𝑡 − 𝑖𝑇

𝑡 − 𝑖𝑇

Swap  market  intermediaries. At  time  𝑡,  risk-averse  and  leverage-
constrained intermediaries who specialize in the swap market allocate 

𝑡 − (𝑛 − 1) 𝑦(𝑛−1)
𝑡+1 .

7 Assuming this perpetuity makes a series of geometrically-declining ﬁxed 
payments, 𝛿 is governed by the rate at which the payments decline over time. 
This approximation appears in Campbell (2018) and is an approximate general-
ization of the fact that the log-return on a 𝑛-period zero-coupon bond is exactly
𝑟(𝑛)
𝑡+1 = 𝑛𝑦(𝑛)
8 Naturally, the return on the pay-ﬁxed swap spread trade that pays the ﬁxed 
swap rate and hedges the associated interest-rate risk by going long Treasury 
bonds is −𝑟𝑠
9 It would be easy to endogenize both swaps spreads and the general level 
of long-term rates merging our model of swap spreads with a Vayanos and 
Vila (2021)-style model of the term structure of interest rates. In that case, one 
would need to clear the markets for both long-term Treasuries and for swaps.

𝑡+1.

their scarce capital 𝑤𝑡 between the swap spread arbitrage trade and 
a risky outside investment opportunity. In practice, we associate these 
intermediaries  with  swap  desks  at  broker-dealers  or  swap  traders  at 
ﬁxed-income  hedge  funds.  Since  our  intermediaries  specialize  in  the 
swap market, it is natural to think of this outside investment oppor-
tunity as another relative-value ﬁxed-income trade. The excess return 
on this outside investment opportunity is 𝑟𝑜
𝑡+1, and we assume that its 
]
= 𝑟𝑜 > 0 and 
ﬁrst  two  moments  are  exogenously  given  by  E𝑡

[
𝑟𝑜
𝑡+1

]

[
𝑟𝑜
𝑡+1

Var𝑡

= 𝜎2

𝑜 > 0.10

]

[
𝑤𝑡

For  simplicity,  we  assume  an  overlapping  generations  structure 
where date-𝑡 intermediaries are born with capital equal to 𝑤𝑡 = 𝑤 + 𝑧𝑤
𝑡 , 
where 𝑤 ≡ E
> 0 is the unconditional mean of intermediary capital 
and 𝑧𝑤
is an exogenous mean-zero state-variable that captures time-
𝑡
variation in intermediary capital.11 Date-𝑡 intermediaries have mean-
variance  preferences  over  their  one-period  ahead  wealth  𝑤𝑡, 𝑡+1,  and 
their coeﬃcient of absolute risk-aversion is 𝛼 ≥ 0.

More  formally,  letting  𝑥𝑡 denote  intermediaries’  position  in  the 
receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade and 𝑜𝑡 their position in the outside in-
vestment opportunity, date-𝑡 intermediaries solve:
[

]}

{

[

]

max
𝑥𝑡, 𝑜𝑡

E𝑡

𝑤𝑡, 𝑡+1

−

Var𝑡

𝑤𝑡, 𝑡+1

𝛼

2

subject to the budget constraint

𝑤𝑡, 𝑡+1 = 𝑤𝑡 + 𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1 + 𝑜𝑡𝑟𝑜
𝑡+1
and the leverage constraint

,

(4)

(5)

|
|𝑥𝑡

|
| + 𝜅𝑜

|
|𝑜𝑡

|
| ≤ 𝑤𝑡.

(6)

𝜅𝑥
Here 𝜅𝑥, 𝜅𝑜 ≥ 0 are the capital requirements associated with the swap 
spread trade and the outside investment opportunity, respectively. In 
order to undertake a swap spread trade of notional size |
|
| intermedi-
|
aries must commit 𝜅𝑥
| of their scarce capital. For example, according 
to Boyarchenko et al. (2020), a large U.S. dealer bank who is subject to 
the Supplementary Leverage Ratio requirement would have 𝜅𝑥 ≈ 6.4%
for a swap spread trade. We assume the required amount of capital is 
(approximately) the same whether the intermediary has a long or short 
position in these trades, hence the absolute values in (6).

|
|𝑥𝑡

|𝑥𝑡

End-user  demand  for  swaps. End  users  of  interest  rate  swaps  are 
agents who demand exposure to long-term interest rates, but who for 
regulatory, accounting, or other frictional reasons prefer to obtain their 
desired exposure using swaps as opposed to Treasuries. Intermediaries 
only need to accommodate the net demand from end users to receive 
the ﬁxed swap rate—i.e., the demand to receive ﬁxed that is not oﬀset 
by other end-user demand to pay ﬁxed. Since end users can substitute 

𝑡+1 + 𝑜𝑡𝑟𝑜

10 In Internet Appendix B.2 we provide an alternative speciﬁcation for the 
outside investment opportunity.
11 This means that we are not modeling the mechanism through which initial 
losses on the swap spread trade could be ampliﬁed because these losses reduce 
intermediaries’ net worth and tighten future leverage constraints as in Brun-
nermeier and Pedersen (2009). We could model this ampliﬁcation mechanism 
if we assumed that intermediary wealth evolved endogenously according to 
𝑤𝑡+1 = 𝑤𝑡 + 𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1. This extension would add signiﬁcant complexity—𝑠𝑡
would depend on 𝑤𝑡 as in our model with exogenous wealth shocks, but 𝑤𝑡
would also depend endogenously on 𝑠𝑡 through the law of motion for intermedi-
ary wealth—and an additional source of non-linearity beyond those considered 
below. Instead, in line with a “segmented-market” view of intermediation, we 
think of the specialized intermediary as a swap desk within a larger ﬁnancial 
institution. In each period the swap desk is endowed with trading capital that 
depends on the total capital of the ﬁnancial institution. However, the proﬁts 
and losses on the swap spread trade have only a small eﬀect on this total capi-
tal. Thus, we interpret 𝑧𝑤
𝑡 as shifts in the overall balance sheet strength of the 
intermediary sector that are largely exogenous from the perspective of the spe-
cialized swap desk.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038147S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

between swaps and Treasuries, we allow net demand to receive ﬁxed 
to be increasing in swap spreads. Speciﬁcally, we assume net end-user 
demand to receive the ﬁxed swap rate is

𝑡 + 𝛾𝑠𝑡,

𝑑𝑡 = 𝑑 + 𝑧𝑑
where 𝛾 ≥ 0 and 𝑧𝑑
end-user demand.

𝑡 is a mean-zero state variable that captures shifts in 

State variable dynamics. We assume an autoregressive process for the 
three state variables governing the short rate diﬀerential (𝑧𝑚
𝑡 ), end-user 
demand (𝑧𝑑
𝑡 ). Speciﬁcally, we assume 
the vector of state variables 𝐳𝑡 = [𝑧𝑚
𝑡 ]′ follows

𝑡 ), and intermediary wealth (𝑧𝑤
𝑡 , 𝑧𝑤

𝑡 , 𝑧𝑑

)

𝐳𝑡+1 = 𝜚𝐳𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡+1,
(
where 𝜚 = 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔
𝜌𝑚, 𝜌𝑑 , 𝜌𝑤
is a diagonal matrix of the AR(1) coeﬃ-
cients  𝜌𝑚, 𝜌𝑑 , 𝜌𝑤 ∈ [0, 1) and  𝜀𝑡+1 = [𝜀𝑚
, 𝜀𝑤
𝑡+1]′ is  the  vector  of 
𝑡+1
structural shocks. For simplicity, we assume the three structural shocks 
(
are  orthogonal  to  each  other:  Var𝑡[𝜀𝑡+1] = 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔
𝑚, 𝜎2
𝜎2
,  where 
𝑑
𝑖 ≡ Var
𝜎2

for 𝑖 = 𝑚, 𝑤, 𝑑.

, 𝜎2
𝑤

, 𝜀𝑑

(8)

𝑡+1

)

[

]

𝜀𝑖
𝑡+1

Market clearing. Since interest rate swaps are in zero net supply, mar-
ket clearing requires

𝑥𝑡 + 𝑑𝑡 = 0.

(9)

In  particular,  if  the  net  demand  from  end  users  to  receive  the  ﬁxed 
swap rate is positive, 𝑑𝑡 > 0, then in equilibrium intermediaries must 
take on a short position in the receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade (paying 
the ﬁxed swap rate and going long Treasuries) equal to 𝑥𝑡 = −𝑑𝑡 < 0. 
By contrast, if there is net end-user demand to pay the ﬁxed swap rate, 
intermediaries must take on a long position in the receive-ﬁxed swap 
spread trade (receiving the ﬁxed swap rate and going short Treasuries).

3.2.  Equilibrium swap spreads

We begin by providing a general characterization of swap spreads 
that is applicable in settings where end-user net demand may change 
signs over time and where intermediary leverage constraints may only 
bind periodically. In this general case, swap spreads will be a nonlinear 
function of intermediary wealth 𝑤𝑡 and end-user net demand 𝑑𝑡. This 
general characterization sheds light on the long-run history of the swap 
market and the regime change it experienced during the 2008 Global 
Financial  Crisis.  We  then  provide  an  aﬃne  characterization  of  swap 
spreads that is valid in settings where (i) the sign of end-user demand 
is constant over time and (ii) the leverage constraint is always binding. 
The resulting aﬃne model is particularly helpful in understanding the 
post-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) period that is the focus of our em-
pirical analysis. Finally, we discuss how the predictions from the aﬃne 
model generalize once we introduce nonlinearities by relaxing assump-
tions (i) and (ii).

3.2.1.  General characterization

Letting 𝜓𝑡 ≥ 0 denote the Lagrange multiplier associated with the 
𝑡+1] = 0 for 

leverage constraint (6) at time 𝑡 and assuming Cov𝑡[𝑟𝑠
simplicity, intermediaries’ ﬁrst-order condition for 𝑥𝑡 is
(

, 𝑟𝑜

𝑡+1

)

E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

𝑡+1] = 𝛼𝑉𝑡 ⋅ 𝑥𝑡 + 𝜅𝑥𝑠𝑔𝑛
(

⋅ 𝜓𝑡,

𝑥𝑡
)

2

𝛿
where 𝑉𝑡 ≡ Var𝑡[𝑟𝑠
1−𝛿
𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1.12 Similarly, the ﬁrst order condition for 𝑜𝑡 is

𝑡+1] =

Var𝑡[𝑠𝑡+1] is the conditional variance of 

𝑠𝑡 =

(10)

(

)

𝑜𝑡

⋅ 𝜓𝑡.

𝑜 ⋅ 𝑜𝑡 + 𝜅𝑜𝑠𝑔𝑛

𝑟𝑜 = 𝛼𝜎2
Since 𝑟𝑜 > 0 and 𝜓𝑡 ≥ 0, we must have 𝑜𝑡 ≥ 0, implying that the Lagrange 
multiplier is
(

(11)

)

− 𝑜𝑡

≥ 0.

(12)

(7)

𝜓𝑡 =

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅𝑜

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

Thus, the shadow value of intermediary capital is proportional to the 
diﬀerence between the unconstrained investment in the outside oppor-
(
tunity, 𝑟𝑜∕ 
, and intermediaries’ current investment, 𝑜𝑡. Combin-
ing the leverage constraint in (6) and (12), we have
{

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

)}

(

)

𝜓𝑡 = 𝜓

(
|
|𝑥𝑡

|
| , 𝑤𝑡

)

= max

0,

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

𝜅𝑜

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

+ 𝜅𝑥

|
|𝑥𝑡

|
| − 𝑤𝑡

.

(13)

Naturally,  the  shadow  value  of  intermediary  capital  is  greater  when 
intermediary capital 𝑤𝑡 is lower and when the scale of intermediaries’ 
|
position in the swap spread trade |
|𝑥𝑡
| is larger.
Combining (3), (10), and (13), and imposing market clearing (9), 
we ﬁnd that the equilibrium expected return on the receive-ﬁxed swap 
spread trade, E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

𝑡+1], satisﬁes:

E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
(

)

[

]

]

𝑠𝑡 − 𝑚𝑡

−

𝛿
1 − 𝛿 (E𝑡

𝑠𝑡+1

− 𝑠𝑡) = =

Compensation for using
scarce capital
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
(
)
(
)
|
| , 𝑤𝑡
(−𝜅𝑥)𝑠𝑔𝑛

|
|𝑑𝑡

⋅ 𝜓

𝑑𝑡

Compensation
for risk
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
(−𝛼)𝑉𝑡 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡 .

+

(14)

Equation (14) highlights the two key forces that shape the equilib-
rium expected returns on the swap spread trade: compensation for using 
scarce intermediary capital and compensation for risk. When 𝜅𝑥 > 0, 
constrained intermediaries will require compensation for committing 
their scarce capital to the swap spread trade even if this trade is com-
pletely riskless. And, being risk-averse, specialized intermediaries will 
require additional compensation for bearing the risk that they may suf-
fer losses due to unexpected changes in swap spreads.

Since  in  equilibrium  intermediaries  must  take  positions  that  are 
equal in size and opposite in sign to those of end users, the equilib-
rium expected return on a receive-ﬁxed swap spread position, E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1], 
has the opposite sign of the net end-user demand to receive the ﬁxed 
rate, 𝑑𝑡. For instance, if net demand to receive ﬁxed is negative—as 
was arguably the case prior to the GFC—we must have E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] > 0 to 
induce intermediaries to take the required long position in the receive-
ﬁxed swap spread trade. By contrast, if net demand to receive ﬁxed 
is positive—as seems to have been the case since the GFC—we must 
have E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] < 0 to induce intermediaries to take the required short 
position in the receive-ﬁxed spread trade. Thus, while a rise in interme-
)
diary balance-sheet costs 𝜓
will raise the absolute magnitude 
of E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1], equation (14) clariﬁes that a rise in balance-sheet costs by 
itself will not lead E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

(
|
|𝑑𝑡

|
| , 𝑤𝑡

𝑡+1] to switch sign.

Iterating  (14) forward  and  assuming  lim𝑘→∞

= 0—as 
would be the case in any stationary environment—we ﬁnd that the equi-
librium level of swap spreads is

𝑠𝑡+𝑘

𝛿𝑘

E𝑡

[

]

Expected short-rate diﬀerentials
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
]
(1 − 𝛿)
𝑚𝑡+𝑘

∑

𝛿𝑘

E𝑡

[

∞
𝑘=0

Expected compensation for using scarce capital
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
)]
(1 − 𝛿)

𝑠𝑔𝑛

∑

[(

𝜓

(

)

)

|
| , 𝑤𝑡+𝑘

|
|𝑑𝑡+𝑘

+

E𝑡

𝛿𝑘

∑

−𝜅𝑥
(−𝛼) 𝑉𝑡+𝑘𝑑𝑡+𝑘
E𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

∞
𝑘=0
∞
𝑘=0

𝛿𝑘

+ (1 − 𝛿)

[

(
𝑑𝑡+𝑘
]

.

(15)

12 We assume Cov𝑡[𝑟𝑠
hedging terms proportional to Cov𝑡[𝑟𝑠
expressions without qualitatively changing our conclusions.

𝑡+1] = 0 for simplicity. Relaxing this assumption adds 
𝑡+1], which complicate the resulting 

, 𝑟𝑜

, 𝑟𝑜

𝑡+1

𝑡+1

Expected compensation for risk

The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of (15) is the fundamental com-
𝑡 , this is simply the 

ponent of swap spreads. Recalling that 𝑚𝑡 ≡ 𝑖𝑆

𝑡 − 𝑖𝑇

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038148S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

expected future diﬀerence between the short-term rate referenced by 
the swap (𝑖𝑆
𝑡 ) and the secured Treasury ﬁnancing rate (𝑖𝑇
𝑡 ) averaged 
over the lifetime of the swap. Under the assumption that 𝑚𝑡 > 0 almost 
surely as would be the case for LIBOR-based swaps, this fundamental 
term pushes towards having positive swap spreads. However, this term 
is (approximately) zero for SOFR swaps where 𝑚𝑡 ≡ 0.

(
𝑤𝑡, |

The second term is the expected future compensation for consum-
ing scarce intermediary capital over the life of the swap. Since 𝜓𝑡 =
𝜓
≥ 0, this term has the opposite sign of net end-user demand 
(𝑑𝑡). For instance, if the net demand to receive the ﬁxed swap rate is 
positive, this term pushes towards having negative swap spreads.

)
|
|

|𝑑𝑡

The third and ﬁnal term is the expected future compensation for 
bearing the risk associated with swap spread volatility over the life of 
the swap. Like the second term, this ﬁnal term has the opposite sign of 
net end-user demand to receive ﬁxed.

3.2.2.  Aﬃne equilibrium

To derive an aﬃne equilibrium that we can readily take to the post-

GFC data, we make two substantive economic assumptions:

A1: End-user net demand to receive the ﬁxed swap rate is always positive. 

Formally, we assume 0 < 𝑑𝑡 at all dates.

A2: Intermediaries’ leverage constraint in equation (6) always binds. For-

mally, we assume

𝑤𝑡 < 𝜅𝑜

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

+ 𝜅𝑥𝑑𝑡

at all dates, ensuring that we always have 𝜓𝑡 > 0.

Assumption A1 rules out the nonlinearities that arise if end-user net 
demand can switch signs over time. This assumption is consistent with 
prime dealers’ net positioning in long-term Treasuries and the nega-
tive swap spreads that have been observed since 2008; see Panel A of 
Fig. 1. By contrast, assumption A2 rules out the nonlinearities that arise 
if leverage constraints only bind occasionally. Below we will consider 
nonlinearities that arise if we relax A1 and/or A2.

When end-user demand is perfectly inelastic (𝛾 = 0), we require an 
additional technical assumption to ensure that market clearing is always 
feasible:

A3: Intermediaries always have suﬃcient capital to accommodate end-user 
|
| < 𝑤𝑡 at all 

demand in the swap market. Formally, we assume 𝜅𝑥
dates.

|
|𝑑𝑡

However, assumption A3 is not required when 𝛾 > 0. To ensure that 
A1, A2, and A3 (if necessary) hold, we assume that the shocks 𝜀𝑡 have 
a bounded support. Given the assumed AR(1) dynamics, this implies 
that  the  state  variables  𝐳𝑡 also  have  a  bounded  support.  And,  when 
(
𝜅𝑜𝑟𝑜
> 0, we can choose  𝑚,  𝑑, and  𝑤 so that A1, A2, and 
A3 (if necessary) hold at each point in the state space. See Internet Ap-
pendix B.3 for additional details.

(
∕ 

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

)

)

We conjecture that equilibrium swap spreads 𝑠𝑡 are an aﬃne func-

tion of the state vector 𝐳𝑡:

𝑠𝑡 = 𝐴

0 + 𝐴𝑚𝑧𝑚

𝑡 + 𝐴𝑑 𝑧𝑑

𝑡 + 𝐴𝑤𝑧𝑤
𝑡 .

(16)

Under assumptions A1, A2, A3 (if necessary), and assuming that spreads 
take the conjectured aﬃne form in (16), 𝑉 = Var𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] is constant over 
time and condition (14) becomes

E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
(

)

[

]

]

𝑠𝑡 − 𝑚𝑡

−

𝛿
1 − 𝛿 (E𝑡

𝑠𝑡+1

− 𝑠𝑡) = (−𝜅𝑥) ⋅

(

𝜓𝑡
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
)
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

+ 𝜅𝑥𝑑𝑡 − 𝑤𝑡

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

𝜅𝑜

+ (−𝛼)𝑉 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡.

(17)

A rational expectations equilibrium of our model is a ﬁxed point 
of an operator which gives the price-impact coeﬃcients 𝐴𝑚, 𝐴𝑑 , and 
𝐴𝑤 that clear the swap market when intermediaries believe the risk of 
the swap spread arbitrage trade is determined by some initial set of 
price-impact coeﬃcients. And, this can be recast as a scalar ﬁxed-point 
problem  involving  𝑉 = Var𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1].  Combining  the  conjectured  aﬃne 
form (16), the end-user demand curve (7), and the equilibrium con-
dition (17), we obtain the following result:

Theorem 1. In the aﬃne equilibrium that may exist when assumptions A1, 
A2, and A3 (if necessary) hold, we have

𝐴

0 =

𝐴𝑚 =

𝑚 − 𝜅𝑥

[

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

𝜅𝑜

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
[(

+ 𝜅𝑥𝑑 − 𝑤
)

2

𝑜 + 𝑉
𝜎2

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜

1 + 𝛼𝛾

]

]

− 𝛼𝑉 𝑑

,

𝐴𝑑 = −

1
[(

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜
)

2

] > 0,

)

2

𝑜 + 𝑉
𝜎2
]

1−𝜌𝑚𝛿
1−𝛿 + 𝛼𝛾
[(

𝛼

1−𝜌𝑑 𝛿
1−𝛿 + 𝛼𝛾
(

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜

[(

𝑜 + 𝑉
𝜎2
)
2

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜
)

2

𝜎2
𝑜

] ≤ 0,

𝑜 + 𝑉
𝜎2

𝐴𝑤 =

𝛼

1
𝜅𝑥

1−𝜌𝑤𝛿
1−𝛿 + 𝛼𝛾

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜
[(

] ≥ 0,

)

2

𝑜 + 𝑉
𝜎2

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜

and

𝑉 =

(

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

)2 (

𝐴2

𝑚𝜎2

𝑚 + 𝐴2

𝑑 𝜎2

𝑑 + 𝐴2

𝑤𝜎2
𝑤

)

≥ 0.

(18a)

(18b)

(18c)

(18d)

(19)

Equations (18b)-(18d) and (19) together deﬁne a higher-order polynomial 
equation in 𝑉 . When either 𝛾 > 0 or 𝛼𝜎2
𝑑 = 0, a solution to this equation al-
> 0, a solution only exists if intermediary 
ways exists. When 𝛾 = 0 and 𝛼𝜎2
𝑑
risk aversion 𝛼 is below a threshold 𝛼∗ > 0. When 𝛼𝜎2
𝑑 = 0, the equilibrium 
is unique. When 𝛼𝜎2
> 0, there are generally multiple solutions correspond-
𝑑
ing to multiple aﬃne equilibria. However, there is at most one equilibrium 
solution that is (i) stable in the sense that it is robust to small perturbations 
in intermediaries’ beliefs about the price impact of demand shocks and (ii) 
does not diverge in the limit where demand risk vanishes (𝜎2
𝑑

→ 0).

To provide intuition for Theorem 1, we consider a number of special 

cases.

With a positive short-term interest rate diﬀerential (𝑚𝑡 > 0 for all 
𝑡) and risk-neutral and unconstrained intermediaries (𝛼 = 𝜅𝑥 = 0), the 
model has a unique equilibrium with positive swap spreads. In this case, 
the swap spread is simply the expected short-rate diﬀerential averaged 
over the life of the swap. Moreover, if short-rate diﬀerentials vary over 
𝑚 > 0) and risk-averse but unconstrained intermediaries must ab-
time (𝜎2
sorb end-user demand shocks (𝛼 > 0, 𝜅𝑥 = 0, and 𝜎2
> 0), these demand 
𝑑
shocks will shift the required compensation for bearing swap spread 
risk. This means that spreads will also reﬂect the expected risk compen-
sation over the life of the swap. In either case, short rate diﬀerentials 
are akin to cash ﬂow fundamentals: they do not induce LoOP violations 
and have standard eﬀects on swap spreads.

Therefore, to illustrate the more novel forces at work in our model, 
we assume the short rate diﬀerential is always zero (𝑚𝑡 = 0 for all 𝑡) 
in the following examples. That is, we consider SOFR swaps where the 
LoOP oﬀers the stark prediction that swap spreads should always be 
zero. We also assume intermediaries are risk averse (𝛼 > 0), there are 
shocks to intermediary wealth (𝜎2
𝑤 > 0), and end-user demand is com-
pletely inelastic (𝛾 = 0).

When  end-user  demand  is  stochastic  (𝜎2
𝑑

> 0)  but  swap  spread 
trades do not consume scarce capital (𝜅𝑥 = 0), the model can have two 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038149S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

aﬃne equilibria: (i) a “zero-volatility” equilibrium in which SOFR swap 
spreads are always zero and (ii) a “high-volatility” equilibrium in which 
SOFR  swap  spreads  are  driven  by  ﬂuctuations  in  end-user  demand. 
This  special  case  is  similar  to  De  Long  et  al.  (1990).  When  demand 
is stochastic, the perceived risk of the swap spread trade depends on 
how intermediaries believe spreads will react to future demand shocks, 
opening the door to multiple equilibrium solutions.13 For example, if 
intermediaries believe that future demand shocks will have an impact 
on  swap  spreads,  they  will  perceive  the  swap  spread  trade  as  being 
risky.  As  a  result,  intermediaries  will  only  absorb  demand  shocks  if 
they are compensated by spread changes and positive expected returns, 
making their initial belief self-fulﬁlling. Conversely, if intermediaries 
believe demand shocks will have no impact on spreads, they will per-
ceive the swap spread trade as being riskless. As a result, intermediaries 
will elastically absorb demand shocks even though spreads are always 
zero. However, only the equilibrium in which SOFR swap spreads are al-
ways zero is (i) stable in the sense that it is robust to small perturbations 
in intermediaries’ beliefs about the price impact of demand shocks and 
(ii) does not diverge in the limit where demand risk vanishes (𝜎2
→ 0). 
𝑑
Thus, there is a clear sense in which the equilibrium where LoOP holds 
is the natural outcome in this case.

When swap spread trades consume scarce intermediary capital (𝜅𝑥 >
0) but there is no demand risk (𝜎2
𝑑 = 0), the model has a unique aﬃne 
equilibrium in which ﬂuctuations in SOFR swap spreads are driven by 
time-variation in intermediary capital. Intuitively, the shadow value of 
capital is positive (𝜓𝑡 > 0) and, since intermediaries’ (constant) swap 
spread positions consume scarce capital (𝜅𝑥 > 0), swap spreads are non-
zero and the LoOP fails.

With both demand risk (𝜎2
𝑑

> 0) and balance-sheet frictions (𝜅𝑥 > 0), 
the model can have two aﬃne equilibria—one with low swap spread 
volatility  and  one  with  higher  volatility—but  only  the  low-volatility 
equilibrium  is  stable.  However,  this  low-volatility  equilibrium  is  no 
longer trivial. In this equilibrium, intermediaries understand that bind-
ing leverage constraints will prevent them from enforcing LoOP, leading 
to non-zero SOFR swap spreads. As a result, shocks to end-user demand 
and intermediary wealth will impact future spreads, creating demand-
supply  imbalance  risk  for  which  risk-averse  intermediaries  must  be 
compensated. Thus, unlike in De Long et al. (1990), LoOP violations 
and arbitrage risk arise even in our model’s stable equilibrium.

Finally, our conclusions hold with a few modiﬁcations when end-
user demand is elastic (𝛾 > 0). When demand is elastic, an equilibrium 
always exists. And, while there can be multiple equilibria when 𝜎2
>
𝑑
0, there is a unique equilibrium that is both stable and that does not 
diverge in the limit where 𝜎2
𝑑

→ 0.14

In conclusion, our model features multiplicity due to the possibility 
of self-fulﬁlling conjectures about the price-impact of demand shocks. 
In what follows, we assume an equilibrium exists (e.g., it is suﬃcient to 
assume 𝛾 > 0) and we focus on the unique equilibrium that is stable and 
does not diverge when demand risk vanishes. In this equilibrium, swap 
spreads are less volatile and demand shocks have a smaller price impact 
as compared to the other candidate equilibria. Nevertheless, spreads are 
non-zero, which reﬂects the combined eﬀects of short rate diﬀerentials, 
binding leverage constraints, and demand-and-supply imbalance risk.

𝑚 = 0, 𝜅𝑥 = 0, and 𝜎2
𝑑

13 When 𝜎2
> 0, the system of equations reduces to a 
quadratic equation in 𝑉 . The stable solution is 𝑉 = 0 and the other solution 
> 0, the system reduces to a 
has 𝑉 > 0. More generally, when 𝛾 = 0 and 𝜎2
𝑑
quadratic in 𝑉 , which has real roots so long as 𝛼 is not too large.
14 When 𝛾 > 0, the ﬁxed-point problem is equivalent to ﬁnding the roots of 
a 7th-order polynomial in 𝑉 in the general case where 𝛼 > 0, 𝜅𝑥 > 0, 𝜎2
> 0, 
𝑑
𝑚 = 0. We can 
> 0. This reduces to 5th-order polynomial when 𝜎2
𝜎2
𝑤
show that this polynomial always has at least one positive root and it only has 
one root that is both stable and remains in the limit where 𝜎2
𝑑

> 0, and 𝜎2
𝑚

→ 0.

3.2.3.  Predictions from the aﬃne model

Since  the  post-GFC  period  will  be  the  main  focus  of  our  empiri-
cal analysis, in this section we highlight the predictions that emerge 
in the aﬃne equilibrium that obtains when end-users always demand 
to receive ﬁxed on net and intermediaries’ leverage constraint always 
binds—i.e., when assumptions A1, A2, and A3 (if necessary) hold. Fur-
𝑑 , 𝜎2
thermore, we assume that 𝛼, 𝜅𝑥, 𝜎2

𝑤 > 0.

Average level of swap spreads. Our model pinpoints the forces that de-
termine the time-series average level of swap spreads:

Proposition 1. The time-series average level of long-term swap spreads is 
given by

[

]

E

[

𝜓𝑡
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
]
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

+ 𝜅𝑥E

𝜅𝑜

𝑑𝑡

[

]

𝐴

0 = 𝑚 − 𝜅𝑥 ⋅
[
𝜓𝑡

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
]
[
𝑑𝑡
Since E
are negative on average (𝐴
ﬁes 𝑚 < 𝑚∗ for some constant 𝑚∗ > 0 that is given in the Appendix.

> 0 by assumption A1, long-term swap spreads 
< 0) if the average short rate diﬀerential satis-

> 0 and E

− 𝛼𝑉 ⋅

− 𝑤

]

0

0

]

[
E

𝑑𝑡
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
)
(
𝑑 + 𝛾𝐴
,

[

]

[

]

𝑑𝑡

[
𝜓𝑡

Just as in (15), the time-series average level of swap spreads (𝐴
0) is 
determined by three forces: the average short rate diﬀerential (𝑚), the 
average compensation for committing scarce capital to the swap spread 
trade (−𝜅𝑥 ⋅ E
), and the average compensation for bearing swap 
spread risk (−𝛼𝑉 ⋅ E
). The average spread is increasing in the aver-
age short rate diﬀerential, 𝑚, which is positive and non-negligible for 
LIBOR swaps, is negligible for OIS swaps, and is (approximately) zero 
> 0 and 
for SOFR swaps. Since assumptions A1 and A2 imply  E
> 0, the other two forces—compensation for committing scarce 
E
capital and compensation for risk—push swap spreads into negative ter-
ritory on average. Thus, our model predicts negative average spreads for 
long-dated OIS and SOFR swaps in the post-GFC era. Relative to those, 
the short rate diﬀerential will push the average level of long-dated LI-
BOR swap spreads towards positive territory. However, so long as 𝑚 is 
not too large, balance sheet and risk considerations will dominate, and 
long-dated LIBOR swap spreads will also be negative on average.

𝜓𝑡

𝑑𝑡

[

]

]

Expected returns on the swap spread trade. Our model emphasizes that 
two distinct forces—compensation for consuming scarce intermediary 
capital and compensation for bearing swap spread risk—drive the ex-
pected returns on the swap spread trade. Speciﬁcally, (17) implies the 
following result:

)

𝑡+1] = −𝜅𝑥 ⋅ 𝜓𝑡 − 𝛼𝑉 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡,  where  𝜓𝑡 =

Proposition 2. The expected return on the received-ﬁxed swap spread trade 
is  E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝛼𝜎2
+
𝑜
is the shadow value of intermediary capital. Thus, E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝜅𝑥𝑑𝑡 − 𝑤𝑡
𝑡+1] is 
decreasing in end-user demand 𝑑𝑡 (i.e., increasing in intermediaries’ position 
𝑥𝑡), even controlling for the shadow value of capital 𝜓𝑡.

(
𝜅𝑜𝑟𝑜∕ 

(
𝛼𝜎2

𝑜 ∕𝜅2
𝑜

) (

)

In equilibrium, the expected returns on the swap spread trade must 
compensate intermediaries for the opportunity cost of committing their 
scarce capital to this trade (−𝜅𝑥 ⋅ 𝜓𝑡 < 0) as well as for bearing swap 
spread risk (−𝛼𝑉 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡 < 0). As end-user demand 𝑑𝑡 to receive ﬁxed in-
creases, the expected return on the receive-ﬁxed spread trade needs to 
become more negative to induce intermediaries to take a larger short 
position in this trade. Furthermore, since intermediaries require com-
pensation for bearing swap spread risk, this is true even after controlling 
for ﬂuctuations in the compensation that they require for using their 
scarce capital.

The model also characterizes the eﬀects that shifts in the three un-
𝑡 ),  end-user 
𝑡 )—have on expected returns 

derlying  structural  factors—the  short  rate  diﬀerential  (𝑧𝑚
demand (𝑧𝑑
E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

𝑡+1]. Using Theorem 1, we obtain the following results:

𝑡 ), and intermediary capital (𝑧𝑤

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381410S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Proposition 3. The expected return on the receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade 
is

E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

𝑡+1] = 𝐵
0 = 𝐴

where 𝐵
𝐵𝑤 = 1−𝜌𝑤𝛿
1−𝛿
𝛾 > 0.

0 + 𝐵𝑚𝑧𝑚
𝑡 + 𝐵𝑑 𝑧𝑑
𝑡 + 𝐵𝑤𝑧𝑤
𝑡 ,
0 − 𝑚 < 0, 𝐵𝑚 = 1−𝛿𝜌𝑚
𝐴𝑚 − 1 ≤ 0, 𝐵𝑑 = 1−𝜌𝑑 𝛿
𝐴𝑑 < 0, and 
1−𝛿
1−𝛿
𝐴𝑤 > 0. Furthermore, 𝐵𝑚 = 0 when 𝛾 = 0 but 𝐵𝑚 < 0 when 

(20)

To see the intuition, it is easiest to ﬂip the sign and think about 
the expected returns on the pay-ﬁxed swap spread position (−E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1]) 
that intermediaries hold in equilibrium under assumption A1. To begin, 
Proposition 3 says that the expected returns on this pay-ﬁxed spread 
trade are positive on average (−𝐵
𝑡+1] > 0). Next, outward shifts 
in end-user demand to receive ﬁxed raise the expected returns on the 
pay-ﬁxed  spread  trade  because  they  raise  both  the  shadow  value  of 
intermediary capital and the required compensation for bearing swap 
spread risk:

0 = −E[𝑟𝑠

−𝐵𝑑 = −

𝑡+1]

𝜕E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝜕𝑧𝑑
𝑡

= 𝜅𝑥 ⋅

𝑡 >0

𝜕𝜓𝑡∕𝜕𝑧𝑑
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

𝜅𝑥(1 + 𝛾𝐴𝑑 ) + 𝛼𝑉 ⋅

𝜕𝑑𝑡∕𝜕𝑧𝑑
𝑡 >0
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
(1 + 𝛾𝐴𝑑 ) > 0.

By contrast, shifts in intermediary wealth move the shadow value of in-
termediary capital and the compensation for risk in opposite directions. 
However,  the  former  eﬀect  always  dominates,  implying  that  wealth 
shocks decrease the expected returns on the pay-ﬁxed spread trade:

−𝐵𝑤 = −

𝜕E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1]
𝜕𝑧𝑤
𝑡

= 𝜅𝑥 ⋅

𝑡 <0

𝜕𝜓𝑡∕𝜕𝑧𝑤
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

(𝜅𝑥𝛾𝐴𝑤 − 1) + 𝛼𝑉 ⋅

𝜕𝑑𝑡∕𝜕𝑧𝑤
𝑡 >0
⏞⏞⏞
𝛾𝐴𝑤 < 0.

Finally, when end-user demand is inelastic (𝛾 = 0), changes in the short-
rate diﬀerential 𝑚𝑡 do not alter E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] even though they impact swap 
cash ﬂows (𝐵𝑚 = 0). However, when end-user demand is elastic (𝛾 > 0), 
increases in 𝑚𝑡 raise swap spreads and hence end-user demand to re-
ceive  ﬁxed.  As  a  result,  an  increase  in  𝑚𝑡 must  be  accompanied  by 
higher expected return on the pay-ﬁxed spread trade to induce inter-
mediaries to accommodate this demand (−𝐵𝑚 > 0).

Identiﬁcation of demand and supply shocks. Our aﬃne model provides 
sign restrictions that can help us identify the structural demand (𝜀𝑑
𝑡 ) 
and supply (𝜀𝑤
𝑡 ) shocks using data on the short rate diﬀerential (𝑚𝑡), 
the level of swap spreads (𝑠𝑡), and end-users’ net position in swaps (𝑑𝑡). 
In particular, we obtain the following result:

Proposition 4. The short rate diﬀerential 𝑚𝑡, the long-term swap spread 𝑠𝑡, 
and end users’ net position in receive-ﬁxed swaps 𝑑𝑡 can be written as

𝐲𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
𝑚𝑡
⎡
⎤
⎢
⎥
𝑠𝑡
⎢
⎥
𝑑𝑡
⎣
⎦

=

𝐚
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
⎡
⎤
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦

𝑚
𝐴
(
0
𝑑 + 𝛾𝐴

)

0

+

𝐀
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
⎡
⎤
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦

0
𝐴𝑑
1 + 𝛾𝐴𝑑

0
𝐴𝑤
𝛾𝐴𝑤

1
𝐴𝑚
𝛾𝐴𝑚

(

)

𝐳𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
𝑧𝑚
⎡
⎤
𝑡
⎢
⎥
𝑧𝑑
⎢
⎥
𝑡
⎢
⎥
𝑧𝑤
⎣
⎦
𝑡

.

(21)

)

Combined with (8), the structural VAR representation of the model’s equi-
librium is
(
𝐈 − 𝐀𝜚𝐀−1

𝐚 + 𝐀𝜚𝐀−1𝐲𝑡 + 𝐀𝜀𝑡+1,

𝐲𝑡+1 =
where 𝐈 is the 3 × 3 identity matrix and 𝜀𝑡+1 = [𝜀𝑚
𝑡+1
𝐴𝑚 > 0, 𝐴𝑑 < 0, 𝐴𝑤 > 0, and 
we also have 𝛾𝐴𝑚 > 0 and 𝛾𝐴𝑤 > 0.

(
1 + 𝛾𝐴𝑑

(22)
, 𝜀𝑤
𝑡+1]′. We have 
> 0. Moreover, assuming 𝛾 > 0, 

, 𝜀𝑑

𝑡+1

)

Proposition 4 implies that the matrix  𝐀 of structural VAR coeﬃ-
cients can be identiﬁed using a combination of sign and zero restric-
tions. To see the intuition most simply, suppose that  𝑚𝑡 = 0 always. 

Assumptions A1 and A2 then imply that we always have 𝑠𝑡 < 0 and we 
can think of |
|
| > 0 as the price that end users pay intermediaries to 
|𝑠𝑡
supply receive-ﬁxed swaps. Rewriting (7) and (17), end-users’ inverse 
demand function for receive-ﬁxed swaps is

|
|𝑠𝑡

𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑
|
|

= 𝛾 −1

(
𝑑 + 𝑧𝑑

)

𝑡 − 𝑑𝑡

,

and intermediaries’ inverse supply function for receive-ﬁxed swaps is

|
|𝑠𝑡

𝑆𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑦
|
|

= (1 − 𝛿)

[𝜅𝑥 ⋅

|
|E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
|
𝑡+1
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞

|
|
]
|

(

𝜅𝑜

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

+ 𝜅𝑥𝑑𝑡 − 𝑤 − 𝑧𝑤
𝑡

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝜓𝑡

)

+𝛼𝑉 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡]

+ 𝛿E𝑡

]

[

|
|𝑠𝑡+1

|
|

[

|
|

]
|
|

𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑
|
|

|
|𝑠𝑡+1
)

.
Thus,  end-user  demand  is  downward-sloping  (𝜕 |
|𝑠𝑡
∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 < 0) 
and, holding E𝑡
ﬁxed, intermediaries’ supply is upward-sloping 
𝑆𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑦
|
(𝜕 |
∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 > 0). Equilibrium occurs where these two curves inter-
|𝑠𝑡
|
(
𝑑𝑡, |
|𝑠𝑡
sect in the 
An  increase  in  𝑧𝑑

space.
𝑡 shifts  end-users’  demand  curve  outward.  Since 
intermediaries’ supply curve is upward sloping, this increase in 𝑧𝑑
is 
𝑡
associated with a rise in both 𝑑𝑡 and |
|
|. Similarly, an increase in 𝑧𝑤
|𝑠𝑡
𝑡
shifts intermediaries’ supply curve outward. Since end-user demand is 
downward sloping, this increase in 𝑧𝑤
is associated with a rise in 𝑑𝑡 and 
𝑡
a decline in |
|
|𝑠𝑡
|. In our empirical work, we use this textbook demand-
and-supply logic to set-identify the structural demand (𝜀𝑑
𝑡 ) and supply 
(𝜀𝑤
𝑡 ) shocks. Speciﬁcally, if there are positive (negative) innovations to 
both 𝑑𝑡 and |
|
|𝑠𝑡
|, then there must have been a positive (negative) shock 
to end-user demand (𝜀𝑑
𝑡 ). Conversely, if there is positive (negative) in-
|
novation to 𝑑𝑡 and a negative (positive) innovation to |
|𝑠𝑡
|, there must 
have been a positive (negative) shock to intermediary supply (𝜀𝑤
𝑡 ).

3.2.4.  Allowing for nonlinearities

In Internet Appendix B.3, we provide a more general characteriza-
tion of swap spreads based on equations (14) and (15) that allows for 
nonlinearities. For simplicity, we focus on the case where swaps have 
zero fundamental value (𝑚𝑡 ≡ 0) and where end-user demand for swaps 
is  inelastic  (𝛾 = 0),  so  there  are  just  two  exogenous  state  variables: 
end-user demand (𝑑𝑡) to receive the ﬁxed swap rate and intermediary 
(
𝑑𝑡, 𝑤𝑡
wealth (𝑤𝑡). We let 𝑠𝑡 = 𝑠 
denote the equilibrium level of swap 
(
spreads, E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
the expected return 
on the receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade, and 𝑉𝑡 ≡Var𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] = 𝑉 (𝑑𝑡, 𝑤𝑡)
the corresponding conditional variance.

𝑡+1] = 𝑠𝑡 − (𝛿∕ (1 − 𝛿))

𝑠𝑡+1

− 𝑠𝑡

E𝑡

)

)

[

]

|𝑑𝑡

Two features of our general model can give rise to nonlinearities. 
First,  intermediaries’  balance  sheet  constraint  is  itself  nonlinear,  de-
pending on |
|
| instead of 𝑑𝑡: this is relevant if end-user demand—and 
hence the balance-sheet cost of intermediating swaps—can switch signs. 
Second, intermediaries’ balance sheet constraint may not always bind. 
This means that the risk of the swap spread trade is time-varying. The 
aﬃne equilibrium that we emphasized in the prior section arises when 
we make simplifying assumptions that switch oﬀ both of these features, 
namely, that (A1) end-user demand is always positive and (A2) inter-
mediaries’ balance-sheet constraint is always binding.

In Internet Appendix B.3, we characterize a number of important 

special cases of this (potentially) nonlinear model:

• Case 1: When both A1 and A2 hold, we obtain Theorem 1 above. 
Speciﬁcally,  𝑠𝑡 and  E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] are  aﬃne  functions  of  𝑑𝑡 and  𝑤𝑡
and  𝑉𝑡 = 𝑉 is  constant.  Furthermore,  we  have  𝜕𝑠𝑡∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 = 𝐴𝑑 <
0 and  𝜕E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1]∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 ∝ 𝐴𝑑 < 0,  whereas  𝜕𝑠𝑡∕𝜕𝑤𝑡 = 𝐴𝑤 > 0 and 
𝜕E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

𝑡+1]∕𝜕𝑤𝑡 ∝ 𝐴𝑤 > 0.

• Case 2: When we relax A2 but maintain A1—i.e., if intermediaries’ 
balance-sheet constraint can be slack, but end-user demand is al-
]
, and 𝑉𝑡 are non-linear functions 
ways positive—then 𝑠𝑡, E𝑡

[

𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381411]

[
𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1

∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 < 0 and 

3.3.  The term structure of swap spreads

S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

that satisfy 𝜕𝑠𝑡∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 < 0 and 𝜕𝑠𝑡∕𝜕𝑤𝑡 > 0; 𝜕E𝑡

]

[
𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1

∕𝜕𝑤𝑡 > 0; and, ﬁnally, 𝜕𝑉𝑡∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 > 0 and 𝜕𝑉𝑡∕𝜕𝑤𝑡 < 0.

𝜕E𝑡
Intuitively,  even  if  leverage  constraints  are  not  binding  at  time 
𝑡, the mere potential for them to bind in the future makes swap 
spread trades risky for intermediaries, and they will only accommo-
date end-user demand for long-term swaps if they are compensated 
for this risk (i.e., we have 𝑉𝑡 > 0 even when 𝜓𝑡 = 0). Furthermore, 
even if the constraint is currently slack, ﬂuctuations in end-user 
demand and intermediary capital will shape the likelihood that the 
constraint will bind in the future and hence the current level of 
spreads.
Thus, the only qualitative diﬀerence between Case 2 and the aﬃne 
model of Case 1 is that the risk of the swap spread trade now ﬂuc-
tuates endogenously as a function of 𝑑𝑡 and 𝑤𝑡. Speciﬁcally, swap 
spreads  become  more  volatile  when  it  is  more  likely  that  inter-
mediary  constraints  will  bind  in  the  future,  explaining  why  the 
variance is increasing in end-user demand (𝑑𝑡) and decreasing in 
intermediary wealth (𝑤𝑡). This endogenous-risk eﬀect adds a fur-
ther channel through which increases in current end-user demand 
(or reductions in intermediary wealth) raise the expected returns 
on  the  swap  spread  trade  and,  hence,  the  current  level  of  swap 
spreads.

]

]

[

]

)

; 𝜕E𝑡

∕𝜕𝑤𝑡

𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1

(
𝑑𝑡
= 𝑠𝑔𝑛 
)

• Case  3:  The  solution  can  also  be  characterized  rigorously  if  we 
relax  both  A1  and  A2,  but  make  the  model  symmetric  by  as-
suming  that  the  steady-state  level  of  end-user  demand  is  zero 
(𝑑 = 0). When 𝑑 = 0, the sign of demand may switch over time, 
but  the  expected  sign  of  future  demand  is  always  the  same  as 
the sign of current demand, making the model quite tractable. In 
,  and  𝑉𝑡 are  non-linear  functions  that  sat-
this  case,  𝑠𝑡,  E𝑡
)

[
𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1
(
𝜕𝑉𝑡∕𝜕𝑑𝑡
; and, ﬁnally, 𝑠𝑔𝑛 

(
isfy 𝜕𝑠𝑡∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 < 0 and 𝑠𝑔𝑛 
𝜕𝑠𝑡∕𝜕𝑤𝑡
)
[
(
= 𝑠𝑔𝑛 
𝑑𝑡

(
𝑟𝑠
𝜕E𝑡
and 𝑠𝑔𝑛 
𝑡+1
)
(
𝑠𝑔𝑛 
and 𝜕𝑉𝑡∕𝜕𝑤𝑡 < 0.
𝑑𝑡
Relative to Case 2, there is an additional source of non-linearity 
due to the fact that end-user demand can switch signs. This means 
(
that 𝑠𝑔𝑛 
𝑠𝑡
, and explains why the 
impact of intermediary wealth on expected returns and spreads de-
pends on the sign of end-user demand. Furthermore, as in Case 2
above, swap spreads become more volatile when it is more likely 
that  constraints  will  bind  in  the  future.  Since  the  constraint  de-
pends on |
|
| and we assume 𝑑 = 0, this explains why variance is 
decreasing in end-user demand when 𝑑𝑡 < 0 and increasing in end-
user demand when 𝑑𝑡 > 0.

(
= −𝑠𝑔𝑛 
𝑑𝑡

(
= 𝑠𝑔𝑛 

[
𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1

∕𝜕𝑑𝑡 < 0

|𝑑𝑡

])

E𝑡

=

)

)

)

Internet Appendix B.3 includes several more general results about 
this (potentially) nonlinear model. Overall, the key qualitative predic-
tions of our aﬃne model, including Propositions 1, 2, and 3 (as well as 
Proposition 7 in Internet Appendix B.1) generalize naturally once we al-
low for nonlinearities. While a non-linear version of our identiﬁcation 
argument in Proposition 4 holds in Case 2, separately identifying the im-
pact of demand and supply becomes more complicated when end-user 
demand can switch signs. For instance, in Case 3, a non-linear version 
of the identiﬁcation argument in Proposition 4 only hold once one con-
(
ditions on 𝑠𝑔𝑛 

.15

𝑑𝑡

)

Thus far, we have modeled the spread on a single perpetual long-
term swap. To derive predictions for the full term structure of swap 
spreads, in Internet Appendix B.4 we extend our model by introduc-
ing  a  series  of  𝑛-period  zero-coupon  swaps  alongside  this  perpetual 
swap.16 As above, intermediaries must accommodate non-zero end-user 
demand for the perpetual swap. To close the model in a simple way, we 
take the limit as net end-user demand for each of these zero-coupon 
swaps goes to zero from above—i.e., we consider the case where end-
users have a positive, but inﬁnitesimal demand to receive ﬁxed on all 
zero-coupon swaps. As a result, this extension does not change inter-
mediaries’ portfolios, so our prior results for the perpetual swap spread 
(𝑠𝑡) are unchanged by construction. For simplicity, we further assume 
that swap spread trades of all maturities consume the same amount of 
intermediary capital per unit of notional exposure.

Using this approach, we can derive the full term structure of swap 
spreads  {𝑠(𝑛)
𝑛=1 from  intermediaries’  ﬁrst-order  conditions.  Speciﬁ-
cally, we generalize (15) to obtain the following expression for 𝑛-period 
swap spreads:

𝑡 }𝑁

Expected short-rate diﬀerentials
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞

𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡 =

𝑛−1

∑𝑛−1
𝑘=0

E𝑡[𝑚𝑡+𝑘] +

𝑛−1

Expected compensation for using scarce capital
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
)
)

−𝜅𝑥

𝜓

(
|
|𝑑𝑡+𝑘

|
| , 𝑤𝑡+𝑘

]

∑𝑛−1
𝑘=0

(
E𝑡[

+

𝑛−1

(23)

𝑑𝑡+𝑘],

Expected compensation for risk
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
∑𝑛−1
(−𝛼) E𝑡[(𝑛−𝑘)
𝑡+𝑘
𝑘=0
𝑡 − (𝑛 − 1) 𝑠(𝑛−1)
≡ 𝑛𝑠(𝑛)
where 𝑟𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡+1 − 𝑚𝑡 is the excess return on an 𝑛-period 
𝑡+1
swap spread trade and (𝑛)
𝑡 ≡Cov𝑡[𝑟𝑠(𝑛)
, 𝑠𝑡+1]
𝑡+1
is the covariance between the returns on the 𝑛-period spread trade and 
the perpetual spread trade. The 𝑛-period swap spread equals the ex-
pected short-rate diﬀerential, the expected compensation for consuming 
scarce intermediary capital, and the expected compensation for bearing 
swap spread risk, each averaged over the next 𝑛 periods. Relative to 
(15), the only substantive change is that the compensation for risk now 
depends on how the returns on this zero-coupon swap will covary with 
those on perpetual swaps over time.

1−𝛿 Cov𝑡[𝑠(𝑛−1)

, 𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1]= (𝑛−1)

𝑡+1

𝛿

Spreads on 1-period swaps are an interesting and important special 
case. In particular, since 1-period swaps are riskless contracts, we have 
(1)
𝑡 = 0 and the 1-period swap spread depends only the current short 
rate diﬀerential and the current shadow value of intermediary capital:

(

)

|
|𝑑𝑡

|
| , 𝑤𝑡

.

𝑠(1)
𝑡 = 𝑚𝑡 − 𝜅𝑥𝜓
Combining  (23) and  (24),  we  can  write  the  𝑛-period  spread  as  the 
expected 1-period spread averaged over time plus a term reﬂecting com-
pensation for risk:

(24)

Future expected short-term spreads
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞

𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡 =

𝑛−1

∑𝑛−1
𝑘=0

E𝑡[𝑠(1)
𝑡+𝑘]

+

Expected compensation for risk
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
∑𝑛−1
𝑘=0

(−𝛼) E𝑡[(𝑛−𝑘)

𝑑𝑡+𝑘].

𝑛−1

𝑡

(25)

Furthermore, under assumptions A1, A2, and A3 (if necessary), 𝑛-

period spreads take the aﬃne form

𝑡 = 𝐴(𝑛)
𝑠(𝑛)

0 + 𝐴(𝑛)

𝑚 𝑧𝑚

𝑡 + 𝐴(𝑛)

𝑑

𝑡 + 𝐴(𝑛)
𝑧𝑑

𝑤 𝑧𝑤
𝑡 ,

(26)

15 Nonlinear versions of our model, which relax A1 or A2, may also prove 
useful in thinking about the term structure of Law of One Price deviations in 
other settings—e.g., the bond-CDS basis or deviations from covered interest 
rate parity (CIP). For the bond-CDS basis, we suspect that the sign of intermedi-
aries’ positions have been constant over time—i.e., intermediaries are long cash 
bonds and short CDS—but that intermediaries’ constraints may sometimes be 
slack. However, for the CIP deviations, the ﬁndings in Du et al. (2018)—i.e., 
the fact that CIP deviations appear to be correlated with short rate diﬀeren-

tials across currencies—suggest that it may be useful to relax A1, thus allowing 
intermediary positions to switch sign over time. Ultimately, however, it is an 
empirical question whether A1 and A2 hold in a given setting.
16 The ﬂoating-rate payments on a zero-coupon swap are made periodically 
over time, but there is just a single pre-determined ﬁxed-rate payment at the 
maturity of the swap. A zero-coupon swap spread is the diﬀerence between this 
zero-coupon swap yield and the zero-coupon Treasury yield with the same ma-
turity.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381412S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

that we characterize in Internet Appendix B.4. Using the resulting aﬃne 
model,  we  derive  several  properties  of  the  term  structure  of  swap 
spreads in Internet Appendix B.4. We provide the following character-
ization of the “global” slope of the swap spread curve, deﬁned as the 
diﬀerence between the spread on the perpetual swap (𝑠𝑡) and the spread 
on 1-period swaps (𝑠(1)

𝑡 ).

Proposition 5. The global slope of the swap spread curve is given by

𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)

𝑡 = (𝐴

0 − 𝐴(1)

0 ) + (𝐴𝑚 − 𝐴(1)

𝑚 )𝑧𝑚

𝑡 + (𝐴𝑑 − 𝐴(1)

𝑑 )𝑧𝑑

𝑡 + (𝐴𝑤 − 𝐴(1)

𝑤 )𝑧𝑤
𝑡 .

[

]

(27)

𝑡

0 − 𝐴(1)

] = −𝛼𝑉 E

0 = E[𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)

We have 𝐴
< 0; i.e., the term structure 
of swap spreads slopes downward on average. Furthermore, 𝐴𝑚 − 𝐴(1)
𝑚 < 0
and 𝐴𝑤 − 𝐴(1)
𝑤 < 0, so increases in short-rate diﬀerentials and intermediary 
wealth each make the spread curve more downward-sloping. Finally, 𝐴𝑑 −
𝐴(1)
𝑑

< 0 as long as swap spread risk 𝑉 is suﬃciently large:

𝑑𝑡

(

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

1 − 𝜌𝑑

)
2

(

)

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜

𝑜 < 𝑉 .
𝜎2

(28)

]

[

𝑑𝑡

Proposition 5 states that, when end-user demand to receive the ﬁxed 
> 0), long-maturity swap spreads are lower 
swap rate is positive (E
than short-maturity spreads on average. This downward-sloping spread 
curve reﬂects the average compensation for risk that swap intermedi-
aries earn for supplying receive-ﬁxed swaps (E[𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
<
𝑡
0). Thus, when 𝑚 > 0 as in the case of LIBOR-based swaps, the model al-
lows for positive average spreads on short-maturity swaps and negative 
average spreads on long-maturity swaps.

] = −𝛼𝑉 E

𝑑𝑡

[

]

Proposition 5 says  that  shocks  to  both  short-rate  diﬀerentials 
(𝑚𝑡) and intermediary wealth (𝑤𝑡) push up short-dated spreads more 
than long-dated spreads. The intuition follows from the expectations-
hypothesis style logic of (25). Speciﬁcally, shocks to 𝑚𝑡 and 𝑤𝑡 largely 
impact longer-dated swap spreads by shifting the expected path of 1-
period swap spreads. (Indeed, when demand is inelastic (𝛾 = 0), shocks 
to 𝑚𝑡 and 𝑤𝑡 only shift the ﬁrst term in (25).) Since both shocks are 
mean-reverting,  they  are  expected  to  have  a  temporary  impact  on 
1-period  spreads.  As  a  result,  these  shocks  have  a  larger  impact  on 
short-dated spreads than on longer-dated spreads. By contrast, demand 
shocks necessarily impact both terms in (25). However, so long as swap 
spread risk is suﬃciently high, demand shocks primarily impact long-
dated swap spreads by shifting the expected compensation for bearing 
swap spread risk, implying that demand shocks have a greater impact 
on long-dated spreads.

Because the slope of the swap spread curve depends on the com-
pensation for bearing swap spread risk, it has predictive power for the 
term structure of returns on swap spread positions. Speciﬁcally, we ob-
tain the following result, which is the swap spread analog of the Fama 
and Bliss (1987) and Campbell and Shiller (1991) result that long-term 
bonds  are  expected  to  outperform  short-term  bonds  when  the  yield 
curve is steep:

Proposition 6. If swap spread risk 𝑉 is suﬃciently large, a larger slope of 
the swap spread curve predicts that longer-maturity swap spread trades will 
outperform short-maturity trades. Speciﬁcally, the slope coeﬃcient from the 
forecasting regression
𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑠(1)
𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1 = 𝑎 + 𝑏 ⋅ (𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
satisﬁes 𝑏 > 0 so long as (28) holds.

) + 𝑒𝑡+1,

(29)

𝑡

Intuitively, when 𝑉 is large, both E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑠(1)
decreasing  in  end-user  demand  𝑑𝑡.  Indeed,  E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
decreasing in 𝑑𝑡 since E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
positive  time-series  association  between  𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
𝑡

𝑡+1 ] and 𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
are 
𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑠(1)
𝑡+1 ] is  always 
𝑡+1 ] = −𝛼𝑉 𝑑𝑡. As a result, there is a 
𝑡+1 ]. 

𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑠(1)

𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑠(1)

and  E𝑡[𝑟𝑠

𝑡

𝑑 = 0.

Furthermore, this forecasting relationship disappears if 𝑑𝑡 and, hence, 
the compensation for risk are constant over time—i.e., if 𝛾 = 𝜎2

𝑡

< 0 for larger 𝑛. 𝐴(𝑛)

Internet Appendix B.4 provides a range of additional results on the 
term structure of swap spreads. In particular, we can also character-
ize the local behavior of the swap spread curve—i.e., how 𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡 − 𝑠(𝑛−1)
behaves as a function of 𝑛—in the limit where end-user demand is com-
pletely  inelastic  (𝛾 = 0).  We  ﬁnd  that  𝐴(𝑛)
is  decreasing  in  maturity 
0
𝑛—i.e., on average, the swap spread curve is locally downward-sloping 
at all maturities. When 𝑚 = 𝐸[𝑚𝑡] ≥ 0 is suﬃciently small, 𝐴(𝑛)
< 0 for 
0
all 𝑛. When 𝑚 is suﬃciently large, 𝐴(𝑛)
> 0 for all 𝑛. In the interme-
0
diate  case  where  𝑚 is  moderately  positive,  𝐴(𝑛)
> 0 for  small  𝑛 and 
0
𝐴(𝑛)
𝑚 reﬂects variation in the expected future short 
0
rate diﬀerentials (𝑚𝑡) over the life of the swap and, thus, is positive and 
locally downward-sloping across maturities 𝑛. 𝐴(𝑛)
𝑤 reﬂects variation in 
the  impact  of  intermediary  wealth  on  expected  future  balance  sheet 
costs (−𝜅𝑥𝜓𝑡) over the life of the swap and, thus, is positive and locally 
downward-sloping across maturities 𝑛. 𝐴(𝑛)
𝑑 is negative for all maturities 
𝑛 and reﬂects both the (i) expected balance sheet costs and (ii) compen-
sation for risk over the life of the swap. When the volatility of swap 
spreads is suﬃciently low, (i) dominates and 𝐴(𝑛)
is an increasing func-
𝑑
tion of maturity 𝑛. When the volatility of swap spreads is higher, (ii) 
dominates. In this case, 𝐴(𝑛)
is downward-sloping across maturities 𝑛
𝑑
when 𝜌𝑑 is suﬃciently high and is a U-shaped function of maturity 𝑛
when 𝜌𝑑 is lower. By continuity, this characterization remains valid so 
long as the demand elasticity 𝛾 is not too large.

4.  Evidence

4.1.  Data and measurement

We use two main types of time-series data in our empirical analysis: 
data on swap spreads and data that we use to proxy for intermediaries’ 
net positions in the swap spread trade. Our main dataset is weekly and 
runs from July 2001 to June 2020.

Swap spreads. We obtain ﬁxed rates for plain-vanilla LIBOR swaps, 
OIS  swaps,  and  SOFR  swaps  from  Bloomberg  and  constant  maturity 
Treasury yields from the Federal Reserve’s H.15 Statistical Release. Data 
availability varies by swap product and maturity. For instance, we have 
data on 30-year LIBOR swap rates over our full sample, but data on 
30-year OIS and SOFR swap rates only become available in September 
2011 and December 2018, respectively. We compute swap spreads as 
the diﬀerence between the ﬁxed swap rate and the constant maturity 
Treasury yield with the same maturity. We obtain 3-month LIBOR, the 
3-month OIS rate, and the rate on 3-month Treasury general collateral 
repurchase agreements (GC repo) from Bloomberg.

Following Boyarchenko et al. (2020), we compute the ℎ-week cu-
mulative returns on the spread trade involving 𝑛-year LIBOR swaps as:

𝑟𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ =

ℎ−1∑

𝑘=0

Carry
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
1
52

(𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡+𝑘 − (𝑖𝐿𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅
𝑡+𝑘

− 𝑖𝑅𝐸𝑃 𝑂
𝑡+𝑘

[

))−

Mark-to-market loss
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝑡+𝑘+1 − 𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡+𝑘 × (𝑠(𝑛)
𝐷𝑉 01(𝑛)

𝑡+𝑘)],

(30)

where  𝑠(𝑛)
− 𝑖𝑅𝐸𝑃 𝑂
in  the  𝑛-year  LIBOR  swap  spread,  𝑖𝐿𝐼𝐵𝑂𝑅
is  the 
𝑡
𝑡
diﬀerence between 3-month LIBOR and GC repo, and 𝐷𝑉 01(𝑛)
is the 
𝑡
dollar value of a basis point for this trade—i.e., the sensitivity of the 
position’s mark-to-market value to changes in the swap spread.17 The 
term in square brackets in (30) is the 1-week spread trade return from 

𝑡

17 The DV01 for a 𝑛-year swap spread trade is the 𝑛-year annuity factor (di-
vided by 10, 000). Assuming the ﬁxed swap leg is paid semi-annually, 𝐷𝑉 01(𝑛)
𝑡 ≡
is the 𝑛-year swap yield. Technically, the 
(1∕2)
𝐷𝑉 01s for the Treasury and swap legs of the spread trade will diﬀer slightly 

𝑡 ∕2)−𝑖 where 𝑌 (𝑛)

2𝑛
𝑖=1(1 + 𝑌 (𝑛)

∑

𝑡

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381413S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

week 𝑡 + 𝑘 to 𝑡 + 𝑘 + 1. As in (3), this weekly return is the sum of a 
carry component known at 𝑡 + 𝑘 and a mark-to-market component that 
depends on the change in swap spreads from 𝑡 + 𝑘 to 𝑡 + 𝑘 + 1. The ℎ-
week cumulative return from 𝑡 to 𝑡 + ℎ, 𝑟𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ, is the sum of the next ℎ
weekly returns after time 𝑡. We focus on ℎ = 13-week and ℎ = 52-week 
returns in our empirical tests—i.e., 3- and 12-month returns.

We  primarily  focus  on  the  30-year  LIBOR  swap  spread.  The  30-
year swap spread corresponds closely to the long-term arbitrage spread 
in our model. Intermediaries who take spread positions using 30-year 
swaps both consume scarce capital and face the risk of suﬀering signif-
icant short-term mark-to-market losses if spreads move against them. 
Moreover,  30-year  LIBOR  swaps  are  a  major  source  of  duration  for 
end users (Klingler and Sundaresan, 2019). However, we also exam-
ine shorter-dated swap spreads and the associated spread trade returns.

Intermediaries’ swap spread positions. Data on intermediaries’ posi-
tions in the swap spread trade are not directly available. However, we 
can use primary dealers’ net position in Treasury securities to proxy for 
the scale of their net swap spread trade position. Broker-dealers are crit-
ical intermediaries in the swap market (TBAC, 2021). However, dealers 
have minimal net exposure to changes in the overall level of long-term 
interest rates.18 In particular, while dealers accommodate net end-user 
demand  to  either  receive  or  pay  the  ﬁxed  swap  rate,  they  typically 
take oﬀsetting positions in Treasuries to hedge the resulting interest-
rate risk. Thus, primary dealers’ net position in Treasuries—especially 
those maturing in more than one year—is a hedge that partially mirrors 
their net position in receive-ﬁxed interest rate swaps.

To construct our measure of primary dealers’ net position, we down-
load weekly data on primary dealers’ aggregate positions in Treasury 
securities from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website. These 
weekly  aggregates  are  derived  from  Form  A  of  the  FR2004  reports 
(the Primary Government Securities Dealers Reports) that primary deal-
ers  are  required  to  ﬁle  with  the  Federal  Reserve  and  which  contain 
detailed dealers’ positions as of market-close each Wednesday. Form 
FR2004 underwent a signiﬁcant revision in July 2001, which is why 
our main sample begins at that time. Dealers’ net Treasury position, 
denoted PD-UST-Net𝑡, is calculated as the diﬀerence between the mar-
ket values of dealers’ long and short Treasury positions. We focus on 
nominal coupon-bearing Treasury securities—which are most likely to 
be tied to swap spread positions—and exclude Treasury bills, TIPS, and 
FRNs. We will sometimes write ̂𝑥𝑡 = −1×PD-UST-Net𝑡 to emphasize that 
−1×PD-UST-Net𝑡 is our proxy for the scale of dealers’ net position in the 
receive-ﬁxed swap spread trade. By market clearing, this means that 
̂𝑑𝑡 = PD-UST-Net𝑡 is our proxy for end-user’s net demand to receive the 
ﬁxed swap rate.

Consistent  with  the  logic  of  our  measurement  approach,  primary 
dealers’ net Treasury positions do not appear to be tightly linked to 
their  net  exposure  to  interest-rate  risk.  To  demonstrate  this,  we  ob-
tain the value-weighted (by book equity) average of primary dealers’ 
interest-rate Value-at-Risk from Anderson and Liu (2021). The correla-
tion between weekly changes in primary dealers’ net Treasury position 
and  changes  in  their  interest-rate  Value-at-Risk  is  just  0.05 between 
2001 and 2018 and 0.08 between 2009 and 2018. The fact that there 
is little relationship between dealers’ net Treasury position and their 
interest-rate Value-at-Risk suggests that these Treasury positions largely 
hedge interest-rate exposures stemming from their positions in interest 
rate swaps and other ﬁxed-income instruments.

That said, we recognize that PD-UST-Net𝑡 is a noisy proxy for the 
scale of dealers’ swap spread positions; a variety of other factors also 

because the Treasury and swap yields diﬀer. Accounting for this small discrep-
ancy has almost no impact on our results, so we have chosen to use the simpler 
deﬁnition of returns in (30).
18 For instance, O’Brien and Berkowitz (2007) show that the variation in deal-
ers’ trading revenues from interest-rate risk exposure is small relative to the 
variation in total trading revenues, which also includes fees and spreads.

aﬀect dealers’ net Treasury position. For instance, primary dealers play 
a role in intermediating Treasury auctions, absorbing some portion of 
new Treasury issuance into short-term inventory and distributing these 
securities to end investors over time (Fleming and Rosenberg, 2008). 
In recent years, the eﬀective quantity of Treasury issuance that deal-
ers must intermediate has also been impacted by the Federal Reserve’s 
Large-Scale Asset Purchase policies (i.e., Quantitative Easing), which 
are regularly implemented by adjusting the amount that the Federal 
Reserve purchases at auctions. Furthermore, dealers use Treasuries to 
hedge their inventories of a variety of other ﬁxed-income instruments 
beyond swaps, especially their corporate bonds inventories. However, 
since we typically use PD-UST-Net𝑡 as an independent variable in our re-
gression speciﬁcations, measurement error will generally attenuate our 
ﬁndings, biasing us against ﬁnding a signiﬁcant relationship between 
PD-UST-Net𝑡 and swap spreads or swap spread trade returns. Indeed, 
our results are strongest when we control for other factors—e.g., the 
gross quantity of Treasury issuance—that are unrelated to the scale of 
dealers’ swap spread positions but that independently aﬀect PD-UST-
Net𝑡.

Additional data. In addition to data on their Treasury positions, we col-
lect data on primary dealers’ net positions in corporate debt securities 
from the FR2004 reports. From the FR2004, we also collect the amount 
of Treasuries collateralizing ﬁnancing agreements in which a primary 
dealer is the cash lender—i.e., dealers’ Treasury “securities in”—or the 
cash borrower—i.e., dealers’ Treasury “securities out.” These ﬁnancing 
arrangements include reverse repos, securities borrowing, and securi-
ties received as margin collateral. Through these arrangements primary 
dealers  play  a  key  role  in  allowing  other  investors—notably  hedge 
funds—to ﬁnance their Treasury positions (He et al., 2022). We use the 
amount of cash primary dealers lend against Treasuries as a noisy proxy 
for the scale of hedge funds’ swap spread positions. And, we use the dif-
ference between primary dealers’ “securities out” and their “securities 
in” as an alternative proxy for their levered exposure to Treasuries. We 
also obtain data on monthly Treasury issuance from SIFMA and weekly 
data on the Federal Reserve’s Treasury holdings from the H.4.1 release.
We  gather  data  on  a  variety  of  additional  market  prices.  From 
Bloomberg, we obtain the spread on 10-year U.S. Treasury credit de-
fault swaps (CDS), the VIX SP500 option-implied equity volatility index, 
and the VXTY option-implied 10-year Treasury futures volatility index. 
We download the Adrian et al. (2013) estimate of the term premium 
component of 10-year Treasury yields from the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York’s website. We obtain Hu et al. (2013)’s measure of yield 
curve noise—the root mean-squared yield error from ﬁtting a Svensson 
(1994) model to the cross-section of Treasuries on each date—from Jun 
Pan’s website.

Finally,  we  collect  proxies  for  several  factors  that  are  thought  to 
shift end users’ demand for or intermediaries’ supply of swaps. First, 
we obtain the modiﬁed duration of the Barclays U.S. MBS index from 
Datastream. The duration of outstanding MBS is a proxy for relative-
value mortgage investors’ desire to pay the ﬁxed swap rate. However, 
as discussed in Section 4.5, MBS duration may also proxy for a vari-
ety  of  related  “convexity-driven”  hedging  motives.  Second,  we  com-
pute Klingler and Sundaresan (2019)’s measure of aggregate deﬁned-
beneﬁt pension underfunding, which aﬀects pensions’ demand to re-
ceive the ﬁxed rate on long-dated swaps. Speciﬁcally, using quarterly 
data  from  the  Financial  Accounts  of  the  United  States,  we  compute 
Pension-UFR𝑡 = (Pension-Sponsor-Claims𝑡∕Pension-Asset𝑡) where Pension-
Sponsor-Claims𝑡 is the total claims of private and public deﬁned-beneﬁt 
pensions on their sponsors and Pension-Asset𝑡 is total deﬁned-beneﬁt 
pension assets. Third, we obtain the monthly gross issuance of domestic 
public bonds by U.S. non-ﬁnancial corporations from the Federal Re-
serve Board, which is a proxy for non-ﬁnancial corporations’ demand 
to receive the ﬁxed rate. Finally, as a proxy for intermediaries’ wealth, 
we obtain primary dealers’ equity capital ratio—the ratio of market eq-
uity to the sum of market equity and book debt—from He et al. (2017).

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381414S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

4.2.  The emergence of negative swap spreads

Consistent with the logic of the general model in Section 3.2.1, Panel 
A of Fig. 1 shows that 30-year LIBOR swap spreads and primary deal-
ers’ net Treasury positions simultaneously switched signs in early 2009. 
Speciﬁcally, (15) says that, absent a large short-rate diﬀerential (𝑚𝑡), 
swap spreads should have the opposite sign of  ̂𝑑𝑡 = − ̂𝑥𝑡 = PD-UST-Net𝑡. 
Indeed, 30-year LIBOR swap spreads averaged 45 basis points from 2001
to 2008 and primary dealers’ net short position in Treasuries averaged 
$96 billion. By contrast, 30-year LIBOR swap spreads have been con-
sistently negative since 2009, averaging −25 basis points from 2009 to 
2020. And, during this 2009–2020 period primary dealers’ net long po-
sition in Treasuries averaged $59 billion. In contemporaneous work, Du 
et al. (2022) also document that primary dealers’ net Treasury position 
and swap spreads move inversely over time and they emphasize this 
regime change in early 2009.

Panel B of Fig. 1 shows the evolution of the 30-year OIS and SOFR 
swap spreads. These two spreads are highly correlated with the 30-year 
LIBOR swap spread, but are even more negative on average because the 
underlying short-rate diﬀerentials are negligible. Almost by deﬁnition, 
a non-zero SOFR swap spread represents a violation of LoOP.

Panel  C  of  Fig. 1 shows  that  the  term  structure  of  swap  spreads 
changed considerably in 2009. While the term structure of spreads was 
fairly ﬂat before the GFC, it has become steeply downward-sloping since 
2009. Speciﬁcally, the average diﬀerence between 30-year and 10-year 
spreads was negligible prior to 2009 but has averaged −29 basis points 
between 2009 and 2020, with 30-year swap spreads being consistently 
more negative than 10-year spreads.

This post-2008 combination of negative long-term swap spreads, a 
downward-sloping swap spread curve, and dealers’ net long position in 
Treasuries is consistent with our models’ predictions in a regime where 
leverage-constrained and risk-averse intermediaries must enter into a 
pay-ﬁxed swap spread trade to accommodate net end-user demand to 
receive ﬁxed. Thus, in what follows, we focus on the post-2008 period, 
examining the speciﬁc predictions that pertain to this regime.

4.3.  Swap spread risk

We begin by testing our model’s prediction that intermediaries’ ex-
posure to swap-spread risk shapes the equilibrium expected returns on 
the swap spread trade. Speciﬁcally, Proposition 2 says that E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] =
−𝜅𝑥 ⋅ 𝜓𝑡 − 𝛼𝑉 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡—i.e., E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] consists of two terms. First, E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] is 
shaped by the cost of consuming scarce intermediary capital (−𝜅𝑥 ⋅ 𝜓𝑡), 
which obtains even if the trade is riskless. Second, E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1] depends on 
the required compensation for bearing mark-to-market risk (−𝛼𝑉 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡), 
which is proportional to the scale of intermediaries’ net position in the 
swap spread trade (𝑑𝑡). Thus, our theory predicts that the scale of in-
termediaries’ swap spread positions should predict returns even when 
controlling for the shadow value of intermediary capital (𝜓𝑡).

We test this implication by running predictive regressions that re-
late the future ℎ-week returns on the receive-ﬁxed 30-year swap spread 
trade 𝑟𝑠(30)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ on primary dealers’ current net Treasury position and the 
3-month OIS swap spread (ST-OIS-Spread𝑡), which we use as a proxy for 
the current shadow value of intermediary capital19:

𝑟𝑠(30)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ = 𝛼 + 𝛽
+ 𝛾

⋅ PD-UST-Net𝑡 + 𝛽
2

⋅ PD-UST-Credit𝑡

1

⋅ ST-OIS-Spread𝑡 + 𝛾 ′
2

1

𝐱𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡→𝑡+ℎ.

(31)

19 This choice is motivated by the model. From (24), the shadow value is 
proportional to the negative of the short-dated SOFR swap spread—i.e., the 
swap spread with no interest-rate diﬀerential. Because data on SOFR swaps is 
only available for a small part of our sample, we use the closely related short-
dated OIS spread.

We estimate these speciﬁcations for ℎ = 13- and 52-week returns (i.e., 
3- and 12-month returns).20 These regressions also include controls for 
factors that arguably have an independent eﬀect on primary dealers’ in-
ventory of Treasuries, namely the 12-month moving average of monthly 
gross Treasury issuance, the Federal Reserve’s Treasury holdings, and 
primary dealers’ net position in corporate debt securities; see Fleming 
and Rosenberg (2008). Changes in these factors may alter PD-UST-Net𝑡
even holding ﬁxed the scale of dealers swap spread positions, making it 
a noisy proxy for dealers’ swap spread positions. Thus, the purpose of 
these controls is to isolate the residual component of PD-UST-Net𝑡 that 
is most informative about dealers’ swap spread positions.

As can be seen by comparing Panels A and B of Table 1, without 
controls, dealers’ net position strongly predicts swap spread returns at 
both 3-month and 12-month horizons in the sample from 2009m1 to 
2018m6, but not when the sample is extended to 2020m6. From mid-
2018 until the end of 2019 Treasury issuance increased due to the Tax 
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 and the Federal Reserve started to reduce the 
Treasury holdings it had accumulated through the Quantitative Easing 
policies it had pursued since 2009. And 2020 then witnessed a surge in 
Treasury issuance due to the vast scale of the ﬁscal policy response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic and a resumption of large-scale Treasury pur-
chases by the Fed. Adding controls that aim to capture these factors 
restores the signiﬁcance of primary dealers’ net position in the sam-
ple from 2009m1 to 2020m6, and also increases its signiﬁcance in the 
sample from 2009m1 to 2018m6.

Recalling that PD-UST-Net𝑡 = − ̂𝑥𝑡 = ̂𝑑𝑡 > 0 in the post-GFC regime, 
the negative coeﬃcient on PD-UST-Net𝑡 means that dealers earn larger 
expected  returns  on  their  pay-ﬁxed  spread  trades  when  they  have 
greater exposure to this trade. Thus, the results in Table 1 align with 
the predictions from Proposition 2. The 𝑅2 of the predictive regression 
for 3-month returns without additional controls reaches 13.2% in the 
sample from 2009m1 to 2018m6.

Institutions other than primary dealers—particularly, ﬁxed-income 
hedge funds—also function as intermediaries in the swap market and 
engage  in  swap  spread  trades.  This  fact  motivates  the  addition  of  a 
second proxy for intermediaries’ swap positions to our forecasting re-
gression: the quantity of short-term credit collateralized by Treasuries 
that primary dealers extend to other institutions referred to as “Treasury 
securities in” and denoted by PD-UST-Credit𝑡. The idea is that these ﬁ-
nancing arrangements, in part, reﬂect the swap spread trades of hedge 
funds. This second proxy also predicts swap spread returns, albeit less 
strongly than primary dealers’ own position.

Focusing on the sample from 2009m1 to 2018m6, Panel A of Table 2
shows  that  primary  dealers’  net  position  in  long-dated  Treasuries—
those maturing in 11 or more years—predicts the returns to the 30-year 
swap spread trade (𝑃 𝐷-𝑈 𝑆𝑇 11+-𝑁𝑒𝑡𝑡). We also obtain similar results 
using a measure of dealers’ levered Treasury exposure, 𝑃 𝐷-𝑈 𝑆𝑇 -𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑡, 
computed as the diﬀerence between dealers’ cash borrowing through 
repurchase agreements (“Treasury securities out”) and their cash lend-
ing through repo (“Treasury securities in”).21 Panel B of Table 2 shows 
that primary dealers’ net Treasury position also predicts the returns to 
the 10-year swap spread trade. However, when we forecast the returns 
on the 10-year trade, our forecasting variables attract coeﬃcients that 

20 Since these regressions use overlapping ℎ-week returns, the residuals will 
be  serially  correlated.  To  draw  proper  inferences,  we  compute  Newey  and 
West (1987) standard errors allowing for serial correlation at up to ⌈1.5 × ℎ⌉
weeks. We assess signiﬁcance using the ﬁxed-𝑏 asymptotic theory of Kiefer and 
Vogelsang (2005) which yields more conservative 𝑝-values and has better ﬁnite-
sample properties than traditional Gaussian asymptotics.
21 A large fraction of dealers’ repo cash borrowing corresponds to matched-
book  repo  transactions  where  the  dealer  is  intermediating  between  a  cash 
borrower like a hedge fund and a cash lender like a money market fund. Thus, 
we use the diﬀerence between cash borrowing and cash lending as a proxy for 
dealers’ levered Treasury exposure. The correlation between the resulting mea-
sure, 𝑃 𝐷-𝑈 𝑆𝑇 -𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑡, and our baseline 𝑃 𝐷-𝑈 𝑆𝑇 -𝑁𝑒𝑡𝑡 variable is 0.82.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381415S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Table 1
Forecasting returns to the 30-year swap spread trade from 2009m1 to 2020m6: This table reports slope co-
eﬃcients from regressions of the form

1

1

𝐱𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡→𝑡+ℎ. 

⋅ PD-UST-Credit𝑡 + 𝛾

⋅ PD-UST-Net𝑡 + 𝛽
2

⋅ ST-OIS-Spread𝑡 + 𝛾 ′
2

𝑟𝑠(30)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ = 𝛼 + 𝛽
We regress the returns to the 30-year swap spread trade on Primary Dealers’ net position in nominal coupon-
bearing  Treasury  securities  (PD-UST-Net𝑡),  Primary  Dealers’  outstanding  balances  of  Treasury  securities  in 
through ﬁnancing arrangements (PD-UST-Credit𝑡), the spread between the 3-month OIS rate and the 3-month 
T-bill rate (ST-OIS-Spread𝑡), and controls. Controls include the Federal Reserve’s holdings of coupon-bearing 
Treasury securities, the 12-month moving average of the gross issuance of coupon-bearing Treasuries, and Pri-
mary Dealers’ net position in corporate bonds. The holding period is equal to ℎ = 13 weeks (3 months) in columns 
1 to 4 and to ℎ = 52 weeks (12 months) in columns 5 to 8. Data are weekly and run from January 2009 to June 
2020 in Panel A and from January 2009 to June 2018 in Panel B. Newey and West (1987) 𝑡-statistics computed 
with 20 lags for 3-month return regressions and 78 lags for 12-month return regressions are reported in paren-
theses. We compute the associated 𝑝-values using the ﬁxed-𝑏 asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005). 
∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

ℎ = 3-month returns

ℎ = 12-month returns

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Sample from 2009m1 to 2020m6

PD-UST-Net𝑡

0.172
(0.47)

-1.064
(1.47)

PD-UST-Credit𝑡

ST-OIS-Spread𝑡

Controls
Adjusted 𝑅2
N

0.833
(0.22)

No
-0.001
599

0.362
(0.09)

Yes
0.043
599

Panel B: Sample from 2009m1 to 2018m6

0.243
(0.62)

-0.169
(1.09)

0.163
(0.04)

No
0.010
599

-0.837
(1.12)

-0.392∗∗∗
(2.78)

0.853
(0.23)

Yes
0.086
599

-1.747
(1.57)

-5.039∗∗∗
(3.33)

-17.155
(1.18)

-26.064∗∗
(2.45)

No
0.075
599

Yes
0.141
599

-1.226
(1.04)

-1.243∗∗
(3.06)

-22.096
(1.70)

No
0.231
599

PD-UST-Net𝑡

-1.580∗∗∗
(3.75)

-3.036∗∗∗
(4.53)

-1.610∗∗∗
(3.79)

-2.901∗∗∗
(4.39)

-4.965∗∗
(2.72)

-7.437∗∗∗
(4.19)

-5.142∗∗∗
(3.45)

PD-UST-Credit𝑡

ST-OIS-Spread𝑡

Controls
Adjusted 𝑅2
N

8.064∗∗
(2.20)

No
0.132
495

4.933
(1.57)

Yes
0.178
495

-0.200
(1.11)

7.438∗∗
(2.14)

No
0.149
495

-0.294∗∗
(2.41)

4.473
(1.47)

Yes
0.205
495

-1.440
(0.07)

No
0.216
495

-15.183
(1.14)

Yes
0.379
495

-1.179∗
(2.18)

-5.133
(0.31)

No
0.348
495

-4.053∗∗
(2.81)

-1.703∗∗∗
(5.00)

-23.931∗∗
(2.61)

Yes
0.327
599

-6.752∗∗∗
(5.72)

-1.491∗∗∗
(5.49)

-17.518
(1.60)

Yes
0.526
495

are smaller in absolute magnitude and the statistical signiﬁcance is not 
quite as strong as when forecasting returns on the 30-year trade. This 
diminished predictive power is consistent with the premise that the 30-
year swap spread trade is subject to greater swap spread risk.

2020). In other words, in reality, there may be multiple demand factors 
and multiple supply constraints, each playing a more or less important 
role at diﬀerent points along the curve. That said, it is instructive to ask 
whether the term structure of spreads is consistent with the predictions 
of our simple term structure model.

4.4.  Term structure

Our analysis thus far has primarily focused on the long end of the 
swap market. We have focused on long-dated swaps for several reasons. 
First, long-dated swap spread trades are subject to greater risk and, as a 
result, long-maturity swap spreads are more informative about the swap 
spread risk channel that we emphasize. Second, short-dated and long-
dated swap spreads may be driven by diﬀerent factors in a way that 
is not captured by our simple three-factor term structure model. For 
instance, on the demand side, end-user demand for short-dated swaps 
may be driven by a diﬀerent set of factors from those that drive de-
mand for long-dated swaps. (We pursue an extension along these lines 
below.)  Relatedly,  on  the  supply  side,  intermediaries  face  a  number 
of  diﬀerent  balance  sheet  constraints,  each  with  its  own  potentially 
time-varying shadow value (Siriwardane et al., 2021). And, while some 
balance sheet constraints like the Supplemental Leverage Ratio apply 
equally to all swap spread positions irrespective of their maturity and 
risk, other balance sheet constraints—e.g., margin requirements—are 
typically less stringent for shorter-dated maturities (Boyarchenko et al., 

The average term structure of swap spreads. Fig. 2 shows the av-
erage term structures of LIBOR, OIS, and SOFR spreads, starting from 
2009 or the date for which data became available. All three term struc-
tures are monotonically downward-sloping on average. Further, for all 
maturities, average OIS and SOFR swap spreads are lower than like-
maturity LIBOR swap spreads. In particular, short-dated LIBOR swap 
spreads  are  positive  on  average,  whereas  short-dated  OIS  and  SOFR 
swap spreads are negative on average.

These  patterns  ﬁt  well  with  Propositions 1 and  5.  Intermediaries 
require compensation for committing their scarce capital to positions 
in the pay-ﬁxed swap spread trade and for bearing the risk associated 
with these positions. Short-date diﬀerentials for OIS and SOFR swaps 
are negligible, so our model predicts negative average OIS and SOFR 
swap spreads for all maturities. And, since longer maturity swaps are 
associated with greater convergence risk and a greater expected return 
compensation, the term structure of OIS and SOFR swap spread should 
slope downward on average. Relative to OIS and SOFR swaps, the dif-
ference between LIBOR and repo rates pushes up the average level of 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381416S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Table 2
Forecasting returns to 30-year and 10-year swap spread trades from 2009m1 to 
2018m6: This table reports the slope coeﬃcients from regressions of the form 

1

1

𝐱𝑡 +𝜖𝑡→𝑡+ℎ

⋅ PD-UST-Credit𝑡 +𝛾

⋅ ST-OIS-Spread𝑡 + 𝛾 ′
2

⋅ PD-UST-Net-Alt𝑡 +𝛽
2

𝑟𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ = 𝛼 +𝛽
for 𝑛 = 10 and 30. We regress returns to swap spread trades on alternative measures of 
Primary Dealers’ net position in Treasury securities (PD-UST-Net-Alt𝑡), Primary Dealers’ 
outstanding balances of Treasury securities in through ﬁnancing arrangements (PD-UST-
Credit𝑡), and the spread between the 3-month OIS rate and the 3-month T-bill rate (ST-
OIS-Spread𝑡). We show results for our baseline net exposure measure (PD-UST-Net𝑡), a 
measure focusing on Treasuries maturing in 11 or more years (PD-UST 11+-Net𝑡), and a 
measure of levered exposure (PD-UST-Lev𝑡). Returns are for the 𝑛 = 30-year swap spread 
trade in Panel A and for the 𝑛 = 10-year swap spread trade in Panel B, and the holding 
period is equal to ℎ = 13 weeks (3 months) in columns 1 to 4 and to ℎ = 52 weeks (12
months) in columns 5 to 8. Data are weekly and run from January 2009 to June 2018. 
Newey and West (1987) 𝑡-statistics computed with 20 lags for 3-month return regressions 
and 78 lags for 12-month return regressions are reported in parentheses. We compute the 
associated 𝑝-values using the ﬁxed-𝑏 asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005). 
∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

ℎ = 3-month returns

ℎ = 12-month returns

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Returns on the 30-year swap spread trade, 𝑟𝑠(30)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ

PD-UST-Net𝑡

-1.610∗∗∗
(3.79)

-5.142∗∗∗
(3.45)

PD-UST11+-Net𝑡

PD-UST-Lev𝑡

PD-UST-Credit𝑡

ST-OIS-Spread𝑡

-7.930∗∗∗
(4.05)

-0.200
(1.11)

7.438∗∗
(2.14)

-0.263
(1.50)

8.482∗∗
(2.33)

-1.145∗∗∗
(3.58)

-0.298
(1.67)

7.050∗
(1.96)

Adjusted 𝑅2
N
Panel B: Returns on the 10-year swap spread trade, 𝑟𝑠(10)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ

0.133
495

0.164
495

0.149
495

PD-UST-Net𝑡

-0.227
(1.38)

PD-UST11+-Net𝑡

PD-UST-Lev𝑡

-1.890∗∗∗
(3.71)

-2.993∗∗
(2.53)

-1.424∗
(2.36)

-7.194
(0.43)

0.252
495

-16.262∗
(2.24)

-1.283∗∗
(2.46)

-5.058
(0.30)

0.228
495

-2.523
(1.36)

-1.179∗
(2.18)

-5.133
(0.31)

0.348
495

-1.017∗
(2.34)

-0.170
(1.51)

-0.621
(1.68)

PD-UST-Credit𝑡

-0.134∗∗
(2.73)

-0.151∗∗∗
(3.13)

-0.149∗∗∗
(2.94)

-0.348∗∗
(3.25)

-0.361∗∗
(2.68)

-0.400∗∗
(3.15)

ST-OIS-Spread𝑡

Adjusted 𝑅2
N

1.385
(1.18)

0.097
495

1.810
(1.68)

0.138
495

1.340
(1.15)

0.096
495

-2.103
(0.65)

0.267
495

-2.337
(0.70)

0.182
495

-2.474
(0.74)

0.224
495

LIBOR  swap  spreads.  Thus,  we  would  expect  to  see  positive  spreads 
on short-dated LIBOR swaps and negative spreads on long-dated LIBOR 
swaps.

Fama-Bliss style forecasting regressions. Assuming that intermedi-
aries  face  signiﬁcant  swap  spread  risk,  Proposition 6 says  that  long-
dated swap spread trades are expected to outperform short-dated trades 
when  the  swap  spread  curve  is  steep.  Intuitively,  greater  end-user 
demand  to  receive  ﬁxed  pushes  down  the  expected  returns  on  long-
dated  spread  trades  relative  to  those  on  short-dated  spread  trades—
i.e., E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡+1 ] = −𝛼𝑉 𝑑𝑡. And, assuming that spread risk is suﬃ-
ciently large, the slope of the spread curve (𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
𝑡 ) is also decreas-
ing in end-user demand, giving rise to a positive relationship between 

𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑠(1)

𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑠(1)

E𝑡[𝑟𝑠
𝑡
further highlight the importance of swap spread risk.

𝑡+1 ] and (𝑠𝑡 − 𝑠(1)

). In this way, Proposition 6 allows us to 

We  test  Proposition 6 using  an  analogue  of  the  regression  speci-
ﬁcation  from  Fama  and  Bliss  (1987) applied  to  swap  spread  trades. 
Speciﬁcally, for two maturities 𝑛 > 𝑛′, we estimate

𝑡

𝑡 − 𝑠(𝑛′)

) + 𝜖𝑡→𝑡+ℎ,

𝑡→𝑡+ℎ = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ⋅ (𝑠(𝑛)

𝑟𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑠(𝑛′)
and our model predicts that 𝛽 > 0. As reported in Table 3, the slope 
of  the  swap  spread  curve  is  a  signiﬁcant  predictor  of  excess  returns 
on longer-dated swap spread trades over shorter-dated trades in both 
the 2009m1 to 2020m6 sample (Panel A) and the 2009m1 to 2018m6 
sample (Panel B) and for a variety of diﬀerent maturity pairs 𝑛 > 𝑛′. 
This result supports a risk-based explanation of swap spreads and, in 

(32)

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381417S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

𝑡

𝑡 − 𝑠(𝑛′)

) + 𝜖𝑡→𝑡+ℎ, 

𝑡→𝑡+ℎ = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ⋅ (𝑠(𝑛)

Table 3
Fama-Bliss style forecasting regressions: This table reports the slope coeﬃcients from regres-
sions of the form 
𝑟𝑠(𝑛)
𝑡→𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑠(𝑛′)
where 𝑛 > 𝑛′. In words, we regress the excess returns on a longer-dated swap spread trade over 
a shorter-dated trade (𝑟𝑠(𝑛) − 𝑟𝑠(𝑛′)) on the corresponding diﬀerence between longer- and shorter-
dated swap spreads (𝑠(𝑛)
). The holding period is equal to ℎ = 13 weeks (3 months) in columns 
1 to 3 and to ℎ = 52 weeks (12 months) in columns 4 to 6. Data are weekly and run from Jan-
uary 2009 to June 2020 in Panel A and from January 2009 to June 2018 in Panel B. Newey 
and West (1987) 𝑡-statistics computed with 20 lags for 3-month return regressions and 78 lags for 
12-month return regressions are reported in parentheses. We compute the associated 𝑝-values us-
ing the ﬁxed-𝑏 asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005). ∗∗∗, ∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical 
signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

𝑡 − 𝑠(𝑛′)

𝑡

ℎ = 3-month returns

ℎ = 12-month returns

(1)
𝑟𝑠(30) − 𝑟𝑠(1)

(2)
𝑟𝑠(10) − 𝑟𝑠(1)

(3)
𝑟𝑠(30) − 𝑟𝑠(10)

(4)
𝑟𝑠(30) − 𝑟𝑠(1)

(5)
𝑟𝑠(10) − 𝑟𝑠(1)

(6)
𝑟𝑠(30) − 𝑟𝑠(10)

Panel A: Sample from 2009m1 to 2020m6

𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
𝑠(30)
𝑡

𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
𝑠(10)
𝑡

𝑡 − 𝑠(10)
𝑠(30)

𝑡

2.550∗∗∗
(3.03)

12.577∗∗∗
(4.97)

1.343∗∗∗
(3.58)

2.988∗∗
(2.51)

Adjusted 𝑅2
N

0.077
599

0.101
599

Panel B: Sample from 2009m1 to 2018m6

2.061∗∗
(2.33)

𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
𝑠(30)
𝑡

𝑡 − 𝑠(1)
𝑠(10)
𝑡

𝑡 − 𝑠(10)
𝑠(30)

𝑡

1.284∗∗∗
(3.19)

Adjusted 𝑅2
N

0.063
495

0.098
495

5.674∗∗∗
(4.05)

0.140
599

4.726∗∗∗
(3.12)

0.120
495

0.422
599

0.163
599

11.143∗∗∗
(4.36)

2.940∗
(2.30)

0.381
495

0.168
495

21.333∗∗∗
(6.58)

0.454
599

18.623∗∗∗
(5.62)

0.384
495

particular, is consistent with our model’s prediction that long-term swap 
spreads should reﬂect compensation for demand-and-supply imbalance 
risk.

The impact of supply and demand on the term structure. Our model 
also suggests that, in absolute terms, supply shocks should have a larger 
impact on short-dated swaps while demand shocks should have their 
greatest impact on intermediate- or longer-dated swaps. In Tables D-1 
and D-2 of the Internet Appendix, we test this additional prediction by 
regressing the 3-month change in swap spreads at various maturities 𝑛
on several proxies for the change in demand and supply. Speciﬁcally, 
we use the same set of proxy variables introduced in Section 4.5 below. 
We ﬁnd that changes in demand generally have their largest impact on 
longer-dated spreads and, thus, alter diﬀerences between longer- and 
shorter-dated swap spreads in the way predicted by our theory. How-
ever, the results for our supply proxies are less clear cut.

primitive factors that drive swap spreads by examining the time-series 
correlates of our estimated demand and supply factors. Finally, we look 
at the respective roles of end-user demand and intermediary supply in 
shaping the expected returns to swap arbitrage. To avoid the need to 
introduce exogenous controls in our SVAR, for simplicity, we focus on 
the 2009m1 to 2018m6 sample in this exercise.

Estimation approach. We begin with the reduced-form representation 
of the VAR implied by our structural model. Speciﬁcally, we consider 
a bivariate VAR involving 30-year swap spreads (𝑠(30)
) and end-users’ 
net position in receive-ﬁxed swaps proxied using primary dealers’ net 
position in Treasuries ( ̂𝑑𝑡 = − ̂𝑥𝑡 = PD-UST-Net𝑡):

𝑡

𝐲𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
]
[
𝑠(30)
𝑡
̂𝑑𝑡

= 𝐜 +

𝐲𝑡−𝑙
⏞⏞⏞
[
]
𝑠(30)
𝑡−𝑙
̂𝑑𝑡−𝑙

+

𝐿∑

𝑙=1

𝐂𝑙

𝜉𝑡
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
[
]

𝜉𝑠(30)
𝑡
𝜉 ̂𝑑
𝑡

.

(33)

4.5.  Demand and supply decomposition

Having validated PD-UST-Net𝑡 as a useful proxy for intermediaries’ 
net  position  in  the  receive-ﬁxed  swap  spread  trade,  we  now  use  a 
structural vector auto-regression (SVAR) to disentangle the eﬀects of 
end-user demand and intermediary supply on the level of 30-year swap 
spreads. Leveraging Proposition 4, we set-identify our structural VAR 
using the sign restrictions approach of Uhlig (2005). We then estimate 
the latent underlying demand and supply factors and decompose swap 
spreads into contributions from these two factors. We shed light on the 

Equation  (33) corresponds  to  our  structural  model  assuming  (i)  the 
short-rate diﬀerential is always zero (i.e., 𝑚𝑡 = 0) and (ii) allowing for 
a more general lag structure in the autoregression—i.e., our model as-
sumes 𝐿 = 1 for simplicity. Naturally, the shocks 𝜉𝑡 in this reduced-form 
VAR each reﬂect a combination of structural shocks to both end-user 
demand and intermediary supply and, thus, do not have clear-cut eco-
nomic interpretations.

For parsimony, we omit the short-rate diﬀerential 𝑚𝑡 from (33). As 
discussed below, adding 𝑚𝑡 to the VAR has minimal impact on our re-
sults. We select a lag length of 𝐿 = 2 weeks in (33) by minimizing the 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381418S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

sumed mapping from latent structural factors to observable outcomes 
is

𝐲𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
]
[
𝑠(30)
𝑡
̂𝑑𝑡

𝐳𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
]
[
𝑧𝑑
𝑡
𝑧𝑤
𝑡

.

= 𝐚 + 𝐀

And, the assumed law of motion for the structural factors is

𝐳𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
[
]
𝑧𝑑
𝑡
𝑧𝑤
𝑡

𝐳𝑡−𝑙
⏞⏞⏞
[
]
𝑧𝑑
𝑡−𝑙
𝑧𝑤
𝑡−𝑙

𝜀𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
[
]
𝜀𝑑
𝑡
𝜀𝑤
𝑡

,

+

=

𝐿∑

𝑙=1

𝐃𝑙

(34)

(35)

where 𝜀𝑡 is a vector of orthogonal structural shocks that each have unit 
variance—i.e., Var𝑡−1[𝜀𝑡] = Var[𝜀𝑡] = 𝐈.22 Combining (34) and (35), we 
obtain a bivariate structural VAR that we can take to the data:

(

)

𝐲𝑡 =

𝐈 −

𝐀𝐃𝑙𝐀−1

𝐚 +

𝐿∑

𝑙=1

𝐿∑

𝑙=1

(𝐀𝐃𝑙𝐀−1)𝐲𝑡−𝑙 + 𝐀𝜀𝑡,

(36)

which corresponds to (22) in the model.

We set identify this structural VAR by imposing the sign restrictions 
from Proposition 4 on the 𝐀 matrix that maps structural shocks 𝜀𝑡 into 
reduced-form shocks 𝜉𝑡. Speciﬁcally, we assume the four elements of 𝐀
satisfy the following sign restrictions:

𝜉𝑡
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
]
[

𝜉𝑠(30)
𝑡
𝜉 ̂𝑑
𝑡

𝐀
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
]
[

=

− +
+ +

𝜀𝑡
⏞⏞⏞
[
]
𝜀𝑑
𝑡
𝜀𝑤
𝑡

.

(37)

𝑡 ).23

𝑡

Intuitively, if there are positive (negative) reduced-form innovations to 
| and  ̂𝑑𝑡, there must have been a positive (negative) shock to 
both |𝑠(30)
end-user demand (𝜀𝑑
𝑡 ). Conversely, if there is negative (positive) inno-
| and a positive (negative) innovation to  ̂𝑑𝑡, there must 
vation to |𝑠(30)
have been a positive (negative) shock to intermediary supply (𝜀𝑤

𝑡

We set identify 𝐀 using the pure sign restrictions approach of Uhlig 
(2005). Since Var[𝜀𝑡] = 𝐈—i.e., the structural shocks are assumed to be 
orthogonal and we are only attempting to identify their impact “up to 
scale”—the observed variance of reduced-form shocks, Var[𝜉𝑡] = 𝐀𝐀′, 
provides us with three restrictions on the four elements of 𝐀. The sign 
restrictions in (37) do not allow us to point identify 𝐀. However, they 
provide a partial identiﬁcation, ruling out many candidates that satisfy 
𝐀𝐀′ = Var[ 𝜉𝑡] and leaving us with an identiﬁed set of 𝐀s. Following 
Fry and Pagan (2005, 2011) and Cieslak and Pang (2021), we select the 
𝐀 in this set that is closest to the median value in the set. To estimate 
the latent structural demand and supply factors, we invert (34) using 
this “closest-to-median” matrix. Letting  ̂𝐀 denote the closest-to-median 
value of 𝐀, our estimated factors are ̂𝐳𝑡 = ̂𝐀−1
, where  ̂𝐚 = (𝐈 −
∑𝐿

𝐲𝑡 − ̂𝐚

(

)

̂𝐂𝑙)−1 ̂𝐜.24

𝑙=1

Fig. 2. Term structures of swap spreads: This ﬁgure shows average LIBOR, 
OIS, and SOFR swap spreads at 1-, 2-, 3-, 5-, 10-, 20 and 30-year maturities for 
subsamples starting in January 2009 (Panel A), January 2013 (Panel B) and 
January 2019 (Panel C), and ending in June 2020. Data are weekly.

Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). Our results are robust to alternate 
choices of 𝐿 as well as to the inclusion of a deterministic time trend.

Following Proposition 4, we posit that the reduced-form VAR in (33)
results from (i) a mapping from a set of unobserved structural demand 
and supply factors to these observable equilibrium outcomes and (ii) a 
dynamic law of motion for the structural factors. Speciﬁcally, the as-

22 The assumption that the demand and supply shocks are orthogonal is nec-
essary for our identiﬁcation approach and is useful for these shocks to have a 
straightforward interpretation. While imperfect, the assumption that demand 
and supply shocks are orthogonal is reasonable for the swap market because 
the institutions that typically receive the ﬁxed rate—end users such as pen-
sion funds—and those that pay the ﬁxed rate—intermediaries such as broker-
dealers—have very diﬀerent investment objectives and face diﬀerent institu-
tional constraints.
23 These statements follow from inverting (37) and using the sign restrictions 
on 𝐀 to sign the elements of 𝐀−1.
24 This closest-to-median 𝐀 corresponds to a particular matrix in the identiﬁed 
set and has a structural interpretation. Working with the closest-to-median 𝐀 is 
preferred to working with the median value of 𝐀 in the identiﬁed set because 
the latter lacks a structural interpretation. However, the demand and supply 
factors implied by the closest-to-median 𝐀 are almost identical to the median 
factors across all 𝐀s in the set, thus satisfying the speciﬁcation check for this 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381419S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

In Internet Appendix C.2, we also consider a tri-variate VAR which 
adds the LIBOR-repo spread and corresponds to our model when there is 
a non-zero short-rate diﬀerential (𝑚𝑡 ≠ 0). The structural shocks in this 
tri-variate VAR are identiﬁed using the sign and zero restrictions im-
plied by Proposition 4. Including the short-rate diﬀerential in the VAR 
has almost no impact on our estimates of the latent demand and supply 
factors. Furthermore, our estimates suggest that the short-rate diﬀer-
ential explains very little of the time-series variation in 30-year swap 
spread observed since 2009; see Fig. D-1 of the Internet Appendix. The 
ﬁnding that the short-rate diﬀerential plays only a small role in explain-
ing 30-year swap spreads is consistent with our model that predicts that 
transient ﬂuctuations in 𝑚𝑡—e.g., due to a temporary rise in concerns 
about the creditworthiness of large banks—should play only a minor 
role in explaining movements in long-dated swap spreads.25 Thus, we 
use the more parsimonious speciﬁcation (33) as our baseline.

Estimated structural decomposition. We begin by reporting and in-
terpreting our closest-to-median estimate,  ̂𝐀. Since we can only identify 
the structural shocks “up to scale,” our estimate ̂𝐀 corresponds to 𝐀𝚺1∕2
in our model. Our closest-to-median estimate is given by:
]

[

]

[

̂𝐀 =

𝜎𝑑

𝜎𝑑 𝐴𝑑
(
1 + 𝛾𝐴𝑑

)

𝜎𝑤𝐴𝑤
𝛾𝜎𝑤𝐴𝑤

=

−2.24 2.26
7.04
7.07

.

(38)

Fig. 3. Swap spread historical decomposition: This ﬁgure shows the 30-year 
swap spread minus its sample average (Swap spread), and the respective con-
tributions of the demand factor (Demand contribution) and the supply factor 
] = ̂𝐴𝑑 ̂𝑧𝑑
(Supply contribution) in 𝑠(30)
𝑡 . The underlying data are 
weekly and run from January 2009 to June 2018.

𝑡 + ̂𝐴𝑤 ̂𝑧𝑤

-E[𝑠(30)
𝑡

𝑡

Using the estimated coeﬃcients from our structural VAR, we can 
use our model to back out some interesting economic parameters. First, 
taking the ratio of the estimated impact of a 1-standard deviation shock 
to 𝑧𝑤
𝑡 on the equilibrium quantity (𝛾𝜎𝑤𝐴𝑤) to the corresponding impact 
on  prices  (𝜎𝑤𝐴𝑤),  we  obtain  an  IV-like  estimate  of  the  elasticity  of 
end-user demand (𝛾). Speciﬁcally, our structural VAR estimates suggest 
that 𝛾 = 7.04∕2.26 = 3.1—i.e., each basis point increase in swap spreads 
raises net end-user demand to receive ﬁxed by $3.1 billion.
)

Using this estimate of 𝛾 and the estimated impact of demand shocks 
on quantities and spreads, we infer that 𝜎𝑑 = 𝜎𝑑
− 𝛾 × 𝜎𝑑 𝐴𝑑 =
7.07 − 3.1 × −2.24 = 14. Thus, at a weekly horizon, we estimate that a 
1-standard deviation shock to end-user demand is $14 billion. This then 
implies that a $1 billion shock to end-user demand to receive ﬁxed re-
duces 30-year swap spreads by 0.16 basis points—i.e., 𝐴𝑑 = 𝐴𝑑 𝜎𝑑 ∕𝜎𝑑 =
−2.24∕14 = −0.16.

1 + 𝛾𝐴𝑑

(

Several caveats are in order. First, dealers are only one set of in-
termediaries in the swap market, the other important set being hedge 
funds. Thus, it seems safe to conclude that these dollar estimates are a 
lower-bound on the relevant market-wide quantities which sum across 
all relevant swap intermediaries. Second, we have arrived at these inter-
pretations by taking our stylized model and our identiﬁcation approach 
rather literally. For instance, our model and identiﬁcation approach as-
sume that the structural shocks to demand and supply are orthogonal. 
This assumption is both conventional and clarifying, but there is little 
reason to think this is a perfect description of reality. Nonetheless, our 
estimates seem to be quantitatively plausible, lending credence to our 
approach.

Next, Fig. 3 shows our estimated structural decomposition of swap 
spreads from 2009m1 to 2018m6 as in (34). Speciﬁcally, using  ̂𝐀 and 
𝑡 − E[𝑠(30)
̂𝐳𝑡, we decompose 𝑠(30)
] into the sum of contributions from end-
user demand ( ̂𝐴𝑑 ̂𝑧𝑑
𝑡 ) and intermediary supply ( ̂𝐴𝑤 ̂𝑧𝑤
𝑡 ). Fig. 3 shows that 
end-user demand and intermediary supply both play important roles 
in explaining the time-series variation in swap spreads. For instance, 
our decomposition suggests that a large outward shift in intermediary 

𝑡

partial identiﬁcation technique suggested by Fry and Pagan (2005, 2011). See 
Fig. 4.
25 This ﬁnding is consistent with the fact that long-dated LIBOR, OIS, and 
SOFR swap spreads are very highly correlated in both levels and changes. By 
contrast, spreads on short-dated LIBOR swaps—which are sensitive to move-
ments in the LIBOR-repo spread—are not highly correlated with those on short-
dated OIS and SOFR swaps.

supply reduced the magnitude of (negative) swap spreads starting in 
late-2012. This outward supply shift is consistent with an easing of ﬁ-
nancial conditions following the crest of the Eurozone crisis. Then, a 
large inward shift in supply from late-2014 until late-2015 pushed swap 
spreads far into negative territory. This estimated inward supply shift 
coincides with a series of regulatory changes that arguably increased in-
termediaries’ balance-sheet costs, including the ﬁnalization of the Sup-
plementary Leverage Ratio in September 2014 and the implementation 
of the Volker Rule in July 2015 (Boyarchenko et al., 2020). However, 
we also ﬁnd that the period of highly negative swap spreads between 
late 2014 and 2018 cannot be solely attributed to a contraction in in-
termediary supply. Indeed, from mid-2016, our estimates suggest that 
rising end-user demand to receive the ﬁxed rate pushed swap spreads 
even further below zero.

The  forecast  error  variance  decomposition  from  our  structural 
VAR—the estimated contributions of the two structural shocks to swap 
spread  innovations  at  various  horizons—conﬁrms  that  both  demand 
and supply shocks play an important role in driving spreads. Demand 
and supply shocks each explain roughly 50% of the innovations to 30-
year swap spreads at a weekly horizon. Our ﬁnding that both demand 
and supply shocks play an important role in driving swap spreads con-
trasts with Goldberg and Nozawa (2021) who ﬁnd that, in the corporate 
bond market, intermediary supply shocks play a dominant role in driv-
ing variation in market liquidity. Interestingly, our estimates suggest 
that supply shocks have a more persistent eﬀect on swap spreads com-
pared to demand shocks. And, as a result, the contribution of supply 
shocks to the innovations to 30-year swap spreads increases to roughly 
65% at an annual horizon.

Drivers of demand and supply. An advantage of our identiﬁcation ap-
proach is that we do not need to specify proxies for demand and supply 
shifters ex ante. Nonetheless, it is instructive to investigate which of the 
demand and supply shifters that have been suggested in the prior litera-
ture are most strongly associated with our estimated demand and supply 
factors. Thus, in Table 4, we regress 30-year swap spreads (𝑠(30)
), the 
contribution of the demand factor to spreads ( ̂𝐴𝑑 ̂𝑧𝑑
𝑡 ), the contribution of 
the supply factor to spreads ( ̂𝐴𝑤 ̂𝑧𝑤
𝑡 ), and PD-UST-Net𝑡, respectively, on 
various proxies for demand and supply. Panel A shows the coeﬃcients 
when these regressions are run in levels, controlling for a linear time 
trend to partial out any low-frequency trends. Panel B reports the cor-
responding coeﬃcients when these regressions are run using 13-week 
changes.

𝑡

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381420S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Table 4
Demand and supply drivers of 30-year swap spreads from 2009m1 to 2018m6: This table reports the slope coeﬃcients from regressions of, respectively, the 
30-year swap spread (columns 1 to 3), the demand contribution to spreads (columns 4 to 6), the supply contribution to spreads (columns 7 to 9), and PD-UST-Net𝑡
(columns 10 to 12) on the modiﬁed duration of the Barclays U.S. MBS index (MBS-Duration𝑡 ), the Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) pension underfunding factor 
(Pension-UFR𝑡), corporate bond issuance (Corp-Issuance𝑡), the broker-dealer leverage factor from Adrian et al. (2014) (BD-Lev𝑡), the logarithm of the HFRX Global 
Hedge Fund Index (ln
), the Adrian et al. (2013) term premium (Term-Prem-ACM𝑡), the VXTY Treasury volatility index (UST-Implied-Vol𝑡), the absolute 
deviation from 3-month covered interest-rate parity (computed as in Du et al. (2018)) averaged across the EUR-USD, GBP-USD, and JPY-USD currency pairs (Avg-
Cip-Basis𝑡), and the Hu et al. (2013) yield curve ﬁtting error (UST-Curve-Noise𝑡). Variables are in levels in Panel A and we control for a time trend (𝑡) and in 13-week 
changes in Panel B. Data are weekly and run from January 2009 to June 2018. Newey and West (1987) 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and are computed 
with 78 lags in Panel A and with 20 lags in Panel B. We compute the associated 𝑝-values using the ﬁxed-𝑏 asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005). ∗∗∗, 
∗∗, and ∗ denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

HFR𝑡

(

)

𝑠(30)
𝑡

(1)

(2)

(3)

𝑠(30)
𝑡

(4)

: Demand contrib.

(5)

(6)

𝑠(30)
𝑡

(7)

: Supply contrib.

PD-UST-Net𝑡

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Panel A: Regressions in Levels

8.984∗∗∗
(4.65)

-1.448
(1.42)

-0.007
(0.08)

6.297∗∗∗
(7.49)

-0.592
(1.16)

-0.041
(0.49)

2.687
(1.66)

-0.857
(1.23)

0.034
(0.62)

-11.523∗
(2.16)

-0.795
(0.38)

0.235
(0.65)

147.138∗∗∗
(3.21)

2.777∗∗∗
(3.67)

43.275
(1.69)

1.894∗∗∗
(4.41)

103.863∗∗
(3.24)

0.883∗
(2.22)

186.131
(1.67)

-3.232∗∗
(3.08)

MBS-Duration𝑡

Pension-UFR𝑡

Corp-Issuance𝑡

ln(BD-Lev𝑡)

ln(HFR𝑡)

Term-Prem-ACM𝑡

UST-Implied-Vol𝑡

Avg-CIP-Basis𝑡

UST-Curve-Noise𝑡

Adjusted 𝑅2
N

0.479
495

0.459
495

Panel B: Regressions in 3-month changes

3.728∗∗∗
(5.01)

-1.056
(1.46)

-0.114∗∗
(2.36)

-0.219
(0.01)

1.097∗∗
(2.24)

Δ13MBS-Duration𝑡

Δ13Pension-UFR𝑡

Δ13Corp-Issuance𝑡

Δ13ln(BD-Lev𝑡)

Δ13ln(HFR𝑡)

Δ13Term-Prem-ACM𝑡

Δ13UST-Implied-Vol𝑡

Δ13Avg-CIP-Basis𝑡

Δ13UST-Curve-Noise𝑡

Adjusted 𝑅2
N

0.196
482

0.080
482

2.866
(0.78)

-0.052
(0.05)

-0.631∗∗∗
(3.53)

-0.232
(0.43)

0.440
495

3.087
(1.06)

1.030∗
(1.79)

-0.041
(0.46)

0.007
(0.01)

0.042
482

0.606
495

0.606
495

3.062∗∗∗
(4.93)

-1.415∗∗∗
(2.61)

-0.088∗∗
(2.14)

-13.906
(0.45)

1.364∗∗∗
(4.39)

0.290
482

0.233
482

5.729∗
(2.18)

0.439
(0.53)

-0.330∗∗
(2.60)

-0.131
(0.39)

0.563
495

5.686∗∗∗
(2.95)

0.229
(0.42)

-0.037
(0.56)

0.247
(0.40)

0.114
482

0.286
495

0.368
495

0.666
(1.08)

0.359
(1.00)

-0.025
(0.90)

13.687
(0.61)

-0.267
(1.04)

0.022
482

0.018
482

-2.863
(1.05)

-0.491
(0.71)

-0.301∗∗∗
(3.35)

-0.102
(0.29)

0.349
495

-2.599
(1.41)

0.801∗
(2.10)

-0.004
(0.09)

-0.240
(0.96)

0.040
482

-26.972∗
(2.20)

-2.909
(0.84)

0.107
(0.27)

0.097
(0.07)

0.561
495

-26.014∗∗∗
(3.47)

1.766
(0.76)

0.103
(0.45)

-1.523
(0.95)

0.133
482

0.507
495

0.619
495

-7.594∗∗
(2.44)

5.578∗∗∗
(3.14)

0.200
(1.23)

86.395
(0.71)

-5.132∗∗∗
(5.57)

0.179
482

0.226
482

We  begin  by  exploring  factors  that  prior  literature  suggests  may 
shift end-users’ demand for swaps. First, Feldhütter and Lando (2008), 
Hanson (2014), Malkhozov et al. (2016), and TBAC (2021) argue that 
the desire of hedged mortgage investors and mortgage servicers to re-
ceive the ﬁxed swap rate increases when long-term interest rates fall. 
A decline in rates increases expected mortgage prepayments, reducing 
the duration of outstanding mortgages. In response, hedged investors 
then want to receive the ﬁxed swap rate to add back duration to their 

portfolios. This view predicts that end-user demand to receive ﬁxed is 
negatively related to the duration of outstanding MBS. Second, insurers 
and pension funds receive ﬁxed to manage the gap between the dura-
tion of their liabilities and the duration of their on-balance sheet assets 
(TBAC, 2021). And, Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) argue that pension 
funds’ demand to receive ﬁxed increases as they become more under-
funded. Third, the bond issuance of corporates, whom TBAC (2021) also 
identiﬁes as receivers of ﬁxed, could inﬂuence their demand for swaps.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381421S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

𝑡

Columns (1), (4), (7), and (10) show the results from regressions of 
𝑠(30)
, the demand and supply contributions to 𝑠(30)
, and PD-UST-Net𝑡, 
𝑡
respectively, on MBS duration, the pension underfunding measure, and 
the 3-month moving average of corporate bond issuance.26 Looking at 
both levels in Panel A and 3-month changes in Panel B, we ﬁnd that 
all three variables are related to our demand factor to some degree, 
with MBS duration having the most statistically signiﬁcant relationship 
with both the 30-year swap spread and its demand-driven component. 
This result echoes earlier ﬁndings of Feldhütter and Lando (2008) and 
Hanson (2014) that hedging demand from MBS investors is an impor-
tant driver of the swap spreads.27 However, the importance of the MBS 
variable in these regressions does not imply that MBS investors play an 
exclusive role in the swap market. Domanski et al. (2017) argue that 
insurers and pension funds also engage in convexity-driven hedging: 
when interest rates fall, they add duration by receiving the ﬁxed swap 
rate to oﬀset the increasing mismatch between their assets and liabil-
ities. Thus, the MBS duration variable may also capture demand from 
insurers and pension funds.

Turning to factors that shift intermediary supply, our theory suggests 
that intermediaries’ supply of swaps should be positively related to the 
balance-sheet capacity of broker-dealers and hedge funds. In columns 
(2), (5), (8), and (11), we consider two proxies for the balance-sheet ca-
pacity of intermediaries: the broker-dealer leverage factor from Adrian 
et al. (2014) and the logarithm of the HFRX Global Hedge Fund In-
dex,  which  follows  the  approach  in  Liu  (2020).  As  shown  in  Panel 
A  of  Table 4,  both  of  these  variables  are  positively  related  to  level 
of swap spreads and the supply-driven component of spreads as one 
might expect. However, both variables are also positively related to the 
demand-driven component spreads and the relationships are less clear-
cut in Panel B when these regressions are run in 3-month changes.

Finally, we relate our estimated end-user demand and intermediary 
supply factors to general conditions in ﬁxed-income markets. Specif-
ically,  columns  (3),  (6),  (9),  and  (12) in  Table 4 report  regressions 
involving the estimated term premium component of 10-year Treasury 
yields  from  Adrian  et  al.  (2013),  the  VXTY  option-implied  Treasury 
yield  volatility  index,  the  absolute  deviation  from  3-month  covered 
interest-rate parity averaged across the EUR-USD, GBP-USD, and JPY-
USD currency pairs, and the Hu et al. (2013) yield curve noise measure 
which captures illiquidity in the Treasury market.

A  noteworthy  pattern  that  emerges  from  these  regressions  is 
the  strong  positive  relationship  between  the  term  premium  and  the 
demand-driven component of the swap spread, which reﬂects the pos-
itive  relationship  between  the  term  premium  and  swap  spreads  and 
the strong negative relationship between the term premium and  ̂𝑑𝑡 =
PD-UST-Net𝑡. This pattern is consistent with the role played by MBS 
investors in the swap market. As discussed above, MBS duration is neg-
atively related to the demand to receive ﬁxed. In turn, Hanson (2014)
and Malkhozov et al. (2016) show that MBS duration positively predicts 
Treasury returns. The close connection between the demand factor, MBS 
duration, and term premium is further illustrated on Fig. D-2 of the In-
ternet appendix.28

Panel A of Table 4 also shows that there is a strong association be-
tween the absolute magnitude of CIP deviations and the level of swap 

26 The Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) pension underfunding variable and the 
broker-dealer leverage factor from Adrian et al. (2014) only available at a quar-
terly frequency. We create weekly versions of these variables by interpolating 
linearly between the quarter-ending values.
27 Fig. D-2 in the Internet Appendix shows the time series of MBS duration and 
the demand factor: the series are almost mirror images of each other.
28 While we oﬀer a diﬀerent demand-and-supply based interpretation, this ob-
servation is related to Du et al. (2022) who note that PD-UST-Net𝑡 is low when 
the yield curve is steep. By contrast, the model in Jermann (2020) makes the 
opposite prediction of what we ﬁnd in the data. In his model, a higher term pre-
mium should be associated with higher values of PD-UST-Net𝑡 and lower (more 
negative) values of 𝑠(30)

.

𝑡

spreads, with swap spreads becoming more negative when CIP devia-
tions are larger in magnitude. This fact is also noted in Siriwardane et 
al. (2021) and Du et al. (2022). One natural interpretation is that short-
dated CIP deviations reﬂect the shadow cost of intermediary capital. 
Interestingly, our analysis suggests that this low-frequency relationship 
between the level of swap spreads and CIP deviations works through 
both the supply- and the demand-driven components of spreads. How-
ever, Panel B shows that this relationship largely disappears when we 
look at  3-month changes. As argued by Siriwardane et al. (2021), if 
these two markets are partially segmented, the shadow cost of inter-
mediary capital reﬂected in CIP deviations need not be the exact same 
as the shadow cost reﬂected in swap spreads. Thus, to the extent that 
these  markets  are  better  integrated  at  low-frequencies  than  at  high-
frequencies—e.g., due to slow-moving capital eﬀects, this may explain 
why the relationship is much stronger at low frequencies.

Impulse-response  functions  and  estimated  half-lives. Panel  A  of 
Fig. 4 shows  the  impulse  response  functions  from  (35).  These  IRFs 
enable us to estimate the half-lives of the responses of the latent de-
mand and supply factors (i.e., the elements of 𝐳𝑡) to structural shocks to 
demand or supply (i.e., the elements of 𝜀𝑡). Panel B of 4 shows the cor-
responding IRFs from (36), allowing us to estimate the half-lives of the 
responses of observables (i.e., the elements of 𝐲𝑡) to these same struc-
tural shocks. In both cases, we deﬁne the half-life as the smallest weekly 
lag length such that the magnitude of the response is less than 50% of 
its initial value on impact. Note, however, these two sets of half-lives 
will not be the same since we allow for cross-lag eﬀects between our 
structural factors—i.e., since the 𝐃𝑙 are not diagonal, shocks to supply 
may aﬀect future demand and vice versa.

We begin by considering shocks to intermediary supply (𝜀𝑤

𝑡 ). We 
ﬁnd that the response of the latent supply factor (𝑧𝑤
𝑡 ) to its own impulse 
(𝜀𝑤
𝑡 ) subsides by half after 26 weeks. This estimated half-life can be 
compared to Goldberg and Nozawa (2021) and Fontaine et al. (2023), 
who consider shocks to ﬁnancial intermediaries with a broadly similar 
interpretation to our supply shocks. Goldberg and Nozawa (2021) ﬁnd 
that shocks to intermediary liquidity supply in the corporate bond mar-
ket have a half-life of 29 weeks. Similarly, Fontaine et al. (2023) ﬁnd 
that the half-life of the response of funding liquidity spreads to shocks 
to intermediary supply is two quarters—i.e., 26 weeks. Turning to ob-
servables, the estimated response of 30-year swap spreads (𝑠(30)
) to an 
impulse to intermediary supply (𝜀𝑤
𝑡 ) falls by half after 72 weeks. By 
contrast, the half-life of the response of 𝑃 𝐷-𝑁𝑒𝑡-𝑈 𝑆𝑇𝑡 to shocks to 𝜀𝑤
𝑡
is just 11 weeks. The more persistent eﬀect of supply shocks on swap 
spreads and the less persistent eﬀect on 𝑃 𝐷-𝑁𝑒𝑡-𝑈 𝑆𝑇𝑡 (as compared 
to the intermediary supply factor) arises due to an indirect, cross-lag ef-
fect. Speciﬁcally, the oﬀ-diagonals of the 𝐃𝑙 imply that a positive shock 
to intermediary supply eventually results in an small but persistent de-
cline in end-user demand. This cross-lag eﬀect pushes up swap spreads 
and reduces intermediary positions, raising the half-life of the former 
and reducing the half-life of the latter.

How persistent are the responses to shocks to end-user demand (𝜀𝑑
𝑡 )? 
Our estimates imply that the response of the latent demand factor (𝑧𝑑
𝑡 ) 
to a demand impulse (𝜀𝑑
𝑡 ) subsides by half after 26 weeks. And, account-
ing for cross-lag eﬀects, the estimated response of 30-year swap spreads 
(𝑠(30)
) to a demand impulse subsides by half after 22 weeks. The half-
𝑡
life of the response of 𝑃 𝐷-𝑁𝑒𝑡-𝑈 𝑆𝑇𝑡 to demand shocks is similar at 31 
weeks. The nature of the relevant demand shocks is fairly speciﬁc to the 
swap market so, unlike supply shocks, their persistence need not match 
estimates from other markets. However, we can provide external val-
idation by noting that MBS duration, which we have shown is tightly 
linked to our estimated demand factor, has a similar persistence. Specif-
ically, using a simple AR(1) model, we estimate that MBS duration has 
a weekly autocorrelation of 0.975. This implies that the half-life of MBS 
duration shocks is 27 weeks, which almost perfectly matches the esti-
mated half-life of our demand factor to its own impulse.

𝑡

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381422S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Fig. 4. Impulse response functions for latent demand and supply factors 
and for observables: These ﬁgures show the impulse response functions from 
our structural VAR. Median, “closest to median,” and 5th to 95th percentiles 
show the set of impulses responses that satisfy the identiﬁcation restrictions. 
Data are weekly and run from January 2009 to June 2018. Panel A shows the 
responses for the latent demand factor (𝑧𝑑
𝑡 ). 
) and quantities 
Panel B shows the responses for 30-year swap spreads (𝑠(30)
( ̂𝑑𝑡 = PD-UST-Net𝑡).

𝑡 ) and the latent supply factor (𝑧𝑠

𝑡

Maturity-speciﬁc demand factors. In Internet Appendix B.5, we ex-
tend  our  theory  to  allow  end-users’  demand  to  receive  ﬁxed  to  be 
driven by two separate factors: a factor controlling demand for shorter-
dated swaps and a factor controlling demand for longer-dated swaps. 
As before, we assume that a single group of risk-averse and leverage-
constrained swap intermediaries absorbs the net end user demand at 
each maturity, hedging the resulting interest-rate risk by taking oﬀset-
ting positions in like-maturity Treasuries. The spreads on 𝑛-year swap 
spreads take the form

𝑡 = 𝐴(𝑛)
𝑠(𝑛)
where 𝑧𝑑,𝑆

0 + 𝐴(𝑛)

𝑚 𝑧𝑚
and 𝑧𝑑,𝐿
𝑡

𝑡

𝑡 + 𝐴(𝑛)

𝑑,𝑆

𝑡 + 𝐴(𝑛)
𝑧𝑑,𝑆

𝑑,𝐿

𝑡 + 𝐴(𝑛)
𝑧𝑑,𝐿

𝑤 𝑧𝑤
𝑡 ,

(39)

are the short- and long-dated demand factors.

As explained in Internet Appendix C.2, we set identify the short-
dated demand factor, the long-dated demand factor, and supply shocks 
in a structural VAR that includes the 5-year swap spread (𝑠(5)
𝑡 ), the 30-
year  swap  spread  (𝑠(30)
),  primary  dealers’  net  position  in  Treasuries 
𝑡
with  maturities  of  6  years  or  less  ( ̂𝑑𝑆
𝑡 ),  and  primary  dealers’ 
net position in Treasuries with maturities over 6 years ( ̂𝑑𝐿
𝑡 ). We 
achieve set identiﬁcation by imposing a set of sign and monotonicity 
restrictions implied by our theory. Speciﬁcally, since our theory does 
not make unambiguous predictions about how 𝑧𝑑,𝑆
should im-
pact the shape of the swap spread curve, our key identifying assumption 
is simply that shocks to short-dated (long-dated) end-user demand has 
a greater impact on primary dealers’ net position in short-dated (long-
dated) Treasuries.

and 𝑧𝑑,𝐿
𝑡

𝑡 = − ̂𝑥𝑆

𝑡 = − ̂𝑥𝐿

𝑡

Our estimated short-dated demand factor explains 39% of the resid-
ual variation in 5-year swap spreads and only 6% of the variation in the 
30-year swap spread at a 1-year horizon. By contrast, the long-dated de-
mand factor explains only 3% of the 1-year residual variation in 5-year 
spreads and 70% of the variation in 30-year spreads.

To  shed  light  on  the  underlying  drivers  of  end-user  demand  for 
short- and long-dated swaps, Table D-3 of the Internet Appendix reports 
regressions of 3-month changes in our two estimated demand factors on 
changes in MBS duration, the Klingler and Sundaresan (2019) pension 
underfunding measure, and corporate bond issuance. Our results sug-
gest that MBS duration and other related convexity-driven ﬂows play 
a major role in driving the demand for both short- and long-maturity 
swaps. However, consistent with the argument in Klingler and Sundare-
san (2019), we ﬁnd that pension underfunding primarily inﬂuences the 
demand for long-dated swaps.

5.  Conclusion

We develop a tractable model in which long-term swap spreads are 
shaped by end users’ net demand for and constrained intermediaries 
supply  of  swaps.  Even  if  swaps  are  completely  redundant,  non-zero 
spreads arise when constrained intermediaries must accommodate end-
user demand for swaps in equilibrium. Long-term swap spreads reﬂect 
both compensation for using scarce intermediary capital and compensa-
tion for bearing convergence risk—i.e., the risk that spreads will move 
against intermediaries due to an unexpected future imbalance between 
demand and supply.

We  ﬁnd  that  a  proxy  for  intermediated  quantities  in  the  swap 
market—primary dealers’ net position in U.S. Treasuries—ﬂipped sign 
at the height of the GFC, at the same time when long-term swap spreads 
turned negative. Consistent with the importance of convergence risk, 
this proxy for intermediated quantities predicts the excess returns on 
long-dated  swap  spread  trades.  Using  this  quantity  proxy,  we  iden-
tify shifts in end-user demand and intermediary supply, and ﬁnd that 
both contribute signiﬁcantly to the volatility of long-term swap spreads, 
while  only  demand  is  powerful  in  forecasting  short-term  returns  on 
swap spread arbitrage.

While  we  have  applied  our  framework  to  study  long-dated  swap 
spreads, in the future it could be used to explore other long-dated near-
arbitrage spreads, including deviations from covered interest rate parity 
and the CDS-bond basis.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Samuel G. Hanson: Writing – review & editing, Writing – origi-
nal draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization. Aytek  Malkhozov: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization. Gyuri Venter: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal anal-
ysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381423S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Replication kit for “Demand-and-Supply Imbalance Risk and Long-
Term Swap Spreads” (2024) by Samuel G. Hanson, Aytek Malkhozov,
Gyuri Venter (Original Data) (Mendeley Data)

Appendix A.  Proofs and derivations for the baseline model

Proof of Theorem 1. We write the conjectured form of swap spreads 
from (16) as

𝑠𝐳𝑡,

0 + 𝐚′

𝑠𝑡 = 𝐴
where 𝐚𝑠 = [𝐴𝑚, 𝐴𝑑 , 𝐴𝑤]′. We can also generalize our aﬃne equilibrium 
to a generic VAR(1) data-generating process 𝐳𝑡+1 = 𝜚𝐳𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡+1, where 𝜚
and  Var𝑡[𝜀𝑡+1] = 𝚺 are  potentially  non-diagonal.  Doing  so  yields  the 
following ﬁxed-point condition for 𝐚𝑠:

that (i) there are either zero or two real roots both of which are non-
negative, (ii) the two real roots exist if and only if intermediary risk 
aversion 𝛼 is below a threshold 𝛼∗ > 0, and (iii) the solution with lower 
volatility is always stable (i.e., 𝐹 ′ (𝑉 ∗) < 1 at this solution) whereas the 
solution with higher volatility equilibrium is unstable (i.e., 𝐹 ′ (𝑉 ∗) > 1
at this solution).

Staying with the case where 𝛾 = 0 and 𝛼𝜎2
𝑑

> 0, we next discuss the 
𝑠 coeﬃcients in a few special cases to better understand 

equilibrium 𝐚∗
the intuition. In particular:

𝑚 = 𝐴∗

𝑑 = 𝐴∗

1. If 𝜅𝑥 = 0 and 𝑚𝑡 = 𝜎𝑚 = 0, we have 𝐴∗

𝑤 = 0 in the unique 
stable equilibrium. However, there is an unstable equilibrium with 
< 0. This is analogous to the unstable equilibrium in De Long 
𝐴∗
𝑑
et al. (1990) where LoOP fails because all arbitrageurs think it will 
fail in the future. However, this equilibrium is not robust to small 
perturbations in intermediary beliefs.
2. If  𝜅𝑥 = 0 and  𝜎𝑚 > 0,  we  have  𝐴∗

𝑤 = 0 in 
the unique stable equilibrium. This is just a standard Vayanos and 
Vila (2021)-style equilibrium with random net supply and a risky 
fundamental (i.e., the short-rate diﬀerential).
3. If 𝜅𝑥 > 0, 𝜎𝑤 > 0, and 𝑚𝑡 = 𝜎𝑚 = 0, we have 𝐴∗

< 0, and 
𝑤 > 0 in the unique stable equilibrium. This is just a standard 
𝐴∗
Vayanos and Vila (2021)-style equilibrium with random supply and 
a stochastic shadow value of intermediary capital which functions 
like a risky fundamental.

< 0,  and  𝐴∗

𝑚 > 0,  𝐴∗
𝑑

𝑚 = 0, 𝐴∗
𝑑

𝐚𝑠 = 𝐅

)

(

𝐚𝑠

≡

[

(1 − 𝛿)−1

(
𝐈 − 𝛿𝜚′

)

+ 𝛼𝛾

((

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜

)
2

𝑜 + 𝑉
𝜎2

]

−1

)
)

𝐈

(

𝐚𝑠

4. Finally, if 𝜅𝑥 > 0, 𝜎𝑤 > 0, and 𝜎𝑚 > 0, we have 𝐴∗

𝑚 > 0, 𝐴∗
𝑑

< 0, and 

𝐴∗

𝑤 > 0 in the unique stable equilibrium.

[

×

𝐞𝑚 − 𝜅𝑥

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

(
𝜅𝑥𝐞𝑑 − 𝐞𝑤

)

− 𝛼𝑉

)

(
𝐚𝑠

𝐞𝑑

]

,

(A.1)

where 𝐈 denotes the 3 × 3 identity matrix, 𝐞𝑚 = (1, 0, 0)′, 𝐞𝑑 = (0, 1, 0)′, 
𝐞𝑤 = (0, 0, 1)′, and
)2
(

)

(
𝐚𝑠

𝑉

=

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

𝑠𝚺𝐚𝑠
𝐚′

(A.2)

)

𝐚∗
𝑠

denote a solution 

(
𝑠 = 𝐅 

is the conditional variance of 𝑠𝑡. Letting 𝐚∗
to this ﬁxed-point problem, we then have

𝐴∗

0 =

𝑚 − 𝜅𝑥

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
𝜅2
𝑜

(
𝜅𝑜

𝑟𝑜
𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
[(

)
+ 𝜅𝑥𝑑 − 𝑤
)
2

𝑜 + 𝑉
𝜎2

− 𝛼𝑉
]
)

(
𝐚∗
𝑠

𝜅𝑥
𝜅𝑜

1 + 𝛼𝛾

(

)

𝑑

𝐚∗
𝑠

.

(A.3)

In the special case where 𝜚 and 𝚺 are diagonal, equations (A.1) and 
(A.3) simplify to the expressions given in (18b)-(19).

To understand the relevant cases for equilibrium existence and mul-
tiplicity, we rewrite (19) to emphasize the dependence of the 𝐴𝑖 coeﬃ-
cients given in (18b) on (18d) on 𝑉 :

𝑉 = 𝐹 (𝑉 ) ≡

(

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

)2 [

(

𝜎2
𝑑

𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]

)
2

(
𝐴𝑚 [𝑉 ]

)
2

+ 𝜎2
𝑚

+ 𝜎2
𝑤

(
𝐴𝑤 [𝑉 ]

)
2

]

.

)

(
Thus, the system of equations 𝐚∗
𝑠 = 𝐅 
collapses to a scalar ﬁxed-
point problem in 𝑉 ≥ 0. An equilibrium is stable if it is robust to small 
perturbations in intermediaries’ beliefs about volatility. Formally, an 
equilibrium with volatility 𝑉 ∗ = 𝐹 (𝑉 ∗) is stable if and only if 𝐹 ′ (𝑉 ∗) <
1—i.e., if the function 𝐹 (𝑉 ) crosses the 45-degree line from above at 
𝑉 = 𝑉 ∗.

𝐚∗
𝑠

(A.4)

(

)
2
𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]

We  ﬁrst  consider  the  case  where  𝛾 = 0.  When  𝛾 = 0,  𝐴𝑚 [𝑉 ]
and  𝐴𝑤 [𝑉 ] are  positive  constants.  If,  in  addition,  𝛼𝜎2
𝑑 = 0,  then 
= 0, so 𝐹 (𝑉 ) is constant, and there exists exactly one valid 
𝜎2
𝑑
solution to (A.4) and it is stable. However, when 𝛼𝜎2
| is lin-
𝑑
|
|𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]|
early increasing in 𝑉 , with lim𝑉 →0
| > 0 and lim𝑉 →∞
| =
∞, so 𝐹 (𝑉 ) is a quadratic function of 𝑉 . In this case, it is easy to show 

|𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]|
|
|𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]|

> 0, |

𝐴𝑚 [𝑉 ], lim𝑉 →0

𝐴𝑤 [𝑉 ] = 0. On the other hand, |

We next consider the case where 𝛾 > 0. When 𝛾 > 0, 𝐴𝑚 [𝑉 ] and 
𝐴𝑤 [𝑉 ] are decreasing and have ﬁnite limits when 𝑉 → 0 and 𝑉 → ∞. 
𝐴𝑚 [𝑉 ] =
In particular, lim𝑉 →0
| is increasing in 𝑉 and 
lim𝑉 →∞
| = 1∕𝛾 < ∞. Thus, 
| > 0 and lim𝑉 →∞
has limits lim𝑉 →0
the RHS of (A.4) must cross the 45-degree line at least once from above 
as we increase 𝑉 from zero to ∞. Therefore, when 𝛾 > 0 a stable equi-
librium in which 𝑉 ≥ 0 always exists.

|𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]|
|𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]|
|

𝐴𝑤 [𝑉 ] > 0, and lim𝑉 →∞

|𝐴𝑑 [𝑉 ]|
|

𝑤 > 0, and 𝜎2

If 𝛾 > 0 and 𝛼𝜎2

𝑑 = 0, this solution is unique. When 𝛾 > 0 and 𝛼𝜎2
𝑑

>
0, however, we can have multiple equilibria as above. In fact, when 
we also have 𝜅𝑥 > 0, 𝜎2
𝑚 > 0, the ﬁxed-point problem (A.4)
is equivalent to ﬁnding the roots of a 7th-order polynomial in 𝑉 . (For 
SOFR swaps, where 𝜎2
𝑚 = 0, this reduces to a 5th-order polynomial.) We 
have shown above that this polynomial always has at least one positive 
real root that is stable. And, while there can be multiple solutions that 
are positive and stable in this case, all solutions but the smallest solution 
diverge in the limit where 𝜎2
→ 0 for 
𝑑
these solutions. By contrast, the smallest solution remains ﬁnite in the 
limit where 𝜎2
𝑑

→ 0—i.e., we have 𝑉 ∗ → ∞ as 𝜎2
𝑑

→ 0. □

Proof of Proposition 1. Let  𝑚∗ = 𝜅𝑥

]

((

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜

)

∕𝜅2
𝑜

) [

𝜅𝑜

+ 𝛼𝑉 𝑑. From (18a), it is immediate that 𝐴

𝜅𝑥𝑑 − 𝑤
𝑚 < 𝑚∗. □

0

(

(

))

𝑟𝑜∕

𝛼𝜎2
𝑜
< 0 as long as 

+

Proof of Proposition 2. From (10), market clearing, and assumption 
A1, we have E𝑡[𝑟𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑
] = −𝜅𝑥 ⋅ 𝜓𝑡 − 𝛼𝑉 ⋅ 𝑑𝑡. The expression for 𝜓𝑡 fol-
𝑡+1
lows from (13) and assumption A2. □

Proof of Proposition 3. The  results  on  the  𝐵𝑖,  𝑖 = {𝑚, 𝑑, 𝑤},  coeﬃ-
cients follow directly from the deﬁnition of swap returns and the equi-
librium coeﬃcients (18b)-(18a). □

Proof of Proposition 4. Equation (21) follows from the deﬁnition of 
𝑚𝑡,  (7),  and  (16).  Equation  (22) follows  from  combining  (21) with 
(8). □

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381424S.G. Hanson, A. Malkhozov and G. Venter

Appendix.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103814.

References

Adrian, T., Crump, R.K., Moench, E., 2013. Pricing the term structure with linear regres-

sions. J. Financ. Econ. 110 (1), 110–138.

Adrian, T., Etula, E., Muir, T., 2014. Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of 

asset returns. J. Finance 69 (6), 2557–2596.

Anderson, C., Liu, W., 2021. Inferring intermediary risk exposure from trade. Working 

paper. Federal Reserve Board.

Augustin, P., Chernov, M., Schmid, L., Song, D., 2021. Benchmark interest rates when the 

government is risky. J. Financ. Econ. 140 (1), 74–100.

Begenau, J., Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., 2020. Banks’ risk exposures. Working paper. 

Stanford University.

Boyarchenko, N., Eisenbach, T.M., Gupta, P., Shachar, O., Van Tassel, P., 2020. Bank-
intermediated arbitrage. Staﬀ Report 858. Federal Reserve Bank of New, York.
Boyarchenko, N., Gupta, P., Steele, N., Yen, J., 2018. Negative swap spreads. Fed. Reserve 

Bank New York Econ. Pol. Rev. 24 (2), 1–14.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Pedersen, L.H., 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Rev. 

Campbell, J.Y., 2018. Financial Decisions and Markets: A Course in Asset Pricing. Prince-

Financ. Stud. 22 (6), 2201–2238.

ton University Press.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future 

dividends and discount factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1 (3), 195–228.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1991. Yield spreads and interest rate movements: a bird’s eye 

view. Rev. Econ. Stud. 58 (3), 495–514.

Chen, H., Joslin, S., Ni, S.X., 2018. Demand for crash insurance, intermediary constraints, 

and risk premia in ﬁnancial markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (1), 228–265.

Cieslak, A., Pang, H., 2021. Common shocks in stocks and bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 142 

Cohen, L., Diether, K.B., Malloy, C.J., 2007. Supply and demand shifts in the shorting 

market. J. Finance 62 (5), 2061–2096.

Collin-Dufresne, P., Solnik, B., 2001. On the term structure of default premia in the swap 

and libor markets. J. Finance 56, 1095–1115.

Cortes, F., 2003. Understanding and modelling swap spreads. In: Quarterly Bulletin. Bank 

(2), 880–904.

of England.

De Long, B.J., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1990. Noise trader risk in 

ﬁnancial markets. J. Polit. Econ. 98 (4), 703–738.

Domanski, D., Shin, H.S., Sushko, V., 2017. The hunt for duration: not waving but drown-

ing? IMF Econ. Rev. 65 (1), 113–153.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2021. Banking on deposits: maturity transformation 

without interest rate risk. J. Finance 76 (3), 1091–1143.

Driscoll, J.C., Judson, R.A., 2013. Sticky deposit rates. Working paper. Board of Governors 

Du, W., Hébert, B., Huber, A.W., 2023. Are intermediary constraints priced? Rev. Financ. 

of the Federal Reserve System.

Stud. 36 (4), 1464–1507.

Du, W., Hébert, B., Li, W., 2022. Intermediary balance sheet and the treasury yield curve. 

Working paper. University of Chicago.

Du, W., Tepper, A., Verdelhan, A., 2018. Deviations from covered interest rate parity. J. 

Finance 73 (3), 915–957.

Duarte, J., Longstaﬀ, F.A., Yu, F., 2006. Risk and return in ﬁxed-income arbitrage: nickels 

in front of a steamroller? Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (3), 769–811.

Duﬃe, D., 2017. Post-crisis bank regulations and ﬁnancial market liquidity. Technical 

report. Banca d’Italia.

Duﬃe, D., Singleton, K.J., 1997. An econometric model of the term structure of interest-

rate swap yields. J. Finance 52, 1287–1321.

Fama, E., Bliss, R.R., 1987. The information in long-maturity forward rates. J. Financ. 

Econ. 77 (4), 680–692.

Feldhütter, P., Lando, D., 2008. Decomposing swap spreads. J. Financ. Econ. 88, 375–405.

Fleming, M.J., Rosenberg, J.V., 2008. How do treasury dealers manage their positions? 

Fontaine, J.-S., Garcia, R., Gungor, S., 2023. Intermediary leverage shocks and funding 

conditions. Working paper. Bank of Canada.

Fry, R., Pagan, A., 2005. Some issues in using vars for macroeconometric research. Tech-

Technical report.

nical report.

Fry, R., Pagan, A., 2011. Sign restrictions in structural vector autoregressions: a critical 

review. J. Econ. Lit. 49 (4), 938–960.

Gârleanu, N., Pedersen, L.H., 2011. Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the 

law of one price. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24, 1980–2022.

Goldberg, J., Nozawa, Y., 2021. Liquidity supply in the corporate bond market. J. Fi-

nance 76 (2), 755–796.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Ray, W., Vayanos, D., 2020. A preferred-habitat model of term premia 

and currency risk. Working paper. London School of Economics.

Greenwood, R., Hanson, S.G., Stein, J.C., Sunderam, A., 2017. Strengthening and stream-

lining bank capital regulation. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 48 (2), 479–565.

Greenwood, R., Hanson, S.G., Stein, J.C., Sunderam, A., 2022. A quantity-driven theory 
of term premiums and exchange rates. Working paper. Harvard Business School.
Greenwood, R., Vayanos, D., 2014. Bond supply and excess bond returns. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 27 (3), 663–713.

2465–2502.

Haddad, V., Sraer, D., 2020. The banking view of bond risk premia. J. Finance 75 (5), 

Hanson, S.G., 2014. Mortgage convexity. J. Financ. Econ. 113 (2), 270–299.
He, Z., Kelly, B., Manela, A., 2017. Intermediary asset pricing: new evidence from many 

asset classes. J. Financ. Econ. 126 (1), 1–35.

He, Z., Nagel, S., Song, Z., 2022. Treasury inconvenience yields during the covid-19 crisis. 

J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 57–79.

Hu, G.X., Pan, J., Wang, J., 2013. Noise as information for illiquidity. J. Finance 68, 

2341–2382.

(1), 212–238.

Jermann, U., 2020. Negative swap spreads and limited arbitrage. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 

Kekre, R., Lenel, M., Maindardi, F., 2022. Monetary policy, segmentation, and the term 

structure. Working paper. University of Chicago.

Kiefer, N.M., Vogelsang, T.J., 2005. A new asymptotic theory for heteroskedasticity-

autocorrelation robust tests. Econom. Theory 21, 1130–1164.

Klingler, S., Sundaresan, S., 2019. An explanation of negative swap spreads: demand for 

duration from underfunded pension plans. J. Finance 74 (2), 675–710.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The aggregate demand for treasury debt. 

Lang, L.H., Litzenberger, R.H., Liu, A.L., 1998. Determinants of interest rate swap spreads. 

J. Polit. Econ. 120 (2), 233–267.

J. Bank. Finance 22, 1507–1532.

Liu, J., 2020. Comovement in arbitrage limits. Working paper. University of Hong, Kong.
Liu, J., Longstaﬀ, F.A., Mandell, R.E., 2006. The market price of risk in interest rate swaps: 

the roles of default and liquidity risks. J. Bus. 79, 2337–2359.

Lowenstein, R., 2000. When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-Term Capital Man-

agement. Random House, New York.

Malkhozov, A., Mueller, P., Vedolin, A., Venter, G., 2016. Mortgage risk and the yield 

curve. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (5), 1220–1253.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-deﬁnite, heteroskedasticity and 

autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703–708.

O’Brien, J., Berkowitz, J., 2007. Estimating bank trading risk: a factor model approach. 
In: Carey, M., Stulz, R.M. (Eds.), The Risks of Financial Institutions. University of 
Chicago Press.

Perli, R., Sack, B.P., 2003. Does mortgage hedging amplify movements in long-term in-

terest rates? J. Fixed Income 13 (3), 7–17.

Siriwardane, E., Sunderam, A., Wallen, J., 2021. Segmented arbitrage. Working paper. 

Harvard Business School.

TBAC, 2021. Treasury borrowing advisory committee report to treasury. Technical report.
Uhlig, H., 2005. What are the eﬀects of monetary policy on output? Results from an 

agnostic identiﬁcation procedure. J. Monet. Econ. 52, 381–419.

Vayanos, D., Vila, J.-L., 2021. A preferred-habitat model of the term structure of interest 

rates. Econometrica 89, 77–112.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10381425