Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

How does competition aﬀect retail banking? Quasi-experimental evidence 
from bank mergers ✩
Jack Liebersohn

Department of Economics, University of California, Irvine 92617, United States of America

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

This  paper  studies  bank  antitrust  rules  which  discontinuously  shift  bank  mergers’  competitive  impact.  The 
likelihood of mandatory divestiture rises sharply for mergers in markets above a threshold level of concentration, 
leading to an increase in the number of banks in these markets. Consistent with greater competition, intervention 
leads to higher deposit rates. Mortgage originations rise by 11%, from both reﬁnancing and purchases. However, 
small business loan quantities do not change. The eﬀects of intervention do not dissipate over time, and nonbank 
lenders respond similarly to banks. Overall, antitrust rules can increase bank competition, but relationships 
protect banks from competitors.

Dataset link: Supplementary data for ‘‘How
Does Competition Aﬀect Retail Banking ?
Quasi -Experimental Evidence From Bank
Mergers ’’ (Original Data)

JEL classiﬁcation:
L41
G21
G28
K21

Keywords:
Banking
Financial institutions
Competition
Antitrust
Deposits

1.  Introduction

Over the past thirty years, market concentration has increased sub-
stantially in the United States. There has been a robust debate in the 
economics literature about the causes and consequences of rising con-
centration, which has been blamed for a variety of problems, including 
higher prices, less investment, and greater inequality (Benmelech et al., 
2018; Grullon et al., 2019; Covarrubias et al., 2020; Dorn et al., 2017).1
A central question for interpreting these trends is how changes in local 
concentration aﬀect prices and quantities, and how the eﬀects of com-
petition vary across goods. This paper provides new evidence on these 
questions in the retail banking market, a setting where the same ﬁrms 

compete in diﬀerent product markets that vary in their switching and 
search costs as well as the importance of relationships.

Understanding how products are aﬀected by local competition has 
important  implications  for  antitrust  policy.  There  is  now  substantial 
interest from policy-makers and economists alike in the eﬀects of an-
titrust law, which is viewed as a possible remedy for the ills caused by 
falling competition (Philippon, 2019; Shapiro, 2018). One of the most 
important  antitrust  policies  is  mandatory  divestiture,  which  requires 
that merging ﬁrms sell some of their assets to a third-party competitor. 
In addition to providing evidence on the eﬀects of competition, this pa-
per provides a new analysis of the eﬀectiveness of such policies in an 

✩ Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. Previously circulated under the title “Does Local Bank Competition Still Matter? Quasi-Experimental Evidence 
from Bank Mergers”. Special thanks to my dissertation committee, Antoinette Schoar, Jonathan Parker, and Jim Poterba. Thanks to Phil Strahan for a very helpful 
discussion. Thanks to Tejaswi Velayudhan, Daniel Green, Ricardo Correa, Ying Fan, Xavier Giroud, Bill Goulding, Anne Gron, Greg Howard, Nancy Rose, Daniel 
Tarullo, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. Thanks to David Xu for excellent research assistance. Valuable feedback was provided 
by audiences at the American Financial Association annual meeting, the MIT Finance Lunch, the MIT Finance Seminar, and the Banco Central do Brasil Annual 
Seminar on Risk, Financial Stability and Banking.

E-mail address: cjlieber@uci.edu.

1 The recent literature on rising concentration in the United States is substantial. See Section 2 for a discussion of the literature.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103797
Received 5 July 2021; Received in revised form 29 January 2024; Accepted 30 January 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)103797Availableonline7February20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).J. Liebersohn

industry that has experienced a substantial increase in concentration at 
both the local and national levels.

I exploit a cutoﬀ rule in the application of bank antitrust policy to 
study the eﬀects of competition in markets where banks apply to merge. 
In banking markets where antitrust rules bind, merging banks divest 
branches, causing lower local bank concentration relative to markets 
where rules do not bind. Do customers beneﬁt? In retail banking, yes: 
Antitrust  rules  cause  higher  deposit  rates,  lower  mortgage  rates  and 
more mortgage reﬁnancing at nearby incumbent banks that are not in-
volved in the merger. However, I estimate no eﬀects of antitrust rules 
on the small business loan market, where relationships with borrow-
ers “protect” banks from competition. The ﬁndings show that antitrust 
rules can be eﬀective at reducing concentration, but whether they help 
customers depends on the market structure; in markets where switching 
costs are high or relationships are important, merger regulation may be 
ineﬀective.

The question of how competition aﬀects retail banking is broadly 
important for credit markets and ﬁrms’ access to capital. Banking the-
ory makes ambiguous predictions that depend on the precise nature of 
banking and bank relationships, and the empirical literature has found 
mixed eﬀects of bank competition. Furthermore, the rise of online and 
nonbank lenders means that it is no longer clear that physical branches 
are  still  important  for  bank  competition,  raising  questions  for  bank-
ing theory and competition policy that assumes banking is “local.” The 
ﬁndings also contribute to a debate about whether bank mergers have 
negative eﬀects on consumers. Sapienza (2002) ﬁnds that bank mergers 
raise deposit rates in the long run because they lead to greater eﬃ-
ciency. In contrast, I ﬁnd that the increase in concentration caused by 
mergers lowers deposit rates, and that this eﬀect does not dissipate over 
time.2

This paper contributes to a growing literature that uses tools from 
applied  microeconomics  to  understand  the  eﬀects  of  mergers.  While 
there is debate about the relative merits of structural versus reduced-
form approaches to merger analysis in general (Nevo and Whinston, 
2010; Angrist and Pischke, 2010), the setting in this paper is well suited 
for  a  quasi-experimental  research  design.  This  is  because  I  focus  on 
mergers close to the regulatory cutoﬀ in an industry with many merg-
ers with plausibly-exogenous variation in antitrust enforcement. Nevo 
and Whinston (2010) argue that these are the criteria that make the 
“treatment eﬀects” framework I use fruitful.

The source of empirical variation is a quantitative cutoﬀ rule used 
by  U.S.  banking  authorities  to  determine  the  approval  conditions  of 
bank mergers which discontinuously changes the probability that reg-
ulators  intervene  in  a  market.3 This  results  in  some  markets  where 
mergers proceed as planned and others where regulators restrict con-
solidation.  When  banks  plan  to  merge,  regulators  decide  whether  to 
intervene based on how the merger would change the Herﬁndahl Index 
(HHI) of bank deposits in any market where both the absorbing and 
acquired bank have branches.4 Therefore, the same proposed merger 
might induce intervention in some banking markets but not others. I 
show that there is no evidence that the rule inﬂuences the banks’ de-
cision to merge,5 but it does mitigate the anti-competitive eﬀects of 

2 Covarrubias et al. (2020) argue that concentration during the 1990s — the 
period under study in Sapienza (2002) — was a result of greater eﬃciency. By 
contrast, my paper focuses on the 2000s, when Covarrubias et al. (2020) argue 
that concentration instead resulted in higher rents.
3 Note that antitrust rules in the banking sector are, in part, enforced by bank 
regulators, leading to a diﬀerent set of rules than in other product markets.
4 The Herﬁndahl Index is a measure of market concentration widely used in 
competition research and policy. Throughout this article, I use the deﬁnition of 
banking market used by bank regulators in the United States. Markets typically 
correspond to MSAs or non-MSA counties. The HHI for banks is measured using 
deposits data from the FDIC Summary of Deposits Database.
5 The reason for this is that merging branks typically operate in many diﬀer-
ent banking markets, but antitrust intervention nearly always aﬀects only one 

mergers in the markets where regulators intervene. Regulators require 
merging banks to divest branches in any market where the HHI would 
rise  by  at  least  200  points  to  a  level  above  1800.  If  the  HHI  would 
rise to a level below 1800, there is no such requirement. I exploit the 
heterogeneous application of antitrust rules above and below the 1800 
HHI cutoﬀ using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences design that compares bank-
ing markets whose pre-merger HHI is within a 800-point range of 1800. 
These eﬀects are robust to using alternative samples and a variety of 
alternative HHI ranges.

The structure of bank antitrust rules results in an important limi-
tation to the generalizability of the ﬁndings. Namely, the results are 
identiﬁed only for markets where bank mergers take place, and where 
competition is ex ante close to the antitrust threshold. Although the ﬁnd-
ings are not sensitive to the exact choice of markets, it is possible that 
competition could have diﬀerent eﬀects in markets without mergers, or 
in markets where the level of competition is already very high or very 
low.

The diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates show that antitrust enforce-
ment has a dramatic eﬀect on the level of concentration, which I then 
use  to  study  the  eﬀect  of  competition  on  bank  lending  and  deposits 
by  banks  uninvolved  in  the  mergers.  I  use  a  dynamic  diﬀerence-in-
diﬀerences estimator based on Wooldridge (2021) which calculates the 
average diﬀerence between treated and control markets across mergers 
and across time. The average eﬀect of intervention is a 183-point de-
crease in HHI, or a 0.12 log points. For comparison, a 183 point change 
in HHI would be approximately equivalent to a change from eight to 
seven equally-sized banks. These eﬀects are long-lasting and are not 
signiﬁcantly reduced by later bank entry into more concentrated mar-
kets.

Having  established  that  antitrust  laws  aﬀect  the  degree  of  bank 
concentration, I use this variation to study three diﬀerent retail mar-
kets where local banks play an important role: Deposits, small business 
loans, and home mortgages. I study mergers taking place from 1994-
2015 and study their eﬀects on retail banking markets from 1994-2017, 
ensuring that I have at least two post-merger years for each market. A 
good reason to study the eﬀects of antitrust in retail banking, in ad-
dition to the possibility of clean identiﬁcation, is that the same laws 
aﬀect diﬀerent product markets where competition works in diﬀerent 
ways. The results show that these diﬀerences matter for whether an-
titrust rules are eﬀective. There are three main ﬁndings.

First, deposit rates respond substantially to changes in local bank 
concentration. The 11% relative HHI decrease in treated markets (mar-
kets with predicted antitrust intervention) is associated with an increase 
in 6-month certiﬁcate of deposit (CD) rates of 0.08 percentage points 
and an increase in 12-month CD rates of 0.11 percentage points, both 
of which are consistent with increased competition and are large com-
pared  to  sample  median  rates  of  3.41%  and  3.76%  respectively  in 
treated markets. The increase is roughly uniform across CDs of diﬀer-
ent maturities. However, I estimate small or statistically insigniﬁcant 
eﬀects on interest-bearing checking and savings accounts. As a result, 
the eﬀects on deposit quantities are small and as well. These ﬁndings 
are important for two reasons. First, deposits are a relatively uniform 
product across regions and banks, so banks’ deposit rates are a good 
measure of market prices. The persistent eﬀect on CD rates I estimate 
implies that antitrust laws aﬀect competition, not just concentration. 
However, the fact that intervention raise rates only in the CD market 
and not in other deposit markets means that competition works diﬀer-
ently in these markets.6

Second, greater competition is associated with a 11% increase in the 
number of mortgages originated and a 0.10 percentage point reduction 

or two markets. Therefore, this rule can be inconsequential from the perspec-
tive of the merging banks as a whole, even as it does matter for those individual 
markets.
6 One possibility is that switching costs are lower in the CD market. Alter-
natively, banks compete for CD customers on prices whereas they compete for 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037972J. Liebersohn

in interest rates on new mortgages. There is some evidence that the ef-
fects on reﬁs are bigger, but this depends on the time horizon, since they 
are aﬀected with a greater lag. Decomposing the competitive response 
by borrower type, the increase in lending occurs more for lower-income 
borrowers and borrowers with a lower debt-to-income ratio.

Third, small business lending is hardly aﬀected by changes to bank 
competition. Neither loan volumes nor the number of loans change in 
response  to  antitrust  intervention.  This  ﬁnding  is  not  merely  due  to 
the local nature of bank competition, as I ﬁnd similar results when do-
ing the analysis at the level of the entire banking market (typically a 
city) and as in samples limited to borrowers located in the same zip 
code as branches of the merging banks. These ﬁndings hold for both 
estimates  at  the  aggregate  market  level  and  at  the  individual  bank 
level.

I also explore the eﬀects of mergers on new entry by online and 
non-local banks. Even though non-bank mortgage origination is an im-
portant  part  of  the  mortgage  market,  I  ﬁnd  little  evidence  that  new 
entry  by  non-bank  lenders  ameliorates  the  anticompetitive  eﬀects  of 
bank mergers. Even though online lenders do not have a physical pres-
ence, they are still aﬀected by local competition in a similar way to 
traditional banks. This suggests that the rise of nonbank and FinTech 
lending has not reduced the need for antitrust rules.

The identifying assumption for these estimates is that banks in mar-
kets where regulators intervene are on parallel trends relative to mar-
kets where regulators do not intervene. Three facts provide evidence 
for this. First, I show that there is no bunching of mergers below the 
1800  cutoﬀ.  One  would  expect  bunching  if  banks  were  merging  se-
lectively.7 Second, I show that there are parallel trends in the main 
outcome variables before intervention and also that intervention and 
non-intervention markets are ex ante indistinguishable on a variety of 
observables. Third, I do not estimate an eﬀect in a variety of placebo 
samples, such as one that uses the HHI=1800 cutoﬀ but restricts merg-
ers to those where the HHI increases by fewer than 200 points and are 
therefore unaﬀected by antitrust law. A variety of other tests and con-
trol variables provide further support for my identiﬁcation.

I use theories of bank competition to interpret the empirical results 
and to explain why diﬀerent ﬁnancial products respond diﬀerently to 
antitrust intervention. In models where banks invest in relationships, 
competition can reduce credit provision — the opposite prediction of 
traditional models where competition raises rates and reduces lending 
(Petersen  and  Rajan,  1995).  My  ﬁndings  show  that  diﬀerent  models 
apply  to  diﬀerent  local  ﬁnancial  markets  (Boot  and  Thakor,  2000). 
The results on small business lending are most consistent with mod-
els in which long-term relationships insulate banks from competition 
for commercial loans. However, competition reduces market power in 
the market for consumer products where relationships matter less.

An  inﬂuential  early  literature  used  inter- and  intra-state  branch 
banking  deregulation  as  a  shock  to  competition  and  found  that  in-
creased competition in the banking industry led to more lending and a 
lower cost of capital for ﬁrms (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996, 1998). But 
in the thirty years since the inter- and intra-state banking deregulation, 
signiﬁcant changes have occurred. One major change is an increase in 
market concentration, similar to changes that have occurred in other 
industries. Since 1994, the number of commercial banks has declined 
by ﬁfty percent from about 10,000 to about 5,000. As shown in Fig. 1, 
this consolidation has led to an increase in local bank concentration as 
measured by the Herﬁndahl Index, a change which is more pronounced 
in large cities.8 Another change is the entry of new nonbank lenders, 

Fig. 1. Average HHI and Top-3 share over time. To create this ﬁgure, I calculate 
the HHI and top-3 bank share by banking market, and take a deposit-weighted 
average of banking markets in each year. Data source: FDIC Summary of De-
posits database.

including FinTech ﬁrms. As a result, it is unclear whether competitive 
forces for retail banking still work the same way.

These two parallel changes — one potentially increasing competi-
tion, the other potentially decreasing it — have led to a debate about 
whether antitrust enforcement in banking is too lax or too strict. On 
the one hand, banks have argued that old regulations should no longer 
apply: Online and nonbank lending has nationalized banking markets 
and increased bank competition, so antitrust rules should be relaxed. 
For example, a merger application from BB&T Bank argues that “online 
lending and banking are not reﬂected in any local deposit-based analy-
sis” and hence its merger “would not have a substantial adverse eﬀect 
on competition” (BB&T Corporation, 2019). However, some consumer 
advocates believe that consolidation has reduced the competitiveness 
of banking markets. Responding to this concern, legislation introduced 
by Senator Elizabeth Warren would make merger review stricter and 
require  regulators  “to  examine  how  the  merger  would  impact  mar-
ket concentration for individual banking products, such as commercial 
deposits,  home  mortgage  lending,  and  small  business  lending  rather 
than just the general availability of banking products in local market-
s” (Warren, 2019). The ﬁndings in this paper speak directly this policy 
debate.

2.  Literature review

Economists have become increasingly interested in competition and 
competition policy because of evidence that competition has changed in 
the United States has changed over the past several decades (Gutierrez 
and  Philippon,  2017;  De  Loecker  et  al.,  2020;  Hall,  2018;  Syverson, 
2019). These changes have led to greater interest in antitrust law as 
a policy tool to aﬀect competition. An important contribution of this 
paper  is  to  provide  new  and  direct  evidence  for  the  eﬀectiveness  of 
such policies.

savings customers on services, which are not aﬀected by competition in a single 
market.
7 This is not surprising, as bank mergers typically involve a large number 
of markets, and antitrust action in a handful of markets is unlikely to derail a 
merger altogether.
8 Rossi-Hansberg et al. shows that, in many industries, concentration at the 
national level has increased but concentration at the local level has decreased. 

In the case of banking, concentration has increased at both the national and 
local levels. To create a representative measure of local concentration, the av-
erage HHI shown in Fig. 1 is calculated using a population-weighted average 
across all U.S. markets. Market concentration in low-population and rural mar-
kets hardly changed over this time and changes in the average are driven by 
changes in urban areas.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037973J. Liebersohn

The existing evidence on the eﬀects of antitrust law is mixed.9 Al-
though there is substantial research on the eﬀects of mergers, there is 
little focus on antitrust rules per se, and the research that exists largely 
uses structural models that estimate the eﬀects of a single merger.10 In 
part this is because some “reduced-form” studies of antitrust rules com-
pare the eﬀects of diﬀerent types of mergers in diﬀerent industries with 
potentially diﬀerent market structures (Nevo and Whinston, 2010). I 
address these critiques by focusing on a single industry with clearly-
deﬁned market deﬁnitions, where there exists plausbly-exogenous vari-
ation in merger enforcement.

This paper is also related to a large literature on bank competition 
and the eﬀects of bank mergers.11 Much of this literature studies the “in-
ternal” eﬀects of mergers — the eﬀects on the banks that actually merge 
— rather than on the eﬀects on the equilibrium provision of credit by 
other banks in the market. Two classic studies about the deposit market 
come to diﬀerent conclusions about the eﬀects of mergers: Prager and 
Hannan (1998) ﬁnds that mergers lead to lower deposit rates, whereas 
Focarelli and Panetta (2003) ﬁnds that the lower deposit rates are only 
temporary. Other papers have focused on the eﬀects of mergers on bank 
loans. For commercial lending, Di Patti and Gobbi (2007) ﬁnds that 
mergers reduce loan quantities, whereas Erel (2011) ﬁnds that mergers 
decrease loan rates. Studing the mortgage market, Allen et al. (2014)
study the cross-sectional eﬀects of a single large Canadian bank merger 
on the distribution of mortgage rates.

The methodology I employ is related to a growing literature on bank 
competition that uses quasi experimental methods to study bank com-
petition, beyond the setting of mergers. Gissler et al. (2020) study how 
banks and non-bank lenders respond to a rule allowing the expansion 
of particular types of credit unions. Drechsler et al. (2017) argue that 
monopoly power in the market for bank deposits plays an important 
role in explaining monetary policy pass-through. Scharfstein and Sun-
deram (2016) ﬁnd that market power matters for monetary policy in 
the mortgage market.

Theories of bank competition predict that the eﬀects of bank merg-
ers  depend  on  how  a  particular  market  functions.  In  the  model  de-
scribed by Petersen and Rajan (1995), monopolists may lend more than 
banks  in  competitive  markets  because  monopolists  can  smooth  prof-
its  over  the  course  of  their  lending  relationships.  Alternatively,  the 
“structure-conduct-performance” paradigm models banks as competing 
passively for customers’ deposits and loans, implying that greater com-
petition should lead to more lending at lower rates (Hannan, 1991). 
Finally, in the model by Boot and Thakor (2000), an increase to com-
petition would make banks shift from information-intensive loans that 
rely on competition, to loans that do not rely on relationship-speciﬁc in-
formation. My ﬁnding, that the eﬀects of competition vary by product, 
most closely match this type of model.

Two recent papers bear special discussion because they use similar 
data  or  methods  as  I  do.  First,  Nguyen  (2019) studies  banks’  volun-
tary branch closures following mergers to estimate the eﬀects of branch 
closings on retail banking markets. The paper demonstrates the impor-
tance  of  local  bank  branches  for  small  business  lending  by  studying 
branch closings following mergers. Branch closings reduce small busi-

9 Two reviews, Crandall and Winston (2003) and Baker (2003), come to oppo-
site conclusions about whether antitrust enforcement matters at all. One reason 
for this is the lack of systematic evidence about the causal eﬀect of antitrust 
enforcement, a problem that has not changed in the years since these reviews 
were written.
10 Exceptions to this include Ashenfelter et al. (2009), Blonigen and Pierce 
(2016), Kwoka (2014) and Kwoka (2017).
11 See Boot and Thakor (2000), Rajan (1992) and Petersen and Rajan (1994)
for various theories about the eﬀects of bank competition. In addition to lo-
cal deposit and credit markets, bank competition is thought to aﬀect ﬁnancial 
stability, labor markets and other local and national economic variables. Inter-
ested readers may refer to Beck (2008) and Degryse and Ongena (2008, 2008)
for research on the broader implications of bank competition.

ness lending but have no eﬀect on mortgage lending, which implies 
that relationships are important in the small business market but not for 
mortgages. Both this paper and Nguyen (2019) imply that relationships 
prevent small businesses from searching for other lenders easily, but 
“protecting” banks from competition. Second, Williams (2020) studies 
the eﬀects of bank size on the monetary policy, exploiting bank antitrust 
rules that create variation in bank size. Instead of studying how compe-
tition changes across markets, as I do, this paper looks within the same 
banking market, comparing branches from diﬀerent banks. It ﬁnds that 
branches owned by larger banks pass through monetary policy diﬀer-
ently than branches owned by smaller banks.

This paper is distinguished from the prior literature on bank com-
petition in several ways. The ﬁndings here provide policy-relevant ev-
idence on the eﬀects of antitrust rules; to the best of my knowledge, 
no other papers have studied the exogenous enforcement of antitrust 
rules, in banking or in any other industry. Furthermore, I show that the 
eﬀects of competition vary systematically across diﬀerent types of ﬁ-
nancial products oﬀered by the same banks at the same time, which 
I show using detailed local data rather than data from a single prod-
uct or from an entire institution. The ﬁndings imply that understanding 
the eﬀects of competition requires distinguishing among industries and 
even among products within the same industry. In my context, the ef-
fects of competition depend on the importance of relationships for each 
ﬁnancial product. Finally, instead of focusing on a single event, I use a 
sample containing a large number of bank mergers, allowing somewhat 
greater generalizability.

3.  Institutional setting

Banks in the United States that plan to merge must apply to the 
acquiring bank’s regulator – a Federal Reserve Bank or the FDIC, for 
example. Part of the regulator’s merger review is a screening for compli-
ance with antitrust law.12 The screening relies on a formal quantitative 
analysis of expected changes to the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) 
due to the merger, in each geographic market where both the acquir-
ing and target banks have branches. When banking markets involved in 
a merger violate the quantitative screening, regulators generally do not 
block the merger altogether. Rather, they require antitrust remedies to 
be applied to the violating banking markets. Merging banks often have 
branches in many of the same banking markets, but only the banking 
markets violating the quantitative screening require antitrust remedies; 
the merger can take place as planned in all other banking markets.13

The HHI screening has three steps. First, regulators calculate the HHI 
of bank deposit concentration in each market where both banks have 
branches.14 Market shares are measured using branch deposit data from 
the FDIC Summary of Deposits Database.

Second, regulators calculate the resulting HHI in each market if the 

merger went through as planned.

12 The regulator for the acquiring bank makes the initial merger decisions. 
Only when the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) disagrees with bank regula-
tors, which happens in a minority of cases, do courts get involved. This set of 
interventions is studied by Williams (2020) to understand how the eﬀects of 
monetary policy vary by bank size.
13 This section summarizes the antitrust review process. The Federal Reserve 
Board provides more detail as well as legal justiﬁcations on their web site, 
available  at  https://www .federalreserve .gov /bankinforeg /competitive -eﬀects -
mergers -acquisitions -faqs .htm.
14 Regional Federal Reserve Banks deﬁne the geographic banking markets. In 
urban areas, markets often coincide with cities, and in rural areas, they may 
be single counties. There is widespread discussion in the legal and economic 
literature about the right deﬁnition of a banking “market.” In order to exploit 
regulatory cutoﬀs, I use the Federal Reserve deﬁnitions for the antitrust anal-
ysis, just as the regulators themselves do. I use data provide by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis to create correspondence ﬁles between Federal Re-
serve market deﬁnitions and other data sources. The procedure for doing this is 
described in Online Appendix A.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037974J. Liebersohn

Third, markets where the HHI would increase by at least 200 points 
(Δ𝐻𝐻𝐼 > 200) to a level above 𝐻𝐻𝐼 = 1800 are ﬂagged for further 
review and antitrust remedies are required in these markets. Discus-
sions with bank regulators indicate that the two parts of the threshold 
– 200 and 1800 – are not chosen because they are believed to matter in 
an important and discontinuous way for banking markets. Rather, they 
are chosen based on their historical use in other, non-bank antitrust 
settings.15

Rather than blocking bank mergers altogether when a banking mar-
ket fails the HHI screening, regulators require an antitrust remedy: The 
merging banks must sell some of the branches in the oﬀending mar-
kets to a third-party bank with no prior local presence. This is known 
as branch divestiture. The purpose of branch divestiture is to maintain 
a high level of competition in banking markets that would otherwise 
become non-competitive due to a merger. Regulators generally require 
that the former branches of the target bank be the ones divested. This 
is to prevent customers from re-opening their accounts at a diﬀerent 
branch of their old bank, which would be possible if the branches of the 
acquirer were divested instead (Pilloﬀ, 2005; Burke, 1998). The num-
ber of divested branches is either all the divested branches or however 
many are enough to bring HHI back to 1800 (Pilloﬀ, 2005). In prac-
tice, this nearly always means divesting all the acquired branches in 
violating markets.16

Regulators monitor the divestiture process to ensure that divested 
branches remain active after they are sold. To keep banks from sabo-
taging their divested branches, banks must bundle together each cus-
tomer’s complete bank services, including loans, deposits, credit cards, 
and  so  on,  and  all  of  these  must  be  divested  together  or  kept  to-
gether. Potential buyers of divested branches must also prove that they 
are suﬃciently large and experienced before they are allowed to buy 
the branches. Finally, regulators monitor divested branches for several 
years to ensure that the level of competition stays high in the banking 
market.17

This  paper’s  empirical  strategy  is  to  use  data  from  realized  bank 
mergers to predict, on an ex ante basis, which mergers required divesti-
ture and which did not. Section 5 will provide evidence that 1) despite 
regulatory  discretion,  it  is  possible  to  predict  reasonably  well  which 
markets require divestiture, and 2) comparing markets where I predict 
intervention and markets where I do not, incumbent banks react dif-
ferently due to regulatory intervention and not some other diﬀerence 
between these markets. A naive approach would use realized rather than 
predicted divestiture to identify changes in competition. The problem 
with the naive approach is that regulators’ actual divestiture decisions 
might be based on their predictions for the future of the banking market 
and not the HHI screening alone.

15 In addition to the “1800/200” rule described here, a merger might also be 
blocked if it leads to a bank having above 35% market share in any banking 
market. Discussions with bank regulators also indicate that merger screenings 
may also consider a Herﬁndahl Index calculated by weighting all bank branches 
equally. While these cutoﬀs may be important in some cases, in estimates, the 
eﬀects of these rules are quantitatively smaller than the 1800-200 rule that 
is the primary focus of this paper. There are times when regulators may ig-
nore HHI screening rules, for example if there is “evidence that rapid economic 
change has resulted in an outdated geographic market,” to use an example from 
an FDIC report. The next section will test and verify that these limits do impact 
divestiture on average.
16 In part because whose branches are divested may be endogenous to expec-
tations of future performance, my main estimation sample excludes branches 
from both the acquiring and absorbed banks and studies only the behavior of 
other banks in the region.
17 Pilloﬀ (2005) and Burke (1998) provide empirical evidence that the branch 
divestiture process works well in the sense that divested branches remain com-
petitive.

4.  Data sources and summary statistics

The  sample  of  banks  and  markets  is  determined  by  the  empiri-
cal strategy, which studies banking markets in a narrow range of the 
𝐻𝐻𝐼 = 1800 cutoﬀ. Speciﬁcally, the sample is limited to banking mar-
kets where the HHI is predicted to rise by at least 200 points and the 
pre-merger HHI is within 800 points of 1800, i.e., between 1000 and 
2600. The 1000 and 2600 cutoﬀs are chosen to ensure that the bank-
ing markets in the sample are not too far from 1800, but the results are 
robust to varying the exact cutoﬀs. Using these cutoﬀs yields 72 bank-
ing markets that are ever non-treated, and 157 banking markets that 
are ever treated. Diﬀerences in geography and years of coverage mean 
that sample sizes are somewhat smaller when using data sources not 
available in all regions or years. I will mostly focus on the response of 
incumbent bank branches to changes in competition. By “incumbents,” 
I mean branches located in the same banking market as merging banks 
that do not actually take part in the merger themselves either as an 
acquirer or as the absorbed bank.18

Table 1 shows summary statistics for treated and non-treated bank-
ing  markets  in  the  sample.  The  summary  statistics  are  reported  for 
the year of the merger. This includes statistics on the main outcome 
variables (deposit rates and mortgages). It also includes market-level 
averages of demographic variables in order to give a sense of what kinds 
places these banking markets are.

Table 1 shows that treated markets have a lower population, lower 
income  and  lower  deposit  rates  per  capita.  In  part  this  is  because 
mergers do not happen at the same time everywhere, which the iden-
tiﬁcation strategy will deal with by comparing treated to non-treated 
markets with mergers happening in the same year. The smaller size is 
a mechanical result of the fact that smaller banking markets are more 
concentrated. Importantly, size diﬀerences are not a problem for iden-
tiﬁcation. As I will show using formal tests, the two groups of markets 
show similar trends in terms of the main outcome variables, supporting 
the parallel trends assumption required for identiﬁcation.19 The fact 
they  there  will  be  few  statistically  distinguishable  diﬀerences  in  the 
trends across both types of markets will support this assumption.

Another diﬀerence between treated and control markets is that the 
change in HHI is larger in treated markets. One reason for this follows 
from  how  HHI  is  calculated.  Since  control  markets  are  concentrated 
by deﬁnition, the same proposed merger will cause a larger change in 
the HHI in these markets. A second reason is that larger mergers are 
more likely to result in an HHI above 1800. What does this imply for 
the identiﬁcation strategy? One important result of this diﬀerence is 
to underline the fact that the estimates will be average treatment on 
the treated (ATT). In other words, they will estimate the average eﬀect 
of  mergers  on  treated markets.  To  understand  how  treatment  eﬀects 
vary by market size, I will explore diﬀerences by market size. Second, 
this diﬀerence raises the question of whether the types of banks enter-
ing these markets, or the pre-merger trends in outcome variables, are 
diﬀerent between treated and control markets. To understand this, in 
addition to pre-trends tests, I will test for diﬀerences in the types of 
banks entering each market.

4.1.  Data sources

Using various sources of banking data, I construct a panel of market-
by-year information for the years 1994-2017. For some data sources, 
data going back to 1994 is not possible, and I note this in the data 
description.

18 The estimates are also robust to removing banks that purchase branches of 
either of the merging banks within two years of the merger.
19 Similar levels are neither suﬃcient nor necessary for parallel trends, which 
is the identifying assumption. However, one might worry that larger and smaller 
towns are on diﬀerent trajectories, leading to non-parallel trends.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037975J. Liebersohn

Table 1
Summary Statistics by Banking Market, Intervention and Non-Intervention mergers. Summary statis-
tics by banking market as of the merger year for mergers with and without predicted intervention. 
Sample sizes vary depending on data availability. Banking market deﬁnitions are provided by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis “CASSIDI” team. Data sources: RateWatch, Community Reinvest-
ment Act, HMDA, FDIC Summary of Deposits, County Business Patterns, IRS Statistics of Income.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

Obs.

Panel A: Intervention

Payrolls Per Worker
APY, 6-Month CD
APY, 12-Month CD
Business Establishments
Deposits Per Branch
Purchase Loans Per Capita (th)
Reﬁ Loans Per Capita (th)
Population
Income per Capita (th)
Households

Panel B: Non-Intervention

Payrolls Per Worker (th)
APY, 6-Month CD
APY, 12-Month CD
Business Establishments
Deposits Per Branch
Purchase Loans Per Capita (th)
Reﬁ Loans Per Capita (th)
Population
Income per Capita (th)
Households

25.64
3.41
3.76
5,553.06
31,627.32
11.24
12.85
228,015.82
17.86
198,734.75

29.07
2.92
3.26
14,573.15
33,666.47
15.65
17.02
558,033.44
21.28
481,795.75

5.45
1.49
1.50
12,034.53
10,863.26
6.49
10.63
479,624.86
4.26
424,515.94

6.50
1.60
1.63
26,575.92
9,784.49
9.12
10.91
959,185.89
5.23
824,094.52

17.51
0.07
0.15
277.00
9,672.50
0.24
0.10
6,333.00
7.79
2,721.00

16.17
0.10
0.10
694.00
15,861.57
0.50
0.08
24,734.00
11.58
21,295.00

40.75
5.26
5.58
84,267.00
88,519.50
31.58
71.96
2,954,274.00
30.95
2,635,986.00

46.13
5.04
5.29
124,110.00
73,271.88
47.41
54.91
4,644,327.00
39.07
3,908,300.00

157
95
96
157
171
157
157
157
157
157

72
56
56
72
72
72
72
72
72
72

Measuring banking markets The main analysis uses the same deﬁnitions 
as  bank  regulators  which  are  provided  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank 
of St. Louis. Historical deﬁnitions from before 2016 are not available. 
This means that it is not possible to precisely replicate regulators’ HHI 
screening process at every given moment in the past. This limitation, 
as well as regulators’ discretion to waive antitrust rules, means that I 
cannot perfectly predict when divestiture actually happened and so the 
estimates will be intent-to-treat (ITT).

For each banking market involved in a merger where both the sur-
viving  and  purchased  bank  have  branches,  I  calculate:  1)  The  HHI 
immediately before the merger takes place, the pre-merger HHI; 2) The 
HHI that would result if the merger went through as planned and no lo-
cal branches were divested, the predicted HHI; 3) The diﬀerence between 
these, the predicted change in HHI due bank mergers.20 The Federal Re-
serve Bank of St. Louis also provides banks with the geographic market 
deﬁnitions used in these calculations which I use to reconstruct their 
calculations. I use the deﬁnitions that they provide and match these to 
the various data sources in order to calculate statistics at the banking 
market level. I also verify the accuracy of my HHI calculations by show-
ing that they are the same as those calculated by the CASSIDI tool when 
applied to current branches.

Deposits data To simulate historical merger screenings and study de-
posit quantities, I use the FDIC Summary of Deposits (SOD) database. 
I match SOD data to data on retail deposit rates provided by the ﬁrm 
RateWatch. This dataset includes branch-level retail deposit rates na-
tionally.  I  use  deposit  rates  data  for  $10,000  CDs,  interest-bearing 
checking, and savings accounts.

Mortgage data Mortgage lending data is from the Home Mortgage Dis-
closure  Act  (HMDA).  The  main  HMDA  variables  I  consider  are  total 
lending and the number of loans for purchase and reﬁnance mortgages.

20 The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis provides a free online tool, CASSIDI, 
which performs these calculations for all bank branches that are in place at the 
time users browse the site. CASSIDI is available at https://cassidi .stlouisfed .org /
index. Thanks to the CASSIDI team for their help in understanding the antitrust 
screening process and for providing data on banking market deﬁnitions.

To measure interest rates, I use data from a national credit registry, 
the University of California Consumer Credit Panel (UC-CCP). The UC-
CCP is a national credit database similar to other credit panels used 
in  recent  research,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s 
Consumer Credit Panel. It contains comprehensive credit information 
from a 2% sample of U.S. households with credit history. I infer interest 
rates by calculating the implied interest rate based on the amortization 
formula and residualizing borrower and lender information. Then I cal-
culate the average interest rate in each zip code and year for mortgages 
originated that year. See Online Appendix H for more details.

Small business lending
I measure lending using Community Reinvest-
ment Act (CRA) data which is reported in two ways: By lender-county-
year and by census tract-year. I study both, although the main sample 
uses the lender-county-year data because this makes it possible to ex-
clude the merging banks from the sample. The main CRA variables are 
the number of loans and loan volume, both measured at the bank level. 
I use CRA data beginning in 1996.

Online Appendix A provides further details of the data and cleaning 

process.

5.  Empirical strategy

This paper’s empirical strategy exploits the heterogenous applica-
tion of antitrust rules in banking markets above and below the 1800 
HHI cutoﬀ. As described in Section 3, regulators do not require branch 
divestiture in banking markets where the predicted HHI rises by at least 
200 points to a level below 1800. When the predicted HHI rises by at 
least 200 points to a level above 1800, however, regulators do require 
branch divestitures, so competition does not fall as much in these mar-
kets. This means that mergers in banking markets experiencing similar 
trends can have very diﬀerent eﬀects on the level of bank competition, 
depending on which side of the cutoﬀ the HHI falls. To evaluate the 
eﬀects of bank competition, I compare the change in competition and 
bank behavior in markets above and below the 1800 HHI cutoﬀ.21 A 

21 In principal, it is possible for a treated market to have a smaller change in 
HHI than a similar control market. For example, consider two markets with an 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037976J. Liebersohn

market could be treated either because its ex ante HHI is high or be-
cause it has a high predicted change in HHI due to the merger. Because 
the average change in HHI is small relative to the possible range of ex 
ante HHIs, most of the selection into treatment comes from the market’s 
ex ante HHI.

I limit my analysis to markets whose pre-merger HHI is within a 
800-point  range  of  1800.  The  goal  is  not  to  ensure  that  the  treated 
and control markets are identical, but rather to exclude much larger or 
much smaller markets which might not be on parallel trends.22 Hence 
the treatment group is deﬁned as markets involved in mergers, where 
the predicted HHI increase is at least 200 points, the predicted HHI level 
is above 1800, and the pre-merger HHI is within 800 points of 1800, i.e. 
1800-2600. Likewise, the control group is deﬁned as markets involved 
in mergers where the predicted HHI increase is at least 200 points, but 
the predicted post-merger HHI level is 1000-1800.23

5.1.  Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences design

I use a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimator which compares treated 
and  untreated  banking  markets  before  and  after  mergers  occur.  Es-
timates  are  limited  to  within  a  10-year  period  of  the  merger  itself. 
The  main  estimates  use  a  staggered  diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences  estima-
tor. Following the regression-based approach advocated by Wooldridge 
(2021) and Wooldridge (2022), I allow for treatment eﬀects to vary by 
merger and by post-treatment year. This methodology addresses several 
critiques  of  the  dynamic  diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences  literature  made  by 
Goodman-Bacon (2021). Wooldridge (2021) derives a regression-based 
method that allows for treatment eﬀect heterogeneity and is optimal 
under general conditions.24

Typical  staggered  diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences  speciﬁcations  use  non-
treated  observations  (either  never-treated  or  not-yet-treated)  as  the 
comparison group for treated observations. Relative to the canonical 
staggered diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences assumptions,  the setting here uses 
assumptions that are weaker in one key respect. In a typical staggered 
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences design, units that are treated in the future act 
as controls for units that are treated at any particular time. But in the 
setting here, the regression speciﬁcation only uses mergers from the 
same cohort but without intervention as a control for mergers with an-
titrust intervention (i.e., rather than using mergers with intervention 
that take place in the future). The identifying assumptions are that there 
are parallel trends and no-anticipation for each treated banking market 
relative to non-treated banking markets where a merger took place in 
the same year.

Building  on  Wooldridge  (2021),  I  use  a  pooled  diﬀerence-in-
diﬀerences estimator that estimates dynamic treatment eﬀects that vary 
by event-time and by cohort. The speciﬁcation is:

𝑌𝑖𝑡 =

∑

+

∑

𝛿𝑐(𝑖),𝑡𝐶𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐(𝑖),𝑡 +
∑

𝛾𝑖𝑀𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑟𝑖
𝛽𝑐(𝑖),𝑡𝑃 𝑂𝑆𝑇𝑐(𝑖),𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑇𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

{𝑐,𝑡>𝑐(𝑖)}

(1)

ex ante HHI of 1500, where the ﬁrst one has a predicted post-merger HHI of 
1700 and the second has a post-merger HHI of 1900. The former might have an 
HHI of change of 200 points while the latter has a change of only 100 points 
(because regulators require branches to be divested such that the resulting HHI 
is 1800). In practice, this situation rarely occurs and treated markets have a 
more negative change in HHI than control markets. The reason is that most 
treated markets have an HHI which begins above 1800, hence the change in 
HHI is roughly zero.
22 Hertzberg et al. (2011) and Mello (2019) use similar strategies to exploit 
interventions that are applied with fuzzy cutoﬀ rules.
23 Figure C.1 in the Online Appendix shows a map of the treatment and control 
markets; they are evenly distributed throughout the country and tend to be 
small- to medium-sized cities.
24 Estimates using this regression-based approach equal estimates from the 
imputation approach in Borusyak et al. (2021), while being easier to compute 
using standard statistical packages.

where 𝑖 indexes mergers taking place in particular banking markets, 𝑐(𝑖)
is market 𝑖’s merger cohort deﬁned as the year the merger took place, 
𝛿𝑐𝑡 is the coeﬃcient on a ﬁxed eﬀect which varies by merger cohort 
and observation year (cohort-year ﬁxed eﬀects), 𝛾𝑖 is the coeﬃcient on 
a ﬁxed eﬀect which varies by market-merger pair (merger ﬁxed eﬀects). 
𝑇 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑇 is an indicator equal to 1 for treated markets and 𝑃 𝑂𝑆𝑇𝑐(𝑖),𝑡
is equal to 1 in year 𝑡 after the merger for markets in cohort 𝑐(𝑖).25
𝛽𝑐(𝑖),𝑡 is  a  coeﬃcient  on  the  treatment  eﬀect  which  varies  by  event-
time and merger cohort. 𝑌𝑖𝑡 is the appropriate outcome variable (e.g., 
deposit rates or mortgage amounts). I use data from ten years before 
to ten years after the merger year.26 Hence a separate treatment eﬀect 
𝛽𝑐(𝑖),𝑡 is estimated by treatment cohort and year for each post-treatment 
year. The overall treatment eﬀect reported in the regression tables is 
the weighted average over the estimated 𝛽𝑐(𝑖),𝑡s, with weights given by 
the number of observations used to calculate that coeﬃcient (i.e., the 
number of observations in that particular year and merger cohort).

∑

I formally test for diﬀerential pre-trends between treatment and con-
trol markets following the approach proposed by Wooldridge (2021). 
The pre-trends tests show 1) that there is no statistically signiﬁcant time 
pre-trend in treated relative to control markets and 2) that the years 
immediately before the merger show no evidence of “anticipation” in 
treated  markets.  Having  veriﬁed  that  the  parallel  trends  assumption 
holds, I then graph the dynamic eﬀects in post-merger years. The event 
study plots in this paper are created by calculating the weighted average 
of 𝛽𝑐𝑡 for each year relative to the merger year, with the average taken 
over all cohorts and the weights equal to the number of observations in 
each cohort-year: 𝛽(𝑡) = 1
𝛽𝑐𝑡𝑤𝑐𝑡 where 𝑤𝑐𝑡 is the number of ob-
𝑊
servations and 𝑊 =
𝑤𝑐𝑡. Estimates are presented as a graph of 𝛽(𝑡)
for 𝑡 from 1 to 5 years.27 While estimates are calculated for later years, 
the coeﬃcients are noisy since they rely on few observations, making 
them less informative for understanding the dynamic eﬀects of mergers.
Two additional speciﬁcations are used in the paper. First, count vari-
ables use Poisson regression instead of ordinary least squares. Second, 
I use a long diﬀerences regression instead of a ﬁxed eﬀects regression. 
The long-diﬀerences speciﬁcation studies the change in outcome vari-
ables from 𝑡 = 0 to 𝑡 = 5 relative to the merger. The advantage of this 
speciﬁcation is that it naturally allows for the addition of controls to 
show how these change the results. These speciﬁcations are described 
in more detail in Online Appendix B.

{𝑐}

∑

See Online Appendix G for more detail on the two formal pre-trends 

tests along with the estimates themselves.

25 Note that the non-interacted 𝑇 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑇 eﬀect is fully absorbed by the unit 
ﬁxed eﬀects and so does not need to be included in the speciﬁcation. The non-
interacted 𝑃 𝑂𝑆𝑇 variable is absorbed by the cohort-year ﬁxed eﬀects.
26 An  equivalent  approach  would  be  to  estimate  a  separate  diﬀerence-in-
diﬀerences speciﬁcation for each merger cohort, comparing the treated merger-
markets in each year to the non-treated merger-markets whose merger took 
place the same year. The regression speciﬁcation for each speciﬁcation would 
be:

∑

𝑌𝑖𝑡 =

𝛿𝑡𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 +

∑

𝛾𝑖𝑀𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑟𝑖 +

∑

{𝑡>̄𝑡}

𝛽𝑡𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(2)

Speciﬁcation (2) would be estimated separately for each merger cohort. 
The overall diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimate from many such speciﬁcations 
would be the average of the coeﬃcients from the non-staggered diﬀerence-in-
diﬀerences estimates. Using this approach would yield the same results as the 
single-step estimator I use. However, the disadvantage of estimating multiple 
non-dynamic speciﬁcations and taking the average is that the standard errors 
are not adjusted for the fact that the same markets may be in multiple cohorts.
27 Wooldridge (2022) and Borusyak et al. (2021) argue against the event-study 
plots commonly shown in diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences papers that include both pre-
and post-treatment years because they combine tests of identifying assumptions 
(i.e., pre-trends) with estimates of the coeﬃcients, so I only show post-treatment 
years.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037977J. Liebersohn

Fig. 2. Histogram of post-merger HHIs. Sample includes each merger with a 
predicted HHI increase of at least 200 points but where the post-merger HHI 
varies. Mergers with a predicted post-merger HHI above 1800 are the “treated” 
group in the regression sample. The lack of bunching below the HHI=1800 
cutoﬀ provides evidence against endogenous merger selection.

Fig. 3. Spinoﬀ likelihood by post-merger HHI. For each merger with a predicted 
HHI increase above 200, I calculate the fraction of branches sold in the year 
after the merger. Mergers are binned by their predicted post-merger HHI. Those 
with a predicted post-merger HHI above 1800 are the “treated” group in the 
regression samples.

5.2.  Identifying assumptions

The identifying assumption is that incumbent banks’ response to a 
merger in their market would have been the same in treatment and con-
trol markets if regulators had not intervened in the treated markets. As 
antitrust intervention is determined by a regulatory cutoﬀ that is not 
chosen with the banking industry in mind, this identifying assumption 
is plausible. Alongside the pre-trends tests, key support for this assump-
tion will come from placebo tests showing no eﬀect when mergers occur 
but regulations do not bind.

I also provide evidence that sample selection coming from strate-
gic bank behavior is not a major concern for the empirical design. One 
might worry that banks strategically forego some otherwise-proﬁtable 
mergers when the mergers are likely to require branch divestiture. If 
this were the case, markets with mergers might be unobservably dif-
ferent than markets without mergers. In reality, bank mergers typically 
involve multiple banking markets and antitrust remedies are generally 
required in no more than a few of these. Therefore, as long as violating 
bank markets are not pivotal for banks’ merger decisions at a national 
level, it is plausible that the cutoﬀs do not lead to strategic merger be-
havior around the 1800 cutoﬀ.28

A histogram showing the density of mergers at diﬀerent HHI thresh-
olds  provides  direct  evidence  against  strategic  bank  selection.  Fig. 2
shows the density of predicted HHIs in banking markets where merg-
ers occur, limited to a sample where the HHI increase is at least 200 
points. If mergers were being avoided because of anticipated antitrust 
violation, one would expect to see fewer mergers just above the 1800 
threshold than below.29 Tables D.1 and D.2 in the Appendix show that 
banks in treatment and control markets are statistically indistinguish-
able, providing further evidence against strategic manipulation.

6.  Eﬀects of intervention on market structure

The empirical design relies on correctly predicting the application 
of antitrust rules. Section 3 discussed two reasons that predicting an-
titrust rule application could be challenging – regulatory discretion and 

mismeasurement of banking markets. However, this section provides 
evidence  that  antitrust  rules  do  indeed  aﬀect  bank  competition  in  a 
measurable way. The ﬁrst piece of evidence is that, as required by reg-
ulation, merging banks sell branches above the 1800 cutoﬀ. Second, 
these branch sales successfully lower the banking market HHI.

6.1.  Branch sales following mergers

The  immediate  eﬀect  of  antitrust  enforcement  is  an  increase  in 
branch sales. Fig. 3 shows the fraction of bank branches sold by merg-
ing banks in markets both above and below the 1800 HHI cutoﬀ. The 
ﬁgure measures branches sold to competitors by merging banks in the 
year after bank mergers. In markets where the predicted HHI is below 
1800, about 3% of branches are sold to competitors, whereas in mar-
kets above the 1800 cutoﬀ, 13% are. Why are only 13% of branches sold 
and not more? The reason is that only enough branches must be sold to 
maintain an HHI below 1800. Furthermore, one would never expect all
branches owned by the merging banks to be sold, since in most cases 
only the branches of the bank being purchased – and not the acquiring 
bank – would generally be divested.30 Conﬁrming that these sales are a 
result of antitrust rules, Online Appendix Figure C.2 shows that a spike 
in sales that happen in the year of mergers or in the following year.

6.2.  Eﬀect of intervention on HHI

This subsection provides evidence that divestiture aﬀects the bank-
ing market HHI. Relative to non-intervention, intervention is intended 
to lower the HHI in the short run. If long-run diﬀerences in HHI per-
sist, it means that there is not suﬃcient entry by new banks into less-
competitive markets to equalize concentration.

Table 3 presents the main estimates of antitrust intervention on the 
HHI. Column 1 shows the average eﬀect of antitrust rules on the HHI 
and column 2 shows the eﬀect on the log of HHI, both estimated us-
ing  Equation  (1).  The  estimated  eﬀect  of  intervention  is  about  0.12 
log points. The sample in this study consists of banking markets with 
an HHI near the cutoﬀ of 1800. A natural question is how antitrust 

28 Further, the main regression results are very similar in a sample of bank 
mergers where the absorbing and acquired banks both have branches in multi-
ple banking markets.
29 Of course, it could be that banks avoid mergers which would cause more 
extreme changes in the HHI, but this does not matter for my identiﬁcation.

30 Online Appendix Figure C.3 replicates Fig. 3, limited to markets where the 
predicted change in HHI is below 200 points – a placebo test. This is limited to 
mergers with a predicted ex post HHI below 2000 because there are very few 
with a predicted HHI level above this where the HHI increase is below 200. 
There is no discontinuity at the 1800 cutoﬀ for the placebo sample.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037978J. Liebersohn

Fig. 4. Herﬁndahl Index Event Study. Event study graph showing the path of the HHI and the natural log of HHI in treated/divestiture and non-treated/no-
divestiture banking markets relative to merger year. Event study calculation is described in the text. HHI calculations give thrifts half weight as per regulatory 
guidelines. Calculations are as described in the text and are calculated from the FDIC Summary of Deposits Database.

Table 2
Pre-Trend Tests. This table tests for statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the main outcome variables between the treated and control 
markets in the three years prior to the merger, following Wooldridge (2022). The estimates in this table come from speciﬁcations in 
which the independent variables are treatment indicators interacted with pre-merger event-time indicators for the three years prior to 
the merger year. Columns 1, 2, 9 and 10 are estimated using ordinary least squares, and Columns 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 are estimated 
using Poisson regression. The sample is the same as the main estimates but omits post-merger years in treated markets. Standard errors 
clustered by banking market. See Online Appendix B for more details on the empirical speciﬁcation and Online Appendix G for further 
placebo tests.

(1)
6m CD

0.0366
(0.0710)

-0.0207
(0.0623)

0.0472
(0.0495)

1459
X
X
.
0.760
0.519

(2)
12m CD

0.0424
(0.0689)

-0.105∗
(0.0623)

0.0157
(0.0554)

1456
X
X
.
2.724
0.0475

𝐼𝑡−1 × 𝑇 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑇

𝐼𝑡−2 × 𝑇 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑇

𝐼𝑡−3 × 𝑇 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑇

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE
Chi2-Statistic
F-Statistic
P-Value

(3)
Purchase Ln

(4)
Reﬁ Ln

0.102∗
(0.0587)

0.0825∗
(0.0496)

0.0401
(0.0380)

2325
X
X
5.752
.
0.124

0.0702
(0.0505)

0.0691
(0.0550)

0.0427
(0.0587)

2315
X
X
3.665
.
0.300

(5)
CRA Vol

-0.0173
(0.0986)

0.0145
(0.0631)

-0.0163
(0.0469)

2135
X
X
2.120
.
0.548

(6)
CRA Lns

-0.0330
(0.0968)

0.00247
(0.0780)

-0.0287
(0.0564)

2135
X
X
6.165
.
0.104

(7)
Branches

0.106
(0.0917)

0.0728
(0.0805)

0.0718
(0.0667)

2585
X
X
4.491
.
0.213

(8)
Deposits

0.0521
(0.0808)

0.0205
(0.0749)

0.0289
(0.0611)

2612
X
X
4.539
.
0.209

(9)
Log(HHI)

(10)
HHI

-0.0443
(0.0383)

-0.0104
(0.0335)

-0.0149
(0.0286)

2693
X
X
.
1.074
0.361

-106.7
(70.80)

-84.09
(66.46)

-82.08
(59.48)

2693
X
X
.
0.848
0.469

rules aﬀect markets of other sizes, either smaller or larger. How do esti-
mates vary by market size? To shed light on this question, the estimates 
shown in columns 3 and 4 are restricted to a sample of markets with 
above- and  below  sample  median  population  respectively.  Note  that 
while each contains the same number of banking markets, the num-
ber of observations is nearly twice as large in column 4 because these 
mergers take place in the middle of the sample so more years of data 
are available. For small markets, the eﬀect of antitrust intervention on 
HHI is above 128 points and for large markets it is 163 points. Both 
estimates are statistically signiﬁcant. This ﬁnding show that antitrust 
intervention has substantial eﬀects in both types of markets, suggesting 
that there is scope for antitrust rules in markets of widely varying sizes. 
To understand the dynamic eﬀects of treatment, Fig. 4 shows an event 
study graph showing HHI changes in treatment and control markets rel-
ative to merger years. Following mergers, the HHI falls in the treatment 
group relative to the control group. Most of the eﬀect of the merger on 
the HHI is immediately in the year following the merger, with a small 
long-run change (the diﬀerence in coeﬃcients between early and late 
years is not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels). This follows 
naturally from the fact that most branch sales occur in the year after 
mergers. Pre-treatment trends are also not statistically distinguishable 
between treated and control markets, as shown in Table 2 and G.1 of 
the Online Appendix.

Since the treatment causes a lower level of market concentration in 
treated relative to control markets, it would be natural to expect greater 
entry in non-treated markets in the years after the merger. This would 
lead to treatment eﬀects that dissipate over time. Yet this is not what 
the results show. Instead, the treatment eﬀects both for concentration 
and for interest rates appear to be constant in the years following the 
merger. The main reason for this lack of convergence may lie in the 
way that banks decide to engage in mergers. Acquiring banks typically 
purchase all the branches of a target bank, so the level of concentration 
in a single market may not matter much for a bank’s entry decision. 
In addition, the change in concentration due to the treatment may not 
be large enough for banks to pay close attention to what happens in 
that market. For both these reasons, there may not be greater entry in 
non-treated markets despite higher concentration.

6.2.1.  Robustness and placebo checks

Online Appendix E shows a variety of and placebo checks for the 
eﬀect of intervention on HHI. First, I show that there is no estimated 
eﬀect in samples where antitrust rules do not apply. Second, I use long 
diﬀerences speciﬁcations to successively control for variables that are 
ex ante diﬀerent between treatment and control markets. The results 
do not change substantially. Third, I show that similar results hold in 
estimates using alternative geographies, such as ZIP codes. Fourth, I 
show that the estimates are similar using alternative 𝐻𝐻𝐼 and Δ𝐻𝐻𝐼

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1037979J. Liebersohn

Table 3
Deposit Market Herﬁndahl Index. Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates from an ordi-
nary least squares regression show the eﬀect of predicted antitrust intervention on 
local bank concentration. These estimates come from a speciﬁcation which estimates 
treatment eﬀects for each cohort that mergers take place and for each year in the ten 
years following the merger. Coeﬃcients shown in the table are the average treatment 
eﬀect across cohorts and across years, weighted by the number of observations in the 
sample. See section 5 for more details on the empirical strategy. Columns 1-2 show 
the eﬀect on the HHI (Herﬁndahl Index) and the log of HHI as measured using FDIC 
Summary of Deposits data. Columns 3-4 show HHI estimates limited to markets with 
above sample median and below sample median population respectively. Standard 
errors are clustered by banking market.

Post X Treat

(1)
HHI

-182.9∗∗∗
(58.44)

(2)
Log HHI

-0.119∗∗∗
(0.0336)

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE

4356
X
X

4356
X
X

(3)
HHI (small markets)

(4)
HHI (large markets)

-127.5∗∗
(63.02)

2103
X
X

-163.4∗∗∗
(59.07)

4127
X
X

cutoﬀs. Fifth, I show that similar results hold when using alternative 
estimation strategies, such as a sample with no overlap between years 
and markets.

7.  Eﬀect of competition on retail and small business banking

7.1.  Retail banking

The small business market is a quintessential setting where relation-
ships are likely to matter. By contrast, many retail banking markets, 
such as mortgage and deposits are often purely “transactional” (Boot 
and Thakor, 2000). At the same time, the degree of search and switching 
costs and market power may vary by particular product — consumers 
may ﬁnd it more diﬃcult to move their deposit accounts than to ﬁnd a 
new bank for their CDs or mortgages. This section explores how these 
diﬀerences result in diﬀerences in the eﬀects of competition.

7.1.1.  Deposit rates and quantities

The market for bank deposits is a natural setting to study the impor-
tance of antitrust rules on competition in the banking market. Deposit 
insurance means that deposits are a relatively uniform product across 
banks and across regions, relative to products in most other industries. 
Also, in speciﬁcations with time ﬁxed eﬀects, estimates of the eﬀect 
of competition on deposit rates are equivalent to estimates on deposit 
spreads, which are a good measure of competition. Finally, the deposits 
market shows similar dynamics to other parts of banking where there is 
competition between physical locations and new online entrants. For all 
these reasons, it is a natural starting point for understanding whether 
antitrust intervention matters for local competition and whether “local” 
branches still matter.

The ﬁrst ﬁnding is that antitrust intervention has a large eﬀect on 
rates for certiﬁcates of deposit, but not for other deposit products. Ta-
ble 4 shows estimates of antitrust intervention on certiﬁcate of deposit 
(CD) rates, interest-bearing checking rates and savings account rates at 
incumbent bank branches.31 The estimates in this table are again es-
timated using the speciﬁcation shown in Equation (1). Columns 1 and 
2 of the table show that antitrust intervention, and the accompanying 

increase in competition, is associated with a 0.08 percentage point rel-
ative  increase  in  6-month  deposit  rates  and  a  0.11  percentage  point 
relative increase in 12-month deposit rates. The estimates are statisti-
cally signiﬁcant at the 5% level. The estimates in columns 3 and 4 show 
that the eﬀects on rates for interest-bearing checking are negative and 
not statistically distinguishable from zero.32 Pre-trends tests, shown in 
columns 1-2 of Tables 2 and G.1 of the Online Appendix, support the 
identifying assumption of parallel trends between treated and control 
markets.

To explore dynamic eﬀects, Fig. 5 shows two series, the evolution 
of 12-month deposit rates and the evolution of savings rates following 
the merger. Overall the dynamic eﬀects are somewhat noisy, but the ef-
fect on 12-month CDs is statistically signiﬁcant and does not follow any 
particular trend. There is evidence that the eﬀect on rates is lagged by 
a year, consistent with the eﬀects of market power (as in Neumark and 
Sharpe 1992). The eﬀects of antitrust intervention on HHI do not dimin-
ish over time, so it is natural that the eﬀects on deposit rates will not 
diminish either. In contrast, the eﬀect on savings rates is consistently 
close to zero.

What explains the diﬀerence in eﬀects between CD rates and savings 
accounts? One reason may be that the beneﬁts of a savings account 
are not just the interest rate on the deposits. A deposit account might 
give access to an ATM network, an online banking platform, and in-
person personalized customer service. Bundled services could increase 
switching costs for customers and make search more diﬃcult (Sharpe, 
1997).

The average eﬀect of competition on the rates of all deposits can 
be calculated by considering the fraction of bank deposits in each cat-
egory. Call reports data shows that, for the sample of banks studied in 
the regressions, approximately 45% of deposits are held as CDs, 24% 
are checking and 31% are savings. I approximate the average eﬀect of 
antitrust intervention on deposit rates (i.e., combining all three cate-
gories) by considering the share-weighted average of the coeﬃcients in 
Table 4. The overall average eﬀect on deposit rates is about 0.023.33

Table 5 estimates  the  eﬀect  of  antitrust  intervention  on  deposit 
quantities and the number of bank branches. The overall eﬀect on de-
posit quantities is 0.025 and the eﬀect on the number of branches is 
0.057. Given that the average eﬀect on deposit rates is 0.023, the im-

31 Repeating the estimates in this section using maturity-matched spreads over 
Treasury rates as the main dependent variable, rather than the spreads them-
selves, yields very similar results to what I show. One should expect similar 
results because the year ﬁxed eﬀects used in the main speciﬁcation control for 
much of the time variation in Treasury rates. In addition, Table D.3 estimates 
long-diﬀerences speciﬁcations that include successive control variables, similar 
to Table E.2.

32 Nakane et al. (2006) ﬁnd, in the context of Brazil, that the interest rate elas-
ticity of deposit supply is substantially higher for time deposits than for other 
types of deposits. These ﬁndings are consistent with the idea that switching 
costs are lower for time deposits, resulting in greater elasticities and a higher 
responsiveness to competition.
33 Assuming CDs respond as the average of the 6-month and 12-month eﬀects.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10379710J. Liebersohn

Table 4
Deposit Rates. Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates from an ordinary least squares re-
gression show the eﬀect of predicted antitrust intervention on rates an local bank 
branches. Regression estimates come from a speciﬁcation which estimates treatment 
eﬀects for each cohort that mergers take place and for each year in the ten years 
following the merger. Coeﬃcients shown in the table are the average treatment ef-
fect across cohorts and across years, weighted by the number of observations in the 
sample. See section 5 for more details on the empirical strategy. Interest rates are a 
market-level average by product type, calculated using data from Ratewatch. Standard 
errors are clustered by banking market.

(1)
6-Month CD

(2)
12-Month CD

(3)
Interest-Bearing Checking

(4)
Savings

Post X Treat

0.0813∗∗
(0.0410)

0.109∗∗∗
(0.0378)

-0.0635
(0.0536)

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE

2421
X
X

2417
X
X

2256
X
X

-0.0145
(0.0389)

2281
X
X

Fig. 5. Deposit rates event study. Event study graph showing average deposit rates for 6-month CDs and savings accounts in treated/divestiture banking markets 
relative to non-treated/divestiture banking markets from the same merger cohort. Event study calculation is described in the text. Interest rate data is calculated 
using data from RateWatch.

Table 5
Deposit Quantities. Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences esti-
mates from Poisson regressions show the eﬀect of 
predicted antitrust intervention on rates an local 
bank branches. Regression estimates come from 
a speciﬁcation which estimates treatment eﬀects 
for each cohort that mergers take place and for 
each year in the ten years following the merger. 
Coeﬃcients shown in the table are the average 
treatment eﬀect across cohorts and across years, 
weighted by the number of observations in the 
sample. Deposit and branch quantities are mea-
sured from FDIC Summary of Deposits data. See 
section 5 for more details on the empirical strat-
egy.  Standard  errors  are  clustered  by  banking 
market.

Post X Treat

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE

(1)
Deposits

0.0249
(0.0314)

3928
X
X

(2)
Branches

0.0573∗∗
(0.0288)

3846
X
X

incumbent banks, suggesting that incumbents open new branches to ac-
commodate the increase in deposit supply. Dynamic eﬀects on deposit 
quantities are shown in Fig. 6. There is some evidence of a slow-moving 
or lagged eﬀect in this ﬁgure, consistent with the lagged eﬀect on de-
posit rates shown in Table 5 and with evidence for switching costs in 
the deposit market (Sharpe, 1997). However, the diﬀerence in eﬀects 
from t=1 to t=5 is not statistically signiﬁcant, so I cannot reject that 
the eﬀects are constant and that the time variation is due to noise.

7.1.2.  Bank characteristics and deposit competition

Previous research has found that bank competition is aﬀected by 
both the number of banks in a market and also by how eﬀectively they 
compete. If bank characteristics are more important than the number of 
banks for local competition, then aggregate increases in the HHI over 
time could be consistent with rising competition, if the types of local 
banks are changing. This could also mean that antitrust rules are wrong 
to target the HHI but should instead depend on other characteristics of 
the merging banks.34

Requiring a bank to divest branches changes both the number of 
banks present in a market and, potentially, which types of banks are 
present.  For  example,  the  banks  purchasing  divested  branches  could 

plied elasticity of deposit demand is about 1. This is a bit lower than 
the estimates in Dick (2008), which vary from 1.77 to 2.99. It is higher 
than the estimate in Egan et al. (2016) of 0.56. The estimated eﬀect on 
the log number of bank branches is 0.56. This indicates that antitrust in-
tervention is associated with a greater number of bank branches among 

34 Inter-state banking liberalization provides an important example of how 
bank  characteristics  matter  for  competition.  Perhaps  surprisingly,  legalizing 
inter-state  banking  did  not  change  the  concentration  of  U.S.  banking  mar-
kets (Strahan, 2003). Rather, inter-state banking reform made banking markets 
more competitive by allowing well-run, eﬃcient banks to purchase smaller and 
less-eﬃcient ones (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1998).

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10379711J. Liebersohn

Fig. 6. Divestiture and CD Rates and Quantities. Event study graph showing average deposit quantity and branch count in treated/divestiture and non-treated/no-
divestiture banking markets relative to merger year. Event study calculation is described in the text. Deposits data is calculated from the FDIC Summary of Deposits 
database.

Table 6
Deposit Rates on Certiﬁcates of Deposit, Controlling for Bank Characteristics. 
Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences  estimates  from  an  ordinary  least  squares  regression 
show  the  eﬀect  of  predicted  antitrust  intervention  on  rates  and  local  bank 
branches. Estimates come from a speciﬁcation which estimates treatment eﬀects 
for each cohort that mergers take place and for each year in the ten years fol-
lowing the merger. Coeﬃcients shown in the table are the average treatment 
eﬀect across cohorts and across years, weighted by the number of observations 
in the sample. See section 5 for more details on the empirical strategy. Controls 
are market averages of bank-level variables for banks which acquire branches 
through merger or divestiture. Risk controls are loan loss reserves divided by to-
tal loans abd non-performing loans divided by total loans. Size control is the log 
of total bank assets. Eﬃciency controls are the ratio of noninterest expenses to 
total assets and the ratio of salary expenses to total assets. Standard errors are 
clustered by banking market.

(1)
12-Month CD

(2)
12-Month CD

(3)
12-Month CD

(4)
12-Month CD

Post X Treat

0.104∗∗∗
(0.0390)

0.110∗∗∗
(0.0390)

0.100∗∗∗
(0.0370)

0.0926∗∗∗
(0.0350)

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE
Risk Ctrl
Size Ctrl
Eﬃciency Ctrl

2127
X
X
X

2136
X
X

X

2136
X
X

X

2127
X
X
X
X
X

be larger or more eﬃcient than the banks acquiring branches through 
a merger. Therefore, branch divestiture potentially aﬀects bank com-
petition by increasing bank concentration or by introducing diﬀerent 
types of banks to the market. Both channels may be consistent with an-
titrust rules being “eﬀective,” although so far this paper has focused 
on the eﬀects of bank concentration. To understand whether the bank-
characteristics channel is relevant as well, this subsection will study the 
characteristics of the merging banks.

To investigate how merging bank characteristics aﬀect competition, 
I estimate the main regression speciﬁcation, but add control variables 
for the characteristics of the newly-entered banks interacted with the 
post-treatment  dummy  variable.  If  the  characteristics  of  these  banks 
explain  why  divestiture  eﬀects  competition  following  mergers,  then 
adding this interaction term should decrease the coeﬃcient on the POST 
x TREAT dummy variable and make it no longer statistically signiﬁcant.
I focus on three possible ways bank characteristics could be chang-
ing, drawing on the ﬁndings in Jayaratne and Strahan (1998). First, 
newly entered banks could manage risk in a diﬀerent way, which I mea-
sure using loan loss reserves and the non-performing loan ratio. Second, 
newly entered banks could be larger, hence I control for the log of bank 
total assets. Finally, newly entered banks could be more eﬃcient, which 
I measure using operating costs per dollar value of assets and salary ex-

pense per dollar value of assets. Each variable uses data on the new 
owner of the branches that once belonged to the target bank as of the 
merger year.

Table 6 shows estimates for the eﬀect of intervention on 12-month 
CD  rates,  controlling  for  bank  characteristics.  Columns  1-3  show  re-
sults with added controls for risk controls (loan loss reserves and non-
performing loans divided by loans), size (log total assets) and expenses 
(operating costs divided by total assets and salary divided by total as-
sets) respectively. Column 4 adds controls for all four variables. Across 
all ﬁve speciﬁcations, the coeﬃcient on POST x TREAT hardly changes. 
Overall, there is no evidence that changing bank characteristics explain 
why divestitures lower the deposit rates oﬀered by incumbent banks.

7.1.3.  Home mortgage origination

The mortgage market is one of the most important consumer ﬁnan-
cial product markets. Getting a mortgage is the most important type 
of ﬁnancial transaction a typical household participates in, and mort-
gages have broader economic importance, like for the transmission of 
monetary policy. For all these reasons, understanding the eﬀects of com-
petition in the mortgage market — and whether antitrust rules have the 
potential to change competition — is important.  Furthermore, mort-
gages will provide an interesting point of comparison with the market 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10379712J. Liebersohn

Table 7
Mortgage Lending. Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates from a Poisson regression show the 
eﬀect of predicted antitrust intervention on total mortgage lending volumes and rates. Es-
timates come from a speciﬁcation which estimates treatment eﬀects for each cohort that 
mergers take place and for each year in the ten years following the merger. Coeﬃcients 
shown in the table are the average treatment eﬀect across cohorts and across years, 
weighted by the number of observations in the sample. See section 5 for more details on 
the empirical strategy. Loan quantities measured using HMDA data. In Column 1, the de-
pendent variable is the total number of loans. In Columns 2 and 3, it is the reﬁnancing 
and purchase loans respectively. In Columns 4 and 5, it is total loans from nonbank and 
local lenders respectively. In Column 6, it is the residualized interest rate calculated from 
credit registry data. Standard errors are clustered by banking market.

Post X Treat

(1)
Total

(2)
Reﬁnance

0.106∗∗∗
(0.0364)

0.111∗∗
(0.0442)

(3)
Purchase

0.0860∗∗
(0.0353)

(4)
Non-Bank

(5)
Local

(6)
Rates

0.119∗∗∗
(0.0427)

0.109∗∗
(0.0495)

-.0997∗∗
(0.0479)

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE

3965
X
X

3963
X
X

3972
X
X

3984
X
X

3905
X
X

1399
X
X

for small business loans. While small business loans rely heavily on rela-
tionships, mortgages are relatively standardized across banks and across 
regions, and do not generally rely on relationship-speciﬁc information. 
Another question I address is whether competition in the mortgage mar-
ket is “local,” and whether non-bank mortgage lenders can substitute for 
banks when bank competition changes.

I  start  by  studying  show  how  intervention  aﬀects  total  mortgage 
origination volumes. Estimates are shown in Table 7. Column 1 shows 
that  antitrust  intervention  is  associated  with  about  11%  more  loans 
overall. However, the average eﬀect on lending hides diﬀerences be-
tween the reﬁnancing and the purchase market. Columns 2 and 3 con-
sider these markets separately. The estimated eﬀect is positive for both 
markets but is somewhat larger in the reﬁnancing market (11%) com-
pared to the purchase market (9%). While the long-run eﬀects on reﬁs 
mortgages are a bit larger, event study plots will show that this is not 
true in the short run. The eﬀects on reﬁs depend on overall economic 
conditions and do not necessarily occur right away, whereas the eﬀect 
on purchase mortgages is more immediate.

The  rise  of  non-bank  and  FinTech  lenders  raises  the  question  of 
whether  antitrust  rules  based  on  local  market  deﬁnitions  still  make 
sense  given  that  much  of  lending  is  now  online.  Columns  4  and  5 
estimate  the  eﬀect  of  competition  on  loan  quantities  for  these  types 
of lenders. The estimates show that non-bank lenders are aﬀected by 
greater competition to a similar extent as local lenders, which are both 
similar to the overall average. This suggests that even non-bank lenders 
compete to a substantial extent with physical, local bank branches.

The estimates in Column 6 show the eﬀect on interest rates. The 
number of observations available is less than half, since I use interest 
rate data from after 2000 and it is not available for all markets. I es-
timate that antitrust intervention reduces interest rates by about 0.10 
percentage points, or about ten basis points. The implied elasticity lies 
between previous estimates. The most closely comparable previous esti-
mates of the elasticity of mortgage demand come from Lo (2017), who 
estimate that a 25 basis point cut results in a 50 percent increase in 
the likelihood of obtaining a purchase mortgage. Compared to that esti-
mate, the elasticity estimated here is about half as large. However, it is 
larger than the estimate from Bhutta and Keys (2016), who ﬁnd that a 
one percentage point change in the interest rate leads to a 27% increase 
in the number of households extracting home equity from their homes.
Does greater competition bring in new types of borrowers to the 
mortgage market? Table 8 explores this question by estimating the ef-
fects of mergers on diﬀerent groups of borrowers. Column 1 shows the 
eﬀect of intervention on loan applications (rather than actual origina-
tions). The eﬀect on applications is about one percentage point larger 
than  the  eﬀect  on  originations,  suggesting  that  new  applications  are 
accepted at slightly lower rates. Columns 2 and 3 split originations by 

Table 8
Mortgage  Lending,  Composition.  Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences  estimates  from  a 
Poisson regression show the eﬀect of predicted antitrust intervention on mort-
gage lending volumes by mortgage and customer type. Estimates come from 
a speciﬁcation which estimates treatment eﬀects for each cohort that merg-
ers take place and for each year in the ten years following the merger. Loan 
quantities measured using HMDA data. Column 1 estimates the eﬀects of pre-
dicted antitrust enforcement on the number of loan applications using a Poisson 
regression. Columns 2-5 estimate the eﬀect of predicted enforcement on the 
number of loans for diﬀerent samples of loans and individuals, as noted by col-
umn. “Post” is an indicator equal to 1 following mergers, “Treat” is an indicator 
equal to 1 in markets which I calculate should have antitrust intervention, and 
“Period” is an indicator equal to 1 in 2010 or later. “Low Inc” refers to in-
dividuals who report an income of below $100,000 and “High Inc” have an 
income above this. “Low DTI” and “High DTI” refer to loans above and below 
the median DTI. Standard errors clustered by banking market.

Post X Treat

(1)
Applications

0.113∗∗∗
(0.0412)

(2)
Low Inc

0.120∗∗∗
(0.0440)

(3)
High Inc

0.0887∗∗
(0.0435)

(4)
Low DTI

0.117∗∗∗
(0.0403)

(5)
High DTI

0.0751
(0.0520)

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE

3963
X
X

3961
X
X

3939
X
X

3967
X
X

3962
X
X

income groups, based on whether borrowers have an income of above or 
below $100,000. Overall, the eﬀect is larger on low income borrowers 
(a coeﬃcient of 0.12) than on high income borrowers (a coeﬃcient of 
0.09). Similarly, columns 4 and 5 split the borrowers based on whether 
their debt-to-income ratio is below or above the sample median. The 
eﬀects are larger for low-DTI borrowers than high-DTI borrowers and 
the latter is not statistically signiﬁcant. The ﬁndings in this table show 
that lower-DTI borrowers are drawn into the mortgage market due to 
antitrust intervention relative to higher-income borrowers. A natural 
explanation is that the interest elasticity of mortgage demand is more 
elastic for low-income borrowers than for high-income borrowers.

The dynamic eﬀects of reﬁnancing are shown in Fig. 7. The event 
study plot shows eﬀects which increase over time (although not statis-
tically signiﬁcantly so). Why should an increase in competition cause 
eﬀects over time, rather than a one-time reﬁnancing wave? Online Ap-
pendix F explores this question in greater detail by studying the eﬀects 
of mergers taking place at diﬀerent times. The evidence in this Appendix 
suggests that competition can have a lagged eﬀect on reﬁnancing, since 
reﬁnancing is only worthwhile when interest rates are generally low. 
Mergers taking place during periods of rising rates may not aﬀect reﬁ-
nancing until years later, when interest rates fall and make reﬁnancing 
a worthwhile option. Online Appendix Table D.4 presents similar re-

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10379713J. Liebersohn

Fig. 7. Number of Reﬁnancing Mortgages (left) and Purchase Mortgages (right). Both are event study graphs showing average mortgage origination by bank in 
treated/divestiture and non-treated/no-divestiture banking markets relative to merger year. Event study is estimated using a Poisson regression as described in the 
text. Mortgage data is calculated using raw mortgage data from HMDA.

sults to Table 7, but instead of showing treatment eﬀects that are the 
average across all years, I calculate treatment eﬀects pre-2010 and post-
2010 and estimate the diﬀerence between the two. The diﬀerences are 
not  statistically  signiﬁcant  except  for  non-bank  lenders,  who  have  a 
larger eﬀect in recent years, underlining the importance of these types 
of lenders more recently. This ﬁnding also underscores the point that 
non-bank lenders are aﬀected by local antitrust intervention even in 
recent years. The eﬀect on reﬁnancing is also larger post-2010, which 
may be because of lower interest rates in this period.

These ﬁndings have three implications. First, antitrust rules have 
large eﬀects in the mortgage market. The marginal antitrust enforce-
ment  decision  does  beneﬁt  consumers.  Second,  entry  by  nonbank 
lenders is not substantial enough to undo the eﬀects of antitrust inter-
vention, and indeed nonbank lenders respond similarly to intervention 
as  banks,  meaning  that  the  mortgage  market  is  still  mostly  “local.” 
Third, reﬁnancing is more sensitive to antitrust intervention than pur-
chase mortgages.

7.2.  Small business lending

Bank  antitrust  regulations  assume  that  retail  banking  is  a  single 
“market” that is the same for all ﬁnancial products. Therefore, the same 
merger policy aﬀects small business loans as well as the consumer loans 
studied in the previous section. This provides an opportunity to study 
how the same merger rules aﬀect diﬀerent types of product markets. 
The view that retail banking is all a single market is inconsistent with 
theories of competition in the small business market which emphasize 
the importance of relationships. The centrality of relationships for small 
businesses makes it diﬀerent from commoditized consumer markets like 
mortgages and deposits which do not require relationships in the same 
way. But do these diﬀerences matter for the eﬀects of antitrust law?

Theories of small business lending make varying predictions. One 
set of theories emphasizes that small business lending requires banks 
to invest in learning about new borrowers’ expected likelihood of re-
payment. Investing is costly for banks initially, but can result in ex post
rents for lenders who have private information about good borrowers 
(Rajan, 1992; Petersen and Rajan, 1994). If the cost of learning about 
borrowers is high, then changes in the competitive environment might 
not aﬀect borrowers who are already part of an existing relationship 
because  switching  lenders  is  expensive.  However,  lower  competition 
might actually increase small business lending for new customers, since 
banks expect higher rents later in the relationship. Empirically, Nguyen 
(2019) shows that it is diﬃcult for small businesses to ﬁnd a new bank 
when their existing branch is closed.

On the other hand, some types of small business lending, such as 
small business credit cards, do not rely as heavily on relationships. Like-
wise, commercial mortgages can have valuable collateral and may not 

require banks to know borrowers as well. If these types of loans are 
similar to residential mortgages, competition could increase the overall 
amount of small business lending.

I estimate the eﬀect of competition on small business lending using 
the Poisson regression diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences speciﬁcation. I ﬁnd that 
greater competition does not lead to a change in small business lending 
that is distinguishable from zero either in the short run or in the long 
run. Estimates in Table 9 show the eﬀect of competition on total small 
business lending, measured at the county level. The estimated eﬀect of 
competition on both categories of small business lending is not statisti-
cally distinguishable from zero. In columns 2 and 4 show that the same 
is true using the total dollar amount of small business lending. Columns 
3 and 4 use ZIP rather than market-level data as the unit of observation.
Further  evidence  comes  from  an  event  study  graph  is  shown  in 
Fig. 8. Panel A shows the long-term eﬀect on the number of loans and 
Panel B shows the eﬀect on the loan volume. The average eﬀect is neg-
ative  but  not  statistically  signiﬁcant.  There  is  statistically  signiﬁcant 
eﬀect on loan counts (but not volume) two years-post merger, but the 
net average eﬀect is neither statistically signiﬁcant nor economically 
large. Overall, the graphical evidence in this ﬁgure suggests little eﬀect 
of competition on the amount of small business lending even at longer 
time horizons. This long-run ﬁnding provides evidence against the view 
that competition aﬀects small business lending even for either existing 
or new borrowers.

The general ﬁnding is that changes in local bank competition have 
no detectable eﬀect on the amount of small business lending. This ﬁnd-
ing is consistent with the theoretical intuition that relationships limit 
small businesses’ ability to “shop around” for a better rate even when 
the market structure changes (Nguyen, 2019). Boot and Thakor (2000)
argue that greater competition can cause banks to shift their focus from 
relationship-intensive forms of lending. The ﬁnding that competition in-
creases mortgage lending and has no eﬀect on small business lending is 
consistent with this theory.

In addition to providing new evidence about how the small business 
market functions, this ﬁnding acts as a placebo check for the results 
from the consumer retail market. If the ﬁndings for the retail banking 
market were driven by an omitted variable, one would expect to ﬁnd 
an eﬀect in the small business market as well.

An important open question beyond the scope of this paper is how 
competition interacts with nonbank lending in the small business mar-
ket. Speciﬁcally, do non-bank and Fintech lenders compete directly, as 
I have shown they do for mortgages, or do they mostly serve diﬀerent 
markets? This question is particularly important given recent research 
documenting that these types of lenders increasingly substitute for tra-
ditional banks (Gopal and Schnabl, 2022; Erel and Liebersohn, 2022). 
Due to the lack of non-bank data in the CRA loan database, this ques-

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10379714J. Liebersohn

Table 9
Small Business Lending. Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates from a Poisson regression 
show the eﬀect of predicted antitrust intervention on rates an local bank branches. Es-
timates come from a speciﬁcation which estimates treatment eﬀects for each cohort 
that mergers take place and for each year in the ten years following the merger. Coef-
ﬁcients shown in the table are the average treatment eﬀect across cohorts and across 
years, weighted by the number of observations in the sample. See section 5 for more 
details on the empirical strategy. Small business lending is measured using Community 
Reinvestment Act (CRA) data. In Columns 1-2 the unit of observation is a bank mark-
ing, and in Columns 3-4 it is a ZIP code. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 3 
is the number of loans and in columns 2 and 4 it is the loan dollar amount. Standard 
errors are clustered by banking market.

(1)
Number of Loans

(2)
Loan Volume

(3)
Number of Loans

(4)
Loan Volume

Post X Treat

𝑁

Cohort-Year FE
Merger FE
Geography

-0.00776
(0.0423)

3881
X
X
Market

-0.00497
(0.0417)

0.0105
(0.0401)

3881
X
X
Market

16288
X
X
ZIP

0.00399
(0.0444)

16288
X
X
ZIP

Fig. 8. Small Business Lending. Event study graph showing the number of small business loans to businesses in treated/divestiture and non-treated/no-divestiture 
banking markets, relative to merger year. Event study point estimates come from a Poisson regression which estimates treatment eﬀects for each cohort that mergers 
take place and for each year in the ten years following the merger. Coeﬃcients shown in the table are the average treatment eﬀect across cohorts within each 
year relative to merger year, weighted by the number of observations in the sample. See section 5 for more details. Data is from the Community Reinvestment Act 
database.

tion is beyond the scope of this paper, but is a promising area for future 
research.

8.  Conclusion

This paper investigates the eﬀects of antitrust intervention on mar-
ket  structure,  deposit  markets,  home  mortgages,  and  small  business 
lending. It uses a new source of exogenous variation in the competitive 
impact of bank mergers. The estimates show that intervention leads to a 
permanent decline in banking market concentration. Even many years 
after mergers take place, diﬀerences in HHI persist.

Clearly antitrust policy is eﬀective for reducing banking market con-
centration in the banking sector. But the more important question is 
whether customers beneﬁt. Here, the evidence is mixed and varies by 
market. In the mortgage market, greater reﬁnancing quantities suggest 
that  competition  helps  consumers.  Likewise,  consumers  beneﬁt  from 
higher CD rates. On the other hand, I do not estimate any eﬀect of an-
titrust intervention on the amount of small business lending. Sharpe 
(1997) argues that switching costs can reduce the competitiveness of 
the banking market, for example, because consumers may ﬁnd it both-
ersome to change where their paychecks are deposited or because banks 
make switching inconvenient on purpose. Consistent with this, the esti-
mated eﬀect on deposit rates for checking and savings accounts is also 
very small compared to the eﬀect on CDs.

These  results  support  a  view  of  banking  in  which  diﬀerent  mod-
els  apply  to  diﬀerent  markets.  The  “structure-conduct-performance” 
paradigm would appear to apply best to the relatively-commoditized 
home  mortgage  and  deposit  markets,  whereas  relationship  lending 
models might apply better to the market for small business loans.

The increase in bank concentration since the passage of the 1994 
Riegle-Neal Act has mirrored a rise in concentration across all U.S. in-
dustries.  Contrary  to  some  claims  in  the  banking  industry  –  such  as 
statements made in BB&T Bank’s merger application – the ﬁndings here 
show that local bank competition remains important. In other words, 
retail banking markets are still substantially “local”. And, despite the 
rise of online and nonbank lending, there is not much substitution be-
tween these types of lenders and traditional banks when competition 
changes. For these reasons, antitrust intervention has substantial eﬀects 
in markets for retail consumer ﬁnancial products. On the other hand, 
policy-makers who want to regulate changes in competition for prod-
ucts where relationships are important will have to ﬁnd other tools.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jack  Liebersohn: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  origi-
nal draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, 
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisi-
tion, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10379715J. Liebersohn

Declaration of competing interest

I have no relevant disclosures to make. There are also no conﬂicts 

of interest for this submission.

Data availability

I have attached a link under the “Research Data”.

Supplementary data for "How Does Competition Aﬀect Retail Bank-
ing? Quasi-Experimental Evidence From Bank Mergers" (Original Data)
(Mendeley Data)

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103797.

References

Allen, Jason, Clark, Robert, Houde, Jean-François, 2014. The eﬀect of mergers in search 
markets: evidence from the Canadian mortgage industry. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (10), 
3365–3396.

Angrist, Joshua D., Pischke, Jörn-Steﬀen, 2010. The credibility revolution in empirical 
economics: how better research design is taking the con out of econometrics. J. Econ. 
Perspect. 24 (2), 3–30.

Ashenfelter, Orley C., Hosken, Daniel, Weinberg, Matthew, 2009. Generating evidence to 

guide merger enforcement. CPI Journal, Competition Policy International 5.

Baker, Jonathan B., 2003. The case for antitrust enforcement. J. Econ. Perspect. 17 (4), 

27–50.

tical Annex.

BB&T Corporation, 2019. Public Memorandum on Competitive Considerations and Statis-

Beck, Thorsten, 2008. Bank competition and ﬁnancial stability: friends or foes? Technical 

Report 4656. The World Bank.

Benmelech, Efraim, Bergman, Nittai, Kim, Hyunseob, 2018. Strong employers and weak 
employees: How does employer concentration aﬀect wages? NBER Working Paper 
24307.

Bhutta, Neil, Keys, Benjamin J., 2016. Interest rates and equity extraction during the 

housing boom. Am. Econ. Rev. 106 (7), 1742–1774.

Blonigen, Bruce A., Pierce, Justin R., 2016. Evidence for the eﬀects of mergers on market 

power and eﬃciency. NBER Working Paper 22750.

Boot, Arnoud W.A., Thakor, Anjan V., 2000. Can relationship banking survive competi-

tion? J. Finance 55 (2), 679–713.

Borusyak, Kirill, Jaravel, Xavier, Spiess, Jann, 2021. Revisiting event study designs: robust 

and eﬃcient estimation. Preprint. arXiv :2108 .12419.

Burke, Jim, 1998. Divestiture as an antitrust remedy in bank mergers. SSRN Scholarly 

Paper ID 119169.

Covarrubias, Matias, Gutiérrez, Germán, Philippon, Thomas, 2020. From good to bad 
concentration? US industries over the past 30 years. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 34 (1), 
1–46.

Crandall, Robert W., Winston, Cliﬀord, 2003. Does antitrust policy improve consumer 

welfare? Assessing the evidence. J. Econ. Perspect. 17 (4), 3–26.

Degryse, Hans, Ongena, Steven, 2008, 2008. Competition and regulation in the banking 
sector: a review of the empirical evidence on the sources of bank rents. In: Handbook 
of Financial Intermediation and Banking, pp. 483–554.

Dick, Astrid A., 2008. Demand estimation and consumer welfare in the banking industry. 

J. Bank. Finance 32 (8), 1661–1676.

Dorn, David, Katz, Lawrence F., Patterson, Christina, Van Reenen, John, et al., 2017. 
Concentrating on the fall of the labor share. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (5), 180–185.
Drechsler, Itamar, Savov, Alexi, Schnabl, Philipp, 2017. The deposits channel of monetary 

policy. Q. J. Econ. 132 (4), 1819–1876.

Egan, Mark, Matvos, Gregor, Seru, Amit, 2016. The Market for Financial Adviser Miscon-

duct. Working Paper 22050. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Erel, Isil, 2011. The eﬀect of bank mergers on loan prices: evidence from the United 

States. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (4), 1068–1101.

Erel, Isil, Liebersohn, Jack, 2022. Can FinTech reduce disparities in access to ﬁnance? 
Evidence from the paycheck protection program. J. Financ. Econ. 146 (1), 90–118.
Focarelli, Dario, Panetta, Fabio, 2003. Are mergers beneﬁcial to consumers? Evidence 

from the market for bank deposits. Am. Econ. Rev. 93 (4), 1152–1172.

Gissler, Stefan, Ramcharan, Rodney, Yu, Edison, 2020. The eﬀects of competition in con-

sumer credit markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (11), 5378–5415.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew, 2021. Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences with variation in treatment 

timing. J. Econom. 225 (2), 254–277.

Gopal, Manasa, Schnabl, Philipp, 2022. The rise of ﬁnance companies and ﬁntech lenders 

in small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4859–4901.

Grullon, Gustavo, Larkin, Yelena, Michaely, Roni, 2019. Are US industries becoming more 

concentrated? Rev. Finance 23 (4), 697–743.

Gutierrez, German, Philippon, Thomas, 2017. Investment-less growth: an empirical inves-

tigation. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act.

Hall, Robert E., 2018. New Evidence on the Markup of Prices over Marginal Costs and the 

Role of Mega-Firms in the US Economy. NBER Working Paper 24574.

Hannan, Timothy H., 1991. Foundations of the structure-conduct-performance paradigm 

in banking. J. Money Credit Bank. 23 (1), 68–84.

Hertzberg, Andrew, Liberti, Jose Maria, Paravisini, Daniel, 2011. Public information and 
coordination: evidence from a credit registry expansion. J. Finance 66 (2), 379–412.
Jayaratne, Jith, Strahan, Philip E., 1996. The ﬁnance-growth nexus: evidence from bank 

branch deregulation. Q. J. Econ. 111 (3), 639–670.

Jayaratne, Jith, Strahan, Philip E., 1998. Entry restrictions, industry evolution, and dy-
namic eﬃciency: evidence from commercial banking 1. J. Law Econ. 41 (1), 239–274.

Kwoka, John, 2014. Mergers, Merger Control, and Remedies. MIT Press.
Kwoka, John, 2017. Mergers, Merger Control, and Remedies: a response to the FTC cri-

tique. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2947814.

Lo, Stephanie H., 2017. What is the Microelasticity of Mortgage Demand to Interest 

Rates?.

De Loecker, Jan, Eeckhout, Jan, Unger, Gabriel, 2020. The rise of market power and the 

macroeconomic implications. Q. J. Econ. 135 (2), 561–644.

Mello, Steven, 2019. More COPS, less crime. J. Public Econ. 172, 174–200.
Nakane, Marcio I., Alencar, Leonardo S., Kanczuk, Fabio, 2006. Demand for bank services 
and market power in Brazilian banking. Central Bank of Brazil Working Paper 107.
Neumark, David, Sharpe, Steven A., 1992. Market structure and the nature of price rigid-
ity: evidence from the market for consumer deposits. Q. J. Econ. 107 (2), 657–680.
Nevo, Aviv, Whinston, Michael D., 2010. Taking the dogma out of econometrics: struc-

tural modeling and credible inference. J. Econ. Perspect. 24 (2), 69–82.

Nguyen, Hoai-Luu Q., 2019. Are credit markets still local? Evidence from bank branch 

closings. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 11 (1), 1–32.

Di Patti, Emilia Bonaccorsi, Gobbi, Giorgio, 2007. Winners or losers? The eﬀects of bank-

ing consolidation on corporate borrowers. J. Finance 62 (2), 669–695.

Petersen, Mitchell A., Rajan, Raghuram G., 1994. The beneﬁts of lending relationships: 

evidence from small business data. J. Finance 49 (1), 3–37.

Petersen, Mitchell A., Rajan, Raghuram G., 1995. The eﬀect of credit market competition 

on lending relationships. Q. J. Econ. 110 (2), 407–443.

Philippon, Thomas, 2019. The Great Reversal: How America Gave up on Free Markets. 

Harvard University Press.

Pilloﬀ, Steven J., 2005. What’s happened at divested bank oﬃces? An empirical analysis 
of antitrust divestitures in bank mergers. Multinational Finance J. 9 (1/2), 43–71.
Prager, Robin A., Hannan, Timothy H., 1998. Do substantial horizontal mergers generate 
signiﬁcant price eﬀects? Evidence from the banking industry. J. Ind. Econ. 46 (4), 
433–452.

Rajan, Raghuram G., 1992. Insiders and outsiders: the choice between informed and 

arm’s-length debt. J. Finance 47 (4), 1367–1400.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Sarte, Pierre-Daniel, Trachter, Nicholas Diverging trends in na-

tional and local concentration. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 35.

Sapienza, Paola, 2002. The eﬀects of banking mergers on loan contracts. J. Finance 57 

(1), 329–367.

Scharfstein, David, Sunderam, Adi, 2016. Market Power in Mortgage Lending and the 

Transmission of Monetary Policy. Working Paper.

Shapiro, Carl, 2018. Antitrust in a time of populism. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 61, 714–748.
Sharpe, Steven A., 1997. The eﬀect of consumer switching costs on prices: a theory and 

its application to the bank deposit market. Rev. Ind. Organ. 12, 79–94.

Strahan, Philip E., 2003. The real eﬀects of U.S. banking deregulation. Fed. Reserve Bank 

St. Louis Rev. 85 (4), 111.

Syverson, C., 2019. Macroeconomics and Market Power: Facts, Potential Explanations and 
Open Questions, Brookings Economic Studies. Brookings Institution, Washington DC.
Warren, Elizabeth, 2019. Senator Warren and Representative García Announce Introduc-
tion of the Bank Merger Review Modernization Act to End Rubber Stamping of Bank 
Merger Applications.

Williams, Emily, 2020. Costly External Financing and Monetary Policy Transmission: Ev-

idence from a Natural Experiment. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3080665.

Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M., 2021. Two-way ﬁxed eﬀects, the two-way mundlak regression, 

and diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimators. Available at SSRN 3906345.

Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M., 2022. Simple Approaches to Nonlinear Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences 

with Panel Data. Available at SSRN 4183726.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10379716