Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Investment when new capital is hard to ﬁnd ✩
Olivier Darmouni a,∗, Andrew Sutherland b
a Columbia Business School, 665 W 130th St, New York, 10027, NY, USA
b MIT Sloan, 100 Main St, Cambridge, 02142, MA, USA

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Dataset link: https://
data .mendeley .com /datasets /ndfwjwhtmw /2

JEL classiﬁcation:
G31
G32
E22
E23
L26

Keywords:
Investment
Capital reallocation
Secondary markets
SMEs
Supply chain
Covid-19

1.  Introduction

We examine how a ﬁxed capital supply shortage aﬀects ﬁrm investment. Using equipment transaction–level data, 
we ﬁnd pandemic-driven production disruptions signiﬁcantly altered capital reallocation patterns across ﬁrms. A 
surge in used capital trading activity softened the investment decline, as ﬁrms acquired used capital from distant 
and dissimilar counterparts. Younger ﬁrms were disproportionately aﬀected even though they rarely purchase 
new capital: while in normal times older ﬁrms sell their capital to younger ﬁrms, following a supply shortage, 
older ﬁrms compete for used capital, pricing out younger ﬁrms. Our evidence highlights the crucial role of 
secondary markets and distributive externalities for corporate investment.

Corporate investment is central to the macroeconomy and has impli-
cations for employment, productivity, and growth. Although standard 
investment models typically include only a single vintage of capital, 
there is evidence that capital reallocation is a key dimension of invest-
ment (Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2006). Some ﬁrms buy new capital from 
capital producers, but many others invest by purchasing used capital in 
secondary markets (Lanteri and Rampini, 2021; Lanteri, 2018). Impor-
tantly, there are diﬀerences across ﬁrms: young ﬁrms tend to acquire 
used capital previously owned by older ﬁrms, consistent with cheaper 
used capital easing ﬁnancial constraints (Ma et al., 2022; Eisfeldt and 
Rampini, 2007). This suggests that the dynamics of secondary markets 
for used capital are central to understanding how shocks aﬀect corpo-
rate investment in the cross-section of ﬁrms.

This paper studies a large-scale capital supply shortage: the global 
production  disruptions  for  new  physical  capital  that  occurred  in 
2021–2022 during the COVID-19 pandemic at the onset of the economic 
recovery. We exploit rich micro-data on transactions for new and used 
equipment to study the equilibrium eﬀects of this supply shortage on 
secondary markets, investment, and capital reallocation, with a speciﬁc 
focus on the diﬀerences across ﬁrms. We document a surge in secondary 
market activity, as some ﬁrms switched to used capital to mitigate the 
shortage of new capital. In turn, this implies that younger ﬁrms were 
disproportionately aﬀected even though they rarely purchase new capi-
tal: they invested relatively less after facing increased competition from 
older  ﬁrms  for  used  capital.  Our  evidence  is  consistent  with  models 
of heterogeneous ﬁrms with new and used capital and highlights the 
crucial role of secondary markets and distributive externalities for cor-
porate investment (Lanteri and Rampini, 2021).

✩ For helpful comments, we thank Nicolas Crouzet (discussant), Andrea Eisfeldt, Michelle Hanlon, Pritt Jeenas (discussant), Andrea Lanteri, Song Ma, William 
Mann (discussant), Justin Murﬁn, Ryan Pratt, Adriano Rampini (discussant), Elena Simintzi, Toni Whited, and seminar participants at McGill, MIT, the 2023 Midwest 
Finance Association annual meetings, the University of Michigan, NBER Summer Institute, the 2023 UNC/Duke Corporate Finance Conference, the 2023 Barcelona 
Summer Forum, and UT Austin.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: omd2109@columbia.edu (O. Darmouni), ags1@mit.edu (A. Sutherland).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103806
Received 15 May 2023; Received in revised form 22 January 2024; Accepted 7 February 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)103806Availableonline16February20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

The shock we study is a large macroeconomic event that emanated 
from the COVID-19 pandemic. Several ensuing developments coalesced 
to signiﬁcantly disrupt the production and shipment of equipment, re-
quired parts, and microchips. Labor shortages at manufacturing plants, 
shipping ports, and trucking companies, as well as an increase in the 
demand  for  consumer  durable  goods  led  to  major  supply  chain  dis-
ruptions.  The  head  of  Case  New  Holland,  one  of  the  world’s  largest 
equipment manufacturers, described the situation as “the worst supply 
chain [he has] seen in [his] career.”1 Supply chain disruptions had been 
ongoing since the onset of the pandemic, but were especially acute in 
late 2021. As some segments of the economy started to recover, there 
were many reports of ﬁerce competition and sharp price increases for 
equipment during that period.

Our dataset consists of a sample of equipment transactions for U.S. 
ﬁrms,  extracted  from  UCC  ﬁlings.  We  observe  the  near  universe  of 
ﬁlings for agriculture, construction, logging, medical, oﬃce, and wood-
working equipment plus forklifts and trucks. Our sample covers over 12 
million unique assets securing ten million contracts originated between 
1997 and March 2022. The contracts involve more than two million 
unique borrowers from every state and industry. For each transaction, 
we can observe the borrower and lender identity and location as well 
as detailed equipment information including the manufacturer, model, 
model year, and serial number. This granularity allows us to trace capi-
tal across time, location, and ﬁrms, providing an unprecedented glimpse 
into the dynamics of capital reallocation and investment after a large 
shock. For 5% of our sample, we can also observe prices. We match 
our transaction records with Dun & Bradstreet’s data to study the eﬀect 
of ﬁrm age, shown to be a key ﬁrm characteristic in prior investment 
work (Ma et al., 2022; Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2007; Hadlock and Pierce, 
2010).

The ﬁrst part of our paper documents a surge in secondary market 
activity for used capital in the fall of 2021. Transactions were signiﬁ-
cantly more likely to include old equipment relative to normal times, 
consistent with used capital serving as a “spare tire” when new capital 
becomes scarcer. Moreover, we ﬁnd an increase in trading activity in 
secondary markets, with shorter times between consecutive sales of the 
same individual piece of equipment and greater geographic distance 
between successive buyers. There is also evidence of more trading of 
used equipment across buyers in diﬀerent sectors, which indicates ﬁrms 
settling for second-best equipment for their needs or even harvesting 
equipment for electronics, chips, and parts. Together, this evidence is 
line with the idea that ﬁrms competed more aggressively for used capi-
tal during this time relative to normal times.

To sharpen identiﬁcation, we exploit a labor strike at John Deere, 
the largest U.S. equipment manufacturer. John Deere is not only the 
largest agricultural equipment manufacturer in the United States, but 
also  the  second-largest  construction  equipment  manufacturer  (over 
600,000 construction equipment contracts in our sample). Over 10,000 
production and warehouse workers walked oﬀ the job in the biggest 
private sector labor disruption in the United States since the General 
Motors strike in 2019. Thus the strike served as a meaningful disrup-
tion to multiple sectors of the economy. We run a Bartik estimation 
using  pre-pandemic  diﬀerences  in  John  Deere’s  market  share  across 
equipment types to measure the heterogeneous exposure of other man-
ufacturers to  the  strike.  Importantly,  we  can  now  augment  our  base 
speciﬁcation  with  time  ﬁxed  eﬀects  to  account  for  other  concurrent 
shocks to investment demand or credit conditions. Intuitively, our tests 
compare equipment transactions for manufacturers in markets where 
John Deere had a large market share (i.e., the supply shortage was more 
consequential) to equipment transactions for manufacturers in markets 
where John Deere had a small market share, while controlling for credit 
demand. In equipment types with higher John Deere market share, we 

1 “It’s like Whack-a-Mole’: tractors and trucks chief bemoans supply short-
ages,” Financial Times July 7th, 2021.

ﬁnd higher prices for both used and new equipment, less time between 
sales, and greater distance and lower sector overlap between consecu-
tive users. This is consistent with supply shortages having meaningful 
eﬀects on secondary market activity.

The second part of our paper studies the eﬀects of the supply short-
age  on  investment  in  the  cross-section  of  ﬁrms.  First,  we  identify  a 
drastic change in the ﬁrm age–capital age gradient. In normal times, 
younger ﬁrms tend to invest in older capital, as shown in Ma et al. 
(2022). During the supply shortage, we see a spike in equipment age for 
ﬁrms in the intermediate ﬁrm age group. This is in line with predictions 
from capital allocation models that emphasize ﬁrm heterogeneity, such 
as Lanteri and Rampini (2021). Speciﬁcally, ﬁrms in the intermediate 
group of ﬁnancial constraints are the ones that switch most aggressively 
from new capital to used capital to dampen the supply shock.

Moreover, the youngest ﬁrms experienced the largest drop in total 
capital investment relative to other ﬁrms. The economic magnitudes are 
large: young ﬁrms’ total investment volume dropped by 21 percentage 
points in relative terms. This is related to the “distributive externali-
ties” through secondary markets emphasized in recent macroeconomic 
models (Dávila and Korinek, 2018; Lanteri and Rampini, 2021). Our ev-
idence supports the relevance of such distributive eﬀects in explaining 
the cross-sectional investment response to this large macro-economic 
shock.  While  the  surge  in  secondary  market  activity  dampened  the 
shock for some ﬁrms, it priced out others. Interestingly, these spillover 
eﬀects imply that the youngest ﬁrms are the ones most aﬀected by a 
supply shortage, even if they do not purchase new capital.

We provide additional tests to support these inferences. First, we 
consider whether our ﬁndings are skewed by selection into the UCC 
data (we do not observe cash purchases). However, the young ﬁrms we 
focus on typically lack the cash to make such purchases. Additionally, 
our ﬁndings are similar if we add granular ﬁxed eﬀects controlling for 
various aspects of ﬁrm type or if we weight our regressions based on the 
distribution of equipment type and location of wholesalers’ inventory. 
Second, consistent with our main mechanism, we ﬁnd that the eﬀects of 
the shock on young ﬁrms are generally stronger in segments with low 
secondary market liquidity. Third, capital demand did not appear to 
be lower for young ﬁrms during these times: like other ﬁrms, younger 
ﬁrms traveled further and acquired capital from less similar ﬁrms than 
in normal times. Likewise, eliminating states with low growth in the 
number of young ﬁrms in 2020 does not aﬀect our inferences. Fourth, 
we ﬁnd little evidence that a credit channel can explain our ﬁndings: the 
results do not vary with nonbank market share, and in placebo tests we 
do not ﬁnd a similar capital reallocation during the 2008–2009 ﬁnancial 
crisis.

1.1.  Related literature

This  paper  relates  to  the  literature  on  capital  reallocation  across 
the business cycle. The closest papers to ours are Eisfeldt and Rampini 
(2007); Lanteri and Rampini (2021); Lanteri (2018); see Eisfeldt and Shi 
(2018) for an extensive survey.2 Compared to these works, we study the 
eﬀects of a capital supply shock as opposed to productivity shocks. We 
also use rich transaction-level data that allow us to track equipment 
over location and time, as opposed to more aggregate or ﬁrm-level data 
typically used in empirical research. Our evidence provides additional 
support for these models in a diﬀerent setting, highlighting the cen-
tral role of capital reallocation and secondary market dynamics for the 
transmission of macroeconomic shocks.

We also contribute to research on the drivers of small business in-
vestment. The market for equipment includes many small and private 

2 Important works that study diﬀerent facets of capital reallocation include 
Eisfeldt (2004); Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006); Li and Whited (2015); Eberly 
and Wang (2009); Gavazza (2011); Midrigan and Xu (2014); Ottonello (2021); 
Giroud and Mueller (2015); Cui (2022); Fuchs et al. (2016); Gopinath et al. 
(2017); Kehrig and Vincent (2017); Wright et al. (2018).

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038062O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Notes: Left panel: This ﬁgure plots the annual increase for four U.S. price indices: (1) construction machinery and 
equipment (series WPU112), (2) agricultural machinery and equipment including tractors (series WPUSI024011), (3) 
general purpose machinery and equipment (series WPU114), and (4) personal consumption expenditures (series 
PCEPI). Source: FRED. Right panel: This ﬁgure plots the Global Supply Chain Pressure Index available on the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York’s website.

Fig. 1. The 2021–2022 Production Disruptions.

ﬁrms (Murﬁn and Pratt, 2019; Gopal and Schnabl, 2020; Darmouni and 
Sutherland, 2021; Minnis et al., 2023), and these ﬁrms often invest in 
the  form  of  used  capital  (Ma  et  al.,  2022).  Compared  to  these  prior 
works, we provide new evidence on the dynamics of secondary markets 
and capital reallocation following a large-scale production shock. We 
also provide some of the ﬁrst micro-evidence in support of distributive 
externalities highlighted in a growing macroeconomic theory literature 
(Lanteri and Rampini, 2021; Dávila and Korinek, 2018). We show the 
empirical relevance of this view of pecuniary externalities in the context 
of a large recent macroeconomic shock.

Acknowledgments

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. For helpful comments, 
we  thank  Nicolas  Crouzet  (discussant),  Andrea  Eisfeldt  (discussant), 
Michelle Hanlon, Pritt Jeenas (discussant), Andrea Lanteri, Song Ma, 
William Mann (discussant), Justin Murﬁn, Ryan Pratt, Adriano Rampini 
(discussant), Elena Simintzi, Toni Whited, and seminar participants at 
McGill, MIT, the 2023 Midwest Finance Association annual meetings, 
AFA,  the  OCC,  London  Business  School,  the  University  of  Michigan, 
NBER Summer Institute, the 2023 UNC/Duke Corporate Finance Con-
ference, the 2023 Barcelona Summer Forum, and UT Austin.

2.  Background and data

2.1.  The 2021–2022 production disruptions

The supply chain shock we study emanated from the COVID-19 pan-
demic. Several developments coalesced to signiﬁcantly disrupt the pro-
duction and shipment of equipment, necessary parts, and microchips. 
First,  production  worker  illnesses  and  stay-at-home  orders  led  to  la-
bor  shortages  that  made  it  more  diﬃcult  for  manufacturers  to  meet 
demand. Second, similar labor shortages at major ports and among rail 
and trucking workers caused extended wait times. Delays in process-
ing and moving cargo in turn caused a shortage in available shipping 
containers that exacerbated the problems. Third, over recent decades, 
suppliers embraced a “lean manufacturing” model focused on matching 
production to demand. Although such an approach promotes eﬃciency 
and  productivity,  it  does  so  at  the  cost  of  slack  that  helps  suppliers 
manage labor disruptions, shipping delays, and demand shocks. Finally, 
there was a national strike at John Deere, the largest U.S. equipment 
manufacturer. Between October and November 2021, about 10,000 em-
ployees went on strike across 14 U.S. plants. We describe the strike in 
more detail later, as we exploit it in our empirical tests. Meanwhile, 
during these developments, stay-at-home orders, sharp increases in re-
mote meetings and learning, and government relief programs led to a 

demand surge for microchips, a key component in computers, automo-
biles, and equipment with electronic interfaces.

As a result, equipment manufacturers faced signiﬁcant shortages of 
labor and key components including steel, plastics, rubber, and com-
puter chips. The head of Case New Holland, one of the world’s largest 
equipment manufacturers, described the situation as “the worst supply 
chain I’ve seen in my career... Dealers had to tell customers they had 
to wait, sometimes as long as 12 months, to get a new machine. Firms 
immediately turned to late-model machinery to meet their needs, but 
rapidly it began to disappear.”3

The  shock’s  impact  is  apparent  in  aggregate  price  data.  The  left 
panel  of  Fig. 1 shows  that  equipment  prices  increased  dramatically 
starting in 2020, far outstripping inﬂation (the PCE index). While this 
price rise is notable on its own, manufacturers also often asked their 
clients to wait longer for a new machine. For our purposes, what matters 
is that new capital became less attractive; how much of that stemmed 
from price increases versus longer delivery times is less important.

Supply chain disruptions had been ongoing since the onset of the 
pandemic but were especially acute in late 2021. The right panel of 
Fig. 1 shows  that  the  Global  Supply  Chain  Pressure  index  climbed 
to almost four standard deviations over its average value during that 
episode. Our analysis examines multiple periods, including one span-
ning a speciﬁc labor strike aﬀecting John Deere, the manufacturer that 
produced  the  most  equipment  in  our  sample.  Most  of  our  tests  use 
November 2021 as a cutoﬀ because by that date the equipment short-
age was indisputably pervasive; nevertheless we show our results are 
robust to using other windows.

2.2.  Data

We obtain a sample of public liens on business property (excluding 
real estate), also known as “UCC ﬁlings” or “UCC-1 ﬁlings.” For secured 
loans in the United States, lenders make UCC ﬁlings with the Secretary 
of State in the borrower’s state to legally establish their claim to the col-
lateral pledged by the borrower. Filings typically identify the borrower, 
lender, ﬁling date, and collateral information. For example, UCC ﬁlings 
detail the manufacturer, model, model year, and serial number to en-
sure correct identiﬁcation of the asset in the event of default or dispute 
with another lender. Given these ﬁlings protect the lender’s claim to col-
lateral in the event of default and are inexpensive (typically $25 or less 
to ﬁle), UCC ﬁling datasets provide comprehensive coverage of secured 

3 “What led to the machinery shortage of 2021 and what to expect for 2022,” 
November 19, 2021, Agriculture.com.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038063O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Fig. 2. Example UCC Filing.

Table 1
Summary Statistics.

p25

Median

p75

Av.

Eq. Age (Y)
% New Eq.
Used Eq. Estimated Value (USD)
New Eq. Estimated Value (USD)
Firm Age (Y)

0
-
12,482
9,799
4

1
-
31,772
27,548
13

6
-
74,250
76,715
29

4.77
60.5
55,422
64,282
21.0

N

12M
18M
7M
10M
16M

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for our transaction sample. We 
eliminate UCC ﬁlings in which the debtor is a wholesaler, equipment seller, rental 
or leasing company, auctioneer, or government. The time period includes con-
tracts originated between January 1997 and March 2022. The estimated equip-
ment values are provided by EDA. Firm age is from Dun & Bradstreet.

commercial lending in the United States. Fig. 2 provides an example of 
a UCC ﬁling.

Our UCC ﬁling dataset comes from Randall Reilly, a data vendor fo-
cused on the equipment ﬁnance sector. Their EDA dataset compiles UCC 
ﬁlings dating back to the 1990s, covering lift trucks, machine tools, and 
agricultural, construction, oﬃce, logging, medical, trucking, and wood-
working equipment. From each UCC ﬁling it extracts the borrower and 
lender identity and location as well as collateral information. It cleans 
this  collateral  information  by  standardizing  equipment  manufacturer 
and model information and assigning assets to one of 497 equipment 
codes. It also supplements UCC ﬁling information with additional bor-
rower information (including a Dun & Bradstreet (DNB) number, which 
allows us to measure ﬁrm age).

UCC ﬁlings do not require collateral prices to be recorded. How-
ever, some lenders include them and Randall Reilly has recorded these 
instances in the data, allowing us to observe actual prices for about 5% 
of our sample. For the remaining observations, we can often observe an 
estimated value from Randall Reilly based on list prices, auction values, 
trade publications, and survey information, which by design are noisier 
than actual prices.

Randall-Reilly sells versions of its EDA dataset as a marketing and 
market intelligence tool to over 4,400 equipment manufacturers and 
lenders. UCC ﬁling data similar to that examined in our study (from 
EDA or other vendors) are used in Edgerton (2012); Thakor (2023); 
Murﬁn and Pratt (2019); Gopal (2021); Ma et al. (2022); and Gopal 
and Schnabl (2020), among others. Because the dataset does not contain 

loan sizes, just equipment values for some observations and estimated 
values for most others, we focus on the number of secured transactions, 
which has been shown to be highly correlated with loan volume in prior 
work. Supporting this, Gopal and Schnabl (2020) show the correlation 
between the volume of lending and the loan count at the county-year 
level is very high: 90% for Community Reinvestment Act data and 97% 
for EDA data.

Following Ma et al. (2022), we eliminate UCC ﬁlings in which the 
debtor  is  a  wholesaler,  equipment  seller,  rental  or  leasing  company, 
auctioneer, or government because our tests focus on the end users of 
equipment. Our sample covers over 12 million assets securing ten mil-
lion contracts originated between 1997 and March 2022. Because we 
are  interested  in  aggregate  investment,  and  UCC  ﬁlings  occasionally 
cover  multiple  pieces  of  equipment,  we  count  each  piece  of  equip-
ment  separately  and  refer  to  each  as  a  “transaction”  for  parsimony. 
The contracts involve more than two million unique borrowers from 
every state and industry. Table 1 presents summary statistics. The aver-
age (median) equipment age is 4.77 (one) years old. Sixty-one percent 
of contracts are secured by new equipment. The average (median) esti-
mated value of used equipment is $55k ($32k), and for new equipment 
it is $64k ($27k) (newer assets commonly include less expensive cate-
gories such as computers).

Our primary measure of ﬁrm heterogeneity is age, following classi-
cal work on capital reallocation (Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2007; Ma et al., 
2022; Lanteri and Rampini, 2021). A great advantage of the UCC data is 
that it covers a signiﬁcant number of small private ﬁrms whose behavior 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038064O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

is diﬃcult to study with other datasets. One caveat is that the informa-
tion we can observe about each ﬁrm is somewhat limited. In particular, 
we  have  no  accounting  or  balance  sheet  information.  We  follow  ex-
isting literature and use ﬁrm age from DNB as a proxy for ﬁnancial 
constraints. Although this measure is imperfect, previous work has em-
pirically shown that the eﬀect of age is consistent with predictions of 
models of ﬁnancial constraints in which younger ﬁrms are relatively 
more constrained.4 It is also widely observable in our sample, as ﬁrm 
age is available for over 80% of the observations.

Finally, it is worth repeating that another limitation of our sample 
is that by construction, it is restricted to equipment with a lien. It thus 
excludes transactions in which the buyer fully paid in cash. Our sample 
is thus tilted toward smaller ﬁrms that are more likely to use secured ﬁ-
nancing or leases to acquire ﬁxed assets. Section 5.4 provides additional 
tests to verify that our main results are not driven by selection into the 
UCC dataset.

3.  Theoretical predictions

This section describes the candidate theoretical predictions for how 
a  supply  shortage  will  be  transmitted  to  capital  goods  markets  and 
ﬁrms’ investment. We begin by contrasting two broad classes of invest-
ment models with ﬁnancing frictions. The ﬁrst is a classical view that 
abstracts from diﬀerences between new and used capital and assumes a 
single vintage of capital (depreciating at an homogeneous rate). It there-
fore focuses on the level of investment as opposed to its composition. 
The second is a capital reallocation view that emphasizes the distinc-
tion between primary markets for new capital and secondary markets 
for used capital (see Eisfeldt and Shi (2018) for a survey). In equilib-
rium,  the  choice  of  which  market  to  access  for  investment  varies  in 
the cross-section of ﬁrms: ﬁnancially constrained ﬁrms tend to invest 
in used capital previously owned by richer ﬁrms. However, models in 
both veins tend to assume centralized (Walrasian) markets for capital 
goods. A smaller literature emphasizes the decentralized nature of these 
markets and the presence of search frictions or related transaction costs 
(Wright et al., 2018; Ottonello, 2017; Gavazza, 2011).

The  ﬁrst  part  of  our  analysis  studies  the  eﬀects  of  the  shock  on 
secondary market activity for used capital. The theoretical predictions 
are intuitive. First, if ﬁrms face a meaningful choice between primary 
and secondary markets, we should observe a substitution toward used 
capital when new capital becomes harder to ﬁnd. We should observe 
more ﬁrms willing to acquire used capital and higher prices. Moreover, 
if secondary markets are decentralized we should also observe ﬁrms 
searching more intensively for used capital when new capital is harder 
to ﬁnd.

The second part of the paper investigates investment in the cross-
section of ﬁrms after the shock. These predictions are more subtle. The 
starting point is that capital reallocation models are useful for under-
standing investment composition diﬀerences across ﬁrms. In particular, 
they can explain the patterns of “young ﬁrms, old capital” with a plausi-
ble correlation between ﬁrm age and ﬁnancial constraints (Eisfeldt and 
Rampini, 2007; Ma et al., 2022; Lanteri and Rampini, 2021).5

We start by asking which type of ﬁrm substitutes most aggressively 
toward used capital after the shock. Capital reallocation models such 
as Lanteri and Rampini (2021) predict that it should be ﬁrms in the 
middle of the age distribution. Intuitively, the youngest ﬁrms are so 

4 For instance, see Hadlock and Pierce (2010).
5 The equilibrium characterization is described in more detail in Lanteri and 
Rampini (2021). Only ﬁrms with suﬃcient net worth invest in new capital. 
Intuitively, new capital has a lower user cost but is more expensive: it requires a 
higher down payment. Firms that are more ﬁnancially constrained thus prefer to 
invest in cheaper used capital. Firms with enough net worth are unconstrained 
and invest in the ﬁrst-best level of capital, using new capital only. Firms with 
an intermediate net worth in equilibrium invest in both new and used capital. 
The mix is tilted more toward new capital the higher their net worth.

constrained that they invest very little in new capital in the ﬁrst place, 
while the oldest ﬁrms are the ones investing in the smaller amount of 
new capital available.

The second question is what kind of ﬁrms suﬀer the largest (rel-
ative) drop in investment: Do young ﬁrms face a greater decrease in 
investment than older ﬁrms after the shock? In theory, the answer is 
not so obvious. On the one hand, young ﬁrms are less directly exposed 
to the shock because they are less likely to invest in new capital relative 
to older ﬁrms. However, there is an indirect eﬀect potentially work-
ing in the opposite direction: when older ﬁrms substitute toward used 
capital, the increased competition leads to a secondary market boom. 
This might have diﬀerential eﬀects on ﬁrms, in line with the idea of 
distributive externalities through secondary markets recently popular-
ized in macroeconomic theory (Lanteri and Rampini, 2021; Dávila and 
Korinek, 2018).

Firms’ investment response to this secondary market boom is also 
not obvious. There are two countervailing eﬀects. On the one hand, in 
theory, constrained ﬁrms are generally less price elastic relative to un-
constrained ﬁrms, that is, their investment is less sensitive to a price 
increase  of  capital  goods.6 That  eﬀect  would  make  young  ﬁrms  in-
vest relatively more than older ﬁrms. On the other hand, constrained 
(young) ﬁrms are less sensitive to an improvement in economic con-
ditions. That eﬀect would make them invest relatively less than older 
ﬁrms. Which eﬀect dominates is thus an empirical question.

4.  Secondary market activity

In this section, we provide micro-evidence on changes in secondary 
market activity in the fall of 2021. We ﬁrst document time-series vari-
ation around November 2021. We then exploit a large strike at John 
Deere to identify the eﬀects of a supply shortage.

4.1.  Time series variation around November 2021

Higher Share of Transactions for Used Capital: We ﬁrst inves-
tigate whether transactions are more likely to include used capital as 
opposed to new capital following the production shock. We estimate 
the following regression speciﬁcation:

𝑁𝑒𝑤𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖,𝑒,𝑡 = 𝟏{Post Nov 21 Crunch} + 𝜈𝑐 + 𝑢𝑒,𝑡 + 𝜁 𝑚 + 𝜉𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑒,𝑡

The  dependent  variable  is  either  an  indicator  for  the  equipment 
being  new  or  the  log  equipment  age  (in  years).  The  variable  of  in-
terest is an indicator for the period beginning in November 2021 and 
ending  in  March  2022  (the  last  month  of  our  sample).7 We  include 
county ﬁxed eﬀects 𝜈𝑐
to control for persistent diﬀerences across lo-
cal markets as well as equipment code-by-calendar month ﬁxed eﬀects 
𝑢𝑒,𝑡
. These are important to control for seasonality, which can be an 
important driver of investment demand. We also include manufacturer-
model ﬁxed eﬀects 𝜁 𝑚
to account for time-invariant diﬀerences across 
the same equipment oﬀering. The most stringent speciﬁcations include 
ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects 𝜉𝑖
to estimate the change within a particular ﬁrm. The 
sample includes all contracts from January 2019 to March 2022. We 
cluster our standard errors by month-year; clustering instead by equip-
ment code does not aﬀect our inferences.

6 In a standard model like Rampini (2013), unconstrained ﬁrms 𝑈 choose 
capital  𝑘𝑈 according  to  the  ﬁrst-order  condition  𝑞 = 𝛽𝑓 ′(𝑘𝑈 ),  where  𝑞 is 
the price of capital and 𝛽 is their discount rate. Assuming for instance that 
𝑓 (𝑘) = 𝑘𝛼 , the elasticity of unconstrained ﬁrms is thus 𝑑 log 𝑘𝑈
< −1. The 
elasticity of constrained ﬁrms however, is smaller (less negative):  𝑑 log 𝑘𝑈
𝑑 log 𝑞 = −1. 
We thank Priit Jeenas and Adriano Rampini for independently providing simple 
proofs of this fact.
7 To the extent that the timing of the shock was diﬀused, this would likely 
attenuate our results. In Table IA.1 and Table IA.2 of the Internet Appendix, we 
show our results are robust to using alternative windows.

𝑑 log 𝑞 = − 1
1−𝛼

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038065O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Table 2
New vs. Used Capital Transactions.

(1)
New

(2)
Log (1+Equipment Age)

(3)
New

(4)
Log (1+Equipment Age)

Post Nov 21 Crunch

-0.077***
[-9.02]

0.163***
[6.68]

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

2211339
0.532

1548352
0.694

-0.055***
[-7.80]

0.098***
[6.90]

1887180
0.685

1280454
0.813

t statistics in brackets.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table models equipment age as a function of time. The unit of observation is a trans-
action for a particular piece of equipment. The dependent variable in Columns 1 and 3 is an 
indicator variable equal to 1 if the equipment is new, and 0 if used; in Columns 2 and 4 the depen-
dent variable is the log of equipment age. Columns 1 and 2 include county, manufacturer-model, 
and equipment code × calendar month ﬁxed eﬀects, while Columns 3 and 4 add ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects. 
The sample includes all contracts from January 2019 to March 2022. Standard errors are clustered 
by month-year.

Table 3
Trading Activity in Used Capital.

(1)
Log Time Since Last Contract

(2)
Log Distance

(3)
Same County

(4)
Same SIC2

(5)
Same Modal Equipment Code

Year 2021/2

-0.148***
[-11.99]

0.051**
[2.33]

-0.018***
[-3.86]

-0.018***
[-3.00]

-0.011**
[-2.06]

329559
0.445

345244
0.324

345244
0.352

345244
0.275

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

288517
0.443
t statistics in brackets.
𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table models secondary market activity as a function of time. The unit of observation is a transaction for 
a particular piece of equipment. The dependent variable in Column 1 is the log number of days between the last two 
transactions for that equipment; in Column 2 it is the log number of miles between the counties of the last two users 
of that equipment; in Column 3 it is an indicator variable for the last two users of that equipment being in the same 
county; in Column 4 it is an indicator variable for the last two users of that equipment being in the same two-digit SIC 
code; in Column 5 it is an indicator variable for the last two users of that equipment sharing the same modal equipment 
code deﬁned over their previous transactions. All speciﬁcations include equipment serial number, county and calendar 
month ﬁxed eﬀects, as well as indicators for each year of equipment age. The sample includes all equipment that 
transacted at least twice. Standard errors are clustered by serial number.

Table 2 presents the results. Column 1 shows that during the sup-
ply  chain  disruption  period,  transactions  are  signiﬁcantly  less  likely 
to include new equipment. Column 2 conﬁrms this result by showing 
that the average equipment age is also higher. Conducting the analy-
sis within-ﬁrm in Columns 3 and 4 produces a similar inference. This 
evidence is consistent with ﬁrms switching to used capital when new 
capital becomes scarcer.

Trading  Activity  for  Used  Capital: To  provide  more  direct  evi-
dence of an increase in demand for used capital, we leverage the fact 
that we can track individual pieces of equipment over time and loca-
tion using granular data that allow us to develop a measure of trading 
activity in secondary markets that would be diﬃcult to construct using 
more aggregated data.

In particular, we aim to capture the idea that ﬁrms competed more 
aggressively for used capital during the supply chain disruption relative 
to normal times. The following quote from November 2021 illustrates 
this competition:

There was this John Deere tractor up for sale at the auction in Key-
mar, Maryland. It was old – built in 1998 – but lightly used, having 
clocked fewer than 1,000 hours, and in pristine condition. The bid-
ding started at $100,000 and quickly shot up to a ﬁnal sale price of 
$170,000. That’s $25,000 over the previous record for that spe-
ciﬁc model. (Brand-new versions start at $205,000.) The buyer was 
so desperate to get his hands on a tractor that he drove all the way 

in from Illinois to bid on this one. When he won, he loaded it onto 
a trailer hitched to his truck and hauled it 12 hours back home.8

This suggests that used equipment would sell faster and across more-
distant locations during the supply chain disruption. We run the follow-
ing regression to test this prediction:

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑒,𝑡 = 𝟏{Year 2021/22} + 𝜉𝑒 + 𝑎𝑒,𝑡 + 𝜈𝑐 + 𝑢𝑡 + 𝜀𝑒,𝑡

The  dependent  variable  measures  diﬀerent  aspects  of  trading  ac-
tivity:  the  time  between  the  last  two  sales  and  geographic  distance 
measures between the last two buyers. Our variable of interest is an 
indicator for 2021 and 2022: in this regression we use a yearly indica-
tor over a monthly indicator as trading activity is diﬃcult to measure 
precisely at a high frequency. The sample includes all equipment that 
transacted at least twice. This allows us to include serial number ﬁxed 
eﬀects, to identify the change in trading intensity in this period keep-
ing the speciﬁc piece of equipment and its speciﬁcation (manufacturer, 
model, vintage, and features) ﬁxed. We also include dummies for each 
yearly equipment age level as well as county and calendar month ﬁxed 
eﬀects to account for the persistent eﬀects of local markets or seasonal-
ity.

Table 3 presents the results. We ﬁnd evidence of an increase in trad-
ing  market  intensity  after  the  shock.  Column  1  shows  that  the  time 
between  sales  signiﬁcantly  decreased  during  this  episode  relative  to 

8 “Wild  bidding  wars  erupt  at  used-tractor  auctions  across  the  U.S.” 
Bloomberg, Nov. 13, 2021. Emphasis added.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038066O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

normal times. This suggests that used equipment took less time than 
normal to ﬁnd a buyer, consistent with heightened demand. Economi-
cally, the decline represents a six-month reduction relative to a mean 
time between sales of 3.5 years.

We also ﬁnd greater geographic distance between consecutive buy-
ers. Columns 2 and 3 show that consecutive users of equipment were 
further apart. The distance between the past and current user increased 
by 5% and they were 2 percentage points less likely to be located in 
the same county. For context, past and current users are in the same 
county about 20% of the time. These distance ﬁndings are consequen-
tial because many equipment types are heavy and therefore costly to 
disassemble, transport, and reassemble.

We also ﬁnd evidence of more used equipment trading across buyers 
in diﬀerent sectors. Column 4 shows that in 2021 and 2022, there was 
a  lower  probability  that  the  last  two  buyers  were  in  same  industry. 
Column 5 shows a similar pattern for indicators of whether the last two 
buyers shared the same modal equipment code (there are nearly 500 
codes). To illustrate this ﬁnding, consider a piece of equipment that was 
previously operated by a ﬁrm that predominantly invests in a certain 
type of loader. In 2021 and 2022, this equipment was more likely to 
be subsequently used by a ﬁrm that does not predominantly invest in 
the same type of loader, relative to previous years. One interpretation is 
that buyers are more likely to purchase capital that is further from their 
ideal type, revealing an additional willingness to substitute after the 
shock. A more extreme possibility is that some ﬁrms acquired diﬀerent 
equipment to access parts that were otherwise diﬃcult to acquire. In 
other words, the ﬁrm acquired the asset intending to harvest it for parts 
or repurpose it in some way.9

To interpret these results, it is worthwhile to examine the supply of 
used capital during this episode. A ﬁrst potential concern is that higher 
transaction volume was not driven by higher demand for used capi-
tal but instead by higher supply coming from ﬁrms scaling down their 
operations  and  selling  assets.  However,  additional  evidence  suggests 
that demand seemed to have signiﬁcantly outstripped supply. Prices for 
capital goods increased signiﬁcantly during this episode, as one would 
expect during a supply shortage. Recall that Fig. 1 shows that the price 
of capital goods increased at a far greater rate than inﬂation, consistent 
with many industry media reports of price increases amidst a shortage 
of equipment10 In addition, the next section exploits a large strike at 
John Deere to isolate the eﬀect of such a supply shortage.

Moreover, there is striking evidence that dealers’ inventory fell sig-
niﬁcantly during this episode. For example, one report described how 
“the run on late-model, large equipment in good condition wiped out 
available inventory in 2021.”11 Survey evidence reveals the dramatic 
run-down. Figure IA.1 in the Internet Appendix shows just how few 
dealers reported high levels of inventory during this episode. The fall in 
dealer inventory is revealing. In normal times, dealers maintain some 
level of inventory that ﬂuctuates as diﬀerent ﬁrms purchase (which in-
creases demand, and runs down inventories) while others stop using 
their equipment (which increases supply, and replenishes inventories). 
Therefore, a large decrease in inventories points to demand for used 
equipment exceeding supply (from ﬁrms getting rid of their machines) 
by a signiﬁcant margin.

9 For example, ﬁrms report acquiring washing machines for the sole purpose 
of stripping out their electronics: “The chip shortage is so bad companies are 
ripping them out of washing machines,” Protocol April 20, 2022.
10 For example, see “Wild bidding wars erupt at used-tractor auctions across 
the U.S.” Bloomberg, Nov. 13, 2021.
11 Source: “Dealer and auction lots remain empty” Nov 15th 2022; Link. See 
also the article “What led to the machinery shortage of 2021 and what to expect 
for 2022” which described how “Dealers had to tell customers they had to wait, 
sometimes as long as 12 months, to get a new machine. Firms immediately 
turned to late-model machinery to meet their needs, but rapidly it began to 
disappear.” Source: November 19, 2021, Agriculture.com.

The fall in dealers’ inventory is also helpful to address the oppo-
site concern: that the supply of used capital might have been extremely 
low as ﬁrms were likely reluctant to part with their equipment during 
this time, given how hard it was to ﬁnd a replacement. In the pres-
ence of dealers’ inventory, while eventually every ﬁrm selling has to 
be  matched  to  a  ﬁrm  buying,  the  timing  of  demand  and  supply  (of 
end users) do not have to coincide. A fall in dealer inventory can ex-
plain how transaction volumes could have increased even in the absence 
an contemporaneous increase in supply. Nevertheless, Section 6 below 
attempts to better understand the dynamic allocation pattern by study-
ing the characteristics of previous end users of used capital acquired in 
2021–2022.

4.2.  Isolating a supply shortage: John Deere strike

The evidence from the previous section is consistent with the pan-
demic  production  disruptions  leading  to  a  demand  shock  for  used 
capital. Nevertheless, from an identiﬁcation perspective, the previous 
empirical analysis relied on time series variation, comparing the recent 
months to normal times. A concern is that the supply shortage was not 
the only aggregate shock to hit the economy during this time, and that 
equipment markets might have ﬂuctuated for diﬀerent reasons during 
this episode. For example, there might have been a change in invest-
ment demand or credit conditions due to the macroeconomic recovery 
or government interventions to alleviate the eﬀects of the pandemic.

In this section, to address these concerns, we exploit a labor strike at 
John Deere to isolate additional cross-sectional variation in the exposure 
to a supply shortage. John Deere, which is the largest U.S. equipment 
manufacturer, specializes in agricultural and construction equipment. 
Between October and November 2021, about 10,000 production and 
warehouse employees went on strike across 14 U.S. plants. This was the 
largest strike ever at John Deere and the largest private sector strike 
in the United States since the 2019 General Motors strike. The strike 
raised concern among end users of capital, as it happened in a period 
in which global production disruptions were already in full force.12 Be-
cause John Deere is the largest agricultural equipment manufacturer 
in  the  United  States  and  the  second-largest  construction  equipment 
manufacturer (next to Caterpillar, Inc.), the strike served as a major 
disruption that aﬀected multiple sectors in all parts of the country. The 
strike led to a severe production backlog. Investment bank William Blair 
& Company estimated that the strike reduced John Deere’s output by 
10% to 15% for 2021Q4 and 2022Q1.

Consistent with this, we observe a distinct decline in new equip-
ment from John Deere compared to its competitors following the strike, 
as shown by Table 4. This had a negative eﬀect on an already tight 
secondary market: “With the four-week-old strike at Deere factories ex-
acerbating an already acute shortage of new tractors, the used market 
is the only place for many desperate farmers to turn.”13

Our identiﬁcation strategy in this section exploits the heterogeneous 
exposure of other manufacturers to the strike. Intuitively, market seg-
ments in which John Deere has a larger presence are more likely to 
experience supply shortages and see ﬁrms turn to other manufactur-
ers relative to other market segments. Speciﬁcally, we run a Bartik-like 
speciﬁcation. We exploit 2019 pre-pandemic diﬀerences in John Deere’s 
market share across equipment types. To illustrate, in 2019, John Deere 
had over a 50% market share in the crawler dozers market versus a 12% 
share in the skid steer loaders market. In the sample of equipment trans-
actions not involving John Deere equipment, we introduce a Strike ×
2019 Deere Market Share interaction, where the strike period is deﬁned 
as December 2021 through January 2022 (the strike ran from October 

12 “Farmers and John Deere suppliers worry about strike’s impact,” Associated 
Press, October 17, 2021.
13 “Deere’s Strike Is Over, but Order Backlog, Higher Costs Remain,” Wall 
Street Journal, Nov. 22, 2021.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038067O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Notes: This ﬁgure displays binned scatterplots of log ﬁrm age against log equipment age. The values are residualized after controlling for 
county-by-equipment family ﬁxed eﬀects. Panel (a) includes all contracts up to December 2019, and Panel (b) includes all contracts after October 2021.
Fig. 3. Firm Age–Capital Age Gradient.

Table 4
John Deere Strike: Share of New Equipment.

(1)
New Equipment

(2)
New Equipment

Deere x Strike

-0.081**
[-2.64]

-0.077**
[-2.64]

3055344
0.279

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

3055351
0.263
t statistics in brackets.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table models equipment age as a func-
tion of time and manufacturer. The unit of observa-
tion is a transaction for a particular piece of equip-
ment. The dependent variable is an indicator vari-
able equal to 1 if the equipment is new, and 0 if 
used. Deere is an indicator for equipment manufac-
tured by John Deere. Strike is an indicator variable 
for transactions occurring between December 2021 
and January 2022. Column 1 ﬁxed eﬀects: county, 
equipment code-month-year, manufacturer; Column 
2 ﬁxed eﬀects: county, equipment code-month-year, 
manufacturer, state-month-year. The sample is lim-
ited to the 2018-2022 period. Standard errors are 
clustered by month-year.

to November 2021, and given production and shipping time, it typi-
cally takes a month or two for equipment to appear in a UCC ﬁling). 
Importantly, we can include granular time ﬁxed eﬀects (in addition to 
others) to account for other concurrent shocks to investment demand 
or credit conditions because we now have a supply shock that varies 
in the cross-section of market segments. Speciﬁcally, we include serial 
number, county and month × year ﬁxed eﬀects, and equipment age (in 
year) indicators. The sample includes all equipment that transacted at 
least twice.

We ﬁnd the eﬀects of this particular supply shortage are in line with 
the previous time series evidence. Table 5 shows that in segments with 
higher John Deere market share, we observe less time between sales, 
larger distance between consecutive users, and more dissimilar consec-
utive users.

Table 6 also provides evidence consistent with larger price increases 
for capital goods in segments with higher John Deere market share. 
Columns 1 and 2 examine used equipment, while Columns 3 and 4 ex-
amine new equipment; all are restricted to transactions for which actual 
prices are available. For both used and new equipment, we ﬁnd larger 

price increases in segments in which John Deere had the largest market 
share. The eﬀects are sizeable: for instance the estimate of Column 2 of 
Table 6 implies that a one standard deviation increase in John Deere’s 
2019 market share (≈ 0.25) increases other manufacturers’ used capi-
tal prices by 25% during the strike. The eﬀects are even larger for new 
capital goods. These results are consistent with our earlier evidence on 
secondary markets, conﬁrming that supply shortages were a key driver 
of the surge in secondary market activity in the fall of 2021.

5.  Investment in the cross-section of ﬁrms

5.1.  Change in the ﬁrm age–capital age gradient

We ﬁrst examine the correlation between ﬁrm age and capital age 
before and during the supply shortage. Fig. 3 displays scatterplots of 
the log of ﬁrm age against log equipment age in our sample, controlling 
for county-by-equipment family ﬁxed eﬀects. The left panel focuses on 
normal times (pre-2020). During this time, we see a clear monotonic 
relationship: younger ﬁrms invest in older capital. This replicates the 
results of Ma et al. (2022), which uses an earlier version of the EDA 
data.

The right panel Fig. 3 shows a drastically diﬀerent picture starting in 
November 2021. The ﬁrms in the intermediate age group experienced 
the largest change in the age of their equipment. This is in line with the 
ﬁrst prediction of models of capital reallocation: intermediate-age ﬁrms 
are the ones that switch the most aggressively from new capital to used 
capital after the shock.

5.2.  Investment in used capital across ﬁrm age distribution

The previous test focused on changes in equipment age conditional 
on investing. In this section and the next, we study changes in the dy-
namics of investment volume across the ﬁrm distribution. To this end, 
we aggregate our micro-data to a monthly time series of investment vol-
ume for diﬀerent market segments. In this subsection, we focus on used 
capital investment. Speciﬁcally, we aggregate the number of transac-
tions at the equipment code × ﬁrm age group × state × month × year 
level. We include three age groups based on the previous scatterplots: 
(1) ﬁrms between one and three years old14; (2) ﬁrms between four and 

14 We exclude brand new ﬁrms (less than one year old) because our dataset 
ends in March 2022 and therefore we cannot observe a full year’s worth of new 
ﬁrms for 2022.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038068O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Table 5
John Deere Strike: Trading Activity in Used Capital.

(1)
Log Time Since Last Contract

(2)
Log Distance

(3)
Same County

(4)
Same SIC2

(5)
Same Modal Equipment Code

Strike × Deere Share 2019

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

-0.712***
[-4.62]

165492
0.447

0.743***
[3.28]

197228
0.526

-0.163***
[-3.15]

209986
0.408

-0.060
[-0.96]

209986
0.298

-0.149**
[-2.48]

209986
0.401

t statistics in brackets.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table models secondary market activity as a function of time and John Deere’s market share in the equipment code. 
The unit of observation is a transaction for a particular piece of equipment. The dependent variable in Column 1 is the log number 
of days between the last two transactions for that equipment; in Column 2 it is the log number of miles between the counties of the 
last two users of that equipment; in Column 3 it is an indicator variable for the last two users of that equipment being in the same 
county; in Column 4 it is an indicator variable for the last two users of that equipment being in the same two-digit SIC code; in 
Column 5 it is an indicator variable for the last two users of that equipment sharing the same modal equipment code deﬁned over 
their previous transactions. Strike is an indicator variable for transactions occurring between December 2021 and January 2022. 
Deere Share 2019 is the share of contracts in that equipment code that involve equipment manufactured by John Deere, measured 
in 2019. All speciﬁcations include equipment serial number, county and calendar month ﬁxed eﬀects, and indicators for each year 
of equipment age. The sample includes all equipment that transacted at least twice. Standard errors are clustered by serial number.

Table 6
John Deere Strike: Prices for Other Manufacturers’ Equipment.

(1)
Log Price-Used

(2)
Log Price-Used

(3)
Log Price-New

(4)
Log Price-New

Strike x Deere Share 2019

Deere Share 2019

Log (1+ Equipment Age)

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

0.953**
[2.19]
1.054
[1.42]
-0.602***
[-8.04]

33666
0.325

1.015***
[3.11]
1.832*
[1.96]
-0.639***
[-10.20]

33666
0.404

3.105***
[6.10]
1.170
[1.71]
-0.000
[-0.00]

7037
0.479

3.145***
[4.67]
2.061**
[2.40]
0.009
[0.12]

7037
0.562

t statistics in brackets.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table studies equipment prices as a function of time and John Deere’s market share in the 
equipment code. Strike is an indicator variable for December 2021 to January 2022. Deere Share 2019 
is the share of contracts in that equipment code that involve equipment manufactured by John Deere, 
measured in 2019. The unit of observation is a transaction for a particular piece of equipment. Fixed eﬀects 
in each column: month × year, state, and sector (odd columns); month × year, state, sector, and equipment 
family (even columns). The sample omits equipment manufactured by John Deere itself and includes only 
equipment for which the actual price is reported. Columns 1 and 2 study used equipment prices, whereas 
Columns 3 and 4 study new equipment prices. Standard errors are clustered by month-year.

29 years old; and (3) ﬁrms 30 or more years old. For example, we con-
struct a monthly time series of the number of used trucks of a speciﬁc 
type purchased by ﬁrms three years old or younger in Maryland. We 
then combine these diﬀerent monthly time series into a more aggregate 
sample to study the dynamics of investment volume after the shock for 
diﬀerent ﬁrm groups.

We run the following regression:

magnitudes are large: according to Column 1, young ﬁrms’ used invest-
ment volume dropped by 10 percentage points more than for the oldest 
ﬁrms. In line with the previous result, the second row shows that ﬁrms 
in the intermediate group actually increased their investment in used 
capital relative to the oldest ﬁrms (although the eﬀect gets statistically 
weaker with more ﬁxed eﬀects). These contrasting dynamics are in line 
with the distributive eﬀects highlighted in Section 3.

𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑑𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑒,𝑎,𝑠,𝑡 = Σ𝑔𝛽𝑔𝟏{Post Nov 21}×𝐴𝑔𝑒𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝(𝑔)+𝜈𝑒 +𝑢𝑡 +𝜀𝑒,𝑎,𝑠,𝑡
The coeﬃcients of interest are the interactions {𝛽𝑔}𝑔 between an 
indicator equal to one starting in November 2021 with age group indi-
cators. These interactions measure how much used capital investment 
changed for a speciﬁc group of ﬁrms. Note that the third age category 
is subsumed by our ﬁxed eﬀects. The {𝛽𝑔}𝑔 coeﬃcients thus represent 
the change in used investment for an age group relative to the oldest 
ﬁrms,  which  we  take  as  the  closest  to  an  unconstrained  investment 
benchmark. The sample includes all contracts for used equipment from 
January 2019 to February 2022.

Table 7 presents the results. Column 1 includes equipment code and 
month × year ﬁxed eﬀects, while Column 2 adds state × month × year 
and ﬁrm age ﬁxed eﬀects. The ﬁrst row shows that the youngest ﬁrms 
experienced the largest drop in used capital investment. The economic 

5.3.  Total investment across ﬁrm age distribution

Next, we run an analysis similar to the above but now consider total 
investment, deﬁned as the sum of used plus new capital investment in 
each segment. We run the same regression speciﬁcation:

𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑒,𝑎,𝑠,𝑡 = Σ𝑔𝟏{Post Nov 21} × 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝(𝑔) + 𝜈𝑒 + 𝑢𝑡 + 𝜀𝑒,𝑎,𝑠,𝑡
Table 8 presents the results. We ﬁnd that the youngest ﬁrms were in fact 
the most aﬀected by the supply shortage. The ﬁrst row shows that the 
youngest ﬁrms experienced the largest drop in total capital investment 
relative to other ﬁrms. The economic magnitudes are again large: their 
total investment volume dropped by 17 to 21 percentage points relative 
to others. On the other hand, the second row shows that ﬁrms in the 
intermediate group actually did not experience a similar decline in total 
investment. Table IA.3 in the Internet Appendix shows that the results 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038069O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Table 7
Investment in Used Capital Across Firm Age Distribution.

Post Nov 21 x Firm Age Below 4y

Post Nov 21 x Firm Age Btw 4 and 29y

Firm Age Below 4y

Firm Age Btw 4 and 29y

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

(1)
Log Used Capital

(2)
Log Used Capital

-0.104**
[-2.69]
0.016**
[2.08]
-0.162***
[-14.02]
0.294***
[77.56]

318765
0.311

-0.128***
[-3.29]
0.014
[1.50]

318757
0.375

t statistics in brackets.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table models the log number of transactions for used equip-
ment as a function of time and borrower age. Post Nov 21 is an indicator 
for months starting in November 2021. We measure borrower age using in-
dicator variables for borrowers 3 years or younger, 4–29 years old, or at 
least 30 years old. The unit of observation is state-equipment code-ﬁrm age 
group-month-year. Fixed eﬀects in each column: (1) equipment code and 
month × year; (2) equipment code, age, and state × month × year. The sam-
ple includes all contracts for used equipment from January 2019 to February 
2022. Standard errors are clustered by month-year.

Table 8
Total Capital Investment Across Firm Age Distribution.

Post Nov 21 x Firm Age Below 4y

Post Nov 21 x Firm Age Btw 4 and 29y

Firm Age Below 4y

Firm Age Btw 4 and 29y

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

(1)
Log Total Capital

(2)
Log Total Capital

-0.170***
[-4.54]
0.008
[1.54]
-0.356***
[-26.43]
0.277***
[72.10]

318765
0.389

-0.205***
[-4.99]
0.004
[0.70]

318757
0.470

t statistics in brackets.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table models the log number of equipment transactions as a func-
tion of time and borrower age. Post Nov 21 is an indicator for months starting 
in November 2021. We measure borrower age using indicator variables for 
borrowers 3 years or younger, 4–29 years old, or at least 30 years old. The 
unit of observation is state-equipment code-ﬁrm age group-month-year. Fixed 
eﬀects in each column: (1) equipment code and month × year; (2) equipment 
code, age, and state × month × year. The sample includes all contracts from 
January 2019 to February 2022. Standard errors are clustered by month-year.

are similar if we use August 2021 as a cutoﬀ instead of November, with 
slightly smaller coeﬃcients as expected.

To complement the panel regressions, Figure IA.2 in the Internet 
Appendix plots the aggregate investment volume by ﬁrm age group. 
Although by design this aggregate analysis cannot control for diﬀeren-
tial composition across equipment types and geography, it does reveal 
similar dynamics. Young ﬁrms experienced a greater fall in capital in-
vestment than other ﬁrms in 2021. The young ﬁrm investment decline 
is particularly pronounced in used capital investment, while the decline 
in new capital investment is relatively homogeneous across ﬁrm age 
categories.

This pattern is consistent with some ﬁrms using secondary markets 
to dampen the shock, eventually crowding out other ﬁrms. Our evidence 
provides empirical support for the distributive externalities emphasized 
in recent macroeconomic theory work (Lanteri and Rampini, 2021) in 
the context of a recent large macroeconomic event. Note however that 
conceptually the indirect eﬀects of shocks in the presence of pecuniary 

externalities can be subtle. Our empirical estimates suggest that young 
ﬁrms were most aﬀected, even if they were not the most directly ex-
posed to the shock to primary markets for new capital.

5.4.  Robustness

Sample  selection: One  limitation  of  our  sample  is  that  by  con-
struction  it  is  restricted  to  equipment  with  a  lien  and  thus  excludes 
transactions in which the buyer paid fully in cash. A potential concern 
is this sample selection drives our results. For instance, it might exclude 
young ﬁrms that actually invested during the supply chain disruptions 
but paid in cash.

Several factors alleviate this concern. First, at a general level, Ma 
et al. (2022) provide multiple forms of evidence that the UCC data are 
representative of the distribution of U.S. ﬁrms in their sample period 
of 1990–2017, which largely overlaps with ours. Second, if anything, 
the  UCC  sample  selection  likely  overweights  younger  ﬁrms,  as  it  is 
well-known  that  they  are  more  likely  to  ﬁnance  capital  investment. 
Similarly, secured ﬁnancing tends to become more common during eco-
nomic downturns (Benmelech et al., 2020). A priori, this would reduce 
the concern that young ﬁrms that actually invested in the fall of 2021 
are excluded from our sample because they disproportionately paid in 
cash.

Third, we conduct additional tests assessing the sensitivity of our 
results to diﬀerent speciﬁcation choices that consider selection in dif-
ferent  ways.  To  start,  we  ﬁnd  that  the  results  are  robust  to  adding 
progressively tighter ﬁxed eﬀects, which we do in an attempt to control 
for the borrower’s decision to ﬁnance equipment. Tables IA.4 and IA.5 
in the Internet Appendix show that if anything, our results strengthen 
as we begin controlling for time and equipment eﬀects, suggesting that 
our results are not driven by borrower unobservables correlated with 
selection into secured ﬁnancing.

Fourth,  we  run  weighted  least  squares  tests  to  reweight  observa-
tions in a way that mitigates sample selection. Tables IA.6 and IA.7 in 
the Internet Appendix reweight observations based on the distribution 
of equipment at wholesalers each year, following the idea of Ma et al. 
(2022).15 Intuitively, by observing the nature and location of inventory 
that wholesalers obtain ﬁnancing for in a given year, we can develop a 
proxy for the population of equipment entering the market, regardless 
of whether the ultimate user ﬁnanced the purchase or paid cash. Re-
gardless of whether we use weights based on location, equipment code, 
or both, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant investment drop for the youngest ﬁrms 
during the supply chain disruption.

Young ﬁrms’ demand for capital: A related concern is that our re-
sults simply reﬂect a decline in capital demand by young ﬁrms instead 
of  the  spillover  eﬀects  of  the  supply  chain  disruption.16 To  test  this 
directly, we revisit our secondary market tests and introduce an inter-
action term for the youngest ﬁrms. Intuitively, if young ﬁrms reduced 
their demand for capital, then we should not observe the same search 
behavior as we found for the full sample: young ﬁrms would not go to 
the eﬀort to travel farther or increasingly acquire capital from funda-
mentally diﬀerent ﬁrms. However, Table IA.8 in the Internet Appendix 
shows a similar pattern for young ﬁrms: the interaction term for young 
ﬁrms is insigniﬁcant in all columns. Together, this evidence contradicts 
interpretations based on young ﬁrms experiencing a disproportionate 
demand decrease for capital.

Other evidence from outside our setting also contradicts explana-
tions based on young ﬁrms experiencing a decline in capital demand. 

15 These wholesale acquisitions are primarily ﬂoor-plan ﬁnancing for dealer 
inventory. Recall that these wholesale buyers are excluded from our main sam-
ple as our focus is on end users of equipment.
16 Possible explanations for this demand reduction include a lack of cash ﬂow 
from operations pauses or labor-capital complementarity if young ﬁrms had 
trouble hiring during this period (Bernstein et al., 2020).

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380610O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

For instance, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Small Business 
Lending Survey shows that loan demand was high in 2021–2022 after 
dropping throughout 2020, in part due to supply chain disruptions.17
In addition, the 2020 Paycheck Protection Program boosted small ﬁrms’ 
ﬁnances.18 More than $950 billion of loans were provided over three 
rounds from April 2020 to May 2021. Although the program focused 
on payroll relief, if anything, the additional liquidity should have lifted 
ﬁrms’ investment demand when the recovery arrived. This extra liquid-
ity, combined with the program’s focus on small ﬁrms, makes it unlikely 
that young ﬁrms experienced a large decline in their demand for capital 
that would explain our ﬁndings.

Slower ﬁrm creation in 2020: One related possibility is that the 
2021–2022 young ﬁrm investment decline was due to a lack of ﬁrm 
creation  in  2020.  The  concern  is  that  many  potential  entrepreneurs 
might have postponed launching in the highly uncertain environment of 
2020. If that was the case, aggregate young ﬁrm investment could me-
chanically decline in 2021–2022 because there were fewer young ﬁrms 
in these years. However, Dinlersoz et al. (2021) ﬁnd that, if anything, 
overall employer business creation increased in 2020. Nevertheless, to 
examine this more directly, we use the DNB data measuring ﬁrm cre-
ation and exclude states with the lowest growth in the number of young 
ﬁrms in 2020.19 We implement this test in a variety of ways. Tables IA.9 
and IA.10 repeat the main analysis after excluding states with a negative 
growth rate of young ﬁrms in 2020 (Columns 1–2), states in the bottom 
quartile of young ﬁrm growth in 2020 (Columns 3–4), and states where 
the growth in the number of young ﬁrms was smaller than the growth 
of old and medium ﬁrms in 2020 (Columns 5–6). The results are largely 
unaﬀected.

Heterogeneous eﬀects of market liquidity: As additional support 
for the mechanism, we conduct a further cross-sectional test. We split 
the sample based on secondary market liquidity. We use the time be-
tween  transactions  as  a  measure  of  liquidity  and  classify  equipment 
codes with a median time between repeat sales above one year as low-
liquidity segments and the others being high-liquidity segments. Tables 
IA.11 and IA.12 in the Internet Appendix show the results for this sam-
ple split. As expected given our mechanism, the results are generally 
stronger in the low-liquidity segments.

Financing  channel: We  conduct  two  additional  tests  to  gauge 
whether a ﬁnancing channel might explain our main results. First, we 
split the sample by lender type to compare banks and nonbanks. It is 
well understood that nonbanks have a large presence in the equipment 
market, but they respond diﬀerently to economic shocks and face lit-
tle regulation (Murﬁn and Pratt, 2019; Gopal and Schnabl, 2020). If the 
capital reallocation we document is driven by a ﬁnancing channel as 
opposed to supply chain disruptions, then one might expect diﬀerent 
patterns for transactions ﬁnanced by banks and nonbanks.20 To exam-
ine this, we split lenders into bank and nonbank categories using Gopal 
and Schnabl (2020)’s algorithm. Tables IA.13 and IA.14 in the Inter-

17 See Chart 9 of the 2022Q1 issue: https://www .kansascityfed .org /Research /
documents /8864 /Kansas -City -Fed -Small -Business -Lending -Survey -Quarter -1 -
2022 .pdf.
18 The Paycheck Protection Program, initiated over a year before our supply 
chain disruption period, provided small businesses with loans to cover up to 
eight weeks of payroll costs during the pandemic. The loans were fully forgiv-
able, so long as the ﬁrm maintained headcount and salary levels. The program 
targeted ﬁrms with 500 or fewer employees, though there were some exceptions 
for larger ﬁrms in speciﬁc industries. Participating ﬁrms had to be established 
before February 15, 2020 (i.e., one could not incorporate and legally receive a 
loan from the program).
19 Note that we do not want to exclude segments in which new ﬁrm creation 
was low in 2021 or 2022, as that can be part of our mechanism. In fact, Ma et 
al. (2022) document that a lack of used capital available for young ﬁrms leads 
to less ﬁrm creation.
20 For instance, banks received large deposit inﬂows in 2020.

net Appendix show our results are similar across the two lender types, 
suggesting that this ﬁnancing channel cannot explain our results.

Moreover,  we  investigate  whether  similar  results  hold  for  the 
2008–2009  crisis,  when  ﬁnancing  was  severely  disrupted  but  supply 
chains were not. Tables IA.15 and IA.16 in the Internet Appendix show 
that this is not the case. This is consistent with the 2008–2009 crisis be-
ing dominated by ﬁnancing and productivity shocks rather than a large 
supply shortage like the one observed during the pandemic.

6.  Discussion

Our analysis focuses on investment and capital reallocation dynam-
ics following the large-scale production disruptions of 2021. The results 
of Ma et al. (2022) suggest that the drop in investment we document for 
small ﬁrms might have signiﬁcant real eﬀects. Speciﬁcally, they docu-
ment that a reduction in the availability of used capital leads to less 
start-up entry, less job creation, and less growth for small ﬁrms. Re-
latedly, there might be some eﬀects on labor markets via capital-labor 
substitution.21 Moreover, the supply shortage eﬀects are likely to be 
persistent if they permanently lowered the stock of used capital. On the 
other hand, the faster the catch-up in production, the more temporary 
the consequences will be. Although our current sample ends in early 
2022 and is thus too short to investigate these eﬀects directly, under-
standing the potential recovery in capital supply is thus an important 
question for future research.22

Although a full analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, we sketch 
some potential aggregate and welfare implications. Theoretical analy-
sis of pecuniary externalities is an active area of research. While Dávila 
and Korinek (2018) argue that there can be over- or under-investment, 
Lanteri and Rampini (2021) show that ﬁnancial frictions can lead to 
ineﬃcient capital reallocation: the price of used capital is higher than 
the socially optimal level. Another important consideration is how pro-
ductivity varies in the cross-section of ﬁrms. There can also be a host 
of additional equilibrium eﬀects: the fear of a supply shortage might 
also discourage ﬁrm entry (related to Ma et al. (2022)), or there could 
be windfall wealth eﬀects for ﬁrms with machines that they might not 
need.

As a ﬁrst step to uncover implications for misallocation, we pro-
vide some evidence on which ﬁrms previously operated the used capital 
sold  in  2021–2022.  Speciﬁcally,  for  every  used  machine  acquired  in 
2021–2022, we track the last end user. In this way, we can compare 
the “buyers” acquiring capital during the crunch with the “sellers,” de-
ﬁned as the last end user. We compare them along three characteristics: 
age, sector productivity growth, and sector COVID exposure.23 We in-
clude all transactions starting in 2013 to remove any inﬂuence of the 
ﬁnancial crisis. For each transaction involving a speciﬁc piece of used 
equipment, we calculate the diﬀerence between the buyer’s and seller’s 
characteristics.

In Table 9, we regress this diﬀerence on a “Year 2021/22” dummy 
that ﬂags used equipment traded in 2021 or 2022, including county and 
equipment code ﬁxed eﬀects. We ﬁnd that, relative to normal times, 
capital was ﬂowing to ﬁrms that (1) were older, (2) had smaller COVID 

21 See, for example Lewis (2011).
22 Quantitative output data are typically not disclosed by equipment produc-
ers. However, in its 2021 annual report, John Deere stated that there was a loss 
of production in 2021 following the strike: “The company’s operations during 
the remainder of the fourth quarter were adversely aﬀected by the work stop-
page, which reduced production and shipments.” (Deere 2021 Annual Report, 
p. 17). It is also unclear whether there was a large production increase in 2022: 
their 2022 annual reported that the vast majority of sales growth came from 
price increases rather than volume increases.
23 Sector productivity growth is from the BLS. Sector COVID exposure is mea-
sured as the abnormal employment decline in 2020Q1 following Chodorow-
Reich et al. (2021). COVID exposure is another potential proxy for reallocation 
needs across sectors, but one that might be more pandemic-speciﬁc.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380611O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Table 9
Prior Users of Used Capital: 2021/22 vs. Normal Times.

(1)
Δ Log Age

(2)
Δ COVID Exposure

(3)
Δ Productivity Growth

Year 2021/22

0.131***
[27.82]

-0.008**
[-1.96]

3.330***
[16.96]

43553
0.114

197868
0.048

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

499069
0.021
t statistics in brackets.
* 𝑝 < 0.10, ** 𝑝 < 0.05, *** 𝑝 < 0.01.
Notes: This table models characteristic diﬀerences between the last two 
users of a speciﬁc piece of equipment as a function of time. The depen-
dent variable in Column 1 is the diﬀerence between the current and most 
recent user’s log age; in Column 2 it is the diﬀerence between the current 
and most recent user’s sector COVID exposure (measured as abnormal em-
ployment decline in 2020Q1 (Chodorow-Reich et al., 2022)); in Column 3 
it is the diﬀerence between the current and most recent user’s sector pro-
ductivity growth rate from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Fixed eﬀects 
include equipment code and county. The sample includes all contracts 
from January 2013 to February 2022. Standard errors are clustered by 
serial number.

exposure, and (3) had higher productivity growth. The ﬁrst result is 
consistent with our ﬁnding of older ﬁrms buying used equipment dur-
ing this time. However, the interpretation of the second and third results 
requires care. On the one hand, this is the intuitive direction that cap-
ital  should  ﬂow.  This  is  thus  relatively  good  news  if  one  is  worried 
about misallocation: frictions were not large enough to prevent capital 
from ﬂowing to more productive users. On the other hand, this does not 
mean that frictions did not impede reallocation to some degree. In fact, 
the  high  productivity  gap  (3.3  percentage  points)  relative  to  normal 
times might actually suggest that only very productive ﬁrms were able 
to acquire capital during the crunch. It is thus possible that ﬁrms with 
lower productivity growth (but with gains from reallocation neverthe-
less) were excluded due to frictions. Note also that there are important 
data limitations inherent to this exercise.24

Another open question relates to public intervention. Lanteri and 
Rampini (2021) show that subsidies for new investment can increase 
welfare when there are distributive externalities in capital reallocation. 
Investment subsidies are commonly used in practice although their op-
timal  design  is  not  yet  well  understood.  In  the  context  of  the  2021 
production shock, it is unclear whether special subsidies for investment 
in new capital would have been eﬀective in alleviating the shock in the 
short-term: the demand for new equipment greatly exceeded available 
supply. A potential alternative might have introduced exceptional sub-
sidies for investment in used capital. On its face, this seems like it could 
have helped smaller and younger ﬁrms facing high prices in secondary 
markets. However, these subsidies need to be properly targeted: if they 
are too broad they might actually exacerbate crowding out by increas-
ing competition in secondary markets even further. Our evidence sheds 
light on the challenges associated with designing interventions and the 
need to think about their implications for equilibrium capital realloca-
tion to avoid perverse eﬀects.

24 First, we have an incomplete picture of the timing of “trades.” We can only 
observe the dates when a new user ﬁnances a piece of equipment, but not when 
they give it up. Moreover, there can be some time between end users, as ma-
chines often sit in the dealer’s inventory before being used again, in a way that 
we cannot track (unless the dealer ﬁnanced the acquisition of the used capi-
tal themselves). Therefore it is possible that a “seller” had in fact stopped using 
their equipment earlier than 2021–2022. Second, assessing productivity diﬀer-
ences is challenging. We can only measure productivity at the sector level using 
BLS data. That means that we cannot measure productivity diﬀerences within 
sectors (for example between young and old ﬁrms). Moreover, BLS productiv-
ity data are normalized and thus we cannot compare levels across sectors, only 
growth rates.

Finally, another interesting aspect of this episode is the role that 
ﬁnancial contracting might have played in amplifying the shock. Specif-
ically, the capital transactions we study are at least in part ﬁnanced by 
lenders either as collateralized loans or leases. Interestingly, this con-
tracting feature can lead to ﬁnancial frictions in asset sales given that 
capital  users  do  not  (or,  do  not  fully)  own  the  assets  (Donaldson  et 
al.,  2021).  The  incentives  to  sell  in  the  face  of  high  prices  are  then 
muted, potentially exacerbating a secondary market price surge. Future 
research can explore the strength of this mechanism.

7.  Conclusion

This  paper  uses  rich  micro-data  on  capital  transactions  to  study 
the  equilibrium  eﬀects  of  a  ﬁxed  capital  supply  shortage  on  ﬁrms’ 
investment.  We  document  that  a  surge  in  secondary  market  activity 
dampened the shock for some ﬁrms but priced out others. Investment 
declined the most for the youngest ﬁrms, even though they rarely pur-
chase  new  capital.  These  results  highlight  the  key  role  of  secondary 
markets and distributive eﬀects for small business investment. Our re-
sults motivate further research on how ﬁxed capital supply shocks, such 
as supply chain disruptions, are transmitted through the economy.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Olivier Darmouni: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodol-
ogy,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Writing  –  review  &  editing. Andrew 
Sutherland: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing 
– original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Research Data: https://data .mendeley .com /datasets /ndfwjwhtmw /

2.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103806.

References

Benmelech, E., Kumar, N., Rajan, R., 2020. The decline of secured debt. Technical Report. 

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernstein, S., Townsend, R.R., Xu, T., 2020. Flight to safety: How economic downturns 
aﬀect talent ﬂows to startups. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Re-
search.

Chodorow-Reich, G., Darmouni, O., Luck, S., Plosser, M., 2022. Bank liquidity provision 

across the ﬁrm size distribution. J. Financ. Econ. 144, 908–932.

Cui, W., 2022. Macroeconomic eﬀects of delayed capital liquidation. J. Eur. Econ. As-

Darmouni, O., Sutherland, A., 2021. Learning about competitors: evidence from sme lend-

soc. 20, 1683–1742.

ing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34, 2275–2317.

Rev. Econ. Stud. 85, 352–395.

Dávila, E., Korinek, A., 2018. Pecuniary externalities in economies with ﬁnancial frictions. 

Dinlersoz, E., Dunne, T., Haltiwanger, J., Penciakova, V., 2021. Business formation: a tale 

of two recessions. In: AEA Papers and Proceedings, pp. 253–257.

Donaldson, J.R., Gromb, D., Piacentino, G., 2021. Collateral reallocation. Technical Re-

port.

Eberly, J., Wang, N., 2009. Capital reallocation and growth. Am. Econ. Rev. 99, 560–566.
Edgerton, J., 2012. Credit supply and business investment during the great recession: 

Evidence from public records of equipment ﬁnancing.

Eisfeldt, A.L., 2004. Endogenous liquidity in asset markets. J. Finance 59, 1–30.
Eisfeldt, A.L., Rampini, A.A., 2006. Capital reallocation and liquidity. J. Monet. Econ. 53, 

369–399.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380612O. Darmouni and A. Sutherland

Monet. Econ. 54, 2656–2681.

361–386.

Eisfeldt, A.L., Rampini, A.A., 2007. New or used? Investment with credit constraints. J. 

Lanteri, A., 2018. The market for used capital: endogenous irreversibility and reallocation 

over the business cycle. Am. Econ. Rev. 108, 2383–2419.

port. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eisfeldt,  A.L.,  Shi,  Y.,  2018.  Capital  reallocation.  Annu.  Rev.  Financ.  Econ. 10, 

Lanteri, A., Rampini, A.A., 2021. Constrained-eﬃcient capital reallocation. Technical Re-

Fuchs, W., Green, B., Papanikolaou, D., 2016. Adverse selection, slow-moving capital, and 

Lewis, E., 2011. Immigration, skill mix, and capital skill complementarity. Q. J. Econ. 126, 

misallocation. J. Financ. Econ. 120, 286–308.

Gavazza, A., 2011. The role of trading frictions in real asset markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 

1029–1069.

Giroud,  X.,  Mueller,  H.M.,  2015.  Capital  and  labor  reallocation  within  ﬁrms.  J.  Fi-

Gopal, M., 2021. How Collateral Aﬀects Small Business Lending: The Role of Lender 

1106–1143.

nance 70, 1767–1804.

Specialization.

Li, S., Whited, T.M., 2015. Capital reallocation and adverse selection.
Ma, S., Murﬁn, J., Pratt, R., 2022. Young ﬁrms, old capital. J. Financ. Econ. 146, 331–356.
Midrigan, V., Xu, D.Y., 2014. Finance and misallocation: evidence from plant-level data. 

Am. Econ. Rev. 104, 422–458.

Minnis, M., Sutherland, A., Vetter, F., 2023. Financial statements not required.
Murﬁn, J., Pratt, R., 2019. Who ﬁnances durable goods and why it matters: captive ﬁ-

Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2020. The Rise of Finance Companies and Fintech Lenders in Small 

nance and the Coase conjecture. J. Finance 74, 755–793.

Business Lending. NYU Stern School of Business.

Gopinath, G., Kalemli-Özcan,  ¸S., Karabarbounis, L., Villegas-Sanchez, C., 2017. Capital 

allocation and productivity in south Europe. Q. J. Econ. 132, 1915–1967.

Hadlock, C.J., Pierce, J.R., 2010. New evidence on measuring ﬁnancial constraints: mov-

ing beyond the kz index. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23, 1909–1940.

Kehrig, M., Vincent, N., 2017. Do ﬁrms mitigate or magnify capital misallocation? Evi-
dence from plant-level data. US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies. Paper 
No. CES-WP-17-14, CESifo Working Paper Series.

Ottonello, P., 2017. Capital unemployment. Work. Pap., Dep. Econ., Columbia Univ., New 

York. Google Scholar Article Locations: Article Location A.

Ottonello, P., 2021. Capital unemployment.
Rampini, A.A., 2013. Collateral and capital structure. J. Financ. Econ. 109, 466–492.
Thakor, R., 2023. Liquidity windfalls and reallocation: Evidence from farming and frack-

Wright, R., Xiao, S.X., Zhu, Y., 2018. Frictional capital reallocation I: ex ante heterogene-

ing. Management Science 69, 6224–6250.

ity. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 89, 100–116.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380613