Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

J’Accuse! Antisemitism and ﬁnancial markets in the time of the Dreyfus 
Aﬀair ✩
Quoc-Anh Do a,∗, Roberto Galbiati b, Benjamin Marx c, Miguel A. Ortiz Serrano d
a Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
b CNRS-Sciences Po (Sciences Economiques Sciences Po), Paris, France
c Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
d CUNEF University, Madrid, Spain

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

We  study  the  stock  market  performance  of  ﬁrms  with  Jewish  board  members  during  the  “Dreyfus  Aﬀair” 
in 19th century France. In a context of widespread latent antisemitism, initial accusations made against the 
Jewish oﬃcer Alfred Dreyfus led to short-lived abnormal negative returns for Jewish-connected ﬁrms. However, 
investors betting on these ﬁrms earned higher returns during the period corresponding to Dreyfus’ rehabilitation, 
starting with the publication of the famous op-ed J’Accuse! in 1898. Our conceptual framework illustrates how 
diminishing antisemitic biases among investors might plausibly explain these eﬀects. Our paper provides novel 
insights on how antisemitism can increase and decrease over short periods of time at the highest socio-economic 
levels in response to certain events, which in turn can aﬀect ﬁrm value in ﬁnancial markets.

Dataset link: https://
data .mendeley .com /datasets /nkk2cyw4f6 /2

JEL classiﬁcation:
J15
J71
N23
G14
G41

Keywords:
Antisemitism
Financial markets
Discrimination

1.  Introduction

Antisemitism and other types of prejudice can persist over centuries 
(Voigtländer and Voth, 2012; Becker and Pascali, 2019), but they may 
also vary over short periods of time in response to societal incidents. 
Financial markets provide an ideal setting to detect these short-term 
ﬂuctuations and their economic consequences. Recent work studies dis-

tortions  in  ﬁrm  value  to  quantify  ethnic  or  nationalistic  preferences 
(Fisman et al., 2014; Kumar et al., 2015; Hjort et al., 2019), but there 
is less evidence on how the activation of prejudice and its ampliﬁcation 
by the press can aﬀect stock market returns. In this paper, we show that 
ﬁnancial markets rapidly respond to societal shifts in antisemitic senti-
ment, and that betting on ﬁrms exposed to these discriminatory beliefs 
can generate excess returns.

✩ Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. This paper beneﬁted from helpful feedback and suggestions from Philipp Schnabl, an anonymous referee, and 
Pamﬁli Antipa, Sascha Becker, Stefano DellaVigna, Michele Fioretti, Ray Fisman, Carola Friedman, Emeric Henry, Kilian Huber, Joel Mokyr, Maria Petrova, Eduardo 
Perez-Richet, Vincent Pons, Angelo Riva, Mirna Saﬁ, Marc Sangnier, David Sraer, Felipe Valencia, Hans-Joachim Voth, and Noam Yuchtman, as well as seminar 
participants at the 2021 ASSA annual meeting, Boston University, Collegio Carlo Alberto, INSEAD, Northwestern University, PSE, Université Paris VIII, University 
of Zurich, and the Virtual Economic History Seminar. Gürcan Gülersoy, Luis Herradón, and Antoine Moutiez provided excellent research assistance. We gratefully 
acknowledge support from the Banque de France and the French National Research Agency (ANR) “Investissements d’Avenir” grants ANR-11-LABX-0091 (LIEPP) 
and ANR-11-IDEX-0005-02. Do thanks the Ford Motor Company Center for Global Citizenship at Northwestern University for its generous support. All errors are our 
own.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: quoc-anh.do@monash.edu (Q.-A. Do), roberto.galbiati@sciencespo.fr (R. Galbiati), bmarx@bu.edu (B. Marx), miguelangel.ortiz@cunef.edu

(M.A. Ortiz Serrano).
1 The early history of European ﬁnancial markets is closely intertwined with that of antisemitism, as ﬁnancial scandals in this era often fueled antisemitic sentiment 
(Arendt, 1951; Doerr et al., 2019). Among the most deeply ingrained antisemitic stereotypes was the notion that global ﬁnance was controlled by Jewish individuals: 
in 1886, a best-selling antisemitic book by the French writer Edouard Drumont claimed that “with the Semite, everything starts and ends with the Stock Exchange” 
(Wilson, 2007, p. 265).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103809
Received 14 September 2021; Received in revised form 30 January 2024; Accepted 13 February 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)103809Availableonline1March20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

We study the response of ﬁnancial markets to exogenous shocks in 
antisemitism during the Dreyfus Aﬀair, a milestone in European history 
which coincided with the early days of modern ﬁnancial markets (Be-
gley, 2009).1 The Aﬀair was centered around Alfred Dreyfus, a French 
Jewish  army  oﬃcer  who  was  convicted  for  high  treason  in  a  noto-
rious  miscarriage  of  justice.  We  show  that  ﬁrms  with  Jewish  board 
members, after initially losing value following Dreyfus’ downfall, ex-
perienced higher returns during the press campaign led by the writer 
Emile Zola to rehabilitate Dreyfus. Our results suggest that latent anti-
semitism can be quickly turned into active antisemitism in response to 
certain incidents ampliﬁed by the media, leading to consequences at the 
highest social and economic levels. We discuss diﬀerent potential expla-
nations for the diﬀerential returns of Jewish-connected ﬁrms and argue 
that these may have reﬂected shifting antisemitic attitudes, including 
among business elites. These ﬁndings are relevant for understanding the 
economic consequences of shifting social norms in polarized societies.

Our  analysis  relies  on  comprehensive  data  on  the  stock  market 
returns  and  the  board  composition  of  publicly  traded  ﬁrms  between 
1891–1899, which we hand-collected from archival sources. We iden-
tify Jewish board members using genealogical data on prominent Jew-
ish families from the seminal research by Grange (2016). We then study 
the performance of ﬁrms with Jewish board members throughout the 
diﬀerent phases of the Dreyfus Aﬀair. Our analysis combines a standard 
event-study approach with a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DID) strategy ex-
ploiting the timing of Dreyfus’ degradation and of “J’Accuse!”, a widely 
publicized editorial that denounced the antisemitic conspiracy against 
Dreyfus and started the campaign demanding his rehabilitation. We also 
implement a Coarsened Exact Matching analysis in order to deal with 
pre-treatment imbalances (Iacus et al., 2012) and a synthetic DID anal-
ysis  to  address  potential  concerns  about  violations  of  parallel  trends 
(Arkhangelsky et al., 2021).

We ﬁrst examine the short-term impact of several salient antisemitic 
episodes that shook French society in the 1890s. These episodes include 
two events associated with the Panama scandal, a ﬁnancial scandal in 
late 1892 which paved the way for the Dreyfus Aﬀair; and four events 
associated with the Dreyfus Aﬀair itself: Dreyfus’ military degradation 
in a widely publicized ceremony in January 1895, the publication of 
J’Accuse! in January 1898, the appointment of the Waldeck-Rousseau 
cabinet in June 1899, and the presidential pardon of Dreyfus in Septem-
ber  1899.  Firms  with  Jewish  board  members  experienced  negative 
cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) after the ﬁrst Panama revelations 
and after Dreyfus’ degradation. J’Accuse! had a negative but imprecisely 
measured eﬀect in the short run. In later stages of the Aﬀair, Jewish-
connected ﬁrms experienced positive CARs around Waldeck-Rousseau’s 
appointment, which publicly signaled the upcoming rehabilitation of 
Dreyfus.

Our analysis then studies the performance of ﬁrms with Jewish con-
nections  during  the  two  main  phases  of  the  Dreyfus  Aﬀair:  a  phase 
of  high  antisemitic  sentiment  following  Dreyfus’  degradation;  and  a 
phase of descending antisemitic sentiment, initiated by J’Accuse!, dur-
ing which new revelations about the conspiracy against Dreyfus came 
to the fore. Our preferred speciﬁcation compares the stock returns of 
Jewish-connected ﬁrms with other ﬁrms during the ﬁrst phase (Novem-
ber 1894 to January 1898) and the second phase (after January 1898) of 
the Aﬀair, relative to a reference period spanning January 1891 to Oc-
tober 1894. Our identiﬁcation strategy ensures that our results are not 
driven by time-varying eﬀects of the correlates of Jewish connections.
Firms with Jewish board members experienced a relative but impre-
cisely estimated decline in returns during the ﬁrst phase, and a more 
pronounced  growth in  returns  during  the  rehabilitation  phase  of  the 
Aﬀair. The mixed evidence we ﬁnd for the 1894–1897 period, in our 
interpretation, reﬂects the already high prevalence of antisemitic sen-
timent in French society when the Aﬀair broke out; a large historical 
literature supports this interpretation (Lazare, 1894; Levaillant, 1907; 
Arendt, 1951). This stands in contrast with the large increase in returns 
we observe during the Aﬀair’s second phase. Our estimates imply that 

during the two years following J’Accuse!, in comparison with the rest 
of the stock market, investors holding Jewish-connected stocks earned 
rents amounting to 14.1% of the value of ﬁrms with any Jewish con-
nection, and 7.9% of the whole market. While the volatility of these 
stocks  also  increased,  the  magnitude  of  these  excess  returns  implies 
that investors were more than compensated for this increased risk—
the risk-adjusted returns of Jewish-connected ﬁrms also increased in 
the aftermath of J’Accuse!.2

To  further  alleviate  concerns  about  potential  violations  of  paral-
lel  trends  between  ﬁrms  with  and  without  Jewish  connections,  we 
deploy two additional empirical strategies. First, we implement the syn-
thetic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (SDID) estimator of Arkhangelsky et al. 
(2021). This estimator identiﬁes optimally weighted combinations of 
pre-period  control  observations  that  eﬀectively  re-balance  pre-trends 
across treated and control ﬁrms. The post-period treatment eﬀect is then 
identiﬁed oﬀ of the diﬀerence in reweighted control-unit trends and ac-
tual treated-unit trends. Second, we use the Coarsened Exact Matching 
procedure (CEM) (Iacus et al., 2012), a type of Iacus et al.’s (2011)
Monotonic Imbalance Bounding multivariate matching method, which 
deﬁnes and matches exactly by the strata where treatment and control 
units belong. In a setting where some of the observable pre-treatment 
variables are not balanced, the CEM procedure minimizes covariate im-
balances and the risk that they may bias the estimated treatment eﬀects. 
Our core results are robust to using both these alternative approaches.

A key potential driver of the stock ﬂuctuations we observe may be 
that the Dreyfus Aﬀair changed expectations (downward, then upward) 
about the proﬁtability of Jewish-connected ﬁrms. We provide evidence 
suggesting  that  this  channel  may  have  been  present,  but  cannot  ex-
plain the entire evolution of stock returns for Jewish-connected ﬁrms. 
First, the actual proﬁtability of these ﬁrms, as measured by dividends, 
did not change relative to other ﬁrms throughout the period. Second, 
Jewish-connected  ﬁrms  that  conducted  their  operations  abroad,  and 
were therefore less vulnerable to a backlash by the French public or 
the state, also experienced higher returns during Dreyfus’ rehabilitation 
campaign. Finally, ﬁrms did not change their board composition in re-
sponse to the Aﬀair; board composition was primarily driven by the 
ownership structure of ﬁrms and was therefore unlikely to respond to 
the ebbs and ﬂows of the Dreyfus Aﬀair. Section 6 provides a detailed 
discussion of these alternative mechanisms.

To explain our ﬁndings, consistent with the historical record doc-
umenting the rise and fall of antisemitism during this period (Wilson, 
2007; Joly, 2007), we propose a diﬀerent and complementary interpre-
tation focusing on the existence of antisemitic investors with pessimistic 
views  of  Jewish  stocks.  Building  on  De  Long  et  al.  (1990)’s  seminal 
model of noise traders, we consider the coexistence of two types of risk-
averse agents: neutral investors with unbiased beliefs and antisemitic 
investors  who  hold  uncertain,  negatively  (positively)  biased  beliefs 
about Jewish (non-Jewish) stocks.3 In this model, Jewish stock prices 
suﬀer from three sources: (i) fundamental antisemitic biases in beliefs 
with long-lasting impacts on stock prices, (ii) idiosyncratic shocks on 
those biases with short-lived eﬀects, and (iii) the uncertainty surround-
ing antisemitic investors’ beliefs that further reduces demand for Jewish 
stocks.

Our  main  results  can  be  interpreted  in  light  of  this  model.  Out-
bursts of antisemitism at the onset of the Aﬀair produced idiosyncratic 
shocks on the bias of antisemitic investors, leading to short-lived neg-

2 Using data on media coverage that we manually collected from ﬁve ma-
jor  contemporaneous  newspapers,  we  additionally  show  that  news  revela-
tions about Dreyfus contributed to the higher returns experienced by Jewish-
connected ﬁrms. The positive relationship between news coverage and these 
ﬁrms’ returns is driven by pro-Dreyfus coverage, while anti-Dreyfus coverage 
has the opposite eﬀect.
3 For conciseness, we use the term “biased beliefs” in the paper to also cap-
ture investors’ biased preferences, or prejudice, between ﬁrms with and without 
Jewish connections.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038092Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

ative market reactions on Jewish stocks. The publication of J’Accuse!
polarized beliefs in French society, which increased uncertainty about 
antisemitic biases and decreased Jewish-connected stock prices in the 
short run. However, J’Accuse! also sparked oﬀ a media campaign aiming 
to rehabilitate Dreyfus, which contributed to debiasing and reducing 
uncertainty about fundamental antisemitic beliefs. Both led to a sus-
tained appreciation of Jewish stocks in the long run.

As  in  Becker’s  (1957) seminal  analysis  of  taste-based  discrimina-
tion in labor markets, discrimination in our model creates rents that 
can  be  exploited  at  the  expense  of  discriminating  agents.  However, 
because uncertainty about biases matters to risk-averse investors, every-
one generically chooses to buy or sell some amount of both Jewish and 
non-Jewish stocks. Thus, changes in the distribution of biases induce 
all investors to re-optimize their portfolios, which aﬀects equilibrium 
prices. Those insights stand in contrast with the phenomenon of segre-
gation of minority workers in labor markets, in which discriminating 
employers do not hire minority workers, and only the marginal em-
ployer’s bias matters for the wage gap (Heckman, 1998; Charles and 
Guryan, 2008; Lang and Lehmann, 2012). The key to this diﬀerence is 
twofold: our model incorporates uncertainty and risk-aversion, and ac-
counts for the fact that investors’ holding of the discriminated stocks is 
not bounded below by zero.

Empirically, our ﬁndings also underscore the resilience of discrimi-
nation against Jewish-connected ﬁrms. Even though antisemitism was a 
declining force after Dreyfus’ pardon (Joly, 2007), all the eﬀects of dis-
crimination likely did not disappear at the end of the Aﬀair. Our model 
highlights how changes in the distribution of biases allowed investors 
to earn higher returns by betting more on Jewish ﬁrms. However, such 
arbitrage involved risk given the uncertainty about future biases. This 
can explain why the price of Jewish stocks did not converge immedi-
ately towards the value predicted by their fundamentals.

Our ﬁnding of excess returns for ﬁrms with Jewish connections af-
ter  J’Accuse! provides  novel  evidence  on  how  discriminatory  beliefs 
might  aﬀect  ﬁnancial  markets.  In  related  work,  Pager  (2016) shows 
that ﬁrms engaging in hiring discrimination are less likely to survive 
ﬁnancial crises. Other studies provide cross-sectional evidence of this 
mechanism in the context of discrimination against women (Hellerstein 
et al., 2002; Kawaguchi, 2007; Weber and Zulehner, 2014). While sug-
gestive, these results may be partially driven by unobservables such as 
managerial practices that correlate with ethnic or gender prejudice. We 
exploit exogenous antisemitic shocks that are plausibly orthogonal to 
ﬁrms’ unobservables.

Several  studies  have  explored  the  distortionary  impacts  of  ethnic 
preferences and social norms on investment. Kumar et al. (2015) docu-
ment a decline in investment ﬂows to funds with managers with Middle-
Eastern-sounding  names  after  9/11,  and  Niessen-Ruenzi  and  Ruenzi 
(2019) report investment ﬂow diﬀerences by gender. Relatedly, Jung 
et  al.  (2019) show  weaker  market  reactions  to  forecast  revisions  by 
analysts  with  less  favorable  names.4 Fisman  et  al.  (2014) show  that 
deteriorating Sino-Japanese relations in the 2000s adversely aﬀected 
the performance of ﬁrms involved in bilateral exchange, and Hjort et 
al. (2019) show that ethnic discrimination lowers value creation among 
publicly listed ﬁrms in Kenya. Overall, the literature has mainly focused 
on the eﬃciency consequences of these behaviors. There is less evidence 
of investors’ discriminatory beliefs generating proﬁt opportunities for 
other investors. Our results are consistent with a long-standing hypoth-
esis that unbiased investors can “beat the market” by betting against 
discriminators (Wolfers, 2006).

More broadly, the paper relates to the large literature on individual 
preferences and investment behaviors (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2001). 
Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) ﬁnd that “sin stocks” associated with alco-

4 Kumar et al. (2015); Niessen-Ruenzi and Ruenzi (2019); Jung et al. (2019)
all show that there is little diﬀerence by performance, thus ruling out the im-
portance of statistical discrimination in those cases.

hol and tobacco products are less likely to be held by norms-constrained 
investors, and have higher expected returns. The political views of man-
agers and analysts also matter to their decisions and the corresponding 
market  reactions  (Hong  and  Kostovetsky,  2012;  Hutton  et  al.,  2014; 
Jiang et al., 2016).

Finally, we contribute to a growing literature on the economic ori-
gins and consequences of antisemitism. Our paper estimates the short-
term impacts of exogenous shifts in antisemitic beliefs. Several studies 
have  explored  the  long-term  persistence  of  antisemitism  and  its  link 
with  ﬁnancial  development  in  historical  Germany  (Voigtländer  and 
Voth, 2012; D’Acunto et al., 2018; Becker and Pascali, 2019) and Rus-
sia (Grosfeld et al., 2019). Ferguson and Voth (2008) study ﬁrms with 
connections to the Nazi movement, and Doerr et al. (2019) show that 
exposure to a failing bank led by a Jewish chairman increased Nazi 
voting after Germany’s 1931 banking crisis. Finally, Huber et al. (2021)
explore the consequences of mass dismissals of Jewish managers in Nazi 
Germany. In contrast to the environment in Huber et al. (2021), ﬁrms 
with Jewish connections during the Dreyfus Aﬀair did not experience 
structural changes and did not face the likely prospect of government 
discrimination.5 We  provide,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  the  ﬁrst 
evaluation of the economic consequences of the Dreyfus Aﬀair, and we 
study the contemporaneous eﬀects of shifts in antisemitic sentiment be-
fore and after J’Accuse!. Our empirical setup allows us to study negative 
as well as positive shocks to antisemitism; in doing so, we provide evi-
dence that debiasing among some investors can aﬀect price movements 
in ﬁnancial markets.6

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We provide relevant 
background on the Dreyfus Aﬀair in Section 2. Sections 3 and 4 describe 
our data and our empirical framework, respectively. Our main results 
are presented in Section 5. Section 6 discusses potential mechanisms. 
Section 7 concludes.

2.  The Dreyfus Aﬀair

We  ﬁrst  discuss  the  origins  of  antisemitism  in  late  19th  century 
France, and then provide a timeline of major events in the Dreyfus Af-
fair, which has inspired a large historical literature. Further details and 
deeper analyses can be found in, e.g., Whyte (2005) and Wilson (2007).

2.1.  Political and social context

In the 1890s, France was governed by a democratic regime known as 
Third Republic, established after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. 
During this time, international politics was characterized by recurring 
tensions with Germany while domestic policy involved major extensions 
of civic and social rights and a secularization of the state. In this con-
text, Jewish citizens enjoyed full civic rights. The process leading to the 
integration of ethnic and religious minorities started with the French 
Revolution and continued throughout the 19th century, during which 
many Jewish citizens followed a path of assimilation. By the late 19th 
century, many Jewish citizens were well-integrated in French business, 
culture, and politics.

However, this integration faced substantial antisemitic opposition 
stemming from conservative forces hostile to secularization. In 1886, 
a writer named Edouard Drumont published a best-selling antisemitic 
book  entitled  La  France  Juive (“The  Jewish  France”).  This  book  de-
scribed an alleged universal Jewish conspiracy against France, which 

5 Liberal French governments never considered or enacted antisemitic poli-
cies under the Third Republic, spanning 1870-1940 (see Section 2.1). Until the 
advent of the Vichy regime in 1940, no viable political force advocated for an-
tisemitic policies.
6 The debiasing mechanism speaks to a large literature on the impact of in-
formation (Adida et al., 2018; Grigorieﬀ et al., 2020), evaluations (Bohren et 
al., 2019), and quota policies (Beaman et al., 2012) on destigmatization and the 
debiasing of prejudice (see also Bertrand and Duﬂo, 2016).

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038093Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

in  Drumont’s  view  permeated  many  spheres  of  French  society.7 The 
Catholic newspaper La Croix and openly antisemitic outlets such as La 
Libre Parole (created in 1892 by Drumont) and L’Antijuif (“The Anti-
Jew”) regularly accused Jews of fomenting the corruption of French 
culture through, in particular, their alleged dominance of the business 
and ﬁnancial spheres. In addition, Jews were often used as scapegoats 
for the French defeat against Prussia in 1871. For example, La Libre Pa-
role published a series of articles condemning the presence of Jewish 
oﬃcers in the military.

In the leadup to the Dreyfus Aﬀair, several scandals further con-
tributed to rising levels of antisemitism. In 1882, Jewish businessmen—
in particular, members of the Rothschild family—were widely blamed 
for the bankruptcy of the L’Union Générale bank; this episode is consid-
ered a founding moment of French antisemitism (Arendt, 1951; Wilson, 
2007).8 The broad-based antisemitic sentiment following the crash of 
L’Union  Générale was  shared  by  the  Agents  de  Change,  the  chartered 
professional traders exclusively allowed to operate in the Paris Stock 
Exchange. During the 1890s, their association ﬁnanced a press cam-
paign that used anti-German and antisemitic arguments to oppose the 
liberalization of trades in the Paris Stock Exchange (Lagneau-Ymonet 
and Riva, 2012; Hautcoeur et al., 2022).

In 1892, antisemitic outlets such as La Libre Parole uncovered revela-
tions around the bankruptcy of the Panama Company. This scandal fur-
ther aggravated antisemitism as it “showed that the intermediaries between 
private enterprise and the machinery of the state were almost exclusively 
Jews” (Arendt, 1951, p. 96). The French Antisemitic League was estab-
lished around the same period, in 1889. Despite the fact that antisemitic 
politicians failed to coordinate around a single political movement and 
fared poorly in the 1893 elections, “public opinion was entertained, during 
the three years before the Dreyfus Aﬀair, in a spirit of deﬁance and hatred... 
in which the Dreyfus Aﬀair fatally had to break out” (Levaillant, 1907). 
According to Lazare (1894), the latent antisemitism in French society 
primarily stemmed from economic resentment:

“This prejudice against the Jews has prevailed to the present day, secret, 
instinctive... People still feel an intense bitterness against the deicides, and 
glance with no favourable eye at their riches, for they still ﬁnd it diﬃcult to 
understand how this tribe of miscreants and murderers, doomed to perdi-
tion, can legitimately be the owners of wealth.”

[Lazare, 1894, p. 388]

2.2.  Timeline of the Dreyfus Aﬀair

The Dreyfus Aﬀair broke out in this context of widespread latent an-
tisemitism. In September 1894, a French spy at the German Embassy in 
Paris discovered a note announcing the delivery of conﬁdential French 
military documents. This information reached the Minister of War, who 
mandated an intelligence oﬃcer, Major Henry, to identify the author 
of the note, the so-called bordereau. Henry fabricated a ﬁle against Al-
fred Dreyfus, an army captain, composed of forgeries under the pretext 
that the bordereau bore some resemblance with Dreyfus’ writing. On the 
basis of this ﬁle, Dreyfus was summarily convicted for high treason by 
a court-martial in December 1894, and deported to French Guiana in 
February 1895.

The  Dreyfus  case  was  made  public  on  November  2,  1894,  when 
La Libre Parole revealed the arrest of a Jewish captain on accusations 
of espionage. Antisemitic coverage of the Dreyfus case peaked in Jan-
uary 1895, when the degradation of Dreyfus made national headlines. 
Newspapers gave a detailed account of the degradation ceremony of 
“the traitor” that took place at the Ecole Militaire in Paris, in front of 
a large crowd shouting antisemitic abuse. Appendix Fig. A.1 (a) shows 

7 Cohn (1967) draws a connection between Drumont’s writings and the infa-
mous antisemitic “Protocol of the Elders of Zion” distributed worldwide in the 
1900s.
8 In 1889, the catholic outlet La Croix wrote: “L’Union Générale was assassi-
nated because it was competing with the Jews.”.

the frontpage of Le Petit Journal after this episode.9 Antisemitic outlets 
emphasized Dreyfus’ Jewish origins and provided derogatory coverage 
denigrating all French Jews. Appendix Fig. A.2 provides two examples 
of such coverage.

After Dreyfus’ deportation, his brother and a few supporters started 
gathering evidence to prove the miscarriage of justice. Meanwhile, an 
intelligence oﬃcer, Lieutenant-Colonel Georges Picquart uncovered ev-
idence suggesting the real culprit was a diﬀerent oﬃcer, Ferdinand W. 
Esterhazy. This information was dismissed by Picquart’s hierarchy. On 
January 11, 1898, Esterhazy was acquitted by military judges, making 
any  revision  of  Dreyfus’  trial  impossible.  Until  that  point,  the  main-
stream media remained anchored to the initial consensus that Dreyfus 
was the treacherous author of the bordereau.

J’Accuse...! The turning point of the Dreyfus Aﬀair occurred on Jan-
uary 13, 1898, with the publication of J’Accuse! by Emile Zola on the 
frontpage of L’Aurore. This editorial revealed all the facts pointing to the 
wrongful conviction of Dreyfus and condemned the rise of antisemitism 
in French society that led to Dreyfus being falsely accused:

“These, Sir, are the facts that explain how a miscarriage of justice came 
about; The evidence of Dreyfus’s moral values, his aﬄuence, the lack of 
motive and his continuous claim of innocence combine to show that he is 
the victim of . . . the hunt for “dirty Jews” that brings shame upon our time.”
[Emile Zola, “J’accuse...!, L’Aurore, 13 January 1898 (authors’ 
translation).]

L’Aurore’s circulation increased tenfold on the day J’Accuse! was pub-
lished as the editorial reached a large share of public opinion. While 
Zola  was  subsequently  prosecuted  for  libel,  J’Accuse! broke  the  con-
sensus  about  Dreyfus’  guilt  and  signaled  the  beginning  of  a  broader 
campaign demanding his rehabilitation.10 Archival work suggests that 
public  opinion  also  became  increasingly  pro-Dreyfus  throughout  the 
year 1898. Wilson (2007) lists 138 pro-Dreyfus public meetings across 
64 French towns between October 1898 and December 1899, compared 
to 23 anti-Dreyfus meetings during the same period.

On June 22, 1899, the liberal politician Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau 
was  given  the  mission  of  forming  a  unity  government  to  bring  the 
Dreyfus Aﬀair to an end. In September 1899, Dreyfus was again found 
guilty, this time with extenuating circumstances. However, at the re-
quest of Waldeck-Rousseau, Dreyfus was granted a presidential pardon 
on September 19, 1899, and released shortly thereafter. This marked 
the end of the most salient and controversial phase of the Aﬀair, al-
though Dreyfus was not fully reinstated until 1906. Appendix Fig. A.3 
shows that media coverage of the Aﬀair peaked after J’Accuse! and fell 
rapidly after Dreyfus’ pardon.

The  Aﬀair  had  deep  political  and  social  consequences  on  French 
society (Begley, 2009). With the resolution of the Dreyfus case, anti-
semitism lost prominence as a broad-based ideology and became associ-
ated with extreme-right politics, lurking inside reactionary movements 
such  as  the  French  Action,  from  which  it  would  experience  a  resur-
gence  in  the  1930s.  French  politics  was  fundamentally  changed,  as 
intellectuals became engagés, namely proactively involved in public life 
and the political sphere. Beyond France, the Aﬀair became an interna-
tional cause célèbre and sent a shockwave throughout Europe, allegedly 
prompting Theodor Herzl to start the Zionist movement for an indepen-
dent Jewish State.

9 A contemporary observer described: “A huge crowd, held oﬀ with diﬃculty 
by the police, danced for joy, seethed with excitement, whistled, shouted cries 
of hatred: ‘Death to the Jews!... Death to the traitor... Death to Judas!’” (Wilson, 
2007, p. 10).
10 Edouard Herriot, a prominent politician recalled: “From then on it was im-
possible not to take sides. Zola’s open letter forced us to rise up, either against an 
outrageous slanderer, or against an unspeakable ruling clique” (Wilson, 2007, 
p. 13).

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038094Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

3.  Data

This section describes the data we collected from three main sources. 
Our analysis combines stock market data with data on Jewish board 
membership among publicly traded ﬁrms, as well as newspaper data on 
coverage of the Aﬀair by pro-Dreyfus and anti-Dreyfus newspapers (see 
also Appendix C).

3.1.  Financial data

Background The Paris Stock Exchange (Bourse de Paris) was established 
in the early 19th century under the purview of a monopolistic organi-
zation  called  the  Compagnie  des  Agents  de  Change (CAC).  The  Bourse
was comprised of two diﬀerent markets: the Parquet or Marché Oﬃciel
regulated by the CAC, and the Coulisse or Marché en Banque operating 
independently of these regulations. Our analysis focuses on the oﬃcial 
market, the Parquet, since there is no reliable daily data on transac-
tions in the Coulisse. Hautcoeur and Riva (2011) describe the Parquet
as “a structured organization... [with] eﬃcient settlement and compen-
sation procedures,” analogous to other major marketplaces of this era. 
Meanwhile, competition between the Parquet and the Coulisse fostered 
antisemitism among the Agents de Change, as many brokers operating in 
the Coulisse were themselves Jewish (Lagneau-Ymonet and Riva, 2012).

Data sources We hand-collected ﬁrm-speciﬁc information from the An-
nuaire des Agents de Change, a registry of stock broker yearbooks pub-
lished by the CAC and available from the archives of the French Ministry 
of Finance. The yearbooks include data on ﬁrm capitalization, the book 
value of shares, dividends, the location of ﬁrm headquarters, surnames 
of board members, and whether a ﬁrm’s assets are guaranteed by the 
French state. We use this data to construct daily measures of stock re-
turns and market indices. The yearbooks also include daily price data 
for contemporary government bonds (Rentes), which we use as the risk-
free rate. Appendix Table A.1 reports summary statistics from this data. 
In total, we observe 140 ﬁrms listed in the Paris Stock Exchange be-
tween 1891–1899, including 124 ﬁrms listed during the entire period.11
The information from the yearbooks was complemented with three 
other sources. Daily stock price data was collected from the Bulletin de 
la Cote, the daily spreadsheet published by the CAC available from the 
French National Library (BNF). This includes two types of stocks: stocks 
tradable in cash (Au Comptant) and stocks tradable as cash and forward 
(Au Comptant et A Terme). The latter category was traded much more 
frequently, and the ﬁrms issuing them were generally better known. 
Additional data on the board composition of ﬁrms was obtained from 
the Archives du Crédit Agricole and the Annuaire Chaix. As we describe 
below, changes in the board composition of ﬁrms are infrequent and 
ﬁrms with Jewish board members do not experience more changes after 
the beginning of the Dreyfus Aﬀair.

3.2.  Jewish board membership

We  use  information  on  boards  of  directors  (conseils  d’administra-
tion)  to  identify  ﬁrms  with  connections  to  prominent  French  Jewish 
families  of  this  era.  The  list  of  families  comes  from  Grange  (2016), 
a comprehensive historical study that identiﬁes 40 prominent French 
Jewish extended families between 1870 and 1940. Grange (2016) ex-
ploits  many  historical  sources,  from  the  marriage  registers  from  the 

11 The fourth row of Table A.1 shows that on an average day 70% of the stocks 
are traded. Given the level of liquidity of ﬁnancial markets at the time, we use a 
stock’s share of traded days during the study period as a proxy for its liquidity, 
and exclude those that were traded less than 20% of days. Liquidity deﬁned in 
this way is uncorrelated with our various measures of Jewish connections. In 
addition, we show in Appendix Table A.12 that our results are not driven by 
low liquidity.

prestigious Parisian synagogue on rue de la Victoire, the directories of 
high society associations such as the Bottin mondain, and the famous 
Livre d’Or des Salons from 1899, to records of naturalization, of the order 
of merit Légion d’Honneur, autobiographies, and interviews. Examples of 
such dynasties include the Pereire, Rothschild, Stern, and Louis-Dreyfus 
families, whose histories, lives, and businesses were vividly depicted 
from multiple historical angles. We identify a board member as Jewish 
if the individual’s ﬁrst and last name exactly match a full name listed 
in Grange (2016). In total, we observe 44 unique Jewish individuals 
out of 1,244 board members between 1891–1899. Our two measures of 
Jewish connections are the fraction of Jewish board members and an 
indicator for ﬁrms with a Jewish CEO.12

Regardless of their religious beliefs, it is reasonable to assume that 
the individuals with a name listed in Grange (2016) were exposed to 
the antisemitic sentiment prevailing in this period. Prominent Jewish 
families were highly recognizable by the public and regularly targeted 
by the antisemitic press which published lists of Jewish businessmen, as 
did L’Antijuif in late 1898 (Tillier, 1997). One among many instances is 
a statement made by Drumont in 1891: “The Third Republic is no longer 
the Republic of the French, but the Kingdom of the Rothschilds” (Wilson, 
2007).

In addition, because of the tight links between many ﬁrms and a 
few prominent founding families, the identity of board members was 
widely publicized and well-known to investors. The contemporary press 
and literature regularly chronicled the business rivalries between some 
of these families, the most famous of which opposed the Pereire (ac-
tive in banking, gas lighting, public transit, railways, and transatlantic 
travel)  to  the  Rothschild  family,  who  controlled  a  large  conglomer-
ate encompassing banks, mines, and railway companies. Similarly, the 
Louis-Dreyfus dynasty established by Léopold Dreyfus (1833-1915) was 
closely associated with naval shipyards and food processing.

At the time of the Dreyfus Aﬀair, board members typically acted 
as non-independent directors with various degrees of involvement in 
corporate management. Given the high concentration of ownership in 
French ﬁrms and the prevalence of strong control by founding fami-
lies (Landes, 1949), board members were most commonly the ﬁrm’s 
founders, the founders’ oﬀspring, and/or the largest shareholders.13 The 
chairman of the board (président du conseil) typically exerted the func-
tion of CEO (président directeur général or PDG in French).

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on Jewish connections over-
all  and  by  sector.  15%  o  ﬁrms  have  a  Jewish  CEO  and  the  average 
fraction  of  Jewish  board  members  is  6.9%.  These  families  are  most 
represented in the gas/electricity and railway sectors (panel a). Panel 
(b) looks at correlates of Jewish connections. Jewish-connected ﬁrms 
experience  slightly  lower  stock  returns  on  average,  are  diﬀerentially 
represented  across  sectors,  and  are  more  likely  to  operate  abroad.14
In  our  analysis,  we  address  concerns  related  to  these  imbalances  by 
ﬂexibly interacting ﬁrm-level covariates with the relevant time dum-
mies in our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences setting. We also implement deploy 
a synthetic DID approach and a Coarsened Exact Matching approach, as 
described below.

One  concern  for  our  analysis  could  be  that  investment  decisions 
reﬂected  broader  patriotic  or  nationalistic  sentiment  rather  than  an-

12 In a robustness check, we also use a diﬀerent, likely less accurate registry 
from Lévy’s (1960) list of Jewish last names. The measures of Jewish connec-
tions computed using both databases are strongly correlated—the correlation 
between the fraction of Jewish board members in Grange (2016) and in Lévy 
(1960) is 0.83.
13 We are not aware of any historical data documenting ownership stakes 
among board members. Murphy (2007) discusses at length the literature on 
the history of corporate ownership in France that took deep root in the 18th 
and 19th centuries.
14 This is consistent with the historical record in Wilson (2007) describing how 
prominent Jewish families, such as the Rothschilds, were regularly attacked for 
their foreign connections.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038095Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Table 1
Sectors and Characteristics of Firms with Jewish Connections.

Sector
Banking/Insurance
Gas/Electricity
Mining/Heavy Industry
Railways/Transport
Other

Total (average)
St. Dev.

Stock price (Fr.)

Firms
(1)

% Board Members
(2)

Jewish CEO
(3)

(a) Jewish Connections by Sector
0.046
33
0.164
12
0.050
29
0.071
36
0.069
30

140

0.068
(0.106)

0.145
0.380
0.074
0.238
0.033

0.150
(0.329)

(b) Firm Characteristics and Jewish Connections
763.74

Daily returns

0.010

Liquidity (traded on any day)

Banking/Insurance

Gas/Electricity

Mining/Heavy Industry

Railways/Transports

Other sectors

State guarantee

Foreign operations

0.70

0.24

0.08

0.20

0.27

0.21

0.22

0.26

Number of shares

98.57

Market Cap. in 1891 (Million Fr.)

88,492.08

Market-to-book ratio

Board Size

Politically connected

2.56

9.95

0.61

112.208
(600.683)
-0.034*
(0.018)
-0.123
(0.183)
-0.469
(0.319)
0.906***
(0.308)
-0.655***
(0.217)
0.147
(0.354)
0.071
(0.322)
-0.038
(0.320)
0.628
(0.439)
140.707
(154.805)
40,674.00
(114,834.2)
-4.190
(3.707)
-2.771
(3.178)
0.260
(0.470)

-180.412
(157.270)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.011
(0.051)
-0.020
(0.109)
0.200*
(0.104)
-0.151*
(0.077)
0.203
(0.126)
-0.232
(0.075)
0.050
(0.114)
0.333***
(0.126)
47.811
(50.435)
7,570.04
(57,898.53)
-1.599*
(0.828)
-0.519
(1.228)
0.105
(0.116)

Notes: Panel (a) reports descriptive statistics on Jewish board membership across 
sectors. Panel (b) reports the coeﬃcients and standard errors from OLS regressions 
of the form: 𝑦𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖, where Jewish connections are mea-
sured as the fraction of Jewish board members (column 2) or a dummy for ﬁrms 
with a Jewish CEO (column 3). The sample averages diﬀer slightly from those in 
Appendix Table A.1 since here we use data at the ﬁrm level instead of data at the 
ﬁrm-day level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard 
errors in parentheses.

tisemitic  biases.  Importantly,  our  results  in  Section 5 are  robust  to 
controlling for foreign connections interacted with the two time dum-
mies  corresponding  to  the  two  phases  of  the  Dreyfus  Aﬀair.  Finally, 
Jewish connections are stable throughout the period since few ﬁrms 
experience changes in their board composition during the ﬁrst phase 
(1895-97, after Dreyfus’ degradation) or the second phase (1898-99, 
after  J’Accuse!)  of  the  Dreyfus  Aﬀair,  as  we  show  in  Appendix  Ta-
ble A.2.

4.  Empirical framework

4.1.  Event study framework

where 𝑖 denotes a ﬁrm, 𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐵𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 denotes the fraction 
of Jewish board members based on Grange (2016), and 𝑋𝑖 is a vector 
of controls including sector dummies, type of admission in the Paris 
Stock Exchange, guarantee type (a dummy indicating whether a stock is 
guaranteed by the French state), a dummy for whether the ﬁrm operates 
abroad, market capitalization at the beginning of the period (January 
1, 1891), and a dummy for political connections.15

In equation (1), cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) are estimated 
as follows. First, we estimate ﬁrm-speciﬁc betas via a one-factor arbi-
trage pricing model (i.e., the so-called market model where the factor 
is  the  market).  We  use  a  capitalization-weighted  market  index  in  a 

We  ﬁrst  estimate  the  short-term  eﬀects  of  major  episodes  of  the 
Panama  scandal  and  the  Dreyfus  Aﬀair  on  the  stock  market  perfor-
mance of ﬁrms with Jewish board members. This analysis is conducted 
in a standard event study framework, as summarized in the following 
speciﬁcation:

𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖 = 𝛽

0 + 𝛽
1

𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐵𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 + Ω𝑋𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖

(1)

15 Following Ortiz-Serrano (2018), we identify politicians in ﬁrm boards based 
on shareholder reports and the online repository of the two French parliamen-
tary chambers (Sénat and Assemblée Nationale). Politically connected ﬁrms are 
deﬁned as ﬁrms whose board of directors included at least one MP (deputy or 
senator), a member of the Council of State (Conseil d’Etat) or the diplomatic 
corps, a regional or local politician, or a government-appointed director (in the 
case of colonial banks).

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038096Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

[-300,-60] estimation window before the ﬁrst revelations related to the 
Panama scandal on September 5, 1892. In the Appendix, we also use 
a 3-factor Fama-French model which includes the market return, the 
diﬀerence in returns between ﬁrms with capitalization below sample 
median and ﬁrms with capitalization above sample median, and the dif-
ference in returns between ﬁrms in the ﬁrst tercile and ﬁrms in the third 
tercile of book-to-market ratio. Second, we calculate abnormal returns 
for each ﬁrm 𝑖 and each trading day as the diﬀerence between actual 
returns (relative to the risk-free asset) and predicted returns. Third, we 
sum abnormal returns in a narrow time windows ([0,2]) around each 
event. If no trading occurred for any ﬁrm on the event date, the event 
window is centered around the subsequent trading day.16

4.2.  Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences

The Dreyfus Aﬀair began in earnest with Dreyfus’ arrest and trial 
by court-martial in November-December 1894, and took an unexpected 
turn  on  January  13,  1898,  with  the  publication  of  J’Accuse!.  These 
events delineate the start of the ﬁrst and second phase of the Drey-
fus Aﬀair, respectively. During the ﬁrst phase, Dreyfus’ treason was not 
questioned in the mainstream, and the Dreyfus case strengthened ex-
isting antisemitic beliefs. J’Accuse! provided new evidence about the 
case and signaled the beginning of a rehabilitation campaign in favor 
of Dreyfus. This marked the beginning of the second phase of the Af-
fair, during which evidence about the miscarriage of justice came to the 
fore, and pro-Dreyfus coverage overtook antisemitic coverage (see Ap-
pendix Fig. A.3). Our main speciﬁcation estimates how the performance 
of Jewish-connected ﬁrms evolved during these diﬀerent phases of the 
Aﬀair:

𝑦𝑖𝑡 =𝛼+𝛽
1

𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖 ×1{Dreyfus’ degradation≤𝑡≤J’Accuse}𝑡

+ 𝛽
2

𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖 × 1{𝑡 ≥ J’Accuse}𝑡 + 𝛿𝑖 + 𝛿𝑡 + (𝐗′

𝑖𝜽𝑡)′𝜼 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡
(2)
where  𝑖 and  𝑡 denote  ﬁrm  and  trading  day,  and  𝛿𝑖 and  𝛿𝑡 denote 
ﬁrm and day ﬁxed eﬀects, respectively. We estimate equation (2) on 
the balanced panel of 124 ﬁrms. We use daily and monthly returns, 
squared  demeaned  returns  (a  proxy  for  volatility),  and  risk-adjusted 
returns  (the  Sharpe  ratio)  as  the  dependent  variable  𝑦𝑖𝑡.17 𝐗𝑖
is  a 
vector of ﬁrm-level controls interacted with the two binary variables 
1{Degradation ≤ 𝑡 ≤ J’Accuse}𝑡 and 1{𝑡 ≥ J’Accuse}𝑡. As in the event 
study  analysis,  these  controls  include  the  log  market  capitalization 
on  January  1,  1891,  sector  dummies,  admission  type,  and  separate 
dummies for (i) stocks guaranteed by the French state, (ii) ﬁrms op-
erating abroad, and (iii) ﬁrms with elected politicians on their board. 
𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖 is a measure of Jewish presence in ﬁrm 𝑖’s board 
of directors. We either use the fraction of Jewish board members or 
an indicator for ﬁrms with a Jewish CEO. In our baseline speciﬁcation, 
we use the average of these measures throughout the period. Standard 
errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by ﬁrm.

16 Our  analysis  follows  the  standard  event  study  method,  as  described  in 
Campbell et al. (1997), chapter 4, which is the most common method to study 
important and abrupt events in ﬁnancial markets. Given that stock prices are 
usually subject to large amounts of idiosyncratic noise over time, other meth-
ods to examine the longer time series (such as structural break tests) are usually 
not eﬃcient in this context.
17 The intuition behind equation (2) is similar to that of a portfolio exercise 
in which investors take a long position on ﬁrms with Jewish board members 
and a short position on other ﬁrms. Compared to this strategy, our speciﬁca-
tion additionally controls for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, sector dummies, and other ﬁrm 
characteristics interacted with the two period dummies, thus better addresses 
ﬁrm-speciﬁc determinants of stock performance over the period as well as any 
sector-wide time-varying shocks. A recent literature takes a similar approach 
to estimate the eﬀect of the Panama Papers on stock returns (Bennedsen and 
Zeume, 2017; O’Donovan et al., 2019).

The key identifying assumption for equation (2) is a parallel trends 
assumption:  conditional  on  ﬁrm  ﬁxed  eﬀects,  day  ﬁxed  eﬀects,  and 
𝑖𝜽𝑡, ﬁrms with Jewish connections should 
the time-varying controls 𝐗′
not have experienced diﬀerential returns in the absence of the Dreyfus 
Aﬀair. Fig. 1 supports this assumption by showing the absence of pre-
trends until 1894. We also show in Appendix Table A.2 that the cam-
paign did not aﬀect the board composition of ﬁrms, an important check 
to  interpret  our  diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence  estimates  as  causal.  Finally, 
there should have been no correlated shocks aﬀecting Jewish-connected 
ﬁrms diﬀerentially after Dreyfus’ degradation and after J’Accuse!. We 
provide a battery of robustness checks to alleviate these concerns in 
Section 5.2.

In addition, to further probe the estimates from equation (2), we 
implement the synthetic DID approach of Arkhangelsky et al. (2021). 
Compared to the standard DID approach, this estimation allows for po-
tential violations of parallel trends by constructing a counterfactual set 
of synthetic control ﬁrms which (by construction) follow parallel trends 
up to the treatment period. This estimation requires a discrete treat-
ment. Thus, we compare ﬁrms with a Jewish director at the onset of 
the Dreyfus Aﬀair in 1894 with synthetic control ﬁrms matched on pre-
treatment stock returns and our usual set of controls. By construction, 
Jewish-connected ﬁrms and synthetic control ﬁrms experience parallel 
returns during the period 1891–1894. We then study the diﬀerential 
evolution of returns for these ﬁrms during the ﬁrst phase (before J’Ac-
cuse!) and the second phase (after J’Accuse!) of the Aﬀair.

Finally, we resort to the Coarsened Exact Matching procedure of Ia-
cus et al. (2012), which deﬁnes and matches exactly by the strata where 
treatment and control units belong. In a setting where some of the ob-
servable pre-treatment variables are not balanced, the CEM procedure 
helps selecting a sample that minimizes covariate imbalances and the 
risk that they may bias the estimated treatment eﬀects.

5.  Results

Antisemitic episodes that shook French society in the 1890s could 
have aﬀected the stock returns of ﬁrms with Jewish board members 
in several ways. In the short run, investors may have divested these 
assets in response to news arrivals about the Panama scandal or the 
alleged  treason  of  Dreyfus.  In  the  long  run,  revelations  about  Drey-
fus’ innocence may have encouraged investment in Jewish-connected 
stocks. Section 5.1 presents the results from an event-study analysis fo-
cusing on short-term eﬀects, while Section 5.2 reports estimates from 
the empirical strategy described in Section 4.2.

5.1.  Short-term eﬀects

We  ﬁrst  explore  the  short-term  eﬀects  of  salient  episodes  of  the 
Aﬀair  on  ﬁrm-speciﬁc  abnormal  returns.  Table 2 reports  estimates 
from equation (1) for ﬁve major events: the ﬁrst revelations about the 
Panama scandal in La Libre Parole; the suicide of Jacques de Reinach 
in  November  1892;  the  military  degradation  of  Dreyfus  in  January 
1895; the publication of J’Accuse! in January 1898; the appointment 
of the Waldeck-Rousseau cabinet in June 1899; and Dreyfus’ pardon 
in September 1899. Cumulative abnormal returns are estimated using 
a one-factor arbitrage pricing model (i.e., the market model where the 
factor is the market) and summed over a [0,2] window around each 
event.

While the Panama Company went bankrupt in 1889, the scale of 
the bankruptcy and its consequences for tens of thousands of French 
shareholders were not immediately known to the public. On Septem-
ber 5-6, 1892, La Libre Parole launched a series of articles documenting 
the fraud and corruption scheme linked with the bankruptcy. At the 
heart  of  these  revelations  were  two  Jewish  ﬁnancial  intermediaries, 
Jacques de Reinach and Cornelius Herz, accused of bribing politicians to 
manipulate the Company’s stock issuances. This coverage caused a na-
tionwide scandal and drastically increased La Libre Parole’s circulation 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038097Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Table 2
Cumulative Abnormal Returns of Firms with Jewish Connections.

Sep 5, 1892
Panama revelations
(1)

Nov 20, 1892
Reinach
(2)

Jan 5, 1895
Degradation
(3)

Jan 13, 1898
“J’Accuse”
(4)

Jun 22, 1899
Waldeck-Rousseau
(5)

Sep 19, 1899
Pardon
(6)

% Jewish Board Members

Constant

Observations (Firms)
R2

-3.073**
(1.327)
-0.662
(2.262)

124
0.17

-1.184
(1.797)
-3.273
(3.003)

124
0.11

-4.372**
(1.935)
-0.837
(4.727)

124
0.14

-3.457*
(2.010)
1.279
(3.171)

124
0.14

11.339**
(4.609)
-2.050
(4.955)

124
0.26

1.786
(1.701)
3.315
(3.505)

124
0.09

Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (1). The dependent variables are cumulative abnormal returns estimated over a 
[0,2] time window around each event. Firm-speciﬁc betas are estimated via a 1-factor model in a [-300,-60] estimation window 
before the ﬁrst Panama revelations on September 5, 1892. Jewish connections are measured as the fraction of Jewish board 
members based on Grange (2016). See Section 3 for details. All regressions control for sector dummies, admission type, guarantee 
by the French state, political connections, whether the ﬁrm operates abroad, and log market capitalization at the beginning of the 
period. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

and proﬁle. Consistent with a short-term outburst of antisemitic senti-
ment, Table 2 shows that the ﬁrst Panama revelations led to abnormal 
negative returns among ﬁrms with Jewish board members (column 1). 
Reinach’s suicide conﬁrmed Drumont’s allegations to the wider public a 
few weeks later in November 1892, but contrary to the revelations from 
La Libre Parole, this event did not aﬀect the returns of Jewish-connected 
ﬁrms (column 2).18

The remaining columns of Table 1 examine events related to the 
Dreyfus Aﬀair. The degradation of Dreyfus took place on January 5, 
1895, in front of a large crowd shouting antisemitic abuse. This event 
received widespread media coverage and marked a peak of France’s an-
tisemitic outburst (see Section 2.2 and Fig. A.1).19 On January 7, 1895, 
the newspapers in our data dedicated 15% of their coverage to Drey-
fus. Column 3 of Table 2 shows that ﬁrms with a greater fraction of 
Jewish board members experienced abnormally negative returns after 
the degradation, which we interpret as the result of a major antisemitic 
outburst. This result is robust to a range of alternative methods for cal-
culating CARs (see Appendix Table A.3) and large in magnitude: a ﬁrm 
with 100% Jewish board members would have experienced a 4.38 per-
centage point decline in returns relative to a ﬁrm without Jewish board 
members.

J’Accuse! was published by L’Aurore on January 13, 1898. A major 
turning point of the Dreyfus Aﬀair, the editorial could have aﬀected the 
stock market in a number of ways. On the one hand, the evidence un-
covered in the editorial may have convinced investors that Dreyfus had 
been the victim of an antisemitic conspiracy. On the other hand, those 
holding antisemitic prejudice could have been conﬁrmed in their be-
liefs about the existence of a conspiracy against the state.20 Finally, the 
editorial could have increased expectations that French society would 
polarize further around the Dreyfus case. Overall, in column 4 of Ta-
ble 2 we ﬁnd that ﬁrms with a greater share of Jewish board members 
experienced negative abnormal returns of 3.45 percentage points im-
mediately around the publication of J’Accuse!. As with the degradation 
of Dreyfus, the rest of the market is unaﬀected by this episode.

We then look at the appointment of the Waldeck-Rousseau cabinet 
on June 22, 1899. Waldeck-Rousseau was given the mission to form 
a unity government to solve the Dreyfus Aﬀair. Column 5 of Table 2
shows that ﬁrms with Jewish connections experienced abnormal posi-

18 The negative constant in column 2 suggests that the market as a whole may 
have suﬀered from this episode. This is consistent with the historical record 
indicating that the Panama scandal was also perceived as a government scandal, 
given the large number of public oﬃcials involved in the corruption scheme.
19 We center the event window around Monday January 7, 1898, which is the 
ﬁrst trading day occurring after the degradation.
20 For example, Zola’s accusations could have increased distrust towards the 
elites among readers whose priors conﬂicted with the new evidence (see Barrera 
et al., 2020).

tive returns following this appointment. While the increased demand for 
Jewish-connected stocks could have reﬂected a more optimistic climate 
around these ﬁrms, Appendix Table A.7 shows that Jewish-connected 
ﬁrms did not experience similar upswings in returns around other cab-
inet changes. For example, the appointment of the Dreyfusard Brisson 
cabinet in June 1898 did not lead to positive returns, while successive 
anti-Dreyfusard governments did not yield negative returns for Jewish-
connected ﬁrms.

Finally, column 6 of Table 2 shows that Jewish-connected ﬁrms also 
experienced positive returns following Dreyfus’ pardon, which brought 
the salient phase of the Aﬀair to an end. However, this estimate falls 
short of statistical signiﬁcance. Importantly, among the four events ex-
amined  in  columns  3–6  of  Table 2,  only  J’Accuse! is  likely  to  have 
occurred as a total surprise to investors. As a result, as in Huberman 
and Regev (2001), the investors’ short-term response likely included 
a behavioral component—the emotional eﬀect of antisemitic outbursts 
on portfolio decisions—in addition to the standard eﬀect of new infor-
mation about Dreyfus’ culpability. We return to this interpretation in 
Section 6.3.

Robustness  checks Appendix  Fig. A.4  shows  that  the  point  estimates 
from the four event studies in columns 3–6 of Table 2 capture distinc-
tive diﬀerences between the distributions of CARs of Jewish-connected 
and non-Jewish-connected ﬁrms, and not driven by a small number of 
outliers. The estimated cumulative distributions of CARs are most sep-
arate at the arrival of Waldeck-Rousseau, and closest around J’Accuse!, 
which is consistent with the low precision of the corresponding estimate 
in Table 2.

Appendix Table A.3 looks at alternative estimation strategies and re-
ports CARs around four additional episodes: the ﬁrst news of Dreyfus’ 
arrest (November 2, 1894), the conviction of Dreyfus by a court-martial 
(December 22, 1894), the revelation of the suicide of Colonel Henry, a 
key actor in the forgery of documents used to incriminate Dreyfus (Au-
gust 31, 1898), and the announcement that Dreyfus was granted a new 
trial (October 29, 1898). None of these events appears to have aﬀected 
the CARs of ﬁrms with Jewish board members. Appendix Table A.5 re-
ports the corresponding robustness checks where we use the dummy 
for having a Jewish CEO as the measure of Jewish connections on the 
right-hand side of equation (1). Overall, investors responded primarily 
to salient episodes of the Aﬀair (episodes most likely to generate an-
tisemitic outbursts), as opposed to events with a higher news content 
such as Henry’s suicide or Dreyfus’ initial arrest.

Finally, Appendix Table A.7 estimates CARs for each cabinet reshuf-
ﬂe during the Aﬀair. Based on the available historical evidence, four 
cabinets  with  a  clear  stance  on  the  Aﬀair  governed  during  the  pe-
riod:  the  Méline  cabinet  (anti-Dreyfusard,  appointed  in  April  1896), 
the  Brisson  cabinet  (Dreyfusard,  June  1898),  the  Dupuy  II  cabinet 
(anti-Dreyfusard,  October  1898),  and  the  Waldeck-Rousseau  cabinet 

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038098Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Table 3
Stock Returns of Jewish-Connected Firms DID estimates.

Daily Returns

Monthly Returns

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

% Board Members × Before J’Accuse

% Board Members × After J’Accuse

R2
Mean Dep Var
Controls
Firms
Observations

Jewish CEO × Before J’Accuse

Jewish CEO × After J’Accuse

(a) % of Jewish Board Members
-0.077**
(0.037)
0.197**
(0.099)

-0.073*
(0.038)
0.158**
(0.079)

-2.249*
(1.161)
4.485*
(2.436)

0.02
0.011
No
124
339988

0.02
0.011
Yes
124
339988

0.10
0.152
No
124
13268

(b) Jewish CEO
-0.006
(0.012)
0.060**
(0.025)

-0.006
(0.013)
0.041*
(0.023)

-0.276
(0.361)
1.369**
(0.635)

-2.188*
(1.244)
3.329*
(1.981)

0.10
0.152
Yes
124
13268

-0.314
(0.406)
0.871
(0.581)

0.10
0.152
No
124
13268

0.10
0.152
Yes
124
13268

0.02
0.011
Yes
124
339988

R2
Mean Dep Var
Controls
Firms
Observations

0.02
0.011
No
124
339988
Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (2). In columns 1–2, the de-
pendent variables (expressed in percentage points) are the daily stock returns 
calculated as the daily growth rate in stock prices. In columns 3–4, the dataset is 
at the ﬁrm-month level and we look at monthly stock returns. In panel (a), Jew-
ish connections are measured as the fraction of Jewish board members based 
on Grange (2016). Panel (b) looks at whether the ﬁrm has a Jewish CEO. See 
Section 3 for details. All regressions include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and trading day 
(in columns 1–2) or month (in columns 3–4) ﬁxed eﬀects. In columns 2 and 
4, we additional control for sector dummies, admission type, guarantee type 
(a dummy for stocks guaranteed by the French state), a dummy for conducting 
operations abroad, political connections, and initial log market capitalization in-
teracted with the two period dummies corresponding to the two phases of the 
Dreyfus Aﬀair.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm.

(Dreyfusard, June 1899). Among these, only the Waldeck-Rousseau ap-
pointment has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the CARs of ﬁrms with Jewish con-
nections. In particular, there is no evidence that the two anti-Dreyfusard 
cabinets (Méline and Dupuy II) negatively aﬀected the short-term per-
formance of these ﬁrms.

5.2.  Time-varying eﬀects of the Dreyfus Aﬀair

We now examine how Jewish-connected stock returns evolved dur-
ing the ﬁrst and second phase of the Dreyfus Aﬀair. Fig. 1 shows that 
Dreyfus’ degradation, and to a larger extent, J’Accuse! represented im-
portant turning points for the market performance of these ﬁrms. The 
ﬁgure  reports  time-varying  coeﬃcients  on  the  eﬀect  of  Jewish  con-
nections  on  daily  stock  returns,  estimated  via  standard  DID.  We  in-
teract the fraction of Jewish board members with year dummies and 
we  control  for  ﬁrm  ﬁxed  eﬀects,  trading  day  ﬁxed  eﬀects,  and  con-
trols interacted with year dummies. Relative to the 1891-1893 period, 
Jewish-connected ﬁrms experience a relative decline in their daily stock 
returns between 1894 and 1897. This changes dramatically after the be-
ginning of Dreyfus’ rehabilitation campaign initiated by J’Accuse!. On 
average, Jewish-connected ﬁrms experience higher daily returns in the 
1898-1899 period.

Stock returns Table 3 reports estimates from equation (2). We look at 
daily and monthly returns in columns 1–2 and 3–4, respectively. Re-
turns are calculated as simple proportional returns, (𝑝𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡−1)∕𝑝𝑡−1 ×
100, where 𝑝 is the stock value and 𝑡 varies either daily or monthly; 
in  the  Appendix,  we  show  that  our  main  results  are  robust  to  us-
ing  log-returns  instead.  All  regressions  include  ﬁrm  and  trading  day 

𝑡 𝛽𝑡𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐵𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 × 𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝛿𝑖 + 𝛿𝑡 + (𝐗′

Notes:  This  ﬁgure  reports  estimates  from  the  following  speciﬁcation:  𝑦𝑖𝑡 =
∑
𝑖𝜽𝑡)′𝜼 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡. 𝑦𝑖𝑡 are daily stock 
returns measured for ﬁrm 𝑖 on day 𝑡. The dashed gray lines indicates 90% con-
ﬁdence intervals and standard errors are clustered by ﬁrm. The two vertical 
top-to-bottom lines highlight the beginning of the Dreyfus Aﬀair in late 1894 
and the publication of J’Accuse! in January 1898, respectively.

Fig. 1. Daily Returns of Jewish-Connected Firms DID Estimates.

(in  columns  1–2)  or  month  (in  columns  3–4)  ﬁxed  eﬀects.  In  even-
numbered columns, we include the full set of controls interacted with 
dummies for the two periods of interest (before/after J’Accuse!), as de-

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)1038099Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

scribed in Section 4. These controls include: sector dummies, admission 
type, guarantee type (a dummy for stocks guaranteed by the French 
state),  a  dummy  for  conducting  operations  abroad,  political  connec-
tions,  and  log  market  capitalization  at  the  beginning  of  the  sample 
period. These controls ensure that our estimates of interest are not pick-
ing up correlated shocks or other diﬀerential eﬀects of these variables 
after J’Accuse!.

Panel  (a)  of  Table 3 looks  at  the  fraction  of  Jewish  board  mem-
bers on the right-hand side of equation (2)—the same measure used in 
Table 2. Columns 1–2 show that a ﬁrm with 100% Jewish board mem-
bers would have experienced a 0.077 percentage point (p.p.) decline in 
daily returns during the ﬁrst phase of the Dreyfus Aﬀair, and about a 
0.197 p.p. point increase in returns after J’Accuse!. These estimates im-
ply that during the two years following J’Accuse!, in comparison with 
the rest of the stock market, investors holding Jewish-connected stocks 
earned rents amounting to 14.1% of the value of ﬁrms with any Jewish 
connection, and 7.9% of the whole market.21 In Panel (b), we inter-
act the two period dummies with an indicator for ﬁrms with a Jewish 
CEO. The coeﬃcient corresponding to the second phase of the Aﬀair 
is again positive and statistically signiﬁcant across all columns, while 
the interaction corresponding to the ﬁrst phase is small in magnitude 
and non-signiﬁcant. The magnitude of estimates in panel (b) is approx-
imately 30% the size of the corresponding estimates in panel (a). This 
means that the eﬀect of a Jewish CEO is approximately equal to that 
of a 30 p.p. increase in the fraction of Jewish board members, which 
ranges between 0 and 0.70 with a standard deviation of 0.11. The ef-
fect of a Jewish CEO therefore amounts to about a 3-SD increase in the 
fraction of Jewish board members.

Synthetic  DID Fig. 2 and  Table 4 report  the  results  from  the  syn-
thetic DID estimation from Arkhangelsky et al.  (2021).  As described 
earlier,  this  estimator  identiﬁes  optimally  weighted  combinations  of 
pre-period  control  observations  that  eﬀectively  re-balance  pre-trends 
across treated and control ﬁrms. Because this estimation requires a bi-
nary treatment, we deﬁne the treated group as ﬁrms with a Jewish CEO 
at the onset of the Dreyfus Aﬀair in 1894. Fig. 2 yields insights similar 
to the standard DID analysis: Jewish-connected ﬁrms experience a rel-
ative decline after Dreyfus’ degradation, and a substantial diﬀerential 
increase in returns from 1898 onwards.

In Table 4, we use two alternative deﬁnitions of the treatment to cor-
roborate these ﬁndings: one in which parallel trends hold until Dreyfus’ 
degradation in November 1894, and one where the treatment corre-
sponds instead to the publication of J’Accuse! in January 1898. Columns 
1–2 and 3–4 report the estimates from these two approaches, respec-
tively. In even-numbered columns, treatment and control units are fur-
ther adjusted based on our standard set of covariates. As expected, in 
columns 1–2 the eﬀect of Jewish connections estimated across the entire 
1895-1899 period is small in magnitude and not statistically signiﬁcant, 
as this estimate combines the initial early negative response with the 
positive eﬀect on stock returns observed after 1898 (see also Appendix 
Table  A.8,  where  we  report  synthetic  DID  eﬀects  separately  for  the 
1895–97 period and for the 1898–99 period relative to the 1891–1894 
period). Columns 3–4 show that ﬁrms with a Jewish CEO experience a 
signiﬁcant increase in returns when the treatment is deﬁned to corre-
spond to the publication of J’Accuse!. Strikingly, the magnitude of these 
SDID estimates is very close to that of the standard DID estimates in 

21 To compute these numbers, we ﬁrst multiply the coeﬃcient of the inter-
action % Board Members × After J’Accuse! from Table 3’s panel (a), column 1 
(shown in percentage points) with each ﬁrm’s fraction of Jewish board mem-
bers, and accumulate it over the considered period after the publication of 
J’Accuse! (599 trading days over 2 years). We then take the weighted aver-
age on the subsample of all ﬁrms with some Jewish board members and on the 
full population of all ﬁrms on the Paris stock market, weighting each ﬁrm by its 
market value at the publication of J’Accuse!.

Notes: This ﬁgure reports synthetic DID estimates from Arkhangelsky et al. 
(2021). This estimation is performed on a balanced panel dataset at the ﬁrm-
year level. The dependent variable is average daily stock returns. The treatment 
group is deﬁned as ﬁrms with a Jewish CEO at the onset of the Dreyfus Aﬀair in 
1894, and these ﬁrms are considered treated from 1895 onwards, which closely 
approximates the onset of the Dreyfus Aﬀair (Dreyfus’ military degradation and 
deportation took place in January 1895). The dark-shaded area represents unit 
and time-speciﬁc weights used to construct the synthetic control group in the 
pre-treatment period. Treatment and control units are further adjusted based 
on our standard set of covariates, namely sector dummies, admission type, 
guarantee type, a dummy for conducting operations abroad, political connec-
tions, and initial log market capitalization.

Fig. 2. Daily Returns of Jewish-Connected Firms Synthetic DID Estimates.

panel (b) of Table 3, when controls are included, suggesting that vio-
lations of parallel trends are not a major issue in our setting. Finally, 
Appendix Table A.9 shows that the SDID estimates in columns 3–4 of 
Table 4 are robust to alternative measures of returns: returns relative to 
the risk-free asset, risk-adjusted returns, and monthly returns.

Coarsened  exact  matching Table 5 shows  results  obtained  using  the 
Coarsened Exact Matching (CEM) method.22 We match by the set of 
observable covariates, including sector dummies, admission type, state 
guarantee type, a dummy for conducting operations abroad, political 
connections, and the ﬁrm’s initial market capitalization. After perform-
ing the stratiﬁcation by CEM, we only retain the successfully matched 
observations (112 ﬁrms out of the main sample’s 124 ﬁrms). The treat-
ment variable is the indicator whether the ﬁrm initially had a Jewish 
CEO. All observations are equally weighted (Appendix Table A.10 re-
ports results using CEM-produced weights, with very similar estimates).
Columns 1 to 3 show the comparison of daily stock returns between 
treated and control ﬁrms through the three major periods, namely be-
fore Dreyfus’ degradation (column 1), between the degradation and the 
publication of J’Accuse (column 2), and after the publication of J’Ac-
cuse (column 3). Again, we ﬁnd no diﬀerence in the ﬁrst period, then 
evidence of relative losses for Jewish ﬁrms in the second period before 
their reversal in the third period. These patterns remain very similar 
when we combine all three periods together in column 4 in a speciﬁca-
tion that further applies the DID speciﬁcation from equation (2) on the 
matched sample, namely combining within-matched-stratum DID esti-
mates with ﬁrm and day ﬁxed eﬀects, as well as sector-by-month ﬁxed 
eﬀects. Analogously, when we turn to monthly returns in the collapsed 

22 CEM capitalizes on the strength of exact matching without succumbing to 
the curse of dimensionality. Iacus et al. (2011) shows that CEM belongs to the 
class of Monotonic Imbalance Bounding multivariate matching methods, which 
assure a number of desirable balancing properties, and which empirically per-
forms better than other traditional matching methods (e.g., by propensity score) 
when it comes to balancing over covariates.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380910Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Table 4
Synthetic DID Estimates.

Treatment:

Dreyfus’ Degradation

J’Accuse!

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Jewish CEO × Post treatment

0.00286
(0.01508)

0.00328
(0.01679)

0.04320***
(0.01257)

0.04101***
(0.01284)

Controls
Firms

No
124

Yes
124

No
124

Yes
124

Notes: This table reports synthetic DID estimates from Arkhangelsky et al. (2021). 
This estimation is performed on a balanced panel dataset at the ﬁrm-year level. 
The treatment group is deﬁned as ﬁrms with a Jewish CEO at the beginning of 
the sample period in January 1891. In columns (1)-(2), these ﬁrms are considered 
treated from January 1895 onwards. In columns (3)-(4), these ﬁrms are considered 
treated from January 1898 onwards. Treatment and control units are further ad-
justed based on our standard set of covariates, namely sector dummies, admission 
type, guarantee type (a dummy for stocks guaranteed by the French state), a dummy 
for conducting operations abroad, political connections, and initial log market cap-
italization.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors are computed using the placebo 
method of Arkhangelsky et al. (2021).

Table 5
Coarsened Exact Matching estimates.

Sample period

Daily Returns

Monthly Returns

Jewish CEO ×

Before Degradation
Jewish CEO × Before J’Accuse

Jewish CEO × After J’Accuse

R2
Mean Returns
Firms
Observations
Firm FE
Strata FE
Strata × time FE
Sector × month FE

2

(2)

3

(3)

All

(4)

1

(1)

-0.004
(0.006)

-0.022**
(0.010)

0.00
-0.007
112
137082
No
Yes
No
No

0.00
0.025
112
103028
No
Yes
No
No

-0.020*
(0.011)
0.044**
(0.020)

0.09
0.010
112
307086
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.034*
(0.018)

0.00
0.021
112
66976
No
Yes
No
No

2

(6)

3

(7)

All

(8)

1

(5)

0.007
(0.249)

-0.637**
(0.305)

0.00
-0.028
112
5376
No
Yes
No
No

0.01
0.012
112
4032
No
Yes
No
No

-0.722**
(0.367)
0.907*
(0.541)

0.22
0.143
112
11984
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.791*
(0.431)

0.01
0.037
112
2576
No
Yes
No
No

Notes: This table reports matching estimates from subsamples created by Coarsened Exact Matching (CEM) (Iacus et 
al., 2012). CEM is performed by observable covariates including sector dummies, admission type, guarantee type (a 
dummy for stocks guaranteed by the French state), a dummy for conducting operations abroad, political connections, 
and initial log market capitalization; only matched observations are retained. In columns 1–4, the dependent variables 
(expressed in percentage points) are the daily stock returns calculated as the daily growth rate in stock prices. In 
columns 5–8, the dataset is at the ﬁrm-month level and we look at monthly stock returns. The three sample periods 
refer to that (1) before Dreyfus’ degradation (columns 1 and 5), (2) from Dreyfus’ degradation until the publication of 
J’Accuse (columns 2 and 6), and (3) after the publication of J’Accuse (columns 3 and 7). In columns 1–3 and 5–7, the 
treatment variable is the indicator whether the ﬁrm has a Jewish CEO. Columns 4 and 8 consider all three periods, 
and undertake the benchmark regression in equation (2), with the interactions of the treatment with each period’s 
indicator, as well as ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, sector by month ﬁxed eﬀects, and matched strata by time ﬁxed eﬀects. All 
regressions include matched strata ﬁxed eﬀects. See Section 3 for data details.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm and period.

dataset at the ﬁrm-month level in columns 5–8, the results remain con-
sistent: ﬁrms with Jewish CEOs suﬀer in terms of monthly stock returns 
during the period from Dreyfus’ degradation until the publication of 
J’Accuse, but more than recover during the rehabilitation campaign af-
ter January 1898.

Table 6,  columns  1–2  show  that  the  rehabilitation  campaign  in 
the  second  phase  of  the  Aﬀair  increased  stock  volatility  for  Jewish-
connected ﬁrms. There is some evidence that this increase in volatil-
ity was largest in the immediate aftermath of J’Accuse! and subsided 
afterwards—Appendix Table A.11 documents this non-monotonic rela-
tionship.23 Columns 3–4 of Table 6 look at a measure of risk-adjusted 

Volatility and risk-adjusted returns Polarization around the Dreyfus case 
could have increased the stock volatility of ﬁrms with Jewish board 
members, if investors perceived this polarization to increase risk. We 
test for this by looking at squared demeaned returns on the left-hand 
side of equation (2). We also examine whether the ﬁndings in Table 3
are robust to using a measure of risk-adjusted returns.

23 In Appendix Table A.11, we focus on the period 1894-1899 and we in-
teract the second diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences term in equation (2) with the time 
(days or months) elapsed since J’Accuse!. The dependent variables are the same 
measures of volatility as those used in Table 6. Columns 1 and 3 of this table 
show the negative association between volatility and time elapsed since J’Ac-

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380911Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Table 6
Volatility and Risk-Adjusted Returns.

% Board Members × Before J’Accuse

% Board Members × After J’Accuse

R2
Mean Dep Var
Controls
Firms
Observations

Jewish CEO × Before J’Accuse

Jewish CEO × After J’Accuse

Volatility

Risk-Adjusted

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(a) % of Jewish Board Members
-0.041
2.519
3.025
(0.032)
(1.803)
(2.016)
0.102**
5.503*
6.411**
(0.047)
(2.785)
(3.167)

0.02
2.052
No
124
339988

0.02
2.052
Yes
124
339988

0.02
0.011
No
124
339988

(b) Jewish CEO
0.407
(0.470)
1.701**
(0.743)

0.508
(0.537)
1.564*
(0.815)

0.005
(0.011)
0.036***
(0.012)

-0.036
(0.030)
0.096**
(0.046)

0.02
0.011
Yes
124
339988

0.008
(0.012)
0.031**
(0.012)

0.02
2.052
Yes
124
339988

0.02
0.011
No
124
339988

0.02
0.011
Yes
124
339988

R2
Mean Dep Var
Controls
Firms
Observations

0.02
2.052
No
124
339988
Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (2). The dependent variables 
are squared demeaned daily returns in columns 1–2 and risk-adjusted returns in 
columns 3–4. Risk-adjusted returns are calculated as raw daily returns divided 
by the ﬁrm-speciﬁc standard deviation of raw returns for each ﬁrm. In panel 
(a), Jewish connections are measured as the fraction of Jewish board members 
based on Grange (2016). Panel (b) looks at whether the ﬁrm has a Jewish CEO. 
See Section 3 for details. All regressions include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and trading 
day ﬁxed eﬀects. In columns 2 and 4, we additional control for sector dummies, 
admission type, guarantee type (a dummy for stocks guaranteed by the French 
state), a dummy for conducting operations abroad, political connections, and log 
market capitalization interacted with the two period dummies corresponding to 
the two phases of the Dreyfus Aﬀair.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm.

returns: daily returns divided by the within-ﬁrm standard deviation of 
returns (the Sharpe ratio). Across both measures of Jewish connections, 
the estimate corresponding to the second phase of the Aﬀair is posi-
tive and signiﬁcant, and eﬀect sizes are in line with those reported in 
Table 3. For example, the diﬀerence in daily returns between a board 
with 100% Jewish board members and a board with zero Jewish board 
member is approximately 0.10 SD; this estimate is robust to including 
the full set of interacted controls. While stock volatility increased after 
J’Accuse! for ﬁrms with Jewish connections, investors who bet on these 
ﬁrms were more than compensated for this increased risk.

Robustness checks Appendix Tables A.12 through A.18 report robust-
ness checks for the results in Tables 3 and 6. Throughout these tables, 
we look at daily raw returns and risk-adjusted returns (deﬁned as in 
column 1–2 of Table 3 and columns 3–4 of Table 6, respectively). As 
in our main tables, odd-numbered columns report estimates from the 
baseline equation (2) without controls, while even-numbered columns 
include the full set of controls interacted with dummies corresponding 
to the two phases of the Dreyfus Aﬀair. Our results are overall robust to 
these speciﬁcation checks.

Appendix Table A.12 shows that our results are not driven by stock 
liquidity. Compared to contemporary ﬁnancial data, liquidity is low in 
our context: 30% of stocks are not traded on any given day. First, in 
columns 1–2 we show that Jewish connections have no discernible time-
varying impact on liquidity (proxied by trading frequency) throughout 

cuse!. Columns 2 and 4, where we additionally interact the relevant terms with 
dummies for 1898 and 1899, show that the eventual decline in volatility was 
strongest during the rest of the year 1898.

the diﬀerent phases of the Aﬀair. Second, we estimate equation (2) on 
the subsample of stocks with high trading frequency, namely all liquid 
stocks on any given day (columns 3 through 6). Our core results hold in 
this selected subsample.

Appendix Table A.13 examines log-returns instead of simple propor-
tional returns in our baseline analysis. The point estimates of the eﬀects 
of Jewish connections are nearly identical in this case. Appendix Ta-
ble A.14 shows robustness to excluding all observations in a [-1,1] time 
window around dividend payment dates; this check ensures that stocks 
returns on ex-dividend dates are not driving our results. In Appendix 
Table A.15, we look at an intent-to-treat measure of Jewish connec-
tions on the right-hand side of equation (2): namely Jewish connections 
measured on November 2, 1894—the day when Dreyfus’ arrest was ﬁrst 
revealed. This check ensures that our results are not driven by changes 
in the board composition of ﬁrms. Recall that overall, ﬁrms experience 
few changes in their board composition, and ﬁrms with Jewish connec-
tions are no more likely to experience such changes (Appendix Table 
A.2).

Appendix Table A.16 looks at Jewish connections computed using 
Lévy (1960). While our systematic hand-coding of the board member-
ship data makes us conﬁdent that we are not overcounting or under-
counting Jewish connections in corporate boards (see Section 3.2), the 
robustness of our results to this alternative measure ensures that our 
core ﬁndings are not driven by (non-classical) measurement error.

Appendix Table A.17 further explores the sensitivity of our results 
to outliers in returns associated with recapitalization episodes. In our 
baseline estimation, we exclude observations coinciding with recapi-
talization episodes (episodes of stock issuances and buybacks), some 
of which are associated with large ﬂuctuations in the stock value. Ap-

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380912Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Table 7
Firm Dividends during the Dreyfus Aﬀair.

% Board Members × Before J’Accuse

% Board Members × After J’Accuse

R2
Mean Dividends
Controls
Firms
Observations

Jewish CEO × Before J’Accuse

Jewish CEO × After J’Accuse

Log Dividends

Dividends/price

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(a) % of Jewish Board Members
-0.053
-1.148
-0.936
(0.042)
(0.915)
(0.845)
-0.009
-0.293
-0.428
(0.045)
(0.941)
(0.990)

0.76
2.928
No
124
1115

0.78
2.928
Yes
124
1115

(b) Jewish CEO
-0.384
(0.234)
-0.318
(0.269)

-0.380
(0.236)
-0.270
(0.255)

0.63
0.045
No
124
1115

-0.023
(0.016)
-0.016
(0.017)

-0.059
(0.043)
-0.019
(0.042)

0.65
0.045
Yes
124
1115

-0.024
(0.016)
-0.020
(0.017)

0.66
0.045
Yes
124
1115

0.64
0.045
No
124
1115

0.78
2.928
Yes
124
1115

R2
Mean Dividends
Controls
Firms
Observations

0.76
2.928
No
124
1115
Notes: This table reports estimates using a panel dataset at the ﬁrm-year level 
between 1891–1899. Dependent variables are log dividends in columns 1–2 
and dividends divided by the stock price (averaged by year) in columns 3–4. 
In panel (a), Jewish connections are measured as the fraction of Jewish board 
members based on Grange (2016). Panel (b) looks at whether the ﬁrm has a 
Jewish CEO. See Section 3 for details. All regressions include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects 
and year eﬀects. Even-numbered columns, we additionally include the same 
set of controls as in Tables 3–6 interacted with year ﬁxed eﬀects. * p<0.1, ** 
p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors two-way clustered by ﬁrm and 
trading day.

pendix Table A.17 shows that our main results are robust to including 
these observations in the analysis.

Finally, Appendix Table A.18 delves into the use of abnormal returns 
and ﬁrms’ betas in the main speciﬁcation. Including the interaction be-
tween ﬁrms’ betas and market returns as a control does not change our 
estimates, either when we use raw returns (columns 1–2) or abnormal 
returns (columns 3-4) as the dependent variable—note that the main ef-
fects of ﬁrms’ betas and the market return are absorbed by the ﬁrm and 
trading day ﬁxed eﬀects included in all speciﬁcations.

6.  Interpretation

6.1.  Expected shifts in performance

Dividends One potential explanation for our ﬁndings thus far could be 
that investors expected shifts (downwards, then upwards) in the actual 
proﬁtability of Jewish-connected ﬁrms throughout the diﬀerent phases 
of the Dreyfus Aﬀair. These shifts could have been induced by changes 
in the level of antisemitic sentiment prevailing among the customers or 
the suppliers of ﬁrms with Jewish connections.

To examine this mechanism, Table 7 studies eﬀects on dividends. 
While dividends only imperfectly respond to changes in proﬁtability, 
this is the best available proxy given the lack of available data on ﬁrms’ 
balance sheets. Here, we estimate a similar speciﬁcation measuring the 
dividends of ﬁrms with Jewish connections before and after J’Accuse!, 
using a panel dataset at the ﬁrm-year level—the level at which divi-
dends are observed. Firms are exposed the “high antisemitic sentiment” 
phase of the Aﬀair during 1895–1897 and to the Dreyfus rehabilitation 
campaign in 1898–1899, while the years 1891–1893 are used as com-
parison years. We look at the log of (one plus) dividends in columns 1–2, 
and dividends as a fraction of the share price in columns 3–4. Over-
all, yearly dividends averaged approximately 4.5% of the share price 
during this period. Across both measures of dividends and both mea-

sures of Jewish connections, we ﬁnd no evidence that the proﬁtability 
of Jewish-connected ﬁrms decreased after 1894, or that it improved 
in 1898-99, after the publication of J’Accuse!. Jewish board member-
ship has a negative eﬀect on log dividends in panels (a) and (b). All 
estimates in columns 3–4 are small in magnitude and statistically in-
signiﬁcant. Overall, there is no evidence suggesting that the Dreyfus 
Aﬀair aﬀected the proﬁtability of ﬁrms with Jewish board members as 
measured by dividends.

Foreign ﬁrms
Investors may also have expected an antisemitic backlash 
against ﬁrms with Jewish board members. For example, an antisemitic 
stance by the government could have translated into adverse procure-
ment policies aﬀecting the returns of ﬁrms with Jewish board members. 
Or, ﬁrms engaged in retail activities could have faced an antisemitic 
backlash from their customer base. These mechanisms, either actual or 
perceived, could have aﬀected the economic fundamentals of Jewish-
connected ﬁrms.

While plausible, these mechanisms are unlikely to be driving our 
results. Both the Dreyfus Aﬀair and the Panama scandal indeed led to 
political instability, but there was no viable political force advocating 
for antisemitic economic policies. In 1898, a handful of legislative can-
didates ran under the banner of an “Antisemitic League” led by Edouard 
Drumont, but these candidates remained on the fringe of mainstream 
politics. The few elected MPs were often ridiculed in Parliament (Joly, 
2007). The group was disbanded in 1901 and Drumont himself failed 
to win reelection in 1902. Liberal French governments never enacted 
or considered antisemitic policies under the Third Republic, spanning 
1870-1940, and no viable party advocated for antisemitic policies until 
the advent of the Vichy regime.

Nonetheless, we explore this alternative interpretation in Table 8, 
where  we  focus  on  ﬁrms  operating  exclusively  in  foreign  territories. 
These ﬁrms are listed in Appendix Table A.19: there are 34 such ﬁrms in 
total, operating in countries such as Austria, Russia, Spain, and the Ot-
toman Empire. Firms with the core of their business operations abroad 
should also have been less exposed to the prospect of adverse govern-
ment policies or regulations.24 Yet, Table 8 shows that ﬁrms operating 
in foreign countries did, in fact, experience lower returns during the 
ﬁrst phase of the Aﬀair, and larger returns after J’Accuse! when they 
had more Jewish board members. This test is informative since these 
ﬁrms should have been less exposed to an antisemitic backlash by the 
state or the market.

In Appendix Tables A.20 and A.21, we additionally consider state-
guaranteed ﬁrms and ﬁrms with no substantial retail activities. State-
guaranteed ﬁrms were institutionally protected by the state and there-
fore sheltered from the threat of adverse government policies. We in-
clude in this subset ﬁrms beneﬁting from a state guarantee, ﬁrms oper-
ating a government monopoly, and ﬁrms with a government-appointed 
director. The guarantee scheme was deﬁned in national laws adopted 
in 1859 and 1883 and committed the state to guarantee some interest 
rate (usually 4 percent) on the capital invested by the beneﬁciary com-
panies. This scheme eﬀectively established a regulated lower bound for 
the prices of these stocks, thus increased expected prices and reduced 
policy-related uncertainty. State-granted (French or foreign) monopo-
lies gave companies exclusive privileges over a commodity or infrastruc-
ture project, for example Vichy waters or the Suez Canal. These privi-
leges provided monopolistic market power, shielding those stocks and 
their holders from potential shocks to how the government may have 
treated Jewish-connected ﬁrms. Finally, government appointments of 
directors implied de facto supervision by the state, which again indi-
cated the state’s own strong interest in those ﬁrms’ operations, hence 

24 Recall from Appendix Table 1 that ﬁrms with Jewish connections are more 
likely to have foreign connections. In Tables 3 and 6, even-numbered columns 
show robustness to controlling for the measure of foreign connections interacted 
with the pre- and post-“J’Accuse” indicators.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380913Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Table 8
Risk and Returns among Foreign-Based Firms.

% Board Members × Before J’Accuse

% Board Members × After J’Accuse

R2
Mean Dep Var
Controls
Firms
Observations

Jewish CEO × Before J’Accuse

Jewish CEO × After J’Accuse

Raw Returns

Volatility

Risk-Adj. Returns

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(a) % of Jewish Board Members
2.723
-0.170
-0.133
(4.072)
(0.110)
(0.099)
20.060***
0.535**
0.495*
(6.884)
(0.239)
(0.270)

-0.011
(4.630)
19.343***
(5.771)

0.06
0.009
No
30
82254

0.06
0.009
Yes
30
82254

(b) Jewish CEO
0.010
(0.020)
0.110**
(0.046)

-0.002
(0.024)
0.122**
(0.051)

0.07
2.972
No
30
82254

0.331
(0.742)
3.202**
(1.256)

0.07
2.972
Yes
30
82254

-0.011
(1.147)
3.090*
(1.525)

-0.059
(0.071)
0.160
(0.109)

0.06
0.005
No
30
82254

0.031
(0.019)
0.060**
(0.022)

-0.142*
(0.077)
0.113
(0.123)

0.06
0.005
Yes
30
82254

0.012
(0.025)
0.050*
(0.029)

0.06
0.009
No
30
82254

0.07
2.972
No
30
82254

0.07
2.972
Yes
30
82254

R2
Mean Dep Var
Controls
Firms
Observations

0.06
0.009
Yes
30
82254
Notes: This table reports estimates from equation (2), using only the sample of foreign ﬁrms listed in Ap-
pendix Table A.19. The dependent variables are raw daily returns in columns 1–2, squared demeaned 
daily returns in columns 3–4, and risk-adjusted returns in columns 5–6. Risk-adjusted returns are calcu-
lated as raw returns divided by the ﬁrm-speciﬁc standard deviation of raw returns for each ﬁrm. In panel 
(a), Jewish connections are measured as the fraction of Jewish board members based on Grange (2016). 
Panel (b) looks at whether the ﬁrm has a Jewish CEO. See Section 3 for details. All regressions include 
ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, trading day ﬁxed eﬀects, and sector-by-month ﬁxed eﬀects.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm.

0.06
0.005
Yes
30
82254

0.06
0.005
No
30
82254

their limited exposure to potentially discriminatory policies. If our key 
result of positive returns after J’Accuse! was mainly driven by chang-
ing expectations about policies towards Jewish-connected ﬁrms, then 
the Dreyfus rehabilitation campaign should have had limited eﬀects on 
ﬁrms in this subsample.

Appendix Table A.20 shows that state-guaranteed ﬁrms with Jewish 
board members did, in fact, experience larger returns after J’Accuse!. 
All the coeﬃcients of interest are larger in magnitude than the baseline 
estimates obtained with the full sample. Since these ﬁrms maintained 
legally binding institutional connections with the state throughout the 
period, the increase in returns they experienced after J’Accuse! plausibly 
comes from changing antisemitic sentiment among investors.

Finally, we look at ﬁrms without a substantial retail component in 
their business operations. We drop from the sample ﬁrms with the fol-
lowing  activities:  retail  banks,  newspapers  and  press  agencies,  retail 
food and water products, and department stores.25 The ﬁrms remaining 
in the sample should have had little exposure to a market backlash via 
antisemitic customers. However, in Appendix Table A.21 we again ﬁnd 
strong positive eﬀects on returns among this subsample. Overall, the re-
sults in Table 8 and Appendix Tables A.20 and A.21 suggest that the key 
ﬁndings in Tables 3 and 6 are unlikely to be driven by diverging expec-
tations about the market environment faced by Jewish-connected ﬁrms.

6.2.  Media coverage

To what extent were the excess returns of Jewish-connected ﬁrms 
caused by an increase in media coverage of the Aﬀair—in particular, 

coverage that revealed the conspiracy against Dreyfus? Extensive work 
by historians suggests that the newspaper press played a decisive role in 
triggering shifts in public opinion throughout the Aﬀair (Miquel, 2003).
We collected daily data on the coverage of the Dreyfus case by ﬁve 
contemporary  newspapers:  Le  Siècle,  La  Croix,  Le  Petit  Journal,  L’Au-
rore,  and  La  Libre  Parole,  for  a  subset  of  our  study  period  (1894  to 
1899). Le Siècle, a liberal mainstream outlet, started to actively sup-
port Dreyfus starting in late 1897. La Croix, a conservative newspaper 
which proclaimed itself to be “France’s most anti-Jewish Catholic news-
paper,” was anti-Dreyfus throughout the period (Sorlin, 1967). L’Aurore
went into circulation in mid-October 1897 and rapidly became the lead-
ing pro-Dreyfus outlet after publishing “J’Accuse...!” in January 1898. 
La Libre Parole was an antisemitic outlet founded in 1892 by Edouard 
Drumont.  Finally,  Le  Petit  Journal was  another  popular  anti-Dreyfus 
newspaper, covering national and international news.

Newspapers in this period typically had four pages. We count the 
number of paragraphs devoted to the Dreyfus Aﬀair both in levels and 
as  a  fraction  of  total  coverage,  excluding  advertisements.  This  data 
was manually collected and coded since the low quality of the news-
paper scans did not allow for OCR processing. After applying a broad 
word ﬁlter,26 we systematically read all newspaper issues mentioning 
the Dreyfus case and hand-coded all the paragraphs discussing the Af-
fair. In total, more than 61,000 paragraphs were dedicated to the Aﬀair 
across the 5 newspapers between January 2, 1894 and December 30, 

25 The idea that these sectors were controlled by Jewish ﬁnance was a com-
mon theme in the antisemitic press. A 1898 pamphlet by La Croix wrote: “The 
emporia and the big stores... are ruining local business. One sees some Lévy or 
other set up in a place, and by means that the Jew alone knows how to employ, 
he very soon forces local business to founder in face of the competition which 
it is impossible to withstand (Wilson, 2007, p.280).

26 The ﬁlter contained the following words: Dreyfus, capitaine (captain), af-
faire (aﬀair), traitre (traitor), trahison (treason), juif or juives (Jewish), juiverie 
(Jewry, an antisemitic term), israélites (Israelites), cherche-midi (a prison where 
Dreyfus was jailed), Ile-du-Diable (the island where Dreyfus was sent into exile), 
jugement (judgment), syndicat (syndicate, a common term in antisemitic dis-
course), espion (spy), espionnage (espionage), as well as the names of key actors 
of the Aﬀair.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380914Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

1899,  with  a  sharp  increase  from  January  1898  onwards  (Appendix 
Fig. A.3).27

In Appendix Table A.22, we explore the role of the press in explain-
ing the excess returns from Tables 3 and 6. We report estimates from 
the following equation:

𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖 ×𝑀𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒

(𝑡−1) + 𝛿𝑖 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝛿𝑠𝑚 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(3)

where 𝑀𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒
(𝑡−1) is the number of paragraphs dedicated to 
the  Dreyfus  Aﬀair  on  day  (𝑡 − 1) across  all  newspapers  in  our  data. 
All other variables are deﬁned as in equation (2). The main eﬀect of 
(𝑡−1) is absorbed by the day ﬁxed eﬀects, 𝛿𝑡. We also 
𝑀𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒
disentangle the eﬀects of pro-Dreyfus and anti-Dreyfus coverage by in-
teracting 𝐽 𝑒𝑤𝑖𝑠ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖 separately with coverage by pro-Dreyfus 
newspapers (Le Siècle and L’Aurore) and coverage by anti-Dreyfus news-
papers  (La  Croix,  Le  Petit  Journal and  La  Libre  Parole).  In  all  these 
speciﬁcations, standard errors are two-way clustered by ﬁrm 𝑖 and by 
day 𝑡 since 𝑀𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑎𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒
(𝑡−1) takes the same value for all ﬁrms on a 
given day.

Appendix Table A.22 provides suggestive evidence that media cov-
erage of the Aﬀair aﬀected investors’ perceptions of ﬁrms with Jewish 
board members and, in doing so, contributed to the increase in stock 
returns experienced by these ﬁrms after J’Accuse!. Panel (a) looks at 
the  fraction  of  Jewish  board  members,  and  panel  (b)  looks  at  ﬁrms 
with a Jewish CEO. Columns 1 and 3 show a positive and signiﬁcant 
association between stock returns and the interaction of our two mea-
sures of Jewish connections with total media coverage of the Dreyfus 
Aﬀair on the previous day. In columns 2 and 4, we disaggregate this 
analysis by the type of coverage—Dreyfusard (L’Aurore and Le Siècle) 
and anti-Dreyfusard (La Croix, Le Petit Journal and La Libre Parole). The 
estimates in these columns suggest that the positive eﬀect of media cov-
erage is driven by Dreyfusard reporting by newspapers such as L’Aurore
and  Le  Siècle.  Anti-Dreyfusard  coverage  by  La  Croix,  Le  Petit  Journal
and La Libre Parole has the opposite eﬀect. The coeﬃcients associated 
with Dreyfusard and anti-Dreyfusard coverage are signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent from each other in panel (b) of column 4.

Overall, Appendix Table A.22 shows that the newspaper press likely 
played an important role in bringing about the excess returns of Jewish-
connected stocks after J’Accuse!. In the following section, we hypoth-
esize  that  this  media  coverage  contributed  to  debiasing  antisemitic 
investors, thereby increasing demand for Jewish-connected stocks and 
enabling arbitrage by all investors.

6.3.  Model: antisemitic traders with incorrect, noisy beliefs

Our results thus far can be summarized as follows. On the one hand, 
major episodes of the Dreyfus Aﬀair had sizable impacts on the stock 
returns of ﬁrms with Jewish board members in the short run. These 
impacts are negative around Dreyfus’ degradation in 1895, the peak 
of France’s antisemitic outburst, and positive around events leading to 
Dreyfus’ rehabilitation. On the other hand, the same ﬁrms experienced 
consistently higher returns after the publication of J’Accuse!, the start-
ing point of a media campaign denouncing the antisemitic conspiracy 
against  Dreyfus.  This  was  not  accompanied  by  a  rise  in  actual  prof-
itability, as measured by dividends. Firms that were not at risk of an 
antisemitic backlash because they operated in foreign territories also 
experienced this increase in returns.

These checks notwithstanding, it is possible that investors still ex-
pected that the ebbs and ﬂows of the Dreyfus Aﬀair would aﬀect the 
performance of Jewish-connected ﬁrms, in a way that cannot be ob-
served in the data. While acknowledging this potential mechanism, in 
this section we propose a complementary interpretation focusing on the 
existence of antisemitic investors biased against Jewish stocks. This in-
terpretation builds on the large historical record indicating the ubiquity 
of antisemitic sentiment in late 19th century France. At the onset of the 
Aﬀair, antisemitic shocks among these investors produced short-lived 
abnormal returns for Jewish-connected ﬁrms. “J’Accuse”, on the other 
hand,  increased  perceived  risk  but  reduced  antisemitic  biases  in  the 
long run. The media campaign that followed it made these biases more 
salient and encouraged some investors to engage in arbitrage.

We illustrate this interpretation with a conceptual framework ex-
panding on De Long et al. (1990)’s seminal model of noise traders. We 
closely follow the minimal setting in De Long et al. (1990), but we in-
troduce two types of risky assets, and we conceptualize noise traders 
as biased investors who discriminate against Jewish-connected stocks. 
This  section  outlines  the  main  takeaways  from  the  model  while  Ap-
pendix B presents the formal derivations.

Model As in De Long et al. (1990), young agents in a two-period over-
lapping generations model choose an investment portfolio in the ﬁrst 
period, only to sell it to consume when old in the second period. Each 
agent maximizes a CARA utility function, 𝑈
, where 𝛾 is the 
coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion and 𝑤 is the expected ﬁnal wealth. 
Here, agents can hold two types of risky assets: a representative stock 
of Jewish ﬁrms 𝐽 and one of non-Jewish ﬁrms 𝑁 . Both stocks and the 
riskless asset pay the same ﬁxed dividend 𝑟 in the second period. All 
investors hold correct beliefs over the riskless rate 𝑟, but their beliefs 
diﬀer for the other two.

𝑑𝑒𝑓
≡ −𝑒−2𝛾𝑤

Demand for stocks emanates from two types of investors: neutral 
investors with unbiased beliefs, and antisemitic investors. Antisemitic 
traders, representing a share 𝜇 of the population, hold a bias 𝜌𝑁
𝑡 on the 
price 𝑝𝑁
𝑡 of Jewish stocks:
(

𝑡 on the price 𝑝𝐽

)

𝑡 of non-Jewish stocks and 𝜌𝐽
(
𝑝𝑁
𝑡
𝑝𝐽
𝑡

𝑑𝑒𝑓
≡

)

𝜌𝑁
𝑡
𝜌𝐽
𝑡
)

∼  (𝝆∗, 𝚺𝜌) ,

𝐩𝑡 =

, 𝝆𝑡
(

𝑑𝑒𝑓
≡

with 𝝆∗

𝜌∗𝑁
𝜌∗𝐽

𝑑𝑒𝑓
≡

, 𝚺𝜌

where the average long-term biases 𝜌∗𝐽
are respectively neg-
ative and positive, and 𝚺𝜌 denotes the variance-covariance matrix be-
tween the antisemitic investors’ two biases.28 The model is then solved 
recursively  by  maximizing  each  type  of  investors’  utility  in  a  steady 
state equilibrium (see Appendix B).

Under  these  assumptions,  the  main  asset  pricing  equation  in  the 
model (equation (𝐏)) shows that stock prices ﬂuctuate as a result of 
short-term  shocks,  long-term  biases  in  antisemitic  beliefs,  and  anti-
semitic trader risk:

𝜇
𝑟

𝚺𝜌𝟏.

𝝆∗ −

𝐩𝑡 = 𝟏 +

𝜇
1 + 𝑟 (𝝆𝑡 − 𝝆∗) +

2𝛾𝜇2
𝑟(1 + 𝑟)2
Since earnings are normalized to 1, asset prices deviate from fun-
damentals by a term dependent on the short-term shock in antisemitic 
investors’ beliefs (𝝆𝑡 − 𝝆∗), a term capturing their long-term biases (𝝆∗), 
and the last term that captures the eﬀect of the presence of antisemitic 
investors among risk-averse investors. Since 𝜌∗𝐽 < 0 and 𝜌∗𝑁 > 0, Jew-
ish stocks are underpriced relative to other stocks. In addition, because 

(𝐏)

[

𝜎𝑁2
𝜌
𝜎𝑁𝐽
𝜌

]

𝜎𝑁𝐽
𝜌
𝜎𝐽 2
𝜌
and 𝜌∗𝑁

27 In addition to the spike around J’Accuse!, the ﬁgure shows a blip in coverage 
in December 1897. We attribute this to the eﬀorts of two individuals, Emile 
Zola and the politician Auguste Scheurer-Kestner, to denounce the conspiracy 
against Dreyfus. Since these eﬀorts really came to fruition with J’Accuse!, we 
use the latter date as the turning point in our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences. All our 
estimates are robust to using December 1897 instead of January 1898 as the 
turning point. .

28 While  not  needed  to  deliver  the  model’s  key  insights,  the  positive  bias 
towards non-Jewish stocks intuitively ensures that antisemitic investors can sur-
vive in the long run. Note however that the fraction of antisemitic traders is 
ﬁxed in this setup. See De Long et al. (1991) and Palomino (1996) for further 
theoretical examination of the long-run survival of noise traders with biased 
beliefs.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380915Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

.

𝜌

of the last term in (𝐏), uncertainty surrounding the behavior of anti-
semitic traders drives all asset prices downward and limits arbitrage 
opportunities  for  all  agents.  Jewish  stocks  are  more  aﬀected  by  the 
uncertainty eﬀect if there is more uncertainty regarding antisemitic be-
liefs, namely 𝜎𝐽 2

𝜌 > 𝜎𝑁2

Our main results can be interpreted in light of this model. Salient, 
exogenous  outbursts  of  antisemitism  trigger  idiosyncratic  shocks  on 
antisemitic  biases,  i.e.,  changes  in  𝜌𝐽
that  only  last  as  long  as  each 
𝑡
event’s saliency. Thus, episodes at the onset of the Aﬀair, such as Drey-
fus’ degradation, produced short-lived negative CARs among Jewish-
connected ﬁrms, whereas positive news in later stages, e.g., Dreyfus’ 
pardon, had similarly short-lived but opposite eﬀects.

Fundamentally diﬀerent from earlier events that pushed public opin-
ion unequivocally against Dreyfus, the publication of J’Accuse! rattled 
and polarized beliefs in the French society, and entailed two mecha-
nisms that aﬀected asset prices. Akin to a shock on the variances of 
antisemitic investors’ biases, J’Accuse! increased the volatility of Jew-
ish stocks (in 𝜎𝐽 2
𝜌 ), which depressed their stock prices by the last term 
of equation (𝐏). This explains the large dip right after J’Accuse!, as seen 
in Fig. 1. Following J’Accuse!, however, the media campaign started to 
gradually reduce inherent antisemitic biases in 𝜌∗𝐽
, causing an appre-
ciation of Jewish stocks relative to non-Jewish ones. In the long run, 
Dreyfus’ rehabilitation also reduced the uncertainty about antisemitic 
beliefs, i.e., lowering 𝜎𝐽 2
𝜌 , further contributing to improve the relative 
prices of Jewish stocks.

Comparison with discrimination in the labor market The model delivers 
familiar insights when compared to Becker’s (1957) seminal analysis of 
discrimination in labor markets, in the sense that discrimination creates 
rents that can be exploited at the expense of discriminating agents. In 
both markets, the market price of the minority factor is depressed due 
to discriminatory biases, and unbiased investors can arbitrage the price 
gap to some extent.

However, given the emphasis on discrimination in ﬁnancial mar-
kets, our model diﬀers from the Beckerian framework in its emphasis 
on the importance of risk. Because of risk aversion, every investor in 
our model, from the most to the least antisemitic, generically chooses 
to buy or sell both Jewish and non-Jewish stocks—unlike employers in 
the labor market, investors can buy or sell any quantity of stocks. As a 
result, any change in the distribution of antisemitic biases induces all 
investors to re-optimize their portfolios, which eventually aﬀects equi-
librium prices. These insights are markedly diﬀerent from those drawn 
from the labor market case, in which the most discriminating employ-
ers do not hire any minority workers, and only the marginal employers’ 
bias matters for marketwide discrimination (Heckman, 1998; Charles 
and Guryan, 2008; Lang and Lehmann, 2012).29

The implication that every investor is aﬀected by changes in the 
distribution of biases raises the perennial question whether biased in-
vestors will be driven out of the market in the long run, a prediction 
originating  from  Becker’s  model  and  emphasized  by  Arrow  (1972). 
While subsequent work on labor market discrimination has shown sev-
eral reasons why one need not expect competition to drive out discrim-
ination in the long run, such as imperfect information in job search 
(Black,  1995),  rigidity  of  wage  posting  (Lang  et  al.,  2005),  and  dis-
crimination seen as favoritism (Goldberg, 1982), our model provides 
a diﬀerent mechanism to explain the persistence of discrimination. Bi-
ased agents in our model prefer to invest more in the stocks for which 
they hold excessively optimistic valuations. Since all stocks are under-
priced because of the volatility of biases (the last term in equation (𝐏)), 

29 The segregation of minority workers across ﬁrms is a strong theme in Beck-
er’s original model, even if it does not predict perfect segregation, and a key 
result in the following theoretical literature on taste-based discrimination since 
Arrow (1972). When the second moment of payoﬀs becomes important, as in 
our model of discrimination in the ﬁnancial market, segregation is no longer a 
generic possibility.

this behavior leads to stronger returns for biased agents, even though 
it exposes them to higher risks than they expect. Under certain general 
conditions, such excess returns oﬀset the excess losses they make from 
underinvesting  in  the  discriminated  stocks.  Overall,  biased  investors 
may earn higher expected net returns than unbiased ones, and survive 
in the long run—Appendix B.2 elaborates on this possibility. This mech-
anism builds on De Long et al.’s (1990) insights on the role of noise 
traders and limited arbitrage in ﬁnancial markets, and diﬀers funda-
mentally from existing analyses of taste-based discrimination in labor 
markets.

Overall,  our  model  highlights  how  changes  in  the  distribution  of 
biases allow investors to capture rents from discrimination by betting 
more on Jewish ﬁrms. However, this arbitrage is neither riskless nor 
instantaneous in a world of risk-averse investors facing uncertain biases.

7.  Conclusion

Firms with Jewish board members experienced substantial ﬁnancial 
unrest  during  the  Dreyfus  Aﬀair,  a  major  societal  crisis  in  late  19th 
century France and a milestone in the global history of antisemitism. 
The Aﬀair ﬁrst prompted an outburst of antisemitism, then polarized 
French society after evidence about the miscarriage of justice began to 
emerge. While revelations about the Dreyfus case exposed the deep en-
trenchment of antisemitism in French society, and initially led to small 
decline in the performance of Jewish-connected ﬁrms, Dreyfus’ rehabil-
itation eventually led to its demise as a broad-based ideology. We show 
that the stocks of ﬁrms with Jewish connections yielded excess returns 
during this rehabilitation campaign. As a potential interpretation, we 
suggest that shifting attitudes in society after J’Accuse! encouraged ar-
bitrage and enabled some investors to capture excess returns.

Our conceptual framework illustrates how two competing forces af-
fect assets associated with a minority group in times when social norms 
towards this group are rapidly changing. In the case of the Dreyfus Af-
fair, revelations about the miscarriage of justice in the later stages of the 
Aﬀair may have reduced antisemitic sentiment among some investors 
and encouraged arbitrage, but the risk and volatility associated with the 
beliefs of antisemitic investors may have simultaneously deterred and 
slowed down such arbitrage. The combined eﬀect of these forces led to a 
gradual appreciation of the market valuation of Jewish-connected ﬁrms, 
after the initial decline. These results highlight the essential role of risk 
and risk-aversion in the persistence of discrimination in all markets. 
While arbitrage against discriminators can allow market participants to 
earn excess returns, the uncertainty surrounding discriminatory beliefs 
can limit the extent of arbitrage in practice and allow discrimination to 
survive in the long run.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Quoc-Anh Do: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Roberto Galbiati: Writing 
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Supervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodol-
ogy,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisition,  Formal  analysis,  Data  cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Benjamin Marx: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Soft-
ware,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation, 
Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Miguel A. Ortiz Serrano: Writing – review & editing, Writing – origi-
nal draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, 
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisi-
tion, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380916Q.-A. Do, R. Galbiati, B. Marx et al.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors hereby declare that they have no relevant or material 

ﬁnancial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

Data availability

The  codes  and  data  of  the  article  can  be  found  at  https://data .

mendeley .com /datasets /nkk2cyw4f6 /2.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103809.

References

Adida, C.L., Lo, A., Platas, M.R., 2018. Perspective taking can promote short-term inclu-
sionary behavior toward Syrian refugees. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 9521–9526.

Arendt, H., 1951. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Meridian Books.
Arkhangelsky, D., Athey, S., Hirshberg, D.A., Imbens, G.W., Wager, S., 2021. Synthetic 

Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences. Am. Econ. Rev. 111, 4088–4118.

Arrow, K., 1972. Some mathematical models of race in the labor market. In: Pascal, A. 
(Ed.), Racial Discrimination in Economic Life. Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.
Barrera, O., Guriev, S., Henry, E., Zhuravskaya, E., 2020. Facts, alternative facts, and fact 

checking in times of post-truth politics. J. Public Econ. 182.

Beaman, L., Duﬂo, E., Pande, R., Topalova, P., 2012. Female leadership raises aspira-
tions and educational attainment for girls: a policy experiment in India. Science 335, 
582–586.

Becker, G., 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.
Becker, S.O., Pascali, L., 2019. Religion, division of labor, and conﬂict: Anti-semitism in 

Germany over 600 years. Am. Econ. Rev. 109, 1764–1804.

Begley, L., 2009. Why the Dreyfus Aﬀair Matters. Yale University Press.
Bennedsen, M., Zeume, S., 2017. Corporate tax havens and transparency. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 31, 1222–1264.

Bertrand, M., Duﬂo, E., 2016. Field Experiments on Discrimination. NBER Working Papers 

22014. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Black, D.A., 1995. Discrimination in an equilibrium search model. J. Labor Econ. 13, 

309–334.

Bohren, J.A., Imas, A., Rosenberg, M., 2019. The dynamics of discrimination: Theory and 

evidence. Am. Econ. Rev. 109, 3395–3436.

Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.L., MacKinlay, A.C., 1997. The Econometrics of Financial Markets. 

Princeton University Press.

Charles, K., Guryan, J., 2008. Prejudice and wages: an empirical assessment of Becker’s 

the economics of discrimination. J. Polit. Econ. 116, 773–809.

Cohn, N., 1967. Histoire d’un mythe: La “conspiration” juive et les protocoles des sages 

de Sion. Gallimard.

D’Acunto, F., Prokopczuk, M., Weber, M., 2018. Historical antisemitism, ethnic special-

ization, and ﬁnancial development. Rev. Econ. Stud. 86, 1170–1206.

De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1990. Noise trader risk in 

ﬁnancial markets. J. Polit. Econ. 98, 703–738.

De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1991. The survival of noise 

traders in ﬁnancial markets. J. Bus., 1–19.

Doerr, S., Gissler, S., Peydró, J.-L., Voth, H.-J., 2019. From ﬁnance to fascism: the real 

eﬀect of Germany’s 1931 banking crisis. CEPR Discussion Paper DP12806.

Ferguson, T., Voth, H.-J., 2008. Betting on Hitler—the value of political connections in 

Nazi Germany. Q. J. Econ. 123, 101–137.

Fisman, R., Hamao, Y., Wang, Y., 2014. Nationalism and economic exchange: Evidence 

from shocks to Sino-Japanese relations. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27, 2626–2660.

Goldberg, M.S., 1982. Discrimination, nepotism, and long-run wage diﬀerentials. Q. J. 

Econ. 97, 307–319.

1939), CNRS edition.

Grange, C., 2016. Une élite parisienne: les familles de la grande bourgeoisie juive (1870-

Grigorieﬀ, A., Roth, C., Ubfal, D., 2020. Does information change attitudes toward immi-

grants? Demography 57, 1117–1143.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., 2001. How distance, language, and culture inﬂuence stock-

holdings and trades. J. Finance 56, 1053–1073.

Grosfeld, I., Sakalli, S., Zhuravskaya, E., 2019. Middleman minorities and ethnic violence: 

anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87, 289–342.

Hautcoeur, P.-C., Riva, A., 2011. The Paris ﬁnancial market in the 19th century: An eﬃ-

cient multi-polar organization? PSE Working Paper no. 2007-31.

Hautcoeur, P.-C., Rezaee, A., Riva, A., 2022. Competition between securities markets: 
Stock exchange industry regulation in the Paris ﬁnancial center at the turn of the 
twentieth century. Cliometrica.

Heckman, J., 1998. Detecting discrimination. J. Econ. Perspect. 12, 101–116.
Hellerstein, J.K., Neumark, D., Troske, K., 2002. Market forces and sex discrimination. J. 

Hum. Resour. 37, 353–380.

Paper.

J. Financ. Econ. 93, 15–36.

Econ. 103, 1–19.

Hjort, J., Song, C., Yenkey, C., 2019. Ethnic investing and the value of ﬁrms. Working 

Hong, H., Kacperczyk, M., 2009. The price of sin: The eﬀects of social norms on markets. 

Hong, H., Kostovetsky, L., 2012. Red and blue investing: Values and ﬁnance. J. Financ. 

Huber,  K.,  Lindenthal,  V.,  Waldinger,  F.,  2021.  Discrimination,  managers,  and  ﬁrm 
performance: evidence from “aryanizations” in Nazi Germany. J. Polit. Econ. 129, 
2455–2503.

Huberman, G., Regev, T., 2001. Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer: A nonevent 

that made stock prices soar. J. Finance 56, 387–396.

Hutton, I., Jiang, D., Kumar, A., 2014. Corporate policies of Republican managers. J. 

Financ. Quant. Anal. 49, 1279–1310.

Iacus, S.M., King, G., Porro, G., 2011. Multivariate matching methods that are monotonic 

imbalance bounding. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 106, 345–361.

Iacus, S.M., King, G., Porro, G., 2012. Causal inference without balance checking: Coars-

ened Exact Matching. Polit. Anal. 20, 1–24.

Jiang, D., Kumar, A., Law, K.K., 2016. Political contributions and analyst behavior. Rev. 

Acc. Stud. 21, 37–88.

Joly,  L.,  2007.  Antisémites  et  antisémitisme  à  la  chambre  des  députés  sous  la  iiie 

république. Rev. Hist. Mod. Contemp. 54, 63–90.

Jung, J., Kumar, A., Lim, S.S., Yoo, C.-Y., 2019. An analyst by any other surname: surname 
favorability and market reaction to analyst forecasts. J. Account. Econ. 67, 306–335.
Kawaguchi, D., 2007. A market test for sex discrimination: Evidence from Japanese ﬁrm-

level panel data. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 25, 441–460.

Kumar, A., Niessen-Ruenzi, A., Spalt, O.G., 2015. What’s in a name? Mutual fund ﬂows 
when managers have foreign-sounding names. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28, 2281–2321.

Lagneau-Ymonet, P., Riva, A., 2012. Histoire de la Boruse. La Decouverte.
Landes, D.S., 1949. French entrepreneurship and industrial growth in the nineteenth cen-

Lang, K., Lehmann, J.-Y.K., 2012. Racial discrimination in the labor market: Theory and 

tury. J. Econ. Hist. 9, 45–61.

empirics. J. Econ. Lit. 50, 959–1006.

Lang, K., Manove, M., Dickens, W.T., 2005. Racial discrimination in labor markets with 

posted wage oﬀers. Am. Econ. Rev. 95, 1327–1340.

Lazare, B., 1894. L’antisémitisme: son histoire et ses causes, Paris. In: Chailley, Léon (Ed.).
Levaillant, I., 1907. La Genèse de l’antisémitisme sous la troisième République. Con-
férence faite à la société des études juives le 14 avril 1907. Rev. Étud. Juives 53, 
76–100.

Lévy, P., 1960. Les Noms des Israelites en France. Histoire et dictionnaire. Presses Uni-

versitaires de France, Paris.

Miquel, P., 2003. L’aﬀaire Dreyfus. Presses Universaires de France.
Murphy, A.E., 2007. Corporate ownership in France: the importance of history. In: Morck, 
R.K. (Ed.), A History of Corporate Governance Around the World. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Niessen-Ruenzi, A., Ruenzi, S., 2019. Sex matters: Gender bias in the mutual fund indus-

try. Manag. Sci. 65, 3001–3025.

O’Donovan, J., Wagner, H.F., Zeume, S., 2019. The value of oﬀshore secrets: Evidence 

from the Panama papers. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 4117–4155.

Ortiz-Serrano, M.Á., 2018. Political connections and stock returns: Evidence from the 

boulangist campaign, 1888–1889. Financ. Hist. Rev. 25, 323–356.

Pager, D., 2016. Are ﬁrms that discriminate more likely to go out of business? Sociol. 

Palomino, F., 1996. Noise trading in small markets. J. Finance 51, 1537–1550.
Sorlin, P., 1967. “La Croix” et les Juifs (1880-1899): contribution à l’histoire de l’an-

tisémitisme contemporain. Grasset, Paris.

Tillier, B., 1997. La Républicature: La caricature politique en France, 1870-1914. CNRS 

Sci. 3, 849–859.

Editions, Paris.

Voigtländer, N., Voth, H.-J., 2012. Persecution perpetuated: the medieval origins of anti-

semitic violence in Nazi Germany. Q. J. Econ. 127, 1339–1392.

Weber, A., Zulehner, C., 2014. Competition and gender prejudice: Are discriminatory 

employers doomed to fail? J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 12, 492–521.

Whyte, G.R., 2005. The Dreyfus Aﬀair: A Chronological History. Palgrave MacMillan.
Wilson, S., 2007. Ideology and Experience: Anti-Semitism in France at the Time of the 

Dreyfus Aﬀair. Liverpool University Press.

Wolfers, J., 2006. Diagnosing discrimination: stock returns and ceo gender. J. Eur. Econ. 

Assoc. 4, 531–541.

JournalofFinancialEconomics154(2024)10380917