Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Data and welfare in credit markets(cid:73)
Mark Jansen a, Fabian Nagel b, Constantine Yannelis c
a University of Utah, Eccles School of Business, United States of America
b Stanford University, Stanford Graduate School of Business, United States of America
c University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
d University of Chicago Booth School of Business, United States of America

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

, Anthony Lee Zhang d

,∗

We show how to measure the welfare effects arising from increased data availability. When lenders have more 
data on prospective borrower costs, they can charge prices that are more aligned with these costs. This increases 
total social welfare and transfers surplus across borrower types. We show that under certain assumptions 
the magnitudes of these welfare changes can be estimated using only quantity and price data. Applying our 
methodology to bankruptcy flag removal, we find that in a counterfactual world where bankruptcy flags are 
never removed from credit reports, previously-bankrupt borrowers’ surplus decreases substantially, whereas 
efficiency increases only modestly.

Dataset link: Data and Welfare in Credit Marke
ts (Original data)

JEL classification:
D14
G21
G28

Keywords:
Credit markets
Data availability
Welfare
Price discrimination

1. Introduction

The past half century saw an explosion of data that lenders can 
use to screen and score potential borrowers. In principle, increasing 
data availability should allow lenders to charge interest rates that are 
more closely aligned with borrowers’ true risks, thereby improving the 
efficiency of credit allocation and raising social welfare. But data may 
also lead to changes in interest rates, shifting the distribution of social 
surplus between lenders and borrowers of different risk levels. How can 
we quantify the effects of increased data availability on social welfare 

and the distribution of surplus between lenders and different kinds of 
borrowers?

This paper develops a tractable framework for measuring the wel-
fare  effects  of  increased  data  availability,  viewing  changes  in  data 
access as enabling a form of third-degree price discrimination. In an em-
pirical application to consumer lending markets, we show that keeping 
prior bankruptcy information on consumer credit reports would sub-
stantially reduce the social surplus of previously-bankrupt borrowers 
while only slightly increasing allocative efficiency in credit markets.

(cid:73)

We thank the editor, Toni Whited, for helpful comments. We are grateful to Jacelly Cespedes, Tony Cookson, Eduardo Davila, Anthony DeFusco, Andreas 
Fuster, Andra Ghent, Zhiguo He, Kyle Herkenhoff, Ray Kluender, Christian Leuz, Alberto Manconi, Sanjog Misra, Matt Notowidigdo, Nicola Pavanini, Nathan 
Seegert, Alp Simsek, Huan Tang, Ansgar Walther, Jialan Wang, Wenyu Wang, Laura Veldkamp, Alexander Zentefis, and Wanran Zhao for thoughtful discussions 
and comments, as well as seminar participants at University of Chicago, Yale School of Management, the NYU Stern School of Business, London Business School, 
Cambridge University Judge School of Business, the Duke Fuqua School of Business, the Rice Jones School of Business, HEC Paris, INSEAD, Washington University 
in St. Louis, the University of Kentucky Gatton College of Business, the Swiss Finance Institute, the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne, the Stockholm 
School of Economics, the Berkeley Conference on Consumer Law, Durham University Business School, SAIF, HEC Lausanne, UW Seattle, FIRS, the London Business 
School Summer Finance Symposium, the Swiss Society for Financial Market Research Conference, the Frankfurt Conference on Regulating Financial Markets, the 
Young Scholars in Finance Consortium, the Midwest Finance Association Conference, the Minnesota Corporate Finance Conference, and the NBER Summer 
Institute. Greg Tracey provided superb research assistance. We are especially grateful for the comments of an anonymous referee, which greatly improved the 
paper. Calculated (or derived) based on credit data provided by TransUnion, a global information solutions company, through a relationship with the Kilts Center 
for Marketing at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. TransUnion (the data provider) has the right to review the research before dissemination to 
ensure that it accurately describes TransUnion data, does not disclose confidential information, and does not contain material it deems to be misleading or false 
regarding TransUnion, TransUnion’s partners, affiliates or customer base, or the consumer lending industry.

E-mail addresses:  mark.jansen@utah.edu (M. Jansen), nagel@stanford.edu (F. Nagel), cny21@cam.ac.uk (C. Yannelis), anthony.zhang@chicagobooth.edu 

∗ Corresponding author.

(A.L. Zhang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104171
Received 30 August 2023; Received in revised form 22 September 2025; Accepted 26 September 2025
Available online 16 October 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
M. Jansen et al.

Whether  lenders  should  be  permitted  to  leverage  granular  data 
has been central to policy debates.1 Recent policy decisions, such as 
the 2022 removal of medical debt collections under $500 from U.S. 
credit reports, highlight the tension between personalized pricing and 
redistribution. Laws such as the General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) in the EU and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) in the US 
aim to balance these tradeoffs by limiting the use of certain borrower 
data. For example, the European Data Protection Supervisor (2021) rec-
ommended allowing lenders to use some data for personalized pricing 
but ‘‘clearly delineating the categories and sources of personal data that 
may be used for the purpose of creditworthiness assessment ’’. Regulatory 
scrutiny  of  personalized  loan  pricing  has  intensified  as  banks  have 
increased their spending on IT and technology: this spending rose to 
$74 billion in 2022, an increase of 37% from 2017.

We develop a model to assess how data shapes welfare in credit 
markets,  where  competitive  lenders  serve  both  high-  and  low-cost 
borrowers. In the absence of data, lenders cannot distinguish high- 
and low-cost borrowers. Suppose, counterfactually, that data was avail-
able, and lenders could always distinguish high-cost consumers from 
low-cost consumers: how would this change each borrower group’s 
consumer surplus and total social welfare?

Since  consumer  loans  generally  involve  upfront  borrowing  and 
staggered repayment, following Marshall (1920) and Vives (1987), we 
think of consumption over future periods as a ‘‘large composite good’’ 
and approximate future-period utility as linear. Marshallian consumer 
surplus —the ‘‘area under the demand curve’’—is then exactly equal 
to  the  dollar  value  consumers  derive  from  borrowing.  This  allows 
us  to  define  surplus  in  consistent  dollarized  units  across  consumer 
groups with different default rates, providing a microfoundation for the 
classical ‘‘surplus trapezoid’’ diagrams in the consumer lending setting.
Data policy entails a tradeoff between efficiency and redistribution. 
Retaining data raises social welfare by improving credit allocation, but 
also transfers surplus from high-cost to low-cost borrowers. The welfare 
gains scale quadratically with data-induced price changes, whereas the 
redistribution effects scale linearly; thus, the transfer effects tend to 
dominate when data-induced price changes are small. Regulators may 
be  willing  to  limit  data  availability  in  settings  where  the  resulting 
cross-subsidies are deemed valuable enough to justify the efficiency 
losses.

If loan demand is approximately linear in payments, the welfare 
and transfer effects of data can be expressed as simple functions of 
observed loan prices and quantities, with and without data. We apply 
this finding in the context of consumer bankruptcy flag removal. Under 
the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), flags indicating the occurrence 
of consumer bankruptcy are removed after seven (ten) years after a 
Chapter 13 (Chapter 7) bankruptcy filing. We exploit within-consumer 
variation, comparing loan terms just before and after flag removal to es-
timate counterfactual outcomes for previously-bankrupt borrowers. For 
never-bankrupt borrowers, we back out counterfactual prices using the 
lenders’ zero-profit condition, and infer quantity changes by assuming 
equal demand elasticities across groups. With these price and quantity 
changes in hand, we can then calculate the welfare and redistribution 
effects under a policy that never removes bankruptcy flags.

Our empirical application studies the social welfare losses and trans-
fers induced by bankruptcy flag removal policy in the US auto lending 
market, using administrative data from TransUnion. A difference-in-
differences  design  shows  that  individuals  whose  flags  are  removed 
experience a 17-point increase in credit scores, a 22.6-basis-point re-
duction  in  interest  rates,  and  an  $18  increase  in  borrowing.  Using 

1 Lenders have screened borrowers based on informal data since antiq-
uity (Calomiris and Neal, 2013). Modern credit scoring systems emerged in 
1958 with Fair Isaac and Company (FICO), and expanded over subsequent 
decades.  The  introduction  of  machine  learning  techniques  and  alternative 
credit data, such as VantageScore, likely had significant welfare implications 
that our framework can help quantify.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

lenders’  zero-profit  condition  and  the  assumption  of  equal  demand 
elasticities, we back out the smaller price decrease and quantity in-
crease  that  never-bankrupt  individuals  would  counterfactually  face. 
Our estimates imply that, if flags were never removed, social welfare 
would increase modestly, by $598,000 a year in aggregate; however, 
roughly $19 million in borrower surplus each year would be transferred 
from the previously-bankrupt to the never-bankrupt. In other words, 
the counterfactual policy generates only about $0.03 in social surplus 
for every dollar redistributed between groups. Thus, while the current 
policy generates allocative inefficiencies, its welfare costs are fairly 
small relative to its redistributional effects.

Our baseline model is stylized and makes strong assumptions in 
some settings. In theoretical extensions, we discuss how our approach 
can be extended to incorporate forces such as imperfect competition, 
adverse selection, interest rate menus, and endogenous default. While 
we frame our results around the application to bankruptcy flag re-
moval, our methodology can be applied in any setting where lenders 
acquire pricing data which is informative about consumers’ default 
risks.

This paper joins together two literatures: work on data in financial 
markets  and  work  on  price-theoretic  approaches  to  study  markets. 
Theoretical work illustrating different channels through which data can 
affect lending market outcomes include Begenau et al. (2018), Ace-
moglu et al. (2022), Farboodi et al. (2019), Farboodi and Veldkamp 
(2020),  Jones  and  Tonetti  (2020),  He  et  al.  (2023),  and  Liu  et  al. 
(2023).2  Empirical  papers  on  data  include  Tang  (2019),  who  uses 
data from a Fintech to value privacy; Nelson (2025) and Blattner and 
Nelson (2021), who use structural models to analyze the efficiency and 
distributional consequences of information removal in the credit card 
market; and Fuster et al. (2022), who analyze the distributional effects 
of machine learning models in credit markets.

Our contribution to the data literature is to develop a price-theoretic
approach to quantify the welfare and transfer effects of data. In the 
baseline, we make a number of simplifying assumptions relative to 
purely theoretical and structural papers. The benefit of these simpli-
fications is that we attain sharp qualitative results about the effects 
of data in credit markets, and a simple ‘‘sufficient-statistics’’ approach 
to empirically estimate the effects of data. We show theoretically and 
empirically  that  –  somewhat  surprisingly  –  when  data  is  not  very 
informative about default rates, the transfer effects of data availability 
are large relative to the effects on aggregate welfare. We view our 
contribution as complementary to richer structural approaches, and 
we  discuss  in  extensions  and  appendices  the  extent  to  which  our 
methodology is robust to other theoretical channels we disregard in the 
baseline.

Our price-theoretic approach builds classical ideas about consumer 
and producer surplus and deadweight loss triangles (Harberger, 1964), 

2 There is a large theoretical literature studying the welfare effects of data 
sharing policies in credit markets in particular. These papers largely emphasize 
different channels to our paper. Pagano and Jappelli (1993) analyze lenders’ 
incentives to share information, and how information sharing can alleviate 
adverse selection. Vercammen (1995), Padilla and Pagano (2000), and Elul 
and Gottardi (2015) focus on how the threat of updating credit scores and 
thus interest rates dynamically affect borrowers’ default incentives. Kovbasyuk 
and Spagnolo (2024) and Blattner et al. (2022) apply Bayesian persuasion 
methods to analyze optimal information structures in credit markets, taking 
into account adverse selection and dynamically evolving consumer types. Chat-
terjee et al. (2023) emphasize how credit scores are a substitute for dynamic 
reputation in incentivizing repayment. Relative to the literature, our paper 
emphasizes exogenous heterogeneity in the willingness to pay for credit; this 
is key to creating allocative efficiency gains from information revelation, which 
is a core focus of our analysis. In the baseline model, we abstract away from 
forces such as dynamic types, reputation, moral hazard and adverse selection, 
though  we  discuss  the  effects  of  many  of  these  effects  in  extensions  and 
appendices.

2 

M. Jansen et al.

brought into the context of insurance markets by Einav et al. (2010), 
and extended to credit markets in DeFusco et al. (2022). Our paper 
applies this price-theoretic approach to data addition or removal in 
credit markets, showing how price and quantity information are suffi-
cient to measure data-induced changes in surplus and welfare. DeFusco 
et al. (2022) focuses on adverse selection – costs depending on prices 
– but does not discuss data policy. In the baseline, we assume away 
adverse selection but address data policy with adverse selection briefly 
in an extension of the model. Beyond the different focus, our paper also 
uses a different microfoundation from DeFusco et al. (2022), allowing 
us to show that the price-theoretic approach can still be used when 
incorporating realistic model features such as multiple periods, costly 
default, arbitrary lender cost structures, and extensive and intensive 
margins of loan demand. Another closely related paper is Liberman 
et al. (2019), who analyze the effect of information removal in Chile. 
Applying a similar price-theoretic methodology based on Einav et al. 
(2010), Liberman et al. (2019) estimate the surplus effects of removing 
default  data  from  credit  reports.  Our  analysis  is  complementary  to 
that of Liberman et al. (2019) We build a microfounded model and 
illustrate the assumptions under which demand and supply curves can 
be  interpreted  in  terms  of  consumer  utility  in  the  setting  of  credit 
markets. We simplify by assuming away adverse selection in the base-
line model. This delivers a sharper qualitative insight: data is always 
welfare-improving in our setting, since it eliminates deadweight loss 
triangles for both groups, though the welfare effects of data addition 
may be small relative to the transfer effects. This helps to rationalize the 
finding of Liberman et al. (2019) that, under a variety of assumptions, 
data removal seems to reduce social surplus. In terms of data, our 
setting has the advantage that we observe prices, whereas Liberman 
et al. (2019) infer prices from observed default rates.

This paper is also related to papers around the classic idea that 
third-degree price discrimination has ambiguous effects on social wel-
fare (Schmalensee, 1981; Varian, 1985, 1989). A related recent paper 
is Chen and Schwartz (2015), who theoretically analyze price discrimi-
nation for a monopolist with information about costs, and also find that 
differential pricing tends to improve pricing more generally than in the 
classic case.

More broadly, this paper also contributes to an empirical litera-
ture on the consequences of bankruptcy, and specifically bankruptcy 
flag  removal.  Musto  (2004)  is  the  first  paper  to  study  the  empir-
ical  effects  of  flag  removal,  studying  the  impact  on  credit  scores 
and default. Several studies, including Herkenhoff et al. (2021), Bos 
et  al.  (2018),  Dobbie  et  al.  (2020),  and  Gross  et  al.  (2020),  study 
how bankruptcy flag removal affects credit access, employment, en-
trepreneurship, consumption, and other outcomes. A recent literature 
on household bankruptcy also links theory to empirics. Gross et al. 
(2021) study the economic consequences of bankruptcy, Indarte (2023) 
studies moral hazard and liquidity in bankruptcy, Argyle et al. (2022) 
study disparities, and Dávila (2020) provides a theoretical framework 
for optimal bankruptcy exemptions. Relative to this literature, we are 
the first to quantify the relative magnitudes of the welfare and transfer 
effects of flag removal, showing that the allocative efficiency losses 
from flag removal are small relative to the induced transfers, in the 
context of auto lending.

2. Model

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

There are two groups of consumers – high-cost and low-cost – who 
borrow to finance a one-time expenditure in period 𝑡 = 0, paying back 
their loans over periods 𝑡 = 1 … 𝑇 . High-cost consumers (𝐻) default on 
loans at the higher rate 𝛿𝐻 . Low-cost consumers (𝐿) default on loans 
at the lower rate 𝛿𝐿. Consumers borrow from a set of competitive firms 
who post identical interest rates.

In a world without data, lenders cannot distinguish 𝐻 and 𝐿 con-
sumers,  and  thus  are  constrained  to  set  equal  prices  for  these  two 
groups. Our goal is to estimate how market outcomes would change in a 
counterfactual world where data is available, so lenders can distinguish 
𝐻 and 𝐿 consumers and set separate prices for the two groups. Since 
most  of  our  results  apply  symmetrically  across  groups,  rather  than 
introducing a group subscript, we will occasionally state results for the 
𝐻 group, understanding that they apply analogously to the 𝐿 group.

2.1. Consumers

Consider first a single consumer 𝑖, who wishes to finance a one-time 
expenditure in period 𝑡 = 0; in our setting, for example a large durable 
asset such as an auto purchase. The borrower’s utility is: 

+

)

(𝑐𝑖,0
𝑢𝑖,0
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
𝑃 𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒

𝑇
∑

)

𝛽𝑡 (1 − 𝛿)𝑡 𝑢 (𝑐𝑖,𝑡
𝑡=1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑃 𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡

+

𝑇
∑

𝑇
∑

(1 − 𝛿)𝑡−1 𝛿

𝛽 ̃𝑡𝑢 (𝑐𝐷
𝑡=1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐷𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡

̃𝑡=𝑡

)

(1)

(𝑐𝑖,0

) from period-0 
In words, the consumer gets concave utility 𝑢𝑖,0
consumption. The consumer defaults at exogenous rate 𝛿 each future 
period 𝑡 = 1 … 𝑇 , which is 𝛿𝐻  for high-cost consumers and 𝛿𝐿 < 𝛿𝐻
for low-cost consumers. With probability (1 − 𝛿)𝑡, the consumer reaches 
period  𝑡  without  defaulting,  consuming  𝑐𝑡  and  for  utility  𝛽𝑡𝑢 (𝑐𝑖,𝑡
)
. 
With probability (1 − 𝛿)𝑡−1 𝛿, she defaults in period 𝑡. Default may be 
harmful for future-period consumption, for example due to collateral 
repossession, or because the consumer has more difficulty borrowing in 
the future; we incorporate this by assuming that, after period-𝑡 default, 
the borrower consumes 𝑐𝐷 in each period 𝑡 through 𝑇 .

Loans are self-amortizing with fixed payments, so if the principal is 
𝐿 and the interest rate is 𝑟, the borrower pays 𝐿𝜙 (𝑟) each future period, 
where 𝜙 (𝑟) follows the amortization formula: 
𝜙 (𝑟) ≡ 𝑟 (1 + 𝑟)𝑇
(1 + 𝑟)𝑇 − 1

(2)

The function 𝜙 (𝑟), which is increasing in 𝑟, can thus be thought of as the 
dollar payment in each future period for each dollar borrowed. We will 
generally use 𝜙 (𝑟) instead of 𝑟 to measure prices; while the notation is 
slightly tedious, this facilitates interpretation of our estimates because 
dollars are a more intuitive measure of welfare than interest-rate points.
The borrower is endowed with wealth 𝑤𝑡 in period 𝑡, and is com-

pletely liquidity-constrained, so she consumes: 

𝑐𝑖,0 = 𝑤𝑖,0 + 𝐿𝑖, 𝑐𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 − 𝐿𝑖𝜙 (𝑟)

(3)

We simplify the general problem by approximating consumer utility in 
payment period 𝑡 = 1 … 𝑇  by a linear function: 
)
𝑢 (𝑐𝑖,𝑡

) (𝑐𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑤𝑖,𝑡

+ 𝑢′ (𝑤𝑖,𝑡

− 𝑢′ (𝑤𝑖,𝑡

≈ 𝑢 (𝑤𝑖,𝑡

= 𝑢 (𝑤𝑖,𝑡

) 𝐿𝜙 (𝑟)

(4)

)

)

)

This section formalizes how to quantify the efficiency and redis-
tributive  effects  of  data  in  credit  markets.  In  our  framework,  data 
enables a form of third-degree price discrimination based on consumers’ 
underlying costs. In the absence of data, lenders charge the same pool-
ing rate across consumers with different costs. The introduction of data 
allows lenders to align prices more closely with costs. The improved 
alignment enhances allocative efficiency by reducing underprovision 
and overprovision of credit, but also redistributes surplus across lenders 
and borrowers with different costs.

Combining (1), (3), and (4), we can thus write the borrower’s optimiza-
tion problem as:

𝑉 (𝑟) = max

𝐿𝑖

𝑢𝑖,0

(𝑤𝑖,0 + 𝐿𝑖

)

+

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛽𝑡 (1 − 𝛿)𝑡 [𝑢 (𝑤𝑖,𝑡

)

− 𝑢′ (𝑤𝑖,𝑡

]
) 𝐿𝑖𝜙 (𝑟)

+

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

(1 − 𝛿)𝑡−1 𝛿

𝑇
∑

̃𝑡=𝑡

𝛽 ̃𝑡𝑢 (𝑐𝐷

)

(5)

For technical convenience we assume there is an interest rate ̄𝑟 high 
enough that all consumers stop borrowing.

3 

M. Jansen et al.

Let 𝐿∗

𝑖 (𝑟) denote the solution to (5), as a function of 𝑟. Differentiat-

ing (5) using the envelope theorem, we have: 

𝑑𝑉
𝑑𝑟

= −

[ 𝑇
∑

𝛽𝑡 (1 − 𝛿)𝑡 𝑢′ (𝑤𝑖,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑈 𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡

𝑡=1

]
)

[

]

𝑑𝜙
𝑑𝑟

𝐿∗

𝑖 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑃 𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒

(6)

The  ‘‘payment  change’’  term  in  (6)  captures  how  an  increase  in  𝑟
increases payments in each future period 𝑡 = 1 … 𝑇 , and the ‘‘utility 
weight’’ term captures the sum of the discounted marginal utility in 
each future period 𝑡, multiplied by the probability (1 − 𝛿)𝑡 of reaching 
period 𝑡 without defaulting.

The linearity assumption in (4) makes the utility weight term in 
(6) constant, so changes in  𝑑𝑉
𝑑𝑟  are driven entirely by loan demand 
𝐿∗
𝑖 (𝑟). This makes the consumer’s preferences quasilinear in future-
period payments, eliminating income effects. Hicksian and Marshallian 
demand thus coincide, and compensating variation (CV), equivalent 
variation  (EV),  and  Marshallian  consumer  surplus  (CS)  are  always 
equal. In the general case, CS differs from CV or EV, but the differences 
tend to be small when price changes and income effects are small.3

The classical justification for quasilinear utility is that, if a good 
is ‘‘small’’ as a fraction of overall consumption, utility concavity for 
the remaining ‘‘composite good’’ can be approximately ignored (Mar-
shall, 1920; Vives, 1987). In our setting, loans reallocate consumption 
between a single present period and multiple future periods; our lin-
earity  assumption  similarly  ignores  concavity  over  the  ‘‘composite’’ 
future-period good.

We can define Marshallian consumer surplus for a single consumer 
simply as the integral over loan demand, dividing out the utility weight 
term in (6): 
̄𝑟

𝑑𝑟

(7)

𝐶𝑆𝑖 (𝑟) = ∫

𝑟

𝐿∗

𝑖 (𝑟)

𝑑𝜙
𝑑𝑟

An interpretation of 𝐶𝑆𝑖 (𝑟) is that, from (6), the consumer is indifferent 
between borrowing at 𝑟, and borrowing nothing and receiving 𝐶𝑆𝑖 (𝑟)
dollars in each future period conditional on not defaulting. Technically, 
this statement follows from the fact that 𝐶𝑆 is equal to compensating 
variation in quasilinear settings. To see this formally, note that we 
defined ̄𝑟 as a rate high enough that the consumer borrows nothing; 
the utility of borrowing at 𝑟 relative to not borrowing at all is thus: 

𝑉 (𝑟) − 𝑉 (̄𝑟) =

[ 𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛽𝑡 (1 − 𝛿)𝑡 𝑢′ (𝑤𝑖,𝑡

] [
)

̄𝑟

∫

𝑟

𝐿∗

𝑖 (𝑟)

]

𝑑𝑟

𝑑𝜙
𝑑𝑟

(8)

From (4), the RHS is exactly the borrower’s total utility gain from 
receiving a lump-sum of ∫ ̄𝑟
𝑟 𝐿∗
𝑑𝑟 dollars in each period 𝑡 = 1 … 𝑇 , 
conditional on not defaulting.

𝑖 (𝑟) 𝑑𝜙

𝑑𝑟

Expression (7) naturally suggests we can define total surplus across 

consumers in the 𝐻 group as: 
𝐶𝑆𝐻 (𝑟) ≡ ∑
𝑖∈𝐻
𝐻  is the finite set of high-cost consumers, and we use 𝛬𝐻 (𝑟)

Where 
to denote aggregate 𝐻 group loan demand: 

𝐶𝑆𝑖 (𝑟) = ∫
𝑟

𝑑𝜙 (̂𝑟)
𝑑 ̂𝑟

𝛬𝐻 (̂𝑟)

(9)

𝑑 ̂𝑟

̄𝑟

𝛬𝐻 (𝑟) =

∑

𝑖∈𝐻

𝐿𝑖 (𝑟)

(10)

The definitions for the 𝐿 group are analogous.

Expressions (7) and (9) measure consumers’ utility in the unintuitive 
units of dollars in each non-default future period. We thus normalize 
by  multiplying  by  the  expected  number  of  non-default  periods,  for 
example: 

̄𝑟

𝐷𝐶𝑆𝐻 (𝑟) = 𝜓𝐻 ∫
𝑟

𝛬𝐻 (̂𝑟)

𝑑𝜙 (̂𝑟)
𝑑 ̂𝑟

𝑑 ̂𝑟

(11)

3 See, for example, Willig (1976), Chipman and Moore (1980), Jehle and 

Reny (2011, pp. 179–183), and Mas-Colell et al. (1995, pp. 80–91). 

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

𝜓𝐻 =

(
1 − 𝛿𝐻

)

)𝑇

)

(

1 −

(
1 − 𝛿𝐻
𝛿𝐻

(12)

and analogously for the 𝐿 group. For example, if 𝐷𝐶𝑆𝐻  is $1 million, 
this implies that 𝐻 consumers would approximately require payments 
summing to $1 million to be willing to completely stop borrowing.4 
While the notation is slightly complex, (11) simply corresponds to the 
integral of loan quantity over changes in interest rates, multiplied by a 
constant adjustment factor 𝜓𝐻  which depends on default rates.

In our empirical application, we will measure changes in dollarized 
consumer surplus arising from an increase in interest rates from 𝑟 to ̃𝑟
as: 

𝐷𝐶𝑆𝐻 (̃𝑟) − 𝐷𝐶𝑆𝐻 (𝑟) = −𝜓𝐻 ∫
𝑟

𝛬𝐻 (̂𝑟)

̃𝑟

𝑑𝜙 (̂𝑟)
𝑑 ̂𝑟

𝑑 ̂𝑟

(13)

Expressions (11) and (13) have the simple ‘‘welfare trapezoid’’ interpre-
tation, shown in Fig.  1: consumer surplus is the trapezoid corresponding 
to the integral of demand quantity over prices. We thus fit into a recent 
literature applying ‘‘price-theoretic’’ concepts of money-metric surplus 
to credit markets (Einav et al., 2010; DeFusco et al., 2022).

2.2. Producers

Loans are produced by a group of competitive lenders. We assume 
that lending has constant marginal costs: within each group, there is 
some interest rate at which lenders make zero profits regardless of the 
amount they lend. This break-even interest rate is the higher rate 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
for the 𝐻 group, and the lower rate 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for the 𝐿 group. Our baseline 
exercise requires that lenders’ marginal costs are constant; this assumes 
away any fixed costs of lending, as well as any forces that would make 
break-even rates dependent on loan amounts, such as adverse selection 
or moral hazard. However, we do not need to take a stance on what 
exactly the structure of lenders’ marginal costs is, and how 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 and 
𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 are connected to the default rates 𝛿𝐻 , 𝛿𝐿. We discuss how to relax 
this assumption and incorporate information asymmetry in Appendix 
B.6.5

)

𝑃 𝑆𝐻

(𝑟𝐻

= 𝜓𝐻 𝛬𝐻

) (𝜙 (𝑟𝐻

Lenders  make  or  lose  money  at  any  interest  rates  other  than
𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟, 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟. Analogous to (11), we define producer surplus for group 
𝐻 at rate 𝑟𝐻  as: 
)
(𝑟𝐻

− 𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
We define producer surplus for the 𝐿 group analogously. In words, 
producers’ dollar profits at rate 𝑟𝐻  are the per-period difference be-
)  and  the  break-even  price  𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
tween  the  actual  price  𝜙 (𝑟𝐻
)
per  dollar  of  loans,  multiplied  by  loan  volume  𝛬 (𝑟𝐻
)  and  the  ex-
pected number of non-default periods 𝜓𝐻 . We then use (14) to define 
producers’ zero-profit condition. 

(14)

))

4 If  we  interpret  the  $1  million  as  a  lump-sum,  the  interpretation  is 
approximate because (11) and (12) simply sum dollars across future periods, 
ignoring discounting.

5 As a simple example, suppose that lenders must pay some origination cost 
𝑐𝐻 , 𝑐𝐿 per dollar they lend to the 𝐻 and 𝐿 groups: we may have 𝑐𝐻 > 𝑐𝐿, for 
example, if screening is more costly for riskier borrowers. Lenders may also 
have expected default-related losses of 𝜁𝐻 , 𝜁𝐿, per dollar lent. Lenders’ expected 
dollar profits at rate 𝑟, per dollar lent, are thus:

)

−

−

−

− 1 − 𝑐𝐻 − 𝜁𝐻 = 0

𝐿𝜁𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝐷𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠

𝐿𝑐𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠

𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
𝑈 𝑝𝑓 𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑡 𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑡

𝐿𝜓𝐻 𝜙 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑃 𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
The break-even interest rate 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 thus solves:
𝜓𝐻 𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
Hence, at any other rate r, lenders earn the spread
𝜓𝐻 𝜙 (𝑟) − 1 − 𝑐𝐻 − 𝜁𝐻 = 𝜓𝐻
on the loan amount. We define 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 correspondingly. Similarly, any other 
source of marginal costs – which scale linearly in the amount lent 𝐿 – can be 
thought of incorporated within the definition of 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 and 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟. 

)
(𝜙 (𝑟) − 𝜙(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟)

M. Jansen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

Fig. 1. Price discrimination in credit markets.
This figure illustrates how third-degree price discrimination affects welfare in credit markets. Suppose there are two groups of prospective borrowers, high-cost 
(panel a) and low-cost (panel b). The red lines show the cost of serving borrowers in each group, and the blue lines show borrowers’ demand curves. Lenders 
are initially unable to distinguish between these borrowers, so they set the pooled price 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙. Once lenders are able to distinguish between these prospective 
borrowers, they set 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for the high-cost group (a) and 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for the low-cost group (b). The dark gray shaded triangles illustrate the increase in social welfare 
for each group after the price change. In panel (a), the light gray shaded area shows the decrease in consumer welfare from the price change. In panel (b), the 
sum of the light gray shaded rectangle and the dark gray shaded triangle represents the increase in consumer welfare after the price change.

Assumption 1.  Suppose that no data is available, so producers cannot 
distinguish 𝐿 consumers from 𝐻 consumers, and thus set a pooled price 
𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙. We assume that 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙 must make producer surplus sum to zero 
across the two groups: 

𝜓𝐿𝛬𝐿

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

) (𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

)

− 𝜙 (𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

))

= 𝜓𝐻 𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

) (𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

)

− 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

))

(15)

In words, the total dollar gains from lending to 𝐿 consumers above 
their break-even rate, on the LHS, must equal the dollar losses from 
lending to 𝐻 consumers below their break-even rate, on the RHS. In 
our empirical application, this has the effect of weighting per-period 
payments slightly lower for the high-cost group, since they default more 
often and thus make payments with lower probability; however, the 
ratio  𝜓𝐿
 is not far from 1 in our application. As with consumer surplus, 
𝜓𝐻
(15) is not totally innocuous: it assumes producers do not discount, and 
ignore idiosyncratic risk from individual defaults. We will ultimately 
find that the welfare effects for the 𝐿 group are small overall; slightly 
different specifications of the zero-profit condition are thus unlikely to 
have large effects on our headline results.

2.3. Intuition

Our framework shows that changing data availability in credit mar-
kets can be thought of as a form of third-degree price discrimination. Fig. 
1 shows a stylized illustration of the 𝐻 and 𝐿 groups. In the absence of 
data, lenders cannot distinguish these groups, so they charge 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙 for 
both groups, determined by the zero-profit condition (15). This pricing 
scheme is socially inefficient, generating two deadweight loss triangles 
(dark gray areas): credit is underprovided to low-cost borrowers, and 
overprovided to high-cost borrowers.

If lenders can distinguish between these consumer groups, prices 
increase to 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for the high-cost group, and decrease to 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 for 
the low-cost group. Social surplus increases for both groups, since both 
DWL triangles are eliminated. The division of surplus also changes, 
since the pooling cross-subsidy between groups is eliminated. 𝐻 bor-
rowers’ surplus decreases by the light gray area in the left panel of Fig. 
1, and 𝐿 borrowers’ surplus increases by the sum of the light gray and 
dark gray areas on the right panel of Fig.  1.

An  interesting  feature  of  Fig.   1  is  that  the  DWL  triangles  scale 
quadratically with price changes, whereas the consumer surplus trans-
fer trapezoids scale approximately linearly. Thus, when 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙 is close 

to the break-even rates 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟, 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟, the ratio of the DWL triangles 
and the transfer trapezoids decreases towards zero. Fig.  1 thus has a 
nuanced conclusion: data is always welfare-increasing, but when data 
has a small effect on prices, the cross-subsidy effects of data tend to be 
large relative to the welfare effects.

Our conclusions differ from the classic literature on third-degree 
price discrimination in that we assume that lenders are competitive, 
and  data  is  informative  about  consumers’  costs.  In  the  classic  set-
ting, sellers have market power, and data is informative only about 
consumers’ demand (Schmalensee, 1981; Varian, 1985, 1989). It is well-
known  that  the  welfare  effects  of  third-degree  price  discrimination 
are ambiguous in the classic setting. Appendix Figure E.1 shows the 
intuition: monopolists set prices above cost for both groups, and data 
may increase prices for one group and decrease prices for another, 
leading to partially offsetting changes in social welfare, so the sign of 
the net welfare effect is indeterminate.6

2.4. Estimation: General data policies

Our framework is particularly straightforward to implement empir-
ically if we assume that loan demand in each group is linear in the 
payment function 𝜙 (𝑟): 

𝛬 (𝑟) = 𝑎 − 𝑏𝜙 (𝑟)

(16)

Consumer, producer, and total surplus then have the following expres-
sions.

Claim 1.  Suppose lenders receive data which allows them to distinguish 
between the 𝐻 and 𝐿 groups, so interest rates for the 𝐻 group shift from 
𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙 to 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟. The net increase in lenders’ profits on group 𝐻 is: 

𝜓𝐻 𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

) (𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

)

− 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

))

The net decrease in 𝐻 borrower surplus is: 

𝜓𝐻

(𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

)

− 𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

))

(

𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

)

(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

)

)

+ 𝛬𝐻
2

(17)

(18)

6 A related paper is Chen and Schwartz (2015), who analyze the case where 
a monopolist has information about costs, showing that welfare increases for a 
broader class of demand functions than the general case. We simplify further 
by assuming perfect competition in our baseline, implying that data is always 
welfare-improving in our setting.

5 

M. Jansen et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

Full

Mean

Median

SD

Pre

Mean

Median

SD

Post

Mean

Median

630.67
8.78
20,783

  Credit Score
  Interest Rate
  Quantity Opened 
Cond. on Opening
  Quantity Opened
  If Charged-off
This table displays basic summary statistics for the main analysis variables: the mean, median, and standard deviation. The first three columns show the statistics for the full 
sample, the next triplet for individuals pre-flag removal, and the final three columns show summary statistics post-flag removal. Source: TransUnion.

639.28
8.57
21,143

643.00
7.43
19,842

620.63
9.02
20,332

631.00
7.96
19,031

76.68
4.30
10,495

638.00
7.66
19,484

83.76
4.31
10,773

3016.52 
0.15

2792.55
0.15

2915.35
0.15

306.50
0.02

343.41
0.02

326.38
0.02

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

SD
88.47  
4.30
10,976  

Social welfare increases by: 
1
− 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
2
All expressions for the 𝐿 group are analogous.

(𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

)) (𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

𝜓𝐻

)

)

− 𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

))

(19)

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

) , 𝛬𝐻

) at the pooled and fair interest rates.

Intuitively, the expressions in Claim  1 are simply the geometric 
areas  of  the  corresponding  rectangular  and  triangular  areas  in  Fig. 
1. These are straightforward to estimate, requiring only default rates 
to  estimate  the  𝜓  term,  and  the  prices  𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟, 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙  and  quantities 
𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
A convenient feature of Claim  1 is the break-even interest rates 
𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟, 𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 are directly inferred from the prices that customers face 
when lenders are able to distinguish the two groups, so we do not 
need to take a stance on how default rates affect lenders’ break-even 
rates. Essentially, the core inputs into Claim  1 are loan rates and loan 
quantities  with  and  without  data;  default  rates  for  each  group  are 
needed only to compute the 𝜓 term, which is used only to convert 
welfare into comparable dollarized units for each group.

2.5. Estimation: Bankruptcy flag removal

In our empirical application, we analyze the removal of bankruptcy 
flags  from  credit  reports.  In  our  framework,  consumers  who  have 
never  declared  bankruptcy  correspond  to  the  low-cost  group,  who 
default at lower rates, while consumers with a prior bankruptcy cor-
respond to the high-cost group, who default at higher rates. Among 
the previously-bankrupt, we distinguish two subgroups: ‘‘bankruptcy-
with-flag’’ consumers, whose credit files still display the bankruptcy 
flag, and ‘‘bankrupt-no-flag’’ consumers, who have declared bankruptcy 
far enough in the past that, under current policy, bankruptcy flags are 
removed from their credit reports. Importantly, lenders cannot distin-
guish bankrupt-no-flag consumers from never-bankrupt consumers, and 
therefore apply pooled pricing to these groups in the status quo.

Our goal is to estimate how outcomes would differ in a counter-
factual  world  where  bankruptcy  flags  are  never  removed,  allowing 
lenders  to  separate  previously  bankrupt  consumers  from  others  in-
definitely.  Although  we  do  not  observe  an  explicit  change  in  flag 
policy, the staggered timing of flag removals allows us to observe a 
transition in which high-cost (previously-bankrupt) individuals move 
from being separated (with-flag) to being pooled (no-flag) with low-cost 
consumers. This variation maps into our model and enables a multi-step 
estimation strategy, described in Sections 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, to recover 
the components of Claim  1.

2.5.1. High-cost/previously-bankrupt borrowers

We  can  estimate  the  quantities  in  Claim   1  for  the  previously-
bankrupt 𝐻 group by analyzing how prices and loan quantities change 
around  bankruptcy  flag  removal.  Under  current  policy  in  the  US, 
bankruptcy flags are removed from credit reports 7 to 10 years after 
bankruptcy, meaning that 𝐻 customers, who lenders can distinguish 
from 𝐿 customers, transition to becoming indistinguishable from 𝐿
customers sharply after a cutoff in time.

6 

Under our assumption that the 𝐻 consumers have equal loan de-
mand and default rates just before and after flag removal, customers 
should face the higher rate 𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
) just before flag removal, and 
) just afterwards. In response, these customers 
the lower rate 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
)
) to 𝛬𝐻
should increase borrowing, from 𝛬𝐻
. We can thus 
estimate these four quantities, and thus all surplus expressions in Claim 
1, simply by observing customers’ interest rates and loan quantities just 
before and after bankruptcy flags are removed.

(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

2.5.2. Low-cost/never-bankrupt borrowers

To identify counterfactual price changes for the never-bankrupt 𝐿

group, we use lenders’ zero-profit condition, (15). Rearranging: 

𝜙 (𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

)

− 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

)

= −

𝜓𝐻 𝛬𝐻
𝜓𝐿𝛬𝐿

)

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
)
(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

(𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

)

− 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

))

(20)

The LHS of (20) is the price decrease that 𝐿 consumers would face, 
if lenders could distinguish them permanently from 𝐻 individuals. The 
RHS says that this can be estimated by multiplying the price change 
for 𝐻 consumers by the ratio of loan volumes between the two groups, 
and a 𝜓-ratio term accounting for default rate differences between the 
groups. In our empirical application, the 𝐿 group is much larger than 
the 𝐻 group, so the ratio  𝛬𝐻
 is small, and the counterfactual price 
𝛬𝐿
change for the 𝐿 group will be fairly small.

We then need to calculate the induced change in loan quantities for 
the never-bankrupt 𝐿 group. This could be calculated by multiplying 
the price change in (20) by an estimate of the demand elasticity for the 
𝐿 group. We assume that demand elasticities are equal across groups, 
although in principle these could be estimated separately given another 
source of price variation.

Assumption 2.  At the price 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙, demand elasticities are equal across 
the 𝐿 and 𝐻 groups; that is, the slopes of demand 𝑏𝐿 and 𝑏𝐻  satisfy: 

𝑏𝐿
(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

) =

𝛬𝐿

𝑏𝐻
(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

)

𝛬𝐻

(21)

Given this assumption, we can calculate the counterfactual quantity 
change facing the 𝐿 group based on the price change; we can then 
calculate changes in consumer surplus and social welfare for this group 
using the expressions in Claim  1. While Assumption  2 is somewhat 
ad-hoc, our main quantitative results are not very sensitive to it. We 
show in Appendix B.1 that the social welfare effects of data policy are 
driven predominantly by the smaller 𝐻 group, so errors in estimating 
outcomes for the larger 𝐿 group actually have relatively little effect on 
our conclusions.

2.6. Discussion of model assumptions

Choice of Welfare Weights. Our approach builds on the tradition 
of Marshallian partial-equilibrium welfare analysis (Marshall, 1920). 
We  take  no  explicit  stance  on  welfare  weights  across  groups:  the 
implicit stance is that welfare is measured in dollars, and classic re-
sults imply that any Pareto-optimal outcome must maximize the sum 

 
 
 
 
 
M. Jansen et al.

of money-metric utility across agents. This approach has the benefit 
of being easily interpretable.  We will find that bankruptcy flag re-
moval burns around $0.03 of social surplus per dollar redistributed 
across groups. The normative judgment of whether the policy’s benefits 
outweigh its costs is left to policymakers.7

Demand Margins. Our model and empirical analysis ignores loan 
rejections. In practice, some prospective borrowers may be rejected 
by all lenders, and may thus be unable to borrow at any price. We 
cannot  capture  welfare  for  these  hypothetical  borrowers,  since  we 
cannot estimate their willingness-to-pay. We do not expect this to be 
a substantial concern in the auto loan setting we analyze, since many 
lenders specialize in serving riskier borrowers, so we believe the vast 
majority of borrowers can get a loan offer at some price in our setting.
Interest Rate Menus. We assumed that borrowers can borrow any 
amount at a fixed rate 𝑟. In reality, borrowers may face a menu of 
interest rate–LTV (Loan-to-Value) combinations, typically subject to a 
maximum loan size. Data policy may affect both the structure of the 
menu and the loan size cap. In Appendix B.2, we show that our results 
still hold if data policy primarily influences outcomes through shifting 
interest rates. However, our analysis does not fully capture welfare 
effects if data policy primarily influences the size of binding loan size 
caps.

Default. Appendix B.3 explores extending the model to incorporate 
richer default behavior and post-default outcomes. Our baseline results 
hold even if borrowers default optimally, and regardless of how default 
affects consumption, as long as the interest rate does not influence 
post-default outcomes. However, if loan rates affect consumption after
default, an additional term appears in the derivative of 𝑉 (𝑟), meaning 
our measures will tend to understate the effects of interest rates on 
welfare. We are unable to quantify these effects in our setting, so we 
ignore this effect in our analysis.

Default Rate Heterogeneity. Appendix B.4 analyzes the case where 
default rates may be heterogeneous within groups. We show that Claim 
1  remains  approximately  accurate  as  long  as  default  rates  are  not 
too different within data groups, and demand elasticities are not too 
correlated with customers’ default rates within groups.

Market Power.  Appendix B.5 extends the framework to imperfect 
competition. In general, if data availability changes the markups that 
lenders can charge, outcomes are known to be complex (He et al., 2023; 
Huang, 2022). Nonetheless, we show that with additional data markups 
can be accommodated. Surprisingly, under a certain set of parameter 
restrictions – when the demand elasticities in the two borrower groups 
are equal, and when markups pre- and post-data availability are the 
same – the existence of markups does not, in fact, affect the welfare 
gains from data availability. While this set of assumptions may not 
always be satisfied exactly in reality, this finding suggests that the 
existence of markups per se does not dramatically affect our results.

Adverse Selection.  In the main text, we assume that there is no 
selection—that is, that costs depend on borrowers’ types but are not 
correlated with borrowers’ willingness to pay. In Appendix B.6, we 
discuss how adverse selection could be accomdated in our framework.

3. Empirical application

We now apply our framework to the specific setting we study empir-
ically: bankruptcy flag removal. In the US, under the Fair Credit Report-
ing Act (FCRA), bankruptcy flags must be removed from credit records 
after ten years. There are two main types of consumer bankruptcy 
in the US: Chapter 7 (liquidation) and Chapter 13 (reorganization). 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy flags are typically removed 117 to 118 months 

7 An alternative approach is to directly specify welfare weights on each 
agent, and then solve for optimal policy. In such approaches, welfare weights 
and optimal policy are entangled: there is little we can say about how efficient 
a policy is, independent of the particular welfare weights chosen.

7 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

after filing, while Chapter 13 bankruptcy flags are typically removed 
seven years after filing. Hence, previously-bankrupt individuals whose 
flags have been removed are pooled with never-bankrupt individuals. 
Flag removal can thus be thought of as a form of data policy: in a 
counterfactual world in which flags were never removed, social welfare 
would be higher, previously-bankrupt borrowers would be worse off, 
and never-bankrupt borrowers would be better off. This application 
illustrates the tradeoff inherent in our model. On the one hand, counter-
factually keeping bankruptcy flags on consumer credit records increases 
efficiency, as lenders can use this information in pricing loans. On the 
other hand, keeping flags would make previously-bankrupt borrowers 
worse off, as they would face higher interest rates.

3.1. Data

To  implement  our  analysis,  we  use  the  Booth  TransUnion  (TU) 
Consumer Credit Panel.8 The data is an anonymized 10% sample of all 
TU consumer credit records from 2009 to 2020. We restrict the sample 
to the 2009–2018 period to allow at least two years for delinquency 
realizations after account openings. The sample is a panel. Individuals 
in the initial sample have their information updated monthly, and each 
month a new 10% sample of first time borrowers is added. At a monthly 
frequency, the data contain basic information about borrowers and 
loans, including the original balance, the current balance, the Vantage 
(credit) score, scheduled payments, the maturity of the loan, geography 
and importantly bankruptcy flags.

Our main outcomes of interest related to the welfare framework 
are credit scores, interest rates, new loan balances, and charge-offs. 
We  do  not  directly  observe  interest  rates,  but  we  back  them  out 
from scheduled payments using the amortization formula.9 To avoid 
selection concerns, we predict interest rates for all individual-month 
observations. We predict interest rates using a third-order polynomial 
of current and up to nine months lagged scores, and time and cohort 
dummies.10 We measure balances as the sum of the balances of the 
new auto loan accounts that an individual opens in a given month, 
and as zero when the individual does not open an account in a given 
month. Charge-offs are measured as whether a loan becomes charged-
off within two years of the account opening. We collapse the data to 
the borrower-month level, and restrict the sample to individuals who 
ever had a Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 bankruptcy flag and observations 
within six months around flag removal.

Table  1 presents summary statistics for our main analysis variables. 
There  are  865,499  individuals  in  our  final  sample  over  13  months 
totaling 11,251,487 individual-month observations. In 1.57 percent of 
the individual-month observations at least one auto-debt account is 
opened, and the average opening balance conditional on opening is 
$20,783.  Hence,  the  average  monthly  account  opening  is  $326.38. 
The average rate is 8.78%. The average credit score in our sample is 
631. Table  1 also shows summary statistics pre and post flag removal. 
Following  flag  removal,  mean  credit  scores  increase,  interest  rates 
decrease and borrowing amounts increase. Of course, these changes 
may be due to both bankruptcy flag removals, and secular time trends, 
which motivates our empirical strategy.

Now, following the steps we have set up in Section 2.5, we show 
how  we  estimate  counterfactual  price  and  quantity  changes  for
previously-bankrupt borrowers in Section 3.2 and for never-bankrupt 
borrowers in Section 3.3. We summarize our results in Section 3.4.

8 These data, along with similar credit panel data, are described in more 

detail in Keys et al. (2023) and Yannelis and Zhang (2023).

9 Specifically, we let the monthly payment 𝐴 =

1−(1+𝑖)−𝑛 , where 𝑃  is the 
principal, 𝑛 is the maturity, and 𝑖 is the interest rate. We use a root-solving 
algorithm to solve for 𝑖. Note that we use scheduled, and not actual payments 
to construct interest rates.
10 Appendix C shows the effect of flag removal on observed interest rates 
with fundamentally similar conclusions.

𝑃 ×𝑖

M. Jansen et al.

3.2. Previously-bankrupt borrowers

3.2.1. Design for flag removal

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

We argued in Section 2.5 that, in a counterfactual world where 
bankruptcy  flags  were  never  removed,  previously-bankrupt  borrow-
ers whose flags are removed would see an increase in interest rates 
and  decrease  in  loan  quantities,  reflecting  their  visible  higher  risk 
to lenders. Moreover, somewhat surprisingly, the magnitudes of the 
counterfactual rate increase and quantity decrease can be estimated 
simply by comparing rates and quantities between individuals observed 
in the present world, just before and after bankruptcy flags are removed 
from credit reports. To estimate these quantities empirically, we use 
variants of the following specification: 
𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾𝑐 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛿𝑦1[𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑] + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡
where  𝑦𝑖𝑡  are  outcomes  for  individual  𝑖  in  month  𝑡,  𝛾𝑐  are  cohort 
fixed effects, 𝛾𝑡 are calendar period fixed effects, 𝑋𝑖𝑡 are individual 
controls, and 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is an error term which we assume is uncorrelated 
with  1[𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑],  conditional  on  observables.  We  cluster  stan-
dard errors at the level of the month in which the bankruptcy flag 
is removed. 1[𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑] is an indicator of whether bankruptcy 
flags  have  been  removed.  The  main  coefficients  of  interest  are  the 
𝛿𝑦 terms, which identify the difference in the outcome 𝑦𝑖𝑡 following 
the removal of information; as we argued in Section 2.5.1, under the 
assumptions of our framework, 𝛿𝑦 is directly informative about the 
difference between separating and pooling prices (𝜙(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟) − 𝜙(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙)
)
and quantities (𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟) − 𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙)

) for the 𝐻 group.

(22)

We explore three primary outcomes: Vantage credit scores, interest 
rates, and loan amounts. We observe credit scores and loan quantities 
in  all  time  periods.  We  only  observe  interest  rates  conditional  on 
contracting. Hence, we additionally assume that these reflect the lowest 
available offer rates for a contract.11

The coefficient 𝛿𝑦 captures the difference in the outcome 𝑦𝑖𝑡 under 
the assumption that nothing changes other than the removal of infor-
mation on previous bankruptcies. More precisely, we assume that flag 
removal is orthogonal to the error term 𝜀𝑖𝑡. A potential concern is that, 
due to removal of individual flags at different points in time, the esti-
mates for 𝛿𝑦 may be biased by individuals leaving the control group and 
the heterogeneity of the treatment effect over time (Goodman-Bacon, 
2021; Barrios, 2021). To address this concern, we first provide sharp 
graphical evidence of breaks when flags are removed, and then imple-
ment modern dynamic difference-in-difference estimators in Appendix 
D.

To provide graphical evidence that the observed effects are indeed 
driven by flag removals, we further estimate an event-study regression 
to  evaluate  the  identifying  assumption  using  the  following  variant 
of Eq.  (22): 

𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾𝑐 + 𝛾𝑡𝑠 +

6
∑

𝑡=−6

𝛿𝑡{𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝑡} + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(23)

11 We  focus  on  the  case  where  the  bankruptcy  decision  is  already  de-
termined,  and  focus  on  the  allocative  effects.  Appendix  B.7  discusses  the 
case where flag removal impacts the filing decision. We construct a simple 
model in which borrowers strategically decide whether to file for bankruptcy, 
and bankruptcy has social deadweight loss costs. In the model, borrowers 
default more than is socially optimal; removing the flag causes borrowers to 
default more, increasing the magnitude of this distortion. In a back-of-envelope 
calculation, we find that these costs can be large relative to the allocative 
welfare costs that we consider here. A policymaker interested in evaluating 
the full costs of bankruptcy flag removal should thus estimate these costs and 
take them into account. However, there is no evidence that we are aware of 
showing that flag removal impacts the decision to file. In fact, only a small 
fraction of bankrupt individuals seem to be aware of flag removal policies: 
just 9.2% of Chapter 7 filers correctly guess the number of years remaining 
for their flag (Gross et al., 2020, Table 6). In this paper, we thus focus only 
on quantifying the costs that bankruptcy flag removal imposes on allocative 
welfare.

8 

Fig. 2. Credit scores, interest rates, and loan balances.
This figure shows estimates of the coefficients 𝛿𝑡 from the following specifi-

6
∑

𝑡=−6

cation 𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾𝑐 + 𝛾𝑡𝑠 +
𝛿𝑡{𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝑡} + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡, along with a 95% confidence 
interval. In Panel A, the outcome 𝑦𝑖𝑡 is credit scores; in Panel B, it is interest 
rates; and in Panel C it is loan volumes. 𝛾𝑐 are cohort fixed effects, and 𝛾𝑡𝑠 are 
time period by score bucket fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the 
cohort level.
Source: TransUnion.

17.118∗∗∗  
(0.237)
621.452∗∗∗  
(0.128)
11,251,487 
0.813

−0.226∗∗∗  
(0.004)
8.898∗∗∗
(0.002)
11,251,487 
0.878

17.793∗∗∗  
(4.010)
316.796∗∗∗  
(2.159)
11,251,487 
0.002
No
No
Yes
Yes
Cohort

M. Jansen et al.

Table 2
 Credit scores, interest rates, and loan volumes.
(1)

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

  Panel A: Credit Scores
  1[FlagRemoved]

  Constant

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
  Panel B: Interest Rates
  1[FlagRemoved]

  Constant

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
  Panel C: Loan Volumes
  1[FlagRemoved]

  Constant

17.216∗∗∗
(0.298)
620.075∗∗∗
(0.488)

11,251,487
0.012

−0.218∗∗∗
(0.018)
9.109∗∗∗
(0.096)

11,251,487
0.003

18.344∗∗
(6.270)
299.363∗∗∗
(7.473)

17.147∗∗∗
(0.258)
621.165∗∗∗
(0.497)

11,251,487
0.017

−0.226∗∗∗
(0.006)
8.979∗∗∗
(0.024)

11,251,487
0.044

17.926∗∗∗
(4.049)
310.897∗∗∗
(2.901)

17.216∗∗∗
(0.298)
620.075∗∗∗
(0.188)

11,251,487
0.017

−0.218∗∗∗
(0.018)
9.109∗∗∗
(0.018)

11,251,487
0.044

18.344∗∗
(6.270)
299.363∗∗∗
(3.098)

17.125∗∗∗
(0.239)
621.448∗∗∗
(0.129)

11,251,487
0.018

−0.226∗∗∗
(0.004)
8.898∗∗∗
(0.002)

11,251,487
0.046

17.979∗∗∗
(4.017)
316.696∗∗∗
(2.163)

  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
  Linear Time Trend
  Year-month FE
  Cohort FE
  Year-month by Score Bucket FE
  Clustered SE
This table shows estimates of the coefficients 𝛿𝑦 from the following specification 𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾𝑐 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛿𝑦1[𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑔𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑] + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡. In the top panel, the outcome 𝑦𝑖𝑡 is the Vantage Score, 
in the middle panel the outcome is interest rates, while in the bottom panel it is loan volumes. Interest rates are predicted with a polynomial of current and past credit scores, 
period, and cohort fixed effects. 𝛾𝑐 are cohort fixed effects, and 𝛾𝑡 are time period fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the cohort level. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗
𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01 Source: TransUnion.

11,251,487
0.000
Yes
No
No
No
Cohort

11,251,487
0.001
Yes
Yes
No
No
Cohort

11,251,487
0.001
Yes
No
Yes
No
Cohort

11,251,487
0.001
No
Yes
Yes
No
Cohort

where 𝛾𝑐 are cohort-month and 𝛾𝑡𝑠 are year-month by score bucket fixed 
effects.12

We plot the coefficients 𝛿𝑡, along with a 95% confidence interval. 
The coefficients capture the difference in an outcome in each month 
before and after flag removal. We exclude the relative time dummy 
for period −1 as well as relative time dummy for period −6 due to 
collinearity  arising  from  the  age-period-cohort  problem  common  in 
similar specifications.13

3.2.2. Effects of flag removal

We  begin  with  graphical  evidence  showing  point  estimates  of
Eq.  (23). The figures show specifications including cohort and score 
bucket  by  year-month  fixed  effects.  Fig.   2  shows  estimates  of  the 
coefficients 𝛿𝑡, where the outcomes are credit scores, interest rates, 
and  loan  quantities.  The  top  panel  shows  the  Vantage  score,  the 
middle panel shows interest rates at origination, and the bottom panel 
shows loan quantities. Consistent with prior work, we see a very sharp 
increase  –  almost  20  credit  score  points  –  for  previously-bankrupt 
individuals following the flag removal. This translates into a reduction 
in borrowing costs. Interest rates for previously-bankrupt individuals 
show a clear drop following the flag removal, when these previously-
bankrupt  borrowers  become  indistinguishable  from  never-bankrupt 
individuals. Consistent with the decline in interest rates, we see a sharp 
rise in loan volumes. There is an approximately $20 increase in auto 
loan openings.

We next quantify the visual results in a regression framework. Table 
2 presents variants of Eq.  (22). Column (1) includes a linear time trend. 

12 We measure score buckets by sorting individuals into one of 20 score 
buckets  in  the  month  before  flag  removal,  and  hold  the  sorting  constant 
throughout the 13 months observed.
13 To ensure that our results are not dependent on this design choice, we 
implement a stacked difference-in-difference comparing individuals with flag 
removal to individuals with bankruptcy flag removal 12 to 17 months later in 
Appendix D.

9 

Column (2) adds time period fixed effects. Column (3) adds cohort fixed 
effects, based on the bankruptcy filing date. Column (4) includes both 
cohort and year-month fixed effects. And, finally, column (5) includes 
cohort and score bucket by time period fixed effects. We measure score 
buckets by sorting individuals into one of 20 such score buckets in the 
month before flag removal and hold the sorting constant throughout 
the 13 months observed. In the top panel, the outcome is the Vantage 
credit score; in the middle panel, it is interest rates; and in the bottom 
panel, it is loan volumes.

The results are broadly in line with the graphical evidence. The 
top  panel  of  Table   2  indicates  that  bankruptcy  flag  removals  lead 
to a 17.1- to 17.2-point increase in credit scores, or an approximate 
2.76% increase in credit scores. The middle panel indicates that this 
is associated with a 21- to 23-basis-point decrease in interest rates, 
or a 2.4%–2.5% decrease in interest rates. The bottom panel shows 
that average new auto loan balances increase by $17.7 to $18.4, or 
5.8%–6%. In the majority of our specifications and in our preferred 
specification, the effect is significant at the 1% level. In columns (1) 
and (3), the effect size for loan quantities is significant at the 5% level.

3.2.3. Welfare estimates

Using our regression estimates, we can now calculate the quantities:

)

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

) , 𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

) , 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

) , 𝛬𝐻
𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
allowing us to calculate the consumer surplus decrease, and welfare 
increase, that would be generated for the 𝐻 group in a counterfactual 
world where bankruptcy flags are never removed. We set 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 equal 
to 9.02%, the average interest rate for borrowers before their flags are 
removed in the data. After flag removal, previously-bankrupt individu-
als are pooled with never-bankrupt individuals; the pooled rate 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
is equal to the pre-flag removal rate plus our regression coefficient, 
9.02% + 𝛿𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒.  To  simplify  surplus  accounting  and  to  stay  in 
accordance with our theory, we express these in terms of repayment 
)  is  2.077%  of  the  original  loan  balance  per 
fractions,  𝜙.  𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
)
month, and the pooling payment, 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
, is 2.066%. Note, also, that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. Jansen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

Fig. 3. Empirical welfare estimates
This figure illustrates the changes in borrower surplus and efficiency if bankruptcy flags are never removed. In each panel, the 𝑦-axis, 𝜙(𝑟), represents the nominal 
fraction of the loan amount repaid each month, which we calculate as the monthly payment divided by the principal balance. For example, a 𝜙(𝑟) value of 
2.077% means that the borrower pays 2.077% of the principal amount each month over the course of a five-year loan. The 𝑥-axis shows the total loan amount 
per year, 𝛬, in billion dollars for previously-bankrupt/high-cost and never-bankrupt/low-cost borrowers, respectively. For example, $2.94 billion represents the 
loan amount that 800,000 previously-bankrupt individuals borrow each year when bankruptcy flags are never removed. In panel (a), the light gray trapezoid 
illustrates the borrower surplus lost by previously-bankrupt individuals in the counterfactual where flags are never removed. The dark gray triangle shows the 
efficiency gain from eliminating credit overprovision to previously-bankrupt individuals in the counterfactual. In panel (b), the light gray and dark gray area 
shows the borrower surplus gain for never-bankrupt individuals in the counterfactual. The dark gray triangle illustrates the efficiency gain due to eliminating 
credit underprovision to never-bankrupt individuals.

) and 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

we show both 𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
) for expositional purposes here 
and in Fig.  3; however, from Claim  1, only the difference 𝜙 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
−
𝜙 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟
) matters for welfare and surplus, meaning that our results 
are functionally driven mainly by the regression estimate 𝛿𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒, 
with the levels of 𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟 and 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙 playing a small role.

)

We observe total loan quantity prior to flag removal: for previously-
bankrupt individuals before flag removal, roughly 18.1% of individuals 
open a loan each year, and the average loan size conditional on opening 
a  loan  is  $20,332.  We  assume  that  previously-bankrupt  individuals 
with or without flag have similar demand at the same price. Hence, 
previously-bankrupt consumers with no bankruptcy flag, when sepa-
rated, have an annual average loan volume of 𝛬𝐻
= $3, 678 per 
individual. From our regression estimates, flag removal causes annual 
loan quantity to increase to:

(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟

)

𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙) = 𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟) + 12𝛿𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒

where  𝛿𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒  is  the  coefficient  on  loan  quantities  from  our
difference-in-differences specification; we multiply 𝛿𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 by 12 
because we run the loan volume regression at a monthly level. We 
thus  find  that  𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙)  is  equal  to  $3, 891.5;  that  is,  loan  quantity 
increases by roughly $213.5 per year after flag removal. Note, also, that 
from Claim  1, the total change in consumer surplus from flag removal 
depends on the level of 𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙), but the social surplus change depends 
only on the difference 𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙) − 𝛬𝐻 (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟).

We then plug these quantities into Claim  1 to calculate counter-
factual outcomes if bankruptcy flags are never removed. We depict 
these calculations graphically in the left panel of Fig.  3. We report 
borrower surplus and social welfare in two ways: in dollars per non-
default month, and in total expected dollars transferred to a borrower 
over  the  lifetime  of  a  loan  (taking  into  account  borrowers’  default 
probability). To calculate surplus in terms of expected dollars over the 
life of a loan as in Claim  1, we multiply per-period surplus by the 
default adjustment term 𝜓𝐻 , as defined in (12). This only requires 
observing the default rate of previously-bankrupt borrowers. Plugging 
in 0.15% for the default rate 𝛿𝐻 , we get 𝜓𝐻  equal to 57.29.14

14 For all auto loans ever opened by individuals who are ever bankrupt, 
we compute the ratio of loans that are charged-off within two years of loan 

We find that in a counterfactual world without flag removal, 𝐻
group surplus decreases by $0.41 per eligible borrower each month. 
Multiplying by 𝜓𝐻 , surplus decreases by roughly $23.75 in expectation 
over the lifetime of a five-year loan. When, in the counterfactual world, 
we restrict our attention to the 18.1% of borrowers that get a new auto 
loan each year, each borrower essentially loses an expected transfer of 
$131.22 over the lifetime of a five-year loan. We find that, due to the 
elimination of credit overprovision to the 𝐻 group in the absence of 
flag removals, there is a social welfare gain of $0.012 per 𝐻 borrower 
per month; multiplying by 𝜓𝐻 , this is $0.67 in expectation over a five-
year loan. Restricting attention to the 18.1% of borrowers that get a 
new auto loan each year, there is a welfare gain of $3.70 per borrower 
over a five-year loan due to the elimination of inefficiently high credit 
provision in the counterfactual.

Next, we aggregate these welfare estimates across borrowers. Ap-
proximately 800,000 individuals have their bankruptcy flags removed 
each year. Multiplying by average loan size, aggregate loan volume is 
approximately $2.94 billion per year in a world without flag removal, 
and approximately $3.11 billion per year in a world with flag removal. 
In the counterfactual world without flag removal, the borrower surplus 
decrease for the 𝐻 group, illustrated as the light gray trapezoid in 
the left panel of Fig.  3, is $0.33 million per month, or $19 million 
in expectation over a five-year loan term. In other words, for loans 
originated in one year, previously-bankrupt borrowers lose $19 million 
in expectation over a five-year loan term due to the higher monthly 
payments.  For  loans  originated  in  a  given  year,  the  gain  in  social 
welfare due to the elimination of credit overprovision in the absence 
of flag removal, illustrated as the dark gray triangle in the left panel of 
Fig.  3, is $9356 per month, or $535,975 in expectation over a five-year 
loan term.

opening as 3.6%. This implies a monthly default probability of 0.15% = 𝛿𝑚 = 1−
(1−𝑃 𝑟(charged off in first two years))
24 . The monthly default rate corresponds 
to  approximately  91%  of  loans  reaching  five-year  maturity  without  being 
charged-off.

1

10 

M. Jansen et al.

3.3. Never-bankrupt borrowers

Price Effects. We follow Section 2.5.2, estimating the counterfac-
tual price change for never-bankrupt individuals in a world without 
bankruptcy flag removal. We use the rearranged zero-profit condition 
for lenders, Eq. (20). To apply (20), we need the relative loan quantities 
for previously-bankrupt and never-bankrupt borrowers, as well as the 
default rate adjustment terms, 𝜓. From the data, we calculate that ap-
proximately 10.6% of individuals go bankrupt at some point; thus, the 
ratio of loan quantity for never-bankrupt individuals to loan quantity 
for previously-bankrupt individuals with no flag is approximately: 

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

)
) =

0.106
1 − 0.106

𝛬𝐻
𝛬𝐿
We thus can calculate total loan quantity, under the pooled rate 𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
for low-cost never-bankrupt individuals, simply as:

≈ 0.1186.

(24)

𝛬𝐿

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙

)

=

)

𝛬𝐻

(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙
0.1186

= $26.26 billion

The default rate adjustment terms, 𝜓𝐻  and 𝜓𝐿, are simply func-
tions  of  default  rates.  Monthly  default  rates  are  0.15%  among  the 
previously-bankrupt, and 0.09% among the never-bankrupt. Thus, we 
have:

𝜓𝐻 = 57.29, 𝜓𝐿 = 58.34

Note  that,  while  we  keep  the  𝜓𝐻 , 𝜓𝐿  multipliers  for  internal  con-
sistency, 𝜓𝐻  and 𝜓𝐿 are very similar in practice, implying that the 
ratio  𝜓𝐿
 is very close to 1; thus, the 𝜓 values essentially have no 
𝜓𝐻
quantitative role in our analysis besides scaling 𝐻 and 𝐿 group welfare 
by a constant.

We can then plug these estimates into (20), derived from the zero-
profit condition of Assumption  1, to determine the hypothetical price 
change for never-bankrupt individuals. We find that, in a counterfactual 
world where bankruptcy flags are never removed, a never-bankrupt in-
dividual has to repay 0.001% of the principal less per month, reflecting 
the fact that in the counterfactual lenders can separate the safer never-
bankrupt individuals from the riskier previously-bankrupt individuals. 
This price change is relatively small since the never-bankrupt group is 
approximately ten times larger than the previously-bankrupt group.

Quantity Effects. We then calculate the counterfactual quantity 
increase for never-bankrupt individuals simply by using Assumption  2, 
which states that demand elasticities are identical across groups. This 
implies that the never-bankrupt demand slope 𝑏𝐿 is:

𝑏𝐿 = 𝑏𝐻 ∗ 1∕(𝛬𝐻 ∕𝛬𝐿)

where 𝑏𝐻 , the demand slope for previously-bankrupt borrowers, is just 
the ratio of aggregate quantity changes and repayment rate changes 
implied by our regressions in Section 3.2 (𝑏𝐻 = 213.52∗800,000
). Using 
the ratio of loan quantities from (24), we calculate a total counterfac-
tual quantity increase, for never-bankrupt borrowers, of approximately 
$170 million. The total loan quantity changes for never-bankrupt and 
previously-bankrupt borrowers are similar in magnitude. Essentially, 
this is because the never-bankrupt quantity change results from mul-
tiplying a smaller price change by a larger total borrower base, and 
these two effects offset under the assumption of equal elasticities.

0.011%

Welfare Estimates. With counterfactual price and quantity changes 
for the never-bankrupt in hand, we can compute the changes in total 
welfare and borrower surplus generated by the never-bankrupt group 
under our counterfactual where flags are never removed. In the coun-
terfactual, for each never-bankrupt individual over the five-year loan 
term, borrower surplus increases by $2.9, but the welfare increase due 
to more efficient credit allocation is only $0.01. Aggregating across 
never-bankrupt borrowers, we find that aggregate loan volume is ap-
proximately $26.42 billion per year in a counterfactual world without 
flag removal, compared to approximately $26.26 billion per year in 

11 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

the status quo where flag removal exists. In the counterfactual without 
flag removal, the increase in borrower surplus for the never-bankrupt, 
illustrated as the light gray rectangle and dark gray triangle in the right 
panel of Fig.  3, is $335,984 per month, or $19.6 million in expectation 
over a five-year loan term. In other words, for loans originated in a 
year, never-bankrupt borrowers gain $19.6 million in expectation over 
a five-year loan term due to the lower monthly payments. This gain 
is slightly larger than the borrower surplus decrease for previously-
bankrupt borrowers in the counterfactual, and the difference between 
the two constitutes the social welfare gain from keeping bankruptcy 
flags. For loans originated in a given year, the gain in social welfare 
due  to  the  elimination  of  credit  underprovision  for  never-bankrupt 
borrowers  in  the  presence  of  data,  illustrated  as  the  dark  gray  tri-
angle in the right panel of Fig.  3, is $1070 per month, or $62,410 
in expectation over a five-year loan term. This gain is small relative 
to the welfare effect generated by the previously-bankrupt borrowers. 
As  we  discuss  in  Appendix  B.1,  this  is  because  the  never-bankrupt 
borrowers far outnumber the previously-bankrupt borrowers, implying 
that deadweight loss triangles are smaller for this group.

Note that the assumption that demand elasticities are equal across 
groups  is  not  quantitatively  important  for  our  results,  because  the 
never-bankrupt 𝐿 group contributes so little to total welfare. For the 
welfare effect in the 𝐿 group to be quantitatively important, the group’s 
demand elasticity would have to be unrealistically large; we show, 
at the end of Appendix B.1, that the 𝐿 group would need a demand 
elasticity almost nine times larger than the 𝐻 group’s in order for the 
𝐿 group’s welfare effect to equal that of the 𝐻 group.

3.4. Summary: Counterfactual welfare and transfer effects across groups

Combining our estimates, we can summarize the welfare and trans-
fer effects of our counterfactual in which bankruptcy flags are never 
removed.  We  visualize  these  effects  in  Fig.   3.  The  horizontal  red 
lines show the break-even payments lending to previously-bankrupt 
𝜙(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟)  and  never-bankrupt  𝜙(𝑟𝐿,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟)  types  in  the  counterfactual 
world without flag removals. The dashed horizontal line shows the 
pooling payment in the presence of flag removal.

In the counterfactual, total welfare increases by $0.75 per previo-
usly-bankrupt individual with a flag removed. Table  3 also summa-
rizes  the  relevant  quantities  expressed  per  individual  with  flag  re-
moval.  Of  the  $0.75  increase,  eliminating  credit  overprovision  to 
previously-bankrupt contributes $0.67 per individual, and eliminating 
credit underprovision to never-bankrupt borrowers contributes $0.08 
per previously-bankrupt individual.15 Multiplying $0.75 by the total 
number of borrowers affected by flag removals, we have a total wel-
fare  change  of  approximately  $598,385  for  loans  originated  in  the 
U.S.  in  a  given  year.  This  estimate  reflects  the  elimination  of  two 
inefficiencies: one arising from credit overprovision to the previously-
bankrupt, shown as the dark gray triangle in the left panel of Fig.  3, and 
one arising from credit underprovision to the never-bankrupt (a much 
smaller contribution), shown as the dark gray triangle in the right panel 
of Fig.  3.

The figure also depicts the surplus redistributed relative to the coun-
terfactual. Per previously-bankrupt individual with no flag, borrower 
surplus decreases by $23.75 over the loan term in the counterfactual. In 
aggregate, in the counterfactual, previously-bankrupt lose $19 million 
in borrower surplus per year of loan originations, as we calculated 
in Section 3.2.3. This corresponds to the light gray trapezoid in the 
left panel of Fig.  3. Per never-bankrupt individual, borrower surplus 
increases by $2.9 over the loan term in the counterfactual. In aggregate, 

15 Note that this $0.08 figure is per previously-bankrupt individual, while 
the  $0.01  reported  in  Section  3.3  is  per  never-bankrupt  individual,  and 
there are roughly 8.5 times as many never-bankrupt as previously-bankrupt 
individuals with no flag.

M. Jansen et al.

Table 3
Welfare estimates.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

9.02%

9.02%

9.02%

9.02%

$220.13

$220.13

$215.11

−0.011%

−0.226%

−0.011%

−0.011%

−0.226%

−0.218%

−0.011%

−0.218%

$3,678.00

$3,678.00

$3,678.00

$3,678.00

$3,678.00 

−0.011%  

−0.226%  

9.02%  

  Panel A: Prices
  Pre-flag-removal loan interest rate 
(%)
  Flag removal-induced change in 
interest rate (%)
  Change in monthly repayment as 
share of loan principal (%)
  Panel B: Quantities
  Pre-flag-removal loan quantity 
(Average $ per borrower per 
year)
  Flag removal-induced change in 
loan quantity 
(Average $ per borrower per 
year)
  Panel C: Average Surplus Changes
  Average consumer surplus 
redistributed to individuals with 
flag removal over 5 years ($ per 
eligible borrower with flag 
removal)
  Change in social surplus per 
individual over 5 years 
($ per eligible borrower with flag 
removal)
  Welfare change per dollar 
redistributed 
to bankrupt individuals
This table summarizes our main estimates implied by the specifications of Table  2. Panel A shows average interest rates in the six months before flag removal (𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟), the interest 
rate effect of flag removal (𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙 −𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟), and the effect of flag removal on the fraction of the principal repaid each month in a standardized five-year loan (𝜙(𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙)−𝜙(𝑟𝐻,𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑟)). Panel 
B shows average loan quantities in the six months before flag removal and the quantity effect of flag removal. Panel C summarizes surplus changes relative to a counterfactual 
world in which bankruptcy flags are never removed. The first row shows the average change in consumer surplus for individuals with flag removal for the average five-year loan. 
It is the sum of monthly non-default period surpluses. The number of non-default periods is derived from the probability that loans to individuals who at some point have a 
bankruptcy flag will be charged-off within two years of opening. The second row shows the social surplus change in expected dollars over the term of a loan, for each individual 
whose flag is removed. The estimate combines the welfare loss due to credit overprovision to the previously-bankrupt 𝐻 group and credit underprovision to the never-bankrupt 
𝐿 group. The third row provides the efficiency change per dollar redistributed to bankrupt individuals through the removal of bankruptcy flags. It is computed by dividing the 
second row by the first row. Source: TransUnion.

−0.0315  

$213.52  

−0.0324

−0.0318

−0.0324

−0.0317

$215.75

$23.75

$23.76

$22.93

$23.76

$22.93

-$0.75

-$0.74

-$0.75

-$0.74

-$0.76

in the counterfactual, never-bankrupt gain of $19.6 million in borrower 
surplus per year of loan originations; as we calculated in Section 3.3. 
This corresponds to the light gray rectangle and dark gray triangle in 
the right panel of Fig.  3.

In our framework, bankruptcy flag removal, relative to the coun-
terfactual  where  flags  are  never  removed,  can  be  thought  of  as  a 
policy which redistributes surplus from the never- to the previously-
bankrupt, at the cost of some social deadweight loss. We can now 
quantify  the  degree  to  which  flag  removal  is  an  imperfect  transfer 
tool: our estimates imply that for loan originations in a given year, 
flag  removal  transfers  roughly  $19  million  from  never-bankrupt  to 
previously-bankrupt borrowers, at the cost of destroying $598,385 in 
social surplus. Thus, for each dollar of surplus transferred to previously-
bankrupt borrowers, 3.15 cents of social surplus are destroyed. This 
substantiates the intuition, from Section 2.3, that when bankruptcy 
flags are removed from credit reports, the social deadweight losses from 
credit misallocation are small.16

16 A natural question is how our conclusions are affected by the informative-
ness of the removed data. In Appendix B.8, we show that the efficiency ratio is 
worse when the signal is more informative: that is, if data is more informative 
about default rates, then removing it has a larger negative impact on social 
welfare, for each dollar of surplus transferred between groups. Quantitatively, 
however,  we  show  that  data  removal  remains  a  low-cost  way  to  transfer 
surplus between groups, costing less than 21 cents of deadweight loss for each 
dollar transferred, even for signals that induce price changes up to eight times 
as large as the price changes induced by bankruptcy flag removal.

12 

4. Conclusion

This paper presents a new framework for studying the role of data 
acquisition  in  consumer  credit  markets.  In  a  simple  price-theoretic 
model of lending markets, we show that the price and quantity changes 
resulting  from  new  data  are  sufficient  statistics  for  calculating  the 
welfare and transfer effects of data policy. We apply our framework 
to  the  setting  of  bankruptcy  flag  removal;  we  show  that  keeping 
bankruptcy flags would increase social welfare relative to the status quo 
where bankruptcy flags are removed. However, the associated welfare 
gains would be fairly small relative to the induced transfers between 
previously-bankrupt and never-bankrupt borrowers.

While we present a specific application associated with the welfare 
benefits of data acquisition, the method is broadly applicable in finan-
cial markets. Future work could study data acquisition in other lending 
markets, and explore other contexts in which data acquisition leads to 
consumer benefits. For example, certain types of data acquisition may 
lead to large welfare gains relative to welfare transfers. Further, the 
welfare gains associated with data acquisition may be small in certain 
settings, suggesting that the privacy or equity gains from making data 
unavailable may outweigh the direct benefits of using the data to screen 
borrowers.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Mark Jansen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Fabian Nagel: Writing – 
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 

 
 
 
 
M. Jansen et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104171 

Supervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Constantine Yannelis: Writing – review & edit-
ing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision, 
Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investiga-
tion, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization. Anthony Lee Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding 
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
TransUnion (the data provider) had the right to review the research 
before  dissemination,  to  ensure  it  accurately  describes  TransUnion 
data, does not disclose confidential information, and does not contain 
material  it  deems  to  be  misleading  or  false  regarding  TransUnion, 
TransUnion’s  partners,  affiliates  or  customer  base,  or  the  consumer 
lending industry.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104171.

Data availability

Data and Welfare in Credit Markets (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Acemoglu, D., Makhdoumi, A., Malekian, A., Ozdaglar, A., 2022. Too much data: Prices 
and inefficiencies in data markets. Am. Econ. J.: Microecon. 14 (4), 218–256.
Argyle, B., Indarte, S., Iverson, B., Palmer, C., 2022. Explaining racial disparities in 

personal bankruptcy outcomes. Working Paper.

Dobbie,  W.,  Goldsmith-Pinkham,  P.,  Mahoney,  N.,  Song,  J.,  2020.  Bad  credit,  no 
problem? Credit and labor market consequences of bad credit reports. J. Financ. 
75 (5), 2377–2419.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Cullen, M.R., 2010. Estimating welfare in insurance markets 

using variation in prices. Q. J. Econ. 125 (3), 877–921.

Elul, R., Gottardi, P., 2015. Bankruptcy: Is it enough to forgive or must we also 

forget? Am. Econ. J.: Microeconomics 7 (4), 294–338.

European Data Protection Supervisor, 2021. Opinion on the proposal for a directive on 

consumer credits.

Farboodi, M., Mihet, R., Philippon, T., Veldkamp, L., 2019. Big data and firm dynamics. 

In: AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 109, pp. 38–42.

Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2020. Long-run growth of financial data technology. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 110 (8), 2485–2523.

Fuster,  A.,  Goldsmith-Pinkham,  P.,  Ramadorai,  T.,  Walther,  A.,  2022.  Predictably 
unequal? The effects of machine learning on credit markets. J. Financ. 77 (1), 
5–47.

Goodman-Bacon, A., 2021. Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing. 

J. Econometrics.

Gross, T., Kluender, R., Liu, F., Notowidigdo, M.J., Wang, J., 2021. The economic 

consequences of bankruptcy reform. Am. Econ. Rev. 111 (7), 2309–2341.

Gross, T., Notowidigdo, M.J., Wang, J., 2020. The marginal propensity to consume over 

the business cycle. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 12 (2), 351–384.

Harberger, A.C., 1964. The measurement of waste. Am. Econ. Rev. 54 (3), 58–76.
He, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2023. Open banking: Credit market competition when 

borrowers own the data. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 449–474.

Herkenhoff, K., Phillips, G.M., Cohen-Cole, E., 2021. The impact of consumer credit 
access  on  self-employment  and  entrepreneurship.  J.  Financ.  Econ.  141  (1), 
345–371.

Huang, J., 2022. Fintech Expansion. Tech. Rep., Working Paper.
Indarte, S., 2023. Moral hazard versus liquidity in household bankruptcy. J. Financ. 78 

(5), 2421–2464.

110 (9), 2819–2858.

Jehle, G.A., Reny, P.J., 2011. Advanced Microeconomic Theory, third ed. Pearson.
Jones, C.I., Tonetti, C., 2020. Nonrivalry and the economics of data. Am. Econ. Rev. 

Keys, B.J., Mahoney, N., Yang, H., 2023. What determines consumer financial distress? 

Place-and person-based factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (1), 42–69.

Kovbasyuk, S., Spagnolo, G., 2024. Memory and markets. Rev. Econ. Stud. 91 (3), 

1775–1806.

Liberman, A., Neilson, C.A., Opazo, L., Zimmerman, S., 2019. The equilibrium effects 
of information deletion: Evidence from consumer credit markets. Working Paper.
Liu, Z., Sockin, M., Xiong, W., 2023. Data Privacy and Algorithmic Inequality. Tech. 

Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Marshall, A., 1920. Principles of Economics, eighth ed. Macmillan and Co. 
Mas-Colell, A., Whinston, M.D., Green, J.R., et al., 1995. Microeconomic Theory, vol. 

1, Oxford university press New York.

Musto, D.K., 2004. What happens when information leaves a market? Evidence from 

Nelson, S.T., 2025. Private information and price regulation in the us credit card 

Padilla, A.J., Pagano, M., 2000. Sharing default information as a borrower discipline 

Pagano, M., Jappelli, T., 1993. Information sharing in credit markets. J. Financ. 48 (5), 

Schmalensee, R., 1981. Output and welfare implications of monopolistic third-degree 

price discrimination. Am. Econ. Rev. 71 (1), 242–247.

Tang, H., 2019. The value of privacy: Evidence from online borrowers. Working Paper.
Varian, H.R., 1985. Price discrimination and social welfare. Am. Econ. Rev. 75 (4), 

870–875.

Vives, X., 1987. Small income effects: A Marshallian theory of consumer surplus and 

downward sloping demand. Rev. Econ. Stud. 54 (1), 87–103.

Willig,  R.D.,  1976.  Consumer’s  surplus  without  apology.  Am.  Econ.  Rev.  66  (4), 

589–597.

Yannelis, C., Zhang, A.L., 2023. Competition and selection in credit markets. J. Financ. 

Econ. 150 (2), 103710.

13 

Barrios, J.M., 2021. Staggeringly problematic: A primer on staggered DiD for accounting 

postbankruptcy consumers. J. Bus. 77 (4), 725–748.

Begenau, J., Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2018. Big data in finance and the growth of 

market. Econometrica 93 (4), 1371–1410.

Blattner, L., Hartwig, J., Nelson, S., 2022. Information Design in Consumer Credit 

device. Eur. Econ. Rev. 44 (10), 1951–1980.

researchers. Working Paper.

large firms. J. Monet. Econ. 97, 71–87.

Markets. Tech. Rep., Working paper.

credit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.07554.

Blattner, L., Nelson, S., 2021. How costly is noise? Data and disparities in consumer 

1693–1718.

Bos, M., Breza, E., Liberman, A., 2018. The labor market effects of credit market 

information. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (6), 2005–2037.

Calomiris, C., Neal, L., 2013. History of financial globalization, overview. Handb. Key 

Glob. Financ. Mark. Inst. Infrastruct. 1, 3–14.

Chatterjee, S., Corbae, D., Dempsey, K., Ríos-Rull, J.-V., 2023. A quantitative theory of 

the credit score. Econometrica 91 (5), 1803–1840.

Varian, H.R., 1989. Price discrimination. Handb. Ind. Organ. 1, 597–654.
Vercammen, J.A., 1995. Credit bureau policy and sustainable reputation effects in credit 

Chen, Y., Schwartz, M., 2015. Differential pricing when costs differ: A welfare analysis. 

markets. Economica 461–478.

Rand J. Econ. 46 (2), 442–460.

Chipman, J.S., Moore, J.C., 1980. Compensating variation, consumer’s surplus, and 

welfare. Am. Econ. Rev. 70 (5), 933–949.

Dávila, E., 2020. Using elasticities to derive optimal bankruptcy exemptions. Rev. Econ. 

Stud. 87 (2), 870–913.

DeFusco, A.A., Tang, H., Yannelis, C., 2022. Measuring the welfare cost of asymmetric 
information in consumer credit markets. J. Financ. Econ. 146 (3), 821–840.

