Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Green tilts(cid:73)
Lubos Pastor a,c,d, Robert F. Stambaugh b,c,∗, Lucian A. Taylor b,c
a University of Chicago, 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
b University of Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
c NBER, USA
d CEPR, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Green Tilts -- Replication Package
(Original data)

JEL classification:
G11
G23

Keywords:
ESG
Sustainable investing
Portfolio tilt

1. Introduction

We estimate financial institutions’ portfolio tilts related to U.S. stocks’ environmental, social, and governance 
(ESG) characteristics. From 2012 to 2023, ESG-related tilts consistently total about 6% of the investment 
industry’s assets and rise from 17% to 27% of institutions’ total portfolio tilts. Significant ESG tilts arise from 
the choice of stocks held and, especially, the weights on stocks held. The largest institutions tilt increasingly 
toward green stocks, while other institutions and households tilt increasingly brown. Divestment from brown 
stocks is typically partial rather than full, even for individual mutual funds. UNPRI signatories and European 
institutions tilt greener; banks tilt browner.

‘‘Investing based on environmental, social, and governance (ESG) 
criteria  has  exploded  in  popularity,  reaching  $35  trillion  in  global 
assets  under  management  (AUM)  in  2020,  according  to  Bloomberg 
Intelligence’’.  Sentences  with  numbers  like  this  introduce  countless 
papers on ESG investing. Those numbers show that ESG matters to 
many financial institutions, but not how much it matters. How much do 
institutions’ portfolio weights differ from what they would be without 
ESG considerations? We estimate these ESG-related portfolio tilts and 
explore  various  additional  questions.  For  example,  how  have  ESG-
related tilts evolved over time? Which investors tilt toward ‘‘green’’ 
assets with favorable ESG characteristics, and which ones make the 

offsetting ‘‘brown’’ tilts? These questions are important because tilting 
green could have financial implications, given both theoretical argu-
ments and empirical evidence that green assets have lower expected 
returns.1

We assess the amount of ESG investing by estimating the size of 
institutions’ ESG-related portfolio tilts. Our approach has three main 
virtues. First, when estimating how stocks’ ESG characteristics relate 
to portfolio weights, we control for non-ESG stock characteristics. We 
thus separate ESG tilts from investment styles such as large-cap growth. 
This is useful because non-ESG attributes such as size and book-to-
market are correlated with ESG characteristics. Second, our approach 
measures ESG-related tilts at both the extensive margin (i.e., which 
stocks are held) and the intensive margin (i.e., weights on stocks held). 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. Pastor also serves as an independent director and trustee of Vanguard. The views in this paper are 
the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are affiliated with. We are grateful for comments from our discussants Dan Green, Sam Hartzmark, 
Andrei Kirilenko, Pedro Matos, Kunal Sachdeva, Adam Winegar, and Shaojun Zhang; from Doug Diamond, Winston Dou, Joanna Harris, Christian Leuz, David 
Musto, Mike Sebastian, Yao Zeng, Olivier David Zerbib; participants at the 2025 AFA conference, 2024 WFA conference, 2024 Baruch Climate Finance and ESG 
Conference, 2024 Cornell OFR Conference on Climate Change, 2024 EFMA meeting, 2024 SoFiE conference, 2023 BI Conference on Corporate Governance, 2023 
Fall Chicago Quantitative Alliance meeting, 2023 FRA conference, 2023 Olin Finance Conference at Washington University, 2023 University of Houston/Dallas 
Fed Energy Finance and the Energy Transition Conference, 2023 University of Alberta Frontiers in Finance Conference; and seminar participants at the following 
universities: Alabama, Brigham Young, Chicago, EDHEC, Emory, Florida State, HEC Montreal, Maryland, Peking, Penn State, Pennsylvania, Purdue, Stockholm 
School of Economics, and Tinbergen Institute. We dedicate this paper to the memory of Livia Amato, whose many contributions as a research professional have 
benefited this article as well as our prior work. We also thank Vitor Furtado Farias, Vanessa Hu, and Chris Yaoyao Zhu for excellent research assistance. This 
research was supported by the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance and the Robert King Steel Fellowship at the University of Chicago Booth School of 
Business.

∗ Corresponding author at: University of Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

E-mail address:  stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu (R.F. Stambaugh).

1 See Pástor et al. (2021, 2022) and Bolton and Kacperczyk (2021, 2023), among others.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104173
Received 11 January 2024; Received in revised form 22 September 2025; Accepted 26 September 2025
Available online 8 October 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
L. Pastor et al.

This allows us, for example, to assess the relative importance of partial 
versus full divestment of brown stocks. Third, our approach allows 
a stock’s E, S, and G characteristics to relate separately to portfolio 
weights. This helps when, say, some investors care primarily about G, 
and one stock has good G and bad S, while another has the opposite. A 
composite ESG score could rate both stocks equally, but these investors 
will overweight the first stock and underweight the second, creating 
tilts explained by G but not by composite ESG.

We do not confine ESG investing to motives related to social re-
sponsibility. ESG characteristics could also enter for financial or other 
reasons.2 For example, an institution could overweight brown stocks 
because it sees them as underpriced, or it could overweight green stocks 
because it sees them as a hedge against climate risk. We do confine ESG 
investing to portfolio choice, excluding shareholder engagement.

Our  empirical  implementation  focuses  on  U.S.  stocks  and  insti-
tutional holdings from 13F filings. After computing institution-level 
ESG-related portfolio tilts, we aggregate them across institutions to 
estimate the total ESG tilt in the investment industry. We find that 
this tilt consistently accounts for about 6% of the industry’s U.S. equity 
AUM between years 2012 and 2023, reaching 6.5% by the end of the 
sample. Our approach’s three virtues are confirmed by our results: First, 
controlling for non-ESG characteristics avoids overstating the total ESG 
tilt by nearly twice. Second, separating the extensive- and intensive-
margin tilts reveals that both are significant, with the intensive being 
two to four times larger. Finally, allowing E, S, and G to enter separately 
avoids understating the total tilt by over 40%, which occurs if just a 
composite ESG score is used.

We also assess ESG tilts in the context of institutions’ overall port-
folio tilts. For an institution less inclined to deviate from the market 
portfolio for any reason, a given ESG tilt is more economically signifi-
cant, as it represents a greater disruption of what the institution would 
otherwise do, given its investing style or mandate. To measure total 
portfolio tilts — deviations of portfolio weights from market weights 
for any reason — we use the active share measure of Cremers and 
Petajisto (2009). On average, ESG tilts are about 20% as large as active 
share during our sample period. So, while ESG tilts are modest relative 
to AUM, they are more substantial relative to total tilts. Moreover, 
although ESG tilts have not grown as a share of AUM, they have grown 
as a share of total tilts: the average ratio of ESG tilt to active share has 
grown from 17% in 2012 to 27% in 2023.

We  then  examine  whether  ESG  tilts  are  green  or  brown.  Given 
the multiple dimensions of ESG, any of them can be used to measure 
greenness. For each dimension, we compute each institution’s net tilt 
toward green stocks, or ‘‘GMB’’ tilt (green minus brown). From 2012 
until  a  modest  downturn  in  2023,  institutions  become  increasingly 
green, exhibiting a positive and rising aggregate GMB tilt. Offsetting 
that behavior, the aggregate portfolio of non-13F investors becomes 
browner, with a negative and decreasing GMB tilt. The rise in GMB tilts 
of 13F institutions occurs primarily via the intensive margin, that is, 
by increasingly overweighting green stocks and underweighting brown 
stocks. For example, divestment from brown stocks, a long-standing 
theme, occurs largely at the intensive margin, by reducing positions 
rather than eliminating them. All of these findings are robust across 
our four measures of greenness: E, S, G, and the composite score.

Our green tilt measure clearly differs from several potential alterna-
tives. For example, at the end of our sample, the aggregate institutional 
GMB  tilt  is  4.2%.  Without  controlling  for  non-ESG  characteristics, 
this tilt would be almost three times larger, 11.2%. An even simpler 
alternative measure, a difference between the portfolio’s total weights 
in green and brown stocks, produces an even larger aggregate value, 
27.6%. Both larger values reflect at least in part the institutions’ well 

2 In their global survey of equity portfolio managers, Edmans et al. (2025) 
find that managers’ primary motivation for using environmental and social 
criteria is to improve financial performance.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

known preference for large-cap stocks and growth stocks, which tend to 
score higher on ESG than small-cap or value stocks. All of these values 
pale in comparison with 76.1%, the share of our sample’s U.S. equity 
AUM managed by institutions that have signed the United Nations’ 
Principles for Responsible Investment (UNPRI). Numbers like that show 
ESG is widely endorsed, but clearly overstate its investment role.

Even though much of their investing is unrelated to ESG, UNPRI 
signatories do have significantly larger GMB tilts. We find this greener 
tilt not only across institutions but, for environmental greenness, also 
over time: institutions tend to become greener after signing the UNPRI. 
We  also  find  that  banks  are  browner  than  other  institutions,  espe-
cially insurance companies, and that European institutions are greener 
(i.e., European institutions’ holdings of U.S. equities are greener than 
U.S. institutions’ holdings of those equities).

ESG investing varies greatly across 13F-filing institutions. For exam-
ple, the rise in the investment industry’s aggregate greenness is driven 
by the largest institutions. When we rank institutions by AUM and 
separate them at the 33rd and 66th percentiles, we find that only the 
top third exhibits a positive and rising GMB tilt. In contrast, the GMB 
tilts of the middle and bottom thirds of institutions are mostly negative 
and  decreasing  over  time—meaning  brown  and  becoming  browner. 
For the biggest institution, BlackRock, the GMB tilt becomes especially 
large through 2020 but declines thereafter.

We  construct  firms’  ESG  characteristics  using  ESG  ratings  from 
MSCI, a leading data provider. For robustness, we re-estimate insti-
tutional tilts using ratings from Sustainalytics.  The results are very 
similar; for example, the aggregate ESG-related tilt ranges from 5.9% 
to 6.7% of AUM, and our main conclusions remain unchanged.

Results are also similar when using industry-adjusted ESG scores, 
computed by subtracting industry averages from firms’ scores. The re-
sulting ESG tilts are smaller, averaging 4% to 5%, but otherwise behave 
similarly to the unadjusted tilts. The same holds for industry-adjusted 
green and brown tilts. Again, our conclusions remain unchanged.

ESG tilts reflect decisions having diverse origins, such as differ-
ent managerial layers within an institution. In a mutual fund family, 
for  example,  an  active  fund’s  tilt  is  chosen  by  the  fund’s  portfolio 
manager, while a passive fund inherits the tilt of the index it tracks, 
chosen by fund-family management. In other cases, ESG tilts reflect 
decisions made outside the institution. For example, client mandates 
could dictate ESG tilts (or the absence thereof) in the portfolios of 
bank-administered trusts or advisor-managed separate accounts. We 
adopt an inclusive approach, not confining our analysis to tilts traceable 
to particular decision origins. Moreover, we focus on AUM-weighted 
tilts, which ultimately reflect the decisions of asset owners, who decide 
where the AUM resides.

Computing an institution’s ESG tilt from 13F holdings may obscure 
offsetting tilts across separate investing entities within the institution. 
For example, a mutual fund family with half its AUM in green-tilting 
funds and half in brown-tilting funds may show little ESG tilt in its 
13F holdings. In that sense, our estimates likely understate the tilts we 
would see if we could disaggregate the entities within each institution. 
Even  for  institutions  that  available  data  allow  us  to  disaggregate, 
namely mutual fund families, the data limit the disaggregation. For 
example, mutual funds often employ multiple managers or sub-advisors 
managing separate ‘‘sleeves’’ that aggregate to the observed fund port-
folio. It seems hard, even in theory, to identify a uniquely meaningful 
level of disaggregation. Quite simply, institutions’ 13F holdings offer 
a consistent and feasible level of aggregation for analyzing ESG tilts 
across the investment industry.

To complement this institution-level analysis, we estimate ESG tilts 
for U.S. equity mutual funds, using fund-level holdings from the S12 
dataset. Disaggregating the holdings of mutual fund families allows us 
to uncover ESG tilts that offset within families. We find these offsets 
to be modest: in 2023, they account for 1.8% of fund families’ AUM, 
or just under 0.5% of aggregate AUM—one fourteenth of the total ESG 
tilt.

2 

L. Pastor et al.

Mutual  funds’  total  ESG  tilt  ranges  from  6%  to  10%  of  AUM, 
and from 10% to 13% for actively managed funds. Extensive-margin 
tilts are about twice as large as those for institutions but remain be-
low intensive-margin tilts. Similarly, extensive-margin divestment from 
brown stocks exceeds that of institutions but still falls short of intensive-
margin divestment, indicating that for mutual funds, just like for 13F 
institutions, brown divestment is more partial than full. Mutual funds 
collectively tilt green, though not as much as institutions in aggregate. 
ESG-labeled funds exhibit larger green tilts and smaller brown tilts than 
non-ESG funds. Funds with higher Morningstar globe ratings also tilt 
greener.

ESG  investing  is  distinct  from  index  investing,  i.e.,  holding  the 
market portfolio. While investors’ ESG preferences can affect market 
weights,  we  do  not  view  pure  index  investors  as  engaging  in  ESG 
investing. Our framework assigns zero ESG tilts to index investors, as 
we control for market weights when estimating tilts. We also show that 
over the past decade, the market portfolio itself has increasingly tilted 
toward environmentally green stocks.

Our paper contributes to the large literature that studies the compo-
sition of institutional portfolios. This literature documents various insti-
tutional investors’ preference for large and liquid stocks (e.g., Falken-
stein  (1996),  Gompers  and  Metrick  (2001),  Bennett  et  al.  (2003), 
and  Ferreira  and  Matos  (2008)).  Institutions’  portfolio  holdings  are 
also related to stock characteristics such as the book-to-market ratio, 
prior-year  return,  and  various  risk  measures.3  We  estimate  institu-
tions’ ESG-related portfolio tilts while controlling for non-ESG stock 
characteristics that prior work relates to portfolio weights.

We  are  not  the  first  to  examine  institutions’  portfolio  tilts  with 
respect to stocks’ ESG characteristics. For example, Ferreira and Matos 
(2008) document institutions’ preference for firms with good gover-
nance. Bolton and Kacperczyk (2021) find that institutions underweight 
firms with high scope-1 carbon emission intensity. Atta-Darkua et al. 
(2023) find that institutions that join climate-related investor initiatives 
increase  their  holdings  of  firms  with  low  carbon  emissions.  Starks 
et al. (2023) find that institutions with longer investment horizons 
tilt their portfolios more towards firms with high ESG scores. Brandon 
et al. (2021) relate institutions’ portfolio-level environmental and social 
scores to performance. Nofsinger et al. (2019) find that institutions 
underweight  stocks  with  negative  environmental  and  social  indica-
tors. Hong and Kostovetsky (2012) find that Democratic-leaning fund 
managers allocate less to the stocks of firms viewed as socially irre-
sponsible. Choi et al. (2020a) show that institutions reduced the carbon 
exposures of their portfolios between 2001 and 2015. Starks (2023) 
shows that U.S. active mutual funds have increased their ownership of 
high-ESG firms between 2013 and 2021.

Like some of these studies, we find that institutions’ portfolios tilt 
green, and increasingly so. However, our approach to measuring ESG-
related portfolio tilts is fundamentally different. Most importantly, the 
above studies do not quantify the total amount of institutions’ ESG-
related  investing.  Moreover,  we  do  not  analyze  portfolio-level  ESG 
characteristics because they reflect also stocks’ non-ESG characteristics 
such as size and book-to-market, for which we control. Our approach 
has  two  additional  advantages.  First,  measuring  the  extensive-  and 
intensive-margin components of ESG tilts delivers new insights, such 
as  that  divestment  from  brown  stocks  occurs  largely  at  the  inten-
sive margin. Second, instead of analyzing one ESG characteristic at a 
time, we find it important to allow all three characteristics to enter 
simultaneously.

In a complementary study, Cremers et al. (2023) develop a new 
measure of how actively a fund uses ESG information. Their measure, 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

which they call active ESG share, is very different from ours: it com-
pares the distribution of a portfolio’s stock-level ESG scores to that of 
its benchmark. Their focus is also different in that they relate their 
measure to fund performance. They do not examine aggregate tilts, 
nor do they compare green vs. brown tilts or intensive vs. extensive 
margins.

Existing studies find mixed evidence on whether UNPRI signatories 
engage in ESG-related behavior, raising concerns about greenwashing 
(Brandon et al. (2022), Humphrey and Li (2021), Kim and Yoon (2023), 
and Liang et al. (2022)). We find that UNPRI signatories’ portfolios tend 
to exhibit greener tilts.

Prior evidence on ESG-related trading by retail investors is also 
mixed. On the one hand, Choi et al. (2020b) find that retail investors, 
but  not  institutions,  respond  to  abnormally  warm  temperatures  by 
selling stocks of carbon-intensive firms. Li et al. (2023) find that retail 
investors’  trades  respond  to  a  broader  set  of  ESG  news  events.  On 
the other hand, Moss et al. (2020) find that retail investors’ buy and 
sell decisions do not respond to ESG disclosures. Instead of analyzing 
responses to news or disclosures, we focus on ESG-related portfolio tilts. 
We find that the portfolios of non-13F investors, most of whom are 
retail investors, tilt brown, and increasingly so.

Our study also relates to the literature exploring links between own-
ership by institutions, including responsible ones, and various aspects 
of corporate social responsibility.4 Our focus on institutions’ ESG tilts 
provides a different and complementary perspective on institutional 
responsibility. Finally, our study relates to those that estimate ESG-
related asset demands in other ways, to address different issues, such 
as price impact.5

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines 
ESG-related tilts. Section 3 outlines our estimation procedure. Section 4 
presents evidence on ESG tilts for a large sample of institutional in-
vestors. Section 5 examines mutual funds’ tilts. Section 6 compares 
our green tilt measures to several alternatives. Section 7 analyzes the 
greening of the market portfolio. Section 8 concludes.

2. ESG-related tilts

To quantify the amount of ESG investing, we measure the extent 
to which investors tilt their portfolios in relation to stocks’ ESG char-
acteristics. We denote the set of all stocks’ ESG characteristics by . 
Each stock has multiple ESG characteristics. We denote neutral values 
of the same characteristics by 
0 is the counterpart of 
 in which each stock’s value of each ESG characteristic is replaced by 
the market portfolio’s value of the same characteristic. Let 𝑤𝑖𝑛 denote 
investor 𝑖’s portfolio weight on stock 𝑛. For any given investor-stock 
pair, we define the investor’s ESG-related portfolio tilt in this stock as 

0. Specifically, 

(1)

0, ] ,


, ] − E[𝑤𝑖𝑛|

𝛥𝑖𝑛 = E[𝑤𝑖𝑛|
where E denotes a conditional expectation and  is the set of stocks’ 
non-ESG stock characteristics. 𝛥𝑖𝑛 is the part of 𝑤𝑖𝑛 attributable to the 
difference between  and 
0, holding constant the non-ESG character-
istics. Holding  constant is important because the ESG and non-ESG 
characteristics  can  be  correlated.  For  example,  Pástor  et  al.  (2022) 
show that stocks with lower book-to-market ratios tend to have higher 
environmental ratings (i.e., growth stocks tend to be greener than value 
stocks). By including a stock’s book-to-market ratio among the non-
ESG characteristics, we control for this ratio in estimating the relation 
between  and portfolio weights. We conduct our analysis at a given 
point in time, 𝑡, but we suppress the variables’ dependence on 𝑡, for 
simplicity.

3 See, for example, Falkenstein (1996), Gompers and Metrick (2001), Ede-
len et al. (2016), DeVault et al. (2019), Koijen and Yogo (2019), and Lettau 
et al. (2021).  Lewellen (2011) shows that institutions’ aggregate holdings 
closely resemble those of the market portfolio.

4 See, for example, Chen et al. (2020), Choi et al. (2023), Dyck et al. (2019), 
Gantchev et al. (2022), Heath et al. (2021), Hwang et al. (2022), Ilhan et al. 
(2020), and Li and Raghunandan (2021).

5 See Koijen et al. (2024), Noh et al. (2023), and van der Beck (2022).

3 

L. Pastor et al.

The above definition of 𝛥𝑖𝑛, a difference in conditional expectations, 
has a familiar analogue in regression analysis. A common way to quan-
tify an independent variable’s contribution to the dependent variable is 
to compare fitted values (estimated conditional expectations) for two 
values of the independent variable, such as the latter’s actual value 
and its sample average. One could, for example, follow that procedure 
and estimate 𝛥𝑖𝑛 by just regressing, across stocks, 𝑤𝑖𝑛 on stock 𝑛’s ESG 
and non-ESG characteristics. We avoid that simple regression approach 
for two reasons. First, how an investor weights a stock depends on 
its attractiveness relative to other stocks in the investor’s portfolio, 
and that comparison involves the other stocks’ characteristics as well. 
Second, we include portfolio choices made at the extensive margin, not 
just the intensive, as there are often many stocks for which 𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 0. 
That feature of the data is poorly suited for the simple regression.

2.1. Extensive- and intensive-margin tilts

The conditional expectations entering the value of 𝛥𝑖𝑛 in Eq. (1) 
can be written as E[𝑤𝑖𝑛|⋅] = Prob{𝑤𝑖𝑛 > 0|⋅} × E[𝑤𝑖𝑛|𝑤𝑖𝑛 > 0, ⋅], under 
≥ 0.6 Therefore,  relates to 𝑤𝑖𝑛 through two 
the assumption that 𝑤𝑖𝑛
channels: the probability that investor 𝑖 holds stock 𝑛 and the amount 
invested in the stock if held. To quantify both channels, for any set of 
ESG characteristics  ̃, we denote
𝜋( ̃) ≡ Prob{𝑤𝑖𝑛 > 0|
̃, }
𝑤+( ̃) ≡ E[𝑤𝑖𝑛|𝑤𝑖𝑛 > 0; ̃, ] .
We apply these formulas for two different values of  ̃: the observed 
values,  ,  and  the  neutral  values,  
0.  We  can  thus  rewrite  Eq.  (1) 
as  𝛥𝑖𝑛 = 𝜋()𝑤+() − 𝜋(
0).  We  can  then  split  𝛥𝑖𝑛  into  two 
components, 
𝑖𝑛 + 𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖𝑛 ,

𝛥𝑖𝑛 = 𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡

0)𝑤+(

(3)

(2)

(4)

representing  the  extensive-  and  intensive-margin  tilts,  respectively. 
These components are
𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡
0) {𝜋() − 𝜋(
𝑖𝑛 = 𝑤+(
𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖𝑛 = 𝜋() {𝑤+() − 𝑤+(

0)} .

0)}

(5)

(6)

The extensive-margin tilt, 𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝑖𝑛 , is computed by varying the prob-
ability of holding the stock, without changing the expected portfolio 
weight conditional on holding the stock. This tilt answers the question: 
how much of investor 𝑖’s weight in stock 𝑛 is attributable to the relation 
between the stock’s ESG characteristics and the probability of holding 
the stock?

The intensive-margin tilt, 𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡

𝑖𝑛 , is computed by varying the expected 
portfolio weight conditional on holding the stock, without changing 
the probability of holding the stock. This tilt answers the question: 
how much of investor 𝑖’s weight in stock 𝑛 relates to the stock’s ESG 
characteristics, conditional on holding the stock?

2.2. Investor-level tilts

We compute investor 𝑖’s ESG-related portfolio tilt by adding up the 
absolute values of the investor’s portfolio tilts with respect to each of 
the 𝑁 stocks: 
𝑁
∑

(7)

𝑇𝑖 =

1
2

|𝛥𝑖𝑛| .

𝑛=1

This definition parallels that of the ESG tilt in Pástor et al. (2021), 
except that here 𝛥𝑖𝑛 is not simply a deviation of the stock’s portfolio 
weight  from  its  market  weight.  The  division  by  2  ensures  that  we 

6 This assumption accommodates our data. Reported holdings of institutions 
and funds include only long stock positions. For stocks that are not held long, 
we set 𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 0 in our empirical implementation.

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

avoid double-counting: for each stock the investor overweights because 
of , the investor must underweight one or more other stocks. Put 
differently, ∑𝑁
𝑛=1 𝛥𝑖𝑛 = 0 for all 𝑖, which follows from Eq. (1), so any 
positive 𝛥𝑖𝑛’s must be balanced by negative ones.

We similarly compute the investor’s intensive- and extensive-margin 

tilts:

𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖 =

1
2

𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑖

=

1
2

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1
𝑁
∑

|𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖𝑛 |

|𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝑖𝑛 | .

(8)

(9)

≠ 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡

𝑛=1
Note that, in general, 𝑇𝑖
cleanly into 𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖𝑛  and 𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡
forward. In particular, |𝛥𝑖𝑛| = |𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡
inequality is strict if and only if 𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡
follows immediately that 𝑇𝑖

. While 𝛥𝑖𝑛 can be decomposed 
𝑖𝑛  (see Eq. (4)), decomposing |𝛥𝑖𝑛| is less straight-
≤
𝑖𝑛 + 𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑖𝑛 |, and the 
𝑖𝑛 |
𝑖𝑛  and 𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑖𝑛  have opposite signs. It 
.

𝑖𝑛 | + |𝛥𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝑖 + 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡

≤ 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡

|𝛥𝑖𝑛𝑡

𝑖 + 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝑖

𝑖

2.3. Aggregate tilts

Let 𝐴𝑖 denote the dollar value of investor 𝑖’s assets. For any given set 
of investors, , we can compute the aggregate tilt as an asset-weighted 
average tilt across investors: 

(10)

𝐴𝑖𝑇𝑖 ,

∑

𝑖∈

𝑇 =

1
𝐴
where 𝐴 = ∑
is ‘‘tilted’’.

𝑖∈ 𝐴𝑖. 𝑇  measures the fraction of total investor assets that 

We compute aggregate intensive- and extensive-margin tilts analo-

gously:

𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡 =

𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡 =

1
𝐴

1
𝐴

∑

𝑖∈
∑

𝑖∈

𝐴𝑖𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖

𝐴𝑖𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑖

.

2.4. Green and brown tilts

(11)

(12)

The tilt measures presented so far capture all ESG-related portfolio 
tilts, regardless of their direction. Two investors with identical 𝑇𝑖 values 
could in principle be using ESG characteristics in opposite ways, one 
tilting toward and the other away from stocks with high values of 
these  characteristics.  Next,  we  design  directional  tilt  measures  that 
separate ‘‘green’’ investment behavior from ‘‘brown’’. Green behavior 
tilts toward green stocks and away from brown stocks, whereas brown 
behavior tilts in the opposite direction.

To define directional tilt measures, we must designate stocks as 
green or brown. That is not straightforward with multiple ESG charac-
teristics, as stocks with high values of one characteristic could have low 
values of another. For any given ESG characteristic, however, such as a 
composite ESG rating or an E score, we can define greenness in terms 
of that characteristic. Let 𝑔𝑛 denote stock 𝑛’s value of that characteristic 
and 𝑔0 the characteristic’s neutral value — the capitalization-weighted 
≥ 𝑔0
average of 𝑔𝑛 across stocks. We classify the stock as green if 𝑔𝑛
and brown if 𝑔𝑛 < 𝑔0. In other words, a stock is green if it is greener 
than the market portfolio and brown if it is browner than the market 
portfolio.

For each {𝑖, 𝑛} pair, we classify the tilt into one of four categories. 
Consequently, each 𝛥𝑖𝑛 from Eq. (1) takes one of the following four 
values (the other three are zero):
≥ 𝑔0

𝛥𝑂𝐺
𝑖𝑛 ∶ when 𝛥𝑖𝑛 > 0 and 𝑔𝑛

→ Overweight Green stocks (green tilt)

𝛥𝑈 𝐵
𝑖𝑛 ∶ when 𝛥𝑖𝑛 < 0 and 𝑔𝑛 < 𝑔0

→ Underweight Brown stocks (green tilt)

𝛥𝑂𝐵
𝑖𝑛 ∶ when 𝛥𝑖𝑛 > 0 and 𝑔𝑛 < 𝑔0

(13)

(14)

L. Pastor et al.

→ Overweight Brown stocks (brown tilt)

𝛥𝑈 𝐺
𝑖𝑛 ∶ when 𝛥𝑖𝑛 < 0 and 𝑔𝑛

≥ 𝑔0
→ Underweight Green stocks (brown tilt) .

(15)

(16)

There are two types of ‘‘green tilts’’, which reflect green investment 
behavior, and two types of ‘‘brown tilts’’, which reflect brown invest-
ment behavior. An investor can tilt green by either overweighting green 
stocks or underweighting brown stocks. An investor can tilt brown by 
either overweighting brown stocks or underweighting green stocks.

Aggregating the signed tilts across stocks to the investor level, we 

define

𝑇 𝑂𝐺
𝑖

=

𝑇 𝑂𝐵
𝑖

=

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1
𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

𝛥𝑂𝐺
𝑖𝑛

,

𝑇 𝑈 𝐵
𝑖

= −

𝛥𝑂𝐵
𝑖𝑛 ,

𝑇 𝑈 𝐺
𝑖

= −

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1
𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

𝛥𝑈 𝐵
𝑖𝑛

,

𝛥𝑈 𝐺
𝑖𝑛

.

(17)

We put minus signs in front of two of the sums to ensure that all four 
tilts are nonnegative. For a given investor 𝑖, all four tilts can be strictly 
positive—the investor can be overweighting some green stocks while 
underweighting others, and similarly for brown stocks.

To quantify a given investor’s overall green and brown behaviors, 
we combine the above tilts to measure the investor’s total green tilt 
(𝑇 𝐺

𝑖 ):

𝑖 ) and total brown tilt (𝑇 𝐵
𝑇 𝐺
𝑖 = 𝑇 𝑂𝐺
𝑖 = 𝑇 𝑂𝐵
𝑇 𝐵
We also compute the investor’s green-minus-brown tilt as7

𝑖 + 𝑇 𝑈 𝐵
𝑖 + 𝑇 𝑈 𝐺

≥ 0 .

≥ 0

𝑖

𝑖

(18)

(19)

(20)

𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
𝑖

= 𝑇 𝐺

𝑖 − 𝑇 𝐵
𝑖

.

> 0  indicates  that  the  investor’s  behavior  is  green  overall, 
< 0 indicates net brown behavior. For comparison, note 

𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
𝑖
whereas 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
that the unsigned tilt from Eq. (7) equals

𝑖

𝑇𝑖 =

=

1
2
1
2

(𝑇 𝑂𝐺

𝑖 + 𝑇 𝑈 𝐵

𝑖

+ 𝑇 𝑂𝐵

𝑖 + 𝑇 𝑈 𝐺

𝑖

(𝑇 𝐺

𝑖 + 𝑇 𝐵

𝑖 ) .

)

(21)

(22)

The value of 𝑇𝑖 thus represents the average of the green and brown tilts 
𝑇 𝐺
𝑖  and 𝑇 𝐵

 represents their difference.

𝑖 , whereas 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵

We also compute asset-weighted averages across investors, analo-
gous to Eqs. (10) through (12), yielding the aggregate tilt measures 𝑇 𝐺, 
𝑇 𝐵, and 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵. If the aggregates are computed across all investors, the 
green and brown tilts are always equal: 

𝑖

𝑇 𝐺 = 𝑇 𝐵 ,

(23)

as we prove in Appendix  A. Given that the green and brown tilts fully 
offset each other, the value of 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵 computed across all investors is 
zero. Nonetheless, 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵 can be nonzero when computed across subsets 
of investors, as we show later.

Finally, we separate the green and brown tilts into their extensive- 
and intensive-margin components. We first split the 𝛥𝑖𝑛’s in Eqs. (13) 
through (16) into two parts, as in Eq. (4). We then aggregate those parts 
to the investor level, as in Eqs. (8) and (9), and then to the aggregate 
level, as in Eqs. (10) through (12).

3. Estimation framework

To estimate the portfolio tilts from Section 2, we first estimate two 
quantities: 𝜋𝑖𝑛, the probability of investor 𝑖 holding stock 𝑛, and 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛, 
the expected weight conditional on holding the stock (see Eqs. (2) and 

7 An  alternative  way  to  compute  this  quantity  is  𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
𝑛∈
𝐵

𝛥𝑖𝑛 −
𝐵 denote the sets of all green and brown stocks, 

𝛥𝑖𝑛, where 

𝐺 and 

𝑛∈

𝐺

𝑖

∑

= ∑

respectively.

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

(3)). With those estimates in hand, we compute the components of 𝛥𝑖𝑛
in Eqs. (5) and (6), which yield 𝛥𝑖𝑛 in Eq. (4).8 We then aggregate the 
𝛥𝑖𝑛 estimates into the tilts defined in Section 2. We estimate 𝜋𝑖𝑛 and 
𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 separately for each quarter 𝑡, but we continue suppressing the 𝑡
subscripts, as in Section 2.

Estimating 𝜋 and 𝑤+ requires a model for portfolio weights. In Sec-
tion 3.1, we describe our econometric model for the extensive margin 
of portfolio weights, which yields an estimate of 𝜋. In Section 3.2, we 
present our model for the intensive margin, which yields an estimate of 
𝑤+, after incorporating a selection correction described in Section 3.3. 
In Section 3.4, we discuss how we adjust our estimates for potential 
bias and compute their standard errors.

We arrange the elements of  into an 𝑁 × 𝐾1 matrix 𝐺 of the 𝑁
stocks’ ESG characteristics. We also arrange the elements of  into 
an 𝑁 × 𝐾2 matrix 𝐶 of non-ESG characteristics, which include stocks’ 
market capitalization weights. We define 𝑋 ≡ [𝜄 𝐺 𝐶], where 𝜄 is an 𝑁-
vector of ones, so that 𝑋 is an 𝑁 ×𝐾 matrix, where 𝐾 = 1+ 𝐾1 +𝐾2. Let 
𝑥𝑛𝑗 denote the (𝑛, 𝑗) element of 𝑋, and 𝑋𝑛 its 𝑛th row. We ensure that 
all elements of 𝑋 are non-negative (by using cross-sectional percentiles 
of raw characteristics, as we explain later).

We estimate tilts related to ESG characteristics, but our method-
ology can be used to estimate tilts related to other characteristics of 
interest. That is, let  contain those characteristics and  contain other 
characteristics included as controls. The tilts defined in Section 2 are 
then reinterpreted as tilts related to the characteristics in . A key 
aspect of our methodology in general is that it estimates tilts at the 
extensive margin in addition to the intensive margin. An alternative 
approach for analyzing primarily the latter is Koijen and Yogo (2019), 
who take as exogenous the subset of stocks an institution can weight 
positively.

3.1. Extensive margin

Our model of the extensive margin gives the value of 
≡ Prob{𝑤𝑖𝑛 > 0|𝑋} .

𝜋𝑖𝑛

(24)

We assume that 𝜋𝑖𝑛 for each investor-stock pair is given by an investor-
specific probit model: 

𝜋𝑖𝑛 = 𝛷(𝑋𝑛𝑎𝑖) ,

(25)

where 𝛷(⋅) denotes the cumulative distribution function of the standard 
normal distribution.

We estimate the model in Eq. (25) for each investor 𝑖 across all 
stocks with non-missing data; as a result, the number of observations is 
the same for all investors. The dependent variable is an indicator 1𝑤𝑖𝑛>0, 
which is equal to one if stock 𝑛 is held by investor 𝑖 and zero otherwise. 
We estimate the coefficients 𝑎𝑖 by maximum likelihood and denote the 
fitted value by ̂𝜋𝑖𝑛. The estimated probabilities ̂𝜋𝑖𝑛 lie between 0 and 1, 
by construction. Additional details, including on goodness of fit, are in 
the Internet Appendix.

Suppose 𝑋 were to include all of the information used by investor 
𝑖, such that 1𝑤𝑖𝑛>0 depends deterministically on 𝑋. The latter depen-
dence could involve all rows of 𝑋, not just 𝑋𝑛, but that dependence 
would likely be complicated, having no analytic solution, especially 
with realistic constraints on asset weights faced by many institutions.9 
Given that any 𝑋 we specify empirically is only a subset of the in-
vestor’s information, the dependence of 1𝑤𝑖𝑛>0 on 𝑋 is probabilistic, 
not  deterministic.  We  condition  the  probability  in  Eq.  (25)  on  just 
𝑋𝑛 for parsimony and tractability. The modeled randomness in 1𝑤𝑖𝑛>0
therefore reflects the omission of information as well as uncertainty 

8 Note that 𝛥𝑖𝑛 is defined for all stocks 𝑛, including stocks not actually held 

by investor 𝑖.

9 For example, even a standard mean–variance optimization with short-sale 

constraints generally does not admit an analytic solution.

L. Pastor et al.

about how information determines the institution’s asset choices. We 
construct 𝑋𝑛 as the cross-sectional percentiles of asset 𝑛’s character-
istics, as explained later, so to that extent 𝑋𝑛 incorporates cross-asset 
information. All stocks’ 𝑋𝑛 values affect the probit estimate of 𝑎𝑖, which 
is another way cross-asset information enters.

3.2. Intensive margin

Our model of the intensive margin gives the value of 
≡ E[𝑤𝑖𝑛|𝑤𝑖𝑛 > 0, 𝑋, 𝜋𝑖] .

𝑤+
𝑖𝑛

(26)

The expectation in Eq. (26) conditions on the full set of probabilities 
≡ [𝜋𝑖1 ⋯ 𝜋𝑖𝑁 ]′ and the full matrix 𝑋, because an investor’s expected 
𝜋𝑖
weight on a given stock can depend on what other stocks, and char-
acteristics thereof, the investor could hold as well. For example, the 
portfolio weight on each stock held by the investor can depend on the 
greenness of all stocks, including stocks not held.

We model 𝑤+

𝑖𝑛 as a restricted linear function of stock 𝑛’s charac-
teristics, after scaling it by the stock’s market portfolio weight, 𝑤𝑚𝑛. 
Specifically, we assume that 

𝑤+
𝑖𝑛
𝑤𝑚𝑛

𝐾
∑

=

𝑐𝑖𝑗 𝑥𝑛𝑗 ,

𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑁,

(27)

𝑗=1
so that 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 is linear in the 𝐾 values of 𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 . If stock 𝑛 is held, 
its expected weight could in principle depend not only on the stock’s 
own value of 𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 but also on the values of that quantity for other 
stocks the investor may hold. Recognizing that potential dependence, 
we allow 𝑐𝑖𝑗 to depend on the portfolio’s expected sum of 𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 across 
stocks. We also restrict the expected portfolio weights to add up to one:
𝑁
∑

𝜋𝑖𝑛𝑤+

𝑖𝑛 = 1 ,

𝑛=1
as long as 𝜋𝑖 has at least one positive element. As we show in the 
Appendix, we can then estimate 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛∕𝑤𝑚𝑛 by the fitted values from the 
regression 

𝐾
∑

=

𝑏𝑖𝑗 ̃𝑥𝑖𝑛𝑗 + 𝑒𝑖𝑛 ,

𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑁,

𝑤𝑖𝑛
𝑤𝑚𝑛

𝑗=1
where ∑𝐾

̃𝑥𝑖𝑛𝑗 =

𝑥𝑛𝑗
𝑛=1 𝜋𝑖𝑛𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗

∑𝑁

.

𝑗=1 𝑏𝑖𝑗 = 1 and the 𝑗th independent variable is 

This regression’s error term, 𝑒𝑖𝑛, could in principle be heteroskedastic, 
but this concern should be alleviated by our use of scaled portfolio 
weights,  𝑤𝑖𝑛∕𝑤𝑚𝑛,  on  the  left-hand  side.  In  fact,  the  main  reason 
why we scale 𝑤𝑖𝑛 by the market weight in Eq. (27) is to reduce the 
heteroskedasticity in 𝑒𝑖𝑛. If we worked with raw weights 𝑤𝑖𝑛 instead, 
𝑒𝑖𝑛’s would likely be more volatile for larger firms (whose portfolio 
weights tend to be larger).

To derive the regression model in Eq. (29), we assume that for each 

stock 𝑛, 

𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 𝑤+

𝑖𝑛 + 𝜖𝑖𝑛 ,

(31)

(28)

(29)

(30)

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

of 𝜁𝑛 to 𝑤𝑖𝑛 be 𝜆𝑖𝜁𝑛. The correlation between 𝜖𝑖𝑛 and 𝑝𝑛 is positive 
(negative)  if  𝜆𝑖  and  ̄𝜆  have  the  same  (opposite)  sign.  Suppose  the 
investor  is  an  actively  managed  fund.  (For  a  passive  fund,  we  are 
presumably not omitting a relevant 𝜁𝑛.) Suppose 𝜁𝑛 reflects positive 
noise-trader sentiment injecting a positive component,  ̄𝜆𝜁𝑛, into the 
equilibrium 𝑝𝑛. On one hand, an active manager with sufficient skill 
to recognize that effect underweights the stock, giving the fund’s 𝜆𝑖
the opposite sign of  ̄𝜆. That opposite sign occurs even if the fund and 
others with similar skill exert negative pressure on 𝑝𝑛 in the process 
of underweighting the stock. The decision to underweight the stock 
is made with full knowledge of the accompanying 𝑝𝑛, whatever the 
forces determining that equilibrium price. On the other hand, an active 
manager with less skill can be infected with the same positive sentiment 
as the noise traders, giving that fund’s 𝜆𝑖 the same sign as  ̄𝜆. Because 
even the sign of any correlation between 𝜖𝑖𝑛 and 𝑝𝑛 is ambiguous, we 
adopt E[𝜖𝑖𝑛|𝑋] = 0 as a reasonable simplification. Also motivating this 
simplification is that we do not focus on the relation between 𝑤𝑖𝑛 and 
the price-related variables in 𝑋.

3.3. Selection correction

The regression in Eq. (29) assumes that for each stock 𝑛 in the 𝑁-
stock universe, if investor 𝑖 were to hold the stock, the weight they 
would place on it, 𝑤𝑖𝑛, would obey that equation, with E[𝑒𝑖𝑛|𝑋] = 0. 
The values of 𝑤𝑖𝑛 we use in estimating the regression in Eq. (29) can 
be only those for the subset of stocks actually held by the investor. If 
the probability of holding stock 𝑛 is correlated with 𝑒𝑖𝑛, then 𝑒𝑖𝑛 need 
not have zero expectation conditional on stock 𝑛 being in that selected 
subset. Estimates of 𝑏𝑖𝑗 can be inconsistent if this selection effect is not 
corrected.

To correct for selection, we follow the two-step procedure of Heck-
man (1979), as described in Appendix  A. We find empirically that the 
selection correction matters more for institutions holding fewer stocks, 
for which selection is more likely to matter. Given that institutions 
holding fewer stocks tend to be smaller, the correction makes relatively 
little difference in the aggregate asset-weighted tilt estimates (see the 
Internet Appendix).

3.4. Bias adjustment and standard errors

The coefficients in Eqs. (25) and (29) are consistently estimated, 
and thus so are the values of 𝛥𝑖𝑛 and the resulting tilts defined in Sec-
tion 2. The finite-sample properties of those estimates are not evident, 
however. We therefore conduct bootstrap simulations to adjust for any 
potential biases in our estimated tilts and to obtain standard errors.

𝑖

For  example,  to  de-bias  the  raw  estimates  of  𝑇𝑖,  which  we  de-
note by 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤
, we simulate many samples of portfolio weights, which 
we  denote  by  ̃𝑤𝑖𝑛,  by  resampling  the  residuals  from  the  extensive- 
and intensive-margin regressions estimated on the sample of observed 
weights, 𝑤𝑖𝑛. For each simulated sample  ̃𝑤𝑖𝑛, we estimate the extensive- 
and intensive-margin regressions on that sample, obtaining an estimate 
of the investor-level tilt, which we denote by  ̃𝑇𝑖. We estimate the bias 
, where  ̄̃𝑇𝑖 is the average value of  ̃𝑇𝑖
in 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤
𝑖
𝑖
across simulations. Our bias-adjusted estimate of 𝑇𝑖 is 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤
− 𝑇 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖. 
An important by-product of the bootstrap analysis is the standard error 
of 𝑇𝑖, which we obtain from the standard deviation of the  ̃𝑇𝑖’s across 
simulations. The details of the bootstrap procedure are in Appendix  A.

 as 𝑇 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖 = ̄̃𝑇𝑖 − 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤

𝑖

with E[𝜖𝑖𝑛|𝑋] = 0. The assumption that E[𝜖𝑖𝑛|𝑋] = 0 merits discussion 
in  light  of  alternative  treatments  such  as  Koijen  and  Yogo  (2019). 
Following  their  argument,  note  that  𝜖𝑖𝑛  includes  effects  on  𝑤𝑖𝑛  of 
the stock’s characteristics that our model omits. Let 𝜁𝑛 denote such a 
characteristic. If 𝜁𝑛 is related to demands for stock 𝑛 by a substantial 
mass of investors, then 𝜁𝑛 can affect the stock’s price, 𝑝𝑛, making 𝜖𝑖𝑛
correlated with 𝑝𝑛. Because 𝑋 includes variables that contain 𝑝𝑛, such 
as the market weight 𝑤𝑚𝑛, the assumption E[𝜖𝑖𝑛|𝑋] = 0 then fails.

While the above scenario of non-zero correlation between 𝜖𝑖𝑛 and 
𝑝𝑛 is possible, it does not even imply a sign for the correlation. In 
particular, let ̄𝜆𝜁𝑛 denote the effect of 𝜁𝑛 on 𝑝𝑛, and let the contribution 

4. Estimates of ESG tilts: Financial institutions

This section presents our main empirical findings. Using the econo-
metric framework from Section 3, we estimate the ESG-related portfolio 
tilts introduced in Section 2 for a comprehensive sample of institutional 
investors. After describing our data in Section 4.1, we analyze total ESG 
tilts in Section 4.2, followed by green and brown tilts in Section 4.3. 
In Section 4.4, we examine how the tilts vary across institutions. In 
Section  4.5,  we  study  tilts  based  on  industry-adjusted  ESG  scores. 
Finally, in Section 4.6, we assess the robustness of our results using 
ESG metrics from an alternative data provider.

6 

L. Pastor et al.

4.1. Data

We estimate the model using quarterly panel data on institutional 
investment managers that file Form 13F with the Securities and Ex-
change Commission. An institution is required to file this form if its 
holdings of U.S. stocks exceed $100 million. Here, ‘‘institution’’ refers 
to an investment company such as Fidelity, not its individual funds. 
Most sample institutions are investment advisors, but the sample also 
includes banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and endowments. 
It also includes non-U.S. institutions’ holdings of U.S. stocks.

We obtain the 13F holdings data from Thomson/Refinitiv. From 
these data, we compute institutions’ quarterly portfolio weights 𝑤𝑖𝑛
among the subset of ‘‘covered’’ stocks, meaning stocks with non-missing 
ESG  and  non-ESG  characteristics.  There  are  roughly  2,000  covered 
stocks throughout our sample period. In 2023, covered stocks account 
for 86% of the combined market capitalization of all CRSP stocks.10 
We define an institution’s AUM to be its combined dollar holdings of 
covered stocks.

We exclude institutions with less than $100 million in total 13F 
holdings (covered and uncovered), less than 50% of their total 13F 
dollar holdings in covered stocks, and, to allow sufficient precision in 
the intensive model, fewer than 30 covered stocks held. These filters 
drop institutions that together account for just 3.8% of covered stocks’ 
total market capitalization in 2023.

The number of institutions in our sample ranges from 1,727 in 2012 
to 3,260 in 2023. Institutions’ combined AUM increases from $9.7 tril-
lion to $31.5 trillion during that period. The institutions hold between 
63% and 70% of covered stocks’ combined market capitalization during 
our sample period.

Our measures of ESG characteristics follow Pástor et al. (2022), 
who use data from MSCI, the world’s largest provider of ESG ratings 
(e.g., Eccles and Stroehle (2018), and Berg et al. (2023b)).  Berg et al. 
(2023a) find that among the ESG ratings from five major providers, 
MSCI’s rating is the most important in explaining ESG fund holdings. 
They also note that MSCI has the largest market share in the ESG 
data market. The MSCI data cover more companies than other ESG 
raters  (Berg  et  al.,  2022)  and  provide  granular  industry-unadjusted 
measures. Our sample begins in 2012q4, when MSCI greatly expanded 
its coverage.

We compute environmental greenness as in Pástor et al. (2022), 
interacting the MSCI variables ‘‘Environmental Pillar Score’’ and ‘‘Envi-
ronmental Pillar Weight’’.11 We compute social and governance green-
ness the same way, replacing MSCI’s E variables with their S and G 
counterparts. In most of our analysis, each stock’s ESG characteristics 
are represented by a 3 × 1 vector representing E, S, and G greenness. 
In some of our analysis, there is only one ESG characteristic per stock: 
the stock’s composite ESG score, which is equal to MSCI’s Weighted 
Average Key Issue score. This composite score equals the sum of our E, 
S, and G greenness measures plus a constant.

In the set of non-ESG stock characteristics, we include seven vari-
ables that are commonly used in portfolio construction: market capi-
talization, book-to-market ratio, profitability, investment, dividends-to-
book ratio, market beta, and the stock’s return over the past 12 months, 
excluding the most recent month. All seven variables are motivated by 
evidence from prior work cited earlier. For example, Koijen and Yogo 
(2019) use essentially the same variables, except for the last one, which 
is motivated by Gompers and Metrick (2001). In the intensive-margin 

10 We study stocks with CRSP share codes of 10, 11, 12, or 18.
11 Environmental greenness equals −(10 − 𝐸_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖,𝑡−1) × 𝐸_𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1∕100. 
𝐸_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  is  ‘‘Environmental  Pillar  Score’’,  a  number  between  zero  and  10 
measuring a company’s resilience to long-term environmental risks. 𝐸_𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
is ‘‘Environmental Pillar Weight’’, a number between zero and 100 measuring 
the importance of E relative to S and G in the company’s industry. As Pástor 
et al. (2022) explain, interacting pillar scores and weights in this way is 
important for producing a meaningful measure of greenness.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

model, non-ESG characteristics also include 𝑤𝑚𝑛, the stock’s weight in 
the market portfolio of covered stocks, as dictated by the model. The 
intensive model thus includes two different measures related to stock 
size. All variables are computed from CRSP and Compustat data. Their 
precise definitions are in the Internet Appendix.

Some of the non-ESG stock characteristics, such as market capital-
ization, exhibit significant skewness. Therefore, instead of using their 
raw  values,  we  employ  their  cross-sectional  percentiles.  For  consis-
tency, we also use cross-sectional percentiles of stocks’ E, S, and G 
greenness values, as well as of the stock’s ESG composite score. In 
short, both sets  and  contain the cross-sectional percentiles of stocks’ 
characteristics rather than raw values. Finally, we use cross-sectional 
percentiles also to compute 
0, which contains the values of the ESG 
characteristics  for  the  market  portfolio.  For  each  characteristic,  we 
compute its value-weighted average across all covered stocks, then we 
set the corresponding element of 
0 to that average’s percentile in the 
cross section of stocks.

4.2. Total ESG tilts

The solid line in Panel A of Fig.  1 displays quarterly estimates of 
𝑇  from Eq. (10) computed across all sample 13F institutions, i.e., the 
aggregate ESG-related tilt. The series begins at 6.9% in 2012, drops 
as low as 5.2% in 2016, and ends at 6.5% in 2023. In other words, 
the  dollar  amount  of  ESG-related  effects  in  each  institution’s  stock 
holdings, summed across institutions, has consistently been about 6% 
of the institutions’ total AUM.

The estimates of 𝑇  are bias-adjusted using the bootstrap procedure 
explained earlier, which also provides standard errors. The bootstrap 
results validate well our estimation approach under the model assump-
tions, as the estimates of 𝑇  require minimal bias adjustment and have 
low standard errors. The bias adjustment in 𝑇  averages just 0.1% across 
quarters, and the standard errors in 𝑇  are at most 0.2%. Table  1 reports 
fourth-quarter values, year by year, of the tilts plotted in Fig.  1, along 
with  the  bootstrap  standard  errors.12  A  key  reason  behind  the  low 
standard errors of 𝑇  is that estimation error in each institution’s 𝑇𝑖
diversifies across institutions when computing the weighted sum in 
Eq. (10); a standard error of 𝑇𝑖 is typically much larger than that of 
𝑇 . In the last quarter of 2023, for example, the estimate of Fidelity’s 𝑇𝑖
has a standard error of 1.2%, as compared to the 0.1% standard error 
of 𝑇  in Table  1. Fidelity’s estimated 𝑇𝑖 in that quarter is 5.5%, after 
a bias adjustment of 0.2%. Recall that Fidelity’s bias adjustment and 
standard error reflect a bootstrap simulation conducted separately for 
each institution and quarter.

A key feature of our estimation approach is that it controls for 
numerous  non-ESG  stock  characteristics.  If  we  rerun  our  approach 
without  including  those  controls,  the  estimate  of  𝑇   is  substantially 
larger, attributing too much to ESG effects. In 2023, for example, that 
alternative estimate is 11.5%, more than three-fourths higher than our 
estimate of 6.5% when controls are included. Across institutions, the 
correlation between 𝑇𝑖 values estimated with and without controls is 
just 0.42. Again in the case of Fidelity, the 5.5% value of 𝑇𝑖 noted above 
instead becomes 7.8% without controls, more than a 40% increase. 
Such  results  underscore  the  importance  of  controlling  for  non-ESG 
characteristics when computing ESG-related tilts.

As noted earlier,  includes three ESG characteristics per stock—
cross-sectional percentiles of the E, S, and G greenness measures. To 
complement this baseline analysis, we re-estimate the model with 
containing only one ESG characteristic: the composite ESG score, also 
expressed as a cross-sectional percentile. The resulting estimates of 𝑇
are substantially smaller. In 2023, for example, our estimate of 𝑇  that 

12 These standard errors lend themselves to the usual interpretation, because 
the 5th and 95th percentiles of the bootstrap distributions are close to the 
estimated tilts minus/plus twice the standard errors.

7 

L. Pastor et al.

Fig. 1. Total, intensive, and extensive ESG tilts. Panel A plots the aggregate 
ESG-related tilt (𝑇 ) and its decomposition into intensive and extensive tilts, 
𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡 and 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡, respectively. In Panel B, we divide each institution’s tilt by 
its active share and then plot the AUM-weighted average of the resulting 
quantities. Tilt estimates are from the specification in which  contains three 
ESG characteristics (E, S, and G) per stock. Tick marks are at the fourth quarter 
of each year.

allows the three ESG dimensions to matter individually is 1.7 times 
the estimate based on the composite. A single ESG score thus fails to 
capture the full extent of ESG-related tilts. The three dimensions of ESG 
are distinct, and institutions differ in how much importance they assign 
to each dimension.

Panel A of Fig.  1 also displays estimates of the aggregate tilts at 
the intensive and extensive margins, defined in Eqs. (11) and (12). The 
extensive-margin tilt is typically around 2%, while the intensive-margin 
tilt is two to four times higher.

The greater role for the intensive-margin tilt could in principle be 
driven by institutions holding many stocks. After all, the extensive-
margin tilt of an institution holding every stock (e.g., a total market 
index fund) is zero. Our aggregate tilts are AUM-weighted, and large 
institutions  tend  to  hold  more  stocks.  To  investigate,  we  construct 
two counterparts of Panel A of Fig.  1, where instead of aggregating 
tilts across all institutions, we aggregate them within two subsets. The 
first subset includes institutions that hold an above-median number of 
stocks in the given quarter, while the second subset includes institutions 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Table 1
Aggregate tilts.
This table shows estimated aggregate tilts from each year’s fourth quarter. 
Tilts  are  estimated  from  the  specification  in  which    contains  three  ESG 
characteristics (E, S, and G) per stock. Columns 2 to 4 report the estimated tilts, 
and columns 5 to 7 show the bootstrapped standard errors. Tilts are expressed 
as a fraction of institutions’ aggregate covered AUM.

Estimated tilt
Total

Intensive

Extensive

Standard error
Total

Intensive

0.069
0.063
0.059
0.059
0.052
0.055
0.055
0.054
0.063
0.062
0.065
0.065

0.057
0.051
0.053
0.051
0.047
0.050
0.052
0.050
0.059
0.058
0.061
0.061

0.029
0.027
0.023
0.022
0.019
0.019
0.018
0.020
0.018
0.017
0.015
0.015

0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001

0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001

Extensive 
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.000

  Year
  2012
  2013
  2014
  2015
  2016
  2017
  2018
  2019
  2020
  2021
  2022
  2023

with a below-median number of holdings, typically fewer than 100.13 
(The plots are in the Internet Appendix.) We find that all tilts are 
substantially smaller for the first subset of institutions, which is not 
surprising, as larger institutions tend to tilt less. More importantly, for 
both subsets of institutions, the intensive-margin tilt always exceeds the 
extensive-margin tilt. Specifically, for the first subset, the intensive-to-
extensive tilt ratio varies from 2.1 to 6.4 across quarters, while for the 
second subset it varies from 1.2 to 2.1. So, even for institutions holding 
relatively few stocks, the intensive-margin tilt is substantially higher 
than the extensive-margin tilt. Therefore, our finding of a greater role 
for the intensive-margin tilt is not driven just by institutions that hold 
many stocks.

Our 6% headline number of the aggregate ESG tilt rests on a variety 
of modeling choices. As noted earlier, this number would rise if we 
were to leave out controls for non-ESG characteristics, and it would fall 
if we were to replace the E, S, and G scores with the ESG composite. 
It would also rise if we were to disaggregate the holdings of mutual 
fund families (see Section 5), but it might fall if we were to include 
more non-ESG characteristics beyond the seven already included. The 
number is also conditional on the functional forms of our extensive- and 
intensive-margin models as well as ESG ratings from a specific provider 
(see Section 4.6 for an alternative). While we find our modeling choices 
reasonable, we encourage the reader to view the magnitudes of our 
results  with  the  customary  dose  of  caution.  We  also  note  that  our 
measures of ESG investing exclude any potential greening of the market 
portfolio (see Section 7) as well as shareholder engagement.

4.2.1. ESG tilts in the context of total portfolio tilts

Many discussions of ESG investing note its growing popularity over 
the past decade. It may therefore seem puzzling that Panel A of Fig.  1 
shows no clear upward trend in the aggregate ESG-related tilt. Instead, 
the pattern is relatively flat, with the largest estimates of 𝑇  appearing 
both early and late in the sample period.

To understand this seeming puzzle, it is useful to note that ESG in-
vesting is not the only trend in the U.S. investment industry. Two other 
trends also matter in this context. First, indexing has steadily gained 

13 The median number of stocks held ranges from 104 to 121 across quarters, 
with the overall median of 115 across institution-quarters. The 90th percentile 
of the number of holdings across institution-quarters is 653, less than one third 
of all covered stocks in our sample. Most institutions hold relatively few stocks.

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

market share relative to active management.14 Second, actively man-
aged funds have become more diversified, increasingly holding more 
stocks and aligning more closely with benchmark weights (e.g., Pástor 
et al., 2020). In other words, active management has been both losing 
market share and becoming less active, continuing the trends noted 
by  Stambaugh  (2014).  These  trends  combine  to  produce  a  down-
ward trend in the industry’s overall portfolio tilts relative to passive 
benchmarks.

Given  this  broader  decline  in  portfolio  tilts,  it  is  less  surprising 
that ESG-related tilts have not increased. We suggest gauging ESG tilts 
within the context of this overall reduction in active tilts. A simple 
measure of institution 𝑖’s total portfolio tilt is active share, defined 
by Cremers and Petajisto (2009) as 

𝑁
∑

|𝑤𝑖𝑛 − 𝑤𝑚𝑛| .

(32)

𝐴𝑆𝑖 =

1
2

𝑛=1

Active share varies both over time and across institutions. Panel A 
of Fig.  2 displays the AUM-weighted average of active share for the 
institutions in our sample. Consistent with a decline in tilts generally, 
this  series  exhibits  a  steady  downward  trend,  falling  from  0.42  to 
0.30  between  2012  and  2023.15  This  fall  in  total  tilts  represents  a 
headwind to institutions’ ESG tilts. Panel B of Fig.  2 plots time series 
of cross-sectional percentiles in active share. The 5th percentile hovers 
around 0.3, while the 95th percentile is consistently near the maximum 
value of 1.0. This large dispersion in active share reflects heterogeneity 
in institutions’ investment approaches. For example, institutions with 
a large presence in indexing tend to have low active shares. Given 
their weaker propensity to tilt overall, such institutions typically have 
relatively low ESG tilts, too.16

To account for overall tilts, we divide each institution’s ESG tilt 
by its concurrent active share. We then compute an AUM-weighted 
average of these ratios and plot the resulting aggregate, essentially 
a scaled version of 𝑇 , in Panel B of Fig.  1. In contrast to Panel A, 
the scaled 𝑇  trends clearly upward, especially after 2016. Adjusting 
for active share thus presents a different picture of ESG investing’s 
importance over time: even though ESG tilts are not a growing share 
of AUM, they are a growing share of total portfolio tilts. The latter 
share doubles between 2016 and 2023, reaching 27% by the end of 
our sample.

4.3. Green and brown portfolio tilts

Next, we separate green tilts from brown. For any given dimension 
of ESG, such as E or the composite ESG score, we compute the various 
tilts  defined  in  Section  2.4.  For  example,  by  taking  AUM-weighted 
averages of 𝑇 𝐺
𝑖  defined via Eqs. (17) through (19), we compute 
the aggregate green and brown tilts, 𝑇 𝐺 and 𝑇 𝐵, respectively. In this 
section, we examine the empirical patterns in green and brown tilts 
both across investors and over time, considering both extensive and 
intensive margins.

𝑖  and 𝑇 𝐵

Fig.  3 plots the time series of 𝑇 𝐺 (Panel A) and 𝑇 𝐵 (Panel B). 
Each panel displays these tilts computed using four alternative scales 
to classify greenness: E, S, G, and the composite ESG score. There are 

14 For example, among equity mutual funds and ETFs, index funds’ owner-
ship of the U.S. stock market increased from 9% to 18%, while active funds’ 
ownership share dropped from 19% to 13% between 2013 and 2023 (see 
the Investment Company Institute’s 2024 Investment Company Fact Book, page 
29).
15 A  steady  decline  in  active  share  has  been  reported  by  Cremers  and 
Petajisto (2009), Stambaugh (2014), Koijen et al. (2024), and others. Koijen 
et al. argue that most of this decline is due to capital flows from active to 
passive investors rather than strategies becoming more passive.
16 In an earlier version of this paper, we present regression evidence showing 
a significant positive relation between institutions’ ESG tilts and their active 
shares, across both time and institutions.

9 

Fig. 2. Active share. Panel A plots the AUM-weighted average of institutions’ 
active share. Panel B plots the cross-sectional percentiles of active share.

three main findings. First, 𝑇 𝐺 always exceeds 𝑇 𝐵, indicating that fi-
nancial institutions as a whole tilt green throughout the sample period. 
Second, 𝑇 𝐺 trends upward whereas 𝑇 𝐵 is fairly constant, implying that 
institutions are becoming increasingly green. Third, all of these patterns 
are similar across the four greenness measures.

If 13F-filing institutions tilt green, other investors must tilt brown 
(see Eq. (23)). We illustrate this point in Fig.  4. Our sample institutions’ 
positive and increasing green-minus-brown (GMB) tilt is plotted as the 
solid line in each of the four panels, with each panel based on one 
of the four greenness measures. The dashed line shows the GMB tilt 
of non-13F filers, taken collectively as one quasi-institution. Non-13F 
filers include households and institutions below the $100 million filing 
threshold for Form 13F. This segment of stockholders has tilted brown 
and increasingly so, balancing the green tilt of the 13F-filers.

Some of the most vocal dialogue surrounding ESG investing calls 
for institutions to divest from brown stocks.17 Such divestment is the 
component of green tilt that we denote as underweighting brown stocks 
(Eq. (14)). In this context, divestment includes both avoidance of brown 

17 For  example,  in  2020,  the  world’s  largest  asset  manager,  BlackRock, 
announced that it would exit investments in thermal coal producers, and the 
world’s largest sovereign wealth fund, that of Norway, fully divested from oil 
and gas explorers and producers.

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Fig. 3. Green and brown tilts. The green and brown tilts for the ESG composite are from the model specification with a single ESG characteristic per stock. 
The other three pairs of tilts are from the specification with three ESG characteristics per stock, changing one of the three characteristics to its neutral value 
while holding the other two characteristics at their sample values. We plot the AUM-weighted average of the tilts.

stocks and reduction of existing positions. Fig.  5 shows that divestment 
at the intensive margin (Panel A) is consistently larger than divestment 
at the extensive margin (Panel B). In other words, most divestment is 
partial, reducing brown stocks’ weights, as opposed to total divestment 
that  eliminates  holdings.  This  finding  is  consistent  with  the  theory 
of Edmans et al. (2024), in which full divestment can be suboptimal 
from  the  perspective  of  a  responsible  investor,  because  it  does  not 
incentivize firms to mitigate their externalities. We find that, unlike 
the extensive margin, the intensive one rises substantially over time, 
especially from 2017 to 2022.

4.4. Which institutions are greener?

In this section, we analyze how greenness varies across institutions 
with  respect  to  institutional  characteristics  such  as  size,  type,  and 
location. We begin with institution size.

In Fig.  6 we plot the AUM-weighted average GMB tilt separately for 
large, medium, and small institutions, grouped by AUM terciles. For 
each of the four greenness measures, large institutions exhibit positive 
and mostly increasing GMB tilts. In other words, large institutions are 
green, and increasingly so. In contrast, the GMB tilts of medium and 
small institutions are often negative and mostly decreasing. In essence, 
the 13F filers’ positive and growing GMB tilt, observed earlier in Fig. 
4, owes to just the largest institutions.

The world’s largest institution, BlackRock, increasingly emphasized 
sustainability  in  the  late  2010s.  This  emphasis  culminated  in  Jan-
uary 2020, when BlackRock declared that sustainability should be its 
new standard for investing (BlackRock, 2020). After 2020, BlackRock’s 
emphasis on sustainability waned. In line with these public stances, 
BlackRock’s GMB tilt grew rapidly in the 2010s for all four measures 
of greenness, peaked in 2020, and declined afterwards. For example, 
based on the ESG composite, BlackRock’s tilt rose from nil in 2013 
to 9% of AUM in 2020, before dropping to 5.5% of AUM by 2023. 
BlackRock’s GMB tilt outpaced its large-institution counterpart, which 
reached 4.2% of AUM in 2020 (see Panel A of Fig.  6). Nonetheless, 
even when we exclude BlackRock from the large-institution group, the 
remaining institutions in that group still display a positive and rising 
GMB tilt for all four greenness measures. Similarly, when we exclude 
the ‘‘Big Three’’ institutions — BlackRock, State Street, and Vanguard 
— from the large-institution group, the remaining large institutions 
have a positive and increasing GMB tilt. The main patterns in Fig.  6 
are thus robust to the exclusions of BlackRock and the Big Three. See 
the Internet Appendix for details.

We also explore whether characteristics other than AUM relate to 
an institution’s GMB tilt. First, we entertain differences across types 
of institutions, as classified by prior studies including Bushee (2001) 
and Bushee et al. (2014). Following those studies, we classify institu-
tions as (i) investment advisors, (ii) banks, (iii) insurance companies, 
or (iv) pensions/endowments.18 By both institution count and AUM, 
the bulk of sample institutions are investment advisors, with banks a 
distant second. Second, we consider whether an institution has signed 
the UNPRI. We download the list of signatories and signature dates 
from the UNPRI website. We merge these data with our sample by 
using institution name and combining fuzzy matching, manual checks, 
and web searches. Finally, we determine each institution’s geographical 
location based on the 13F filings and manual checks.

Table  2 reports the estimates from panel regressions of institutions’ 
GMB tilts on a number of explanatory variables that include UNPRI, 
institution-type, and location dummies as well as the institution’s ac-
tive share and log AUM. We also include a time trend, by itself and 
interacted with log AUM. Across the columns, we show specifications 
with no fixed effects, with time fixed effects, and with institution fixed 
effects. Results including both fixed effects are in the Internet Appendix; 
they are very similar to the results based on institution fixed effects 
only. When including fixed effects, we omit explanatory variables as ap-
propriate (e.g., no institution-type dummies when including institution 
fixed effects).

A number of significant relations appear in Table  2. With either no 
fixed effects or time fixed effects, AUM exhibits a strongly significant 
positive relation to greenness. Since the time trend is constructed to 
equal  zero  in  2023,  the  result  indicates  that  larger  institutions  are 
greener at the end of the sample period. The positive coefficient on the 
interaction term indicates that the relation between AUM and greenness 
strengthens over time. These results are robust across greenness mea-
sures, with just two exceptions (the AUM coefficient when greenness 
is measured by E and the interaction-term coefficient when greenness 
is measured by G). Estimates in the first column imply that increasing 
AUM from its 33rd percentile to its 67th percentile is associated with 
a 3.2 percentage point (pp) increase in GMB tilt in 2023 and a 1.6 pp 

18 We are grateful to Brian Bushee for providing these data on his website. 
Following Bushee et al. (2014), we combine the categories Investment Com-
pany and Independent Investment Advisor into a single category; we combine 
Public Pension Funds and University and Foundation Endowments into a single 
category; and we omit institutions classified as Miscellaneous.

10 

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Fig. 4. GMB tilts of 13F filers and non-filers. The solid line shows the AUM-weighted average of GMB tilt across sample 13F institutions. The dashed line shows 
the same quantity for non-13F investors, which we treat as a single quasi-institution whose dollar holding of each stock equals the stock’s market capitalization 
minus the combined holdings of the stock by 13F institutions (including those not in our sample). In Panel A,  contains just the composite ESG score, so tilts 
are computed from the model specification with a single ESG characteristic per stock. In Panels B through D, 𝑔𝑛 is a stock’s E, S, or G component, and tilts are 
computed from the specification with  containing three ESG characteristics per stock.

decrease in GMB tilt in 2012.19 These relations, including their reversal 
over time, are consistent with the patterns in Fig.  6.

UNPRI  signatories  have  significantly  greener  tilts.  This  relation 
holds strongly across institutions (i.e., in specifications with time fixed 
effects), for all four greenness measures. The relation has the same 
estimated sign also within institutions (i.e., in specifications with in-
stitution  fixed  effects),  but  it  is  significant  only  for  the  E  measure 
of greenness, indicating that an institution becomes environmentally 
greener after signing UNPRI. Across institutions, UNPRI signatories’ 
GMB tilts are higher by a sizable 1.8–4.7 pp. The regressions’ low 𝑅2
values, however, suggest that UNPRI status is far from a perfect indi-
cator of an institution’s greenness. Moreover, these simple regressions 
do not establish any causal relation. Nonetheless, it seems useful to 
document that institutions that sign a commitment to invest responsibly 
tilt their portfolios toward greener stocks.

19 The difference in log(AUM) between the two percentiles is 1.40. Note that 
0.032 equals 1.40 × 0.0229, and −0.016 equals 1.40 × [0.0229 − 0.44 × 0.0779], 
where −0.44 is the value of Trend in 2012.

GMB tilts also differ significantly across the four institution types. 
F-tests strongly reject equality of tilts across institution types, except 
for the E measure of greenness. Depending on the specification, banks’ 
GMB tilts are 2.9–14.0 pp lower than those of insurance companies (the 
omitted type), and the difference is significant for each greenness mea-
sure except E. Banks are also browner than both investment advisors 
and pensions/endowments. In most specifications, insurance companies 
are the greenest institution type.

In the Internet Appendix, we show the time series of GMB tilts by 
institution type. For all four types, including banks, the GMB tilt is 
mostly positive and growing over the sample period. The positive GMB 
tilt for banks may seem surprising, given the evidence discussed in the 
previous paragraph. The reason behind it is that the type-level GMB tilts 
are computed by AUM-weight-averaging the GMB tilts of institutions 
within the given type. While a typical bank is brown, the largest banks 
are green (recall the positive coefficients on AUM in Table  2), and their 
greenness disproportionately affects the AUM-weighted average.

As also shown by Table  2, European institutions are significantly 
greener than U.S. ones (the omitted category). More precisely, Euro-
pean institutions’ holdings of U.S. stocks are greener than U.S. insti-
tutions’ holdings of U.S. stocks, as measured by GMB tilts. Depending 

11 

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Fig. 5. Divestment from brown stocks. Divestment from brown stocks, which is a component of green tilt, can be done on either the extensive margin 
(full divestment) or intensive margin (partial divestment). We show both. Panel A shows the component of intensive green tilts coming from under-weighting 
brown stocks. Panel B shows the component of the extensive green tilts coming from under-weighting brown stocks. Tilts using the ESG composite are from the 
model specification with a single ESG characteristic per stock, and other tilts are from the specification with three ESG characteristics per stock. We plot the 
AUM-weighted average of the tilts.

Table 2
Which institutions are greener?
This table shows results from panel regressions with the dependent variable equal to the institution’s GMB tilt, 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
. The greenness measure is 
noted in the column headers. All regressions use 100,357 institution×quarter non-missing observations from 2012q4–2023q4. AUM is divided by 
the total market capitalization of all covered stocks. Trend equals the observation’s quarter minus 2023q4, divided by 100, so Trend is increasing 
over time, zero at the end of the sample, and negative in preceding quarters. We compute active share as in Cremers and Petajisto (2009). 
1(UNPRI) is an indicator for whether the institution signed the UNPRI on or before the given quarter. Institution types are from Bushee et al. 
(2014), with 1(Insurance) the excluded category. Institution locations are from the 13F filings, with 1(United States) the excluded category. Robust 
𝑡-statistics clustered by institution are in parentheses. The regression 𝑅2 as well as the 𝑅2 from a regression with fixed effects only are shown at 
the bottom. The last row contains 𝑝-values testing whether the coefficients are equal across the four institution-type indicators (Insurance, Inv. 
advisor, Bank, and Pension/endowment).

𝑖𝑡

  log(AUM)

  log(AUM) × trend

  Trend

  Active share

  1(UNPRI)

  1(Inv. advisor)

  1(Bank)

No fixed effects
Env.
ESG

Soc.

Gov.

0.0229
(8.50)

0.0779
(8.19)

0.6341
(6.53)

0.0043
(1.42)

0.0428
(3.87)

0.3585
(3.18)

0.0245
(7.48)

0.0513
(4.66)

0.4315
(3.85)

0.0179
(6.91)

0.0031
(0.33)

0.0276
(0.28)

Time fixed effects
ESG

Env.

Soc.

Gov.

0.0231
(8.56)

0.0803
(8.41)

0.0056
(1.85)

0.0486
(4.37)

0.0251
(7.64)

0.0551
(4.98)

0.0194
(7.53)

0.0100
(1.06)

Institution fixed effects
Env.
ESG

0.0085
(1.46)

0.0652
(5.98)

0.5056
(4.79)

−0.0157
(−2.24)

0.0347
(2.93)

0.2303
(1.97)

−0.0012 −0.0119
(−0.58)
(−0.07)

0.0138
(0.63)

−0.0459
(−2.52)

−0.0016 −0.0120
(−0.58)
(−0.10)

0.0128
(0.58)

−0.0461
(−2.53)

−0.0094 −0.0511
(−1.00)
(−0.22)

0.0452
(4.64)

0.0453
(4.09)

0.0473
(4.28)

0.0196
(2.22)

0.0452
(4.63)

0.0438
(3.96)

0.0469
(4.25)

0.0180
(2.04)

0.0261
(1.75)

0.0500
(2.86)

−0.0244
(−1.68)

0.0019
(0.10)

−0.0058 −0.0214
(−0.99)
(−0.24)

−0.0246
(−1.69)

0.0020
(0.11)

−0.0058 −0.0213
(−0.98)
(−0.24)

−0.0855 −0.0292 −0.1398 −0.0623
(−2.47)
(−4.28)

(−4.39)

(−1.36)

−0.0858 −0.0291 −0.1399 −0.0624
(−2.47)
(−4.29)

(−4.39)

(−1.35)

Gov.

Soc.
0.0111 −0.0020 
(−0.34)  
(1.55)
0.0020  
(0.18)

0.0471
(3.86)

0.3996
(3.36)

0.0150  
(0.14)

0.0410 −0.0383 
(−0.90)  
(0.80)
0.0008  
(0.06)

0.0190
(1.21)

  1(Pension/endowment) −0.0128 −0.0135
(−0.58)

(−0.75)

  1(Europe)

  1(Rest of world)

  𝑅2
  𝑅2 (FEs only)
  𝑝 (Inst. types equal)

0.0345
(2.49)

0.0113
(0.75)

0.020
N/A
0.000

0.0502
(3.27)

0.0381
(2.23)

0.005
N/A
0.122

0.0211
(0.78)

0.0514
(3.25)

0.0224
(1.22)

0.023
N/A
0.000

0.0059
(0.24)

0.0377
(2.89)

0.0112
(0.66)

0.016
N/A
0.004

−0.0128 −0.0134
(−0.58)
(−0.75)

0.0210
(0.78)

0.0349
(2.51)

0.0118
(0.79)

0.023
0.009
0.000

0.0510
(3.30)

0.0395
(2.31)

0.008
0.003
0.122

0.0521
(3.30)

0.0233
(1.26)

0.025
0.004
0.000

0.0059
(0.24)

0.0386
(2.96)

0.0128
(0.76)

0.019
0.003
0.004

0.436
0.432
N/A

0.446
0.444
N/A

0.497
0.496
N/A

0.406
0.406
N/A

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Fig. 6. Institution size and greenness. This figure compares GMB tilts across subsamples formed based on quarterly AUM terciles. Each line shows the 
subsample’s AUM-weighted average GMB tilt.

on the specification, European institutions’ GMB tilts are 3.5–5.2 pp 
higher than those of U.S. institutions. The GMB tilts of institutions 
located in the rest of the world are between those of European and 
U.S. institutions.

For comparison, Koijen et al. (2024) find that non-U.S. investors 
have a higher demand for stocks with higher E scores but lower G 
scores. They also find differences in demand elasticities for E and G 
scores across institution types. However, they use a different method-
ology and different data; for example, their E scores come from Sus-
tainalytics  and  their  G  scores  reflect  the  number  of  entrenchment 
provisions. Atta-Darkua et al. (2023) find that European investors who 
are members of the CDP (formerly the Carbon Disclosure Project) have 
been decarbonizing their portfolios faster than other investors.

Table  3 explores whether the above patterns in GMB tilt are driven 
by its green or brown leg. We estimate similar panel regressions replac-
ing the dependent variable 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
𝑖 .20 We see that 
both green and brown tilts drive the positive relation between AUM 
and greenness, but brown tilts matter much more. At the end of our 

 with either 𝑇 𝐺

𝑖  or 𝑇 𝐵

𝑖

20 Table  3 reports results from regressions without fixed effects. Results with 
fixed effects are in the Internet Appendix. Results with time fixed effects are 
very similar to those reported in Table  3.

13 

sample period, larger institutions are both slightly greener and much 
less brown. Both legs, green and brown, contribute to the widening 
gap in GMB tilts between large and small institutions. The roles of 
time trends, UNPRI status, and institution type are similarly strong, but 
opposite in sign, for green and brown tilts. Finally, active share has a 
strong, positive relation to both green and brown tilts. The GMB tilt 
exhibits no relation to active share, however, as the positive effects in 
the green and brown legs largely offset each other (Table  2).

4.5. Industry adjustment

Our ESG characteristics are based on MSCI ESG ratings, which are 
not industry-adjusted. ESG ratings vary across industries—for example, 
E ratings tend to be higher in finance, health care, and technology, and 
lower in chemicals, steel, and mining (see Table 2 in (Pástor et al., 
2022)). We focus on unadjusted ratings because they are widely used 
and reflect how many investors approach ESG, particularly those who 
exclude entire industries, such as oil and gas, from their portfolios. That 
said, some investors assess ESG performance relative to industry peers. 
In this section, we examine portfolio tilts based on industry-adjusted 
ESG scores.

We classify each firm into one of 94 industries, quarter by quarter, 
using MSCI’s industry classification. For each of E, S, G, and the com-
posite ESG score, we compute the average greenness of each industry 

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Table 3
Institutions’ green and brown tilts.
This table shows results from panel regressions with dependent variable equal to the institution’s green tilt (𝑇 𝐺
brown tilt (𝑇 𝐵

𝑖𝑡 , columns 5–8). There are no fixed effects. Remaining details are the same as in Table  2.

𝑖𝑡 , columns 1–4) or 

  log(AUM)

  log(AUM) × trend

  Trend

  Active share

  1(UNPRI)

  1(Inv. advisor)

  1(Bank)

  1(Pension/endowment)

  1(Europe)

  1(Rest of world)

  𝑅2
  𝑝 (Inst. types equal)

Green tilts
ESG

0.0025
(1.84)

0.0230
(4.33)

0.2431
(4.45)

0.0904
(10.01)

0.0230
(3.74)

−0.0030
(−0.33)

−0.0171
(−1.72)

−0.0055
(−0.57)

0.0272
(2.87)

0.0097
(1.08)

0.017
0.085

Env.

−0.0024
(−1.22)

0.0270
(3.71)

0.2653
(3.57)

0.1439
(11.03)

0.0225
(2.95)

0.0063
(0.43)

−0.0121
(−0.77)

−0.0077
(−0.47)

0.0388
(3.55)

0.0258
(2.19)

0.024
0.060

Soc.

0.0037
(2.13)

0.0156
(2.52)

0.2078
(3.22)

0.1283
(11.38)

0.0122
(1.81)

0.0048
(0.48)

−0.0303
(−2.71)

0.0104
(0.86)

0.0281
(2.61)

0.0151
(1.40)

0.023
0.000

Gov.

0.0038
(3.08)

0.0029
(0.63)

0.0564
(1.17)

0.0939
(10.45)

0.0020
(0.43)

−0.0163
(−1.58)

−0.0298
(−2.59)

−0.0054
(−0.46)

0.0271
(3.57)

0.0139
(1.56)

0.014
0.013

Brown tilts
ESG

Env.

Soc.

−0.0204
(−11.46)

−0.0550
(−9.39)

−0.3912
(−6.62)

0.0916
(8.52)

−0.0223
(−4.09)

0.0215
(2.79)

0.0685
(5.16)

0.0073
(0.74)

−0.0072
(−0.97)

−0.0016
(−0.19)

0.043
0.000

−0.0067
(−4.13)

−0.0160
(−2.73)

−0.0944
(−1.58)

0.1552
(13.34)

−0.0229
(−4.29)

0.0045
(0.52)

0.0171
(1.57)

0.0057
(0.47)

−0.0114
(−1.45)

−0.0124
(−1.43)

−0.0208
(−9.69)

−0.0356
(−5.19)

−0.2233
(−3.24)

0.1143
(7.77)

−0.0350
(−5.47)

0.0107
(0.60)

0.1095
(4.45)

−0.0108
(−0.58)

−0.0233
(−2.70)

−0.0074
(−0.68)

Gov.
−0.0140 
(−7.84)  
−0.0002 
(−0.03)  
0.0288  
(0.45)

0.1396  
(11.24)  
−0.0176 
(−3.08)  
0.0052  
(0.33)

0.0325  
(1.79)

−0.0113 
(−0.65)  
−0.0105 
(−1.32)  
0.0026  
(0.25)

0.030
0.389

0.043
0.000

0.037
0.014

in each quarter by computing the value-weighted average of 𝑔𝑛 across 
all firms in that industry and quarter. We then compute each firm 𝑛’s 
industry-adjusted score in each quarter as 𝑔𝑛 minus the corresponding 
industry average. We convert both the industry-adjusted values and 
the industry average to percentiles in the full cross section of stocks, 
analogous to our main analysis. Finally, we treat the industry-adjusted 
ESG scores’ percentiles as our ESG characteristics (), and we add the 
industry-average ESG scores’ percentiles to the set of controls ().

Fig.  7 is the counterpart of Fig.  1 using industry-adjusted ESG scores. 
The resulting total ESG tilt, 𝑇 , remains fairly stable over time, ranging 
mostly from 4% to 5%. This range is below that of the unadjusted 𝑇
(5.2% to 6.9%; see Fig.  1), suggesting that more investors use raw 
scores than industry-adjusted scores when forming portfolios. Apart 
from their lower levels, the adjusted tilts closely resemble the unad-
justed  ones:  in  both  figures,  𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡  far  exceeds  𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡,  with  the  former 
trending slightly upward and the latter downward. The key takeaway 
from both figures is the same: ESG tilts account for a modest share of 
AUM and are much larger on the intensive margin.

Fig.  8 mirrors Fig.  3 but uses industry-adjusted green and brown 
tilts. Again, the levels are lower compared to the unadjusted tilts, but 
the overall patterns remain similar. In both figures, green tilts exceed 
brown, green tilts trend upward while brown tilts are flat, and these 
patterns hold across the four greenness measures. Industry-adjusted 
or not, institutions collectively tilt green, and increasingly so. In the 
Internet Appendix, we show the industry-adjusted versions of the other 
previous figures and tables.

4.6. Sustainalytics ratings

While  MSCI  is  the  leading  global  provider  of  ESG  ratings  (see 
Section 4.1), investors have access to multiple data sources. In this 
section, we assess the robustness of our results by using ESG scores 
from one of MSCI’s main competitors: Sustainalytics.

Our Sustainalytics sample is smaller than our MSCI sample, for two 
reasons. First, MSCI covers more than twice as many firms. Second, we 

use Sustainalytics data only from December 2018 onward, following 
a major methodology overhaul that year. ESG ratings from the two 
providers are positively correlated, with correlations ranging from 0.17 
for G scores to 0.78 for E scores. For a detailed description of the 
Sustainalytics data, including data coverage and summary statistics, see 
the Internet Appendix.

We use Sustainalytics’ ESG scores to re-estimate all portfolio tilts 
for  our  institutional  sample.  We  report  all  of  our  main  results  — 
the counterparts of Figs.  1 through 6 and Tables  1 through 3 — in 
the Internet Appendix. These results are remarkably similar to those 
based on MSCI scores. For example, the aggregate tilt is stable over 
time, ranging from 5.9% to 6.7%. The aggregate intensive-margin tilt 
remains much larger than the extensive-margin tilt. Green tilts exceed 
brown, indicating that institutions as a whole tilt green. Divestment 
from brown stocks still occurs primarily at the intensive margin. Larger 
institutions tilt greener for three of the four greenness measures. UNPRI 
signatories and European institutions are also greener, significantly so 
for the ESG composite and E measures. To summarize, all of our main 
conclusions hold also when using Sustainalytics’ ESG scores.

5. Estimates of ESG tilts: Mutual funds

In this section, we estimate ESG-related portfolio tilts for U.S. equity 
mutual funds. Looking at mutual funds is useful for several reasons. 
First, some of the institutions analyzed in Section 4 are mutual fund 
families.  In  their  13F  filings,  fund  families  aggregate  the  portfolio 
holdings of their individual funds. This aggregation could mask fund-
level ESG tilts that offset within families, understating the extent of 
overall tilting. It could also understate extensive-margin tilts, because 
a stock excluded by some funds will still appear in family-level holdings 
if held by any fund of the same family. Analyzing fund-level holdings 
allows us to address both issues and assess their importance. It also 
enables us to examine the tilts of ESG-labeled funds, which cannot be 
identified in 13F filings.

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L. Pastor et al.

Fig. 7. Industry-adjusted tilts. This figure plots versions of the tilts from Fig. 
1 estimated using stocks’ industry-adjusted ESG scores. For each of E, S, and 
G, we compute stocks’ industry-adjusted scores as 𝑔𝑛 minus the value-weighted 
average of 𝑔𝑛 across stocks in the same industry and quarter. We convert the 
industry average and industry-adjusted values to percentiles in the full cross 
section of stocks, similar to our main analysis. We include in  the industry-
adjusted E, S, and G scores’ percentiles, and we add the three industry-average 
E, S, and G scores’ percentiles to the set of exogenous controls. Otherwise, the 
method and data are the same as in our main analysis.

A key limitation of the mutual fund universe is that it is much 
smaller than financial institutions in aggregate, covering only about 
a  quarter  of  the  13F  sample’s  AUM.  The  mutual  fund  sample  ex-
cludes significant holdings, especially of banks, insurers, pension funds, 
endowments, hedge funds, and sovereign wealth funds. As a result, 
mutual fund evidence cannot fully capture the extent of ESG-related 
tilting in the investment industry. We view the results presented in 
this section as complementary to our main findings in Section 4, which 
draw on a broader and more comprehensive institutional sample.

5.1. Data

Starting with the Thomson Reuters Mutual Fund Holdings (S12) 
dataset, we compute funds’ quarterly portfolio weights 𝑤𝑖𝑛 among the 
subset of covered stocks. We take data on funds’ characteristics from 
CRSP and Morningstar Direct.

15 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

We construct the fund sample as follows. Starting from all funds in 
the S12 dataset, we exclude bond funds, international funds, funds of 
funds, real estate funds, target retirement funds, and other non-equity 
funds based on keywords in the Morningstar Category variable. We also 
exclude variable annuity funds using the CRSP flag. We include index 
funds, labeled as ‘‘index’’ or ‘‘enhanced index’’ by CRSP or Morningstar. 
We aggregate multiple share classes of the same fund and drop funds 
with less than $10 million in AUM. As in the previous section, we 
require funds to have at least 50% of their assets in covered stocks and 
at least 30 holdings, and we define a fund’s AUM as the total value of 
its covered holdings. We clean the mutual fund data following Pástor 
et al. (2020).21

The number of funds in our sample ranges from 1,506 in 2012 to 
1,221 in 2023. Funds’ combined AUM grows from $2.5 trillion to $8.3 
trillion during that period. For comparison, the 13F sample studied 
earlier contains roughly four times as much AUM. As of 2023, index 
funds make up 15% of the fund sample by count and 58% by AUM.

5.2. Total ESG tilts

Fig.  9 plots aggregate ESG tilts — 𝑇 , 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡, and 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡 from Eqs. (10) 
through (12) — based on three mutual fund samples. The first sample 
includes only active funds, excluding index funds. The second sample 
includes all funds, active and passive. The third sample includes mutual 
fund families, which we create by grouping funds into families based on 
family names obtained from Morningstar (or CRSP if unavailable). For 
each family, we combine the holdings of member funds into a single 
‘‘quasi-fund’’ and estimate its tilt.

Panel A of Fig.  9 shows total ESG tilts, 𝑇 , across the three samples. 
For active funds, 𝑇  is stable, ranging from 10% to 13%. Including 
passive  funds  lowers  𝑇   to  6%–10%,  reflecting  their  much  smaller 
tilts. Fund-family tilts are lower still, between 3.5% and 6%. The gap 
between the 𝑇  values for all funds and for fund families, which ranges 
from 1.6 to 4.2 percentage points, captures the extent of within-family 
offsetting. These offsets modestly reduce overall tilts. For example, at 
the end of our sample, 𝑇  is 6.5% for all funds and 4.7% for fund fam-
ilies, so that offsetting tilts account for 1.8% of mutual fund families’ 
AUM. Multiplying this share by the fraction of institutional AUM held 
by mutual fund families implies that adjusting for within-family offsets 
would increase the aggregate tilt in Fig.  1 by just under 0.5% in 2023.22 
This adjustment, from 6.5% to 7%, is fairly small.

Panels B and C of Fig.  9 plot intensive- and extensive-margin tilts, 
𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡 and 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡. The values of 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡 for the all-fund sample are about three 
times larger than those for the fund-family sample, and they also exceed 
their counterparts for the broader institutional sample (see Fig.  1). This 
is expected, as stock exclusions are more common at the fund level than 
at the family level, as explained earlier. More importantly, for each 
sample and each point in time, 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡 < 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡, just like in Fig.  1. In other 
words, our finding that 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡 < 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡 obtains not only at the institution 
level but also at the fund level.

21 During the cleaning process, we correct one additional, notable, recently-
introduced error in the S12 dataset. One data-cleaning step involves excluding 
funds whose total holdings exceed twice their fund-level assets. This step 
mistakenly  drops  the  world’s  largest  mutual  fund,  Vanguard’s  Total  Stock 
Market Index Fund, starting in 2020q4. In the S12 data, this fund’s reported 
asset values are misreported by a factor of ten from 2020q4 onward. After we 
correct this data error, the fund is restored to our sample.
22 Mutual  fund  families  manage  $8.3  trillion  in  2023,  which  represents 
26.3% of the AUM of all institutions in our 13F sample. Multiplying 26.3% 
by 1.8% gives 0.47%.

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Fig. 8. Industry-adjusted green and brown tilts. This figure plots versions of the tilts from Fig.  3 estimated using stocks’ industry-adjusted ESG scores. Details 
on the method are the same as in Fig.  7.

Fig. 9. Mutual funds’ ESG tilts. Panels A, B, and C plot the aggregate ESG-related tilt (𝑇 ), intensive-margin tilt (𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡), and extensive-margin tilt (𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡), respectively, 
estimated in mutual-fund samples indicated in the legend. The sample of all funds includes both active and passive funds. We create the sample of mutual fund 
families as follows. For each family, we construct a ‘‘quasi-fund’’ by aggregating all funds (active and passive) within each family into a single portfolio, and we 
estimate that quasi-fund’s tilts. All lines show AUM-weighted averages of tilts within the given sample of mutual funds. Tilt estimates are from the specification 
in which  contains three ESG characteristics (E, S, and G) per stock.

5.3. Green and brown portfolio tilts

5.4. Which funds are greener?

Fig.  10 plots green and brown tilts, 𝑇 𝐺 and 𝑇 𝐵, for the all-fund 
sample. The figure mirrors Fig.  3, but with tilts estimated at the mutual 
fund level rather than the institution level. As in Fig.  3, though to 
a lesser extent, we observe 𝑇 𝐺 > 𝑇 𝐵, indicating that mutual funds 
collectively tilt green. Unlike in Fig.  3, there is no upward trend in 
𝑇 𝐺 (or 𝑇 𝐵), suggesting that the gradual increase in green tilting is 
driven by non-mutual-fund institutions. Green tilts range from 3% to 
8%; brown tilts from 2% to 6%. All patterns in Fig.  10 look similar 
across the four greenness measures.

Fig.   11  examines  mutual  funds’  divestment  from  brown  stocks, 
paralleling  Fig.   5  but  using  the  all-fund  sample  instead  of  the  full 
institutional sample. Extensive-margin divestment is larger for funds 
— ranging mostly from 0.5% to 1.5%, compared to 0.1% to 1.3% for 
institutions — reflecting the greater prevalence of full divestment at 
the fund level. More notably, as in the institutional sample, intensive-
margin divestment remains consistently larger, typically from 1.5% to 
3%, and it exceeds extensive-margin divestment throughout. Intensive- 
exceeds extensive-margin divestment even for active funds, where one 
might expect the latter divestment to be largest, as active funds typi-
cally hold fewer stocks than passive funds (see the Internet Appendix). 
Thus, even for individual mutual funds, brown divestment is primarily 
partial rather than full.

Table  4 reports results from panel regressions of mutual funds’ green 
and brown tilts on three fund characteristics — AUM, active share, and 
an ESG-label dummy — along with a time trend and its interaction 
with AUM. These regressions are analogous to those in Table  3, but 
they exclude institution-level regressors and include a fund-specific ESG 
dummy. This indicator, sourced from Morningstar, equals one if the 
fund is described in its prospectus or other regulatory filings as focusing 
on ESG, sustainability, or impact investing. We estimate the regressions 
separately for all mutual funds (Panel A) and for active funds only 
(Panel B). As the results are similar across panels, we discuss them 
jointly.

Table  4 shows that both green and brown tilts are strongly and 
positively related to active share, echoing the institution-level results in 
Table  3. Green tilts are also positively related to the time trend and its 
interaction with AUM, though these effects are somewhat weaker than 
in Table  3. Unlike in Table  3, the negative relations between brown 
tilts and both AUM and its interaction with the time trend are not 
statistically significant.

The most novel findings in Table  4, with no counterpart in Table 
3, concern the ESG dummy. Compared to non-ESG funds, ESG-labeled 
funds’ green tilts are substantially larger, by 9–16 pp of AUM, and 

16 

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Fig. 10. Mutual funds’ green and brown tilts. This figure plots the same quantities as Fig.  3, but tilts are estimated at the level of individual mutual funds 
(both active and passive).

Fig. 11. Mutual funds’ divestment from brown stocks. This figure plots the same quantities as Fig.  5, but tilts are estimated at the level of individual mutual 
funds (both active and passive).

their brown tilts are 2–5 pp smaller. Both of these relations are highly 
statistically significant across all four greenness measures. The relations 
are economically large relative to funds’ aggregate green tilts (3%–8%) 
and brown tilts (2%–6%), plotted in Fig.  10. These results indicate 
that tilting, as captured by our methodology, is an important feature 
of mutual funds’ ESG investment strategies.

6. Comparing measures of green portfolio tilts

𝑖

𝑖

A key feature of 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵

How do other potential measures of green tilts differ from ours? In 
this section, we contrast our measure, 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 from Eq. (20), with several 
alternatives. We perform two comparisons at the end of our sample 
(2023q4): one across 13F institutions and another across mutual funds.
 is that it controls for non-ESG stock char-
acteristics, listed in Section 4.1. The first alternative we consider is a 
modified version of 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 that drops these controls. The second, even 
simpler alternative is the difference between the portfolio’s weights 
in green and brown stocks: ∑
𝑛∈𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛, where 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛
(𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛) denotes covered stocks whose ESG composite score is in the 
highest (lowest) quintile. This measure does not control for non-ESG 
characteristics, nor does it separate holdings at the extensive versus 
intensive margin—another key feature of our measure.

𝑛∈𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − ∑

𝑖

The third alternative, computed for the 13F sample, is an indicator 
for whether the institution signed the UNPRI by 2023q4. The fourth 
and  fifth,  computed  for  the  mutual-fund  sample,  are  the  ESG-fund 
indicator from Section 5.4 and the fund’s Morningstar Sustainability 
Rating,  or  the  ‘‘globe  rating’’.  To  compute  this  rating,  Morningstar 
uses firm-level data from Sustainalytics to calculate the ESG risk of 
a fund’s holdings. Funds receive 1 to 5 globes, with 5 indicating the 
lowest ESG risk relative to peer funds. Peers are funds in the same 
Morningstar Global Category, based on asset class and investment style 
(e.g., U.S. large-cap growth equity). Because the globe rating is relative, 
it implicitly controls for some non-ESG stock characteristics, such as 
size and book-to-market.

6.1. 13F institutions

Table  5 compares the green tilt measures at the 13F institution 
level. Column 1 reports each measure’s AUM-weighted mean across 
institutions in 2023q4. For 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
, this average is 4.2%, indicating an 
aggregate net green tilt (see also Panel A of Fig.  4). Without controlling 
for non-ESG characteristics, the average rises to 11.2%, nearly three 
times larger. The even higher average of 27.6% for ∑
𝑛∈𝐵 𝑤𝑖𝑛

𝑛∈𝐺 𝑤𝑖𝑛 −∑

𝑖

17 

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

Table 4
Mutual funds’ green and brown tilts.
This table shows results from panel regressions with dependent variable equal to the mutual fund’s green tilt (𝑇 𝐺
𝑖𝑡 , columns 1–4) 
𝑖𝑡 , columns 5–8). Variable 1(ESG-labeled fund), obtained from Morningstar, is an indicator for whether the fund 
or brown tilt (𝑇 𝐵
is described in the prospectus or other regulatory filings as focusing on sustainability, impact investing, or ESG factors. Panel 
A shows results using all mutual funds (passive and active); this sample includes 28,789 fund×quarter non-missing observations 
from 2018q4–2023q4. (We begin the sample in 2018q4 because this is the first quarter that 1(ESG-labeled fund) is available.) 
Panel B shows results using active mutual funds only; this sample includes 24,788 fund×quarter non-missing observations from 
2018q4–2023q4. Other details are the same as in Table  3.
Green tilts
ESG

Brown tilts
ESG

Gov.

Gov.

Env.

Env.

Soc.

Soc.

  Panel A: All funds

  log(AUM)

  log(AUM) × trend

  Trend

  Active share

  1(ESG-labeled fund)

  𝑅2

  Panel B: Active funds

  log(AUM)

  log(AUM) × trend

  Trend

  Active share

  1(ESG-labeled fund)

  𝑅2

−0.0002
(−0.09)

−0.0028
(−1.14)

−0.0010
(−0.49)

0.0252
(1.90)

0.3598
(2.48)

0.0862
(10.58)

0.1395
(9.78)

0.0412
(2.31)

0.5525
(2.93)

0.0642
(5.56)

0.1581
(9.49)

0.0339
(2.25)

0.4306
(2.62)

0.1108
(10.59)

0.1118
(7.62)

0.0011
(0.71)

0.0282
(2.10)

0.2055
(1.40)

0.1011
(13.08)

0.0896
(7.55)

−0.0019
(−1.24)

−0.0048
(−0.45)

−0.0057
(−0.05)

0.0269
(3.87)

−0.0203
(−3.43)

−0.0000
(−0.02)

−0.0161
(−1.24)

−0.2302
(−1.62)

0.1362
(12.90)

−0.0437
(−8.13)

−0.0011
(−0.57)

−0.0034
(−0.27)

−0.0761
(−0.54)

0.0722
(7.85)

−0.0385
(−6.21)

−0.0031 
(−1.94)  
−0.0079 
(−0.60)  
−0.2480 
(−1.70)  
0.0584  
(7.38)

−0.0193 
(−2.77)  

0.075

0.054

0.051

0.050

0.006

0.039

0.014

0.015

0.0006
(0.31)

0.0365
(2.23)

0.4914
(2.70)

0.0968
(8.04)

0.1453
(9.31)

−0.0012
(−0.41)

−0.0005
(−0.21)

0.0618
(2.85)

0.8119
(3.46)

0.0311
(1.75)

0.1678
(9.62)

0.0464
(2.51)

0.5789
(2.80)

0.1272
(8.43)

0.1170
(7.16)

0.0018
(0.99)

0.0385
(2.36)

0.3182
(1.74)

0.1214
(10.43)

0.0956
(7.21)

−0.0016
(−0.88)

−0.0054
(−0.41)

−0.0021
(−0.01)

−0.0103
(−0.89)

−0.0233
(−3.42)

−0.0007
(−0.31)

−0.0238
(−1.49)

−0.3374
(−1.89)

0.1543
(10.02)

−0.0475
(−7.85)

−0.0012
(−0.52)

−0.0074
(−0.47)

−0.1109
(−0.64)

0.0449
(3.16)

−0.0415
(−5.91)

−0.0033 
(−1.70)  
−0.0137 
(−0.85)  
−0.3271 
(−1.78)  
0.0318  
(2.52)

−0.0208 
(−2.60)  

0.070

0.049

0.047

0.046

0.003

0.031

0.006

0.007

Table 5
Comparing measures of institutions’ green tilts.
This table describes 13F institutions’ green tilt measures in 2023q4. The two 
 measures are from our specifications in which  contains only the ESG 
𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
𝑖
composite score. The first of those specifications includes the non-ESG controls, 
as in our main analysis, and the second specification excludes those controls. 
To compute the third measure below, given by ∑
𝑛∈𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛, we 
define 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛 (𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛) to be the set of covered stocks whose ESG composite 
score is in the highest (lowest) quintile. 1(UNPRI𝑖) is an indicator for whether 
institution 𝑖 signed the UNPRI on or before 2023q4.

𝑛∈𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − ∑

𝑖

  Green tilt measure
  (1) 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
  (2) 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
  (3) ∑
  (4) 1(𝑈 𝑁𝑃 𝑅𝐼𝑖)

𝑛∈𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − ∑

𝑖

, with controls
, without controls

𝑛∈𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛

AUM-weighted

Correlations

average

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) 

0.042
0.112
0.276
0.761

1
0.352
0.342
0.118

1
0.569
0.017

1
0.056

1  

underscores the importance of controlling for firm size, as larger firms 
tend to score higher on ESG. Finally, the 76.1% average for the UNPRI 
indicator reflects the share of U.S. equity AUM managed by UNPRI 
signatories, as mentioned in the introduction.

The remainder of Table  5 reports pairwise correlations across insti-
tutions among the four measures. The correlation between 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 with 
and without controls is only 35.2%, again underscoring the importance 

𝑖

Table 6
Comparing measures of mutual funds’ green tilts.
This table describes mutual funds’ green tilt measures in 2023q4. Details are as 
in the previous table. MS Globe Rating𝑖 is fund 𝑖’s Morningstar Sustainability 
Rating. 1(ESG-labeled fund𝑖) is defined in Table  4.

𝑖

  Green tilt measure
  Panel A: All funds
  (1) 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
  (2) 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
  (3) ∑
𝑛∈𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − ∑
  (4) MS Globe Rating𝑖
  (5) 1(ESG-labeled fund𝑖)

, with controls
, without controls

𝑖

𝑛∈𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛

𝑖

, with controls
, without controls

  Panel B: Active funds
  (1) 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
  (2) 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
  (3) ∑
𝑛∈𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − ∑
  (4) MS Globe Rating𝑖
  (5) 1(ESG-labeled fund𝑖)

𝑖

𝑛∈𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑤𝑖𝑛

AUM-weighted Correlations

average

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5) 

0.012
0.233
0.269
2.902
0.014

−0.001
0.229
0.255
2.684
0.026

1
0.164 1
0.325 0.759 1
0.236 0.173 0.357 1
0.162 0.159 0.255 0.355 1  

1
0.156 1
0.314 0.752 1
0.229 0.171 0.367 1
0.159 0.169 0.271 0.362 1  

of controls (if the controls had no effect, the correlation would be 
100%). The correlation between our measure (𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 with controls) 
and  the  simple  difference  ∑
𝑛∈𝐺 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − ∑
𝑛∈𝐵 𝑤𝑖𝑛  is  34.2%.  The  fact 
that this correlation is positive is essentially a sanity check, as both 

𝑖

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

measures aim to capture portfolio tilts toward green stocks; that this 
correlation is low shows that our measure is quite different from the 
simple one. The simple measure correlates more strongly (56.9%) with 
𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 without controls, which is consistent with both ignoring non-
𝑖
ESG characteristics. Finally, the UNPRI indicator has positive but low 
correlations with 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵

, both with and without controls.

𝑖

6.2. Mutual funds

Table  6 mirrors Table  5, but at the mutual fund level. Panel A covers 
all funds; Panel B focuses on active funds. The results in both panels are 
similar, and they lead to the same conclusions as in Table  5.

𝑖

The AUM-weighted means show that omitting controls for non-ESG 
characteristics substantially inflates aggregate green tilt estimates. For 
example, in Panel A, the tilt is 23.3% without controls but only 1.2% 
with controls. The correlation between 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 with and without controls 
is only 16% in both panels — less than half its 13F-level counterpart 
in Table  5 — indicating that controlling for non-ESG characteristics is 
even more important at the mutual fund level. This makes sense, as 
individual mutual funds often follow more focused investment styles 
(e.g.,  size  or  value/growth),  whereas  styles  tend  to  blend  together 
within 13F institutions. The correlation between 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 and the simple 
difference ∑
𝑛∈𝐵 𝑤𝑖𝑛 is about 32% in both panels, similar 
to its equivalent in Table  5, but it rises to about 75%, much more 
sharply than in Table  5, when 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 is computed without controls. 
Again, controlling for non-ESG characteristics is even more critical for 
funds than for 13F institutions.

𝑛∈𝐺 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − ∑

𝑖

𝑖

Our measure is also positively correlated with the two remaining 
measures: about 23% with Morningstar’s globe rating and 16% with 
the ESG-fund indicator, passing two additional sanity checks.23 The 
ESG-fund indicator’s correlation with 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 is about the same whether 
or  not  controls  are  applied.  In  contrast,  the  globe  rating  is  more 
strongly correlated with 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
 with controls, which is consistent with 
its  peer-adjusted  design  that  effectively  controls  for  some  non-ESG 
characteristics, as explained earlier.

𝑖

𝑖

7. ESG investing versus index investing

We distinguish ESG investing from index investing. The rationale 
follows Pástor et al. (2021): when all investors value ESG equally, they 
all hold the market portfolio, as their preferences are fully reflected in 
market weights through equilibrium prices. There is then only index 
investing and no ESG investing.

To say there is no ESG investing in that setting seems reasonable. 
For example, the standard CAPM is another setting in which all in-
vestors hold the market portfolio, even though they have a preference 
for low-beta stocks. In that setting, low-beta stocks have low expected 
returns, so they have high prices and thus large market weights, all 
else equal. Yet the CAPM is generally characterized as a world of index 
investing, not ‘‘low-beta’’ investing. The same logic applies when ESG 
preferences are fully embedded in market prices.

The  market  portfolio’s  weights  depend  on  the  average  strength 
of ESG preferences, but without heterogeneity in those preferences, 
there is no ESG investing. The latter arises from differences in ESG 
preferences  across  investors.  To  simplify  their  model,  Pástor  et  al. 
(2021)  assume  that  ESG  is  the  only  reason  investors  deviate  from 
the market portfolio. Here we allow additional stock characteristics to 
affect investors’ portfolio choices, given our empirical focus, but we 
maintain the same distinction between ESG and index investing by 
controlling for market weights when estimating tilts.

23 The latter positive correlation is expected, given the evidence from Table 
4 that ESG-labeled funds tend to have larger green tilts and smaller brown tilts 
than non-ESG funds.

19 

Fig. 12. Market reallocation to green stocks.  This figure plots the cumula-
tive sum of 𝜅𝑡, defined in Eq. (33). Equivalently, it plots the cumulative change 
in the fraction of stocks whose greenness, 𝑔𝑛, is less than the value-weighted 
mean of 𝑔𝑛 across all stocks. A positive (negative) change corresponds to the 
market placing greater (less) weight on green stocks relative to brown. The 
figure shows results with four versions of 𝑔𝑛: the composite ESG score as well 
as its separate E, S, and G components.

If the average ESG preference strengthens, then, all else equal, the 
market portfolio will allocate more to green stocks. To investigate this 
possibility, for each month 𝑡 we compute 

𝜅𝑡 =

𝑁𝑡−1∑

𝑛=1

(𝑤𝑚𝑛,𝑡 − 𝑤𝑚𝑛,𝑡−1)𝑔𝑛,𝑡−1 ,

(33)

where 𝑁𝑡−1 is the number of stocks in our covered universe at the 
beginning of the month, and 𝑤𝑚𝑛,𝑠 is proportional to stock 𝑛’s market 
capitalization, summing to 1 across stocks for 𝑠 equal to both 𝑡 − 1 and 
𝑡. The value of 𝜅𝑡 is positive (negative) if market weights reallocate 
toward green (brown) stocks during month 𝑡.

Fig.  12 plots the cumulative sum of 𝜅𝑡 for each of our four greenness 
measures.  For  the  ESG  composite,  the  cumulative  reallocation  falls 
during the first half of the sample period, but then it rises sharply, by 
5.5 percentage points, between mid-2018 and mid-2020. By the end of 
the sample period, the cumulative reallocation reaches 2.1%. The end-
of-sample value is very similar when we measure greenness by the G 
score, although the reallocation to G-friendly stocks follows a different 
path. In contrast, the market reallocates away from S-friendly stocks 
over the full sample period, despite a steady reallocation toward them 
between 2015 and 2021. Finally, the reallocation to E-friendly stocks 
increases steadily between 2012 and 2020, before pulling back slightly 
at the end. Overall, for greenness measured by E, the market portfolio’s 
allocation to green stocks increases substantially, by 7.6 percentage 
points, during the sample period.

8. Conclusion

From 2012 to 2023, ESG-related tilts in institutional U.S. equity 
portfolios consistently account for about 6% of the institutions’ ag-
gregate U.S. equity AUM. Over the same period, institutions’ overall 
portfolio tilts in U.S. stocks, as measured by active share, have declined. 
When scaled by active share, the typical institution’s ESG tilt has grown 
from 17% to 27%. So, while ESG tilts are a modest and steady fraction 
of total AUM, they represent a substantial and growing fraction of total 
portfolio tilts.

Our approach to estimating ESG tilts has several advantages. First, 
it isolates ESG tilts by controlling for non-ESG characteristics, which 
is valuable because stocks’ ESG and non-ESG characteristics are cor-
related. For example, an institution may hold Tesla’s stock either for 

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

its environmental profile or because it likes holding large-cap growth 
stocks. Our approach separates the two motives. We show that failing to 
control for non-ESG characteristics would overstate institutions’ overall 
ESG tilt by more than three-fourths. Second, our approach allows the 
three dimensions of ESG to enter separately, recognizing, for example, 
that investors may assess Tesla’s environmental virtues separately from 
Tesla’s treatment of its employees. We find that using only a composite 
ESG score misses over 40% of the tilts associated with the E, S, and 
G  characteristics.  Third,  our  approach  breaks  down  ESG  tilts  into 
components capturing the extensive and intensive margins. We find 
significant ESG tilts at both margins, but the intensive-margin tilts are 
two to four times larger.

Our approach also allows us to separate green tilts from brown. 
We find that institutions as a whole tilt more green than brown, and 
increasingly so. The rise in net green tilting occurs primarily at the 
intensive margin; for example, institutions divest from brown stocks 
mostly by reducing positions rather than eliminating them. In contrast, 
non-13F institutions and households tilt more brown than green, and 
increasingly so. Greenness also varies across institutions. Larger institu-
tions are greener, and the rise in net green tilting is fully driven by the 
largest third of institutions. Those institutions are increasingly green, 
whereas smaller institutions are increasingly brown. UNPRI signatories 
and European institutions are also greener in terms of their U.S. stock 
holdings, while banks are the least green institutional type. Our results 
are similar across four different ESG-related measures of greenness. 
These results are important because green tilts could come with lower 
expected returns, as noted at the outset.

We also estimate the ESG-related tilts of U.S. equity mutual funds. 
We find only small offsetting ESG tilts within fund families. Mutual 
funds’ aggregate ESG tilts range from 6% to 10%, and up to 13% for 
active funds. Extensive-margin tilts are larger than for 13F institutions 
but remain smaller than intensive-margin tilts. Divestment of brown 
stocks also remains smaller at the extensive margin, indicating that 
even at the fund level, brown divestment is more partial than full. 
Mutual funds collectively tilt green, though less so than institutions. 
Finally, funds with ESG labels or more Morningstar globes tilt greener.
Our study opens many avenues for future research. For example, do 
institutions substitute voting green for tilting green, or are those actions 
complementary?24 What are the financial implications of institutions’ 
green tilts? Could one compute stock-level ESG tilts and relate them 
to stocks’ expected returns? One could also apply our methodology to 
measure portfolio tilts with respect to non-ESG characteristics as well 
as tilts in other asset classes, such as bonds, bank loans, and private 
equity.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Lubos  Pastor:  Writing  –  original  draft.  Robert  F.  Stambaugh: 

Writing – original draft. Lucian A. Taylor: Writing – original draft.

Appendix A

A.1. Green and brown tilts net to zero across all investors

In this section, we prove the statement in Eq. (23), namely, that the 
green and brown tilts aggregated across all investors are always equal: 
𝑇 𝐺 = 𝑇 𝐵.

For each investor 𝑖, define 𝜙𝑖 = 𝐴𝑖∕𝐴, where 𝐴 = ∑

𝑗 𝐴𝑗 is total 
AUM across all investors. Each stock 𝑛’s market portfolio weight is 
given by 𝑤𝑚𝑛 = 𝑀𝑛∕𝑀, where 𝑀𝑛 is stock 𝑛’s market capitalization 
and 𝑀 = ∑
𝑗 𝑀𝑗 is total market capitalization across all stocks. Note 
that 𝐴 = 𝑀. Also note that 𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 𝑀𝑖𝑛∕𝐴𝑖, where 𝑀𝑖𝑛 is the dollar 
amount of stock 𝑛 held by investor 𝑖. Therefore, for each stock 𝑛, 
∑

∑

∑

∑

𝐴𝑖
𝐴

𝑀𝑖𝑛
𝐴𝑖

=

𝑀𝑖𝑛
𝐴

=

𝑀𝑖𝑛
𝑀

=

𝑀𝑛
𝑀

= 𝑤𝑚𝑛,

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖
with the sums taken across all investors. Taking conditional expecta-
tions of both sides of Eq. (A.1), we obtain 
∑
∑
0, } = 𝑤𝑚𝑛,

, } =


𝜙𝑖E{𝑤𝑖𝑛|

𝜙𝑖E{𝑤𝑖𝑛|

(A.2)

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖
treating  the  𝜙𝑖’s  as  known  and  noting  that  𝑤𝑚𝑛  is  included  in  . 
Recalling  the  definition  of  𝛥𝑖𝑛  from  Eq.  (1),  Eq.  (A.2)  immediately 
implies that 
∑

𝜙𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑛 =

(A.1)

(A.3)

𝜙𝑖𝛥𝑖𝑛 = 0

𝑖
for all 𝑛. That is, each stock’s AUM-weighted tilt is zero. Let 
𝐺 denote 
the  set  of  all  green  stocks.  For  any  green  stock  𝑛,  note  from  the 
definitions in Eqs. (13) through (16) that 𝛥𝑖𝑛 = 𝛥𝑂𝐺
𝑖𝑛 . Summing 
both sides of Eq. (A.3) across all green stocks, using the definitions in 
(17), we obtain

𝑖𝑛 + 𝛥𝑈 𝐺

(

∑

∑

0 =

)

𝜙𝑖𝛥𝑖𝑛

=

∑

𝜙𝑖

∑

𝑛∈𝐺
∑
𝜙𝑖

𝑖

=

𝑖
𝑖𝑛 + 𝛥𝑈 𝐺
𝑖𝑛

(𝛥𝑂𝐺

)

𝑖
∑

𝑛∈𝐺

𝑛∈𝐺
∑

=

𝑖

𝛥𝑖𝑛

(𝑇 𝑂𝐺

𝑖 − 𝑇 𝑈 𝐺

𝑖

)

𝜙𝑖

= 𝑇 𝑂𝐺 − 𝑇 𝑈 𝐺,

implying 

𝑇 𝑂𝐺 = 𝑇 𝑈 𝐺,
where  𝑇 𝑂𝐺 = ∑
  are  the  aggregate 
overweight-green 
tilts, 
respectively.
Analogously, summing Eqs. (A.3) across all brown stocks, we obtain 

  and  𝑇 𝑈 𝐺 = ∑
and  underweight-green 

𝑖 𝜙𝑖𝑇 𝑈 𝐺
𝑖

𝑖 𝜙𝑖𝑇 𝑂𝐺
𝑖

(A.4)

𝑇 𝑂𝐵 = 𝑇 𝑈 𝐵,
where 𝑇 𝑂𝐵 = ∑
desired Eq. (23): 

𝑖 𝜙𝑖𝑇 𝑂𝐵
𝑖

 and 𝑇 𝑈 𝐵 = ∑

𝑖 𝜙𝑖𝑇 𝑈 𝐵
𝑖

. We thus obtain the 

(A.5)

𝑇 𝐺 = 𝑇 𝐵,
where 𝑇 𝐺 = ∑
𝑖  are the aggregate green and 
brown tilts, respectively. The last step follows from recognizing that 
𝑇 𝐺 = 𝑇 𝑂𝐺 + 𝑇 𝑈 𝐵 and 𝑇 𝐵 = 𝑇 𝑂𝐵 + 𝑇 𝑈 𝐺, based on Eqs. (18) and (19). 

𝑖  and 𝑇 𝐵 = ∑

𝑖 𝜙𝑖𝑇 𝐺

𝑖 𝜙𝑖𝑇 𝐵

(A.6)

Declaration of competing interest

A.2. Estimating the intensive-margin model

□

We have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

24 A growing literature compares the effectiveness of exit and voice strategies 
at curtailing firms’ anti-social behavior. For a recent example of an empirical 
comparison, see Saint-Jean (2023).

20 

This section extends the discussion from Section 3.2 by providing a 
detailed justification for the regression model in Eq. (29). We begin by 
specifying two desired properties of our model for the intensive margin. 
First, for simplicity, 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛∕𝑤𝑚𝑛 is given by a restricted linear function of 
stock 𝑛’s characteristics: 
𝑤+
𝑖𝑛
𝑤𝑚𝑛

𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑁.

𝑐𝑖𝑗 𝑥𝑛𝑗 ,

(A.7)

𝐾
∑

=

𝑗=1

L. Pastor et al.

That is, 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 is linear in the 𝐾 values of 𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 . If a given stock 𝑛 is held, 
its expected weight could in principle depend not only on the stock’s 
own value of 𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 but also on the values of that quantity for other 
stocks the investor may hold. Recognizing that potential dependence, 
we allow 𝑐𝑖𝑗 to depend on the portfolio’s expected sum across stocks of 
𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 (i.e., 𝜋′
𝑖 ℎ𝑗 , where ℎ𝑗 denotes the 𝑁 ×1 vector whose 𝑛th element 
is 𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 ). Second, for any 𝜋𝑖 having at least one positive element, 
expected unconditional weights, which we denote by  ̄𝑤𝑖𝑛, always sum 
to one: 
𝑁
∑

𝑁
∑

̄𝑤𝑖𝑛 =

𝜋𝑖𝑛𝑤+

𝑖𝑛 = 1.

(A.8)

𝑛=1

𝑛=1

Given these two properties, it can be readily verified that 𝑐𝑖𝑗 must 

be proportional to the reciprocal of ∑𝑁

𝑛=1 𝜋𝑖𝑛𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 . That is, 

𝑐𝑖𝑗 = 𝑏𝑖𝑗

/ 𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

𝜋𝑖𝑛𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗 ,

𝑗 = 1, … , 𝐾,

(A.9)

where 𝑏𝑖𝑗 does not depend on 𝑋 or 𝜋𝑖. In addition, it must be that 

𝐾
∑

𝑗=1

𝑏𝑖𝑗 = 1.

(A.10)

Substituting the right-hand side of Eq. (A.9) into Eq. (A.7) gives 
)

(

.

(A.11)

𝑤+
𝑖𝑛
𝑤𝑚𝑛

=

𝑏𝑖𝑗

𝐾
∑

𝑗=1

𝑥𝑛𝑗
𝑛=1 𝜋𝑖𝑛𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗

∑𝑁

For each stock held by the investor, the actual weight 𝑤𝑖𝑛 obeys 

𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 𝑤+

𝑖𝑛 + 𝜖𝑖𝑛,

(A.12)

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

regression is estimated for each institution and quarter subject to the 
linear coefficient restriction in Eq. (A.10). We find that the regressions 
fit  the  data  quite  well,  delivering  an  average  𝑅2  of  0.41  (Internet 
Appendix). Finally, we plug the estimated 𝑏𝑖𝑗 ’s into Eq. (A.11) to obtain 
expected weights for all assets, 𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑁.

The resulting values of 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 contain some estimation error. This error 
causes some estimates of 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 to be negative or exceed 1. We remove 
these implausible values by truncating 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 to be in [0,1]. The rate of 
truncation is low. Roughly 5% of 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 values are truncated at 0, and 
less than 0.5% are truncated at 1. The rate of truncation is not con-
centrated in any particular set of institutions (e.g., large versus small, 
investment advisors vs. insurance companies), nor is it concentrated 
in any particular industry. To show this, we regress an indicator for 
whether 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛 is truncated on dummy variables for institution categories 
and stock industries. We find an 𝑅2 of only 0.003, and few dummies 
enter significantly (Internet Appendix).

After the truncation of 𝑤+

𝑖𝑛, the expected unconditional weights, 
̄𝑤𝑖𝑛, no longer sum to 1. We restore that property by rescaling 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛. 
Specifically, we divide 𝑤+
0) by the investor-specific sums 
0), respectively. After this adjustment,  ̄𝑤𝑖𝑛() and 
of  ̄𝑤𝑖𝑛() and  ̄𝑤𝑖𝑛(
̄𝑤𝑖𝑛(
0) both sum to 1 for every investor. As a result, the sum of our 
estimated values of 𝛥𝑖𝑛 across stocks is zero for each investor, as it is 
for the population values of 𝛥𝑖𝑛.

𝑖𝑛() and 𝑤+

𝑖𝑛(

In  addition,  we  truncate  𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡

,  𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡
  and  their  green  and  brown 
𝑖
components to be less than 1. In 2023, this truncation affects only 0.9% 
of institutions that represent around 0.1% of covered AUM. No values 
of 𝑇𝑖 or 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵

 exceed 1 in 2023.

𝑖

𝑖

where 𝜖𝑖𝑛 has zero mean conditional on 𝑋. Combining Eqs. (A.11) and 
(A.12) gives the following regression model for the stocks held: 

A.3. Bias adjustment and standard errors

𝑤𝑖𝑛
𝑤𝑚𝑛

=

𝐾
∑

𝑗=1

𝑏𝑖𝑗 ̃𝑥𝑛,𝑗 + 𝑒𝑖𝑛,

where the 𝑗th independent variable is 

̃𝑥𝑛𝑗 =

𝑥𝑛𝑗
𝑛=1 𝜋𝑖𝑛𝑤𝑚𝑛𝑥𝑛𝑗
The  quantity  𝑒𝑖𝑛

∑𝑁

.

≡ 𝜖𝑖𝑛∕𝑤𝑚𝑛  satisfies  the  property  required  of  a 
regression disturbance, i.e., that it has zero expectation conditional on 
the ̃𝑥𝑛𝑗 ’s, because the 𝑛th row of 𝑋 includes 𝑤𝑚𝑛 (as noted earlier).

(A.13)

(A.14)

This section describes the bootstrap procedure that we use to de-
bias the raw estimates of 𝑇𝑖 and obtain their standard errors, extending 
the discussion from Section 3.4. We use the same procedure to de-bias 
all other quantities of interest (𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡
, 
𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵,𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑖

, 𝑇 𝑒𝑥𝑡, 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝑇 𝐺
, 𝑇 𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑖
, etc.) and obtain their standard errors.
Let 𝑆 denote the set of stocks with non-missing data (i.e., ‘‘covered’’ 
stocks), and let 𝑁 denote the number of stocks in this set. Let 𝐾𝑖
denote the number of covered stocks held by institution 𝑖. The bootstrap 
algorithm proceeds as follows, for each institution 𝑖:

, 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵,𝑖𝑛𝑡

𝑖 , 𝑇 𝐺𝑀𝐵
𝑖

𝑖 , 𝑇 𝐵

𝑖

𝑖

We estimate the regression in (A.13) using the set of stocks held by 
the investor. To do so, we must first construct the underlying values of 
̃𝑥𝑛,𝑗 , which depend on 𝜋𝑖 via Eq. (A.14). For that purpose we set 𝜋𝑖 = ̂𝜋𝑖, 
the estimate of 𝜋𝑖 from our model of the extensive margin. We also 
allow for the possible correlation between 𝑒𝑖𝑛 and the probability that 
stock 𝑛 is held. Specifically, we apply a correction following Heckman 
(1979). The first step is to estimate the probit model, 

𝑦𝑖𝑛 = 𝛾 ′

𝑖 𝑧𝑖𝑛 + 𝑢𝑖𝑛,

(A.15)

where 𝑢𝑖𝑛 is a standard normal variate, and investor 𝑖 holds stock 𝑛 if 
𝑦𝑖𝑛 > 0. We specify 𝑧𝑖𝑛 as a two-element vector, with the first element 
equal to 1 and the second element equal to an indicator variable set to 1 
if investor 𝑖 held stock 𝑛 during any of the previous 11 quarters (and set 
to 0 otherwise). The probit model is estimated via maximum likelihood 
using  all  stocks  with  non-missing  data.  The  second  step  is  to  esti-
′𝑧𝑖𝑛)
mate the regression in Eq. (A.13) with the quantity 𝜙( ̂𝛾𝑖
included as an additional independent variable, where 𝜙(⋅) and 𝛷(⋅)
denote the standard normal density and distribution functions.25 This 

′𝑧𝑖𝑛)∕𝛷( ̂𝛾𝑖

25 The use of lagged holdings in the probit model is consistent with the 
finding by Koijen and Yogo (2019) that an institution does not often hold 
a stock currently if the stock was not held within the past 11 quarters. This 
persistence in holdings conveniently allows us to have the probit model rely on 
a variable different from the 𝑥𝑛𝑗 ’s used in the intensive-margin model, thereby 
satisfying the recommended exclusion restriction for the successful application 

1. Estimate the extensive- and intensive-margin regression mod-
els using the actual data (observed portfolio weights 𝑤𝑖𝑛 and 
characteristics 𝑋).

(a) For each covered stock, let ̂𝜋𝑖𝑛 denote the estimated prob-
ability that institution 𝑖 holds stock 𝑛, for all 𝑛 ∈ 𝑆.
(b) Let 𝑒𝑖 denote the 𝐾𝑖×1 vector of estimated residuals from 
the intensive-margin regression (Eq. (A.13)), to which we 
have  added 
regressor,
𝑖 𝑧𝑖𝑛)∕𝛷(̂𝛾 ′
𝜙(̂𝛾 ′
𝑖 𝑧𝑖𝑛) (see previous section for details). Since 
the intensive-margin regression is estimated with a con-
straint, the mean of 𝑒𝑖 is not necessarily zero. We de-mean 
𝑒𝑖 at the institution level to be consistent with the model’s 
assumption that 𝜖𝑖𝑛 = 𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑤𝑚𝑛 has zero mean conditional 
on 𝑋.

the  additional  Heckman 

of the Heckman correction (e.g., (Puhani, 2000)). If instead we were simply to 
′𝑧𝑖𝑛) could possess 
specify 𝑧𝑖𝑛 as containing those same 𝑥𝑛𝑗 ’s, then 𝜙( ̂𝛾𝑖
strong collinearity with the 𝑥𝑛𝑗 ’s, making it difficult to separate any selection 
effect from the primary roles of the 𝑥𝑛𝑗 ’s in the intensive-margin model. We 
do not include lagged holdings in our extensive-margin model, because the 
objective of that model is to infer how stock characteristics predict the set of 
stocks the institution currently holds, regardless of how long the institution 
has held those stocks.

′𝑧𝑖𝑛)∕𝛷( ̂𝛾𝑖

21 

L. Pastor et al.

(c) Let ̂𝑏𝑖 denote the intensive-margin model’s estimated co-
efficient vector, and let ̂[𝜌𝜎𝑢]𝑖 denote the estimated coef-
ficient on 𝜙(̂𝛾 ′

𝑖 𝑧𝑖𝑛)∕𝛷(̂𝛾 ′

𝑖 𝑧𝑖𝑛).

2. Motivated by the heteroskedasticity observed in the data, we 
allow the volatility of 𝑒𝑖𝑛 to depend on stock 𝑛’s market cap-
italization, 𝑀𝑛, in an institution-specific manner. Specifically, 
we assume the volatility of 𝑒𝑖𝑛 is proportional to 𝑀 𝜆𝑖
𝑛 . We esti-
mate 𝜆𝑖 as the coefficient on log(𝑀𝑛) from an institution-specific 
regression  of  log(|𝑒𝑖𝑛|)  on  log(𝑀𝑛).26  Let  𝛿𝑖𝑛
𝑛   de-
note  the  volatility-adjusted  value  of  𝑒𝑖𝑛,  up  to  a  constant  of 
proportionality. Let 𝛿𝑖 denote the vector of 𝛿𝑖𝑛.

≡ 𝑒𝑖𝑛∕𝑀 𝜆𝑖

3. Compute the actual value of 𝑇𝑖 from Eq. (7). Label this value 

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤
𝑖

.

4. Compute a simulated value of  ̃𝑇𝑖 by using the following steps:

(a) Simulate which stocks are held, ̃𝐼𝑖𝑛, as follows. For each of 
the 𝑁 covered stocks in 𝑆, draw a uniform [0,1] random 
variable  and  set  the  indicator  ̃𝐼𝑖𝑛 = 1  if  this  random 
variable is below  ̂𝜋𝑖𝑛 and  ̃𝐼𝑖𝑛 = 0 otherwise. Let 𝐿𝑖 denote 
the number of stocks with ̃𝐼𝑖𝑛 = 1, which is the number of 
≥ 30
stocks held in the simulated sample. We require 𝐿𝑖
stocks, just like in the actual data; if this condition is not 
met, we repeat this step until the condition is met.
(b) With this new sample of size 𝑁, estimate the extensive-
margin  model  while  replacing  the  actual  𝐼𝑖𝑛  with  the 
simulated  ̃𝐼𝑖𝑛. Denote the fitted values as  ̃𝜋𝑖𝑛.

(c) Simulate weights among the stocks held,  ̃𝑤𝑖𝑛, as follows. 
For each of the 𝐿𝑖 stocks that are held, compute 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛∕𝑤𝑚𝑛
from Eq. (A.11) while using the estimates of ̂𝑏𝑖 and  ̂𝜋𝑖𝑛
from step 1. Following Eqs. (A.11) and (A.13), compute 
a draw of  ̃𝑤𝑖𝑛∕𝑤𝑚𝑛 by adding two terms to 𝑤+
𝑖𝑛∕𝑤𝑚𝑛. The 
first term is a random draw of 𝑒, which we compute as 
the product of 𝑀 𝜆𝑖
𝑛  and a random draw (with replace-
ment) of an element of 𝛿𝑖. Multiplying by 𝑀 𝜆𝑖
𝑛  performs a 
heteroskedasticity adjustment to 𝑒. The second term, from 
the Heckman adjustment, is ̂[𝜌𝜎𝑢]𝑖 times 𝜙(̂𝛾 ′
𝑖 𝑧𝑖𝑛). 
Adding  this  second  term  allows  a  correlation  between 
the  error  term  in  the  intensive-margin  model  and  the 
probability that the stock is held.

𝑖 𝑧𝑖𝑛)∕𝛷(̂𝛾 ′

(d) With this new sample of size 𝐿𝑖, estimate the intensive-
margin  model  as  in  Eq.  (A.13),  replacing  𝜋𝑖𝑛  with  ̃𝜋𝑖𝑛
and 𝑤𝑖𝑛 with  ̃𝑤𝑖𝑛, and performing the Heckman adjust-
ment.  Denote  the  new  intensive-margin  model  coeffi-
cients  by  ̃𝑏𝑖𝑗 .  Substitute  ̃𝑏𝑖𝑗  and  ̃𝜋𝑖𝑛  into  Eq.  (A.11)  to 
𝑖𝑛, also denoted  ̃𝑤+[, ̃𝜋𝑖()]. Similarly, compute 
obtain  ̃𝑤+
0, ̃𝜋𝑖(
̃𝑤+[

0)].

(e) Replacing variables with their tilde counterparts, compute 

̃𝛥𝑖𝑛 in Eq. (1).

(f) Compute  ̃𝑇𝑖 from Eq. (7), substituting  ̃𝛥𝑖𝑛 for 𝛥𝑖𝑛.

5. Repeat step 4 for a total of 𝑁𝑆𝑖𝑚 trials.
6. Compute 𝑇 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖 = ̄̃𝑇𝑖 − 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤

𝑖

, where  ̄̃𝑇𝑖 is the average value of  ̃𝑇𝑖

across the 𝑁𝑆𝑖𝑚 trials. 𝑇 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖 is the estimated bias in 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤

.

𝑖

7. Compute our final bias-adjusted estimate of 𝑇𝑖: 

̂𝑇𝑖 = 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑤

𝑖

− 𝑇 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖.

(A.16)

8. Compute the standard error of  ̂𝑇𝑖 as follows. Let 𝑉𝑇  denote the 
variance of ̃𝑇𝑖 across the 𝑁𝑆𝑖𝑚 trials. The standard error of  ̂𝑇𝑖 is 
[𝑉𝑇 + 𝑉𝑇 ∕𝑁𝑆𝑖𝑚]1∕2. We need to add 𝑉𝑇 ∕𝑁𝑆𝑖𝑚 because 𝑇 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖, 
an average across 𝑁𝑆𝑖𝑚 trials, is itself estimated with error. The 
variance of the 𝑇 𝐵𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖 estimate is 𝑉𝑇 ∕𝑁𝑆𝑖𝑚.

26 In 2023, the mean and median of estimated 𝜆𝑖 are −0.258 and −0.270, 
respectively. Estimated 𝜆𝑖 is negative for more than 95% of institutions and 
significantly negative at the 5% level for more than 75% of institutions.

22 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

9. We compute a 95% confidence interval for 𝑇𝑖 as follows.

𝑖

(a) The lower end of this interval equals  ̂𝑇𝑖 − Gap2.5, where 
 is the gap between the mean and the 

Gap2.5 = ̄̃𝑇𝑖 − ̃𝑇 2.5
2.5th percentile of  ̃𝑇𝑖 across simulated trials.

(b) The higher end of this interval equals  ̂𝑇𝑖 + Gap97.5, where 
− ̄̃𝑇𝑖 is the gap between the 97.5th per-

Gap97.5 = ̃𝑇 97.5
centile and the mean of  ̃𝑇𝑖 across simulated trials.

𝑖

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104173.

Data availability

Green Tilts -- Replication Package (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Atta-Darkua, Vaska, Glossner, Simon, Krueger, Philipp, Matos, Pedro, 2023. Decarboniz-
ing institutional investor portfolios: Helping to green the planet or just greening 
your portfolio?. Working paper.

Bennett, James A., Sias, Richard W., Starks, Laura T., 2003. Greener pastures and the 
impact of dynamic institutional preferences. Rev. Financ. Stud. 16, 1203–1238.
Berg, Florian, Heeb, Florian, Koelbel, Julian F., 2023a. The economic impact of ESG 

ratings. Working paper, MIT.

Berg,  Florian,  Koelbel,  Julian  F.,  Pavlova,  Anna,  Rigobon,  Roberto,  2023b.  ESG 
confusion and stock returns: Tackling the problem of noise. Working paper, MIT.
Berg, Florian, Koelbel, Julian F., Rigobon, Roberto, 2022. Aggregate confusion: The 

divergence of ESG ratings. Rev. Financ. 26, 1315–1344.

BlackRock, 2020. BlackRock’s 2020 letter to clients. https://www.blackrock.com/corp

orate/investor-relations/2020-blackrock-client-letter.

Bolton, Patrick, Kacperczyk, Marcin, 2021. Do investors care about carbon risk? J. 

Bolton, Patrick, Kacperczyk, Marcin, 2023. Global pricing of carbon-transition risk. J. 

Financ. Econ. 142, 517–549.

Financ. 78, 3677–3754.

Brandon, Rajna Gibson, Glossner, Simon, Krueger, Philipp, Matos, Pedro, Steffen, Tom, 
2022. Do responsible investors invest responsibly? Rev. Financ. 26, 1389–1432.
Brandon, Rajna Gibson, Krueger, Philipp, Mitali, Shema F., 2021. The sustainability 
footprint of institutional investors: ESG driven price pressure and performance. 
Working paper.

Bushee,  Brian  J.,  2001.  Do  institutional  investors  prefer  near-term  earnings  over 

long-run value? Contemp. Account. Res. 18, 207–246.

Bushee, Brian J., Carter, Mary Ellen, Gerakos, Joseph, 2014. Institutional investor 
preferences for corporate governance mechanisms. J. Manag. Account. Res. 26, 
123–149.

Chen, Tao, Dong, Hui, Chen, Lin, 2020. Institutional shareholders and corporate social 

responsibility. J. Financ. Econ. 135, 483–504.

Choi, Darwin, Gao, Zhenyu, Jiang, Wenxi, 2020a. Measuring the carbon exposure of 

institutional investors. J. Altern. Investments 23, 8–11.

Choi, Darwin, Gao, Zhenyu, Jiang, Wenxi, 2020b. Attention to global warming. Rev. 

Choi,  Darwin,  Gao,  Zhenyu,  Jiang,  Wenxi,  Zhang,  Hulai,  2023.  Carbon  stock 

Financ. Stud. 33, 1112–1145.

devaluation. Working paper.

Cremers, Martijn, Petajisto, Antti, 2009. How active is your fund manager? A new 

measure that predicts performance. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22, 3329–3365.

Cremers, Martijn, Riley, Timothy B., Zambrana, Rafael, 2023. The complex materiality 
of ESG ratings: Evidence from actively managed ESG funds. Working paper.
DeVault, Luke, Sias, Richard, Starks, Laura, 2019. Sentiment metrics and investor 

demand. J. Financ. 74, 985–1024.

Dyck, Alexander, Lins, Karl V., Roth, Lukas, Wagner, Hannes F., 2019. Do institutional 
investors drive corporate social responsibility? International evidence. J. Financ. 
Econ. 131, 693–714.

Eccles, Robert G, Stroehle, Judith C., 2018. Exploring social origins in the construction 

of ESG measures. Working paper, University of Oxford.

Edelen, Roger M., Ince, Ozgur S., Kadlec, Gregory B., 2016. Institutional investors and 

stock return anomalies. J. Financ. Econ. 119, 472–488.

Edmans, Alex, Gosling, Tom, Jenter, Dirk, 2025. Sustainable investing in practice: 

Objectives, constraints, and limits to impact. Working paper.

Edmans, Alex, Levit, Doron, Schneemeier, Jan, 2024. Socially responsible divestment. 

Working paper.

Falkenstein, Eric G., 1996. Preferences for stock characteristics as revealed by mutual 

fund portfolio holdings. J. Financ. 51, 111–135.

L. Pastor et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104173 

47, 153–161.

finance. J. Financ. Econ. 103, 1–19.

Hong,  Harrison,  Kostovetsky,  Leonard,  2012.  Red  and  blue  investing:  Values  and 

equity investing. Working paper.

Humphrey, Jacquelyn E., Li, Yong, 2021. Who goes green: Reducing mutual fund 

Econ. 138, 614–634.

Ferreira, Miguel A, Matos, Pedro, 2008. The colors of investors’ money: The role of 

institutional investors around the world. J. Financ. Econ. 88, 499–533.

Gantchev,  Nickolay,  Giannetti,  Mariassunta,  Li,  Rachel,  2022.  Does  money  talk? 
Divestitures and corporate environmental and social policies. Rev. Financ. 26, 
1469–1508.

Gompers, Paul A., Metrick, Andrew, 2001. Institutional investors and equity prices. Q. 

J. Econ. 116, 229–259.

Heath, Davidson, Macciocchi, Daniele, Michaely, Roni, Ringgenberg, Matthew C., 2021. 

Does socially responsible investing change firm behavior? Working paper.

Heckman, James J., 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica 

emissions and its consequences. J. Bank. Financ. 126, 106098.

Hwang, Chuan Yang, Titman, Sheridan, Wang, Ying, 2022. Investor tastes, corporate 
behavior, and stock returns: An analysis of corporate social responsibility. Manag. 
Sci. 68, 7131–7152.

Ilhan, Emirhan, Krueger, Philipp, Sautner, Zacharias, Starks, Laura T., 2020. Climate 

risk disclosure and institutional investors. Working paper.

Investment Company Institute, 2024. Investment Company Fact Book. Washington, DC.
Kim, Soohun, Yoon, Aaron, 2023. Analyzing active fund managers’ commitment to ESG: 
Evidence from the United Nations Principles for Responsible Investment. Manag. 
Sci. 69, 741–758.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Richmond, Robert J., Yogo, Motohiro, 2024. Which investors matter 
for equity valuations and expected returns?. Rev. Econ. Stud. 91, 2387–2424.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., Yogo, Motohiro, 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. 

J. Political Econ. 127, 1475–1515.

fund portfolios: Where are the value funds?. Working paper.

Lewellen, Jonathan, 2011. Institutional investors and the limits of arbitrage. J. Financ. 

Econ. 102, 62–80.

Li, Xi, Raghunandan, Aneesh, 2021. Institutional ownership and workplace misconduct: 

Evidence from federal labor law violations. Working paper.

Li, Qianqian, Watts, Edward M., Zhu, Christina, 2023. Retail investors and ESG news. 

Liang, Hao, Sun, Lin, Teo, Melvyn, 2022. Responsible hedge funds. Rev. Financ. 26, 

Working paper.

1585–1633.

Moss, Austin, Naughton, James P., Wang, Clare, 2020. The irrelevance of ESG disclosure 

to retail investors: Evidence from Robinhood. Working paper.

Nofsinger, John R., Sulaeman, Johan, Varma, Abhishek, 2019. Institutional investors 

and corporate social responsibility. J. Corp. Financ. 58, 700–725.

Noh, Don, Oh, Sangmin S., Song, Jihong, 2023. Unpacking the demand for sustainable 

Pástor, Ľuboš, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian A., 2020. Fund tradeoffs. J. Financ. 

Pástor, Ľuboš, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian A., 2021. Sustainable investing in 

equilibrium. J. Financ. Econ. 142, 550–571.

Pástor, Ľuboš, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian A., 2022. Dissecting green returns. 

Puhani, Patrick A., 2000. The Heckman correction for sample selection and its critique. 

Saint-Jean, Victor, 2023. Exit or voice? Divestment, activism, and corporate social 

J. Financ. Econ. 146, 403–424.

J. Econ. Surv. 14, 53–68.

responsibility. Working paper.

Financ. 69, 1415–1453.

Stambaugh, Robert F., 2014. Presidential address: Investment noise and trends. J. 

Starks, Laura T., 2023. Presidential address: Sustainable finance and ESG issues—Value 

versus values. J. Financ. 78, 1837–1872.

Starks, Laura T., Venkat, Parth, Zhu, Qifei, 2023. Corporate ESG profiles and investor 

horizons. Working paper.

Lettau, Martin, Ludvigson, Sydney C., Manoel, Paulo, 2021. Characteristics of mutual 

van der Beck, Philippe, 2022. Flow-driven ESG returns. Working paper.

23 

