Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Regulatory leakage among financial advisors: Evidence from FINRA 
regulation of ‘‘bad’’ brokers
Colleen Honigsberg a,∗, Edwin Hu b,1, Robert J. Jackson Jr. c
a Stanford Law School, 559 Nathan Abbott Way, Stanford, 94305, CA, USA
b UVA School of Law, 580 Massie Road, Charlottesville, 22903, VA, USA
c New York University School of Law, 40 Washington Square South, New York, 10012, NY, USA

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Replication Data (Reference data)

JEL classification:
D18
K20
K22
K23
G24
G28

Keywords:
Financial advisors
Regulatory arbitrage
Misconduct
FINRA
Insurance regulation

1. Introduction

The regulatory framework for financial advisors is fragmented, with multiple state and federal regulators. 
Prior empirical literature on financial advisors has largely focused on a single subset of financial advisors, but 
we create a database containing brokers regulated primarily by FINRA, investment advisers regulated by the 
SEC or state securities regulators, and insurance producers regulated by state insurance regulators. There is 
significant overlap across the regimes; more than 40% of the advisors in our data are registered with more 
than one regulator. This overlap has implications for labor allocation and market discipline. For example, of 
the individuals who exit FINRA’s broker regime, 79% were jointly registered in insurance upon exiting FINRA’s 
regime. This could be efficient if it reflects bad actors who transition to lower risk work, but our evidence shows 
that these advisors continue to engage in financial planning after they move to the insurance side, as over 
90% maintain licenses to sell annuities. Moreover, those who committed misconduct when regulated by FINRA 
continue to have heightened levels of misconduct in insurance. Our findings have additional implications for 
regulatory discipline. In 2018 and 2019, FINRA proposed rules designed to nudge ‘‘bad’’ brokers out of the 
industry. We show that these proposals caused thousands of high-risk brokers to exit the FINRA broker regime, 
but that the majority of these individuals did not leave financial services—98% are currently registered with 
state regulators as insurance producers.

There  has  been  much  focus  on  the  so-called  wandering  police 
officer, a law enforcement officer who leaves one department after bad 
behavior only to find employment with a different department (Grun-
wald  and  Rappaport,  2020).  Evidence  suggests  this  pattern  is  not 
limited to police officers, but also exists in professions such as teachers, 
clergymen, and financial advisors (Honigsberg et al., 2022). On the one 
hand, allowing ‘‘wandering’’ in financial services may be efficient if 
individuals preserve their human capital and skill in selling financial 
products but transition to lower-risk work. On the other hand, ‘‘wander-
ing’’ could reflect a form of arbitrage that allows bad actors to continue 
working in a similar function while evading market discipline.

The overlapping and fragmented legal regimes for financial advisors 
also raise questions about regulators’ ability to discipline bad actors. 
Consider, for example, Terrence Reid Pipenhagen, who was previously 
registered as a broker with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority 
(‘‘FINRA’’). In 2008, FINRA barred Mr. Pipenhagen from association 
with any FINRA-registered broker-dealer in any capacity. FINRA al-
leged that, after losing his clients’ funds, Mr. Pipenhagen sent false 
account  statements  to  his  clients  to  prevent  them  from  attempting 
to  withdraw  their  depleted  investments.  Although  Mr.  Pipenhagen 
was not registered with the Commodities Futures Trading Association 
(CFTC) at the time, the CFTC later determined that he had also violated 
federal commodities law and brought additional enforcement of its 
own. In 2010, the CFTC imposed a fine of $150,000 and mandated 

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  ColleenH@law.stanford.edu (C. Honigsberg), ehu@law.virginia.edu (E. Hu), robert.j.jackson@nyu.edu (R.J. Jackson Jr.).

1 Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank Adam Badawi (discussant), Bobby Bartlett, Lucian Bebchuk, Emiliano Catan, Albert Choi, Stephen Choi, 
Alma Cohen, Shan Ge (discussant), Joe Grundfest, Daniel Hemel, Matt Kozora, Stefan Lewellen (discussant), Jonathan Sokobin, Jeff Strnad, and participants at the 
American Finance Association, Berkeley Law and Economics Workshop, Conference on Empirical Legal Studies, Harvard Law School Workshop in Empirical Law 
and Economics, the Corporate and Securities Litigation Workshop, the Junior Corporate Law Workshop, the University of Texas Law, Business, and Economics 
Workshop, the Northwestern Pritzker Law and Economics Colloquium, the NYU Law and Economics Faculty Workshop, the Texas Forensic Finance Conference, 
and the Stanford Law School Faculty Workshop for helpful comments. We thank Charlotte LeBarron and Robyn Stewart for excellent research assistance.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104170
Received 11 October 2023; Received in revised form 17 September 2025; Accepted 20 September 2025
Available online 7 October 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
C. Honigsberg et al.

that Mr. Pipenhagen never apply for CFTC registration nor claim CFTC 
exemption—effectively barring him from commodities. In effect, Mr. 
Pipenhagen was barred by two federal regulators. Yet, Mr. Pipenhagen 
remains in financial services. As of July 14, 2022, the Florida Division 
of Agent and Agency Services shows that Mr. Pipenhagen holds five 
types of insurances licenses, providing him the ability to sell life and 
health insurance products, including variable annuities. Notably, Mr. 
Pipenhagen’s record shows that his insurance licensing dates back to 
1978, meaning that he was already licensed in insurance before being 
barred by federal regulators. Following his discipline by the federal 
regulators, he merely maintained his insurance licenses and continued 
with that work.

Mr. Pipenhagen is not a lone example. Of the 456,906 individuals 
who withdrew their FINRA brokerage licenses during the years from 
2012 to 2022 and remain outside the FINRA regime, roughly 26.5% 
of these individuals are registered with another financial regulator. 
This contradicts a common assumption in academic literature that an 
exit from FINRA registration is akin to exiting the financial services 
industry. Instead, the regulatory landscape for what we colloquially 
deem financial advisors is fragmented, with multiple federal and state 
regulatory regimes. Individuals who withdraw their FINRA registration 
often remain registered with another financial regulator.

The specific tasks that an advisor can perform vary depending on 
that advisor’s registration, but there is a great deal of overlap across 
the registrations, especially at the consumer level. In fact, consumers 
are generally not aware of the difference (SEC, 2010). For example, 
consider a broker-dealer representative versus an investment adviser 
representative. Broadly stated, broker-dealers buy and sell securities 
on behalf of clients after obtaining permission, and investment advis-
ers are wealth managers who provide their clients with advice and 
recommendations. The line distinguishing these functions is increas-
ingly narrow. Yet, broker-dealer representatives are regulated primarily 
through FINRA, while investment adviser representatives are regulated 
through the SEC. The line becomes even more blurred as it relates to in-
surance. Fixed annuities have long been deemed an insurance product. 
Likewise, in accordance with the Dodd–Frank Act, indexed annuities 
are deemed insurance products—even though the payout is driven by 
the return of an underlying basket of securities. By contrast, although 
variable annuities are also sold by insurance companies, courts have 
recognized them to be securities that must be registered with the SEC, 
meaning that an individual who sells variable annuities will likely need 
both insurance and securities licenses.

Arguably, this regulatory framework invites self-selection, as ‘‘bad’’ 
advisors are incentivized to seek the most lax regulatory regime. Yet, 
the fragmentation also has potential benefits, as it may allow higher-
risk advisors with a history of misconduct to transition to lower-risk 
work, while preserving their human capital. A key question is thus 
whether advisors who transition to another regime continue in a similar 
role or whether they transition to lower risk activities. For example, 
an advisor who leaves the broker regime and transitions to insurance 
may sell products like car insurance (low risk) or products like variable 
annuities (high risk). The sale of either product allows the broker to 
make use of prior skills rather than finding a new industry altogether, 
but they pose differing risks to consumers.

This unique regulatory framework has been largely ignored in aca-
demic work, so our analysis begins with summary statistics on four 
different  categories  of  financial  advisors.  First,  we  obtain  data  on 
registered  representatives  of  broker-dealers  (primarily  regulated  by 
FINRA)  from  BrokerCheck.  Second,  we  obtain  data  on  investment 
adviser representatives (primarily regulated by the SEC and state secu-
rities regulators) from the SEC’s Investment Adviser Public Disclosure 
(IAPD) webpage. Within this category, we separate investment advisers 
by whether the primary regulator will be the SEC or a state securities 
regulator, as prior work has shown that SEC regulation in this area 
is more strenuous than state regulation (Charoenwong et al., 2019). 
Finally, we obtain data on state registered insurance producers through 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

state websites and public records requests filed with state regulators. 
In terms of relative size, insurance is the largest regime, with over two 
million active insurance producers. This is followed by over one million 
active FINRA-registered broker-dealers, around four-hundred thousand 
SEC-registered investment adviser representatives, and around twenty-
thousand state-registered investment adviser representatives. For our 
analysis, we merge the different data sources and track individuals 
who register in more than one regime. Cross-registration is common; 
roughly 42% of FINRA-registered brokers hold at least one additional 
registration in any given year.

We  begin  by  asking  whether  financial  advisors  select  into  spe-
cific regulatory regimes following misconduct. This analysis extends 
prior  literature  finding  that  FINRA  brokers  are  likely  to  withdraw 
their  FINRA  registration  after  misconduct  (Egan  et  al.,  2019).  Our 
findings  show  that  this  prior  result  is  driven  by  advisors  who  are 
jointly registered as FINRA brokers and insurance producers, and that 
these individuals continue to work as insurance producers after exit-
ing FINRA’s regime. Indeed, in the year following serious misconduct 
(defined  as  criminal  or  regulatory  infractions,  civil  judgments,  and 
employer terminations after allegations of improper conduct), a FINRA 
broker  who  is  not  jointly  licensed  in  another  regime  is  1.6  to  3.3 
percentage points more likely to withdraw from FINRA registration. By 
contrast, a FINRA broker who is also registered in insurance is almost 
36 percentage points more likely to withdraw his FINRA registration—
in other words, these dual-registrants are 10 to 20 times more likely to 
withdraw from FINRA registration after serious misconduct.

To understand whether this flow from the brokerage industry to 
insurance poses risk to consumers, we make two inquiries. First, we 
look at the products sold by former FINRA brokers who operate in 
insurance. We show that 92% are licensed to sell annuities; 76% are 
licensed to sell variable annuities specifically. Fewer than 15% have the 
authority to sell personal or casualty products (e.g., home insurance). 
In sum, these former FINRA brokers appear to be operating on the 
asset management side of insurance rather than the traditional risk-
reduction side. Second, we show that individuals with a history of 
insurance  misconduct  continue  to  commit  misconduct  in  insurance. 
Further, individuals are more likely to withdraw their FINRA registra-
tion and work in insurance when the state insurance regulator is more 
lenient (as measured by the regulator’s budget and total fines relative 
to the number of producers in that state), and in states with a smaller 
salary gap between brokers and insurance producers (brokers typically 
earn more than insurance producers). Jointly, these tests suggest that 
former brokers with a history of misconduct who transition to insurance 
continue to engage in similar behavior.

The overlapping regulatory regimes raise the additional question 
of whether an individual regulator can discipline wayward financial 
advisors  who  operate  across  multiple  regimes.  Consider  two  recent 
FINRA rule changes. In 2018, FINRA proposed that brokerage firms 
obtain FINRA’s approval (a costly and time-consuming process) before 
hiring brokers with a substantial history of misconduct. Then, in 2019, 
FINRA proposed to designate firms with an unusually high number 
of previously disciplined brokers as ‘‘restricted’’, and to require some 
of  those  firms  to  maintain  a  reserve  account  with  assets  available 
for aggrieved customers—a penalty so severe that one industry blog 
likened it to expelling the firms in question. These rules were adopted 
largely as written in 2021. Assuming that the rules were effective at 
pushing bad actors out of FINRA’s regime, it is unclear whether the 
effect of the rules would be to force bad actors out of financial services 
entirely—or to force bad actors into less regulated areas of financial 
services.

We study this question by identifying the set of FINRA-registered 
brokers who were targeted by the rules. Our identification strategy 
compares the likelihood that targeted brokers withdraw from FINRA 
registration  after  the  rules  were  proposed,  relative  to  brokers  who 
are employed at the same firm, working in the same county, in the 

2 

C. Honigsberg et al.

same year, with similar qualifications and regulatory registrations—
i.e., those who are also registered insurance producers and may have 
records of misconduct, but do not fit the exact definition of ‘‘bad’’ 
broker  under  the  FINRA  rule.  Consistent  with  the  rule’s  intent  to 
crack down on these bad brokers, we find a significant increase in 
the likelihood that brokers who meet the definition of ‘‘bad’’ under 
the proposed rules withdraw after 2018. This pattern is almost entirely 
due to FINRA brokers who are jointly registered in insurance. Indeed, 
we trace the career outcomes for these individuals after they exit the 
FINRA database and find that 98% of them are actively registered as 
insurance producers as of this writing.

Our study provides three contributions to the literature. First, to our 
knowledge, we provide the first large-scale evidence on the significant 
overlap between insurance producers and other types of financial advi-
sors. Relative to other categories of financial advisors, insurance is the 
largest in number and has seen the highest growth over the past decade. 
The overlap between FINRA brokers and insurance producers has also 
grown: in 2012, we estimate that around 14% of FINRA brokers were 
insurance producers; by 2022, that estimate more than doubled to 35%. 
This trend reflects that the line between insurance and securities has 
become increasingly blurred since the passage of the Dodd–Frank Act, 
which caused indexed annuities to be regulated as insurance. The sheer 
number of insurance producers is also noteworthy. In some states, the 
number of insurance producers licensed to operate in that state exceeds 
10% of the state’s population.2

Second, we contribute to literature on market discipline of financial 
advisors. Prior literature on financial advisors has largely focused on 
individuals in the BrokerCheck database and thus regulated primarily 
by FINRA (e.g., Egan et al., 2019, 2022; Dimmock et al., 2018; Griffin 
et al., 2019; Honigsberg and Jacob, 2021). These papers find evidence 
of market discipline. For example, Egan et al. (2019) finds that roughly 
half  of  brokers  with  misconduct  exit  the  FINRA  broker  regime.  By 
contrast, we draw data from multiple regimes and define financial ad-
visors by job function rather than by regulator, allowing us to analyze 
whether these advisors leave financial services entirely or only leave 
the FINRA regime. Our results paint a more nuanced picture of market 
discipline: although FINRA brokers with misconduct have high rates 
of exit from the FINRA regime, many remain in financial services by 
transitioning to insurance. As noted previously, an individual who is 
jointly registered as a FINRA broker and insurance producer is 10 to 
20 times more likely to withdraw from FINRA registration after serious 
misconduct than a FINRA broker who is not dual registered. In total, of 
those former FINRA brokers who exited to insurance, almost 14% had 
prior misconduct.

Third, we contribute to literature on regulatory leakage by high-
lighting the limitations of regulatory discipline when there are overlap-
ping, fragmented regimes. Prior work has shown that when regulation 
allows  for  evasion  (or  leakage),  the  net  effect  of  the  regulation  is 
unclear. For example, the Kyoto Protocol led to significant relocation of 
developed countries’ energy-intensive production (Babiker, 2005), and 
tighter capital requirements on commercial banks increased shadow 
bank lending (Gebauer and Mazelis, 2019). We are the first to an-
alyze this effect in financial advisory services. Because 98% of the 
‘‘bad’’ FINRA brokers who withdrew from FINRA registration remain 
in insurance, where most continue to have authority to sell investment 
products, bad actors and regulators appear to engage in an ongoing 
game of whack-a-mole. The primary effect of the FINRA rules we study 
was arguably to cause the targeted set of brokers to be subject to lower 
levels of monitoring than before.

Finally, our study contributes to the continuing policy debate over 
the regulation of financial advisors. During the Obama Administration, 

2 For example, the population of Alaska is an estimated to be 734,323 
and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners reported that 86,268 
individuals were licensed to sell insurance in that state. Of course, many of 
these insurance producers could be licensed in Alaska without living in Alaska.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

the Department of Labor attempted to set a uniform fiduciary standard 
across brokers and advisers, and this effort led to changes in sales 
practices  of  high-expense  annuities  before  it  was  ultimately  struck 
down in court (Egan et al., 2020). Since then, consumer advocates 
have continued to push for uniform standards of conduct (Consumer 
Federation of America, 2020), but regulators have continued to focus 
on regulatory distinctions rather than mandate consistent regulation 
across advisors.

2. Institutional background

The regulation of financial advice generally seeks to constrain two 
types of misconduct: outright fraud and more subtle conflicts of inter-
est. The latter is particularly relevant because financial products, unlike 
most consumer goods, are often sold through intermediaries who have 
their own financial incentives to recommend products that pay a high 
commission but may not be suitable for the consumer. A large empirical 
literature documents that conflicts of interest drive advisors to steer 
clients into worse-performing or more expensive products (Mahoney, 
2004; Bergstresser et al., 2008; Christoffersen et al., 2013; Chalmers 
and Reuter, 2020).

To understand the problems that the law guards against, consider 
the case brought by the SEC against Jonathan Dax Cooke and Keystone 
Capital Partners (SEC v. Keystone Capital Partners, Inc. d/b/a Federal 
Employee Benefit Counselors, No. 1:17-cv-02873 (N.D. Ga. 2017); Scharf 
(2022)). In 2017, the SEC alleged that Cooke (and Keystone Capital 
Partners, the firm he co-founded) fraudulently targeted federal em-
ployees nearing retirement, inducing them to roll over their retirement 
accounts into risky variable annuity products. Cooke and his associates, 
who acted as registered broker dealer representatives, investment ad-
viser representatives, and insurance producers, identified themselves 
as  representatives  of  ‘‘Federal  Employee  Benefit  Counselors’’  –  the 
pseudonym for Keystone Capital Partners – despite no affiliation with 
the federal retirement system. Using materials the SEC deemed mislead-
ing, they sold variable annuities to hundreds of federal employees, with 
a face value of $40 million dollars, earning themselves commissions 
and fees of around $1.7 million. At no point did they disclose their 
affiliations and respective duties as registered financial advisors. Nor 
did they disclose that they were selling higher-risk, higher-fee, higher-
commission  variable  annuity  products,  compared  to  the  lower-risk, 
lower-fee annuity offered to all federal employees for which they would 
collect no commissions. In 2022, after a jury returned a unanimous 
verdict against Cooke and Keystone for fraud, the SEC barred Cooke 
from the industry.

regulatory 

Cooke’s  misconduct 

crossed  many 
regimes—
broker-dealer, investment adviser, and insurance. There are significant 
differences in these regimes. Activities that may constitute misconduct 
in one regime may be an accepted practice in another. Part of the 
difficulty of regulating financial advice is that consumers are commonly 
unaware of these distinctions (Securities and Exchange Commission, 
2011; RAND Corporation, 2018). In this section, we begin with a brief 
discussion of each of the distinct regulatory regimes in our analysis, 
and we conclude with FINRA’s recent rules designed to nudge brokers 
with significant history of misconduct out of the industry.

2.1. FINRA-registered brokers

First, financial advisors can be registered representatives at firms 
subject to broker-dealer oversight. Popularized by movies such as The 
Wolf of Wall Street and Boiler Room, this classification is perhaps the 
most well-known type of financial advisor. In exchange for commission-
based  compensation,  these  advisors  execute  transactions  on  clients’ 
behalf  and  offer  limited  investment  advice.  Broker-dealer  firms  are 
overseen primarily by FINRA with some contribution from the SEC, 
and the individual advisors who work at those firms are referred to 

3 

C. Honigsberg et al.

as registered representatives of broker-dealers. For concision, we refer 
to these individuals as ‘‘FINRA brokers’’.

Broadly stated, FINRA regulation can be broken into three cate-
gories: substantive conduct, disclosure, and enforcement. First, as to 
substantive conduct, the law mandates that FINRA brokers abide by 
a specific code of conduct—in other words, FINRA specifies how bro-
kers must weigh their personal interests against those of their clients. 
Historically,  FINRA  brokers  were  subject  to  a  suitability  standard, 
meaning that they could recommend investments based on reasonable 
diligence of the investor’s needs. Today, however, FINRA brokers are 
subject to a ‘‘Best Interest’’ standard, which includes a duty to exercise 
reasonable diligence, care, and skill when making recommendations 
to retail customers. Although the exact meaning of the Best Interest 
standard is unclear, it is commonly considered to be higher than the 
prior suitability standard but lower than a fiduciary standard.

Second, FINRA uses disclosure to facilitate private market enforce-
ment and monitoring. FINRA records scores of information on regis-
trants in a centralized database known as Central Registration Deposi-
tory (CRD), and much of the information in CRD is made available to 
the public for free through FINRA’s BrokerCheck website. BrokerCheck 
provides information on each FINRA broker’s background, work his-
tory, prior regulatory or criminal actions, qualifications, customer com-
plaints, and the results of any related arbitration or litigation. Prior 
research has shown that the information in BrokerCheck can predict fu-
ture misconduct and aids market discipline (Egan et al., 2019; Qureshi 
and Sokobin, 2015).

Finally, FINRA maintains a relatively robust inspection and enforce-
ment arm to police misconduct. In any given year, FINRA typically 
examines more than half of its registered broker-dealer firms, and bars, 
suspends, or fines hundreds of firms and individuals. In addition to the 
relatively high frequency of its inspections, there are two distinct fea-
tures of FINRA’s enforcement regime. First, FINRA primarily regulates 
at the firm-level, not at the individual-level. It holds firms responsible 
for bad actions of their brokers, and it will discipline firms for failure 
to supervise if individuals at the firm commit significant misconduct. 
Second, FINRA oversees an extensive arbitration program that allows 
consumers to bring claims against their brokers far more cheaply than 
the traditional court system, plausibly allowing for resolution of client 
disputes that would otherwise have been unresolved and unreported. 
In 2021 alone, 2893 new requests for arbitration were filed and 4029 
cases were closed (Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2021). The 
results of these arbitrations typically show up in BrokerCheck.

2.2. Registered investment advisers

Second, financial advisors can be registered representatives at firms 
regulated under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 and SEC rules 
promulgated thereunder. An investment adviser (spelled here as ‘‘ad-
viser’’ rather than ‘‘advisor’’) is a firm or individual engaged in the 
business of providing securities-related advice, reports, or analysis for 
compensation. Investment advisers are required to register with either 
the SEC or the state in which the adviser maintains their principal place 
of business. In accordance with the Dodd–Frank Act, the determination 
is based on assets under management (AUM), with smaller investment 
advisers generally required to register at the state-level, and larger 
investment advisers required to register with the SEC.

Like FINRA brokers, regulation of investment advisers can be bro-
ken into regulation of substantive conduct, disclosure, and enforce-
ment.  First,  as  to  substantive  conduct,  all  investment  advisers  are 
fiduciaries—regardless of whether they are regulated primarily by the 
SEC or a state securities regulator. They are required to prioritize their 
clients’ interests above their own, and to disclose any potential conflicts 
of interest. Although investment advisers differ from broker-dealers in 
that they provide ongoing advice and wealth management, whereas 
brokers are more typically transaction based, the standard of conduct 
is arguably the biggest difference between the two classifications, as 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

investment advisers are subject to a fiduciary standard and broker-
dealers are not. Of course, registered investment advisers may also be 
FINRA brokers, potentially leading to various conflicts that can impede 
the application of the fiduciary standard (Boyson, 2019).

Second, as with FINRA brokers, regulators provide significant public 
disclosure on state- and SEC-registered advisers. All registered invest-
ment advisers must file Form ADV, which requires individuals to de-
scribe their professional background and conduct, employment history, 
and any disciplinary events. The information in Form ADV is made 
available to the public through the SEC’s equivalent of the BrokerCheck 
database: the Investment Adviser Public Disclosure (IAPD) database. 
This website provides information on both state and SEC registered 
advisers. Despite the similarities between BrokerCheck and IAPD, Bro-
kerCheck attracts far more web traffic (Honigsberg and Jacob, 2021). 
One explanation is that, until recently, limitations on the IAPD website 
made it difficult to access certain historical information, making the 
data provided in Form ADV less informative (Dimmock and Gerken, 
2012).

Finally,  as  with  FINRA  brokers,  investment  advisers  are  subject 
to  regulatory  investigations  and  enforcement  procedures,  but  these 
procedures  have  historically  been  much  more  limited  than  in  the 
FINRA regime (Honigsberg et al., 2022). Nonetheless, compared to the 
states, the SEC is considered to provide a more stringent enforcement 
regime (Charoenwong et al., 2019). Although private enforcement is 
arguably lower for investment advisers than for brokerage firms, as 
there is no SEC-sponsored arbitration system allowing for relatively 
cheap resolution of disputes, one similarity is that investment advisers 
are also regulated primarily at the firm-level, with regulators holding 
the firm responsible for the misconduct of its employees.

2.3. State-registered insurance producers

Finally, firms and professionals offering financial advice may be 
insurance producers, who provide a wider range of financial services 
than their title suggests. Following more than a decade of lobbying, 
the Dodd–Frank Act included a provision guaranteeing that most fixed-
indexed annuities would be regulated as insurance products rather than 
securities. This has been a boon for the nascent fixed-indexed annuities 
market, which as Fig.  1 shows, has more than tripled in size to over 
$550 billion in assets since 2010 when Dodd–Frank was passed. Fixed-
indexed annuities typically offer a guaranteed minimum rate with an 
additional potential payout that is determined based on a market index, 
while variable annuities are linked entirely to the performance of an 
underlying investment. Given that annuities are very popular products, 
with roughly 35% of FINRA brokers being qualified to sell variable 
annuities and Koijen and Yogo (2022) reporting that variable annuities 
account for $1.5 trillion or 35% of U.S. life insurer liabilities in 2015, 
the potential overlap between securities professionals and insurance 
producers is substantial. Variable annuity products raise similar ques-
tions – and present similar risks – as those raised by securities more 
generally. As an example, consider that life insurance products are 
commonly complex financial products where the payout relies on the 
underlying securities. Unlike traditional types of insurance, such as car 
or home insurance, many insurance products are now a critical compo-
nent of tax and financial planning—and many insurance producers are 
more akin to financial advisors than to traditional insurance salesmen. 
The overlap between variable annuities and securities explains why the 
SEC states that a securities license is required to sell variable annuities. 
Nevertheless,  we  find  numerous  individuals  (like  Mr.  Pippenhagen) 
who lack a securities license, but have an insurance license to sell 
variable annuities.

Unlike the other regimes described here, insurance producers are 
regulated entirely at the state-level. State-level licensing and registra-
tion is required for those that sell insurance, and state-level licenses 
typically cover a specific category, or ‘‘line’’, of insurance, with many 
states requiring separate licenses for six separate lines of insurance: life, 

4 

C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Fig. 1. Assets under management in annuities.
Source: LIMRA secure retirement institute.

accident and health, variable products, property, casualty and personal 
insurance (National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 2011). 
As  of  2022,  about  2.45  million  individuals,  and  222,467  business 
entities were licensed to provide insurance services in the United States. 
Insurance producers are commonly registered with ‘‘resident’’ status in 
their home state and ‘‘non-resident’’ status in all other states in which 
they are licensed to sell insurance but do not reside. They typically 
operate in multiple states. In our dataset, the mean (median) insurance 
producer has 2.85 (2) state licenses.

As with FINRA brokers or investment advisers, insurance producer 
regulation  can  broadly  be  broken  down  into  standards  of  conduct, 
disclosure, and enforcement, but there is significant variation between 
states, especially with respect to enforcement. We try to summarize the 
main components here. First, as to standards of conduct, most insurance 
producers are subject to a type of suitability standard, meaning that 
they are expected to recommend products that are suitable for their 
clients. Although the National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
(NAIC)  has  approved  a  standard  for  insurance  producers  who  rec-
ommend annuity products that is similar to the new ‘‘Best Interest’’ 
standard for FINRA brokers, many states have modified the language of 
this standard upon adoption. In sum, although there is variation across 
states, it is common for insurance producers to be subject to lower 
standards of conduct than either FINRA brokers or investment advisers.
The level of disclosure is also lower for insurance producers than for 
FINRA brokers or investment advisers. Unlike these other categories of 
financial advisors, there is no consumer-oriented centralized website 
containing information on insurance producers.3 Instead, consumers 

seeking information on a state-licensed insurance salesperson must typ-
ically search each state’s database, and there is considerable variation 
in the type and quantity of information made available to consumers 
in each jurisdiction. Few states allow consumers to identify producer-
level misconduct through these databases, and those that do make that 
process far more burdensome than a search of BrokerCheck or IAPD 
(Brown and Minor, 2015).

Finally,  as  to  enforcement,  there  is  significant  variation  across 
states. For example, the frequency of regulatory actions varies widely, 
with  some  states  taking  action  against  as  many  as  one  out  of  100 
registered  insurance  producers  each  year  and  others  taking  action 
against as few as one out of 1000 (Schwarcz and Siegelman, 2015). 
And,  private  enforcement  is  limited  relative  to  FINRA  brokers  or 
investment advisers. An important distinction from these other regimes 
is that insurance producers rarely associate with a single firm; they 
sell products on behalf of a wide range of insurance companies. For 
example, Mr. Pipenhagen sells products for no less than 20 different in-
surance companies. Unlike the regimes for FINRA brokers or investment 
advisers, where the regulators discipline primarily at the firm-level 
and each firm is responsible for their advisors, insurance companies 
have little to no responsibility for their agents; consumers typically 
cannot successfully sue the company, and regulators rarely discipline 
companies for the actions of agents.

Much has been written on insurance regulation, and one explanation 
for  why  it  appears  to  be  relatively  friendly  to  insurance  producers 
–  and  less  friendly  to  consumers  –  is  that  there  has  been  substan-
tial regulatory capture in this area (Randall, 1999; Schwarcz, 2010, 

3 The closest parallel is the National Insurance Producer Registry (NIPR), 
a non-profit, national registry of insurance registrations created by the Na-
tional  Association  of  Insurance  Commissioners  (NAIC)  in  1996.  However, 

the NIPR offers a multitude of services for producers but does not provide 
background information on insurance producers for consumers that is akin to 
the information provided on BrokerCheck and IAPD.

5 

C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Fig. 2. New registrations per year. This figure shows the number of new registrations per year in each regulatory regime. Note that the figure reflects new 
registrations, not net registrations, due to data limitations.
Source: NAIC and author calculations.

2013). For example, prior work has noted that nearly 50% of state 
insurance commissioners go directly to the insurance industry after 
leaving  government,  that  at  least  7.5%  of  state  legislators  who  sit 
on committees overseeing the insurance industry are active insurance 
producers, and that 11% of state legislators who sit on these committees 
were former insurance producers (Grace and Phillips, 2008; Honigsberg 
et al., 2022).

Of the different classifications of financial advisors that we study, 
insurance producers are both the largest and have seen the most growth 
in recent years. Fig.  2 provides a line graph showing the number of 
new registrations per year in each year from 2012 through 2021. Note 
that we show the number of new registrations, not the change in net 
registrations, because the NAIC provided us with the number of new 
registrations in each year but declined to provide the change in net 
registrations. As shown, new registrations in the securities regimes have 
largely remained flat, but new registrations in insurance have exploded 
in recent years.

3. Sample construction

3.1. Data sources

Our analysis relies on data from three sources: (1) FINRA’s Bro-
kerCheck; (2) the SEC’s IAPD; and (3) state insurance regulators. We 
describe the steps we took to collect data from each source below.

FINRA’s  BrokerCheck:  We  scraped  BrokerCheck  in  June  2022, 
so  our  BrokerCheck  data  contain  information  on  all  brokers  with 
records available on BrokerCheck at that point in time. This yields an 
unbalanced panel of roughly 1.1 million unique brokers and 8.3 million 
individual-year  observations.  With  limited  exceptions,  BrokerCheck 
maintains records for all individuals who were actively registered with 

6 

FINRA at any point in the past ten years. This means that we have 
information on all brokers who were registered at any point from June 
2012 through June 2022, including those who have withdrawn, but 
that we would not have a complete set of brokers if we were to extend 
the sample prior to June 2012. If a broker switched firms midway 
through the year, he was assigned to the firm that he spent the most 
time at in any given year. If a broker was registered at two or more 
firms for an entire year, he was randomly assigned to one firm for the 
year for the purposes of estimating firm fixed effects.

Following Egan et al. (2019), we consider 6 of the 23 disclosure 
categories on BrokerCheck to be ‘‘misconduct’’. These six categories are 
as  follows:  Customer  Dispute-Settled,  Regulatory-Final,  Employment 
Separation  After  Allegations,  Customer  Dispute  -  Award/Judgment, 
Criminal - Final Disposition, and Civil-Final. To have more consistency 
across the different advisors, we create a subset of ‘‘serious miscon-
duct’’ defined as the four categories of misconduct excluding Customer 
Dispute-Settled and Customer Dispute-Award/Judgment. By excluding 
customer complaints and restricting to more serious infractions, this 
definition helps to address concerns that certain complex or opaque 
products may be particularly prone to customer complaints. Further, 
following Qureshi and Sokobin (2015), we define retail brokers as those 
who hold more than three state registrations. In addition, to better 
reflect  each  advisor’s  expertise  and  job  function,  we  group  similar 
exams together and create five new dummy variables, with each set to 
1 if the advisor has passed one or more relevant exams. NASAA Exam 
refers to the set of licenses required by the North American Securities 
Administration Association and likely captures retail focused advisors 
(the Series 65 and 66). Var. Annuities Exam refers to the set of licenses 
required to sell variable annuities (the Series 6 and 26). Supervisor 
Exam refers to the set of exams that can be necessary to serve in a 
supervisory capacity (the Series 9, 10, 4, 14, 16, 23, 24, 26–28, and 

C. Honigsberg et al.

39). NFA Exam refers to the set of exams required for commodities 
brokers (the Series 3, 30–32, and 34). MSRB Exam refers to the set of 
licenses required to sell municipal securities (the Series 51–54). Finally, 
we use the World Gender Name Dictionary 2.0 to determine a broker’s 
gender (Martínez et al., 2021). If the broker’s first name was not in 
the database or was unisex, we matched the middle name or any other 
name excluding the broker’s last name.

SEC’s IAPD: We scraped the SEC’s IAPD in July 2022, so our IAPD 
data contain information on all investment adviser representatives and 
firms with records available on IAPD at that point in time. This yields 
an unbalanced panel of just under 409,124 unique investment adviser 
representatives and roughly 3.2 million individual-year observations. 
We determine whether each individual is a SEC-registered adviser or a 
state-registered adviser based on whether the firm that employs them 
is subject to SEC or state oversight. Like BrokerCheck, IAPD maintains 
records for individuals who have been active at any time in the past ten 
years, allowing us to collect a complete sample of investment adviser 
representatives, including those that have withdrawn, over the period 
from July 2012 to July 2022. FINRA and the SEC completed the con-
vergence of BrokerCheck and IAPD prior to our scape of the database, 
allowing us to define variables available in BrokerCheck consistently 
across the two databases. Although BrokerCheck and IAPD may report 
different years of experience for individuals who are included in both 
databases (BrokerCheck reports their years of experience as a registered 
representative, and IAPD reports their years of experience as an invest-
ment adviser), we compute years of experience based on the earliest 
registration year reported in either database.

State Insurance Producers: We obtained data on insurance pro-
ducers from state insurance regulators. We first attempted to procure 
registration  data  in  the  summer  of  2022.  We  downloaded  publicly 
available data when available, and we filed public records requests in 
all states that do not provide data online. The registration data includes 
name,  address,  lines  of  authority,  state  of  registration,  registration 
start date, registration expiration date, license number, and National 
Producer Number—a unique identifier for each insurance producer that 
is common across states. If we received data from a state that did not 
contain this information, we used the partial information to scrape the 
state’s website or the NAIC’s State Based System.

Our attempts to obtain registration data were largely successful. We 
procured data on registered insurance producers from over 31 states, 
including major markets for financial advisors such as New York, Texas, 
Ohio, and Florida.4 Because it is common for insurance producers to be 
registered in more than one state, our data includes individuals who 
are in states for which we did not receive data. In total, we acquired 
data on 2,336,771 million insurance producers. For comparison, the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners reported to us that 
there were roughly 2.45 million active insurance producers across the 
U.S. in 2022, thus indicating that we received data on 95% of the total 
sample.

Nonetheless, there is a notable limitations to the registration data 
we obtained on insurance producers. Unlike our other datasets, the 
insurance producer dataset includes only individuals who are currently 
registered. We do not have historical time-series data that includes 
those individuals who have exited the regime. This means that any esti-
mate of crossover between FINRA brokers and insurance producers will 
be biased downward. For example, consider a hypothetical individual 
who exits the FINRA broker regime in 2015, but remains an insurance 
producer until he retires in 2020. This person would not show up in our 
insurance data because he retired in 2020. He would, however, show up 
in our FINRA data. Thus, this individual would be recorded as having 

4 The distribution of insurance producers in our sample is presented visually 
in Figure A.1. All states that are shaded with vertical lines are the states for 
which we did not receive data from the state.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

exited financial services after exiting FINRA because we would have no 
record of his time in insurance.

In the winter of 2024, we attempted to supplement our registration 
data with information on producer misconduct. This data request was 
not successful. We returned to all the states that initially provided us 
with a response to request any data on producer misconduct, but most 
states declined to provide data on misconduct or consumer complaints, 
frequently  noting  that  the  information  was  confidential  or  was  not 
tracked. The few states that provided any data provided data that was 
so sparse and inconsistent that it was not usable (e.g., key information 
was missing or data was maintained for only a short period of time such 
as five days).

We address this limitation using two approaches. First, in building 
our main sample, we rely on the records in BrokerCheck to identify 
misconduct for insurance producers. Because former FINRA brokers are 
required to report to FINRA any infractions that occur in the two years 
after exiting BrokerCheck – and that two-year period will be extended 
if any infractions are reported – the BrokerCheck data should reliably 
capture infractions of former FINRA brokers for at least two years post 
exit (Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2025).

Second, we supplement our main analysis with focused study of 
insurance misconduct in one specific state (Texas), for which we were 
able to scrape data on insurance complaints and misconduct. Unlike 
other states, Texas makes its insurance complaints data public on its 
open  data  portal  (Texas  Department  of  Insurance,  2021).  Although 
imperfect, this approach provides a consistent baseline across states, 
and Texas has a large number of insurance producers, including non-
resident producers, who are licensed to sell insurance. Further, this type 
of single-state analysis helps to alleviate concerns about inconsistent 
enforcement across states. Indeed, given the wide variation in enforce-
ment and record-keeping across states, there is reason to expect varying 
levels of recorded misconduct across states even if actual misconduct 
is constant.5

3.2. Combined dataset

To construct our final dataset, we started with the BrokerCheck 
universe, and merged in data from IAPD and state insurance regula-
tors. We start with FINRA’s BrokerCheck because, as noted previously, 
our  dataset  on  insurance  producers  lacks  information  on  producers 
who have withdrawn. This prevents us from being able to merge all 
datasets in all years. The merge between BrokerCheck and IAPD is 
straightforward because both databases identify advisors using CRD (a 
unique 8-digit identifier). Merging the BrokerCheck data with the data 
on insurance producers is more difficult. As described in Appendix A.1, 
we performed a fuzzy match based on name, state, and zip codes. We 
disambiguated matches by requiring that matches be in the same zip 
code or state. This process identifies roughly 230,000 individuals who 
were, at some point over the past ten years, in BrokerCheck and are 
currently registered with a state insurance department.

For each individual in our sample, we pulled the individual-level 
variables  shown  in  Table   1.  As  noted  previously,  we  focus  on  the 
BrokerCheck data and examine the career trajectories for all individuals 
who appeared in BrokerCheck in any year from 2012 to 2022. During 
our sample period, 91% of individual-year observations are actively 
registered as FINRA brokers, meaning that 9% of the individual-year 
observations in our dataset correspond to people who were no longer 

5 The  occurrence  and  timing  of  misconduct  is  not  random,  nor  is  its 
detection. The opportunity to commit misconduct also likely varies across 
different products, as some products allow for more obfuscation of terms such 
as commissions, and the detection of misconduct likely varies across regulatory 
regimes. We control for joint registrations and licenses in our regressions to 
better address these concerns. Further, the definition of serious misconduct 
likely mitigates some variation across product types by restricting to more 
serious infractions.

7 

C. Honigsberg et al.

Table 1
This table displays summary statistics for all individuals in BrokerCheck at 
any point from June 2012 to June 2022 who remained registered as FINRA 
brokers, SEC or state investment advisers, or insurance producers in 2022 (the 
final year of our sample). Observations are by advisor and year. A person 
is included in the applicable regulatory regime in each year if they have an 
active registration. A person is jointly registered if they are actively registered 
in more than one regulatory regime in a given year.
  Variable name

Full sample

Wandering 
sample

N

Mean

N

Mean

  Regulatory regimes
  FINRA broker
  SEC investment adviser
  State investment adviser
  Insurance producer
  Joint registrations
  Any joint registration
  FINRA broker & SEC adviser
  FINRA broker & State adviser
  FINRA broker & Insurance producer
  SEC adviser & Insurance
  FINRA broker, SEC adviser & 
Insurance

7,512,442
3,276,746
164,095
1,716,903

3,464,695
2,927,523
61,849
1,377,294
902,716
873,003

  Advisor characteristics
  Female
  Retail broker
  Years experience
  Misconduct
  Complaints (flow)
  Misconduct (flow)
  Serious misconduct (flow)
  Complaints (level)
  Misconduct (level)
  Serious misconduct (level)
  Ever barred
  Ever suspended
  High-risk broker
  Advisor qualifications
  Number of exams
  Series 63
  Series 7
  SIE Exam
  NASAA Exam
  Var. Annuity Exam
  Supervisor Exam
  NFA Exam
  MSRB Exam

90.8
39.6
2.0
20.8

41.9
35.4
0.7
16.6
10.9
10.6

27.4
26.0
14.82

0.4
0.4
0.3
7.1
7.4
4.1
0.1
0.5
0.6

3.3
71.5
64.2
44.1
45.4
35.2
21.5
7.9
3.1

69,229

100.0 

55,857
2,742
222
54,122
1,142
1,142

80.7  
4.0  
0.3  
78.2  
1.6  
1.6  

29.0  
0.0  
15.72 

0.8  
3.2  
3.4  
8.3  
11.1  
7.6  
0.3  
0.8  
1.1  

4.5  
73.1  
49.4  
80.6  
42.4  
56.5  
15.4  
5.2  
2.2  

registered  with  FINRA,  but  were  registered  investment  advisers  or 
insurance producers. In any given year, 0.44% (0.34%) of individuals 
in our sample have new misconduct (serious misconduct) disclosures, 
and  7.4%  (4.1%)  of  individual-year  observations  have  a  record  of 
misconduct (serious misconduct). Half of the individuals in our sample 
have more than 13 years of experience, and 27% are female.

The first two columns of Table  1 show the full sample, but the 
remaining columns include only those FINRA brokers who left FINRA 
and show up as registered in another regime within one year. The first 
set of columns shows that a total of 41.7% of our sample was jointly 
registered in more than one regime, with 35.2% of individuals jointly 
registered as FINRA brokers and investment advisers, and 15.9% jointly 
registered as FINRA brokers and insurance producers.

There is a striking increase in the percentage of joint registrations 
when we examine the sample of FINRA brokers who exit FINRA and 
are registered in another regime within a year. Of this population, 79% 
were jointly registered as insurance producers within a year, and a 
total of 81.8% were registered with at least one other regime within 
a year. This shows that FINRA brokers who move from one regulatory 
regime to another are commonly jointly registered in that other regime 

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

– overwhelmingly insurance – at the time they withdraw their FINRA 
registration. These ‘‘wandering advisors’’ challenge the assumption in 
academic literature that advisors who leave the securities industry also 
leave the business of financial advice.

4. Regulatory overlap

4.1. Career outcomes and misconduct

In Table  2, we examine individuals’ registration status in the final 
year they appear in our data (typically 2022, but earlier for those who 
are not presently registered in any regime). The table shows descriptive 
statistics for each unique individual in our sample. Panel A includes 
the full set of individuals, and Panel B includes only the subset of 
individuals who have exited the FINRA broker regime. As highlighted 
in  Panel  A,  FINRA  brokers  who  are  jointly  registered  in  insurance 
have relatively high rates of misconduct. For the full sample of FINRA 
brokers, just over 7% have any history of misconduct, and roughly 
4.5% have a history of serious misconduct. This rises to 11.26% and 
6.05% for insurance producers. Almost half of the jointly registered 
FINRA brokers-insurance producers have taken a qualifying exam to 
sell variable annuities, more than any other category, indicating the 
importance of these products in the overlap between insurance and 
FINRA brokers.

Panel B of Table  2 examines only those advisors who have exited 
BrokerCheck—i.e., they no longer maintain an active FINRA registra-
tion.  Of  the  456,932  individuals  who  exited  BrokerCheck  over  our 
ten-year  sample  period,  121,208  (27%)  remained  in  other  regimes. 
Perhaps  most  striking,  advisors  in  this  subsample  have  higher  lev-
els of misconduct than those who exit financial services entirely or 
those who remain in BrokerCheck—and these elevated levels of mis-
conduct are driven entirely by insurance producers.6 Those who exit 
BrokerCheck but remain as investment advisers (either SEC-registered 
or state-registered) have lower levels of misconduct than those still 
registered  with  FINRA.  By  contrast,  almost  14%  of  FINRA  brokers 
who have exited the FINRA regime but remain insurance producers 
have a history of misconduct; just over 10% have a history of serious 
misconduct. And 2% of insurance producers were suspended during 
their time as a FINRA broker, while another 1.25% were barred in some 
capacity. For comparison, 0.13% of former FINRA brokers who are now 
investment advisers were suspended, and 0.03% were barred in some 
capacity.

This table is presented visually in Fig.  3. Starting from the left, we 
identify 121,208 former FINRA brokers who remain in insurance or 
as investment advisers. We divide the population of former brokers 
into those with and without a history of serious misconduct. On the 
right-hand side, we identify the former brokers’ current registration. 
As shown, of the 58,034 former advisors who are now in insurance, 
5984 (10.3%) have a history of serious misconduct. This is far greater 
– in terms of both magnitude and percentage – than the level of serious 
misconduct for former FINRA brokers who are now solely investment 
advisers (either SEC- or state-registered).

4.2. Brokers transitioning to insurance

We begin our regression analysis by examining which FINRA bro-
kers transition to other regimes—and how. Table  3  examines whether 

6 Table  2 captures misconduct and serious misconduct only as a dummy 
variable (i.e., the presence of misconduct), so one question is whether individu-
als who withdrew from FINRA had a single instance of misconduct, or whether 
these individuals are recidivists. As shown in Figure A.2 in the Appendix, the 
former FINRA brokers are more likely to be recidivists. A greater percentage of 
former FINRA brokers have one, two, three, and four+ misconduct disclosures 
– more at every level – than currently registered brokers.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Table 2
This table displays summary statistics for each financial advisor in our sample. Panel A includes all individuals who were in BrokerCheck at any point from June 
2012 to June 2022. Panel B includes only individuals who withdrew their FINRA broker registration during our sample period. Across both panels, observations 
are presented at the advisor-level and represent the advisor’s status in the final year they appear in our data. The Years Experience and Num. Exams variables 
are presented at the mean.

All registered

State investment adviser

Insurance producer

SEC investment adviser

FINRA broker 

  Panel A. Currently registered advisors
  Number of individuals
  Female (%)
  Years Experience
  Num. Exams
  NASAA Exam (%)
  Var. Annuity Exam (%)
  Misconduct (level) (%)
  Serious misconduct (level) (%)
  Suspended (%)
  Barred (%)

1,183,984
28.22%
15
4
43.12%
34.92%
7.32%
4.67%
0.55%
0.20%
Total who exited 
BrokerCheck

  Panel B. Advisors who exited BrokerCheck
  Number of individuals
  Female (%)
  Years Experience
  Num. Exams
  NASAA Exam (%)
  Var. Annuity Exam (%)
  Misconduct (level) (%)
  Serious misconduct (level) (%)
  Suspended (%)
  Barred (%)

451,765
28.99%
12
3
31.01%
37.33%
7.40%
5.51%
0.61%
0.34%

22,523
18.00%
15
3
65.35%
15.22%
7.74%
5.23%
0.92%
0.15%

256,512
26.73%
20
4
60.28%
47.31%
11.08%
6.01%
0.87%
0.33%

409,253
25.52%
18
4
78.95%
26.17%
8.28%
3.88%
0.42%
0.02%

Remain in other 
regimes

State investment adviser

Insurance producer

1,056,119
28.69%
15
4
41.22%
35.31%
7.16%
4.47%
0.49%
0.15%
SEC investment adviser 

127,865
24.33%
16
3
58.76%
31.72%
8.61%
6.30%
1.09%
0.65%

14,059
16.23%
12
2
75.16%
8.86%
4.57%
3.15%
0.24%
0.04%

65,384
27.61%
20
3
45.04%
54.41%
13.77%
10.27%
2.01%
1.24%

52,964
21.99%
10
2
73.60%
8.57%
3.08%
2.02%
0.10%
0.03%

Table 3
This table displays the regression results for a linear probability model (Eq. (1)). The dependent variable in columns (1)–(3) is a dummy variable indicating 
whether a FINRA-registered broker adds SEC adviser registration in the following year. The dependent variable in columns (4)–(6) is a dummy variable indicating 
whether a FINRA-registered broker adds insurance producer registration in the following year. Columns (1)–(3) exclude advisors who are already registered as 
SEC advisers, and columns (4)–(6) exclude advisors who are already registered as insurance producers. Coefficient units are percentage points. Serious misconduct 
measures whether the broker had a new allegation of serious misconduct in the current year. Observations are at the advisor by year level. Advisor-level controls 
include controls for the advisor’s years of work experience (measured in years), qualifications (grouped as in Table  1), and gender. Standard errors are in 
parentheses and are clustered by firm.

  Serious misconduct

  Female

  Years of experience

  Number of exams

  Retail broker

  Controls
  Firm-county-year FE
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2

Add adviser registration
(1)

(2)

−0.084
(0.505)

4,618,390
0.00000

−0.300
(0.503)
−0.334***
(0.039)
−0.041***
(0.004)
0.032
(0.020)
−1.587***
(0.086)

Y

4,618,390
0.005

(3)

−0.317
(0.513)
−0.377***
(0.031)
−0.052***
(0.004)
0.119***
(0.020)
−1.500***
(0.111)

Y
Y
4,618,390
0.052

Add insurance registration
(4)

(5)

2.495***
(0.181)

6,150,255
0.0003

2.186***
(0.176)
−0.107***
(0.026)
−0.007***
(0.002)
−0.108***
(0.011)
−1.119***
(0.062)

Y

6,150,255
0.005

(6)
1.659***  
(0.175)
−0.080*** 
(0.022)
−0.011*** 
(0.001)
−0.044*** 
(0.007)
−0.998*** 
(0.080)

Y
Y
6,150,255  
0.067

advisors add investment adviser or insurance producer licenses after 
serious misconduct using the equation below. 

𝐴𝑑𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡+1 = 𝛽0+𝛽1𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡+𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡+ 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡+𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡.

(1)

We  follow  Egan  et  al.  (2019)  in  approximating  the  comparison 
between individuals with serious misconduct and those without within 
the same firm-county-year. The dependent variable, Add Registration 
Statusijlt+1 is one of two dummy variables indicating whether the ad-
visor added an insurance producer or investment adviser registration 
in  year  t +1.  We  restrict  our  sample  to  currently  registered  FINRA 
brokers who do not have insurance or adviser registrations in year t. 
The main independent variable of interest Serious Misconductijlt is an 

indicator for whether an individual had a serious misconduct disclosure 
in year t, 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 represents our controls, and 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 is a firm-county-year 
fixed effect. If the advisor’s firm is unknown, we consider the individual 
self-employed and create a unique firm fixed effect for that individual. 
Standard errors are clustered by firm.

The firm-county-year fixed effect absorbs variation that may arise 
if, for example, some firms have affiliated insurance or SEC advisory 
businesses that make it easier for FINRA brokers to be jointly registered 
and/or  switch  regimes.  This  fixed  effect  also  absorbs  any  common 
variation at the state-level that may influence the decision to change 
regulatory regimes (e.g., lax state securities or insurance oversight). 
Finally, the fixed effect absorbs any aggregate variation in regulatory 
status changes or misconduct (e.g., spikes in misconduct investigated 
after the financial crisis).

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Honigsberg et al.

Fig. 3. Flow of former FINRA brokers. This figure reflects the flow of former 
FINRA  brokers  who,  at  the  end  of  our  sample  period,  remain  in  other 
regulatory regimes and have not reactivated their FINRA registration. The 
flow of individuals with serious misconduct is presented separately along the 
bottom of each subcategory. The numbers reflect individuals with serious 
misconduct who withdrew their FINRA registration but remain in each other 
regime at the end of our sample period.

As shown in Table  3, FINRA brokers are more likely to add an 
insurance registration after serious misconduct, but the economic mag-
nitude appears relatively small. The dependent variable in columns 
(1)–(3) reflects whether the individual added an investment adviser 
registration  in  the  following  year,  and  in  columns  (4)–(6)  reflects 
whether the individual added insurance producer registration in the 
following year. Serious misconduct increases the probability of adding 
insurance producer registration in the following year by roughly 1 to 
2 percentage points, where the unconditional probability of adding an 
insurance producer license is 0.5–0.7 percentage points, meaning that 
individuals are 2–4 times more likely to add insurance registrations
after serious misconduct. By contrast, Table  3 provides no evidence 
that FINRA brokers add an investment adviser registration in the year 
following serious misconduct. The results for investment advisers are 
unsurprising—scrutiny designed to safeguard against ‘‘bad actors’’ is 
typically most substantial when an individual applies for a new reg-
istration. What is surprising is that advisors are more likely to add 
an insurance producer registration after misconduct. We also see that 
women are less likely to add both insurance and, especially, investment 
adviser registration, and that advisors typically add these registrations 
earlier in their careers.

Another way that brokers with serious misconduct can end up in 
the insurance industry is if brokers who are jointly registered withdraw 
their FINRA registration after serious misconduct. Table  4 examines 
this possibility by running a cross-sectional regression comparing the 
likelihood of exiting the FINRA regime after serious misconduct for 
individuals with serious misconduct and those without within the same 
firm-county-year. We estimate the following linear probability model 
for individual i, at firm j, in county l, in year t :

𝐷𝑟𝑜𝑝 𝐹 𝐼𝑁𝑅𝐴𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑆𝐸𝐶 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡

+ 𝛽3𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
+ 𝛽5 𝑆𝐸𝐶 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟 × 𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
+ 𝛽6 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟 × 𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
+ 𝛽7𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 × 𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡

+ 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡.

(2)

The  dependent  variable  is  an  indicator  for  whether  the  advisor 
dropped  their  FINRA  registration  in  year  t+1,  so  the  sample  is  re-
stricted to currently registered FINRA brokers. 𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
is an indicator for whether an individual had a serious misconduct 
disclosure in year t. 𝑆𝐸𝐶 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 represents whether the FINRA 
broker is jointly registered with an SEC investment adviser in year
t,  𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡  represents  whether  the  FINRA  broker  is  jointly 

10 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

registered with a state investment adviser in year t, and 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
represents whether the FINRA broker is jointly registered as an in-
surance  producer  in  year  t.  𝑆𝐸𝐶 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟 × 𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡, 
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑟 × 𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡,  and  𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 ×
𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 represent the interactions of these variables. As 
before, 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 represents our controls, and 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 is a firm-county-year fixed 
effect.

We include six specifications in Table  4. The first three columns in-
clude only the Serious Misconductijlt variable, and the next three columns 
include the joint registration dummies and interaction terms. For each 
set of three columns, the first includes only the main variable(s) of 
interest, the second adds advisor-level controls, and the third adds firm-
county-year fixed effects. In general, the probability that an individual 
will withdraw their FINRA registration in any given year is very low—
between  0.3  and  0.8  percentage  points.  However,  columns  (1)–(3) 
show, consistent with prior literature, that serious misconduct increases 
the likelihood that a FINRA broker will withdraw her registration in the 
year following that misconduct by between 5 and 7 percentage points.
Columns (4)–(6) show that exit following misconduct is particularly 
pronounced for FINRA brokers who are jointly registered insurance 
producers. Under this specification, a FINRA broker without any joint 
registrations is 1.5 to 3.3 percentage points more likely to exit the 
FINRA broker regime in the year following serious misconduct—much 
lower than the estimates in columns (1)–(3). The difference appears to 
be due to the inclusion of the interaction between serious misconduct 
and jointly registered insurance producers. Advisors who are jointly 
registered as FINRA brokers and insurance producers are almost 36 
percentage points more likely to drop their FINRA registration in the 
year following serious misconduct. These individuals must be active 
insurance producers in 2022 for them to be included in our sample, 
so this result shows that jointly registered FINRA brokers-insurance 
producers cannot be assumed to exit the financial services industry 
after misconduct, but are instead likely to drop their FINRA registration 
while they remain in insurance.7 By contrast, the pattern is the opposite 
for jointly registered FINRA brokers-investment advisers; this subpopu-
lation is roughly 10–12 percentage points less likely to withdraw their 
FINRA broker license in the year after serious misconduct. Even jointly 
registered FINRA brokers who are also state-registered advisers are less 
likely to withdraw their broker registration at the margin.

In sum, whether a FINRA broker is jointly registered in another 
regime  has  a  substantial  impact  on  the  likelihood  that  the  advisor 
will exit the FINRA regime after serious misconduct. Although FINRA 
brokers without a joint registration are more likely to exit the FINRA 
broker regime in the year following serious misconduct, the economic 
magnitude of that finding increases substantially for jointly registered 
FINRA brokers and insurance producers—this subpopulation of advi-
sors  is  almost  36  percentage  points  more  likely  to  exit  the  FINRA 
regime in the year following serious misconduct, compared with 1.5 to 
3 percentage points for a FINRA broker who is not jointly registered. 
Moreover, the insurance regime seems to permit individuals to add 
insurance licenses after serious misconduct—a trend not present for 
state or SEC investment adviser regimes.

7 The interaction terms in Table  4 reflect only brokers who already had an 
adviser or insurance license at the time they dropped their FINRA registration. 
Table A.2 in the Appendix replicates this specification but also captures brokers 
who later added an adviser or insurance license (i.e., the insurance and adviser 
variables in Table A.2 reflect brokers who were jointly registered at the time 
they exited the FINRA regime and those brokers who added the registration 
after exiting the FINRA regime). Under this specification, advisors who are 
jointly  registered  as  FINRA  brokers  and  insurance  producers  (or  become 
insurance producers after exit) are roughly 43 percentage points more likely 
to drop their FINRA registration in the year following serious misconduct. This 
finding suggests that the results in Table  4 reflect a conservative estimate of 
the frequency with which former brokers with misconduct leave to practice in 
insurance.

C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Table 4
This table displays the regression results for a linear probability model (Eq. (2)). The dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether a FINRA-registered 
broker drops her FINRA registration in the following year. Coefficient units are percentage points. Serious misconduct measures whether the broker had a new 
allegation of serious misconduct in the current year. SEC Adviser, State Adviser, and Insurance all indicate whether the FINRA broker is jointly registered in one 
of these other regimes in the current year. Observations are at the advisor by year level. Advisor-level controls include controls for the advisor’s years of work 
experience (measured in years), qualifications (grouped as in Table  1), and gender. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by firm.
  Drop FINRA broker status

  Serious misconduct

  SEC adviser

  State adviser

  Insurance producer

  Serious Mis. × SEC

  ... × State

  ... × Insurance

  Controls
  Firm-county-year FE
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2

(1)

7.734***
(0.397)

(2)

7.286***
(0.383)

(3)

5.716***
(0.348)

7,581,671
0.002

Y

7,581,671
0.014

Y
Y
7,581,671
0.148

(4)

3.789***
(0.194)
−2.009***
(0.097)
−0.829***
(0.099)
3.978***
(0.232)
−13.724***
(0.766)
−3.361***
(0.919)
36.190***
(1.524)

7,581,671
0.041

(5)

3.320***
(0.182)
−2.103***
(0.093)
−0.943***
(0.110)
3.897***
(0.220)
−13.321***
(0.757)
−3.157***
(0.909)
36.065***
(1.526)

Y

7,581,671
0.050

(6)

1.885***
(0.149)
−1.748***  
(0.089)
−1.579***  
(0.523)
3.523***
(0.218)
−11.745*** 
(0.764)
−1.701
(1.229)
36.982***  
(1.731)

Y
Y
7,581,671  
0.172

Together, these findings raise questions about labor allocation and 
market  discipline.  On  the  one  hand,  this  could  reflect  incomplete 
market discipline, as advisors with misconduct seem to leave the FINRA 
regime but continue in financial services. On the other hand, if these 
advisors transition to a regime where the potential for causing harm 
to  consumers  is  negligible,  this  may  be  evidence  of  optimal  labor 
allocation.

5. Labor outcomes for former brokers

A key question is therefore whether former brokers continue to 
engage  in  the  same  types  of  activity  when  operating  in  insurance. 
To evaluate this question, we analyze the behavior of former FINRA 
brokers and the products they sell.

5.1. Products sold by former FINRA brokers

First, to understand the activities of former FINRA brokers who mi-
grate to insurance, it is necessary to understand what products they are 
licensed to sell. As explained earlier, insurance products may be akin to 
asset management where customers assume risk of loss (e.g., variable 
annuity products) or to traditional insurance where customers pay the 
insurance company to assume risk (e.g., car insurance). The financial 
consequences of working with a ‘‘bad’’ insurance producer are likely to 
vary depending on the products in question.

Fig.  4 shows that nearly all former brokers who remain in insurance 
are licensed to sell annuities products—and more than three-quarters 
are licensed to sell variable annuities. A majority are also licensed 
to  sell  Accident  &  Health  insurance,  which  often  features  products 
structured as annuities (for example, structured settlements for personal 
injuries and long-term care insurance are annuities from an economic 
perspective).  Only  12–13.5%  are  licensed  to  sell  products  that  fall 
under  Property,  Casualty,  or  Personal  lines,  indicating  that  few  of 
these former FINRA brokers engage with products such as home or 
car insurance that reflect the traditional role of insurance risk sharing. 
Appendix A.2 provides additional details on the data construction for 
this analysis.

5.2. Misconduct by former FINRA brokers

Second, to understand the behavior of former FINRA brokers, we 
examine misconduct rates for former FINRA brokers who leave but 
remain registered to sell insurance. In particular, we are interested in 
the distribution of insurance misconduct and the risk posed by repeat 
offenders. Due to the aforementioned data limitations, this analysis 
is limited to Texas, where we scraped data on insurance misconduct. 
Like Charoenwong et al. (2019), we start with customer complaints. 
Complaints  are  most  often  customer-initiated,  can  be  filed  for  free 
on the Texas insurance department website, and are made available 
through the open data portal. However, life and annuity complaints, at 
least in Texas, are most often associated with alleged poor financial 
advice  such  as  misrepresentations  of  policy  terms  or  unauthorized 
acts. Infractions captured by these complaints may be minor, so we 
further identify a subset of complaints that we classify as insurance 
misconduct. Like Egan et al. (2019), we define misconduct as the subset 
of complaints that lead to investigations, regulatory sanctions, and civil 
or criminal referrals, as well as complaints that were resolved against 
the producer.

Most insurance producers in Texas do not have any customer com-
plaints filed against them; less than one in one-hundred and fifty have 
any record of complaints. Instead, a small number of individuals, many 
of whom are repeat offenders, account for nearly all complaints in the 
data. Using the subset of FINRA brokers (current and former) who 
are jointly registered as insurance producers in Texas, Fig.  5 shows 
that  former  FINRA  brokers  are  both  more  likely  to  have  customer 
complaints filed against them than currently registered FINRA brokers 
and to be repeat offenders.

The relatively high rates of recidivism suggest that, like brokers 
and investment advisers, insurance producers’ (mis)conduct should be 
predictable. Using the same sample, we study the relationship between 
the flow of new complaints (misconduct) and the stock of prior com-
plaints (prior misconduct) using the following linear probability model 
for individual 𝑖, in county 𝑙, in year 𝑡: 

𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑡 + 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝜇𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑙𝑡.

(3)

The dependent variable 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑡 measures the flow of new com-
plaints over a 1-year period and is a dummy variable indicating that the 
producer received one or more complaints in year 𝑡. 𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑡
is our main independent variable of interest; it is a dummy variable 
indicating if the producer has a record of complaints prior to year 𝑡, 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Fig. 4. Lines of authority for former brokers. This figure shows the lines of insurance that former FINRA brokers who exited to insurance are licensed to sell as 
of the end of our sample period. Because an individual may be licensed across multiple states, the numbers reflect whether an individual is licensed to sell a line 
of insurance in at least one state.

where those complaints are sourced from both the Texas insurance data 
and BrokerCheck. 𝑋𝑖𝑡 is a set of insurance producer controls for gender, 
experience, and licensing qualifications, and 𝜇𝑙𝑡 reflects a set of county-
year fixed effects. We control for the type of license that the insurance 
producer holds because complaints and misconduct may be driven by 
consumer confusion related to the types of insurance products they 
purchase (Browning et al., 2012). Unlike our other analyses, we do not 
include firm-county-year fixed effects in this model; not only do we lack 
sufficient data to identify the firm(s) each insurance producer repre-
sents, but independent insurance agents commonly represent multiple 
firms.

Table  5 presents the results from the model in Eq.  (3). The main 
coefficient of interest measures whether an insurance producer with 
a record of complaints is likely to receive future complaints, relative 
to producers in the same county and year, and with similar qualifi-
cations. The sample for this table includes the full set of registered 
insurance producers in Texas, where that dataset is supplemented with 
misconduct data from BrokerCheck for those advisors who appear in 
both datasets. The coefficient in column (3) of 1.582 percentage points 
suggests a significant propensity to reoffend relative to the baseline rate 
of misconduct is 0.871 percentage points. Similarly, column (6) shows 
that producers with a record of misconduct in either BrokerCheck or 
the insurance data are more than twelve times more likely to reoffend 
(1.087  relative  to  an  unconditional  baseline  of  0.086  =  12.64).  If 
anything, this coefficient likely underestimates the degree of recidi-
vism because our data consist of only currently registered insurance 
producers, meaning that brokers who had their licenses revoked prior 
to our sample will not be reflected in the data. Notably, 𝐹 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑒𝑟𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑟
is negative and statistically significant in all specifications, suggesting 
that former brokers without a history of misconduct are less likely to 

offend in insurance—even if ‘‘bad’’ former brokers are still ‘‘bad’’ in 
insurance. In sum, there is evidence that former FINRA brokers sell in-
vestment management products as insurance producers and that former 
brokers with misconduct continue to have higher rates of recidivism in 
insurance.8

5.3. FINRA broker exits and state characteristics

The prior evidence on recidivism is limited to one state: Texas. 
However, insurance is a state-level regime, with potentially important 
variation across states. If former FINRA brokers strategically exit FINRA 
but  continue  to  work  in  insurance  in  states  with  lax  (or  rigorous) 
regulatory oversight, it could either exacerbate or mitigate the prior 
concerns regarding consumer harm. To examine whether broker exit is 
related to state-level characteristics, we hand-collected data on state-
level insurance department resources and activities from the NAIC’s 
Insurance  Department  Resources  Reports  from  2011–2021.  Table   6 
presents results from cross-sectional regressions under the following 

8 It  is  possible  that  these  individuals  are  not  selling  insurance  even  if 
licensed to do so. To investigate this possibility, we randomly selected 100 
individuals who were registered in insurance after exiting BrokerCheck and 
hand-checked their online profiles. We found that at least 60 were selling 
insurance  products,  while  the  remainder  were  generally  ambiguous.  From 
a regulatory perspective, however, whether registered insurance producers 
sell insurance may be purely academic. For example, when asked about this 
possibility, the former deputy head of enforcement at FINRA responded ‘‘[A]s 
a regulator, I wouldn’t care if they were not currently selling insurance ... 
[T]hey still have the ability to do so’’ (Saitz and Smith, 2024).

12 

C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Fig. 5. Insurance customer complaints. The figure shows the percentages of current insurance producers with 1, 2, or 3+ customer complaints (in basis points). 
The data are separated by whether the advisor is formerly a FINRA broker or currently remains a FINRA broker. The sample consists of the subset of insurance 
producers who are currently registered as insurance producers in Texas and can be matched with BrokerCheck.

specification:

𝐷𝑟𝑜𝑝 𝐹 𝐼𝑁𝑅𝐴 & 𝑊 𝑜𝑟𝑘 𝑖𝑛 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡

the insurance regime. The analysis raises further concern related to 
FINRA broker exit, as it suggests that bad brokers who continue in 
insurance operate in states with less scrutiny.9

+ 𝛽2𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡−1
+ 𝛽3𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
× 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡−1

+ 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡.

(4)

6. Regulatory leakage

We focus on the following state-level characteristics: (1) the state 
insurance regulator’s budget relative to the number of insurance pro-
ducers  registered  in  that  state,  (2)  the  total  fines  imposed  by  that 
regulator relative to the number of producers registered in the state, 
and  (3)  the  difference  between  the  median  broker’s  annual  wages 
minus  the  median  insurance  producer’s  annual  wages  within  each 
state. On average, states have a budget of around $155 dollars per 
producer, impose fines of $2.73 per producer, and the median FINRA 
broker earns $13,235 more than the median insurance producer per 
year (full summary statistics are presented in Appendix Table A.1). As 
before, 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 reflects controls for broker characteristics, and 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 reflects 
firm-county-year fixed effects.

Table  6 shows that insurance producers are less likely to exit the 
FINRA broker regime and continue working in insurance in states with 
higher regulatory enforcement (as proxied by the state’s budget and 
fines relative to total producers). They are also less likely to exit FINRA 
in states with a larger pay gap between brokers and insurance produc-
ers. Coefficients are standardized, such that a one standard deviation 
change in a state insurance department’s budget corresponds to a 0.928 
percentage point decrease in the probability that a broker with serious 
misconduct will leave the brokerage regime and continue working in 

The overlap across regulatory regimes, and the ease with which 
brokers appear to move from one regime to another, raises questions 
about the ability for regulators to discipline bad actors. This section 
examines the effects of a regulatory shock which increases scrutiny 
of brokers at the federal level. Specifically, we examine the effect of 
proposed FINRA Rules 1017(a)(7) and 4111, which were designed to 
make it more costly for firms to hire and employ ‘‘high-risk’’ FINRA 
brokers.  As  we  show,  the  rules  effectively  pushed  many  high-risk 
brokers out of FINRA’s regulatory purview, but not out of financial 
services more broadly; 98% remain in state insurance regimes.

9 The  average  state-year  in  our  sample  has  a  budget  per  producer  of 
$155, with a standard deviation of just under $120. Thus, a one standard 
deviation increase is approximately a 77% increase in budget relative to the 
average  state-year  budget.  A  one  standard  deviation  increase  in  fines  per 
producer is approximately a 280% increase relative to the average state-year. 
Finally, a one standard deviation increase in the broker-producer pay gap is 
approximately a 110% increase in the average pay gap, which corresponds to a 
2.8% percentage point decrease in the likelihood that brokers with misconduct 
will leave and continue working in insurance.

13 

C. Honigsberg et al.

Table 5
This  table  displays  the  regression  results  for  a  linear  probability  model 
(Eq. (3)). The dependent variables indicate whether an insurance producer has 
a new complaints (columns 1–3) or allegation of misconduct (columns 4–6) 
filed against them in any given year. Our main covariates of interest are the 
producer’s stock of misconduct as of the prior year. For both the stock and 
flow of misconduct we combine misconduct records from BrokerCheck with 
analogous insurance records from Texas. The sample includes all registered 
insurance producers in Texas, where that dataset is supplemented with broker 
data from BrokerCheck (if applicable). We include controls for the producer’s 
licensing, experience, and gender where indicated. We also include county-
year fixed effects where indicated. Standard errors are clustered by county.

Complaints

Misconduct

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

  Prior complaints

  Prior misconduct

  Former broker

  Annuities

  Controls
  County-year FE
  Observations
  R2

3.009∗∗∗
(0.282)

1.578∗∗∗
(0.077)

1.582∗∗∗
(0.080)

−0.350∗∗∗ −0.344∗∗∗
(0.043)
0.271∗∗∗
(0.079)

(0.043)
0.379∗∗∗
(0.084)

Y

343,475 342,628
0.012

0.005

Y
Y
342,628
0.001

1.176∗∗∗
(0.062)

1.087∗∗∗  
1.104∗∗∗
(0.062)  
(0.062)
−0.167∗∗∗ −0.135∗∗∗ 
(0.039)  
(0.038)
0.126
0.087
(0.079)  
(0.078)
Y
Y
342,619  
0.007

Y
Y

342,702 342,619
0.003

0.003

Table 6
This  table  displays  the  regression  results  for  a  linear  probability  model 
(Eq. (4)). The dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether 
a  FINRA-registered  broker  drops  her  FINRA  registration  in  the  following 
year  and  is  registered  as  an  insurance  producer.  We  report  standardized
coefficients.
  Drop FINRA &
  Work in Insurance𝑡+1

Budget
($/Producer)
(1)

Dollar fines
($/Producer)
(2)

  Serious Misconduct𝑡

  State Characteristic𝑡−1

  ... × Serious Mis.𝑡−1

  Controls
  Firm-county-year FE
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2

11.224***
(0.284)
0.014
(0.014)
−0.946***
(0.305)

Y
Y
7,795,319
0.819

11.216***
(0.284)
−0.040***
(0.011)
−1.032***
(0.146)

Y
Y
7,795,319
0.820

Broker - Ins.
($ Wage)
(3)
11.188***  
(0.281)
0.018
(0.019)
−2.836***  
(0.246)

Y
Y
7,832,319  
0.820

6.1. Recent changes to FINRA rules

In 2018 and 2019, FINRA proposed significant changes to its rules 
governing brokers with a history of significant misconduct. As is keep-
ing with FINRA’s regulatory strategy, the proposals target the firms that 
would hire such brokers, but would likely affect the individual brokers 
through the firms. The first proposal introduced Rule 1017(a)(7), which 
imposed additional constraints on firms seeking to hire brokers with 
a significant history of misconduct, defined as two or more ‘‘specified 
risk events’’ during the prior five years or one or more ‘‘final criminal 
matters’’ (Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2018).10 Under the 

10 Under the proposal, ‘‘specified risk events’’ included any final, investment-
related (1) arbitration award or civil judgment against the broker for $15,000 
or more, (2) arbitration or litigation settlement for $15,000 or more, (3) 
civil  sanction  against  the  broker  for  $15,000  or  more,  or  (4)  regulatory 
sanctions involving fines of $15,000 or more or a bar from the brokerage 
industry. A ‘‘final criminal matter’’ was defined to include a conviction, guilty 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

proposal, any firm attempting to hire brokers meeting these require-
ments would be required to consult with FINRA to determine whether 
the firm would be required to file a Continuing Membership Application 
(CMA).

To give context for the importance of Form CMA, this same form 
is  required  when  a  firm  seeks  to  undergo  a  merger  or  acquisition, 
or  has  major  changes  in  ownership.  In  other  words,  it  is  used  for 
material changes in business operations. By threatening that brokerage 
firms may be required file Form CMA if they attempt to hire high-risk 
brokers, FINRA’s proposal highlighted the significance, in its view, of 
hiring a broker with two or more ‘‘specified risk events’’ in the past five 
years or one or more ‘‘final criminal matters’’. In response to FINRA’s 
proposal, attorneys advising brokerage firms noted that the proposals 
made clear that ‘‘FINRA is focused and will continue to be focused on 
high-risk brokers’’ (Bressler and Ross, 2018).

Although the initial 2018 proposal to add Rule 1017(a)(7) focused 
only on firms proposing to hire brokers with significant disciplinary 
history,  in  June  2019,  FINRA  proposed  a  new  rule  targeting  firms 
already employing high-risk individuals. The determination of high-risk 
was similar to that used in the 2018 proposal. Under the 2019 proposal, 
creating a new FINRA Rule 4111, firms employing a significant number 
of high-risk individuals would presumptively be deemed ‘‘restricted’’, 
and restricted firms could, in turn, be required to maintain a deposit 
account necessary to ‘‘protect investors and the public interest’’ (Fi-
nancial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2019). In other words, FINRA 
could require these firms to maintain cash and securities in reserve 
to ensure that the firm could pay fees and settlements incurred from 
arbitration awards. An industry blog concluded that it would be ‘‘so 
expensive and onerous to remain in business’’ if a firm were deemed 
restricted that a restricted designation was the equivalent of a ‘‘back-
door expulsion[]’’ from the industry (Wolper, 2022). Others noted that 
the proposals ‘‘set[] the equivalent of a financial penalty for firms hiring 
brokers with negative [BrokerCheck] histories’’ (Bryan et al., 2021).

In sum, by proposing to add Rules 1017(a)(7) and 4111 in 2018 
and 2019, respectively, FINRA put both individual brokers and firms on 
notice that hiring or employing high-risk brokers would soon become 
considerably more costly for firms. In 2021, after a public comment 
period, FINRA adopted both rules largely as proposed.

6.2. Effect of FINRA rules

We begin our analysis on the effect of FINRA Rules 1017(a)(7) and 
4111 in 2018, when the former was proposed. We use the proposal 
date as our event date because industry publications noted that firms 
began firing high-risk brokers after the proposals were made public in 
anticipation of these rules. For example, a Senior Director at FINRA 
noted during an industry conference that ‘‘[w]e have heard and we 
have seen representatives being terminated at this point prepping for 
the rule’’ (Braswell, 2022). In this regard, our analysis is consistent 
with Egan et al. (2020), which also examined the effects of a proposed 
rule and noted that the securities industry began complying after the 
rule was proposed and before it was finalized.

In total, we identify 4062 FINRA registered brokers in 2018 who 
were deemed high-risk and thus potentially affected by the proposal. 
This amounts to roughly 0.6% of the total number of FINRA brokers. 
Fig.   6  shows  the  distribution  of  individuals  across  states  who  ever 
qualify as high-risk brokers under these rules (i.e., brokers with two 
or more specified risk events or one or more final criminal matters). 
Although  such  individuals  are  spread  across  the  U.S.,  they  appear 
particularly concentrated in the Southeast and Southwest. Nevada had 

plea, or plea of no contest in a criminal matter required to be disclosed on 
BrokerCheck (Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2018).

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Fig. 6. Distribution of high-risk brokers. This figure shows the percentages of current FINRA brokers deemed high-risk under FINRA Rules 1017(a)(7) and 4111 
(i.e., the broker has two or more Specified Risk Events or one or more final criminal matter).

Fig. 7. Effect of FINRA rules targeting high-risk brokers. This figure shows the effect of FINRA’s 2018 and 2019 proposals on high-risk FINRA brokers who were 
jointly registered as insurance producers. The figure plots the coefficients on each interaction from Eq. (6). The 𝑌 -axis reflects the percentage of high-risk brokers 
who withdrew their FINRA registration in each year.

the highest percentage of high-risk brokers, at 4.9%, with Florida and 
North Dakota close behind with around 4%.

We proceed by estimating whether FINRA’s tightening standards 
caused  high-risk  brokers  to  withdraw  from  FINRA  regulation.

15 

C. Honigsberg et al.

However, because our prior analyses suggest that jointly registered 
brokers behave differently, we use a triple interaction that controls for 
joint registration. This allows us to examine the effects of the proposals 
on jointly registered, high-risk brokers, and to identify any incremental 
effects on high-risk brokers due to joint registration. We separately 
examine (1) FINRA brokers who were jointly registered as insurance 
producers, and (2) FINRA brokers who were jointly registered as SEC 
investment advisers. Table  5 presents this analysis using the equation 
below.

𝐷𝑟𝑜𝑝 𝐹 𝐼𝑁𝑅𝐴𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 2018𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐽 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡

+ 𝛽4𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 2018𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
+ 𝛽5𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 × 𝐽 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
+ 𝛽6𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 2018 × 𝐽 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡
+ 𝛽7𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 × 𝐽 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 2018𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡

+ 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡.

  High risk broker

  Post 2018

(5)

As before, the dependent variable is an indicator for whether an 
advisor dropped their FINRA registration in year t+1, so the sample is 
restricted to currently registered FINRA brokers. High Riskijlt is an indi-
cator for whether a broker would be deemed high-risk under FINRA’s 
2018 proposal. 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 2018𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 is an indicator set to 1 for all observations 
after 2018. 𝐽 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡  is an indicator set to 1 in Panel A if the broker 
was jointly registered as an insurance producer, and set to 1 in Panel 
B if the broker was jointly registered as a SEC investment adviser. 
The remaining variables represent the interactions of these variables. 
𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡  represents our controls, and 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 is a firm-county-year fixed effect. 
Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Our identification strategy relies on the fact that, while many bro-
kers may have misconduct, the FINRA rules target only a narrow subset 
of individuals who meet specific criteria. By using firm-county-year 
fixed effects and controls for joint registration, our control group is, 
in essence, the subset of individuals who are not ‘‘high-risk brokers’’ 
under the rules and do not share the same joint registration, but who 
work at the same firm, in the same year, located within the same 
county.  Differences  across  firms,  such  as  the  propensity  to  employ 
‘‘high-risk brokers’’ or to sell annuities are absorbed by the fixed effects, 
as are changes in local economic conditions. We also control for each 
individual’s experience, qualifications, and gender.

Table   7  presents  two  panels.  Both  panels  include  the  full  sam-
ple  of  FINRA  brokers,  but  Panel  A  examines  FINRA-registered  bro-
kers who were jointly registered as insurance producers, and Panel 
B examines FINRA-registered brokers who were jointly registered as 
SEC  investment  advisers.  Consistent  with  our  earlier  findings  that 
broker-producers with misconduct are more likely to drop their FINRA 
registration, high-risk brokers who are joint insurance producers are 
roughly 4 percentage points more likely to leave in any given year. 
However, the triple interaction indicates that high-risk brokers who 
were  jointly  registered  insurance  producers  were  even  more  likely 
to leave after FINRA proposed Rule 1017(a)(7) in 2018—after 2018, 
brokers-producers were an incremental 2 percentage points more likely 
to withdraw their FINRA registration. Notably, the coefficient on the 
interaction term, 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 2018𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡, is statistically indistinguish-
able from zero, which suggests that high-risk brokers who were not 
insurance producers were no more likely to exit after FINRA proposed 
Rule 1017(a)(7).

Panel B repeats the analysis for jointly registered SEC investment 
advisers. Unlike Panel A, the interaction term, 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘×𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 2018𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡, 
is significant, indicating high-risk brokers who were not SEC invest-
ment  advisers  were  almost  1  percentage  point  more  likely  to  exit 
after FINRA proposed Rule 1017(a)(7). Given that the coefficient on 
this  variable  was  not  significant  in  Panel  A  (and  was  slightly  neg-
ative), it appears that the jointly registered FINRA broker-insurance 
producers are driving this result in Panel B. By contrast, high-risk, 
jointly-registered FINRA brokers and investment advisers were almost 

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Table 7
This  table  displays  the  regression  results  for  a  linear  probability  model 
(Eq. (5)). The dependent variable in both panels is a dummy variable indi-
cating whether a FINRA-registered broker drops their FINRA registration in 
the following year. High-Risk Broker is a dummy variable reflecting whether 
the broker was targeted by FINRA’s 2018 and 2019 proposals. Post 2018 is 
a dummy variable that is set to 1 in all years after FINRA’s 2018 proposal. 
Insurance and SEC Adviser are dummy variables capturing whether the in-
dividual is jointly registered in the applicable regime. Coefficient units are 
percentage points. Observations are at the advisor by year level. Advisor-level 
controls include controls for the advisor’s years of work experience (measured 
in years), qualifications (grouped as in Table  1), and gender. Standard errors 
are in parentheses and are clustered by firm.
  Panel A. Producers dropping FINRA broker registration

(1)

(2)

0.365***
(0.066)
−0.085***
(0.010)
3.174***
(0.243)
−0.191**
(0.090)
4.301***
(0.532)
1.303***
(0.177)
1.874**
(0.942)

  Insurance producer

  High Risk × Post 2018

  High Risk × Insurance

  Post 2018 × Insurance

  High Risk × Post 2018 × Insurance

  Controls
  Firm-county-year FE
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
  Panel B. Advisers dropping FINRA broker registration

6,934,272
0.023

  High risk broker

  Post 2018

  Adviser

  High Risk × Post 2018

  ... × Adviser

  Post 2018 × Adviser

  ... × Post 2018 × Adviser

  Controls
  Firm-county-year FE
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2

(1)

0.365***
(0.066)
−0.085***
(0.010)
3.174***
(0.243)
−0.191**
(0.090)
4.301***
(0.532)
1.303***
(0.177)
1.874**
(0.942)

6,934,272
0.023

0.179***
(0.064)
−1.847***
(0.119)
3.480***
(0.219)
−0.202**
(0.096)
4.245***
(0.517)
1.397***
(0.178)
1.861**
(0.920)

Y

6,934,272
0.039

(2)

0.179***
(0.064)
−1.847***
(0.119)
3.480***
(0.219)
−0.202**
(0.096)
4.245***
(0.517)
1.397***
(0.178)
1.861**
(0.920)

Y

6,934,272
0.039

(3)

−0.068
(0.061)

3.221***  
(0.220)
−0.076
(0.105)
3.571***  
(0.510)
1.078***  
(0.153)
2.425**  
(1.020)

Y
Y
6,934,272 
0.165

(3)

−0.068
(0.061)

3.221***  
(0.220)
−0.076
(0.105)
3.571***  
(0.510)
1.078***  
(0.153)
2.425**  
(1.020)

Y
Y
6,934,272 
0.165

1 percentage point less likely to withdraw their FINRA registration. 
Taken together, the two panels show that high-risk brokers who are 
jointly registered as insurance producers are more likely to withdraw 
their FINRA registration, but that other high-risk brokers are not.

Our identification in Table  7 relies on the assumption of parallel 
trends between high-risk and non-high risk FINRA broker-insurance 
producers.  Although  there  may  be  differences  in  the  propensity  of 
each group to leave the industry, the fixed effect will absorb those 
differences as long as they are constant. Using only the sample of FINRA 
brokers who are jointly registered as insurance producers, Fig.  7 tests 
this assumption by plotting event-study estimates from the specification 
below.

𝐷𝑟𝑜𝑝 𝐹 𝐼𝑁𝑅𝐴𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 × 𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡

+ 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜇𝑗𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑡.

(6)

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Fig. 8. Career outcomes for high-risk brokers. This figure shows career outcomes for the high-risk brokers targeted by FINRA’s 2018 and 2019 proposals. The 
figure is based on all advisors who were targeted by the rules and withdrew their FINRA registration at any point after 2018. The percentages reflect the percentage 
of such individuals in each regime at the end of our sample period.

Year represents a series of year dummies for each year from 2012 
through 2021 (2018 is excluded). The figure plots the coefficients on 
each interaction between the year dummy and the high-risk variable. 
The figure shows no significant difference between the high-risk and 
non-high-risk brokers prior to 2018, but there is a notable increase 
in  the  percentage  of  high-risk  brokers  who  exit  the  FINRA  regime 
after 2018. This is consistent with FINRA’s proposals causing high-
risk FINRA brokers—and specifically those FINRA brokers who were 
also jointly registered insurance producers—to withdraw their FINRA 
registrations.

The  event  study  plot  also  shows  that  the  effect  of  the  shock  is 
immediate.  In  2019,  individuals  who  are  jointly  registered  broker-
producers targeted by the Rule are nearly 7.5% more likely to drop 
their FINRA registration compared to their colleagues who are also 
jointly registered broker-insurance producers but are not targeted by 
the rules. The estimates for 2020 and 2021 are lower, as the highest 
risk brokers may have left in 2019, but the difference between high-risk 
and non-high risk brokers remains statistically significant throughout 
the entire post period. In sum, our evidence is consistent with broker 
representatives anticipating higher federal scrutiny, and responding by 
immediately  leaving  the  FINRA  regime.  This  is  consistent  with  the 
aforementioned anecdotal evidence that firms began firing high-risk 
brokers to avoid the costs of complying with Rules 1017(a)(7) and 
4111.

6.3. Labor outcomes for former high-risk brokers

Consistent with our prior analysis, we are interested in employ-
ment outcomes for the high-risk brokers who withdrew their FINRA 

registration. The policy implications of ‘‘wandering’’ vary depending 
on whether these individuals are serving in roles that pose comparable, 
more, or less risk to consumers. Thus, we trace the regulatory registra-
tions for all high-risk brokers who withdrew their FINRA membership 
after 2018. As shown in Fig.  8, 98% of these individuals remain in 
insurance. Of those in insurance, over 90% have a license to sell an-
nuities, and over 75% have a license to sell variable annuities. Further, 
almost 15% have reactivated their FINRA registration by finding a new 
firm that is willing to employ them, and almost 6% are SEC investment 
advisers. None remain as state investment advisers, and none have left 
the industry. In sum, although Table  7 and the event study in Fig.  7 
show that the rule effectively nudged a subset of high-risk brokers out 
of FINRA registration, these individuals remain in financial services 
(primarily  insurance).  Arguably,  a  primary  effect  of  FINRA’s  Rules 
1017(a)(7) and 4111 has been to push a subset of the highest risk 
brokers into a regime with lower regulatory scrutiny.

7. Conclusion

By  providing  the  most  comprehensive  overview  of  the  financial 
advisor industry, our paper demonstrates how regulatory fragmentation 
can affect labor outcomes and regulatory discipline. We combine data 
on FINRA brokers, SEC investment advisers, state investment advisers, 
and state registered insurance producers to show that more than 40% 
of FINRA brokers are jointly registered in more than one regulatory 
regime. The overlap with the insurance industry is particularly impor-
tant, as insurance is growing rapidly and most FINRA brokers who 
withdraw  their  FINRA  registration  but  remain  in  financial  services 
remain in insurance. Further, insurance seems to attract FINRA brokers 
with a history of misconduct.

17 

C. Honigsberg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

The  descriptive  finding  that  ‘‘bad’’  brokers  flow  to  insurance  is 
consistent with our analysis of the effects of FINRA’s Rules 1017(a)(7) 
and 4111, which significantly increased the costs that FINRA-registered 
firms bear to hire and employ high-risk brokers. Although we show 
these rules caused a subset of targeted brokers to withdraw from FINRA 
registration,  none  of  the  targeted  brokers  who  left  following  2018, 
when Rule 1017(a)(7) was proposed, have exited financial services. 
Notably, 98% of these individuals remain in insurance.

This finding shows that leaving the brokerage industry may not be 
a career death-sentence as the literature generally assumes—instead, it 
is arguably an opportunity for a second chance in a related career. In 
this sense, it may be efficient for former FINRA brokers to transition 
to  selling  insurance  products,  as  it  preserves  their  human  capital. 
However,  as  we  show,  these  former  FINRA  brokers  commonly  sell 
insurance products that are more akin to asset management (variable 
annuities) than traditional risk-management (car insurance). Moreover, 
the former FINRA brokers with misconduct continue to have higher 
rates of recidivism in insurance, raising concerns of future harm. In 
sum, the behavior of these former FINRA brokers who exit to insurance 
looks like a form of regulatory arbitrage.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Colleen Honigsberg: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, 
Data curation, Conceptualization. Edwin Hu: Writing – review & edit-
ing, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, 
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Robert J. Jackson: 
Funding acquisition, Data curation.

Declaration of competing interest

The  author  is  an  advisory  board  member  at  AIMR  Analytics,  a 
fintech company that provides consumers with detailed background 
information on financial advisors.

Edwin Hu has nothing to disclose.
Robert Jackson has nothing to disclose.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104170.

Data availability

Replication Data (Reference data) (Link for replication)

References

Babiker,  Mustafa  H.,  2005.  Climate  Change  Policy,  Market  Structure,  and  Carbon 

Leakage. J. Int. Econ. 65 (2), 421–445.

Bergstresser, Daniel, Chalmers, John M.R., Tufano, Peter, 2008. Assessing the costs 
and benefits of brokers in the mutual fund industry. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (10), 
4129–4156.

Boyson,  Nicole  M.,  2019.  The  Worst  of  Both  Worlds?  Dual-Registered  Investment 
Advisers. North-eastern University - D’Amore-McKim School of Business Research 
Paper, (3360537).

Braswell, Mason, 2022. Firms Fire High Risk Brokers as Finra Takes Aim at Rogue 

Actors. AdvisorHub.

Bressler, Amery, Ross, P.C., 2018. FINRA Continues to Crackdown on the Supervision 
of High-Risk Brokers: FINRA’s Latest Regulatory Notices Provide Guidance and 
Propose Rule Amendments.

Brown, Jennifer, Minor, Dylan, 2015. Misconduct in Financial Services: Differences 
Across  Organizations.  Harvard  Business  School  Strategy  Unit  Working  Paper, 
(16-022).

Browning, Chris, Finke, Michael S., Huston, Sandra J., 2012. Rational choice with 
complex products: Consumer valuation of annuities. J. Financ. Couns. Plan. 23 
(2), 32–45.

Bryan, Cave, Leighton, LLP, Paisner, 2021. The song remains the same – FINRA’s Riff 

on high-risk brokers and firms.

Chalmers, John, Reuter, Jonathan, 2020. Is conflicted investment advice better than no 

advice? J. Financ. Econ. 138 (2), 366–387.

Charoenwong,  Ben,  Kwan,  Alan,  Umar,  Tarik,  2019.  Does  Regulatory  Jurisdiction 
Affect the Quality of Investment-Adviser Regulation? Am. Econ. Rev. 109 (10), 
3681–3712.

Christoffersen, Susan E.K., Evans, Richard, Musto, David K., 2013. What do consumers’ 
fund flows maximize? Evidence from their brokers’ incentives. J. Financ. 68 (1), 
201–235.

Consumer Federation of America, 2020. Solicitation of Comments on Proposed Fidu-
ciary  Conduct  Standard  for  Broker-Dealers,  Agents,  Investment  Advisers,  and 
Investment Adviser Representatives. Lett. Mass. Secur. Div..

Dimmock,  Stephen  G.,  Gerken,  William  C.,  2012.  Predicting  Fraud  by  Investment 

Managers. J. Financ. Econ. 105 (1), 153–173.

Dimmock,  Stephen  G.,  Gerken,  William  C.,  Graham,  Nathaniel  P.,  2018.  Is  Fraud 
Contagious? Coworker Influence on Misconduct by Financial Advisors. J. Financ. 
73 (3), 1417–1450.

Egan, Mark L., Ge, Shan, Tang, Johnny, 2020. Conflicting Interests and the Effect of 
Fiduciary Duty — Evidence from Variable Annuities. In: Working Paper Series, 
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Egan,  Mark,  Matvos,  Gregor,  Seru,  Amit,  2019.  The  Market  for  Financial  Adviser 

Misconduct. J. Political Econ. 127 (1), 233–295.

Egan, Mark, Matvos, Gregor, Seru, Amit, 2022. When Harry Fired Sally: The Double 

Standard in Punishing Misconduct. J. Political Econ. 130 (5), 1184–1248.

Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority,  2018.  Regulatory  Notice  18-16  |  FINRA 
Requests Comment on FINRA Rule Amendments Relating to High-Risk Brokers and 
the Firms That Employ Them.

Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority,  2019.  Regulatory  Notice  19-17  |  FINRA 
Requests  Comment  on  Proposed  New  Rule  4111  (Restricted  Firm  Obligations. 
In:  Imposing  Additional  Obligations  on  Firms  with  a  Significant  History  of 
Misconduct.’’.

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, 2021. Dispute resolution statistics.  available 

at https://www.finra.org/arbitration-mediation/dispute-resolution-statistics.

Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority,  2025.  Formerly  registered  reps.  available 
at https://www.finra.org/registration-exams-ce/manage-your-career/formerly-regist
ered-reps.

Gebauer, Stefan, Mazelis, Falk, 2019. Macroprudential Regulation and Leakage to the 

Shadow Banking Sector. SSRN Working Paper.

Grace, Martin F., Phillips, Richard D., 2008. Regulator Performance, Regulatory Envi-
ronment and Outcomes: An Examination of Insurance Regulator Career Incentives 
on State Insurance Markets. J. Bank. Financ. 32 (1), 116–133.

Griffin, John M., Kruger, Samuel, Maturana, Gonzalo, 2019. Personal Infidelity and 
Professional Conduct in 4 Settings. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 (33), 16268–16273.
Grunwald, Ben, Rappaport, John, 2020. The Wandering Officer. Yale Law J. 129 (6), 

1676–1782.

Honigsberg, Colleen, Hu, Edwin, Jackson, Jr., Robert J., 2022. Regulatory Arbitrage 

and the Persistence of Financial Misconduct. Stanf. Law Rev. 74 (4), 737.

Honigsberg, Colleen, Jacob, Matthew, 2021. Deleting Misconduct: The Expungement of 

BrokerCheck Records. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (3), 800–831.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Yogo, Motohiro, 2022. Global Life Insurers during a Low Interest 

Rate Environment. AEA Pap. Proc. 112, 503–8.

Mahoney, Paul G., 2004. Manager-investor conflicts in mutual funds. J. Econ. Perspect. 

18 (2), 161–182.

Martínez, Gema Lax, de Juano-i Ribes, Helena Saenz, Yin, Deyun, Le Feuvre, Bruno, 
Hamdan-Livramento, Intan, Saito, Kaori, Raffo, Julio, 2021. Expanding the World 
Gender-Name Dictionary: WGND 2.0. pp. 1–11.

National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 2011. Revisions and Clarifications to 

the Uniform Licensing Standards.

Qureshi, Hammad, Sokobin, Jonathan S., 2015. Do Investors Have Valuable Information 

About Brokers? In: SSRN Scholarly Paper.

RAND  Corporation,  2018.  Investor  Testing  of  Form  CRS  Relationship  Summary. 

Securities and Exchange Commission.

Randall, Susan, 1999. Insurance Regulation in the United States: Regulatory Federalism 
and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Fla. State Univ. Law Rev. 
26 (3), 77.

Saitz, Greg, Smith, Aaron, 2024. Hundreds Banned from Securities Industry Still Freely 
Sell Insurance. URL https://www.financialadvisoriq.com/c/4654824/616764/hund
reds_banned_from_securities_industry_still_freely_sell_insurance?referrer_module=issu
eHeadline.

Scharf, Rachel, 2022. SEC Wins Atlanta Trial Over $1.7M Retirement Savings Scam - 

Law360.

Schwarcz, Daniel, 2010. Regulating Insurance Sales or Selling Insurance Regulation?: 
Against Regulatory Competition in Insurance. In: 94 University of Minnesota Law 
Review. Vol. 94, 1707.

Schwarcz,  Daniel,  2013.  Preventing  Capture  Through  Consumer  Empowerment 
Programs:  Some  Evidence  from  Insurance  Regulation.  In:  Carpenter,  Daniel, 
Moss, David A. (Eds.), 367 Preventing Regulatory Capture: Special Interest Influence 
and how To Limit It 365.

18 

C. Honigsberg et al.

Schwarcz, Daniel, Siegelman, Peter (Eds.), 2015. Research Handbook on the Economics 

of Insurance Law. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Securities and Exchange Commission, 2011. Staff Study on Investment Advisers and 
Broker-Dealers as Required By the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act.

Journal of Financial Economics 174 (2025) 104170 

Texas Department of Insurance, 2021. Insurance complaints: All data. available at http
s://data.texas.gov/dataset/Insurance-complaints-All-data/ubdr-4uff/about_data URL 
https://data.texas.gov/dataset/Insurance-complaints-All-data/ubdr-4uff/about_data.

Wolper, Alan, 2022. The 411 On FINRA Rule 4111. Broker-Dealer Law Corner.

19 

