Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Customer data access and fintech entry: Early evidence from open banking(cid:73)
Tania Babina a,b,c, Saleem Bahaj d,e,c, Greg Buchak f, Filippo De Marco g,c
Will Gornall h,∗, Francesco Mazzola i, Tong Yu j
a Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, 7699 Mowatt Lane, College Park, MD 20740, United States of America
b NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, 02138-5398, MA, United States of America
c CEPR, 2nd Floor, 33 Great Sutton Street, London, EC1V 0DX, United Kingdom
d University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom
e Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London, EC2R 8AH, United Kingdom
f Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, 655 Knight Way, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America
g Bocconi University, Via Roentgen, 1, Milan, 20136, Italy
h Sauder School of Business, University of British Columbia, 2053 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2, British Columbia, Canada
i ESCP Business School, Turin campus, Via Andrea Doria, 31/a, Turin, 10123, Italy
j Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom

, Angus Foulis e

, 

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Replication Information for Custo
mer Data Access and Fintech Entry: Early Evid
ence from Open Banking (Original data)

Keywords:
Financial regulation
Open banking
Financial innovation
Data access
Data rights
Big data
Artificial intelligence

Open banking (OB) empowers bank customers to share their financial transaction data with fintechs and other 
banks. New cross-country data shows 49 countries adopted OB policies, privacy preferences predict policy 
adoption, and adoption spurs fintech entry. UK microdata shows that OB enables: (i) consumers to access 
both financial advice and credit; (ii) SMEs to establish new lending relationships. In a calibrated model, OB 
universally improves welfare through entry and product improvements when used for advice. When used for 
credit, OB promotes entry and competition by reducing adverse selection, but higher prices for costlier or 
privacy-conscious consumers partially offset these benefits.

The increasing ease with which data is collected, stored, and ana-
lyzed has made it a critical input in economic decision-making. Data’s 
growing importance has led to an active discussion about who should 
control the data generated through private economic activity: A firm

or its customers. This issue is particularly salient in financial services, 
where banks’ provision of financial products inherently generates useful 
customer data. Periodic direct deposits, overdrafts, and late payme-
nts help predict a potential borrower’s riskiness. Account balances and

(cid:73)

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We are grateful to Mark Boyd for sharing Platformable’s data and Zhaochen Jiang for outstanding research 
support. For comments, we are grateful to Isha Agarwal, Jonathan Berk, Bo Bian, Charlie Calomiris, Olivier Darmouni, Douglas Diamond, Maryam Farboodi, 
Zhiguo He, Sean Higgins, Steve Kaplan, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Theresa Kuchler, Luc Laeven, Stefan Nagel, Tomek Piskorski, Ragu Rajan, Amit Seru, Amir Sufi, 
Ansgar Walther, Luigi Zingales, Yao Zeng, and seminar and conference audiences at the AFA; Barcelona Summer Forum; Bank of Canada workshop; Bank of 
Sweden; Baruch College; CKGSB; CMU; Columbia; HBS; HEC Lausanne; EFA; Entrepreneurship and Innovation at Nova SBE; Erasmus University in Rotterdam; 
Esade Spring Workshop (Barcelona); FDIC 21st Annual Bank Research Conference; FIRS; HEC Workshop on Entrepreneurship; IESE (Barcelona); Imperial College 
London; Maastricht University; MIT; NBER SI Corporate Finance; NBER Economics of Privacy Conference; NFA; NY Fed; NY Fed Fintech Conference; NYU; 
NYU WAPFIN (Women Assistant Professors in Finance); OCC Conference; OSU; Oxford University; Rome Junior Finance Conference; Queens College School of 
Business; Stanford; Stockholm School of Economics; Toulouse School of Economics; Wharton; UBC; UBC Winter Finance Conference; Universidad Carlos III de 
Madrid; University of Maryland; University of Pittsburgh; University of Warwick; University of Washington; UPF; USC; UTD Finance Conference. Gornall thanks 
the SSHRC for their support. The FCA Financial Lives Survey data for this research has been provided by the Consumer Data Research Centre, an ESRC Data 
Investment, under project ID CDRC 1512, ES/L011840/1; ES/L011891/1. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the Bank of England, the MPC, the FPC, or the PRC, nor those of the Financial Conduct Authority.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:  will.gornall@sauder.ubc.ca (W. Gornall).
URL:  https://www.willgornall.com (W. Gornall).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103950
Received 22 April 2022; Received in revised form 14 September 2024; Accepted 18 September 2024
Available online 5 April 2025 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
T. Babina et al.

transactions allow firms to learn about a customer’s needs and offer tai-
lored financial advice or other products. A small business’s transaction 
data could inform lenders about its health and help a fintech deliver 
financial management services.

Historically, a customer’s financial data has been under her bank’s 
exclusive control, giving that bank an advantage in pricing and cus-
tomizing financial services.1 However, banks’ exclusive access to this 
data is being upended by a movement known as open banking (OB). OB 
empowers bank customers to share their financial transaction data with 
other financial service providers. For example, OB allows a bank cus-
tomer to easily share her bank account history with a potential lender 
(which can analyze her income and spending habits to underwrite her 
credit) or with a financial management app (to help her manage her 
money).

While some banks have implemented OB of their own accord, many 
governments are promoting or even mandating it. As of October 2021, 
regulators in 80 countries have taken at least some steps to encourage 
the  adoption  of  OB.  49  of  the  80  have  already  adopted  their  key 
OB policies. Through OB, policymakers aim to boost innovative entry, 
competition, and financial inclusion. Policymakers reason that allowing 
bank  customers  to  share  their  financial  transaction  data  will  allow 
fintech entrants and other banks to better compete for business and 
innovate.

In  this  paper,  we  explore  the  causes  and  consequences  of  gov-
ernment  policies  to  promote  OB.  In  doing  so,  we  make  four  key 
contributions. First, we assemble the first comprehensive, standardized 
dataset of government-led OB policies. Using this data, we document 
the ubiquity of OB government policies around the world and examine 
their drivers. Second, we use microdata from the UK — an early adopter 
of OB — to provide evidence on how OB policies impact consumers and 
small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Third, we examine the 
global impact of OB policies on financial innovation using our country-
level  OB  policy  data.  Finally,  we  provide  a  quantitative  modeling 
framework for customer data sharing, which measures the overall and 
distributional welfare effects of OB.

We begin by assembling a comprehensive dataset on government 
policies to promote OB for the world’s 168 largest countries—represen-
ting more than 99% of world GDP. We uncover vast heterogeneity 
in OB policy choices. For example, countries in the European Union 
(EU) have adopted OB regimes that require sharing only data from 
transaction accounts (e.g., checking accounts or credit cards). In con-
trast, countries in other regions typically mandate sharing data from 
a broader set of financial products (e.g., mortgages or insurance). We 
also examine the drivers of OB policies and show that consumer trust 
in sharing data with fintechs predicts OB policy adoption: Intuitively, 
consumer willingness to share their data increases the potential benefit 
of these policies. Other country characteristics are less predictive, in-
cluding economic and financial development, the levels of innovation, 
or the quality of local institutions.

The prevalence of OB policies motivates further study of the eco-
nomic effects of these policies. We first focus on the UK where granular 
microdata offers direct evidence on the adoption and economic impact 
of OB for both consumers and SMEs. For consumers, we use a survey 
by the UK Financial Conduct Authority to document two main distinct 
reasons  consumers  share  data:  Financial  planning  and  management 
(which we term advice OB) and borrowing (credit OB). There is little 
overlap between users of advice and credit OB, and consumers are more 

1 As  a  motivating  example,  Online  Appendix  A1  Panel  (a)  shows  non-
banks and fintech lenders, which lack such customer data, overwhelmingly 
use  standardized  underwriting  models  such  as  FICO  when  originating  US 
residential mortgages. Banks are much more likely to use non-standard credit 
models, allowing them to exploit their customer data. These non-standard 
models lead to more individualized pricing: Panel (b) shows that non-standard 
models lead to more dispersed interest rate residuals than standard models.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

likely to use both OB products if they are willing to share their data, are 
employed, or have missed bill payments. We find suggestive evidence 
that OB use improves consumer outcomes: Advice OB is associated with 
greater financial knowledge and credit OB is associated with greater 
credit access.

For SMEs, UK panel data allows us to estimate the causal impact 
of OB on borrowers, measure whether banks or non-banks provide 
new  loans,  and  examine  OB’s  financial  inclusion  implications.  We 
exploit the fact that the commercial OB-related policy applied only 
to SMEs with annual sales below £25 million. This cutoff provides 
quasi-random variation and allows us to compare outcomes for eligible 
and non-eligible SMEs following the policy implementation using a 
difference-in-differences and event-study designs. We document that 
SMEs eligible to share data form more new lending relationships with 
non-bank lenders (e.g., fintechs). In terms of distributional effects, we 
find that treated firms with prior lending relationships are more likely 
to get new loans, and those SMEs that form new lending relationships 
with non-banks pay less interest.

We next provide global evidence on the effect of OB on fintech 
entry, which regulators regard as a key mechanism through which OB 
can improve innovation and competition. We measure fintech entry 
using  data  on  venture  capital  (VC)  investment  in  fintech  startups. 
Using the staggered implementation of OB policies across countries in a 
difference-in-differences and event-study designs, we show that VC in-
vestment in fintechs surges following OB policy adoption. Event studies 
show a discontinuous increase in fintech activity after the introduction 
of OB policies, with no pre-trends. Countries whose residents place 
more trust in sharing data with fintechs see greater post-OB fintech VC 
investment, suggesting that consumer preferences for data sharing play 
an important role in OB’s impact. Importantly, we observe increases 
in fintech activity across many financial products (e.g., financial ad-
vice apps, credit, payments, regtech), consistent with our UK survey 
evidence that OB data has a wide range of use cases.

While our empirical results offer valuable descriptive and causal 
evidence regarding OB use, they fall short of addressing several key 
economic and policy relevant questions related to OB. First, they are 
largely silent on the mechanisms by which access to OB data increases 
entry across the two distinct use cases — financial advice and credit 
— highlighted by our UK consumer results. Second, our differences-
in-differences tests have little to say on equilibrium effects, welfare, 
or distributional consequences. Third, while the consumer and SME 
microdata is informative about the UK case, our cross-country results 
highlight  the  importance  of  customer  preferences  for  sharing  data, 
which raises questions about how OB might look in countries with 
different social attitudes towards fintechs and privacy.

We tackle these questions directly using a quantitative model of 
data usage. This model incorporates consumer data use into a standard 
industrial organization (IO) model of consumer choice with hetero-
geneous consumers. In our model, data about a bank’s customer — 
interpreted as either an individual or a business — reveals her pref-
erences (allowing the creation of better products for advice OB) and 
costliness to serve (allowing to learn default risk for screening in credit 
OB). A relationship bank always sees her data, while other firms see it 
only if she shares it via OB. We calibrate the model to the two use 
cases using our reduced-form results and pre-OB estimates from the 
literature. In our credit use case, we calibrate to mortgage products, 
where data is informative about consumer risk. In our financial advice 
use case, we calibrate to investment advice, where data is informative 
about particularized customer needs. OB spurs innovation and competi-
tion in both cases, but through different channels. In the credit OB case, 
unequal data access discourages entry by giving relationship banks an 
underwriting advantage and creating adverse selection for entrants. 
Allowing data sharing reduces this adverse selection, makes entrants 
more profitable, and, in equilibrium, increases entry. In the advice OB 
case, unequal data access impairs fintechs’ ability to offer customized 

2 

T. Babina et al.

products, and enabling customers to share their data leads to better-
customized products, higher customer demand, and, again, increased 
entrant profitability and entry.

While OB unambiguously increases competition and innovative en-
try, our model also shows how these goals can sometimes, but not 
always,  come  into  conflict  with  the  financial  inclusion  goal  of  OB 
policies. The distributional effects of OB depend critically on how the 
data is used. All customers benefit in the advice OB use case, where 
the data is used to provide higher-quality or more tailored products. 
In contrast, the credit OB use case can have negative distributional 
consequences because OB increases entry precisely by enabling entrants 
to better exclude unprofitable (higher risk) customers. Users who share 
unfavorable data lose directly. Users who opt out of sharing are inferred 
to have strategically hidden unfavorable data, even when opting out 
due to strong privacy preferences. Thus, consistent with our reduced-
form findings in the SME analysis, the customers who benefit the most 
may be those who already have credit access. Customers who opt out 
still gain from increased entry and competition, but lose because they 
are now inferred to be higher risk. Our quantitative model allows us to 
weigh this tradeoff, a particularly important question for policymakers 
concerned with the distributional consequences of OB.

Our model shows that societal preferences for privacy (i.e., unwill-
ingness to share data) not only drive the impact of OB (consistent 
with  our  cross-country  results),  but  also  play  an  important  role  in 
explaining these distributional effects. The financial transaction data 
shared through OB differs from credit registry data not simply because 
of its utility for generating financial advice, but also because it is by 
nature more sensitive and many customers are reluctant to share it, 
as highlighted by our UK consumer data. In our model, strong societal 
preferences for privacy blunt the impact of OB as few customers opt in 
to data sharing and so few fintechs enter. However, societal preferences 
for privacy have a silver lining because they cause customers to opt 
out of data sharing for privacy reasons, which means that opting out 
sends only a weak signal about one’s riskiness. In fact, under reasonable 
parameters — including those obtained in our UK calibration — OB 
is  welfare-improving  for  all  customers  even  when  data  is  used  for 
screening in lending. The negative inference lenders draw against opt-
outs is more than offset by the benefits that these customers derive from 
increased entry and competition. Consequently, incorporating privacy 
preferences and the implications of different use cases is an impor-
tant part of an OB implementation, highlighting a crucial distinction 
between credit registries and OB data sharing.

To summarize, we document that government policies to promote 
OB are prevalent: About half of countries have some OB efforts. Our 
empirical analyses and the quantitative model show that OB data can 
have beneficial economic effects. Our work suggests that the potential 
implications of OB for industry, society, and policymakers are large. By 
giving customers the ability to share their financial transaction data, OB 
promises to upend the organization of the financial sector. The welfare 
and distributional effects of this, however, depend crucially on specific 
uses of customers’ data and their willingness to share data.

Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, we situate our contri-
bution in the literature. In Section 2, we describe our data. In Section 3, 
we examine the effects of OB policies, and in Section 4, we provide an 
economic framework for evaluating our results. Section 5 concludes.

1. Related literature

Our  paper  contributes  to  several  strands  of  literature.  First,  our 
research question and methodology connect to the broader literature 
on cross-country bank regulation. In the wake of the financial crisis, 
much of this literature focuses on regulation and bank risk, for exam-
ple, Laeven and Levine (2009), Beck et al. (2013), and Ongena et al. 
(2013). Our paper is closer to research on regulation and competition, 
such as that by Claessens and Laeven (2004) who argue contestability 
and regulation are key drivers of bank competition, or (Barth et al., 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

2004)  who  argue  for  the  role  of  disclosure  and  private  incentives. 
We contribute by showing that government policies to promote bank 
customer data sharing foster entry into the financial sector across many 
financial products and potentially improve bank customer outcomes.

Second,  we  engage  with  the  fundamental  question,  originating 
with Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Diamond (1984), over what 
makes banks special. While fintechs and other non-depository insti-
tutions have gained significant market share in transaction-oriented 
functions like origination and servicing (e.g., Gopal and Schnabl, 2022; 
Buchak  et  al.,  2024b),  they  have  been  slower  to  replace  banks  in 
deeper intermediation roles like underwriting, monitoring, and balance 
sheet lending. Importantly, banks appear to derive significant value 
from engaging in multiple intermediation activities simultaneously, as 
in Egan et al. (2022), Aguirregabiria et al. (2019), or (Benetton et al., 
2022), suggesting there are significant barriers that limit the growth of 
new single-product competitors. Information lies at the heart of rela-
tionship banking (Ramakrishnan and Thakor, 1984; Boot and Thakor, 
1997)  and  our  paper  directly  addresses  the  idea  that  aggregating 
data across multiple business lines leads to informational advantages. 
This  explanation  dates  to  Petersen  and  Rajan  (1994),  Petersen  and 
Rajan (1995), and, more recently, Granja et al. (2022) and Blickle 
et al. (2023). Recent empirical work by Ghosh et al. (2024) shows a 
direct effect of transaction data on screening quality for commercial 
loans. Berg et al. (2020) and Di Maggio et al. (2022b) show the value 
of alternative data more generally. Banks’ informational advantages are 
challenged with OB, paving the way for an analysis of how important 
these advantages are.

Third, we add to the nascent literature on the economic effects of 
data ownership and access. Theoretical work typically views data as 
either an input to production or a way to address information asym-
metries. Taking the production-input view, Jones and Tonetti (2020) 
show that a firm may suboptimally hoard product-improving data to 
prevent entry, motivating the reallocation of data property rights from 
firms to consumers. Farboodi et al. (2019) model data as valuable for 
forecasting and suggest that large firms generate more data and benefit 
from it. Emphasizing the information economics view, He et al. (2023) 
and Parlour et al. (2022) highlight how data sharing and portability 
can increase the quality of lending while having ambiguous effects on 
consumer welfare and bank profits. Goldstein et al. (2022) emphasize 
that the economic impact of data sharing is influenced by the extent 
to which lenders engage in liquidity transformation. He et al. (2024) 
study how the hardening of soft information, which can result from 
policies like open banking, affects competition in lending markets. Em-
pirically, Babina et al. (2024) show that larger firms — that naturally 
generate more data — benefit more from their investments in Artificial 
Intelligence  (AI)  and  AI  use  is  associated  with  increased  industrial 
concentration, suggesting that a current status quo (where firms own 
their customers’ data) can stifle entry and weaken competition.

We build on this largely theoretical literature in several ways. OB 
policies weaken bank data monopolies and give consumers the power to 
share their data, offering a valuable opportunity to study the economic 
effects of change in data ownership policies. We document that man-
dating incumbent firms to share their customers’ data spurs new firm 
entry, but also generates complex competitive interactions that depend 
on how the consumer data is used (i.e., customer screening in credit 
products  vs.  product  innovation  in  financial  advice  products)  with 
unclear distributional consequences.2 To the best of our knowledge, 
we  provide  the  first  empirical  study  on  the  impact  of  government 
policies that open access to rich customer-level financial transaction 
data. Beyond that, we provide a quantitative framework for studying 

2 More generally, the risks of ever broader data use by firms are not well un-
derstood. For example, the use of data in AI applications leads firms to become 
more systematically risky with unclear impacts on their customers (Babina 
et al., 2023b).

3 

T. Babina et al.

the use of consumer data in the context of OB. Building on common 
tools in the IO/finance literature (e.g., Egan et al., 2017; Di Maggio 
et  al.,  2022a;  Buchak  et  al.,  2024a),  we  connect  data  to  informa-
tion about consumer heterogeneity around marginal costs and desired 
product customization. Through these channels, we synthesize both 
the input-to-production and information economics views of data and 
highlight their quantitative importance across particular applications. 
In contrast to, e.g., He et al. (2023) and Parlour et al. (2022), our model 
emphasizes entry and innovation, which are key policy goals of OB. 
Moreover, our analysis complements this literature by highlighting the 
importance of consumer preferences over data privacy (e.g., Acquisti 
et al. (2016), Tang (2019), Bian et al. (2021), and Chen et al. (2024)) by 
explicitly incorporating privacy preferences into our structural model.
While  conceptually  related  to  data  sharing  via  credit  registries, 
e.g., Djankov et al. (2007) and Hertzberg et al. (2011), OB policies 
differ in important respects. They typically cover consumers regardless 
of their credit usage and are designed from the outset to facilitate 
ease of data access by potential bank competitors, including nonbanks. 
The richer data that OB covers lends itself to uses beyond screening; 
however, this very richness creates greater privacy concerns than a 
standard credit file.3 We show these aspects of OB are important in 
driving its effects. Thus, our paper provides evidence of the effects 
of adopting data-sharing policies more generally, complementing the 
literature on credit registries.

Fourth, our structural model allows us to broaden the literature 
around the industrial organization of the financial sector. This literature 
has studied the role of banks and the increased competition they face 
from  non-depository  institutions,  e.g.,  Buchak  et  al.  (2018),  Fuster 
et al. (2019), Jiang et al. (2020) (mortgages), Erel and Liebersohn 
(2022), Gopal and Schnabl (2022) (small business lending in the US), Di 
Maggio  and  Yao  (2021),  De  Roure  et  al.  (2022)  (personal  loans), 
and Buchak et al. (2021) (deposits). These papers typically highlight 
the interplay between technology and regulation and how they interact 
with  the  comparative  advantages  of  depository  and  non-depository 
institutions.4  Our  results  also  connect  to  the  growing  literature  on 
financial system structure and financial inclusion (e.g., Claessens and 
Rojas-Suarez, 2016; Bartlett et al., 2022; Philippon, 2019).

Finally,  our  paper  is  connected  to  the  literature  on  the  drivers 
of innovation and entrepreneurship. We document the importance of 
data access for innovation: We show a large effect of OB policies on 
innovative entry, which adds to a literature that has shown mixed 
results  on  whether  policymakers  are  able  to  promote  high-growth 
entrepreneurship (Acs et al., 2016; Denes et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2022; 
Babina et al., 2023c).5

2. Institutional background and descriptive analysis

This section describes the institutional background of OB policies, 
details our data collection process, shows the global importance of OB 
policies, and examines their drivers.

3 For example, Nam (2022) looks at a German OB fintech and shows that 
the vast majority of its credit report-sharing applicants are unwilling to also 
share their OB data.

4 Literature reviews on the impact of technology in finance can be found 
in Stulz (2019), Vives (2019), Allen et al. (2021), Thakor (2020), Berg et al. 
(2022), and Boot et al. (2021).

5 Other work shows the positive impact of less entry regulation (Klapper 
et al., 2006; Mullainathan and Schnabl, 2010), more optimistic beliefs (Puri 
and Robinson, 2007), VC availability (Kaplan and Lerner, 2010), R&D sub-
sidies  (Babina  and  Howell,  2024),  and  competition  policies  (Phillips  and 
Zhdanov, 2017; Babina et al., 2023a).)

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

2.1. Institutional background on open banking

OB describes a broad trend where, upon customer request, finan-
cial intermediaries (e.g., banks) share — willingly or by regulatory 
fiat  —  access  to  their  customers’  data  with  other  financial  service 
providers (e.g., fintechs or banks). There are two primary non-mutually 
exclusive ways in which OB is spreading around the world: Market-
led, where banks and fintechs adopt OB without government inter-
vention,  and  government-led,  where  regulators  institute  policies  to 
promote the adoption of OB by the financial sector. This paper focuses 
on  government-led  OB  policies,  which  typically  apply  to  a  bank’s 
individual customers and sometimes also apply to business customers.
While the specifics of government OB efforts vary, the UK’s Open 
Banking  Initiative  is  an  instructive  introduction:  In  2017,  the  UK’s 
Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) introduced one of the first 
OB regulations — commonly known as the CMA Open Banking Order 
— with the aim of increasing innovation and competition in the retail 
banking sector. The initiative required that by 2018, banks ‘‘give their 
personal and business customers the ability to access and share their ac-
count data on an ongoing basis with authorized [by the government] third 
parties.’’ 6 Here, third parties refer to both fintechs and other banks. 
Additionally, banks were required to allow customers to authorize third 
parties to make payments from their accounts—a practice called pay-
ment initiation. OB differs significantly from the UK’s existing private 
sector credit bureaus: It covers richer data (in particular, information 
on transaction accounts), it gives banks’ customers control over their 
data, it is free to the requester, and banks are forced to participate. 
These are common features of OB policies around the world and mean 
that OB goes beyond traditional credit bureaus.

By opening bank data, regulators aim to create an environment 
where financial intermediaries — both incumbents and entrants — can 
create new or improved financial services for bank customers and better 
compete with existing services. The prototypical use case of OB is a 
financial advice product, such as financial account aggregation, which 
works as follows. A consumer might have financial accounts scattered 
across several financial intermediaries: Her bank account, several credit 
cards, a mortgage, an investment account, and so on. With OB, fintechs 
can access, aggregate, and analyze these separate accounts to provide 
customized financial advice. She may find it helpful to monitor these 
accounts in a single place to understand her spending habits and get 
advice on budgeting, savings, and credit management. Another use 
case of OB is credit, where potential lenders can access the otherwise 
private information that a consumer’s home bank has about her. For 
example,  with  customer  permission,  a  fintech  lender  could  use  the 
data on a bank’s customer to query her bank account transactions to 
help price her a loan. Beyond financial advice and credit, many other 
use cases have emerged, including identity verification, payments, and 
insurance. These financial products powered by OB data are typically 
highly customized to each customer with AI models—consistent with 
AI,  more  generally,  being  used  by  firms  for  product  innovation  so 
far (Babina et al., 2024).

Data sharing typically occur through a bank-provided Application 
Programming Interface (API). APIs are a technology that allows two 
computer  systems  (e.g.,  a  bank’s  and  a  fintech’s)  to  speak  to  each 
other over a network. OB APIs are published by the data provider 
(e.g., bank) and are a set of standardized, programmatic commands that 
allow data users (e.g., fintechs) to interact with the provider’s customer 
database and to perform financial services on customers’ behalf. The 
particulars are regime-specific, but API functionality in OB typically 
allows read access (e.g., querying account data) and sometimes allows 

6 Page 11 of ‘‘Open Banking, Preparing for Lift off’’ document. See the
official policy document. A related data-sharing policy focusing exclusively on 
SME bank customers was introduced in 2015 and implemented in 2017. We 
discuss this policy in detail in Section 3.2 and Online Appendix E.

4 

T. Babina et al.

write access (e.g., payment initiation). In Online Appendix B, we show 
that in countries that implement OB policies, banks are indeed more 
likely to provide APIs for customer data sharing.

Even without government OB policies, fintechs have gained access 
to customer bank data through financial aggregators such as Yodlee 
and Plaid that collect data via a combination of bilateral agreements 
and ‘‘screen scraping’’ (web scraping using user-provided passwords). 
In practice, although these market-based solutions are improving, they 
are expensive for fintechs and offer incomplete coverage.7 Incumbent 
banks’  reluctance  to  voluntarily  offer  widespread  data  sharing  sug-
gests  that  they  lose  monopoly  rents  —  an  intuition  crystallized  in 
our model — and that there are significant contracting frictions that 
prevent them from capturing surpluses. For example, bank customer 
stickiness or a lack of customer sophistication prevents banks from 
extracting the value of data sharing from customers, and coordina-
tion problems around large numbers of (merely hypothetical) fintech 
entrants prevents a Coasian solution. Importantly, because banks are 
data monopolists, standard economics predicts that a straightforward 
arrangement where the bank sells information access to fintechs will 
lead to markups and an inefficiently low quantity of data access. Thus, 
government involvement in data sharing appears to be an important 
force in its widespread adoption.

2.2. Data collection methodology for open banking around the world

We create a comprehensive, hand-collected database of OB gov-
ernment policies (or the lack thereof) for the largest 168 countries 
(covering over 99% of global GDP). This section describes our method-
ology; Online Appendix C provides further detail. We base our sample 
on countries with at least one million people according to the IMF 
2018 data or at least 10 VC-backed companies.8 For each country, 
we manually search for official OB policy documents using Google, 
and  when  those  are  not  available,  for  descriptions  of  government-
led  OB  initiatives  from  law  firms,  research  papers,  journalists,  and 
industry participants. We classify these policies on multiple dimensions, 
giving preference to official policy documents (laws, regulations, policy 
papers, and official statements) to classify the various dimensions of OB 
policies into standardized categorical variables.

We ensure accuracy by performing multiple cross-checks. First, two 
authors independently classify each country’s OB regime and jointly 
reconcile  any  discrepancies.  Second,  we  use  automated  news  topic 
searches to uncover any material potentially missed in our manual 
searches.  Third,  we  reconcile  our  results  against  a  database  of  OB 
regulations maintained by Platformable,9 an OB advocacy group.

2.3. Summary statistics on open banking government policies

Table  1 provides summary statistics on our hand-collected OB data 
both overall and by region.10 As of October 2021, 80 of the 168 coun-
tries in our sample have at least a nascent government OB effort and 49 
have adopted their key OB policies. There is significant heterogeneity 
by region. 80% of countries in Europe and Central Asia have conducted 
at  least  some  government  OB  policies.  OB  is  less  present  in  other 
regions but all regions in the world have seen at least some government 
OB effort.

7 For  example,  financial  aggregator  pocketsmith.com  reports  a  median 
connection success rate of 44% for Yodlee among the Canadian banks it claims 
to cover as of mid-2023. In the US, Fidelity and PNC dropped support for Plaid 
in late 2023 (see here).

8 The IMF data is from here. The VC data is from PitchBook and is described 

later.

9 Platformable’s data is described here.
10 Following World Bank geographic terms, regions are Africa, Middle East 
& North Africa; Europe & Central Asia; Latin America & the Caribbean; North 
America; South Asia, East Asia & Pacific.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

OB  regulators  frequently  cite  one  or  more  justifications  for  im-
plementing OB regimes in their official statements. The three most 
common are to promote innovation, competition, and financial inclu-
sion. Table  1 shows that 97% of regulators cite innovation as a policy 
goal; 82% cite competition, and 29% cite financial inclusion. There 
is  significant  regional  heterogeneity  in  financial  inclusion  being  an 
OB policy goal: Only 10% of countries in Europe & Central Asia cite 
financial inclusion, whereas other regions are much more likely to do 
so.

Finally, we note that the EU adopted and implemented a common 
OB framework known as the Revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2, 
EU  Directive  2015/236).  PSD2  obligated  participating  countries  to 
implement its provisions in their respective banking regulations. In the 
country-level summary statistics in this section, we keep the partici-
pating countries separate. For our analyses in Sections 2.4 and 3.3, we 
weight all countries covered by PSD2 as a single pooled observation.
Implementation status and key dates of government-led poli-
cies We categorize a country’s OB maturity in terms of its implemen-
tation status on a 0 to 7 scale, where 0 denotes no effort towards 
OB, 1–2 correspond to ongoing policy discussions, 3–5 correspond to 
being in the process of implementation, and 6–7 correspond to full 
implementation.11

Panel (a) of Fig.  1 shows the geographical distribution of government-
led OB initiatives based on their maturity. As of October 2021, among 
countries with a government-led approach to OB, 31 (38%) are at the 
discussion stage, 14 (18%) are in the process of implementation, and 35 
(44%) are fully implemented or already seeing follow-on policies. We 
refer to the 49 countries in the latter two groups as having implemented 
OB.  To  provide  three  examples  along  the  implementation  timeline, 
OB  discussion  is  underway  in  the  US,12  Brazil  is  in  the  process  of 
implementing OB (see here), and the UK has fully implemented its 
Open Banking Initiative and is considering a follow-on ‘‘open finance’’ 
regulation.13 Fig.  1 Panel (b) shows the passage year of countries’ major 
OB government policies.

Requirements set by the regulator OB government policies differ 
in  what  they  require  of  market  participants,  and  indeed,  whether 
they require anything at all. The UK, for example, places explicit de 
jure legal requirements on banks to participate. Other examples with 
binding regulatory approaches are Australia, Bahrain, Brazil, the EU, 
and Israel. In contrast, regulators in Singapore, Malaysia, and Russia do 
not explicitly mandate data sharing and instead facilitate the adoption 
of OB by mediating industry discussion or providing technical standards 
or infrastructure for data sharing.

As shown in Table  1, among the countries whose OB initiatives 
have advanced sufficiently for these issues to be decided, we find that 
88% require banks to share data (variable ‘‘Required data sharing’’). In 

11 Specifically, the stages are (1) pre-discussion (some government interest 
is announced but no actual law or policy implementation is taking place); (2) 
discussion (the actual law has been discussed or rulemaking is taking place); 
(3) pre-implementation (the major policy-making has concluded but nothing is 
yet binding or implemented); (4) early implementation (some data sharing re-
quirements are binding, e.g., bank-level product information, but not personal 
account/transactions); (5) mid-implementation (personal account/transaction 
data sharing is binding or OB infrastructure/technical standards have been 
put in place, but not all planned elements are in place); (6) fully implemented 
(full implementation as described in the law/rulemaking/policy documents); 
(7) follow-on regulation or policies (OB is implemented, and regulators are 
actively working on related policies, such as open finance or open data, or 
building new infrastructure for OB).
12 The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) is looking into whether 
to create regulation based on Dodd-Frank’s Section 1033 that gives consumers 
the right to their financial data, but which was never codified into rulemaking 
and, hence, is not legally binding. See here.
13 This policy would broaden data access beyond transaction accounts. See 
here.

5 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Table 1
Open banking government policies summary statistics. 
  Variable

Worldwide 

Africa, Middle East
& North Africa
25% (65)

Europe
& Central Asia
80% (50)

Latin America
& the Caribbean
32% (25)

North America 

South Asia,
East Asia & Pacific 
56% (25)

67% (3)

48% (168)

97% (65)
82% (65)
29% (66)

97% (39)
87% (39)
10% (39)

100% (1)
0% (1)
100% (1)

100% (9)
67% (9)
40% (10)

92% (13)
77% (13)
54% (13)

38% (80)
18% (80)
44% (80)

75% (16)
6% (16)
13% (16)

100% (3)
100% (3)
100% (3)

  Government-led open banking presence
  Policy justification
  Innovation
  Competition
  Inclusion
  Status
  Discussion
  Mid-implementation
  Implemented
  Policy strength
  Required data sharing
  Data reciprocity
  Regulator provides tech specs
  Beyond transaction accts
  Functionality scope
  Data sharing only
  Payments only
  Both
This table presents summary statistics on open banking government policies for 168 countries. The first number in each column is the percentage of countries 
fitting the given criteria and the number in parentheses is the number of countries under consideration. Government-led open banking presence considers all 
countries in the respective region for which data were collected, while the other categories (policy mandates, status, participation, product scope, and functionality 
scope) consider only those countries with a government-led open banking approach that has advanced far enough that the issue in question has been (at least 
preliminarily) decided. Columns split the sample into regions, with geographic terms following the World Bank definitions.

100% (2)
100% (2)
100% (2)
100% (3)

64% (11)
45% (11)
83% (12)
91% (11)

100% (1)
100% (1)
100% (1)
100% (1)

97% (37)
0% (36)
15% (39)
3% (36)

88% (57)
18% (56)
39% (62)
34% (56)

67% (6)
33% (6)
63% (8)
80% (5)

0% (38)
0% (38)
100% (38)

36% (14)
43% (14)
21% (14)

9% (11)
0% (11)
91% (11)

0% (6)
0% (6)
100% (6)

100% (2)
0% (2)
0% (2)

100% (1)
0% (1)
0% (1)

12% (40)
12% (40)
75% (40)

5% (58)
0% (58)
95% (58)

75% (8)
25% (8)
0% (8)

50% (2)
0% (2)
50% (2)

addition to requiring incumbent banks to share data, some OB regimes 
also require reciprocal sharing by new entrants (e.g., fintechs): Our 
data shows that only 18% of regimes have data sharing reciprocity 
(variable  ‘‘Data  reciprocity’’).  Finally,  39%  of  countries’  regulators 
lay out technical specifications for data sharing (variable ‘‘Regulator 
provides tech specs’’), while the remainder do not. There is significant 
regional variation in government-led approaches regarding mandatory 
data sharing and technical specifications: Fig.  2 Panels (a) and (b) 
show  these  differences  graphically  for  mandatory  data  sharing  and 
regulator-set technical specifications, respectively.

Open banking scope: covered services and functions OB gov-
ernment  policies  differ  in  what  financial  products  are  covered.  By 
definition, all OB regimes cover at least transaction accounts (check-
ing accounts, credit cards, and digital wallets). Some regimes include 
a broader set of core consumer finance products: Savings accounts, 
investments, and loans. Still broader regimes, called ‘‘open finance,’’ 
cover all financial services. Fewer then 34% of countries cover non-
transaction accounts (variable ‘‘Beyond transaction accts’’). Regarding 
regional heterogeneity, Europe & Central Asia OB policies tend to be 
very narrow in scope, with only 3% covering non-transaction accounts. 
In contrast, OB policies in other regions are much broader, with 90% 
going beyond transaction accounts.

Regarding functionality, OB data sharing can, in theory, be used 
both to read data (e.g., pull customer account information) and to write 
data (e.g., initiate transactions). Some OB regimes focus on data sharing 
only, and some on both. Our data shows that among those countries 
where  this  issue  has  been  decided  (variables  under  ‘‘Functionality 
scope’’), only 5% focus on data sharing only, none on payments only, 
and 95% on both.

Open banking strength index Using our hand-collected data on 
OB policies, we construct an OB Strength Index, which measures the 
comprehensiveness of OB policies. The index averages the four key 
OB policy dimensions discussed above: Whether the regulators have 
set policies that (i) mandate banks to share data, (ii) require financial 
service  providers  (such  as  fintechs)  who  use  data  to  share  data  in 
return,  (iii)  cover  a  wide  range  of  financial  products,  and  (iv)  set 
technical standards for data sharing. This index ranges from 0 (all four 
dimensions are not yet mandated) to 1 (yes on all four dimensions).

2.4. Drivers of open banking government policies

We next examine what factors drive countries to adopt OB poli-
cies around the world. In the spirit of Kroszner and Strahan (1999) 
or (Cornelli et al., 2020), we examine what predicts OB policy adoption 
using a broad set of country characteristics as summarized in Panel 
(a)  of  Table  A1  in  Online  Appendix.  We  start  with  basic  country-
level data, including per capita GDP in thousands of US dollars and 
population in millions from the World Bank. Given the importance 
of consumer willingness to share data for OB adoption, we use the 
measure of consumer trust in sharing data with fintechs from (Chen 
et al., 2023). From the World Bank, we also add standard measures of 
country-level financial sector development, including the quantity of 
private sector credit to GDP, the number of bank branches per 100k 
people, and the financial sector’s Lerner Index (which captures the 
market power of banks). We take the percentage of banks that are 
foreign owned from (Claessens and Van Horen, 2013). To capture the 
quality of institutions, we use the Rule of Law Index from the Cato 
Institute. Finally, to measure innovation, we add data on VC deals from 
PitchBook, widely acknowledged as one of the best VC data sources for 
more recent years.14

Using our cross-country data, we then test the association between 
the time of OB policy implementation and these country characteristics 
using a Cox proportional hazards model: 

ℎ𝑖(𝑡) = ℎ0(𝑡) exp(𝑋′

𝑖 𝛽 + 𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑟)

(1)

where ℎ𝑖(𝑡) represents the hazard function for the occurrence of the 
OB outcome (implementation of OB policies through 2021) in year 𝑡
in country 𝑖. This hazard function can be interpreted as the risk of 

14 The data on trust in sharing data with fintechs is based on the survey 
underlying the EY Global Fintech Adoption Index. Specifically, it measures 
trust as the portion of survey respondents in each country who ‘‘agree’’ or 
‘‘strongly agree’’ that they are comfortable with their main bank to securely 
share their financial data with fintechs. The trust in fintechs variable is based 
on  surveys  conducted  in  February  and  March  of  2019,  as  earlier  survey 
vintages had very low coverage. All other variables are as of 2013, with that 
year chosen because it predates the earliest OB regimes and because it is the 
final year that comprehensive Lerner Index data is available from the World 
Bank.

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Fig. 1.  Government-led open banking regimes around the world. These maps show the current implementation status of government-led open banking policies and the year 
in which the major open banking policy was passed. Panel (a) shows the implementation status of their government open banking policies. Fully implemented corresponds to 
countries that have implemented open banking government policies; Implementation to those that have determined the specifics of the open banking approach and are currently 
implementing it; Discussion to those either considering implementing open banking policies or discussing that implementation; None to those with no government open banking 
approach; and NA to those where we have not collected data. Panel (b) shows the passage year of countries’ major open banking policies. Data on government open banking 
policies is current as of October 2021.

the event happening at time 𝑡 given it has not yet occurred. 𝑋′
𝑖  is a 
vector of country-level characteristics. 𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑟 are region fixed effects. 
Data availability causes the number of observations to fluctuate across 
specifications.

We supplement this regression with a cross-country regression on 
OB characteristics. We use both the 0 to 7 OB implementation status 
(the measure of how far government OB policy has progressed) and 
the 0 to 1 OB Strength Index (the measure of comprehensiveness of OB 
policies) based on key OB policy dimensions. These regressions take the 
following form, where 𝑂𝐵𝑖 denotes the two measures of OB policy for 
country 𝑖 as of 2021: 

𝑂𝐵𝑖 = 𝑋′

𝑖 𝛽 + 𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑟 + 𝜖𝑖

(2)

Table  2 presents the determinants of OB adoption speed (columns 
1–5), implementation status (columns 6–7), and policy strength (columns 
8–9). Columns 1 to 5 use Eq. (1). Since low overall levels of economic 
development could be associated with the introduction of OB policies 
in all columns we control for both GDP per capita (and its square) and 
log population. However, neither a country’s GDP nor its population 

robustly predicts the introduction of OB government policies. Column 
1  shows  that  consumer  trust  in  sharing  their  data  with  fintechs  is 
associated  with  earlier  implementation  of  OB  policies,  despite  the 
limited  number  of  observations  available  for  only  27  countries  for 
the  trust  in  fintech  data.  The  effect  is  economically  meaningful:  A 
one standard deviation (0.15) increase in trust is associated with a 
significantly higher rate of OB policy adoption, with the hazard (or 
event occurrence) rate nearly quadrupling.

Other country characteristics are only weakly associated with OB. 
Column 2 shows that measures of financial development do not predict 
government-led efforts to promote OB. Column 3 shows that OB policies 
are somewhat more likely to be adopted in countries with more non-
fintech VC deals in 2013, but that fintech VC deals are not predictive 
of adoption. In column 4, we find weak and statistically insignificant 
associations between the adoption of OB policies and both the Rule 
Law variable and the fraction of foreign-owned banks. In column 5, we 
include both our trust in fintechs measure and non-fintech VC deals as 
those were the significant predictors: The coefficient on trust in fintechs 
is largely unchanged and remains statistically significant, while the 
coefficient on non-fintech VC becomes statistically insignificant.

7 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Fig. 2.  Open banking government policy dimensions. These maps show mandated data sharing and technical specifications among countries with government-led open banking 
efforts developed enough to specify those policy dimensions. Panel (a) shows whether the current or proposed policy requires banks to share data upon customer request. Panel (b) 
shows whether the regulator sets a technical standard for open banking application programming interfaces—the technology used to share bank customer data. Countries marked 
NA either have no government-led open banking regime, are too early in discussion for the issue to be decided, or were excluded from our data collection. Data on government 
open banking policies is current as of October 2021.

Columns 6 to 9 present estimates of Eq.  (2). Trust in fintechs is again 
associated with the OB implementation, with a one standard deviation 
increase in trust being associated with about two steps of increase on 
our seven-step scale (column 6). The coefficient is unchanged when 
we  control  for  non-fintech  VC  deals  (column  7).  Columns  8  and  9 
show trust in fintechs is associated with our OB Strength Index with 
borderline significance. Overall, consumer trust in sharing data with 
fintechs is associated with the adoption of OB policies. Trust increases 
the potential benefit of these policies, as people being willing to share 
their financial data is crucial to the operation of OB.15

3. The economic effects of open banking

Next, we examine the economic effects of OB. We first focus on 
the  UK  (one  of  the  first  countries  to  adopt  OB  policies):  We  show 

that OB enables consumers to access both financial advice and credit 
(Section 3.1) and leads SMEs to form new lending relationships (Sec-
tion 3.2). We then examine the global impact of OB policies on financial 
innovation using our country-level OB policy data (Section 3.3).

3.1. Evidence from UK microdata on consumers

We analyze the use of OB by UK consumers and their financial 
outcomes using data from the Financial Lives Survey (FLS). The FLS is a 
representative survey of UK consumers conducted by the Financial Con-
duct Authority (FCA)—one of the main regulators of the UK financial 
services industry. The survey provides information about consumers’ 
demographics, attitudes towards managing their money, financial prod-
uct usage, and experiences engaging with financial services firms. We 
use the February 2020 survey which covers usage of OB products for 
the first time.16 Online Appendix Table A2 provides summary statistics.

15 A potential concern is reverse causality, as the trust in fintechs was based 
on a survey conducted in early 2019. However, since consumer trust is likely 
persistent, this concern is unlikely to be of first-order importance.

16 See the survey questionnaire here.

8 

T. Babina et al.

Table 2
Drivers of open banking government policies. 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Open banking adoption
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

OB implementation (0-7)
(6)

(7)

OB Strength Index (0-1)
(9)
(8)

9.755∗
(5.284)

  Trust in fintechs

  Branches per 100k people

  Private sector credit to GDP

  Financial sector Lerner index

−0.007 
(0.020)
−0.001 
(0.005)
0.246 
(1.301)

  Non-fintech VC deals

  Fintech VC deals

  Foreign-owned banks

  Rule of Law Index

  OB adoption year

0.311∗∗
(0.135)
0.098 
(0.271)

−0.150 
(0.463)
0.049 
(0.126)

8.803∗∗
(4.044)

15.130∗∗∗
(3.939)

14.006∗∗∗
(4.079)

5.403∗
(2.471)

4.836∗
(2.436) 

0.540 
(0.438)

0.488 
(0.659)

0.144 
(0.148) 

0.231 
0.256 
(0.164) 
−0.207
0.072 
0.056 
(0.071) 
(0.069)
−4.409  −3.234 
(6.116) 
(5.957)
0.121 
0.216∗∗
(0.145) 
(0.085)
Yes 
Yes 
19 
19

0.047∗∗
(0.023)

0.021 
(0.021)

0.442∗∗∗
(0.096)

0.202∗∗∗
(0.065)

0.139∗∗∗
(0.053)

  Log population

  Per capita GDP ($k)

0.330∗
(0.180)
−32.951∗
(16.022)
−0.159 
(0.308)
Yes 
27

0.067 
(0.042)
  Per capita GDP ($100k) squared −20.218∗∗∗ −6.516  −2.869  −4.696∗∗ −14.530∗∗∗ −43.110∗∗∗
(4.100)
0.011 
(0.042)
Yes 
86
0.882 

(4.725)
−0.232∗∗
(0.106)
Yes 
27
0.917 

(5.707)
−0.086 
(0.133)
Yes 
27
0.893 

(2.120)
−0.095∗
(0.057)
Yes 
163
0.924 

(2.235)
0.027 
(0.092)
Yes 
130
0.895 

(8.154)
0.044 
(0.176)
Yes 
27

  Region FE
  Observations
  Concordance index
  Adjusted 𝑅2
This table shows whether ex-ante country characteristics predict the implementation of open banking government policies. Columns 1–5 consider Cox 
proportional hazards models testing the adoption year of open banking based on the period up to October 2021. Columns 6–7 consider a cross-country OLS 
regression of the status of a country’s open banking (OB) regulation, expressed as a zero-to-seven score of each country’s open banking implementation 
progress as of October 2021, with 0 being no action, 1–2 being increasingly serious levels of discussion, and 3–7 being levels of implementation progress. 
Columns 8–9 consider our OB Strength Index, a zero-to-one measure of the strength of each countries’ open banking regime equal to the average of four 
indicators of policy strength (banks needing to share data, data-using firms needing to share data, regulators setting technical standards, and coverage 
of financial products beyond transaction accounts). The independent variables are country characteristics. Trust in fintechs is the portion of survey 
respondents who report being willing to share their financial data with fintechs, as reported by Chen et al. (2023). Bank branches per 100k people, 
Private sector credit to GDP, and Financial sector Lerner index are from the World Bank. The Lerner index measures markups over marginal costs, 
ranges between 0 and 1, and captures the market power of banks, with higher values denoting less competition. Non-fintech VC deals and Fintech VC 
deals are from PitchBook and are used after taking the log of one plus the number of VC deals. Foreign-owned banks is the share of banks that are 
foreign-owned and are from the (Claessens and Van Horen, 2013) foreign bank ownership data. The Rule of Law Index is from the Cato Institute and 
is on a zero-to-ten scale with higher numbers denoting more favorable conditions. OB adoption year is the calendar year of OB policy adoption. All 
specifications include GDP per capita in thousands of US dollars, the square of GDP per capita in hundreds of thousands of US dollars, and the log 
of population based on World Bank data, as well as region fixed effects for i) Africa, Middle East & North Africa; ii) Europe & Central Asia; iii) Latin 
America & the Caribbean; iv) North America; v) South Asia, East Asia & Pacific, following World Bank geographic terms. All independent variables are 
as of 2013, except for the trust in fintechs measure which is from early 2019. The regressions are cross-sectional, where each country in the sample 
corresponds to a single data point. European Union member states are weighted to count as a single country for estimates and standard errors. Robust 
standard errors are in parentheses. *** denotes 𝑝-value < 0.01, ** denotes <0.05, and * denotes <0.1.

0.800 

0.696

0.698

0.789

This data has three advantages. First, the survey asks consumers 
whether  they  use  financial  services  based  on  OB,  providing  novel 
evidence on uptake. Second, its demographic information allows us to 
examine what type of consumers adopt OB. Finally, the survey covers 
consumer financial outcomes so we can examine their association with 
OB use.

We begin with consumers’ uptake of OB. The survey asked 4,310 
consumers who report having a day-to-day bank account (necessary 
to use OB) about their use of OB products. The survey splits these 
products into two broad categories: Advice OB and credit OB. Advice 
OB is applications that provide information or services to users, such as 
financial advice apps: Apps that aggregate data from several financial 
accounts or help users with savings. Credit OB is applications that offer 
credit, either directly (e.g., lending) or indirectly (e.g., credit ratings or 
interest rate comparison).17

17 The question we use to proxy for financial advice OB is ‘‘RB102c’’ which 
asks about the use of financial aggregation apps that allow consumers to 
see the accounts they hold with different banks in one place (e.g., Money 
Dashboard, Yolt, MoneyHub) and savings-related apps that help build savings 

Among  consumers  who  report  knowing  whether  they  use  these 
types of services, Online Appendix Table A2 shows that 8.6% report 
the use of advice OB and 5.5% of credit OB. The high use of advice 
OB shows that OB data is valuable for more than just credit provision, 
consistent with our findings in subsequent sections of an OB-led in-
crease in VC fintech investment across a wide range of financial product 
categories. Surprisingly, we find little association between these two 
types of OB services. Only 13% of advice OB users also use credit OB, 
while 20% of credit OB users use advice OB. Overall, the total rate of 
(unique) OB users is 13%.

by monitoring consumer current accounts and automatically transferring funds 
(e.g., Chip, Cleo, Moneybox, Plum). The question we use to proxy for credit 
OB is ‘‘RB102d’’ which asks about the use of credit products, such as firms 
offering lending products, credit reference agencies (which use OB to provide 
alternative credit scores), or interest rate comparison websites (which use OB 
to prequalify borrowers or match them to lenders). The survey questions ask 
about specific OB products being used to address the fact that consumers might 
be unaware of exactly what OB is. In practice, this means OB use will be 
somewhat under-reported and these rates are a lower bound on the share of 
consumers using OB services.

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Table 3
Consumers’ open banking usage and their financial knowledge and credit access.

  Advice OB

  Credit OB

Financial knowledge
(1)

0.370***
(0.143)
0.019
(0.197)

Credit product ownership
Credit card
(2)

Personal loan
(3)

0.039
(0.034)
0.126***
(0.040)

0.020
(0.026)
0.108***
(0.035)

Student loan
(4)

Pawnbroking loan 
(5)

−0.030
(0.026)
0.002
(0.034)

0.006
(0.004)
0.001
(0.005)

Yes
Yes
3,098
0.158

Yes
Yes
3,104
0.025

Yes
Yes
3,104
0.325

Yes
Yes
3,104
0.089

Yes
Yes
3,104
0.167

  Respondent controls
  County FE
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
This table shows the association between financial knowledge, credit product usage, and open banking (OB) usage using 
person-level responses to the Financial Conduct Authority’s 2020 Financial Lives Survey in the UK. We use a cross-sectional 
OLS specification, where each respondent to the survey corresponds to a single data point. The dependent variable in column 
1 is the respondent’s answer to the question ‘‘How knowledgeable would you say you are about financial matters?’’ on a 
0 (not at all knowledgeable) to 10 (very knowledgeable) scale. The dependent variables in columns 2 to 5 are indicator 
variables equal to one if the respondent currently holds the credit product in question or held it in the last 12 months. 
Advice OB is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent uses OB for financial advice products, i.e., answers yes 
to using financial aggregation apps that allow consumers to see the accounts they hold with different banks in one place 
(e.g., Money Dashboard, Yolt, MoneyHub) or savings-related apps that help build savings by monitoring consumer current 
accounts and automatically transferring funds (e.g., Chip, Cleo, Moneybox, Plum). Credit OB is an indicator variable equal 
to one if the respondent uses OB for credit products, i.e., answers yes to using firms offering customized lending products, 
credit reference agencies (which can personalize credit reports), or price comparison websites (e.g., rates offered by different 
lenders). Respondent controls are indicator variables for being unwilling to share data (respondent gives a score of 3 or below 
on a 0-to-10 scale to the question ‘‘Thinking about Open Banking, how willing would you be to give your bank permission 
to securely access your banking information?’’), being employed (working full- or part-time), missing bill payments (reports 
missing bill payments in at least three of the last six months or finds keeping up with domestic bills and credit commitments 
to be a heavy burden), having high risk aversion (gives a score of 3 or below on a 0-to-10 scale to the question ‘‘Are you a 
person who is generally willing to take risks?’’), having at least some post-secondary education, being younger (aged 18–39 
years), being male, being of white ancestry, and being married or in a registered civil partnership. All specifications control 
for county (UK local authority) fixed effects and estimate robust standard errors (reported in parentheses). *** denotes 𝑝-value 
< 0.01, ** denotes <0.05, and * denotes <0.1.

Online  Appendix  Table  A3  shows  the  cross-sectional  association 
between  the  use  of  each  type  of  OB  and  consumer  characteristics. 
We regress whether a consumer use advice OB (column 1) and credit 
OB (column 2) on consumer characteristics and location fixed effects. 
People who have concerns about sharing their OB data are less likely 
to  use  both  types  of  OB  (variable  ‘‘Unwillingness  to  share  data’’). 
Employed people are more likely to share their data with both types 
of OB products, in line with standard models of voluntary disclosure 
(e.g., Grossman, 1981) as employment status is information absent from 
credit reports but shareable via OB. People who miss bill payments 
are also more likely to share, suggesting more demand for both advice 
and credit products for this financially vulnerable group. Young people 
are more likely to use advice products (but not credit), while college-
educated  (variable  ‘‘Higher  education’’)  tend  to  use  credit  (but  not 
advice). Other consumer characteristics, such as gender, being white, 
being  married,  or  risk  aversion  are  not  correlated  with  either  OB 
product uptake.

We  next  test  whether  OB  usage  is  associated  with  consumer  fi-
nancial outcomes. Table  3 relates OB usage to financial knowledge 
(column 1) and credit product usage (columns 2 to 5). We control 
for all the consumer characteristics from Online Appendix Table A3 
and location fixed effects. In column 1, we find that consumers who 
use advice OB report 0.16 of a standard deviation higher knowledge 
about  financial  matters,  potentially  suggesting  advice  OB  improves 
consumers’ financial education and awareness. Here, a key concern is 
that financially savvy people could be more eager to use advice OB. 
However, another study of UK consumers shows that those who use ad-
vice OB are less financially confident ex-ante and report better financial 
awareness and decision-making ex-post (see here). Interestingly, credit 
OB use is not associated with improved financial knowledge, potentially 
because these applications, by design, do not aim to improve consumer 
financial literacy.

In columns 2 to 5, we look at the link between credit OB use and 
credit access.18 We exploit the fact that OB data might be more used 
for some products than others. Credit cards and personal loans are 
unsecured credit products likely to benefit from data informative about 
creditworthiness. Credit OB users are more than 10% more likely to 
get both credit cards (column 2) and personal loans (column 3).19 We 
use student loans and pawnbroking as placebo products that are ex-
ante unlikely to benefit from OB. Due to UK regulations, student loan 
underwriting does not depend on consumer creditworthiness (see here), 
while pawnbroking is backed by physical collateral and low-tech. As 
expected, neither student loans (column 4) nor pawnbroking (column 
5) are associated with credit OB use.20 These results show that credit 
OB use is robustly associated with access to credit products that are 
ex-ante expected to benefit from OB underwriting.

Overall, the data on UK consumers shows that OB enables con-
sumers to access financial advice and credit products, and is associated 
with better consumer financial outcomes.

18 Unfortunately, we cannot observe interest rates on credit products because 
we do not have this data for the sample of OB respondents in the FLS data.
19 We do not provide analysis for the other major credit product — mort-
gages — because, due to the institutional and regulatory features of the UK 
mortgage market, it was not ex-ante clear whether this market would benefit 
from OB. However, in unreported results, we do find that there is an increased 
probability of getting a mortgage among credit OB users.
20 Our credit access results could be partially driven by consumers seeking 
credit from OB lenders signing up for OB too. Although this still shows an 
active role for OB, we can mitigate this concern by controlling for credit 
demand. Online Appendix Table A4 shows that our credit effects are robust to 
controlling for credit use as proxies for demand (columns 1 to 4; measured as 
the number of other credit products a consumer has) or tests with person-level 
fixed effects (column 5; the specification is run on product-by-person-level 
data).

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Fig. 3.  New SME lending relationships around CCDS eligibility threshold. This figure shows the association between new lending relationship formation and firm sales before 
and after the implementation of the Commercial Credit Data Sharing (CCDS) policy. The underlying data is company-year data on secured loans for UK firms from Companies 
House. Panel (a) presents observations from before the implementation of the CCDS (2014–2016) and Panel (b) presents observations after the policy (2017–2019). Each dot is 
the fraction of firms forming new lending relationships (y-axis) among firms in a given sales bucket (x-axis). We use 22 equally sized buckets from £10 million to £40 million of 
2016 firm sales. A firm establishes a new relationship when it gets a loan from a lender that it had not borrowed from in the preceding three years. The vertical line denotes the 
cutoff firm sales for data sharing under the policy (£25 million), with firms to the left of the line in Panel (b) being treated by the policy and firms to the right of the threshold 
serving as the control group. The solid curves plot best-fit quadratic polynomials for lending relationship propensity, separately estimated above and below the policy cutoff.

3.2. Evidence from UK microdata on SMEs

Data on the 2017 launch of the UK’s SME-focused OB policy — the 
‘‘Commercial Credit Data Sharing’’ (CCDS) — allows us to estimate how 
OB impacted SMEs’ ability to obtain new loans (from banks and non-
banks) and test OB’s financial inclusion implications. The CCDS is an 
SME-focused analog of the UK’s main OB policy (which covers all bank 
customers). The CCDS mandated banks to share information on their 
SME customers, with client approval. Specifically, it required that the 
nine largest UK banks share detailed information on the transaction ac-
counts, loan repayments, and corporate credit cards of their SME clients 
with other lenders. Since previous initiatives had made SME credit 
histories available through credit bureaus, the CCDS principally re-
vealed information about SMEs’ transaction accounts (i.e., cash flows). 
Thus, the information shared on SMEs is analogous to the information 
individual bank customers share under OB. We briefly describe our 
analysis of this policy’s effect on SME lending, with Online Appendix E 

providing more detail on the CCDS policy, variable definition, summary 
statistics, and robustness tests.

The CCDS initiative applied only to SMEs with annual sales below 
£25  million,  which  creates  quasi-random  variation  that  we  exploit 
for identification. We compare SMEs just below the cutoff (treated) 
to SMEs just above the cutoff (control) for the three years prior to 
(2014–2016) and following (2017–2019) the implementation of the 
policy.21 We then test how the CCDS policy affects SMEs’ ability to 
form relationships with new lenders. An increased ability to switch or 
add lending relationships is a direct benefit of greater data sharing and 
a key channel through which OB is theorized to increase competition 
and innovation. Following Ioannidou and Ongena (2010), we consider 

21 While the CCDS was due to go live in April 2016, technical issues meant 
that data sharing started only in the second half of 2017. Therefore, we include 
2016 in the period prior to the reform. We exclude 2020 from the sample 
because of the potential confounding effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.

11 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Fig. 4.  Event-study of SME data sharing and new lending relationships. This figure shows changes in new lending relationship formation for SMEs treated by the UK Commercial 
Credit Data Sharing (CCDS) policy using a panel event-study analysis. The underlying data is company-year data on secured loans for UK firms with 2016 sales between £10 million 
and £40 million from Companies House via Bureau van Dijk for the 2014–2019 period. Firms are classified as treated if their 2016 sales is below the CCDS’s £25 million eligibility 
threshold, with firms above the threshold serving as the control group. Panel (a) shows an event-study on the rate of new lending relationships with any lender for treated firms, 
while Panel (b) shows an event-study on the rate of new lending relationships with non-banks. The event-study specification is estimated using one period lagged firm-level control 
variables of the log of total assets, a low credit risk dummy, cash to total assets, and leverage ratio, as well as firm, sector-by-year, region-by-year, and relationship stage-by-year 
fixed effects. Low credit risk is defined as a QuiScore above 80, sectors are defined based on 1-digit 2003 UK SIC codes, regions are the 124 postcode areas, and relationship stage 
is the decile of the average relationship length the firm has with its lenders. The shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the 
firm level.

a firm as forming a new relationship if, in a given year, it borrows from 
at least one lender that is not part of the set of lenders from whom the 
firm had borrowed in the previous three years. 𝐴𝑛𝑦 𝑁𝑒𝑤 𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑡 is 
an indicator variable equal to one if firm 𝑖 forms a relationship with a 
new lender in year 𝑡.

Firms in the UK are required to report all claims (‘‘charges’’) lenders 
have against their assets, including lender (bank or non-bank) names, 
the date the claim commenced, and when the charge ceases, to Com-
panies House (the UK firm Registrar).22 The information on charges in 

22 These reports are similar to Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) data on 
SME lending in the US where lenders make filings on all secured loans to 
preserve priority in bankruptcy (Gopal and Schnabl, 2022). The charge can be 
against a specific asset or it can be a charge covering the entirety of the firm’s 
balance sheet or its outstanding invoices in the case of invoice financing. There 
are strong incentives to ensure this data is accurately reported. Lenders have 
21 days to formally register their claim (or face legal barriers to repossessing 
the assets). Borrowers have an incentive to declare when a charge is satisfied 
to unencumber their assets. We do not observe unsecured claims. However, 
the overwhelming majority of loans to UK SMEs are collateralized and hence 

Companies House is collected by Bureau Van Dijk (BvD) and provided 
in  their  FAME  database.  BvD  data  also  provides  annual  firm-level 
financial information matched to charge-holders information.23 Hence, 
we observe firms’ lending relationships as well as their balance sheet 
and income statement information over time.

Fig.  3 presents binned scatterplots of new borrowing relationship 
formation against firm sales before and after the reform. Panel (a) 
shows no evidence of a change in the propensity for SMEs to form new 
lending relationships around the £25 million in sales threshold before 
the policy, while Panel (b) shows a discontinuity at that threshold 
appearing after the policy. Firms below the threshold are more likely 

this data provides a highly representative and timely view of a firm’s lending 
relationships.
23 BvD data is well known for suffering from survivorship bias and various is-
sues with constructing consistent historical panels (Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2024). 
To alleviate this concern and maximize coverage of historical observations, 
we use annually sampled archived vintages of the FAME database, as in Bahaj 
et al. (2020), to compile our final panel dataset.

12 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Table 4
SME data sharing and new lending relationships.

Any new lender
(2)
(1)

(3)

(4)

New
bank

(5)

New
non-bank

(6)

New
bank

(7)

New
non-bank

(8)

  Treated SME × Post

  Treated SME

0.0136***
(0.005)
−0.0021
(0.004)

0.0156***
(0.005)

0.0153***
(0.005)

0.0003
(0.004)

0.0061
(0.004)

0.0093***
(0.003)

0.0008
(0.003)

0.0005
(0.003)

Any new
lender

(9)
0.0003  
(0.004)  

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

0.0067
(0.007)
0.0046
(0.010)

0.0228***
(0.009)
0.0064
(0.013)

0.0146***
(0.006)
0.0017
(0.009)

0.0129*  
(0.008)  
0.0279** 
(0.012)  
Yes

  Treated SME × Post
    × Prior CCDS relationship
  Treated SME × Post
    × Prior non-CCDS relationship
  Treated SME × Post
    × Single relationship 
  Treated SME × Post
    × Multiple relationships
  Firm controls
  Year FE
  Firm FE
  Relationship stage-by-year FE
  Sector-by-year FE
  Region-by-year FE
  Observations
  Adjusted 𝑅2
This table shows changes in new lending relationship formation for SMEs treated by the UK Commercial Credit Data Sharing (CCDS) policy. The table 
uses a difference-in-differences design on firm-year data on secured loans for UK firms with 2016 sales between £10 million and £40 million from 
Companies House via Bureau van Dijk for the 2014–2019 period. A firm is classified as a Treated SME if its 2016 sales is below the CCDS’s £25 million 
eligibility threshold for data sharing. Post is an indicator variable equal to one after the CCDS was implemented in 2017. Prior CCDS relationship 
equals one if the firm had an existing lending relationship in 2016 with one of the nine banks required to share SME data under the CCDS, while Prior 
non-CCDS relationship is an equivalent indicator variable for SMEs that did not have a prior relationship with the nine banks but had a relationship 
with another lender. Single relationship and Multiple relationships are indicator variables equal to one if in 2016 the firm had loans from one lender 
or loans from multiple lenders, respectively. The dependent variable in columns 1–4 and 9 is an indicator variable equal to one if the firm takes a loan 
in the year in question from a lender that it had not borrowed from in the preceding three years. The dependent variable in columns 5 and 7 is an 
indicator variable equal to one if the firm similarly takes a new loan and that loan is from a bank, while in columns 6 and 8 the indicator variable is 
equal to one if the loan is from a non-bank. Firm controls are the log of total assets, a low credit risk dummy, cash to total assets, and leverage ratio, 
all lagged one year. Low credit risk is defined as a QuiScore above 80, sectors are defined based on 1-digit 2003 UK SIC codes, regions are the 124 
postcode areas, and relationship stage is the decile of the average relationship length the firm has with its lenders. Standard errors are clustered at the 
firm level and are in parentheses. *** denotes 𝑝-value < 0.01, ** denotes <0.05, and * denotes <0.1.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,089  
0.071

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,089
0.021

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,089
0.020

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,089
0.076

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,089
0.063

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,089
0.076

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
39,089
0.064

39,089
0.000

39,089
0.058

Yes

Yes

to establish a new lending relationship than firms above the threshold 
after the policy but not before.24

We formally estimate the effect of the policy on new lending re-
lationships using a difference-in-differences (DiD) design with a linear 
probability model:

𝐴𝑛𝑦 𝑁𝑒𝑤 𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑀𝐸𝑖 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡

+ 𝜂𝑋𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛾𝑠,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑔,𝑡 + 𝜈𝑟,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡

(3)

We focus on firms with 2016 sales between £10 million and £40 
million to cleanly identify the effect of the new data-sharing policy. The 
treatment indicator variable 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑀𝐸𝑖 equals one for firms with 
sales below £25 million in 2016. 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is an indicator variable equal to 
one in the years after the policy went live (2017 and later). 𝛽 measures 
the focal policy effect. 𝑋𝑖,𝑡−1 is a lagged vector of firm controls: The 
log of total assets, cash to total assets, leverage ratio, and credit risk. 
We include a rich set of fixed effects, including firm (𝛼𝑖), sector-by-
year (𝛾𝑠,𝑡), region-by-year (𝜂𝑔,𝑡), and lending relationship-stage-by-year 
(𝜈𝑟,𝑡).25 Regions correspond to the 124 UK postcode areas and industry 
sectors are based on one-digit SIC codes. Standard errors are clustered 
at the firm level.

24 The overall downward trend in the new relationship formation rate over 
time arises mechanically because we fix our sample of firms at the beginning 
of the period in order to have a balanced panel. This means that the firms in 
Panel (b) are somewhat older and thus less likely to form new relationships.
25 Relationship  stages  are  calculated  as  the  deciles  of  the  relationship 
duration (in months) an SME has with its lenders up to year 𝑡.

Table  4 reports our results. The first four columns show consis-
tently positive effects of the data-sharing policy on SMEs’ propensity 
to borrow from new lenders. In column 1, where we control for year 
fixed effects only, the 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑀𝐸 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 interaction coefficient is 
positive and statistically significant, showing the policy increased the 
probability of SMEs forming new borrowing relationships. We find a 
1.36 percentage point increase for treated firms after the policy, a 26% 
increase from the sample mean relationship formation rate of 5.3%. 
Adding firm fixed effects (column 2) and our richer set of fixed effects 
and controls (column 3) slightly increases these estimates.

In column 4, we use an even tighter identification strategy that 
leverages the fact that the CCDS initially only required the nine largest 
UK banks to share data. We interact the 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑀𝐸 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡 term 
with both an indicator variable equal to one if SME 𝑖 had pre-CCDS 
borrowing relationships with one of the nine banks required to share 
data under the CCDS (𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝑆 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖) and an equivalent 
indicator variable for SMEs that did not have a prior relationship with 
the nine banks but had a relationship with another lender (𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝑛𝑜𝑛 −
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝑆 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖).  The  treatment  effect  is  entirely  concentrated 
among clients of the banks required to share SME data.

Our data allows us to observe whether new lending relationships 
are with banks (columns 5 and 7) or non-banks (6 and 8). The DiD 
coefficient  is  positive  but  not  statistically  significant  for  new  rela-
tionships  formed  with  banks  in  column  5,  and  is  both  larger  and 
statistically significant in column 6 for new relationships formed with 
non-banks (e.g., fintechs). The effect is concentrated among clients of 
the banks required to share their customer data (the triple interaction 
with 𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝑆 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖 in columns 7 and 8), and these clients 
are more likely to borrow from non-banks (column 8). Fig.  4 presents 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Babina et al.

event-study plots for lending relationship formation (Panel (a)) and 
lending relationship formation with non-bank lenders (Panel (b)) using 
our main specification in Eq.  (3). This figure illustrates that treated 
and non-treated firms were on approximately parallel trends prior to 
the policy, with a divergence starting in 2017 (the first year of data 
sharing). Post-policy in 2017, the coefficient turns positive and signif-
icant, especially for non-banks, and it remains positive for the whole 
duration after the policy. These results show that access to customer 
bank data leads to non-bank entry into the SME lending market, con-
sistent with the increased fintech entry after OB policy introduction in
Section 3.3.

In Online Appendix Table E4, we present an additional analysis of 
the policy’s effects on SME interest expenses and balance sheets. We 
find that treated firms with new non-bank relationships see declining 
interest expenses after the policy (suggesting lower interest rates on 
new loans), as well as more short-term liabilities and assets (suggesting 
more overall borrowing).

Finally, since financial inclusion is a key objective expressed by 
many policymakers, we examine the distributional effects of the data-
sharing  policy  by  comparing  firms  with  and  without  prior  lending 
relationships. It is not ex-ante obvious whether OB will be of greater 
benefit to those customers who already had credit or those who did 
not. Presumably, firms with no prior lending relationship have the most 
to gain from outside lenders obtaining non-standard data that could be 
useful in underwriting. Pushing against this is a countervailing selection 
mechanism. Customers whose transactions reveal them to be low risk 
are both more likely to get credit from their relationship lender prior 
to the policy (because it sees they are low risk) and more able to 
establish new lending relationships after the policy (because a non-
relationship lender can now see they are low risk). We examine the 
policy’s extensive margin effects in column 9 of Table  4 by testing how 
prior lending relationships mediate the rate of new lending relationship 
formation. We interact our DiD coefficient with indicator variables for 
whether a firm had a single or multiple prior lending relationships in 
2016. The rate of relationship formation rises more for firms that had 
multiple lending relationships prior to the reform. This gives support 
for the selection mechanism. As we show in Section 4, this is consistent 
with our model’s distributional predictions.

Overall, we find that the SMEs affected by the data-sharing policy 
are  more  likely  to  form  new  lending  relationships  with  non-banks 
(e.g., fintechs). In terms of distributional effects, treated firms with 
multiple prior lending relationships are more likely to get new loans. 
Finally, these new lending relationships are likely beneficial to firms as 
the SMEs that form new lending relationships with non-banks pay less 
interest.

3.3. Open banking government policies and financial innovation around the 
world

Our last set of empirical results focuses on the global consequences 
of OB policies around the world, broadening our UK-specific analysis. 
We test whether increased data access spurs financial innovation, which 
is the most common goal of OB policies. Regulators hope that giving 
bank customers the ability to share their financial data with fintechs 
will spark the creation of new firms that offer innovative financial 
products  and  increase  competition.  We  use  data  on  VC  investment 
into  startups  as  a  proxy  for  innovative  entry,  as  past  research  has 
shown that VC-backed startups are generally innovative, fast-growing 
entrants  (Puri  and  Zarutskie,  2012;  Gornall  and  Strebulaev,  2021). 
This proxy is a forward-looking measure of profit-motivated investors’ 
expectations. We use a standard panel event-study design:

𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑉 𝐶𝑖,𝑡 =

∑

𝑘≠0

𝛽𝑘 × 𝑂𝐵𝐿𝑎𝑔(𝑘)𝑖,𝑘,𝑡

+ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑖 + 𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑟 × 𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡,

(4)

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

where 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑉 𝐶𝑖,𝑡 is a measure of fintech VC activity in country 𝑖 and 
year 𝑡, measured as either the number of deals or the millions of US 
dollars invested using data from PitchBook.26 𝑂𝐵𝐿𝑎𝑔(𝑘)𝑖,𝑘,𝑡 is an event 
time indicator, equal to 1 if country 𝑖’s adoption of OB government 
policy occurred 𝑘 years from time 𝑡 and zero otherwise.27 We normalize 
the  year  of  the  OB  policy’s  passage  to  zero  so  that  the  coefficient 
𝛽𝑘  measures  changes  in  fintech  VC  activity  𝑘  years  before  or  after 
OB policy passage relative to the year of its passage. 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑖 and 
𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑟 × 𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 are country and region-by-year fixed effects. Standard 
errors are clustered at the country level.

VC data poses two challenges. First, VC activity is skewed, with the 
US having far more VC investments than any other country. We correct 
for this using a log(1 + 𝑥) transformation of our VC activity measures, 
which is common in the VC literature (e.g., Gompers and Lerner, 1998 
or Li and Zahra, 2012). With this transformation, our tests measure 
relative  increases  or  decreases  in  VC  activity.  Second,  the  lack  of 
central VC investment registries in most countries makes collecting VC 
data challenging. Online Appendix Table A5 summarizes our data and 
shows that PitchBook, despite being one of the best VC databases, has 
significant gaps in its international coverage. Due to a combination of 
data collection and low VC activity, only one-quarter of our post-2000 
country-years have any fintech VC deals and more than half have no 
VC deals at all. To reduce the biases created by using log-transformed 
variables in the presence of zeros and VC data coverage issues, we 
restrict our attention to countries with active PitchBook coverage. As 
our first government OB policy passage occurs in 2016 or later and 
PitchBook coverage improves over time, we restrict our analysis of 
VC activity to the 2011–2021 period. In addition, we consider only 
countries that PitchBook already covered before our regression sample 
period by focusing on countries with five or more fintech deals in the 
2000–2010 pre-period, which we refer to as high-coverage countries.28 
Our focus on high-coverage countries and our tests using VC dollars, 
which load on large and hard-to-miss deals, help attenuate concerns 
that PitchBook coverage improvements are correlated with the passage 
of OB government policies.29 Because we condition on pre-period deals, 
our results mostly speak to countries that already have developed VC 
markets.30 Because our filter drops a large number of country-years that
never had OB, identification in this specification comes chiefly (though 
not entirely) through the staggered adoption of OB within countries. 
Intuitively,  our  regression  is  comparing  VC  activity  in  countries  at 
time 𝑡 to other countries in the region that will adopt OB but have 
not  adopted  it  yet.  The  key  identifying  assumption  is  that,  absent 
the treatment, countries within a region would have been on parallel 
trends.

26 The staged nature of VC investments means that deal counts tend to 
measure earlier-stage investment and dollar amounts tend to measure later-
stage investment. Since our interest lies in financial innovation, we split the 
VC deals in each country-year into fintech deals and non-fintech deals, with 
fintech deals being the deals PitchBook places in the ‘‘Financial Software’’ sub-
industry or the ‘‘Fintech’’ vertical. Because of the cryptocurrency boom and 
bust cycles and the fact that digital assets are not related to OB, we reclassify 
digital assets startups as non-fintech for our main analysis, although this does 
not have any impact on our results.
27 For countries in the sample that never adopt OB, 𝑂𝐵𝐿𝑎𝑔(𝑘)𝑖,𝑘,𝑡 is zero 
everywhere; these countries help identify region-by-year fixed effects.
28 Specifically, we consider Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Ger-
many, Denmark, Finland, France, India, Ireland, Israel, Japan, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Russia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United 
States of America.
29 Although only 13% of countries are high-coverage, they include 91% of 
the VC deals and 94% of the investment value. Thus, our analysis of OB 
policies on fintech VC activity uses the sample of high-coverage countries in 
the 2011–2021 period. 99% of these high-coverage country-years have at least 
one fintech deal, dramatically reducing the econometric issues associated with 
log-transforming zeros.

14 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Fig. 5.  Event-study of fintech investment after open banking government policies. This figure shows changes in fintech venture capital (VC) activity around the passage of open 
banking government policies using a panel event-study analysis. We perform this analysis on our high-coverage Pitchbook panel of 2011–2021 data for the 21 countries with at 
least five fintech VC deals in the 2000–2010 period. Panel (a) shows an event study on the log of one plus the number of fintech VC deals, and Panel (b) shows an event study 
on the log of one plus the millions of US dollars invested in fintech VC deals. Year 0 is the passage year of each country’s major open banking initiative. The coefficient for year 
0 is set to zero and other coefficients are presented net of country fixed effects and region-by-year fixed effects. Regions are (i) Africa, Middle East & North Africa; (ii) Europe & 
Central Asia; (iii) Latin America & the Caribbean; (iv) North America; (v) South Asia, East Asia & Pacific, following World Bank geographic terms. European Union member states 
are weighted to count as a single country for estimates and standard errors. The shaded regions denote 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the 
country level.

Fig.  5 presents the results from the event-study specification in Eq. 
(4) and shows a relative absence of pre-trends in fintech VC activity 
in the number of deals in Panel (a) and the amount invested in Panel 
(b). In both panels, there is a clear inflection point around the year 
of the OB policy passage and a change of large economic magnitude: 
Deals increase by almost half a log point and dollars by about a full 
log point. The sharp increase in fintech VC investments following OB 
policy adoption is a natural consequence of the uncertainty reduction 
around the timing of OB policy passage and combined with VCs’ fast 
reactions to new investment opportunities.31

30 The results in Table  5 continue to hold with similar coefficients for the 
entire sample of countries; however, the large number of zeros makes it hard 
to interpret the results.
31 For example, OB has been in the works in the US since the 2010 Dodd-
Frank Act specified that consumers should own their financial transaction data, 
yet over a decade later, it has not been codified into regulation and hence 
does not bind on banks. VCs target at least 30% returns and so see timing 
as a crucial factor for their financial performance (Gompers et al., 2020). 
High required returns and a desire to move fast mean that the VC industry 

Table  5 uses a difference-in-differences design to quantify the rela-

tionship between OB policies and fintech VC activity:

𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑉 𝐶𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽 × 𝑂𝐵𝑖,𝑡 + 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑖

+ 𝛾 × 𝑁𝑜𝑛 − 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑉 𝐶𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑟 × 𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡,

(5)

where 𝑂𝐵𝑖,𝑡 is an indicator variable equal to one if OB was adopted 
in  country  𝑖  before  year  𝑡  and  other  variables  are  as  in  Eq.   (4). 
We  are  interested  in  the  coefficient  𝛽  which  measures  log  change 
in fintech VC activity following the introduction of government OB 
policies. Alternative specifications remove the control for non-fintech 
VC,  add  the  interaction  of  our  trust  in  fintechs  measure  with  OB 
passage (𝛾 × 𝑂𝐵𝑖,𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖), use year fixed effects instead of region-by-
year fixed effects (𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡), or include additional controls for potentially 
time-varying importance of trust in fintechs (𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖 × 𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡).

is characterized by dramatic year-over-year changes in investment in response 
to perceived investment opportunities (Gompers et al., 2008).

15 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Table 5
Fintech investment after open banking government policies.
Fintech VC deals
(1)

(2)

  After OB initiative

  After OB initiative × Trust in fintechs

0.214∗
(0.111)

0.101
(0.164)
0.594∗
(0.280)

  Non-fintech VC deals

  Non-fintech VC dollars

(3)

(4)

(5)

Fintech VC dollars
(6)

(7)

0.416∗∗
(0.159)

0.308∗∗
(0.125)

0.432∗
(0.205)

0.746∗∗
(0.267)

0.802∗
(0.390)
0.041
(0.784)

0.498∗∗∗
(0.139)

(8)

(9)

1.058∗∗
(0.415)

0.874∗∗
(0.368)

(10)
0.949∗  
(0.487) 

0.338∗∗∗
(0.105)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

176
0.918

231
0.919

231
0.937

231
0.930

Yes
Yes
176
0.925

  Country FE
  Year FE
  Region-by-year FE
Yes
  Fintech trust-by-year FE
Yes
  Observations
176
  Adjusted 𝑅2
0.888  
This table shows changes in fintech venture capital (VC) investment following the implementation of open banking (OB) government policies. The table 
uses a difference-in-differences design on our high-coverage Pitchbook panel of country-year data spanning 2011–2021 for the 21 countries with at 
least five fintech deals in the 2000–2010 period. The dependent variable in columns 1 to 5 is the log of one plus the number of fintech deals in a 
country-year, and in columns 6 to 10 it is the log of one plus the amount invested in millions of US dollars. The main independent variable is After OB 
initiative which is an indicator variable equal to one if the year in question is after the year major open banking policy was passed in the country in 
question. Columns 2 and 7 include After OB initiative × trust in fintechs which interacts that term with country-level trust in fintechs variable equal to 
the portion of survey respondents who report being willing to share their financial data with fintechs, as measured for the EY Global Fintech Adoption 
Index and reported by Chen et al. (2023). Columns 4 and 9 include a control for non-fintech VC activity using Pitchbook data, transformed the same way 
as fintech VC activity. All specifications control for country fixed effects; columns 1, 2, 6, and 7 contain controls for year fixed effects; and columns 3, 
4, 5, 8, 9 and 10 control for region-by-year fixed effects. Regions are i) Africa, Middle East & North Africa; ii) Europe & Central Asia; iii) Latin America 
& the Caribbean; iv) North America; v) South Asia, East Asia & Pacific, following World Bank geographic terms. Columns 5 and 10 additionally offer 
time-varying controls for the trust-in-fintech measure, with the coefficient on the control variable being estimated separately for each calendar year. 
European Union member states are weighted to count as a single country for estimates and standard errors. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) 
are clustered at the country level. *** denotes 𝑝-value < 0.01, ** denotes <0.05, and * denotes <0.1.

231
0.877

176
0.869

231
0.894

231
0.898

Table 6
Fintech investment after open banking government policies by fintech product area.
Financial IT
(3)

Alternative lending
(1)

Consumer finance
(2)

Payments
(4)

Regtech Wealth management
(5)

(6)

Digital assets
(7)

  After OB initiative

0.503∗∗
(0.187)

0.656∗∗
(0.296)
Yes 
Yes
Yes
231
0.872

0.409∗
(0.209)
Yes 
Yes
Yes
231
0.871

0.480∗∗∗
(0.140)
Yes 
Yes
Yes
231
0.835

0.608∗∗∗
(0.140)
  Non-fintech VC control
Yes 
  Country FE
Yes
  Region-by-year FE
Yes
  Observations
231
  Adjusted 𝑅2
0.882
This table shows changes in fintech venture capital (VC) investment by different product areas following the implementation of government open banking 
policies. The table uses a difference-in-differences design on our high-coverage Pitchbook panel of country-year data spanning 2011–2021 for the 21 
countries with at least five fintech deals in the 2000–2010 period. The dependent variable in each specification is the log of one plus the number of 
VC deals in a country-year and given subsector of fintech, where subsectors are defined based on Pitchbook keywords as described in Online Appendix 
D. The independent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if the year in question is after the year major open banking policy was passed in 
the country in question. We use Equation (5) which controls for the log of one plus the number of non-fintech VC deals, country fixed effects, and 
region-by-year fixed effects. Regions are (i) Africa, Middle East & North Africa; (ii) Europe & Central Asia; (iii) Latin America & the Caribbean; (iv) 
North America; (v) South Asia, East Asia & Pacific, following World Bank geographic terms. European Union member states are weighted to count as 
a single country for estimates and standard errors. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the country level. *** denotes 𝑝-value <
0.01, ** denotes <0.05, and * denotes <0.1.

−0.136
(0.259)
Yes 
Yes
Yes
231
0.835

0.432
(0.293)
Yes 
Yes
Yes
231
0.887

Yes
Yes
Yes
231
0.882

Across specifications, fintech companies receive significantly more 
VC investment following the adoption of OB policies. Using our pre-
ferred specification from Eq.  (5), we find a 0.31 increase in log fintech 
VC deals (column 4 of Table  5) and a 0.87 increase in log fintech VC 
dollars (column 9). These estimates are robust to different combinations 
of controls and fixed effects (columns 1, 3, 6, and 8). The median 
country-year in this data has 19 fintech VC deals worth $89 million 
and so our estimates of 𝛽 translate into an additional 7 deals and $125 
million annually for the median country. Although these investments 
are small in absolute terms, small investments in companies with the 
potential to become large is a defining property of the VC industry.32

32 For  example,  less  than  $3  billion  was  invested  by  US  VCs  up  to 
1981  (Gompers  et  al.,  2008),  yet  that  investment  included  a  $1  million 
investment in Microsoft and a $150 thousand investment in Apple (Gornall 
and Strebulaev, 2021).

In Section 2.4, we identified consumer trust in sharing their data 
with fintechs as a potential driver of OB government policies. We next 
examine if trust in fintechs mediates the effect of OB on VC investments 
in  fintech.  We  provide  suggestive  evidence  that  trust  amplifies  the 
effect of OB policies on fintech VC activity, with the coefficient on the 
interaction between OB passage and trust in fintechs being positive and 
significant at the 10% level for fintech VC deals (column 2) and positive 
and insignificant for dollars invested (column 7). These relationships 
are tentative given that our trust measure is only estimated for a small 
number of countries and our VC data is inherently noisy. A potential 
confounder in this setting is that countries that had high trust in fin-
techs experience both increases in fintech VC activity and the passage 
of OB policies. However, our country controls absorb a time-invariant 
relationship between trust and fintechs. Moreover, in columns 5 and 
10 we show that our results persist while controlling for trust-by-year 
fixed effects: This addresses a concern that trust was more important 
for fintechs in the later part of the sample and countries happened to 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

be passing OB laws around the same time. In Online Appendix D, we 
present additional robustness tests and show that OB policies that force 
banks to share their customers’ data drive these results.

We also test if OB spurs fintech entrants offering different financial 
products. This allows us to shed light on whether the new data made 
available  by  OB  is  used  for  many  financial  products  or  only  used 
for credit underwriting. Since Pitchbook lacks more granular product 
classifications, we overcome this by using PitchBook’s keywords feature 
to define seven subindustries of fintech: alternative lending, consumer 
finance, financial IT, payments, regtech (i.e., the use of technology to 
address regulatory processes), wealth management, and digital assets.33 
Details of our classification are in Online Appendix D. Using Eq. (5), 
Table  6 considers VC investments in companies targeting specific use 
cases as dependent variables. Alternative lending shows a 0.66 log point 
increase; consumer finance, financial IT, payments, and regtech show 
increases of between 0.48 and 0.61 log points; and wealth management 
shows a statistically insignificant 0.43 log point increase. The notable 
and reassuring exception to this trend is digital assets, where we see an 
insignificant negative effect. This is intuitive and serves as a placebo 
test: Digital assets, such as cryptocurrency, are largely unrelated to OB 
functionality. Overall, we find a broad-based increase in fintech activity 
following OB policy implementation, which suggests VCs anticipate OB 
data as offering value not just for credit issuance but for a variety of 
fintech use cases. This is consistent with our findings in Section 3.1 
that UK consumers use many OB-data-reliant products, such as financial 
advice and credit.

4. An economic framework for open banking

We build on the empirical facts documented in the previous section 
to develop a structural model of how wider access to bank customers’ 
data  affects  entry,  competition,  and  welfare.  Our  empirical  results 
illustrate the importance of both credit OB and advice OB. Our model 
allows us to examine the distinct economic mechanisms that underlie 
these different data uses. We calibrate our model by linking our novel 
results on OB firm entry and customer OB adoption with off-the-shelf 
estimates  of  financial  product  markets  from  the  relevant  literature. 
This allows us to assess the welfare and distributional consequences 
of OB and to extend the insights from our UK microdata to different 
environments, including countries with different privacy preferences 
for sharing data.

Our  model  is  tailored  to  speak  to  three  issues.  First,  we  model 
the two use cases of OB identified in our empirical work: Credit and 
advice. For credit, we use a standard setup where data provides a signal 
of borrower risk, whereas for advice we adapt and use models with 
product (e.g., Jones and Tonetti, 2020) or business practice (e.g., Far-
boodi et al., 2019) improvements to capture data improving financial 
products.  Second,  reflecting  the  goal  of  OB  in  promoting  financial 
innovation and competition, we explicitly model new firm entry on 
the extensive margin together with product and price improvements 
on the intensive margin. Third, our consumer OB use and fintech entry 
results confirm that privacy considerations are central to the uptake 
of  the  policy.  Our  model  builds  off  this  result  and  considers  data-
sharing  choices  as  a  trade-off  between  privacy  preferences  and  the 
better products or lower prices a customer could obtain from revealing 
her data.

33 It is worth mentioning that the size of each of these subindustries is small. 
Specifically, the median (mean) subindustry-year sees 4 (15) deals worth $9 
million ($300 million).

17 

4.1. Model

The model extends a standard discrete choice framework by explic-
itly considering consumer data usage. For expositional purposes, we 
use the term ‘‘consumer,’’ which we interpret generically as applying 
to either an individual or an SME. Consumer data allows competing 
firms to improve their products or pricing by learning about the char-
acteristics of heterogeneous consumers. For example, the pricing of a 
loan is improved using data from a transaction account that reveals a 
consumer’s credit risk, as shown by Ghosh et al. (2024) and our SME 
analysis in Section 3.2. Alternatively, a financial planning app uses 
balances and transactions from a consumer’s financial accounts to offer 
her customized financial and tax advice.

We model two data access regimes that determine which firms can 
use a consumer’s data. In the relationship banking regime, which is 
the pre-OB status quo, only a consumer’s incumbent relationship bank 
can use her data. In the OB regime, each consumer chooses whether to 
opt in to data sharing, and if she does, all firms providing the financial 
product can use her data regardless of whether they are her relationship 
bank. If she opts out of data sharing, all firms observe that she opted 
out, and only the relationship bank can use her data.

4.1.1. Consumer data and market structure

A  mass  𝑚  of  heterogeneous  consumers,  indexed  by  𝑖,  can  pur-
chase a financial product. Products are offered by 𝐼 incumbent firms 
(i.e., banks) and an endogenous number, 𝑁, of new entrants (i.e., fin-
techs). All firms offer a single product to each consumer, who chooses 
a single product among the available offerings.

Each consumer is endowed with a vector of characteristics, 𝜒𝑖, that 
is known to the consumer and revealed to firms that can access that 
consumer’s data. Which firms can access the consumer’s data depends 
on the policy regime. Under the relationship banking regime, only a 
single relationship bank can access the data and learn 𝜒𝑖, and all other 
firms only know the unconditional distribution 𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖). Under the OB 
regime, the relationship bank still knows 𝜒𝑖, but, additionally, the con-
sumer decides whether to share her data with all other firms. Let 𝑆𝑖 ∈
{0, 1} denote consumer 𝑖’s (endogenous) choice of whether to opt in to 
data sharing. If consumer 𝑖 opts to share data (𝑆𝑖 = 1), all firms observe 
𝜒𝑖. If the consumer does not (𝑆𝑖 = 0) the non-relationship firms observe 
only that the consumer opted out of data sharing and consequently infer 
the endogenous conditional type distribution 𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖|𝑆𝑖 = 0).

To account for both advice OB and credit OB use cases, we assume 
that 𝜒𝑖 provides information on both the consumer-specific marginal 
cost (𝑚𝑐𝑖)34 paid by the lender to provide the product and consumer-
specific customization needs (𝑓𝑖), which if precisely met, provide ad-
)
. Marginal cost 
ditional utility to the consumer. Thus, 𝜒𝑖
covers both usage cost (will they exploit credit card bonuses or incur 
late fees?) and risk (will they default?) and is most linked to credit 
OB. Customization needs cover product tailoring (how can we set up 
a financial plan for a particular customer?) and creation (how can we 
communicate their spending to them or help them save?) and is most 
linked to advice OB.

≡ (𝑓𝑖, 𝑚𝑐𝑖

4.1.2. Consumer demand

Consumer 𝑖 makes a discrete choice of firm 𝑗’s product from among 
≡ (𝑝𝑖𝑗 , 𝑔𝑖𝑗 ), 
the 𝐼 + 𝑁 competing firms. Product 𝑖𝑗 is characterized by 𝜈𝑖𝑗
where 𝑝𝑖𝑗 is price and 𝑔𝑖𝑗 are non-price characteristics, e.g., whether 
the offered advice is customized or whether the firm had a relationship 

34 We interpret variance in 𝑚𝑐𝑖 as the residual conditional on observables, 
e.g., residual variation after controlling for a consumer’s publicly available 
credit score. For example, in countries where credit scores are more informa-
tive, we would expect our modeled variance in 𝑚𝑐𝑖 to be smaller relative to 
a country that has no credit scores. We discuss this in more detail in Online 
Appendix F.

T. Babina et al.

with consumer 𝑖 in the prior period. Consumer 𝑖 receives the following 
indirect utility from product 𝑖𝑗: 

𝑢(𝜈𝑖𝑗 , 𝜒𝑖) ≡ −𝛼𝑝𝑖𝑗 + (𝜃 + 𝜆)𝑅𝑖𝑗 + 𝜆(1 − 𝑅𝑖𝑗 )𝑆𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖𝑗 .

(6)

Here, 𝛼 is the consumer’s price sensitivity and 𝑝𝑖𝑗 is the price. 𝑅𝑖𝑗 is 
an indicator for whether firm 𝑗 is the relationship bank for consumer 𝑖, 
and 𝜃 represents the consumer’s utility from obtaining the product from 
her relationship bank, e.g., due to a desire to obtain financial services 
from a convenient one-stop shop. 𝜆 is the extra utility the consumer 
gets from a financial institution that can provide customization, e.g., by 
being offered more relevant financial advice. 𝑆𝑖 is an indicator for 
whether the consumer shares her data with outsiders. When a consumer 
obtains a product from her relationship bank, she receives both the 
additional relationship utility 𝜃 as well as the customization utility 
𝜆.  When  a  consumer  obtains  a  product  from  an  outsider,  she  only 
obtains the customization utility and only if she shares her data. 𝑢 is 
implicitly a function of 𝜒𝑖 because 𝜒𝑖 contains the consumer’s desired 
customization.

Finally, 𝜖𝑖𝑗 is a horizontal taste shock whose i.i.d. realization is 
known  to  the  consumer  at  the  time  of  making  the  product  choice 
(and only after deciding whether to share her data) but unknown to 
the firms, creating differentiation and giving individual firms market 
power.  Importantly,  these  𝜖  shocks  prevent  the  unraveling  of  pure 
strategy equilibria by obscuring whether a consumer chooses an un-
informed offer because she is a high-cost type with high-price offers 
from insiders, or because she is a low-cost type with a high idiosyncratic 
preference for the outsider’s product (see, e.g., Crawford et al., 2018).
Among  the  offerings  and  an  outside  option,  𝑢0,  the  consumer 
chooses the product that offers the highest indirect utility. Let 𝑠𝑗 (𝝂𝑖, 𝜒𝑖)
denote the probability that a consumer with characteristics 𝜒𝑖 chooses 
firm  𝑗’s  product  given  all  product  offerings,  including  the  outside 
option,  𝝂𝑖.  This  quantity  is  obtained  by  integrating  the  consumer’s 
optimal choice over the consumer-firm taste shocks, 𝝐𝒊: 

𝑠𝑗 (𝝂𝑖, 𝜒𝑖) = ∫

I {𝑢(𝜈𝑖𝑗 , 𝜒𝑖) > 𝑢(𝜈𝑖𝑘, 𝜒𝑖), ∀𝑘 ≠ 𝑗} 𝑑𝐹 (𝝐𝒊).

(7)

4.1.3. Consumer opt-in to data sharing

Under the OB regime, each consumer chooses whether to opt in 
to data sharing.35 If she shares her data, all 𝐼 + 𝑁 firms observe her 
consumer-specific 𝜒𝑖. If she does not share her data, her relationship 
bank observes 𝜒𝑖, and the other firms observe only that she opted out 
of data sharing. Let 𝝂𝑆
 denote the set of offers she receives 
if she opts in to or out of data sharing, respectively. Let 𝐸𝑢(𝝂𝑖) denote 
the consumer’s expected utility of the discrete choice problem in Eq. 
(7) for a given set of offers, with 
} 𝑑𝐹 (𝝐𝒊).

{𝑢(𝜈𝑖𝑗 , 𝜒𝑖)

𝑖  and 𝝂∼𝑆

𝐸𝑢(𝝂𝑖) = ∫ max

(8)

𝑖

𝑗

The consumer makes her data-sharing decision by comparing her 
expected utility if she shares her data to her expected utility if she 
does not. We enrich this decision by incorporating a consumer-specific 
preference for privacy, reflecting both aggregate preferences for pri-
vacy and consumer-level heterogeneity.36 In the same discrete choice 
framework, we model the consumer’s indirect utility of sharing or not 
sharing her data as follows:
𝑖 , 𝜒𝑖) + 𝜖𝑆
𝑖

𝑖 = −𝜙 + 𝐸𝑢(𝝂𝑆
𝑢𝑆

(9)

35 For simplicity, we assume the consumer either shares her data with all the 
firms or no firms (besides the relationship bank, which already has it). This 
assumption is nearly without loss of generality because if a consumer is made 
better off by sharing her data with one extra firm, she is made even better off 
by sharing her data with all firms. The only exception to this would be if the 
consumer has increasing hedonic disutility from sharing data with more firms.
36 See, for example, Tang (2019), Bian et al. (2021), and Ben-Shahar and 
Schneider (2011).

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

𝑖 = 𝐸𝑢(𝝂∼𝑆
𝑢∼𝑆

𝑖

, 𝜒𝑖) + 𝜖∼𝑆

𝑖

.

(10)

𝑖

Here, 𝜙 represents a society-wide hedonic privacy preference and 𝜖𝑆
𝑖
and 𝜖∼𝑆
 represent consumer-specific i.i.d. privacy preference shocks.37 
Based  on  her  characteristics  and  privacy  preference,  the  consumer 
chooses  the  greater  of  these  utilities,  which  yields  an  endogenous 
probability of disclosure for each set of consumer characteristics 𝜒𝑖
given by 𝜓𝑖: 

𝜓𝑖 = ∫

I {𝑢𝑆

𝑖 > 𝑢∼𝑆

𝑖

} 𝑑𝐹 (𝜖𝑆

𝑖 , 𝜖∼𝑆
𝑖

).

(11)

Finally, the conditional distribution of types who opt out of data 

sharing is 

𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖|𝑆𝑖 = 0) =

(1 − 𝜓𝑖)𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖)
∫
𝑖(1 − 𝜓𝑖)𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖)

.

(12)

4.1.4. Firms

Entrant firms pay a fixed cost 𝑐 to enter. Conditional on entry, firms 
compete in a differentiated Bertrand structure. Firm 𝑗’s marginal cost 
for consumer 𝑖 is the sum of two parts. First, 𝑚𝑐𝑗 , a firm-specific cost 
common to all of 𝑗’s potential customers, which is known to firms and 
assumed in our calibration to differ only by incumbent versus new 
entrant. Second, 𝑚𝑐𝑖, a consumer-specific cost that is common to all 
firms selling to consumer 𝑖, known by the relationship bank and by 
new entrants only if data is shared by the consumer: 

𝑚𝑐𝑖𝑗

≡ 𝑚𝑐𝑗 + 𝑚𝑐𝑖.

(13)

Firms are informed about consumer 𝑖’s characteristics, 𝜒𝑖, if (1) 
they are consumer 𝑖’s relationship bank or (2) the economy is in the 
OB regime and consumer 𝑖 has opted into data sharing. Uninformed 
firms know only the distribution of consumer types not sharing data, 
which in the relationship banking regime is the unconditional con-
sumer  distribution,  𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖),  and  in  the  OB  regime  is  the  consumer 
distribution conditional on opting out of data sharing, 𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖|𝑆𝑖 = 0). 
Firms set prices and product characteristics to maximize profits, with 
informed firms setting consumer-specific prices and products (𝜈𝑖𝑗 ) and 
uninformed firms offering a single product and price to all consumers: 

𝛱𝑖𝑗 =

⎧
max𝜈𝑖𝑗
⎪
⎪
⎪
max𝜈𝑗
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
max𝜈𝑗
⎪
⎪
⎩

𝑠𝑗 (𝝂𝑖, 𝜒𝑖)(𝑝𝑖𝑗 − 𝑚𝑐𝑖𝑗 )
for firms with data 
∫ 𝑠𝑗 (𝝂𝑖, 𝜒𝑖)(𝑝𝑗 − 𝑚𝑐𝑖𝑗 )𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖)
 for firms without data under relationship banking
∫ 𝑠𝑗 (𝝂𝑖, 𝜒𝑖)(𝑝𝑗 − 𝑚𝑐𝑖𝑗 )𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖|𝑆𝑖 = 0)
 for firms without data under OB.

(14)

Each  firm’s  profit  is  equal  to  its  profit  across  all  its  customers, 
including both profit from offering targeted products and pricing to cus-
tomers whose data they know (due to OB data sharing or relationships, 
if any) and profit from offering an uncustomized product at a single 
price to the customers whose data they do not know: 

𝛱𝑗 = ∫

𝑖

𝛱𝑖𝑗 𝑑𝑖 − 𝑐.

(15)

The entry cost of 𝑐 implies that in equilibrium, 𝛱𝑗 = 𝑐 for the marginal 
entrant.

37 The variance of these shocks being greater than zero precludes a cutoff 
strategy of opt in versus opt out.

18 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Fig. 6.  Aggregate and distributional outcomes of open banking. Panel (a) presents model-implied aggregate changes after open banking (OB), with each bar showing the percentage 
change in the relevant outcome caused by moving from the status-quo relationship banking regime to the OB regime. Magenta and cyan bars show outcomes for the financial 
advice and non-GSE residential mortgage calibrations, respectively. # entrants is the number of new entrants. Quantities (all) is the population fraction obtaining the financial 
service, which we further split into Quantities (relationship), i.e., relationship bank, and Quantities (outsiders), i.e., fintechs. Price (average) is the average fee or rate charged. 
Relationship profit is relationship banks’ profits. Panels (b)–(e) show the distributional outcomes of OB in the credit case. 𝑥-axes show borrowers with different marginal costs. 
Red lines and dotted green lines indicate outcomes for the relationship banking and calibrated OB regime, respectively. Dashed blue lines indicate outcomes in a counterfactual 
simulation where borrowers’ privacy preference is 25% lower. Panel (b) shows the fraction of the population opting into data sharing. Panel (c) shows the average interest rate. 
Panel (d) shows the fraction of the population obtaining credit. Panel (e) shows the outsiders’ market share. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, 
the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

4.1.5. Equilibrium

Events proceed as follows in the relationship banking regime. First, 
firms choose whether to enter. Second, firms simultaneously set prices 
and products for both the consumers whose data they have and the 
consumers  whose  data  they  do  not  have.  Third,  consumers  choose 
products and consume them. The OB regime has a similar structure but 
has an added first stage where consumers choose whether to share their 
data.

We focus on symmetric equilibria within firm types where all in-
formed firms charge the same consumer-specific price and all unin-
formed  firms  charge  the  same  price  to  observably  equivalent  con-
sumers. For a given regime, an equilibrium consists of a set of prices 
and  product  customization  choices,  𝝂𝑖,  a  number  of  new  entrants, 
consumer product choices, and consumer data-sharing choices. The en-
dogenous choices satisfy the optimal firm entry and profit maximization 
conditions, optimal consumer product and data sharing choice, and 
firms’ consistent beliefs over consumer choices by type.

4.1.6. Model calibration

We breathe life into the model using simple calibrations based on 
two products: US non-Government-Sponsored Enterprise (GSE) residen-
tial mortgages and financial planning advice. We use these products as 
representative examples of the credit OB and advice OB use cases de-
scribed previously. Both calibrations are intended to be quantitatively 
realistic illustrations of the economic forces affecting two real-world 
applications of OB.

The  non-GSE  residential  mortgage  calibration  is  an  example  of 
where consumer data is useful for underwriting, as the relevant dimen-
sion of heterogeneity is in default risk.38 This market is well studied 

38 We focus in particular on the non-GSE sector because GSEs’ guarantees 
mostly render default risk irrelevant.

and there exists estimates for several key parameters in the literature 
for calibration. The financial advice calibration is an example of the 
data allowing for a product more tailored to the consumer’s needs: 
The relevant dimension of heterogeneity is what the optimal savings, 
investment, and tax strategy would be given the consumer’s particular 
financial situation.

We detail our calibration exercise in Online Appendix F. Broadly, 
our key objects for calibration are the variance of unobserved marginal 
costs (for mortgages), the value of customized advice (for financial 
advice), and consumer preferences for privacy (for both cases). We 
calibrate these parameters through the simulated method of moments, 
utilizing empirical moments from our earlier reduced-form analysis, 
including the difference-in-differences estimates of fintech entry (de-
scribed in Section 3.3) and consumer adoption of OB from the UK 
consumer  survey  (described  in  Section  3.1).  Other  parameter  esti-
mates, such as consumer price sensitivity and lender marginal costs, are 
taken from the relevant mortgage (Buchak et al., 2024a) and financial 
advice (Di Maggio et al., 2022a) literature.

4.2. Consequences of open banking

Using  our  calibrated  model,  we  first  look  at  the  aggregate  and 
distributional effects of OB (Section 4.2.1) before moving on to the 
role  of  society-wide  privacy  preferences  (Section  4.2.2).  Additional 
discussion showing the interaction between credit registries and OB is 
presented in Online Appendix F.3.

4.2.1. Aggregate and distributional consequences of open banking

Fig.  6 Panel (a) compares equilibrium outcomes under OB to those 
under  relationship  banking  for  our  financial  advice  (magenta)  and 
credit  (cyan)  calibrations.  Across  both  calibrations,  entry  rises  and 
the quantities of financial services provided increase, although these 

19 

T. Babina et al.

increases are more dramatic in the advice case. We decompose these ag-
gregate quantity changes into quantity changes from relationship banks 
(columns  ‘‘Quantities  (relationship)’’)  and  other  providers  (columns 
‘‘Quantities  (outsiders)’’).  Outsider  (e.g.,  fintech)  quantities  increase 
and relationship bank quantities decrease for both products. The sub-
stantial increases in quantities offered by outsiders for both financial 
products are consistent with our findings on large increases in fin-
tech  entry  in  Section  3.3.  Average  prices  in  both  cases  are  largely 
unchanged, although the modest aggregate price changes in the credit 
case mask dramatic heterogeneity along the distribution of borrower 
types. Incumbent profits fall and consumer surplus increases in both 
cases, although the surplus increase is larger for the advice case despite 
lower entry.

Panels (b) through (e) provide greater insight into the distributional 
effects of credit OB across the distribution of borrower marginal cost 
(MC), which reflects default probability. Here, we focus on the compar-
ison between the no-OB status quo in red and the calibrated OB regime 
in green.39 Panel (b) shows the fraction of borrowers opting into data 
sharing. In the no-OB status quo, no consumers share data. Once in the 
OB regime, the green line shows that the propensity to share data is 
decreasing in the borrower’s unobserved marginal MC: Roughly 60% 
of borrowers with the lowest MC share their data, while essentially no 
borrowers with medium or higher MC share data.40

Turning to price and quantity outcomes, Panel (c) shows that in the 
no-OB status quo (red line) average interest rates are only weakly in-
creasing in MC. The relationship is weak because average interest rates 
are a combination of informed insider rates, which only partially track 
borrower MC due to information rents, and the uninformed pooled 
interest rate, which is invariant. In the OB regime (green line), low-
MC borrowers opt in to data sharing and reveal their type to outside 
lenders. These borrowers are offered lower rates from both outsiders 
and the insider, who now faces greater competition. These lower rates 
lead to more borrowing (Panel (d)), and to outsiders gaining market 
share among the lowest-MC borrowers (Panel (e)). In contrast, high-MC 
borrowers, who choose not to opt in to data sharing, partially reveal 
to  outside  lenders  their  type,  although  hedonic  privacy  preferences 
partially obscure this inference. Therefore, uninformed outsiders charge 
slightly higher rates as compared to the status quo.

The results in Panels (c) through (d) are consistent with our findings 
in the SME analysis in Section 3.2: Under OB firms with prior lending 
relationships are more likely to get new loans and those firms that 
form new lending relationships with non-banks pay less interest. Im-
portantly, however, because information revelation reduces the adverse 
selection faced by outsiders, entry rises and in our calibration, entry’s 
positive effect through product variety more than offsets the negative 
effect of higher prices, even among the highest-MC borrowers. Thus, 
the quantity of credit provided increases for all borrowers under the 
OB regime.

Finally, consider the financial advice calibration. Here, consumer 
‘‘type’’ represents the idiosyncratic needs for financial advice. All types 
are  made  better  off  under  OB.  This  arises  because  customers  that 
share data benefit through outsiders’ ability to offer fully customized 
advice. Furthermore, there is an increase in competition which benefits 

39 We return to a counterfactual with a smaller consumer preference for 
privacy below (in blue).
40 Note that this proportion is smoothly decreasing in MC due to borrowers’ 
idiosyncratic preferences for privacy. This smoothness prevents a full (Gross-
man, 1981) unraveling, and is in contrast to many theoretical signaling models 
where stark cutoff strategies are common. Importantly, opting out of data 
sharing does not fully reveal the borrower’s type. However, based on the 
results in Panel (b), it is clear that opting out of data sharing in the OB regime
is  at  least  partially  revealing,  and  indeed,  the  distribution  conditional  on 
opting out, 𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖|𝑆𝑖 = 0) has a higher expected MC than the unconditional 
distribution 𝑑𝐹 (𝜒𝑖).

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

everyone including customers that do not share their data due to pri-
vacy concerns. Since, in contrast to credit OB, no negative information 
is revealed by sharing data, consumers are more likely to opt in to 
OB in the advice case than the credit case. Intuitively, all customers 
benefit from providing more data to their financial advisor, while only 
customers with low MC directly benefit from providing more data to 
their  loan  underwriter.  This  helps  to  explain  the  greater  uptake  of 
advice OB than credit OB observed in the UK survey data in Section 3.1.

4.2.2. Consumer attitudes towards privacy

We conclude our analysis of the model by examining how consumer 
attitudes  towards  privacy  impact  the  equilibrium  outcomes  of  OB. 
Fig.  7 shows the impact of varying consumers’ mean preference for 
privacy. The x-axis shows the value of privacy as a multiple of the 
calibrated  value  for  the  UK  such  that  consumers’  aversion  to  data 
sharing is increasing in the x-value. The lines with circle markers show 
the fraction of consumers opting into data sharing. The 𝑥 marks show 
the fraction of consumers (regardless of whether they opt in to OB) who 
are made worse off by OB in a utility sense. The red lines and marks 
show outcomes for the financial advice calibration, and the blue lines 
and marks show outcomes for the credit calibration.

Unsurprisingly, the fraction of consumers opting into data sharing 
is decreasing in their preference for privacy. However, our finding in 
Section 3.1 that more consumers opt in to OB for financial advice 
than for credit is sustained across counterfactual privacy preferences. 
Next, while in the credit case, high MC borrowers, who do not share 
their data, do not benefit directly from OB, they do experience two 
indirect  effects:  They  benefit  from  increased  lender  entry  and  are 
harmed by their opt-out decision partially revealing their high MC. For 
societies with weak privacy preferences, the act of not sharing data 
reveals strong negative information about their type, and so the harm 
outweighs the benefits of increased entry. In contrast, in societies with 
privacy preferences similar to the UK, the negative inference from not 
sharing data is relatively weak, and so the competition and product 
variety benefits of increased entry outweigh the signaling costs. Our 
plot showing the fraction of customers made worse off by OB makes 
this clear. For advice, for the reasons described, all types of consumers 
are better off at all levels of societal privacy preference. For credit, 
we see a distinct threshold at about 85% of our calibrated UK privacy 
preference, below which the signaling cost for high-MC types outweighs 
the benefit of new entry and a positive number of borrowers are made 
worse off (marked with 𝑥 in blue).

We confirm this intuition by revisiting Fig.  6 Panels (b) through (e). 
Here, the dashed blue lines reflect a counterfactual where the privacy 
preference is decreased by 25%—corresponding to 0.75 on the x-axis 
of Fig.  7. These panels show that as more borrowers opt in to OB 
(Panel (b)), rates decrease more for low-MC borrowers and increase 
more for high-MC borrowers (Panel (c)). This leads to greater quantities 
of credit for low-MC borrowers, but less credit for high-MC borrowers, 
both overall and from outsiders, relative to the no-OB status quo (Panels 
(d) and (e)).

4.2.3. Summary

The  bottom  line  from  our  model  is  that  a  serious  quantitative 
evaluation of OB, and not merely a theoretical one, is necessary for 
policymakers  when  thinking  about  the  aggregate  and  distributional 
consequences of OB.

The complex interplay between use cases, consumer heterogeneity, 
and societal preferences for privacy leads us to a range of important 
predictions for the impact of OB on the market for financial products. 
The advice OB case has little ambiguity. All customers benefit from 
the option to share their data either directly through better products 
when sharing data or indirectly through increased competition when 
they are privacy conscious. In contrast, the results in the credit OB are 
far more nuanced. Customers with favorable data and low privacy pref-
erences share data and benefit from improved loan terms. Firm entry 

20 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Fig. 7.  Effect of Societal Privacy Preferences on Open Banking Equilibria This figure shows how the impact of open banking (OB) varies as societal privacy preferences vary 
under the model of Section 4. Specifically, it shows outcomes (y-axis) for the advice (red) and credit (blue) OB as population preferences for privacy vary (x-axis). The solid lines 
with circle indicators show the fraction of the population opting into open banking. The 𝑥 markers show the fraction of the population made worse under open banking. Privacy 
preferences are presented as a multiple of the baseline calibration, with a lower value corresponding to individuals being more willing to share data. (For interpretation of the 
references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

increases as potential entrants face less adverse selection. Customers 
with unfavorable data or strong privacy preferences do not share, which 
partially signals to outsiders that they are costly to serve, leading to 
higher interest rates. These negative effects for non-sharing customers 
are potentially offset by increased entry and competition. Thus, while 
on the surface there appears to be an inherent conflict between OB’s 
stated goals of increased competition and innovation with financial 
inclusion, it is not ex-ante obvious which force dominates for high-cost 
or privacy-conscious customers.

We  find  that  the  societal  desire  for  privacy  plays  an  important 
role in pinning down distributional consequences of credit OB. More 
privacy-conscious consumers shield high-MC borrowers from scrutiny: 
Lenders cannot infer from opting out of OB that the borrower is not 
sharing because she has a high-MC type. As the preference for privacy 
decreases, opting out is a more precise signal that the consumer is 
a costly borrower to serve and lenders charge higher rates. This has 
the effect of potentially leaving privacy-conscious consumers and those 
with a high marginal cost worse off.

5. Conclusion

Our paper examines the dramatic rise of OB, which is now present 
in some form in roughly 80 countries. Using a hand-collected dataset 
of OB government policies around the world, we document significant 
heterogeneity in these policies’ timing, purpose, and implementation. 
Granular microdata on UK consumers shows that they use OB for credit 
but also for financial advice, with that usage associated with higher 
credit use and greater financial knowledge, respectively. Data on UK 
SMEs affected by OB shows they form more new lending relationships, 
especially with non-banks. These new relationship formation is highest 
for SMEs with prior lending relationships. Large increases in VC fintech 
investments across different financial products (e.g., financial advice 
applications, credit, payments, regtech) follow OB policy implemen-
tations, suggesting consumer financial transactions data are valuable 
across many financial applications.

We interpret these results through a general framework of data use 
and sharing, focusing on the contrasting implications of using data 
for underwriting (in credit OB) and using data to improve products 
(in  advice  OB).  OB increases  entry  in  both  use  cases  through  very 
different channels: For credit, data allows entrants to underwrite more 
effectively and reduce adverse selection; while for product improve-
ments, data allows entrants to improve their product quality. Although 
our results suggest OB is achieving its innovation-promotion goals, our 
framework highlights how OB-enabled credit underwriting can harm 
consumers whose data would indicate their riskiness. Being able to opt 

out to share data offers only partial protection to these consumers, as 
the act of opting out itself sends a signal from which lenders draw a 
negative inference. Moreover, these high risk consumers are likely to be 
on the margins of the financial system, and thus precisely those whose 
financial inclusion policymakers are interested in facilitating. These 
results are at odds with the financial inclusion goals of OB policies but 
consistent with our finding that the SMEs who already had credit access 
benefit the most from OB.

Importantly, these potential negative distributional effects are not 
present when OB data is used for product improvements rather than 
for credit screening, and preliminary evidence suggests that product 
improvements are an equally — if not more — quantitatively relevant 
OB application. Additionally, social privacy preferences can ameliorate 
some of the worst distributional effects and prevent a stigma from non-
sharing. In our quantitative calibration on UK data, the benefits of entry 
and innovation more than offset the losses from information revelation 
for even the riskiest borrowers, with many borrowers seeing major 
benefits. This result is specific to our calibration and our estimates 
of UK privacy preferences, highlighting the importance of quantitative 
models like ours for evaluating the impacts of OB.

As  policymakers  set  the  path  of  future  banking  regulation,  our 
paper helps put these tradeoffs in perspective. Data lies at the heart of 
relationship banking, and large financial institutions benefit from their 
special ability to aggregate huge amounts of customer data. Because 
of that, removing banks’ monopoly on customer data has the potential 
to transform the very nature of relationship banking. If opening data 
reduces banks’ economies of scope, the entire banking ecosystem could 
reorganize around more specialized and interconnected firms. The large 
reaction of fintech investment to OB policy implementations shows the 
potential for disruption and just how valuable innovators perceive this 
data to be, while our results on non-bank SME borrowing document 
real disruption to an important market.

More generally, the role that data ownership and access plays in 
endogenously creating and maintaining market power is a first-order 
question in an increasingly data-driven economy, and sectors that are 
dominated by a small number of data-intensive firms. Opening data 
to potential competitors and innovators in order to spur innovation, 
increase competition, and ultimately raise welfare is a natural policy 
response, and our paper is the first to provide a global comparative 
analysis of such policy initiatives. Our work aims to set the stage for 
future research on OB and the use of data in finance and beyond by 
highlighting why it matters and the key tradeoffs it raises. However, 
this potentially profound disruption and restructuring of the financial 
system is still in its infancy. Important empirical and theoretical ques-
tions remain about how these policies will impact the behavior and 
outcomes of consumers, businesses, and financial firms.

21 

T. Babina et al.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Tania  Babina:    Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original 
draft, Project administration, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization. Saleem Bahaj: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, 
Data  curation.  Greg  Buchak:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing 
–  original  draft,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization. 
Filippo De Marco: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Data 
curation. Angus Foulis: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, 
Data curation. Will Gornall: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Project administration, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Francesco Mazzola: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Data 
curation. Tong Yu: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Data 
curation.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Will Gornall reports financial support was provided by Government of 
Canada Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council Insight Grant 
435-2023-0747 ‘‘The financial returns to innovation’’. Filippo De Marco 
thanks BAFFI for their support

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103950.

Data availability

Replication Information for Customer Data Access and Fintech Entry: E
arly Evidence from Open Banking (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Acquisti, A., Taylor, C., Wagman, L., 2016. The economics of privacy. J. Econ. Literature 

54 (2), 442–492.

Acs, Z., Åstebro, T., Audretsch, D., Robinson, D.T., 2016. Public policy to promote 

entrepreneurship: A call to arms. Small Bus. Econ. 47 (1), 35–51.

Aguirregabiria, V., Clark, R., Wang, H., 2019. The geographic flow of bank funding 
and access to credit: Branch networks, local synergies, and competition. CEPR 
Discussion Paper No. 13741, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, United 
Kingdom.

Allen, F., Gu, X., Jagtiani, J., 2021. A survey of fintech research and policy discussion. 

Rev. Corp. Finance 1 (3–4), 259–339.

Babina, T., Barkai, S., Jeffers, J., Karger, E., Volkova, E., 2023a. Antitrust enforcement 

increases economic activity.

Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A.X., Hodson, J., 2023b. Artificial intelligence and firms’ 

systematic risk. Available at SSRN 4868770.

Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A., Hodson, J., 2024. Artificial intelligence, firm growth, and 

product innovation. J. Financ. Econ. 151, 103745.

Babina,  T.,  He,  A.X.,  Howell,  S.T.,  Perlman,  E.R.,  Staudt,  J.,  2023c.  Cutting  the 
innovation  engine:  How  federal  funding  shocks  affect  university  patenting, 
entrepreneurship, and publications. Q. J. Econ. 138 (2), 895–954.

Babina, T., Howell, S.T., 2024. Entrepreneurial spillovers from corporate R&D. J. Labor 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Benetton, M., Buchak, G., Robles-Garcia, C., 2022. Wide or narrow? Competition and 
scope in financial intermediation. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 17497, Centre for 
Economic Policy Research, London, United Kingdom.

Berg, T., Burg, V., Gombović, A., Puri, M., 2020. On the rise of fintechs: Credit scoring 

using digital footprints. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (7), 2845–2897.

Berg, T., Fuster, A., Puri, M., 2022. Fintech lending. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ. 14 (1), 

187–207.

Bian, B., Ma, X., Tang, H., 2021. The supply and demand for data privacy: Evidence 

from mobile apps. Available at SSRN 3987541.

Blickle, K., Parlatore, C., Saunders, A., 2023. Specialization in banking.
Boot, A., Hoffmann, P., Laeven, L., Ratnovski, L., 2021. Fintech: What’s old, what’s 

new?. J. Financial Stabil. 53, 100836.

Boot, A.W.A., Thakor, A.V., 1997. Financial system architecture. Rev. Financ. Stud. 10 

(3), 693–733.

Buchak, G., Hu, J., Wei, S.J., 2021. FinTech as a financial liberator. NBER Working 
Paper No. 29448, National bureau of economic research Cambridge, Mass., USA.
Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and 

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2024a. Beyond the balance sheet model 
of banking: Implications for bank regulation and monetary policy. J. Polit. Econ. 
132 (2).

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2024b. The secular decline of bank 

Chen, S., Doerr, S., Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Shin, H.S., 2023. The fintech gender gap. 

balance sheet lending.

J. Financial Intermed. 54, 101026.

Chen, L., Huang, Y., Ouyang, S., Xiong, W., 2024. Data privacy and digital demand.
Claessens, S., Laeven, L., 2004. What drives bank competition? Some international 

evidence. J. Money Credit Bank. 36 (3), 563–583.

Claessens,  S.,  Rojas-Suarez,  L.,  2016.  Financial  regulations  for  improving  financial 

inclusion. Task Force Report, Center for Global Development.

Claessens, S., Van Horen, N., 2013. Impact of foreign banks. J. Financial Perspect. 1 

Cornelli, G., Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Rau, R., Wardrop, R., Ziegler, T., 2020. Fintech 
and  big  tech  credit:  A  new  database.  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  887,  Bank  for 
International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland.

Crawford, G.S., Pavanini, N., Schivardi, F., 2018. Asymmetric information and imperfect 

competition in lending markets. Amer. Econ. Rev. 108 (7), 1659–1701.

De  Roure,  C.,  Pelizzon,  L.,  Thakor,  A.V.,  2022.  P2P  lenders  versus  banks:  Cream 

skimming or bottom fishing? Rev. Corp. Finance Stud. 11 (2), 213–262.

Denes, M., Howell, S.T., Mezzanotti, F., Wang, X., Xu, T., 2023. Investor tax credits 
and entrepreneurship: evidence from us states. J. Finance 78 (5), 2621–2671.
Di Maggio, M., Egan, M., Franzoni, F., 2022a. The value of intermediation in the stock 

market. J. Financ. Econ. 145 (2), 208–233.

Di Maggio, M., Ratnadiwakara, D., Carmichael, D., 2022b. Invisible primes: Fintech 
lending with alternative data. NBER Working Paper No. 29840, National bureau 
of economic research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Di Maggio, M., Yao, V., 2021. FinTech borrowers: Lax screening or cream-skimming?. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (10), 4565–4618.

Diamond, D.W., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Rev. Econ. 

Diamond, D.W., Dybvig, P.H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. J. 

(1), 29–42.

Djankov, S., McLiesh, C., Shleifer, A., 2007. Private credit in 129 countries. J. Financ. 

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility: 

Evidence from the US banking sector. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 169–216.

Egan, M., Lewellen, S., Sunderam, A., 2022. The cross section of bank value. Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 35 (5), 2101–2143.

Erel, I., Liebersohn, J., 2022. Can FinTech reduce disparities in access to finance? 
Evidence from the Paycheck Protection Program. J. Financ. Econ. 146 (1), 90–118.
Farboodi, M., Mihet, R., Philippon, T., Veldkamp, L., 2019. Big data and firm dynamics. 

AEA Papers and Proceedings 109, 38–42.

Fuster,  A.,  Plosser,  M.,  Schnabl,  P.,  Vickery,  J.,  2019.  The  role  of  technology  in 

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1854–1899.

Ghosh, P., Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2024. FinTech lending and cashless payments. J. Finance 

Forthcoming.

Goldstein, I., Huang, C., Yang, L., 2022. Open banking under maturity transformation. 

Gompers, P.A., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S.N., Strebulaev, I.A., 2020. How do venture 

capitalists make decisions?. J. Financ. Econ. 135 (1), 169–190.

Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J., Scharfstein, D., 2008. Venture capital investment 

cycles: The impact of public markets. J. Financ. Econ. 87 (1), 1–23.

Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 1998. What drives venture capital fundraising?. Brook. Pap. 

Econ. Activity. Microecon. 1998, 149–204.

Stud. 51 (3), 393–414.

Polit. Econ. 91 (3), 401–419.

Econ. 84 (2), 299–329.

Bahaj, S., Foulis, A., Pinter, G., 2020. Home values and firm behavior. Amer. Econ. 

Working Paper.

Econ. 42 (2).

Rev. 110 (7), 2225–2270.

Bai, J., Bernstein, S., Dev, A., Lerner, J., 2022. The dance between government and 
private investors: Public entrepreneurial finance around the globe. NBER Working 
Paper No. 28744, National bureau of economic research Cambridge, Mass., USA.
Barth, J.R., Caprio Jr., G., Levine, R., 2004. Bank regulation and supervision: What 

works best?. J. Financial Intermed. 13 (2), 205–248.

Bartlett, R., Morse, A., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2022. Consumer-lending discrimination 

Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2022. The rise of finance companies and fintech lenders in 

in the FinTech era. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 30–56.

small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4859–4901.

Beck,  T.,  De  Jonghe,  O.,  Schepens,  G.,  2013.  Bank  competition  and  stability: 

Gornall, W., Strebulaev, I.A., 2021. The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence 

Cross-country heterogeneity. J. Financial Intermed. 22 (2), 218–244.

from public companies. Available at SSRN 2681841.

Ben-Shahar,  O.,  Schneider,  C.E.,  2011.  The  failure  of  mandated  discourse.  Univ. 

Granja, J., Leuz, C., Rajan, R.G., 2022. Going the extra mile: Distant lending and credit 

Pennsylvania Law Rev. 159, 647–749.

cycles. J. Finance 77 (2), 1259–1324.

22 

T. Babina et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 103950 

Grossman, S.J., 1981. The informational role of warranties and private disclosure about 

Nam, R.J., 2022. Open banking and customer data sharing: Implications for FinTech 

product quality. J. Law Econ. 24 (3), 461–483.

He, Z., Huang, J., Parlartore, C., 2024. Information span in credit market competition.
He, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2023. Open banking: Credit market competition when 

borrowers own the data. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 449–474.

Hertzberg, A., Liberti, J.M., Paravisini, D., 2011. Public information and coordination: 

Evidence from a credit registry expansion. J. Finance 66 (2), 379–412.

Ioannidou, V., Ongena, S., 2010. ‘‘Time for a change’’: Loan conditions and bank 

behavior when firms switch banks. J. Finance 65 (5), 1847–1877.

Jiang, E., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2020. Banking without deposits: Evidence 
from shadow bank call reports. NBER Working Paper No. 26903, National bureau 
of economic research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Jones, C.I., Tonetti, C., 2020. Nonrivalry and the economics of data. Amer. Econ. Rev. 

110 (9), 2819–2858.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B., Villegas-Sanchez, C., Volosovych, V., Yesiltas, S., 2024. 
How to construct nationally representative firm level data from the ORBIS global 
database: New facts on SMEs and aggregate implications for industry concentration. 
Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 16 (2), 353–374.

Kaplan, S.N., Lerner, J., 2010. It ain’t broke: The past, present, and future of venture 

capital. J. Appl. Corp. Finance 22 (2), 36–47.

borrowers. SAFE Working Paper No. 364.

Ongena, S., Popov, A., Udell, G.F., 2013. ‘‘When the cat’s away the mice will play’’: 
Does regulation at home affect bank risk-taking abroad?. J. Financ. Econ. 108 (3), 
727–750.

Parlour, C.A., Rajan, U., Zhu, H., 2022. When fintech competes for payment flows. Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4985–5024.

Petersen, M.A., Rajan, R.G., 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: Evidence from 

small business data. J. Finance 49 (1), 3–37.

Petersen, M.A., Rajan, R.G., 1995. The effect of credit market competition on lending 

relationships. Q. J. Econ. 110 (2), 407–443.

Philippon, T., 2019. On fintech and financial inclusion. NBER Working Paper No. 

26330, National bureau of economic research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Phillips,  G.M.,  Zhdanov,  A.,  2017.  Venture  capital  investments  and  merger  and 
acquisition activity around the world. NBER Working Paper No. 24082, National 
bureau of economic research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Puri, M., Robinson, D.T., 2007. Optimism and economic choice. J. Financ. Econ. 86 

Puri,  M.,  Zarutskie,  R.,  2012.  On  the  life  cycle  dynamics  of  venture-capital-  and 

non-venture-capital-financed firms. J. Finance 67 (6), 2247–2293.

Klapper,  L.,  Laeven,  L.,  Rajan,  R.,  2006.  Entry  regulation  as  a  barrier  to 

Ramakrishnan,  R.T.S.,  Thakor,  A.V.,  1984.  Information  reliability  and  a  theory  of 

entrepreneurship. J. Financ. Econ. 82 (3), 591–629.

Kroszner, R.S., Strahan, P.E., 1999. What drives deregulation? Economics and politics 
of the relaxation of bank branching restrictions. Q. J. Econ. 114 (4), 1437–1467.
Laeven, L., Levine, R., 2009. Bank governance, regulation and risk taking. J. Financ. 

Econ. 93 (2), 259–275.

financial intermediation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 51 (3), 415–432.

Stulz, R.M., 2019. Fintech, bigtech, and the future of banks. J. Appl. Corp. Finance 31 

Tang, H., 2019. The value of privacy: Evidence from online borrowers. Working Paper.
Thakor, A.V., 2020. Fintech and banking: What do we know?. J. Financial Intermed. 

(1), 71–99.

(4), 86–97.

Vives, X., 2019. Digital disruption in banking. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ. 11 (1), 243–272.

Li, Y., Zahra, S.A., 2012. Formal institutions, culture, and venture capital activity: A 

41, 100833.

cross-country analysis. J. Bus. Venturing 27 (1), 95–111.

Mullainathan,  S.,  Schnabl,  P.,  2010.  Does  less  market  entry  regulation  generate 
more entrepreneurs? Evidence from a regulatory reform in Peru. In: International 
Differences in Entrepreneurship. The University of Chicago Press, pp. 159–177.

23 

