Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Data sales and data dilution(cid:73)
Ernest Liu a,d, Song Ma b,d,∗, Laura Veldkamp c,d
a Princeton University, USA
b Yale University, USA
c Columbia University, USA
d NBER, USA

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We explore indicators of market power in a data market. Markups cannot measure competition, because most 
data products’ marginal cost is zero, making the markup infinite. Yet, data monopolists may not exert monopoly 
power because they cannot commit to restricting data sales to future customers. This limited commitment 
and strategic substitutability of data undermine sellers’ monopoly power. But data subscriptions restore this 
monopoly power. Evidence from online data markets supports the model’s insight that subscriptions indicate 
market power. Model and evidence reveal that data subscriptions are better for consumers because they sustain 
the incentive to invest in high-quality data.

Dataset link: Replication Package for Liu, Ma, V
eldkamp, Journal of Financial Economics, ‘‘Dat
a Sales and Data Dilution’’ (Original data)

JEL classification:
C6
D4
D5
L1

Keywords:
Market power
Data markets
Data economy
Technological change
Market structure

One of the largest concerns that economists and policymakers have 
about the new digital economy is the market power of firms that sell 
data. The fact that data has a large fixed cost component and is free 
to replicate suggests the emergence of natural monopolies. However, 
little is known about how this market functions and prices data. We 
use theory to understand what indicators of market power to look for 
and collect new empirical evidence on data marketplaces to measure 
that market power and its welfare consequences.

It is not obvious how to identify market power in a market where 
every seller has a monopoly over their data set and where the marginal 
cost of producing additional data copies is zero. Therefore our empirical 
exploration of data markets needs to be guided by theory. We build a 
dynamic model of a monopolist data seller with two key features: Infor-
mation that others know generates less value and sellers cannot commit 
not to sell more data in the future. These are realistic features of a 
data market. The first, commonly called the ‘‘strategic substitutability’’ 
of information (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980), arises in many settings 

where users of data choose quantities and market clearing determines 
the price.

The second assumption, a classic commitment friction, is particu-
larly relevant in data markets where one could easily transform data to 
make it non-identical, but functionally equivalent.

Our model teaches us that, even a data monopolist may have limited 
power to extract rent from their customers when the data seller cannot 
commit to a price schedule. The reason is that a data seller competes 
with its future self. If a data seller cannot commit not to sell the data 
to the buyer’s competitors, the buyer’s willingness to pay for the data 
declines. This force keeps data prices low. In this type of environment, 
we should worry less about the excessive profits of data monopolies and 
worry more about whether data is under-provided. Since we observe 
that  many  data  producers  sell  data  subscriptions,  rather  than  data 
ownership, we add that feature to our model. We find that subscriptions 
for data allow a seller to re-capture much of its lost revenue from the 
lack of commitment.

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank her and an anonymous referee for feedback that significantly improved our paper. We thank Christopher 
Tonetti, Itay Goldstein, and Liyan Yang for discussing our paper, and Anton Korinek and participants at the FRA Conference, Econometric Society Meeting, and 
GSU-RFS FinTech Conference for helpful comments. We thank the Brookings Institution, USA for financial support of this project. Yajie Luo and Xinhui Yu 
provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own.

∗ Correspondence to: 165 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

E-mail addresses:  ernestliu@princeton.edu (E. Liu), song.ma@yale.edu (S. Ma), lv2405@columbia.edu (L. Veldkamp).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104053
Received 15 January 2024; Received in revised form 19 March 2025; Accepted 22 March 2025
Available online 7 April 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. 

 
 
 
E. Liu et al.

But  if  data  subscriptions  allow  sellers  to  capture  more  surplus 
from consumers, why would anyone sell data outright? We use the 
model to identify three features of a data seller that make subscrip-
tions less attractive: financial frictions, a small market, and high data 
depreciation.

Our theory thus provides us a way to understand the prevalence and 
force of monopoly power — it directs us to examine data sales models. 
Specifically, we should look for the prevalence of data sales versus data 
subscriptions and patterns in how these trade types are used. Therefore, 
how data is sold becomes the centerpiece of our empirical analysis.

To measure activity in data markets, we hand-collect a novel data 
set from Datarade, one of the largest online data marketplaces that 
connects buyers and sellers of data. The evidence about the geographic, 
industry, and data type coverage of this market place paints a nuanced 
picture of the way in which data is traded. Across over 3,000 data 
products,  we  find  that  64%  offer  an  option  to  buy  the  data  for  a 
one-time fee. However, over 80% offer a subscription-based payment 
system. These fractions do not sum to one because many sellers offer 
multiple purchasing options. This finding suggests that at least half of 
all data providers have significant abilities to extract rents.

To test the predictions of our model, we need to merge the data 
marketplace evidence with company-level characteristics of the data 
sellers and the characteristics of their data products. Some of these data 
sellers are publicly listed companies, but many are private. We use a 
variety of data sources—Crunchbase, Pitchbook, Compustat, and CRSP 
to  collect  information  on  these  companies  background  information 
and financing history. We use Edgar 10-K filings, combined with data 
product descriptions on Datarade, to fill in the characteristics of the 
markets in which they sell their data.

The model predicts that data sellers should choose one-time fees if 
they are financially constrained. If they do not urgently need cash, the 
subscription model of selling data is typically more profitable because 
it resolves the commitment problem. However, one-time fees bring in 
more revenue early in the life of the data-selling firm. Our empirical 
analysis  confirms  this  prediction.  We  find  a  significant  correlation 
between the way in which a data seller sells its data and its age, the 
number of rounds of VC funding it has received, and the total amount 
of that funding. The older, better-funded data sellers are more likely to 
extract surplus, through the use of data subscriptions.

The model also predicts that when the market of data buyers is 
small, there is less scope to erode the value of data with future sales. 
Therefore, data that pertains to a more specialized group of potential 
buyers could be sold for a one-time fee, with little loss.

The data marketplace evidence also confirms this prediction. We 
determine the size of the market for data sales by comparing the textual 
similarity of data descriptions with the universe of 10-K reports and 
then determining the industries with the greatest similarities. Then, we 
compute the number of relevant industries to determine the size of the 
market for the data. We find that this market size positively predicts 
data subscriptions and is negatively correlated with data sales.

We acknowledge that it is also possible that some settings lend 
themselves  to  complementarity  in  the  use  of  data.  In  settings  like 
speculative attacks or price-setting, the value of data might rise as 
others acquire it. In such settings, the data sellers’ lack of commitment 
will be less costly, because data gains in value when more copies are 
sold. In contrast, dynamic complementarity, where an investor wants 
to learn data now that others will acquire later, still decreases the value 
of data over time.

Finally, one might object that data is not a durable good because 
it  becomes  less  relevant  over  time.  We  explored  the  role  of  data 
depreciation in Section 1.7.

These results inform ongoing debates about data policy. The Euro-
pean Commission’s ‘‘Free Flow of Non-Personal Data’’ initiative (Reg-
ulation 𝐸𝑈 2018∕1807) argues that the development of efficient data 
markets that promote data mobility is essential to the development of 
the EU digital economy. It specifically cites ‘‘distortions of competition’’ 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

as a problem to be addressed. Our paper explores competitive pricing in 
data markets. Traditional competition theory is designed for production 
of physical products, with non-zero costs of replication, that are un-
likely to have the strategic substitutability inherent in most information 
products.

Our results teach us that even a monopolist data seller has little 
effective market power in the market for data because it cannot commit 
not to compete against itself. This implies that data competition policy 
should err on the side of less activism. Our results further call into 
question even the idea that market power should be eliminated. If we 
do not provide some monopoly rents, the incentive to provide a high-
quality product disappears. It may well make sense to regulate other 
harms. However, monopoly rents alone do not imply an undesirable 
outcome for consumers.

Related literature.  Our work builds on the insights of the literature on 
the dynamic Coase (1972) conjecture. When selling a durable good, a 
monopolist who lacks commitment not to lower future prices is forced 
to compete with its future self. As consumers become very patient, 
such a seller is unable to obtain any rents, despite its monopoly power 
(Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991, Chapter 10).

What we add to this well-known problem is three-fold. First, we 
connect data to semi-durable goods. Second, we introduce strategic 
substitutability between users of data: Data that others have is less 
valuable. Not only is a seller competing with its own lower prices, as 
in a standard durable goods problem, it also suffers from its inability 
to commit not to sell to others. Third, we quantify the strength of this 
force in data marketplaces.

While the logic of debt dilution and information leakage (Brun-
nermeier and Oehmke, 2013; Green and Liu, 2021; DeMarzo and He, 
2021) have similarities, our mechanism has important differences as 
well.  First,  information  is  non-rival  and  can  be  replicated  at  near 
zero  marginal  cost.  Second,  information  depreciates  as  the  state  of 
the world changes and old information becomes less relevant. Finally, 
information can be sold or licensed as a subscription, in a way that debt 
cannot.1

The literature on information sales considers when a seller should 
personalize data (Admati and Pfleiderer, 1986), sell a data service (Ad-
mati and Pfleiderer, 1990), share data (Bergemann and Morris, 2013), 
or offer a menu of data products (Bergemann et al., 2018; Yang, 2022). 
However, these are static models that miss the dynamic tension at the 
heart of this paper.

The data economy literature is similar in topic, but more different 
in its tools. Acemoglu et al. (2021) and Bergemann and Bonatti (2024) 
explore whether static data markets are efficient. Ichihashi (2020) show 
how goods sellers can use consumer data to price discriminate. Jones 
and Tonetti (2020), Cong et al. (2021) and Farboodi and Veldkamp 
(2022) build models of the data economy, but without market power 
in data markets. Existing work on the digital economy does explore 
whether data can be a source of market power (Kirpalani and Philip-
pon, 2020). Lambrecht and Tucker (2015) take a strategy perspective 
on whether data has the necessary features to confer market power. 
However, none of these consider the dynamic commitment problem of 
a data seller with market power, that we explore and quantify.

1. A model of a market for data purchases

Our  model  has  two  parts.  The  first  part,  describing  households 
who  purchase  goods  from  producers  that  can  utilize  data,  is  there 
because we need households with utility functions in order to make 
welfare  statements.  This  part  of  the  model  is  constructed  to  make 
producers’ willingness to pay for data decreasing in the number of 
other producers that buy the data. For all the non-welfare results, it 

1 Externalities also arise in multilateral contracting with a principal’s lack 

of commitment power in Arnott and Stiglitz (1991, 1993) and Segal (1999).

2 

E. Liu et al.

would be sufficient to simply assume this relationship directly. The 
idea that data is a strategic substitute is an old one. It goes back to 
the work of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). Of course, that paper was 
written about information used to choose portfolios of risky assets. 
But  the  idea  of  strategic  substitutability  in  information  acquisition 
or data purchases holds much more broadly. Hellwig et al. (2012) 
show that information is a strategic substitute in most settings where 
actions are strategic substitutes. Markets where quantities are chosen 
and prices clear markets are such a setting. If other agents demand 
more of a good or sell more of a product, that moves prices adversely 
and makes other less willing to take the same action. While we take 
strategic substitutability as a payoff primitive in this model, we sketch 
an oligopolistic goods market in the appendix to show why this form 
arises.

The second part of the model describes the problem of the data 
seller who lacks the power to commit not to engage in future data 
sales. This is where the model’s novel ideas lie. One reason a data seller 
might not be able to commit to restrict its sale of data is that proving 
the equivalence of two data sets is not easy. The seller could give the 
data set a different name, create linear combinations of the variables, 
or even add a small amount of noise to data. Although the information 
content of the new data set would be nearly equivalent to the original, it 
might be difficult to enforce a contract prohibiting the sale of identical 
data.

One might object that most data providers are not true monopolists. 
In many cases, buyers could obtain substitutable data from another 
source. However, since we are exploring whether market power might 
not be as effective as one might think, we start from a setting with 
an extreme degree of market power and see how much commitment 
problems remedy that power.

1.1. Model assumptions

Households and data buyers.  Time is discrete 𝑡 = −1, 0, 1, 2, … , ∞. There 
are three types of players: a representative consumer, goods-producing 
firms, and a monopoly data supplier. The representative consumer has 
preferences over a measure-one continuum of goods, indexed by 𝑖

𝑈 =

∞
∑

𝑡=0

𝛽𝑡𝑢𝑡,

𝑢𝑡 = ∫
0

1

𝜎
𝜎 − 1

𝑞

𝜎−1
𝜎

𝑖𝑡 − 𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑞𝑖𝑡 d𝑖,

(1)

where 𝜎 > 1 governs the elasticity of substitution across goods.

There is a measure-2 continuum of goods-producing firms—twice as 
many producers as goods. Goods producers choose prices to maximize 
expected profit. At each date 𝑡, two producers are randomly selected 
to produce each good. This randomness simplifies our exposition by 
ensuring that goods producers face uncertainty in whom to compete 
with in the future. Once matched, they produce perfectly substitutable 
goods and compete as in standard Bertrand price competition.

Goods-producing firms use data to reduce their marginal cost of 
production. Let 𝑛 be the measure of goods producers that have data. 
A producer without data has a marginal cost of 𝑐 = 1. A producer with 
data can use the data to optimize its operations and has a marginal cost 
is 𝑐 = 1∕𝑧, where 𝑧 > 1 is the quality of the data.

The consumer and goods producers are active from time 𝑡 ≥ 0
onwards. Time 𝑡 = −1 is the ex-ante stage, where the data supplier 
makes investments into data, a process which we describe now.

Data supplier.  The data supplier is a monopolist who maximizes the 
expected present discounted value of profits. At the ex-ante stage 𝑡 =
−1, the data supplier chooses data quality and the duration of data 
access. From time 𝑡 ≥ 0 onwards, the data supplier chooses the number 
of copies of the data to sell.

When the data supplier also chooses the duration of data access, 
they could simply sell the data, so that the buyers have permanent 
access to it. Alternatively, the supplier could incur a fixed cost 𝜂 at the 
ex-ante stage 𝑡 = −1 to setup the infrastructure for data subscription, so 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

that buyers must pay every period. This technology limits the duration 
of data access.

The data supplier chooses the data quality 𝑧 with a one-time, convex 

(( 𝜎−1

)𝜎−1
𝑧

)2

fixed cost 𝐹 (𝑧). We assume that 𝐹 (𝑧) =
∕2. The 
functional form is chosen to simplify expressions. Once produced, the 
data can be sold to multiple buyers with zero marginal cost.

− 1

𝜎

Data sales take place over time. At each date 𝑡, the data supplier 
chooses how many additional copies to sell in that period. Then time 
moves on to 𝑡 + 1 and the game repeats.

Future  payoffs  are  discounted.  We  denote  the  discount  rate  for 
𝑡 ≥ 0 of data buyers as 𝛽 and that of the data supplier as 𝛾. We allow 
these discount rates to potentially differ. For expositional simplicity, we 
assume the data supplier does not discount between the ex-ante stage 
(𝑡 = −1) and 𝑡 = 0.

1.2. Discussion of model assumptions

No data resale.  An important feature of the model is that data pur-
chasers cannot resell data. In reality, most data is sold with a contract 
that forbids data buyers from selling the purchased data to others. But 
this stands in contrast to the assumption that data suppliers cannot use 
contracts to commit themselves.

One-sided commitment.  While these assumptions comport with real fea-
tures of data contracts, they do raise the question of why commitment 
is one-sided. One reason could be that there is one data supplier and 
many buyers. If a buyer violates the contract, the supplier has a strong 
incentive to sue. However, if the supplier were to commit to sell few 
copies and violated that contract, each buyer might find it optimal to 
wait for other buyers to sue. In other words, contract enforcement is 
costly. Enforcing contractual restrictions on data sales could be subject 
to a collective action problem.

Observable data quality and market size.  We assume that data quality 𝑧
and data buyer number 𝑛 are observable to other buyers. In the model, 
both can be inferred as equilibrium choices. In practice, data quality 
is often conveyed by data vendors by providing a free sample of the 
data. Some platforms report the number of downloads. Both variables 
are part of the reputation of the data vendor. For example, people 
know that Bloomberg is used by many others, while satellite imagery 
is available to a smaller group, who pay its higher cost.

Up-front payments or financing of data purchases.  Data sellers could offer 
an option for the data buyers to finance their purchase, by making 
payments over time. Financing could be an attractive option if the data 
supplier is more patient than the buyer (𝛾 > 𝛽). The data supplier 
can extract more surplus by postponing payments, but making those 
payments larger, and profiting from the difference in discount rates.

While most of our data market analysis assumes that financing is 
not a possibility, this is without loss of generality. With the exception 
of one case where the data seller has commitment, allowing a more 
general contract that allows for upfront cost and a gradual payment is 
formally equivalent to our model with up front payments, plus a loan 
from the data seller to the data buyer. These problems are separable: 
The optimal size of the loan is independent of the data sales choice and 
vice-versa.2

The case with data sales under commitment is different because a 
patient data seller can choose an increasing number of copies of data 
to sell, as a way of shifting data buyer profits forward in time and 
data seller profits back in time. This makes a particular sales path an 
imperfect substitute for a loan. Therefore, in this case only, we explore 
the interaction of data sale and financing.

2 If one party is more patient, the optimal loan may become infinite in size. 
That is a problem for any solution, but not one that has anything to do with 
the data market question at hand.

3 

E. Liu et al.

1.3. Equilibrium

Equilibrium Definition: At the start of the game, the data supplier 
chooses the duration of data access and the data quality 𝑧 to maximize 
the expected present value of their profits, discounted at rate 𝛾. Then, 
in each period 𝑡,

1. the data supplier makes take-it-or-leave-it offers to sell data to a 

chosen number of goods producers;

2. goods producers decide whether to buy the data or not, taking 
as given the others’ past, current and expected future choices;
3. good  producers  are  randomly  matched  and  choose  prices  to 

maximize their one-period profit;

4. households choose their basket of goods to maximize (1), taking 

all prices as given;
5. time moves on to 𝑡 + 1.

𝑖

𝑞

𝜎−1
𝜎

Differentiating household utility (1) with respect to the quantity of each 
good and setting that to zero yields a first-order condition, which can 
be re-arranged in the form of a demand curve, 𝑞𝑖 = 𝑝−𝜎
. The consumer 
𝑖
surplus associated with each variety 𝑖 is  𝜎
− 𝑝𝑖𝑞𝑖.
𝜎−1

Data buyers can generate profits from the data. The profit in each 
period depends on the quality of the data 𝑧 and on how many producers 
𝑛 have access to the same data in that period. For each product variety, 
there are three possible market configurations in each period: (1) both 
producers have data; (2) one producer has data and the other does 
not, and (3) neither producer has data. Let 𝑛 denote the measure of 
producers that have data in that period. Recall that the total measure 
of goods producers is 2. Thus, the probability of any producer having 
data is 𝑛∕2 and the probability that two randomly selected producers 
have data is 𝑛2∕4 (case 1). Similarly, the probability of any producer 
not having data is (2−𝑛)∕2. The probability that two randomly matched 
producers both lack data is (2 − 𝑛)2∕4 (case 3). The fraction of varieties 
for which one producer has data and the other does not is 𝑛(2 − 𝑛)∕2
(case 2).

In  cases  (1)  and  (3),  the  two  firms  producing  the  variety  have 
symmetric marginal costs. Symmetric producers that engage in price 
competition make zero profits.

In case (2), one producer has a lower marginal cost than its com-
petitor.  In  this  case,  the  producer  with  data  maximizes  its  profit, 
𝑞𝑖(𝑝𝑖 − 𝑐), by charging price 𝑝𝑑 = min{ 𝜎
∕𝑧, 1}. That is, there are two 
𝜎−1
possible pricing regimes. In one, the firm charges the unconstrained 
monopolistic price  𝜎
∕𝑧. In the other regime, i.e., when the uncon-
𝜎−1
strained monopolistic price is above the competitor’s marginal cost 1, 
the firm engages in limit pricing and charges the marginal cost of its 
competitor. As we show later, the functional form imposed on the data 
supplier’s cost function 𝐹 (𝑧) for improving data quality ensures that, 
in equilibrium,  𝜎
∕𝑧 ≤ 1, thereby ensuring that we are always in the 
𝜎−1
monopoly pricing regime, and 𝑝𝑑 = 𝜎
∕𝑧. We use the subscript 𝑑 here 
𝜎−1
to denote the price and quantity for a producer that has data when 
its competitor does not. This implies a markup of  𝜎
. The producer 
𝜎−1
without data sells nothing because its marginal cost of 1 exceeds this 
price.

)𝜎

)𝜎−1

that the quantity sold is 𝑞𝑑 =

Substituting the price 𝑝𝑑 into the household demand curve implies 
(
𝑧 𝜎−1
. This generates revenue for 
𝜎
)𝜎−1
(
𝑧 𝜎−1
𝜎

. The producer’s profit is 

the producer with data of 𝑝𝑑 𝑞𝑑 =
1
𝜎

 when its competitor does not have data.

(
𝑧 𝜎−1
𝜎
The expected value of data, for one period, is the probability that the 
buyer’s competitor will be uninformed, times the profit of having data 
when a competitor does not. We call this one-period expected value 
𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑧): 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

For our subsequent analysis, it is useful to define 𝑥 ≡ (𝑧 𝜎−1
)𝜎−1 as a 
𝜎
monotonically transformed measure of data quality, and define 𝑎 ≡ 1∕𝜎, 
𝑏 = 𝑎∕2, so that the per-period profit of each goods producer with access 
to data can be written as 

𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥) = 𝑥(𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛).

(3)

The substitutability of having access to data arises here because 
the goods producer makes zero profit in every case, except that case 
where it has data and its competitor does not. This is what makes 
the producer’s expected value of data decline in the number of other 
producers that also have data. This is surely extreme. But it is a simple 
way of capturing an externality that is much more prevalent that this 
specific model mechanism. Appendix B works out a richer equilibrium 
model of oligopolistic producers that use data to forecast demand, that 
justifies this substitutability assumption.

The reason for building out the household part of the model, rather 
than just assuming a 𝜋 function, is to be able to derive welfare. We 
return to the welfare calculation in Section 5. For the rest of the model 
solution, we simply use the fact that the data buyers’ (goods producer’s) 
profit function 𝜋 is increasing in quality 𝑧 and decreasing in data sold 
𝑛, i.e. 𝜋𝑧 > 0, 𝜋𝑛 < 0. The assumption that expected value is decreasing 
in data sold 𝑛 captures the strategic substitutability of information. The 
parameter 𝑏 governs the strength of the externality. If 𝑏 is large, then 
data substitutability is strong. If 𝑏 is close to zero, the strategic effect 
disappears.

1.4. Commitment solution

We first explore a solution where the data supplier, after choosing 
the initial data quality, can commit to the quantity of data. It can 
tell customers exactly how many copies of the data will be sold in 
each-period. The data supplier will never sell any more copies of the 
data than the committed number 𝑛𝑡. This ability to commit will allow 
the data supplier to choose a higher price up front and will maximize 
the data supplier’s revenue. After presenting this solution, we compare 
the price and revenue to the solution when the data supplier cannot 
commit.

Consider the static problem of the data supplier choosing the avail-
able  quantity  of  data  𝑛𝑡  to  maximize  the  flow  value  it  can  extract 
from data buyers in each period 𝑡, given the initial data quality 𝑥. The 
maximized flow value is max 𝑛 ⋅ 𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥). This is each buyer’s maximum 
willingness to pay for the flow value of data, 𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥), times the number 
of copies sold 𝑛. Note that the maximizer 𝑛∗ is time-invariant and equals 
to:

𝑛∗ = 𝑎∕2𝑏 = 1.

The data supplier would thus like to commit to the same data availabil-
ity at all times. Conditioning on data quality 𝑥, the value of the data 
producer is concave in 𝑛: having more clients 𝑛 could bring more profits 
but could also reduces the willingness to pay by each client. There is a 
Laffer curve that plots the relationship between quantity and revenue; 
the optimal choice 𝑛∗ reflects the point at which the Laffer curve is 
maximized.

Fig.   1  plots  the  data  supplier’s  flow  profit  as  a  function  of  the 
number of subscribers. If the data supplier has no clients, it has zero 
revenue. But if there are 𝑛 = 𝑎∕𝑏 = 2 subscribers, it would earn a price 
of 𝑥 (𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛) ∕(1 − 𝛽) = 0 per units. This is also zero revenue. The peak 
revenue is achieved half way in between these two points at 𝑛 = 1. 
This relationship between the data supplier’s revenue and quantity is 
similar to the idea of a Laffer curve in public finance that describes the 
relationship between government taxation and government revenue.

The maximum ex-ante value of the flow payoff for the data supplier 

is 

𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑧) =

1
𝜎

(
𝑧

𝜎 − 1
𝜎

)𝜎−1

(1 − 𝑛∕2) .

(2)

𝑉 = max
𝑥,𝑛

𝑛 ⋅ 𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥)
1 − max (𝛽, 𝛾)

− 𝐹 (𝑥) .

(4)

4 

E. Liu et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

provides the data as a subscription, and a buyer pays for data access in 
each period.

Formally, at each time 𝑡, the data supplier solves a recursive prob-
lem, with the total number of data copies already sold 𝑛 and data 
quality 𝑥 as state variables. The value function represents the supplier’s 
present discounted value of the revenue derived from their data. The 
data supplier is a monopolist. So they can make a take-it-or-leave-it 
offer to the data buyer for the buyer’s willingness to pay for the data.

Fig. 1.  Equilibrium choice of 𝑛 that maximizes profit under commitment.
The formula for the curve is the total profit expression in (4), minus the one-time 
investment cost 𝐹 (𝑥).

This is the maximum value the data supplier can extract from the data 
buyers. It is the present-discounted value of the maximum flow payoff 
for the buyers, using the discount rate of either the supplier or the buyer 
— whoever is more patient — net of the ex-ante fixed cost of producing 
data of quality 𝑥.

The value in Eq.  (4) can be achieved if the data supplier can commit 
to selling 𝑛∗ copies of data upfront in the initial period and give the 
data buyers an option to finance the purchase at the gross interest rate 
of 1∕𝛾. When the data buyers are more patient than the supplier (𝛾 < 𝛽), 
the buyers do not take up the financing option; they pay their valuation 
of data upfront, netting the supplier a revenue of  𝑛⋅𝜋(𝑛;𝑥)
1−𝛽  in the initial 
period 𝑡 = 0. On the other hand, when the supplier is more patient than 
the buyers, the supplier effectively lends to the buyers and receive a 
flow payment of max𝑛 𝑛 ⋅ 𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥) each period, with a present discounted 
value of 𝑛⋅𝜋(𝑛;𝑥)
1−𝛾

We refer to the path of data quantity 𝑛∗ = 1 as the commitment 
solution. Substitute 𝑥 ≡ (𝑧 𝜎−1
)𝜎−1 into the quadratic cost function 𝐹 (𝑧), 
𝜎
we can write the cost of data quality as 𝐹 (𝑥) = (𝑥 − 1)2 ∕2. The optimal 
choice of data quality is thus

.

𝑥∗ = 1 +

𝑎2
4𝑏 (1 − max (𝛽, 𝛾))

.

Under the optimal choice of data quality, the value of the data 

supplier under commitment is

𝑉 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑡 =

𝑎2
4𝑏 (1 − max (𝛽, 𝛾))

+

1
2

(

𝑎2
4𝑏 (1 − max (𝛽, 𝛾))

)2

.

Because the supplier can extract the statically maximal flow profits 
from  the  data  buyers  under  the  commitment  solution,  the  supplier 
would never choose to incur the fixed cost 𝜂 to setup the infrastructure 
for data subscription. Subscription is only relevant when the supplier 
cannot commit to the sequence of future data sales, as we show below.

1.5. Data sales without commitment

The problem is that after selling the data to 𝑛 buyers at time 𝑡, 
the data supplier has the incentive to sell to more clients at 𝑡 + 1. 
Doing so reduces the profitability of prior clients. Knowing that future 
copies will be sold reduces prior clients’ willingness to pay. The lack of 
commitment therefore reduces the market power of the data supplier. 
Note that while the data supplier cannot commit to the number of 
copies of data it sells in the future, it does commit to the quality of 
the data as the quality is chosen up-front and does not change over 
time.

We now study this more realistic game of data sales without com-
mitment. In Section 1.6 below we analyze the game where the supplier 

The buyer, however, has a willingness to pay that is based on their 
rational expectation of the data supplier’s future data sales. The buyer 
will earn 𝜋(𝑛; 𝑥) profits from their data in the first period. But will earn 
only 𝜋( ̃𝑛; 𝑥) dollars of profit the following period, if an additional ̃𝑛 − 𝑛
customers buy the data. Thus, at date 𝑡, the buyer’s willingness to pay 
is ∑∞
, where 𝑛𝜏 is the total purchases of the data, up 
to and including date 𝜏. Next, we rewrite this willingness to pay, as a 
function of the optimal selling strategy of the data supplier. We do not 
yet know that strategy. We will use a placeholder strategy function 𝑔
and then solve for the optimal selling strategy, as a fixed point of the 
buyers’ and data supplier’s problem.

]
[𝜋(𝑛𝜏 ; 𝑥)

𝜏=𝑡 𝛽𝜏−𝑡E

𝑡

Let 𝑔 (𝑛, 𝑥) denote the data supplier’s optimal choice of new total 
data sales, given that 𝑛 goods-producing producers have already pur-
chased the data. As we show below, the optimal choice depends only 
on 𝑛 and is invariant to the data quality 𝑥, so we suppress the argument 
and simply write 𝑔(𝑛). The number of new clients being sold to is 
𝑔(𝑛) − 𝑛. Let 𝑔2 (𝑛) ≡ 𝑔 (𝑔 (𝑛)), 𝑔0 (𝑛) = 𝑛 and define 𝑔𝑘 (𝑛) to be the 
operation 𝑔 performed 𝑘 times on 𝑛. Then 𝑔𝑘 represents how many total 
copies of the data supplier will choose to sell 𝑘 periods from now, if 
there are already 𝑛 total buyers today. Note that 𝑛 is a stock of total past 
buyers and 𝑔𝑘(𝑛) is a new stock of buyers. If the data supplier decided to 
sell no new copies of data, then this would be represented as 𝑔𝑘(𝑛) = 𝑛.
Substituting 𝑔𝑡−1 (𝑛) for 𝑛𝜏 in the sum above, a goods producer’s total 

stream of profits from data can be expressed as 

̄𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥) =

∞
∑

𝑡=1

𝛽𝑡−1E [𝜋 (𝑔𝑡−1 (𝑛) ; 𝑥)

|𝑛, 𝑥]

(5)

This profit ̄𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥) incorporates data buyers’ conditional rational expec-
tations that their ability to extract value from this data will decline over 
time, given the current state variables (𝑛, 𝑥). It anticipates the future 
path of data sales. This present discounted revenue from data is also 
the buyer’s willingness to pay for data.

Since the data supplier is a monopolist, the revenue-maximizing 
choice is to charge each buyer their willingness to pay for data. Giving 
this willingness to pay, the data producer, who has already sold 𝑛
data  copies,  chooses  to  sell  ̃𝑛 − 𝑛  additional  copies  of  the  data  in 
period 𝑡. This choice earns the supplier a price of  ̄𝜋 (̃𝑛, 𝑥) earned for 
each of the (̃𝑛 − 𝑛) additional copies of the data sold that period. The 
supplier’s optimal choice should maximize this current revenue, plus 
the discounted present value of future revenue. Using 𝑉 (𝑛, 𝑥) to denote 
the data supplier’s continuation value given the state variables, this 
choice problem can be written recursively as, 
{(̃𝑛 − 𝑛) ̄𝜋 (̃𝑛, 𝑥)

+ 𝛾𝑉 (̃𝑛, 𝑥)} .

𝑉 (𝑛, 𝑥) = max

(6)

̃𝑛

Definition  1.1.   Given  data  quality  𝑥,  a  Markov  perfect  equilibrium 
(MPE) is the pair of functions { ̄𝜋 (⋅; 𝑥) , 𝑔 (⋅)} such that:

1. the goods producers’ willingness to pay for data  ̄𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥) is con-
sistent with their rational expectation of the future sequence of 
data sales, satisfying (5);

2. the policy function for the data supplier 𝑔 (𝑛) solves the problem 

solves (6).

Optimal data sales without commitment.  In principle, the dynamic game 
involving  a  non-commitment  data  supplier  and  a  sequence  of  data 
buyers (i.e., the goods producer) is difficult to analyze, as the MPE 
involves a fixed point in the two functions { ̄𝜋 (⋅; 𝑥) , 𝑔 (⋅)}. However, 

5 

E. Liu et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

under  our  tractable  formulation,  the  recursive  problem  of  the  data 
supplier (6) is quadratic in the state variable 𝑛, thereby enabling us 
to solve for the equilibrium in closed-form.

The solution to this model shows how commitment problems result 
in more data sales, lower prices and reduced profits. Importantly, the 
solution also tells us where to look for evidence of this commitment 
problem: declining data prices, over time. 

Proposition 1.   The data issuance policy function 𝑔(𝑛) is characterized by 
an equilibrium scalar 𝛿: 

𝑔 (𝑛) = 𝑛 + (1 − 𝛿) (

𝑎
𝑏

− 𝑛)

 with

𝛿 =

√

1 − 𝛾

1 −

𝛾

.

(7)

Data buyers’ willingness to pay is characterized by an equilibrium scalar 
𝜉 ≡ 1−𝛽
1−𝛽𝛿

̄𝜋 (𝑛, 𝑥) = 𝜉

𝜋(𝑛, 𝑥)
1 − 𝛽

=

1 − 𝛽
1 − 𝛽𝛿

𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛
1 − 𝛽

𝑥.

(8)

Fig. 2.  Equilibrium paths of data sales, prices and profit, without commitment.

Given data quality 𝑥, the data provider’s value function is 
)2

𝑉 (𝑛, 𝑥) =

𝑏𝛿
2 (1 − 𝛽𝛿)

( 𝑎
𝑏

− 𝑛

𝑥

(9)

All proofs are in Appendix A.

Interpretation.  The Markov perfect equilibrium is captured by the two 
endogenous variables (𝛿, 𝜉), respectively parametrizing the data pro-
ducer’s and data buyers’ equilibrium strategy.

Note  ̄𝑛 ≡ 𝑎
𝑏

= 2 is the maximum total sales; data is worthless to 
goods producers when every potential competitor has access to it. Given 
existing sales 𝑛 at the beginning of each period, the total sales at the end 
of each period 𝑔 (𝑛) is a weighted average between ̄𝑛 and 𝑛. Intuitively, 
1 − 𝛿 captures how aggressively the data producer sells to new clients. 
When 𝛿 = 1, 𝑔 (𝑛) − 𝑛 = 0, meaning the data producer does not sell to 
new clients. A lower 𝛿 translates to more aggressive sales.

On the other hand, 𝜉 scales how data buyers value data, reflecting 
their expectation about future data sales. When buyers anticipate no 
future data sales (𝛿 = 1), 𝜉 = 1, and  ̄𝜋 (𝑛; 𝑥) = 𝑎−𝑏𝑛
𝑥 coincides with the 
1−𝛽
present discounted future flow value if no future data sales are made 
after the current period. Absent commitment, buyers anticipate future 
sales and thereby place a proportional discount 𝜉 on the value of data.
1 − 𝛿𝑡) 𝑎
(
, 

Note  that  the  path  of  total  data  issuance  is  𝑔𝑡 (0) =

𝑏

meaning the path of new sales at each time period is

𝑔𝑡 (0) − 𝑔𝑡−1 (0) = (1 − 𝛿)

𝛿𝑡−1

𝑎
𝑏

which decays to zero exponentially at rate 𝛿.

The path of prices is  ̄𝜋 (𝑔𝑡 (0) ; 𝑥)

=

)
𝜉(𝑎−𝑏𝑔𝑡(0)
1−𝛽

𝑥 which simplifies to

̄𝜋 (𝑔𝑡 (0) ; 𝑥)

=

𝜉𝑎𝛿𝑡
1 − 𝛽

𝑥,

which also decays to zero exponentially at rate 𝛿.

Fig.  2 shows the equilibrium path without commitment. Specifi-
cally, the outermost curve plots (𝑛 − 0) ̄𝜋 (𝑛), which is the initial Laffer 
curve. The red dot reflects the equilibrium choice 𝑛1 in the first period 
and the corresponding profit. The second curve shows (𝑛 − 𝑛1
) ̄𝜋 (𝑛) as a 
function of 𝑛, which is the Laffer curve in the second period, and the red 
dot on the curve reflects the equilibrium choice 𝑛2 in the second period 
and the corresponding profit. The slopes of the dashed lines reflect the 
sequence of equilibrium willingness to pay  ̄𝜋 (𝑛𝑡

)
.

Ex-ante stage: choosing data quality.  We now solve the data supplier’s 
ex-ante  problem  of  choosing  data  quality,  noting  that  the  data  ac-
quisition  cost  can  be  written  as  𝐹 (𝑥) = (𝑥 − 1)2∕2,  where  𝑥 ∶=
( 𝜎−1
𝜎

)𝜎−1
𝑧

:

𝑉 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 = max

𝑥

𝑉 (0, 𝑥) − (𝑥 − 1)2∕2

6 

Under the data sales scheme, the data supplier’s optimal choice of data 
) . We can then plug that choice back into 
quality is 𝑥 = 1 +

(

𝑎
√

1−𝛽+

1−𝛾

the data supplier’s initial value function to find the value of the data 
to the supplier with discount rate 𝛾: 

𝑉 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 =

𝑎
√

1 − 𝛽 +

1 − 𝛾

(

+

1
2

𝑎
√

1 − 𝛽 +

1 − 𝛾

)2

.

(10)

Data buyers’ discount rate and the value of commitment.  An important 
implication of the model is that the value of commitment depends cru-
cially on the data buyer’s discount rate 𝛽. Intuitively, low discounting 
implies that existing data buyers expect more negative externalities 
arising from future data sales. This expectation causes the data buyer 
to discount the value of the data by more. The value of data to the data 
buyers is lower than in the full-commitment case, because the buyers 
know that additional future copies will be sold.

To see this formally, consider the case where data buyers are more 
patient than the supplier (𝛽 ≥ 𝛾). This makes financing irrelevant. We 
compare the gap in the supplier’s surplus with and without commit-
ment, and we examine how this gap varies with the buyers’ discount 
rate. Formally, for any given data quality 𝑥, if the data supplier were 
able to commit to selling a fixed number of copies of the data initially, 
they would have chosen 𝑛∗ = arg max 𝑛 ⋅ (𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛) = 1 copies of the 
data, which coincides with the choice under the subscription scheme. 
On the other hand, absent commitment, the data sales scheme features 
an  increasing  sequence  of  copies  sold  over  time,  with  lim𝑡→∞ 𝑛𝑡 =
lim𝑡→∞ 𝑔𝑡 (0) = 2 > 𝑛∗.

For a given quality of the data, the value that the data supplier 
can extract from data buyers is 𝑉 (0, 𝑥) when lacking commitment; the 
value is 𝑛∗𝜋(𝑛∗, 𝑥)∕(1 − max{𝛾, 𝛽}) when the data supplier can commit. 
𝑉 (0,𝑥)
≤ 2𝛿𝜉, where 𝛿 and 𝜉 are 
Proposition  1 implies that 
𝑛∗𝜋(𝑛∗,𝑥)∕(1−max{𝛾,𝛽})
defined in the proposition. Recognizing that lim𝛽→1 𝜉 = 0, we have 
that the value obtained by the data supplier who cannot commit is 
vanishing relative to the commitment value as 𝛽 → 1. As the data 
buyers anticipate future data sales, their willingness to pay relative to 
≤ 𝜉 →
the commitment case declines toward zero (i.e., 
0 as 𝛽 → 1).

̄𝜋(𝑛,𝑥)
𝜋(𝑛∗,𝑥)∕(1−max{𝛾,𝛽})

1.6. Data subscriptions

We now consider the data supplier’s total profit under a subscription 
scheme. Under this scheme, a data buyer must pay for the data access 
each period. Because, in each period, customers observe how many 
subscriptions are sold, the subscription scheme allows the data supplier 
to  commit  to  the  optimum,  period-by-period.  In  each  period,  it  is 
optimal to sell 𝑛 subscriptions, where 𝑛 maximizes the flow profit in 

cumulative customers over timeprofitprofit Laffer curveprofit in each periodE. Liu et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

1.7. Sales and subscriptions with depreciating data

So far, we have characterized data as being like a durable good. At 
the same time, data loses value over time. Next, we consider how data 
depreciation affects our predictions. Data depreciates for many reasons. 
First, data may become inaccurate over time due to changes in the 
environment or context in which the data was collected. For example, 
data on consumer behavior from five years ago may not be applicable 
today as consumer preferences may have evolved. Second, data can 
degrade over time due to corruption of electronic files. Lastly, legal 
requirements or regulations may require data to be deleted or destroyed 
after a certain period. Appendix C formalizes data depreciation and 
formally links it to volatility in the economic environment.

Suppose data quality depreciates exponentially at rate 𝜆 < 1. Given 

Fig. 3.  Data contract choices that maximize supplier revenue, without commitment. 
Lower discount rates mean that there is a stronger preference for early cash flows.

that period. We find that this 𝑛 coincides with the commitment solution: 
𝑛∗ = 1.

The data supplier’s ex-ante value at 𝑡 = −1 is the present-discounted 
value of the flow profits, minus the ex-ante fixed costs of producing data 
quality 𝑥 and paying for the subscription infrastructure:

𝑉 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = max

𝑥

𝑥 ⋅

𝑛∗ (𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛∗)
1 − 𝛾

− 𝐹 (𝑥) − 𝜂.

The optimal choice of data quality is thus
𝑎
2 (1 − 𝛾)

𝑥𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 1 +

.

Under the optimal choice of data quality, the value of the data supplier 
choosing the subscription scheme is 

𝑉 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =

𝑎
2 (1 − 𝛾)

+

1
2

)2

(

𝑎
2 (1 − 𝛾)

− 𝜂.

(11)

Data  sales  without  commitment  vs.  subscription.  The  data  supplier
chooses ex-ante whether to adopt a subscription scheme or sell the 
data for perpetual access. The data sales scheme has the disadvantage 
that, due to the lack of commitment power, the data supplier loses 
market power. The subscription scheme enables commitment. But the 
subscription scheme also has two disadvantages: (1) it involves the ex-
ante fixed cost 𝜂; (2) the cashflow arising from the subscription scheme 
is realized period-by-period. Since a one-time fee delivers revenue up 
front, it makes sense that an impatient data supplier prefers to sell data, 
rather than adopt a subscription model. One of the key determinants 
of the pricing model a data supplier selects is how impatient they are.
Formally, a data supplier prefers outright sales over subscription if 
𝑉 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠−𝑉 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ≥ 0. The left-hand side of this inequality is increasing 
in the discount rate of the buyers (𝛽), decreasing in the discount rate 
of the supplier (𝛾), and increasing in the fixed cost 𝜂 of setting up 
subscription services.

Fig.  3 illustrates, for a given cost 𝜂, the set of discount rates for 
buyers and suppliers that would result in the choice of a supplier to sell 
the data outright, or to license it with a subscription fee. More patient 
suppliers wait for the subscription revenue because it is higher.

)

…

) , 𝜆𝑥 (𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛2

) , 𝜆2𝑥 (𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛3

initial quality 𝑥, the flow payoff to data buyers is
𝑥 (𝑎 − 𝑏𝑛1
Given the anticipated sequence of future data sales, the willingness to 
pay by a borrower with discount rate 𝛽 for the data that depreciates at 
rate 𝜆 is therefore identical to the willingness to pay by a borrower with 
discount rate 𝜆𝛽 for data that do not depreciate. Because the supplier’s 
flow profit in equilibrium also scales proportionally with the quality 
of data, the equilibrium in a model with data depreciation is therefore 
isomorphic to one without data depreciation, but where the data buyers 
have discount rate 𝛽𝜆 and the supplier has discount rate 𝛾𝜆, where 𝜆 < 1
captures the effect of data depreciation.

If we shrink each player’s rate of time preference by a common 
factor 𝜆 < 1, the data supplier is more likely to favor data sales over 
subscription.

Fig.  3 illustrates the nature of this relationship: Starting with a given 
discount rate (𝛽, 𝛾) in the top, left region and moving toward the origin, 
the supplier switches from preferring subscription to upfront sales.

2. Testable predictions of the model

While the previous section laid out the solution to the data sales 
and data subscription models, we ultimately want to ask whether the 
model’s mechanism is consistent with data markets. This section derives 
predictions to test. These are not meant to capture all the relevant 
considerations in a data supplier’s choice of business model. Rather, 
the predictions below are the considerations that are indicative of our 
mechanism at work.

2.1. Financial constraints and the choice of data sales or subscription

Financial constraints on the part of data suppliers may induce them 
to behave as if they were less patient. When unable to borrow, a data 
supplier may value immediate cash flows more highly than later ones. 
This type of financial constraint might explain why some suppliers 
choose the one-time data payment model, instead of a data subscription 
model.

H1: Financially constrained data suppliers are more likely to 

sell data, rather than license it.

2.2. Data depreciation and data sales

Section 1.7 established that more rapidly depreciating data is more 
likely to be sold. The logic is that when data depreciates rapidly, the 
benefits of setting up a subscription model are less, while the set-up 
cost is the same. For a sufficiently rapid rate of depreciation, setting up 
the subscription model is not worth the cost and data is sold.

H2:  Data  that  depreciates  faster  is  more  likely  to  be  sold, 

instead of licensed.

7 

00.20.40.60.81discount rate of buyer00.20.40.60.81discount rate of data sellerdata seller prefers upfront salesdata seller prefers subscription45-degreeE. Liu et al.

2.3. Market size and data sales or subscriptions

Having a larger pool of potential customers for data makes sub-
scriptions more advantageous both because it lowers the per-user cost 
of setting up subscriptions and because it makes commitment more 
valuable.  This  is  what  we  call  the  market  size  effect.  Setting  up  a 
subscription service is costly. When the number of potential buyers of 
a data product is small, the cost is not justified by the small potential 
revenue.  Furthermore,  the  presence  of  more  potential  data  buyers 
induces a data producer to invest more in data quality. Higher quality 
data raises the value of commitment, achieved through subscriptions.

Consider this relationship between market size and the sales choice 
mathematically in the model. We can model to a larger market with 
measure 𝜇 > 1 of goods and measure 2𝜇 of potential data buyers. 
In this environment, the flow profit of the data supplier rises by the 
proportion 𝜇 > 1. Scaling up the data seller’s revenue by the fixed 
factor 𝜇, but leaving the fixed costs of setting up subscriptions 𝜂 and the 
cost of investing in data quality 𝐹 (⋅) unchanged is the same problem as 
keeping the revenue at its original level and shrinking the fixed costs 
by a factor of 𝜇. Formally, the equilibrium choices in the model with 
larger market size are isomorphic to the baseline model with a cost of 
providing data quality equal to 𝐹 (⋅) ∕𝜇 and the fixed cost of setting up 
a subscription services reduced to 𝜂∕𝜇. Both fixed cost changes make 
subscriptions more advantageous.

H3: Data that is relevant to a large set of buyers is more likely 

to be licensed, instead of sold.

2.4. The decline in new customers and new revenue

Strategic substitutability is a force restraining customer growth of 
data  sellers.  If  data  is  less  valuable  when  others  know  it,  then  a 
data  seller  with  a  growing  market  sells  a  worsening  product.  That 
depresses future sales. How this force plays out depends on whether 
data providers sell subscriptions or sell data outright.

When  data  providers  sell  data  subscriptions,  the  results  in  Sec-
tion  1.6  show  that  the  number  of  data  copies  𝑛  is  time-invariant. 
That means that after the first period, there are no new customers. 
Obviously, that is unrealistic, in part because our model is one with 
no costs or delay from customer acquisition. In reality, it takes time 
to acquire the optimal number of customers. But after reaching that 
market size, data subscriptions stagnate.

When data suppliers sell data outright, the customer base grows 
over time, because of the lack of commitment. The maximum total data 
that a data seller would ever sell is 𝑎∕𝑏. Proposition  1 tells us that when 
the number of data copies reaches 𝑛 = 𝑎∕𝑏, data becomes worthless to 
goods producers. At this point, data sales stop.3

H4: New customers and new revenue should grow more slowly 

for data firms than for comparable non-data firms. 

Of course, not all data exhibit equal strategic substitutability. Fi-
nancial data is known to be nearly worthless if it is widely known. 
Similarly, strategic business data typically offers profits only if that 
market strategy is not saturated. In contrast, weather data is something 
everyone can benefit from, to all be better prepared for the day. The 
difference is not in the type of data, as much as it is the use of that data. 
If some trader discovered a profitable trading strategy, based on the 
weather, then this would be less valuable if other acquired weather data 
and used it for that same purpose. Data has strategic substitutability 
when the uses of data are to inform actions that themselves exhibit 
substitutability.  The  financial  data  exhibits  strategic  substitutability 

3 The rate at which data sales slow is governed by the equilibrium object 
𝛿 ∈ [0, 1). When the data seller is patient, 𝛾 is close to one and therefore 𝛿
is close to 1. This makes for slow convergence. The patient data seller sells a 
little bit of additional data every period. But an impatient seller – one with 𝛾
close to zero and 𝛿 close to zero – sells most of their data quickly.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

because buying risky assets is less profitable when others buy the same 
assets at the same time. Investors compete with each other. The typical 
weather forecast is not a strategic substitute because people do not 
typically compete with each other in the use of an umbrella.

3. Data and descriptive statistics

3.1. Data products and providers

We obtain data on the market for data from Datarade (https://
datarade.ai/),  a  global  data  trading  platform  that  helps  companies 
discover, compare, and connect with data providers across the globe. As 
of Summer 2024, Datarade is one of the largest data markets, hosting 
more than 4,000 different data products, spanning a broad set of major 
categories, provided by more than 600 data-selling firms. Datarade is 
Germany-based, but it hosts data providers and products around the 
world. Nearly half of the data providers headquarter in the US. Other 
popular headquarter locations for data providers are the UK, India, and 
Germany.4

Datarade provides detailed information on each data product. For 
each of the products hosted on the platform, the information page 
reports key statistics that are useful for our empirical study. Fig. A.1 in 
the Appendix provides an example of the information page. First, they 
report the data provider company, which allows us to later merge with 
company-level information from other data sources. Second, a menu 
of data transaction methods is provided, including one-off purchase, 
licensing (monthly or yearly), and usage-based pricing. Sometimes, the 
price level is available, though the coverage is very limited.

Datarade also tags each data product with up to five data categories. 
There are 670 different data categories which are finely defined. In our 
example, the product is associated with five different tags: Location 
Data,  Foot  Traffic  Data,  Mobile  Location  Data,  Raw  Location  Data, 
Mobility Data. The description of the data product is extensive (see Fig. 
A.2 for the continued example). It describes, not only the data contents, 
but  also  potential  use  cases.  In  our  example,  the  data  description 
lists uses such as consumer insights, market intelligence, advertising, 
and retail analytics. We use these descriptions to map each product 
to  industries  that  may  use  it.  Fig.   4  presents  a  word  cloud  of  the 
descriptions to provide an overview of how data suppliers describe their 
data.

The data providers in our sample are usually startups or small to 
medium sized firms, so we link these data providers from Datarade 
to company-level data sets Crunchbase and PitchBook using a fuzzy 
name-matching algorithm. This allows us to extract their characteristics 
including  the  data  provider’s  geographic  location,  funding  history, 
survival, and age. To measure the financial conditions of these data 
providers, we observe whether these companies obtained any funding 
from venture investors (as of Summer 2024), the total rounds of invest-
ments, and the total amount of investment in USD. For the unmerged 
companies, we impute the funding variables to be 0. The assumption 
that data sellers that have never received documented venture funding 
are unfunded is one that we verified by hand checking and internet 
searches.

3.2. Measuring potential data demand, depreciation and data sales growth

Identifying relevant buyers for each data product.  To connect data prod-
ucts to their potential buyers, we measure how relevant each data 
product is to each industrial sector. First, we create a mapping from 
each product to its relevant industrial users by jointly analyzing data 
product descriptions from Datarade and business descriptions (item 1) 
and Management Discussion and Analysis (MD&A, item 7) from 10-
K of industrial firms. In specific, for each data product description, 

4 See https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/datarade.

8 

E. Liu et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

Fig. 4.  Word cloud of product descriptions on Datarade.
Notes. This is a word cloud generated by the text of all the data descriptions on Datarade.

we calculate its textual similarities with all the Edgar 10-K filings in 
2020, and find the top 30 filings with the highest similarity scores. If 
the overview and potential use cases a 10-K business description, we 
determine that it is more likely that the business described may find 
the data useful.

Quantifying potential buyers.  In our theory, market size represents the 
potential interest from data buyers who compete in the same goods 
market. If there are more direct competitors interested in a data prod-
uct, the data will lose more value from additional sales. Thus, if most 
data buyers are from the same industry, that suggests a more severe 
commitment problem.  In  contrast,  if  buyers’ interests are dispersed 
across different industries, the data are less likely to be used by direct 
competitors, and the commitment problem is mitigated.

For each data product, we count the industries with sufficiently 
high relevance to that data description. We group data products into 
10 deciles based on the inverse of the number of different three-digit 
SIC industries in the interested buyer set. A higher decile, or a lower 
number  of  relevant  industries,  indicates  more  concentrated  interest 
from potential buyers competing in product markets—we label this as 
high market interest from product market competitors.

Measuring data depreciation.  The depreciation of a data product is the 
weighted average of the depreciation rates for the industries relevant 
to that data (i.e., 𝑗 ∈ 
𝑖). For each industry, data depreciation captures 
the  ability  of  information  from  the  past  to  predict  future  business 
performance. If past information is more predictive of future business 
activities  in  that  industry,  the  depreciation  of  data  is  low;  if  past 
information is less predictive of future business activities, data in that 
industry depreciates rapidly.5

To implement this idea, for each Compustat firm 𝑙, we predict its 
return on assets (ROA) using lagged ROA in the previous year, with 
the following model, 

𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑙𝑡 = 𝜓0 + 𝜓1 𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑙,𝑡−1 + 𝜀.

(12)

Denote the 𝑅2 from this regression for firm 𝑙 as 𝑅2
𝑙 . For each data 
product 𝑖, we calculate the average 𝑅2 over top potential buyer set 
identified above for 𝑖. We group data products into 10 deciles based 

on the 𝑅2 calculated. A lower decile suggests high data depreciation 
rate. In contrast, a higher decile suggests a slow-changing environment 
and low data depreciation.

Measuring the growth of a data seller.  In the model, the size of a data 
seller is the number of customers. When a data seller attracts more 
customers, its value rises. Venture value is the value of a start-up. 
For a start-up to grow in value, it needs to attract more customers or 
more customer dollars. Thus, while customer growth and venture value 
growth are not identical, customer growth is a necessary condition for 
sustained venture growth.6

The other measure of customer base we explore is Google trends. 
This  data  is  only  sold  online.  Buying  an  online  product  begins  by 
navigating to the product website. Most people navigate to a website 
through a search engine and Google is the dominant search engine. 
Obviously, not every search results in a sale and not every sale will 
record  a  Google  search.  But  trends  in  searches  suggest  changes  in 
customer activity.

3.3. Descriptive statistics

Our sample covers 3,206 data products traded on Datarade that 
have complete information on product description and available trans-
action methods. These products are offered by 445 data providers. Each 
product is tagged with four categories, on average. Table  1 details the 
top ten categories of data products traded on Datarade and their market 
shares. The category company data, B2B contact data, and similarly, 
B2B leads data, B2B marketing data, are among the most popular on 
the platform. Other business intelligence data, such as point of interest 
data and business website data, are also popular. These detailed data 
categories are further aggregated to 22 broad data categories, which 
we describe in Appendix Table A.1.

These key data categories also suggest that our sample is well-suited 
to examine the commitment problems described by our model for three 
reasons. First, these data categories describe types of data that are 
durable, not ephemeral insights. That is important because it suggests 
that the threat of a seller selling this durable data to others is a relevant 

5 In Appendix C, we formally derive a conceptual framework to formalize 

this measurement construction.

6 This is not a mathematical statement: We could construct a model where 
some other effect raises venture value. However, in practice, while valuation 
effects might boost a venture’s valuation, they do not sustain long-term growth.

9 

E. Liu et al.

Table 1
Key data categories on the market for data.
  Category
  Company Data
  B2B Contact Data
  B2B Leads Data
  B2B Marketing Data
  B2B Email Data
  Point of Interest (POI) Data
  Firmographic Data
  Location Data
  Business Website Data
  Machine Learning (ML) Data
Notes. This table presents the top ten data categories in our data set. The sample 
includes 3,206 data products traded on Datarade. Each product could be tagged with 
on average four different categories. This table presents the count of products in each 
of the top ten categories, and the proportion as a percentage in the full sample.

Percentage (out of 3,206) 
14.91%
12.91%
12.69%
11.73%
10.29%
7.70%
7.67%
6.33%
6.18%
5.71%

Product count
478
414
407
376
330
247
246
203
198
183

problem. Second, these data products are suitable for multiple users 
(not firm-specific). Finally, they fit the model because future data sales 
would likely decrease the value of data for earlier buyers. For example, 
if more competitors obtain the contact list of potential customers, then 
the earlier data buyers’ ability to profit from contacting that same group 
of customers diminishes.

The main variable in our analysis is the transaction model adopted 
by each product. We report this information in Table  2 Panel (a). One-
off purchase is available for 64% of the products. Licensing (either 
annually  or  monthly)  is  offered  for  81%  of  the  products.  For  14% 
of the data products, one-off purchase is the only transaction model 
offered. The proportion of products with only licensing model offered 
is 31%. This also means that about 50% of the products offer one-time 
purchasing and licensing simultaneously.7

Next, we describe the key characteristics of data providers. Impor-
tantly, we measure data provider firms’ access to financing. Measuring 
financial constraints is always imperfect (Whited and Wu, 2006). In 
the case of data providers in our sample, the problem is compounded 
by the fact that most of these are not public firms. Because the data 
providers are mostly private and often startup companies, we use the 
presence of venture capital (VC) financing, the number of financing 
rounds and the dollar amount of VC financing as proxies of their lack 
of financial constraints. While not ideal, these measures are widely 
used when studying private firms. In addition, since Hadlock and Pierce 
(2010), Ma et al. (2022) find that firm age is a useful proxy for the lack 
of financial constraints, we use firm age as an alternative measure.

Table  2 Panel (b) reports the funding status of the Datarade data 
provider firms. Out of all the firms, 16% obtained venture funding, 
with the average number of funding rounds being 0.56. Conditional on 
obtaining funding, the average number of funding rounds is about 3.5. 
The total funding obtained by a provider firm is highly skewed, with 
an average of 26 million USD. The median age is 10 years old.

4. Testing model predictions: Data subscriptions and data sales

Recall that the main prediction of the theory was that data sub-
scriptions were associated with market power in the data marketplace, 
whereas one-time sales were likely to yield less revenue for data sellers. 
This section measures the extent of data purchases versus subscriptions 
and provides empirical tests of the theory’s prediction. These results do 
not establish any causal relationships. Instead, these are novel empirical 
facts  that  inform  us  about  the  features  of  data  markets.  They  are 
consistent with the prediction that data sellers choose data sales in 
some cases and licensing or subscriptions in others.

7 In our simple model, this is only a knife-edge case. However, we could 
easily extend the model by adding data buyers that are heterogeneous in their 
rates of time preference. In such an environment, some data sellers will choose 
to offer both sales and subscriptions to segment the market.

10 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

4.1. Financial constraints and data transaction model

The first prediction of the model (H1) that we test pertains to the 
relationship between data suppliers’ financial conditions and the type 
of pricing models they adopt. To do this, we estimate 

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖 = 𝛤0 + 𝛤1 ⋅ 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 + 𝜃𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖.

(13)

The dependent variables are dummy variables indicating whether 
the data product offers a certain transaction model (one-off purchase 
or licensing). The key explanatory variable 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 takes multiple 
forms. In one specification, financing measures the total number of 
rounds of VC financing; in another, it measures the total amount of 
VC financing obtained by the data provider. We also use firm age as a 
proxy. In this model and others in this section, we control for fixed 
effects at the level of primary data category as tagged on Datarade 
to account for similarities of transaction models among similar data 
products. Our model predicts a negative 𝛤1 coefficient for the one-off 
purchase model, and positive 𝛤1 coefficients for licensing.

Consistent with the model’s predictions, Table  3 shows that more 
financially constrained provider firms are more likely to choose data 
sales. In Panel A, we present the results using the logarithm of the 
number of funding rounds of the provider as the explanatory variable. 
In columns (1) and (3), we find that the number of funding rounds is 
associated with a lower probability of offering one-off purchase models 
but a higher probability of offering licensing. In columns (2) and (4), 
we focus on cases where the product only has one of the two transaction 
models. We find consistent results: More funding rounds are associated 
with a lower probability of offering only one-off purchase, and higher 
probability of offering only licensing model.

The economic magnitude is not small. When going from one round 
of financing to two rounds, the probability of offering a one-off data 
purchase goes down by 0.094 × (ln 2 − ln 1) = 6.5 percentage points 
(pp). This is a 10.1% decrease from the base rate of 64%. Applying a 
similar calculation to column (3), we find that going from one round of 
financing to two rounds of financing is associated with a 3.7 pp (4.6% 
from the base) increase in the probability of using licensing. In Panel 
(b), we show that the results are robust to the use of the logarithm of 
total funding amounts as the key explanatory variable.

In Panel (c), we switch to use firm age to proxy the level of financial 
constraints (Hadlock and Pierce, 2010; Ma et al., 2022). In this analysis, 
firm age is transformed using an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. 
We also can only focus on the subsample of data providers with age 
data as this information cannot be reliably imputed. We find that older 
firms, which are typically considered to be less financially constrained, 
are less likely to offer one-off purchase as a transaction option, and 
they are more likely to use licensing as the transaction model. In terms 
of economic magnitudes, doubling firm age is associated with a 2.2 pp 
decrease in the use of one-off purchase and a 1.4 pp increase in the use 
of licensing.

4.2. Data depreciation

Next, we explore (H2), that data depreciation makes data sales more 
likely.  In  our  model,  data  about  environments  that  change  quickly 
(fast-changing finance data vs. slow-moving consumer tastes) is like 
an environment with a higher discount rate. As Fig.  3 shows, data 
providers may have more commitment power, and there is likely less 
loss from the one-time fee model.

To test this, we again use the transaction model as a proxy for a 

provider’s commitment power. We use the following model: 

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖 = 𝛤0 + 𝛤1 ⋅ 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 + 𝜃𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖.

(14)

In  this  empirical  model,  the  key  explanatory  variable  is  𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ
𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖, which indicates the top decile data depreciation rates cal-
culated using the steps outlined in Section 3.2. The high-depreciation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Liu et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

Mean

Std.Dev

25th Percentile

Table 2
Financial information about data suppliers: Summary statistics.
Median
  Panel (a): Transaction Models of Data Products (N = 3,206)
  One-off Purchase (0/1)
  Licensing (0/1)
  Only One-off Purchase (0/1)
  Only Licensing (0/1)
  Panel (b): Data Providers (N = 445)
  Obtained VC Funding (0/1)
  No. of Funding Rounds
  Total Funding (mil. USD)
  Age (as of June, 2024)
Notes. This table presents summary statistics for the transaction models of the data products on Datarade (Panel (a)), and the 
characteristics of data providers selling products on the platform (Panel (b)). Provider-level information is obtained from Crunchbase. 
Product-level transaction models are extracted from product pages from Datarade.

0.00
0.00
0.00
10.00

0.36
1.48
26.00
14.14

0
0
0
15.00

0.16
0.56
4.20
13.60

75th Percentile 

0.48
0.39
0.34
0.46

0.64
0.81
0.14
0.31

0
0
0
6.00

0
1
0
0

1
1
0
1

1
1
0
0

Table 3
Providers’ financial condition and transaction Models.

(1)

One-off Purchase

(2)
Only
One-off Purchase

  Panel (a): Total Funding Rounds and Transaction Models
  ln(No. of Funding Rounds)

−0.094***
(0.016)

  Observations
  R-squared
  Panel (b): Total Funding Amounts and Transaction Models
  ln(Total Funding Amt)

3,206
0.126

−0.003**
(0.002)

  Observations
  R-squared
  Panel (c): Provider Firm Age and Transaction Models
  Provider Firm Age

3,206
0.118

−0.032**
(0.016)

−0.066***
(0.008)

3,206
0.039

−0.005***
(0.001)

3,206
0.036

−0.018*
(0.010)

(3)

Licensing

0.053***
(0.011)

3,206
0.037

0.004***
(0.001)

3,206
0.036

0.020*
(0.011)

(4)
Only
Licensing 

0.080*** 
(0.016)  

3,206
0.129

0.002
(0.002)  

3,206
0.122

0.034**  
(0.015)  

1,929
0.175

  Observations
  R-squared
Notes. This table correlates the type of data transaction models available for each data product with the funding 
status of the providers. Panel (a) presents the analysis using the logarithm of total funding rounds, Panel (b) presents 
the analysis using the logarithm of the total funding amount received, and Panel (c) presents the analysis in which 
firm age is used to proxy the level of financial constraint, firm age is transformed using an inverse hyperbolic sine 
transformation. All specifications control for primary data category fixed effects and report robust standard errors. 
*< 0.1, **< 0.05, ***< 0.01.

1,929
0.052

1,929
0.067

1,929
0.186

data categories identified through this method coincide with our intu-
itions. For example, the most rapidly depreciating data category is job 
posting information.

It is worth noting that in this exercise we face the following prob-
lem. While data depreciation mitigates the dynamic commitment prob-
lem, it also makes licensing convenient for buyers who need to access 
the data frequently. This is a force that is outside the scope of our 
model.

To avoid this confounding effect, we exclude a sub-sample of data 
products for which the convenience force is likely to be dominant. 
Specifically,  we  exclude  products  that  are  updated  daily  (or  more 
frequently than daily).

Table  4 shows that the information depreciation rate associated with 
a data product positively correlates with the use of one-off purchases 
and negatively predicts the use of licensing models. The 0.171 in col-
umn (1) suggests that high-depreciation products are 17.1 percentage 
points more likely to use one-off purchase. Thus, data that depreciates 
is  more  likely  to  be  sold  with  a  single  transaction,  rather  than  a 
subscription, which allays fears about data seller market power. The 
same change is associated with a 10.7 pp decrease in the probability of 
using licensing.

4.3. Market size

Next, we explore H3, that a larger pool of potential buyers makes 
data subscriptions or licensing more likely. Potential buyers are those 
in the same product market that may find the data useful and thus 
may make a purchase. More potential buyers make data subscription 
more profitable than data sales. The key explanatory variable in this 
model is 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒, which measures the number of relevant industry 
competitors that might be interested in the data. 

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑖 = 𝛤0 + 𝛤1 ⋅ 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 + 𝜃𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖.

(15)

Table  5 shows the relationship between market size and pricing 
models. We find that market size negatively correlates with the use of 
one-off purchases and positively correlates with the use of the licensing 
model in transactions. The coefficient of 0.010 in column (3) means 
that products that are of top-decile interest to more buyers are 10 pp 
more likely to use the licensing model than products that are of interest 
to fewer data buyers. This suggests that as the market for data grows, 
there is likely to be more use of subscriptions.

4.4. Slower sales growth

The final prediction of the model, H4, tests the mechanism in a 
different way. The problem a data seller faces is that they need to 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Liu et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

Table 4
Data depreciation rate and transaction models.

  High Depreciation

(1)

One-off Purchase
0.171***
(0.054)

(2)
Only
One-off Purchase
0.157***
(0.051)

(3)

Licensing

−0.107**
(0.051)

(4)
Only
Licensing 
−0.121** 
(0.052)  

709
0.261

  Observations
  R-squared
Notes. This table correlates the type of data transaction models available for each data product with the information 
depreciation rate of connected industries. The equation estimated is (14). Depreciation is defined in Section 3.2. 
All specifications control for primary data category fixed effects and report robust standard errors. *< 0.1, **< 0.05, 
***< 0.01.

709
0.077

709
0.088

709
0.271

Table 5
Potential market size and transaction models.

  Market Size (Deciles)

(1)

One-off Purchase
−0.014***
(0.003)

(2)
Only
One-off Purchase
−0.011***
(0.002)

(3)

Licensing

0.010***
(0.003)

(4)
Only
Licensing 
0.012*** 
(0.003)  

  Observations
  R-squared
Notes. This table correlates the type of data transaction models available for each data product with the potential 
market size of each product. The equation estimated is (15). Market size is defined in Section 3.2. All specifications 
control for primary data category fixed effects and report robust standard errors. *< 0.1, **< 0.05, ***< 0.01.

3,206
0.037

3,206
0.037

3,206
0.126

3,206
0.122

Table 6
Time-series trend of data value and potential customers.
(1)
𝛥Venture Value
−3.347***
(0.881)

  Data Provider

(2)
𝛥Google Trends Index  
−0.066*
(0.035)

Company-Round
38,489
0.001
Year, Lag Between Rounds

  Observation-level
  Observations
  R-squared
  Fixed Effects
Notes. 𝛥Venture Value is the percentage change of the current financing round from 
the previous round. Source: Crunchbase and PitchBook. 𝛥Google Trends Index is the 
percentage change in the Google Trends index from 2018 to 2023 for data and non-data 
tech firms. Column (1) clusters standard errors at the state and year level, and column 
(2) clusters at the year-month level. *< 0.1, **< 0.05, ***< 0.01.

Search Term-YearMonth 
19,741
0.012
Year-Month

restrict new data sales to earn monopoly rents. This need to restrict 
sales  is  not  a  problem  faced  by  most  other  non-data  tech  firms  in 
the industry because most technologies do not exhibit strategic sub-
stitutability. A computer is not less valuable when others buy the same 
computer. Instead, for most technology products the reverse is true: If 
everyone purchases and uses Apple products, for example, using non-
Apple products becomes less compatible with others and less valuable. 
Therefore, we test H4 by comparing the customer and revenue growth 
of data firms to their non-data counterparts, after controlling for time 
trends.

We  compare  growth  in  firm  value.  The  comparison  is  between 
data-providing companies and companies that do not sell data, but 
are  in  related  industries.  Each  observation  is  a  financing  round  of 
a  startup  company.  The  firms  are  data  providers  in  our  Datarade 
sample, described above. The control sample includes companies in 
Crunchbase that are in top 5 industries that data providers operate in. 
These industries include Analytics, Software, Information Technology, 
Advertising, and Big Data.

We estimate the following model, 

𝛥𝑉 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑉 𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝛤0 + 𝛤1 ⋅ 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝜃𝐹 𝐸 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡.

(16)

The  key  dependent  variable  is  𝛥Venture  Value,  which  captures 
the percentage change of the current financing round from the previ-
ous round. The key explanatory variable is 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟, indicating 

12 

whether the company is a data provider. We control for the lag from 
the previous round to this round and for year fixed effects and we 
cluster standard errors at the year and state levels. Thus, our estimates 
compare firms that are data providers with those that are not, which 
raised funding in the same year, with the same funding gap from the 
previous round. Column (1) of Table  6 shows that data providers’ value 
growth (𝛥) is significantly lower than that of comparable companies. 
The average 𝛥Venture Value in the sample is 5.81, meaning that an 
average startup appreciates roughly 6 times between venture rounds, a 
common feature for startups at this stage. The −3.347 estimate suggests 
that this increase is much lower for data sellers: The 𝛥Venture for data 
firms is 2.46 (the difference of 5.81 − 3.35).

Column  (2)  examines  the  time-series  change  in  search  popular-
ity, captured using Google Trends. This analysis compares the Google 
Trends index from 2018 to 2023 of two groups of terms: data sales 
terms and technology terms. Data sales terms consist of all data cate-
gories extracted from Datarade (i.e., ‘‘commercial market data’’, ‘‘busi-
ness location data’’). As a control group, we use technology terms. 
These  are  top  breakthrough  technologies,  as  identified  annually  by 
MIT Technology Review during the sample period (i.e., ‘‘custom cancer 
vaccines’’, ‘‘3-D metal printing’’, ‘‘online privacy’’).8 For each of the 
data and technology terms, we extract the monthly Google Trend index. 
We estimate the following model, 

𝛥𝐺𝑜𝑜𝑔𝑙𝑒𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑡 = 𝛤0 + 𝛤1 × 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝜃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡.

(17)

The key dependent variable is 𝛥GoogleTrend, which captures the per-
centage change of the current Google Trends from the previous round. 
The key explanatory variable is 𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟 indicating if the term 
is  a  data  sales  term  or  a  general  technology  term.  We  control  for 
year-month fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the same level. 
In this thought experiment, we are comparing data sales terms with 
other technology terms in terms of their monthly change in search 
popularity, after controlling for granular time trends, using year-month 
fixed effects. Table  6 reveals that data related technology terms have 
lower growth compared to the control terms.

8 The MIT Technology Review’s annual breakthrough technologies can be 

accessed at: https://www.technologyreview.com/supertopic/tr10-archive/.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Liu et al.

A  potential  measurement  challenge  is  selection:  Most  surviving 
firms grow their sales over time. However, our approach of taking the 
difference between data and non-data firms should remove this effect. 
As long as data firms have a similar selection of surviving firms as their 
non-data counterparts, this effect should disappear in the difference. 
However, future work could investigate whether the failure rates are 
indeed similar.

5. Consumer, goods producer and data supplier welfare

Having shown that the empirical evidence from data markets is 
consistent with the model, we end by investigating what this implies 
for welfare.

Of course, our model is a stylized one. It surely does not contain all 
the welfare-relevant trade-offs one would want for a thorough policy 
analysis. However, our results suggest that data sales models regulate 
monopoly power and this can have an effect on consumer surplus and 
on welfare.

Data poses a trade-off for consumer surplus. Good producers with-
out data do not have monopoly pricing power. Lower prices benefit 
consumers. However, data makes goods producers more efficient. Those 
without  data  have  higher  marginal  costs,  which  get  passed  on  to 
consumers as well. That trade-off shows up throughout our comparison 
of data market structures as well. To quantify the trade-off, we first 
derive expressions for consumer surplus from the model, in the case of 
data sales and data licensing.

To compute consumer surplus, we substitute in the solutions for the 
equilibrium price and quantity 𝑝𝑖 and 𝑞𝑖 for each variety. Recall that 
each variety has three possible market structures: (1) both firms have 
data, (2) one has data, the other does not, and (3) neither has data. 
Then, we multiply each of these surpluses times the fraction of varieties 
that yield that surplus. This yields a one-period consumer surplus, as 
a function of data supplier choices 𝑛 and 𝑧. Finally, we substitute in 
these data producer choices and cumulate up the one-period surpluses 
to yield total lifetime consumer surplus. Appendix A follows these steps 
and prove the following result.

Proposition 2. 
a. Lifetime consumer surplus when data is sold is 

∞
∑

𝑡=0

𝛽𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒
𝑡

=

1
𝜎 − 1

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
( 𝜎

+

1 +

)𝜎−1

( 𝜎
𝜎−1
1 − 𝛽𝛿2

𝑥 − 2𝑥

(18)

)𝜎−1

(

𝑥

1
1 − 𝛽

−

2
1 − 𝛽𝛿

)

+ 𝑥

2
1 − 𝛽𝛿

]

,

𝜎 − 1

where 𝛿 = 1−

√

1−𝛾

, and 𝑥 = 1 + 1
𝜎

1

√

1−𝛾−𝛽

(

1+

) .

𝛾

b. Lifetime consumer surplus, when data is licensed as a subscription is 
[

)]

(

𝛽𝑡𝑢𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

=

𝑡

1
1 − 𝛽

1
𝜎 − 1

1
4

( 𝜎

)𝜎−1

1 +

𝜎 − 1

̂𝑥 + 2 ̂𝑥

,

(19)

∞
∑

𝑡=0

where ̂𝑥 = 1 + 1
𝜎

1
2(1−𝛾)

.

c. Data supplier surplus is 𝑉 = max{𝑉 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠, 𝑉 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛}, where 𝑉 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠

follows Eq. (10) and 𝑉 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 follows Eq. (11).
d. Data buyer (goods producer) surplus is zero in either case.

In both cases, 𝛿 represents the rate at which data sales converge to 

steady state and 𝑥 and ̂𝑥 are the optimal choices of data quality.

To  better  understand  the  efficiency  of  the  choice  of  data  sales 
model, Fig.  5 plots regions where each sales model delivers higher total 
welfare, for various levels of time preference and elasticity.9 Welfare 

9 We set the cost of subscription setup to 0.5. But changes in this cost would 

just shift the choice and welfare curves out together, in a predictable way.

13 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

here  means  the  sum  of  consumer  surplus  (18)  or  (19),  data  seller 
surplus (10) or (11) and goods producer surplus, which is zero.

The solid line represents parameter combinations that make the 
data seller indifferent between choosing sales and subscription. The 
dashed lines are parameters where sales and subscriptions are welfare-
equivalent. Most of the time, data sellers’ choices of sales model are 
socially optimal. But the gaps between the two curves indicate regions 
where data sellers choose the socially suboptimal sales model.

Understanding consumer welfare.  Finally, we can use the model to an-
swer the policy relevant question about what sorts of data sales are 
better for consumers. Fig.  5 shows that, unless goods are highly elastic, 
data licensing or subscription is often better for welfare than data sales. 
At first, that might seem surprising. After all, data sellers make less use 
of their monopoly power. Monopoly power usually creates deadweight 
loss that makes consumers worse off. So data sales would seem to be 
better for consumers. However, the two consumer surplus expressions 
in Proposition  2 are not easily rankable. Because data sellers lose most 
of their rents from data, they have little incentive to invest in data 
quality. Since higher quality data makes goods firms more efficient, 
which in turn, makes good cheaper, consumers benefit when more data 
is sold. When goods are highly elastic, data sales typically dominate 
because, in this case, data producers have little incentive to invest in 
quality data anyway.

The last question we pose to the model is whether firms’ incentives 
to choose data sales or data subscriptions aligns with consumer welfare. 
Fig.  5 shows that firms often choose the welfare-maximizing form of 
data transaction. However, in some cases, firms incentives to choose 
the right data business model will be misaligned with the consumers’ 
interests. When patience is high, the monopoly power of subscriptions 
can be particularly harmful. When goods are inelastic, society might 
prefer that firms invest more in quality data and offer subscriptions. 
These results suggest that optimal regulation might be crafted in a very 
targeted way.

6. Conclusion

Many  policy  makers  are  concerned  about  the  market  power  of 
data sellers. However, the inability of data sellers to commit to sell 
limited copies of data, combined with the fact that data’s strategic value 
declines in the number of users, forces competitive pricing. Even if the 
seller is a monopolist, the inability to restrict future data sales makes 
the seller compete with its future self in data provision. Of course, with 
the loss of monopoly power comes a loss of incentive to produce quality 
data.

Monopoly power for data is not entirely bad. Just as patent laws 
protect the monopoly power of innovators to encourage innovation, 
copyright law could be seen as protection for data to encourage the 
discovery of new, high-quality data sources.

Data  subscription  services  are  a  tool  for  data  provider  firms  to 
restore monopoly power. While subscriptions restore monopoly power, 
they also restore an incentive for data sellers to invest in producing 
high-quality data. We find that subscriptions benefit consumers when 
goods are not close substitutes.

Market power in data markets depends on the pricing models data 
sellers choose to implement. We collected data from one of the largest 
on-line data marketplaces to investigate data sellers’ pricing strategies. 
We derived three predictions from the model about data provider firms 
that are most likely to choose to sell subscriptions instead of sales and 
one prediction about the growth rate of data sale revenue. All four 
predictions are supported by new facts from data marketplaces. These 
findings support our hypothesis about the nature of data markets and 
give us new insight into the functioning of this rapidly-expanding and 
politically controversial market.

E. Liu et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104053 

Fig. 5.  Do data sales or data subscriptions maximize welfare?
Notes. Welfare is the sum of consumer surplus (18) or (19), data seller surplus (10) or (11) and goods producer surplus, which is zero. The fixed cost of setting up the subscription 
model 𝜂 is set to 0.5.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Ernest Liu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization.  Song  Ma:  Writing  –  re-
view  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization,  Validation, 
Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, 
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Con-
ceptualization. Laura Veldkamp: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding 
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

I disclose that I received compensation, under $5,000, from the 
Brookings Institution Center on Regulation and Markets for this project. 
Brookings did review the paper for topic fit, prior to the initial release 
of the working paper, but had no oversight of this submitted version of 
the paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104053.

Data availability

Replication Package for Liu, Ma, Veldkamp, Journal of Financial Econo
mics, ‘‘Data Sales and Data Dilution’’ (Original data) (Mendeley Data).

Admati,  A.,  Pfleiderer,  P.,  1986.  A  monopolistic  market  for  information.  J.  Econ. 

Admati, A., Pfleiderer, P., 1990. Direct and indirect sale of information. Econometrica 

Theory. 39 (2), 400–438.

58 (4), 901–928.

Arnott, R., Stiglitz, J., 1991. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets with moral 

hazard. NBER Working Paper No. 3588.

Arnott, R., Stiglitz, J., 1993. Price equilibrium, efficiency, and decentralizability in 

insurance markets with moral hazard. Work. Pap..

Bergemann, D., Bonatti, A., 2024. Data, competition, and digital platforms. Am. Econ. 

Bergemann, D., Bonatti, A., Smolin, A., 2018. The design and price of information. Am. 

Rev. 114 (8), 2553–2595.

Econ. Rev. 108 (1), 1–48.

Bergemann,  D.,  Morris,  S.,  2013.  Robust  predictions  in  games  with  incomplete 

information. Econometrica 81 (4), 1251–1308.

Brunnermeier,  M.,  Oehmke,  M.,  2013.  The  maturity  rat  race.  J.  Financ.  68  (2), 

483–521.

Cong, L., Xie, D., Zhang, L., 2021. Knowledge accumulation, privacy, and growth in a 

data economy. Manag. Sci. 67 (10), 6480–6492.

DeMarzo, P., He, Z., 2021. Leverage dynamics without commitment. J. Financ. 76 (3), 

Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2022. A model of the data economy. NBER Working Paper 

Fudenberg, D., Tirole, J., 1991. Game Theory. MIT Press.
Green, D., Liu, E., 2021. A dynamic theory of multiple borrowing. J. Financ. Econ. 139 

1195–1250.

No. 28427.

(2), 389–404.

Grossman,  S.,  Stiglitz,  J.,  1980.  On  the  impossibility  of  informationally  efficient 

markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 70 (3), 393–408.

Hadlock, C., Pierce, J., 2010. New evidence on measuring financial constraints: Moving 

beyond the KZ index. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (5), 1909–1940.

Hellwig, C., Kohls, S., Veldkamp, L., 2012. Information choice technologies. Am. Econ. 

Ichihashi, S., 2020. Online privacy and information disclosure by consumers. Am. Econ. 

Jones, C., Tonetti, C., 2020. Nonrivalry and the economics of data. Am. Econ. Rev. 

Rev. 102 (3), 35–40.

Rev. 110 (2), 569–595.

110 (9), 2819–2858.

Kirpalani, R., Philippon, T., 2020. Data sharing and market power with two-sided 

platforms. NBER Working Paper No. 28023.

Lambrecht, A., Tucker, C., 2015. Can big data protect a firm from competition?. 

Working Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2705530.

Ma, S., Murfin, J., Pratt, R., 2022. Young firms, old capital. J. Financ. Econ. 146 (1), 

References

Acemoglu, D., Makhdoumi, A., Malekian, A., Ozdaglar, A., 2021. Too much data: Prices 
and inefficiencies in data markets. Am. Econ. J.: Microecon. (Forthcoming).

331–356.

Segal, I., 1999. Contracting with externalities. Q. J. Econ. 114 (2), 337–388.
Whited, T., Wu, G., 2006. Financial constraints risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 19 (2), 531–559.
Yang, K., 2022. Selling consumer data for profit: Optimal market-segmentation design 

and its consequences. Am. Econ. Rev. 112 (4), 1364–1393.

14 

