Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Payments and privacy in the digital economy(cid:73)
Toni Ahnert a,b
a European Central Bank, Germany
b CEPR, United Kingdom
c University of Bern and Study Center Gerzensee, Switzerland

, Peter Hoffmann a,∗, Cyril Monnet c

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We propose a model of lending, payments choice, and privacy in the digital economy. While digital payments 
enable merchants to sell goods online, they reveal information to their lender. Cash guarantees anonymity, but 
limits distribution to less efficient offline venues. In equilibrium, merchants trade off the efficiency gains from 
online distribution (with digital payments) and the informational rents from staying anonymous (with cash). 
While new technologies can reduce the privacy concerns associated with digital payments, they also redistribute 
surplus from the lender to merchants. Hence, privacy enhancements do not always improve welfare.

JEL classification:
D82
E42
E58
G21

Keywords:
Payments
Privacy
Lending
Central bank digital currency
Data sharing

1. Introduction

The rise of the digital economy has profound implications for the 
economics of payments. As more goods and services are sold online, 
physical currency (‘‘cash’’) is becoming impractical as means of pay-
ment for a growing share of economic activity. At the same time, the 
speed and convenience of digital payments has increased tremendously 
due to the proliferation of mobile wallets and the launch of instant 
payment systems. Accordingly, the use of cash is declining fast.1

However, these developments are not without concern. Digital pay-
ments  generate  troves  of  data  that  reveal  information  about  those 
making and receiving payments. It is well-known that the economic 
consequences of reduced privacy are ambiguous (Acquisti et al., 2016). 
This double-edged nature of data disclosure is also pervasive in credit 
markets. On the one hand, better information protects lenders from 
adverse selection and thus increases the availability of credit (Stiglitz 

and Weiss, 1981). On the other hand, more data also enables price 
discrimination and rent extraction (Boissay et al., 2021). Accordingly, 
a proliferation of data from digital payments may increase or decrease 
social welfare. 

Privacy is a design feature of payments system that can be tai-
lored to meet social needs and preferences. While the current system 
based on commercial bank money generates relatively large amounts of 
data, technological advances and regulatory initiatives can give rise to 
different environments. For example, advances in cryptography such 
as zero knowledge proofs (Goldwasser et al., 1989) and blockchain 
technology can enable decentralized transaction settlement with high 
levels of privacy. Similarly, public digital money in the form of central 
bank  digital  currency  (CBDC)  could  have  a  comparative  advantage
at  providing  privacy  because  it  is  not  bound  by  profit-maximizing

(cid:73)

Andreas Fuster was the editor for this article. We would like to thank the editor, two anonymous referees, and our discussants Rod Garratt, Naveen Gondhi, 
Maxi Guennewig, Zhiguo He, Yunzhi Hu, Jing Huang, Charlie Kahn, Alexandr Kopytov, Andreea Minca, Maarten van Oordt, Anatoli Segura, and Harald Uhlig for 
useful comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to audiences at HEC Paris, ECB, Sveriges Riksbank, Philadelphia Fed, the 2022 CEPR Paris Symposium, 
the CEMFI workshop on CBDC, VU Amsterdam, Bank of Canada, the CEPR conference ‘‘The Digital Revolution and Monetary Policy: What is New?’’, the 5th 
University of Washington Summer Finance Conference, EFA 2022 (Barcelona), the 2022 CEBRA Annual Meetings, the 21st FDIC Annual Bank Research Conference, 
the Economics of Payments XI Conference, the HEC Paris Banking in the age of challenges Conference, the CB&DC Seminar Series, MFA 2023 (Chicago), NFA 
2023 (Toronto), the CEPR-Bocconi Conference ‘‘The Future of Payments and Digital Assets’’, and AFA 2024 for useful comments and suggestions. An earlier 
version was circulated under the title The digital economy, privacy, and CBDC. The views expressed in this paper are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the European Central Bank or the Eurosystem.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  toni.ahnert@ecb.europa.eu (T. Ahnert), peter.hoffmann@ecb.europa.eu (P. Hoffmann), cyril.monnet@unibe.ch (C. Monnet).

1 See, for example, Table III.1 in Bank for International Settlements (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104050
Received 3 March 2024; Received in revised form 4 March 2025; Accepted 8 March 2025
Available online 8 April 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
T. Ahnert et al.

incentives or political motives.2

Given this background, what is the optimal design for digital pay-
ment instruments? This paper speaks to this question by developing a 
stylized model of lending to analyze the interconnections of payments 
and privacy in the context of the digital economy. In our model, het-
erogeneous sellers require outside finance for two rounds of production. 
They privately learn their type (high (H) or low (L)) in the initial round 
of production, and only H-sellers generate a continuation payoff that 
merits re-financing. The lender wants to learn sellers’ type to (i) extract 
the maximum surplus from first-round production, and (ii) to avoid 
adverse selection on the second loan. While the lender is a monopolist, 
her ability to set loan terms is disciplined by sellers’ outside option.

Sellers  can  distribute  their  goods  offline  (through  a  brick-and-
mortar  store)  or  online  (over  the  internet).  Online  distribution  is 
efficient  in  the  sense  that  it  generates  high  sales.  However,  online 
transactions must be settled with digital payment means, which leave 
a trace (‘‘signal’’) observable to the lender. By contrast, offline sales 
create a relatively low surplus, but they can be settled in cash with-
out any digital footprint. This forces the lender to elicit information 
through contractual terms (‘‘screening’’), enabling sellers to earn some 
informational rents. These rents constitute sellers’ endogenous benefit 
of privacy.

The  dichotomy  between  sales  efficiency  and  privacy  creates  the 
following trade-off for sellers. Online distribution creates a large sur-
plus, but the lack of privacy that arises from the need to use digital 
payments leaves sellers with a relatively small share of this surplus. 
By contrast, offline distribution generates less surplus, but the privacy 
brought about by cash guarantees that sellers can appropriate a larger 
share of it. If the benefits of more efficient sales outweigh the loss of 
informational rents associated with privacy, sellers distribute online.

While online distribution is efficient, there are three inefficiencies 
when sellers choose to stay offline. First, offline distribution generates 
a low level of sales. Second, the lender may find it too costly to elicit all 
information through contractual terms. In this case, only some, but not 
all, H-sellers will be re-financed, and additional future output is lost. 
And third, the lender may refuse to extend the initial loan because the 
informational rents appropriated by sellers are too high and prevent 
the lender from recovering her cost of funds.

Our benchmark case of perfectly informative payment flows is in-
spired by traditional payments systems centered around bank deposits 
(‘‘-money’’)  that  constitute  a  significant  source  of  information  for 
banks.3 We then extend the model to speak to recent developments 
that challenge this status quo, for example through changes in the 
competitive landscape, the rise of new technologies, or regulation.

First, we study the equilibrium when the design of digital money in-
cludes privacy-preserving features (called ‘‘-money’’). This is inspired 
by the gravitation of payments data outside of the banking sector (via 
non-bank PSPs), the development of privacy-preserving technologies, 
and the debate on CBDCs. In the context of our model, this means that 
the lender no longer gets a signal from payments.

Then -money enables sellers to capture the best of both worlds. 
They can reap some of the efficiency gains of online distribution, and 
at the same time earn informational rents from remaining anonymous. 
This raises welfare by (i) increasing sellers’ incentives to distribute 
online and (ii) inducing the lender to always elicit full information, 
so that her refinancing decisions are efficient. However, the resulting 

2 Major central banks have pledged to include privacy-preserving features, 
likely also in response to citizens’ concerns. For example, privacy has been 
named as number one concern in the Eurosystem’s public consultation on a 
digital euro (European Central Bank, 2021).

3 For  example,  the  consultancy  firm  PwC  argues  that  ‘‘payments 
generate  roughly  90%  of  banks’  useful  customer  data’’.  See  ‘‘Navigating 
the  payments  matrix–Payments  2025  &  beyond’’,  available  at  https:
//www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/financial-services/publications/financial-
services-in-2025/payments-in-2025.html.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

re-distribution of surplus towards sellers implies that the lender finds it 
more difficult to cover her cost of funds. As a result, she may refuse to 
grant the initial loan in case sellers’ outside option is sufficiently large, 
which reduces welfare. Notably, -money does not fully crowd out cash 
because the latter can generate higher informational rents under some 
conditions. Accordingly, the equilibrium with -money can still feature 
offline distribution.

Second, we analyze the case where users have control over the data 
generated by payments. Such a design of digital payments reflects a 
broader notion of privacy (Hughes, 1993; Acquisti et al., 2016), and 
is consistent with initiatives aimed at increasing end-user control over 
the data they help generate, such as ‘‘open banking’’ regulations. In our 
model, this new type of money (‘‘-money’’) enables sellers to choose 
whether the lender receives a signal or not, and at what time. We show 
that, in equilibrium, sellers decide to reveal a perfect signal after the 
repayment of the first loan. This timing choice separates the bright side 
(generating continuation finance) from the dark side (rent extraction) 
of informative payment flows, and guarantees that sellers always opt 
for online distribution. However, by empowering merchants, -money 
exacerbates the pressure on the lender’s profit margin, which increases 
the range of parameters for which she is not willing to grant the initial 
loan.

Since no form of digital money is unequivocally optimal, we close 
our analysis by studying the problem of a social planner that faces ex-
ante uncertainty about sellers’ outside option and chooses the available 
digital payment instrument to maximize utilitarian welfare. We find 
that privacy (i.e. -money) is optimal for most parameter configura-
tions because it strikes a balance between (i) providing incentives for 
sellers to distribute online and (ii) ensuring that the lender is able to ex-
tract sufficient surplus to cover her cost of funds. The additional feature 
of end-user control (-money) is only beneficial when the social gains 
from online distribution are small and sellers have poor outside options. 
Otherwise, the concomitant re-distribution of rents from the lender to 
sellers is ‘‘too large’’ in the sense that it can induce a breakdown of 
the lending market. Similarly, traditional payment methods such as 
deposits (-money) are optimal whenever the social benefits of online 
distribution are large and sellers are able to appropriate a sufficient 
share of these gains.

Literature.  Our  paper  is  related  to  the  literature  on  privacy  in 
payments. In Kahn et al. (2005), cash payments preserve the anonymity 
of the purchaser, which provides protection against moral hazard (mod-
eled as the risk of theft). This is different from the benefit of anonymity 
in our model, which is a reduced rent extraction in the lending market. 
Moreover, we also study new trade-offs associated with the choice of 
trading venues and their interactions with the privacy design of digital 
payments.

Garratt and Van Oordt (2021) is also a closely related paper. They 
study  a  setting  in  which  merchants  use  information  gleaned  from 
current customer payments to price discriminate future customers.4 
Customers can take costly actions to preserve their privacy in pay-
ments but fail to appreciate the full social value of doing so. Overall 
investment in privacy protection thus falls short of the social optimum, 
similar to a public goods problem. Instead of analyzing this externality, 
we focus on the private benefits and costs of privacy in payments, 
which we endogenize. Specifically, the benefits arise from informa-
tional rents in a contracting problem, while the costs arise from lower 
sales due to inefficient offline distribution.

Our paper builds on work studying the interaction of payments 
and lending. A large empirical literature (see, e.g., Black, 1975; Mester 
et al., 2007; Norden and Weber, 2010; Puri et al., 2017; Ouyang, 2023; 
Ghosh et al., 2024) suggests that payment flows are informative about 
borrower quality. Parlour et al. (2022) study a screening model where 

4 Kang (2024) uses a similar idea, although in his set up data helps to 

improve the matching of goods and customers’ preferences.

2 

T. Ahnert et al.

banks face competition for payment flows by FinTechs. While such 
competition may improve financial inclusion, it affects lending and 
payment pricing by threatening the information flow to banks. Relative 
to their contribution, we explicitly model the link between the signal 
and payments data. As a result, we show that the bank may prefer a 
contract that does not lead to full separation, which gives rise to other 
types of inefficiencies. Moreover, we study a broader definition of end-
user control over payments data that includes the ability to time the 
possible data release.

He  et  al.  (2023)  study  competition  between  banks  and  Fintech 
in lending markets with consumer data sharing. They find that open 
banking can hurt borrowers when lenders have different abilities to 
analyze the data shared by the borrower. In this case, there is a winner’s 
curse that can discourage participation of the lender with the worse 
data-analysis technology. Rather, we find that a digital payment tech-
nology with data-sharing features can be beneficial because it enables 
an ‘‘informational level-playing field’’ among lenders, as empirically 
documented by Babina et al. (2024). Finally, Agur et al. (2023) study 
the  privacy  policy  and  data  sales  decisions  of  a  ‘‘BigTech’’  digital 
payments provider. Unlike in our model, privacy is a fully exogenous 
cost to end-users in their setting.

Other theoretical work considers how the payment choice may sig-
nal the borrower’s quality and affects lending market outcomes. Ghosh 
et al. (2024) offer a model of a competitive lending market in which 
borrowers signal their propensity to divert funds (and thus default) via 
their choice of payment technology. The cost of default depends on the 
information received from payments. In Cheng and Izumi (2024), the 
choice of payment method affects the enforcement capability of the 
lender. By contrast, our focus is on how a lender with some market 
power can screen borrowers and how this is influenced by the choice 
of payment instruments. Rent distribution in the payment system is also 
a key feature in Auer et al. (2024).

Finally, our paper is related to the fast-growing literature on CBDC
(Ahnert et al., 2022). The interaction of payments information and 
credit supply in our model relates to work analyzing the effects of CBDC 
on  bank  disintermediation  (Andolfatto,  2021;  Keister  and  Sanches, 
2022; Chiu et al., 2023). Brunnermeier and Payne (2022) develop a 
model of platform design under competition with a public marketplace 
and a potential entrant, and study how different forms of interoper-
ability are affected by regulation (including CBDC). In Garratt and Lee 
(2021), privacy features of CBDC are a way to maintain an efficient 
monopoly in data collection. And in Keister and Monnet (2022), real-
time information from the payment system improve the efficacy of bank 
resolution in crisis times.

Structure. The paper proceeds as follows. We introduce the basic 
model with cash and deposits in Section 2, and solve for the equilib-
rium with digital payment in Section 3. We then introduce alternative 
payment  arrangements  in  Section  4,  and  study  the  social  planner’s 
optimal choice in Section 5. Section 6 concludes. All proofs are found 
in  Appendix   A,  and  additional  results  are  described  in  the  Online 
Appendix.

2. The basic model

There are four dates 𝑡 = 0, 1, 2, 3 with no discounting, a single good, 
and two sets of risk-neutral agents: a lender (she) and a continuum of 
sellers (he/they) of unit mass.

Sellers.  Sellers are of two types. A fraction 𝑞 ∈ (0, 1) is of high type 
(H-sellers) and the remaining 1 − 𝑞 are of low type (L-sellers). L-sellers 
produce a good of low quality at 𝑡 = 1 and nothing at 𝑡 = 3. By contrast, 
H-sellers produce a good of high quality at 𝑡 = 1, and output worth 𝜃 > 1
at 𝑡 = 3. Production at 𝑡 requires an investment of one unit at 𝑡 − 1 that 
must be raised from the lender. Production is indivisible, and sellers 
privately learn their type at the beginning of 𝑡 = 1.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

Lender.  The monopolistic lender is endowed with one unit of the good 
at 𝑡 = 0 and 𝑡 = 2. She always derives utility 1 from consuming one unit 
of the good, which is also her opportunity cost.

Loans.  The lender makes take-it-or-leave it offers to sellers. The lender 
can neither commit to long-term contracts, nor to not renegotiating the 
loan terms. Hence, it is as if she could set the interest rates on her loan 
at 𝑡 = 1 and 𝑡 = 3, respectively. While the monopolistic lender has 
all the bargaining power, sellers can always abscond with a fraction 
𝜆 ∈ (0, 1) of their sales or loaned good.5

Goods distribution.  Sellers can distribute their goods via two different 
venues 𝑣. They can either sell offline (𝑣 = 𝐹 ) via a brick-and-mortar 
store, or online (𝑣 = 𝑂) over the internet. Since their production is 
indivisible, they can only choose one of the two venues and they must 
do so at 𝑡 = 0, i.e. before learning their type.6

We assume that online distribution yields a relatively high level 
of sales. In particular, it guarantees that H-sellers generates sales of 
𝑝𝐻 . By contrast, offline distribution is less efficient. Specifically, high-
quality goods generate sales of 𝑝𝐻  only with probability 𝛼, and are 
sold for 𝑝𝐿 < 𝑝𝐻  with probability 1 − 𝛼. Thus, 𝛼 measures the relative 
efficiency of offline sales. We refer to H-sellers with high sales 𝑝𝐻  as 
HH-sellers, and H-sellers with low sales 𝑝𝐿 as HL-sellers. For simplicity, 
we assume that low-quality goods generate sales of 𝑝𝐿 independently of 
the distribution venue. For notational ease, we denote expected sales on 
venue 𝑣 by 𝑝𝑣, so that 𝑝𝑂 = 𝑞𝑝𝐻 +(1−𝑞)𝑝𝐿 and 𝑝𝐹 = 𝑝𝑂 −(1−𝛼)𝑞𝛥𝑝, with 
≡ 𝑝𝐻 − 𝑝𝐿. In Online Appendix OA.2, we show how to endogenize 
𝛥𝑝
this price structure using search frictions and Nash bargaining.

To  make  matters  interesting,  we  assume  that  the  payoff  on  the 
continuation project 𝜃 exceeds 𝑝𝐿, but at the same time is smaller than 
𝑝𝐻 .

Assumption 1.  𝑝𝐻

≥ 𝜃 > 𝑝𝐿

≥ 1.

This assumption ensures that the lender can extract the full contin-
uation surplus from HH-sellers but not from HL-sellers. Accordingly, 
she faces a non-trivial choice among different types of contract menus 
when sellers distribute their goods offline.7

Payments.  Offline sales can be settled with physical currency (‘‘cash’’). 
This is too cumbersome for online sales, which therefore must be settled 
via a digital means of payment. However, unlike cash, such transactions 
create a digital footprint. In line with existing literature, we assume that 
digital payment flows are informative about borrowers’ income. More 
precisely, when the digital payment for an online sale is processed, it 
generates a signal 𝜎(𝑝) to the lender with 𝑝 ∈ {𝑝𝐻 , 𝑝𝐿} such that

{

𝜎(𝑝) =

𝑝 with prob. 𝑥
𝑝′ with prob. 1 − 𝑥,

𝑝′ ≠ 𝑝,

where 𝑥 ≥ 1∕2 denotes the precision of the signal. The lender observes 
a signal about the revenue and tries to infer both sellers’ type and 

5 Alternatively, sellers’ ability to extract a share of the surplus could arise 
from a moral hazard problem in the spirit of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), 
whereby the lender needs to provide incentives for sellers to exert effort. We 
lay out the details for such an alternative model setup in Online Appendix 
OA.4.

6 We think of distribution decisions as long-term, which sellers have to 
make before knowing the (entire) demand for their goods. Hence, they cannot 
condition the trading venue on their own quality. In Online Appendix OA.3, we 
alternatively assume that sellers learn their type before choosing the trading 
venue. We show the existence of a mimicking equilibrium in which the venue 
choice is uninformative, so that our baseline results go through.

7 Alternatively, such a trade-off for the lender arises endogenously when 
prices are the result of Nash bargaining between sellers and prospective buyers. 
In this case, a feedback effect from continuation investment to sales prices 
creates variation in the informational rents that sellers can appropriate (see 
Online Appendix OA.2 for details).

3 

T. Ahnert et al.

their true revenue (more on this below). By contrast, the exchange of 
physical currency does not leave any trace. Accordingly, we assume 
that offline transactions settled in cash do not generate any signal.8

Timing and equilibrium definition.  The timing is as follows. At 𝑡 = 0, 
sellers try to borrow one unit from the lender and, in case of success, 
choose their distribution venue 𝑣 ∈ {𝑂, 𝐹 }. At 𝑡 = 1, sellers learn 
their type 𝜏 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿} and generate sales 𝑝. The pair 𝜋 = (𝜏, 𝑝) ∈
{𝐻, 𝐿} × {𝑝𝐿, 𝑝𝐻 } is the seller’s profile. The lender learns the signal 
𝜎 ∈ {𝑝𝐻 , 𝑝𝐿, ∅}, where 𝜎 = ∅ whenever the seller trades offline or 
absconds. Given 𝜎, the lender offers a contract menu {𝑟𝜎 (𝜋), 𝑘𝜎 (𝜋)}𝜎,𝜋, 
where 𝑟𝜎 (𝜋) is the repayment of the initial loan and 𝑘𝜎 (𝜋) ∈ {0, 1} is 
an indicator whether a continuation loan is granted at 𝑡 = 2, when a 
seller reports profile 𝜋. The lender also chooses the repayment 𝑅 on the 
continuation loan at 𝑡 = 3. H-sellers who have received a continuation 
loan produce 𝜃 and repay 𝑅, or abscond with the production to obtain 
a payoff 𝜆𝜃. L-sellers who have received a continuation loan abscond 
with it to obtain a payoff 𝜆. Our equilibrium definition is as follows.

Definition 1.  An equilibrium consists of an initial lending decision, 
a menu of contracts {𝑟𝜎 (𝜋), 𝑘𝜎 (𝜋)}𝜎,𝜋 , a repayment for the second loan 
R, a venue choice 𝑣 ∈ {𝑂, 𝐹 }, and a reporting strategy  ̂𝜋 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿} ×
{𝑝𝐿, 𝑝𝐻 } such that:

1. the lender decides upon the initial loan and chooses the contract 
menu {𝑟𝜎 (𝜋), 𝑘𝜎 (𝜋)}𝜎,𝜋 as well as repayment on the second loan 
𝑅 to maximize expected profits, taking sellers venue choice and 
reporting strategy as given;

2. upon being granted the initial loan, sellers choose the venue 𝑣
and reporting strategy  ̂𝜋 to maximize expected profits, taking 
{𝑟𝜎 (𝜋), 𝑘𝜎 (𝜋)}𝜎,𝜋 and 𝑅 as given.

As is standard, sellers report a profile that maps into a contract of 
repayment and a refinancing choice. It is as if sellers were choosing that 
contract and this is how we will think about the sellers report going 
forward.

Welfare.  Four potential inefficiencies can arise in equilibrium. First, 
offline distribution is inefficient because it generates lower expected 
sales, as a fraction 1 − 𝛼 of H-sellers only generates revenue 𝑝𝐿. Second, 
the lender may not extend the initial loan if the share of the surplus 
that she can extract is too low (i.e. 𝜆 is too high). Third, the lender 
may not re-finance all H-sellers at 𝑡 = 2 if she is not fully informed 
about their type. Fourth, sellers may decide to abscond, which destroys 
resources because the fraction 1 − 𝜆 of output is lost. Therefore, welfare 
is maximized whenever (i) the lender extends an initial loan to all 
sellers;  (ii)  all  sellers  distribute  their  goods  online;  (iii)  the  lender 
grants a second loan to all H-sellers but not to L-sellers; (iv) all sellers 
repay their loans. This efficiency benchmark is useful as we turn to the 
economy with asymmetric information.

Key parameters and mapping them to the real world.  In what follows, 
we will solve for the equilibrium with different types of money that 
differ in terms of (i) signal precision 𝑥 and (ii) the extent to which 
sellers can control the timing of the signal release. The two crucial 
parameters  are  𝜆  and  𝛼.  While  𝜆  formally  represents  the  threat  of 
absconding, we think of it as capturing real-world features such as 
the degree of competition in lending markets, or the level of legal 
contract enforcement. Similarly, 𝛼 (the relative efficiency of offline 
distribution)  could  in  reality  correspond  to  factors  such  as  sector-
/country-specific exposure to technological innovation, or differences 
in market structure. We will further discuss these interpretations in 
Section 5.

8 Nothing  would  change  if  we  also  allowed  offline  sales  to  be  settled 
digitally.  Since  digital  payments  do  not  entail  a  benefit  for  offline  sales, 
merchants would choose not to accept digital payments but only cash.

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

3. Benchmark: Transparent digital payments

In this section, we solve for the equilibrium when digital payments 
provide a signal with high precision to the lender. We believe this 
benchmark is useful because of the structure of traditional payment 
systems. These are centered around banks and their ability to create 
deposits, or ‘‘commercial bank money’’. As providers of both means 
of payment and payment rails, banks derive a substantial amount of 
information from processing customer payment flows. This does not 
only include the amount and timing of payments, but also information 
on the parties involved and the purpose of the transaction. It is well-
known that these data can then be used to assess and monitor borrower 
credit quality.

We therefore associate digital payment means with a high level of 
signal precision 𝑥 to bank deposits or related payment instruments that 
leave a trace observable to the lender. We henceforth refer to them as 
-money (short for deposits). For simplicity, we assume that the signal 
is perfect, 𝑥 = 1.9 Since the lender observes digital payments activity 
in real time under such an arrangement, she is able to detect sellers’ 
attempts of absconding by ‘‘catching them in the act’’. Hence we assume 
that absconding requires the diversion of cash flows through offshore 
accounts or the use of opaque accounting procedures, which renders 
the signal completely uninformative.10

To solve for the equilibrium, we proceed backwards. We start with 
the lender’s decision to extend a continuation loan. We then solve for 
the optimal contract menu for the initial loan repayment, and then 
determine the seller’s choice of trading venue. Finally, we study the 
lender’s initial lending choice.

Lender refinancing choice.  Since not all sellers produce output at 𝑡 = 3, 
the lender’s decision at 𝑡 = 2 depends on whether she is informed 
about  sellers’  type.  When  she  is  informed,  L-sellers  do  not  receive 
a continuation loan because they will produce nothing and abscond 
with the loan. By contrast, H-sellers do generate output 𝜃, so that the 
monopolistic lender will set a repayment of 

𝑅∗ = (1 − 𝜆)𝜃

(1)

and leave H-sellers with nothing in excess of their outside option 𝜆𝜃.

To make the analysis interesting, we require the repayment to cover 
at least the lender’s unit cost of investment, since she would never 
grant a continuation loan otherwise. This is the case whenever 𝜆 <
𝜆 ≡ 𝜃−1
. Conversely, when the lender does not know the seller’s type, 
𝜃
she faces adverse selection and will only earn the repayment 𝑅∗ with 
probability 𝑞. To simplify the analysis, we assume that this renders 
uninformed lending unprofitable. We ensure this by imposing 𝜆 > 𝜆 ≡
max{ 𝑞𝜃−1
𝑞𝜃

, 0}.11 We summarize these bounds as follows.

Assumption 2.  𝜆 ∈ (𝜆, 𝜆).

For  expositional  clarity,  we  additionally  impose  bounds  on  the 
degree of adverse selection, 𝑞. The upper bound on 𝑞 helps to reduce the 
number of contract menus that the lender will offer in equilibrium.12 
The lower bound ensures that the lender always breaks even when -
money is used so that the equilibrium is efficient. This assumption is 
without loss of generality in the sense that it does not affect the welfare 

9 The intuition developed here and in the next section carries over to the 
, 1], which we 

general case in which 𝑥 can take any value in the interval [ 1
study in Online Appendix OA.1.
10 Importantly, the use of such procedures is not a separate choice from 
absconding, but rather a necessity.
11 Uninformed lending is unprofitable whenever (1 − 𝜆)𝑞𝜃 < 1. For 𝑞𝜃 < 1, 
this is always true, so that no lower bound on 𝜆 is required. Otherwise, it holds 
whenever 𝜆 > 𝑞𝜃−1
12 Specifically, it rules out a partial participation contract—see the Proof of 
Lemma  2 for details.

𝑞𝜃

.

2

(3)

(4)

T. Ahnert et al.

ranking of the various payment instruments considered. As we will see 
below, the lender earns the highest expected profits under -money. 
Taken together, we assume the following.

Assumption 3.  𝑞 ∈ (𝑞, 𝑞), where 𝑞 ≡ 𝑝𝐿
𝑝𝐻

 and 𝑞 ≡ 𝜃−𝑝𝐿

𝜃(𝜃−1)+𝛥𝑝

Loan repayment at 𝑡 = 1.  Here we study the lender’s choice of repay-
ment the initial loan. We separately study the cases of online and offline 
distribution, since the lender’s information set depends on the selected 
distribution venue.

When sellers distribute online and accept -money, the payment 
system  perfectly  reveals  their  type  to  the  lender  because  sales  and 
types are perfectly correlated with online distribution. Therefore, the 
repayments do not have to satisfy any incentive constraints and are 
fully  pinned  down  by  sellers’  participation  constraints.  Hence,  the 
lender refinances all H-sellers at 𝑡 = 2.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

Sellers’  choice  of  distribution  venue.  We  can  now  determine  sellers’ 
choice of distribution venue at 𝑡 = 0. At this stage, sellers take the 
contracts derived in the previous section as given. With offline distri-
bution, they will face the separating contract {𝑟𝑆 , 𝑘𝑆 } or the partially 
pooling contract {𝑟𝑃 , 𝑘𝑃 }, depending on parameters. By contrast, online 
distribution implies that they will face the contract {𝑟, 𝑘}.

Let 𝑀 = {𝑆, 𝑃 , } denote the set of contract menus that sellers can 
possibly face at 𝑡 = 1, with individual elements indexed by 𝑚. Sellers’ 
expected profits for a given venue 𝑣 and contract menu 𝑚 are then 
given by expected sales minus loan repayment plus the gains from the 
continuation project. This expectation is taken over all possible profiles 
𝜋 = (𝜏, 𝑝) ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿} × {𝑝𝐻 , 𝑝𝐿} for this particular venue,14

[𝑝 − 𝑟𝑚(𝜋) + 𝑘𝑚(𝜋)𝜆𝜃] .

 𝑚
𝑣 = 𝐸𝜋|𝑣
Then, using Lemmas  1 and 2, we get expected profits of 

Lemma 1.   Suppose that sellers choose online distribution with -money. 
Then, the lender sets repayments 𝑟
𝐻 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃.

𝐿 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 and 𝑟

 𝑚
𝑣 =

𝜆𝑝𝐹 + 𝛼𝑞(1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝
𝜆𝑝𝐹 + 𝛼𝑞(1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝 + 𝑞𝜆(𝜃 − 𝑝𝐿)
𝜆𝑝𝑂

if 𝑚 = 𝑃 and 𝑣 = 𝐹
if 𝑚 = 𝑆 and 𝑣 = 𝐹
if 𝑚 =  and 𝑣 = 𝑂.

(a)
(b)
(c)

In essence, the information from payment flows enables the lender 
to condition the contract terms on sellers’ type. She can therefore ex-
tract the maximum possible surplus, which leaves sellers with nothing 
but their reservation value.

Under offline distribution with cash payments, the lender receives 
no  signal.  Accordingly,  she  must  elicit  information  by  offering  an 
appropriate menu of contracts (‘‘screening’’). Ideally, the lender wants 
to learn sellers’ full profile. Knowledge of the type allows her to choose 
refinancing appropriately, while knowledge of the level of sales enables 
her to set the repayment as high as possible. However, the fact that H-
sellers sometimes realize low sales complicates the lender’s inference 
problem and prevents her from acquiring all this information.

In choosing the optimal contract, the lender faces the following 
trade-off. She can either offer a separating contract with repayments 
(𝑟𝑆
𝐻 , 𝑟𝑆
𝐿) that identifies all H-sellers, or alternatively a partial pooling
contract with repayments (𝑟𝑃
𝐿) that only singles out HH-sellers, and 
pools the remaining HL-sellers with L-sellers. While the first contract 
menu generates more information, it requires the lender to leave addi-
tional informational rents to sellers by lowering some of the repayments 
on the initial loan. Lemma  2 characterizes the lender’s optimal choice.

𝐻 , 𝑟𝑃

Lemma 2.  Suppose that sellers choose offline distribution. Then, the lender 
offers a separating contract (S) whenever 
𝜃 − 1
𝜃 − 𝑝𝐿

≡ (1 − 𝛼)

𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑆

(2)

,

𝐻 = 𝑝𝐿, and 𝑟𝑃

𝐻 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 + 𝜆𝜃.

and a partial pooling contract (P) otherwise. The respective repayments are 
𝐿 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿, 𝑟𝑆
𝑟𝑆

𝐿 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿, 𝑟𝑃
Inequality (2) captures the trade-off inherent in the lender’s screen-
ing  problem.13  With  full  separation,  the  lender  can  distinguish  HL-
sellers from L-sellers. This allows for more efficient re-financing, so 
that the continuation surplus 𝜃 − 1 is not only generated by HH-sellers, 
but also HL-sellers (conditional on an H-seller arriving, the probability 
increases by 1 − 𝛼). At the same time, separation is costly because the 
lender must ensure that HL-sellers can afford the high repayment. This 
requires her to lower the ‘‘spread’’ between high and low repayments 
from 𝜆𝜃 to 𝜆𝑝𝐿, which is only optimal if 𝜆 is sufficiently low.

With offline (𝐹 ) distribution, sellers earn informational rents so that 
their profits exceed their outside option 𝜆𝑝𝐹 . These rents are higher 
with the separating contract because the bank must lower the ‘‘spread’’ 
between  high  and  low  repayments  from  𝜆𝜃  to  𝜆𝑝𝐿  to  achieve  full 
separation. By contrast, sellers receive exactly their reservation utility 
with online (𝑂) distribution and -money. However, we have 𝑝𝑂 > 𝑝𝐹
because HL-sellers’ generate sales of 𝑝𝐻  in this case, compared to 𝑝𝐿
with offline distribution. The following Lemma characterizes sellers’ 
venue choice, where 𝜆𝑆 is defined in Eq.  (2).

Lemma 3.  Suppose sellers obtain the initial loan. Then, they choose online 
distribution if one of the following conditions is satisfied.

(i) 𝜆 > 𝜆𝑆 and 𝜆 ≥ 𝛼
(ii) 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑆 and 𝜆 ≥ 𝜆0
Otherwise they choose offline distribution.

𝛥𝑝
𝑝𝐻 −𝜃

≡ 𝛼

Sellers’ choice trades off the efficiency gains from online distribution 
with  the  informational  rents  arising  from  the  anonymity  of  offline 
sales settled in cash. Intuitively, a high value of 𝜆 means that sellers 
obtain  a  large  share  of  the  efficiency  gains  associated  with  online 
distribution, which increases their willingness to choose this venue. By 
contrast, a high value of 𝛼 means that the efficiency gains from online 
distribution are relatively small, so sellers are less willing to sacrifice 
the informational rents from using cash with offline trade.

To understand this trade-off, it is most instructive to look at the 
case in which the lender offers a partial pooling contract under offline 
distribution (𝜆 > 𝜆𝑆 ). Using Eqs. (4)(a) and (4)(c), we can write 

(5)

𝐹 = 𝜆(1 − 𝛼)𝑞𝛥𝑝 − 𝛼𝑞(1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝.

 
𝑂 −  𝑃
The first term of (5) represents the efficiency gains from online distribu-
tion that accrues to sellers. Relative to offline distribution, the overall 
surplus increases by 𝑝𝑂 − 𝑝𝐹 = (1 − 𝛼)𝑞𝛥𝑝 because HL-sellers’ sales 
increase from 𝑝𝐿 to 𝑝𝐻 . Since the lender is a monopolist, she extracts 
the maximum surplus possible so that sellers are left with a share 𝜆 of 
these gains. The second term of (5) is the cost of online distribution due 
to a loss of anonymity. Since the lender obtains a perfect signal, HH-
sellers (with mass 𝛼𝑞) no longer earn an information rent of (1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝. 
Canceling terms, we deduce that sellers distribute online if and only if 
𝜆 > 𝛼.15

13 As usual under monopolistic screening (Bolton and Dewatripont, 2004), 
the low repayment 𝑟𝐿 is pinned down by L-sellers’ participation constraint, 
who just earn their outside option 𝜆𝑝𝐿. The spread between the high and 
the low repayment is determined by the incentive constraint of HH-sellers for 
the partial pooling contract, and the feasibility constraint of HL-sellers for the 
separating contract. While other contracts are possible, we show in the Proof 
of Lemma  2 that they imply lower expected profits for the lender.

14 For example, 𝜋|𝑂 ∈ {(𝐻, 𝑝𝐻 ), (𝐿, 𝑝𝐿).
15 The  intuition  for  the  case  in  which  the  lender  offers  the  separating 
contract with offline distribution (𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑆 ) is the same. However, sellers’ 
indifference curve is steeper (the slope of 𝜆0 is larger than one) because they 
earn more information rents under this contract.

5 

1. For 𝜆 > 𝜆𝑆 , the lender offers a partial pooling contract to offline 



T. Ahnert et al.

The lender’s initial lending decision.  We close the model by determining 
the  lender’s  initial  lending  decision.  She  is  willing  to  grant  a  loan 
at 𝑡 = 0 if and only if she can at least break even. Note that this 
can in principle allow for the first loan to be a loss-maker as long 
as these losses are recouped via the second loan. In equilibrium, the 
lender correctly anticipates sellers’ distribution choice and her own 
subsequent contract choice. Using Lemmas  1 and 2, we can write the 
lender’s expected profits as 

𝑚

𝑣 =

(1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝑂 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1)
(1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1) − 𝑞𝜆(𝜃 − 𝑝𝐿)
(1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝛼𝑞(𝜃 − 1)

if 𝑚 =  and 𝑣 = 𝑂
if 𝑚 = 𝑆 and 𝑣 = 𝐹
if 𝑚 = 𝑃 and 𝑣 = 𝐹 .

(a)
(b)
(c)

(6)

Eq. (6)(a) illustrates that -money enables the lender to extract the 
maximum surplus as sellers just obtain their outside option. Our bounds 
on 𝑞 and 𝜆 ensure that this expression is always positive, so the lender 
extends the first loan. By contrast, with offline distribution, the lender 
must cede additional surplus to sellers’ for eliciting information. This 
reduces her profits, such that she may fail to break even if 𝜆 is too large 
(see the Appendix  A for the precise thresholds 𝜆𝑆
𝐹 ). In this case, 
the lender will not extend the initial loan. The following Proposition 
fully characterizes the equilibrium.

𝐹  and 𝜆𝑃

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium in the Baseline Model). 

sellers. Sellers

(i) distribute online if 𝜆 ≥ 𝛼,
(ii) distribute offline if 𝜆 < min{𝛼, 𝜆𝑃
(iii) do not get an initial loan for 𝜆𝑃

𝐹 }, and
𝐹 < 𝜆 < 𝛼.

2. For 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑆 , the lender offers a separating contract to offline sellers. 

Sellers

(i) distribute online if 𝜆 ≥ 𝜆0,
(ii) distribute offline if 𝜆 < min{𝜆0, 𝜆𝑆
(iii) do not get an initial loan for 𝜆𝑆

𝐹 }, and
𝐹 < 𝜆 < 𝜆0.

All online sales are settled with -money (by assumption). The thresholds 
𝜆𝑆
𝐹  and 𝜆𝑃

𝐹  are defined in inequalities (A.4) and (A.5) in Appendix  A.
Fig.  1 illustrates the equilibrium in the (𝜆, 𝛼)-space. The downward-
sloping  solid  line  is  𝜆 = 𝜆𝑆 ,  which  represents  inequality  (2)  from 
Lemma   2.  It  delineates  the  parameter  combinations  for  which  the 
lender offers a partially pooling contract (to the right) and a separating 
contract (to the left) under offline distribution. The two upward-sloping 
dotted lines represent sellers’ indifference curves regarding the choice 
of trading venue. For parameter combinations above (below), sellers 
choose online (offline) distribution. Finally, the dash-dotted lines repre-
sent the break-even thresholds 𝜆𝑆
𝐹  and 𝜆𝑃
𝐹 . For parameter combinations 
above  these  lines,  the  lender  does  not  extend  a  loan  because  she 
correctly anticipates that this will generate losses.

Overall, the following equilibrium outcomes are possible:  (i) no 
loan,  (ii)  online  distribution,  and  (iii)  offline  distribution.  To  gain 
intuition, it is helpful to focus on a subset of the parameter space where 
the contract menu offered by the lender at 𝑡 = 1 (separating or partial 
pooling) is held fixed.

So consider the area to the left of the solid black line where the 
lender offers a separating contract. Whenever 𝜆 is high relative to 𝛼, 
sellers distribute online because the resulting efficiency gains are large 
and they are able to extract a sizeable share thereof. Moreover, the use 
of -money ensures that the lender is always willing to lend because 
it guarantees maximum profits. As 𝛼 increases, sellers’ incentives to 
distribute online diminish and they switch to offline distribution with 
cash. However, this reduces the lender’s profits as she must cede some 
rents in proportion of 𝜆 to extract information on sellers’ type. If 𝜆
is sufficiently high (above 𝜆𝑆
𝐹 ), lending becomes unprofitable and the 
lender is no longer willing to extend the initial loan.

The intuition for the case when the lender offers a partial pooling 
contract is essentially the same. The only difference is that this contract 

6 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

entails lower information rents, which slightly alters the trade-offs for 
sellers’ distribution decision (at 𝑡 = 1) and the lender’s initial lending 
decision (at 𝑡 = 0). This can be seen by the differences in slope for the 
dotted and dash-dotted lines in Fig.  1 across both sides of the solid line.
The equilibrium is efficient whenever sellers distribute goods online 
(see  the  white  areas  in  Fig.   1).  In  this  case,  all  H-sellers  generate 
high sales 𝑝𝐻 . Moreover, the use of -money ensures that the lender 
becomes fully informed and provides a continuation loan to all H-sellers 
(and only them). The total surplus generated in this case is given by 



𝑂 = 𝑝𝑂 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1).

(7)

Otherwise, the equilibrium is inefficient, which is indicated by gray and 
shaded areas in Fig.  1. Since sellers do not abscond on the equilibrium 
path, three inefficiencies arise in equilibrium. First, offline distribution 
entails a welfare loss of (1 − 𝛼)𝑞𝛥𝑝 because HL-sellers generate low 
revenues. Second, an additional inefficiency arises when the lender 
uses  the  partial  pooling  contract.  In  this  case,  she  fails  to  provide 
continuation financing to HL-sellers, which generates a welfare loss of 
(1 − 𝛼)𝑞(𝜃 − 1). Finally, whenever the lender decides not to grant the 
initial loan, no output is generated at all and total welfare is equal to 
zero.

 𝑃

 𝑆

𝐹 = 
𝐹 = 
𝑁𝐿 = 0.

𝑂 − (1 − 𝛼)𝑞𝛥𝑝

𝑂 − (1 − 𝛼)𝑞𝛥𝑝 − (1 − 𝛼)𝑞(𝜃 − 1)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Accordingly, we can rank equilibrium outcomes in terms of welfare as 
follows: 

𝑂 >  𝑆

𝑁𝐿.

𝐹 >  𝑃

𝐹 > 

4. Alternative arrangements

In this section, we study two deviations from the benchmark model. 
These are motivated by recent developments such as the rise of non-
bank payment service providers (PSPs), the advent of new technologies 
(e.g. blockchain), regulatory initiatives like ‘‘open banking’’, and the 
ongoing  debate  on  central  bank  digital  currency  (CBDC).  First,  we 
study the case of privacy-preserving digital payments that prevent the 
lender from extracting information from payment flows. Second, we 
analyze a model where end-users have control over the data generated 
by payment systems, and can decide whether and with whom to share 
them.

4.1. Privacy-preserving digital payments

The past two decades have seen the rapid rise of non-bank PSPs, 
including firms like Paypal (United States), Wise (United Kingdom), 
WeChat Pay and AliPay (China). While payments continue to be settled 
in commercial bank money held in segregated accounts, these entities 
provide the customer interface for an increasing number of transac-
tions. This implies that they are in control over the data that is being 
generated  through  individual  payments.  Accordingly,  banks  merely 
provide  the  payment  rails  and  often  only  observe  netted  payment 
flows after individual transactions have been internalized within the 
PSPs’ systems. Moreover, these transactions frequently come without 
information on their ultimate origin and purpose. Taken together, the 
growth of non-bank PSPs implies a significant loss on banks’ ability to 
derive information from payment flows.

Going forward, technological innovations also have the potential to 
diminish banks’ ability to derive information from payments data. The 
central premise of distributed ledger technology (DLT) is the decen-
tralized settlement of transactions in the digital space. By definition, 
this aims to eliminate the creation of an informative digital footprint. 
While cryptocurrencies are currently not widely adopted as means of 
payment, DLT has the potential to further disrupt the information flows 
to banks and other lenders.

 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Ahnert et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

Fig. 1.  Equilibrium Map with -money in (𝛼, 𝜆)-space. Parameter values are: 𝑝𝐻 = 6, 𝑝𝐿 = 2.5, 𝜃 = 5, 𝑞 = 0.11. The 𝑦-axis is truncated at 𝜆 = 0.8. Since 𝑞𝜃 < 1, 𝜆 = 0. Labels indicate 
(i) the type of contract menu offered by the lender conditional on sellers choosing offline distribution, and (ii) the equilibrium outcome (Online, Offline, No Loan). For example, 
the label ‘‘S-Online’’ indicates that the lender offers a separating contract under offline distribution, and sellers choose to distribute online in equilibrium.

Finally,  central  banks  around  the  world  are  examining  the  case 
for retail CBDC. Several major central banks have made pledges to 
incorporate privacy-preserving features into their CBDC designs, which 
is likely to reduce the informational content of payment flows relative 
to the status quo with -money.16 The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) 
has already rolled out its e-CNY across several major cities, and its 
privacy provisions imply a drastic loss of access to information for 
banks.17

With these developments in mind, we modify our benchmark model 
and henceforth assume that digital payments are based on privacy-
preserving technology. We refer to this as -money. Again for simplic-
ity, we assume that such payments generate a completely uninforma-
tive signal, so 𝑥 = 1
. Recall that Online Appendix OA.1 considers the 
2
case with general precision 𝑥 ∈ [ 1
2

, 1].
Whenever sellers distribute online and allow sales to be settled in -
money, the lender faces a similar problem as with offline sales settled in 
cash.18 Since the signal is uninformative, she must elicit information by 
setting the appropriate contractual terms on the initial loan. However, 
since online distribution is efficient, all H-sellers generate high sales, 
𝑝𝐻 . This simplifies the lender’s inference problem.

Lemma 4.   Suppose that sellers choose online distribution and settlement 
in  -money.  Then,  the  lender  always  offers  a  separating  contract  with 
repayments 𝑟

𝐻 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 + 𝜆𝜃 and 𝑟

𝐿 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿.

16 For example, the Bank of England recently launched a new consultation 
paper, according to which CBDC users would be able to ‘‘vary their privacy 
preferences to suit their privacy needs’’ (Bank of England, 2023b).
17 See Duffie and Economy (2022) for a detailed description. They write 
(p.32): ‘‘Within the e-CNY system, operating institutions cannot directly see 
who is paying whom or even how much is being paid because the PBOC’s 
authentication center verifies the authenticity of circulating e-CNY, not the 
operating institutions’’.
18 We do not consider the case of offline sales settled in -money because 
the only feature that distinguishes them from cash is their ability to settle 
online transactions.

7 

Given these contract terms, sellers’ expected payoff under online 

distribution with -money is equal to 
 
𝑂 = 𝜆𝑝𝑂 + 𝑞(1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝.

(11)

In this case, all H-sellers generate high sales and earn an informational 
rent of (1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝. Comparing this payoff with Eqs. (4)(a)–(4)(c) yields 
the following result regarding sellers’ optimal venue choice.

Lemma 5.   Define ̂𝜆 ≡ (1 − 𝛼)
 and suppose sellers obtain the initial 
loan. Then, they choose offline distribution if and only if ̂𝜆 < 𝜆 < 𝜆𝑆 . All 
online payments are settled in -money.

𝛥𝑝
𝜃−𝑝𝐿

Relative to the benchmark case where sellers must choose between 
cash  and  -money,  the  introduction  of  -money  enables  sellers  to 
capture the best of both worlds. They can reap the efficiency gains of 
online distribution, as well as the informational rents from remaining 
anonymous vis-a-vis the lender. As a result, -money fully displaces 
-money.

Interestingly, physical cash continues to play a role in the economy 
with -money. This is the case whenever sellers prefer to distribute 
offline, which requires two conditions. First, the lender must choose to 
offer a separating contract with offline distribution, which yields higher 
informational rents for sellers than the partial pooling contract. This 
requires 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑆 . Second, sellers must prefer this option over online 
distribution with -money, which is the case for 𝜆 ≥ ̂𝜆. The following 
inequality ensures that 𝜆𝑆 > ̂𝜆, so that both conditions can be fulfilled 
simultaneously. Going forward, we assume that it is satisfied.

Assumption 4.  𝜃 − 1 > 𝛥𝑝.

The lender’s expected profit is 

 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1),
which is non-negative for 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆 ≡ 𝑝𝐿−1+𝑞(𝜃−1)
. Together with Lemmas 
2 and 5, we can now characterize the equilibrium in the economy with 
-money.

(12)

𝑝𝐿

T. Ahnert et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

Fig. 2.  Equilibrium Map with -money in (𝛼, 𝜆)-space. Parameter values are: 𝑝𝐻 = 6, 𝑝𝐿 = 2.5, 𝜃 = 5, 𝑞 = 0.11. The 𝑦-axis is truncated at 𝜆 = 0.8. Since 𝑞𝜃 < 1, 𝜆 = 0. Labels indicate 
(i) the type of contract menu offered by the lender conditional on sellers choosing offline distribution, and (ii) the equilibrium outcome (Online, Offline, No Loan). For example, 
the label ‘‘S-Online’’ indicates that the lender offers a separating contract under offline distribution, and sellers choose to distribute online in equilibrium.

Proposition 2 (Equilibrium with -Money). 
1. For 𝜆𝑆 < 𝜆, the lender offers a partial pooling contract to offline sellers. 
Sellers distribute online for 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆 , and do not get an initial loan otherwise.
2. For ̂𝜆 < 𝜆 < 𝜆𝑆 , the lender offers a separating contract to offline sellers. 
Sellers distribute offline for 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑆
𝐹 , and do not get an initial loan otherwise.
3. For 𝜆 < ̂𝜆, the lender offers a separating contract to offline sellers. Sellers 
distribute online for 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆 , and do not get an initial loan otherwise.
All online sales are settled with -money.

Fig.  2 illustrates the equilibrium. There are two downward-sloping 
diagonal lines which separate the parameter space into three regions 
that correspond to the different cases listed in Proposition Proposition 
2. As before, the solid line 𝜆 = 𝜆𝑆 delineates the parameter space 
for which the lender offers a partially pooling contract (to the right) 
and a separating contract (to the left) under offline distribution. In 
addition, the dashed line 𝜆 = ̂𝜆 indicates the parameter combinations 
for which sellers are indifferent between online distribution with -
money  and  offline  distribution  with  cash  when  the  lender  offers  a 
separating contract. Following Assumption  4, we have ̂𝜆 < 𝜆𝑆 , so this 
line is to the left of the solid line, and the space between both lines 
represents the parameter space where sellers prefer offline distribution.
To gain some intuition, fix some point in the ‘‘S-Online’’ region and 
move horizontally by increasing 𝛼 while keeping 𝜆 fixed. As 𝛼 increases, 
offline distribution becomes more attractive, and sellers prefer to switch 
once the threshold ̂𝜆 is crossed. As 𝛼 increases further, the lender finds 
it less worthwhile to engage in full separation and opts for a partial 
participation contract instead once the second threshold 𝜆𝑆 is crossed. 
However, the resulting decrease in sellers’ informational rents induces 
them to switch back to online distribution.

The  horizontal  dotted  lines  represent  the  thresholds  𝜆𝑆

𝐹   and  𝜆
above which the lender is not willing to grant the initial loan. We 
observe that 𝜆 > 𝜆𝑆
𝐹 , i.e. it is more difficult for lenders to break 
even when sellers choose the offline venue. This is intuitive: in order 
to  achieve  full  separation  with  cash,  the  lender  must  offer  larger 
informational rents. Moreover, the total surplus generated is lower than 
with online distribution.

Comparing Propositions  1 and 2 allows us to study the welfare ef-
fects of an introduction of -money relative to the benchmark economy 
with -money. We have the following result.

8 

Corollary 1 (Relative Efficiency of - and -Money). 

, we have 𝑊  ≤ 𝑊  whenever 𝜆 ≥ 𝜆 , and 

(i) For 𝑞 ≤ 𝑞∗ ≡ 𝜃−𝑝𝐿
𝜃(𝜃−1)

𝑊  ≥ 𝑊  otherwise.

(ii) For 𝑞 > 𝑞∗, we always have 𝑊  ≥ 𝑊 .

Importantly, online distribution generates the same total surplus 𝑊𝑂
(see Eq. (7)) for both types of money. Accordingly, any differences in 
welfare can only arise from their effects on lending decisions or venue 
choices.

We highlight three channels affecting welfare. The first two effects 
ensure that the introduction of -money tends to raise welfare when-
ever 𝜆 is relatively low and sellers tend to opt for offline distribution in 
the benchmark economy. First, the availability of -money improves 
sellers’ incentives to opt for online distribution, in which case all H-
sellers generate high sales 𝑝𝐻 . Second, with -money, there is no longer 
an equilibrium with offline sales and a partial pooling contract. This 
implies that the lender’s continuation investment choice is now always 
efficient, conditional on the extension of an initial loan.

The third channel of introducing -money however reduces welfare 
for high values of 𝜆. Indeed, the use of -money re-distributes surplus 
from the lender to sellers. If this effect is sufficiently strong so that 
𝜆 < 𝜆 (or equivalently 𝑞 < 𝑞∗), the lender will refuse to grant the initial 
loan, and no surplus is generated. Finally, we note that -money and 
-money lead to the same equilibrium outcome for 𝜆 ∈ [̂𝜆, 𝜆𝑆 ], namely 
offline distribution with a separating contract. In this case, there is no 
welfare difference between - and -money.

4.2. Digital payments with data-sharing/user-control

The previous section has shown that the introduction of -money 
can increase efficiency relative to a world with only cash and -money. 
However, even when the initial loan is granted, the equilibrium is not 
always efficient because the informational rents associated with cash 
can be too large to induce sellers to switch to online distribution. In 
this section, we ask whether efficiency can be improved by providing 
sellers with some form of control over their payments data.

This idea is based on a host of recent regulatory initiatives known 
under the umbrella term ‘‘open banking’’. In a nutshell, open banking 
aims to enable users to share their payments data with third parties 

T. Ahnert et al.

in order to enhance competition and innovation in the provision of 
financial services (He et al., 2023; Babina et al., 2024). While much 
of the related debate has focused on consumers, it is also relevant 
for firms, in particular small businesses.19 However, open banking is 
still far from ‘‘full’’ control since these regulations do not prevent the 
original institution from observing the data when they are generated, 
thus still giving it a competitive (first-mover) advantage.

Recent advances in technology allow us to envisage a system where 
users are in complete control of their data. One concrete example is 
‘‘India Stack’’, an infrastructure project that is transforming the pay-
ment ecosystem in India. It comprises digital ID, interoperable digital 
payments, and user consent.20 The last element (consent) is guaranteed 
by the existence of so-called ‘‘fiduciaries’’ that intermediate the flow of 
financial data between individuals and financial firms. These fiduciaries 
are responsible for managing personal data, and must obtain an individ-
ual’s consent before processing it. They may not access or store shared 
data, but can charge a fee for their services (see Carriere-Swallow et al., 
2021).

Similarly, the design of CBDCs may include significant elements of 
end-user control. Several major central banks made statements in this 
direction. In particular, they emphasize that user consent will likely be 
a prerequisite for intermediaries to obtain access to payments data.21

Given  these  developments,  we  study  the  implications  of  digital 
payments with end-user control in our model. This is consistent with 
a  broader  concept  of  privacy  that  goes  beyond  the  dimension  of 
anonymity, as summarized succinctly by Acquisti et al. (2016): ‘‘Privacy 
is not the opposite of sharing—rather it is control over sharing’’.22 We 
refer to such payments as -money (where  refers to user ‘‘control’’). 
Specifically, we assume that sellers can choose whether they want the 
lender to receive a signal (i.e. they choose 𝑥 ∈ { 1
, 1}), and whether this 
2
signal is revealed before or after the repayment of the initial loan. This 
extent of user-control implies that the lender can no longer monitor 
sellers’  payments  activity  in  real  time  even  in  case  they  choose  to 
disclose the signal after repayment. Accordingly, sellers are able to 
abscond successfully without the need for offshore accounts or opaque 
accounting procedures. Hence, the signal’s informativeness is preserved 
when it is released to the lender, even in the case sellers decide to 
abscond.

The ability to exert data control via -money has profound conse-
quences for the equilibrium in the lending market at 𝑡 = 1. In particular, 
it prevents the lender from ‘‘screening’’ because incentive compatibility 
breaks down. Since H-sellers can reveal their type truthfully and at zero 
cost (using the payments record) after the repayment of the initial loan, 
they have no incentive to incur any but the lowest possible repayment. 
By contrast, L-sellers still have an incentive to pretend being H-sellers 

19 For example, a recent report by Moody’s states: ‘‘Open Banking is trans-
forming the SME lending landscape by shifting ownership of transactional data 
from banks to the firms themselves, granting SMEs access and control of their 
own data’’. See https://www.moodys.com/web/en/us/insights/banking/open-
banking-real-time-analytics-for-small-and-medium-sized-enterprises.html.  The 
webpage of ‘‘Open Banking Limited’’, a non-profit body in the UK tasked 
with the implementation of standards and systems at the request of the UK 
Competition and Markets Authority, contains a wide range of short articles and 
guides aimed at informing SMEs, such as ‘‘Open banking for small businesses – 
a quick guide’’ (available at https://www.openbanking.org.uk/insights/open-
banking-for-small-businesses-a-quick-guide/).
20 See https://indiastack.org for details.
21 A recent report by the European Central Bank states: ‘‘Digital euro users 
would have full control over how their own personal data are used’’. European 
Central Bank (2023). The Bank of England has communicated: ‘‘Digital pound 
users will be able to make choices about the way their data is used. We are 
supportive of, and encourage, firms to offer services that enable holders to opt 
for enhanced privacy functionality and exert greater user control of personal 
data’’. Bank of England (2023a)
22 In a similar vein, Hughes (1993) argues that ‘‘Privacy is the power to 
selectively reveal oneself to the world’’.

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

and abscond with the second loan. Together, this makes it impossible 
for lender to separate types.23 Hence a separating contract is infeasible, 
and the lender can only offer a pooling contract with interest rate 
̄𝑟 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿. Therefore, sellers’ ex-ante expected payoff is given by 
 
𝑂 = 𝜆𝑝𝑂 + 𝑞[(1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝 + 𝜆𝜃],
where  
𝑂 indicates the use of -money with online distribution. Com-
parison  with  Eqs.  (4)(a)–(4)(c)  and  (11)  reveals  that  this  payoff  is 
strictly larger than those associated with any other payment means. 
Hence, conditional on receiving the initial loan, sellers always opt for 
online distribution with -money.

(13)

The associated expected profit to the lender is 

 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝑞[(1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1],

(14)

where the first two terms are the surplus from the first loan, while 
the last term represents the profits from lending to H-sellers for the 
second round of production. This expression is non-negative for 𝜆 ≤
𝜆 ≡ 𝑝𝐿−1+𝑞(𝜃−1)

. We can summarize this discussion as follows.

𝑝𝐿+𝑞𝜃

Proposition 3 (Equilibrium with -Money).

Sellers receive an initial loan and distribute online for 𝜆 ≤ 𝜆 . Otherwise 
they do not receive an initial loan. Only H-sellers receive a continuation 
loan. All online sales are settled with -money.

The  use  of  -money  enables  sellers  to  separate  the  bright  side 
(generating  continuation  finance)  and  the  dark  side  of  informative 
payment flows (rent extraction). Since they can delay the release of 
the signal until after the initial repayment, the lender is no longer able 
to appropriate the full continuation surplus through the first loan. Once 
the repayment is carried out, H-sellers are happy to reveal the signal 
in order to reap a share 𝜆 of the additional surplus generated by the 
continuation loan. L-sellers would prefer to hide their identity, but they 
cannot since H-sellers prefer to reveal theirs.24

Corollary 2 (Relative Efficiency of - and -Money).

We have 𝑊  ≤ 𝑊   for 𝜆 ≥ 𝜆 , and 𝑊  ≥ 𝑊   otherwise.

Relative to the economy with -money, -money generates addi-
tional efficiency gains by fully crowding out offline distribution settled 
with cash, which ensures that the level of initial sales is always efficient. 
However, at the same time, -money re-distributes even more surplus 
from the lender to sellers. This lowers the break-even threshold from 𝜆
to 𝜆 , and thus increases the range of parameters for which no surplus 
at all is generated because the lender refuses to extend the initial loan.

5. Optimal payment instruments

In this section, we extend the model by studying a social planner’s 
ex-ante choice of payment instrument. To this end, we assume that 𝜆
is not constant, but instead the realization of a random variable ̃𝜆 with 
cumulative distribution function 𝐹 (𝜆) defined over the interval (𝜆, 𝜆). 
While 𝜆 is realized at the beginning of 𝑡 = 0 (so all of our previous 
calculations continue to apply for a realized 𝜆), the planner chooses the 
available digital payment instrument at 𝑡 = −1 from the set {, , } to 

23 Formally, a separating contract (𝑟
𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟

𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟
≥ 𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟

𝐿 + 𝜆𝜃
𝐻 + 𝜆.

𝐿

𝐻 , 𝑟

𝐿), must satisfy the following ICs

In essence, -money enables H-sellers to obtain a share of the surplus of the 
second loan even upon absconding. These constraints imply 0 ≥ 𝑟
≥ 𝜆, a 
contradiction.
24 A seller hiding his identity reveals he is of type L.

𝐻 − 𝑟

𝐿

T. Ahnert et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

Fig. 3.  This figure shows how the planner’s optimal choice ∗ depends on parameters. The areas with hashed lines represent -money, the light gray areas represent -money, 
and the dark gray areas represent -money. In Panel A (LHS), the parameter values are: 𝑝𝐻 = 6, 𝑝𝐿 = 2.5, 𝜃 = 5, 𝑞 = 0.11. In Panel B (RHS), the parameter values are: 𝑝𝐻 = 6, 
𝑝𝐿 = 2.5, 𝑞 = 0.11, 𝛼 = 0.5.

maximize utilitarian welfare. We assume that cash is always available. 
Formally, the planner solves 

max
∈{,,} ∫
𝜆

𝜆

(𝜆)𝑑𝐹 (𝜆),

(15)

where (𝜆) is the equilibrium surplus in the economy with -money 
for  ̃𝜆 = 𝜆.

Since this problem is analytically intractable, we solve it numeri-
cally. We assume that 𝜆 is drawn from a beta distribution B(𝑎, 𝑏) with 
shape parameters 𝑎 and 𝑏. We fix 𝑎 = 3 throughout, and let 𝑏 take values 
in the interval [0.25, 10]. Recall from Assumption  2 that 𝜆 ∈ (𝜆, 𝜆). 
Accordingly, we truncate the probability density function so that only 
values from this interval can be drawn.

Fig.  3 illustrates how the welfare-maximizing choice ∗ depends on 
the model’s parameters. In both panels, the 𝑦-axis represents the shape 
parameter 𝑏. For a B(𝑎, 𝑏) distribution, an increase in 𝑏 shifts mass to 
the left, so that lower values of 𝜆 are becoming more likely. The 𝑥-axis 
represents the relative efficiency of offline distribution, 𝛼, in Panel A 
(LHS), and the size of the continuation surplus, 𝜃, in Panel B (RHS). As 
the Figure shows, each type of digital money can be the ex-ante optimal 
choice for at least some parameter combinations.

We first discuss Panel A (LHS). First, we see that -money (area 
with hashed lines) is the optimal choice when (i) 𝛼 is not too high and 
(ii) 𝑏 is relatively low (i.e. higher values of 𝜆 are more likely). We have 
shown in the previous two sections that, conditional on the first loan 
being granted, such a parameter constellation will induce sellers to opt 
for online distribution with all types of digital money. Since the loan 
market never breaks down with -money (unlike with - or -money), 
it is the optimal choice in this case. As 𝛼 increases, it ceases to be 
optimal because of the increased incentives for sellers to stay offline.25
Second, -money is optimal for high (but not too high) values of 
𝛼 and 𝑏 (so low values of 𝜆 are more likely), as shown by the dark 
shaded area. This is consistent with Fig.  2, which shows that sellers 
prefer cash to -money when 𝛼 is in this range. At the same time, a 
high weight on low values of 𝜆 ensures that the likelihood of a loan 
market breakdown with -money is not too severe, so that it is the 
optimal choice. For the remainder of the parameter space (the gray 
area), -money is the optimal choice, as it strikes a balance between 

25 The second region where -money is optimal (for intermediate values of 
𝛼) arises as the lender switches from a separating to a pooling contract, where 
relatively high values of 𝜆 again give rise to online distribution, as shown in 
Fig.  1.

10 

the provision of incentives for online distribution and the risk of a loan 
market breakdown.

The intuition from Panel B (RHS) is similar. For sufficiently high 
values  of  the  continuation  surplus  𝜃,  the  optimal  design  of  digital 
money depends on the shape of the distribution function 𝐹 (𝜆). When 
𝑏 is high (so low values of 𝜆 are more likely), -money is optimal 
because it enables sellers to capture at least part of the continuation 
surplus. By contrast, a low 𝑏 (high values of 𝜆) can give rise to a loan 
market breakdown, and the potential loss in output is larger for higher 
values  of  𝜃.  Then,  -money  is  optimal.  -money  strikes  a  balance 
between these two effects and is thus optimal for intermediate values 
of 𝑏. Whenever 𝜃 is low, this trade-off disappears as the welfare effects 
related to 𝜃 are diminishing.

While our model is deliberately abstract, some policy implications 
can be derived by mapping the key parameters to real-world observ-
ables. Our discussion focuses on the role of cross-country differences 
because payments are typically regulated at the national level. One key 
parameter is 𝜆, which represents sellers’ bargaining position via-à-vis 
the lender (captured through the threat of absconding). Two interpre-
tations come to mind: (i) competition in lending markets, and (ii) moral 
hazard frictions related to the enforcement of financial contracts. We 
discuss the implications for both views in turn.

First, 𝜆 may reflect the degree of competition in national lending 
markets, e.g. as measured by the Herfindahl–Hirschman index (HHI). In 
more competitive markets characterized by high values of 𝜆, borrowers 
face a lower cost of credit (see, e.g., Sapienza, 2002; Beck et al., 2004; 
Degryse and Ongena, 2005) which enables them to extract a higher 
share of the surplus from their projects. This helps to reach efficient 
outcomes by aligning private and social incentives. Our model implies 
that countries with a very competitive banking system should be wary 
of fostering the adoption of digital payment instruments with privacy 
features because the resulting pressure on banks’ profit margins may 
lead to a decline in the volume of credit. By contrast, countries with a 
concentrated banking system will be better off by fostering the adoption 
of privacy enhancement in the payments space, including policies such 
as ‘‘open banking’’.

Second,  𝜆  may  represent  the  (non-pecuniary)  costs  of  enforcing 
financial  contracts  (as  in  e.g.  Mendoza  et  al.,  2009;  Castro  et  al., 
2004).26 Our model suggests that countries with less-developed legal 
systems (represented by a high value of 𝜆) may not benefit from privacy 

26 Similarly, 𝜆 could also reflect cross-country differences in the availability 
of collateral.

T. Ahnert et al.

enhancements in payments. Since lending markets are already under-
developed due to moral hazard frictions, a redistribution of surplus 
away from lenders will put further strain on the provision of credit.

Another key parameter is 𝛼, which captures the efficiency level 
of offline distribution (relative to online distribution). Again, different 
interpretations are possible. For example, 𝛼 may represent the exposure 
of  different  economic  sectors  to  innovations  in  digital  distribution, 
such as tradable (low 𝛼) vs. non-tradable (high 𝛼) goods and services. 
Alternatively,  it  may  capture  broader  levels  of  economic  efficiency 
across economies, as this is directly related to the expected efficiency 
gains  of  technology  adoption.  Along  these  lines,  high  values  of  𝛼
could  represent  advanced  economies,  while  low  values  of  𝛼  would 
represent emerging market economies. Following this interpretation, 
our model would imply that emerging economies would benefit more 
from privacy enhancements in the payments space because they have 
relatively more to gain from aligning private and social incentives in 
technology adoption. However, this would have to be weighed against 
the above-mentioned enforcement frictions.

The parameter 𝛼 also relates to the structure of markets. Low values 
of 𝛼 could represent economies with a large informal sector where it is 
more difficult to advertise products. Empirically (see e.g. Johnson et al., 
1998), the presence of a large informal sector (an offline market with a 
low 𝛼) tends to go hand in hand with low levels of enforcement (a high 
𝜆). For such economies, our model shows that -money is optimal.

Finally, the parameter 𝜃 represents future product demand. Empir-
ically, this could relate to cross-country variation in growth opportu-
nities, driven by differences in sectoral composition (e.g. growth vs. 
value  sectors),  productivity,  or  demographic  conditions.  Our  analy-
sis suggests that for countries with relatively lower growth potential 
(e.g. mature economies with low productivity growth), -money is the 
optimal choice. By contrast, for high-growth economies, the optimal 
design of digital money depends on the level of 𝜆 (e.g. banking sector 
concentration or the ease of contract enforcement).

6. Conclusion

Our model provides a tractable framework for thinking about the 
interconnections between payments and privacy in the digital economy. 
In its most basic version, the model is centered around a simple trade-
off: digital payments facilitate the efficient distribution of goods via 
online channels, but they entail a costly loss in privacy because they 
leave a digital footprint. Sufficiently large privacy concerns (endoge-
nously derived from first principles) then lead to welfare losses because 
of inefficient goods distribution and suboptimal investment.

In this setting, digital payment means that preserve privacy or allow 
for end-user control over data can improve welfare because they enable 
sellers to get the best of both worlds: they can remain anonymous when 
it matters, reveal their type when they need it, and still reap the benefits 
of distributing goods online. However, the concomitant re-distribution 
of rents from the lender to sellers can be ‘‘too large’’ and induce a 
breakdown of the lending market. Accordingly, the socially optimal 
choice of available payment instruments is ambiguous.

Our paper has important implications for the regulation of payment 
systems and the optimal design of private and public digital money. Our 
findings suggest that laissez-faire may entail welfare losses, and regu-
lations such as ‘‘open banking’’ (and further steps towards ‘‘full’’ user 
control) can help alleviate privacy concerns because they help level the 
playing field. However, we also highlight the ‘‘perils of control’’, since 
tilting the balance too much from lenders towards end-users creates 
the risk of credit rationing. Accordingly, the optimal design of digital 
money depends on the economic environment, including factors such 
as competition in lending markets, the legal system, and the sectoral 
structure of the economy.

While most of the discussion on privacy and payments focuses on 
customers, our paper places a novel emphasis on the privacy of mer-
chants. As our paper exemplifies, there are good reasons to think this is 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

also an important aspect of payment system design that regulators and 
central banks should consider seriously.27

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Toni  Ahnert:  Writing  –  original  draft,  Project  administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Peter 
Hoffmann: Writing – original draft, Project administration, Method-
ology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Cyril Mon-
net:  Writing  –  original  draft,  Project  administration,  Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Proofs

Proof  of  Lemma   1.  When  -money  (deposits)  is  used  under  online 
distribution,  the  lender  receives  a  perfect  signal  about  actual  sales 
(𝑥 = 1), which directly reveals sellers’ types. Thus, no ICs are needed 
and the relevant PCs are
𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟
𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐻
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟
≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐿,

𝐿

where we have used the fact that absconding requires a scrambling of 
the payment signal, so that the lender cannot extend a continuation 
loan to a H-seller who absconds because uninformed lending is unprof-
itable, (1 − 𝜆)𝑞𝜃 < 1. Profit maximization implies that each of these 
PCs bind, resulting in the repayment stated in the Lemma. Feasibility 
is ensured by Assumption  1. The lender’s expected profit is 
𝑂 = 𝑞(𝑟


𝐿 − 1) + 𝑞 [(1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1]

𝐻 − 1) + (1 − 𝑞)(𝑟

= (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1) + 𝑞(1 − 𝜆)𝛥𝑝 > 0.

(A.1)

Positive expected profits to the lender arises because the lower bound 
in Assumption  3, 𝑞 > 𝑞, whenever 𝜆 < 𝜆. More formally, the critical 
value of 𝜆 at which 
𝑂

≡ 0 exceeds 𝜆 whenever 𝑞 > 𝑞.

Proof  of  Lemma   2.  First,  consider  the  separating  contract.  Since  the 
lender provides re-financing to all H-sellers, incentive compatibility 
requires  that  they  both  choose  the  high  repayment  𝑟𝑆
𝐻 .  Hence,  the 
contract must satisfy the following simplified ICs:
𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟𝑆
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑆

𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟𝑆
𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑆
𝐿
≥ 𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑆
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑆
𝐻 + 𝜆,
𝐿
because pretending to have high sales by paying 𝑟𝑆
𝐻  yields a continu-
ation loan, which is worth 𝜆 to an L-seller (who can abscond with the 
loan at 𝑡 = 2).

𝐿

Uninformed lending is again unprofitable, so a seller who absconds 

does not obtain a loan. Hence, the participation constraints (PCs) are
𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟𝑆
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑆

𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐻 ,
𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐿,

27 Several central banks, such as the European Central Bank and the Bank of 
England have floated the idea of holding limits for CBDCs (see, e.g. European 
Central Bank, 2023; Bank of England, 2023b). Transactions exceeding these 
limits would be transferred automatically (or ‘‘swept’’) into ordinary bank 
accounts. Low holding limits would imply that the payment flows observable 
to banks remain relatively informative, so that not all potential welfare benefits 
from enhanced privacy are realized.

11 

T. Ahnert et al.

𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑆
𝐿

≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐿.

The  first  PC  must  be  slack  because  the  second  PC  is  more  restric-
tive. Moreover, feasibility requires that sellers have enough funds for 
repayment at 𝑡 = 1,

𝑝𝐻

≥ 𝑟𝑆
𝐻 ,

𝑝𝐿

≥ 𝑟𝑆
𝐻 ,

𝑝𝐿

≥ 𝑟𝑆
𝐿.

Clearly, only the second feasibility constraint can be binding in equi-
librium.

Under  profit  maximization,  the  last  PC  binds,  𝑟𝑆

𝐿 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿. 
Substitution into either of the first two ICs or the second PC (they have 
identical implications) yields 𝜆𝜃 + (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿
𝐻 . By Assumption  1, all 
of these three constraints are slack. As a result, the second feasibility 
constraint must bind, so we have 𝑟𝑆
𝐻 = 𝑝𝐿. Note that the third IC (the 
≥ 1 (Assumption  1). 
one for the L-seller) is also satisfied because 𝑝𝐿
The lender earns
𝐹 = 𝑞(𝑟𝑆
𝑆

𝐿 − 1) + 𝑞 [(1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1]

𝐻 − 1) + (1 − 𝑞)(𝑟𝑆

≥ 𝑟𝑆

= (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1) − 𝑞𝜆(𝜃 − 𝑝𝐿).

(A.2)

𝐿. Hence, the simplified ICs read

Second, consider the partial pooling contract, under which the lender 
only extends continuation finance to HH-sellers (H-sellers with high 
sales). Since HL-sellers do not obtain re-financing, they must optimally 
choose the low repayment 𝑟𝑃
𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟𝑃
𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟𝑃
𝐿,
≥ 𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑃
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑃
𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃,
𝐿
≥ 𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑃
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑃
𝐻 + 𝜆.
𝐿
Pretending  to  have  high  sales  by  paying  𝑟𝑃
𝐻   yields  a  continuation 
loan, which is worth 𝜆𝜃 to an HL-seller (who can abscond with future 
production at 𝑡 = 3) and 𝜆 to an L-seller (who can abscond with the loan 
at 𝑡 = 2). The first two ICs directly yield 𝑟𝑃
𝐿 +𝜆𝜃. The contract must 
also satisfy the following PCs.
𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟𝑃
𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐻 ,
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑃
≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐿,
𝐿
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟𝑃
≥ 𝜆𝑝𝐿.
𝐿

𝐻 = 𝑟𝑃

𝐿 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿, so 𝑟𝑃

Profit maximization yields 𝑟𝑃
𝐻 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 + 𝜆𝜃. 
Assumption  1 ensures that the contract is feasible. Lender profits under 
partial pooling are
𝐹 = 𝛼𝑞(𝑟𝑃
𝑃

𝐿 − 1) + 𝛼𝑞 [(1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1]

𝐻 − 1) + (1 − 𝛼𝑞)(𝑟𝑃
= (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝛼𝑞(𝜃 − 1).

(A.3)

Comparing Eqs. (A.2) and (A.3) yields 𝑞(1− 𝛼)(𝜃 −1) ≥ 𝑞𝜆(𝜃 − 𝑝𝐿), which 
can be expressed as the inequality in Lemma  2.

A (fully) pooling contract would imply a repayment ̄𝑟 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 for 
all sellers and thus yield strictly lower lender profits than the contracts 
characterized above. Intuitively, the lender learns nothing under full 
pooling, so a continuation loan is never granted and the lender never 
reaps future surplus.

Finally, consider a partial participation contracts, whereby L-sellers 
default  and  abscond  but  the  seller  can  extract  more  surplus  from 
H-sellers.  There  are  two  cases:  (a)  only  HH-sellers  participate  and 
HL-sellers also default and abscond; and (b) all H-sellers participate. 
We  consider  these  cases  in  turn  and  show  that  they  yield  a  lower 
expected profit to the lender than at least one of the previous contracts 
(separation or partial pooling) because of a small share of H-sellers 
(Assumption  3).

Note that a single repayment is offered under partial participation, 
so there are no ICs. In case (a), the PC of HH-sellers binds, so 𝑟𝑃 𝑃 ,𝑎 =
(1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃, which is feasible because of Assumption  1. Since the 
share of HH-sellers is 𝛼𝑞, the expected profit of the lender is 𝛼𝑞[𝑟𝑃 𝑃 ,𝑎 +
(1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1] − 1 = 𝛼𝑞(1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐻 − 1 + 𝛼𝑞(𝜃 − 1) < 𝑃
𝐹  by Assumption 
3  and  𝛼 < 1.  In  case  (b),  the  PC  of  HL-sellers  is  more  restrictive 
than the PC of HH-sellers. Because of Assumption  1, the feasibility 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

constraint of HL-sellers is even more restrictive and binds, so 𝑟𝑃 𝑃 ,𝑏 = 𝑝𝐿. 
Since the share of H-sellers is 𝑞, the expected profit of the lender is 
𝑞[𝑟𝑃 𝑃 ,𝑏 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1] − 1 = 𝑞𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝑞[(1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1] < 𝑆
𝐹  because of 
𝑞 < 1.

Proof of Proposition  1.  Straightforward algebra reveals that the payoff 
in Eq.  (6)(b) is non-negative iff 

≡

𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑆
𝐹

𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1)
𝑞𝜃 + (1 − 𝑞)𝑝𝐿
Similarly, (6)(c) is non-negative iff 
𝑝𝐿 − 1 + 𝛼𝑞(𝜃 − 1)
𝑝𝐿

𝜆 ≤ 𝜆𝑃
𝐹

≡

.

(A.4)

(A.5)

Combining these two conditions with Lemmas  2 and 3 yields the results 
in the Proposition.

Proof of Lemma  4.  Since there are only two types of matches with 
online sales, the lender’s choice under online distribution is either a 
separating, a fully pooling, or a partial participation contract. (Partial 
pooling does not apply with two matches 𝑚.)

Consider the separating contract first. As usual, the PC of L-sellers 
𝐿 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿, where the superscript indicates that trades are 

binds, 𝑟
settled in -money. The ICs are
𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃 ≥ 𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟
𝑝𝐻 − 𝑟
≥ 𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟
𝑝𝐿 − 𝑟

𝐿

𝐿
𝐻 + 𝜆,
which together with profit-maximization yield 𝑟
𝐿 + 𝜆𝜃. Feasibil-
ity is ensured by Assumption  1. The lender’s expected profits under 
separation are
𝑂 = 𝑞 [𝑟
𝑆

+ (1 − 𝑞)𝑟

𝐻 = 𝑟

𝐿 − 1

]

𝐻 + (1 − 𝜆)𝜃 − 1
= (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1) − 1.

The pooling contract again yields  ̄𝑟 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿, so expected lender 
profits are (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐿 − 1. This is strictly lower than under separation 
(the lender learns nothing under the pooling contract and, therefore, 
does not extend a second loan).

Finally, a partial participation contract sets a single repayment 𝑟𝑃 𝑃 , 
so no ICs are required. The repayment is set for the PC of H-sellers to 
bind, so 𝑟𝑃 𝑃 = (1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐻 + 𝜆𝜃, which is feasible by Assumption  1. L-
sellers default on the initial loan and absconds with sales, so the lender 
receives nothing from them but the partial participation contract allows 
her to extract more surplus from H-sellers. The expected lender profits 
is 𝑞(1 − 𝜆)𝑝𝐻 − 1 + 𝑞(𝜃 − 1), which is lower than the expected profit under 
separation because of the low share of high types (Assumption  3).
Proof of Corollary  1.  Note that 𝑞 < 𝜃−𝑝𝐿
𝜃(𝜃−1)  implies 𝜆 < 𝜆, so that -
money leads to no loan for at least some 𝜆 < 𝜆. Next, we establish that 
̂𝜆 and 𝜆0 cross at 𝜆 = 1, and thus at the border or outside the relevant 
parameter space. Indeed, we have

𝜆0

≡ 𝛼

𝛥𝑝
𝑝𝐻 − 𝜃

= (1 − 𝛼)

𝛥𝑝
𝜃 − 𝑝𝐿

≡ ̂𝜆

⟺ 𝛼 =

𝑝𝐻 − 𝜃
𝛥𝑝
= 1. Hence, we have 𝑊  = 𝑊   for ̂𝜆 < 𝜆 < 𝜆𝑆 .

so that 𝜆0|𝛼=

𝑝𝐻 −𝜃
𝛥𝑝

Moreover, for 𝜆 ∈ [𝜆, ̄𝜆] ⧵ [̂𝜆, 𝜆𝑆 ], we have that 𝑊  = 𝑊 𝑂 ≡
𝑞𝑝𝐻 +(1−𝑞)𝑝𝐿 −1+𝑞(𝜃 −1) for 𝜆 > 𝜆  and 𝑊  = 0 otherwise. This is the 
best respectively worst outcome possible, so we must have 𝑊  ≥ 𝑊 
for 𝜆 > 𝜆  and 𝑊  ≤ 𝑊  otherwise.

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104050.

12 

T. Ahnert et al.

References

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104050 

European Central Bank, 2021. Eurosystem report on the public consultation on a digital 

euro.

Acquisti, A., Taylor, C., Wagman, L., 2016. The economics of privacy. J. Econ. Lit. 54 

(2), 442–492.

Agur, I., Ari, A., Dell’Ariccia, G., 2023. Bank competition and household privacy in a 

digital payment monopoly. IMF Work. Pap. 2023 (121).

Ahnert, T., Assenmacher, K., Hoffmann, P., Leonello, A., Monnet, C., Porcellacchia, D., 
2022. The economics of central bank digital currency. Int. J. Central Bank. 20 (4), 
221–274.

Andolfatto, D., 2021. Assessing the impact of central bank digital currency on private 

banks. Econ. J. 131 (634), 525–540.

Auer, R., Monnet, C., Shin, H.S., 2024. Distributed ledgers and the governance of 

money. J. Financ. Econ. 167 (May 2025), 104026.

Babina, T., Bahaj, S.A., Buchak, G., De Marco, F., Foulis, A.K., Gornall, W., Mazzola, F., 
Yu, T., 2024. Customer Data Access and Fintech Entry: early Evidence from Open 
Banking. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bank for International Settlements, 2021. BIS annual economic report 2021.
Bank of England, 2023a. The digital pound: a new form of money for households and 

businesses?.

Bank of England, 2023b. The digital pound: Technology working paper.
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2004. Bank competition and access to 

finance: International evidence. J. Money Credit. Bank. 627–648.

Black, F., 1975. Bank funds management in an efficient market. J. Financ. Econ. 2 (4), 

323–339.

Boissay, F., Ehlers, T., Gambacorta, L., Shin, H.S., 2021. Big techs in finance: on the 

new nexus between data privacy and competition. BIS Work. Pap. 970.

Bolton, P., Dewatripont, M., 2004. Contract theory. In: MIT Press Books, vol. 1, The 

Brunnermeier, M., Payne, J., 2022. Platforms, Tokens and Interoperability. Mimeo, 

MIT Press.

Princeton University.

Carriere-Swallow,  Y.,  Haksar,  V.,  Patnam,  M.,  2021.  India’s  approach  to  open 
banking:Some implications for financial inclusion. IMF Working Paper 21/52.
Castro, R., Clementi, G.L., MacDonald, G., 2004. Investor protection, optimal incentives, 

and economic growth. Q. J. Econom. 119 (3), 1131–1175.

Cheng, Y., Izumi, R., 2024. CBDC: Banking and Anonymity. Mimeo Bank of Canada.
Chiu, J., Davoodalhosseini, S.M., Jiang, J., Zhu, Y., 2023. Bank market power and 
central bank digital currency: Theory and quantitative assessment. J. Political Econ. 
131 (5), 1213–1248.

Degryse, H., Ongena, S., 2005. Distance, lending relationships, and competition. J. 

Financ. 60 (1), 231–266.

Duffie, D., Economy, E., 2022. Digital Currencies: The US, China, and the World at a 

Crossroads. Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University.

European Central Bank, 2023. A stocktake on the digital euro: Summary report on the 

investigation phase and outlook on the next phase.

Garratt, R., Lee, M., 2021. Monetizing privacy with central bank digital currencies. 

Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3583949.

Garratt, R.J., Van Oordt, M.R., 2021. Privacy as a public good: a case for electronic 

cash. J. Political Econ. 129 (7), 2157–2180.

Ghosh, P., Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2024. FinTech lending and cashless payments. J. Financ. 

(forthcoming).

Goldwasser, S., Micali, S., Rackoff, C., 1989. The knowledge complexity of interactive 

proof systems. SIAM J. Comput. (Print) 18 (1), 186–208.

He, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2023. Open banking: Credit market competition when 

borrowers own the data. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 449–474.

Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real 

sector*. Q. J. Econ. 112 (3), 663–691.

Hughes, E., 1993. A Cypherpunk’s Manifesto. Berkeley.
Johnson, S., Kaufmann, D., Zoido-Lobatón, P., 1998. Regulatory discretion and the 

unofficial economy. Am. Econ. Rev. 88 (2), 387–392.

Kahn, C.M., McAndrews, J., Roberds, W., 2005. Money is privacy. Internat. Econom. 

Rev. 46 (2), 377–399.

Kang, K.-Y., 2024. Digital currency and privacy. Theor. Econ. 19 (1), 131–167.
Keister, T., Monnet, C., 2022. Central bank digital currency: Stability and information. 

J. Econom. Dynam. Control 142, 104501.

Keister, T., Sanches, D.R., 2022. Should central banks issue digital currency? Rev. Econ. 

Stud. rdac017.

Mendoza, E.G., Quadrini, V., Rios-Rull, J.-V., 2009. Financial integration, financial 

development, and global imbalances. J. Polit. Economy 117 (3), 371–416.

Mester,  L.J.,  Nakamura,  L.I.,  Renault,  M.,  2007.  Transactions  accounts  and  loan 

monitoring. Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (3), 529–556.

Norden, L., Weber, M., 2010. Credit line usage, checking account activity, and default 

risk of bank borrowers. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (10), 3665–3699.
Ouyang, S., 2023. Cashless payment and financial inclusion. Work. Pap. 
Parlour, C.A., Rajan, U., Zhu, H., 2022. When FinTech Competes for Payment Flows. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4985–5024.

Puri, M., Rocholl, J., Steffen, S., 2017. What do a million observations have to say about 
loan defaults? Opening the black box of relationships. J. Financ. Intermediation 31, 
1–15.

Sapienza, P., 2002. The effects of banking mergers on loan contracts. J. Financ. 57 (1), 

329–367.

Stiglitz, J.E., Weiss, A., 1981. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information. 

Am. Econ. Rev. 71 (3), 393–410.

13 

