Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Screening using a menu of contracts: A structural model for lending markets(cid:73)
Alberto Polo a, Arthur Taburet b,∗, Quynh-Anh Vo a
a Bank of England, United Kingdom
b Duke University, United States of America

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/QQ
JOB4

Keywords:
Menu of contracts
Screening
Structural models

1. Introduction

When  lenders  screen  borrowers  using  a  menu,  they  generate  a  contractual  externality  by  rendering  the 
composition of their competitors’ borrowers worse. Using data from the UK mortgage market and a structural 
model of screening with endogenous menus, this paper quantifies the impact of asymmetric information on 
equilibrium contracts and welfare. Counterfactual simulations show that, because of the externality, there is 
too much screening along the loan-to-value dimension. The deadweight loss, expressed in borrower utility, is 
equivalent to an interest rate increase of 30 basis points (a 15% increase) on all loans.

Menus  of  contracts  are  widely  used  in  financial  markets.1  For 
instance, mortgage borrowers often have the choice between fixed or 
flexible interest rates, high or low loan-to-value (LTV) ratios, and differ-
ent combinations of interest rates and fees. A leading explanation is that 
lenders offer menus to induce borrowers to reveal their private infor-
mation through their choices (i.e., screening). By screening borrowers, 
lenders can restore perfect information pricing, but this may come at 
the cost of distortions in other contract terms. For example, if high 
LTV contracts are more valuable for high-default borrowers, lenders 
can make them self-select into a high interest rate high LTV contract. 
However, maintaining borrowers’ incentives requires that low-default 
borrowers get a lower LTV contract than high-default borrowers, which 
is not necessarily what would happen in the first best.

The theoretical literature has demonstrated that the equilibrium in 
markets with adverse selection can be inefficient. For instance, Roth-
schild  and  Stiglitz  (1976)  shows  that  pooling  contracts  cannot  be 
offered in competitive markets even when pooling is a Pareto improve-
ment over screening. The reason is that a lender can take advantage of 
their competitors’ pooling contract by introducing a contract with — for 
instance — an LTV just below the one offered by competitors to steal 

the safer and more profitable borrowers (i.e., ‘‘cream skimming’’).2 
This  market  failure  emerges  when  lenders  do  not  internalize  how 
their screening strategies change the types of borrowers who select 
competitors’ products and, thus, the cost of lending via those products.
Yet the practical relevance of the question and the impact of ad-
verse selection on contract terms and welfare remains open (see Einav 
et al., 2021 for a literature review). Quantifying the impact of adverse 
selection on contract terms requires determining which contracts would 
be offered if there were no adverse selection (‘‘first best’’) and which 
contracts would be offered by a social planner who internalizes the 
fact that deviating from pooling may be inefficient (‘‘second best’’). 
Answering this question is challenging since those situations are not 
directly observed in the data.

In this paper, we quantify the impact of asymmetric information on 
contract terms and welfare using the first structural model of screening. 
We use our structural model to simulate the menu of contracts that 
would be offered in the first and second-best cases. By comparing the 
simulated contracts with the ones in the data, we assess the extent 
to  which  contracts  are  distorted  and  quantify  the  welfare  loss.  To 
flexibly capture screening incentives, we develop a supply and demand 
model with imperfect competition and allow borrowers to have private 

(cid:73)

We thank the editor, Toni Whited, for helpful comments. A. Taburet is deeply grateful to his advisors Alessandro Gavazza, Martin Oehmke, Daniel Paravisini 
and Ricardo Reis, for their patient guidance, constant encouragement, and invaluable advice. The paper uses data from the Financial Conduct Authority and 
the Bank of England that has been provided under a data-access agreement for external research purposes. The views expressed in this paper are those of the 
authors and do not represent those of the Bank of England or members of the Monetary Policy Committee, Financial Policy Committee, or Prudential Regulation 
Authority Board views of the Financial Conduct Authority. Any errors are our own.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  alberto.polo@bankofengland.co.uk (A. Polo), arthur.taburet@duke.edu (A. Taburet), quynh-anh.vo@bankofengland.co.uk (Q.-A. Vo).

1 Example includes insurance (Handel et al., 2015), consumer loans (Hertzberg et al., 2018), credit cards (Nelson, 2025), and mortgages.
2 In Rothschild and Stiglitz (1978) the pure strategy equilibrium does not exist in that case because there is also a profitable pooling deviation when all lenders 
screen. Papers such as Lester et al. (2019) characterize the mixed strategy equilibrium and show that lenders cannot cross-subsidize — and thus pool — when 
competition is high enough.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104056
Received 6 August 2023; Received in revised form 24 March 2025; Accepted 25 March 2025
Available online 16 April 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Bank of England.  Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved,  including those for text and data mining,  AI training,  and similar 
technologies. 

 
 
 
A. Polo et al.

information about their default probabilities and their preferences over 
each contract characteristic. We identify and estimate model parame-
ters using administrative data on lenders’ menus, borrowers’ contract 
choices, and defaults in the United Kingdom (UK) mortgage market for 
first-time buyers from 2015 to 2019.

A key challenge when identifying screening incentives is the fol-
lowing: Borrowers who choose different contracts can have different 
default probabilities because of the causal impact of contract terms 
(i.e., burden of payment or moral hazard) rather than borrowers’ un-
observable characteristics (i.e., adverse selection). We propose a novel 
research design to disentangle moral hazard from adverse selection. We 
leverage the idea that, everything else equal, changes in the price of a 
given contract ‘‘A’’ change the type of borrowers who choose another 
contract ‘‘B’’. Adverse selection can thus be recovered by comparing 
the default probability of groups of borrowers who chose the same 
contract ‘‘B’’, but self-selected differently because contract ‘‘A’’ was 
offered at a different price for each group. We show how to implement 
this  idea  formally  within  a  structural  model  using  an  instrumental 
variable approach to exogenously shift the interest rate spread between 
contracts. The IV is based on contract-specific capital requirements that 
affect contract-specific lending costs.

We obtain three new empirical results. First, we find that the LTV 
ratio and interest rates are used together to screen. Lenders set their 
LTV pricing schedule such that high-default borrowers choose a higher 
LTV-higher  interest  rate  contract  relative  to  low-default  borrowers. 
Screening works because high-default borrowers — who also tend to 
be less price elastic3 — have higher willingness to pay for LTV. That 
is, high-default borrowers are more reluctant to provide a higher down 
payment for each pound they borrow (i.e., they have a higher marginal 
rate of substitution of interest rate for LTV). We also find that other 
contract characteristics (fees and the type of interest rate) are also used 
to screen.

Second, using counterfactual simulations, we show that maintaining 
incentives to self-select requires distorting contract terms away from 
their perfect information value. In the data, 50% of borrowers (those 
with a lower default probability) choose contracts with an LTV between 
70% and 85%. However, under perfect information, those borrowers 
and most other borrowers as well would have obtained an LTV above 
85% and bought a bigger house. Thus, according to our model, con-
tracts with an LTV between 70% and 85% are introduced primarily to 
screen borrowers rather than to cater to their preferences. We also find 
that because of screening, the interest rate on 95% LTV loans is lower 
by 70 basis points (bps) relative to what those borrowers would have 
gotten under perfect information.

Finally, by comparing the menu in the data to the one offered when 
lenders internalize the fact that deviating from a pooling contract can 
be inefficient (second best), we isolate the effect of the contractual 
externality and show that there is excessive screening. A lower bound 
of the deadweight loss generated by this externality is equivalent to the 
utility loss caused by a 30 bps interest rate increase on all loans.4

Our results show that screening is an important force in the UK 
mortgage  market  and  that  the  associated  contractual  externality  is 
costly. This suggests that there is room for Pareto improving policy 
interventions.  Examples  of  such  policies  —  which  are  analyzed  in 
a theoretical companion paper (Taburet, 2024) — include lowering 
competition, increasing the capital requirement for low LTV in a low-
competition environment, or banning the use of lower LTV products. 

3 The correlation between default and price elasticity is consistent with 
risky borrowers internalizing the probability that their application is rejected 
and thus behaving as if they had higher search costs (see Agarwal et al., 2024 
for empirical evidence).

4 Considering an average loan size of £200,000 and a 25-year maturity, 
this corresponds to a £25 monthly increase in borrowing expenses for all 
borrowers. In practice, this cost is borne by a third of borrowers and is thus 
equivalent to a £75 monthly increase.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Those  policies  reduce  the  impact  of  the  contractual  externality  by 
preventing cream-skimming deviations from occurring.

We  derive  our  empirical  results  using  a  novel  structural  model 
that allows us to recover the correlations between borrowers’ pref-
erences and their default probabilities, lenders’ unobservable costs of 
originating mortgages, and the fixed cost of changing the menu size.

On the demand side, borrowers choose the contract on their individ-
ual specific menu that maximizes their utility. Following the industrial 
organization  literature  (Berry  et  al.,  1995;  Crawford  et  al.,  2018), 
we  assume  that  borrowers’  utilities  are  linear  functions  of  contract 
characteristics  (loan  size,  interest  rate  type,  LTV,  lender,  and  fees) 
and estimate of the contributory value of each. We allow those con-
tributory  values  to  be  heterogeneous  and  to  depend  on  borrowers’ 
observable  characteristics  (income,  age,  location  of  the  house);  un-
observable characteristics (e.g., risk aversion, financial sophistication, 
income volatility); and their expected default probability. Our model 
yields a discrete-continuous demand system (as in, for instance, Train 
(1986)) composed of a mixed logit model for the product choice and a 
linear regression model for the loan demand. We specify borrowers’ de-
fault probabilities as a linear function of contract terms and borrowers’ 
observable and unobservable characteristics.

On  the  supply  side,  we  model  lenders  as  heterogeneous  multi-
product firms that offer differentiated menus of mortgages and compete 
based on the number of contracts, their interest rates, LTV, and fees. 
Contracts are exclusive. As such, our framework is adapted to mortgage 
markets but not to corporate and consumer loans, whereby firms and 
households borrow from multiple banks simultaneously (See Attar et al. 
(2011) for a theoretical framework with non-exclusivity).

We identify model parameters using a three-step approach. First, 
we use, as in Nevo (2001), a revealed preference approach to recover 
moments of the distribution of borrowers’ ex ante unobservable pref-
erences from contract product choice and loan size choice data. In 
the second step, we use the demand estimates to build a measure of 
the average preferences of borrowers conditional on contract choice 
(henceforth, the average borrower type). We use this measure in a 
default  probability  regression  in  which  we  compare  the  default  of 
groups of borrowers who choose the same contract but have different 
average preferences. Variation in the average preference comes from 
changes  over  time  in  the  characteristics  of  the  menu  offered  to  a 
particular  group  of  borrowers.  In  the  third  step,  we  then  use  the 
demand and default parameters together with formulas derived from 
the lenders’ profit maximization problem to back out the marginal costs 
of originating mortgage products and the fixed cost of changing menus.
In the second step, an endogeneity concern can arise if changes in 
the average borrower type that selects a given contract are correlated 
with changes in unobservable characteristics. To address this identi-
fication threat, we instrument average borrower type using product-
specific risk weights and minimum capital requirements for contracts 
other than the one chosen. Risk weights are predetermined and vary 
over time across lenders and mortgages with different maximum LTVs. 
Minimum  capital  requirements  vary  over  time  and  across  lenders. 
Both have been extensively used as an instrument for interest rates 
(e.g., Aiyar et al., 2014; Benetton, 2021; Robles-Garcia, 2019). Our 
instrument is relevant because it affects the spread between interest 
rates and, thus, the type of borrower who chooses a given contract. 
We  control  for  unobserved  characteristics  that  are  common  among 
products (lender shocks) and those that are common across lenders 
(market shocks). Given the absence of individual-based pricing in the 
UK (see Benetton, 2021), the exclusion restriction requires that our cost 
shifter is not correlated with economic shocks that affects borrower 
types  differently,  changes  in  unobserved  product  characteristics,  or 
acceptance and rejection rules based on characteristics unobserved by 
the econometrician. It is plausible that the endogeneity that stems from 
mortgage application rejections based on soft information observed by 
the lender but not the econometrician is not fully addressed, since 
lenders may update their acceptance and rejection criteria following 

2 

A. Polo et al.

any product cost shock. In that case, our results should be interpreted 
as a lower bound on adverse selection since lenders are likely to become 
stricter to mitigate the increase in the cost of lending.

This paper contributes to the empirical literature on adverse se-
lection and the industrial organization literature on credit markets. A 
large empirical literature tests whether adverse selection and screening 
occur in practice. Seminal papers are Chiappori and Salanie (2000) for 
the positive correlation test approach and Einav et al. (2010) for the 
sufficient statistic approach. Our paper is closely related to a recent 
strand  of  the  literature  that  focuses  on  disentangling  moral  hazard 
from adverse selection in credit markets. This literature uses reduced-
form approaches. Identification relies on lenders that just started using 
menus (Hertzberg et al., 2018) or the use of experimental data (Karlan 
and Zinman, 2009). We contribute to this literature by showing that 
variation in interest rate spreads can be used to disentangle moral 
hazard from adverse selection. Our approach is thus applicable to a 
wide variety of setups, since the literature has extensively documented 
plausibly exogenous variations in interest rates. We also implement 
our identification strategy within a structural model, which enables 
us to answer a more comprehensive range of questions by perform-
ing counterfactual simulations. In particular, this is the first paper to 
quantify the impact of adverse selection on contract terms and welfare 
with respect to the first best (perfect information case) and second best 
(when the contractual externality is internalized by lenders).

This paper also relates to the literature that analyzes consumers’ and 
lenders’ behavior in retail financial markets. Our paper contributes to 
this literature by studying screening. To do so, we build on Benetton 
(2021) and Crawford et al. (2018) models and include endogenous 
mortgage product offering and screening.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we 
describe the institutional features of the UK mortgage market, outline 
the data used, and conduct a descriptive analysis to motivate the mod-
eling assumptions. In Section 3, we present the structural model and 
discuss its main assumptions. We discuss the identification strategy and 
estimation procedure in Section 4. In Sections 5 and 6, we analyze the 
estimation results and counterfactual experiment outcomes. Section 7 
concludes.

2. Institutional setting, data, and motivating evidence

This section describes the key institutional features of the market 
and the data used. It then provides suggestive evidence that screening 
is an important feature of the UK mortgage market.

2.1. Institutional setting

Market  features:  While  mortgage  markets  are  important  credit 
markets in most countries, their institutional features vary (Campbell, 
2013). The UK mortgage market differs from other mortgage markets, 
including the United States, along three dimensions.

First, lenders do not offer long-term fixed-rate contracts in the UK 
market. Instead, borrowers can fix the interest rate for a given number 
of years (typically 2, 3, or 5). After that period, the ‘‘teaser rate’’ is 
reset to a generally significantly higher and flexible ‘‘follow-on rate’’. 
Coupled  with  the  fact  that  contracts  feature  high  early  repayment 
charges — which typically account for 5% or 10% of the outstanding 
loan — refinancing around the time the teaser rate period ends is very 
frequent in this market (Cloyne et al., 2019).

Second, the interest rate of a contract advertised by a given bank on 
its website or other platforms is the one paid by every borrower who 
chooses that contract. This is because minimal negotiation takes place 
between borrowers and lenders, and banks do not  practice individual-

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

based pricing.5 However, while pricing is independent of borrowers’ 
characteristics, banks may reject loan applications based on individual 
characteristics. This approach is common in other markets (credit cards, 
hedge funds) and online platforms.6

Finally, the UK mortgage market is very concentrated; The ‘‘big six’’ 
lenders account for approximately 75% of mortgage origination. The 
number of active banks is stable over time.

Loan contracts: As illustrated in Fig.  1, a borrower who is willing 
to take on a mortgage from a particular bank in the UK can choose from 
a menu of standardized loan contracts.

The pricing of those contracts is primarily based on product char-
acteristics such as lender name, rate type, maximum LTV, and fees. 
Indeed, using a linear regression of rate on product characteristics, 
we show — consistent with other papers on the UK mortgage market 
(Benetton, 2021; Robles-Garcia, 2019) — that 90% of the price vari-
ation is explained by interacting time dummies with lender dummies, 
rate type, maximum LTV, and fees dummies. The remaining variation 
is  independent  of  the  characteristics  of  borrowers  who  choose  the 
contract.

Conditional on those product characteristics, loan size and maturity 

choices do not impact interest rates.

While the contract pricing is independent of borrowers’ characteris-
tics, a bank can choose to reject a borrower’s loan application based on 
their observable characteristics (e.g., income, age, credit score). Since 
we do not observe loan applications or the criteria used by banks, we 
will build our empirical strategy while accounting for this limitation.

2.2. Data

We  use  the  Product  Sales  Database  001  (hereafter,  PSD  001). 
The data are collected quarterly by the Financial Conduct Authority 
(FCA) and contain contract-level information on households’ mortgage 
choices and detailed information on mortgage origination characteris-
tics for the universe of residential mortgages in the UK. The dataset is 
available to restricted members of staff and associated researchers at 
the FCA or the Bank of England.

We merge the data with PSD 007, which contains the credit events 
for mortgages. We use arrears as a measure of default, which is defined 
as being 90 or more days delinquent on monthly payments. The loans 
are full recourse, but in practice, only 5% of the house is repossessed 
conditional on default, according to UK finance.

In this paper, we focus on the years 2015 to the end of 2018. During 
this period, for each mortgage origination, we observe details on the 
loan (interest rate, loan amount, initial fixed period, maturity, lender, 
fees); the borrower (income, age); and the property (value, location). 
We focus on the first-time buyer market to abstract from preexisting 
lending relationships between lender and borrower. In a given month, 
about 30% of the new mortgage contracts are first-time buyers. The 
other 70% are borrowers that remortgage and home movers (i.e. 35% 
remortgage  and  35%  home  movers).  First-time  buyers  are  younger 
(31  years  for  FTB  versus  42  for  the  other  categories),  have  lower 
income (25% lower for first-time buyers), and have higher LTV than 
remortgages (average LTV of 75 versus 55 for remortgage and 65 for 
home mover).

5 The search platform Moneyfacts reports: ‘‘A personal Annual%age Rate is 
what you will pay. For a mortgage this will be the same as the advertised 
APR, as with a mortgage you can either have it or you can’t. If you can 
have the mortgage, the rate doesn’t change depending on your credit score, 
which  it  may  do  with  a  credit  card  or  a  loan’’.  See  Leanne  Macardle, 
‘‘What is an APR?’’ Moneyfacts, https://moneyfacts.co.uk/guides/credit-cards/ 
what-is-an-apr240211/.

6 This can be rationalized by the fixed cost of negotiation’s being high 
compared with the size of loans in the consumer market compared with the 
firm market.

3 

A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Fig. 1.  Extract of the menu of contracts offered by HSBC in January 2023.
Source: Source: HSBC website.

The structural estimation uses 2018 data (see Table  1 in Appendix 
A for data summary statistics), for which we also have Bank of England 
supervisory data about the risk weights and capital requirements. For 
that  year,  we  observe  847,000  first-time  buyer  contracts,  of  which 
almost 90% are mortgages with initial fixed periods of 2, 3, or 5 years. 
The average interest rate is 2.5% points, and the average origination fee 
is £503. The average loan is almost £165,000 with an LTV of 80%, a 
loan-to-income of 4.6, and an average maturity of 29 years. Borrowers 
are, on average, 31 years old and have an annual income of £36,000.
We also supplement our analysis with data on the number of prod-

ucts from 2008 to 2022 (Moneyfacts database).

2.3. Motivating evidence

This  section  discusses  descriptive  patterns  about  banks’  menus. 
We also provide suggestive evidence that screening is feasible in this 
market, because borrowers’ (observable) characteristics are correlated 
with contract choices and default.

Variation in product offerings: As shown in Fig.  2, the number of 
products varies over time and across market participants. In particular, 
first-time buyers shopping for 90% LTV contracts faced on average two 
options at each bank in 2010 and six options in 2018. Menu sizes are 
larger at 75% LTV. Indeed, the average menu contains seven alternative 
contracts at 75% LTV in 2010 and 15 in 2018. Typically, in 2018 the 
average bank offers at 75% LTV, the option of fixing the rate for 0, 2, 
3, or 5 years and proposes three levels of fees (0, 750, 1,500). A higher 
fee level is associated with a lower rate. Considering all combinations 
of fixed rates and fees for all LTV levels offered starting from 60% 
LTV (i.e., 60, 65, . . . , 90, 95), we find that, on average, only 40% of 
those products are offered by the average bank. This empirical result 
motivates the fact that the number of products needs to be endogenized 
in the model.

Sorting on observables: Because suggestive evidence shows that 
borrowers with different characteristics tend to select different prod-
ucts, we regress borrowers’ observable characteristics on LTV dummies 
(see Table  2).

We document that compared with borrowers who choose 75% LTV 
contracts, borrowers who choose 95% LTV contracts are on average 

Fig. 2.  Average number of advertised mortgage products for BtL, FtB and Remortgage.
Source: Moneyfacts and Bank of England’s calculations.

1.5 years younger, earn 7,400 net pounds less a year, and are 20% more 
likely to be part of a couple.

This correlation between LTV and borrowers’ characteristics can 
be the result of borrowers’ self-selection or the fact that banks may 
decline the loan applications of riskier borrowers for a high LTV loan. 
Since banks generally offer high LTV loans only to safer borrowers, it 
is likely that the income and age gap between high and low LTV loans 
would be higher absent banks’ rejection behavior. Causing borrowers 
to self-select (on observable characteristics) using LTV is thus feasible.
Sorting on default: Because suggestive evidence shows that bor-
rowers who choose different products have different default behavior, 
we regress default on borrower and contract characteristics (see Table 
3): 

𝐷𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 = 𝛽𝑋𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖

(1)

4 

A. Polo et al.

𝐷𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 is equal to 1 if borrower i has been in arrears by the end 
of 2019, and 𝑋𝑖 includes borrower i’s contract terms (lender, LTV, 
rate, fees, teaser period, mortgage term) and borrower i’s characteristics 
(age, income, location of the house, number of applicants, month and 
year at which the loan has been originated).

We document that 1.2% of the loans originated in 2018 had de-
faulted by 2020. The default probability on 85%–95% LTV loans is 
1.4%, while the average for 75%–85% LTV loans is 0.8%.

Using  a  baseline  default  of  1.2%,  the  regression  of  default  on 
product and borrowers’ characteristics implies that a 100 bps increase 
in rate is associated with a 50% increase in default probability; the 
default probability of a 5-year fixed rate contract is 40% lower than that 
of flexible rate contracts; the default probability of a zero fee contract 
is 30% lower than contracts with fees of £1,000; and borrowers whose 
income is one standard deviation lower (£16,000) are 16% more likely 
to default.

Those  results,  together  with  the  one  on  borrowers’  choice  of
contract — and given that pricing is independent of borrowers’ income 
— provide suggestive evidence of adverse selection along the income 
dimension. Indeed, we document that low-income borrowers are more 
likely to choose high LTV contracts and are more likely to default.

Need for a structural model: To further understand the impact of 
screening on equilibrium quantities, we need to compare the observed 
equilibrium contracts’ terms with a counterfactual in which there is no 
private information. Given the difficulty of finding the right counterfac-
tual in the data, we instead build a structural framework that relies on 
simulations. The following sections discuss the model assumptions and 
our identification strategy. Our modeling approach and identification 
strategy also enable us to look at selection on unobservable borrowers’ 
characteristics, address the bias generated by the rejection of mortgage 
applications, and disentangle moral hazard or burden of payment from 
adverse selection in the default regression.

3. General model setup

For each month t, we consider the data through the lens of the 
model of supply and demand described in this section. To simplify 
notation, we drop the time index t on variables except for the fixed 
cost section, for which the timing is relevant.

3.1. Overview of the model

There are two groups of agents: Borrowers and lenders. We also 
refer to the second group as banks. There are n borrowers indexed by 
i. There is a finite number of banks indexed by b ∈ 𝐵. The number of 
borrowers and lenders is exogenous.

Definition  of  contracts  and  products:  Banks  offer  a  menu  of 
contracts.  Based  on  UK  institutional  features,  we  define  as  a  loan 
contract the object (𝐿, 𝑋, 𝑟) in which L is the loan size, X is a vector 
that contains other contract characteristics (lender dummy, teaser rate 
period, maximum LTV, and fees), and r is the interest rate on the loan.
Using industrial organization literature vocabulary, we also refer to 
the vector of characteristics (𝑋) as a product, r as the product price, 
and L as the product quantity. We index a product by the subscript 
c. We denote 𝑃𝑖𝑏 as the set of products (c) available to borrower i at 
bank b.7 We denote by 𝑀𝑖𝑏 ∶= {(𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏)}𝑐∈𝑃𝑖𝑏  the menu of products 
offered to borrower i at bank b. We drop the b or i index in M and P 
to refer to the market menu (𝑀𝑖 ∶= ∪𝑏𝑀𝑖𝑏 and 𝑃𝑖 ∶= ∪𝑏𝑃𝑖𝑏) or the bank 
menu (𝑀𝑏 ∶= ∪𝑖𝑀𝑖𝑏 and 𝑃𝑏 ∶= ∪𝑖𝑃𝑖𝑏). 𝐶𝑏 ∶= 𝐜𝐚𝐫𝐝(𝑃𝑏) is the number of 
products sold by bank b.

For each product 𝑐 ∈ 𝑃𝑏, there exists a contract (𝐿, 𝑋𝑐, 𝑟𝑐 ) for any 
loan amount 𝐿 ∈ [𝑎, 𝑏]. The menu of contracts (i.e., its size 𝐶𝑏 and 
content 𝑀𝑏) is endogenous.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Supply and demand: Our model is based on the following max-
imization problems. Borrower i chooses the bank and contract on its 
individual specific set that maximize its indirect utility. Lenders choose 
the menus of contracts they offer to maximize their expected profits. 
Lenders take competitors’ contracts as given and know how borrowers 
select banks and contracts. They do not perfectly observe borrowers’ 
characteristics but know their joint distribution.  Formally, for each 
period t we have:

𝐁𝐨𝐫𝐫𝐨𝐰𝐞𝐫 𝐢 ∶ 𝐂𝐨𝐧𝐭𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐭 𝐜 𝐚𝐧𝐝 𝐥𝐞𝐧𝐝𝐞𝐫 𝐛 𝐜𝐡𝐨𝐢𝐜𝐞

(𝑐𝑖, 𝑏𝑖) = argmax

{𝑉𝑖(

{𝑏∈𝐵𝑖,𝑐∈𝑃𝑖𝑏}
default probability
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝑑𝑖(𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏)

contract terms and price
⏞⏞⏞
𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏

loan demand
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝐿𝑖(𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏, 𝑑𝑖(𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏)),

,

demand shock
⏞⏞⏞
𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏

}

(2)

) +

𝑉𝑖(⋅) + 𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏 is the borrower indirect utility. The demand shocks 𝜀 have 
a mean of zero. 𝐿𝑖(⋅) is the optimal loan size conditional on contract 
choice c. 𝑑𝑖(⋅) is the default probability conditional on contract and loan 
choice.

𝐋𝐞𝐧𝐝𝐞𝐫 𝐛 ∶ 𝐌𝐞𝐧𝐮 𝐨𝐟𝐟𝐞𝐫𝐢𝐧𝐠 𝐌

𝑀𝑏 ⊂ argmax
{𝑀∈ ,𝑃𝑖𝑏}

[

𝛱𝑏(𝑀,𝑃𝑖𝑏)
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
marginal cost of lending
⏞⏞⏞
𝑁𝑃 𝑉 (𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏, 𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑏,
𝑚𝑐𝑐𝑏
)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
expected NPV if i chooses cb

𝟏{(𝑐𝑖,𝑏𝑖)=(𝑐,𝑏)}

∑

E

]

𝑖,𝑐

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑

−

𝐹 (𝑀, 𝑀𝑏𝑡−1)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
fixed cost of changing menu
𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑠′ 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘 (𝑐𝑖, 𝑏𝑖)
𝑎𝑟𝑒 𝑔𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑛 𝑏𝑦 𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (2)

(3)

This formulation is a general version of screening models such as 

that of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1978).

[∑

𝑖,𝑐 1{(𝑐𝑖,𝑏𝑖)=(𝑐,𝑏)}

𝛱𝑏(⋅) is the expected gross margin, defined as the product of two 
]
terms. The first is E
, the probability that the bor-
rower 𝑖 chooses the bank 𝑏 and contract 𝑐. The second is 𝑁𝑃 𝑉 (⋅), the 
net present value of lending to borrower 𝑖 conditional on their choice 
of contract. I use the shortcut notation 𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏 and 𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑏 for the demand 
and default probability values when contract 𝑐𝑏 is chosen. 𝑚𝑐𝑐𝑏 is the 
bank-product-specific marginal lending cost. 𝐹 (⋅) is the fixed cost of 
designing a new menu. 𝑀𝑏𝑡−1 is the menu offered by bank b in the 
previous period.  is the feasible set of menus. To fit the empirical 
application, we allow the interest rate to be a continuous variable, 
but contract characteristics and the number of contracts are discrete 
variables.

Information  set:  The  expectation  in  Eq.   (3)  is  conditional  on 
the lender information set. The information set contains competitors’ 
menus of contracts and observable borrower characteristics.

Timing: Given that product characteristics are updated less fre-
quently than interest rates, we follow Wollmann (2018) and assume 
that lenders play a two-stage game. They chose product characteristics 
first and then compete on interest rates. This modeling is the most 
conservative as it is likely to lower the contractual externality as lenders 
partially internalize their competitors’ behavior.

3.2. Key parametric assumptions

In this section, we present our parametric assumptions. The implica-
tions of the modeling assumptions are discussed in depth in Section 3.3.

7 Each combination of product characteristics (X) is a one-to-one mapping 

to a natural number.

The following equations can be interpreted as linear approximations 
around contract terms of the indirect utility, the logarithm of the loan 

3.2.1. Demand

5 

A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

demand, and default functions (denoted 𝑉 , 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐿) and 𝑑). As shown in 
Appendix  C, the same formulas can also be obtained by specifying an 
indirect utility and using Roy’s identity to derive the loan demand.

In the spirit of the positive correlation literature (see Chiappori and 
Salanie, 2000), we model adverse selection via the correlation between 
random variables in the demand default equations. We generalize their 
approach by allowing the random variables to affect the slopes (i.e., the 
demand sensitivity to contract terms) rather than only the intercepts. 
This generalization is needed for screening to be possible. A formal 
proof  is  provided  in  Appendix   E;  the  intuition  is  the  following.  If 
high-default borrowers find it relatively more costly to provide a high 
level of down payment for each additional unit they borrow, low LTV 
contracts attract unobservably safer borrowers and can be offered at a 
lower price.

Borrower indirect utility: The indirect utility in Eq.  (2) of bor-
rowing via contract c at bank b is parametrized as a linear function of 
contract terms:8

𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 ∶= 𝛽𝑃

𝑖 𝑋𝑐𝑏 − 𝛼𝑃

𝑖 𝑟𝑐𝑏 + 𝜉𝑐𝑏

(4)

𝑖 , 𝛼𝑃

(𝛽𝑃
𝑖 ) drive how borrower i values product characteristics and inter-
est rate; we loosely refer to these as borrowers’ preferences. They are 
parametrized as a linear function of observable borrowers’ characteris-
tics (denoted 𝐷𝑖) and unobserved borrower heterogeneity (modeled by 
a random variable denoted 𝑃 𝐼 𝑃
𝑖 ). I describe the correlation structure 
between random variables more formally at the end of this section once 
the full demand system is presented.

𝜉𝑐𝑏  is  a  product  bank  fixed  effect.  It  captures  the  average  bor-
rower’s indirect utility from contract characteristics unobserved by the 
econometrician.

Plugging Eq. (4) into Eq. (2) and assuming that the demand shocks 
𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏 are extreme value distributed and independent of unobserved bor-
rower characteristics, the probability that borrower i choose contract 
(c,b) is:9

𝑃 𝑟(𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑠 (𝑐, 𝑏)|𝛼𝑃

𝑖 𝛽𝑃

𝑖 , 𝜉𝑐𝑏) =

(5)

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏)
∑

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑦𝑥)

𝑥∈𝐵,𝑦∈{𝑃𝑖𝑏}

Notice that the logit functional form of Eq.  (5) implies that any 

borrower fixed effect in the indirect utility cancels each other.
Loan demand: The loan demand is parametrized as: 

𝑙𝑛(𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏) = 𝛽𝐿

𝑖 𝑋𝑐𝑏 − 𝛼𝐿

𝑖 𝑟𝑐𝑏 + 𝜈𝐿𝐷𝑖 + 𝜎𝐿𝜖𝐿

𝑖𝑐𝑏

(6)

(𝛽𝐿

𝑖 , 𝛼𝐿

𝑖 ) parameterize the loan size semi-elasticities. They are lin-
ear functions of observable borrowers’ characteristics and unobserved 
borrower heterogeneity (modeled by a random variable denoted 𝑃 𝐼 𝐿
𝑖 ).
The vector 𝜈𝐿 parameterizes the sensitivity of the loan demand to 

the borrower’s characteristics.

lenders can use contract terms to screen borrowers on their default 
probabilities.
𝜎𝑑 𝜖𝑑

𝑖𝑐𝑏  is  a  random  variable  that  represents  the  part  of  default 

probabilities that is not captured by the other variables.

𝑖 , 𝑃 𝐼 𝐿

Unobservable heterogeneity: The key innovation of the demand 
system is to allow borrower unobservable characteristics — modeled by 
a random variable 𝑃 𝐼 ∶= (𝑃 𝐼 𝑃
𝑖 ) — to jointly determine demand 
𝑖 , 𝛽𝐿
and  default.  Formally,  the  random  variables  (𝛽𝑃
𝑖 )  driving 
the  demand  elasticities  are  linear  functions  of  observable  (𝐷𝑖)  and 
unobservable heterogeneity (𝑃𝑖):
𝑖 = 𝛽𝑥 + 𝛾 𝑥𝐷𝑖 + ̄𝑃 𝐼 𝑥
𝛽𝑥
𝑖𝑐 , 𝜖𝑑
(𝑃 𝐼𝑖, 𝜖𝐿
𝑖𝑐 ) ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝛺)
𝑖 , 𝑃 𝐼 𝐿
𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑃 𝐼𝑖 ∶= (𝑃 𝐼 𝑃

𝑖 = 𝛼𝑥 + ̃𝛾 𝑥𝐷𝑖 + ̃𝑃 𝐼 𝑥

𝑖 )𝑥, 𝑥 ∈ {𝑃 , 𝐿}

𝑖 ) 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑃 𝐼 𝑥

𝑖 , ̃𝑃 𝐼 𝑥

𝑖 , 𝛼𝑥

𝑖 ∶= (

𝑖 , 𝛼𝐿

𝑖 , 𝛼𝑃

̄𝑃 𝐼 𝑥

(10)

(8)

(9)

𝑖

𝑖 , 𝛼𝑥

ities (𝛽𝑥

(𝛽𝑥, 𝛼𝑥) drive the average demand sensitivities.
(𝛾 𝑥, ̃𝛾 𝑥) drive the observable heterogeneity in demand sensitivities.
𝑃 𝐼 is a random variable capturing the part of the demand sensitiv-
𝑖 ) that is not captured by the observable characteristics.
𝛺 allows the random variables in the demand and default equations 
to be correlated. It captures the fact that (𝑉 , 𝐿, 𝑑) derive from the 
same maximization problem. This random variable approach helps to 
mitigate the selection on unobservables when bringing the model to the 
data. It is a generalization of Train (1986).

3.2.2. Supply

NPV: We follow the standard literature assumptions to build an 
approximation of the net present value of the cash flow associated 
with a mortgage. As in Benetton (2021) and Crawford et al. (2018), 
we assume that banks are risk neutral, that all borrowers refinance at 
the end of the teaser rate period10, and that lenders do not forecast the 
probability of default in each period, but consider an average expected 
probability of default. The Net Present Value (NPV) of lending is thus 
well approximated by: 

𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 ≈ 𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏 ⋅ [(1 − 𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑏)𝑟𝑐𝑏 − 𝑚𝑐𝑐𝑏]𝑓𝑐𝑏

(11)

where 𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏 is borrower i’s loan demand conditional on choosing con-
tract  c  at  bank  b  (defined  in  Eq.   (6)),  𝑑  is  the  default  probability 
(defined in Eq.  (7)), 𝑟 is the interest rate, 𝑓 is the fixed rate period 
and 𝑚𝑐 is the marginal cost of lending.

Derivation of the formula is provided in Appendix F.
Fixed cost: Given that price changes are more common than prod-
uct introduction and withdrawal, we consider that only changes in 
product characteristics affect the fixed cost as in Wollmann (2018). 
Thus, the fixed cost of designing a menu thus takes the following form:

𝜎𝐿 is the standard deviation of the demand shock 𝜖𝐿
Default probabilities: The default probabilities are specified as: 

𝑖𝑐𝑏.

𝐹 (𝑚, 𝑀𝑏𝑡−1) =

𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑏 = 𝛽𝑑 𝑋𝑐𝑏 + 𝛼𝑑 𝑟 + 𝜈𝑑 𝐷𝑖 + 𝜌𝑃 𝐼𝑖 + 𝜎𝑑 𝜖𝑑
𝑖𝑐𝑏

(7)

The parameters 𝛽𝑑 and 𝛼𝑑 capture the impact of contact terms X 
and prices r on default probabilities. They can be interpreted as moral 
hazard or burdens of payment.

𝜈𝑑 parameterizes the sensitivity of default to borrowers’ character-

istics.

𝜌 is the key parameter of interest. This vector captures the average 
impact of borrowers’ unobservable characteristics 𝑃 𝐼𝑖 ∶= (𝑃 𝐼 𝑃
𝑖 , 𝑃 𝐼 𝐿
𝑖 )
on default probabilities. When the first element of 𝜌 differs from zero, 

8 Notice that we use IO notation for the indexes. That is, as in — for 
instance, Benetton (2021) — while we only observe one choice per borrower, 
we index all possible alternatives that were available to the borrower.

9 The parameterization of the indirect utility is robust to the use of borrower 

and time fixed effect as they would disappear in Eq.  (5).

̃𝐹 (𝑚, 𝑀𝑏𝑡−1) ∶=

+ 𝛽𝐹 𝑒𝐹
𝑚

̃𝐹𝑏(𝑚, 𝑀𝑏𝑡−1)
𝛽𝐹
𝜃′𝑋𝑐𝑏[𝟏𝑐∈𝑃𝑏𝑡,𝑐∉𝑃𝑏𝑡−1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛

𝑐∈𝑃𝑏𝑡

∑

+ 𝜆𝟏𝑐∈𝑃𝑏𝑡−1,𝑐∉𝑃𝑏𝑡
]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛

(12)

(13)

𝑒𝐹
𝑚 is a cost shock that is independent across products and extreme 
value distributed. 𝛽𝐹  is the variance of this cost. We scale down the 
fixed cost 𝐹𝑏 by 𝛽𝐹  for notational convenience in the estimation section, 
but this is without loss of generality.

̃𝐹  is the non-random cost of changing the menu. We use the same 
functional  form  as  Wollmann  (2018),  in  which  𝜃′𝑋  is  the  cost  of 
introducing a new contract with characteristics 𝑋 (i.e., the origination 
fee,  LTV,  and  fixed-rate  period),  and  𝜆  is  a  scaling  parameter  that 
captures the cost or benefits of withdrawing a contract from the menu.

10 Given the high level of refinancing at the end of the initial period, it 
is unreasonable to assume that lenders compute the present value as if all 
mortgages were held until maturity.

6 

A. Polo et al.

3.3. Discussion of the model’s assumptions

Any model simplifies reality to focus on a given economic phe-
nomenon. For instance, we do not endogenize the house price upon 
default or model dynamic considerations in order to be able to model 
screening  incentives  in  more  detail.  Our  counterfactual  simulations 
thus consider that those elements — as well as unobserved product 
characteristics  (captured  by  product-lender  fixed  effects)  —  remain 
constant.

3.3.1. Demand

In this section, we discuss how our assumptions affect the interpre-

tation of demand parameters.

Savings: Since we do not observe savings, we cannot explicitly 
model constraints on the level of down payment (𝑑𝑝) a borrower can 
provide. We address this issue by modeling borrowers’ choice of both 
LTV and the loan size and relying on a revealed preference approach 
to recover the demand parameters. Using the definition of LTV, we get: 
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ∶= 𝐿
. In the situation in which a borrower 
is constrained by their savings (𝑠𝑖) when selecting their level of down 
payment, their loan demand function is 𝐿𝑖(𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ) = 𝑠𝑖
, where 𝑠𝑖
is a parameter to be recovered using choice data. Our specification of 
the demand allows us to capture this situation.

⇔ 𝑑𝑝 = 𝐿 ⋅ 1−𝐿𝑇 𝑉
𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝐿𝑇 𝑉
1−𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝑑𝑝+𝐿

Rejection of mortgage application: In borrowers’ maximization 
problem (2), we allow for the menu available to each borrower (𝑃𝑖𝑏) to 
differ as a result of rejections of borrowers’ applications for a particular 
contract. Our modeling of the choice of product is general enough to 
encompass the case in which borrowers have or do not have perfect 
knowledge regarding which applications would be successful and which 
would not. We favor the perfect information case interpretation, since 
this case can be justified by the heavy use of brokers in this market. 
The imperfect information case is discussed in Appendix D.

Borrowers’  participation  in  the  mortgage  market:  As  shown 
by Benetton et al. (2021), borrowers’ entry decision in the mortgage 
market is very inelastic to loan prices and characteristics.11 Further-
more, Robles-Garcia (2019) and Benetton (2021) show that the level of 
competition is high in the UK mortgage market, which makes it unlikely 
that banks will be able to extract the full surplus from borrowers. This 
motivates the assumption of taking borrowers’ participation as given 
and the use of a static demand model.

3.3.2. Supply

In this section, we discuss how our assumptions affect interpretation 

of the supply parameters.

Collateral:  Our  NPV  parameterization  is  derived  in  Appendix   F 
from a model in which banks do not recover anything following bor-
rowers’ default. This assumption does not affect the demand estimation, 
because we do not explicitly model the cost of default and instead 
use a revealed preference approach. However, it affects interpretation 
of  the  marginal  cost  of  lending  parameter  that  is  recovered  in  the 
estimation section. To provide intuition for how to interpret the results 
given our assumption about collateral, let us introduce the following 
notation. Upon default, the mortgage originator can seize the lender’s 
house and get 𝑚𝑖𝑛{𝛿 ⋅ 𝐿
, 𝑟𝐿}. L is the loan size, r the interest rate, 
𝐿𝑇 𝑉
𝐿
𝐿𝑇 𝑉  the house value at the origination date, and 𝛿 the ratio of the 
house price upon default over the one at origination. Default happens 
with probability 𝑑. If 𝛿 is not equal to zero, the estimated marginal 
cost we recover will capture the average loss given default conditional 
]
on LTV E
. Following the literature (for 
instance, Benetton (2021), Crawford et al. (2018)), we do not identify 
𝛿 and 𝑚𝑐 separately.

, 𝑟}𝑑|𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝑚𝑐 − 𝑚𝑖𝑛{𝛿 ⋅

1
𝐿𝑇 𝑉

[

11 They estimate the entry decision in regular time, as opposed to a financial 
crisis,  but  it  seems  that  even  during  the  COVID-19  crisis,  the  number  of 
borrowers did not drop on average.

7 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Static model of supply: The supply model used in this paper is 
static, since at each period lenders maximize the expected profits gen-
erated by current lending activities only. This consideration is justified 
by demand’s also being static. However, using the fixed cost function 
in the lenders’ problem creates a dynamic relationship between current 
and past maximization problems, which makes the use of a dynamic 
model natural.

The following considerations can nonetheless justify the static sup-
ply approach. First, our static modeling can be written as the hurdle 
rate approach, which is a good approximation of firms’ product-offering 
decisions according to recent surveys (see Wollmann, 2018). The hurdle 
rate approach assumes that firms choose to offer a set of products such 
that, for any other feasible set, the expected ratio of the added profits 
to added sunk costs does not exceed a set number (the hurdle rate).

Second, the only parameter affected by a dynamic modeling ap-
proach is the fixed cost function, which is not an object of interest 
in our analysis. Indeed, the marginal costs are not affected, because 
they are identified from a model optimality condition that depends 
on the number of products being fixed. The counterfactual experiment 
is  not  affected  by  the  use  of  the  static  model  as  long  as  the  rela-
tionship between current and expected profits in the counterfactual 
experiment  remains  the  same  as  in  the  data.  The  static  estimation 
affects the economic interpretation of the size of the fixed cost. As 
a  complementary  approach,  we  show  in  Appendix   B  how  methods 
used in the dynamic demand estimation literature could be used in 
a dynamic version of our model to estimate the supply parameters. 
However, the dynamic estimation increases the computational burden 
of counterfactual experiments to the point at which the counterfactual 
model would not be solvable with the methods currently available.

Fixed cost: Fixed costs are needed to rationalize the fact that banks 
do not offer a continuum of products despite the large heterogeneity 
in preferences. They can be interpreted as monetary costs that capture, 
for instance, marketing expenses or updates in software, but can also 
be interpreted as nonmonetary costs such as managerial frictions or 
collusion. Since our model is static, the fixed cost may capture the 
impact of competitors’ punishment strategy if the bank deviates from 
the current menu offering (see, for instance, Dou et al. (2022) for a 
game theoretical modeling of dynamic collusion).

4. Identification and estimation

We use product choice and loan size data to recover demand pa-
rameters, and default data to recover default probabilities. Once the 
demand parameters are estimated, we use the lender model optimality 
conditions  together  with  data  on  the  menus  offered  and  estimated 
demand parameters to recover the supply parameters.

For notational convenience, we collect all parameters in the vector 
𝛩 ∶= (𝛩𝐷, 𝛩𝑑 , 𝛩𝑆 ) where 𝛩𝐷 ∶= (𝛩𝑃 , 𝛩𝐿)) denotes demand parameters 
related to product demand (𝛩𝑃 ) and loan demand (𝛩𝐿). 𝛩𝑑 contains 
the default parameters (𝛽𝑑 , 𝜈𝑑 , 𝜌𝑑 ) and 𝛩𝑆 the supply ones (𝑚𝑐, 𝐹 ). The 
elements of 𝛩𝑃  and 𝛩𝐿 are defined in the relevant sections. Each of the 
following sections — demand (Section 4.1.1), default (Section 4.1.3), 
and supply (Section 4.1.4) — focuses on identification and estimation 
of its respective 𝛩 element.

4.1. Identification

4.1.1. Step 1: Demand

In this first step, we use contract choice data to identify and esti-
mate borrowers’ heterogeneous demand elasticities. Those elasticities 
capture banks’ ability to screen borrowers along their outside options. 
For instance, if borrowers who value high LTV contracts the most also 
tend to less intensively compare products across banks, lenders can use 
a menu to extract more surplus from them.

The demand parameters (𝛩𝑃 , 𝛩𝐿) that govern the choice of con-
tract (the mixed logit equation (5)) and optimal loan choice (linear 

A. Polo et al.

regression (6)) are identified using the cross section for a given month. 
However, we estimate the model using both time and cross-sectional 
variation.

4.1.2. Identification of the product choice and loan demand parameters

Identification challenges for bank and contract choice: There 
are two classic challenges related to demand estimation. The first is that 
interest rates are endogenous. In particular, interest rates are likely to 
be correlated with unobserved product characteristics such as product-
specific marketing expenses. The second identification threat comes 
from unobserved lender loan application rejection criteria that affect 
the borrower-specific choice set (𝑃𝑖). For instance, it may be that some 
borrowers did not choose a higher LTV contract because they were 
unable to rather than because it was too expensive. As a result, using 
a  larger  choice  set  in  the  logit  regression  than  the  one  offered  to 
borrowers is likely to lead to downward bias in willingness to pay for 
LTV.

We use an instrumental variable approach together with bank and 
product fixed effects to address the unobserved product characteristics. 
Fixed effects control for unobserved product characteristics that are 
common across banks (e.g., market segment-specific advertising) or 
common across products of the same bank (e.g., the branch network 
or customer service).

Following  Benetton  (2021)  and  Robles-Garcia  (2019),  we  use
product-specific risk weights as cost shifters. The instrument is relevant 
for the following reasons. Lenders fund their lending via deposits and 
their own capital (equity). Typically, deposits are a cheaper funding 
source  because  of  the  convenience  yield  of  holding  deposits.  Risk 
weights affect the amount of capital requirements a lender must hold 
when lending via a particular type of contract. They thus affect the cost 
of lending. Under imperfect competition, this cost is partially passed 
through the contract interest rates (this holds empirically) and thus 
affects the spread between interest rates. It is likely for this reason that 
our instrument is relevant.

Risk weights vary across lenders and over time.  For the largest 
banks, risk weights come from an Internal Ratings-Based (IRB) model. 
While the choice of model is endogenous, it must be approved by the 
central bank before being used. Since the approval process entails some 
delay, it is unlikely that current unobservable shocks are correlated 
with  predetermined  risk  weights.  Given  the  absence  of  individual-
based pricing in the UK (see Benetton, 2021), the exclusion restric-
tion requires that our cost shifter is not correlated with unobserved 
bank-product-specific unobservable characteristics. This restriction is 
violated  if  lenders  react  to  cost  by  changing  unobservable  product 
characteristics. However, given that observable contract characteristics 
other than interest rates (e.g., reset rates, pre-payment penalties) are 
relatively constant over time for any given bank, it is unlikely that the 
time series variation in risk weights is highly correlated with changes 
in unobservable product characteristics.

Consideration set bias is dealt with using a sufficient set approach, 
as in Crawford et al. (2021). This approach shows that taking a subset of 
the menu for which banks’ rejection is independent of variables unob-
served by the econometrician restores the consistency of the estimates. 
The choice of subset is subject to the econometrician’s judgment. Since 
a failure of the sufficient set correction would lead to downward bias 
of the WTP LTV estimates, our main results for the LTV distortion level 
and the cost of those distortions should be interpreted with caution as a 
lower bound of the true effect. We construct the choice set as follows, as 
in Benetton et al. (2021) and Robles-Garcia (2019). We build sets based 
on the product sold in the same month in the same geographic region. 
The geographic restriction mostly affects building societies and smaller 
banks, because they often have limited coverage across regions. The 
time restriction accounts for the entry and exit of products. We then 
further restrict the choice set by considering products with LTV just 
above and just below the one actually chosen. In addition, if a borrower 
got a loan from a large bank (top 8), we restrict his choice set to large 

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

banks. We impose similar restrictions for small lenders. This captures 
consideration bias in the search or lender rejection. Furthermore, we 
assume that a household will not qualify for a product if it has a larger 
loan-to-income ratio, or if they are older than any of the cutoff values. 
The rationale for these restrictions is based on lenders’ most common 
set of affordability criteria.

Identification challenges regarding loan amount: There are two 

econometric challenges.

The  first  one  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  interest  rate  can  be 
correlated  with  unobservable  bank-product  characteristics.  We  deal 
with  this  using  the  same  instrumental  variable  approach  as  in  the 
product choice estimation.

The second challenge arises from selection bias. It occurs if, for 
instance, borrowers with a high unobservable propensity to borrow are 
also more likely to compare products more intensively and thus end 
up choosing lower-rate contracts. This bias is mitigated by allowing 
𝑖𝑐 , 𝜖𝑑
random variables in the demand and default regressions (𝑃 𝐼𝑖, 𝜖𝐿
𝑖𝑐 )
to be correlated. Train (1986) is an extreme version of this approach 
because it assumes that the coefficients are perfectly correlated.

4.1.3. Step 2: Default probabilities

In this second step, we use contract default data together with our 
demand estimates to identify and estimate adverse selection (𝜌) and 
moral hazard parameters (𝛼𝑑 ).

Default  parameters  are  identified  and  estimated  using  cross
-sectional variation and variation in the mortgage origination month.

Research design: In the default regression (7), some product or 
borrower characteristics may be unobservable by the econometrician. 
In particular, the borrower’s private information 𝑃 𝐼𝑖 is unobservable. 
However, given the use of menus in this market, we can construct a 
measure of the average borrower type conditional on product choice 
from our demand estimates. We denote it  ̂𝛽𝑃
𝑖𝑐𝑏. This is formally defined 
as 
𝑖𝑐𝑏𝑐− ∶= ̂E[𝑃 𝐼 𝑃
̂𝛽𝑃
𝑖 |

𝐸
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑏]

(14)

𝐸
𝑃  denotes the econometrician information set and 𝛽𝑃
in Eq.  (4).12

𝑖  is defined 

Because of the specification of preferences 𝛽𝑃

𝑖  and the use of bank-
𝑖   is  uncorrelated  with  observable  and 
𝑐𝑏). As a result, the co-
𝑖𝑐𝑏 contains no information on moral hazard or burden of 

product  fixed  effects  (𝜉𝑐𝑏),  𝛽𝑃
unobservable contract characteristics (𝑋𝑜
efficient  ̂𝛽𝑃
payment.13

𝑐𝑏, 𝑋𝑢

We use the index 𝑐− to emphasize that the average borrower type 
who selects product c depends on the other contracts 𝑐− offered. To gain 
intuition, let us consider a situation in which high-default borrowers 
tend to choose high LTV contracts. If the price of high LTV contracts 
increases, some borrowers will substitute to lower LTV contracts, which 
therefore changes the average type of borrower who chooses low LTV 
contracts. It is this source of variation — i.e., changes in outside options 
𝑐− — that identifies the screening for default parameter 𝜌 in the default 
regression.

Identification of the coefficients that drive moral hazard (𝛼𝑑 ) and 
adverse  selection  (𝜌𝑑 )  thus  comes  from  two  different  sources  of

∑

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽𝑋𝑐 −𝛼𝑟𝑐 )
𝑥 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽𝑋𝑥−𝛼𝑟𝑥)

1
𝑥 𝑒𝑥𝑝((𝛽𝑋𝑥−𝛼𝑟𝑥)−(𝛽𝑋𝑐 −𝛼𝑟𝑐 ))

𝑑𝐹 (𝛽𝑃 ; 𝛺𝑃 )  and  𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|

𝐸
12 The average type can be recovered as follows. E[𝛽𝑃
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐] =
𝑖 |
∫ 𝛽𝑃 𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|
𝐸
𝑃 ,𝛩𝑃 ,𝛽𝑃
𝑖 )
𝑖 ), 
𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|
𝐸
𝑃 ,𝛩𝑃 )
given  by  Eq.   (5),  depends  on  the  spread  between  contracts  only 
𝐸
𝑃 , 𝛩𝑃 ) is given by 
=
(
∑
𝐸
integrating 𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|
𝑃 , 𝛩𝑃 , 𝛽𝑃
13 This last statement is conditional on interpreting the 𝛽𝑃
𝑖  coefficient as 
coming from a first-degree approximation of borrowers’ valuation of contract 
characteristics (𝛽𝑃
𝑖 + 𝑓 (𝑋𝑐𝑏)), or assuming that the causal impact of 
contract terms is homogeneous across agents—as in, for instance, Hertzberg 
et al. (2018).

). 𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|
𝑖 ) over 𝛽𝑃 .

𝐸
𝑃 , 𝛩𝑃 , 𝛽𝑃

𝑖𝑐𝑏 ≈ 𝛽𝑃

A. Polo et al.

variation—for instance, changes in the interest rate of product c and 
changes in the interest rate spread between product c and its close 
substitutes (𝑐−). Variations in interest rate 𝑟𝑐𝑏 — while keeping interest 
rate spreads constant — keep incentives to choose a given contract 
unchanged ( ̂𝛽𝑃
𝑖𝑐𝑏𝑐− does not vary), but change the burden of payment 
for the borrower (𝛼𝑑 𝑟𝑐𝑏). In contrast, variations in the spread between 
contracts c and other contracts — keeping 𝑟𝑐𝑏 constant — will only 
change the type of borrower who gets contract c (𝛽𝑑 𝑟𝑐𝑏).

Identification challenges: Let us now formally discuss the identifi-
cation challenges. As in the product choice regression, we might worry 
that  unobserved  product  characteristics  are  correlated  with  interest 
rates. We mitigate this concern using the same cost shifter (capital 
requirement) to instrument the for interest rate.

One potential identification challenge is associated with adverse 
selection coefficients 𝜌𝑑 . This arises if changes in outside options — 
for instance, the interest rates for contract 𝑐− — are correlated with 
changes in contract c characteristics that we cannot control for or to 
changes in other variables that affect default, such as sector specific 
labor shocks.

To limit this omitted variable concern, we use bank fixed effects 
and product fixed effects and control for the mortgage origination date. 
Our empirical strategy thus controls for differences across acceptance 
and rejection rules that are common among products (lender shocks) 
and differences across products that are common across lenders (market 
shocks).

We also use a new instrument for our measure of borrower average 
type  ̂𝛽𝑃
𝑖𝑐𝑏𝑐− . The instrument is based on risk weights, as in the product 
choice regression. The difference with product choice regression is that 
the risk weights of products that were not chosen are also used as 
instruments. The instrument is relevant, because changes in the cost of 
producing products other than product c are passed through the interest 
rate for those products, and thus change the type of borrower who 
chooses product c even when the characteristics of product c did not 
change. Formally, we instrument  ̂𝛽𝑃
𝑖𝑐𝑏 by replacing interest rates with 
capital requirements in Eq.  (14).

The instrument exclusion restrictions are that changes in capital 
requirements of other contracts than contract 𝑐 are uncorrelated with 
unobserved bank-product specific characteristics of contract 𝑐 or any 
bank-product specific shocks that also affect default. The instrument 
faces the same limitation as the one discussed in the product demand 
Section 4.1.1. Given the comprehensive set of contract characteristics, 
we observe that the main bias likely stems from a correlation of risk 
weights  with  acceptance  and  rejection  rules.  Such  rules  are  lender 
choice variables, and as such, they may react to any product-specific 
cost shocks. Any instrumental variable would thus face this caveat, but 
this may be less of an issue for rejection rules because the economic 
literature argues that they are quite sticky (Agarwal et al., 2024). Yet, 
to be conservative, our results can be interpreted as a lower bound on 
adverse selection since lenders are likely to become stricter to mitigate 
the increase in the cost of lending. An alternative IV approach could 
exploit the timing of a bank-specific internal rate-based approval as 
an exogenous variation in the interest rate spread between products, 
assuming that acceptance and rejection rules take time to react to that 
change. However, the internal rate-based model mostly happens around 
2010—A period in which the PSD data feature less information about 
contract characteristics. This approach is thus outside the scope of our 
paper.

4.1.4. Step 3: Supply

In this third step, we use menu data together with our demand and 
default estimates to identify and estimate the marginal costs of lending 
and the fixed cost of designing a new product.

Conditional on the demand and default parameters’ being identified 
and estimated, the supply parameters are identified and estimated using 
the cross-sectional variation.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Identification: The optimality conditions of the lender problem (3), 

written from the econometrician information set, are:

𝛱𝑏(𝑀𝑏, 𝑃𝑖) = 0,  for all rates 𝑟𝑐𝑏

𝜕𝑟𝑐𝑏
Pr(𝑀𝑏|𝛩) = Pr(𝑀𝑏 ∈ argmax
{𝑚∈ }

{𝛱(𝑚, 𝑃𝑖) − 𝐹 (𝑚, 𝑀𝑏,𝑡−1)}|𝛩)

(15)

(16)

⟺ Pr(𝑀𝑏|𝛩) =

exp(𝛽𝐹 𝛱(𝑀𝑏, 𝑃𝑖) − ̃𝐹 (𝑀𝑏, 𝑀𝑏,𝑡−1))
∑
exp(𝛽𝐹 𝛱(𝑚, 𝑃𝑖) − ̃𝐹 (𝑚, 𝑀𝑏,𝑡−1))
𝑚∈
𝛩 is the set of parameters. All other elements are defined below 

(17)

Eqs. (3) and (13).

The  first-order  condition  with  respect  to  interest  rate  (15)
— analyzed formally in Appendix  H — states that the interest rates 
can be written as a markup over the effective marginal cost. As in, 
for instance, Crawford et al. (2018), the markup is larger when the 
demand elasticity and default elasticity (i.e., the burden of payment) 
are low. Indeed, when elasticity is low, lenders can increase interest 
rates without losing customers. However, when the payment burden 
channel is large, increasing rates leads to larger default probabilities, 
which provides incentives to keep interest rates low. As in Rothschild 
and Stiglitz (1978) some contracts feature an asymmetric information 
premium while others offer a discount (i.e., an information rent). The 
premium  and  discounts  are  decrease  and  increase  in  interest  rates 
relative to the perfect information case. They are used to maintain 
borrowers’ incentives to self-select.

Eq. (17) states that the menu 𝑀𝑏 is more likely to be offered if 
it is the best response to menus offered by other lenders. Given that 
the gross margin function is increasing and concave in the number of 
products, the fixed cost is such that any additional product introduction 
beyond what we observe in the data must generate less revenue than 
the fixed cost of introducing the said product. Using this condition 
for all banks, we can point-identify the fixed cost parameters using a 
standard logit model argument. A similar argument holds for identi-
fication of the parameter (𝜆) that captures the cost of the benefits of 
withdrawing a product from the menu.

Contrary to Wollmann (2018) and, for instance, Pakes et al. (2021), 
we  assume  that  the  error  terms  in  the  fixed  cost  function  (𝐹 )  are 
extreme value distributed. This parametric assumption allows us to 
write the moment inequalities (derived using the best response function 
approach as in Wollmann, 2018) as a logit model. This parametric 
assumption allows us to point-identify the parameters using classing 
logit model arguments.

Identification  challenges:  Given  demand  and  default  estimates 
and data on menus, the only unknown in Eq.  (15) is the marginal cost 
of lending. As in the seminal paper by Berry et al. (1995), we thus 
recover the bank product-specific lending cost by inverting the first-
order condition with respect to interest rates. Once the marginal cost 
is recovered using Eq. (15), we can construct an estimate of the gross 
margin function  ̂𝛱(𝑀𝑏, 𝑃𝑖). We then use it in Eq.  (17) to recover the 
fixed cost.

The marginal cost equation is recovered by inverting equation (15) 
for each bank-product without making any identification assumptions. 
As a result, there are no identification challenges, but interpretation of 
the marginal cost coefficient changes depending on the model used. We 
discuss this point extensively — as well as the fixed cost interpretation 
— in Section 3.3.2.

Instead, the fixed cost estimation relies on the classic assumption 
that the error terms (𝑒𝐹
𝑚 ) are uncorrelated with observable characteris-
tics. Those error terms can be interpreted as both unobserved fixed cost 
heterogeneity and growth margin misspecification. The latter occurs 
because we use an estimate  ̂𝛱 instead of the true 𝛱 in the fixed cost 
regression (17).

Omitted variable bias emerges if, for instance, high LTV products 
are often associated with higher marketing expenses. This would tend 
to bias upward the cost of high LTV products. To mitigate these issues, 
we use product-fixed effects from the demand regressions as dependent 

9 

A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

variables. The reasoning is that those fixed effects can be interpreted 
as unobservable product-bank characteristics (see, for instance, Berry 
et al. (1995) or Granja (2021)).

The fixed cost identification also relies on an assumption about the 
set of alternative menus that were considered by the lender (i.e.,  ). 
This issue is common to the demand estimation, and has been analyzed 
in the consideration set literature (see, e.g., Crawford et al. (2021)). For 
instance, wrongly including a highly profitable product that is not being 
offered  because  of  regulations  or  that  is  mistakenly  not  considered 
by the banks will bias the cost of introducing this product upward. 
To  mitigate  this  issue  and  the  computational  burden,  we  perform 
the estimation only at product introduction and in product exclusion 
periods and calculate counterfactual profits in the equation using the 
menu from the previous period. As a robustness check, we also conduct 
the estimation considering as a set of potential products, combinations 
of the most common values for the characteristics of existing products 
in the market.14

4.2. Estimation

The demand coefficient in the logit model is estimated separately 

for each consideration set, as in Benetton (2021).

Joint estimation of the demand, default and supply parameters is 
computationally demanding, because it would require iterating on the 
estimate of average preference E[𝛽𝑃
𝐸
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑏] for each 𝛩𝑃 . For 
𝑖 |
this reason, we estimate each equation ((5), (6), (7), (15), (17)) sepa-
rately using GMM (see, for instance, Nevo (2001) for the mixed logit 
procedure) and calculate standard errors using a bootstrap method.

We condition the moments on the information gathered from pre-
vious  steps.  That  is,  the  loan  choice  moment  built  from  Eq.   (6)  is 
conditional on the product choice. The default moment built from Eq. 
(7), is conditional on the choice of product and loan size. The supply 
parameters are conditional on the demand parameters. The correlations 
between random variables are recovered by constructing a consistent 
estimate of their average value conditional on product choice (and loan 
choice for the default regression) and using this value as a depen-
dent variable. For instance, the procedure for the default regression 
is as follows. Given a consistent estimate for 𝛩𝑃  — taken from the 
product demand estimation — we construct a consistent estimate for 
E[𝛽𝑃
𝐸
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑏] using Bayes’ rule and the estimated preferences 
𝑖 |
coefficients of Eqs. ((5), (6)).15 To lower the computational burden of 
calculating conditional random variables in E[𝛽𝑃
𝐸
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑏], we 
𝑖 |
approximate the equation using a linearized version of the logit model 
in the spirit of Salanié and Wolak (2019). We then use our estimate of 
E[𝛽𝑃
𝐸
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑏] as a dependent variable in the default regression.
𝑖 |
Marginal cost estimates are recovered by inverting equation (15). 
We obtain an estimate the gross margin using demand and marginal 
cost in the gross margin function 𝛱(𝑀𝑏, 𝑃𝑖).

We then simulate the equilibrium gross margin in the second stage 
of the game for all product deviations in the feasible set  . Because 

14 We limit the feasible set to a combination of products with teaser rates 
of 0, 2, 3 or 5 years, three potential levels of fees (0, 750, 1,500) and buckets 
of LTV from 60% to 95% by increasing levels of 5%. We only consider one 
product introduction for each market segment considered. Each time, I chose 
the product withdrawal or introduction that led to the higher gross margin. 
When calculated this way, the fixed cots are a bit higher (£25M instead of 
£16M)
15 We construct a consistent estimate of E[𝛽𝑃
𝑖 |
rule and the estimated preferences coefficients of equation ((5), (6)) to get 
𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|

𝐸
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑏] by using Bayes’ 

𝑑𝐹 (𝛽𝑃 ; ̂𝛺𝑃 )

(18)

̂E[𝛽𝑃
𝑖 |

𝐸
𝑃 , 𝑖 𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑏] = ∫ 𝛽𝑃

𝑃 , ̂𝛩𝑃 , 𝛽𝑃
𝐸
𝑖 )
𝑃 , ̂𝛩𝑃 )
𝐸

𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|

𝐸
𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|
𝑃 , 𝛩𝑃 , 𝛽𝑃
is  given  by  integrating  𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|
cumulative distribution function 𝐹 (𝛽𝑃 ; ̂𝛩𝑃 ).

𝑖 ) is defined in Eq.  (5). 𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(i chooses cb|

𝑃 , ̂𝛩𝑃 )
𝐸
𝑖 )  over  𝛽𝑃   using  the 

𝑃 , ̂𝛩𝑃 , 𝛽𝑃
𝐸

Fig. 3.  Distribution of price elasticity for the discrete choice regression for the full 
population.

Fig. 4.  Distribution of WTP for LTV for the full population.

product characteristics are fixed in that stage, the gross margin calcu-
lation is similar to standard IO setups. We can thus use (Morrow and 
Skerlos, 2011) contraction mapping to recover the equilibrium interest 
rate. As such, calculating lenders’ growth margins for each deviation 
does not feature any multiple equilibrium issues.

We then estimate the logit equation (17) using the estimated gross 

margin.

5. Estimation results

This section presents estimation results for demand, default, and 
supply parameters. The implied interest rate and product distortions 
are studied in Section 6.1.

5.1. Demand results

Discrete choice: Demand parameter coefficients are reported in 

Table  5.

10 

A. Polo et al.

There  is  substantial  heterogeneity  in  the  interest  rate  elasticity, 
mainly driven by income.16 The corresponding average own-product 
demand elasticity is equal to 2.6, 3.6 and 5.1 for borrowers shopping 
for a 70%–85% LTV loan that are in the first, second, and third quartile 
of the income distribution (see Table  7). This result implies that on 
average, a 1% increase in the interest rate decreases the market share 
of the mortgage by 3.6% for 70%–85% LTV shoppers. Looking at the 
market share of low-income borrowers only (the first quartile of the 
distribution), we see that a 1% increase in the interest rate decreases 
the market share by 2.6%. Fig.  3 depicts the price elasticity distribution 
for the whole borrower population.

The estimate implies that borrowers with higher income are more 
sensitive  to  rates.  This  can  be  rationalized  by,  for  instance,  search 
costs as in Agarwal et al. (2024). Borrowers with higher income are 
more likely to be accepted for any loan contract and thus have more 
incentives to search intensively. The correlation between income and 
price elasticity can also be related to the fact that income could be a 
proxy for other variables such as financial sophistication. Alternatively, 
this  correlation  can  be  rationalized  by  the  direct  effect  of  default 
probabilities: Borrowers who are more likely to default are also less 
likely to repay the full face value of the debt and thus end up being less 
price elastic. As shown in the motivating evidence and in Section 5.2, 
default is indeed correlated with income.

The average LTV coefficient is 0.17, implying an elasticity of about 
8, which means that the average borrower likes high LTV loans. In 
contrast to the interest rate case, the heterogeneity is mainly driven by 
the random variable rather than income. This coefficient is significant 
at the 0.1 level.17 The first quartile of the distribution is 0.13 and 
the third quartile is 0.21. However, when considering only observable 
heterogeneity, we find that the lower quartile of the distribution has 
an average of 0.16 and the third quartile’s average is 0.18. One in-
terpretation of the positive coefficient results is that borrowers do not 
like to make down payments, because they may be credit constrained. 
Combining the two coefficients’ estimates, we find that 70%–85% LTV 
shoppers in the first, second and third quantile are, respectively, willing 
to pay ( 𝛽
) up to 7, 10, and 14 bps for a 1% LTV increase. Fig.  4 depicts 
𝛼
the distribution of WTP for LTV for the whole population.

We also find substantial heterogeneity for the teaser rate parameter. 
The heterogeneity is driven by the random variable term rather than 
income. This is the only product characteristic that is valued positively 
by certain borrowers and negatively by others. Fixing rates for a longer 
period provides a hedge against interest rate increases when borrowers 
refinance their loan. The interest rate risk, and thus the benefit of 
fixing  rates,  can  be  a  result  of  future  changes  in  borrowers’  credit 
risk or variation in lenders’ cost of lending. Consequently, the teaser 
rate coefficients can be rationalized by borrowers who have different 
degrees of risk aversion or expectations about the future economic path. 
This implies that some borrowers prefer a fixed rate and others prefer 
a flexible rate. Borrowers in the first, second, and third quantile have 
a coefficient of −0.4, 0.1, and 0.9. Those coefficients imply a WTP of 
−30, 8, and 50 bps for a 1-year increase in the teaser rate.

The average borrower dislikes fees. There is no observable and un-
observable heterogeneity for that coefficient, given the other coefficient 
for heterogeneity. Borrowers have an average coefficient of −7 ⋅ 10−4. 
Those coefficients imply a willingness to pay of 32, 43, and 60 bps for 
a £1, 000 decrease in fees.

Loan demand: Loan coefficients are all significant and reported in 
Table  8. We find that high LTV increases the amount borrowed by 
15%. For the teaser rate, we find that increasing the teaser rate by 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

0.8%. We further document that borrowers with a high unobserved 
preference for LTV or a fixed rate also have a higher propensity to 
borrow. Indeed, borrowers with an unobserved preference for a fixed 
rate that is one standard deviation higher borrow, on average, 20% 
more. Borrowers with an unobserved preference for an LTV that is 
one standard deviation higher borrow, on average, 1.3% more. If those 
borrowers are also profitable, this creates incentives for banks to create 
a menu to extract more surplus from them.

5.2. Default results

Default  parameter  coefficients  are  significant  and  reported  in

Table  9.

We document positive selection along the LTV random variable. For 
a given level of income and other observable characteristics, borrowers 
who have an unobserved propensity to choose high LTV products (high 
̂𝑒𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ) that are one standard deviation above the average of the  ̂𝑒𝐿𝑇 𝑉
distribution also have a baseline default probability that is twice as 
low relative to the average borrower (assuming the average is 1.2%). 
The positive selection along the  ̂𝑒𝐿𝑇 𝑉  dimension can be the result of 
borrowers who are willing to obtain high leverage and thus a bigger 
house when they know they are less likely to pay the cost of defaulting. 
This effect goes in the other direction relative to the income effect.

We also document that low-income borrowers are more likely to 
default and are also more likely to choose a high LTV loan. The latter 
can be rationalized by a model in which borrowers want to buy the 
same house size but have different amounts of savings due to their 
different  income  levels.  In  the  UK  mortgage  market,  because  there 
is  no  individual-based  pricing,  this  correlation  between  observable 
characteristics and default drives adverse selection.

The correlation of the random variable associated with unobserved 
LTV preferences implies positive selection, and the one with income 
implies adverse selection. If the positive selection effect dominated, 
screening along the LTV dimension would not be possible as screen-
ing requires a positive correlation between borrowers’ willingness to 
pay  and  the  cost  of  offering  them  the  product  (see,  for  instance,
Rothschild  and  Stiglitz  (1978)).  In  the  counterfactual  section  (Sec-
tion 6), we show that contracts are distorted along the LTV dimension, 
which implies that adverse selection dominates.18 The net effect is ex-
actly given by looking at the difference between the perfect information 
benchmark and the data menus (done in Section 6.1).

As  explained  in  the  demand  section,  longer  teaser  rates  hedge 
borrowers against changes in interest rates. Variation in future rates can 
be a result of, for instance, general economic conditions or borrower-
specific credit risk changes. Borrowers who prefer higher teaser rates 
are  thus  likely  to  be  more  risk  averse  or  to  see  their  credit  score 
decrease (and thus their refinancing rate goes up). Those two channels 
imply opposite predictions regarding adverse or advantageous selec-
tion. Indeed, theoretically, borrowers who are highly risk averse are 
less likely to default. In contrast, private information about a credit 
risk interpretation will likely lead to adverse selection along the teaser 
rate dimension. Indeed, borrowers with private information about their 
credit risk’s being likely to go up over time are more likely to fix their 
contract terms. Those borrowers are also more likely to default.

Our estimates imply mild positive selection along the teaser rate 
dimension. Indeed, borrowers who are one standard deviation above 
the mean are 2% less likely to default. These results suggest that the 
risk aversion channel dominates. This interpretation is also consistent 
with the loan regression results, which show that those customers tend 

16 The other source of heterogeneity arising from the observable hetero-
geneity and the random variable terms are non-significant (statistically and 
economically).
17 The income interaction term is not significant and has almost no impact 
on the parameter.

18 Indeed, if high LTV contracts are more valuable for high-default bor-
rowers, lenders can make them self-select into a high interest rate-high LTV 
contract. However, maintaining borrowers’ incentives requires that low-default 
borrowers get a lower LTV contract than high-default borrowers, which is not 
necessarily what would happen in the first best.

11 

A. Polo et al.

to borrow more: Those borrowers are less likely to lose their house and 
thus benefit more from each extra unit of house bought. However, the 
fact that the teaser rate coefficients are low may be a result of both 
channels being present.

5.3. Marginal costs and fixed cost results

Marginal costs: Results are reported in Table  10. We find that the 
average marginal cost is 220 bps. Scaled up by a default probability 
between 0% and 5%, this implies an average fair price of between 220 
and 231 bps. Marginal costs are increasing in LTV in a convex fashion. 
While the average marginal cost increases by 10 bps between 70% and 
80% LTV loans, it increases by 110 bps between 90% and 95% LTV 
loans. Longer teaser rate products are more expensive to produce. One 
year longer costs 4 bps at a low level but 14 bps per year above the fifth 
level. Finally, higher fee products are associated with lower marginal 
costs. A 500£ fee increase is associated with a marginal costs decrease 
of 10 bps starting from a zero fee product. This decrease is even bigger 
for higher fee products.

Fixed costs: Results are reported in Table  11. The fixed cost is 

obtained by taking the ratio of 𝜃 over 𝛽 in Table  11.

We find that the average fixed costs of introducing a new product 
are between £40,000 and £180,000 per product, depending on the 
assumption  about  refinancing.  This  represents  about  2%  of  current 
profits. Those costs are equivalent to an interest rate decrease of 0.2 bps 
on each contract in a given market segment and represent 0.1% of the 
revenue generated. Around 30% of the fixed cost is recovered after the 
withdrawal of an existing product. As a comparison, Wollmann (2018) 
finds fixed costs in between $5 and $25 million for the car industry. 
The difference makes economic sense since the fixed costs of setting up 
or dismantling a production line for trucks is likely to be much higher 
than adding or scraping a mortgage product.

The  difference  in  the  estimates  depends  on  assumptions  about 
whether  the  borrower  stays  at  the  bank  or  refinances  the  contract 
elsewhere.19 The conservative estimate (£40,000) is obtained assuming 
profits are zero after the teaser rate period (i.e. f is set to be the teaser 
rate period in Eq.  (11)). For the less conservative estimate (£180,000), 
we assume the lender can extract as much surplus with the refinancing 
contract as the first-time buyer contract and set the number of periods 
to the loan’s maturity (i.e., f in Eq.  (11) is set to the loan maturity, 
which is on average 30 years).

The estimates are those implied by the model to justify that banks 
offer  a  discrete  number  of  products  and  should  not  be  interpreted 
as a monetary cost. The sunk cost includes monetary costs such as 
marketing expenses, updates of the menu on all lending platforms, and 
changes in risk-weight calculations. They also include nonmonetary 
costs such as within-firm managing frictions.

Tables  12 and 13, 14 provide additional robustness checks. Tables 
12 and 13 show that the size of the fixed cost is mainly driven by the 
90–95 LTV market segment that features a lower number of products 
and is also the most profitable. Estimates using only the 90–95 market 
segments yield fixed costs that are 10 times higher.

Table  14 shows that the fixed costs are multiplied by four when 
allowing for a simultaneous instead of a two-stage game; the intu-
ition is that it is more profitable to deviate when competitors keep 
interest rates than when they optimally adapt their price following the 
deviation.

6. Counterfactual analysis

In the following sections, we use simulations to provide a measure 
of product distortions relative to the perfect information benchmark 

19 This assumption impacts the estimated profits by the number of periods 
(as in Eq.  (33) in Appendix  F).

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

(Section 6.1) and to the social planner benchmark (Section 6.2). The 
later allows us to calculate the cost of the contractual externality.

We propose two well-behaved benchmarks to mitigate the two key 
challenges related to computing the counterfactuals. The first challenge 
stems from the multiplicity of equilibria in models of products or firms 
entry with fixed cost (see, for instance, Eizenberg (2014)).20 The second 
one is the difficulty of characterizing the equilibrium in competitive 
screening models because the equilibrium may not exist in pure strat-
egy (see, for instance, Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1978 or Azevedo and 
Gottlieb, 2017).

6.1. Product and interest rate distortions

This section compares perfect information benchmarks equilibrium 
contracts to the data to quantify the interest rate and product distor-
tions.

6.1.1. Conceptual framework

As  well  known  in  the  contract  theory  literature  (see,
for instance, Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1978), perfect information con-
tracts may not be incentive compatible. To illustrate this point, let us 
consider that the first-best contracts consist of contracts with the same 
LTV but with different interest rates to reflect borrowers’ heterogeneous 
default probabilities. If lenders were to offer the first-best contracts in 
a menu, all borrowers would choose the lower-rate contract.

Thus,  to  maintain  incentives  to  self-select,  lenders  must  distort 
contract terms away from their first best value. If high LTV contracts 
are more valuable for high-default borrowers, lenders can distort in-
terest rates and LTVs to make the low-rate contract less attractive to 
high-default borrowers.

One option is to lower the LTV on the low-rate contract. This works 
because choosing a lower LTV is relatively more costly to high-default 
borrowers, given that they have a larger willingness to pay. We call this 
channel product distortions.

Another  option  is  to  decrease  the  interest  rate  of  the  high-rate 
contract—or, more generally, lower the interest rate spreads between 
contracts.  We  call  this  channel  interest  rate  distortions  or  cross
-subsidies. In the extreme situation in which only interest rate distor-
tions are used, this leads to a single pooling contract.

6.1.2. Perfect information benchmark

We  characterize  the  product  and  interest  rate  distortions  using 

different approaches.

We characterize product distortions by comparing the menu offered 
in the data with the one offered under perfect information. We consider 
that under perfect information, all the random variables except the 
demand shocks are observable by the lender. The demand shocks allow 
for imperfect competition as Taburet (2024). The model is presented in 
Appendix  G.

Because  the  fixed  cost  estimates  heavily  depend  on  the  model-
ing assumptions (see Section 5.3), we abstract away from them and 
use a conservative approach instead. We first construct a continuous 
marginal cost function by interpolating our marginal cost estimates 
using a spline interpolation. Then, we solve for the optimal contract 
characteristics for each borrower using the model first-order conditions 
(see Appendix  G). If the result gives a contract characteristic in between 

20 A multiple equilibrium problem arises when moving away from the two 
above-mentioned benchmarks to, for instance, simulate the impact of a change 
in competition or a ban in high LTV. The literature uses Lee and Pakes (2009) 
algorithm as in Wollmann (2018). However, the algorithm is known to be 
non-stable in some instances. The logit functional form developed in this paper 
allows to assign a probability to each potential equilibrium. This approach is 
feasible and could be a good alternative to Lee and Pakes (2009) algorithm 
when the set of players and strategy is small enough.

12 

A. Polo et al.

the discrete values observed in the data (e.g., an LTV of 83 while 
only  LTVs  of  75,  80  and  85  are  observed  in  the  data)  we  set  the 
counterfactual characteristic to its discrete value closer to the data 
equilibrium value (e.g., 85 if the borrower had chosen 85 in the data, 
or 80 if he had chosen 75 or 80).

The interest rate distortions are measured holding the other contract 
terms constant, and are recovered using a decomposition of the imper-
fect information structural model described in Appendix  H. Formally, 
we use the imperfect information structural model’s first-order condi-
tions to decompose the interest rate into a perfect information perfect 
competition price, a perfect information markup, and an asymmetric 
information discount or premium (i.e., the amount of cross-subsidy 
generated by adverse selection). Again, perfect information refers to 
the situation in which all the random variables except the logit demand 
shocks are observable.

Holding the contract characteristic constant is a relevant metric 
for  describing  the  distortions,  and  it  also  allows  the  results  to  be 
independent of the fixed cost value. In addition, the different com-
ponents  of  the  formula  are  functions  of  model  parameters  and  the 
data and do not require additional simulations. As a result, there is 
no  equilibrium  multiplicity  problem  or  computational  burden.  The 
cost of this approach is that we can only recover the average perfect 
information interest rate for borrowers who chose the same contract 
under imperfect information.

6.1.3. Product distortions: results

Our results imply that maintaining borrowers’ incentives to self-
select requires distorting contract terms away from their perfect in-
formation value. Because high-default-low price elastic borrowers have 
high WTP for LTV, low-default-high price elastic borrowers get a lower 
LTV and thus a lower house size under imperfect information.

We find that more than 90% of borrowers shopping between 70 
and  95%  LTV  would  get  an  85%–95%  LTV  product  under  perfect 
information-perfect competition (see Table  15). This finding suggests 
that products below 85% LTV are introduced to screen rather than to 
cater to borrowers’ heterogeneous preferences. We exclude borrowers 
shopping for below 65% LTV, because they constitute less than 10% of 
the loans originated, and the data quality is lower for that subsample.21 
Our benchmark does not endogenize house prices and does not feature 
any risk associated with having a portfolio composed of high-leveraged 
loans only. The results should be thus interpreted as a comparative 
static, holding those elements constant.

Our results are robust to the use of models with observable het-
erogeneity and estimating the coefficient separately for each sufficient 
set.22  The  amount  of  product  distortion  relative  to  the  perfect  in-
formation situation is accentuated when moving away from perfect 
competition. Finally, the result is robust to changing the fact that a 
higher LTV decreases default. One might be worry that this sign results 
from banks that select good borrowers for high LTV loans based on 
soft information not observable by the econometrician. However, the 
LTV coefficient of the default regression would need to be positive and 
100 times larger in absolute value to imply that 10% of borrowers 
get offered lower than 90% LTV products. Given the standard error of 
2.8⋅10−6 and the average coefficient of −3.9⋅10−5 on the LTV coefficient, 
this situation is not likely.

As summarized in Table  15, we find distortions in fees and teaser 
rate periods. The model implies that more products should be offered—
in particular, higher fee products (more than £1500) and longer teaser 

21 Including them would imply that LTV between 50% and 75% would be 
introduced but would account for less than 5% of market shares.
22 As the unobservable heterogeneity uses a normal random variable, there 
is always a mass of borrowers with very low WTP for any characteristics. 
However, borrowers who will choose lower than 90% LTV in the heterogeneity 
case account for less than 5% of the population.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

rate periods (longer than 7 years). The share of the population that 
would like to get them is low (below 20% of the 80+ LTV borrowers). 
In addition, this result highly depends on how the marginal costs of 
lending vary with fees and the teaser period. Since marginal costs are 
estimated for products with fees ranging from 0 to 1500 and teaser 
rates from 0 to 7, product introduction results are highly dependent 
on our extrapolation of the marginal cost function. We find that the 
distribution of borrowers would shift toward lower-fee products and 
more flexible rate contracts. This is the result of interest rate distortions. 
Those distortions are analyzed in Section 6.1.3.

6.1.4. Interest rate distortions: Results

Results for the interest rate decomposition are summarized in Table 
18, Table  17, and Fig.  5. Doing this decomposition, we find that the 
average fair price is 231 bps, the markup is about 116 bps, and the 
average information rent is −70 bps for high LTV loans (above 80). For 
loans with LTV between 70 and 80, the average fair price is 202 bps, 
the markup is about 60 bps, and the average information rent is −30. 
These differences across LTV are mainly due to the fact that lower LTV 
loans are chosen by borrowers who are more price elastic on average. 
As a result, banks are less able to apply large interest rates or large 
information rents. The impact of default is mild when explaining the 
interest rate level. For instance, the difference between the effective 
marginal cost and the marginal cost is on average less than 5 bps (and 
less than 10 bps when we scale up all default probabilities by 5 to take 
into account that the estimated default probabilities may underestimate 
banks’ true default expectations). However, even a mild difference in 
default can lead to big product distortions when the screening device 
is not very effective.

Looking at the differences in the average information rent between 
different products, we find that high LTV products (95% LTV) earn low 
information rents (5 bps) compared with 75% LTV products. This is 
because high LTV products are also more expensive to produce, which 
implies that the information rent need not be large. This result is also 
consistent with the fact that banks maintain incentives to self-select 
by distorting the LTV rather than rates. Contrarily, we find that lower 
fee contracts and longer rate contracts get a substantial information 
rent.  This  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  high-fee  products  are 
chosen  by  more  price  elastic  borrowers.  Under  perfect  information 
those borrowers would thus get a lower markup (see markup columns 
in Tables  17 and 18). To be able to extract more surplus from other 
borrowers, banks make high-fee products relatively more expensive 
than what they should be. This is consistent with the product distortion 
and the shift in the low-fee products category observed under perfect 
information: Banks increase rates in low-fee products to extract more 
surplus from the low price elastic borrowers, and as a result more price 
elastic borrowers are pushed to high-fee products when they exist. This 
creates incentives to introduce more high-fee products relative to the 
first best in order to implement screening.

Longer teaser rate products are more expensive to produce and are 
chosen by less price elastic borrowers. Under perfect information, those 
borrowers would get a higher markup. Those products also benefit from 
an information rent.

6.1.5. Summary of results and economic interpretation

Our estimates imply that, in the perfect information case, borrowers 
in the first and last WTP quartile of the LTV distribution would get 
contracts with similar LTVs — respectively, 85% and 95% — and be 
charged different prices because of their heterogeneous price elasticity 
and  default  probabilities.  As  a  result,  a  menu  composed  of  perfect 
information contracts cannot be offered under imperfect information, 
since high default-low price elastic borrowers would be tempted to 
choose lower rate contracts. This creates incentives to decrease the 
interest rate on high LTV contracts (i.e., an asymmetric information 
discount, which is also called information rent in monopoly models) 
and increase the interest rate on low LTV contracts (i.e., an asymmetric 

13 

A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Fig. 5.  Interest rate decomposition by LTV.

information premium) relative to the perfect information case. As a 
complementary incentive, lenders also introduce LTV contracts that are 
lower than 85%. Since high default-low price elastic borrowers are 
more reluctant to provide higher down payments for each loan unit, 
low LTV contracts attract unobservably safer borrowers and can be 
offered at a lower price.

These results imply that welfare is lower relative to the perfect 
information-perfect competition case. The overall loss in borrowers’ 
utility in the current data is equivalent to the loss in utility following 
a 100 bps interest rate increase on all loans.

The perfect information-imperfect competition case is not a natural 
benchmark to study welfare, given that asymmetric information and 
imperfect competition interact. Removing one friction can thus increase 
the other. For instance, by removing asymmetric information, lenders 
are able to set a higher interest rate (70 bps) for high LTV contracts 
without the fear of borrowers’ substituting to a lower LTV contract 
designed to attract safer borrowers.

Reducing the level of asymmetric information or allowing lenders 
to price borrowers on all observable characteristics, such as ethnicity, 
gender, disability, or religious beliefs, may not be feasible or desirable. 
As a result, it is also relevant to look at how far the product offered 
is from the second best (i.e., the menus offered by an informationally 
constrained social planner). This is the purpose of the following section.

6.2. Quantitative analysis of the screening externality

This section compares social planner benchmarks equilibrium con-

tracts to the data to quantify the contractual externality.

6.2.1. Conceptual framework

Screening allows lenders to (partially) restore perfect information 
pricing at the cost of contract term distortions relative to the perfect 
information case. Yet, due to a contractual externality, socially optimal 
menus may not be offered (see Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1978, Dasgupta 
and Maskin (1986) or Taburet (2024) for characterization of the equi-
librium). The friction emerges because lenders do not internalize how 
their screening strategies change the types of borrowers who select 

their competitors’ products—and thus the cost of lending via those 
products.

To illustrate this point, let us consider a perfectly competitive mar-
ket in which screening is achieved by making high-default borrowers 
to self-select a high-rate contract because lower-interest-rate contracts 
contain features that are relatively more costly for them, such as a low 
LTV. When the LTV distortions needed to screen borrowers are high, 
pooling at least some types of borrowers is a Pareto improvement over 
screening. This happens because with pooling contracts, high-default 
borrowers get a lower rate and low-default borrowers are less credit 
constrained. Yet, if a lender prices its customers using the average 
default probability (pooling), a competitor can use the lender pooling 
strategy to introduce contracts that will steal only low-cost customers 
(cream skimming) by offering a low rate-low credit constraint contract.

6.2.2. Social planner benchmark:

To capture the contractual externality, we solve for the contract 
under the following specification (See Appendix  I for the formal model 
description). We fix the customers of each bank and look at whether 
a Pareto-improving menu exists. Fixing the market share eliminates 
the externality by preventing borrowers from moving from one bank 
to  another.  It  also  allows  us  to  focus  exclusively  on  the  screening 
externality by preventing an increase in welfare generated by a better 
allocation of borrowers to more productive banks. Because we shut 
down competition, we add a participation constraint (PC) to prevent 
the lender from extracting too much surplus from borrowers. The con-
straint ensures that the new contracts offered are Pareto improvements 
over the contract observed in the data.

The benefit of setting the social planner benchmark this way is 
that it becomes similar to the textbook monopolistic screening model, 
which does not feature the equilibrium problems in competitive models 
such as, for instance, Rothschild and Stiglitz (1978). This allows us 
to  overcome  the  issues  related  to  solving  for  a  potentially  mixed-
strategy  equilibrium  (see,  for  instance,  Lester  et  al.  (2019))  or  the 
need to use equilibrium refinements to solve screening models (see, for 
instance, Handel et al. (2015), who rely on Riley (1979) equilibrium 

14 

A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Fig. 6.  Data and social planner simulation distribution of the equilibrium interest rate and LTV distribution.

concepts, which forces the screening equilibrium to occur). The multi-
plicity arising from the fixed cost is also mitigated as we can solve each 
bank problem separately for each menu in the bank feasible set.23

We define social welfare as the sum of firms’ profits plus the sum 
of borrowers’ utility expressed in monetary terms. We measure the 
cost of the screening externality by comparing the utilitarian social 
welfare level implied by our structural model with one achievable in 
a benchmark in which the contractual externality is internalized.

6.2.3. Summary of results and economic interpretation

As illustrated by Fig.  6, the counterfactual simulation shows that the 
social planner could achieve a Pareto improvement by pooling more 
borrowers at higher LTV. Low-default borrowers are better off because 
they can buy a larger house, and high-default borrowers benefit from 
being pooled by getting a lower interest rate. Lenders are also better 
off because lower LTV distortions imply that the surplus generated by 
the lending activity is larger, and they are thus able to extract more 
surplus and increase their profits.

We find that despite the low spread between defaults, the cost of the 
screening externality is quite large. The deadweight loss associated with 
the externality is equivalent to the loss in borrowers’ utility following 
a 32 bps increase in interest rates for all contracts.

The results are robust to using the fixed cost approach or the more 
conservative one that abstracts from the fixed costs (See Appendix  I 
for a description of the two approaches). The similarity comes from 
the optimal menu mainly involving the removal of some products to 
pool borrowers, making the fixed costs less relevant. Fig.  7 reports 
the  equilibrium  distributions.  The  differences  come  from  the  lower 
inclusion of products in the 95 LTV market segments with the fixed 
cost approach.

This finding suggests that there is room for Pareto to improve policy 
interventions. As shown in the theoretical companion paper by Taburet 
(2024), lowering competition, increasing the capital requirement for 
low LTV in a low-competition environment, or banning the use of lower 
LTV products could reduce the impact of the contractual externality by 
preventing cream-skimming deviations to occur. However, our model 
focuses on asymmetric information distortions and does not explicitly 
model other frictions. For instance, deposit insurance could lead banks 

23 To lower the computational burden, we restrict the feasible set for LTV 
to contract just above and below the one currently offered to the borrower.

to underestimate the lending risk via higher LTV. This friction would 
then lead to too much leverage in the mortgage market instead of too 
little leverage. As a result, policy interventions should consider both 
frictions before implementing a low LTV ban.

This  paper  focuses  on  first-time  buyers  to  reduce  concern  that 
lenders  have  superior  information  than  their  competitors  and  the 
econometrician.  For  the  following  reasons,  I  expect  the  screening 
externality  to  be  lower  in  the  remortgaging  market.  First,  lenders 
learn  about  their  customers  over  time,  so  I  expect  the  information 
asymmetry to be lower in the population of mortgage borrowers. In 
addition, borrowers may have higher switching costs in the refinancing 
market. The combination of lower competition and lower asymmetric 
information is likely to lower the contractual externality

7. Conclusion

This paper provides the first analysis of product and price distor-
tions in the context of credit markets in which menus of contracts are 
used. We do so by developing and identifying a novel structural model 
of screening. Thanks to the tools developed in this paper, We provide 
the first quantification of the contractual externality and show that 
there is room for policy interventions.

We develop a novel identification strategy to test whether screening 
for default probability is possible. Along the way, we discuss how to 
adapt classic structural models for the banking market. Those changes 
are guided by the fact that financial markets are not a classic IO market 
in many regards. For instance, contrary to a traditional IO market, the 
quantity (loan size) of products being sold to a given borrower may be 
limited by sellers, sellers may not agree to sell borrowers some products 
(i.e., rejection of loan applications), and the market is likely to feature 
adverse or positive selection.

The paper’s second innovation is to propose a new set of tools to an-
alyze the impact of screening on product and price distortions. Instead 
of using the classic counterfactual analysis — for which the technical 
properties (equilibrium uniqueness) have not been fully analyzed by 
the literature in the context of multiple endogenous variables — we 
propose a new, complementary approach. We first use perfect infor-
mation and a well-behaved model as a benchmark to analyze product 
distortions. Second, we use a sufficient statistic approach to decom-
pose equilibrium interest rates into a fair price, a perfect information 
markup, and an asymmetric information premium or discount.

15 

A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Fig. 7.  Social planner distribution of the equilibrium interest rate and LTV distribution with two different approaches for the fixed costs.

Table 1
Summary statistics for 2018.
  Variable
  Loan Characteristics:
  Max LTV (%)
  Teaser rate period (years)
  Maturity (years)
  Fees (£)
  Rate (%)
  Loan amount (£ 1000)
  Borrower Characteristics:
  Household income (£ 1000)
  Loan applicants
  Age (years)
  Loan to Income
  N

Mean

SD

Min

82.5
3.3
29.7
503
2.5
164

36
1.56
31
4.6

847,379

10.8
1.6
5.7
631
0.8
129

16
0.5
7
1.2

50
0
8
0
1.1
35

25
1
18
1.1

Max  

95  
7
40  
2610 
8
864  

944  
2
75  
6.1  

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Alberto  Polo:  Resources.  Arthur  Taburet:  Writing  –  review  & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, 
Software, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding 
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Quynh-
Anh Vo: Resources.

Declaration of competing interest

Arthur Taburet declared that he has no financial and personal rela-
tionships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately 
influence or bias my work.

Appendix A. Tables

A.1. Descriptive statistics

See Tables  1–4. 

A.2. Estimation results

See Tables  5–14.

A.3. Counterfactual results

Counterfactuals are presented in Appendices  G and H (see Table  16).

Appendix B. Menu adjustment costs: Dynamic approach

Let us denote 𝑀𝑡−1 the menu offered by a bank in the previous 
period. The probability of observing menu M in period t when menu 
𝑀𝑡−1 was offered in the previous period is:

𝑃 𝑟(𝑑𝑗𝑡(𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1)), 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑑𝑗𝑡(𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1)

∶= 1{𝑉𝑗𝑡(𝑀)−𝐹 (𝑀,𝑀𝑡−1)≥𝑉𝑗𝑡(𝑀𝑡−1)+𝑒𝑀𝑡𝑗 −𝑒𝑀𝑡−1 𝑡𝑗 }

F is the fixed cost of changing the menu. 𝑉𝑗𝑡(𝑀) is the value function 
of the bank j at time t when offering menu M. (𝑒) are error terms. 
Formally, the value function is:

𝑉𝑗𝑡(𝑀𝑡−1) = max
𝑀∈𝑗

𝛱𝑗 (𝑀) − 𝐹 (𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1) + 𝛽𝐸[𝑉𝑗𝑡+1(𝑀)]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑣(𝑀,𝑀𝑡−1)

+𝑒𝑀𝑡𝑗

Where 𝛱𝑗 (𝑀) is the lender’s gross margin and 𝛽 is a discount factor.

With (𝑒𝑀𝑡𝑗 ) being iid and extreme value distributed, the probability 

𝑃 𝑟(𝑑𝑗𝑡(𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1)) is: 

𝑃 𝑟(𝑑𝑗𝑡(𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1)) =

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑢 ̃𝑀 (𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1))
𝑚≠ ̃𝑀 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑢 ̃𝑀 (𝑚, 𝑀𝑡−1))

1 + ∑

with:

𝑢 ̃𝑀 (𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1) ∶= 𝛱(𝑀) − 𝛱( ̃𝑀) − [𝐹 (𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1) − 𝐹 ( ̃𝑀, 𝑀𝑡−1)]
− 𝛽[𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃 𝑟(𝑑𝑗𝑡( ̃𝑀, 𝑀))) − 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃 𝑟(𝑑𝑗𝑡( ̃𝑀, ̃𝑀)))
]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑂𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎

The term (𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃 𝑟(𝑑𝑗𝑡( ̃𝑀, 𝑀))) − 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃 𝑟(𝑑𝑗𝑡( ̃𝑀, ̃𝑀)))) comes from us-
ing the shock being extreme value distributed and rewriting the value 
function as in Arcidiacono and Miller (2011).

(19)

(20)

Appendix C. Demand with Roy’s identity

This section derives the demand equations by specifying an indirect 

utility and using Roy’s identity to derive the loan demand.

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Age

Table 2
Regression LTV on borrowers’ characteristics.
  Variable
  Below 60% LTV
  60%–70% LTV
  70%–75% LTV
  75%–80% LTV
  80%–85% LTV
  85%–90% LTV
  95+ LTV
  N
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

33***
−0.7***
−1.5***
−1.3***
−1.7***
−2.4***
−2.7***

1,077,291

Yearly net income
39,855
−82
3,675***
1,793*
1,941**
−2,716***
−3,842***

Number of borrowers
1.35***
0.04***
0.007***
0.11***
0.16***
0.22***
0.28***

1,077,291

1,077,291

Self employed 
0.085***
0.01***
−0.005***
0.006***
0.007***
−0.024***
−0.06***

1,077,291

12∗∗∗
−3.5

Mortgage holiday by 2021

Table 3
Mortgage holiday take up and arrears. A mortgage holiday is a payment deferral (up to 6 months).
Arrears by 2020
(Origination: 2018)
5.8∗∗∗
−1.4∗∗∗
−0.9∗∗∗
3.7 ⋅ 10−3 ∗∗∗
−1.2 ⋅ 10−4 ∗∗∗
−3.9∗∗∗
6.7 ⋅ 10−2 ∗
−1.4∗∗∗

  Interest (in%)
  LTV> 90
  Fixed rate period (years)
  Lender fees
  Income
  Nb applicants
  Age
  LTI
  Time fixed effect
  Bank fixed effect
  Region fixed effect
  Mean
  Observations
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.
Notes: All the coefficients of the first column need to be rescaled by ⋅10−2 and by ⋅10−3 in the second 
column.

Yes
Yes
Yes
1.2%
279,379

No
Yes
No
26%
53

Table 4
Most common product characteristics.
Source: PSD001 + Moneyfact.
  Variable

  Average number of products (rounded)
  Fixed rate period (years)
  Average lender fees (rounded)

  Average number of products (rounded)
  Fixed rate period (years)
  Average lender fees (rounded)

Table 5
Mixed logit (Origination: 2018).

  Interest rate (%)

  LTV (%)

  Fixed rate period (years)

  Lender fees (pounds)

  Interest rate ×Yearly Net Income (pounds)

  Standard deviation random variable Fixed rate period

  Standard deviation random variable LTV

  Region-Age-Nb applicants interaction terms for all product characteristics
  Interest rate- Fixed rate period-fees random variable
  Observations
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.
Notes: All the coefficients of the first column need to be rescaled by ⋅10−2.

17 

2019
high LTV (95)
8
(5,3,2,0)
(0, 750)
medium LTV (75–85)
12
(5,3,2,0)
(0, 750, 1450)

2021

0–2
5-year more likely
high fees more likely

16
(5,3,2,0) + longer fixed rates 
(0, 750, 1450)

85 + LTV loans
−54
(50)
23∗∗∗
(1.2)
−78∗
(40)
−9 ⋅ 10−2 ∗∗∗
(1.610−2)
−4.5 ⋅ 10−3 ∗∗∗
(1.1 ⋅ 10−5)
250∗∗∗
(48)
24∗∗∗
(2.7)

Yes
Yes
279,379

70%–85% LTV loans 
−7.1
(44)
21∗∗∗
(5)
−18
(19)
−7 ⋅ 10−2 ∗∗∗
(5 ⋅ 10−3)
−3.2 ⋅ 10−3 ∗∗∗
(1.7 ⋅ 10−5)
100∗∗∗
(27)
4.8∗∗∗
(2 ⋅ 10−1)

Yes
Yes
230,680

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Polo et al.

Table 6
Coefficient heterogeneity.

Interest rate (%)

  Observable heterogeneity only
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
  Observable and unobservable heterogeneity
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile

−11
−8.6
−6.3

−11
−8.6
−6.3

  Observable heterogeneity only
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
  Observable and unobservable heterogeneity
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
Notes: All the coefficients of the first column need to be rescaled by ⋅10−1.

−23
−19
−15

−23
−19
−15

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Teaser rate (year)

Fees (pounds) 

−7.8
−7.8
−7.8

−2.4
−7.8
9.2

1.5
1.5
1.5

−4.3
1.5
9.1

−8 ⋅ 10−3
−8 ⋅ 10−3
−8 ⋅ 10−3

−8 ⋅ 10−3
−8⋅10−3
−8⋅10−3

−7⋅10−3
−7⋅10−3
−7⋅10−3

−7⋅10−3
−7⋅10−3
−7⋅10−3

LTV (%)
85+ loans

2.3
2.3
2.3

1.5
2.3
3
70–85 loans

1.6
1.7
1.8

1.3
1.7
2.1

Price elasticity

WTP LTV (%)
85+ loans

WTP teaser rate (year)

WTP fees (pounds) 

1
1.4
1.9

0.5
1.3
2.4
70-85 loans

Table 7
WTP and elasticity heterogeneity.

  Observable heterogeneity only
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
  Observable and unobservable heterogeneity
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile

28
39
54

28
39
54

  Observable heterogeneity only
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
  Observable and unobservable heterogeneity
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
Notes: All the coefficients of the first column need to be rescaled by ⋅10−1.

26
36
51

26
36
51

0.8
1
1.4

0.7
1
1.4

Table 8
Loan demand (Origination: 2018).

  Interest rate (%)

  LTV (%)

  LTV=95 (%)

  Fixed rate period (years)

  Lender fees (pounds)

  log(Income) (pounds)

  unobserved WTP fixed rate: ̂𝑒𝑇 𝑅 (mean 0 sd normalized to 1)

  unobserved WTP LTV: ̂𝑒𝐿𝑇 𝑉  (mean 0 sd normalized to 1)

  Lender, Region, time fixed effects
  Borrowers’ characteristics control
  Borrowers’ WTP interaction terms
  𝑅2
  Observations
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.
Notes: All the coefficients of the first column need to be rescaled by ⋅10−3.

18 

−6.5
−4.9
−3.7

−1.1
−4.4
5.3

0.7
0.9
1.2

−3
0.8
5

log(Loan size)
−520∗∗∗
(3.9)
0.9∗∗∗
(0.2)
76∗∗∗
(7.3)
−1.7∗
(9 ⋅ 10−4)
6.5 ⋅ 10−2 ∗∗∗
(1.6 ⋅ 10−3)
800∗∗∗
(4)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.76
279,379

−6.6⋅10−3
−5⋅10−3
−3.8⋅10−3

−6.6⋅10−3
−5⋅10−3
−3.8⋅10−3

−6⋅10−3
−4.3⋅10−3
−3.2⋅10−3

−6⋅10−3
−4.3⋅10−3
−3.2⋅10−3

log(Loan size) 
−520∗∗∗
(3.9)
0.8∗∗∗
(0.4)
150∗∗∗
(21)
−8.5∗∗∗
(2.4 ⋅ 10−3)
6.9 ⋅ 10−2 ∗∗∗  
(1.6 ⋅ 10−3)
800∗∗∗
(4)
200∗∗∗
(2.3)
80∗∗∗
(13)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.77
279,379

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Polo et al.

Table 9
Default regression (mortgage originated in 2018).

  Interest (in %)

  LTV

  Fixed rate period (years)

  Lender fees (in thousands)

  Income (in thousands)

  Nb applicants

  Age

  ̂𝑒𝐿𝑇 𝑉  (sd normalized to 1)

  ̂𝑒𝑇 𝑅 (sd normalized to 1)

Arrears by 2020
5.8∗∗∗
(0.4)
−0.2∗∗∗
(2.7)
−0.1 ∗∗∗
(2.7)
3.7
(0.7)
−0.12∗∗∗
(1.1 ⋅ 10−2)
−3.9∗∗∗
(0.3)
0.067∗
(1.1 ⋅ 10−2)

Arrears by 2020 
3.9∗∗∗
(0.34)
0.12
(2.1)
−0.6 10∗
(0.16)
4
(0.6)
−0.24∗∗∗
(1.6 ⋅ 10−2)
−3.1∗∗∗
(0.2)
0.07∗
(1.9 ⋅ 10−2)
−5.4∗∗∗
(9.4)
−0.2∗∗∗
(5.1)

  Time fixed effect
  Lender fixed effect
  Region fixed effect
  Macroeconomics controls (monthly GDP)
  Control for loan size
  Mean
  Observations
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.
Notes: All the coefficients of the first column need to be rescaled by ⋅10−3.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1.2%
279,379

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1.2%
279,379

Table 10
Marginal costs regression and interest rate (LTV > 70).

  Intercept

  1𝐿𝑇 𝑉 <85×LTV (%)

  1𝐿𝑇 𝑉 >85×LTV (%)

  95% LTV (dummy)

  Fixed rate period (years)

  High Fixed rate period (≥5)

  Lender fees (pounds)

  High fees (1000–1500)

Marginal costs
85∗∗∗
(20)
12∗∗∗
(2.8)
18∗∗∗
(1.5)
98∗∗∗
(91)
40 ⋅ 10∗∗
(10)
180∗∗∗
(5 ⋅ 10−2)
−0.2∗∗∗
(1.8 ⋅ 10−2)
−100∗
(40)

Interest rates 
12∗∗∗
(8.69)
14∗∗∗
(0.1)
20∗∗∗
(0.1)
120∗∗∗
(2.1)
44∗∗
(5.3 ⋅ 10−1)
23010∗∗∗
(1.6 ⋅ 10−3)
−0.4∗∗∗
(5.7 ⋅ 10−4)
−130∗∗∗
(2.7)

  Bank fixed effect
  Average
  N
  𝑅2
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.
Notes: All the coefficients of the first column need to be rescaled by ⋅10−2.

Yes
2.12
278
0.88

Yes
2.42
647,433
0.76

Table 11
Fixed cost results: all market segments.

  Profits (𝛽)

  Nbr of Product included (𝜃)

  Nbr of Product excluded (𝜃 ⋅ 𝜆)

NPV using teaser rate
2.3∗∗∗
(1.4 ⋅ 10−2)
8.8 ⋅ 104 ∗∗∗
(3.6 ⋅ 10)
−1.4 ⋅ 104 ∗∗∗
(2.6 ⋅ 10)

NPV using maturity 
4.47∗∗∗
(6.37 ⋅ 10−2)
8.3 ⋅ 105 ∗∗∗
(4.5 ⋅ 10)
−2.4 ⋅ 105 ∗∗∗
(2.1 ⋅ 10)

  Bank fixed effect
  Time fixed effect
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.
Note: In the first column of Table  11, the NPV is calculated using the teaser rate period 
as f in Eq.  (33), in the second column the maturity is used instead.

No
No

No
No

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Table 12
Fixed cost results: above 90 LTV.

  Profits (𝛽)

  Nbr of Product included (𝜃)

  Nbr of Product excluded (𝜃 ⋅ 𝜆)

  Bank fixed effect
  Time fixed effect
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Table 13
Fixed cost results: below 90 LTV.

  Profits (𝛽)

  Nbr of Product included (𝜃)

  Nbr of Product excluded (𝜃 ⋅ 𝜆)

  Bank fixed effect
  Time fixed effect
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

Table 14
Fixed cost results: simultaneous game.

  Profits (𝛽)

  Nbr of Product included (𝜃)

  Nbr of Product excluded (𝜃 ⋅ 𝜆)

  Bank fixed effect
  Time fixed effect
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

C.1. Main

NPV using teaser rate 
3.7∗∗∗
(4.9 ⋅ 10−1)
1.1 ⋅ 106 ∗∗∗
(9 ⋅ 104)
−1.8 ⋅ 105 ∗∗∗
(5 ⋅ 104)

No
No

NPV using teaser rate 
3.8∗∗∗
(1.6 ⋅ 10−2)
4.2 ⋅ 103 ∗∗∗
(3.3 ⋅ 101)
−2.7 ⋅ 103 ∗∗∗
(1.5 ⋅ 101)

No
No

NPV using teaser rate 
6.1∗∗∗
(7.9 ⋅ 10−2)
9.6 ⋅ 106 ∗∗∗
(7.3 ⋅ 104)
−8.1 ⋅ 105 ∗∗∗
(5.8 ⋅ 103)

No
No

Guided by the micro foundation presented in Appendix  C.3, we 
parameterize  the  indirect  utility  derived  at  the  optimal  borrowing 
amount given loan characteristics X and price r as 

𝑈𝑖(𝐿𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟); 𝑋, 𝑟) ∶= 𝐴𝑖(𝑋)

𝐿𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟)
𝐿𝑇 𝑉

+ 𝑉𝑖(𝑌𝑖),

(21)

where  𝑌𝑖  is  the  income  of  borrower  i,  𝐴𝑖  is  a  function  of  product 
characteristics X, 𝑉𝑖 is a function of income, and 𝐿𝑖 is the optimal loan 
size as a function of product characteristics X and rate r. LTV is the 
loan-to-value of the contract, so 𝐿𝑖(𝑋,𝑟)

𝐿𝑇 𝑉  is the house price.

This parameterization is a generalized version of Train (1986). The 
main departure from Train (1986) is that we allow 𝐴𝑖 to be a gen-
eral function that varies with products’ and borrowers’ characteristics 
instead of a constant.

Using Roy’s identity, the optimal loan size should satisfy 𝐿𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟) =
− 𝜕𝑟𝑈 (𝐿,𝑋,𝑟)
. In Appendix C.2, we show a parameterization of the func-
𝜕𝑌 𝑈 (𝐿,𝑋,𝑟)
tion (A) that leads to the following demand system. We index by c a 
product (𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏) offered by bank b and relabel 𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏 ∶= 𝐿(𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏):

𝑢𝑖(𝑐,𝑏)
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝛽𝑃
𝑖𝑐𝑏𝑋𝑐𝑏 − 𝛼𝑃
𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 =
𝑙𝑛(𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏) = 𝛽𝐿
𝑖𝑐𝑏, 𝛼𝑃
𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ (𝛽𝑃

𝑖𝑐𝑏𝑋𝑐𝑏 − 𝛼𝐿
, 𝛽𝐿
𝑖𝑐𝑏, 𝜎−1
𝑖

𝑖𝑐𝑏𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏
𝑖𝑐𝑏𝑟𝑐𝑏 + 𝜈𝐷𝑖 + 𝑒𝐿
𝑖𝑐𝑏, 𝑒𝐿
𝑖𝑐𝑏, 𝛼𝐿

𝑖𝑐𝑏𝑟𝑐𝑏 + 𝜉𝑐𝑏 +𝜎−1

𝑖𝑐𝑏
𝑐𝑏) 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑,

19 

(22)

(23)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Polo et al.

Table 15
Product distortion (80+ LTV loans).

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Ideal LTV (%)Ideal teaser rate (year)Ideal Fees (pounds) 

  Observable heterogeneity only (perfect information+perfect competition)
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
  Observable and unobservable heterogeneity (perfect information+perfect competition)
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile
  Product choice distribution (data)
  First quartile
  Second quartile
  Third quartile

95
95
95

90
95
95

85
90
95

0
0
0

0
2
5–7

2
2
5–7

0
0
500

0
0
500

0
500
1000

Table 16
LTV distortion perfect competition-perfect information benchmark (70+ LTV loans).
  Decile
  Product choice distribution (data)

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

  Benchmark-implied distribution (observable heterogeneity)

  Benchmark-implied distribution (observable + unobservable heterogeneity)

75

90

85–90

75

90

90

80

95

90

85

95

90

90

95

95

90

95

95

90

95

95

90

95

95

90% 

95  

95  

95  

Table 17
Interest rate decomposition (70-80+ LTV loans).

Fair price (bps)

Perfect information 
mark-up (bps)

  LTV
  fees (500)
  fees (1000)
  fees (1500)
  teaser rate period (2 years)
  teaser rate period (5 years)
  teaser rate period (7 years)
  Average
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

2∗∗∗
−16∗∗∗
−29∗∗∗
−35∗∗∗
−40∗∗∗
−20∗
7

202

Table 18
Interest rate decomposition (80+ LTV loans).

1 ⋅10−1
−9∗∗∗
−20∗∗∗
−30∗∗∗
−8
−4
10

65

Fair Price (bps)

Perfect information 
mark-up (bps)

  LTV
  fees (500)
  fees (1000)
  fees (1500)
  teaser rate period (2 years)
  teaser rate period (5 years)
  teaser rate period (7 years)
  Average
***𝑝 < 0.01, **𝑝 < 0.05, *𝑝 < 0.1.

12∗∗∗
−12∗∗∗
−35∗∗∗
−46∗∗∗
3
15∗∗∗
27∗∗

231

8 ⋅10−2
−19∗∗∗
−46∗∗∗
−55∗∗∗
15∗∗∗
35∗∗∗
43∗∗∗

116

Asymmetric 
Information 
discount/premium 
(bps)

2⋅10−1 ∗
6∗∗∗
13∗∗∗
17∗∗∗
0
−10∗∗
−20∗∗

−30

Asymmetric 
Information 
discount/premium 
(bps)

2∗∗∗
20∗∗∗
41∗∗∗
45∗∗∗
−16∗∗∗
−31∗∗∗
−40∗∗∗

−68

where 𝑢𝑖(𝑐, 𝑏) is a monotonic transformation of the indirect utility 𝑈𝑖
defined in Eq.  (21).24

C.2. Derivation of the demand system

Indexing  each  combination  of  contract  characteristic  and  prices 

24 𝑉𝑖(𝑌𝑖) is not present, since 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑐 𝑈𝑖(𝐿∗, 𝑋𝑐 , 𝑟𝑐 ) = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑐 𝑈𝑖(𝐿∗, 𝑋𝑐 , 𝑟𝑐 ) −
𝑉𝑖(𝑌𝑖). For those who are skeptical about the discrete-continuous approach, 
we could end up with the same functional form by assuming that borrower i 
chooses product c and the optimal loan size 𝐿𝑖(𝑋𝑐 , 𝑟𝑐 ):

𝑢𝑖(𝐿𝑖(𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏), 𝑋𝑐𝑏, 𝑟𝑐𝑏) + 𝜎−1

𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑐∈𝑀𝑖𝑏
and make the assumption that 𝐿𝑖(𝑋𝑐 , 𝑟𝑐 ) and 𝑢𝑖(𝐿∗
contract terms.

𝑖 𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏

𝑖 (𝑋𝑐 , 𝑟𝑐 ), 𝑋𝑐 , 𝑟𝑐 ) are linear in 

(𝑋, 𝑟) by c, borrower i maximization problem is:
𝐿𝑐
𝐿𝑇 𝑉𝑐

𝑢(𝐿𝑐, 𝑐) = max

+ 𝑉 (𝑌𝑖)

max
𝑐

𝐴𝑖𝑐

𝑐

𝐴𝑐 captures the fact that default or consumption trade-off depends on 
contract c features.

The problem is equivalent to:

max
𝑐

𝑢(𝐿𝑐, 𝑐) = max

𝑐

𝑙𝑛(𝐴𝑖𝑐 ) + 𝑙𝑛(𝐿𝑐) − 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐿𝑇 𝑉𝑐 )

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Polo et al.

We parameterize 𝑙𝑛(𝐴𝑖𝑐) = 𝛽𝐿
{ 𝐿
𝐿𝑇 𝑉
𝑉𝑌 (𝑌 )

= 𝛾 −1

[𝜕𝐷𝐹𝑖

}]𝐴𝑖𝑐

𝐿
𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝑖 𝑋𝑐 + 𝜎𝑖𝜀𝑖𝑐. From Roy’s identity:

Integrating with respect to 𝐷𝐹𝑖 (loan discount factor):

𝑙𝑛(𝐿𝑐 ) = 𝑙𝑛(𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ) + 𝛾

𝑉𝑌
𝐴𝑖𝑐

𝐷𝐹𝑖 + 𝑐𝑠𝑡

𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ ∶ 𝑐𝑠𝑡 ∶= 𝛽𝑖𝑋𝑐 + 𝜖𝑖, 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ (𝑐𝑠𝑡 𝑟)
setting  𝐷𝐹𝑖
 to be a linear function of contract terms and borrowers’ 
𝐴𝑖𝑐
characteristics and allowing for some element of 𝐴𝑖 to be proxied by 
the income, we get the demand system used in this paper.

C.3. Micro-foundation for borrowers’ utility mortgage market

In this section, I micro-found the borrowers’ indirect utility function 

used in the main text of the paper.

Assumptions  regarding  borrowers’  utility  function  are  made  for 

tractability and do not impact the qualitative results.

Toy Model: Consume in period 1, default and lose the house in 

period 2

𝑢(𝐶 ∗, 𝐻 ∗) ∶= max
{𝐶,𝐿}

𝜇

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
⏞⏞⏞
𝐶1

+

𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝛿
2

(1 −

𝑟
𝑌2

𝐿) [𝜙

𝐻𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝐿
𝑃𝐻 𝐿𝑇 𝑉

+𝜇𝐶2]

𝑝𝐶1 + (1 − 𝐿𝑇 𝑉 )

𝑝𝐶2 = 𝑌2 − 𝑟𝐿

𝐿
𝐿𝑇 𝑉

= 𝑌1

𝐿

p is the price of consumption and 𝑃𝐻  is the house price. 𝜇 is the 
marginal  utility  of  consumption.  𝜙  the  marginal  utility  of  housing. 
𝛿
𝐿𝑇 𝑉  represents the fact that the borrower is more likely to default 
2
when he has a higher leverage. 𝛿 parameterizes the default sensitivity 
to the interest rate 𝑟. 𝐿 is the loan size and 𝐿𝑇 𝑉  is the Loan-to-Value.

𝑟
𝑌2

The optimal loan size is:

𝐻 ∗ =

𝐿∗
𝐿𝑇 𝑉

=

𝑏𝑖𝑔𝑔𝑒𝑟 ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒
⏞⏞⏞
𝜙
𝑃𝐻

𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑑 1
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝜇
𝑝

(1 − 𝐿𝑇 𝑉 )

−

𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑑 2
⏞⏞⏞
𝜇𝑟

−

(

−

)𝛿

𝜇𝑟
𝑝

𝜙𝑐
𝑟
𝑃𝐻
𝑌2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝑑𝑒𝑓 𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡

Thus:

𝑉 (𝑌1, 𝐻 ∗) ∶= 𝑢(𝐶 ∗, 𝐻 ∗) =

𝜇
𝑝

[𝑌1 + 𝑌2]

+ 𝐻 ∗{(

𝜙𝑐
𝑃𝐻

𝜙𝑐
𝑃𝐻

− 𝜇𝑟 ⋅ 𝑙𝑡𝑣)[

(1 − 𝑙𝑡𝑣)

− 𝜇
𝑝
2( 𝜙𝑐
𝑃𝐻

𝑟 + 𝜇
𝑝
− 𝜇𝑟
𝑝

)

] −

𝜇
𝑝

𝛿𝑟
2𝑙𝑡𝑣

}

Without consumption in period 2 this yields the functional form used 
in Appendix  C.2:

𝑉 (𝑌1, 𝐻 ∗) ∶= 𝑢(𝐶 ∗, 𝐻 ∗) =

𝜇
𝑝

𝑌1 + 𝐻 ∗[

𝜙𝑐
𝑃𝐻

+ 𝜇
𝑝

(1 − 𝑙𝑡𝑣)

2

]

Appendix D. Model extensions: Imperfect information about ac-
ceptance and rejections

When borrowers do not observe acceptance and rejection rules the 

utility they derive from applying to a contract 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 is:

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑅 is the probability of being accepted to contract c conditional on the 
rejection history R. 𝑢(𝑐) is the utility of getting contract c. 𝛽 is a discount 
rate. 𝑈 (𝑅) is the expected utility after being rejected from the contracts 
present in vector R. 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 is the cost ob being rejected and filling another 
application.

Since rejections are observed by other banks, the probability of 
being accepted for another contract may be lower upon rejections. 
Assuming that borrowers get a new extreme value drawn after each 
rejection, we can calculate U in a closed-form manner. To ease the 
computational burden, we can assume that the probability of being 
accepted after the first rejection is 0 and replace 𝑈 (⋅) with an outside 
option that is borrower-specific ̄𝑢𝑖.
Assuming that the term 𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑏[𝜎−1

𝑖 𝜀𝑖𝑏𝑐 − ̄𝑢𝑖] + ̄𝑢𝑖 is extreme value dis-
tributed with a variance ̄𝜎−1
, the new model thus becomes equivalent to 
the perfect information case with all utility parameters scaled by 𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑅.

𝑖

Appendix E. Proof screening

Let us start by considering that the demand parameters 𝛽𝑃

𝑖  in Eq. 
(4) can take only two values, 𝛽𝑃
𝐿𝑖 and 𝛽𝑃
𝐻𝑖; preferences 
along other dimensions are continuously distributed and independent 
of contract characteristics. We can then generalize the proof to any 
number of values.

𝐻𝑖, with 𝛽𝑃

𝐿𝑖 < 𝛽𝑃

Using Bayes’ rule:

𝑃 𝑟(𝛽𝑃

𝑖 = 𝛽𝑃

𝑗𝑖 |𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡 𝑏)

=

∑

𝑖 = 𝛽𝑃
𝑃 𝑟(𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡 𝑏|𝛽𝑃
𝑚∈{𝐿,𝐻} 𝑃 𝑟(𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡 𝑏|𝛽𝑃

𝑗𝑖 )𝑃 𝑟(𝛽𝑃
𝑖 = 𝛽𝑃

𝑖 = 𝛽𝑃
𝑗𝑖 )
𝑖 = 𝛽𝑃
𝑚𝑖)𝑃 𝑟(𝛽𝑃
𝑚𝑖)

We start by offering contract A with characteristics (X,r) that would 
be accepted by both borrowers and then offer another contract B with 
𝛽𝑃
𝑖𝑗
𝛼𝑃 }. When 𝛥𝑋 = 0, 
characteristics 𝑋 + 𝛥𝑋, 𝑟 + 𝜔𝛥𝑋𝑐 with 𝜔 > min𝑗 {
contract A has the following market share: 𝑃 𝑟(𝑉𝑖𝐴 + 𝜀𝑖𝐴 > 𝑉𝑖𝐵 + 𝜀𝑖𝐵)
where 𝑉𝑖𝑐 + 𝜀𝑖𝑐 is the borrower utility when getting contract c, defined 
is Eq. (2). Denoting f the pdf of 𝑉𝑖𝐴 + 𝜀𝑖𝐴 − 𝑉𝑖𝐵 − 𝜀𝑖𝐵, by increasing 𝛥𝑋
the probability of contract B being chosen by the high willingness to 
𝑓 (0), while for 
pay (WTP) borrower increases by approximately 

𝛽𝐻𝑖
𝛼 −𝜔
𝜎

the other it decreases by 

𝛽𝐿𝑖
𝛼 −𝜔
𝜎

𝑓 (0).

We can generalize this proof by first separating the lowest WTP 
from all other borrowers, then the second-lowest WTP from all other 
borrowers. When there are no bounds on r and on X, or when 𝜎 → 0, 
borrowers can be almost perfectly screened ∀𝜖, ∃(𝛥𝑋𝑚, 𝜔𝑚)𝑚 ∶ ∀𝑗, ∃𝑚 ∶
𝑃 𝑟(𝛽𝑃

𝑖𝑗 |𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡 𝑚) > 1 − 𝜖.

𝑖 = 𝛽𝑃

Appendix F. Derivation of the present value of lending

Given  a  loan  size  L,  a  maturity  T,  and  a  per  period  compound 
interest rate r, the per period mortgage repayment C is given by the 
annuity formula: 
𝐿𝑟(1 + 𝑟)𝑇
(1 + 𝑟)𝑇 − 1

(26)

𝐶 =

Similarly, we can express the bank cost of lending an amount L as 
a constant rate (mc) and write it as an annuity to make it comparable 
to the interest rate (r): 
𝐿𝑚𝑐(1 + 𝑚𝑐)𝑇
(1 + 𝑚𝑐)𝑇 − 1

(27)

𝐷 =

The marginal cost includes, among others, the interest rate banks 

need to pay on their deposits.

(24)

Using 𝛿 as the discount rate, the present value of lending the amount 

L, abstracting from default, can thus be written:

𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑅𝑢(𝑐) + (1 − 𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑅)𝛽[𝐸𝜀[𝑈 (𝑅)] − 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡]
[𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑅′ 𝑢(𝑥)

𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 ∶ 𝑈 (𝑅) = max

{𝑥∈𝐶∖𝑅}

+ (1 − 𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑅′ )]𝛽𝐸𝜀[𝑈 (𝑅′) − 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡], 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑅′ ∶= {𝑥 ∪ 𝑅}

(25)

𝐿

𝑓
∑

𝑘=1

𝛿𝑘[

𝑟(𝑟 + 1)𝑇
(𝑟 + 1)𝑇 − 1

−

𝑚𝑐(𝑚𝑐 + 1)𝑇
(𝑚𝑐 + 1)𝑇 − 1

]

21 

A. Polo et al.

+ 𝛾𝑏

𝑇
∑

𝑘=𝑓 +1

𝛿𝑘[

𝑅(𝑅 + 1)𝑇 −𝑓
(𝑅 + 1)𝑇 −𝑓 − 1

−

𝑚𝑐(𝑚𝑐 + 1)𝑇 −𝑓
(𝑚𝑐 + 1)𝑇 −𝑓 − 1

]

(28)

Appendix G. Perfect information model

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

R is the reset rate and b is the remaining balance at the end of the 
teaser rate period. F is the fixed rate period, 𝑇  is the maturity of the 
loan, 𝛾 is the share of people not refinancing, and mc is the marginal 
cost of lending.

As in Crawford et al. (2018), assuming that banks consider the 
average default instead of the probability of defaulting in each period, 
for a constant discount rate (𝛿 < 0) and denoting d a dummy equal to 
1 if borrower defaults, the present value of lending up to period f is 

𝑓
∑

𝐶 ⋅ 𝐸[(1 − 𝑑)] ⋅

(1 + 𝑟)𝑇
(1 + 𝑟)𝑇 − 1
When 𝑇  and f are large,  (1+𝑟)𝑇
(1+𝑟)𝑇 −1

𝛿𝑘 = 𝐿𝑟

𝑘=1

value of lending, is thus

⋅ 𝐸[(1 − 𝑑)] ⋅

1 − 𝛿𝑓
1 − 𝛿
≈ 1 and 𝛿𝑓 ≈ 0, the net present 

(29)

𝛿

𝑃 𝑉 ≈ 𝐿 ⋅ {𝐸[(1 − 𝑑)]𝑟

+ 𝛾𝐸[(1 − 𝑑)]𝑅

𝛿
1 − 𝛿
1 − 𝛿𝑇 −𝑓
1 − 𝛿
With (𝛿 = 1), the expression is instead 

𝛿
1 − 𝛿

𝛿𝑓 ]𝑚𝑐}

− [

+ 𝛾

1 − 𝛿𝑇 −𝑓
1 − 𝛿

𝛿𝑓

(30)

Under  perfect  information,  a  lender  designs  a  contract  for  each 
borrower to maximize static profits, knowing the borrower survival 
probability function (𝜃𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟) ∶= 1 − 𝑑𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟), with 𝑑 defined in Eq. 
(7)), the choice of bank function (𝛷(𝑋, 𝑟) ∶=
), with the 
utility 𝑉𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟) defined in Eq.  (4)) and loan demand function—𝐿𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟), 
defined in Eq.  (6). Formally, the problem is: 

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖(𝑋,𝑟))
𝑏∈𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖(𝑋𝑏,𝑟𝑏))

∑

max
{𝑋,𝑟}

𝛷(𝑉𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟))[𝜃𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟)𝑟 − 𝑚𝑐(𝑋)]𝐿𝑖(𝑋, 𝑟)

(38)

Where 𝑚𝑐(𝑋) is the marginal cost of lending function, recovered by 

interpolating our point estimates.

Using  the  change  of  variable  𝛼𝑃
𝑋 + 𝜉
− 𝑢𝑖, we have that: 
𝛼𝑃
𝑖

𝑖 𝑢𝑖 = 𝛽𝑃

𝑖 𝑋 − 𝛼𝑃

𝑖 𝑟 + 𝜉 ⟺ 𝑟 =

𝛽𝑃
𝑖
𝛼𝑃
𝑖

max
{𝑋,𝑢𝑖}

𝛽𝑃
𝑖
𝛷(𝑢𝑖)[𝜃𝑖(𝑋, 𝑢𝑖)[
𝛼𝑃
𝑖
Denoting  ̃𝛽 ∶= 𝐿𝑋

𝐿

𝜉
𝛼𝑃
𝑖

chooses characteristics X to maximize the social surplus: 

, the first order conditions imply that the lender 

𝑋 +

− 𝑢𝑖] − 𝑚𝑐(𝑋)]𝐿𝑖(𝑋, 𝑢𝑖)

(39)

𝑃 𝑉 ≈ 𝐿 ⋅ [𝐸[(1 − 𝑑)]𝑟𝑓 + 𝛾𝑅𝐸[(1 − 𝑑)](𝑇 − 𝑓 ) − [𝑓 + 𝛾(𝑇 − 𝑓 )]𝑚𝑐]

(31)

𝜃𝑋 𝑟 + 𝜃

− 𝑚𝑐′ + ̃𝛽[𝜃𝑟 − 𝑚𝑐] = 0

(40)

𝛽𝑃
𝑖
𝛼𝑃
𝑖

We further assume, as in Benetton (2021), that 𝜕𝑟𝛾 = 0 so that it 
does not enter inside the FoC of 𝑟𝑐 and set 𝛾𝑐 to 0 (i.e., all borrowers 
remortgage). We can thus also abstract from the discount rate if 𝛿 < 1, 
since it is constant across mortgages, and we thus get 

𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 ∶= 𝐿 ⋅ [𝐸[(1 − 𝑑)]𝑟 − 𝑚𝑐] when 𝛿 < 1

(32)

The  above  expression  implies  that  banks  do  care  about  fixing  the 
interest rate, except for its impact on the cost of lending (mc), default 
(d) or demand (L). This result comes from the assumption that 𝛿𝑓 ≈ 0. 
This may be problematic, for a given demand, interest rate, default, 
and marginal cost, profits are likely to be increasing in f as the loan 
generates annuities for a longer period.

Relaxing the assumption that 𝛿𝑓 ≈ 0 would, however, require an 
assumption about the discount rate used (for instance, the bond of or 
deposit rates) or the use of non-standard approaches such as integrating 
over one. This last method is too computationally demanding for our 
set-up. We thus go with the first approach and assume that 𝛿 = 1. We 
get 

Eq.  (40)  can  be  solved  for  any  value  of  promised  utility  𝑢𝑖.  In 
particular, under perfect competition, lenders break even so that 𝜃𝑟 =
𝑚𝑐, which implies that: 
𝛽𝑃
𝑖
𝛼𝑃
𝑖

𝑚𝑐𝑋
𝑚𝑐

𝜃𝑋
𝜃

𝑚𝑐
𝜃

(41)

=

−

[

]

A similar expression yields when lenders can use non-linear pricing 

so that the lender set L to the first best value as in Taburet (2024).

Using the results from Table  9, we neglect the default elasticity with 
respect to LTV. Using the notation 𝑑 ∶= 1 − 𝜃, the expression becomes: 

𝛽𝑃
𝑖
𝛼𝑃
𝑖
⏟⏟⏟
𝑤𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑝𝑎𝑦

=

𝑚𝑐𝐿𝑇 𝑉
1 − 𝑑𝑖
⏟⏟⏟
𝑒𝑓 𝑓 𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡

(42)

This expression states that the LTV should increase until the bor-
rower’s willingness to pay equals the effective marginal cost of increas-
ing the LTV.

𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 ∶= 𝐿 ⋅ [(1 − 𝑑)𝑟 − 𝑚𝑐]𝑓 when 𝛿 = 1

(33)

Appendix H. First-order conditions with respect to interest rates

Alternative approach
Without using Crawford et al. (2018) assumption about default, the 
expression for the annuity would be, using d as the per period default 
probability: 

𝐶

𝑡
∑

𝑘=1

(1 + 𝑟)𝑇
((1 − 𝑑)𝛿)𝑡 = 𝐿𝑟((1 − 𝑑)𝛿)
(1 + 𝑟)𝑇 − 1
Using the same approximations as in Benetton (2021) —  (1+𝑟)𝑇
(1+𝑟)𝑇 −1

1 − ((1 − 𝑑)𝛿)𝑡
1 − ((1 − 𝑑)𝛿)

and 𝜕𝑟𝛾 = 0 — the expression for the NPV becomes

(34)

≈ 1

𝑟𝑐𝑏 = {

𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 ∶= 𝐿 ⋅ [(1 − 𝑑)𝛿

1 − ((1 − 𝑑)𝛿)𝑓
1 − 𝛿 + 𝑑𝛿

𝑟 − 𝑚𝑐

1 − 𝛿𝑓
1 − 𝛿

] when 𝛿 < 1

(35)

𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 ∶= 𝐿 ⋅ [(1 − 𝑑)

1 − (1 − 𝑑)𝑓
𝑑

𝑟 − 𝑚𝑐 ⋅ 𝑓 ] when 𝛿 = 1

(36)

Here again, since the discount rate is not observable, the NPV would 
require estimating both the discount rate 𝛿 and the marginal cost 𝑚𝑐. 
In a low rate environment, the discount factor can be approximated by 
1. Changing the definition of the NPV will impact interpretation of the 
mc as discussed in Section 3.3.2. Moreover, when d is small, as in our 
empirical application, and 𝛿 is equal to 1, the expression becomes the 
same as in Crawford et al. (2018): 

𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏 ∼
𝑑→0

𝐿 ⋅ [(1 − 𝑑)𝑟 − 𝑚𝑐] ⋅ 𝑓 , when 𝛿 = 1

(37)

22 

First-order  conditions  with  respect  to  interest  rate  of  the  model 

presented in Section 3 yield:

𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘−𝑢𝑝
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝐵𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑃 𝑎𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
−𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐] + 𝛽𝑑
𝑟 𝑟
1 − 𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]

1

(

)

𝐹 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝑚𝑐𝑏
1 − 𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]

𝐸[𝛷𝑐𝑏]
𝐸[−𝛷′
𝑐𝑏]
𝐴𝐼 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡∕𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞

+

+

∑

𝑗≠𝑐

𝐸[𝛷′
𝑗 ]
𝐸[−𝛷′
𝑐𝑏]

̃𝜋𝑐𝑏
1 − 𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]

}

1 − 𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]
1 − 𝐸[𝑑′|𝑏𝑐]

(43)

𝑖

∑

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑐𝑏)
𝑥 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑥)

where 𝛷𝑐𝑏 ∶= ∑
𝐿𝑖𝑐𝑏 is the expected amount lent and  ̃𝜋𝑐𝑏 ∶=
(1 − 𝐸[𝑑|𝑐𝑏])𝑟𝑐𝑏 − 𝑚𝑐𝑐𝑏 is the expected profit on each loan unit given 
that the borrower chooses contract c at bank b. 𝐸[𝑑|𝑐𝑏] is the expected 
default conditional on contract and bank choice (𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐] ∶= 𝛽𝑑 𝑋𝑐𝑏 +
𝛼𝑑 𝑟𝑐𝑏 + 𝜌 𝐸[𝛷𝑐𝑏𝛽𝑖]
).
𝐸[𝛷𝑐𝑏]
The first term 

1−𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]  is the pricing at which banks break even 
given the expected default probability of borrowers’ choosing contract 
c  at  bank  b.  This  is  the  marginal  cost  scaled  up  by  the  survival 
probability.

𝑚𝑐

A. Polo et al.

(

𝐸[𝛷𝑗 ]
𝐸[−𝛷′
𝑗 ]

The second term is 

1−𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]+𝛽𝑑
𝑟 𝑟
) is the pricing set by banks 
1−𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]
above the fair price if they could observe the average default proba-
bility of the type of borrowers who choose each contract (𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]∀𝑐𝑏). 
𝐸[𝛷𝑗 ]
𝑗 ]  is the impact of borrowers’ product elasticity (i.e., competition). 
𝐸[−𝛷′
𝛽𝑑
𝑟 𝑟
1−𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]  accounts for the burden of payment: When increasing r, bor-
rowers are more likely to default (𝛽𝑑 < 0); this creates incentives to 
lower the mark-up.
The last term ∑

1−𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]  is the equivalent of the infor-
mation  rent  in  the  textbook  principal–agent  model.  It  ensures  that 
borrowers self-select. Under perfect information, menus are not offered, 
so this term would be equal to zero.
, in which 𝐸[𝑑′

, 
scales up the three terms by taking into account the fact that changes 
in r impact the type of borrowers who choose a given contract.25

|𝑏𝑐] ∶= 𝛽𝑑 𝑋𝑐𝑏 + 𝛼𝑑 𝑟𝑐𝑏 + 𝜌

The ratio  1−𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐]
|𝑏𝑐]

𝐸[𝛷′
𝛽𝑖]
𝑐𝑏
𝐸[𝛷′
𝑐𝑏]

𝐸[𝛷′
𝑗 ]
𝐸[−𝛷′
𝑐𝑏]

1−𝐸[𝑑′

𝑗≠𝑐

̃𝜋𝑗

For the equilibrium observed in the data, all the elements in Eq. 
(43) are observable (e.g., contract terms) or estimated (e.g., demand 
and default elasticities, marginal cost).

Appendix I. Screening externality model

Formally, lender b problem is defined as a monopoly problem:

max
𝑀𝑏𝑡∈ ,𝑃𝑖𝑏𝑡

𝐶
∑

∑

𝑖

𝑐=1

𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
̃𝛷(𝑉𝑖(𝑋𝑐, 𝑟𝑐 )) 𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑐

𝑠.𝑡. ∀𝑖 𝐸[max𝑐 𝑉𝑖𝑐 + 𝜖] ≥ 𝐸[max𝑐

̄𝑉𝑖 + 𝜖] (𝑃 𝐶)

(44)

We drop the b subscript for notational convenience. The key differ-
ence with the model used in the estimation comes from the demand 
𝛷(𝑉𝑖(𝑋𝑐 , 𝑟𝑐)) and the constraint (PC).

The NPV term is the same as the main model and is described in Eq. 
(11). It is the net present value of lending to borrower i via contract c.
We restrict borrower consideration set to the set of contracts offered 
by bank b. The demand is thus 𝛷(𝑉𝑖(𝑋𝑐, 𝑟𝑐 )) ∶= 𝑛𝑖
. It 
captures how borrowers i make their choice of contract when they only 
have access to bank b contracts (indexed by 𝑐 ∈ [[1, 𝐶]]). We use this 
demand instead of the one used in the structural model (
) 
to shut down the intensive margin (i.e., competition) channel which 
drives the contractual externality.

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑐 )
𝑥∈[[1,𝐶]] 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑥)

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑐 )
𝑥∈𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑥)

∑

∑

Because we shut down competition, we add a participation con-
straint (PC) to prevent the lender from extracting too much surplus 
from borrowers. The constraint ensures that the new contracts offered 
are Pareto improvements over the contract observed in the data.

Formally, the participation constraint (PC) is:

𝐸[max

𝑐

𝑉𝑖𝑐 + 𝜖] ≥ 𝐸[max

𝑐

̄𝑉𝑖 + 𝜖]

⟺

𝐶
∑

𝑐=1

𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑐 ) ≥ 𝐶𝑒𝑥𝑝( ̄𝑉𝑖) ⟺ 𝐸𝑐[𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑉𝑖𝑐 )] ≥ 𝑒𝑥𝑝( ̄𝑉𝑖)

(45)

(46)

Eq. (45) states that borrower i’s expected utility should be at least as big 
as what they got under the competitive equilibrium if they chose bank 
b (denoted ̄𝑢𝑖). ̄𝑢𝑖 is the utility the borrower derive from the contract 
they got in the data.26

25 When the number of products in the market is large and the loan rate 
elasticity is low ( ̃𝛽𝑟 low), 𝐸[𝑑|𝑏𝑐] and 𝐸[𝑑′
|𝑏𝑐] are relatively close to each 
other. Indeed, 𝛷′ ≈ 𝛷( ̃𝛽𝑟 + 1)𝛷 ≈ 𝛷.
26 Ideally, we would have used a nested demand system where the borrower 
chooses first the bank and then the contract within the menu. This way, the 
error terms 𝜖 in Eq.  (45) would have had the same economic interpretation as 
in the structural model. However, this approach would have been too compu-
tationally demanding. I refer the interested reader to Taburet (2024), which 
proposes an alternative approach to calculate the contractual externality.

23 

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Because the fixed cost estimates heavily depend on the modeling 
assumptions,  we  abstract  away  from  them  and  use  a  conservative 
approach instead. As in the estimation, we limit the feasible set to a 
combination of products with teaser rates of 0, 2, 3 or 5 years, three 
potential levels of fees (0, 750, 1,500) and buckets of LTV from 60% to 
95% by increasing levels of 5%. In the estimation (see Section 4.1.2), 
we assumed that a given borrower can only get access to a contract 
with an LTV just below and above the one they get in the data. In the 
counterfactual, we consider adding or removing products that were not 
in the choice set, but we keep the constraint of the LTV being just above 
or below the one chosen in the data.

Without any more restrictions, we end up with menus that can be 
composed of up to 48 products. This implies that there exist 𝐶 48
10 =
6, 540, 715, 896 different potential menus with 10 products. To overcome 
the computational burden, we hold the teaser rate period and fee level 
and focus on changes in LTVs only. For instance, let us consider a 
menu composed of two contracts {(90, 0, 5), (95, 500, 5)} where the first 
number is the LTV, the second is the fees, and the last is the teaser rate 
period. If the borrower chose the second one, I consider that (95, 0, 5)
and (90, 500, 5) are potential products to include. I do not consider LTV 
above 95 because they are never observed in the data, and I assume 
that 85 LTV products would not be preferred or available because they 
are 10% below the contract they chose.

As a robustness check, I also solve the model with fixed costs. For 
consistency, I consider the same feasible set as described in the previous 
paragraph. I use the conservative estimates of the fixed costs for the 
simulation.

Data availability

The reference data is available at https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/

QQJOB4.

References

Agarwal, S., Grigsby, J., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., Seru, A., Yao, V., 2024. Searching 

for approval. Econometrica 92 (4), 1195–1231.

Aiyar,  S.,  Calomiris,  C.W.,  Hooley,  J.,  Korniyenko,  Y.,  Wieladek,  T.,  2014.  The 
international transmission of bank capital requirements: Evidence from the UK. 
J. Financ. Econ. 113 (3), 368–382.

Arcidiacono,  P.,  Miller,  R.A.,  2011.  Conditional  choice  probability  estimation  of 
dynamic discrete choice models with unobserved heterogeneity. Econometrica 79 
(6), 1823–1867.

Attar, A., Mariotti, T., Salanié, F., 2011. Nonexclusive competition in the market for 

Azevedo,  E.M.,  Gottlieb,  D.,  2017.  Perfect  competition  in  markets  with  adverse 

lemons. Econometrica 79 (6), 1869–1918.

selection. Econometrica 85 (1), 67–105.

Benetton, M., 2021. Leverage regulation and market structure: A structural model of 

the UK mortgage market. J. Financ. 76 (6), 2997–3053.

Benetton, M., Gavazza, A., Surico, P., 2021. Mortgage pricing and monetary policy. 

Working paper, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP16456.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., Pakes, A., 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium. 

Econometrica: J. Econ. Soc. 841–890.

Campbell, J.Y., 2013. Mortgage market design. Rev. Financ. 17 (1), 1–33.
Chiappori, P.-A., Salanie, B., 2000. Testing for asymmetric information in insurance 

markets. J. Political Econ. 108 (1), 56–78.

Cloyne, J., Huber, K., Ilzetzki, E., Kleven, H., 2019. The effect of house prices on 
household borrowing: a new approach. Am. Econ. Rev. 109 (6), 2104–2136.
Crawford, G.S., Griffith, R., Iaria, A., 2021. A survey of preference estimation with 

unobserved choice set heterogeneity. J. Econometrics 222 (1), 4–43.

Crawford, G.S., Pavanini, N., Schivardi, F., 2018. Asymmetric information and imperfect 

competition in lending markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 108 (7), 1659–1701.

Dasgupta, P., Maskin, E., 1986. The existence of equilibrium in discontinuous economic 

games, I: Theory. Rev. Econ. Stud. 53 (1), 1–26.

Dou, W.W., Wang, W., Wang, W., 2022. The cost of intermediary market power for 

distressed borrowers. Available at SSRN 4163319.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Cullen, M.R., 2010. Estimating welfare in insurance markets 

using variation in prices. Q. J. Econ. 125 (3), 877–921.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Mahoney, N., 2021. The IO of selection markets. In: Handbook 

of Industrial Organization, vol. 5, (no. 1), Elsevier, pp. 389–426.

Eizenberg, A., 2014. Upstream innovation and product variety in the us home pc 

market. Rev. Econ. Stud. 81 (3), 1003–1045.

A. Polo et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 169 (2025) 104056 

Granja, J., 2021. Regulation and service provision in dynamic oligopoly: Evidence from 

mobile telecommunications. Working paper.

Handel, B., Hendel, I., Whinston, M.D., 2015. Equilibria in health exchanges: Adverse 

selection versus reclassification risk. Econometrica 83 (4), 1261–1313.

Hertzberg, A., Liberman, A., Paravisini, D., 2018. Screening on loan terms: evidence 
from maturity choice in consumer credit. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (9), 3532–3567.
Karlan,  D.,  Zinman,  J.,  2009.  Observing  unobservables:  Identifying  information 
asymmetries  with  a  consumer  credit  field  experiment.  Econometrica  77  (6), 
1993–2008.

Lee, R.S., Pakes, A., 2009. Multiple equilibria and selection by learning in an applied 

setting. Econom. Lett. 104 (1), 13–16.

Lester, B., Shourideh, A., Venkateswaran, V., Zetlin-Jones, A., 2019. Screening and 

adverse selection in frictional markets. J. Political Econ. 127 (1), 338–377.

Morrow, W.R., Skerlos, S.J., 2011. Fixed-point approaches to computing Bertrand–Nash 

equilibrium prices under mixed-logit demand. Oper. Res. 59 (2), 328–345.

Nelson, S., 2025. Private information and price regulation in the us credit card market. 

Econometrica (Forthcoming).

Econometrica 69 (2), 307–342.

Pakes, A., Porter, J.R., Shepard, M., Calder-Wang, S., 2021. Unobserved heterogeneity, 
state dependence, and health plan choices. Working paper, National Bureau of 
Economic Research.

Riley, J.G., 1979. Informational equilibrium. Econometrica: J. Econ. Soc. 331–359.
Robles-Garcia, C., 2019. Competition and incentives in mortgage markets: The role of 

brokers. Working paper.

Rothschild, M., Stiglitz, J., 1976. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An 
essay on the economics of imperfect information. Q. J. Econ. 90 (4), 629–649.
Rothschild, M., Stiglitz, J., 1978. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An 
essay on the economics of imperfect information. In: Uncertainty in Economics. 
Elsevier, pp. 257–280.

Salanié, B., Wolak, F.A., 2019. Fast, ‘‘robust’’, and approximately correct: estimating 
mixed demand systems. Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Taburet, A., 2024. Screening using a menu of contracts in imperfectly competitive 

markets with adverse selection. Working Paper.

Train, K., 1986. Qualitative Choice Analysis: Theory, Econometrics, and an Application 

to Automobile Demand, vol. 10, MIT Press.

commercial vehicles. Am. Econ. Rev. 108 (6), 1364–1406.

Nevo,  A.,  2001.  Measuring  market  power  in  the  ready-to-eat  cereal  industry. 

Wollmann, T.G., 2018. Trucks without bailouts: Equilibrium product characteristics for 

24 

