Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Missing values handling for machine learning portfolios ✩
Andrew Y. Chen a,∗, Jack McCoy b
a Federal Reserve Board, United States of America
b Columbia Business School, United States of America

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Dataset link: https://
data .mendeley .com /datasets /jcw4xkp886 /1

JEL classiﬁcation:
G0
G1

Keywords:
Stock market predictability
Stock market anomalies
Missing values
Machine learning

1.  Introduction

We characterize the structure and origins of missingness for 159 cross-sectional return predictors and study 
missing value handling for portfolios constructed using machine learning. Simply imputing with cross-sectional 
means performs well compared to rigorous expectation-maximization methods. This stems from three facts about 
predictor data: (1) missingness occurs in large blocks organized by time, (2) cross-sectional correlations are small, 
and (3) missingness tends to occur in blocks organized by the underlying data source. As a result, observed data 
provide little information about missing data. Sophisticated imputations introduce estimation noise that can lead 
to underperformance if machine learning is not carefully applied.

A growing literature applies methods from machine learning (ML) 
to asset pricing. These studies combine the information in dozens, or 
even hundreds, of cross-sectional stock return predictors. Freyberger et 
al. (2020) combine 62; Kelly et al. (2023) combine 138; and Han et al. 
(2022) combine up to 193 predictors. Each of these papers ﬁnds that 
there are economic gains to expanding the set of predictors beyond the 
ﬁve used in Fama and French (2015).1

Buried  in  this  literature  is  the  problem  of  missing  values.  When 
learning from many predictors, the standard practice of dropping stocks 
with missing values is often untenable. For example, applying the stan-
dard  practice  to  the  125  most-observed  predictors  in  the  Chen  and 
Zimmermann (2022) dataset drops 99% of stocks. So even though im-

puting missing values may seem dangerous, ML researchers often have 
no choice but to impute.

We examine missing data handling for 159 predictors using a broad 
array of imputation and return forecasting methods. We focus on cross-
sectional expectation-maximization (EM) and cross-sectional mean im-
putation, but also examine several other methods, including some that 
incorporate time-series information. Our baseline forecasts use principal 
component regressions (PCR), but we also examine neural networks and 
gradient boosting. These methods are chosen to provide an overview 
and intuition behind missing data issues, rather than to advocate for a 
particular imputation algorithm.

We ﬁnd that imputing with cross-sectional means (as in Kozak et al. 
(2020); Gu et al. (2020)) does a surprisingly good job of capturing the 
potential expected returns. Imputing with means and then sorting stocks 

✩ Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. This paper was previously circulated as “Missing Values and the Dimensionality of Expected Returns.” First 
submitted to arXiv.org: July 20, 2022. This paper originated from many conversations with Fabian Winkler. We thank an anonymous referee, the editor, Heiner 
Beckmeyer, Charlie Clarke, Harry Mamaysky, Markus Pelger, and Yinan Su for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reﬂect the position of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or the Federal Reserve System.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: andrew.y.chen@frb.gov (A.Y. Chen), jmccoy26@gsb.columbia.edu (J. McCoy).

1 Lewellen (2015) ﬁnds that regressions on 15 predictors lead to an annualized Sharpe Ratio of around 0.8 (excluding micro-caps). Freyberger et al. (2020); Kelly 
et al. (2023); and Han et al. (2022) ﬁnd Sharpe ratios in excess of 1.8, and as high as 2.4 (excluding micro-caps or value-weighting). Other papers that combine 
many predictors include Haugen and Baker (1996); Green et al. (2017); DeMiguel et al. (2020); Gu et al. (2020); Lopez-Lira and Roussanov (2020); Kozak et al. 
(2020); Chen and Velikov (2022); Simon et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2023).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103815
Received 20 October 2022; Received in revised form 21 February 2024; Accepted 23 February 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)103815Availableonline8March20240304-405X/PublishedbyElsevierB.V.A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

on return forecasts from a three-layer neural network leads to long-short 
decile returns of 66% per year equal-weighted or 37% per year value-
weighted. Imputing with cross-sectional EM leads to nearly identical 
returns: 67% equal-weighted and 39% value-weighted.2 This invariance 
is  seen  across  most  forecasting  and  imputation  methods,  despite  the 
fact that EM has strong theoretical properties and is recommended in 
textbooks on missing data handling and machine learning (Little and 
Rubin (2019); Efron and Hastie (2016)).

This invariance is intuitive given three properties of cross-sectional 
predictor data. The ﬁrst is that missingness occurs in large blocks orga-
nized by time. For common stocks on major exchanges that are missing 
book-to-market this month, 81% are also missing book-to-market in ev-
ery previous month. As a result, there is little time-series information 
about missing values.

The second key property is that predictors are largely uncorrelated 
cross-sectionally (Green et al. (2013); Chen and Zimmermann (2022)). 
Almost all correlations lie between −0.25 and +0.25, and the ﬁrst 10 
principal components span only 40% of total variance. Thus, most ob-
served  predictors  contain  little  cross-sectional  information  about  the 
missing predictors.

The third key property is that missingness tends to occur in blocks 
organized by the underlying data. For stocks that are missing book-to-
market, about 90% are also missing earnings-to-price. So even though 
book-to-market and earnings-to-price have a nontrivial cross-sectional 
correlation of around 0.3, this correlation can rarely be used for imput-
ing book-to-market.

Overall, we ﬁnd the observed predictors provide little information 
about the missing predictors, so one might as well impute with cross-
sectional means.

In some settings, EM imputation can even lead to underperformance. 
Our baseline results form forecasts separately for micro-cap, small-cap, 
and big stocks, motivated by the fact that predictability can diﬀer by 
market cap and market liquidity (Fama and French (2008); Chen and 
Velikov (2022)). If we instead form forecasts using all stocks simulta-
neously, EM often leads to smaller value-weighted returns compared to 
simple mean imputation, though equal-weighted returns are generally 
similar.

This underperformance is consistent with the idea that sophisticated 
imputations introduce estimation noise. This noise can lead to under-
performance, particularly if the forecasts are not carefully structured. 
Consistent with this interpretation, we ﬁnd that EM imputation errors 
are larger among small stocks in random masking exercises.

All together, we recommend using simple cross-sectional mean im-
putation for handling missing values when applying machine learning 
to cross-sectional return predictors. In theory, EM should be less biased, 
more eﬃcient, and thus lead to more accurate forecasts. In practice, 
the missingness and covariance structures of cross-sectional predictors 
imply that the improvements are small, and estimation noise can even 
lead to underperformance.

The high dimensionality of cross-sectional predictors naturally raises 
the question of how many of these dimensions contribute to expected 
returns. Our principal components (PC) regression tests ﬁnd that the 
answer is subtle and depends on multiple measurement choices. Com-
puting PCs the standard way, we ﬁnd that about 75 PCs contribute to 
the potential equal-weighted returns of 50% per year, while 40 PCs con-
tribute to the potential value-weighted returns of about 20%. However, 
standard  PC  analysis  is  an  unsupervised  method  that  ignores  return 
information. Using Huang et al. (2022)’s scaled PCA to incorporate re-
turn information leads to a much smaller dimensionality: about 30 PCs 

are required when equal-weighting while 15 are required when value-
weighting.

We  also  describe  the  origins  of  missing  values  in  the  Chen  and 
Zimmermann  (2022) dataset.  We  ﬁnd  there  are  three  main  drivers: 
(1) missing underlying data, (2) predictors requiring a long history of 
underlying data, and (3) using missingness as a substitute for interac-
tion eﬀects. Requiring accounting variables leads to an observed share 
of around 70% in 1985 and requiring analyst forecasts drops the ob-
served  share  to  about  50%.  Variables  that  require  a  long  history  of 
data  includes  5-year  sales  growth,  which  is  observed  for  about  40% 
of stocks. Interaction eﬀects are implicit in predictors like asset tan-
gibility and payout yield, which are replaced with missing values for 
non-manufacturing ﬁrms and stocks with non-positive payout, respec-
tively. These drivers of missingness can themselves interact and lead 
to  extremely  low  rates  of  observability.  For  example,  Asquith  et  al. 
(2005)’s institutional ownership among high short interest stocks pre-
dictor requires both specialized underlying data and uses missingness 
to represent interaction eﬀects, leading to a 0.2% of stocks having ob-
servations in 1985.

We post all of our code at https://github .com /jack -mccoy /missing _
data. The imputed predictor data can be found at https://sites .google .
com /site /chenandrewy/.

1.1.  Related literature

In contemporaneous work, Freyberger et al. (2023) (FHNW), Bryz-
galova et al. (2023) (BLLP), and Beckmeyer and Wiedemann (2023) also 
study missing values in cross-sectional predictor data. Each paper advo-
cates a diﬀerent imputation algorithm, though all avoid modeling the 
missingness process. FHNW uses moment conditions designed for cross-
sectional predictors, BLLP use Xiong and Pelger (2023)’s latent factor 
method, and Beckmeyer and Wiedemann use a masked language model. 
Our paper takes a more neutral approach and compares textbook impu-
tation methods (Little and Rubin (2019)) with the cross-sectional mean 
imputation used in asset pricing. Our approach leads us to focus on 
practical issues, like whether imputation aﬀects inferences made from 
standard  ML  algorithms  like  neural  networks  and  gradient  boosting 
(Efron and Hastie (2016)). We also are distinct in providing a detailed 
discussion of the origins of missingness for 159 predictors and exploring 
the intuition for why simple mean imputation seems to perform well in 
ML applications, including using neural network models and FHNW’s 
regularized non-linear strategies.

The contemporaneous papers also diﬀer in their predictor and stock 
return datasets. In this respect, FHNW is the most similar to ours. We 
both use 80+ predictors from the CZ open-source dataset and cover all 
common stocks in CRSP. Beckmeyer and Wiedemann (2023) examine 
143 characteristics from the Jensen et al. (2023) open source dataset 
and  restrict  stock-months  to  those  with  data  on  at  least  20%  of  the 
predictors. BLLP examines 45 characteristics from Kozak et al. (2020)
and restrict stocks to those with at least one Compustat characteristic. 
Given the size and breadth of these data, and the diversity of statistical 
methods, the empirical results in these studies are complementary.

Our results provide a rigorous justiﬁcation for the ubiquitous use 
of mean imputation in machine learning papers. Almost every paper 
that attempts to combine large sets of predictors imputes with cross-
sectional means or medians, including Gu et al. (2020); Freyberger et 
al. (2020); Kozak et al. (2020).3 This result is important because the 
algorithms in these papers are often complex, so a simple imputation 
algorithm is helpful for transparency.

Our PC analyses relate to the ongoing debate about the factor struc-
ture of the cross-section of returns. Our ﬁndings are consistent with the 

2 The returns from PCR in mean-imputed data are 51% and 32% (equal- and 
value-weighted, respectively), compared to 54% and 36%, in EM-imputed data. 
All results use the usual assumption of no transaction costs, including no short-
ing fees.

3 Other  machine  learning  style  papers  that  examine  imputing  with  cross-
sectional averages include Green et al. (2017); DeMiguel et al. (2020); Fulop 
et al. (2022); Han et al. (2021); Azevedo et al. (2022); Da et al. (2022); Simon 
et al. (2022); Zhang and Aaraba (2022); Jensen et al. (2022).

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038152A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

idea that there are many dimensions of predictability if one is interested 
in all stocks (Green et al. (2014); Bessembinder et al. (2021)) and that 
a moderately strong factor structure is possible if one considers only 
large stocks (Green et al. (2017); Lettau and Pelger (2020); Kozak et al. 
(2020)). Our ﬁndings complement Lopez-Lira and Roussanov (2020), 
who document large Sharpe ratios in strategies that hedge the principal 
components of individual stock returns.

2.  The structure and origins of missing predictor data

We describe the structure and origins of missingness among pub-
lished  cross-sectional  predictors.  We  also  explain  why  imputation  is 
required for large scale machine learning studies.

2.1.  Cross-sectional predictor data

Our predictors data begins with the August 2023 release of the CZ 
dataset. This release contains 212 cross-sectional predictors published 
in academic journals. We merge this data with CRSP and keep only com-
mon stocks (SHRCD 10, 11, or 12) listed on the NYSE, NYSE MKT, or 
NASDAQ (EXCHCD 1, 2, 3, or 31, 32, 33). This ensures that the missing 
data problems we study apply to widely-studied common stocks, and 
do not occur because of the rise of ETFs or other more exotic securities. 
The screens we use follow Banz (1981), Fama and French (1992), and 
Bali et al. (2016) among others.4

We drop the 33 discrete predictors because the missing values in 
this subset are closely related to the interpretation of these predictors 
by CZ. Many of these predictors draw on event studies (e.g. exchange 
switch), which CZ interpret as a binary ﬁrm characteristic (following 
McLean and Pontiﬀ (2016)). Others are based on double-sorts (e.g. an-
alyst recommendation and short interest). In both cases, CZ use missing 
values for any stocks that belong in neither the long or short portfolio, 
though there are other ways to interpret these studies.

We drop an additional 20 predictors because they have months with 
fewer than 2 stock observations in the 1985-2021 sample. 18 of these 
predictors use data that does not begin until after 1985. The remaining 
predictors are junk stock momentum (Mom6mJunk) and ﬁrm age - mo-
mentum (FirmAgeMom), which have small gaps in recent years. This 
screen ensures the predictor data is relatively well-behaved and avoids 
the use of special techniques to handle predictor-months with no data.

The  ﬁnal  159  predictors  include  not only  those  based  on  CRSP 
and Compustat, but also predictors that use IBES analyst forecast data. 
This inclusion is important, as analyst forecasts may oﬀer a distinct di-
mension of predictability. Unfortunately, the list excludes option-based 
predictors, as option prices are not observed until the 1990s.

2.2.  Where does missingness come from?

Table 1 presents a list of selected predictors that illustrates the ori-
gins of missingness. The predictors are sorted by the share of stocks 
with observations in 1985, a year that is fairly representative of other 
years. The observed share ranges from 99.8% for size all the way down 
to 0.2% for institutional ownership among high short interest stocks. 
We curate this list from the full list of 159 predictors, which can be 
found in the Internet Appendix (Table IA.1).

The most-observed predictors use only recent CRSP data. These pre-
dictors  include  short-term  reversal,  idiosyncratic  volatility,  and  size, 
and are observed for nearly 100% of stocks. Requiring a longer history 
of CRSP data leads to a small but non-trivial share of missing values. 
12-month momentum is observed for 92% of stocks. A similar amount 
of CRSP data is required for coskewness, beta, and two of the zero trade 
predictors.

4 Previous versions of this paper did not apply these screens. We thank Jun 
Kyung Auh for pointing out this issue.

Requiring accounting variables drops the observed share into the 
60% to 75% range. Predictors that fall in this range include B/M and 
asset growth. Many other accounting-based predictors fall in this range, 
including employee growth, leverage, taxes, external ﬁnancing, and ac-
cruals.

Rates of observability below 50% are driven by a wide variety of 
issues. Most of these predictors require a long history of accounting or 
CRSP data, such as return seasonality in years 11-15 or revenue growth 
rank, which uses the past 5 years of sales growth. Long histories of data 
are also required for intangible value, Titman et al. (2004)’s investment 
predictor, and composite debt issuance.

But many of the less-observable predictors are missing values simply 
because the data items they require are often missing. Predictors that 
use analyst forecast data are observed for at most 50% of stocks, such as 
EPS forecast revision. Earnings surprise streak requires a long history of 
EPS forecasts, leading to an even smaller share. Data items are also often 
missing for less-common accounting variables, like advertising expense.
Still  other  predictors  have  missing  values  due  to  a  diverse  range 
of  specialized  ﬁlters.  Asset  tangibility  applies  only  to  manufacturing 
ﬁrms, while IPO and age only applies to recent IPOs. Payout yield drops 
stocks with non-positive payout. In CZ’s interpretation, turnover volatil-
ity drops stocks in the top two size quintiles, and operating proﬁtability 
drops stocks in the bottom size tercile. The original Piotroski F-score 
(PS) study only examines stocks in the highest BM quintile.

At the bottom of Table 1 are selected predictors that are observed 
for less than 10% of stocks in 1985. These very low rates of observabil-
ity are sometimes due to highly specialized data. Conglomerate return 
uses Compustat segment data and customer momentum uses the BEA 
input-output tables. Yet others combine specialized data with the use 
missingness  to  substitute  for  interaction  eﬀects,  such  as  institutional 
ownership for high short interest.

As seen in these details, missingness is sometimes used as a substi-
tute for modeling non-monotonicity and interaction eﬀects. Incorporat-
ing these interactions is non-trivial. It requires going into the code be-
hind the individual predictors, removing the missingness assignments, 
and carefully introducing new interaction variables. We leave this work 
for future research.

2.3.  Summarizing missingness for individual predictors

Table 2 describes missingness at the individual predictor level. For 
each predictor, we compute the share of stocks that have observed pre-
dictors in selected months between 1970 and 2000. Panel (a) shows 
order statistics across predictors.

Though many cross-sectional predictability studies begin in 1963, at 
least 5% of our 159 predictors have no observations until about 1980. 
Several of these predictors draw on analyst forecast data, which is not 
generally observed until 1985 (using IBES).

Missingness reaches a steady state in 1985, as the order statistics are 
largely unchanged after this date. In this steady state, the typical predic-
tor is observed for 70% of stocks, and 75% of predictors are observed 
for roughly 50% of stocks. While this distribution suggests that miss-
ing values are a relatively modest problem, we will see that combining 
large sets of predictors compounds the issue.

This steady state suggests that missingness in the time series exhibits 
structural breaks: predictor data is continually missing until the data 
begins being published, after which the data is continually observed.

2.4.  Why imputation is often required

When combining predictors, one typically needs a numerical value 
for all predictors for each stock-month in consideration. This require-
ment compounds the magnitudes in Panel (a) of Table 2, leading to a 
dramatically larger missingness problem.

This  problem  is  illustrated  in  Fig. 1,  which  shows  the  “missing-
ness map” for the 159 predictors among common stocks in June 1990. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038153A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Table 1
Missingness in 1985 for Selected Predictors. Predictors are selected to illustrate the 
causes of missingness (see discussion in text). ‘% Obs’ is the mean share of stock-months 
for which the predictor is observed in 1985, for common stocks listed on the NYSE, 
NYSE MKT, and NASDAQ. The full list of 159 continuous predictors with at least 2 ob-
servations in every month between 1985 and 2021 is in the Internet Appendix (Table 
IA.1). Interpretation: Missingness is due to the availability of the underlying data (ac-
counting, analyst forecast, etc), the requirement of having a long history of underlying 
data (Ret Seasonality Yr 11-15), and is also imposed to approximate interaction eﬀects 
(IPO and Age).

Predictor

Reference

Data Focus

% Obs

Size
12-Month Momentum
Book-to-Market
Asset Growth
EPS Forecast Revision
Ret Seasonality Yr 11-15
Revenue Growth Rank
Payout Yield
Asset Tangibility
Advertising Expense
IPO and Age
Earnings Surprise Streak
Conglomerate Return
Customer Momentum
Inst Own for High Short Int

Banz, 1981
Jegadeesh and Titman 1993
Stattman 1980
Cooper, Gulen and Schill 2008
Hawkins, Chamberlin, Daniel 1984
Heston and Sadka 2008
Lakonishok, Shleifer, Vishny 1994
Boudoukh et al. 2007
Hahn and Lee 2009
Chan et al. 2001
Ritter 1991
Loh and Warachka 2012
Cohen and Lou 2012
Cohen and Frazzini 2008
Asquith Pathak and Ritter 2005

Price
Price
Accounting
Accounting
Analyst
Price
Accounting
Accounting
Accounting
Accounting
Other
Accounting
Price
Other
Other

99.8
91.6
74.4
67.1
46.0
45.3
40.5
35.9
34.9
31.3
14.2
14.1
8.4
4.9
0.2

Table 2
The Missing Value Problem for Large-Scale Predictability Studies. Data consists of 159 
continuous predictors from Chen and Zimmermann (2022) with at least 2 observations for 
common stocks listed on major exchanges in every month between 1985 and 2021. Panel 
(a) computes the % of stocks with observations for individual predictors and then com-
putes percentiles across predictors. Panel (b) selects the 𝐽 most-observed predictors and 
then computes the % observed among these using two methods: ‘Predictor-Stocks’ sums 
predictor-stock observations and then divides by 𝐽 × the number of stocks. ‘Stocks w/all 𝐽 ’ 
counts the number of stocks with all 𝐽 predictors and divides by the number of stocks. In-
terpretation: Missing values are a much larger problem when combining many predictors. 
When combining 75 or more predictors, one must impute missing values or drop most stocks.

Predictor 
Percentile

Panel (a): Individual Predictors
% of Stocks With Predictor Data in June

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

5
25
50
75
95

0
25
67
82
100

0
34
53
72
97

3
42
66
80
97

14
43
66
78
99

14
45
69
79
99

15
45
71
87
99

16
50
74
89
99

𝐽

25
50
75
100
125
150

Panel (b): Combining 𝐽 Predictors

June 1975

Predictor-
Stocks w/
Data (%)

Stocks w/ 𝐽
Predictors 
(%)

June 1985

Predictor-
Stocks w/
Data (%)

Stocks w/ 𝐽
Predictors
(%)

June 1995

Predictor-
Stocks w/
Data (%)

Stocks w/ 𝐽
Predictors
(%)

89.2
82.1
76.2
71.3
63.2
55.8

49.7
37.4
9.7
0.0
0.0
0.0

96.2
87.9
81.3
76.7
70.7
63.5

86.4
42.1
16.1
10.1
0.9
0.0

95.8
91.0
85.7
81.4
75.0
67.6

88.1
53.5
23.8
11.2
0.8
0.0

Roughly half of the map is non-shaded, indicating that roughly half of 
the data is observed. This does not mean, however, that roughly half of 
stocks can be used in a machine learning algorithm without imputation. 
In general, only stocks with no missing values can be used, correspond-
ing to columns in the missingness map that are entirely non-shaded. 
Zero columns satisfy this requirement.

Panel (b) of Table 2 quantiﬁes this problem. This panel examines 
the prevalence of missing values when combining 𝐽 predictors, where 

𝐽 ranges from 25 to 150. The 𝐽 = 25 row examines the 25 predictors 
with the most observations in selected months. It shows that one can 
combine 25 predictors with minimal missing data issues. In June 1985, 
96% of predictor-stocks have observations and 86% of stocks have pre-
dictor data for all of these 25 predictors.

But when combining for 75 or more predictors, one needs to take a 
stand on imputation. As seen in the 𝐽 = 75 row, simply dropping stocks 
with missing values would result in dropping all but 16% of the data. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038154A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Fig. 1. Missingness Map: June 1990. Vertical axis represents 159 predictors and horizontal axis represents 6,000 common stocks traded on major exchanges. 
Shading indicates months since the last observation. Lightest shade is currently observed and the darkest indicates the predictor-stock has never been observed. 
Predictors are sorted by the type of data they focus on (according to the CZ documentation). Interpretation: When combining 159 predictors, a stock can only be 
used without imputation if it has values for all 159 predictors. No stocks satisfy this requirement. The complexity of missingness suggests assuming Rubin (1976)
ignorability is required. Missingness occurs in blocks organized around data type and time. There is very little time series information about missing values.

For 𝐽 = 125, essentially the entire dataset is gone if one follows the 
traditional  missing  value  handling  used  in  individual  predictor  stud-
ies.

Returning to Fig. 1, the complex missingness patterns show that a 
general purpose missing data imputation is required. There are dozens 
of  distinct  shapes  in  Fig. 1,  suggesting  that  dozens  of  equations  are 
required to model the speciﬁc missingness mechanisms. It is unlikely 
that an analyst could convincingly present such a complicated model. 
The only alternative is to assume Rubin (1976) ignorability, which leads 
to our focus on EM methods (Section 3.2).

3.  Baseline imputation methods

The  missingness  patterns  imply  that  one  must impute  data  when 
combining more than 100 predictors. This section describes our baseline 
imputation methods: EM and simple mean.

These imputations are important benchmarks. EM is recommended 
in  the  inﬂuential  Little  and  Rubin  (2019) textbook  on  missing  data. 
Simple mean imputation is the most common method in ML-style asset 
pricing.

We examine several additional imputations in Section 5.

2.5.  The structure of missingness

3.1.  Preprocessing

Fig. 1 sorts the predictors by the type of data they focus on (accord-
ing to the CZ documentation). This sort shows that missingness occurs 
in blocks, organized by data type. Stocks that are missing some account-
ing predictors are often missing every single accounting predictor. The 
same pattern arises with analyst forecast predictors, as seen in the dark 
vertical lines that span the “Analyst” section of the plot.

Block structures also occur within data categories, consistent with 
the fact that missingness often occurs due to the requirement of hav-
ing a certain amount of historical data. This block structure suggests 
that extracting information about missing values from cross-sectional 
observations may be diﬃcult.

Missingness  is  extremely  persistent.  For  predictor-stock  combina-
tions that are missing in June 1990 (everything except for the lightest 
shade), the vast majority were never observed before June 1990 (dark-
est shade). Only a tiny share has observations in the past 12 months. 
This structure implies that there is very little time-series information 
about missing values.

This missingness structure leads us to focus on linear cross-sectional 
imputations in our baseline methods. These methods focus on the part 
of the data which contains more information about the missing values 
(the cross-section), and they avoid over-parameterizing the model when 
the amount of information in the cross-section is likely limited.

Before applying any imputation, we use the following preprocessing. 
First, we winsorize across stocks symmetrically at the 1% level for each 
predictor-month. Second, we apply Hawkins and Weisberg (2017)’s ex-
tension of Box and Cox (1964) to make each predictor approximately 
normal. Finally, we standardize predictors to have zero mean and unit 
variance.

The  Box-Cox  transform  is  not  commonly  found  in  asset  pricing, 
but it is a natural extension of the log transformation that is typically 
applied to size and B/M (Fama and French (1992)). More broadly, cross-
sectional predictability studies rarely impose a functional form on the 
relationship between the predictor predictors and expected returns, so 
one might as well standardize the predictors to be approximately nor-
mal.

3.2.  Cross-sectional EM imputation

There are 𝑁 stocks, and stock 𝑖 in month 𝑡 has a vector of predic-
obs|𝑖,𝑡, 

tor values 𝑋𝑖,𝑡. Missing values are represented by 𝑋
which are the missing and observed subvectors of 𝑋𝑖,𝑡.5

miss|𝑖,𝑡 and 𝑋

5 For example, if 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 =
missing, then 𝑋

1 2 3 4
miss|𝑖,𝑡 = [ 1 3 ] and 𝑋

[

]′
, and the ﬁrst and third elements are 
obs|𝑖,𝑡 = [ 2 4 ]. 𝑋𝑖+1,𝑡 may have a diﬀerent 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038155A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Suppose  ̂Σ𝑡 is a reasonable estimate for Σ𝑡, the cross-stock covari-
ance matrix of 𝑋𝑖,𝑡. For example, one could let  ̂Σ𝑡 be the sample covari-
ance across pairs of stocks that have predictor data, as in BLLP. Then, 
an intuitive way to impute 𝑋
miss|𝑖,𝑡 is to use:

̂𝑋

miss|𝑖,𝑡 = ̂𝛽′
where

𝑖,𝑡𝑋

obs|𝑖,𝑡,

(1)

obs,obs|𝑖,𝑡

̂Σobs,miss|𝑖,𝑡,

̂𝛽𝑖,𝑡 ≡ ̂Σ−1
(2)
and ̂Σmiss,obs|𝑖,𝑡 and ̂Σobs,obs|𝑖,𝑡 are the submatrices of ̂Σ𝑡 corresponding to 
the missing and observed predictors for stock 𝑖. Analogous to the clas-
sic OLS formula  ̂𝛽 = [𝑋′𝑋]−1𝑋′𝑦, Equations (1)-(2) use the covariance 
between the LHS and RHS variables to forecast the LHS. Equation (1)
omits the intercept since we standardize variables to have mean zero 
(Section 3.1).

The problem with this approach is that it is not self-consistent. That 

is, the imputed data would generally imply

̂Σ𝑡 ≠ 𝑁 −1

𝑁∑

̂𝑋𝑖,𝑡

̂𝑋′
𝑖,𝑡,

(3)

𝑖=1
where  ̂𝑋𝑖,𝑡 combines  ̂𝑋
whether you should be using  ̂Σ𝑡 or 𝑁 −1
missing values.

miss|𝑖,𝑡 and  𝑋

obs|𝑖,𝑡.  In  this  case,  it  is  unclear 
𝑖,𝑡 to be imputing 

∑𝑁
𝑖=1

̂𝑋𝑖,𝑡

̂𝑋′

miss|𝑖,𝑡

miss|𝑖,𝑡. The expected value of 𝑋
𝑋′

A secondary issue is that Equations (1)-(2) do not tell you how to 
deal with higher order missing terms. That is, not only is 𝑋
miss|𝑖,𝑡 un-
known, but so is 𝑋
𝑋′
miss|𝑖,𝑡
is diﬀerent than the outer product of Equation (1), and is potentially 
important for a rigorous estimate of Σ𝑡. An intuitive way to estimate 
this higher order term is to use
[
̂𝑋𝑖,𝑡𝑋′

= Σmiss,miss|𝑖,𝑡 − ̂𝛽′

𝑖,𝑡Σobs,miss|𝑖,𝑡 + ̂𝑋

miss|𝑖,𝑡

̂𝑋′

(4)

𝑖,𝑡

]

,

miss|𝑖,𝑡

miss|𝑖,𝑡

miss,miss|𝑖,𝑡

which can be derived from Gaussian updating formulas.

The EM algorithm solves the self-consistency problem by iterating 

between Equations (1)-(2) and Equation (3):

1. E-step: impute missing data with the observed data and the current 

guess  ̂Σ𝑡, using Equations (1) and (2).

2. M-step: estimate a new guess  ̂Σnew

by plugging the imputed data 
from step 1 into the RHS of Equation (3). Add to  ̂Σnew
the higher 
order  correction  implied  by  Equation  (4) for  submatrices corre-
sponding to  ̂𝑋

̂𝑋′

𝑡

𝑡

miss|𝑖,𝑡

miss|𝑖,𝑡.6

‖
‖
‖∞

‖
‖
These two steps are repeated until 
‖

𝑡 − ̂Σ𝑡
̂Σnew
≤ 𝛿. We use 𝛿 = 10−4.
The E- and M-steps can be applied to almost any imputation and es-
timation formulas. Our main results focus on the simple cross-sectional 
regression formula (Equations (1)-(2)). This method avoids look-ahead 
bias and is intuitive given the missingness structure described in Sec-
tion 2.5. We examine variations that assume a factor structure and take 
on time-series information in Section 5.

More formally, this EM algorithm can be derived from maximum 
likelihood (Dempster et al. (1977)), assuming that the process gener-
ating the missing data is “ignorable” in the sense of (Rubin (1976)). A 
suﬃcient condition for ignorability is that data is “missing at random,” 
which is a technical condition that is best described as the weakest gen-
eral condition that leads to ignorability (Little (2021)). This notion of 
“missing at random” is diﬀerent than the one used in Xiong and Pel-
ger (2023), whose notion of “missing at random” is often described as 

set of missing predictors, and thus the length of 𝑋
diﬀerent compared to 𝑋
6 Some  descriptions  of  EM  omit  the  higher  order  correction  (e.g.  Roweis 
(1997); Efron and Hastie (2016)).

obs|𝑖+1,𝑡 may be 

miss|𝑖+1,𝑡 and 𝑋

miss|𝑖,𝑡 and 𝑋

obs|𝑖,𝑡.

“missing completely at random” (Little and Rubin (2019)). We provide 
a formal derivation of our EM algorithm and discuss these technical 
issues in the Internet Appendix.

This  EM  algorithm  is  sometimes  described  as  “requiring”  the  as-
sumption of normality (e.g. Freyberger et al. (2023), BLLP). But while 
normality along with ignorability are suﬃcient conditions for the va-
lidity of EM, they are not necessary assumptions. Indeed, simulation 
studies ﬁnd this algorithm works well even if the data are not normal 
(Little (1988); Azen et al. (1989); Graham and Schafer (1999); King 
et al. (2001)). This robustness is consistent with the intuition that EM 
is an iterative form of OLS, and like OLS, is maximum likelihood un-
der ideal conditions but works well in real world settings. Little (1988)
shows that allowing for fat tails leads to the same algorithm but with 
smaller weights on the extreme observations. As we winsorize our data 
before imputation, such a fat tail extension should have little eﬀect on 
our results.

3.3.  Simple mean imputation

Simple  mean  imputation  replaces  missing  values  with  the  mean 
observed  value  conditional  on  the  predictor-month.  Given  our  pre-
processing (Section 3.1), simple mean imputation amounts to replacing 
missing predictor values with zeros, and median imputation is equiva-
lent.

Mean  imputation  could  lead  to  signiﬁcantly  biased  inferences 
(BLLP). But Equations (1) and (2) show this may not be the case. Mean 
imputation is the special case of EM (and thus maximum likelihood) 
in which the oﬀ-diagonal terms of  ̂Σ𝑡 are zero. In this case,  ̂Σmiss,obs|𝑖,𝑡
is a matrix of zeros, the imputation slopes  ̂𝛽𝑖,𝑡 is a vector of zeros, and 
̂𝑋

miss|𝑖,𝑡 is also a vector of zeros.
More generally, if the oﬀ-diagonal terms of Σ𝑡 are close to zero for 
predictor pairs that can be used for imputation, then mean imputation 
should be similar to EM and other algorithms focused on Σ𝑡.

Studies of large sets of cross-sectional predictors ﬁnd that the oﬀ-
diagonal terms of Σ𝑡 are mostly close to zero (Green et al. (2017); Chen 
and Zimmermann (2022)). We verify this result in Section 4.3. More-
over, the predictor pairs that can be used for imputation often cross 
data  categories  (Fig. 1),  implying  the  relevant  covariances  are  even 
smaller than those that have been documented. Lastly, assuming the 
oﬀ-diagonal terms are small can be thought of as a structural restric-
tion, implied by the idea that predictors need to be novel to be worthy 
of publishing (Chen and Zimmermann (2020)).

Mean imputation also has the advantages of tractability and trans-
parency. These advantages are notable in our setting due to the number 
and complexity of the missingness patterns in Fig. 1. For each missing-
ness pattern, EM imputation implies a diﬀerent matrix inversion, and 
every matrix inversion must be done in every iteration of the algorithm. 
There are other general-purpose algorithms that are more tractable, but 
it can be diﬃcult to formally derive their statistical properties under 
general assumptions (e.g. Roweis (1997)’s pPCA). The transparency of 
mean imputation is also important, given the complexity of the ML pro-
cedures that are applied to imputed data.

4.  EM vs simple mean imputation

This section provides the main results. We compare the performance 
of EM vs mean imputation for predicting long-short returns in single 
sorts (Section 4.1) or PCR portfolios (Section 4.2). We explain why this 
performance is largely similar (Section 4.3) and why EM can sometimes 
underperform (Section 4.4).

We  also  show  how  Huang  et  al.  (2022)’s  scaled  PCR  leads  to  a 
smaller  dimensionality  of  expected  returns,  though  imputations  still 
have little eﬀect on inferences about expected returns (Section 4.5).

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038156A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Table 3
Missing Data Eﬀects on Single Predictor Strategies. Strategies long the 500 
stocks with the most positive predictor values and short the 500 stocks with 
the most negative predictor values. ‘EM Imputed’ uses cross-sectional EM im-
putation (Section 3.2) and ‘Missing Dropped’ drops stock-months with missing 
predictors. For both methods, we drop predictor-months with less than 1000 
stock-predictor observations. ‘EM Improvement’ is ‘EM Imputed’ minus ‘Missing 
Dropped,’ computed at the predictor level. Interpretation: Though EM gener-
ally improves performance, the typical eﬀect is small, and it comes at the cost 
of worse performance for many predictors.

Percentile Across Predictors

10

25

50

75

90

Panel (a): Equal-Weighted

Mean Return (% Ann)

EM Imputed
Missing Dropped

EM Improvement

Sharpe Ratio (Ann)

EM Imputed
Missing Dropped

EM Improvement

Mean Return (% Ann)

EM Imputed
Missing Dropped

EM Improvement

Sharpe Ratio (Ann)

EM Imputed
Missing Dropped

EM Improvement

-1.2
-0.1

-2.0

-0.05
-0.01

-0.22

2.9
3.1

-0.3

0.16
0.26

-0.04

7.1
6.2

0.5

0.58
0.53

0.01

Panel (b): Value-Weighted

-1.9
-2.1

-1.5

-0.13
-0.12

-0.10

0.5
0.8

-0.4

0.04
0.04

-0.04

3.1
2.6

0.2

0.22
0.22

0.00

12.7
10.2

2.1

0.86
0.89

0.09

7.0
5.5

1.5

0.43
0.36

0.06

17.5
15.2

4.4

1.21
1.11

0.18

11.2
10.4

3.8

0.54
0.51

0.19

4.1.  Single-predictor strategies

We start with single-predictor strategies because they are so familiar 
to asset pricing researchers. It is unlikely that missing data handling has 
a large eﬀect here, but these results are helpful “descriptive” statistics 
before the main results.

Our single-predictor strategies go long the 500 stocks with the most 
positive predictor values and short the 500 stocks with the most neg-
ative  predictor  values  each  month.  We  do  this  for  two  missing  data 
handling  methods:  (1)  EM  imputation  and  (2)  dropping  stocks  with 
missing values.

This design allows us to examine the most common method for han-
dling missing values (dropping missing) while simultaneously removing 
“predictor dilution” eﬀects that can occur when using imputed data. In-
tuitively, the imputed data covers more stocks, and if these additional 
stocks have more neutral predictors, the extreme deciles using imputed 
data will display less predictability simply because of this additional 
coverage. Fixing the number of stocks in each leg controls for this issue.
Table 3 shows the resulting distribution of mean returns and Sharpe 
ratios. EM generally improves the distribution of performance, but the 
typical eﬀect is small, and it comes at the cost of worse performance 
for many predictors. The distribution of mean returns shifts to the right 
overall, but the left tail shifts to the left, particularly in equal-weighted 
portfolios. Using Sharpe ratios, the typical improvement is eﬀectively 
zero, while both tails shifts outward.

4.2.  159-predictor strategies using PCR

We now examine the more compelling setting for studying missing 
values: strategies that combine information from many predictors. We 
combine information using principal components regression (PCR), a 
simple method for handling potentially correlated predictors and po-
tential overﬁtting problems.

Our PCR analysis forms “real-time” long-short strategies as follows: 
For each month 𝑡 between January 1995 and December 2021, we apply 
the following steps:

1. Separate stocks into three size groups (micro, small, and big) ac-
cording to market cap by month. Micro is below the 20th percentile 
NYSE market cap and big is above the 50th percentile NYSE market 
cap, following Fama and French (2008).

2. For each size group, ﬁnd the principal components (PCs) of the 
predictors using data from the past 120 months. Then use OLS to 
predict stock returns using the ﬁrst 𝐾 PCs.

3. Form a portfolio that goes long the top decile of predicted returns 
and short the bottom decile. Hold this position for one month.

We make inferences on each size group separately because predictabil-
ity diﬀers by market cap (Fama and French (2008)) and market liquidity 
(Chen and Velikov (2022)). Within each size group, OLS and PCA are 
run pooling observations.7

Fig. 2 shows the result. It plots the mean returns (Panel (a)) and 
Sharpe ratios (Panel (b)) as a function of the number of PCs used to 
forecast returns. The various lines show equal- or value- weighting, and 
EM or simple mean imputation.

Notably, the results depend relatively little on whether EM or mean 
imputation is used. Echoing Table 3, EM leads to high mean returns in 
equal-weighted portfolios, but the improvement is minor to moderate 
and vanishes if many PCs are used. For value-weighted portfolios, EM 
and simple mean imputation lead to very similar inferences for most of 
the plot.

These results suggest that the simple mean imputation used in the 
machine learning strategies of Freyberger et al. (2020); Gu et al. (2020)
and others largely captures the potential returns and Sharpe ratios. We 
verify this robustness for boosted tree and neural network strategies in 
Section 5.

Fig. 2 also suggests an extremely high dimensionality of expected re-
turns. Mean returns and Sharpe ratios increase in the number of PCs, up 
to at least 40 PCs. This dimensionality may be overstated, however, as 
PCA does not incorporate return information, and can be thought of as 
an “unsupervised learning” model. We revisit this issue in Section 4.5, 
where we examine a “supervised” version of PCA.

4.3.  Imputation information and predictor correlations

Why do EM and simple mean imputation lead to similar inferences 

about expected returns?

The answer is that the observed predictors contain little information 
about the missing predictors. This fact is illustrated in Fig. 3, which 
shows the distribution of correlations between pairs of predictors. The 
“Observed” lines use all pairs of stocks that have predictor data in the 
given month (“available case” or “pairwise complete” correlations). The 
“EM Algo” lines use the correlations estimated from EM.

The correlations cluster near zero, consistent with Chen and Zim-
mermann (2022). As a result, mean imputation should be a reasonable 
approximation of EM (Section 3.3). Intuitively, the low correlations im-
ply that the observed value of one predictor tells you relatively little 
about  a  missing  predictor.  Similarly,  principal  components  are  rela-
tively uninformative. 10 PCs capture only 40% of total variance.8 These 
results are stable over time and do not depend on whether you use avail-

{
7 Pooling can be justiﬁed if 

𝑁 −1

∑𝑁
𝑖=1

𝑋𝑖,𝑡𝑋𝑖,𝑡
(

}

is weakly dependent, 

so that the pooled estimator converges to 𝐸
8 The relationship between PCA and imputation slopes is diﬃcult to formalize 
but we show high dimensionality is associated with small imputation slopes in 
simulations in the Internet Appendix.

𝑋𝑖,1

)
𝑡=1,2,3,...
𝑋′
𝑖,1

.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038157A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Fig. 2. Missing Data Eﬀects in 159-Predictor Strategies using PCR. Each 
month, we forecast next month’s returns by running PCR on the past 10 years 
of data by size group (micro, small, big). Strategies go long-short stocks in the 
extreme deciles of predicted returns. ‘EM Algo’ imputes missing values with 
cross-sectional EM (Section 3.2). ‘Simple Mean’ imputes with cross-sectional 
means (Section 3.3). Interpretation: EM and simple mean imputation lead to 
similar inferences about expected returns and Sharpe ratios.

able case or EM correlations.9 Consistent with the interpretation that 
the observed data is uninformative, we ﬁnd that the imputation slopes 
(Equation (2)) cluster close to zero (Internet Appendix Fig. IA.4).

Fig. 3 actually  overstates  the  potential  information  gains.  As  dis-
cussed in Section 2.4, missingness tends to occur in blocks organized 
around the data source. If a stock is missing an accounting-based predic-
tor, it is likely to be missing all accounting-based predictors. So while 
earnings-to-price and book-to-market may be correlated, this correla-
tion typically cannot be used to impute book-to-market. Instead, one 
would need to impute with a more distant predictor like coskewness 
or trading volume, which are unlikely to tell us much about book-to-
market.

Similarly, while Fig. 3 focuses on cross-sectional information, one 
might argue that there is time-series information from, say, the per-
sistence in book-to-market. However, missingness also tends to occur 
in blocks organized around time (Fig. 1). If book-to-market is missing 
now, it is extremely likely to be missing last year, so this time-series 
correlation is also not informative.

9 Though the observed and EM distributions look identical, we show in the 
Internet Appendix that they diﬀer slightly.

4.4.  Imputation noise and pitfalls

EM imputation not only adds little information, it also introduces 
noise. This noise can lead to poor forecasting performance if the data is 
not carefully handled.

Fig. 4 illustrates the noise introduced by imputation. It shows im-
putation errors from a masking exercise: we randomly mask 10% of 
observed stock-predictor values, impute with EM, and calculate the er-
ror as the diﬀerence between the masked value and the imputed value.
For stocks with below-median market cap, the RMSE is at least 0.70. 
For comparison, imputing with simple means would lead to an RMSE of 
1.00, since the data are standardized (Section 3.1). Thus, the imputation 
errors are quite large, especially among small stocks.

Indeed,  the  RMSEs  in  Fig. 4 are  surely  understated,  as  our  ran-
dom  masking  does  not  account  for  the  fact  that  accounting  predic-
tors  are  typically  missing  together.  To  mask,  we  draw  all  observed 
predictor-stock combinations with equal probability, so we will often 
mask book-to-market without masking the other accounting-based pre-
dictors. Thus, the imputation exercise in Fig. 4 can “cheat,” by imputing 
book-to-market with earnings-to-price, even though in the real world 
these variables are almost always missing together.

Imputation noise can lead to poor forecasting performance, as seen 
in Fig. 5. This ﬁgure repeats the long-short portfolio exercise from Sec-
tion 4.2, but instead of estimating predicted returns by size group, it 
runs pooled estimations, estimating a single model for all size groups 
simultaneously. Thus, it ignores the fact that predictability is stronger 
in small stocks, as well as the fact that imputation errors are larger for 
small stocks.

In value-weighted portfolios, EM leads to much worse performance 
than simple mean imputation if more than 75 PCs are used. Importantly, 
simple mean imputation leads to value-weighted returns as high as 25% 
per year, while EM imputation tops out at 20%. This problem is much 
smaller in equal-weighted portfolios, in which returns top out at around 
53% per year, regardless of the imputation method.

This underperformance is consistent with the pattern in imputation 
errors. EM underperformance happens when many PCs are used, fore-
casts are pooled, and performance is evaluated using value-weighting. 
In this setting, the large imputation errors in small stocks aﬀect the fore-
casts of large stocks, and these large-stock forcasts are the focus of the 
performance evaluation.

These  results  illustrate  a  pitfall  of  sophisticated  imputations.  The 
noise  introduced  by  sophisticated  imputation  may  outweigh  the  in-
formation gained. This risk is higher if forecasts are not aligned with 
performance evaluation, as in Fig. 5’s value-weighted results. Section 5
shows that this pitfall is not just a property of EM imputation and PCR, 
but is also seen using other methods.

This pitfall leads us to recommend simple mean imputation for cross-
sectional asset pricing research. While sophisticated imputations more 
fully incorporate information, they also introduce noise and can lead 
to underperformance. Given the complexity of most imputation and ML 
forecasting methods, our judgment is that the beneﬁts of simple mean 
imputation outweigh the costs.

4.5.  Huang et al. (2022)’s scaled PCR and the dimensionality of expected 
returns

The PCR results (Figs. 2 and 5) imply that there are dozens of PCs 
that  contribute  to  the  cross-section  of  expected  returns.  This  section 
shows that the dimensionality of expected returns is actually subtle and 
depends on multiple measurement decisions. To show this result, we 
repeat the portfolio formation exercise in Section 4.2, but use Huang et 
al. (2022)’s scaled PCA instead of standard PCA.

We apply Huang et al. (2022)’s scaled PCA as follows: For each pre-
dictor 𝑗, we estimate 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛾𝑗 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 using OLS, where 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1
is the value of predictor 𝑗 for stock 𝑖 in month 𝑡 − 1. Then we deﬁne the 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038158A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Fig. 3. Empirical Distribution of Correlations. All predictors are transformed using an extended Box-Cox algorithm to have approximately normal marginal 
distributions at the predictor level (Section 3.1). ‘Observed’ uses all available cases at the predictor-pair level (a.k.a. pairwise-complete). ‘EM Algo’ uses the cross-
sectional EM-estimated covariance matrix. Interpretation: The correlations cluster near zero, implying that imputation slopes are close to zero (Equation (2)), and 
thus simple mean imputation should be similar to EM imputation.

scaled predictor  ̇𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ≡ ̂𝛾𝑗 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 and apply standard PCA to  ̇𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 to ob-
tained scaled PCs. This rescaling provides a simple and intuitive method 
for incorporating return information into the PC estimation. Huang et 
al. (2022) show that scaled PCA outperforms standard PCA using the-
ory, simulation, and a macroeconomic forecasting exercise.

The performance of scaled-PCR portfolios is shown in Fig. 6. Com-
pared to Fig. 2, the implied dimensionality is much smaller, especially 
if it is applied to EM-imputed data. In this speciﬁcation, only 30 PCs are 
required to capture the potential equal-weighted returns, compared to 
about 70 PCs using standard PCR. Focusing on very large stocks implies 
a much smaller dimensionality. Scaled PCR requires only about 15 PCs 
to capture the potential value-weighted returns (Panel (b)), compared 
to about 30 PCs using standard PCR.

Still, mean returns depend relatively little on how missing data is 
handled. Through most of Fig. 6, the lines for EM and simple mean 
imputation largely overlap. And the potential “real-time” mean returns 
top out at around 50% per year equal-weighted or 20% value-weighted. 
Whether the underlying data is imputed with EM or just simple means 
does not matter. We ﬁnd broadly similar results using CAPM and FF6 
alphas in the Appendix (Fig. A.2).

An important exception to this invariance is in value-weighted port-
folios that use more than 125 PCs. Here, EM imputation underperforms, 

consistent with the idea that the estimation noise using EM can exceed 
the information gained (Section 4.4).

5.  Comparing six imputations using six return forecasting 
methods

Our baseline results examine just two imputation methods and two 
return forecasting methods. This section expands the analysis in both 
directions.

We  examine  four  additional  imputations,  including  ones  that  in-
corporate time-series information. We examine four additional return 
forecasting methods, including two based on neural networks.

The  main  results  continue  to  hold:  ad-hoc  imputations  and  more 
sophisticated imputations lead to largely similar inferences about ex-
pected returns.

5.1.  Four additional imputation methods

We examine the following additional imputations:

1. Cross-sectional  EM  on  AR1  Residuals: We  estimate  an  AR1 
model on Box-Cox transformed predictors using the past 60 months 
of data and apply cross-sectional EM to the residuals. To impute 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038159A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Fig. 4. Imputation  Errors  in  a  Random  Masking  Exercise. We  measure 
out-of-sample imputation errors a la cross-validation as follows: For each cross-
section, we randomly divide the stock-predictor observations into 10 groups. 
We mask one of the groups, impute with cross-sectional EM, and ﬁnd the im-
putation  errors  for  the  masked  stock-predictors.  Masking  and  imputation  is 
repeated for each of the 10 groups. We then calculate RMSE by market equity 
decile. Interpretation: Imputations errors are very large among small stocks, 
nearly as large as the errors from mean imputation, which is about 1.0 by con-
struction.

missing predictors, we add the AR1 prediction to the cross-sectional 
EM-imputed residuals. This algorithm takes on time-series informa-
tion, which BLLP ﬁnd is important in their imputation error tests.
2. Practical EM for Probabilistic PCA: We assume Box-Cox trans-
formed  predictors  follow  a  10-dimensional  factor  structure  and 
impute using Roweis (1997)’s “practical” EM algorithm for missing 
data. This practical EM algorithm simply imputes missing predic-
tors using the factor model prediction in the E-step, and as such is 
not a maximum likelihood estimate (it ignores higher order terms 
like  Equation  (4)).  However,  it  is  easily  implemented  using  the 
pcaMethods R library and provides a regularized alternative to our 
cross-sectional EM imputation.

3. Industry - Size Decile Means: Within each 3-digit SIC code, we 
sort  stocks  into  size  deciles.  We  then  replace  missing  Box-Cox 
transformed predictors with their means within each industry-size 
group. This imputation applies the intuition that industry and size 
are important determinants of a ﬁrm’s economics.

4. Last  Observed: Replace  missing  values  with  the  last  observed 
value  within  the  last  12  months.  If  there  is  no  observed  value 
within the last 12 months, we replace missing values with cross-
sectional means. This imputation takes on time-series information 
while avoiding using stale information. It is also easy to implement.

For additional details see Appendix A.1.

5.2.  Four additional return forecasting methods

We examine the following additional return forecasting methods:

1. Simple OLS: We simply regress future stock returns on predictors 
using OLS without any regularization. Simple OLS provides a help-
ful benchmark.

2. Gradient-Boosted  Regression  Trees  (GBRT): We  model  future 
stock returns using as the average of 𝐵 shallow regression trees. 
The model is ﬁtted by gradient boosting: starting from an existing 
tree, the tree is “boosted” by adding a new tree, where the new tree 
is chosen to step along the gradient of a squared-error loss function, 
and this process is continued 𝐵 times. 𝐵 and other hyperparame-
ters are tuned following Gu et al. (2020) and Li et al. (2022), and 
the algorithm is implemented with Microsoft’s open source light-
GBM library.

Fig. 5. Missing Data Eﬀects in PCR Strategies Using Pooled Forecasts. Like 
Fig. 2, we form portfolios on PCR return forecasts, but now we forecast all stocks 
together instead of forecasting micro, small, and big stocks separately. ‘EM Al-
go’ imputes missing values with the cross-sectional EM algorithm (Section 3.2). 
‘Simple Mean’ imputes with cross-sectional means (Section 3.3). Interpreta-
tion: Large imputation errors in small stocks (Fig. 4) lead to poor performance 
in value-weighted strategies, if micro and big stock returns are assumed to have 
the same structure. EM introduces estimation noise, which can lead to underper-
formance relative to mean imputation, particularly if forecasts are not carefully 
designed.

3. 3-Layer Neural Network (NN3): We model the relationship be-
tween future stock returns and predictors as the average of an en-
semble of feed-forward neural networks with three hidden layers. 
We  ﬁt  the  model  using  an  Adam  optimizer  with  batch  normal-
ization and early stopping. Tuning and other speciﬁcation details 
follow Gu et al. (2020), who ﬁnd that neural network performance 
peaks  at  three  hidden  layers.  We  implement  the  algorithm  with 
Google’s open source Tensorﬂow and Keras libraries.

4. 1-Layer  Neural  Network  (NN1): This  forecast  uses  the  same 
model as NN3, but with only one hidden layer. This model high-
lights  the  robustness  of  NN3,  which  we  ﬁnd  is  by  far  the  best-
performing forecasting method.

We apply these methods either to all stocks at the same time or by size 
group. For additional details on the neural network speciﬁcations see 
Appendix A.2.

5.3.  Out-of-sample forecasting and hyperparameter tuning

We impute missing values using one of the six methods and then 
construct  “out-of-sample”  portfolios  using  one  of  the  six  forecasting 
methods.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381510A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Fig. 6. Missing Data Eﬀects on 159-Predictor Strategies using Scaled-PCA.
Like Fig. 2, we form portfolios on PCR return forecasts, but now we construct 
PCs using Huang et al. (2022)’s scaled-PCA instead of standard PCA. Panel (b) 
zooms in on the ﬁrst 25 PCs. Interpretation: PCA signiﬁcantly overstates the di-
mensionality of expected returns. Scaled PCA requires far fewer PCs to capture 
the potential returns, especially if EM is used. The dimensionality of expected 
returns is subtle and depends on multiple measurement decisions. Mean impu-
tation still does a good job capturing the potential mean returns.

Portfolio construction uses the following procedure. For each June 𝑡

between 1995-2021, we

1. Separate the data between January 1985 and 𝑡 into a training sam-
ple and a validation sample. The validation sample is either the 
latter half of the data or the past 12 years, whichever sample is 
shorter. The remainder of the data is the training sample.

2. For each size group (micro, small, big), tune hyperparameters and 

ﬁt the return model.
(a) For all hyperparameter sets in a pre-selected set-of-sets, ﬁt re-
turns  to  lagged  imputed  data  using  the  training  sample  and 
measure the RMSE in the validation sample.

(b) Using the hyperparameter set with the smallest RMSE, ﬁt re-

turns to lagged imputed data from January 1985 to 𝑡.

3. For each month 𝑡, 𝑡 + 1, ..., 𝑡 + 11, sort stocks on the predicted return 

and form long-short decile portfolios.

This procedure follows Gu et al. (2020) closely, though we add the size 
group separation, which we ﬁnd generally improves performance (see 
Section 4.4). We also diﬀer in requiring that at least half of the January 
1985 to 𝑡 subsamples are used for training. Gu et al. do not need this 
requirement because their data goes back to 1957.

With the exception of OLS, the forecasting methods require hyperpa-
rameter tuning. We tune hyperparameters following Gu et al. (2020) as 
closely as possible (see their Appendix Table A.5). For PCR and sPCR, 
we select the number of PCs from {10, 30, 50, 70, 90}. For GBRT, the 
depth is 1 or 2, the learning rate is 0.01 or 0.10, and the number of trees 
is in {1, 250, 500, 750, 1000}. For NN1 and NN3, the L1 penalty is either 
10−5 or 10−3, the learning rate is 0.001 or 0.010, and other hyperpa-
rameters are ﬁxed: batch size is 10,000, epochs are 100, early stopping 
patience is 5, the ensemble number is 10, and we use the Adam opti-
mizer with default parameters in the Keras interface to TensorFlow.10

5.4.  Results across a broad array of methods

Table 4 shows the result across all combinations of the 6 imputa-
tions (rows) and 6 forecasting methods (columns). For each forecasting 
method, we examine estimating separately for micro, small, and big 
stocks  (“By  Size”)  or  estimating  all  stocks  together  (“Pool”).  We  ex-
amine both equal-weighted (Panel (a)) and value-weighted (Panel (b)) 
returns.

5.4.1.  Performance across imputations

The central feature of Table 4 is that returns depend little on the im-
putation method. Neural networks outperform other forecasting meth-
ods (columns) and returns are much higher in equal-weighted portfolios 
(Panel (a)). But moving across imputations (rows), there is little change 
in  mean  returns.  For  example,  applying  a  one-layer  neural  network 
(NN1) to mean imputation leads to equal-weighted returns of 65% per 
year, compared to 64% imputing with EM on AR1 residuals. Similarly, 
applying a one-layer neural network to mean imputation leads to value-
weighted returns of 40% per year, compared to 39% per year using EM 
on AR1 residuals. This strong performance for mean imputation is con-
sistent with the idea that the observed data provide little information 
about the missing data (4.3).

Mean imputation outperforms in some settings. This outperformance 
is concentrated in value-weighted portfolios using pooled return fore-
casts (Panel (b), “Pool” columns). This result is consistent with the idea 
that sophisticated imputations can lead to additional noise in small-cap 
stocks, which can lead to poor forecasting performance if the data is 
not carefully handled (Section 4.4). This pitfall leads us to recommend 
simple mean imputation for cross-sectional asset pricing research.

There is one setting in which mean imputation can lead to signiﬁcant 
underperformance. Using GBRT, mean imputation can lead to notice-
ably lower returns compared to EM, perhaps because regression trees 
deal  poorly  with  the  degenerate  distributions  that  result  from  mean 
imputation. One should not over-interpret this result, however, since 
tree-based algorithms often have their own specialized methods for han-
dling missing values, which we do not employ because of our goal of 
evaluating “general-purpose” imputations.11

Adding time-series information to the imputations has little eﬀect. 
The “Last Obs” row diﬀers little from the other ad-hoc imputations and 
similarly the “EM AR1” row diﬀers little from the other EM imputations. 
This result is consistent with the fact that missingness occurs in large 
time-series blocks (Fig. 1). It also illustrates the robustness of our main 
results to the incorporation of time-series information, which BLLP ﬁnd 
is important for imputation accuracy under simulated missingness pat-
terns. We also ﬁnd that the BLLP local backward cross-sectional imputa-
tion has little eﬀect on estimated expected returns (Appendix Fig. A.1).

10 We diﬀer from Gu et al. (2020) by using the standard L2 objective in GBRT 
rather than a Huber loss. Our implementation of GBRT uses lightGBM, which 
currently has poor documentation of the objective function, and we ﬁnd that 
objective = ‘huber’ works poorly on simulated and empirical data. Li et al. 
(2022) does not mention using Huber loss.
11 lightGBM can handle missing values by adding a second greedy stage to 
each split assessment.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381511A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Table 4
Performance Across Several Imputation and Return Forecast Methods. We impute missing values, forecast re-
turns, and then form long-short decile portfolios recursively each June between 1995-2021. ‘Mean’ imputes with 
cross-sectional means and ‘EM’ is cross-sectional EM (Section 3.2). Other imputations are deﬁned in Section 5.1. ‘PCR’ 
and ‘sPCR’ run OLS on PCs or scaled PCs (Section 4.2). Other forecasts are deﬁned in Section 5.2. Tuning is described 
in Section 5.3. Forecasts are either estimated within market equity groups (‘By Size’) or using all stocks (‘Pool’). In-
terpretation: Across many forecasting tests, mean imputation performs well compared to other imputations, including 
imputations that incorporate time-series information and ones that regularize using a factor structure (see also Fig. A.1). 
Mean imputation can even outperform EM imputation if the forecasts ignore the size dependence of predictability.

Panel (a): Equal-Weighted Mean Return (% Annualized)

Forecasting Methods

Linear

OLS

PCR

sPCR

GBRT

NN1

NN3

Non-Linear

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

Ad-hoc Imputations
Mean
Ind / Size
Last Obs

55
56
56

EM Imputations
EM
EM AR1
pPCA10

58
56
57

55
56
55

57
55
56

51
53
52

54
51
50

50
51
49

52
49
49

50
52
52

55
53
54

50
50
51

54
50
49

31
43
40

52
49
54

40
38
37

51
48
53

65
64
65

65
64
65

66
64
66

65
64
65

66
65
67

67
66
67

68
67
68

68
67
68

Panel (b): Value-Weighted Mean Return (% Annualized)

Forecasting Methods

Linear

OLS

PCR

sPCR

GBRT

NN1

NN3

Non-Linear

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

By Size

Pool

Ad-hoc Imputations
Mean
Ind / Size
Last Obs

31
31
30

EM Imputations
EM
EM AR1
pPCA10

28
34
30

27
27
26

19
21
23

32
31
38

36
35
34

21
21
20

16
18
20

27
28
34

31
33
31

23
22
21

18
18
18

17
22
23

32
27
32

25
12
7

11
13
17

40
37
38

43
39
40

37
37
38

34
33
33

37
34
35

39
36
38

40
40
45

40
40
40

Similarly,  regularizing  EM  by  using  pPCA  has  little  eﬀect.  The 
“pPCA10” rows diﬀer little from the other EM rows. We also ﬁnd that 
using industry / size means has little eﬀect.

5.4.2.  Improvements due to forecasting by size group

A second theme in Table 4 is that forecasting by size group signif-
icantly improves performance in value-weighted portfolios. Using PCR 
or sPCR, value-weighted mean returns increase from around 20% per 
year,  to around 33% per year when forecasting by size group.  Non-
trivial gains from forecasting by size group are also seen in OLS- or 
GBRT-based value-weighted portfolios.

These results are consistent with the fact that predictability diﬀers 
by market cap and liquidity (Fama and French (2008); Chen and Ve-
likov (2022)). We also ﬁnd that the dimensionality of expected returns 
diﬀers signiﬁcantly across size groups (Section 4.2). Thus, the forecast-
ing model should vary by size group, and assuming that the expected 
return structure found among big stocks is the same as those found in 
small stocks will lead to sub-optimal forecasts.

Indeed, we ﬁnd that our hyperparameter tuning, which is performed 
by size group (Section 5.2), ﬁnds a much lower dimensionality for large 
stocks. This variable dimensionality allows the PCR and sPCR value-
weighted returns in Table 4 to far exceed the value-weighted returns in 
Figs. 2 and 6, which ﬁx the dimensionality for across size groups.

5.4.3.  Performance across forecasting methods

A  third  theme  from  Table 4 is  that  ML-style  methods  can  un-
derperform relative to simple OLS. Moving across the columns of Ta-

ble 4, outperformance relative to OLS is only seen using neural network 
forecasts.

These results may be surprising, given that many papers tout the 
outperformance of machine learning methods (Gu et al. (2020); Frey-
berger et al. (2020); Simon et al. (2022)). However, they are consistent 
with these papers once one examines the details. Gu et al. (2020) ﬁnd 
that applying PCR and GBRT to 94 predictors leads to returns that are 
not much larger than those obtained from applying linear regression to 
just three predictors. Freyberger et al. (2020) and Simon et al. (2022)
both examine continuous non-linear models of returns, which are dif-
fered substantially from linear PCR models and the discontinuous GBRT 
models.

Moreover, the underperformance of PC-based methods is intuitive 
given the fact that mean returns are largely monotonic in the number 
of PCs used (Figs. 2, 5, and 6). OLS always uses all PCs in the data. In 
contrast, PC-based methods need to tune the number of PCs, which can 
lead to too few PCs being used.

The outperformance of neural network forecasts is large. Mean re-
turns  increase  from  around  50  percent  per  year  to  65  percent  using 
equal-weighting, and from around 30 percent per year to 40 percent 
using value-weighting. In fact, we ﬁnd that other neural network ar-
chitectures work quite well also, and that performance is fairly robust 
to ensembling and other tuning choices if early stopping is set follow-
ing Gu et al. (2020). These results support the strong performance of 
neural networks found in other papers (Gu et al. (2020); Simon et al. 
(2022)) and show that this strong performance is robust to imputation 
methods.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381512A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

6.  Conclusion

In the age of machine learning, the standard practice of dropping 
stock-months with missing predictors is often untenable. Previous ML 
studies apply ad-hoc imputations or data adjustments, with little discus-
sion of their motivation or study of alternatives. The goal of our paper 
is to provide guidance on this problem.

We recommend using simple mean imputation for ML studies. This 
recommendation may seem surprising, since mean imputation essen-
tially  ignores  all  information  about  the  missing  data.  However,  the 
missingness and the covariance structures in cross-sectional predictor 
data imply that there is little information about missing values. As a re-
sult, one might as well ignore all information. Consistent with this idea, 
we ﬁnd mean imputation leads to similar portfolio returns and Sharpe 
ratios across a broad array of imputation and return forecasting meth-
ods.

Our PC analyses relate to the ongoing debate about the factor struc-
ture of the cross-section of returns. Our ﬁndings are consistent with a 
very high dimensionality for all stocks. In contrast, there is the poten-
tial for a strong factor structure among very large stocks. We also ﬁnd 
that the results depend on the methodology used to compute PCs, with 
supervised methods like Huang et al. (2022) implying far fewer PCs are 
required to fully capture the cross-section.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Andrew Y. Chen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft,  Visualization,  Validation,  Supervision,  Software,  Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Jack McCoy: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Software, Investiga-
tion, Formal analysis.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

The  codes  and  data  of  the  article  can  be  found  at  https://data .

mendeley .com /datasets /jcw4xkp886 /1.

Appendix A

A.1.  Additional imputation method details

A.1.1.  Cross-sectional EM with time-series information

Our main EM imputation handles each cross-section independently. 

This imputation incorporates time-series information.

We impute in three steps for each “forecasting month” 𝜏:

1. Using OLS estimate  ̂𝜙𝑗 for the AR1 model

𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝜙𝑗 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−ℎ + 𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
where 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is Box-Cox transformed predictor (as in Section 3.3), 
ℎ ∈ {1, 3, 12} is  the  periodicity  of  the  underlying  data  updates 
(based on Chen and Zimmermann (2022)’s documentation), 𝜙𝑗 is 
the persistence of predictor 𝑗, and 𝜖𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is a zero mean shock. In this 
step, we use observed data from month 𝜏 − 59 to 𝜏.

(5)

2. Using EM, estimate  ̂Ω𝜏 for

̂𝜀𝑖,𝜏 ≡

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

̂𝜀𝑖,1,𝜏
̂𝜀𝑖,2,𝜏
...
̂𝜀𝑖,𝐽 ,𝜏

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

∼ MVN

)

(
0, Ω𝜏

,

(6)

where ̂𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 ≡ 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 − ̂𝜙𝑗 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−ℎ. Assuming standard regularity con-
ditions, this two-step estimation is consistent (Wooldridge (1994)).
3. For missing 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 , impute by combining the prediction of the AR1 
model with the residual estimate—that is, use  ̂𝜙𝑗𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−ℎ + ̂𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 (if 
𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−ℎ is observed) or ̂𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝜏 (if 𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−ℎ is not observed).

A.1.2.  Practical EM for probabilistic PCA

We did not restrict the covariance matrix in our main EM imputa-
tion. This imputation imposes a factor structure and estimates using a 
variant of EM (Roweis (1997), see also Tipping and Bishop (1999)).

We estimate the following model:

𝑋𝑖,𝑡 = Λ𝑡𝐹𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡

(7)

𝐹𝑖,𝑡 ∼ MVN (0, 𝐼)

(

)

0, 𝜎2𝐼

𝜀𝑖,𝑡 ∼ MVN
where 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 is a 𝐽 -dimensional vector of predictors for stock 𝑖 in month 𝑡, 
𝐹𝑖,𝑡 is a 𝐾-dimensional vector of factor realizations for stock 𝑖 in month 
𝑡, Λ𝑡 is a 𝐽 × 𝐾 matrix that maps factors into predictors, and 𝜎2 is a 
scalar.

(8)

The  estimation  alternates  between  two  steps  for  each  forecasting 

month 𝑡:

1. E-step: Given a guess for Λ𝑡 and 𝐹𝑖,𝑡, replace the missing compo-
nents of 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 with Λ𝑡𝐹𝑖,𝑡. Find the expectations of 𝐹𝑖,𝑡 and 𝐹𝑖,𝑡𝐹 ′
𝑖,𝑡
conditional on Λ𝑡, 𝜎, and 𝑋𝑖,𝑡.

2. M-step:  Plug  the  expectations  of  𝐹𝑖,𝑡 and  𝐹𝑖,𝑡𝐹 ′
𝑖,𝑡

into  the  log-
likelihood assuming that all 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 and 𝐹𝑖,𝑡 are observed, and max-
imize to obtain new Λ𝑡 and 𝐹𝑖,𝑡.

The algorithm iterates these two steps until the objective in the M-step 
no longer improves.

As in the case of our baseline model (Equation (2)), Equations (7)-(8)
imply that the ignorable quasi-likelihood can be optimized using EM 
(Tipping and Bishop (1999)) (see Internet Appendix A.2). This algo-
rithm does not follow the full EM method, as it does not include higher 
moments  of  missing  𝑋𝑖,𝑡 in  the  E-step.  However,  the  computer  sci-
ence literature ﬁnds that less formal variants of EM work well on this 
model using simulated data (Roweis (1997); Ilin and Raiko (2010)). Our 
implementation uses the R library pcaMethods, which follows Roweis 
(1997)’s algorithm.

A.1.3.  Bryzgalova et al. (2023)’s factor model with added time-series 
information

BLLP’s  local  backward  cross-sectional  model  is  similar  to  the  im-
putations  we  study  in  that  it  can  be  used  to  form  forecasts  without 
look-ahead bias. They emphasize the importance of time-series infor-
mation, so we examine how their method for adding time-series infor-
mation aﬀects our scaled-PCA results here. We ﬁnd similar results in 
our other forecasting methods but show just the scaled-PCA results for 
brevity.

Our implementation of BLLP’s local backward cross-sectional impu-

tation proceeds as follows. For each month of predictor data:

1. Compute  the  available  case  cross-sectional  covariance  matrix  of 
predictors. If there are no overlapping observations for a pair of 
predictors, we use zero as the covariance matrix entry.

2. Form a matrix using the 𝐾 eigenvectors with the largest eigenval-
ues. The rows of this matrix are the “loadings” of each predictor.
3. Regress predictor-stock values on the predictor loadings. The slopes 
are called “characteristic factors” and there should be 𝐾 for each 
stock.

4. Regress  predictors  on  characteristic  factors  and  lagged  predic-
tors that are observed within the last 24 months. We only used 
lagged predictors that have signal updates according to the Chen-

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381513A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

Fig. A.1. BLLP’s Imputation and Scaled-PCA Returns. Each month, we fore-
cast returns using scaled principal components regression and form long-short 
deciles  portfolios.  ‘BLLP  loc  B-XS’  imputes  using  the  local  backward  cross-
sectional model in BLLP, where we use six factors to be consistent with Section 
4.1  of  BLLP,  and  lags  used  in  the  second  stage  regression  are  restricted  to 
relevant predictor update months based on documentation for the Chen and 
Zimmermann (2022) dataset. Interpretation: Taking on time-series informa-
tion following BLLP results in similar estimates as simple mean imputation.

Zimmermann documentation (only use lags 12 and 24 for annual 
predictors).

5. Use the slopes from step 4 to impute missing values.

We apply scaled-PCA (by size) and form portfolios. The results are in 
Fig. A.1.

A.2.  Additional forecasting method details

GBRT details are fully described in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.
Neural network details follow Gu et al. (2020). NN1 has a single hid-
den layer of 32 neurons and NN3 has hidden layers with 32, 16, and 
8 neurons. All layers are connected with the ReLU activiation function. 
The objective is L2 with a L1 penalty to weight parameters and is min-
imized using the Adam extension of Stochastic Gradient Descent under 
early stopping with a patience parameter of 5 in batches of 10,000, for 
100 epochs. The L1 penalty and learning rate are tuned as described 
in the main text. Last, we form ﬁnal return forecasts as the ensemble 
average of 10 neural network forecasts.

Appendix B.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103815.

Fig. A.2. Missing Data Eﬀects on Alphas from Scaled PCA. Each month, we 
forecast returns using scaled principal components regression and form long-
short deciles portfolios, as in Fig. 6. We then measure CAPM alphas (Panel 
(a)) or Fama-French 5 factor + momentum alphas (Panel(b)). Interpretation:
Simple mean imputation also performs well when examining alphas.

References

Asquith, P., Pathak, P.A., Ritter, J.R., 2005. Short interest, institutional ownership, and 

stock returns. J. Financ. Econ. 78, 243–276.

Azen, S.P., van Guilder, M., Hill, M.A., 1989. Estimation of parameters and missing values 
under a regression model with non-normally distributed and non-randomly incom-
plete data. Stat. Med. 8, 217–228.

Azevedo, V., Kaiser, S., Müller, S., 2022. Stock market anomalies and machine learning 

across the globe. Available at SSRN 4071852.

Bali, T.G., Engle, R.F., Murray, S., 2016. Empirical Asset Pricing: The Cross Section of 

Banz, R.W., 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks. 

Stock Returns. John Wiley & Sons.

J. Financ. Econ. 9, 3–18.

Beckmeyer,  H.,  Wiedemann,  T.,  2023.  Recovering  missing  ﬁrm  characteristics  with 

attention-based machine learning. Available at SSRN 4003455.

Bessembinder, H., Burt, A., Hrdlicka, C.M., 2021. Time series variation in the factor zoo. 
In: Aaron Paul and Hrdlicka, Christopher M., Time Series Variation in the Factor Zoo. 
December 22, 2021.

Box, G.E., Cox, D.R., 1964. An analysis of transformations. J. R. Stat. Soc., Ser. B, 

Bryzgalova, S., Lerner, S., Lettau, M., Pelger, M., 2023. Missing ﬁnancial data. Available 

Chen, A.Y., Velikov, M., 2022. Zeroing in on the expected returns of anomalies. J. Financ. 

Methodol. 26, 211–243.

at SSRN 4106794.

Quant. Anal., 1–83.

Chen, A.Y., Zimmermann, T., 2020. Publication bias and the cross-section of stock returns. 

Rev. Asset Pricing Stud. 10, 249–289.

Chen, A.Y., Zimmermann, T., 2022. Open source cross sectional asset pricing. Crit. Fi-

nance Rev.

Chen, L., Pelger, M., Zhu, J., 2023. Deep learning in asset pricing. Manag. Sci.
Da, R., Nagel, S., Xiu, D., 2022. The Statistical Limit of Arbitrage. Technical Report. Tech-

nical Report, Chicago Booth.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381514A.Y. Chen and J. McCoy

DeMiguel, V., Martin-Utrera, A., Nogales, F.J., Uppal, R., 2020. A transaction-cost per-
spective on the multitude of ﬁrm characteristics. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 2180–2222.
Dempster, A.P., Laird, N.M., Rubin, D.B., 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete 

data via the em algorithm. J. R. Stat. Soc., Ser. B, Methodol. 39, 1–22.

Efron, B., Hastie, T., 2016. Computer Age Statistical Inference, vol. 5. Cambridge Univer-

Ilin, A., Raiko, T., 2010. Practical approaches to principal component analysis in the 

presence of missing values. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11, 1957–2000.

Jensen, T.I., Kelly, B.T., Malamud, S., Pedersen, L.H., 2022. Machine learning and the 

implementable eﬃcient frontier. Available at SSRN 4187217.

Jensen, T.I., Kelly, B.T., Pedersen, L.H., 2023. Is there a replication crisis in ﬁnance? J. 

Finance 78 (5), 2465–2518.

sity Press.

1–22.

SSRN.

Fama, E., French, K., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. J. Finance, 

427–465.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2008. Dissecting anomalies. J. Finance 63, 1653–1678.
Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A ﬁve-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116, 

Kelly, B., Malamud, S., Pedersen, L.H., 2023. Principal portfolios. J. Finance.
King, G., Honaker, J., Joseph, A., Scheve, K., 2001. Analyzing incomplete political science 
data: an alternative algorithm for multiple imputation. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 95, 49–69.
Kozak, S., Nagel, S., Santosh, S., 2020. Shrinking the cross-section. J. Financ. Econ. 135, 

271–292.

Freyberger, J., Neuhierl, A., Weber, M., 2020. Dissecting characteristics nonparametri-

Lettau, M., Pelger, M., 2020. Factors that ﬁt the time series and cross-section of stock 

cally. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 2326–2377.

Freyberger, J., Höppner, B., Neuhierl, A., Weber, M., 2023. Missing data in asset pricing 

panels. University of Chicago Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper.

Fulop, A., Li, J., Wang, M., 2022. Option mispricing and alpha portfolios. Available at 

Graham, J.W., Schafer, J.L., 1999. On the performance of multiple imputation for mul-
tivariate data with small sample size. In: Statistical Strategies for Small Sample 
Research, vol. 50, pp. 1–27.

Green, J., Hand, J.R., Zhang, X.F., 2013. The supraview of return predictive signals. Rev. 

Acc. Stud. 18, 692–730.

returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 2274–2325.

Lewellen, J., 2015. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Crit. Finance Rev. 4, 1–44.
Li, B., Rossi, A., Yan, S., Zheng, L., 2022. Real-time machine learning in the cross-section 

of stock returns. Working Paper.

Little, R.J., 1988. Robust estimation of the mean and covariance matrix from data with 

missing values. J. R. Stat. Soc., Ser. C, Appl. Stat. 37, 23–38.

Little, R.J., 2021. Missing data assumptions. Annu. Rev. Stat. Appl. 8, 89–107.
Little, R.J., Rubin, D.B., 2019. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data, vol. 793. Wiley.
Lopez-Lira, A., Roussanov, N.L., 2020. Do common factors really explain the cross-section 

of stock returns? Available at SSRN 3628120.

Green, J., Hand, J., Zhang, F., 2014. The remarkable multidimensionality in the cross-

McLean, R.D., Pontiﬀ, J., 2016. Does academic research destroy stock return predictabil-

section of expected us stock returns. Available at SSRN 2262374.

Green, J., Hand, J.R., Zhang, X.F., 2017. The characteristics that provide independent 
information about average us monthly stock returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. hhx019.
Gu, S., Kelly, B., Xiu, D., 2020. Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. Rev. Financ. 

ity? J. Finance 71, 5–32.

Roweis, S., 1997. Em algorithms for PCA and SPCA. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 10.
Rubin, D.B., 1976. Inference and missing data. Biometrika 63, 581–592.
Simon, F., Weibels, S., Zimmermann, T., 2022. Deep parametric portfolio policies. Avail-

Haugen, R.A., Baker, N.L., 1996. Commonality in the determinants of expected stock 

Wooldridge,  J.M.,  1994.  Estimation  and  inference  for  dependent  processes.  Handb. 

Stud. 33, 2223–2273.

Han, Y., He, A., Rapach, D., Zhou, G., 2021. Expected stock returns and ﬁrm characteris-

tics: E-lasso, assessment, and implications. Assess. Implic., September 2021.

Han, Y., He, A., Rapach, D., Zhou, G., 2022. Expected stock returns and ﬁrm characteris-

tics: E-enet, assessment, and implications. Working Paper.

returns. J. Financ. Econ. 41, 401–439.

Hawkins, D., Weisberg, S., 2017. Combining the Box-Cox power and generalised log trans-
formations to accommodate nonpositive responses in linear and mixed-eﬀects linear 
models. S. Afr. Stat. J. 51, 317–328.

Huang, D., Jiang, F., Li, K., Tong, G., Zhou, G., 2022. Scaled pca: a new approach to 

dimension reduction. Manag. Sci. 68, 1678–1695.

able at SSRN 4150292.

Tipping, M.E., Bishop, C.M., 1999. Probabilistic principal component analysis. J. R. Stat. 

Soc., Ser. B, Stat. Methodol. 61, 611–622.

Titman, S., Wei, K.J., Xie, F., 2004. Capital investments and stock returns. J. Financ. 

Quant. Anal. 39, 677–700.

Econom. 4, 2639–2738.

Xiong, R., Pelger, M., 2023. Large dimensional latent factor modeling with missing obser-

vations and applications to causal inference. J. Econom.

Zhang, C., Aaraba, A., 2022. Dynamic optimal portfolio with trading cost constraints via 

deep reinforcement learning. Available at SSRN.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381515