Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Journal of Financial Economics 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec 

Price ceilings, market structure, and payout policies

✩ 

Xiongshi Li a, Mao Ye b,*, Miles Zheng c 
a Guangxi University of Finance and Economics, China 
b Cornell University and NBER, 349 Sage Hall, 106 E Ave, Ithaca 14853, NY, United States 
c Texas Christian University, United States   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

To prevent issuers from inflating their share prices, SEC Rule 10b-18 sets price ceilings on share repurchases 
through  open markets. We find that market-structure reforms  in the 1990s and 2000s dramatically increased 
share repurchases because they relaxed constraints on issuers competing with other buyers under price ceilings. 
The  Tick  Size  Pilot  Program,  a  controlled  experiment  that  partially  reversed  previous  reforms,  significantly 
reduced share repurchases. We estimate that price ceilings and reduced market-structure frictions explain 18% of 
the secular increase in share repurchases. Meanwhile, these two frictions still exist, which explains why share 
repurchases have not crowded out dividends entirely.   

Original content: Replication Package for Price 
Ceilings, Market Structure, and Payout Policies 
(Original data)  

JEL classification: 
G14 
G32 
G35 

Keywords: 
Market Structure 
Share Repurchase 
Queue Competition 
Dark Pool 
Regulation 

1. Introduction 

Miller  and  Modigliani  (1961)  demonstrate  that,  in  a  frictionless 
market, it does not matter whether firms pay out through dividends or 
share repurchases. If dividends are taxed at a higher rate than capital 
gains, shareholders should prefer share repurchases to dividends. Sur-
prisingly,  dividends  dominated  share  repurchases  until  the  1990s 
despite  the  tax  advantage  that  repurchases  provided  (Fig.  1).  More 
surprisingly,  even  though  this  tax  advantage  of  repurchases  has 

gradually  diminished  over  recent  decades,  Farre-Mensa  et  al.  (2014) 
show  a  secular  increase  in  share  repurchases  over  dividends.  This 
secular increase in share repurchases presents a significant challenge to 
the  payout  literature,  as  explaining  this  puzzle  must  address  three 
questions. First,  why does the economic driver of this trend begin by 
favoring dividends? Second, why does this economic driver continue to 
move in the same direction, favoring share repurchases to an increas-
ingly  greater  extent?  Third,  why  does  this  economic  driver  lead  to 
gradual change rather than inflicting a one-time shock on the market? 

✩

Philipp  Schnabl  was  the  editor  for  this  article.  We  gratefully  acknowledge  helpful  comments  from  the  editor  and  an  anonymous  referee.  We  thank  Heitor 
Almeida, Jim Angel, Dion Bongaerts, Eric Budish, John Campbell, Raj Chetty, Tarun Chordia, Gregory Eaton, Amy Edwards, Harry Feng, Slava Fos, John Friedman, 
Robin  Greenwood,  Gustavo  Grullon,  Sam  Hanson,  Joel  Hasbrouck,  Jiekun  Huang,  Steven  Ho,  Mathias  Kronlund,  Pete  Kyle,  Mark  Leary,  Yoon  Kang  Lee,  Mark 
Loewenstein, Neil Pearson, George Pennacchi, Joshua Pollet, Jeffrey Pontiff, Jim Poterba, Amir Rubin, Gideon Saar, Martin Schmalz, Antoinette Schoar, Paul Schultz, 
Beibei Shen, Ji Shen, Andriy Shkilko, Jeff Smith, Elvira Sojli, Chester Spatt, Adi Sunderam, Alexei Tchistyi, Anjan Thakor, Kumar Venkataraman, Theo Vermaelen, 
Scott Weisbenner, Russell Wermers, Ingrid Werner, Toni Whited, Yufeng Wu, Yuhai Xuan, Liu Yang, Chen Yao, Bart Yueshen, and participants at Arrowstreet Capital, 
Boston College, Case Western Reserve University, Emory University, the George Washington University, Harvard Business School, INSEAD, the University of British 
Columbia,  the  University  of  Hong  Kong,  the  University  of  Illinois,  the  University  of  Iowa,  the  University  of  Maryland,  the  University  of  Michigan,  the  Cornell 
University Market Microstructure Ph.D. Seminar, Microstructure Exchange, Guanghua International Symposium, CICF, EFA, NFA, the WRDS Advanced Research 
Scholar Program, the SAFE Market Microstructure Meeting, the Sydney Market Microstructure Meeting, and the ITAM Finance Conference for helpful suggestions. Ye 
acknowledges support from National Science Foundation grant 1838183 and the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE). We remain 
responsible for all errors and omissions. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: my87@cornell.edu (M. Ye).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103818 
Received 24 February 2022; Received in revised form 26 February 2024; Accepted 27 February 2024   

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)103818Availableonline1April20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

at the price ceilings. The first reform wave increased issuers’ execution 
priority  at  the  bid  price.  The  Manning  Rule  of  1994  repealed  dealer 
priority  and  the  Order  Handling  Rules  of  1997  further  strengthened 
customers’  execution  priority  (Hasbrouck,  2007).  The  second  wave 
reduced the intensity of competition at the price ceiling: the minimum 
price variation (the tick size) dropped from $1/8 to $1/16 in 1997 and 
then to 1 cent in 2001. A more continuous price grid relaxes the price 
ceiling and reduces competition to buy at the same price. The third wave 
reduced  monitoring  and  compliance  costs  at  the  price  ceiling.  For 
example, the NYSE installed autoquotes in 2003, allowing issuers to use 
computer algorithms to buy back shares. 

Nowadays, an issuer or its broker can buy back shares using desig-
nated  repurchase  algorithms  or  adding  Rule  10b-18  compliance  in-
structions to a general-purpose algorithm. In addition to sending orders 
to traditional stock exchanges, these algorithms can also send orders to 
dark pools, which are market-structure innovations that have emerged 
in recent decades. Although dark pools are not designed exclusively for 
share  repurchases,  their  execution  mechanism,  which  matches  orders 
passively using reference prices set by stock exchanges, dovetails with 
the  principle  underlying  Rule  10b-18.  For  example,  if  a  dark  pool 
matches orders using the bid price, it automatically complies with Rule 
10b-18. 

To  establish  the  causal  impact  of  market  structure  on  share 
repurchases, we begin our empirical analysis using a controlled exper-
iment—the  2016  Tick  Size  Pilot  Program—followed  by  event  studies 
that focus on market-structure reforms implemented in the 1990s and 
2000s. The Tick Size Pilot serves as our primary test because of its two 
unique  features.  First,  it  included  randomly  selected  treatment  and 
control stocks. The SEC increased the tick size for 1,200 treatment stocks 
from 1 cent to 5 cents, whereas the tick size for the 1,199 control stocks 
remained at 1 cent. Second, the Tick Size Pilot was designed to partially 
undo the market-structure reforms. This shock enables us to show that 
the increase in share repurchases is not necessarily secular: reversing the 
previously  established  market-structure  reforms  significantly  reduced 
share repurchases. We find that the Tick Size Pilot reduced the treatment 
firms’ share repurchases by 21% relative to control firms. 

To provide further evidence, we partition treatment firms into two 
subgroups.  The  tick-constrained  group  includes  firms  whose  pre-Pilot 
quoted  spreads  were  below  5  cents,  for  which  the  Tick  Size  Pilot 
imposed a binding constraint on price competition. We find that share 
repurchases  in  tick-constrained  treatment  firms  dropped  by  45%, 
whereas share repurchases in tick-unconstrained treatment firms barely 
changed. As the bid–ask spreads of the tick-constrained treatment firms 
increased  by  3  cents  while  the  bid–ask  spreads  of  tick-unconstrained 
treatment firms barely changed, an increase in the bid–ask spread may 
have contributed to the reduction in share repurchases. A small increase 
in the bid–ask spread alone is unlikely, however, to explain a dramatic 
reduction  in  share  repurchases.4  The  main  contributor  to  such  a 
reduction comes from the price ceiling under Rule 10b-18, which affects 
share repurchases through two channels: the queuing channel and the 
dark-pool channel. 

The idea of the queuing channel follows Yao and Ye (2018). An in-
crease in the tick size imposed a binding constraint on price competition. 
Consequently,  we  find  that  market  depth  has  increased  by  214%,  as 
more traders are willing to quote the same price at the wider tick sizes. 
As order executions at the same price follow time priority in stock ex-
changes, queuing—or early arrival to the market to beat rivals at the 
(Yao  and  Ye,  2018)—became  more 
important. 
same  price 

4  Using a proprietary NYSE dataset, Li et al. (2023) show that the limit price 
for repurchasing orders is significantly higher than the ask price, meaning that 
issuers are willing to buy immediately at ask prices if they can. Therefore, the 
friction that prevents them from buying back shares is the price ceiling imposed 
by  Rule  10b-18,  which  prevents  their  aggressive  orders  from  being  executed 
immediately or even results in non-execution. 

Fig. 1. The secular increase in share repurchases over dividends. In this figure, 
we plot aggregate repurchases made and dividends paid by publicly listed U.S. 
companies from 1971 through 2021. The units are reported in billions of real 
2021  U.S.  purchasing  power  dollars.  Repurchases  are  calculated  as  total  ex-
penditures for the purchase of common and preferred stocks (PRSTKC) minus 
any reduction in the value of the net number of preferred stocks outstanding 
(PSTKRV).  Dividends  are  calculated  as  the  total  dollar  amounts  of  dividends 
declared on a company’s common/ordinary capital. 

In this paper, we show that two frictions on share repurchases—price 
ceilings and market structure—provide an explanation for the secular 
increase in share repurchases over dividends. The current price ceiling 
on share repurchases stems from Rule 10b-18, which asks firms to buy 
their shares at prices that do not exceed the highest independent bids or 
the most recent transaction prices.1 As issuers cannot buy back shares in 
the  open  markets  by  outbidding  other  traders,  price  competition  be-
comes  secondary  to  share  repurchases.  The  market  structure  then 
emerges as the first-order effect because competition at the same price 
depends  crucially  on  market  structure.  Of  particular  importance  is 
whether the market structure allows issuers effectively to buy at the bid 
price.2  The  friction  issuers  buying  at  the  bid  was  surprisingly  severe 
before 1994, when dealers enjoyed execution priority over issuers at the 
bid  price.  Dealers  were  able  to  step  ahead  of  issuers  at  the  bid  price 
because the dealers were intermediaries who enjoyed the privilege of 
buying at the bid price and selling at the ask price, whereas other traders 
were entitled only to buy at the ask price and sell at the bid price. Such 
dealer  priority  imposes  significant  constraints  on  issuers,  preventing 
them from buying at the price ceiling while also explaining why divi-
dends were favored over repurchases before the 1990s. 

One main purpose of market-structure reforms in the U.S. over the 
past  several  decades  has  been  to  provide  “an  opportunity  to  obtain 
execution  without  dealer  intervention.”3  These  reforms  have  gradually, 
over several waves, relieved frictions that constrain issuers from buying 

1  The purpose of a price ceiling is to prevent firms from inflating their share 
prices. Although Rule 10b-18 is a safe-harbor provision, the SEC (2002) states 
that “issuers generally are reluctant to undertake any repurchases without the cer-
tainty that their repurchases come within the Rule’s safe harbor.”  

2  Although  a  price  ceiling  can  be  either  the  independent  bid  or  the  most 
recent  transaction  prices,  the  independent  bid  price  plays  the  dominant  role 
under  normal  market  conditions,  to  the  extent  that  the  SEC  even  tried  to 
eliminate the last independent transaction price while keeping only the inde-
pendent bid price as the price ceiling (SEC, 2002). This idea was pushed back 
based  on  extreme  market  stress,  such  as  the  1987  Market  Break  and  market 
reopening  after  September  11,  2001,  when  the  bid  price  for  other  market 
participants disappeared (Merrill Lynch Comment Letter on Proposed Amend-
ments  to  Rule  10b-18,  available  at  https://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/s 
75002/cjplohn1.htm).  

3  Exchange Act Section 11A(a)(1), 15 U.S.C. 78k-1(a)(1). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038182X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Unfortunately, issuers are unlikely to achieve front-of-the-queue posi-
tions because they are not as fast as high-frequency traders (HFTs). Even 
if issuers could use the same technology as HFTs, the extra step needed 
to confirm Rule 10b-18 compliance would still make issuers slower than 
HFTs.  Consistent  with  the  queuing  channel,  we  find  that,  among  the 
tick-constrained treatment firms, firms that experienced above-median 
increases  in  bid  depth  reduced  share  repurchases  24%  more  than 
below-median firms did. 

Firms can bypass queues in stock exchanges using dark pools, which 
usually do not follow the time-priority rule. The Tick Size Pilot imposed 
an additional Trade-at Rule on 400 firms in test group 3 to prevent the 
execution of dark orders that do not improve National Best Bid and Offer 
(NBBO) by more than 2.5 cents. Yet Rule 10b-18 regards buying above 
the  best  bid  as  an  indicator  of  price  manipulation.  The  contradiction 
between  the  Trade-at  Rule  and  Rule  10b-18  unintentionally  banned 
repurchases through dark pools. We find that tick-constrained firms in 
test group 3 reduced repurchases by 55%, while those in test groups 1 
and 2 reduced repurchases by only 36%. 

After  analyzing  the  Tick  Size  Pilot,  we  travel  back  in  history  and 
conduct event studies on major market-structure reforms identified in 
the literature (Hasbrouck, 2007). These events involved quasi-treatment 
and quasi-control groups because they affected some stocks severely but 
barely  affected  others.  Decades  ago,  Nasdaq  dealers  enjoyed  much 
higher execution priority than HFTs do today. Before 1994, a Nasdaq 
dealer  could  step  ahead  of  issuers  at  the  bid  price  even  if  the  dealer 
arrived later. The Manning Rule prohibits dealers from executing ahead 
of their customers at the same price. Using matched non-Nasdaq stocks 
as  the  control  group,  we  find  that  share  repurchases  in  Nasdaq  firms 
increased  60%  relative  to  control  firms  after  the  1994  Manning  Rule 
granted execution priority to customers’  limit orders. The 1997 Order 
Handling  Rules,  which  extended  issuers’  execution  priority  over  all 
dealers in the market, led to another 38% increase in share repurchases 
by Nasdaq firms relative to control firms. 

As tick size reductions reduce the number of competitors with which 
issuers must contend at the same price, we find that share repurchases 
increased when the SEC reduced the tick size. We assign stocks exhib-
iting above-median decreases in quoted spreads to treatment firms and 
matched  remaining  stocks  to  the  control  group  (Fang  et  al.,  2014). 
Treatment firms increased share repurchases by 41% relative to control 
firms following the 1997 tick-size reduction from $1/8 to $1/16. The 
relative increase in share repurchases for treatment firms was 32% in 
2001 when decimalization further reduced the tick size from $1/16 to 1 
cent. 

We examine the impact of automated trading in share repurchases 
using  the  installation  of  autoquotes  by  the  NYSE  in  2003  as  a  quasi- 
natural experiment, where we use NYSE firms as treatment firms and 
matched non-NYSE stocks as control firms. The transition from manual 
to automated execution reduced monitoring and compliance costs. Is-
suers  can  now  use  computer  algorithms  to  compete  with  exchange 
specialists even when issuers are not physically present on an exchange 
floor.  Computer  algorithms  also  make  compliance  with  Rule  10b-18 
easy  and  automated.  In  addition,  specialists  lost  their  last-mover 
advantage  because  order  executions  no  longer  needed  their  approval 
(MacKenzie,  2017).  We  find  that  NYSE  firms  increased  their  share 
repurchases by 25% relative to control firms following the installation of 
autoquotes. 

We find that the Tick Size Pilot and historical events do not affect 
tender offers, which are exempted from Rule 10b-18 because they are 
conducted  outside  the  open  market.  This  result  again  indicates  that 
frictions  in  secondary  markets—price  ceilings  and  market  structur-
e—are  the  drivers  of  changes  in  share  repurchases.  Our  back-of-the- 
envelope  calculations  show  that  these  historical  market-structure  re-
forms contribute ~18% of the secular increase in share repurchases from 
1995 through 2021. 

Our paper contributes to the literature on taxes on payouts. Poterba 
and  Summers  (1985)  and  Chetty  and  Saez  (2010)  assume  exogenous 

costs for repurchases to explain why firms pay dividends despite the tax 
advantage that repurchases provide. Chetty and Saez (2010) point out 
that  “understanding  the  microeconomic  foundations  of  the  cost  of  share 
repurchases is an issue of great importance for future work, independent of its 
potential  implications  for  taxation.”  We  show  that  price-ceiling  and 
market-structure  frictions  provide  a  micro-foundation  for  such  costs. 
Chetty and Saez (2005) show that the 2003 dividend tax cut increased 
dividend payouts. A notable puzzle that arises in Chetty and Saez (2005, 
Fig. IX), however, is that share repurchases increased to a greater extent 
than  dividends  following  the  dividend  tax  cut.  The  transition  from 
manual to automated executions of share repurchases during the same 
period provides one interpretation of this puzzle. 

Our  paper  contributes  to  the  literature  on  the  transaction  costs  of 
payouts, which aims to explain why firms pay dividends despite their tax 
disadvantage when compared with capital gains (Allen and Michaely, 
2003). One challenge of the literature is to find transaction costs that are 
high enough to overcome the tax disadvantage of dividend payouts, as 
the transaction costs investors pay to sell their shares are much lower 
than  the  tax  difference  between  dividends  and  capital  gains.  We 
contribute  to  the  literature  by  examining  the  “transaction  costs”  that 
issuers (buyers) face instead of traditional transaction costs to investors 
(sellers).  Our  paper  indicates that price  ceilings and  market structure 
create  substantial  friction  when  issuers  buy  back  their  shares.  In  this 
sense, we contribute to the market-microstructure literature by showing 
that  the  impacts  of  microstructure  on  corporate  policies  go  beyond 
traditional  channels  such  as  liquidity  and  price  discovery.  Combined 
with other frictions, such as price ceilings, the market microstructure 
can impose first-order frictions as severe as implicit bans. 

Our paper provides one explanation of the secular increase in share 
repurchases  over  recent  decades.  One  major  goal  of  market-structure 
reforms  in  recent  decades  is  to  provide  executions  without  dealer 
intervention.  This  direction  consistently  makes  it  easier  for  issuers  to 
compete with other traders at the price ceilings. The increase in share 
repurchases has been secular over decades because regulators did not 
and could not institute full market-structure reforms in one step. In fact, 
the market-structure reforms are ongoing. In showing that price ceilings 
and market structure are important frictions affecting share repurchases, 
our paper explains why firms, brokers, and trading venues encourage 
the SEC to raise the price ceiling for share repurchases. One proposal is 
to  increase  the  price  ceiling  to  the  Volume  Weighted  Average  Price 
(VWAP) and the other is to increase the price ceiling to the midpoint of 
the bid–ask spread. We predict that these two higher price ceilings, if 
adopted, would lead to another wave of share repurchases. 

2. Institutional background 

In this section, we begin in Subsection 2.1 by describing the price 
ceilings on share repurchases established by SEC Rule 10b-18. In Sub-
section  2.2,  we  outline  the  market-structure  innovations  adopted  by 
issuers, brokers, and trading venues to comply with Rule 10b-18. The 
first  two  subsections  provide  the  background  for  understanding  Sub-
section 2.3, where we summarize policy proposals that were designed to 
further relax frictions on share repurchases. 

2.1. Price ceilings under SEC Rule 10b-18 

In 1982, the SEC enacted Rule 10b-18, which provides a “safe har-
bor”  that  shields  issuers  from  liability  for  manipulation  when 
repurchases are consistent with the Rule’s four conditions. These four 
conditions impose binding constraints on share repurchases in practice, 
as  “no  one  is  going to  feel  safe  trading  outside of  the current  safe  harbor 
rules.”5 

5  See Letter from NBT Bancorp Inc. Available at https://www.sec.gov/rules/p 

roposed/s75002/mjchewens1.txt. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038183X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

(1)  Manner condition: A firm should use only one broker or dealer on 

2.2.1. Brokers and their algorithms 

any single day.  

(2)  Timing  condition:  A  firm  should  not  repurchase  during  the 
opening or last half-hour before the closing of the market.  
(3)  Price condition: A repurchase price should not exceed the highest 
independent  bid  or  the  previous  independent  trade  price, 
whichever  is  higher,  that  is  quoted  or  reported  in  the  consoli-
dated system at the time the Rule 10b-18 purchase is effected.  

(4)  Volume condition: The total volume of purchases effected on any 
single  day  must  not  exceed  25  percent  of  the  average  daily 
trading volume in the preceding four weeks. 

Before the adoption of Rule 10b-18, share repurchases could easily 
expose a firm to charges of market manipulation under the Securities 
and Exchange Act of 1934 Section 9(a)(2) and Section 10(b). Repurch-
ase programs were rare until the rule came into effect because of the 
threat  of being  charged with manipulation for inflating  stock prices.6 
Therefore,  although  the  establishment  of  Rule  10b-18  created  con-
straints  on  share  repurchases,  this  constraint  was  looser  than  the 
constraint that was in place before the Rule was adopted. Grullon and 
Michaely (2002) find that share repurchases increased after the adop-
tion  (1983–2000)  over  the  repurchase  volume  before  the  adoption 
(1972–1982). At the same time, Grullon and Michaely (2002) leave two 
interesting  questions  open:  1)  Why  did  the  one-time  shock  that  Rule 
10b-18 created lead to a gradual increase in share repurchases over 20 
years (their sample period)? 2) Why did most of the increase in share 
repurchases occur in the later period (after the 1990s)? 

Our paper addresses these questions. Rule 10b-18 has replaced the 
previous  constraint  on  share  repurchases  (the  threat  of  manipulation 
charges) with a looser constraint (there are no manipulation charges if 
issuers  buy  at  the  price  ceilings).  Therefore,  share  repurchases  began 
increasing in the 1980s. Still, firms complain that Rule 10b-18 “limits 
ability  to  make  any  significant  purchases  over  a  realistic  time  frame.”7 
Therefore, the major increase in share repurchase happened much later, 
when  the  market-structure  reforms  gradually  reduced  frictions  for  is-
suers seeking to buy back shares at the price ceiling. 

2.2. Modern plumbing for share repurchases and Rule 10b-18 compliance 

Decades ago, when share repurchases were executed manually, the 
costs of complying with Rule 10b-18 were high. Humans incur high costs 
when continuously monitoring the price condition, and they risk unin-
tentionally violating the condition (Cook et al., 2003).8 Over the years, 
market-structure  innovations  and  reforms  have  dramatically  reduced 
the monitoring and compliance costs involved in share repurchases. In 
this subsection, we introduce the current plumbing through which U.S. 
open-market share repurchases are executed.9 

6  The  SEC  has  charged  companies  with  illegally  manipulating  their  stock 
prices during repurchase programs. See, for example, Genesco, Inc., (May 10, 
1966),  [1964-66  Transfer  Binder]  CCH  Fed.  Sec.  L.  Rep.  77,354;  and  SEC  v. 
Georgia-Pacific Corporation, [1964-66 Transfer Binder] CCH Fed. Sec. L. Rep. 
91,692, (S.D.N.Y. 1966). In the early 1960s, both corporations acquired other 
businesses using stocks as payments. The number of shares to be paid was made 
contingent on stock prices during specified periods. During these periods, both 
corporations repurchased stocks in the open market. The SEC alleged that these 
repurchases resulted in elevated stock prices and reduced the number of shares 
to be paid. See Thel (1988) and Davis v. Pennzoil Co., 438 Pa. 194, 264 A.2d 
597 (Pa. Sup. Ct. 1970).  
7  See supra note 5.  
8  Cook et al., (2003) use daily aggregate repurchase data for 1993 and 1994 
provided by 54 firms. They acknowledge that they may overestimate the actual 
level  of  non-compliance  because  they  do  not  have  transaction-level  data  on 
share repurchases.  

9  In our context, plumbing means “major institutional arrangements connecting 
participants in core financial markets that are fixed in the short run” (Duffe, 2003). 

Brokers provide the gateway through which issuers can access stock 
exchanges  and  dark  pools.  In  past  decades,  share  repurchases  were 
“high-touch” transactions, as human brokers executed orders manually. 
Nowadays, share repurchases are “low-touch” transactions and brokers 
typically buy back shares using computer algorithms. We use Interactive 
Brokers Jefferies Algos as an example. The first method for buying back 
shares is to use designated buyback algorithms. Fig. A.1 Panel A shows 
that firms need only to specify the “Start Time,”  the “End Time,”  and 
“Max  %  Vol,”  and  then  the  “Buyback”  algorithm  automatically  buys 
back shares in compliance with Rule 10b-18.10 

The other common method for repurchasing shares is to add a “Buy 
Back” option to a generic algorithm. For example, the VWAP algorithm 
automatically manages transactions to achieve the all-day or intra-day 
VWAP;  the  “DarkSeek”  algorithm  searches  for  liquidity  only  in  dark 
pools. Fig. A.1 Panel B shows that issuers and their brokers can add the 
“Buy Back” option to these algorithms that allow them to generate only 
trades that are consistent with Rule 10b-18.11 

In summary, algorithms make it easier for issuers to buy back shares 
and serve as gatekeepers for Rule 10b-18, thereby reducing monitoring 
and compliance costs for issuers. 

2.2.2. Stock exchanges and dark pools 

Brokers  and  their  algorithms  provide  issuers  with  access  to  stock 

exchanges or dark pools. 

Stock exchanges. Stock exchanges have also designed mechanisms 
to facilitate compliance with Rule 10b-18 for issuers and brokers. One 
such mechanism involves designing special order  types. For example, 
the  NYSE  designed  a  buy-minus-zero-plus  (BMZP)  order  type,  which 
buys only when the price is not higher than the current bid and the most 
recent trade price. The NYSE states: “The BMZP instruction is designed to 
assist member organizations in their compliance with the ‘safe harbor’ pro-
visions of Rule 10b-18 under the Act (‘Rule 10b-18′) for issuer repurcha-
ses.”12  Li et al. (2023) show that the limit price for BMZP orders is on 
average 18 bps higher than the ask price. Such aggressive prices would 
lead  to immediate execution  if BMZP  orders were not constrained by 
Rule 10b-18. Yet Li et al. (2023) find that it takes considerable time for 
BMZP orders to execute, and BMZP orders execute only less than half of 
their specified sizes across their lives. Therefore, traditional transaction 
costs such as bid–ask spreads are unlikely to be the major constraint on 
share  repurchases;  the  main  friction  is  created  by  the  price  ceilings 
imposed by Rule 10b-18. 

BMZP orders delegate responsibility for compliance with Rule 10b- 
18  to  stock  exchanges.  Certainly,  issuers  and  their  brokers  can  also 
check  Rule 10b-18  compliance.  Computer  algorithms  make  it  easy to 
check the Rule 10b-18 conditions, but this extra step adds latency. As all 
major U.S. stock exchanges follow price/time priority, share-repurchase 
algorithms  are  unlikely  to  achieve  front-of-the-queue  positions.  First, 
share-repurchase  algorithms  represent  one  type  of  agency  algorithm; 
such  algorithms are  slower than proprietary HFT  algorithms.  Second, 
even if issuers used the same technology as HFTs, the extra step needed 
to  check  Rule  10b-18  compliance  would  still  make  them  slower  than 
HFTs. 

Dark pools. Brokers can also send repurchase orders to dark pools. 
We  hand-collect  dark  pools’  ATS-N  filing  data.  Part  III  (“Manner  of 
Operations”)  in  an  ATS-N  filing  discloses  detailed  information  about 
how a given dark pool operates, such as the types of subscribers, the 

10  Available  at  https://www.interactivebrokers.com/en/software/tws/use 
rsguidebook/algos/jeffbuyback.htm.  
11  Available  at  https://www.interactivebrokers.eu/en/index.php?f=41864. 
Certainly, not all algorithms offer a “Buy Back” option. Two examples are the 
“opener”  and  “finale”  algorithms,  as  the  time  condition  under  Rule  10b-18 
prevents firms from repurchasing shares at market open or close.  
12  Available at https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nyse/2016/34-78679.pdf. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038184X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

order-execution priority rules, and the order types provided by the dark 
pool. The results reported in Table A.1, column (4) indicate that 20 of 32 
dark pools explicitly report that issuers are among their customers. For 
example, CrossStream states that they provide “services to assist issuers 
repurchasing their own stock.” 

Three economic incentives encourage issuers and their brokers to use 
dark pools. First, many brokers own dark pools. Anand et al. (2021) find 
that institutional brokers prefer routing orders to affiliated dark pools. 
Second, the results reported in Table A.1, column (5) indicate that many 
dark  pools  do  not  follow  strict  price/time  priority.  For  example,  MS 
POOL ATS-4 (Morgan Stanley’s largest dark pool) employs price/capa-
city/size/time priority, which encourages large order sizes and deem-
phasizes  speed. The  priority  rules  in  dark  pools  are  thus  friendlier  to 
issuers because issuers may have large orders but are not as fast as HFTs. 
Finally, dark pools usually do not create their own prices; they passively 
match  orders  using  stock  exchange  prices.  Such  passive  executions 
dovetail  nicely  with  the  anti-manipulation  principle  behind  Rule 
10b-18.  Many  dark pools,  such  as  UBS  ATS  and  SIGMA  X2,  offer the 
“primary peg”  option to match buy orders using bid prices, a practice 
that automatically complies with Rule 10b-18. The results reported in 
Table A.1, column (6) indicate that 21 dark pools provide the “primary 
peg” option. Some dark pools also offer a “Buyback Instructions” option, 
which permits an order only “for execution consistent with the price con-
ditions of Rule 10b-18.”13 

2.3. Proposals to increase price ceilings under Rule 10b-18 

Because price ceilings and market structure are important frictions 
for share repurchases, issuers and brokers continue to lobby the SEC to 
“update the Rule to take account of market developments.” One proposal is 
to  increase  the  price  ceiling  to  the  Volume  Weighted  Average  Price 
(VWAP).  For  example,  ExxonMobile  “strongly  endorses  the  proposal  to 
include purchases effected on the basis of VWAP pricing within the express 
safe  harbor provisions  of  the Rule. VWAP  pricing  ensures that  issuers  are 
passive price takers, rather than active market makers. As a result, we believe 
VWAP pricing represents an ideal methodology for purposes of the Rule.”14 
The other proposal is to increase the price ceiling to the midpoint of the 
NBBO. The IEX “has petitioned the SEC to let firms buying back shares using 
hidden orders that only execute at the midpoint between the best bid and the 
best offer.” This initiative has been supported by firms such as UPS.15 

In 2010, the SEC considered increasing the price ceiling to the VWAP 
and  stated  that  an  increase  in  the  price  ceiling  could  increase  share 
repurchases: “[T]he proposed VWAP exception from the Rule’s price con-
dition  would  provide  issuers  and  their  brokers  with  flexibility  and  greater 
certainty in effecting qualifying VWAP transactions within the safe harbor. 
The  proposed  VWAP  exception  to  the  Rule’s  price  condition  also  may  in-
crease  the  likelihood  that  firms  would  engage  in  open  market  repurchases 
since the price condition would be less restrictive for such transactions” (SEC 
2010). The same proposal also considers increasing the price ceiling to 
the midpoint of the NBBO, as “some issuers may effect repurchases through 
electronic trading systems that use passive or independently-derived pricing 
mechanisms.”  This  proposal  was  finally  tabled  by  the  SEC  because  of 
resource  constraints,  as  noted  in  the  Reuters  news  coverage:  “But  the 
proposal was dropped in the wake of the May 2010 stock market flash crash, 
which,  along  with  Dodd-Frank  rulemaking  following  the  financial  crisis, 
overwhelmed  the  regulator’s  resources.”  As  a  result,  “Eight  years  later, 
UPS’s Barth (assistant treasurer at UPS) said he is still waiting for the SEC to 

is  BIDS  ATS,  https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar 

13  One  example 
/data/1368727/000095012321000929/xslATS-N_X01/primary_doc.xml#par 
tIIIitem1.  
14  Available at https://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-04-10/s70410-10.pdf.  
15  Available  at  https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-stocks-buybacks/old 
-rules-algorithmic-traders-add-costs-to-u-s-share-buybacks-idUSKBN1HY0GD. 

take action.”16 

3. The controlled experiment 

We begin our analysis with a unique controlled experiment: the U.S. 
Tick Size Pilot Program. In Subsection 3.1, we introduce the Pilot and 
the  sample-construction  process.  In  Subsection  3.2,  we  analyze  the 
impact of the Tick Size Pilot Program on payout policies. In Subsection 
3.3  and  Subsection  3.4,  we  show  evidence  of  two  main  economic 
channels:  the  queuing  and  dark-pool  channels.  In  Subsection  3.5,  we 
present robustness checks. 

3.1. The U.S. Tick Size Pilot Program and sample construction 

In  2012,  The  Jumpstart  Our  Business  Startups  Act  (“JOBS  Act”) 
directed the SEC to study whether reductions in U.S. stock tick sizes in 
the  late  1990s  and  early  2000s  could  be  driving  the  decline  in  the 
number of initial public offerings (IPOs). In 2014, the SEC ordered na-
tional securities exchanges (NSEs) and the Financial Industry Regulatory 
Authority (FINRA) to develop a pilot program. On May 6, 2015, the SEC 
issued  an  order  approving  the  plan  to  implement  the  Tick  Size  Pilot 
Program. The Program began on October 3, 2016 and ended on October 
1, 2018. 

The Program included 2,399 stocks, comprising all Regulation Na-
tional  Market  System  (Reg  NMS)  stocks  that  satisfied  the  following 
criteria  during  a  three-month  measurement  period  before  Program 
implementation:  a  share  price  of  at  least  $1.50  each  day,  a  volume- 
weighted  average  price  of  at  least  $2,  average  sales  volume  of  fewer 
than one million shares, market capitalization below $3 billion, and a 
closing  price  above  $2  on  the  last  day  of  the  period.17  NSEs  and  the 
FINRA  then  divided  these  stocks  into  27  categories  based  on  three 
criteria: (1) low, medium, or high share prices; (2) low, medium, or high 
market  capitalization;  and  (3)  low,  medium,  or  high  volume.  Stocks 
were then randomly drawn from each category to form three test groups 
such that each test group contained 400 stocks. The remaining 1,199 
stocks were assigned to the control group. 

Stocks in the control group continued to be quoted and traded at the 
1-cent tick size; stocks in test group 1 could be quoted only in $0.05 
increments but could still be traded at $0.01 increments; stocks in test 
group 2 could be quoted and traded only at $0.05 increments. Stocks in 
test group 3 adhered to all the same requirements as those in test group 2 
but  were  also  subject  to  an  additional  Trade-at  Rule,  which  granted 
execution priority to displayed orders unless non-displayed orders could 
improve prices by at least 2.5 cents, with certain exceptions (SEC, 2015). 
We obtained the list of test and control stocks from FINRA’s website. 
We  obtained  quarterly  share  repurchases,  dividends,  and  other  firm- 
level  financial  information  from  Compustat’s  North  America  Funda-
mentals  Quarterly  files.  We  define  our  payout  variables  following 
existing  conventions  (Almeida  et  al.,  2016;  Fama  and  French,  2001): 
repurchase payouts equal total expenditures in common stock repurcha-
ses divided by lagged assets; dividend payouts equal common stock div-
idends  divided  by  lagged  assets.18  Total  payouts  equal  the  sum  of 
repurchase  payouts  and  dividend  payouts.  Payout  structure  equals 
(repurchase payouts + 1)/(dividend payouts + 1).19 Size is the natural 

16  See supra note 15.  
17  Reg NMS stocks are listed on stock exchanges such as the NYSE and Nasdaq.  
18  Following the previous literature, our share-repurchase measure is based on 
quarterly  data.  On  Dec  15,  2021,  the  SEC  proposed  amendments  to  the 
disclosure  rules  for  repurchases.  The  proposed  new  Form  SR  requires  daily 
disclosure of any amount purchased on the open market and the amount that is 
in compliance with the safe harbor provisions in Rule 10b-18. See https://www. 
sec.gov/news/press-release/2021-257.  
19  We  add  1  to  both  the  numerator  and  the  denominator  because  the  latter 
often equals zero (Fama and French, 2001). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038185X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

log of book assets. Profitability is income before extraordinary items plus 
depreciation and amortization divided by lagged assets. Growth oppor-
tunity is the market value of assets divided by lagged assets. Following 
Holden and Jacobsen (2014), we calculate spread, turnover, and depth 
measures  using  Daily  TAQ  data:  percent  quoted  spread  is  the 
time-weighted  difference  between  the  national  best  offer  and  the  na-
tional best bid divided by their midpoint. Total turnover is the average 
daily total share volume divided by shares outstanding. Market depth is 
the average of the displayed best-bid depth and best-offer depth. 

Our sample-selection process runs as follows. We drop stocks with 
missing  information  in  the  Compustat  database  and  the  Daily  TAQ 
database. Following  other Tick  Size  Pilot studies  (Albuquerque et  al., 
2020; Rindi and Werner, 2019), we retain only common stocks (CRSP 
share codes 10 or 11) that remained in the Pilot throughout the Tick Size 
Pilot  period.  Following  the  payout  literature,  we  exclude  regulated 
utility  and  financial  firms  (SIC  codes  4200–4299  and  6000–6999) 
because companies operating in these industries face additional regu-
lations that might generate divergent payout behavior (Chetty and Saez, 
2005; Fama and French, 2001). Our final sample includes 602 firms in 
the three test groups and 654 firms in the control group. 

Our difference-in-differences (DiD) specification is as follows: 

yi,t = ηi + λt + β × Treatmenti × Postt + ζ′ × Controlsi,t + εi,t,

(1)  

where i indexes firms, t indexes time, and yi,t is the dependent variable. ηi 
are firm fixed effects and λt  are year-quarter fixed effects. Treatmenti is a 
dummy variable that equals one if a firm is in a test group and zero if it is 
in  the  control  group.  Postt  is  a  dummy variable  that equals  one  if  an 
observation is from the post-treatment period and zero if it is from the 
pre-treatment period. εi,t  is an error term. The main coefficient  of in-
terest is  β, which estimates the average treatment effects. All variables 
are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard 
errors  are  robust  to  heteroskedasticity  and  are  clustered  at  the  firm 
level.20 

3.2. The effects of the Tick Size Pilot Program on payout policies 

In Table 1, we report the average effects of the Tick Size Pilot on 
corporate payouts where Treatmenti  equals one if a stock is in one of the 
three test groups and zero if the stock is in the control group, while Postt 
equals one if the observation is from the post-treatment period (2016 
Q4–2018  Q3)  and  zero  if  it  is  from  the  pre-treatment  period  (2014 
Q4–2016 Q3). Controls include size, profitability, and growth opportu-
nity, as in Fama and French (2001). 

The results reported in Table 1 indicate that, in the Tick Size Pilot 
Program,  treatment  firms  reduce  repurchase  payouts  by  0.092  per-
centage points relative to control firms, representing a 21% decline from 
the pre-treatment average repurchase payout of 0.43 percentage points. 
Results reported in column (2) of Table 1 indicate that the Tick Size Pilot 
Program does not lead to a relative change in dividend payouts. Total 
payouts by treatment firms decrease by 0.096 percentage points relative 
to  control  firms,  representing  a  14%  decline  over  the  pre-treatment 
average  total  payouts  of  0.67  percentage  points.  In  addition,  the 
payout structures of the treatment firms decrease by 0.083 relative to 
control firms, a 6.64% decrease over the pre-treatment mean of 1.25. 
Therefore, the Tick Size Pilot Program, an initiative that was designed to 
reverse  market  structure  reforms  enacted  in  previous  decades,  also 
reversed the secular increase in repurchases. 

Next, we examine whether the reduction in repurchases came from 
the intensive or extensive margin. The Tick Size Pilot might reduce share 
repurchases at the extensive margin based on two factors. First, issuers 
may cancel or delay share repurchases if they are selected for one of the 

20  In Table A.2, we present summary statistics for the main sample for the Tick 
Size Pilot Program with a breakdown by event year. 

Table 1 
Tick Size Pilot Program and payout policies. In this table, we report the average 
effects of the Tick Size Pilot on the corporate payout variables. We report the DiD 
regression results for the payout variables: repurchase payouts, dividend payouts, 
total payouts, and payout structure. Treatment is a dummy variable that equals one 
if a stock is in one of the three test groups and zero if it is in the control group. 
Post is an indicator variable that equals one if the year-quarter falls into the post- 
treatment period (2016 Q4–2018 Q3) and zero if it falls into the pre-treatment 
period (2014 Q4–2016 Q3). Controls include size, profitability, and growth op-
portunity,  as in  Fama and  French  Fama and  French  (2001). All variables  are 
winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard errors that 
are  robust  to  heteroskedasticity  and  clustered  at  the  firm  level  are  shown  in 
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% 
levels, respectively.  

Difference-in-Differences Regression Results  
Repurchase 
Payouts 
(1) 

Dividend 
Payouts 
(2) 

Total 
Payouts 
(3) 

Payout 
Structure 
(4) 

Treatment ×

(cid:0) 0.0918*** 

(cid:0) 0.00463 

(cid:0) 0.0964*** 

(cid:0) 0.0831***  

Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year-quarter 

FE 

Cluster by 
firm 

N 
R2 

((cid:0) 2.72) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

((cid:0) 0.32) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

((cid:0) 2.66) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

((cid:0) 2.74) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

19,633 
0.382 

19,633 
0.702 

19,633 
0.486 

19,633 
0.396  

test  groups.  Second,  as  buyback  algorithms  were  designed  and  opti-
mized for a 1-cent tick size, they need to be updated for each test group 
during this two-year pilot window. Therefore, some brokers may simply 
avoid buying back shares if the cost of updating the codes outweighs the 
revenue. In Table 2 we present the DiD results for the Repurchase dummy, 
which equals one if a firm repurchases shares during the quarter and 
zero otherwise. We find no significant changes at the extensive margin. 
The results show that the Tick Size Pilot does not reduce the number of 
repurchasing firms. Therefore, the decrease in share repurchases comes 
from the intensive margin: treatment firms buy back fewer shares after 
the Pilot. 

Table 2 
Tick Size Pilot Program: extensive vs. intensive margins. For this 
table, we test whether the effects of the Tick Size Pilot on share 
repurchases  come  from  the  extensive  or  intensive  margin.  We 
report the DiD regression results for Repurchase dummy, which 
equals one if a firm repurchases shares during the quarter and 
zero otherwise. Treatment is a dummy variable that equals one if 
a stock is in one of the three test groups and zero if it is in the 
control group. Post is an indicator variable that equals one if the 
year-quarter falls into the post-treatment period (2016 Q4–2018 
Q3)  and  zero  if  it  falls  into  the  pre-treatment  period  (2014 
Q4–2016  Q3).  Controls  include  size,  profitability,  and  growth 
opportunity, as in Fama and French Fama and French (2001). All 
variables  are  winsorized  at  the  1%  and  99%  levels.  t-statistics 
based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and 
clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and 
*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, 
respectively.   

Treatment × Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year-quarter FE 
Cluster by firm 
N 
R2 

Repurchase Dummy  
(1) 

(cid:0) 0.00641  
((cid:0) 0.43) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
19,633 
0.564  

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038186X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

3.3. The queuing channel 

To identify the economic forces that drive the intensive margin, we 
partition treatment firms into tick-constrained and tick-unconstrained 
subsamples  based  on  their  average  dollar-quoted  spreads  one  quarter 
before the launch of the Pilot (2016 Q3). Tick-constrained firms had pre- 
Pilot quoted spreads that were lower than 5 cents, and we define the 
other  firms  as  tick-unconstrained  firms.  Because  the  firms  are  parti-
tioned into two subsamples, we create matched control samples for the 
treatment tick-constrained and tick-unconstrained subsamples based on 
pre-treatment  repurchase  payouts,  dividend  payouts,  and  the  three 
control  variables  (size,  profitability,  and  growth  opportunity).21  In 
Panel A of Table 3, we report the summary statistics and the mean dif-
ferences  between  the  treatment  and  matched  control  sample  for  the 
payout variables in the pre-treatment period. The t-test results show that 
the mean differences are not statistically significant. 

In columns (1)–(4) of Table 3 Panel B, we report the results for tick- 
constrained  firms,  while  in  columns  (5)–(8)  we  report  the  results  for 
tick-unconstrained firms. The results show that the treatment effects of 
the  Tick  Size  Pilot  are  concentrated  in  tick-constrained  firms.  Results 
reported  in  column  (1)  indicate  that  tick-constrained  treatment  firms 
reduce their repurchase payouts by 0.183 percentage points relative to 
their  control  firms,  representing  a  45%  decline  over  the  average  pre- 
treatment level of 0.41 percentage points. Results reported in column 
(2)  indicate  that  tick-constrained  treatment  firms  did  not  experience 
significant changes in dividend payouts points relative to their control 
firms. Tick-constrained treatment firms’ total payouts decline by 0.187 
percentage  points  relative  to  control  group,  representing  a  30.4% 
decline over their average pre-treatment total payouts. In addition, the 
payout structure decreased by 0.146, about 11.6% of the pre-treatment 
average. In comparison, none of the payout variables changed signifi-
cantly for the tick-unconstrained firms relative to their control group. 
The results are also consistent with our finding that the decrease in share 
repurchases does not come from the extensive margin. If the main results 
are driven by issuers who cancel or delay share repurchases or brokers 
who refuse to buy back shares, we expect the Tick Size Pilot to affect 
tick-unconstrained firms as well. 

The next step in our analysis is to refine the economic forces that 
drive  the  dramatic  decrease  in  share  repurchases  for  tick-constrained 
firms.  Panel  C  of  Table  3  presents  the  results  for  the  three  standard 
liquidity  measures:  percentage  quoted  spreads,  share  turnover,  and 
market depth. For tick-constrained firms, the Tick Size Pilot caused an 
84% increase in percentage quoted spreads (0.32/0.38), a 16% decrease 
in  total  share  turnover  (0.14/0.92),  and  a  214%  increase  in  market 
depth (12.90/6.01), whereas the changes for tick-unconstrained firms 
are much smaller. 

We first rule out share turnover as the main driver of the decrease in 
share repurchases. The volume condition in Rule 10b-18 prohibits firms 
from  purchasing  more  than  25%  of  the  preceding  four-week  average 
daily volume on any trading day, but we find that the repurchase pro-
gram  represents  only  less  than  5%  of  the  volume  in  our  sample.  In 
addition, Rule 10b-18 exempts firms from one block trade each week, 
which further relaxes the 25% volume constraint. Therefore, the volume 
constraint is unlikely to be binding. 

The increase in the proportional bid–ask spread is equivalent to a 
three-cent increase in the nominal bid–ask spread. Although a three-cent 
increase  in  the  bid–ask  spread  may  contribute  to  reducing  share 
repurchases,  it  is  also  unlikely  to  be  the  main  driver.  First,  Li  et  al. 
(2023) find evidence that issuers and their brokers are willing to pay 
much  higher  prices  than  ask  prices  if  they  can  execute  their  orders. 
Therefore,  a  three-cent  increase  in  the  bid–ask  spread  is  unlikely  to 

disincentivize share repurchases. Second, issuers often cannot buy at the 
ask price because of the price ceilings. Instead, a safer strategy is to use 
limit orders to buy at the bid price. As a wider tick tends to increase the 
bid–ask spread by increasing the ask price and decreasing the bid price 
(Li and Ye, 2022), an issuer can buy at lower prices instead of higher 
prices. 

Surprisingly,  an  increase  in  depth  is  the  most  likely  driver  of  the 
reduction in share repurchases. The depth increases because a wider tick 
constrains price competition and forces traders with heterogenous val-
uations to quote the same price (Yao and Ye, 2018). Such an increase in 
depth, in turn, crowds out share repurchases because issuers face more 
intense  competition  at  the  same  price.  We  can express  the  same  eco-
nomic intuition alternatively by noting that a wider tick mechanically 
reduces  the  best  bid  price  (Li  and  Ye,  2022).  Therefore,  a  wider  tick 
reduces  the  price  ceilings  for  share  repurchases  but  imposes  tighter 
constraints on issuers under Rule 10b-18. 

The following hypothetical example provides intuition. Suppose the 
tick size is $0.01, the best ask for a stock is at $10.01 for 100 shares, and 
the best bid is at $10.00 for 100 shares. An issuer can submit a limit 
order  to  buy  at  $10.00.  There  are  also  two  less  aggressive  bids:  100 
shares at $9.99 and 100 shares at $9.98. The issuer’s limit order then 
establishes price priority over the quotes at $9.99 and $9.98. A wider 
five-cent  tick  size  tends  to  increase  the  ask  price  and  reduce  the  bid 
price.22 Suppose that the ask price increases to $10.03 and the bid price 
decreases to $9.98. Then the price ceiling for the issuer becomes $9.98. 
The lower price ceiling intensifies the competition at the same price, as 
the issuer now needs to compete with 300 shares at $9.98. 

Consistent with this intuition, we find that the depth at the best price 
increases by 214% for tick-constrained treatment firms relative to con-
trol firms. As stock exchanges use the time to determine the execution 
priority among orders at the same price, queuing—or early arrival to the 
market to beat rivals at the same price (Yao and Ye, 2018)—becomes 
more important. Unfortunately, issuers cannot trade as quickly as HFTs 
(SEC, 2018). Even if an issuer hires an HFT for share repurchases, the 
algorithms cannot run as rapidly as other HFTs because of the additional 
latency caused by checking for compliance with Rule 10b-18. Therefore, 
the  queuing  channel  predicts  that an  increase  in  depth  reduces  share 
repurchases, the opposite of the prediction based on liquidity in general. 
Generally,  a  market  with  greater  depth  is  considered  more  liquid, 
particularly for large traders. Jones and Lipson (2001) find, for example, 
that the 1997 tick-size reduction decreased transaction costs for small 
orders but increased these costs for large orders because of the reduction 
in depth. 

To examine whether a longer queue discourages share repurchases, 
we partition tick-constrained firms into two subgroups based on their 
increased bid-side depth and re-run the DiD analyses. In Table 3 Panel D 
we report the results. We find that firms that experience a greater in-
crease  in  bid-side  depth  reduce  share  repurchases  to  an  even  greater 
extent:  firms  with  an  above-median  increase  in  depth  reduce  share 
repurchases by 56% relative to control group (0.264/0.469), whereas 
firms  with  a  below-median  increase  in  the  depth  reduce  share 
repurchases by only 32% relative to their control group (0.115/0.357). 
The 24% difference is statistically significant (p-value < 0.01). In sum-
mary,  our  results  are  consistent  with  the  queuing  channel:  a  longer 
queue harms issuers because a lengthy queue makes speed competition 
at the price ceiling more important, and issuers are unlikely to win the 
speed competition. 

3.4. The dark-pool channel 

Issuers can avoid queues by using dark pools. Many dark pools do not 
enforce time priority. For example, SIGMA X2 follows broker priority, 

21  Our  results  are  similar  when  we  use  an  unmatched  sample.  All  of  our 
matching variables are measured prior to the treatment to ensure that they are 
unaffected by the treatment (Roberts and Whited, 2013). 

22  Li  and  Ye  (2022)  provide  a  formal  model  of  this  widening  effect  under 
varying tick sizes. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038187X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Table 3 
Tick Size Pilot Program: the queuing channel. In this table, we show that the queuing channel is one underlying mechanism that drives the effects of the Tick Size Pilot 
on share repurchases. In Panel A, we present pre-treatment summary statistics and the mean difference test results for the treatment and matched control firms. We 
partition firms into two subgroups. The tick-constrained sample includes firms whose average pre-treatment (2016 Q3) dollar-quoted spreads are below 5 cents, while 
other firms comprise the unconstrained sample. In Panel B, we report the DiD regression results for corporate payout variables. In Panel C, we report the DiD regression 
results for market-liquidity measures. In Panel D, we report the DiD regression results for repurchase payouts when we partition the tick-constrained sample equally into 
two groups based on the increase in bid-side depth. Using the bootstrap method, the p-values reported in the bottom row are estimated based on the null hypothesis that 
the coefficients are equal for the two groups under consideration. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard errors that are 
robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, 
respectively.  

Panel A: Pre-Treatment Summary Statistics for the Constrained Sample and the Unconstrained Sample  

Tick-Constrained Sample 
Treatment 
Mean 

Control 
Mean 

Repurchase payouts 
Dividend payouts 
Total payouts 
Payout structure 

0.412 
0.203 
0.615 
1.255 

0.399 
0.177 
0.576 
1.291 

Panel B: Regression Results for Payout Variables  

t-test 
Diff 

0.013 
0.026 
0.039 
(cid:0) 0.036 

p-value 

0.673 
0.107 
0.273 
0.233 

Tick-Unconstrained Sample 
Treatment 
Mean 

Control 
Mean 

0.443 
0.274 
0.718 
1.241 

0.440 
0.271 
0.712 
1.216 

t-test 
Diff 

0.003 
0.003 
0.006 
0.025 

p-value 

0.932 
0.867 
0.883 
0.375  

Tick-Constrained Sample 
Repurchase 
Payouts 
(1) 

Dividend 
Payouts 
(2) 

Total 
Payouts 
(3) 

Payout 
Structure 
(4) 

Tick-Unconstrained Sample 
Repurchase 
Payouts 
(5) 

Dividend 
Payouts 
(6) 

Treatment ×

(cid:0) 0.183*** 

(cid:0) 0.00479 

(cid:0) 0.187*** 

(cid:0) 0.146*** 

(cid:0) 0.0249 

(cid:0) 0.0240 

Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year-quarter FE 
Cluster by firm 
N 
R2 

((cid:0) 3.46) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8546 
0.441 

((cid:0) 0.24) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8546 
0.821 

((cid:0) 3.19) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8546 
0.520 

((cid:0) 3.10) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8546 
0.466 

((cid:0) 0.46) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
10,314 
0.363 

((cid:0) 1.42) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
10,314 
0.734 

Panel C: Regression Results for Market-Liquidity Variables    

Total 
Payouts 
(7) 

(cid:0) 0.0489 

((cid:0) 0.90) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
10,314 
0.482 

Payout 
Structure 
(8) 

(cid:0) 0.0429  

((cid:0) 0.94) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
10,314 
0.373  

Tick-Constrained Sample 
Percentage Quoted Spread 
(1) 

Total Share Turnover 
(2) 

Market Depth 
(3) 

Tick-Unconstrained Sample   
Percentage Quoted Spread 
(4) 

Total Share Turnover 
(5) 

Market Depth   
(6)   

Treatment × Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year-quarter FE 
Cluster by firm 
N 
R2 

0.316*** 
(11.98) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8522 
0.756 

(cid:0) 0.144*** 
((cid:0) 3.41) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8522 
0.587 

12.90*** 
(18.15) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
8522 
0.611 

0.0125 
(0.32) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
10,299 
0.848 

(cid:0) 0.0290 
((cid:0) 1.03) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
10,290 
0.600 

4.643***    
(9.28)   
Yes   
Yes   
Yes   
Yes   
10,299   
0.702    

Panel D: Results for Partitioning Samples Based on Increase in Bid-Side Depth        

Dependent Variable: Repurchase Payouts       
Below-Median Increase in Bid-Side Depth 
(1) 

Above-Median Increase in Bid-Side Depth       
(2)       

Treatment × Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year-quarter FE 
Cluster by firm 
N 
R2 
p-value (Small=Large) 

(cid:0) 0.115* 
((cid:0) 1.77) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
4303 
0.438 
< 0.01        

(cid:0) 0.264***        
((cid:0) 3.21)       
Yes       
Yes       
Yes       
Yes       
4243       
0.443       

JPM-X and Barclays ATS follow subscriber tier priority, and these pri-
orities can help issuers if their brokers own a dark pool or are affiliated 
with a dark pool. IBKR ATS, MS POOL ATS-4, and CrossStream follow 
order-size priority, and this priority helps issuers if they buy back a large 
number of shares. 

As  test  group  3  in  the  Tick  Size  Pilot  faces  an  additional  trade-at 
requirement  that  restricts  dark-pool  trading,  we  predict  that  firms  in 
test group 3 reduce share repurchases to a greater extent than firms in 
other  test  groups.  The  results  reported  in  Table  4  show  that  the 

treatment effect on repurchase payouts for tick-constrained firms in test 
group  3  is  (cid:0) 0.26  percentage  points  (a  55%  reduction  under  the  pre- 
treatment mean), whereas the treatment effect on repurchase payouts 
for  tick-constrained  firms  in  test  groups  1  and  2  is  (cid:0) 0.14  percentage 
points (a 36% reduction under the pre-treatment mean). The difference 
is both economically (19%) and statistically significant (p-value < 0.01). 
The results also show nonsignificant effects on tick-unconstrained firms 
in both test group 3 and test groups 1 and 2. 

Why does the 2.5-cent price improvement requirement in dark pools 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038188X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Table 4 
Tick Size Pilot Program: the dark-pool channel. In this table, we show that dark 
pools represent another mechanism that drives the effects of the Tick Size Pilot 
on share repurchases. The Tick Size Pilot imposed Trade-at Rule on test group 3 
but not on test groups 1 and 2. The tick-constrained sample includes a firm if its 
average dollar-quoted spread for the quarter before the Pilot implementation 
(2016  Q3)  is  below  5  cents,  while  other  firms  comprise  the  unconstrained 
sample. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based 
on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the firm 
level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Using the bootstrap method, the p- 
values reported in the bottom row are estimated based on the null hypothesis 
that the coefficients are equal for the two groups under consideration.  

Dependent Variable: Repurchase Payouts  

Test Groups 1 and 2 
Tick- 
Constrained 
(1) 

Tick- 
Unconstrained 
(2) 

Test Group 3 
Tick- 
Constrained 
(3) 

Tick- 
Unconstrained 
(4) 

(cid:0) 0.139** 

(cid:0) 0.0191 

(cid:0) 0.258*** 

(cid:0) 0.0449  

((cid:0) 2.18) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

((cid:0) 0.31) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

((cid:0) 2.68) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

((cid:0) 0.48) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

6107 
0.449 

7006 
0.363 

2433 
0.414 

3329 
0.368 

Treatment 
× Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year- 

quarter 
FE 

Cluster by 
firm 

N 
R2 

p-value (test groups 1&2= test group 3, tick-constrained samples): < 0.01. 

lead to the additional 19% reduction in share repurchases? Rindi and 
Werner (2019) show that the Trade-at Rule has a nonsignificant impact 
on overall liquidity. The answer to this question again comes not from 
overall  liquidity  but  from  the  price  ceilings  under  Rule  10b-18.  The 
Trade-at Rule requires dark pools to match orders at a price that is 2.5 
cents above the independent bid.23 Rule 10b-18 implies, however, that 
buying shares at prices above independent bids indicates price manip-
ulation. Therefore, the conflicts between the Trade-at Rule and 10b-18 
impose  an  implicit  ban  on  repurchasing  in  dark  pools.  Our  results 
imply that dark pools were important platforms for share repurchases 
before the implicit ban. 

applicable to a broader sample. 

Effects  on  tender  offers.  The  results  reported  in  column  (5)  of 
Table 5 Panel A show that the Tick Size Pilot has no significant effects on 
corporate  self-tender  offers.24  This  result  helps  rule  out  alternative 
channels that may lead to a drop in share repurchases because tender 
offers are share repurchases that are not executed through the secondary 
market and are not regulated by Rule 10b-18. Therefore, the Tick Size 
Pilot, a shock to the secondary market, should not affect tender offers. 
The differences in results between the two alternative ways of buying 
back shares provide additional evidence that price ceilings under Rule 
10b-18  and  market-structure  frictions  are  the  main  drivers  of  the  re-
ductions in share repurchases. 

Alternative  explanations.  To  further  isolate  our  channel,  we 
include control variables identified in the literature that are the main 
determinants  of  payouts  to  our  baseline  regression  specification.  As 
some explanatory variables are recorded at annual frequency, we report 
the  results  of  DiD  tests  using  annual  data.25  The  results  reported  in 
Table 5 Panel B are generally consistent with the findings in the litera-
ture. For example, firms repurchase more shares when managers own 
more stocks or options, consistent with agency issues with repurchases 
(e.g., Brown et al., 2007; Fenn and Liang, 2001); when there are more 
exercised  options,  consistent  with  the  use  of  repurchases  to  offset 
earnings dilution caused by exercising options (e.g., Kahle, 2002); when 
firms  have  more  non-operating  cash  flows,  consistent  with  the 
financial-flexibility benefit of repurchases to distribute temporary cash 
flows (e.g., Jagannathan et al., 2000); and when firms are undervalued, 
consistent with market timing of repurchases (e.g., Dittmar and Field, 
2015).26 Most importantly, the coefficients on Treatment × Post remain 
statistically  significant  and  the  economic  magnitudes  are  almost  un-
changed, suggesting that our results are not driven by these alternative 
channels. 

Where does the undistributed cash go? Our main results show that 
treated  firms  reduced  repurchases  while  not  increasing  dividends, 
leaving  a  follow-on  question:  what  did  the  treated  firms  do  with  the 
undistributed money? To address this question, we test the effects of the 
Tick  Size  Pilot  Program  on  short-term  debt,  cash  holdings,  and  in-
vestments.  The  results  in  Table  5  Panel  C  show  that  tick-constrained 
treatment firms reduce short-term debt relative to their control firms, 
while there are no significant changes in cash holdings or investments. 
These findings suggest firms neither hold cash nor invest but instead pay 
off short-term debt with the undistributed money. 

3.5. Robustness checks 

4. Historical market-structure reforms and payout policies 

Reversal and placebo tests. In column (1) of Table 5 Panel A, we 
report results that show the reversal effects following the end of the Tick 
Size Pilot, using the four quarters after the Pilot’s end (2018 Q4–2019 
Q3) as the post-Pilot-end period and the four quarters before the Pilot’s 
end (2017 Q4–2018 Q3) as the pre-Pilot-end period. Tick-constrained 
firms  increased  their  repurchases  by  43%  (0.122/0.285)  in  the  post- 
Pilot-end period. We then run placebo tests using two years before the 
Pilot implementation as a placebo shock. The results in column (2) show 
no significant changes in repurchases. 

Result sensitivity to firm size. Our controlled experiment involves 
only small and medium-sized stocks. To mitigate the concern that the 
results apply only to small stocks, we follow Yagan (2015) and split the 
sample equally based on pre-treatment firm size. We report the results in 
columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 Panel A. For small (large) firms, we find a 
46.3%  (44.9%)  reduction 
the 
pre-treatment mean (0.155/0.335 vs. 0.220/0.490). Both reductions are 
statistically  significant.  These  results  suggest  that  price-ceiling  and 
market-structure  frictions  do  not  concentrate  in  small  firms  and  the 
economic  mechanism  revealed  by  the  controlled  experiment  is  likely 

in  repurchases  compared  with 

23  SEC (2015) provides a few exemptions from this requirement. 

In this section, we travel back in history and conduct event studies 
centered  on  the  market-structure  reforms  of  the  1990s  and  2000s.  In 
Subsection 4.1, we discuss our investigation of the effects of the 1994 
Manning Rule and the 1997 Order Handling Rules. In Subsection 4.2, we 
examine the effects of the two tick-size reductions following the 1997 
Common Cents Pricing Act. In Subsection 4.3, we discuss the effects of 
the NYSE’s jumpstart of algorithmic trading in 2003. In Subsection 4.4, 
we  present  robustness  checks.  In  Subsection  4.5,  we  estimate  the 
contribution of these reforms to the secular increase in share repurchase. 
These reforms are major changes in market structure identified in the 
created 

(Hasbrouck,  2007).  Also, 

literature 

reforms 

these 

24  We obtain self-tender-offer data from the Securities Data Company (SDC). 
Tender offer equals the value of self-tender offers divided by lagged assets (in 
percentages).  
25  For  example,  annual  managerial  stock  and  option  holdings  are  from  the 
Compustat  Execucomp  database  and  total  exercised  and  exercisable  option 
holdings are from the Compustat Fundamentals Annual database. In the ana-
lyses, Post equals one if the year is 2017 or 2018 and zero if it is 2015 or 2016.  
26  Allen and Michaely (2003) and Farre-Mensa et al. (2014) provide excellent 
reviews of the determinants of payout policy. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038189X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Table 5 
Tick Size Pilot Program: robustness checks. In this table, we report the results of robustness checks related to our analysis of the Tick Size Pilot Program. The sample 
includes tick-constrained firms. In Panel A columns (1) and (2) we report the results of the reversal and placebo tests, respectively. In the reversal test, we define the 
post-treatment period as 2018 Q4–2019 Q3 and the pre-treatment period as 2017 Q4–2018 Q3. In the placebo test, we define the post-treatment period as 2014 
Q4–2016 Q3 and the pre-treatment period as 2012 Q4–2014 Q3. In Panel A columns (3) and (4) we report results of tests of sensitivity to firm size by partitioning the 
sample equally based on pre-treatment total assets. In Panel A column (5) we report the DiD regression results for tender offer. In Panel B, we show that our results 
remain robust after controlling for the other main determinants of corporate payout choice identified in the literature. As the compensation-related variables are 
recorded at annual frequency, we report the results of DiD tests for repurchase payouts using annual data. Post equals one if the year is in 2017 or 2018 and zero if it is in 
2015 or 2016. For column (1), we show the main results on repurchase payouts without additional controls. For column (2), we control for managerial stock holdings 
and managerial options holdings. For column (3), we control for total exercised and exercisable options. For column (4), we control for the financial flexibility 
advantage of share repurchases proxied by cash-flow volatility and non-operating cash flows. For column (5), we control for mispricing proxied by future one-year 
market-adjusted  returns.  For  column (6),  we  control  for  financial constraint  proxied  by  the  WW index  (Whited  and  Wu,  2006).  For  column (7),  we  control for 
price informativeness proxied by return non-synchronicity, defined as one minus the R2 from a firm-specific regression of daily stock returns on value-weighted market 
returns for a year. For column (8), we control for these explanatory variables simultaneously. In Panel C, we report the results of the effects on short-term debt, cash 
holdings, and investments. Controls for Panels A and B include size, profitability, and growth opportunity. Controls for Panel C include size, profitability, and growth 
opportunity as well as the additional control variables used for Panel B. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard errors that 
are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, 
respectively.  

Panel A: 

Treatment × Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year-quarter FE 
Cluster by firm 
N 
R2 

Panel B: 

Treatment × Post 

Manager stocks 

Manager options 

Exercised options 

Exercisable options 

Cash-flow volatility 

Non-operating cash flow 

Future market-adjusted return 

WW index 

Price informativeness 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year FE 
Cluster by firm 
N 
R2 

Panel C 
Dependent Variable 

Treatment × Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year FE 
Cluster by firm 
N 
R2 

Dependent Variable: Repurchase Payouts 
Reversal and Placebo Tests 
Reversal Test 
(1) 

Placebo Test 
(2) 

Result Sensitivity on Firm Size     
Small Firms 
(3) 

Large Firms     
(4) 

0.122** 
(2.05) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
4027 
0.539 

0.0539 
(0.85) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
7924 
0.400 

(cid:0) 0.155** 
(2.36) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
4288 
0.472 

(cid:0) 0.220*** 
(2.75) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
4258 
0.412 

Tender offer     

(5)    

0.00350     
(1.00)    
Yes    
Yes    
Yes    
Yes    
8546    
0.064     

Controlling for Alternative Explanations (Annual Data)  
Dependent Variable: Repurchase Payouts 
(3) 
(2) 
(1) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(cid:0) 1.003*** 
((cid:0) 3.43) 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.608 

(cid:0) 1.015*** 
((cid:0) 3.50) 
1.341* 
(1.79)      
0.165 
(0.53)      
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.610 

(cid:0) 1.009*** 
((cid:0) 3.46) 
- 

(cid:0) 1.005*** 
((cid:0) 3.44) 
- 

(cid:0) 1.002*** 
((cid:0) 3.43) 
- 

(cid:0) 1.010*** 
((cid:0) 3.49) 
- 

(cid:0) 1.007*** 
((cid:0) 3.45) 
- 

- 

4.945** 
(2.39)     
(cid:0) 0.157 
((cid:0) 0.25)     
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.613 

- 

- 

- 

(cid:0) 0.663 
((cid:0) 0.74)    
0.165*** 
(3.73)    
- 

- 

- 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.610 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0.0346 
(0.20)   
- 

- 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.608 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

(cid:0) 0.422** 
((cid:0) 2.52)  
- 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.613 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

(cid:0) 0.964 
((cid:0) 0.87) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.608 

(cid:0) 1.041***  
((cid:0) 3.62) 
1.281*   
(1.74) 
0.287   
(0.90) 
4.848**    
(2.35) 
(cid:0) 0.733    
((cid:0) 1.16) 
(cid:0) 0.689     
((cid:0) 0.67) 
0.163***     
(3.89) 
0.125      
(0.72) 
(cid:0) 0.428***       
((cid:0) 2.68) 
(cid:0) 1.014        
((cid:0) 0.91) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.622  

What Did Firms Do with the Money Not Distributed? (Annual Data)      
Short-term Debt 
(1) 

Investment      
(3)      

Cash 
(2) 

(cid:0) 0.962** 
((cid:0) 2.56) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.703 

0.430 
(0.75) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
1945 
0.945 

(cid:0) 0.386       
((cid:0) 0.74)      
Yes      
Yes      
Yes      
Yes      
1945      
0.922       

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381810X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

quasi-treatment  and  quasi-control  groups  because  they  affected  some 
intensely  but  barely  affected  others.27  Comparing 
stocks 
the 
quasi-treatment  and  quasi-control  groups  helps  us  to  control  for  the 
effects  of  confounding  events.  To  further  control  for  heterogeneity 
across firms, we match the treatment firms with the control firms based 
on repurchase payouts, dividend payouts, size, profitability, and growth 
opportunities. Table A.3 presents the pre-treatment summary statistics 
and  mean  differences,  which  suggest  that  treatment  firms  and  their 
matched controls are similar before the events. Control variables include 
the  main  determinants  of  corporate  payout  choice  identified  in  the 
literature, as in Section 3.5. We also limit our sample period to one year 
before and one year after the events. In all these tests, we use the same 
sample filters that we used with the Tick Size Pilot analyses and follow 
the DiD regression using Eq. (1). Observations are recorded at annual 
frequency because firms do not report quarterly repurchase information 
until 2004. 

4.1. Manning Rule and the Order Handling Rules 

In  this  section,  we  discuss  our  investigation  of  the  importance  of 
execution  priority  using  the  1994  Manning  Rule  and  the  1997  Order 
Handling  Rules  as  quasi-natural  experiments.  Before  1994,  Nasdaq 
dealers could trade ahead of their customers’ limit orders. For example, 
suppose  a  dealer  quotes  a  $100  bid  price  and  a  $102  offer  price.  A 
customer who wants to buy at a bid price of $100 has lower execution 
priority than the dealer because the dealer can trade ahead of her cus-
tomers. A dealer can even trade through her customers: a Nasdaq dealer 
who receives a customer order to buy at $101 does not have to display 
the order as a new, more aggressive quote; the dealer can buy for his own 
account at prices below $101, thus trading through the customer order. 
The customer is entitled to execution only when the market offer price 
drops to 101, which makes the customer order marketable (Hasbrouck, 
2007).  The  Manning  Rule,  approved  by  the  SEC  on  June  29,  1994, 
prohibited dealers from trading ahead of or trading through their cus-
tomers, thereby increasing the execution priority of issuers over their 
own dealers.28 

The Manning Rule applied only to Nasdaq-listed firms. Firms listed 
on  other  exchanges  were  not  affected.  For  example,  NYSE  specialists 
faced order-flow competition from floor traders and public limit orders. 
Limit-order prices were incorporated into prices displayed on the mar-
ket, and limit orders took precedence over specialists’ orders (Christie 
and Schultz, 1994). 

In the DiD analyses, Treatmenti  equals one for Nasdaq firms and zero 
for matched firms listed on other exchanges, while Postt  equals one if an 
observation is from 1995 and zero if it is from 1993. The results reported 
in  Panel A of Table  6 show that repurchase payouts by Nasdaq firms 
increased  by  0.377  percentage  points  relative  to  control  firms,  repre-
senting a 60% increase over their pre-treatment mean (0.377/0.631). 
We find no significant treatment effects on dividend payouts. NASDAQ 
firms’  total  payouts  increased  by  0.373  percentage  points  relative  to 
control  firms,  representing  a  29%  increase  over  their  pre-treatment 
mean  (0.373/1.267).  Finally,  NASDAQ  firms’  payout  structures 

27  Market structure continued to evolve after 2003, but it became extremely 
hard  to  find  quasi-treatment  and  quasi-control  groups  because  the  trading 
mechanism  across  stock  exchanges  converged  after  these  earlier  reforms. 
Finding an event date for later market structure changes is also challenging. For 
example, the proliferation of dark pools is a gradual process and does not have a 
clear event day. Therefore, we rely on the implementation of the Trade-at Rule 
to identify the causal impact of the dark pool on share repurchases.  
28  The Manning Rule is a result of the 1988 Manning decision. A customer of a 
National  Association  of  Securities  Dealers  (NASD)  member  firm,  William 
Manning, alleged that the dealer had accepted his limit order, failed to execute 
it, and violated its fiduciary duty to him by trading ahead of the order (Secu-
rities Exchange Act Release No. 44357). 

increased by 0.326 relative to control firms, representing a 25% increase 
over its pre-treatment mean (0.326/1.324). 

The 1994 shock is unique because it affected repurchases at both the 
extensive  and  intensive  margins,  whereas  we  do  not  find  that  other 
market-structure reforms affected repurchases at the extensive margin. 
We find that the fraction of issuers that repurchased shares increased by 
5 percentage points, representing a 21% increase over the pre-treatment 
level (0.048/0.224). These results suggest that the Manning Rule opened 
the  door  to  other  market-structure  reforms  that  facilitate  share 
repurchases. If dealers  enjoyed execution  priority at all times, issuers 
would find it hard to compete with dealers at the price ceilings. 

Along with the Manning Rule implementation, Nasdaq also under-
went  another  change:  the  odd-eighth  adoption.  Before  1994,  Nasdaq 
market makers rarely quoted odd eighths. Christie and Schultz (1994) 
indicate that quoting only even eighths may be evidence of tacit collu-
sion  among  Nasdaq  market  makers,  such  that  the  minimum  bid–ask 
spread  is  at  least  one-quarter  of  a  dollar  wide.  After  this  influential 
article,  Nasdaq  market  makers  began  quoting  odd  eighths,  which  is 
equivalent to a reduction in the tick size for Nasdaq stocks. It is difficult 
to  disentangle  the  Manning  Rule’s  impact  from  the  impact  of  the 
odd-eighth  adoption  because  both  reduced  the  advantage  market 
makers enjoyed. Nevertheless, without the Manning Rule, issuers would 
find it hard to compete with dealers at the bid price irrespective of the 
tick size. Therefore, the Manning Rule relaxed the constraints on whether 
Nasdaq  firms  could  repurchase  shares,  whereas  tick-size  reduction  is 
related more directly to how many shares they can repurchase. There-
fore, an increase in repurchases at the extensive margin may suggest the 
impact of the Manning Rule. 

The  1997  Order  Handling  Rules  further  increased  the  execution 
priority for customer limit orders. Before 1997, a Nasdaq dealer did not 
need to display customers’ limit orders. If an issuer submitted a buy limit 
order at the best bid or offer, the order could be invisible to other dealers 
and  these  dealers’  customers.  The  Order  Handling  Rules  required 
dealers to display all public orders when these orders were at the best 
bid or offer.29 Once an issuer’s limit order becomes visible, it can trade 
with the customers of other dealers, either because the customers choose 
to transact with the limit order or because these other dealers forward 
customers’  marketable  orders  to  the  limit  order  to  fulfill  the  best 
execution obligation. Therefore, the Order Handling Rules extended an 
issuer’s execution priority from one dealer to all dealers. 

Order Handling Rules apply to all U.S. stocks, but they are specif-
ically targeted at Nasdaq stocks (Barclay et al., 1999). In our DiD ana-
lyses, Treatmenti equals one for Nasdaq firms and zero for matched firms 
listed  on  other  exchanges,  while  Postt  equals  one  if  an  observation  is 
from 1998 and zero if it is from 1996. The results we report in Panel B of 
Table 6 indicate that Nasdaq firms’ repurchases increase by 0.387 per-
centage  points  relative  to  control  firms,  representing  a  38%  increase 
over  pre-treatment  mean  (0.387/1.008).  We  do  not  find  significant 
treatment effects for dividends. NASDAQ firms’  total payouts increase 
by 0.414 percentage points relative to control firms, representing a 28% 
increase  over  pre-treatment  mean  (0.414/1.480).  NASDAQ  firms’ 
payout  structures  increase  by  0.360  relative  to  control  firms,  repre-
senting  a  22%  increase  over  pre-treatment  mean  (0.360  /1.639).  In 
summary, the results reported in this subsection suggest the first-order 
importance  of  execution  priority  for  repurchases  when  issuers  face 
price ceilings. 

4.2. The 1997 tick-size reduction and the 2001 decimalization 

In our controlled-experiment analyses, we show that an increase in 
the tick size reduces share repurchases. To conduct an external validity 
check, we examine the effects of the 1997 tick-size reduction from $1/8 

29  Barclay et al. (1999) note that the Order Handling Rules include four sets of 
rules. The Limit Order Display Rule is the most highly relevant rule for issuers. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381811X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Table 6 
Event studies: historical market-structure reforms and payout policies. In this table we report the results of event studies designed to test the effects of historical market- 
structure reforms on payout policies. In the event study for the 1994 Nasdaq Manning Rule, Treatment equals one if a firm is listed on Nasdaq and zero if it is a matched 
firm listed on another U.S. exchange, while Post equals one if an observation occurs in 1995 and zero if it occurs in 1993. In the event study for the 1997 Order Handing 
Rule, Treatment equals one if a firm is listed on Nasdaq and zero if it is a matched firm listed on another U.S. exchange, while Post equals one if an observation occurs in 
1998 and zero if it occurs in 1996. In the event study for the 1997 tick size reduction, Treatment equals one if a firm experiences an above-median decrease in the spread 
and zero for matched firms, while Post equals one if an observation occurs in 1998 and zero if it occurs in 1996. In the event study for the 2001 decimalization, 
Treatment equals one if a firm experiences an above-median decrease in the spread and zero for matched firms, while Post equals one if an observation occurs in 2002 
and zero if it occurs in 2000. In the event study for the 2003 implementation of autoquotes on the NYSE, Treatment equals one if a firm is listed on the NYSE and zero if it 
is a matched firm listed on another U.S. exchange, while Post equals one if an observation occurs in 2004 and zero if it occurs in 2002. Control variables include size, 
profitability, growth opportunity; managerial stock holdings and managerial options holdings; exercised and exercisable options; the financial flexibility advantage of 
share repurchases proxied by cash-flow volatility and non-operating cash flow; mispricing proxied by future one-year market-adjusted returns; financial constraint 
proxied by the WW index; and price informativeness proxied by return non-synchronicity, defined as one minus the R2 from a firm-specific regression of daily stock 
returns on value-weighted market returns for a year. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard errors that are robust to 
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.   

Repurchase Payouts 
(1) 

Dividend Payouts 
(2) 

Total Payouts 
(3) 

Payout Structure 
(4) 

Repurchase Dummy 
(5) 

Tender Offer  
(6) 

Panel A: 1994 Nasdaq Manning Rule 
Treatment × Post 
0.377*** 
(2.68) 

Panel B: 1997 Order Handling Rule 
Treatment × Post 
0.387** 
(2.21) 
Panel C: 1997 Tick Size Reduction 
Treatment × Post 

0.354** 
(1.99) 

Panel D: 2001 Decimalization 
Treatment × Post 

0.540*** 
(3.56) 

Panel E: 2003 NYSE Autoquote 
Treatment × Post 

Controls 
Firm FE 
Year FE 
Cluster by firm 

0.399** 
(2.02) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

(cid:0) 0.00349 
((cid:0) 0.10) 

0.0268 
(0.85) 

0.0162 
(0.64) 

(cid:0) 0.00671 
((cid:0) 0.19) 

0.0235 
(0.44) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.373** 
(2.53) 

0.414** 
(2.33) 

0.370** 
(2.05) 

0.533*** 
(3.41) 

0.422** 
(2.06) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.326*** 
(2.81) 

0.360** 
(2.44) 

0.296** 
(2.03) 

0.470*** 
(3.80) 

0.181 
(1.13) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.0477** 
(2.26) 

(cid:0) 0.00688 
((cid:0) 0.33) 

0.0137 
(0.68) 

0.00200 
(0.09) 

(cid:0) 0.00359 
((cid:0) 0.14) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.0460  
(0.89) 

0.0527  
(1.27) 

0.103  
(1.44) 

0.00522  
(0.08) 

0.0742  
(1.03) 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes  

to  $1/16  and  the  2001  decimalization  following  the  1997  Common 
Cents  Pricing  Act.  Goldstein  and  Kavajecz  (2000)  and  Bessembinder 
(2003) show that these two tick-size reductions narrowed the bid–ask 
spread  and  reduced  market  depth.  We  expect  to  find  increases  in 
repurchase payouts following both tick-size reductions. 

We follow prior literature and define Treatmenti  as equal to one for 
firms that experience above-median decreases in the bid–ask spread and 
zero for matched firms (Fang et al., 2014), while Postt  equals one if an 
observation is from one year after the tick-size reduction and zero if it is 
from one year before the tick-size reduction. In Panels C and D of Table 6 
we  report  the  results,  which  show  that,  following  the  1997  tick-size 
reduction, treatment firms’  repurchase payouts increase by 0.354 per-
centage  points  relative  to  control  firms,  representing  a  41%  increase 
over their pre-treatment mean (0.354/0.874). We do not find significant 
treatment effects on dividend payouts. Treatment firms’  total payouts 
increase  by  0.370  percentage  points  relative  to  control  firms,  repre-
senting a 26% increase over their pre-treatment mean (0.370/1.404). 
The ratio of repurchase payouts to dividend payouts among treatment 
firms increases by 0.296 relative to control firms, representing a 20% 
increase over its pre-treatment mean (0.296/1.462). Following the 2001 
decimalization,  the  treatment  firms’  repurchase  payouts  increase  by 
0.540 percentage points relative to control firms, representing a 32% 
increase over their pre-treatment mean (0.540/1.671). Again, we do not 
find significant treatment effects on dividend payouts. Treatment firms’ 
total payouts increased by 0.533 percentage points, representing a 23% 
increase  over  their  pre-treatment  mean  (0.533/2.298).  The  ratio  of 
repurchase  payouts  to  dividend  payouts  among  treatment  firms  in-
creases by 0.470 relative to control firms, representing a 23% increase 
over its pre-treatment mean (0.470 /2.030). 

The results of tick-size reductions reflect an intuition that is similar to 
that  associated  with  the  Tick  Size  Pilot.  A  reduction  in  the  tick  size 
narrows the bid–ask spread, reduces market depth at the best bid price, 

and reduces the queue competition at the price ceilings. Therefore, firms 
can repurchase more shares under less constraining price ceilings. 

4.3. 2003 NYSE autoquote installation 

In this subsection, we explore the importance of automated execu-
tion for share repurchases. We use the NYSE autoquote installation as a 
quasi-natural experiment  (Hendershott et al., 2011). In Section 3,  we 
noted that the Tick Size Pilot added frictions for computer algorithms. 
The  shocks  imposed  by  the  autoquote  installation  were  much  more 
fundamental  because  they  reshaped  the  share-repurchase  business  in 
two ways. 

First,  autoquotes  reduced  monitoring  and  compliance  costs  for  is-
suers.  They broke  down  the  physical barrier to  accessing  the market: 
issuers could use computer algorithms to compete with specialists for 
liquidity provision. Before the autoquote installation, share repurchases 
were executed manually (a high-touch process). When executions were 
manual, other liquidity providers could compete with specialists only 
when these liquidity providers were present, either on the floor or in the 
limit-order book. Automated execution significantly leveled the playing 
field  for  issuers  and  specialists.  Autoquotes  allowed  algorithms  to 
execute share repurchases (a low-touch process) and also made it easier 
for issuers to comply with Rule 10b-18. 

Second, autoquotes removed the last-mover advantage that special-
ists  enjoyed.  Before  the  autoquotes  were  installed,  NYSE  specialists 
disseminated  quotes  manually  and  approved  each  transaction  by 
pressing the “Enter” key. They could therefore condition their actions on 
incoming orders before they hit the “Enter” button (MacKenzie, 2017). 
For example, specialists could choose to participate in trades from their 
own  accounts  by  improving  quotes  from  existing  limit  orders.  They 
could also stop executions of incoming marketable orders by promising 
future price improvements. In both cases, specialists stepped ahead of 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381812X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

other liquidity providers, including issuers. After automated execution 
became  available,  specialists  lost  their  last-mover  advantage  because 
executions occurred in the absence of specialists’ approval. The loss of 
specialists’ execution privilege increased execution priority for issuers. 
In this event study, we define Treatmenti  as equal to one for NYSE 
firms and zero for matched firms listed on other exchanges; for example, 
Nasdaq stocks shifted to electronic trading before 2003 because of the 
proliferation  of  Electronic  Communication  Networks  (Barclay  et  al., 
2003). Postt  equals one if an observation is from 2004 and zero if it is 
from 2002. The results are reported in Panel E of Table 6 and show that 
the installation of autoquotes on the NYSE causes a 25% (0.399/1.628) 
increase in repurchase payouts in treated firms relative to control firms. 
This result provides one explanation of the increase in repurchases over 
dividends following the 2003 dividend-tax cut, as documented in Chetty 
and Saez (2005). The transition of repurchase execution from manual 
(high-touch)  execution  to  automated  (low-touch)  execution  reduced 
repurchasing  frictions  and  thus  increased  share  repurchases  around 
2003. 

4.4. Robustness Checks 

We next run two robustness checks on the effects of the historical 
events. First, we test the impact of historical events on tender offers. The 
results  reported  in  column  (6)  of  Table  6  indicate  that  the  historical 
market-structure reforms have no significant effects on tender offers. As 
a tender offer is not made through the secondary market and therefore is 
not regulated under Rule 10b-18, the nonsignificant treatment effects 
for tender offers help to establish price ceilings and market structure as 
the drivers of the increases in open-market share repurchases. Second, 
we  use  event-time  DiD  analyses  to  estimate  differences  in  changes in 
repurchases between the treatment and control groups from three years 
before the events to one year after the events, where year t (cid:0) 3 is the 
baseline year. Fig. A.2 plots the DiD coefficients graphically. In general, 
the differences in repurchase changes between the treatment and control 
groups are nonsignificant prior to the events, suggesting that the treated 
and control firms follow a similar trend in share repurchases prior to the 
treatment.30  The  figure  also  shows  the  main  treatment  effects  of  in-
creases in repurchases following the reforms. 

4.5. Linking micro-level evidence to the macro-level trend 

In this section, we use back-of-the-envelope calculations to provide 
rough estimates of the contributions of the historical market-structure 
reforms to the secular increase in repurchases. Quantifying the contri-
butions  of  any  single  economic  factor  to  the  secular  increase  in 
repurchases is certainly a challenging task. Existing explanations such as 
option dilution and financial flexibility rely on cross-sectional evidence 
but  do  not  directly  address  how  large  the  time-series  increase  in 
repurchases is driven by these factors (Farre-Mensa et al., 2014). Our 
DiD  research  design  using  historical  market-structure  events  as 
quasi-natural experiments provides us with a unique setting in which to 

carry out the estimations. Because our DiD estimates reported in Table 6 
represent  the  implied  changes  in  repurchases  that  are  attributable  to 
market-structure reforms divided by pre-year total assets, the implied 
dollar increase in repurchases that is attributable to each event depends 
on the treated firms’  total assets. Therefore, we extrapolate the dollar 
increase  in  share  repurchases  led  by  each  reform  by  multiplying  its 
treatment effect by the treated firms’ total assets. We then sum the ef-
fects  of  all  market-structure  reforms  and  find  that  they  contribute  to 
18%  of  the  secular  increase  in  share  repurchases  from  1995  through 
2021. 

Table 7 details the steps in our extrapolation and Fig. 2 visualizes the 
results. The implied dollar increase in share repurchases that is attrib-
utable  to  market-structure  reforms  depends  on  three  factors:  1)  the 
number  of  treated  firms,  2)  the  size  of  the  treated  firms,  and  3)  the 
treatment  effect  on  treated  firms.  We  therefore  conduct  a  three- 
dimensional  decomposition  to  project  our  micro-evidence  onto  the 
macro-trends. 

Panel A of Table 7 presents the number and fraction of treated firms 
over time. The results reported in columns (1)–(5) indicate the number 
of  treated  firms  in  each  market-structure  reform.  The  1994  Nasdaq 
Manning Rule led to 1096 treated firms in 1995, but this dropped to 960 
in  1997  because  some  treated  firms  were  delisted  from  the  stock  ex-
change during this period.31 The 1997 Nasdaq Order Handling Rule led 
to more treated firms (1,256) because many Nasdaq firms were newly 
listed  between  1994  and  1997.  The  1997  tick-size  reduction  and  the 
2001 decimalization affected not only Nasdaq firms but also NYSE firms 
and  led  to  even  larger  numbers  of  treated  firms  (1,662  and  1,474, 
respectively).32  Finally, the 2003 NYSE autoquote installation led to a 
relatively  lower  number  of  treated  firms  (872).  For  column  (6)  we 
measure the number of firms that have been treated by at least one re-
form. We call these firms treated firms for the sake of simplicity. Column 
(7) presents the number of all firms (including both treated and non- 
treated  firms)  in  the  sample.  Column  (8)  presents  the  fraction  of 
treated firms over all firms. As Panel A of Fig. 2 illustrates, this fraction 
increased from 21% in 1995 to 43% in 1998 to 56% in 2002, reaching 
61% in 2004 following the NYSE autoquote installation. Therefore, most 
firms have been treated by at least one market-structure reform after the 
NYSE installed autoquotes. 

Panel B of Table 7 presents the pre-year total assets of treated firms 
over time, which is the multiplier we use to calculate the implied in-
crease in share repurchases with our DiD estimates. The 1994 Nasdaq 
Manning  Rule  led  to  $632  billion  in  treated  assets  in  1995,  which 
increased to $814 billion in 1997 because of asset growth in the treated 
firms.  Like  the  pattern  shown  in  Panel  A,  the  1997  Nasdaq  Order 
Handling  Rule  led  to  greater  treated  assets  ($913  billion),  while  the 
1997  tick-size  reduction  and  2001  decimalization led  to even  greater 
treated assets ($2,180 billion and $2,167 billion, respectively).33  Most 
interestingly,  the  great  explosion  in  treated  assets  followed  the  2003 
NYSE autoquote installation, which led to $9,914 billion in treated as-
sets.  Panel  B  of  Fig.  2  shows  that  the  asset  weight  of  treated  firms 
increased from 7% in 1995 to 26% in 1998, 36% in 2002, and 85% in 
2004  following  the  NYSE  autoquote  installation.  Therefore,  market- 

30  Note that there was an increase in repurchases in treated firms over control 
firms from year (cid:0) 3 to year (cid:0) 2 in the 2003 NYSE autoquote analyses. Perhaps 
the  dot-com  bubble  burst  in  the  early  2000s  affected  mainly  NASDAQ  firms, 
and therefore NASDAQ firms reduced repurchases more than NYSE firms. There 
was no significant change from year (cid:0) 2 to year (cid:0) 1, as the impact of the dot- 
com  bubble  stabilized.  This  result  also  highlights  the  importance  of  using 
short windows of one year before and one year after the treatments in our main 
analyses  to  avoid  confounding  events  that  may  contaminate  the  estimates. 
There was a slight increase in repurchases in treated firms over repurchase in 
control firms from year (cid:0) 1 to year 0, as our data are reported at annual fre-
quency and year 0 is partially treated. For the 2001 decimalization, there was a 
slight increase in repurchases in treated firms over repurchases in control firms 
from  year (cid:0) 3  to  year  (cid:0) 1  but  the relative  change  in  repurchases was  nonsig-
nificant from year (cid:0) 2 to year (cid:0) 1. 

31  A firm may delist voluntarily or involuntarily. Voluntary delisting can occur 
because of mergers, takeovers, or privatization. Involuntary delisting can occur 
for failing to meet listing requirements (e.g., regulatory, financial, and trading 
standards) set by a stock exchange.  
32  The total number of treated firms in 1998 (2,275) is smaller than the sum of 
the number of treated firms in each of the three reforms (864+1,256+1,662) 
because a firm can be treated by more than one reform. For firms treated by 
more  than  one  reform,  we  include  the  impact  of  each  treatment  when  we 
compute the results in Panel C of Table 7.  
33  Like the results reported in Panel A, here the total non-overlapping treated 
assets in 1998 (2,833) is smaller than the sum of the treated assets in each of the 
three  reforms  (870+913+2,180)  because  the  total  non-overlapping  treated 
firms do not double-count firms that are treated by multiple reforms. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381813X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Table 7 
Event studies: linking micro-level evidence to macro-level trends. In this table we provide quantitative estimations of the contribution of the market-structure events to 
the secular increase in repurchases. Panel A presents the number and fraction of treated firms. Panel B presents the pre-year total assets and the asset weights of treated 
firms. Panel C presents the estimation results pertaining to the implied increase in repurchases attributable to the market-structure reforms and the contribution of the 
market-structure reforms to the secular increase in share repurchases. Columns (1)–(5) show the implied dollar changes in repurchases attributable to market-structure 
reforms. For each year following an event, we multiply our DiD estimates reported in Table 6 by the pre-year total assets of treated firms reported in Table 7 Panel B. We 
aggregate the implied increase in share repurchases across events in Column (6). Column (7) shows the aggregate repurchases of all firms from 1994 through 2021. 
Column (8) presents the estimation of the secular increase in share repurchases. Column (9) shows the fraction of the secular increase in share repurchases attributable 
to the market-structure reforms. The units in dollar amounts are reported in billions of real 2021 U.S. purchasing power.  

Year 

1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 

Year 

1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 

1994 
Nasdaq 
Manning 
Rule 
(1) 

1096 
1033 
960 
864 
772 
709 
665 
641 
616 
589 
560 
523 
497 
479 
464 
440 
422 
393 
370 
361 
348 
335 
316 
298 
286 
275 
255 

1994 
Nasdaq 
Manning 
Rule 
(1) 

632 
728 
814 
870 
979 
1123 
1234 
1209 
1182 
1180 
1224 
1173 
1218 
1261 
1211 
1255 
1406 
1557 
1703 
1819 
1879 
2038 
2222 
2318 
2206 
2229 

Panel A: The Number of Treated Firms 

1997 Order 
Handling 
Rule 

1997 Tick 
Size 
Reduction 

2001 
Decimalization 

2003 NYSE 
Autoquote 

All 
Treated 
Firms 

All Firms in the 
Sample 

Fraction of 
Treated Firms   

(2) 

- 
- 
- 
1256 
1123 
1016 
944 
909 
866 
821 
773 
721 
678 
649 
626 
592 
569 
534 
509 
490 
471 
452 
427 
404 
385 
368 
342 

(3) 

- 
- 
- 
1662 
1503 
1344 
1205 
1115 
1040 
975 
907 
850 
778 
722 
683 
651 
623 
596 
565 
538 
511 
486 
457 
437 
420 
399 
373 

(4) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1474 
1404 
1325 
1247 
1166 
1043 
983 
932 
881 
845 
801 
761 
728 
691 
660 
624 
592 
565 
541 
518 

(5) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
872 
845 
807 
749 
730 
716 
697 
675 
659 
639 
625 
602 
580 
560 
545 
524 
507 
489 

(6) 

1096 
1033 
960 
2275 
2037 
1821 
1636 
2228 
2098 
2267 
2128 
1997 
1827 
1720 
1634 
1551 
1484 
1409 
1347 
1297 
1237 
1182 
1125 
1076 
1031 
989 
942 

(7) 

5232 
5648 
5675 
5308 
5076 
4920 
4357 
4010 
3752 
3723 
3644 
3572 
3506 
3296 
3121 
3014 
2919 
2847 
2877 
2977 
2952 
2866 
2867 
2885 
2879 
2971 
3122 

(8)  

21%  
18%  
17%  
43%  
40%  
37%  
38%  
56%  
56%  
61%  
58%  
56%  
52%  
52%  
52%  
51%  
51%  
49%  
47%  
44%  
42%  
41%  
39%  
37%  
36%  
33%  
30%  

Panel B: Pre-year Total Assets of Treated Firms 

1997 Order 
Handling 
Rule 

1997 Tick 
Size 
Reduction 

2001 
Decimalization 

2003 NYSE 
Autoquote 

All 
Treated 
Firms 

All Firms in the 
Sample 

Asset Weights 
of Treated 
Firms   

(2) 

- 
- 
- 
913 
1174 
1382 
1610 
1550 
1496 
1505 
1576 
1473 
1527 
1568 
1522 
1577 
1751 
1938 
2113 
2266 
2370 
2548 
2748 
2907 
2829 
2911 

(3) 

- 
- 
- 
2180 
2495 
2783 
2834 
2982 
2708 
2844 
2878 
2872 
2929 
2884 
2675 
2651 
2709 
2970 
3174 
3257 
3392 
3622 
3711 
3827 
3636 
3773 

(4) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2167 
2268 
2351 
2503 
2514 
2533 
2488 
2411 
2402 
2384 
2499 
2619 
2636 
2699 
2783 
2789 
2831 
2635 
2866 

(5) 

(6) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
9914 
10,400 
10,200 
10,300 
10,400 
9906 
10,100 
10,500 
10,700 
10,800 
11,000 
11,100 
11,200 
10,900 
11,100 
11,100 
11,800 

632 
728 
814 
2833 
3113 
3500 
3664 
5035 
4825 
11,900 
12,400 
12,100 
12,200 
12,400 
11,800 
12,000 
12,500 
12,900 
13,300 
13,600 
13,800 
14,000 
13,900 
14,300 
14,200 
15,000 

(7) 

9009 
9365 
10,100 
10,700 
11,400 
12,800 
13,900 
13,700 
13,400 
14,000 
14,700 
14,600 
15,000 
15,400 
14,600 
14,900 
15,700 
16,300 
17,000 
17,800 
18,500 
19,000 
19,200 
20,000 
20,100 
21,200 

(8)  

7%  
8%  
8%  
26%  
27%  
27%  
26%  
37%  
36%  
85%  
84%  
83%  
81%  
81%  
81%  
81%  
80%  
79%  
78%  
76%  
75%  
74%  
72%  
72%  
71%  
71%  

(continued on next page) 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381814X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Table 7 (continued ) 

2021 

Year 

1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Sum 

2288 

2998 

3767 

2918 

11,900 

15,200 

21,800 

70%  

1994 
Nasdaq 
Manning 
Rule 
(1) 

- 
2.38 
2.74 
3.07 
3.28 
3.69 
4.23 
4.65 
4.56 
4.46 
4.45 
4.61 
4.42 
4.59 
4.75 
4.57 
4.73 
5.30 
5.87 
6.42 
6.86 
7.08 
7.68 
8.38 
8.74 
8.32 
8.40 
8.63 
146.88 

Panel C: Implied Increase in Repurchases Attributable to Market-Structure Reforms 

1997 Order 
Handling 
Rule 

1997 Tick 
Size 
Reduction 

2001 
Decimalization 

2003 NYSE 
Autoquote 

Sum of 
Events 

Repurchases of 
All Firms in the 
Sample 

Secular 
Increase in 
Repurchases 

(2) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
3.53 
4.54 
5.35 
6.23 
6.00 
5.79 
5.82 
6.10 
5.70 
5.91 
6.07 
5.89 
6.10 
6.78 
7.50 
8.18 
8.77 
9.17 
9.86 
10.63 
11.25 
10.95 
11.26 
11.60 
178.99 

(3) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
7.72 
8.83 
9.85 
10.03 
10.56 
9.59 
10.07 
10.19 
10.17 
10.37 
10.21 
9.47 
9.38 
9.59 
10.52 
11.24 
11.53 
12.01 
12.82 
13.14 
13.55 
12.87 
13.35 
13.34 
260.38 

(4) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
11.70 
12.25 
12.70 
13.52 
13.57 
13.68 
13.44 
13.02 
12.97 
12.87 
13.50 
14.14 
14.23 
14.57 
15.03 
15.06 
15.29 
14.23 
15.48 
15.76 
277.00 

(5) 

(6) 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
39.56 
41.50 
40.70 
41.10 
41.50 
39.52 
40.30 
41.90 
42.69 
43.09 
43.89 
44.29 
44.69 
43.49 
44.29 
44.29 
47.08 
47.48 
771.34 

- 
2.38 
2.74 
3.07 
14.53 
17.07 
19.43 
20.91 
32.82 
32.08 
72.59 
75.92 
74.56 
75.65 
75.96 
72.47 
73.49 
76.43 
80.08 
83.07 
85.28 
87.13 
90.08 
90.70 
93.11 
90.65 
95.58 
96.80 
1634.58 

(7) 

69.53 
105.06 
141.15 
198.61 
249.66 
255.08 
228.61 
188.48 
176.60 
191.90 
289.19 
431.29 
562.08 
691.20 
452.59 
182.28 
351.41 
488.50 
435.73 
512.23 
586.73 
606.87 
531.72 
481.07 
770.26 
619.35 
509.93 
749.90 
- 

(8) 

- 
35.53 
71.61 
129.07 
180.12 
185.55 
159.07 
118.95 
107.06 
122.36 
219.66 
361.76 
492.55 
621.67 
383.05 
112.74 
281.87 
418.97 
366.20 
442.70 
517.20 
537.34 
462.18 
411.53 
700.72 
549.82 
440.40 
680.36 
9110.05 

Percentage 
Contribution of 
Market-Structure 
Reforms  
(9) 

- 
6.70% 
3.83% 
2.38% 
8.07% 
9.20% 
12.22% 
17.58% 
30.66% 
26.22% 
33.05% 
20.99% 
15.14% 
12.17% 
19.83% 
64.28% 
26.07% 
18.24% 
21.87% 
18.76% 
16.49% 
16.21% 
19.49% 
22.04% 
13.29% 
16.49% 
21.70% 
14.23% 
17.94% 

(1995–2021) 

Percentage 

Contribution 
by Reforms 

1.61% 

1.96% 

2.86% 

3.04% 

8.47% 

-  

structure  reforms  began  by  affecting  a  large  number  of  firms  with 
relatively lower assets in the 1990s, but later affected much larger firms 
in the 2000s. These patterns help explain the aggregate trend through 
which the secular increase in share repurchases begins with an increase 
in  the number of firms that switch from paying dividends to  offering 
share  buybacks  in  the  1990s  (Fama  and  French,  2001;  Grullon  and 
Michaely, 2002), while the dramatic increase in the dollar amount of 
share repurchases occurs after 2003 (Farre-Mensa et al., 2014). 

Panel C of Table 7 presents the estimation results for the treatment 
effect on treated firms. The results reported in columns (1)–(5) indicate 
the implied dollar increases in repurchases in each reform-year, where 
we multiply the treatment effect indicated in Table 6 by the pre-year 
total assets of treated firms reported in Table 7 Panel B. For example, 
for column (1) we extrapolate the impact of the Nasdaq Manning Rule by 
multiplying its treatment effect by treated firms’  pre-year total assets. 
The implied increase in share repurchases in 1995 ($2.38 billion) that is 
attributable to the Nasdaq Manning Rule equals the product of the DiD 
coefficient reported in column (1) of Table 6 Panel A (0.377%) and the 
treated firms’ pre-year total assets in 1995 ($632 billion). The implied 
increase in share repurchases in 1998 is $3.28 billion, using the same 
DiD coefficient multiplied by treated firms’ pre-year total assets in 1998 
($870 billion). 

After 1997, additional market-structure reforms kicked in, and we 
show results indicating their effects in columns (2)–(5) of Table 7. For 
example,  the  1997  Order  Handling  Rule  and  tick-size  reduction  led, 
respectively, to $3.53 billion (0.387% × $913 billion) and $7.72 billion 
(0.354% × $2,180 billion) implied increases in repurchases in 1998. For 
column  (6)  we  measure  the  aggregated  implied  increase  in  share 

repurchases  across  events.  The  aggregated  implied  increase  in  share 
repurchases that is attributable to market-structure reforms in 1998 is 
$14.53 billion, which we calculated by summing the implied increase in 
repurchases  from  these  three  reforms  (3.28+3.53+7.72).  Decimaliza-
tion and the NYSE autoquote installation generated larger implied in-
creases  in  share  repurchases.  Decimalization  resulted  in  an  $11.70 
billion (0.540% × $2,167 billion) implied increase in share repurchases 
in  2002,  while  the  NYSE  autoquote  installation  resulted  in  a  $39.56 
billion (0.399% × $9,914 billion) implied increase in share repurchases 
in 2004. The total implied increase in share repurchases across reforms 
rose to $32.08 billion in 2002 and $72.59 billion in 2004. After 2004, all 
five  reforms  were  implemented  and  the  total  implied  increase  in 
repurchases across reforms continued to grow, rising to $96.80 billion in 
2021. We also sum the estimates of the implied increase in repurchases 
over  the  entire  1995–2021  period:  the  Manning  Rule  and  the  Order 
Handling Rule resulted in $146.88 billion and $178.99 billion increases 
in repurchases, respectively; the 1997 tick-size reduction and decimal-
ization  resulted  in  $260.38  billion  and  $277.00  billion  increases  in 
repurchases, respectively; and the NYSE autoquote installation resulted 
in a $771.34 billion increase in repurchases. The total implied increase 
in share repurchases due to these reforms over the 1995–2021 period is 
~$1.63 trillion. 

The  next  step  in  calculating  the  percentage  contribution  of  the 
market-structure reforms to the secular increase in share repurchases is 
to  estimate  the  denominator.  We  first  calculate  the  increase  in 
repurchases in each year over the 1995–2021 period over repurchases in 
the baseline year of 1994. To capture the secular trend during the entire 
sample period from 1995 through 2021 instead of a point estimate in a 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381815X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Fig.  2. Event studies:  linking  micro-level  evidence  to  macro-level  trends.  In this  figure,  we  plot  the  quantitative estimations  of  the  contribution of  the  market- 
structure  events  to  the  secular  increase  in  repurchases  from  1995  to  2021.  Panel  A  plots  the  number  and  fraction  of  treated  firms.  Panel  B  plots  the  pre-year 
total  assets  and  the  asset  weights  of  treated  firms.  Panel  C  plots  the  estimation  results  pertaining  to  the  implied  increase  in  repurchases  attributable  to  the 
market-structure reforms and the percentage contribution of the market-structure reforms to the secular increase in share repurchases in each year. Panel D plots the 
accumulative  implied  increase  in  repurchases  attributable  to  the  market-structure  reforms  and  the  accumulative  percentage  contribution  of  the  market-structure 
reforms  to  the  secular  increase  in  share  repurchases.  For  example,  in  2003,  the  implied  increase  in  repurchases  attributable  to  the  market-structure  reforms  is 
the implied increase in 2003 only, while the accumulative implied increase in repurchases attributable to the market-structure reforms is the sum of the implied 
increase from 1995 to 2003. Similarly, in 2003, the secular increase in share repurchases is the aggregate increase in repurchases in 2003 only, while the accu-
mulative secular increase in share repurchases is the sum of the aggregate increase in repurchases from 1995 to 2003. 

particular year, we accumulate these increases in repurchases. Column 
(7) presents the repurchases of all firms from 1994 through 2021. Col-
umn  (8)  presents  the  increase  in  repurchases  each  year  over  the 
1995–2021 period over the baseline year of 1994. Column (9) shows the 
fraction of the aggregate increase in share repurchases that is attribut-
able to the market-structure reforms, where we divide the implied in-
crease  in  share  repurchases  reported  in  column  (6)  by  the  aggregate 
increase in repurchases reported in column (8). Panel C of Fig. 2 plots 
the implied increase in repurchases and the percentage contribution of 
market-structure  reforms  by  year.  For  example,  the  increase  in 
repurchases in 1995 over repurchases in 1994 is $35.53 billion, calcu-
lated by subtracting the aggregate repurchase amount in 1994 ($69.53 
billion)  from  the  aggregate  repurchase  amount  in  1995  ($105.06 
billion), and the percentage contribution of market-structure reforms in 
1995 was 6.70% (2.38/35.53). Similarly, the increase in repurchases in 
2021 over repurchases in 1994 was $680.36 billion (749.90–69.53), and 
the  percentage  contribution  of  market-structure  reforms  in  2021  was 
14.23% (96.80/680.36). Summing the annual estimates for each year, 
Panel D of Fig. 2 shows that the accumulative secular increase in share 
repurchases from 1995 through 2021 is ~$9.11 trillion, and the total 
contribution of the market-structure reforms to the secular increase in 
share repurchases over the 1995–2021 period was ~18% (1.63/9.11). 
The last row in Panel C of Table 7 presents the breakdown of the 
percentage contribution by event. One interesting result is that the NYSE 

autoquote  installation  made  the  greatest  contribution  to  the  secular 
increase  in  share  repurchases  (8.47%)  even  though  it  occurred  last 
among  the  reforms,  while  the  1994  Nasdaq  Manning  Rule  made  the 
smallest contribution (1.61%) even though it was the first to occur. As 
the installation of autoquotes affects NYSE stocks while earlier reforms 
affect mostly NASDAQ stocks, and NYSE firms are on average larger than 
NASDAQ firms, this reform increased share repurchases more measur-
ably  in  dollar  amounts.  The  Order  Handling  Rule,  the  1997  tick-size 
reduction,  and  decimalization  contributed  1.96%,  2.86%,  and  3.04% 
of the secular increase in repurchases, respectively. 

To  summarize  the  economic  implications  of  our  back-of-the- 
envelope  analysis,  the  results  presented  in  this  section  indicate  that 
the historical market-structure reforms played an important role in the 
secular  increase  in  share  repurchases,  not  only  qualitatively  but  also 
quantitatively. Moreover, we find that the market-structure reforms at 
first affected a large number of firms in the 1990s following the 1994 
NASDAQ Manning Rule but had relatively smaller impacts on the dollar 
amounts  of  share  repurchases,  and  later  had  much  larger  impacts  on 
increasing the dollar amount of share repurchase in the 2000s after the 
2003 NYSE autoquote installation. These results help explain why the 
secular increase in share repurchases over paying dividends begins with 
an increase in the number of firms (Fama and French, 2001; Grullon and 
Michaely, 2002) followed by an increase in dollar amounts (Farre-Mensa 
et al., 2014). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381816X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

5. Conclusion 

When  U.S.  firms  repurchase  shares  in  the  open  market,  they  face 
price ceilings established by SEC Rule 10b-18. The price ceilings, in turn, 
gives market structure the first-order role in share repurchases. We show 
that  the  price  ceilings  and  reduced  market-structure  frictions  provide 
one explanation of the secular increase in share repurchases over divi-
dends.  The  1994  Manning  Rule  and  the  1997  Order  Handling  Rules 
increased issuers’  execution priority at the price ceilings. Tick-size re-
ductions in 1997 and 2001 led to finer price grids, relaxing the price 
ceilings and reducing queue competition at the same price. Automated 
execution (e.g., the 2003 NYSE autoquote installation) allows traders to 
use computer algorithms to monitor the market and comply with Rule 
10b-18.  These  market-structure  reforms  have  reduced  frictions  for  is-
suers  who  compete  with  other  traders  at  the  price  ceiling  and  have 
thereby increased share repurchases. The Tick Size Pilot Program, which 
partially reversed the market reforms by increasing the tick size, also 
reversed the secular increase in share repurchases for randomly selected 
treatment firms. Meanwhile, the frictions introduced by the price ceiling 
and market structure still exist, which explains why share repurchases 
have not crowded out dividends entirely. 

Our results indicate that market structure can have first-order effects 
on corporate policies when firms trade directly on the open market and 
face regulatory constraints such as price ceilings. These two conditions 
suggest  new  directions  for  research  at  the  intersection  of  market 
microstructure  and  corporate  finance.  Our  results  open  two  new 
research  dimensions  for  liquidity:  liquidity-for-whom  and  liquidity- 
from-where. Although a market with greater depth is generally consid-
ered more liquid, it may harm issuers because they face more intense 
competition when repurchasing shares at the price ceiling. Therefore, 
regulations  can  blur  the  definition  of  liquidity  for  distinct  groups  of 
traders, indicating the importance of liquidity-for-whom. We find that 
dark pools are important for share repurchases because these platforms 
allow  issuers  to  avoid  queues  at  the  price  ceilings.  The  trade-at  rule, 
which unintentionally banned share repurchases in dark pools, reduces 
share repurchases, indicating the importance of liquidity-from-where. 

Finally, the market-structure reforms and innovations we study did 
not cause just a single shock. Instead, they continued affecting markets 
for decades and will continue to do so well into the future. Such gradual 
changes  not  only  provide  an  interpretation  of  the  secular  increase  in 
share  repurchases  over  decades  but  also  generate  out-of-sample  pre-
dictions of future changes. In showing that the price ceiling from Rule 
10b-18  introduces  a  major  friction  for  share  repurchases,  our  paper 
explains why  firms  lobby the  SEC  to  increase  the  price  ceiling to  the 
VWAP  or  the  midpoint  of  the  bid–ask  price.  In  addition,  as  both  the 
midpoint price and the VWAP would further loosen the price ceilings for 
share  repurchases,  the  results  presented  in  our  paper  indicate  that 
implementing  these  proposals  could  create  another  boost  to  share 
repurchases. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Xiongshi  Li: Writing  –  review &  editing, Writing  –  original  draft, 
Visualization,  Validation,  Resources,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis, 
Data curation, Conceptualization. Mao Ye: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing –  original draft, Visualization, Validation, Resources, Method-
ology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Miles Zheng: 
Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization, 
Validation,  Resources,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation, 
Conceptualization. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The  author  declares  that  he  has  no  relevant  or  material  financial 

interests that relate to the research described in this paper. 

Data availability 

Data will be made available on request. 
Replication Package for Price Ceilings, Market Structure, and Payout 

Policies (Original data) (Mendeley Data)  

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103818. 

Appendix Additional figures and tables 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381817X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Fig. A.1. Designated and customized buyback algorithms. In this figure, we show that an issuer can buy back shares using designated repurchase algorithms or by 
adding a 10b-18 compliance restriction to a general-purpose algorithm (a customized buyback algorithm). Panel A shows an algorithm that is assigned to share 
repurchases. Firms need to specify the “Start Time,” the “End Time,” and “Max % Vol” and then the algorithm automatically buys back shares in compliance with 
Rule  10b-18.  Panel  B  shows  two  examples  of  customized  buyback  algorithms.  The  Volume  Weighted  Average  Price  (VWAP)  algorithm  automatically  manages 
transactions to achieve the all-day or intra-day VWAP. The DarkSeek algorithm searches for liquidity only in dark pools. Issuers can add the “Buy Back” option to 
these algorithms such that they generate only trades that are consistent with Rule 10b-18. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381818X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Fig. A.2. Event studies: parallel trend and treatment effects. In this figure, we graph the event-time DiD estimates. For each event-time DiD analysis, the sample 
period runs from t(cid:0) 3 to t + 1, where year t(cid:0) 3 is the baseline period. The figure shows that the differences in changes in repurchases between the treatment and 
control groups were in general nonsignificant prior to the events, suggesting that the treated and control firms followed similar trends prior to the treatment. As our 
data are reported at annual frequency, firms may be partially treated at year 0.  

Table A.1 
Dark pools and share repurchases: evidence from ATS-N filings. This table presents dark-pool information that we hand-collect from ATS-N filings on the SEC website 
(https://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/form-ats-n-filings.htm), accessed on February 13, 2021. Columns (1)–(3) list the ATS name, broker-dealer operator, and 
Form link. In column (4) “Y” and “N” indicate whether subscribers include issuers; obtained from Part III, Item 1, “Types of ATS Subscribers.” Column (5) presents 
priority rules, obtained from Part III, Item 7, “Order Types and Attributes” or Item 11, “Trading Services, Facilities, and Rules.” In column (6) “Y” and “N” indicate 
whether the ATS offers primary peg orders which match the buy orders using the bid prices and automatically comply with Rule 10b-18, obtained from Part III, Item 7, 
“Order Types and Attributes.”.  

ATS Name 

Broker-Dealer Operator 

Form Link 

(2) 

UBS SECURITIES LLC 

(3) 

013–00069 

GOLDMAN SACHS & CO. LLC 
CREDIT SUISSE SECURITIES (USA) LLC 

013–00121 
013–00106 

(1) 

UBS ATS 

SIGMA X2 
Crossfinder 

JPM-X 
LeveL ATS 
The Barclays ATS 
IBKR ATS 
MS POOL ATS-4 
BIDS ATS 
IntelligentCross ATS 
Virtu MatchIt ATS 
Instinct X 
MS Trajectory Cross 

ATS-1 
SuperX ATS 
POSIT 
CrossStream 
JPB-X 
Liquidnet H2O ATS 
MS RPOOL ATS-6 

J.P. MORGAN SECURITIES LLC 
EBX LLC 
BARCLAYS CAPITAL INC. 
INTERACTIVE BROKERS LLC 
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC 
BIDS TRADING L.P. 
INTELLIGENT CROSS LLC 
VIRTU AMERICAS LLC 
BOFA SECURITIES, INC. 
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC 

DEUTSCHE BANK SECURITIES INC. 
VIRTU AMERICAS LLC 
NATIONAL FINANCIAL SERVICES LLC 
J.P. MORGAN SECURITIES LLC 
LIQUIDNET, INC. 
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC 

Issuer as 
Subscriber 
(4) 

Priority Rule 

(5) 

Primary 
Peg 
(6) 

N 

Y 
Y 

Y 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 

Y 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 

N 
Y 
Y 

Price/time for orders, price/quantity/time for CI 
(conditional indications) 
Price/broker/time 
Price/time for standard book, price/symbol score/size/ 
time for CI 
Price/tier/time 
Price/time 
Price/tier/time 
Price/quantity/time 
Price/capacity (tier) /size/time 
Price/quantity/time or quantity/price/time 
Price/display type/time 
Price/time for main session, price/quantity/time for CI 
Price/capacity (tier) /time 
Capacity (tier) /size/time 

Price/time 
Price/pro rata 
Price/tier/size/time 
Equal split/time 
Tier/time 
Type of interest (i.e., orders have priority over CI), 
capacity, size, and time 
Price/time 
Price/time 
Price/time 

Y 

Y 
Y 

Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 

Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
N 
N 

N 
Y 
Y 

(continued on next page) 

013–00110 
013–00132 
013–00127 
013–00114 
013–00117 
013–00031 
013–00116 
013–00140 
013–00150 
013–00115 

013–0052 
013–00175 
013–00118 
013–00109 
013–00078 
013–00139 

013–00113 
013–00108 
013–00105 

DEALERWEB 
Instinet BlockCross 
CBX 

DEALERWEB INC. 
INSTINET, LLC 
INSTINET, LLC 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381819X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Table A.1 (continued ) 

ATS Name 

Broker-Dealer Operator 

Form Link 

(1) 

(2) 

CODA 
Liquidnet Negotiation 

CODA MARKETS, INC. 
LIQUIDNET, INC. 

ATS 

Luminex ATS 
CitiBLOC 
Ustocktrade 
Instinet Crossing 
Aqua 
XE 
tZERO ATS 
Stifel X 

LUMINEX TRADING & ANALYTICS LLC 
CITIGROUP GLOBAL MARKETS INC. 
USTOCKTRADE SECURITIES, INC. 
INSTINET, LLC 
AQUA SECURITIES L.P. 
PIPER JAFFRAY & CO. 
tZERO ATS, LLC 
STIFEL, NICOLAUS & COMPANY, 
INCORPORATED 

(3) 

013–00096 
013–00107 

013–00112 
013–00129 
013–00119 
013–00104 
013–00067 
013–00160 
013–00126 
013–00171 

Issuer as 
Subscriber 
(4) 

Y 
Y 

N 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
N 

Priority Rule 

(5) 

Price/size/time 
Price/time 

Auto execution size/top size/time 
Tier/time 
Price/time 
Pro rata for VWAP, subscriber priority for MOC 
Price/time 
Price/time 
Price/time or price/broker/time 
Price/time 

Primary 
Peg 
(6) 

Y 
N 

N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y   

Table A.2 
Tick Size Pilot Program and payout policies: summary statistics. In this table, we present summary statistics for the main sample for the Tick Size Pilot Program with a 
breakdown by event year. The pre-treatment period in our analyses for the Tick Size Pilot Program is 2014 Q4–2016 Q3. The post-treatment period is 2016 Q4–2018 
Q3.   

Full sample 
Mean 

2014Q4–2015Q3 
Mean 

2015Q4–2016Q3 
Mean 

2016Q4–2017Q3 
Mean 

2017Q4–2018Q3  
Mean 

Repurchase payouts 
Dividend payouts 
Total payouts 
Payout structure 

0.325 
0.222 
0.547 
1.173 

0.414 
0.235 
0.649 
1.240 

0.346 
0.221 
0.567 
1.195 

0.263 
0.215 
0.478 
1.123 

0.279 
0.217 
0.496 
1.136   

Table A.3 
Event studies: pre-treatment summary statistics. In this table, we present pre-treatment summary statistics and the mean differences for the treatment and the matched 
control firms in the event studies.   

Panel A: 1994 Manning Rule 
Treatment 
Mean 

Control 
Mean 

Repurchase payouts 
Dividend payouts 
Total payouts 
Payout structure 

0.631 
0.636 
1.267 
1.324 

0.570 
0.635 
1.204 
1.285 

Panel C: 1997 Tick Size Reduction 
Treatment 
Mean 

Control 
Mean 

Repurchase payouts 
Dividend payouts 
Total payouts 
Payout structure 

0.874 
0.530 
1.404 
1.462 

0.831 
0.516 
1.346 
1.453 

t-test 
Diff 

0.061 
0.001 
0.063 
0.039 

t-test 
Diff 

0.043 
0.014 
0.058 
0.008 

p-value 

0.544 
0.987 
0.616 
0.643 

p-value 

0.663 
0.743 
0.614 
0.913 

Panel E: 2003 NYSE Autoquote      
Treatment 
Mean 

Control 
Mean 

Repurchase payouts 
Dividend payouts 
Total payouts 
Payout structure 

1.628 
1.093 
2.721 
1.727 

1.492 
1.006 
2.499 
1.733 

t-test      
Diff 

0.136 
0.087 
0.223 
(cid:0) 0.006 

Panel B: 1997 Order Handling Rule  
Treatment 
Mean 

Control 
Mean 

1.008 
0.472 
1.480 
1.639 

0.928 
0.465 
1.394 
1.583 

Panel D: 2001 Decimalization  
Control 
Treatment 
Mean 
Mean 

1.576 
0.616 
2.192 
1.990 

1.671 
0.627 
2.298 
2.030 

p-value     

0.460     
0.233     
0.272     
0.964      

t-test  
Diff 

0.080 
0.007 
0.087 
0.056 

t-test  
Diff 

0.095 
0.011 
0.106 
0.040 

p-value 

0.505 
0.896 
0.526 
0.570   

p-value 

0.465 
0.804 
0.456 
0.717   

References 

Albuquerque, R., Song, S., Yao, C., 2020. The price effects of liquidity shocks: a study of 

SEC’s tick-size experiment. J. Financ. Econ. 138, 700–724. 

Allen, F. Michaely, R., 2003. Payout policy. Constantinides, G.M., Harris, M. Stulz, R. M. 

(Ed.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Elsevier, 1, 337–429. 

Almeida, H., Fos, V., Kronlund, M., 2016. The real effects of share repurchases. J. Financ. 

Econ. 119, 168–185. 

Anand, A., Samadi, M., Sokobin, J., Venkataraman, K., 2021. Institutional order handling 

and broker-affiliated trading venues. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34, 3364–3402. 

Barclay, M.J., Christie, W.G., Schultz, P.H., 1999. Effects of market reform on the trading 

costs and depths of Nasdaq stocks. J. Finance 54, 1–34. 

Barclay, M.J., Hendershott, T., Mccormick, D.T., 2003. Competition among trading 

venues: information and trading on electronic communications networks. J. Finance 
58, 2637–2665. 

Bessembinder, H., 2003. Trade execution costs and market quality after decimalization. 

J. Financ. Q Anal. 38, 747–777. 

Brown, J.R., Liang, N., Weisbenner, S., 2007. Executive financial incentives and payout 

policy: firm responses to 2003 dividend tax cut. J. Finance 62, 1935–1965. 
Chetty, R., Saez, E., 2005. Dividend taxes and corporate behavior: evidence from the 

2003 dividend tax cut. Q J. Econ. 120, 791–833. 

Chetty, R., Saez, E., 2010. Dividend and corporate taxation in an agency model of the 

firm. Am Econ J.: Econ. Policy 2, 1–31. 

Christie, W., Schultz, P.H., 1994. Why do NASDAQ market makers avoid odd-eighth 

quotes? J. Finance 49, 1813–1840. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381820X. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Cook, D.O., Krigman, L., Leach, J.C., 2003. An analysis of SEC guidelines for executing 

Kahle, K., 2002. When a buyback isn’t a buyback: open market repurchases and 

open market repurchases. Journal of Business 76, 289–315. 

employee options. J. Financ. Econ. 63, 235–261. 

Dittmar, A., Field, L.C., 2015. Can managers time the market? evidence using repurchase 

Li, S., Ye, M., 2022. Discrete price, discrete quantity, and the optimal price of a stock. 

price data. J. Financ. Econ. 115, 261–282. 

Duffie, D., 2013. Replumbing our financial system: uneven progress. Int. J. Cent. Bank. 9, 

251–280. 

Brandeis University, Cornell University and NBER. Unpublished working paper.  
Li, S., Ye, M., Zheng, M., 2023. Refusing the best price? J. Financ. Econ. 147, 317–337. 
MacKenzie, D., 2017. A material political economy: automated trading desk and price 

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2001. Disappearing dividends: changing firm characteristics or 

prediction in high-frequency trading. Soc. Stud. Sci. 47, 172–194. 

lower propensity to pay? J. Financ. Econ. 60, 3–43. 

Miller, M., Modigliani, F., 1961. Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of shares. 

Fang, V.W., Tian, X., Tice, S., 2014. Does stock liquidity enhance or impede firm 

J. Business 34, 411–433. 

innovation? J. Finance 69, 2085–2125. 

Poterba, J.M., Summers, L.H., 1985. The economic effects of dividend taxation. Recent 

Farre-Mensa, J., Michaely, R., Schmalz, M., 2014. Payout policy. Annual Rev. Financial 

Advances in Corporate Finance. Dow Jones-Irwin Publishing. 

Econ. 6, 75–134. 

Fenn, G.W., Liang, N., 2001. Corporate payout policy and managerial stock incentives. 

J. Financ. Econ. 60, 45–72. 

Roberts, M., Whited, T., 2013. Endogeneity in empirical corporate finance. 

Constantinides, G. M., Harris, M. Stulz, R. M. (Ed.), Handbook of the Economics of 
Finance. Elsevier, 2, 493–572. 

Goldstein, M.A., Kavajecz, K.A., 2000. Eighths, sixteenths, and market depth: changes in 

Securities and Exchange Commission, 2002. Proposed Rule: rule 10b-18 and Purchases of 

tick size and liquidity provision on NYSE. J. Financ. Econ. 56, 125–149. 
Grullon, G., Michaely, R., 2002. Dividends, share repurchases, and the substitution 

Certain Equity Securities by The Issuer and Others. Washington, DC. 

Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015. Plan to Implement A Tick Size Pilot 

hypothesis. J. Finance 57, 1649–1684. 

Program. Washington, DC. 

Hasbrouck, J., 2007. Empirical Market Microstructure: The Institutions, Economics, and 

Securities and Exchange Commission, 2018. Assessment of The Plan to Implement A Tick 

Econometrics of Securities Trading. Oxford University Press, New York.  

Size Pilot Program. Washington, DC. 

Hendershott, T., Jones, C.M., Menkveld, A.J., 2011. Does algorithmic trading improve 

Rindi, B., Werner, I., 2019. U.S. tick size pilot. Bocconi University, and The Ohio State 

liquidity? J. Finance 66, 1–33. 

Holden, C.W., Jacobsen, S., 2014. Liquidity measurement problems in fast, competitive 

markets: expensive and cheap solutions. Journal of Finance 69, 1747–1785. 
Jagannathan, M., Stephens, C.P., Weisbach, M.S., 2000. Financial flexibility and the 
choice between dividends and stock repurchases. J. Financ. Econ. 57, 355–384. 
Jones, C.M., Lipson, M.L., 2001. Sixteenths: direct evidence on institutional execution 

costs. J. Financ. Econ. 59, 253–278. 

University. Unpublished working paper.  

Thel, S., 1988. Regulation of manipulation under Section 10 (b): security prices and the 
text of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Columbia Business Law Rev. 359. 
Whited, T., Wu, G., 2006. Financial constraints risk. Rev. Financial Stud. 19, 531–559. 
Yagan, D., 2015. Capital tax reform and the real economy: the effects of the 2003 

dividend tax cut. Am. Econ. Rev. 105, 3531–3563. 

Yao, C., Ye, M., 2018. Why trading speed matters: a tale of queue rationing under price 

controls. Rev. Financial Stud. 31, 2157–2183. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381821