Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Journal of Financial Economics 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec 

Production complementarity and information transmission 
across industries

✰ 

Charles M.C. Lee a, Terrence Tianshuo Shi b, Stephen Teng Sun c,*, Ran Zhang d 
a Foster School of Business, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States 
b Harvard Business School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States 
c City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 
d School of Business, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Economic theory suggests that production complementarity is an important driver of sectoral co-movements and 
business  cycle  fluctuations.  We  operationalize  this  concept  using  a  measure  of  production  complementarity 
proximity (COMPL) between any two companies. We show firms from different industries but are closely aligned 
in COMPL exhibit strong co-movement in their operating, investing, and financing activities, as well as quarterly 
earnings revisions and monthly returns. We further document a lead-lag effect in their returns, such that a long- 
short strategy based on recent COMPL peer returns yields a monthly 6-factor alpha of 122 basis points. This inter- 
industry momentum spillover effect is not explained by other network-based mechanisms, such as shared analyst 
coverage. We conclude information transmission takes place along complementarity networks, but stock prices 
do not update instantaneously.   

JEL Classifications: 
E60 
G10 
G14 
M20 
M21 

Keywords: 
Momentum spillovers 
Economically linked firms 
Return prediction 
Investor inattention 
Information transmission 
Cross-industry news 
Production complementarity 

1. Introduction 

A striking feature of production networks is that industries (or firms) 
producing  distinct  intermediate  inputs  to  the  same  output  can  form 
complementary  relationships.  Entities  that  share  some  production 
complementarities  are  called  complementors,  and  the  production  de-
cisions of these entities are textbook examples of strategic complemen-
tarity from game theory. For example, batteries and processor chips are 
complementary goods because of their common usage in the production 
of smartphones. Breakthroughs in battery technology will likely increase 
demand  for  more  powerful  processor  chips,  just  as  breakthroughs  in 
processor chips will likely increase demand for more durable batteries. 

In this setting, producers of batteries and producers of processor chips 
are complementors, even though (a) they belong to different industries, 
and  (b)  they  have  no  direct  customer-supplier  relationship  with  each 
other.  Economic  theory  predicts  that  a  positive  (negative)  shock 
affecting one entity in a complementarity network bodes well (poorly) 
for other entities along the same complementarity network. 

Economists have long posited that such networks play an important 
role  in  the  transmission  of  shocks  across  the  economy.  For  example, 
macroeconomists use this theory to model the aggregation and propa-
gation of more granular shocks (Conley and Dupor, 2003; Jones, 2011; 
Baqaee and Farhi, 2019; Elliott and Golub, 2022). In particular, Atalay 
(2017) estimates a multi-industry general equilibrium model in which 

✰

Dimitris  Papanikolaou  was  the  editor  for this  article.  The authors  contributed  equally  to  this  work. An  earlier  version  of  the  paper was  titled:  “Production 
Complementarity and Transmission of Shocks in the Capital Markets.” We greatly appreciate the comments and suggestions from our anonymous reviewer, as well as 
those from: Will Lin Cong, William Grieser, John Hand, Kevin Li, Chuchu Liang, Eric So, Jennifer Tucker, Hong Xiang, Haifeng You, Shiyi Zhang, and participants at 
workshops at Georgia Tech, HKUST, Renmin University of China, University of Rochester, University of Texas at Dallas, University of Arkansas, the 2020 EFA Annual 
Conference, 2022 CICF Meeting, the 2023 Hawaii Accounting Research Conference, the 2023 FARS Midyear Meeting, and the 2023 Haskayne and Fox Accounting 
conference. The year-by-year pairwise complementarity scores developed in this paper are available for download at: https://sites.google.com/view/complementarit 
y-link?usp=sharing. 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: sunteng2007@gmail.com (S.T. Sun).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103812 
Received 27 April 2023; Received in revised form 15 February 2024; Accepted 18 February 2024   

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)103812Availableonline10March20240304-405X/©2024PublishedbyElsevierB.V.C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

goods produced by different industries complement one another as in-
puts  in  the  production  process  of  downstream  industries.  In  this 
framework, Atalay (2017) shows sectoral shocks can explain more than 
half of the variation in aggregate output growth for the economy as a 
whole.  Much  of  the  power  in  the  model  derives  not  from  direct 
customer-supplier  links,  but  from  second-moment  linkages  in  which 
shocks to complementor industries reinforce each other. A key stylized 
fact from this literature is that production complementarity can be an 
important  driver  of  sectoral  co-movements  and  business  cycle 
fluctuations. 

This study examines the capital market implications of production 
complementarity. Our analysis proceeds in two stages. First, we develop 
a  measure  of  complementarity  proximity  (COMPL)  between  any  two 
companies. Intuitively, COMPL captures the extent to which the outputs 
of any two firms are used as complementary inputs in the same down-
stream  production  process.  Next,  for  each  “focal  firm”  (i.e.,  a  firm of 
primary  research  interest),  we  use  COMPL  to  identify  a  set  of  com-
plementor peers. In identifying these complementors, we drop any peer 
firm  that  is  in  the  same  SIC  4-digit  industry  as  the  focal  firm  (“hori-
zontal”  peers),  as  well  as  any  firm  with  a  material  customer-supplier 
relationship  with  the  focal  firm  (“vertical”  peers).  These  procedures 
ensure  that  the  set  of  identified  complementors  does  not  include  any 
direct competitors, customers, or suppliers. They also ensure that our 
subsequent analyses are sharply focused on information transfers of an 
inter-industry  nature  that  are  not  due  to  direct  customer-supplier 
linkages.1 

Our first set of tests investigates the usefulness of COMPL as a mea-
sure of economic linkage between firms. Theory suggests that the eco-
nomic fortunes of complementor firms should wax and wane together, 
even if they are not from the same industry. We conduct a series of tests 
to evaluate the extent to which firms with high COMPL scores experi-
ence correlated shocks in various dimensions of their businesses. To the 
extent  that  these  firms  are  economically  linked,  we  expect  to  find  a 
positive co-movement in the level of their fundamental activities over 
time. 

Our  results  show  that  this  is  the  case.  Using  seven  measures  of 
fundamental business activity, we find firms that are close to each other 
in terms of COMPL exhibit strong co-movement in their annual oper-
ating (profitability, sales growth), investing (capital expenditures, R&D, 
and  patent-related  innovation  measures),  and  financing  (market 
leverage,  external  financing)  activities.  These  results  hold  after  con-
trolling for industry-wide co-movements as well as firm and year fixed 
effects. We also find a positive correlation in the monthly stock returns 
and quarterly analyst earnings forecast revisions between the focal firms 
and their complementors, after controlling for firm size, book-to-market, 
the  firm’s  own  lagged  monthly  returns,  and  medium-term  price 
momentum. 

Further  analyses  show  a  peer  firm’s  complementarity  closeness 
(COMPL)  is  positively  associated  with  the  degree  of  co-movement  in 
company fundamentals. We find the strongest positive correlation for 
Strong Complementors (peer firms ranked above 98% by COMPL). These 
positive correlations are still detectable, but become weaker, for Medium 
Complementors (peer firms ranked between 98% and 96% by COMPL) 
and Weak Complementors (peer firms ranked between 96% and 94% by 

1  Our  correlation  results,  both  contemporaneous  and  lagged,  are  uniformly 
stronger  if  we  include  firms  from  the  same  industry  or  firms  with  a  direct 
customer-supplier relationship in the set of complementor peers. However, to 
cleanly  isolate  inter-industry  spillover  effects  that  are  not  due  to  customer- 
supplier links, we opt to eliminate all firms with a direct vertical or horizon-
tal relationship with the focal firm. 

COMPL).  This  pattern  of  gradually  weaker  results  as  we  increase 
complementarity proximity is observed for all seven measures of busi-
ness  activity,  as  well  as  for  quarterly  earnings  revisions  and  monthly 
stock returns.2 

Together,  these  findings  show  that  a  production  complementor 
based algorithm can identify peer firms from different industries that are 
linked economically. To our knowledge, these are among the first pieces 
of micro-level evidence on the importance of inter-corporate connect-
edness between firms from different industries that do not share direct 
customer-supplier  relations.  The  granularity  of  this  data  (firm-level 
observations at relatively high frequencies) allows us to confirm a long- 
standing prediction from macro- and micro-economic theory about how 
shocks propagate across industries and business sectors. Our evidence 
shows  that  these  inter-industry  linkages  are  pervasive  in  the  cross- 
section of publicly traded companies. 

In  the  second  stage  of  our  analyses,  we  investigate  the  lead-lag 
relationship  in  stock  returns  among  complementors.  Having  estab-
lished  complementors  as  closely  linked  firms  that  reside  in  different 
industries,  we  now  evaluate  the  speed  with  which  shocks  propagate 
along complementarity networks. While neoclassic theory predicts that 
asset prices are quickly updated to reflect all publicly available infor-
mation, recent empirical studies report striking lead-lag patterns in the 
returns of economically linked firms. Starting with early work by Cohen 
and Frazzini (2008), who document a significant return lead-lag rela-
tionship  between  customer  firms  and  their  suppliers,  a  large  body  of 
literature now reports similar patterns between the returns of firms that 
share  some  form  of  fundamental  commonality.  Collectively,  this  is 
referred to as a “momentum spillover effect”.3  We examine the return 
lead-lag pattern among complementor firms. 

This part of our investigation is motivated by two observations. First, 
complementors typically share little, if any, common analyst coverage. 
This is because most financial analysts focus on one sector and/or a few 
closely  related  industries.  By  construction,  our  complementor  firms 
come from different industries, so that although they are economically 
linked,  they  are  not  typically  covered  by  the  same  analysts.  Ali  and 
Hirshleifer  (2020;  AH)  show  that  firms  with  shared  analyst  coverage 
exhibit an exceptionally strong lead-lag effect in returns. After control-
ling for shared analyst coverage, AH find the other momentum spillover 
effects become insignificant, leading them to conclude that “momentum 
spillover effects are a unified phenomenon captured by shared analyst 
coverage  (p.649)”.  We  are  interested  in  understanding  whether  AH’s 
claim about shared analyst coverage applies to firms that are in the same 
complementarity  network  but  have  no  direct 
industry  or 
customer-supplier linkages. 

A second reason for examining the momentum spillover effect among 
complementors is the subtle nature of this economic linkage. The pre-
vailing explanation for these lead-lag return patterns is that investors 
have limited attention and do not fully appreciate the price implications 

2  We  find  the  same  complementarity  distance  related  decay  in  correlations 
whether peer firms are weighted equally, by their COMPL scores, or by a variety 
of size-related metrics (i.e., asset value, market capitalization, log of asset value, 
and log of market capitalization).  

3  Studies that report a momentum spillover effect among economically-linked 
firms  have  examined  many  kinds  of  linkages:  firms  in  the  same  industry 
(Moskowitz and Grinblatt, 1999), text-based industry peers (Hoberg and Phil-
lips, 2018), firms that share the same geographic location (Parsons et al., 2020), 
customer-supplier relationships (Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Menzly and Ozbas, 
2010), firms with similar technological expertise (Lee et al., 2019), single- and 
multi-segment firms operating in the same industries (Cohen and Lou, 2012), U. 
S. multinationals with different foreign operations (Huang, 2015), and shared 
analyst coverage (Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038122C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

of  the  fundamental  connection  between  linked  firms.4  Prior  studies 
show that the delayed price reaction is stronger for focal firms with less 
media attention and analyst coverage (e.g., Lee et al., 2019) and for past 
return patterns that are less likely to attract investor attention (Huang 
et al., 2022). By these metrics, the complementor relationship may be 
one of the strongest, yet least appreciated, economic linkages between 
publicly traded firms. Complementors are not from the same industry 
and their relationships are not as visible or salient as customer-supplier 
links, industry links, or geographic links. These firms are typically not 
covered by focal firm analysts and this economic linkage is not readily 
discernible  from  the  focal  company’s  financial  reports.  To  the  extent 
that  limited  investor  attention  is  an  important  driver  of  momentum 
spillover effects, we predict a significant lead-lag return pattern among 
complementor firms. 

We  measure  the  degree  of  production  complementarity  between 
firms using the industry-level Input-Output (IO) table from the Bureau of 
Economic  Analysis  (BEA)  and  each  firm’s  reported  segment  informa-
tion.5  Specifically,  for  each  firm  i  and  time  period  t,  we  construct  an 
“output  flow”  vector  OFit = (Oit1, Oit2, …, Oitn, …, OitN), where  each 
element Oitn  describes the proportion of firm i sales used by industry n. 
We then define the production complementarity score between any two 
firms i and j as the cosine similarity of their output flow vectors, i.e., 
COMPLijt =

′)1/2. Similar measures have been used to es-

(OFit OFjt
′)1/2(OFjt OFjt

(OFit OFit

′)

timate the pairwise distance between firms in other contexts, but our 
application of this procedure to estimate production complementarity 
proximity between firms is, to our knowledge, novel to the literature.6 
To reduce noise from the inclusion of peer firms with relatively weakly 
correlated  outputs,  we  further  impose  a  minimum  threshold  require-
ment for the complementarity score. Specifically, we report results for 
Strong  complementors  (the  top  2%  of  complementor  pairs  in  the 
network,  as  ranked  by  COMPL),  Medium  complementors  (next  2%  as 
ranked by COMPL) and Weak complementors (the third 2% as ranked by 
COMPL). 

Our results show that complementors’  lagged returns have signifi-
cant predictive power for focal firm returns. Specifically, a portfolio that 
goes long in the focal firms whose complementors (defined as the top 2% 
COMPL related firms) performed best in the prior month and goes short 

4  For example, Cohen and Frazzini (2008) argue that the customer-supplier 
return predictability is due to investors’  ignorance of customer-supplier links. 
Similarly,  Moskowitz  and  Grinblatt  (1999)  and  Hou  (2007)  suggest  that  in-
vestors tend to overlook common industry shocks, and Huang (2015) posits a 
lack  of  appreciation  for  information  that  originates  from  foreign  sources.  In 
each  case,  the  sluggish  price  adjustment  is  attributed  to  investors’  failure  to 
understand  or  be  fully  attentive  to,  the  nature  of  the  underlying  economic 
linkage.  

5  We construct COMPL by combining industry-level exposure data (from BEA) 
and  firm-level  data  on  sales  to  different  industries  (from  the  Compustat  His-
torical  Industry  Segment  database).  As  a  result,  the  quality  of  the  firm-level 
partitions is constrained by the granularity of the disclosed segment informa-
tion.  For  multi-segment  firms  (firms  that  operate  in  multiple  industries),  we 
weigh each of the industry-level exposures by the fraction of the firm-sales that 
comes  from  a  given  industry.  For  single-segment  firms,  the  firm-level  output 
flows are assumed to be the same as those of its industry. Section 3 explains 
COMPL construction in more detail.  

6  The original cosine similarity measure developed by Jaffe (1986) has been 
used to estimate the distance between firms in terms of technological expertise 
(Bloom et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2019), as well as the textual similarity of their 
business  descriptions  (Hoberg  and  Phillips,  2016)  and  financial  statements 
(Brown  et  al.,  2023).  Brown  and  Tucker  (2011)  apply  a  similar  technique  to 
measure year-over-year changes in each firm’s management discussion analysis 
(MD&A)  disclosure.  Other  studies  also  used  BEA  data  to  examine  economic 
linkages between segments of a given firm (e.g., Lemelin, 1982; Fan and Lang, 
2000). Our COMPL variable differs from variables in these prior studies in that 
it  is  constructed  to  capture the  output  complementarity  distance  between  firms 
from different industries. 

in the focal firms whose complementors performed worst in the prior 
month, yields an equal-weighted return of 130 basis points (t = 6.01) per 
month. The analogous value-weighted portfolio yields hedged returns of 
92 basis points (t = 3.97) per month. Controlling for common risk factors 
has little effect. For example, the 6-factor alpha is 122 basis points (t =
5.95) for the equal-weighted strategy, and 68 basis points (t = 3.04) for 
the value-weighted strategy.7 The economic magnitude of these returns 
is striking, given that the lead firms are in different industries from the 
lag firms. We refer to this return predictability effect as “complementor 
momentum”. 

We find that the magnitude of the complementor momentum effect is 
a function of COMPL: as complementarity distance increases, the pre-
dictive power of COMPLRET for focal firm returns declines. For example, 
while the 3-factor alpha for the Strong complementor group is 1.34% per 
month,  the  corresponding  alphas  for  the  Medium  and  Weak  com-
plementors  are  0.58%  (t  = 2.88)  and  0.50%  (t  = 2.74),  respectively. 
While both are still significantly positive, the predictive powers of the 
Medium and Weak complementors are reliably less than the predictive 
power of the Strong complementors.8 

We conduct a battery of tests to ensure we have not rediscovered a 
previously  documented  network  effect.  As  noted  earlier,  we  exclude 
firms from the same industry in constructing complementor portfolios. 
To further ensure this effect is not driven by industry momentum, we 
incorporate  past  industry  returns  in  cross-sectional  regressions.  In 
addition,  we  also  explicitly  control  for  lagged  supplier  and  customer 
returns  (Cohen  and  Frazzini,  2008;  Menzly  and  Ozbas,  2010), 
(Cohen  and  Lou,  2012),  and 
pseudo-conglomerate 
technology-peer  returns  (Lee  et  al.,  2019).  We  find  our  main  results 
remain robust in all these tests, both statistically and economically.9 

returns 

Ali  and  Hirshleifer  (2020;  hereafter  AH)  argue  that  analyst 
co-coverage  subsumes  other  proxies  for  fundamental  linkage  across 
firms. To better understand how complementor momentum is related to 
their finding, we perform two standard asset pricing tests. First, we run a 
time-series spanning test that adds AH’s co-coverage factor to the five 
Fama  and  French  (2015)  factors  and  the  Carhart  (1997)  momentum 
factor.  We  find  that  the  magnitude  of  the  monthly  alphas  from  the 
complementor  strategy  remains  both  economically  and  statistically 
significant.  Second,  we  run  a  series  of  cross-sectional  Fama-Macbeth 
regressions, with the AH momentum variable included as a regressor. 
Again, we find that the complementor factor continues to predict focal 
firm returns. 

To further shed light on the role of analysts in the price discovery 
process,  we  subdivide  complementor  firms  into  two  groups:  one  that 
shares at least one common analyst with the focal firm, and another that 
has  no  shared  coverage.  We  find  that  when  complementors  come 
exclusively from the second group (i.e., when they have no co-coverage 

7  The 6-factor risk model we use adds a momentum factor (Carhart, 1997) to 

the 5-factor model in Fama and French (2015).  

8  Summarizing  the  theory  behind  inter-industry  complementarity,  Shea 
(2002)  asserts  that  “complementarities  do  not  merely  imply  that  A  should 
comove with B; they imply that the amount of co-movement between A and B 
should depend on the degree of linkage between A and B.”  In support of this 
assertion,  Conley  and  Dupor  (2003)  show  that  cross-sector  productivity 
covariance is higher for sectors with higher production complementarity.  

9  Menzly  and  Ozbas  (2010;  hereafter  MO)  warrants  additional  attention  as 
they also use BEA data and report a lead-lag return relationship. In the context 
of their study, the BEA data is used to identify customer-supplier connections, 
not  complementor  relationships.  To  be  sure  that  we  did  not  rediscover  the 
common customer effect from MO, we performed a 5x5 portfolio double-sort, 
on  complementor  returns  and  lagged  customer  returns  (computed  using  the 
same  methodology  as  MO).  Our  results,  reported  in  Internet  Appendix 
Table IA10, show that in each of the five quintiles of lagged customer returns, 
the long-short hedged COMPL portfolio delivers positive and significant returns 
(with  t-stats  from  4.8  to  11.2).  These  findings  further  confirm  the  com-
plementor effect is distinct from the customer-supplier effect reported by MO. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038123C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

with  the  focal  firm),  the  complementor  strategy  still  predicts  returns 
(monthly alpha = 1.17; t = 5.99), again indicating this is not a redis-
covery of the AH effect. The predictive power of this non co-coverage 
group  is  significant  in  months  t,  t+1,  and  t+2.  Interestingly,  the  co- 
coverage  group  (i.e.,  the  complementors  with  some  co-coverage)  ex-
hibits an even higher correlation with focal firm returns in months t and 
t+1, but has no ability to predict returns beyond month t+1. Overall, 
these findings suggest the existence of shared analyst coverage helps to 
facilitate a faster integration of news from complementors into focal firm 
returns. 

We also conduct a battery of cross-sectional tests to shed light on the 
underlying reasons for the gradual diffusion of value-relevant informa-
tion along the production complementarity network. First, we show the 
lead-lag effect is stronger for focal firms with higher “degree centrality” 
in the network (i.e., they are linked to more complementors). Second, 
we show return predictability is stronger for focal firms that are more 
likely to be overlooked by investors (i.e., smaller firms, firms with lower 
analyst coverage, or firms with lower institutional ownership). Third, 
we document a stronger effect for focal firms that are associated with 
higher  arbitrage  costs  (i.e.,  higher  idiosyncratic  return  volatility). 
Together,  our  findings  are  broadly  consistent  with  a  sluggish  price 
response process that is more pronounced when: (a) the complementary 
linkage is stronger; (b) the focal firm is more central in the network; (c) 
the  focal  firm  receives  less  attention;  and  (d)  the  focal  firm  is  more 
difficult to arbitrage. 

As  a  final  test,  we  provide  direct  evidence  of  information  trans-
mission  between  complementor  firms  using  a  patent  announcement 
setting. Every Tuesday, the U.S. Patent Office publishes newly granted 
patents and Kogan et al. (2017) find substantial stock trading around the 
day  when  a  firm’s  patent  issuance  is  announced.  For  each  focal  firm 
patent announcement date, we calculate the cumulative abnormal re-
turn  (Patent  CAR)  around  a  two-day  window.  We  then  examine  the 
extent of news transmission by regressing peer firms’ average monthly 
return on the focal firm’s average Patent CAR in a month. Our results 
show  a  strongly  positive  relation  between  focal  firm  short-window 
returns due to patent announcements and same-month returns among 
its  complementors  (COMPLRET).  Grouping  complementors  by  their 
COMPL  score  (Strong,  Medium,  Weak),  we  find  a  monotonically 
decreasing relation in their response to Patent CAR. Moreover, we find 
that  Patent  CAR  reliably  predicts  the  next-month  returns  of  the  com-
plementors in the Strong COMPL groups, but has no predictive power for 
the returns of the Medium and Weak groups. This additional test is novel 
to the momentum spillover literature and provides direct evidence that: 
(a)  economic  shocks  are  being  transmitted  along  complementor  net-
works, and (b) the economic impact of a firm-level shock is not fully 
incorporated into complementor prices instantaneously. 

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out 
the background for the setting we examine in the paper. Section 3 de-
scribes the data and variables. Section 4 presents our main results as well 
as robustness tests. Section 5 explores the underlying mechanism behind 
our results and rules out risk-based explanations. Section 6 concludes. 

2. Background 

Our  paper  builds  on  and  contributes  to  several strands  of  existing 
literature. First, we add to a growing body of work on the implications of 
production  complementarity among firms or  sectors, and the  broader 
literature that studies production networks. Interest in production net-
works, especially the complementarity construct, has been growing in 
the economics literature. Macroeconomists, in particular, have adopted 
complementarity  concepts  to  help  explain  the  granular  origin  of 
aggregate  shocks  (Acemoglu  et  al.,  2012,  2017;  Conley  and  Dupor, 
2003; Jones, 2011; Baqaee and Farhi, 2019; Elliott and Golub, 2022). 
The pioneering work of Jovanovic (1987) shows that sufficiently strong 
forms  of  strategic  complementarity  among  agents  are  required  if  one 
wants to obtain aggregate shocks from micro shocks. Later works using 

sector-level  aggregates  provide  empirical  support  for  Jovanovic 
(1987)’s  theoretical  argument.  Notable  studies  such  as  Shea  (2002), 
Conley and Dupor (2003), and Atalay (2017) confirm: (a) the existence 
of a strong co-movement in the outputs of sectors that have overlapping 
customer sectors, and (b) production complementarity plays an impor-
tant  role  in  the  propagation  of  individual  sectoral  shocks  across  the 
aggregate economy. 

Durlauf (1993) studies the implications of production complemen-
tarity in macroeconomic growth models by analyzing the evolution of a 
countable set of industries over time. In his model, technological com-
plementarities  create  intertemporal  linkages  between  the  production 
functions of each sector. An interesting implication of this model is that 
the  growth  of  leading  sectors  can  cause  a  shift  to  a  high  aggregate 
production  equilibrium  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Jones  (2011) 
further  develops  the  growth  implications  of  production  complemen-
tarity in a theory of “weak links”: just as a chain is only as strong as its 
weakest  link,  problems  along  a  production  chain  can  sharply  reduce 
output across the entire complementarity network. In his model, these 
forces amplify distortions to the allocation of resources and contribute to 
large income differences across countries. 

Two recent microeconomic studies also provide supporting evidence 
on  the  role  of  production  complementarity  in  transmitting  economic 
shocks.  Boehm  et  al.  (2019)  utilize  the  exogenous  disruption  of  pro-
duction  in  Japan  caused  by  the  March  2011  Tohoku  earthquake  and 
tsunami as a natural experiment. They find that as imports from Japan 
for intermediate  inputs to the Japanese  affiliates in the US decreased 
sharply, non-Japanese imported complementary inputs also fell nearly 
proportionately,  demonstrating  that  the  shock  in  Japan  has  quickly 
propagated  to  other  non-Japanese  firms  through  production  comple-
mentarity.  Barrot  and  Sauvagnat  (2016)  provide  similar  evidence  by 
demonstrating that natural disasters in the US hitting certain suppliers 
have large spillover effects on other suppliers to the same firm that were 
otherwise untouched by the disasters. 

Our  paper  provides  highly  granular  supporting  evidence  for  these 
theories  by  documenting  a  strong  co-movement  in  the  operating,  in-
vestment, and financing activities of complementor firms. Our evidence 
shows that news shocks propagate along production complementarity 
networks across firms in different industries, leading to a positive cor-
relation in the quarterly earnings forecast revisions and monthly stock 
returns of complementor firms. These return correlations are stronger 
for  firms  that  are  closer  in  complementarity  proximity,  further  vali-
dating our COMPL variable as a meaningful measure of economic dis-
tance between seemingly unrelated firms. 

Our paper also contributes to a large body of literature that examines 
investors’ inefficient belief updating in the context of new information. 
Tversky and Kahneman (1974) and Daniel et al. (1998), among others, 
suggest that investors may overweigh their own prior beliefs and un-
derweight observable public signals. Thus, investors may have lagged 
responses  to  the  information  contained  in  value-relevant  public  price 
signals. Models featuring limited attention investors (e.g., Merton, 1987; 
Hong and Stein, 1999; Hirshleifer and Teoh, 2003; and Peng and Xiong, 
2006)  predict  that  delayed  information  recognition  due  to  investors’ 
limited attention can give rise to return predictability patterns that are 
difficult  to  explain  with  traditional  asset  pricing  models.  These  theo-
retical  works  have  inspired  a  growing  set  of  empirical  studies.10 
Particularly  noteworthy  are  recent  studies  that  document  a  lead-lag 
return  relation  between  firms  that  have  close  economic  affinities  of 

10  Exemplary studies include Barber and Odean (2008); Dellavigna and Pollet 
(2009);  Hong  et  al.  (2007);  Hou  (2007);  Huberman  and  Regev  (2001);  and 
Menzly and Ozbas (2010). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038124C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

varying forms.11 

Our  paper  can  be  framed  in  terms  of  this  literature,  and  we 
contribute  to  it  by  showing  that  investors  under-react  to  information 
from production complementors, an economic linkage with deep theo-
retical underpinnings. We further provide evidence that the main driver 
of this effect is a form of investor inattention or sluggish adjustment to 
value-relevant  information  along  the  complementarity  network.  The 
effect is stronger for firms that receive less investor attention and are 
more  costly  to  arbitrage.  Shared  analyst  coverage  is  relatively  rare 
among our complementor firms (which are from different industries by 
construction), but where it exists, common coverage improves the price 
adjustment process, leading to shorter momentum spillover effects. This 
last finding suggests that common analyst coverage plays two, poten-
tially offsetting, roles in the transmission of information between firms: 
(1) it helps to identify more subtle forms of economic linkage between 
two firms (as per Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020), and (2) it helps to facilitate 
the price discovery of new information between firms, thus reducing the 
momentum spillover effect. 

3. Data and variables 

We use a series of Benchmark Input-Output Surveys of the Bureau of 
Economic Analysis to identify product complementary relationships (see 
Fan  and  Lang,  2000;  Aobdia  et  al.,  2014).  BEA  Surveys  provide  a 
detailed picture of the interdependent structure of the U.S. economy by 
assigning gross output to industry accounts and by reporting the amount 
of inter-industry flows of goods and services in the Use Table. The in-
dustry linkages are reported at both the sector level (around 70 IO in-
dustries) and the detail level (around 400 IO Industries, with the exact 
number varying slightly across years). We rely on the detail level data to 
identify  a  firm’s  industry  membership.  BEA  Surveys  are  published 
roughly  once  every  five  years  to  coincide  with  the  Economic  Census 
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. We draw on nine different surveys 
(1967,  1972,  1977,  1982,  1987,  1992,  1997,  2002,  and  2007)  on  a 
rolling basis to measure complementary relations. Here, the “year” label 
indicates the first year for each survey. For example, the “2007 version” 
of BEA IO table covers data from 2007 to 2012 and was not publicly 
available until December 2013. 

For the first part of our analysis, when testing for contemporaneous 
co-movement in firms’ underlying fundamentals and stock returns, we 
use data from a given survey until a new snapshot is provided by the 
following survey. That is, we use data from the 1977 Survey between 
1977 and 1981, the 1982 Survey between 1982 and 1986, and so on. For 
the second part of our analysis, when investigating lead-lag return pat-
terns, we delay the use of any data from a given survey until the survey is 
publicly  released  –  i.e.,  1974,  1979,  1984,  1991,  1994,  1997,  2002, 
2007, and 2013. For example, the “2007 version” of the BEA IO table 
covered data from 2007 to 2012 and was released in 2013. To  avoid 
peek-ahead bias, we use the “2007 version” for 2014 and forward. 

We begin by computing an industry-level complementarity measure. 
From  the  IO  table,  we  extract  a  measure  of  the  degree  to  which  two 
industries’ outputs are going to a common clientele. Specifically, we use 
Oakt  to denote the proportion  of industry a’s output that is supplying 
industry k at time t. There are around 400 different industries at the most 
granular level of the IO table, and we construct a vector of the output 
flow for each industry a at time t as: OIat = (Oa1t, Oa2t, …, OaNt). The 
level of overlap in the output flow between any two industries, a and b, 
can  then  be  calculated  as  the  cosine  similarity  of  their  output  flow 
vectors, 

11  See, for example, Cohen and Frazzini (2008); Cohen and Lou (2012); Hou 
et al. (2012); Aobdia et al. (2014); Li et al. (2014); Li (2015); Huang (2015); Lee 
et al. (2015); Cao et al. (2016); Hoberg and Phillips (2018); Lee et al. (2019); 
Parsons et al. (2020); and Ali and Hirshleifer (2020). 

IND COMPLabt =

(cid:0)

)

(cid:0)

OIatOI′
)1/2(cid:0)

bt
OIbtOI′
bt

OIatOI′
at

)1/2

(1) 

To extend this analysis from the industry level to the firm level, we 
utilize  the  Compustat  Historical  Industry  Segment  database.12  For  a 
single-segment firm i, the firm level output flow OFit  is the same as the 
industry-level output flow vector OInt, where n is its industry member-
ship. For a multi-segment firm, we compute its output flow vector as a 
weighted average of its segment industry’s output flow vectors, using its 
segment  sales  as  weight.  That  is,  for  a  multi-segment  firm  i, OFit =
∑
N
n=1sales shareint ∗ OInt, where sales shareint  is firm i’s segment sales of 
industry n out of total firm-level sales and OInt  is the output flow vector 
of industry n. 

For  any  two  firms  i  and  j  at  time  t,  we  then  calculate  a  pairwise 
production  complementarity  score  as  the  cosine  similarity  of  their 
output flow vectors, 
(cid:0)

)

COMPLijt =

(OFitOF′

OFitOF′
jt
it)1/2(cid:0)
OFjtOF′
jt

)1/2

(2)  

where OFit  is a vector of firm i’s output flow as defined above. Note that 
this production complementarity measure ranges between zero and one, 
depending on the degree of overlap in downstream industry space, and is 
symmetric in firm ordering (i.e., COMPLijt  = COMPLjit). 

Our design of COMPL reflects our interest in evaluating production 
complementarity as a conduit for inter-industry news transmission. Two 
prior studies featured variables that are related to COMPL. First, Lemelin 
(1982) used the correlation coefficient across the industry input struc-
ture between any two industries to measure industry-level relatedness. 
Second, Fan and Lang (2000) proposed two industry-level relatedness 
measures  which  they  call  “vertical  relatedness”  and  “(industry) 
complementarity”. Compared to the variables in these studies, COMPL is 
unique in that it alone measures the output complementarity distance 
between pairs of firms. We further sharpen the economic interpretation 
of this variable by removing from the set of potential complementors 
any  same-industry  firm  and  any  firm  with  a  direct  customer-supplier 
relationship with the focal firm.13 

The construction of production complementarity may be illustrated 
using  a  numerical  example.  For  simplicity,  assume  there  are  in  total 
three BEA IO industries (IOA, IOB, IOC) and two firms (F1, F2). Most of 
F1’s revenue (80%) belongs to industry IOA, with the rest (20%) coming 
from IOB. All of F2’s revenue belongs to IOc. At the industry level, assume 
that 60% of IOA’s outputs are consumed by itself (i.e., by the same in-
dustry),  with  the  rest  being  equally  consumed  by  IOB  and  IOC  (20% 
each).  The  distribution  of  IOA’s  outputs  can  be  represented  using  a 
vector: (0.6, 0.2, 0.2). Similarly, assume the output flow vectors of IOB 
and  IOC  are  (0.1,  0.5,  0.4)  and  (0.1,  0.2,  0.7),  respectively.  Then  the 
conglomerate F1’s output flow vector is a combination of IOA and IOB’s 
output vectors, using its share of sales as weight: OF1 = (0.5, 0.26, 0.24). 
For the standalone firm F2, its output flow vector is the same as IOC: OF2 
= (0.1,  0.2,  0.7).  Following  the  formula  above,  the  production 

12 Starting  from  1976,  all  firms  are  required  by  Statement  of  Financial  Ac-
counting Standards (SFAS) No.14 (Financial reporting for segments of a busi-
ness enterprise, 1976) and No.131 (Reporting desegregated information about a 
business  enterprise,  1998)  to  report  relevant  financial  information  of  any  in-
dustry  segment  that  comprises  more  than  10%  of  a  firm’s  total  consolidated 
annual sales. We exclude firms that do not have data available in the Compustat 
Segment database. On average 4.02% of Compustat firms do not have data in 
the Compustat Segment Database. The proportion of missing firms in each in-
dustry range from a high of 15.3% (Coal Mining) to a low of 0% (Legal Service, 
Membership Organizations, and Miscellaneous Services).  
13  The  year-by-year  pairwise  complementarity  scores  we  developed  are 
available  for  download  at:  https://sites.google.com/view/complementarity-li 
nk?usp=sharing. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038125C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

complementarity between F1 and F2 is COMPL12 = 0.60. 

In Fig. 1, we provide a case study featuring two firms: Cummins Inc. 
(NYSE:  CMI;  SIC  3510)  and  Magna  International  (NYSE:  MGA;  SIC 
3714). Although these firms are in different industries, their pairwise 
production  complementarity  score  is  high  (COMPLijt  = 0.85).  On 
reflection, it is perhaps not surprising, as Magna produces key compo-
nents for the transmission and driveshaft of many vehicles that feature 
Cummins’ engines. 

To  provide  further  intuition  on  the  nature  of  production  comple-
mentarity linkages across a broader set of firms and industries, Appendix 
B presents information on ten focal firms, along with four or five of their 
major complementors.14  We provide industry codes and brief business 
descriptions for each focal firm, and offer a suggested rationale for each 
pairwise complementarity relation. The key takeaway from this table is 
that  well-known  firms  from  different  industries  can  be  closely  linked 
through complementarity networks, even though such linkages may not 
come readily to mind when identifying peers through other means. 

Having  developed  a  continuous  production  complementarity  mea-
sure for any pair of firms each year, we then eliminate peers from the 
same 4-digit SIC industry group as the focal firm.15  We also eliminate 
peer firms that are either a material customer or material supplier of the 

Fig. 1. Product complementarities between cummins inc. and magna interna-
tional inc. 
This figure depicts the product complementary nature of Cummins Inc. (NYSE: 
CMI)  and  Magna  International  Inc.  (NYSE:  MGA).  Cummins  Inc.  (SIC  Code: 
3510)  is  a manufacturer  of  internal combustion  engines  used  in  construction 
machinery  and heavy  trucks.  Magna International  (SIC Code:  3714) is a pro-
ducer of vehicle parts and accessories. Although these two firms are in different 
industries, their pairwise production complementarity score is high: COMPLijt  =
jt )1/2= 0.85. On reflection, it is perhaps not surprising, as Magna 
(OFit OF′
produces key components for the transmission and driveshaft of many vehicles 
that feature Cummins’ engines. Our results show that this close affinity in terms 
of their production complementarity is an important economic linkage for the 
firms, even though they operate in different industries and are not a supplier or 
a customer to each other. 

′
(OFit OF
it )1/2(OFjt OF′

jt )

focal  firm,  based  on  the  Compustat  Segment  database  (Cohen  and 
Frazzini, 2008). For any given focal firm, the remaining peers with a 
non-zero production complementarity score can still be quite large. In 
our baseline analysis, to focus on firms with a sufficiently high level of 
complementarity, we keep only those in the 99th and 98th percentile 
(the  top  2%)  as  ranked  by  their  COMPL  score  (we  call  these  Strong 
Complementors).  In  more  detailed  analyses,  we  also  report  results  for 
firms in the 97th and 96th percentile (Medium Complementors) and firms 
in  the  95th  and  94th  percentile  (Weak  Complementors).16  Finally,  to 
exclude sparely connected firms, we require a focal firm to have at least 
3 complementor peers. Varying this minimum cutoff from 1 to 5 firms 
makes little difference to our results. 

We define complementor return (COMPLRET) as the equal-weighted 
average monthly return of the portfolio of complementary firms in our 
network. We also use the same equal-weighting scheme to compute the 
average fundamental variables for our complementor firms. We report 
the  equal-weighting  results  for  parsimony,  because  the  industry  peer 
portfolios are also equal-weighted. All of our findings are robust to the 
use  other  weighting  schemes,  such  as:  (a)  the  COMPL  score  between 
focal firm and  its  complementors, (b)  total assets,  (c) the  log of total 
assets, (d) market value, and (e) the log of market value. 

Our  main  sample consists  of  firms  at  the  intersection of  the  Com-
pustat Historical Industry Segments and CRSP. We focus the analysis on 
common  stocks  (CRSP  share  codes  10  and  11)  and  exclude  financial 
firms  (firms  with  a  one-digit  SIC code  of  six).  To  ensure  the  relevant 
financial  information  is  publicly  available,  we  impose  at  least  a  six- 
month gap between the fiscal-year end month and the portfolio forma-
tion date. To reduce the impact of micro-cap stocks, we further exclude 
from  our  sample  those  stocks  priced  below  one  dollar  a  share  at  the 
beginning of the holding period.17 Finally, we also require firms to have 
non-missing market equity from CRSP, and non-negative book equity at 
the  end of  the previous fiscal year from Compustat. The final sample 
consists  of  1002,682  firm-month  observations  spanning  July  1978  to 
June 2018. 

Table  1  presents  descriptive  statistics  for  our  sample  firms.  On 
average, we have 2799 focal firms per year, ranging from a low of 1185 
firms in 1977 to a high of 4919 firms in 1998. These focal firms have an 
average  of  103  complementors  each.  The  pairwise  product  comple-
mentarity score (COMPL) has an average value of 0.20 with a standard 
deviation of 0.25, indicating that the focal firms in our sample generally 
share some measure of production complementarity with the firms that 
we have identified as their complementors. 

4. Empirical results 

4.1. Fundamentals co-movement 

We  begin  by  examining  the  degree  of  co-movement  in  the  funda-
mentals of production complementor firms. We examine a set of firm- 
level  fundamentals:  economic  performance  measured  by  ROA  (return 
on assets) and sales growth, financial policy in terms of market leverage 
and  external  financing,  and  real  activities  in  terms  of  capital 

14 The  10  large  focal  firms  were  chosen  to  represent  a  diverse  range  of  in-
dustries,  including  IT,  healthcare,  automotive,  semiconductor,  mining,  steel, 
and  others.  For  each  focal  firm,  we  report  4  or  5  major  complementors.  We 
chose  these  complementors  based  on  the  following  criteria:  (a)  it  must  rank 
among the top 2% of complementary peers by COMPL score, (b) it is a large cap 
(relatively  visible)  firm,  and  (c)  it  comes  from  a  different  industry  from  the 
other selected complementors. This last criterion helps to ensure the table re-
flects the broad range of industries represented in each focal firm’s strong (top 
2%) complementors.  
15  In Internet Appendix Table IA2 and IA3, we further exclude: (a) peer firms 
that belong to the same Fama-French 17 or 48 industry or sector, or (b) peer 
firms in the same textual-based industry (Hoberg and Phillips, 2016). Our re-
sults are robust to these perturbations. 

16  Our  choice  of  a  2%  cutoff  corresponds  to  prior  studies  of  information 
transmission  between  peer  firms,  such  as  Hoberg  and  Phillips  (2016,  2018). 
Note that a top-2% cutoff produces a network granularity comparable to that of 
the 3-digit SIC code (i.e., it results in each focal firm having roughly 80 com-
plementor  peers).  We  also  compare  results  for  Strong,  Medium,  and  Weak 
complementors, to help gauge how quickly network effects diminish beyond the 
top 2% of ranked firms.  
17  In Internet Appendix Table IA1, we further restrict our tests to more liquid 
focal firms. First, we limit our focal firms to stocks that are priced above five 
dollars  per  share  (rather  than  one  dollar  per  share).  Second,  we  narrowly 
examine the results for the top 500 focal firms in terms of market capitalization 
at the beginning of the holding period. The Internet Appendix shows that our 
main results are robust to these perturbations. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038126C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 1 
Summary statistics. 
This table presents summary statistics for the key variables used in the cross- 
sectional regressions. The sample includes all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ-listed se-
curities with share codes 10 or 11 that are contained in the CRSP/Compustat 
merged data file. Financial firms (i.e., firms with a one-digit SIC code of six) and 
stocks with price less than $1 at portfolio formation are excluded. All variable 
definitions are in Appendix A.   

Mean 

Sd 

Q1 

Med 

Q3 

Sample Description      
# of focal firms per year 
Average # of complementors per 

2,799 
103 

810 
134 

2,488 
13 

2,601 
42 

3,015 
153 

firm 

Key Variables      
COMPL 
RET 
COMPLRET 
INDRET 
SIZE 
BM 
RETt-1 
MOM 
INDMOM 

0.20 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
5.20 
0.67 
0.01 
0.17 
0.12 

0.25 
0.15 
0.07 
0.05 
2.10 
0.59 
0.15 
0.60 
0.20 

0.02 
(cid:0) 0.07 
(cid:0) 0.03 
(cid:0) 0.02 
3.60 
0.28 
(cid:0) 0.07 
(cid:0) 0.19 
0.01 

0.09 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
5.08 
0.52 
0.00 
0.07 
0.12 

0.32 
0.08 
0.05 
0.04 
6.67 
0.88 
0.08 
0.37 
0.24  

expenditures and innovation activities. More specifically, we estimate a 
firm-level panel regression in the form of: 

Fundamentalit = β1FundamentalComplementors

it

+ β2FundamentalIndustry

it

+ γi + δt

+ εit

(3)  

it

where  Fundamentalit  is  the  fundamental  variable  for  focal  firm  i.  The 
average  fundamental  of  complementors,  FundamentalComplementors
,  is 
calculated  as  the  equal-weighted  average  of  complementors’  corre-
sponding  fundamental  variable  (analogous  to  our  approach  in  calcu-
lating complementor returns). We also control for industry level average 
of the fundamental variable FundamentalIndustry
, calculated as the simple 
arithmetic  average  of  firms  in  the  same  industry.  We  standardized 
and  FundamentalIndustry
FundamentalComplementors
to  have  a  mean  of  zero 
and a standard deviation of one, so that their coefficients can be directly 
compared. Firm and year fixed effects are included, and standard errors 
are clustered by firm for robustness. 

it 

it 

it

We examine fundamental co-movement among complementors for 
three  types  of  business  activities:  (a)  operating  performance,  (b) 
financing  activities,  and  (c)  investment  and  innovation  activities.  We 
posit  that  annual  changes  in  the  fundamental  activities  of  the  com-
plementor firms will be positively correlated with changes in the focal 
firms, even after controlling for the focal firm’s own industry peers. For 
operating performance, we measure each firm’s return-on-asset (ROA) 
and growth in sales (Sales Growth). For financing activities, we measure 
each  firm’s  market  leverage  (Leverage)  and  net  new  financing  ratio 
(External Financing). For investment and innovation activities, we mea-
sure each firm’s capital expenditure (CapEx), research and development 
expense  (R&D),  and  the  log  of  one  plus  the  citation-weighted-patent 
numbers  (Citation-weighted-patents).  See  Appendix  A  for  variable  con-
struction details. 

Table 2 Panel A presents the results of these tests. Not surprisingly, 
focal firm fundamentals co-move strongly with their same industry peers 
(i.e.,  4-digit  SIC).  More  importantly,  focal  firms  also  display  a  strong 
contemporaneous  co-movement with their complementors from other 
industries.  We  find  a  statistically  significant  positive  relation  on  the 
Strong Complementors variable (peer firms in the top 2% as ranked by 
COMPL) for all seven fundamental activities. In terms of their economic 
magnitude, the coefficients on the complementor variable are roughly 
1/4  to  3/4  the  size  of  the  corresponding  coefficients  on  the  industry 
peers,  which  seems  reasonable  considering  complementors  are  in 
different industries from the focal firms. Note that the R2s are quite high: 

on average, these models explain more than half of the annual change in 
focal firm ROA, Leverage, CapEx, R&D, and Citation-weighted-patents. 

As a placebo test, we also created a Random Complementor portfolio 
by  randomly  selecting  2%  of  the  firms  from  our  complementarity 
network sample in a given year. As reported in Table 2 Panel B, we find 
the  business  fundamentals  of  the  Random  Complementors  are  not 
significantly  correlated  with  those  of  the  focal  firms.  The  last  row  of 
Panel B reports a formal test of differences in the estimated coefficients. 
These results show Strong Complementors co-move more strongly with 
focal firms than Random Complementors. Across the seven fundamental 
activity  measures,  the  difference  between  Strong  vs.  Random  peers  is 
most pronounced for Sales Growth (t = 11.72) and CapEx (t = 10.86), and 
least pronounced for External Financing (t = 2.84). 

We further investigate how complementarity intensity (i.e., COMPL) 
affects  the  degree  of  co-movement  among  complementor  firms.  Sum-
marizing the theory behind interindustry complementarity, Shea (2002) 
asserts  that  “complementarities  do  not  merely  imply  that  A  should 
comove with B; they imply that the amount of co-movement between A 
and  B  should  depend  on  the  degree  of  linkage  between  A  and  B.”  In 
support  of  this  assertion,  Conley  and  Dupor  (2003)  show  that 
cross-sector  productivity  covariance  is  higher  for  sectors  with  higher 
production complementarity. Analogously, if our results are driven by 
economic proximity between firms, firms closer in the network should 
exhibit greater co-movement in fundamentals. 

To test this conjecture, we construct three complementor peer groups 
based on their COMPL scores. In addition to using peer firms ranked in 
the top 2% by their production complementarity score (this is the group 
we call Strong Complementors in Panel A), we also consider a group of 
Medium Complementors (firms in the 97 and 96 percentiles as ranked by 
COMPL) and Weak Complementors (firms in the 95 and 94 percentiles as 
ranked by COMPL). Table 2 Panel C reports the co-movement in com-
pany fundamentals when firms from all three complementor groups are 
included  in  the  same  regression.  Looking  across  the  first  row,  Strong 
Complementors exhibit positive co-movement with the focal firm across 
all seven fundamental metrics. Looking across the second row, all seven 
coefficients for the Medium Complementors are again positive, although 
two  are  insignificant.  Looking  at  the  third  row,  six  of  the  seven  co-
efficients for the Weak Complementors are positive, but only three are 
statistically significant. These findings suggest that the co-movement in 
company fundamentals dissipates as COMPL distance increases. 

The magnitudes of the estimated coefficients convey the same story. 
Coefficients for the Strong Complementor group (in row 1) are generally 
two to four times larger than the coefficients for the other two groups 
(rows 2 and 3). At the bottom of Panel C, we report a test of the dif-
ferences in coefficients between Strong Complementors and the other two 
groups.  These  results  show  Strong  complementors  have  reliably  more 
positive coefficients than either the Medium or the Weak group. How-
ever, the co-movement results become weaker as we move away from 
the top 2% COMPL firms. We find that Medium Complementors generally, 
but  not  always,  have  more  positive  coefficients  than  the  Weak  Com-
plementors. Taken together, these results show that (a) the correlation in 
company fundamentals decreases as the complementarity distance be-
tween firms increases, and (b) the usefulness of COMPL as a measure of 
economic  distance  fades  quickly  beyond  the  top  2  to  6%  of  ranked 
firms.18 

In sum, our firm-level evidence confirms and extends the evidence 

18  Our results are based on an equal weighting of peer firms. We chose equal 
weighting to ensure complementor firms are weighted the same way as the peer 
firms  in  the  Industry  Peer  Average  control  variable.  However,  all  our  results, 
including  the  gradual  fading  of  the  correlation  in  company  fundamentals 
beyond  the  top  2-4%  of  COMPL  firms,  show  up  clearly  when  we  use  other 
weighting schemes, such as weighting firms by: COMPL, total assets, log of total 
assets, market capitalization, and log of market capitalization. These results are 
available upon request. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038127C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 2 
Co-movement in Operating Performance & Other Fundamentals. 
This table presents a series of panel regressions on the co-movement between focal firms and their peers in terms of operating performance and other fundamental 
metrics. In each regression, the dependent variable is a fundamental metric of the focal firm. In Panel A, we report contemporaneous co-movements between the focal 
firm, Strong Complementors (firm in the 99th and 98th percentile as ranked by their complementarity score, COMPL) and Industry Peers (based on 4-digit SIC). Each 
regressor is computed as the equal-weight average of the fundamental metric across a given group of peer firms. The fundamental metrics we examine are annual 
measures of: ROA, Sales Growth, Leverage, External Financing, CapEx, R&D, and Citation-weighted-patents. In Panel B, we repeat this analysis while adding a set of Random 
peers (2% of the firms in the network, randomly selected). We also report the differences in the estimated coefficients between the Strong Complementors vs. Random 
Complementors, as well as the t-statistics associated with these differences. In Panel C, we replace the Random peer group with a group of Medium Complementors (firms 
in the 97th and 96th percentiles as ranked by COMPL) and Weak Complementors (firms in the 95th and 94th percentiles as ranked by COMPL). We also report the 
differences in the estimated coefficients between the Strong Complementors vs. either the Medium or Weak complementors. In each analysis, we include firm and year 
fixed effects and report t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm. All variables are winsorized at 1% and 99% levels and are 
standardized with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Coefficients marked with *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.  

Panel A. Co-movement in Operating Performance and other Fundamentals 

Dependent Variable 

Strong Complementors 

Industry Peers Average 

Firm FE 
Year FE 
N 
R2 

(1) 
ROA 

0.032*** 
(6.44) 
0.043*** 
(7.41) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,661 
0.552 

(2) 
Sales Growth 

0.060*** 
(15.40) 
0.113*** 
(26.56) 
Yes 
Yes 
107,905 
0.225 

(3) 
Leverage 

0.051*** 
(9.32) 
0.183*** 
(22.98) 
Yes 
Yes 
104,301 
0.701 

Panel B. Co-movement in Fundamentals, including Random Complementors as Placebo 

Dependent Variable 

Strong Complementors 

Random Complementors 

Industry Peers Average 

Firm FE 
Year FE 
N 
R2 
Strong vs. Random 
Coeff. Difference 

(1) 
ROA 

0.032*** 
(6.44) 
0.001 
(0.25) 
0.043*** 
(7.41) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,661 
0.552 
0.031*** 
(4.86) 

(2) 
Sales Growth 

0.060*** 
(15.40) 
(cid:0) 0.001 
((cid:0) 0.29) 
0.113*** 
(26.56) 
Yes 
Yes 
107,905 
0.225 
0.061*** 
(11.72) 

(3) 
Leverage 

0.051*** 
(9.31) 
(cid:0) 0.003 
((cid:0) 1.53) 
0.183*** 
(22.96) 
Yes 
Yes 
104,301 
0.701 
0.054*** 
(9.28) 

(4) 
External Financing 

0.018*** 
(4.12) 
0.049*** 
(8.75) 
Yes 
Yes 
94,088 
0.298 

(4) 
External Financing 

0.018*** 
(4.12) 
0.002 
(0.56) 
0.049*** 
(8.76) 
Yes 
Yes 
94,088 
0.298 
0.016*** 
(2.84) 

Panel C: Co-movement between Focal Firms and Strong, Medium, and Weak Complementors 

Dependent Variable 

Strong Complementors 

Medium Complementors 

Weak Complementors 

Industry Peers Average 

Firm FE 
Year FE 
N 
R2 
Strong vs. Medium 
Coeff. Difference 
Strong vs. Weak 
Coeff. Difference 

(1) 
ROA 

0.030*** 
(6.03) 
0.018*** 
(5.16) 
0.004 
(1.18) 
0.041*** 
(7.15) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,661 
0.552 
0.012** 
(1.98) 
0.026*** 
(4.32) 

(2) 
Sales Growth 

0.056*** 
(14.38) 
0.015*** 
(4.26) 
0.014*** 
(4.15) 
0.110*** 
(26.05) 
Yes 
Yes 
107,905 
0.226 
0.041*** 
(7.81) 
0.042*** 
(8.15) 

(3) 
Leverage 

0.047*** 
(8.75) 
0.010*** 
(2.76) 
0.011*** 
(3.08) 
0.182*** 
(22.87) 
Yes 
Yes 
104,301 
0.701 
0.037*** 
(5.71) 
0.036*** 
(5.58) 

(4) 
External Financing 

0.018*** 
(4.08) 
0.005 
(1.50) 
0.008* 
(1.92) 
0.048*** 
(8.60) 
Yes 
Yes 
94,088 
0.298 
0.013** 
(2.35) 
0.010* 
(1.65) 

(5) 
CapEx 

0.060*** 
(11.34) 
0.170*** 
(20.97) 
Yes 
Yes 
107,464 
0.532 

(5) 
CapEx 

0.060*** 
(11.34) 
(cid:0) 0.002 
((cid:0) 0.93) 
0.170*** 
(20.97) 
Yes 
Yes 
107,464 
0.532 
0.062*** 
(10.86) 

(5) 
CapEx 

0.059*** 
(11.08) 
0.008** 
(2.17) 
(cid:0) 0.001 
((cid:0) 0.17) 
0.169*** 
(20.96) 
Yes 
Yes 
107,464 
0.532 
0.051*** 
(7.88) 
0.060*** 
(7.49) 

(6) 
R&D 

0.036*** 
(5.00) 
0.150*** 
(10.90) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,898 
0.770 

(6) 
R&D 

0.036*** 
(5.00) 
(cid:0) 0.002 
((cid:0) 1.13) 
0.150*** 
(10.89) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,898 
0.770 
0.038*** 
(5.13) 

(6) 
R&D 

0.032*** 
(4.54) 
0.014*** 
(3.51) 
0.002 
(0.55) 
0.149*** 
(10.77) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,898 
0.770 
0.018** 
(2.22) 
0.030*** 
(3.79) 

(7)  
Citation-weighted-patents 

0.030***  
(5.01) 
0.072***  
(8.20) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,898 
0.752 

(7)  
Citation-weighted-patents 

0.030***  
(5.01) 
(cid:0) 0.002  
((cid:0) 1.27) 
0.072***  
(8.20) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,898 
0.752 
0.032*** 
(5.17) 

(7)  
Citation-weighted-patents 

0.028***  
(4.62) 
0.003  
(0.80) 
0.005  
(1.34) 
0.072***  
(8.20) 
Yes 
Yes 
108,898 
0.752 
0.025*** 
(3.51) 
0.023*** 
(3.23)  

from macroeconomics on the role of complementarity networks. Using 
detailed  capital  market  data,  we  show  granular  economic  shocks  can 
propagate across the economy along such networks. We also establish 
COMPL as a credible measure of economic distance between firms from 
different  industries.  These  results  set  the  stage  for  a  more  detailed 
analysis of the speed of information transmission along complementor 
networks, which we undertake in the next section. 

4.2. Stock returns and production complementarity 

We  now  focus  on  the  stock  market reaction  to  news  shocks  along 

production complementarity networks. To perform these analyses, we 
use  higher  frequency  (quarterly  and  monthly)  data.  In  Table  3,  we 
examine the contemporaneous co-movement in monthly stock returns 
and quarterly analyst forecast revisions. In Tables 4 through 8 we study 
the pattern of lead-lag returns among complementor firms. Table 9 ex-
amines how stock market shocks originating from a patent grant to the 
focal firm propagate across the stock returns of complementors, industry 
peers, and technology peers. 

4.2.1. Contemporaneous response in the stock market 

Table 3 documents the co-movement in stock returns and earnings 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038128C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 3 
Co-movement in stock returns and earnings forecast revisions. 
This table reports the co-movement in monthly stock returns and quarterly analysts’ quarterly earnings (EPS) forecast revisions between focal firms and their peers. In 
Panel A, we report results of monthly Fama-MacBeth return regressions. The dependent variable is either the focal firm’s monthly return RET (columns 1–6), or the 
firm’s excess return over its industry return RET-INDRET (columns 7–8). The main independent variables of interests, Strong (Medium/Weak) COMPLRETt, are the 
average strong (medium/weak) complementors’ return in the same period. In columns 5–8, we add the concurrent industry average return (INDRET). Other control 
variables  include  firm size  (SIZE),  book-to-market  ratio (BM), the  focal firm’s  own  lagged  monthly return (RETt-1),  and medium-term price momentum  (MOM). 
Standard  errors  are  Newey-West  adjusted  for  heteroskedasticity  and  autocorrelation.  We  report  the  differences  in  the  estimated  coefficients  between  Strong 
COMPLRETt vs. either Medium or Weak COMPLRETt. In Panel B, we report co-movements in quarterly EPS revisions between focal firms and their peers. We measure 
EPS consensus revisions using the change in the median forecast. Strong (Medium/Weak) Complementors is the equal-weighted average of the consensus EPS revisions 
across complementor peers. Industry Peers Average is the equal-weighted average of the consensus EPS revisions across industry peers. We include firm and quarter fixed 
effects, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by firm. We also report the differences in the estimated coefficients 
between the Strong Complementors vs. either the Medium or Weak complementors. All variables are winsorized at 1% and 99% and are standardized with a mean of zero 
and a standard deviation of one. Coefficients marked with *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.  

Panel A: Co-movement in Monthly Stock Returns 

(1) 
RETt 

5.464*** 
(16.07) 

No 
989,165 
0.015 

Dependent 
Variable 

Strong COMPLRETt 

Medium COMPLRETt  

Weak COMPLRETt  

INDRETt     

Controls 
N 
R2 
Strong vs. Medium  
Coeff. Difference  
Strong vs. Weak  
Coeff. Difference  

(3) 
RETt 

4.329*** 
(17.43) 

Yes 
989,165 
0.050 

(2) 
RETt 

4.632*** 
(15.93) 
1.417***  
(10.01)  
1.130***  
(8.75)  

No 
989,165 
0.019 
3.22***  
(9.94)  
3.50***  
(11.01)  

(4) 
RETt 

3.658*** 
(17.19) 
1.171***  
(9.20)  
0.887***  
(7.45)  

Yes 
989,165 
0.053 
2.49***  
(10.03)  
2.77***  
(11.36)  

(5) 
RETt 

4.038*** 
(16.83) 

1.080*** 
(9.04) 
Yes 
989,165 
0.052 

(6) 
RETt 

3.431*** 
(16.60) 
1.082***  
(8.75)  
0.780***  
(6.73)  
1.014*** 
(8.93) 
Yes 
989,165 
0.056 
2.35***  
(9.75)  
2.65***  
(11.19)  

Panel B: Co-movement in Quarterly Consensus EPS Forecast Revisions 

(7) 
RETt - INDRETt 

(8) 
RETt - INDRETt 

2.200*** 
(12.13) 

0.537*** 
(3.62) 
Yes 
989,165 
0.041 

1.865***  
(11.47) 
0.339***   
(3.36) 
0.231**   
(2.11) 
0.506***      
(3.41) 
Yes 
989,165 
0.043 
1.53*** 
(7.97) 
1.63*** 
(8.34) 

Dependent Variable 

Strong Complementors 

Medium Complementors  

Weak Complementors  

Industry Peers Average 

Firm FE 
Year FE 
N 
R2 

Strong vs. Medium  
Coeff. Difference  
Strong vs. Weak  
Coeff. Difference  

(1) 
Consensus EPS Revisions 

(2)  
Consensus EPS Revisions 

0.007*** 
(4.69) 

0.031*** 
(9.00) 

Yes 
Yes 
173,494 
0.092 

0.007***  
(4.67) 
(cid:0) 0.001   
((cid:0) 0.76) 
0.000   
(0.05) 
0.031***  
(9.00)    

Yes 
Yes 
173,494 
0.092    

0.008*** 
(4.14) 
0.007*** 
(3.63)  

forecast revisions between focal firms and their peer firms. In Panel A, 
we  report  the  results  of  monthly  Fama-MacBeth  return  regressions 
where  the  standard  errors  are  Newey-West  adjusted  for  hetero-
skedasticity and autocorrelation. The dependent variable is either the 
focal  firm’s  monthly  return  RET  (columns  1–6),  or  the  firm’s  excess 
return  over its industry return RET-INDRET (columns 7–8). The inde-
pendent variable of primary interest is the average complementors’ re-
turn in the same period (COMPLRETt). In columns 5 to 8, we add the 
concurrent industry average return (INDRET). Other control variables 
include firm size (SIZE), book-to-market ratio (BM), the focal firm’s own 
lagged  monthly  return  (RETt-1),  and  medium-term  price  momentum 
(MOM).  We find  a significant  and  positive co-movement between the 
focal firm’s stock return and its complementors’ average return in the 
same  month.  In  all  eight  specifications,  the  coefficient  on  Strong 
COMPLRET is positive and significant (t-statistic from 11.47 to 17.43). 
Furthermore,  consistent  with  Table  2  results,  the  co-movement  in 

monthly returns drops as complementarity distance increases. While the 
coefficient on the Medium and the Weak complementor returns are also 
positive,  their  magnitudes  are  generally  only  one-third  to  one-eighth 
that of the coefficients for Strong Complementors (column 6 or 8). 

We  also  examine  how  analysts’  quarterly  earnings  (EPS)  forecast 
revisions  are  correlated  among  complementors.  Having  observed  a 
positive co-movement in their annual ROA and sales growth, we expect 
their quarterly EPS revisions to also exhibit some co-movement. Table 3 
Panel B shows that this is indeed the case. Overall, we find the quarterly 
EPS revisions of the focal firm are correlated with the analyst forecast 
revisions  of  its  complementors,  above  and  beyond  the  information 
contained  in  same-industry  peers.  We  no  longer  observe  any  co- 
movement  pattern  when  we  use  the  Medium  or  Weak  Complementors, 
again  demonstrating  that  the  degree  of  complementarity  affects  the 
degree of co-movement. 

Taken  together,  Tables  2  and  3  results  offer  a  coherent  set  of 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038129C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

evidence  that  focal  firms  and  their  complementors  are  affected  by 
similar economic shocks. These shocks result in a highly significant level 
of co-movements in their fundamental performance metrics. We observe 
this co-movement at the annual, quarterly, and even monthly levels. In 
short, production complementors are highly economically linked firms 
that  reside  in  different  industries.  In  the  next  section,  we  examine 
whether these relatively subtle economic linkages result in lead-lag re-
turn patterns. 

4.2.2. Lead-lag effect 

Table  4  reports  the  performance  of  a  complementor  momentum 
strategy for the 1978–2018 period. Panel A provides the baseline port-
folio return results. To construct this table, we sort all focal firms into 
deciles  at  the  beginning  of  each  month,  based  on  the  return  of  their 
complementors  in  the  previous  month.  The  decile  portfolios  are  then 
rebalanced  monthly  to  maintain  either  equal  (EW)  or  value  (VW) 
weights.  The  last  two  rows  in  the  table  report  the  average  monthly 
returns to a long-short portfolio (L/S) that buys the firms in the top 10% 
as  ranked  by  their complementor  returns  in the  past  month and  sells 
short firms in the bottom 10%. Our results show that an equal-weighted 
hedge portfolio yields average monthly returns of 130 basis points (t =
6.01),  or  roughly  15.6%  per  year.  The  corresponding  value-weighted 
hedged return is 92 basis points per month (t = 3.97), or about 11.2% 
per  year.  In  the  next  five  columns,  we  control  for  other  known  risk 
factors. The same L/S strategy delivers CAPM abnormal returns of 1.31% 
(0.97%) per month in equal- (value-) weighted portfolios. The Fama and 
French (1993) three-factor abnormal returns for this strategy are 1.34% 
(0.93%) per month in equal- (value-) weighted implementations. Aug-
menting this model by adding the stock’s own price momentum (Car-
hart, 1997) has limited effects, as the four-factor alpha remains 1.16% 
(0.75%) per month in equal- (value-) weighted portfolios. Finally, we 
adjust  returns  using  the  Fama  and  French  (2015)  five-factor  model 
(5-factor), and also conduct a test using the five-factor model plus the 
momentum  factor  (6-factor).  We  find  the  strategy  continues  to  earn 
positive  5-factor  and  6-factor  monthly  abnormal  returns  of  1.34% 
(0.79%) and 1.22% (0.68%), respectively, in equal- (value-) weighted 
portfolios.  These  results  show  high  (low)  complementor  momentum 
stocks  earn  high  (low)  subsequent  returns,  even  after  controlling  for 
common risk factors. 

In Panel B of Table 4, we report the portfolio alphas as well as the 
factor loadings on each of the Fama-French five factors and the Carhart 
momentum  factor  (MOM).  The  L/S  hedge  portfolio  has  a  significant 
positive  loading  on  MOM.  Evidently,  this  strategy  works  well  when 
momentum firms outperform. It has no significant exposure to market 
beta (MKT), firm size (SMB), or book-to-market (HML), and its exposure 
to RMW and CMA seems to vary depending on whether the portfolio is 
equal- or value-weighted. Overall, the strategy earns significant monthly 
alphas even after controlling for all these exposures. 

4.2.3. Ali and Hirshleifer (2020) common analyst linkage 

Ali and Hirshleifer (2020) argue that common analyst coverage is a 
superior  proxy  for  the  economic  linkage  between  firms  and  report  a 
strong  momentum  spillover  effect  when  focal  firms  are  sorted  on  the 
recent returns of their co-covered peer firms. A key implication of their 
findings  is  that  new  information  or  common  economic  shocks  are 
transmitted  along  networks  of  firms  that  share  common  analyst 
coverage. In this subsection, we conduct several analyses to better un-
derstand  the  interaction  between  the  production  complementarity 
linkage and the common analyst linkage. 

In the first analysis, we exclude peer firms simultaneously covered by 
shared  analysts  in  the  construction  of  a  production  complementary 
network  (among  complementary  peers,  only  4.75%  have  co-coverage 
with the focal firm). This analysis ensures the complementor firms we 
use for the COMPL strategy exclude any common coverage firms from 
Ali and Hirshleifer (2020). Panel A of Table 5 shows that the portfolio 
alphas are only slightly weaker under this more stringent definition of 

complementors.  Specifically,  the  average  equal-  (value-)  weighted 
monthly hedge returns drop 2 (16) bps to 128 (76) bps. Across the factor 
models,  all  results  remain  statistically  significant  at  the  1%  level. 
Evidently,  production  complementary  linkages  provide  predictive 
power beyond analyst co-coverage. 

Second, we examine how the predictive power of COMPL varies as a 
function  of  whether  the  complementary  peers  are  covered  (or  not 
covered) by a common analyst. To conduct this analysis, we first sepa-
rate  all  complementary  peer  firms  into  two  groups  depending  on 
whether  each  peer  shares  an  analyst  with  the  focal  firm.  We  then 
construct complementor momentum signals for each of the two groups. 
At the end of each month, we separately rank and assign firms into decile 
portfolios  based  on  the  returns  to  a  portfolio  of  their  within-group 
complementors.  We  then  hold  this  portfolio  for  up  to  3  months  and 
calculate  the  factor  alpha  from  the  time-series  regression  of  portfolio 
returns in a five-factor model at the end of each month (from t to t+3). 
The results are reported in Panel B of Table 5. The first column of 
Panel  B  (column  label  t)  shows  the  focal  firm’s  return  has  a  strong 
contemporaneous correlation with both peer groups. Perhaps not sur-
prisingly,  the  group  of  complementors  that  also  share  at  least  one 
common analyst displays a stronger contemporaneous correlation. This 
finding suggests that either (a) co-coverage by analysts is a sign of closer 
inter-firm  linkages,  or  (b) co-coverage  accelerates  price  discovery  be-
tween  pairs  of  complementor  firms.  The  first-month  lead-lag  alpha 
(labeled  t+1)  is  slightly  larger  for  complementors  that  do  not  share 
common analysts (the N group), suggesting that the month t+1 returns 
to a COMPL strategy are stronger when the lead firm is not connected 
with the lag firm through analyst coverage. Specifically, we see that the 
complementor strategy for the group with no shared analysts (row N) 
returns a five-factor alpha of 1.29 (t = 6.45), and for the group with 
shared analysts (row O) returns a five-factor alpha of 1.17 (t = 4.58). 

Even  more  interesting  is  the  performance  of  the  two  strategies  in 
months t+2 and t+3. Starting from month t+2, the alphas of the O group 
become  statistically  insignificant  from  zero.  In  contrast,  the  monthly 
alpha  to  production  complementary  peers  that  are  not  covered  by  a 
common analyst (the N group) remains sizable (51 bps larger than the 
alpha from co-covered complementary peers) and significantly different 
from zero at the 5% level. We observe a similar, although diminished, 
pattern in month t+3. In the last column of Panel B, we calculate the 
percentage of price drift for each group, defined as the returns that are 
not realized in the contemporaneous month (t) as a percentage of the 
accumulated  returns  from  t  to  t+3.  We  find  that  the  price  drift  for 
complementarity peers not covered by a common analyst (the N group) 
is 34.03%, while the price drift for co-covered complementarity peers 
(the  O  group)  is  only  12.89%.  In  other  words,  the  delayed  price 
adjustment  for  a  focal  firm  without  co-covered  complementors,  as  a 
percentage of total news, is more than twice as large when a focal firm 
shares at least one analyst with its complementors. 

These  findings  have  two  implications  for  the momentum  spillover 
literature.  First,  COMPL  is  a  novel  inter-firm  linkage  not  spanned  by 
prior  momentum  spillover  variables,  including  analyst  co-coverage. 
Second,  we  show  that  shared  analyst  coverage  in  fact  speeds  up  the 
rate  of  information  transmission  along  COMPL  networks.  Evidently, 
when investors or analysts do not pay enough attention to these link-
ages, information transmission occurs with a lag. However, the presence 
of at least one shared analyst increases the speed of news transmission 
and reduces the momentum effect. 

In Table 5 Panel C, we conduct a series of spanning tests to further 
examine whether returns from a COMPL strategy can be fully explained 
by the common analyst momentum from Ali and Hirshleifer (2020). To 
construct  this  panel,  we  rank  stocks  into  quintiles  at  the  end  of  each 
month  based  on  the  lag  returns  of  connected  firms  through  common 
analyst  coverage.  We  also  independently  divide  stocks  into  large  and 
small size groups based on whether their market capitalization is above 
or  below  the  NYSE  median  market  capitalization  at  the  end  of  the 
month. We then calculate the value-weighted returns of the 10 (5 × 2) 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381210C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 4 
Complementor momentum strategy and abnormal returns. 
This table reports abnormal returns for a complementor momentum strategy. To construct this table, firms are ranked and assigned into decile portfolios at the 
beginning of every calendar month, based on the prior-month return to a portfolio of their Strong Complementors (COMPLRET). All stocks are equal- (value-) weighted 
within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain equal (value) weights. All non-financial stocks with stock price greater 
than $1 at portfolio formation are included. Excess return is the raw return of the portfolio over the risk-free rate. Alpha is the intercept from a regression of monthly 
excess return on factor returns. Factor returns are from the Kenneth French Data Library, and factor models include: the CAPM model; the Fama-French (1993) three- 
factor model; a four-factor model (Fama-French three factors and Carhart (1997)’s momentum factor), Fama-French (2015) five-factor model, and six-factor model 
(Fama-French five factors and momentum factor). L/S is the alpha of a zero-cost portfolio that holds the top 10% stocks ranked by average complementors returns 
(COMPLRET) and sells the bottom 10%. Panel B reports the alpha and the risk factor loadings, where the benchmark is a six-factor model (Fama-French five-factor +
momentum factor).  

Panel A: Baseline Portfolio Returns  

Excess Return (%) 

CAPM Alpha (%) 

3-Factor Alpha (%) 

4-Factor Alpha (%) 

5-Factor Alpha (%) 

6-Factor Alpha (%)  

1(Low) 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10(High) 

L/S 
(EW) 

L/S 
(VW) 

0.08 
(0.27) 
0.30 
(1.00) 
0.39 
(1.34) 
0.47 
(1.71) 
0.65 
(2.35) 
0.54 
(2.04) 
0.95 
(3.49) 
1.01 
(3.61) 
1.22 
(4.02) 
1.38 

(4.33) 
1.30 
(6.01) 

0.92 
(3.97) 

Panel B: Risk Factor Loadings  

1(Low) 

10(High) 

L/S 
(EW) 
L/S 
(VW) 

Alpha (%) 

(cid:0) 0.42 
((cid:0) 3.03) 
0.80 
(5.29) 
1.22 
(5.95) 
0.68 
(3.04) 

(cid:0) 0.72 
((cid:0) 3.99) 
(cid:0) 0.51 
((cid:0) 2.98) 
(cid:0) 0.40 
((cid:0) 2.36) 
(cid:0) 0.28 
((cid:0) 1.90) 
(cid:0) 0.10 
((cid:0) 0.67) 
(cid:0) 0.18 
((cid:0) 1.24) 
0.22 
(1.40) 
0.26 
(1.62) 
0.45 
(2.33) 
0.59 

(2.82) 
1.31 
(4.74) 

0.97 
(4.50) 

MKT 

1.00 
(29.69) 
0.96 
(26.04) 
(cid:0) 0.04 
((cid:0) 0.79) 
(cid:0) 0.01 
((cid:0) 0.18) 

(cid:0) 0.77 
((cid:0) 5.35) 
(cid:0) 0.51 
((cid:0) 4.06) 
(cid:0) 0.44 
((cid:0) 3.34) 
(cid:0) 0.33 
((cid:0) 2.92) 
(cid:0) 0.20 
((cid:0) 1.78) 
(cid:0) 0.26 
((cid:0) 2.43) 
0.16 
(1.35) 
0.19 
(1.64) 
0.40 
(2.97) 
0.57 

(3.71) 
1.34 
(6.37) 

0.93 
(4.26) 

SMB 

0.81 
(16.37) 
0.90 
(16.56) 
0.09 
(1.19) 
0.11 
(1.33) 

(cid:0) 0.55 
((cid:0) 4.07) 
(cid:0) 0.33 
((cid:0) 2.76) 
(cid:0) 0.25 
((cid:0) 1.97) 
(cid:0) 0.19 
((cid:0) 1.74) 
(cid:0) 0.04 
((cid:0) 0.40) 
(cid:0) 0.14 
((cid:0) 1.40) 
0.23 
(1.97) 
0.31 
(2.82) 
0.52 
(3.89) 
0.61 

(3.87) 
1.16 
(5.59) 

0.75 
(3.45) 

HML 

(cid:0) 0.07 
((cid:0) 1.07) 
(cid:0) 0.23 
((cid:0) 3.22) 
(cid:0) 0.16 
((cid:0) 1.65) 
0.09 
(0.89) 

(cid:0) 0.55 
((cid:0) 3.76) 
(cid:0) 0.25 
((cid:0) 1.98) 
(cid:0) 0.23 
((cid:0) 1.74) 
(cid:0) 0.19 
((cid:0) 1.64) 
(cid:0) 0.12 
((cid:0) 1.10) 
(cid:0) 0.21 
((cid:0) 1.99) 
0.20 
(1.74) 
0.28 
(2.43) 
0.64 
(4.86) 
0.79 

(5.31) 
1.34 
(6.45) 

0.79 
(3.51) 

RMW 

(cid:0) 0.24 
((cid:0) 3.83) 
(cid:0) 0.57 
((cid:0) 8.15) 
(cid:0) 0.33 
((cid:0) 3.43) 
0.12 
(1.19) 

(cid:0) 0.42   
((cid:0) 3.03)  
(cid:0) 0.15   
((cid:0) 1.22)  
(cid:0) 0.11   
((cid:0) 0.90)  
(cid:0) 0.11   
((cid:0) 0.93)  
(cid:0) 0.02   
((cid:0) 0.20)  
(cid:0) 0.14   
((cid:0) 1.31)  
0.25   
(2.15)  
0.36   
(3.25)  
0.70   
(5.37)  
0.80   

(5.29)  
1.22  
(5.95)  

0.68  
(3.04)  

CMA 

(cid:0) 0.11 
((cid:0) 1.17) 
0.30 
(2.89) 
0.41 
(2.93) 
0.17 
(1.15) 

MOM 

(cid:0) 0.24  
((cid:0) 7.60) 
(cid:0) 0.01  
((cid:0) 0.21) 
0.23 
(4.97) 
0.19 
(3.87)  

resulting  portfolios  during  the  next  month  and  the  long-short  factor 
return as: 
(

(

)

)

0.5 ∗

RET 5

small + RET 5

large

(cid:0) 0.5 ∗

RET 1

small + RET 1

large

(4)  

where RET5
cap stocks in characteristic quintile q. 

small(Large) is the value-weighted average return of small (large) 

Panel C of Table 5 presents the results of time-series regressions of 
the returns of complementor momentum after adding the common an-
alyst momentum factor as an additional explanatory variable in the five- 
and six-factor regressions. We find that controlling for common analyst 
momentum reduces the alpha of the COMPL strategy, but this strategy 
still produces sizable and statistically significant alphas of 71 to 75 basis 
points per month. These results show both the power of the common 
analyst momentum variable (Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020) and the incre-
mental usefulness of COMPL in return prediction. 

4.2.4. Predictability beyond one month 

We also examine the long-run return pattern of the complementor 
momentum  effect.  If  returns  to  the  COMPL  strategy  reflect  investor 
overreaction to the news from complementor firms, we should observe 

some  return  reversal  over  a  longer  holding  period.  Conversely,  if  the 
effect we document is primarily an underreaction to the news that af-
fects focal firms’ fundamental value, we should see little return reversal 
in the future. In Fig. 2, we plot the cumulative return of the COMPLRET 
hedge portfolio in the 12 months after portfolio formation. Consistent 
with the latter hypothesis, we observe a modest upward drift through 
month  12  for  an  equal-weighted  portfolio  and  month  11  for  a  value- 
weighted portfolio. The returns of equal- (value-) weighted portfolios 
accumulate to 455 (218) basis points in 12 months after the portfolio 
formation.  Moreover,  in  unreported  analyses,  we  find  no  return  re-
versals in even longer periods. Overall, the evidence reveals a mecha-
nism  of  delayed  updating  of  focal  firm  prices  to  complementor 
information and not an overreaction phenomenon. 

4.3. Cross-sectional analysis 

4.3.1. Baseline Fama-Macbeth regression results 

In this section, we use Fama-Macbeth regressions to test for the re-
turn predictability of complementors after controlling for a number of 
other variables nominated by the literature. To ensure the robustness of 
the results, we follow the suggestion of Hou et al. (2020) and use both 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381211C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 5 
Incremental information beyond common analyst coverage. 
This table presents a series of tests that examine the incremental information in complementor momentum after controlling for the common analyst effect documented 
in Ali and Hirshleifer (2020). In Panel A, we exclude all complementors that are simultaneously covered by common analysts when constructing complementor 
momentum and report equal- and value-weighted hedge portfolio returns. In Panel B, we separate all production complementors into two groups by whether the peers 
are covered by common analysts or not and construct complementor momentums for each group. At the end of each month, we separately rank and assign firms into 
decile portfolios based on the contemporaneous returns to a portfolio of their within-group complementors. We then hold this portfolio for 3 months and calculate the 
factor alpha from the time-series regression of portfolio returns in a five-factor model at the end of each month (from t to t+3). All stocks are equal weighted within a 
given portfolio. In the last column, “Percentage of Price Drift (%)” is defined as the returns that are not realized in the contemporaneous month (t) as a percentage of the 
accumulated returns from t to t+3. “O/N” is the alpha of a zero-cost portfolio that buys the hedge portfolio covered by common analysts group (O) and shorts the hedge 
portfolio not covered by common analysts group (N). In Panel C, we report returns to the complementor strategy after adding common analyst (CA) momentum factor as 
an additional explanatory variable to the standard five- or six-factor model. In both Panel A and C, L/S is the alpha of a zero-cost portfolio that holds the top 10% stocks 
ranked by complementor momentum and sells short the bottom 10%.  

Panel A: Abnormal Returns after Excluding Complementors covered by at least One Common Analyst  

Excess Return (%) 

CAPM Alpha (%) 

3-Factor Alpha 
(%) 

4-Factor Alpha 
(%) 

5-Factor Alpha (%) 

6-Factor Alpha 
(%) 

1 
(Low) 
10 
(High) 
L/S (EW) 

L/S (VW) 

0.07 
(0.22) 
1.35 
(4.25) 
1.28 
(6.37) 
0.76 
(3.37) 

(cid:0) 0.73 
((cid:0) 4.09) 
0.56 
(2.70) 
1.30 
(4.71) 
0.78 
(3.75) 

(cid:0) 0.76 
((cid:0) 5.49) 
0.54 
(3.71) 
1.31 
(6.46) 
0.71 
(3.45) 

(cid:0) 0.55 
((cid:0) 4.19) 
0.56 
(3.78) 
1.11 
(5.61) 
0.58 
(2.76) 

(cid:0) 0.54 
((cid:0) 3.89) 
0.76 
(5.35) 
1.30 
(6.54) 
0.63 
(2.95) 

(cid:0) 0.42 
((cid:0) 3.13) 
0.75 
(5.27) 
1.17  
(5.99) 
0.54  
(2.54) 

Panel B: Price Discovery for Complementors Covered and not Covered by a Common Analyst  

Not covered by a 
common analyst (N) 
Covered by a 
common 
analyst (O) 
O/N (Long O and 

Short N) 

T 

4.13 
(17.43) 
7.91 

(27.46) 
3.78 

(10.13) 

Panel C: Spanning Tests  

t+1 

1.29 
(6.45) 
1.17 

(4.58) 
(cid:0) 0.12 

((cid:0) 0.37) 

Percentage of Price 
Drift (%)  

34.03%  

12.89%  

t+2 

t+3 

0.49 
(2.29) 
(cid:0) 0.02 

((cid:0) 0.09) 
(cid:0) 0.51 

((cid:0) 1.65) 

0.35 
(1.63)   
0.02 

(0.07)   
(cid:0) 0.33    

((cid:0) 0.92)   

5-Factor + CA Momentum Factor 
Alpha (%) 

6-Factor + CA Momentum Factor 
Alpha (%)     

1 
(Low) 
10 
(High) 
L/S (EW) 

(cid:0) 0.18 
((cid:0) 1.45) 
0.57 
(4.24) 
0.75 
(4.07) 

(cid:0) 0.35     
((cid:0) 2.78)     
0.36     
(2.54)     
0.71      
(3.75)      

ordinary least squares (shown in Table 6 Panel A) and weighted least 
squares with the market equity as the weights (shown in Panel B) in the 
Fama  and  MacBeth  (1973)  cross-sectional regressions.  Specifically,  in 
Table 6, the dependent variable of columns 1 to 3 is the focal firm’s raw 
return  in  month  t  (RETt).  The  independent  variable  of  interest  is  the 
average  return  of  the  focal  firm’s  complementors  in  month  t-1 
(COMPLRETt-1).  To  further  control  for  industry  momentum,  we  also 
include the industry return of the focal firm in month t-1 (INDRETt-1) as 
an independent variable (Cohen and Lou, 2012; Moskowitz and Grin-
blatt,  1999).  Other  control  variables 
size, 
book-to-market, lagged focal firm return RETt-1 (Jegadeesh and Titman, 
1993) and medium-term price momentum MOM (Chan et al., 1996). All 
explanatory  variables  are  based  on  the  last  non-missing  available 
observation for each month t and are assigned to deciles ranging from 
zero to one. Cross-sectional regressions are run each calendar month, 
and the time-series standard errors are Newey-West (1987) adjusted for 
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. 

include 

lagged 

Table 6 columns 1 to 3 in Panel A and B report the baseline results. 
Consistent with the time-series portfolio-based tests, COMPLRETt-1  re-
mains a strong predictor of next month’s focal firm return in all three 
specifications. Controlling for standard variables (Panel A column 3) and 
using the equal-weighted OLS, the coefficient on COMPLRETt-1 is 0.969 
with  a  t-statistic  of  6.37,  indicating  that  the  average  monthly  alpha 

spread  of  the  focal  firms  in  the  top  and  bottom  deciles  is  96.9  basis 
points.  Results  are  similar  with  weighted  least  squares  in  Panel  B  of 
Table 6, as the coefficient on COMPLRETt-1  is 0.902 with a t-statistic of 
6.37.  The  coefficients  on  other  control  variables  are  consistent  with 
prior literature and omitted for brevity. In column 4 of both panels, we 
report results using the firm’s industry-adjusted return (calculated as the 
difference  between  a  focal  firm’s  return  and  its  contemporaneous  in-
dustry  return)  as  the  dependent  variable.  Moskowitz  and  Grinblatt 
(1999) show industry momentum is a short-lived effect strongest in the 
month  immediately  after  portfolio  formation.  By  subtracting  industry 
return from focal firm return, we purge any predictability from monthly 
industry-wide autocorrelation in returns. Column 4 results show that the 
magnitude of the coefficient for COMPLRETt-1  is slightly smaller with 
industry-adjusted  returns.  However,  the  implied  monthly  alpha  con-
tinues to be economically significant in both the FM-OLS (0.803; t-sta-
tistic of 6.46) and the FM-WLS (0.730; t-statistic of 6.66) specifications. 
Note  also  that  the  coefficient  on  lagged  industry  returns,  INDRETt-1, 
decreases in  both  significance and  magnitude.  Together,  these results 
show  the  predictive  power  of  COMPLRETt-1  comes  from  delayed  pro-
cessing  of  firm-level  news  rather  than  from  industry-wide  return 
continuation (see Cohen and Lou (2012) for an expanded discussion of 
this argument). 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381212C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 2. Hedge portfolio performance persistence. 
This figure shows the cumulative returns of the hedge portfolio in the 12 months after portfolio formation. At the beginning of every calendar month, all firms are 
ranked in ascending order on the basis of the return of a portfolio of its complementors at the end of the previous month. The ranked stocks are assigned to one of ten 
decile portfolios. All stocks are either equal-weighted (red) or value-weighted (blue) within each portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to 
maintain equal or value weights. The hedge portfolio is a zero-cost portfolio that buys the top decile and sells short the bottom decile. The sample excludes financial 
firms (with a one-digit SIC code of six) and stocks with a price of less than $1 at portfolio formation. 

4.3.2. Controlling for other economic links 

returns 

Using Fama-Macbeth regressions, we further account for effects from 
other economic links that are well established in the literature. Columns 
5–8  of  Table  6  examine  the  incremental  usefulness  of  complementor 
momentum  after  controlling  for  various  other  links.  Specifically,  we 
control for similar link-based momentum factors such as supplier and 
customer 
column  5), 
pseudo-conglomerate  returns  (Cohen  and  Lou,  2012;  column  6), 
technology-linked  returns  (Lee  et  al.,  2019;  column  7)  and  common 
analyst returns (Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020; column 8). In each case, we 
find the coefficient for COMPLRETt-1 remains statistically significant and 
economically  sizeable,  indicating  that  the  sluggish  diffusion  of  infor-
mation  along  complementarity  networks  is  not  subsumed  by  other 
well-documented inter-firm links in previous literature. 

(Menzly  and  Ozbas,  2010; 

5. Underlying mechanisms and robustness tests 

In this section, we conduct several empirical analyses to better un-
derstand the underlying mechanisms driving our main finding. Overall, 
our results provide support for the delayed updating of focal firm prices 
to  fundamental  information  transmitted  through  the  production 
complementarity  network.  We  further  explore  the  cross-sectional 
sensitivity  of  our  main  results  to  various  characteristics  associated 
with:  (a)  the intensity  of production  complementarity, (b)  the  degree 
centrality of a firm in the complementarity network, (c) the extent to 
which investors might be attentive to information transmitted through 
production complementarity network, and (d) the costs that investors 
face if they attempt to arbitrage the mispricing. We also examine stock 
price  reactions  around  earnings  announcement  to  provide  direct  evi-
dence that it is mispricing rather than risks that drives our results. 

5.1. Intensity of production complementarity 

In  Table  7  Panel  A,  we  conduct  Fama-Macbeth  regressions  using 
Strong, Medium, and Weak return signals. Specifically, we regress the raw 
returns of the focal firm on the lagged returns of the Strong, Medium, and 
Weak complementors (see columns 1, 2, and 3, respectively). These tests 
show both the economic magnitude of the coefficients and their statis-
tical  significance  decline  as  we  move  from  Strong  to  Weak  com-
plementors. The coefficient on Strong Complementor is 1.221, with a t- 

statistics of 7.35, compared with the coefficient on Weak Complementor of 
0.389.  Note  also  that  the  returns  from  all  three  groups  significantly 
predict the focal firm’s returns at the 5% confidence level. In column 4, 
we run a pooled regression with Strong, Medium, and Weak Complementor 
returns simultaneously and find these results still hold. In Table 7, Panel 
B,  we  replicate  our  main  tests  in  Table  4  and  estimate  the  hedged 
portfolio  returns  based  on  Medium  Complementors  or  Weak  Com-
plementors.  The  monthly  average  excess  returns  and  3-factor  model 
adjusted abnormal returns exhibit a gradual decline but remain signif-
icant  when  we  use  the  Medium  or  Weak  complementor  signal.  The 
monthly hedged return of 48 basis points for the Weak Complementor 
group is roughly 37% of the returns from the baseline hedged portfolio 
using  Strong  Complementors.  Overall,  these  results  are  consistent  with 
our  hypothesis  that  the  lead-lag  effect  along  the  production  comple-
mentary  network  is  attributable  to  the  co-movement  in  underlying 
fundamentals: when we observe a tighter relation in terms of the firms’ 
economic fundamentals, we also observe a stronger lead-lag relation in 
return. 

5.2. Degree centrality in the complementarity network 

In this subsection, we examine how production network centrality 
affects  complementor  momentum.  We  measure  production  network 
centrality by the number of stocks that a particular stock is connected to 
in the complementary network (i.e., a stock’s “degree centrality”). If a 
stock  is  connected  to  many  other  stocks  in  the  network,  information 
from the adjacent stocks would be incorporated more slowly into the 
focal firm’s price. Intuitively, this effect arises because when a focal firm 
has a higher degree of centrality investors need to monitor or consider a 
larger  set  of  related  firms.  Following  this  intuition,  we  expect  the 
delayed price reaction to be more pronounced when the focal firm has a 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381213C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 6 
Fama-macbeth regressions. 
This table reports results of the Fama-MacBeth return forecasting regressions. The dependent variable is either the focal firm’s monthly return RET (columns 1–3, 5–8), 
or the firm’s excess return over its industry return RET-INDRET (column 4). In columns 3 and 4, we add the lagged industry average returns (INDRET). In column 5, we 
add the lagged returns from portfolios of both the focal firm’s suppliers (SUPPRET) and customers (CUSTRET). These portfolios are constructed following Menzly and 
Ozbas (2010). In column 6, a portfolio of pseudo conglomerate returns (PCRET) is added based on Cohen and Lou (2012). In column 7, a portfolio of technology-linked 
firms’ returns (TECHRET) is added following Lee et al. (2019). In column 8, we also add the lagged average return of firms that are connected through common analyst 
coverage (CARET) following Ali and Hirshleifer (2020). The control variables include firm size (SIZE), book-to-market ratio (BM), the firm’s own lagged monthly return 
(RETt-1), and medium-term price momentum (MOM). We use ordinary least squares cross-sectional regressions in Panel A and weighted least squares with market 
equity as the weights in Panel B. All variables are defined in Appendix A. The sample sizes for different columns vary by data availability. All explanatory variables are 
assigned to deciles ranging from 0 to 1. Cross-sectional regressions are run every calendar month, and the standard errors are Newey-West adjusted for hetero-
skedasticity and autocorrelation. Coefficients marked with *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.  

Panel A: Ordinary Least Squares (Equal-Weighted) Fama-Macbeth 

Dependent Variable 
*100 

(1) 
RETt 

(2) 
RETt 

1.267*** 
(5.72) 

1.221*** 
(7.35) 

(3) 
RETt 

0.969*** 
(6.37) 
1.176*** 
(8.58) 

(4) 
RETt - INDRETt 

0.803*** 
(6.46) 
0.603***        
(4.16)     

(5) 
RETt 

(6) 
RETt 

(7) 
RETt 

(8) 
RETt 

1.059*** 
(7.00) 

0.616*** 
(4.60) 

0.799*** 
(5.24) 

0.733*** 
(4.93) 

0.592***         
(4.03)    
0.626***         
(3.87)    

0.959***         
(6.82)   

0.527**         
(2.32)  

Panel B: Weighted Least Square (Size-Weighted) Fama-Macbeth 

Dependent Variable 
*100 

(1) 
RETt 

(2) 
RETt 

1.174*** 
(5.33) 

1.137*** 
(7.30) 

No 
1,002,682 
0.005 

Yes 
1,002,682 
0.034 

Yes 
1,002,682 
0.037 

Yes 
1,002,682 
0.030 

Yes 
843,463 
0.046 

Yes 
205,126 
0.066 

Yes 
244,508 
0.060 

1.909***         
(8.94) 
Yes 
640,427 
0.053 

(3) 
RETt 

0.902*** 
(6.37) 
1.054*** 
(7.65) 

(4) 
RETt - INDRETt 

0.730*** 
(6.66) 
0.480***        
(3.53)     

(5) 
RETt 

(6) 
RETt 

(7) 
RETt 

(8) 
RETt 

0.991*** 
(6.99) 

0.537*** 
(4.57) 

0.763*** 
(5.17) 

0.638*** 
(4.63) 

0.498***         
(3.42)    
0.585***         
(3.60)    

0.852***         
(6.30)   

0.465**         
(2.07)  

No 
1,002,682 
0.007 

Yes 
1,002,682 
0.041 

Yes 
1,002,682 
0.044 

Yes 
1,002,682 
0.034 

Yes 
843,463 
0.054 

Yes 
205,126 
0.070 

Yes 
244,508 
0.066 

1.882***         
(8.67) 
Yes 
640,427 
0.058  

COMPLRETt-1 

INDRETt-1   

CUSRETt-1     

SUPRETt-1     

PCRETt-1      

TECHRETt-1       

CARETt-1        

Controls 
N 
R2 

COMPLRETt-1 

INDRETt-1   

CUSRETt-1     

SUPRETt-1     

PCRETt-1      

TECHRETt-1       

CA RETt-1        

Controls 
N 
R2 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381214C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 7 
Intensity of production complementarity. 
This table reports how expected returns vary by the intensity of production complementarity. For a focal firm, strong complementor returns (Strong COMPLRETt-1) are 
the equal-weighted average returns of complementors in the 99th and 98th percentile as ranked by their complementarity score, COMPL. Medium complementor 
returns (Medium COMPLRETt-1) are the equal-weighted average returns of complementors in the 97th and 96th percentile as ranked by their complementarity score. 
Weak complementor returns (Weak COMPLRETt-1) are the equal-weighted average returns of complementors in the 95th and 94th percentile as ranked by their 
complementarity score. All columns include SIZE, BM, RETt-1, and MOM as controls. In Panel A, we report the results from Fama-MacBeth return forecasting re-
gressions. The time-series standard errors are Newey-West adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics are reported below the co-
efficient estimates. Coefficients marked with *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. We report the differences in the estimated coefficients 
between Strong COMPLRETt-1 vs. either Medium or Weak COMPLRETt-1. In Panel B, we replicate our main tests in Table 4 and estimate the hedged portfolio returns 
based on Medium complementors or Weak complementors. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, and t-statistics are shown in parentheses below the coefficient 
estimates.  

Panel A: Fama-Macbeth Regressions 

Dependent Variable 

(1) 

*100 
Strong COMPLRETt-1 

Medium COMPLRETt-1  

RETt 
1.221***   
(7.35)   

Yes 
1,002,682 
0.034 

Weak COMPLRETt-1   

Controls 
N 
R2 
Strong vs. Medium    
Coeff. Difference    
Strong vs. Weak    
Coeff. Difference    

Panel B: Portfolio Returns  

(2) 

RETt 

0.429***  
(3.34)  

Yes 
935,514 
0.035 

(3) 

RETt 

0.389*** 
(3.40) 
Yes 
909,078 
0.034 

(4)   

RETt   
1.036***    
(6.03)   
0.170     
(1.25)   
0.266**      
(2.23)   
Yes   
766,330   
0.041   
0.866***   
(3.39)   
0.770***   
(3.11)   

Decile 

1 
(Low) 
10 
(High) 
L/S (EW) 

Strong 
Excess Returns (%) 

3-Factor Alpha (%) 

Medium 
Excess Returns (%) 

3-Factor Alpha (%) 

Weak 
Excess Returns (%) 

3-Factor Alpha (%) 

0.08 
(0.27) 
1.38 
(4.33) 
1.30 
(6.01) 

(cid:0) 0.77 
((cid:0) 5.35) 
0.57 
(3.71) 
1.34 
(6.37) 

0.44 
(1.42) 
1.06 
(3.52) 
0.62 
(3.59) 

(cid:0) 0.37 
((cid:0) 2.41) 
0.21 
(1.62) 
0.58 
(2.88) 

0.45 
(1.58) 
0.93 
(3.19) 
0.48 
(2.93) 

(cid:0) 0.39 
((cid:0) 2.93) 
0.11 
(0.86) 
0.50  
(2.74)  

Table 8 
Production complementarity characteristics, limited attention, and cost of arbitrage. 
This table reports the results of a series of cross-sectional analyses designed to evaluate the sensitivity of complementor momentum to proxies of limited attention and 
arbitrage costs. The tests are Fama-MacBeth return forecasting regressions where the dependent variable is the monthly stock return (RET). Explanatory variables 
include the lagged complementor returns (COMPLRETt-1), assigned to deciles ranging from 0 to 1, plus a number of interaction terms. HighPeerNum equals one if the 
number of complementary peers of a focal firm is above the sample median in a given year. Larger_Size equals one if a focal firm is above the third quartile in a given 
month in terms of the log value of market capitalization, and zero otherwise. More_Analyst equals one if the number of analysts following a focal firm at the end of the 
previous month is above the third quartile in the sample, and zero otherwise. Higher_InstitOwn equals one if the institutional holding at the end of the previous fiscal- 
year is above the sample median. More_IdioVol equals one if the idiosyncratic volatility at the end of the previous fiscal year is above the sample median. IdioVol is the 
standard deviation of the residuals from a regression of daily stock returns in the previous month on the Fama and French (1993) factors (at least ten daily returns 
required). Control variables include SIZE, BM, RETt-1, and MOM. The sample excludes financial firms (with a one-digit SIC code=6) and stocks with price less than one 
dollar at portfolio formation. Cross-sectional regressions are run every month and the time-series standard errors are Newey-West adjusted. Fama-MacBeth t-statistics 
are reported below the coefficient estimates. Coefficients marked with *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.  

Dependent Variable 
*100 

COMPLRETt-1 

COMPLRETt-1* HighPeerNum 

COMPLRETt-1* Larger_Size  

COMPLRETt-1* More_Analyst   

COMPLRETt-1* Higher_InstitOwn    

COMPLRETt-1* More_IdioVol     

Controls 

N 
R2 

(1) 
RETt 

0.828*** 
(5.04) 
0.816***      
(3.14)     

(2) 
RETt 

1.543*** 
(7.90) 

(cid:0) 0.656***      
((cid:0) 4.23)    

(3) 
RETt 

1.299*** 
(7.37) 

(cid:0) 0.313**      
((cid:0) 2.34)   

Yes 

1,002,682 
0.038 

Yes 

1,002,682 
0.030 

Yes 

1,002,682 
0.035 

(4) 
RETt 

1.503*** 
(7.30) 

(5) 
RETt 

1.013*** 
(7.39) 

(cid:0) 0.575***      
((cid:0) 3.73)  

Yes 

1,002,682 
0.036 

0.419***      
(2.59) 
Yes 

1,002,682 
0.037  

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381215C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

greater number of linked firms.19 

The  results  in  column  1  of  Table  8  show  that  complementor  mo-
mentum  is  indeed  stronger  for  focal  firms  with  a  higher  number  of 
complementors. In this table, HighPeerNum equals one if the number of 
complementary peers of a focal firm is above the sample median in a 
given  year.  The  estimated  coefficient  on  the  key  interaction  variable 
(COMPLRETt-1*  HighPeerNum) shows that highly networked focal firms 
(those firms with a high degree of centrality) exhibit a complementor 
momentum effect that is roughly twice that of other firms. 

5.3. Investors’ limited attention 

If  complementor  momentum  is  due  to  investor  inattention,  we 
should observe a stronger effect for focal firms that are subject to less 
investor  monitoring.  We  adopt  three  measures  of  investor  attention 
commonly  used  in  prior  literature:  firm  size,  analyst  coverage,  and 
institutional  ownership  (e.g.,  Cohen  and  Frazzini,  2008;  Hirshleifer 
et al., 2013; Hou, 2007; Jiang et al., 2016; and Menzly and Ozbas, 2010). 
Larger firms, firms with higher analyst coverage, and firms with more 
institutional  ownership  are  generally  regarded  as  receiving  more 
attention from investors, and if investor under-reaction drives our result, 
these firms should exhibit a less sluggish price reaction to the informa-
tion contained in complementors’ returns. 

To test this prediction, we construct an indicator variable (Larger_-
Size) that equals one if a focal firm’s market capitalization is above the 
third  quartile  of  the  sample  in  a  given  month,  and  zero  otherwise. 
Similarly,  we  capture  the  analyst  coverage  effect  using  an  indicator 
variable  (More_Analyst)  that  equals  one  if  the  number  of  analysts 
following a focal firm at the end of the previous month is above the third 
quartile in the sample, and zero otherwise. We also construct an indi-
cator  variable  (Higher_InstitOwn)  that  equals  one  if  the  institutional 
ownership  at  the  end  of  the  previous  fiscal  year  is  above  the  sample 
median.  Results  of  the  tests  are  reported  in  columns  2–4  of  Table  8. 
Consistent with the limited attention explanation, the coefficient esti-
mates on these three interaction terms are all negative and statistically 
significant, indicating that the complementor momentum effect is more 
muted among firms with higher investor attention. These results lend 
further support to our hypothesis that the lead-lag effect is driven by 
investors’  inattention to fundamental news transmitted along produc-
tion complementary networks. 

5.4. Cost of arbitrage 

Investors may be less able or willing to fully incorporate new infor-
mation into prices when the focal firm is associated with higher arbi-
trage costs (Beneish et al., 2015; Hirshleifer et al., 2011). Wurgler and 
Zhuravskaya  (2002)  argue  that  arbitrageurs’  demand  for  a  stock  is 
inversely related to its arbitrage cost, as measured by the idiosyncratic 

19  Ahern  (2013)  argues  that  industries  in  more  central  positions  within  an 
input-output network are riskier, because they have greater exposure to sectoral 
shocks that transmit from one industry to another. Consistent with this argu-
ment,  his  empirical  findings  show  that  centrally  positioned  industries  earn 
higher average returns. Like Ahern (2013), we are interested in how the greater 
sectoral exposure of centrally position firms affect their stock prices. However, 
our  focus  differs  from  Ahern  (2013)  in  that  we  are  studying  how  network 
centrality affects the speed of price adjustment, not the average returns earned 
by  these  firms.  In  his  study,  network  centrality  leads  to  higher  risk  and  thus 
higher  average  returns.  In  our  study,  network  centrality  leads  to  greater 
informational friction and thus slower price adjustment. The two findings are 
not incompatible. The increased exposure to sectoral shocks could potentially 
make these focal firms riskier. These cross-sectoral exposures can also make it 
more difficult for investors to keep track of all relevant shocks from related peer 
firms, leading to a stronger complementor momentum effect. Our results show a 
slower price adjustment process among centrally positioned firms, but we do 
not speak to their average returns. 

volatility of its returns. Analogously, if complementor momentum is a 
form of slow price reaction to fundamental news, the effect should be 
more pronounced for firms with higher idiosyncratic volatility. To test 
this  conjecture,  we  compute  idiosyncratic  volatility  as  the  standard 
deviation of the residuals from a regression of daily stock returns in the 
previous  month  on  the  Fama  and  French  (1993)  factors.  We  then 
construct  an  indicator  variable  (More_IdioVol)  that  equals  one  if  the 
idiosyncratic volatility at the end of the previous fiscal year is above the 
sample median, and zero otherwise. As reported in Table 8 column 5, the 
estimated coefficient on the interaction term COMPLRETt-1*More_IdioVol 
is strongly positive and statistically significant, indicating that arbitrage 
costs  likely  contribute  to  the  magnitude  of  the  complementor  mo-
mentum effect. 

5.5. Evidence on shock transmission across stocks 

As a final test, we investigate information transmission from focal 
firms to their complementor peers using a patent announcement setting 
(Kogan  et  al., 2017).  Every  Tuesday,  the  U.S.  Patent  Office  publishes 
newly granted patents and Kogan et al. (2017) find substantially higher 
trading volume around the day when a firm’s patent is published. They 
further construct a measure of the market value of the patents, based on 
the  stock  market  reaction,  or  short-window  cumulative  abnormal 
returns (CAR), around the announcement date. The publication date for 
a given patent is not known in advance, either by the focal firm or by its 
investors. The timing of these events is also exogenous with respect to 
daily  market  conditions  and  news  shocks  from  the  firm’s  customer-
s/suppliers. Therefore, we should be able to use the announcement date 
return  in  a  patent  publication  setting  to  examine  shock  transmission 
from the focal firm to its peer firms. To perform this test, we obtain the 
publication  date  for  each  patent  from  Kogan  et  al.  (2017)’s  patent 
database. For each patent publication, we compute the focal firm CAR 
around a 2-day event window (day t and day t+1). If there is more than 
one patent publication for a given firm-month, we sum up the individual 
CARs to derive a “Patent CAR” variable for that focal firm. Intuitively, 
Patent CAR is a measure of the market value of the focal firm’s approved 
patent(s) in a given month. We then examine whether, and how quickly, 
the news contained in “Patent CAR” is transmitted to other peer firms. 
In Table 9 we present the results of this analysis for contemporaneous 
return  transmission  (month  t)  as  well  as  one-month  forward  return 
transmission (month t+1). In Panel A, we find a strongly positive rela-
tion between focal firm short-window returns and same-month returns 
among its complementors (COMPLRET), industry peers (INDRET), and 
technology peers (TECHRET). Dividing the complementor returns into 
three groups based on their COMPL distance (Strong, Medium, andWeak), 
we find a monotonic relation in terms of their response to the focal firm 
patent issuance shock – Strong complementors exhibit the most positive 
return correlation, followed by the Medium group and then the Weak 
group. These results further validate the notion that COMPL is a sound 
measure  of  the  economic  distance  between  a  focal  firm  and  its  com-
plementors.  We  find  an  even  stronger  positive  correlation  among  in-
dustry and technology peers. This is perhaps unsurprising, as industry 
and technology affinities are more salient and likely to be more closely 
monitored by analysts and investors. 

We find a striking result when examining shock transmission in the 
following  month  (month  t+1):  the  short-window  focal  firm  return 
(Patent  CAR)  significantly  predicts  the  next-month  returns  of  Strong 
complementors,  but  not  the  returns  of  the  Medium  and  Weak  com-
plementors (see Table 9 Panel B). The month t+1 effects for industry 
peers and technology peers are also insignificant or marginally signifi-
cant, suggesting a relatively complete same-month response to the focal 
firm shock among industry and technology peers. We note that the re-
turn  signal  featured  in  our  main  tests  (COMPLRET)  is  more  compre-
hensive, in that it summarizes all the news affecting the complementor 
firms, not just patent news. However, this additional test is novel in the 
literature and provides direct evidence that economic shocks are indeed 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381216C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Table 9 
Patent shocks and complementor returns. 
This table reports how patent-induced stock price shocks to a focal firm transmit 
to  complementors,  industry  peers,  and  technology  peers.  The  key  variable, 
CAR[0,1], is the sum of a focal firm’s cumulative abnormal returns around 2-day 
windows (day t and day t+1) of patent issuance dates in a month. In columns 1-3, 
the dependent variable is strong, medium and weak complementor return. Strong 
complementor returns are the equal-weighted average returns of complementors 
in  the  99th  and  98th  percentile  as  ranked  by  their  complementarity  score, 
COMPL. Medium complementor returns are the equal-weighted average returns 
of complementors in the 97th and 96th percentile as ranked by their comple-
mentarity score. Weak complementor returns are the equal-weighted average 
returns  of complementors in the 95th and 94th percentile as ranked by their 
complementarity  score.  The  dependent  variable  is  either  industry  average 
returns,  INDRET,  in  column  4  or  technological  peers  returns  in  column  5.  In 
Panel A, we focus on the stock market reaction of peer firms in the contempo-
raneous month. In Panel B, we focus on the stock market reaction of peer firms in 
the subsequent month. The control variables include SIZE, BM, and MOM. All 
variables are defined in Appendix A. Both firm fixed effects and month fixed 
effects  are  included.  Standard  errors  are  double-clustered  by  both  firm  and 
month. Coefficients marked with *, **, and *** are significant at 10%, 5%, and 
1%, respectively.  

Panel A: Patent Shock Transmission in the Contemporaneous Month  

COMPLRETt 
(1) 
Strong 

(2) 
Medium 

(3) 
Weak   

INDRET t 
(4) 

TECHRET t  
(5)  

0.046*** 
(8.51) 
Yes 
Yes 

0.027*** 
(5.84) 
Yes 
Yes 

0.024*** 
(6.56) 
Yes 
Yes 

0.050*** 
(10.44) 
Yes 
Yes 

0.057***  
(11.28) 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

106,358 
0.631 

90,400 
0.667 

86,514 
0.727 

106,358 
0.755 

78,762 
0.864 

CAR[0,1] 

Controls 
Firm Fixed 
Effects 
Month Fixed 
Effects 

N 
R2 

Panel B: Patent Shock Transmission in the Subsequent Month  

COMPLRETt+1 

(1) 
Strong 

(2) 
Medium 

0.018*** 
(3.49) 
Yes 
Yes 

0.004 
(1.01) 
Yes 
Yes 

(3) 
Weak   

0.005 
(1.63) 
Yes 
Yes 

INDRET 
t+1 
(4) 

TECHRET 
t+1  
(5)  

0.008* 
(1.66) 
Yes 
Yes 

0.007  
(1.30) 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

103,362 
0.629 

88,056 
0.664 

84,276 
0.726 

103,362 
0.751 

76,446 
0.861  

CAR[0,1] 

Controls 
Firm Fixed 
Effects 
Month Fixed 
Effects 

N 
R2 

being transmitted along complementor networks. 

5.6. Robustness tests 

In the Internet Appendix, we present the findings of a host of addi-
tional robustness tests. First, we impose more stringent restrictions on 
firms’ market capitalization to prevent a microcap bias (Table IA1) and 
find the results still hold. Second, we exclude peer firms that belong to 
the same Fama-French 17 or 48 sector (Table IA2), or peer firms in the 
same  textual-based 
industry  from  Hoberg  and  Phillips  (2016) 
(Table IA3) and find our results remain robust. Third, we change the 
threshold for the minimum number of complementor peers. In our main 
tests, we keep a focal firm if it has 3 or more complementor peers; in 
Table IA4, we show our results are robust when the minimum threshold 
changes to 1, 2, 4, or 5 complementor peers. Fourth, we examine the 
sensitivity of the results to the “age” of the production complementarity 
mapping (Table IA5). Our results show that the effect declines slightly 
with “stale” COMPL mappings but is still significant even when we use 
three-year-old COMPL data. Fifth, we employ the method in Burt and 

Hrdlicka (2021) to rule out any bias arising from correlated alphas be-
tween linked firms due to common factor shocks. Our results show that 
sorting  on  the  idiosyncratic  returns  of  complementor  firms  yields 
essentially  the  same  return  predictability  patterns  as  sorting  on  raw 
returns (Table IA6). Sixth, we examine whether COMPLRET can predict 
future  standardized  unexpected  earnings  (SUE),  defined  as  the  unex-
pected  earnings  (year-over-year  change  in  quarterly  earnings  before 
extraordinary  items)  scaled  by  the  standard  deviation  of  unexpected 
earnings  over  the  eight  preceding  quarters.  Our  results  show  that 
COMPLRET  has  strong  predictability  power  for  future  SUE  even  after 
including a variety of lagged control variables (Table IA7). Seventh, we 
examine stock returns around subsequent earnings announcements and 
find that the return spread from complementor strategy on a day during 
an earnings announcement window is more than two times higher than 
on  non-announcement  days  (Table  IA8).  This  evidence  is  difficult  to 
square  with  standard  risk  models  and  points  toward  investor  under-
reaction as a more likely explanation. Eighth, we use focal firms’  dis-
closed information on major customers, rather than BEA’s Input-Output 
table, to construct the complementarity network.20 Because most firms 
do not list any major customers,  this alternative approach greatly  re-
stricts  the  number  of  complementors  we  are  able  to  identify.  Never-
theless, we still find a strong lead-lag return relationship between these 
complementors  and  the  focal  firm  (Table  IA9).  Ninth,  as  discussed 
earlier, we report portfolio returns from a double sort on our variable 
and the Menzly and Ozbas (2010) lagged customer return variable and 
find that our variable has strong incremental power to predict returns in 
every quintile of the lagged customer return (Table IA10). 

Finally, we examine the robustness of our results to the inclusion of 
indirect  network  effects.  Our  COMPL  variable  is  a  measure  of  direct 
network  complementarity.  However,  higher  orders  of  indirect  effect 
exist in IO matrices and may be important. For example, although in-
dustry A and industry B may not share any common customers, firms in 
industry A may still be indirectly complementary to firms in industry B if 
some  of  both  A  and  B’s  customers  have  industry  C  as  a  common 
customer.  The  chain  of  input–output  relations  among  industries  thus 
gives rise to an indirect effect, which can be neatly computed using a 
Leontief inverse transformation (see ten Raa, 2006).21  Internet Appen-
dix Table IA11 reports a replication of our key results using a Combined 
Complementors variable developed from Leontief inverse transformed IO 
matrices to account for combined effects from both direct and indirect 
complementors  derived  in  the  BEA  Input-Output  table.  When  we 
examine fundamental variables, the coefficients on the Combined Com-
plementors variable are positive and mostly significant (except for R&D), 
indicating  that  it  can  still  identify  peer  firms  with  contemporaneous 
co-movements  of  the  focal  firm.  However,  the  coefficient  value  and 
statistical  significance  are  weaker  compared  with  our  baseline  case 
when we only use direct complementarity information from the BEA IO 
table.  Furthermore,  when  we  construct  long-short  hedge  portfolios 
based on the Combined Complementors’ past month average returns, we 
no longer find any statistically significant excess returns or alphas when 
constructing value-weighted portfolios. We conclude that for most ap-
plications,  the  set  of  complementors  derived  from  using  only  direct 
network relationships is likely to suffice. 

6. Conclusions 

Firms  along  the  same  production  network  can  develop  a 

20  Firms are required to report material customers in their annual reports, and 
we use the disclosed customer information from Compustat to identify a group 
of alternative complementor firms. For this test, we define a complementor as a 
firm from a different industry that has at least one major customer in common 
with the focal firm.  
21  This  is  one  of  several  excellent  suggestions  provided  by  our  referee,  to 
whom we owe a great debt of gratitude. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381217C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

complementary relationship because they supply an overlapping set of 
customers. A growing literature in economics demonstrates the micro 
and macro implications of such production complementarity. Our study 
extends this analysis by demonstrating the implications of production 
networks for firm-level fundamental analysis and asset pricing. To our 
knowledge, this is the first paper that documents these capital market 
implications. 

We find that firms co-move strongly with their complementor peer 
firms in terms of economic fundamentals related to operating, investing, 
and  financial  activities.  We  further  show  that  news  shocks,  including 
news  about  focal  firm  patent  approvals,  travel  along  complementor 
networks.  By  construction,  these  complementor  firms  have  neither 
“vertical” nor “horizontal” linkages with the focal firm. Therefore, our 
results suggest a new way to identify economically linked peer firms that 
are not disclosed in focal firm financial reports. As a practical matter, 
our evidence suggests that the efficacy of COMPL as a measure of eco-
nomic distance gradually dissipates as  we move below the top 2% of 
ranked  firms.  We  think  this  is  something  future  researchers  should 
consider when using this algorithm in their projects. 

Furthermore,  we  find  a  robust  lead-lag  relationship  between  the 
stock returns of the complementors and the focal firm. The economic 
magnitude of this lead-lag effect is substantial, with a hedged portfolio 
constructed based on the price signals of the complementors producing a 
monthly excess return of 130 basis points or 15.6% on an annual basis. 
This  complementor  momentum  effect  is  robust  after  controlling  for  a 
variety  of  predictive  variables,  including  firm  size,  book-to-market, 
short-term  reversal,  and  medium-term  price  momentum.  It  is  distinct 
from, and cannot be explained by, previously documented lead-lag ef-
fects  among  economically  linked  firms,  such  as  industry  momentum, 
customer-supplier  momentum,  technology  momentum,  or  momentum 
from common analyst coverage. 

In  the  cross-section,  we  show  COMPL  is  a  meaningful  measure  of 
economic distance between firms from different industries. Specifically, 
we find  that firms whose pairwise COMPL scores are  higher (i.e., are 
more closely aligned in terms of production complementarity) exhibit 
stronger  same-month  return  correlations,  as  well  as  stronger  lead-lag 
return patterns. This pattern appears in our main tests, as well as in an 
announcement-based event study of shock transmission from focal firm 
patent publications to peer firm returns. 

We further provide evidence that the main driver of this effect is a 
form  of  investor  inattention  or  sluggish  adjustment  to  value-relevant 
information  along  the  complementarity  network.  The  effect  is  stron-
gest for firms that receive less investor attention and are more costly to 
is  relatively  rare  among 
arbitrage.  Shared  analyst  coverage 

complementor firms (which are from different industries by construc-
tion), but where it exists, common coverage improves the price adjust-
ment process. This last finding suggests that common analyst coverage 
plays two, potentially offsetting, roles in the transmission of information 
between firms: (1) it helps to identify more subtle forms of economic 
linkage between two firms (as per Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020), and (2) it 
helps  to  facilitate  price  discovery  of  new  information  between  firms, 
thus reducing the momentum spillover effect. 

Overall, we show that production complementarity networks play an 
important role in the transmission of information across publicly listed 
firms. Our hope is that these findings will stimulate further research into 
the  capital  market  implications  of  production  complementarity.  In 
particular, the network connections that we have identified should help 
researchers trace the propagation of specific granular shocks across the 
cross-section of stocks. In such applications, the ability to identify and 
isolate idiosyncratic shocks becomes important. Recent work by Gabaix 
and  Koijen  (2023)  appears  particularly  promising  in  this  regard.  To 
facilitate this and other future research, we have compiled a database of 
our complementarity distance measure (COMPL), which is available for 
download 
(https://sites.google.com/view/complementarity-link? 
usp=sharing). We look forward to future research along these lines. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Charles  M.C.  Lee:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original 
draft,  Validation,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis,  Data  curation, 
Conceptualization. Terrence Tianshuo Shi: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data 
curation,  Conceptualization.  Stephen  Teng  Sun:  Writing  –  review  & 
editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Validation,  Methodology,  Formal 
analysis,  Data  curation,  Conceptualization.  Ran  Zhang:  Writing  –  re-
view  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Validation,  Methodology, 
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

Replication  codes  and  pseudo  data  can  be  found  at:  https://data. 

mendeley.com/datasets/s76tjsb4gb/1.  

Supplementary materials 

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103812. 

Appendix A. Variable definitions  

Variables 

COMPL 

COMPLRET 
RET 
INDRET 

INDMOM 
SIZE 
BM 
RETt-1 

Definitions 

COMPLijt denotes the production complementarity between firm i and j at year t, calculated as the cosine similarity of their output flow vectors, COMPLijt =

jt)

′
(OFitOF
it)1/2(OFjtOF′

jt)1/2 

(OFitOF′
where OFit = (Oit1, Oit2, …, OitN) is a vector of firm i’s output flow among the detailed-level IO industries. 
The equal-weighted average stock returns of complementors. 
Stock monthly raw return. 
Industry returns, defined as value-weighted average industry returns following Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999). Specifically, for each month, we construct 
20 industry portfolios using CRSP two-digit SIC codes and calculate value-weighted average returns within each industry as industry returns. 
Medium-term Industry peer value-weighted average price momentum, defined as a focal firm’s INDRET for the last 12 months except for the past one month. 
Firm size, defined as the natural log of market equity. 
Book-to-market ratio, calculated as book equity divided by market value at the end of the fiscal year. 
Lagged stock return, or short-term return reversal, defined as the firm’s stock return at month t-1. 

(continued on next page) 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381218C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

(continued ) 

Variables 

Definitions 

MOM 
ROA 
Sales Growth 
Leverage 
External Financing 
CapEx 
R&D 
Citation-weighted- 

patents 

Consensus EPS 
Revisions 

CUSRET 

SUPRET 
PCRET 
TECHRET 
CARET 
HighPeerNum 
Larger_Size 

More_Analyst 

Higher_InstitOwn 

More_IdioVol 

Medium-term price momentum, calculated as the firm’s stock return over the previous 12 months, excluding the most recent month. 
Income before extraordinary items divided by lagged total assets. 
The change in logged sales of the current year over the last year. 
The total book value of debt divided by the sum of total book value of debt and the market value of common stock. 
The sum of net equity issuance and net debt issuance, divided by lagged total assets. 
The capital expenditures on PPE, excluding amounts arising from acquisitions, scaled by lagged total assets. 
R&D expenses scaled by lagged total assets. 
The log of 1 plus the number of citation-weighted patents applied in a given year. 

The change of the market consensus (median) of analysts’ EPS forecast. 

Customer industry momentum, defined as the returns from a portfolio of the focal firm’s customer industries, constructed following Menzly and Ozbas 
(2010). 
Supplier industry momentum, defined as the returns from a portfolio of the focal firm’s supplier industries, constructed following Menzly and Ozbas (2010). 
Returns from pseudo conglomerate portfolios, constructed following Cohen and Lou (2012). 
The average returns of the focal firm’s technological peers, constructed following Lee et al. (2019). 
The average return of firms that are connected through common analyst coverage with the focal firm, constructed following Ali and Hirshleifer (2020). 
An indicator variable that equals one if the number of complementary peers of a focal firm is above the sample median in a given year, and zero otherwise. 
An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if a focal firm is above the third quartile in a given month in terms of the log value of market capitalization, and 
zero otherwise. 
An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the number of analysts following a focal firm at the end of the previous month is above the third quartile in 
the sample, and zero otherwise. 
An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the institutional holding at the end of the previous fiscal-year end is above the sample median, and zero 
otherwise. 
An indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the idiosyncratic volatility at the end of the previous fiscal year is above the sample median, and zero 
otherwise. IdioVol is the standard deviation of the residuals from a regression of daily stock returns in the previous month on the Fama and French (1993) 
factors (at least ten daily returns required).  

Appendix B. Examples of focal firms and their complementors  

Focal Firms (SIC Industry) 

Top Large Complementors (SIC Industry) 

Nature of Complementarity 

Focal Firm 1: Alphabet Inc. 

SIC Industry: Services-Computer 
Programming, Data Processing (7370) 

Focal Firm 2: Cisco Systems, Inc. 

SIC Industry: Computer 
Communications Equipment (3576) 

Focal Firm 3: Johnson & Johnson 
SIC Industry: Pharmaceutical 
Preparations (2834) 

AT&T Inc.; US Cellular Corp 
(Radiotelephone Communications, 4812) 

Symbol Technologies 
(Computer Peripheral Equipment, 3577) 

Omnicom Group Inc. 
(Services-Advertising Agencies, 7311) 

S&P Global Inc. 
(Credit Reporting Services, 7323) 

Oracle Corp 
(Services-Computer Programming, Data 
Processing, 7370) 
Microsoft Corporation 
(Services-Computer Programming, Data 
Processing, 7370) 
Verizon Communications Inc. 
(Radiotelephone Communications, 4812) 

Citrix Systems Inc. 
(Services-Prepackaged Software, 7372) 

VMware, Inc. 
(Services-Computer Integrated Systems 
Design, 7373) 
Becton Dickinson 
(Surgical & Medical Instruments & 
Apparatus, 3841) 
Stryker Corp 
(Orthopedic, Prosthetic & Surgical 
Appliances & Supplies, 3842) 
3 M Co 
(Converted Paper & Paperboard Prods, 
2670) 
Medtronic PLC 
(Electromedical & Electrotherapeutic 
Apparatus, 3845) 
OPKO Health Inc. 
(Services-Medical Laboratories, 8071) 

Alphabet’s technological infrastructure and digital services can complement carriers’ 
telecommunications offerings, serving a common base of businesses that require 
integrated digital solutions and connectivity services. 
They complement each other by providing integrated technology solutions to retail 
businesses and logistics companies, where Alphabet offers digital platforms and cloud 
services, and Symbol Technologies provides barcode and RFID technology. 
They have a complementary relationship as both cater to businesses needing digital 
advertising and marketing services, with Alphabet providing the technological platform 
and Omnicom offering specialized marketing and communication expertise. 
Both companies serve businesses requiring analytical tools and data insights, with 
Alphabet providing technological infrastructure and S&P Global offering financial and 
market data. 
Oracle provides database and cloud services, which complement Cisco’s networking 
solutions for shared customers in sectors like finance and healthcare, enhancing overall IT 
infrastructure. 
Microsoft’s cloud services and software products complement Cisco’s networking 
hardware for shared customers, particularly in enterprise IT environments. 

Telecommunications services can complement Cisco’s networking hardware and services 
by providing the necessary connectivity solutions for enterprises, enhancing overall 
communication and network infrastructure. 
Citrix’s virtualization and networking solutions complement Cisco’s offerings, enhancing 
network and application delivery for shared customers, particularly in remote work 
environments. 
VMware’s virtualization and cloud services complement Cisco’s networking and security 
solutions for shared customers, particularly in the creation of efficient and secure IT 
infrastructures. 
J&J’s surgical products and BD’s medical technology products are used together in 
hospitals and clinics 

Johnson & Johnson’s medical devices and Stryker’s orthopedic products are often used 
together in surgical procedures, serving the same healthcare providers. 

Johnson & Johnson’s surgical products and wound care items complement 3M’s medical 
supplies such as medical tapes, dressings, sterilization products, and infection prevention 
solutions. 
J&J’s medical devices and Medtronic’s technology complement each other in surgical and 
chronic disease management applications, serving the same healthcare institutions. 

Johnson & Johnson’s broad range of healthcare products can complement OPKO Health’s 
diagnostic technologies and pharmaceuticals in shared healthcare provider settings. 

(continued on next page) 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381219C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

(continued ) 

Focal Firms (SIC Industry) 

Top Large Complementors (SIC Industry) 

Nature of Complementarity 

Focal Firm 4: Nvidia Corp 

SIC Industry: 
Semiconductors & Related Devices, 3674 

Focal Firm 5: Cummins Inc. 

SIC Industry: 
Engines & Turbines (3510) 

Focal Firm 6: Oracle Corp 

SIC Industry: 
Services-Prepackaged Software (7372) 

Focal Firm 7: Medtronic Plc 

SIC Industry: 
Electromedical & Electrotherapeutic 
Apparatus (3845) 

Focal Firm 8: RTX Corporation 

SIC Industry: 
Aircraft Engines & Engine Parts (3724) 

NetApp Inc. 
(Computer Storage Devices, 3572) 

SanDisk Corp 
(Computer Storage Devices, 3572) 

Trimble Inc. 
(Measuring & Controlling Devices, 3829) 

Panasonic Holdings Corp 
(Electronic & Other Electrical Equipment, 
No Computer Equip, 3600) 
Blue Coat Systems Inc 
(Services-Computer Programming, Data 
Processing, etc., 7370) 

Aptiv plc 
(Motor Vehicle Parts & Accessories, 3714) 
Magna International Inc 
(Motor Vehicle Parts & Accessories, 3714) 

Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co 
(Tires & Inner Tubes, 3011) 

Illinois Tool Works 
(General Industrial Machinery & 
Equipment, 3560) 

Openlane Inc. 
(Services-Business Services, 7389) 

Accenture PLC 
(Services-Management Consulting Services, 
8742) 
Seagate Technology Holdings 
(Computer Storage Devices, 3572) 

Netgear Inc 
(Telephone & Telegraph Apparatus, 3661) 

Micron Technology Inc 
(Semiconductors & Related Devices, 3674) 

Keysight Technologies Inc 
(Instruments for Measuring & Testing of 
Electricity & Electrical Signals, 3825) 
Johnson & Johnson; Pfizer Inc. 
(Pharmaceutical Preparations, 2834) 

3 M Co 
(Converted Paper & Paperboard Prods, 
2670) 
Laboratory Corp Of Amer 
(Services-Medical Laboratories, 8071) 

Quest Diagnostics Inc 
(Services-Medical Laboratories, 8071) 

Trimble Inc. 
(Measuring & Controlling Devices, 3829) 

B/E Aerospace Inc. 
(Public Bldg & Related Furniture, 2531) 

ITT INC 
(Search, Detection, Navigation, Guidance, 
Aeronautical Sys, 3812) 
Precision Castparts Corp 
(Aircraft Parts & Auxiliary Equipment, 
3728) 
Crane Co 
(Miscellaneous Fabricated Metal Products, 
3490) 

Nvidia’s GPUs are crucial in AI and machine learning, while NetApp specializes in data 
management. Both can complement each other in sectors like AI data analysis, where 
robust data storage and processing power are needed. 
SanDisk provides memory storage solutions, complementing Nvidia’s high-speed data 
processing in environments needing large-scale data storage, like in advanced computing 
systems. 
Nvidia’s technology in AI and GPUs can complement Trimble’s solutions in GPS, laser, 
optical and inertial positioning technologies used in surveying, construction, agriculture, 
and other fields, especially in the context of data processing and analysis. 
Panasonic’s diverse electronic products can be complemented by Nvidia’s GPU 
technology, especially in areas like automotive electronics, where advanced processing 
power is beneficial. 
Nvidia Corp and Blue Coat Systems are complementary because Nvidia’s advanced GPU 
and AI technology can complement Blue Coat’s cybersecurity solutions, benefiting 
common customers in sectors like technology, finance, and healthcare that require robust 
data processing and secure network environments. 
Aptiv focuses on automotive technology, especially advanced safety, connectivity, and 
mobility solutions, complementing Cummins’ engine in the automotive industry. 
Magna International specializes in automotive manufacturing, offering body exteriors, 
powertrains, and electronic systems, complementing Cummins’ engine in the automotive 
industry. 
Goodyear is a renowned tire manufacturer. Their products can complement Cummins’ 
engines in the automotive sector, particularly in heavy vehicles like trucks and buses, 
where both high-quality tires and efficient engines are crucial. 
Illinois Tool Works produces a wide range of industrial products and equipment. There’s 
potential synergy in combining their industrial tools and solutions with Cummins’ power 
generation products for customers in industries like construction, agriculture, and 
manufacturing. 
Openlane provides online auction services for automotive dealers. While not directly 
product-related, there could be complementary benefits in terms of vehicle lifecycle 
management and remarketing services for vehicles equipped with Cummins engines. 
Oracle’s enterprise software products can be integrated into the solutions Accenture 
develops for its clients, particularly in digital transformation projects. 

Seagate’s products can complement Oracle’s database and cloud solutions by providing 
the physical data storage infrastructure necessary for Oracle’s systems, beneficial for 
customers needing comprehensive data management solutions. 
Netgear provides networking equipment for home and business use. Oracle’s cloud 
solutions could be complemented by Netgear’s networking hardware, offering a more 
complete infrastructure setup for small to medium-sized businesses. 
Micron is a leader in memory and storage solutions. Their products could complement 
Oracle’s database technologies, offering enhanced performance for applications that 
require fast and large-scale memory solutions, like big data analytics. 
Specializing in electronic design and test instrumentation, Keysight’s technologies can be 
used alongside Oracle’s software products in the development and testing of electronics, 
benefiting customers in sectors like telecommunications and industrial electronics. 
Johnson & Johnson or Pfizer’s focus is on pharmaceuticals, while Medtronic’s is on 
medical devices. The medications developed by Johnson & Johnson or Pfizer could be 
used in conjunction with Medtronic’s devices for treatments, benefiting common 
customers such as hospitals and clinics. 
3M’s medical supplies and technologies can complement Medtronic’s devices in surgical, 
dental, orthopedic, and other healthcare settings. 

Laboratory Corp provides clinical laboratory services. There could be complementary use 
cases where LabCorp’s diagnostic tests and Medtronic’s medical devices are used together 
for patient treatment planning. 
Quest Diagnostics offers diagnostic testing services. Medtronic’s devices for monitoring 
and treatment could be used in tandem with diagnostic information provided by Quest to 
offer comprehensive patient care. 
Trimble’s advanced navigation and surveying (e.g., GPS, laser, inertial positioning) 
technologies could complement RTX’s aerospace engine and system products in joint end- 
user applications, such as precision agriculture or construction. 
RTX Corporation, through its aerospace systems and engines, and B/E Aerospace Inc., 
which specializes in aircraft cabin interior products, complement each other by offering 
different components to the aircraft constructions. 
ITT Inc.’s engineered components, like connectors and energy absorption devices, can 
complement RTX Corp’s aerospace engines and systems for the common customers in the 
aerospace industry. 
Precision Castparts Corp produces critical metal components and castings for use in the 
aerospace and defense industries, complementing RTX Corp’s products of aerospace 
engines and defense systems.  
Crane Co’s specialized industrial products, such as fluid handling systems and electronics, 
could complement RTX Corp’s aerospace and defense technologies by providing essential 
sub-components that enhance the functionality and efficiency of RTX’s systems. 

(continued on next page) 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381220C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

(continued ) 

Focal Firms (SIC Industry) 

Top Large Complementors (SIC Industry) 

Nature of Complementarity 

Focal Firm 9: Nucor Corp 

SIC Industry: 
Steel Works, Blast Furnaces & Rolling 
Mills (Coke Ovens) (3312) 

Texas Industries Inc. 
(Cement, Hydraulic, 3241) 

Fastenal Co 
(Wholesale-Durable Goods, 5000) 

Focal Firm 10: Occidental Petroleum Corp 

SIC Industry: 
Crude Petroleum & Natural Gas (1311) 

Kennametal Inc. 
(Metalworking Machinery & Equipment, 
3540) 
Watsco Inc. 
(Wholesale-Hardware & Plumbing & 
Heating Equipment & Supplies, 5070) 
ARMCO Metals Holdings Inc. 
(Rolling Drawing & Extruding Of 
Nonferrous Metals, 3350) 
Magellan Midstream; MPLX LP 
(Pipe Lines (No Natural Gas), 4610) 

Quanta Services 
(Electrical Work, 1731) 

TC Energy 
(Natural Gas Transmission, 4922) 

Headwaters Incorporated 
(Concrete Products, Except Block & Brick, 
3272) 

Texas Industries was a supplier of heavy construction materials, including cement and 
aggregates. They are complementary in construction, where steel from Nucor and 
materials from Texas Industries could be used in tandem for infrastructure projects. 
Fastenal provides industrial supplies, fasteners, tools, and materials. Nucor’s steel 
products can serve as essential raw materials for Fastenal’s customers, enabling the 
manufacture of a diverse range of industrial and construction products. 
Kennametal specializes in tooling solutions for manufacturing sectors. The steel products 
from Nucor could be used in the production of Kennametal’s tooling solutions by their 
shared customers in manufacturing sectors. 
Nucor is a manufacturer of steel and steel products, whereas Watsco is the largest 
distributor of air conditioning, heating, and refrigeration equipment. The steel produced 
by Nucor could be used in the manufacturing of HVAC systems that Watsco distributes.  
They are complementary in the metals industry because while Nucor produces a broad 
range of standard steel products, ATI specializes in advanced specialty materials and 
complex components, catering to interconnected needs from their shared customers. 
Magellan Midstream and MPLX specialize in the transportation, storage, and distribution 
of petroleum products. There’s a complementary relationship with Occidental, where 
Occidental’s production could be transported and stored by Magellan’s or MPLX’s 
infrastructure. 
Quanta’s expertise in designing and building energy infrastructure complements 
Occidental’s supply of oil and gas, ensuring efficient project implementation and 
dependable energy utilization for their shared customers. 
TC Energy’s extensive network for transporting and storing energy resources efficiently 
supports Occidental’s oil and gas production, ensuring a streamlined and reliable supply 
chain for energy consumers. 
Headwaters’ construction materials and energy technologies can enhance infrastructure 
development and efficiency, while Occidental’s oil and gas production ensures a reliable 
supply of energy resources, together offering a more integrated and efficient solution to 
their shared customers.  

References 

Acemoglu, D., Carvalho, V.M., Ozdaglar, A., Tahbaz-Salehi, A., 2012. The network 

origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5), 1977–2016. 

Acemoglu, D., Ozdaglar, A., Tahbaz-Salehi, A., 2017. Microeconomic origins of 

macroeconomic tail risks. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 54–108. 

Ahern, K., 2013. Network Centrality and the Cross Section of Stock Returns. University of 

Southern California. Unpublished working paper.  

Ali, U., Hirshleifer, D., 2020. Shared analyst coverage: unifying momentum spillover 

effects. J. Financ. Econ. 136 (3), 649–675. 

Aobdia, D., Caskey, J., Ozel, N.B., 2014. Predictability of earnings and stock returns. Rev. 

Account. Stud. 19 (3), 1191–1224. 

Atalay, E., 2017. How important are sectoral shocks? Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 9 (4), 

254–280. 

Baqaee, D.R., Farhi, E., 2019. The macroeconomic impact of microeconomic shocks: 

beyond Hulten’s theorem. Econometrica 87 (4), 1155–1203. 

Barber, B.M., Odean, T., 2008. All that glitters: the effect of attention and news on the 
buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (2), 
785–818. 

Barrot, J.N., Sauvagnat, J., 2016. Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic 

shocks in production networks. Q. J. Econ. 131 (3), 1543–1592. 

Beneish, M.D., Lee, C.M.C., Nichols, D.C., 2015. In short supply: short-sellers and stock 

returns. J. Account. Econ. 60 (2–3), 33–57. 

Bloom, N., Schankerman, M., Van Reenen, J., 2013. Identifying technology spillovers 

and product market rivalry. Econometrica 81 (4), 1347–1393. 

Boehm, C.E., Flaaen, A., Pandalai-Nayar, N., 2019. Input linkages and the transmission of 

shocks: firm-level evidence from the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. Rev. Econ. Statist. 
101 (1), 60–75. 

Brown, S.V., Ma, G., Tucker, J.W., 2023. Financial statement similarity. Contemp. 

Account. Res. forthcoming.  

Brown, S.V., Tucker, J.W., 2011. Large-sample evidence on firms’ year-over-year MD&A 

modifications. J. Account. Res. 49 (2), 309–346. 

Burt, A., Hrdlicka, C., 2021. Where does the predictability from sorting on returns of 
economically linked firms come from? J. Financ. Q. Anal. 56 (8), 2634–2658. 
Cao, J., Chordia, T., Lin, C., 2016. Alliances and return predictability. J. Financ. Q. Anal. 

51 (5), 1689–1717. 

Carhart, M.M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. J. Finance 52 (1), 

57–82. 

Chan, L.K.C., Jegadeesh, N., Lakonishok, J., 1996. Momentum strategies. J. Finance 51 

(5), 1681–1713. 

Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., 2008. Economic links and predictable returns. J.f Finance 63 (4), 

1977–2011. 

Cohen, L., Lou, D., 2012. Complicated firms. J. Financ Econ. 104 (2), 383–400. 
Conley, T.G., Dupor, B., 2003. A spatial analysis of sectoral complementarity bill dupor. 

J. Polit. Econ. 111 (2), 311–352. 

Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A., 1998. Investor psychology and security 

market under- and overreactions. J. Finance 53 (6), 1839–1885. 
Dellavigna, S., Pollet, J.M., 2009. Investor inattention and friday earnings 

announcements. J. Finance 64 (2), 709–749. 

Durlauf, S.N., 1993. Nonergodic economic growth. Rev. Econ. Stud. 60 (2), 349–366. 
Elliott, M., Golub, B., 2022. Networks and economic fragility. Annu. Rev. Econom. 14, 

665–696. 

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116 

(1), 1–22. 

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. 

J Financ. Econ. 33 (1), 3–56. 

Fama, E.F., Macbeth, J.D., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests. J. Polit. 

Econ. 81 (3), 607–636. 

Fan, J.P.H., Lang, L.H.P., 2000. The measurement of relatedness: an application to 

corporate diversification. J. Bus. 73 (4), 629–660. 

Gabaix, X., Koijen, R.S.J., 2023. Granular Instrumental Variables. J. Polit. Econ. 

forthcoming.  

Hirshleifer, D., Hsu, P.H., Li, D., 2013. Innovative efficiency and stock returns. J. Financ. 

Econ. 107 (3), 632–654. 

Hirshleifer, D., Lim, S.S., Teoh, S.H., 2011. Limited investor attention and stock market 
misreactions to accounting Information. Rev. Asset. Pricing. Stud. 1 (1), 35–73. 
Hirshleifer, D., Teoh, S.H., 2003. Limited attention, information disclosure, and financial 

reporting. J. Account. Econ. 36, 337–386. 

Hoberg, G., Phillips, G., 2016. Text-based network industries and endogenous product 

differentiation. J. Polit. Econ. 124 (5), 1423–1465. 

Hoberg, G., Phillips, G., 2018. Text-based industry momentum. J. Financ. Q. Anal. 53 (6), 

2355–2388. 

Hong, H., Stein, J.C., 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and 

overreaction in asset markets. J. Finance 54 (6), 2143–2184. 

Hong, H., Torous, W., Valkanov, R., 2007. Do industries lead stock markets? J. Financ. 

Econ. 83 (2), 367–396. 

Hou, K., 2007. Industry information diffusion and the lead-lag effect in stock returns. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (4), 1113–1138. 

Hou, K., van Dijk, M.A., Zhang, Y., 2012. The implied cost of capital: a new approach. 

J. Account. Econ. 53 (3), 504–526. 

Huang, S., Lee, C.M.C., Song, Y., Xiang, H., 2022. A frog in every pan: information 
discreteness and the lead-lag returns puzzle. J. Financ. Econ. 145, 83–103. 
Hou, K., Xue, C., Zhang, L., 2020. Replicating anomalies. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 

2019–2133. 

Huang, X., 2015. Thinking outside the borders: investors’ underreaction to foreign 

operations information. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (11), 3109–3152. 

Huberman, G., Regev, T., 2001. Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer: a nonevent 

that made stock prices soar. J. Finance 56 (1), 387–396. 

Jaffe, A.B., 1986. Technological opportunity and spillovers of R and D: evidence from 

firms’ patents, profits, and market value. Am. Econ. Rev. 76, 984–1001. 
Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S., 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: 

implications for stock market efficiency. J. Finance 48 (1), 65–91. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381221C.M.C. Lee et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Jiang, Y., Qian, Y., Yao, T., 2016. R&D spillover and predictable returns. Rev. Financ. 20 

Menzly, L., Ozbas, O., 2010. Market segmentation and cross-predictability of returns. 

(5), 1769–1797. 

J. Finance 65 (4), 1555–1580. 

Jones, C.I., 2011. Intermediate goods and weak links in the theory of economic 

Merton, R., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete 

development. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 3 (2), 1–28. 

Jovanovic, B., 1987. Micro shocks and aggregate risk. Q. J. Econ. 102 (2), 395–410. 
Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., Stoffman, N., 2017. Technological innovation, 

resource allocation, and growth. Q. J. Econ. 132 (2), 665–712. 

Lee, C.M.C., Ma, P., Wang, C.C.Y., 2015. Search-based peer firms: aggregating investor 
perceptions through internet co-searches. J. Financ. Econ. 116 (2), 410–431. 
Lee, C.M.C., Sun, S.T., Wang, R., Zhang, R., 2019. Technological links and predictable 

returns. J. Financ. Econ. 132 (3), 76–96. 

information. J. Finance 42 (3), 483–510. 

Moskowitz, T.J., Grinblatt, M., 1999. Do industries explain momentum? J. Finance 54 

(4), 1249–1290. 

Parsons, C.A., Sabbatucci, R., Titman, S., 2020. Geographic lead-lag effects. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 33 (10), 4721–4770. 

Peng, L., Xiong, W., 2006. Investor attention, overconfidence and category learning. 

J. Financ. Econ. 80 (3), 563–602. 

Shea, J., 2002. Complementarities and comovements. J. Money. Credit Bank 34 (2), 

Lemelin, A., 1982. Relatedness in the patterns of interindustry diversification. Rev. Econ. 

412–433. 

Stat. 64 (4), 646–657. 

Li, N., 2015. Who are my peers? Labor market peer firms through employees’ internet co- 
Search patterns. Unpublished working paper, Rotman School of Management. 

Li, N., Richardson, S., Tuna, I., 2014. Macro to micro: country exposures, firm 

fundamentals and stock returns. J. Account. Econ. 58 (1), 1–20. 

ten Raa, T., 2006. The Economics of Input-Output Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 

Cambridge, UK.  

Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. 

Science 185 (4157), 1124–1131. 

Wurgler, J., Zhuravskaya, E., 2002. Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks? 

J. Business 75 (4), 583–608. 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10381222