Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Robo advisors and access to wealth management ✩
Michael Reher a,∗, Stanislav Sokolinski b
a University of California San Diego, Rady School of Management, United States of America
b Broad College of Business, Michigan State University, United States of America

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Dataset link: https://
data .mendeley .com /datasets /3f88g2cb7x /2

JEL classiﬁcation:
G11
G24
D3
O3

Keywords:
FinTech
Financial advice
Portfolio delegation
Inequality

We  investigate  how  access  to  robo-advisors  impacts  the  ﬁnancial  investment  and  welfare  of  less-wealthy 
investors. We leverage a quasi-experiment where a major U.S. robo-advisor signiﬁcantly expands access by 
reducing its account minimum, increasing participation by middle-class investors but not the poor. A benchmark 
model  calibrated  to  portfolio-level  data  rationalizes  this  increase:  middle-class  investors  want  sophisticated 
investing but cannot achieve it themselves. Their welfare rises moderately, driven by advanced features like 
multi-dimensional glide-paths and additional priced risk factors. Middle-age investors gain three times more 
than millennials. Our results reveal novel margins of demand for robo-advisors, helping explain their sustained 
growth.

“The  wealth-management  industry  stratiﬁes  customers  in  a  manner 
rather similar to airlines. ‘High-net-worth’ clients ﬂy business class, pick-
ing stocks and chatting in person with named advisors. Cattle class gets no 
service at all. Technology is conspiring to change that.”

The Economist Magazine

1.  Introduction

Recent  technological  innovation  has  enabled  ﬁnancial  intermedi-
aries to scale the provision of many traditional services. In the wealth 

management  market,  this  scaling  has  taken  the  form  of  “robo  advi-
sors”:  intermediaries  that  use  automation  to  provide  services  similar 
to a traditional wealth manager (D’Acunto and Rossi 2020). Robo ad-
visors  have  grown  rapidly  in  both  popularity  and  size  over  the  past 
decade. For example, the largest ﬁve robo advisors have grown roughly 
tenfold,  and  all  of  the  Big-4  U.S.  banks  now  oﬀer  a  robo  advising 
service.1

Robo advisors claim to have two key advantages over their tradi-
tional counterparts. First, by adhering to a transparent investing algo-
rithm,  robo  advisors  can  beneﬁt  their  clients  by  circumventing  inef-
ﬁciencies documented among ﬁnancial advisors, many of which stem 

✩ Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We thank Christoph Aymanns, John Campbell, Michael Boutros, Francesco D’Acunto, Ben Friedman, Pedro Gete, 
Steﬀen Hitzemann, Jakub Jurek, Iva Kalcheva, Yaron Levi, Jun Liu, Matteo Maggiori, Apurva Mehta, Will Mullins, Alessandro Previtero, Franklin Qian, Enrichetta 
Ravina, Jonathan Reuter, Alberto Rossi, Nikolai Roussanov, Andrei Shleifer, Celine Sun, Allan Timmermann, Ross Valkanov, Boris Vallee, Ken Wilbur, anonymous 
referees, and seminar participants at UC Irvine Finance Conference, Michigan State University, University of Houston, Indiana University, University of Texas at 
Dallas, CEAR-RSI Household Finance Workshop, Northeastern University Finance Conference, University of Mannheim, USC, University of Wisconsin, Jackson Hole 
Winter Finance Conference, FINRA NORC Diversity Conference, FMA Annual Conference, Paris FinTech Conference, Toronto FinTech Conference, the New York 
Fed’s FinTech Conference, Georgetown’s Finance and Policy Center, UC San Diego, Rutgers Business School, California Corporate Finance Conference, CAFR FinTech 
Workshop, and Harvard’s ﬁnance PhD lunch for comments. Ruikai Ji provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the position of Wealthfront Inc.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: mreher@ucsd.edu (M. Reher), sokolins@msu.edu (S. Sokolinski).

1 The top ﬁve robo advisors managed $283 billion in 2020 versus $30.4 billion in 2015 (Appendix Table A1).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103829
Received 12 July 2023; Received in revised form 1 March 2024; Accepted 9 March 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)103829Availableonline22March20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

from  portfolio-by-portfolio  discretion.2 Second,  because  automation 
lowers per-portfolio management costs, robo advisors can extend the 
beneﬁts of professional wealth management to less-wealthy investors, 
who do not have enough assets to invest with traditional managers. Our 
paper examines the latter claim, which is popular and intuitive but has 
not been studied. We use a quasi-experiment and a quantitative model 
to trace out the eﬀect of access to robo advisors down to the welfare of 
new, less-wealthy robo investors.

In the ﬁrst part of the paper, we study how access to robo advisors 
aﬀects participation by the less-wealthy. Not only is this exercise impor-
tant in its own right, but the results will also help discipline the model 
that we develop in the second part of the paper. However, identifying 
the eﬀect of interest is challenging for two reasons: lack of standardized 
data on robo participants; and a need for a setting in which robo advi-
sors suddenly become more accessible to the less-wealthy. We overcome 
these challenges by obtaining a novel dataset directly from a major U.S. 
robo advisor and by studying a quasi-experiment. In our setting, de-
scribed in Sections 2 and 3, the same robo advisor suddenly reduces its 
account minimum from $5,000 to $500. This shock represents one of 
the ﬁrst examples in which sophisticated wealth management becomes 
available to a wide range of less-wealthy investors.

In Section 4, we ﬁnd that the reduction democratizes the market for 
robo advisors by bringing in new, middle-class investors. The wealth 
distribution  of  robo  participants  shifts  sharply  leftward  after  the  re-
duction, while showing no pre-trend in the prior months. The share of 
participants from the second and third U.S. wealth quintiles (the “mid-
dle class”) increases by 107% (16 pps). This increase reﬂects a sharp 
break from trend in the number of middle-class participants, whereas 
there is no such change in the number of participants from the upper 
two quintiles (the “upper class”). However, the democratization is in-
complete, in that we ﬁnd no change in participation among the bottom 
quintile (the “lower class”), as conjectured by Philippon (2019).

According  to  our  theory,  a  relaxation  of  minimum-account  con-
straints drives this shift in the robo wealth distribution. We sharpen this 
interpretation  through  a  diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence  (DiD)  analysis.  The 
middle class represents the treatment group, since it experiences a relax-
ation of minimum-account constraints due to the reduction. The upper 
class is the control group. As a benchmark, we ﬁnd that middle-class 
investors are 14 pps more likely to participate with the robo advisor af-
ter the reduction, relative to the upper class. We obtain similar results 
from dynamic DiD designs at various time frequencies, and we perform 
an event study that strongly supports the assumption of parallel trends.
Section 5 further tests that the empirical eﬀect works by relaxing 
minimum-account constraints. We ﬁrst show that the majority of new, 
middle-class robo participants bunched their investment at the previ-
ous  minimum  of  $5,000  prior  to  the  reduction.  Such  bunching  is  a 
hallmark of binding constraints. After the reduction, the bunching im-
mediately disappears, and most new middle-class participants make a 
previously infeasible investment of under $5,000. Additionally, we ﬁnd 
no evidence that the results are driven by other channels such as: het-
erogeneous response to targeted or non-targeted advertising; gambling 
motives; business stealing from competitors; heterogeneous trends by 
demographics or risk attitude; or measurement error in self-reported 
wealth.

In the second part of the paper, we develop and calibrate a quan-
titative model of asset allocation with endogenous portfolio delegation 
and an account minimum. This exercise addresses two major questions 
that cannot be answered by the reduced-form DiD analysis from the 

2 A partial list of ineﬃciencies includes impulsive recommendations (e.g., Lin-
nainmaa et al. 2021), pandering to client biases (e.g., Mullainathan et al. 2012), 
overly generic recommendations (e.g., Foerster et al. 2017), and recommenda-
tions of inferior products due to commissions (e.g., Egan 2019; Chalmers and 
Reuter 2020). D’Acunto and Rossi (2020) discuss how robo advisors can correct 
some of these ineﬃciencies.

ﬁrst part. First, we ask whether diﬀerences in asset allocation suﬃce to 
explain the increase in middle-class participation with the advisor, or 
whether we must appeal to non-ﬁnancial channels, like peace-of-mind 
from portfolio delegation (e.g., Gennaioli et al. 2015). Second, we as-
sess the welfare gain from access to robo advisors, using the standard 
lifetime consumption metric (e.g., Gomes 2020). This approach lets us 
examine the potential beneﬁts of robo advisors more comprehensively 
than, say, using realized returns, as it accounts for the investor’s hori-
zon and human capital.3 We are particularly interested in how these 
potential beneﬁts may vary across investors and which features of robo 
portfolios drive the results.

Our comparison group consists of retail investors who would other-
wise manage their risky assets on their own without access to a robo 
advisor (“self-managed portfolios”). Section 6 uses portfolio-level mi-
crodata to document three advantages that robo portfolios have over 
self-managed  ones.  First,  robo  portfolios  contain  greater  exposure  to 
priced risk factors, such as bond and value premia. Consequently, they 
provide a 2 pps higher expected return. Second, they are much better 
diversiﬁed. Third, robo portfolios exhibit personalization by both age 
and wealth, which we call a “double glide path”: exposure to stocks 
falls as an investor grows older, holding wealth ﬁxed; but it rises as an 
investor becomes wealthier, holding age ﬁxed. So, robo portfolios are 
more personalized than target date funds (TDF), which oﬀer a single 
glide path by age.

In Section 7, we embed these portfolio characteristics in the model 
and reproduce the empirical results from the ﬁrst part of the paper. 
The  model  closely  matches  the  eﬀects  of  the  reduction  in  minimum 
on the wealth distribution of robo participants. Thus, simply account-
ing  for  how  robo  advisors  invest  diﬀerently  than  retail  investors  on 
their  own  explains  the  reduced-form  evidence  quite  well,  without  a 
clear need for non-ﬁnancial channels. The economic mechanism that 
generates  these  results  within  the  model  is  precisely  a  relaxation  of 
minimum-account constraints, with the following key trade-oﬀ. Absent 
the  minimum,  all  investors  would  like  to  invest  with  the  robo  advi-
sor because of the aforementioned advantages. However, the account 
minimum requires a larger-than-optimal risky share and savings rate 
for less-wealthy investors. As a result, these investors prefer to manage 
their own portfolios, even though they cannot do so as well as the robo 
advisor. Reducing the minimum relaxes this constraint, prompting in-
vestors with low-to-intermediate wealth (middle class) to invest with 
the advisor. However, lower-class investors still ﬁnd the required risky 
investment too large, and so they choose not to participate.

We next examine the magnitude, drivers, and distribution of wel-
fare gains from access to the robo advisor. The reduction raises welfare 
of new robo participants by 0.8%, in terms of lifetime consumption. 
This increase is meaningful yet plausible.4 Interestingly, we ﬁnd sub-
stantial heterogeneity by age: the reduction raises welfare three times 
as much for investors over age 55 (1.7%) than for those under age 35 
(0.6%). This diﬀerence arises from diﬀerences in lifetime human capi-
tal, mainly because younger investors have longer working lives. As a 
result, many of them would have accumulated enough earnings to over-
come the previous minimum anyway, whereas older investors would 
not have become robo participants without the reduction.

3 Recent and contemporaneous studies have found that robo portfolios have 
characteristics that would improve welfare in a static model of asset allocation, 
such as better diversiﬁcation (e.g., D’Acunto et al. 2019, Rossi and Utkus 2021b, 
Loos et al. 2020). Our approach builds on these insights by both quantifying the 
gains from these static features in terms of lifetime utility and by highlighting 
dynamic beneﬁts (e.g., age glide paths).
4 Measuring welfare gains as a percent of lifetime consumption has a long 
tradition in the literature dating back to at least Lucas (1987). A gain of greater 
than 0.5% is typically considered consequential. For reference, a gain of 0.8% 
lies well-within the range of gains from correcting various investment mistakes 
in a workhorse model developed by Cocco et al. (2005).

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038292M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Since our comparison group consists of self-managed portfolios, the 
welfare gains for new robo participants must fundamentally reﬂect the 
diﬀerent characteristics of robo portfolios relative to self-managed ones. 
We evaluate which characteristics add the most value by calculating the 
welfare gain for counterfactual robo portfolios after removing each of 
their advantages, one at a time. Without improved diversiﬁcation, the 
welfare gain is 70% lower. Similarly, removing exposure to bond risk 
factors reduces the welfare gain by 70%. By contrast, diﬀerences in ex-
posure to the overall stock market have almost no impact on welfare. 
This  ﬁnding  reﬂects  how  investors  in  our  data  attain  such  exposure 
on their own. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that personalization by wealth im-
proves welfare as much as does personalization by age, highlighting the 
importance of a “double glide path”.

Taken together, our results present a novel perspective on the im-
pact of robo advisors. First, robo advisors do not solely impact aﬄu-
ent investors, who already have access to professional managers: robo 
advisors also expand access to the less-wealthy by relaxing minimum-
account constraints. Removing constraints raises participation because 
less-wealthy  investors  have  strong  demand  for  sophisticated  wealth 
management.  This  result  challenges  the  canonical  model  of  a  self-
suﬃcient  investor.  Our  results  also  challenge  models  in  which  non-
ﬁnancial beneﬁts drive the demand for delegated management, since 
we can explain this demand as a rational response to improved asset al-
location. In that vein, our evidence matches survey results from Rossi 
and Utkus (2021a), who ﬁnd that investors seek robo advisors more 
to improve their investment ability and performance than to achieve 
peace of mind. More broadly, we exemplify how sophisticated wealth 
management is not necessarily a luxury good.

The second contribution of this paper is to rigorously document the 
properties of a fully-automated asset allocation rule and to assess which 
of its features investors value most. We show that robo advisors do not 
simply substitute for a low-cost equity index fund or a TDF. Instead, 
much of their value comes from providing sophisticated features like 
a double glide path and exposure to multiple risk factors. Less-wealthy 
investors appreciate these features because they struggle to enact sim-
ilar features on their own. Older investors especially beneﬁt because 
they rely less on non-ﬁnancial income, a ﬁnding that challenges robo 
advisors’ stereotype as a product for millennials. Overall, our results 
help explain the sustained growth of the robo market and its integra-
tion with the traditional ﬁnancial sector, despite the many other retail 
products available during the FinTech era.

Our conclusions are based on the subset of retail investors who are 
interested in fully automated wealth management, rather than the av-
erage U.S. investor. The investors in our sample are presumably more 
sophisticated than the general U.S. population, since, for example, many 
of  them  at  least  participated  in  the  stock  market  before  joining  the 
advisor. However, a unique feature of our setting is that the advisor’s al-
gorithm allocates the same robo portfolio to all investors with the same 
demographic proﬁle and risk attitude, regardless of sophistication. By 
adhering to this form of algorithmic fairness, the robo advisor plausibly 
generates higher gains for less-sophisticated investors who either do not 
participate in the stock market or do so with major pitfalls. Therefore, 
our welfare calculations would constitute a lower bound with respect to 
the gains for the general population. By the same logic, our estimated 
eﬀect on participation would constitute an upper bound.5

Related literature

This  article  speaks  to  a  nascent  literature  on  FinTech  intermedi-
aries, which includes robo advisors. Unlike prior and contemporaneous 

5 Recent evidence suggests that retail investors prone to particular behav-
ioral biases endogenously use FinTech products that perpetuate those biases 
(e.g., Cookson et al. 2023; Barber et al. 2022; Ben-David et al. 2022). These re-
sults would imply that bias-prone investors prefer not to participate with robo 
advisors because they dislike the “textbook” aspect of robo portfolios.

studies, we study automated wealth management in a pure form that 
involves: complete portfolio delegation, as opposed to non-binding ad-
vice (e.g., D’Acunto et al. 2019; Bianchi and Briére 2022; D’Hondt et al. 
2020); no option for human interaction (e.g., Rossi and Utkus 2021b); 
and robo advisors unaﬃliated with the banking system (e.g., Loos et al. 
2020). We also focus on less-wealthy investors in a quasi-experimental 
setting, complementing the literature’s typical focus on more-aﬄuent 
investors.6

Within the literature on robo advisors, our study shares common 
ground with Reher and Sun (2019), who examine how deposit inﬂow 
changes  after  the  2015  reduction  in  minimum.  Several  crucial  dis-
tinctions  set  our  work  apart.  Most  importantly,  our  novel  structural 
approach enables both a rigorous calculation of welfare gains and an 
assessment of the economic mechanisms driving the surge in account 
formation after the reduction.7 In particular, we can challenge and re-
fute three potential mechanisms left open by the atheoretical approach 
in Reher and Sun (2019). First, we challenge the idea that investors 
become  robo  participants  purely  to  follow  a  popular  trend;  instead, 
we quantitatively rationalize their response using diﬀerences between 
robo and self-managed portfolios. Second, we challenge the notion that 
they respond solely because they cannot form a diversiﬁed portfolio of 
stocks; we show that a hypothetical investor in a low-cost equity in-
dex fund would also gain from access to robo portfolios, underscoring 
the importance of more-sophisticated features like additional risk fac-
tors and glide paths. Third, we challenge the conventional assumption 
that robo advisors only beneﬁt younger investors; while the young com-
prise a large share of new robo participants, the primary beneﬁciaries 
are  actually  older  investors  with  limited  investable  wealth.  Our  em-
pirical approach also diﬀers from Reher and Sun (2019) by rigorously 
accounting for time-varying confounds, particularly targeted advertis-
ing, which enables us to credibly identify the reduction’s causal eﬀect. 
Lastly, Reher and Sun (2019) only document a response by investors 
with less than $107,500 in wealth, but we show that the reduction im-
pacts investors much farther down the U.S. wealth distribution, notably 
those with $6,000 to $42,000 (third quintile) and especially those with 
$1,000 to $6,000 (second quintile).

Our  study  also  delivers  a  new  perspective  on  the  drivers  of  de-
mand for professional portfolio management. The literature has argued 
that retail investors seek portfolio managers because managers actively 
collect information about the underlying assets (e.g., Gârleanu and Ped-
ersen 2018) or confer peace of mind (e.g., Gennaioli et al. 2015). We 
ﬁnd that many less-wealthy investors have more mundane needs: to 
construct personalized and diversiﬁed portfolios, even if the underly-
ing assets are passively managed.8 These mundane needs are not fully 
met by another form of personalized asset management, TDFs (e.g., Bal-
duzzi and Reuter 2019; Parker et al. 2021), as robo advisors oﬀer more 
personalization via a double glide path.

Finally, we contribute to the household ﬁnance literature by char-
acterizing account minimums as a friction that distorts investment in 
risky assets. This ﬁnding demonstrates the importance of frictions that 
arise from the supply side, like internet speed (e.g., Hvide et al. 2023), 
as distinct from frictions that directly depend on investor characteristics 

6 Our study also relates to a broader question of how technological innovation 
aﬀects ﬁnancial inclusion and wealth inequality. See, for example, the studies in 
the contexts of app-based payments (e.g., Hong et al. 2022), bank deposits (e.g., 
Bachas et al. 2018; Bachas et al. 2020; Higgins 2022), and mortgage markets 
(e.g., Fuster et al. 2019; Bartlett et al. 2021; Fuster et al. 2021).
7 By studying a model of portfolio choice with a dynamic decision between 
self-managed and professionally managed portfolios, we also contribute to the 
literature on quantitative life cycle models summarized by Gomes (2020).
8 This ﬁnding corroborates the Von Gaudecker (2015) result that Dutch in-
vestors diversify better when they consult a ﬁnancial professional. Insofar as 
wealth correlates with ﬁnancial literacy, our ﬁndings are also consistent with 
the Bianchi (2018) result that less-literate investors struggle to rebalance to 
their optimal risk exposure.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038293M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

like: preferences (e.g., Barberis et al. 2006), sophistication (e.g., Grin-
blatt et al. 2011; Christelis et al. 2010), socialization (e.g., Hong et al. 
2004), or education (e.g., Cole et al. 2014; Van Rooij et al. 2011).

2.  Institutional background

Below we describe the U.S. robo advising market (2.1), the advi-
sor’s service we study (2.2), and our quasi-experiment (2.3). We use the 
terms “robo advisor” and “automated wealth manager” synonymously 
throughout the study.9

2.1.  The U.S. robo advising market

Robo advisors emerged in the mid-2000s in response to the limita-
tions of traditional wealth managers (D’Acunto and Rossi 2020). They 
rely on algorithms to select and maintain an allocation for their clients. 
This approach features lower per-portfolio management costs relative 
to the traditional approach of manually constructing and managing a 
client’s portfolio (Moulliet et al. 2016). Several robo advisors also in-
corporate human judgment on a portfolio-by-portfolio basis, much as a 
traditional manager would. Others rely purely on algorithm, including 
our data provider, Wealthfront.

Appendix Table A1 summarizes the largest robo advisors in the U.S. 
as of July 2015, including their account minimums, assets under man-
agement, fees, and provision of traditional, human-based management. 
At the time of our analysis, Wealthfront managed $2.4 billion and was 
the  largest  standalone  robo  advisor  in  the  U.S.  market,  with  Better-
ment  and  Personal  Capital  as  its  nearest  competitors.  Wealthfront  is 
also the only robo advisor that relies purely on automation, with no 
option for a human advisor. Two traditional managers, Vanguard and 
Charles Schwab, launched robo advising services early in 2015. Both 
of these services managed more than Wealthfront because they trans-
ferred assets from existing, non-robo services. From here on, we refer 
to Wealthfront simply as “the robo advisor”.

2.2.  The robo advisor’s baseline service

We study the robo advisor’s baseline service: an automatically re-
balanced portfolio of 10 ETFs corresponding to 10 asset classes. The 10 
ETFs are chosen to track stock market indices (VIG, VTI, VEA, VWO), 
bond market indices (LQD, PCY, MUB, SCHP), and other asset classes, 
namely real estate (VNQ) and commodities (XLE). The portfolio weights 
are determined by a questionnaire about the client’s age, liquid assets, 
income, demographic background, and response to hypothetical invest-
ment decisions. The client is then assigned to one of 20 possible risk 
tolerance scores, which range from 0.5 to 10 in increments of 0.5. Each 
risk tolerance score uniquely determines a robo portfolio. The portfolio 
weights solve a problem of optimal asset allocation across the 10 ETFs, 
taking this score as a parameter.10

9 The robo advisor we study is an automated wealth manager because it oﬀers 
an entire pipeline of wealth management services (“wealth manager”) without 
human interaction (“automated”), as opposed to just providing ﬁnancial advice. 
This pipeline includes the baseline product that we study (a personalized and 
automatically rebalanced portfolio) as well as: tax loss harvesting; a risk parity 
fund; and ﬁnancial planning on both the asset and liability sides of the investor’s 
balance sheet.
10 Each asset class has a secondary ETF, which the advisor will occasionally 
hold instead of the primary ETFs named in the text. Since the robo advisor does 
not hold fractional shares in its baseline product, it will substitute the secondary 
ETF when the share price of the primary ETF is suﬃciently high, relative to 
the portfolio’s size, that the target portfolio weight cannot be achieved within 
reasonable tracking error (Wealthfront 2023). We conduct our main analysis 
under the approximation that the advisor holds fractional shares, but we will 
assess robustness to this approximation in Section 6.2.1. Appendix Table A3 
lists the secondary ETF for each asset class and reports the correlation in total 

Importantly, robo portfolios are not recommendations: rather, they 
are  directly  selected,  managed  and  rebalanced  by  the  robo  advisor. 
Consequently,  investors  have  little  discretion  over  their  portfolio  al-
locations, and so their robo performance will not depend on sophis-
tication (e.g., Grinblatt et al. 2011; Christelis et al. 2010), ability to 
diversify (e.g., Calvet et al. 2007), willingness to follow advice (e.g., 
Bhattacharya et al. 2012), or reluctance to rebalance (e.g., Calvet et al. 
2009). For its services, the advisor charges an asset-based management 
fee of 0% for accounts under $10,000 and 0.25% for larger accounts. So, 
most of the less-wealthy investors in our data incur no management fee.

2.2.1.  Risk proﬁle of robo portfolios

We summarize two important characteristics of robo portfolios that 
will later explain many of our results. This summary uses the core robo 
datasets described in Section 3.2.

First, robo portfolios are very well-diversiﬁed, with little idiosyn-
cratic risk. To illustrate this feature, we ﬁrst separate idiosyncratic risk 
from priced risk, using a ﬁve-factor model described in Section 6.2.1
with three Fama and French (1993) factors and two bond factors. Then, 
we calculate total volatility across portfolios with diﬀerent risk toler-
ance scores as well as the volatility that comes from factor exposure 
(“volatility from priced risk”). Panel (a) of Fig. 1 shows that the diﬀer-
ence between the total volatility and the volatility from priced risk is 
small, implying very little idiosyncratic risk. In addition, this small and 
constant diﬀerence holds across risk tolerance scores, which means that 
all robo participants receive a well-diversiﬁed portfolio.

Second, robo portfolios are personalized along a variety of dimen-
sions, the most important of which are age and wealth. For example, 
panel (b) shows that they provide less priced risk to both older and 
less-wealthy investors. These features agree with two recommendations 
of canonical life cycle models: older investors take less risk because they 
hold a smaller share of total wealth in human capital; and less-wealthy 
investors do so to hedge background risk. As a result, robo portfolios 
oﬀer a “double glide path” by age and wealth, as opposed to TDFs that 
adjust asset allocation by age only. The robo advisor implements these 
glide paths by reducing stock exposure and raising bond exposure for 
older and less-wealthy investors (panels (c) and (d)). Appendix Fig. A6 
shows that the advisor also raises investors’ exposure to value stocks as 
they age (e.g., Jurek and Viceira 2011).

2.3.  The 2015 reduction in account minimum

On July 7, 2015, the robo advisor unexpectedly reduced its account 
minimum from $5,000 to $500, meaning that an investor would need 
to invest only $500 to participate with the advisor as opposed to $5,000 
beforehand. This reduction is sizeable from the standpoint of most U.S. 
retail investors. For reference, $5,000 equals 30% of median liquid as-
sets ($17,000), and it deﬁnes the 37th percentile of the U.S. wealth 
distribution, according to the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances. So, 
prior to the reduction, half of U.S. retail investors could not participate 
without investing at least 30% of their wealth, while 37% could not 
participate at all without borrowing.

At the time of the reduction, all of the largest ﬁve U.S. robo advi-
sors required an account minimum of at least $5,000 except for one, 
which had no account minimum but maintained a fee structure that 
discouraged setting up small accounts.11 Importantly, the month of the 
reduction does not coincide with any other product launches by the 
robo advisor, any changes in its fee, or any signiﬁcant developments in 

return with the primary ETF. The correlation coeﬃcient is quite high and often 
greater than 0.99.
11 Betterment charged a $3 service fee on accounts under $10,000 for cus-
tomers who do not auto-invest $100 monthly in their accounts. This fee struc-
ture implies a 7.2% annual management fee for a $500 account and a 36% 
management fee for a $100 account.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038294M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Note: This ﬁgure summarizes the priced risk from factor exposure in robo portfolios. Panel (a) plots the total volatility and the volatility from priced risk by the 
portfolio’s risk tolerance score, which the robo advisor assigns based on the investor’s response to the advisor’s questionnaire. Total Volatility is the standard deviation 
of the total portfolio returns, which is the sum of idiosyncratic return and systematic return. Volatility from Priced Risk is the standard deviation of systematic return. 
Systematic returns are based on a ﬁve-factor asset pricing model. The model is estimated at the security level, and the factor loadings are aggregated across securities 
using the portfolio weights that the robo advisor assigns to investors of a given age and liquid wealth. The ﬁve factors are: the three Fama and French (1993) factors; 
and the monthly percent changes in Barclays’ U.S. and global bond indices. Panel (b) plots volatility from priced risk by investor age and wealth. Panels (c)-(d) plot 
the loadings on the market factor (Market Beta) and U.S. bond factor (Bond Beta) by investor age and wealth. Details on robo portfolios are in Section 3. Details on 
estimating the factor models are in Appendix D.

Fig. 1. Understanding the robo advisor’s asset allocation.

the overall robo advising market. Since our data are at a relatively high 
(weekly) frequency, this eﬀectively-random timing allows us to identify 
the reduction’s eﬀect on robo participation.12

dataset and robo non-participants (3.2). Appendix A has details, includ-
ing information on additional datasets that we use. We use the term 
“robo participant” to describe investors who have invested money with 
the robo advisor.

3.  Data

Our analysis relies on two core datasets that draw from the same 
population: a panel dataset covering deposit activity by investors who 
participate with the robo advisor (3.1); and a dataset on self-managed, 
outside portfolio holdings that includes both investors in the deposits 

12 We make no claim as to the advisor’s motivation or the reduction’s op-
timality  as  a  business  decision.  In  its  press  releases,  the  advisor  motivates 
the reduction as a bet that less-wealthy customers will eventually accumulate 
enough assets to become proﬁtable (Nash 2015).

3.1.  Deposits dataset

The ﬁrst core dataset contains a weekly time series of deposits with 
the robo advisor from December 1, 2014 through February 29, 2016. 
Straddling  the  July  2015  reduction,  this  time  window  also  marks  a 
formative period in the history of the robo advising market when the 
number of robo participants was still small. For each investor, we ob-
serve the size of their weekly deposits and the following demographic 
variables: annual income; state of residence; age; and liquid assets, de-
ﬁned as “cash, savings accounts, certiﬁcates of deposit, mutual funds, 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038295M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

IRAs, 401ks, and public stocks”. The demographic variables are self-
reported via the robo advisor’s questionnaire and are static. We address 
measurement error from potential misreporting later in Section 4.3. To 
match the setup of our model, in which account holders have at most 
one  risky  account,  we  treat  taxable  and  non-taxable  accounts  of  the 
same account holder in our deposits dataset as separate observations 
(separate  “investors”).  Section 5.3 reproduces  our  main  results  after 
dropping the 12% of account holders who have multiple accounts.

Studying a private, company-speciﬁc dataset has two major advan-
tages over publicly available datasets such as the SEC’s Form ADV ﬁl-
ings, which serve as the basis for many industry reports about the robo 
market.  First,  Form  ADV  data  includes  inactive  clients  who  stopped 
making deposits as well as “clients” who create a username but never 
provide the robo advisor with any capital to manage.13 Second, our 
dataset includes information about a robo participant’s wealth, allow-
ing us to study investment activity across the wealth distribution.

We use the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to categorize 
investors into three wealth groups. We respectively use the terms “lower 
class”, “middle class”, and “upper class” to describe investors from the 
ﬁrst, second or third, and fourth or ﬁfth quintiles of the U.S. distribu-
tion of liquid assets. The resulting boundary between the lower versus 
middle class is $1,000, and the boundary between the middle versus 
upper class is $42,000.14 Since the SCF includes a representative sam-
ple of U.S. retail investors, this approach ensures that we deﬁne wealth 
groups in accordance with the overall U.S. population.

3.1.1.  Summary statistics

Table 1 summarizes the deposits dataset. Panel (a) compares new 
participants who join the robo advisor after the reduction in account 
minimum with existing participants. New participants are signiﬁcantly 
less wealthy, earn lower incomes, make smaller initial deposits, and are 
16 pps more likely to belong to the middle class. They are also more 
likely  to  come  from  less  ﬁnancially  developed  U.S.  states  (Appendix 
Fig. A1). Importantly, new robo participants invest with persistence, as 
98% of them do not close their account over our sample period; and 
71% make subsequent deposits that are typically much smaller than 
their initial investment. These results suggest that new participants did 
not join the advisor for a short-term experimentation.

Panel (b) conveys similar patterns within the middle-class, with two 
principal ﬁndings. First, over half of existing middle-class participants 
invested exactly $5,000 for their initial deposit. This “bunching” sug-
gests that the previous minimum imposed a binding constraint on their 
investment behavior. Second, new middle-class participants are not sig-
niﬁcantly younger than existing ones, suggesting the reduction does not 
disproportionately aﬀect the young. We explore both ﬁndings later, in 
our quantitative model.

3.2.  Portfolio dataset

The second core dataset contains information on self-managed port-
folio  holdings  for  a  subset  of  investors  who  use  the  advisor’s  online 
ﬁnancial advice tool. The tool works by loading data from the investor’s 
brokerage account and providing free ﬁnancial advice about the portfo-
lio in that account. The tool also shows the investor the portfolio they 
would receive if they become a client of the advisor. Some investors de-
cide to join the robo advisor, migrating into the deposits dataset. Other 

13 For example, we observe 9,702 participants in our dataset, in contrast to 
the 61,000 reported in publicly available SEC ﬁlings. This discrepancy reﬂects 
how: “The deﬁnition of ‘client’ for Form ADV states that advisors must count 
clients who do not compensate the advisor” (SEC 2017).
14 See Appendix Table A4 for detail. Liquid assets in the SCF are calculated 
to match the deﬁnition in our robo advising dataset as closely as possible: the 
sum of checking accounts, savings accounts, certiﬁcates of deposit, cash, stocks, 
bonds,  savings  bonds,  mutual  funds,  annuities,  trusts,  IRAs,  and  employer-
provided retirement plans.

Note: This ﬁgure plots the distribution of liquid assets among investors who 
participated with the robo advisor before the reduction in account minimum 
(Existing Participants) and who become robo participants after the reduction 
(New Participants). Liquid assets are deﬁned in Table 1. We remove a very small 
number of wealthy outliers to ﬁt the distribution on one page. The distribution 
is calculated using a kernel density.

Fig. 2. How the robo wealth distribution changes after expanding access.

investors decide not to become robo participants. The combined dataset 
comprises 1,913 pairs of self-managed and counterfactual robo portfo-
lios for both robo participants and non-participants. Investors in the 
portfolio dataset have similar demographic characteristics as those in 
the deposit dataset (Appendix Table A5).

Three unique features of the portfolio dataset allow us to study an 
investor’s choice between self-management versus delegation to a robo 
advisor. First, we observe robo non-participants (45% of sample), which 
avoids selection bias from the possibility that only investors who cannot 
invest eﬃciently on their own choose to delegate. Second, we can en-
sure that outside portfolios are indeed self-managed because we observe 
advisory and management fees. Accordingly, we restrict our analysis to 
portfolios without such fees, corresponding to 73% of the overall sample 
and 85% of the middle class. Third, we directly observe the counterfac-
tual self-managed portfolio for each robo portfolio. Specifying such a 
counterfactual is critical for measuring the eﬀects of delegated manage-
ment (Chalmers and Reuter 2020).

We use both deposit and portfolio datasets throughout our study to 
accomplish separate goals. We primarily use the deposits data in the 
ﬁrst part of our paper, Sections 4 and 5. This dataset contains infor-
mation on all robo participants, which is important for estimating the 
eﬀects of accessibility on participation. We primarily use the portfolio 
dataset to study the drivers of demand for robo advisors and welfare in 
Sections 6 and 7, since the aforementioned features make it especially 
suitable for this purpose.

4.  Eﬀect of accessibility on robo participation

4.1.  Shift in wealth distribution of robo participants

We ﬁrst examine how the wealth distribution of new robo partici-
pants changes over time. Fig. 2 shows that it shifts sharply leftward in 
the third quarter of 2015, immediately after the reduction. The wealth 
distribution is stable in all of the preceding quarters, suggesting that 
the post-reduction shift does not simply reﬂect a pre-trend. These re-
sults imply that reduction “democratizes” the robo market by bringing 
in new less-wealthy investors.

Fig. 3 compares the distributions of new and existing participants 
across U.S. wealth quintiles. The eﬀect of the reduction is concentrated 
among the middle-class. The share of robo participants from the sec-
ond and third quintiles of the U.S. wealth distribution grows by 107% 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038296M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Table 1
Summary of robo participants.

Existing participants (𝑁 = 4, 366)
Standard 
Deviation

Median

Mean

New participants (𝑁 = 5, 336)
Standard 
Deviation

Mean

Median

(a) All Investors:
Liquid Assets𝑖 (‘000)
Income𝑖 (‘000)
Initial Deposit𝑖 (‘000)
Age𝑖
Middle𝑖
First Deposit at $5k𝑖
First Deposit < $5k𝑖
No Account Closure𝑖
Subsequent Deposit𝑖

(b) Middle Class:
Liquid Assets𝑖 (‘000)
Income𝑖 (‘000)
Initial Deposit𝑖 (‘000)
Age𝑖
First Deposit at $5k𝑖
First Deposit < $5k𝑖
No Account Closure𝑖
Subsequent Deposit𝑖

436.44
157.36
33.68
35.79
0.15
0.33

660.82
110.67
94.54
8.72
0.35
0.47

23.23
92.86
7.6
30.33
0.55

11.68
62.21
5.34
6.33
0.5

200
130
10
34

25
80
5
29

100
90
5
33

18
60
2
28

265.21
116.17
22.56
35.4
0.3
0.11
0.42
0.98
0.71

19.71
67.14
4.95
30.04
0.09
0.66
0.97
0.72

480.25
95.9
72.61
9.97
0.46
0.32
0.49
0.15
0.45

11.36
42.52
12.58
7.07
0.29
0.47
0.18
0.45

New vs. existing
Diﬀerence 
in Mean

Standard 
Error

-171.22***
-41.18***
-11.12***
-0.39***
0.156***
-0.212***

(11.968)
(2.128)
(2.424)
(0.190)
(0.008)
(0.012)

-3.527***
-25.720***
-2.652***
-0.293
-0.460***

(0.542)
(2.682)
(0.430)
(0.306)
(0.028)

Note: This table summarizes investors who participated with the robo advisor before the reduction in account min-
imum (Existing Participants) and who become participants after the reduction (New Participants), based on the 
Deposits Dataset. Subscript 𝑖 indexes investor. Liquid Assets𝑖 is the sum of cash, savings accounts, certiﬁcates of de-
posit, mutual funds, IRAs, 401ks, and public stocks, in thousands of dollars. Income𝑖 is annual investor income, 
in thousands of dollars. Initial Deposit𝑖 is the value of the investor’s initial deposit, in thousands of dollars. Age𝑖
is the investor’s age. High Risk Tolerance𝑖 indicates if the investor chooses a higher risk tolerance score than that 
recommended by the robo advisor. Middle𝑖 indicates if 𝑖 belongs to the second ($1k-$6k) or third U.S. wealth quin-
tile ($6k-$42k). No Account Closure𝑖 indicates if the investor does not close the account, over the sample period. 
Subsequent Deposit𝑖 indicates if the investor makes a subsequent deposit after her initial one. Most (86%) of subse-
quent deposits are less than the initial deposit. First Deposit at $5k𝑖 indicates if the investor’s initial deposit equals 
$5,000 or is no more than 5% higher. First Deposit < $5k𝑖 indicates if the investor’s initial deposit lies between 
$500 and $5,000. Wealth consists of liquid assets, and wealth quintiles are calculated using the 2016 Survey of 
Consumer Finances (SCF) dataset. The sample consists of investors who participate with the robo advisor and make 
a deposit over the period from December 2014 through February 2016. The upper panel summarizes all investors 
in the sample, and the lower panel summarizes investors from the second or third U.S. wealth quintile. Appendix A 
has details.

middle-class participants, not a decrease in the number of upper-class 
participants  (Appendix  Fig. A2).  The  democratization  is  incomplete, 
though, since investors from the ﬁrst quintile remain non-participants. 
We ﬁnd similar results using the subsample of participants in the port-
folio dataset (Appendix Fig. A3).

We will use the previous graphical evidence to discipline our quanti-
tative model. Accordingly, we must ﬁrst verify that it indeed represents 
the eﬀect of the reduction. We use a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DiD) ap-
proach to achieve this purpose.

4.2.  Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence setup

Begin with the following ﬂexible model of robo participation in pe-

riod  ,

Participant𝑖, =𝜇

(

Middle𝑖 × Post

(

)

+ 𝜓

𝑋𝑖 × Post

)

+ 𝜁𝑖

+ 𝜚Post + 𝑣𝑖, ,

(1)

where  𝑖 indexes  investor;   indexes  the  pre-reduction  period  (i.e., 
 = 0) versus the post-reduction period (i.e.,  = 1); 𝑃 𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖, in-
dicates if investor 𝑖 participates with the robo advisor at some point in 
period  ; 𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 equals one if 𝑖 belongs to the second or third U.S. 
wealth quintile; 𝜁𝑖 is an investor ﬁxed eﬀect; and 𝑋𝑖 is a vector of in-
vestor characteristics: age, log income, state of residence ﬁxed eﬀects, 
and a measure of subjective risk tolerance from the advisor’s question-
naire.

Our parameter of interest is 𝜇, which equals the double diﬀerence 
in the probability of becoming a robo participant after versus before 

Note: This ﬁgure plots the share of robo participants from each quintile of the 
U.S. wealth distribution. The share is calculated separately for investors who 
participated before the reduction in account minimum (Existing Participants) 
and who become participants after the reduction (New Participants). Wealth 
consists of liquid assets, deﬁned in Table 1. Wealth quintiles are calculated 
using the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) dataset.

Fig. 3. Change in representativeness of robo wealth distribution.

(16 pps), while the share from the upper two quintiles falls by 18% 
(16 pps). This distributional shift reﬂects an increase in the number of 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038297M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

the  reduction  between  middle-class  versus  upper-class  investors.  We 
hypothesize  that  the  reduction  aﬀects  robo  participation  by  relaxing 
minimum-account constraints. Accordingly, we interpret middle-class 
investors as the treatment group and upper-class investors as the con-
trol group.

The  additional  terms  in  equation  (1) capture  channels  distinct 
from  minimum-account  constraints.  The  investor  ﬁxed  eﬀect  𝜁𝑖 cap-
tures slow-moving characteristics that predispose investors to partici-
pating with the advisor, such as sophistication or trust. The interaction 
𝑋𝑖 × Post captures heterogeneous trends by observed investor charac-
teristics. If, for example, younger investors are more likely to become 
robo participants after the reduction for reasons apart from a relaxation 
of minimum-account constraints, then the coeﬃcient 𝜓 would capture 
this eﬀect.

Estimating  equation  (1) is  equivalent  to  estimating  the  ﬁrst-

diﬀerenced equation,

ΔParticipant𝑖 ≡ New Participant𝑖 = 𝜇Middle𝑖 + 𝜓𝑋𝑖 + 𝜚 + 𝑢𝑖,

(2)

where New Participant𝑖 indicates if investor 𝑖 becomes a robo participant 
after the reduction; and 𝑢𝑖 ≡ Δ𝑣𝑖. The following identiﬁcation assump-
tion allows us to interpret 𝜇 as the causal eﬀect of the reduction:

[

0 = 𝔼

𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 × 𝑢𝑖

]

.

|
| 𝑋𝑖

(3)

Equation (3) states that unobserved determinants of a change in robo 
participation,  𝑢𝑖,  do  not  systematically  vary  across  the  middle  and 
upper  classes  except  because  of  the  reduction  in  account  minimum, 
conditional on the investor’s observable characteristics, 𝑋𝑖. Under this 
condition, the diﬀerence in the change in robo participation between 
the middle and upper classes reﬂects the eﬀect of relaxing minimum-
account constraints.

There are three ways in which equation (3) could be violated. The 
ﬁrst  is  measurement  error  in  self-reported  liquid  assets.  The  second 
source of bias is an omitted variable that is not caused by the reduc-
tion, but it nevertheless aﬀects changes in middle-class investors’ robo 
participation. One such confounding variable could be trend growth in 
investors’ preferences for robo advisors. The third source of bias is an 
omitted variable that is actually caused by the reduction. The leading 
example is advertising. If the eﬀects of advertising by Wealthfront are 
stronger or weaker for middle-class investors, then 𝜇 confounds the ef-
fect of advertising with the eﬀect of minimum-account constraints. We 
deal with each of these concerns in our analyses below.

4.3.  First-diﬀerence results

We ﬁrst estimate equation (2) in the deposits dataset. Therefore, we 
interpret 𝜇 as the reduction’s eﬀect, conditional on eventually partici-
pating with the robo advisor. One can also interpret 𝜇 as the share of 
robo participants whom the reduction has caused to participate, as Ap-
pendix B.3 derives. Table 2 gives the results. Column (1) shows that 
middle-class investors are 15 pps more likely to become robo partici-
pants after the reduction. The robustness of this estimate to state ﬁxed 
eﬀects (column (2)) implies that the result is not driven by the propen-
sity of middle-class investors to live in certain locations. Neither does 
the eﬀect vary with age (column (3)), in line with the descriptive evi-
dence in Table 1. We cluster standard errors by investor, but the results 
remain statistically signiﬁcant when clustering standard errors by state 
of residence (Appendix Table A8).

In column (4) we estimate equation (2) using the portfolio dataset. 
In this case, we need not condition the interpretation of 𝜇 on eventual 
participation because we observe non-participants as well. We ﬁnd the 
reduction raises middle-class investors’ probability of participation by 
10.6 pps in this sample. The slightly smaller eﬀect suggests that middle-

class investors who use the online advice tool may have weaker demand 
for robo advisors.15

Our treatment exposure variable, 𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖, may be subject to addi-
tive measurement error due to self-reporting. As we show formally in 
Appendix B.2, such measurement error can bias the estimate upwards 
only if new participants underreport their wealth relative to existing 
participants. We mitigate this concern by remeasuring Middle𝑖 in two 
ways. First, we redeﬁne the middle class exclusively as the second quin-
tile of the U.S. wealth distribution and omit investors from the third 
quintile from the sample. Under this deﬁnition, upper-class investors 
would need to underreport liquid assets by at least $36,000 to be mis-
classiﬁed as middle-class. Second, we exclude investors whose liquid 
assets are within a 10% buﬀer of the boundary between the third and 
fourth quintiles. This approach removes all cases of mismeasurement 
less than $8,400 (2 × 0.1 × 42, 000). Columns (5) and (6) show that the 
estimates based on these alternative measures are roughly the same as 
our baseline estimate.16

Lastly,  we  examine  how  the  eﬀects  of  the  reduction  vary  within 
the  middle  class.  We  alter  our  main  speciﬁcation  from  equation  (2)
by  replacing  𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 with  𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 (second  wealth  quintile) 
and 𝑈 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 (third wealth quintile). We estimate a larger eﬀect 
of the reduction among the lower half of the middle-class, shown in 
Appendix Table A7.

4.4.  Dynamic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence results

The ﬁrst-diﬀerence equation (2) has the advantage of parsimony, but 
it does not inform whether higher-frequency dynamic eﬀects inﬂuence 
the baseline results. Accordingly, we estimate the dynamic diﬀerence-
in-diﬀerence (DiD) equation

New Participant𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜇

(

Middle𝑖 × Post𝑡

)

(
X𝑖 × Post𝑡

)

+ 𝜓

+ 𝜁𝑖 + 𝜚𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡,

(4)
where 𝑖 and 𝑡 index investor and week; Post𝑡 indicates if 𝑡 is greater 
than the week of the reduction; New Participant𝑖,𝑡 indicates if 𝑖 becomes 
a robo participant in week 𝑡; 𝜁𝑖 is an investor ﬁxed eﬀect; and 𝜚𝑡 is a 
week ﬁxed eﬀect. Standard errors are clustered by investor and week.

Columns (7)-(8) of Table 2 establish a benchmark eﬀect of between 
0.6 pps and 0.8 pps. Compounding this weekly eﬀect over the 32-week 
post-reduction period implies a cumulative eﬀect that is on par with our 
ﬁrst-diﬀerence estimates (e.g., 17.6% = (1 − (1 − 0.006)32)).

The main attraction of a dynamic approach is the ability to evalu-
ate dynamic confounds through an event study. We interact Middle𝑖 in 
equation (4) with a vector of month ﬁxed eﬀects to trace out the reduc-
tion’s full dynamic eﬀect,
∑

New Participant𝑖,𝑡 =

𝑚≠𝐽 𝑢𝑛𝑒 2015

∑

+

𝑚≠𝐽 𝑢𝑛𝑒 2015

(
𝜇𝑚 × Middle𝑖 × 1𝑡∈𝑚
)
(

)

𝜓𝑚 × X𝑖 × 1𝑡∈𝑚

+ 𝜁𝑖 + 𝜚𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡,

(5)

where the coeﬃcients 𝜇𝑚 on the treatment indicator, Middle𝑖, vary non-
parametrically by month 𝑚, which includes week 𝑡. These coeﬃcients 
represent  the  diﬀerence  in  outcomes  between  the  middle  and  upper 

15 Estimating the eﬀect using the portfolio dataset makes the results dependent 
on the sample of investors who actively chose to use the online tool. In this 
case, we interpret 𝜇 as the eﬀect conditional on using the tool, rather than on 
eventually participating. The advantage of using both datasets is that we can 
test the robustness of our results across diﬀerent subpopulations of investors.
16 To sharpen the interpretation of our estimates, we use them to back out the 
reduction’s eﬀect on the overall number of robo participants. Appendix Section 
B.1 describes this procedure. The results in Appendix Table A10 imply that the 
reduction increases the number of middle-class participants by 108% and the 
overall number of robo participants by 13%. Thus, the reduction seems to have 
spurred signiﬁcant growth in overall participation with the robo advisor.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038298M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Table 2
Eﬀects of the reduction on middle-class participation.

𝑌𝑖 =

Middle𝑖

Middle𝑖 × Age𝑖

Middle𝑖 × Post𝑡

First-diﬀerence

New Participant𝑖

Dynamic DiD

New Participant𝑖,𝑡

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

15.051***
(1.357)

13.718***
(1.339)

17.987***
(5.116)
-0.137
(0.158)

10.560**
(2.966)

14.516***
(3.060)

15.467***
(1.408)

0.823***
(0.067)

0.608***
(0.085)

Measure of Middle

2nd or 3rd
Quintile

2nd or 3rd
Quintile

2nd or 3rd
Quintile

2nd or 3rd
Quintile

2nd
Quintile

Buﬀer
on Middle

2nd or 3rd
Quintile

2nd or 3rd
Quintile

Subsample

Main

Main

Main

Outside
Portfolios

Main

Main

Main

Main

Controls
State FE
Investor FE
Week FE
Controls × Post𝑡
State FE × Post𝑡
R-squared
Number of Observations

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.067
9,349

0.097
9,349

0.097
9,349

0.076
1,901

0.078
7,530

0.098
8,982

Yes
Yes
No
No
0.008
620,928

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.008
620,928

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Point estimates are multiplied by 100. This table estimates equations (2) and (4), 
which test whether the reduction in account minimum brings middle-class investors into the market for robo advice. Subscripts 
𝑖 and 𝑡 index investor and week. Columns (1)-(6) estimate the ﬁrst-diﬀerence equation (2), and so there are no 𝑡 subscripts,

New Participant𝑖 = 𝜇Middle𝑖 + 𝜓𝑋𝑖 + 𝜚 + 𝑢𝑖,

where Middle𝑖 indicates if 𝑖 belongs to the second ($1k-$6k) or third U.S. wealth quintile ($6k-$42k), as opposed to the fourth or 
ﬁfth quintile (>$42k) that together constitute the reference group; and New Participant𝑖 indicates if 𝑖 becomes a robo participant 
after the reduction, as opposed to before it. Columns (5)-(6) assess the scope for measurement error by remeasuring Middle𝑖. 
Column (5) uses an indicator for whether 𝑖 belongs to the second U.S. wealth quintile, after assigning a missing value to 
investors from the third U.S. wealth quintile. Column (6) uses an indicator for whether 𝑖 belongs to the second or third U.S. 
wealth quintile, after assigning a missing value to investors whose liquid assets are within a 10% buﬀer of the third quintile. The 
sample in columns (1)-(3) and (5)-(6) consists all robo participants in the Deposits Dataset. The sample in column (4) consists 
of all investors in the Portfolio Dataset, which includes robo non-participants and a subset of investors in the Deposits Dataset. 
State ﬁxed eﬀects cannot be included in column (4) because the state of residence is unobserved for robo non-participants. 
Columns (7)-(8) estimate the dynamic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence (DiD) baseline equation (4),

New Participant𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜇

(

)

Middle𝑖 × Post𝑡

+ 𝜁𝑖 + 𝜚𝑡 + 𝜓𝑡𝑋𝑖 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡,

where Post𝑡 indicates if 𝑡 is greater than the week of the reduction; and New Participant𝑖,𝑡 indexes if 𝑖 becomes a robo participant 
in week 𝑡, as opposed to the other weeks in our observation window. Column (7) includes week and investor ﬁxed eﬀects. 
Column (8) additionally interacts Post𝑡 with investor controls and a vector of state ﬁxed eﬀects. Wealth consists of liquid 
assets, deﬁned in Table 1. Wealth quintiles are calculated using the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) dataset. Investor 
controls 𝑋𝑖 are: the log of annual investor income; the investor’s age; and an indicator for whether the investor chooses a 
lower risk tolerance score than that recommended by the robo advisor. Column (4) additionally controls for the log of the 
outside portfolio’s size. Standard errors are clustered by investor (heteroscedasticity robust) in columns (1)-(6), and are two-
way clustered by investor and week in columns (7)-(8).

class in each month. We omit the month prior to the reduction, June 
2015, such that we interpret the level of 𝜇𝑚 relative to this base period. 
The parallel trend assumption requires that 𝜇𝑚 = 0 for all months prior 
to July 2015.

The results in Fig. 4 show that the probability of becoming a robo 
participant increases sharply and signiﬁcantly for middle-class investors 
exactly in the month of the reduction, July 2015. Importantly, the dif-
ferences  between  middle  and  upper-class  investors  are  economically 
small and statistically indistinguishable from zero before the reduction, 
providing strong support for the parallel trend assumption. It is thus 
highly unlikely that pre-trends in middle-class investors’ robo participa-
tion or other dynamic eﬀects bias the baseline results. Otherwise, such 
confounding factors would need to coincide exactly with the month of 
the reduction, which is itself highly unlikely.17

17 Speciﬁcally, the absence of a pre-trend rules out bias from the launching of 
new robo products by the two traditional managers described in Section 2.2. 

5.  Robustness and extensions

The  purpose  of  the  following  robustness  exercises  is  to  distin-
guish  between  the  channel  relevant  for  our  model,  namely  a  relax-
ation  of  minimum-account  constraints,  and  alternative  explanations, 
like changes in the advisor’s visibility.

5.1.  Initial deposits

If  middle-class  investors  face  minimum-account  constraints,  then 
they  are  more  likely  to  make  an  initial  deposit  exactly  at  the  prior 

These new products were launched at least two months prior to the reduction 
(March and May), comfortably before the strong divergence in middle-class 
investors’ behavior. We reiterate that these two traditional managers largely 
expanded their robo products among existing clients, and so they eﬀectively 
compete in a diﬀerent pool than our advisor.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038299M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Note: This ﬁgure assesses the eﬀect of the reduction in account minimum on 
middle-class investors’ robo participation by estimating the following speciﬁca-
tion:

Note: This ﬁgure assesses the change in bunching for middle-class investors 
around the reduction in account minimum by estimating the following speciﬁ-
cation:

+ 𝜁𝑖 + 𝜚𝑡

1[First Deposit𝑖,𝑡 = $5𝑘] = 𝛽Middle𝑖 + 𝛾X𝑖 + 𝜚𝑡 +

∑

(

𝜇𝑚 × Middle𝑖 × 1𝑡∈𝑚

)

∑

New Participant𝑖,𝑡 =

𝑚≠𝐽 𝑢𝑛𝑒 2015
∑

+

(
𝜇𝑚 × Middle𝑖 × 1𝑡∈𝑚
)
(

)

𝜓𝑚 × X𝑖 × 1𝑡∈𝑚

+ 𝑢𝑖,𝑡.

𝑚≠𝐽 𝑢𝑛𝑒 2015

Subscripts 𝑖 and 𝑡 index investor and week. The ﬁgure shows the estimated co-
eﬃcients 𝜇𝑚, which are interpreted as the average diﬀerence in the weekly 
probability of robo participation between the middle and the upper classes 
among all weeks in a given month. Brackets are 95% conﬁdence intervals with 
standard errors clustered by investor and week. The shaded region corresponds 
to the period after the reduction in account minimum. Time 0 is the month 
when the reduction was implemented. Time -1 is the reference month (June 
2015). The remaining notes are the same as in Table 2.

Fig. 4. Event study. The eﬀects of the reduction in account minimum on the 
middle class.

minimum of $5,000, as previously shown in Table 1. Such “bunching” 
is a hallmark of constrained behavior. By removing these constraints, 
the reduction should theoretically reduce bunching at the prior mini-
mum.

We test this hypothesis by replacing the outcome in equation (5)
with an indicator that equals one if the initial deposit made by investor 
𝑖 in week 𝑡 equals $5,000 and zero otherwise.18 The results in Fig. 5
support the role of minimum-account constraints. Consistent with a sub-
sequent relaxation of constraints, middle-class investors who become 
participants after the reduction are 20-30 pps less likely to invest right 
at the prior minimum. The diﬀerences in the outcome variable between 
the middle-class and upper-class are statistically indistinguishable from 
zero before the reduction, in line with the parallel trend assumption.

Appendix Table A9 further shows that this eﬀect is roughly 50% 
larger for investors from the second wealth quintile than for the third 
quintile. Since minimum-account constraints should theoretically bind 
more strongly for the less-wealthy, these diﬀerences within the middle-
class further support the constraints channel.

5.2.  Eﬀects of advertising

We next examine the potential bias in our results due to changes in 
the advisor’s advertising (ad) policy that coincide with the reduction 
and diﬀerentially aﬀect middle-class investors. To address this concern, 

18 We include observations where the initial deposit is within 5% of $5,000 
to account for potential reporting errors. Excluding these observations does not 
aﬀect our results. Since the sample consists of investor-weeks in which the in-
vestor makes its initial deposit, we cannot include investor ﬁxed eﬀects.

∑

(

+

𝑚≠𝐽 𝑢𝑛𝑒 2015

𝑚≠𝐽 𝑢𝑛𝑒 2015

)

𝜓𝑚 × X𝑖 × 1𝑡∈𝑚

+ 𝑢𝑖,𝑡.

Subscripts 𝑖 and 𝑡 index investor and week. The ﬁgure shows the estimated 
coeﬃcients 𝜇𝑚, which are interpreted as the average diﬀerence in the ﬁrst de-
posit amount between the middle and the upper classes among all weeks in a 
given month. Brackets are 95% conﬁdence intervals with standard errors clus-
tered by investor and week. The shaded region corresponds to the period after 
the reduction in account minimum. Time 0 is the month when the reduction 
was implemented. Time -1 is the reference month (June 2015). We do not in-
clude investor ﬁxed eﬀects, since the sample includes only the ﬁrst deposits. 
The remaining notes are the same as in Table 2.

Fig. 5. Event study. Bunching behavior by the middle class.

we gather data on the advisor’s ad spending during the period around 
the reduction in account minimum.

We source our data from Kantar’s Vivvix dataset, which contains 
comprehensive information on advertising spending. Kantar is a promi-
nent business intelligence data provider whose data are commonly used 
in the literature on the advertising of mutual funds (e.g., Kaniel and 
Parham 2017; Roussanov et al. 2020). Details on data construction are 
outlined in Appendix A. In summary, we compile monthly ad spending 
data by Wealthfront in 2015 across various geographical areas, media 
sources, and products. The geographic unit in Kantar is the Designated 
Market  Area  (DMA),  which  we  map  to  counties  using  the  crosswalk 
from Gentzkow (2006) and Gentzkow and Shapiro (2008). Then, we 
merge  our  advertising  data  with  county-level  imputed  stock  market 
wealth from Chodorow-Reich et al. (2021). This enables us to analyze 
ad spending across areas with diﬀerent wealth levels.

Our analysis focuses on two key questions. Firstly, did the advisor 
alter its advertising strategy to target investors based on their wealth 
levels?  Secondly,  did  any  such  changes  impact  the  likelihood  of  in-
vestors  joining  the  advisor  after  the  reduction?  To  address  the  ﬁrst 
question, we examine the time-series of ad spending surrounding the re-
duction. Panel (a) of Fig. 6 illustrates monthly ad spending, revealing an 
ad campaign by the advisor. Notably, the advisor initiated advertising 
three  months  before  the  reduction,  reaching  a  peak  monthly  spend-
ing of $3 million just before the reduction. Subsequently, the spending 
decreased to approximately $1 million post-reduction. The campaign 
concluded three months after the reduction, with no ad spending in the 
remaining months of 2015. Importantly, all 2015 ad spending pertained 
to the advisor’s main product analyzed in this study, namely, “Wealth-
front Online.”

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382910M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Note: This ﬁgure presents the times-series of monthly ad spending by the advi-
sor, surrounding the reduction in account minimum such that time 0 is the 
month  when  the  reduction  was  implemented.  Panel  (a)  shows  the  total  ad 
spending. Panel (b) shows the total spending in middle-class and upper-class 
Designated Market Areas (DMAs). A DMA is classiﬁed as middle-class if its im-
puted stock market wealth in 2015 is in quintiles two or three of the wealth 
distribution across all DMAs. DMAs in the top two quintiles are classiﬁed as 
upper-class. Ad spending data are from Vivvix by Kantar. Data on county-level 
imputed stock market wealth are from Chodorow-Reich et al. (2021), which we 
aggregate to the DMA level. Details on data construction are in Appendix A.

Fig. 6. Advertising spending by the robo advisor.

TV advertisements are the dominant method of advertising in the 
data, accounting for over 99% of spending over the three months be-
fore  and  after  the  reduction.  The  small  remaining  share  consists  of 
spending on internet search and display advertisements.19 Almost all 

19 We check whether the dominance of TV advertisements is due to measure-
ment error in the Kantar dataset by tabulating the same statistic using Nielsen’s 
Ad Intel dataset. The Nielsen dataset has a similar form as Kantar’s, but it does 
not contain information on spending across geographic markets and, so, cannot 
be used for our main analysis. The share of the robo advisor’s advertising spend-
ing on TV advertisements over the same time period in the Nielsen dataset also 
equals 99%, suggesting that the main results based on Kantar are not an arti-
fact. Even if the advisor executed unobserved targeted internet advertisements 
based on wealth, we can still identify the impact of the reduction under the rea-

TV ad spending (98%) is on cable TV advertisements. Considering that 
addressable advertising on cable TV was less common during that pe-
riod, it seems unlikely that the advisor speciﬁcally targeted individual 
investors. Nonetheless, there remains the possibility that the advisor 
broadly targeted investors in speciﬁc market areas according to house-
hold wealth in those areas.

To investigate this possibility, we categorize a Designated Market 
Area  (DMA)  as  middle-class  if  its  imputed  stock  market  wealth  falls 
within  quintiles  two  and  three  of  the  wealth  distribution  across  all 
DMAs. DMAs in the top two quintiles are classiﬁed as upper-class, mir-
roring  the  classiﬁcation  method  used  for  individual  investors  in  our 
main  datasets.  In  panel  (b)  of  Fig. 6,  we  present  the  total  spending 
across DMAs, revealing a notable trend: upper-class areas received sub-
stantially more ad spending than their middle-class counterparts. This 
observation suggests that the advisor directed its advertising eﬀorts to-
ward wealthier investors.20 Appendix Fig. A5 reinforces this notion by 
demonstrating statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in average ad spend-
ing between middle-class and upper-class areas.

We then delve into examining whether these spending disparities 
across  market  areas  translated  into  diﬀerences  in  the  likelihood  of 
investors  joining  the  advisor  post-reduction.  Given  that  our  primary 
dataset includes information on the investor’s home state, we convert 
DMA-level spending into state-level spending. Our initial measure of 
state-level spending, denoted as 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡, is the average spending across 
all  DMAs  in  state  𝑠 in  the  month  of  week  𝑡.  To  assess  how  adver-
tising inﬂuenced the response of middle-class investors to the reduc-
tion,  we  extend  our  DiD  equation  (4) by  including  the  interactions 
𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 × 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡 and 𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡. We incorporate state-
by-week ﬁxed eﬀects, which absorb the direct eﬀect of 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡 and also 
account for all state-level unobservables, including diﬀerences in adver-
tising costs across states.

Our ﬁndings, presented in Table 3, reveal several key insights. In 
column (1), we estimate a coeﬃcient of approximately 0.7 on Middle𝑖 ×
Post𝑡, akin to the result in Table 2. This coeﬃcient represents the ef-
fect of the reduction on the middle class when advertising spending is 
zero. The marginal eﬀect of advertising on the middle class after the re-
duction, captured by the triple interaction 𝑀𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑖 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡, is 
statistically insigniﬁcant. We ﬁnd similar results in columns (2)-(3) after 
introducing additional interactions between the controls from Table 2
and our key advertising measures (Post𝑡, 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡, and 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡), 
which allows for targeted advertising by characteristics like income and 
age that correlate with wealth. To be clear, these results do not imply 
that the advisor’s advertising had no impact on overall robo participa-
tion; this overall impact would be subsumed by the state-by-time ﬁxed 
eﬀects. Rather, the evidence implies that shifts in advertising cannot 
explain the relative increase in middle-class participation after the re-
duction.

Lastly, as an additional robustness check, we introduce a diﬀerent 
measure of state-level ad spending, denoted 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑤,𝑠,𝑡, that accounts for 
targeting  by  market  areas  within  states.  This  measure  calculates  the 
average  spending  in  state  𝑠 in  the  month  of  week  𝑡,  separately  for 
middle-class and upper-class DMAs. Since this measure varies within 
state-months, we extend our previous speciﬁcations from columns (1)-
(3)  by  controlling  for  𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑤,𝑠,𝑡 and  𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑤,𝑠,𝑡 separately.  The 

sonable assumption that internet ad spending targeted at people with a certain 
wealth level co-varies with television ad spending targeted at regions where 
average wealth is the same level, which we do observe. Lastly, the marketing 
literature does not have a clear consensus about the impact of internet adver-
tising on advertiser revenue, as summarized by Gordon et al. (2020), which 
suggests that unobserved internet advertisements would have minimal impact 
on our results.
20 This could be attributed to the dual goals of expanding its long-term client 
base and enhancing short-term revenues. Notably, the bulk of short-term rev-
enues primarily stems from wealthier clients, as the advisor only charges a fee 
for portfolios exceeding $10,000.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382911M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Table 3
Advertising as a confounding factor.

𝑌𝑖,𝑡 =

New Participant𝑖,𝑡

Middle𝑖 × Post𝑡

Middle𝑖 × Post𝑡 × Adv𝑠,𝑡

Middle𝑖 × Adv𝑠,𝑡

Middle𝑖 × Post𝑡 × Adv𝑤,𝑠,𝑡

Middle𝑖 × Adv𝑤,𝑠,𝑡

Investor FE
Week FE
State × Week FE
Controls × Post𝑡
Controls × Adv𝑠,𝑡
Controls × Adv𝑠,𝑡 × Post𝑡
Adv𝑤,𝑠,𝑡
Post𝑡 × Adv𝑤,𝑠,𝑡
Controls × Adv𝑤,𝑠,𝑡
Controls × Adv𝑤,𝑠,𝑡 × Post𝑡

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.729***
(0.070)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.001)

0.557***
(0.078)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.001)

0.611***
(0.078)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)

0.816***
(0.079)

0.652***
(0.081)

0.689***
(0.084)

-0.028
(0.036)
0.012
(0.007)

-0.028
(0.036)
0.012
(0.007)

-0.031
(0.037)
0.011
(0.007)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

R-squared
Number of Observations

0.018
477,005

0.018
477,005

0.018
477,005

0.018
447,050

0.018
447,050

0.018
447,050

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Point estimates are multiplied by 100. This table estimates a variant of equation (4)
that assesses the robustness of the baseline results to a dynamic speciﬁcation that accounts for changes in advertising that may 
disproportionately aﬀect middle-class investors. Subscripts 𝑖 and 𝑡 index investor and week. The baseline regression equation 
in columns (1)-(3) is of the form

New Participant𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜇

(

Middle𝑖 × Post𝑡

(

)

+ 𝜆

0

Middle𝑖 × Post × 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑠,𝑡

)

+ 𝜆

1

(
Middle𝑖 × Adv𝑠,𝑡

)

+ 𝜁𝑖 + 𝜚𝑡 + 𝛾𝑠,𝑡 + 𝜓𝑡𝑋𝑖 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡,

where Adv𝑠,𝑡 is the robo advisor’s ad spending in state 𝑠 in the month of week 𝑡, in thousands of dollars; and 𝛾𝑠,𝑡 are state-by-
week ﬁxed eﬀects. Columns (4)-(6) use a measure of within-state ad spending Adv𝑤,𝑠,𝑡: the average spending in state 𝑠 in the 
month of week 𝑡, separately for middle-class and upper-class Designated Market Area (DMAs), again in thousands of dollars. 
A DMA is classiﬁed as middle-class if its average imputed stock market wealth falls within quintiles two or three of the wealth 
distribution across all DMAs. DMAs in the top two quintiles are classiﬁed as upper-class. The ad spending data are sourced 
from Vivvix by Kantar. Details on data construction are outlined in Appendix A and Section 5.2. The remaining notes are the 
same as in Table 2.

results in columns (4)-(6) mirror those obtained from the initial mea-
sure.21 We therefore conclude that the estimated eﬀect of the reduction 
does not confound shifts in the advisor’s advertising.

5.3.  Additional extensions

Gambling. Experimental  evidence  shows  that  investors  exhibit 
lower risk aversion in the context of small lotteries (e.g., Bombardini 
and  Trebbi  2012).  So,  lowering  the  minimum  may  induce  some  ac-
count holders to set up an additional, smaller “play account” in which to 
gamble. Whether this gambling channel drives the results in Table 2 de-
pends on the relative size of a gambling account for the middle versus 
upper  classes.  If  the  optimal  size  of  a  gambling  account  for  the  up-
per class lies between $500 and $5,000 while the optimal size for the 
middle class lies below $500, then Table 2 actually underestimates the 
eﬀect of relaxing minimum-account constraints. If, on the other hand, 
the optimal size of a gambling account for the middle class lies between 
$500 and $5,000 while the optimal size for the upper class lies above 
$5,000, then the gambling channel may actually drive the main results 

21 The slight drop in the number of observations, less than 10%, between 
columns (1)-(3) and (4)-(6) can be attributed to certain states where all DMAs 
are grouped into a single wealth category. For instance, in Alabama, all DMAs 
(Birmingham, Huntsville, Mobile, and Montgomery) are classiﬁed as middle-
class DMAs. As a result, 𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑤,𝑠,𝑡 is not deﬁned for all upper-class households in 
Alabama within the deposit dataset. Consequently, these speciﬁc observations 
are excluded from the estimation in columns (4)-(6).

in Table 2. We assess this possibility by re-estimating the main speciﬁ-
cations from Table 2 after removing the 12% of account holders with 
multiple accounts from the sample. The resulting estimates in Appendix 
Table A6 are almost the same as with the full sample, suggesting that 
gambling motives indeed do not drive the results.

Business Stealing. We examine whether our results are driven by 
a reallocation of actual or potential participants across robo advisors 
(“business stealing”), versus an overall increase in robo participation. 
A close examination of these concerns requires detailed data on clients 
of competitors. While we do not have access to such data, we nonethe-
less propose several basic tests based on publicly available data. Specif-
ically,  we  use  data  from  the  SEC’s  Form  ADV  to  examine  trends  in 
participation at other standalone robo advisors, namely Betterment and 
Personal Capital. The Form ADV data have limitations described in Sec-
tion 3, but they are the best source of data for this exercise, short of 
having microdata from each major U.S. robo advisor.

Business stealing could aﬀect our results in two key ways. First, the 
reduction in the account minimum at the advisor may attract existing
clients from competitor robo advisors. In this case, we would expect to 
observe a decline in the total number of clients at the competitors after 
the reduction. The results in Fig. 7 do not support this concern; we ac-
tually observe an increase in the number of participants at competitors 
from the pre-reduction to the post-reduction periods.

Second, the reduction may attract potential new clients. In particular, 
new middle-class robo participants may have planned to invest with a 
competitor robo advisor during the post-reduction period, but the re-
duction prompted them to invest with the advisor instead. This concern 
would  imply  that  the  competitors  continue  growing  after  the  reduc-

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382912M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Note: This ﬁgure plots the number of clients across robo advisors, in thousands, 
which assesses whether the reduction increases robo participation or simply 
reallocates robo participants across advisors. We plot this value separately for 
the robo advisor that reduced its account minimum, Wealthfront, and for its 
competitors combined. Data are from the SEC’s Form ADV. Competitors are 
deﬁned as Betterment and Personal Capital, since Schwab’s and Vanguard’s 
robo advising services do not ﬁle a separate Form ADV. The SEC deﬁnes clients 
to include investors who have not compensated their advisor. Advisors do not 
ﬁle a Form ADV every quarter, and so we use the nearest available observation 
when the advisor does not ﬁle a form ADV in a quarter. We take the average 
number of clients in cases where a robo advisor ﬁles more than one ADV in a 
given quarter.

Fig. 7. Participants across robo advisors. Assessing business stealing.

tion, but at a lower rate. The results in Fig. 7 are inconsistent with this 
concern since they show very little change in growth trends for com-
petitors. We observe an increase in client growth only for the advisor 
itself, which is consistent with the eﬀects of the reduction.

6.  Description of model

At  an  intuitive  level,  our  reduced-form  results  may  seem  unsur-
prising.  However,  it  is  not  obvious  why  retail  investors  would  want 
a “textbook” robo portfolio given recent evidence that, in many cases, 
they  prefer  FinTech  products  that  perpetuate  their  behavioral  biases 
(e.g., Cookson et al. 2023; Barber et al. 2022; Ben-David et al. 2022). 
This contrast raises the question of whether robo participants act in a 
welfare-improving manner. Moreover, even if the decision to become a 
robo investor increases welfare, the drivers and the distribution of any 
welfare gains are unknown. Studying welfare along these various di-
mensions lets us examine whether and how robo portfolios diﬀer from 
existing ﬁnancial products (e.g., index funds, TDFs), which informs why 
the robo market has continued to grow despite the availability of poten-
tial alternatives. We pursue these questions by calibrating a benchmark 
model of portfolio choice, suitably modiﬁed for our setting.

6.1.  Setup

We follow the setup of benchmark portfolio choice models as closely 
as possible. See Gomes (2020) for a summary. We emphasize the unique 
features of our model below, while Appendix C provides full details on 
the more conventional aspects.

6.1.1.  Preferences and labor income

Let 𝑖 index investor. Time is discrete, and 𝑡 indexes year. For the 
rest of the exposition, we conserve notation by aligning an investor’s 
age with the year, such that we do not maintain both age and time 
subscripts. Investors begin their problem at age 𝑡
0. With probability 𝑝𝑡, 
an investor of age 𝑡 survives until age 𝑡 + 1, and at age 𝑇 any surviving 

investors leave the model. Investors have CRRA preferences over annual 
ﬂow consumption 𝐶𝑖,𝑡. Expected lifetime utility is given by:

𝑈𝑖,𝑡 = 𝔼𝑡

⎡
𝜏=𝑇∑
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝜏=𝑡

(

𝑗=𝜏−1∏

)

𝑝𝑗

𝛿𝜏−𝑡

𝑗=𝑡

1−𝛾

𝐶𝑖,𝜏
1 − 𝛾

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

,

(6)

where  𝛿 is  the  discount  factor,  and  𝛾 is  the  coeﬃcient  of  relative 
risk aversion. Investors enter age 𝑡 with consumable and investable re-
sources 𝑊𝑖,𝑡. To match our empirical work, we call 𝑊𝑖,𝑡 “liquid assets” 
instead of “cash-on-hand” (e.g., Deaton 1991). Liquid assets are replen-
ished through labor income and income from ﬁnancial assets.

Appendix C.1.1 describes the labor income process, which is stan-
dard. Brieﬂy, investors receive uninsurable labor income for 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇 , and 
retire  at  age  𝑇+1.  Following  Carroll  (1997),  log  income  evolves  ac-
cording to the sum of: a deterministic function of age, 𝑓𝑖; a permanent 
shock with volatility 𝜎𝜐; a transitory shock with volatility of 𝜎𝜉 ; a disas-
ter shock that yields zero labor income and occurs with probability 𝜙; 
and an aggregate shock that has a correlation coeﬃcient 𝜌𝑌
with the 
robo portfolio’s abnormal return, so that 𝜌𝑌
captures the cyclicality of 
labor income.

Since our empirical setting concerns pre-retirement investment, we 
err on the side of parsimony and avoid additional parameters that gov-
ern investment decisions within retirement. Instead, retired investors 
simply solve a consumption and savings problem with initial wealth 
𝑊𝑇 +1. This setup abstracts from two other forms of retirement income: 
payments from an employer-sponsored plan (e.g., pension, 401k); and 
social  security  payments.  Abstracting  from  the  former  seems  reason-
able, since only 26% of investors in the bottom three wealth quintiles 
have  retirement  support  from  their  employer  according  to  the  2016 
SCF. Abstracting from the latter has a theoretically ambiguous eﬀect 
that depends on the design of the social security system, a complicated 
problem that deserves its own study.22

6.1.2.  Financial assets

In  modeling  ﬁnancial  assets,  we  make  two  principal  additions  to 
benchmark  models.  First,  rather  than  investing  in  a  single,  perfectly 
diversiﬁed risky asset, investors have two risky investment opportuni-
ties: a self-managed portfolio ( ), which can be likened to a discount 
brokerage  account;  and  a  portfolio  overseen  by  a  robo  advisor  (). 
We do not make any prior assumptions on the characteristics of these 
portfolios, instead letting the data inform these characteristics. Second, 
the two portfolios diﬀer in that the robo portfolio requires an account 
minimum, 𝑀 . We simplify the model’s computational complexity by 
assuming investors cannot hold the self-managed and automated port-
folios concurrently. This simpliﬁcation has little bearing on the results 
because it is rarely optimal for investors to hold both portfolios at the 
same time.

We introduce a factor structure for risky returns. This approach im-
proves the quality of our calibration, as it addresses the well-known 
challenge of estimating expected returns in ﬁnite samples (e.g., Merton 
1980). We model the return on portfolio  ∈ {, } as:

𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽
𝑅

𝑖 𝐹𝑡 + 𝜖
𝑖,𝑡,

(7)

22 Following  the  modeling decisions  of  early  papers  (e.g.,  Campbell  et  al. 
2001),  incorporating  social  security  would  function  similarly  to  incorporat-
ing forced savings in a riskless asset. This would reduce investors’ after-tax 
savings rate but increase their risky share within after-tax savings. The ﬁrst 
channel raises the wealth threshold at which investors become a robo partici-
pant, which would shift the welfare gains from reducing the account minimum 
towards more-wealthy segments of the middle class. The second channel has 
the opposite eﬀect. Our model overshoots the increase in robo participation by 
the second U.S. wealth quintile (Fig. 9), which would loosely suggest that the 
channel related to a lower savings rate dominates.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382913M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

and covariance matrix Σ𝐹

where 𝐹𝑡 is a vector of priced risk factors, normally distributed with 
; 𝛽
mean 𝜋𝐹
is the loading of portfolio  on 
𝑖
𝐹𝑡 for investor 𝑖; and 𝜖
𝑖,𝑡 is an idiosyncratic shock, normally distributed 
with mean zero and volatility of 𝜎
𝜖,𝑖. The quantities of compensated, 
systematic risk (𝛽
𝜖,𝑖) also vary across in-
vestors. This ﬂexibility allows us to capture the personalization of robo 
portfolios, documented in Fig. 1.

𝑖 ) and idiosyncratic risk (𝜎

6.1.3.  Model solution

Appendix C.1.2 states the consolidated problem, as a Bellman equa-
tion. The state variables are age (𝑡) and liquid assets (𝑊𝑖,𝑡). The control 
variables are consumption and the share of liquid assets allocated to: 
the risk-free asset, the self-managed portfolio, and the robo portfolio. 
We solve the model through backward induction, using standard nu-
merical methods in Appendix C.1.3.

6.2.  Calibration

6.2.1.  Portfolio parameters

𝜖,𝑖, 𝜎
We next discuss the calibration of the portfolio parameters {𝜎
𝜖,𝑖,
𝑖 , 𝛽
𝛽
𝑖 }.  We  use  the  portfolio  dataset,  which  contains  pairs  of  self-
managed and robo portfolios (see Section 3.2). Our calibration proceeds 
in three steps, brieﬂy summarized below. Appendices C and D have de-
tails.

First,  following  a  convention  in  the  household  ﬁnance  literature 
(e.g., Calvet et al. 2007; Von Gaudecker 2015), we estimate factor load-
ings and idiosyncratic volatilities for all individual securities. Speciﬁ-
cally, for a given vector of risk factors, 𝐹 , we estimate the following 
pricing equation for each security 𝑘 in the portfolio dataset,

(8)

𝑅𝑘,𝑚 = 𝛽𝑘𝐹𝑚 + 𝜖𝑘,𝑚,
where 𝑚 indexes month; and 𝑅𝑘,𝑚 denotes the monthly return on se-
curity 𝑘, in excess of the risk-free return. We specify 𝐹 as the three 
Fama and French (1993) factors with two additional bond factors: the 
monthly percent changes in the U.S. and the global bond indices from 
Barclays.23

In  the  second  step,  we  calculate  the  parameter  vector  {𝜎
𝑗 } for each pair of portfolios, indexed by 𝑗. Let 𝑤

𝜖,𝑗, 𝜎
𝜖,𝑗 ,
𝑗 , 𝛽
𝛽
𝑗 denote a vector 
of weights across securities 𝑘 for the self-managed portfolio 𝑗, and let 
𝑤
𝑗 denote the weight vector for 𝑗’s matched robo portfolio. Given an 
estimated vector of loadings across securities,  ̂𝛽, and covariance matrix 
of idiosyncratic volatilities,  ̂Σ𝜖 , we calculate the portfolio parameters as

√

𝜎
𝜖,𝑗 =

𝑤 ′
𝑗

̂Σ𝜖𝑤

𝑗 , 𝛽

𝑗 = 𝑤 ′
𝑗

̂𝛽,

(9)

for  ∈ {, }.

Table 4 compares  benchmark  characteristics  of  self-managed  and 
robo portfolios. Robo portfolios feature a 30 pps higher Sharpe ratio for 
both the middle and upper classes. The higher Sharpe ratio reﬂects a 2 
pps higher expected return and a 11 pps lower idiosyncratic volatil-
ity.  By  construction,  the  higher  expected  return  stems  from  greater 
exposure to priced risk factors, speciﬁcally value and bond premia (Ap-
pendix Table A13). Bonds, in particular, have a relatively high Sharpe 
ratio, which undergirds the well-known strategy of risk parity (e.g., As-
ness et al. 2012). The lower idiosyncratic volatility in robo portfolios 
reﬂects how investors in our data mostly hold individual stocks and 
actively-managed funds. For example, the median self-managed portfo-
lio allocates only 8% to broad-based index-linked ETFs.

23 We calibrate the mean and covariance matrix of 𝐹 using the longest ob-
served time series over 1960-2017 and report these values in Appendix Table 
A14. For reference, the mean and volatility of the market factor equal 7.6% and 
14.7%, respectively. Our baseline choice of ﬁve factors includes many of the 
factors to which the robo advisor gives exposure. However, we obtain similar 
insights from other factor models (Appendix Table A15).

To understand the magnitude of the improvement, we perform a 
return-loss calculation similar to Calvet et al. (2007). This calculation 
gives  the  counterfactual  expected  return  that  the  investor  would  re-
ceive if they invested with the same total volatility, but with the greater 
Sharpe ratio of its robo match. We call this counterfactual return the 
“robo-Sharpe expected return”, and the diﬀerence relative to investors’ 
actual return gives the return loss from investing ineﬃciently on their 
own.  Accordingly,  the  average  investor  in  our  sample  would  gain  7 
pps in expected return from investing with the same eﬃciency as the 
robo advisor. This potential gain is the same for both wealth classes. 
Appendix Table A11 recalculates all of these results without the approx-
imation that the advisor can hold fractional shares for portfolios smaller 
than $5,000. The results are similar because, as described in Section 2.2, 
the advisor substitutes the primary ETF with a highly-correlated sec-
ondary ETF that has a lower share price if holding the primary ETF in 
discrete quantities would induce meaningful tracking error. Appendix 
Table A12 veriﬁes that the results are robust to excluding self-managed 
accounts smaller than 10% of the investor’s wealth, which may be gam-
bling accounts.

Lastly, in the third step of the calibration, we embed the empirical 
portfolio parameters in the model. Since age and liquid assets comprise 
the model’s state variables, we project each of the empirical portfolio 
parameters on the investor’s log liquid assets and a ﬁfth-order polyno-
mial in age. Then, we substitute the ﬁtted values into the parameter 
, using the age and liquid assets of investor 𝑖.
vector 

𝜖,𝑖, 𝜎
𝜎

𝜖,𝑖, 𝛽

𝑖 , 𝛽

{

}

𝑖

6.2.2.  Other parameters

Table 5 reports the other parameters. We choose standard preference 
parameter values of 𝛾 = 4 and 𝛿 = 0.95. Appendix Table A19 obtains 
similar values when structurally estimating these parameters. We fol-
low Cocco et al. (2005) in our calibration of labor income parameters. 
Accordingly, the deterministic component of income, 𝑓𝑡, is a third-order 
polynomial in investor age, and the coeﬃcients equal those estimated 
by Cocco et al. (2005) for their baseline analysis. Similarly, we parame-
terize 𝜎𝜈 = 0.103, 𝜎𝜉 = 0.271, and 𝜌𝑌 = 0.3%. Following Carroll (1997), 
we parameterize 𝜙 = 0.12% to match the share of investors with zero 
total income, based on the 2016 SCF. The remaining parameter val-
ues are: 𝑅𝑓 = 0.2%, corresponding to the average one-month Treasury 
yield over 2010-2017; 𝑡
0 = 25, 𝑇 = 65, and 𝑇 = 100, all of which are 
standard; and 𝑝𝑡, which we calculate using the Center for Disease Con-
trol’s mortality tables (Xu et al. 2020).

6.3.  Characterizing investor behavior through policy rules

The model reproduces many common implications of life cycle mod-
els,  but  it  also  generates  several  implications  that  arise  due  to  our 
unique setting. We succinctly summarize investors’ optimal investing 
behavior (policy rules) in Fig. 8. Appendix C.2 has more detailed dis-
cussion.

The following patterns are conventional. Young investors accumu-
late a buﬀer stock of liquid assets to insure against idiosyncratic income 
shocks. Consequently, the savings rate initially decreases in age (panel 
(a)).  As  investors  approach  retirement,  this  pattern  reverses  and  the 
savings rate begins to increase. The youngest investors also hold most 
of their total wealth in bond-like human capital, and so they invest a 
higher share of their liquid wealth in risky assets than do investors in 
their 40 s (panel (b)). Lastly, since we do not incorporate stock market 
participation costs until Section 7.4.2, almost all investors hold risky 
assets, either through the robo portfolio or through the self-managed 
portfolio.

Unlike in benchmark models, in our model investors choose between 
two portfolios. On the one hand, the robo portfolio is preferable be-
cause of the advantages just described (e.g., diversiﬁcation, priced risk 
exposure). On the other hand, the robo portfolio has an account mini-
mum. Due to this trade-oﬀ, investors switch to the robo portfolio after 
their liquid assets cross some threshold. Panel (d) shows that, under a 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382914M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Table 4
Summary of self-managed and robo portfolios.

Middle Class (𝑁 = 354)

Upper Class (𝑁 = 1, 559)

Self-Managed

Matched Robo

Diﬀerence

Self-Managed

Matched Robo

Diﬀerence

Sharpe Ratio

Expected Return

Total Volatility

Idiosyncratic Volatility

(1)

0.452

0.080

0.209

0.146

(2)

0.750

0.102

0.137

0.034

Robo-Sharpe Expected Return

0.154

Return Loss

-0.074

(3)

(4)

0.298***

0.459

0.023***

0.078

-0.071***

0.196

-0.111***

0.138

0.147

-0.069

(5)

0.756

0.101

0.134

0.033

(6)

0.297***

0.023***

-0.062***

-0.104***

Note: This table summarizes portfolios that investors manage themselves (Self-Managed) and portfolios they would 
receive if they become robo participants (Matched Robo), based on the Portfolio Dataset, which we use to calibrate the 
model in Section 6. Each observation is a pair of self-managed and robo portfolios. Sharpe Ratio is the ratio of expected 
return to standard deviation of return; Expected Return is the expected annual return based on a linear factor model; 
Total Volatility is the standard deviation of return; Idiosyncratic Volatility is the standard deviation of the pricing error in 
the factor model; and Robo-Sharpe Expected Return is the counterfactual expected return assuming that the self-managed 
portfolio invests with the same amount of total volatility as its robo match, which equals the product of the robo Sharpe 
ratio and the self-managed total volatility. Return Loss is the diﬀerence between the self-managed portfolio Expected 
Return and its Robo-Sharpe Expected Return. The baseline factor model, which is used in this table, is the Fama-French 
Three Factor Model augmented with two bond factors: the monthly percent changes in Barclays’ U.S. and global bond 
indices (Fama-French with Bond). Expected returns for a portfolio are calculated as the dot product of the portfolio’s 
loading, shown in equation (9), and the risk prices of the factors, reported in Appendix Table A14. Columns (1)-(2) 
report the mean across portfolios for investors in the second or third U.S. wealth quintiles, and columns (4)-(5) do so for 
the fourth and ﬁfth quintiles. Columns (3) and (6) test for a diﬀerence in mean between matched robo and self-managed 
portfolios for each wealth class. The sample consists of non-advised portfolios for investors who consult the robo advisor 
for a free portfolio review. Of these investors, 45% become robo participants. Details on estimating the factor models 
are in Appendix D. The remaining notes are the same as in Table 1.

$5,000 account minimum, the threshold ranges between $25,000 and 
$30,000 for most of the investor’s working life. This result is broadly 
consistent with the data, as the median liquid assets of existing middle 
class robo participants equals $25,000 (Table 1). Once the investor be-
comes a robo participant, the risky share jumps (panel (b)) due to the 
advantages of robo portfolios.

As investors approach retirement, the threshold falls for two reasons. 
First, as in benchmark models, older investors have a higher savings 
rate. So, they are willing to allocate a large share of their resources to 
the robo advisor. Second, unlike in benchmark models, robo portfolios 
feature a double glide path, taking less priced risk as the investor ages or 
suﬀers negative wealth shocks. This personalization strengthens older 
investors’ demand for the robo portfolio, and, by extension, raises their 
risky share. This channel oﬀsets the decrease in risky share that would 
obtain in a benchmark model from the declining share of human capital 
in total wealth.

7.  Eﬀect of the reduction within the model

7.1.  Can portfolio diﬀerences explain the empirical eﬀect?

We compute the reduction’s theoretical eﬀects as follows. We ﬁrst 
use the policy functions to calculate how an investor of a given age and 
level of wealth optimally invests under the minimums of $5,000 and 
$500. We then aggregate these individual decisions using the joint dis-
tribution of age and wealth in the 2016 SCF. Precisely, we discretize 
this joint distribution, and we average investment decisions across age-
by-wealth cells weighting by the share of the overall U.S. population 
in each cell. This approach diﬀers from simulation-based methods that 
would instead rely on a model-implied wealth distribution, obtained 
from simulating an investor from starting age to retirement. This dis-
tinction matters, since in simulated models investors rapidly accumulate 
wealth  as  they  age  (e.g.,  Gomes  2020).  Consequently,  the  reduction 
would only aﬀect the youngest investors, as many older investors would 
have already overcome the $5,000 minimum. In reality, however, in-

vestors accumulate wealth much more slowly. For example, nearly 40% 
of U.S. retail investors over age 40 have less than $6,000 in liquid as-
sets (Appendix Fig. A4). Our methodology accounts for this empirical 
regularity.

Even  though  we  begin  with  the  external  wealth  distribution,  the 
model will still generally undershoot the level of welfare gains because 
the gains are calculated using internal policy rules. Since investors save 
aggressively under such policy rules, those who become robo partici-
pants in response to the reduction would have otherwise overcome the 
$5,000 minimum in a few years. Consequently, they value access to the 
robo advisor at the lower $500 minimum less than they would under 
the more-realistic scenario in which they slowly accumulate wealth.

7.1.1.  Results

We  focus  on  comparing  the  reduction’s  theoretical  and  empirical 
eﬀects on the wealth distribution of robo participants.  In Fig. 9, we 
overlay the empirical eﬀect from Fig. 3 with open circles that show 
the theoretical eﬀect. The model matches the share of existing partic-
ipants  from  each  wealth  quintile  almost  exactly.  It  also  explains  the 
wealth distribution of new participants quite well. This result is surpris-
ing because of the model’s parsimony. Given that our goal is to ask how 
far a benchmark model can go in explaining the data, we refrain from 
adding parameters that would ﬁne-tune the model’s ﬁt but cannot be 
quantitatively disciplined in a straightforward way (e.g., ﬁxed costs of 
delegation).

The model’s consistency with the data also indirectly supports our 
main DiD identiﬁcation assumption. In the model, the diﬀerence in the 
reduction’s eﬀect on the middle versus the upper class reﬂects the ef-
fect of relaxing minimum-account constraints, by construction. This is 
exactly what we assume in our DiD research design, thereby supporting 
the validity of the estimates.

To gain more conﬁdence in the model, we examine whether it can 
match  other  features  of  the  data.  Table 6 evaluates  the  model’s  ﬁt 
through three other sets of statistics. Panel (a) reports the pre-reduction 
and post-reduction share of investors from the middle-class. This share 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382915M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Table 5
Model parameters.

Parameter

Value

Source

Summarized in Table 4
Summarized in Appendix Table A13

Portfolio Dataset
Portfolio Dataset

(a) Portfolio Parameters:
Idiosyncratic Volatility (𝜎𝜖,𝑖)
Factor Loadings (𝛽𝑖)

(b) Asset Pricing Factors:

Market Factor, Mean
Market Factor, Volatility
Fama-French Factors
Bond Factors

(c) Preferences:
Coeﬃcient of Relative Risk Aversion (𝛾)
Discount Factor (𝛿)

4
0.95

0.076
0.147
Appendix Table A14
Appendix Table A14

CRSP
CRSP
French
Barclays

Standard
Standard

(d) Labor Income Parameters:
Age Proﬁle (𝑓 (𝑥))
Permanent Shock Volatility (𝜎𝜐)
Temporary Shock Volatility (𝜎𝜉 )
Correlation with Financial Return (𝜌𝑌 )
Probability of Disaster (𝜙)

(e) Other Parameters:
Risk-Free Rate (𝑅𝑓 )
, 𝑇 ])
Pre-Retirement Age Range ([𝑡
0
Range of Survival Rates ([𝑝(𝑇 ), 𝑝(𝑡

0)])

0.1682 ⋅ 𝑥 − 0.0323 ⋅ 𝑥2∕10 + 0.002 ⋅ 𝑥3∕100
0.103
0.271
0.003
0.001

CGM
CGM
CGM
CGM
SCF

0.002
[25, 65]
[0.865, 0.999]

French
Standard
CDC

Note: This table summarizes the baseline calibration of the portfolio choice model in Section 6. 
Panel (a) notes the location of the table summarizing portfolio parameters. Panel (b) summarizes 
asset pricing factors, presenting the mean and volatility of the market factor and notes the location 
of the tables summarizing the other factors. Factor moments are calibrated using the means and 
covariances evaluated over the longest available time series over 1960-2017. Panel (c) summarizes 
preference parameters. Panel (d) summarizes parameters of the labor income process. Note that: a 
correlation between log labor income and ﬁnancial returns of 𝜌𝑌 = 0.3% corresponds to a loading of 
0.007; the probability of labor income disaster is calculated as the share of investors with zero total 
income (Carroll 1997), using the 2016 SCF. Panel (e) summarizes other parameters: the risk-free 
rate corresponds to the average one-month Treasury yield in 2016; investors begin their problem at 
age 𝑡
0, retire after age 𝑇 , and leave the model at 𝑇 = 100; and the survival rate corresponds to the 
probability that an investor of age 𝑡 survives until age 𝑡 + 1, and it is monotonically decreasing in 
age. Column (3) reports the source of each value: CRSP denotes the annually-updated stock ﬁle from 
CRSP; French denotes Ken French’s website; Barclays denotes the Bloomberg-Barclays aggregate U.S. 
and unhedged global bond indices; CGM denotes Cocco et al. (2005); CDC denotes the Center for 
Disease Control’s mortality tables; SCF denotes the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances; and Portfolio 
Dataset denotes the paper’s portfolio dataset summarized in Table 4. Appendix A has details on these 
data sources.

is  essentially  a  weighted  average  of  the  second  and  third  quintiles 
shown  in  Fig. 9.  Panel  (b)  reports  the  risky  share  for  new  and  ex-
isting middle-class participants. The model matches the data well on 
average,  though  producing  a  lower  risky  share  for  new  middle-class 
participants.  Lastly,  panel  (c)  presents  the  model-implied  stock  mar-
ket participation rate, after adding standard stock market participation 
costs (Section 7.4.2). Interestingly, the model matches the U.S. stock 
market participation rate very well.

These ﬁndings suggest that middle-class investors seek robo advi-
sors largely because of the portfolio-level advantages that they confer. 
In particular, these advantages alone can mostly explain the empirical 
eﬀects of the reduction. This interpretation accords with surveys, which 
report improved asset allocation as a major reason why retail investors 
seek robo advisors (Rossi and Utkus 2021a; Costa and Henshaw 2022). 
We return to the question of why investors cannot replicate the robo 
portfolio on their own in our conclusion.

7.2.  Welfare gains

tion. Let 𝑉
𝑖 and 𝑉 𝑖 denote the value functions under the minimums of 
$5,000 and $500, respectively. Appendix C shows that this welfare gain 
equals:
(

− 1.

(10)

) 1
1−𝛾

𝑞𝑖 =

𝑉 𝑖
𝑉

𝑖

Table 7 reports various calculations of equation (10). Panel (a) re-
ports the welfare gain under various speciﬁcations of the self-managed 
portfolio. We focus primarily on the ﬁrst row of panel (a), in which self-
managed portfolios are calibrated using investors’ actual allocations in 
the portfolio dataset as described in Section 6.2.1. Column (1) shows 
that the baseline welfare gain equals 0.77% of lifetime consumption, 
which is moderate by the standards of the literature, per footnote 4. For 
reference, this gain lies within the range of gains from correcting var-
ious investment mistakes in the analogous speciﬁcation of Cocco et al. 
(2005), such as ignoring labor income (0.65%) or not investing in risky 
assets (1.04%).

We  move  to  the  model’s  second  purpose:  computing  the  welfare 
gains from access to robo advisors. We are particularly interested in 
the channels that drive any welfare gains and the distribution of these 
gains. As standard, we measure investor 𝑖’s welfare gain by the per-
cent increase in annual consumption under the previous minimum that 
raises their expected lifetime utility by the same amount as the reduc-

7.2.1.  Human capital and heterogeneous welfare gains by age

We  next  examine  how  welfare  gains  vary  by  age.  Returning  the 
benchmark comparison group based on actual self-managed portfolios, 
the results in columns (2)-(4) show that new participants older than 55 
gain almost three times as much (1.68%) as new participants aged 35 
or younger (0.58%). This ﬁnding challenges robo advisors’ popular im-

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382916M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Note: This ﬁgure summarizes investors’ optimal participation, portfolio choice, and savings behavior (i.e., policy rules) under a $5,000 account minimum, based on 
the model in Section 6. Panel (a) plots the savings rate, which is the ratio of the investor’s total savings to cash-on-hand. Total savings is the diﬀerence between 
cash-on-hand and consumption. Panel (b) plots the share of the investor’s total savings allocated to either the robo portfolio or the self-managed portfolio. Panel (c) 
plots the share of the investor’s savings allocated to the robo portfolio. Panel (d) plots the threshold of liquid assets at which the investor participates with the robo 
advisor, by 5-year age bin. Policy rules are averaged across years in each age bin. Appendix C contains discussion and details.

Fig. 8. Model mechanics. Policy rules under the previous minimum of $5,000.

age and their claim to “build our products and services for millennials” 
(e.g., Hutchins 2020).

The  central  explanation  for  this  diﬀerence  lies  in  human  capital. 
Older investors have fewer remaining working years, as well as non-
increasing earnings growth. Consequently, they may fail to reach the 
wealth threshold at which it becomes optimal to participate with the 
robo advisor before retirement, under a $5,000 minimum. By contrast, 
younger investors may eventually accumulate enough earnings to be-
come robo investors even under this higher minimum. As a result, older 
investors beneﬁt more from the reduction than their younger peers. This 
argument is especially relevant in the context of the overall U.S. popu-
lation, in which investors with modest wealth comprise a large share of 
investors past their peak earnings years (Appendix Fig. A4).

We sharpen this explanation by asking how many years it would take 
for a robo non-participant to accumulate enough wealth to become a 
robo participant under a minimum of $5,000. We simulate 5,000 life cy-
cles of robo participation from various starting ages. We next calculate 
the average number of years until the investor’s ﬁrst robo investment 

across simulations. We normalize this average by dividing it by the re-
maining years in the investor’s working life.24

Fig. 10 shows that a 55 year-old who does not participate under 
a $5,000 minimum would continue to be a robo non-participant for 
around half of her remaining working life. By contrast, a similar 25 
year-old would spend only around 3% of her life as a non-participant. 
This  result  corroborates  the  previous  intuition:  the  55  year-old  has 
stronger demand for robo portfolios because she is much less likely to 
accumulate enough earnings to overcome the higher minimum.25

24 The starting level of liquid assets equals $6,000 in each simulation, which 
is the 40th percentile of the U.S. wealth distribution (i.e., the midpoint of the 
middle class). The starting level of permanent income 𝜈𝑖,𝑡 equals the average 
value among investors who have accumulated less than $6,000 by the time 
they reach the starting age.
25 This ﬁnding does not contradict column (3) of Table 2 because it shows 
that the magnitude of the welfare gain varies by age, whereas Table 2 shows 
that the eﬀect on participation does not vary by age. In particular, any investor 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382917M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Note: This ﬁgure plots the share of robo participants from each quintile of the 
U.S. wealth distribution, based on the portfolio choice model in Section 6. The 
shares are shown by the open circles. Explicitly, ﬁgure shows the distribution 
across wealth quintiles for participants who ﬁnd it optimal to participate under 
the previous minimum (Existing Participants) and for those who ﬁnd it opti-
mal to participate under the reduced minimum (New Participants). The overall 
number of existing and new participants is calculated by aggregating investor-
level policy functions across the bins of age and liquid assets that deﬁne the 
state space, weighting by share of the 2016 SCF population within each bin. 
For reference, the bars plot the empirical share of robo participants from each 
quintile of the U.S. wealth distribution, already shown in Fig. 3. The remaining 
notes are the same as in Fig. 3.

Fig. 9. Rationalizing the data with a benchmark model of asset allocation.

Note: This ﬁgure plots the amount of time until a middle-class investor ﬁrst 
participates with the robo advisor under an account minimum of $5,000. The 
amount of time is calculated based on 5,000 simulated paths of the model in 
Section 6. The outcome variable equals the average number of years until an 
investor who begins age 𝑡 with $6,000 in liquid assets becomes a robo partici-
pant, where 𝑡 equals one of the values shown on the x-axis. The number of years 
until participation is then normalized by the number of years until the investor 
retires. The starting level of liquid assets of $6,000 equals the 40thpercentile of 
the U.S. wealth distribution. The starting level of permanent income, 𝜈𝑖,𝑡, is cho-
sen to match the average value of permanent income among investors who have 
reached age 𝑡 with less than $6,000 in liquid assets. We obtain 𝜈𝑖,𝑡 by separately 
simulating the life cycle of 5,000 investors starting at age 25 and calculating 
the distribution of 𝜈𝑖,𝑡 at each subsequent age. Explicitly, 𝜈𝑖,𝑡 = −0.03 × (𝑡 − 25).

Fig. 10. Understanding why middle-age investors gain more.

Table 6
Rationalizing the data with a benchmark model of asset allocation.

Model

Data

Source

(1)

(2)

(3)

(a) Baseline Model, Robo Participation:
Pre-Reduction Share from Middle-Class
Post-Reduction Share from Middle-Class

(b) Baseline Model, Risky Share:

Risky Share, Existing Middle-Class
Risky Share, New Middle-Class

14.9%
43.1%

12.6%
28.4%

Deposits Dataset

32.3%
21.4%

31.1%
30.6%

Deposits Dataset

(c) Model with Participation Costs:
Stock Market Participation, Middle-Class

17.3%

19.1%

SCF

Note: This table compares various model-implied statistics with their empiri-
cal counterparts, which assesses whether the quasi-experimental evidence can 
be rationalized using the portfolio choice model from Section 6. Panel (a) sum-
marizes the share of robo participants from the middle class before and after 
the reduction, calculated as follows: in the model, we compute the share of 
participants from the middle class among those who ﬁnd it optimal to partic-
ipate under the previous minimum and under the reduced minimum; in the 
data, we compute the share of participants from the middle class among those 
who participate before the reduction in minimum and who become partici-
pants after the reduction. Panel (b) summarizes the average portfolio share 
allocated to the robo advisor for existing and new middle-class robo par-
ticipants, calculated as follows: in the model, we compute the average robo 
portfolio share 𝛼
𝑖,𝑡 among middle and upper class participants who ﬁnd it opti-
mal to participate under the previous minimum and the reduced minimum; in 
the data, we compute the ratio of robo investment to liquid assets among mid-
dle class investors during the pre-reduction period, for existing participants, 
and over the post-reduction period, for new participants. Panel (c) summa-
rizes the share of middle-class investors who participate in the stock market, 
calculated as follows: in the model, we compute the share of middle-class in-
vestors who invest in either the robo portfolio or the self-managed portfolio 
before the reduction; in the data, we compute the share of middle-class in-
vestors who invest in the stock market, based on the 2016 SCF as described in 
Appendix A. The statistics in panel (c) are based on a variant of the baseline 
model in which investors incur a per-period cost of 𝜅 = $200 when investing 
in the self-managed portfolio (Appendix C.4), since it is well-known that port-
folio choice models generally do not deliver limited stock market participation 
without a ﬁxed cost. All model-implied statistics aggregate investor-level pol-
icy functions across the bins of age and liquid assets that deﬁne the state space, 
weighting by the share of the 2016 SCF within each bin. The remaining notes 
are the same as in Table 2.

7.3.  Portfolio characteristics that drive the results

By construction, any welfare improvement in the model must reﬂect 
a diﬀerence between robo and self-managed portfolio characteristics. 
We next assess each characteristic’s welfare impact to infer the sources 
of middle-class investors’ demand for wealth management.

7.3.1.  Inference through counterfactual robo portfolios

Our most direct approach to this question calculates the welfare gain 
from  reducing  the  minimum  on  a  counterfactual  robo  portfolio  that 
no longer diﬀers from the self-managed portfolio in terms of a given 
characteristic. The diﬀerence between the counterfactual gain and the 
baseline gain in panel (a) tells us how important that characteristic is 
from a welfare perspective.26

with a positive welfare gain will choose to participate. So, our model interprets 
Table 2 as saying that the probability of experiencing a positive gain does not 
vary by age, even though older investors gain more overall. Consistent with this 
interpretation, we replicate column (3) of Table 2 in our model and ﬁnd that 
the average change in the probability of robo participation for investors under 
age 50 (+20 pps) is almost the same as for investors above age 50 (+19 pps).
26 An alternative approach would be to remove diﬀerences in characteristics 
one after another. However, this approach might understate or overstate the 
gains from each characteristic. For example, if we ﬁrst remove the diﬀerence 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382918M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

Table 7
Distribution of welfare gains and channels that drive the gains.

Increase in Lifetime Consumption

Middle Class

Pooled

Age 25-35

Age 36-55

Age 56-65

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(a) Welfare Gain From the Reduction:

0.77%

0.58%

0.59%

1.68%

(b) Gain from Reduction on Counterfactual Robo Portfolios:

(i) Asset Allocation Counterfactuals
Same Idiosyncratic Risk as Self-Managed Portfolio
Same Market Loading as Self-Managed Portfolio
Same Value and Size Loadings as Self-Managed Portfolio
Same Bond Loadings as Self-Managed Portfolio

(ii) Glide Path Counterfactuals
No Adjustment for Age
No Adjustment for Wealth
No Adjustment for Age or Wealth

(c) Gain Compared to Hypothetical Self-Managed Portfolios:

Compared to Stock Index Fund
Compared to Target Date Fund

0.22%
0.71%
0.46%
0.20%

0.11%
0.54%
0.32%
0.15%

0.34%
0.37%
0.24%

0.34%
0.33%
0.26%

0.72%
0.23%

0.47%
0.16%

0.10%
0.51%
0.26%
0.10%

0.20%
0.23%
0.15%

0.52%
0.17%

0.80%
1.60%
1.31%
0.58%

0.73%
0.88%
0.44%

1.84%
0.47%

Note: This table summarizes the average welfare gain for investors who participate with the robo advisor 
under the reduced minimum but not under the previous minimum, based on the portfolio choice model in 
Section 6. Welfare gains are measured by the percent increase in annual consumption under the previous 
minimum that raises an investor’s expected lifetime utility by the same amount as the reduction, as in 
equation (10). Panel (a) summarizes the average of this statistic for all new middle-class participants in 
column (1), and columns (2)-(4) do so for various age bins. Panel (b) summarizes the welfare gain when the 
minimum is reduced on a counterfactual robo portfolio, which helps assess the channels that contribute to 
the result in (a). The counterfactual portfolios in panel (b.i) constrain the parameters of the robo portfolio 
for investor 𝑖 to equal those of the self-managed portfolio for investor 𝑖. The constraints are: the same 
idiosyncratic risk (𝜎
𝜖,𝑖 = 𝜎
𝑀𝐾𝑇 ,𝑖); the same loading 
on value and size factors (𝛽
𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖); and same the loadings on the U.S. and global 
bond factors (𝛽
𝑈 𝑆𝐵,𝑖, 𝛽
𝐺𝐿𝐵,𝑖). The counterfactual portfolios in panel (b.ii) shut down 
adjustment in the parameters of the robo portfolio (𝛽
𝜖,𝑖) by investor characteristics. The adjustments 
𝑖
that are shut down are: age, so that robo portfolios only adjust for liquid assets (No Adjustment for Age); 
liquid assets, so that robo portfolios only adjust for age (No Adjustment for Wealth); and both age and liquid 
assets, so that robo portfolios do not adjust at all (No Adjustment for Age or Wealth). Panel (c) performs a 
similar calculation as in panel (a) after specifying a hypothetical self-managed portfolio as the comparison 
group: Vanguard’s Total Stock Market ETF (VTI); and the Vanguard TDF in which an investor of a given 
age 𝑡 in 2015 and retirement age 65 would invest. The remaining notes are the same as in Table 2.

𝜖,𝑖); the same loading on the market factor (𝛽
𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖 = 𝛽
𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖 = 𝛽

𝑀𝐾𝑇 ,𝑖 = 𝛽

𝑈 𝑆𝐵,𝑖 = 𝛽

𝐺𝐿𝐵,𝑖 = 𝛽

𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖, 𝛽

, 𝜎

𝜖,𝑖) and to priced risk (𝛽

We report the results in panel (b) of Table 7, starting with diﬀer-
ences in exposure to idiosyncratic risk (𝜎
𝑖 ). 
Column (1) shows a substantially smaller welfare gain of 0.23% if the 
diversiﬁcation beneﬁt of robo portfolios is stripped away (i.e., no re-
duction  in  𝜎
𝜖,𝑖).  Similarly,  we  obtain  a  gain  of  0.2%  if  we  remove 
the diﬀerence in robo portfolios’ bond exposure. This reﬂects the rela-
tively high Sharpe ratio of bonds discussed in Section 6.2.1. By contrast, 
constraining robo portfolios to provide the same stock market beta as 
self-managed portfolios results in almost the same welfare gain (0.72%). 
This ﬁnding reﬂects how self-managed and robo portfolios already have 
similar stock market exposures. Lastly, removing the diﬀerence in value 
(HML) and size (SMB) exposures results in a smaller gain of 0.46%. This 
gain arises because self-managed portfolios have less exposure to value 
stocks (Appendix Table A13).

in idiosyncratic risk, the gain equals 0.23% (a decline of 0.54 pps). By con-
struction, removing any other characteristic after this will not reduce the gain 
by more than 0.23%. Based on this result, one may conclude that the diﬀer-
ence in idiosyncratic risk is the most important. However, if we ﬁrst remove 
the diﬀerence in bond loadings, the gain is an even smaller 0.20% (a decline 
of 0.57 pps). The order of removals matters because the consumption metric 
is a nonlinear function of the welfare change, in utils, and because there are 
complementarities between diﬀerent characteristics. Therefore, we undertake a 
more conservative approach, removing one characteristic at a time.

We next consider the welfare eﬀects of the double glide path. We 
constrain the robo portfolio’s asset allocation: to vary by wealth, but 
not by age; to vary by age, but not by wealth; and to neither vary by 
age nor by wealth. Panel (b.ii) reports the welfare gain from reducing 
the minimum on these counterfactual robo portfolios. We ﬁnd equally 
smaller gains when removing the adjustment for age (0.34%) or the 
adjustment for wealth (0.37%). This result suggests that middle-class 
investors value both adjustments comparably. Column (4) shows that 
the adjustment by age is particularly important for older investors.27

Our  counterfactual  analysis  suggests  that  middle-class  investors 
value  both  basic  and  sophisticated  characteristics  of  robo  portfolios. 
At a basic level, robo portfolios add value through improving diversi-
ﬁcation. On its own, this ﬁnding may suggest that robo advisors may 

27 Personalization by wealth can improve welfare because the two-fund the-
orem (Tobin 1958) does not hold in our setting. One reason concerns labor 
income (e.g., Campbell and Viceira 2002). Intuitively, labor income functions 
like an endowed risky asset. Therefore, the optimal asset allocation, as en-
coded by the loadings 𝛽
𝑖 , will generically depend on the share of income in 
total wealth, which, in turn, depends on both the investor’s age and wealth. 
Additionally, the two-fund theorem does not necessarily hold because the ac-
count minimum and the implicit borrowing constraint place bounds on the risky 
share. Lastly, while each household has an optimal robo allocation, the actual 
robo allocation only approximates the optimal one. Personalization raises wel-
fare insofar as it moves a household closer to her optimal allocation.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382919M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

oﬀer similar beneﬁts as buying an index fund. However, investors also 
place signiﬁcant value on arguably more-sophisticated characteristics, 
like exposure to additional stock and bond risk factors and a double 
glide path by age and wealth. Combining these characteristics with im-
proved diversiﬁcation is important for generating welfare gains, as we 
shall see from the next approach that directly computes the welfare gain 
for someone who already invests in an index fund.

7.3.2.  Inference through hypothetical comparison groups

The previous approach asks how much actual investors would gain 
when reducing the minimum on a counterfactual robo portfolio. Sym-
metrically, one can also ask how much a counterfactual investor would 
gain when again reducing the minimum on an actual robo portfolio. 
To do so, we reperform the baseline welfare calculation in panel (a) of 
Table 7 after replacing the self-managed portfolio with an alternative 
comparison. Motivated by the results in panel (b), we specify two com-
parisons: a stock index fund, speciﬁcally Vanguard’s Total Stock Market 
ETF (VTI); and the Vanguard TDF with a target year that an investor 
seeking to retire at age 65 would have chosen in 2015.

Panel (c) of Table 7 summarizes the results. A new middle-class par-
ticipant whose risky portfolio would consist only of VTI without the 
reduction gains 0.72% in lifetime consumption, or around 90% of the 
gain  for  one  who  would  otherwise  invest  as  do  the  investors  in  our 
data. So, while robo portfolios partly resemble a stock index fund, as 
suggested by Reher and Sun (2019), investors appear to value charac-
teristics of robo portfolios that go beyond this similarity. Otherwise, this 
hypothetical investor would have experienced no gain.28

Next, consider a hypothetical middle-class participant whose risky 
portfolio would have consisted of a Vanguard TDF without the reduc-
tion. To focus the comparison on asset allocation, we ignore the fact that 
this TDF itself has an account minimum of $1,000, which means we pro-
vide a lower bound on the welfare gain. Accordingly, this hypothetical 
investor gains 0.23% in lifetime consumption, or one-third of the gain 
for a participant who would have otherwise invested as investors actu-
ally do in our data.29 On the one hand, both TDFs and robo portfolios 
go beyond a stock index fund by giving investors access to bond risk 
factors and by adjusting their allocation as they age, as documented in 
Appendix Fig. A7. This similarity explains why we ﬁnd a smaller gain 
for a hypothetical investor who already invests in a TDF. On the other 
hand, robo portfolios also adjust for changes in the investor’s wealth, 
which explains why the gains are still non-trivially positive. Quantita-
tively, the results make sense in light of the companion exercise in panel 
(b), which ﬁnds gains of the same magnitude when removing the dis-
tinguishing features of TDFs from robo portfolios (bond exposure and 
age glide paths).

Based on our ﬁndings from this subsection, we conclude that the 
recent growth in the robo market diﬀers from the concurrent growth ob-
served in index funds and TDFs. While these trends share a connection, 
the distinction lies in the fact that investors would still gain from access 
to robo advisors even if they already invested in one of these alternative 
products. This is because robo portfolios introduce additional layers of 

28 This ﬁnding does not contradict the large gains from diversiﬁcation implied 
by panel (b.i) because the eﬃcient benchmark in our model is not necessarily 
a stock index fund. In particular, returns do not follow the CAPM but rather 
the factor model in equation (8), which accounts for multiple stock and bond 
risk factors. This also explains why the distribution of welfare gains across age 
is more pronounced relative to panel (a). Speciﬁcally, investors in our data 
do have some exposure to bond factors. Since tilting towards bonds and away 
from stocks is optimal for older investors (Fig. 8), the actual older investors in 
our data gain less from the reduction than their hypothetical peer who would 
otherwise invest only in VTI.
29 We obtain a similar gain of 0.16% when using the Fidelity Freedom Fund 
TDF as the comparison (Appendix Table A18). Most TDF target years vary in 
5 year increments, and so we assign investors to the TDF that would deliver a 
retirement age between 65 and 69 based on their age in 2015.

sophistication beyond the features already in TDFs and, especially, in 
index funds. Hence, even a hypothetical investor with a relatively so-
phisticated approach of investing in TDFs would nevertheless beneﬁt 
from accessing robo portfolios. In a broader context, this ﬁnding aligns 
with the advisor’s mantra that “everyone deserves sophisticated invest-
ment advice”, emphasizing that a signiﬁcant portion of the gains from 
accessing robo portfolios stems from their more advanced characteris-
tics.

7.4.  Additional analysis

7.4.1.  Heterogeneity by pre-participation, initial deposit, and wealth

Our main welfare results in Table 7 restrict to new robo participants, 
but it is possible that existing robo participants also gain from the re-
duction. Indeed, over half of existing middle-class participants invested 
precisely $5,000 as their initial deposit, per Table 1. Such investors may 
have wanted to invest less than $5,000 were it not for the account min-
imum, but they nevertheless prefer investing precisely $5,000 to not 
investing at all. Reducing the account minimum to $500 enables such 
investors to reduce their robo allocation to its optimal level. Panel (a) 
of Appendix Table A16 uses the model to calculate the welfare gain for 
all middle-class robo participants, including existing ones who experi-
ence positive gains. The overall gain equals 0.62%, which is a weighted 
average of the 0.77% gain for new participants already shown in Ta-
ble 7 and a much smaller 0.05% gain for existing participants. Thus, 
the intensive margin eﬀect on existing participants attenuates the ex-
tensive margin eﬀect on new participants, leading to a smaller welfare 
gain for middle-class participants overall than for new middle-class par-
ticipants.30

Panel (b) of Appendix Table A16 again restricts to new robo partici-
pants, and it separately calculates the welfare gains for investors whose 
initial deposit lies in various ranges below $5,000. We ﬁnd gains of 
0.86%, 0.70%, and 0.55% for investors with an initial deposit in the 
ranges from $500 to $2,000, from $2,000 to $3,500, and from $3,500 
to $4,500, respectively. Panel (c) performs a similar exercise in terms 
of the investor’s wealth quintile, ﬁnding a larger gain of 1.21% for new 
robo participants in the second U.S. wealth quintile versus 0.52% for 
those in the third quintile. The economic intuition for these ﬁndings re-
ﬂects how the optimal robo investment is increasing in the investor’s 
wealth (Fig. 8).31 Without the reduction, therefore, new participants 
from the second quintile would have required a longer time to accumu-

30 An analogy can be drawn between this ﬁnding and the analysis of exten-
sive and intensive margin eﬀects in Reher and Sun (2019). Speciﬁcally, Reher 
and Sun (2019) demonstrate that reducing the account minimum increases log 
participant inﬂow from less-wealthy investors by twice as much as it raises log 
dollar inﬂow. In their context, extensive versus intensive margins pertain to the 
number of accounts versus dollars-per-account: the reduction raises the num-
ber of less-wealthy participants (extensive margin); however, due to their small 
account size (intensive margin), the eﬀect on participant inﬂow surpasses the 
eﬀect on deposit inﬂow. In our contribution, our focus lies on understanding 
the drivers and distribution of welfare. Therefore, the concept of extensive ver-
sus intensive margins pertains to welfare gains for new versus existing robo 
participants. Speciﬁcally, Appendix Table A16 suggests a signiﬁcant eﬀect on 
new robo participants (extensive margin) but a minor eﬀect on existing ones 
(intensive margin), leading to a more muted overall gain. Just as the intensive 
margin in Reher and Sun (2019) attenuates the reduction’s eﬀect on overall dol-
lar inﬂow from their deﬁnition of the less-wealthy, the intensive margin in our 
setting attenuates the reduction’s impact on overall welfare gains for the middle 
class.
31 Returning to the data, Appendix Table A17 substantiates this point by re-
tabulating  several  of  the  summary  statistics  from  Table 1 according  to  the 
investor’s initial deposit and wealth quintile. Consistent with the model, the 
results in panels (a)-(b) of Appendix Table A17 imply that new participants 
from the second wealth quintile make smaller initial deposits relative to those 
from the third quintile, and also relative to existing participants from the second 
quintile.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382920M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

late enough wealth to be willing to invest, relative to new participants 
from the third quintile. Consequently, they value the reduction in ac-
count minimum much more.

Collectively,  these  ﬁndings  imply  that  the  reduction  yields  the 
largest gains for middle-class investors who respond by making very 
small initial deposits (e.g., under $2,000). However, their larger gains 
are diluted by smaller gains for either existing participants or new par-
ticipants who do not make such a small deposit.

7.4.2.  Model extensions and robustness

Appendix C.4 describes various extensions and robustness exercises, 

with results in Appendix Table A18. Brieﬂy summarizing:

Participation Costs. We calculate a higher welfare gain of 1.23% 
when,  as  in  Vissing-Jørgensen  (2002),  investors  incur  a  per-period 
cost of holding the self-managed portfolio ($200). This gain is of the 
same  order  of  magnitude  as  our  baseline  gain,  reﬂecting  how  non-
participation in the stock market leads to modest welfare losses if the 
alternative  is  investing  ineﬃciently  on  one’s  own  (e.g.,  Calvet  et  al. 
2007).

Borrowing. Allowing investors to borrow at the interest rate on con-
sumer credit has little impact on the results. Intuitively, borrowing to 
invest in the robo portfolio would be suboptimal given the high interest 
rate on consumer credit.

Alternative Calibrations. Weﬁnd similar results when: recalibrat-
ing the portfolio parameters by using the parameters in Calvet et al. 
(2007); and recalibrating the preference parameters 𝛾 and 𝛿 in various 
ways. The appendix also estimates these parameters via GMM, ﬁnding 
similar values as in our baseline parameterization (𝛾 = 5.1, 𝛿 = 0.92) 
and a gain of 1.19%.

Procyclical Income. Lastly, we parameterize 𝜌𝑌 = 80%, such that 
labor income becomes more stock-like. Thus, contrary to the glide paths 
found among traditional TDFs, the optimal risky share increases in age 
(e.g., Benzoni et al. 2007; Lynch and Tan 2011). On the one hand, such 
a  parameterization  should  theoretically  lower  the  value  of  investing 
with  the  robo  advisor,  as  doing  so  increases  the  investor’s  total  risk 
through correlation between labor and ﬁnancial income. On the other 
hand, this correlation reduces an investor’s unconstrained-optimal risky 
share, which makes investing under a lower minimum especially valu-
able. Moreover, concerning glide paths, the advisor’s double adjustment 
by age and wealth attenuates the loss from how the age glide path re-
duces priced risk over the life cycle. On net, these forces approximately 
cancel out, leading to almost the same results as in our baseline calcu-
lation.

8.  Conclusions

We draw two conclusions. First, wealth management is not necessar-
ily a luxury service, and many middle-class investors have substantial 
demand for it. Recent FinTech innovation, in the form of robo advi-
sors, can accommodate that demand. Robo advisors do so by using new 
technologies to expand access to sophisticated investing, thus providing 
retail investors with advanced features such as double glide paths and 
exposure to multiple risk factors. We provide novel evidence that these 
relatively-sophisticated features are an important driver of demand for 
robo advisors, and, quantitatively, they are at least as important for ex-
plaining this demand as more-basic features, like diversiﬁed exposure 
to the stock market. Expanding access leads to moderate gains over-
all for investors, but these gains vary considerably and are largest for 
older, lower-middle-class investors. These results help explain why the 
market for automated wealth management has continued to grow, both 
independently and within the traditional ﬁnancial sector, despite the 
existence of products like index funds and TDFs.

Second, our results support models of bounded rationality in which 
retail  investors  optimally  seek  professional  management  given  limits 
on  their  ability  to  invest  with  the  same  level  of  sophistication  as  a 
professional manager. By gaining access to robo advisors, less-wealthy 

investors experience moderate welfare gains. We leave open the ques-
tion  of  why  households  do  not  invest  like  a  professional,  as  well  as 
whether these results extend to hybrid wealth management that does 
not rely fully on automation.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Michael Reher: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Stanislav Sokolinski: Writ-
ing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Valida-
tion, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Method-
ology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have nothing to disclose.

Data availability

The  code  and  data  of  the  article  can  be  found  at  https://data .

mendeley .com /datasets /3f88g2cb7x /2.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103829.

References

Anal. J.

Asness, C.S., Frazzini, A., Pedersen, L.H., 2012. Leverage aversion and risk parity. Financ. 

Bachas, P., Gertler, P., Higgins, S., Seira, E., 2018. Digital ﬁnancial services go a long 
way: transaction costs and ﬁnancial inclusion. In: AEA Papers and Proceedings.
Bachas, P., Gertler, P., Higgins, S., Seira, E., 2020. How debit cards enable the poor to 

Balduzzi, P., Reuter, J., 2019. Heterogeneity in target date funds: strategic risk-taking or 

save more. J. Finance.

risk matching? Rev. Financ. Stud.

Barber, B.M., Huang, X., Odean, T., Schwarz, C., 2022. Attention induced trading and 

returns: evidence from robinhood users. J. Finance.

Barberis, N., Huang, M., Thaler, R.H., 2006. Individual preferences, monetary gambles, 

and stock market participation: a case for narrow framing. Am. Econ. Rev.

Bartlett, R., Morse, A., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2021. Consumer-lending discrimination 

Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F., Kim, B., Moussawi, R., 2022. Competition for attention in the 

in the FinTech era. J. Financ. Econ.

ETF space. Rev. Financ. Stud.

Benzoni, L., Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S., 2007. Portfolio choice over the life-cycle 

when the stock and labor markets are cointegrated. J. Finance.

Bhattacharya, U., Hackethal, A., Kaesler, S., Loos, B., Meyer, S., 2012. Is unbiased ﬁ-
nancial advice to retail investors suﬃcient? Answers from a large ﬁeld study. Rev. 
Financ. Stud.

Bianchi, M., 2018. Financial literacy and portfolio dynamics. J. Finance.
Bianchi, M., Briére, M., 2022. Augmenting Investment Decisions with Robo-Advice.
Bombardini, M., Trebbi, F., 2012. Risk aversion and expected utility theory: an experi-

ment with large and small stakes. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc.

Calvet, L.E., Campbell, J., Sodini, P., 2007. Down or out: assessing the welfare costs of 

household investment mistakes. J. Polit. Econ.

Calvet, L.E., Campbell, J.Y., Sodini, P., 2009. Fight or ﬂight: portfolio rebalancing by 

individual investors. Q. J. Econ.

Campbell, J.Y., Cocco, a.F.J., Gomes, F.J., Maenhout, P.J., 2001. Investing Retirement 
Wealth: A Life-Cycle Model, Risk Aspects of Investment-Based Social Security Reform.
Campbell, J.Y., Viceira, L.M., 2002. Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for Long-

Term Investors. Oxford University Press.

Carroll, C.D., 1997. Buﬀer-stock saving and the life cycle/permanent income hypothesis. 

Chalmers, J., Reuter, J., 2020. Is conﬂicted investment advice better than no advice? 

Chodorow-Reich, G., Nenov, P.T., Simsek, A., 2021. Stock market wealth and the real 

economy: a local labor market approach. Am. Econ. Rev.

Christelis, D., Jappelli, T., Padula, M., 2010. Cognitive abilities and portfolio choice. Eur. 

Q. J. Econ.

J. Financ. Econ.

Econ. Rev.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382921M. Reher and S. Sokolinski

the life cycle. Rev. Financ. Stud.

cial outcomes. Rev. Financ. Stud.

Cocco, J.F., Gomes, F.J., Maenhout, P.J., 2005. Consumption and portfolio choice over 

Hvide, H.K., Meling, T.G., Mogstad, M., Vestad, O.L., 2023. Broadband Internet and the 

Cole, S., Paulson, A., Shastry, G.K., 2014. Smart money? The eﬀect of education on ﬁnan-

Jurek, J.W., Viceira, L.M., 2011. Optimal value and growth tilts in long-horizon portfolios. 

stock market investments of individual investors. J. Finance.

Rev. Finance.

Cookson, A.J., Engelberg, J.E., Mullins, W., 2023. Echo chambers. Rev. Financ. Stud.
Costa, P., Henshaw, J.E., 2022. Quantifying the Investor’s View on the Value of Human 

and Robo-Advice. Vanguard Research Report.

Kaniel, R., Parham, R., 2017. WSJ category kings - the impact of media attention on 

consumer and mutual fund investment decisions. J. Financ. Econ.

Linnainmaa, J.T., Melzer, B.T., Previtero, A., 2021. The misguided beliefs of ﬁnancial 

D’Acunto, F., Prabhala, N., Rossi, A.G., 2019. The Promises and Pitfalls of Robo-Advising, 

advisors. J. Finance.

Review of Financial Studies.

Loos, B., Previtero, A., Scheurle, S., Hackethal, A., 2020. Robo-advisers and Investor Be-

D’Acunto, F., Rossi, A.G., 2020. Robo-advising. In: Rau, R., Wardrop, R., Zingales, L. 

havior.

(Eds.), Palgrave Macmillan Handbook of Technological Finance.

Deaton, A., 1991. Savings and liquidity constraints. Econometrica.
D’Hondt, C., De Winne, R., Ghysels, E., Raymond, S., 2020. Artiﬁcial intelligence alter 

egos: who might beneﬁt from robo-investing? J. Empir. Finance.

Lucas, R.E., 1987. Models of Business Cycles. Oxford University Press.
Lynch, A.W., Tan, S., 2011. Labor income dynamics at business-cycle frequencies: impli-

cations for portfolio choice. J. Financ. Econ.

Merton, R.C., 1980. On estimating the expected return on the market: an exploratory 

Egan, M., 2019. Brokers versus retail investors: conﬂicting interests and dominated prod-

investigation. J. Financ. Econ.

ucts. J. Finance.

J. Financ. Econ.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. 

advisory. Deloitte Technical Report.

Foerster, S., Linnainmaa, J.T., Melzer, B.T., Previtero, A., 2017. Retail ﬁnancial advice: 

Study. NBER Working Paper.

does one size ﬁt all? J. Finance.

Fuster, A., Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Ramadorai, T., Walther, A., 2021. Predictably un-

equal? The eﬀects of machine learning on credit markets. J. Finance.

Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Schnabl, P., Vickery, J., 2019. The role of technology in mortgage 

Gârleanu, N., Pedersen, L.H., 2018. Eﬃciently ineﬃcient markets for assets and asset 

eﬀects. J. Invest. Manag.

lending. Rev. Financ. Stud.

management. J. Finance.

Moulliet, D., Stolzenbach, J., Bein, A., Wagner, I., 2016. Cost-income ratios and robo-

Mullainathan, S., Noeth, M., Schoar, A., 2012. The Market for Financial Advice: An Audit 

Nash, A., 2015. It’s Time to Kill the Monthly Fee for Small Accounts. Technical report.
Parker, J.A., Schoar, A., Su, Y., 2021. Retail Financial Innovation and Stock Market Dy-

namics: the Case of Target Date Funds. NBER Working Paper.

Philippon, T., 2019. On FinTech and Financial Inclusion. NBER Working Paper.
Reher, M., Sun, C., 2019. Automated ﬁnancial management: diversiﬁcation and clientele 

Rossi, A.G., Utkus, S.P., 2021a. The needs and wants in ﬁnancial advice: Human versus 

robo-advising. Working Paper.

Rossi, A., Utkus, S., 2021b. Who Beneﬁts from Robo-Advising: Evidence from Machine 

Learning.

Roussanov, N.L., Ruan, H., Wei, Y., 2020. Marketing mutual funds. Rev. Financ. Stud.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 2017. Form ADV and IARD Frequently Asked 

Questions: Item 5.D. SEC Reference Guides.

Tobin, J., 1958. Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk. Rev. Econ. Stud. 25.
Van Rooij, M., Lusardi, A., Alessie, R., 2011. Financial literacy and stock market partici-

pation. J. Financ. Econ.

Vissing-Jørgensen, A., 2002. Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice Het-
erogeneity: Nonﬁnancial Income and Participation Cost Structure. NBER Working 
Paper.

Von Gaudecker, H.-M., 2015. How does household portfolio diversiﬁcation vary with 

Wealthfront, 2023. Automated Investing Accounts. below $5,000, Technical report.
Xu, J., Murphy, S.L., Kochanek, K.D., Arias, E., 2020. Mortality in the United States, 2018. 

Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2015. Money doctors. J. Finance.
Gentzkow, M., 2006. Television and voter turnout. Q. J. Econ.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J.M., 2008. Preschool television viewing and adolescent test 

scores historical evidence from the Coleman study. Q. J. Econ.

Gomes, F., 2020. Portfolio choice over the life cycle: a survey. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ.
Gordon, B.R., Jerath, K., Katona, Z., Narayanan, S., Shin, J., Wilbur, K.C., 2020. Ineﬃ-

ciencies in digital advertising markets. J. Mark.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., Linnainmaa, J., 2011. IQ and stock market participation. 

Higgins, S., 2022. Financial Technology Adoption: Network Externalities of Cashless Pay-

Hong, C.Y., Lu, X., Pan, J., 2022. FinTech Adoption and Household Risk-Taking. NBER 

J. Finance.

ments in Mexico.

Working Paper.

J. Finance.

Hong, H., Kubik, J.D., Stein, J.C., 2004. Social interaction and stock market participation. 

ﬁnancial literacy and ﬁnancial advice? J. Finance.

Hutchins, C., 2020. How Millennials Are Thinking About Their Finances During COVID-

19, Technical report, Wealthfront.

NCHS Data Brief.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10382922