Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

The timing of voluntary delisting ✩
Alcino Azevedo a, Gonul Colak b,c,∗, Izidin El Kalak d, Radu Tunaru b
a Centre for Business Prosperity, Aston University, United Kingdom
b Department of Accounting and Finance, University of Sussex, United Kingdom
c Department of Finance and Economics, Hanken School of Economics, Finland
d Department of Accounting and Finance, Cardiﬀ University, United Kingdom

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

For  many  ﬁrms,  voluntarily  delisting  from  a  stock  exchange  can  be  optimal.  We  model  an  entrepreneur’s 
incentives to voluntarily delist the ﬁrm as a trade-oﬀ between consumption of private beneﬁts when listed 
and expected improvements in the ﬁrm’s performance after delisting. Our model allows for heterogeneity across 
ﬁrms and countries, and various micro and macro shocks aﬀect the delisting decision. Such a model makes novel 
predictions regarding the delisting patterns around the world. We empirically conﬁrm these predictions using 
manually collected delisting data from 26 countries. Increasing policy and regulatory uncertainties can partially 
explain the greater popularity of voluntary delistings.

JEL classiﬁcation:
G32
G34
G38
G81

Keywords:
Voluntary delisting
Political uncertainty
Regulatory uncertainty
Competing risk

1.  Introduction

In  recent  years,  the  attractiveness  of  being  a  public  ﬁrm  has  de-
clined, and there is a major listing gap in the US exchanges. According 
to Doidge et al. (2017), as of 2016 there were more delistings than new 
listings, and this gap would still exist if the new listings had stayed as 
high as a few decades ago. This observation indicates that voluntary 
exchange delistings have become a prominent feature of modern ﬁnan-
cial markets. Perhaps a good testimonial for this is the op-ed peace by 
Michael Dell in November of 2014 where he states that: “At Dell, we 
faced a conﬂuence of factors in making the decision to end a 25-year 
run as a publicly traded company. These factors included the big op-
portunities ahead, the required pace of innovation and investment, and 
an aﬄiction of short term thinking that drove a wedge between our 

customer and investor priorities.”1 This statement raises some impor-
tant questions about the voluntary delistings: Is delisting a ﬁrm from 
an exchange beneﬁcial to the shareholders or are there other consider-
ations by the owner-entrepreneur? What sudden changes in the ﬁrm’s 
business conditions could inﬂuence this decision? In this paper, we de-
velop a theoretical model that addresses these important questions and 
empirically tests its novel predictions regarding the micro and macro 
determinants of the decision to voluntarily delist.

Compared to the period from 1980 to 1999, the voluntary delistings 
from the US and other major exchanges worldwide have noticeably in-
creased in the last two decades (Doidge et al., 2017). This is part of a 
global trend to move away from public equity ﬁnancing (Jensen, 1986; 
Stulz, 2020; Schlingemann and Stulz, 2022). Since voluntary delisting 
is a choice, this trend indicates that many ﬁrms have recently found 

✩ Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We appreciate very helpful comments from an anonymous referee. We also thank Roger Adkins, Kevin Aretz, 
Jie Chen, Kyoung Jin Choi, Marc Goergen, Martin Gregor, Hideaki Kato, Bart Lambrecht, Meziane Lasfer, Nadia Massoud, Khelifa Mazouz, Patrick McColgan, Nishad 
Matawlie, Dean Paxson, Paulo Pereira, Artur Rodrigues, Bill Schwert, Mark Shackleton, Han Smit, Lenos Trigeorgis, Kazuo Yamada, Cong Wang, and Elizabeth 
Whalley; participants in the British Accounting and Finance Association Meeting 2018, European Financial Management Association Conference 2019, Financial 
Management Association Conference 2018, International Finance and Banking Society Conference 2018, and Real Options Conference 2018; and the participants 
in the research seminars at Adam Smith Business School in 2019, Aston Business School in 2019, Bath School of Management in 2020, Cardiﬀ Business School in 
2017, Institute of Economic Studies at Charles University in 2023, Kadir Has University in 2021, Kent Business School in 2017, Mid Sweden University in 2020, and 
Nagoya Business School in 2017.
* Corresponding author at: Department of Accounting and Finance, University of Sussex, United Kingdom.

E-mail address: g.colak@sussex.ac.uk (G. Colak).

1 See the op-ed article by Michael Dell named “Going Private Is Paying Oﬀ for Dell” in the Opinion section of Wall Street Journal on November 24, 2014.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103832
Received 16 June 2023; Received in revised form 9 March 2024; Accepted 13 March 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)103832Availableonline3April20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

delisting from the stock exchanges to be a rational action to take. Under-
standing why is the goal of this paper. A theoretical model on delisting 
is not yet available; this is surprising given that the cost-beneﬁt ratio-
nale and agency considerations are at the centre of the decision to be a 
publicly listed ﬁrm (Pagano et al., 1998; Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002; 
Stulz, 2005). There are advantages to being a public ﬁrm. It widens 
the sources of external ﬁnancing, it improves the access to cheaper cap-
ital, it provides ﬁrms with the opportunity of using stock options to 
attract talented managers, and it increases the prestige and market vis-
ibility  of  ﬁrms  (for  a  survey  on  this  literature  see  Ritter  and  Welch 
(2002) and Lowry et al. (2017)). It also facilitates the “rebalancing of 
the accounts” after a period of high growth and investment (Pagano et 
al., 1998; Pour and Lasfer, 2013) or the sale of the ﬁrm, either gradu-
ally through a reduction in the ownership, or immediately through an 
acquisition (Shleifer and Vishny, 1986; Celikyurt et al., 2010; Arikan 
and Stulz, 2016). However, being listed also has some disadvantages. 
Many studies emphasize the importance of agency costs related to the 
extraction of private beneﬁts by the owner-entrepreneur (brieﬂy, “the 
entrepreneur”) at the expense of minority shareholders.2 Other costs in-
volve regulatory compliance. For instance, in the US the direct costs of 
being listed on an exchange include the expenses related to compliance 
with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002 and the new governance 
rules and information disclosure requirements (Benninga et al., 2005; 
Marosi and Massoud, 2007), the potential losses related to disclosing 
business secrets to a ﬁrm’s rivals (Maksimovic and Pichler, 2001), the 
management’s “short-termism” associated with quarterly earnings re-
porting,  and  the  absence  of  ownership  control  (Pástor  et  al.,  2008; 
Zingales, 1995). Hence, if the total net beneﬁt from being publicly listed 
is suﬃciently low, delisting from a stock exchange might become opti-
mal for the entrepreneur.

We  develop  a  theoretical  model  on  the  delisting  decision  of  the 
ﬁrms that face agency problems (appropriation of private beneﬁts by 
the entrepreneur), certain disclosure costs (regulatory requirements), 
and various internal and external shocks to their business conditions. 
Our model builds on the theoretical arguments developed by Shleifer 
and Wolfenzon (2002), Stulz (2005), and Stulz (2009), who describe 
the trade-oﬀs and incentives faced by the private ﬁrms that want to get 
listed on a public exchange in a given country. In our modelling frame-
work, the delisting decision works in reverse to listing, and it can be 
applied as a switching model between listed and delisted states over 
a multiperiod timeline. We assume that the ﬁrm is already listed on 
an exchange and there exists a controlling shareholder(s), who is con-
sidering whether delisting is optimal.3 The decision to delist depends 
on the trade-oﬀs and the dynamics between two key drivers of the en-
trepreneur’s wealth: the consumption of private beneﬁts in listed and 
delisted states (the agency motives for delisting) and the expected im-
provements in the ﬁrm’s business performance in the delisted state (the 

2 Some examples of papers that theoretically model this extraction of private 
beneﬁts are: Burkart et al. (1997), Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Pagano and 
Röell (1998), Bebchuk and Roe (1999), La Porta et al. (2002), Shleifer and 
Wolfenzon (2002), Doidge et al. (2004), Stulz (2005, 2009). La Porta et al. 
(1999) and Faccio and Lang (2002) show empirically that most ﬁrms outside 
the US are controlled by large shareholders who can extract private beneﬁts 
from the corporations they control.
3 Throughout the paper, we shall refer to this controlling shareholder (or a 
syndicate of large shareholders with aligned interests) as “the entrepreneur.” 
Many public ﬁrms around the world are managed by large shareholders who 
typically are the founders (La Porta et al., 1999). Anecdotal examples of such 
large and inﬂuential shareholders/entrepreneurs who can use their large own-
ership (and substantial inﬂuence capabilities on other shareholders) to delist 
their ﬁrm include Michael Dell of Dell Inc and Elon Musk of Tesla Inc. Another 
set of anecdotal examples involve inﬂuential CEOs who organize many small 
shareholders to take their ﬁrm private with the help of external ﬁnancing (e.g., 
leveraged buyouts). Morck et al. (2005) discuss the ways insiders control votes 
in excess of their fractional ownership of cash ﬂows.

economic  motives  for  delisting).  Our  model  succinctly  demonstrates 
that  when  the  economic  motives  for  delisting  outweigh  the  agency 
beneﬁts from staying listed, the entrepreneur will voluntarily delist at 
the end of which they will own the entire ﬁrm and its future revenue 
stream. Our model further shows that the agency motives for delisting 
are, in turn, aﬀected by several key economic variables, such as the 
entrepreneur’s ownership rate, the degree of protection provided to mi-
nority shareholders in the country where the exchange is located, the 
dividend paid to the shareholders, and the costs of being publicly listed. 
Under the assumptions of our model, the economic motives for delisting 
are captured by the ﬁrm’s growth rate (growth of its revenue stream) 
and  its  business  risk  (volatility  of  its  revenue  stream).  These  perfor-
mance indicators tend to change over time depending on the evolution 
of the ﬁrm’s internal business performance, and they can be shocked 
by external macroeconomic factors (e.g., policy uncertainty shocks as 
in Baker et al. (2016) and major increases in regulatory restrictions as 
in Kalmenovitz (2023)). Such changes in the internal dynamics of the 
ﬁrms and various external shocks to its business can make voluntary 
delisting an optimal choice.

Our  model  is  applied  on  a  multiperiod  basis  and  thus,  the  en-
trepreneur continuously compares the beneﬁts they can extract by keep-
ing the ﬁrm public with the beneﬁts they can get if the ﬁrm is delisted. 
In the latter case, in addition to receiving all the dividends, they have 
the beneﬁt of expropriating funds and not being caught or punished by 
the regulator. The entrepreneur has an insider view on how the ﬁrm 
will do in the future when they will fully own it. While under the listed 
state, the ﬁrm’s business characteristics are easier to determine by the 
external parties; in the delisted state, they become the entrepreneur’s 
private information and thus unobservable to third parties. Finally, our 
multiperiod model can also be used to reverse the delisting decision 
(i.e., list the ﬁrm again on an exchange) if the conditions that induced 
delisting have changed and it is optimal to list anew the ﬁrm.

The multiperiod (dynamic) aspect of our model allows for analyzing 
the role of uncertainty in managerial decisions (Bernanke, 1983; Dixit 
and Pindyck, 1994) and in particular, the entry and exit decisions under 
uncertainty (Dixit, 1989). Uncertainty becomes a more acute problem in 
stochastic dynamic environments (Dixit and Pindyck, 1994), and it can 
change the optimal timing of managerial actions. We empirically show 
that various policy uncertainties, be it the economic policy uncertainty 
of Baker et al. (2016) or the regulatory risk as in Dawson and Seater 
(2013), can change the optimal time to delist. In other words, an exoge-
nous policy shock to either the growth rate or business risk can change 
the calculus of the delisting decision. Furthermore, this common shock 
could have heterogeneous eﬀects on diﬀerent ﬁrms depending on their 
unique business operations. Within this framework, our paper shows 
that external-to-the-ﬁrm conditions can potentially explain the recent 
rise in voluntary delistings.

This model yields some novel empirical predictions. To test these 
predictions in a multi-country setting in which the stringency of the ex-
propriation laws can vary substantially across countries (see La Porta 
et al., 1998) and the policy and regulatory uncertainty shocks can ar-
rive at diﬀerent times, we manually collect delisting information from 
26 countries by reading the relevant news around the delisting event 
to determine the reasons for it.4 We classify the delistings as voluntary, 
involuntary  (liquidation  or  bankruptcy),  or  mergers  and  acquisitions 
(M&A). Our cross-country sample covers the period from 1990 to 2020; 
and it comprises 26,090 ﬁrms of which 6,708 delisted due to M&As, 
1,035  involuntarily  delisted,  and  832  voluntarily  delisted.  Since  our 
theoretical framework is suitable primarily for voluntary delistings in 
which the entrepreneur has a choice, the predictions from our model 
should not be relevant for the involuntary and M&A delistings. There-

4 As explained later on in the paper, the list of these countries is determined 
by the availability of the economic policy uncertainty index of Baker et al. 
(2016) for that country.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038322A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

fore, we use a competing risk analysis (as in Fine and Gray (1999) and 
Mehran and Peristiani (2010)) to empirically test our model’s predic-
tions. Competing risk is a special type of survival analysis that aims 
to estimate the marginal probability of an event (voluntary delisting) in 
the presence of competing events (liquidation and M&A). This empirical 
setup enhances the power of our tests as it allows for rejecting the null 
of voluntary delisting by contrasting it with the ﬁrms that delist due to 
bankruptcy or acquisition. It is particularly helpful when some of the co-
variates are possibly endogenous regarding the delisting decision (Fine 
and Gray, 1999; Wheelock and Wilson, 2000; Mehran and Peristiani, 
2010). Using the above multi-country sample and the competing risk 
econometric model, we estimate the determinants of voluntary delist-
ing decisions of the ﬁrms around the world.

We obtain some valuable insights from this analysis. First, a novel 
prediction of our theoretical model is to highlight the relative impor-
tance  of  agency  motives  behind  the  voluntary  delisting  decisions  of 
ﬁrms around the globe. Indeed, our competing risk estimation shows 
that  some  key  variables  that  determine  the  optimal  amount  of  cash 
ﬂows to be expropriated by the entrepreneur, such as the expropria-
tion penalty parameter of a country and the entrepreneur’s ownership 
stake,  are  economically  very  relevant  for  the  decision  to  voluntarily 
delist. Both are positively related to it. A ﬁrm’s listing expenses (e.g., 
auditing fees) also relate positively to this type of delisting, and the 
dividend ratio of the ﬁrm relates negatively to it. Another novel as-
pect  of  our  theoretical  model  is  to  assess  the  relative  importance  of 
economic motives for making the delisting decision. The variables cap-
turing the economic motives (growth rate and business risk) are also 
statistically signiﬁcant determinants of delisting but economically they 
appear to be of lesser importance to the entrepreneur than some of the 
agency variables. Their estimated marginal eﬀect ranks behind the in-
sider ownership stake but above the expropriation penalty parameter of 
a country, the listing expenses, and dividends. Furthermore, as a third 
testable hypothesis derived from our model, we predict that exogenous 
macroeconomic factors such as policy uncertainty and the number of 
new regulations imposed on the ﬁrm’s production activities can increase 
the delisting probability by aﬀecting the aforementioned economic pa-
rameters of our model. In particular, the mediation analyses (Baron and 
Kenny,  1986)  show  that  policy  and  regulatory  uncertainties  acceler-
ate the delisting decision through two economic channels: the reduced 
growth rate and the increased business risk channels. These are the key 
insights that help explain the recent trends that made the delisting de-
cision an optimal one for many ﬁrms (Gao et al., 2013; Doidge et al., 
2017).

This paper contributes to the delisting literature in several ways. 
First, to the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst to theoretically model 
the controlling shareholder’s incentives to voluntarily exit the public 
equity markets at an optimal time. This delisting model yields novel 
testable predictions regarding the relative importance of agency issues 
and economic performance in inducing voluntary delisting. Second, the 
paper provides empirical evidence that stresses the importance of sev-
eral key determinants of the voluntary delisting decision: expropriation 
penalty costs in a country, degree of insider ownership, ﬁrm’s growth 
rate, and its business risk. The dividend payout and listing expenses are 
also relevant. We are the ﬁrst in this literature to test the role of these 
variables in the voluntary delisting decision and to introduce an empir-
ical proxy for the ﬁrm’s ongoing listing expenses.5 Third, we model and 
test the proposition that external macroeconomic shocks, like a sudden 

5 The empirical delisting literature is relatively extensive (Sanger and Peter-
son, 1990; Shumway, 1997; Clyde et al., 1997; Pagano et al., 1998; You et al., 
2012; Pour and Lasfer, 2013), although this literature is scarce on voluntary 
delisting decisions with the exception of Clyde et al. (1997), Leuz et al. (2008), 
and Cohn et al. (2014). In general, the forced (involuntary) delistings are asso-
ciated with a substantial decline in stock prices, large jumps in stock volatility, 
and a widening of the bid-ask spreads (Sanger and Peterson, 1990; Macey et 
al., 2008). Further, a large group of investors tend to get hurt by the announce-

jump in economic policy uncertainty or an increase in regulatory re-
strictions, could make it optimal for ﬁrms to delist immediately rather 
than waiting. This channel could explain why voluntary delistings have 
been frequent during the last two decades (Doidge et al., 2017) in which 
the political and regulatory uncertainty has been rapidly rising (Baker 
et al., 2016; Kalmenovitz, 2023). Other proposed explanations for such 
a rise in the number of delistings within the US are the pressure of com-
petition and scale economies (Gao et al., 2013) and the role of ﬁnancial 
globalisation (Doidge et al., 2013). We provide explanations for the in-
crease in voluntary delistings in an international setting.

2.  The model

Our voluntary delisting model is based on the assumption that the 
ﬁrm’s initial decision to list on the exchange (the initial public oﬀer-
ing (IPO) event that took place in the past) was based on the theory 
developed by Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002), Stulz (2005), and Stulz 
(2009). These authors describe the incentives of the entrepreneur (or 
group of insiders with perfectly aligned motives and interests) with re-
gards  to  shareholder  expropriation  and  the  related  agency  problems 
it creates. Our next assumption is that the ﬁrm is already listed on a 
country’s stock exchange and that the same agency-related incentives 
(shareholder expropriation) that guided the IPO decision are still in ef-
fect as long as the ﬁrm stays listed. We also assume that in the current 
period the ﬁrm has already made the initial investment and the pro-
duction is ongoing. At the end of each yearly period the manager, who 
is the entrepreneur or somebody closely aligned with them, considers 
whether to delist from the exchange or keep the ﬁrm listed. The en-
trepreneur (insiders) act in their own best interests and optimize their 
own private beneﬁts when making the delisting decision, but the ap-
propriation of private beneﬁts has a deadweight cost that is paid by 
the insiders (e.g., legal penalties). We model this cost explicitly by fol-
lowing Stulz (2009), who provides a concrete expression of a generic 
deadweight cost function that was originally proposed by Shleifer and 
Wolfenzon (2002).

2.1.  Entrepreneur’s beneﬁts when ﬁrm stays listed

Fig. 1 shows a timeline that illustrates the two stages of our model: 
listed and delisted. The decision to delist can be made at any point in 
time (..., 𝑡𝑛−2, 𝑡𝑛−1, 𝑡𝑛, 𝑡𝑛+1...) from the moment the ﬁrm is listed. In 
each period, the entrepreneur monitors whether the ﬁrm should stay 
listed in the exchange or should delist, up until the moment (𝑡∗
𝑛) when 
it becomes optimal to delist the ﬁrm from the exchange. The delisting 
decision materializes at 𝑡𝑛+1 and from that moment onwards the ﬁrm is 
privately owned by the entrepreneur.

This ﬁgure shows a timeline of the delisting decision for our model framework. 
From the moment the ﬁrm is listed (..., 𝑡𝑛−2, 𝑡𝑛−1,...), the entrepreneur decides 
𝑛) it 
in each time period whether to delist or not. If in the period starting at (𝑡∗
becomes optimal to delist, the delisting action is materialized at 𝑡𝑛+1 and from 
this moment onward, the ﬁrm is delisted.

Fig. 1. Delisting timeline.

ments of involuntary delisting events (Sanger and Peterson, 1990; Bharath and 
Dittmar, 2010; Pour and Lasfer, 2013). Firms often delist because of limited an-
alyst coverage, a decreased interest from institutional investors (Mehran and 
Peristiani, 2010), or because they want to rebalance their leverage (Pagano et 
al., 1998; Pour and Lasfer, 2013).

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038323A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Let 𝐾𝑛 denote the total capital invested in the ﬁrm at the beginning 
of period 𝑛. The period 𝑛 refers to the timeframe [𝑛, 𝑛 + 1). The wealth 
of the entrepreneur is 𝑊𝑛 and we assume that 𝑊𝑛 < 𝐾𝑛, since the en-
trepreneur needs external shareholders to make the initial investment. 
The entrepreneur’s ownership stake in the ﬁrm at the beginning of pe-
riod 𝑛 is 𝛼𝑛. The ﬁrm’s total cash ﬂows are determined by a random 
variable 𝑅𝑛+1, for the gross investment return that becomes known at 
time 𝑛 + 1.

The cash ﬂows, 𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛, produced by the ﬁrm are used for several 
purposes. A fraction 𝑣𝑛 of these cash ﬂows is expropriated by the en-
trepreneur for private consumption. The direct costs of being publicly 
listed include auditing fees, risk management, exchange fees, and other 
legal costs; therefore, they are modelled as a proportional fraction 𝑙𝑛
of the ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows. The shareholders are paid a dividend equal 
to a proportion  𝑑𝑛 from the residual cash ﬂows after paying for the 
private consumption of the entrepreneur and the costs associated with 
being listed. The risk free rate for period 𝑛 is 𝑟𝑛. Like in Stulz (2009), 
the total penalty for expropriation of shareholder funds is expressed 
by 0.5𝑏𝑛𝑅𝑛+1
𝑛, and it will be paid by the entrepreneur from their 
personal funds. The choice of the penalty function as 𝑓 (𝑣) = 0.5𝑏𝑣2𝑅𝐾
satisﬁes the assumptions stated in Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) for 
such a function, that is 𝑓 (0) = 0, 𝑓 ′(0) = 0, 𝑓 ′′(𝑣) = 𝑣𝑅𝐾 > 0 and that 
𝜕(𝑓 ′∕𝑓 ′′)
= 1 > 0. The parameter 𝑏𝑛 is country-speciﬁc, and it reﬂects 
𝜕𝑣
the costs of shareholder expropriation. This parameter is expected to be 
very high for countries that have strict minority shareholders protection 
laws (La Porta et al., 1998).

𝐾𝑛𝑣2

Since the ﬁrm is already in production, the entrepreneur’s wealth at 

the end of period 𝑛 is:

𝑊𝑛+1 = 𝛼𝑛𝑑𝑛(1 − 𝑣𝑛)(1 − 𝑙𝑛)𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛 + 𝑣𝑛𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛 −

1
2

𝑏𝑛𝑣2

𝑛𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛

(1)

Further, the entrepreneur pays the penalty from their own account; 
and in countries with very high penalties, the entrepreneur has less of 
an incentive to consume private funds. From the total return 𝑅𝑛+1
𝐾𝑛, 
the entrepreneur ﬁrst consumes private money at the rate 𝑣𝑛 and then 
receives dividends in proportion to their ownership stake after paying 
the listing expenses.

The optimal rate of consumption of private funds 𝑣𝑛 is determined 
by  the  entrepreneur  under  the  assumption  that  the  ﬁrm  stays  listed 
throughout the period 𝑛. This is determined by maximizing 𝐸𝑛(𝑊𝑛+1)
subject to a rational constraint imposed by the minority shareholders in 
order to keep them invested in the ﬁrm (Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002; 
Stulz, 2009). This constraint is expressed as:

𝑑𝑛(1 − 𝛼𝑛)(1 − 𝑙𝑛)(1 − 𝑣𝑛)𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)𝐾𝑛 ≥ (𝐾𝑛 − 𝑊𝑛)𝑟𝑛

(2)

The rational entrepreneur can and will always change 𝑊𝑛 by taking 
more money out (e.g., private trips, executive gifts, etc.) and make the 
constraint binding. Hence, the solution for 𝐾𝑛 is:

𝐾𝑛 =

𝑊𝑛𝑟𝑛
𝑟𝑛 − 𝑑𝑛(1 − 𝛼𝑛)(1 − 𝑙𝑛)(1 − 𝑣𝑛)𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)

(3)

Then, the optimisation problem that is solved by the entrepreneur is

[

max
𝑣𝑛

𝛼𝑛𝑑𝑛(1 − 𝑣𝑛)(1 − 𝑙𝑛)𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)𝐾𝑛 + 𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)𝐾𝑛𝑣𝑛

−

1
2

𝑏𝑛𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)𝐾𝑛𝑣2
𝑛

]

The ﬁrst order condition gives

𝑣∗
𝑛 =

1 − 𝛼𝑛𝑑𝑛(1 − 𝑙𝑛)
𝑏𝑛

(4)

(5)

The numerator in (5) is always a number between zero and one given 
that 𝛼𝑛, 𝑑𝑛 and 𝑙𝑛 ∈ (0, 1). In order to ensure that 𝑣∗
𝑛 ∈ (0, 1), we have 
with necessity that 𝑏𝑛 ≥ 1, for any 𝑛.

However, 𝑣∗

𝑛 is a solution known only to the entrepreneur.6 For nota-
tional simplicity we, henceforth, drop the ∗. Thus, when the ownership 
stake of the entrepreneur increases, the optimal rate of consumption of 
private funds decreases.7 The same is true for a dividend payout. How-
ever, if the costs of being public increase, then the entrepreneur can 
get away with a higher optimal rate of consumption of private funds. 
A higher 𝑏𝑛 means better regulated and more transparent economies 
that results in a lower rate of consumption of private funds by the en-
trepreneur.

After replacing 𝑣𝑛 from (5) and taking 𝐾𝑛 from to (3) into (1), we 

get:

𝑊𝑛+1 = (1 − 𝑏𝑛𝑣𝑛)(1 − 𝑣𝑛)𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛 + 𝑣𝑛𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛 −

1
2

𝑏𝑛𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛𝑣2
𝑛

(6)

After applying the expectation at the beginning of period 𝑛, we obtain:

𝐸𝑛(𝑊𝑛+1) = 𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)𝐾𝑛 − 𝑏𝑛𝑣𝑛𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)𝐾𝑛 +

1
2

𝑏𝑛𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)𝐾𝑛𝑣2
𝑛

(7)

or

𝐸𝑛(𝑊𝑛+1) = 𝐾𝑛𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)(1 − 𝑏𝑛𝑣𝑛 +

𝑏𝑛𝑣2
𝑛)

1
2

(8)

The factor (1 − 𝑏𝑛𝑣𝑛 + 1
𝑛) represents the entrepreneur’s ability to ex-
2
tract  wealth  from  the  company.  To  simplify,  we  denote  this  factor  as 
Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛), and we rewrite the last equation as:

𝑏𝑛𝑣2

𝐸𝑛(𝑊𝑛+1) = 𝐾𝑛𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)

(9)

Therefore,  in  each  period  𝑛 the  entrepreneur  is  considering  their 
own  beneﬁt  from  being  involved  with  the  ﬁrm,  and  their  expected 
wealth is determined by three factors. The ﬁrst is the capital used in the 
production, 𝐾𝑛, which is multiplied by the second factor that reﬂects 
the expected returns from the production 𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1). However, 𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)
depends directly on the ﬁrm’s gross investment return that can be repre-
sented by the ﬁrm’s annual revenues. The last factor, Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛), reﬂects 
the entrepreneur’s ability to extract private beneﬁts from the ﬁrm given 
the  regulatory  eﬃciency  in  the  country,  𝑏𝑛,  where  the  ﬁrm  is  listed 
during the period 𝑛. Hence, when the ﬁrm is listed, the entrepreneur’s 
expected wealth depends on how they distribute the cash ﬂows, the cap-
ital available for investment, and the production of goods that the ﬁrm 
can sell.

2.2.  Entrepreneur’s beneﬁts when ﬁrm is delisted

The entrepreneur would consider delisting the ﬁrm if and when it 
becomes more proﬁtable for them to do so. The entrepreneur would 
decide at time 𝑛 whether it is beneﬁcial for them to delist the ﬁrm by the 

6 When  the  entrepreneur  is  the  only  shareholder,  they  will  not  expropri-
ate funds because those funds will come out of their pocket. Similarly, when 
there is only a small group of shareholders, these shareholders can monitor the 
entrepreneur and act as a deterrent, so the entrepreneur has only limited abil-
ity to expropriate funds. However, when the ﬁrm is public, as it is the case 
with the initial status of the ﬁrm in our model, the ownership being dispersed 
implies that individual shareholders ﬁnd it cost prohibitive to monitor the en-
trepreneur because of limited access to information. Minority shareholders also 
cannot change actions taken by the entrepreneur easily and in this case the en-
trepreneur can expropriate funds much easier. Recall also that the entrepreneur 
can decide on the size of the project 𝐾𝑛 and the degree of their ownership 𝛼𝑛. 
The consumption of private beneﬁts directly implies a decrease in the wealth 
of the entrepreneur because of the payoﬀ decrease from the shares they own, 
hence the entrepreneur’s perks is inversely related to their ownership stake 
𝛼𝑛. These important points were discussed at length in Stulz (2009) and Stulz 
(2020).
7 Within any given period with a given ﬁxed level of ownership 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1) for 
the entrepreneur and the ﬁrm’s total dividend payout 𝑑 ∈ (0, 1) and the total 
𝜕𝛼 = −𝑑(1 − 𝑙)∕𝑏 < 0;  𝜕𝑣
listing fees 𝑙 ∈ (0, 1), it is true that:  𝜕𝑣
𝜕𝑑 = −𝛼(1 − 𝑙)∕𝑏 < 0; 
𝜕𝑙 = 𝛼𝑑∕𝑏 > 0; and  𝜕𝑣
< 0.

𝜕𝑏 = − 1−𝛼𝑑(1−𝑙)

𝜕𝑣

𝑏2

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038324A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

end of the period. At the time of the decision, the entrepreneur would 
not yet know the value of 𝑅𝑛+1. The total value of the ﬁrm at the time of 
𝐾𝑛 and the entrepreneur owns 𝛼𝑛 percent 
delisting is expressed by 𝑅𝑛+1
of  that.  Thus,  when  the  ﬁrm  delists,  the  wealth  of  the  entrepreneur 
becomes 𝑊𝑛+1 = 𝛼𝑛𝑅𝑛+1

The decision to delist during the period [𝑛, 𝑛 + 1) is essentially based 
on comparing the expected wealth of the entrepreneur when the ﬁrm 
is listed, as given in (9), with the expected wealth of the entrepreneur 
when the ﬁrm is delisted, that is calculated as:

𝐾𝑛.

𝐸𝑛(𝑊𝑛+1) = 𝐸𝑛(𝛼𝑛𝑅𝑛+1

𝐾𝑛) = 𝛼𝑛𝐾𝑛𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1).

(10)

The  entrepreneur  may  have  inside  information  about  possible 
changes in the ﬁrm’s business conditions that may occur after the delist-
ing  of  the  ﬁrm.  For  example,  upon  delisting,  the  entrepreneur  may 
change  the  direction  of  production  and  marketing  such  that  the  ﬁr-
m’s growth rate is expected to increase. To reﬂect more correctly the 
decision-making process, we denote as  ̃𝐸𝑛 the expectation under the 
delisting information ﬁltration of the entrepreneur, which is not avail-
able in full to external shareholders. The entrepreneur would decide at 
time 𝑛 whether to voluntary delist by considering whether

̃𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)

𝐾𝑛𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛) < 𝛼𝑛𝐾𝑛
If the condition is veriﬁed, then the ﬁrm may be delisted; if it is not, the 
ﬁrm should stay listed. Therefore, one of the main results of this paper 
is contained in the following proposition.

(11)

Proposition 1. A ﬁrm is listed on an exchange and it is owned by an en-
trepreneur who sold shares to outside shareholders. For the entrepreneur, it 
is optimal to delist at the end of each time period 𝑛 if:

Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)
𝛼𝑛

<

̃𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)
𝐸𝑛(𝑅𝑛+1)

(12)

The proof is derived above between (1) and (11).
As condition (12) highlights, our theoretical model is based on the 
intuitive idea that the delisting occurs when the ratio of the economic 
payoﬀs  ̃𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) to 𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) is larger than what the entrepreneur can 
maximally expropriate under the listed state relative to their share of 
the  ﬁrm  (Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)∕𝛼𝑛).  The  left-hand  side  of (12) represents  mainly 
the ability and willingness of the entrepreneur to expropriate ﬁrm re-
sources. The right-hand side is the ratio of the income production rev-
enues of the ﬁrm in the delisted state over the listed state. It reﬂects 
the internal and external factors that aﬀect the economic performance 
of the ﬁrm besides the entrepreneur’s selﬁsh motives. The condition in 
(12) succinctly summarizes two main drivers of the voluntary delisting 
decision: managerial agency problems (left-hand side) and ﬁrm’s eco-
nomic performance (right-hand side). The entrepreneur can make the 
voluntary delisting decision due to the desire to improve the cash ﬂows 
of the ﬁrm or to increase (optimize) their expropriation beneﬁts.

The left-hand side of (12) is clearly deﬁned with the existing model’s 
parameters (see also (5)), however the right-hand side is more diﬃcult 
to express analytically given that the numerator ( ̃𝐸) is determined by 
the entrepreneur’s private information (or estimation) about how the 
ﬁrm would perform after delisting. Thus, in the next subsection, we will 
make some additional modelling assumptions about the distributions of 
𝑅𝑛+1 under the delisting and listed states of the world.

Now, we theorize how various important parameters aﬀect the left-
hand side of (12) (i.e., how they aﬀect the delisting decision through 
a change in the entrepreneur’s expropriation motives). Endogenously 
determined variables for the entrepreneur are the ownership ratio, 𝛼, 
and  the  dividend  payout,  𝑑.  Exogenously  imposed  variables  for  the 
entrepreneur are 𝑏 and 𝑙. The optimal rate of consumption of private 
funds, 𝑣, depends both on the endogenously chosen and exogenously 
imposed parameters (see (5)). Facing a shock to the exogenous vari-
ables, 𝑏 and 𝑙, the entrepreneur would adjust the endogenous variables 

𝛼 and 𝑑 to optimize 𝑣. When further adjustments are not possible, the 
entrepreneur would delist the ﬁrm.

When making the decision to delist, the entrepreneur must consider 
simultaneously  four  inputs.  For  the  ﬁrst  two,  the  entrepreneur  own-
ership stake 𝛼 and dividend payout 𝑑, the entrepreneur has a degree 
of  control  that  depends  on  other  considerations.  The  other  two,  the 
exchange related costs 𝑙 and the country penalty parameter 𝑏, are ex-
ternally determined. In the next proposition, we formalize the marginal 
relationship between each of these four parameters and the likelihood 
of the ﬁrm being delisted.8

Proposition 2. An entrepreneur’s expropriation motives (agency problems) 
are key determinants of the delisting decision. These expropriation motives 
are determined by four parameters: the country’s expropriation penalty pa-
rameter 𝑏, the entrepreneur’s ownership stake 𝛼, the dividend payout 𝑑, and 
the exchange listing costs 𝑙. The marginal impact of each of these parameters 
can be derived analytically. Ceteris paribus,

(i) the marginal impact of 𝑏 on the likelihood of voluntarily delisting is 

positive.

(ii) the marginal impact of 𝛼 on the likelihood of voluntarily delisting is 

positive.

(iii) the marginal impact of 𝑑 on the likelihood of voluntarily delisting is 

negative.

(iv) the marginal impact of 𝑙 on the likelihood of voluntarily delisting is 

positive.

See the proof in the Appendix A.

2.3.  Further modelling assumptions and new theoretical insights

In this subsection, we focus on the right-hand side of condition (12)
and make further assumptions about the dynamics of the ﬁrm produc-
tion return 𝑅. In our model, the ﬁrm’s economic performance is deﬁned 
by the expected value of 𝑅 in either the listed or delisted state depend-
ing on which state the ﬁrm is in. We assume that the production output 
(revenue) of the ﬁrm at time 𝑛 is 𝑆𝑛 and that {𝑆𝑛}𝑛≥0 follows the dy-
namics of a geometric Brownian motion with drift parameter  𝜇 and 
volatility parameter 𝜎. Recall that 𝑅𝑛+1 is the gross investment return in 
the period [𝑛, 𝑛 + 1). Under our model assumptions, 𝑅𝑛+1 depends only 
on the process  {𝑆𝑛},  𝑅𝑛+1 =
. Hence, we can calculate  𝐸[𝑅𝑛+1]
from the distributional properties of {𝑆𝑛}. For empirical purposes, we 
work with a typical geometric Brownian motion for which the estimates 
of parameters 𝜇 and 𝜎 are updated with additional information learned 
in period 𝑛. Therefore, we use estimates of 𝜇𝑛+1 and 𝜎𝑛+1 that repre-
sent the growth rate and the business uncertainty of the ﬁrm following 
period [𝑛, 𝑛 + 1).

𝑆𝑛+1
𝑆𝑛

Furthermore, the entrepreneur may have a diﬀerent expectation for 
the next period based on their inside information on the ﬁrm’s activ-
ities and other latent projects. As mentioned before, “~” denotes the 
entrepreneur’s inside calculations or knowledge about the expected eco-
nomic performance of the ﬁrm when it delists. Under the assumptions 
regarding  the  distribution  of  investment  return  𝑅,  this  notation  also 
encompasses the future growth rate 𝜇𝑛+1 and business risk 𝜎𝑛+1. We 
can analytically formalize the delisting condition (12) in the following 
proposition.

Proposition  3. The  ﬁrm’s  economic  performance  (production  return  𝑅) 
in  listed  and  delisted  states  is  also  an  important  determinant  of  the  en-

8 The entrepreneur is also interested in the optimum level of expropriation 
funds 𝑣. As 𝑣 increases, everything else being equal, delisting becomes more 
likely but the relationship is non-linear. By deﬁnition Ψ(𝑏, 𝑣) = 1 − 𝑏𝑣 + 1
𝑏𝑣2. 
2
Then  𝜕Ψ
𝜕𝑣 = −𝑏 + 𝑏𝑣 = 𝑏(𝑣 − 1) < 0. Therefore, when 𝑣 ↑ ⟹ Ψ ↓ and when 𝑣 ↓
⟹ Ψ ↑.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038325A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

trepreneur’s delisting decision. Under our probability distributional assump-
tions for investment return 𝑅, delisting is optimal at the end of each time 
period 𝑛 if:

3.  Towards an empirical testing framework

3.1.  Testable implications and hypothesis development

Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)
𝛼𝑛

<

where (𝜇𝑛+1
state, and (̃𝜇𝑛+1

𝑛+1

1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2
1 + 𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5𝜎2
, 𝜎𝑛+1) are the ﬁrm’s growth rate and business risk in the listed 

(13)

𝑛+1

, ̃𝜎𝑛+1) are the same variables for the delisted state.

The proof is in the Appendix A.
The right-hand side of condition (13) is determined by the business 
performance of the ﬁrm and it can be interpreted as follows. Delisting 
becomes more likely when the current business performance of the ﬁrm 
is low, but by delisting the entrepreneur believes they can improve the 
situation. When there is more to make by exploiting the natural produc-
tion environment of the ﬁrm, the entrepreneur would delist in order to 
maximize their wealth. The ﬁrm’s conditions can improve either by in-
creasing the growth of the ﬁrm (a higher ̃𝜇𝑛+1 than the 𝜇𝑛+1) or when 
the current business risk is high and by delisting the entrepreneur be-
lieves they can reduce it, that is, when 𝜎𝑛+1 is high and ̃𝜎𝑛+1 is lower.

An important beneﬁt of our model is that it allows for internal or 
external shocks to the ﬁrm’s business conditions to trigger the delist-
ing decision. In response to these shocks, the entrepreneur can choose 
to move towards a new equilibrium whereby they adjust 𝛼𝑛 and the 
corresponding optimal expropriation 𝑣𝑛. However, if this adjustment is 
still not suﬃcient to overturn the inequality in condition (13), they may 
select the voluntary delisting route.

Proposition 4. Under our model assumptions, the following results hold:

(i) If a ﬁrm’s growth rate 𝜇𝑛+1 is shocked by an additive factor into 
𝜇𝑛+1 + 𝜀, then the likelihood of delisting decreases (increases) with positive 
(negative) shocks to the growth rate.

(ii) If a ﬁrm’s business risk is shocked by an additive factor such that 
𝑛+1 + 𝜀, then the likelihood of delisting decreases (increases) with positive 
𝜎2
(negative) shocks to the business risk.9

See the proof in the Appendix A.
Further, our model is general and it can be used in a sequential series 
of listing and delisting decisions. Essentially, the condition (13) could 
also work in the reverse sense whereby in the future the entrepreneur 
can decide to enlist the ﬁrm again on a public exchange as in Shleifer 
and Wolfenzon (2002), Stulz (2005), and Stulz (2009). If the ﬁrm is 
delisted in the past but the condition underlying (13) did not materi-
alize, like the entrepreneur hoped for, then they may consider relisting 
the ﬁrm.10 Thus, our multi-period model oﬀers a general set-up for cov-
ering  listing  and  voluntary  delisting  decisions  of  the  ﬁrm.  However, 
this generality comes at a cost whereby to not lose the salience of the 
model, we are forced to abstract from various institutional settings of 
public listing and delisting actions that may be inadvertently linked to 
key economic and/or agency motives. For example, along with the ever 
increasing size and breadth of the institutional investor community and 
the related shareholder activism, the agency motives of the intermedi-
aries can become an important determinant of switching costs between 
listed and delisted states.

9 Without loss of generality, we use both 𝜎 and 𝜎2 as two closely related 
measures of ﬁrm’s business risk.
10 This was exactly what happened to Dell Inc, a company founded in 1984 by 
Michael Dell, who took it public (IPO) for the ﬁrst time in 1988, then took it 
private in 2013, and made it a public company again in 2018.

Next, we brieﬂy outline the testable implications of our model and 
its propositions. We develop several empirical hypotheses that allow for 
formal testing of these theoretical propositions.

3.1.1.  Relevance of key model parameters

Proposition 1 points to several key parameters that the entrepreneur 
considers when making the delisting decision. Four of these variables 
(𝑏, 𝛼, 𝑑, and 𝑙) directly aﬀect the left-hand side of the condition (13)
that represents the entrepreneur’s ability and willingness to expropriate 
ﬁrm resources. Thus, we will refer to them brieﬂy as managerial agency 
variables that aﬀect the delisting decision. Two additional variables (𝜇
and 𝜎) aﬀect the right-hand side of the condition (13) that represent 
ﬁrm’s return from investments. Thus, we will brieﬂy refer to these vari-
ables as economic performance indicators.

Two of the managerial agency variables (𝑏 and 𝑙) are exogenously 
imposed on the entrepreneur by the governing bodies of the country, 
while the other two agency variables (𝑑 and 𝛼) are part of the decision-
making process within the ﬁrm. Thus, as per the condition (13), the 
levels of these variables are expected to be informative of the delisting 
plans of the entrepreneur. The eﬀects of these four agency variables 
(left-hand side of condition (13)) on the voluntary delisting decision 
have not been properly analyzed in the literature.11 Our model (see 
Proposition 2) provides theoretical insights about the expected sign of 
the relationship between each of the key parameters and the delisting 
decision. Thus, in our ﬁrst empirical hypothesis, we test whether these 
four agency variables are indeed relevant to the delisting decision and if 
so, what is the direction of their eﬀect. We organize the ﬁrst hypothesis 
into four empirically testable sub-hypotheses.

From Proposition 2(i) it directly follows that:
H1A: The probability of voluntary delisting increases with country’s ex-

propriation penalty parameter 𝑏.

From Propositions 2(ii)-2(iv), the levels of 𝛼, 𝑑, and 𝑙 are also ex-
pected to be informative about the delisting decision. The expression 
in (5) and (13) make that clear. According to Proposition 1, when the 
total value of the Ψ(𝑏, 𝑣) factor rises, the inequality is less likely to be 
satisﬁed and the probability of the delisting decreases. Hence, we state 
our next three sub-hypotheses as:

H1B: The probability of voluntary delisting increases with entrepreneur’s 

insider ownership 𝛼.

H1C: The probability of voluntary delisting decreases with the size of the 

dividend payout 𝑑.

H1D: The  probability  of  voluntary  delisting  increases  with  listing  ex-

penses 𝑙.

In our Hypothesis 2, we test whether the entrepreneur takes into 
consideration the current performance of the ﬁrm or do they just focus 
on  the  agency  variables  when  making  the  decision.  The  two  perfor-
mance parameters are the ﬁrst two moments in the distribution of 𝑅. 
Our model is the ﬁrst to show the relevance of these variables for the 
delisting decision (see Section 2). Proposition 3 compares the growth 
rates in the delisted state ( ̃𝜇, which is a latent variable that is diﬃcult 
to measure) to the growth rate 𝜇 in the listed state. This proposition 

11 The role of listing costs (𝑙) in any kind of delisting decision has not been an-
alyzed in the existing literature. Doidge et al. (2004) and Marosi and Massoud 
(2008) have shown the importance of a country’s expropriation penalty param-
eter (𝑏) in the cross-listing decision, but its role in the voluntary decision to 
delist is still an open question. Bharath and Dittmar (2010) treat the dividend 
payout ratio (𝑑) as a control variable, but they do not identify it as a key driver 
of the voluntary delisting decision. Marosi and Massoud (2007) and Marosi and 
Massoud (2008) brieﬂy discuss the role of insider ownership (𝛼) in making the 
cross-listing and cross-delisting decision from multiple exchanges, but not for 
voluntary delisting.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038326A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

states that, ceteris paribus, the probability of delisting decreases with 
the rise in 𝜇, which is an observable quantity since the ﬁrm is currently 
publicly listed and has to report on its accounting performance. Thus, 
we hypothesize that the probability of delisting is negatively related to 
a ﬁrm’s growth rate:

H2A: The probability of voluntary delisting decreases with ﬁrm’s growth 

rate 𝜇.

Proposition 3 also compares the ﬁrm’s business risk in the delisted 
state (̃𝜎, which again is a latent variable that is diﬃcult to measure) to 
the business risk 𝜎 in the listed state. The algebraic expression in the 
right-hand side of (13) indicates that, ceteris paribus, the probability of 
delisting increases with the rise in business risk 𝜎 which is a measurable 
quantity using ﬁrm’s annual accounting reports. This claim is stated in 
our next sub-hypothesis:

H2B: The probability of voluntary delisting increases with ﬁrm’s business 

risk 𝜎.

3.1.2.  The role of macroeconomic shocks

Hypothesis 2 argues that the ﬁrm’s performance variables are rele-
vant to the delisting decision. To a certain extent, these variables can 
be changed by the entrepreneur by making modiﬁcations to the opera-
tion of the ﬁrm (e.g., improving the production technology). However, 
in  certain  circumstances,  the  investment  return  (𝑅)  of  the  ﬁrm  and 
its  distribution  moments  (𝜇 and  𝜎)  can  be  altered  by  sudden  politi-
cal and socioeconomic shifts that are completely out of the control of 
the entrepreneur. Thus, in the next hypothesis, we will emphasize how 
macroeconomic shocks that are exogenous to the ﬁrm can trigger delist-
ing decisions regardless of the entrepreneur’s desires for expropriation. 
The distributional moments of  𝑅 will act as mediators of the delist-
ing decision. We focus on two kinds of macroeconomic variables: i) the 
political uncertainty shocks as measured by the Baker et al. (2016) in-
dicators for the 26 countries in our sample, and ii) the changes in the 
general shifts in a country’s governing and regulatory uncertainty as 
measured  by  the  World  Bank’s  Governance  Indicators  for  that  coun-
try.12

Financial  decisions  at  the  ﬁrm  level  are  severely  aﬀected  by  un-
certainty  (McDonald  and  Siegel,  1986;  Dixit  and  Pindyck,  1994).  It 
aﬀects ﬁrms by changing the value of real options, in particular the op-
tion to delay irreversible investments (Bernanke, 1983). Many empirical 
studies have examined the eﬀect of political risk on ﬁrms’ investments 
(Leahy and Whited, 1996; Bloom, 2009; Julio and Yook, 2012; Gulen 
and Ion, 2016) and large asset purchases (Bonaime et al., 2018; Nguyen 
and Phan, 2017). Their ﬁndings are in line with the real options ar-
gument that ﬁrms should exercise their option to delay the investment 
when facing higher uncertainty.

A diﬀerent branch of the literature argues that policy uncertainty 
lowers  the  value  of  a  ﬁrm’s  assets  in  general  (Pástor  and  Veronesi, 
2012, 2013), which increases the equity premium (Brogaard and Detzel, 
2015), and makes it unattractive for the ﬁrms to issue seasoned equity 
(Gungoraydinoglu  et  al.,  2017)  or  to  conduct  initial  public  oﬀerings 
(Çolak et al., 2017). Elevated policy uncertainty is also associated with 
uncertainty over macroeconomic indicators, taxes, and labour policies, 
among others. These uncertainties can manifest as the unpredictability 
of the ﬁrms’ operations and proﬁts (Sialm, 2006; Ulrich, 2013). Specif-
ically, this eﬀect can have a substantial impact on the ﬁrms’ growth 
rate and business risk which are the two key parameters in the option 
to delist that is inherent in our model. These ﬁndings indicate that pe-
riods of elevated policy uncertainty can create optimal conditions for 
a ﬁrm to voluntarily delist; the ﬁrm’s equity and assets are underval-

12 These indicators measure the general uncertainty of governance in the coun-
try,  and  they  may  or  may  not  relate  to  shareholder  expropriation.  The  six 
dimensions comprise: (i) voice and accountability, (ii) political stability and 
absence of violence/terrorism, (iii) government eﬀectiveness, (iv) regulatory 
uncertainty, (v) rule of law, and (vi) control of corruption.

ued, the growth rate is lower, and the beneﬁts of being public are lower 
(external ﬁnancing is constrained).

Furthermore,  the  introduction  of  new  rules  and  regulations  also 
create their own uncertainties. The accumulated eﬀects of these reg-
ulations  can  have  numerous  potential  consequences  for  the  aﬀected 
ﬁrms. Several studies have identiﬁed the macro- and micro-level nega-
tive eﬀects of more regulations or the regulatory burden. For example, 
Dawson and Seater (2013) ﬁnd that over their study period, the ac-
cumulation of federal regulations slowed US economic growth by an 
average of 2% per year. McLaughlin (2016) tests the eﬀect of regula-
tion on a ﬁrm’s investment choices. He ﬁnds that regulations negatively 
aﬀect the ﬁrm’s investment choices that lead to innovation, which in 
turn leads to a reduction in the annual growth rate of the US GDP.

In general, our Proposition 4 claims that a signiﬁcant external shock, 
𝜖, that emanates from policy uncertainty or regulatory changes could 
lead  to  a  lower  growth  rate  and  higher  business  risk  that,  in  turn, 
increase the probability of voluntary delisting. Put diﬀerently, any ex-
ogenous shock to the ﬁrm’s economic performance variables (𝜇 and 𝜎) 
can change the optimal timing of the delisting for a given ﬁrm. Fur-
thermore, this common shock could have a heterogeneous eﬀect on the 
ﬁrms depending on their unique business operations.

Building  on  the  above  discussion,  we  conjecture  that  two  key 
macroeconomic factors, namely policy uncertainty and regulatory con-
ditions within a country, could be important economic channels that 
aﬀect the ﬁrm’s probability of delisting by decreasing the growth rate 
and increasing the business risk. Our model predicts that shocks to these 
macroeconomic variables would increase the value of delisting for the 
entrepreneur. Thus, we formulate our third hypothesis as follows:

H3A: The probability of voluntary delisting increases when policy uncer-

tainty in a country rises.

H3B: The probability of voluntary delisting increases when the overall 

regulatory uncertainty in a country rises.

3.2.  Empirical methods: competing risks hazard rate model

In this subsection, we move from theoretical modelling towards an 
empirical setup that allows for proper testing of our model’s predictions. 
In the Online Appendix, we show how the delisting time implied by our 
theoretical condition in (13) can be linked to a hazard rate process. 
Then, our model predictions can be tested with a hazard model or a 
logistic regression model. Most of our empirical results are based on the 
former, and thus we focus on it explicitly.

In the context of our paper, delisting can occur for three diﬀerent 
reasons: voluntary, involuntary, and M&As. The three diﬀerent types 
of delistings can be conceptualized as competing (mutually exclusive) 
outcomes, thus an appropriate empirical approach would be to use a 
competing risk hazard rate model.13 In our case, the primary outcome 
of interest is the time to voluntary delisting. Delisting for non-voluntary 
reasons is a competing risk (e.g., ﬁrms that delist due to M&A or invol-
untary reasons). To estimate these risks in the context of our model, we 
follow Fine and Gray (1999) and use a semi-parametric proportional 
sub-hazard speciﬁcation as follows:

ℎ(𝑛|𝑋𝑖,𝑛) = ℎ(𝑛|0)𝑒𝛽𝑋𝑖,𝑛
for all ﬁrms 𝑖 and all yearly periods 𝑛. The hazard function, ℎ(𝑛|𝑋𝑖,𝑛), 
represents the sub-hazard rate of ﬁrm 𝑖 that is conditional on the ﬁrm 

(14)

13 Such models have been utilized before in ﬁnancial economics (Fine and 
Gray, 1999; Wheelock and Wilson, 2000; Doidge et al., 2009; Mehran and Peri-
stiani, 2010) due to certain advantages. Given that the competing risk model 
is a method of time-to-event analysis, the hazard of an event (i.e., voluntary 
delisting) happening changes with time. Therefore, the competing risk survival 
regression allows for explicitly modelling the voluntary decision to delist as 
a function of the explanatory variables, while recognizing the three types of 
delisting outcomes (i.e., voluntary, involuntary, and M&A) as competing risks.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038327A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

not voluntarily delisting until time 𝑛, while ℎ(𝑛|0) is known as the base-
line sub-hazard. In our case, it captures how the probability of voluntary 
delisting changes over time assuming that all the variables are equal to 
zero. The 𝑋𝑖,𝑛 speciﬁes the 𝑋𝑛 matrix for ﬁrm 𝑖 that can be expressed 
as (without loss of generality we drop the subscript 𝑖):

𝑋𝑛 =

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
Managerial Agency

𝑏𝑛, 𝛼𝑛, 𝑑𝑛, 𝑙𝑛;
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

𝜇𝑛+1
, 𝜎2
𝑛+1;
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟

Economic Performance

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑍𝑛
⏟⏟⏟

Controls

(15)

where managerial agency variables (𝑏𝑛, 𝛼𝑛, 𝑑𝑛, 𝑙𝑛) deﬁne the left-hand 
side value of the delisting condition (13), the ﬁrm economic perfor-
, 𝜎𝑛+1) that contribute to the right-hand side value 
mance variables (𝜇𝑛+1
of the same condition, and 𝑍𝑛 is the vector of control variables. During 
the empirical estimation of competing risks model, each ﬁrm’s ̃𝜇 and ̃𝜎2
are known only to the entrepreneur and thus they are reﬂected in the 
constant term in 𝑍𝑛.

The coeﬃcients’ 𝛽s are estimated using the partial maximum like-
lihood. The standard errors of the coeﬃcients are corrected for pos-
sible  ﬁrm-level  clustering  and  we  apply  industry  ﬁxed-eﬀects  (two-
digit SIC codes). The sign of the estimated coeﬃcient 𝛽 for a speciﬁc 
variable from  𝑋𝑛 should be interpreted as follows: a positive (nega-
tive) 𝛽 estimate represents a shorter (longer) duration to the time to 
delist.  Alternatively,  we  can  interpret  𝛽 as  an  indication  of  the  par-
tial  eﬀect  of  a  given  characteristic  of  the  ﬁrm  on  the  likelihood  of 
delisting, while holding the duration constant. The sub-hazard ratio is 
determined by computing the exponentiated model coeﬃcient from the 
sub-distribution  hazard  model,  𝑒𝛽
,  which  shows  how  much  the  sub-
hazard of the voluntary delisting event increases with a unit change in 
the independent variable, while holding all other independent variables 
constant. Therefore, we can interpret the sub-hazard ratio as an indica-
tion of the relative change in the instantaneous rate of occurrence of 
the event (i.e., voluntary delisting) in those ﬁrms that do not delist or 
that have experienced an M&A or an involuntary delisting.

As all of the active ﬁrms remain listed on the exchange at or after 
the end of our sample period, we cannot observe the true duration until 
they eventually delist (right censoring). This aspect of our data sample 
must be taken into account, otherwise our model parameters could suf-
fer from biased and inconsistent estimates (Ongena and Smith, 2001). 
To correct for this right censoring problem, we express the pseudo log-
likelihood  function  as  a  weighted  average  of  the  sample  density  of 
completed duration spells (delisting) and the survivor function of un-
completed spells (listed) - see Kiefer (1988). In Section 4.3, we conduct 
some  additional  robustness  tests,  such  as  considerations  for  the  left-
censoring problem.

In the Online Appendix, we show that our theoretical model could 
also be tested with generic logistic regression models. Thus, as an ad-
ditional test, following Doidge et al. (2017), we estimate a multinomial 
logit model in which the ﬁrm faces multiple delisting outcomes. Firms 
that do not delist in a given year constitute the base category and the 
three delisting outcomes are voluntary delisting, involuntary delisting, 
and M&A.

3.3.  Data, sample selection, and variables

3.3.1.  Sample construction

Our  sample  covers  26  countries  for  which  there  is  an  available 
country-speciﬁc  measure  of  the  Baker  et  al.  (2016) economic  policy 
uncertainty index. Following Doidge et al. (2017), our sampling period 
starts in 1990 and ends in 2020.14 We collect data about listed and 
delisted  ﬁrms  for  the  main  stock  exchanges  of  each  country15 using 

14 Datastream’s coverage for many countries is less complete prior to the early 
1990s.
15 The countries and their respective stock exchanges included in our sample 
are: the Toronto Stock Exchange and TSX Venture (Canada), Australia Stock 

several databases such as CRSP, Compustat North America, Compus-
tat Global, and Reﬁnitiv’s Datastream. Below, we describe the sample 
selection procedure of our delisted ﬁrms’ sample.

For data on US ﬁrms, we focus on the CRSP database that covers 
the  listed  ﬁrms  in  one  of  the  three  main  stock  exchanges:  The  New 
York Stock Exchange (NYSE), American Stock Exchange (AMEX), and 
NASDAQ. Delisted ﬁrms are identiﬁed using the share delisting code 
(DLSTCD) from CRSP. We follow studies such as Bharath and Dittmar 
(2010) and  exclude  ﬁnancial,  insurance,  and  utility  ﬁrms.  The  ﬁrms 
are organized into three delisting categories: mergers and acquisitions 
(DLSTCD codes 200-399 excluding 332), involuntary delistings due to 
bankruptcy  or  liquidation  (DLSTCD  codes  ≥ 400  excluding  570  and 
573),  and  voluntary  delistings  (DLSTCD  codes  332,  570  and  573).16
For a reliable estimation of our model parameters (e.g., 𝜎) in the pre-
delisting period, we require that ﬁrms stay listed for at least four years, 
and then either continue to remain listed or delist.17 Also, we manu-
ally check the sample of voluntarily delisted ﬁrms and verify that the 
delisting is indeed voluntary. This sample selection procedure leaves us 
with 173 voluntary delistings from the US stock exchanges.18 Panel A 
of Table 1 provides details on our sample construction procedure for 
the delisted ﬁrms in the USA.

For the remaining 25 countries in our sample, we use Compustat 
Global and Reﬁnitiv’s Datastream databases to create a combined sam-
ple of 23,816 ﬁrms in total.19 We again start by excluding ﬁnancial, 
insurance, and utility ﬁrms. Compustat Global database has a variable 
named the Reason for Deletion (DLRSN) that allows us to obtain an 
initial  classiﬁcation  of  the  type  of  delisting.  Similar  to  the  construc-
tion  of  the  delisting  sample  for  the  US  ﬁrms,  we  classify  ﬁrms  into 
three categories: mergers and acquisitions (DLRSN codes 01 (acquisi-
tion or merger) and 04 (reverse acquisition)), involuntary delisting due 
to bankruptcy or liquidation (DLRSN codes 02 (bankruptcy) and 03 (liq-

Exchange (Australia), EuroNext Liﬀe Brussels (Belgium), Sao Paulo Stock Ex-
change (Brazil), Santiago Stock Exchange (Chile), Shanghai Stock Exchange and 
Shenzhen Stock Exchange (China), Bogota Stock Exchange (Columbia), Zagreb 
Stock Exchange (Croatia), EuroNext Liﬀe Paris (France), Athens Stock Exchange 
(Greece), Hong Kong Stock Exchange (Hong Kong), Bombay Stock Exchange 
and National Stock Exchange of India (India), EuroNext Liﬀe Dublin (Ireland), 
Deutsche Boerse AG and Xetra Stock Exchange (Germany), Milan Stock Ex-
change (Italy), Tokyo Stock Exchange and JASDAQ (Japan), Mexico Stock Ex-
change (Mexico), EuroNext Liﬀe Amsterdam (the Netherlands), Pakistan Stock 
Exchange  (Pakistan),  Russian  Trading  System  (Russia),  Singapore  Stock  Ex-
change (Singapore), Korea Stock Exchange and KOSDAQ (South Korea), Madrid 
Stock Exchange and Mercado Continuo Espangol (Spain), Stockholm Stock Ex-
change (Sweden), the London Stock Exchange (UK), and the three US exchanges 
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), American Stock Exchange (AMEX), and NAS-
DAQ.
16 After delisting, a ﬁrm can still be traded on the OTCBB. Some of the vol-
untarily delisted ﬁrms, which are included in our sample, are also deregistered 
from the SEC. After delisting, we do not make any further distinctions between 
voluntarily delisted and deregistered ﬁrms. For more details on the deregistra-
tion process, please see Marosi and Massoud (2007).
17 Eﬀectively,  our  delisting  sample  starts  in  1994  because  our  theoretical 
model relies on business risk (𝜎) and for a proper estimation of the standard 
deviation, we need several years (more than three years) of observations to ﬁrst 
calculate ﬁrm’s growth rate (𝜇) and then to calculate the standard deviation of 
the growth rate (𝜎).
18 Our ﬁnal sample of voluntarily delisted US ﬁrms is relatively smaller than 
the sample of 434 ﬁrms reported in Doidge et al. (2017). That paper includes 
all the voluntary delisted ﬁrms from the AMEX, NASDAQ, and the NYSE that 
are in CRSP database for the period from 1975 to 2012. Unlike Doidge et al. 
(2017), we have to impose several additional screens (i.e., dropping ﬁrm-year 
observations with missing values of variables used in constructing our model 
parameters and requiring that ﬁrms to stay listed for at least four years).
19 We obtain 13,908 ﬁrms from Compustat Global and 20,924 ﬁrms from Re-
ﬁnitiv’s Datastream. We, then, merge these data samples into one large sample 
of 23,816 unique ﬁrms from 25 countries spanning three decades between 1990 
and 2020. See Table 1 for further details.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038328A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Table 1
Sample selection procedure.

Explanation

Panel A: USA delisting sample

Total Number Firms

Voluntary

Involuntary

M&A

All ﬁrms from the merged Compustat & CRSP database (excluding ﬁnancial, insurance, and utility ﬁrms)
After dropping the ﬁrms that are not listed on one of the main exchanges (NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ)
After dropping ﬁrms with less than 4 years of data or observations with missing values of regression variables
After manually checking the actual reason for delisting (reading news articles)

Panel B: The Other 25 Countries (Excluding USA) - Compustat Global

All Compustat Global ﬁrms (excluding ﬁnancial, insurance, and utility ﬁrms)
After dropping the ﬁrms that are not listed on one of the main exchanges
After dropping ﬁrms with less than 4 years of data or observations with missing values of regression variables
After using SDC database to identify M&A ﬁrms
After manually checking the actual reason for delisting (reading news articles)

Panel C: The Other 25 Countries (Excluding USA) - Reﬁnitive’s DataStream

All DataStream ﬁrms (excluding ﬁnancial, insurance, and utility ﬁrms)
After dropping ﬁrms with less than 4 years of data or observations with missing values of regression variables
After using the reason for delisting provided, within the name of the ﬁrm (for some ﬁrms in the sample)
After using SDC database to identify M&A ﬁrms
After manually checking the actual reason for delisting (reading oﬃcial press releases)

Panel D: Combined Sample of 26 Countries - All Databases

Comprehensive Compustat Global and DataStream combined sample for the 25 countries
Combined sample (USA plus 25 other countries)
Final Sample (after dropping the missing observations of 𝛼)

14,013
9,448
6,352
6,314

23,058
19,753
13,908
13,908
13,908

44,265
20,924
20,924
20,924
20,924

23,816
30,130
26,090

386
351
244
173

3,334
2,706
1,514
1,148
597

3,579
135
45
61

201
169
59
55
426

5,813
5,502
3,601
3,618

3,693
3,112
1,925
2,295
2,475

....................... 22,213 .....................
......................... 7,499 .....................
6,591
4,806
597

508
2,293
5,684

400
400
1,218

893
1,066
832

1,280
1,341
1,035

5,955
9,573
6,708

The table provides details on the sample selection criteria we follow while constructing the (de)listing sample for 26 countries. We show the number of delisted 
ﬁrms that remain after each step. For the USA, we use a raw sample extracted from Compustat and CRSP merged dataset, and follow the steps described in 
Panel A. For the rest of the 25 countries in the sample, to increase our coverage, we use two separate databases: Compustat Global and Reﬁnitiv’s DataStream 
databases. When creating the sample of (de)listed ﬁrms from Compustat Global, we follow the steps shown in Panel B. We complement this sample with 
additional data retrieved from DataStream database as described in Panel C. As DataStream does not provide delisting codes, we are unable to pre-classify the 
ﬁrms into one of the three delisting categories. We only know if a ﬁrm is listed or delisted and thus, we manually check the delisting reason for all the delisted 
ﬁrms in that database. In total, we manually check the delisting reason for 244 ﬁrms in Panel A, 1,148 ﬁrms in Panel B, and 4,806 in Panel C. The ﬁnal sample 
contains 26,090 ﬁrms, of which 6,708 delisted due to M&A, 1,035 delisted involuntarily, and 832 delisted voluntarily. The remaining 17,515 ﬁrms were still 
listed in a stock exchange as of the end of 2020. Regression variables are the ones used for the analyses in Table 4 (all model variables plus controls; missing 
values of 𝛼 are discussed separately in Panel D of this table). Online Appendix provides further details about our sample selection procedure.

uidation)), and voluntary delistings (DLRSN codes 07 (others: no longer 
ﬁles  with  SEC  among  other  possible  reasons  but  pricing  continues), 
09 (Now a private company), and 10 (Other: no longer ﬁles with SEC 
among other reasons)). As the codes for voluntary delistings are broad 
and do not explicitly pinpoint the voluntary delistings as intended by 
our model, we apply the following additional screening steps. First, we 
use Thompson Reuters’ Securities Data Company’s (SDC) Mergers and 
Acquisitions databases to identify ﬁrms that delist because of a merger. 
Second, using exchange websites and oﬃcial news releases, we manu-
ally check the rest of the voluntary delistings sample (1,148 ﬁrms) for 
the reasons for delisting and re-classify the ﬁrm into one of the three 
categories accordingly. Third, we also verify that the delisting is indeed 
voluntary. We are left with 597 veriﬁed voluntary delistings. Panel B 
of Table 1 provides further details about our delistings sample obtained 
from Compustat Global database.

As the Datastream database does not provide delisting codes, we 
are  unable  to  electronically  pre-sort  the  ﬁrms  into  one  of  the  three 
delisting categories; we can only discern whether the ﬁrm is listed or 
delisted. Therefore, to identify the exact reason for the delisting of a 
Datastream ﬁrm, we ﬁrst drop the ﬁrms in the ﬁnancial, insurance, and 
utility sectors and then repeat the sample selection steps applied for the 
delisted ﬁrms in Compustat Global. We also identify all the overlapping 
ﬁrms with Compustat Global by merging the two samples using ISIN 
codes. This step yields 4,806 voluntary delistings from Datastream. In 
the next step, we manually check these delisting cases for the reason 
for delisting. This check leaves us with 597 voluntary delistings from 
Datastream, some of which overlap with the voluntary delisting sample 
from Compustat Global (the sample of 597 voluntary delistings from 
Panel B). After removing these overlapping cases, we end up with 296 
voluntary delistings that are unique to Datastream. This brings the total 
number of voluntary delistings from Compustat Global and Datastream 
to 893 (see Panels B, C, and D of Table 1).

As a ﬁnal screening criterion, we drop ﬁrm-year observations with 
missing  values  for  important  model  variables  (e.g.,  𝛼)  and  the  con-
trols used in the regressions. These exclusions leave us with information 
on 26,090 ﬁrms from 26 diﬀerent countries. Of these ﬁrms, 832 have 
voluntarily  delisted,  1,035  involuntarily  delisted,  and  6,708  of  them 
delisted due to an M&A. Table 1 has the details on the breakdown of our 
ﬁnal delistings sample that is constructed using diﬀerent data sources 
and the related sample selection criteria. Online Appendix provides fur-
ther details about our sample selection procedure.

Fig. 2 shows the number of delisted ﬁrms, by type, over our sample 
period. The number of voluntary delisted ﬁrms increases over time with 
substantial variation from year to year; particularly near well-known 
economic, ﬁnancial, and regulatory-related events. For instance, volun-
tary delistings increased after the dot.com bubble in the early 2000s 
and during the 2007-2009 ﬁnancial crisis.

3.3.2.  Variable construction

From the CRSP database we extract daily trading information for US 
ﬁrms, and from Compustat and DataStream we obtain corporate ﬁnan-
cial data. For the sample of ﬁrms outside of the US, we use Compustat 
Global, Datastream, and Worldscope databases to extract daily stock 
prices,  ﬁnancial,  and  auditing  information.  We  use  the  World  Bank 
database to retrieve the macroeconomic indicators used in this study 
(see Table A.1 of Appendix B for further details).

As mentioned in Section 3.1 (Equation (15)), our empirical testing 
relies on the variables comprising the vector 𝑋𝑛. Next, we describe the 
construction of these variables. Our model variable 𝑏 captures the ex-
propriation penalty parameter in a country and it is approximated by 
the Anti-Self Dealing Index of Djankov et al. (2008). The dividend pay-
out 𝑑 is calculated as the ratio of a ﬁrm’s dividends over its revenues 
(sales). A ﬁrm’s growth rate 𝜇 and business risk 𝜎 are calculated from 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)1038329A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

This ﬁgure shows the number of ﬁrms that delisted from the main exchanges of 26 countries over the period between 1994 and 2020. This is based on 
our ﬁnal sample of 832 voluntary, 1,035 involuntary, and 6,708 M&A related delistings. Firms are organized into three delisting categories (voluntary, 
involuntary, and M&A) as described in Section 3.3. The plot starts in 1994 because our theoretical model relies on business risk estimation (𝜎, which 
is the standard deviation of the ﬁrm’s growth rate) and for a more accurate estimation of standard deviation we need several years (more than three 
years) of observations to ﬁrst calculate the growth rate and then to calculate the standard deviation of the growth rate (see our sample selection criteria 
described in Section 3.3). Panel A shows the ﬂuctuations in the number of voluntary and involuntary delistings over time. Since the number of M&A 
delistings is relatively larger than the other types of delistings, in Panel B we create a separate plot for this type of delistings.

Fig. 2. Delistings over time.

the yearly changes in ﬁrm’s revenues. See Table A.1 for formal deﬁni-
tions of these variables.

Since it is an important variable for our theoretical model, we care-
fully collect information on insider ownership (𝛼) for each ﬁrm by using 
the Worldscope database for our sample of 26 countries. The World-
scope data has some missing observations on this variable. Thus, we 
complement any missing observations for 𝛼 using Thomson-Reﬁnitiv’s 
EIKON database that has information on the same variable for the ﬁrms 
located in the aforementioned 26 countries. The remaining missing val-
ues of insider ownership (around 9.4% of our sample) are replaced with 
the ﬁrm’s mean value during our sampling period. As we show in Table 
OA2 of the Online Appendix, our results are robust to dropping from 
the sample the observations with missing 𝛼.

Our study is the ﬁrst to introduce listing expenses 𝑙 as one of the de-
terminants of voluntary delistings. A good proxy for this determinant 
are the audit fees (scaled by ﬁrm’s sales), which reﬂect the costs asso-
ciated with ﬁling periodic earnings statements due to the public status 
of the ﬁrm. To obtain information on audit fees, we use Worldscope 
(variable name: auditor fees) and Audit Analytics (variable name: To-
talFees). For some international ﬁrms in some years, the information 
on audit fees is missing and for some ﬁrms the scaled variable 𝑙 shows 
extreme variation from year to year due to drastic drop in their sales. 
Therefore, to better approximate the listing expenses 𝑙 based on ﬁrm’s 
country and size group, we utilize a portfolio approach whereby all the 
ﬁrms in the same country and size tercile are assigned the mean value 
of this variable in their corresponding portfolio.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383210A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Table 2
Model accuracy across countries.

Country 
Name

(1)

Brazil
Colombia
Greece
Russia
Ireland
Pakistan
Italy
Spain
China
Croatia
Belgium
Chile
Hong Kong
Mexico
Netherland
France
Japan
South Korea
Sweden
Singapore
Canada
India
Australia
USA
Germany
UK

Number 
Delistings

Number 
Accurate Predictions

Model 
Accuracy

(2)

2
2
2
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
7
10
11
17
24
24
24
30
37
39
69
120
136
231

(3)

1
2
2
3
4
4
5
3
6
6
6
7
7
8
3
16
24
22
21
30
26
38
63
105
100
220

(4)

50%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
60%
100%
100%
86%
100%
100%
80%
27%
94%
100%
92%
88%
100%
70%
97%
91%
88%
74%
95%

𝑏

(5)

2.7361
5.7292
2.1667
4.4028
7.8889
4.0833
4.2083
3.7361
7.6250
2.4583
5.4444
6.2500
9.6250
1.7222
2.0278
3.7917
4.9861
4.6875
3.3333
10.0000
6.4167
5.7917
7.5694
6.5417
2.8194
9.5000

𝛼

(6)

0.4111
0.5018
0.4294
0.5641
0.2366
0.2235
0.4035
0.3766
0.3431
0.4198
0.3861
0.5078
0.4376
0.2449
0.3156
0.3861
0.3465
0.3313
0.2646
0.4475
0.2130
0.4520
0.3298
0.2079
0.2603
0.2680

Average

𝑑

(7)

0.0297
0.0572
0.0249
0.0251
0.0116
0.0261
0.0188
0.0261
0.0482
0.0155
0.0239
0.0543
0.0277
0.0254
0.0159
0.0140
0.0090
0.0081
0.0210
0.0277
0.0229
0.0130
0.0189
0.0153
0.0177
0.0144

𝑙

(8)

0.0008
0.0009
0.0016
0.0277
0.0024
0.0003
0.0022
0.0035
0.0003
0.0004
0.0010
0.0003
0.0072
0.0006
0.0028
0.0018
0.0005
0.0013
0.0019
0.0008
0.0180
0.0009
0.0382
0.0045
0.0109
0.0040

𝜇

(9)

0.2641
0.1801
0.0052
0.2095
0.1410
0.1503
0.0370
0.0810
0.1460
0.0315
0.0545
0.1009
0.0845
0.1487
0.0492
0.0437
0.0301
0.0914
0.1201
0.0530
0.1589
0.1737
0.1379
0.1513
0.1036
0.1334

𝜎

(10)

0.2531
0.2081
0.2721
0.2200
0.2606
0.2464
0.2817
0.2144
0.2548
0.1912
0.2791
0.2362
0.3324
0.1749
0.2282
0.2518
0.1155
0.2410
0.2513
0.2947
0.3563
0.2522
0.6224
0.2174
0.2762
0.2635

Number 
Observ.

(11)

2,682
482
300
103
481
3,985
2,598
1,426
37,251
893
1,628
2,129
15,079
3,231
2,246
7,197
53,122
26,937
4,950
8,105
10,484
27,693
20,601
71,455
33,420
18,623

832

732

Total

0.0236

0.3580

88.15%

5.2131
This table provides the names of the countries considered in our data sample (column 1) and their respective statistics, including averages 
within and across countries. Speciﬁcally, columns 2, 3, and 4 show the number of voluntary delistings, the number of accurately 
predicted delistings by our model, and the accuracy of our model as a percentage of the total delisting events that occurred in that 
country over our sample time period. Columns 5 to 10 show the average of the key parameters considered by our theoretical delisting 
model, respectively, 𝑏, 𝛼, 𝑑, 𝑙, 𝜇, 𝜎, where 𝑏 is a penalty factor that measures the quality of the country’s laws and regulations, 𝛼 represents 
the insiders’ ownership in the ﬁrm while it is listed, 𝑑 is the dividend payout, 𝑙 is the listing expenses, and 𝜇 and 𝜎 represent the growth 
rate and the business risk of the ﬁrm, respectively. The last column (11) shows the number of ﬁrm-year observations. The countries are 
ordered based on the number of voluntary delistings during the sampling period of 1990-2020. At the bottom of the table, we show the 
sum (or the average) values across all countries.

357,101

0.0052

0.1108

0.2614

The set of control variables (𝑍𝑛) used in our estimations are de-
rived  from  the  studies  that  examine  the  determinants  of  the  ﬁrm’s 
decision to go private (i.e., Marosi and Massoud (2007); Bharath and 
Dittmar (2010); Mehran and Peristiani (2010)). These control variables 
are the ﬁrm’s size (Size), age (FirmAge), leverage (Leverage), market 
to book (MB), free cash ﬂow (FCF), capital expenditure (CAPEX), re-
search  and  development  expenses  (R&D),  net  equity  issuance  (NEI), 
stock  turnover  (Turnover),  stock  return  volatility  (ReturnVolatility), 
cross-listing dummy (CrossListing), and a country’s stock market cap-
italisation to its gross domestic product (MCGDP). The deﬁnitions of 
the control variables are provided in Table A.1 of Appendix B.

3.4.  Model validation across countries

This subsection presents some preliminary model validation checks, 
while the simulation results are relegated to the Online Appendix. These 
validations are intended to verify how well our model ﬁts the voluntary 
delisting patterns across various countries. Table 2 presents the model 
accuracy for each country separately together with the average values 
for  the  six  key  model  parameters.  Our  model  is  very  accurate  (90% 
or higher) for 17 countries and it is less accurate (less than 50%) for 
only one country (the Netherlands). The average accuracy overall for 
all the countries is around 88%. This indicates that our model quite ac-
curately reﬂects the real decision-making regarding the timing of the 
voluntarily delistings of ﬁrms around the World. The average values of 
our six key model parameters show substantial variation across coun-

tries  which  could  potentially  explain  the  delisting  patterns  from  the 
public exchanges located in these countries.

Figure OA.1 in the Online Appendix shows the evolution over time 
of the accuracy of our model in predicting the voluntary delistings in 
the aggregated data across all countries. When plotting this ﬁgure, we 
use the observed outcomes (delisted or not) and the actual observed val-
ues of the parameters (𝑏, 𝛼, 𝑑, 𝑙, 𝜇, 𝜎2) for each ﬁrm. We further assume 
that the entrepreneur believes that post-delisting values of the param-
eters (̃𝜇, ̃𝜎2) associated with the ﬁrm performance will converge to the 
industry sector averages. The accuracy of our model prediction of vol-
untary delisting is very high in the 1990s period (around 100%), but it 
drops slightly and ﬂuctuates around 88% thereafter.

The Online Appendix presents simulations that help us gauge the 
parameters’ sensitivities on the delisting decision. From those simula-
tions, we can conjecture that the delisting decision appears to be most 
sensitive to the parameters 𝛼 and 𝑏.20 In the next section, we will for-
mally investigate the role of all six model parameters in explaining the 
voluntary delisting decision.

20 In untabulated tests, we reach qualitatively similar conclusions when we use 
pseudo-𝑅2s from multinomial logit estimations to gauge the economic impor-
tance of each variable. We essentially compare the magnitude of the changes in 
Pseudo-𝑅2 when each of the six model variables (𝑏, 𝛼, 𝑑, 𝑙, 𝜇, 𝜎) are separately 
included (one at a time) in the regression together with all the control variables 
(𝑍𝑛).

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383211A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Table 3
Univariate analysis.

Full Sample: n = 357,101

Voluntary: n = 8,745

Involuntary: n = 10,389

t-test

M&A: n = 71,533

t-test

Mean

(1)

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

(5)-(3)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Mean

(8)

Std. Dev.

(8)-(3)

(9)

(10)

0.1143
0.2549

6.0189
0.3143
0.0193
0.0056

Variables Related to Agency Motives:
ExpropriationPenalty (𝑏)
InsidersOwnership (𝛼)
DividendPayout (𝑑)
ListingExpenses (𝑙)
Variables Related to Economic Motives:
GrowthRate (𝜇)
BusinessRisk (𝜎)
Control Variables:
Size (Millions USD)
FirmAge (Years)
Leverage
MB
FCF
CAPEX
R&D
NEI
Turnover (ratio)
ReturnVolatility
CrossListing
MCGDP

1527.7650
17.2057
0.2149
1.0264
-0.0277
0.0366
0.0231
0.0284
1.2750
0.5622
0.0332
1.2161

1.9871
0.1728
0.0349
0.0126

0.2178
0.2902

5887.9020
13.8263
0.1824
1.6425
0.1420
0.0450
0.0583
0.0943
2.0708
0.3047
0.1792
1.7267

6.3835
0.3513
0.0156
0.0088

0.1125
0.3235

657.5859
13.4525
0.2179
0.8668
-0.0607
0.0352
0.0229
0.0430
0.6543
0.6871
0.0593
1.0085

2.5781
0.1728
0.0362
0.0155

0.2618
0.3348

3991.2890
9.8472
0.1851
1.6693
0.1781
0.0448
0.0607
0.1105
1.6518
0.3929
0.2363
0.7403

5.9410
0.3190
0.0099
0.0148

0.1046
0.4631

229.4793
11.6351
0.2475
0.5233
-0.1180
0.0204
0.0258
0.0742
1.0238
0.7756
0.0103
1.4583

2.4191
0.1659
0.0256
0.0216

0.3200
0.4228

2177.1240
7.9436
0.2266
1.3505
0.2265
0.0423
0.0613
0.1488
2.0813
0.4379
0.1010
2.2478

-12.2295***
-13.1541***
-12.7637***
21.6429***

5.9277
0.2871
0.0138
0.0078

-1.8534***
24.9800***

0.1440
0.2698

-9.3973***
-14.1273***
9.7859***
-15.7311***
-19.2031***
-23.5748***
3.3008***
16.2132***
12.5295***
14.5834***
-19.1798***
17.9136***

709.4502
14.9118
0.2096
0.9592
-0.0310
0.0389
0.0376
0.0447
0.6531
0.5916
0.0292
1.0090

2.0774
0.1753
0.0327
0.0123

0.2489
0.2969

2962.3630
11.9238
0.1862
1.4929
0.1559
0.0501
0.0754
0.1100
1.5630
0.3224
0.1683
0.7904

-18.8209***
-32.3959***
-4.7254***
-7.4268***

11.1069***
-15.7327***

1.4811***
10.9960***
-3.9221***
5.3920***
16.5231***
6.5473***
17.5150***
1.3995
-0.0648
-25.4924***
-15.0499***
0.0531***

This table displays summary statistics on ﬁrm characteristics for the entire sample as well as the subsamples of ﬁrms corresponding to delisted ﬁrms (voluntary, 
involuntary, and M&A). Variables are deﬁned in Table A.1. The sample consists of 26,090 (357,101 ﬁrm-year observations) ﬁrms over the 26 countries from 
1990 to 2020 of which 832 (8,745 ﬁrm-year observations) voluntarily delisted ﬁrms, 1,035 (10,389 ﬁrm-year observations) involuntarily delisted, and 6,708 
(71,533 ﬁrm-year observations) delisted due to a merger. The rest of the ﬁrms (17,515 ﬁrms; 266,434 ﬁrm-year observation) belong to the stay-listed ﬁrms. 
All continuous variables included in our main empirical model are winsorized at the 1𝑠𝑡 and 99𝑡ℎ percentiles (except for ExpropriationPenalty (𝑏)). t-tests are 
conducted to test for diﬀerences in means between voluntary delisted subsample and involuntary and M&A subsamples; columns 7 and 10 present the t-values 
from this test. The superscripts ***, **, and * indicate that the coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

4.  Empirical results

4.1.  Univariate analysis

In Table 3, we provide a univariate analysis for the variables used 
in our empirical testing. Speciﬁcally, we report the means and standard 
deviations for the full sample of listed and delisted ﬁrms for the subsam-
ples of voluntary, involuntary, and M&A delistings. We also report the 
t-test results for the diﬀerences in means between the voluntary delisted 
subsample and each of the other two subsamples. More detailed sum-
mary statistics for each subsample are provided in Table OA1 of our 
Online Appendix.

On average, voluntarily delisted ﬁrms are mostly located in coun-
tries with the highest expropriation penalty measure (𝑏) compared to 
other delisted ﬁrms. The average value of  𝑏 for the group of volun-
tarily delisted ﬁrms is 6.3835 (out of maximum of 10) versus 5.9410 
(5.9277) for the involuntary (M&A) subsample. This value provides ini-
tial support for our Hypothesis H1A. Further, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms in the 
voluntary delisting subsample have the highest ratio for insider owner-
ship with an average of 35.13%. The mean of the listing expenses (𝑙), 
as a percentage of the annual revenue, diﬀers signiﬁcantly between the 
voluntary subsample (0.88%) and the other two subsamples.

As for the variables that are related to the ﬁrm’s economic perfor-
mance,  we  ﬁnd  that  the  growth  rate  and  business  risk,  are  11.43% 
and 25.49%, respectively, for an average ﬁrm in our full sample that 
comprises of both listed and delisted ﬁrms. On average, the involun-
tarily delisted ﬁrms have very high business risk at around 46.31%, 
followed by the voluntary subsample at 32.35% and the M&A subsam-
ple at 26.98%. The growth rate is the highest for the M&A subsample 
(14.40%) and is followed by the voluntary (11.25%), and the involun-
tary (10.46%) subsamples. The t-tests of the growth rate (𝜇) and the 
business  risk  (𝜎)  variables  shows  that  the  mean  diﬀerences  between 
the voluntary delisted subsample and each of the involuntary and M&A 
delisted subsamples are statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

Further,  the  t-test  results  show  statistically  signiﬁcant  diﬀerences 
in the means of the control variables between the voluntary delisted 
subsample and the other subsamples. Some notable ﬁndings about vol-
untarily delisted ﬁrms around the World are as follows. These ﬁrms, 
on  average,  are  13.4525  years  old,  have  total  assets  equivalent  to 
USD657.5859 million, have a leverage to total asset ratio of 21.79%, 
have a stock return volatility of 68.71%, and 5.93% of them are cross-
listed  on  other  exchanges.  Their  market-to-book  and  R&D  ratios  are 
0.8668 and 0.0229, respectively.

These statistics provide some insights into the nature of voluntary 
delisted ﬁrms in our cross-county sample. Overall, the univariate com-
parisons are in line with our model’s predictions in that the average 
values of 𝑏, 𝛼, 𝑑, 𝑙, 𝜇, and 𝜎 are substantially diﬀerent for voluntary 
delistings than the other types of delistings.

4.2.  Multivariate analysis: competing risk and multinomial logit models

Model (1) of Table 4 provides the results from estimating our com-
peting risk sub-hazard model. The focus is on the six theoretical vari-
ables that relate to the agency motives (𝑏, 𝛼, 𝑑, 𝑙) and the economic 
motives (𝜇 and 𝜎) for delisting. Model (1) shows the coeﬃcient esti-
mates, while Model (2) gives the sub-hazard rates.

Following  Austin  and  Fine  (2017) approach,  we  interpret  the  re-
sults as follows. As shown in Model (1), we ﬁnd that the coeﬃcients 
for the variables that represent the agency motives and economic mo-
tives to have the signs as predicted by our theory. As per Model (2), 
the sub-hazard rate of voluntary delisting increases with the expropria-
tion penalty variable (𝑏), insider ownership (𝛼), listing expenses (𝑙), and 
business risk (𝜎), but it decreases with the dividend payout (𝑑; albeit 
statistically insigniﬁcant) and growth rate (𝜇). The positive coeﬃcient 
for 𝑏 indicates that ﬁrms located in countries that are classiﬁed as hav-
ing a higher anti-self-dealing index are more likely to delist voluntarily 
- the sub-hazard ratio is 1.2161 that means that the sub-hazard rate of 
delisting changes by 21.61% (= 1.2161 − 1) for each unit increase in 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383212A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Table 4
Prediction testing analysis - competing risk subhazard & multinomial logit models.

Competing Risks Model

Multinomial Logit Model

M&A

Involuntary

Voluntary

Coeﬃcient

SHR

Coeﬃcient

RRR

Coeﬃcient

RRR

Coeﬃcient

RRR

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

DividendPayout (𝑑)

Variables Related to Agency Motives:
ExpropriationPenalty (𝑏)

InsidersOwnership (𝛼)

0.1957***
(0.0285)
1.7471***
(0.2372)
-2.0801
(1.4229)
0.1269***
(0.0345)
Variables Related to Economic Motives:
GrowthRate (𝜇)

ListingExpenses (𝑙)

1.2161

5.7378

0.1249

1.1354

0.4004

1.2511

0.9977

1.8344

1.3174

0.8505

0.3564

0.1069

4.5777

0.2250

1.0243

1.6146

3.4921

0.7183

1.0302

0.6710

0.0522

1.1220

0.5548

1.4342

0.9817313

1.4142

1.2450

0.8386

1.2617

0.7739

47.8479

0.6301

1.0265

0.4522

0.9223

0.8873

0.0297***
(0.0084)
-0.3990***
(0.0844)
-2.9529***
(0.5233)
0.1151***
(0.0235)

-0.5892***
(0.0613)
0.3606***
(0.0470)

-0.0184***
(0.0067)
0.3465***
(0.0202)
0.2191***
(0.0739)
-0.1760***
(0.0168)
0.2325*
(0.1376)
-0.2563
(0.3936)
3.8680***
(0.2186)
-0.4618**
(0.1858)
0.0262***
(0.0047)
-0.7936***
(0.0646)
-0.0809
(0.0828)
-0.1196***
(0.0100)
-4.5157***
(0.3350)

-0.9153***
(0.1435)
0.2240**
(0.1025)

-0.0023
(0.0161)
0.6067***
(0.0495)
0.2757*
(0.1657)
-0.1619***
(0.0598)
-1.0318***
(0.2352)
-2.2357**
(1.0460)
1.5212**
(0.6625)
-1.4916***
(0.4513)
0.0240
(0.0173)
0.4791***
(0.1026)
1.2505***
(0.1597)
-0.3308***
(0.0530)

Yes
14,368.69
-8,068.18
—
357,101

1.2118

5.9942

0.0572

1.1486

0.3721

1.3400

0.9835

1.4395

1.3470

0.8399

0.2474

0.0526

5.6245

0.1754

1.0290

1.3840

3.4085

0.7195

0.1921***
(0.0280)
1.7908***
(0.2476)
-2.8606**
(1.4584)
0.1385***
(0.0362)

-0.9887***
(0.1670)
0.2927**
(0.1153)

-0.0167
(0.0167)
0.3643***
(0.0521)
0.2979*
(0.1743)
-0.1744***
(0.0632)
-1.3966***
(0.2530)
-2.9454***
(1.0735)
1.7271***
(0.6700)
-1.7407***
(0.4770)
0.0286*
(0.0167)
0.3250***
(0.1132)
1.2263***
(0.1600)
-0.3291***
(0.0462)
-8.5794***
(0.7794)

0.9697

0.6413

0.0003

1.1177

0.1875

3.1762

0.9089

1.3292

3.6814

0.9200

0.2632

0.0004

1.6893

0.0536

1.0093

0.9701

0.9860

1.0212

-0.0308
(0.0214)
-0.4442**
(0.2015)
-8.0167***
(1.9043)
0.1112*
(0.0572)

-1.6737***
(0.1330)
1.1557***
(0.0757)

-0.0955***
(0.0143)
0.2846***
(0.0506)
1.3033***
(0.1267)
-0.0834**
(0.0371)
-1.3350***
(0.2020)
-7.7417***
(1.5192)
0.5243
(0.5900)
-2.9266***
(0.3580)
0.0093
(0.0102)
-0.0303
(0.0991)
-0.0141
(0.2786)
0.0210
(0.0188)
-4.9145***
(0.5289)

Yes
—
-43,410.44
0.0609
357,101

BusinessRisk (𝜎)

Control Variables:
Size

FirmAge

Leverage

MB

FCF

CAPEX

R&D

NEI

Turnover

ReturnVolatility

CrossListing

MCGDP

Constant

Industry FE
Wald 𝜒 2
LPLR
Pseudo 𝑅2
Observations

This table presents two sets of estimates. The ﬁrst set provides the estimates of the competing risk sub-hazard model, based on 
maximum likelihood estimation, using the method of Fine and Gray (1999). The competing risk model posits a speciﬁcation 
for the sub-hazard function as per Equation (14). The dependent variable is the time to voluntarily delist, which measures 
the time between the IPO date and the voluntarily delisting date. When the IPO date is not available, we use the ﬁrst 
available observations in Compustat and Global Compustat. The coeﬃcients measure the partial impact of each variable on 
the likelihood of voluntary delisting conditional on the duration. A set of control variables is used as explained in Section 3.3. 
While Model (1) reports the coeﬃcient estimates, Model (2) reports the Sub-Hazard Ratios (SHR). The sub-hazard ratio gives 
an estimate of how much the sub-hazard of voluntary delisting increases for a unit change in the variable. The second set 
provides the estimates of the multinomial logit model. The dependent variable equals zero if a ﬁrm did not delist. It equals 
one for delistings because of merger, two for involuntary, and three for voluntary. While Models (3), (5) and (7) report the 
coeﬃcient estimates, Models (4), (6), and (8) report the Relative Risk Ratios (RRR). The relative risk ratio gives an estimate 
of how much the risk of the outcome falling in the comparison group (i.e., M&A, Involuntary, and Voluntary) compared to 
the risk of the outcome falling in the reference group (i.e., Listed) changes with the variable in question. All models include 
industry ﬁxed eﬀects using the two-digit SIC industry code, and the estimates are adjusted for right censoring. The standard 
errors are reported below the coeﬃcients in between brackets and are corrected for ﬁrm-level clustering eﬀects. Our sample 
includes 26,090 listed ﬁrms over the 26 countries from 1990 to 2020 of which 832 voluntary delisted ﬁrms, 1,035 involuntary 
delisted ﬁrms, and 6,708 delisted due to M&A. The superscripts ***, **, and * denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 
and 10% level, respectively. LPLR denotes to Log-pseudolikelihood ratio. All variables are deﬁned in Table A.1.

anti-self-dealing index. This coeﬃcient supports our Hypothesis H1A. 
Similarly,  the  sub-hazard  ratio  of  the  insiders  ownership  is  5.7378 

which indicates that a unit increase in insiders ownership increases the 
likelihood of a voluntary delisting by a multiple of 5.7378 relative to 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383213A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

the normal value of a hazard rate of one.21 The sub-hazard ratio of 
listing expenses is 1.1354 that indicates the sub-hazard rate of delist-
ing changes by 13.54% (= 1.1354 − 1) for each unit increase in listing 
expenses. The coeﬃcient for the dividend payout ratio is statistically in-
signiﬁcant; hence, we cannot meaningfully interpret its sub-hazard ratio 
and its eﬀect on the probability of voluntary delisting. The weak result 
for that ratio is consistent with our simulation results in the Online Ap-
pendix. Overall, these results provide supporting evidence for our main 
Hypotheses 1 and 2.

Further, the negative coeﬃcient for the growth rate indicates that 
ﬁrms  with  lower  revenue  growth  are  more  likely  to  delist;  the  sub-
hazard ratio is 0.4004 that means it changes by -59.96% (= 0.4004 − 1) 
for each unit increase in growth rate. This supports our Hypothesis H2A. 
Moreover, the higher the business risk, the more likely the delisting is; 
the sub-hazard ratio of 1.2511 indicates that a one unit increase in busi-
ness risk changes the probability of delisting by 25.11% (= 1.2511 −
1) which is in line with Hypothesis H2B. Based on these results, we can 
sort the main theoretical variables based on their economic signiﬁcance 
as  per  the  following:  insider  ownership,  ﬁrm’s  growth  rate,  business 
risk, country’s expropriation penalty parameter, listing expenses, and 
dividends.

The eﬀect of the control variables on the probability of voluntary 
delisting is as follows: the sub-hazard rate decreases with the market to 
book ratio, free cash ﬂow, capital expenditure, net equity issuance, and 
stock market capitalisation to GDP; while it increases with the ﬁrm’s 
age, leverage, research and development, stock return volatility, and 
cross listing.

In our second set of results, we use a multinomial logit estimation 
model. Models (3), (5), and (7) provide the coeﬃcient estimates for 
M&A, involuntary, and voluntary delistings, respectively, compared to 
the  reference  group  of  listed  ﬁrms.  Models  (4),  (6),  and  (8)  present 
the Relative Risk Ratios (RRR) of the multinomial logit model which 
are obtained by exponentiating the multinomial logit coeﬃcients. The 
relative risk ratio gives an estimate of how much the probability of the 
risk of the outcome falling in the comparison group compared to the 
risk  of  the  outcome  falling  in  the  reference  group  (i.e.,  listed  ﬁrms) 
changes with the variable in question. A RRR value higher (lower) than 
one indicates that the risk of the outcome falling in the comparison 
group relative to the risk of the outcome falling in the referent group 
increases (decreases) as the variable increases.

In Models (3) to (8), we ﬁnd that ﬁrms located in countries with 
a higher expropriation penalty measure (𝑏) are associated with higher 
probability of delisting for M&A or voluntary reasons. Unlike the results 
from the voluntary delisted subsample, ﬁrms with higher percentages 
of insider ownership (𝛼) are less likely to delist due to M&A and invol-
untary reasons. Firms paying higher dividend ratios (𝑑) are associated 
with a lower risk of M&A, involuntary, and voluntary delistings. Higher 
listing  expenses  (𝑙)  are  associated  with  higher  probability  of  delist-
ing for merger, involuntary, and voluntary reasons. Firms with higher 
growth rates (𝜇) are less likely to delist because of merger, involuntary, 
or voluntary reasons. Higher business risk (𝜎) is associated with higher 
probability of M&A, involuntary, and voluntary delistings.

In summary, using the multinomial logit estimation instead of the 
competing risk model does not meaningfully alter our qualitative con-
clusions regarding our model’s predictions.

4.3.  Alternative estimation methods

In this subsection, we check the validity of our main empirical re-

sults under alternative estimation speciﬁcations.

21 With competing risk survival models, such large multiples are common; see 
Table 3 of Fos and Jiang (2015).

4.3.1.  Diﬀerent regression estimations

First, we address potential problems with left censoring, as studies 
have  shown  that  it  biases  the  estimation  of  the  parameters  (Ongena 
and Smith, 2001). We follow Heckman and Singer (1984) and remove 
from our sample all the left-censored observations and then reestimate 
Equation (14). The results are provided in Model (1) of Table 5. On-
gena and Smith (2001) also advocate that if the results are sensitive 
to left-censored observations, a change in the ﬁrst observed year cre-
ates instability among the parameter estimates. Under Model (2), we 
also check whether changing the starting date of our sample time pe-
riod to 1994 aﬀects our results. Furthermore, the previous literature on 
ﬁrms’ delisting decisions has highlighted the diﬀerences in incentives 
between domestic and foreign ﬁrms’ decisions to list, delist, or dereg-
isters from the home market (see Leuz et al. (2008) and Marosi and 
Massoud (2008)). We rerun our main model after excluding cross-listed 
ﬁrms from our sample and report the results in Model (3). To verify 
that our main results are not aﬀected by countries with a small num-
ber of voluntary delisted ﬁrms (see Table 2), under Model (4) we rerun 
our main model after excluding all ﬁrms in countries with less than ﬁve 
voluntarily delisted ﬁrms throughout the sample period. The results re-
ported in Models (1) through (4) of Table 5 are qualitatively similar to 
our main ﬁndings in Table 4.

Our next robustness test addresses the unobserved heterogeneity at 
the ﬁrm and industry levels. For this issue, we use a parametric model 
to estimate the hazard rates. Survival analysis studies typically assume 
that  the  population  is  homogeneous.  In  our  context  this  assumption 
means that ﬁrms have the same risk of experiencing a delisting event, 
conditional on a set of control variables, and that the delisting times are 
independent. However, the former assumption may not hold because 
ﬁrms can have diﬀerent risks and sub-hazards. Also, an association be-
tween the event times of some subsamples can exist if these share a 
common characteristic that cannot be observed. If we do not control for 
unobserved heterogeneity, our results could be biased by the nature of 
the duration dependence (Heckman and Singer, 1984). Therefore, to re-
duce this bias, we control for an unobserved random factor (𝜙𝑖,𝑛) known 
as “frailty.” This factor multiplicatively modiﬁes the hazard function of 
each ﬁrm, or a cluster of ﬁrms, according to Equation (16):

ℎ(𝑛|𝑋𝑖,𝑛) = ℎ(𝑛|0)(𝜔𝑖,𝑛)𝑒𝛽𝑋𝑖,𝑛
(16)
where  𝜔𝑖,𝑛 = 𝑒𝜙𝑖,𝑛 .  According  to  Mehran  and  Peristiani  (2010),  it  is 
computationally easier to specify the heterogeneity using a parametric 
model than using a semi-parametric model. In order to test our para-
metric model with heterogeneity, we use the following equation:

(17)

ℎ(𝑛|𝛽𝑋𝑖,𝑛; 𝛾, 𝜃) = 𝛾𝑒𝛽𝑋𝑖,𝑛+𝜙𝑖,𝑛 (𝑛𝑒𝛽𝑋𝑖,𝑛+𝜙𝑖,𝑛 )𝛾−1
where  𝜙𝑖,𝑛 is  an  unobserved  heterogeneity  factor  that  is  assumed  to 
be  normally  distributed  with  a  zero  mean  and  a  variance  of  𝜃.  The 
variance 𝜃 is the frailty variance that is estimated from our data sam-
ple and measures the variability of the frailty across various groups of 
ﬁrms and industries groups. The rest of the variables are as deﬁned in 
Equation (14). Models (5) and (6) of Table 5, show our results for the 
parametric models that consider the existence of a shared frailty at the 
industry 𝜙𝑖,𝑛 = 𝜙𝑗 (𝑗 = two-digits SIC) and ﬁrm 𝜙𝑖,𝑛 = 𝜙𝑖 (𝑖 = ﬁrm) lev-
els. Overall, the qualitative conclusions are unchanged after adjusting 
for heterogeneity.

Survival  analysis  depends  heavily  on  the  censoring  assumptions. 
Competing risk models utilise cause-speciﬁc hazard functions and are 
particularly appropriate when the possible failure events are known as 
a complete set. In addition, they are theoretical superior in presence of 
covariate information that may inﬂuence the censoring time. The com-
peting risk models we employ in our paper follow Fine and Gray (1999)
and they are a direct analog to Cox regression hazard rate models. Our 
competing risk models are still semiparametric in the sense that the 
baseline subhazard has no particular functional form while the eﬀects 
of covariates are assumed to be proportional, see Van Cleave (2016).

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383214A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Table 5
Prediction testing analyses - alternative estimations.

Left 
Censoring

Diﬀerent 
Subsample

Unobserved 
Heterogeneity

Diﬀerent 
Estimation Methods

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

DividendPayout (𝑑)

Variables Related to Agency Motives:
ExpropriationPenalty (𝑏)

InsidersOwnership (𝛼)

0.1401***
(0.0341)
1.3137***
(0.2667)
-2.2408
(1.5771)
0.1176*
(0.0623)
Variables Related to Economic Motives:
GrowthRate (𝜇)

ListingExpenses (𝑙)

BusinessRisk (𝜎)

Controls
Industry FE
Wald 𝜒 2 (LR 𝜒 2)
LPLR (LL)
Observations

-0.7337***
(0.1571)
0.2765**
(0.1148)
Yes
Yes
29,499
-6,025
263,146

0.1957***
(0.0285)
1.7471***
(0.2372)
-2.0801
(1.4229)
0.1269***
(0.0345)

-0.9153***
(0.1435)
0.2240**
(0.1025)
Yes
Yes
14,369
-8,068
350,232

0.2123***
(0.0289)
1.6827***
(0.2485)
-1.6840
(1.4969)
0.1286***
(0.0352)

-0.9366***
(0.1481)
0.2138**
(0.1060)
Yes
Yes
14,665
-7,527
345,238

0.1953***
(0.0291)
1.6777***
(0.2408)
-1.7104
(1.4242)
0.1697***
(0.0386)

-0.8674***
(0.1429)
0.2265**
(0.1031)
Yes
Yes
14,150
-7,873
349,068

0.1967***
(0.0205)
1.7500***
(0.2221)
-3.7646***
(1.2787)
0.1168***
(0.0245)

-0.8384***
(0.1577)
0.2322*
(0.1220)
Yes
Yes
(709.71)
-3,608
357,101

0.2188***
(0.0232)
1.9920***
(0.2600)
-3.8341***
(1.3571)
0.1138***
(0.0254)

-0.8380***
(0.1653)
0.2754**
(0.1341)
Yes
Yes
(343.83)
-3,601
357,101

0.4492***
(0.1063)
2.3756***
(0.2278)
-1.2450
(1.2342)
0.0241**
(0.0113)

-0.8610***
(0.1480)
0.2051*
(0.1063)
Yes
Yes
25,362
-7,749
357,101

0.2324***
(0.0302)
1.5246***
(0.2406)
-3.0115**
(1.4932)
0.1580***
(0.0383)

-0.9690***
(0.1411)
0.1998**
(0.0997)
Yes
Yes
822
-7,866
357,101

-0.0010***
(0.0001)
-0.0058***
(0.0010)
0.0147**
(0.0066)
-0.0007***
(0.0002)

0.0036***
(0.0006)
-0.0007*
(0.0004)
Yes
Yes
2,083
587
357,101

This table provides the results of our alternative regression estimations. Models (1), (2), (3), (4), and (7) provide the estimates of the competing risk 
sub-hazard model, based on maximum likelihood estimation, using the method of Fine and Gray (1999) as per Equation (14). Models (1) and (2) 
report the results after addressing the left censoring problem. Model (1) shows the results based on Heckman and Singers (1984) estimation strategy, 
and Model (2) shows our results when we change the ﬁrst year of the sample from 1990 to 1994. Models (3) and (4) report the results using diﬀerent 
subsamples. Models (3) and (4) report the results after removing all the cross-listed ﬁrms from the sample and excluding all ﬁrms in countries with 
less than ﬁve voluntary delisted ﬁrms throughout the sample period, respectively. Models (5) and (6) report the results based on maximum likelihood 
estimation of the proportional hazard model using Weibull distribution as the baseline hazard rate as per Equations (17), while taking the eﬀect of 
industry and ﬁrm unobserved heterogeneity into consideration. Models (5) and (6) are estimated under the assumption of shared frailty eﬀects at 
the industry and ﬁrm levels using the two-digit SIC codes (𝜙𝑖,𝑛 = 𝜐𝑗 where 𝑗 = SIC code) and (𝜙𝑖,𝑛 = 𝜙𝑖 where 𝑖 = ﬁrm), respectively. Models (7), 
(8), and (9) report the results using diﬀerent estimations. Model (7) is estimated while controlling for both industry and country ﬁxed eﬀects. Model 
(8) is estimated using the Cox proportional hazard model. Model (9) is estimated using the Accelerated Failure Time (AFT) model drawn from a 
Weibull density distribution. For all models, the dependent variable is the time to delist, which measures the time between the IPO and the delisting 
event. All estimates are adjusted for right censoring. The table reports the coeﬃcients and, in parentheses, the standard errors which are corrected 
for ﬁrm-level clustering eﬀects. All models include industry, at the two-digit SIC code, ﬁxed eﬀects. The superscripts ***, **, and * denote statistical 
signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. LPLR denotes to Log-pseudo likelihood ratio, LL denotes to Log Likelihood, and LR Chi2
denotes to Likelihood Ratio Chi2. All variables are deﬁned in Table A.1.

Finally, to check whether our main results hold under diﬀerent spec-
iﬁcations, we reestimate our competing risk model: (i) with industry 
and country ﬁxed eﬀects, (ii) by using the semi-parametric Cox propor-
tional hazard model; and (iii) by applying the Accelerated Failure Time 
model (AFT) drawn on a Weibull density distribution to parametrize 
the baseline survivor function.22 Note that, the signs of the coeﬃcients 
estimated from the AFT model are the exact opposite of those reported 
by the competing risks models. The change in sign is because the com-
peting risks models use variables to model the hazard rate, while the 
AFT models use variables to model the survival times. In other words, 
in an AFT model, estimated parameters quantify whether the survival 
time accelerates (if it is positive) or decelerates (if it is negative) for a 
one unit change in the variables values. As per Models (7), (8), and (9), 
the results remain qualitatively similar.

4.3.2.  Matching estimators

According to Wheelock and Wilson (2000), the competing risk esti-
mation inherently benchmarks and compares several diﬀerent compet-
ing outcomes, and in doing so eﬀectively adjusts for the counterfactual 
(in  our  case  any  outcome  other  than  voluntary  delisting  serves  as  a 
counterfactual).23 Such adjustments for counterfactuals are known to 

22 We also consider other functional forms such as lognormal, loglogistic, and 
exponential. All these models provide qualitatively similar results.
23 The power of such tests derives from the ability to reject the null (voluntary 
delisting) when it is false. Our theoretical model should not apply to ﬁrms who 
continue to stay listed or delist due to other reasons. As such, these outcomes 
can serve as a proper control sample or as a counterfactual.

ameliorate  the  endogeneity  bias  (Roberts  and  Whited,  2013),  which 
strengthens our conﬁdence in the results provided in Table 4.

Nonetheless, we take additional care to improve the identiﬁcation 
of our main tests using two techniques. First, a method that has been 
shown  to  reduce  endogeneity  bias  without  needing  an  instrument  is 
the matching estimation approach (Dehejia and Wahba, 2002; Çolak 
and Whited, 2007). In particular, we use a regression analysis but by 
ﬁrst  applying  propensity  score  matching  (PSM).  Other  studies  have 
used this dual approach before (Drucker and Puri, 2005). Table OA3 in 
the Online Appendix provides the details of our PSM approach. Model 
(1) presents the results for the pre-matching logistic regression with-
out the six theoretical variables. Model (2) shows the same estimates 
for the post-matching sample. All regression coeﬃcients for the post-
matching sample are statistically insigniﬁcant, which implies that our 
PSM technique successfully removes any diﬀerences in the observable 
characteristics other than the diﬀerence in the six variables of inter-
est. Next, in Model (3), we use the matched sample to re-estimate our 
baseline model from Table 4. Our conclusions regarding six theoretical 
variables are qualitatively similar except for the coeﬃcient for business 
risk.

Our second technique is more suitable for the cases when there are 
multiple endogenous variables. In our paper’s context, there are sev-
eral endogenously chosen variables by the entrepreneur (see Section 3) 
and each one of them is an important variable for our model. Thus, en-
dogeneity bias may originate from any of the six theoretical variables. 
In such cases of multi-variable endogeneity, Wintoki et al. (2012) rec-
ommends using the system generalized method of moments (GMM) of 
Blundell and Bond (1998). Our IV-style instrument is tax revenues (as 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383215A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

% of GDP) that is prevalent in a country during a given year (shortly 
Taxes; see Table A.1). We argue that this variable is relevant for the 
entrepreneur when they determine the optimal levels of the endoge-
nous variables like the ownership stake (𝛼) and the dividend ratio (𝑑), 
but we are not aware of any economic argument (or academic study) 
that  claims  that  government’s  tax  revenues  are  important  for  volun-
tary  delisting  decisions.  Using  this  IV-style  instrument  together  with 
the lagged values of the control variables, we implement the GMM. As 
shown under Model (4), our qualitative conclusions regarding all theo-
retical variables are unchanged.

are positively and signiﬁcantly associated with the probability of vol-
untarily delistings. This result is novel to both the public listing and 
uncertainty literatures as it shows that political uncertainty not only 
reduces the number of private ﬁrms willing to conduct an IPO (Çolak 
et al., 2017), but it also increases public ﬁrms’ probability of voluntary 
delisting. That is, it squeezes the number of public ﬁrms from both sides. 
In short, these ﬁndings indicate that rising policy uncertainties (Baker 
et al., 2016) and regulatory restrictions (Doidge et al., 2017; Kalmen-
ovitz, 2023) in some countries can be one reason for declining numbers 
of public ﬁrms as claimed by Doidge et al. (2017) and Stulz (2020).

5.  Macroeconomic shocks and the delisting decision

5.2.  Mediation analysis

In this section, we test Hypothesis 3 that claims that macroeconomic 
shocks can disproportionately aﬀect certain ﬁrms and make it optimal 
for them to voluntarily delist. The economic motives for delisting (𝜇
and 𝜎) can play a mediating role and through them external shocks 
could impact the delisting decision. We ﬁrst test whether a country’s 
political and regulatory uncertainties aﬀect the delisting choices of the 
local ﬁrms and then, we focus on the mediating role of 𝜇 and 𝜎.

5.1.  Does uncertainty aﬀect the delisting outcomes?

We ﬁrst test for an important consequence of rising political and reg-
ulatory uncertainties within a country. Speciﬁcally, we test Hypotheses 
3A and 3B by using proxies for the uncertainties generated by rapidly 
changing economic and regulatory policies within a country.

Our  measure  of  political  uncertainty  is  the  economic  policy  un-
certainty index (PolUncertainty) of Baker et al. (2016); this index is a 
country-speciﬁc measure constructed based on newspaper articles pub-
lished on policy uncertainty. The economic policy uncertainty database 
(www .policyuncertainty .com)  provides  the  data  for  various  national 
economic  policy  uncertainty  indices.24,25 Our  regulatory  uncertainty 
measure (RegUncertainty) is obtained from the World Bank’s World Gov-
ernance Indicators and it is one of the six major governance indicators 
(Regulatory Quality) in that database.26 It captures the perceptions of 
the economic agents in that country regarding the abilities of the gov-
ernment  to  formulate  and  implement  sound  policies  and  regulations 
that permit and promote private sector development.

To capture the direct eﬀects of uncertainty variables on the delist-
ing outcome, we essentially rerun our analyses from Table 4 but by 
adding the uncertainty variable(s) to the list of determinants of the vol-
untary delisting outcome. As estimation methods, we again use both 
the competing risk sub-hazard and the multinomial logit models. The 
results are reported in Table 6. Both, PolUncertainty and RegUncertainty, 

24 Please refer to the following studies for further details on the construction of 
each country’s uncertainty index: Arbatli et al. (2017), Armelius et al. (2017), 
Baker et al. (2016), Cerda et al. (2016), Ghirelli et al. (2019), Gil and Silva 
(2018), Hardouvelis et al. (2018), Kroese et al. (2015), and Zalla (2017).
25 The data series on economic policy uncertainty index is available at dif-
ferent time periods for diﬀerent countries in our sample. The data series for 
each country is as follows: Brazil (1991-2020), Columbia (1997-2020), Greece 
(1997-2020),  Russia  (1994-2020),  Pakistan  (2010-2020),  Italy  (1997-2020), 
Ireland (1990-2020), Spain (1997-2020), Croatia (2003-2020), Belgium (2001-
2020), China (1997-2020), Chile (1993-2020), Hong Kong (1998-2020), Mex-
ico (1996-2020), Netherlands (1997-2020), France (1990-2020), South Korea 
(1990-2020), Canada (1990-2020), Japan (1990-2020), Sweden (1990-2020), 
Singapore (2003-2020), India (1997-2020), Australia (1997-2020), Germany 
(1993-2020), the United States (1990-2020), and the United Kingdom (1997-
2020). After merging our sample with the economic policy uncertainty index 
(PolUncertainty), the sample size drops to 349,626 ﬁrm-year observations.
26 When merging our sample with the regulatory uncertainty measure (Re-
gUncertainty),  we  end  up  with  a  sample  of  304,779  ﬁrm-year  observations. 
When the missing observations for both policy and regulatory uncertainty vari-
ables are dropped, we end up with a ﬁnal sample of 301,785 ﬁrm-year obser-
vations.

To test and establish the mediating role of 𝜇 and 𝜎 in transform-
ing the uncertainty shocks into delisting outcomes, we follow studies 
such as Baron and Kenny (1986) and MacKinnon (2012) and perform a 
formal mediation analysis. A mediation analysis (or pathway analysis) 
involves parsimonious speciﬁcations of structural equation modelling.27
Some studies have used this method to establish direct evidence on the 
underlying economic channels in other settings that use OLS regressions 
(e.g., Tsang et al., 2019). However, our analyses involve a proportional 
hazard model that requires a more elaborate mediation analysis that 
has no precedence in the ﬁnancial economics literature but has been 
used in the biomedical ﬁeld (e.g., VanderWeele, 2011).

Section D of our Online Appendix formally describes the mediation 
analysis in the context of our proportional hazard model and it presents 
our ﬁndings. We demonstrate that the macroeconomic shock variables 
(PolUncertainty and RegUncertainty) aﬀect the voluntary delisting haz-
ard through several pathways. Most importantly, both the growth rate 
(𝜇) and the business risk (𝜎) are strong mediators of the uncertainty 
shocks: individually, they can mediate between 41.96% to 42.72% of 
the total eﬀect exerted by the uncertainty shocks. This ﬁnding supports 
our Hypotheses H3A and H3B. Thus, our model variables that relate to 
the ﬁrm’s economic performance play an important role: they expose 
the ﬁrm’s delisting decisions to external macroeconomic shocks. Not 
only the internal dynamics of the ﬁrm, but also the external macroe-
conomic conditions can make it optimal to voluntarily delist from an 
exchange.

6.  Conclusion

In this paper, we develop a theoretical model of a publicly listed 
ﬁrm that is considering voluntarily delisting from a stock exchange. A 
large shareholder, or a syndicate of shareholders with perfectly aligned 
interests whom we refer to as the entrepreneur, controls the decision to 
voluntarily delist. Consistent with prior models of the exchange list-
ing  decision  of  an  entrepreneur  (e.g.,  Pagano  et  al.,  1998;  Shleifer 
and  Wolfenzon,  2002;  Stulz,  2009),  our  model  assumes  that  the  en-
trepreneur is inclined to expropriate the publicly listed ﬁrm’s assets at 
a rate that is inﬂuenced by the quality and enforceability of the share-
holder protection laws within the country where the ﬁrm is listed. This 
is the agency motive for voluntary delisting. There are also economic 
motives behind the entrepreneur’s delisting decision that include rela-
tively higher and/or smoother production returns. In equilibrium, the 
entrepreneur balances the agency motives and the economic motives. 
The model allows for heterogeneity across ﬁrms and across countries 
whereby the unique conditions of the ﬁrm’s business and the environ-
ment the ﬁrm operates in (the country) make it optimal for some ﬁrms 

27 Pathway analysis is a branch of structural equation modelling and it is used 
to examine the causal relationship between two or more variables. It is a method 
to discern the eﬀects of several variables acting on a speciﬁed outcome via mul-
tiple causal pathways. Pathway analysis is an extension of regression analysis, 
and it is only useful in cases applying regression analysis techniques. It is just a 
series of regressions applied sequentially to data. For further details, please see 
MacKinnon (2012).

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383216A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Table 6
The impact of macro factor on voluntary delisting.

Competing Risk

Multinomial Logit

(1)

(2)

(3)

PolUncertainty

RegUncertainty

ExpropriationPenalty (𝑏)

InsiderOwnership (𝛼)

DividendPayout (𝑑)

ListingExpenses (𝑙)

GrowthRate (𝜇)

BusinessRisk (𝜎)

Controls
Industry FE
Wald 𝜒 2
LPLR
Pseudo 𝑅2
Observations

0.0018***
(0.0002)

0.1808***
(0.0298)
1.9346***
(0.2517)
-3.9555**
(1.6604)
0.1196***
(0.0370)
-0.9528***
(0.1468)
0.2457**
(0.1074)

Yes
Yes
27,776.98
-7,296.50
—–
301,785

0.0018***
(0.0002)
0.0370***
(0.0038)
0.1609***
(0.0283)
2.2976***
(0.2450)
-2.5356*
(1.4432)
0.0621**
(0.0271)
-0.7942***
(0.1471)
0.2130*
(0.1097)

Yes
Yes
27,410.53
-7,199.14
—–
301,785

0.0368***
(0.0037)
0.1930***
(0.0306)
2.2518***
(0.2476)
-2.3000
(1.4258)
0.0638**
(0.0262)
-0.7614***
(0.1492)
0.1798
(0.1115)

Yes
Yes
29,087.90
-7,220.63
—–
301,785

M&A

(4)

-0.0008***
(0.0001)
0.0407***
(0.0015)
0.0527***
(0.0084)
0.1077
(0.0872)
-2.9325***
(0.5338)
0.0717***
(0.0198)
-0.3797***
(0.0640)
0.2773***
(0.0513)

Involuntary

Voluntary

(5)

(6)

0.0012***
(0.0002)
0.0394***
(0.0038)
0.1912***
(0.0305)
2.3359***
(0.2577)
-3.2926**
(1.4972)
0.0715***
(0.0277)
-0.8179***
(0.1742)
0.2232*
(0.1230)

0.0014***
(0.0002)
0.0035
(0.0024)
0.0106
(0.0232)
-0.2676
(0.2318)
-9.4904***
(2.3188)
0.0861
(0.0606)
-1.5928***
(0.1480)
1.1483***
(0.0848)

Yes
Yes
—–
—–
0.082
301,785

This  table  reports  the  results  of  the  direct  eﬀect  of  macroeconomic  shock,  represented  by  political 
(PolUncertainty) and regulatory (RegUncertainty) uncertainty measures on ﬁrm’s probability of voluntary 
delisting. The ﬁrst three columns show the estimates of the competing risk sub-hazard model as in Table 4, 
where the dependent variable is the time to voluntarily delist. Models (1)-(3) report the coeﬃcient estimates 
while adding the political (PolUncertainty) uncertainty, regulatory (RegUncertainty) uncertainty, and both po-
litical (PolUncertainty) and regulatory (RegUncertainty) uncertainty variables to the models, respectively. The 
coeﬃcients measure the partial impact of each variable on the likelihood of voluntary delisting conditional 
on the duration. The second set provides the estimates of the multinomial logit model after adding both po-
litical (PolUncertainty) and regulatory (RegUncertainty) uncertainty variables to the model in Equation (14). 
The dependent variable equals zero if a ﬁrm did not delist. It equals one for delistings because of merger, 
two for involuntary, and three for voluntary. Models (4)-(6) report the coeﬃcient estimates. As explained in 
Section 5, PolUncertainty and RegUncertainty variables have some missing observations for some countries in 
earlier years of our sample. Thus, in this table, we work with the squared sample whereby all the missing 
observations are removed, which leaves us with a sample of 301,785 observations. All models include indus-
try ﬁxed eﬀects using the two-digit SIC industry code and the estimates are adjusted for right censoring. The 
standard errors are reported inside the brackets and are corrected for ﬁrm-level clustering eﬀects. The super-
scripts ***, **, and * denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All variables 
are deﬁned in Table A.1.

to delist but not the others. Furthermore, various micro (within ﬁrm) 
and macro (external to the ﬁrm) shocks can change the optimality of 
the delisting decision.

A model with such assumptions makes a number of predictions con-
cerning the voluntary delisting patterns across diﬀerent countries. First, 
it emphasizes the agency motives for voluntary delisting that in our 
model  are  parametrized  by  variables  such  as  i)  country’s  expropria-
tion penalty parameter, ii) entrepreneur’s insider ownership, iii) listing 
expenses (e.g., audit fees), and iv) dividend payouts to shareholders. 
Second, it shows that under certain assumptions about the production 
returns, the economic motives behind the delisting decision can be de-
scribed by the growth rate and volatility of the ﬁrm’s revenue stream 
in the years leading up to the delisting. Third, our model demonstrates 
how exogenous shocks generated by increasing economic policy and 
regulatory uncertainties in a country can make it more optimal for the 
ﬁrm to delist that year.

We show that our theoretical model’s delisting condition has a re-
duced  form  which  can  be  approximated  by  a  hazard  rate  model,  or 
alternatively, by a multinomial logit. Thus, the empirical tests of our 
model  are  conducted  with  the  help  of  a  competing  risk  hazard  rate 
model that contrasts voluntary delistings to involuntary and acquisition-
related delistings to better discern the determinants of the voluntary 
delisting  decision  in  many  countries.  The  competing  risk  model  en-
hances  the  power  of  our  tests  as  it  allows  for  rejecting  the  null  of 

voluntary delisting by contrasting it to ﬁrms that delist involuntarily 
or due to an M&A.

To test our model’s predictions, we collect delisting data from 26 
countries  spanning  three  decades  between  1990  and  2020.  We  then 
read the news around the delisting events and manually sort them into 
subsamples of voluntary, involuntary, and M&A delistings. This sorting 
yields the largest known cross-country dataset of delisted ﬁrms that in-
cludes 832 voluntary, 1035 involuntary, and 6,708 acquisition-related 
delistings  across  26  diﬀerent  countries  with  diﬀerent  economic  and 
regulatory conditions. Working with such a multi-country dataset is es-
sential, since our model makes various general statements of principals 
that should be tested universally to be convincing. Using this data, we 
show that our model is broadly consistent with the voluntary delisting 
patterns around the World. The results from our competing risk model 
indicate that among the six key parameters that our model emphasizes, 
economically and statistically the most important ones are (in order of 
economic signiﬁcance): insider ownership, ﬁrm’s growth rate, business 
risk, country’s expropriation penalty parameter, listing expenses, and 
dividends.

Furthermore,  the  related  mediation  analyses  show  that  economic 
policy  uncertainty  aﬀects  the  voluntary  delisting  odds  by  curtailing 
the ﬁrm’s growth and by increasing its sales volatility (business risk). 
Similar analyses for regulatory uncertainty indicate that increasing reg-
ulatory requirements for the listed ﬁrms raise the attractiveness of the 

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383217A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

voluntary delisting decision by aﬀecting both the growth rate and busi-
ness  risk.  These  ﬁndings  can  help  explain  the  rising  trend  towards 
voluntary delisting we observe in many countries (Doidge et al., 2017; 
Stulz, 2020). The uncertainty in US economic policy has been rising in 
recent decades (Baker et al., 2016) and many additional business regu-
lations and reporting guidelines have been imposed on listed ﬁrms since 
the early 2000s (Doidge et al., 2017; Kalmenovitz, 2023).

Overall, our model provides valuable insights into the key determi-
nants of the decision to voluntarily delist and the external factors that 
aﬀect the timing of that decision. Further, this model can potentially 
inspire other models on the decision to delist. For instance, one can 
consider the delisting decision as a real option held by the entrepreneur 
from the moment the ﬁrm is listed to the moment it is optimal to delist it 
from the exchange, possibly also considering the entrepreneur’s option 
to completely abandon the business. Such a real option model would 
have the advantage of providing the entrepreneur with not only the 
optimal threshold to delist the ﬁrm from the exchange (as our model 
does), but also with the values of the options to delist and to abandon, 
and to see how they evolve over time and how they react to exogenous 
shocks. Another related model to ours could study the optimal delisting 
decision from the perspective of the policymaker (or social planner), for 
instance through a welfare analysis, with the aim of guiding the social 
planner on the optimal regulatory policy to be followed over time to en-
hance IPOs and minimize voluntary delistings. A diﬀerent model could 
explicitly focus on regulatory uncertainty and analyse whether the abil-
ity to lobby politicians reduces or increases the value of the delisting 
option. This model extension would be of particular relevance for coun-
tries where there is high regulatory policy uncertainty.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Alcino Azevedo: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Gonul 
Colak: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, 
Supervision,  Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  For-
mal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Izidin El Kalak: Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Resources, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Radu Tunaru: Writing – 
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Re-
sources, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal anal-
ysis, Data curation.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.

Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

Appendix A.  Proposition proofs

Proof of Proposition 2. (i) First, let us notice that the Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛) factor 
𝑏𝑣2. Since 𝑣 = 1−𝛼𝑑(1−𝑙)
is given by 1 − 𝑏𝑣 + 1
it follows that 𝑣′(𝑏) =
2
− 1−𝛼𝑑(1−𝑙)
𝑣
𝑏 . Then,
= −
𝑏2

𝑏

𝜕Ψ
𝜕𝑏 = −[𝑣 + 𝑏𝑣′] +
1
2

= −𝑣 + 𝑣 +

[𝑣2 + 2𝑏𝑣𝑣′] = −𝑣 + 𝑏

1
2

𝑣
𝑏 +

1
2

[𝑣2 − 2𝑏𝑣

𝑣
𝑏 ]

[𝑣2 − 2𝑣2] = −

< 0

𝑣2

2
This means that when 𝑏 ↑ ⟹ Ψ(𝑏, 𝑣) ↓ and when 𝑏 ↓ ⟹ Ψ(𝑏, 𝑣) ↑.

In order to assess how changes in 𝑏 may impact the likelihood of 
, which reﬂects 

delisting, we need to consider the function Γ(𝑏) = Ψ(𝑏,𝑣)
the entrepreneur’s behaviour.

𝛼

The case of 𝛼 being determined exogenously

In this case, 𝛼 is not linked to 𝑏 and because Γ(𝑏) = 1

𝛼 Ψ(𝑏, 𝑣) it fol-
lows that Γ has the same monotony with respect to 𝑏 as Ψ. Therefore, 
when 𝑏 ↑ ⟹ Γ(𝑏) ↓ and when 𝑏 ↓ ⟹ Γ(𝑏) ↑.
The case of 𝛼 being determined endogenously
In this case, recall that 𝛼 = 1−𝑏𝑣
𝑑(1−𝑙)

. Because Γ(𝑏) = 1−𝑏𝑣+0.5𝑏𝑣2

= 𝑑(1 −

1−𝑏𝑣
𝑑(1−𝑙)

𝑙) + 1
2

𝜕Γ
𝜕𝑏 =

=

=

𝑑(1 − 𝑙)

𝑏𝑣2

1−𝑏𝑣 it follows that

0.5𝑑(1 − 𝑙)
(1 − 𝑏𝑣)2
0.5𝑑(1 − 𝑙)
(1 − 𝑏𝑣)2
0.5𝑑(1 − 𝑙)
(1 − 𝑏𝑣)2

[
(𝑣2 + 2𝑏𝑣𝑣′)(1 − 𝑏𝑣) + (𝑣 + 𝑏𝑣′)𝑏𝑣2

]

(𝑣2 + 2𝑏𝑣(−𝑣∕𝑏))(1 − 𝑏𝑣) + 𝑏𝑣2(𝑣 + 𝑏(−𝑣∕𝑏))

(𝑣2 − 2𝑣2)(1 − 𝑏𝑣) = −

0.5𝑑(1 − 𝑙)
(1 − 𝑏𝑣)

𝑣2 < 0

But 𝛼 > 0 implies that 1 − 𝑏𝑣 > 0 so then  𝜕Γ
< 0. Therefore, when 𝑏 ↑
𝜕𝑏
⟹ Γ(𝑏) ↓ so if  ̂𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) and 𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) stay ﬁxed then delisting is more 
likely. Similarly, when 𝑏 ↓ ⟹ Γ(𝑏) ↑ and if  ̂𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) and 𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) stay 
ﬁxed then delisting is less likely.
𝛼 = 1−𝑏𝑣+0.5𝑏𝑣2

. Recall that 𝑣 = 1−𝛼𝑑(1−𝑙)

and hence 

𝑏

(ii) Let Γ = Ψ(𝑏,𝑣)
1 − 𝑏𝑣 = 𝛼𝑑(1 − 𝑙), 𝑣′

𝛼
𝑑(1−𝑙)
𝑏

𝛼 = −

. Then,

𝜕Γ
𝜕𝛼 =

=

[−𝑏𝑣′

𝛼 + 𝑏𝑣𝑣′

𝛼]𝛼 − [1 − 𝑏𝑣 + 0.5𝑏𝑣2]

𝛼2
−𝑣 + 𝑏𝑣2 − 0.5𝑏𝑣2
𝛼2

=

𝑣[0.5𝑏𝑣 − 1]
𝛼2

= −

[𝛼𝑑(1 − 𝑙) + 1] < 0

𝑣
2𝛼2

The left-hand side of the delisting condition decreases when 𝛼 increases 
and delisting becomes more likely.

(iii) We can calculate 𝑣′

𝑑 = −

𝛼(1−𝑙)
𝑏

. Similar calculations lead to

𝜕Γ
𝜕𝑑 =

1
𝛼 [−𝑏𝑣′

𝑑 + 𝑏𝑣𝑣′

𝑑 ] =

1
𝛼 [𝛼(1 − 𝑙) − 𝛼(1 − 𝑙)𝑣]

= (1 − 𝑙)(1 − 𝑣) > 0

Hence, the left-hand side of the delisting condition increases when 𝑑
increases and delisting becomes less likely.

(iv) Since 𝑣′

𝑙 =

𝛼𝑑
𝑏 , we get

𝜕Γ
𝜕𝑙 =

=

𝑙] =

𝑙 + 𝑏𝑣𝑣′

1
1
𝛼 [−𝛼𝑑 +
𝛼 [−𝑏𝑣′
1
𝛼𝑏 [𝛼𝑑(1 − 𝑏) − 𝛼2𝑑2(1 − 𝑙)]

𝛼𝑑(1 − 𝛼𝑑(1 − 𝑙))
𝑏

]

The condition  𝜕Γ
< 0 is satisﬁed if 𝛼𝑑(1 − 𝑏) − 𝛼2𝑑2(1 − 𝑙) < 0 which is 
𝜕𝑙
𝑏−1
equivalent to 1 − 𝑙 > 1−𝑏
𝛼𝑑 . If 𝑏 ≥ 1 as it is the case in our 
paper, because 𝑙 < 1, the last condition is always true. Therefore, 𝜕Γ
< 0
𝜕𝑙
always holds in this case, which means that when 𝑙 ↑ it follows that Γ ↓
and the entrepreneur is more likely to delist the company. □

𝛼𝑑 or 𝑙 < 1 +

Proof of Proposition 3. It is well-known (see Luenberger, 1998, Sec-
tion 11.7) that, for a Geometric Brownian motion, the conditional con-
nection between the value of 𝑆𝑛 and the value of 𝑆𝑇 at some future 
time 𝑇 is described by 𝑆𝑇 = 𝑆𝑛 exp{(𝜇 − 1
𝜎2)(𝑇 − 𝑛) + 𝜎𝑊𝑇 −𝑛} where 
2
{𝑊𝑛}𝑛≥0 is the Wiener process associated with the geometric Brownian 
motion. Thus, 𝑌
𝜎2)(𝑇 − 𝑛) + 𝜎𝑊𝑇 −𝑛 and since for 
[𝑛,𝑇 ]
yearly 𝑅𝑛+1 ≈ 1 + 𝑌

≡ ln(
[𝑛,𝑛+1], it follows that 𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) ≈ 1 + 𝜇 − 1
2

Replacing now in (12) the  ̃𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) and 𝐸(𝑅𝑛+1) with the respective 

) = (𝜇 − 1
2

𝑆𝑇
𝑆𝑛

𝜎2.

formula based on the approximation above we get (13). □

Proof of Proposition 4. The delisting condition can be rewritten28 as

28 This requires all quantities involved to be positive.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383218A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

𝑛+1

1 + 𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5𝜎2
1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2
Then, by adding the shock to business uncertainty we get

𝛼𝑛
Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)

𝑛+1

<

<

𝛼𝑛
Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)

1 + 𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5(𝜎2

𝑛+1 + 𝜀)

1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2

𝑛+1
1 + 𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5𝜎2
1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2

−

0.5𝜀
1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2
The last inequality is more diﬃcult to hold when 𝜀 < 0 and it is more 

𝛼𝑛
Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)

𝑛+1

𝑛+1

𝑛+1

+

<

(A.1)

likely to hold when 𝜀 > 0. Likewise, by adding the shock to the growth 
rate we get

𝑛+1

<

𝛼𝑛
Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)

1 + 𝜇𝑛+1 + 𝜀 − 0.5𝜎2
1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2

𝑛+1
1 + 𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5𝜎2
1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2

+

𝜀
1 + ̃𝜇𝑛+1 − 0.5̃𝜎2
The last inequality is more diﬃcult to hold when 𝜀 > 0 and it is more 
likely to hold when 𝜀 < 0. □

𝛼𝑛
Ψ(𝑏𝑛, 𝑣𝑛)

𝑛+1

𝑛+1

𝑛+1

<

Appendix B.  Variables deﬁnition

Table A.1
Variables deﬁnition.

Variable Name

Deﬁnition

InsidersOwnership (𝛼)

Variables Related to Agency Motives for Delisting
ExpropriationPenalty (𝑏) Proxied by the Anti-Self Dealing Index of Djankov et al. (2008), which is originally
deﬁned to range between 0 and 1, however in our sample, there is no country with
the value of 0. Furthermore, as described in Section 2.1, our model requires the proxy
for the true country penalty parameter to be greater than 1 (𝑏 ≥ 1). Thus, we multiply
the Anti-self dealing index with 10 to ensure the 𝑏 values are between 1 and 10.
Firm’s insiders ownership is measured as the natural logarithm of insiders ownership
in the ﬁrm plus one. As per DataStream, WC08021 is deﬁned as the number of close-
ly held shares divided by common shares outstanding where closely held shares are
those held by the insiders. For US ﬁrms, we complement the missing values of insiders
ownership from DataStream with those obtained from shares Reﬁnitiv Eikon Database
(around 9% of the sample). The remaining missing values of this variable are replaced
with the ﬁrm’s mean value (around 9.4% of the sample). To smooth out the extreme
observations just before delisting, we take ﬁve years moving average of the variable.
Dividend payout is a ratio of dividend paid (in millions of local currency) divided by
total sales (in millions of local currency). To smooth out the extreme observations
just before delisting, we take ﬁve years moving average of this variable.
Listing expenses is a ratio of audit fees (from Reﬁnitiv’s Worldscope; in millions of
local currency) divided by ﬁrm’s total sales (in millions of local currency). For US
ﬁrms, we complement the missing observations with data from Audit Analytics. We
replace all observations in the sample with the mean values of this variable for the
portfolio of ﬁrms sorted by country and ﬁrm size tercile. In some developing countries
this variable shows extreme observations (above 100%) in some years, so we standard-
ize this variable and we take ﬁve years moving average.

DividendPayout (𝑑)

ListingExpenses (𝑙)

Variables Related to Economic Motives for Delisting
GrowthRate (𝜇)

BusinessRisk (𝜎)

Control Variables
Size

FirmAge

Leverage

MB

FCF

CAPEX

The ﬁrm’s growth rate is deﬁned as the annual change in the natural logarithm of
total sales (inﬂation adjusted). To smooth out the extreme observations just before
delisting, we take ﬁve years moving average of this variable.
Firm’s business risk is deﬁned as the standard deviation of the ﬁrm’s growth rate
(GrowthRate) over the ﬁve years window.

The ﬁrm’s size is deﬁned as the natural logarithm of total assets (inﬂation-adjusted).
To smooth out the extreme observations just before delisting, we take ﬁve years
moving average of this variable.
Firm’s age is deﬁned as the natural logarithm of (1 + the number of years since the
ﬁrm’s IPO date). If the IPO date is not available, then we use the number of years
since the ﬁrm’s record ﬁrst appears in the corresponding dataset. For USA ﬁrms, we
also complement missing IPO dates with dates obtained from Jay Ritter’s website as
described in Appendix A of Loughran and Ritter (2004).
The ﬁrm’s leverage is deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s total debt divided by total assets. To smo-
oth out the extreme observations just before delisting, we take ﬁve years moving ave-
rage of this variable.
It is deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s market value divided by total assets. To smooth out the ex-
-treme observations just before delisting, we take ﬁve years moving average of this
variable.
The ﬁrm’s free cash ﬂow. For ﬁrms in Worldscope this variable is already calculated.
In the Worldscope manual, FCF is deﬁned as Operating activities minus (capital exp-
-enditure, extraordinary items and discontinued operations, and total working capital
change) divided by ﬁrm’s total assets. To be consistent, for Compustat North America
and for Compustat Global, FCF is deﬁned using the same formula. To smooth out the
extreme observations just before delisting, we take ﬁve years moving average of this
variable.
The ﬁrm’s CAPEX is deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s capital expenditure divided by total asset.
To smooth out the extreme observations just before delisting, we take ﬁve years mo-
-ving average of this variable.

Item Code

CRSP/
Compustat

Djankov et al. (2008)

Datastream/
Worldscope

ln(WC08021 + 1)

DV/SALE

WC05376/WC01001

WC01801 and
TotalFees
(from Audit Analytics)

WC01801

𝑙𝑛(𝑆𝐴𝐿𝐸𝑡)−)
𝑙𝑛(𝑆𝐴𝐿𝐸𝑡−1

Std.Dev.
(Growth Rate)

ln(AT)

𝑙𝑛(𝑊 𝐶01001𝑡)−
𝑙𝑛(𝑊 𝐶01001𝑡−1)

Std.Dev.
(Growth Rate)

ln(WC02999)

ln(FirmAge + 1)

ln(FirmAge + 1)

(DLTT+DLC)/AT

WC03255/WC02999

(AT-CEQ+
(CSHO*PRCC_F))/AT

MV/WC02999

(OANCF - CAPX - XIDOC - WCAPCH)/AT (WC05507 * WC05301)/

WC02999

CAPX/AT

WC04601/WC02999

(continued on next page)

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383219A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Table A.1 (continued)

Variable Name

Deﬁnition

R&D

NEI

Turnover

ReturnVolatility

CrossListing

MCGDP

Macroeconomic Variables
PolUncertainty

RegUncertainty

Alternative measures of 𝑏
Revised Anti-director
Index

Public Enforcement
Index

Instrumental Variable
Taxes

The ﬁrm’s R&D ratio is deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s research and development expen-
diture divided by total assets; missing values of R&D are replaced by zero. We
take the ﬁve years rolling window to smooth out the extreme observations.
The net equity issuance ratio is deﬁned as net equity issuance to total assets. To
smooth out the extreme observations just before delisting, we take ﬁve years
moving average of this variable.
The ﬁrm’s stock turnover is deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s natural logarithm of the annual
number of shares traded divided by the number of shares outstanding. We take
the ﬁve years rolling window to smooth out the extreme observations.
The ﬁrm’s stock return volatility is deﬁned as the annualized standard deviation
of the daily stock returns. To smooth out the extreme observations just before
delisting, we take ﬁve years moving average of this variable.
Cross listing is a dummy variable that equals one if a local ﬁrm is also cross
listed in a foreign exchange and zero otherwise.
Stock market capitalisation to GDP ratio is the country’s stock market capital-
isation divided by its gross domestic product.

Political uncertainty index is a country speciﬁc measure constructed based on
newspaper articles regarding policy uncertainty. We use the variable as deﬁned.
The regulatory uncertainty measure is proxied by the World Bank’s World Go-
vernance Indicators as one of the six major governance (Regulatory Quality) in-
dicators. It captures perceptions about the ability of the government to formu-
late and implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote pri-
vate sector development.

Item Code

CRSP/
Compustat

XRD/AT

Datastream/
Worldscope

WC01201/WC02999

(SSTK-PRSTKC)/AT

WC04251/WC02999

ln(CSHTR_F)/ln(CSHO)

ln(VO)/ln(WC05301)

Std.Dev.(StockReturn)

Std.Dev.(StockReturn)

Authors’ calculation

Authors’ calculation

WorldBank Database

WorldBank Database

Baker et al.’s (2016) economic policy uncertainty database:
https://www.policyuncertainty.com/all_country_data.html
World Bank’s World Governance Indicators database:
https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/

The index is deﬁned as the aggregate index of shareholder rights. The index is
formed by summing: (1) vote by mail, (2) shares not deposited, (3) cumulative
voting, (4) oppressed minority, (5) pre-emptive rights, and (6) capital to call a
meeting. By deﬁnition, this index ranges from 1 to 5 (i.e., 𝑏 ≥ 1 is satisﬁed).
Index of public enforcement if all disclosure and approval requirements have been
met. By deﬁnition, it ranges from 0 to 1. We use the index for robustness checks
and, thus, we do not apply any transformation to change the range of this index.

Djankov et al. (2008)

Djankov et al. (2008)

WDI deﬁnes this variable as: “Tax revenue refers to compulsory transfers to the
central government for public purposes. Certain compulsory transfers such as ﬁ-
nes, penalties, and most social security contributions are excluded. Refunds and
corrections of erroneously collected tax revenue are treated as negative revenue.”

World Development Indicator (WDI) and OECD Database

This table deﬁnes all the variables that are used in the empirical analyses.

Appendix C.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103832.

References

Arbatli, E.C., Davis, S.J., Ito, A., Miake, N., 2017. Policy uncertainty in Japan. Tech. Rep. 

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arikan, A.M., Stulz, R.M., 2016. Corporate acquisitions, diversiﬁcation, and the ﬁrm’s life 

Armelius, H., Hull, I., Köhler, H.S., 2017. The timing of uncertainty shocks in a small open 

cycle. J. Finance 71 (1), 139–194.

economy. Econ. Lett. 155, 31–34.

Austin, P.C., Fine, J.P., 2017. Practical recommendations for reporting Fine-Gray model 

analyses for competing risk data. Stat. Med. 36 (27), 4391–4400.

Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., 2016. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Q. J. 

Econ. 131 (4), 1593–1636.

Baron, R.M., Kenny, D.A., 1986. The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. J. Pers. 
Soc. Psychol. 51 (6), 1173.

Bebchuk, L.A., Roe, M.J., 1999. A theory of path dependence in corporate ownership and 

Benninga, S., Helmantel, M., Sarig, O., 2005. The timing of initial public oﬀerings. J. 

governance. Stanf. Law Rev. 52, 127.

Financ. Econ. 75 (1), 115–132.

(1), 85–106.

Brogaard, J., Detzel, A., 2015. The asset-pricing implications of government economic 

policy uncertainty. Manag. Sci. 61 (1), 3–18.

Burkart, M., Gromb, D., Panunzi, F., 1997. Large shareholders, monitoring, and the value 

of the ﬁrm. Q. J. Econ. 112 (3), 693–728.

Celikyurt, U., Sevilir, M., Shivdasani, A., 2010. Going public to acquire? The acquisition 

motive in IPOs. J. Financ. Econ. 96 (3), 345–363.

Cerda, R., Silva, A., Valente, J.T., 2016. Economic policy uncertainty indices for Chile. 

Working paper.

Clyde, P., Schultz, P., Zaman, M., 1997. Trading costs and exchange delisting: the case 
of ﬁrms that voluntarily move from the American stock exchange to the Nasdaq. J. 
Finance 52 (5), 2103–2112.

Cohn, J.B., Mills, L.F., Towery, E.M., 2014. The evolution of capital structure and operat-
ing performance after leveraged buyouts: evidence from US corporate tax returns. J. 
Financ. Econ. 111 (2), 469–494.

Çolak, G., Durnev, A., Qian, Y., 2017. Political uncertainty and IPO activity: evidence 

from US gubernatorial elections. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 52 (6), 2523–2564.

Çolak, G., Whited, T.M., 2007. Spin-oﬀs, divestitures, and conglomerate investment. Rev. 

Dawson, J.W., Seater, J.J., 2013. Federal regulation and aggregate economic growth. J. 

Financ. Stud. 20 (3), 557–595.

Econ. Growth 18 (2), 137–177.

Dehejia, R.H., Wahba, S., 2002. Propensity score-matching methods for nonexperimental 

causal studies. Rev. Econ. Stat. 84 (1), 151–161.

Dixit, A., 1989. Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty. J. Polit. Econ. 97 (3), 620–638.
Dixit, A., Pindyck, R., 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton University Press, 

New Jersey.

Bernanke, B.S., 1983. Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. Q. J. Econ. 98 

Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The law and economics 

of self-dealing. J. Financ. Econ. 88 (3), 430–465.

Bharath, S., Dittmar, A., 2010. Why do ﬁrms use private equity to opt out of public 

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2004. Why are foreign ﬁrms listed in the US worth 

markets? Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (5), 1771–1818.

Bloom, N., 2009. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623–685.
Blundell, R., Bond, S., 1998. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel 

data models. J. Econom. 87 (1), 115–143.

Bonaime, A., Huseyin, G., Ion, M., 2018. Does policy uncertainty aﬀect mergers and ac-

quisitions? J. Financ. Econ. 129 (3), 531–558.

more? J. Financ. Econ. 71 (2), 205–238.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2009. Has New York become less competitive than 
London in global markets? Evaluating foreign listing choices over time. J. Financ. 
Econ. 91 (3), 253–277.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2013. The US left behind? Financial globalization 

and the rise of IPOs outside the US. J. Financ. Econ. 110 (3), 546–573.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383220A. Azevedo, G. Colak, I. El Kalak et al.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2017. The US listing gap. J. Financ. Econ. 123 (3), 

McLaughlin, P., 2016. What if the US regulatory burden were its own country? Mercatus 

464–487.

Finance 60 (6), 2763–2799.

J. Financ. Econ. 65 (3), 365–395.

Drucker, S., Puri, M., 2005. On the beneﬁts of concurrent lending and underwriting. J. 

Mehran, H., Peristiani, S., 2010. Financial visibility and the decision to go private. Rev. 

Faccio, M., Lang, L.H., 2002. The ultimate ownership of Western European corporations. 

Morck, R., Wolfenzon, D., Yeung, B., 2005. Corporate governance, economic entrench-

Fine, J.P., Gray, R.J., 1999. A proportional hazards model for the subdistribution of a 

Nguyen, N.H., Phan, H.V., 2017. Policy uncertainty and mergers and acquisitions. J. Fi-

competing risk. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 94 (446), 496–509.

nanc. Quant. Anal. 52 (2), 613–644.

Fos, V., Jiang, W., 2015. Out-of-the-money CEOs: private control premium and option 

Ongena, S., Smith, D.C., 2001. The duration of bank relationships. J. Financ. Econ. 61 (3), 

Gao, X., Ritter, J.R., Zhu, Z., 2013. Where have all the IPOs gone? J. Financ. Quant. 

Pagano, M., Panetta, F., Zingales, L., 1998. Why do companies go public? An empirical 

449–475.

analysis. J. Finance 53 (1), 27–64.

Ghirelli, C., Pérez, J.J., Urtasun, A., 2019. A new economic policy uncertainty index for 

Pagano, M., Röell, A., 1998. The choice of stock ownership structure: agency costs, mon-

exercises. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (6), 1549–1585.

Anal. 48 (6), 1663–1692.

Spain. Econ. Lett. 182, 64–67.

Center. 26.

Financ. Stud. 23 (2), 519–547.

ment, and growth. J. Econ. Lit. 43 (3), 655–720.

Gil, M., Silva, D., 2018. Economic policy uncertainty indices for Colombia. Deutsche Bank 
Research. Available online. http://www .policyuncertainty .com /methodology .html. 
(Accessed 7 September 2021).

Gulen, H., Ion, M., 2016. Policy uncertainty and corporate investment. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 29 (3), 523–564.

Gungoraydinoglu, A., Çolak, G., Öztekin, Ö., 2017. Political environment, ﬁnancial inter-

mediation costs, and ﬁnancing patterns. J. Corp. Finance 44, 167–192.

Hardouvelis, G.A., Karalas, G., Karanastasis, D., Samartzis, P., 2018. Economic policy 
uncertainty, political uncertainty and the Greek economic crisis. In: Political Uncer-
tainty and the Greek Economic Crisis. April 3, 2018.

Heckman, J.J., Singer, B., 1984. Econometric duration analysis. J. Econom. 24 (1–2), 

Jensen, M.C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash ﬂow, corporate ﬁnance, and takeovers. Am. 

Sanger, G., Peterson, J., 1990. An empirical analysis of common stock delistings. J. Fi-

Julio, B., Yook, Y., 2012. Political uncertainty and corporate investment cycles. J. Fi-

Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., 2022. Have exchange-listed ﬁrms become less important 

63–132.

Econ. Rev. 76 (2), 323–329.

nance 67 (1), 45–83.

646–679.

Ber. 4715, 464–467.

Kalmenovitz, J., 2023. Regulatory intensity and ﬁrm-speciﬁc exposure. Rev. Financ. Stud.
Kiefer, N.M., 1988. Economic duration data and hazard functions. J. Econ. Lit. 26 (2), 

Econ. 94 (3, Part 1), 461–488.

Kroese, L., Kok, S., Parlevliet, J., 2015. Beleidsonzekerheid in Nederland. Econ. Stat. 

737–783.

La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 1999. Corporate ownership around the 

Econ. 66, 3–27.

world. J. Finance 54 (2), 471–517.

La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2002. Investor protection and 

corporate valuation. J. Finance 57 (3), 1147–1170.

La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1998. Law and ﬁnance. J. 

Leahy, J.V., Whited, T.M., 1996. The eﬀect of uncertainty on investment: some stylized 

ﬁnancial globalization. J. Account. Res. 47 (2), 349–390.

itoring, and the decision to go public. Q. J. Econ. 113 (1), 187–225.

Pástor, L., Taylor, L.A., Veronesi, P., 2008. Entrepreneurial learning, the IPO decision, 
and the post-IPO drop in ﬁrm proﬁtability. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (8), 3005–3046.
Pástor, L., Veronesi, P., 2012. Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices. J. 

Pástor, L., Veronesi, P., 2013. Political uncertainty and risk premia. J. Financ. Econ. 110 

Finance 67 (4), 1219–1264.

(3), 520–545.

Pour, E.K., Lasfer, M., 2013. Why do companies delist voluntarily from the stock market? 

J. Bank. Finance 37 (12), 4850–4860.

Ritter, J.R., Welch, I., 2002. A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations. J. Fi-

nance 57 (4), 1795–1828.

Roberts, M.R., Whited, T.M., 2013. Endogeneity in Empirical Corporate Finance 1. Hand-

book of the Economics of Finance, vol. 2. Elsevier, pp. 493–572.

nanc. Quant. Anal. 25 (2), 261–272.

for the economy? J. Financ. Econ. 143 (2), 927–958.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1986. Large shareholders and corporate control. J. Polit. 

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. A survey of corporate governance. J. Finance 52 (2), 

Shleifer, A., Wolfenzon, D., 2002. Investor protection and equity markets. J. Financ. 

Shumway, T., 1997. The delisting bias in CRSP data. J. Finance 52 (1), 327–340.
Sialm, C., 2006. Stochastic taxation and asset pricing in dynamic general equilibrium. J. 

Econ. Dyn. Control 30 (3), 511–540.

Stulz, R.M., 2005. The limits of ﬁnancial globalization. J. Finance 60 (4), 1595–1638.
Stulz, R.M., 2009. Securities laws, disclosure, and national capital markets in the age of 

Stulz, R.M., 2020. Public versus private equity. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 36 (2), 275–290.
Tsang, A., Xie, F., Xin, X., 2019. Foreign institutional investors and corporate voluntary 

disclosure around the world. Account. Rev. 94 (5), 319–348.

Ulrich,  M.,  2013.  How  does  the  bond  market  perceive  government  interventions? 

Columbia Business School Research Paper (12/42).

Van Cleave, M., 2016. Introduction to Logic and Critical Thinking. Matthew J. van Cleave.
VanderWeele, T.J., 2011. Commentary: causal mediation analysis with survival data. Epi-

demiology, 582–585.

Wheelock, D.C., Wilson, P.W., 2000. Why do banks disappear? The determinants of U.S. 

bank failures and acquisitions. Rev. Econ. Stat. 82 (1), 127–138.

Wintoki, M.B., Linck, J.S., Netter, J.M., 2012. Endogeneity and the dynamics of internal 

corporate governance. J. Financ. Econ. 105 (3), 581–606.

You, L., Parhizgari, A.M., Srivastava, S., 2012. Cross-listing and subsequent delisting in 

foreign markets. J. Empir. Finance 19 (2), 200–216.

Zalla, R., 2017. Economic policy uncertainty in Ireland. Atl. Econ. J. 45 (2), 269–271.
Zingales, L., 1995. Insider ownership and the decision to go public. Rev. Econ. Stud. 62 

Polit. Econ. 106 (6), 1113–1155.

facts. Tech. Rep.

Leuz, C., Triantis, A., Wang, T.Y., 2008. Why do ﬁrms go dark? Causes and economic 
consequences of voluntary SEC deregistration. J. Account. Econ. 45, 181–208.
Loughran, T., Ritter, J., 2004. Why has IPO underpricing changed over time? Financ. 

Manag. 33 (3), 5–37.

Lowry, M., Michaely, R., Volkova, E., et al., 2017. Initial public oﬀerings: a synthesis 
of the literature and directions for future research. Found. Trends Finance 11 (3–4), 
154–320.

Luenberger, D.G., 1998. Investment Science. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Macey, J., O’Hara, M., Pompilio, D., 2008. Down and out in the stock market: the law 

and economics of the delisting process. J. Law Econ. 51 (4), 683–713.
MacKinnon, D.P., 2012. Introduction to Statistical Mediation Analysis. Routledge.
Maksimovic, V., Pichler, P., 2001. Technological innovation and initial public oﬀerings. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 14 (2), 459–494.

Marosi, A., Massoud, N., 2007. Why do ﬁrms go dark? J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 42 (02), 

Marosi, A., Massoud, N., 2008. “You can enter but you cannot leave...”: U.S. securities 

(3), 425–448.

markets and foreign ﬁrms. J. Finance 63 (5), 2477–2506.

McDonald, R., Siegel, D., 1986. The value of waiting to invest. Q. J. Econ. 101 (4), 

421–442.

707–727.

JournalofFinancialEconomics155(2024)10383221