Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Bank heterogeneity and financial stability✩
Itay Goldstein a,b, Alexandr Kopytov c,∗, Lin Shen d, Haotian Xiang e
a The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, 19104, PA, USA
b NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, 02138, MA, USA
c Simon Business School, University of Rochester, 500 Wilson Boulevard, Rochester, 14627, NY, USA
d INSEAD, Boulevard de Constance, Fontainebleau, 77300, France
e Guanghua School of Management, Peking University, No. 5 Yiheyuan Road, Beijing, 100871, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We propose a model of the financial system in which banks are individually prone to runs and connected
through fire sales. Strategic complementarities within and across banks amplify each other, making hetero-
geneity in bank risks a key factor shaping the fragility of each bank and the entire system. As long as different
banks are interconnected, an increase in heterogeneity stabilizes all banks. Reductions in asset commonality,
bank-specific disclosures, and even broad-based policies such as asset purchases and liquidity requirements
can enhance stability by increasing bank heterogeneity.

Dataset link: Replication package for "Bank het
erogeneity and financial stability" (Original dat
a)

JEL classification:
G01
G21
G28

Keywords:
Financial fragility
Fire sales
Strategic complementarity
Bank run

1. Introduction

The global financial crisis of 2007–2008 put the correlation in risks
across financial institutions (for short, banks) in the limelight. The con-
cern emphasized by policymakers (Haldane, 2009; Yellen, 2013) is that
the joint failure of many banks presents a big threat to the economy.
Therefore, several measures have been developed to track comovement
in banks’ risks.1 What is less clear is whether the correlation between
banks makes them more prone to failure overall. This is critical for
evaluating the importance of tail comovement. After all, if banks were
more correlated in their failures, but at the same time less likely to
fail overall, then the implications of comovement for financial fragility

would be much less severe. The model presented in this paper uncovers
a new channel through which risk correlation makes banks overall
more fragile. Based on this channel, we develop new implications for
financial policy aimed at minimizing fragility.

Our model features banks that are individually fragile due to the
provision of liquidity transformation and indirectly interconnected
through fire-sale spillovers.2 When facing withdrawals, banks liquidate
their assets in a common market, thereby imposing negative fire-
sale externalities on one another. We define financial fragility as the
unconditional probability of individual banks to suffer a run. We show
that the degree of bank heterogeneity — the extent to which different
banks experience runs in different states and a measure of tail-risk

✩

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, an anonymous referee, Franklin Allen, Max Bruche, Markus Brunnermeier, Stephen
Cecchetti, Jean Dermine, Thomas Eisenbach, Piero Gottardi, Naveen Khanna, John Kuong, Xuewen Liu, Zehao Liu, Andrey Malenko, Dmitry Orlov, Cecilia
Parlatore, Adriano Rampini, Stathis Tompaidis, Aleh Tsyvinski, Harald Uhlig, Ming Yang, Yao Zeng, Zhen Zhou, as well as seminar participants at INSEAD,
Princeton, UBC, Washington University in St. Louis, NYU, UCSD, UCL, Nankai, AFA, Virtual Finance Theory Seminar, NBER Summer Institute, RCFS/RAPS Winter
Conference, International Moscow Finance Conference, Banca d’Italia and Bocconi University Conference, Scottish Economic Society Annual Conference and CICF
for useful comments. Earlier versions of the paper circulated under the title ‘‘Synchronicity and Fragility’’.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

itayg@wharton.upenn.edu (I. Goldstein), akopytov@simon.rochester.edu (A. Kopytov), lin.shen@insead.edu (L. Shen),

xiang@gsm.pku.edu.cn (H. Xiang).

1 Popular systemic risk measures are based on tail comovement among financial institutions, e.g. Huang et al. (2009), Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016),

Acharya et al. (2017) and Brownlees and Engle (2017).

2 We refer to individual institutions as banks, but our analyses can be applied to other types of institutions with runnable liabilities (e.g., corporate bond

mutual funds, Goldstein et al., 2017).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103934
Received 28 November 2022; Received in revised form 31 August 2024; Accepted 2 September 2024

Available online 10 September 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

dispersion in our setting — is a key indicator of financial stability of
individual banks and the system as a whole. We further argue that
boosting heterogeneity, at least to a certain point, is a natural goal for
regulators aiming at minimizing real losses caused by financial fragility
and inefficient fire sales.

Why does bank heterogeneity reduce fragility? The main economic
force behind this result is a two-layered coordination problem that nat-
urally arises in our setting. First, typical to a bank-run model, there is
a within-bank strategic complementarity. Investors who withdraw money
from a bank early cause costly asset liquidations and impose negative
externalities on those who stay. Second, there is a cross-bank strategic
complementarity due to fire-sale spillovers. Key to our results is that
these two complementarities amplify each other. An investor is more
concerned about withdrawals in her bank when she expects investors of
other banks to withdraw in their banks, forcing premature liquidations
and driving up the fire-sale discount. Therefore, if withdrawals from
different banks coincide with each other, cross-bank fire-sale spillovers
are particularly detrimental to bank stability. As withdrawals become
more dispersed, fire-sale spillovers are attenuated and become less
detrimental to stability. There exists a natural limit to this result: If
runs are sufficiently dispersed, investors become certain about run
situations in other banks. In that case, the strength of fire-sale spillovers
is effectively fixed, and bank heterogeneity no longer affects fragility.
It is important to highlight that our theory offers very distinct
insights compared to existing theories about systemic risk, which typ-
ically feature a tension between systemic risk and risks of individual
institutions. In particular, as interconnectedness rises, banks are more
likely to fail together but weaker banks are less likely to fail.3 In our
paper, such tension does not exist, since larger heterogeneity across
banks reduces fragility for each individual bank, and hence the system
as a whole. Therefore, heterogeneity is a first-order concern. This high-
lights the need to track heterogeneity. Ignoring the impact of policies
on heterogeneity would lead to an imprecise assessment of their effect
on financial stability.

How can regulators affect bank heterogeneity? To answer this ques-
tion, we identify main factors contributing to heterogeneity and point
out how various policies affect it. First, if banks hold different assets,
they are exposed to different fundamental shocks, which naturally
leads to dispersion in withdrawals. Policies that reduce asset common-
ality, such as ring fencing, can thus increase heterogeneity. Second,
because investors are the ones who make withdrawal decisions, what
matters for runs is perceived rather than physical asset commonality.
By mandating disclosure of bank-specific information, regulators can
reduce investors’ perceived asset commonality and boost heterogeneity.
Third, since run decisions are shaped by investors’ beliefs about the
magnitude of the fire-sale discount, liquidity conditions in the asset
market also play an important role. We show that secondary market
liquidity injections and liquidity requirements have a stronger positive
effect on liquidity conditions perceived by investors of banks with
stronger fundamentals and thus increase heterogeneity.

We now describe the model and the results in more detail. As is
typical for models of financial fragility, run decisions of bank investors
are characterized by run thresholds. Specifically, run happens if and
only if the aggregate fundamental falls below a bank-specific threshold.
Therefore, low run thresholds indicate low fragility. In our model, all
bank-specific thresholds are determined jointly in equilibrium. When
deciding whether to withdraw their funds early, investors assess run
situations in all banks in the financial system. To pin down equilibrium
run thresholds, we thus need to characterize investors’ beliefs about run
decisions of other investors in their banks and investors in other banks.
Analytical characterization of these beliefs in a setting featuring inter-
acting within- and cross-bank complementarities is one contribution of
our paper.

3 See, for example, Cabrales et al. (2017) in the context of financial

networks and Bouvard et al. (2015) in the context of bank disclosure.

There are two main factors that shape run thresholds. The first one
is bank fundamentals. In the model, bank asset returns are subject to
aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. Idiosyncratic shocks separate banks
into two types ex post: strong banks receive a positive shock and weak
banks receive a negative shock. Strong banks are relatively more stable,
and a worse aggregate shock is needed to trigger runs on these banks.
Hence, they have a lower run threshold. Second, run thresholds depend
on investors’ beliefs about the fire-sale discount. Marginal strong-bank
investors expect a higher fire-sale discount than marginal weak-bank
investors do. This is because if strong-bank investors are on the margin
of running or not, they expect that weak banks are experiencing severe
run problems. Conversely, marginal investors of weak banks expect
fewer runs on strong banks. Overall, reflecting both the fundamental
effect and the fire-sale effect, the run thresholds of both types of banks
are determined in equilibrium. The distance between the run thresholds
of strong and weak banks captures bank heterogeneity.

Our main theoretical result is that an increase in bank hetero-
geneity makes both weak and strong banks more resilient to panic
runs by weakening the reinforcement between within- and cross-bank
complementarities. A larger heterogeneity implies that strong banks’
stability is challenged by a greater downward pressure that weak banks
impose on liquidation prices, and weak banks’ fragility is alleviated by
a lower pressure that strong banks impose. The key to the decrease in
the overall fragility is that the effect on weak banks dominates that
on strong banks. This is a direct result of the fact that within- and
cross-bank complementarities are mutually reinforcing. In particular,
given that weak banks are more internally fragile, their investors are
more strongly affected by the alleviated fire-sale pressure than strong-
bank investors are affected by the intensified fire-sale pressure. Hence,
fragility is lower when heterogeneity increases.

When heterogeneity becomes too large, however, a further increase
in it has no effect on fragility. In this case, strong banks and weak banks
are effectively disconnected. Specifically, investors in strong (weak)
banks become certain that all (no) investors in weak (strong) banks
will run. Therefore, when investors decide whether to run, they face
uncertainties only regarding run situations in the same type of banks.
As a result, an increase in heterogeneity no longer affects cross-bank
spillovers. These extreme scenarios with two non-interacting groups of
banks are less interesting from a theoretical standpoint. Furthermore,
they are also difficult to reconcile with experiences from recent finan-
cial crises that featured substantial uncertainties about the health of
various financial institutions among market participants.

After establishing the key insight about heterogeneity and fragility,
we proceed to policy analyses. We show that in our model, reducing
bank fragility is welfare-improving because runs are associated with
real resource losses due to fire sales. Thus, stabilizing the financial
sector is a natural goal for the regulator. We consider four policies,
often discussed as part of financial regulation, and study their effect on
fragility through the heterogeneity channel.

First, we consider a ring-fencing policy that separates bank balance
sheets into different divisions according to business or geographic
focus. Such a policy increases the dispersion in asset returns across
different bank divisions. In the model, this corresponds to an increase
in the ex-post difference between weak and strong banks and, hence,
a higher bank heterogeneity. As argued above, an increase in hetero-
geneity is beneficial for stability of all banks (unless heterogeneity
is already too large). The existing literature that examines the re-
lation between asset commonality and financial stability has mainly
focused on cascades of fundamental defaults in which investors play a
passive role. This literature suggests that asset differentiation reduces
systemic bank failures at the expense of more individual failures of
weak banks (Shaffer, 1994; Wagner, 2010 and 2011; Ibragimov et al.,
2011). Simulation analyses suggest that purely fundamental default
cascades are unlikely in modern financial systems (Elsinger et al., 2006;
Upper, 2011). Differently, we consider panic-based runs with investors
actively withdrawing because of concerns about others’ withdrawals,

2 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

precipitating illiquidity which then spreads across banks through fire-
sale spillovers. Importantly, we show that in our environment asset
differentiation can make both strong and weak banks more resilient
to panic-driven runs.

Second, we consider regulatory disclosure that affects the quality of
bank-specific information available to investors. We extend the model
by adding noise to investors’ information about bank-specific shocks. In
this extended setting, we show that what matters for heterogeneity is
perceived differences between bank asset returns. In an opaque finan-
cial system, investors can hardly distinguish between strong and weak
banks, resulting in an effectively homogeneous financial system. Dis-
closing bank-specific information enlarges heterogeneity and stabilizes
the financial system.4 While existing literature argues that disclosing
bank-specific information can undermine the stability of weak banks
(e.g., Bouvard et al., 2015 and Goldstein and Leitner, 2018), our
results suggest that disclosure can stabilize the entire financial sector,
including weak banks, by alleviating fire-sale pressure on particularly
fragile institutions.5

The third policy we examine is secondary market liquidity in-
jections, widely used by regulators during market turmoils in the
2007–2008 financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. Unlike ring-
fencing and disclosure policies, a liquidity injection does not affect
(perceived) dispersion in bank fundamentals. However, it does affect
heterogeneity by reshaping investors’ beliefs about the fire-sale dis-
count. In the model, a liquidity injection reduces the fire-sale discount
for any amount of long-term assets liquidated by banks. Surprisingly,
even though an injection is broad-based — that is, the regulator does
not purchase assets owned by a particular group of banks — it tends to
reduce the fire-sale discount perceived by strong-bank investors more
prominently. The reason is that strong banks start to experience runs
when weak banks are already forced to liquidate a lot of their assets;
that is, strong banks are under runs when liquidity conditions are
particularly dire. A liquidity injection therefore provides a greater relief
to strong-bank investors, thereby boosting heterogeneity and stabilizing
the financial system.

Different from ring-fencing and disclosure policies that influence
financial fragility only through changing heterogeneity, liquidity injec-
tions also have a direct stabilizing effect—that is, a reduction in the
fire-sale discount following a liquidity injection benefits banks even
with fixed heterogeneity. A calibration exercise based on data of U.S.
banks during the 2007–2008 crisis suggests that the indirect effect
working through changing bank heterogeneity is nontrivial.

The last policy we explore is liquidity requirements. We consider
an extension that allows banks to hold both cash and long-term assets.
Cash serves as a liquidity buffer against early withdrawals and can be
used to acquire assets sold by other banks. Similar to liquidity injection
by regulators, required liquidity buffers improve liquidity conditions
and directly enhance the stability of the financial system. In addition
to that, since strong banks utilize their liquidity buffers under worse
liquidity conditions, the same amount of liquidity buffer has a greater
stabilizing effect on strong banks than on weak banks. As a result,
liquidity requirements can also enhance stability indirectly by boosting
bank heterogeneity.

Literature

Our model, featuring interconnected fragile banks,
builds on two large strands of literature on financial fragility. The
first one studies fragility of financial institutions due to strategic com-
plementarities among investors and panic-driven runs (Diamond and

4 A contemporaneous paper by Dai et al. (2024) argues that disclosure
of banks’ systemic risk exposures — but not their idiosyncratic risks — can
mitigate financial fragility. In our framework with reinforcing complementar-
ities, disclosing bank-specific information can enlarge heterogeneity which is
beneficial for overall stability.

5 In a one-bank setting, Parlatore (2015) shows that an increase in
transparency can worsen coordination problem among depositors and thus
undermine stability.

Dybvig, 1983). Settings with strategic complementarities typically fea-
ture multiple equilibria if there is no uncertainty about bank funda-
mentals, with the same policies potentially having different effects
in different equilibria. We use the global games technique (Rochet
and Vives, 2004; Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005) to pin down a unique
equilibrium. Specifically, bank investors in our model are uncertain
about the aggregate fundamental and thus cannot perfectly foresee run
situations in their own and other banks. The global games approach
allows us to characterize the strategic beliefs of bank investors about
run situations in their own banks and other banks in the financial
system. This approach is particularly appealing for policy analysis as
it ties the endogenous likelihood of a crisis to economic fundamentals,
which allows us to make precise predictions about costs and benefits
of different policy interventions.

The fact that fragilities of individual banks are interrelated through
fire sales connects our paper to the second strand of literature that stud-
ies contagion through fire-sale spillovers. Early contributions (Cifuentes
et al., 2005; Diamond and Rajan, 2005) emphasize existence of cross-
bank spillovers due to a limited liquidity pool. Uhlig (2010) discusses
microfoundations of fire-sale discounts faced by banks. A few papers
examine the coordination problem across homogeneous financial insti-
tutions induced by fire-sale externality. For example, Parlatore (2016)
shows that sponsors’ support of money market funds complements each
other because lower asset prices caused by fire sales make support
costlier; Kuong (2021) demonstrates that a tightening of collateral
requirements by lenders causes borrowers to default, which results in
fire-sale discounts for collateral; Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015) construct a
macro-model that links the likelihood of bank-run equilibrium and fire
sales with the time-varying strength of financial accelerator. Different
from these papers, our model features both cross- and within-bank
strategic complementarities that intensify each other. More closely
related to us are works by Liu (2016, 2018) and Eisenbach (2017) who
study models in which bank runs are connected through secondary
markets in the absence of uncertainty about the liquidation price.
However, their focus is different from ours: Eisenbach (2017) studies
the effectiveness of rollover risk as a market disciplinary device in
the presence of fire-sale spillovers, and Liu (2016, 2018) shows that
fire-sale spillovers might lead to equilibrium multiplicity. We instead
emphasize heterogeneous effects of the feedback loop between bank
runs and fire sales on different banks in the financial system, and
uncover bank heterogeneity as a key determinant of the feedback
strength and thus fragility.6

A few papers emphasize that regulators should target agents that
impose a stronger externality on others in one-complementarity coor-
dination games. Sákovics and Steiner (2012) consider a coordination
game with heterogeneous agents and study optimal targeted poli-
cies. Shen and Zou (2024) propose policies that screen agents based on
their heterogeneous information in global games and illustrate the ef-
ficiency of such policies in targeting agents with medium beliefs. Cong
et al. (2020) argue that saving small banks is cheaper and can generate
stronger informational externalities. Probably the closest to us is Choi
(2014). He argues that regulators should support strong banks because
the fragility of strong banks affects weak banks on the margin but not
vice versa. In our setting, fragilities of weak and strong banks always
affect each other simultaneously.7 We show that the reinforcement

6 Settings with multilayered complementarities have been used to study
other questions, e.g. capital and liquidity regulation (Carletti et al., 2020) and
twin crises (Goldstein, 2005). Given their different focus, these papers do not
talk about heterogeneity and its importance for fragility.

7 The difference arises because Choi (2014) uses a binary payoff structure
similar to Morris and Shin (1998), while we use Diamond and Dybvig (1983)-
like payoffs. In addition, he shows that, depending on the parameters, it can
be optimal to support both types of banks or only weak banks. His main result
emerges in the continuous-time model where the noise in investors’ signals has
bounded support.

3 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

between within- and cross-bank complementarities, which is absent
in Choi (2014), makes heterogeneity beneficial for all banks. This
economic mechanism is behind our novel policy analyses. In particular,
we show that even broad-based policies such as liquidity injections and
liquidity requirements can boost heterogeneity and enhance financial
stability.

Our paper is also related to a series of studies on the role of asset
commonality for systemic risk (Shaffer, 1994; Acharya, 2009; Stiglitz,
2010; Ibragimov et al., 2011; Wagner, 2010 and 2011; Allen et al.,
2012; Cabrales et al., 2017; Kopytov, 2023).8 As discussed above, these
papers focus on correlated fundamental bank defaults. They emphasize
a trade-off between losses due to failures of individual institutions and
systemic crises, which means that whether asset diversification is desir-
able might depend on the distribution of shocks. For example, Cabrales
et al. (2017) argue that fully diversified systems are socially desirable
if negative shocks are expected to be small, but asset dispersion is
beneficial if shocks are large. In contrast, we focus on panic-driven runs.
We show that what matters for financial stability is bank heterogeneity,
that is, the dispersion of runs across banks, rather than the dispersion of
asset returns. Furthermore, in our framework dispersion in asset returns
can reduce run probability for all banks irrespective of distributional
assumptions on shocks. This is consistent with empirical findings of
Huang et al. (2009) who document that an increase in asset correlation
among large U.S. banks leads to an increase in their individual default
probabilities.

More generally, our paper makes a theoretical contribution to the
global games literature pioneered by Carlsson and van Damme (1993)
and later developed into various topics such as currency attacks (Morris
and Shin, 1998; Hellwig et al., 2006) and bank runs (Rochet and Vives,
2004; Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005). A key feature of a standard global
games setting is the Laplacian property (Morris and Shin, 2003): A
marginal investor is uninformed about the rank of her signal, and her
belief about the mass of runners is uniform. Even when investors have
heterogeneous payoffs, a version of the Laplacian property holds for
the weighted average belief of marginal investors of different types
(Sákovics and Steiner, 2012). In those settings, increasing heterogeneity
has no impact on investors’ run decisions on average, as the optimism
of weak-bank investors about the actions of strong-bank investors is
exactly offset by the pessimism of strong-bank investors. This is no
longer true in our model featuring two types of interacting strategic
complementarities. In our setting, the overall fragility depends on
the weighted average of beliefs about the interaction between fire-
sale pressure and runs in individual banks. These interaction terms
are not symmetric across bank types and depend on the degree of
heterogeneity.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays
out the model. Section 3 presents the main theoretical results on the
relationship between heterogeneity and fragility. Section 4 discusses
how policies affect heterogeneity and, in turn, stability and welfare.
Section 5 concludes.

2. Model

The economy is populated with three types of risk-neutral agents:
banks, bank investors, and outside investors. There are three periods,
𝑡 = 0, 1, 2, and no time discounting.

2.1. Banks

There is a continuum of banks indexed by 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1]. At 𝑡 = 0,
bank 𝑖 collects one unit of capital from a unit mass of investors in
the form of demandable debt and makes long-term investment that

8 A recent paper by Song and Thakor (2023) shows how an endogenously
arising interbank market can make ex-ante identical banks ex-post different
and improve intermediation efficiency.

generates a gross return of 𝑧𝑖 = 𝜃 + 𝜁𝑖 at 𝑡 = 2, where 𝜃 is the aggregate
component shared by all banks and 𝜁𝑖 is the bank-specific component.9
The cumulative distribution function of the aggregate fundamental
𝐹𝜃 (⋅) has a support [𝜃, ̄𝜃], where ∞ ≥ ̄𝜃 > 𝜃 > 0. The bank-specific
shock 𝜁𝑖 is a zero-mean random variable that takes values 𝜂 ≥ 0 and −𝜂
with equal probabilities.10 The size of bank-specific shocks is restricted
to be such that overall productivity is always positive for all banks,
i.e., 𝜃 − 𝜂 > 0. Both 𝜃 and 𝜁𝑖 are unknown at 𝑡 = 0.

Upon shock realizations at 𝑡 = 1 banks become heterogeneous.
There are two groups of banks: strong banks with 𝜁𝑖 = 𝜂 and weak
banks with 𝜁𝑖 = −𝜂. The masses of the two groups are identical.
Parameter 𝜂 governs the ex-post difference between performances of
strong and weak banks and reflects the dispersion in bank asset returns,
or simply asset dispersion. From an ex-ante perspective, 𝜂 affects the
=
pairwise correlation between bank fundamentals, i.e., Corr
V𝜃
V𝜃
V𝜃+𝜂2 , where V denotes variance. As 𝜂 increases, the relative
V𝜃+V𝜁𝑖
importance of aggregate shocks declines and asset returns of banks 𝑖
and 𝑗 become less correlated.

(𝑧𝑖, 𝑧𝑗

=

)

At 𝑡 = 1, after both aggregate and bank-specific productivities are
realized, bank investors may choose to withdraw their funds early.
Throughout most of the paper, we assume that banks invest all their
capital in long-term projects, and so any early withdrawals from a given
bank force this bank to liquidate some of its long-term investment in
the asset market. Section 4.4 and Supplemental Appendix A.7 consider
extensions in which banks can hold liquid assets that can be used to
repay early withdrawals and acquire assets liquidated by other banks.

2.2. Outside investors and the asset market

At 𝑡 = 1, if a mass 𝑚𝑖 of investors withdraw their funds early from
bank 𝑖, bank 𝑖 needs to raise funds of amount 𝑚𝑖 by partially liquidating
its long-term investment. This means that bank 𝑖 has to liquidate 𝑚𝑖∕𝑝𝑖
units of its long-term investment, where 𝑝𝑖 is an endogenous liquidation
price.

The asset market is competitive and populated with a unit mass
of identical outside investors. Reminiscent of the cash-in-the-market
pricing (Allen and Gale, 1994), liquidity is scarce in the asset market,
which can cause asset prices to fall below their fundamental values.
In particular, in order to purchase a portfolio {𝑘𝑖}𝑖∈[0,1] of bank assets,
an outside investor has to raise 𝐿 = ∫ 𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑖𝑑𝑖 units of external funds
by incurring a financing cost. We summarize the financing cost with a
simple functional form 𝑔(𝐿) ≥ 𝐿, where the spread 𝑔(𝐿) − 𝐿 represents
the amount of real losses due to financial imperfections such as agency
costs (Gomes, 2001). We assume that 𝑔(⋅) is an increasing and strictly
convex function with 𝑔(0) = 0 and 𝑔′(0) = 1. The convexity captures an
increasing marginal cost of liquidity.11

Given masses of runners 𝒎 = {𝑚𝑖}𝑖∈[0,1] and bank
Definition 1.
fundamentals 𝒛 = {𝑧𝑖}𝑖∈[0,1], an equilibrium in the asset market consists
of outside investors’ demand functions {𝑘𝑖(𝒑, 𝒛)}𝑖∈[0,1] and liquidation
prices 𝒑 = {𝑝𝑖(𝒎, 𝒛)}𝑖∈[0,1] such that:

9 Throughout the paper we take the contracts issued by banks to investors
as given. Specifically, unlike Diamond and Dybvig (1983), we do not micro-
found why banks issue demandable debt. The focus of our paper is therefore
on within- and cross-bank interactions of bank investors given the contract
structure observed in reality.

10 In Supplemental Appendix A.5, we show that our main results extend to
the case in which 𝜁𝑖 is a zero-mean random variable that can take an arbitrary
number of values with arbitrary probabilities.

11 Supplemental Appendix A.1 provides an alternative microfoundation for
fire-sale losses—that is, outside investors are less efficient than banks in
managing assets or incur inventory costs when holding them (Shleifer and
Vishny, 1992; Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997). We show that that the pricing
function in that case takes the same form as in Lemma 1.

4 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

1. Given the liquidation prices 𝒑, outside investors’ demand func-
tions {𝑘𝑖(𝒑, 𝒛)}𝑖∈[0,1] maximize their expected payoffs: max
∫ 𝑧𝑖𝑘𝑖𝑑𝑖 − 𝑔 (∫ 𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑖𝑑𝑖)
.

𝑘𝑖,𝑖∈[0,1]

2. The liquidation prices satisfy the market-clearing conditions:

𝑚𝑖 = 𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑖 ∀𝑖 ∈ [0, 1].

The key feature of the asset market is that fire-sale externalities can
spill over across banks. One interpretation of this feature is that banks
face the same group of buyers of their assets. Even if asset markets for
different banks are separated, arbitrage capital might flow across these
markets, leading to comoving fire-sale discounts.

The following lemma summarizes the key properties of the liquida-

tion prices.

Lemma 1. Given masses of runners 𝒎 and bank fundamentals 𝒛, the
equilibrium liquidation price for bank 𝑖’s assets is 𝑝𝑖 = 𝑝(𝑧𝑖, 𝑚) = 𝑧𝑖∕𝜆(𝑚)
∀𝑖 ∈ [0, 1], where 𝑚 ≡ ∫ 𝑚𝑖𝑑𝑖 is the total mass of runners in the economy
and 𝜆(𝑚) ≡ 𝑔′(𝑚) is a strictly increasing function.

Proof. See Appendix B.1. □

The liquidation prices of bank assets are proportional to their pro-
ductivities 𝑧𝑖’s and are subject to a common fire-sale discount factor
𝜆(𝑚). The discount factor 𝜆(𝑚) increases in the total mass of runners in
the entire financial system. Intuitively, if more bank investors withdraw
their funds early, banks have to raise more liquidity in the asset
market. Because the marginal cost of liquidity is an increasing function,
i.e., 𝑔′′(⋅) > 0, the price discount factor 𝜆(𝑚) increases if more bank
investors withdraw early. This is akin to the key property of cash-in-
the-market pricing: asset prices fall as the liquidity demand exceeds
what is available in the market.12

2.3. Bank investors and runs

This section describes the behavior of bank investors. For each bank
𝑖, there is a unit mass of infinitesimal investors indexed by 𝑙 ∈ [0, 1].
At 𝑡 = 0, each investor contributes one unit of capital to her bank. At
that point, bank-specific fundamentals are unknown and so investors
are indifferent regarding which bank to invest in.

At 𝑡 = 1, an investor 𝑙 of bank 𝑖 observes the bank-specific funda-
mental 𝜁𝑖 and receives a noisy private signal 𝑠𝑖𝑙 about the aggregate
fundamental 𝜃,13

𝑠𝑖𝑙 = 𝜃 + 𝜎𝜖𝑖𝑙.

(1)

The signal noise 𝜖𝑖𝑙 has a cumulative distribution function 𝐹𝜖(⋅), which
is differentiable and strictly increasing on its support [𝜖, ̄𝜖]. The cor-
responding probability density function is denoted by 𝑓𝜖(⋅). In what
follows, we work with a bounded noise support, −∞ < 𝜖 < ̄𝜖 < ∞, but
our analyses carry through if it is unbounded. The signal noise 𝜖𝑖𝑙 has a
zero mean and a unit variance, i.e., E𝜖𝑖𝑙 = 0 and V𝜖𝑖𝑙 = 1, so that 𝜎 is the
standard deviation of the private signal conditional on the aggregate
fundamental 𝜃. This information structure follows a conventional global
games setup.

12 In Allen and Gale (1994), 𝑔(𝐿) = ∞ if 𝐿 exceeds a certain threshold ̄𝐿,
so outsiders are constrained by the amount of their cash reserves. We allow
outsiders to raise additional funds when they run out of cash, so that banks’
demand for liquidity can always be satisfied.

13 Section 4.2 extends the model by allowing for partially informative signals
about bank-specific fundamentals. Under imperfect information about the
aggregate fundamental 𝜃, there exist strategic uncertainties both within and
across banks, which allows investors to coordinate and supports equilibrium
uniqueness. Under perfect information about 𝜃, multiplicity is possible (Liu,
2016).

With probability ̄𝑚 ∈ (0, 1), investor 𝑙 is ‘‘non-sleepy’’ and may
withdraw her funds from her bank at 𝑡 = 1.14 With probability 1 −
̄𝑚, investor 𝑙 is ‘‘sleepy’’ and neglects the option to withdraw early.
Therefore, bank 𝑖 needs to liquidate at most a fraction ̄𝑚∕𝑝𝑖 of its
assets if all ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investors withdraw their funds early. We
≤ 1 (as in Chen et al.,
rule out bank failures by assuming that ̄𝑚∕𝑝𝑖
2010). Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) show that the possibility of bank
failure creates a region of strategic substitution, making the analysis
much more technically involved. Importantly, while the assumption
on investors’ limited attention rules out complete bank failures, the
key property of runs is preserved—they reduce the amount of funds
to stayers and are socially undesirable because they trigger fire sale
losses. In Supplemental Appendix A.4, we show that our main results
hold even if bank failures are possible.

In the absence of bank failures, investors who withdraw early are
guaranteed to get their funds back at 𝑡 = 1. At 𝑡 = 2, the investment
return to bank 𝑖 is equally distributed among investors who have not
withdrawn their funds at 𝑡 = 1. A ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investor 𝑙’s payoff
conditional on her decision to withdraw early 𝑎𝑖𝑙 ∈ {𝑟𝑢𝑛, 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑦} from
bank 𝑖 is

𝑢𝑖(𝑎𝑖𝑙) =

1
𝑧𝑖

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

)

(
1 − 𝑚𝑖
𝑝𝑖
1 − 𝑚𝑖

if 𝑎𝑖𝑙 = 𝑟𝑢𝑛,

if 𝑎𝑖𝑙 = 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑦.

Plugging in the market-clearing liquidation price 𝑝𝑖 derived in Lemma 1,
we can express the incremental payoff from staying as

𝜋(𝑧𝑖, 𝑚𝑖, 𝑚) ≡ 𝑢𝑖 (𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑦) − 𝑢𝑖 (𝑟𝑢𝑛) =

𝑧𝑖 − 𝑚𝑖𝜆(𝑚)
1 − 𝑚𝑖

− 1.

(2)

A ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investor 𝑙 of bank 𝑖 runs if and only if the expected
incremental payoff given her signal is negative,15

E[𝜋(𝑧𝑖, 𝑚𝑖, 𝑚)|𝑠𝑖𝑙] < 0.

(3)

Eq. (2) reveals two types of strategic complementarities featured
by our model. First, there is a within-bank strategic complementarity: an
investor’s incremental payoff from staying declines if more investors
in her own bank run.16 On top of that, the fire-sale externalities in
the asset market give rise to a cross-bank strategic complementarity: an
investor’s incremental payoff from staying declines if more investors
in other banks run. More importantly, these two complementarities
amplify each other, namely,

𝜕2𝜋(𝑧𝑖, 𝑚𝑖, 𝑚)
𝜕𝑚𝑖𝜕𝑚

= −

𝜆′(𝑚)
(1 − 𝑚𝑖)2

< 0.

(4)

Banks that encounter more runs (higher 𝑚𝑖’s) have to liquidate more
assets, which naturally makes the payoff to staying investors more
sensitive to a reduction in the liquidation price and therefore the total

14 We assume that investors who withdraw early do not redeposit their funds
to other banks. Supplemental Appendix A.6 considers a simple extension in
which redepositing is allowed. It shows, in particular, that our main results
hold if some investors who withdraw early do not redeposit their funds to
other banks. Relatedly, Egan et al. (2017) analyze a structural model of bank
runs with heterogeneous banks and find that cross-bank deposit flows make
extreme distress episodes unlikely.

15 We assume that bank investors make their withdrawal decisions before
liquidation prices are realized. As a result, bank investors only receive ex-
ogenous private signals (1) about the aggregate fundamental. Consequently,
although liquidation prices are endogenous in our model, they do not serve
as endogenous public signals to bank investors (as in, e.g., Angeletos and
Werning, 2006).

16 Note that when 𝜆(𝑚) < 𝑧𝑖, the fire-sale discount is small relative to
long-term asset return, so the incremental payoff function (2) implies within-
bank strategic substitution. However, as we show in Supplemental Appendix
B, the incremental payoff function satisfies a single-crossing property, which,
together with mild assumptions on the noise distribution, are sufficient for the
uniqueness of threshold equilibrium.

5 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Fig. 1. Timeline.

mass of runners in the economy 𝑚. In Section 3.2, we explain how this
feature drives our main result.

2.4. Timeline and equilibrium definition

Fig. 1 depicts the timeline of our model.
Denote by {𝑎𝑖𝑙(𝑠𝑖𝑙, 𝜁𝑖)}𝑖,𝑙∈[0,1] the set of strategies of ‘‘non-sleepy’’
investors that map bank-specific fundamentals 𝜁𝑖 and their private
signals about the aggregate fundamental 𝑠𝑖𝑙 to their action space 𝑎𝑖𝑙 ∈
{𝑟𝑢𝑛, 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑦}. We have the following equilibrium definition.

Definition 2. Bank investors’ strategies {𝑎𝑖𝑙(𝑠𝑖𝑙, 𝜁𝑖)}𝑖,𝑙∈[0,1], outside
investors’ demand functions {𝑘𝑖(𝒑, 𝒛)}𝑖∈[0,1],
liquidation prices 𝒑 =
{𝑝𝑖(𝒎, 𝒛)}𝑖∈[0,1], and masses of runners 𝒎 = {𝑚𝑖(𝜃, 𝜁𝑖)}𝑖∈[0,1] constitute
an equilibrium if

1. Given 𝒎 and 𝒛, {𝑘𝑖(𝒑, 𝒛)}𝑖∈[0,1] and 𝒑 constitute an equilibrium in

the asset market as in Definition 1;

2. Given her private signal and the bank-specific fundamental of
her bank, each ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investor forms beliefs about 𝒑 and
𝒎 and runs if and only if (3) holds;
3. 𝑚𝑖(𝜃, 𝜁𝑖) = ∫ 1 {𝑎𝑖𝑙(𝑠𝑖𝑙, 𝜁𝑖) = 𝑟𝑢𝑛} 𝑑𝑙.

2.5. Global games and threshold equilibrium

𝑖 and stays when 𝑠𝑖𝑙

We focus on threshold equilibria in which investor 𝑙 of bank 𝑖 runs
≥ 𝜃∗
when 𝑠𝑖𝑙 < 𝜃∗
𝑖 .17 We characterize the threshold
equilibrium in this section and prove its uniqueness in Supplemental
Appendix B. Throughout most of the paper, we focus on the limiting
case of infinitely precise signals, 𝜎 → 0, as is typical in the global games
literature. As such, run thresholds should be understood as limits with
𝜎 → 0. However, for brevity and when it does not cause confusion, we
do not explicitly write endogenous variables as limits. For example, in
𝜃∗
most cases we write a bank 𝑖’s run threshold as 𝜃∗
𝑖 (𝜎). We
show that our results are robust to non-negligible noise in Supplemental
Appendix A.3.

𝑖 , not as lim
𝜎→0

)

( 𝜃∗
𝑖 −𝜃
𝜎

A threshold investor with a signal 𝑠𝑖𝑙 = 𝜃∗
𝑖

is indifferent between
running and staying. Denote her belief about the fraction of ‘‘non-
sleepy’’ investors running on bank 𝑖 as 𝑥. We have ̄𝑚𝑥 = ̄𝑚P (𝑠𝑖𝑙 < 𝜃∗
=
̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
. Therefore, her belief about the aggregate fundamental that
is consistent with 𝑥 is 𝜃(𝑥) = 𝜃∗
(𝑥). As is standard in global
games models, a threshold investor has a Laplacian belief, that is,
she believes that 𝑥 is uniformly distributed (Morris and Shin, 2003).
Therefore, taking the expectation of the incremental payoff function
(2), the indifference condition for her is given by18
) ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑖 − 𝜎𝐹 −1
𝜖

)

1

𝑖

𝜃(𝑥) + 𝜁𝑖 − 𝜆 (𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑖 (𝑥)

∫
0

𝑑𝑥 = 1,

(5)

where 𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝑖 (𝑥) is the mass of runners in the entire economy from her
perspective. Crucially, because the threshold investor’s signal is infor-
mative about the aggregate productivity, she makes inference about

17 Because the incremental payoff function (2) does not always imply within-
bank strategic complementarity, non-threshold equilibria cannot be ruled out.
However, under additional assumptions on the noise distribution — e.g., if it
is uniform — it can be shown that non-threshold equilibria do not exist.

18 See Appendix B.2.1 for derivation.

6 

𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡

is ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

)

( 𝜃∗

𝑗 −𝜃(𝑥)
𝜎

𝑖 (𝑥). Specifically, the amount of runs on bank 𝑗 from her perspective

. Integrating across all 𝑗’s implies

𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝑖 (𝑥) = ̄𝑚 ∫ 𝐹𝜖

)

( 𝜃∗

𝑗 − 𝜃(𝑥)
𝜎

𝑑𝑗 = ̄𝑚 ∫ 𝐹𝜖

( 𝜃∗

𝑗 − 𝜃∗
𝑖
𝜎

)

+ 𝐹 −1
𝜖

(𝑥)

𝑑𝑗. (6)

𝑠 for strong-bank investors and 𝜃∗

Under the binary structure of bank-specific shocks, there are two
equilibrium thresholds, 𝜃∗
𝑤 for weak-
bank investors. Therefore, from the perspective of a strong-bank thresh-
old investor who believes that fraction 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investors run
on her bank, other strong banks are all expected to encounter a mass ̄𝑚𝑥
of runners, whereas weak banks are all expected to encounter a mass
̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

of runners, where

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1
)
(𝑥)
𝜖
𝑤 − 𝜃∗
𝜃∗
𝑠
𝜎

𝛥 ≡ lim
𝜎→0

is the distance between the two run thresholds scaled by the noisiness
of private signals. Consequently, from the perspective of this investor,
the total mass of runners in the economy, given by (6), simplifies to
) .

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑥 +

(𝑥)

(8)

𝑠 (𝑥, 𝛥) =

𝜖

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

Analogously, from the perspective of a weak-bank threshold investor
who believes that a fraction 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investors run on her
bank, the total mass of runners in the economy, given by (6), becomes

𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑤 (𝑥, 𝛥) =

̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

) .

(𝑥)

Taking the limit 𝜎 → 0 in Eq. (5), we get

𝜃∗
𝑠 + 𝜂 =

𝜃∗
𝑤 − 𝜂 =

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥
1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

𝑑𝑥

∫ 1
0

∫ 1
0

(
1 + 𝐼𝑠(𝛥)

) ,

(
1 + 𝐼𝑤(𝛥)

) ,

where

𝐼𝑠(𝛥) ≡

𝐼𝑤(𝛥) ≡

∫
0

1

1

∫

0

𝜆 (𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡

) ̄𝑚𝑥

𝜆 (𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑠 (𝑥, 𝛥)
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
𝑤 (𝑥, 𝛥)
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
𝑠 (𝑥, 𝛥) and 𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡

) ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

𝑑𝑥,

and where 𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝑤 (𝑥, 𝛥) are given by (8) and (9), respectively.
Here 𝐼𝑠(𝛥) and 𝐼𝑤(𝛥) represent expected fire-sale losses borne by thresh-
old investors in strong and weak banks, respectively, which we refer to
as fire-sale pressure on strong and weak banks hereafter. Notably, fire-
sale pressure on a given bank is exerted by banks of its own group and
those of the other group.

Recall that the endogenous variable 𝛥, given by (7), is the distance
between the two run thresholds scaled by the noisiness of private
signals. It measures how dispersed runs are across strong and weak
banks. Therefore, we call 𝛥 bank heterogeneity, or simply heterogeneity. It
is straightforward to verify that 𝛥 ≥ 0.19 If 𝛥 = 0, the financial system is
homogeneous—that is, each threshold investor believes that all banks
in the economy face the same amount of runs. If 𝛥 > 0, runs are

(𝑥, 𝛥) ≤ 𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡

19 To see that, suppose that 𝛥 < 0 and hence 𝜃∗

(9), 𝑚𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝑠
(10) and (11) and the fact that 𝜂 ≥ 0 it then follows that 𝜃∗
𝑤
contradiction.

𝑠 . Then, from (8) and
𝑤 (𝑥, 𝛥), and so, from (12) and (13), 𝐼𝑤(𝛥) ≥ 𝐼𝑠(𝛥). From
𝑠 , which is a

𝑤 < 𝜃∗

≥ 𝜃∗

(7)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

heterogeneous, and threshold investors of strong (weak) banks believe
that weak (strong) banks face more (less) severe run problems.

— as is the case in the alternative model without complementarity
interaction — a threshold investor is more likely to stay.

Bank heterogeneity 𝛥 governs cross-bank interactions in this econ-
omy. Because banks impose fire-sale externalities on one another,
investors need to evaluate the run situations in all banks simultaneously
to make their own decisions whether to withdraw early. Consider a
threshold investor of a strong bank as an example. As shown in Eq. (8),
if a fraction 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investors run on strong banks, she expects
) ≥ 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investors to run on weak
a fraction 𝐹𝜖
banks. 𝛥 plays an important role in shaping investors’ beliefs about the
total amount of runs in the economy and thus the fire-sale discount,
which in turn governs their own run decisions.

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

(𝑥)

𝜖

3. Heterogeneity and stability

The key premise of our model is that within-bank run problems and
cross-bank complementarities due to fire-sale spillovers are mutually
reinforcing. This observation is by no means novel in the literature.20
The main novelty of our paper is that the strength of the complementar-
ity reinforcement — and hence the overall financial fragility — depends
on the structure of the financial system. Our main insight is that differ-
entiating banks moderates the adverse effects of the complementarity
reinforcement and thus stabilizes individual banks and the financial
system as a whole. To emphasize the importance of heterogeneity, we
start by considering a homogeneous benchmark in Section 3.1 and then
analyze the role of heterogeneity in Section 3.2.

3.1. Homogeneous benchmark

Consider a homogeneous benchmark in which all banks have the
same bank-specific productivities, i.e., 𝜂 = 0. Bank heterogeneity is then
𝛥 = 0, and all investors follow the same threshold strategy. From (5),
the common threshold 𝜃∗

0 is given by

1

𝜃∗
0 − 𝜆( ̄𝑚𝑥) ̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

∫
0

𝑑𝑥 = 1.

(14)

Even in the absence of heterogeneity, complementarity reinforcement
is at play and runs on individual banks are aggravated by the fire-sale
externality. To illustrate this point, we consider an alternative setting in
which the fire-sale discount is fixed at the average level ̄𝜆 = ∫ 1
0 𝜆( ̄𝑚𝑥)𝑑𝑥,
so that there are no complementarity interactions. In this case, the run
threshold ̂𝜃∗

0 is given by

1

0 − ̄𝜆 ̄𝑚𝑥
̂𝜃∗
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

∫
0

𝑑𝑥 = 1.

Comparing (14) and (15), we obtain the following:

)

∫

(𝜃∗

0 − ̂𝜃∗
[

0

= E

𝜆( ̄𝑚𝑥)

1

0

1
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
]
̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

1

𝑑𝑥 = ∫

0

𝜆( ̄𝑚𝑥) ̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
[

𝑑𝑥 − ∫
0
]

1

̄𝜆 ̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
(

− E [𝜆( ̄𝑚𝑥)] E

= Cov

𝜆( ̄𝑚𝑥),

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

(15)

𝑑𝑥

)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

> 0,

where expectations and covariance are taken with respect to a random
variable 𝑥 that is uniformly distributed on [0, 1], and where the covari-
ance is positive because 𝜆( ̄𝑚𝑥) and
are both increasing functions
of 𝑥.

̄𝑚𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

> ̂𝜃∗

We can see that the model with the complementarity interaction
features a higher fragility, 𝜃∗
0 . With the complementarity reinforce-
0
ment, runs are particularly detrimental to stayers when the fire-sale
discount is high. If a threshold investor expects the within-bank run
problem to be severe and the fire-sale discount to be large in the same
states of the world, her expected payoff from staying is low. If, in
contrast, within-bank runs and the fire-sale discount are uncorrelated

20 See Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015), Parlatore (2016) and Kuong (2021) and,

in particular, Liu (2016, 2018) and Eisenbach (2017).

This simple example illustrates that the interacting within- and
cross-bank complementarities are detrimental for stability in a homo-
geneous financial system. In what follows, we show that heterogeneity
can be helpful to alleviate the complementarity reinforcement. In par-
ticular, we emphasize the importance of bank heterogeneity 𝛥 and
analyze how various model primitives affect 𝛥 and, ultimately, financial
stability.

3.2. Impact of heterogeneity on stability

We decompose our analyses into two cases. In Section 3.2.1, bank
heterogeneity 𝛥 is not too large, 𝛥 < ̄𝛥 ≡ ̄𝜖 − 𝜖, and the financial sys-
tem features nontrivial cross-bank strategic uncertainties. In this case,
threshold investors of strong banks are uncertain about run behavior of
weak-bank investors, and vice versa. Formally speaking, it implies that
the fire-sale pressure terms 𝐼𝑠(𝛥) and 𝐼𝑤(𝛥), given by (12) and (13),
vary with 𝛥. In Section 3.2.2, 𝛥 ≥ ̄𝛥, and the fire-sale pressure terms
are constants. In this case, threshold strong-bank investors are certain
that all ‘‘non-sleepy’’ weak-bank investors are running, and threshold
weak-bank investors are certain that none of strong-bank investors are
running. We think of such a lack of cross-bank strategic uncertainty
to be less empirically relevant, as in practice it is hard for investors
to precisely assess the run situations in other banks during financial
turmoils. In comparison, the first case is more empirically relevant and
also more interesting from a theoretical standpoint.

3.2.1. Nontrivial cross-bank strategic interactions
𝜃∗
𝑤. Then, using (10) and

Define average fragility as 𝜃∗ ≡ 1
2

𝑠 + 1
𝜃∗

2

(11), we get

𝜃∗ =

1
𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫ 1
0

and

𝜂 =

1

2 ∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

(

1 +

1
2

𝐼𝑠(𝛥) +

)

𝐼𝑤(𝛥)

,

1
2

(𝐼𝑠(𝛥) − 𝐼𝑤(𝛥)

) .

(16)

(17)

𝜃∗
𝑠 = lim
𝜎→0

𝑤. Although 𝜃∗
𝜃∗

By definition of bank heterogeneity in the limit of negligible in-
formation friction (7), a finite 𝛥 implies that the run thresholds of
𝜃∗ =
weak and strong banks are infinitely close to each other, i.e., lim
𝜎→0
𝑠 and 𝜃∗
lim
𝑤 are infinitely close, investors
𝜎→0
receiving signals at 𝑡 = 1 with noise 𝜎 → 0 can distinguish between
them. Therefore, even if investors’ fundamental uncertainty is trivial
(𝜎 → 0), strategic uncertainty is still nontrivial, meaning that investors
are uncertain about run decisions of other investors. Furthermore, the
strategic beliefs of weak- and strong-bank investors differ substantially.
For example, a threshold strong-bank investor is well aware that weak
banks experience more runs than her own bank. This is reflected in the
fact that 𝛥 = lim𝜎→0
is a positive finite number. Consequently,
although the assumption of infinitely small 𝜎 implies that the thresholds
of strong and weak banks are infinitely close, banks are different from
depositors’ perspective when they decide whether to run or not.21

𝑤−𝜃∗
𝜃∗
𝑠
𝜎

The assumption of infinitely precise signals implies that investors
perceive strong and weak banks as heterogeneous at 𝑡 = 1, even though
the run thresholds 𝜃∗
𝑤 are infinitely close. From the 𝑡 = 0
perspective, however, fragilities of all banks are characterized by one
threshold 𝜃∗. Eq. (16) shows how 𝜃∗ is affected by bank heterogeneity 𝛥

𝑠 and 𝜃∗

21 The fact that run thresholds are infinitely close is a typical feature of
global games with heterogeneous agents and negligible information friction
(e.g., Sákovics and Steiner, 2012). With non-negligible information friction
(𝜎 > 0), run thresholds of weak and strong banks are distinct and centered
around the average threshold, 𝜃∗
𝑠 (𝜎) < 𝜃∗(𝜎) < 𝜃∗
𝑤(𝜎). We show in Supplemental
Appendix A.3 how our results extend to this case.

7 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

and model primitives, whereas (17) implicitly defines 𝛥 as a function of
model primitives. Naturally, such a formulation allows us to decompose
the effect of any regulatory policy on financial stability into two parts.
Holding 𝛥 fixed, a change in any policy-related parameter 𝑣 can have a
direct effect on 𝜃∗. This channel captures policy impact holding cross-
bank interactions fixed. Furthermore, a policy can affect 𝜃∗ indirectly
through reshaping cross-bank interactions and thus bank heterogeneity
𝛥. That is,
𝑑𝜃∗
𝑑𝑣

(18)

=

+

.

𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑣
⏟⏟⏟
Direct effect

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑑𝛥
𝜕𝛥
𝑑𝑣
⏟⏟⏟
Indirect effect

The key novelty of our paper is to highlight this indirect effect.
The sign and the magnitude of the corresponding term in Eq. (18)
depends on two components. First, it depends on the relationship
between heterogeneity and fragility 𝜕𝜃∗
. Lemma 2 and Proposition 1
𝜕𝛥
below use Eq. (16) to establish that financial systems with higher
bank heterogeneity are more stable, namely, 𝜕𝜃∗
< 0. Second, the
𝜕𝛥
indirect effect depends on how the policy variable affects heterogeneity,
that is, on 𝑑𝛥
. Eq. (17) reveals various determinants of heterogeneity,
𝑑𝑣
such as asset dispersion 𝜂 and liquidity conditions in the asset market
that shape the fire-sale discount faced by strong and weak banks. In
Section 4, we examine several regulatory policies and discuss how they
affect stability both directly and indirectly.

Eq. (16) reveals that the common run threshold 𝜃∗ is determined
by the average fire-sale pressure on strong and weak banks, 1
𝐼𝑠(𝛥) +
2
1
𝐼𝑤(𝛥). Hence, to understand how heterogeneity affects fragility, we
2
need to examine the impact of heterogeneity on the fire-sale pressure
on both strong and weak banks. This relationship is characterized by
Lemma 2.

Lemma 2. When 𝛥 < ̄𝛥 = ̄𝜖 − 𝜖, an increase in bank heterogeneity
> 0, and alleviates fire-
aggravates fire-sale pressure on strong banks,
< 0. Furthermore, the latter effect is
|
|
|

sale pressure on weak banks,
more substantial than the former, namely, |
|
|

𝜕𝐼𝑤(𝛥)
𝜕𝛥

𝜕𝐼𝑠(𝛥)
𝜕𝛥

> |
|
|

𝜕𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

𝜕𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

|
|
|

.

Proof. See Appendix B.2. □

𝜕𝐼𝑠(𝛥)
𝜕𝛥

As 𝛥 captures the dispersion in fragilities between strong and weak
banks, an increase in 𝛥 affects the strength of fire-sale pressure on
the two groups of banks. From the perspective of strong-bank in-
vestors, an increase in 𝛥 means that weak banks become more fragile.
Consequently, strong-bank investors expect a higher fire-sale pressure
> 0. At the same time, weak-
imposed by weak banks, that is,
bank investors perceive strong banks as more stable, leading them to
< 0. Notably,
anticipate a lower fire-sale pressure, reflected by
the alleviation of the fire-sale pressure on weak banks is more sub-
stantial than the aggravation of the fire-sale pressure on strong banks,
𝜕𝐼𝑤
|
|
𝜕𝛥
|

|
|
|
The key economic force underlying this result is the mutually rein-
forcing within- and cross-bank complementarities, captured by Eq. (4).
Intuitively, weak banks experience more severe runs and, therefore,
have to liquidate more assets in any state of the world. Consequently,
they are more sensitive to changes in asset prices in the secondary
market than strong banks. An increase in 𝛥, thus, has a disproportionate
stabilizing effect on weak banks, which in turn positively affects strong
banks and pulls all banks to an equilibrium of greater stability, i.e., 𝜃∗
goes down. Proposition 1 formalizes this result.

𝜕𝐼𝑤(𝛥)
𝜕𝛥

> |
|
|

𝜕𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

|
|
|

.

Proposition 1. When 𝛥 < ̄𝛥 = ̄𝜖 − 𝜖, run thresholds of strong and weak
banks are infinitely close to the average threshold 𝜃∗, which captures the
fragility of the financial system. Moreover, 𝜃∗ = 𝜃∗(𝛥) decreases in bank
heterogeneity 𝛥.

Proof. See Appendix B.2. □

8 

It is worth emphasizing that both weak and strong banks become
more stable as the difference between their fragilities 𝛥 enlarges. This
can be clearly seen in the case with negligible information friction
as weak and strong banks have infinitely close run thresholds. In
Supplemental Appendix A.3, we analyze the non-limiting case where
the run thresholds of weak and strong banks decouple. In that case,
the average fragility still declines in 𝛥, and both weak and strong banks
tend to benefit from a large 𝛥 unless the signal noise is too large.

As discussed above, the key economic force behind Proposition 1 is
the mutually reinforcing within- and cross-bank complementarities. In
our model, the reinforcing complementarities are a natural implication
of fire-sale externalities and Diamond and Dybvig (1983) payoff struc-
ture. In Supplemental Appendix A.2, we consider a generalized version
of the incremental payoff function (2) and illustrate the importance of
mutually reinforcing complementarities for our result in Proposition 1.

3.2.2. Trivial cross-bank strategic interactions

When the financial system features large heterogeneity, 𝛥 ≥ ̄𝛥, there
are no strategic uncertainties between investors of weak and strong
banks. In particular, threshold investors of strong banks are certain that
all ‘‘non-sleepy’’ investors of weak banks will run; conversely, threshold
investors of weak banks are certain that no investor in strong banks will
run. Therefore, when investors make their run decisions, they only need
to make inferences about the behavior of investors in the same type of
banks. In this case, fire-sale pressure on both strong and weak banks,
𝐼𝑠(𝛥) and 𝐼𝑤(𝛥), no longer depend on 𝛥, and runs in strong and weak
banks can be analyzed separately.

Formally, Eqs. (10) and (11) for the run thresholds become

𝜃∗
𝑠 =

𝜃∗
𝑤 =

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫ 1
0

∫ 1
0

(

1 + ∫
0

𝑑𝑥

(

1 + ∫

0

𝑑𝑥

1

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

)

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

)

𝑑𝑥

− 𝜂,

1

𝜆

)

𝑥

( ̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

)

𝑑𝑥

+ 𝜂.

(19)

(20)

Because the run thresholds of weak and strong banks do not vary with
𝛥, the average fragility of banks 𝜃∗ does not vary with 𝛥 either.22

4. Regulatory policies and heterogeneity

The previous section shows that heterogeneity has important effects
on financial stability in the presence of reinforcing complementarities.
Notably, moving from stability to welfare is straightforward in our
model. Since all agents are risk-neutral, welfare at 𝑡 = 0 can be
measured as the expected output from banks’ long-term projects net
of the losses due to inefficient fire sales. Specifically,

𝑊 = ∫ 𝜃𝑑𝐹𝜃(𝜃)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Expected output
(𝜃∗
𝑤

−

)

−

𝐹𝜃(𝜃∗
𝑠 ) (𝑔( ̄𝑚) − ̄𝑚)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Losses if all banks are under run
)
(𝜃∗
𝑠

)) (

̄𝑚

)

,

− 𝐹𝜃

(𝐹𝜃
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Losses if only weak banks are under run

̄𝑚

−

𝑔

1
2

( 1
2

(21)

where 𝐹𝜃(⋅) is the cumulative distribution function of the aggregate
fundamental 𝜃 at 𝑡 = 0. If strategic interactions between investors
of weak and strong banks are nontrivial and the information friction
is negligible, 𝜃∗
𝑤 are infinitely close (Proposition 1), and (21)
simplifies to

𝑠 and 𝜃∗

𝑊 = ∫ 𝜃𝑑𝐹𝜃(𝜃) − 𝐹𝜃(𝜃∗) (𝑔( ̄𝑚) − ̄𝑚) .

(22)

22 In the case of trivial cross-bank strategic interactions, 𝜃∗

𝑤 are not
infinitely close. Then by definition (7), 𝛥 → ∞ in the limit of infinitely small
𝜎. If 𝜎 is not infinitely small, then 𝛥 is finite even in the case of trivial strategic
interactions.

𝑠 and 𝜃∗

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Eqs. (21) and (22) imply that reducing bank fragilities — that is,
reducing run thresholds — is welfare-improving. In this section, we
look into policies that are widely adopted by regulators in order to
make the financial system more resilient. We emphasize that many
policies, by affecting heterogeneity, have an indirect effect on stability
(see Eq. (18)) that has been previously overlooked. Interestingly, as
we will show in this section, even though some policies are generally
considered broad-based, they can impact certain banks more than
others, thus changing heterogeneity.

Section 4.1 studies ring-fencing that affects bank asset dispersion.
Section 4.2 extends the model by allowing for imperfect informa-
tion about bank-specific fundamentals and studies disclosure of bank-
specific fundamentals. Section 4.3 examines liquidity injections into the
asset market. Section 4.4 studies effects of required liquidity buffers.

4.1. Ring-fencing

Ring-fencing refers to separating large banks’ balance sheets and
restricting fund reallocations across ring-fenced subsidiaries. It is typi-
cally conducted along two dimensions. First, separations can take place
according to the service divisions. In the United States, the Volcker
Rule restricts proprietary trading by commercial banks, essentially
spinning off their investment banking activities. Similarly, starting from
2019, largest U.K. banks are required to separate core businesses in
retail banking from investment banking.23 Second, separations can be
carried out according to geographic locations. For example, the Fed
requires foreign banking organizations with more than $50 billion
in U.S. subsidiary assets to put all their U.S. subsidiaries under an
intermediate holding company (Kreicher and McCauley, 2018). Geo-
graphic ring-fencing has also been pursued by the European regulator
through imposing heavier restrictions on foreign-owned subsidiaries
and restricting intragroup cross-border asset transfers (Enria, 2018).

In the context of our model, a regulator separating banks into
subsidiaries with different business or geographic focuses effectively
increases the dispersion of asset returns 𝜂. For instance, consider split-
ting a large bank issuing mortgages in New York and San Francisco into
two separate banks, one of which operating only in New York while the
other one only in San Francisco. As long as regional shocks of New York
and San Francisco are not perfectly correlated, the two separate banks
are exposed to larger bank-specific shocks than the conglomerate.

The comparative statics of the run thresholds with respect to 𝜂 are
established in Proposition 2 and illustrated in Fig. 2. For the rest of this
section, we express run thresholds and bank heterogeneity as functions
of 𝜂.

Proposition 2. Define

̄𝜂 ≡

1

2 ∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

1

[

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

∫
0

𝑥 +

)

̄𝑚
2

− 𝜆

)]

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 > 0.

(23)

If 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂), then cross-bank strategic interactions are nontrivial, 𝛥 (𝜂) < ̄𝛥,
and run thresholds of strong and weak banks are infinitely close to 𝜃∗ (𝜂).
Moreover, 𝛥 (𝜂) increases in 𝜂 and 𝜃∗ (𝜂) decreases in 𝜂.

Proof. See Appendix B.3. □

When asset performances of weak and strong banks are not too
dispersed, 𝜂 < ̄𝜂, cross-bank interactions are nontrivial, 𝛥 < ̄𝛥, and the
run thresholds of strong and weak banks are infinitely close to each
other. It is straightforward to verify from Eq. (17) that an increase
in 𝜂 raises heterogeneity, i.e., 𝑑𝛥
> 0. Moreover, by Proposition 1,
𝑑𝜂

23 Ring-fencing was first introduced through the Financial Services (Bank-
ing Reform) Act 2013, followed by adjustments in further legislation. See
a summary at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ring-fencing-
information/ring-fencing-information.

Fig. 2. Run thresholds of strong (𝜃∗
𝑤) banks, and their average (𝜃∗ =
1
𝜃∗
𝑤) as functions of the size of bank-specific shock 𝜂. Parametrization:
̄𝑚 = 0.55,
2
𝜆(𝑚) = 1 + 𝑚2, 𝐹𝜖 (⋅) is truncated standard normal over [−1, 1], 𝜂 varies from 0 to 0.05.

𝑠 ) and weak (𝜃∗

𝑠 + 1
𝜃∗

2

𝜕𝜃∗
< 0. Combining these results together, we can see that the effect
𝜕𝛥
of 𝜂 on 𝜃∗ is negative. In other words, when assets become more bank-
specific, all banks become more stable, including those whose asset
performances end up being weaker. Therefore, by (22), increasing 𝜂 up
to ̄𝜂 is unambiguously welfare-improving. Notably, existing literature
studying downsides of asset commonality typically argues that a larger
degree of asset dispersion is associated with fewer systemic crises but
more defaults of weak banks (e.g. Wagner, 2010 and 2011; Ibragimov
et al., 2011; Cabrales et al., 2017). Different from these papers that
focus on fundamental defaults, we study panic-driven runs and empha-
size that more diverse asset performances are associated with lower
fragility even for weak banks due to alleviation of cross-bank fire-sale
externalities.

Corollary 1.
threshold of strong banks 𝜃∗
𝑤(𝜂) increases in 𝜂. The average fragility 𝜃∗(𝜂) does not change with 𝜂.
𝜃∗

If 𝜂 ≥ ̄𝜂, then cross-bank interactions are trivial, 𝛥 ≥ ̄𝛥. Run
𝑠 (𝜂) decreases in 𝜂. Run threshold of weak banks

Proof. See Appendix B.3. □

Proposition 2 and Corollary 1 show that the effect of 𝜂 on fragility
is not ‘‘symmetric’’ in the following sense. If 𝜂 < ̄𝜂, an increase in 𝜂
leads to a higher bank heterogeneity 𝛥, lower fragility for all banks
and, hence, higher welfare. If 𝜂 > ̄𝜂, an increase in 𝜂 has different
implications for strong and weak banks. Specifically, if 𝜂 increases be-
yond ̄𝜂, banks become so different that cross-bank strategic interactions
become trivial, i.e., 𝛥 > ̄𝛥. As there are no strategic uncertainties
across investors of different banks, the run thresholds of strong and
weak banks decouple. That is, the run thresholds 𝜃∗
𝑤, given by
(19) and (20), are not infinitely close and no longer depend on 𝛥. A
further increase in 𝜂 does not affect cross-bank fire-sale externalities but
only further strengthens (weakens) asset performances of strong (weak)
banks. As a result, the strong-bank run threshold keeps declining while
the weak-bank run threshold starts to increase (see Fig. 2). Moreover,
since an increase in 𝜂 does not change the average bank fundamentals,
average fragility 𝜃∗ remains constant. Overall, our results suggest that
the planner should seek to set 𝜂 to be at least as high as ̄𝜂. Whether
welfare (21) increases or decreases in 𝜂 when 𝜂 > ̄𝜂 depends on the
ex-ante distribution of the aggregate fundamental.

𝑠 and 𝜃∗

Another issue that ring-fencing policies intend to address is a ‘‘too-
big-to-fail’’ problem. The following corollary points out that size per se
is not the key to financial stability in our model and downsizing banks

9 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

into identical clones has no impact.24 Behind the result is that investors
of ring-fenced subsidiaries are still interconnected through the asset
market. The fire-sale complementarity across these subsidiaries resem-
bles the bank-run complementarity across a large group of investors in
the merged bank. The objective of ring-fencing, therefore, should not be
only to downsize banks’ balance sheets but also to achieve an optimal
level of asset dispersion across institutions.

Corollary 2.
fragility.

If ring-fencing does not affect 𝜂, then it does not affect

Proof. The corollary follows directly from the scale invariance of
𝜋(𝑧𝑖, 𝑚𝑖, 𝑚). □

4.2. Disclosure of bank-specific information

In this section, we extend the model by allowing for noisy infor-
mation about bank-specific fundamentals. We then analyze disclosure
policies that affect the quality of bank-specific information available to
bank investors.

In particular, investor 𝑙 of bank 𝑖 receives two distinct noisy signals.
The signal about the aggregate fundamental is the same as in the
baseline model, 𝑠𝑖𝑙 = 𝜃 + 𝜎𝜖𝑖𝑙. In addition, she receives a signal 𝑑𝑖 about
the bank-specific component 𝜁𝑖. This signal takes two values, 𝐺 and 𝐵,
with a probability mass function specified below.
]
P(𝑑𝑖 = 𝐺|𝜁𝑖 = 𝜂) = P (𝑑𝑖 = 𝐵 |
, 1
|
Parameter 𝛼 captures the quality of bank-specific information. Under
this signal structure, a regulator can vary 𝛼 by changing the stringency
of bank disclosure policy. Below, we discuss how 𝛼 affects fragility and
welfare.

𝜁𝑖 = −𝜂)

[ 1
2

= 𝛼 ∈

.

Denote the posterior belief about the probability of bank 𝑖 being
≥

strong as 𝑝𝐺 if 𝑑𝑖 = 𝐺 and 𝑝𝐵 if 𝑑𝑖 = 𝐵. We have 𝑝𝐺 = 𝛼 ≥ 1
2
𝑝𝐵 = 1 − 𝛼. The equality holds if and only if 𝛼 = 1
, that is, signals are
2
uninformative about bank-specific fundamentals. Another special case
is perfect bank-specific information as in our baseline setting, 𝛼 = 1.

Proposition 3. The model with imperfect information about bank-specific
fundamentals is equivalent to the main model in which bank-specific shocks
take values 𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓 (𝛼) with probability 1
and −𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓 (𝛼) with probability 1
,
2
2
where 𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓 (𝛼) = (2𝛼 − 1)𝜂.

Proof. See Appendix B.4. □

)

( 1
2

The main takeaway from Proposition 3 is that besides reshaping as-
set dispersion directly, regulators can improve stability by manipulating
investors’ beliefs about it. If signals about bank-specific fundamentals
are uninformative, then bank investors perceive strong and weak banks
as homogeneous, 𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓
= 0. Run decisions of investors of strong
and weak banks are then completely synchronized, and the financial
system is fragile. If signals are informative, 𝛼 > 1
, investors are able
2
to differentiate between banks. In that case, runs become heteroge-
neous, 𝛥 > 0. A more stringent disclosure policy improves the quality
of bank-specific information 𝛼 and enlarges the perceived difference
between bank asset performances 𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓 (𝛼). In the presence of nontrivial
cross-bank strategic interactions, this increases heterogeneity, enhances
stability of the financial system by Proposition 2, and improves welfare
given by (22). In particular, the planner should always seek to set 𝛼
such that 𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓 (𝛼) is not smaller than ̄𝜂 that is given by (23).

benefit of disclosing bank-specific information: It enhances financial
stability by boosting bank heterogeneity. Notably, some papers argue
that disclosure should be state-dependent so that bank information
is opaque in good times and transparent in bad times (e.g. Bouvard
et al., 2015; Goldstein and Leitner, 2018). Specifically, disclosing bank-
specific information in bad times induces weak banks to fail but, at
the same time, saves strong banks. In our model, disclosing bank-
specific information makes weak-bank investors aware of the weak
fundamentals of their banks but, at the same time, less worried about
spillovers from strong banks. The latter effect dominates in the presence
of reinforcing complementarities, and weak-bank investors’ run incen-
tives weaken. As a result, instead of inducing runs, disclosure reduces
fragility of even weak banks.

Naturally, in the absence of cross-bank strategic uncertainty, dis-
closure can no longer indirectly stabilize weak banks because fire-sale
pressure from strong banks is already at its minimum level. Specifi-
cally, when 𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓 (𝛼) > ̄𝜂, cross-bank strategic interactions are trivial,
and disclosing more bank-specific information stabilizes strong banks,
destabilizes weak banks, and has no impact on the average fragility (see
Fig. 2). In this case, whether additional disclosure is desirable depends
on the ex-ante distribution of the aggregate fundamental.

4.3. Asset market interventions

One distress resolution approach regulators frequently use dur-
ing economic downturns is a liquidity injection into asset markets.
Prominent examples include the U.S. government’s purchases of dis-
tressed assets during the 2007–2008 financial crisis and corporate
bonds and bond ETFs via the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Fa-
cility during the COVID-19 pandemic. In our framework, such policies
reduce fire-sale discounts. Keeping bank heterogeneity fixed, a reduc-
tion in fire-sale discounts stabilizes banks directly. As we show below,
such policies also impact bank heterogeneity and thus affect fragility
indirectly.25

We consider an extension of our baseline model in which the regu-
lator injects 𝐿 ∈ [0, ̄𝑚) into the asset market. Specifically, asset prices
remain at their fundamental levels if the aggregate liquidity needs do
not exceed 𝐿. Any liquidity needs beyond this point are fulfilled by
outside investors as in the baseline model. As a result, the fire-sale
discount factor in the asset market is

̂𝜆(𝑚, 𝐿) =

{

1

𝜆 (𝑚 − 𝐿)

if 𝑚 < 𝐿,
if 𝑚 ≥ 𝐿,

where 𝜆(⋅) is the fire-sale discount factor in the baseline model and 𝑚
is the total mass of runners in the economy. To evaluate the impacts of
liquidity injections, we establish comparative statics with respect to 𝐿
in Proposition 4.

Suppose that 𝜆′′(⋅) ≥ 0 and 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂), where ̄𝜂 is
Proposition 4.
defined in Eq. (23). There exists a decreasing function ̄𝐿(𝜂) > 0 such that if
(
)
, then cross-bank interactions are nontrivial, 𝛥 < ̄𝛥, and run
0, ̄𝐿 (𝜂)
𝐿 ∈
thresholds of strong and weak banks are infinitely close to 𝜃∗. Moreover,
𝑑𝜃∗
𝑑𝐿

= 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝐿

+ 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

, where

𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝐿

1. The direct effect is stabilizing, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝐿
2. The indirect effect is stabilizing, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

< 0;

< 0 and 𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝐿

> 0.

Existing literature on disclosure policies highlights various costs and
benefits of disclosing bank-specific information. We highlight a novel

Proof. See Appendix B.5. □

24 Given the focus of this paper is on cross-bank interactions, certain features
that are important to study a ‘‘too-big-to-fail’’ issue, such as banks’ moral
hazard, are absent from our model.

25 Regulators often act as lenders of last resort (LOLR) and inject liquidity
to financial institutions. Similar to a liquidity injection into the asset market, a
LOLR intervention stabilizes the financial system both directly and indirectly.

10 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Different from ring-fencing and disclosure policies that influence
fragility only through their impacts on bank heterogeneity, a liquidity
injection has a direct stabilizing effect, captured by 𝜕𝜃∗
< 0. Impor-
𝜕𝐿
tantly, even though liquidity injections are broad-based — that is, the
regulator does not restrict the purchase to assets owned by a particular
group of banks — strong and weak banks are affected differently. The
reason is that strong-bank investors expect to receive a higher implicit
subsidy in the event of a run. In our model, what determines the run
threshold for a given bank is the belief of this bank’s marginal investor.
Given strong banks receive a positive bank-specific shock, a strong-
bank investor is on the margin of running when the market liquidity
conditions are particularly dire. In contrast, a weak-bank investor is
on the margin of running under milder fire-sale pressure. Formally,
from Eq. (8), if a strong-bank marginal investor expects a fraction 𝑥
of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ strong-bank investors to run, then she expects a larger
) > 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ weak-bank investors to
fraction 𝐹𝜖
run. In contrast, from Eq. (9), a weak-bank marginal investor expecting
a fraction 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ weak-bank investors to run expects a
) < 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ strong-bank
smaller fraction 𝐹𝜖
investors to run. Therefore, inefficient liquidations, occurring when
the total mass of runs in the economy exceeds the liquidity injec-
tion size 𝐿, are more likely from the marginal strong-bank investor’s
perspective than from the marginal weak-bank investor’s perspective.
Consequently, an increase in the liquidity injection size reduces fire-sale
pressure on strong banks in a larger number of states, which implies
𝜕𝐼𝑠
< 0.26 This further strengthens strong banks relative to weak
𝜕𝐿
banks, thereby increasing bank heterogeneity, 𝑑𝛥
> 0, and stabilizing
𝑑𝐿
the financial system indirectly, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

< 0.
For completeness, the corollary below summarizes the case with
trivial cross-bank interactions. In this case, heterogeneity ceases to have
an effect and liquidity injection functions only through the direct effect.

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

< 𝜕𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝐿

(𝑥)

(𝑥)

𝜖

𝜖

If 𝜂 ≥ ̄𝜂 or 𝐿 ≥ ̄𝐿(𝜂), cross-bank interactions are trivial,
Corollary 3.
𝛥 ≥ ̄𝛥. Liquidity injection reduces the average fragility and fragilities of
strong and weak banks through the direct effect only, 𝑑𝜃∗
< 0,
𝑑𝐿
𝑑𝜃∗
𝑠
< 0.
𝑑𝐿

= 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝐿

𝑑𝜃∗
𝑤
𝑑𝐿

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑤
𝜕𝐿

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑠
𝜕𝐿

< 0,

=

=

Proof. See Appendix B.5. □

Given that liquidity injections can stabilize the financial system both
directly and indirectly, it is important to understand how the latter
effect compares to the former quantitatively. We conduct a simple
numerical exercise in the context of the Great Recession. In particular,
we pick the size of bank-specific shocks 𝜂 = 0.025 to match the cross-
sectional dispersion in annual returns on assets of U.S. banks during
the 2007–2008 financial crisis (our data is from the FR Y-9C filings;
see Appendix A for more details). We set ̄𝑚 = 0.57, corresponding to
the fraction of bank liabilities that is not covered by deposit insurance
in 2007Q4 and is thus subject to runs. We parametrize 𝜆 (𝑚 − 𝐿) =
1 + (𝑚 − 𝐿)2. Under such a choice, when a systemic bank run occurs in
the absence of any government liquidity injections, that is, 𝑚 = ̄𝑚 and
𝐿 = 0, asset prices are 25% below their fundamental values. This value
is in line with the estimates of James (1991) and Granja et al. (2017)
who document comparable discounts in prices paid for assets of failed
banks during the Savings and Loan Crisis and the 2007–2008 financial
crisis, respectively.27 Finally, we choose the uniform noise distribution
with a support [−1, 1]. Our results are not sensitive to this choice.

26 Although this effect arises even if the fire-sale discount function 𝜆(⋅) is
linear, it becomes more pronounced if it is convex. In that case, an increase
in 𝐿 is particularly helpful for strong banks because their marginal investors
expect a large fire-sale discount on average.

27 Our parametrization of the fire-sale discount function is conservative. For
example, during the 2007–2008 crisis, the government actively intervened in
the financial sector, likely having prevented more widespread runs. In the
absence of such interventions, a collapse in asset prices might have been much
more substantial.

11 

We normalize the aggregate amount of bank assets to one and
vary the liquidity injection size 𝐿 from 0 to 0.01. Our parametrization
implies nontrivial cross-bank interactions for all 𝐿 ∈ [0, 0.01]. We
investigate how the common run threshold 𝜃∗ = 𝜃∗ (𝐿) changes with
the size of liquidity injection in two scenarios. In the baseline case,
bank heterogeneity 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝐿) adjusts as 𝐿 increases such that 𝜃∗ (𝐿)
changes both due to direct and indirect effects. This case is illustrated
by the blue solid line in the left panel of Fig. 3. The red dashed line
shows how the run threshold changes with 𝐿 if bank heterogeneity is
held fixed, 𝛥 = 𝛥(0). Therefore, it reflects only the direct effect. The
difference suggests that the indirect effect accounts for about 15% of
the total reduction in the average run threshold as 𝐿 changes from 0
to 0.01.

To map the change in the run threshold to that in the probability
of a crisis, we need to calibrate the prior distribution of the aggregate
fundamental 𝐹𝜃(⋅). We assume that the prior distribution of 𝜃 is log-
normal with parameters 𝜇𝜃 and 𝜎𝜃. Using the FR Y-9C filings, we
calibrate 𝜎𝜃 = 0.01 to match the standard deviation of the average
returns on assets for U.S. banks in the pre-crisis years of 1991–2006.
We pick 𝜇𝜃 = 0.0715 so that the annual frequency of systemic crises in
the model is 𝐹𝜃 (𝜃∗) = 2%, a number consistent with the historical data
(e.g. Jordà et al., 2017; Romer and Romer, 2017). The right panel of
Fig. 3 shows how the ex-ante run probability 𝐹𝜃 (𝜃∗ (𝐿)) changes with
the size of liquidity injection when bank heterogeneity adjusts with 𝐿
(solid blue line) and when bank heterogeneity is held fixed at 𝛥 = 𝛥(0)
(red dashed line). We observe that an increase in 𝐿 from 0 to 0.01
implies a significant decline in the ex-ante run probability from 2% to
1%. The indirect effect accounts for a nontrivial part of this decline: If
bank heterogeneity is held fixed, the run probability declines from 2%
to 1.13%.

4.4. Liquidity buffers

In our baseline model, we assume that banks invest all capital
they raise from investors in long-term assets. As a result, if banks face
runs at 𝑡 = 1, they have to liquidate some of their long-term assets.
Furthermore, banks are unable to acquire each other’s assets. In reality,
stronger banks frequently acquire assets of failing banks. This is often
seen as a desirable outcome because banks are likely more efficient
users of those assets than outside investors.28 In this section, we extend
our model by allowing banks to hold a fraction 𝑙 ∈ [0, ̄𝑚) of their capital
in cash that has a unit return. We treat 𝑙 as an exogenous parameter
and study how changes in 𝑙 affect bank heterogeneity and fragility.
This exercise can be seen as investigating the impacts of changing
liquidity requirements or, more broadly, how banks’ holdings of liquid
assets affect the economy. In Supplemental Appendix A.7, we solve for
an endogenous 𝑙 and discuss why banks underinvest in liquid assets
relative to the social optimum.

Specifically, suppose that bank 𝑖 invests a fraction 𝑙 of its assets in
cash and the remaining 1 − 𝑙 fraction in a long-term project. If the
mass of early withdrawals is 𝑚𝑖 > 𝑙, the bank has to liquidate some
of its long-term assets. If, on the contrary, 𝑚𝑖 < 𝑙, then the bank can
repay runners without liquidating its long-term assets. Furthermore, it
can acquire assets liquidated by other banks (if any) at their market
price. We assume that banks are efficient users of liquidated assets. As
such, bank 𝑖 acquiring one unit of bank 𝑗’s long-term assets expects to
get a gross return 𝑧𝑗 . Therefore, if the marginal acquirer of liquidated
assets is an outside investor, prices of assets on the secondary market
deviate from their fundamental values due to fire-sale discounts, and
the acquiring bank makes a profit.

28 Throughout most of the paper, we assume that the fire-sale discount
emerges because it is costly for outside investors to raise liquidity. Supplemen-
tal Appendix A.1 shows that fire-sale discount can also arise because outside
investors are less efficient than banks in managing bank assets.

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Fig. 3. Run threshold 𝜃∗ (left panel) and ex-ante probability of a systemic crisis 𝐹𝜃 (𝜃∗) (right panel; in percentage) as functions of the liquidity injection size 𝐿. In the ‘‘Baseline’’
case, heterogeneity 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝐿) adjusts as 𝐿 changes. In the ‘‘Fixed 𝛥’’ case, bank heterogeneity is fixed at its initial level 𝛥 (0). See text for parametrization.

𝜖

𝜖

(𝑥)

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

̄𝑚𝑥 + 1
2

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

In this extended setup, strong banks acquire assets of weak banks in
some states of the world. Recall that if a marginal weak-bank investor
believes that a fraction 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’ weak-bank investors run, then
) <
her perceived mass of runners in a strong bank is ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
̄𝑚𝑥, and, from (9), the perceived total mass of runners in the economy
)
is 1
(𝑥)
. Thus, if a marginal weak-bank investor
2
expects that her bank is unable to fully repay runners using its liquidity
̄𝑚𝑥 > 𝑙, then strong banks can step in and acquire at
buffer, i.e.,
̄𝑚𝑥 +
least part of liquidated assets. In particular, if
)
1
(𝑥)
, aggregate liquidity buffer in the banking system
2
is enough to absorb all runs in the economy. In that case, strong banks
acquire all assets liquidated by weak banks, while outside investors
do not acquire any assets, and liquidated assets are priced at their
)
fundamental values. If 𝑙 < 1
(𝑥)
, strong banks
2
are unable to acquire all assets liquidated by weak banks. Still, they
alleviate fire-sale pressure on weak banks by reducing the amount of
assets outside investors have to absorb.

̄𝑚𝑥 > 𝑙 > 1
2

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

̄𝑚𝑥 + 1
2

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

𝜖

𝜖

𝜖

𝜖

(𝑥)

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

̄𝑚𝑥+ 1
2

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

In contrast, weak banks never acquire assets of strong banks. If a
marginal strong-bank investor believes that a fraction 𝑥 of ‘‘non-sleepy’’
strong-bank investors run, then her perceived mass of runners in a weak
) > ̄𝑚𝑥, and, from (8), the perceived total
bank equals ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
)
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1
mass of runners in the economy is 1
(𝑥)
. Therefore,
2
if a marginal strong-bank investor expects that her bank is unable to
̄𝑚𝑥 > 𝑙, then weak
fully repay runners using its liquidity buffer, i.e.,
banks are also unable to do so. In this case, both strong and weak banks
are forced to liquidate assets, which will be absorbed by inefficient
outside investors, leading to a fire-sale discount. Nevertheless, liquidity
buffers held by weak banks reduce fire-sale pressure on strong banks
because weak banks can cover part of early withdrawals with their
internal funds and thus sell fewer assets to outside investors. This
has a large beneficial effect on strong banks because they experience
runs when market liquidity conditions are particularly dire. In ad-
dition to this benefit, strong banks may profit from acquiring assets
liquidated by weak banks at a discount. This happens when ̄𝑚𝑥 <
)
𝑙 < 1
(𝑥)
, that is, when strong banks have extra
2

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

̄𝑚𝑥 + 1
2

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

𝜖

liquidity buffers after repaying their own runners, but these extra
buffers are insufficient to fully absorb premature liquidations of weak
banks. Therefore, a marginal acquirer of liquidated assets is an outside
investor, and thus, assets are traded at a fire-sale discount.

The following proposition establishes how changes in the liquidity

buffer size affect financial fragility.

Suppose that 𝜆′′(⋅) ≥ 0 and 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂), where ̄𝜂 is
Proposition 5.
defined in Eq. (23). There exists a decreasing function ̄𝑙(𝜂) > 0 such that
)
(
, then cross-bank interactions are nontrivial, 𝛥 < ̄𝛥, and run
0, ̄𝑙 (𝜂)
if 𝑙 ∈
thresholds of strong and weak banks are infinitely close to 𝜃∗. Moreover,
𝑑𝜃∗
𝑑𝑙

= 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑙

+ 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

, where

𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝑙

1. The direct effect is stabilizing, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑙
2. The indirect effect is stabilizing, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

< 0;

< 0 and 𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝑙

> 0.

Proof. See Appendix B.6. □

Proposition 5 shows that the impact of an increase in the liquidity
buffer size 𝑙 on fragility is qualitatively analogous to that of an increase
in the liquidity injection size 𝐿 discussed in Section 4.3. Naturally,
a higher 𝑙 stabilizes banks directly, 𝜕𝜃∗
< 0, because it implies that
𝜕𝑙
banks have to liquidate fewer long-term assets if runs occur. A higher 𝑙
also stabilizes banks indirectly. Similar to the intuition behind Proposi-
tion 4, a strong-bank investor is on the margin of running under worse
liquidity conditions than a weak-bank marginal investor. Furthermore,
in the presence of liquidity buffers, strong banks benefit from acquiring
assets liquidated by weak banks at a discount in some states of the
world. All in all, an increase in 𝑙 has a stronger positive effect on a
strong-bank marginal investor than on a weak-bank marginal investor,
leading to a higher bank heterogeneity, 𝜕𝛥
𝜕𝑙

For completeness, the corollary below summarizes the case with
trivial cross-bank interactions where heterogeneity ceases to have an
effect.

> 0.29

If 𝜂 ≥ ̄𝜂 or 𝑙 ≥ ̄𝑙(𝜂), cross-bank interactions are trivial, 𝛥 ≥ ̄𝛥.
Corollary 4.
Liquidity buffer reduces the average fragility and fragilities of strong and
weak banks through the direct effect only, 𝑑𝜃∗
< 0,
𝑑𝑙
𝑑𝜃∗
𝑤
𝑑𝑙

= 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑙

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑤
𝜕𝑙

𝑑𝜃∗
𝑠
𝑑𝑙

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑠
𝜕𝑙

< 0,

< 0.

=

=

Proof. See Appendix B.6. □

5. Concluding remarks

This paper analyzes interactions between fragile banks through asset
fire sales. Such interactions can lead to a spread of panics across
institutions and thus a systemic crisis. The key feature of our model
is the reinforcement between within- and cross-bank complementari-
ties, that is, bank runs and fire sales. We highlight the key factor —
bank heterogeneity — that governs cross-bank interactions and plays
an important role in determining the fragility of the entire financial
system.

The broad message of our policy analyses is that in a financial sys-
tem featuring interconnected fragilities, various factors can affect finan-
cial stability through changing bank heterogeneity. Regulators should

29 Notably, an increase in 𝑙 reduces the amount capital invested in the long-
term assets. This, in turn, has a direct impact on the expected output and
welfare. As shown in Supplemental Appendix A.7, when banks or a planner
set 𝑙 endogenously, this effect is taken into account.

12 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

take this indirect effect into account when monitoring bank activities
and developing intervention strategies. Without doing so, policies may
undermine financial stability by making runs more synchronized.

For instance, regulatory policies that narrow the dispersion in bank
asset performances can be harmful for stability. One example is mergers
and acquisitions in the banking system. Another example is direct
financial support — or a belief about it shared by market participants
— biased toward weak banks. Although such financial support directly
enhances weak banks’ resilience to negative shocks, its effectiveness
can be hindered by the resulting commonality in (perceived) asset
performances. Furthermore, when banks face multiple capital regula-
tions, regulatory arbitrage incentive pushes banks to converge in their
business models and asset holdings (Greenwood et al., 2017).

Stress testing is another widely used policy tool that can lead to
an unintended reduction in heterogeneity. Currently, regulators test
bank resilience against a common set of stress scenarios. Banks that
are more likely to fail these tests — weak banks in our paper —
are required by regulators to increase their liquidity buffers or equity
cushions, which can raise their similarity to strong banks. Furthermore,
anticipating such corrective actions, weak banks might act preemp-
tively and strengthen their balance sheets against stress test scenarios,
again making the financial system more homogeneous. As a result of
higher similarity across banks, heterogeneity diminishes, which can
undermine the effectiveness of stress tests. Our paper suggests that a
certain difference between banks’ resistance to a common set of stress
scenarios is desirable.

Relatedly, regulators should closely monitor aggregate market con-
ditions and conduct interventions in a timely manner. Recall that when
strong banks are forced to liquidate their assets, the asset market is
already highly stressed due to massive liquidations by weak banks. If
regulators commit to intervene in situations when fire-sale discounts
are especially high, then this can be particularly helpful to strong banks.
As our results in Section 4.3 suggest, this can have a sizeable stabilizing
effect through enlarging heterogeneity and alleviating the vicious loop
between bank runs and deteriorating liquidity conditions.

Overall, various bank activities and regulatory policies might affect
heterogeneity and, thus, impact financial stability. Regulators should
take a holistic approach and combine different regulatory tools to
maintain a certain level of heterogeneity in the financial system.

Appendix A. Data appendix for Section 4.3

Our data on U.S. bank holding companies is from the FR Y-9C filings
and covers the period between 1991 and 2018. Each year, we focus
on 100 largest parent-level bank holding companies to reduce the role
of outliers; our results are not sensitive to this cutoff. Each year 𝑡, we
compute returns on assets 𝑅𝑖𝑡 for each bank 𝑖 as the sum of interest
and nontinterest income net of noninterest expense, divided by the
last-year total assets. In the model, 𝜃 is the aggregate productivity of
bank assets before payments to investors and in the absence of any
inefficient liquidations. Therefore, to estimate 𝜎𝜃, we compute time-
series standard deviation of the cross-bank average of 𝑅𝑖𝑡 in the years
before the 2007–2008 financial crisis. The parameter 𝜂 governs the
cross-sectional standard deviation in productivities of bank assets. Since
this standard deviation can be time-varying and since our focus is
on understanding investors’ run decisions, we pick 𝜂 to match the
cross-sectional standard deviation in 𝑅𝑖𝑡 during the 2007–2008 period.

Appendix B. Proofs

B.1. Liquidation price

This appendix proves Lemma 1.

Proof. Outside investors solve the problem
(

)

max
{𝑘𝑖}𝑖∈[0,1]

∫ 𝑧𝑖𝑘𝑖𝑑𝑖 − 𝑔

∫ 𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑖𝑑𝑖

.

The first-order condition implies that the liquidation price of bank 𝑖’s
assets 𝑝𝑖 is proportional to its fundamental 𝑧𝑖, 𝑝𝑖 = 𝑧𝑖∕𝑔′ (𝐿), where 𝐿 ≡
∫ 𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑖𝑑𝑖. Aggregation of the market clearing conditions for individual
banks implies that the total liquidity demand 𝑚 equals to the liquidity
supply 𝐿, 𝑚𝑖 = 𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑖 ⇒ 𝑚 = ∫ 𝑝𝑖𝑘𝑖𝑑𝑖 = 𝐿. Therefore, we obtain the
equilibrium asset prices 𝑝𝑖(𝑧𝑖, 𝑚) = 𝑧𝑖∕𝜆(𝑚), where 𝜆(𝑚) ≡ 𝑔′(𝑚). Since
𝜆′(𝑚) = 𝑔′′(𝑚) > 0, the liquidation price 𝑝𝑖(𝑧𝑖, 𝑚) is a decreasing function
of the total mass of runners 𝑚 for any 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1]. □

B.2. Impact of heterogeneity on stability

CRediT authorship contribution statement

We first derive (5) and then prove Lemma 2 and Proposition 1.

Itay Goldstein: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal anal-
ysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Alexandr Kopytov: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization. Lin Shen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. Haotian Xiang: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

Itay Goldstein has been retained by a law firm as an expert on a case
involving a liquidity crisis and government intervention in a European
bank. This case has not influenced the research in this paper, and the
research in this paper has not influenced the case. Remaining authors
have nothing to disclose.

B.2.1. Derivation of Eq. (5)

)

𝑤 is 1

The mass of strong-bank investors receiving a signal below 𝜃∗

𝑠 is
, and the mass of weak-bank investors receiving a signal

( 𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜃
1
̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
𝜎
2
below 𝜃∗
. Recall that the incremental payoff func-
tion is given by (2). Then the indifference condition for a threshold
strong-bank investor is
( 𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜃
𝜎

𝜃 + 𝜂 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

( 𝜃∗
𝑤−𝜃
𝜎

( 𝜃∗
𝑤−𝜃
𝜎

( 𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜃
𝜎

𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜎𝜖

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

( 1
2

+ 1
2

))

)

)

)

𝜆

2

∫

𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜎 ̄𝜖
× 𝑓 (𝜃|𝜃∗

𝑠

1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

)

( 𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜃
𝜎

) 𝑑𝜃 = 1,

where 𝑓 (𝜃|𝑠) =

𝑓𝜖
∫ 𝑠−𝜎𝜖
𝑠−𝜎 ̄𝜖 𝑓𝜖

)

( 𝑠−𝜃
𝜎
( 𝑠−𝜃
𝜎

𝑓𝜃 (𝜃)
)

𝑓𝜃 (𝜃)𝑑𝜃

is the posterior probability distri-

fundamental 𝜃 conditional on observing signal

bution function of
𝑠.

Changing the variable of integration, 𝑥 = 𝐹𝜖

can be written as

)

( 𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜃
𝜎

, this expression

Data availability

1 =

Replication package for "Bank heterogeneity and financial stability" (O
riginal data) (Mendeley Data)

13 

× ∫
0

1
∫ 1
𝑠 − 𝜎𝐹 −1
0 𝑓𝜃(𝜃∗
𝜖
𝑠 − 𝜎𝐹 −1
𝜃∗
𝜖

1

(𝑥))𝑑𝑥

(𝑥) + 𝜂 − ̄𝑚𝑥𝜆

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

( 𝜃∗

𝑤−𝜃∗
𝑠
𝜎

))

(𝑥)

+ 𝐹 −1
𝜖

̄𝑚𝑥 + 1
2

( 1
2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

I. Goldstein et al.

× 𝑓𝜃(𝜃∗

𝑠 − 𝜎𝐹 −1
𝜖

(𝑥))𝑑𝑥.

by 𝜆′

( ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠) + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠

))

. However, the resulting changes in their

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Taking the limit 𝜎 → 0, we get

1

𝜃∗
𝑠 + 𝜂 − ̄𝑚𝑥𝜆

( 1
2

̄𝑚𝑥 + 1
2

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

))

(𝑥)

∫

0

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 = 1,

where 𝛥 is given by (7). This is Eq. (10) (a special case of Eq. (5) for
strong banks) in the main text. It is straightforward to derive analogous
expressions for weak banks.

B.2.2. Lemma 2

Proof. Rewrite Eq. (12) as

𝐼𝑠(𝛥) = ∫
𝜖

̄𝜖−𝛥

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠) +

(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠

𝐹𝜖

))

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠)
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠)

𝑑𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠)

̄𝜖

+ ∫

̄𝜖−𝛥

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠) +

)

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠)
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠)

𝑑𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠),

payoffs are different. Specifically, weak banks experience more runs
than strong banks, i.e., 𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑤) = 𝐹𝜖(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠) > 𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠). Due to reinforcing
within- and cross-bank complementarities, the same change in the fire-
sale cost has a more profound effect on weak-bank investors than on
strong-bank investors, which implies that 𝐴𝑤,3 > 𝐴𝑠,3. Because this is
𝜕𝐼𝑠
true for any 𝜖𝑠, we have |
|
𝜕𝛥
|

|
. □
|
|

> |
|
|

𝜕𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

|
|
|

B.2.3. Proposition 1

Proof. Eq. (16) implies that the impact of bank heterogeneity 𝛥 on 𝜃∗
is
𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

( 𝜕𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

𝜕𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

)

=

+

1

.

2 ∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

By Lemma 2,
0. □

𝜕𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

< 0 < 𝜕𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

and |
|
|

𝜕𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

|
|
|

> |
|
|

𝜕𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

|
|
|

. It follows that 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

<

where we change the variable of integration 𝑥 = 𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠) with 𝜖𝑠 being
the realization of signal noise for a threshold investor of a strong bank.
Differentiate it with respect to 𝛥:

B.3. Ring-fencing

𝜕𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

= ∫

𝜖

̄𝜖−𝛥
𝑓𝜖(𝜖𝑠)

×

⏟⏟⏟
𝐴𝑠,1

𝑓𝜖(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠)

̄𝑚
2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴𝑠,2

This appendix proves Proposition 2 and Corollary 1.

B.3.1. Proposition 2

× 𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠) +

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠)
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴𝑠,3

(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠

̄𝑚
2

))

𝐹𝜖

𝑑𝜖𝑠 > 0.

(B.1)

Proof. Recall that when cross-bank strategic interactions are nontrivial
(𝛥 < ̄𝛥), bank heterogeneity 𝛥 is implicitly defined by Eq. (17), which
we repeat below,

The integrand can be decomposed into three parts. First, 𝐴𝑠,1 repre-
sents the probability of a state in which a threshold investor receives a
signal with a noise realization 𝜖𝑠. As 𝛥 goes up, this investor expects a
larger mass of runners on weak banks, which is captured by the second
term 𝐴𝑠,2. More runs on weak banks increase the fire-sale discount and
reduce the payoff to the threshold investor. The third term 𝐴𝑠,3 captures
the marginal decrease in the payoff. Integrating over all possible states
yields the total change in the fire-sale pressure on a strong bank in
response to a marginal increase in 𝛥.
Similarly, we can show that:

𝜂 =

1

2 ∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

(𝐼𝑠(𝛥) − 𝐼𝑤(𝛥)

) .

(B.3)

From Eqs. (12) and (13), it is clear that 𝐼𝑠(𝛥) increases in 𝛥 and 𝐼𝑤(𝛥)
decreases in 𝛥. Hence, 𝛥(𝜂) is an increasing function. Moreover, 𝛥(0) = 0
and 𝛥( ̄𝜂) = ̄𝛥.

Therefore, when 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂), we have 𝛥 ∈ (0, ̄𝛥), and cross-bank
strategic interactions are nontrivial. From Eq. (16), 𝜃∗(𝜂) = 𝜃∗(𝛥(𝜂)).
Since 𝛥(𝜂) increases in 𝜂 on (0, ̄𝜂), by Proposition 1, run thresholds of
strong and week banks are infinitely close to 𝜃∗(𝜂) which decreases in
𝜂 on (0, ̄𝜂). □

̄𝜖

= − ∫

𝑓𝜖(𝜖𝑤)

̄𝑚
2

𝑓𝜖(−𝛥 + 𝜖𝑤)𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2

(
−𝛥 + 𝜖𝑤

)

+

𝐹𝜖

)

𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑤)

̄𝑚
2

B.3.2. Corollary 1

𝑑𝜖𝑤 =

𝑓𝜖(𝜖𝑠)

̄𝑚
2
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
𝐴𝑤,2

× 𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠) +

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠)
(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴𝑤,3

̄𝑚
2

))

𝐹𝜖

𝑠 and 𝜃∗

Proof. If 𝜂 ≥ ̄𝜂, Eq. (B.3) does not have a solution 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝜂). Therefore,
run thresholds 𝜃∗
𝑤 cannot be infinitely close to each other. Then
they are given by (19) and (20), respectively. From these equations,
𝑠 (𝜂) is a decreasing function, 𝜃∗
it is clear that 𝜃∗
𝑤 (𝜂) is an increasing
function, and 1
𝑠 (𝜂) + 1
𝜃∗
2

𝜃∗
𝑤 (𝜂) does not depend on 𝜂. □

2

(B.2)

B.4. Proposition 3

where 𝜖𝑤 is the realization of signal noise for a threshold investor of a
weak bank. The second equality is obtained by changing the variable
of integration, 𝜖𝑠 = 𝜖𝑤 − 𝛥.

𝜃∗
𝑠 −𝜃
𝜎

Compare the magnitudes of a marginal impact of 𝛥 on strong and
weak banks, that is, the absolute values of (B.1) and (B.2). For a given
realization of the aggregate fundamental 𝜃, if a threshold investor of a
strong bank has a signal noise realization 𝜖𝑠 =
, a threshold investor
of a weak bank must have a noise realization 𝜖𝑤 =
= 𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠.
These two investors hold the same beliefs about the run situations in
the economy: The mass of runs in all strong and all weak banks are
̄𝑚
𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠 + 𝛥), respectively. From the perspective of these
2
investors, changes in the masses of runners in response to an increase
in 𝛥 are symmetric, such that 𝐴𝑠,1 × 𝐴𝑠,2 = 𝐴𝑤,1 × 𝐴𝑤,2. Moreover, since
they hold the same view on the aggregate runs in the economy, they
expect the same marginal impact on the fire-sale discount, captured

𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑠) and ̄𝑚
2

𝜃∗
𝑤−𝜃
𝜎

Proof. Fraction 𝛼 of strong-bank investors and fraction 1 − 𝛼 of weak-
bank investors receive signal 𝐺. Therefore, fraction 1
(1 − 𝛼) = 1
2
2
of all investors receive this signal. These investors run if their signals
about the aggregate fundamental are below 𝜃∗
𝐺. Similarly, fraction
1
of all investors receive signal 𝐵. These investors
2
run if their signals about the aggregate fundamental are below 𝜃∗
𝐵. The
run thresholds for investors receiving signals 𝐺 and 𝐵 are determined
by

(1 − 𝛼) + 1
2

𝛼 = 1
2

𝛼 + 1
2

𝜃∗
𝐺 + 𝑝𝐺𝜂 − (1 − 𝑝𝐺)𝜂 =

𝜃∗
𝐵 + 𝑝𝐵𝜂 − (1 − 𝑝𝐵)𝜂 =

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

𝑑𝑥

∫ 1
0

∫ 1
0

(

(

1 + ∫

0

1 + ∫
0

1

1

)

𝜆(𝑚𝐺(𝑥, 𝛥)) ̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

)

𝜆(𝑚𝐵(𝑥, 𝛥)) ̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

,

,

14 

𝜕𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

×

− ∫
𝜖

𝜖+𝛥
̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑤)
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝜖𝑤)
̄𝜖−𝛥
𝑓𝜖(𝛥 + 𝜖𝑠)

×

⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
𝐴𝑤,1

× 𝑑𝜖𝑠 <0,

I. Goldstein et al.

where 𝛥 = lim
𝜎→0

𝐵 −𝜃∗
𝜃∗
𝐺
𝜎

and

1
2
1
2

𝑚𝐺(𝑥, 𝛥) =

𝑚𝐵(𝑥, 𝛥) =

Define

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

̄𝑚𝑥 +

1
2
̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

(𝑥)) +

(𝑥)),

1
2

̄𝑚𝑥.

𝜂𝑒𝑓 𝑓 (𝛼) = 𝑝𝐺𝜂 − (1 − 𝑝𝐺)𝜂 = (2𝛼 − 1) 𝜂.

It straightforward to see that the model described in Section 4.2 boils
down to our baseline setting with redefined 𝜂. Therefore, the results of
Section 3.2 generalize to the case of noisy bank-specific signals. □

B.5. Asset market interventions

This appendix proves Proposition 4 and Corollary 3. Throughout

this appendix, we make the following assumption.

Assumption 1. 𝜆(⋅) is a weakly convex function, that is, 𝜆′′(⋅) ≥ 0.

B.5.1. Proposition 4

With the modified fire-sale discount function ̂𝜆(𝑚, 𝐿), we can express

the fire-sale pressure terms as

̂𝐼𝑠(𝛥, 𝐿) = ∫

1

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝐿

)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Suppose that there exist nontrivial cross-bank strategic in-
Lemma 3.
teractions and 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) solves (B.11). Then it must be that 𝐿 <
̄𝑚
≥ 0, with the inequality being strict
2
if 𝐿 > 0 or 𝜆′′(⋅) > 0.

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) + ̄𝜖). Moreover, 𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝐿

+ ̄𝑚
2

Proof. Suppose that 𝐿 and 𝛥 are such that 𝐿 ≥ ̄𝑚
𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖).
2
Then, using the definitions (B.6) and (B.7), we get 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) = 2𝐿
− 1 ≥
̄𝑚
𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) and 𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿) = 1. Then the fire-sale pressure terms (B.4)
and (B.5) become

+ ̄𝑚
2

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

)

− 𝐿

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 + ∫

0

2𝐿
̄𝑚 −1

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

1

2𝐿
̄𝑚 −1
1

̂𝐼𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) = ∫

̂𝐼𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿) = ∫

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

0

In this case, the derivative of the right-hand side of (B.11) with respect
to 𝛥 is 0, that is, the right-hand side of (B.11) does not depend on 𝛥.
In other words, the fire-sale pressure terms do not depend on bank
heterogeneity 𝛥, i.e., there are no cross-bank strategic uncertainties,
which is a contradiction.

Therefore, it must be that 𝐿 < ̄𝑚
𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖). Then 0 ≤ 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) <
2
𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) and 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) ≤ 𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿) < 1. Using the expressions for
the fire-sale pressure terms (B.4) and (B.5), we can straightforwardly
establish that

< 0. Moreover,

> 0 and

+ ̄𝑚
2

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝐿

)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

(B.4)

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝐿

−

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝐿

1

= − ∫
𝑥𝑠
1

∫

𝑥𝑤

𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2
𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝐿

)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥+

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝐿

)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 ≤ 0.

𝑑𝑥,

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥𝑠

+ ∫

0

𝑥𝑠
̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
1

̂𝐼𝑤(𝛥, 𝐿) = ∫

𝑥𝑤

+ ∫

0

𝑥𝑤
̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

(B.5)

where 𝑥𝑠 = 𝑥𝑠(𝛥, 𝐿) and 𝑥𝑤 = 𝑥𝑤(𝛥, 𝐿) are the critical fractions
of strong- and weak-bank runners below which perceived fire-sale
discount is zero, i.e.,

𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿)

=

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

0
̂𝑥𝑠 ∶ ̄𝑚
2

𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿)

̂𝑥𝑠 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
( ̂𝑥𝑠)

if 𝐿 ≤ ̄𝑚
2
= 𝐿 if 𝐿 > ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝜖) ,
(𝛥 + 𝜖) ,

̂𝑥𝑤 ∶ ̄𝑚
2

̂𝑥𝑤 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
( ̂𝑥𝑤)

1

= 𝐿 if 𝐿 < ̄𝑚
2
if 𝐿 ≥ ̄𝑚
2

+ ̄𝑚
2
+ ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) ,

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) .

=

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

(B.7)

The run thresholds for strong and weak banks are implicitly given

by

∫
0

∫
0

1

1

𝜃∗
𝑠 + 𝜂
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
𝜃∗
𝑤 − 𝜂
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 − ̂𝐼𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) = 1,

𝑑𝑥 − ̂𝐼𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿) = 1.

(B.8)

(B.9)

As in the baseline model, if cross-bank strategic interactions are
nontrivial, run thresholds of strong and weak banks are infinitely close
to the average threshold

𝜃∗ =

1
𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫ 1
0

(

1 +

1
2

̂𝐼𝑠(𝛥, 𝐿) +

)
̂𝐼𝑤(𝛥, 𝐿)

,

1
2

(B.10)

The latter inequality holds because 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) ≤ 𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿) and 𝜆(⋅) is
weakly convex. Moreover, this inequality is strict if 𝐿 > 0 (because
then 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) < 𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿)) or if 𝜆′′(⋅) > 0.
By the implicit function theorem,

it then follows that

=

𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝐿

−

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥 −
𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝐿 −

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥
𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝐿

> 0. □

(B.6)

Lemma 3 implies, in particular, that if Eq. (B.11) has a solution
𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) for some 𝐿, then it also has a solution 𝛥( ̃𝐿, 𝜂) < 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) for any
̃𝐿 ∈ [0, 𝐿).

Recall that ̄𝜂, defined in (23), can be written as

̄𝜂 =

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

∫
0

𝑑𝑥

1

[
𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

)

̄𝑚
2

− 𝜆

)]

𝑥

( ̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

Lemma 4. For each 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂), there exists ̄𝐿 = ̄𝐿 (𝜂) such that if 𝐿 < ̄𝐿,
then cross-bank interactions are nontrivial, 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) < ̄𝛥. Moreover,
̄𝐿 (𝜂) = 0.
̄𝐿 (𝜂) is a decreasing function such that sup
𝜂∈(0, ̄𝜂)

̄𝐿 (𝜂) = ̄𝑚 and inf

𝜂∈(0, ̄𝜂)

Proof. Lemma 3 implies that if (B.11) has a solution 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂), then
𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) increases in 𝐿. Define the supremum value of 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) by
𝛥∗ (𝜂). Two cases are possible.

Case 1: 𝛥∗ (𝜂) = ̄𝛥.
Suppose that 𝐿 = ̄𝐿 (𝜂) such that 𝛥 = 𝛥∗ (𝜂) = ̄𝛥. By Lemma 3, it

must be that
̄𝐿 ≤ ̄𝑚
2

+

𝐹𝜖

̄𝑚
2

− ̄𝛥 + ̄𝜖)
(

̄𝑚
2
Using the definitions (B.6) and (B.7), we find 𝑥𝑠
𝑥𝑤
. Plugging these into (B.11), we obtain

( ̄𝛥, ̄𝐿)

=

.

= 2 ̄𝐿
̄𝑚

(B.12)

= 0 and

( ̄𝛥, ̄𝐿)

where bank heterogeneity 𝛥 = 𝛥(𝐿, 𝜂) is implicitly defined by

𝜂 =

1

2 ∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

( ̂𝐼𝑠(𝛥, 𝐿) − ̂𝐼𝑤(𝛥, 𝐿)

) .

(B.11)

𝜂 =

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

[

∫
0

𝑑𝑥

1

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

)

− ̄𝐿

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

In equilibrium, there exist nontrivial cross-bank interactions if (B.11)
has a solution 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) < ̄𝛥.

Below, we prove several lemmas that together imply Proposition 4.

− ∫

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

1

2 ̄𝐿
̄𝑚

)

𝑥 − ̄𝐿

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 − ∫

0

2 ̄𝐿
̄𝑚

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

.

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

15 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

− 1

]

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

B.6. Liquidity buffers

This equation defines ̄𝐿 = ̄𝐿 (𝜂) implicitly. It is easy to verify that the
right-hand side decreases in ̄𝐿 if 𝜆(⋅) is weakly convex. Therefore, ̄𝐿 (𝜂)
is a decreasing function. Define

̂𝜂 =

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

∫
0

𝑑𝑥

1

[
𝜆

)

𝑥

( ̄𝑚
2

]

− 1

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

(B.13)

Note that if 𝜆(⋅) is weakly convex, then ̄𝜂 > ̂𝜂.

It is easy to see that ̄𝐿 ( ̂𝜂) = ̄𝑚
2

and ̄𝐿 ( ̄𝜂) = 0. Furthermore, if 𝜂 < ̂𝜂,

, which contradicts (B.12).

then ̄𝐿 (𝜂) > ̄𝑚
2
Case 2: 𝛥∗ (𝜂) < ̄𝛥.
Suppose that 𝐿 = ̄𝐿 (𝜂) such that 𝛥 = 𝛥∗ (𝜂) < ̄𝛥. By Lemma 3, it

must be that
̄𝐿 ≤ ̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚
2

+

𝐹𝜖

−𝛥∗ + ̄𝜖) .
(

(B.14)

Suppose that this inequality holds strictly. Then, from our proof of
Lemma 3, the right-hand side of (B.11) strictly increases in 𝛥 and
strictly decreases in 𝐿 in the neighborhood of
. Therefore, for
a given 𝜂, a marginal increase in ̄𝐿 implies a marginal increase in 𝛥∗.
Moreover, such changes do not violate (B.14). Therefore, 𝛥∗ is not the
supremum value of 𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) for a given 𝜂. Therefore, it must be that
(B.14) holds as equality, i.e.,

(𝛥∗, ̄𝐿)

̄𝐿 =

̄𝑚
2

+

̄𝑚
2

−𝛥∗ + ̄𝜖) .
(

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥∗, ̄𝐿)
= 𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥∗ + ̄𝜖) and 𝑥𝑤
Under (B.15), we get 𝑥𝑠
(B.6) and (B.7). Plugging these into (B.11), we obtain
−𝛥∗ + ̄𝜖)))
(

[
𝜆

𝜂 =

(𝑥 − 𝐹𝜖

1

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

∫

𝑑𝑥

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥∗+ ̄𝜖)

( ̄𝑚
2

(B.15)

(𝛥∗, ̄𝐿)

= 1 from

This equation defines 𝛥∗ = 𝛥∗ (𝜂) implicitly. Clearly, 𝛥∗ (𝜂) is an in-
creasing function. From (B.15) it then follows that ̄𝐿 (𝜂) is a decreasing
function. Note that 𝛥∗ < ̄𝛥 = ̄𝜖 −𝜖 ⇔ 𝜂 < ̂𝜂, where ̂𝜂 is defined by (B.13).
Finally, 𝛥∗ (0) = 0 and 𝛥∗ ( ̂𝜂) = ̄𝛥, and so ̄𝐿 (0) = ̄𝑚 and ̄𝐿 ( ̂𝜂) = ̄𝑚
2

The analyses of cases 1 and 2 imply that if 𝐿 = ̄𝐿 (𝜂) then (B.11)
has a solution 𝛥 = 𝛥∗ (𝜂). Therefore, by Lemma 3, (B.11) has a solution
𝛥 (𝐿, 𝜂) < 𝛥∗ (𝜂) for any 𝐿 ∈ [0, ̄𝐿 (𝜂)). □

.

Finally, we establish

Lemma 5.
𝜕𝜃∗
< 0.
𝜕𝛥

Suppose that 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂) and 𝐿 < ̄𝐿 (𝜂). Then 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝐿

< 0 and

Proof. From Lemmas 3 and 4 it follows that if 𝐿 < ̄𝐿 (𝜂) then 0 ≤
𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) < 𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) and 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝐿) ≤ 𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿) < 1. Therefore, using the
definitions of the fire-sale pressure terms (B.4) and (B.5), we get
𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝐿
which together imply that 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝐿

< 0, where 𝜃∗ is defined by (B.10).

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝐿

< 0,

and

< 0

In the absence of liquidity injections, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥
(
)
0, ̄𝐿 (𝜂)
Below we show that this result holds if 𝐿 ∈
.

< 0 by Proposition 1.

𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)

(𝑥)

− 𝐿

)

)
(𝑥)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥−

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥+ ̄𝜖)

𝑥𝑠
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

∝ ∫

× 𝑓𝜖
𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2

1

∫

𝑥𝑤

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝐿

)

𝑓𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)

(𝑥)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

where ∝ denotes proportionality up to a positive multiplicative term.
By changing the variable of integration in the second integral, 𝑦 =
𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥+ ̄𝜖)

𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

∝ ∫

𝑥𝑠

× 𝑓𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

)
(𝑥)

𝜖

)
(𝑥)
, we can rewrite the expression as
𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2
(

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

− 𝐿

̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

(𝑥)

𝐹𝜖

)

)

𝜖

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

−

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

𝜖

(𝑥))

(𝑥))

Proposition 4 follows from Lemmas 3–5.

B.5.2. Corollary 3

Proof. The proof of Lemma 4 implies that if 𝜂 ≥ ̄𝜂 or 𝐿 ≥ ̄𝐿(𝜂), then
cross-bank interactions are trivial. Then (B.4) and (B.5) become

̂𝐼𝑠(𝐿) = ∫

1

𝑥𝑠

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

)

− 𝐿

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 + ∫
0

𝑥𝑠

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

̂𝐼𝑤(𝐿) = ∫

1

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 − 𝐿

)

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 + ∫
0

𝑥𝑤

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

𝑥𝑤

where from (B.6) and (B.7),

𝑥𝑠 (𝐿) =

{
0
2
̄𝑚

𝐿 − 1

if 𝐿 ≤ ̄𝑚
2
if 𝐿 > ̄𝑚
2

,

,

and 𝑥𝑤 (𝐿) =

{ 2
̄𝑚
1

𝐿 if 𝐿 < ̄𝑚
2
if 𝐿 ≥ ̄𝑚
2

,

.

Therefore, the average fragility 𝜃∗ no longer depends on 𝛥,

𝜃∗ =

1
𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫ 1
0

(

1 +

1
2

̂𝐼𝑠(𝐿) +

)
̂𝐼𝑤(𝐿)

.

1
2

Since 𝜃∗ no longer depends on 𝛥, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥
<
injection reduces fire-sale pressure directly, i.e.,
0. Therefore, liquidity injection reduces fragility only through its direct
effect, 𝑑𝜃∗
< 0
𝑑𝐿
𝑑𝜃∗
𝑤
=
and
𝑑𝐿

< 0. Furthermore, from (B.8) and (B.9),

= 0. Nonetheless, liquidity

= 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝜃∗
𝑤
𝜕𝐿

𝑑 ̂𝐼𝑤(𝐿)
𝑑𝐿

𝑑 ̂𝐼𝑠(𝐿)
𝑑𝐿

< 0. □

< 0 and

𝑑𝜃∗
𝑠
𝑑𝐿

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑠
𝜕𝐿

=

This appendix proves Proposition 5 and Corollary 4. Throughout

this appendix, we assume that Assumption 1 holds.

B.6.1. Proposition 5

Define

𝜆

1

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

̂𝐼𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) = ∫
𝑥𝑠
̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

+ ∫

𝑥𝑠

0

𝑑𝑥,

̂𝐼𝑤 (𝛥, 𝑙) = ∫

𝑥𝑤

+ ∫

0

𝑥𝑤
̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

𝜆

1

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

(B.16)

(B.17)

where 𝑥𝑠 = 𝑥𝑠(𝛥, 𝑙) and 𝑥𝑤 = 𝑥𝑤(𝛥, 𝑙) are the critical fractions of strong-
and weak-bank runners below which perceived fire-sale discount is
zero, i.e.,

𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙)

=

⎧
0
⎪
⎨
̂𝑥𝑠 ∶ ̄𝑚
⎪
2
⎩
𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝑙)

̂𝑥𝑠 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
( ̂𝑥𝑠)

= 𝑙

if 𝑙 ≤ ̄𝑚
2
if 𝑙 > ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝜖) ,
(𝛥 + 𝜖) ,

(B.18)

̂𝑥𝑤 ∶ ̄𝑚
2

̂𝑥𝑤 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
( ̂𝑥𝑤)

= 𝑙

1

=

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

if 𝑙 < ̄𝑚
2
if 𝑙 ≥ ̄𝑚
2

+ ̄𝑚
2
+ ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) ,

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) .

(B.19)

The run thresholds for strong and weak banks are implicitly given

)

𝑑𝑥 < 0. □

by

1

1

∫
0

∫

0

16 

(𝜃∗

(𝜃∗

𝑠 + 𝜂)
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
𝑤 − 𝜂)
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

(1 − 𝑙)

(1 − 𝑙)

𝑑𝑥 − ̂𝐼𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) = 1,

𝑑𝑥 − ̂𝐼𝑤 (𝛥, 𝑙) = 1.

(B.20)

(B.21)

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

As in the baseline model, if cross-bank strategic interactions are
nontrivial, run thresholds of strong and weak banks are infinitely close
to the average threshold

𝜃∗ =

1
1−𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥

(

1 +

1
2

̂𝐼𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) +

)
̂𝐼𝑤 (𝛥, 𝑙)

,

1
2

where bank heterogeneity 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) is implicitly given by

𝜂 =

1
1−𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

( ̂𝐼𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) − ̂𝐼𝑤 (𝛥, 𝑙)

) .

(B.22)

(B.23)

In equilibrium, there exist nontrivial cross-bank interactions if (B.23)
has a solution 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) < ̄𝛥.

Below, we prove several lemmas that together imply Proposition 5.

Lemma 6.
teractions and 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) solves (B.23). Then it must be that 𝑙 < ̄𝑚
2
̄𝑚
> 0.
2

Suppose that there exist nontrivial cross-bank strategic in-
+

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) + ̄𝜖). Moreover, 𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝑙

Proof. Suppose that 𝑙 and 𝛥 are such that 𝑙 ≥ ̄𝑚
𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖). Then,
2
using the definitions (B.18) and (B.19), we get 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) = 2𝑙
− 1 ≥
̄𝑚
𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖) and 𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝐿) = 1. Then the fire-sale pressure terms (B.16)
and (B.17) become

+ ̄𝑚
2

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

− 𝑙

) ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥 + ∫

0

2𝑙
̄𝑚 −1

̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

̂𝐼𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) = ∫

1

2𝑙
̄𝑚 −1
1

̂𝐼𝑤 (𝛥, 𝑙) = ∫

0

̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

In this case, the right-hand side of (B.23) does not depend on 𝛥.
In other words, the fire-sale pressure terms do not depend on bank
heterogeneity 𝛥, i.e., there are no cross-bank strategic uncertainties,
which is a contradiction.

𝑙
̄𝑚

1
2

Therefore, it must be that 𝑙 < ̄𝑚
2
≤ 𝑥𝑤 (𝛥, 𝑙) < 1. Furthermore, from (B.18) and (B.19),

+ ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖). Then 0 ≤ 𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) ≤

𝑥𝑠 +

1
2

𝑥𝑤 =

𝑙
̄𝑚

.

(B.24)

Using the expressions for the fire-sale pressure terms (B.17) and

(B.16), we get

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

−

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥

𝜆′

1

= ∫
𝑥𝑠

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

𝜂 =

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
) 𝑑𝑥+

(𝑥)

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

×

1

̄𝑚
2
𝜆′

𝑓𝜖
( ̄𝑚
2

∫

𝑥𝑤

×

̄𝑚
2

𝑓𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
) 𝑑𝑥

(𝑥)

Using the change of variable, 𝑦 = 𝐹𝜖
integral, we get

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)
, in the second

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

−

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤
𝜕𝛥
× 𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2

(

1

𝑥𝑠
̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

= ∫

𝑥 +

+

̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1
) ̄𝑚
2

− 𝑙
)
(𝑥)
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝑓𝜖

𝜖

𝜖

)

) 𝑑𝑥.

(𝑥)

Denote the right-hand side of (B.23) by 𝑇 (𝛥, 𝑙). We have just proved
> 0. Using the implicit function theorem, we then derive 𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝑙

that 𝜕𝑇
𝜕𝛥
(see the unumbered equations given in Box I).

Clearly, 𝑇1 > 0. Furthermore, the second term in 𝑇2 is nonnegative
under Assumption 1. Finally, recall from (B.24) that 𝑥𝑠 and 𝑥𝑤 are
symmetric around 𝑙
. Therefore, the first term in 𝑇2 is nonnegative
̄𝑚
because

𝜆′

𝑥𝑤

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

𝑑𝑥 ≥

∫

𝑥𝑠
( ̄𝑚
𝜆′
2

(

𝐹𝜖

𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

( 𝑙
̄𝑚

1 − 𝑙

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
)

))

− 𝑙
2

(

𝑥𝑤

∫

𝑙
̄𝑚

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙) 𝑑𝑥−∫

)

(𝑙 − ̄𝑚𝑥) 𝑑𝑥

= 0.

𝑙
̄𝑚

𝑥𝑠

It follows that 𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝑙

> 0. □

Lemma 6 implies, in particular, that if Eq. (B.23) has a solution
𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) for some 𝑙 > 0, then it also has a solution 𝛥(̃𝑙, 𝜂) < 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) for
any ̃𝑙 ∈ [0, 𝑙).

Recall that ̄𝜂, defined in (23), can be written as

̄𝜂 =

1
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

∫
0

𝑑𝑥

1

[
𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

)

̄𝑚
2

− 𝜆

)]

𝑥

( ̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚𝑥
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

Lemma 7. For each 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂), there exists ̄𝑙 = ̄𝑙 (𝜂) such that if 𝑙 < ̄𝑙, then
cross-bank interactions are nontrivial, 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) < ̄𝛥. Moreover, ̄𝑙 (𝜂) is a
decreasing function such that

̄𝑙 (𝜂) = ̄𝑚 and inf

̄𝑙 (𝜂) = 0.

sup
𝜂∈(0, ̄𝜂)

𝜂∈(0, ̄𝜂)

Proof. Lemma 6 implies that if (B.23) has a solution 𝛥 = 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂), then
𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) increases in 𝑙. Define supremum value of 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) by 𝛥∗ (𝜂). Two
cases are possible.

Case 1: 𝛥∗ (𝜂) = ̄𝛥.
Suppose that 𝑙 = ̄𝑙 (𝜂) such that 𝛥 = 𝛥∗ (𝜂) = ̄𝛥. By Lemma 6, it must

be that
̄𝑙 ≤ ̄𝑚
2

+

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

− ̄𝛥 + ̄𝜖)
(

=

̄𝑚
2

.

(B.25)

Using the definition (B.19), we find 𝑥𝑠
Then (B.23) can be rewritten as

( ̄𝛥, ̄𝑙)

= 0 and 𝑥𝑤

( ̄𝛥, ̄𝑙)

= 2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

.

( ̄𝑚
2

𝜆

)
−̄𝑙

𝑥+ ̄𝑚
2
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫ 1
0

( ̄𝑚𝑥−̄𝑙)

𝑑𝑥 − ∫ 1
2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

( ̄𝑚
2

𝜆

)
𝑥−̄𝑙

( ̄𝑚𝑥−̄𝑙)

1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

𝑑𝑥 − ∫
0

̄𝑚𝑥−̄𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

1−̄𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

.

This equation defines ̄𝑙 = ̄𝑙 (𝜂) implicitly. By the implicit function
theorem,

𝑑 ̄𝑙
𝑑𝜂

= − ∫
0

[

1

2

1 − ̄𝑙) 𝑑𝑥
(
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

1
1 − ̄𝑙

(

1

∫

2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

(

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

)
− ̄𝑙

̄𝑚
2

−𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

))

𝑥 − ̄𝑙

𝑑𝑥 + ∫

0

2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

(

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

(

𝜆′

1

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

)
− ̄𝑙

− 𝜆′

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 − ̄𝑙

∫

2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

+ ∫

0

2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

𝜆′

( ̄𝑚
2

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

) ( ̄𝑚𝑥 − ̄𝑙)

− ̄𝑙

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑥 +

)
− ̄𝑙

̄𝑚
2
)) ( ̄𝑚𝑥 − ̄𝑙)

− 1

)

𝑑𝑥

+

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑑𝑥

]

𝑑𝑥

−1 < 0.

Clearly, the integrand is positive if 𝑥 ≥ 𝑙
̄𝑚

. On 𝑥 ∈

)

[

𝑥𝑠, 𝑙
̄𝑚

, we have

Therefore, ̄𝑙 (𝜂) is a decreasing function. Define

̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

+

>

2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
( 1
2

𝜖

)
(𝑥)
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1
1
2

̄𝑚𝐹𝜖

𝜖

− 𝑙
)
(𝑥)
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

̄𝑚𝑥 +

)

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

≥ 0,

where the latter inequality follows from the definition of 𝑥𝑠, given in
(B.18). Therefore,

− 𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑤

> 0.

𝜕 ̂𝐼𝑠
𝜕𝛥

𝜕𝛥

̂𝜂 =

1
1− ̄𝑚
2
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫
0

𝑑𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

(

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

)

𝑥

1

− 1

) (

̄𝑚𝑥 − ̄𝑚
2

)

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

(B.26)

It is easy to see that ̄𝑙 ( ̂𝜂) = ̄𝑚
2
̄𝑙 (𝜂) > ̄𝑚
2

, which contradicts (B.25).

Case 2: 𝛥∗ (𝜂) < ̄𝛥.

and ̄𝑙 ( ̄𝜂) = 0. Furthermore, if 𝜂 < ̂𝜂, then

17 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

𝑑𝛥
𝑑𝑙

= −

𝜕𝑇
𝜕𝑙
𝜕𝑇
𝜕𝛥

=

1
𝜕𝑇
𝜕𝛥

𝑇1 + 𝑇2
2 (1 − 𝑙)2 ∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

, where

𝑇1 = ∫

𝑥𝑤

𝑥𝑠

[
𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

]

− 1

𝑑𝑥 + ∫

1

(

𝜆

𝑥𝑤

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

− 𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

))

𝑑𝑥,

and

𝑇2
1 − 𝑙

𝜆′

𝑥𝑤

=∫

𝑥𝑠

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥+∫

(

𝜆′

( ̄𝑚
2

1

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

𝑥𝑤

−𝜆′

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

( ̄𝑚
2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

))

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

𝑑𝑥.

Suppose that 𝑙 = ̄𝑙 (𝜂) such that 𝛥 = 𝛥∗ (𝜂) < ̄𝛥. By Lemma 6, it must

and

Box I.

be that
̄𝑙 ≤ ̄𝑚
2

+

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

−𝛥∗ + ̄𝜖) .
(

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙) 𝜆′

1

(B.27)

𝑇2 = ∫

𝑥𝑠

Suppose that this inequality holds strictly. Then, from our proof of
Lemma 6, the right-hand side of (B.23) strictly increases in 𝛥 and
strictly decreases in 𝑙 in the neighborhood of
. Therefore, for a
given 𝜂, a marginal increase in ̄𝑙 implies a marginal increase in 𝛥∗.
Moreover, such changes do not violate (B.27). Therefore, 𝛥∗ is not the
supremum value of 𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) for a given 𝜂, and so (B.27) must hold as
equality, i.e.,

(𝛥∗, ̄𝑙)

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

( ̄𝑚
2

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

𝐹𝜖

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥+

)

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

𝑑𝑥.

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙) 𝜆′

1

∫

𝑥𝑤

Recall that 𝑥𝑠
. The second
term in 𝑇2 is clearly positive. The first term in 𝑇2 is also positive because

≤ 𝑥𝑤 < 1 and, by (B.24), 1
2

𝑥𝑤 = 𝑙
̄𝑚

𝑥𝑠 + 1
2

≤ 𝑙
̄𝑚

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙) 𝜆′

1

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

𝑑𝑥 >

̄𝑙 =

̄𝑚
2

+

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

−𝛥∗ + ̄𝜖) >
(

̄𝑚
2

.

Under (B.28), 𝑥𝑤
(B.23) can be rewritten as

(𝛥∗, ̄𝑙)

= 1, 𝑥𝑠

(B.28)

(𝛥∗, ̄𝑙)

= 2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

− 1 = 𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥∗ + ̄𝜖). Then

∫

𝑥𝑠
( ̄𝑚
𝜆′
2

(

𝐹𝜖

𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

1 − 𝑙

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
))

− 𝑙
2

( 𝑙
̄𝑚

)

(

𝑥𝑤

∫

𝑙
̄𝑚

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙) − ∫
𝑥𝑠

𝑙
̄𝑚

)

(𝑙 − ̄𝑚𝑥) 𝑑𝑥

= 0.

𝜂 =

1
1−̄𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0

1

∫

2̄𝑙
̄𝑚 −1

𝑑𝑥

[
𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

)
− ̄𝑙

− 1

] ̄𝑚𝑥 − ̄𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥.

This equation defines ̄𝑙 = ̄𝑙 (𝜂) implicitly. By the implicit function
theorem,

𝑑 ̄𝑙
𝑑𝜂

= −

∫ 1
2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

𝜆′

−1

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

− ̄𝑙

) ̄𝑚𝑥−̄𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

1−̄𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

2 ∫ 1
0
𝑑𝑥 + 1
1−̄𝑙

𝑑𝑥

∫ 1
2̄𝑙
̄𝑚

−1

(

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

)
− ̄𝑙

− 1

)

𝑑𝑥

< 0.

Therefore, ̄𝑙 (𝜂) is a decreasing function. Clearly, ̄𝑙 (0) = ̄𝑚 and ̄𝑙 ( ̂𝜂) = ̄𝑚
,
2
where ̂𝜂 is given by (B.26). Furthermore, if 𝜂 > ̂𝜂 then ̄𝑙 (𝜂) < ̄𝑚
, which
2
contradicts (B.28).

The analyses of cases 1 and 2 imply that if 𝑙 = ̄𝑙 (𝜂), then (B.23)
has a solution 𝛥 = 𝛥∗ (𝜂). Therefore, by Lemma 6, (B.23) has a solution
𝛥 (𝑙, 𝜂) < 𝛥∗ (𝜂) for any 𝑙 ∈ [0, ̄𝑙 (𝜂)). □

Finally, we establish

Lemma 8.
𝜕𝜃∗
< 0.
𝜕𝛥

Suppose that 𝜂 ∈ (0, ̄𝜂) and 𝑙 < ̄𝑙 (𝜂). Then 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑙

< 0 and

Proof. From Lemmas 6 and 7 it follows that if 𝑙 < ̄𝑙 (𝜂) then cross-bank
strategic interactions are nontrivial and 𝑙 < ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖 (−𝛥 + ̄𝜖).

+ ̄𝑚
2

Using (B.16) and (B.17), we can write the derivative of the average

Therefore, 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑙

< 0.

Next, compute the derivative of 𝜃∗ with respect to 𝛥. We have

𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

=

̄𝑚
1−𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

4 ∫ 1
0

(

1

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙) 𝑓𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

(𝑥)

∫

𝑥𝑠

×

) 𝜆′

( ̄𝑚
2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)

(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

𝑑𝑥−

1

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙) 𝑓𝜖

(

−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

(𝑥)

∫

𝑥𝑤

) 𝜆′

( ̄𝑚
2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2

(

𝐹𝜖

−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)

)

(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)
.

𝑑𝑥

By changing the variable of integration in the second integral, 𝑦 =
)
𝐹𝜖
(𝑥)
, we can rewrite the expression as

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

(

1

1
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

−

𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝛥

=

̄𝑚
1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

4 ∫ 1
0
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

∫
𝑑𝑥
𝑥𝑠
) 𝜆′ ( ̄𝑚
2
Proposition 5 follows from Lemmas 6–8.

1 − ̄𝑚𝐹𝜖
(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

(𝑥)

𝐹𝜖

𝜖

𝜖

×

1

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1
𝜖
)
)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

𝑓𝜖

)

(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥 < 0. □

B.6.2. Corollary 4

Proof. The proof of Lemma 7 implies that if 𝜂 ≥ ̄𝜂 or 𝑙 ≥ ̄𝑙(𝜂), then
cross-bank interactions are trivial. Then (B.16) and (B.17) become

threshold (B.22) with respect to 𝑙 as
𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑙

( 1

1
2 (1 − 𝑙) ∫ 1
0

1 − 𝑙

= −

1
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥

𝑇1 + 𝑇2

)

,

1

̂𝐼𝑠 (𝑙) = ∫
𝑥𝑠

where

1

𝑇1 = ∫
𝑥𝑠
1

∫

𝑥𝑤

(

𝜆

(

𝜆

( ̄𝑚
2

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 +

𝑥 +

̄𝑚
2

̄𝑚
2

𝐹𝜖

(𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

)

− 1

𝑑𝑥+

𝐹𝜖

(
−𝛥 + 𝐹 −1

𝜖

)
(𝑥)

− 𝑙

)

)

− 1

𝑑𝑥 > 0,

( ̄𝑚
2

𝜆

)

− 𝑙

𝑥 + ̄𝑚
2
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥
)

( ̄𝑚
2

𝑥 − 𝑙

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

( ̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙)

𝑑𝑥 + ∫
0

𝑥𝑠

̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

𝑑𝑥 + ∫

0

𝑥𝑤

̄𝑚𝑥 − 𝑙
1 − ̄𝑚𝑥

𝑑𝑥,

̂𝐼𝑤 (𝑙) = ∫

𝜆

1

𝑥𝑤

where from (B.18) and (B.19),

𝑥𝑠 (𝛥, 𝑙) =

{

0
2𝑙
̄𝑚

− 1

if 𝑙 < ̄𝑚
2
if 𝑙 ≥ ̄𝑚
2

,

,

and 𝑥𝑤 (𝑙) =

{ 2𝑙
̄𝑚
1

if 𝑙 < ̄𝑚
2
if 𝑙 ≥ ̄𝑚
2

,

.

18 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Therefore, the average fragility 𝜃∗ no longer depends on heterogene-

ity 𝛥,

𝜃∗ =

1
1−𝑙
1− ̄𝑚𝑥

∫ 1
0

𝑑𝑥

(

1 +

1
2

̂𝐼𝑠 (𝑙) +

)
̂𝐼𝑤 (𝑙)

.

1
2

Since 𝜃∗ no longer depends on 𝛥, 𝜕𝜃∗
= 0. Using the same approach
𝜕𝛥
as in the proof of Lemma 8, one can show that the liquidity buffer
requirement reduces fragility only through its direct effect, 𝑑𝜃∗
<
𝑑𝑙
0. Furthermore, using (B.20) and (B.21), it is straightforward to show
that

= 𝜕𝜃∗
𝜕𝑙

< 0. □

< 0 and

=

=

𝑑𝜃∗
𝑤
𝑑𝑙

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑤
𝜕𝑙

𝑑𝜃∗
𝑠
𝑑𝑙

𝜕𝜃∗
𝑠
𝜕𝑙

Appendix C. Supplementary material

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2015. Banking, liquidity, and bank runs in an infinite horizon
economy. Amer. Econ. Rev. 105 (7), 2011–2043, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/
aer.20130665.

Goldstein, I., 2005. Strategic complementarities and the twin crises. Econom. J. 115

(503), 368–390, URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2005.00993.x.

Goldstein, I., Jiang, H., Ng, D.T., 2017. Investor flows and fragility in corporate bond
funds. J. Financ. Econ. 126 (3), 592–613, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2
016.11.007.

Goldstein, I., Leitner, Y., 2018. Stress tests and information disclosure. J. Econom.

Theory 177, 34–69, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jet.2018.05.013.

Goldstein, I., Pauzner, A., 2005. Demand-deposit contracts and the probability of bank
runs. J. Finance 60 (3), 1293–1327, URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.20
05.00762.x.

Gomes, J.F., 2001. Financing investment. Amer. Econ. Rev. 91 (5), 1263–1285, URL:

https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.91.5.1263.

Granja, J., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2017. Selling failed banks. J. Finance 72 (4),

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

1723–1784, URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12512.

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103934.

References

Acharya, V.V., 2009. A theory of systemic risk and design of prudential bank regulation.

J. Financ. Stab. 5 (3), 224–255, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2009.02.001.

Acharya, V.V., Pedersen, L.H., Philippon, T., Richardson, M., 2017. Measuring systemic

risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (1), 2–47, URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw088.

Adrian, T., Brunnermeier, M.K., 2016. CoVaR. Amer. Econ. Rev. 106 (7), 1705–1741,

URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.20120555.

Allen, F., Babus, A., Carletti, E., 2012. Asset commonality, debt maturity and systemic
risk. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (3), 519–534, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.20
11.07.003.

Allen, F., Gale, D., 1994. Limited market participation and volatility of asset prices.

Angeletos, G.-M., Werning,

Amer. Econ. Rev. 84 (4), 933–955, URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2118039.
Information aggregation,
I., 2006. Crises and prices:
multiplicity, and volatility. Amer. Econ. Rev. 96 (5), 1720–1736, URL: https://
doi.org/10.1257/aer.96.5.1720.

Bouvard, M., Chaigneau, P., Motta, A.D., 2015. Transparency in the financial system:
Rollover risk and crises. J. Finance 70 (4), 1805–1837, URL: https://doi.org/10.1
111/jofi.12270.

Brownlees, C., Engle, R.F., 2017. SRISK: A conditional capital shortfall measure of
systemic risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (1), 48–79, URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/
hhw060.

Cabrales, A., Gottardi, P., Vega-Redondo, F., 2017. Risk sharing and contagion in
networks. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (9), 3086–3127, URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
rfs/hhx077.

Greenwood, R., Stein, J.C., Hanson, S.G., Sunderam, A., 2017. Strengthening and
streamlining bank capital regulation. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 2017 (2), 479–565,
URL: https://doi.org/10.1353/eca.2017.0020.

Haldane, A.G., 2009. Rethinking the Financial Network. Speech delivered at

the

Financial Student Association, Amsterdam.

Hellwig, C., Mukherji, A., Tsyvinski, A., 2006. Self-fulfilling currency crises: The role
of interest rates. Amer. Econ. Rev. 96 (5), 1769–1787, URL: https://doi.org/10.12
57/aer.96.5.1769.

Huang, X., Zhou, H., Zhu, H., 2009. A framework for assessing the systemic risk of
major financial institutions. J. Bank. Financ. 33 (11), 2036–2049, URL: https://do
i.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2009.05.017.

Ibragimov, R., Jaffee, D., Walden, J., 2011. Diversification disasters. J. Financ. Econ.

99 (2), 333–348, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2010.08.015.

James, C., 1991. The losses realized in bank failures. J. Finance 46 (4), 1223–1242,

URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1991.tb04616.x.

Jordà, Ò., Schularick, M., Taylor, A.M., 2017. Macrofinancial history and the new
business cycle facts. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 31 (1), 213–263, URL: https://doi
.org/10.1086/690241.

Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Econ. 105 (2), 211–248, URL: ht

tps://doi.org/10.1086/262072.

Kopytov, A., 2023. Booms, busts, and common risk exposures. J. Finance 78,

3299–3341, URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13283.

Kreicher, L.L., McCauley, R.N., 2018. The new US intermediate holding companies:
Reducing or shifting assets? BIS Q. Rev. March 2018, URL: https://www.bis.org/p
ubl/qtrpdf/r_qt1803.htm.

Kuong, J.C.-F., 2021. Self-fulfilling fire sales: Fragility of collateralized short-term debt
markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (6), 2910–2948, URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/
hhaa115.

Carletti, E., Goldstein, I., Leonello, A., 2020. The Interdependence of Bank Capital and

Liu, X., 2016. Interbank market freezes and creditor runs. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (7),

Liquidity. Vol. 2020–128, BAFFI CAREFIN Centre Research Paper.

1860–1910, URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw017.

Carlsson, H., van Damme, E., 1993. Global games and equilibrium selection.

Econometrica 61 (5), 989–1018, URL: https://doi.org/10.2307/2951491.

Chen, Q., Goldstein,

I., Jiang, W., 2010. Payoff complementarities and financial
fragility: Evidence from mutual fund outflows. J. Financ. Econ. 97 (2), 239–262,
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2010.03.016.

Choi, D.B., 2014. Heterogeneity and stability: Bolster the strong, not the weak. Rev.
Financ. Stud. 27 (6), 1830–1867, URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhu023.
Cifuentes, R., Ferrucci, G., Shin, H.S., 2005. Liquidity risk and contagion. J. Eur.
Econom. Assoc. 3 (2–3), 556–566, URL: https://doi.org/10.1162/jeea.2005.3.2-3
.556.

Cong, L.W., Grenadier, S.R., Hu, Y., 2020. Dynamic interventions and informational
linkages. J. Financ. Econ. 135 (1), 1–15, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2
019.05.011.

Dai, L., Luo, D., Yang, M., 2024. Disclosure of bank-specific information and stability
of financial systems. Rev. Financ. Stud. 37 (4), 1315–1367, URL: https://doi.org/
10.1093/rfs/hhad089.

Diamond, D.W., Dybvig, P.H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. J.

Liu, X., 2018. Diversification and Systemic Bank Runs. Working Paper.
Morris, S., Shin, H.S., 1998. Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency
attacks. Amer. Econ. Rev. 88 (3), 587–597, URL: https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.90.1
.316.

Morris, S., Shin, H.S., 2003. In: Dewatripont, M., Hansen, L.P., Turnovsky, S.J. (Eds.),
Global Games: Theory and Applications. In: Econometric Society Monographs,
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, pp. 56–114.

Parlatore, C., 2015. Transparency and Bank Runs. Working Paper.
Parlatore, C., 2016. Fragility in money market funds: Sponsor support and regulation.
J. Financ. Econ. 121 (3), 595–623, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2016.05
.004.

Rochet, J.-C., Vives, X., 2004. Coordination failures and the lender of last resort: Was
bagehot right after all? J. Eur. Econom. Assoc. 2 (6), 1116–1147, URL: https://do
i.org/10.1162/1542476042813850.

Romer, C.D., Romer, D.H., 2017. New evidence on the aftermath of financial crises in
advanced countries. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (10), 3072–3118, URL: https://doi.org
/10.1257/aer.20150320.

Polit. Econ. 91 (3), 401–419, URL: https://doi.org/10.1086/261155.

Sákovics, J., Steiner, J., 2012. Who matters in coordination problems? Amer. Econ.

Diamond, D.W., Rajan, R.G., 2005. Liquidity shortages and banking crises. J. Finance

Rev. 102 (7), 3439–3461, URL: https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.7.3439.

60 (2), 615–647, URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2005.00741.x.

Shaffer, S., 1994. Pooling intensifies joint failure risk. In: Research in Financial Services:

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility:
Evidence from the US banking sector. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 169–216, URL: h
ttps://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20150342.

Private and Public Policy. Vol. 6, pp. 249–280.

Shen, L., Zou, J., 2024. Intervention with screening in panic-based runs. J. Finance 79

(1), 357–412, URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13295.

Eisenbach, T.M., 2017. Rollover risk as market discipline: A two-sided inefficiency. J.
Financ. Econ. 126 (2), 252–269, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2017.07.0
09.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1992. Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach. J. Finance 47 (4), 1343–1366, URL: https://doi.org/10.1
111/j.1540-6261.1992.tb04661.x.

Elsinger, H., Lehar, A., Summer, M., 2006. Risk assessment for banking systems.

Song, F., Thakor, A.V., 2023. Market freeze and bank capital structure heterogeneity.

Manage. Sci. 52 (9), 1301–1314, URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1060.0531.

Manage. Sci. 69 (3), 1856–1876, URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4374.

Enria, A., 2018. Fragmentation in banking markets: Crisis legacy and the challenge of
brexit. In: Speech Delivered at BCBS-FSI High Level Meeting for Europe on Banking
Supervision.

Stiglitz, J.E., 2010. Risk and global economic architecture: Why full financial integration
may be undesirable. Amer. Econ. Rev. 100 (2), 388–392, URL: https://doi.org/10.
1257/aer.100.2.388.

19 

I. Goldstein et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103934 

Uhlig, H., 2010. A model of a systemic bank run. J. Monetary Econ. 57 (1), 78–96,

URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2009.10.010.

Upper, C., 2011. Simulation methods to assess the danger of contagion in interbank
markets. J. Financ. Stab. 7 (3), 111–125, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2010.
12.001.

Wagner, W., 2010. Diversification at financial institutions and systemic crises. J. Financ.

Intermed. 19 (3), 373–386, URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2009.07.002.

Wagner, W., 2011. Systemic liquidation risk and the diversity-diversification trade-off.
J. Finance 66 (4), 1141–1175, URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2011.01
666.x.

Yellen, J., 2013. Interconnectedness and systemic risk: Lessons from the financial crisis
and policy implications. In: Speech Delivered at the AEA/AFA Joint Luncheon. San
Diego.

20 

