Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Broken promises, competition, and capital allocation in the mutual fund
industry✩
Simona Abis a, Anton Lines b,∗
a University of Colorado Boulder, Leeds School of Business, 995 Regent Dr, Boulder, 80309, CO, United States
b Copenhagen Business School, Solbjerg Plads 3, 2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

What characteristics of mutual funds do investors care about? In addition to performance and fees, we show
that investors exhibit a clear preference for managers who adhere to the strategies they describe in their
prospectuses. Capital flows respond negatively when funds diverge from the average holdings of their text-
based strategy peer groups, but positively when they outperform those peer averages. We identify this effect
using a novel instrumental variables approach, and show that funds face a delicate trade-off between keeping
their promises and outperforming their peers who make similar promises.

Dataset link: Abis Lines Mutual Fund Strategy D
escriptions (Original data), Abis Lines MF Prom
ises Replication Packet (Original data)

JEL classification:
G11
G23
L10

Keywords:
Mutual fund strategies
Prospectuses
Industrial organization
Fund flows
Machine learning

1. Introduction

Most fund managers operate according to fixed investment man-
dates that curtail the types of assets they are permitted to hold (He
and Xiong, 2013), implying that institutional demand is ultimately
determined by end investors allocating across fund categories. In this
view, it is of crucial importance to uncover what characteristics drive
investors’ allocation decisions and fund product offerings.

The existing literature studying US active equity mutual funds has
mostly focused on investors’ preference for higher risk-adjusted returns,
and documented product segmentation along priced characteristics
such as size, value and momentum. In this paper we expand the current
understanding of investor preferences and fund styles by taking advan-
tage of the Principal Investment Strategy (PIS) descriptions included

in mutual fund prospectuses.1 We obtain a comprehensive sample
of prospectuses from EDGAR (the SEC’s Electronic Data Gathering,
Analysis, and Retrieval system) for the period 2000–2017. Then, using
a simple tool from unsupervised machine learning — the k-means
algorithm — we distill the text into interpretable strategy peer groups
(SPGs): clusters of similar descriptions that represent distinct text-based
investment styles. SPGs provide a novel taxonomy for the equilibrium
outcome between investor demand for fund characteristics and the
supply of funds. Quantifying this equilibrium sheds light on which fund
characteristics investors desire, and how their preferences shape the
Industrial Organization (IO) of the mutual fund industry.

In analyzing the market equilibrium, we first focus on the supply of
funds. We show that differences in strategy descriptions across SPGs

✩

Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We thank Nikolai Roussanov and one anonymous referee for excellent comments. We also thank Svetlana
Bryzgalova, Kent Daniel, Leonard Kostovetsky, Harry Mamaysky, Paul Tetlock, and conference/seminar participants at AFA 2021, Future of Financial Information
Conference 2020, Columbia GSB, Minnesota 3M Seminar, London Business School, SFI, Toulouse, and City U HK for helpful feedback. Anton Lines gratefully
acknowledges support from the Danish Finance Institute and the Center for Big Data in Finance (grant no. DNRF167). Finally, we thank Luofeng Zhou, Tian
Zhang, Ritt Keerati, and Gary Buranasampatanon for superb research assistance. This paper was previously circulated under the title ‘‘Do Mutual Funds Keep
Their Promises?’’.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: simona.abis@colorado.edu (S. Abis), ali.fi@cbs.dk (A. Lines).

1 Mandated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, these descriptions are intended to ‘‘explain in general terms how the fund’s adviser decides what
securities to buy and sell … [and] provide investors with essential information about the fund’s investment approach and how the fund’s portfolio would be
managed.’’ (SEC rule S7-10-97).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103948
Received 8 January 2022; Received in revised form 12 September 2024; Accepted 14 September 2024

Available online 28 September 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

reflect significant differences in fund returns, holdings, and strategy
features, but not in risk-adjusted performance. Textual differences do
not seem to be a mere marketing artifact, but rather reflect a dif-
ferentiated product offering. The lack of differences in risk-adjusted
performance suggests that product differentiation might happen along
risk exposures and/or non-priced characteristics. Second, we focus on
investor demand by examining their flow responses. We show that
investors are aware of SPG boundaries by documenting a significant
flow-performance sensitivity for SPG-adjusted returns, of comparable
magnitude to that for other commonly used performance measures.
Additionally, we show that investors care about the strategy features
offered by SPGs, as they react with outflows when funds diverge from
their SPG’s core strategy, even after controlling for performance. Lastly,
we provide evidence for the economic mechanism driving the results:
investor preferences for both higher SPG-adjusted performance and
adherence to SPG core strategies provide funds with conflicting incen-
tives. This generates a trade-off between SPG-adjusted performance and
SPG adherence: when SPG peer groups are crowded in the classic style
space (size, value, and momentum), funds that move to a less crowded
space by diverging from their SPG’s core strategy outperform their SPG
peers.

Our full analysis is structured as follows. We first describe the
construction of our Strategy Peer Groups, using the k-means algorithm.2
We start by encoding each fund’s PIS description as a vector of relative
word frequencies. Then, after randomly initializing 𝑘 centroid vectors
in the space spanned by the entire corpus of descriptions, each PIS is
assigned to the closest centroid by Euclidean distance. Following this
assignment, each centroid vector is recomputed as the mean vector of
all documents assigned to it. The last two steps are repeated until con-
vergence, resulting in 𝑘 clusters, each with minimal distance between
their constituents and the geometric center.3

We optimally identify 17 distinct strategies, as shown in Fig. 1.
The key features of some strategies are well known to academics and
practitioners (e.g. Large Cap, Mid Cap, Small Cap). But most appear to go
beyond: some are associated with firm characteristics (Dividends; New
Products & Services; Competitive Advantage; Price-Earnings Ratio), some
with investment philosophies (Quantitative; Fundamental; Intrinsic Value;
Long Term; Defensive; Tax), some with secondary asset classes (Fixed In-
come; Derivatives), and some with international markets (Foreign (ADR);
Foreign (Emerging Markets)).4 In our baseline analysis we adopt the
simplifying assumption that, at any given time, funds belong to a single
dominant strategy. Hence, our strategy peer groups (SPGs) perfectly
overlap with the outcome of the k-means algorithm. We then generalize
that approach by allowing funds to promise any combination of the
above strategies, which identifies customized fund-specific SPGs. All
results hold with both methods, as funds tend to have a dominant SPG
which explains the majority of the documented effects, consistent with

2 A popular alternative for textual topic modeling is Blei et al. (2003)’s
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), which estimates a posterior distribution
over several topics for each document. Although this method yields similar
results to k-means if we assign peer groups based on the most probable
topic for each fund, we use k-means in our main specifications for two
reasons: (i) philosophically, minimizing the distance to a single cluster center
is more consistent with our interpretation of average portfolio weights as core
strategies; and (ii) empirically, the topics generated by LDA have slightly less
clear boundaries (e.g. two very similar topics for quantitative, while small cap
and large cap strategies are merged into one topic; see Appendix C).

3 To determine the number of clusters, we develop two criteria which we
call density and stability. Intuitively, the density criterion requires new clusters
to be sufficiently linguistically distinct, and the stability criterion requires most
funds to be classified into the same groups across consecutive 𝑘s. Our results
are not sensitive to the exact number of clusters chosen; see Appendix B.2.

4 All funds in our sample hold an average of at least 80% of assets in U.S.
common stock; however, what funds do with the remaining 20% is sometimes
their most distinguishing feature.

the findings of He and Xiong (2013), who show a tendency towards
narrower mandates.

Having determined the structure of promised product offerings, we
assess whether SPGs reflect an actual differentiated product offering.
Starting with a narrative approach, we find that the characteristics of
fund holdings differ significantly across funds belonging to different
SPGs, in a way that is consistent with an intuitive reading of their
promised strategies. For instance, funds belonging to the ‘‘Dividend’’
SPG hold stocks with the highest dividend yield, less cash and less
investment, whereas funds belonging to the ‘‘Long Term’’ SPG hold
stocks with lower book-to-market ratios, higher intangibles and lower
dividend yields.

Next, we build a formal measure of strategy adherence (or, equiv-
alently, strategy divergence). This approach has the advantages of
quantifiability and objectivity but requires a simplifying assumption:
that divergences from core strategies within each peer group are purely
idiosyncratic. If this condition is satisfied, the average portfolio weight
vector within each SPG represents its core strategy. Our measure of
strategy divergence is therefore the (log-transformed) sum of squared
differences between each fund’s portfolio weight vector and the average
weight vector for all funds in the same SPG.5 If funds are following
their promised strategies, they should diverge less from their own peer
group average than from a placebo strategy, i.e., some other peer group
average. Indeed, we find that funds’ portfolio weights are between 9%
and 46% more similar to their own SPG average than the placebo (de-
pending on included controls), confirming that funds generally follow
their promised strategies. To show that SPGs capture a novel dimension
of product differentiation, the controls include alternative measures
of competition (Hoberg et al. (2018), henceforth HKP) and product
uniqueness (Kostovetsky and Warner (2020), henceforth KW).

Following standard practice in the literature, we study investor
demand for SPGs through their flow responses. A rich body of work has
documented flow sensitivity to performance (e.g. Chevalier and Ellison
(1997); Sirri and Tufano (1998); Barber et al. (2016); Berk and Van
Binsbergen (2016)) and stressed the importance of evaluating funds
relative to their direct rivals (e.g., Cohen et al. (2005) and Hoberg et al.
(2018)). Combining these insights, we hypothesize that if investors are
aware of SPG boundaries and consider funds in the same SPG to be
substitute products, we should observe a significant flow-performance
sensitivity when benchmarking performance relative to these SPG ri-
vals. Thus we construct SPG-adjusted returns by subtracting the average
return of all funds in same textual peer group, and show that this
new measure of performance is positively and significantly related to
future flows, even when controlling for a wide variety of traditional
performance measures, namely: CAPM alpha, Fama–French-Carhart
four-factor (FFC4) alpha, Fama and French (2015) five-factor plus
momentum (FFC6) alpha, HKP customized peer alpha, and the Daniel
et al. (1997) (henceforth, DGTW) characteristic selectivity measure.
When all controls are included, the sensitivity of flows to SPG-adjusted
performance remains 43% as large as the sensitivity to CAPM alpha,
suggesting that investors are aware of SPG boundaries and consider
funds belonging to the same SPG to be imperfect substitutes. We note
that this perceived substitutability must occur along dimensions that
are novel and distinct from traditional priced characteristics, given the
traditional performance controls.

To further explore investors’ preferences for SPG-specific charac-
teristics, we study their responses when funds diverge from promised
strategies. In months following higher strategy divergence, flows as
a percentage of TNA are significantly lower, and this result is ro-
bust to controlling for both performance and alternative measures of
product differentiation (KW and HKP). To analyze the dynamics and
full magnitude of the effect, we implement a structural panel Vector

5 The log transformation is applied so that the variable is approximately

normally distributed.

2 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Fig. 1. Strategy Peer Groups: Word clouds for all estimated SPGs using the k-means algorithm with 𝑘 = 17 clusters. These represent the frequency of features (words and bi-grams)
in the strategy sections within each SPG. Word sizes are proportional to frequency.

3 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Auto-Regression (SPVAR) model. Orthogonalized divergence shocks
are recovered using a Cholesky identification approach (Sims, 1980),
with variable ordering based on a slow-moving capital argument. This
approach enables us to show that investors’ outflows continue for more
than 12 months following an initial change in divergence, with a
single-month, one-standard-deviation shock leading to a reduction in
annual percentage flows equal to 15% of the annual sample mean.
Using this framework, we are also able to analyze the dynamics of
strategy divergence. Divergence exhibits mean reversion at an un-
conditional rate of 75% per year, which increases by 12.5% when
funds face one-standard-deviation outflows. This result is consistent
with a market-led disciplining mechanism holding funds close to their
promised strategies, even when legal enforcement would be difficult.

Although the SPVAR approach renders reverse causality unlikely,
other forms of endogeneity remain a concern for our analysis. In
particular, unobserved fund characteristics or macroeconomic events
may be correlated with both strategy divergence and investor flows,
resulting in omitted variable bias. To mitigate these concerns, we rely
on the fact that our sample excludes industry funds (hence, most funds
have a balanced exposure to multiple industries), and identify plau-
sibly exogenous shocks to divergence originating from idiosyncratic
industry-specific events. The idea is that large idiosyncratic industry
returns — positive or negative — will mechanically change the com-
position of a fund’s portfolio in a way that is uncorrelated with fund
attributes or macroeconomic events.6 Since return-driven shocks affect
individual portfolios and SPG averages differently, they will cause
funds to involuntarily diverge from their core strategies.

Idiosyncratic industry shocks are computed by regressing returns
from each of the Fama–French 10 industry portfolios on a comprehen-
sive factor model (the Fama–French-Carhart six factors). The absolute
values of the regression residuals then serve as instruments. In the
first stage of the IV regression, we show that there is a strong posi-
tive relationship between absolute idiosyncratic industry returns and
changes in divergence (𝐹 -statistic > 10). Using the fitted values from
the first stage, we then show that funds experience outflows starting
one quarter after a divergence shock and lasting for at least four
quarters. Economically this pattern is reassuring, as investors would
likely react with a delay after observing the impact of the shocks on
portfolio composition. Due to the time-series nature of the instruments
the IV resembles an event study, and in this light it is also encouraging
to note that the ‘‘no pre-trends’’ assumption is satisfied: instrumented
divergence has no effect on flows prior to the industry shock.

In the OLS and SPVAR regressions, we estimate an average effect
across cases where divergence is intentional and cases where it is
unintentional. The IV approach, by contrast, allows us to estimate the
effect of divergence specifically in cases where it is not confounded
by strategic managerial decisions. Thus, the results of our IV regres-
sions likely reflect investors’ ‘‘pure’’ preferences for SPG adherence.
Based on variation in strategy divergence directly attributable to the
industry shocks, a one-standard-deviation increase in fitted changes in
divergence results in an annual percentage flow reduction of 0.6% per
year, or 25% of the annual sample mean. Note that the magnitude
of this result is constrained by the size of the shocks generated by
our instrument. Hence, it likely represents a lower-bound for the true
magnitude of the typical effect.

Finally, having examined the supply and demand effects of SPGs, we
explore a potential economic mechanism driving strategy divergence.
As highlighted by our IV approach, there exist scenarios in which
divergence happens involuntarily, and investors punish those cases
harshly. We could imagine, however, that funds might want to diverge
strategically when they identify alpha opportunities and/or when they
face high competition from similar funds, despite potential disapproval

6 Effects on flows coming via performance are accounted for using explicit

controls.

from investors. To better understand this trade-off, we isolate cases
in which divergence is more likely to happen strategically. Relying
on HKP’s finding that funds with fewer DGTW peers are better able
to deliver alpha, we conjecture that changes in divergence which
lead funds to move from a high-density DGTW-characteristics space
(many HKP peers) to a lower density space (fewer HKP peers) are
more likely to be driven by strategic considerations. In these cases
we expect increases in divergence to lead to increases in SPG-adjusted
performance. Confirming this conjecture, we find that while divergence
is generally negatively or insignificantly related to performance, the
effect becomes significantly positive when interacted with the strategic
divergence dummy. In these cases, increasing divergence from the
lower quartile to the upper quartile of its empirical distribution results
in funds outperforming their SPG peers by 1.02% (or 56% of the sample
standard deviation; the mean is zero by construction).

1.1. Related literature

Our findings relate primarily to the mutual fund IO literature, where
we contribute by showing that investor preferences, and the supply
of fund styles, are much more fine-grained than what has previously
been documented in the literature. Various papers have studied com-
petition in the index fund space,7 while fewer investigate the active
equity space. Those that do, study competition via holdings or return
similarities. In this vein, the closest papers to ours are Wahal and Wang
(2011), who examine competition among incumbents and new entrants
through similarities in overall fund holdings; Li and Qiu (2014), who
document that funds reduce competition by differentiating the factor
exposures of their portfolios; Hoberg et al. (2018), who identify fund-
specific peer groups by computing similarities in exposures to size,
value, and momentum; and Kostovetsky and Warner (2020),8 who find
that small and start-up fund families avoid competition by differenti-
ating themselves through more distinctive prospectus text.9 Adding to
this body of work, we show that investors exhibit preferences that go
beyond standard measures of performance and priced characteristics
(particularly size, value, and momentum), and that funds clearly dif-
ferentiate their product offerings along these lines. We further show
that differences in strategy descriptions reflect real differences in fund
behavior rather than pure marketing, and that they are relevant for
investors in terms of their specific content, not simply the uniqueness
of the text.10

We also contribute to the more extensive mutual funds style lit-
erature by proposing a novel taxonomy of styles based on textual
information in mutual fund prospectuses. The existing literature focuses
mostly on return-based (e.g., Sharpe (1988, 1992); Brown and Goetz-
mann (1997); Hunter et al. (2014)) or holdings-based (e.g., Grinblatt

7 e.g., Elton et al. (2004); Hortacsu and Syverson (2004); Khorana et al.
(2009); Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdú (2009); Stoughton et al. (2011); Sun (2021)
8 Kostovetsky and Warner (2020) use strategy description excerpts provided
by Morningstar, which contain, on average, only the first 70 words of the full
strategy text available in EDGAR filings. For comparison, the average length
of this section in our dataset is 317 words.

9 Other related papers include Khorana and Servaes (2012), who study the
drivers of fund family market shares by analyzing their marketing expenses
and funds’ exposure to price-to-book, earnings growth, and market capitaliza-
tion; Ali et al. (2020), who show that among funds taking advantage of post
earnings announcement drift, only those who are able to avoid competition
by investing in harder to hold stocks outperform, and Guercio and Reuter
(2014), who study funds’ incentives to generate alpha based on the competitive
pressure they face due to diverse preferences of their target clientele (proxied
by distribution channels).

10 To ensure that our SPGs capture a novel and distinct dimension of
competition, we show that there exists a low correlation between KW’s and
HKP’s measures and ours, and we include both of these measures as controls
in our analysis.

4 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 1
Summary Statistics: This table reports summary statistics for the full matched sample in our dataset (i.e., each observation for which we can assign
a prospectus to the fund). For each variable, the table displays the number of available observations (𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡), the mean (𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛), the standard deviation
(𝑠𝑑), the minimum (𝑚𝑖𝑛) and maximum (𝑚𝑎𝑥) values, and the 25th (𝑝25), 50th (𝑝50) and 75th (𝑝75) percentiles.

TNA ($M)
Age (Months)
Expense Ratio (%)
Turnover Ratio (%)
Flows (%)
Raw Return (Monthly)
CAPM Alpha (Monthly)
FFC6 Alpha (Monthly)

count

315 190
315 178
313 724
313 288
314 940
315 006
296 110
296 110

mean

1209.68
178.83
1.21
78.78
−0.12
0.61
−0.07
−0.09

sd

4394.34
158.20
0.39
65.91
3.42
4.74
1.86
1.18

min

5.10
0.00
0.28
4.00
−9.00
−13.96
−5.49
−3.57

p25

68.70
78.00
0.98
33.35
−1.50
−1.88
−1.05
−0.73

p50

246.80
138.00
1.18
62.00
−0.45
1.04
−0.10
−0.11

p75

908.20
221.00
1.42
102.00
0.74
3.54
0.86
0.52

max

177 462.59
1121.00
2.44
369.00
12.54
12.18
5.86
3.72

and Titman (1989); Daniel et al. (1997); Chan et al. (2002); Chan et al.
(2009); Hoberg et al. (2018)) style definitions. An exception is Sensoy
(2009) who analyzes funds’ self disclosed benchmarks in prospectuses,
but does not attempt to extract styles from prospectuses’ text. These
approaches require the ex-ante knowledge of relevant characteristics.
Our unsupervised approach instead determines them endogenously,
while still providing intuitive strategy descriptions thanks to the data’s
narrative nature.

We additionally contribute to the vast empirical literature on fund
flows by documenting two novel drivers: SPG-adjusted performance
and SPG-divergence. Existing work has mostly examined flow responses
to performance (e.g. Chevalier and Ellison (1997); Sirri and Tufano
(1998); Barber et al. (2016); Berk and Van Binsbergen (2016)), fees
(e.g. Barber et al. (2005); Ivković and Weisbenner (2009)), and mar-
keting/product differentiation (e.g. Jain and Wu (2000); Cooper et al.
(2005); Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006); Khorana and Servaes (2012);
Christoffersen et al. (2013); Kostovetsky and Warner (2020); Roussanov
et al. (2021)).

Finally, we contribute to the burgeoning literature analyzing mutual
fund mandatory disclosures. We are the first to provide a compre-
hensive analysis of the full PIS description for active equity mutual
funds. Abis (2022) uses the same data, but only to identify quantitative
funds. Abis et al. (2022) test a theoretical model of fund disclosure
choice and investors’ learning; their analysis, though, is conducted
within fund mandates. Kostovetsky and Warner (2020) construct a
textual measure of product differentiation, but do not explore the
described strategies. Akey et al. (2021) use PIS text to determine the
investment objectives of a different segment of the industry: ETFs
and index funds. Krakow and Schäfer (2020) measure textual unique-
ness within fund families as a proxy for disclosure informativeness;
and Sheng et al. (2021) examine summary risk descriptions.

2. Data and clustering methodology

2.1. Data

To construct our mapping of the mutual fund industry, we combine
standard information about mutual fund characteristics, returns and
holdings with a novel textual dataset of their ‘‘Principal Investment
Strategy’’ descriptions, taken from mandatory disclosures to the SEC
(prospectuses). Our combined sample runs from March 2000 to De-
cember 2017, covering 2,995 unique funds and 315,190 fund–month
observations. Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the final dataset.

2.1.1. Prospectuses

The SEC requires all mutual fund families to publish prospectuses
covering all of their funds. We obtain fund prospectuses from the
Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system (EDGAR) of
the SEC. The EDGAR system has been active since 1994, with a 2-year
phase-in period. A number of subsequent reforms led to increasing
standardization in disclosure formatting. In particular, as detailed in
Release No. 33-7684, the SEC began to accept disclosures in HTML

format in 2000. Prior to this year, the lack of standardization renders
textual analysis much less reliable, and coverage of funds is also much
more sparse. Hence, we begin our sample in March (end of Q1) 2000.
Prospectuses are divided into sections, each addressing a different
regulatory question. In this paper we focus on a specific section: Princi-
pal Investment Strategies (PIS), corresponding to Item 9(c) of the N-1 A
mandatory disclosure form.11 This item requires funds to disclose their
main investing methodology, including the types of securities they tend
to hold and the primary criteria used in selecting those securities. Funds
provide narrative descriptions of their strategies, constrained only by
the above requirements and the additional stipulation that they be
written in ‘‘plain English’’ (rule 421(d) of the Securities Act).12

We construct a comprehensive panel dataset of PIS descriptions
by fund–month, which we then merge to the traditional mutual fund
datasets. We are able to match 31,695 PIS descriptions to our funds of
interest. Prospectuses may be published on any day of the year, and are
often published less than once per quarter. Since any material change to
the management of the fund must be reported to both the SEC and fund
investors, for any month in which PIS is not available, we forward-fill
it using the latest available one.

Appendix A provides detailed summary statistics for the PIS corpus
utilized in our analysis. We document a large variation in the length,
complexity and sentiment of PIS descriptions, suggesting they may
contain heterogeneous information about fund strategies.

2.1.2. Fund characteristics and returns

We obtain fund characteristics and returns

from the CRSP
Survivorship-Bias-Free Mutual Fund dataset. We restrict the sample to
equity funds and exclude international funds, sector funds, index funds,
and underlying variable annuities. We account for incubation bias by
excluding observations dated before the fund’s first offer date (Evans,
2010). We also exclude funds with less than $5 million in Total Net
Assets (TNA), following Kacperczyk et al. (2008). We then aggregate
observations across all share classes of each fund for each time period.
This is done by keeping the first offer date of the oldest share class,
summing the TNA of all share classes, and averaging all other variables
(e.g. fees, returns, turnover, etc.), weighted by lagged TNA. Follow-
ing Abis (2022), we identify each fund’s share classes by constructing
a comprehensive fund identifier using the CRSP Class Group identifier,
the WFICN identifier in MFLinks, and fund names. This choice is
particularly relevant for matching fund returns and characteristic to
their holdings. Notably, the MFLinks table excludes many new funds in
recent years (Shive and Yun (2013); Zhu (2020)). Finally, we exclude
funds for which we have less than 12 months of observations.

2.1.3. Holdings

Fund holdings are obtained by combining the Thomson Reuters (for-
merly CDA/ Spectrum) Mutual Fund Holdings dataset (from January
2000 to August 2008) and the CRSP Mutual Fund Holdings dataset (from

11 https://www.sec.gov/files/form-n-1a.pdf
12 https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-7497.txt

5 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

September 2008 to December 2017). The date of the switch is chosen
to maximize coverage of active equity funds. We drop funds that hold
fewer than 10 stocks, and funds that hold, on average, less than 80%
of their assets (excluding cash) in common stock (Kacperczyk et al.,
2008). When observations are missing or only available quarterly, we
forward-fill them to a monthly frequency.13

2.1.4. Other

We also use the CRSP monthly security database, Compustat,
Fama–French factors and industry portfolios, and the CBOE VIX Index.

2.2. Strategy peer groups

We now describe our methodology for grouping funds into quan-
tifiable and interpretable ‘‘Strategy Peer Groups’’ (SPGs) based on
similarities in their PIS text.

2.2.1. Pre-processing

To convert textual data to quantitative data, we use the ‘‘bag of
words’’ approach. This procedure yields a list of all words and bi-grams
(consecutive two-word combinations) for each document. We remove
symbols, standard English stop-words (e.g. ‘‘is’’, ‘‘the’’, ‘‘and’’, etc.), and
a list of context-specific stop words.14 We reduce words to their root
using the Porter stemmer algorithm (e.g., ‘‘company’’, ‘‘companies’’,
. . . = ‘‘compani’’).

The second step is to remove boilerplate language, which occurs in
most prospectuses and is therefore less informative. This step reduces
classification noise. To do this, we aggregate unique word stems found
in any of the PIS sections into a corpus, then compute the frequency of
all 4-grams (4 word combinations) in this corpus. For each document,
we remove any 4-gram with a full-corpus frequency above the 0.1th
percentile (this procedure removes 601 4-grams). We further remove
single words and bi-grams that appear in more than 30% of PIS sections
and in fewer than 5%. The remaining words and bi-grams are the
‘‘features’’ utilized in the clustering algorithm.

In the third step, we represent the entire corpus as a single matrix,
whose columns are linguistic terms (words and bi-grams) and whose
rows are individual PIS sections. Each element in this matrix is the
frequency of a particular feature in a particular PIS section, scaled
by the number of sections in which that feature appears. This matrix
is known as the term frequency–inverse document frequency, or tfidf,
matrix.

2.2.2. Clustering

We use the k-means algorithm to group PIS sections by textual
similarity. We choose this algorithm for its simplicity, and because its
outcome naturally aligns with our measurement of core strategies as
peer group average portfolio weights.15

K-means takes as inputs: the tfidf matrix, the desired number of
clusters, and a tolerance parameter. The goal of the algorithm is to
minimize the total Euclidean distance between the center of each

13 Monthly holdings are already available for or 42% of the sample; 90% of
the data is forward-filled for at most 1 quarter in total; and 99% is forward-
filled for at most 2 quarters in total. Forward-filling is restricted to a maximum
of 1 year.

14 The full list of removed words, after stemming, is as follows: advis, alloc,
asset, averag, bar, billion, chart, class, compani, describ, equiti, fmr, fund, iii,
inform, invest, least, manag, may, might, money, mutual, net, nyse, object,
page, portfolio, potenti, price, princip, prospectu, rang, reason, risk, russel,
s&p, secur, sharehold, shown, state, stock, strategi, style, subadvis, total, unit,
varieti, year.

15 It is possible to construct peer groups using other popular models such as
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). In that case, core strategies could be defined
by using the highest weighted topic for each fund. This procedure gives similar
results to k-means clustering. See Appendix C.

cluster (called the ‘‘centroid’’) and all observations assigned to that
cluster. In the context of textual analysis, the Euclidean distance is
computed as follows:
√
√
√
√

𝑅
∑

(1)

‖𝑥𝑟 − 𝑥𝐶

𝑟 ‖2,

𝑟=1

where 𝑥𝑟 is the tfidf value for feature 𝑟 in a specific document and 𝑥𝐶
𝑟 is
the corresponding value in the cluster centroid. 𝑅 is the total number
of features. Centroids are initialized randomly in the vector space of all
documents, then updated using an iterative process. In each iteration,
each document is assigned to the closest centroid (i.e., with the smallest
Euclidean distance), after which the centroid is redefined as the mean
tfidf vector of all documents assigned to it. This process continues until
the Euclidean distance between cluster centroids in two consecutive
iterations is smaller than the specified tolerance level.16

The key hyper-parameter is the number of clusters, 𝑘. The optimal
number varies depending on the true structure of the data. To find
this optimum, we run the algorithm independently for consecutive
𝑘 = [10, 20], then compare outcomes according to two criteria:

1. Stability. A robust approach should not be very sensitive to the
number of clusters chosen. The majority of PIS sections should
be jointly categorized into the same cluster across consecutive
𝑘s. This should hold for any two consecutive 𝑘s.

2. Density. When moving from 𝑘 to 𝑘 + 1, the new cluster generated
should be sufficiently distinct from existing ones. This provides
an optimal stopping point, beyond which additional clusters are
redundant.

We systematically quantify the above concepts as follows. First, we
define the cross-tab matrix as the number of observations falling in
cluster 𝑖 under 𝑘 and cluster 𝑗 under 𝑘 + 1, such as:

𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑎𝑏(𝑖,𝑗) = # 𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑎𝑠 𝑖 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝑘 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑗 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝑘 + 1.

If we treat 𝑘 + 1 as the ground truth, and 𝑘 as the predicted value,
for any combination (𝑖, 𝑗), the denominator of its precision is the sum
for all j given i, and the denominator of its recall is the sum for all i
given j. Formally, define precision and recall as:
𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑎𝑏(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑖=1 𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑎𝑏(𝑖,𝑗)

𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑎𝑏(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑗=1 𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑎𝑏(𝑖,𝑗)

; 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙(𝑖,𝑗) =

𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑖,𝑗) =

∑𝐾+1

∑𝐾

.

Intuitively, a large 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑖,𝑗), means that observations classified as i
under 𝑘, are likely to be classified as j under 𝑘 + 1. Similarly, a large
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙(𝑖,𝑗), means that observations classified as j under 𝑘 + 1, are likely
to be classified as i under 𝑘. We combine those two criteria into an
𝐹 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 matrix indicating their harmonic mean. Due to the characteristic
of the harmonic mean, if 𝐹 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑖,𝑗) is large, 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑖,𝑗) and 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙(𝑖,𝑗)
are both expected to be large, and cluster i under 𝑘 is likely to be in
line with cluster j under 𝑘 + 1:

𝐹 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑖,𝑗) = 2 ⋅

𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑖,𝑗) ⋅ 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑖,𝑗) + 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙(𝑖,𝑗)

.

We finally transform the 𝐹 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒(𝑖,𝑗) matrix into a 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑖,𝑗) matrix
by substituting scores with 1 if they are greater than a threshold (we
currently use 0.5), 0 otherwise. All 1s indicate matched clusters across
consecutive runs 𝑘 and 𝑘 + 1.

Next, we define 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡 as the Eucledian distance between the cen-
troids of any pair of clusters under 𝑘 and 𝑘+1 as: 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑖,𝑗) = ‖𝐶 𝑘
2;
‖
where 𝐶 𝑘
indicates the centroid of tfidf vector of cluster i under 𝑘, and
𝑖
𝐶 𝑘+1
indicates the centroid of tfidf vector of cluster j under 𝑘+1. A small
𝑗
distance between two centroids indicates that the underlying clusters
are likely to be similar in meaning. Hence, we transform the 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑖,𝑗)

𝑖 −𝐶 𝑘+1

𝑗

16 For a more detailed description of the k-means algorithm, see Ap-

pendix B.1.

6 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

matrix into the 𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑖,𝑗) matrix by substituting distances with 1 if
they are lower than a threshold (we currently use 0.2), 0 otherwise. All
1s indicate matched clusters across consecutive runs 𝑘 and 𝑘 + 1.

We start by inspecting the 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑖,𝑗) matrix for (𝑘, 𝑘+1) = (10, 11).
For the 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 criterion to be satisfied we must have that: (1) all rows
of 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑖,𝑗) sum to at least 1; that means that all clusters in 𝑘 = 10
are matched to at least 1 cluster in 𝑘 = 11. (2) Columns should sum to
at most 1; that means that all clusters in 𝑘 = 11 are matched to at most
one cluster in 𝑘 = 10. Any column whose sum is zero is considered to
be a new cluster. Note that it is possible for a cluster in 𝑘 to be matched
into 2 clusters in 𝑘 + 1, that would be the case if a cluster representing
a broad category is split into two meaningfully different sub-clusters.
To verify that newly generated clusters are sufficiently distinct from
existing ones we next inspect the 𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑖,𝑗) matrix for (𝑘, 𝑘 + 1) =
(10, 11). For the density criterion to be satisfied we must have that
for any newly generated cluster in 𝑘 + 1 the sum of the corresponding
column in the 𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑖,𝑗) matrix should equal 0 (i.e., the centroid vector
for that cluster should be meaningfully different from any centroid
vector already present in 𝑘). If both conditions are satisfied we proceed
to analyzing the 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 and 𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 matrices for (𝑘, 𝑘 + 1) = (11, 12).
We repeat the above steps until the 𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 criterion fails. That allows
us to establish that the optimal number of clusters in our setting is 17.17

2.2.3. Clusters as text-based styles

Centroids identified through this methodology should be interpreted
as distinct text-based promised strategies. Although strategies are rep-
resented by a full distribution over words and bi-grams, the labels
and key terms shown in Fig. 1 are a useful short-hand to indicate
the features that are most distinctive of each. The key features of
some strategies are commonly known by academics and in the industry
(Large Cap, Mid Cap, Small Cap). But most represent novel dimensions:
some are associated with firm characteristics (Dividends, New Products &
Services, Competitive Advantage, Price-Earnings Ratio); some with invest-
ment philosophies (Quantitative, Fundamental, Intrinsic Value, Long Term,
Defensive, Tax); some with secondary asset classes (Fixed Income, Deriva-
tives); and some with international markets (Foreign (ADR), Foreign
(Emerging Markets)).

K-means assigns each PIS section to one centroid, implicitly assum-
ing that each strategy description has a dominant strategy; i.e., that the
spatial distribution of funds is concentrated around centroids. We adopt
two methods to assign funds to Strategy Peer Groups (SPGs). First,
we take k-means assignments to represent SPGs; i.e., we study funds’
dominant promised strategies. Then, we generalize SPG definitions by
allowing funds to promise a weighted combination of the identified
strategies (a fund’s promise vector). That approach yields fund-specific
SPGs, defined as the set of funds with the most similar promise vectors.
In both approaches the 2,995 funds of interest are assigned to an SPG
for every month they are active between March 2000 and December
2017. All of the paper’s results are robust to utilizing either imple-
mentation. Hence, for simplicity of exposition, we first report results
based on the simplified method, while generalized results are reported
in Section 3.4.

Fig. 2 shows that the relative size of SPGs varies over time in terms
of both the number of funds and TNA. Panel 1 of Fig. 3 shows the
frequency of assignment to each SPG; Panel 2 shows that funds tend
to be assigned to the same SPG over time. 1,087 funds are assigned to
only one SPG throughout their lives, the majority of funds is assigned
to a maximum of 5, and only a small number is assigned to more
(that may be the result of estimation noise). We do not constrain the
cluster estimation to group together PIS sections from the same fund.
Hence, the time-series stability of the assignment further confirms the
robustness of our approach.

17 Since the stability criterion is generally satisfied for any consecutive 𝑘s,
our results are not very sensitive to the choice of k. Appendix B.2 shows that
our main result holds for 𝑘 = [14, 20].

3. Empirical analysis

3.1. Supply of funds

To better understand the nature of the uncovered strategies, and to
ascertain if this promised product differentiation lines up with actual
differences in implementation, we start with a narrative analysis. We
ask whether fund characteristics, risk-factor loadings, performance,
and holdings attributes line up with an intuitive reading of strategy
descriptions. This exercise necessarily involves a subjective component.
Hence, it should be intended as purely descriptive. In Section 3.1.1 we
provide evidence based on objective similarity measures.

For each variable, and for each SPG, we implement a regression
analysis which allows us to estimate the average difference in that
variable for the SPG of interest and all other SPGs (holding other
characteristics, family membership, and month constant). Appendix D
explains in detail that regression strategy, reports a detailed set of
results, and provides a discussion of the key characteristics of all 17
SPGs. In the discussion below, we highlight the most striking attributes
of a few selected SPGs.

Dividends. The ‘‘Dividends’’ group arguably has the most straightfor-
ward strategy and the clearest ex-ante expectations for investors: funds
in this SPG should try to maximize dividend distributions. Accordingly,
we find that these funds hold stocks with (by far) the highest dividend
yield among all SPGs. The funds implementing this strategy tend to
charge lower fees and have lower turnover ratios. The companies they
hold are typical high-dividend firms: they are larger and older, have
lower investment, and R&D expenses, and hold less cash (plausibly due
to higher payout ratios). Portfolios are tilted towards high-dividend
industries such as Utilities, Telecoms, and Banks; and tilted away from
the Tech industry.

Long term. Funds in this SPG claim to be searching for long term invest-
ment opportunities, or companies with long term growth potential. In
the data, funds implementing this strategy tend to be older and have
lower turnover ratios. The stocks they hold have lower than average
book-to-market ratios, both at the fund level and at the stock level
(indicting a growth style tilt). They tend to avoid mature industries
such as Utilities and Banks. Instead, they hold companies with higher
intangibles (which includes capitalized R&D), higher cash, and lower
dividend yields (greater retained earnings, typically used to grow the
firm).

New products & services. Funds in this SPG focus on companies with
new or innovative product lines, and new or rapidly changing tech-
nologies. Consistent with this focus, funds in this SPG tend to avoid
stable industries such as utilities, telecoms, and banks, while holding a
significantly greater fraction of stocks from innovative industries such
as technology and pharmaceuticals (drugs). The funds implementing
this strategy charge higher fees and have higher turnover ratios. The
firms they hold have higher levels of investment and R&D expenditure,
higher asset growth, and lower dividend yield, as would be expected
for companies introducing new products and services.

It is clear from the above descriptions, and by inspecting the full
Tables in Appendix D, that each of these strategies has a multi-faceted
implementation. Indeed, they imply differential exposures to various
risk-factors, as well as differences in other fund and holdings features.
For instance, both the Long Term and the New Products & Services
strategies have a growth tilt, but they achieve that objective differently:
Long Term funds have a low turnover ratio, New Products & Services
funds have a high one. New Products & Services funds hold younger
firms with higher asset growth and R&D expenditures, and a greater
than average exposure to the Tech and Drugs industries, while Long
Term funds do not.

A natural next question is whether SPGs significantly differ in risk-
adjusted performance. Appendix Table D.9 shows that this is generally

7 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Fig. 2. TNA by SPG Over Time: Panel 1 displays the cumulative TNA managed by funds in different SPGs between January 2000 and December 2017. Panel 2 displays the
number of funds assigned to the different SPGs between January 2000 and December 2017.

not the case. An intuitive alternative explanation for the documented
product differentiation is that funds cater to investors with different
preferences for risk-exposures and/or for non-priced characteristics. For
instance, investors who prefer income to capital gains might choose
Dividend funds.18 Similarly, among investors looking for exposure to
the growth factor, those with a longer horizon might prefer Long Term
funds while those with a shorter horizon might prefer New Products &
Services ones.

3.1.1. Divergence from core strategies

In this section, we construct a general measure of strategy di-
vergence that does not depend on subjective interpretations of the
text. The underlying assumption is that the average holdings of the
funds in each SPG are representative of the group’s core strategy—in
other words, we assume that individual fund divergences are purely
idiosyncratic and cancel out over many funds in a group. Then, the core
strategy of each SPG is measured as the mean portfolio weight vector

18 e.g., Allen et al. (2000); and Hartzmark and Solomon (2019) document
investor preferences for high dividends, motivated by taxation or behavioral
reasons, respectively.

across all funds in that group, and an individual fund’s divergence from
the core strategy is measured by the distance of its holdings from this
mean vector. For each month in our sample, we compute this distance
relative to each fund’s own assigned SPG, and relative to the average of
other SPGs. If funds are following their promised strategies, we should
observe smaller divergences from their own group average. Formally:

𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒

𝐺𝑗,𝑡
𝑗,𝑡 =

𝑁 𝑗
𝑡∑

𝑖=1

(
𝑤𝑗

𝑖,𝑡 − ̄𝑤

)2

𝐺𝑗𝑡
𝑖,𝑡

(2)

for 𝐺 = [𝑆𝑃 𝐺, ̃𝑆𝑃 𝐺], where 𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑗,𝑡 is the SPG of fund 𝑗 at time
𝑡, and ̃𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑗,𝑡 represents all groups other than 𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑗,𝑡. 𝑤𝑗
is the
𝑖,𝑡
𝐺𝑗,𝑡
weight on stock 𝑖 in fund 𝑗’s portfolio in month 𝑡, and ̄𝑤
is the
𝑖,𝑡
average weight on stock 𝑖 at time 𝑡 for all funds belonging to group
𝐺𝑗,𝑡. We log-transform divergence so that it is approximately normally
distributed.

To test whether funds generally adhere to the strategies described in
their prospectuses (which lead them to be categorized into a particular
SPG) we run the following regression:

𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 − ̃𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝜆′𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡.

(3)

8 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 2
SPG Divergence - Validation: This table reports mean divergence of funds from the
average holdings of their own peer group (Column 1), mean placebo divergence from
the average holdings of other peer groups (Column 2), and the difference between
these two estimates (Column 3) (see Section 3.1.1). Throughout the table, averages are
estimated controlling for fund age, log assets, expense ratio, turnover ratio, monthly
fund flows, fund flow volatility, and family-month fixed effects. In the second row,
we additionally control for funds’ holdings divergence based on Daniel et al. (1997)
characteristics peer groups, the log of the number of Hoberg et al. (2018) fund
peers, and the Kostovetsky and Warner (2020) uniqueness measure. All non-binary
independent variables are demeaned. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund
and month.

Baseline

R2
N

Add. Controls

R2
Obs

Controls
FE
Cluster

(1)
Within SPG

−4.790***
(−443.16)

0.347
266 803

−2.015***
(−47.44)

0.566
264 089

Yes
Family-Month
Fund+Month

(2)
Outside SPG

−4.360***
(−348.65)

0.374
266 803

−1.086***
(−25.48)

0.700
264 089

Yes
Family-Month
Fund+Month

(3)
Difference

−0.430***
(−50.54)

0.278
266 803

−0.929***
(−23.21)

0.326
264 089

Yes
Family-Month
Fund+Month

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

relative to the fund’s own SPG (within) and relative to other SPGs
(outside), respectively. Column 3 shows that divergence is on average
8.98% lower within the SPG than outside it,19 and all results are
significant at the 1% level.20

These results imply that funds allocate their capital more similarly
to the average fund in their own SPG. Thus we conclude that, on aver-
age, promised product differentiation translates into actual differences
in product offering. This interpretation does not depend on the average
level of distance within any particular group, as long as funds with
high in-group distance still have higher distance with respect to funds
outside of the group.21

A remaining concern is that SPG-divergence might be capturing a
simple transformation of other product differentiation measures previ-
ously documented in the literature. In particular, SPG centroids might
be conceptually similar to centroids obtained by sorting funds based
on terciles of market capitalization, book-to-market, and past returns
of the stocks they hold (DGTW-peers).22 Hence, we construct peer
groups based on that alternative methodology and compute diver-
gence based on those clusters, following Eq. (3). As HKP have shown,
though, competition in DGTW space is driven by the crowdedness
of the strategy space in the proximity of a fund’s location. For that
reason, we additionally compute HKP’s fund-specific peer groups and
proxy for the degree of competition using the number of HKP peers
and its natural logarithm. Finally, it is plausible that SPG divergence
could be capturing a general drive towards strategy uniqueness, in a
conceptually similar way to KW’s uniqueness measure. Hence, we also
reproduce it.

19 Portfolio weight divergences are always negative due to the log

transformation.

20 Note that the large t-statistics are due to the fact that the reported

coefficients are regression intercepts.

21 We acknowledge that our measure is limited by how well portfolio
weights can capture all aspects of fund strategies. The ̂𝛼 coefficient could
be biased towards zero if we miss a major axis of commonality for a par-
ticular strategy (e.g., we do not observe derivative positions for funds in the
Derivatives SPG).

22 The 9 main Morningstar categories for U.S. Equity funds are nested within

the 27 DGTW peer groups.

Fig. 3. SPG Assignments Per Fund: Panel 1 shows the number of
fund-month
observations assigned to each of the SPGs using the k-means algorithm with 17 clusters.
The number next to each bar indicates the unique number of funds assigned to each SPG
at some point in their lifetimes. Panel 2 shows the number of different SPG assignments
that unique funds receive throughout their lives.

The coefficient of interest is ̂𝛼, which estimates the difference be-
tween within-group 𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 and outside-group ̃𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 when
all control variables are equal to their mean values (all controls are
demeaned). The control variable vector, 𝑋𝑗,𝑡, contains the log of total
net assets (TNA), the log of fund age, the fund’s expense and turnover
ratios, monthly percentage flows, and monthly flow volatility for fund
𝑗 in month 𝑡. 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 are fund family × month fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by fund and month. Hence, a negative and significant ̂𝛼
should be interpreted as a lower mean in SPG-divergence within SPGs
than outside, between funds in the same month and fund family, after
controlling for fund-level characteristics.

The top Panel of Table 2 reports the estimated ̂𝛼s in the third
column, while the first two columns show the average divergences

9 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 3
SPG Divergence - Correlations: This table reports the monthly correlations of our
SPG Divergence measure with other measures of mutual fund competition and product
differentiation used in the literature: the Hoberg et al. (2018) number of customized
characteristics-based peers (HKP Peers) and its natural logarithm (HKP Log Peers); the
Kostovetsky and Warner (2020) uniqueness measure; and an alternative divergence
measure based on Daniel et al. (1997) characteristics peer groups. SPG Divergence is
the log sum of squared differences between the fund’s portfolio weights and the average
weights for funds in the same Strategy Peer Group. DGTW Divergence is constructed
in the same way but with respect to average portfolio weights among funds whose
holdings are in the same Daniel et al. (1997) size, book-to-market, and past return
terciles. See Section 3.1.1 for further details.

Divergence

SPG

DGTW

HKP

Peers

Log Peers

DGTW Divergence

HKP Peers

Log HKP Peers

KW Uniqueness

𝑁

0.628∗∗∗
−0.123∗∗∗
−0.203∗∗∗
0.126∗∗∗

315 190

∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001.

−0.146∗∗∗
−0.242∗∗∗
0.120∗∗∗

0.829∗∗∗
0.028∗∗∗

−0.018∗∗∗

3

of

the

Table

shows

among

correlation

correlation

SPG-divergence

12.6% between

SPG-divergence,
DGTW-divergence, HKP-peers, and KW-uniqueness. We observe a small
positive
and
KW-uniqueness; a small negative correlation of (−20.3%) −12.3% be-
tween SPG-divergence and (log) HKP-peers; and a much higher positive
correlation of 62.8% between SPG-divergence and DGTW-divergence.
The higher correlation with DGTW-divergence is not surprising, as both
measures are constructed as distances between holdings vectors. Given
those correlations, the bottom Panel of Table 2 repeats the analysis in
Eq. (3) by adding those variables to the controls vector (𝑋). In this
case, the difference increases substantially: divergence is 46.1% lower
with respect to funds’ own assigned SPGs, suggesting that our measure
is capturing a novel dimension of product differentiation.

In Appendix E we allow for more stringent controls by comparing
funds pairwise. That analysis yields similar conclusions: any pair of
funds is more likely to have lower divergence and similar moments in
future return distribution if they belong to the same SPG.

3.2. Investor demand

In this section we examine investors’ demand for SPGs by studying
their flow responses to SPG-adjusted performance and SPG-divergence.

3.2.1. Fund flows and SPG-adjusted performance

Given our analysis of the supply of funds, it is plausible that
SPG-level product differentiation might reflect investor preferences for
risk-exposures and/or other non-priced characteristics distinctive of
each SPG. If that was the case, investors should be aware of SPG
boundaries and should view funds within the same SPG as imperfect
substitutes.

An extensive academic literature has documented investors’ pref-
erence for higher active returns and their flow-performance sensitivity
(e.g. Chevalier and Ellison (1997); Sirri and Tufano (1998); Barber et al.
(2016); Berk and Van Binsbergen (2016)). If investors prefer higher
active returns, while simultaneously having a preference for other SPG
features, we should observe a significant flow-performance sensitivity
when benchmarking a fund’s return against the average return of other
funds in the same SPG. To test that hypothesis we build a measure of
SPG-adjusted performance as follows:

𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 = 𝑅𝑗,𝑡 − ̄𝑅𝑡

𝑆𝑃 𝐺
𝑗,𝑡

(4)

where 𝑅𝑗,𝑡 is the annual net of fee return of fund 𝑗 from month 𝑡 − 11
to month 𝑡; and ̄𝑅𝑡
is the average annual net of fee return from
month 𝑡 − 11 to month 𝑡, of funds belonging to the same SPG as fund

𝑆𝑃 𝐺
𝑗,𝑡

10 

𝑗 in month 𝑡. Table 4 displays the correlations between SPG Alpha and
other performance measures commonly used in the literature.

We then run the following regression:

𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛾 ′𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜆′𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡. (5)

where 𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡+1 represents fund flows at time 𝑡 + 1 (one month ahead),
measured as the percentage change in total net assets not due to
returns. 𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑗,𝑡 is the SPG-adjusted performance for fund 𝑗 in
month 𝑡, as defined in Eq. (4). 𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 contains other common
measures of performance, namely: CAPM, FFC4, and FFC6 alphas;23
and HKP and DGTW peer-adjusted returns. All returns and alphas are
net of fees. 𝑋𝑗,𝑡 contains fund-level control variables (log TNA; log age;
expense ratio; turnover ratio) for fund 𝑗 in month 𝑡. Since capital flows
are heavily influenced by distribution channels common to funds in
the same family, and given the impact of overall market conditions
(e.g., aggregate outflows during recessions) that may affect different
families in different ways, all specifications include fund family×month
fixed effects, represented by 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡. Standard errors are clustered by fund
̂𝛽 would indicate a significant
and month. A positive and significant
flow-performance sensitivity towards SPG-adjusted performance.

Column 1 of Table 5 shows the outcome of that regression, when
excluding the vector of additional 𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 controls. As expected,
we observe a positive and significant (at the 1% level) ̂𝛽 = 0.116. To
better understand the economic magnitude of this result, and to assess
its incremental explanatory power, Column 2 of Table 5 reports the
same results when adding other standard performance controls. The
̂𝛽 is unchanged (1% level), while its point
statistical significance of
estimate becomes ̂𝛽 = 0.015. Despite other alphas absorbing much of the
variation, SPG alpha remains incrementally relevant to investors: to put
the coefficient into perspective, it represents 43% of the incremental
effect of CAPM alpha, 29% of that of FFC4 alpha, 60% of that of FFC6
alpha, 200% of that of DGTW-adjusted returns, and 22% of that of HKP
peer-adjusted returns.

These results suggests that investors are aware of SPG bound-
aries and consider products within them to be imperfect substitutes.
Combining those insights with the lack of differences in risk-adjusted
performance across SPGs, provides preliminary evidence of investor
preferences for other characteristics of SPGs, beyond risk-adjusted per-
formance.

3.2.2. Fund flows and SPG divergence

To more formally study investors’ preferences for SPG core strate-
gies, we study their flow responses to SPG-divergence. If investors have
a preference for risk exposures or other non-priced features of SPGs,
we should observe that they punish funds with outflows when their
implemented strategy diverges from the promised one.

To test this hypothesis, we use the measure of SPG-divergence,
constructed as per Eq. (2). To facilitate discussion of magnitudes,
we standardize the measure to have mean zero and variance 1. We
then examine the relationship between fund flows and SPG-divergence,
controlling for fund characteristics, past performance, and fund family
membership, which are already known to drive flows, by running the
following regression:

𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜆′𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡+1, (6)

where 𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡+1 represents fund flows at time 𝑡 + 1 (one month ahead);
Divergence is within-SPG divergence (Eq. (2)) for fund 𝑗 in month 𝑡;

23 All alphas are computed at a monthly frequency by subtracting monthly
fund returns from a beta-adjusted factor return portfolio, where the betas are
estimated using rolling 24-month regressions. We then aggregate the monthly
alphas up to the annual frequency. Note that we do not include Berk and van
Binsbergen (2015)’s value added measure in this regression as our goal is to
understand investor responses. Value-added is a measure of fund manager skill
in the presence of decreasing returns to scale, while investors only care about
the returns they will experience on their own portfolios.

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 4
SPG Alpha - Correlations: This table reports the correlations of monthly SPG-adjusted performance (SPG Alpha) with various
other standard performance measures: Daniel et al. (1997) characteristic selectivity measure (DGTW Alpha); Hoberg et al.
(2018) customized peer alpha (HKP Alpha); CAPM Alpha, Fama–French-Carhart 4-Factor Alpha (FFC4 Alpha), and Fama–
French-Carhart 6-Factor Alpha (FFC6 Alpha). All performance measures are computed net of fees. See Section 3.1.1 for
further details.

SPG Alpha

DGTW Alpha

HKP Alpha

CAPM Alpha

FFC4 Alpha

DGTW Alpha

HKP Alpha

CAPM Alpha

FFC4 Alpha

FFC6 Alpha

𝑁

0.566∗∗∗
0.750∗∗∗
0.756∗∗∗
0.557∗∗∗
0.495∗∗∗

315 006

t statistics in parentheses
∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001.

0.619∗∗∗
0.513∗∗∗
0.452∗∗∗
0.408∗∗∗

0.607∗∗∗
0.593∗∗∗
0.534∗∗∗

0.641∗∗∗
0.576∗∗∗

0.892∗∗∗

Table 5
Fund Flows, SPG Divergence, and Performance: This table shows regressions of one-month-ahead net fund flows (% of TNA)
on SPG Divergence, SPG Alpha, various other measures of one-year past performance, and controls for fund characteristics
(omitted for brevity), competition, and product differentiation (see Section 3.2.2). SPG Alpha is the fund’s return relative
to the average of all funds in the same text-based Strategy Peer Group (SPG). SPG Divergence is the log sum of squared
differences between the fund’s portfolio weights and the average weights for funds in the same SPG. DGTW Divergence is
constructed in the same way but with respect to funds in the same Daniel et al. (1997) characteristics terciles. HKP Peers
is the number of fund competitors according to Hoberg et al. (2018), and HKP Alpha is the fund’s return relative to these
competitors. The dummies Low Comp and Med Comp indicate the bottom and middle terciles (by month) of the distribution of
HKP Peers. KW Uniqueness is the Kostovetsky and Warner (2020) measure of textual prospectus uniqueness. All specifications
include fund-family × month fixed effects, and standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and month.

(1)

(2)

(3)

−0.049***
(−2.63)

0.116***
(22.07)

0.116***
(22.03)

0.015***
(2.91)
0.035***
(7.32)
0.052***
(5.93)
0.025***
(3.43)
0.007**
(2.05)
0.068***
(12.27)

(4)

−0.060***
(−3.20)
0.027
(1.59)
−0.043*
(−1.71)
−0.036**
(−2.11)
0.013**
(2.40)
0.035***
(7.42)
0.053***
(5.95)
0.024***
(3.20)
0.007**
(2.05)
0.071***
(12.53)

SPG Divergence

DGTW Divergence

KW Uniqueness

Log HKP Peers

SPG Alpha

CAPM Alpha

FFC4 Alpha

FFC6 Alpha

DGTW Alpha

HKP Alpha

Low Comp

Med Comp

Low Comp × HKP Alpha

Med Comp × HKP Alpha

R2
Obs

0.320
239,751

0.336
239,751

0.320
239,751

0.336
237,178

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

(5)

−0.055***
(−2.96)
0.027
(1.60)
−0.041
(−1.63)

0.012**
(2.20)
0.036***
(7.70)
0.052***
(5.94)
0.024***
(3.21)
0.007**
(2.22)
0.060***
(7.61)
0.142***
(3.17)
0.120***
(3.38)
0.011
(1.49)
0.016**
(2.25)

0.336
239,486

𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 is SPG-adjusted performance (Eq. (4)); 𝑋𝑗,𝑡 contains fund-
level controls (log TNA; fund age; expense ratio; turnover ratio) for
fund 𝑗 in month 𝑡; 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 are family×month fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by fund and month. A negative and significant ̂𝛽 would
indicate outflows when a fund’s portfolio diverges from that of its SPG’s
average.

Column 3 of Table 5 reports the results without additional controls.
As expected, ̂𝛽 is negative and significant at the 1% level. Although the
single-month magnitude appears modest — on average, a one-standard-
deviation increase in SPG-Divergence leads to a decrease in next-month
flows of 0.05% — the effect grows over time and is substantially greater
in the long run, as we show in Sections 3.2.3 and 3.2.4. Furthermore,

as we discuss in Section 3.3, SPG divergence can occur for a variety of
reasons, both accidental and deliberate. In equilibrium, the estimated
coefficient reflects an average of these effects and thus will be driven
towards zero, whereas Section 3.2.4 shows that the magnitude is much
greater when divergence is not a conscious choice by the fund manager.
Lastly, it is worth keeping in mind that our measure of SPG adherence is
necessarily noisy, which also potentially biases the coefficient towards
zero.

The effect of 𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 on flows (̂𝛾) remains positive and sig-
nificant, highlighting the dual preference of investors for higher SPG-
adjusted returns and lower SPG divergence.

11 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

To explore the robustness of these results, in Column 4 of Table 5
we add to the controls vector all additional performance measures
included in Column 3; as well as DGTW-divergence, KW-uniqueness
and log(HKP-peers) (constructed as in Section 3.1.1). This alleviates
concerns that the effect of divergence on flows might be driven by
SPGs’ correlation with omitted measures of performance, competition,
̂𝛽 remains statistically
or product differentiation. In this specification,
significant at the 1% level, while its economic magnitude increases: a
one-standard-deviation increase in SPG-Divergence leads to a decrease
in next-month flows of 0.06%. To ascertain that SPG-divergence is
capturing a truly distinct effect from HKP’s measures, we further refine
our analysis by substituting log(HKP-peers) with dummies for funds in
the bottom and mid terciles of HKP-peers, as well as the interaction
between those dummies and HKP Alpha. Column 5 of Table 5 reports
those results, showing a similar economic and statistical significance of
̂𝛽 = 0.055.

the

that

these

results

indicate

Taken together,

effect of
SPG-divergence on flows is driven by investor preferences that are
novel and distinct from the preference for higher risk-adjusted perfor-
mance. However, questions remain about the magnitude of the effect,
which we address in our subsequent analysis. The joint significance
of SPG-adjusted performance and SPG-divergence in driving flows,
suggests that the dual nature of investor preferences is distinct and the
two effects need not necessarily go in the same direction. We study this
trade-off more in depth in Section 3.3, when investigating the economic
mechanism driving divergence.

3.2.3. Dynamics of investor and fund responses

In this section we explore the dynamic interrelationships among
our main variables of interest. We have shown that investors respond
negatively to funds’ divergence from their core strategies and positively
to higher peer-adjusted returns, but our interpretation of these results
may be confounded by endogenous feedback effects in a complex
equilibrium system. For instance, rational fund managers may also
anticipate or respond to investors’ responses, and fund performance
may depend on prior managerial actions and investor flows. To capture
these intertemporal feedback effects in a more disciplined way, we
consider a structural panel vector autoregression (SPVAR) model.

Structural panel vector autoregression. The 𝐿-order structural equation
we would like to estimate is:

𝑦𝑗,𝑡𝐴0 =

𝐿
∑

𝑙=1

𝑦𝑗,𝑡−𝑙𝐴𝑙 + 𝑥𝑗,𝑡𝐵 + 𝛼𝑗 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

(7)

where 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 is an 𝑁-vector of endogenous variables for fund 𝑗 in month
𝑡; 𝑥𝑗,𝑡 is a vector of exogenous control variables; 𝐴0 through 𝐴𝐿 and
𝐵 are coefficient matrices; 𝛼𝑗 are fund-level fixed effects;24 and 𝜀𝑗,𝑡 is a
vector of independent structural shocks driving each of the endogenous
variables, distributed as 𝑁(0, 𝐼). The endogenous vector 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 contains
SPG divergence (measured at the beginning of month 𝑡), SPG alpha
(measured from 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1), percentage fund flows (measured from 𝑡 to
𝑡 + 1), and the multiplicative interaction between divergence and flows.
Including the interaction term allows the autoregressive coefficients for
divergence to depend on flows, and vice versa. The exogenous vector
𝑥𝑗,𝑡 contains other standard performance measures—HKP, and DGTW
peer-adjusted returns, and CAPM, FFC4, and FFC6 alphas (measured
from 𝑡 − 12 to 𝑡 − 1)—as well as fund characteristics—log age, log TNA,
expense ratio, and turnover ratio (measured as of the beginning of
month 𝑡).

This framework permits simultaneous estimation of several key
intertemporal relationships: (i) the long-run effects of divergence and
performance on flows (Section 3.2.2 considers investor responses only

24 We use fund fixed effects as we are interested in estimating within-fund

time-series dynamics.

one month ahead); (ii) the time-series properties of divergence; (iii) the
feedback effects of flows on future divergence; and (iv) the effects of
divergence and flows on future performance.

Contemporaneous relationships among the endogenous variables
are represented by the matrix 𝐴0, which is not directly observable. We
also cannot directly observe the structural shocks 𝜀𝑗,𝑡. Fortunately, well-
documented market frictions combined with variable timings imply a
natural causal ordering that allows us to first estimate the reduced-form
model,

𝑦𝑗,𝑡 =

𝐿
∑

𝑙=1

𝑦𝑗,𝑡−𝑙

̃𝐴𝑙 + 𝑥𝑗,𝑡

̃𝐵 + ̃𝛼𝑗 + 𝜈𝑗,𝑡,

(8)

where 𝜈𝑗,𝑡 ∼ 𝑁(𝜔, 𝛺), and then identify the structural coefficients
via Cholesky decomposition of the reduced-form residual variance–
′ = ̂𝛺,
covariance matrix ̂𝛺 (Sims, 1980). Specifically, we set
̂𝐴𝑙 = ̃𝐴𝑙
0 , and
which yields estimates
̂𝐴−1
̂𝜀𝑗,𝑡 = ̂𝜈𝑗,𝑡
0 . Our identification strategy thus depends crucially on the
following ordering of variables and equations:

̂𝐴0
̂𝛼𝑖 = ̃𝛼𝑗

̂𝐵 = ̃𝐵 ̂𝐴−1
0 ,

̂𝐴0
̂𝐴−1

̂𝐴−1
0 ,

1. SPG divergence is causally ordered first (i.e., last in 𝑦𝑗,𝑡, due to
the lower-triangular form of ̂𝐴0), allowing the orthogonalized di-
vergence shocks ( ̂𝜀𝐷𝑖𝑣
𝑗,𝑡 ) to affect all variables contemporaneously,
while other shocks can only affect divergence with a lag. This
assumption is true by construction, since divergence is recorded
at the beginning of month 𝑡 while the other variables are recorded
during month 𝑡.

2. The interaction between divergence and flows is causally or-
dered second (second-last in 𝑦𝑗,𝑡). The divergence component of
the orthogonalized interaction shocks ( ̂𝜀𝐷𝑖𝑣×𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤
) can affect all
other variables contemporaneously but the flow component can-
not affect divergence contemporaneously, again by construction
due to variable timing.

𝑗,𝑡

𝑗,𝑡

3. Fund flows are causally ordered third (third-last in 𝑦𝑗,𝑡): or-
thogonalized flow shocks ( ̂𝜀𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤
) can affect only flows and per-
formance contemporaneously (the latter could occur due to
flow-induced trading as fund managers seek to deploy new
capital or meet redemptions). For the same reason as above, flow
shocks cannot immediately affect divergence or its interaction.
4. SPG alpha is causally ordered last (first in 𝑦𝑗,𝑡), implying that
orthogonalized performance shocks ( ̂𝜀𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎
) can affect all other
variables only with a lag. This is mechanically true for diver-
gence as discussed above, and it is justifiable for flows due to
market frictions, particularly slow-moving capital (Mitchell et al.
(2007), Duffie (2010)).

𝑗,𝑡

Following Hansen (1982), Holtz-Eakin et al. (1988), Arellano and
Bover (1995), and Abrigo and Love (2016), we estimate the model
using feasible generalized method of moments (GMM) after applying
a forward orthogonal deviation (FOD) transformation to the data to
absorb fund fixed effects,25 while the untransformed variables are used
as GMM instruments.26 Estimation results are reported as orthogonal-
ized impulse-response functions (IRFs), derived from the infinite-order
vector moving average (VMA) representation of Eq. (7):

𝐼𝑅𝐹0 = 𝐼𝑁 ;

𝐼𝑅𝐹𝑘 =

𝑘
∑

𝑖=1

𝐼𝑅𝐹𝑘−1

̂𝐴𝑘

∀𝑘 > 0

(9)

25 This methodology delivers consistent and efficient estimates of

the
reduced-form coefficient matrices for fixed 𝑇 (number of months) as 𝐽 → ∞
(number of funds), which is sensible in our setting. Alvarez and Arellano
(2003) prove consistency also for 𝑇 → ∞, but under conditions that do not
hold in our setting.

26 The optimal weighting matrix is derived from the expected squared
moment condition 𝐸[𝑍′ ̂𝜈 ̂𝜈′𝑍], where 𝑍 is the stacked matrix of instrument
observations and 𝜈 is the stacked matrix of reduced-form residuals.

12 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Fig. 4. SPVAR Impulse Response Functions: This figure plots orthogonalized impulse response functions for all endogenous variables in the structural panel VAR described in
Section 3.2.3. In the figure arrangement, rows correspond to impulses and columns to responses. Responses of the interaction between 𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 and 𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤 are not shown
for brevity. Structural identification is via Cholesky decomposition, and variables are causally ordered from bottom to top in the figure. Shaded regions indicate 95% confidence
intervals, computed via bootstrapping (Lütkepohl, 2005).

IRF confidence intervals are computed by bootstrapping from the
reduced-form residuals (Lütkepohl, 2005), retaining their estimated
covariance structure. To select the number of lags 𝐿 we rely on the
coefficient of determination (𝑅2), as the model is just-identified and
thus information criteria are unavailable (Abrigo and Love, 2016).

Note that this identification strategy says nothing about the ultimate
source of the structural shocks, only that they are orthogonal to each
other. Shocks to divergence could arise from strategic managerial de-
cision making, from flow-induced trading, from return-driven changes
in portfolio composition, or from shifts in the core strategy of the
peer group. Several of these sources may be driven by macroeconomic
events or unobserved fund/manager characteristics that could poten-
tially also affect flows. Thus, while the SPVAR approach is informative
for establishing intertemporal feedback relationships and ruling out
reverse causality, omitted variable bias remains a concern. We ad-
dress this concern in Section 3.2.4 using an instrumental variables
identification strategy.

Results. Fig. 4 displays the orthogonalized impulse response functions
(IRFs). Each row of the figure shows responses to a different structural
shock (rows are arranged in reverse causal order), and each column

13 

shows the responses of a different endogenous variable. Since the
interaction term between SPG divergence and flows is not itself an
outcome of interest, we omit its responses for the sake of brevity.
The impulses are positive one-standard-deviation realizations of the
structural errors ̂𝜈𝑗,𝑡

̂𝐴−1
0 .

The first notable result, which can be seen in the bottom right
panel of Fig. 4, is that SPG divergence is strongly mean-reverting
over time. After an initial shock raises divergence by just over 40%
of its unconditional standard deviation, the effect declines to 10%
after twelve months, implying a mean reversion rate of 0.75 per year.
Rather than funds having the freedom to move permanently to different
strategy spaces, their portfolio weights appear to be anchored to the
core strategies of their peer groups. This finding further validates the
salience of SPGs in explaining fund manager behavior, and suggests
that funds are responsive to market or regulatory forces pushing them
to keep their promises. Given the many possible drivers of divergence
(see discussion in previous subsection), it would be practically impos-
sible for a fund to adhere perfectly to the peer group average even if
such adherence were the goal. Thus, the speed at which mutual funds
revert towards the average is potentially as important as the level of
divergence itself.

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

of Fig. 4: the impact of SPG-adjusted performance on flows persists
for over a year following the initial shock.28 Fund flow shocks have
a contemporaneously positive effect on SPG Alpha which lasts into
the first post-shock month (Column 1, Row 2), consistent with flow-
induced trading. Finally, SPG divergence shocks have a lasting negative
impact on future fund performance. We will return to the relationship
of divergence and fund performance in Section 3.3.

3.2.4. Identification
Instrumental variables. To mitigate the concern that unobserved fund
attributes could be correlated with both SPG divergence and fund flows,
resulting in omitted variable bias, we employ a novel instrumental
variables strategy. The key underlying idea is that SPG divergence can
change mechanically when some subset of a funds’ portfolio holdings
experiences extreme returns. Provided the fund’s holdings are not
initially identical to the SPG core strategy (confirmed in Table 2), the
re-weighting caused by large positive or negative returns will have
differing effects on the fund’s portfolio and the SPG average portfolio,
potentially increasing their distance. To exploit this effect for identifica-
tion, we then require a source of extreme stock returns that is plausibly
unrelated to both fund and investor behavior.

Following this logic, we propose the use of (absolute) idiosyncratic
industry returns as instruments for changes in SPG divergence. After
subtracting compensation for aggregate risk exposures (using the FFC6
factor model), industry return residuals should be driven almost en-
tirely by specific shocks to narrow sectors of the economy, and thus
should be approximately orthogonal to the macroeconomic shocks that
drive aggregate mutual fund flows. Moreover, because our sample
explicitly excludes sector funds, and industry returns only affect part of
a fund’s portfolio, they are less likely to be correlated with unobserved
fund or manager attributes. We also control directly for observable fund
performance (SPG, HKP, and DGTW peer-adjusted returns; and CAPM,
FFC4, and FFC6 factor model alphas) as well as fund characteristics (log
TNA, log age, expense ratio, and turnover ratio). In some specifications
we also control for the VIX Index, to account for common volatility
shocks that may drive both absolute industry return residuals and fund
flows.

In sum, our instruments are valid if: (1) Relevance: absolute industry
return residuals significantly predict changes in SPG divergence; and;
(2) Exogeneity: (i) risk adjustment using a standard asset pricing model
is sufficient to separate industry-specific news from economy-wide
shocks; (ii) industry-specific news does not affect flows via channels
other than SPG divergence, fund alphas, or common volatility shocks.
Although it is impossible to prove that the exogeneity condition
is satisfied, we submit that (i) and (ii) are reasonable assumptions.
First, we use a comprehensive factor model that enjoys much empirical
success in the asset pricing literature. Second, it seems unlikely that
idiosyncratic events affecting narrow industries without any corre-
sponding effects on the market (or small stocks, value stocks, profitable
stocks, stocks with low investment or high past returns) should directly
drive mutual fund flows across the entire market, unless through their
effects on fund performance, which is controlled for in our regressions,
or funds’ portfolio composition. By using an idiosyncratic shock to
instrument for a more general effect, our approach is similar in spirit
to the granular instrumental variables strategy of Gabaix and Koijen
(2021). Even if the above assumptions do not hold universally, the IV
approach should be closer to random assignment than ordinary least
squares.

We estimate the effect of SPG divergence on future fund flows using
a two-stage least squares (2SLS) procedure. The first stage is as follows:

𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑔𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓𝑗,𝑡 = 𝜄𝑗 +

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

𝛿𝑛

̃𝐼𝑛,𝑡 + 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

(10)

Fig. 5. SPVAR Cumulative Flow Response: This figure plots the cumulative response
of fund flows to the orthogonalized SPG divergence shock in the structural panel VAR
described in Section 3.2.3. Shaded regions indicate 95% confidence intervals, computed
via bootstrapping (Lütkepohl, 2005).

If market discipline is a factor driving fund manager behavior,
we hypothesize that the future evolution of divergence should be
influenced by investors’ flow responses. Specifically, we expect strategy
mean reversion to be faster if the initial divergence shock results in
higher outflows. Including the interaction of divergence and subsequent
flows as an endogenous variable allows us to test this hypothesis. As
shown in the third row of the final column in Fig. 4, the interaction
effect is significant and positive from month 𝑡 + 1 onwards, peaking
in month 6 at a value of 0.0075. That indicates that mean reversion
speed increases when flows are negative, or conversely that divergence
remains higher for longer relative to its pre-shock level if flows are
positive.

To illustrate the magnitude of the effect, consider a large shock
that shifts divergence two standard deviations above its mean. Then,
if monthly flow is one standard deviation below its mean following
the divergence shock (−3.37% in the regression sample), divergence
will be 0.0075 × 2 × −3.37 ≈ 0.05 closer to its long-run mean after six
months than if flow was at its mean—or an increase in mean-reversion
speed of 12.5%. These results are in line with a market-led disciplining
mechanism, whereby flow responses keep funds’ actual strategies close
to the promised ones, even when that would be difficult to achieve
through legal enforcement.

The main finding from Section 3.2.2 — that SPG divergence neg-
atively affects flows — is confirmed in the bottom row and second
column of Fig. 4. Compared to the OLS methodology, orthogonalizing
the divergence shock results in the estimation of a delayed flow effect:
the response is initially insignificant, and only becomes significantly
negative in the second month after the shock. This delay is consistent
with investor inattention or slow moving capital. The magnitude of the
response continues to increase through month six, possibly as more in-
vestors become aware of the fund’s promise-breaking, before gradually
decaying towards zero. Fig. 5 plots the cumulative flow response: a
one-standard-deviation increase in divergence results in a reduction in
percentage flows of about 0.35% over the course of a year (about 15%
of the unconditional mean of 2.35% in the regression sub-sample).27

Several other results are also of secondary interest. The dynamics
of the flow-performance relationship are shown in Column 2, Row 1

27 Note that this figure differs from the average reported in the full-sample

28 This result holds for any standard performance measure, as we confirm

statistics (Table 1).

in unreported results.

14 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 6
IV - First Stage: This table reports estimated coefficients and 𝐹 -statistics from the first stage of an instrumental variables regression
of future fund flows on first-differences of SPG Divergence. SPG Divergence differences (the dependent variable in the first stage
regression) is instrumented using absolute idiosyncratic industry returns (i.e., residuals from the Fama–French-Carhart six factor model)
for the Fama–French 10 industry portfolios. Included exogenous control variables are fund characteristics, yearly lagged performance,
competition and product differentiation measures (see description of Table 5). Column 1 omits the control variables to illustrate the
relevance of the excluded instruments alone, and is therefore is not used in the second stage regressions. Columns 2 through 5 are
used in the second stage regressions. Columns 2 and 4 use the full sample of observations, while Columns 3 and 5 omit the dotcom
crash years of 2000-01 and the financial crisis of 2008-09. Columns 4 and 5 also control for the VIX Index. All specifications include
fund fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by fund. See Section 3.2.4 for further details.

Consumer Durables

Consumer NonDur

Manufacturing

Energy

High Tech

Telecoms

Wholesale/Retail

Healthcare

Utilities

Other

VIX Index

Controls
Sample
F-Statistic
Obs

(1)

0.039
(1.09)
0.260***
(3.37)
0.328***
(2.89)
0.071*
(1.75)
0.295***
(3.81)
0.148***
(2.63)
−0.194***
(−2.60)
0.243***
(3.90)
−0.224***
(−5.06)
−0.084
(−0.67)

No
All
10.13
271,708

(2)

0.085**
(2.29)
0.253***
(3.27)
0.295**
(2.55)
0.061
(1.50)
0.341***
(4.40)
0.157***
(2.77)
−0.243***
(−3.20)
0.236***
(3.74)
−0.205***
(−4.64)
−0.064
(−0.51)

Yes
All
67.59
271,708

(3)

0.036
(0.82)
0.054
(0.65)
0.350***
(2.78)
0.153***
(3.21)
0.516***
(6.37)
0.224***
(3.68)
−0.370***
(−4.15)
0.404***
(5.47)
−0.125**
(−2.50)
−0.268*
(−1.71)

Yes
No Crash
62.56
230,404

(4)

0.123***
(3.26)
0.257***
(3.31)
0.391***
(3.36)
0.019
(0.47)
0.384***
(4.97)
0.203***
(3.55)
−0.277***
(−3.64)
0.271***
(4.24)
−0.221***
(−4.98)
0.003
(0.02)
−0.069***
(−7.90)

Yes
All
69.31
271,708

(5)

0.044
(0.97)
0.059
(0.70)
0.360***
(2.87)
0.143***
(2.96)
0.526***
(6.49)
0.233***
(3.76)
−0.373***
(−4.17)
0.412***
(5.48)
−0.126**
(−2.53)
−0.255
(−1.63)
−0.015
(−1.22)

Yes
No Crash
60.27
230,404

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

where 𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑔𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓𝑗,𝑡 is the first difference of SPG divergence within
funds, 𝜄𝑗 is a fund-specific intercept and the vector 𝑋𝑗,𝑡 contains per-
formance controls, VIX levels, and fund characteristics. Using the es-
timated coefficients from Eq. (10), we compute fitted values of the
dependent variable, ̂𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑔𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓 (we use first differences because re-
turn shocks affect changes in portfolio holdings rather than levels).
Note the variation in ̂𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑔𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓 is mostly time-series variation, as
the instruments are the same for all funds (only the control variables
differ).29 The interpretation of the first-stage fitted values is therefore
the average change in SPG divergence, across all funds, that is driven
by idiosyncratic industry shocks.30 In this way, the IV results resemble
an event study following an exogenous shock.

Finally, we estimate the second stage regression:

𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡+1∶𝑡+𝑘 = 𝜄𝑗 + 𝛽 ̂𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑔𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓 𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

𝑘 = 1, … , 12

(11)

where 𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑗,𝑡+1∶𝑡+𝑘 is the cumulative flow to fund 𝑗 from months 𝑡+1 to
𝑡 + 𝑘. In addition to cumulative future flows, we also estimate variants
of Eq. (11) with contemporaneous and past flows on the left hand
side. If our instruments do in fact capture exogenous shocks to SPG
divergence, we would expect there to be no effects on past flows.
Similarly, if our assumptions (i) and (ii) hold, we should also not see
any contemporaneous effects on flows. Throughout the analysis, due to
the variation in our instruments being exclusively time-series in nature,
we can include only fund-level fixed effects and cluster standard errors
at the fund level.

Results. The first-stage coefficients (Eq. (10)) are reported in Table 6.
The first column shows a variant of the regression omitting all con-
trols, to illustrate the relevance of the instruments (importantly, the
fitted values from this column are not used in the second stage).
The 𝐹 -statistic of this regression is above the standard rule-of-thumb
of 10 (10.13) and, as hypothesized, the majority of the coefficients
are positive and significant. In other words, increasing the magnitude
of idiosyncratic shocks that affect only part of funds’ portfolios also
generally results in a greater positive change in SPG divergence. These
conclusions continue to hold if we include fund-specific control vari-
ables (particularly past performance) in Column 2, where the 𝐹 -statistic
rises considerably (to 67.59).

As shown in Columns 3-5, we employ two strategies to further
reduce the likelihood that our instruments capture unobserved macroe-
conomic variation. First, as in Columns 3 and 5, we run the regression
in a sub-sample that excludes two major events that primarily affected a
single industry—the bursting of the Dotcom bubble during 2000–2001,
which mainly affected tech firms; and the financial crisis of 2008–2009,
which was driven by financial firms. We are extremely conservative in
excluding two full years for each event. Second, in Columns 4 and 5,
we add the VIX index as a control to capture common volatility shocks.
Encouragingly, the first stage results are similar across the different
specifications, confirming that the relevance condition is satisfied.31
Intuitively, the VIX is relevant only in the full sample, and does not
affect portfolio compositions outside of the crisis periods. The last spec-
ification (Column 5) is therefore the most likely to satisfy assumption
(ii) of the endogeneity condition. Unlike in Sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3,

29 Due to the time-series nature of the instruments we can only include fund-
level fixed effects. For the same reason, standard errors are clustered at the
fund level.

30 We use changes in SPG divergence because they correspond to changes

in stock prices, i.e., returns.

31 We are unable to run tests of over-identifying restrictions in this setting,
as they are invalid in the presence of sample heterogeneity, which is clearly
the case for mutual fund panel data (Angrist and Pischke, 2009).

15 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Fig. 6. IV Regression Second Stage Coefficients: In this figure we plot point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from an instrumental variables regression of cumulative fund
flows on changes in SPG divergence, where divergence changes are instrumented using absolute idiosyncratic industry returns. Stocks are classified into Fama–French 10 industry
portfolios, and idiosyncratic returns are computed by subtracting estimated FFC six-factor model benchmarks. The regression includes exogenous controls for fund performance
(SPG Alpha; Hoberg et al. (2018) Alpha; FFC 6-factor Alpha), fund characteristics (log TNA; log age; expense ratio; turnover ratio), competition (Hoberg et al. (2018) customized
peer alpha and log number of peers), product differentiation (Kostovetsky and Warner (2020) uniqueness), and fund fixed effects. Panels (c) and (d) also include the VIX Index
as an additional control. Panels (a) and (c) use the full sample, while panels (b) and (d) omit the years 2000-01 and 2008-09. Light blue indicates lagged cumulative flows (from
months 𝑡 − 𝑘 to 𝑡), red indicates contemporaneous (month 𝑡) flows, and dark blue indicates future cumulative flows (from months 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 𝑘). The bars are 95% confidence intervals,
and standard errors are clustered at the fund level. See Section 3.2.4 for further details.

where the variation in SPG divergence may be driven by many factors
including strategic managerial considerations, the variation in the fitted
values from these regressions is more likely to be unintentional on the
part of fund managers.

The second stage coefficients are plotted in Fig. 6 for various cumu-
lative flow horizons. Starting with the baseline full-sample case without
a VIX control (panel a; corresponding to the first stage in Column
(2) of Table 6), flows are unaffected by fitted changes in divergence
for up to six months prior to the idiosyncratic shock. This result
is necessary (though not sufficient) for our identifying assumptions
to hold. Consistent with a delayed investor response, flows are also
unaffected contemporaneously and for two months following the shock.
Then, in month three, they begin to respond negatively and continue
to do so in each subsequent month. By month twelve, the cumulative
coefficient is −60. Since fitted divergence has a standard deviation of
0.01, a one-SD shock results in an annual percentage flow response of
0.6%, or approximately 25% of its annual mean in the regression sub-
sample (2.35%).32 Note that the magnitude of this result is constrained
by the size of the shocks generated by our instrument. Hence, it likely
represents a lower-bound for the true magnitude of the typical effect.
Removing the Dotcom crash and the global financial crisis from
the data does not attenuate the results significantly (panel b; corre-
sponding to Column 3 of Table 6), suggesting that the instruments

32 Note that this figure differs from the average reported in the full-sample

statistics (Table 1).

are not driven entirely by the largest macroeconomic events affecting
particular industries during our sample period. Adding the VIX as a
control (panel c; corresponding to Column 4 of Table 6) introduces
substantial noise in the estimation, but the significance of the results
nonetheless holds (for at least eight months after the shock). Finally,
adding the VIX in the restricted sample (panel d; corresponding to
Column 5 of Table 6) no longer increases estimation variance, and
the effect on flows remains steadily significant after twelve months.
Although the coefficient magnitude is halved compared to the baseline.
Overall, the results presented in this section increase our confidence
that fund investors are responding to fund strategy divergence and
not some unobserved attribute of the fund, the fund manager, or the
macroeconomic environment.

3.3. Economic mechanism

In this section, we delve deeper into the economic mechanism
driving divergence. Section 3.2.1 highlighted the dual preference of
investors for SPG-adjusted performance and SPG-adherence. If all funds
were skilled, and divergence only happened for strategic motives, we
would expect funds to diverge from their promised strategy only when
that would increase SPG-adjusted performance. If this is the case, we
should observe a positive relationship between divergence and future
performance. As highlighted by our IV strategy, though, there can be
scenarios in which divergence happens involuntarily. Additionally, un-
skilled fund managers might diverge to exploit alpha opportunities but
be unsuccessful in their attempts. Hence, the net effect of divergence on

16 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 7
Future Performance and SPG Divergence: This table reports coefficients from regressions of future (𝑡 + 1 to 𝑡 + 12) fund performance on SPG
Divergence, as well as controls for lagged (𝑡 − 11 to 𝑡) performance, fund characteristics, competition, and product differentiation (see description
of Table 5). Performance variables are SPG-adjusted returns (SPG Alpha), CAPM Alpha, and Fama–French-Carhart six-factor alpha (FFC6 Alpha).
All specifications include fund fixed effects, and standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and month. See Section 3.3 for further details.

SPG Alpha

(1)

−0.021
(−0.41)

0.043*
(1.75)

SPG Divergence

DGTW Divergence

KW Uniqueness

Low Comp

Med Comp

Lagged SPG Alpha

Lagged HKP Alpha

Low Comp × HKP Alpha

Med Comp × HKP Alpha

Other Lagged Alphas
Fund Controls
R2
Obs

No
Yes
0.298
211,014

(2)

−0.079
(−1.49)
0.009
(0.18)
−0.014
(−0.20)
1.340***
(5.24)
1.221***
(6.65)
0.038
(1.01)
0.008
(0.23)
−0.019
(−0.83)
−0.025
(−1.26)

Yes
Yes
0.306
210,764

CAPM Alpha

(3)

−0.144**
(−2.52)

−0.166***
(−5.45)

No
Yes
0.385
211,014

(4)

−0.077
(−1.41)
−0.127***
(−2.62)
0.121
(1.52)
0.448*
(1.86)
0.634***
(3.46)
−0.202***
(−5.65)
0.062*
(1.88)
−0.011
(−0.52)
−0.009
(−0.46)

Yes
Yes
0.387
210,764

FFC6 Alpha

(5)

−0.095***
(−2.78)

−0.003
(−0.27)

No
Yes
0.370
211,014

(6)

−0.084**
(−2.30)
−0.031
(−0.94)
−0.036
(−0.73)
0.349***
(2.76)
0.387***
(3.45)
−0.021
(−1.64)
−0.002
(−0.07)
0.046**
(2.51)
0.029*
(1.89)

Yes
Yes
0.371
210,764

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

future performance is unclear. To explore that relationship empirically,
we run the following regression:

𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡+12 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜃′𝐶𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜆′𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑗,𝑡 (12)

where 𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡+12 is the annualized net of fees 𝑆𝑃 𝐺, 𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝑀 or
𝐹 𝐹 𝐶6 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 for fund 𝑗 over the period (𝑡 + 1 to 𝑡 + 12); 𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 is
within-SPG divergence (as in Eq. (2)) for fund 𝑗 in month 𝑡. 𝐶𝑗,𝑡 contains
competition controls (DGTW-divergence, KW-uniqueness, HKP-peers
controls) for fund 𝑗 in month 𝑡.33 𝑋𝑗,𝑡 contains fund-level controls (log
TNA; fund age; expense ratio; turnover ratio) for fund 𝑗 in month 𝑡. 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡
are family×month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by fund
and month. The coefficient of interest is ̂𝛽—as previously discussed,
there is no clear economic prediction for the sign of the result.

Table 7 reports the outcome of those regressions. Regardless of
how we measure performance, divergence is not significantly positively
related to future performance (on the contrary, point estimates are
often negative and sometimes significantly so). That is not surprising,
as those regressions do not distinguish between strategic or involuntary
motives for divergence. Instead, they provide an average estimate
across all scenarios.

To better understand the relationship between strategic divergence
and performance, we need to isolate cases in which divergence likely
happens for strategic reasons. To do so, we utilize HKP’s findings. HKP
show that funds with fewer DGTW peers face lower competition and are
better able to achieve higher future performance. Hence, we conjecture
that divergence which leads funds to move to a lower density DGTW-
space (i.e., a space with fewer HKP peers) is likely to be driven by
strategic motives. If so, in those cases we would expect increases in
divergence to lead to increases in SPG-adjusted performance.

To test that hypothesis we construct a dummy variable that takes
a value of 1 when divergence is likely to happen strategically, and 0
otherwise. We isolate those cases by imposing two conditions. First, we

33 In order to provide the most stringent set of competition controls, for what
regards HKP-peers we add dummies for the bottom and medium terciles of the
number of HKP-peers as well as the interaction between those dummies and
𝐻𝐾𝑃 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎. That is the specification utilized by HKP in their performance
regressions.

require the number of HKP peers at 𝑡−1 to be in the top tercile; i.e., ex-
ante competition should be high for funds to be incentivized to move
to a less crowded space. Second, we require changes in divergence and
changes in the number of HKP peers between 𝑡−1 and 𝑡 to go in opposite
directions; i.e., there should be a trade-off between SPG-divergence and
the degree of competition funds face.

We then run the following regression:

𝛥𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡+12 =𝛼 + 𝛽𝛥𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛿𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐𝑗,𝑡+

𝜁𝛥𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 × 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜃′𝛥𝐶𝑗,𝑡+
𝛾 ′𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜆′𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑗,𝑡.

(13)

where 𝛥𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡+12 is the change in annualized net of fees 𝑆𝑃 𝐺,
𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝑀 or 𝐹 𝐹 𝐶6 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 for fund 𝑗 between the periods (𝑡 − 11 to 𝑡), and
(𝑡+1 to 𝑡+12). 𝛥𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 is the change in within-SPG divergence for
fund 𝑗 between months 𝑡−1 and 𝑡. 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐𝑗,𝑡 is the dummy identifying
whether the divergence of fund 𝑗 between 𝑡 − 1 and 𝑡 is likely strategic;
𝛥𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡 × 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐𝑗,𝑡 is the interaction between 𝛥𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡
and 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐𝑗,𝑡. 𝛥𝐶𝑗,𝑡 contains changes in competition controls (DGTW-
divergence, and KW-uniqueness) for fund 𝑗 between months 𝑡 − 1
and 𝑡, as well as their interaction with 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐𝑗,𝑡.34 𝑃 𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑗,𝑡−1
contains controls for past annualized net of fee 𝐻𝐾𝑃 , 𝑆𝑃 𝐺, 𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝑀 or
𝐹 𝐹 𝐶6 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 for the period (𝑡 − 23 to 𝑡 − 12). 𝑋𝑗,𝑡 contains fund-level
controls (log TNA; fund age; expense ratio; turnover ratio) for fund
𝑗 in month 𝑡. 𝜂𝑓 ,𝑡 are family×month fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by fund and month.

The coefficients of interest are ̂𝛽, and ̂𝜁.

̂𝛽 identifies the uncon-
ditional effect of changes in divergence on changes in performance.
Similarly to the prior specification, we cannot provide a clear prediction
̂𝜁, instead, identifies the incremental
for the direction of this effect.
effect of changes in divergence on changes in performance, when
divergence likely happens for strategic reasons. The overall effect in
those cases is given by ̂𝛽 + ̂𝜁. We expect that overall effect ( ̂𝛽 + ̂𝜁) to be
positive and statistically significant.

34 We cannot add controls based on HKP-peers as they are collinear with the
𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐 dummy, which already accounts for the interaction between HKP’s
result and ours.

17 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 8
Strategic SPG Divergence: This table reports coefficients from regressions of changes in annual fund performance (month 𝑡 + 1 to 𝑡 + 12 minus
month 𝑡−11 to 𝑡) on changes in SPG Divergence, a dummy variable (𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐) indicating that divergence changes are more likely to be strategic
rather than involuntary, and the interaction between these variables. 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐 equals 1 when Hoberg et al. (2018) competition at time 𝑡 − 1
is high, and changes in SPG Divergence have the opposite sign to changes in the number of HKP peers. The regressions also control for fund
characteristics, lagged (𝑡 − 23 to 𝑡 − 12) performance, changes in DGTW divergence and Kostovetsky and Warner (2020) uniqueness, and the
interaction of the IO variables with the 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑐 dummy. All specifications include family-month fixed effects, and standard errors are two-way
clustered by fund and month. See Section 3.3 for further details.

SPG Divg. Diff.

Strategic

Strategic × SPG Divg. Diff.

DGTW Divg. Diff.

KW Unique Diff.

Strategic × DGTW Divg. Diff.

Strategic × KW Unique Diff.

Lagged HKP Alpha

Lagged SPG Alpha

Lagged CAPM Alpha

Lagged FFC6 Alpha

Fund Controls
R2
Obs

(1)
SPG Alpha

−0.044
(−0.58)

−0.032
(−0.94)
0.042
(0.36)

0.066
(1.58)
−0.044
(−0.92)

(2)

−0.155**
(−2.13)
−0.075
(−0.33)
0.927***
(3.28)
−0.033
(−0.89)
0.054
(0.40)
−0.024
(−0.19)
−0.088
(−0.30)
0.066
(1.60)
−0.045
(−0.93)

(3)
CAPM Alpha

(4)

−0.080
(−1.09)

−0.039
(−1.05)
0.054
(0.41)

0.130***
(4.38)

−0.129*
(−1.81)
0.099
(0.44)
0.357
(1.52)
−0.045
(−1.13)
0.056
(0.36)
0.050
(0.41)
−0.013
(−0.04)
0.130***
(4.36)

−0.087**
(−2.54)

−0.087**
(−2.52)

Yes
0.289
182,690

Yes
0.289
182,690

Yes
0.374
182,690

Yes
0.374
182,690

(5)
FFC6 Alpha

−0.020
(−0.46)

−0.003
(−0.11)
−0.048
(−0.75)

0.028**
(2.02)

(6)

−0.026
(−0.57)
−0.040
(−0.38)
0.055
(0.41)
−0.002
(−0.06)
−0.058
(−0.74)
−0.013
(−0.16)
0.074
(0.39)
0.028**
(2.03)

−0.164***
(−11.12)

Yes
0.346
182,690

−0.164***
(−11.14)

Yes
0.346
182,690

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Table 8 reports the outcome of those regressions. In line with
Table 7’s results, the unconditional effect ( ̂𝛽) is negative or insignificant
in all specifications. The effect of the interaction between changes
in divergence and the Strategic dummy ( ̂𝜁), instead, is positive and
statistically significant (at the 1% level) when measuring performance
using changes in 𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 specifically (Column 2). As expected, the
combined effect in these cases ( ̂𝛽 + ̂𝜁) = −0.155 + 0.927 = 0.772 is
overwhelmingly positive. Increasing divergence from the lower quartile
to the upper quartile of its empirical distribution would result in the
average fund outperforming its SPG peers by 1.02%, or 56% of the
sample standard deviation (since the mean change in SPG alpha is
zero by construction, the relevant comparison is the sample standard
deviation).

The estimate of ̂𝜁 is not statistically significant in any other speci-
fication; i.e., it is only significant when measuring changes in perfor-
mance using 𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎. This is in line with the expected economic
mechanism. As previously highlighted, the characteristics driving SPG
product differentiation are unrelated to funds’ ability to generate risk-
adjusted performance. Hence, if all funds remained close to their SPG’s
core strategy, that location would likely become crowded in an HKP-
sense. When that happens, funds that strategically diverge in order
to move to a less crowded space are able to beat their SPG-peers.
As more funds diverge, the trade-off between SPG adherence and
SPG-adjusted performance would become less advantageous, leading
to mean-reversion towards SPG core strategies. Funds cannot fully
anticipate other funds’ behavior or overall equilibrium outcomes, as
divergence can also happen for non-strategic reasons.

The results in this section are consistent with the hypothesized
trade-off faced by fund managers between SPG adherence and SPG
Alpha. However, the results are open to interpretation, and we consider
this analysis to be suggestive rather than conclusive. Further research
along this dimension would be a fruitful topic for future research.

3.4. Generalized SPG assignments

All results presented so far rely on the assumption that funds’
promises contain one dominant strategy. This implies that the spatial
distribution of strategy descriptions is concentrated around k-means
centroids. If instead many funds were close to cluster boundaries, we
might erroneously assign a high divergence to these boundary funds
that are actually close to implementing their promised strategy. To
exclude this alternative interpretation, we generalize SPG assignment
by allowing funds to offer a combination of the 17 strategies identified
by the k-means algorithm.

Similarly to HKP, we locate each fund in a multi-dimensional space
based on its exposure to different strategy dimensions. HKP consider
3 dimensions in their main results: size, value, and momentum char-
acteristics of funds’ holdings. We adopt a similar methodology in a
17-dimensional space by identifying each fund with a vector of weights
on each SPGs’ core strategy. To compute weights we first identify
the features of each centroid that are most indicative of that SPG’s
core strategy. We do so by curtailing the centroid vector to the top
1% of most frequent terms.35 For each prospectus we then compute
the percentage of top-terms of each SPG centroid which are present
in its text, weighted by their tfidf score. Finally, we normalize those
percentages to sum to one for each prospectus’ 17-dimensional vector,
which we define as the fund’s ‘‘promise vector’’. Finally, we identify
fund-specific sets of SPG-peers by taking pairwise Euclidean distances
between funds’ promise vectors, and utilizing the same cut-off as HKP
to identify the boundaries of each peer set (i.e., the average number of
peers in Lipper fund categories).

The columns of Fig. 7 report the average promise vector for funds
that were originally assigned to each of the 17 strategies. Reassuringly,

35 Results are robust, but noisier, if choosing higher cut-offs up to at least

10%.

18 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 9
Promise-Weighted Divergence - Correlations: This table reports correlations among various generalized versions of our SPG
Divergence measure, constructed as the log sum of squared differences between the fund’s portfolio holdings vector and the
weighted average holdings of funds in the top 𝑥 most relevant strategy peer groups (SPGs). The weights on the SPG holdings
vectors are given by the fund’s ‘‘promise vector’’, constructed from the fraction of relevant words for each SPG that appear
in the fund’s prospectus strategy description (see Section 3.4).

SPG Divg.

Weighted SPG Divg.

Single SPG

Top 2

Top 3

Top 5

Top 10

Weighted Divg. (Top 2)

Weighted Divg. (Top 3)

Weighted Divg. (Top 5)

Weighted Divg. (Top 10)

Weighted Divg. (All SPGs)

𝑁

0.799∗∗∗
0.786∗∗∗
0.770∗∗∗
0.757∗∗∗
0.755∗∗∗

315 190

t statistics in parentheses
∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.001.

0.977∗∗∗
0.959∗∗∗
0.947∗∗∗
0.946∗∗∗

0.987∗∗∗
0.977∗∗∗
0.976∗∗∗

0.994∗∗∗
0.994∗∗∗

1.000∗∗∗

Fig. 7. SPG Promise Weights: This figure shows the average ‘‘promise weight’’ for each Strategy Peer Group (along the rows) among funds assigned primarily to the SPGs listed
along the columns. Promise weights are constructed from the fraction of relevant words for each SPG that appear in the fund’s prospectus strategy description (see Section 3.4).

the dominant strategy in each average promise vector is always con-
sistent with the dominant strategy that had been assigned utilizing the
simplified approach, with average weights ranging from 13% for funds
originally assigned to the 𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝐶𝑎𝑝 SPG, to 50% for those originally
assigned to the 𝑇 𝑎𝑥 SPG. Additionally, none of the other strategies
appears to be co-dominant.

Next, we compute SPG-divergence and SPG-adjusted performance
based on the generalized approach. To compute SPG-divergence, we
first construct a tailored reference portfolio for each fund, as the
weighted average of each SPG’s average portfolio, weighted by the
fund’s promise vector. We then compute divergence equivalently to
𝐺𝑗𝑡
Eq. (2), but substituting ̄𝑤
𝑖,𝑡 with the weights in each stock 𝑖 in the ref-
erence portfolio of fund 𝑗 at time 𝑡. Finally, we compute SPG-adjusted
performance by subtracting from each fund’s return the average return
of its tailored SPG-peers. This procedure is repeated monthly, but, just
like the single-cluster SPG assignment, it is sticky as PIS sections vary
slowly over time.

repeat

For SPG Divergence, we

in
𝑥-dimensional spaces, for 𝑥 𝑖𝑛 [2, 3, 5, 10], by considering only the 𝑥
SPGs with the greatest weight in each fund’s 17-dimensional promise
vector; i.e., we construct 𝑥-dimensional promise vectors, which we
normalize to sum to 1.

the above procedure

Table 9 reports the correlation of SPG-divergence constructed using
the simplified method (1-strategy assignment per fund-month) with the
generalized versions (up to 17 weighted strategy assignments per fund-
month). Correlations are always very high. There is a 79.9% correlation
between the single-strategy assignment and the 2-strategy assignment;
that correlation only drops to 75.5% when allowing up to 17-strategy
assignments.

19 

Table 10
Customized SPG Alpha - Correlations: This table
reports the correlation between our baseline mea-
sure of SPG-adjusted performance (SPG Alpha),
and an alternative measure based on the aver-
age performance of customized ‘‘promise peers’’
(Promise Peer Alpha). Promise Peer Alpha is con-
structed by applying the Hoberg et al. (2018) peer
identification methodology to the vector of funds’
textual loadings on our 17 strategy peer groups
(see Section 3.4).

Promise Peer Alpha

𝑁

SPG Alpha

0.941∗∗∗

315 006

Table 10 reports the correlation between SPG-adjusted performance
based on a single dominant SPG, and the generalized version based on
funds with similar promise vectors. For SPG-adjusted performance the
correlation is still 94% when comparing the construction based on the
single-strategy assignment to that based on the 17-strategy assignment.
Finally, we replicate our core results in 2/3/5/10/17-dimensional
spaces. First, in Table 11 we confirm that investors have a dual prefer-
ence for higher SPG-adjusted performance but lower SPG-divergence.
All specifications are based on Eq. (6), and are equivalent to Col-
umn 4 of Table 5, with the only difference that SPG-divergence and
𝑆𝑃 𝐺 𝐴𝑙𝑝ℎ𝑎 are computed based on 1/2/3/5/10/17-dimensional spaces.
̂𝛽 and ̂𝛾 are almost identical across specification, both
Coefficients
statistically and economically (even if t-stats drop with the number

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table 11
Flows, Divergence, and Performance (Promise-Weighted): This table repeats the analysis of future flows, SPG Divergence, and SPG Alpha
from Column 4 of Table 5, but using the generalized versions of these measures based on funds’ ‘‘promise vectors’’ (i.e., the weighted fraction
of relevant words from each SPG that are found in the fund’s prospectus strategy description). See Section 3.4 for additional details.

SPG Divergence

SPG Alpha

DGTW Divergence

KW Uniqueness

Log HKP Peers

HKP Alpha

Controls
R2
Obs

(1)
Single

−0.060***
(−3.20)
0.013**
(2.40)
0.027
(1.59)
−0.043*
(−1.71)
−0.036**
(−2.11)
0.071***
(12.53)

Yes
0.336
237,178

(2)
Top 2

−0.062***
(−3.01)
0.015***
(2.73)
0.031*
(1.77)
−0.044*
(−1.73)
−0.041**
(−2.36)
0.069***
(12.25)

Yes
0.337
237,178

(3)
Top 3

−0.058***
(−2.73)
0.016***
(2.77)
0.029
(1.63)
−0.043*
(−1.71)
−0.041**
(−2.34)
0.069***
(12.06)

Yes
0.336
237,178

(4)
Top 5

−0.060***
(−2.75)
0.016***
(2.75)
0.030*
(1.66)
−0.043*
(−1.70)
−0.042**
(−2.39)
0.069***
(12.02)

Yes
0.336
237,178

(5)
Top 10

−0.057***
(−2.61)
0.015***
(2.65)
0.028
(1.55)
−0.043*
(−1.70)
−0.042**
(−2.40)
0.069***
(12.07)

Yes
0.336
237,178

(6)
All

−0.058***
(−2.63)
0.015***
(2.65)
0.029
(1.57)
−0.043*
(−1.70)
−0.042**
(−2.40)
0.069***
(12.07)

Yes
0.336
237,178

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

of dimensions). Second, in Fig. 8 we confirm the dynamics of the
relationship between divergence and flows. Row 1 of Fig. 8 reproduces
the two key panels of the SVAR baseline result from Fig. 4, which show
respectively that flows decrease following a shock to divergence, and
that mean-reversion in divergence is accelerated by outflows. Rows 2-
4 of Fig. 8 report the same two panels when constructing measures
based on 2/5/17-dimensional spaces. Impulse response functions are
almost identical across specifications. Third, Fig. 9 confirms that the IV
results hold with multi-dimensional SPG assignments. Panel 1 of Fig. 9
reports the second stage of the 2SLS baseline approach (as in Panel 1 of
Fig. 6). Panels 2-4 report the same analysis when constructing measures
based on 2/5/17-dimensional spaces. Results are economically similar
across specifications, while confidence intervals widen with the number
of dimensions.

These results lead us to conclude that our original assumption was
reasonable. Indeed, it appears that funds do have a dominant strategy
and investor flows seem to respond predominantly to SPG-divergence
and SPG-adjusted performance based on that dominant dimension. That
conclusion is in line with the findings of He and Xiong (2013), who
show a tendency towards narrower mandates. Indeed, from a ‘‘market-
disciplining’’ perspective, it would be more complex for investors to
determine the correct weighting of different strategies from PIS text
and hold funds accountable to their promises, leaving more room for
manipulation. Hence, it is reasonable that in equilibrium we would
observe funds with narrower mandates, while investors can still com-
bine different funds into an overall portfolio that can accommodate
preferences over multiple SPG strategies.

4. Conclusion

In this paper we investigate the characteristics sought by U.S.
mutual fund investors by examining the strategy descriptions in their
prospectus documents. We use unsupervised machine learning to group
together funds with similar strategy descriptions and use these to infer
aggregated portfolios that correspond to different fund strategies. Each
of the resulting 17 strategy peer groups (SPGs) capture distinct and
interpretable approaches to investment, most of which go beyond the
standard size-value axis widely used to measure fund styles.

To answer the question of whether funds follow their promised
strategies, we compute fund-level divergences from the core strategy
of each SPG and find that funds are on average closer to the core
strategies of their own peer groups than to others. We then document
a market discipline effect that operates via investors’ net capital flows.
Controlling for performance and other fund characteristics, flows are
lower for funds that diverge more from the core strategy of their

Fig. 8. Promise-Weighted SPGs - SPVAR IRFs: In this figure we repeat the analysis
from Fig. 4 but using generalized versions of our SPG Divergence measure, constructed
as the log sum of squared differences between the fund’s portfolio holdings vector and
the weighted average holdings of funds in the top 𝑥 most relevant strategy peer groups
(SPGs). The weights on the SPG holdings vectors are given by the fund’s ‘‘promise
vector’’, constructed from the fraction of relevant words for each SPG that appear in
the fund’s prospectus strategy description (see Section 3.4).

SPG. The investor response is persistent, lasting up to twelve months
after the initial divergence. Investors also chase SPG-adjusted returns
independently of standard factor model alphas, with similar levels of
predictive power. We show that funds are responsive to the disciplinary

20 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Fig. 9. Promise-Weighted SPGs - IV Second Stage: In this figure we repeat the analysis from Fig. 6 but using generalized versions of our SPG Divergence measure, constructed
as the log sum of squared differences between the fund’s portfolio holdings vector and the weighted average holdings of funds in the top 𝑥 most relevant strategy peer groups
(SPGs). The weights on the SPG holdings vectors are given by the fund’s ‘‘promise vector’’, constructed from the fraction of relevant words for each SPG that appear in the fund’s
prospectus strategy description (see Section 3.4).

effect of fund flows. Strategy divergence mean-reverts over time, and
does so at a faster rate following months in which funds diverged more
from their core strategies and experienced outflows.

To overcome concerns of omitted variable bias, we implement a
novel instrumental variables identification strategy based on idiosy-
cratic shocks to portfolio composition coming from narrow industry
sectors. Finally, we document a plausible economic mechanism driving
our results. When funds diverge from their peer groups in order to move
to a less crowded strategy space, they earn higher SPG-adjusted returns.
However, in the absence of these strategic considerations, diverging
results in negative or insignificant effects on performance. Our results
uncover a diverse fund strategy landscape that was previously unknown
from traditional analyses of holdings and returns.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Simona Abis: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cu-
ration, Conceptualization. Anton Lines: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Soft-
ware, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation,
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

AbisLinesMutualFundStrategyDescriptions(Originaldata) (Mendeley
Data) AbisLinesMFPromisesReplicationPacket(Originaldata) (Mendeley
Data).

Appendix A. Prospectuses summary statistics

In this section we provide detailed summary statistics about the

corpus of PIS sections utilized in the paper.

Fig. A1 displays the cross-sectional distribution of PIS word counts,
which show wide variation from as few as 20 to as many as 1500. This
figure also indicates that the complete PIS sections are much longer
than the excerpts provided by Morningstar (average word counts of 70
for Morningstar versus 306 in our sample), examined previously by KW.
We also observe significant variation in the textual sentiment and
textual complexity of these sections. Panel 1 of Fig. A2 shows the dis-
tribution, across fund–month observations, of the Flesch-Kincaid grade
level complexity measure (Kincaid et al., 1975). Panel 2 displays the
same distribution for the Flesch reading ease measure (Flesch, 1948).
These measures are based on the relative number of total words to total
sentences (average sentence length) and the relative number of total
syllables to total words (average word syllable length) in a given text.
They are calibrated to indicate, respectively, the number of years of
schooling required to comprehend the text (panel 1) and a standardized
readability index on a range of [0, 100] (panel 2). The figure shows
that there exists a large dispersion in the complexity (readability) of

21 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Finally, we use the Loughran and McDonald dictionaries of pos-
itive, negative, uncertainty and litigious words to measure sentiment.
These dictionaries are adapted to account for specific characteris-
tics of financial language (Loughran and McDonald, 2011). Fig. A3
shows the distribution of the frequency of positive (panel 1), negative
(panel 2), uncertainty (panel 3) and litigious (panel 4) words for all
pooled fund–month strategy descriptions. Here we also observe large
cross-sectional variation in the sentiment of strategy sections.

These descriptive statistics suggest that the narrative descriptions in
fund prospectuses may contain relevant and heterogeneous information
about their strategies.

Appendix B. K-means

Fig. A1. Distribution of word count for Strategy Sections: Pooled distribution of
the number of words contained in of all fund–month observations, for PIS sections.

B.1. The algorithm

The K-Means algorithm takes as inputs the tfidf matrix, the number
of desired clusters (𝑘) and a tolerance threshold (𝜏). The algorithm is
initialized by choosing 𝑘 points in the vector space (centroids). Points
are deliberately chosen to be far from each other in order to minimize
the likelihood of converging to a local minimum. Each chosen point
represents a features vector of same length as the number of chosen
features (10,000), whose elements exist in [0, 1]. Then the following
steps are repeated until the pre-defined tolerance is reached:

1. Calculate the euclidean distance between the vectors

representing each document (rows of the tfidf matrix) and each

of the 𝑘 centroid vectors as follows:

𝑅
∑

‖𝑥𝑟 − 𝑥𝐶
2
𝑟 ‖

(B.1)

𝑟=1
where 𝑥𝑟 is the frequency assigned to feature 𝑟 in a specific
document and 𝑥𝐶
is the frequency assigned to feature 𝑟 in a
𝑟
cluster’s centroid. 𝑅 is the total number of features.

2. Assign each document to the closest centroid (form clusters)
3. Generate new centroids (features vectors) by taking the item-by-
item average of the feature vectors of all documents assigned to
the same cluster

4. Calculate the euclidean distance between the centroids at itera-

tion 𝑛 and those at iteration 𝑛 + 1.

• If the largest distance is greater than the tolerance level 𝜏,

repeat all steps

• Otherwise exit the loop and return the formed clusters

(convergence)

We ran the above algorithm with different specifications for the user
defined parameters (𝑘 and 𝜏). All runs are independent (use different
seeds). Despite the possibility of K-means reaching a local optimum,
in our setting, the procedure is robust to changes in initial parameters
(see discussion in Appendix B.2). In the main specification we use the
default value for 𝜏 in Python’s scikit-learn implementation: 0.0001. We
use 17 clusters for the determination of the SPGs.

B.2. Robustness to choice of 𝑘

To further verify the validity of our methodology and the stability
of assignment when changing the number of clusters (𝑘), Table B.1
replicas our main result in Table 5 using alternative numbers of SPGs
from 14 to 20. All specifications are based on Eq. (6), and are equivalent
to Column 4 of Table 11, aside for the number of chosen clusters in the
k-means implementation. We confirm the dual preference of investors
for higher SPG-adjusted performance and lower SPG-divergence. Co-
efficients ̂𝛽 and ̂𝛾 are both statistically and economically significant
across specifications. Reassuringly, the effect of SPG-divergence on
future flows is largest in magnitude for 𝑘 = 17.

Fig. A2. Distribution of Complexity for Strategy Sections: Panel 1 displays the
pooled distribution of the Flesch-Kincaid grade level complexity measure across all
fund–month observations, for PIS sections. This measure indicates the number of years
of schooling required in order to comprehend each section. Panel 2 displays the same
distribution for the Flesch-Kincaid reading ease measure. This measure indicates, on
a scale of [1, 100], how easily a section can be read (a higher score indicates lower
complexity). Both measures are based on the relative number of total words to total
sentences (average sentence length) and the relative number of total syllables to total
words (average word length) contained in each section.

these sections, with most sections requiring between 5 to 25 years of

schooling (with a mean of 13.7), or a reading ease score between 10

and 80.

22 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Fig. A3. Frequency of Positive, Negative Uncertainty and Litigious Words in Strategy Sections: Panel 1 displays the distribution of the frequency of positive words for all
fund–month observations. Panel 2 displays the distribution for negative words, Panel 3 for uncertainty words and Panel 4 for litigious words. The frequency of words per PIS is
obtained by computing the percentage of the total number of words in each section that appear in the Loughran-McDonald positive, negative, uncertainty or litigious dictionaries.
These dictionaries are adapted to account for specific characteristics of financial language (Loughran and McDonald (2011)).

Table B.1
Flows, Divergence, and Performance (Alternative Clustering): This table repeats the analysis of future flows, SPG Divergence, and SPG
Alpha from Column 4 of Table 5, but using alternative numbers of Strategy Peer Groups from the K-Means Algorithm.

Number of clusters

SPG Divergence

DGTW Divergence

KW Uniqueness

Log HKP Peers

SPG Alpha

CAPM Alpha

FFC4 Alpha

FFC6 Alpha

DGTW Alpha

HKP Alpha

Fund Controls
R2
Obs

14

−0.064***
(−3.76)
0.034*
(1.92)
−0.044*
(−1.74)
−0.038**
(−2.22)
0.013**
(2.42)
0.035***
(7.42)
0.053***
(5.96)
0.024***
(3.20)
0.007**
(2.04)
0.071***
(12.52)

Yes
0.337
237,178

15

−0.070***
(−4.04)
0.037**
(2.09)
−0.044*
(−1.74)
−0.038**
(−2.21)
0.013**
(2.40)
0.036***
(7.43)
0.053***
(5.94)
0.024***
(3.22)
0.007**
(2.06)
0.071***
(12.53)

Yes
0.337
237,170

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

16

−0.069***
(−4.03)
0.035**
(2.04)
−0.043*
(−1.71)
−0.037**
(−2.15)
0.012**
(2.39)
0.036***
(7.45)
0.053***
(5.94)
0.024***
(3.23)
0.007**
(2.05)
0.071***
(12.53)

Yes
0.337
237,178

23 

18

−0.053***
(−3.05)
0.026
(1.53)
−0.043*
(−1.71)
−0.036**
(−2.08)
0.013**
(2.42)
0.035***
(7.42)
0.053***
(5.96)
0.024***
(3.21)
0.007**
(2.01)
0.071***
(12.57)

Yes
0.336
237,162

19

−0.055***
(−3.16)
0.027
(1.54)
−0.043*
(−1.69)
−0.035**
(−2.07)
0.012**
(2.37)
0.036***
(7.42)
0.053***
(5.95)
0.024***
(3.20)
0.007**
(2.03)
0.072***
(12.59)

Yes
0.336
237,162

20

−0.048***
(−2.83)
0.023
(1.32)
−0.043*
(−1.70)
−0.035**
(−2.04)
0.012**
(2.37)
0.036***
(7.44)
0.053***
(5.96)
0.024***
(3.18)
0.007**
(2.03)
0.071***
(12.53)

Yes
0.336
237,092

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Fig. C1. LDA Topics: Word clouds for 𝑘 = 17 topics estimated by applying Latent Dirichlet Allocation to fund strategy descriptions. The word clouds represent the distribution of
features (words and bi-grams) for each topic. Word sizes are proportional to frequency.

Appendix C. Alternative clustering: LDA

Latent Dirichlet Allocation (Blei et al., 2003) is commonly used for
textual topic modeling in the finance and economics literatures (see
the recent survey in Loughran and McDonald (2020)). The reader may
wonder why we use k-means clustering instead of the more common
LDA. In practice, the results of the two methodologies are fairly similar,
as can be seen in Fig. C1. This figure shows the topic word clouds re-
sulting from an application of LDA with prior topic probability 𝐷𝑖𝑟(1∕𝑘)
and prior word probability 𝐷𝑖𝑟(1∕𝑁), where 𝑘 is the number of topics
and 𝑁 is the number of terms (words and bi-grams) in the corpus. For
comparison with our k-means results, we choose 𝑘 = 17.

Despite the similarities, k-means is more suited to our particular ap-
plication because it explicitly generates maximum differences between
groups, whereas LDA seeks to maximize the likelihood of a generative
model, even if the resulting topics are fairly similar. Fig. C1 illustrates

this problem with LDA: there are two ‘‘Quantitative’’ topics, two ‘‘Fun-
damental’’ topics, and two ‘‘PE-Ratio’’ topics, with quite similar word
distributions. On the other hand, topics that are separated by k-means
are sometimes merged by LDA: e.g. ‘‘Tax’’ and ‘‘Dividends’’; and ‘‘Small
Cap’’ and ‘‘Large Cap’’.

Another issue with LDA is that it is much less stable than k-means.
The example in Fig. C1 would not be reproducible by re-running the
algorithm, whereas k-means, even with different random seeds, delivers
similar clusters every time it is run on the same data.

Finally, one advantage of LDA, in principle, is that it estimates
a distribution over topics for each document. In the context of fund
strategies, it would be useful to have the ability to assign multiple
strategies to the same fund. In practice, however, due to the short
length of the PIS descriptions (about 300 words, on average), over
90% of funds have virtually all of their weight in a single topic. The
relatively short documents may also be the reason why LDA is less
stable in our setting.

24 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.1
Fund Attributes by SPG: This table reports differences between average fund attributes within a particular Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the
average across all other SPGs. Coefficients are estimated in separate regressions of the dependent vars (log of fund age, log of TNA, expense
ratio, and turnover ratio) on dummies for each SPG (see Appendix D). Also shown are the overall averages across the full sample. We include
month and fund family fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and month.

Large Cap

Fundamental

Products & Services

Dividends

Derivatives

Comp. Advantage

Defensive

Quantitative

Small Cap

Long Term

PE-Ratio

Foreign (ADR)

Mid Cap

Intrinsic Value

Fixed Income

Tax

Foreign (EM)

Overall

Obs

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

ln(TNA)

−0.0268
(−0.69)

0.0151
(0.33)

0.0876
(1.61)

0.0447
(0.68)

−0.0441
(−0.76)

0.0784
(1.07)

0.123**
(2.21)

−0.251***
(−3.75)

0.00894
(0.13)

0.103
(1.61)

−0.0275
(−0.36)

−0.0438
(−0.69)

−0.104
(−1.27)

0.0239
(0.27)

0.0841
(1.42)

−0.105
(−1.11)

−0.0168
(−0.17)

5.545***
(325.90)

288,012

ln(Age)

0.0382
(1.52)

−0.0400
(−1.47)

0.0365
(1.17)

0.0279
(0.69)

−0.0261
(−0.66)

−0.00135
(−0.04)

−0.0464
(−1.32)

−0.116***
(−3.20)

−0.104***
(−3.05)

0.102***
(2.67)

0.0813**
(2.04)

−0.0406
(−1.04)

0.0168
(0.42)

0.000798
(0.01)

0.0612*
(1.66)

−0.0154
(−0.33)

0.0607
(1.26)

4.898***
(472.54)

288,012

Expenses

−0.0255**
(−2.19)

0.00132
(0.12)

0.0586***
(4.09)

−0.0676***
(−4.27)

−0.0346**
(−2.42)

0.0377**
(2.09)

−0.0289**
(−2.13)

−0.0713***
(−3.90)

0.0725***
(3.88)

0.0365*
(1.90)

0.0126
(0.71)

−0.0254
(−1.46)

0.0276
(1.37)

0.0399**
(2.44)

0.00454
(0.26)

−0.00645
(−0.29)

−0.00695
(−0.32)

1.224***
(278.75)

288,012

Turnover

−4.658**
(−2.33)

2.480
(0.97)

8.583**
(2.57)

−10.60***
(−3.90)

13.94***
(4.25)

−0.761
(−0.24)

−3.678
(−1.09)

27.24***
(6.11)

1.201
(0.37)

−11.01***
(−4.18)

−2.328
(−0.65)

−1.840
(−0.59)

4.676
(1.36)

−18.96***
(−7.20)

3.322
(0.88)

−11.38**
(−2.59)

−7.608**
(−2.44)

81.29***
(99.19)

288,012

Appendix D. Full narrative analysis

As a supplement to our quantitative findings on core strategy diver-
gences, we conduct a narrative analysis of each strategy peer group
(SPG), asking whether its implementation lines up with an intuitive
reading of the strategy descriptions. This exercise necessarily involves
a subjective component, and reasonable readers may disagree with
some of our choices. We try to avoid overly detailed inferences and
instead focus on broad observations that we believe are less likely
to be controversial. This narrative exercise is intended to act as a
sanity check on, and to provide context for, the objective similarity
measures examined in Section 3.1.1. The exercise also has independent
descriptive value, as the active equity investment landscape in the
United States has not previously been examined in this way.

For each fund, we compile fund attributes, performance statistics,
risk-factor loadings, average industry composition, and average stock
characteristics weighted by the percentage of assets invested in each
stock. The fund attributes are log TNA, log age, expense ratio, and

turnover ratio. The performance measures are rolling 24-month six-
factor alphas ((Fama and French, 2015) plus momentum) and six-factor
value-added (Berk and van Binsbergen, 2015). For risk-factor loadings,
we again use the five Fama–French factors plus momentum. For in-
dustry composition, we use the Fama–French 48 industries. The stock
characteristics are subdivided into five categories: (i) ‘‘traditional’’
characteristics (market beta, market capitalization, book-to-market ra-
tio, past year’s stock return, investment, and profitability); (ii) bal-
ance sheet variables (current assets, inventories, non-performing assets,
PP&E, intangible assets, asset growth, cash and equivalents, current
liabilities, deferred taxes, long-term debt, and leverage ratio); (iii) in-
come statement variables (operating income, earnings growth, and R&D
expenditures); (iv) market variables (dividend yield, equity issuance,
equity repurchases, Amihud illiquidity, and firm age). Furthermore, we
compute the following portfolio characteristics: percentage of holdings
in ADRs (American Depository Receipts); percentage of holdings that
are foreign incorporated; percentage of holdings in common stock;
percentage of holdings in cash; and number of different stocks in the

25 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.2
Risk Factor Exposures by SPG: This table reports differences between funds’ loadings on the Fama and French (2015) five factors plus momentum
within a particular Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the average across all other SPGs. Coefficients are estimated in separate regressions of fund
loadings (estimated from prior 12 months’ daily returns) on dummies for each SPG (see Appendix D). Also shown are the overall averages
across the full sample. We control for (demeaned) log age, log assets, expense and turnover ratio, fund flows, flow volatility, as well as month
fund and family fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and month.

MOM beta

RMW beta

Market beta

SMB beta

LargeCap

Fundmntl

ProdServ

Dividends

Deriv

CompAdv

Defensive

Quantit

SmallCap

LongTerm

PE-Ratio

Foreign(ADR)

MidCap

IntrValue

FixedInc

Tax

Foreign(EM)

Overall

Obs

−0.00302
(−0.65)

0.00153
(0.32)

0.0194***
(2.77)

−0.0203**
(−2.54)

−0.0305***
(−3.65)

0.00610
(0.92)

−0.0119*
(−1.90)

0.00603
(0.88)

0.0205***
(2.91)

0.00944
(1.15)

0.00556
(0.75)

0.00985
(1.24)

0.00935
(1.30)

−0.00306
(−0.34)

−0.0154
(−1.64)

0.00110
(0.17)

−0.00647
(−0.79)

0.980***
(970.75)

285,996

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

−0.0357**
(−2.57)

0.0309*
(1.90)

0.0601***
(3.18)

−0.179***
(−11.13)

−0.0472***
(−2.75)

−0.0171
(−0.74)

−0.0373**
(−2.57)

−0.0385
(−1.65)

0.372***
(19.48)

−0.0176
(−0.82)

0.00966
(0.38)

−0.00703
(−0.30)

−0.00812
(−0.47)

−0.0716***
(−3.14)

−0.0125
(−0.72)

−0.0615**
(−2.14)

0.0294
(1.09)

0.222***
(34.85)

285,996

HML beta

−0.00561
(−0.64)

0.0101
(1.01)

−0.0653***
(−6.34)

0.0863***
(7.95)

0.00147
(0.15)

−0.0985***
(−7.67)

0.00344
(0.36)

0.0361***
(3.06)

0.0402***
(3.22)

−0.0375***
(−2.75)

0.0423***
(3.23)

−0.0145
(−1.03)

−0.0272**
(−2.10)

0.0675***
(5.34)

0.00391
(0.37)

−0.0139
(−1.13)

−0.0160
(−1.05)

−0.00637*
(−1.85)

285,996

0.00182
(0.46)

0.00476
(1.08)

0.0298***
(5.16)

−0.0420***
(−7.38)

−0.00753
(−1.35)

0.0170**
(2.53)

−0.00717
(−1.35)

0.0158***
(2.76)

0.00406
(0.79)

0.000236
(0.04)

−0.00407
(−0.53)

0.0129**
(2.37)

0.00937
(1.61)

−0.0485***
(−7.40)

−0.0202***
(−3.60)

0.00367
(0.67)

0.0106
(1.55)

0.0307***
(21.39)

285,996

−0.00575
(−0.89)

−0.0130*
(−1.71)

−0.0764***
(−7.20)

0.105***
(11.05)

0.00763
(0.86)

−0.0604***
(−5.31)

0.00265
(0.30)

0.0790***
(9.18)

−0.00438
(−0.43)

−0.0144
(−1.29)

0.0364***
(3.23)

−0.0130
(−1.09)

−0.0136
(−1.27)

0.0260**
(2.17)

−0.0160
(−1.50)

0.0135
(1.19)

−0.0335***
(−3.00)

−0.0542***
(−20.49)

CMA beta

−0.00825
(−1.28)

−0.00954
(−1.29)

−0.0391***
(−4.67)

0.106***
(10.44)

0.0110
(1.34)

−0.0622***
(−5.18)

0.0115
(1.28)

0.0238***
(2.71)

−0.0135**
(−1.98)

−0.0373***
(−3.43)

0.0206**
(2.11)

−0.0271**
(−1.97)

0.0190*
(1.88)

0.0360***
(3.09)

0.0115
(1.14)

0.00345
(0.36)

−0.0351***
(−2.82)

−0.0319***
(−13.29)

285,996

285,996

portfolio. All variables are normalized by subtracting the full-sample
mean and dividing by the standard deviation.

and all other SPGs (holding other characteristics, family membership,
and month constant).

As highlighted in Section 3.1, for each of the above variables, and

for each SPG, we run the following regression:

𝑌𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐼

𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑗,𝑡
𝑗,𝑡

+ 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑡 + 𝜄𝑗∈𝑓 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

(D.1)

𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑗,𝑡
𝑗,𝑡

where 𝑌𝑗,𝑡 is the variable of interest for fund 𝑗 at time 𝑡; 𝜂𝑡 and 𝜄𝑗∈𝑓
denote fixed effects for month 𝑡 and membership of fund 𝑗 in family
𝑓 , respectively; 𝐼
is an indicator variable equal to 1 if fund 𝑗
belongs to the SPG of interest at time 𝑡, and 0 otherwise; and 𝑋𝑗,𝑡 is a
vector of demeaned fund-level control variables (the natural logarithms
of fund age and TNA, expense ratio, turnover ratio, net fund flows, and
flow volatility; when 𝑌𝑗,𝑡 is one of these fund-level characteristics, it is
excluded from the control vector). Because all independent variables
are demeaned, 𝛼 can be interpreted as the mean of the characteristic
of interest when 𝐼
= 0 (i.e. when fund 𝑗 does not belong to
the SPG of interest at time 𝑡). The 𝛽 coefficient then indicates the
average difference between the characteristic for the SPG of interest

𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑗,𝑡
𝑗,𝑡

In the discussion below, we highlight the most striking (and statis-
tically significant) attributes of each SPG. The full breakdown for all of
the above attributes is provided in Tables D.1 through D.8.

Large cap, mid cap, and small cap. The obviously relevant attributes
for peer groups based on company size are SMB beta, average market
capitalization, and average firm age. Accordingly, we find that funds
in the Large Cap SPG have significantly lower SMB betas, and hold
significantly older firms with larger average market cap. The SMB beta
of the Mid Cap SPG is not significantly different from other funds, but
average firm age and market cap are smaller. The Small Cap SPG has
both a higher SMB beta (highest among all SPGs) and a much lower
average firm age and market cap (lowest among all SPGs).

Intrinsic value. Funds in this SPG invest in companies trading at a
discount to perceived intrinsic value. This is the closest SPG to a typical
‘‘value’’ strategy, and as such is reflected in higher than average HML

26 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.3
Industry Exposures by SPG: This table displays differences in average industry exposures between funds in each Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and
the average across all other SPGs. These differences are estimated in separate regressions of fund-level industry exposures on dummy variables
for each SPG (see Appendix D), controlling for fund age, log assets, expense ratio, turnover ratio, monthly fund flows, monthly fund flow
volatility, and month as well as fund family fixed effects. All non-binary independent variables are demeaned. Standard errors are two-way
clustered by fund and month. Industries are the Fama–French 48 industries—a selected sample is displayed for brevity.

LargeCap

Fundamental

ProductsServices

Dividends

Derivatives

CompAdvantage

Defensive

Quantitative

SmallCap

LongTerm

PERatio

Foreign(ADR)

MidCap

IntrinsicValue

FixedIncome

Tax

Foreign(EM)

Obs

Util

−0.23**
(−2.29)

0.22
(1.58)

−0.68***
(−6.04)

1.71***
(8.89)

0.14
(0.96)

−0.87***
(−7.75)

0.03
(0.23)

0.25
(1.63)

−0.24**
(−2.01)

−0.55***
(−2.69)

0.39**
(2.49)

−0.51**
(−2.07)

0.43**
(2.29)

0.14
(0.77)

0.19
(1.34)

−0.41*
(−1.95)

−0.17
(−0.80)

288,012

Telcm

−0.16
(−1.07)

−0.34**
(−2.54)

−0.46**
(−2.04)

1.83***
(7.95)

0.37**
(2.16)

−0.61***
(−3.58)

0.16
(0.84)

0.41**
(2.43)

−1.53***
(−9.00)

−0.19
(−0.76)

−0.13
(−0.65)

−0.28
(−1.12)

−0.39**
(−2.07)

1.87***
(3.52)

0.14
(0.54)

0.28
(1.07)

−0.08
(−0.29)

288,012

Hshld

0.05
(0.98)

−0.08
(−1.47)

−0.08
(−1.38)

0.11*
(1.79)

−0.00
(−0.01)

0.35***
(3.94)

−0.02
(−0.33)

−0.09*
(−1.67)

−0.12*
(−1.79)

0.10
(1.03)

0.03
(0.26)

−0.19**
(−2.46)

−0.07
(−0.91)

0.02
(0.18)

−0.06
(−0.78)

0.12
(1.24)

−0.13
(−1.43)

288,012

Oil

−0.28
(−1.12)

0.37
(1.12)

−0.36
(−0.96)

0.31
(1.02)

−0.02
(−0.06)

−1.33***
(−3.77)

0.07
(0.21)

0.63*
(1.74)

2.62***
(4.37)

−0.52
(−1.14)

0.26
(0.56)

0.54
(1.18)

−1.83***
(−4.61)

−1.57***
(−3.25)

0.13
(0.35)

1.28**
(2.14)

−0.60
(−1.01)

288,012

Banks

−0.05
(−0.16)

0.57
(1.64)

−2.77***
(−6.33)

4.09***
(7.44)

0.04
(0.10)

−1.18***
(−2.86)

0.87*
(1.81)

1.19***
(2.63)

−1.41***
(−3.11)

−1.35***
(−2.66)

0.79
(1.36)

0.20
(0.40)

−2.75***
(−5.99)

1.91***
(3.41)

0.21
(0.44)

0.37
(0.73)

−0.54
(−1.04)

288,012

Tech

0.00
(1.38)

0.00
(0.81)

0.01***
(3.43)

−0.02***
(−5.91)

0.00
(0.73)

0.01*
(1.86)

−0.00
(−0.53)

0.00
(0.08)

−0.01***
(−2.69)

0.00
(1.08)

−0.00
(−1.25)

0.00
(0.10)

−0.00
(−1.20)

−0.00
(−0.01)

0.00
(0.03)

0.00
(0.91)

0.00
(1.16)

288,012

Drugs

−0.05
(−0.20)

−0.18
(−0.64)

0.99**
(2.51)

−0.27
(−0.83)

0.01
(0.03)

1.15***
(2.78)

−0.56*
(−1.85)

−0.37
(−1.19)

0.32
(0.61)

0.93*
(1.81)

−0.99***
(−2.91)

0.38
(1.13)

−1.57***
(−4.42)

−0.57
(−1.63)

0.49
(0.99)

0.66
(1.29)

−0.55*
(−1.70)

288,012

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

betas at the fund level, as well as higher than average book-to-market
ratio at the stock level. The ‘‘discount to intrinsic value’’ attribute may
also be reflected in the fact that these funds buy firms with higher share
repurchases, potentially indicating undervaluation.

Long term. Funds in this SPG claim to be searching for long term invest-
ment opportunities, or companies with long term growth potential. In
the data, funds implementing this strategy tend to be older and have
lower turnover ratios. The stock they hold have lower than average
book-to-market ratios, both at the fund level and at the stock level
(indicting a growth style tilt). They tend to avoid mature industries
such as Utilities and Banks. Instead, they hold companies with higher
intangibles (which includes capitalized R&D), higher cash, and lower
dividend yields (greater retained earnings, typically used to grow the
firm).

Fixed income. The Fixed Income SPG is distinguished by an emphasis on
bonds as a secondary asset class. Consistent with this emphasis, we find
funds in this SPG to have the lowest percentage of holdings in common
stock, and the highest holdings in cash.

Derivatives:. Funds in this SPG discuss the use of derivatives (partic-
ularly options and futures) and short selling to enhance their port-
folio return. Unfortunately, we do not observe derivative positions
in our dataset and are thus unable to validate this SPG using the
narrative/descriptive approach.

Quantitative. Funds in this group are significantly younger and smaller,
with higher turnover ratio and lower expense ratio. This confirms
the findings of Abis (2022), who identifies quantitative funds using a
different methodology (supervised machine learning). We also expect
Quantitative funds to make greater use of trend-following strategies
and hold stocks of more companies at a time, signifying their greater
information-processing capabilities. Both of these expectations are val-
idated by the data: funds in this SPG have higher momentum betas and
hold stocks of more companies than other funds.

Fundamental. The Fundamental SPG is comprised of funds that engage
in bottom-up, fundamental research on individual companies. As such,
we would not expect any particular tilts in industry composition, risk
factor loadings or stock characteristics. Funds in this peer group can be
seen as generic traditional investment managers. Consistent with this

27 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.4
Traditional Stock Characteristics by SPG: This table reports differences between various average stock characteristics within a particular
Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the average across all other SPGs. The differences are estimated in separate regressions of fund-level average
stock characteristics on dummy variables for each SPG (see Appendix D), controlling for fund age, log assets, expense ratio, turnover ratio,
monthly fund flows, monthly fund flow volatility, and month as well as fund family fixed effects. All non-binary independent variables are
demeaned. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and month.

MarketBeta

MarketCap

BookToMkt

Momentum

Investment

Profitability

LargeCap

Fundmntl

ProdServ

Dividends

Deriv

CompAdv

Defensive

Quantit

SmallCap

LongTerm

PERatio

Foreign(ADR)

MidCap

IntrValue

FixedInc

Tax

Foreign(EM)

Obs

−0.942**
(−2.03)

0.618
(1.17)

0.843
(1.09)

−2.774***
(−4.28)

0.796
(0.99)

−0.0285
(−0.04)

−0.825
(−1.25)

−0.247
(−0.38)

2.153**
(2.41)

0.626
(0.72)

−0.236
(−0.27)

1.428*
(1.71)

0.249
(0.35)

−1.332
(−1.26)

0.114
(0.13)

1.240
(1.40)

−1.173
(−1.27)

288,012

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

7.372**
(2.47)

−4.409
(−1.36)

−14.96***
(−3.82)

38.89***
(10.74)

7.771**
(2.08)

6.995
(1.40)

5.265
(1.64)

9.875**
(2.22)

−68.46***
(−18.03)

5.138
(1.11)

−2.696
(−0.51)

1.856
(0.39)

−12.88***
(−3.40)

13.17***
(2.81)

2.770
(0.70)

18.27***
(3.08)

−10.12*
(−1.93)

288,012

−0.0126
(−0.13)

0.113
(1.09)

−0.337***
(−3.01)

0.763***
(5.60)

0.118
(1.02)

−0.817***
(−5.50)

0.0531
(0.56)

0.0675
(0.56)

0.350*
(1.76)

−0.408***
(−2.63)

0.0336
(0.26)

−0.0654
(−0.34)

−0.156
(−0.69)

0.287**
(2.04)

0.101
(0.89)

0.0109
(0.06)

−0.204
(−1.62)

288,012

−0.935
(−1.03)

1.562*
(1.68)

6.930***
(4.27)

−10.61***
(−6.48)

−1.397
(−1.13)

3.233**
(2.31)

−2.519**
(−2.27)

1.021
(0.73)

5.071***
(3.36)

0.562
(0.38)

−1.647
(−1.02)

3.049**
(2.23)

0.335
(0.29)

−7.736***
(−6.64)

−2.037*
(−1.69)

1.271
(0.72)

1.690
(1.35)

288,012

−0.492
(−0.75)

−0.296
(−0.55)

2.542***
(2.73)

−2.195***
(−3.80)

0.502
(0.63)

−0.420
(−0.53)

−0.530
(−0.87)

−2.325***
(−4.68)

5.652***
(4.45)

0.912
(0.77)

−0.569
(−0.62)

0.460
(0.70)

−1.184**
(−2.30)

−2.803***
(−3.58)

−0.132
(−0.15)

−0.348
(−0.30)

0.466
(0.83)

288,012

0.552
(0.60)

−0.715
(−0.73)

4.726***
(4.17)

−7.378***
(−7.89)

−1.820
(−1.34)

7.258***
(5.79)

0.341
(0.32)

−0.447
(−0.41)

−2.402
(−1.46)

2.421
(1.56)

−1.198
(−0.84)

1.518
(1.10)

3.009**
(2.45)

−3.813***
(−2.94)

−3.458**
(−2.39)

−1.022
(−0.64)

0.610
(0.41)

288,012

intuition, we do not observe large differences between funds in this
SPG and funds outside this SPG.

Defensive.
In general, ‘‘defensive’’ strategies can mean either safer asset
classes or defensive industries—the word cloud indicates that this SPG
focuses on the former, specifically money market and other short term
securities. The text generally permits managers to use these cash-like
securities to reduce risk in adverse market conditions. In line with this
objective, our results show that these funds hold a smaller fraction of
their assets in common stock. The funds also have a lower than average
market beta.

Tax. This SPG is characterized by tax-management strategies that
explicitly aim to reduce the tax burden to the end investor through
lower distributions. This strategy is difficult to assess using the simple
characteristics we report in this paper, as it depends on the timing of
sales relative to accrued capital gains. We note, however, that the Tax
SPG holds much less of its assets in cash than other funds, which may
correlate with lower taxable distributions.

Dividends. The ‘‘Dividends’’ group arguably has the most straightfor-
ward strategy and the clearest ex-ante expectations for investors: funds

in this SPG should try to maximize dividend distributions. Accordingly,
we find that these funds hold stocks with (by far) the highest dividend
yield among all SPGs. The funds implementing this strategy tend to
charge lower fees and have lower turnover ratios. The companies they
hold are typical high-dividend firms: they are larger and older, have
lower investment, and R&D expenses, and hold less cash (plausibly due
to higher payout ratios). Portfolios are tilted towards high-dividend
industries such as Utilities, Telecoms, and Banks; and tilted away from
the Tech industry.

PE ratio. The use of the price-earnings ratio in security valuation is
the common theme among funds in this SPG, who claim to look for
companies whose prices are low relative to the prices implied by PE
multiples for similar firms. This SPG also contains funds who use the
PE ratio to identify ‘‘value’’ firms (i.e., those with low PE ratios). This
is consistent with our finding that funds in this SPG have higher than
average HML betas (though not higher book-to-market ratios at the
stock level). Overall, our analysis for this SPG is limited.

28 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.5
Balance Sheet Variables by SPG: This table reports differences between average balance sheet characteristics of fund holdings within a particular
Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the average across all other SPGs. These differences are estimated in separate regressions of the dependent
variables on dummies for each SPG (see Appendix D), controlling for fund age, log assets, expense ratio, turnover ratio, monthly fund flows,
monthly fund flow volatility, and month as well as fund family fixed effects. All non-binary independent variables are demeaned. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by fund and month.

CurrAsts

Invent.

NonPrfAst

PP&E

LargeCap

Fundmntl

ProdServ

Dividends

Deriv

CompAdv

Defensive

Quantit

SmallCap

LongTerm

PERatio

Foreign(ADR)

MidCap

IntrValue

FixedInc

Tax

Foreign(EM)

−0.05
(−0.03)

−0.72
(−0.49)

13.88***
(7.54)

−20.09***
(−12.05)

−2.20
(−1.35)

8.99***
(4.43)

−2.00
(−1.23)

−5.96***
(−3.53)

13.13***
(6.27)

4.57**
(2.04)

−4.20*
(−1.94)

1.51
(0.73)

1.16
(0.64)

−9.28***
(−4.61)

−2.16
(−1.12)

−4.10*
(−1.88)

3.09
(1.37)

0.47
(0.59)

0.26
(0.42)

−0.95
(−1.27)

−2.83***
(−3.30)

−0.24
(−0.30)

−0.03
(−0.03)

0.27
(0.25)

2.74***
(3.59)

2.24**
(1.99)

1.24
(1.13)

2.80**
(2.48)

−0.55
(−0.67)

0.10
(0.11)

−2.65**
(−2.34)

−1.80*
(−1.74)

−1.27
(−1.22)

−1.90
(−1.58)

−0.46
(−1.40)

1.10**
(2.53)

−0.96**
(−2.28)

0.98**
(2.53)

−0.42
(−0.79)

−1.94***
(−3.61)

1.44*
(1.86)

−0.03
(−0.06)

1.77***
(2.92)

−1.61***
(−3.35)

0.92*
(1.69)

−0.22
(−0.36)

−2.35***
(−4.78)

1.24
(1.50)

1.11*
(1.76)

−0.64
(−1.41)

−0.15
(−0.22)

Obs

288,012

288,012

288,012

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

−1.42
(−1.33)

1.03
(0.89)

−1.27
(−0.84)

1.72
(1.33)

0.77
(0.67)

−6.17***
(−3.82)

−2.50*
(−1.76)

0.44
(0.37)

6.30***
(3.62)

−2.40
(−1.31)

2.58
(1.38)

−0.08
(−0.05)

3.32*
(1.94)

−4.22**
(−2.08)

1.20
(0.81)

1.34
(0.61)

−0.11
(−0.06)

288,012

Intang.

0.78
(0.60)

−1.75
(−1.27)

5.25***
(3.48)

−4.54***
(−3.24)

−2.87*
(−1.73)

9.09***
(4.53)

0.21
(0.14)

−8.78***
(−4.94)

−11.08***
(−5.93)

4.83**
(2.40)

−2.46
(−1.35)

0.18
(0.10)

13.10***
(6.06)

5.47**
(2.10)

−3.80**
(−2.19)

−4.68**
(−2.38)

2.36
(0.97)

AstGrw

−0.24
(−0.52)

0.66
(1.12)

4.15***
(4.85)

−6.18***
(−7.37)

−1.14**
(−1.99)

2.22***
(3.01)

−0.86
(−1.33)

−2.63***
(−4.34)

3.15***
(3.19)

1.21
(1.49)

−0.56
(−0.63)

2.23***
(2.97)

−0.27
(−0.37)

−3.82***
(−5.41)

−0.41
(−0.47)

0.31
(0.36)

1.39**
(1.98)

Cash

−0.23
(−0.18)

−0.79
(−0.55)

11.83***
(6.07)

−14.61***
(−9.32)

−0.72
(−0.40)

8.13***
(3.59)

−1.80
(−1.11)

−5.30***
(−3.38)

9.17***
(3.85)

4.83**
(2.04)

−5.80***
(−3.04)

2.40
(1.22)

−5.31***
(−3.11)

−5.77***
(−2.63)

−0.58
(−0.30)

−1.24
(−0.56)

3.53*
(1.69)

288,012

288,012

288,012

New products & services. Funds in this SPG focus on companies with
new or innovative product lines, and new or rapidly changing tech-
nologies. Consistent with this focus, funds in this SPG tend to avoid
stable industries such as utilities, telecoms, and banks, while holding a
significantly greater fraction of stocks from innovative industries such
as technology and pharmaceuticals (drugs). The funds implementing
this strategy charge higher fees and have higher turnover ratios. The
firms they hold have higher levels of investment and R&D expenditure,
higher asset growth, and lower dividend yield, as would be expected
for companies introducing new products and services.

Foreign. The two Foreign SPGs — Emerging Markets (EM) and American

Depository Receipts (ADR) — represent quite different strategies. While

the former is explicitly focused on buying stocks of foreign companies,

usually in emerging markets, the latter strategy appears to simply

indicate a larger investment opportunity set, where funds are permitted

(but not required) to hold ADRs. The characteristics data are consistent

with this interpretation: Foreign (EM) funds hold a higher fraction of

both ADRs and foreign-incorporated firms in their portfolios, compared

to all other funds. However, there are no significant differences for

Foreign (ADR) funds.

Competitive advantage. According to the text, the two defining at-
tributes of this SPG are companies with a sustainable competitive
advantage and those with a strong balance sheet. Consistent with
both of these attributes, we find that funds in this SPG tend to hold
companies with higher than average profitability (highest among all
SPGs) and companies with lower levels of debt (lowest among all SPGs)
and lower leverage.

While we are not able to measure every relevant characteristic

associated with the various strategies — derivative and bond positions,

for example — we do not find any inconsistencies among the large set

of characteristics that we are able to measure, and in most cases the

measured characteristics directly affirm the text. Overall, we conclude

that fund characteristics are broadly consistent with the investment

approaches described in the text.

29 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.6
Additional Balance Sheet and Income Statement Variables by SPG: This table reports differences between average characteristics of fund
holdings within a particular Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the average across all other SPGs. These differences are estimated in separate
regressions of the dependent variables on dummies for each SPG (see Appendix D), controlling for fund age, log assets, expense ratio, turnover
ratio, monthly fund flows, monthly fund flow volatility, and month as well as fund family fixed effects. All non-binary independent variables
are demeaned. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and month.

LargeCap

Fundmntl

ProdServ

Dividends

Deriv

CompAdv

Defensive

Quantit

SmallCap

LongTerm

PERatio

Foreign(ADR)

MidCap

IntrValue

FixedInc

Tax

Foreign(EM)

CurrLiab

0.97
(1.14)

−1.44*
(−1.68)

4.69***
(4.62)

−5.69***
(−5.78)

−0.22
(−0.22)

4.39***
(4.43)

−0.50
(−0.50)

0.99
(0.90)

−2.31*
(−1.93)

1.65
(1.29)

−2.02
(−1.41)

−0.08
(−0.06)

3.05**
(2.45)

−2.48*
(−1.89)

−1.46
(−1.23)

−1.07
(−0.77)

−0.13
(−0.09)

Obs

288,012

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Levrg

0.02
(0.06)

−0.65*
(−1.75)

−2.33***
(−5.01)

2.82***
(6.16)

0.43
(0.91)

−1.24**
(−2.31)

0.88**
(2.11)

2.15***
(4.70)

DefTax

2.02
(1.21)

−1.32
(−0.72)

−7.74***
(−3.80)

19.86***
(9.05)

3.52*
(1.69)

1.08
(0.40)

−3.04
(−1.28)

7.89***
(3.61)

−2.58***
(−4.79)

−19.50***
(−9.93)

−0.09
(−0.16)

−0.05
(−0.08)

−1.09**
(−2.05)

−0.17
(−0.33)

3.05***
(3.43)

0.29
(0.60)

0.53
(0.90)

−0.37
(−0.69)

288,012

2.44
(0.95)

−0.46
(−0.17)

2.00
(0.69)

−10.15***
(−4.57)

4.55*
(1.72)

−3.03
(−1.32)

8.05**
(2.48)

−6.30**
(−2.14)

288,012

LTDebt

−2.76***
(−3.16)

−0.10
(−0.10)

−2.71**
(−2.34)

2.89***
(2.62)

−0.09
(−0.10)

−5.62***
(−4.40)

−0.77
(−0.69)

0.67
(0.64)

3.13**
(2.05)

−0.59
(−0.31)

−0.34
(−0.28)

−0.97
(−0.71)

5.48***
(4.34)

4.72**
(2.44)

3.33*
(1.88)

−2.32
(−1.59)

1.58
(1.18)

288,012

OperInc

−2.22
(−1.25)

1.60*
(1.74)

−2.20
(−1.54)

2.92***
(4.17)

−2.94
(−0.83)

−0.18
(−0.11)

−0.48
(−0.36)

4.33***
(3.46)

−4.85**
(−2.17)

0.19
(0.21)

1.50
(1.64)

0.08
(0.10)

1.59**
(2.04)

4.98
(1.56)

−0.16
(−0.15)

0.30
(0.16)

−1.56
(−1.32)

288,012

EarnGrw

−0.17
(−0.80)

0.07
(0.31)

−0.13
(−0.38)

0.28
(1.08)

0.14
(0.62)

0.25
(0.63)

0.11
(0.31)

0.19
(0.72)

−0.74
(−1.64)

0.04
(0.11)

−0.22
(−0.67)

0.18
(0.62)

0.21
(0.51)

−0.75
(−1.16)

−0.46
(−1.45)

0.51
(1.49)

0.65
(1.13)

288,012

R&D

0.04
(0.03)

−1.91*
(−1.79)

6.07**
(2.52)

−4.13***
(−3.70)

−1.34
(−1.20)

−0.59
(−0.35)

−0.04
(−0.02)

−3.40***
(−3.48)

7.54**
(2.48)

2.51
(0.97)

−0.76
(−0.38)

0.99
(0.49)

−2.10**
(−2.24)

−4.99***
(−2.98)

0.98
(0.49)

1.05
(0.35)

−0.68
(−0.71)

288,012

30 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.7
Security Market Characteristics by SPG: This table reports differences between average market characteristics of securities
held by funds within a particular Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the average across all other SPGs. These differences are
estimated in separate regressions of the dependent variables on dummies for each SPG (see Appendix D), controlling for fund
age, log assets, expense ratio, turnover ratio, monthly fund flows, monthly fund flow volatility, and month as well as fund
family fixed effects. All non-binary independent variables are demeaned. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and
month.

LargeCap

Fundmntl

ProdServ

Dividends

Deriv

CompAdv

Defensive

Quantit

SmallCap

LongTerm

PERatio

Foreign(ADR)

MidCap

IntrValue

FixedInc

Tax

Foreign(EM)

Obs

DivYield

−0.23*
(−1.74)

−0.16
(−1.14)

−0.74***
(−4.03)

3.48***
(10.00)

0.36
(1.52)

−0.83***
(−4.34)

0.27*
(1.70)

0.12
(0.69)

−1.06***
(−6.26)

−0.66**
(−2.35)

0.01
(0.07)

−0.46**
(−1.97)

−0.58**
(−2.33)

0.49*
(1.94)

0.36
(1.36)

0.11
(0.45)

−0.50*
(−1.93)

288,012

Issuance

Repurchase

0.03
(0.07)

0.17
(0.43)

−1.49***
(−3.63)

3.01***
(6.35)

0.10
(0.20)

−1.32**
(−2.12)

0.55
(1.23)

2.23***
(3.43)

−2.82***
(−4.53)

0.71
(1.32)

−0.05
(−0.09)

0.24
(0.40)

−1.42**
(−2.08)

0.18
(0.24)

−0.35
(−0.50)

1.79***
(2.65)

−1.61**
(−2.32)

288,012

2.36**
(2.29)

−1.75
(−1.39)

−4.91***
(−3.59)

5.07***
(4.07)

1.90
(1.29)

−3.60**
(−2.08)

1.93*
(1.69)

11.79***
(6.83)

−19.07***
(−11.80)

−1.07
(−0.71)

−0.21
(−0.12)

1.14
(0.68)

0.18
(0.12)

10.80***
(5.00)

0.51
(0.38)

4.87**
(2.32)

−6.02***
(−3.02)

288,012

Illiquid

0.00
(0.33)

−0.00
(−0.33)

−0.00*
(−1.92)

0.01**
(2.40)

−0.00
(−1.28)

−0.01**
(−2.48)

0.00
(0.39)

0.01**
(2.14)

−0.01**
(−1.98)

−0.00
(−0.35)

0.00
(0.77)

0.00
(0.69)

−0.00
(−0.68)

−0.00
(−0.42)

0.01
(1.47)

−0.00
(−1.42)

−0.00
(−1.19)

288,012

FirmAge

5.49**
(2.05)

−5.21
(−1.64)

−23.29***
(−6.36)

61.97***
(15.40)

8.23**
(2.16)

−11.85***
(−2.72)

2.11
(0.70)

17.54***
(4.19)

−53.29***
(−16.02)

−3.30
(−0.74)

9.79*
(1.96)

−4.14
(−0.80)

−18.66***
(−4.78)

15.32***
(3.08)

3.34
(0.84)

17.78***
(3.22)

−20.42***
(−4.12)

288,012

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

31 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.8
Holdings Characteristics by SPG: This table reports differences between average fund holdings characteristics for a particular
Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the average across all other SPGs. These differences are estimated in separate regressions
of the dependent variables on dummies for each SPG (see Appendix D), controlling for fund age, log assets, expense ratio,
turnover ratio, monthly fund flows, monthly fund flow volatility, and month as well as fund family fixed effects. All non-binary
independent variables are demeaned. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and month.

LargeCap

Fundmntl

ProdServ

Dividends

Deriv

CompAdv

Defensive

Quantit

SmallCap

LongTerm

PERatio

Foreign(ADR)

MidCap

IntrValue

FixedInc

Tax

Foreign(EM)

Obs

ADR%

−0.02
(−0.38)

−0.09
(−1.15)

−0.00
(−0.05)

0.95***
(6.40)

0.02
(0.23)

−0.03
(−0.31)

0.11
(1.17)

−0.65***
(−7.95)

−0.36***
(−4.26)

0.02
(0.20)

−0.22**
(−2.08)

0.03
(0.18)

−0.20
(−1.32)

0.10
(0.67)

−0.09
(−0.87)

0.12
(0.84)

0.46***
(3.30)

288,012

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

ForeignInc

NumStocks

0.06
(0.34)

0.06
(0.24)

0.15
(0.49)

0.37
(1.39)

0.18
(0.67)

0.13
(0.47)

0.39*
(1.68)

−1.81***
(−7.54)

−0.88***
(−2.91)

−0.22
(−0.72)

−0.34
(−1.03)

0.46
(1.45)

0.51
(1.49)

0.50
(1.62)

−0.03
(−0.10)

−0.29
(−0.94)

1.08***
(2.60)

288,012

−2.05
(−0.66)

−2.61
(−0.98)

−1.42
(−0.71)

−6.47*
(−1.75)

3.52
(0.99)

−13.55***
(−5.61)

−3.48*
(−1.67)

18.93***
(4.89)

40.14***
(4.79)

−11.17*
(−1.91)

−4.50
(−1.30)

−4.18**
(−2.02)

−6.47
(−1.54)

−13.87***
(−7.47)

−1.43
(−0.65)

15.03
(1.62)

−8.30**
(−2.13)

288,012

Cash%

2.45
(1.00)

0.64
(0.28)

−2.34
(−0.82)

−4.02
(−1.30)

2.23
(0.55)

0.98
(0.22)

3.40
(1.00)

−15.44***
(−4.23)

3.45
(1.15)

−1.33
(−0.33)

−1.03
(−0.24)

−3.89
(−1.32)

−3.47
(−1.37)

3.66
(0.84)

21.33***
(4.40)

−12.45***
(−3.34)

7.60*
(1.81)

275,825

CommStk%

4.48*
(1.71)

2.05
(0.72)

7.48**
(2.24)

−23.36***
(−4.80)

−5.59
(−1.09)

8.85*
(1.81)

−9.22**
(−2.36)

25.16***
(6.67)

−3.90
(−1.12)

7.61*
(1.66)

7.39*
(1.73)

4.31
(1.09)

6.19*
(1.86)

−12.79**
(−2.01)

−26.77***
(−4.04)

11.11**
(2.54)

−16.74**
(−2.01)

275,825

32 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table D.9
Fund Performance by SPG: This table reports differences between average fund alphas within a particular Strategy Peer Group (SPG) and the
average across all other SPGs. Coefficients are estimated in separate regressions of the dependent vars (log of fund age, log of TNA, expense
ratio, turnover ratio, post-fee FFC6 Alpha, and post-fee FFC6 Value Added) on dummies for each SPG (see Appendix D). Also shown are the
overall averages across the full sample. We include month and fund family fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered by fund and
month.

Raw Return

SPG Alpha

CAPM Alpha

FFC6 Alpha

DGTW Alpha

HKP Alpha

0.00342
(0.30)

0.0144
(1.45)

0.00789
(0.43)

−0.0316
(−1.20)

−0.00603
(−0.41)

0.0264
(1.41)

0.0102
(0.52)

−0.0302
(−1.57)

−0.00922
(−0.52)

−0.0104
(−0.54)

0.00354
(0.19)

0.00125
(0.07)

0.000426
(0.02)

−0.0132
(−0.58)

0.00681
(0.35)

0.00397
(0.24)

0.0169
(0.72)

−0.0133
(−0.90)

−0.0115
(−0.85)

−0.0184
(−0.63)

0.0437
(1.11)

−0.0542***
(−2.74)

0.0157
(0.56)

−0.00183
(−0.08)

0.0178
(0.65)

0.00634
(0.21)

−0.0177
(−0.77)

0.0509*
(1.71)

−0.0225
(−1.37)

0.0140
(0.61)

0.0221
(0.81)

−0.0223
(−0.87)

−0.0359
(−1.51)

0.0432
(1.35)

−0.101***
(−47.48)

254,428

−0.0397***
(−24.54)

266,803

0.000502
(0.04)

−0.00181
(−0.17)

−0.0315
(−1.40)

0.0155
(0.47)

−0.0470**
(−2.45)

0.0278
(1.30)

−0.0124
(−0.70)

0.00752
(0.34)

−0.0150
(−0.95)

0.0166
(0.83)

0.0424*
(1.80)

0.00790
(0.52)

0.0161
(1.03)

−0.00457
(−0.20)

−0.00919
(−0.40)

−0.0177
(−1.00)

0.0110
(0.45)

−0.00299**
(−2.48)

264,086

LargeCap

Fundamental

ProdServ

Dividends

Derivatives

CompAdv

Defensive

Quantitative

SmallCap

LongTerm

PERatio

ForeignADR

MidCap

IntrValue

FixedIncome

Tax

ForeignEM

Overall

Obs

−0.0136
(−0.90)

−0.0147
(−0.93)

−0.0199
(−0.46)

0.00101
(0.02)

−0.0669**
(−2.22)

0.0161
(0.44)

0.00355
(0.12)

−0.0276
(−0.84)

0.0746
(1.11)

−0.00331
(−0.12)

0.0814**
(2.38)

−0.00854
(−0.44)

0.0705**
(2.23)

−0.00345
(−0.09)

−0.0217
(−0.69)

−0.100***
(−3.01)

0.0365
(1.12)

0.629***
(239.03)

266,803

t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

−0.0140
(−1.00)

−0.00242
(−0.23)

0.0318
(1.55)

−0.00385
(−0.19)

0.0143
(0.82)

−0.00307
(−0.16)

0.0205
(0.88)

−0.0310*
(−1.83)

−0.0367**
(−2.05)

−0.00649
(−0.32)

0.0548*
(1.86)

−0.00168
(−0.10)

0.0162
(1.19)

0.000642
(0.03)

0.0145
(0.60)

−0.0412**
(−2.48)

0.00774
(0.37)

0.000482
(0.22)

266,803

−0.0120
(−0.87)

−0.0241*
(−1.80)

−0.00587
(−0.17)

0.0191
(0.35)

−0.00326
(−0.13)

0.0264
(0.80)

−0.0243
(−0.99)

−0.00879
(−0.30)

−0.0112
(−0.18)

−0.00680
(−0.26)

0.0405
(1.45)

0.00897
(0.45)

0.0513*
(1.67)

0.0114
(0.30)

0.00701
(0.27)

−0.0493*
(−1.80)

0.00718
(0.22)

−0.0808***
(−39.03)

254,428

33 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Appendix E. Pairwise analysis

To allow for more strict control variables, we compute our diver-
gence measure, as well as differences between the first four return
moments, for each pair of funds in the full sample, every month.

𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐷𝐺𝑇 𝑊𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+

𝛽3𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐹 𝐹 3𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Table E.2
In this table we regress pairwise absolute
Pairwise Return Moment Distances:
return moment differences (mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis) on a
dummy for whether the funds are grouped into the same SPG (see Appendix E).
Moments are estimated over the subsequent 24 months. Regressions control for past
moment differences (previous 24 months), fund-level characteristic differences (log
assets, log age, expense ratio, turnover ratio, flows, flow volatility) and co-membership
in alternative peer groups, based on holdings characteristics (Daniel et al. 1997) and
risk factor loadings (Fama and French, 1993). All specifications include month fixed
effects, and standard errors are clustered by fund and month.

𝜂𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝑡;

(E.1)

Ret. Mean

Ret. Std.

Ret. Skew.

Ret. Kurt.

𝑀𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+(1,24) = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐷𝐺𝑇 𝑊𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+
𝛽3𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐹 𝐹 3𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑀𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−(24,1)+

Same SPG

Same DGTW

𝛾𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑗,𝑡.

(E.2)

Same FF3

𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is defined as in Eq. (2), except the average portfolio
weights ̄𝑤𝐺
𝑖,𝑡 are replaced with the weights of another individual fund
𝑖. 𝑀𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+(1,24) is the absolute difference (between fund 𝑖 and
fund 𝑗, in month 𝑡) in each moment of the distribution of future
24-months rolling returns, for 𝑀𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 ∈ [𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛, 𝑆𝑡𝐷𝑒𝑣, 𝑆𝑘𝑒𝑤𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠,
𝐾𝑢𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑠]. The variables denoted by 𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 (for 𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟 =
[𝑆𝑃 𝐺, 𝐷𝐺𝑇 𝑊 , 𝐹 𝐹 3]) are indicator variables that take a value of 1 if
funds 𝑖 and 𝑗 are assigned to the same peer group, and 0 otherwise.
The three peer groups are, respectively, (i) our text-based strategy
peer groups (𝑆𝑃 𝐺𝑠); (ii) Daniel et al. (1997) holdings-based peer
groups, constructed from terciles of market capitalization, book-to-
market ratio, and past returns (𝐷𝐺𝑇 𝑊 ); and (iii) peer groups con-
structed using funds’ exposures to the Fama–French 3-factor model
(𝐹 𝐹 3). In both regressions, we control for differences in the same
fund-level control variables as in Section 3.1.1 (represented here by
𝑋𝑖,𝑗,𝑡), as well as the past portfolio weight divergences and moment
differences (𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1 and 𝑀𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐷𝑖𝑓 𝑓𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−(24,1), respectively).
We also include month (𝜂𝑡) fixed-effects, and cluster standard errors
at the fund and month level.

The moment-similarity regressions have a predictive interpretation:
a negative and significant 𝛽1 indicates that belonging to the same SPG
today correlates with lower differences (higher similarity) in future
returns. The portfolio weight divergence regression is run contempo-
raneously, hence a negative and significant 𝛽1 indicates that funds
belonging to the same SPG also have more similar holdings. Since
we control for alternative peer group co-membership, a positive and
significant 𝛽1 indicates that prospectuses have incremental predictive
power for holdings and return similarities relative to traditional factors
or characteristic portfolios.

Table E.1
Pairwise Strategy Divergence: This table reports the results of regressing pairwise
portfolio weight divergence on a dummy variable for whether the two funds are
grouped into the same SPG (see Appendix E). The regressions control
for past
differences in fund-level characteristics (log assets, log age, expense ratio, turnover
ratio, net flows, net flow volatility), past portfolio weight divergence, and dummies
for co-membership in alternative peer groups, based on holdings characteristics (Daniel
et al. 1997) and risk factor loadings (Fama and French, 1993). All specifications include
month fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by fund and month.

Same SPG

Same DGTW

Same FF3

Controls
FixedEffects
Clustering
R2
Observations

Portfolio Weight Divergence

−0.0188***
(−12.20)

−0.0172***
(−11.59)
−0.174***
(−22.66)

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.0354
159681454

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.0739
159681454

−0.0175***
(−11.79)

−0.175***
(−17.22)

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.0729
159681454

−0.0161***
(−11.20)
−0.159***
(−24.09)
−0.159***
(−17.04)

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.105
159681454

−0.00731***
(−4.35)
−0.0481***
(−9.84)
−0.0414***
(−8.69)

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.0870
87 938 298

−0.0431***
(−8.39)
−0.216***
(−19.39)
−0.197***
(−18.31)

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.0953
87 938 298

−0.00617***
(−4.06)
−0.0425***
(−6.86)
−0.0329***
(−6.23)

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.179
87 938 298

−0.00821***
(−3.19)
−0.0692***
(−8.56)
−0.0584***
(−9.76)

Yes
Month
Fund+Month
0.150
87935610

Controls
FixedEffects
Clustering
R2
Observations

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Tables E.1 and E.2 report the results. 𝛽1 is always negative and sta-
tistically significant, even when controlling for alternative peer groups.
The magnitudes of the coefficients on the 𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑆𝑃 𝐺 indicator vari-
able are between 6 and 10 times smaller than the coefficients on the
𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐷𝐺𝑇 𝑊 or 𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐹 𝐹 3 indicator variables. This is not surprising.
Indeed, the alternative peer groups are constructed directly from funds’
holdings, which implies that they will mechanically have explanatory
power for holdings similarities, and will
likely predict similarities
in returns. Instead, it is surprising that the text-based SPGs, which
are constructed independently from funds’ holdings or returns, have
any incremental explanatory power at all. These results indicate the
SPGs capture a novel dimension of similarity that is not subsumed by
traditional classifications.

References

Abis, S., 2022. Man vs. Machine: Quantitative and discretionary equity management.

Working paper.

Abis, S., Buffa, A.M., Javadekar, A., Lines, A., 2022. Learning from prospectuses.

Working Paper.

Abrigo, M.R., Love, I., 2016. Estimation of panel vector autoregression in stata. Stat.

J. 16 (3), 778–804.

Akey, P., Robertson, A.Z., Simutin, M., 2021. Closet active management of passive

funds.

Ali, A., Chen, X., Yao, T., Yu, T., 2020. Can mutual funds profit from post earnings
announcement drift? The role of competition. J. Bank. Financ. 114, 105774.
Allen, F., Bernardo, A.E., Welch, I., 2000. A theory of dividends based on tax clienteles.

J. Finance 55 (6), 2499–2536.

Alvarez, J., Arellano, M., 2003. The time series and cross-section asymptotics of

dynamic panel data estimators. Econometrica 71 (4), 1121–1159.

Angrist, J.D., Pischke, J.S., 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s

Companion. Princeton University Press.

Arellano, M., Bover, O., 1995. Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of

error-components models. J. Econometrics 68 (1), 29–51.

Barber, B.M., Huang, X., Odean, T., 2016. Which factors matter to investors? Evidence

from mutual fund flows. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (10), 2600–2642.

Barber, B.M., Odean, T., Zheng, L., 2005. Out of sight, out of mind: The effects of

expenses on mutual fund flows. J. Bus. 78 (6), 2095–2120.

Berk, J.B., van Binsbergen, J.H., 2015. Measuring skill in the mutual fund industry. J.

Financ. Econ. 118 (1), 1–20.

Berk, J.B., Van Binsbergen, J.H., 2016. Assessing asset pricing models using revealed

preference. J. Financ. Econ. 119 (1), 1–23.

Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I., 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn.

Res. 3, 993–1022.

Brown, S.J., Goetzmann, W.N., 1997. Mutual fund styles. J. Financ. Econ. 43 (3),

373–399.

Chan, L.K., Chen, H.L., Lakonishok, J., 2002. On mutual fund investment styles. Rev.

t statistics in parentheses; * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Financ. Stud. 15 (5), 1407–1437.

Chan, L.K., Dimmock, S.G., Lakonishok, J., 2009. Benchmarking money manager

performance: Issues and evidence. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (11), 4553–4599.

34 

S. Abis and A. Lines

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103948 

Chevalier, J., Ellison, G., 1997. Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives.

Jain, P.C., Wu, J.S., 2000. Truth in mutual fund advertising: Evidence on future

J. Political Econ. 105 (6), 1167–1200.

performance and fund flows. J. Finance 55 (2), 937–958.

Christoffersen, S.E., Evans, R., Musto, D.K., 2013. What do consumers’ fund flows
maximize? Evidence from their brokers’ incentives. J. Finance 68 (1), 201–235.
Cohen, R.B., Coval, J.D., Pástor, L., 2005. Judging fund managers by the company they

Kacperczyk, M., Sialm, C., Zheng, L., 2008. Unobserved actions of mutual funds. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 21 (6), 2379–2416.

Khorana, A., Servaes, H., 2012. What drives market share in the mutual

fund

keep. J. Finance 60 (3), 1057–1096.

industry? Rev. Financ. 16 (1), 81–113.

Cooper, M.J., Gulen, H., Rau, P.R., 2005. Changing names with style: Mutual fund
name changes and their effects on fund flows. J. Finance 60 (6), 2825–2858.
Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1997. Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. J. Finance 52 (3), 1035–1058.
Duffie, D., 2010. Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital.

J. Finance 65 (4), 1237–1267.

Khorana, A., Servaes, H., Tufano, P., 2009. Mutual fund fees around the world. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 22 (3), 1279–1310.

Kincaid, P.J., Fishburne, R.P., Rogers, R.L.J., Chissom, B.S., 1975. Derivation of new
readability formulas (automated readability index, fox count and flesch reading
ease formula) for navy enlisted personel. Inst. Simul. Train. 56.

Kostovetsky, L., Warner, J.B., 2020. Measuring innovation and product differentiation:

Elton, E.J., Gruber, M.J., Busse, J.A., 2004. Are investors rational? Choices among index

Evidence from mutual funds. J. Finance 75 (2), 779–823.

funds. J. Finance 59 (1), 261–288.

Krakow, N.J., Schäfer, T., 2020. Mutual funds and risk disclosure: Information content

Evans, R.B., 2010. Mutual fund incubation. J. Finance 65 (4), 1581–1611.
Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.

of fund prospectuses. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper 20–54.

Li, S., Qiu, J., 2014. Financial product differentiation over the state space in the mutual

J. Financ. Econ. 33 (1), 3–56.

fund industry. Manage. Sci. 60 (2), 508–520.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116

Loughran, T., McDonald, B., 2011. When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis

(1), 1–22.

Flesch, R., 1948. A new readability yardstick. J. Appl. Psychol. 32 (3), 221–233.
Gabaix, X., Koijen, R.S., 2021. In search of the origins of financial fluctuations: The
inelastic markets hypothesis. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
No. w28967.

dictionaries and 10-Ks. J. Finance 66 (1), 35–65.

Loughran, T., McDonald, B., 2020. Textual analysis in finance. Annu. Rev. Finan. Econ.

12, 357–375.

Lütkepohl, H., 2005. New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis. Springer

Science & Business Media.

Gil-Bazo, J., Ruiz-Verdú, P., 2009. The relation between price and performance in the

Mitchell, M., Pedersen, L.H., Pulvino, T., 2007. Slow moving capital. Amer. Econ. Rev.

mutual fund industry. J. Finance 64 (5), 2153–2183.

97 (2), 215–220.

Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., 1989. Mutual fund performance: An analysis of quarterly

Reuter, J., Zitzewitz, E., 2006. Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias in the

portfolio holdings. J. Bus. 393–416.

financial media. Q. J. Econ. 121 (1), 197–227.

Guercio, D.D., Reuter, J., 2014. Mutual fund performance and the incentive to generate

Roussanov, N., Ruan, H., Wei, Y., 2021. Marketing mutual funds. Rev. Financ. Stud.

alpha. J. Finance 69 (4), 1673–1704.

34 (6), 3045–3094.

Hansen, L.P., 1982. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments

Sensoy, B.A., 2009. Performance evaluation and self-designated benchmark indexes in

estimators. Econometrica 1029–1054.

the mutual fund industry. J. Financ. Econ. 92 (1), 25–39.

Hartzmark, S.M., Solomon, D.H., 2019. The dividend disconnect. J. Finance 74 (5),

Sharpe, W.F., 1988. Determining a fund’s effective asset mix. Invest. Manag. Rev. 2

2153–2199.

(6), 59–69.

He, Z., Xiong, W., 2013. Delegated asset management, investment mandates, and capital

Sharpe, W.F., 1992. Asset allocation: Management style and performance measurement.

immobility. J. Financ. Econ. 107 (2), 239–258.

J. Portf. Manag. 18 (2), 7–19.

Hoberg, G., Kumar, N., Prabhala, N., 2018. Mutual fund competition, managerial skill,

Sheng, J., Xu, N., Zheng, L., 2021. Do mutual funds walk the talk? A textual analysis

and alpha persistence. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (5), 1896–1929.

of risk disclosure by mutual funds. Working Paper.

Holtz-Eakin, D., Newey, W., Rosen, H.S., 1988. Estimating vector autoregressions with

Shive, S., Yun, H., 2013. Are mutual funds sitting ducks? J. Financ. Econ. 107.1,

panel data. Econometrica 1371–1395.

220–237.

Hortacsu, A., Syverson, C., 2004. Product differentiation, search costs, and competition
in the mutual fund industry: A case study of SP 500 index funds. Q. J. Econ. 119
(2), 403–456.

Sims, C.A., 1980. Macroeconomics and reality. Econometrica 1–48.
Sirri, E.R., Tufano, P., 1998. Costly search and mutual fund flows. J. Finance 53 (5),

1589–1622.

Hunter, D., Kandel, E., Kandel, S., Wermers, R., 2014. Mutual fund performance

Stoughton, N.M., Wu, Y., Zechner, J., 2011. Intermediated investment management. J.

evaluation with active peer benchmarks. J. Financ. Econ. 112 (1), 1–29.

Finance 66 (3), 947–980.

Ivković, Z., Weisbenner, S., 2009. Individual investor mutual fund flows. J. Financ.

Sun, Y., 2021. Index fund entry and financial product market competition. Manage.

Econ. 92 (2), 223–237.

Sci. 67 (1), 500–523.

Wahal, S., Wang, A.Y., 2011. Competition among mutual funds. J. Financ. Econ. 99

(1), 40–59.

Zhu, Q., 2020. The missing new funds. Manage. Sci.

35 

