Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Competition, Product differentiation and Crises: Evidence from 18 million
securitized loans✩
Peter Haslag a,∗, Kandarp Srinivasan b, Anjan V. Thakor c
a Owen Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University, United States of America
b D’Amore-McKim School of Business, Northeastern University, United States of America
c Olin Business School, Washington University in St. Louis, ECGI, FTG Fellow and MIT LFE, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

RMBS sponsors contributed to the rise of new product features in securitized mortgages prior to the 2008
financial crisis. Using a regulatory shock to sponsor competition , we show securitization influences the design
of mortgage contracts, empirically demonstrating a unique, feedback loop of product differentiation from the
derived security (MBS) to the underlying asset (loans). Product differentiation in Prime MBS collateral rises
faster than that of non-prime in the early boom period (2000–2004), a strategic choice by MBS sponsors in the
face of increasing competition. At very high levels of competition, product differentiation targets non-prime
(marginal) borrowers. We develop a theoretical framework for sponsor-induced product differentiation that
explains these empirical findings.

Dataset link: Replication Program for "Competit
ion, Differentiation and Crises: Evidence from 1
8 Million Securitized Loans" (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G01
G2
K2

Keywords:
Securitization
Competition
Product differentiation
Mortgage
Financial crisis

1. Introduction

In the Schumpeterian view, the introduction of new products by
firms drives economic growth (e.g. Kogan et al. (2017)). But, this
insight need not extend to financial products, given their potential
contribution to systemic risk (e.g. Gennaioli et al., 2012, and Judge,
2012). The Global Financial Crisis (GFC) was preceded by extraordinary
growth in new products — not only mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
but also the underlying collateral. The proportion of private-label secu-
ritized loans with interest-only features was around 1.5% in 1999. That
number jumped to over 14% in 2004, representing a ten-fold increase.

These loans were a key factor that exacerbated the crisis because they
performed significantly worse relative to standard mortgages (Amromin
et al., 2018). Why was there such a high prevalence of differentiated
product features in mortgages in the years preceding the GFC?1

Two classes of explanations have been offered so far. On the de-
mand side, Garmaise (2013) and Amromin et al. (2018) attribute this
growth to borrower preferences. On the supply-side, Di Maggio et al.
(2019) and Acolin et al. (2022) argue that deregulation and originator
competition played a role. While important, these explanations are
missing a key ingredient — the role of securitization in the issuance

✩

For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank an anonymous referee, Dimitris Papanikolaou (the Editor), Rajesh Aggarwal, Andra Ghent, Benjamin
Keys, Adam Levitin, Alexander Reisz, Susan Wachter, Vincent Yao, Elena Loutskina, Anthony DeFusco, Helyoth Hessou, participants at the OCC Symposium on
Systemic Risk and Stress Testing in Banking, Financial Innovation: a threat to financial stability Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and Georgia
State University, the Fixed Income and Financial Institutions Conference at the University of South Carolina, Eastern Finance Association Annual Meeting, and
seminar participants at Northeastern University. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Hans Stoll Financial Market Research Center. All errors
are our own.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: peter.haslag@vanderbilt.edu (P. Haslag), kandarp@northeastern.edu (K. Srinivasan), thakor@wustl.edu (A.V. Thakor).

1 We define product differentiation in a mortgage as the inclusion of any of the following non-standard features: balloon payments, interest-only, negative
amortization, pay teaser, hybrid and option ARMs. We use this definition in the sense of Thakor (2012), where a differentiated financial product is one that
lacks plentiful historical data to accurately assess its risks. The lack of such data makes the financial product harder for competitors to ‘‘poach’’, because there
is greater disagreement in the market on its default probabilities.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103947
Received 18 May 2023; Received in revised form 7 September 2024; Accepted 7 September 2024

Available online 12 September 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

of non-standard contracts, because an overwhelming proportion of
these loans were sold off to MBS issuers (‘‘sponsors’’). Even more,
mortgage-backed securities themselves became increasingly differen-
tiated (complex) prior to the crisis (Ghent et al., 2017), warranting
a closer examination of this period of intense competition in secu-
ritization markets. In this paper, we study whether MBS sponsors
played a role in the growth of product differentiation in the underlying
collateral.

Two aggregate facts suggest such a role. First, the trend in non-
standard contracts closely follows the rise and fall of securitization
markets (Fig. 1 Panel A). Second, the rise in these features was first
observed in the collateral of Prime MBS, a trend that preceded that
of non-prime MBS (Fig. 1 Panel B). Neither borrower preferences nor
explanations based on lending shocks to originators (such as the 2004
OCC deregulation) can connect these facts.2 We use novel data on the
MBS securitization chain to reconcile these trends and understand how
the growth of loan-level product differentiation deepened the financial
crisis.

Building on Thakor (2012), we provide a theoretical framework
where greater competition between securitization sponsors leads to
higher mortgage-level product differentiation. The core idea is that, due
to the absence of patent protection, financial institutions have greater
incentives to escape competition (á la Aghion et al., 2005), by introduc-
ing new products with lower degrees of familiarity because these are
less likely to be imitated by competitors. The defining characteristic of
a differentiated product in Thakor (2012) is the paucity of historical
data that prevents an accurate assessment of its default probability.3
The theoretical model we develop in this paper adopts this view of
product differentiation and studies the incentives of MBS sponsors in a
competitive environment. Adding new features to mortgage contracts
makes it possible for sponsors to cater to MBS investors as well as
enables marginal borrowers – who did not qualify for mortgages offered
previously – to take mortgages. Our model generates two empirical
predictions. First, increasing competition among MBS sponsors induces
originators to issue new contracts to borrowers that are different from
existing mortgages. This sequence of events posits a striking feedback
loop of product differentiation — introduction of a derivative (MBS)
can induce changes in the underlying assets (securitized loans). Second,
the competitive threshold to warrant such differentiation is lower for
higher credit quality loans. Product differentiation brings marginal
borrowers into the market, an effect that kicks in only at sufficiently
high levels of sponsor competition.

The link between MBS issuers and loan-level product differentiation,
however, is hard to establish empirically. It is difficult to ascertain the
parent financial institution because MBS are typically issued by special
purpose vehicles. Further, increases in sponsor competition may be cor-
related with unobserved demand for non-standard loans, so the hurdle
of identification needs to be overcome. We address these gaps by merg-
ing unique, hand-collected data on the SPV’s parent company from MBS
prospectuses, with detailed information on over 18 million securitized
loans from Lewtan’s ABSNet. We measure sponsor competition within
local markets using a county-level measure (‘‘Local Sponsor HHI ’’)
defined using the subset of securitized loans made in a given county.

2 Prior research has argued that subprime credit expansion was fueled
by securitization, but product differentiation is outside the scope of these
analyses (Mian and Sufi, 2009; Nadauld and Sherlund, 2013). On the other
hand, securitization is outside the purview of research on the prevalence of
complexity in the prime segment (Garmaise, 2013; Amromin et al., 2018). For
instance, when loans with non-standard features are offered by an originating
bank, Garmaise (2013) shows that risky borrowers adversely select into such
features. Whether securitization markets themselves induce originating banks
to offer such contracts to borrowers remains unclear.

3 In the early 2000s, non-standard features introduced into the collateral
of private label MBS lacked historical precedence (Internet Appendix Figure
IA.B.1).

We exploit within-state variation in this measure arising from a supply-
side regulatory shock that differentially changed competition dynamics
for private MBS sponsors. In a dynamic difference-in-differences (DiD)
setting, we show that sponsor competition increased heterogeneously in
certain areas, leading to a corresponding increase in loan-level product
differentiation following the regulatory change.

MBS sponsors are typically financial institutions with a national
presence. Yet, we find significant cross-sectional and time-series varia-
tion in local competition (Fig. 2), a fact that we take advantage of in
our empirical tests. What explains this contrast? In RMBS prospectuses,
sponsors report the extent of (state-level) geographic diversification
in their loan pools, so this constraint induces regional competition
among national sponsors. Further, sponsors also report the specific ZIP
code with the highest concentration of loans (Internet Appendix Figure
IA.B.2), suggesting that sponsors account for the geographic distribu-
tion of loans even within a given state. To capture these localized
effects, we use a county-level competition measure. Nevertheless, we
obtain similar results using broader geographic units of aggregation.

In our baseline tests, we document an economically significant link
between increases in MBS sponsor competition and the probability
of a loan having a non-standard feature. A one standard deviation
decrease in local sponsor HHI results in an increase of 1.2–2.5 pps. in
the probability of loan-level product differentiation, translating into a
2.6–5.4 percent relative increase in the likelihood of differentiation. To
the best of our knowledge, this result is the first evidence of a feedback
loop where issuance of a differentiated derived security can induce
such features in the underlying assets. While Back (1993) provides a
theoretical analysis of such a phenomenon in options markets, there
has been no empirical evidence supporting it thus far.

Our baseline tests include fixed effects that account for time-varying
regulatory shocks at the state-level. For instance, our results cannot be
explained by differences in originator responses to the 2004 preemption
rule across states with variation in anti-predatory lending laws (Di
Maggio et al., 2019). We compare loans across demographically-similar
counties with comparable borrower demand for mortgage loans. By
using fixed effects at the sponsor level, we also account for a predispo-
sition for risk-taking that was prevalent among certain sponsors (such
as Countrywide) during the pre-crisis period. Even so, loan contracts
are offered by originators and not by the sponsors themselves. What
if the issuance of differentiated loans was a response by originators to
local demand conditions? To address this concern, we exploit the data’s
granularity to test for differences in outcomes from the same originator,
in the same region and year, but that are exposed to different levels
of sponsor competition. This empirical strategy uses fixed effects to
restrict variation within the same Originator × State × Year, accounting
for time-varying confounds at the originator level. We continue to find
robust results with a more stringent restriction on local time-varying
unobservables at the Originator × CBSA × year level. The within-
originator analysis provides credence to our claim that MBS sponsors
played a role in product differentiation of the underlying collateral.

While fixed effects can shut down confounding sources of variation,
they are less useful in isolating an identifying source of variation in
MBS sponsor competition that is plausibly exogenous. In the absence
of such variation, we may worry about reverse causality — suppose
higher borrower demand for differentiated mortgages created more
high-margin opportunities for securitizers, then such demand may have
attracted new sponsors to enter, increasing competition among them.4
To this end, in our main identification strategy, we study a regulatory

4 To the extent the level of mortgage applications in a given area reflects
borrower demand, we are already controlling for that factor. Further, our
fixed effect structure (Originator × CBSA × Year) already controls for time-
varying demand conditions at a high level of granularity. Nevertheless, it is
challenging to rule out confounding factors in the absence of an exogenous
source of variation.

2 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Fig. 1. Puzzling trends in the evolution of non-standard mortgages. This figure lays out two open questions: (a) why is activity in private securitization markets correlated with
loan-level differentiation? and (b) why does the rise of differentiation in prime MBS collateral precede that of non-Prime collateral? The aggregate evolution of non-standard
mortgages in RMBS securitization markets is tracked using a comprehensive database of over 18 million loans. In both panels, the 𝑥-axis is the year in which the loan was
securitized (i.e. the year of closing of the securitization deal). The dashed line (left axis) of Panel (a) counts the average # of non-standard features per securitized loan. The
timing of this growth coincides with the number of loans sold to private securitizers plotted in the solid line (right axis). This data comes from the HMDA disclosure on loan
purchases. In Panel (b), we show the varying rates of differentiation by type of MBS. We use the deal classification from the ABSNet database to categorize these types. Private
securitizers used more non-standard features in Prime MBS relative to non-prime MBS such as Subprime and Alt-A in the early 2000s. Differentiation refers to mortgages having
non-standard features: Hybrid ARM, Balloon, Interest Only, Negative Amortization, Pay Teaser, and Option ARMs.

change affecting securitization competition, and trace out the effects
of this shock on mortgage-level product differentiation. In 2000, the
affordable housing goals of the Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
required Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSE’s) to significantly
increase securitization in low-income areas relative to high-income
areas.5 We implement the effect of this rule in a dynamic difference-in-
differences (DiD) setting. Similar to the ‘‘crowding out’’ effect shown
in Gabriel and Rosenthal (2010), we find that the entry of GSE’s into
underserved regions had the unintended effect of encouraging private

5 The rule used census tracts to defined underserved areas. A census tract
qualifies as an underserved area if its median family income is 90% or less than
the median income of the corresponding MSA. We compute the proportion of
underserved census tracts in a county and classify counties in the 75th (25th)
percentile as low (high) income counties.

3 

securitizers to compete more in the high-income areas. As a result
of the sudden increase in private sponsor competition, we show non-
standard features significantly increased in those counties, providing
compelling evidence of the role of sponsors in inducing differentiation
in the underlying collateral. Supporting a causal interpretation, our
dynamic DiD regressions exhibit parallel trends in the pre-period, ruling
out the possibility that outcomes in treated and control counties had
differential trends prior to the regulation.

As we moved closer to the financial crisis, non-standard features
became more common, leading sponsors to seek alternative ways to dif-
ferentiate themselves even more. At very high levels of competition, our
theoretical model predicts that these features were offered to marginal
(non-prime) borrowers. To test this hypothesis, we use two splines of
our HHI measure based on the degree of competition (SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤
and SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ). When we interact these two measures with bor-
rower quality, we find both the propensity and intensity of product

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Fig. 2. The localized nature of sponsor competition. This figure shows snapshots of geographic dispersion in sponsor competition (scaled) and loan differentiation for three time
periods prior to the crisis (years 2000, 2004, and 2006). We see significant dispersion in local sponsor competition that we exploit in our regression analysis. Further, a comparison
of the top and bottom panels suggest sponsor competition leads the growth in loan differentiation. The graphs are plotted using the full sample of securitized loans from ABSNet.

Fig. 3. Greater sponsor competition is associated with higher loan-level differentiation. This figure tracks the aggregate relation between differentiated loan prevalence and sponsor
competition (measured using the Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI)). A higher value of Sponsor HHI indicates a lower level of competition among sponsors. On a quarterly basis
over time, we plot the share of differentiated loan features (bar charts, left-hand axis) and Sponsor HHI (solid line, right-hand axis). As sponsor competition increases (decrease
in Sponsor HHI), we see an increase in the share of differentiated loans over all loans securitized during this period. The average rate of mortgage differentiation in the sample
is 46%.

differentiation is greater for marginal borrowers, but only at high levels
of competition. Using HMDA data, we also find that mortgage applica-
tion denial rates are lowest for areas with more marginal borrowers
when facing high levels of sponsor competition. Our evidence suggests
that sponsor-induced product differentiation expanded the borrower
pool to the marginal segment in the years immediately preceding the
crisis.

Prior research has shown evidence of obfuscation by sponsors —
complex MBS products defaulted at a greater frequency than standard
MBS, and investors did not perceive differentiated products offered
by sponsors as being riskier, ex-ante (Ghent et al., 2017). We find
corroborating evidence at the loan-level that is consistent with this
notion. Over $190 billion of differentiated loans packaged into low-
yield, prime MBS during 2000–2008 subsequently became delinquent.
In the early boom period (2000–2004) coinciding with sponsor-induced
product differentiation, the delinquencies of differentiated prime loans
was large ($91 bn), even relative to similar cohorts in Subprime ($24.5

bn) and Alt-A ($16.2 bn) collateral. This pattern reversed in the later
part of the sample, with delinquencies being highest in the marginal
borrower segment just before the crisis. These results provide sugges-
tive evidence that competition-induced differentiation led to greater
risks that deepened the financial crisis.

The intended marginal contribution of this paper is threefold. To
begin, we provide the first empirical support for the theoretical pre-
dictions of Back (1993), namely that the introduction of a derivative
affects the pricing dynamics of the underlying asset.6 In our context,
competition among issuers of the derived security (MBS) induces prod-
uct differentiation in the underlying assets (securitized loans). These
results raise an interesting challenge for future theoretical models on

6 Although one could argue that the precise product differentiation-based
mechanism in our argument differs from the trading-based mechanism in Back
(1993).

4 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

MBS security design because we show that securitization itself can
influence the design of mortgage contracts.

Second, we document new facts on the role of securitization in
the differentiation of mortgage collateral. Our results reconcile two
seemingly unconnected strands of the literature — the prevalence of
complex features in loans made to higher income households (Amromin
et al., 2018) with the role of securitization in fueling subprime mortgage
credit expansion (Mian and Sufi, 2009; Nadauld and Sherlund, 2013).
Competition-induced product differentiation not only led to the greater
prevalence of non-standard features in the prime segment, but these
features also expanded to borrowers of marginal credit quality at very
high levels of competition. While the financial crisis literature has
argued a role for securitization in the expansion of subprime mortgage
credit, it has largely remained silent on the product differentiation
margin, a gap that our evidence fills.

Third, we contribute to the debate on how incentives of finan-
cial institutions contribute to financial crises. Given that non-standard
mortgages performed significantly worse relative to standard products,
our results point to a potential risk build-up that arose from sponsor
competition. With the well-documented spillover costs of default, this
begs the question as to what extent sponsor-induced product differen-
tiation exacerbated the 2007–09 financial crisis. Since MBS investors
did not fully anticipate risks at the time, our results also suggest
that greater differentiation potentially facilitated obfuscation. Thus,
we complement the finding in Ghent et al. (2017) by showing that
obfuscation may have extended beyond MBS design, to the sourcing
of the collateral underlying these products.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the
related literature. Section 3 develops the theoretical model. Section 4
discusses the data and the measurement of sponsor competition. Em-
pirical evidence is presented in Sections 5, 6, and 7. Section 8 presents
robustness checks. All proofs are in the Internet Appendix A.

2. Related literature

Our paper complements earlier research on competition among
originators and their role in the complexity of subprime mortgages. Di
Maggio et al. (2019) study the 2004 OCC preemption rule, and provide
evidence that this deregulation led non-OCC lenders to issue non-
standard loan contracts via an indirect competition channel, in states
not restricted by anti-predatory lending (APL) laws. Acolin et al. (2022)
also find APL laws helped to reduce the effect of concentration on non-
standard mortgages. Our focus is on the effect of sponsors, rather than
originators, so the securitization pipeline is central to our setting. We
analyze growth in these contracts in the early 2000s, so the economic
forces in our setting operate several years prior to the 2004 shock af-
fecting mortgage originators. While the increase in credit supply due to
the OCC rule targeted the subprime borrower segment, we show growth
in non-standard features occurring in prime borrowers as a result of
a regulatory shock affecting the securitization of GSE loans. Levitin
and Wachter (2020) argue that the pre-crisis housing bubble resulted
from a supply glut driven by private-label securitization. In their view,
nontraditional mortgages enabled the expansion of the borrower pool, a
premise for which we find supporting evidence in the paper. Consistent
with this supply-side story, Dokko et al. (2019) find increased product
differentiation preceded non-fundamental house price growth and was
accompanied by a decline in denial rates. Our paper contributes to this
work by highlighting the role of private sponsors in driving product
differentiation in mortgage contracts.

Our work is related to Gabaix and Laibson (2006) who present
a model of obfuscation (the process of sellers shrouding product at-
tributes to increase buyer search costs) that can persist in competitive
markets. In the securitization context, Ghent et al. (2017) provide
evidence consistent with sponsor incentives to obfuscate MBS products
through complexity at the deal structure level. Such strategic decisions
by sponsors to increase investor search costs, can plausibly extend to

the underlying collateral of the MBS themselves. But direct evidence
on such a mechanism has been lacking so far. To our knowledge, we
are the first to show a direct link between MBS sponsor competition
and financial product differentiation in the underlying mortgage collat-
eral. Our results on distress of low-yield prime MBS collateral provide
evidence on emerging theoretical work on obfuscation (Spiegler, 2016).
The financial crisis literature has shown securitization weakens
lender incentives for screening (Keys et al., 2010; Purnanandam, 2011;
Griffin and Maturana, 2016; Vanasco, 2017; Ashcraft et al., 2019).
We expand on this literature by showing cross-sectional differences in
loan performance within the universe of securitized loans. Conditional
on a loan being securitized, we show that non-standard mortgages
performed worse than standard mortgages. Further, the differentiated
mortgages in low-yield MBS fared worse than those in higher-yield MBS
for loans securitized during the boom years. Our results explain the
role of competition in precipitating financial crises, building on Thakor
(2012) where competition prompts product differentiation, which then
heightens disagreement in asset valuations and increases the likelihood
of funding disruptions. Our study of competition among securitizers
complements the empirical work in Berger et al. (2017) who study
linkages between bank competition and financial stability.

Prior research has investigated borrower demand in explaining the
rise of non-standard features (e.g., Piskorski and Tchistyi, 2010; Cocco,
2013). Amromin et al. (2018) document a significant jump in complex
mortgage defaults, focusing on the role of contract design. They find
complex mortgages are used by higher-income households rather than
by subprime borrowers. Our results point to a sponsor competition
channel, offering a new explanation for why non-standard mortgages
grew in the early 2000s. Using the 2000 HUD Affordable Housing Act
that affected GSE purchases, we also shed light on why this growth
initially focused on the prime segment.

Our results extend the line of research on product complexity de-
cisions. Asriyan et al. (2023) develop a model in which greater in-
vestor demand leads to more complex and possibly lower-quality prod-
ucts. Thakor and Merton (2023) develop a theory of product complexity
and information disclosure in which complexity adds value but in-
creases the cost of disclosure, and in equilibrium the producers of the
most complex products disclose the least information. The strategy
of MBS sponsors to ‘‘escape the competition’’ by differentiating is
consistent with the theory in Carlin (2009), who argues that complexity
increases the market power of firms. Krieger et al. (2022) find evidence
that non-financial firms innovate when faced with negative shocks to
existing products. Célérier and Vallée (2017) provide evidence that
financial complexity in MBS products arises from the need to cater
to yield-seeking investors. We provide a theoretical foundation and
empirical evidence that such catering incentives can even filter into the
underlying mortgage collateral. Our results imply MBS sponsors can
themselves influence the design of the underlying collateral backing
such products. Thus, our empirical evidence presents a challenge to
traditional theoretical models on security design. For example, what
is the role of competition among the issuers of derivative securi-
ties driving differentiated features in the underlying assets on which
these derivatives are written? This question has relevance far beyond
mortgages and MBS to a wide range of financial contracts.

3. Theoretical framework

In this section, we present a theory model that builds on Thakor
(2012) to motivate the connection between MBS sponsor competition
and product differentiation. The model’s main goal is to explain the
economics of why competition among sponsors in the securitization
market leads to mortgage-level product differentiation.

5 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Fig. 4. Model timeline and competition thresholds. Panel (a) of this figure shows the sequence of events for the theory in Section 3. Panel (b) shows the relation between product
differentiation, competition thresholds, and marginal borrowers. 𝜃 refers to the probability of competitive entry.

3.1. Model

Consider an economy with universal risk neutrality and a zero risk-
less rate. There are the following main players in the model: a borrower
seeking a mortgage, an originator who originates the mortgage and
‘‘designs’’ it, a securitization sponsor who provides the funding for the
mortgage by selling tranches to investors, and investors who buy these
tranches. The sequence of events is outlined in Fig. 4. There are three
dates. The model begins at Date 0 when the originator, in consultation
with the sponsor, must decide whether to issue a ‘‘standard’’ or ‘‘new’’
(product-differentiated) mortgage. The sponsor is then responsible for
selling at Date 1 when a competing sponsor may or may not arrive. At
Date 2, investors receive their payoffs.

Originator and Sponsor : We assume there is never any disagree-
ment or conflict of interest between the sponsor and originator about
payoff values. The originator (e.g. bank) simply collects a fee 𝑓 > 0
(stipulated exogenously) for originating (and possibly servicing) the
mortgage for a borrower who needs to borrow 𝐿. The sponsor then
securitizes the mortgage, creating 2 tranches and selling them to in-
vestors.

Competition in the Securitization Market : We take the market
structure in the mortgage origination market as given, so the borrower
agrees to a repayment equal to all of his pledgeable future cash flow in
exchange for a loan of 𝐿 at 𝑡 = 0. The repayment occurs at 𝑡 = 2.

In the securitization (RMBS) market, sponsors compete for investors
to sell their tranches to. We assume that there is a probability 𝜃 ∈ (0, 1)
that a competing sponsor will arrive. In this case, the two sponsors
engage in Bertrand competition and each earns zero expected profit if
they are successful in selling the tranches to investors — this is net of
the fee 𝑓 paid to the originator.

If investors do not buy both the tranches, then 𝐿 cannot be raised
and the borrower will not take the mortgage (i.e., the loan request is
indivisible). However, the sponsor still has to pay the originator 𝑓 , so
the sponsor suffers a loss of 𝑓 (profit= −𝑓 ) if both tranches do not sell.
Payoff on Primary Mortgage: There are two types of borrowers:
those with regular access to credit (‘‘access’’ borrowers) and those
without (‘‘marginal’’ borrowers). For now, we will focus on access bor-
rowers, and describe marginal borrowers later. There are two types of
mortgages. The standard existing mortgage (designated by the subscript
‘‘𝑜’’ for ‘‘old’’) allows the access borrower to borrow 𝐿 and get a payoff
of:

{

𝑧𝑜 =

𝑋 + 𝑌 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑝𝑜 ∈ (0, 1)
𝑥 + 𝑌 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1 − 𝑝𝑜

(1)

where 𝑋 is the access borrower’s pledgeable payoff (say disposable in-
come + savings from not paying rent) in the ‘‘good’’ state (full employ-
ment) and 𝑥 is the pledgeable payoff in the ‘‘bad’’ state (unemployed
or only partially employed), with 0 < 𝑥 < 𝑋.

𝑌 > 0 is the access borrower’s nonpledgeable income/utility. This
could be joy of ownership of the house plus cash income that the bank
cannot contract upon. Since 𝑌 > 0, the borrower wants the mortgage
even if the repayment equals all pledgeable cash flow.

For the access borrower, the new mortgage (with subscript ‘‘𝑛’’ for

‘‘new’’) has a payoff structure:

{

𝑧𝑛 =

𝑋 + 𝑌 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑝𝑛 ∈ (0, 1)
𝑥 + 𝑌 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1 − 𝑝𝑛

(2)

Since the new mortgage has no prior data on repayment etc.,
agents form ‘‘rational beliefs’’, in the sense of Kurz (1994), about 𝑝𝑛
(see Thakor, 2012). The originator draws 𝑝𝑛 from {𝑝, 0} where 𝑝 ∈ (0, 1].

6 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

If 𝑝𝑛 = 0 is drawn, the originator discards the new mortgage idea. So we
focus only on the case in which the originator draws 𝑝𝑛 = 𝑝. Assume:

𝐿 > 𝑥 > 𝑓

𝑝𝑜𝑋 > 𝐿

𝑝𝑋 > 𝐿

(3)

(4)

(5)

There is some uncertainty about the access borrower’s willingness to
use a new mortgage. Let 𝛹 ∈ (0, 1) be the probability that a new
mortgage will be accepted by an access borrower.

Disagreement and Competition in the Securitization Market : Let
𝜌 be the degree of innovation or newness in the new mortgage. The
higher 𝜌 is, the more differentiated the new mortgage is, i.e., the greater
its difference compared to the old mortgage. Let 𝜌 ∈ [𝜌, 𝜌].

The basic idea here, based on Thakor (2012), is that a greater
paucity of historical data leaves more room for agents (with het-
erogeneous priors) to come up with different posterior beliefs about
the payoff distribution of a loan. As Kurz (1994) showed, when the
underlying state variables are drawn from non-stationary distributions,
the rational posterior beliefs of agents – all of whom observe the same
data – can diverge. New types of loans will have less historical data
on them than traditional loans that have been in the market for a long
time. Traditional loans will thus have a sufficiently long time series of
data to enable differences in posterior beliefs to narrow, but this will
typically not be the case for new types of loans. So we view a loan as
more differentiated if there is less historical data on its performance.7
Let 𝑞(𝜌) be the probability that a competing sponsor will agree that
the new mortgage is worth securitizing — i.e., 𝑞(𝜌) is the probability
that a competing sponsor will also draw 𝑝𝑛 = 𝑝. We assume:

𝑞′ < 0, 𝑞′′ = 0

(6)

i.e., the probability of agreement with more differentiated mortgages is
lower. This is because the newer and more differentiated a security, the
higher is the likelihood that competitors will disagree about whether it
is an attractive security to imitate. For simplicity, we assume 𝑞 is linear.
Assuming a non-linear 𝑞 function adds algebraic complexity without
adding insight.

Similarly, let 𝑆(𝜌) be the probability that investors will also draw

Marginal Borrowers: The marginal borrower’s payoffs from the
standard and differentiated mortgages (with the superscript ‘‘𝑚’’ to
designate ‘‘marginal’’) are:

{

{

𝑧𝑚
𝑜 =

𝑧𝑚
𝑛 =

𝑋 + 𝑦 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑝𝑚
𝑜
𝑥 + 𝑦 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1 − 𝑝𝑚
𝑜

𝑋 − [ ̂𝜌 − 𝜌]𝑦 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑝𝑛
𝑥 − [ ̂𝜌 − 𝜌]𝑦 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1 − 𝑝𝑛

(9)

(10)

where 𝑦 > 0 is a non-pledgeable payoff to the borrower and ̂𝜌 is a
threshold level of differentiation in the mortgage. We assume

𝑜 𝑋 + [1 − 𝑝𝑚
𝑝𝑚

𝑜 ]𝑥 < 𝐿

(11)

The interpretation of these expressions is as follows. Eqs. (9) and
(11) jointly imply that the marginal borrower does not qualify for a
standard mortgage. Expression (10) says that the marginal borrower
will not apply for a new type of mortgage as long as the newness in
̂𝜌. What we have in
the mortgage is less than some threshold level,
mind is that a mortgage would have to be sufficiently differentiated
in terms of its design to induce marginal borrowers to simultaneously
apply and also be creditworthy. But, if this condition is satisfied, a
marginal borrower will take the new mortgage with probability 1. For
simplicity, we assume that a lender will approach a marginal borrower
only if an access borrower cannot be found for the new mortgage.

Securitization: The sponsor splits the mortgage into two tranches.
Tranche 1 is most senior and is guaranteed a payoff of 𝑥 − 𝑓 , while
tranche 2 is riskier and is promised 𝑧 − 𝑥. Thus, tranche 2 receives a
payoff of 𝑋 − 𝑥 in the ‘‘good’’ state and nothing in the ‘‘bad’’ state. The
originator is promised 𝑓 . Thus, the distribution of payoffs is:

Payoffs

Originator:

1st tranche:

2nd tranche (residual):

=

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

𝑓 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1

𝑥 − 𝑓 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1
{

𝑋 − 𝑥 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑝𝑜 𝑜𝑟 𝑝𝑛
0

𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 1 − 𝑝𝑜 𝑜𝑟 1 − 𝑝𝑛

Analysis with access borrowers

(12)

𝑝𝑛 = 𝑝. We assume:

𝑆′ < 0, 𝑆′′ < 0

Our analysis initially focuses on access borrowers exclusively. We

introduce marginal borrowers later.

(7)

with the Inada conditions 𝑆′(𝜌) = 0, 𝑆′(𝜌) = −∞.

In general, we could make 𝑝𝑛(𝜌) a function of 𝜌, say 𝑝𝑛(𝜌) = 𝑝𝑜 + 𝑟(𝜌)
with 𝑟′ > 0, 𝑟(0) = 0. This would naturally link the old and new
mortgages, so 𝜌 = 0 would imply both are the same (𝑝𝑛 = 𝑝𝑜). But
for simplicity, we assume that 𝜌 ∈ [𝜌, 𝜌] is the feasible set of 𝜌, and 𝑝𝑛
is unaffected by 𝜌. Thus,

1 > 𝑞(𝜌) = 𝑞 > 𝑞(𝜌) = 𝑞 > 0

(8)

We do not impose any restriction on what the relationship of 𝑝 is to

𝑝𝑜, although 𝑝 > 𝑝𝑜 is a natural assumption.8

7 It is true that in other international settings, borrowers were more reliant
on adjustable rate features. But extrapolating default risk data of borrower
pools from other countries into the U.S. may have been challenging for
investors. Also, beyond adjustable rate mortgages, we include loans that are
interest-only, reverse mortgages, and option ARMs in our definition, which are
less prevalent features in an international context.

8 Although we do not model competition among originators for borrowers,
our specification is consistent with a frictional (random) search model in
which borrowers and originators search and match and the payoff structure
is determined through Nash bargaining. Also, there is no disagreement with
standard (old) mortgages.

Proposition 1.
securitization always succeeds and the expected profit of the sponsor is:

If the sponsor securitizes a standard (old) mortgage, the

𝛱0 = [1 − 𝜃]{𝑝𝑜𝑋 − 𝐿 + 𝑥 − 𝑓 }

(13)

Proof. See Internet Appendix A.

Proposition 2. Suppose an access borrower takes a new, differentiated
mortgage. Then, the securitization fails with probability 1 − 𝑆(𝜌). The
expected profit of the sponsor is:

{

𝛱𝑛 =

[1 − 𝜃𝑞(𝜌)]{𝑆(𝜌)[𝑝𝑋 − 𝐿 + [𝑥 − 𝑓 ]] + [1 − 𝑆(𝜌)][−𝑓 ]}

−𝜃𝑞(𝜌){𝑓 [1 − 𝑆(𝜌)]}

(14)

There exists a unique optimal degree of differentiation, 𝜌∗ ∈ (𝜌, 𝜌).

Proof. See Internet Appendix A.

Proposition 3. Assume originators are extending mortgages to access
borrowers. There exists a probability 𝜃∗ such that when the probability
of competitive entry 𝜃 exceeds 𝜃∗, the sponsor prefers the (optimal) new
mortgage over the standard mortgage. Given a small enough 𝑓 , 𝜃∗ ∈ (0, 1).

Proof. See Internet Appendix A.

7 

P. Haslag et al.

Analysis with access and marginal borrowers

Now we allow marginal borrowers to be in the credit market. As
indicated earlier, these borrowers do not qualify for standard loans, and
they enter the analysis only if the lender cannot find an access borrower
to take a new, differentiated mortgage.

Proposition 4. When there are both access and marginal borrowers in the
credit market, the optimal degree of product differentiation with the new
mortgage, 𝜌∗, is increasing in the degree of competition, 𝜃. The sponsor
prefers the (optimal) new mortgage over the standard mortgage when
the probability of competitive entry, 𝜃, exceeds some threshold level, 𝜃∗.
Moreover, for ̂𝜌 high enough, mortgages are offered to marginal borrowers
only when competition 𝜃 > 𝜃∗∗ > 𝜃∗.

Proof. See Internet Appendix A.

This proposition indicates that there are two forces at work in gen-
erating the impetus for product differentiation in mortgages, and both
are related to competition among sponsors. As competition increases,
the expected profitability of standard mortgages declines, and at a
sufficiently high level of competition, the new mortgage is preferred by
the sponsor. So this is the first force. The second force kicks in when
competition rises further and 𝜌∗ rises so that it now exceeds ̂𝜌, thus
making the new mortgage attractive for marginal borrowers. This is
depicted in the Panel (b) of Fig. 4.

3.2. Predictions

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

the degree of differentiation as the number of features the mortgage
contains. These features fit a common description of non-standard or
complex loans in that they backload mortgage payments which allows
for lower payments upfront, as compared to fully amortized loans
(Garmaise, 2013; Amromin et al., 2018).

Most loans in our sample are single-family homes, with the mean
balance at loan origination being $199,788 for standard loans. Dif-
ferentiated loans are larger ($283,221) suggesting that they are likely
associated with higher income borrowers (Amromin et al., 2018). Panel
(b) of Table 1 shows that the most common category for both standard
and differentiated mortgages are purchase loans. In terms of the type of
MBS these loans are securitized into (Panel (c)), we find that a majority
of loans in our data form part of subprime MBS (≈9.4 mn), relative to
prime MBS (≈3.4 mn) and Alt-A MBS (≈3.6 mn). Differentiated loans,
however, form a slightly greater proportion of prime MBS (≈1.8 mn)
relative to standard loans in the prime category (≈1.6 mn).

4.1. Measuring sponsor competition

We measure local sponsor competition for the 𝑁 sponsors sourcing
loans in county 𝑐 in year 𝑡 as follows. Let 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑐,𝑡 represent the
loan amount at origination of loan 𝑗 securitized by sponsor 𝑖. If 𝑀𝑖,𝑐,𝑡
is the total loans made by a sponsor in a given county-year, then the
market share of sponsor 𝑖 in county 𝑐 in year 𝑡 is defined as:

𝑠𝑖,𝑐,𝑡 =

∑𝑀𝑖,𝑐,𝑡
𝑗=1
∑𝑀𝑖,𝑐,𝑡
𝑗=1

∑𝑁
𝑖=1

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑐,𝑡

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑗,𝑐,𝑡

(15)

Propositions 1–4 generate two empirical predictions:

county-year level:

Prediction 1: Greater sponsor competition leads to a higher proba-
bility of a loan having a differentiated feature.

LocalSponsorHHI𝑐,𝑡 =

𝑁
∑

𝑖=1

𝑠2
𝑖,𝑐,𝑡

(16)

Using these market shares, we construct our Herfindahl index at the

Prediction 2: As competition increases, differentiated loan features
are first observed among prime borrowers. At higher levels of
competition, product differentiation targets marginal borrowers.
Marginal borrowers are associated with greater degree of differen-
tiation.

4. Data and summary statistics

Our data comes from multiple sources. Securitized residential mort-
gages from ABSNet is provided by Lewtan, a Moody’s Analytics Com-
pany. We merge this database with county-level information on loan
applications (HMDA), originator-servicer information (Bloomberg),
county-level demographics (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and under-
served census tracts from Bhutta (2012). After dropping observations
with missing information, we are left with 18 million loans from
metropolitan areas covering the period 1997 to 2008.

A novel feature is that we hand-collect information linking the
special purpose vehicle (SPV) issuing the MBS to the parent sponsor
by searching individual MBS prospectuses. Thus, our data allows us to
track the ultimate sponsors as they securitized loans through space and
time. Internet Appendix Table IA.B.1 shows a sample matching of issuer
SPV’s to the parent sponsor (Panel (a)). The largest sponsors, by value
of loans securitized, include Countrywide, GMAC, Lehman Brothers,
and Bear Stearns (Panel (b)).

Table 1 provides details on loan characteristics by property type
(Panel (a)), loan purpose (Panel (b)) and type of MBS (Panel (c)). The
number of loans in each category and the average loan size are split
by whether a loan is standard or differentiated. We define a loan as
differentiated if it has one or more of the following features: Hybrid
Adjustable Rate Mortgages (ARMs), Balloon Payments, Interest Only,
Pay Teaser, Negative Amortization, Option ARMs. Our main dependent
variable is an indicator that turns on if a given loan 𝑗 in county 𝑐 in year
𝑡 is classified as differentiated (1Differentiation𝑗,𝑐,𝑡
). In later tests, we define

The county-year level is broad enough to capture the time trend while
avoiding seasonality or any distortions from large issuances in a par-
ticular quarter. Our results are not sensitive to the choice of using
loan balance or the number of loans when calculating county-level
HHI measures. As with every HHI measure, our variable moves in the
opposite direction of competition. In other words, more competition
leads to lower levels of LocalSponsorHHI. The HHI measure of compe-
tition aligns closely with our theoretical motivation where competition
is captured by the probability of a competing sponsor arriving. In the
limiting case, if a market is completely concentrated (i.e., 𝐻𝐻𝐼 → 1),
we expect the probability of a competing sponsor arriving would be
𝜃 → 0. However, at high levels of competition (𝐻𝐻𝐼 → 0), the
probability that a competing sponsor arrives is almost certain, so 𝜃 → 1.
Nevertheless, there are alternative ways to measure competition. As
we discuss in Section 8, our results are robust to using concentration
ratios that capture the market share of the top three sponsors within
the county-year (Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2016).

4.2. The local nature of sponsor competition

We observe significant dispersion in our measure of local sponsor
competition (Fig. 2), a fact we exploit in our empirical tests. But,
if sponsors are large financial institutions with a national presence,
why is competition local in nature? Our measure captures the spatial
diversification constraint faced by sponsors while sourcing loans from
originators. Sponsors and investors pay attention to the geographic
distribution of collateral at the state level (see Internet Appendix Figure
IA.B.2 for a sample MBS prospectus). Indeed, we find evidence that
sponsor competition at the state level is positively correlated with the
share of differentiated loans in the state (Internet Appendix Figure
IA.B.3).

But in addition to state-level constraints, sponsors are also re-
quired to report the specific local area within a given state with

8 

P. Haslag et al.

Table 1
Loan characteristics.

(a) Statistics by property type

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Standard loans

Differentiated loans

Single family
PUD
Other

(b) Statistics by loan purpose

N

7,086,275
926,719
1,751,375

Avg. size

$199,788
$232,257
$168,460

N

5,517,863
1,259,843
1,508,562

Standard loans

Differentiated loans

Purchase
Cash Out Refi
Refinancing
Other

(c) Statistics by type of MBS

N

3,504,491
3,209,151
1,686,349
1,364,378

Avg. size

$191,961
$194,675
$262,250
$136,556

N

3,862,903
2,348,908
1,275,100
799,357

Prime
Subprime
Alt-A
Other

Standard loans

Differentiated loans

N

1,551,076
5,725,372
1,573,369
914,552

Avg. size

$395,703
$151,536
$201,826
$138,990

N

1,812,687
3,671,932
2,076,092
725,557

Avg. size

$283,221
$284,065
$222,910

Avg. size

$258,930
$292,096
$349,602
$156,151

Avg. size

$439,067
$182,481
$290,271
$259,592

All loans

N

12,604,138
2,186,562
3,259,937

All loans

N

7,367,394
5,558,059
2,961,449
2,163,735

All loans

N

3,363,763
9,397,304
3,649,461
1,640,109

Avg. size

$236,313
$262,107
$193,657

Avg. size

$227,074
$235,846
$299,861
$143,795

Avg. size

$419,071
$163,627
$252,140
$192,342

This table describes loan characteristics of 18 million securitized loans over the period 1997–2008. Across all panels, summary statistics are shown separately for Standard and
Differentiated loans, where a loan is defined as ‘‘Differentiated’’ if it takes any of the following features: Negative Amortization, Interest Only, Hybrid ARM, Option ARM, Balloon
Payment or Pay Teaser. Standard loans are the complementary set of non-differentiated loans. N refers to the number of loans in each category and Avg. size refers to the mean
of the original loan balance. In Panel (a), we provide summary statistics broken out by the property type. Note, PUD refers to ‘‘Planned Unit Development’’. Panel (b) provides
summary statistics by loan purpose, as defined in ABSNet. Finally, in Panel (c) we provide summary statistics by the type of MBS, which refers to the MBS category of the
securitized deal in ABSNet.

Table 2
County characteristics.

(a) All local markets

Number of loans (#)
Number of differentiated loans (#)
Local Sponsor HHI
Loan Demand
Population (#)
Total Personal Income ($ mn)
Employment (#)

(b) Prime and non-Prime markets

Number of loans (#)
Number of differentiated loans (#)
Local Sponsor HHI
Loan Demand
Population (#)
Total Personal Income ($ mn)
Employment (#)

Averages across counties

N

7720
7720
7696
7711
7471
7471
7471

PrimeMarket

N

4936
4936
4923
4927
4795
4795
4795

Mean

2341
1074
0.178
2.11
345,109
$12.3
208,244

Mean

2744
1266
0.177
2.17
392,810
$13.5
242,552

𝜎

8974
5336
0.153
0.32
593,038
$22.7
369,878

p50

381
57
0.129
2.15
181,752
$5.3
105,672

p50

368
56
0.129
2.09
168,516
$5.2
95,415

nonPrimeMarket

N

2784
2784
2773
2784
2676
2676
2676

p25

98
9
0.081
1.88
97,727
$2.8
50,627

Mean

1627
732
0.179
2.02
259,636
$10.1
146,769

p75

1388
397
0.208
2.32
380,949
$12.8
223,022

p50

350
54
0.129
1.99
155,842
$5.2
85,445

This table describes characteristics of local markets where sponsors compete for sourcing loans from originators. Summary statistics are presented at the county × year level over
the period 1997–2008. Panel (a) summarizes data for all counties, whereas Panel (b) describes characteristics for the Treated (PrimeMarket ) and Control (SubprimeMarket ) counties.
If the percentage of census tracts in a given county defined as Underserved Areas as per the HUD regulation are in the 25th percentile or below, then that county is classified as
a PrimeMarket. This definition captures higher-income areas. Additional variable definitions can be found in Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2.

the highest concentration of the overall loan balance.9 The cross-
state diversification constraint, together with the within-state limit on
local concentration, motivate our definition of sponsor competition at

9 Bank of America’s Asset Backed Funding Corporation Prospectus (dated
‘‘The greatest ZIP Code ge-
October 3, 2006) for $1,386,432,000 reports:
ographic concentration of the initial group 1 Mortgage Loans by Principal
Balance as of the Cut-off Date is expected to be approximately 0.63% in the
60629 ZIP Code, located in Illinois, for the initial group 2 Mortgage Loans
is expected to be approximately 0.54% in the 92704 ZIP Code, located in
California, and for all the Initial Mortgage Loans is expected to be 0.38% in
the 33463 ZIP Code, located in Florida’’. [pg A-12].

the county-level. Note that the nature of the diversification constraint
on sponsors differs, depending on whether it is across states (more
binding) or within a given state (less binding). As long as the sourcing
of loans do not excessively concentrate in very local areas (i.e., ZIP
codes), sponsors may have latitude in choosing loans within a given
state. Indeed, our identification strategy in Section 6 using the HUD rule
of 2000 exploits this within-state variation in sponsor competition. Note
that in addition to these geographic constraints, local informational
advantages through existing originator networks may be important to
the deal’s portfolio composition (Coval and Moskowitz, 2001).

Although we use sponsor HHI defined at the county level for most
empirical tests, our main result is not sensitive to this definition. In the

9 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

alternate identification strategy (Section 8.2), we define sponsor HHI
at the MSA level and continue to find consistent results.

4.3. Sample summary statistics

In Table 2 Panel (a), we present county-level summaries across
our entire sample for the number of differentiated loans, average
local sponsor competition, loan demand and other demographics. The
detailed definitions of these variables are in Internet Appendix Table
IA.B.2. The average value of our main independent variable
(LocalSponsorHHI ) is 0.178 with a standard deviation of 0.153. The
typical county in our sample has an average population of 345,109 with
a total personal income estimate of $12.3 mn. The number of employed
persons on average is 208,244.

We study the differential competition response of sponsors across
counties which are more or less exposed to the GSE regulatory shock.
We term those areas more exposed to the shock as nonPrimeMarkets,
and those less exposed as PrimeMarkets. In Table 2 Panel (b), we
show differences in county characteristics between PrimeMarkets and
nonPrimeMarkets. The county-year observations for PrimeMarkets are
slightly higher than those of nonPrimeMarkets. Panel (b) shows that
local sponsor competition levels are comparable across both markets.
PrimeMarkets tend to have higher population, greater total personal
income and employment levels relative to nonPrimeMarkets.

Internet Appendix Table IA.B.3 shows the distribution of loans based
on the year of securitization. The table also shows the proportion of
differentiated loans in each year. The table confirms the trend in Fig. 3
— the proportion of differentiated loans increased significantly in the
early boom period. The average rate of differentiation in the overall
sample is 46%, with significant heterogeneity (3.7% in 1999, 66.6% in
2007) across securitization years.

5. Sponsor competition and loan differentiation

We begin our empirical analysis by examining aggregate trends
in sponsor competition and differentiation. In Fig. 3, as competition
increases (Sponsor HHI decreases), we see a steady increase in the share
of differentiated loans, with levels peaking just before the financial
crisis (2007Q3). The share of loans with differentiated features is
greatest when competition between the sponsors of securitizations is
also the highest. In untabulated results, we find a similar pattern with
differentiation intensity.

To better understand the relationship between sponsor competition
and differentiated mortgages, our empirical strategy is comprised of a
three-pronged approach. In this section, we provide results for the first
two approaches before discussing our main identification strategy in
Section 6.

5.1. Exploiting local variation in sponsor competition

In our baseline results in Table 3, we test whether the propensity
of differentiation in securitized loans is greater in local markets that
experience greater competition from sponsors. We regress an indicator
for loan differentiation against local sponsor HHI. We use the cross-
section of all securitized loans 𝑗 in Eq. (17) where 𝑋𝑐,𝑡 represents
controls and/or fixed-effects at appropriate levels.10 We cluster stan-
dard errors at the state-year level to account for (a) correlation in
errors that may be driven by changes in the regulatory environment
at the state-level affecting both competition and the rate of non-
standard mortgages usage (such as anti-predatory lending laws), and

(b) correlation due to other unobserved time-varying shocks that affect
variation in competition and differentiation within the same state.
We also show in Section 8 that our results are not sensitive to other
reasonable choices in clustering. Running our analysis at the loan level,
as opposed to the county level, is important so that we can account
for sponsor details, observable loan characteristics, and other important
within-county variation.

1Differentiation𝑗,𝑐,𝑡

= 𝛼 + 𝜷(LocalSponsorHHI𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 + 𝛿𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟

+ 𝛿𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒×𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 + 𝜖

(17)

Column (1) of Table 3 shows a robust negative relationship: a one
standard deviation decrease in local sponsor HHI (i.e. increase in
local competition) results in a 2.5 percentage point increase in the
probability of observing a differentiated mortgage. In terms of the
average differentiation of 46% (Internet Appendix Table IA.B.3), this
translates into a relative increase of 5.4%. An immediate concern in
interpreting this correlation is that securitization in the pre-crisis period
was dominated by large institutions such as Countrywide, Bear Stearns,
and Lehman Brothers, companies that were ultimately found lacking in
their risk management practices (FCIC, 2011). So unobservable institu-
tional characteristics (such as risk culture, in the sense of Fahlenbrach
et al., 2012) may not only explain greater competition but also correlate
with the increased differentiation. To address this question, all our
regressions absorb institutional differences using sponsor fixed effects.
To ensure that our results in Table 3 are not confounded by the
findings in Di Maggio et al. (2019), we control for State × Year fixed
effects in all our regressions. These fixed effects have the advantage of
controlling for average differences in the regulatory environment at the
state level (such as APL laws). Even more, we allow for such differences
to vary through time which can capture broad changes in economic
conditions. Thus, it is unlikely that differences in the responses of
originators to the OCC rule across states with and without APL laws
can explain our results. As our later results will show, we document
an effect many years prior to 2004, which cannot be explained by the
effects of the OCC rule.

Since our regression uses variation in sponsor competition across lo-
cal counties, Column (2) of Table 3 includes time-varying county-level
observables such as population, employment and income that may be
correlated with this variation.11 These controls mitigate the possibility
that our results are driven by demand factors specific to a geography
because we compare local markets with comparable demographic fac-
tors. For instance, our results are unlikely to be driven by fundamental
differences between urban and rural areas. Even more, Column (3) of
Table 3 directly includes a measure of loan demand using data from
HMDA mortgage applications. We find that greater sponsor competition
is associated with more differentiated loans after controlling for loan
demand. From Column (3) of Table 3, we see that borrower demand
is negatively related to the propensity to issue differentiated contracts.
The negative coefficient suggests that when borrower demand is high,
originators utilize less differentiated mortgages. To the extent demand
factors confound our interpretation, they bias against finding a result.
Nevertheless, observable controls may not fully account for time-
varying unobservable demand factors within local markets that may
confound our interpretation. In Column (4) of Table 3, we employ our
most stringent specification which accounts for time-varying unobserv-
ables at a high level of granularity, with the inclusion of CBSA × Year
fixed effects, in addition to demographic controls. We continue to find
consistent results. In sum, we find strong, consistent evidence that an
increase in local sponsor competition is associated with higher rate
differentiation for securitized mortgages.

10 We use a linear probability model to avoid the incidental parameters
problem associated with fixed effects in logit regressions. However, using logit
regressions (untabulated), we find our results are economically and statistically
similar.

11 We do not explicitly control for house prices because Dokko et al. (2019)
show evidence that the rise in house prices were a consequence of the issuance
of non-standard mortgage contracts, rather than a cause of it. See also Levitin
and Wachter (2020) who make a similar argument.

10 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Table 3
Higher sponsor competition associated with greater loan differentiation.

Differentiation indicator

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑆𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑐,𝑡−1

−0.253***
(0.077)

−0.133**
(0.054)

−0.131***
(0.017)
−0.035***
(0.009)
0.167***
(0.014)

−0.133**
(0.054)

−0.106***
(0.017)
−0.034***
(0.009)
0.143***
(0.015)
−0.051***
(0.010)

Yes
Yes
–

−0.132***
(0.037)

−0.062***
(0.010)
0.015**
(0.006)
0.042***
(0.007)
−0.076***
(0.008)

Yes
–
Yes

Yes
Yes
–

Yes
Yes
–

𝑃 𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑐,𝑡−1

𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑐,𝑡−1

𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑐,𝑡−1

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑐,𝑡−1

Sponsor FE
State × Year FE
CBSA × Year FE

Observations
𝑅2

18,020,433
0.205

17,462,253
0.208

17,462,253
0.208

17,434,827
0.212

This table reports the results of linear probability panel regressions investigating:

1Differentiation𝑗,𝑐,𝑡

= 𝛼 + 𝜷𝟏(𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑆𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 + 𝛿𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒×𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟 + 𝜖

We estimate regressions over the database of securitized mortgages over the period
1997–2008. The dependent variable is an indicator that captures the incidence of
differentiation in a securitized loan. Differentiation for individual loans is calculated
based on indicators for any of the following features: Hybrid ARM, Balloon, Interest
Only, Negative Amortization, Pay Teaser, Option ARM. The main independent variable
refers to lagged Sponsor HHI (Herfindahl–Hirschman Index) based on loan balances
defined at the county-year level. Columns 2–4 include county-level, time-varying
controls. Columns 3–4 include loan demand which is measured as the lagged ratio
of HMDA applications to HMDA originations in a given county and year. The fixed
effects included in each regression are denoted below the regression. Standard errors
are clustered at the State × Year level. Detailed variable definitions can be found in
Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2.

In our next set of tests, we utilize the variation in sponsor com-
petition within the same originator and region for seemingly identical
loans to help narrow the role of the sponsor competition in increased
differentiation.

5.2. Variation in sponsor competition within originator

While the previous result helps addresses the challenge of corre-
lated omitted variables arising from common shocks to sponsors or
the regulatory environment in any given year, it may leave open
the possibility that sponsor competition is correlated with the market
dynamics of originators. Originators, not sponsors, make loans, so
one could reasonably argue that variation in local sponsor HHI may
be driven by the competition between originators. To address this
identification concern, Table 4 performs a within-originator analysis. But
data on originators in the ABSNet database is limited, so we assume
loan servicers as a useful proxy. To support this assumption, we use
the fact that in the pre-crisis period, a majority of originators also
retained servicing rights for the mortgages they originated.12 We ensure
our results are not sensitive to this assumption by reporting consistent
results with the original, limited sample of lenders in Internet Appendix
Table IA.B.4.

The thought experiment is to take an originator that is in a relatively
homogeneous lending market, at a given point in time, but is exposed to
different levels of competition. If the originator’s rate of differentiation
varies across these sponsors, then it suggests that originator incentives
to differentiate are engendered by sponsor competition. To this end, we
estimate the effect of local sponsor HHI on differentiation by including

12 In Ashcraft et al. (2008), top 10 originators such as HSBC, Countrywide,
Citigroup, Ameriquest, Option One, Wells Fargo were also listed under the top
10 mortgage servicers (See Tables 2 and 4).

Table 4
Greater
differentiation.

sponsor competition within the same originator

leads

to higher

loan

𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑆𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑐,𝑡−1

𝑃 𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑐,𝑡−1

𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑐,𝑡−1

𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑐,𝑡−1

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑐,𝑡−1

Differentiation indicator

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

−0.226***
(0.065)

−0.120***
(0.044)

−0.121***
(0.044)

−0.096***
(0.027)

−0.109***
(0.013)
−0.029***
(0.007)
0.138***
(0.011)

−0.090***
(0.013)
−0.029***
(0.007)
0.121***
(0.012)
−0.038***
(0.007)

−0.050***
(0.007)
0.011**
(0.004)
0.036***
(0.006)
−0.061***
(0.007)

Sponsor FE
Originator × State × Year FE
Originator × CBSA × Year FE –

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
–

Yes
Yes
–

Yes
–
Yes

Observations
𝑅2

17,782,788 17,234,366 17,234,366 17,137,086
0.358

0.360

0.360

0.371

This table reports the results of linear probability panel regressions investigating:

1Differentiation𝑗,𝑐,𝑡

= 𝛼 + 𝜷𝟏(𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑆𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 + 𝛿𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟×𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒×𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟 + 𝜖

We estimate regressions over the database of securitized mortgages over the period
1997–2008. The dependent variable is an indicator that captures the incidence of
differentiation in a securitized loan. Differentiation for individual loans is calculated
based on indicators for any of the following features: Hybrid ARM, Balloon, Interest
Only, Negative Amortization, Pay Teaser, Option ARM. Importantly, the empirical
strategy includes Originator × State × Year fixed effects, so the identifying variation
compares the same originator in the same state at the same point in time, but exposed
to differing levels of sponsor competition. The main independent variable refers to
lagged Sponsor HHI (Herfindahl–Hirschman Index) based on loan balances defined
at the county-year level. Columns 2–4 include county-level, time-varying controls.
Columns 3–4 include loan demand which is measured as the lagged ratio of HMDA
applications to HMDA originations in a given county and year. The fixed effects
included in each regression are denoted below the regression. Standard errors are
clustered at the State × Year level. All variables are defined in Internet Appendix
Table IA.B.2.

Originator × State × Year fixed effects. By analyzing loan differentiation
within the same originator in the same geographic region (state) and
year, our research design helps isolate the effect of sponsors because
variation in differentiation can no longer be purely attributed to time-
varying differences at the originator level. As discussed earlier, these
tight fixed effects subsume effects of APL law differences that motivate
the analysis in Di Maggio et al. (2019). In column (1) of Table 4, we
find a one standard deviation increase in sponsor competition (decrease
in HHI) results in a 2.4 percentage point increase in the probability of
differentiation, translating to an 5.2% increase in economic terms.

As in Table 3, we control for time-varying unobservable local char-
acteristics as well as demand conditions that may confound our in-
terpretation. Thus, we are effectively comparing loans in observably
identical local geographies, made by the same originator at a similar
point in time and location, but one loan is made in an area that is
exposed to significantly more sponsor competition than the other area.
Such a tight comparison rules out the possibility that local sponsor
HHI may proxy for unobservable local characteristics that are also
correlated with differentiated features. In sum, the results of Table 4
reinforce the earlier finding that sponsor competition likely contributed
to the increased differentiation of securitized mortgages.

6. Exogenous variation in sponsor competition

Despite the within-originator analysis and the use of high-
dimensional fixed effects, one might still worry that variation in local
sponsor HHI may be correlated with omitted factors unobservable to
the econometrician. To confound our interpretation, however, these
unobservable factors must not only explain variation in local sponsor
competition and loan differentiation, but also be unrelated to key

11 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Fig. 5. Response of GSEs to the affordable housing act. This figure tracks the time-series evolution of GSE market share and differentiated mortgage prevalence in the non-prime
and prime markets over the period of 1998–2003. GSE market share is defined as the number of HMDA loans sold to GSEs over all loans sold and is displayed with the bold blue
line (values correspond to the 𝑦-axis on the left). Conditional on a HMDA loan being sold, a greater share was purchased by GSEs following the announcement of the HUD rule
in 2000. The blue dashed line captures the prevalence of differentiated loans in Prime MBS deals (values correspond to the 𝑦-axis on the right). Notably, the figure shows that
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the
GSE purchases following the HUD rule coincides with the rise in differentiation of Prime MBS collateral.
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

loan characteristics or originator and time-specific effects. While we
believe such a possibility is less likely, we cannot rule it out unless we
can find plausibly exogenous variation in local sponsor competition.
To overcome the identification hurdle, we set up a difference-in-
differences research design around a regulatory change that identifies
an exogenous source of variation for sponsor competition.

6.1. The HUD rule of 2000

In 1992, Congress passed the Affordable Housing Act giving the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) the right
to set affordable housing purchase goals for Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac, the government sponsored enterprises (GSEs). In 1996, these
GSEs were expected to source 40% of all eligible loans from low to
moderate income households. That limit was changed to 42% for 1997
to 1999. Then, the biggest change (which is the focus of our research
design) came in 2000 when the limit was revised to 50% for the years
2001–2003. This represents a one-year increase of almost 20% in the
allocation of GSE loans to lower-income areas. The goals remained in
effect for 2004 and beyond.

We exploit the HUD rule of 2000 (which significantly raised the
limit of GSE purchases) to generate plausibly exogenous variation in
local sponsor HHI. Fig. 5 shows a large jump in the loans sold to the
GSEs following the 2000 regulatory change. Prior to the rule change,
45%–50% of all loans originated were sold to the GSEs. However, after
the rule went into effect in 2001, the share of loans sold to the GSEs
abruptly increased to approximately 60% of all originated loans.

Not only did the rule change increase the market share of the GSEs,
the Affordable Housing Act also required the GSEs to focus on less
creditworthy borrowers. A loan counted towards the GSEs’ affordable
housing goal if the corresponding census tract had a median family
income less than or equal to 90% of the median family income in the
respective MSA or a minority share of at least 30%. Bhutta (2012) finds
that the HUD rule had a causal effect of increasing GSE purchases in
underserved areas. The impact on competition among private securi-
tizers, however, remains an empirical question. On the one hand, if
private securitizers are competing in a restricted market of low-income
borrowers, it is possible that the HUD rule increased competition in
lower-income counties. On the other hand, if GSE purchases crowd
out loans to more creditworthy borrowers, we may expect greater
incentives for private securitizers to compete more intensely in areas

less affected by the HUD rule. In the next subsection, we differentiate
between these possibilities and investigate the HUD rule’s effect on
sponsor competition and loan differentiation.

6.2. Effect of the 2000 HUD rule on private securitizer competition and
loan differentiation

We estimate a dynamic difference-in-differences regression at the
county-year level to test the effects of the HUD rule on local sponsor
competition and loan differentiation (𝑦):

𝑦 = 𝛼 +

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛽𝑡(𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑐 × 𝛿𝑡) + 𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑐 +

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛿𝑡 + 𝛿𝑐 + 𝜖 (18)

We follow Bhutta (2012) and the HUD’s definition of Underserved
Areas (UA) based on the 1993 census as those census tracts whose
median income is less than 90% of the MSA median income. Since our
analysis is at the county level, we calculate the percentage of census
tracts classified as UA in any given county. Since we want to test for
effects of private securitizer competition in areas less affected by the
rule change, we define PrimeMarket counties as those whose percentage
of census tracts qualifying as UA are in the 25th percentile or below.
Based on this definition, those counties not classified as prime markets
serve as the control group.13 Internet Appendix Table IA.B.6 presents a
comparison of treated and control counties prior to the law change.

Results in Gabriel and Rosenthal (2010) suggest the 2000 HUD Rule
may have crowded out competition in areas where GSEs increased their
purchases most. The intuition for our tests is predicated on private
label activity being crowded out to areas that were least likely to see
increases in GSE activity. Put differently, we suspect that private label
securitizers will compete against one another more in areas where the
HUD rule is unlikely to have a binding effect. In Internet Appendix
Table IA.B.7, we show that the rule had a meaningful impact on the
share of loans purchased by GSEs. In the years immediately following
the rule change, we find that GSEs bought a greater share of mortgages
in the counties most affected by the HUD requirement. An analogous

13 In Internet Appendix Table IA.B.5 we obtain consistent results when we
define PrimeMarket as counties whose percentage of census tracts classified as
UA are in 50th percentile or below. Thus, our results are not sensitive to the
specific definition of PrimeMarket.

12 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

interpretation is that GSEs were now purchasing a relatively lower
share of loans in the PrimeMarket counties.

Next, we test the intuition that the GSEs’ decreased prevalence
in PrimeMarket counties resulted in increased sponsor competition by
examining a county-year difference-in-differences regression where the
outcome variable is local sponsor competition. We control for county
and state-year fixed effects to account for any time-invariant differ-
ences across county and the general increase in state-level competition
through time, respectively.14 In Table 5, we confirm that the timing
of the rule coincides with a statistically significant increase in sponsor
competition in the PrimeMarket counties. We find the effect peaks in
economic significance in 2000, then slowly dissipates in economic and
statistical significance through the end of our sample. The coefficient
of −0.022 in 2000 suggests a 12.3% relative increase in competition,
relative to the mean. These results lay the foundation for our interpre-
tation that any changes in differentiated mortgages flows through the
rule’s effect on local sponsor competition.

Note that if the entry of GSEs increased overall competitive pressure
in the low-income (control) counties for the types of loans that PLS
sponsors were targeting, we might worry that the effect of the HUD
rule on sponsor competition is ambiguous. In this alternate explana-
tion, GSEs compete with private sponsors in the low-income areas
(i.e. overall competition, PLS + GSE, increased), rather than crowding
private sponsors out into the high-income regions. To distinguish the
GSE competition hypothesis from the crowding out story (laid out in
Internet Appendix Table IA.B.8), we expand our data to include GSE-
securitized loans and examine whether overall (PLS + GSE) competition
increases in the control regions. Internet Appendix Table IA.B.9 rejects
this explanation, in favor of the crowding-out effect.

Next, we test whether the increased competition that resulted from
the rule change impacted mortgage differentiation. Given our previous
analysis, we expect differentiation to increase more in prime markets in
the presence of a crowding-out effect. The base year (1999) is omitted
in the estimation. Table 6 presents the results.

The coefficients of interest are the interaction terms 𝛽𝑡. Table 6
shows an increase in loan differentiation in the years following the
HUD rule for PrimeMarket counties. Between the years 2001 and 2004,
differentiation increased more in prime markets relative to non-prime
counties due to the increase in private sponsor competition in those
markets. Note that county fixed effects control for (time invariant)
county characteristics that may confound our results. State-year fixed
effects will account for any legal or broad time-varying economic
unobservables. Consistent with the timing of increases in competition,
we find that differentiation significantly increases starting in 2001
by 2.3 to 3 percentage points. In terms of average differentiation in
2001, this effect translates into an economic magnitude of 15%–20%.
The economic significance of this effect increases in subsequent years,
peaking in 2004.

In support of parallel trends, the coefficients are statistically in-
significant prior to the rule change, a necessary condition for a causal
interpretation. Mortgage differentiation in Prime and non-Prime mar-
kets was not different prior to the regulatory change, but suddenly
diverged after its implementation. These results help explain the di-
vergence in the rise of differentiated collateral of prime and non-prime
MBS in the early 2000s, seen in Fig. 5. Overall, Table 6 shows evi-
dence of differentiation increasing in PrimeMarket counties after the
law change, consistent with sponsor-induced competition resulting in
greater differentiation at the loan level.

Bhutta (2012) argues that effects of the HUD rule may have di-
verged from the rule’s original intent because there is limited evidence
of an overall increase in mortgage credit supply due to the HUD

Table 5
Change in sponsor competition in prime markets after the HUD rule.

PrimeMarket × 1997

PrimeMarket × 1998

PrimeMarket × 2000

PrimeMarket × 2001

PrimeMarket × 2002

PrimeMarket × 2003

PrimeMarket × 2004

PrimeMarket × 2005

PrimeMarket × 2006

PrimeMarket × 2007

PrimeMarket × 2008

Control for loan demand?
Control for time-varying County Char.?
County FE
State × Year FE

Observations
𝑅2

Double difference estimates
Local Sponsor HHI

(1)

(2)

(3)

−0.011
(0.009)
−0.003
(0.006)
−0.022***
(0.006)
−0.018***
(0.006)
−0.013***
(0.005)
−0.007
(0.005)
−0.008*
(0.005)
−0.006
(0.005)
−0.007
(0.005)
−0.006
(0.005)
−0.004
(0.010)

No
No
Yes
Yes

7655
0.823

−0.011
(0.009)
−0.003
(0.006)
−0.022***
(0.006)
−0.018***
(0.006)
−0.013***
(0.005)
−0.007
(0.005)
−0.008*
(0.004)
−0.006
(0.005)
−0.007
(0.005)
−0.006
(0.005)
−0.004
(0.010)

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

7646
0.823

−0.014
(0.010)
−0.006
(0.005)
−0.026***
(0.006)
−0.019***
(0.006)
−0.015***
(0.005)
−0.011**
(0.005)
−0.012***
(0.005)
−0.010*
(0.005)
−0.010**
(0.005)
−0.012**
(0.005)
−0.008
(0.010)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

7192
0.741

This table reports the results of dynamic differences-in-differences panel regressions
investigating:

𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑐,𝑡 = 𝛼 +

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛽𝑡(𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑐 × 𝛿𝑡) + 𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑐 + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 +

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛿𝑡 + 𝛿𝑐 + 𝜖

We estimate regressions over the database of securitized mortgages over the period
1997–2008. The dependent variable is local Sponsor HHI (Herfindahl–Hirschman Index)
based on loan balances defined at the county-year level. In our dynamic difference-in-
differences research design, PrimeMarket is an indicator variable that takes the value
of one if the percent of census tracts designated as an underserved areas falls below
the 25th percentile and zero otherwise. Column (2) includes county loan demand
and column (3) includes time-varying county-level characteristics. Additional variable
definition details can be found in Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2. All regressions include
County and State × Year fixed effects, which subsume the Prime Market indicator and
annual dummy indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the State × Year level.

rule. Not only did the rule potentially not achieve its primary goal of
increasing aggregate mortgage credit supply, but it may also have had
an unintended consequence — we document an increase in competition
among private securitizers in higher-income counties which ultimately
led to greater use of non-standard mortgages in securitized loan con-
tracts. The fact that the rule increased competition, and ultimately
differentiation, in areas that were of higher borrower quality provides a
potential explanation why differentiated mortgages grew first in prime
MBS collateral in the early 2000s, prior to non-prime MBS collateral.
This result is consistent with the second empirical prediction of our
model in Section 3. Higher-credit-quality loans have a lower threshold
of competition to warrant increased differentiation. Taken together,
our result reconciles a seemingly puzzling fact about prime borrowers’
use of non-standard mortgages by pointing to the role of sponsor
competition in affecting the timing and places where differentiation
occurred.

7. High competition and marginal borrowers

14 Of the CBSAs and counties included in our final sample, more than two-
thirds of CBSAs have only treated or control counties present. This limits our
ability to utilize CBSA × Year fixed effects in this set of empirical results.

The analysis thus far suggests that sponsor competition led to an
increase in mortgage-level product differentiation, consistent with our
model’s first theoretical prediction. These features were focused on

13 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

the prime segment in the early boom period, as shown by results in
Section 6. As non-standard features become more common, we expect
sponsors to increasingly seek alternative ways to differentiate them-
selves even more. This product differentiation may have appealed to
marginal borrowers, who could not have obtained a standard mortgage.
As described in Proposition 4 of our theory model (Section 3) and Fig. 4
Panel (b), we can consider a second threshold for competition (𝜃∗∗).
At very high levels of competition, we expect sponsor-induced product
differentiation to target the non-prime segment.15

To test this hypothesis, we first plot the time-series evolution of non-
standard mortgages across prime and marginal borrowers (Fig. 6 Panel
(a)). Separating borrowers by credit quality aligns with the model’s
classifications of ‘‘access’’ (those with regular access to credit) and
‘‘marginal’’ (those without credit access). Product differentiation is
associated with marginal borrowers in the later part of our sample. To
investigate this pattern further, we test whether there is a structural
break in the level of competition and the allocation of non-standard
mortgages across different borrower characteristics. Panel (b) of Fig. 6
shows that at very high levels of competition (HHI < 0.1), the allo-
cation of differentiated mortgages begins to dramatically tilt towards
lower credit quality borrowers. These figures are consistent with the
predictions from our theory model (Section 3.2).

∈

two spline variables SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

To formally test the effect of different regimes of competition, we
(0.1, 1) and
create
SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤 ∈ (0, 0.1) at the knot point SponsorHHI = 0.1. Note that
the spline variables are continuous measures (not indicators). We inter-
act these measures with an indicator variable for whether the borrower
is marginal or not. We then use our originator fixed effect model to
test whether higher levels competition have a differential impact for
marginal borrowers. In Table 7, we test whether the sponsor-induced
product differentiation has greater sensitivity at higher levels of com-
petition (SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤) for the marginal borrowers. A negative coeffi-
cient is obtained for SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤 × MarginalBorrower (i.e. increasing
competition for marginal borrowers) but not for SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ ×
Marginal Borrower. This difference suggests that sponsor-induced prod-
uct differentiation is greatest for marginal borrowers, but only at the
highest levels of competition. We interpret this evidence as consistent
with our model’s second prediction (Section 3.2). In Table 8 we test
whether the intensity/degree of product differentiation (measured by
the number of non-standard features) is higher for marginal borrowers
at high levels of competition, and find consistent results as well.

Finally, using HMDA data on mortgage applications we test whether
the denial rates on these applications is different for marginal borrow-
ers in high competition areas. The analysis in Table 9 is at the county
level. A lower denial rate is suggestive of borrower pool expansion.
The interaction term SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤 ×MarginalBorrower is positive and
statistically significant. Since lower HHI signals higher competition,
this result shows that at very high levels of competition (i.e. decreasing
HHI), denial rates are lowest for marginal borrowers. Although we find
a similar result for lower levels of competition in some specifications,
the economic magnitude is considerably higher at the highest levels of
competition. This evidence is consistent with the notion that, in highly
competitive areas, sponsors offered non-standard contract terms as a
means to expand the borrower pool to those with lower credit quality.
Overall, the evidence in this section provides support for the notion
that product differentiation by sponsors also led to market expansion
targeting marginal borrowers.16 Pairing the marginal borrower analysis
with our earlier results demonstrates that product differentiation served
two purposes. First, there is a fundamental motivation for sponsors

15 We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion.
16 As private label sponsor competition resulted in an expansion into the
marginal borrower segment, via differentiated loans, this change potentially
explains the decline in FHA loan originations from about 20% to 4% over the
period 2000–2007 (Demyanyk and Kolliner, 2015).

14 

to offer differentiated products to investors when facing greater com-
petition. Second, at very high levels of competition, sponsors utilize
differentiated mortgages as a way to expand the borrower pool to
marginal borrowers who may not have qualified, or desired, standard
mortgages. These results provide empirical support for the model’s pre-
dictions and help provide a supply-side explanation for the timing and
rise of differentiated mortgages across prime and non-prime borrowers.

8. Robustness checks

Our results strongly suggest that sponsor competition was an im-
portant contributor to the run-up in mortgage differentiation prior to
the Global Financial Crisis. To ensure our conclusions are not sensitive
to the empirical and modeling choices made in the analyses, we run a
battery of robustness checks around these choices/assumptions.

8.1. Addressing concerns of measurement error

To verify that our baseline results are not driven by the specific
definition of competition, we replicate our results from Table 3 us-
ing a measure of competition based on loan counts instead of loan
balances (Internet Appendix Table IA.B.10). We find consistent re-
sults. We replace the Herfindahl index using an alternative measure
of competition following Scharfstein and Sunderam (2016). Internet
Appendix Tables IA.B.11 and IA.B.12 finds consistent results using the
concentration of loans sold to the top three sponsors in a given county-
year. This evidence suggests that our results are not driven by the
specific formulation of the Herfindahl index.

In Internet Appendix Table IA.B.4, we use the original, limited
sample of originators classified by the ABSNet database to show that
our findings are not sensitive to the choice of originator definition in
Table 4. Internet Appendix Table IA.B.4 also shows that our results are
robust to alternate fixed effect structures that restrict comparisons to
observably identical loans.

For our DiD specifications, we show evidence that the choice in how
we define 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 and 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙 counties based on census tract propor-
tions does not alter our interpretation. Internet Appendix Table IA.B.5
continues to find consistent results that counties with below-median
proportion of underserved areas experience greater mortgage-level dif-
ferentiation relative to the control group, after the passage of HUD
regulation. Using the DiD framework, we also show that our choice
of clustering standard errors does not affect the statistical significance
of our main DiD tests (Internet Appendix Table IA.B.13). Finally, in
Internet Appendix C.1 we discuss concerns of the stable unit treat-
ment value assumption (SUTVA) that potentially arises from GSE entry
causing sponsors to exit particular locations. We use both location-
based and sponsor-based approaches to mitigate these concerns. In
Internet Appendix Tables IA.C.1–IA.C.4 we motivate the analyses and
find results that are nearly identical to our main DiD coefficients,
mitigating SUTVA concerns that could bias our results or interpretation.
We explain these tests in detail in Internet Appendix C.1.

Our definition of sponsor competition uses a county-level aggrega-
tion of the HHI measure (discussed in Section 4.2). Such aggregation
also allows us to account for variation in state-level regulatory changes
in the lending market via state-year fixed effects. Nevertheless, our
results are not sensitive to the unit of aggregation since we find
consistent estimates with sponsor competition defined at the state-level
(Internet Appendix Figure IA.B.3) and MSA level (Internet Appendix
C.2). Finally, Internet Appendix Table IA.B.14 shows that the main
result obtains, even without the inclusion of 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 × 𝑌 𝑒𝑎𝑟 fixed effects.

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Fig. 6. Product differentiation, marginal borrowers, sponsor competition. This figure plots product differentiation by borrower type in the time series (Panel a) and in the
cross-section of varying levels of SponsorHHI (Panel b). Panel (a) shows that the share of differentiated loans increases for marginal borrowers in the years just before the crisis. In
the early boom period, the growth in differentiated products is observed in prime borrowers. Panel (b) shows the ratio of differentiated loans in the prime segment (as a percentage
of total loans) over similar loans in the subprime segment. As we move from the right to the left on the 𝑥-axis, competition increases (SponsorHHI decreases). At lower levels
of competition, there is more product differentiation in prime relative to subprime. But this pattern reverses at high levels of competition. This regime change happens around
SponsorHHI = 0.1.

8.2. Alternative identification strategy

In Internet Appendix C.2, we provide an alternative identification
strategy that utilizes an instrument for sponsor competition at the MSA
level. Hurst et al. (2016) show that private sponsors react to changes in
local default risk of mortgages, with sponsors sourcing more loans from
areas that reduce their local default risk. Sponsors’ tendency to tilt their
loan sourcing to areas with lower default risk is then likely to affect
local sponsor competition. Thus, our alternative identification strat-
egy utilizes local default risk as an instrumental variable for sponsor
competition. Internet Appendix Figure IA.C.1 shows a strong first stage
relationship. The measure of default risk is provided at the MSA-quarter
level rather than the county-level, making a direct comparison of
magnitudes with our baseline tests difficult. Nevertheless, and despite
the different geographic level of sponsor competition, we find that

sponsor competition led to loan-level differentiation (Internet Appendix
Table IA.C.5). This helps provide yet another piece of evidence for
our main mechanism, and one that is neither predicated on the choice
of county-level aggregation nor on the effects of the HUD regulation.
We provide the result and a discussion of the exclusion restriction in
Internet Appendix C.2.

Overall, the battery of tests presented in this section strengthens our
main interpretation of the role of sponsor competition in explaining
differentiation in mortgage contracts.

9. Delinquencies of differentiated loan contracts

In this section, we compare the delinquency performance of MBS
collateral across prime and non-prime (Subprime, Alt-A) categories. We
track delinquency statuses of securitized loans over a long time horizon

15 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

(from the year of its securitization until a decade after the onset of the
crisis (i.e., 2017)). We use an indicator that takes a value of one if the
loan is in any of the following statuses: 60+ days delinquent, 90+ days
delinquent, bankrupt, foreclosed, REO or liquidated with loss.17 Ceteris
paribus, we expect delinquency rates for the collateral of (low-yield)
prime MBS to be lower than that of (higher-yield) non-prime MBS.

Table 10 presents delinquency statistics for standard and differenti-
ated loans across prime and non-prime categories. In the early boom
period (2000–2004), we find that over $90 billion of differentiated
Prime MBS collateral ended up becoming delinquent. This is higher
than the sub-total for standard loans ($68.5 bn). This period coincides
with the increase in sponsor-induced product differentiation following
the HUD regulation. The delinquency estimate is higher even relative to
differentiated collateral of the Subprime and Alt-A MBS ($24.5 bn and
$16.3 bn respectively), suggestive of higher growth in product differen-
tiation for that segment. During 2005–2008, this pattern gets reversed.
Delinquencies for non-prime categories significantly increase, coincid-
ing with our result in Section 7 that competition-induced product
differentiation targets the marginal borrower segment.

These results offer support for two non-competing interpretations.
First, the fact that delinquencies are larger in the prime segment in
the early boom period, suggests that sponsor-induced product differ-
entiation was a means to obfuscate the quality of products offered to
investors. Ghent et al. (2017) show that MBS deals with greater deal
complexity defaulted at a greater frequency than standard MBS, and
investors did not perceive differentiated products offered by sponsors
as being riskier, ex-ante. Thus, our loan-level evidence is consistent
with their findings. Second, the fact that differentiated mortgages in
the marginal borrower segment performed relatively worse later in the
sample suggests that sponsor-induced credit expansion may have led to
a build up of risk just before the crisis.

10. Conclusion

The use of non-standard mortgage features increased dramatically in
the pre-crisis period. These mortgages defaulted at significantly higher
rates in times of market distress, deepening the financial crisis. Using
a database of over 18 million securitized loans, we provide plausi-
ble causal evidence that increased competition among MBS sponsors
played a key role in driving the increase in non-standard features in
home mortgages. Sponsor-induced competition not only explains the
role of securitization markets in loan-level differentiation, but also
sheds light on why differentiation in Prime MBS preceded that of non-
Prime MBS in the early boom period. Our results strongly suggest that
securitization sponsors are not merely passive conduits of differentiated
mortgages, but rather contributors to the significant increase in non-
standard mortgages during the pre-crisis period. We have shown that
the government-mandated purchases of loans from underserved areas
can have unintended consequences, raising potential additional costs
regarding the effectiveness of affordable housing regulation. Our evi-
dence of MBS sponsors influencing the design of the underlying assets
on which the derivatives are written presents an interesting challenge
for theoretical models on security design.

Following the financial crisis, private label securitizers exited the
RMBS market, leaving the current market to be predominantly run
by the GSEs. Yet, the origination market remains highly competitive
with the increasing entry of non-bank mortgage companies (Buchak
et al., 2018), who rely almost exclusively on selling loans to the

Table 6
Differentiation induced in prime markets by the HUD rule of 2000.

Double difference estimates
Loan differentiation

(1)

(2)

(3)

PrimeMarket × 1997

PrimeMarket × 1998

PrimeMarket × 2000

PrimeMarket × 2001

PrimeMarket × 2002

PrimeMarket × 2003

PrimeMarket × 2004

PrimeMarket × 2005

PrimeMarket × 2006

PrimeMarket × 2007

PrimeMarket × 2008

0.002
(0.011)
−0.004
(0.009)
0.014
(0.010)
0.030**
(0.012)
0.043***
(0.014)
0.035***
(0.008)
0.047***
(0.007)
0.041***
(0.007)
0.032***
(0.008)
0.022***
(0.008)
0.001
(0.013)

Control for loan demand?
Control for time-varying County Char.?
Sponsor FE
County FE
State × Year FE

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.002
(0.011)
−0.004
(0.009)
0.014
(0.010)
0.029**
(0.012)
0.044***
(0.014)
0.036***
(0.008)
0.048***
(0.007)
0.042***
(0.007)
0.033***
(0.007)
0.023***
(0.008)
0.004
(0.013)

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.005
(0.013)
−0.002
(0.012)
0.010
(0.011)
0.023**
(0.011)
0.032***
(0.012)
0.021**
(0.010)
0.030***
(0.009)
0.021**
(0.009)
0.009
(0.010)
−0.001
(0.011)
−0.021
(0.014)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
𝑅2

18,022,263
0.212

17,721,204
0.212

17,462,253
0.211

This table reports the results of dynamic differences-in-differences panel regressions
investigating:

1Differentiation𝑗,𝑐,𝑡

= 𝛼 +

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛽𝑡(𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑐 × 𝛿𝑡) + 𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑐 + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 +

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

𝛿𝑡 + 𝛿𝑐 + 𝜖

indicator variable that

We estimate regressions over the database of securitized mortgages over the period
1997–2008. The dependent variable is a loan-level
takes
the value of one if the loan contains any of the following features: Hybrid ARM,
Balloon, Interest Only, Pay Teaser, Negative Amortization, Option ARM. In our dynamic
difference-in-differences research design, PrimeMarket is an indicator variable that takes
the value of one if the percent of census tracts designated as an underserved areas falls
below the 25th percentile and zero otherwise. Column (2) includes county loan demand.
Column (3) includes the following time-varying county-level characteristics: Population,
Employment, and Personal Income at the county level. Additional variable definition
details can be found in Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2. All regressions include County
and State × Year fixed effects, which subsume the Prime Market indicator and annual
dummy indicators. Standard errors are clustered at the State × Year level.

GSEs. As a result of GSE dominance and post-crisis regulation, mort-
gages are increasingly ‘‘standardized’’.18 In light of our findings, this
trend of increasing non-bank competition along with institutional con-
straints that standardize product features predicts a shift towards pro-
cess-based differentiation in today’s mortgage market. The proliferation
of technology-based lenders (i.e. FinTech) is consistent with these play-
ers differentiating on the cost/process dimension — via new, automated
loan processing and underwriting methods. Indeed, recent research
provides robust empirical evidence that FinTech originators have faster
loan processing times (Fuster et al., 2019). Thus, our evidence on
the link between competition and product differentiation points to a
mechanism that is generalizable to today’s mortgage markets.

17 Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2 provides a complete definition. For loans
classified as ‘‘Other’’
in the ABSNet database, we trace their 12 month
history and re-classify them based on whether they were delinquent or
current/paid-in-full based on that history.

18 The main reasons for this trend include (a) adherence to GSE conforming
standards to be eligible for securitization, and (b) greater originations of
loans satisfying the Qualified Mortgage (QM) rule introduced in 2014 by the
Consumer Finance Protection Bureau (which disallowed non-standard features
such as interest-only and balloon payments).

16 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Table 7
Competition, product differentiation and marginal borrowers.

Spline regression

Product Differentiation Indicator

SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤 × Marginal Borrower

SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ × Marginal Borrower

SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤

SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

Marginal Borrower

Controls
Sponsor FE
Originator × State × Year FE
Originator × CBSA × Year FE

Observations
𝑅2

(1)

−5.949***
(0.743)

1.108***
(0.241)
3.800***
(0.795)
−1.082***
(0.254)
0.288***
(0.062)

No
Yes
Yes
–

(2)

−5.870***
(0.733)

1.176***
(0.214)
4.117***
(0.683)
−1.045***
(0.210)
0.288***
(0.061)

Yes
Yes
Yes
–

(3)

−5.866***
(0.735)

1.168***
(0.217)
4.064***
(0.681)
−1.033***
(0.213)
0.288***
(0.061)

Yes
Yes
Yes
–

(4)

−6.112***
(0.457)

1.333***
(0.165)
4.282***
(0.428)
−1.128***
(0.159)
0.311***
(0.038)

Yes
Yes
–
Yes

16,319,290
0.363

15,817,053
0.364

15,817,053
0.364

15,727,555
0.374

This table reports the results of a spline regression investigating:

1Differentiation𝑗,𝑐,𝑡

= 𝛼 + 𝜷𝟏(SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤
+ 𝜷𝟑(SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤

𝑐,𝑡−1 × MarginalB.) + 𝜷𝟐(SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

𝑐,𝑡−1 × MarginalB.)

𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝜷𝟒(SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 + 𝛿𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔.×𝑆𝑡.×𝑌 𝑟 + 𝜖

We estimate regressions over the database of securitized mortgages over the period 1997–2008. The dependent variable is an indicator that
captures the incidence of product differentiation in a securitized loan. Differentiation for individual loans is calculated based on indicators for
any of the following features: Hybrid ARM, Balloon, Interest Only, Negative Amortization, Pay Teaser, Option ARM. Importantly, the empirical
strategy includes Originator × State × Year fixed effects, so the identifying variation compares the same originator in the same state at the
same point in time, but exposed to differing levels of sponsor competition. The two main variables SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑐,𝑡−1 are
splines of SponsorHHI, defined using the cutoff point SponsorHHI = 0.1 motivated by Panel (b) of Fig. 6. MarginalBorrower is an indicator
for borrowers classified as Subprime and Alt-A. Columns 2–4 include county-level, time-varying controls. Columns 3–4 include loan demand
which is measured as the lagged ratio of HMDA applications to HMDA originations in a given county and year. The fixed effects included in
each regression are denoted below the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the State × Year level. All variables are defined in Internet
Appendix Table IA.B.2.

𝑐,𝑡−1 and SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

Table 8
Competition, product differentiation intensity and marginal borrowers.

Spline regression

Degree of Product Differentiation

SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤 × Marginal Borrower

SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ × Marginal Borrower

SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤

SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

Marginal Borrower

Controls
Sponsor FE
Originator × State × Year FE
Originator × CBSA × Year FE

Observations
𝑅2

(1)

−5.902***
(1.836)

2.377***
(0.453)
2.956
(1.848)
−2.196***
(0.459)
0.043
(0.165)

No
Yes
Yes
–

(2)

−5.835***
(1.800)

2.545***
(0.410)
3.681**
(1.623)
−2.131***
(0.385)
0.050
(0.163)

Yes
Yes
Yes
–

(3)

−5.827***
(1.805)

2.529***
(0.415)
3.568**
(1.621)
−2.106***
(0.390)
0.050
(0.164)

Yes
Yes
Yes
–

(4)

−6.330***
(1.059)

2.828***
(0.317)
4.534***
(0.829)
−2.257***
(0.309)
0.097
(0.095)

Yes
Yes
–
Yes

16,319,290
0.459

15,817,053
0.460

15,817,053
0.460

15,727,555
0.469

This table reports the results of a spline regression investigating:

𝑦𝑖,𝑐,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝜷𝟏(SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤
+ 𝜷𝟑(SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤

𝑐,𝑡−1 × MarginalB.) + 𝜷𝟐(SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

𝑐,𝑡−1 × MarginalB.)

𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝜷𝟒(SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 + 𝛿𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔.×𝑆𝑡.×𝑌 𝑟 + 𝜖

We estimate regressions over the database of securitized mortgages over the period 1997–2008. The dependent variable 𝑦𝑖 is a count of the
number of differentiated features introduced in the same securitized loan. Differentiation for individual loans is based on any of the following
features: Hybrid ARM, Balloon, Interest Only, Negative Amortization, Pay Teaser, Option ARM. Importantly, the empirical strategy includes
Originator × State × Year fixed effects, so the identifying variation compares the same originator in the same state at the same point in time,
but exposed to differing levels of sponsor competition. The two main variables SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑐,𝑡−1 are splines of SponsorHHI,
defined using the cutoff point SponsorHHI = 0.1 motivated by Panel (b) of Fig. 6. MarginalBorrower is an indicator for borrowers classified
as Subprime and Alt-A. Columns 2–4 include county-level, time-varying controls. Columns 3–4 include loan demand which is measured as the
lagged ratio of HMDA applications to HMDA originations in a given county and year. The fixed effects included in each regression are denoted
below the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the State × Year level. All variables are defined in Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2.

𝑐,𝑡−1 and SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

17 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

Table 9
Mortgage denial rates are lowest when high competition targets marginal borrowers.

Spline regression

Denial rates (County-level)

SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤 × MarginalB.Share

SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ × MarginalB.Share

MarginalBorrowerShare

SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤

SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

Controls
County FE
State × Year FE

Observations
𝑅2

(1)

1.159***
(0.320)

−0.020
(0.021)
−0.098***
(0.030)
−1.513***
(0.292)
0.018
(0.019)

No
Yes
Yes

7653
0.844

(2)

0.721**
(0.307)

0.048*
(0.029)
−0.075***
(0.028)
−1.067***
(0.282)
−0.038
(0.026)

Yes
Yes
Yes

7653
0.878

(3)

0.755***
(0.288)

0.096***
(0.033)
−0.080***
(0.026)
−1.087***
(0.264)
−0.083***
(0.031)

Yes
Yes
Yes

7255
0.884

This table reports the results of a spline regression investigating:

𝑦𝑐,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝜷𝟏(SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤
+ 𝜷𝟑(SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤

𝑐,𝑡−1 × MarginalB.Share) + 𝜷𝟐(SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

𝑐,𝑡−1 × MarginalB.Share)

𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝜷𝟒(SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ

𝑐,𝑡−1) + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡−1 + 𝛿County + 𝛿𝑆𝑡.×𝑌 𝑟 + 𝜖

We estimate regressions over the database of securitized mortgages over the period 1997–2008. The
dependent variable 𝑦𝑐,𝑡 is the ratio of number of mortgage applications denied a given County-Year over
the total applications in a given County-Year. We perform this regression at the county level because we do
not have a direct mapping of ABSNet with HMDA at the loan level. The two main variables SponsorHHI𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑐,𝑡−1
and SponsorHHIℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ
𝑐,𝑡−1 are splines of SponsorHHI, defined using the cutoff point SponsorHHI = 0.1 motivated
by Panel (b) of Fig. 6. MarginalBorrowerShare is computed as the share of borrowers classified as Subprime
and Alt-A in the ABSNet database. Column (2) includes county loan demand as a control and column (3)
includes time-varying county-level characteristics as controls. The fixed effects included in each regression
are denoted below the regression. Standard errors are clustered at the State × Year level. All variables are
defined in Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2.

Table 10
Delinquencies by product differentiation and securitization cohort.

(Values in $ bn)

Early boom period
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

Sub-total

Pre-crisis period
2005
2006
2007
2008

Sub-total

Total

Subprime

Standard
(1)

Differentiated
(2)

Alt-A

Standard
(3)

Differentiated
(4)

Prime

Standard
(5)

Differentiated
(6)

5.64
5.46
19.39
36.8
56.0

123.29

78.09
69.48
25.46
0.58

173.61

296.91

0.19
0.37
1.18
4.86
17.90

24.51

58.31
132.14
75.72
0.60

266.77

291.28

0.31
3.13
2.96
7.54
10.02

23.97

11.85
17.50
14.06
0.02

43.43

67.40

0.03
2.98
3.68
2.23
7.34

16.26

42.99
87.78
69.51
0.28

200.56

216.82

0.53
5.69
14.93
29.04
18.32

68.52

15.88
11.74
9.70
0.55

37.9

0.66
1.47
19.31
26.85
42.90

91.20

33.47
37.48
27.92
0.62

99.49

106.40

190.68

This table presents the economic significance of delinquencies in the collateral of Subprime, Alt-A and Prime MBS. Note that the years do not
refer to the year of delinquency, rather they refer to the year of securitization (deal closing). Values are in billions of dollars based on loan
balances at origination. The delinquency amount within each category is further broken down into standard and differentiated collateral. A
loan is defined as ‘‘Differentiated’’ if it takes any of the following features: Negative Amortization, Interest Only, Hybrid ARM, Option ARM,
Balloon Payment or Pay Teaser. All variables are defined in Internet Appendix Table IA.B.2.

18 

P. Haslag et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103947 

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Coval, J.D., Moskowitz, T.J., 2001. The geography of investment: Informed trading and

Peter Haslag: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Kandarp Srinivasan:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project
administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization. Anjan V. Thakor: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Data
curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have nothing to disclose.

Data availability

Replication Program for "Competition, Differentiation and Crises: Evi
dence from 18 Million Securitized Loans" (Reference data) (Mendeley
Data)

Appendix A. Supplementary data

asset prices. J. Polit. Econ. 109 (4), 811–841.

Demyanyk, Y., Kolliner, D., 2015. FHA lending rebounds in wake of subprime crisis.

Econ. Trends.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Korgaonkar, S., 2019. Partial deregulation and competition:

Effects on risky mortgage origination. Manage. Sci..

Dokko, J., Keys, B.J., Relihan, L., 2019. Affordability, financial innovation, and the

start of the housing boom.

Fahlenbrach, R., Prilmeier, R., Stulz, R.M., 2012. This time is the same: Using bank
performance in 1998 to explain bank performance during the recent financial crisis.
J. Finance 67 (6), 2139–2185.

FCIC, 2011. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report. Final Report of

the National
Commission on the Causes ofthe Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States.
Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Schnabl, P., Vickery, J., 2019. The role of technology in

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1854–1899.

Gabaix, X., Laibson, D., 2006. Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information

suppression in competitive markets. Q. J. Econ. 121 (2), 505–540.

Gabriel, S.A., Rosenthal, S.S., 2010. Do the GSEs expand the supply of mortgage credit?
New evidence of crowd out in the secondary mortgage market. J. Public Econ. 94
(11–12), 975–986.

Garmaise, M.J., 2013. The attractions and perils of flexible mortgage lending. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 26 (10), 2548–2582.

Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2012. Neglected risks, financial innovation, and

financial fragility. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (3), 452–468.

Ghent, A.C., Torous, W.N., Valkanov, R., 2017. Complexity in structured finance. Rev.

Econ. Stud..

Griffin, J.M., Maturana, G., 2016. Who facilitated misreporting in securitized

loans? Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (2), 384–419.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

Hurst, E., Keys, B.J., Seru, A., Vavra, J., 2016. Regional redistribution through the US

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103947.

References

mortgage market. Amer. Econ. Rev. 106 (10), 2982–3028.

Judge, K., 2012. Fragmentation nodes: a study in financial innovation, complexity, and

systemic risk. Stan. L. Rev. 64, 657.

Keys, B.J., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2010. Did securitization lead to lax

screening? Evidence from subprime loans. Q. J. Econ. 125 (1), 307–362.

Acolin, A., An, X., Wachter, S.M., 2022. Lending competition,
nontraditional mortgages. Real Estate Econ. 50 (2), 340–365.

regulation, and

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., Stoffman, N., 2017. Technological innovation,

resource allocation, and growth. Q. J. Econ. 132 (2), 665–712.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., 2005. Competition and

Krieger, J.L., Li, X., Thakor, R.T., 2022. Find and replace: R&D investment following

innovation: An inverted-U relationship. Q. J. Econ. 120 (2), 701–728.

the erosion of existing products. Manage. Sci. 68 (9), 6552–6571.

Amromin, G., Huang, J., Sialm, C., Zhong, E., 2018. Complex mortgages. Rev. Financ.

Kurz, M., 1994. On the structure and diversity of rational beliefs. Econ. Theory 4 (6),

22 (6), 1975–2007.

877–900.

Ashcraft, A.B., Gooriah, K., Kermani, A., 2019. Does skin-in-the-game affect security

performance? J. Financ. Econ. 134 (2), 333–354.

Ashcraft, A.B., Schuermann, T., et al., 2008. Understanding the securitization of

subprime mortgage credit. Found. Trends® Financ. 2 (3), 191–309.

Levitin, A.J., Wachter, S.M., 2020. The Great American Housing Bubble: What Went
Wrong and How We Can Protect Ourselves in the Future. Harvard University Press.
Mian, A., Sufi, A., 2009. The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence

from the U.S. mortgage default crisis. Q. J. Econ. 124 (4), 1449–1496.

Asriyan, V., Foarta, D., Vanasco, V., 2023. The good, the bad, and the complex: Product

Nadauld, T.D., Sherlund, S.M., 2013. The impact of securitization on the expansion of

design with asymmetric information. Am. Econ. J.: Microecon. 15 (2), 187–226.

subprime credit. J. Financ. Econ. 107 (2), 454–476.

Back, K., 1993. Asymmetric information and options. Rev. Financ. Stud. 6 (3), 435–472.
Berger, A.N., Klapper, L.F., Turk-Ariss, R., 2017. Bank competition and financial
stability. In: Handbook of Competition in Banking and Finance. Edward Elgar
Publishing.

Piskorski, T., Tchistyi, A., 2010. Optimal mortgage design. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (8),

3098–3140.

Purnanandam, A., 2011. Originate-to-distribute model and the subprime mortgage

crisis. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (6), 1881–1915.

Bhutta, N., 2012. GSE activity and mortgage supply in lower-income and minority
neighborhoods: The effect of the affordable housing goals. J. Real Estate Financ.
Econ. 45 (1), 238–261.

Scharfstein, D., Sunderam, A., 2016. Market Power

in Mortgage Lending and
the Transmission of Monetary Policy. Working Paper 2, Harvard University,
Unpublished.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and

Spiegler, R., 2016. Choice complexity and market competition. Annu. Rev. Econ. 8,

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

1–25.

Carlin, B.I., 2009. Strategic price complexity in retail financial markets. J. Financ. Econ.

Thakor, A.V., 2012. Incentives to innovate and financial crises. J. Financ. Econ. 103

91 (3), 278–287.

(1), 130–148.

Célérier, C., Vallée, B., 2017. Catering to investors through security design: Headline

Thakor, R.T., Merton, R.C., 2023. Trust, transparency, and complexity. Rev. Financ.

rate and complexity. Q. J. Econ. 132 (3), 1469–1508.

Stud. 36 (8), 3213–3256.

Cocco, J.F., 2013. Evidence on the benefits of alternative mortgage products. J. Finance

Vanasco, V., 2017. The downside of asset screening for market liquidity. J. Finance 72

68 (4), 1663–1690.

(5), 1937–1982.

19 

