Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Direct lenders in the U.S. middle market✩
Tetiana Davydiuk a, Tatyana Marchuk b,c,∗, Samuel Rosen d
a Carey Business School, Johns Hopkins University, 100 International Drive, 21202, Baltimore, MD, USA
b BI Norwegian Business School, Nydalsveien 37, 0442, Oslo, Norway
c CEPR, London, UK
d Fox School of Business, Temple University, 1801 Liacouras Walk, 19122, Philadelphia, PA, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/3r3zsmx34k/1

Keywords:
Business development companies
Direct lending
Private debt
Middle market
Economic growth

1. Introduction

This paper studies the rise of direct lending using a comprehensive dataset of investments by business
development companies (BDC). We exploit three exogenous shocks to credit supply, including new banking
regulations and a major finance company collapse, to establish that BDC capital acts as a substitute for
traditional financing. Using firm-level data, we further document that firms’ access to BDC funding stimulates
their employment growth and patenting activity. Beyond credit provision, BDCs contribute to firm growth
through managerial assistance.

Firms’ access to credit plays an essential role in generating economic
growth. In periods when credit becomes scarce, firms that are risky
may have difficulty qualifying for conventional forms of financing. This
issue has become particularly germane after the Financial Crisis of
2007–2008, which triggered the tightening of regulation in the banking
sector and subsequently impeded credit supply. These changes in the
credit environment contributed to a surge in direct lenders and, in par-
ticular, business development companies (BDCs) — yet understudied
players in the financial system.

BDCs are a special type of closed-end investment company that
provide funding directly to businesses with annual revenues between

$10 million and $1 billion — so-called middle-market firms. Over the
past two decades, the BDC sector has grown rapidly, with asset growth
close to 35% per annum, reaching almost $100 billion in total assets by
the end of 2017 (Fig. 1). The size of the BDC sector is comparable to the
size of the well-established venture capital sector (VC), with deployed
assets under management of about $250 billion at the same date.1
While the existing literature has extensively studied the importance
of early-stage financing for entrepreneurship and economic growth,
the understanding of the direct lending space and middle-market seg-
ment funding is limited.2 In this paper, we investigate whether BDC
capital can act as a substitute for traditional financing and whether
the availability of private debt capital contributes to firm growth and
innovation.

✩

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank the editor and an anonymous referee, as well as our discussants Sergey Chernenko, Steven Kaplan,
Bernadette Minton, Raluca Roman, and Daniel Weagley for their valuable and thorough feedback. We also thank Paul Ehling, Tim Eisert, Rüdiger Fahlenbrach,
Manasa Gopal, Ralf Meisenzahl, Chester Spatt, and Adam Winegar, as well as seminar and conference participants at Aalto University School of Business, BI
Norwegian Business School, Fox Business School, Durham University, Johns Hopkins University, Tepper Business School, Showcasing Women in Finance (EU),
MoFiR Workshop on Banking, Early Career Women in Finance Conference, NBER Summer Institute, Private Equity Research Virtual Symposium, European Winter
Meeting of the Econometric Society, the American Finance Association meetings, Fixed Income and Financial Institutions Conference, Oslo Macro Group Meetings,
and USC Macro-Finance Workshop. Jong Hyun Kim, Lu Lu, and Yevhen Riabtsun provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from the Young Scholars
Interdisciplinary Forum (Temple University), BI Open Research Funds, and Center for Asset Pricing Research (BI) is gratefully acknowledged. Davydiuk also
received financial support from National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant 2018854 and Rosen from NSF Grant 2018973. This paper was previously circulated as
‘‘Direct Lending in the U.S. Middle Market.’’ All remaining errors are ours.

∗ Corresponding author at: BI Norwegian Business School, Nydalsveien 37, 0442, Oslo, Norway.

E-mail addresses:

tetianav.davydiuk@jhu.edu (T. Davydiuk), tatyana.marchuk@bi.no (T. Marchuk), sir@temple.edu (S. Rosen).

1 Preqin reports that the assets under management of VC funds is $342.9 billion as of the end of 2017, including $96 billion of dry powder. According to OECD

(2020), the deployed venture and growth capital constitutes $82 billion.

2 See, e.g., Rin et al. (2013) and Metrick and Yasuda (2021) for reviews of the literature studying the VC space.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103946
Received 26 February 2024; Received in revised form 4 September 2024; Accepted 7 September 2024

Available online 17 September 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

academic literature.4 Business development companies were created in
the 1980s with the goal to stimulate the flow of capital to small- and
mid-sized private firms. However, the BDC sector began to grow signif-
icantly only in the early 2000s. BDCs represent a hybrid of traditional
banks and private equity funds: similar to a bank, they extend term
loans and lines of credit to middle-market firms, but much like a pri-
vate equity fund, they provide equity financing along with managerial
assistance. In exchange for charging a premium of 4%–5% on their
debt securities relative to bank loans (Chernenko et al., 2022), BDCs
offer their borrowers significant flexibility, loan tailoring, quick deal
execution, and loose covenants. To sustain their investment activities,
BDCs rely on capital markets to secure both equity and debt financing.
Apart from that, they borrow from banks through revolving credit
facilities and term loans. Even though their minimum equity-to-assets
ratio permitted by regulation is 50% during our period of analysis,
BDCs maintain on average a ratio of 60%–70%, given the high riskiness
of their portfolios. Overall, BDCs have established themselves as a
growing segment within the space of private debt funds, constituting
a quarter of the total private debt investments by the end of 2017.

We next aim to understand the factors driving the growth of the
BDC sector. To this end, we exploit three exogenous negative shocks to
the supply of capital to middle-market firms by traditional banks and
finance companies. Specifically, we rely on (i) the first implementation
of regulatory stress tests for bank holding companies under the Supervi-
sory Capital Assessment Program in 2009 (SCAP shock), (ii) the collapse
of one of the largest finance companies the CIT Group (CIT shock), and
(iii) the changes in accounting standards related to the consolidation of
variable interest entities (VIEs) for bank holding companies according
to the FAS 166/167 regulation (FAS 166/167 shock). Both the SCAP
and FAS 166/167 shocks prompted banks to recapitalize and employ a
flight-to-quality strategy, thereby reducing the credit supply available
to risky borrowers such as middle-market firms. Since debt markets
feature borrower segmentation, with finance companies serving riskier
firms compared to banks (Carey et al., 1998), the CIT Group failure
also constitutes a contractionary capital supply shock in the middle
market. We therefore expect that BDCs are more likely to enter counties
with a shortage of funding by affected traditional lenders due to BDCs’
specialization in funding the middle-market firms. For all shocks, we
identify treated counties as those with the presence of affected lenders.
In a difference-in-differences setting, we provide evidence that BDC
capital acts as a substitute to financing provided by traditional lenders.
Specifically, we document that treated counties have a 2%–6% higher
presence of BDCs than counties in the control group following the
capital supply shock. In dollar terms, we find that BDCs allocate on
average $5.3–$41.4 million more debt capital to a treated county
relative to a control one. To corroborate our identification strategy,
we demonstrate that there were no significant differences in the entry
of BDCs and BDC debt investment amounts between the treated and
control groups of counties prior to the shocks. Our findings are in
line with the views of BDC investment managers, who often claim to
target middle-market firms precisely because they are ‘‘underserved’’.
Repeating this difference-in-differences analysis for PD funds, we find
similar evidence. For example, treated counties have a 5%–19% higher
presence of PD funds than counties in the control group. Finally, we
show that among affected counties BDCs are more likely to enter those
largely served by the national banking institutions, where they face less
competition from incumbent local banks.

In a manner similar to VC funds, we find that BDCs target firms
with high growth potential and, in particular, innovative firms. In a
triple difference specification, we show that among treated counties
BDCs allocate on average $8.7–$48.4 million more debt capital to a
high-tech county that to a non-high-tech county following the shocks.

Fig. 1. Size of the BDC sector. The figure depicts the aggregate total assets of publicly
traded and privately held BDCs along with their count as reported by SNL Financial.
BDCs with missing total assets are excluded from the count. The data on total assets are
real quarterly observations from 2001:Q1 to 2017:Q4, expressed in billions of December
2017 dollars.

For our analysis, we construct a novel database of BDC investments
to assess the role of direct lenders in financing the middle market and
their importance in fostering firm growth. First, we provide a system-
atic analysis of BDCs and identify the key properties of their investment
model. Second, we investigate the factors that determine the propensity
of BDCs to enter specific lending markets. To this end, we exploit
three contractionary shocks to credit supply: the introduction of stress
tests for bank holding companies, the 2009 collapse of a major finance
company, and the adoption of the new accounting standards regarding
the consolidation of off-balance items for banks. In a difference-in-
differences setting, we show that BDCs invest in areas with a shortage of
financing by traditional lenders, indicating that their capital can act as a
substitute.3 Furthermore, leveraging a new dataset of private debt deals
from Preqin, we find that PD funds follow similar investment strategies
as BDCs and enter areas subject to contractionary credit supply shocks.
These similarities suggest that we can gain insights into an opaque
private debt space through the lens of BDC investment allocations.

Finally, firm-level data reveal that BDC-funded firms experience
higher employment growth and file more patents following BDC invest-
ment. Beyond the credit provision, BDCs contribute to firm employment
growth through managerial assistance. Our findings indicate that BDC
capital plays an essential role in the growth of middle-market firms.

Our analysis relies an extensive database of BDC investments hand-
collected from publicly available filings. Our quarterly database covers
the period 2001 through 2017 and it includes 69 BDCs, about 10,000
portfolio firms, and over 20,000 individual debt investments. For each
debt investment, we record such characteristics as debt type, deal size,
industry, interest rate, and maturity date. Importantly, we determine
the geographic areas in which BDCs concentrate their investment activ-
ity by hand collecting the exact addresses of their portfolio firms from
BDCs’ capital registration statements. This level of data granularity is
unique in the space of private debt investments, which is typically
characterized by limited disclosure due to lack of regulatory oversight.
As the first step of our investigation, we describe the institutional
background and assess the investment model of BDCs, which provides
the necessary context for our subsequent analysis. This paper is the
first to conduct a comprehensive study of these direct lenders in the

3 Even though a finance company can be classified as a shadow bank, many
finance companies provide financing to small- and middle-market segments. By
traditional lenders, we therefore understand banking institutions and finance
companies.

4 Boehm et al. (2004) study the legal aspects of BDCs as investment
vehicles, while Beltratti and Bock (2018) and Munday et al. (2018) provide
institutional background on the BDC sector and analyze the performance of
BDC stocks.

2 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

The comparable estimates for a high-R&D-intensive county relative to
a low-R&D-intensive county are $8.2–$49.9 million.5 These findings
suggest that BDC debt investments can be particularly well-suited for
firms active in high-tech and high-R&D-intensive industries and as such
can promote innovation.

Using firm-level data, we analyze the effects of firms’ access to
BDC financing on their employment growth and patenting activity.
In an event study, we document that BDC debt investments enable
firms to increase their employment growth by 0.8%–1.2% per annum
relative to their employment growth in the pre-investment period.
We continue to find similar effects on the employment growth in
a staggered difference-in-differences design (Borusyak et al., 2024),
where we compare the employment growth for firms that received
BDC investment relative to firms that have not yet received BDC
funding. Additionally, we show that firms experience an even higher
employment growth following the BDC investment if they receive more
managerial assistance from their lenders. Importantly, our findings
extend to a set of middle-market firms financed by PD funds implying
that our insights apply to the broader and more opaque private debt
space. Finally, we find a positive effect of BDC funding on firms’
patenting activity. BDC-funded firms file 2% more patents per quarter
after obtaining funding, representing about a 10% increase from the
average patenting frequency.

Next, we estimate the causal effect of BDC funding on firms’ em-
ployment growth by exploiting our three capital supply shocks. We
document that BDC-funded firms located in counties with low shortages
of traditional financing experience a 0.9% higher employment growth
following the shock. By contrast, the employment growth of firms
located in counties with high exposure to the shocks is 1.1% lower
relative to firms in counties with low shock exposure. The sum of these
estimates implies that BDC-funded firms were merely able to substitute
loss of funding from traditional lenders with BDC capital.

Overall, our findings are consistent with the view that small and
risky firms have been credit rationed in the debt markets in the period
after the 2007–2008 Financial Crisis. We not only provide empirical
support that BDCs are filling in this lending gap by extending funding
to middle-market firms, but also that their financing plays an important
role in promoting firm growth and innovation. To assess the impor-
tance of nonbank financing for the growth of the middle-market sector
overall, one needs to extend the analysis beyond BDCs and private
debt funds to other middle-market lenders such as finance companies,
FinTech lenders, and middle-market CLOs (see, e.g., Gopal and Schnabl,
2022).

Related Literature. Our paper contributes to the emerging liter-
ature on the role of nonbank institutions in the financial sector. As
the share of nonbank financial intermediation continues to increase
both in the U.S. and worldwide policymakers have become concerned
about potential risks originating in this less-regulated segment of the
economy.6 From the macro-financial stability perspective, it is crucial
to distinguish between bank and nonbank credit due to strong nonsyn-
chronicities in their dynamics throughout the business cycle as it allows
to sustain the availability of capital to borrowers (Herman et al., 2017;
Kemp et al., 2018; Elliott et al., 2024). Though the BDC sector is still
relatively small compared to the entire financial sector in the U.S. and
thus is unlikely to pose substantial systemic risks, it is a rapidly growing
segment within the space of private debt investments, and BDC capital
constitutes an important source of financing for middle-market firms.

5 We designate a county to be high-tech if its employment share in high-
tech industries as defined by Hecker (2005) is above the cross-sectional
median. We similarly identify a county as high-R&D-intensive based on the
definition in Galindo-Rueda and Verger (2016).

6 Among recent papers investigating the rise of shadow banking sector
are Claessens et al. (2023), Cucic and Gorea (2024) and Aldasoro et al.
(2023). Jiang et al. (2020) studies the characteristics of nonbank financial
intermediaries.

The tightening of regulation in the banking sector after the Financial
Crisis of 2007–2008 has impeded the flow of credit to borrowers,
thereby causing them to substitute away from traditional banks to less-
regulated financial institutions.7 In the U.S. mortgage market, Buchak
et al. (2018) and Fuster et al. (2019) find a significant shift towards
mortgage originations by shadow bank lenders and, in particular, Fin-
Tech lenders. In contrast, we focus on the role of nonbank institu-
tions in the corporate debt markets. Using novel data from Uniform
Commercial Code, Gopal and Schnabl (2022) document that finance
companies and FinTech lenders offset the contraction of credit supply
to small businesses by banks following the Financial Crisis. Our analysis
contributes to this literature by providing evidence of the substitu-
Irani et al. (2020)
tion of bank credit with BDC and PD financing.
and Neuhann and Saidi (2016) highlight the importance of nonbank
intermediaries in the U.S. corporate syndicated loan market as ultimate
holders of loans originated by banks. In our paper, we document that
nonbank lenders act as both originators and holders of loans in the
middle-market segment.

Since BDCs are a growing part of the larger private debt sector,
our analysis complements the study by Munday et al. (2018), who
provide an overview of the performance of private credit funds in the
U.S. Furthermore, our paper is closely connected to Loumioti (2022),
who analyzes the institutional composition of direct lending space and
links the rise of direct lending to recent changes in the regulation
of the banking industry. Novel to the literature, our study provides
a systematic analysis of business development companies and their
investment activities. More importantly, we establish causal evidence
on how the contraction in credit supply from traditional lenders leads
to the entry and growth of nonbank capital providers.

Our paper also provide insights into the middle market — an
understudied yet important part of the U.S. economy. In this context,
our study is closely related to the analysis of Chernenko et al. (2022),
who examine the terms of nonbank loans for a large set of publicly
traded middle-market firms. Due to the eligibility requirements for
portfolio firms, BDCs primarily specialize in financing private firms and,
as a result, constitute only a small share of the lenders considered
by Chernenko et al. (2022). The contribution of our paper therefore
is to analyze capital provision within less transparent segment of the
middle market and highlight the importance of the private debt for the
employment growth of middle-market firms.

Our firm-level analysis complements the existing literature that
assesses real effects of credit expansion. While we focus on funding
provided by BDCs, Samila and Sorenson (2011), Puri and Zarutskie
(2012), and Gonzalez-Uribe and Paravisini (2019) analyze real effects
from equity investments by venture capital and private equity funds.
Similar to Gopal and Schnabl (2022), we investigate the entry of
nonbank lenders and provide evidence that BDC debt investments
act as a substitute to funding provided by traditional lenders. In a
broader sense, our study is related to literature on real effects from
small business lending. While Craig et al. (2007), Brown and Earle
(2017) and Greenstone et al. (2020) argue that the impact of Small
Business Administration (SBA) guaranteed lending on growth is either
economically small or negligible, we find a positive effect of BDC
funding on firms’ employment growth and patenting activity.

2. Systematic analysis of the BDC sector

2.1. Institutional background

Business development companies (BDCs) were created through the
Small Business Investment Incentive Act of 1980 (‘‘1980 Amendments’’),

7 Chen et al. (2017), Bord et al. (2021), Cortés et al. (2020), and Begley
and Srinivasan (2022) document a significant decrease in funding extended to
small firms following the tightening of regulation in the banking sector.

3 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

which aimed to relieve many restrictions in the Investment Company Act
of 1940 (the ‘‘1940 Act’’) and facilitate the flow of capital to small- and
mid-sized private firms. After their initial appeal in the 1980s, however,
the popularity of BDCs was rather modest until the early 2000s, when
we see that the number of BDCs and their assets under management
begin to significantly increase (see Fig. 1).

A BDC is a special category of closed-end investment company.
Under the 1980 Amendments, BDCs benefit from relaxed requirements
on external debt issuance and greater flexibility with respect to investor
compensation than typical closed-end funds. In return, BDCs are subject
to a number of restrictions on their activity. Specifically, BDCs are
required to hold at least 70% of their investments in eligible assets,
which primarily consist of cash, government securities, and investments
in eligible portfolio firms. The latter in turn include all private firms
and public U.S. firms with equity market capitalization of up to $250
million.8 Aside from the eligible asset requirement, a unique feature
of BDCs is that they are required to provide substantial managerial
assistance to their portfolio firms. BDCs typically provide significant
guidance and counsel concerning the management, operations, or busi-
ness objectives and policies of their portfolio firms (Boehm et al., 2004).
In this regard, BDCs adopt the key features of both commercial banks
and private equity funds.

BDCs fund their investments in eligible portfolio firms by raising
capital both in public and private markets. After the initial round of
investment using private funding, most BDCs decide to become publicly
traded and raise equity through an initial public offering (IPO). For
their debt funding, BDCs do not rely on short-term funding such as
deposits but rather borrow long term through senior secured debt,
convertible bonds and other hybrid securities. In terms of leverage,
BDCs are less restricted than other closed-end funds but more than
traditional banks. By regulation prior to 2018, BDCs had a maximum
allowable debt-to-equity ratio of 1:1 compared to 1:2 for other invest-
ment companies. Meanwhile, banks must maintain a capital ratio –
a ratio of regulatory tier 1 equity capital to average total assets – of
at least 4% and above 5% in order to be considered well-capitalized
by regulators. The BDC debt-to-equity ratio of 1:1 translates into a
minimum capital ratio of 50%. In March 2018, the restriction on BDC
leverage was further relaxed to a minimum of a 2:1 debt-to-equity ratio
or a 33% minimum capital ratio.9

For tax purposes, BDCs can elect to be treated as a regulated
investment company (RIC). By doing so, they can avoid double taxation
by passing through their net income and capital gains to shareholders
free of tax. The key prerequisite for qualifying as a RIC is distributing
at least 90% of taxable income to debt- and equityholders. Further
requirements include income and diversification tests for sources of
income. Since most of the BDC income is distributed as dividends
and capital gains, shareholders end up holding high-yielding stocks in
addition to enjoying a sizable tax advantage.

Another important advantage of BDCs is that they provide retail in-
vestors with the access to illiquid investments in private firms. Histori-
cally, this risk exposure was only available to institutional investors and
wealthy individuals through private funds. By being publicly traded,
BDCs provide their investors with similar risk exposure and substantial
liquidity at the same time. In this sense, BDCs are similar to publicly
held private equity or venture capital funds. Moreover, investors benefit
from regulatory disclosures by having access to the information on
the BDCs portfolio strategy and end-use of funds. When electing to be
treated as a BDC, a company must have a class of its equity securities
registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Consequently,
BDCs file periodic and current reports (i.e., Forms 10-Q, 10-K and 8-
K) as well as proxy statements with the SEC like those filed by public
companies.

2.2. Data

Our analysis of the BDC sector relies on a variety data sources.
The BDC universe is constructed from the list of companies that file
a Form N-54A with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).10
The number of companies making a BDC election has been steadily
increasing since 2001 and has reached over 90 as of 2017:Q4.11

First, to understand the business model of BDCs, we analyze finan-
cial statements data from S&P SNL Financial, debt capital structure data
from S&P Capital IQ, and ownership structure data from WRDS SEC
Analytics Suite (13F Holdings Data). SNL Financial collects financial
statements data both for publicly traded and privately held BDCs. For
our analysis of the private debt space, we supplement the BDC data
with data on private debt deals from Preqin.

Second, we construct a comprehensive database of BDC investments
by hand collecting data from the SEC filings. As part of their regula-
tory status, publicly registered BDCs have to disclose their individual
investments in the 10-Q and 10-K filings, within the so-called schedule
of investments (SOI) tables.12 Our database covers the period 2001:Q1
through 2017:Q4 and includes 69 BDCs providing funding to about
10,000 portfolio firms. It includes key investment-level variables such
as industry, instrument type, deal amount, rate, and maturity date.

Finally, to establish the geographic areas in which BDCs concentrate
their investment activity, we augment our investment-level data by
collecting location data on the BDC-funded firms. The majority of
BDCs file Forms N-2 — a registration statement submitted to the SEC
when issuing new debt and equity securities. Importantly, these forms
record the exact addresses of portfolio firms, which allows us to hand
collect location data (city, state and ZIP code) for over 7500 firms.
We manually track firm name changes and account for mergers and
acquisitions. In nearly every quarter, we obtain the location data for
over 80% of portfolio firms and around 90% if we measure the share
of portfolio firms with location information in terms of their investment
fair value (see Appendix A for more details).

We augment our BDC- and investment-level data with data from
a variety of other sources. We rely on the Call Reports to measure
asset holdings of consolidated VIEs for bank holding companies, on the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) Summary of Deposits to
identify banks’ presence in local markets, and on Refinitiv DealScan
(thereafter, DealScan) syndicated loan data to construct counties’ ex-
posure to the CIT Group collapse. We collect the county-level data
on total, middle-market, and industry-level employment, job creation,
and job losses from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS); gross output
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA); number of establishments
from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS); house price index from the
Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). We also collect firm-level
employment from Preqin and number of patent applications from the
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). Throughout our
analysis, we deflate all nominal quantities to obtain real measures
using the consumer price index (CPI) from the BLS. In particular, we
normalize the price level to 1 in December of 2017.

2.3. BDC business model

Fig. 1 demonstrates that BDCs have expanded rapidly over the
past two decades with asset growth close to 35% per annum. BDC
total assets reach almost $100 billion by the end of 2017. Despite the
growing prominence of BDCs, there has been no systematic study of

8 See the Section 55(a) of

the 1940 Act as amended by the 1980

11 Balance sheet information available through SNL Financial is reported

Amendments for a more detailed definition of eligible assets.

only for 81 BDCs as of 2017:Q4 (see Fig. 1).

9 Balloch and Gonzalez-Uribe (2021) investigate this regulatory change and

12 Publicly registered BDCs include both those with publicly-traded equity

its effect on the BDC sector.

and those with non-traded equity, that is, privately held.

10 Form N-54A is a notification of election to be subject to Sections 55–65

of the 1940 Act.

4 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Fig. 2. Size of private debt market. The Figure depicts the aggregate amount of
investment deals originated by BDCs, direct lenders and other private debt funds. Other
debt funds include mezzanine, distressed debt, special situations and venture debt funds.
The numbers for BDCs represent the fair value of investments from our hand-collected
dataset. The numbers for direct lenders and other private debt funds represent the
assets under management net of the dry powder from Preqin. The data are real annual
observations for the period 2004 to 2017, expressed in billions of December 2017
dollars.

these direct lenders in the academic literature. We therefore carry out
a detailed analysis of the BDC market using our newly constructed
database. This empirical exercise allows us to provide the necessary
context for our further analysis.

BDCs as a Private Debt Provider. In the U.S., business develop-
ment companies established themselves as a rapidly growing segment
in the market of private debt investments. However, it is difficult to
assess their share in the market. The data on financing deals executed
between private capital providers and portfolio firms are scarce due to
the lack of regulatory oversight. To address this question, we rely on a
new dataset of private debt deals provided by Preqin, which allows us
to study the deals arranged by direct lenders other than BDCs.

Even though the BDC sector may seem to be relatively small com-
pared to the aggregate banking industry, BDCs play an important role
in providing financing to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
As of 2017 year end, the fair value of outstanding debt investments
by BDCs constitutes $57 billion, while outstanding bank loans to SMEs
reach $619 billion according to OECD (2020). Moreover, within the
private debt space, BDC investments comprise a quarter of the total deal
volume as of 2017 year end (see Fig. 2). Specifically, we compare the
aggregate value of BDC investments with the assets under management
of direct lenders as identified by Preqin and other private debt funds
(including mezzanine, distressed debt, special situations and venture
debt funds). Preqin only tracks a small subsample of BDCs and does
not account for their investments in the direct lending category. We
therefore rely on our hand-collected dataset to estimate the aggregate
fair value of BDC deals. Fig. 2 further shows that the private debt sector
has expanded drastically over our sample period growing on average by
15% per annum, and more than 50% of the private debt deals in the
U.S. are originated by direct lenders.

It is also important to note that BDCs are often associated with
large asset management companies managing other funds that target
similar market segments as BDCs, including other direct lending and
private equity funds. In Appendix B, we estimate that BDC-affiliated
asset management companies deploy between $75 and $149 billion in
related capital alongside BDC investments.

Role of BDCs in the Middle Market. Financing middle-market
firms is intrinsic to the BDC business model. BDCs specialize in pro-
viding these firms with large capital infusions, helping them to scale
and grow, often with the goal of taking a firm public through an
initial public offering, selling a firm through a strategic acquisition, or
negotiating a management buyout. According to the National Center for
the Middle Market (NCMM), middle-market firms are defined as firms

Fig. 3. BDC investments in high-tech and high-R&D-intensive industries. The figures
depict the industry composition of the BDC investments over time. Panel (a) depicts the
fair value of investments allocated to firms in high-tech and non-high-tech industries
according to the classification of Hecker (2005). Panel (b) depicts the fair value of
investments allocated to firms in low- and high-R&D-intensive industries according to
the classification of Galindo-Rueda and Verger (2016). The sample covers the period
from 2004:Q1 to 2017:Q4.

with annual revenues ranging between $10 million and $1 billion. An
alternative definition of a middle-market firm is based on the employ-
ment level — a firm with the number of employees between 50 and
500. BDCs’ strategy to target the middle-market segment is reflected in
the management discussion in their SEC filings (see Appendix C).

The middle market is a critical sector of the U.S. economy fueling
job creation, yet relatively understudied in the academic literature.
As of 2017, the NCMM estimates that the middle-market sector com-
prises nearly 200,000 firms and accounts for a third of private-sector
employment and GDP. Survey evidence however suggests that one of
the key impediments to the growth in this sector is lack of funding
under advantageous terms (Makhija, 2011). Middle-market firms are
relatively large and mature to qualify for small business or venture
capital financing, but they are at the same time not large enough
to directly tap public capital markets. As such, they predominantly
rely on financing from banks, PE funds, PD funds, and more recently
from business development companies. The BDC presence has been
steadily growing with the number of portfolio firms exceeding 4300
as of 2017:Q4 and reaching close to 10,000 firms in total during our
sample period.

BDC Investment in Innovation. Among middle-market firms, BDCs
target high-growth and, in particular, innovative firms. First, we find
that many BDC-funded firms previously received venture capital and
private equity financing. Specifically, we are able to identify about

5 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table 1
Investment portfolio of BDCs.

(a) 2010:Q4

Portfolio firms, Count
Allocation top 1 portfolio firms, %
Allocation top 3 portfolio firms, %
Allocation top 5 portfolio firms, %
Allocation top 10 portfolio firms, %
Outstanding deals, Count

Outstanding debt deals, %
Outstanding equity deals, %
Outstanding structured products, %

(b) 2017:Q4

Portfolio firms, Count
Allocation top 1 portfolio firms, %
Allocation top 3 portfolio firms, %
Allocation top 5 portfolio firms, %
Allocation top 10 portfolio firms, %
Outstanding deals, Count

Outstanding debt deals, %
Outstanding equity deals, %
Outstanding structured products, %

N

30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30

N

59
59
59
59
59
59
59
59
59

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

10%

25%

75%

90%

50.93
16.21
32.68
43.69
61.99
87.07
55.51
38.67
3.84

41.71
18.33
22.97
24.72
24.89
76.46
26.82
25.69
7.58

42.50
10.58
25.21
34.93
55.63
67.50
63.08
33.45
0.00

11.50
4.31
11.22
17.22
28.85
14.00
6.61
13.42
0.00

18.00
6.22
16.64
26.14
43.08
36.00
47.46
18.18
0.00

67.00
20.12
42.53
57.45
87.09
111.00
75.00
50.00
3.70

121.50
30.91
64.78
82.32
97.10
172.50
84.73
80.48
14.28

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

10%

25%

75%

90%

94.00
13.04
25.61
34.69
50.86
151.49
64.08
32.43
3.15

183.08
15.83
19.23
21.11
23.08
228.82
21.17
21.95
8.06

56.00
8.06
19.49
28.41
46.60
95.00
65.12
29.93
0.00

20.00
3.98
8.65
13.71
24.25
34.00
32.92
6.45
0.00

31.00
5.05
13.28
19.05
32.74
55.00
52.78
17.39
0.00

93.00
14.82
33.77
44.60
63.64
165.00
78.82
44.78
3.45

161.00
23.40
45.84
63.52
82.60
214.00
88.46
67.08
6.52

The tables report summary statistics for portfolio of BDC investments. Allocations to portfolio firms are recorded in terms
of their fair values. The figures represent the cross-sectional statistics across BDCs as of 2010:Q4 and 2017:Q4. Allocations
in collateralized loan obligations, collateralized debt obligations, venture capital funds, mutual funds and other funds are
excluded when computing the portfolio concentration statistics.

3200 BDC portfolio firms as previously funded by PE and VC funds
according to the Thomson VentureXpert, which is about 30% of port-
folio firms in our dataset. Second, through a manual review of portfolio
firms’ names, we find that BDCs have provided financing to large and
successful tech firms such as Facebook, Dropbox, Lyft, and Twitter.13
Third, we explore the industry composition of BDC investment portfo-
lios. We rely on Hecker (2005) to identify high-technology industries
and based on this classification we define a BDC portfolio firm as
high-tech if it belongs to a high-tech industry.14 Panel (a) of Fig. 3
documents that BDCs allocate a significant portion of their capital to
high-tech industries. Alternatively, we categorize BDC portfolio firms
as high- and low-R&D-intensive using the classification of Galindo-
Rueda and Verger (2016). They identify five industry groups based
on industries’ R&D investment intensity, from low to high. For our
analysis, we define a firm as high-R&D-intensive if its industry code
is among high and medium-high categories. Even though the share of
BDC capital allocated to high-R&D-intensive industries is not as large
as for high-tech industries, it is increasing over time (see Panel (b) of
Fig. 3).

BDC Portfolio Composition. Given that BDCs are required to pro-
vide substantial managerial assistance to their portfolio firms, we find
that BDCs investment portfolios are highly skewed to a few large firms.
Table 1 documents that as of 2010:Q4 the capital allocation to the
top 10 firms in a BDC portfolio ranges between 29% and 97%, while
the largest allocation to a single firm is 16% on average. Portfolio
concentration of BDC investments only moderately declines between

13 We also find the names of many firms previously funded by BDCs that
are not necessarily household names. Examples of such firms are Hologic Inc
(innovative medical technology firm); Celanese Corp (chemical and specialty
materials); Rocket Pharmaceuticals Inc; Albany Molecular Research Inc; No-
vavax Inc (clinical-stage biotechnology firm); Life Technologies Corp; Alion
Science and Technology Corp; Infoblox Inc (cybersecurity); InterCloud Systems
Inc; Roku Inc; Amgen Inc (bio-pharmaceuticals); NRG Energy; XTO Energy;
Solar City Pure Storage; and B/E Aerospace Inc.

14 According to the definition of Hecker (2005), ‘‘[a]n industry is considered
high tech if employment in technology-oriented occupations accounted for a
proportion of that industry’s total employment that was at least twice the
4.9–percent average for all industries’’.

Fig. 4. BDC investment instruments. The Figure depicts the shares of different invest-
ment instruments employed by BDCs. The investment instruments include senior debt,
subordinated debt, equity, structured products, and other investments. The shares are
calculated based on the fair values of investments. The data are quarterly observations
from 2004:Q1 to 2017:Q4.

2010:Q4 and 2017:Q4. Even though the high concentration of the
portfolio increases BDCs risk exposure, it allows them to provide a
higher quality managerial assistance to their portfolio firms and gives
them a more powerful role when negotiating distress situations. Anec-
dotal evidence further suggests that large-scale deals carry a prestige
premium and can help BDCs to secure their position in the competitive
market of private debt investments and scale up in the future. Though
we observe a skewed portfolio composition when analyzing capital
allocations in terms of their fair values, BDCs originate investment deals
across numerous firms. For example, a typical BDC as of 2017:Q4 holds
95 securities extended to 56 distinct portfolio firms (see Table 1). While
the largest BDCs sponsor more than 200 deals, the smallest — finance
less than 35 deals.

Within the corporate structure of their borrowers, BDCs issue most
commonly debt securities. As shown in Fig. 4, the share of debt in-
vestments is relatively stable throughout 2004 and 2017, fluctuating

6 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

between 60% and 80%. However, after the Financial Crisis there has
been a shift in composition towards debt deals with higher seniority.
Senior secured debt investments by BDCs can be viewed as an equiva-
lent to loans originated by traditional banks. The growth in senior debt
investments was predominantly at the expense of sponsoring junior and
subordinated debt.

To a lesser extent, BDCs make and hold equity investments, which
include common stock, preferred shares, warrants, membership and
limited partnership interests. Fig. 4 shows that equity securities consti-
tute less than 25% of all issued financial securities in terms of their fair
values. When considering the number of deals, equity investments on
average represent 39% of all outstanding deals as of 2010:Q4 and 32%
as of 2017:Q4 (see Table 1). One of the risk-management strategies im-
plemented by BDCs is offering a debt security bundled with a warrant.
In periods when a portfolio firm defaults on its obligations, a BDC can
exercise a warrant to receive a stake in the firm and acquire the control
rights, thereby offsetting some of its losses on debt securities. In our
sample, BDCs implement this financing strategy with around 13% of
portfolio firms.

Finally, BDCs invest in structured products such as collateralized
loan obligations (CLOs) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
However, investments through these structured products constitute
only a small share of BDCs investment portfolio. Table 1 further shows
that a typical BDC holds only 3%–4% of its portfolio capital in CLOs
and CDOs in terms of the number of originated deals. These numbers
are in line with the business objective of BDCs — to facilitate the flow
of capital to middle-market firms.

Terms of BDC Debt Securities. Even though BDCs offer various
financing solutions, their main investment instrument is debt securities.
Examining the terms of BDC debt securities, we find that a median
loan originated by BDCs is $4 million with a maturity of 5 years. BDC
borrowers typically face interest rates of 8%.15 When benchmarked
against the aggregate rate on bank C&I loans, the spread comprises
about 4%–5% on average.16 This comparison is subject to a caveat that
this spread does not take into account the difference in the risk profile
of bank and BDC borrowers and, as such, does not necessarily imply
that BDCs loans are relatively more expensive. These magnitudes are
consistent with findings of Chernenko et al. (2022), who document
that public middle firms face about 4%–5% higher interest rates when
borrowing directly from nonbank financial intermediaries relative to
traditional banks. In their analysis, the spread reduces to 2% after
controlling for firm and loan characteristics. Among possible reasons
why middle-market firms choose to borrow from BDCs despite the
higher cost are greater flexibility in loan tailoring, quicker deal closure,
and looser covenants. Since BDCs do not face any restrictions on their
borrowers’ loan-to-earnings ratios, they are able to provide larger loan
amounts to firms with low earnings relative to banks.

BDC Capital Structure and Ownership. Unlike deposit-financed
commercial banks, BDCs raise debt capital in public markets to fund
their portfolio investments. First, they have access to cheap government
sponsored debt financing such as SBA debentures. Second, BDCs can
borrow through public debt instruments. They specialize in issuing so-
called baby-bonds (i.e., bonds with face values of $25) and exchange
traded notes with yields ranging from 5% to 7% per annum. Apart from
the public markets, BDCs borrow from banks through revolving credit
facilities and term loans (see Panel (a) of Fig. 5). Importantly, BDCs do
not face a high degree of the maturity mismatch between their assets
and liabilities. While a median loan originated by BDCs has a maturity
of 5 years, the maturity of their liabilities fluctuates around 6–8 years

15 More details on loan terms are reported in Appendix D.
16 We compute the weighted average interest rate on C&I loans as the ratio
of the aggregate sum of interest and fee income on C&I loans in domestic
offices (riad4012) divided by the aggregate sum of average C&I loans in
domestic offices (rcon3387 ).

for bonds and notes, 4–6 years for revolving credit, and 4 years for term
loans (see Panel (b) of Fig. 5).

BDCs also raise capital in public equity markets, providing investors
with the access to illiquid investments in middle-market firms. Since
BDCs offer high returns on their capital allocations, the sector has
attracted a large number of institutional investors. Using the 13-F
disclosures, we find that among key institutional shareholders are
private equity firms, mutual funds, and financial intermediaries. In a
companion paper, Davydiuk et al. (2023) study the importance of BDCs’
access to public equity markets for sustaining their investment activity.
Panel (c) of Fig. 5 shows that a typical BDC maintains a book equity-
to-assets ratio of 60%–70%, which is above 50% prescribed by the
regulation prior to 2018.

3. Capital supply shocks and BDC entry

In this section, we investigate the factors that explain geographic
variation in the BDC presence and drive the growth of the BDC sector.
We observe in Fig. 6 that there is a substantial heterogeneity across
regions in the amount of credit supplied by BDCs. For example, as
of 2017:Q4 counties such as New York (NY), Harris (TX), Cook (IL),
and Los Angeles (CA) received over $1.8 billion each in financing from
BDCs, while firms located in South Dakota, Montana, and West Virginia
had very limited access to this funding form.

In our analysis, we rely on the conjecture that BDCs filled a gap in
credit supply by offering funding solutions to firms who were credit
rationed by traditional banks and finance companies. Within their
annual filings, BDCs often describe investing in the middle market as
an attractive opportunity because the firms in this segment are ‘‘under-
served’’ by banks and other competitors. For example, FS Investment
Corporation states in their 2012 annual report:

‘‘Despite the size of the [U.S. middle] market, we believe that financial
difficulties and a widespread consolidation in the U.S. financial services
industry have substantially reduced the number of investment firms and
financial institutions lending to middle market companies’’.

BDCs specifically identify stricter bank regulation as an important
factor behind the reduction in bank credit supply to the middle market.
This belief is also shared by investment analysts covering the BDC
sector. For instance, the 2014 Wells Fargo Securities report states that
‘‘banks are showing signs of being pushed out of the market with
regulation’’. We provide more excerpts from the BDC filings and analyst
reports supporting this narrative in Appendix C.

3.1. Identification strategy

Our identification strategy relies on three contractionary shocks to
the credit supply by traditional financial institutions: the introduction
of stress tests for bank holding companies; the collapse of a major fi-
nance company, the CIT Group; and the introduction of new accounting
standards on the consolidation of off-balance items for banks. While
the CIT Group bankruptcy represents an idiosyncratic shock to lenders
specializing in middle-market financing, the other two regulations con-
stitute a sector-wide shock to the traditional banking industry. We rely
on a difference-in-differences analysis to examine whether the presence
of BDCs and PD funds more generally grew in counties subject to capital
shocks.

The 2009 Bank Stress Tests. Following the 2007–2008 Financial
Crisis, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve introduced new
macroprudential policies to ensure that financial institutions are well-
capitalized to withstand future potential economic downturns. Among
the introduced measures were bank stress tests. The first test was
conducted under the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP)
at the end of 2008 and was followed by the annual Comprehensive
Capital Analysis and Reviews (CCARs) from 2011 onward. As a result
of the SCAP, 10 out of 19 bank holding companies were required to

7 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Fig. 5. Debt financing of BDCs. Panel (a) of the Figure depicts the composition of the BDC outstanding debt over time. The debt instruments include revolving credit, term loans,
bonds and notes. The data on debt components are real quarterly observations expressed in billions of December 2017 dollars. For a subset of BDCs, prior to 2010 the data on
outstanding debt are reported only annually. Panel (b) of the Figure depicts the cross-sectional median of the maturity of the BDCs outstanding debt securities over time. The
data on debt maturity are smoothed using the four-quarter moving averages and are expressed in years. Panel (c) of The Figure depicts the cross-sectional median, 25th and 75th
percentiles of a book equity-to-assets ratio across BDCs over time. The sample covers the period from 2004:Q1 to 2017:Q4.

Fig. 6. Location of BDC portfolio firms. The Figure shows the snapshot of the geographical presence of BDCs’ portfolio firms as of 2017:Q4. The darker areas correspond to
counties with larger capital allocations and the lighter areas — with smaller capital allocations. Capital allocations are recorded at their fair values.

increase their regulatory capital (Acharya et al., 2014). Data on the
SCAP results were released on April 24, 2009, while the recapitalization
should have been implemented in November 2009.

Through stress tests, regulators impose a higher level of scrutiny on
bank holding companies. Among other quantities, stress-tested banks
are required to provide estimates of potential losses on their loan

portfolios under two alternative macroeconomic scenarios and a set of
indicative loss rate ranges. Under a threat of failing future stress tests,
BHCs will retain more capital and choose investments with smaller
regulatory risk-weights to lower loss rates under adverse scenarios.
The outcome of the stress test therefore has a direct impact on BHCs’
future loan originations. Acharya et al. (2018) and Gropp et al. (2018)

8 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

document that insufficient capital levels led banks to reduce their
overall capital charges by shifting away from loans to risky borrowers.
We argue that this contraction in bank credit provision led to a funding
gap in particular for small and middle-market firms (see, e.g., Doerr,
2021). Traditionally loans to these firms are riskier than investments in
large mature businesses since they are contracted with higher spreads,
require more collateral, and have higher nonaccrual rates (see, e.g.,
Chodorow-Reich et al., 2022; Rosen and Vitanza, 2021). As a result, we
conjecture that the recapitalization and loan portfolio adjustments of
stress-tested banks constitutes a contractionary shock to middle-market
lending.

In our analysis, we use the first implementation of the stress tests –
the SCAP – as our shock, since the design and set of tested character-
istics was not known to banks in advance. Even though the following
CCARs included a larger group of tested institutions, the overall setup
and test outcomes were more predictable. We define a bank to be
treated if it participates in the SCAP, reports non-zero estimated losses
on the C&I lending, and was required to recapitalize after the results’
release.

To uncover the effects of this capital supply shock on the rise
of private debt financing, we exploit variation in the geographical
presence of treated banks across the U.S. and conduct our analysis at
the county level. We rely on the FDIC Summary of Deposits to measure
counties’ access to financing from treated banks. Specifically, a bank
is considered to be present in a given county if it has at least one
branch located in this county with a strictly positive amount of deposits.
We propose two measures of county-level exposure to the SCAP shock:
(i) an indicator whether a county 𝑗 has at least one treated bank,
𝐷(𝑆𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑗,2008 > 0), and (ii) the deposit market share of treated
banks in a county 𝑗, measured as the total deposits of treated bank
in a county 𝑗 scaled by the total deposits of all banks in that county,
∑

𝑏 𝑆𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑏,𝑗,2008
𝑏 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑏,𝑗,2008

.

∑
The Collapse of the CIT Group. Next, we propose to exploit a
negative credit supply shock in spirit of Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010)
and Chodorow-Reich (2014). Rather than using the failure of Lehman
Brothers as a source of exogenous variation in the availability of credit,
we tailor our identification strategy to the middle market by focus-
ing on finance companies. Specifically, we analyze one of the largest
bankruptcies among finance companies during the Great Recession —
the failure of the CIT Group. The choice of the CIT Group is supported
by the evidence in Edgerton (2012) and Gopal and Schnabl (2022).
Using DealScan data, we further find that the share of middle-market
loans among all loans originated by the CIT Group increased from about
40% to over 60% between 2001 and 2008. These figures together with
the existing circumstantial evidence highlight the importance of the CIT
Group financing for the middle-market firms and validates our choice
of the shock.17

Because of its exposure to underperforming subprime mortgages and
student loans and subsequent difficulties in securing short-term fund-
ing, the CIT Group had to file for bankruptcy protection on November
1, 2009. Even though it emerged from bankruptcy 38 days later, on
December 10, 2009, the CIT Group lending activity started to contract
much earlier in 2008. According to 10-K filings, its loan origination
volume in commercial businesses was $7.0 billion in 2009, down from
$18.6 billion in 2008 and well below $35.4 billion during 2007. Partic-
ularly dramatic was the drop in consumer and small business lending:

17 For example, a November 2009 article in the New York Times noted that
the CIT Group was arguing against bankruptcy because ‘‘being forced into
Chapter 11 protection would spell disaster for its customers: a wide swath
of the nation’s small and midsize businesses who rely on the 101-year-old
company for financing’’. (see Michael J. de la Merced, Creditors Back CIT’s
Bankruptcy, New York Times, Nov. 1, 2009). A CBS News article at the same
time noted that the CIT Group was ‘‘trying to keep badly needed loans flowing
to thousands of mid-sized and small businesses’’. (see CIT Group Files for
Bankruptcy Protection, CBS News, Nov. 1, 2009).

9 

$1.3 million in 2009, down from $1.4 billion in 2008 and well below
$6.6 billion during 2007.18 Importantly, even after its restructuring into
a bank holding company, the CIT Group never resumed its lending
activity at the pre-crisis levels: its new lending volume totaled $3.2
billion in 2011, $6.0 billion in 2012, and $7.1 billion in 2013.

Since debt markets feature borrower segmentation with finance
companies serving riskier firms compared to banks (Carey et al., 1998),
the bankruptcy of a finance company will have a direct effect on BDC
portfolio firms.19 Additionally, there could be an indirect effect through
a capital reallocation channel: the funding that financial intermediaries
could have provided to BDC portfolio firms is now reallocated to former
CIT Group borrowers due to a limited credit supply. Admittedly, this
indirect channel argument is applicable for our two other shocks to
the banking industry as well. Overall, we expect counties with higher
exposure to the CIT Group bankruptcy to experience a higher shortage
of capital supply.

To capture the county-level exposure to the CIT Group failure,
we propose two measures: (i) an indicator whether firms in county
𝑗 have any outstanding loans from the CIT Group in the 2001–2005
period, 𝐷(𝐶𝐼𝑇 𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑗,[2001,2005] > 0), as reported in the DealScan
syndicated loan data; and (ii) the natural logarithm of the average
amount of outstanding loans to firms in county 𝑗 from the CIT Group
between 2001 and 2005, 𝐿𝑛(𝐶𝐼𝑇 𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑗,[2001,2005]).20 We exclude
2006 and 2007 years when measuring the pre-crisis exposure in order
to minimize the effect of the credit boom. To measure the county-level
exposure, we consider all originated loans where the CIT Group is a
member of the syndicate irrespective of its role.

FAS 166/167 Regulation. In 2010, the Financial Accounting Stan-
dards Board (FASB) instituted new accounting standards on the consol-
idation of variable interest entities (VIEs) for bank holing companies
— so-called FAS 166/167. Starting from 2011:Q1, banks have been
required to consolidate VIEs’ off-balance sheet assets onto their balance
sheets. Since the assets held by VIEs and associated loan loss reserves
became treated as on-balance sheet items, the adoption of FAS 166/167
had a direct effect on the calculation of regulatory capital ratios such
as leverage and risk-weighted capital ratios.

In line with previous studies, we argue that this new regulation con-
stitutes an exogenous negative shock to bank credit supply. While Dou
(2020) and Dou et al. (2018) show that VIE-consolidating banks re-
duced their small business lending and mortgage approval rates follow-
ing the shock, we cannot document a similar decline in bank lending
to middle-market firms due to the lack of the data. It is however very
likely that FAS 166/167 had a negative effect on loans to middle-
market firms as well. Middle-market loans are riskier than loans to large
public firms and, as such, more costly in terms of risk-based capital.
This conjecture aligns with the finding of Tian and Zhang (2016) that
affected banks employ a flight-to-safety strategy in terms of credit
card lending. VIE-consolidating banks have reduced their lending to
risky borrowers, plausibly including middle-market firms, to offset the
decline in the regulatory capital following the implementation of FAS
166/167 (Dou et al., 2018).

18 See Form 10-K for

the fiscal year ended December 31, 2009
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1171825/000089109210001036/
e38085_10k.htm.

19 Similar inferences have been drawn from the analysis of private debt
placements (Denis and Mihov, 2003) and capital structure of the U.S. public
firms (Colla et al., 2013). They conclude that nonbank private credit is
essential in financing enterprises deemed too risky by traditional lenders.

20 Admittedly, our measure of CIT Group exposure only serves as a proxy
for their middle-market lending given that the DealScan database generally
focuses on loans to large corporations. In the data, we observe that the size
of a median loan extended by the CIT Group in 2001–2005 is about $100
million, which is substantially larger than a typical BDC loan of $10 million.
However, there is substantial variation in loan size both for BDCs and the CIT
Group, such that about 40%–50% of loans issued by the CIT are smaller than
the largest BDC loan.

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table 2
Descriptive statistics: Treated vs. control counties.

(a): SCAP shock

Total employment growth, %
Middle-market employment growth, %
Job creation/Total employment, %
Job loss/Total employment, %
Output growth, %
Middle-market firms, %
# of bank branches per 1000 establishments
Deposits HHI
Average 2001–2006 HPI growth, %

(b): CIT shock

Total employment growth, %
Middle-market employment growth, %
Job creation/Total employment, %
Job loss/Total employment, %
Output growth, %
Middle-market firms, %
# of bank branches per 1000 establishments
Deposits HHI
Average 2001–2006 HPI growth, %

(c): FAS 166/167 shock

Total employment growth, %
Middle-market employment growth, %
Job creation/Total employment, %
Job loss/Total employment, %
Output growth, %
Middle-market firms, %
# of bank branches per 1000 establishments
Deposits HHI
Average 2001–2006 HPI growth, %

Treated

Control

Difference

N

1621
1569
1621
1621
1600
1637
1637
1637
1588

Mean

St.Dev.

N

Mean

St.Dev.

0.30
0.43
4.50
4.41
0.56
4.17
16.62
0.25
5.75

3.23
10.64
1.46
1.34
5.16
1.49
11.61
0.22
2.23

807
681
807
807
800
809
801
801
684

0.13
0.52
4.76
4.64
1.05
3.32
23.91
0.38
4.48

2.64
6.57
1.12
1.02
3.74
1.45
6.49
0.14
3.20

0.174
−0.090
−0.262 ∗∗∗
−0.231 ∗∗∗
−0.487 ∗∗∗
0.843 ∗∗∗
−7.284 ∗∗∗
−0.131 ∗∗∗
1.269 ∗∗∗

Treated

Control

Difference

N

231
230
231
231
232
236
236
236
236

Mean

St.Dev.

N

Mean

St.Dev.

−0.44
−0.81
3.99
4.04
−0.78
5.34
13.13
0.19
6.69

2.97
8.67
1.28
1.18
5.13
1.46
9.68
0.18
2.93

1872
1702
1872
1872
1846
1881
1873
1873
1741

−0.53
−0.25
4.56
4.56
−0.35
3.74
19.98
0.30
5.21

2.00
3.81
0.58
0.54
2.70
1.25
3.81
0.11
3.66

0.092
−0.558
−0.578 ∗∗∗
−0.519 ∗∗∗
−0.430

1.601 ∗∗∗
−6.845 ∗∗∗
−0.102 ∗∗∗
1.481 ∗∗∗

Treated

Control

Difference

N

1837
1767
1849
1849
1807
1853
1853
1854
1803

Mean

St.Dev.

N

Mean

St.Dev.

−1.16
−1.86
4.43
4.43
−0.10
4.04
17.58
0.25
5.63

3.12
10.97
1.54
1.49
6.04
1.46
12.11
0.22
2.26

656
527
658
658
654
658
650
657
535

−1.09
−1.38
4.68
4.67
0.91
3.13
25.60
0.40
4.46

2.51
6.18
1.17
1.10
3.75
1.45
7.37
0.14
3.14

−0.072
−0.484
−0.246 ∗∗∗
−0.249 ∗∗∗
−1.008 ∗∗∗
0.914 ∗∗∗
−8.022 ∗∗∗
−0.157 ∗∗∗
1.163 ∗∗∗

The tables report the descriptive statistics for counties in the treated and control groups. The county-level outcomes are
averages over the three years prior to the shock. The set of treated counties is defined in Section 3.1. The control group
includes non-treated counties with BDC debt financing during the pre-shock period along with non-treated counties adjacent
to them. Middle-market firms are defined as firms with the number of employees between 50 and 500. HHI stands for
Herfindahl–Hirschman Index. HPI stands for House Price Index. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level.

Using data on asset holdings of consolidated VIEs from Call Reports,
we identify 53 bank holding companies that were subject to the FAS
166/167 regulation. There is a wide heterogeneity in the degree to
which bank holding companies were exposed to this new regulation.
While for a typical affected bank the VIEs’ assets constituted 7.5% of
total assets, the exposure of banks ranges between less than 1% to
over 50%. Similar to the SCAP shock, we identify treated counties as
those with presence of treated banks. Specifically, we construct the
following two measures to capture the counties’ exposure to the shock:
(i) an indicator whether a county 𝑗 have at least one treated bank,
𝐷(𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑗,2010 > 0), and (ii) the deposit market share of treated
banks in a county 𝑗, measured as the total deposits of treated bank
in a county 𝑗 scaled by the total deposit of all banks in that county,
∑

𝑏 𝐹 𝐴𝑆 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑏,𝑗,2010
∑
𝑏 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑏,𝑗,2010

.

debt investment amount by BDCs, or 𝐵𝐷𝐶 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑗,𝑡, the dollar
amount of BDC debt investments in county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 expressed in
millions.21, 22 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is a dummy variable that equals one post the capital
supply shock starting from (i) 2009:Q3 for the SCAP shock, (ii) 2010:Q1
for the CIT shock, and (iii) 2011:Q1 for the FAS 166/167 shock. To
capture the treatment effect, we restrict our sample period to three
years before and five years after the shock. We use two measures of
county-level exposure to treatment: an indicator variable 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
𝑗 and
a continuous variable 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑐)
𝑗 as defined in Section 3.1. Our control
group is comprised of (i) non-treated counties with BDC debt financ-
ing; and (ii) non-treated counties adjacent to counties with BDC debt
financing. Focusing on adjacent counties allows us to better account for
differences in economic conditions across the U.S. geographical regions.
Our difference-in-differences approach captures the causal effect
of the capital supply shock on the entry of BDCs provided that the

3.2. BDC entry following capital supply shocks

The first step of our analysis is to establish that the growth of BDCs
is concentrated in areas with the contraction in credit supply either by
finance companies or traditional banks. Specifically, we estimate:

𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑘)

𝑗 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

𝑓 𝑜𝑟 𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐} (1)

where the dependent variable is either 𝐷(𝐵𝐷𝐶 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑗,𝑡 > 0), an
indicator that equals one if a county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 has a non-zero

21 We estimate our regressions using the BDC investment amount in levels
rather than the natural logarithm or growth rate of the BDC investment
amount. Provided that a large fraction of control counties have zero capital
allocation by BDCs, the natural
logarithm and growth rates of the BDC
investment amount are not well defined.

22 In our analysis, we focus on debt investments by BDCs. We continue to
find nearly identical results if we include both equity and debt investments
(untabulated for brevity).

10 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table 3
BDC entry following credit supply shock.

(a): BDC presence

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
County-Cohort FE
Time-Cohort FE
𝑅2
N

SCAP

(1)

0.023***
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.72
76 078

(b): BDC investment amount

SCAP

(1)

5.255***
(0.252)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.75
76 078

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
County-Cohort FE
Time-Cohort FE
𝑅2
N

(2)

0.028***
(0.007)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.72
76 078

(2)

17.222***
(1.216)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.75
76 078

CIT

(3)

0.055***
(0.007)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.72
65 933

CIT

(3)

41.399***
(1.879)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.74
65 933

FAS 166/167

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.038***
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.72
78 142

0.085***
(0.006)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.72
78 142

0.008***
(0.001)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.72
65 933

FAS 166/167

(4)

(5)

(6)

9.113***
(0.327)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.73
78 142

9.964***
(0.501)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.75
65 933

46.402***
(2.020)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.74
78 142

Stacked

(7)

0.035***
(0.002)

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.72
220 153

Stacked

(7)

12.841***
(0.363)

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
0.74
220 153

𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐}.

𝑗 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the difference-in-differences regression:
𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑘)
The dependent variable is (i) an indicator that equals one if a county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 has a non-zero debt investment amount by
BDCs in Panel (a), and (ii) the dollar amount of BDC debt investments in county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 expressed in millions in Panel
(b). 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is a dummy variable that equals one post the capital supply shock starting from (i) 2009:Q3 for the SCAP shock, (ii)
2010:Q1 for the CIT shock, and (iii) 2011:Q1 for the FAS 166/167 shock. The set of treated counties and treatment intensity
are defined in Section 3.1. The control group includes non-treated counties with BDC debt financing during the pre-shock
period along with non-treated counties adjacent to them. The sample covers the period three years before and five years after
the shock. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

following assumptions hold. First, the capital supply shocks were not
anticipated. Second, we require that there exist no factors that make
the treated and control counties systematically different and cannot
be controlled for. Finally, absent the shock the change in the average
outcomes for treated counties would not have been different than the
change in the average outcomes for the untreated counties — parallel
trend assumption.

Table 2 reports the counties’ characteristics across the two groups
prior to the shock. We find that regardless of the shock, treated counties
on average have a lower job creation and job loss intensity, a higher
share of middle-market firms (defined as firms with the number of
employees between 50 and 500), a lower number of bank branches
per 1000 establishments, exhibit a higher level of bank competition
(measured by the deposits Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI)), and
had a higher house price growth in the pre-crisis period than control
counties. There are no statistical differences in total and middle-market
employment growth between the treated and control groups. For SCAP
and FAS 166/167 shocks, we also find treated counties on average
have a lower output growth than control counties. We control for the
full set of observable characteristics presented in Table 2 to alleviate
concerns about these systematic differences among counties in treated
and control groups. In order to account for unobservable time-invariant
county-specific characteristics and common time trends, we include
time and county fixed effects. As an alternative method to address
potential systematic differences between treated and control counties,
we conduct our analysis with a matched control group constructed
using a propensity score matching algorithm. All conclusions continue
to be valid (see Appendix E.1).

The regression estimates of (1) are reported in Table 3. The co-
efficient of interest is 𝛽, which captures the average change in BDC

presence and debt investments following the capital supply shock for
the treated group of counties relative to the control group. We find
that following the capital supply shock exposed counties have a 2%–6%
higher presence of BDCs than counties in the control group. We addi-
tionally document a positive and statistically significant effect when
we account for the treatment intensity based on continuous measures
of counties’ exposure to the shocks. For example, for the FAS 166/167
shock a 1% increase in the market share of treated banks leads to a
8.5% higher presence of BDCs in treated relative to control counties
following the adoption of new regulation. As shown in Panel (b) of
Table 3, we continue to find a positive and statistically significant effect
when analyzing the debt investment volumes by BDCs. For example,
following the FAS 166/167 shock BDCs allocate on average $9.1 mil-
lion more debt capital to a treated county relative to a control one.
To corroborate our findings, we additionally estimate a specification
combining all three capital shocks together similar in spirit to the
methodology of Gormley and Matsa (2011) and continue to find similar
patterns.

To formally test that the entry of BDCs in the treated and control
counties have evolved in parallel prior to the contractionary credit
shock, we estimate the following regression specification:

𝑦𝑗,𝑡 =

∑

(

𝛾𝑡

𝑡

𝜆𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
𝑗

)

+ 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

(2)

where 𝜆s are post-quarter dummies. For each quarter 𝑡 in our sample
period, we set 𝜆𝑡 to one in quarter 𝑡 and zero otherwise. Importantly,
we exclude dummies for the last quarter before the shock, which allows
us to estimate the dynamics of the treatment relative to this reference
period. Fig. 7 plots the coefficient estimates of 𝛾 along with the 95%

11 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Fig. 7. Parallel trends for BDC presence and debt investment amount. The figures depict the coefficient estimates of 𝛾s along with the 95% confidence intervals from the following
panel regression: 𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = ∑
+ 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡, where the dependent variable is (a) an indicator that equals one if a county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 has a non-zero debt
investment amount by BDCs, and (b) the dollar amount of BDC debt investments in county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 expressed in millions. 𝜆s are post-quarter dummies: for each quarter 𝑡
in the sample period, 𝜆𝑡 is set to one in quarter 𝑡 and zero otherwise. Dummies for the last quarter before the shock are excluded.

(
𝜆𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)

𝑡 𝛾𝑡

)

𝑗

confidence intervals for BDC presence and debt investment amounts.
For the SCAP and CIT capital supply shocks, we document parallel
trends in the presence of BDCs prior to the shock: there were no
significant differences in the presence of BDCs between the treated
and control group. In line with our conjecture, we find a rise in
the BDC entry among exposed counties relative to the treated group
following the shocks, with the effect becoming stronger over time. For
the FAS 166/167 shock, we observe a large significant effect after
the adoption of new standards on assets’ consolidation, with mild pre-
shock differences in the number of present BDCs. Given that the FAS
166/167 shock occurred after the SCAP and CIT shocks, the pre-FAS-
shock differences can be driven in part by the BDC entry following
the first two capital supply shocks. For example, a control county for
the FAS 166/167 shock could have been a treated county for the CIT
shock with BDC entry. For BDC debt investment amounts, the parallel
trend assumption holds for all three capital supply shocks (see Panel (b)
of Fig. 7). We continue to find no significant pre-trends if we use the
continuous measure of the treatment (unreported for brevity).

Overall, our results confirm our hypothesis that BDCs tend to target
the areas that experience shortages in capital supply suggesting that
BDC capital can act as a substitute source of financing for loans orig-
inated by traditional lenders. Due to lack of data on middle-market
loans, we cannot assess the magnitude of the decline in capital supply
provided by banks and finance companies to BDC-funded firms. How-
ever, our findings are in line with the evidence of a substitution channel
in Gopal and Schnabl (2022), who highlight the importance of finance
companies and FinTech lenders in the recovery of small businesses in
the aftermath of the Financial Crisis.

3.3. PD fund entry following capital supply shocks

In our main analysis, we focus on financing provided by BDCs due
to the richness of the available data. At the same time, BDCs are a
part of the larger private debt space rapidly growing over the recent
decade (see Fig. 2). We therefore expect that PD funds follow similar
investment strategies as BDCs.

To test whether PD funds, similarly to BDCs, enter markets subject
to credit shortages by traditional lenders, we rely on the data available
via Preqin and compare geographic presence of portfolio firms financed
by BDCs and PD funds. We find a significant overlap in the county-
level presence of the two investor types as measured both in terms of
dollar volume and number of deals. For example, as of 2014 year end
54% of counties served by BDCs also received financing from PD funds.
Further, we reestimate the difference-in-differences regression (1) for
PD funds. In Table 4, we document that private debt funds are more
likely to invest in counties with shortages in credit supply by traditional
lenders. The results are even stronger than for BDCs both in terms of
the propensity to enter and investment amounts. While this analysis is
interesting and important in itself, it requires a number of assumptions
due to the data limitations (see Appendix E.2). Nevertheless, our re-
sults are indicative of the rise of PD funds driven by the pullback of
traditional lenders.

3.4. Effect of bank competition on BDC entry

We expect that BDCs are more likely to enter markets with low
presence of regional banks, since they will face lower competition
from arm’s length lenders in these areas. Incumbent local banks may
deter new lenders by offering better monitoring and cheaper financing.
To this end, we explore the BDC entry among counties with differ-
ent local banking structure focusing on the SCAP and FAS 166/167
shocks. We follow Mian and Sufi (2014) to classify counties into those
predominantly served by local banks and those with high presence of
national banks. For each bank, we first compute its share of deposits
allocated across counties. Then, for each county 𝑗, we calculate the
weighted average of these deposit shares over the banks located in
the county, using the bank’s dollar amounts of deposits as weights, —
. We also create an indicator variable 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑖)
𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑐)
𝑗
𝑗
that equals one if the 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑐)
for county 𝑗 is above the cross-
𝑗
sectional median level in the year prior to the shock. A local banking
county is therefore served by banks with a large fraction of their overall
deposits concentrated in that county. To test our hypothesis that BDCs

12 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table 4
PD presence following credit supply shock.

(a): PD presence

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
𝑅2
N

SCAP

(1)

0.074***
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.69
65 692

(2)

0.143***
(0.008)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.69
65 692

(b): PD investment amount

SCAP

(1)

278.410***
(13.297)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.79
65 692

(2)

851.097***
(80.842)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.79
65 692

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
𝑅2
N

CIT

(3)

0.187***
(0.007)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.73
47 609

CIT

(3)

1317.688***
(70.508)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.83
47 609

(4)

0.034***
(0.001)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.73
47 609

FAS 166/167

(5)

0.051***
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.76
68 650

(6)

0.141***
(0.006)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.76
68 650

FAS 166/167

(4)

(5)

(6)

177.956***
(10.335)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.82
68 650

320.048***
(18.722)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.83
47 609

1022.846***
(68.381)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.82
68 650

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the difference-in-differences regression: 𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑗 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 +
𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡. The dependent variable is (i) an indicator that equals one if a county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 has at least two investment
deals by PD funds in Panel (a), and (ii) the dollar amount of PD investments in county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 expressed in millions
in Panel (b). 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is a dummy variable that equals one post the capital supply shock starting from (i) 2009:Q3 for the SCAP
shock, (ii) 2010:Q1 for the CIT shock, and (iii) 2011:Q1 for the FAS 166/167 shock. The set of treated counties is defined
in Section 3.1. The control group includes non-treated counties with PD financing during the pre-shock period along with
non-treated counties adjacent to them. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table 5
BDC investment in counties with local and national banking.

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × Local Banking(𝑖)

SCAP

(1)

7.034***
(0.374)
0.387***
(0.114)

Post × Treated(𝑖) × Local Banking(𝑖) −4.012***

(0.484)

Post × Local Banking(𝑐)

Post × Treated(𝑖) × Local Banking(𝑐)

FAS 166/167

(2)

(3)

(4)

4.916***
(0.240)

0.327
(0.245)
−8.853***
(0.915)

(0.321)

11.961*** 8.800***
(0.472)
0.691***
(0.137)
−6.215***
(0.641)

1.386***
(0.311)
−14.057***
(1.404)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
𝑅2
N

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.75
76 060

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.75
76 060

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.73
78 142

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.73
78 142

𝑗 ×

𝑗 + 𝛽3𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)

𝑗 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡, for 𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐}.

𝑗 + 𝛽2𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑘)

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the triple difference regression:
𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑘)
The dependent variable is the dollar amount of BDC debt investments in county 𝑗 in
quarter 𝑡 expressed in millions. 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is a dummy variable that equals one post the
capital supply shock starting from (i) 2009:Q3 for the SCAP shock, and (ii) 2011:Q1
for the FAS 166/167 shock. 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑖)
is a dummy variable that equals one if
𝑗
a county 𝑗 has the above median presence of local banks, and 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑐)
is
𝑗
the deposit share of local banks in county 𝑗. The set of treated counties is defined in
Section 3.1. The control group includes non-treated counties with BDC debt financing
during the pre-shock period along with non-treated counties adjacent to them. The
sample covers the period three years before and five years after the shock. ***, **,
and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

13 

are more likely to enter markets with low presence of local banks, we
estimate the following triple difference specification:
𝑗 + 𝛽2𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑘)
𝑗 × 𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔(𝑘)

𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
+ 𝛽3𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
+ 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡, 𝑓 𝑜𝑟 𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐}.

(3)

𝑗

𝑗

For ease of interpretation and exposition, we only consider an indicator
variable of county treatment. The estimation results are presented in
Table 5. In line with our conjecture, we find that affected counties
served predominantly by local banks experience a lower level of BDC
investments relative to affected national banking counties following the
shock as captured by negative and statistically significant 𝛽3 coefficient.
We also find similar effects when using the continuous measure of bank
competition. Our findings suggest that BDC not only enter counties
experiencing shortages in capital supply but also take into account
the level of bank competition in the area and, more specifically, the
presence of arm’s length lenders.

3.5. BDC investment in innovation

Recall that BDCs tend to invest in firms with high expected growth
potential similar to other private capital providers. We therefore for-
mally test whether BDCs allocate more capital to high-tech and high-
R&D-intensive counties by estimating the following triple difference
specification:

𝐵𝐷𝐶 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
+ 𝛽3𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
+ 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

𝑗 + 𝛽2𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑒(𝑘)
𝑗 × 𝑒(𝑘)

𝑗

𝑗

𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐}

(4)

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table 6
BDC investment in high-tech and high-R&D-intensive counties.

(a): High-tech counties

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × High-Tech County(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑖) × High-Tech County(𝑖)

Post × High-Tech County(𝑐)

Post × Treated(𝑖) × High-Tech County(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
𝑅2
N

(b): High-R&D-intensive counties

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × R&D County(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑖) × R&D County(𝑖)

Post × R&D County(𝑐)

Post × Treated(𝑖) × R&D County(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
𝑅2
N

SCAP

(1)

−0.067
(0.093)
0.514***
(0.129)
8.744***
(0.449)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
73 904

(2)

4.301***
(0.218)

0.025***
(0.007)
1.135***
(0.071)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
73 904

SCAP

(1)

0.102
(0.083)
0.801***
(0.137)
8.164***
(0.443)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
73 904

(2)

4.910***
(0.247)

0.008
(0.007)
0.676***
(0.049)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
73 904

CIT

(3)

−1.892**
(0.889)
1.817***
(0.158)
48.383***
(2.332)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.73
63 934

CIT

(3)

−2.953***
(0.724)
1.774***
(0.159)
49.868***
(2.284)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.73
63 934

FAS 166/167

(4)

(5)

(6)

15.770***
(1.486)

0.111***
(0.015)
5.722***
(0.352)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
63 934

−0.097
(0.095)
0.890***
(0.185)
15.358***
(0.602)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
76 062

7.817***
(0.290)

0.016*
(0.008)
1.866***
(0.096)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
76 062

FAS 166/167

(4)

(5)

(6)

35.426***
(1.966)

0.097***
(0.014)
2.855***
(0.384)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.73
63 934

−0.367***
(0.091)
0.501***
(0.192)
15.526***
(0.594)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
76 062

8.474***
(0.319)

−0.004
(0.008)
1.220***
(0.076)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.74
76 062

𝑗 + 𝛽2𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑒(𝑘)

𝑗 + 𝛽3𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the triple difference regression:
𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
𝑗 × 𝑒(𝑘)
The dependent variable in each regression is the dollar amount of BDC debt investments in county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 expressed in
millions. 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is a dummy variable that equals one post the capital supply shock starting from (i) 2009:Q3 for the SCAP shock,
and (ii) 2011:Q1 for the FAS 166/167 shock. 𝑒(𝑖)
is a dummy variable that equals one if a county 𝑗 has the above median
𝑗
employment share in high-tech and high-R&D-intensive industries in Panels (a) and (b), respectively. 𝑒(𝑐)
is the employment
𝑗
share in high-tech and high-R&D-intensive industries in Panels (a) and (b), respectively. The set of treated counties is defined
in Section 3.1. The control group includes non-treated counties with BDC debt financing during the pre-shock period along
with non-treated counties adjacent to them. The sample covers the period three years before and five years after the shock.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

𝑗 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡, for 𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐}.

𝑗 = 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ-𝑇 𝑒𝑐ℎ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑦(𝑐)

where 𝑒(𝑘)
, 𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐} represents an indicator and continuous measures
𝑗
of the prevalence of innovative firms in county 𝑗. Specifically, we com-
pute 𝑒𝑐
𝑗 as the share of employment in high-tech
industries based on the classification method described in Section 2.
𝑗 = 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ-𝑇 𝑒𝑐ℎ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑦(𝑖)
We also consider an indicator variable 𝑒𝑖
that
equals to one if the 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ-𝑇 𝑒𝑐ℎ 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑦(𝑐)
for county 𝑗 is above the cross-
𝑗
sectional median level in one year prior to the shock. We construct
𝑅&𝐷 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑦(𝑐)
in a similar manner based on the
𝑗
share of employment in high-R&D-intensive industries.

and 𝑅&𝐷 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑦(𝑖)
𝑗

𝑗

In line with our descriptive evidence, we document that BDCs
allocate more capital in high-tech and high-R&D-intensive counties
across all three shocks. As shown in Panel (a) of Table 6, following
the SCAP shock among treated counties BDCs allocate on average $8.7
million more debt capital to a high-tech county than to non-high-tech
county. The comparable estimates for the CIT and FAS 166/167 shocks
are $48.4 million and $15.4 million. At the same time, we find no
differential capital allocation by BDCs between the treated and control
groups among non-high-tech counties. The exception is the CIT shock,
for which we document a negative effect, though not economically
significant. For the continuous measure of the prevalence of innova-
tive firms, we document that among treated counties a 1 percentage

14 

increase in the share of employment in high-tech industries leads to
$1.1–$5.7 million increase in debt capital allocated by BDCs. We find
very similar results both qualitatively and quantitatively when exam-
ining BDC investments between low- and high-R&D-intensive counties
(see Panel (b) of Table 6).

Our findings suggest that BDC debt investments can be particularly
well-suited for firms active in high-tech and high-R&D-intensive in-
dustries. Therefore, we argue that BDCs are important for promoting
innovation and economic growth.

4. Importance of BDC financing

In this section, we analyze the effects on firms employment growth
and patenting activity from having access to BDC financing. For iden-
tification, we continue to exploit our three capital supply shocks de-
scribed in Section 3.

4.1. Employment and patenting dynamics of portfolio firms

To assess whether BDC investments have real effects on their portfo-
lio firms, we first implement an event study design around investment

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table 7
Firm outcomes and BDC financing: Event-study analysis.

(a): Employment growth

Table 8
Firm outcomes and BDC financing: Staggered difference-in-differences analysis.

Employment growth

Patenting

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

}

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗

𝑓 − 8

}

h = 4

h = 6

h = 8

h = 12

Placebo

0.901***

1.084***

1.197***

0.800*

(0.281)

(0.360)

(0.396)

(0.418)

Investment Qtr FE
Firm FE
Time FE
Industry-Year FE
R2
N

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.626
7100

(b): Patenting propensity

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.587
8674

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.555
10 256

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.506
13 412

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

}

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗

𝑓 − 8

}

h = 4

h = 6

h = 8

h = 12

Placebo

−0.000

(0.013)

0.010

(0.012)

0.020*

(0.011)

0.021*

(0.011)

Investment Qtr FE
Firm FE
Time FE
Industry-Year FE
R2
N

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.737
7681

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.731
9385

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.726
11 097

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.700
14 513

1

}

{

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

+ 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ 𝑓 𝑜𝑟 ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12}.

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the firm-level regression:
𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = 𝛽ℎ
The dependent variable is (a) the employment growth and (b) the natural logarithm
of one plus the number of patents filed by a firm 𝑓 in an industry 𝑘 in a quarter 𝑡
with an investment quarter 𝑡∗. 1
is an indicator variable which equals one
for quarters following the BDC investment quarter in a firm 𝑓 , and zero otherwise. In
columns (1)–(4), the sample period includes four quarters prior to the investment date
and ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12} quarters after the investment date for each firm 𝑓 . The specification
𝑃 𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑏𝑜 in the rightmost column is similar to the specification ℎ = 8 with the sample
period and investment date shifted backwards by eight quarters. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

}

{

0.469

(0.364)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.545
9633

−0.001

(0.011)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.698
11 097

{

1

{

1

{

1

}

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = −4

}

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = −3

}

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = −2

{

{

{

{

{

{

1

1

1

1

1

1

}

}

}

}

}

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = −1

}

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = 0

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = +1

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = +2

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = +3

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = +4

Investment Qtr FE
Firm FE
Time FE
Industry-year FE
N

Main

−0.191

(0.233)

−0.023

(0.413)

−0.106

(0.607)

−0.003

(0.801)

0.683**

(0.329)

0.841*

(0.460)

0.532

(0.581)

0.350

(0.713)

0.266

(0.849)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
8357

Placebo

Main

Placebo

−0.207

(0.309)

−0.608

(0.523)

−0.876

(0.728)

−1.057

(0.935)

−0.066

(0.298)

−0.193

(0.435)

−0.432

(0.564)

−0.813

(0.696)

−1.050

(0.816)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6436

0.004

(0.015)

0.009

(0.018)

0.002

(0.022)

0.004

(0.026)

0.006

(0.013)

0.021

(0.015)

0.021

(0.018)

0.049**

(0.019)

0.033

(0.022)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
10 240

0.003

(0.012)

−0.014

(0.017)

−0.016

(0.021)

−0.002

(0.026)

−0.012

(0.012)

0.001

(0.014)

−0.017

(0.016)

−0.023

(0.019)

−0.018

(0.021)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
10 240

}

{

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = 𝑚

𝑚=−4 𝛽𝑚

+ 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ ,

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the difference-in-differences regression
with staggered treatment adoption:
𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = ∑𝑚=+4
1
The dependent variable is (a) the employment growth and (b) the natural logarithm of
one plus the number of patents filed by a firm 𝑓 in an industry 𝑘 in a quarter 𝑡 with
an investment quarter 𝑡∗. 𝑡∗
𝑓 is the BDC investment quarter in firm 𝑓 . 𝑚 is the number
of quarters relative to the investment date. The indicator variables 1
are
leads and lags of the investment date indicator. ***, **, and * indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

𝑓 = 𝑚

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

{

}

dates. Specifically, we estimate the following regression specification

𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = 𝛽ℎ

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

}

+𝜂𝑓 +𝜏𝑡 +𝜃𝑡∗ +𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 +𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ 𝑓 𝑜𝑟 ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12} (5)

where the dependent variable 𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ is either a firm-level employment
growth or the natural logarithm of one plus the number of patents filed
by a firm 𝑓 in an industry 𝑘 in a quarter 𝑡 with an investment quarter 𝑡∗
𝑓 .
1
is an indicator variable which equals one for quarters follow-

}

{

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

ing the BDC debt investment quarter in a firm 𝑓 and zero otherwise. For
each firm, we include four quarters prior to the investment date as the
pre-investment period. 𝛽ℎ measures the relative change in the outcome
of interest following the BDC financing for the post-investment period
of ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12} quarters. We saturate regressions with numerous
fixed effects. In particular, we include firm and time fixed effects to
account for unobservable time-invariant firm-specific characteristics
and common trends in the firms’ fundamentals. We further control for
the cohort effects by including investment-quarter fixed effects and for
industry-specific shocks by including industry-year fixed effects.

Table 7 reports the estimation results of regression (5). As shown
in Panel (a), we find that BDC financing allows firms to increase
their employment growth by 0.8%–1.2% per annum relative to the
employment growth in the pre-investment period. This positive effect
is present one year after the investment date and persists for another
two years. Panel (b) demonstrates a positive effect of BDC financing on
firms’ patenting activity, however this effect appears only two years
after the investment date. This delayed effect on patents is in line
with the notion that innovation activity has a longer cycle than hiring.
Specifically, BDC-funded firms file 2% more patents per quarter after
receiving the financing. This coefficient estimate represents about a

15 

10% increase from the average patenting frequency by firms in our
sample in the pre-investment period.

One possible concern with the above estimation is that the observed
real effects are due to BDC strategy to target firms with steady employ-
ment growth or patenting activity. To alleviate this issue, we conduct
a placebo test by shifting the investment date by eight quarters back-
wards. The corresponding estimation results with ℎ = 8 are reported in
the rightmost column of Table 7. We find no significant effect both for
employment growth and patenting frequency by BDC-funded firms.

In an ideal thought experiment, we would compare growth of two
identical firms following the BDC investment, where one of the firms
receives BDC funding and the other one does not. Since data on private
firms’ fundamentals is scarce or stale, such an experiment is challenging
in practice . However, we can rely on BDC-funded firms prior to
receiving the BDC investment to construct a control group for firms
that have already obtained BDC funding. Specifically, we implement a
difference-in-differences design with staggered investments following
the methodology of Borusyak et al. (2024). In such a specification,
we compare the outcomes of interest for firms that received BDC
investment relative to firms that have not yet received BDC funding.
More formally, we estimate

𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ =

𝑚=+4
∑

{

1

𝛽𝑚

}

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑓 = 𝑚

+ 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ ,

(6)

𝑚=−4
where 𝑡∗
𝑓 is the BDC investment date in firm 𝑓 and 𝑚 is the number
of quarters relative to the investment date. Quarters preceding the
investment date correspond to 𝑚 < 0, and 𝑚 > 0 corresponds to quarters
after the investment date. The indicator variables 1
are

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

{

}

𝑓 = 𝑚

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

{

Fig. 8. Parallel trends for employment and patenting dynamics. The figures depict the coefficient estimates of 𝛽s along with the 90% confidence intervals from the following
regression: 𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = ∑𝑚=+4
+ 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ , where the dependent variable is (a) the employment growth and (b) the natural logarithm of one plus the
number of patents filed by a firm 𝑓 in an industry 𝑘 in a quarter 𝑡 with an investment quarter 𝑡∗. 𝑡∗
𝑓 is the BDC investment date in firm 𝑓 . 𝑚 is the number of quarters relative to
the investment date. The indicator variables 1
are leads and lags of the investment date indicator. The left column of figures corresponds to the main specification,
while the right column of figures correspond to the placebo specification where the investment date is shifted by eight quarters backwards.

𝑚=−4 𝛽𝑚

𝑓 = 𝑚

𝑓 = 𝑚

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

𝑡 − 𝑡∗

{

}

}

1

leads and lags of the investment date indicator and as such coefficients
𝛽𝑚 capture the dynamic investment effects.

The estimation results of regression (6) are presented in Table 8.
In line with our previous findings, we observe a positive effect of BDC
financing on firm employment growth (see Panel a). Specifically, we
document a significant employment growth of 0.7% at the investment
quarter and of 0.8% in the quarter thereafter. Importantly, we do not
detect any significant pre-investment trends in employment growth (see
Panel (a) of Fig. 8). For patenting activity, we observe a similar delayed
effect of BDC funding as in the event study analysis with a signifi-
cant positive effect of 4.9% in the third quarter after the investment
date. Panel (b) of Fig. 8 demonstrates that there are no significant
pre-investment trends in patenting frequency. To further validate our
findings, we implement a placebo test where we shift the investment
date by eight quarters backwards. As shown in the ‘‘Placebo’’ columns
of Table 8 and Fig. 8, we find no significant effects and occasionally
negative coefficient estimates both for firm employment growth and
patenting frequency. Overall, our results are comparable across the
event study and staggered difference-in-differences designs.

BDC Managerial Assistance. Recall that as part of their regulatory
status BDCs are required to provide substantial managerial assistance
to their portfolio firms. To assess whether such managerial assistance
plays any role for firms’ growth, we estimate the following firm-level
regression:

𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗

{

}

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
= 𝛽1,ℎ
𝑓
+ 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ ,

+ 𝛽2,ℎ

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

1

}

𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑓 ,𝑡∗

(7)

where we proxy for the degree of managerial assistance with the
inverse of the number of firms in the BDC portfolio. Arguably, the

16 

assistance degree will depend on how many other firms are under
guidance and supervisory support of a lender. In particularly, the
variable 𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑓 ,𝑡∗ is defined as the inverse of the number
of firms in the portfolio of the BDC when it initiates an investment
in a firm 𝑓 . If a firm receives an investment from multiple BDCs in
the same quarter, we take the average value of the number of firms
across the BDCs’ portfolios. For ease of interpretation, we standardize
the 𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 variable by subtracting its mean and scaling by
its standard deviation. As shown in Table 9, a one standard deviation
increase in the degree of managerial assistance above its mean is asso-
ciated with a 0.3%–0.4% higher firm employment growth following the
BDC investment. These positive and statistically significant coefficient
estimates indicate that manager supervision is an important source of
added value for portfolio firms.23 Furthermore, these results highlight
a unique mechanism through which BDCs contribute to firm growth.

BDC vs. PD Financing. To draw a comparison between the role of
BDC and PD financing for firm growth, we additionally hand-collect
employment data from Preqin for PD-funded middle-market firms. We
next estimate the following regression specification:

𝛥𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = 𝛽1,ℎ

{

}

{

}

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓
+ 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ ,

+ 𝛽2,ℎ

1

𝐵𝐷𝐶 𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑓

(8)

for ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12}. 𝐵𝐷𝐶 𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑓 is an indicator variable which equal
one if a firm 𝑓 receives financing from BDCs and zero if a firm 𝑓

23 In untabulated results, we find no effect of managerial assistance on
firm patenting frequency. Arguably, BDC manager supervision would have less
effect on firm innovation and R&D activity.

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table 9
Firm employment growth and BDC managerial assistance.

Table 10
Firm employment growth and PD financing: Event-study analysis.

h = 4

h = 6

h = 8

h = 12 Placebo

h = 4

h = 6

h = 8

h = 12

Placebo

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

}

}

0.909*** 1.102*** 1.220*** 0.825**

(0.281)

(0.360)

(0.396)

(0.419)

× Manager Attention

0.331

0.426*

0.436*

0.404*

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

}

}

0.724

1.189**

1.408***

1.228**

× BDC Funded

0.195

−0.029

−0.160

(0.452)

(0.503)

(0.525)

(0.521)

−0.496

(0.656)

(0.229)

(0.221)

(0.234)

(0.231)

{

1

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗

𝑓 − 8

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗

𝑓 − 8

}

}

× Manager Attention

0.464

(0.364)

−0.129

(0.243)

{

1

{

1

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗

𝑓 − 8

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗

𝑓 − 8

}

}

× BDC Funded

(0.617)

(0.648)

(0.664)

Investment Qtr FE
Firm FE
Time FE
Industry-Year FE
R2
N

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.626
7100

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.588
8674

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.556
10 256

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.506
0.545
13 412 9633

Investment Qtr FE
Firm FE
Time FE
Industry-Year FE
R2
N

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.651
12 115

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.602
14 737

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.567
17 334

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.511
22 358

0.447

(0.503)

0.267

(0.648)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.581
16 914

1

1

{

}

{

}

{

+ 𝛽2,ℎ

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑓 ,𝑡∗ + 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ ,

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the firm-level regression:
}
𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = 𝛽1,ℎ
for ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12}.
The dependent variable is the employment growth of a firm 𝑓 in an industry 𝑘 in a
quarter 𝑡 with an investment quarter 𝑡∗. 1
is an indicator variable which equals
one for quarters following the BDC investment quarter in a firm 𝑓 , and zero otherwise.
𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑓 ,𝑡∗
is the inverse of the number of firms in the portfolio of the BDC
when it initiates an investment in a firm 𝑓 . We standardize the 𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
variable by subtracting its mean and scaling by its standard deviation. In columns
(1)–(4), the sample period includes four quarters prior to the investment date and
ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12} quarters after the investment date for each firm 𝑓 . The specification
𝑃 𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑏𝑜 in the rightmost column is similar to the specification ℎ = 8 with the sample
period and investment date shifted backwards by eight quarters. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

𝑓

receives financing from PD funds. Table 10 documents that financing by
PD funds allows firms to increase their employment growth by 0.7%–
1.4% per annum. At the same time, we find that the difference in the
employment growth after the investment is not statistically different
across BDC- and PD-funded firms. These findings support our earlier
results that BDCs and other private capital providers follow similar
investment strategies, allowing us to study an opaque private debt
space through the lens of BDC investment allocations.

4.2. Real effect of BDC funding

To estimate the causal effect of BDC financing on firms’ growth, we
continue to rely on the three shocks to the capital supply by traditional
lenders. While there might exist endogeneity concerns regarding the
allocation of BDC capital to specific firms, our capital supply shocks are
plausibly exogenous as argued in Section 3.1. We therefore estimate the
following difference-in-differences regression at the portfolio firm-level:

𝛥𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑓 ,𝑗,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = 𝛽1𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡+𝛽2𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡×𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)

𝑗 +𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1+𝜂𝑓 +𝜃𝑡∗ +𝜀𝑓 ,𝑗,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ (9)

where the dependent variable is the employment growth of a firm 𝑓
located in a county 𝑗 in an industry 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 with an investment
date 𝑡∗. 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is the post-shock indicator variable and 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
is
𝑗
the treatment indicator variable used in regression (1). Since most of
portfolio firms are located in treated counties, we modify the treatment
definition: 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
is equal to one if a county 𝑗’s treatment intensity
𝑗
is above the 25th percentile of 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑐) and zero otherwise. To isolate
the effect of the shocks, we limit the sample of portfolio firms to those
receiving BDC funding during the four quarters after the shock. The
sample period covers four quarters prior to the shock and eight quarters
after the shock. The coefficients of interest are 𝛽1, which captures the
effect of BDC financing on firm employment growth in counties with
no or mild reduction in capital supplied by traditional lenders, and
𝛽2, which captures the differential effect for firms located in counties
with high exposure to the capital supply shocks. For this reason, we do

1

1

{

}

{

+ 𝛽2,ℎ

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the firm-level regression:
}
𝐵𝐷𝐶 𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑓 + 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜔𝑘,̃𝑡 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ , for
𝑦𝑓 ,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = 𝛽1,ℎ
ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12}. The dependent variable is the employment growth of a firm 𝑓 in an
industry 𝑘 in a quarter 𝑡 with an investment quarter 𝑡∗. 1
variable which equals one for quarters following the BDC or PD investment quarter in
a firm 𝑓 , and zero otherwise. 𝐵𝐷𝐶 𝐹 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑓 is an indicator variable which equal one if
a firm 𝑓 receives financing from BDCs and zero if a firm 𝑓 receives financing from PD
capital providers. In columns (1)–(4), the sample period includes four quarters prior
to the investment date and ℎ ∈ {4, 6, 8, 12} quarters after the investment date for each
firm 𝑓 . The specification 𝑃 𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑏𝑜 in the rightmost column is similar to the specification
ℎ = 8 with the sample period and investment date shifted backwards by eight quarters.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

is an indicator

𝑡 ≥ 𝑡∗
𝑓

}

{

Table 11
Firm employment growth and BDC financing.

Post

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Controls
Investment Qtr FE
Firm FE
Firm-Cohort FE
𝑅2
N

SCAP

1.084*
(0.632)
−1.582**
(0.674)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.60
2496

CIT

0.969*
(0.515)
−0.400
(0.463)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.52
4117

FAS 166/167

Stacked

0.091
(0.406)
−1.525***
(0.413)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.51
4605

0.876***
(0.246)
−1.108***
(0.281)

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
0.53
11 218

𝑗 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑓 + 𝜃𝑡∗ + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑗,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ .

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the difference-in-differences regression:
𝛥𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑓 ,𝑗,𝑘,𝑡,𝑡∗ = 𝛽1𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
The dependent variable is the employment growth of a firm 𝑓 located in a county 𝑗 in
an industry 𝑘 in quarter 𝑡 with an investment quarter 𝑡∗. 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is a dummy variable that
equals one post the capital supply shock starting from (i) 2009:Q3 for the SCAP shock,
(ii) 2010:Q1 for the CIT shock, and (iii) 2011:Q1 for the FAS 166/167 shock. 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)
𝑗
is equal to one if a county 𝑗’s treatment intensity is above the 25th percentile of
𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑐) and zero otherwise. The county treatment intensity is defined in Section 3.1.
The sample of portfolio firms is limited to firms receiving BDC funding during the four
quarters after the shock. The sample period covers four quarters prior to the shock and
eight quarters after the shock. The rightmost column reports the estimation results for
a stacked regression specification combining all three capital supply shocks. ***, **,
and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

not include the time fixed effects which will absorb 𝛽1. We estimate
regression (9) separately for each shock, as well as stack the three
shocks together in a single specification.

As shown in the rightmost column of Table 11, BDC-funded firms
experience a 0.9% higher employment growth following the shock
if they are located in counties with low shortages of financing by
traditional lenders. By contrast, we find that the employment growth
of firms located in counties with high exposure to the shocks is 1.1%
lower relative to firms in counties with low shock exposure. The sum
of these estimates is close zero implying that BDC-funded firms located
in counties with high exposure to the shocks were merely able to
substitute loss of funding from traditional lenders with BDC capital.
Provided that we focus on the narrow sample period around the shocks

17 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

and the set of firms receiving BDC funding right after the shock, we
argue that the observed positive effect on firm growth is attributed
to BDC financing. Also, the proximity of the BDC investment dates
to the capital supply shocks allows us to mitigate the concerns about
the credit demand effects. These coefficient estimates are qualitatively
and quantitatively similar to our previous estimates in the event study
and staggered difference-in-differences designs. Overall, we document
positive real effects of firms’ access to BDC capital.

5. Conclusion

The Financial Crisis of 2007–2008 has triggered the tightening of
regulation in the banking sector, thereby contributing to a surge in
alternative lenders and, in particular, business development companies.
Our paper is the first to provide a systematic analysis of these financial
institutions in the academic literature. To this end, we construct an
extensive database of BDC investments from publicly available filings.
Using this novel hand-collected database, we describe the BDCs’ uses
and sources of funds — portfolio composition, types of investments,
geographical presence, loan pricing terms, ownership structure, and
cost of funding.

Although our initial analysis focuses on BDCs themselves, our study
ultimately investigates the role of private debt capital for the growth
of the middle-market sector. First, we document that BDCs enter local
markets experiencing shortage of capital by traditional lenders, indicat-
ing that BDC financing acts as a substitute to more conventional sources
of funding. This result is in line with the views of BDC investment man-
agers, who often claim to target middle-market firms precisely because
they are ‘‘underserved’’. We further find that PD funds follow a similar
investment strategy to BDCs, which implies that our insights apply
to the broader and more opaque private debt space. Second, relying
on hand-collected firm-level data, we document that BDC financing
plays an important role in promoting firms’ employment growth and
patenting activity.

Overall, our findings lead us to conclude that BDCs fill a niche
that allows capital to reach middle-market firms – often firms with
high growth opportunities and lack of sustainable funding sources, –
thereafter stimulating firm growth and innovation.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Tetiana Davydiuk: Writing – review & editing, Writing – origi-
nal draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources,
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acqui-
sition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tatyana
Marchuk: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Vi-
sualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Samuel Rosen: Writing –
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors do not have any potential conflicts of interest. The
first author received financial support from NSF Grant 2018854 for
a research project ‘‘Direct Lending in the U.S. Middle Market’’. The
last author received financial support from NSF Grant 2018973 for a
research project ‘‘Direct Lending in the U.S. Middle Market’’.

Data availability

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/3r3zsmx34k/1Direct Lenders in
the U.S. Middle Market (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

Appendix A. Coverage of portfolio firm locations

In this Appendix, we describe our method for merging portfolio firm
location data with our quarterly investment-level data. The investment-
level data are from the schedule of investments (SOI) tables from the
10-Q and 10-K filings of BDCs that are available on the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) website. For each BDC in our sample,
we collect location information from its N-2 filings. N-2 forms are a
registration statement filed by companies when issuing new debt and
equity securities. From each N-2 filing, we extract firm names along
with the corresponding addresses including city, state, and ZIP code.24
If a firm has an address outside of the United States, we flag it as a
foreign firm.

In order to merge the N-2 filing location data onto the SOI data, we
proceed as follows. First, we use a string matching algorithm to link
the set of firm names in each N-2 filing to the SOI table from the same
BDC and filing quarter. Given that we can obtain high but less than
100% matching scores due to minor differences in the string values, we
manually review all of the assumed matches. Since N-2 filings should
contain the addresses of all active portfolio firms reported in the SOI
tables, this step yields a match rate of 95.4%. Specifically, we are able
to match 19,123 out of the 20,043 total observations in the N-2 data
for which there is a corresponding SOI table to match against.

We also keep track of possible address changes over time. Specif-
ically, once we have assigned addresses to portfolio firms in quarters
with a N-2 filing, we consider any given location to be effective until
a future quarter in which the BDC reports a different location or the
end of our sample, whichever comes first. If a BDC reports a different
location for a portfolio firm in a future N-2 filing, this location becomes
effective from the date of the corresponding N-2 filing. For each firm,
we consider the first reported location to be valid from the first date
the firm appears in the SOI tables.

In the second step, we spread location information across BDCs if
a firm receives funding from multiple BDCs. In this context, a firm’s
name is a unique string identifier that we have created after manually
reviewing and standardizing every name reported in the SOI tables.
This step allows us to assign location information to firms which borrow
from BDCs that have never submitted an N-2 filing or borrow in the
quarter when a BDC did not submit an N-2 filing.25 Through these two
steps, we collect location information for 77.3% of portfolio firms in our
sample. Fig. A.1 summarizes the coverage of portfolio firm locations in
our dataset over time. We report the match rates both in terms of the
investment count and fair values throughout the sample period in each
filing quarter.

Appendix B. Affiliated assets of the BDC sector

While BDCs are comparatively smaller than traditional lenders in
the U.S., their assets represent only a fraction of deployed capital.
This discrepancy arises because BDCs frequently operate under the
umbrella of large asset management firms that manage other funds
targeting similar market segments, including other direct lending and
private equity funds. BDCs often report in their SEC filings that they
source some of their deals through affiliates. For example, Fifth Street
Finance Corporation lists ‘‘Capitalize on our investment adviser’s strong
relationships with private equity sponsors’’ as a key aspect of their
business strategy. In Table B.1, we report non-BDC related assets under

24 In some cases, a BDC only reports city and state or only state. For these
observations, we manually gather and verify ZIP code information from other
sources including other N-2 filings.

25 For firms with multiple locations (e.g., branches) receiving funding from
several BDCs we proceed as follows. First, we locate BDC investments based
on the addresses they report in their N-2 fillings. If for one of the BDCs the
location information is not available, we assign the location of another BDC.

18 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Fig. A.1. Coverage of portfolio firm locations over time. The figures depict the shares of portfolio firms with location information. The shares are calculated based on the number
of portfolio firms in Panel (a) and based on fair values of investments in Panel (b). In computing these figures, we exclude collateralized loan obligations, collateralized debt
obligations, and investments to venture capital funds, mutual funds, and other funds which allow investors to access the financial markets. The data are quarterly observations
from 2004:Q1 to 2017:Q4.

Table B.1
Assets under management for BDC-affiliated entities.

Asset management companies

BDCs

Related AUM by strategy

Direct
lending

Private
equity

Other

CLO

AINV
CCT
ABDC
FSEP, FSIC
TSLX
ARCC
GSBD
NMFC
GBDC

Apollo Global Management LLC
KKR & Co LP
Alcentra Group (BNYM)
Blackstone Group LP
TPG Global, LLC
Ares Management LP
Goldman Sachs Group Inc
New Mountain Capital Group LLC
Golub Capital Inc
American Capital Asset Management LLC ACAS, ACSF
Tennenbaum Capital Partners LLC
Garrison Investment Group
Monroe Capital LLC
JMP Group Inc
TriplePoint Capital
Medley Capital LLC
Stellus Capital Management LLC
BlackRock Inc
OFS Capital Management LLC
Fifth Street Capital LLC
Capitala Group
The Tokarz Group LLC

TCPC
GARS
MRCC
HCAP
TPVG
MCC, SIRR
SCM
BKCC
OFS
FSC, FSFR
CPTA
MVC

3.4
1.5
–
5.8
–
0.3
–
–
2.7
–
–
0.2
0.8
–
–
0.6
0.4
–
0.2
–
–
–

19.7
8.5

–

0.3
9.8
5.5
6.5
4.0
–
1.3
1.0
1.9
–
0.1

–
–
–

0.3
–
–
0.2
0.1

3.2
4.0
21.7
9.4
0.7
1.9
–
–
1.3
–
2.1
–
0.6
–
1.0
–
–
–
–
0.2
–
–

16.0
8.5

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2.5
–
–
–
1.1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Total

Total

Lower

Upper

23.1
9.9
–

6.0
9.8
5.8
6.5
4.0
2.7
1.3
1.0
2.1
0.8
0.1
–

0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.2
0.1

–

74.9

42.3
22.5
21.7
15.4
10.5
7.6
6.5
4.0
4.0
3.8
3.1
2.1
1.5
1.2
1.0
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1

149.2

The table reports estimates for assets under management (AUM) for affiliated asset management companies of BDCs as of the end of 2014. The
fund-level AUM data are from Preqin with the exception for Alcentra Group (BNYM); American Capital Asset Management, LLC; JMP Group,
Inc; and the collateralized loan obligation (CLO) fund category for which our data are from SEC filings. From Preqin, we include data from
funds with a vintage year between 2009–2014 and a geographic focus in North America. For funds with missing size information, we estimate
their size by applying the average fund size for that strategy for the same fund manager as available. The ‘‘Lower’’ column includes only ‘‘Direct
Lending’’ and ‘‘Private Equity’’. The ‘‘Upper’’ column adds ‘‘Other’’ and ‘‘CLO’’. All figures are in billions of dollars.

management for a set of affiliated asset management companies as of

Appendix C. BDC statements about investment strategies

the end of 2014. We estimate that these affiliates managed $75 to $149

billion in related capital that may have been deployed alongside BDC

investments of $45 billion during the period of our study. These figures

suggest additional investment allocations beyond BDC financing into

the middle market.

Within their annual filings, BDCs often state that BDC financing
substitutes for traditional lending in the middle market. Here are a few
examples from 2012 annual reports. Ares Capital Corporation stated
that ‘‘[w]e invest primarily in U.S. middle-market companies, where
we believe the supply of primary capital is limited and the investment

19 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

opportunities are most attractive’’. Fifth Street Finance Corporation
wrote that ‘‘[a] significant part of our competitive advantage stems
from the fact that the market for investments in small and mid-sized
firms is underserved by traditional commercial banks and other finan-
cial sources’’. BlackRock Kelso Capital Corporation commented that
‘‘[w]e believe the tight supply of credit due to deleveraging by banks
provides a promising environment in which to originate investments in
middle-market companies’’. Triangle Capital Corporation asserted that
the lower middle market (LMM) has ‘‘traditionally been underserved’’
and Main Street Capital Corporation said that they seek to ‘‘fill the
current financing gap for LMM businesses, which, historically, have
had more limited access to financing from commercial banks and other
traditional sources’’.

Some BDCs identify stricter bank regulation as an important fac-
tor. In their 2012 annual report, Ares Capital Corporation explained,
‘‘[Commercial and investment banks] are limited in their ability to
underwrite and hold bank loans and high yield securities for middle-
market issuers as they seek to meet existing and future regulatory
capital requirements. These factors may result in opportunities for
alternative funding sources to middle-market companies and therefore
more new-issue market opportunities for us’’. During the period 2013–
2016, other BDCs made similar claims. In their 2013 annual report,
Corporate Capital Trust wrote that, ‘‘[a]s new banking regulations such
as Basel III and Dodd-Frank require financial institutions to meet new
increased capital requirements, our Advisors believe the confluence of
both legislative and regulatory measures will make it more difficult and
inefficient for commercial banks to supply all of the capital to meet
the financing needs of growing medium- to large-sized companies’’. In
that same year, Stellus Capital Investment Corporation and OFS Capital
Corporation raised similar points in their annual report. In 2014, CM
Finance Inc joined the chorus by writing ‘‘the introduction of new
international capital and liquidity requirements ... have caused banks
to curtail lending to middle-market companies’’. In 2015, Alcentra
Capital Corporation and Princeton Capital Corporation added similar
statements to their annual reports. In 2016, Credit Suisse Park View
BDC, Inc. opined that significant increases to capital and liquidity
requirements for banks would ‘‘decreas[e] their capacity and appetite
to hold non-investment grade loans on their balance sheets’’.

The belief in the general narrative that bank regulation was causing
banks to lend less to the middle market was also shared by invest-
ment analysts covering the BDC sector. For instance, one 2014 report
commented that ‘‘banks are showing signs of being pushed out of the
market with regulation’’. The quote from the Wells Fargo Securities
report on September 11, 2014 titled ‘‘The Q4 2014 BDC Scorecard’’
continues to say, ‘‘As a result of pressure from the OCC and Leveraged
Lending Guidance, many banks have been shying away from more
highly leveraged transactions. However, as leverage continues to creep
upwards in the middle market, this has resulted in many banks being
disintermediated and unable to meet their lending goals’’. In 2017, a
Guggenheim Investments report titled ‘‘An Overview of Business De-
velopment Companies (BDCs)’’, opined that, ‘‘Traditional lenders, such
as banks, are facing increased regulatory burdens and are unable to
lend to small and mid-sized businesses, resulting in increased demand
for BDC capital. BDCs have become an important source of capital by
lending to American businesses that might not otherwise be able to
obtain financing’’.

Appendix D. Additional details on BDC business model

BDCs offer various financing solutions with their main investment
instrument being debt securities. BDCs offer several pricing alternatives
for their debt securities, including a conventional spread over a base
rate (e.g., LIBOR), a fixed cash rate, and a ‘‘payment-in-kind’’ (PIK)
rate options. Table D.2 demonstrates that debt deals with a fixed
cash rate were relatively more common among BDCs in 2010, while
in 2017 there has been a shift towards floating rate pricing.26 Not
surprisingly, we find that floating loan rates are on average lower than
the fixed ones. For example, in 2010:Q4 the median variable loan rate
offered by BDCs was almost 3% lower that the corresponding fixed
rate. In 2017:Q4, this difference shrinks to less than 1%. Table D.2 also
indicates that very few deals featured loan rates with a PIK option.
The PIK rate offers borrowers a possibility to postpone their debt
interest payments up to the maturity date, allowing them to better
align the maturity of their capital expenditures and funding. Though
more flexible, the PIK loans are on average more expensive than loans
with conventional floating and fixed interest rates. Among firms which
obtain funding from BDCs through debt securities, about 16% receive
a loan with a PIK option at least once.

BDC Capital Structure and Ownership. BDCs not only provide
investors with the access to illiquid investments in private firms, but
also offer high returns on their capital allocations. Table D.3 reports
that a typical BDC receives over 9% annually in interest income per
unit of assets. The right tail of the interest income distribution exceeds
12% as of 2010:Q4 and reaches 11% as of 2017:Q4. Besides earning in-
terest income on their investments, BDCs collect nontrivial noninterest
income predominantly consisting of management fees for their capital
allocation services.

The BDC sector has attracted a number of institutional investors.
Using the 13-F disclosures, we find that among key institutional share-
holders are private equity firms, mutual funds, and financial intermedi-
aries. The synergies between the private equity sector and direct lenders
can be particularly high because of the PE funds’ expertise in screening
and monitoring private ventures. Sourcing deals from the PE sector can
help BDCs to facilitate their investment process. The TPG Capital LP
and New Mountain Capital are two examples of private equity firms
with BDC ownership. To gain exposure to the middle market, the TPG
Capital LP launched a privately held BDC, TPG Specialty Lending Inc,
in 2011 and took it public in 2014. New Mountain Capital has operated
a public BDC, New Mountain Finance Corporation, since 2010.

Rather than financing middle-market firms directly, banking insti-
tutions may seek opportunities to enter this market segment indirectly
through investments in BDC equity capital.27 This strategy allows banks
to avoid high capital charges, since debt securities issued to middle-
market firms are usually not rated, but if they were they would have
been rated as junk bonds. Basel II postulates that a capital charge for
high-risk debt investments is 150%, while for BDCs equity investments
this charge is only 100%. Admittedly, this regulatory loophole may
increase bank risk exposures as equity positions in BDCs are levered
claims on high-risk debt investments.

It is a common strategy among banks to hold equity of multiple
BDCs. For example, Credit Suisse Group AG holds shares of American
Capital Senior Floating Ltd., Oaktree Strategic Income Corp., OHA In-
vestment Corp., and Crossroads Capital Inc. In extreme cases, financial
intermediaries launch their own BDCs. For instance, in April 2013
Goldman Sachs Group Inc. launched a new lending unit to invest in
high-risk debt, later known as Goldman Sachs BDC Inc. Importantly, to
avoid the Volcker rule regulations the equity share of a bank should
remain below 20%. Otherwise, a bank-founded BDC would be under
the umbrella of a bank holding company and, as such, subject to its
regulations.

BDC Portfolio Characteristics. In line with their regulatory re-
quirements, BDCs tend to allocate on average 97% of their assets into
cash-like securities and investments in qualifying portfolio firms (see
Table D.1). In the cross section of BDCs, there is a wide dispersion
in cash holdings, with the 90th percentile of the cash-to-assets ratio
exceeding 25% as of 2017:Q4.

26 Note Table D.2 documents the summary statistics across BDC portfolio
debt investments and does not include any controls for riskiness of their
borrowers.

27 Amid the data limitations, we are not able to distinguish between the
actual equity ownership by banks, that is, using their capital, or by banks’
asset management arms.

20 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table D.1
Balance sheet composition of BDCs.

(a) 2010:Q4

Total assets, $ Billions

(Cash+Securities)/Total assets, %
Cash/Total assets, %
Securities/Total assets, %
Other assets/Total assets, %
Book equity/Total assets, %
Book equity/(Total assets-cash), %
Market equity/Total assets, %
Debt/Total assets, %
Other liabilities/Total assets, %

(b) 2017:Q4

Total assets, $ Billions

(Cash+Securities)/Total assets, %
Cash/Total assets, %
Securities/Total assets, %
Other assets/Total assets, %
Book equity/Total assets, %
Book equity/(Total assets-cash), %
Market equity/Total assets, %
Debt/Total assets, %
Other liabilities/Total assets, %

N

30
30
30
30
30
30
30
28
30
30

N

81
81
81
81
81
81
81
52
81
81

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

10%

0.96
94.26
13.24
81.03
5.74
71.49
94.98
66.54
24.51
4.00

1.54
7.88
16.42
17.91
7.88
18.91
79.10
22.45
18.46
5.60

0.47
97.93
6.01
87.41
2.07
70.48
82.52
67.96
27.59
2.07

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

1.15
97.14
8.99
88.15
2.86
63.04
71.61
49.12
32.20
4.76

1.76
3.30
11.33
12.01
3.30
15.24
26.36
15.59
16.19
7.50

0.51
98.02
4.97
92.86
1.98
57.21
61.52
51.54
37.63
2.49

0.04
85.83
1.29
54.78
0.99
50.12
53.35
41.45
0.00
1.11

10%

0.05
95.27
0.58
72.51
0.96
50.68
53.20
30.68
0.00
0.94

25%

0.17
93.13
3.64
75.57
1.75
58.64
62.42
56.18
9.99
1.39

25%

0.23
97.12
1.78
85.94
1.30
53.65
56.41
40.19
22.84
1.49

75%

90%

0.90
98.25
18.10
93.01
6.87
84.94
100.27
79.92
37.13
5.07

75%

1.55
98.70
9.57
95.85
2.88
68.72
78.08
57.19
43.59
3.51

2.52
99.01
31.05
96.43
14.17
98.36
117.88
90.59
45.54
7.48

90%

2.44
99.04
25.13
97.55
4.73
92.49
102.09
65.68
46.50
10.99

The tables report the balance sheet summary statistics for publicly traded and privately held BDCs from SNL Financial. The
figures represent the cross-sectional statistics across BDCs as of 2010:Q4 and 2017:Q4. The data on total assets are expressed
in billions of December 2017 dollars.

Table D.2
Pricing terms of BDC debt securities.

(a) 2010:Q4

Outstanding loan size, $ Millions
New loan size, $ Millions
New loan maturity, Years
New loan rate, %

Rate: Cash only, %
Rate: PIK only, %
Rate: Cash and/or PIK, %
Rate: Base + Spread, %

(b) 2017:Q4

Outstanding loan size, $ Millions
New loan size, $ Millions
New loan maturity, Years
New loan rate, %

Rate: Cash only, %
Rate: PIK only, %
Rate: Cash and/or PIK, %
Rate: Base + Spread, %

N

1599
300
298
291
118
4
15
152

N

6417
1027
1014
1002
91
19
4
883

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

11.46
10.26
4.67
9.89
10.35
12.00
14.37
8.97

16.89
13.21
1.87
3.86
3.28
0.00
1.77
4.07

5.62
6.71
5.00
9.75
10.50
12.00
14.00
7.50

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

9.14
10.11
6.43
8.44
9.06
11.95
13.56
8.26

20.06
25.59
4.90
2.18
3.10
5.05
1.69
1.83

2.61
4.24
5.00
8.02
9.00
12.00
13.25
7.84

10%

0.57
1.17
1.92
5.50
6.00
12.00
12.00
5.50

10%

0.01
0.03
2.42
6.20
5.00
3.00
12.00
6.23

25%

2.02
2.47
3.33
6.80
8.00
12.00
13.00
6.25

25%

0.13
0.40
3.92
7.15
7.63
9.00
12.25
7.15

75%

12.96
11.56
6.00
12.00
13.00
12.00
16.00
11.00

75%

10.29
11.85
7.75
9.60
11.74
14.00
14.88
9.48

90%

29.59
23.07
6.92
15.00
14.50
12.00
16.50
13.75

90%

23.19
23.70
10.00
11.25
12.00
16.50
15.75
10.57

The tables report summary statistics for pricing terms of BDC debt securities. The figures represent the cross-sectional statistics
across BDC debt deals as of 2010:Q4 and 2017:Q4. The data on loan size are expressed in millions of December 2017 dollars.

Appendix E. Robustness and supporting evidence

In this Appendix, we perform a series of robustness checks to
validate our identification strategy and provide supporting evidence for
our analysis.

E.1. Matched sample of counties

As shown in Table 2, treated counties differ across a number of
observable characteristics from counties in the control group. To ad-
dress these potential differences between treated and control counties,

we construct a matched control group relying on the propensity score
matching algorithm. Specifically, we account for the county character-
istics listed in Table 2 averaged in the pre-shock period predicting the
exposure to each capital supply shock. We also account for BDC pres-
ence prior to the shock. As demonstrated in Table E.1, this matching
algorithm allows us to reduce the differences in observable character-
istics between the treated and control groups. We are able to achieve
a better match for counties exposed to the CIT shock than to the SCAP
and FAS 166/167 shocks as the pool of potential control counties is
substantially larger. We next re-estimate our difference-in-differences
specification using a matched set of counties. Table E.2 shows that our

21 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table D.3
Profitability summary statistics of BDCs.

(a) 2010:Q4

Interest income/Total assets, %
Interest expense/Total assets, %
Net Interest income/Total assets, %
Noninterest income/Securities, %
ROA, %
ROE, %
ROD, %

(b) 2017:Q4

Interest income/Total assets, %
Interest expense/Total assets, %
Net interest income/Total assets, %
Noninterest income/Securities, %
ROA, %
ROE, %
ROD, %

N

28
28
28
28
28
28
23

N

80
79
80
81
79
80
70

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

10%

8.55
1.10
7.46
1.21
10.57
12.36
4.70

4.13
0.99
3.87
3.49
13.62
21.62
2.73

9.39
0.94
8.54
0.44
10.56
13.73
4.96

1.67
0.00
0.95
0.00
−6.42
−14.18
1.77

Mean

St.Dev.

Median

10%

8.59
1.59
7.02
0.57
6.24
6.65
5.12

2.81
0.92
2.55
1.27
11.77
14.06
1.84

9.20
1.75
7.32
0.27
5.77
7.25
4.68

4.72
0.01
3.83
−0.05
−1.75
−4.98
3.75

25%

6.75
0.33
5.41
0.06
2.93
3.01
2.81

25%

7.52
1.17
5.83
0.02
3.04
2.42
4.20

75%

11.24
1.72
9.98
1.26
15.15
20.83
6.07

75%

10.21
2.22
8.40
0.74
7.93
10.83
5.86

90%

12.27
2.42
11.95
2.83
27.14
33.90
6.56

90%

10.97
2.77
9.15
1.43
10.69
14.79
7.36

The tables report the summary statistics for publicly traded and privately held BDCs from SNL Financial. The figures represent
the cross-sectional statistics across BDCs as of 2010:Q4 and 2017:Q4.

Fig. E.1. Parallel trends for BDC presence and investment amount in matched sample. The figures depict the coefficient estimates of 𝛾s along with the 95% confidence intervals
from the following panel regression: 𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = ∑
+ 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡, where the dependent variable is (a) an indicator that equals one if a county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡
has a non-zero debt investment amount by BDCs, and (b) the dollar amount of BDC debt investments in county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 expressed in millions. 𝜆s are post-quarter dummies:
for each quarter 𝑡 in the sample period, 𝜆𝑡 is set to one in quarter 𝑡 and zero otherwise. Dummies for the last quarter before the shock are excluded. The control group of counties
is constructed using the propensity score matching algorithm described in Appendix E.1.

(
𝜆𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑖)

𝑡 𝛾𝑡

)

𝑗

findings are both quantitatively and qualitatively similar to our bench-
mark specification. Fig. E.1 shows that the parallel trends assumption
underlying our analysis also continue to hold in the matched sample.

E.2. Data on PD funds

In our analysis, we rely on the deal-level data provided by Preqin.
Specifically, we use the information on the exact location of the portfo-
lio firms sponsored by PD funds. There are a few limitations with these

data: (i) since the private debt sector is not regulated, all the investment
information is either self-reported by PD funds or solicited via FOIA
requests; (ii) investment deals are observed only at the origination
date; and (iii) not all investments contain information on the size of
the executed deal. To address the second issue, we assume that the
maturity of each deal is equal to 6 years in line with the average
maturity of BDC financing solutions and the value of the deal remains
unchanged over the life of the investment. For deals with missing deal
size information, we approximate its value with the industry-quarter

22 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Fig. E.2. Location of PD portfolio firms. The figures show the snapshot of the geographical presence of PD portfolio firms between 2010 and 2016. The darker areas correspond
to counties with larger capital allocations and the lighter areas — with smaller capital allocations. Capital allocations are recorded at their fair values.

Table E.1
Descriptive statistics: Treated vs. control counties in matched sample of counties.

(a): SCAP shock

Total employment growth, %
Middle-market employment growth, %
Job creation/Total employment, %
Job loss/Total employment, %
Output growth, %
Middle-market firms, %
# of bank branches per 1000 establishments
Deposits HHI
Average 2001–2006 HPI growth, %

(b): CIT shock

Total employment growth, %
Middle-market employment growth, %
Job creation/Total employment, %
Job loss/Total employment, %
Output growth, %
Middle-market firms, %
# of bank branches per 1000 establishments
Deposits HHI
Average 2001–2006 HPI growth, %

(c): FAS 166/167 shock

Total employment growth, %
Middle-market employment growth, %
Job creation/Total employment, %
Job loss/Total employment, %
Output growth, %
Middle-market firms, %
# of bank branches per 1000 establishments
Deposits HHI
Average 2001–2006 HPI growth, %

Treated

Control

Difference

N

1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330

Mean

St.Dev.

N

Mean

St.Dev.

0.22
0.48
4.46
4.39
0.51
4.10
17.03
0.24
5.33

2.69
6.64
1.08
0.98
3.74
1.35
6.24
0.11
2.90

1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330
1330

0.29
0.37
4.44
4.36
0.28
4.24
17.38
0.25
5.42

1.31
2.32
0.48
0.45
1.92
0.91
4.49
0.07
1.88

−0.071
0.109
0.025
0.036
0.232 ∗∗
−0.149 ∗∗∗
−0.357 ∗
−0.008 ∗∗
−0.098

Treated

Control

Difference

N

193
193
193
193
193
193
193
193
193

Mean

St.Dev.

N

Mean

St.Dev.

−0.42
−0.54
4.03
4.08
−0.85
5.17
13.58
0.19
6.29

2.10
3.92
0.60
0.56
2.84
1.18
3.79
0.10
3.55

193
193
193
193
193
193
193
193
193

−0.42
−0.70
4.05
4.10
−0.74
5.19
13.49
0.19
6.31

1.11
2.11
0.49
0.49
1.87
0.91
2.80
0.06
2.63

−0.003
0.156
−0.021
−0.025
−0.119
−0.027
0.090
0.001
−0.014

Treated

Control

Difference

N

1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456

Mean

St.Dev.

N

Mean

St.Dev.

−1.24
−1.69
4.39
4.41
−0.09
3.94
17.92
0.25
5.26

2.45
6.16
1.08
1.02
3.81
1.34
6.46
0.12
2.80

1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456
1456

−1.15
−1.43
4.50
4.43
−0.49
4.06
17.50
0.28
6.18

0.99
2.51
0.60
0.52
3.28
0.91
5.65
0.07
2.77

−0.083
−0.263
−0.106 ∗∗∗
−0.027

0.403 ∗∗∗
−0.114 ∗∗∗
0.420 ∗
−0.035 ∗∗∗
−0.917 ∗∗∗

The tables report the descriptive statistics for counties in the treated and control groups. The county-level outcomes are
averages over the three years prior to the shock. The set of treated counties is defined in Section 3.1. The control group of
counties is constructed using the propensity score matching algorithm described in Appendix E.1. Middle-market firms are
defined as firms with the number of employees between 50 and 500. HHI stands for Herfindahl–Hirschman Index. HPI stands
for House Price Index. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

23 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Table E.2
BDC entry following credit supply shock in matched sample.

(a): BDC presence

SCAP

(1)

0.019***
(0.002)

No
Yes
Yes
0.69
85 120

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
𝑅2
N

(b): BDC investment amount

SCAP

(1)

2.363***
(0.168)

No
Yes
Yes
0.66
85 120

Post × Treated(𝑖)

Post × Treated(𝑐)

Controls
County FE
Time FE
𝑅2
N

(2)

0.046***
(0.009)

No
Yes
Yes
0.69
85 120

(2)

11.089***
(1.074)

No
Yes
Yes
0.66
85 120

CIT

(3)

0.074***
(0.009)

No
Yes
Yes
0.72
12 352

CIT

(3)

28.785***
(1.858)

No
Yes
Yes
0.69
12 352

FAS 166/167

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.035***
(0.002)

No
Yes
Yes
0.78
93 184

0.090***
(0.006)

No
Yes
Yes
0.78
93 184

0.011***
(0.002)

No
Yes
Yes
0.72
12 352

FAS 166/167

(4)

(5)

(6)

6.829***
(0.306)

No
Yes
Yes
0.69
93 184

7.927***
(0.609)

No
Yes
Yes
0.69
12 352

34.934***
(1.990)

No
Yes
Yes
0.70
93 184

𝑗 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜏𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

The tables report the estimated coefficients from the difference-in-differences regression:
𝑦𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 × 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑘)
𝑘 ∈ {𝑖, 𝑐}
The dependent variable is (i) an indicator that equals one if a county 𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 has a non-zero debt
investment amount by BDCs in Panel (a), and (ii) the dollar amount of BDC debt investments in county
𝑗 in quarter 𝑡 expressed in millions in Panel (b). 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡
is a dummy variable that equals one post the
capital supply shock starting from (i) 2009:Q3 for the SCAP shock, (ii) 2010:Q1 for the CIT shock, and
(iii) 2011:Q1 for the FAS 166/167 shock. The set of treated counties and treatment intensity are defined
in Section 3.1. The control group of counties is constructed using the propensity score matching algorithm
described in Appendix E.1. The sample covers the period three years before and five years after the shock.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

averages computed based on the deals with available data. We depict
the geographic presence of PD portfolio firms in terms of deal volume in
Fig. E.2. In line with our expectations, we observe a significant overlap
in the geographic presence of BDCs and PD funds (see Fig. 6).

References

Acharya, V.V., Berger, A.N., Roman, R.A., 2018. Lending implications of U.S. bank

stress tests: Costs or benefits? J. Financ. Intermediation 34, 58–90.

Acharya, V., Engle, R., Pierret, D., 2014. Testing macroprudential stress tests: The risk

of regulatory risk weights. J. Monetary Econ. 65, 36–53.

Aldasoro, I., Doerr, S., Zhou, H., 2023. Non-Bank Lending During Financial Crises. BIS

Working Paper No 1074.

Balloch, C., Gonzalez-Uribe, J., 2021. Leverage Limits in Good and Bad Times. LSE

Working Paper.

Begley, T., Srinivasan, K., 2022. Small bank lending in the era of fintech and shadow

banks: A sideshow? Rev. Financ. Stud. 35, 4948–4984.

Beltratti, A., Bock, J., 2018. BDCs: The most important commercial lenders you’ve never

heard about. J. Altern. Invest. 20, 8–20.

Boehm, S.B., Krus, C.M., Pangas, H.S., Morgan, L.A., 2004. Shedding new light on

business development companies. Invest. Lawyer 11, 15–23.

Bord, V.M., Ivashina, V., Taliaferro, R.D., 2021. Large banks and small firm lending.

J. Financ. Intermediation 48, 100924.

Borusyak, K., Jaravel, X., Spiess, J., 2024. Revisiting event study designs: Robust and

efficient estimation. Rev. Econ. Stud..

Brown, J.D., Earle, J.S., 2017. Finance and growth at the firm level: Evidence from

SBA loans. J. Finance 72, 1039–1080.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130, 453–483.

Carey, M., Post, M., Sharpe, S.A., 1998. Does corporate lending by banks and finance
companies differ? Evidence on specialization in private debt contracting. J. Finance
53, 845–878.

Chen, B.S., Hanson, S.G., Stein, J.C., 2017. The Decline of Big-Bank Lending To Small
Business: Dynamic Impacts on Local Credit and Labor Markets. Working Paper
23843, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chernenko, S., Erel, I., Prilmeier, R., 2022. Why do firms borrow from nonbanks? Rev.

Financ. Stud. 35, 4902–4947.

Chodorow-Reich, G., 2014. The employment effects of credit market disruptions:
Firm-level evidence from the 2008-9 financial crisis. Q. J. Econ. 129, 1–59.
Chodorow-Reich, G., Darmouni, O., Luck, S., Plosser, M., 2022. Bank liquidity provision

across the firm size distribution. J. Financ. Econ. 144, 908–932.

Claessens, S., Cornelli, G., Gambacorta, L., Manaresi, F., Shiina, Y., 2023. Do macro-
prudential policies affect non-bank financial intermediation? Int. J. Central Bank.
19, 185–236.

Colla, P., Ippolito, F., Li, K., 2013. Debt specialization. J. Finance 68, 2117–2141.
Cortés, K.R., Demyanyk, Y., Li, L., Loutskina, E., Strahan, P.E., 2020. Stress tests and

small business lending. J. Financ. Econ. 136, 260–279.

Craig, B.R., Jackson, W.E., Thomson, J.B., 2007. Small firm finance, credit rationing,
and the impact of SBA-guaranteed lending on local economic growth. J. Small Bus.
Manag. 45, 116–132.

Cucic, D., Gorea, D., 2024. Nonbank Lending and the Transmission of Monetary Policy.

Danmarks Nationalnbank Working Paper.

Davydiuk, T., Marchuk, T., Rosen, S., 2023. Market discipline in the direct lending

space. Rev. Financ. Stud. 37, 1190–1264.

Denis, D.J., Mihov, V.T., 2003. The choice among bank debt, non-bank private debt,
and public debt: Evidence from new corporate borrowings. J. Financ. Econ. 70,
3–28.

Doerr, S., 2021. Stress tests, entrepreneurship, and innovation. Rev. Finance 25,

1609–1637.

Dou, Y., 2020. The spillover effect of consolidating securitization entities on small

business lending. Account. Rev. 96, 207–229.

Dou, Y., Ryan, S.G., Xie, B., 2018. The real effects of FAS 166/167 on banks’ mortgage

approval and sale decisions. J. Account. Res. 56, 843–882.

Edgerton, J., 2012. Credit supply and business investment during the great recession:

Evidence from public records of equipment financing. SSRN Electr. J..

Elliott, D., Meisenzahl, R.R., Peydró, J.L., 2024. Nonbank lenders as global shock
absorbers: Evidence from US monetary policy spillovers. J. Int. Econ. 149, 103908,
International Seminar on Macroeconomics, 2023.

Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Schnabl, P., Vickery, J., 2019. The role of technology in

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 1854–1899.

Galindo-Rueda, F., Verger, F., 2016. OECD taxonomy of economic activities based on

R&D intensity.

Gonzalez-Uribe, J., Paravisini, D., 2019. How Sensitive Is Young Firm Investment To
the Cost of Outside Equity? Evidence from a UK Tax Relief. LSE Working Paper.
Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2022. The rise of finance companies and FinTech lenders in

small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35, 4859–4901.

24 

T. Davydiuk et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103946 

Gormley, T.A., Matsa, D.A., 2011. Growing out of trouble? Corporate responses to

Loumioti, M., 2022. Direct lending: The determinants, characteristics and performance

liability risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24, 2781–2821.

of direct loans. SSRN Electr. J..

Greenstone, M., Mas, A., Nguyen, H.L., 2020. Do credit market shocks affect the real
economy? Quasi-experimental evidence from the great recession and ‘‘normal’’
economic times. Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 12, 200–225.

Makhija, A., 2011. Leading from the middle. In: National Middle Market Summit.
Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., 2021. Venture Capital and the Finance of Innovation. Wiley.
Mian, A., Sufi, A., 2014. What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment? Econo-

Gropp, R., Mosk, T., Ongena, S., Wix, C., 2018. Banks response to higher capital
requirements: Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32,
266–299.

Hecker, D.E., 2005. High-Technology Employment: A NAICS-Based Update, vol. 128,
Monthly Labor Review / U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, pp.
57–72.

Herman, A., Igan, D., Solé, J., 2017. The macroeconomic relevance of bank and

metrica 82, 2197–2223.

Munday, S., Hu, W., True, T., Zhang, J., 2018. Performance of private credit funds: A

first look. J. Altern. Invest. 21, 31–51.

Neuhann, D., Saidi, F., 2016. Bank Deregulation and the Rise of Institutional Lending.

Working paper.

OECD, 2020. Financing SMEs and entrepreneurs 2020.
Puri, M., Zarutskie, R., 2012. On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital- and

nonbank credit: An exploration of U.S. data. J. Financ. Stab. 32, 124–141.

non-venture-capital-financed firms. J. Finance 67, 2247–2293.

Irani, R.M., Iyer, R., Meisenzahl, R.R., Peydró, J.L., 2020. The rise of shadow banking:

Rin, M.D., Hellmann, T., Puri, M., 2013. A survey of venture capital research. In:

Evidence from capital regulation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34, 2181–2235.

Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Elsevier, pp. 573–648.

Ivashina, V., Scharfstein, D., 2010. Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008. J.

Rosen, S., Vitanza, J., 2021. Commercial Loan Performance in the U.S. Temple

Financ. Econ. 97, 319–338.

University Working Paper.

Jiang, E., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2020. Banking Without Deposits: Evidence
from Shadow Bank Call Reports. University of Southern California Working Paper.
Kemp, E., Stralen, R.v., Vardoulakis, A.P., Wierts, P., 2018. The Non-Bank Credit Cycle.
Technical Report 2018-076, In: Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal
Reserve Board.

Samila, S., Sorenson, O., 2011. Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth.

Rev. Econ. Stat. 93, 338–349.

Tian, X., Zhang, H., 2016. Impact of FAS 166/167 on Credit Card Securitization. The

Ohio State University Working Paper.

25 

