Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Do personal taxes affect investment decisions and stock returns?✩
Alexander P. Kontoghiorghes
Bank of England, Threadneedle St, London EC2R 8AH, UK

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: APK AIM Replication Package (Re
ference data)

Keywords:
Market frictions
Personal investment taxes
Cost of capital
After-tax returns
Payout policy
Company investment decisions

1. Introduction

This paper studies the causal effects of personal investment taxes on stock returns and the financial decisions of
companies. I exploit a change in legislation in 2013 which allowed stocks listed on the Alternative Investment
Market, a sub-market of the London Stock Exchange, to be held in capital gains and dividend tax-exempt
investment accounts for the first time. Using a difference-in-differences approach, I find that excess stock
returns decreased by their pre-legislation change effective tax rate, and that firms adjusted their capital
structure and increased their spending on dividends, capital, and labour, in-line with the ‘‘traditional view’’
of corporate investment.

Taxes are a fundamental part of the financial decision making
process for both investors and companies. For risky investments, the
tax rate on investment proceeds is often the only component which is
known with certainty beforehand. Therefore, rational economic agents
will mitigate their tax liability wherever possible through efficient tax
planning. While this is well understood, there is a paucity of empirical
evidence which is able to establish a causal link between the personal
tax rate on investment proceeds, and the effect this has on an asset’s
returns (Poterba, 2001; Graham, 2003). Moreover, recent studies look-
ing at the effect of personal investment taxes on company investment
decisions have found no effects (Yagan, 2015), or seemingly conflicting
effects (Moon, 2022; Matray, 2023).

In this paper, I study how the tax rate faced by retail investors
on the proceeds of their stock investments affects the equity cost of
capital, and the payout and investment decisions of companies. I do
this by exploiting a change in legislation in 2013 which allowed stocks
listed on the Alternative Investment Market (AIM), a sub-market of the
London Stock Exchange (LSE) designed for small growing companies,
to be held in capital gains and dividend tax-exempt Individual Savings

Accounts (ISAs) for the first time. Main market LSE stocks have always
been eligible for ISAs, which therefore warrants their potential use
as a control group. Using a difference-in-differences and factor model
approach, I exploit the variation in taxation across both time and
assets, and find that a reduction in capital gains and dividend taxes
caused excess stock returns to decrease in-line with their pre-legislation
change effective tax rate of 0.9 percentage points per month. In-line
with the ‘‘traditional view’’ of corporate investment theory, I also find
that the payout and investment decisions of AIM companies are highly
responsive to changes in personal taxes, and estimate the following
elasticities with respect to one minus the dividend tax rate: dividends
(0.5), shares issued (0.2), debt (2.2), capital (1.8), total pay (0.5), and
employees (1.4).

The main novelty of this paper is to provide the first causal evi-
dence that personal investment taxes jointly affect company decisions
and stock returns by exploiting a unique quasi-natural experiment.1
While time series descriptive evidence exists that personal investment
taxes affect stocks returns, my findings provide the first causal ev-
idence to compliment this evidence (Poterba and Summers, 1984;
Sialm, 2009). By using a difference-in-differences methodology which

✩

I thank the editor Dimitris Papanikolaou, an associate editor, and two anonymous referees for their comments and suggestions which have greatly improved the
paper. I also thank Vimal Balasubramaniam, Daniele Bianchi, Thierry Foucault, Maren Froemel, Elise Gourier, Moqi Groen-Xu, Vasso Ioannidou, Iryna Kaminska,
Sarolta Laczo, Stavros Panageas, Lasse Pedersen, James Poterba, Ricardo Reis, Farzad Saidi, Clemens Sialm, George Skiadopoulos, Laura Starks, Johannes Stroebel,
Jason Sturgess, Andrea Tesei, Raman Uppal, Andrea Vedolin, Motohiro Yogo, Konstantinos Zachariadis, and seminar participants at the CFE 2020, EEA-ESEM
2023, Paris-Dauphine, Bank of England, ESCP Business School, and Bristol University for their comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the author, and not necessarily those of the Bank of England or its committees.

E-mail address: alex.kontoghiorghes@bankofengland.co.uk.

1 Compared to IRAs in the US, ISAs have no withdrawal penalties before retirement, and withdrawals are not liable for income tax. In 2013, ISAs exempted
investors from a 37.5% and 28% dividend and capital gains tax, and over three million adults in the UK owned a Stocks and Shares ISA (around 6% of the adult
population) with a total market value of approximately £200 billion ($300 billion). I apply £1 = $1.5 in this paper.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103927
Received 21 December 2022; Received in revised form 16 August 2024; Accepted 18 August 2024

Available online 11 September 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 The Bank of England.  Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved,  including those for text and data mining,  AI training,  and similar 
technologies. 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

compares AIM companies to a propensity score matched2 Financial
Times Stock Exchange All-Share Index (henceforth FTSE3) control
group, I am able to identify the tax effect on stock returns, and therefore
clearly demonstrate that taxes are capitalized into stock prices, in-line
with the tax capitalization hypothesis of Brennan (1970) which assumes
that stock returns efficiently adjust to reflect the tax burden faced by
the marginal investor. This has been a considerable challenge in other
settings due to endogeneity issues, since tax changes are often related to
macroeconomic factors. By exploiting an exogenous change in personal
tax treatment, which the clientele literature typically lacks, this paper
also relates to studies which explore tax-driven investor behaviour,
e.g. Miller and Modigliani (1961), Michaely et al. (1995), Graham and
Kumar (2006), Feenberg and Poterba (1991), and Babina et al. (2021).
Furthermore, while Yagan (2015) studies the real economic effects of
the 2003 US dividend tax cut on privately held companies and finds
no significant effects, my results provide supportive evidence that a
decrease in both dividend and capital gains taxes caused my sample of
publicly listed companies to increase both payouts and investments, in-
line with the ‘‘traditional view’’ of corporate behaviour which assumes
that personal taxes affect corporate investment decisions (Harberger,
1962; Feldstein, 1970; Poterba and Summers, 1983), as opposed to the
‘‘new view’’ which assumes that payout and investment decisions are
determined solely by the retained earnings of companies (King, 1977;
Bradford, 1981; Auerbach, 1979).

My setting differs from Yagan (2015) (and other related studies)
in a number of important dimensions which can help to explain our
differing results. Firstly, in comparison to the dividend tax changes in
the US, the tax cut under consideration in my setting was more likely
viewed as a permanent tax cut since it equalized the tax treatment of
AIM stocks with that of main market stocks. This is especially important
as equity prices are forward looking, and since company investment
decisions can take many years to pay off, companies might not pursue
new investments if they do not view the tax cut as permanent. Secondly,
in comparison to Yagan (2015)’s sample of privately owned compa-
nies, my sample consists of younger, publicly listed companies, who
will be less financially constrained, have less concentrated ownership
structures, and have a higher propensity to issue new equity to fund
growth, which are all important determinants of company investment
decisions (Korinek and Stiglitz, 2009; Chetty and Saez, 2010). Thirdly,
if the share of capital gains tax-liable investors is more than dividend
tax-liable investors, or if returns from capital gains are a lot more than
from dividends, then the effects of both a capital gains and dividend
tax cut together will be larger than from just a dividend tax cut, as
discussed in Moon (2022).

My first finding is that excess AIM stock returns permanently de-
creased after the legislation change, and by a magnitude which the
data does not reject as equalling the average monthly effective tax rate
of AIM stocks in the decade before the tax cut, 0.9 percentage points.
Looking deeper into the heterogeneity within AIM stocks, this result is
further reinforced by showing that AIM stocks with the highest and the
lowest effective tax rates in the decade before the tax cut experienced
commensurate falls in their excess stock returns in the decade after.
The result holds when using multiple factor model specifications, and
a more powerful difference-in-differences set-up, which ensures that the
results are not being driven by the control group. My results support
the theoretical model of Brennan (1970), and the empirical findings
of Poterba and Summers (1984) who study the relationship between
dividends and stock price movements during different tax regimes, and
find that ‘‘tax changes can affect security returns’’, and Sialm (2009)
who shows that US investors were compensated for their dividend

2 The propensity score covariates used are firm size, age,

sector,

book-to-market ratio, and market beta.

3 The FTSE All-Share Index is the most comprehensive stock index of the

main market LSE.

tax burden between 1912 and 2006. My results compliment these
earlier findings which used time-series regressions by providing causal
evidence that taxes influence stock returns, and therefore they address
concerns that the correlation between taxes and stock returns is being
driven by endogenous macroeconomic factors.

My second finding is that after the legislation change, dividend
paying AIM companies increased their dividends by 40% compared
with their payout level before, an elasticity with respect to one minus
the dividend tax rate of 0.55. This is very close to the elasticity
estimated by Chetty and Saez (2005) and Yagan (2015) for the 2003
US dividend tax cut, and by Matray (2023) for a 2013 French dividend
tax increase. My second finding is therefore in-line with Chetty and
Saez (2005), Desai and Jin (2011), Matray (2023), and Bilicka et al.
(2023) who find that the payout policy of companies is influenced by
the tax-based preferences of their shareholders. My study differs from
these related papers in two main ways. Firstly, I explore the effects of
the tax cut on the equity cost of capital, and secondly I study the effects
of a large complete elimination of dividend taxes, not just a reduction.
Also, unlike (Chetty and Saez, 2005) who study short run effects, I can
make comparisons to a group of companies which did not receive a tax
cut during the sample period and therefore provide longer-term causal
evidence, an advantage that their setting does not provide. In contrast
to Desai and Jin (2011), my focus is on retail investors whereas their
focus is on institutional investors.

My third finding is that AIM companies also responded to the tax
cut by issuing both more equity and debt. On average, compared to the
matched control group, the number of shares issued and the ratio of
debt to pre-reform assets for AIM companies increased by 13% and 14
percentage points respectively. The new equity issuance was dominated
by cash constrained companies, whereas the debt issuance was more
widespread. Both of these decisions can be explained by the tax cut
which resulted in a lower equity cost of capital, and therefore higher
stock prices. These results provide further evidence that the capital
structure decision of companies is affected by the personal taxation
level of their investors (Graham, 1999; Lin and Flannery, 2013).

My fourth and final finding is that AIM companies responded to
the tax cut with large increases in their capital stock and labour
expenditure, in-line with the ‘‘traditional view’’ of corporate investment
and with the findings of Moon (2022) who finds large effects from a
capital gains tax cut in South Korea. After the tax cut, AIM companies
increased their tangible capital stock (specifically property, plant, and
equipment) relative to pre-reform total assets by 24 percentage points,
total pay relative to pre-reform revenue by 8 percentage points, and to-
tal employees relative to pre-reform revenue by 0.5 percentage points.
My finding of an increase in investment following a cut in personal
investment taxes differs from Yagan (2015) and Bach et al. (2021)
given that they find no effect on aggregate investment following US and
French dividend tax reforms, but also from Matray (2023) and Bilicka
et al. (2023) who find that an increase in French and Greek dividend
taxes respectively led to an increase in company investment, which
implies a positive dividend tax elasticity. I investigate which factors
are important in explaining the heterogeneity in tax effects, and show
that dividend paying firms increased their capital stock significantly
less than non-dividend paying companies after the tax cut, and that
companies which issued the most new equity and debt invested the
most in capital and labour, in-line with the life-cycle model of Korinek
and Stiglitz (2009) who emphasize the importance of maturity in com-
pany investment decisions. I also find a positive relationship between
pay increases and the concentration of shareholder ownership, which
when taken together with the observed negative relationship between
investment in capital and company payout policies, lends support to
the agency model of Chetty and Saez (2010) which highlights the
tensions between managers and shareholders when making payout and
investment decisions.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
outlines the setting of this study, Section 3 presents the results, and
Section 4 concludes.

2 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

2. Institutional details

This section outlines the institutional details of the legislation
change which allowed AIM stocks to be held in ISAs for the first time
in 2013. I discuss the AIM stock exchange, the main LSE, ISAs, and the
motivation for the legislation change.

2.1. The AIM and the main LSE

The AIM was launched in 1995 and was designed for smaller
growing companies who wanted to raise equity more quickly and at a
lower price than on the main LSE. The AIM markets itself as the world’s
most successful growth market, and since opening, as of December
2022 3,988 companies have raised over £130 billion ($195 billion) on
the AIM. Doukas and Hoque (2016) find that half of firms who initially
list on the AIM could list on the main market, but choose not to because
of the lower initial listing fee and lower subsequent cost of raising
capital. The financial reporting and accounting requirements are also
less stringent on the AIM. While most AIM stocks are small growth
companies, there are also many large well established UK businesses
listed on the AIM.4

The FTSE All-Share comprises around 600 companies and is the
aggregation of the FTSE 100 Index, the FTSE 250 Index, and the FTSE
Small Cap Index, which are stock indices formed from stocks listed
on the main LSE. In terms of market capitalization and age, there is
a wide overlap of companies listed on the AIM and the FTSE All-Share
Index, with the FTSE All-Share also listing many small and growing
companies. I exploit this overlap along with other commonalities when
forming my control group. To limit data issues such as stale prices and
missing observations, I will focus on the 100 largest companies listed
on the AIM which are the more established and the more frequently
traded.

2.2. Personal investment taxes in the United Kingdom

Between 2010 and 2016, a 28% capital gains tax for stocks was due
on any profits made during the financial year above the capital gains
tax allowance which was £10,900 ($16,350). In the years leading up
the legislation change, the capital gains tax rate varied between 40%
(2004 to 2008) and 18% (2008 and 2010). Between 2013 and 2016,
dividends were taxed up to 37.5% if the investor earned over £150,000
($225,000). Between 2010 and 2013 the dividend tax rate was 42.5%,
and between 2004 and 2009 it was 32.5%.5

2.3. AIM stocks become eligible for ISAs

Individual Savings Accounts (ISAs) allow UK residents to save and
also invest money in qualifying investments up to a certain limit each
financial year without being subject to capital gains or dividend tax.
The Stocks and Shares ISA limit was £11,520 ($17,280) in the 2013–
2014 financial year, £15,000 ($22,500) from July 2014 till April 2017
and £20,000 ($30,000) since then. Similar tax efficient investment
accounts exist in other countries, for example France, Canada, Italy,
Russia, South Africa, and the Scandinavian countries. Traditional and
Roth Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) in the US also exempt
investors from capital gains and dividend taxes within the IRA, but
unlike ISAs, IRAs can face a penalty for withdrawing funds before

4 Under certain conditions, AIM stocks can also be exempt from a 40%

inheritance tax. Appendix A.5 in the Appendix provides more details.

5 For more information on UK taxes see Appendix A.5 in the Ap-
pendix, https://www.gov.uk/capital-gains-tax, and https://www.gov.uk/tax-
on-dividends.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

retirement.6 In 2013, over three million people held a Stocks and Shares
ISA account, which was approximately 6% of the UK adult population.
The total value of these investments was over £200 billion ($300
billion) which dwarfs the total 2013 AIM market capitalization in 2013,
£76 billion ($114 billion).7

On the 3rd of July 2013, the UK treasury announced that as of the
5th of August 2013, stocks listed on the AIM could be held in Stocks and
Shares ISAs for the first time. The main reason behind the legislation
change was an impetus within the UK government to provide more
help to smaller growing domestic companies by giving them access
to the large pool of ISA capital (also referred to as ‘‘patient capital’’)
and therefore reduce their equity cost of capital. The initiative remains
to this day a high priority for the UK governments as they seek to
nurture a favourable environment to develop home-grown innovative
companies.8 Furthermore, AIM companies and business lobby groups
had been calling for the ISA legislation change for many years. They
had argued it would level the playing field for companies looking
to raise capital on both exchanges and would therefore provide AIM
companies with a potential multi-billion pound pool of capital. Fig. 1
shows that in the years before the tax cut came into effect, the average
effective personal tax rate of the AIM 100 was equal to 10.7% per
year, or 0.9% on a monthly basis, compared to 0% for the main market
FTSE stocks. During this period, the average top rate capital gains and
dividend tax rate was 29.8% and 36.4% respectively, and the average
yearly return and dividend yield for the AIM 100 sample was 32% and
1.1% respectively.9

Regarding anticipation of the announcement, news reports show
there was some general discussion in the years leading up to the official
government announcement, but no reports preceded or predicted the
exact date. However, due to the nature of the legislation change, the
main effect on asset demand and asset returns is not likely to have been
realized before AIM stocks were actually allowed to be held in ISAs
as the treatment only affected retail investors and not other financial
institutions. Also, the short time between the announcement and the
legislation change meant that investors did not have a long time to
change their behaviour before the change came into effect. Another
restriction to the speed and magnitude of the legislation is that there
is an ISA limit each financial year, so if investors have reached their
limit for that financial year and do not wish to liquidate their current
holdings, they have to wait for the next financial year to add AIM
stocks to their ISA. Empirical studies have shown that retail investors
exhibit inattention to their portfolios and are slow, or even reluctant
to rebalance (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Agnew et al., 2003, and Sialm
et al., 2015).10 These factors suggest against any large anticipatory
effects.

Regarding confounding events, no other events occurred during
2013 which affected only AIM stocks specifically or ISAs. In 2014,
for the same reasons that permitted AIM stocks to be held in ISAs,
i.e. to encourage capital flows into smaller growing businesses, stamp
duty tax was abolished on AIM stock purchases on the 28th of April
2014. The tax was however small, only 0.5%, and was not therefore

6 Unlike traditional IRAs, ISA contributions are not income tax deductible,
and withdrawals in retirement are not income tax liable. Unlike Roth IRAs,
pre-retirement investment earnings withdrawals are not penalized.

7 As a comparison, the total market cap of the FTSE All-Share at that time

was over £1 trillion ($1.5 trillion).

8 For further details on the government’s motivations and justifications, see
the following https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/patient-capital-
review.

9 See Eq. (2) for estimation details. Negative returns and non-dividend
paying companies were included in the effective personal tax rate calculations.
The sample period also includes the global financial crisis which negates the
hypothesis that this was an uncharacteristically bullish period for equities.

10 For a theoretical demonstration see Abel et al. (2007), Huang and Liu

(2007), and Abel et al. (2013).

3 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Fig. 1. This figure plots the average effective tax rate (𝜏𝑒) of the AIM 100 sample before and after the tax cut in 2013 alongside 95% confidence intervals, where 𝜏𝑒 equals
the average sum of the effective capital gains tax rate (capital gains tax rate multiplied by net returns) and the effective dividend tax yield (dividend tax rate multiplied by the
dividend yield).

economically important to the majority of retail investors who buy
and hold for more than a few months (Benartzi and Thaler, 1995).11
Three additional events happened in the years around the reform, but
all of them affected either all UK investors, or all UK companies, and
are therefore not an issue for identification when using a difference-in-
differences methodology. Firstly, the yearly ISA limit for all investments
increased from £11,520 ($17,280) to £15,000 ($22,500) in July 2014.
Secondly, from 2012 to 2018 the main rate of corporation tax in the UK
was gradually reduced from 24% to 19%. Finally, in the years around
the tax cut, there were changes to the Annual Investment Allowance,
which is a form of tax relief that allows businesses to deduct the full
value of eligible expenditure up to a limit from their profits before
tax. The 2013 AIM legislation change set the effective personal tax
rate of AIM stocks from 10.7% per year to 0% when held in tax
efficient investment accounts, and therefore the magnitude of the tax
cut provides an ideal setting to study whether personal taxes affect
company investment decisions and stock returns.

3. Empirical analysis

In this section I first describe my data sources and then I discuss my
main empirical strategy where I match AIM stocks to FTSE stocks based
on a propensity score matching methodology in order to accurately
estimate the effects of the tax cut using a difference-in-differences
analysis.

3.1. Data

The main data sources for this study are Refinitiv Datastream and
Bloomberg, from which I obtain information on company characteris-
tics, prices, trading metrics, balance sheet, and income statement data
for all companies listed on the AIM 100 and the FTSE All-Share. Five
monthly European factor portfolios (Fama and French, 2015) covering
the whole sample period and a European momentum factor (Carhart,

11 A main market LSE stock investor would require a one-off premium of
0.503%, or 0.00836% per month compounded over five years, to negate the
extra stamp duty tax compared to AIM stocks, a very small percentage relative
to average annual stock returns.

1997) are obtained from Kenneth French’s website, and a global liquid-
ity factor (Pástor and Stambaugh, 2003) is obtained from the website of
Robert Stambaugh which ends in December 2021. For AIM shareholder
data, I use the FactSet database which collects data mainly from the UK
Share Register (UKSR), as well as the Regulatory News Service (RNS)
which contains all the disclosures of institutions who own over 3% of a
publicly listed UK company. ETF fund flow and high frequency tick data
is obtained from Refinitiv Eikon and Refinitiv Datascope respectively.
Following Yagan (2015), Moon (2022), and Matray (2023), I scale real
investment outcome variables by revenue, assets, or total capital. To
limit the effect of outliers, I winsorize excess returns at the second
and ninety-eighth percent level by time period and group, and real
economic outcome variables across the whole sample at the second and
ninety-eighth percent level.

3.2. The FTSE all-share as a control group

The ideal control group in this setting would be a similar group
of AIM companies which did not receive the tax cut. However, as
the legislation change affected all AIM stocks this is not possible.
The next best option is to create a control group from the main LSE
which is as similar as possible to the AIM sample so that the parallel
trends conditions holds. Creating a control group which is as similar as
possible to the treatment group reduces the likelihood that changes in
outcome variables are being driven by confounding factors.

Many AIM companies could list on the main market if they wanted
to. Both FTSE and AIM stocks are LSE constituents, they operate mainly
in the UK, and they compete within the same economic sectors. As
a consequence, they will have similar customers and risk exposures.
Furthermore, FTSE stocks have always been allowed to be held in ISAs
and did not experience a change in their tax treatment during the
time period studied. A big difference between AIM and FTSE stocks
however is their average size and age, as seen in Table 1. The AIM
mostly consists of young, small to medium sized companies, whereas
the FTSE contains older, small to very large sized companies. Therefore,
the average FTSE company is much older and larger than the average
AIM company.

The observation that smaller capitalization stocks systematically
earn different returns to larger capitalization stocks was one of the first
and most important documented in the asset pricing literature (Banz,

4 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

1981). Company payout and investment decisions are also strongly
associated with company size. To address the potential effect that com-
pany size, age, and other important characteristics might have on the
pre-trends between AIM and FTSE companies, I create a control group
from the FTSE All-Share index by using a propensity score matching
methodology with the following covariates: company size, age, sector,
market-to-book ratio (value), and market beta. These characteristics
were chosen as they are well established drivers of company valuations
and behaviour.12

Table 1 displays the following observable characteristics of the AIM
sample, the FTSE matched sample, and the full FTSE All-Share sample:
market capitalization (size), age, market-to-book ratio (value), market
beta,13 Dimson Beta, price to earnings ratio, return on equity (ROE),
and trading volume. Firstly, the last column of Table 1 shows that the
AIM and full FTSE All-Share sample are indeed very different across
all characteristics, with the difference in sample averages for six out
of eight characteristics highly statistically different from zero. This is
in stark contrast to the propensity score matched control group in the
second to last column, with the differences in sample averages across all
characteristics statistically insignificant, and therefore on average, the
AIM and the matched FTSE sample are statistically indistinguishable at
the 99% confidence level. As a further check, I estimate (Dimson, 1979)
Betas14 which correct for infrequent trading. While the average beta
sizes increased for both the AIM stocks and the matched FTSE sample
(0.72 and 0.77 respectively), the two samples are still statistically
indistinguishable on average.

In summary, the AIM and the propensity score matched FTSE All-
Share samples are very similar across multiple characteristics which
have been highlighted in the financial economics literature as fac-
tors which are important determinants of both stock price valuations
and company financial decisions. Furthermore, as a precaution and
to account for any possible fundamental differences in the AIM and
the matched FTSE sample which may affect the trends in outcomes, I
include the main risk factors and control variables documented in the
asset pricing literature, and present results for the unmatched control
group when analysing stock returns. As in Yagan (2015), Moon (2022),
and Matray (2023), the main identifying assumption underlying the
difference-in-differences methodology design is not the random assign-
ment of companies to list on the AIM and the main market LSE, it is that
the AIM and the matched main market LSE company outcomes would
have trended similarly in the absence of the tax cut. I therefore include
the dynamic difference-in-differences coefficient plots for all the main
outcome variables in the results section.

3.3. Hypothesis design

Before presenting the empirical results of this study, I briefly discuss

the potential effects of the tax cut under certain hypotheses.

Hypothesis 1. a cut in personal taxes will reduce the equity cost of
capital and therefore the expected excess return of a stock.

If investor tax clienteles exist (Miller and Modigliani, 1961), and
stock returns compensate investors for their tax liability (Brennan,
1970), we should observe a permanent decrease in AIM excess stock
returns after the legislation change as investors no longer need to be
compensated for their tax liability if they hold stocks in their ISAs.
Alternatively, if investors are always able to offset their tax liabili-
ties (Miller and Scholes, 1978), we should not observe any change in
AIM stock returns.

12 The data used for matching are from before the legislation announcement.
13 The FTSE 100 is used to calculate the CAPM beta for UK stocks, and since
both the stock samples include many small-cap stocks, the average betas are
low on average.

14 The estimation used an additional four lagged market excess returns with

two years of daily data.

Hypothesis 2. a cut in personal taxes will increase equity and debt
issuance, and increase the dividend payments and investments of a
company.

If company management take the personal taxes of their investors
into account when deciding on payout policy, and if personal taxes
affect the cost of capital and therefore the marginal returns on invest-
ments (in-line with the ‘‘traditional view’’ of corporate investment Har-
berger, 1962; Feldstein, 1970; Poterba and Summers, 1983) then we
should observe an increase in dividend payments, equity and debt is-
suance, capital, and labour expenditure after the tax cut. Alternatively,
if dividend and investment decisions are based only on the retained
earnings of companies and taxes have no impact on dividend payments,
capital structure, and investments (in-line with the ‘‘new view’’ King,
1977; Bradford, 1981; Auerbach, 1979), then we should not observe an
increase in equity or debt issuance, dividend payments, capital stock,
or the labour expenditure of AIM companies.

3.4. The effect of the legislation change on stock returns

In this section, I examine whether AIM stock returns were affected
by the large cut in capital gains and dividend taxes. As in Sialm (2009),
the analysis in this section is based on (Brennan, 1970). Assume that the
equilibrium rate of return for stocks follows the below more generalized
version of Brennan (1970)’s Equation 2.18,

X,

(1)

E(𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑓 ) = 𝜏𝑖 + 𝛽′
𝑖
where E(𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑓 ) is the expected equilibrium pre-tax excess rate of
return for stock i, 𝜏𝑖 = is the tax premium which provides compensation
for capital gains and dividend tax, X contains a matrix of priced risk
factors for which investors require compensation, and 𝛽 measures the
sign and magnitude of the required compensation for each factor for
stock i. In Brennan (1970), X contains only the expected excess market
return, but Sialm (2009) extends this to include the Fama–French-
Carhart factors.15 In a world where asset returns are perfectly explained
by Eq. (1), the estimated tax premium should equal the effective tax
rate of the marginal investor. If we assume that retail investors are
the marginal investor for AIM stocks, and that they rebalance once
a year and anticipate realizing their capital gains without postponing
(as in Brennan (1970)), we can estimate the effective tax yield that
they faced before the tax cut and hence the AIM tax premium.16 Even
if investors do not rebalance every year, the capital gains component
of the effective tax yield is still priced-in since returns, and hence the
capital gains liability, compound over time which means the intuition
can be applied to any time-horizon.17 Fig. 1 displays an estimate of

15 The expected excess market return in Equation 2.18 (Brennan, 1970) is
multiplied by a constant term which includes capital gains and dividend taxes,
and will therefore be absorbed into the estimated risk loading for the market
return. Following the empirical methodology of Sialm (2009), and due to the
preferential tax treatment of UK government bond proceeds, I do not subtract
a risk-free rate from the tax premium.

16 Benartzi and Thaler (1995) estimate the average retail investor’s invest-
ment horizon to be one year, and Barrot et al. (2016) estimate an average
portfolio holding period of 310 days, which provides empirical support for the
yearly rebalancing assumption. If the marginal AIM investor rebalanced more
(less) frequently than once a year, the present value of their capital gains tax
liability would be relatively higher (lower), and therefore the effect on AIM
stock prices and returns after the tax cut would be larger (smaller).

17 Consider a fixed-period setting with two assets which apart from their
capital gains tax treatment are identical. Assume also that all investors face the
same taxes. If the capital gains tax rate on asset 1 is less than the capital gains
tax rate on asset 2, ceteris paribus, investors will value asset 1 more than asset
2, and the price of asset 1 will be higher. Without any other frictions, the price
(and therefore return) disparity between the two assets must be explained by
the capital gains tax differential, otherwise an arbitrage opportunity will exist,
i.e. even if investors do not intend to sell the asset every period, if the price

5 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table 1
This table displays the sample averages of relevant observable characteristics before the legislation change for the AIM 100 sample, the matched FTSE sample, and the full FTSE
All-Share sample. The absolute difference in sample averages between the AIM sample and the FTSE samples are also displayed, along with their statistical significance. The
observable characteristics are log market capitalization (size), age, market value of equity to book value of equity (P/B), CAPM beta relative to the FTSE 100, Dimson Beta with
4 lags, price to earnings ratio, return on equity (ROE), and log volume. Where an exchange listing date is missing, the incorporation date of the company is used to estimate
company age. Sector codes were used in the matching procedure but sector averages are not displayed due to a lack of economic meaning. Data is winsorized to limit the effect of
outliers on sample averages. Standard errors are in parentheses below sample averages. Stars denote whether sample averages are statistically different at the following confidence
intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

𝜏𝑖 for my sample of AIM stocks in the pre-legislation change period,
with the average annual effective tax rate equal to 10.7%, or 0.9% on
a monthly basis. I estimate the effective tax rate ̂𝜏i with the following
equation,

̂𝜏i =

1
𝑇

𝑇
∑

𝑡=1

(

1
𝐼

𝐼
∑

𝑖=1

)
(𝜏c,t𝑅𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜏d,t𝐷𝑌𝑖,𝑡|𝑡)

= 10.7%,

(2)

where 𝜏c,t is the capital gains tax rate in year t, 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 is the annual net
stock return of company i in year t, 𝜏d,t the dividend tax rate in year
t, and 𝐷𝑌𝑖,𝑡 the dividend yield of company i in year t. Negative stock
returns and non-dividend paying companies are included in the sample.
The time period used in the estimation is July 2004 to end of June
2013.

Eq. (1) therefore provides a simple framework to test the effect of
the tax cut, or equivalently the effect of setting 𝜏𝑖 = 0, on AIM stock
returns. Consider the following econometric version of Eq. (1) which
we can estimate using OLS,

̄𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽′
1,𝑖

X

𝑡 + 1(𝑡≥7∕13)

(
𝛾𝑖 + 𝛽′
2,𝑖

X
𝑡

)

+ 𝜖𝑖,𝑡,

(3)

where ̄𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 is the average realized excess return of asset group
i in month t, 𝛼𝑖 is a constant for asset group i, X
𝑡 is a matrix of
tradeable risk factors, 𝛽1,𝑖 is a vector of coefficient estimates for the
risk factors for asset group i, 1(𝑡≥7∕13) is an indicator function which
equals 1 if the observation is during or after July 2013 (the month
of the announcement), 𝛾𝑖 is the coefficient estimate of the indicator

function for asset group i, 𝛽2,𝑖 is a vector of coefficient estimates of
the risk factors interacted with the indicator function for asset group i,
and 𝜖𝑖,𝑡 is an error term. 𝛼𝑖 will capture any tax premium before the
tax cut, and 𝛾𝑖 will capture the effect on stock returns after the tax
cut and after controlling for systematic risk. I calculate average returns
using three groups of stocks: the AIM 100 sample, the propensity score
matched FTSE sample, and the full FTSE All-Share sample. For priced
risk factors, I test multiple different specifications using factors from the
following set: the market return, size, value, profitability, investment,
momentum, and liquidity.18 If taxes are capitalized into asset prices
and Eq. (1) is an accurate representation of asset returns, we can make
the following predictions for each of the above equally weighted port-
folios: after controlling for systematic risk, monthly excess AIM stock
returns should have a positive and statistically significant constant
equal to 0.9% before the tax cut (Fig. 1 and Eq. (2)). After the tax cut
and after controlling for systematic risk, the tax premium AIM stocks
previously commanded to compensate investors for their tax liability
should be eliminated, and therefore we should estimate a negative and
statistically significant 𝛾 equal to −0.9%. The same logic applies to the
spread between AIM and matched FTSE stock returns, as well as the
spread between the AIM and the full FTSE since no tax premium is
commanded by FTSE stocks before or after legislation change.

Table 2 displays the regression results of Eq. (3). The top panel
uses only the market return as a risk factor, the middle panel uses
the three Fama–French factors, and the bottom panel uses all factors
in the set. We see that the null hypotheses assuming tax capitalization
are not rejected by the stock return data at the 95% confidence level

of the asset does not reflect the expected capital gains tax rate differential,
investors will long and short the two assets until their prices reflect this tax
differential.

18 See Section 3.1 for more information on the factor portfolios. All missing

observations are dropped from the sample in every analysis.

6 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table 2
This table displays the coefficient estimates of 𝛼 and 𝛾 in the return factor model (Eq. (3)) for average AIM excess stock returns alone, AIM excess returns minus the propensity
score matched FTSE sample average returns, and the AIM excess returns minus the full FTSE sample average returns. The top panel uses only the excess market return as a risk
factor, the middle panel uses the Fama & French 3 factors, and the bottom panel uses all risk factors: market, size, value, profitability, investment, momentum, and liquidity.
Newey–West standard errors are displayed below coefficient estimates in parentheses. The sample period is between 2004 and 2022. The null hypothesis value of 𝛼 and 𝛾 assuming
tax capitalization is stated in each table segment. Stars denote whether coefficient estimates reject their 𝐻0 values at the following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05,
*p < 0.1.

for all return specifications (AIM stocks alone, the spread between AIM
stocks and their matched FTSE counterparts, and the spread between
AIM stocks and the unmatched FTSE sample). For the AIM-Matched
FTSE return spread in the middle column, the null hypotheses are never
rejected, and the absolute magnitude of the coefficient estimates are
very close to 0.9%. The null hypothesis of 𝛾 = −0.9% is never rejected
for all three samples, and for all three separate systematic risk speci-
fications. By failing to reject the null hypotheses of tax capitalization
in all specifications, Table 2 provides very strong and clear evidence
that taxes are capitalized into asset prices and hence affect stock
returns. Before the legislation change, excess AIM stock returns earned
a positive and significant return premium of at least 0.9 percentage
points per month, even after controlling for an extensive list of priced
risk factors which have been shown in the empirical asset pricing
literature to capture systematic risk and after comparing AIM stock
returns to the already treated FTSE stocks. After the legislation change,
excess AIM stock returns became at least 0.9 percentage points lower
per month than they were, completely removing the tax premium they
once commanded. The regressions have also permitted factor betas to
change after the tax cut, which addresses the possibility that changes
in asset returns were due to changes in systematic risk exposure.

In order to fully exploit the benefits of this unique difference-in-
differences set-up, I now proceed to investigate the effect on AIM

stock returns using the much bigger sample of individual observations
instead of portfolio averages. Doing so will allow to control for stock,
sector, and time fixed effects which might be important in explaining
the empirical results so far, as well additional controls, such as stock
level proxies for liquidity and public information to account for ad-
ditional mechanisms which might have arisen after the tax cut. The
difference-in-differences specification is:

𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑠,𝑡 + 𝛽 Treated𝑖 × Post𝑡 + 𝛾 ′ Controls𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡,

(4)

where 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 is the monthly excess return of stock 𝑖 in month 𝑡,
Treated𝑖 is a dummy variable which equals one if the stock is an AIM
stock, Post𝑡 is equal to one from July 2013 on-wards, and controls
refers to the inclusion of the factor portfolios (market, size, value,
investment, profitability, momentum, and liquidity) which were used
in the previous portfolio analysis. To capture liquidity and information
effects which might result from AIM stocks being permitted into ISA’s
for the first time, I also include the following additional controls for
each stock: trading volume, turnover, and the number of professional
analysts making earnings forecasts. I include stock fixed effects 𝛼𝑖 to
absorb any time invariant characteristics of individual stocks, a sector
and month interaction 𝛼𝑠,𝑡, and the factor portfolios to ensure that the
difference in returns is not being driven by systematic risk sources

7 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table 3
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for the monthly difference-in-differences regressions, Eq. (4), which compares monthly AIM stock returns against
the propensity score matched and the unmatched monthly FTSE stock returns, before and after the legislation change. Fixed Effects refers to the inclusion of company and a
month–sector interaction fixed effect. Controls refers to the inclusion of the five Fama–French factors, momentum, and liquidity, all interacted with a post and treated dummy
variable. Stock level proxies for public information and liquidity are also included as controls. The sample period is between 2004 and 2022. Standard errors are in parentheses
below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm level. The null hypothesis value for 𝛽 assuming tax capitalization is stated above the corresponding column. Column (1)
uses the matched FTSE sample as a control group, and column (2) uses the unmatched FTSE control group. Compared to column (2), column (3) uses only AIM stocks in the
highest effective tax rate quartile from the pre-legislation period, and column (4) uses the lowest quartile. Stars denote whether coefficient estimates reject their 𝐻0 values at the
following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

(a higher market beta for example). As before, I interact the factor
portfolios with a treated, post, and treated times post dummy which
permits time-varying loadings, and I state the null hypothesis value for
the interaction term assuming tax capitalization in the table above the
coefficient estimate.19 Column’s (1) and (2) of Table 3 test against a null
hypothesis of 𝛽 = −0.9% for the whole AIM sample against the matched
FTSE sample in the first column, and the whole AIM sample against the
unmatched FTSE sample in the second column. Column’s (3) and (4)
dissect the AIM sample by looking at the highest and lowest effective
tax rate quartile’s in the pre-legislation change period separately, and
hence test against the null hypotheses of 𝛽 = −1.9% and 𝛽 = −0.03%,
the respective average effective tax rates for the highest and lowest
quartiles in the pre-legislation change period. Looking at these subsets
of AIM stocks separately allows us to test whether those stocks with
the highest (lowest) effective tax rate experienced the largest (smallest)
reduction in their excess stock returns.20

In the first column,

̂𝛽 = −0.011 implies that after the legislation
change and after controlling for systematic and stock level risk fac-
tors, AIM stock returns relative to the matched FTSE control group
were around 1.1 percentage points less per month than they would
have been had they not been allowed to be held in tax efficient ISA
accounts, a magnitude which the data does not reject as equalling
the effective tax rate in the pre-legislation change period.21 In col-
umn (2) where the control group is the unmatched FTSE sample,

19 Assignment to treatment is fixed and therefore results are for an intention

to treat analysis.

20 To calculate the effective tax rate quartiles, I rank AIM stocks based on

their average yearly effective tax rate in the decade before the tax cut.

21 I cluster standard errors at the firm level because my sample was selected
based on the 100 largest AIM stocks and therefore not all AIM stocks have
been represented. However, the results remain qualitatively and quantitatively
similar when clustering standard errors at the more conservative sector level,
and when double clustering by sector and month. See Abadie et al. (2017) for
a discussion of when and at what level clustering is appropriate.

̂𝛽 = −0.009, an amount which exactly equals the effective tax rate
in the pre-legislation change period.22 In column’s (3) and (4) the
null hypothesis values for tax capitalization are also not rejected,
and hence the magnitude of the tax cut effect is not statistically
significant from each individual quartiles’ effective tax rate in the
pre-legislation period, a striking result. This within-AIM heterogeneity
strongly reinforces the first main result by showing that even within
the AIM stock sample, stock returns decreased commensurately with
their effective tax rate in the pre-legislation change period. Table A.1
in the Appendix shows that the results in Table 3 are very similar in
magnitude and robust to using different combinations of risk factors
(e.g. using only the market factor, and dropping momentum from the
set), and when standard errors are doubled clustered at the firm and
month level.

Fig. 2 plots the coefficient estimates of the following dynamic
difference-in-differences for yearly excess AIM stock returns relative to
the matched and unmatched FTSE samples:

R𝑖,𝑡 − R𝑓 ,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑠,𝑡 +

𝑇
∑

𝑘=𝑡0,𝑘≠𝑗

𝛽𝑘 Treated𝑖 × 1(𝑘 = 𝑡) + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡,

(5)

where R𝑖,𝑡 −R𝑓 ,𝑡 is the yearly excess return of stock i in year t (estimated
using end of June prices each year), 1 is an indicator function for year
t, 𝑗 is the baseline year before the policy announcement, and Treated𝑖
is a dummy variable which equals one if the stock is an AIM stock. 𝛽𝑘
captures the period 𝑡 specific effect for the treatment group relative
to the control group, with respect to the baseline period before the
legislation announcement 𝑗. We observe firstly that the parallel trends
condition always holds for the matched control group in the left-hand

22 A range of other effective tax rate estimates around 0.9% per month
would also not be rejected by the data, which is important if the marginal
investor’s holding period was more or less than one year as assumed.

8 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

side chart, and in the most recent years for the unmatched control
group in the right-hand side chart. Secondly we observe the permanent
reduction in excess AIM stock returns relative to both the matched and
unmatched FTSE samples.

The results in Tables 2 and 3 show that after AIM stocks were
permitted to be held in tax efficient ISA savings accounts, their average
excess stock returns decreased by amounts equal to their effective
tax rates in the pre-legislation period, as predicted by asset pric-
ing models of tax capitalization. Fig. 2 reinforces this by showing
that the reduction in returns was permanent. This is important as it
shows very clearly the effect that different levels of taxation have
on the returns of assets. The economic intuition of these results is
that after the tax cut, the equilibrium rate of return decreased for
retail investors as their tax liability was reduced by the previously
demanded tax premium. This meant the instantaneous stock price was
cheaper than its new equilibrium price, and retail investors therefore
bought the stock until the new more expensive price reflected the
new permanently reduced rate of return. For institutional investors,
the required rate of return for AIM stocks did not change after the
legislation change, and it is possible that they sold their AIM hold-
ings after the initial rally in order to profit from their positions.
Table A.2 in the Appendix provides evidence that AIM stock prices
relative to their pre-reform (2012) book value increased after the legis-
lation change, especially for those AIM companies who had the highest
effective tax rates before the legislation change.23 Using shareholder
data, Fig. A.1 in the Appendix shows how retail investors and then
retail investor focused institutions increased their relative ownership
of AIM companies after the legislation change, mostly at the expense
of stakeholders. Appendices A.2 and A.3 in the Appendix provide
further evidence of a positive price and demand impact from the tax
cut by showing an increase in the flows into AIM-related ETFs, and
high-frequency price reactions on the days of the announcement and
legislation change.

These findings are in-line with Sialm (2009) who provides both
time-series and cross-sectional evidence over a long time-horizon in the
US that personal investment taxes are capitalized into stock returns by
looking at the disparity in the pre-tax stock returns of portfolios sorted
by their average dividend yield, and Litzenberger and Ramaswamy
(1979) who find that asset returns compensate investors for their tax
burden and also provides empirical evidence for the theoretical tax-
CAPM model of Brennan (1970).24 They are also in-line with Schulz
(2016) who highlights the importance of taking into consideration
the effect of taxes and other frictions when addressing perceived as-
set pricing puzzles.25 These results contribute to the small body of
empirical research which establishes a link between personal taxes
and stock returns, as noted by Graham (2003). The contribution to
previous studies is that I have provided evidence for tax clienteles and
stock return compensation in a causal regression framework which is
more robust than a time-series analysis because it addresses poten-

23 The limitation of looking at prices in this natural experiment setting is
that while AIM prices clearly became higher after the legislation change than
they were before (see Table A.2), the difference in price (and valuation ratios)
between AIM and main market stocks will not have parallel trends in the
pre-legislation period, unlike returns which differed by a constant amount
commensurate with the AIM tax premium.

24 Litzenberger and Ramaswamy (1979) tested a modified version of Bren-
nan (1970)’s after-tax CAPM (assuming no capital gains tax) by examining the
relationship between pre-tax returns and dividend payments. Dai et al. (2008)
also find evidence in an event study that tax changes can affect stock demand
and returns.

25 See Binsbergen and Koijen (2016) for a challenge of the tax estimates

used in Schulz (2016).

9 

tial endogeneity issues which may bias the effect of taxes on stock
returns.2627

3.5. Dividend payout policy and capital structure

In this section I examine the dividend payout policy and the capital
structure decisions of AIM companies after the legislation change. Once
AIM stocks could be held in ISAs, retail investors no longer faced an up
to 37.5% income tax upon receipt of dividend payments.

In a related study, Chetty and Saez (2005) investigate the effects of
the 2003 US dividend tax cut. Compared to their setting, I observe a
complete elimination of dividend taxes when stocks are held in ISAs.
Furthermore, unlike (Chetty and Saez, 2005) who assign their sample of
companies to treatment and control groups under the assumption that
their control group has no reason to change their dividend payments
because of higher institutional ownership, I am able to compare AIM
dividend payments to a group of companies which did not experience
a tax cut, main-market FTSE stocks, and therefore provide a causal
estimate for the effect of a tax cut on company dividend payments
without additional assumptions.

To study the effect of the tax cut on company decisions, I estimate
Eq. (6) below, where Financial Decision in this section refers to the
following dependent variables: log of dividends paid (in millions of
pounds), a dividend dummy which equals one if the company paid any
dividends in the year and zero otherwise, log of shares issued, and debt
relative to pre-reform (2012) assets. I include the pre-reform (2012)
value of the following controls (as used in Fama and French, 2001),
interacted with time dummy variables: company profits, company size,
book-to-market ratio, the company’s total value of assets, and the
company’s total cash holdings.

Financial Decision𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 +𝛼𝑠,𝑡 +𝛽 Treated𝑖 ×Post𝑡 +𝛾 ′ Controls𝑖,𝑡 +𝜖𝑖,𝑡. (6)

Did the legislation change encourage AIM companies who already
made dividend payments to pay out more of their earnings to their
investors? Column’s (1) and (2) of Table 4 show that there was a
positive and statistically significant increase in the amount of dividends
paid, both with and without the controls. The coefficient estimate in
column (2) corresponds to an average 40% increase in the amount of
dividends paid after the legislation change, which implies an elasticity
with respect to one minus the dividend tax rate of 0.55, very similar
to the dividend tax elasticity estimated by Chetty and Saez (2005),
Yagan (2015), and Matray (2023).28 Investors who held their shares
in an ISA no longer faced a dividend income tax of up to 37.5%, and
therefore were able to receive dividend payments without this sizeable
tax burden. This sharp increase in dividend payments is consistent with
the results of Chetty and Saez (2005) who found that US companies
paid out 20% more dividends after dividend taxes were reduced from
35% to 15% in the US. The results are also in-line with Desai and Jin
(2011) and Golubov et al. (2020) who showed that companies alter
their payout policies in response to shareholder tax-based preferences,
and provides empirical support for the theoretical model of Allen et al.
(2000).

Did the elimination of dividend taxes for ISA investors encourage
more AIM companies to start paying out dividends? Column’s (3) and

26 On the potential effect that the timing of the sample selection might have
had on the magnitude of the results, instead of selecting the AIM 100 stock
sample before the legislation change announcement, I selected the AIM 100
sample one, two, and three years before and after the announcement date to
see how this affected the main results of this section. The results remained
quantitatively and qualitatively similar.

27 Carletti et al. (2021) look at the behaviour of households and also identify

large tax cut effects.

28 I estimate elasticity with respect to one minus the tax rate as 𝜖𝑦,1−𝜏 =
for each tax rate separately. %𝛥𝑦 uses the

%𝛥𝑦
%𝛥(net of tax rate)
treated×post coefficient estimate when the dependent variable is logged.

× (1−𝜏0)
𝛥𝜏

= 𝛥𝑦
𝑦0

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Fig. 2. The left (right) figure plots the coefficient estimates of the annual excess returns dynamic difference-in-differences (DID) regression along with 95% confidence intervals
displayed vertically using the matched (unmatched) sample as the control group. The baseline year is 2012, the year before the announcement. Yearly excess returns are estimated
using end of June prices. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Firm fixed effects and a sector × year interaction are included in the regression.

Table 4
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for the financial decision’s regression, Eq. (6), which compares yearly log dividend payments, a dividend dummy, the
log of shares issued, and the debt to pre-reform (2012) assets ratio for AIM companies relative to their matched FTSE sample, before and after the legislation change. Fixed
Effects refers to the inclusion of a company and a month–sector interaction fixed effect. Controls refers to the inclusion of the pre-reform value (2012) of the following variables
interacted with year fixed effects: company profits, company size, book-to-market ratio, value of assets, and value of cash holdings. The sample period is between 2005 and 2022.
The pre-treated mean is estimated for AIM stocks in the pre-legislation change period, and the elasticity is estimated for both taxes separately with the treated × post coefficient
estimate used for %𝛥𝑦 when the dependent variable is logged. Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm level. Stars denote
whether sample averages are statistically different from zero at the following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

(4) in Table 4 present the coefficient estimates of the linear probability
model and show that there was between a 5.6% to 8.6% increase
respectively in the number of AIM companies paying dividends after
the tax cut, but this increase is only statistically significant in the
specification without controls.29 This result provides evidence that
after the tax cut, a higher number of AIM companies started paying
out dividends to their investors, in-line with Chetty and Saez (2005)
who found that the fraction of publicly listed companies paying out
dividends increased from 20% to 25% six quarters after the tax cut.

Share repurchases are an alternative way for companies to pay out
cash to their investors. After AIM stocks became eligible to be held
in ISAs, any share repurchases would no longer be liable for capital
gains tax if investors held the stock in an ISA. Six quarters before
the tax cut, there were no share repurchases recorded, but there were

29 Adding controls reduces the sample size and increase the standard error

of the estimate.

six share repurchases recorded six quarters after. Were the compa-
nies who initiated share repurchases the same as the dividend paying
stocks? Out of the six companies who initiated share repurchases after
the legislation change, five of them were already issuing dividend
payments. Perez-Gonzalez (2003) finds evidence that individual share-
holders can influence dividend policy, which suggests that after the tax
cut, company management were influenced to increase their dividend
payments to shareholders. In Appendix A.7, I discuss how the tax cut
might affect the efficiency of capital markets and I also provide a
back-of-the-envelope evaluation of the tax cut.

Did the capital structure decision of AIM companies change after
the reduction in personal taxes, as hypothesized by Miller (1977)?
Column’s (5) and (6) in Table 4 present the difference-in-differences
coefficient estimates when the dependent variable is the log of shares
issued. Both coefficients are positive and statistically significant, and
the coefficient estimate of the specification with controls implies that
companies increased the amount of equity in issue by 13%, an elas-
ticity with respect to one minus the dividend and capital gains tax of

10 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Fig. 3. The top left figure plots the coefficient estimates of the log dividends dynamic difference-in-differences regression along with 95% confidence intervals displayed vertically,
the top right figure for dividends weighted by pre-reform (2012) assets, the middle left figure for debt weighted by pre-reform assets, the middle right figure for cash weighted
by pre-reform assets, the bottom left figure for paid-in equity weighted by pre-reform assets, and the bottom right figure for the log of shares outstanding. The baseline year is
2012, the year before the announcement. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Firm fixed effects and a sector × year interaction are included in the regression.

0.18 and 0.34 respectively, in-line with the view that a reduction in
their cost of capital meant that AIM companies could raise capital on
more favourable terms. Regarding the external validity of this result,
it is likely that the elasticity of equity issuance to taxes is higher
for publicly listed companies rather than privately owned companies
due to their better access to equity capital markets, and for growing
rather than mature companies, as in the model of Korinek and Stiglitz
(2009).

Another decision which might be influenced by higher stock prices
is the leverage ratio of companies. With higher stock prices, companies
may have more scope to issue debt and therefore benefit from the inter-
est rate tax-shield without unsettling their shareholder base. Column’s
(7) and (8) in Table 4 display the difference-in-differences coefficient
estimate with the debt to pre-reform assets as the dependent variable.
The coefficients are both positive and statistically significant. In terms
of magnitude, the coefficient estimates correspond to a between 21%
and 14% average increase in the debt to pre-reform assets for AIM

companies after the legislation change. In-line with Faccio and Xu
(2015) who study pooled tax changes across many countries in a cross-
sectional but not difference-in-differences setting, these two results
provide evidence that the capital structure decision of companies is
affected by the personal taxation level of their investors, since the
reduction of taxes reduces a companies cost of capital, which makes
marginal investments more worthwhile and hence companies raise
additional capital to fund them.

Fig. 3 plots the coefficient estimates for log dividends, dividends
to pre-reform assets, debt relative to pre-reform assets, cash relative
to pre-reform assets, paid-in equity relative to pre-reform assets, and
the log of shares in issue, for the dynamic difference-in-differences
(Eq. (5)). Paid-in equity (also known as paid-in capital) is calculated
as the sum of shareholders equity and the contributed surplus, and
therefore complements the number of shares outstanding as an equity
issuance measure which does not reflect monetary amounts. For all
variables, we see that the parallel trends condition holds in the most

11 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

recent years before the tax cut. After the reform, we see a clear and
sustained increase in log dividends, log shares outstanding, paid-in
equity, cash, and debt post-reform.30 However, for dividends relative
to pre-reform assets, while the coefficient estimates are on average
higher than the reference period, we do not observe a statistically
significant increase post-reform. This suggests that the increase in
dividend payments was driven primarily by companies already paying
dividends, and not by an extensive margin effect. While Chetty and
Saez (2005) observed both a large intensive and extensive margin
effect, my sample of AIM companies is generally younger and faster
growing, which could explain why more AIM companies did not initiate
dividend payments, and instead opted to invest, as explored in the next
section.

The elasticity of debt to pre-reform assets in column (8) of Table 4 is
also very large (2.2 and 4.1 for dividend and capital gains taxes respec-
tively), and this large increase can partly be explained by the relatively
low initial debt level of AIM companies in the pre-legislation change
period, which at 0.09 is much lower than 0.21 for the control group (see
Tables A.3 and A.4 in the Appendix for further summary statistics both
pre and post-reform).31 An interesting question is whether the increase
in debt was due to a scale effect, or due to a relaxation of collateral
constraints. In standard collateral constraint models (e.g. Banerjee and
Newman, 1993; Fonseca and Van Doornik, 2022, and Bau and Matray,
2023), a firm’s debt level is determined by the firm’s equity value and
a collateral constraint parameter. Fig. A.4 in the Appendix plots the dy-
namic difference-in-differences of the contemporaneous debt to market
equity ratio for the AIM sample relative to the control group, relative
to the index period in 2012. We observe no statistically significant
increase in the contemporaneous debt to equity ratio, which suggests
that the increase in leverage for AIM companies was due to a scale
effect, i.e. the increase in the equity value (due to the reduction in the
cost of capital) allowed AIM companies to increase their debt levels by
a proportional amount, and not due to a relaxation of their collateral
constraint parameter.

of employees relative to pre-reform total revenue by 0.5 percentage
points, an elasticity with respect to one minus the dividend (capital
gains) tax rate of 1.35 (2.57).32 These elasticities are comparable to
those estimated by Moon (2022) who estimates a capex elasticity with
respect to the capital gains tax of 1.99, compared to 2.14 in column (4)
of Table 5.

Fig. 4 plots the coefficient estimates for the dynamic difference-
in-differences for the same outcome variables above. We see that the
parallel trends condition holds for most outcome variables, at least in
the periods closest to reform date, and that after the reform, there
is a clear and persistent increase in all real economic variables, in-
line with the ‘‘traditional view’’ of corporate decision making which
assumes that the investment decisions of companies is affected by the
personal investment tax rate of their investors. After the tax cut, AIM
companies issued both equity and debt due to their lower cost of
capital, and using this capital, they increased their stock of property,
plant, and equipment, as well as their capital expenditure persistently
after the reform. They also increased their total pay sizeably, as well
as the total number of employees hired. When looking at average
pay per employee instead of total pay, the effect is positive but only
statistically significant at the 90% level, which suggests that firms
mostly expanded the size of their workforce, rather than just paying
their existing employees more.33

Did the AIM companies who issued the most equity and debt
also invest the most? When looking at those AIM companies whose
equity and debt issuance was above the AIM median, the treated×post
coefficient estimate for both PPE and total pay is substantially larger
than the sample average. AIM companies who issued the most equity
(debt) had a PPE elasticity with respect to one minus the dividend tax
rate of 2.06 (2.99) against the sample average of 1.88 (column (1) in
Table 5). This implies that those companies who invested the most were
the most financially constrained before-hand and the tax cut afforded
those companies with the opportunity to raise capital at a lower cost,
hence making the new investments more worthwhile.

3.6. Real economic effects: Capital and labour investment

3.7. Across-firm analysis and relation to other studies

In this section, I examine the capital and labour expenditure of AIM
companies after the legislation change. Section 3.4 showed that the
equity cost of capital for AIM companies decreased after the tax cut, and
Section 3.5 showed that AIM companies responded to the reduction in
dividend taxes and their cost of capital by paying out more in dividends
and issuing more equity and debt. The natural question is whether AIM
companies also increased expenditure on assets and labour after raising
additional capital?

To investigate this, I estimate Eq. (6) with the following depen-
dent variables: tangible capital (property, plant, and equipment (PPE))
relative to pre-reform (2012) assets, capital expenditure relative to
pre-reform PPE, total pay relative to pre-reform revenue, and the
total number of employees relative to pre-reform revenue. Table 5
displays the coefficient estimates and shows a statistically significant
increase for all real economic dependent variables. PPE relative to pre-
reform assets increased by 24 percentage points, an elasticity with
respect to one minus the dividend (capital gains) tax rate of 1.81
(3.44), capex relative to pre-reform PPE increased by 43 percentage
points, an elasticity with respect to one minus the dividend (capital
gains) tax rate of 1.12 (2.14), total pay relative to pre-reform revenue
by 8 percentage points, an elasticity with respect to one minus the
dividend (capital gains) tax rate of 0.51 (0.98), and the total number

30 I discuss the increase in cash in Section 3.8.
31 Additionally, Tables A.5 and A.6 in the Appendix provide results for
unweighted dependent variables. At 0.93 and 1.77, we see the elasticity
of logged debt to dividend and capital gains tax respectively is large but
noticeably smaller than the elasticity for the ratio of debt to pre-reform assets.

In this section, I look into the heterogeneity across the AIM sample
depending on their cash constraints, ownership concentration, and
dividend policy. I then discuss my findings in relation to other studies
in the literature, and the external validity of my results.

The top panel of Table 6 displays the coefficient estimates of a
three-way difference-in-differences regression with a cash rich dummy
variable, interacted with the treated×post dummy variables. Cash rich
takes the value of one if the company’s pre-legislation change net profit
margin is above the sample median, since the more profits the company
generates, the more capital available for the company to reinvest or
pay dividends to investors (all else being equal). The middle panel of
Table 6 displays the coefficient estimates of a three-way difference-in-
differences regression with a concentrated ownership dummy variable,
interacted with the treated×post dummy variables. Concentrated own-
ership takes a value of one if the stakeholder ownership of the company
is above the sample median, the idea being that the more of the equity
the stakeholders own, the more influence they will have over the
company’s decision making process. The bottom panel of Table 6 dis-
plays the coefficient estimates of a three-way difference-in-differences
regression with a dividend paying dummy variable, interacted with
the treated×post dummy variables. The dividend paying dummy takes
a value of one if the company paid out dividends anytime after the
reform.

32 Tables A.5 and A.6 in the Appendix show that results are robust to using

an unweighted specification.

33 Section 3.8 looks at the allocated spending split in further detail.

12 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table 5
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for the financial decision’s regression, Eq. (6), which compares capital, or property, plant, and equipment (PPE), capital
expenditure (capex), total pay to all employees and officers, and the total number of employees. PPE is scaled by total assets in the year prior to the tax cut (2012), capex is scaled
by PPE in the year prior to the tax cut, pay and employees are scaled by total revenue in the year prior to the tax cut. All specifications include a company and a month–sector
interaction fixed effect. Controls refers to the inclusion of the pre-reform (2012) value of the following variables interacted with year fixed effects: company profits, company
size, book-to-market ratio, value of assets, and value of cash holdings. The sample period is between 2005 and 2022. The pre-treated mean is estimated for AIM stocks in the
pre-legislation change period, and the elasticity is estimated for both taxes separately with the treated × post coefficient estimate used for %𝛥𝑦 when the dependent variable is
logged. Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm level. Stars denote whether sample averages are statistically different from
zero at the following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

Fig. 4. The top left figure plots the coefficient estimates of the dynamic difference-in-differences regression with Property, Plant, and Equipment (PPE) weighted by pre-reform
(2012) assets as the dependent variable, along with 95% confidence intervals displayed vertically, the top right figure for capital expenditure (capex) weighted by pre-reform PPE,
the bottom left figure for total pay weighted by pre-reform revenue, and the bottom right figure for the number of employees weighted by pre-reform revenue. The baseline year
is 2012, the year before the announcement. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Firm fixed effects and a sector × year interaction are included in the regression.

13 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table 6
This table displays the treated × post, and the treated × post × firm characteristic coefficient estimates, from a three-way difference-in-differences regression where firm characteristic
equals either a cash rich dummy, a concentrated ownership dummy, or a dividend paying dummy. The yearly dependent variable in column (1) is the log of dividends paid,
column (2) the log of shares in issuance, column (3) debt relative to pre-reform assets, column (4) PPE relative to pre-reform assets, column (5) pay relative to pre-reform revenue,
and column (6) employees relative to pre-reform revenue. All specifications include a company and a month–sector interaction fixed effect. The sample period is between 2005
and 2022. Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm level. Stars denote whether coefficient estimates are statistically different
from zero at the following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

Three interesting results arise from this exercise. Firstly, in the
top panel, we see that the most cash rich AIM companies were not
the companies issuing the most equity after the tax cut, which is
intuitive since these companies already have relatively more capital
available to invest in new projects or to pay dividends. On the other
hand, it reinforces the evidence for the ‘‘traditional view’’ of corporate
decision making because the result implies it was cash constrained
AIM companies who were issuing equity given the reduction in their
cost of capital. Secondly, in the middle panel, we see that the AIM
companies with the highest stakeholder ownership percentage were
those that increased their total pay the most. Given the increase in total
pay mostly came from the number of employees hired, it suggests that
company directors and founders hired more staff to potentially reduce
their workload, expand into new areas, or to bring in-house some
previously out-sourced jobs. Finally, in the bottom panel we see that the
majority of the increase in PPE came from those AIM companies who
were not paying out dividends, which suggests that the magnitude of
the effect for a cut in personal investment taxes on company investment
decisions will vary depending on whether the company is a dividend
paying firm or not. From an accounting perspective, this is intuitive as
it implies dividend paying AIM companies have relatively less money
left over to invest in their capital expenditure after they have exhausted
some of their available capital on payouts, especially since it was the

AIM companies who were already paying out dividends who further
increased their payouts after the tax cut (Fig. 3). This result is in-line
with company life-cycle models such as Korinek and Stiglitz (2009)
which argue that younger, faster growing companies, who typically
do not pay dividends, are more likely to respond to personal tax cuts
than more mature firms who base their investment decisions more off
retained earnings rather than the cost of issuing new capital. Moreover,
while not explicitly modelled within the agency framework of Chetty
and Saez (2010), the results in the second and third panels lend support
to the frictions in Chetty and Saez (2010) which derive from a differ-
ence in incentives due to the non-perfectly aligned payoff’s between
managers and shareholders.

Why have some studies found no evidence, or even a positive
elasticity, for the effect of personal investment taxes on company in-
vestment decisions? Firstly, an important difference between my setting
and other similar studies is that investors and companies were more
likely to view the AIM tax cut as permanent since it equalized a large
initial difference in the tax treat of UK listed companies, whereas the
dividend tax cuts in the US, France, and Greece were more prone to
future reversals due to political and business cycles. If investors do not
view a tax cut as permanent, then the change in the tax rate will not
be fully capitalized into asset prices, and therefore the cost of capital
faced by companies will not change as much. Furthermore, companies

14 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

will not pursue investments which take long periods to pay off given the
uncertainty around the future tax levels. Secondly, my sample consists
of younger, publicly listed companies, who will be less financially con-
strained than privately held firms due to their better access to capital
markets, and have less concentrated ownership structures which could
create frictions as in Chetty and Saez (2010). Publicly listed companies
might also be more financially sophisticated and therefore able to take
advantage of the opportunities afforded to them by tax cuts (Bach et al.,
2021). Furthermore, my sample consists of growing companies who
could be more likely to begin new investments following a change
in tax rates than more mature companies as in Korinek and Stiglitz
(2009). Finally, in my setting I observe a reduction in both dividend
and capital gains taxes, and it possible that investors respond more
to capital gains taxes than dividend taxes if the share of capital gains
tax exempt investors is less than the share of dividend tax exempt
investors, or if capital gains make up a much higher component of
total returns than dividend payments. This is supported by the evidence
provided by Moon (2022) who observes an increase in investments
following a cut in capital gains tax in South Korea. Relatedly, Goodman
et al. (2023) find that limiting interest rate deductions from taxable
profit calculations has no economically significant impact on company
investments, which when taken together with the other evidence in
this section, reinforces the message that various tax changes which
all directly affect the cost of capital, can have differential effects on
company financial and investment decisions depending on the specific
setting and the frictions at play.

3.8. Following the money

In this section I compare the amount of newly issued capital to
the expenditure of AIM companies after the tax cut. Specifically, I
compare the post-reform amount of paid-in equity and debt of AIM
companies to their post-reform spending on dividends, buybacks, PPE,
employee pay, and cash holdings. I scale all variables by their pre-
reform (2012) value of total assets so that all variables have the same
unit of measurement.

Table 7 displays the coefficient estimates of the difference-in-
differences regression for the ‘‘Money In’’ group of variables, and the
‘‘Money Out/Held’’ group separately, and the bottom row of the table
aggregates the coefficient estimates within each group. On average,
AIM companies raised 0.653 pence per pound of pre-reform total assets
after the tax cut, and spent/held 0.604 pence per pound of pre-reform
total assets after the tax cut. These amounts are close in magnitude,
and from these numbers we can infer that on average AIM companies
raised 69% of their new capital through additional equity, and 31%
through new debt. We can also infer that on average, AIM companies
spent 1.3% of their new capital on dividends, close to 0% on share
buybacks, 37% on PPE, 20% on pay, and held 30% as cash.

The pass-through of newly issued equity and debt (money in) to PPE
and pay is 57%, which is substantially higher than the equivalent pass-
through of the ‘‘retained earning shock’’ estimated by Matray (2023) of
38%, but much closer to the 60%–70% pass-through estimate of Rauh
(2006) who studies the change in capital expenditure in response to
changes mandatory pension contributions. Furthermore, Bilicka et al.
(2023) find that on average 46% of reallocated dividend funds went
on capital investment, which is broadly in-line with the 37% pass-
through I estimate for PPE expenditure, but their pass-through to
cash estimate of 6% is much lower than the 30% I estimate for AIM
companies.

A potential explanation for the large increase in cash for AIM
companies is that the lower cost of capital substantially increased the
number of positive net present value investment opportunities available
to them, which increased the value of having cash available within
the company so that they could more readily take advantage of any
new profitable investment opportunities. An additional explanation

is that the increased cash amount could serve as a buffer to help
manage their larger debts in times of financial distress or interest rate
shocks.

4. Conclusion

Prior to a legislation change in August 2013, AIM stocks were not
permitted to be held in tax efficient Individual Savings Accounts (ISAs)
which exempt retail investors from dividend and capital gains tax. I
exploited variation across both time and assets in order to study the
effect that this large tax cut had on the returns of AIM stocks, their
capital structure, and their payout and investment decisions. I found
evidence that asset prices compensate investors for their tax burden,
consistent with the theory of Brennan (1970), and therefore with the
empirical evidence of Poterba and Summers (1984) and Sialm (2009).
My analysis also uncovered the existence of tax clienteles who respond
to different tax rates, consistent with the ideas of Miller and Modigliani
(1961).

After the legislation change, I showed that monthly AIM excess
stock returns decreased in-line with their effective tax rate in the pre-
legislation change period. Furthermore, AIM stocks with the highest
and lowest effective tax rates in the pre-legislation period experienced
commensurate decreases in their excess stock returns after the tax
cut. This result was robust to using a factor model approach and a
difference-in-differences specification, which ensures that the results do
not hinge on the choice of control group.

I also showed that AIM companies responded to the tax rate faced
by their retail investors by issuing more equity and debt, increasing
their dividend payments, and increasing their capital stock and labour
expenditure, in-line with the ‘‘traditional view’’ of corporate investment
(Harberger, 1962; Feldstein, 1970; Poterba and Summers, 1983). My
results highlighted the importance of the specific type of tax cut un-
der consideration, as well company characteristics such as maturity,
financial constraints, and ownership concentration.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Alexander P. Kontoghiorghes: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: My
employer, the Bank of England, had the right to review the manuscript
prior to submission. I have no other potential conflicts to disclose.

Data availability

APK AIM Replication Package (Reference data) (Mendeley Data).

Appendix

A.1. How did the ownership structure of AIM stocks change?

Recent literature such as Koijen and Yogo (2019), and Koijen et al.
(2021) explores the heterogeneity in investor types across different

15 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table 7
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for two groups of variables denoted as ‘‘Money In’’ and ‘‘Money Out/Held’’. The ‘‘Money In’’ category includes paid-in
equity and debt, and the ‘‘Money Out/Held’’ category includes dividends, buybacks, PPE, pay, and cash. All variables are scaled by total assets in the pre-reform period (2012),
and all specifications include a company and month–sector interaction fixed effect. Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm
level. Stars denote whether coefficient estimates are statistically different from zero at the following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

stocks, and the resulting implications on the stock price dynamics.
By using the same shareholdings data as these studies, I can inves-
tigate how the shareholder composition of AIM stocks changed after
the legislation change. This is a particularly useful exercise in this
study as the tax cut only directly affected retail and not institutional
investors.

FactSet records shareholder ownership and designates each share-
holder into an investor group. For UK listed stocks, the main source of
this data is the UK shareholder register (UKSR). FactSet only records
information on the UKSR if the investor has assets under manage-
ment (AUM) over £20 million and if the investor is not registered
offshore. Additionally, FactSet also collects data from the Regulatory
News Service (RNS), and it calculates the sum of funds held across
its database to fill in any gaps if they exist. Fig. A.1 displays the
ownership share of AIM stocks before and after the legislation change
at a quarterly horizon. I group investors into short horizon investors,
long horizon investors, stakeholders, retail focused institutions, and
residual ownership investors.34 The residual ownership therefore in-
cludes retail investors, institutions with less than £20 million under
management, and institutions registered offshore. Koijen and Yogo
(2019), who use US data which has a lower recording threshold of
$10 million AUM, refer to the residual group as the household sec-
tor.

Two main observations can be made from Fig. A.1. Firstly, in the
quarter immediately after the tax cut, the residual ownership of AIM
stocks, which is likely to comprise mostly of retail investors, increased
by 6.62 percentage points. The equivalent reduction in ownership came
mostly from stakeholders (includes founders and early investors) who

reduced their ownership by 5.21 percentage points. This suggests that
in the first quarter after the tax cut, retail investors bought up AIM
stocks, and stakeholders (founders and early investors) sold them. This
is consistent with the idea of tax clienteles and investors responding to
tax incentives.

The second observation is that after the initial quarter, retail focused
institutions substantially increased their ownership of AIM stocks.
Comparing the ownership before and after the legislation change,
retail focused institutions increased their ownership by 7.23 percent-
age points.35 Interestingly, this increase in ownership came at the
expense of the residual ownership which decreased by 7.75 percentage
points over the sample. One possible explanation for this is that
retail investors moved their stock ownership into the control of in-
vestment managers, or institutions which specialize in ISA account
management.36

A.2. ETF fund flows

While there is no ETF which exclusively invests in AIM stocks, the
iShares MSCI UK Small Cap UCITS ETF is one of, if not the most
popular ETF in which investors are able to get exposure to small-
cap UK equities.37 The ETF invests primarily in UK stocks across both
the main market LSE and the AIM. Using data from the Global Funds
Database at Refinitiv Eikon, Fig. A.2 plots the following statistics: fund
flows into the iShares MSCI UK Small Cap UCITS, the total value of
the ETF, the number of AIM companies included in the ETF (out of
approximately 200 companies in total), and finally the relative value
of all AIM holdings in the ETF. The figures show that compared to
before the legislation change, there was an increase in fund flows into

34 Short horizon investors includes hedge funds, bank investment divisions,
brokers, fund of hedge funds, market makers, real estate hedge funds, stock
borrowers, and venture capitalists. Long horizon investors includes pension
funds, insurance companies, endowments, sovereign wealth funds, and re-
search firms. Stakeholders includes mostly the founders and early investors of
a company. Retail focused institutions includes mutual funds, family offices,
investment advisors, private banking, and fund of funds.

35 The FactSet data sample begins in the first quarter of 2011 and ends in

the last quarter of 2016.

36 It is noteworthy that the ownership of short and long term investors did

not substantially change after the tax cut.

37 On the performance of pooled investments, Sialm and Zhang (2020) find

that the performance of US mutual funds is related to their tax burdens.

16 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Fig. A.1. This figure displays the ownership share of the AIM stock sample broken down into short horizon institutions, long horizon institutions, stakeholders, retail focused
institutions, and the residual ownership share which includes retail investors.

the ETF, a permanent increase in the ETF value, an increase in the
number of AIM companies included in the ETF, and an initial increase
in the value of AIM holdings in the ETF, followed by an eventual
decrease.

A.3. High frequency price reactions on announcement and legislation
change day

This section plots the five minute interval high frequency price
data for the FTSE AIM All-Share Index on both the announcement day,
and the legislation change day. In Fig. A.3 we see that the AIM index
jumped up both on the announcement and on the legislation change
day, which supports the hypothesis that the instantaneous stock price
was cheaper after the tax cut, and therefore investors bought AIM stock
until their price reflected their new lower required rate of return.

A.4. Additional tables and figures

See Fig. A.4 and Tables A.3 and A.6.

A.5. Capital gains, dividend, and inheritance taxes in the United Kingdom:
More information

As of 2021 in the UK, Capital gains tax is due on any profits made
during the financial year above the capital gains tax allowance which is
£12,600 ($18,900). Investors can also report losses to reduce their total
taxable gains. If an investor’s total taxable gain is still above the tax-
free allowance, they can deduct unused losses from previous tax years.
Capital gains tax for stocks (chargeable assets) is 20% (it was 28% from
2010 to 2016) and for residential property it is 28% if taxable income
is over £50,000 ($75,000). Tax is paid on anything above the personal
allowance.38 For dividends, no tax is paid on the first £2000 ($3000) of

dividends and also if total income (including all sources of income that
financial year) falls below £12,500 ($18,750). After these allowances,
dividends are taxed at 32.5% if earning are above £50,000 ($75,000)
and 37.5% if earnings are above £150,000 ($225,000).39

Inheritance tax (IHT) of 40% in the UK is applied to the value of
all bequeathed assets over the current £325,000 ($487,500) threshold
(since 2009). If an agent’s main residence is being bequeathed, the nil-
rate band increases by £125,000 ($187,500), increasing to £175,000
($262,500) by 2021.40 IHT is not liable in the following circumstances:
If assets are bequeathed to a spouse or civil partner, if any wealth
was gifted seven years before the agents death, if bequeathed wealth
includes a life insurance policy or lump-sum pension payout which is
under a trust, if all wealth is bequeathed to a charitable organization.
Gifts below £3000 ($4500) are allowed each year, IHT free. The estates
of military personnel who die in active service do not face IHT. Most
AIM shares qualify for ‘‘Business Property Relief’’ (BPR) which makes
them exempt from IHT if the investor holds the AIM share for two
continuous years. The tax office rule is that AIM shares qualify for BPR
if they do not make most of their profits investing in financial assets.

A.6. Did stocks switch exchange during my period of study?

Switching between the AIM exchange and the main market LSE
is not uncommon. In fact, as shown in Table A.7, it happens nearly
every year in both directions. In total, from the entire AIM exchange,
65 companies switched to the main market LSE between 2008 and
2018. Throughout the same period, 56 companies went in the opposite
direction. From my AIM 100 sample and the matched FTSE sample, 7
went from the AIM to the main, and 4 went from the main to the AIM.
All switches from my AIM 100 sample to the main LSE occurred
after the legislation change. It is therefore possible that the switch
was a consequence of the treatment. Hence, in my main analysis in

38 See https://www.gov.uk/tax-sell-shares for further information.

39 See https://www.gov.uk/tax-on-dividends.
40 The nil-rate band in the US is up to $5,000,000.

17 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Fig. A.2. The top left figure plots fund flows in millions of pounds sterling, the top right figure plots the total value of the ETF, the bottom left figure plots the number of AIM
companies included in the ETF, and the bottom right figure plots the total value of AIM stock holding included in the ETF.

Fig. A.3. The left panel plots the intra-day price of the FTSE AIM All-Share Index after the announcement, and the right panel plots the intra-day price on the day of the legislation
change.

Section 3, I keep the treatment status of companies fixed, which yields
an ‘‘intention-to-treat’’ estimate of the treatment effect. As a robustness
check, I allow treatment status to change, and I also drop all switching
stocks from the analysis. Results remain substantially unchanged.

A.7. Efficiency implications and policy evaluation of the tax cut

Permitting AIM stocks to be held in tax-efficient ISAs restored the
previous imbalance in tax burdens on retail investors when investing
in AIM and FTSE stocks. The imbalance of taxes could have led to
an inefficient allocation of capital between AIM and FTSE stocks as

investors might have been reluctant to invest in AIM stocks given their
potential tax liability. This means that on the margin, capital which
should have gone to AIM companies to invest in and help grow the
company was not ending up there. Therefore, the legislation might
have acted to improve the capital allocation efficiency in UK stock
markets. In a more practical sense, the marginal positive net present
value investment by a company might now go ahead if for example,
future capital issues are able to reach capital targets more easily.

With regards to the efficiency improvement after the dividend tax
reduction, if AIM companies were hoarding earnings and not paying
them out as dividends because of the dividend tax, it is possible

18 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table A.1
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for the monthly difference-in-differences regressions, Eq. (4), using various specifications which all include a company
and a month–sector interaction fixed effect. In Panel A, all controls refers to the inclusion of the five Fama–French factors, momentum, and liquidity, all interacted with a post and
treated dummy variable. Stock level proxies for public information and liquidity are also included as controls. In Panel B, all controls except the momentum factor are included, and
in Panel C only the market factor is included. Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are double-clustered at the firm and month level in comparison
to the main text table which was clustered at the firm level. The null hypothesis value for 𝛽 assuming tax capitalization is stated above the corresponding column. Column (1)
uses the matched FTSE sample as a control group, and column (2) uses the unmatched FTSE control group. Compared to column (2), column (3) uses only AIM stocks in the
highest effective tax rate quartile from the pre-legislation period and column (4) uses the lowest quartile. Stars denote whether coefficient estimates reject their 𝐻0 values at the
following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

Table A.2
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for the difference-in-differences regression for treated AIM companies against the matched FTSE control group, before
and after the legislation change, using the following dependent variables: yearly total market capitalization price to pre-reform (2012) book values, monthly log turnover, log
volume, and log number of analysts following a company. Fixed Effects refers to the inclusion of company, year (or month), sector, and a year (or month) × sector interaction
fixed effect. The sample begins in 2007 and ends in 2018. Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm level. Column (1) is the
market to pre-reform book value for the full AIM sample, column (2) is for the AIM companies with the highest pre-reform effective tax rates, column (3) for AIM companies with
the lowest pre-reform effective tax rate. Column (4) looks at log turnover, column (5) log volume, and column (6) the log of the number of analysts following a company. Stars
denote whether sample averages are statistically different at the following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

19 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table A.3
This table displays summary statistics for the variables used as dependent variables in the analysis from Section 3.5 onwards. The summary statistics are estimated using pre-
legislation change data. The top panel contains statistics for the treated AIM companies, and the bottom panel for the matched FTSE control group. The statistics displayed are
the 10th percentile, median, 90th percentile, mean, and standard deviation. Pre-reform refers to the year before the tax cut, 2012.

that the retained earnings were not being used efficiently. Therefore,
given that we observed an increase in dividend payments, this might
suggest that the dividend tax cut increased the efficiency of capital
allocation between companies and investors. As share repurchases also
increased, it is not the case that dividend payments simply replaced
share repurchases, which provides further evidence that there was an
increase in the capital allocation efficiency after the tax cut.

Evaluating the policy would require a comparison between the
direct loss in tax revenue after allowing AIM stocks to be held in ISAs,
and the potential benefits a tax cut might have on the UK economy. The
benefits of the tax cut may be an increase in investment and growth
by AIM companies if they have more access to capital, which may
result in higher UK economic growth, which in turn leads to higher
tax receipts. Capital gains tax revenue in the UK in 2013 was around
£4 billion, out of a total of £567.15 billion (OECD). Capital gains tax
revenue came 77% from financial assets, of which 66% is categorized as
‘‘listed UK and foreign shares’’ which includes London Stock Exchange
stocks (UK Government). From AIM and FTSE market capitalization’s
in 2013, if AIM represents around 5% of the total, I estimate that
£101.64 million was collected in capital gains tax on AIM stocks, which
is 0.01792% of total UK tax revenue. UK GDP in 2013 was £1.782
trillion, and therefore, in order for the tax cut policy to pay for itself,
UK GDP would need to increase by 0.0057% as a consequence of the
tax cut, or in monetary terms, provide at least £101.64 million in
growth.

20 

Fig. A.4. This figure plots the coefficient estimates of the debt relative to contempo-
raneous equity dynamic difference-in-differences regression. The baseline year is 2012,
the year before the announcement. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Firm
fixed effects and a sector × year interaction are included in the regression.

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table A.4
This table displays summary statistics for the variables used as dependent variables in the analysis from Section 3.5 onwards. The summary statistics are estimated using post-
legislation change data. The top panel contains statistics for the treated AIM companies, and the bottom panel for the matched FTSE control group. The statistics displayed are
the 10th percentile, median, 90th percentile, mean, and standard deviation. Pre-reform refers to the year before the tax cut, 2012.

21 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table A.5
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for the financial decision’s regression, Eq. (6), which compares paid-in equity, debt, capital, or property, plant, and
equipment (PPE), capital expenditure, total pay to all employees and officers, the total number of employees, and cash. All dependent variables are logged and all specifications
include a company and a month–sector interaction fixed effect. The sample period is between 2005 and 2022. The pre-treated mean is estimated for AIM stocks in the pre-legislation
change period, and the elasticity is estimated for both taxes separately with the treated × post coefficient estimate used for %𝛥𝑦 given that the dependent variable is logged.
Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm level. Stars denote whether sample averages are statistically different from zero at the
following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

Table A.6
This table displays the treated × post coefficient estimates for the financial decision’s regression, Eq. (6), which compares paid-in equity, debt, capital, or property, plant, and
equipment (PPE), capital expenditure, total pay to all employees and officers, the total number of employees, and cash. All dependent variables are logged and all specifications
include a company and a month–sector interaction fixed effect. Additional controls refers to the inclusion of the pre-reform (2012) value of the following variables interacted with
year fixed effects: company profits, company size, book-to-market ratio, value of assets, and value of cash holdings. The sample period is between 2005 and 2022. The pre-treated
mean is estimated for AIM stocks in the pre-legislation change period, and the elasticity is estimated for both taxes separately with the treated × post coefficient estimate used for
%𝛥𝑦 given that the dependent variable is logged. Standard errors are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and are clustered at the firm level. Stars denote whether sample
averages are statistically different from zero at the following confidence intervals: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.

22 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Table A.7
This table displays the number of companies which switched between the AIM stock exchange and the main market London Stock Exchange. Numbers are provided for all companies
on each exchange, and also for my AIM sample and the matched FTSE sample. In total, 65 (56) companies switched from the AIM (Main) to the Main (AIM). In my sample, 7
(4) companies switched from the AIM (Main) to the Main (AIM).

23 

A.P. Kontoghiorghes

References

Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G.W., Wooldridge, J., 2017. When Should You Adjust

Standard Errors for Clustering? NBER Working Paper Series.

Abel, A.B., Eberly, J.C., Panageas, S., 2007. Optimal inattention to the stock market.

Amer. Econ. Rev. 97 (2), 244–249.

Abel, A.B., Eberly, J.C., Panageas, S., 2013. Optimal inattention to the stock market
with information costs and transactions costs. Econometrica 81 (4), 1455–1481.
Agnew, J., Balduzzi, P., Sunden, A., 2003. Portfolio choice and trading in a large 401

(K) plan. Amer. Econ. Rev. 93 (1), 193–215.

Allen, F., Bernardo, A.E., Welch, I., 2000. A theory of dividends based on tax clienteles.

J. Finance IV (6), 2499–2536.

Auerbach, A.J., 1979. Wealth maximization and the cost of capital. Q. J. Econ. 93 (3),

433–446.

Babina, T., Jotikasthira, C., Lundblad, C., Ramadorai, T., 2021. Heterogeneous taxes
and limited risk sharing: Evidence from municipal bonds. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34
(1), 509–568.

Bach, L., Bozio, A., Fabre, B., Guillouzouic, A., Leroy, C., Malgouyres, C., 2021. Follow

the Money! Why Dividends Overreact to Flat-Tax Reforms. PSE Working Papers.

Banerjee, A.V., Newman, A.F., 1993. Occupational choice and the process of

development. J. Polit. Econ. 101 (2), 274–298.

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103927 

Fonseca, J., Van Doornik, B., 2022. Financial development and labor market outcomes:

Evidence from Brazil. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 550–568.

Golubov, A., Lasfer, M., Vitkova, V., 2020. Active catering to dividend clienteles:

Evidence from takeovers. J. Financ. Econ. 137 (3), 815–836.

Goodman, L., Isen, A., Richmond, J., Smith, M., 2023. Tax Policy, Investment, and

Firm Financing: Evidence from the U.S. Interest Limitation. Working Paper.

Graham, J.R., 1999. Do personal taxes affect corporate financing decisions? J. Public

Econom. 73 (5), 1471–1493.

Graham, J.R., 2003. Taxes and corporate finance: A review. Rev. Financ. Stud. 16 (4),

1075–1129.

Graham, J.R.., Kumar, A., 2006. Do dividend clienteles exist? Evidence on dividend

preferences of retail investors. J. Finance 61 (3), 1305–1336.

Harberger, A.C., 1962. The incidence of the corporation income tax. J. Polit. Econ. 70

(3), 215–240.

Huang, L., Liu, H., 2007. Rational inattention and portfolio selection. J. Finance 62

(4), 1999–2040.

King, A.T., 1977. Estimating property tax capitalization: A critical comment. J. Polit.

Econ. 85 (2), 425–431.

Koijen, R.S.J., Richmond, R., Yogo, M., 2021. Which Investors Matter for Global Equity

Valuations and Expected Returns?. SSRN Electron. J..

Koijen, R.S.J., Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. J. Polit.

Banz, R.W., 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.

Econ. 127 (4), 1475–1515.

J. Financ. Econ. 9, 3–18.

Korinek, A., Stiglitz, J.E., 2009. Dividend taxation and intertemporal tax arbitrage. J.

Barrot, J.-N., Kaniel, R., Sraer, D., 2016. Are retail traders compensated for providing

Public Econom. 93 (1–2), 142–159.

liquidity? J. Financ. Econ. 120 (1), 146–168.

Lin, L., Flannery, M.J., 2013. Do personal taxes affect capital structure? Evidence from

Bau, N., Matray, A., 2023. Misallocation and capital market integration: Evidence from

the 2003 tax cut. J. Financ. Econ. 109 (2), 549–565.

India. Econometrica 91 (1), 67–106.

Benartzi, S., Thaler, R.H., 1995. Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle.

Q. J. Econ. 110 (1), 73–92.

Bilicka, K.A., Guceri,

I., Koumanakos, E., 2023. Dividend Taxation and Firm

Performance with Heterogeneous Payout Responses. NBER Working Paper.

Binsbergen, J.H.V., Koijen, R.S., 2016. On the timing and pricing of dividends: Reply.

Amer. Econ. Rev. 106 (10), 3224–3237.

Bradford, D.F., 1981. The incidence and allocation effects of a tax on corporate

distributions. J. Public Econom. 15 (1), 1–22.

Brennan, M.J., 1970. Taxes, market valuation and corporate financial policy. Natl. Tax

J. 23 (4), 417–428.

Litzenberger, R.H., Ramaswamy, K., 1979. The effect of personal taxes and dividends
on capital asset prices. Theory and empirical evidence. J. Financ. Econ. 7 (2),
163–195.

Madrian, B.C., Shea, D.F., 2001. The power of suggestion:

Inertia in 401 (k)

participation and savings behavior. Q. J. Econ. 116 (4), 1149–1187.

Matray, A., 2023. Dividend Taxes, Firm Growth, and the Allocation of Capital. NBER

Working Paper Series 30099.

Michaely, R., Thaler, R.H., Womack, K.L., 1995. Price reactions to dividend initiations

and omissions : Overreaction or drift? J. Finance 50 (2), 573–608.

Miller, M.H., 1977. Debt and taxes. J. Finance 32 (2), 261–275.
Miller, M.H., Modigliani, F., 1961. Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of shares.

Carhart, M.M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. J. Finance LII (1),

J. Bus. 34 (4), 411–433.

57–82.

Carletti, E., De Marco, F., Ioannidou, V., Sette, E., 2021. Banks as patient lenders:

Evidence from a tax reform. J. Financ. Econ. 141 (1), 6–26.

Chetty, R., Saez, E., 2005. Dividend taxes and corporate behavior: Evidence from the

2003 dividend tax cut. Q. J. Econ. 120, 791–833.

Miller, M.H., Scholes, M.S., 1978. Dividends and taxes. J. Financ. Econ. 6, 333–364.
Moon, T.S., 2022. Capital gains taxes and real corporate investment: Evidence from

Korea. Amer. Econ. Rev. 112 (8), 2669–2700.

Pástor, L., Stambaugh, R.F., 2003. Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. J. Polit.

Econ. 111 (3), 642–685.

Chetty, R., Saez, E., 2010. Dividend and corporate taxation in an agency model of the

Perez-Gonzalez, F., 2003. Large Shareholders and Dividends: Evidence from U.S. Tax

firm. Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 2 (3), 1–31.

Dai, Z., Maydew, E., Shackelford, D.A., Zhang, H.H., 2008. Capital gains taxes and asset

prices: Capitalization or lock-in? J. Finance 63 (2), 709–742.

Desai, M.A., Jin, L., 2011. Institutional tax clienteles and payout policy. J. Financ.

Econ. 100 (1), 68–84.

Reforms. (January), Mimeo, Columbia University.

Poterba, J.M., 2001. Taxation and portfolio structure: Issues and implications. NBER

Work. Pap. Ser. 8223, 103–142.

Poterba, J.M., Summers, L.H., 1983. Dividend taxes, corporate investment, and ‘Q’. J.

Public Econom. 22 (2), 135–167.

Dimson, E., 1979. Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading. J.

Poterba, J.M., Summers, L.H., 1984. New evidence that taxes affect the valuation of

Financ. Econ. 7 (2), 197–226.

dividends. J. Finance 39 (5), 1397–1415.

Doukas, J.A., Hoque, H., 2016. Why firms favour the AIM when they can list on main

Rauh, J.D., 2006. Investment and financing constraints: Evidence from the funding of

market? J. Int. Money Finance 60, 378–404.

corporate pension plans. J. Finance 61 (1), 33–71.

Faccio, M., Xu, J., 2015. Taxes and capital structure. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 50 (3),

Schulz, F., 2016. On the timing and pricing of dividends: Comment. Amer. Econ. Rev.

277–300.

106 (10), 3185–3223.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2001. Disappearing dividends: Changing firm characteristics

or lower propensity to pay? J. Financ. Econ. 60 (1), 3–43.

Sialm, C., 2009. Tax changes and asset pricing. Amer. Econ. Rev. 99 (4), 1356–1383.
Sialm, C., Starks, L.T., Zhang, H., 2015. Defined contribution pension plans: Sticky or

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116

discerning money? J. Finance 70 (2), 805–838.

(1), 1–22.

Sialm, C., Zhang, H., 2020. Tax-efficient asset management: Evidence from equity

Feenberg, D.R., Poterba, J.M., 1991. Which Households Own Munipal Bonds? Evidence

mutual funds. J. Finance 75 (2), 735–777.

from Tax Returns. NBER Working Paper Series, 3900.

Yagan, D., 2015. Capital tax reform and the real economy: The effects of the 2003

Feldstein, M.S., 1970. Corporate taxation and dividend behaviour. Rev. Econ. Stud. 37

dividend tax cut. Amer. Econ. Rev. 105 (12), 3531–3563.

(1), 57–72.

24 

