Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Token-based platform governance✩
Joseph Abadi a,∗, Markus Brunnermeier b
a Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 N Independence Mall W, Philadelphia, PA 19106, United States of America
b Princeton University, 20 Washington Road, Princeton, NJ 08542, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Utility tokens
Platforms
DeFi
Corporate governance

1. Introduction

We develop a model to compare the governance of traditional shareholder-owned platforms to that of platforms
that issue tokens. A traditional shareholder governance structure leads a platform to extract rents from its
users. A platform that issues tokens for its services can mitigate this rent extraction, as rent extraction lowers
the platform owners’ token seigniorage revenues. However, this mitigation from issuing ‘‘service tokens’’ is
effective only if the platform can commit itself not to dilute the ‘‘service token’’ subsequently. Issuing ‘‘hybrid
tokens’’ that bundle claims on the platform’s services and its profits enhances efficiency even absent ex-ante
commitment power. Finally, giving users the right to vote on platform policies, by contrast, redistributes surplus
but does not necessarily enhance efficiency.

The emergence of platforms that issue their own digital currencies
or credits to users – called tokens – has offered an alternative to
traditional platforms’ model of financing and governance. Traditional
platforms are owned and governed by shareholders (i.e., residual cash
flow claimants). A platform’s users, by contrast, do not necessarily play
a role in financing or decision-making. Shareholders may not govern
a traditional platform in users’ best interests: they can exercise the
platform’s market power to extract rents from users. Proponents of
cryptocurrency and decentralized finance (DeFi) argue that by giving
users a stake in the system, token-financed platforms are more likely to
be governed in accordance with users’ preferences.

Tokens can offer users several types of claims or rights. Some
platforms issue tokens that offer transaction services while retaining the
traditional shareholder governance model. For example, the (central-
ized) Binance cryptocurrency exchange issues a token (BNB) that users
can redeem to receive a discount on trading fees. Blockchain-based
platforms often issue ‘‘utility tokens’’ that can be used to purchase a
digital service: e.g., the Golem platform’s tokens (GLM) can be used
to rent out computational resources, and Chainlink’s token (LINK) is
used to pay network operators to retrieve data for smart contracts.
Other tokens function essentially like shares of a traditional platform,
granting cash flow claims and voting rights. The Kyber decentralized

cryptocurrency exchange, for instance, issues a token (KNC) that can be
‘‘staked’’ to receive a share of the platform’s revenues and to participate
in governance. Still other tokens bundle transaction services with cash
flow claims and/or voting rights. The archetypal example is a proof-
of-stake cryptocurrency with ‘‘on-chain’’ governance, like Tezos or
Algorand. On these blockchains, tokens play a dual role: users can hold
them to transact with others, and ‘‘validators’’ can set tokens aside
as collateral (called ‘‘staking’’) to verify blockchain transactions, earn
monetary rewards, and vote on policies.

The advent of token-financed platforms raises key economic ques-
tions. Can token-financed platforms succeed in mitigating rent extrac-
tion and aligning policies with users’ interests? How should tokens
be designed to promote efficient platform governance? Should tokens
grant transaction services, cash flows claims, voting rights, or some
combination of features?

To answer these questions, we develop a unified model of a platform
economy that is general enough to encompass traditional platforms as
well as platforms that issue tokens with various features. The model is
set in continuous time and has two groups of agents: users, who enjoy
the platform’s transaction services, and investors, who hold cash flow
claims on the platform but do not engage in transactions.

In our benchmark model, the platform’s policy consists of a trans-
action fee charged to users and (possibly) a rate of token seigniorage,

✩

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank Agostino Capponi, Hanna Halaburda, Sylvain Chassang, and an anonymous referee for helpful suggestions,
as well as seminar participants at the Canadian Economic Association meetings, the CMU Secure Blockchain Summit, the FRB Philadelphia Digital Currencies
conference, the Tokenomics conference, and Princeton University. Disclaimer: The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia or the Federal Reserve System. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the
authors.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:

joseph.abadi@phil.frb.org (J. Abadi), markus@princeton.edu (M. Brunnermeier).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103951
Received 14 March 2024; Received in revised form 18 September 2024; Accepted 21 September 2024

Available online 3 October 2024 
0304-405X/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

when we consider a platform that issues tokens. These policies dic-
tate the split of surplus between users and investors, since fees and
seigniorage both represent transfers from users to investors, as well
as total surplus, since the costs users face to use the platform deter-
mine their demand for its transaction services. Governance decisions
(i.e., opportunities to vote on the platform’s policies) occur periodically
over time. Hence, there is limited commitment in governance: instead of
committing to a full sequence of policies at 𝑡 = 0, the platform can
rewrite its policies in each governance decision.

The platform’s market power generates scope for inefficiencies. The
platform faces no competition, so it can set fees higher than the
marginal cost of processing transactions without losing its user base.
Importantly, fees are distortionary because the platform cannot fully ex-
tract surplus from users: higher fees lead to lower transaction volumes
and deadweight losses.

For each of the platform designs we consider, there are two types
of assets. There is a transaction asset that users must hold to receive the
platform’s transaction services: users’ flow payoffs depend on their real
balances of transaction assets, as in many models of platforms that issue
tokens (Cong et al., 2021; Gryglewicz et al., 2021). There is also a cash
flow asset held by investors that grants claims on the platform’s profits.
Either type of asset can have voting rights, depending on the setting. We
consider three different platform designs in this general environment.

• Traditional platform: Users transact with an asset that originates
outside the platform, such as cash, deposits, or other liquid assets.
The platform issues shares to investors that confer cash flow and
governance rights (so shares are the cash flow asset). Investors
choose the platform’s policies to maximize its equity value.

• Service tokens: Users transact with tokens that are issued by
the platform (so tokens are the transaction asset). Investors hold
shares (the cash flow asset) that grant claims on profits. At first,
we assume the platform maintains the shareholder governance
model, but we later extend the model to permit token-holding
users to vote as well.

• Hybrid tokens: The platform does not issue shares — it issues a
token that serves as both a transaction asset and a cash flow asset.
Users hold tokens in order to transact on the platform, whereas
investors ‘‘stake’’ tokens to receive a claim on the platform’s
profits. Again, we begin by assuming that only the holders of
staked tokens (investors) can vote, and then extend the model to
permit users to vote as well.

We study the efficiency of each platform design in terms of total surplus
vis-à-vis the first-best allocation.

Traditional platform: The shareholders of a traditional platform
simply set fees to maximize the present value of profits without regard
for user surplus. Consequently, as is typical of models with imperfect
competition, the platform’s fees are set higher than the marginal cost of
processing transactions. Transaction volumes are therefore inefficiently
low from a social perspective.

Service tokens: When the platform issues service tokens, investors
choose both fees and the rate of seigniorage. They have a reason to
internalize user surplus: the equilibrium price of tokens, and therefore
the platform’s seigniorage revenues from its initial token issuance,
depends on the service flow that users expect to receive from tokens
in the future (i.e., the marginal benefit of holding a token). Policies
that enhance users’ welfare (e.g., a promise of lower fees or less
future seigniorage) increase service flows and thus token prices. If
investors’ ability to commit to future policies is strong enough, then the
prospect of greater initial seigniorage revenues will incentivize them
to choose policies that are more beneficial to users. Therefore, under
commitment, investors will set lower fees than a traditional platform,
leading to greater transaction demand. The equilibrium outcome is
unambiguously more efficient than in the traditional case.

However, if investors’ ability to commit to future policies is weak,
then this logic breaks down. Investors no longer have as strong an

incentive to pass policies that benefit users: they can frequently rewrite
policies and do not internalize any reduction in value of tokens issued
in the past. Instead, users bear those costs. Investors are tempted to
set fees too high and over-issue tokens to boost seigniorage revenues.
This temptation is so severe that in the limit of no commitment, there
does not exist an equilibrium in which tokens are valued: realizing
that investors will attempt to extract high rents in the future, users
are unwilling to purchase tokens in the first place. Commitment is thus
crucial for service tokens to enhance efficiency on their own.

Our analysis of service tokens sets the stage for us to ask: what type
of token design can overcome investors’ time-consistency problem? Of
course, there are several mechanisms that could enhance platform own-
ers’ commitment to policies that benefit users, such as token retention
or smart contracts that pre-program a specified sequence of policies.
Our paper’s main result, however, shows that so long as investors have
limited commitment power, a hybrid token that bundles transaction
services with cash flow claims can serve as an effective substitute for
commitment.

Hybrid tokens: A hybrid token is held by users for its transaction
services and staked by investors for its cash flows. Equilibrium token
prices reflect both their service value (the present value of service flows,
which is users’ valuation) and their cash flow value (the present value of
dividends, which is investors’ valuation). Even when investors govern
the platform without strong commitment to future policies, equilibrium
outcomes are unambiguously more efficient than in the traditional
platform case. Here our main result, in fact, is that hybrid tokens over-
come investors’ time-inconsistency problem: equilibrium governance
decisions are precisely the same as in the case of a platform that
issues service tokens with full commitment. The key intuition is that
investors hold an asset whose value reflects users’ future service flows,
so investors bear part of the costs if they pass policies that harm users.
When a platform issues service tokens to users without commitment,
by contrast, investors may seek to pass policies that increase the value
of their equity while reducing token prices. This mechanism is quite
general: in the Online Appendix, we show that the introduction of
hybrid tokens resolves investors’ time-inconsistency problem in several
extensions of our benchmark model.1

User voting: We then extend the model to accommodate token-
issuing platforms that permit users to vote, rather than just investors.
We consider both a platform that issues service tokens and one that
issues hybrid tokens. When users can participate in governance, they
receive a greater share of total surplus, but equilibrium outcomes
are not necessarily more efficient. If users acquire a majority share
of voting power, they pass policies that increase their surplus at the
expense of lower profits — transaction quantities may be inefficiently
high. Intuitively, simply reallocating voting power does not cause users to
internalize investor welfare. By contrast, bundling cash flow claims with
transaction services causes investors to internalize user surplus, unlike
the owners of a traditional platform.

Organization. In the remainder of this section, we give a review
of the related literature. Section 2 gives a brief overview of the types
of tokens issued by platforms in practice. Section 3 introduces the eco-
nomic environment and other preliminary elements of the benchmark
model. Section 4 studies the governance of a traditional platform as
a benchmark. Section 5 introduces service tokens, outlines how token
issuance affects equilibrium governance decisions, and highlights the
time-consistency problem that is central to our analysis. Section 6
analyzes the hybrid token scheme and proves our main result: that
hybrid tokens achieve the full-commitment outcome. Section 7 lays out
an extension with user voting. Section 8 discusses the model’s main
assumptions. Section 9 concludes. All proofs are in the Appendix.

1 We thank an anonymous referee for noting that hybrid tokens can
potentially overcome time-inconsistent governance in a broad range of
environments.

2 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Related literature. Our paper is most closely related to the emerg-
ing literature that studies the role of tokens in DeFi platforms’ gover-
nance. In the context of a platform with network externalities, Sockin
and Xiong (2023) study the introduction of a token that grants platform
membership and permits users to vote on platform policies, prevent-
ing the platform from exploiting their data. However, users are not
able to share the costs of investments in the platform and therefore
cannot subsidize the admission of new users to the platform. Bakos
and Halaburda (2022) study a platform that issues tokens that offer
cash flow claims and voting rights. They highlight conditions under
which token holdings become concentrated among non-users, leading
to rent extraction. Similarly, Han et al. (2023) develop and empirically
test a model in which concentrated token holdings by a large investor
can undermine efficient governance. Relatedly, Bena and Zhang (2022)
and Gan et al. (2023) compare the inefficiencies in governance of a
platform that issues service tokens to those of a traditional platform.
While our analysis shares some of these themes, it is complementary:
we characterize the separate roles of tokens’ transaction services, cash
flow claims, and voting rights, providing novel insights into the optimal
design of tokens.

The broader literature on financing through token sales and ICOs is
also related to our work. Closest to our paper, Goldstein et al. (forth-
coming) show that by issuing utility tokens, a platform can commit
to charge lower prices to users, as in our model. Their mechanism,
however, is related to the Coase (1972) conjecture and is quite distinct
from ours. Gryglewicz et al. (2021) and Cong et al. (2022) study
the optimal issuance of tokens by a financially-constrained platform,
demonstrating how seigniorage policies can be used to reward platform
owners for investments. Li and Mann (2017), Chod and Lyandres
(2021), and Lee and Parlour (2022) study other reasons why firms
might finance themselves through the issuance of utility tokens. Li and
Mayer (2020) and d’Avernas et al. (2022) present models to study the
optimal issuance of stablecoins. Similarly, You and Rogoff (2023) study
how the tradability of a platform’s utility tokens affects the revenue
raised by a token offering. Relative to this literature, our paper differs
in that it considers the role of tokens exclusively for governance — there
are no financial frictions that motivate token issuance.

Of course, our paper connects to the corporate governance literature
as well. There is an extensive body of work on control rights, ownership
structure, and the theory of the firm stemming from the work of Coase
(1937), Williamson (1979), and Grossman and Hart (1986). Our paper
contributes to this literature by characterizing the specific governance
consequences brought about by different token designs — we show that
despite the fact that users can potentially be exploited by the platform,
it is not always most efficient to give them control rights (Hansmann,
1988). Our work is complementary to the literature that studies how
different control structures aggregate information in governance deci-
sions (see Aghion and Tirole, 1997, among many others). Recent work
has extended this literature to the study of DeFi platforms (Tsoukalas
and Falk, 2020; Benhaim et al., 2023).

2. An overview of tokens

Before introducing the model, we briefly outline the different claims
or rights that tokens may confer and examples of tokens that are issued
in practice. Tokens typically grant at least one of (1) claims on a
platform’s transaction services, (2) claims on cash flows, or (3) voting
rights. Fig. 1 provides a taxonomy of tokens based on whether they
provide transaction services and whether they confer platform owner-
ship (cash flow claims and/or voting rights). This section discusses each
class of tokens in this taxonomy as well as how the different types of
tokens used in practice relate to the assets in the model.

Transaction services only: Tokens that grant only claims on trans-
action services are typically referred to as utility tokens. Examples are
the Binance token (BNB) or the Golem token (GLM) discussed in the
Introduction, which users can redeem for specific services or perks.

However, tokens can facilitate transactions on a platform even if they
are not redeemable for any particular service. In the context of our
model, a pure cryptocurrency that has no intrinsic value but is used for
transactions among a platform’s users could also be viewed as a token
that offers an implicit claim on the platform’s transaction processing
services. Even outside of DeFi, some platforms have begun to issue, or
have considered issuing, their own currencies (e.g., Alibaba’s ‘‘Alipay’’
or Facebook’s now-defunct Libra/Diem project).2

Ownership features only: Other tokens grant claims on the plat-
form’s cash flows (e.g., transaction fees or seigniorage revenues).3
Usually, such tokens have voting rights in governance decisions as well.
The (previously discussed) KNC token issued by the Kyber decentralized
exchange (DEX) is a leading example. Kyber provides automated cryp-
tocurrency market-making services and collects transaction fees from
traders. Token holders can ‘‘stake’’ their tokens in order to receive
a share of these fees. They may also participate in on-chain gover-
nance: the community regularly votes on referenda that determine the
platform’s policies, including fees and software upgrades, and voting
power is allocated proportionally to token holdings. Most of the assets
that users transact on the platforms are cryptocurrencies that originate
elsewhere.4 In the context of our model, a token that offers only cash
flow claims and voting rights is equivalent to a share of a traditional
platform. So, in the case of Kyber, the ‘‘investors’’ would be KNC
token holders and ‘‘users’’ would be those who trade various other
cryptocurrencies on the platform.

Pure governance tokens offer only voting rights. For example, the
Uniswap DEX issues the UNI token, which entitles holders to vote on
changes to the market-making protocol. UNI does not currently pay its
holders any dividends, but in principle, token holders could vote to pay
themselves a dividend at some point in the future.5 The COMP token
issued by the popular Compound lending platform carries similar voting
rights. Tokens that have only voting rights are beyond the scope of our
model.

Transaction services and ownership features: Finally, we turn
to platforms that issue native tokens that bundle transaction services
with ownership features. We have already given the example of proof-
of-stake cryptocurrency blockchains with on-chain governance, like
Algorand or Tezos. On these platforms, tokens are held by users who
wish to transact with others. They are staked by ‘‘validators’’ (the ana-
logue of investors in the model) who run the computational hardware
needed to verify transactions and collect monetary rewards, which
could take the form of transaction fees or newly minted tokens. Some
blockchain platforms permit any token holder to stake and vote on
proposed policies (e.g., Algorand), whereas others allow users to del-
egate their votes to validators who they trust to act on their behalf
(e.g., Tezos). Typical policies adjust the blockchain’s transaction fees
or upgrade transaction verification protocols.

This setup is not restricted to proof-of-stake cryptocurrencies, how-
ever. Some DeFi platforms issue tokens that bundle voting rights, cash
flow claims, and direct claims on the platform’s services. The Aave
lending platform issues a token (AAVE) with voting rights that (1) bor-
rowers can post as collateral to receive discounted interest rates and (2)
investors can stake to provide a liquidity backstop and receive a share
of Aave’s profits. Similarly, some platforms that enable interoperability
across DeFi applications, such as the Cosmos and Polkadot networks,
issue tokens with voting rights that users hold to pay network fees and
validators stake to provide transaction security.

2 A key difference, however, is that tokens issued by non-DeFi platforms

are typically backed at least partially by existing fiat currencies.

3 These are distinct from security tokens, which usually represent a claim on
another firm’s profits or a claim on a financial asset that exists outside of the
blockchain.

4 Kyber users, for example, may access a ‘‘liquidity pool’’ that permits them

to trade Ether for the Tether stablecoin.

5 See

https://protos.com/to-fee-or-not-to-fee-that-is-the-question-does-
uniswap-have-an-answer/. Whether UNI will eventually pay dividends has
been a topic of intense speculation in the community.

3 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Fig. 1. A taxonomy of the types of tokens issued by platforms in practice. Tokens are categorized by whether they confer ownership in the platform (cash flow claims and/or
voting rights) and whether they offer transaction services. We also indicate how we refer to each type of token in the model.

3. Model

Environment: We consider a continuous-time,

infinite-horizon
economy in which agents interact on a platform. There are two com-
modities: a numéraire good (referred to as a ‘‘dollar’’) and transaction
services (henceforth ‘‘transactions’’) produced by the platform at a
marginal cost 𝑐 > 0. The economy is populated by a unit mass of two
types of agents: users 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1] and investors 𝑗 ∈ [0, 1]. Users enjoy
the platform’s transaction services: a user 𝑖 who consumes a quantity

𝑥1−𝛾
𝑖𝑡
1−𝛾

, where 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1).6
𝑥𝑖𝑡 of transactions at time 𝑡 receives utility
Investors, on the other hand, hold cash flow claims on the platform
but do not enjoy its transaction services. All agents are risk-neutral over
consumption of dollars and share a common discount rate 𝑟 > 0.7

𝑡 and supply 𝐴𝑇

Assets: In this economy, assets can play two roles. First, there is a
transaction asset (with endogenous price 𝑄𝑇
𝑡 ) that can be
held by users to receive the platform’s transaction services: users enjoy
transaction services equal to their real balances of transaction assets,
as is typical in the literature on tokens (as well as models with money
in the utility function, e.g., (Sidrauski, 1967; Feenstra, 1986)).8 So a
user 𝑖 who holds a quantity of transaction assets 𝑎𝑖𝑡 at time 𝑡 receives
transaction services

𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑡.

𝑥𝑖𝑡 = 𝑄𝑇
Second, there is a cash flow asset (with price 𝑄𝐶
𝑡 ) that
is held by investors9 and provides a pro-rata claim on the platform’s
profits: a cash flow asset pays a dividend 𝑑𝐷𝑡 = 𝑑𝛱𝑡∕𝐴𝐶
𝑡 at time 𝑡,
where 𝑑𝛱𝑡 denotes the platform’s profits.

𝑡 and supply 𝐴𝐶

(1)

We consider three schemes for the design of assets in this economy:
a traditional platform, a platform that issues service tokens, and a
platform that issues hybrid tokens. The Introduction specifies what
plays the role of the cash flow asset and the transaction asset under each
scheme. We will mostly study the case in which only cash flow assets
have voting rights (so investors govern the platform), but Section 7
extends the model to allow users to vote as well.

Platform governance: The platform’s policy at time 𝑡 consists of
≥ 0 and (possibly) a token seigniorage policy at all

a transaction fee 𝑓𝑡+𝑠

6 We assume 𝛾 < 1 to ensure users’ transaction demand is sufficiently elastic

that a profit-maximizing policy for the platform exists.

7 Throughout, we make the additional parametric assumption 𝑐∕(1 − 𝛾) > 𝑟
to streamline the presentation of results. However, the main results remain
unchanged if we drop this assumption.

8 Biais et al.

(2023) micro-found a similar utility function in an

overlapping-generations model.

9 Section 8 discusses the assumption that users do not hold cash flow assets.

future dates 𝑡+𝑠.10 The platform’s policies are determined in governance
decisions at times {𝜏0 = 0, 𝜏1, 𝜏2, … } that arrive according to a Poisson
process at rate 𝜆. In a governance decision at time 𝜏𝑘, any previous
policy commitments are torn up, and new policies (for all future dates
𝜏𝑘 +𝑠) are chosen by a vote among the agents who govern the platform.
Hence, the parameter 𝜆 indexes the degree of commitment to future
policies: in the limit 𝜆 → 0, the platform’s policies are fully determined
at 𝑡 = 0 (as with an immutable smart contract), whereas in the limit
𝜆 → ∞, a new policy is chosen at each instant. Agents are infinitesimal,
so no individual agent’s vote is ever pivotal. Therefore, all agents take
policies as given.

Payoffs: A user 𝑖 who engages in 𝑥𝑖𝑡 transactions at time 𝑡 pays a
fee 𝑓𝑡 per transaction, so the user receives a total flow payoff from
transactions
( 𝑥1−𝛾
𝑖𝑡
1 − 𝛾

𝑑𝑈𝑖𝑡 =

− 𝑓𝑡𝑥𝑖𝑡

)𝑑𝑡.

The platform receives the transaction fees paid by users and incurs
a marginal cost 𝑐 per transaction. When we consider token-issuing
platforms, the platform will also receive (endogenous) seigniorage
revenues from token issuance, which we denote by 𝑑𝑆𝑡 for now. Thus,
letting 𝑋𝑡
0 𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑑𝑖 denote the aggregate quantity of transactions, the
platform’s flow profits at 𝑡 are

≡ ∫ 1

𝑑𝛱𝑡 = (𝑓𝑡 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑡𝑑𝑡 + 𝑑𝑆𝑡.

In the remainder of this section, we describe the elements of our
model that are held constant across the different settings considered.
In subsequent sections, we analyze each platform design individually.

Remark. We illustrate the logic of our main results in a benchmark
model that makes several specific assumptions. However, we extend the
model to more general settings to show that the main results continue
to hold:

• Online Appendix F considers a platform that must make gover-
nance decisions about investment as well as fees and seigniorage;

10 While we assume that the platform cannot subsidize transactions for
simplicity, all that is required for our results is that the platform cannot
promise unboundedly large subsidies to users. That is, there must exist some
≥ 𝑓 . The inability to provide large subsidies may
lower bound 𝑓 such that 𝑓𝑡
be viewed as another dimension of limited commitment.

4 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

• Online Appendix G considers a platform in which users’ utility

exhibits network effects11;

• Online Appendix H considers a setting with monopolistic compe-
tition across platforms, rather than a single monopolistic plat-
form12;

• Online Appendix I considers a setting in which the platform
permits users to redeem transaction assets in exchange for a
service (instead of the money-in-the-utility assumption used in the
benchmark model).

3.1. Individual optimization problems

We first lay out agents’ individual portfolio optimization problems.
Users choose their transaction asset holdings to maximize their ex-
pected lifetime utility subject to a standard budget constraint, taking
the price of transaction assets 𝑄𝑇
𝑡 and fees 𝑓𝑡 as given. In Appendix A.1,
we show that this problem reduces to a static one:

agents have identical policy preferences. We assume that agents in
each constituency vote unanimously for their most-preferred policy.13
Throughout most of the analysis, we will focus on the case in which
only cash flow assets confer the right to vote. In this case, investors
will hold all of the voting power, so they will implement their most-
preferred policy. However, we will later extend the model to allow
users the opportunity to vote as well.

Each constituency’s preferences over policies is determined by the
lifetime utility its members expect to obtain after a new policy is
passed.14 Investors’ expected lifetime utility 𝑉 𝐼
is equal to the market
𝑡
value of their cash flow assets, whereas users’ expected lifetime utility
𝑉 𝑈
is equal to the market value of their transaction assets plus the
𝑡
present value of infra-marginal rents 𝑅𝑡 that they earn from transactions,
defined below.

Proposition 1.
investors’ expected lifetime utility is

Following the announcement of a new policy at time 𝜏,

( 𝑥1−𝛾
𝑖𝑡
1 − 𝛾

max
𝑥𝑖𝑡,𝑎𝑖𝑡

− 𝑓𝑡𝑥𝑖𝑡

)𝑑𝑡 + (E

𝑡[𝑑𝑄𝑇

𝑡 ] − 𝑟𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑑𝑡)𝑎𝑖𝑡 s.t. (1).

The first term in parentheses is the flow utility of transactions 𝑥𝑖𝑡,
whereas the second term represents the expected return on transaction
assets net of holding costs 𝑟𝑄𝑇
𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑡. All users 𝑖 optimally choose the
same transaction quantity 𝑥𝑖𝑡. Users’ optimality condition can be used
to show that aggregate transaction demand 𝑋𝑡 obeys
[ 𝑑𝑄𝑇
𝑡
𝑄𝑇
𝑡

𝑡 𝑑𝑡 = 𝑓𝑡𝑑𝑡 +

(𝑟𝑑𝑡 − E

𝑋−𝛾

]).

(2)

𝑡

Transaction demand is decreasing in the net marginal cost of transact-
ing, which consists of two components: the transaction fee 𝑓𝑡 and the
opportunity cost 𝑟 − 1
of holding transaction assets. Of course,
𝑑𝑡
the aggregate demand for transaction assets is equal to aggregate
transaction demand,

[ 𝑑𝑄𝑇
𝑡
𝑄𝑇
𝑡

E
𝑡

]

𝑋𝑡 = 𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝐴𝑇
𝑡 .

(3)

Similarly, investors choose their holdings of cash flow assets to max-
imize lifetime utility subject to a standard budget constraint. Investors’
problem is formally stated in Appendix A.1. Their first-order condition
implies that cash flow assets are priced according to the present value
of dividends:

𝑟𝑄𝐶

𝑡 𝑑𝑡 = 𝑑𝐷𝑡 + E

𝑡[𝑑𝑄𝐶

𝑡 ] where 𝑑𝐷𝑡 =

𝑑𝛱𝑡
𝐴𝐶
𝑡

.

(4)

Eqs. (3) and (4) summarize the demand for transaction assets and
cash flow assets, respectively. The supply of each asset is determined in
a different way for each of the platform designs we consider.

3.2. Governance decisions

The platform’s status quo policy at time 𝑡 consists of a transaction fee
and (possibly) a seigniorage rate at all future dates, {𝑓𝑡+𝑠, 𝑑𝑆𝑡+𝑠}𝑠≥0. In
a governance decision at time 𝜏𝑘, the platform’s status quo policy can
be revised. Each agent who has the right to do so votes for a new policy.
If some policy attains a majority, then the status quo is abandoned and
the new policy is implemented. Otherwise, the status quo is maintained.
In principle, this voting game could be quite complicated since there
are infinitely many potential policies. However, our environment offers
a useful simplification: within each constituency (investors or users),

11 We assume that a user’s utility depends on their own transactions 𝑥𝑖𝑡
with

as well as other users’ aggregate transaction activity 𝑋𝑡 via
𝜈 ∈ (0, 1); i.e., 𝜈 captures the strength of network effects.

𝑡 𝑥1−𝜈
𝑖𝑡
1−𝛾

(𝑋𝜈

)1−𝛾

12 We assume a continuum of platforms 𝑘 that produce differentiated trans-
action services. A user’s total transaction services 𝑥𝑖𝑡 are a CES aggregate of
transactions 𝑥𝑖𝑘𝑡 on each platform 𝑘, 𝑥𝑖𝑡 = (∫ 1

𝜂−1 .

𝜂−1
𝜂

𝜂

0 𝑥

𝑖𝑘𝑡 𝑑𝑘)

𝜏 𝐴𝐶
𝜏− ,

𝜏 = 𝑄𝐶
𝑉 𝐼
where 𝐴𝐶
announcement, and users’ expected lifetime utility is

𝜏− denotes investors’ cash flow asset holdings before the new policy

(5)

𝜏 = 𝑄𝑇
𝑉 𝑈

𝜏 𝐴𝑇

𝜏− + 𝑅𝜏 , where 𝑅𝜏

≡ E
𝜏

[

∞

∫
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

]
.

𝑋1−𝛾

𝜏+𝑠 𝑑𝑠

(6)

3.3. Notation

Throughout the analysis, we will focus on Markov equilibria. Suppose
that the most recent governance decision occurred at time 𝜏. Then, the
only relevant state variable for outcomes at time 𝑡 is the time 𝑠 = 𝑡 − 𝜏
that has elapsed since the most recent decision.

As is typical in models of policy-making with limited commitment,
both current policies and anticipated future policies influence agents’
behavior in equilibrium. It is therefore necessary to distinguish be-
tween actual policies chosen at 𝜏 and the policies that were anticipated
before the governance decision at 𝜏, since, at least in principle, the
constituency that governs the platform can deviate from the anticipated
policy. We index actual policies and outcomes simply by the subscript
𝑠: for example, 𝑓𝑠 denotes the chosen level of fees at time 𝜏 + 𝑠, 𝑋𝑠
denotes actual aggregate transaction quantities at that time, and so on.
We denote anticipated policies and outcomes with a hat as functions of
𝑠: so ̂𝑓𝑠 denotes the level of fees at time 𝜏 +𝑠 that was anticipated before
̂𝑋𝑠 denotes anticipated transaction quantities, etc. Of
the decision at 𝜏,
course, in equilibrium, actual outcomes must coincide with anticipated
outcomes.

We focus on equilibria in which jumps in variables may occur at the
time of a governance decision, but variables evolve smoothly between
governance decisions. The drift of a variable is denoted with a dot, so,
for example, 𝑑𝑋𝑠 = ̇𝑋𝑠𝑑𝑠 for 𝑠 > 0.

3.4. The first-best

Before examining specific platform designs, we derive the properties
of optimal allocations in this environment. This analysis will facilitate
a comparison of the inefficiencies that arise under each platform design
studied in subsequent sections.

13 Hence, we ignore self-fulfilling equilibria in which agents do not vote for
their most-preferred policy (as is typical in the corporate governance literature,
see Levit et al., 2024). For instance, if all agents vote for a random policy, then
no policy will ever attain a majority, so it is in fact individually rational for
each agent to vote randomly.

14 Given an expected path of policies, there may be multiple equilibrium
paths of transaction quantities {𝑋𝑡} consistent with those policies. Follow-
ing convention in the literature, we select the ‘‘best-case’’ equilibrium that
generates the greatest total surplus.

5 

where ̂𝑉 𝑃
𝑠
only if
𝑋𝑠 = 𝑋𝐹 𝐵 ≡ 𝑐− 1

𝛾 ∀ 𝑠.

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

There is transferable utility in this environment, so an allocation is
efficient if and only if it maximizes utilitarian social welfare (i.e., the
sum of agents’ payoffs). Note that fees will be irrelevant for total
welfare, since they are just a transfer from users to investors.

An allocation is therefore summarized simply by a sequence of
aggregate transaction quantities 𝑋𝑡.15 Total surplus at time 𝑡 is just
𝑋1−𝛾
∕(1−𝛾)−𝑐𝑋𝑡. To maintain symmetry with our model of governance,
𝑡
we assume a social planner with limited commitment: at the time of a
governance decision, the planner chooses an allocation {𝑋𝑠}𝑠≥0 that is
maintained until the next governance decision at time 𝜏 (which arrives
at rate 𝜆).

Proposition 2. A first-best allocation solves

̂𝑉 𝑃
0 = max
𝑋𝑠

E
0

[

𝜏

∫
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

( 𝑋1−𝛾
𝑠
1 − 𝛾

)

− 𝑐𝑋𝑠

𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑉 𝑃
0

]

,

(7)

is the planner’s value function. An allocation is first-best if and

solving for users’ transaction demand. The price of transaction assets
is constant, so (2) implies that users’ transaction demand is downward-
sloping in the level of fees:

𝑋𝑠 =

(𝑓𝑠 + 𝑟)− 1
𝛾 .

(10)

Eqs. (4) and (5) imply that investors’ expected lifetime utility is
equal to the present value of profits E
0 𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑑𝛱𝑡]. In a governance
decision, investors unanimously vote in favor of the policy {𝑓𝑠}𝑠≥0 that
maximizes the present value of profits. Investors’ governance problem
can then be written as

0[∫ ∞

̂𝑉 𝐼
0 = max
𝑓𝑠,𝑋𝑠

E
0

[

𝜏

∫

0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠(𝑓𝑠 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑠𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑉 𝐼
0

]

s.t. (10), 𝑓𝑠

≥ 0,

(11)

where 𝜏 denotes the (random) time interval from 𝑠 = 0 until the next
governance decision and ̂𝑉 𝐼
𝑠 denotes investors’ value function at time
𝑠 since the most recent governance decision.

A Markov equilibrium consists of a value function ̂𝑉 𝐼
𝑠

for investors

and outcomes { ̂𝑓𝑠, ̂𝑋𝑠} that solve (11).

4.3. Welfare and efficiency under the traditional scheme

(8)

The first-best level of transactions, 𝑋𝐹 𝐵, is set so that the marginal
utility of an additional transaction, 𝑋−𝛾
, is equal to the marginal cost
𝑠
𝑐 of processing that transaction. Thus, the optimal level of aggre-
gate transactions is constant over time and decreasing in transaction
processing costs 𝑐.

4. Traditional platform

In this section, we study the case of a traditional platform as a simple
benchmark. We demonstrate that as in most models with a monopolistic
firm, a traditional platform charges inefficiently high fees, distorting
transaction volumes downwards.

4.1. Setup

In the case of a traditional platform, there are two distinct as-
sets: shares that are issued by the platform and transaction assets that
originate outside the platform (such as cash, stablecoins, or another
cryptocurrency). Users hold transaction assets for their transaction ser-
vices but cannot vote in governance decisions. We assume transaction
assets are supplied elastically at a price 𝑄𝑇
𝑡 = 1.16 Shares serve as the
economy’s cash flow asset and grant investors the right to vote on the
platform’s policies. The supply of shares is normalized to 𝐴𝐶
𝑡 = 1 – we
assume, without loss of generality, that the platform does not issue new
shares or buy them back from investors.17

Since the platform does not issue tokens in this environment, it
receives no seigniorage revenues. Therefore, it derives profits only from
processing transactions:

𝑑𝛱𝑡 = (𝑓𝑡 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑡𝑑𝑡.

4.2. Equilibrium

(9)

We look for a Markov equilibrium in one state variable: the time
𝑠 elapsed since the most recent governance decision. We begin by

15 Users have identical concave utility functions. Without loss of generality,
then, we can restrict attention to allocations in which each user transacts the
same amount, 𝑥𝑖𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡 for all 𝑖.

16 What matters is not that the price of transaction assets is constant, but
rather that (1) their price is exogenous to the platform’s policies, and (2) their
rate of return is below the discount rate 𝑟 (that is, there is a liquidity premium
on transaction assets, as with cash, Treasury bills, or deposits).

17 There are no financial frictions, so the Modigliani–Miller theorem applies
in the setting of a traditional platform. The platform’s share issuance policy is
irrelevant.

Under the traditional governance scheme, the platform is just a mo-
nopolistic firm that maximizes the present value of its profits. Investors
do not internalize how changes in the platform’s policies affect user
surplus. As a result, equilibrium policies are inefficient: they maximize
investor surplus at the expense of total surplus.

Proposition 3. Under the traditional scheme, the equilibrium sequence
of policies {𝑓𝑡} maximizes expected investor surplus (but not total surplus)
over all feasible sequences of policies. That is, regardless of the degree of
commitment 𝜆, equilibrium policies solve

∞

max
𝑓𝑡,𝑋𝑡

∫

0

𝑒−𝑟𝑡(𝑓𝑡 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑡𝑑𝑡 s.t. 𝑋𝑡 =

(𝑓𝑡 + 𝑟)− 1
𝛾 .

Under the equilibrium policy, fees are

𝑓𝑡 =

1
1 − 𝛾

𝑐 +

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

𝑟

and transaction quantities are inefficiently low:

𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑 ≡

)− 1
𝛾

(

𝑐 + 𝑟
1 − 𝛾

< 𝑋𝐹 𝐵.

(12)

(13)

(14)

Note, moreover, that a traditional platform’s equilibrium policy
is time-consistent, so limited commitment to future policies (param-
eterized by the frequency 𝜆 of governance decisions) is irrelevant.
Intuitively, this is the case because time-𝑡 transaction demand depends
only on time-𝑡 policies. When we study a token-issuing platform, this
will no longer be true: future token issuance policies will affect the
current return on tokens and therefore current transaction demand.

Equilibrium transaction quantities 𝑋𝑡 are inefficiently low because
users’ marginal cost of transacting, fees 𝑓𝑡 plus the opportunity cost 𝑟
of holding transaction assets, is greater than the social marginal cost 𝑐
of processing transactions. By (13),

𝑓𝑡 + 𝑟 =

𝑐 + 𝑟
1 − 𝛾

> 𝑐.

This equation for the effective transaction cost faced by users reveals
two distortions, each corresponding to a distinct source of user surplus
that investors neglect. First, the discount rate 𝑟 appears in the numer-
ator on the right-hand side. This distortion arises because investors do
not take into account the aggregate service flows

𝑆𝐹𝑡

≡ 𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

− 𝑓𝑡𝑋𝑡 = 𝑟𝑋𝑡,

(15)

that users earn on their transaction asset holdings, defined as users’
marginal utility per transaction times the aggregate quantity of trans-
actions.18

18 That is, 𝑆𝐹𝑡 is defined as 𝑋𝑡 × 𝜕
𝜕𝑋𝑡
𝑟𝑋𝑡 in equilibrium by (10).

(

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡
1−𝛾

− 𝑓𝑡𝑋𝑡). Service flows are equal to

6 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Fig. 2. An illustration of the sources of neglected surplus in the case of a traditional platform. Aggregate transaction quantities 𝑋 are on the horizontal axis. The downwards-sloping
curve represents users’ marginal utility of transacting (as a function of 𝑋). The horizontal line corresponds to the marginal cost 𝑐 of processing a transaction. The profit-maximizing
transaction quantity is 𝑋𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑 , which is below the first-best 𝑋𝐹 𝐵 .

Second, an additional factor 1 − 𝛾 appears in the denominator on
the right-hand side. This is because investors do not internalize the
infra-marginal rents
≡ ( 𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡
1 − 𝛾

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

− 𝑆𝐹𝑡 =

− 𝑓𝑡𝑋𝑡

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

(16)

𝐼𝑅𝑡

)

that users receive from infra-marginal transactions: since users’ utility
is concave in transactions, user surplus is greater than their marginal
valuation of transaction assets’ services.19

When we analyze a platform that issues tokens for transactions, we
will demonstrate that, by contrast, investors take users’ service flows
into account. Hence, the first distortion will vanish, while the second
will remain. Fig. 2 illustrates how these distortions cause investors to
set fees too high and destroy surplus.

There are three necessary ingredients for the inefficiency in this
model. First, the platform has market power, so shareholder value
maximization is not equivalent to maximization of social surplus. Put
differently, the platform’s market power creates a conflict of interest
between the two constituencies. Second, the platform’s owners can
extract rents from users only by charging distortionary fees that cause
deadweight losses: it is not possible for the platform to use a more
complex pricing scheme (like a two-part tariff) that fully extracts user
surplus. However, the Coase Theorem implies that absent restrictions
on contracting, investors and users would nevertheless contract around
these inefficiencies and arrive at an efficient outcome. The third nec-
essary ingredient for inefficiency, therefore, is limited contracting : users
cannot sign a contract in which they commit to compensate investors
for choosing a more socially beneficial policy. These limits to contract-
ing could be micro-founded, for instance, by assuming that users are
unable to commit to a sequence of payments in response to the policies
chosen by investors.

How can agents overcome the problem of limited contracting? In
the next section, we outline conditions under which token issuance
can partially substitute for the missing contracts between users and
investors.

5. Service tokens

In this section we consider a platform that issues tokens that provide
transaction services only. The platform continues to be governed by

19 Note that the discounted infra-marginal rents that enter users’ lifetime
utility in (6) are just 𝑅𝑡 = E

0 𝑒−𝑟𝑠𝐼𝑅𝑡+𝑠𝑑𝑠].

𝑡[∫ ∞

shareholders (investors) who hold all cash flow claims and voting
rights. In contrast to the traditional setting, investors’ ability to commit
to future policies is key. We show that service tokens can substitute for
missing contracts between users and investors (and therefore increase
welfare) only if investors’ commitment power is strong enough. When
commitment power is weak, they are tempted to inflate away the
value of tokens, depressing transaction quantities and resulting in a less
efficient equilibrium.

5.1. Setup

Consider an environment in which the two assets are shares held
by investors, which serve as the cash flow asset, and tokens that the
platform issues to users, which serve as the transaction asset. Since
the transaction asset is issued by the platform rather than supplied
elastically, in this case its price 𝑄𝑇
𝑡 evolves endogenously. We maintain
the assumptions that (1) all voting rights are allocated to shareholders,
and (2) the platform neither issues nor buys back shares, so the supply
of shares is normalized to 𝐴𝐶
𝑡 = 1. The platform in this setting can be
thought of as the issuer of a ‘‘utility token’’ or as a tech platform that
issues its own currency.20

Unlike a traditional platform, a token-issuing platform can earn
seigniorage revenues by minting new tokens. We denote the growth
rate of the token stock by

𝑑𝜇𝑡

≡

𝑑𝐴𝑇
𝑡
𝐴𝑇
𝑡

≥ 0.

To ensure that an optimal policy exists, we assume that the rate of token
≤ 𝛥,

issuance is bounded above by some large positive constant,

≤ 𝛥
1+𝛥

.21 The token issuance rate 𝑑𝜇𝑡 is a policy
which implies 𝑑𝜇𝑡
determined in governance decisions. Seigniorage revenues are equal to
the current token price times the quantity of tokens issued at time 𝑡,
𝑑𝑆𝑡 = 𝑄𝑇

𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡𝑑𝜇𝑡. The platform’s profits at time 𝑡 are then

𝑡 𝑑𝐴𝑇

𝐴𝑇
𝑡 −𝐴𝑇
𝑡−
𝐴𝑇
𝑡−

𝑑𝛱𝑡 = (𝑓𝑡 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑡𝑑𝑡 + 𝑋𝑡𝑑𝜇𝑡.

20 In our benchmark model, tokens have no intrinsic value (agents enjoy
transaction services only if the price of tokens is positive). Online Appendix
I outlines an extension in which tokens have intrinsic value: they can be
redeemed for a service at a fixed exchange rate, as is common for utility
tokens.

21 All of our substantive results continue to hold in the limit of unrestricted

token issuance, 𝛥 → ∞.

7 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

5.2. Equilibrium

We again consider a Markov equilibrium in which all outcomes
depend only on the time 𝑠 since the most recent governance decision.
We look for an equilibrium in which variables may jump at the time
of a governance decision (𝑠 = 0) but evolve smoothly thereafter. In
particular, the platform may issue a discrete quantity of tokens when
a new policy is implemented, 𝑑𝜇0 > 0, but afterwards, the supply of
tokens evolves smoothly, 𝑑𝜇𝑠 = ̇𝜇𝑠𝑑𝑠 for 𝑠 > 0.

When the platform issues service tokens, users’ transaction demand
is no longer statically pinned down by fees as in (10). Transaction
demand also depends on expected changes in token prices: all else
equal, higher expected returns on tokens will increase demand. The
following lemma characterizes the returns on tokens in this setting.

Lemma 1. When the platform issues service tokens, the expected return
on tokens satisfies
[ 𝑑𝑄𝑇
̇𝑋𝑠
𝑄𝑇
𝑋𝑠

(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0)

− ̇𝜇𝑠 + 𝜆

̂𝑋0
𝑋𝑠

1
𝑑𝑠

− 1

E
𝑠

(

)

=

]

.

The first two terms represent returns in the absence of a new policy,
while the third term represents returns conditional on a new policy
̂𝑑𝜇0 denotes anticipated token issuance at the time of the
(Recall that
next governance decision, and ̂𝑋0 is anticipated transaction demand at
that time.) Simply put, this lemma implies that the expected return on
tokens is equal to the expected growth rate of transaction quantities
minus the expected growth rate of the token stock. If the token stock
grows without a commensurate increase in transaction demand, there
will be inflation (a decrease in the price of tokens and a low return).

Lemma 1 allows us to characterize transaction demand in this

setting — (2) implies

(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠 = 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − (𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠)𝑋𝑠 + ̇𝑋𝑠
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
current policy

+ 𝜆(

) ̂𝑋0
1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
exp. future policy

.

(17)

Users’ transaction demand is equal to the present value of service
flows net of the costs of dilution from additional token issuance —
new seigniorage reduces the price of tokens, representing an implicit
transfer from token holders to investors. This transaction demand con-
dition illustrates why lack of commitment matters. Transaction demand
depends not only on current policy, but also on anticipated policy after
the next governance decision, which arrives at rate 𝜆. If users expect
that investors will be tempted to issue a large quantity of tokens in the
next governance decision ( ̂𝑑𝜇0 > 0), then they expect a reduction in the
value of their tokens, lowering transaction demand.

As before, (4) and (5) imply that investors choose fees 𝑓𝑠 and a
token issuance policy (𝑑𝜇0, { ̇𝜇𝑠}𝑠>0) to maximize the present value of
profits:

̂𝑉 𝐼
0 = max

𝑓𝑠,𝑑𝜇0, ̇𝜇𝑠,𝑋𝑠

E
0

[

𝑋0𝑑𝜇0 + ∫

𝜏

0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠(𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑠𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑉 𝐼
0

]

s.t. (17), 𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠

≥ 0, 𝑑𝜇0 ∈ [0,

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

],

(18)

where 𝜏 denotes the time of the next governance decision. We search
for a Markov equilibrium consisting of a value function ̂𝑉 𝐼
𝑠 for investors
and outcomes { ̂𝑓𝑠, ̂𝑑𝜇0, ̂̇𝜇𝑠, ̂𝑋𝑠} that solve (18).

We begin our analysis of equilibrium with some simplifying obser-
vations. Note that at the time when the governance decision takes place
(𝑠 = 0), investors can issue tokens without affecting transaction demand
for 𝑠 ≥ 0. Transactions instead depend on future token issuance ( ̇𝜇𝑠
for 𝑠 > 0 and ̂𝑑𝜇0 in the next governance decision), since that is what
determines expected returns on tokens by Lemma 1. Therefore, at the
time of a governance decision, investors issue a large quantity of new
tokens and inflate away the value of existing tokens.

Lemma 2. When the platform issues service tokens, investors issue the
maximum feasible quantity of tokens at the time of a governance decision
(𝑑𝜇0 = 𝛥
1+𝛥

).

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

In our benchmark model, this is the source of time-inconsistency –
ex ante, investors would like to commit not to inflate away the value of
tokens, but ex post (at the time of a governance decision), it is optimal
to do so. Using this result, we henceforth denote the expected rate of
dilution from such jumps in token issuance by

̂𝜆 ≡ 𝜆

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

.

When a governance decision takes place, investors decide to issue a
large quantity of tokens that inflates away a fraction 𝛥
of the value of
1+𝛥
existing tokens. The parameter ̂𝜆 will be a crucial measure of investors’
ability to commit to seigniorage policies.22

Lemma 2 can be used to write the platform’s expected profits in
a simple form. The platform’s expected profits are equal to users’
discounted service flows 𝑆𝐹𝑠 (given in (15)), plus discounted future
profits from transaction processing, (𝑓𝑠 −𝑐)𝑋𝑠, plus a term that depends
on anticipated future policies.

Proposition 4. When the platform issues service tokens, the expected
value of platform profits on [0, 𝜏) is
]

[

𝜏

E

0

∫

0

= E
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠𝑑𝛱𝑠
[

𝜏

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

∫
0

(

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑠 − 𝑓𝑠𝑋𝑠
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
service flow 𝑆𝐹𝑠

+ (𝑓𝑠 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑠
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
profits

)

𝑑𝑠 +

]
1
(𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑋0 − 𝑋0)
1 + 𝛥
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
future policy

.

(19)

The intuition behind this result is straightforward. The platform
makes profits in two ways: by charging transaction fees and by issuing
new tokens. Users value tokens according to the present value of their
service flows. Hence, when the platform issues new tokens at 𝑠 =
0, it receives revenues equal to the present value of service flows.
Thereafter, it earns the transaction processing fees that make up the
remainder of its profits.

Unlike in the case of a traditional platform, then, investors take
users’ service flows into account when choosing policies. By passing
policies that raise users’ anticipated service flows, they increase token
prices and therefore seigniorage revenues. Hence, investors’ policy pref-
erences will be more aligned with users’ when the platform can issue
tokens. Nevertheless, welfare will still fall short of the first-best: despite
the fact that investors take users’ service flows into account, they still
fail to internalize how their policies affect users’ infra-marginal rents.
Investors’ ability to commit will be key in determining equilibrium
outcomes. We will distinguish between two regimes in what follows:
the strong commitment regime ( ̂𝜆 small enough) and the weak commitment
regime ( ̂𝜆 large enough). Equilibrium outcomes will differ sharply across
these two regimes. We analyze each in turn.

5.3. The strong commitment regime

We begin by analyzing the strong commitment regime. We show
that when investors’ commitment power is strong enough, their gover-
nance problem is time-consistent – that is, they choose the same policies
that they would have chosen if they could commit to a full sequence
of policies at 𝑡 = 0. In this regime, equilibrium policies maximize the
present value of service flows plus platform profits.

There exists 𝜆∗ (defined in (24)) such that if ̂𝜆 ≤ 𝜆∗,
Proposition 5.
investors’ governance problem (18) is time-consistent. Equilibrium policies
solve

(

∞

𝑒−𝑟𝑡

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

max
𝑓𝑡, ̇𝜇𝑡,𝑋𝑡

∫
0

)

− 𝑐𝑋𝑡

𝑑𝑡 s.t. 𝑓𝑡, ̇𝜇𝑡

≥ 0,

22 Note that even in the limit of unrestricted seigniorage, 𝛥 → ∞, expected

dilution remains finite, lim𝛥→∞

̂𝜆 = 𝜆..

8 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Fig. 3. Illustration of the sources of surplus in the case of a platform that issues service tokens. Unlike in the case of a traditional platform (Fig. 2), investors internalize users’
service flows. Profits are maximized by setting lower fees than in the traditional case, raising transaction quantities to 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 (which remains below the first-best 𝑋𝐹 𝐵 ).

𝑟𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑡

− (𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇𝑡)𝑋𝑡 + ̇𝑋𝑡.

Under the equilibrium policy, transaction quantities satisfy

𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 =

(

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

)− 1
𝛾

.

(20)

(21)

The quantity of transactions 𝑋𝑡 and welfare are both higher than in the

case of a traditional platform (but below their first-best levels).

In the Appendix, we take a Lagrangian approach to solve for equi-
librium policies and transaction quantities, but we summarize the main
results here. Transfers from users to investors (fees plus seigniorage
revenues) are set statically to maximize service flows plus transaction
processing profits,
− 𝑐𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

.

𝑡

− 𝑓𝑡𝑋𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
service flows 𝑆𝐹𝑡

+ (𝑓𝑡 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
profits

The equilibrium level of transactions is given in (21). Equilibrium
transaction quantities are greater than in the case of a traditional
platform (see (14)) but nevertheless remain below the first-best level
(8).

When commitment to future policies is strong enough, then, token
issuance enhances efficiency. The key idea is that since investors care
about maintaining a high token price to maximize their seigniorage
revenues at 𝑠 = 0, they are reluctant to set fees too high. High fees imply
low service flows for users, reducing the token price and the platform’s
seigniorage revenues. Hence, investors commit to lower fees than in the
traditional setting. However, investors still fail to internalize how the
platform’s policies affect infra-marginal rents, so transaction quantities
remain distorted downwards (hence the additional factor of 1 − 𝛾 in the
denominator of (21) relative to the first-best level (8)). Fig. 3 illustrates
this point.

̂𝜆)
Why is the degree of commitment (i.e., the precise value of
irrelevant in this setting? The answer lies in how investors choose
to raise revenues from users. Conceptually, there are two ways the
platform can raise revenues: by charging transaction fees or by issuing
additional tokens. Recall that the expected rate of dilution in future
governance decisions is ̂𝜆. Then, between governance decisions, users
pay investors transaction fees 𝑓𝑡𝑋𝑡𝑑𝑡 as well as seigniorage revenues
̇𝜇𝑡𝑋𝑡𝑑𝑡. The transaction demand condition (17) then implies that if
𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇𝑡 is constant, transaction demand satisfies
)− 1
𝛾

)− 1
𝛾

(

(

𝑋𝑡 =

𝑟 + 𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇𝑡 + ̂𝜆

=

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

,

they will be more tempted to raise revenues by issuing tokens. Then,
they choose to charge lower fees and issue fewer tokens in the present
to boost transaction demand and keep total transfers from users (𝑓𝑡 +
̇𝜇𝑡 + ̂𝜆)𝑋𝑡 constant. The platform’s fee policy and its seigniorage policy
are therefore substitutes: what matters for the platform’s profits and
transaction demand is the sum 𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇𝑡 + ̂𝜆, not how revenues are split
between fees, current seigniorage, and anticipated future seigniorage.

Proposition 6. Under the optimal policy with commitment, the level of
fees 𝑓𝑡 and the growth rate of the token stock ̇𝜇𝑡 are indeterminate. Their
sum, 𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇𝑡, is uniquely determined in equilibrium:

𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇𝑡 =

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

− (𝑟 + ̂𝜆).

5.4. The weak commitment regime

(22)

We now turn to the case in which investors’ commitment power is
weak. In this regime, investors’ temptation to inflate away the value
of tokens is strong enough that it impairs transaction demand. In the
limit of no commitment, expected inflation is so high that transaction
quantities go to zero. The following proposition summarizes these
results.

Proposition 7. When ̂𝜆 > 𝜆∗ (defined in Proposition 5), investors’ policy
problem is no longer time-consistent. Equilibrium transaction quantities are

(𝑟 + ̂𝜆)− 1

𝛾 < 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛.

𝑋𝑡 =
In the no-commitment limit ( ̂𝜆 → ∞), transaction quantities 𝑋𝑡 → 0.

(23)

When investors lack commitment power, their temptation to issue
tokens creates inflation and undermines transaction demand. Specifi-
cally, Lemma 2 implies that in governance decisions, investors choose
to issue a large quantity of new tokens and inflate away the value of
existing tokens. Recall that effective transfers paid by users to investors
are fees 𝑓𝑡 plus current seigniorage ̇𝜇𝑡 plus ̂𝜆, which determines antici-
pated future seigniorage. Previously, we argued that investors’ desired
effective fee satisfies 𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇 + ̂𝜆 = 𝑐∕(1 − 𝛾) − 𝑟, so that the marginal
cost faced by users (transfers to investors plus the opportunity cost 𝑟
of holding tokens) is a markup over the marginal cost of transaction
processing, 𝑐∕(1 − 𝛾). When anticipated future seigniorage is greater
(higher ̂𝜆), investors either cut fees 𝑓𝑡 or current seigniorage ̇𝜇𝑡.

Now, however, suppose that

̂𝜆 > 𝜆∗ ≡ 𝑐

1 − 𝛾

− 𝑟.

(24)

where the second equality follows from (21). When ̂𝜆 is higher
(i.e., commitment power is weaker), investors know that in the future,

Then, even if investors cut fees and current seigniorage to zero (𝑓𝑡 =
̇𝜇𝑡 = 0), users still face such a high cost ̂𝜆 from expected future inflation

9 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

that the total transfer to investors is greater than its optimal level.
In this case, the entire transfer from users to investors consists of
seigniorage during governance decisions, and the cost faced by users is
expected seigniorage ̂𝜆 plus the opportunity cost 𝑟 of holding tokens.
Users’ transaction demand thus falls below investors’ desired level
𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛, as shown by (23).

These results demonstrate that when the commitment problem is
severe enough, transaction quantities and welfare may even fall below
the levels attained by a traditional platform. Put differently, the intro-
duction of service tokens is socially beneficial only if a platform has
sufficient mechanisms to commit to future policies — otherwise, the
introduction of tokens reduces welfare.

Proposition 7 is reminiscent of results in financing problems without
commitment (Admati et al., 2018; DeMarzo and He, 2021). Typically,
an issuer that cannot commit to future issuance effectively competes
with its future self: it does not internalize the price impact of current
issuance decisions and therefore over-issues relative to the commitment
outcome. Goldstein et al. (forthcoming) demonstrate that if a monop-
olistic platform can commit to a token’s redemption value but not an
issuance policy, then token issuance mitigates the platform’s tendency
to under-supply its services.

Our result is similar in spirit to those in the previous literature, but
it is distinct. While it is true that the platform’s investors are tempted
to extract rents from users by over-issuing new tokens, outcomes with
weak commitment would exhibit similar inefficiencies even if new
seigniorage were prohibited after 𝑡 = 0. Investors have another tool
– fees – that they can use to extract rents in the absence of new token
issuance. Instead of issuing new tokens at the time of a governance
decision, investors would choose to charge very high transaction fees
immediately following the implementation of a new policy. Anticipat-
ing this rent extraction, users would not place a high value on tokens
and would be reluctant to transact on the platform.

A severe enough lack of commitment power is detrimental to the
platform’s profits, so investors may therefore seek mechanisms that
permit them to commit. Of course, in reality, a platform’s founders and
investors can use smart contracts to commit to future token issuance,
or they could use token retention schemes to incentivize them to pass
policies that benefit users. To the extent that such mechanisms are
imperfect, though, the next section argues that bundling transaction
services with cash flow claims can provide an effective substitute for
missing commitment mechanisms.

6. Hybrid tokens

We now consider a platform that issues a single hybrid token that
bundles transaction services with cash flow claims. Users hold the
token for transaction services, whereas investors ‘‘stake’’ the token
for cash flows. In this setting, we assume tokens must be staked in
order to participate in governance — as a result, only investors vote
in governance decisions. This assumption is close to the reality for
several DeFi platforms: for example, many proof-of-stake cryptocur-
rency blockchains allow only validators who stake their tokens to vote
on policy changes. Our main result is that by issuing a hybrid token,
a platform governed by investors can achieve the full-commitment
outcome of Section 5.3 even if investors lack commitment power.

6.1. Setup

In this economy, there is a single asset called a token. Tokens serve
as both the economy’s transaction asset and as its cash flow asset: users
can hold tokens for their transaction services, whereas investors can
hold tokens to receive dividends. Given that there is only one asset, we
let 𝑄𝑡 denote the price of tokens (dispensing with our previous notation
𝑄𝐶
𝑡 , 𝑄𝑇
𝑡 ). Furthermore, we denote the total supply of tokens at 𝑡 by
𝐴𝑡 = 𝐴𝐶
𝑡 ) denotes the quantity of tokens
held by investors (users) at 𝑡. Henceforth, let 𝑀𝑡 = 𝑄𝑡𝐴𝑡 denote the

𝑡 , where 𝐴𝐶
𝑡

(resp. 𝐴𝑇

𝑡 + 𝐴𝑇

total market capitalization of tokens, and let 𝜁𝑡 = 𝐴𝐶
the fraction of tokens that are held by investors (‘‘staked’’).

𝑡 ∕(𝐴𝐶

𝑡 + 𝐴𝑇

𝑡 ) denote

As before, users’ transaction services are equal to their real balances
of token holdings, 𝑥𝑖𝑡 = 𝑄𝑡𝑎𝑇
𝑖𝑡 , where 𝑎𝑇
𝑖𝑡 is the quantity of tokens held
by user 𝑖. Aggregate transaction demand is equal to the real value of
tokens held by users, so

𝑋𝑡 = 𝑄𝑡𝐴𝑇

𝑡 = (1 − 𝜁𝑡)𝑀𝑡.

The platform can earn revenues both by charging fees and by issuing

tokens. Again, 𝑑𝜇𝑡 will denote the rate of seigniorage,

𝑑𝜇𝑡 =

𝑑𝐴𝑡
𝐴𝑡

∈ [0,

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

],

so the platform’s seigniorage revenues are 𝑑𝑆𝑡 = 𝑀𝑡𝑑𝜇𝑡, and total
profits are

𝑑𝛱𝑡 = (𝑓𝑡 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑡𝑑𝑡 + 𝑀𝑡𝑑𝜇𝑡.

Dividends are distributed pro rata to the holders of staked tokens, so
each staked token pays a dividend 𝑑𝐷𝑡 = 𝑑𝛱𝑡∕𝜁𝑡𝐴𝑡. When a greater
fraction 𝜁𝑡 of tokens are staked, the per-token dividend is lower, all
else equal. Investors who stake tokens compete over a fixed pool of
dividends, as is common in practice.23 The fraction of staked tokens is
a key equilibrium variable: it adjusts until users and investors place an
equal valuation on tokens.

For now, we assume that staking is required to vote, so only
investors participate in governance decisions. In Section 7, though, we
extend the model to the case in which users may vote on policies as
well.

6.2. Equilibrium

We look for a Markov equilibrium in the time 𝑠 since the most recent
policy change in which variables can jump at the time of a governance
decision and evolve smoothly thereafter, as in previous sections. The
expected return on tokens is equal to the expected growth rate in the
market capitalization of tokens net of the issuance rate, analogously to
the return on tokens in Lemma 1.

Lemma 3. When the platform issues hybrid tokens, their expected return
satisfies

1
𝑑𝑠

E

𝑠

]

[ 𝑑𝑄
𝑄

=

̇𝑀𝑠
𝑀𝑠

− ̇𝜇𝑠 + 𝜆

( ̂𝑀0
𝑀𝑠

)

(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0) − 1

for 𝑠 > 0.

(25)

Recall that in (25),

stock at the time of the next governance decision, whereas
anticipated market capitalization of tokens at that time.

̂𝑑𝜇0 denotes the anticipated jump in the token
̂𝑀0 is the

When the platform issues a hybrid token, then both constituencies
must be willing to hold tokens at the same price. That is, both users
and investors are marginal in the market for tokens. This is the key
difference between a hybrid token platform and a platform that issues
tokens that offer only transaction services. When investors pass policies,
they have an additional incentive to consider how those policies affect
users: a policy that is detrimental to users will decrease users’ token
valuation, reducing the price of the tokens held by investors. We
therefore begin by studying how each constituency values tokens.

Users price tokens according to their service value (i.e., the present
value of tokens’ service flows). The transaction demand condition (2)
can be combined with (25) for 𝑠 > 0 to obtain

(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑀𝑠 =

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑓𝑠𝑋𝑠
1 − 𝜁𝑠

+ ̇𝑀𝑠 − ̇𝜇𝑠𝑀𝑠 + 𝜆(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0) ̂𝑀0.

(26)

23 For example, in proof-of-stake blockchains, the rate at which new blocks
are produced (and therefore the rate at which block rewards are issued)
typically does not scale linearly with the quantity of staked tokens. When
an additional token is staked, then the chance that any other staked token
is selected to propose a new block is reduced. Several papers in the literature,
such as John et al. (2021) and Jermann (2023), make a similar assumption.

10 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

The way to understand this equation is that users earn aggregate service
flows 𝑋1−𝛾
− 𝑓𝑠𝑋𝑠 while holding a stock of tokens worth (1 − 𝜁𝑠)𝑀𝑠
(hence the first term). The remaining terms represent the expected
return on tokens.

𝑠

By contrast, investors value tokens for their dividends when staked.
Their optimality condition (4) requires that the token price be equal to
tokens’ cash flow value (i.e., the present value of dividends), which can
be written for 𝑠 > 0 as

(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑀𝑠 =

(𝑓𝑠 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠𝑀𝑠
𝜁𝑠

+ ̇𝑀𝑠 − ̇𝜇𝑠𝑀𝑠 + 𝜆(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0) ̂𝑀0.

(27)

The pricing conditions (26)–(27) then imply a relationship between
tokens’ service flows and their dividend yields that must hold so that
tokens’ service value is equal to their cash flow value:

(𝑓𝑠 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠𝑀𝑠
𝜁𝑠
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
dividend yield

=

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑓𝑠𝑋𝑠
1 − 𝜁𝑠
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
service flow

.

(28)

How are users’ and investors’ token valuations kept in line with one
another? The fraction of staked tokens 𝜁𝑠 adjusts in equilibrium. Off-
equilibrium, if the dividend yield were higher than the service flow,
then tokens would be more attractive for their cash flows than for their
transaction services. Investors would therefore purchase and stake ad-
ditional tokens, increasing 𝜁𝑠 and driving down the per-token dividend
𝑑𝐷𝑠 = 𝑑𝛱𝑠∕𝜁𝑠𝐴𝑠.

Under the hybrid token scheme, then, token prices reflect both their
usefulness in transactions and staking dividends. In fact, the market
capitalization of tokens is equal to the present value of transaction
processing profits plus service flows.

Lemma 4.
capitalization of tokens satisfies

Under the hybrid token system, for 𝑠 > 0 the market

𝑀𝑠 = E
𝑠

[

𝜏

∫

𝑠

𝑒−𝑟(𝑢−𝑠)

(

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑢 − 𝑐𝑋𝑢

)

]
𝑑𝑢 + 𝑒−𝑟(𝜏−𝑠) ̂𝑀0(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0)

,

(29)

where 𝜏 is the time of the next governance decision.

This equation conveys a key intuition: when investors pass a policy,
they succeed in increasing the cash flows from their staked tokens only
if that policy increases current service flows plus profits. This result
may seem counter-intuitive: why is it that they cannot always increase
cash flows by raising fees, as in the case of a platform that issues a
service token? Indeed, raising fees may increase the platform’s profits
while decreasing the per-token dividend yield. If a policy increases the
platform’s profits at the expense of a larger decrease in tokens’ service
flows, then users will sell tokens to investors, causing investors to stake
more tokens (increasing 𝜁𝑠) and decreasing the dividend yield below its
initial level.

Of course, despite the fact that fees and the seigniorage rate do not
appear in the valuation Eq. (29), they are not irrelevant in equilibrium.
Fees and the seigniorage rate matter because they determine transac-
tion demand through (26). All else equal, higher fees or seigniorage
increase users’ costs of transacting on the platform. Nevertheless, the
pricing Eq. (29) does imply an important monetary neutrality result.

Lemma 5 (Monetary Neutrality). For a given path {𝑋𝑠}, the token market
capitalization {𝑀𝑠} is independent of { ̇𝜇𝑠} for 𝑠 > 0, and

𝑀0(1 − 𝑑𝜇0) = 𝑀0+ ,

(30)

where 𝑀0+ denotes the market capitalization of tokens immediately after
the governance decision at 𝑠 = 0.

Holding transaction quantities fixed, the path of seigniorage is
irrelevant for the total market capitalization of tokens. If investors
immediately choose to issue a large quantity of tokens 𝑑𝜇0 when
they make a governance decision, (30) implies that this issuance is
immediately offset by a drop in the token price, so that the market

11 

capitalization of tokens before the issuance, 𝑀0(1 − 𝑑𝜇0), is equal to
the market capitalization after, 𝑀0+ . That is, when the platform issues
a hybrid token, seigniorage imposes a capital loss on investors. This is the
main difference from the setting with service tokens: in that setting, the
value of investors’ assets (shares) would not drop upon the issuance of
new tokens.

In governance decisions, only investors are permitted to vote on the
level of fees 𝑓𝑠 and the seigniorage rate 𝑑𝜇𝑠. Per (5), investors choose
policies to maximize the value of their tokens. The value of tokens
outstanding at the time of the governance decision is 𝑀0(1 − 𝑑𝜇0), with
investors holding some fraction of those. Therefore, investors’ gover-
nance problem is equivalent to maximizing the market capitalization
𝑀0(1 − 𝑑𝜇0) of tokens outstanding, which by Lemmas 4–5 satisfies
]
)𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑀0(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0)

𝑒−𝑟𝑠(𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑐𝑋𝑠

E
0

[

𝜏

̂𝑀0(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0) = max
𝑓𝑠 ,𝑑𝜇0 , ̇𝜇𝑠 ,
𝑋𝑠 ,𝑀𝑠 ,𝜁𝑠

∫
0

s.t. (26), (28), 1 − 𝜁𝑠 =

𝑋𝑠
𝑀𝑠

, 𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠

≥ 0, 𝑑𝜇0 ∈ [0,

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

].

(31)

6.3. Attaining the full-commitment outcome

We now prove our main result: equilibrium allocations are identical
to those attained under the full-commitment outcome in Section 5.3.
The logic underlying this result has two steps. First, as is plain from
(31), the value of investors’ staked tokens is proportional to future ag-
gregate service flows plus platform profits. Second, investors’ problem
is time-consistent : the degree of commitment is irrelevant to equilibrium
policies.

Proposition 8. When the platform issues a hybrid token, investors’
governance problem (31) is time-consistent: optimal policies and equilibrium
allocations are invariant to the frequency 𝜆 of governance decisions.

Time-consistency implies that no matter how strong investors’ com-
mitment power, they will choose policies to maximize the present value
of service flows plus profits.

How, exactly, does a hybrid token overcome the time-inconsistency
problem? After all, even in the case where the platform issues a token
for transactions only, investors’ profits depend on users’ anticipated
service flows. This logic is deceptive, though. When the platform issues
a service token, share prices reflect the present value of profits and
token prices reflect anticipated future service flows net of inflation. In-
vestors can capture future service flows by issuing new tokens, diluting
the value of existing tokens held by users. This is precisely the source
of time-inconsistency: investors are tempted to issue a large quantity
of new tokens after each governance decision. However, this token
issuance is socially detrimental: it causes inflation, raising the cost of
transacting on the platform and reducing transaction demand. Investors
inefficiently choose to issue tokens and boost share prices at the cost
of lowering the value of users’ tokens.

When the platform issues a hybrid token, on the other hand, there is
a single asset (tokens) held by both constituencies whose value reflects
the present value of future profits plus service flows. Regardless of
whether investors vote to issue new tokens, the value of their assets will
depend on users’ future service flows, so they have an incentive to keep
service flows high. Indeed, the monetary neutrality result demonstrates
that investors cannot benefit from issuing new tokens: any seigniorage
revenues are offset by a decrease in the value of their tokens. The
fact that investors’ tokens lose value when they vote to issue new
tokens (𝑑𝜇0 > 0) eliminates the time-inconsistency problem. Formally,
one can see this fact from (31): seigniorage at 𝑠 = 0 does not enter
investors’ objective function (unlike investors’ problem (18) in the case
of a platform that issues service tokens). Intuitively, under the hybrid
token system, users are protected from devaluation because they hold
the same asset as the investors who govern the platform. With service

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

tokens, by contrast, seigniorage reduces the price of users’ tokens rather
than investors’ shares.

Since investors pass policies to maximize the present value of service
flows plus profits, the equilibrium allocation is precisely the same as the
full-commitment outcome of Section 5.3.

Proposition 9. When governed by investors, a platform with a hybrid
token achieves the full-commitment outcome of Section 5.3. Equilibrium
policies solve

(

∞

𝑒−𝑟𝑡

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

)

− 𝑐𝑋𝑡

𝑑𝑡 s.t. 𝑓𝑡, ̇𝜇𝑡

≥ 0,

max
𝑓𝑡, ̇𝜇𝑡,𝑋𝑡 ,
𝑀𝑡,𝜁𝑡

∫
0

𝑟𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑡

− (𝑓𝑡 + ̇𝜇𝑡)𝑋𝑡 + (1 − 𝜁𝑡) ̇𝑀𝑡, (28), 1 − 𝜁𝑡 =

(32)

𝑋𝑡
𝑀𝑡

.

Equilibrium transaction quantities are 𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛, defined in (21).

The equilibrium is unambiguously more efficient than the equilibrium

with a traditional platform but less efficient than the first-best.

policies {𝑓𝑠, 𝑑𝜇0, ̇𝜇𝑠} if they hold a majority of the token stock,
whereas investors choose the policy otherwise, as in Section 6.
(Control may pass from one constituency to the other over time
as their token holdings change.)

In both cases, we look for a Markov equilibrium as before. The anal-
ysis leads to optimization problems quite similar to (18) or (31), so
we present the main results here but defer the formal analysis to
Appendix E.

The main difference is that users seek to pass policies that maximize
the value of their transaction assets plus future infra-marginal rents,
which is different from investors’ objective of maximizing the value of
cash flow assets. At the time 𝜏 of a governance decision, the value of
users’ tokens satisfies

𝑄𝑇

𝜏 𝐴𝑇

𝜏− =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

[

E

𝜏

0 𝑒−𝑟𝑠(𝑋1−𝛾
∫ ∞
𝜏+𝑠 − (𝑓𝜏+𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑡+𝑠)𝑋𝜏+𝑠
[
0 𝑒−𝑟𝑠(𝑋1−𝛾
∫ ∞

𝜏+𝑠 − 𝑐𝑋𝜏+𝑠

(1 − 𝜁𝜏−)E
𝜏

]
)𝑑𝑠
]
)𝑑𝑠

Service token

Hybrid token

We should note that in this benchmark model a hybrid token can
enhance efficiency by alleviating time-inconsistency in seigniorage poli-
cies. However, the benefits of hybrid tokens are actually more general.
Online Appendix F studies an extension with investment in which a
hybrid token can resolve time-inconsistency in investment policies as
well as seigniorage.

The value of a service token is equal to the present value of service
flows net of future token dilution, whereas the value of a hybrid token
is equal to the present value of service flows plus profits.

Our main result is that giving users the right to vote redistributes
economic rents away from investors, but it does not necessarily enhance
efficiency.

7. Giving users the right to vote

Up until this point, we have assumed that the platform is governed
by investors. Our main results demonstrated how various token de-
signs can align investors’ policy preferences with users’ (or not). An
important feature of the DeFi landscape, however, is the prevalence of
platforms that give users the power to vote on policies directly. In this
section, we discuss the consequences of giving token-holding users the
right to vote in our model.

The model’s basic ingredients are unchanged. Governance decisions
arrive at a Poisson rate 𝜆. Now, at the time 𝜏 of a governance decision,
a new policy is chosen by whichever constituency (users or investors)
has a voting majority at that time. If investors control the platform,
as before, they choose policies that maximize the value of their assets.
However, if users control the platform, then they choose a sequence of
policies that maximizes the combined value of their tokens plus their
expected future infra-marginal rents 𝑅𝜏 ,

𝑄𝑇

𝜏 𝐴𝑇

𝜏− + 𝑅𝜏 where 𝑅𝜏 = E

[

∞

𝜏

∫

0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

]
𝜏+𝑠 𝑑𝑠

𝑋1−𝛾

,

Proposition 10. Giving users the right to vote can increase user surplus,
but it does not necessarily increase total surplus. Moreover, when users
control the platform, transaction quantities may be above the first-best level
𝑋𝐹 𝐵. Specifically,

1. When the platform issues service tokens, users vote to set fees and
seigniorage equal to zero (𝑓𝑡 = ̇𝜇𝑡 = 0), and transaction quantities
satisfy
𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 ≡ 𝑟− 1

𝛾 > 𝑋𝐹 𝐵 ∀ 𝑡.

(33)

2. When the platform issues a hybrid token, for 𝛾 sufficiently small,
users have a voting majority in the long run (𝑡 → ∞). In this case,
there exists 𝜁 ∗ ∈ (0, 1
2

] such that

𝑋𝑡 → min

{(

1 − 𝜁 ∗
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝜁 ∗) + 𝛾

𝑐

)− 1
𝛾

}

, 𝑋𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟

> 𝑋𝐹 𝐵 as 𝑡 → ∞,

(34)

where 1 − 𝜁 ∗ is the fraction of tokens held by users as 𝑡 → ∞.

as shown by Proposition 1. We analyze both types of platforms that
issue tokens in our model:

Fig. 4 shows that a service token-issuing platform may indeed
achieve lower surplus when governed by users rather than investors.

• Service token platform: Users are allocated voting power in
proportion to their token holdings. Without loss of generality, we
assume that users hold a majority of voting power24 and choose
a fee policy and a seigniorage policy {𝑓𝑠, 𝑑𝜇0, ̇𝜇𝑠} at the time of
each governance decision.

• Hybrid token platform: All agents, both users and investors, are
allocated voting power proportional to their token holdings. In
reality, this setup is akin to a DeFi platform that does not limit
voting power to those who stake their tokens. At the time of
a governance decision, users get to choose fee and seigniorage

24 Consider a platform that issues service tokens and allocates some voting
power to users in proportion to their token holdings, with the remaining votes
being allocated to shareholders. Each constituency always votes unanimously,
so all that matters is whether token holders are allocated a minority or a
majority of votes in the aggregate. When token holders have a minority of
voting power, we are back in the case of an investor-controlled platform
analyzed in Section 5.

Proponents of DeFi sometimes claim that enfranchising users is key
to mitigating inefficiencies. This argument contains a kernel of truth,
but it is incomplete. When users are given the right to vote, the platform
is more likely to be run in accordance with their interests, so there
is less rent extraction. Users unambiguously benefit from the right
to vote. However, users have incentives to run the platform in their
own favor, to investors’ detriment. In particular, users do not bear the
platform’s costs of operation — those are instead borne by investors.
Users are therefore willing to pass policies that increase their infra-
marginal rents at the expense of platform profits. This desire to increase
their own rents is why users pass policies that lead to inefficiently high
transaction quantities. A redistribution of voting power can increase
welfare only to the extent that it brings the median voter’s preferences
closer in line with maximizing total surplus (Hart and Moore, 1998).
Just as there is no reason to presume that consumer cooperatives are
more efficient than stockholder corporations, then, there is no reason
to presume that a user-governed platform is more efficient than an
investor-governed platform.

12 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Fig. 4. A comparison of total welfare (for a platform that issues service tokens) under governance by each constituency. The figure is plotted with parameters 𝛾 = 0.5, 𝑐 =
0.06, 𝑟 = 0.035. The blue curve plots total surplus as a function of transaction demand 𝑋. Transaction demand under investor governance is 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛, whereas transactions under user
governance are 𝑋𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟. The red lines mark the level of surplus in each case. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)

Note, however, that the policies preferred by users depend on
whether the platform issues a service token or a hybrid token. In par-
ticular, users vote for policies that result in (weakly) lower transaction
quantities under the hybrid token scheme — that is, they vote for
higher fees and platform profits. Why would users vote to give some
profits to investors? In this case, the value of users’ tokens depends not
only on their own service flows but also on the expected dividends that
will be paid out to investors, as explained in Section 6. Consequently,
users do not want to reduce the platform’s profits too much.

Notice also that unlike a service token platform, a hybrid token
platform that issues tokens with voting rights does not always lead to
user control, even in the long run. If investors control the platform,
they may pass policies that let them continue to keep a voting majority
of tokens. This may involve setting fees above the level that maximizes
token prices, thereby limiting transaction quantities (and thus users’
token holdings). Investors will be willing to relinquish control to users
only if they do not expect users to distort transaction quantities too far
above their preferred level 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛. Users, in turn, have less of an incen-
tive to distort transaction quantities upwards when their infra-marginal
rents are small, i.e., when their utility function is not too concave. This
is the case when 𝛾 is small, hence the result in Proposition 10 that users
control the platform in the long run for 𝛾 close to zero.

The key to the hybrid token scheme is that it introduces an asset
whose value is determined by the welfare of both constituencies. The
fact that the value of investors’ token holdings depends on users’
welfare moderates their desire to extract rents from users. Similarly,
if users govern the platform, their desired policies are moderated by
the fact that they hold tokens whose value depends on the platform’s
profits. It is this alignment of preferences, not a redistribution of voting
rights, that mitigates inefficiencies in platform policies.

8. Discussion of assumptions

Here we comment on the model’s main assumptions. The model has
three key features that shape the results. First, there are distinct groups
of agents who interact on the platform, generating scope for conflicts
of interest. Second, the agents who run the platform lack the ability to

commit to a sequence of policies. Third, we limit the types of contracts
that can be written between users and investors.

Conflicts of interest: In our model, there are two distinct groups
of agents: users who enjoy the platform’s services and investors who
hold all cash flow claims on the platform. This separation of users and
investors may seem unnatural, since the users of a platform’s service
are typically not prevented from holding the platform’s equity.

We make two comments on this issue. First, while this stark assump-
tion helps to illustrate the logic of our model, it could be substantially
relaxed without significantly altering the main results. What really
matters for our results is that there must be some heterogeneity in
preferences: there must be some agents who are more interested in the
platform’s services and others who are more natural investors (even
if investors also enjoy the platform’s services to some extent). For
instance, investors could be interpreted as individuals who are more
patient or who have deeper pockets. In the context of DeFi, those who
stake tokens and earn cash flows often need some technical aptitude
or computational resources — for example, blockchain ‘‘validators’’
typically use powerful hardware to certify transactions. As long as
there is some heterogeneity in preferences, there will be conflicts of
interest: natural users will prefer low fees and greater investment in
the platform’s technology, whereas natural investors will prefer to
maximize profits at users’ expense (see Hart and Moore, 1998; or Bakos
and Halaburda, 2022; who emphasize a similar theme).

Second, even within the context of our model, our main results
would mostly go through if we were to permit users to hold cash flow
claims on the platform as well. In this case, there would be a continuum
of equilibria. There would still be an equilibrium in which investors
hold all of the cash flow claims on the platform. However, for each
𝑘 ∈ (0, 1], there would also be an equilibrium in which users hold a
fraction 𝑘 of all cash flow claims, with investors holding the remaining
fraction 1 − 𝑘. The inefficiencies that we highlight would continue to
arise in this setting: investors would vote for policies that maximize
profits at users’ expense, whereas users would try to maximize their
rents at investors’ expense. The only efficient equilibrium would be the
case in which users hold all cash flow claims on the platform (𝑘 = 1)
– when investors sit out entirely, then conflicts of interest become

13 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

irrelevant. By focusing on the case in which investors hold all cash
flow claims and voting rights, our model addresses concerns about the
possible ‘‘centralization’’ of DeFi platforms via a concentration of token
holdings among non-users.

Lack of commitment: While a lack of commitment is of course
central to our main results, we consider it natural to assume that
investors cannot make a fully binding commitment to a sequence of
policies. In reality, it is quite common for digital platforms to change
their terms of service and fees. Even in the context of DeFi, despite
the fact that some policies can be hard-coded at the time a platform
is founded, it is possible for the rules of almost any platform to be
amended in some way. While some blockchains require a ‘‘hard fork’’
(i.e., a split in the blockchain) to re-write the initially set rules, other
platforms allow for rules to be updated in arbitrary ways by a sim-
ple vote among stakers. For example, the DeFi platforms MakerDAO,
Curve, and Uniswap operate in this way. The possibility of amending
the rules, moreover, is typically considered to be a desirable feature
rather than a detriment to the platform’s viability. However, our main
results of course also encapsulate the case of full commitment as 𝜆 → 0
(which could be achieved, e.g., if the platform is governed by a smart
contract whose rules can never be superseded).

Limited contracting: The last key assumption in our model is
limited contracting between users and investors. In particular, we
assume away the Coase-style solution in which users and investors
collectively agree on a contract that rewards investors for passing a
socially beneficial sequence of policies. We view this as a reasonable
restriction for several reasons. It may be costly for users to coordinate
and collectively bargain with investors. Moreover, if a contract that
anticipates all possible future contingencies were feasible, then it would
not even be necessary to have platform governance in the first place
— all decisions could simply be encoded in the initial contract. We
take the view of Grossman and Hart (1986): if the platform’s ownership
structure is to play an essential role, contracts must be incomplete to
some extent.

9. Conclusion

We develop a general model of platform governance that is flexible
enough to capture both traditional platforms as well as platforms that
issue tokens with some combination of transaction services, cash flow
claims, and voting rights.

A traditional platform extracts rents from its users by setting fees
above its marginal costs. This discourages users from transacting and
distorts volumes downwards, below the first-best level.

The issuance of service tokens can partially align shareholders’ policy
preferences with those of users, as long as shareholders are able to
commit to future policies ex ante. If the platform passes policies that
benefit users, they will be willing to pay a greater price to purchase
tokens. Hence, if investors commit to pass such policies, they can
reap large seigniorage revenues. However, if investors lack the ability
to commit, this mechanism no longer aligns preferences: after selling
tokens to users, investors will again be tempted to extract rents from
them by inflating away their value.

The platform can overcome the commitment problem by issuing a
hybrid token that bundles transaction services with cash flow claims.
The key idea is that by issuing a single asset whose value reflects both
constituencies’ welfare, investors can be disincentivized from extracting
rents. If they pass policies that are detrimental to users, the token price
will fall, hurting investors as well.

Giving users the right to vote, on the other hand, redistributes
economic rents to users but does not necessarily enhance welfare. Just
like investors, users are self-interested and pass policies that increase
their rents at investors’ expense.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Joseph Abadi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal
analysis, Conceptualization. Markus Brunnermeier: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft, Resources, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Model

A.1. Agents’ optimization problems

Users: Users’ optimization problem is

𝑈𝑖 = max
𝑥𝑖𝑡,𝑎𝑖𝑡,𝑐𝑖𝑡

[

E

0

∫
0
s.t. 𝑄𝑇

∞

𝑒−𝑟𝑡

(
(

𝑥1−𝛾
𝑖𝑡
1 − 𝛾
𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑖𝑡 + 𝑑𝑐𝑖𝑡 = 0, 𝑥𝑖𝑡

)]

− 𝑓𝑡𝑥𝑖𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝑑𝑐𝑖𝑡

≤ 𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑡, 𝑎𝑖0 given.

The only individual state variable for user 𝑖 is asset holdings 𝑎𝑖𝑡.

Using integration by parts, it is possible to rearrange an agent’s

lifetime utility from consumption of dollars:

∞

∫

0

𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑑𝑐𝑖𝑡 = − ∫

0

∞

𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑖𝑡
∞

∞

|
|
|
0
|
∞

= −𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑡

= 𝑄𝑇

0 𝑎𝑖0 + ∫

0

+ ∫

0
𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑡

𝑒−𝑟𝑡(𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑑𝑄𝑇

𝑡 − 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑑𝑡)

(𝑑𝑄𝑇

𝑡 − 𝑟𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑑𝑡).

Using this equation, agent 𝑖’s optimization problem can be reformu-

lated as

𝑈𝑖 = max
𝑥𝑖𝑡,𝑎𝑖𝑡

𝑄𝑇

0 𝑎𝑖0 + E

0

[

∞

∫
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑡

(

( 𝑥1−𝛾
𝑖𝑡
1 − 𝛾

− 𝑓𝑡𝑥𝑖𝑡

)𝑑𝑡 − 𝑎𝑖𝑡(𝑟𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑑𝑡 − E

𝑡[𝑑𝑄𝑇

𝑡 ])

)]

(A.1)

s.t. 𝑥𝑖𝑡

≤ 𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑡, 𝑎𝑖0 given.

Users’ problem then reduces to a sequence of static optimizations over
(𝑥𝑖𝑡, 𝑎𝑖𝑡).

The optimal 𝑥𝑖𝑡 solves

( 𝑥1−𝛾
𝑖𝑡
1 − 𝛾

)

− 𝑓𝑡𝑥𝑖𝑡

𝑑𝑡 −

max
𝑥𝑖𝑡,𝑎𝑖𝑡

so

(𝑟𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑑𝑡 − E
𝑡

[𝑑𝑄𝑇
𝑡

])𝑎𝑖𝑡 s.t. 𝑥𝑖𝑡

≤ 𝑄𝑇

𝑡 𝑎𝑖𝑡,

𝑥−𝛾
𝑖𝑡 𝑑𝑡 = 𝑓𝑡𝑑𝑡 +

(

𝑟𝑑𝑡 − E
𝑡

])

,

[ 𝑑𝑄𝑇
𝑡
𝑄𝑇
𝑡

as claimed in (2).

(A.2)

We also derive users’ value functions, since those will be important
in determining users’ preferences over sequences of policies. Users’
first-order condition (2) implies that the flow utility they receive at time
𝑡 is
( 𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡
1 − 𝛾

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

𝑟𝑑𝑡 − E

𝑑𝑡 − 𝑋𝑡

− 𝑓𝑡𝑋𝑡

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

])

𝑑𝑡.

)

(

=

𝑡

[ 𝑑𝑄𝑇
𝑡
𝑄𝑇
𝑡

Then, plugging this expression into the right-hand side of (A.1),

𝑈𝑖 = 𝑄𝑇

0 𝐴𝑇

0− + 𝑅0, where 𝑅0

≡ E

0

[

∞

∫
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑡

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

]

𝑑𝑡

,

(A.3)

as claimed in Proposition 1.

14 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Investors’ lifetime utility can be derived with analogous calcula-

tions. Investor 𝑗’s problem is

𝑈𝑗 = max
𝑎𝑗𝑡,𝑐𝑗𝑡

E

0

[

∞

∫
0

]

𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑑𝑐𝑗𝑡

s.t. 𝑄𝐶

𝑡 (𝑑𝑎𝑗𝑡 − 𝑎𝑗𝑡𝑑𝐷𝑡) + 𝑑𝑐𝑗𝑡 = 0, 𝑎𝑗0 given.

Integration by parts yields

In equilibrium, conditional on no governance
Proof of Lemma 1.
and
decision, transactions and the stock of tokens grow at rates
̇𝜇𝑠, respectively. When a governance decision takes place, transactions
jump to ̂𝑋0 and the stock of tokens immediately grows by ̂𝑑𝜇0. Then,
using the fact that 𝑄𝑇

, we have

̇𝑋𝑠
𝑋𝑠

𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡
𝐴𝑇
𝑡

𝑈𝑗 = max
𝑎𝑗𝑡

𝑄𝐶

0 𝑎𝑗0 + E

0

[

∞

∫

0

(

𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑗𝑡

𝑑𝐷𝑡 + 𝑑𝑄𝐶

𝑡 − 𝑟𝑄𝐶

𝑡 𝑑𝑡

)]

s.t. 𝑎𝑗0 given.

𝑑𝑄𝑇
𝑡
𝑄𝑇
𝑡

=

( ̇𝑋𝑠
𝑋𝑠

)

− ̇𝜇𝑠

𝑑𝑠 +

( ̂𝑋0
𝑋𝑠

(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0) − 1

)

𝑑𝐽𝑠.

The first-order condition implies that at an optimum (4) holds, and

𝑈𝑗 = 𝑄𝐶

0 𝐴𝐶
0− .

(A.4)

where 𝑑𝐽𝑠 denotes a Poisson process that arrives at rate 𝜆 (representing
the next governance decision). Taking expectations of both sides, we
obtain the equation in Lemma 1. □

Proof of Proposition 1. The result is immediate from (A.3) and
(A.4). □

A.2. The first-best

Proof of Lemma 2. This result is immediate from investors’ gover-
nance problem (18). The rate of seigniorage 𝑑𝜇0 at 𝑠 = 0 can be
increased up to the maximum limit 𝑑𝜇0 = 1 without affecting profits
or the constraint (17) at any future date. □

In this section, we formally lay out and solve the planner’s problem:

Proof of Proposition 4. Using the result of Lemma 2, we have

̂𝑉 𝑃
0 = max
𝑋𝑠

E
0

[

𝜏

∫
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

( 𝑋1−𝛾
𝑠
1 − 𝛾

)

− 𝑐𝑋𝑠

𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑉 𝑃
0

]

.

(A.5)

We now prove Proposition 2, which characterizes the first-best alloca-
tion.

Proof of Proposition 2. First, note that the planner’s problem is time-
consistent by standard arguments (see Stokey and Lucas, 1989): it is
a standard dynamic programming problem with control 𝑋𝑠 and no
state variables. Therefore, the optimal policy solves the corresponding
sequence problem. The sequence problem is

∞

( 𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡
1 − 𝛾

𝑒−𝑟𝑡

∫
0

max
𝑋𝑡
with first-order condition 𝑋−𝛾

− 𝑐𝑋𝑡

𝑑𝑡

)

𝑡 = 𝑐, which immediately implies (8). □

Appendix B. Traditional platform

In this section, we prove our main results about the traditional

scheme in Proposition 3.

Proof of Proposition 3. Standard arguments (Stokey and Lucas, 1989)
imply that investors’ governance problem (11) is time-consistent: it is a
standard dynamic programming problem with control 𝑓𝑠 and no state
variables. Therefore, investors’ problem can be written as the sequence
problem (12). We substitute the transaction demand constraint (10)
into investors’ profits to obtain

(𝑓𝑡 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑡

− (𝑐 + 𝑟)𝑋𝑡

and use this result to write the sequence problem as.

(

∞

𝑒−𝑟𝑡

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡

)

− (𝑐 + 𝑟)𝑋𝑡

𝑑𝑡.

max
𝑋𝑡

∫
0

The first-order condition is

(1 − 𝛾)𝑋−𝛾

𝑡 = 𝑐 + 𝑟.

Therefore, the optimal transaction quantity is 𝑋𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑 given by (14),
which is clearly less than 𝑋𝐹 𝐵 in (8). Since 𝑋𝐹 𝐵 is the first-best
quantity of transactions, it is immediate that welfare is lower than the
first-best with a traditional platform. □

Appendix C. Service tokens

In this section, we prove the results in Section 5.

15 

E
0

[

𝜏

∫
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠𝑑𝛱𝑠

]

[

= E
0

𝛥
𝑋0 + ∫
1 + 𝛥
(

0

𝑋0 + E

0

[

𝜏

∫
0

𝜏

𝑒−𝑟𝑠(𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑠𝑑𝑠

]

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − (𝑐 + 𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠 + ̇𝑋𝑠 + 𝜆 ̂𝑋0(1 −

𝜏

(

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − (𝑐 + 𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠 + ̇𝑋𝑠 + 𝜆

)

̂𝑋0

𝑑𝑠𝑑𝜏

𝜆𝑒−𝜆𝜏

∫
0
(

)

]

𝑑𝑠

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

)

1
1 + 𝛥
)

̂𝑋0

𝑑𝑠

𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − (𝑐 + 𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠 + ̇𝑋𝑠 + 𝜆

(

𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − (𝑐 + 𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠 + 𝜆

1
1 + 𝛥

1
1 + 𝛥
)

̂𝑋0

𝑑𝑠

=

=

=

=

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

𝑋0 + ∫

0

𝑋0 + ∫

0

∞

∞

∞

𝑋0 + ∫

0
∞
|
|
|
0
|
𝑋0 + ∫

0

+ 𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠𝑋𝑠

∞

𝑒−𝑟𝑠(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠𝑑𝑠

+ ∫
0
∞

(A.6)

= −

1
1 + 𝛥

𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠

(

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑐𝑋𝑠 + 𝜆

)

𝑑𝑠,

1
1 + 𝛥

̂𝑋0

as desired. The second equality uses (17). The fifth equality integrates
∫ ∞
0 𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠 ̇𝑋𝑠𝑑𝑠 by parts. □

Proof of Propositions 5–7. We characterize the properties of equilib-
rium in both the strong commitment and weak commitment regime.
We begin by taking a Lagrangian approach to investors’ governance
problem. Following Proposition 4, investors’ problem can be written as

̂𝑉 𝐼
0 = max
𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠,𝑋𝑠

−

𝛥
1 + 𝛥

𝑋0 + ∫

0

(

∞

𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑐𝑋𝑠 + 𝜆(

1
1 + 𝛥

̂𝑋0 + ̂𝑉 𝐼
0 )

(

− 𝜓𝑠

(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠 − 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 + (𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠)𝑋𝑠 − ̇𝑋𝑠 − 𝜆

1
1 + 𝛥

)

̂𝑋0

The Euler–Lagrange conditions for 𝑠 > 0 are

(𝑓𝑠) ∶ 0 = 𝜓𝑠𝑋𝑠 + 𝜒 𝑓
𝑠 ;
( ̇𝜇𝑠) ∶ 0 = 𝜓𝑠𝑋𝑠 + 𝜒 𝜇
𝑠 ;
(𝑋𝑠) ∶ ̇𝜓𝑠 = (1 + 𝜓𝑠)(1 − 𝛾)𝑋−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑐 − 𝜓𝑠(𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠).

− 𝜒 𝑓

𝑠 𝑓𝑠 − 𝜒 𝜇

𝑠 ̇𝜇𝑠

)

𝑑𝑠.

We will conjecture an equilibrium in which fees 𝑓𝑠 = 𝑓 , seigniorage
̇𝜇𝑠 = ̇𝜇, transaction quantities 𝑋𝑠 = 𝑋, and the Lagrange multipliers are
constant as well. Define 𝜆∗ as

𝜆∗ =

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

− 𝑟.

We proceed by analyzing two distinct cases.

Case 1: Strong commitment ( ̂𝜆 ≤ 𝜆∗). We conjecture that in this
case, the Lagrange multiplier 𝜓 is equal to zero. The Euler–Lagrange
condition for 𝑋𝑠 then implies that transaction quantities must satisfy

(1 − 𝛾)𝑋−𝛾

𝑠 = 𝑐 ⇒ 𝑋𝑠 =

)− 1
𝛾

(

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

≡ 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 for 𝑠 > 0.

This quantity of transactions is greater than 𝑋𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑 but below the first-
best 𝑋𝐹 𝐵.

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

To confirm that this is indeed an equilibrium allocation, we must
show that there exist non-negative levels of fees 𝑓 and seigniorage ̇𝜇
that support it. The transaction demand condition (i.e., the condition
corresponding to the multiplier 𝜓𝑠) yields

𝑓 + ̇𝜇 =

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

− (𝑟 + ̂𝜆).

(C.1)

̂𝜆 ≤ 𝜆∗. Our conjectured
Then it is possible that 𝑓 , ̇𝜇 ≥ 0 only if
equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium, then, if and only if ̂𝜆 ≤ 𝜆∗. This
concludes the proof of Proposition 5.

Note, moreover, that this argument proves Proposition 6. Any com-

bination (𝑓 , ̇𝜇) satisfying (C.1) implements the same equilibrium.

Case 2: Weak commitment ( ̂𝜆 > 𝜆∗). In this case, we conjecture
and verify that fees and seigniorage are equal to zero, 𝑓 = ̇𝜇 = 0. With
a constant Lagrange multiplier 𝜓, we have

(1 + 𝜓)(1 − 𝛾)𝑋−𝛾 = 𝑐 ⇒ 𝑋 =

(

𝑐
(1 + 𝜓)(1 − 𝛾)

)− 1
𝛾

.

The transaction demand condition (17) pins down 𝑋:

𝑋 =

(

𝑟 + ̂𝜆
1 − 𝛾

)− 1
𝛾

.

When ̂𝜆 > 𝜆∗, clearly, the Lagrange multiplier 𝜓 is indeed non-zero,
justifying the fact that both fees and seigniorage are at their constraints.
This concludes the proof of Proposition 7. □

Appendix D. Hybrid tokens

D.1. Equilibrium

In this section, we prove general results about the equilibrium with

a hybrid token.

Proof of Lemma 4. Multiply (26) by 1 − 𝜁𝑠, multiply (27) by 𝜁𝑠, and
add the two resulting equations together to obtain

(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑀𝑠 = 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑐𝑋𝑠 + ̇𝑀𝑠 + 𝜆 ̂𝑀0(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0).

Imposing the transversality condition lim𝑠→∞ 𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠𝑀𝑠 = 0, this differ-
ential equation can be solved forward to obtain

𝑀𝑠 = ∫
0

= E
𝑠

∞

𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑢

(

[

𝜏

∫

0

𝑒−𝑟(𝑢−𝑠)

𝑋1−𝛾

)
𝑠+𝑢 − 𝑐𝑋𝑠+𝑢 + 𝜆 ̂𝑀0(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0)
)
(

𝑑𝑢

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑢 − 𝑐𝑋𝑢

]
+ 𝑒−𝑟(𝜏−𝑠) ̂𝑀0(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0)

,

• The token price adjusts to a new ex-dividend level 𝑄0+ .

Using this notation, we have 𝑑𝜇0 = (𝐴0+ − 𝐴0)∕𝐴0+ , 𝑀0 = 𝑄0𝐴0+ ,
𝑀0+ = 𝑄0+ 𝐴0+ , and 𝑑𝑆0 = 𝑀0𝑑𝜇0.

Note that if 𝑑𝜇0 > 0, then (28) implies that investors hold the entire
stock of tokens at 𝑠 = 0, i.e., 𝜁0 = 1. Then 𝑑𝐷0 = 𝑑𝑆0∕𝐴0+ , and investors’
pricing equation for tokens (4) yields
𝑑𝑆0
𝐴0+

0[𝑑𝑄0]

+ E

0 =

= 𝑀0𝑑𝜇0 + 𝑄0+ 𝐴0+ − 𝑄0𝐴0+
= 𝑀0𝑑𝜇0 + 𝑀0+ − 𝑀0

⇒ 𝑀0(1 − 𝑑𝜇0) = 𝑀0+ . □

D.2. Attaining the commitment outcome

Next, we prove our main results about the hybrid token system with

investor governance.

Proof of Proposition 8. Problem (31) is time-consistent by standard
arguments. When written in Lagrangian form, it can be viewed as a
typical Bellman equation with controls (𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠, 𝑋𝑠, 𝑀𝑠, 𝜁𝑠). Therefore,
optimal policies are independent of the times at which governance
decisions took place: the policy chosen at time 𝜏 for 𝑠 ≥ 𝜏 is precisely
the same as the policy chosen for 𝑠 ≥ 𝜏 at 𝑡 = 0. Hence, optimal
policies and equilibrium allocations are independent of the frequency
𝜆 of governance decisions. □

Proof of Proposition 9. Given that Problem (31) is a time-consistent
Bellman equation, the optimal policy must solve the corresponding
sequence problem (32). Note that the objective function is precisely
the same as in (20). To show that all of the results carry over, we
merely need to demonstrate that there exists some set of controls
that implements the full-commitment allocation. Investors can simply
choose to charge a constant fee 𝑓𝑡 = 𝑐∕(1 − 𝛾) − 𝑟 (as in the case with
̇𝜇𝑡 = 0 for all 𝑡. Since policies
commitment) and issue no new tokens,
are constant over time, token prices will be as well, so users’ optimality
condition (2) implies

𝑋𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 =

)−𝛾

(

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

∀ 𝑡.

Hence, we have shown that equilibrium transaction quantities are
precisely the same as in Proposition 5, and just as in that proposition,
the equilibrium allocation is more efficient than that with a traditional
platform but less efficient than the first-best. □

as desired. The second line uses the fact that for any function ℎ(𝑢),

Appendix E. Giving users the right to vote

∞

[
𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑢ℎ(𝑢)𝑑𝑢 = E

𝜏

]
𝑒−𝑟𝑢ℎ(𝑢)𝑑𝑢

,

∫
0

∫

0

where 𝜏 denotes the time of a Poisson event that arrives at rate 𝜆. □

Proof of Lemma 5. That {𝑀𝑠} is independent of
̇𝜇𝑠 for 𝑠 > 0 is
immediate from Lemma 4. It remains to prove that 𝑀0(1 − 𝑑𝜇0) = 𝑀0+ .
If the token quantity does not jump at 𝑠 = 0, this result is trivial, so we
focus on the case in which a positive quantity of tokens is issued at the
time of the governance decision. In this case, the following sequence of
events takes place:

• Investors announce the quantity of new tokens 𝐴0+ − 𝐴0 that will
be issued (where 𝐴0 denotes the quantity of tokens outstanding
before the governance decision);

• The new tokens are sold in competitive markets at price 𝑄0;
• Token holders decide whether to stake or hold tokens for trans-

actions;

In this section, we prove the results in Proposition 10. The Proposi-
tion deals with two cases – a setting with a platform that issues service
tokens and one with a platform that issues hybrid tokens. The following
two subsections address each in turn.

E.1. A service token platform

As discussed in Section 7, when the platform permits service token
holders to vote, we can restrict attention to the case in which users
control a majority of voting power for all 𝑡. Hence, users choose their
most-preferred policy in each governance decision.

We look for a recursive equilibrium in which quantities may jump at
the time of a governance decision but evolve smoothly thereafter, with
the same notation as in the benchmark model. Users maximize their
lifetime utility, which per (6) is equal to the value of their tokens plus
the present value of their infra-marginal rents, which will be denoted
by

• Seigniorage profits (𝐴0+ − 𝐴0)𝑄0 are paid out to the holders of

staked tokens;

̂𝑅0 = E

0

[

𝜏

∫

0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑅0

]

.

16 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

].

Under the conjecture that all quantities are constant between gov-

ernance decisions, the decision-maker’s problem reduces to

The value of users’ tokens at the time 𝑠 = 0 of a governance decision
satisfies
0 𝐴𝑇

0− = 𝑋0(1 − 𝑑𝜇0),

𝑄𝑇

since users’ initial token holdings are only a fraction 1 − 𝑑𝜇0 of the
initial token stock if new token issuance at 𝑠 = 0 is 𝑑𝜇0. Then, users’
governance problem can be written recursively in Lagrangian form as

(

𝑒−(𝑟+𝜆)𝑠

∞

∫
0

(1 − 𝑑𝜇0)

𝑠 − (𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠)𝑋𝑠

(𝑋1−𝛾

)

(1 − 𝑑𝜇0) ̂𝑋0 + ̂𝑅0 = max

𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠,𝑑𝜇0,𝑋𝑠

+

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑠

+ 𝜆(

(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0) ̂𝑋0 + ̂𝑅0

)

− 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 + (𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠)𝑋𝑠 − ̇𝑋𝑠 − 𝜆(1 − ̂𝑑𝜇0) ̂𝑋0

𝑑𝑠,

(E.1)

+ 𝜒 𝑓

𝑠 𝑓𝑠 + 𝜒 𝜇

𝑠 ̇𝜇𝑠 + 𝜓𝑠
)

(

(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠
)

subject to the additional constraint 𝑑𝜇0 ∈ [0, 𝛥
1+𝛥

Users will always choose to set initial seigniorage 𝑑𝜇0 to zero —
unanticipated seigniorage is just a transfer to investors. The Euler–
Lagrange conditions are

(𝑓𝑠) ∶ (𝜓𝑠 − 1)𝑋𝑠 = 𝜒 𝑓
𝑠 ;
( ̇𝜇𝑠) ∶ (𝜓𝑠 − 1)𝑋𝑠 = 𝜒 𝜇
𝑠 ;
(𝑋𝑠) ∶ (𝑟 + 𝜆)𝜓𝑠 = 𝑋−𝛾
𝑠 − (𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠) + 𝜓𝑠((𝑟 + 𝜆)
− (1 − 𝛾)𝑋−𝛾
𝑠 + 𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠) + ̇𝜓𝑠.

It is simple to see from this problem that users’ utility is strictly
increasing in transaction quantities 𝑋𝑠 and decreasing in fees and
seigniorage. Hence, there is no advantage to users of setting fees or
seigniorage above their minimum allowable levels. Users thus set fees
𝑓𝑠 = 0 for all 𝑠 and choose zero seigniorage,
̇𝜇𝑠 = 0 for all 𝑠. By setting
𝑓𝑠 = ̇𝜇𝑠 = 0 and conjecturing a constant multiplier 𝜓𝑠 = 𝜓, we obtain

0 = (1 − (1 − 𝛾)𝜓)𝑋−𝛾

𝑠 ⇒ 𝜓=

1
1 − 𝛾

.

𝑠 , 𝜒 𝜇

From there, one can find suitable values for the Lagrange multipli-
ers 𝜒 𝑓
𝑠 using the Euler–Lagrange conditions above. Transaction
quantities satisfy (17), so
𝑠 = 𝑟𝑋𝑠 ⇒ 𝑋𝑠 = 𝑋𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 ≡ 𝑟− 1
𝑋1−𝛾
𝛾 ,
as desired.

E.2. A hybrid token platform

Before proving the specific results in this section, we characterize
equilibrium in a slightly more general setting and then show how to
derive the results from this general characterization.

In the case where users can vote, there are two state variables in
a Markov equilibrium: the time 𝑠 since the most recent governance
decision and the fraction of tokens 𝜁 held by investors just prior to the
decision. The fraction of tokens held by investors is relevant because it
determines which constituency gets to choose the platform’s policies.

We consider an equilibrium in which token quantities never jump.
Lemma 5 guarantees that this is without loss of generality. The equi-
librium quantities are then { ̂𝑓𝑠(𝜁), ̂̇𝜇𝑠(𝜁), ̂𝑋𝑠(𝜁),
̂𝑀𝑠(𝜁), ̂𝜁𝑠(𝜁), ̂𝑅𝑠(𝜁)}. As in
the main body of the paper, several conditions must be satisfied in
equilibrium. There is the token demand condition
),
( ̇𝑀𝑠 + 𝜆 ̂𝑀0(𝜁𝑠)

(𝑟 + 𝜆)𝑋𝑠 = 𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − (𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠)𝑋𝑠 + 𝜁𝑠

(E.2)

the token pricing condition (29), the condition determining 𝜁𝑠, which
can be re-written as
𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − (𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠)𝑋𝑠
1 − 𝜁𝑠

=

(𝑓𝑠 + ̇𝜇𝑠 − 𝑐)𝑋𝑠
𝜁𝑠

,

(E.3)

and the Bellman equation determining the present value of infra-
marginal rents,
𝜏

[

̂𝑅0(𝜁) = E
0

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

∫
0

]
𝑠 𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ̂𝑅0(𝜁𝜏 )

𝑋1−𝛾

.

(E.4)

17 

We consider a decision-maker who, starting in state 𝜁, chooses

policies to maximize

E
0

[

𝜏

∫
0

(

𝑒−𝑟𝑠

(1 +

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

max
𝑓𝑠 , ̇𝜇𝑠
𝑋𝑠 ,𝑀𝑠 ,𝜁𝑠

𝑏(𝜁))𝑋1−𝛾

𝑠 − 𝑐𝑋𝑠

)

]
)
𝑑𝑠 + 𝑒−𝑟𝜏 ( ̂𝑀0(𝜁𝜏 ) + 𝑏(𝜁) ̂𝑅0(𝜁𝜏 )

s.t. (29), (E.2), (E.3), 𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠

≥ 0,

(E.5)

).

where the function 𝑏 is decreasing, continuous, and differentiable (ex-
cept for perhaps at 𝜁 = 1
2

We conjecture an equilibrium in which quantities are constant
between governance decisions, e.g., 𝑋𝑠 = 𝑋, 𝑀𝑠 = 𝑀, and so on. To
avoid confusion, we denote the fraction of tokens held by investors at
the time of the governance decision by 𝜁, and we let 𝜁 ′ = 𝜁𝑠 denote the
fraction held by investors after the decision takes place.

max
𝑓 , ̇𝜇,𝑋,𝑀,𝜁 ′

(1 + 𝛾
1−𝛾

𝑏(𝜁))𝑋1−𝛾 − 𝑐𝑋

𝑟 + 𝜆

+

s.t. (29), (E.2), (E.3), 𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠

𝜆
𝑟 + 𝜆
≥ 0.

( ̂𝑀0(𝜁 ′) + 𝑏(𝜁) ̂𝑅0(𝜁 ′)

)

(E.6)

We proceed in several steps.

̂𝑀0(𝜁) ( ̂𝑅0(𝜁)) is weakly monotonically increasing
Step 1: In equilibrium,
(decreasing) in 𝜁. Notice that in the type of equilibria we consider, the
policy problem faced by the decision-maker can be written as

max
𝑓 , ̇𝜇,𝑋,𝑀,𝜁 ′

𝑀0 + 𝑏(𝜁)𝑅0 s.t. (29), (E.2), (E.3), 𝑓𝑠, ̇𝜇𝑠

≥ 0,

where 𝑏(𝜁) is a decreasing function of 𝜁 and

𝑀0 =

𝑋1−𝛾 − 𝑐𝑋 + 𝜆 ̂𝑀0(𝜁 ′)
𝑟 + 𝜆

,

𝑅0 =

𝛾
1−𝛾

𝑋1−𝛾 + 𝜆 ̂𝑅0(𝜁 ′)

𝑟 + 𝜆

.

The decision-maker chooses policies to maximize a weighted aver-
age of token values and users’ infra-marginal rents, where the weight
on rents is decreasing in 𝜁. Clearly, then, higher 𝜁 implies that at an
optimum, 𝑀0 will be larger and 𝑅0 will be smaller.
Step 2: In equilibrium, the fraction of tokens 𝜁 ′ held by investors is an
increasing function of the transaction quantity 𝑋.

Observe that the constraints (E.2) and (E.3) depend on (𝑓 , ̇𝜇) only
through their sum 𝑓 + ̇𝜇. Given a transaction quantity 𝑋, we can
therefore view these constraints as two equations in the two unknowns
𝑓 + ̇𝜇 and 𝜁 ′. The transaction demand condition (E.2) implies an inverse
relationship between 𝑋 and total transfers 𝑓 + ̇𝜇 from users to investors.
The condition (E.3) determining 𝜁 ′ implies an increasing relationship
between transfers 𝑓 + ̇𝜇 and 𝜁 ′. Therefore, the fraction of tokens 𝜁 ′ held
by investors is a decreasing function of the transaction quantity 𝑋.
Step 3: Let 𝜁𝑘 be the fraction of tokens held by investors at the time of the
𝑘th governance decision. Then the sequence {𝜁𝑘} converges to some 𝜁 ∗.

𝛾
1−𝛾

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑟+𝜆

We begin by showing that there exists a monotonically increasing
mapping 𝐺(⋅) ∶ [0, 1] → [0, 1] such that 𝜁𝑘+1 = 𝐺(𝜁𝑘). There are two
terms in the objective of Problem (E.6) whose weights are decreasing
and ̂𝑅0(𝜁𝑘+1). The former is clearly increasing in 𝑋, but
in 𝜁𝑘:
the latter is increasing in 𝑋 as well because ̂𝑅0(⋅) is increasing in 𝜁𝑘+1
by Step 1 of this argument and 𝜁𝑘+1 is decreasing in 𝑋 by Step 2. The
weights on the other two terms, − 𝑐𝑋
and ̂𝑀0(𝜁𝑘+1), are constant in 𝜁𝑘.
𝑟+𝜆
Both terms are decreasing in the current transaction quantity 𝑋. Thus,
the optimal 𝑋 from the decision-maker’s perspective is decreasing in 𝜁𝑘,
the fraction of tokens held by investors at the time of the most recent
governance decision. Applying Step 2 again, the fraction of tokens
𝜁𝑘+1 held by investors at the next governance decision is an increasing
function of 𝜁𝑘.

Convergence follows from the fact that 𝐺 is a monotonically increas-
, 1]. There

ing function that is continuous on the intervals [0, 1
2
are two cases to consider.

] and ( 1
2

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

) ≤ 1
2

Case 1: 𝐺( 1
2

. If 𝜁0 ∈ [0, 1
], Brouwer’s fixed point theorem
2
immediately implies that the sequence 𝜁𝑘 converges, since the interval
[0, 1
] is mapped to itself. If 𝜁0 > 1
, then there are again two cases:
2
2
𝐺(𝜁) > 1
𝐺(𝜁) < 1
. In the first case, 𝐺 maps
or lim𝜁→+ 1
either lim𝜁→+ 1
2
2
some interval [ 1
+ 𝜖, 1
] to itself, so 𝜁𝑘 converges somewhere in that
2
2
interval. In the second case, if 𝜁𝑘 does not converge to a steady state in
( 1
], after which point it
2
converges in that interval.

, 1], then it eventually enters the interval [0, 1
2

2

2

Case 2: 𝐺( 1
2
We are now ready to move on to the more specific case in our model,

. The proof in this case is analogous.

) > 1
2

where

𝑏(𝜁) =

{ 1
1−𝜁
0

𝜁 ≤ 1
2
𝜁 > 1
2

We proceed with the proof of Proposition 10.

Proof of Proposition 10. Appendix E.1 proves the result in the case of
a platform that issues service tokens. For a platform that issues hybrid
tokens, we first characterize transaction quantities in the long run when
users control the platform. Then, we show that 𝛾 being close to zero is
a sufficient condition to ensure users will control the platform in the
long run.

When users control the platform in the long run, 𝜁 converges to
. In this limit, the governance problem (E.6) reduces
of

some limit 𝜁 ∗ ≤ 1
2
to maximizing the present value of token values plus a multiple 1
1−𝜁
rents,

(1 + 1
1−𝜁 ∗

𝛾
1−𝛾
𝑟

max
𝑋,𝑓 , ̇𝜇

)𝑋1−𝛾 − 𝑐𝑋

The first-order condition yields

s.t. 𝑋−𝛾 = 𝑟 + 𝑓 + ̇𝜇, 𝑓 , ̇𝜇 ≥ 0.

{(

𝑋 = min

1 − 𝜁 ∗
(1 − 𝛾)(1 − 𝜁 ∗) + 𝛾

𝑐

)− 1
𝛾

, 𝑟− 1

𝛾

}

,

as desired.

Next, we show that users control the platform as 𝑡 → ∞ whenever
𝛾 is close enough to zero. Our argument above demonstrates that
equilibrium outcomes with a hybrid token are equivalent to those in
the following game:

• If a governance decision occurs at 𝑡𝑘, then whichever constituency
controls the platform (users or investors) chooses a level of trans-
actions 𝑋𝑡𝑘
that will be maintained for the interval [𝑡𝑘, 𝑡𝑘+1],
where 𝑡𝑘+1 denotes the time of the next governance decision.
• There exists a threshold level of transactions ̂𝑋 such that users
≥

≥ 1
2

) if and only if 𝑋𝑡𝑘

control the platform at 𝑡𝑘+1 (i.e., 𝜁𝑡𝑘+1
̂𝑋.25

• Going forward from time 𝑡𝑘, investors’ payoff is

𝑉𝐼 (𝑡𝑘) = 𝜁𝑘

E

𝑡𝑘

[ ∞
∑

𝑛=0

(𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑘+𝑛 − 𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑘+𝑛+1 )

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡𝑘+𝑛

− 𝑐𝑋𝑡𝑘+𝑛
𝑟

]

,

whereas users’ payoff is

𝑉𝑈 (𝑡𝑘) = E

𝑡𝑘

(𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑘+𝑛 −𝑒−𝑟𝑡𝑘+𝑛+1 )

[ ∞
∑

𝑛=0

(

(1−𝜁𝑘)

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡𝑘+𝑛

− 𝑐𝑋𝑡𝑘+𝑛
𝑟

+

𝛾
1 − 𝛾

𝑋1−𝛾
𝑡𝑘+𝑛
𝑟

)]
.

Note that investors’ optimal outcome is for the level of transactions

to be

𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 =

)− 1
𝛾

(

𝑐
1 − 𝛾

at all times. Indeed, if investors control the platform at 𝑡 = 0, and

𝜁 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 = 1 − (1 − 𝛾)

𝑟
𝑐

≥ 1
2

,

then investors choose transaction level 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 at 𝑡 = 0, giving them
control of the platform at 𝑡1, at which point they choose transaction
level 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 again (and at all future dates of governance decisions).

However, this equilibrium is not possible if

2𝑟 ≥ 𝑐
1 − 𝛾

.

If investors choose transaction level 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 at 𝑡 = 0, then 𝜁0
, so
users will control the platform at 𝑡1. In this case, one of two equilibrium
outcomes is possible. Either

≤ 1
2

1. Investors choose to maintain control of the platform at all dates,

choosing a transaction quantity

̂𝑋 = (2𝑟 + 𝑐)

− 1
𝛾 ,

leading to 𝜁𝑘 = 1
2

for all 𝑘, or

2. Investors choose to let users control the platform and choose
∈ [ ̂𝑋, 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛]. In this latter case, users will control
some 𝑋𝑡0
the platform at 𝑡1. Moreover, since they always prefer higher
transaction quantities than investors and 𝜁𝑘 is decreasing in 𝑋𝑘,
users will continue to choose transaction quantities larger than
̂𝑋, leading to 𝜁𝑘 < 1
for all 𝑘, so users control the platform
2
starting from 𝑡1.

Hence, a sufficient condition to ensure that investors will relinquish

control to users is:
)
( ̂𝑋1−𝛾 − 𝑐 ̂𝑋
𝑟

log

≤ log

(

𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛1−𝛾

− 𝑐𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛

𝑟 + 𝜆

)
.

(E.7)

The left-hand side is the (log) payoff earned by investors if they
= ̂𝑋 for all 𝑘. The right-
maintain control of the platform by setting 𝑋𝑡𝑘
hand side is a lower bound on the expected payoff earned by investors if
they set 𝑋0 = 𝑋𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 and permit users to control the platform thereafter.

In the limit 𝛾 → 0, inequality (E.7) can be rewritten as

0 ≤ lim
𝛾→0

log

( 𝛾

1 − 𝛾

= lim
𝛾→0

log 𝛾 + log

×

𝑐
𝑟 + 𝜆
𝑐
2(𝑟 + 𝜆)

(

𝑐
1 − 𝛾
1
𝛾

+

)

)− 1
𝛾

(
1 +
log

(

2 × (2𝑟 + 𝑐)

− 1
𝛾

)

− log

).

2𝑟
𝑐

Note that as 𝛾 → 0, the right-hand side goes to infinity. This is because
the function 1
diverges at a faster rate than log 𝛾. Therefore, for small
𝛾
enough 𝛾, investors prefer to give users control of the platform in the
first period, and users control the platform in the long run. □

Appendix F. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103951.

References

Admati, A., DeMarzo, P., Hellwig, M., Pfleiderer, P., 2018. The leverage ratchet effect.

J. Finance 73 (1), 145–198. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12588.

Aghion, P., Tirole, J., 1997. Formal and real authority in organizations. J. Polit. Econ.

105 (1), 1–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/262063.

Bakos, Y., Halaburda, H., 2022. Will blockchains disintermediate platforms? Lim-
its to credible decentralization in DAOs. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4221512,
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4221512.

Bena, J., Zhang, S., 2022. Token-based decentralized governance, data economy and
platform business model. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4248492, Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4248492.

Benhaim, A., Falk, B.H., Tsoukalas, G., 2023. Balancing power in decentralized
governance: Quadratic voting under imperfect information. http://dx.doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.4416748, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4416748.
Biais, B., Bisière, C., Bouvard, M., Casamatta, C., Menkveld, A., 2023. Equilibrium
bitcoin pricing. J. Finance 78 (2), 967–1014. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13206.
Chod, J., Lyandres, E., 2021. A theory of ICOs: Diversification, agency, and information
asymmetry. Manage. Sci. 67 (10), 5969–5989. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.
2020.3754.

Coase, R., 1937. The nature of the firm. Economica 4 (16), 386–405. http://dx.doi.

25 This is because 𝜁𝑡𝑘

is a decreasing function of 𝑋𝑡𝑘

, as shown previously.

org/10.1017/cbo9780511817410.009.

18 

J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier

Journal of Financial Economics 162 (2024) 103951 

Coase, R., 1972. Durability and monopoly. J. Law Econ. 15 (1), 143–149. http:

//dx.doi.org/10.1086/466731.

Cong, L.W., Li, Y., Wang, N., 2021. Tokenomics: Dynamic adoption and valuation. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 34 (3), 1105–1155. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhaa089.

Cong, L.W., Li, J., Wang, N., 2022. Token-based platform finance. J. Financ. Econ. 144

(3), 972–991. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.10.002.

Jermann, U., 2023. A macro-finance model

for proof-of-stake ethereum. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4335835, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=
4335835.

John, K., Rivera, T., Saleh, F., 2021. Equilibrium staking levels in a proof-of-stake
blockchain. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3965599, Available at SSRN: https://
ssrn.com/abstract=3965599.

d’Avernas, A., Maurin, V., Vandeweyer, Q., 2022. Can stablecoins be stable? http:
//dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4226027, Becker-Friedman Institute Working Paper No.
2022-131.

Lee, J., Parlour, C., 2022. Consumers as financiers: Consumer surplus, crowdfunding,
and initial coin offerings. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (3), 1105–1140. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/rfs/hhab058.

DeMarzo, P., He, Z., 2021. Leverage dynamics without commitment. J. Finance 76 (3),

Levit, D., Malenko, N., Maug, E., 2024. Trading and shareholder democracy. J. Finance

1195–1250. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13001.

79 (1), 257–304. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13289.

Feenstra, R., 1986. Functional equivalence between liquidity costs and the utility
of money. J. Monetary Econ. 17 (2), 271–291. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-
3932(86)90032-2.

Gan, J., Tsoukalas, G., Netessine, S., 2023. Decentralized platforms: Governance,
tokenomics, and ICO design. Manage. Sci. 69 (11), 6667–6683. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1287/mnsc.2021.02076.

Goldstein, I., Gupta, D., Sverchkov, R., 2024. Utility tokens as a commitment to

competition. J. Finance http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4248492

Grossman, S., Hart, O., 1986. The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical
and lateral integration. J. Polit. Econ. 94 (4), 691–719. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/
261404.

Gryglewicz, S., Mayer, S., Morellec, E., 2021. Optimal financing with tokens. J. Financ.
Econ. 142 (3), 1038–1067. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.05.004.
Han, J., Lee, J., Li, T., 2023. DAO governance. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4346581,

Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4346581.

Hansmann, H., 1988. Ownership of the firm. J. Law Econ. Organ. 4 (2), 267–304.

Li, J., Mann, W., 2017. Digital tokens and platform-building. http://dx.doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.3088726, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3088726.
Li, Y., Mayer, S., 2020. Money creation in decentralized finance: A dynamic model
of stablecoin and crypto shadow banking. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3757083,
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3757083.

Sidrauski, M., 1967. Rational choice and patterns of growth in a monetary economy.
Amer. Econ. Rev. 57 (2), 534–544, URL https://www.jstor.org/stable/1821653.
Sockin, M., Xiong, W., 2023. Decentralization through tokenization. J. Finance 78 (1),

247–299. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13192.

Stokey, N., Lucas, R., 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics. Harvard

University Press.

Tsoukalas, G., Falk, B.H., 2020. Token-weighted crowdsourcing. Manage. Sci. 66 (9),

3843–3859. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3515.

Williamson, O., 1979. Transaction-cost economics: The governance of contractual
relations. J. Law Econ. 22 (2), 233–261. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/466942.
You, Y., Rogoff, K., 2023. Redeemable platform currencies. Rev. Econ. Stud. 90 (2),

http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.jleo.a036953.

975–1008. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdac028.

Hart, O., Moore, J., 1998. Cooperatives vs. Outside ownership. http://dx.doi.org/10.

3386/w6421, NBER Working Paper 6421.

19 

