Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Asymmetric information, disagreement, and the valuation of debt and
equity✩
Snehal Banerjee a
a Stephen M. Ross School of Business, University of Michigan, 701 Tappan Street, Ann Arbor, 48109, MI, USA
b Rady School of Management, UC San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, 92093, CA, USA
c Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, 655 Knight Way, Stanford, 94305, CA, USA

, Bradyn Breon-Drish b

,∗, Kevin Smith c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We study debt and equity valuation when investors have private information and may exhibit differences of
opinion. Our model generates several predictions that are consistent with empirical evidence but difficult to
reconcile with traditional models. Belief dispersion relates to expected equity and debt returns in opposite
directions. Similarly, expected debt (equity) returns typically increase (decrease) with default risk, though
these relationships reverse for firms close to bankruptcy. Firms’ capital structures affect their valuations even
without classical capital structure frictions (e.g., tax shields, distress costs) – when liquidity is higher in the
equity than in the debt market, leverage can raise firm value.

Dataset link: Code for figures (Original data)

JEL classification:
G10
G12
G14
G32

Keywords:
Capital structure
Rational expectations
Difference of opinions
Disagreement
Liquidity trading
Information quality

1.  Introduction

The impact of heterogeneous investor beliefs on asset prices is a
foundational  question  in  financial  economics,  yet  the  empirical  evi-
dence  on  this  relation  is  strikingly  different  across  stock  and  bond
markets. In the cross-section, belief dispersion appears to be negatively
related to stock returns (e.g., Diether et al., 2002), but positively related
to bond returns (e.g., Güntay and Hackbarth, 2010). Reconciling this
evidence simultaneously poses a puzzle for traditional approaches to
understanding dispersed beliefs across investors, including noisy ratio-
nal expectations (RE) and difference of opinions (DO) models. This is
because  such  models  have  largely  restricted  attention  to  settings  in
which security payoffs are linear in underlying fundamentals, and so

ignore the distinct non-linearity in debt and equity payoffs.

To  understand  how  investor  information,  disagreement,  and  liq-
uidity/noise  trading  affect  returns  on  debt  and  equity  in  a  unified
framework, we consider a setting where investors who have dispersed
information about a firm’s cash flows trade these securities with liq-
uidity,  or  noise,  traders  (e.g.,  as  in  the  noisy  RE  model  of Hellwig,
1980).  Our  model  captures  two  key  features.  First,  the  payoffs  to
debt  and  equity  depend  non-linearly  on  the  firm’s  underlying  cash
flows.  Second,  belief  dispersion  can  arise  through  a  combination  of
asymmetric information and noise trading (as in noisy RE models) and
investor disagreement (as in DO models).1

✩
Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank Sivan Frenkel, Jungsuk Han (discussant), Mina Lee (discussant), Mirela Sandulescu, Haresh
Sapra, Duane Seppi (discussant), Liyan Yang, participants at the 2023 Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference, the 2023 SIAM Conference on
Financial Mathematics and Engineering, the 2023 China International Conference in Finance, the Fall 2023 Finance Theory Group Conference, the 2024 CMU
Accounting Conference, and seminar participants at Macquarie Business School, Amsterdam Business School, Oxford Said Business School and Warwick Business
School for valuable feedback. All errors are our own.

∗ Correspondence to: Rady School of Management, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive #0553, La Jolla, CA 92093-0553, United States.

E-mail addresses: snehalb@umich.edu (S. Banerjee), bbreondrish@ucsd.edu (B. Breon-Drish), kevinsm@stanford.edu (K. Smith).

1 We distinguish between ‘‘belief dispersion’’ and ‘‘disagreement’’. Belief dispersion refers to the differences in investors’ beliefs about firm value, regardless of
their source. Specifically, it encompasses differences in beliefs driven both by investor private information that is not fully revealed by prices, and by investors
‘‘agreeing to disagree’’ about the information content of one another’s signals and thus ignoring the information in prices. Disagreement refers only to the latter
source of differences in investor beliefs.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.103995
Received 12 May 2023; Received in revised form 3 January 2025; Accepted 4 January 2025
Available online 21 January 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

In equilibrium, belief dispersion depends on two primary factors:
noise-trading volatility and investor disagreement. We show that higher
noise-trading  volatility  reduces  the  informativeness  of  prices,  which
raises belief dispersion and leads to lower equity returns and higher
debt returns. Our model can thus jointly reconcile the empirical evi-
dence on the relation between belief dispersion and debt and equity
returns. However, while investor disagreement also raises belief dis-
persion, we show that it has the opposite effects on expected returns.
Thus, the impact of belief dispersion on expected returns may differ
in settings where it is driven by disagreement as opposed to noise in
prices.  This  highlights  the  need  for  empirical  research  to  separately
consider the underlying drivers of heterogeneous investor beliefs.

The  model  further  generates  several  predictions  on  how  a  firm’s
capital structure relates to its equity and debt valuations in the presence
of  asymmetric  information.  For  instance,  we  show  that  distress  risk
raises the expected return on investment-grade debt, but lowers the
expected return on equity for such firms. However, this relationship
reverses for firms close to bankruptcy, and thus the overall relation
between distress risk and equity returns is hump-shaped. Because firm-
specific private information and liquidity trade drive these results, they
may help explain empirical evidence that links distress risk to expected
equity  returns  even  after  controlling  for  systematic  risk  exposures,
which is difficult to reconcile in standard asset-pricing models.2

Our  model  also  offers  novel  predictions  about  how  the  relation
between default risk and expected returns varies across firms. We find
that this relation weakens, and can even reverse, when disagreement
among investors is sufficiently high or when liquidity trading is low.
Moreover, considering the prices of equity and debt jointly, we show
that a firm’s capital structure affects its valuation even in the absence
of  traditional  frictions  such  as  tax  shields  of  debt  or  distress  costs.
Specifically,  the  optimal  choice  of  leverage  depends  on  the  relative
amount of liquidity trading in each security. When liquidity trading is
higher in equity, the total value of a levered firm exceeds that of an
unlevered firm.

Overview  of  Model  and  Mechanism. In  our  model,  privately-
informed, risk-averse investors trade the debt and equity of a levered
firm  alongside  liquidity  traders.3 We  allow,  but  do  not  require,  in-
vestors to agree to disagree about the quality of others’ information
and, consequently, dismiss the information in prices. Our model nests
two natural benchmarks as special cases: investors may either exhibit
rational expectations (RE) and correctly interpret the information in
prices,  or  exhibit  pure  differences  of  opinion  (DO)  and  completely
ignore price information. A key challenge in characterizing the equi-
librium is that the payoffs to levered equity and debt are option-like,
and depend non-linearly on the firm’s underlying cash flows, and so
standard approaches (e.g., Hellwig, 1980) cannot be employed. Instead,
we apply recent work on non-linear equilibria by Breon-Drish (2015),
and the multi-asset model of Chabakauri et al. (2022), to characterize
an equilibrium in which security prices depend non-linearly on beliefs
about fundamentals and liquidity trading.

2 See e.g. Campbell et al. (2008) for evidence on distress risk and expected
equity returns after controlling for standard risk factor exposures, and Huang
and  Huang (2012)  and Bai  et  al. (2020)  for  evidence  on  distress  risk  and
expected bond returns. Garlappi et al. (2008) finds a hump-shaped relationship
between default risk and expected equity returns that continues to hold after
adjusting for standard risk characteristics.

3 In our benchmark analysis, we consider a single-firm model in which the
source of systematic risk is the aggregate supply of each security that investors
have to hold. In Section 7, we show that our analysis extends naturally to a
setting with multiple firms and a systematic risk factor. Our results on ‘‘excess’’
expected returns should be interpreted as predictions about ‘‘alphas’’ from the
perspective of an outside econometrician who is controlling for variation in
systematic risk exposures of the securities. However, these alphas do not reflect
mispricing from the perspective of investors in the model.

The option-like nature of the equity and debt payoffs affects how the
prices of these securities aggregate investor information and respond to
liquidity shocks. To gain intuition, we start with a benchmark setting
where  liquidity-trader  demands  in  the  equity  and  debt  markets  are
identical. In this case, debt and equity prices each convey the same
information signal to investors. We find that equity and debt valuations
depend crucially on how investors update from this price signal. Specif-
ically, relative to a benchmark economy without private information
or  liquidity  trade,  the  expected  excess  return  on  equity  is  negative
and  the  expected  excess  return  on  debt  is  positive  unless  investors
are  sufficiently  dismissive  of  price  information  and  liquidity-trading
volatility is sufficiently low.

These  results  are  driven  by  how  the  security  prices  respond  to
investors’  private  information  and  liquidity-trader  demand  in  equi-
librium.  We  show  that  security  prices  can  be  expressed  as  expected
security payoffs under a risk-neutral distribution, where the risk-neutral
expectation of cash flows is increasing in investors’ aggregate cash flow
expectations and liquidity-trader demand.

This  enables  us  to  provide  a  simple  characterization  of  expected
returns.  Since  equity  payoffs  are  convex  in  cash  flows,  the  equity
price  is  a  convex  function  of  the  risk-neutral  cash  flow  expectation
—  analogously,  the  debt  price  is  concave.  Building  on  the  intuition
from  Jensen’s  inequality,  this  implies  that  the  expected  returns  on
the securities depend on the difference between the volatility of the
risk-neutral cash flow expectation and that of the (physical) cash flow
expectation of a typical investor. The convexity in equity payoffs and
prices implies that expected excess returns on equity are positive when
the  risk-neutral  expectation  is  less  volatile.  The  concavity  for  debt
implies that the expected excess returns are positive when the reverse
is true.

The  relative  volatility  of  the  risk-neutral  cash  flow  expectation
versus the cash flow expectation of a typical investor depends on asym-
metric information, noise-trading volatility, and their interaction with
disagreement. On the one hand, because the risk-neutral expectation
reflects aggregate investor beliefs, it tends to be less volatile than the
beliefs of an individual investor. On the other hand, because the risk-
neutral expectation is also driven by noise-trader demand, it tends to
be more volatile when noise-trading volatility is higher.

We show that the relative impact of these forces depends crucially
on  disagreement,  and  specifically  how  much  weight  investors  give
the information in prices when forming their beliefs. When investors
interpret the price as being informative (e.g., when they exhibit RE),
they put relatively more weight on the common (price) signal. This
amplifies  the  impact  of  noise-trading  volatility  and  makes  the  risk-
neutral expectation more volatile, which leads to lower equity returns
and  higher  debt  returns.  In  contrast,  when  investors  disagree  about
the  informativeness  of  others’  signals,  they  dismiss  the  information
in  prices,  which  makes  individual  expectations  more  volatile.  As  a
result, when noise-trading volatility is sufficiently low, the first channel
dominates, which leads to higher equity returns and lower debt returns.
Implications. The  above  economic  mechanisms  have  several
empirically-relevant implications. First, as discussed above, our model
jointly explains why belief dispersion can be negatively related to eq-
uity returns but positively related to debt returns. Moreover, our analy-
sis highlights the importance of identifying the source of belief disper-
sion — asymmetric information and noise trading or disagreement —
when studying this relation.

Second,  for  firms  far  from  default,  we  find  that  higher  leverage
is associated with higher expected excess debt returns relative to an
economy without private information or noise trade. Thus, these factors
amplify  the  impact  that  distress  risk  has  on  expected  debt  returns.

2 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Similarly,  expected  excess  equity  returns  are  negatively  related  to
leverage when default probabilities are low (consistent with Campbell
et al., 2008), but increase with leverage for highly distressed firms.4

Third, the above intuition implies that these relations weaken, and
can even reverse, when investors are highly dismissive of the infor-
mation in prices and the volatility of liquidity trading is sufficiently
low. As such, our model provides novel predictions on how the relation
between expected returns and distress risk varies across firms. Specifi-
cally, the expected return on debt is positively related to the interaction
between  distress  risk  and  liquidity-trading  volatility,  but  negatively
related to the interaction between distress risk and disagreement; the
predictions for the expected return on equity are reversed.

We  then  generalize  our  benchmark  model  to  consider  a  setting
in which liquidity trading in debt and equity markets can differ. In-
vestors update their beliefs about cash flows from both the debt and
equity  prices,  which  generates  a  spillover  across  markets:  liquidity-
trader  demand  in  the  equity  market  increases  debt  prices  and  vice
versa.  Our  analysis  implies  that  the  correlation  between  equity  and
debt prices increases with leverage when the likelihood of default is
sufficiently low, consistent with the empirical evidence in Pasquariello
and Sandulescu (2024).

In our baseline analysis, because liquidity traders’ demands in both
markets are identical, their impact on the combined valuation of debt
and equity cancel out exactly. As a result, the total value of the levered
firm is equal to the value of the unlevered firm i.e., Modigliani and
Miller’s  irrelevance  result  obtains.  However,  when  liquidity  trading
differs across the two markets, this is no longer true. Instead, we find
that, when the volatility of liquidity trading in equity is higher than
that in debt, equity valuations are more significantly inflated than debt
valuations  are  deflated,  so  that  leverage  increases  the  firm’s  overall
value. Moreover, the total market value of the firm is hump-shaped
in leverage, which suggests that an interior level of leverage is optimal
for the firm, even in the absence of traditional frictions associated with
debt financing (e.g., tax shields, distress costs).

Finally, we consider a multi-firm generalization in which there are
an arbitrary number of firms, each with a potentially different leverage
policy, and whose cash flows are exposed to a systematic risk factor
and  are  subject  to  firm-specific  shocks.  We  show  that  the  insights
of  our  baseline  model  apply  directly:  when  investors  are  informed
about the firm-specific component of cash flows and liquidity trading
is  idiosyncratic  across  firms,  our  predictions  about  expected  returns
from the baseline model become predictions about expected returns in
excess of those in a frictionless economy without private information or
liquidity trading (i.e., in which returns are driven only by exposure to
the systematic risk factor). This analysis establishes that our key mech-
anisms survive in a multi-firm setting even after properly controlling
for systematic risk, and consequently firm-specific private information
and liquidity trade continue to influence expected returns.

The rest of the paper is as follows. The next section discusses the
related literature and our incremental contribution. Section 3 presents
the model, and Section 4 characterizes the equilibrium in the baseline
case.  Section 5 characterizes  how  the  expected  returns  on  debt  and
equity  depend  on  the  features  of  the  model.  Section 6 presents  the
characterization of the equilibrium when the liquidity-trader demands
in the two markets are not identical. Section 7 generalizes the baseline
model to a setting with multiple firms and an explicit systematic risk
factor. Section 8 presents the empirical implications of the model and
discusses existing empirical research that relates to our results. Finally,
Section 9 concludes. Unless noted otherwise, proofs are in Appendix A.

4 Note the relationship between default risk and expected debt returns is
consistent with Huang and Huang (2012). The overall hump shape between de-
fault risk and expected equity returns is consistent with the results in Garlappi
et al. (2008), Garlappi and Yan (2011).

2.  Related literature

One contribution of our analysis is to study trade in equity and debt
in a setting that allows for both heterogeneity in investor information
and differences of opinion. That is, in addition to jointly considering
both equity and debt issued by the same firm (as in Chabakauri et al.,
2022), our model differs from the standard noisy rational expectations
framework by allowing investors to ‘‘agree to disagree’’. We show that
this leads to novel predictions on how non-linearity in payoffs affects
expected returns.

Chabakauri et al. (2022) offers the closest model to ours, analyzing
private information in a general multi-asset noisy rational expectations
framework with CARA investors. When applying their model to study
debt and equity prices, their focus is on showing that the informative-
ness of these prices does not depend on the firm’s capital structure (a
result that also holds in our model). We complement their work by
allowing investors to potentially disregard the information in prices,
by  analyzing  expected  debt  and  equity  returns,  and  by  considering
a  setting  with  multiple  firms  and  systematic  risk  factors.  Moreover,
we derive readily-interpretable closed-form solutions for demands and
prices in the two securities by focusing on the case in which firm cash
flows are normally distributed.

Our analysis is related to noisy rational expectations models of debt
and equity markets in which non-linearity in security prices plays a key
role. To study the credit-spread puzzle, Albagli et al. (2021) consider
a setting in which risk-neutral, informed investors have position limits
and trade in a bond with binary payoffs, and find that the bond price
overweights risk. Similarly, Albagli et al. (2024) argue that in general
settings,  noisy  aggregation  of  information  leads  to  prices  that  place
excess  weight  on  tail  risks. Davis (2017)  extends  their  analysis  to
consider the firm’s issuance decision over time and across markets, in a
setting where investors choose how much information to acquire about
fundamentals. Back and Crotty (2015) consider the pricing of debt and
equity in a continuous-time Kyle model in which a strategic, informed
investor can trade in both debt and equity markets, and market making
is integrated. They show that the stock-bond correlation depends on
the cross-market lambda, and is positive (negative) when the strategic
trader is informed about the mean (risk) of firm’s assets.

In  a  single-period  Kyle  model  of  debt  and  equity  with  segmen-
tation  in  market  making, Pasquariello  and  Sandulescu (2024)  study
how changes in leverage affect the sensitivity of debt and equity to
firm value, and consequently, affect the intensity of informed specu-
lation in each security. This gives rise to variation in liquidity across
debt and equity, and non-monotonicity in the co-movement of their
prices. Chaigneau (2024)  considers  capital  structure  when  investors
have information on both upside and downside risks. Finally, Frenkel
(2023) considers a Glosten–Milgrom model of debt trading to charac-
terize how negative news for firms that are close to default can trig-
ger more information acquisition, and subsequently, lead to liquidity
dry-ups.

We view our analysis as complementary to this earlier work. While
these papers largely consider settings in which the price is determined
by  risk-neutral  investors/market  makers,  investors  in  our  model  are
risk-averse. Moreover, while these models focus on rational expecta-
tions equilibria, our model allows investors to ‘‘agree to disagree’’ about
the  informativeness  of  others’  signals,  and  consequently  dismiss  the
information in prices. We show that this has important implications for
how non-linearity in payoffs affects expected returns.5

5 Models in which investors ‘‘agree to disagree’’ about others’ information
include Miller (1977), Morris (1994), Kandel and Pearson (1995), Scheinkman
and Xiong (2003), and Banerjee (2011). Our analysis also has implications for
settings where investors dismiss the information in prices due to other reasons,
including  ‘‘cursedness’’  (e.g., Eyster  et  al., 2018),  costly  price  information
(e.g., Mondria  et  al., 2022)  and  ‘‘wishful  thinking’’  (e.g., Banerjee  et  al.,
2024a).

3 

S. Banerjee et al.

3.  Model setup

We  consider  a  model  of  trade  among  informed  investors  in  the
spirit of Hellwig (1980), with two modifications: we allow the firm to
be levered and for investors to potentially ignore the information in
price. We begin with a single-firm model, where our results are most
transparent, but illustrate how they extend to a large economy with
many firms in Section 7.

Payoffs. Investors  trade  in  the  risky  debt  and  equity  of  a  firm
alongside a risk-free security. The gross return on the risk-free security
is normalized to 1. The firm’s total cash flows per share (i.e., the sum of
its cash flows per share/unit that accrue to equity and debt holders) are
)
 ≡ 𝑚+𝜃, where 𝑚 is a constant and 𝜃 ∼ 𝑁 (
. The assumption that
 is normally distributed keeps the traders’ updating problem simple
and transparent, but can be relaxed using the approach of Breon-Drish
(2015) and Chabakauri et al. (2022).

0, 𝜎2
𝜃

The  firm  has  debt  with  a  face  value  of 𝐾 per  unit,  i.e.,  equity
payoffs per share are 𝑉𝐸 =  max ( − 𝐾 , 0) and debt payoffs per unit
are 𝑉𝐷 =  min (, 𝐾),  so  that  = 𝑉𝐸 + 𝑉𝐷.  We  assume  that  there
)
are  liquidity  traders  who  submit  identical  demand 𝑧 ∼ 𝑁 (
0, 𝜎2
𝑧
shares/units in both the equity and debt markets. The per capita supply
of the firm’s securities is 𝜅 ≥ 0 (i.e., there are 𝜅 units of debt and
𝜅 shares outstanding per capita). Note that setting per capita supply
equal in the debt and equity securities ensures that changes in the firm’s
capital structure do not mechanically change the total cash flow paid
out to investors. That is, the aggregate cash flow of the two securities
𝜅 𝑉𝐷 + 𝜅 𝑉𝐸 always sums to 𝜅 × .

The assumption that the liquidity-trader demands in the debt and
equity markets are perfectly correlated is made for expositional clarity
in our initial analysis. In Section 6, we explore a setting where liq-
uidity trading in the two markets follows a general bivariate normal
distribution,  which  allows  for  imperfect  correlation  and/or  different
variances  across  the  markets.  Note  that  setting 𝐾 ≥ 0 ensures  that
firms’ equity holders always earn non-negative payoffs, consistent with
limited liability. However, because the cash flow  can take on negative
values, our baseline analysis allows for potentially negative payoffs to
the debt. We extend our model to fully incorporate limited liability
in Appendix D in which we consider a setting where the cash flow is
bounded below by zero.

Preferences and Information. There is a unit mass of investors
indexed by 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1]. Each investor 𝑖 is endowed with 𝜅 shares of the
stock and bond, and exhibits CARA utility with risk-tolerance 𝜏 over
her terminal wealth 𝑊𝑖. Let 𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖 and 𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖 denote investor 𝑖’s demands
for the equity and debt, respectively (so that 𝑥𝑘,𝑖 − 𝜅 is her net trade
in security 𝑘 ∈ {𝐷 , 𝐸}), and let 𝑃𝐸 denote the equity and 𝑃𝐷 the debt
price per share/unit. The terminal wealth 𝑊𝑖 of investor 𝑖 is therefore:
𝑊𝑖 = 𝜅(𝑃𝐷 + 𝑃𝐸 ) + 𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖(𝑉𝐸 − 𝑃𝐸 ) + 𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖(𝑉𝐷 − 𝑃𝐷).

Investor 𝑖 observes a private signal 𝑠𝑖 of the form:

𝑠𝑖 = 𝜃 + 𝜀𝑖,
where  the  error  terms 𝜀𝑖 ∼ 𝑁 (
random variables.

0, 𝜎2
𝜀

)

are  independent  of  all  other

(1)

Subjective Beliefs. We allow for a flexible specification of subjec-
tive beliefs about the private information of others. Following Banerjee
(2011), we assume that investor 𝑖’s beliefs about her own signal are
given by (1), but her beliefs about investor 𝑗’s signal are given by:

𝑠𝑗 =𝑖 𝜌 𝜃 +

√

1 − 𝜌2 𝜉𝑖 + 𝜀𝑗 ,

(2)

where  the  random  variables 𝜉𝑖 ∼𝑖 𝑁(0, 𝜎2
are
independent  of  all  other  random  variables  and  each  other.  We  use
a subscript 𝑖 on expectations, variances, and distributions to refer to
investor 𝑖’s subjective beliefs.

𝜃 ) and 𝜀𝑗 ∼𝑖 𝑁 (

0, 𝜎2
𝜀

)

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

The  parameter 𝜌 ∈  [0, 1] captures  the degree  of  disagreement
across investors.6 Specifically, when 𝜌 = 1, investors agree: all investors
share common priors about the joint distribution of fundamentals and
signals, and so exhibit rational expectations (as in Hellwig, 1980). In
this  case,  investors  fully  condition  on  the  information  in  prices  (in
addition to their private information) when updating their beliefs about
fundamentals. At the other extreme, when 𝜌 =  0, investors disagree
maximally  and  exhibit  ‘‘pure’’  differences  of  opinion  (as  in Miller,
1977):  each  investor  believes  no  other  investor  has  payoff  relevant
information, and so prices are not incrementally informative about pay-
offs. In this case, investors do not place any weight on price information
when updating their beliefs about cash flows. Finally, when 𝜌 ∈ (0, 1),
investors disagree partially about the informativeness of each other’s
signals, since each investor believes others’ signals are informative, but
less so than they actually are. As a result, each investor is partially
dismissive of the information in prices when forming beliefs.

The assumption that all investors can trade in both markets is made
for tractability, but also serves as a useful benchmark. It allows us to
focus on the implications of belief heterogeneity on debt and equity
valuations without introducing differences in clienteles, investor infor-
mation, or risk aversion across these securities. In practice, one might
argue that bond markets are more specialized and have less participa-
tion than equities. Although we expect the economic mechanisms that
we study to operate in richer settings, explicitly accounting for different
groups  of  investors  in  each  security  (e.g.,  investor  specialization)  is
intractable in our framework.7

Equilibrium. An equilibrium consists of demands {𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖, 𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖}𝑖∈[0,1]
and  prices (𝑃𝐷, 𝑃𝐸 ) such  that  (i)  the  demands (𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖, 𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖) maximize
investor 𝑖’s expected utility, given her information 
𝑖 = 𝜎(𝑠𝑖, 𝑃𝐷, 𝑃𝐸 )
and subjective belief formation mechanism described above, and (ii)
the equilibrium prices (𝑃𝐷, 𝑃𝐸 ) are determined by market clearing
∫ 𝑥𝑘,𝑖𝑑 𝑖 + 𝑧 = 𝜅;
4.  Analysis

𝑘 ∈ {𝐷 , 𝐸}.

(3)

Because the equity and debt securities are effectively options on the
underlying cash flows, their payoffs are not normally distributed. As a
result, the equilibrium in which prices are linear in the fundamental
and  liquidity  trade,  which  is  common  in  traditional  CARA-Normal
rational expectations models, does not exist. Instead, we focus on the
following more general class of equilibria, which is a two-asset version
of the equilibrium studied in Breon-Drish (2015) and Chabakauri et al.
(2022) and allows for non-linear price functions.8

We emphasize that this class of equilibria is not an approximation to
a linear equilibrium; rather, it entertains more general functional forms
for asset prices.

Definition 1. A generalized linear equilibrium is one in which there
exists an injective function (𝑃𝐷(⋅), 𝑃𝐸 (⋅)) mapping R2 into R2, and linear
statistics of the form

6 The assumption that 𝜉𝑖 has the same distribution as 𝜃 ensures that investor
𝑖 cannot detect the error in her subjective beliefs based on the unconditional
mean  and  variance  of  others’  signals.  Note  that  investor 𝑖 believes  that 𝜉𝑖
is  the  common  ‘‘error’’  in  all  other  investors’  signals.  This  is  analogous  to
the  subjective  beliefs  of  investors  in  other  difference  of  opinions  models
(e.g., Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003) and in the ‘‘cursed equilibrium’’ of Eyster
et al. (2018).

7 As Section 6 illustrates, we can allow for differences in the informative-
ness of debt and equity prices by assuming that liquidity trading in the two
markets have different variances.

8 We follow existing applied work in focusing on equilibria in the gener-
alized linear class. Indeed, in classic CARA-Normal settings (e.g., Grossman
and Stiglitz, 1980, Hellwig, 1980), the set of generalized linear equilibria is
precisely the set of linear equilibria. The equilibria we characterize below are
unique in the class of generalized linear equilibria.

S. Banerjee et al.

𝑠𝑝1 = 𝑠 + 𝑏1𝑧

𝑠𝑝2 = 𝑠 + 𝑏2𝑧,

(4)

(5)

where 𝑠 = ∫ 𝑠𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 is the average private signal and 𝑏1, 𝑏2 are endogenous
constants such that the equilibrium debt and equity prices are given by
𝑃𝐷(𝑠𝑝1, 𝑠𝑝2) and 𝑃𝐸 (𝑠𝑝1, 𝑠𝑝2).

The key feature of such an equilibrium is that the information in
prices  reduces  to  two  linear  statistics 𝑠𝑝1 and 𝑠𝑝2,  corresponding  to
the fact that investors observe two prices. This implies that Bayesian
updating takes a tractable form as in linear noisy rational expectations
models. As we will see, in the case of identical liquidity trading in both
markets, in equilibrium, the debt and equity prices convey the same
information, and as such, the two price statistics are identical. We refer
to the single statistic conveyed by prices as

𝑠𝑝1 = 𝑠𝑝2 = 𝑠𝑝

≡ 𝑠 + 𝑏𝑧 =𝑖 𝜌 𝜃 +

√

1 − 𝜌2 𝜉𝑖 + 𝑏𝑧.

(6)

It is worth noting that the objective distribution of this signal is given
by 𝑠𝑝 = 𝜃 + 𝑏𝑧, which coincides with investors’ beliefs when 𝜌 = 1.

To  solve  for  an  equilibrium,  we  derive  investors’  demands  given
these beliefs, apply market clearing, and verify that the resulting price
indeed takes the ‘‘generalized linear’’ form from Definition 1.

4.1.  Benchmarks

To  provide  intuition  for  the  equilibrium  that  arises  in  the  gen-
eral  case,  we  start  by  characterizing  the  equilibrium  in  two  natural
benchmarks.

4.1.1.  Unlevered firm benchmark

First, consider the case in which the firm issues only equity (i.e.,
when 𝐾 → −∞). In this case, the payoff to equity holders is normally
distributed as in traditional models, and so we recover the standard,
linear equilibrium. Moreover, since the firm only issues one type of
security, investor 𝑖 infers a single linear statistic from the unlevered
equity price that takes the form in (6).

Given this signal, investor 𝑖’s conditional beliefs about cash flows 

(

𝑠𝑖
𝜎2
𝜀

+

)

𝑠𝑝
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝
)−1

are normal with moments given by

𝜇𝑖

≡ E

𝑖

[

]

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑃𝑈

= 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝜎2
𝑠

≡ V
𝑖

[

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑃𝑈

]

=

(

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

𝜎2
𝑝

≡ 1 − 𝜌2
𝜌2

𝜎2
𝜃 +

𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧

𝜌2

1
𝜎2
𝑝

and

, where

(7)

(8)

(9)

and where it is understood that when 𝜌 =  0, we take 1
=  0
𝜎2
𝑝
in the above expressions. Standard calculations imply that investor 𝑖’s
optimal demand for the security is given by

= 1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

,

(10)

𝑥𝑖 = 𝜏

(

)

𝜇𝑖 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎2
𝑠

and market clearing implies that the equilibrium price is given by:

𝑃𝑈 = ∫ 𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 +

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

(𝑧 − 𝜅) .

This implies the following result.

Lemma 1 (Unlevered Firm Benchmark). Suppose that the firm only issues
equity (i.e., 𝐾 → −∞). Then,  there is a unique linear equilibrium in which

the firm’s price satisfies:

((

𝑃𝑈 (⋅) = 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

(

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

)

(𝑠 + 𝑏𝑧) −

)

,

𝜅
𝜏

(11)

)−1

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

.

1
𝜎2
𝜃

𝑠 =

+ 1
𝜎2
𝜀

, and 𝜎2

where 𝑏 =

+ 1
𝜎2
𝑝
Notably, the above equilibrium coincides with the rational expec-
tations equilibrium in Hellwig (1980) when 𝜌 = 1. On the other hand,
when 𝜌 = 0, investors ignore the information in prices (since the weight
they put on 𝑠𝑝 in (7) is zero).

4.1.2.  Risk-neutral, uninformed benchmark

As a second benchmark, consider the setting in which investors are
risk neutral (i.e., 𝜏 → ∞) and completely uninformed (i.e., 𝜎2
𝜀 → ∞).
In this case, the price of each security is given by the unconditional
expectation of its payoff i.e.,
𝑃𝐸 = E [max ( − 𝐾 , 0)] and

𝑃𝐷 = E [min (, 𝐾)] .

In what follows, the definition below will be convenient.

Suppose 𝑥 ∼ 𝑁(𝜇𝑥, 𝜎2

𝑥).  Let 𝑀𝐸 (𝜇𝑥, 𝜎2

𝑥, 𝐾) and

Definition  2.
𝑀𝐷(𝜇𝑥, 𝜎2
𝑀𝐸 (𝜇𝑥, 𝜎2

𝑥, 𝐾) denote:
𝑥, 𝐾) ≡ E [max (𝑥 − 𝐾 , 0)]

[

=

1 − 𝛷

( 𝐾 − 𝜇𝑥
𝜎𝑥

)] ⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝜇𝑥 − 𝐾 + 𝜎𝑥

𝑀𝐷(𝜇𝑥, 𝜎2

𝑥, 𝐾) ≡ E [min (𝑥, 𝐾)]

𝜙

)

( 𝐾−𝜇𝑥
𝜎𝑥
( 𝐾−𝜇𝑥
𝜎𝑥

1 − 𝛷

= 𝐾 − 𝛷

( 𝐾 − 𝜇𝑥
𝜎𝑥

) ⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝐾 − 𝜇𝑥 + 𝜎𝑥

)

)

𝜙

𝛷

( 𝐾−𝜇𝑥
𝜎𝑥
( 𝐾−𝜇𝑥
𝜎𝑥

.

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

,

(12)

)

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

(13)

It is worth noting that since max(𝑥 − 𝐾 , 0) is an increasing, convex
𝑥, 𝐾) is increasing
𝑥, but decreasing in 𝐾. Similarly, since min(𝑥, 𝐾)  = 𝐾 +
𝑥, 𝐾)

function of 𝑥−𝐾, we immediately have that 𝑀𝐸 (𝜇𝑥, 𝜎2
in 𝜇𝑥 and 𝜎2
min(𝑥−𝐾 , 0) is increasing and concave in 𝑥, we have that 𝑀𝐷(𝜇𝑥, 𝜎2
is increasing in 𝜇𝑥 and 𝐾, but decreasing in 𝜎2
𝑥.

Given the above definition, we can characterize the equilibrium in

this benchmark as follows.

Lemma 2 (Risk-neutral, Uninformed Benchmark). Suppose that investors
are risk neutral and uninformed (i.e., 𝜏 → ∞, 𝜎2
𝜀 → ∞). Then, there is a
unique equilibrium in which the firm’s equity and debt prices are given by
𝜃 , 𝐾)
. Moreover, the total value
and 𝑃𝐷 = 𝑀𝐷
𝑃𝐸 = 𝑀𝐸
of the firm is given by 𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷 = 𝑚.

𝜃 , 𝐾)

(𝑚, 𝜎2

(𝑚, 𝜎2

)

( 𝐾−𝑚
𝜎𝜃

The above results are intuitive. Note that Pr ( <  𝐾)  = 𝛷

reflects the probability that the firm defaults on its debt. Given this,
the price of equity is given by the probability of no default times the
conditional expected cash flows, given no default i.e.,
𝑃𝐸 = Pr ( > 𝐾) × E[ − 𝐾|
which corresponds to the expression for 𝑀𝐸 in (12), evaluated at the
firm’s cash flow mean and variance. Similarly, the price of debt is given
by the face value of debt, 𝐾, minus the probability of default times the
loss given default i.e.,
𝑃𝐷 = 𝐾 − Pr ( < 𝐾) × E[𝐾 − 

 > 𝐾],

 < 𝐾],

|

which corresponds to the expression for 𝑀𝐷 in (13). Not surprisingly,
since investors are uninformed and risk-neutral, the total value of the
firm reflects the unconditional expected cash flows. In the following
subsection, we show that the equilibrium prices when investors are risk
averse and privately informed are natural generalizations of the above
expressions.

5 

S. Banerjee et al.

4.2.  Equilibrium

To start, we study investors’ demands holding fixed the equity and
debt prices. We then show that the firm’s equity and debt prices contain
the same information as in the unlevered firm benchmark, which lends
tractability to our model.

Lemma 3. Given equity and debt prices 𝑃𝐸 and 𝑃𝐷, investors’ demands
take the form:
)
(

)]

[(

(

)

− 𝐺

,

(14)

𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖
𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖

=

𝜏
𝜎2
𝑠

𝜇𝑖
𝜇𝑖

𝑃𝐸
𝑃𝐷

=

=

𝜕 𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖
𝜕 𝜇𝑖

for a function 𝐺(⋅) defined in the appendix. As a result, the firm’s equity
and  debt  prices  contain  the  same  information  as  in  the  unlevered  firm
}
{𝑠𝑖
and 𝑧 only through the statistic 𝑠𝑝.
benchmark, i.e., they depend upon
The first part of the lemma illustrates that investors’ demands are
additively  separable  in  investors’  beliefs  about  the  firm’s  total  cash
𝑖 [],  and  the  prices 𝑃𝐸 , 𝑃𝐷.  Moreover,  each  investor
flow, 𝜇𝑖 = E
speculates on her beliefs in the same direction in both markets, and
exhibits the same trading aggressiveness in the two markets:
𝜕 𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖
𝜕 𝜇𝑖
Intuitively, both securities are exposed to the firm’s underlying cash
flows  in  the  same  direction.  One  might  posit  that  investors  would
trade more aggressively in the security that is more exposed to a shift
in the firm’s cash flows. For instance, when the firm’s expected cash
flows 𝜇𝑖 are large, the debt almost certainly pays off 𝐾, and so the
equity is considerably more sensitive to a change in 𝜇𝑖. Thus, one might
expect an investor with a positive signal to take a larger position in the
equity than the debt. However, while the expected payoffs to trading
on private information are greater in the security that is more exposed
to 𝜃, so too is the risk, and these two effects precisely offset.9

risk tolerance
posterior uncertainty

𝜏
𝜎2
𝑠

(15)

=

.

Eq. (15) holds regardless of the firm’s debt level 𝐾, which implies
that the firm’s capital structure does not influence the investors’ trading
aggressiveness. In addition, the total supplies of the equity and debt to
be absorbed by the investors, 𝜅 −𝑧, are identical. Together, these results
imply that the equity and debt prices contain the same information
and that this information is the same as in the case where the firm
is  unlevered,  as  in Chabakauri  et  al. (2022).  Therefore,  investors’
expectations and variances of total firm cash flows in equilibrium are
identical to those in Eqs. (7) and (8).

Building on these findings, the next proposition characterizes the

equilibrium price and investor demands.

Proposition  1.
within this class, in which the equity and debt prices satisfy:

There  exists  a  generalized  linear  equilibrium,  unique

(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

𝑠 , 𝐾)

(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

𝑠 , 𝐾) .

and 𝑃𝐷 = 𝑀𝐷

𝑃𝐸 = 𝑀𝐸
Moreover, the total value of the equity and debt is equal to 𝑃𝑈 i.e., 𝑃𝑈 =
𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷, and investors’ equilibrium equity and debt demands satisfy:

(16)

𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖 = 𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖 = 𝜏

𝜇𝑖 − ∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠

− 𝑧 + 𝜅 .

(17)

This proposition demonstrates that the firm’s equity and debt prices
are equal to their expected payoffs under the distribution  ∼ 𝑁(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2
𝑠 ).
That is,  ∼ 𝑁(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2
𝑠 ) is the risk-neutral distribution of cash flows
in our equilibrium.10 Importantly, the mean of this distribution 𝑃𝑈 =

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

∫ 𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖+
(𝑧 − 𝜅) captures both how prices aggregate investors’ diverse
information signals (via the term ∫ 𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖), as well as the risk premium
associated with bearing the net supply of equity and debt (via the term
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

(𝑧 − 𝜅)).
The result establishes that the total market price of the firm’s equity
and debt, 𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷, is independent of the firm’s capital structure and
equal to the price were the firm unlevered 𝑃𝑈 . Moreover, consistent
with the finding in Lemma 3 that investors speculate on their beliefs
equally in both markets, their equilibrium demands in the two markets
are identical and coincide with their demands in the unlevered firm
case.

Intuitively, because the investors have private information about the
firm’s total cash flows, , their goal is to obtain exposure to  (either
positive or negative, depending on their signal).11 Specifically, since
cash flows (and signals) are normally distributed, and noise trading in
both markets is identical, investors want to hold portfolios that are only
exposed to . Moreover, investors can always do this by reconstructing
a security that pays off in proportion to the firm’s total cash flows by
buying equal  amounts of  the  outstanding  debt  and  equity  securities.
Importantly, because the noise trading in the two securities is identical
(as is the aggregate supply of each security), both security markets can
clear in this case regardless of the firm’s capital structure. As a result,
each investor’s equilibrium demands for debt and equity are equal, and
the equilibrium price of a claim to the firm’s total cash flows (i.e., 𝑃𝑈 )
is independent of the firm’s capital structure and equal to the sum of
the debt and equity prices (i.e., 𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷). This implies the Modigliani–
Miller theorem holds in this setting, even though investors have private
information.

Because the securities’ prices can be expressed as their expected pay-
offs under a risk-neutral cash flow distribution, they satisfy a number of
intuitive features. For instance, any feature that shifts up the unlevered
𝑠 , will also cause
price, 𝑃𝑈 , while holding fixed posterior uncertainty 𝜎2
the prices of the debt and equity to increase. This yields the following
result.

Corollary 1. The firm’s equity and debt prices:

(i) increase in the firm’s mean cash flows, 𝑚,
(ii) increase in liquidity-trader demand, 𝑧, and
(iii) decrease in the per capita supply, 𝜅.

The  firm’s  equity  (debt)  price  decreases  (increases)  in  the  face  value  of
debt, 𝐾. Moreover, the firm’s equity (debt) price is convex (concave) in
the risk-neutral expectation, 𝑃𝑈 .

Fig. 1 illustrates the equity and debt price functions as a function
of the risk-neutral mean 𝑃𝑈 . Importantly, note that the equity price is
convex in the risk-neutral expectation 𝑃𝑈 of cash flows, while the debt
price is concave in it. To understand the economic intuition, consider
the price of equity — the intuition is precisely reversed in the case
of debt. Note that the equity payoff is a convex function of the firm’s
cash flows. Intuitively, since equity payoffs are unbounded above, but
bounded below by zero, this implies that favorable cash flow news has
a larger price impact on equity than unfavorable cash flow news.

Similarly,  the  impact  of  liquidity  trading  on  prices  is  also  non-
linear. When liquidity traders sell the firm’s equity, investors must hold
larger long positions and demand a drop in price to do so. However,
since the equity payoffs are truncated from below (i.e., equity payoffs
are positively skewed), the downside from being long is limited, and
the price compensation is relatively small.12 On the other hand, when

9 Note  we  have  verified  that  this  result  on  demand  linearity  in  private
information holds when the firm’s cash flow  follows an arbitrary distribution
and investors receive conditionally iid signals about . It does not depend upon
normally distributed cash flows.
10 Similarly, in the case of an unlevered firm, the price 𝑃𝑈 of the unlev-
ered equity is precisely the expectation of the firm’s cash flows under this
distribution.

11 This distinguishes our setting from that of Simsek (2013), who models a
security whose payoff has multiple components and shows that splitting the
security into separate securities that allow investors to trade on the individual
components changes investors’ equilibrium risk exposures.
12 Investors with CARA utility exhibit a preference for (positive) skewness,
see e.g., Eeckhoudt and Schlesinger (2006).

6 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Proposition  2.
(i.e., 𝜅 = 0). Then:

Suppose  the  per  capita  endowment  of  shares  is  zero

(i) the expected return on equity is positive (i.e., E[𝑅𝐸 ] > 0) if and only

(ii) the expected return on debt is positive (i.e., E[𝑅𝐷] > 0) if and only

if V[𝑃𝑈 ] < V

𝑖[𝜇𝑖].

if V[𝑃𝑈 ] > V

𝑖[𝜇𝑖].

To  gain  intuition  for  this  result,  note  that  one  can  express  the

expected returns on equity and debt as
]
E[𝑅𝐸 ] = E[𝑉𝐸 − 𝑃𝐸 ] = E
𝑠 , 𝐾)
𝑖
]
E[𝑅𝐷] = E[𝑉𝐷 − 𝑃𝐷] = E
𝑠 , 𝐾)
𝑖

[𝑀𝐸 (𝜇𝑖, 𝜎2
[𝑀𝐷(𝜇𝑖, 𝜎2

− E [𝑀𝐸 (𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2
− E [𝑀𝐷(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

]
𝑠 , 𝐾)
𝑠 , 𝐾)

and (18)
] ,

(19)

respectively.14 Now, the unconditional means of 𝜇𝑖 and 𝑃𝑈 both equal 𝑚
(the assumption that 𝜅 = 0 ensures the latter). Moreover, since 𝑀𝐸 (⋅) is
convex in its first argument, the sign of expected equity returns depends
on  the  relative  variance  of 𝜇𝑖 versus 𝑃𝑈 —  the  expected  return  on
equity is positive when the variance of a typical investor’s subjective
expectation of cash flows, 𝜇𝑖, is higher than the variance of the risk-
neutral expectation of cash flows, 𝑃𝑈 . Similarly, since 𝑀𝐷(⋅) is concave
in its first argument, the expected return on debt is positive when the
difference in the two variances is flipped.

The following corollary shows that disagreement 𝜌 plays a pivotal

role in driving the sign of expected returns.

Corollary 2. Suppose the per capita endowment is zero (i.e., 𝜅 = 0).

𝑧 > 𝜏2
𝜎2
𝜀

(i) When 𝜎2

, then for any value of 𝜌 ∈ [0, 1], the expected return
on  equity  is  negative,  and  the  expected  return  on  debt  is  positive
i.e., E[𝑅𝐸 ] < 0 and E[𝑅𝐷] > 0.

(ii) When 𝜎2

𝑧 < 𝜏2
𝜎2
𝜀

, then there exists 𝜌∗ ∈ (0, 1) such that the expected
return on equity is positive when 𝜌 < 𝜌∗ and negative otherwise, and
the expected return on debt is negative when 𝜌  <  𝜌∗ and positive
otherwise.

Note while the expected return on one of the securities is always
negative, which may appear inconsistent with empirical evidence, we
show  in  Section 7 that  raw  expected  returns  on  both  securities  are
typically positive upon introducing an explicit systematic risk factor to
the model. Moreover, our results continue to hold in this case.

Recall that Proposition 2 establishes that the key quantity that deter-
mines the signs of the expected returns is V[𝑃𝑈 ] − V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖], which reflects
the  difference  between  the  variance  of  the  risk-neutral  expectation
of cash flows and the variance of a typical investor’s expectation of
cash flows. The difference in variances is driven by two countervailing
effects. On the one hand, the risk-neutral expectation 𝑃𝑈 can be less
variable  than  the  expectation 𝜇𝑖 of  the  typical  investor  because  it
reflects the aggregate (or average) valuation (i.e., V[∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗] < V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖]).
In  fact,  in  the  limit  when  the  volatility  of  noise  trading  approaches
zero (i.e., 𝜎𝑧 → 0), the risk-neutral expectation 𝑃𝑈 perfectly reflects
fundamentals, and so is always (weakly) less volatile than the typical
investor’s beliefs i.e., V[𝑃𝑈 ] ≤ V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖].15 On the other hand, 𝑃𝑈 can be
more variable that 𝜇𝑖 because it is more sensitive to liquidity-trading
shocks  via  the  ‘‘risk  compensation’’  term
𝑧.  For  instance,  in  the
benchmark  with  no  private  information  (i.e.,  when 1∕𝜎2
𝜀 → 0),  the
typical investor’s conditional expectation is constant, and so V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖] <
V[𝑃𝑈 ] so long as there is some noise trading.

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

Importantly,  the  relative  impact  of  these  forces  depends  on  (i)
the magnitude of noise-trading volatility relative to the precision of

Fig. 1. Price Function
This figure plots the equilibrium price of equity, debt, and a claim to the total cash
flow of the firm as a function of the risk-neutral mean 𝑃𝑈 . The parameters are set to:
𝜎2
𝜃 = 𝜎2

𝑧 = 𝜌 = 𝑚 = 𝜏 = 𝐾 = 1; 𝜅 = 0.1.

𝜀 = 𝜎2

liquidity traders buy equity, informed investors bear the risk of being
short. In this case, their downside is unlimited and so they charge a
large increase in the price for bearing the risk.13

Since the risk-neutral expectation of cash flows, 𝑃𝑈 , is linear in (ag-
gregate) investor beliefs and noise-trading demand, the above implies
that the equity price is convex in 𝑃𝑈 . Analogously, the debt price is
concave in 𝑃𝑈 . As we show in the next section, this has implications
for the expected returns on debt and equity.

5.  Expected return on debt and equity

In  our  setting  the  (dollar)  return  on  debt  and  equity  can  be  ex-
pressed  as 𝑅𝐷 = 𝑉𝐷 − 𝑃𝐷 and 𝑅𝐸 = 𝑉𝐸 − 𝑃𝐸 ,  respectively.  When
the security payoff is linear in fundamental shocks and liquidity trade,
the expected return typically increases with the per capita supply of
the asset. For instance, note that the price of the unlevered firm from
Lemma 1 implies that the expected return on unlevered equity is given
by

E[𝑅𝑈 ] = E[ − 𝑃𝑈 ] =

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

𝜅 .

This implies that if the per capita supply of the firm is zero (i.e., 𝜅 = 0),
so is the expected return, because the firm does not expose investors, on
average, to any risk. The firm’s price under zero net supply corresponds
to  the  price  of  the  idiosyncratic  cash  flows  of  a  typical  firm  in  the
economy.  The  reason  is  that,  as  the  typical  firm  is  a  small  part  of
the  overall  economy,  its  idiosyncratic  cash  flows  exhibit  negligible
correlation with the average investor’s wealth.

In contrast, when security payoffs are non-linear, this is no longer
true.  The  following  result  illustrates  that  in  general,  the  expected
returns on debt and equity systematically differ from zero, even when
the per capita supply of shares is zero. This implies that idiosyncratic
risk  affects  the  expected  returns  on  debt  and  levered  equity  in  our
model. We show this more formally in Section 7, where we extend the
model to a multi-firm setting in which firm cash flows are driven by
idiosyncratic and systematic shocks.

13 This asymmetric risk-compensation effect is absent in traditional models
with  linear  prices  because  the  value  is  symmetric  and  unbounded.  How-
ever,  it  is  analogous  to  the  ‘‘skewness  effect’’  discussed  in Albagli  et  al.
(2021), Chabakauri et al. (2022), Cianciaruso et al. (2023), and Banerjee et al.
(2024b).

14 The  second  equality  follows  from  the  fact  that  investors’ unconditional
distribution of cash flows coincides with the objective distribution and so we
have E[𝑉𝐸 ] = E
𝑖[𝑉𝐷].
15 The  inequality  is  strict  as  long  as  investors  do  not  exhibit  rational
expectations i.e., for all 𝜌 < 1, and their information is noisy i.e., 𝜎𝜀 > 0.

𝑖[𝑉𝐸 ] and E[𝑉𝐷] = E

7 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Fig. 2. Expected Return Comparative Statics
This figure plots expected returns on the equity and debt as a function of the model parameters. The parameters are set to: 𝜎2

𝜃 = 𝜎2

𝑧 = 0.752; 𝜎2

𝜀 = 𝑚 = 𝜏 = 𝐾 = 1; 𝜅 = 0; 𝜌 = 0.5.

private  information,  and  (ii)  the  degree  of  disagreement.  When  the
volatility of noise trading is sufficiently high relative to the precision
𝑧 > 𝜏2
of private information (i.e., 𝜎2
), the second channel dominates
𝜎2
𝜀
irrespective of the degree of disagreement. As a result, the variance of
the risk-neutral expectation is higher than that of a typical investor’s
expectation  (i.e., V[𝑃𝑈 ] > V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖]),  and  consequently,  the  expected
return on debt (equity) is always positive (negative).

However, when noise-trading volatility is not too high, the relative
impact  of  the  two  forces  depends  on  the  degree  of  disagreement.
Specifically, when disagreement is high (i.e., 𝜌 is low), investors put
relatively less weight on the price and more weight on their private
information, and as a result, the first channel dominates. This implies
the risk-neutral expectation is less volatile than that of a typical investor
(i.e., V[𝑃𝑈 ] < V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖]) and consequently, the expected return on debt
(equity) is negative (positive). On the other hand, when disagreement
is low (i.e., 𝜌 is high), investors heavily weight the price, and so the
second  channel  dominates  and  the  implications  for  debt  and  equity
returns are reversed.

We next characterize how expected returns on the two securities

relate to the model’s parameters.

Corollary 3. Suppose the per capita endowment of shares is zero (i.e., 𝜅 =
0).

(i) The  magnitudes  of  the  expected  returns  on  the  debt  and  equity,
E[𝑅𝐷]|, are hump-shaped in 𝐾 and maximized at 𝐾 = 𝑚.
(ii) Expected equity returns decrease and expected debt returns increase

E[𝑅𝐸 ]|, |
|

with liquidity-trading volatility 𝜎𝑧.

This corollary follows directly from Eqs. (18) and (19). Together
with  Jensen’s  inequality,  these  equations  reveal  that  two  quantities
drive the magnitude of expected returns on the securities: the extent of
convexity/concavity the security’s expected payoff in the expected cash
flow 𝜕2
𝑖[𝜇𝑖]. Part (i) of the
corollary follows because, in the two limits in which leverage 𝐾 is large
or small, one of the debt or equity securities is approximately linear,
while the other has value close to zero. Thus, in either such limit, the

𝑠 , 𝐾) and the magnitude of V[𝑃𝑈 ] − V

𝜕 𝑡2 𝑀𝑥(𝑡, 𝜎2

extent of convexity/concavity, 𝜕2
𝑠 , 𝐾), is close to zero for both
𝜕 𝑡2 𝑀𝑥(𝑡, 𝜎2
debt and equity. When 𝐾 = 𝑚, the firm’s expected cash flows lie directly
at the point of default (E[] = 𝐾), when debt and equity payoffs are the
most concave/convex. This can also be understood by via the analogy
between equity/debt and call/put options: the convexity, or ‘‘vega’’,
of option prices tends to be largest for options that are approximately
at the money. Part (ii) of the corollary follows since, when liquidity-
trading volatility increases, the variance of 𝑃𝑈 , and thus V[𝑃𝑈 ] − V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖],
increases, which reduces equity returns and increases debt returns.

Fig. 2 illustrates the corollary. The upper-left panel demonstrates
how expected returns vary with the firm’s leverage, in terms of the
probability of default.16 The plot shows that the magnitudes of these
returns  are  maximized  when  the  debt  level  is  equal  to  the  firm’s
expected cash flows, corresponding to a 50% default probability (which
corresponds to 𝐾 = 𝑚). These results suggest that for the typical firm
with  default  probability  well  below  50%,  expected  returns  on  debt
increase, and expected returns on equity fall, with default risk. More-
over, the marginal impact of distress risk on expected debt returns is
strongest for firms that have a low degree of default risk. As we discuss
in Section 8, these findings are consistent with empirical evidence.

The figure further shows that prior uncertainty and private informa-
tion quality, which we can jointly capture via the signal-to-noise ratio
𝜎2
, have a non-monotonic impact on expected returns. Intuitively,
𝜃
𝜎2
𝜃 +𝜎2
𝜀
when investors’ private information quality is very high, their beliefs
converge towards the true value of the firm, and hence expected returns
must converge to zero. When investors’ private information quality is
very low, they rely on their common priors and so the only force that
drives V [𝑃𝑈
is liquidity trade. Thus, equity and debt returns
are negative and positive, respectively. Finally, for intermediate values
of private information quality, investors’ beliefs are more dispersed and
prices aggregate these diverse beliefs. As discussed above, this reduces
V [𝑃𝑈

]
, thereby raising equity and lowering debt returns.

− V
𝑖

[𝜇𝑖

[𝜇𝑖

− V

]

]

]

𝑖

16 Both expected returns and default risk depend on 𝑚 and 𝐾 only through
𝑚−𝐾, and so this plot looks identical regardless of whether variation in default
risk is driven by 𝐾 or 𝑚.

8 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

6.  Extension: Differing liquidity trade in debt and equity

where 𝐺 ∶ R2 → R2 is a function defined in the proof.

In this section, we consider a generalization of the baseline setting in
which liquidity-traders’ demands in the debt and equity markets differ,
but are potentially correlated. Specifically, in contrast to the baseline
setting  described  in  Section 3,  demand  shocks 𝑧 =  (𝑧𝐷, 𝑧𝐸 )  ∈ R2
follow a general bivariate normal distribution 𝑧 ∼ 𝑁(𝟎, 𝛴𝑧) with 𝛴𝑧 an
arbitrary 2 × 2 positive definite covariance matrix.17 As in the baseline
setting, we let 𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖 and 𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖 denote the investor’s demand for debt and
equity respectively, with 𝑥𝑖 = (𝑥𝐷 ,𝑖, 𝑥𝐸 ,𝑖) the vector of demands.

The definition of a generalized linear equilibrium is analogous to
that above, but generalized to account for the fact that in this setting
the debt and equity prices generally depend on two non-identical linear
statistics.

Definition 3. A generalized linear equilibrium is one in which there
exists an injective function 𝑃 (⋅, ⋅) = (𝑃𝐷(⋅), 𝑃𝐸 (⋅)) mapping R2 into R2
and linear statistics of the form
𝑠𝑝1 = ∫ 𝑠𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 + 𝑏1𝐷𝑧𝐷 + 𝑏1𝐸 𝑧𝐸

𝑠𝑝2 = ∫ 𝑠𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 + 𝑏2𝐷𝑧𝐷 + 𝑏2𝐸 𝑧𝐸
such that the equilibrium price vector is
𝑃𝐷(𝑠𝑝1, 𝑠𝑝2)
𝑃𝐸 (𝑠𝑝1, 𝑠𝑝2)

𝑃 (𝑠𝑝1, 𝑠𝑝2) =

(

)

.

As before, investor 𝑖’s optimal demand is additively separable in
her  beliefs 𝜇𝑖 and  the  prices,  and  her  trading  aggressiveness  again
remains the same in each security. The equilibrium debt and equity
prices follow from imposing market clearing and matching coefficients
on the price-signal vector 𝑠𝑝.

There  exists  a  generalized  linear  equilibrium  in  the
Proposition  3.
financial market, unique within the generalized linear class. The vector of
equilibrium asset prices takes the form

(

𝑃 = 𝑔′

𝟏

(

= 𝑔′

1
𝜎2
𝑠

∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠
(

−

1
𝜏

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

)

(𝜅𝟏 − 𝑧)

(
𝐼

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+ 𝟏𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝

)

1
𝜌

𝑠𝑝 −

))

𝟏𝜅

(22)

(23)

where the equilibrium coefficient matrix is 𝐵 =

, and 𝑔′ ∶ R2 →

R2 is the gradient of a function 𝑔 ∶ R2 → R, both given in closed-form
in Appendix A.

The above result extends the generalized linear equilibrium char-
acterized in Proposition 1. Combining the expression for the optimal
demand from Lemma 6 and the equilibrium price in this proposition im-
mediately yields the equilibrium quantity demanded by each investor,
which we record in the following corollary.

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

0

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

0

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

Let 𝑠 ≡ ∫ 𝑠𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 denote the cross-sectional average signal and let

Corollary 4. The equilibrium demand of investor 𝑖 is

𝑠𝑝 = 𝟏𝑠 + 𝐵 𝑧

concisely  denote  the  stacked  vector  of  price-signals,  with 𝟏 a  con-
formable vector of ones and
)

𝐵 =

( 𝑏1𝐷 𝑏1𝐸
𝑏2𝐷 𝑏2𝐸

the 2 × 2 matrix of coefficients on 𝑧. In the main text we will focus on
the case in which 𝛴𝑧 is invertible (i.e., strictly positive definite).18

Given 𝑠𝑖 and the conjectured 𝑠𝑝, investor 𝑖’s beliefs about the firm

cash flow  are normal with conditional moments
(

)

𝜇𝑖

≡ E [

]

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

= 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠𝑖
𝜎2
𝜀

+ 𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝

𝑠𝑝

, and

1
𝜌

𝜎2
𝑠

≡ V [

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

]

=

(

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)−1

+ 𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝 𝟏

,

(20)

(21)

𝜌2 𝜎2
where 𝛴𝑝
Eqs. (7)–(8) in the benchmark analysis.

𝜃 𝟏𝟏′ + 1

≡ 1−𝜌2

𝜌2 𝐵 𝛴𝑧𝐵′.19 These  are  the  analogues  to

We next extend our characterization of the investor’s optimal de-

mand in Lemma 3 to this case.

(𝑃𝐷, 𝑃𝐸

)

∈ R2. The optimal demand of trader 𝑖

Lemma 4. Fix any 𝑃 =
is given by
𝜏
𝜎2
𝑠

(𝟏𝜇𝑖 − 𝐺 (𝑃 )

𝑥𝑖 =

) ,

17 The proofs of all results in this section allow for an arbitrary mean vector
𝜇𝑧 ∈ R2 and  allow  for  a  covariance  matrix 𝛴𝑧 that  is  only  positive  semi-
definite. In the text, we normalize the means to zero and consider only strictly
positive definite 𝛴𝑧 for expositional clarity.
18 The case in which 𝛴𝑧 is singular (e.g., perfectly correlated liquidity trade
across both markets, or one of the liquidity trades constant) is considered in
the formal derivations in the appendix.
19 Because 𝛴𝑧 is assumed positive definite, it follows that 𝐵 𝛴𝑧𝐵′ is positive
definite.  Furthermore, 𝛴𝑝,  being  a  sum  of  a  positive  definite  and  positive
semidefinite matrix is itself positive definite and therefore invertible, where
it is understood that we take 𝛴−1
= (𝜌𝛴𝑝)−1 = 𝟎 in the above
𝑝 = 𝟎 and 𝛴−1
𝑝
expressions when 𝜌 = 0.

1
𝜌

9 

𝑥𝑖 = 𝜏

𝜇𝑖 − ∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠

𝟏 + 𝜅𝟏 − 𝑧.

(24)

This  result  shows  that  the  speculative  portion  of  each  investor’s
holdings are equal across the debt and equity markets, and, as in our
benchmark model, are given by 𝜏
. Thus, investors’ debt and
equity demands differ if and only if the liquidity trade in the debt and
equity markets differ.

𝜇𝑖−∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠

6.1.  Cross-market demand spillovers

Fig. 3 illustrates how the equity and debt prices respond to liquidity-
trader  demand  in  each  market.  Specifically,  liquidity-trader  demand
for  a  given  security  affects  not  only  the  price  of  that  security,  but
also the price of the other security. Intuitively, this is driven by both
information and risk effects. Since demand in either security may be
perceived as informed, it raises investors’ expectations of cash flows,
and consequently, the price of both securities. In addition, holding debt
(equity) exposes an investor to the risk of the firm’s underlying cash
flows, which also makes them view the equity (debt) as riskier. Thus,
equity demand also raises the price of debt, and vice versa, via investor
risk aversion. However, demand for equity has a much stronger effect
on the equity price than on the debt price through this risk aversion
effect, and vice versa. As a result, the demand spillover between the
two markets is incomplete in the sense that 𝑧𝐸 has a stronger impact
on the equity price than 𝑧𝐷, and 𝑧𝐷 has a stronger impact on the debt
price than 𝑧𝐸 .

As in the baseline model (e.g., see Fig. 1), the equity (debt) price is
a convex (concave) function of demand in each market. This, in turn,
implies that our main results regarding expected returns continue to
hold  in  this  case.  Interestingly,  however,  the  total  price  of  the  firm
(i.e., 𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷) is convex in equity liquidity-trader demand, but concave
in  debt  liquidity-trader  demand.  As  we  discuss  further  in  the  next
subsection, this implies that the Modigliani–Miller theorem no longer
holds in this setting. Instead, the sum of the firm’s debt and equity
prices is greater (lower) than the price of an unlevered firm, on average,
when the volatility of equity liquidity trading is higher (lower) than

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Fig. 3. Cross-Market Demand Spillovers
This  figure  plots  the  expected  security  prices  conditional  on  equity  liquidity  trade 𝑧𝐸 (left  panel)  and  debt  liquidity  trade 𝑧𝐷 (right  panel).  The  parameters  are  set  to:
𝜃 = 1.52; 𝜎2
𝜎2

= 𝑚 = 𝜏 = 𝐾 = 1; 𝜅 = 0; C [𝑧𝐸 , 𝑧𝐷

𝜀 = V [𝑧𝐸

= V [𝑧𝐷

= 0.

]

]

]

Fig. 4. Leverage and Debt-Equity Price Correlation
This figure plots the correlation between the debt and equity prices as a function of the firm’s default risk. The parameters are set to: 𝑚 = 3; 𝐾 = 2; 𝜎2
𝜏 = 1; 𝜅 = 0; C [𝑧𝐸 , 𝑧𝐷

= 0.

]

𝜃 = 1; 𝜎2

𝜀 = V [𝑧𝐸

]

= V [𝑧𝐷

]

=

that of debt liquidity trading.

The incomplete spillover of demand shocks across securities also
affects  the  correlation  between  equity  and  debt  prices.  As Fig.  4 il-
lustrates, the correlation between debt and equity prices is maximized
when the likelihood of default is 50%.20 Intuitively, when the default
probability approaches zero, the payoff to debt is almost risk-free, and
so  demand  shocks  in  either  security  have  little  impact  on  the  debt
price but significant impact on the equity price. Similarly, when the
probability of default approaches one, the value of equity approaches
zero and is relatively insensitive to demand shocks, but the price of
debt remains responsive to such shocks. As a result, the correlation in
prices approaches zero in both extremes. In contrast, for intermediate
levels of distress, both security prices are sensitive to demand shocks,
and so price correlation is high.

6.2.  Capital structure and total firm valuation

We next show that, in contrast to our baseline specification, the
Modigliani–Miller  theorem  does  not  hold,  i.e.,  the  firm’s  equity  and

20 Pasquariello and Sandulescu (2024) derive a similar result in a Kyle model
where risk-neutral market makers specialize in either debt or equity, while
investors can trade both securities. As such, the market making in their model
is segmented: the price in each market depends only on the order flow in that
market. In contrast, markets are integrated in our setting: investors can update
their beliefs from equity and debt prices and can trade in both markets.

debt  prices  do  not,  in  general,  sum  to  the  price  of  the  unlevered
firm: E [𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷
.  As  a  result,  the  firm’s  capital  structure
can meaningfully impact its value, even in the absence of traditional
frictions (e.g., tax shields of debt, costs of financial distress).

] ≠ E [𝑃𝑈

]

]

]

√

√

as a function of
V [𝑧𝐷

In Fig. 5, we show that the expected price of the debt plus equity
relative to the price of the unlevered firm depends upon the relative
amount  of  liquidity  trade  in  the  two  markets.  For  instance,  the  left
V [𝑧𝐸
panel of Fig. 5 plots E [𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷
, holding fixed
]
). The plot illustrates
the volatility of debt liquidity trade (i.e.,
that the expected value of debt plus equity is higher than the expected
value of the unlevered firm (i.e., E [𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷
= 1) if and only
if the volatility of equity liquidity trading is higher than that of debt
√
√
liquidity trading (i.e.,
). Intuitively, this is because
liquidity trade in the equity market does not fully spill over into the
debt market. As such, the price-increasing effect that equity liquidity-
trading volatility has on equity prices tends to raise the overall value
of the firm.

] > E [𝑃𝑈

V [𝑧𝐷

V [𝑧𝐸

] >

]

]

This result holds irrespective of whether investors use the informa-
tion in prices (i.e., whether 𝜌 =  1 or 𝜌 =  0), but is stronger when
investors do not condition on prices (i.e., when 𝜌 = 0). This is because,
even though the effect of belief dispersion on expected prices in the
two securities precisely offset, investors face more uncertainty when
they do not condition on prices, and this increases the sensitivity of
prices to liquidity trading shocks. The right panel of Fig. 5 shows the
same  result  by  plotting  the  expected  value  of  debt  plus  equity  as  a
function of debt liquidity-trading volatility, holding fixed the equity

10 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Fig. 5. Violations of Modigliani–Miller
This figure plots the total expected firm price, E [𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷
]
𝑚 = 𝜏 = 𝐾 = 1; 𝜅 = 0; C [𝑧𝐸 , 𝑧𝐷

= 0. Note that E[𝑃𝑈 ] = 𝑚 = 1.

]
, as a function of liquidity trade volatility in the two markets. The parameters are set to: 𝜎2

𝜃 = 1.52; 𝜎2

𝜀 = V [𝑧𝐸

]

= V [𝑧𝐷

]

=

Fig. 6. Optimal Capital Structure
This figure plots the total expected firm price, E [𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷
parameters are set to: 𝜎2
𝜃 = 1.52; 𝜎2
total expected price is maximized.

𝜀 = 𝑚 = 𝜏 = 𝐾 = 1; 𝜅 = 0; C [𝑧𝐸 , 𝑧𝐷

]
, as a function of the firm’s leverage, paramaterized in terms of its ex-ante probability of default, Pr ( < 𝐾). The
= 1. Note that E[𝑃𝑈 ] = 𝑚 = 1. The solid dots indicate the point at which the firm’s

= 4; and V [𝑧𝐷

= 0; V [𝑧𝐸

]

]

]

liquidity-trading volatility.

]

] > E [𝑃𝑈

Fig.  6 illustrates  how  the  firm’s  capital  structure  influences  its
valuation.21 When equity liquidity-trading volatility exceeds that in the
debt, the value of the levered firm is higher than an unlevered firm
E [𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷
. In this case, there is an interior optimal capital
structure that maximizes the firm’s valuation. Intuitively, an all equity
or all debt firm is suboptimal as, in either case, the firm has linear
]
→ E [𝑃𝑈
payoffs, and so E [𝑃𝐸 + 𝑃𝐷
. This implies that even in the
absence of traditional frictions associated with leverage, heterogeneity
in  information,  beliefs,  and  liquidity  trading  across  debt  and  equity
markets causes the value of the firm to be maximized at an interior
level of debt.

]

7.  Extension: Systematic risk and multiple firms

In this section, we illustrate how our results extend to a multi-firm
economy with systematic and idiosyncratic sources of risk. We show
that the condition that determines the sign of expected returns in our
baseline analysis now determines how the firm’s expected returns com-
pare to a benchmark without liquidity and informed trade. Moreover,
we verify that our comparative statics results continue to apply in this
setting.

21 In the plot, we express capital structure in terms of the unconditional
default probability Pr ( < 𝐾), which is a monotone function of the face value
𝐾 but is unit-free and so more easily interpretable than the raw face value.

11 

Formally, assume now that investors trade in the securities of 𝑁

firms. Firm 𝑛’s total cash flows per share are:

𝑛



≡ 𝑚𝑛 + 𝜃𝑛 + 𝛽𝑛𝐹 .
The terms 𝜃𝑛 ∼ 𝑁 (
are independent across firms and the term
𝐹 ∼ 𝑁 (
captures a common systematic risk factor. Moreover, 𝑚𝑛
0, 𝜎2
𝐹
denotes firm 𝑛’s expected cash flows and 𝛽𝑛 captures firm 𝑛’s cash-flow
beta.

0, 𝜎2
𝜃

)

)

We assume that the only source of systematic risk in the economy is
𝐹 and that there is a tradeable factor security with payoff 
𝐹 = 𝑚𝐹 +𝐹 .
Investors are endowed with 𝜅 shares of the factor security and zero
shares of each firm’s equity and debt, which corresponds to a large
economy  where  each  individual  firm  is  small.22 Thus,  in  aggregate,
investors have no exposure to 𝜃𝑛, and so 𝜃𝑛 is a purely idiosyncratic
source of risk and would not affect expected returns if the investors
were homogeneous.

We allow for arbitrary differences in leverage across firms: firm 𝑛
has debt and equity defined as in the baseline model, where the face
value of the debt is 𝐾𝑛. Investor 𝑖 now observes a private signal 𝑠𝑖𝑛

22 We can obtain similar results by taking the limit of an economy with
finite investors and firms as the number of investors and firms grows large.
In this case, each firm becomes a small part of the economy and so the per
capita supply of each firm approaches zero. However, to avoid the notational
burden of having to take limits throughout the analysis, it is more convenient
to simply assume that 𝐹 is the only systematic source of risk.

S. Banerjee et al.

about the idiosyncratic cash flows of each firm 𝑛:

𝑠𝑖𝑛 = 𝜃𝑛 + 𝜀𝑖𝑛,
where  the  error  terms 𝜀𝑖𝑛 ∼ 𝑁 (
are  independent  of  all  other
random variables. We continue to allow investors to agree to disagree
about one another’s signals. Specifically, each investor 𝑖 believes that
others’ signals are of the form

0, 𝜎2
𝜀

(25)

)

√

1 − 𝜌2𝜉𝑖𝑛 + 𝜀𝑗 𝑛

𝑠𝑗 𝑛 = 𝜌𝜃𝑛 +
where 𝜉𝑖𝑛 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2

𝜃 ) are independent of one another.
Finally, we assume that there are liquidity traders in each firm’s
stock who seek exposures of 𝑧𝑛 ∼ 𝑁 (
to the idiosyncratic cash
flows of each firm 𝜃𝑛. Formally, these traders submit demands 𝑧𝑛 ∼
𝑁 (
in  the  debt  and  equity  of  each  firm  and  hedge  the  risk
exposure that these demands create by submitting demands of −𝛽𝑛𝑧𝑛
in the factor asset. Thus, market clearing in the factor security requires
that:

0, 𝜎2
𝑧

0, 𝜎2
𝑧

)

)

𝑥𝑖𝐹 𝑑 𝑖 −

∫

∑

𝛽𝑛𝑧𝑛 = 𝜅 ,

𝑛

𝑖
and market clearing in each individual firm’s equity and debt requires
that:

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

𝑛 𝜎2
𝐹 .

single-asset model in two ways. First, each firm’s price includes a risk
premium  that  is  proportional  to  its  cash-flow  beta, 𝛽𝑛.  This  enters
the debt and equity prices through the unlevered price statistic 𝑃𝑛𝑈 .
Second, the risk-neutral variance now includes a term that is driven by
the firm’s exposure to systematic risk, 𝛽2

We next characterize each firm’s expected price and returns. Recall
that in our baseline model, we studied whether expected returns were
positive or negative; given that we excluded any source of systematic
risk,  non-zero  expected  returns  could  be  attributed  to  asymmetric
information and/or liquidity trade. In this setting, however, there is
a systematic risk, and so, even absent these forces, expected returns
would be non-zero. To understand how firm-specific asymmetric in-
formation and liquidity trade influence expected returns, we compare
expected  returns  to  a  frictionless  benchmark  without  liquidity  and
informed trade, i.e., 𝜎2
𝜀 → ∞. In such a setting, returns
are driven only by exposures to the systematic factor. Specifically, let
𝑅𝑛𝐸 = 𝑉𝑛𝐸 − 𝑃𝑛𝐸 and 𝑅𝑛𝐷 = 𝑉𝑛𝐷 − 𝑃𝑛𝐷 denote the return on firm 𝑛’s
debt and equity, and let ̄𝑅𝑛𝐸 and ̄𝑅𝑛𝐷 denote the corresponding returns
in a frictionless economy in which 𝜎2
𝜀 → ∞. The following
result shows that analogs to Proposition 2 and Corollary 3 obtain in
this setting.

𝑧 → 0 and 𝜎2

𝑧 → 0 and 𝜎2

𝑥𝑖𝑛𝐸 𝑑 𝑖 + 𝑧𝑛 = 0 and ∫

𝑖

∫

𝑖

𝑥𝑖𝑛𝐷𝑑 𝑖 + 𝑧𝑛 = 0.

Proposition 5.

The assumption that liquidity traders hedge in this fashion enables
us  to  interpret  the  risk  exposures  they  create  as  idiosyncratic.  One
can interpret these traders as allocating a fixed trading budget across
stocks,  while  keeping  their  total  allocation  to  systematic  risk  fixed.
Specifically, this ensures that liquidity trade in a given stock does not
affect the supply of systematic risk 𝐹 to be borne by the remaining
traders, and thus does not shift the price of the factor. Hence, the price
variation that such liquidity traders create would not be captured by
betas in standard factor models of returns and is purely idiosyncratic.
However, this assumption is generally not essential for our equilibrium
construction; except in the case in which 𝜌 = 1, our model allows as a
special case the limit in which there is no liquidity trade.23

7.1.  Equilibrium and expected returns

Analogous to our baseline model, we search for an equilibrium in
which each firm 𝑛’s price is a generalized linear function of investors’
𝑖 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑑 𝑖, and liquidity
aggregate signal about firm 𝑛’s cash flows, ̄𝑠𝑛
trade in firm 𝑛’s stock, 𝑧𝑛. The next proposition is analogous to our
Proposition 1.

≡ ∫

Proposition 4. There exists a generalized linear equilibrium. The price of
the factor asset satisfies:
𝑃𝐹 = 𝑚𝐹 − 𝜏−1𝜎2

(26)

𝐹 𝜅 .

Each firm 𝑛’s equity and debt prices satisfy:
𝑃𝑛𝐸 = 𝑀𝐸 (𝑃𝑛𝑈 , 𝜎2
𝑠 + 𝛽2

𝐹 , 𝐾𝑛) and 𝑃𝑛𝐷 = 𝑀𝐷(𝑃𝑛𝑈 , 𝜎2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝑠 + 𝛽2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝐹 , 𝐾𝑛),

where:

𝑃𝑛𝑈 = 𝑚𝑛 + 𝜎2
𝑠

(

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀
𝑠 , and 𝜎2

)

(𝑠𝑛 + 𝑏𝑧𝑛) − 𝛽𝑛

E

𝑖[𝐹 − 𝑃𝐹 ],

and where 𝑏, 𝜎2

𝑝 take the same form as in the baseline model.

This  proposition  illustrates  that  the  equilibrium  prices  can  again
be expressed as the risk-neutral expectation of security payoffs, where
the risk-neutral distribution of firm 𝑛’s cash flows is given by 
𝑛 ∼
𝐹 ).  Note  that  these  prices  differ  from  those  in  the
𝑁(𝑃𝑛𝑈 , 𝜎2

𝑠 + 𝛽2

𝑛 𝜎2

(27)

(28)

0) if and only if V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] < V

(i) The expected excess return on equity is positive (i.e., E[𝑅𝑛𝐸 − ̄𝑅𝑛𝐸 ] >
𝑖[E
(ii) The expected excess return on debt is positive (i.e., E[𝑅𝑛𝐷 − ̄𝑅𝑛𝐷] >
𝑖[E

0) if and only if V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] > V

𝑖[𝜃𝑛|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝]].

𝑖[𝜃𝑛|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝]].

These results follow from similar arguments to those in our baseline
model.  The  sign  of  the  expected  excess  return  follows  by  applying
Jensen’s inequality to the difference between the expectation of the
security price in (27) and the expectation of the security price in an
economy without informed and liquidity trading (since the expected
price of the unlevered firm 𝑃𝑛𝑈 is identical across both economies). The
result clarifies that, in our setting, expected returns on debt and equity
can vary across firms even after controlling for their risk exposures.
Specifically, the sign of the expected excess return (or ‘‘alpha’’) on a
security depends on the difference between the variance of the risk-
neutral  expectation  of  cash  flows  (i.e., V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ])  and  the  variance  of
cash flow expectations of a typical investor, just as in the benchmark
analysis.

The following corollary shows that the comparative statics results in
the baseline model (as characterized in Corollaries 2 and 3) continue
to hold in this case.

Corollary 5.

𝑧 > 𝜏2
𝜎2
𝜀

(i) When 𝜎2

, then for any value of 𝜌 ∈ [0, 1], the expected excess
return on equity is negative, and the expected excess return on debt
is positive.
(ii) When 𝜎2

, then there exists 𝜌∗ ∈ (0, 1) such that the expected
excess  return  on  equity  is  positive  when 𝜌  <  𝜌∗ and  negative
otherwise, and the expected excess return on debt is negative when
𝜌 < 𝜌∗ and positive otherwise.

𝑧 < 𝜏2
𝜎2
𝜀

(iii) The magnitudes of the expected excess returns in the debt and equity

are hump-shaped in 𝐾 and maximized at 𝐾 = E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ].

(iv) Expected  excess  equity  returns  decrease  and  expected  excess  debt

returns increase with liquidity-trading volatility 𝜎𝑧.

Intuitively, the magnitude of expected excess returns is again driven
by the variance difference V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] − V
𝑖[𝜃𝑛]], which takes the same
form as in our baseline model.24 Importantly, neither of the variances

𝑖[E

23 When 𝜌 = 1 and there is no liquidity trade, investors correctly infer that
firm 𝑛’s equity/debt prices perfectly reveal 𝜃𝑛, and so expected excess returns
(i.e., expected returns after accounting for 𝛽𝑛) are zero.

24 Numerical results indicate that, similar to expected returns in our baseline
model, E[𝑅𝑛𝐷 − ̄𝑅𝑛𝐷] and E[𝑅𝑛𝐸 − ̄𝑅𝑛𝐸 ] are non-monotonic in default risk.

12 

S. Banerjee et al.

𝑖[E

V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] nor V
𝑖[𝜃𝑛]] depend on the firm’s risk-factor loading 𝛽𝑛.25 As
such, the above result establishes how firm-specific liquidity demand
𝑧𝑛 and disagreement 𝜌 affect expected returns on debt and equity, even
holding fixed a firm’s systematic risk-factor loadings 𝛽𝑛. The magnitude
of expected returns is again maximized when the face value of the firm’s
debt is equal to the expected price of the unlevered firm. However,
the latter now includes a premium for systematic risk, and so expected
returns tend to be maximized at a lower level of leverage than in the
single-firm model.

Fig. 7 illustrates these results and shows that the impact of private
information quality on excess returns also mirrors the single-firm case,
upon focusing on expected excess returns (i.e., the dashed yellow lines
in the figure). The figure also shows that, owing to the presence of
the systematic risk factor, expected raw returns on equity and debt are
generally positive — private information alters the magnitude of these
positive returns.

8.  Empirical implications

Our model generates predictions on expected debt and equity re-
turns and how these returns vary with financial distress, disagreement,
and  the  intensity  of  liquidity  trade.  Existing  work  proposes  several
proxies for these constructs that render our predictions directly testable.
For  instance,  considerable  work  proxies  for  belief  dispersion  using
volume and analyst forecast dispersion (Diether et al., 2002, Banerjee,
2011).26 Moreover, Greenwood and Thesmar (2011) develops a proxy
for liquidity-trader volatility based upon the concentration of a firm’s
ownership and the correlation in the liquidity shocks its owners face.
We summarize our model’s predictions and their relation to existing
empirical work below; several are consistent with existing empirical
analyses while others have yet to be tested.

Given that a key feature of our model is the ability of both diversely-
informed  investors  and  liquidity  traders  to  take  positions  in  debt,
our results apply most clearly to public debt markets. As such, when
referencing debt markets, we focus on the literature on public bond
markets. We further focus on our predictions for firms that are far from
bankruptcy (i.e., with less than 50% probability of default), as such
firms represent the vast majority of publicly-traded stocks.

Belief dispersion and expected returns. There is empirical evidence
that proxies for belief dispersion — trading volume and analyst forecast
dispersion — are negatively related to expected equity returns (e.g., Lee
and Swaminathan, 2000, Diether et al., 2002, Cen et al., 2017) and
positively  related  to  expected  debt  returns  (Güntay  and  Hackbarth,
2010).27 Existing theories of belief dispersion often restrict attention
to linear security payoffs and so cannot jointly explain the observed
patterns in the two markets. Our model can reconcile this evidence,
but also suggests that the relationship between belief dispersion and
expected returns depends on the underlying driver of belief dispersion.
Specifically,  in  our  model,  dispersion  in  beliefs  can  arise  either
because  investors  ‘‘agree  to  disagree’’  about  the  informativeness  of
others’  signals  (i.e., 𝜌  < 1)  or  because  they  have  different  private

25 Note  that  even  though 𝛽𝑛 affects  the  price 𝑃𝑛𝑈 ,  it  does  not  affect  its
variance since the factor risk premium E[𝐹 − 𝑃𝐹 ] is constant.
26 We follow the literature in interpreting analyst forecast dispersion as a
measure of belief dispersion across investors. It is worth noting that while
analyst forecasts are publicly observable in practice, investor beliefs in our
model are private. However, we expect our main results to be qualitatively
similar in a more general model in which a finite number of agents (analysts)
reveal their forecasts publicly, while the remaining investors in the economy
do not.
27 See Chang  et  al. (2022)  for  more  recent  evidence  on  the  relationship
between belief dispersion and stock prices based on a plausibly exogenous
shock. Their finding that share prices exhibit larger declines in response to
cash-flow  news  is  indirect  evidence  of  a  negative  relation  between  belief
dispersion and expected equity returns.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

information and prices are noisy because of liquidity trading. To see
this, note that dispersion in beliefs can be captured by the variance
across investors’ conditional expectations of cash flows, which reduces
to

 ≡

(

∫
𝑖

𝜇𝑖 − ∫
𝑗

)2

𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗

𝑑 𝑖 =

1

(

𝜎2
𝜀

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+ 1
𝜎2
𝜀

+ 1
𝜎2
𝑝

)2

(

)2

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

𝑧

𝑝 = 1−𝜌2

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜃 + 1
where we recall that 𝜎2
is investors’ perceived
variance of the error in the price signal. This shows that belief disper-
sion increases with (i) the extent to which investors disagree about the
informativeness of others’ signals (a decrease in 𝜌) and (ii) the volatility
of liquidity trading (an increase in 𝜎𝑧), all else equal. Intuitively, greater
variability in liquidity trade reduces the informativeness of the stock
price. Because this price is a common public signal, when it is noisier,
investors’ beliefs diverge.28

As clarified by Corollary 3, an increase in liquidity-trading volatility
decreases equity returns (increases debt returns). Thus, our model can
reconcile the broad empirical evidence as the consequence of variation
in the intensity of liquidity trade across firms. However, Corollary 2
also demonstrates that an increase in disagreement tends to have the
opposite effects, increasing equity returns and decreasing debt returns.
As such, our analysis indicates that the impact of belief dispersion on
expected returns may differ in settings where it is primarily driven by
disagreement as opposed to noise in prices.

As  a  reduced-form  test  of  the  model, Corollaries  2 and 3 (and
their  multi-firm  counterparts  in Corollary  5)  suggest  the  following
regressions, where the dependence of expected returns on systematic
risk-factor loadings is omitted for brevity and the predicted signs are
presented below the coefficients:

𝑅𝐸 ,𝑡+1 = 𝛾0,𝐸 + 𝛾1,𝐸

⏟⏟⏟
>0
𝑅𝐷 ,𝑡+1 = 𝛾0,𝐷 + 𝛾1,𝐷

⏟⏟⏟
<0





𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔 ,𝑡 + 𝛾2,𝐸

⏟⏟⏟
<0
𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔 ,𝑡 + 𝛾2,𝐷



𝐿𝑖𝑞 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙 ,𝑡;



𝐿𝑖𝑞 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙 ,𝑡,

⏟⏟⏟
>0

where 
ment and 
asymmetric information and liquidity-trading volatility.

𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔 ,𝑡 reflects variation in belief dispersion driven by disagree-
𝐿𝑖𝑞 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙 ,𝑡 reflects variation in belief dispersion driven by

𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔 ,𝑡 and 

One  approach  to  obtaining 

𝐿𝑖𝑞 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙 ,𝑡 would  be
to  project  measures  of  belief  dispersion  (e.g.,  analyst  forecast  dis-
persion)  on  measures  of  liquidity-trading  volatility  proposed  above
(e.g., Greenwood  and  Thesmar, 2011, Friberg  et  al., 2024)  and  at-
tribute the residual to disagreement. Alternatively, one could directly
condition on proxies for disagreement: for instance, in a closely related
setting, Banerjee (2011) argues that disagreement 𝜌 is positively related
to the correlation between trading volume and return volatility.29

Note, as shown in the multiple-firm model in Section 7, our find-
ings on how disagreement and noise-trading volatility affect expected
returns speak to returns after explicitly controlling for systematic risk
exposures.  Specifically,  the  predictions  are  about  ‘‘alphas’’  from  the
perspective  of  an  econometrician  who  accounts  for  systematic  risk,
even  though  these  returns  do  not  reflect  any  mispricing  from  the

28 This is consistent with the empirical literature which uses idiosyncratic
volatility as a proxy for belief dispersion and disagreement (e.g., see Boehme
et al., 2006, Wang et al., 2023, and Goulding et al., 2023 for a comprehensive
summary).
29 Specifically,  in  a  dynamic  setting  where  security  prices  are  linear  in
fundamentals, Banerjee (2011)  shows  that  the  correlation  between  trading
volume  and  return  volatility  is  negative  when  investors  agree  to  disagree
(i.e., 𝜌 = 0), but is positive when they have rational expectations (i.e., 𝜌 = 1).

13 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Fig. 7. Expected Returns with Systematic Risk
This figure plots expected returns as a function of model parameters for a given firm 𝑛 in both the model and in a benchmark without private information or liquidity trade. The
parameters are set to: 𝜎2

𝜀 = 𝜅 = 𝜏 = 1; 𝐾𝑛 = 0.25; 𝜅 = 𝜌 = 0.5.

𝑧 = 0.752; 𝑚𝐹 = 𝑚𝑛 = 𝛽𝑛 = 𝜎2

𝐹 = 𝜎2

𝜃 = 𝜎2

perspective of investors in the model.30

Distress risk and expected returns. Several empirical studies examine
the relationship between distress risk and equity returns, controlling
for standard systematic risk exposures, typically finding that greater

30 Note because debt and equity are non-linear securities, expected returns
in our model depend non-linearly on systematic risk exposures, 𝛽𝑛. Thus, to
control for the impact of these risk factors on expected returns, one should
apply a technique that controls for potential non-linearities, such as sorting
firms into portfolios based on standard risk factors. Indeed, this is common
in  the  existing  literature  that  studies  the  returns  to  distressed  securities
(e.g., Campbell et al., 2008).

distress risk is associated with lower equity returns. Such a relationship
is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  traditional  models  due  to  the  forces  of
diversification, leading the literature to propose that distress risk is mis-
priced (e.g., Campbell et al., 2008).31 Our analysis suggests that such
a relation can arise when investors are diversely informed and prices
are noisy, even when they rationally incorporate all the information
available to them (i.e., even when 𝜌 =  1). Note further that the U-
shaped pattern in excess equity returns as a function of default risk that
arises in our model (see the upper-left panel of Fig. 7) is consistent with

31 See also Dichev (1998), Campbell et al. (2008), Penman et al. (2007),
and Caskey et al. (2012).

14 

S. Banerjee et al.

the empirical patterns documented in Garlappi et al. (2008).

In  the  debt  market,  several  studies  find  that  default  risk  has  an
excessive impact on credit spreads, after controlling for exposure to
relevant systematic risk factors (commonly referred to as the credit-
spread  puzzle).32 While  our  model  does  not  provide  a  quantitative
resolution of the puzzle, it implies that asymmetric information may
lead  to  a  stronger  relationship  between  distress  risk  and  expected
bond returns than one obtains in representative investor models (see
Proposition 5 and the upper-right panel of Fig. 7).

Moreover, the specific pattern in expected debt returns as a function
of default risk that arises in our model — an increasing and then de-
creasing relationship — is consistent with empirical evidence (e.g., Ang,
2014, Chapter 9). Importantly, our findings hold even though investors’
private information and liquidity trade are both idiosyncratic in the
model,  and  so  are  unlikely  to  be  captured  by  the  systematic  risk
exposures explored in the existing literature.

Our model offers several predictions that may help to distinguish it
from other theories. First, as discussed in Corollaries 3 and 5, it predicts
that the marginal impact of distress risk on expected debt returns is
strongest for firms that have a low degree of default risk. Second, our
model predicts that the relationship between distress risk and expected
stock returns depends on (i) the extent to which investors disagree and
(ii) the prevalence of liquidity trade in a firm’s stock and bonds. In
particular, our analysis motivates the following regressions for firms
with less than 50% probability of default, where the dependence on
systematic  risk-factor  loadings  and  the  main  effects  are  omitted  for
brevity and the predicted signs are presented below the coefficients:
𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡 × 𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔 𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑡

𝑅𝐸 ,𝑡+1 = 𝛾0,𝐸 + 𝛾1,𝐸

⏟⏟⏟
>0
𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡 × 𝐿𝑖𝑞 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑡;

+ 𝛾2,𝐸

⏟⏟⏟
<0

+ 𝛾2,𝐷

⏟⏟⏟
>0

𝑅𝐷 ,𝑡+1 = 𝛾0,𝐷 + 𝛾1,𝐷

𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡 × 𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑔 𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑡

⏟⏟⏟
<0
𝐷 𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑡 × 𝐿𝑖𝑞 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑒𝑉 𝑜𝑙𝑡.

These  predictions  follow  from  the  observation  that  the  expected  re-
turn  on  equity  (debt)  is  decreasing  (increasing)  in  the  difference  in
variances, V[𝑃𝑈 ] − V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖] (see Propositions 2 and 5), which increases
in liquidity-trading volatility and is greater when investors exhibit DO
than when they exhibit RE.

Co-movement in equity and bond prices. The analysis in Section 6.1
implies that shocks to demand in either security impact both debt and
equity prices, and so induce correlation in these securities’ prices. Our
results  are  broadly  consistent  with  the  evidence  in Back  and  Crotty
(2015), who show that while the unconditional correlation between
stock  and  bond  returns  is  low,  the  correlation  in  the  parts  driven
by  order  flow  is  quite  large.  Our  analysis  suggests  that  the  stock-
bond correlation is higher when liquidity trading in the two markets
is more correlated. Our results are also consistent with the evidence
of Pasquariello and Sandulescu (2024), who document that the stock-
bond correlation is low when the firm-level default probability is either
very high or very low, but higher otherwise.

Capital  structure  and  firm  valuation. When  liquidity  traders’  de-
mands in equity and bond markets are not identical, our model implies
that the capital structure of the firm affects its total valuation, even
in the absence of traditional frictions (e.g., tax shields of debt, distress
costs). Since we expect that for most firms, the probability of default is
lower than 50% and the volatility of liquidity trading in equity is higher

32 See, e.g., Elton et al. (2001), Driessen (2005), Huang and Huang (2012),
and Bai et al. (2015).

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

than that in debt, our model predicts that an increase in leverage leads
to an increase in firm value. Moreover, the model predicts that, ceteris
paribus, the impact of an increase in leverage is larger when investors
dismiss the information in prices (see Fig. 6).

9.  Conclusion

We develop a model where privately-informed, risk-averse investors
trade  alongside  liquidity  traders  in  the  debt  and  equity  of  a  firm.
Our  model  can  reconcile  the  disparate  relationships  between  belief
dispersion  and  debt  and  equity  returns  documented  in  past  work.
We  further  show  that  the  impact  of  private  information  on  security
valuation depends on the firm’s likelihood of default, the intensity of
liquidity trading in each market, and the extent to which investors learn
from prices. Finally, we show that a firm’s capital structure can affect
its total valuation even in the absence of traditional frictions associated
with debt issuance.

Our model generates a number of novel empirical predictions about
the relation among disagreement, liquidity trading, distress risk, and
debt  and  equity  valuation.  Moreover,  our  model  serves  as  a  useful
benchmark  for  future  theoretical  analysis.  For  instance,  it  would  be
interesting to explore the incentives of investors to acquire information
(e.g., Davis, 2017) in our setting when the liquidity trading in debt and
equity are not identical, as well as to study the effects of segmentation
across debt and equity markets. It would also be interesting to study
how joint trade in equity and debt influences managers’ investment
decisions, both through their costs of capital and through managerial
learning from debt and equity prices (as explored by Davis and Gondhi,
2024).

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Snehal  Banerjee: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  origi-
nal  draft,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization. Bradyn  Breon-Drish:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis,
Conceptualization. Kevin Smith: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that  could  have  appeared  to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A.  Proofs

A.1.  Proof of Lemmas 1 and 2

These results are limiting cases of Proposition 1 below.

A.2.  Proof of Lemma 3

This result is a special case of Lemma 6, where we define 𝐺(𝑃 ) ≡

𝑠 × (𝑔′)−1(𝑃 ) to condense notation in the statement of the Lemma.
𝜎2

A.3.  Proof of Proposition 1

The existence of a generalized linear equilibrium is a special case of
Proposition 6 and the representation of the equilibrium demands is a
special case of Corollary 4. It remains to show that the expression for
the equilibrium price from Proposition 6 can be represented in terms

15 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

of the 𝑀𝐸 and 𝑀𝐷 functions and that the equilibrium debt and equity
prices sum to 𝑃𝑈 . From Proposition 6, we have that the equilibrium
price vector satisfies

(

(

(

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝟏𝜎2
𝑠

𝑃 = 𝑔′

(

= 𝑔′

1
𝜎2
𝑠
𝑃𝑈 (𝜃 , 𝑧)
𝜎2
𝑠

𝟏

)

,

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

))

)

𝑠𝑝 −

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

𝟏𝜅

where the second line uses the definition of 𝑃𝑈 (from Lemma 1) to
simplify the argument of the gradient 𝑔′ and where the function 𝑔 ∶
R2 → R satisfies
(

)

(

)

(

𝑔

𝑦1
𝑦2

= log

exp

{ 1
2

}

𝛷

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

+  exp

{(𝑦1 − 𝑦2

) 𝐾 +

1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

(

}

1 − 𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

)))

.

Computing the two partial derivatives that make up the gradient 𝑔′
yields

𝜕 𝑔
𝜕 𝑦1

=

⎛
⎜
𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦1 − 𝜎𝑠
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

(

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝜙

𝛷

)

𝑠 𝑦1

)

𝑠 𝑦1

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

exp

{ 1
2

(

}

𝛷

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

)

exp

{ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

}

𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

)

{

+exp

(𝑦1−𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

(

}

(

1−𝛷

+ 𝐾

exp

{ 1
2

{
(𝑦1 −𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2
)

exp

(

(

}

(

1−𝛷

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

+exp

{
(𝑦1 −𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2

(

}

1−𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

))

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠
))

𝜕 𝑔
𝜕 𝑦2

=

⎛
⎜
𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦2 + 𝜎𝑠
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝛷

}

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1
(

𝜙

1 − 𝛷

)

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

{

exp

(𝑦1−𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2
)

) − 𝐾

𝑠 𝑦2

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

}

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

1−𝛷

))

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

(

exp

{ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

}

𝛷

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

{

(𝑦1−𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

(

}

1−𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

+exp

)) .

= 1 − 𝛷

)

( 𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

> 0.

A.5.  Proof of Proposition 2

Observe that 𝑃𝑈 is unconditionally normally distributed with mean

E [𝑃𝑈

]

= E

[
∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 +

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

]

(𝑧 − 𝜅)

] 𝑑 𝑗 −

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

𝜅

= ∫

E [𝜇𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏
Thus, we have:
E [𝑃𝐸
(𝑃𝑈

= 𝑚 −

)]

𝜅 .

𝑠

)

= E {E [
(𝑥 + 𝑃𝑈 − 𝐾 , 0
= E {E [
max (𝑥 + 𝑦 − 𝐾 , 0) |𝑥 ∼ 𝑁 (
= E [
[

max (𝑥 − 𝐾 , 0) |𝑥 ∼ 𝑁 (𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2
|𝑥 ∼ 𝑁 (
max
0, 𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

max (𝑥 − 𝐾 , 0) |𝑥 ∼ 𝑁
(

= E

𝑚 −

(

)

= 𝑀𝐸

𝑚 −

𝜅 , 𝛺 , 𝐾

.

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

)]}

)]}
0, 𝜎2
𝑠
) , 𝑦 ∼ 𝑁 (E [𝑃𝑈

𝜅 , 𝜎2

𝑠 + V [𝑃𝑈

]

] , V [𝑃𝑈
)]

(A.1)

])]

where we have defined 𝛺 ≡ 𝜎2
law of total variance to express 𝜎2
The debt result follows analogously.

𝑠 + V[𝑃𝑈 ] = 𝜎2
𝜃 − V
𝑠 = 𝜎2

𝜃 − V
𝑖[𝜇𝑖] + V[𝑃𝑈 ], using the
𝑖[𝜇𝑖] in the second equality.

)) ;

We next show how the equity payoffs compare to equity expected
cash flows; the result for debt follows analogously. Observe that, as
𝜅 → 0, the expected equity price approaches 𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝛺 , 𝐾). Now, the
expected equity payoff equals:
(𝑚, 𝜎2
E [max (𝜃 − 𝐾 , 0)] = 𝑀𝐸

𝜃 , 𝐾) .

Thus, equity earns negative expected returns if and only if 𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝛺 , 𝐾)
𝜃 , 𝐾) > 0 and earns positive expected returns if and only if
(𝑚, 𝜎2
− 𝑀𝐸
𝜃 , 𝐾) < 0. Now, note that the derivative of 𝑀𝐸
𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝛺 , 𝐾) − 𝑀𝐸
with respect to its second argument is:
𝜕 𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝑥, 𝐾)
[
𝜕 𝑥

(𝑚, 𝜎2

2 (𝐾 − 𝑚)

2 (𝐾 − 𝑚)

(
𝑥− 1

1 − 𝛷

(𝐾 − 𝑚)

𝑥− 1

1
2 𝜙

)]

{

}

=

−

)

(

𝑥

𝜕
𝜕 𝑥
1
𝑥− 1
2

=

(
𝑥− 1

2 𝜙

)

2 (𝐾 − 𝑚)

> 0.

Evaluating these expressions at 𝑦1 = 𝑦2 = 𝑃𝑈
𝜎2
𝑠
prices, respectively:

gives the debt and equity

𝑃𝐷 =

𝜕 𝑔
𝜕 𝑦1

|
|
|
|𝑦1 =𝑦2 =

𝑃𝑈
𝜎2
𝑠

=

𝑃𝑈 − 𝜎𝑠

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

= 𝑀𝐷(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

𝜙

( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
𝑠 , 𝐾),

𝛷

)

)

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝛷

( 𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

)

(

+ 𝐾

1 − 𝛷

))

( 𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

Thus, we have that:
𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝛺 , 𝐾) − 𝑀𝐸

𝜃 , 𝐾) ≷ 0 ⇔ 𝛺 − 𝜎2
which completes the proof of statements (i) and (ii) in the proposition.

𝜃 ≷ 0 ⇔ V[𝑃𝑈 ] − V

𝑖[𝜇𝑖] ≷ 0,

(𝑚, 𝜎2

and

𝑃𝐸 =

𝜕 𝑔
𝜕 𝑦2

|
|
|
|𝑦1=𝑦2=

𝑃𝑈
𝜎2
𝑠

=

⎛
⎜
𝑃𝑈 + 𝜎𝑠
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝜙

)

( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

1 − 𝛷

) − 𝐾

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

1 − 𝛷

( 𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

))

= 𝑀𝐸 (𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

𝑠 , 𝐾),

as claimed. Adding the expressions above immediately yields that the
overall firm value is:
(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

+ 𝑀𝐷

= 𝑃𝑈 .

𝑠 , 𝐾)

𝑃𝐷 + 𝑃𝐸 = 𝑀𝐸

𝑠 , 𝐾)
A.4.  Proof of Corollary 1

It is straightforward to verify that 𝑀𝐸 (𝑥, ⋅, ⋅) and 𝑀𝐷(𝑥, ⋅, ⋅) increase
in 𝑥. Hence, results (i)-(iii) follow from the fact that, as can be seen in
Lemma 1, 𝑃𝑈 increases in 𝜃 and 𝑧 and decreases in 𝜅. To verify that the
equity and debt prices decrease and increase in 𝐾, respectively, note:
𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

𝑀𝐷(𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2

𝑠 , 𝐾) = −

𝜕
𝜕 𝐾
= 1 − 𝛷

𝑀𝐸 (𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2
𝑠 , 𝐾)
( 𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
)
𝜎𝑠

−

𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

𝜙

( 𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

)

− 𝜙′

)

( 𝐾 − 𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

16 

A.6.  Proof of Corollary 2

As  in  the  proof  of Proposition  2,  let 𝛺 ≡ 𝜎2

𝑠 + V[𝑃𝑈 ].  From
Proposition 2, to sign expected returns, it suffices to determine the sign
𝜃 in terms of the deep parameters of the model.
of 𝛺−𝜎2

𝜃 = V(𝑃𝑈 ) +𝜎2

𝑠 −𝜎2

V (𝑃𝑈

)

((

We can write the unconditional variance of 𝑃𝑈 as
1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝
)2

(𝑠 + 𝑏𝑧)

(𝜎2
𝑠

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)2 V

)2

)

)

(

=

+

=

=

= 𝜎2

(𝜎2
𝑠

(𝜎2
𝑠

(
)2 ⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
(
)2 ⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
𝜃 − 𝜎2
𝑠
)2 ⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

(𝜎2
𝑠

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝜎2
𝜃 +

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

1
𝜎2
𝑠

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

−

1
𝜎2
𝑝

−

1
𝜎2
𝜃

)2

(

𝜎2
𝜃 +

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

)2

𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

𝜎2
𝜃

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)2

(

− 𝜎2
𝜃

1
𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)2

S. Banerjee et al.

(

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

)2

(

𝑏2𝜎2

𝑧 −

)

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
+ 1
𝜎2
𝑝

where the third equality adds and subtracts 1
𝜎2
𝜃
in the large parentheses and uses the definition of 1
to
𝜎2
𝑠
simplify. The final equality does algebraic manipulations and collects
terms. Hence, the sign of 𝛺 − 𝜎2
)2

𝜃 is pinned down by the sign of
)2

inside the first term
+ 1
𝜎2
𝜀

= 1
𝜎2
𝜃

+ 1
𝜎2
𝑝

)2

(

)

(

(

(

𝜎2
𝜃

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

− 𝜎2
𝜃

1
𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝑏2𝜎2

𝑧 −

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

(A.2)

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
(A.3)

(A.4)

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
(A.5)

(A.6)

The  limits  of  the  expression  in  Eq. (A.2) as 𝜌 tends  to  zero  and
itself

𝑝 = 1−𝜌2

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜃 +

𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧
𝜌2

one, being careful to account for the fact that 𝜎2
depends on 𝜌, are
)2

)2

)2

(

(

(

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

− 𝜎2
𝜃

1
𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝑏2𝜎2

𝑧 −

)

(

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

lim
𝜌→0

𝜎2
𝜃

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

(

𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧

𝜎2
𝜀

=

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)

− 1

(

lim
𝜌→1

𝜎2
𝜃

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)2

(

− 𝜎2
𝜃

1
𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)2

(

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

)2

(

𝑏2𝜎2

𝑧 −

)

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

(

=

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧

) 𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧
𝜎2
𝜀

Furthermore, the expression in Eq. (A.2) is strictly increasing in 𝜌

(

since

𝜕
𝜕 𝜌

𝜎2
𝜃

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)2

(

− 𝜎2
𝜃

1
𝜎2
𝑝

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)2

(

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

)2

(

𝑏2𝜎2

𝑧 −

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

= 2

(𝜎2

𝜃 + 𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧
(
𝜎2
𝜀

) (

(1 − 𝜌)2 𝜎2

(1 − 𝜌2)𝜎2

𝜃 + 𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧

𝜃 + 𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧
)2

)

> 0.

)
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
(A.7)

(A.8)

𝑧 > 𝜏2
𝜎2
𝜀

It follows that for 𝜎2

𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧
𝜎2
𝜀
𝑧 < 𝜏2
𝜌 ∈ [0, 1]. On the other hand, for 𝜎2
𝜎2
𝜀
that there exists some 𝜌∗ such that for all 𝜌 < 𝜌∗ we have 𝛺 − 𝜎2
while for all 𝜌 > 𝜌∗ we have 𝛺 − 𝜎2

𝜃 > 0 for all
< 1 the above implies
𝜃 < 0

> 1 we have 𝛺 − 𝜎2

𝑏2𝜎2
𝑧
𝜎2
𝜀

⇔

⇔

𝜃 > 0.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

𝜕2
𝜕 𝐾 𝜕 𝑥

𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝑥, 𝐾) =

𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

1
2

1
√
𝑥

𝜙

)

(

𝐾 − 𝑚
√
𝑥

=

1
2

1
𝑥

𝜙′

)

(

𝐾 − 𝑚
√
𝑥

=

1
2

1
𝑥

𝑚 − 𝐾
√
𝑥

𝜙

(

)

.

𝐾 − 𝑚
√
𝑥

Hence, for 𝐾 < 𝑚, we have

sgn

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

)
E[𝑅𝐸 ]

∫

𝜎2
𝜃

= sgn

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
= − sgn(𝛺 − 𝜎2
𝜃 ),

𝛺

𝜕2
𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝑥, 𝐾)
𝜕 𝐾 𝜕 𝑥
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
>0

and therefore

sgn

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

)
E[𝑅𝐸 ]|
|
On the other hand for 𝐾 > 𝑚,

= sgn2 (𝛺 − 𝜎2

|
|

𝜃

) > 0.

sgn

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

)
E[𝑅𝐸 ]

∫

𝜎2
𝜃

= sgn

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
= sgn(𝛺 − 𝜎2
𝜃 ),

𝛺

𝜕2
𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝑥, 𝐾)
𝜕 𝐾 𝜕 𝑥
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
<0

𝑑 𝑥

𝑑 𝑥

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

and therefore

|
|

sgn

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

= − sgn2 (𝛺 − 𝜎2

)
E[𝑅𝐸 ]|
|
E[𝑅𝐸 ]|
Because |
|
|
decreasing in 𝐾 for 𝐾 > 𝑚, it follows that |
|
𝐾 and achieves its maximum at 𝐾 = 𝑚.

) < 0.

𝜃

is  strictly  increasing  in 𝐾 for 𝐾  <  𝑚 and  strictly
is hump-shaped in

E[𝑅𝐸 ]|
|

Part (ii) Consider debt returns. We have that:

]

𝜕E [𝑅𝐷
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

=

𝜕 𝑀𝐷

𝜃 , 𝐾)

(𝑚, 𝜎2
𝜕 𝜎𝑧
𝜕 𝑀𝐷 (𝑚, 𝛺 , 𝐾)
𝜕 𝛺

= −

−

𝜕 𝑀𝐷 (𝑚, 𝛺 , 𝐾)
𝜕 𝜎𝑧
𝜕 𝛺
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

∝

.

𝜕 𝛺
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

Similarly, for equity returns, we obtain
the equation in Box I.

𝜕E[𝑅𝐸]
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

∝ − 𝜕 𝛺
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

. Now, we have

A.8.  Proof of Lemma 4

This is a special case of Lemma 6, where we define the function

𝐺(𝑃 ) = 𝜎2

𝑠 × (𝑔′)−1(𝑃 ) in the text.

A.7.  Proof of Corollary 3

Part (i) We consider equity returns; the proof for debt returns is

A.9.  Proof of Proposition 3

analogous. We have

sgn

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

E[𝑅𝐸 ]|
|
|
|

)

= sgn

(

sgn

(E[𝑅𝐸 ]

= sgn(E[𝑅𝐸 ]) sgn
(𝛺 − 𝜎2
)

= − sgn

𝜃

)
E[𝑅𝐸 ]
)
E[𝑅𝐸 ]

) 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

sgn

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

)
E[𝑅𝐸 ]

.

𝑠 +V[𝑃𝑈 ] is as defined in the proof of Proposition 2.

where, again, 𝛺 = 𝜎2
Differentiating the expected return with respect to 𝐾 yields
𝜕
𝜕 𝐾

)
𝜃 , 𝐾) − 𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝛺 , 𝐾)

E[𝑅𝐸 ] =

=

𝜕
𝜕 𝐾
𝜕
𝜕 𝐾 ∫
𝜎2
𝜃

(𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝜎2
𝜎2
𝜃

𝜕
𝜕 𝑥

𝛺

𝜕2
𝜕 𝐾 𝜕 𝑥

= ∫
𝛺

𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝑥, 𝐾)𝑑 𝑥

𝑀𝐸 (𝑚, 𝑥, 𝐾)𝑑 𝑥,

where the second equality uses the fundamental theorem of calculus to
express the difference in the 𝑀𝐸 function an integral. Computing the
cross-partial derivative of 𝑀𝐸 yields

17 

This is a special case of Proposition 6 in which 𝜇𝑧 = (0, 0) and 𝛴𝑧 is

positive definite.

A.10.  Proof of Proposition 4

The existence of equilibrium and the specific expressions for the
security prices follow from Proposition 7 after specializing the vector
notation  to  isolate  individual  assets.  In  the  vector  representation  of
prices as risk-neutral expected payoffs, the risk-neutral mean for a given
firm 𝑛’s cash flow (or for the factor cash flow) is the unlevered price,
𝑃𝑛𝑈 (or 𝑃𝐹 for the factor) given in Lemma 7. Similarly, the risk-neutral
variance for a given cash flow is the 𝑛th (or (𝑁 + 1)st, in the case of
the  factor)  diagonal  element  of  the  cash  flow  variance  matrix 𝛤 =
( 𝜎2
𝑖[𝐹 ] − 𝑃𝐹 ,
which allows one to express the final term in Eq. (28) in the form of the
cash flow beta times the factor expected return. Substituting in these
values yields the expression in the Proposition.

. Finally, we can write 1
𝜏

𝐹 𝜅 = 𝑚𝐹 − 𝑃𝐹 = E
𝜎2

𝛽 𝛽′ 𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝐹

𝑠 𝐼+𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝛽′
𝐹

)

𝛽

S. Banerjee et al.

2𝜎4

𝜃 𝜎𝑧𝜎4
𝜀

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝜕 𝛺
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

=

+(1 − 𝜌)𝜏6𝜎4
𝜃

(
3

𝜃 +

) 𝜎2

1 − 𝜌2)2 𝜎4
(

𝜏4𝜎2
𝜃 𝜎2
𝑧 𝜎4
𝜀
(
𝜃 + (1 − 𝜌)(𝜌 + 1)
(1 − 𝜌)2(𝜌 + 1)3𝜎4
1 − 𝜌2) 𝜎2
(
3𝜏2𝜎2
+ 𝜎6
𝑧 𝜎12
𝑧 𝜎8
𝜀
𝜀
1 − 𝜌2) 𝜎2
(𝜎2
(
𝜃 + 𝜎2
𝜀

(
3 − 𝜌3(𝜌 + 2)
𝜃 𝜎2
(
2𝜌2 + 𝜌 + 1
(𝜎2
𝜃 + 𝜎2
𝜀
)) 3

(𝜎2
𝜀 +
)

𝜃 𝜎4
(𝜎2

+ 𝜏2𝜎2
𝜃

𝜏2 (𝜎2

𝜃
𝜀 +

𝑧 𝜎4
𝜀

𝜀 + 2𝜌3𝜎4
𝜀
) 𝜎2
𝜃 𝜎2
)

)

𝜃

)

𝜀 + 2𝜌3𝜎4
𝜀

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

⎞
⎟
)
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

> 0.

A.11.  Proof of Proposition 5

Box I.

Analogously to the representation of unconditional expected prices
in Proposition 2, we can write firm 𝑛’s unconditional expected equity
and debt prices as:
E [𝑃𝑛𝐸

)

]

= 𝑀𝐸
= 𝑀𝐸
= 𝑀𝐷
= 𝑀𝐷

𝑛 𝜎2

𝑠 + 𝛽2

(E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ], V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
(𝑚𝑛 − 𝛽𝑛
(E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ], V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
(𝑚𝑛 − 𝛽𝑛

𝐹 , 𝐾𝑛
E[𝐹 − 𝑃𝐹 ], V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
𝐹 , 𝐾𝑛
E[𝐹 − 𝑃𝐹 ], V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2

𝑠 + 𝛽2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝐹 , 𝐾𝑛

𝑠 + 𝛽2
)

𝑠 + 𝛽2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝐹 , 𝐾𝑛

)

;

) .

E [𝑃𝑛𝐷

]

Next, note that in the no information, no liquidity trade benchmark, we
E[𝐹 − 𝑃𝐹 ] but in that case the variance
still have that E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] = 𝑚𝑛 − 𝛽𝑛
of the unlevered price is zero, V [𝑃𝑛𝑈
= 0 and investors’ conditional
𝜃 . Thus, given
cash flow variance is equal to the prior variance 𝜎2
𝑠 = 𝜎2
the convexity of 𝑀𝐸 and concavity of 𝑀𝐷, we have that debt (equity)
returns are higher (lower) than under the benchmark if and only if
𝐹 ⇔ V [𝑃𝑛𝑈
V [𝑃𝑛𝑈
𝑖[𝜃𝑛|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝]].

𝐹 < 𝜎2

] < 𝜎2

𝜃 − 𝜎2

𝜃 + 𝛽2

𝑠 = V

𝑠 + 𝛽2

+ 𝜎2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝑖[E

]

]

A.12.  Proof of Corollary 5

𝑖[E

Parts  (i)  and  (ii) Note  from Proposition  4 that V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] and
V
𝑖[𝜃𝑛|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝] take  on  the  same  values  as  in  the  single-firm  model.
Consequently,  applying Proposition  5,  the  conditions  for  expected
excess  returns  to  be  positive  and  negative  are  the  same  as  in  the
single-firm model.

)

Part  (iii) Recall  from  the  proof  of  part  (i)  of Corollary  3 that
( 𝜕2𝑀𝐸 (𝑚,𝑥,𝐾)
𝜕 𝐾 𝜕 𝑥
E[𝑅𝑛𝐸 − ̄𝑅𝑛𝐸 ]

= sgn(𝑚 − 𝐾). Hence, we have
𝑛 𝜎2
𝜎2
𝜃 +𝛽2
𝐹

𝑀𝐸 (E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ], 𝑥, 𝐾𝑛)𝑑 𝑥

= sgn

)

(

)

(

sgn

sgn

𝜕
𝜕 𝐾𝑛

∫

𝑠 +𝛽2

V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ]+𝜎2
𝑛 𝜎2
𝐹
𝜃 − V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] − 𝜎2

𝜕2
𝜕 𝐾 𝜕 𝑥
𝑠 ) sgn(E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] − 𝐾𝑛)

= sgn(𝜎2
= sgn(E[𝑅𝑛𝐸 − ̄𝑅𝑛𝐸 ]) sgn(E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] − 𝐾𝑛).

This immediately implies that the magnitude of expected excess equity
returns is maximized when E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] − 𝐾𝑛 =  0; the result for expected
excess debt returns follows similarly.

Part (iv) Consider excess debt returns. We have that:
(E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ], 𝜎2
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

𝜕E [𝑅𝑛𝐷 − ̄𝑅𝑛𝐷
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

𝐹 , 𝐾)

𝜃 + 𝛽2

𝜕 𝑀𝐷

𝑛 𝜎2

=

]

𝜕 𝑀𝐷

−

(E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ], V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2

𝑠 + 𝛽2

𝑛 𝜎2

𝐹 , 𝐾)

𝜕 𝜎𝑧

= −

𝑛 𝜎2

𝜕 𝑀𝐷

𝐹 , 𝐾)

(E[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ], V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
𝑠 + 𝛽2
𝜕(V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
𝑠 )
𝜕(V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
𝑠 )
𝜕 𝜎𝑧
𝑠 is equal to V[𝑃𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
Note that V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
𝑠 = 𝛺 in the single-firm
model, and, from the proof of part (ii) of Corollary 3, 𝜕 𝛺
> 0. The
𝜕 𝜎𝑧
result for expected excess equity returns follows analogously.

𝜕(V[𝑃𝑛𝑈 ] + 𝜎2
𝑠 )
𝜕 𝜎𝑧

∝

×

.

In this section, we characterize the equilibrium in the fully-general
version of the model in which liquidity trading 𝑧 =  (𝑧𝐷, 𝑧𝐸 ) follows
a general bivariate normal distribution 𝑁(𝜇𝑧, 𝛴𝑧) where 𝜇𝑧 ∈ R is an
arbitrary vector of means, and 𝛴𝑧 is an arbitrary positive semi-definite
covariance matrix. As in the text, we consider equilibria of the ‘‘gen-
eralized linear’’ form specified in Definition 3 where the endogenous
price statistics take the form
𝑠𝑝 = 𝟏𝑠 + 𝐵 (𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧

) .

)

( 𝑏1𝐷 𝑏1𝐸
𝑏2𝐷 𝑏2𝐸

with 𝐵 =

the 2 × 2 matrix of coefficients to be determined.
We  begin  by  characterizing  an  arbitrary  investor 𝑖’s  conditional
distribution of the vector of debt and equity payoffs, 𝑉 =  (𝑉𝐷, 𝑉𝐸 ),
given arbitrary 𝑁(𝜇𝑖, 𝜎2
𝑠 ) beliefs about the underlying firm cash flow
.  In  this  derivation,  and  others  throughout  these  Appendices,  we
follow the convention that cumulative distribution functions (CDF) are
denoted by 𝐹(⋅) and probability density functions (PDF) by 𝑓(⋅), with
subscripts corresponding to the relevant random variable. E.g., the CDF
and PDF of  are written 𝐹 and 𝑓 , respectively.

Suppose  that  is  conditionally  normally  distributed  with
Lemma  5.
𝑠 . Then the vector 𝑉 = (min (, 𝐾) , max ( − 𝐾 , 0))
mean 𝜇𝑖 and variance 𝜎2
follows  a  bivariate  exponential  family  with  moment-generating  function
(MGF) that is finite for any 𝑢 ∈ R2, and is given explicitly by

{

(

)

(

)}

[

E

𝑖

exp

{𝑢′𝑉 }]

= exp

𝑔

𝑢 + 𝟏

− 𝑔

𝟏

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

)

(

where the function 𝑔 ∶ R2 → R is defined as
𝑠 𝑦1
{ 1
2

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

= log

exp

(

(

𝛷

}

𝑔

𝑦1
𝑦2

)

+  exp

{(𝑦1 − 𝑦2

) 𝐾 +

1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

(

}

1 − 𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

)))

.

(B.1)

Proof. The claim about finiteness follows immediately once we have
proven  that  the  MGF  takes  the  given  form  since,  by  inspection,  the
function 𝑔 is finite on all of R2. The claim that the distribution is an
exponential family also follows immediately from the functional form
(see e.g., Sampson, 1975, Hoffmann and Schmidt, 1982). To establish
the expression for the MGF, write
E
𝑖

{𝑢′𝑉 }]

[
exp
∞

= ∫

= ∫

−∞
𝐾

−∞

exp

{𝑢1 min {𝑡, 𝐾} + 𝑢2 max {𝑡 − 𝐾 , 0}

} 𝑑 𝐹 (𝑡|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝)

∞

exp

{𝑢1𝐾 + 𝑢2 (𝑡 − 𝐾)

} 𝑑 𝐹 (𝑡|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝)

exp

{𝑢1𝑡} 𝑑 𝐹 (𝑡|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝) + ∫
}

(

𝐾
𝐾 − 𝜇𝑖 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝑠 𝑢1

𝛷

{

= exp

𝜇𝑖𝑢1 +

1

𝑠 𝑢2
𝜎2

1
2
{(𝑢1 − 𝑢2

+ exp

) 𝐾 + 𝜇𝑖𝑢2 +

}

1
2

𝑠 𝑢2
𝜎2

2

)

(

1 − 𝛷

(

𝐾 − 𝜇𝑖 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝑠 𝑢2

))

Appendix B.  Equilibrium with arbitrary, correlated liquidity trad-
ing

{

= exp

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

+ 𝑢1

)2

−

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

)2}

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝑠

𝛷

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

+ 𝑢1

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎𝑠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

18 

S. Banerjee et al.

{

+ exp

(𝑢1 − 𝑢2

) 𝐾 +

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

+ 𝑢2

)2

−

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

)2}

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝑠

×

⎛
⎜
1 − 𝛷
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

+ 𝑢2

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎𝑠

⎞
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎠

{

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

)2}

+ 𝑢1

𝛷

=

⎛
⎜
exp
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝑠

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

+ 𝑢1

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎𝑠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

{

+ exp

(𝑢1 − 𝑢2

) 𝐾 +

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

+ 𝑢2

{

exp

−

)2}

.

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝑠

)2} ⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

1 − 𝛷

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

+ 𝑢2

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎𝑠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎠

Taking the logarithm, this expression is identical to that in the Lemma
after  recognizing  that 𝑔 as  defined  in  the  statement  of  the  Lemma
satisfies 𝑔

𝑠 𝑦2 when both arguments are identical. □
𝜎2

( 𝑦
𝑦

)

= 1
2

With trader beliefs pinned down, we next characterize the optimal

demand.

Lemma 6. Fix any 𝑃 =
in set of no-arbitrage prices {(𝑝𝐷, 𝑝𝐸 ) ∶
𝑝𝐷 < 𝐾 , 𝑝𝐸 > 0}. There is a unique optimal demand for trader 𝑖, given by

(𝑃𝐷, 𝑃𝐸

)

(

𝑥𝑖 = 𝜏

(𝑔′)−1

−

𝟏

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

)

(𝑃 )

where

(𝑔′)−1

∶ R2 → R2 is the inverse of the gradient 𝑔′

)

≡

( 𝑦1
𝑦2

)

.

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝑦1
𝜕 𝑦2

𝜕

𝑔

𝑔

From Lemma  5,  we  can  compute  the  trader’s  conditional

Proof.
expected utility given an arbitrary demand 𝑥𝑖 as
}
E

{

]

[

− exp

𝑖

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

1
−
𝜏
{

𝑥′
𝑖 (𝑉 − 𝑃 )
(

1
𝜏

𝑥′
𝑖𝑃 + 𝑔

𝟏

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

−

1
𝜏

𝑥𝑖

)

(

− 𝑔

𝟏

)}

.

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

𝑔

( 𝜕
𝜕 𝑦1
𝜕
𝑔
𝜕 𝑦2
1
𝑥𝑖
𝜏

−

)

)

denote the gradient of 𝑔, the FOC is

− 𝑃 .

(B.2)

= − exp

Letting 𝑔′ =
(
𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

0 = 𝑔′

𝟏

𝜕2
𝜕 𝑦1 𝜕 𝑦2

𝜕2
𝜕 𝑦2
1
𝜕2
𝜕 𝑦1 𝜕 𝑦2

𝑔

𝑔

𝑔

𝑔

Note that the Hessian matrix 𝑔′′ ≡

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
tive definite, owing to the fact that it is the matrix of 2nd derivatives
of the cumulant generating function of 𝑉 , which is strictly convex. It
follows that the optimum, if it exists, is unique and the FOC in (B.2) is
sufficient to characterize it. Hence, it suffices to show that there exists
a demand 𝑥𝑖 ∈ R2 that satisfies Eq. (B.2).

is necessarily posi-

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝜕2
𝜕 𝑦2
2

Due to the positive-definiteness of 𝑔′′ it follows that the gradient
𝑔′ is injective and therefore invertible on its range. Hence, if we can
establish that the range is the set of no-arbitrage prices {(𝑝𝐷, 𝑝𝐸 ) ∶ 𝑝𝐷 <
𝐾 , 𝑝𝐸 > 0}, the existence and characterization of the optimal demand
will follow immediately from rearranging the FOC in Eq. (B.2).

Let 𝑆 = {(𝑣𝐷, 𝑣𝐸 ) ∶ 𝑣𝐷 < 𝐾 , 𝑣𝐸 = 0} ∪ {(𝑣𝐷, 𝑣𝐸 ) ∶ 𝑣𝐷 = 𝐾 , 𝑣𝐸 > 0}
denote the support of the payoff vector (𝑉𝐷, 𝑉𝐸 ). We claim that the
range  of 𝑔′ is  the  interior  of  the  closed  convex  hull  of 𝑆,  which  is
precisely the set of no-arbitrage prices. This follows from the following.
First,  because  the  CGF 𝑔 is  defined  on  all  of R2,  and  furthermore
because R2 is open, the exponential family described by the CGF is
necessarily ‘‘regular’’ as defined by Barndorff-Nielsen (2014). It follows
from  Theorem  8.2  of Barndorff-Nielsen (2014)  that  the  exponential
family is ‘‘steep’’ and therefore from Theorem 9.2 in Barndorff-Nielsen

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

(2014) that the gradient 𝑔′ maps R2 onto the interior of the closed
convex hull of the support 𝑆. This set, int conv(𝑆) = {(𝑥, 𝑦) ∶ 𝑥 < 𝐾 , 𝑦 >
0}, is the set of candidate prices in which the debt price is less than
the face value 𝐾 and the equity price is greater than zero, which is
precisely the set of prices that do not admit arbitrage. □

Proposition 6. There exists an equilibrium in the financial market. The
vector of equilibrium asset prices takes the form
𝑃 = 𝑔′

(𝜅𝟏 − 𝑧)

(B.3)

(

)

−

𝟏

.

∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠

1
𝜏

where the function 𝑔′ ∶ R2 → R2 is given in closed-form in Eqs. (B.9)—
(B.10) the proof. This equilibrium is unique within the generalized linear
class.

1. If 𝛴𝑧 is invertible, then the equilibrium price vector is
(
𝟏𝜅
𝐼

𝑃 = 𝑔′

(

(

)

+ 𝟏𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠𝑝 −

))

(B.4)

1
𝜌

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

1
𝜎2
𝜀

1
𝜎2
𝑠

where  the  equilibrium  price  signals  coefficient  matrix  is  diagonal

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

0

𝐵 =

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

0

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

2. If 𝛴𝑧 is singular and of the form 𝛴𝑧 = 𝟏𝟏′𝜎2

identical in the two markets, 𝑧𝐸 = 𝑧𝐷 = 𝜁 for 𝜁 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2
the equilibrium price vector is
(
1
𝑃 = 𝑔′
𝜎2
𝜀

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝟏𝜎2
𝑠

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

1
𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠𝑝 −

))

𝟏𝜅

(

(

)

+

𝑧 (i.e., liquidity trade is
𝑧 )), then

(B.5)

where 𝑠𝑝 = 𝑠 + 𝑏𝜁 is one-dimensional, 𝜎2
𝑝

≡ 1−𝜌2

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜃 + 𝑏2

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝑧 with

(

)−1

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

.

𝑏 =

1
𝜎2
𝜃

𝑠 =

+ 1
𝜎2
𝜀

, and 𝜎2

+ 1
𝜎2
𝑝
3. If 𝜌  < 1,  and 𝛴𝑧 is  singular  and  not  of  the  form 𝛴𝑧 = 𝟏𝟏′𝜎2
𝑧
(i.e., liquidity trade is perfectly positively correlated but with different
variances, or is perfectly negatively correlated, or at least one of the
𝑧𝑗 is constant), then the equilibrium price vector is given by
1
𝑃 = 𝑔′
𝜎2
𝜀

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

1
𝜎2
𝑠

(B.6)

𝑠𝑝 −

))

𝟏𝑎′

𝟏𝜅

(

(

(

)

+

𝐼

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

0

where 𝐵 =

⎞
⎟
𝜎2
⎟
𝜀
⎠
𝜏
the vector 𝑎 ∈ R2 is defined in the proof.

𝜌2 𝜎2

≡ 1−𝜌2

𝜃 , 𝜎2

, 𝜎2
𝑝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

0

𝑠 =

(

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+ 1
𝜎2
𝜀

+ 1
𝜎2
𝑝

)−1

, and

4. If 𝜌 = 1, and 𝛴𝑧 is singular and not of the form 𝛴𝑧 = 𝟏𝟏′𝜎2

𝑧 , then
there exists a fully-revealing equilibrium in which 𝑃𝐷 = min{, 𝐾}
and 𝑃𝐸 = max{ − 𝐾 , 0}.

Proof. Using the expression for trader demand from Lemma 6, the
market clearing condition yields

∫ 𝑥𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 + 𝑧 = 𝟏𝜅

⇔ ∫ 𝑥𝑗 𝑑 𝑗 + 𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧 = 𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧
)

(
𝟏

⇔𝜏

⇔𝑃 = 𝑔′

∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠
(
𝟏

∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠

(𝑔′)−1

−

(𝑃 )

+ 𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧 = 𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧

+

1
𝜏

(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧

)

−

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧

1
𝜏

)
)

.

(B.7)

Because the vector of the liquidity trade 𝑧 enters explicitly multiplied
only by a scalar, we can conclude that in any equilibrium it suffices to
consider only diagonal coefficient matrices 𝐵 with identical elements
on the diagonal. That is, 𝐵 = 𝑏𝐼 for 𝑏 ∈ R still to be determined.

19 

S. Banerjee et al.

A closed-form expression for the gradient 𝑔′

follows from com-
puting the partial derivatives of the function 𝑔 as defined in Lemma 5:

)

( 𝑦1
𝑦2

𝜕 𝑔
𝜕 𝑦1

=

⎛
⎜
𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦1 − 𝜎𝑠
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

(

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝜙

𝛷

)

𝑠 𝑦1

)

𝑠 𝑦1

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

exp

{ 1
2

(

}

𝛷

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

)

×

exp

{ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

}

𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

)

{

+exp

(𝑦1 −𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

(

}

(

1−𝛷

))

(B.8)

+ 𝐾

exp

{ 1
2

{
(𝑦1 −𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2
)

exp

(

(

}

(

1−𝛷

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

+exp

{
(𝑦1 −𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2

(

}

1−𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

))

(B.9)

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠
))

𝜕 𝑔
𝜕 𝑦2

=

⎛
⎜
𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦2 + 𝜎𝑠
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝛷

}

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1
(

𝜙

1 − 𝛷

)

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

{

exp

(𝑦1 −𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2
)

) − 𝐾

𝑠 𝑦2

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

}

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

1−𝛷

))

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

×

(

exp

{ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
1

}

𝛷

𝑠 𝑦1

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

{

(𝑦1 −𝑦2)𝐾+ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
2

(

}

1−𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦2

𝐾−𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

+exp

)) .

(B.10)

To complete the proof and derive the explicit expressions in the Propo-
sition,  it  is  convenient  to  separately  consider  the  cases  of  positive
definite 𝛴𝑧 and singular 𝛴𝑧.

If 𝛴𝑧 is positive definite, then we can write the conditional moments

explicitly as
𝜇𝑖 = E [

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

]

= 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

(

𝑠𝑖
𝜎2
𝜀

)

, and

+ 𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝

1
𝜌

𝑠𝑝

)−1

(B.11)

=

1
𝜎2
𝑠

+ 𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝 𝟏

(B.12)

𝑠 = V (
𝜎2

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

)

=

(

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

≡ 1−𝜌2

𝜃 𝟏𝟏′ + 1

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜌2 𝐵 𝛴𝑧𝐵′.  Because 𝛴𝑧 is  assumed  positive
where 𝛴𝑝
definite, it follows that 𝐵 𝛴𝑧𝐵′ is positive definite. Furthermore, 𝛴𝑝,
being a sum of a positive definite and positive semidefinite matrix is
itself positive definite and therefore invertible, where it is understood
that we take 𝛴−1
= (𝜌𝛴𝑝)−1 = 𝟎 in the above expressions
when 𝜌 → 0.

𝑝 = 𝟎 and 𝛴−1
𝑝

1
𝜌

Substituting the explicit expression for 𝜇𝑖 in the argument of 𝑔′ in

)

𝟏

+

1
𝜏

(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧

Eq. (B.7) and grouping terms yields
∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
𝜎2
𝑠
1
𝜎2
𝑠
(

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧
)

1
𝜎2
𝜀
(

𝑠 𝟏′𝛴−1

𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠 + 𝜎2

= 𝟏

1
𝜏

1
𝜌

𝑠𝑝

(

(

+

−

)

𝑝

1
𝜏

=

1
𝜎2
𝑠

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝟏𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝

𝑠𝑝 +

1
𝜌

1
𝜎2
𝜀

(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧

)

−

1
(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧
𝜏
))

)

)

𝟏𝑠 +

(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧)

−

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧)

.

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

Matching coefficients on the initial conjecture 𝑠𝑝 = 𝟏𝑠 + 𝐵(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧),
. The previous expression

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

with 𝐵 = 𝑏𝐼 as derived above, requires 𝑏 =
now simplifies to
1
𝜎2
𝑠

+ 𝟏𝟏′𝛴−1
𝑝

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

1
𝜎2
𝜀

𝑠𝑝 −

1
𝜌

)

(

(

𝐼

)

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧)

which,  upon  plugging  back  into 𝑔′,  matches  the  expression  in  the
Proposition. Because there is a unique coefficient matrix 𝐵 that satisfies
the initial conjecture, this equilibrium price function is the unique one
within the generalized linear class.

If 𝛴𝑧 is  singular,  then  the  matrix 𝛴𝑝 that  appears  above  is  not
invertible and the above expressions for beliefs do not apply directly.33

33 The cases can be handled in a unified way by re-representing the above
expressions for the conditional moments in forms involving pseudo-inverses of
𝛴𝑝. However, to avoid tedious technical complications, we choose to treat the
case of singular 𝛴𝑧 separately.

20 

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Intuitively, in this case there is only a single shock to liquidity trading
and  so  the  vector  of  price-signals 𝑠𝑝 collapse  to  an  informationally-
equivalent one-dimensional signal.

If 𝛴𝑧 is of the form 𝟏𝟏′𝜎2

𝑧 (i.e., liquidity trade is perfectly positively
correlated, with identical variance in both markets, as in the baseline
model),  then  the  price  statistics  themselves  are  necessarily  identical
across both markets (i.e., 𝑠𝑝1 = 𝑠𝑝2). Abusing notation to let 𝑠𝑝 ∈ R
denote this common price statistic and 𝜁 = 𝑧𝐷 − 𝜇𝑧𝐷 = 𝑧𝐸 − 𝜇𝑧𝐸 ∈ R
denote the common liquidity trade shock realization, the expressions
for the conditional moments become
1
𝜇𝑖 = E [
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝
)−1

= 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

(B.13)

𝑠𝑖
𝜎2
𝜀

, and

𝑠𝑝

(

)

(

+

]

𝑠 = V (
𝜎2

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

)

=

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

1
𝜎2
𝑝

(B.14)

≡ 1−𝜌2

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜃 + 1

𝜌2 𝑏2𝜎2

𝑧 and it is understood that we take 1
𝜎2
𝑝

where 𝜎2
𝑝
and 1
= 0 in the above expressions when 𝜌 = 0.
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝
Substituting this explicit expression for 𝜇𝑖 in the argument of 𝑔′ in
Eq. (B.7) (recalling that 𝜁 ∈ R denotes the common liquidity trade
realization in this case) and grouping terms yields
∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧
𝜎2
𝑠

𝟏𝜁 −

= 0

1
𝜏

1
𝜏

+

𝟏

)

= 𝟏

𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠𝑝

+ 𝟏

(

1
𝜎2
𝑠
(

)

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

1
𝜎2
𝜀
(

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝟏𝜎2
𝑠

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝑠𝑝 +

1
𝜎2
𝜀

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧

)

1
𝜏

𝜁 −

1
𝜏
))

(

𝑠 +

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

𝜁

)

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧)

.

−

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

Matching coefficients on the initial conjecture 𝑠𝑝 = 𝑠 + 𝑏(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧), with
. The previous expression now
𝐵 = 𝑏𝐼 as derived above, requires 𝑏 =
simplifies to
1
𝜎2
𝑠

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝟏𝜎2
𝑠

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧)

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

1
𝜎2
𝜀

𝑠𝑝 −

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

(

(

)

)

+

which,  upon  plugging  back  into 𝑔′,  matches  the  expression  in  the
Proposition.

If 𝛴𝑧 is singular but not of the form 𝟏𝟏′𝜎2

𝑧 (i.e., the liquidity trade
is perfectly positively correlated but has different variances in the two
markets, or is perfectly negatively correlated, or is constant in at least
one of the markets), then price statistics 𝑠𝑝 = (𝑠𝑝1, 𝑠𝑝2) can be combined
to solve for 𝑠. That is, there exists a vector 𝑎 ∈ R2 such that 𝑠 = 𝑎′𝑠𝑝.34
Hence, the conditional moments for trader 𝑖 are
𝜇𝑖 = E [

, and

= 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

𝑎′𝑠𝑝

(

)

+

]

𝑠𝑖
𝜎2
𝜀

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝
)−1

,

𝑠 = V (
𝜎2

|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

)

=

(

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

𝜌2 𝜎2

≡ 1−𝜌2
where 𝜎2
𝑝
that we take 1
𝜎2
𝑝

𝜃 is strictly positive since 𝜌 < 1 and it is understood
= 0 and 1
= 0 in the above expressions when 𝜌 = 0.
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝
Substituting this explicit expression for 𝜇𝑖 in the argument of 𝑔′ in

Eq. (B.7) and grouping terms yields
∫ 𝜇𝑗 𝑑 𝑗
)
(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧
(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧
𝜎2
𝑠
))
(

1
𝜏

1
𝜏

(

+

−

𝟏

)

= 𝟏

1
𝜎2
𝑠

𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠𝑖
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝑎′𝑠𝑝

+

(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧

)

−

1
𝜏

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧

)

1
𝜏

34 It can be shown that 𝑎 =
when the correlation is
±1, which is finite given the form of 𝛴𝑧 under consideration in this case. If
V(𝑧𝐷) = 0 or V(𝑧𝐸 ) = 0, one can take 𝑎 = (1, 0) or 𝑎 = (0, 1), respectively.

V(𝑧𝐷 )
V(𝑧𝐷 )−C(𝑧𝐷 ,𝑧𝐸 )

V(𝑧𝐸 )
V(𝑧𝐸 )−C(𝑧𝐷 ,𝑧𝐸 )

(

)

S. Banerjee et al.
(

=

1
𝜎2
𝑠

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

(

𝟏

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

𝑎′𝑠𝑝 +

(

𝟏𝑠 +

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

1
𝜎2
𝜀

))

(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧)

)

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧)

.

−

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

Matching coefficients on the initial conjecture 𝑠𝑝 = 𝑠 + 𝐵(𝑧 − 𝜇𝑧), with
𝐵 = 𝑏𝐼 as derived above, requires 𝑏 =
. The previous expression now
simplifies to

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

(

(

𝟏 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

1
𝜎2
𝑠

𝐼

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

)

𝟏𝑎′

𝑠𝑝 −

𝜎2
𝑠
𝜏

)

(𝟏𝜅 − 𝜇𝑧)

(B.15)

which,  upon  plugging  back  into 𝑔′,  matches  the  expression  in  the
Proposition.  Because  there  is  a  unique  matrix 𝐵 satisfying  the  ini-
tial  conjecture,  we  again  have  that  this  price  is  unique  within  the
generalized linear class.

Finally, if 𝜌 = 1 in the previous case, then in equilibrium traders
can directly infer 𝜃 = 𝑠 = 𝑎′𝑠𝑝 from the vector of asset prices. Because
payoffs are riskless given observation of 𝜃, the equilibrium prices must
then be 𝑃𝐷 = min{𝑚 + 𝜃 , 𝐾} and 𝑃𝐸 = max{𝑚 + 𝜃 − 𝐾 , 0} to preclude
arbitrage. This set of prices is not of the posited generalized linear form,
but it is now easily confirmed that such fully-revealing prices constitute
an equilibrium. □

Appendix C.  Equilibrium with multiple firms

In  this  section  we  characterize  the  equilibrium  in  a  multi-asset
version of the model in which there are 𝑁 firms, each exposed to a
systematic risk factor, and each with a potentially different amount of
debt outstanding. Specifically, there are 𝑁 ≥ 1 firms, indexed by 𝑛.
Firm 𝑛’s total cash flow per unit/share is

)

)


𝑛 = 𝑚𝑛 + 𝜃𝑛 + 𝛽𝑛𝐹
where 𝑚𝑛 and 𝛽𝑛 are constants. The idiosyncratic shocks 𝜃𝑛 ∼ 𝑁 (
are independent across firms, and 𝐹 ∼ 𝑁 (
There is a factor asset with payoff 

0, 𝜎2
𝜃
is a systematic factor.
0, 𝜎2
𝐹
𝐹 = 𝑚𝐹 + 𝐹 that is directly
tradeable and is in supply 𝜅 ≥ 0. Each firm has both debt and equity
outstanding, all in zero net supply, so that firms are ‘‘small’’ relative
to the overall economy. We allow for arbitrary differences in leverage
across  firms,  with 𝐾𝑛 denoting  the  face  value  of  debt  for  firm 𝑛.
)
To  condense  notation,  let 𝜓𝑛
denote  the  payoff
function for the debt of firm 𝑛. As in the baseline model, we 𝑉𝑛𝐷 =
denote the debt and equity payoffs as
𝜓𝑛
random variables, and for completeness we note that the factor asset
payoff is always simply equal to its underlying cash flow 𝑉𝐹 = 
𝐹 . We
let 𝑃𝑛𝐷 and 𝑃𝑛𝐸 denote the endogenous prices of each firm 𝑛’s debt and
equity and let 𝑃𝐹 denote the endogenous price of the factor asset.
Investors receive private signals about each firm’s cash flow

and 𝑉𝑛𝐸 = 

=  min

𝑛 − 𝜓𝑛

𝑛, 𝐾𝑛

{

(

(

(

}

)

)

𝑛

𝑛

𝑛

𝑠𝑖𝑛 = 𝜃𝑛 + 𝜀𝑖𝑛
where 𝜀𝑖𝑛 ∼ 𝑁 (
are  mutually  independent.  As  in  the  main
model, we continue to allow investors to agree to disagree about the
information content of one another’s signals. Specifically, each investor
𝑖 believes that other investors’ signals are of the form

0, 𝜎2
𝜀

)

√

𝑠𝑗 𝑛 = 𝜌𝜃𝑛 +
where 𝜉𝑖𝑛 ∼ 𝑁 (

1 − 𝜌2𝜉𝑖𝑛 + 𝜀𝑗 𝑛
)

0, 𝜎2
𝜃

are mutually independent.

Finally, we assume that there are exogenous liquidity traders who
trade  to  gain  exposures  to  the  idiosyncratic  portion  of  each  firm’s
cash flow 𝜃𝑛. In particular, for a given firm 𝑛, liquidity traders submit
demands 𝑧𝑛 ∼ 𝑁 (
in the debt and equity of firm 𝑛 and simultane-
ously submit demand −𝛽𝑛𝑧𝑛 in the factor asset. To ensure that liquidity
demand is truly idiosyncratic, we continue to assume that the 𝑧𝑛 are
independent across firms 𝑛. We let 𝑧𝐹 = − ∑𝑁
𝑛=1 𝛽𝑛𝑧𝑛 concisely denote
the total liquidity demand in the factor asset.

0, 𝜎2
𝑧

)

In  the  derivation,  it  will  be  convenient  to  use  vector/matrix  no-
tation. We let objects without subscripts denote vectors of firm-level
objects  (i.e.,  vectors  of  all  firms/assets  excluding  the  factor  asset).
For  instance,  =
is  the  vector  of  firm  cash  flows,

(

1, … , 
𝑁

)

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

)

)′

𝑁 , 
)′

(
1, … , 
(𝑚1, … , 𝑚𝑁 , 𝑚𝐹
)′
(𝛽1, … , 𝛽𝑁 , 1

(𝑚1, … , 𝑚𝑁
the  vector  of  expected  cash  flows, 𝛽 =
with 𝑚 =
)′
(𝛽1, … , 𝛽𝑁
the vector of cash-flow betas, etc. We let objects with ⃗⋅
denote  vectors  augmented  with  the  factor  asset  in  the  last  slot.  For
instance, ⃗ =
is  the  overall  vector  of  cash  flows,
𝐹
the  vector  of  expected  cash  flows,  and
with ⃗𝑚 =
⃗𝛽 =
the vector of cash flow betas. In the expressions
below, we let 𝐼𝑘 denote a 𝑘 × 𝑘 identity matrix, 𝟏𝑘 a 𝑘-vector of ones,
𝟎𝑘 a 𝑘-vector of zeros, and 𝟎𝑗×𝑘 a 𝑗 × 𝑘 matrix of zeros. To eliminate
notational clutter we will sometimes drop the subscripts that explicitly
label the dimensions of these objects — it should be understood that
they are conformable with the expressions in which they appear (e.g., it
will be clear from the context what is the appropriate dimension of a
given identity matrix 𝐼, whether 𝟎 represents a vector or a matrix, etc.).

C.1.  Beliefs

As  in  the  main  model  in  the  text,  we  consider  equilibria  of  the
generalized linear form, in which there is an 𝑁-dimensional vector of
price statistics that can be represented in form
𝑠𝑝 = 𝑠 + 𝐵 𝑧
) ≡ (∫ 𝑠𝑗1𝑑 𝑗 , … , ∫ 𝑠𝑗 𝑁 𝑑 𝑗)
where 𝑠 ≡ (𝑠1, … , 𝑠𝑁
is  the  vector  of  ag-
gregate  signals,  and  where 𝐵 is  a  nonsingular 𝑁 × 𝑁 matrix  to  be
determined, with generic entry 𝑏𝑚𝑛 in row 𝑚 and column 𝑛.

We  begin  by  characterizing  trader  beliefs  in  an  arbitrary  gener-
alized linear equilibrium of the posited form. Under this conjecture,
the  beliefs  in  both  levered  and  unlevered  versions  of  the  economy
remain conditionally normal though, in principle, they may be asso-
ciated  with  different  conditional  moments  since  the  matrix 𝐵 could
differ across these economies. Using standard updating formulas, the
conditional distribution of ⃗ for any trader 𝑖 is conditionally normal
with conditional mean vector and variance matrix given by

⃗𝜇𝑖

≡ E
𝑖

]

[
⃗

=

)

( 𝜇𝑖
𝑚𝑓

)

𝑠𝑝

1
𝜌
)

(

𝑠𝑖 + 𝛴−1
𝑝

1
𝜎2
𝜀
( V𝑖(𝜃)+𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝛽′
𝐹
)−1

𝛽

𝛽 𝛽′ 𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝐹

𝜇𝑖

≡ E

𝑖 [] = 𝑚 + V

𝑖 (𝜃)

(

𝛤 ≡ V
𝑖

)

=

𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

⃗|
|
|
|

)

1
𝜎2
𝜀

((

+

1
𝜎2
𝜃
≡ 1−𝜌2

V

𝑖 (𝜃) =

𝐼𝑁 + 𝛴−1
𝑝

𝑝

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜃 𝐼 + 1
𝜌2 𝜎2
and 𝛴−1

𝑧 𝐵 𝐵′. To condense notation, it is understood
where 𝛴𝑝
1
that we set 𝛴−1
to 𝟎 in the above expressions when 𝜌 = 0,
𝑝
𝜌
since traders optimally place zero weight on prices when updating in
this case. Note further that for 0 < 𝜌 ≤ 1, the inverse 𝛴−1
is always
𝑝
well-defined. Because 1−𝜌2
𝜃 𝐼 is positive semidefinite (positive definite
if 𝜌 < 1) and because 𝐵 is conjectured to be nonsingular and therefore
𝐵 𝐵′ is positive definite, it follows that 𝛴𝑝 is the sum of a positive semi-
definite and positive definite matrix. Hence, 𝛴𝑝 is itself positive definite
and therefore invertible.

𝜌2 𝜎2

C.2.  Unlevered economy

We begin by characterizing the equilibrium in the case that all firms
are unlevered. As in the baseline model, the equilibrium price vector
in the unlevered economy plays a key role in the representation of the
equilibrium prices in the levered case. Let 𝑃𝑛𝑈 denote the unlevered
(𝑃1𝑈 , … , 𝑃𝑁 𝑈
equity price for firm 𝑛, with 𝑃𝑈 =
the vector of such
)
(𝑃1𝑈 , … , 𝑃𝑁 𝑈 , 𝑃𝐹
prices, and ⃗𝑃𝑈 =
this vector augmented with the
factor asset price.

)

Suppose  that  under  each  investor’s  information  set, ⃗ is
Lemma  7.
conditionally normally distributed with mean ⃗𝜇𝑖 and variance matrix 𝛤 .
Then, there is a linear equilibrium in which the vector of equilibrium prices

21 

S. Banerjee et al.

has the representation

⃗𝑃𝑈 = ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 −

1
𝜏

𝛤

)

(( 𝟎
𝜅

)

− ⃗𝑧

.

This  equilibrium  price  vector  can  be  written  in  terms  of  the  underlying
random variables and parameters as

(

)

𝑚+V𝑖(𝜃)

⃗𝑃𝑈 =

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

+ 1
1
𝜎2
𝜎2
𝜀
𝑝
𝑚𝐹 − 1
𝜏

1
𝜌

𝑠𝑝−𝛽 1
𝜏

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

⇒ ⃗𝑃𝑈 =

(

(

𝑚+V𝑖(𝜃)

)

)

1
𝜌

𝑠𝑝

−

̄𝑠+𝛴−1
𝑝

1
𝜎2
𝜀
𝑚𝐹

)

𝜅

( 1
𝜏

𝛽 𝜎2
𝐹
1
𝜏

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

( 1
𝜏

+

)

V𝑖(𝜃)𝑧

0

(

𝑚+V𝑖(𝜃)

(

𝑚+V𝑖(𝜃)

1
𝜎2
𝜀

1
𝜎2
𝜀

=

=

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

̄𝑠+𝛴−1
𝑝

1
𝜌

𝑠𝑝+ 1
𝜏

𝑧

)

−𝛽 1
𝜏

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

𝜅

𝑚𝐹 − 1
𝜏
(
𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

̄𝑠+

𝜎2
𝐹
)

𝑧

+𝛴−1
𝑝

)

1
𝜌

𝑠𝑝

𝑚𝐹 − 1
𝜏

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

−𝛽 1
𝜏

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

.

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

Grouping terms, to satisfy the initial conjecture about 𝑠𝑝, we must have
that the equilibrium coefficient matrix 𝐵 satisfies

where the equilibrium price signal coefficient matrix is diagonal, 𝐵 =

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

𝐼,

𝐵 =

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

𝐼 ,

(

and 𝜎2

𝑝 =

1−𝜌2
𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜃 + 1

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝑧

)2)

(

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

.  Consequently,  (i)  the  conditional

⃗𝑃𝑈 =

𝑚+V𝑖(𝜃)

which is diagonal. Hence,
(

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

)
𝑠𝑝−𝛽 1
𝜏

1
𝜌

+𝛴−1
𝑝

1
𝜎2
𝜀
𝑚𝐹 − 1
𝜏

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

variance matrix of idiosyncratic cash flow shocks is diagonal:
V

𝑖 (𝜃) = 𝜎2
𝑠 𝐼

(C.1)

(

≡

+ 1
with 𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎2
𝜀
matrix of cash flows is

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+ 1
𝜎2
𝑝

)−1

,  and  (ii)  the  overall  conditional  variance

𝛤 =

( 𝜎2

𝑠 𝐼+𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝛽′
𝐹

)

.

𝛽

𝛽 𝛽′ 𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝐹

(C.2)

Proof. We  begin  by  solving  the  partial  equilibrium  demand  prob-
lem  for  an  arbitrary  trader.  Let 𝑥𝑖𝑛 denote  investor 𝑖’s  demand  for
the  unlevered  equity  of  firm 𝑛,  with 𝑥𝑖 =
and ⃗𝑥𝑖 =
(𝑥𝑖1, … , 𝑥𝑖𝑁 , 𝑥𝑖𝐹
. Given the conditional normality of ⃗, investor 𝑖’s
expected utility at the trading stage is

(𝑥𝑖1, … , 𝑥𝑖𝑁

)′

)′

[

E

𝑖

− exp

{

−

1
𝜏

(

⃗𝑥′
𝑖

(
⃗ − ⃗𝑃𝑈

)

+ 𝜅 𝑃𝐹

]

𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝

)} |
|
|
|
)

= − exp

{

(

(

⃗𝑥′
𝑖

−

1
𝜏

)

⃗𝜇𝑖 − ⃗𝑃𝑈

+ 𝜅 𝑃𝐹

+

1
2

1
𝜏2

⃗𝑥′
𝑖𝛤 ⃗𝑥𝑖

}

.

Maximizing over ⃗𝑥𝑖 yields demand function
⃗𝑥𝑖 = 𝜏 𝛤 −1 (
.

⃗𝜇𝑖 − ⃗𝑃𝑈

)

Aggregating across traders and enforcing the market-clearing condition
yields( 𝟎
)

)

𝜅

= ∫ 𝜏 𝛤 −1 (
⇒ ⃗𝑃𝑈 = ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 −

⃗𝜇𝑖 − ⃗𝑃𝑈
(( 𝟎
𝜅

𝛤

1
𝜏

𝑑 𝑖 + ⃗𝑧

)

)

− ⃗𝑧

,

(C.3)

which matches the first representation in the Lemma.

To further characterize the equilibrium 𝐵 and write the prices in
the second form in the lemma, note that, using the belief expressions
from Appendix C.1, we have
1
𝑚+V𝑖(𝜃)
𝑠𝑝
∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 =
𝜌

̄𝑠+𝛴−1
𝑝

)

(

)

(

1
𝜎2
𝜀
𝑚𝐹

)

and
𝛤

(( 𝟎
𝜅

)

− ⃗𝑧
( V𝑖(𝜃)+𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝛽′
𝐹
)
𝜅

( 𝛽 𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝐹

𝜅

=

=

𝛽

𝛽 𝛽′ 𝜎2
𝐹
𝜎2
𝐹
( V𝑖(𝜃)𝑧
0

−

) (( 𝟎

𝜅

)

.

)

−

( 𝑧

))

−𝛽′𝑧

Substituting back in to Eq. (C.3) and collecting terms yields

22 

1
𝜎2
𝜃
)2

(

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

with V

𝑖 (𝜃) =

((

)

+ 1
𝜎2
𝜀

𝐼 + 𝛴−1

𝑝

)−1

,  and 𝛴𝑝 = 𝜎2

𝑝 𝐼 where 𝜎2

𝑝 =

𝑧

𝜌2 𝜎2

𝜃 + 1

1−𝜌2
.  Plugging  the  expression  for 𝛴𝑝 back  into  the
𝜌2 𝜎2
expression  for ⃗𝑃𝑈 ,  plugging  the  expression  for V
𝑖(𝜃) back  into  the
expression  for 𝛤 ,  and  collecting  terms  yields  the  expressions  in  the
Proposition. □

C.3.  Levered economy

Now, consider the setting in which firms have leverage. Our goal in

this section is to establish the following result.

Proposition 7. There exists an equilibrium in the financial market. The
vector of equilibrium asset prices has the representation

𝑃 = 𝑔′

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

𝛤 −1

∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 +

1
𝜏

𝛤 ⃗𝑧 −

1
𝜏

𝛤

( 𝟎𝑁
𝜅

))⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(C.4)

where 𝑒𝑛 ∈ R𝑁+1 and 𝑒𝐹 ∈ R𝑁+1 are vectors with ones in the 𝑛th and
(𝑁 + 1)st elements, respectively, and zeros in all other elements, and the
function 𝑔′ ∶ R2𝑁+1 → R2𝑁+1 is  the  gradient  of  a  function  given  in
closed-form in Eq. (C.10) in the proof.

The equilibrium price vector can be written in terms of the underlying

random variables and parameters as

⃗𝑃 = 𝑔′

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝑃𝑈

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(C.5)

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

where ⃗𝑃𝑈 is  the  vector  of  unlevered  prices  from Lemma  7 in  which  the
equilibrium price signal coefficient matrix is diagonal 𝐵 =

𝐼.

Furthermore,  this  vector  of  prices  can  be  understood  as  a  vector  of

risk-neutral expected payoffs under the joint cash flow distribution
⃗ ∼Q 𝑁

)

(

⃗𝑃𝑈 , 𝛤

(C.6)

Under  the  generalized  linear  equilibrium  conjecture,  the 𝑁 + 1
dimensional vector of cash flows ⃗ is jointly normally distributed with
mean vector ⃗𝜇𝑖 and variance matrix 𝛤 characterized in Appendix C.1
above.  We  can  use  this  fact  to  derive  the  conditional  distribution
of  the  overall 2𝑁 + 1 dimensional  vector  of  security  payoffs ⃗𝑉 =
((𝑉1𝐷, 𝑉1𝐸
)
) , …
, which is the key step in the equilib-
rium derivation.
Let ⃗𝑢 =

((𝑢1𝐷, 𝑢1𝐸
∈ R2𝑁+1 be an arbitrary
∈ R𝑁+1 be the subvector of
vector and let 𝑢𝐸 ,𝐹 =
elements associated with the equity security ‘‘slots’’ in ⃗𝑢, including the

) , … , (𝑢𝑁 𝐷, 𝑢𝑁 𝐸
(𝑢1𝐸 , … , 𝑢𝑁 𝐸 , 𝑢𝐹

(𝑉𝑁 𝐷, 𝑉𝑁 𝐸

) , 𝑢𝐹
)′

) , 𝑉𝐹

)′

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

factor security. Explicitly integrating against the joint density of the
cash flows ⃗ ∈ R𝑁+1, the conditional MGF of ⃗𝑉 ∈ R2𝑁+1 can be written
E

}]

{

[

⃗𝑢′ ⃗𝑉
{ 𝑁
∑

exp

𝑖

= ∫ exp

𝑢𝑛𝐷𝜓𝑛

)

(𝑣𝑛

+

𝑁
∑

𝑢𝑛𝐸

(𝑣𝑛 − 𝜓𝑛

(𝑣𝑛

))

+ 𝑢𝐹 𝑣𝐹

}

(2𝜋)−(𝑁+1)∕2
{( 𝑁
∑

1∕2

|𝛤 |
(𝑢𝑛𝐷 − 𝑢𝑛𝐸

= ∫ exp

𝑛=1

1

𝑛=1
1

×

×

(2𝜋)−(𝑁+1)∕2
{ 1
2

|𝛤 |
(𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖 + 𝑢𝐸 ,𝐹

1∕2

)′

= exp

× ∫

1

(2𝜋)−(𝑁+1)∕2

1∕2 exp

|𝛤 |

𝑛=1
{

exp

−

1
2

( ⃗𝑣 − ⃗𝜇𝑖
)
)

+ 𝑢′

) 𝜓𝑛

(𝑣𝑛

𝐸 ,𝐹 ⃗𝑣

{

)

−

exp

( ⃗𝑣 − ⃗𝜇𝑖

1
2
𝛤 (𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖 + 𝑢𝐸 ,𝐹
{(∑𝑁

1
2
)
𝑛=1(𝑢𝑛𝐷−𝑢𝑛𝐸 )𝜓𝑛(𝑣𝑛)
))} 𝑑 ⃗𝑣

−

− 1
2

( ⃗𝑣−𝛤 (𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖+𝑢𝐸 ,𝐹

))′

𝛤 −1( ⃗𝑣−𝛤 (𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖+𝑢𝐸 ,𝐹

)}

𝑑 ⃗𝑣

)′ 𝛤 −1 ( ⃗𝑣 − ⃗𝜇𝑖
}

(C.7)

)′ 𝛤 −1 ( ⃗𝑣 − ⃗𝜇𝑖

)}

𝑑 ⃗𝑣

(C.8)

(𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

)′

𝛤 (𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

)}

= max
⃗𝑥𝑖

− exp

𝑔

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝟏2𝑒′
1

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖
⋮
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖
𝐹

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

−

1
𝜏

⃗𝑥𝑖

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

− 𝑔

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝟏2𝑒′
1

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖
⋮
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖
𝐹

+

1
𝜏

⃗𝑃 −

⃗𝑥′
𝑖

1
𝜏

𝜅 𝑃𝐹

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

.

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Given that the CGF 𝑔(⋅) is strictly convex, twice continuously differ-
entiable,  and  finite  on  all  of R2𝑁+1,  this  objective  function  is  twice
continuously  differentiable,  strictly  concave,  and  defined  on  all  of
R2𝑁+1. Hence the first-order condition is necessary and sufficient for
an optimum, and the optimum is unique whenever a solution to the
FOC exists. Rearranging the FOC yields the optimal demand

⃗𝑥𝑖 = 𝜏

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝟏𝑒′
1

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖
⋮
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

𝟏𝑒′
𝑁
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

𝑒′
𝐹

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(𝑔′)−1 (
⃗𝑃

)

−

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

where we have used the fact that 𝑔 is strictly convex to conclude that
the gradient 𝑔′ is injective and therefore invertible on its range.

(C.9)

where the first equality writes the expectation explicitly as an integral
and writes the debt and equity payoffs as functions of the underlying
cash flows, the second equality groups terms in the exponential, and
the final equality completes the square in the exponential.
) , … , (𝑦𝑁 𝐷, 𝑦𝑁 𝐸
(𝑦1𝐸 , … , 𝑦𝑁 𝐸 , 𝑦𝐹

((𝑦1𝐷, 𝑦1𝐸
∈ R2𝑁+1 be an arbitrary
∈ R𝑁+1 denote the subvector
vector and let 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹 =
associated  with  the  equity  security  ‘‘slots’’.  Define  the  function 𝑔 ∶
R2𝑁+1 → R by
𝑔 ( ⃗𝑦)

) , 𝑦𝐹
)

Let ⃗𝑦 =

)′

}

(

exp

= log

{ 1
2

𝑦′
𝐸 ,𝐹 𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹

{∑𝑁

1

× ∫

− 1

1∕2 exp

(2𝜋)−(𝑁+1)∕2

|𝛤 |
2 ( ⃗𝑣−𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹 )′𝛤 −1( ⃗𝑣−𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹 )

𝑛=1(𝑦𝑛𝐷−𝑦𝑛𝐸 )𝜓𝑛(𝑣𝑛)
} 𝑑 ⃗𝑣)

((𝑦1, 𝑦1

) , 𝑦𝐹
and  note  that  when ⃗𝑦 =
argument within each pair of firm-level slots, we have
)
𝑔 ((𝑦1, 𝑦1
(
= log
exp

) , … , (𝑦𝑁 , 𝑦𝑁

) , 𝑦𝐹
}

)′

2 ( ⃗𝑣−𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹 )′𝛤 −1( ⃗𝑣−𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹 )
− 1

)
} 𝑑 ⃗𝑣

) , … , (𝑦𝑁 , 𝑦𝑁
𝑦′
𝐸 ,𝐹 𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹
{

{ 1
2

1

1∕2 exp

|𝛤 |

∫

1
2

=

(2𝜋)−(𝑁+1)∕2

𝑦′
𝐸 ,𝐹 𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹

(C.10)

has  the  same

where the second equality uses the fact that the integral in the first
equality is simply the integral of an 𝑁 + 1 dimensional normal density
with mean vector 𝛤 𝑦𝐸 ,𝐹 and variance matrix 𝛤 over all of R𝑁+1 and
hence has a value of one.

Let 𝑒𝑛 ∈ R𝑁+1 and 𝑒𝐹 ∈ R𝑁+1 be the vectors with ones in the 𝑛th and
(𝑁 + 1)st elements, respectively, and zeros in all other elements. With
the above definition of 𝑔, we can therefore write the MGF in Eq. (C.9)
as

[

E

𝑖

exp

}]

{

⃗𝑢′ ⃗𝑉

= exp

( 𝑢1𝐷
𝑢1𝐸

)

+𝟏2𝑒′
1

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

⋮

( 𝑢𝑁 𝐷
𝑢𝑁 𝐸

)

+𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

𝑢𝐹 +𝑒′
𝐹

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑔

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

− 𝑔

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝟏2𝑒′
1

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖
⋮
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖

𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝛤 −1 ⃗𝜇𝑖
𝐹

.

⎫
⎞
⎪
⎟
⎪
⎟
⎬
⎟
⎪
⎟
⎪
⎠
⎭

We record for completeness that, under this representation, 𝑔 is pre-
cisely the cumulant generating function (CGF) of ⃗𝑉 .

Now, using this expression for the conditional MGF, we can write

the problem for an arbitrary investor 𝑖 as
(
1
𝜏

(
⃗𝑉 − ⃗𝑃

[
− exp

+ 𝜅 𝑃𝐹

E
𝑖

⃗𝑥′
𝑖

{

−

)

max
⃗𝑥𝑖

)}]

𝑆 =

We claim that the range of 𝑔′ is the set of no-arbitrage prices. Let
{(𝑣1𝐷, 𝑣1𝐸 , … , 𝑣𝑁 𝐷, 𝑣𝑁 𝐸 , 𝑣𝐹
)
(𝑣𝑛𝐷 < 𝐾𝑛, 𝑣𝑛𝐸 = 0

∈ R2𝑁+1 ∶
)
(𝑣𝑛𝐷 = 𝐾𝑛, 𝑣𝑛𝐸 > 0

∀𝑛

}

)

or
𝑣𝐹 ∈ R

denote the support of the overall payoff vector ⃗𝑉 . As in the baseline
setting, the range of 𝑔′ is the closed convex hull of 𝑆. This again follows
from results about exponential family distributions in Barndorff-Nielsen
(2014).  Because  the  function 𝑔 is  defined  on  all  of R2𝑁+1 and  fur-
thermore  because  this  set  is  open,  the  exponential  family  described
by 𝑔 is ‘‘regular’’. Hence, it follows from Theorem 8.2 in Barndorff-
Nielsen (2014)  that  the  exponential  family  is  ‘‘steep’’  and  therefore
from Theorem 9.2 in Barndorff-Nielsen (2014) that the gradient 𝑔′ maps
R2𝑁+1 onto the interior of the closed convex hull of 𝑆, int conv(𝑆). This
set coincides with the set of candidate prices in which each firm’s debt
price is strictly less than its face value 𝐾𝑛, each firm’s equity price is
strictly greater than zero, and the price of the factor asset can take any
value, which is precisely the set of prices that do not admit arbitrage.
We can now enforce the market clearing condition, where we use
the fact that liquidity trade is identical within each firm’s securities,
(𝑧𝑛𝐷, 𝑧𝑛𝐸
𝟎2
⋮
𝟎2
𝜅

= ∫ ⃗𝑥𝑖𝑑 𝑖 +

= 𝟏2𝑒′

𝑛 ⃗𝑧:

)′

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⃗𝑧

⇒ ⃗𝑃 = 𝑔′

⎛
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎝

𝟏2𝑒′
1

⋮

𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

𝛤 −1 ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖
𝛤 −1 ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖

−

1
𝜏

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝟎2
⋮
𝟎2
𝜅

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

−

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⃗𝑧
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(C.11)

⃗𝑧

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⎛
⎞
⋮
⎜
⎟
𝟏2𝑒′
⎜
⎟
1
⎜
⎟
𝑒′
⎝
⎠
𝐹
𝛤 −1 ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖

⃗𝑧

𝟏2𝑒′
1

)

( 𝟎𝑁
𝜅

𝟎2
⋮
𝟎2
𝜅

)

=

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

Because

⋮
( 𝟎𝑁
𝜅
( 𝟎𝑁
𝜅
argument of 𝑔′ above as

𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁

𝑒′
𝐹

)

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

=

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

)

( 𝟎𝑁
𝜅

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

we can further write the

−

1
𝜏

𝟎2
⋮
𝟎2
𝜅

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

−

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⃗𝑧
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝛤 −1

∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 +

))

1
𝜏

⃗𝑧 −

( 𝟎𝑁
𝜅

1
𝜏

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝟏2𝑒′
1

𝛤 −1 ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖

⋮

𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

𝛤 −1 ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖
𝛤 −1 ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖
𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

=

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

23 

S. Banerjee et al.

=

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

𝛤 −1

∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 +

1
𝜏

𝛤 ⃗𝑧 −

1
𝜏

𝛤

( 𝟎𝑁
𝜅

))

.

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

As in the unlevered case, we obtain that the equilibrium price signal
coefficient matrix is 𝐵 =
𝐼 by plugging in for ⃗𝜇𝑖 from the expression
in Appendix C.1 above, grouping terms, and enforcing the initial linear
conjecture on 𝑠𝑝.

With this value of 𝐵 pinned down, we recognize that ∫ ⃗𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 + 1
𝜏

𝛤 ⃗𝑧 −
𝛤 ( 𝟎𝑁
1
is precisely the vector of prices from the unlevered economy,
𝜅
𝜏
⃗𝑃𝑈 . Therefore, the equilibrium price vector in Eq. (C.11) can be written

)

⃗𝑃 = 𝑔′

𝟏2𝑒′
1
⋮
𝟏2𝑒′
𝑁
𝑒′
𝐹

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝛤 −1 ⃗𝑃𝑈

.

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

Differentiating the expression for 𝑔(⋅) defined above yields, upon in-
spection, that this expression is equivalent to representing each secu-
rity’s  price  as  the  expectation  of  the  security’s  payoff  under  a  risk-
neutral joint distribution for cash flows given by ⃗ ∼Q 𝑁

)

(

.

⃗𝑃𝑈 , 𝛤

Appendix D.  Limited liability

Our  baseline  model  can  capture  the  limited  liability  feature  of
levered equity (when 𝐾 ≥ 0). However, it does not capture the limited
liability  feature  of  debt:  debt  payoffs  in  the  model  are  unbounded
below.  Furthermore,  in  the  case  that  the  firm  is  unlevered,  equity
payoffs  are  unbounded  below.  In  this  section,  we  alter  our  baseline
model by specifying that firm cash flows follow a distribution that is
bounded below by zero. This ensures that the payoffs on all securities
satisfy limited liability.

In particular, suppose that the firm’s cash flows  follow a trun-
𝜃 ) distribution, truncated below at zero. The unconditional

cated 𝑁(𝑚, 𝜎2
density of  is

𝟏{𝑣≥0}

𝑓 (𝑣) =

√

{

− 1
2

(𝑣−𝑚)2
𝜎2
𝜃

}

.

(D.1)

exp

1
2𝜋 𝜎2
𝜃
1 − 𝛷

)

( −𝑚
𝜎𝜃

We continue to assume that the firm has both debt and equity out-
standing. In order to keep the equilibrium non-trivial, we assume that
the face value of debt satisfies 𝐾 > 0.

We continue to assume that investors observe private signals of the

form
𝑠𝑖 = ( − 𝑚) + 𝜀𝑖

𝜀 ) and perceive others signal as
where 𝜀 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2
√
𝑠𝑗 = 𝜌 ( − 𝑚) +
1 − 𝜌2𝜉𝑖 + 𝜀𝑗

(D.2)

where 𝜉𝑖 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2
𝜉 ) is  independent  of  all  other  random  variables.
As in the baseline model, we also continue to assume that liquidity
traders submit identical demands 𝑧 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2
𝑧 ) in both the debt and
equity of the firm. Finally, we also consider to search for equilibria
in the generalized linear class, in which security prices depend on the
underlying random variable through a linear statistic

𝑠𝑝 = 𝑠 + 𝑏𝑧

(D.3)

with 𝑏 an endogenous constant to be determined.

The next proposition characterizes the equilibrium.

Proposition  8. Suppose  that  the  firm  cash  flow  is  unconditionally
distributed as a truncated normal, truncated below by zero, with parameters
𝜃 . Then there exists a generalized linear equilibrium, unique within
𝑚 and 𝜎2
this class. In this equilibrium:

1. Each investor’s conditional distribution of firm cash flow  is trun-
𝑠 that are identical to those

cated normal with parameters 𝜇𝑖 and 𝜎2

24 

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

in the baseline model.

2. The equilibrium prices of debt and equity can be represented as the
securities’ expected payoffs under a risk-neutral cash flow distribu-
tion. The risk-neutral cash flow distribution is truncated normal with
𝑠 that  are  identical  to  those  in  the  baseline
parameters 𝑃𝑈 and 𝜎2
model.35

Proof. The proof takes a similar form to the derivation in the baseline
model, and so we omit some of the algebraic details to focus on the key
differences.

Under the generalized linear conjecture, Bayes’ rule implies that the

conditional density for an arbitrary investor 𝑖 satisfies
𝑓

)

|𝑠𝑖,𝑠𝑝

(𝑣|𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝
∝ 𝑓 (𝑣) 𝑓𝑠𝑖,𝑠𝑝|

(𝑠𝑖, 𝑠𝑝|𝑣)



{

∝ 𝟏{𝑣≥0} exp

−

}

exp

1
2

(𝑣 − 𝑚)2
𝜎2
𝜃

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

−

1
2

)2

(𝑠𝑖 − (𝑣 − 𝑚)
𝜎2
𝜀

−

1
2

( 𝑠𝑝
𝜌

)2

− (𝑣 − 𝑚)

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

(

1
2

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

)

𝑣2 +

𝑚
𝜎2
𝜃

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

+

𝑚 + 𝑠𝑖
𝜎2
𝜀

+

𝑚 +

𝑠𝑝
𝜌

𝜎2
𝑝

∝ 𝟏{𝑣≥0} exp

−

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
{

∝ 𝟏{𝑣≥0} exp

−

)2

}

(𝑣 − 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

1
2

𝜎2
𝑝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑣

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

where 𝜎2

𝜇𝑖 = 𝑚 + 𝜎2
𝑠

𝑝 = 1−𝜌2
𝜌2 𝜎2
(
1
𝜎2
𝜀

)

𝜉 + 1
𝑧 𝑏2 and where
𝜌2 𝜎2
1
1
𝑠𝑝
𝑠𝑖 +
𝜌
𝜎2
𝑝
)−1

(

𝜎2
𝑠 =

1
𝜎2
𝜃

+

1
𝜎2
𝜀

+

1
𝜎2
𝑝

.

(D.4)

(D.5)

Hence, the conditional cash flow distribution remains truncated normal
𝜃 .  We  can  use
but  with  parameters 𝜇𝑖 and 𝜎2
𝑠
this  to  derive  the  conditional  MGF  of  the  vector  of  security  payoffs
(𝑉𝐷, 𝑉𝐸
[
E
exp

= (min {, 𝐾} , max { − 𝐾 , 0}):

in  place  of 𝑚 and 𝜎2

{𝑢𝐷𝑉𝐷 + 𝑢𝐸 𝑉𝐸

}]

)

𝑖

𝐾

exp

{𝑢𝐷𝑣}

= ∫

0

{

exp

− 1
2

(𝑣−𝜇𝑖)2
𝜎2
𝑠

}

√

1

2𝜋 𝜎2

𝑠

1 − 𝛷

)

(
− 𝜇𝑖
𝜎𝑠

𝑑 𝑣

exp

{𝑢𝐷𝐾 + 𝑢𝐸 (𝑣 − 𝐾)

}

√

∞

+ ∫
𝐾

exp

}

{

− 1
2

(𝑣−𝜇𝑖)2
𝜎2
𝑠

1

2𝜋 𝜎2

𝑠

1 − 𝛷

)

(

− 𝜇𝑖
𝜎𝑠

𝑑 𝑣

{

= exp

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

+ 𝑢𝐷

)2

−

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

)2}

𝐾−𝜎2
𝑠

(

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎𝑠

𝛷

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

+𝑢𝐷

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
1 − 𝛷

)

+𝑢𝐷

(

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎𝑠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

−𝜎2
𝑠

− 𝛷

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
(
)
− 𝜇𝑖
𝜎𝑠

{

+ exp

(𝑢𝐷 − 𝑢𝐸

) 𝐾 +

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

+ 𝑢𝐸

)2

−

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠

( 𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

)2}

Defining the function 𝑔 ∶ R2 → R as

1 − 𝛷

𝐾−𝜎2
𝑠

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1 − 𝛷

)

+𝑢𝐸

(

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠
𝜎𝑠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

.

)

(

− 𝜇𝑖
𝜎𝑠

((

35 Note  that  for  easy  comparability  of  the  expressions  for  equilibrium
price  and  returns,  we  abuse  notation  by  continuing  to  let 𝑃𝑈 = 𝑚 +
. The actual equity price in the unlevered version
𝜎2
𝑠
of the truncated normal economy is itself nonlinear and is not equal to 𝑃𝑈 .

(𝑠 + 𝑏𝑧) − 𝜅
𝜏

+ 1
𝜌𝜎2
𝑝

1
𝜎2
𝜀

)

)

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Fig. D.8. Limited Liability Comparative Statics
This figure compares expected returns under our baseline model to those under the model considered in this section. The parameters are set to: 𝜎2
0; 𝜌 = 0.5.

𝜃 = 𝜎2

𝜀 = 𝑚 = 𝜏 = 𝐾 = 𝜎2

𝑧 = 1; 𝜅 =

)

(

𝑔

𝑦𝐷
𝑦𝐸

(

≡ log

exp

{ 1
2

}

𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦2
𝐷

(

(

𝛷

𝑠 𝑦𝐷

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

)

(

− 𝛷

−𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐷
𝜎𝑠

))

+ exp

{(𝑦𝐷 − 𝑦𝐸

) 𝐾 +

1
2

𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦2
𝐸

(

}

1 − 𝛷

(

𝑠 𝑦𝐸

𝐾 − 𝜎2
𝜎𝑠

(D.6)

)))

,

(D.7)

we can concisely write the MGF as

[

E

𝑖

exp

{𝑢′𝑉 }]

= exp

{

(

𝑔

𝑢 + 𝟏

)

(
𝟏

− 𝑔

)}

,

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

which is of the exponential family form. It follows that the demand
function of investor 𝑖 is

𝑥𝑖 = 𝜏

(

𝟏

𝜇𝑖
𝜎2
𝑠

(𝑔′)−1

−

)

(𝑃 )

.

Imposing the market-clearing condition and rearranging yields equilib-
rium price vector
∫ 𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 + 1
𝜏
𝜎2
𝑠

𝑠 𝑧 − 1
𝜎2

𝑃 = 𝑔′

(D.9)

𝜎2
𝑠 𝜅

𝟏

.

𝜏

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

Plugging in the expression for 𝜇𝑖 from (D.4), grouping terms, and im-
posing the generalized linear conjecture, we find that there is a unique
for the price signal coefficient. Finally, recognizing that
solution 𝑏 =
𝜎2
𝑠 𝜅 = 𝑃𝑈 , where 𝑃𝑈 is as defined
𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏

𝑠 𝑧 − 1
𝜎2
with 𝑏 =
in the baseline model, we can write the equilibrium price vector as

𝜎2
𝜀
𝜏
we have ∫ 𝜇𝑖𝑑 𝑖 + 1
𝜏

𝜏

.

(D.10)

𝑃 = 𝑔′

(

)

𝟏

𝑃𝑈
𝜎2
𝑠

Differentiating the expression for 𝑔 above yields, upon inspection, that
the debt and equity prices can be interpreted as expected payoffs under
a risk-neutral distribution for the cash flow  that is truncated normal,
𝑠 ,  truncated  below  at  zero.  To  see  this,
with  parameters 𝑃𝑈 and 𝜎2
consider the equity (the expression for debt is analogous). We have

(D.8)

( 𝑦𝐷
𝑦𝐸

𝑔

𝜕
𝜕 𝑦𝐸

) |
|
|
|𝑦𝐸 =𝑦𝐷 =

𝑃𝑈
𝜎2
𝑠

25 

S. Banerjee et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

⎛
⎜
⎜
𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐸 −𝐾+𝜎𝑠
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
𝐷

(

(

𝛷

}

(

𝜙

1−𝛷

)

)

𝐾−𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐸
𝜎𝑠
𝐾−𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐸
𝜎𝑠
(

(

)

{

exp

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
))

𝐾−𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐷
𝜎𝑠

−𝛷

−𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐷
𝜎𝑠

+exp

(𝑦𝐷 −𝑦𝐸 )𝐾+ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
𝐸

}

(

(

1−𝛷

𝐾−𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐸
𝜎𝑠

))

{
(𝑦𝐷 −𝑦𝐸 )𝐾+ 1
2

𝑠 𝑦2
𝜎2
𝐸

}(

(

1−𝛷

𝐾−𝜎2
𝑠 𝑦𝐸
𝜎𝑠

))

|
|
|
|𝑦𝐸 =𝑦𝐷 =

𝑃𝑈
𝜎2
𝑠

exp

{ 1
2

(

=

=

=

𝑃𝑈 − 𝐾 + 𝜎𝑠

(

𝛷

( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

)

⎛
⎜
𝑃𝑈 − 𝐾 + 𝜎𝑠
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

𝜙

1−𝛷

− 𝛷

)

)

( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( −𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

)

𝜙

1 − 𝛷

)

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(
1 − 𝛷

( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

))

))

+ (

1−𝛷

))

( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( 𝐾−𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠
( −𝑃𝑈
𝜎𝑠

1 − 𝛷

1 − 𝛷

)

) ,

which is precisely the expectation of max{0,  − 𝐾} for

 ∼ 𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐 𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑁 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙

(

𝑃𝑈 , 𝜎2
𝑠

|
|
|
|

)

 ≥ 0

. □

This proposition demonstrates that, as in the baseline model, se-
curity prices can be expressed as their expected payoffs under a risk-
neutral  distribution  with  mean  and  variance  parameters 𝑃𝑈 and 𝜎2
𝑠 ,
respectively.  The  key  difference  is  that  this  distribution  is  now  the
truncated normal, truncated below at zero. However, expected returns
no longer follow simple analytical expressions as in the main text. Thus,
we next numerically calculate expected returns to assess whether our
main findings are robust.

Fig. D.8 illustrates the findings, comparing the results under limited
liability to our baseline results. The figure reveals that the qualitative
implications of our model continue to hold: private information quality,
liquidity-trading volatility, and default risk impact expected debt and
equity returns similarly to as in our baseline model. However, the lower
right-hand plot reveals that there are two intuitive differences relative
to the baseline model. First, as default risk converges to zero, expected
equity returns converge to zero in our baseline model, but to a strictly
negative value under limited liability. The reason is that, even when the
firm is unlevered, limited liability causes the equity payoffs to remain
positively skewed.

Second, for high levels of default risk, debt earns negative expected
returns under limited liability. Intuitively, when the firm is extremely
close to default, given limited liability, debt payoffs resemble those of
an equity security, and thus become convex. In particular, debt has
limited  downside  and  large  upside  in  the  (unlikely)  event  that  the
firm produces high cash flows. We have confirmed across a range of
parameters that this reversal only applies to firms with default risk that
exceeds 50%, which represents an extremely small proportion of traded
stocks, even among those with junk debt (e.g., Hilscher and Wilson,
2017).

Data availability

Code for figures (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Albagli, E., Hellwig, C., Tsyvinski, A., 2021. Dispersed information and asset prices.

Working Paper.

Albagli, E., Hellwig, C., Tsyvinski, A., 2024. Information aggregation with asymmetric

asset payoffs. J. Finance 79 (4), 2715–2758.

Banerjee,  S.,  Davis,  J.,  Gondhi,  N.,  2024a.  Choosing  to  disagree:  Endogenous
dismissiveness  and  overconfidence  in  financial  markets.  J.  Finance  79  (2),
1635–1695.

Banerjee, S., Marinovic, I., Smith, K., 2024b. Disclosing to informed traders. J. Finance

79 (2), 1513–1578.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O., 2014. Information and Exponential Families. Wiley, New York.
Boehme, R.D., Danielsen, B.R., Sorescu, S.M., 2006. Short-sale constraints, differences

of opinion, and overvaluation. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 41 (2), 455–487.

Breon-Drish, B., 2015. On existence and uniqueness of equilibrium in a class of noisy

rational expectations models. Rev. Econ. Stud. 82 (3), 868–921.

Campbell, J.Y., Hilscher, J., Szilagyi, J., 2008. In search of distress risk. J. Finance 63

(6), 2899–2939.

Caskey, J., Hughes, J.S., Liu, J., 2012. Leverage, excess leverage, and future returns.

Cen, L., Wei, K.J., Yang, L., 2017. Disagreement, underreaction, and stock returns.

Rev. Account. Stud. 17 (2), 443–471.

Manage. Sci. 63 (4), 1214–1231.

Chabakauri,  G.,  Yuan,  K.,  Zachariadis,  K.E.,  2022.  Multi-asset  noisy  rational
expectations  equilibrium  with  contingent  claims.  Rev.  Econ.  Stud.  89  (5),
2445–2490.

Chaigneau,  P.,  2024.  Capital  structure  with  information  about  the  upside  and  the

downside. J. Financial Quantitative Anal. 59 (8), 3921–3958.

Chang, Y.C., Hsiao, P.J., Ljungqvist, A., Tseng, K., 2022. Testing disagreement models.

J. Finance 77 (4), 2239–2285.

Cianciaruso, D., Marinovic, I., Smith, K., 2023. Asymmetric disclosure, noise trade, and

firm valuation. Account. Rev. 98 (5), 215–240.

Davis,  J.,  2017.  Optimal  issuance  across  markets  and  over  time.  Working  Paper,

University of North Carolina.

Davis, J., Gondhi, N., 2024. Learning in financial markets: Implications for debt-equity

conflicts. Rev. Financ. Stud. 37 (5), 1584–1639.

Dichev,  I.D.,  1998.  Is  the  risk  of  bankruptcy  a  systematic  risk?  J.  Finance  53  (3),

1131–1147.

Diether, K., Malloy, C., Scherbina, A., 2002. Differences of opinion and the cross section

of stock returns. J. Finance 57 (5), 2113–2141.

Driessen, J., 2005. Is default event risk priced in corporate bonds? Rev. Financ. Stud.

Eeckhoudt, L., Schlesinger, H., 2006. Putting risk in its proper place. Amer. Econ. Rev.

18 (1), 165–195.

96 (1), 280–289.

Elton, E.J., Gruber, M.J., Agrawal, D., Mann, C., 2001. Explaining the rate spread on

corporate bonds. J. Finance 56 (1), 247–277.

Eyster, E., Rabin, M., Vayanos, D., 2018. Financial markets where traders neglect the

informational content of prices. J. Finance 74 (1), 371–399.

Frenkel, S., 2023. Liquidity of securities. Working paper, Tel Aviv University, Coller
School of Management. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4662114.
Friberg,  R.,  Goldstein,  I.,  Hankins,  K.W.,  2024.  Corporate  responses  to  stock  price

fragility. J. Financ. Econ. 153, 103795.

Garlappi, L., Shu, T., Yan, H., 2008. Default risk, shareholder advantage, and stock

returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (6), 2743–2778.

Garlappi, L., Yan, H., 2011. Financial distress and the cross-section of equity returns.

J. Finance 66 (3), 789–822.

Goulding,  C.L.,  Harvey,  C.R.,  Kurtović,  H.,  2023.  Disagreement  of  disagreement.

Working paper, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4647471.

Greenwood,  R.,  Thesmar,  D.,  2011.  Stock  price  fragility.  J.  Financ.  Econ.  102  (3),

471–490.

Grossman,  S.,  Stiglitz,  J.,  1980.  On  the  impossibility  of  informationally  efficient

markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 70 (3), 393–408.

Güntay, L., Hackbarth, D., 2010. Corporate bond credit spreads and forecast dispersion.

Hellwig,  M.,  1980.  On  the  aggregation  of  information  in  competitive  markets.  J.

J. Bank. Financ. 34 (10), 2328–2345.

Econom. Theory 22 (3), 477–498.

Hilscher,  J.,  Wilson,  M.,  2017.  Credit  ratings  and  credit  risk:  Is  one  measure

enough? Manage. Sci. 63 (10), 3414–3437.

Hoffmann,  K.,  Schmidt,  C.,  1982.  Characterizations  of  the  exponential  family  by
generating functions and recursion relations for moments. Ser. Stat. 13 (1), 79–90.
Huang, J.Z., Huang, M., 2012. How much of the corporate-treasury yield spread is due

to credit risk? Rev. Asset Pricing Stud. 2 (2), 153–202.

Kandel, E., Pearson, N.D., 1995. Differential interpretation of public signals and trade

in speculative markets. J. Polit. Econ. 103 (4), 831—872.

Lee, C.M., Swaminathan, B., 2000. Price momentum and trading volume. J. Finance

Miller,  E.,  1977.  Risk,  uncertainty,  and  divergence  of  opinion.  J.  Finance  32  (4),

55 (5), 2017–2069.

1151–1168.

Sci. 68 (1), 52–74.

Econometrica 62, 1327.

Ang, A., 2014. Asset Management: A Systematic Approach to Factor Investing. Oxford

Mondria, J., Vives, X., Yang, L., 2022. Costly interpretation of asset prices. Manage.

Back, K., Crotty, K., 2015. The informational role of stock and bond volume. Rev.

Morris, S., 1994. Trade with heterogeneous prior beliefs and asymmetric information.

Bai, J., Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S., Helwege, J., 2015. On bounding credit-event

Pasquariello, P., Sandulescu, M., 2024. Speculation and liquidity in stock and corporate

Bai, J., Goldstein, R.S., Yang, F., 2020. Is the credit spread puzzle a myth? J. Financ.

Penman, S.H., Richardson, S.A., Tuna, I., 2007. The book-to-price effect in stock returns:

University Press, Oxford.

Financ. Stud. 28 (5), 1381–1427.

risk premia. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (9), 2608–2642.

Econ. 137 (2), 297–319.

Stud. 24 (9), 3025–3068.

bond markets. Working paper, University of Michigan.

accounting for leverage. J. Account. Res. 45 (2), 427–467.

generating functions. Ann. Statist. 3 (3), 747–753.

Banerjee, S., 2011. Learning from prices and the dispersion in beliefs. Rev. Financ.

Sampson,  A.R.,  1975.  Characterizing  exponential  family  distributions  by  moment

26 

S. Banerjee et al.

Scheinkman, J., Xiong, W., 2003. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. J. Polit.

Simsek, A., 2013. Speculation and risk sharing with new financial assets. Q. J. Econ.

Econ. 111 (6), 1183–1220.

128 (3), 1365–1396.

Journal of Financial Economics 165 (2025) 103995 

Wang,  J.,  Wu,  K.,  Pan,  J.,  Jiang,  Y.,  2023.  Disagreement,  speculation,  and  the

idiosyncratic volatility. J. Empir. Financ. 72, 232–250.

27 

