Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

ESG: A panacea for market power?✩
Philip Bond, Doron Levit ∗

University of Washington, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Code used in "ESG: A Panacea for
Market Power?" (Original data)

JEL classification:
D74
D82
D83
G34
K22

Keywords:
ESG
Shareholder primacy
Stakeholder capitalism
Corporate social responsibility
Corporate governance
Market power

1.  Introduction

We study the equilibrium effects of the “S” dimension of ESG under imperfect competition. ESG policies are
pledges made by firms that constrain managers to treat their stakeholders better than market conditions alone
dictate. Moderate policies limit market power and prompt managers to be more competitive; aggressive polices
backfire, both for adopting firms and intended beneficiaries. In contrast to the “shareholder primacy” paradigm,
competition in ESG policies under the “stakeholder capitalism” paradigm is a panacea for market power,
delivering the first-best outcome in equilibrium. We discuss drivers behind the recent rise in ESG, ESG-linked
compensation, and disclosure practices.

There is a long-running debate in academic and policy circles over
whether the purpose of the corporation is or, should be, to maximize
value  for  shareholders  or,  instead,  to  operate  in  the  interest  of  all
of its various stakeholders.  These questions have far-reaching impli-
cations, including whether and how companies and boards take into
account Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) considerations
when developing and delivering products and services, making business
decisions,  managing  risk,  developing  long-term  strategies,  recruiting
and  retaining  talent  and  investing  in  the  workforce,  implementing
compliance programs, and crafting public disclosures. A growing num-
ber of empirical studies have examined whether firms indeed pursue

ESG policies, whether these policies achieve their putative aims, and
whether equity markets reward such policies. Theoretical studies have
also examined whether and how shareholder actions incentivize firms
to behave in socially responsible ways. However, largely absent from
the  literature  is  an  examination  of  how  firms’  ESG  policies  affect
equilibrium outcomes in the real input and output markets that they
operate  in.  Our  paper  aims  to  fill  this  gap,  and  to  study  the  “basic
economics” of ESG policies.

Specifically: We focus on the “S” component of ESG in labor and
product markets. We interpret a typical firm’s policy in this realm as a
pledge to treat its workers or customers better than market conditions
alone dictate. Leading real-world examples of such practices are pledges

✩
Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank the editor for helpful comments. We are grateful to Daniel Green, Deeksha Gupta, Andrey Malenko,
Robert Marquez, Martin Oehmke, Johann Reindl, Karin Thorburn, conference participants at the UNC-Duke Corporate Finance Conference 2023, Finance Theory
Webinar 2023, Adam Smith Workshop in Corporate Finance 2023, Financial Intermediation Research Society 2023, BI Conference on Corporate Governance
2023, NBER SI Corporate Finance 2023, ECGI 2024, and seminar participants at the University of British Columbia, the University of Bonn, the Federal Reserve
Board, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, the University of Geneva, INSEAD, CEU, the University of Vienna, Reichman University, HKUST, Rice
University, the University of Utah, Boston University, Copenhagen Business School, Iowa State University, Yeshiva University, and Wharton, for helpful comments
and discussions.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: apbond@uw.edu (P. Bond), dlevit@uw.edu (D. Levit).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103991
Received 4 April 2024; Received in revised form 20 December 2024; Accepted 23 December 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)103991Availableonline24January20250304-405X/©2024PublishedbyElsevierB.V.P. Bond and D. Levit

to pay employees above market wages,1 to provide generous benefits,
to invest in worker training, and to create a friendly work environment;
and, in the context of product markets, to offer products with low envi-
ronmental impact, high safety standards, strong protection of customer
privacy/cybersecurity, low prices and/or high quality-to-price, etc.

We study how individual firm pledges to depart from market clear-
ing prices affect equilibrium outcomes. We first characterize outcomes;
and then analyze how firms pick policies in anticipation of the out-
comes they generate. We are especially interested in the effect of such
pledges in markets where firms wield market power and standard wel-
fare theorems do not apply. Indeed, one of our main results shows that
competition in ESG policies between socially minded firms eliminates
market power distortions.

Our analysis revolves around two robust consequences of ESG poli-
cies that pledge to treat workers/customers better than market con-
ditions  dictate.  On  the  one  hand,  such  policies  make  workers  more
expensive to hire/customers less profitable to serve, in turn leading to
a smaller firm that provides softer competition for its competitors. On
the other hand, such policies ameliorate monopsony/oligopoly temp-
tations to moderate hiring/production; this in turns leads to a larger
firm that provides stronger competition for its competitors. We label
these conflicting effects as the anti- and pro-competitive effects of ESG
policies.

We first characterize the effects of just one firm adopting an ESG
policy.  For  example,  a  firm  may  be  a  “thought  leader”  or  “early
adopter”  in  ESG,  or  may  be  better  able  to  credibly  pledge  to  treat
stakeholders well than its competitors. For mild ESG policies – meaning
pledges to treat workers/customers only moderately better than market
conditions require – the pro-competitive effect dominates. In this case,
the ESG firm gains market share at the expense of competitors; and
the ESG policy generates positive spillovers for workers/customers of
other firms. In contrast, for aggressive ESG policies the anti-competitive
effect dominates: the ESG firm loses market share, and while the ESG
firm’s  own  workers/customers  benefit,  the  reduced  competitiveness
engendered by the ESG policy produces negative spillovers for other
firms’ workers/customers.

When multiple firms adopt ESG policies, the gain in market share
associated with incremental increases in ESG is even more pronounced.
Specifically: if firms adopt the same ESG policy then this shared-ESG
policy determines the overall size of the market, but not its division
among competing firms. Marginally outdoing the ESG policies of com-
peting  firms  breaks  the  indeterminacy,  and  discretely  increases  the
market share of the ESG-winner.

We turn next to firms’ choices of ESG policies, assuming that firms
anticipate the consequences of these policies for market outcomes. We
consider two corporate governance paradigms: “shareholder primacy”
and  “stakeholder  capitalism.”  In  the  first  case,  a  firm  chooses  ESG
policies to maximize profits; while in the second case, a ‘‘purposeful’’
firm chooses ESG policies to maximize the combination of profits and
employee/customer surplus.

While we consider both corporate governance paradigms, i.e., alter-
native objectives of boards/controlling shareholders, we focus through-
out  on  the  case  in  which  firms’  operational  decisions  are  made  by
managers who seek to maximize profits. Consequently, and in contrast
to  the  case  of  profit-maximizing  firms,  for  purposeful  firms  there  is

1 As a representative example of such policies: In recent years, Bank of
America has adopted a nationwide minimum hourly wage for its employees,
which  has  risen  from  $15  in  2017  to  $23  in  2023.  According  to  Bank  of
America’s  CHRO  Sheri  Bronstein,  “Providing  a  competitive  minimum  rate
of  pay  is  foundational  to  being  a  great  place  to  work.”  Moreover,  “By
investing in a variety of benefits to attract and develop talented teammates,
we are investing in the long-term success of our employees, customers and
communities. Our commitment to $25 by 2025 is how we share success with
you and lead the way for other companies.” (www.shrm.org, “Bank of America
Bumps Up Minimum Wage”).

a meaningful distinction between the economic agents who set ESG
policies and those who make operational decisions constrained by these
policies.

An individual profit-maximizing firm benefits from adopting a mild
ESG  policy.  At  first  sight  it  may  seem  surprising  that  a  pledge  to
pay higher wages/charge lower prices increases profits. The underly-
ing economic force is that mild pledges are pro-competitive, because
they commit a firm to ignoring monopsony/oligopoly distortions; and
commitment  is  generally  valuable  in  competitive  settings.  Interest-
ingly, ESG policies of the type we consider – again, pledges to treat
workers/customers better than market conditions alone dictate – are
enough to give a profit-maximizing firm all the commitment that it
desires.  Even  though  such  a  firm  selects  an  ESG  policy  with  only
its own profits in mind, and the policy directly affects only its own
wages/prices, the equilibrium outcome is to increase welfare for both
its own workers/customer and those at other firms. However, a firm’s
ESG policy distorts production by driving a wedge between its marginal
product and that of its competitors; and under some circumstances, this
distortion is sufficiently large that overall social surplus declines.

An individual purposeful firm adopts a stronger ESG policy than a
profit-maximizing firm, as one would expect. More interesting is that a
purposeful firm always adopts an ESG policy that is excessive from the
perspective of overall social surplus; on the margin, the aforementioned
production distortion dominates other effects. At the same time, and
differently from its profit-maximizing counterpart, a purposeful firm
wishes it had additional tools at its disposal beyond the ESG policies
that we focus on (e.g., ESG-linked executive pay)—though access to
such tools would be socially costly, and further reduce social surplus.
The advantages that a firm gains from pledging to treat its stake-
holders well naturally give rise to competition on a new front: ESG
policies. We first consider competition in ESG policies under the share-
holder  primacy  paradigm.  As  noted  above,  a  firm  gains  significant
market share by marginally outdoing its competitor’s ESG policy. Be-
cause of this, ESG policies are strategic complements at moderate levels.
However, if a competitor has adopted an aggressive ESG policy then
abandoning ESG is a better response than further escalation; the cost
of treating stakeholders even more generously exceeds the benefit of
additional market share. Hence, ESG policies are strategic substitutes
at aggressive levels. These observations naturally result in competing
firms  adopting  different  ESG  policies,  even  when  ex  ante  identical.
Relative to a no-ESG benchmark, competition in ESG policies between
profit-maximizing firms reduces industry profits while benefiting work-
ers/customers. Nevertheless, ESG-competition leaves an industry that is
too small from a social perspective, because it ameliorates but does not
eliminate market power distortions. Furthermore, competition in ESG
policies has the potential to reduce overall social surplus, because of
the production distortions mentioned earlier.

ESG-competition  between  purposeful  firms  plays  out  differently.
The  main  reason  is  that  ESG  policies  are  stronger  strategic  comple-
ments  for  purposeful  firms  than  for  shareholder-value  maximizing
ones. Similar to a profit-maximizing firm, a purposeful firm benefits
from marginally outdoing its competitor’s ESG policy. Unlike a profit-
maximizing firm, however, a purposeful firm is not tempted to undercut
its  competitor  by  abandoning  ESG  policies,  since  it  internalizes  the
direct gains to its stakeholders. In this case, we obtain a striking welfare
theorem:  Competing  purposeful  firms  pick  equilibrium  ESG  policies
that lead to the first-best outcome for the industry. In this respect, ESG
is a panacea to market power. We emphasize that this result holds even
though each individual firm aims only to maximize its own surplus,
which  as  discussed  above  has  adverse  welfare  effects  when  only  a
subset of firms are purposeful.

Our  welfare  theorem  is  driven  by  two  opposing  forces.  On  the
one hand, a purposeful firm seeks to be large. Similar to our earlier
discussion,  an  unconstrained  purposeful  firm  would  operate  above
its  first-best  size.  On  the  other  hand,  a  profit-maximizing  manager
operates at a scale at which marginal profits are positive; this causes

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039912P. Bond and D. Levit

aggressive ESG policies to backfire and reduce a firm’s size. Combining
these two observations: the misalignment between the objectives of a
purposeful board and its profit-maximizing managers drives firms to
be large—but not too large; and competition between purposeful firms
delivers the first best outcome. Moreover, the ESG policy that balances
the misaligned objectives of purposeful boards and profit-maximizing
manager is robust to perturbations to the board’s objectives, and con-
sequently our welfare theorem holds as long as the weight placed on
worker/consumer welfare is sufficiently large.

Our analysis has important implications that go beyond the specific
context of our model. First, our analysis suggests two possible drivers
for the recent rise in ESG: the rise of concentration and market power
in key industries across the US economy and a shift in the strength of
investors’ pro-social preferences.

Second, relative to non-ESG firms, the output of firms that adopt
moderate ESG policies is less sensitive to own productivity shocks, but
more sensitive to productivity shocks hitting competitors.

Third,  our  analysis  suggests  that  ESG-linked  executive  pay  offers
no discernible social value, and stakeholder capitalism is best served
when managers maintain a focus on profit-maximization, with boards
strategically setting ESG policies to mitigate any adverse impacts that
profit-maximization may have on other stakeholders of the firm.

Last, while regulations that facilitate transparency and disclosure of
ESG policies contribute to the efficacy and adoption of these policies
under the shareholder primacy paradigm, they matter much less for the
adoption of ESG policies under the stakeholder capitalism paradigm.

Overall,  our  analysis  relates  the  adoption  of  ESG  policies  to  the
nature  of  competition  between  firms  and  the  prevailing  corporate
governance paradigm. We conclude with a large set of novel empirical
predictions for how ESG policies affect profits, market shares, margins,
responsiveness to productivity shocks, wages/prices, welfare of stake-
holders; and also for how competition, transparency, peer-firms’ ESG
policies, and corporate governance affect ESG.

Related literature

The literature on the consequences of ESG policies for the equilibria
of the real markets in which firms operate, and in turn for the ESG
choices of competing firms, is relatively sparse.

The closest relevant study is Stoughton et al. (2020), which analyzes
imperfect  competition  between  firms  that  commit  to  maximize  an
objective that weights both profits and worker/customer surplus. Our
analysis shares with Stoughton et al. the observation that shareholder
value  is  potentially  raised  by  a  firm’s  commitment  to  deviate  from
profit-maximizing behavior. However, in contrast to Stoughton et al.
we model an ESG policy as a firm’s explicit promise to treat its stake-
holders well, which operates as a constraint on the minimum level of
utility to stakeholders. This difference in how we conceptualize ESG
policies has important implications. First, while in Stoughton et al. ESG
policies  are  always  pro-competitive,  many  of  our  results  stem  from
the interplay of the pro- and anti-competitive effects of ESG, which
in turn stems from the separation between high-level firm objectives
(e.g.,  of  the  board)  and  profit-maximization  at  the  operations  stage
(e.g., by the manager). In particular, the presence of anti-competitive
effects means that aggressive ESG policies can backfire both for the
firm and their intended beneficiaries. Second, in Stoughton et al. ESG
policies  are  always  strategic  substitutes,  while  in  our  analysis  ESG
polices  are  strategic  complements  at  moderate  levels  and  strategic
substitutes at extreme levels, thereby capturing in a natural way both
a firm’s incentives to outdo a competitor’s modest ESG policies, and
a  firm’s  willingness  to  severely  undercut  a  competitor’s  “generous”
policy. Third, the combination of the first two points plays a crucial role
in our central welfare theorem that competition between purposeful
firm delivers efficiency. Last, our distinction between the objective of
the  board/shareholder  who  sets  ESG  policies  and  the  manager  who

executes them generates novel implications with respect to the desir-
ability of additional ESG tools such as ESG-linked executive pay and the
effectiveness of regulations that facilitate transparency and disclosure
of ESG policies.

Xiong and Yang (2024) explore a different motive for ESG policies
by  shareholder-value  maximizing  firms  that  specifically  operates  for
network goods. Albuquerque et al. (2019) model ESG as a characteristic
that  directly  impacts  consumer  demand. Besley  and  Ghatak (2007)
argue that public-good provision by competing profit-maximizing firms
neither ameliorates nor amplifies the free-rider problem associated with
direct  contributions  to  public  goods. Dewatripont  and  Tirole (2024)
study a model of imperfect competition with socially responsible con-
sumers.  Unlike  in  our  framework,  in  their  model  firms  adopt  ESG
policies that affect consumers’ welfare above and beyond the price they
charge. They show that the degree of competitive pressure is irrelevant
for the adoption of ESG policies if prices are flexible. In contrast, we
examine policies aimed at treating firms’ stakeholders well in situations
where excessive market power disadvantages them, and establish that
in these cases firms typically adopt more aggressive ESG policies as
markets become less competitive.

At an abstract level, the idea of firms’ ESG choices affecting subse-
quent equilibrium outcomes under imperfect competition is related to
literature studying the effects of other types of firm decisions, includ-
ing, for example, Brander and Lewis (1986)’s analysis of debt choices
and Fershtman and Judd (1987)’s, as well as Sklivas (1987)’s analysis
of managerial contracts. A central theme in much of this literature is
that  firms  can  effectively  commit  to  compete  more  aggressively  via
decisions made prior to product market interactions, and that doing
so is a potential source of advantage. Perhaps surprisingly, this same
effect operates in our setting also—after all, it is not obvious whether
constraining  managers  to  pay  workers  more  leads  firms  to  compete
more or less aggressively.2 More generally, the application of the idea
that commitment helps in imperfect competition settings to the specific
context of ESG yields numerous insights, including the extent to which
competition in ESG firms pushes the equilibrium outcome toward the
socially optimal one.

A sizeable literature has addressed the topic of a firm’s objectives.
See, for example, Tirole (2001); or for a recent survey, Gorton et al.
(2022). Magill et al. (2015) note that just including the surpluses of the
firm’s own consumers and workers in the firm’s objective does not lead
to efficiency, and that underweighting these stakeholders in the firm’s
objective function could improve efficiency. Allen et al. (2015) study
the strategic behavior between stakeholder-oriented firms, defined as
firms that overweight their survival relative to what their own share-
holders would internalize; they do not study firms’ choices to adopt ESG
polices. Geelen et al. (2023) study how differences in social preferences
between the firm’s manager and owner affect the sustainability of the
organization. Allcott et al. (2023) quantitatively estimate the relative
importance of firm’s profits, consumer and worker surplus, and a subset
of externalities including carbon emissions.

While the theoretical literature on the effects of ESG policies on
product and labor market is small, a larger theoretical literature consid-
ers the effects of responsible investment on corporate policies: Heinkel
et al. (2001), Davies and Van Wesep (2018), Oehmke and Opp (2024),
Edmans et al. (2022), Landier and Lovo (2020), Green and Roth (2024),
and Chowdhry et al. (2019), Huang and Kopytov (2022), Gupta et al.
(2022), and Piccolo et al. (2022).

Finally, in the labor-market application of our model, a firm can in-
crease its profits by paying above market-clearing wages to its workers.
In this respect, our paper adds a new channel to the extensive literature

2 In a non-ESG setting, Rey and Tirole (2019) study the use of price caps by
firms selling complementary goods, and show that such price caps can alleviate
double-marginalization problems for firms. In their analysis, firms collectively
agree to price-cap arrangements.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039913P. Bond and D. Levit

on  efficiency  wages  that  has  explored  a  variety  of  ways  in  which
firms may benefit from above market-clearing wages (see Katz (1986)
for a literature review). The distinguishing feature of our channel is
that it operates via inter-firm strategic interactions; a firm’s promise
of  higher  pay  can  induce  competitors  to  compete  less  aggressively.
In  contrast  to  the  existing  efficiency  wage  literature,  paying  higher
wages ends up lowering (rather than raising) the productivity of a firm’s
marginal worker. Related, unlike the literature on minimum wages, in
our model minimum wages are self-imposed, allowing for variations
across firms and richer welfare implications. Nonetheless, our model
is consistent with recent empirical evidence by Azar et al. (2023), who
show that minimum wage increases lead to positive employment effects
in concentrated labor markets.3

2.  Set-up

(𝑙𝑖

For transparency, we present our analysis in terms of ESG policies
for workers. Parallel implications hold for ESG policies for suppliers
and for customers; see Section 6.1. Consider an imperfectly competitive
labor  market  with  two  firms.4 Each  firm 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2} deploys  labor
)
,  where 𝑓𝑖 (⋅) is  strictly  increasing  and
𝑙𝑖 ∈ [0, 1] to  produce 𝑓𝑖
concave. Throughout, we assume firms hire a strictly positive number
of  workers  by  imposing  the  standard  Inada  condition 𝑓 ′
𝑖 (0) =  ∞.
The productivity of the two firms is unambiguously ordered, i.e., the
2 (𝑙) is independent of 𝑙. Without loss,
comparison between 𝑓 ′
2 (⋅). We write 𝐿 ≡ 𝑙1 + 𝑙2
firm 1 is weakly more productive, 𝑓 ′
for total labor employed at all firms. There is a continuum of workers,
with a measure normalized to 1, and ordered on [0, 1] by outside option
𝑊 (𝑙) for worker 𝑙 ∈ [0, 1], where 𝑊 ′ (⋅) > 0. Hence the inverse labor
supply curve is 𝑊 (𝐿).

1 (𝑙) and 𝑓 ′

1 (⋅) ≥ 𝑓 ′

Firms compete in Cournot fashion. That is, firms’ managers simul-
taneously announce hiring 𝑙1, 𝑙2, and the market wage is determined
by 𝑊 (𝐿). There is significant evidence that employers enjoy market
power in labor markets; see, for example, Lamadon et al. (2022).

The objective of the manager of each firm is to maximize its profits.

We assume
𝑊 ′′ (𝐿) 𝐿 + 𝑊 ′ (𝐿) > 0,

(1)

which ensures both that managers’ reaction functions to other man-
agers’ hiring decisions slope down (see Lemma 1 below) and that the
employment  cost 𝑊 (𝐿) 𝐿 faced  by  a  monopsonistic  firm  is  convex
(i.e., 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿) 𝐿 + 2𝑊 ′ (𝐿) > 0).

The  key  innovation  of  our  analysis  is  that  firms  can  adopt  ESG
policies. Specifically, before managers make hiring decisions, the board
of  each  firm 𝑖 may  adopt  an  ESG  policy  that  constrains  the  firm
≥ 0.  Hence  an  ESG  policy  is  fully
to  pay  its  workers  at  least 𝜔𝑖
characterized  by 𝜔𝑖.  If  firm 𝑖 adopts  policy 𝜔𝑖,  it  pays  its  workers
.5 Firms’  ESG  policies  are  public,  and  in  particular
max
observed by competitors. The firm’s manager maximizes firm-profits
subject to this constraint. That is: The board of directors of the firm
adopts an ESG policy that can be monitored and enforced (wages and
benefits are observable and verifiable), but the hiring decision is made

{𝜔𝑖, 𝑊 (𝐿)
}

3 For more evidence on the effects of minimum wages see, e.g., Card and
Krueger (1995), Neumark and Wascher (2008) and references in Azar et al.
(2023).

4 In Appendix I of the Online Appendix, we analyze competition between
one ESG firm and 𝑁 ≥ 2 non-ESG firms, and show that the results are similar
to those reported in Section 4. Moreover, the analysis of one ESG firm and
a  competitive  fringe  is  also  similar  to  the  analysis  in  Section 4 since  the
competitive  fringe  will  never  adopt  an  ESG  policy.  Analyzing  competition
between 𝑁 > 2 ESG firms is substantially more complicated and left for future
research.

5 ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 has no effect on firm 𝑖’s production or revenue. A positive
and direct effect on the firm’s production function would be analogous to the
effect of efficiency wages.

by executives who have incentives to maximize profit.

We emphasize that, in practice, ESG promises to treat workers well
often cover multiple dimensions of the employment relation, including
non-pecuniary  benefits  of  various  kinds  (e.g.,  health  care  coverage,
paid  family  leave,  and  workplace  flexibility),  and  that 𝜔𝑖 should  be
understood as the monetary-equivalent of these various promises.

We consider two corporate governance paradigms throughout the
analysis.  Under  the  shareholder  primacy  paradigm,  a  firm’s  board
adopts an ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 with the objective of maximizing firm profits,
i.e., shareholder value. We label such firms as shareholder firms. Under
the stakeholder capitalism paradigm, a firm’s board instead adopts an
ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 with the objective of maximizing a broader measure of
a firm’s impact, namely total surplus created by the firm—which here
equals the sum of firm-profits and worker-surplus. We label such firms
as purposeful firms. Leading cases in which purposeful firms potentially
emerge are if shareholders are socially conscious, if workers gain board
representation, or if the firm is incorporated as a Benefit Corporation
(“B Corp”) with a legal obligation to consider the impact of its policies
not  only  on  shareholders  but  also  on  other  stakeholders  such  as  its
employees. Note that purposeful firms are “narrow” consequentialists
in the sense that they internalize the impact of their policies on all
stakeholders of their firm, i.e., their own shareholders and workers, but
not the stakeholders of their competitors. The same assumption is made
in prior literature, including, for example, Magill et al. (2015).6

For both corporate governance paradigms we assume that managers
maximize profits, subject to the constraints imposed by ESG policies.
In  Section 4.2,  we  show  that  shareholder  firms  do  not  gain  from
also incentivizing managers to directly internalize the welfare of the
firm’s employees, e.g., via ESG-linked executive pay. In contrast, our
analysis in Section 4.3 demonstrates that purposeful firms could gain
from providing such incentives, but that doing so would reduce social
welfare. See Section 6.4 for a discussion of alternative ESG tools.

Remark on the framework of competition

Our  analysis  builds  on  a  standard  Cournot  model  of  imperfect
competition. This makes transparent the role of the novel aspects of
our  analysis,  namely,  firms’  ESG  policies  to  treat  their  stakeholders
well. The Cournot model has the specific advantages of allowing for
a clear separation between ESG policies (expressed in terms of price)
and subsequent actions in the imperfect-competition game (in Cournot,
quantities).7 It also naturally generates the pro- and anti-competitive
effects of ESG policies that are central to our analysis.

Related,  the  assumption  of  downwards  sloping  quantity-reaction
functions is intuitive and widely-imposed in the literature. It is an im-
portant ingredient in our analysis of shareholder firms, but matters less
for the case of purposeful firms (see discussion at end of Section 4.3.)8

6 Even among proponents of stakeholder capitalism, there exists consider-
able skepticism whether firms should internalize the welfare of stakeholders
affiliated with their competitors; see, e.g., Bebchuk and Tallarita (2020) and
Mayer (2022).

7 Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) show that, under some circumstances, the
Cournot outcome arises if firms first choose maximum capacities, and then
subsequently engage in price competition. Similarly, we conjecture that equi-
libria in our setting coincide with the outcomes of a game in which (i) boards
of directors set ESG policies; (ii) profit-maximizing managers make capacity
decisions; (iii) profit-maximizing managers engage in price competition.

8 Note that although the distinction between actions as strategic substitutes
and complements is sometimes related to quantity versus price competition,
the two notions are separate; quantity competition can generate strategic com-
plementarity, while price competition can generate strategic substitutability.
Indeed,  in  models  of  price  competition  based  on  firm  “location,”  this  last
point is often overlooked because many analyses focus for simplicity on the
case in which all consumers buy from at least one firm; see, for example, the
discussion in Mas-Colell et al. (1995), and especially exercise 12.c.14.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039914P. Bond and D. Levit

Remark on commitment

An ESG policy in our model is a firm’s pledge to treat its stakehold-
ers well. This formulation implicitly assumes that shareholder firms,
whose  objective  is  profit  maximization,  refrain  from  subsequently
breaking these ESG pledges.9

A firm that breaks its pledges risks damaging public perception of
its  ethical  standards.  By  itself,  this  incentivizes  a  firm  to  honor  its
pledges so as to maintain the trust of its stakeholders. Transparency and
disclosure of ESG policies, along with information intermediaries such
as Glassdoor and Great Place To Work for labor markets, and organiza-
tions such as the American National Standards Institute and Consumer
Reports for product markets, reinforce these incentives. Moreover, in
practice, many pledges to stakeholders involve up-front investments or
third-party contracts; subsequent divestment or reneging on contracts
is then costly. For example, employee retirement and healthcare plans
often  involve  contracts  with  major  financial  institutions.  Such  com-
mitments  are  complex  and  infrequently  revised  (e.g., Yang (2024)).
Likewise, generous warranty programs for durable goods are not easily
reversible.  Moreover,  firms  that  neglect  pledges  to  product  safety,
privacy, or cybersecurity measures expose themselves to legal action
and regulatory scrutiny. In all scenarios, non-trivial commitment can
be achieved at least for the short to medium run, which is the minimal
assumption our model requires.

We model a firm’s pledge to treat its stakeholders well as a com-
mitment  to  provide  a  minimum  level  of  utility.  Theoretically,  ESG
policies could also be stated in quantities, e.g., a commitment to hire
a specific number of workers. However, commitments to such quotas
are less likely to entail significant upfront investments or third-party
contracts, and instead rely more heavily on alternative commitment
mechanisms such as reputation , and thus are less inherently credible.
Moreover, verifying and enforcing quota-based policies can be chal-
lenging; a profit-maximizing manager might justify under-hiring due
to a purported lack of qualified applicants or undermine it by reducing
advertising, lowering benefits, or raising hiring standards. This might
explain why such policies are uncommon.

ESG policies constrain the range of feasible outcomes, relative to
direct  commitment  to  quantities.  However,  as  we  observe  in  Sec-
tion 4.2, for shareholder firms, the limited commitment generated by
these  policies  suffices.10 In  contrast,  Section 4.3 highlights  that  for
purposeful  firms,  the  distinction  between  commitment  in  quantities
versus commitments in wages/utilities matters. This contrast is further
explored in Section 5.3, particularly concerning the role of the wedge
between  the  purposeful  board  and  the  profit-maximizing  managers
in our key findings, as well as in Section 6.4 concerning ESG-linked
executive compensation implications.

3.  Preliminaries

We start by stating several basic results and definitions that we use

throughout.

3.1.  First-best benchmark

The first-best allocation maximizes industry surplus, which equals

total output net of the outside options of workers employed:
𝑆 (𝑙1, 𝑙2

𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙 .

) ≡ 𝑓1

+ 𝑓2

(𝑙1

(𝑙2

𝑙1+𝑙2

)

)

− ∫

0

(2)

9 The same arguments apply to purposeful firms, although for these firms,
commitment is less needed. See Lemma D-12 in the Online Appendix and the
discussion that follows Corollary 1 in Section 4.3.
10 Specifically, the equilibrium allocations characterized by Proposition 2
would not change if instead the shareholder firm adopts an ESG policy that is
stated in quantities rather than wages/utilities.

2

)

) .

(𝑙∗∗
𝑖

1 + 𝑙∗∗

such that for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}

Thus, the first-best allocation is 𝑙∗∗
𝑖
= 𝑊 ∗∗ ≡ 𝑊 (𝑙∗∗
𝑓 ′
𝑖
Note  that 𝑙∗∗
𝑖 would  be  the  equilibrium  outcome  if  both  firms  were
controlled by a single owner whose objective is to maximize surplus
rather  than  profit.  It  is  also  immediate  that  the  first-best  allocation
would arise if the labor market was fully competitive, so that each firm
acts as a price-taker. Indeed, let

(3)

(𝑊0

𝜆𝑖

) ≡ ar g max

𝑙

𝑓𝑖 (𝑙) − 𝑙 𝑊0

(4)

be firm 𝑖’s profit-maximizing hiring decision if facing a constant wage
𝑊0. Then, 𝑙∗∗
𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗). Notice that 𝜆𝑖 (⋅) is a decreasing function. We
use this notation throughout. Since firm 1 is weakly more productive
≥ 𝑙∗∗
2 . Never-
it hires more workers under the first-best allocation, 𝑙∗∗
1
(𝑙∗∗
theless, the marginal productivity of both firms is identical, 𝑓 ′
=
1
1
𝑓 ′
2

(𝑙∗∗
2

)
.

)

3.2.  No-ESG benchmark

Consider a benchmark in which firms do not adopt ESG policies
(i.e., 𝜔1 = 𝜔2 =  0).  Firm 𝑖 takes  firm −𝑖’s  hiring 𝑙−𝑖 as  given  and
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
maximizes profits, generating firm 𝑖’s reaction function 𝑟𝑖
. Here,
0 denotes No-ESG policy (𝜔𝑖 = 0). Formally,
𝑟𝑖

𝑓𝑖 (𝑙) − 𝑙 𝑊 (𝑙 + 𝑙−𝑖

) ≡ ar g max

(𝑙−𝑖; 0

(5)

) .

𝑙

is strictly decreasing in 𝑙−𝑖 and

Lemma 1. The reaction function 𝑟𝑖
𝑟𝑖

)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
+ 𝑙−𝑖 is strictly increasing in 𝑙−𝑖.

)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
All omitted proofs are in Appendix A. Lemma 1 establishes that if
firm −𝑖 hires more then firm 𝑖 hires less, because firm −𝑖’s increased
hiring  raises  wages.  However,  firm 𝑖 reduces  its  hiring  by  less  than
the  increase  in  firm −𝑖’s  hiring,  so  that  overall  hiring  increases.  To
see the latter point, note that if firm 𝑖 instead reduces its hiring by
the same amount that firm −𝑖 increases its, then wages would remain
unchanged, while firm 𝑖’s marginal productivity is higher (since 𝑓 is
concave), implying that firm 𝑖 is not optimizing.

Next, we characterize the equilibrium of the No-ESG benchmark.

2

(𝑙𝐵
𝑖

= 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝐵

)
, i.e.,
−𝑖; 0
𝑖 + 𝑊 (𝑙𝐵
) 𝑙𝐵

Lemma 2. In the unique equilibrium of the No-ESG benchmark, each firm
(𝑙𝐵
𝑖 = 1, 2 hires 𝑙𝐵
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖
)
1 + 𝑙𝐵
𝑓 ′
𝑖
≥ 𝑙𝐵
Moreover, 𝑙𝐵
2 ,
1
1 + 𝑙𝐵
𝑙𝐵
1 + 𝑙∗∗
2 < 𝑙∗∗
2 ,
and both firms pay their workers
𝑊 𝐵 ≡ 𝑊 (𝑙𝐵
1 + 𝑙𝐵

) < 𝑊 ∗∗.

1 + 𝑙𝐵

(6)

(7)

(8)

) .

2

2

≥ 𝑙𝐵

As in the first-best benchmark, the more productive firm hires more
workers, 𝑙𝐵
2 . However, unlike the first-best benchmark, the larger
1
)
firm has a higher marginal productivity, 𝑓 ′
. Intuitively,
1
monopsony power stops firms from fully internalizing the social benefit
of increasing employment, and the larger firm fails to internalize it to
a larger extent.

) ≥ 𝑓 ′
2

(𝑙𝐵
1

(𝑙𝐵
2

Lemma 2 confirms that the usual monopsony distortion arises, so
that  total  employment  and  wages  are  below  first-best  levels.  Forc-
ing both firms to hire more and pay higher wages would move the
economy closer to efficiency. Regulators who aim to maximize social
welfare would be tempted to impose a minimum wage on the industry.
However, such an intervention would need to be tailored to industry-
specific conditions that are likely to be hard for a regulator to observe.
In contrast, firms have a better knowledge of the industry in which
they  operate,  motivating  our  interest  in  studying  their  incentives  to
self-impose ESG policies.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039915P. Bond and D. Levit

3.3.  An ESG firm’s reaction function 𝑟𝑖

(
⋅; 𝜔𝑖

)

Suppose that, before hiring, firm 𝑖’s board adopts the ESG policy 𝜔𝑖,
thereby constraining the firm to pay its workers max
. Given
this constraint, firm 𝑖’s manager chooses 𝑙𝑖 to maximize its profits. Here,
we characterize firm 𝑖’s hiring response 𝑙𝑖 to firm −𝑖’s hiring 𝑙−𝑖, given
firm 𝑖’s ESG policy 𝜔𝑖—that is, firm 𝑖’s reaction function.

}
{𝜔𝑖, 𝑊 (𝐿)

Firm 𝑖’s profits given employment decisions 𝑙𝑖 and 𝑙−𝑖 and firm 𝑖’s

ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 is
) ≡ 𝑓𝑖
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
𝜋𝑖

)

(𝑙𝑖

− max

{𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
Note  that  firm 𝑖’s  profits  are  affected  by  firm −𝑖’s  ESG  policy  only
via firm −𝑖’s hiring decision 𝑙−𝑖. As such, firm 𝑖’s reaction function is
independent of firm −𝑖’s ESG policy:

) , 𝜔𝑖

} 𝑙𝑖.

(9)

𝑟𝑖

) .

(10)

(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

) ≡ ar g max

(𝑙 , 𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
)
, we first define 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) as the solution to

𝜋𝑖
𝑙
(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
To characterize 𝑟𝑖
𝛬 + 𝑟−𝑖 (𝛬; 0) = 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) .
In words, 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) is the level of hiring by firm 𝑖 such if firm −𝑖 is a non-
ESG firm and responds optimally then the resulting wage is 𝜔. Define
) < 𝜔
𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) = 0 if 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖 (0; 0)
for all 𝛬. Note that 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) is well-defined because, by Lemma 1, the left
hand side of (11) is strictly increasing in 𝛬, so at most one solution
exists.  For  use  below,  note  that Lemma  1 also  implies  that 𝛬𝑖 (⋅) is
strictly increasing.

) > 𝜔 and 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) = ∞ if 𝑊 (𝛬 + 𝑟𝑖 (𝛬; 0)

(11)

The next result, formally characterizing the firm’s reaction function,
uncovers two contrasting effects of the firm’s ESG policy on the man-
ager’s hiring decisions: The pro-competitive effect prompts the manager
to  adopt  a  more  aggressive  stance  in  the  labor  market,  while  the
anti-competitive effect leads to a more cautious approach in hiring.

if 𝑙−𝑖
)

Lemma 3. Firm 𝑖’s reaction function is given by 𝑟𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
𝜆𝑖
(𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
Equivalently,
(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
)
;  equals 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
− 𝜆𝑖
)
);  and  equals 𝑟𝑖

≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
) , 𝛬−𝑖

{𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0

(𝑙−𝑖; 0

− 𝑙−𝑖, 𝑟𝑖

) , max

)
(𝜔𝑖

= min

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

{𝜆𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

𝑟𝑖

)

)

if 𝑙−𝑖

)}} .

)
, which equals
if 𝑙−𝑖 ∈
− 𝑙−𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
.

≥ 𝛬−𝑖

(12)

)

)

)

− 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

)
, we have 𝑟𝑖

In the second region, where 𝑙−𝑖 ∈ (𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

The  solid  line  in Fig.  1 graphically  illustrates Lemma  3,  and  in
particular shows the three regions of firm 𝑖’s ESG reaction function.
As one would expect, the reaction function is weakly decreasing in 𝑙−𝑖.
≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
In the first region, where 𝑙−𝑖
=
) ≤ 𝜔𝑖.  Since  demand  by  firm −𝑖 is
)
and 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖
𝜆𝑖
+ 𝑙−𝑖
relatively low, the market wage is below firm 𝑖′𝑠 self-imposed minimum
wage 𝜔𝑖. Hence, firm 𝑖 pays its employees above the market wage and
hires as if it faces a perfectly elastic supply at 𝜔𝑖.11 In other words, the
ESG policy mutes the monopsony distortion of the manager, who acts
as a price taker. We label this as the price-taking region.
(𝜔𝑖
− 𝑙−𝑖, which implies 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖

)
), we
)
have 𝑟𝑖
=
𝜔𝑖. That is, the market wage is equal to firm 𝑖’s self-imposed minimum
wage. In this region, demand by firm −𝑖 is higher, and if firm 𝑖 were to
hire as if it faces a perfectly elastic supply at 𝜔𝑖, the resulting market
wage would be higher than its self-imposed minimum wage, which in
turn would incentivize firm 𝑖 to hire less, as if it faces no minimum
wage constraint. However, since firm −𝑖’s demand is not so high, if firm
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
, then the
𝑖 were to hire as if it has no constraints, that is 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖
resulting market wage would be lower than its self-imposed minimum
wage, which in turn, would incentivize it to hire more aggressively, as
if it faces perfectly elastic supply at 𝜔𝑖. Therefore, the best response

) , 𝛬−𝑖
(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
)
+ 𝑙−𝑖

= 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

)

)

)

11 If 𝜔𝑖 >  𝑊 (𝐿) then  firm 𝑖 may  face  excess  supply.  In  this  case,  the
employment in firm 𝑖 is rationed and workers are randomly allocated to firm
𝑖 until 𝑙𝑖 of them are hired.

Fig. 1. An ESG firm’s labor reaction function.

of  the  firm  is  to  choose  the  residual  level  of  demand  such  that  the
resulting market wage exactly equals its self-imposed minimum wage.
Put differently, the manager of firm 𝑖 ignores the monopsony distortion
as long as there are enough workers who are willing to accept a wage
of 𝜔𝑖. Notice that while firm 𝑖 is not paying above the market wage, its
ESG policy increases the market wage above the level that would have
emerged if it were to set 𝜔𝑖 = 0. We label this region as the residual
region.

In the third region, where 𝑙−𝑖 > 𝛬−𝑖
)

)
, firm 𝑖’s ESG policy is not
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝜔𝑖
)
binding, i.e., 𝑟𝑖
. To see this, note that 𝑙−𝑖 > 𝛬−𝑖
= 𝑟𝑖
is equivalent to 𝑊 (𝑙−𝑖 + 𝑟𝑖
)) > 𝜔𝑖, which says that firm 𝑖’s profit
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
maximizing  response  to 𝑙−𝑖 pushes  the  market  wage  above 𝜔𝑖 even
absent any ESG-imposed constraint. We label this as the non-binding
region.

(𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

Fig. 1 also shows how firm 𝑖’s reaction function shifts as its ESG
policy grows more aggressive; this is the shift from the solid blue line
to the dashed green line. The price-taking, residual, and non-binding
regions all shift to the right. For intermediate hiring by firm −𝑖, roughly
the residual region, a more aggressive ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 leads firm 𝑖 to hire
more, and the reaction function shifts up. This is the pro-competitive
effect of ESG; a more aggressive ESG policy extends the perfectly elastic
portion of the supply curve that firm 𝑖’s manager faces. But for low
hiring by firm −𝑖, roughly the price-taking region, a more aggressive
ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 leads firm 𝑖 to hire less, and the reaction function shifts
down.  This  is  the anti-competitive effect  of  ESG;  a  more  ESG  policy
makes workers more expensive, and the manager hires less.

4.  Competition between ESG and non-ESG firms

To  develop  our  first  set  of  results,  we  start  by  considering  the
case  in  which  only  firm 𝑖 adopts  an  ESG  policy.  For  example,  only
firm 𝑖 is able to credibly constrain its manager to treat workers well;
or  alternatively,  firm 𝑖 is  a  “thought  leader”  or  a  “first  mover”  and
considers a policy that has not occurred to firm −𝑖. This analysis will
also develop key intuitions that will be instrumental in Section 5, where
we study competition in ESG policies between firms.

4.1.  Labor market equilibrium with one ESG firm

As a first step, we characterize the labor market equilibrium that

arises when only firm 𝑖 adopts an (exogenous) ESG policy 𝜔𝑖.

Proposition  1.
equilibrium is:

Suppose 𝜔−𝑖 =  0.  Then,  the  for  any 𝜔𝑖 the  unique

≤ 𝑊 𝐵 then the No-ESG benchmark is obtained.
, 𝑙∗

)}

𝑖 =  min

(𝜔𝑖

(i) If 𝜔𝑖
(ii) If 𝜔𝑖 >  𝑊 𝐵 then 𝑙∗
𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖, and 𝑊 ∗

𝑊 ∗

{𝛬𝑖
𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
(𝑙∗
𝑖 ; 0

) , 𝜆𝑖
))
.

−𝑖 = 𝑊 (𝑙∗

−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙∗

)
𝑖 ; 0
,

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039916P. Bond and D. Levit

Fig. 2. Firm 2 adopts a moderate ESG policy 𝜔2 ∈

(𝑊 𝐵 , ̂𝑊2

)
.

Fig. 4. Firm 2 adopts the size-maximizing ESG policy 𝜔2 = ̂𝑊2.

̂𝑊𝑖 is the ESG level at which pro-competitive effects end and
In words,
anti-competitive effects begin. Fig. 4 graphically depicts this point: the
ESG firm’s reaction function intersects with the non-ESG firm’s reaction
function exactly at the kink, where the price-taking and the residual
regions of the reaction function meet. Below, we consider the optimal
choice  of  ESG  policies  by  firms’  boards  of  directors.  We  first  study
the choice of a shareholder firm, and then, in turn, the choice of a
purposeful firm.

4.2.  Shareholder-value maximizing ESG policies

To analyze a shareholder firm’s choice of ESG, we start with the
observation that modest ESG policies increase profits for the adopting
firm.  Intuitively,  a  modest  ESG  policy  effectively  commits  firm 𝑖 to
compete more aggressively in the labor market, which in turn induces
the competitor firm −𝑖 to retreat. Importantly, different from a stan-
dard Cournot setting, the commitment attainable with ESG policies is
limited; as discussed above, any policy more aggressive than ̂𝑊𝑖 will
backfire and have the opposite effect. The maximal employment that
firm 𝑖 can achieve is 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖).

If,  however,  firm 𝑖 is  adopting  ESG  policies  purely  in  order  to
maximize profits, then the limited commitment power they generate
is more than enough. Specifically, a shareholder firm 𝑖 would adopt an
ESG policy strictly below ̂𝑊𝑖, the size-maximizing ESG policy. This is
readily seen from the following expression for firm 𝑖’s marginal profits
from committing to increase hiring 𝑙𝑖:
𝑓 ′
𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

))

)) .

)) 𝑙𝑖𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0
This  expression  is  negative  at 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖).  The  third  term  is  the
monopsony  distortion,  and  is  negative.  Evaluated  at 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖),
the  combination  of  the  first  two  terms  is 0,  because  by  definition
𝑖 (𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖)) = ̂𝑊𝑖.
𝑓 ′

The next result characterizes the ESG policy that maximizes share-
𝑖 ,12 and compares the properties of

holder value, which we denote by 𝜑∗
the equilibrium that unfolds to the No-ESG benchmark.

(14)

)

(𝑙𝑖
− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
(
(𝑙𝑖; 0
1 + 𝑟′
−
−𝑖

Suppose  firm 𝑖’s  opponent  adopts  the  No-ESG  policy
Proposition  2.
(i.e., 𝜔−𝑖 =  0).  Then,  the  shareholder-value  maximizing  ESG  policy  of
)
𝑖 ∈  (𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖).  Under  ESG  policy 𝜑∗
firm 𝑖 satisfies 𝜑∗
,
)
(𝜑∗
𝑖 .  Relative  to  the  No-ESG
𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗
𝑙∗
−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖
𝑖
benchmark, worker welfare, industry employment, and firm 𝑖’s employment
and profit are higher. In contrast, firm −𝑖’s employment and profit are lower.
Both firms pay the same wage, which is higher than the No-ESG benchmark.

)
,  and 𝑊 ∗
; 0

−𝑖 = 𝜑∗

𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖

𝑖 , 𝑙∗

(𝜑∗
𝑖

(𝛬𝑖

12 For the non-generic cases in which the maximizer is not unique, we focus
on the smallest maximizer.

(13)

Fig. 3. Firm 2 adopts an aggressive ESG policy 𝜔2 ∈

( ̂𝑊2, 𝑊 ∗∗)
.

)

)

= 𝑙𝐵

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

{𝛬𝑖

𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖

(𝑊 𝐵)

(𝑊 𝐵)

) > 𝑙𝐵

𝑖 = min

increases, while the second term 𝜆𝑖

From Proposition 1, the ESG firm’s hiring is 𝑙∗
)}

) , 𝜆𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
. The two terms in the minimand correspond, respectively, to the
equilibrium falling in the residual and price-taking regions of firm 𝑖’s
reaction function. As firm 𝑖’s ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 becomes more aggressive,
the first term 𝛬𝑖
decreases,
corresponding to the pro- and anti-competitive effects of ESG discussed
𝑖 ; while
above. At the No-ESG benchmark 𝑊 𝐵 we know 𝛬𝑖
the  monopsony  distortion  in  the  No-ESG  benchmark  implies 𝑙𝐵
𝑖 <
. Consequently, if firm 𝑖 adopts an ESG policy moderately above
𝜆𝑖
𝑊 𝐵 then it hires 𝑙∗
𝑖 , which is increasing in the ESG policy
𝜔𝑖. Fig. 2 illustrates this pro-competitive effect: Comparing the black
dot, which shows the No-ESG benchmark, with the blue square, which
is the equilibrium when firm 2 adopts a moderate ESG policy, shows
that a moderate ESG policy increases firm 2’s hiring at the expense of
firm 1, and in equilibrium, firm 2 operates in the residual region of its
reaction function. As firm 𝑖 continues to increase its ESG policy the anti-
)
. In particular,
competitive effect eventually dominates, and 𝑙∗
we know the anti-competitive effect dominates as 𝜔𝑖 approaches the
first-best wage level 𝑊 ∗∗, because the monopsony distortion and the
definition of 𝑊 ∗∗ imply
𝜆𝑖(𝑊 ∗∗) + 𝑟−𝑖(𝜆𝑖(𝑊 ∗∗); 0)
(𝑊 ∗∗)

= 𝑊 −1 (𝑊 ∗∗) ,
)
) < 𝛬𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
in turn implying (Lemma 1) 𝜆𝑖
. Fig. 3 illustrates this anti-
competitive effect: Comparing the blue square with the green triangle,
which is the equilibrium when firm 2 adopts an extreme ESG policy,
shows that an extreme ESG policy decreases the employment of firm 2
(while increasing the employment of firm 1), and in equilibrium, firm
2 produces in the price-taking region of its reaction function.

< 𝜆𝑖(𝑊 ∗∗) + 𝜆−𝑖

𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

It follows that the ESG policy that maximizes firm 𝑖’s employment is
, defined as the (unique) intersection of the functions

(𝑊 𝐵, 𝑊 ∗∗)

̂𝑊𝑖 ∈
𝛬𝑖 (⋅) and 𝜆𝑖 (⋅):
𝛬𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖) = 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖).

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039917P. Bond and D. Levit

4.3.  A purposeful firm’s preferred ESG policy

We  next  characterize  and  study  the  implications  of  a  purposeful
firm’s choice of ESG policy. A purposeful firm’s board adopts an ESG
policy  with  the  objective  of  maximizing  the  surplus  created  by  the
firm, which here equals the sum of profits and worker surplus. Worker
surplus depends on workers’ outside options, which in turn depends
on how workers are allocated across different firms. The minimum and
maximum values of the combined outside options of firm 𝑖’s workers
are,  respectively, ∫ 𝑙𝑖
𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙.  We  define  firm 𝑖’s
0
surplus  using  a  weighted  average  of  these  possibilities,  with  weight
𝜇 ∈ (0, 1).17
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖

𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙 and ∫ 𝑙𝑖+𝑙−𝑖

𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙 − (1 − 𝜇) ∫

𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙 .

) ≡ 𝑓𝑖

(15)

𝑙𝑖+𝑙−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖

𝑆𝑖

𝑙−𝑖

)

𝑙𝑖

− 𝜇 ∫
0

𝑙−𝑖

)
Note that, by maximizing 𝑆𝑖
, a purposeful firm’s board cares
about the direct actions of the firm but not about equilibrium conse-
quences for competitor-firms and their workers.

(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖

The next result characterizes a purposeful firm’s most-preferred ESG

policy, which we denote as the optimal purposeful ESG policy.

Suppose  firm 𝑖’s  opponent  adopts  the  No-ESG  policy
Proposition  3.
̂𝑊𝑖.
(i.e., 𝜔−𝑖 = 0). Then, the optimal purposeful ESG policy of firm 𝑖 is
−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖(𝛬𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖); 0),
𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖) = 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖), 𝑙∗
Under optimal ESG policy ̂𝑊𝑖, 𝑙∗
−𝑖 = ̂𝑊𝑖.  Relative  to  the  No-ESG  benchmark,  worker
and 𝑊 ∗
welfare, industry employment, and firm 𝑖’s employment are higher. Firm −𝑖
’s employment and profit are lower. Both firms pay the same wage, which
is higher than the No-ESG benchmark.

𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗

Proposition 3 resembles Proposition 2, with the exception that pur-
poseful  firms  adopt  more  aggressive  ESG  policies  than  their
𝑖 . In partic-
shareholder-value maximizing counterparts, i.e.,
̂𝑊𝑖.
ular,  a  purposeful  firm  adopts  the  size-maximizing  ESG  policy,
Intuitively, in order to maximize surplus, a purposeful firm wants to
be large, even at the expense of profits.

̂𝑊𝑖 >  𝜑∗

The next result shows that the purposeful board of firm 𝑖 would like
it to be even larger than the size 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖) that it attains under ESG policy
̂𝑊𝑖.

Corollary 1. The marginal total surplus of firm 𝑖 is strictly positive under
the optimal purposeful ESG policy ̂𝑊𝑖, that is,

|𝑙𝑖=𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖) > 0.18

𝜕 𝑆𝑖

)

(𝑙𝑖,𝑙∗
−𝑖
𝜕 𝑙𝑖

To see the intuition, recall that the total surplus created by a firm
𝑖 (𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖)) =
is the sum of profits and worker-surplus. Since ̂𝑊𝑖 satisfies 𝑓 ′
̂𝑊𝑖, the marginal worker hired produces zero profits. At the same time,
the marginal worker hired produces strictly positive worker surplus,
since firm 𝑖 evaluates the marginal worker’s outside option as 𝜇 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖
+
(1 − 𝜇) ̂𝑊𝑖 < ̂𝑊𝑖.

)

Corollary 1 has three significant implications. First, it shows that the
result that a purposeful firm adopts policy ̂𝑊𝑖 is robust to perturbing
the weights placed on shareholder profits and worker welfare. Second,
and in contrast to a shareholder firm, the board of a purposeful firm
wishes it had additional tools at its disposal beyond an ESG promise
to treat workers well. But under the assumption that this is the only
tool available, increases in ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 beyond ̂𝑊𝑖 backfire, because

=
)
,  that  is,  the  sum  of  individual  firms’  surplus  equals  the  industry

16 Formally, we show in the proof of Proposition 2 in the Appendix A that
industry surplus is always increasing if the more productive firm chooses an
ESG policy in the neighborhood of 𝑊 𝐵.
17 Our results hold for any 𝜇 ∈ [0, 1]. If 𝜇 = 1
2
𝑆 (𝑙𝑖, 𝑙𝑗
surplus.
18 Corollary 1 says that firm 𝑖’s marginal surplus is positive even holding
the hiring of its competitor −𝑖 fixed. This conclusion is only strengthened if
𝜕 𝑆𝑖(𝑙𝑖,𝑙∗
−𝑖)
firm −𝑖 responds:
𝜕 𝑙𝑖

𝜕 𝑆𝑖(𝑙𝑖,𝑟−𝑖(𝑙𝑖;0))
𝜕 𝑙𝑖

then 𝑆𝑖

(𝑙𝑗 , 𝑙𝑖

(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙𝑗

+ 𝑆𝑗

> 0.

|𝑙𝑖=𝑙∗

|𝑙𝑖=𝑙∗

>

)

)

𝑖

𝑖

Fig. 5. Firm 𝑖’s employment as a function of its own ESG policy.

𝑖 + 𝑙∗

−𝑖 <  𝑙𝐵

𝑖 and 𝑙∗

Fig. 5 below plots the firm’s employment as a function of its own
ESG  policy,  and  in  particular,  illustrates  that  the  shareholder-value
𝑖 is pro-competitive.
maximizing ESG policy 𝜑∗
While firm 𝑖’s shareholders benefit from its ESG policy at the ex-
pense of firm −𝑖’s shareholders, the employees of both firms gain from
firm 𝑖’s ESG policy. Indeed, in equilibrium, both firms pay their workers
𝑖 >  𝑊 𝐵.13 Moreover, while employment at firm 𝑖 increases at the
𝜑∗
𝑖 >  𝑙𝐵
−𝑖), total
expense of employment at firm −𝑖 (i.e., 𝑙∗
𝑖 + 𝑙𝐵
−𝑖 > 𝑙𝐵
−𝑖). That is, firm 𝑖 increases
employment increases (i.e., 𝑙∗
its  employment  by  more  than  firm −𝑖 reduces  it.  Therefore,  worker
welfare  always  increases  relative  to  the  No-ESG  benchmark.  In  this
respect, the unintended consequences of a profit-motivated ESG policy
are beneficial to workers. Interestingly, since ESG and non-ESG firms’
wages coincide in equilibrium, it is empirically challenging to identify
which  firm  is  the  ESG-firm  based  purely  on  employment  conditions
(and in particular, without information on productivity).14 The effect
of firm 𝑖’s ESG policy on industry profits and surplus is more nuanced.
In the proof of Proposition 2 in the Appendix A, we show that if firm
𝑖 is the (weakly) less-productive firm (i.e., 𝑖 = 2), then total industry
profits decrease relative to the No-ESG benchmark. That is, the increase
in firm 𝑖’s profits is lower than the decline firm −𝑖’s profits. Intuitively,
as firm 𝑖 increases employment at the expense of its more productive
opponent, production is shifted the “wrong” way, toward the firm with
the lower marginal productivity and a smaller monopsony distortion
in the first place. This force also explains why industry surplus could
decline due to firm 𝑖’s ESG policy, which we illustrate by example in
Appendix E of the Online Appendix. In this respect, when unproductive
firms use ESG policies to gain a competitive advantage in real markets,
they  create  distortions  that  are  beneficial  to  the  firm’s  shareholders
but  can  be  costly  from  a  social  perspective.  In  contrast,  if  firm 𝑖 is
the  more  productive  firm  (i.e., 𝑖 =  1),  then  it  is  possible  that  total
industry profits increase relative to the No-ESG benchmark. In this case,
the adoption of the ESG policy is a Pareto improvement and industry
surplus increases.15 In fact, industry surplus can increase in those cases
in  which  industry  profitability  declines.  Intuitively,  when  the  more
productive firm uses ESG to enhance its competitive advantage, produc-
tion is shifted the “right” way and toward the firm whose monopsony
distortion creates a larger social cost (and hence, increasing production
is marginally more valuable).16

𝑖

𝑖

)

)

))

; 0

(𝜑∗

(𝜑∗

(𝛬𝑖

−𝑖 = 𝑊 (𝛬𝑖

+ 𝑟−𝑖

,  by  the  definition  of 𝛬𝑖 (⋅),

13 Since 𝑊 ∗
𝑊 ∗
−𝑖 = 𝜑∗
𝑖 .
14 Notice that if firms were symmetric then the ESG firm would be larger
than the non-ESG firm since it employs more workers. However, in general,
when firms are asymmetric, it is hard to identify which one is the ESG firm
since less productive firms can adopt ESG policy and still hire less.
15 Recall the shareholder value of the competing firm always declines. Hence
a Pareto improvement only arises if shareholders are diversified across the two
firms, e.g., common ownership.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039918P. Bond and D. Levit

they reduce firm 𝑖’s hiring. Third, Lemma D-12 in the Online Appendix
shows  that  a  purposeful  firm  adopts  policy ̂𝑊𝑖 even  if  its  choice  is
unobserved  by  its  competitor.  The  reason  is  that  a  purposeful  firm
adopts ESG policies in order to more-closely align its manager’s actions
with the wishes of the board and/or shareholders. This stands in stark
contrast to a shareholder firm which adopts ESG policies solely because
of their strategic impact on competitors. Indeed, a firm’s ESG policy
increases  its  profits  only  if  its  competitors  are  aware  of  the  policy.
Thus, while regulations that facilitate transparency and disclosure of
ESG policies would contribute to the effectiveness and adoption of ESG
policies  by  shareholder  firms,  they  would  matter  much  less  for  the
adoption of ESG policies by purposeful firms.

Returning to Proposition 3, it follows that firm 𝑖 ’s hiring and total
industry employment are both maximized under the optimal purposeful
ESG policy, whereas firm −𝑖’s hiring is minimized. Since total employ-
ment is higher than under a shareholder firm’s preferred ESG policy 𝜑∗
𝑖
and the wages paid by both firms also higher, employees of both firms
benefit more from the optimal purposeful ESG policy than from 𝜑∗
𝑖 .

As in the case of a shareholder firm adopting ESG, the competitor’s
(firm −𝑖) profits are lower under the optimal purposeful ESG policy
than in the No-ESG benchmark. However, it is not guaranteed that firm
𝑖’s profits are higher than in this benchmark. After all, a purposeful
firm’s ESG policy is not chosen to maximize profits; and indeed, since
the optimal purposeful ESG policy leads the adopting firm to equate
marginal productivity with wages, the firm would increase profits by
moderating its ESG policy.

Interestingly, the optimal purposeful ESG policy does not maximize

industry surplus.

Corollary  2. The  optimal  purposeful  ESG  policy  of  firm 𝑖 does  not
maximize industry surplus. The industry-surplus maximizing ESG policy of
firm 𝑖 leads to less employment at firm 𝑖 and more employment at firm −𝑖,
relative to the optimal purposeful ESG policy ̂𝑊𝑖.

)

(𝑙∗
𝑖

(𝑙∗
−𝑖

= ̂𝑊𝑖 <  𝑓 ′
−𝑖

Purposeful firms do not internalize how their ESG policies affect
competitor-surplus. In particular, under firm 𝑖’s optimal purposeful ESG
)19:  marginal  productivity  is  lower  at
policy 𝑓 ′
𝑖
purposeful ESG firm 𝑖 than at its non-ESG competitor. Industry surplus
would increase if firm 𝑖 hired less and firm −𝑖 hired more; but firm 𝑖
adopts an ESG policy with only its own surplus in mind and neglects
this potential welfare gain. In this respect, a purposeful firm adopts
an ESG policy that is too aggressive from a social perspective. Recall
𝑖 < ̂𝑊𝑖).
that a shareholder firm adopts a less aggressive ESG policy (𝜑∗
Thus, to maximize industry surplus, a purposeful firm must overweight
shareholders relative to its other stakeholders, for example, by giving
shareholders greater board-representation. By doing so, the firm adopts
a  more  moderate  ESG  policy,  thereby  reducing  its  hiring—which  as
shown  above  is  socially  beneficial.  (In  contrast:  A  “broad”  conse-
quentialist purposeful firm would, by definition, internalize competitor
welfare and adopt the socially optimal ESG policy.)

then adopting an ESG policy that is slightly more aggressive than 𝑊 𝐵
reduces the ESG firm’s profits, as can be seen directly from (14).

In contrast, the assumption of downward-sloping reaction functions
is not crucial for our results on a purposeful firm’s choice of ESG. In
particular, Proposition 3’s prediction for firm surplus is independent
of the slope of reaction functions: A moderate ESG policy increases a
firm’s hiring, in turn increasing the surplus generated by the firm.

5.  Competition in ESG policies

In the analysis above, only firm 𝑖 has the capacity to adopt ESG
policies. In this section, we consider what ESG policies firm −𝑖 would
optimally  adopt  in  response  to  firm 𝑖’s  ESG  choice,  and  given  the
expected reaction of firm −𝑖, we analyze firm 𝑖’s optimal ESG policy.
Similar  to  the  structure  of  Section 4,  we  consider  both  corporate
governance paradigms, starting with the shareholder primacy paradigm
and then turning to the stakeholder capitalism paradigm.

As  a  preliminary  observation:  We  will  show  that  for  many  ESG
policies 𝜔𝑖 adopted  by  firm 𝑖,  its  competitor  firm −𝑖 would  ideally
respond by adopting a policy that is infinitesimally more aggressive.
Consequently, the characterization of firm −𝑖’s response to 𝜔𝑖 faces an
open-set problem. Accordingly, we restrict firm −𝑖’s policy 𝜔−𝑖 to lie
in a finite grid of possible choices, with grid size 𝜖  > 0. We state all
results below for the case in which this grid is sufficiently fine, i.e., 𝜖
sufficiently close to 0.

5.1.  Labor market equilibrium

As a preliminary step, we characterize the labor market equilibrium
arising  from  an  arbitrary  pair  of  ESG  policies,  thereby  generalizing
for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2}, and firm
Proposition 1. In equilibrium, 𝑙∗
𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖
𝑖 pays its workers 𝑊 ∗

{𝑊 (𝑙∗

(𝑙∗
1 + 𝑙∗

)
−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
}
) , 𝜔𝑖
2

𝑖 = max

.

Proposition 4. For a given pair of ESG policies
equilibrium exists:

(𝜔1, 𝜔2

)
, a labor market

(i) If max𝑖 𝜔𝑖

≤ 𝑊 𝐵 then  the  unique  equilibrium  coincides  with  the

No-ESG Benchmark.

(ii) If min𝑖 𝜔𝑖
𝑊 ∗

𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 for 𝑖 = 1, 2.

≥ 𝑊 ∗∗ then the unique equilibrium is 𝑙∗

𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖

)

(𝜔𝑖

and

(iii) If 𝜔𝑖 = 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜔 ∈ (𝑊 𝐵, 𝑊 ∗∗) then for any 𝑖 = 1, 2 and 𝑙∗ in the

interval
{𝛬−𝑖 (𝜔) , 𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔)
[𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − min
there is an equilibrium in which
𝑊 ∗

=
−𝑖 = 𝜔. No other equilibrium exists.

} , min
(𝑙∗

𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗

𝑖 , 𝑙∗
−𝑖

{𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) , 𝜆𝑖 (𝜔)
)

}]

(𝑙∗, 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑙∗)

(16)

and

(iv) If 𝜔𝑖 > 𝜔−𝑖, 𝜔𝑖 > 𝑊 𝐵 and 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗ then the unique equilibrium
(𝑙∗
)
, 𝑙∗
, 𝑊 ∗
is 𝑙∗
−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖
𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 and
(𝑙∗
))}
. If firm 𝑖 is weakly more
𝑊 ∗
𝑖 ; 𝜔−𝑖
𝑖 > 𝑙∗
productive and 𝜔𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗ then 𝑙∗
−𝑖.

{𝛬𝑖
) , 𝜆𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
{𝜔−𝑖, 𝑊 (𝑙∗

𝑖 =  min
−𝑖 =  max

(𝜔𝑖
𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

𝑖 ; 𝜔−𝑖

)}

Remark on downward-sloping reaction functions

Proposition 2’s implication that a moderate ESG policy increases
a  firm’s  profits  depends  on  the  assumption  that  reaction  functions
slope  down  (see (1)).  To  see  this,  we  briefly  consider  the  opposite
case in which reaction functions slope up, at least locally at the No-
ESG  benchmark.  In  this  case,  adopting  a  moderate  ESG  policy 𝜔𝑖
that  is  slightly  more  aggressive  than  the  non-ESG  wage 𝑊 𝐵 shifts
firm 𝑖’s reaction function upwards, and effectively commits it to hire
more. Thus, the effect of the firm’s ESG policy on its manager’s hiring
decisions (and hence, on workers’ welfare) is qualitatively similar to
the case of downward-sloping reaction functions. However, different
) > 0)
from the baseline model, if reaction functions slope up (𝑟′
−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

Proposition 4 has several important takeaways. First, by part (i), if
both firms adopt ESG-policies milder than 𝑊 𝐵, then the labor market
equilibrium coincides with the No-ESG benchmark. Intuitively, these
mild ESG policies are non-binding and have no effect. Second, by part
(ii), if both firms adopt ESG-policies that are more aggressive than the
first-best  wage 𝑊 ∗∗,  then  each  firm  pays  its  self-imposed  minimum
wage and hires as if facing a perfectly elastic supply at that level. If at
least one firm adopts 𝜔𝑖 > 𝑊 ∗∗ then both firms pay wages strictly above
the market clearing level.20 If both firms adopt an ESG policy of 𝑊 ∗∗
then the first-best obtains. Figs. 6 and 7 depict the reaction functions
and labor market equilibrium for symmetric firms when 𝜔1 = 𝜔2 = 𝑊 𝐵
and 𝜔1 = 𝜔2 = 𝑊 ∗∗, respectively.

19 Firm −𝑖’s hiring reflects the monopsony distortion and hence marginal
productivity exceeds the wage.

20 If 𝜔𝑖 > 𝑊 ∗∗ then 𝜆𝑖
𝑊 (𝜆1 (𝑊 ∗∗) + 𝜆2 (𝑊 ∗∗)
)

) < 𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗), and hence, 𝑊 (𝜆1

(𝜔𝑖
= 𝑊 ∗∗ < 𝜔𝑖.

)

(𝜔1

+ 𝜆2

(𝜔2

)) <

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039919P. Bond and D. Levit

Fig. 6. Reaction functions under ESG policies 𝜔2 = 𝜔1 = 𝑊 𝐵 .

Fig. 8. Moderate ESG reaction functions: 𝜔2 = 𝜔1 ∈

(𝑊 𝐵 , ̂𝑊 )
.

Fig. 7. Reaction functions under ESG policies 𝜔2 = 𝜔1 = 𝑊 ∗∗.

Fig. 9. Moderate ESG reaction functions: 𝜔′

2

> 𝜔1 ∈

(𝑊 𝐵 , ̂𝑊 )
.

Third, by part (iii), if both firms adopt the same ESG policy 𝜔 then
multiple equilibria exist. In all of these equilibria, both firms pay the
market wage, which equals their identical self-imposed minimum wage
𝜔, and total employment is 𝑊 −1 (𝜔). Although firms pay the market
wage, both this wage and total employment exceed their counterparts
in the No-ESG benchmark. Multiple equilibria arise from different splits
of the constant employment level across the two firms. The multiplicity
stems from the fact that the reaction functions always intersect in the
residual-demand region, which has a slope of −1. There, both firms
have  incentives  to  hire  just  enough  workers  such  that  the  market
wage equals the self-imposed minimum wage. Indeed, neither firm has
incentives to hire more, since doing so would derive the wage up (the
monopsony effect). At the same time, neither firm has an incentives
to  hire  less,  since  doing  so  would  push  the  market  wage  below  its
self-imposed minimum wage.21

Finally, by part (iv), if the competing firms are similar, the firm that
adopts a more aggressive ESG-policy hires more workers in equilibrium.
Intuitively, an aggressive ESG-policy commits a firm to hire more and
consequently pushes its competitor to hire less. If the more productive
firm also adopts a more aggressive ESG policy, then it will be more ag-
gressive in the labor market both due to its ESG policy and its inherent
higher productivity. If the less productive firm adopts a more aggressive
ESG policy, then the two forces operate in opposite directions, and the
ranking with respect to the ESG policies is ambiguous.

Fig. 8 depicts the reaction functions of the symmetric firms when
they adopt the same moderate ESG policy. The overlapping 45-degree

Fig. 10. Aggressive ESG reaction functions: 𝜔2 = 𝜔1 ∈

( ̂𝑊 , 𝑊 ∗∗)
.

lines are the graphical representation of equilibrium multiplicity. Fig. 9
shows how the equilibrium set collapses to the green triangle if firm 2
increases its ESG policy above its opponent’s (𝜔′
> 𝜔2 = 𝜔1). Here, the
2
equilibrium is unique, with firm 2 hiring more but firm 1 hiring less.
Fig. 10 is similar to Fig. 8 with the exception that the two firms
adopt a relatively extreme ESG policy (i.e., 𝜔1, 𝜔2 ∈ ( ̂𝑊 , 𝑊 ∗∗)). Fig. 11
shows how the equilibrium set collapses to the green triangle when firm
2 decreases its ESG policy below its opponent’s. Here, the equilibrium
is unique, with firm 2 hiring less but firm 1 hiring (weakly) more.

5.2.  ESG competition between shareholder firms

21 It is worth stressing that equilibrium multiplicity arises in the general
case of asymmetric firms, and is not in any way special to the symmetric case;
indeed, in the residual-demand region a firm’s hiring decision is independent
of its production function.

With Proposition 4’s characterization of labor-market outcomes in
hand, we turn to the analysis of competition in ESG policies between
shareholder firms. We present our results in this section for cases in

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399110P. Bond and D. Levit

Proposition  5.
shareholder values:

Suppose  firms  choose  ESG  policies  to  maximize  their

(𝑖) Either: Firm 𝑖 chooses an ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 < 𝜑∗

−𝑖 and firm −𝑖 chooses
−𝑖. The equilibrium is payoff equivalent to the equilibrium that
𝑖 = 0) and firm −𝑖

𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜑∗
emerges when firm 𝑖 adopts the No-ESG policy (𝜔∗
adopts the policy 𝜑∗
Or:  Firm 𝑖 chooses  the  ESG  policy
non-binding ESG policy.

−𝑖 defined in Proposition 2.

̌𝑊−𝑖 and  firm −𝑖 chooses  a

(𝑖𝑖) Worker welfare is higher and industry profits are lower than in the

No-ESG benchmark.

Proposition 5(i) establishes that either firm 𝑖 adopts an ESG policy
that is too moderate to deter firm −𝑖, which in turn outdoes firm 𝑖’s ESG
policy and obtains an advantage in the labor market, or firm 𝑖 adopts
an ESG policy that is aggressive enough to deter firm −𝑖 from matching
it, and firm 𝑖 consequently retains its advantage in the labor market. In
choosing between the two scenarios firm 𝑖 faces the following trade-off:
in the first scenario firm 𝑖 faces an aggressive competitor in the labor
market, but is itself essentially unconstrained. In the second scenario,
firm 𝑖 instead  faces  a  weak  competitor  in  the  labor  market,  but  is
constrained by its own aggressive ESG policy to pay high wages.

Regardless of which of these two scenarios prevails in equilibrium,24
Proposition 5(ii) establishes that competition in ESG policies between
shareholder firms benefits workers; but it reduces profits, and for some
parameterizations reduces industry surplus also. As discussed earlier,
the  misallocation  of  labor  that  arises  after  ESG  adoption  is  socially
detrimental. Thus, competition in ESG policies that are motivated by
profit-maximization can cause more harm than good. In contrast, in
the  next  section  we  show  that  competition  in  ESG  policies  between
purposeful firms always raises industry surplus.

Because  competition  in  ESG  policies  reduces  industry  profits,  if
there is ex-ante uncertainty about which firm is the first-mover in the
ESG-game then firms find it mutually beneficial to coordinate on low-
impact ESG policies. Ideally, from the shareholders’ perspective, firms
would agree to abstain from ESG altogether. But in practice this may
not be possible, since the gain to deviation would be highest in this
case, and firms may instead have to settle on coordinating on mild ESG
policies in order to reduce deviation-incentives. This conclusion raises
anti-trust concerns for the seemingly benevolent adoption of industry-
wide ESG standards, and for moves by large asset managers (“common
owners”) to promote ESG.

Proposition  5 uses  the  best-ESG-response  result  of Lemma  4 to
characterize a leader–follower game. One can also ask: What happens
if  firms  choose  ESG  policies  independently,  without  observing  each
others’ choices? In this case, Lemma 4 implies that no pure strategy
equilibrium  exists25 since  firms  have  incentives  to  “top”  their  com-
petitors’ moderate ESG policies and “abandon” their own ESG policies
altogether  when  competitors’  policies  are  aggressive.  Specifically:  If
both firms adopt relatively moderate ESG policies, the firm with the
(weakly)  milder  policy  would  deviate  and  adopt  a  more  aggressive
policy; but if firm 𝑖 adopts an aggressive policy, its competitor −𝑖 adopts
a policy so mild that it is non-binding—but then firm 𝑖 would deviate
to a less aggressive policy.

5.3.  ESG competition between purposeful firms

Next, we analyze competition in ESG policies between purposeful
firms.  We  start  by  characterizing  the  best-response  ESG  policy  of  a
purposeful firm:

24 Appendix G of the Online Appendix gives examples to illustrate that both
scenarios can arise in equilibrium.
25 See formal proof in Appendix C of the Online Appendix.

Fig. 11. Aggressive ESG reaction functions: 𝜔′

2

< 𝜔1 ∈

( ̂𝑊 , 𝑊 ∗∗)
.

which  firms  are sufficiently  similar in  the  sense  that  the  differences
between the firms’ production functions are relatively small.

̌𝑊−𝑖 ∈ ( ̂𝑊𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗) such that the ESG policy that
Lemma 4. There exists
maximizes firm −𝑖’s shareholder value in response to firm 𝑖 adopting ESG
policy 𝜔𝑖 has the following properties:

(𝑖) If 𝜔𝑖 < ̌𝑊−𝑖 then firm −𝑖 adopts a more aggressive ESG policy than
firm 𝑖, i.e., 𝜔−𝑖 > 𝜔𝑖. Moreover, firm −𝑖’s policy weakly increases in
𝜔𝑖 in this region.

(𝑖𝑖) If 𝜔𝑖

≥ ̌𝑊−𝑖 then firm −𝑖 either adopts the No-ESG policy (𝜔−𝑖 = 0),
or else an ESG policy that is sufficiently moderate to generate the
same outcomes.

Lemma 4 shows that ESG policies are strategic complements when
the  policies  are  moderate  and  strategic  substitutes  when  they  are
extreme.22 If firm 𝑖’s ESG policy is very moderate (𝜔𝑖 <  𝜑∗
−𝑖),23 then
firm −𝑖 simply responds by picking 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜑∗
−𝑖, viz., the ESG policy
that it would adopt if firm 𝑖 had not adopted any ESG policy at all. In
this case, the “leader” firm 𝑖’s ESG policy does not affect the “follower”
firm’s choice.

If firm 𝑖’s ESG policy is intermediate (𝜑∗

−𝑖 <  𝜔𝑖 < ̌𝑊−𝑖), then by
Proposition 4’s characterization of the labor-market equilibrium, firm
−𝑖 gains nothing from adopting an ESG policy more moderate than its
competitor’s.  So  instead,  firm −𝑖 responds  by  outdoing  firm 𝑖’s  ESG
policy. In this case, as firm 𝑖’s ESG choice becomes more aggressive,
firm −𝑖 responds by adopting progressively more and more aggressive
ESG policies. In all numerical simulations that we have examined firm
−𝑖 adopts an ESG policy infinitesimally more aggressive than 𝜔𝑖.

Finally, if firm 𝑖’s ESG policy is sufficiently aggressive (𝜔𝑖 > ̌𝑊−𝑖)
then the benefit to firm −𝑖 of outdoing 𝜔𝑖 is too small to justify the
cost of paying higher wages. This is immediate once 𝜔𝑖 crosses the first-
best level 𝑊 ∗∗, since in this case firm −𝑖’s hiring shrinks if it outdoes
firm 𝑖’s ESG policy, while its labor costs increase (Proposition 4). By
continuity, this conclusion extends to an interval of firm 𝑖’s ESG policies
below 𝑊 ∗∗. Conditional on not outdoing firm 𝑖’s ESG choice, firm −𝑖 is
best-off abandoning ESG (or, strictly speaking, picking an ESG policy
so moderate that it has no effect on its behavior).

The  next  result  characterizes  the  equilibrium  when  shareholder
firms compete in ESG policies. Specifically, firm 𝑖 chooses 𝜔𝑖 and then
)
firm −𝑖 responds  by  choosing 𝜔−𝑖.  Given  ESG  policies
,  the
firms compete in the labor market.

(𝜔𝑖, 𝜔−𝑖

22 Lemma 4 does not require firms to be sufficiently similar.
23 Both in the main text and in the Appendix A, for the non-generic case
in which there are multiple ESG policies that maximize firm −𝑖’s profits when
played against the No-ESG policy 𝜔𝑖, for expositional transparency we let 𝜑∗
−𝑖
be the least aggressive such policy. We emphasize, moreover, that nothing is
at stake with this choice.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399111P. Bond and D. Levit

Lemma 5. The ESG policy that maximizes the surplus created by purposeful
firm −𝑖 in  response  to  firm 𝑖 adopting  ESG  policy 𝜔𝑖 has  the  following
properties:

(i) If 𝜔𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗ then firm −𝑖 adopts a more aggressive ESG policy than

firm 𝑖, i.e., 𝜔−𝑖 > 𝜔𝑖.

(ii) If 𝜔𝑖 > 𝑊 ∗∗ then firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗.
(iii) If 𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗ then firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗.

Part  (i)  of Lemma  5 parallels  part  (i)  of Lemma  4’s  analysis  of
a  shareholder  firm’s  choice  of  ESG.  Specifically,  if  the  leader  firm 𝑖
adopts a moderate ESG policy then firm −𝑖 responds by outdoing it. The
difference between the cases of purposeful and shareholder ‘‘follower’’
firms  is  that  a  purposeful  follower  outdoes  the  ‘‘leader’’  firm  for  a
wider  range  of  leader-policies.  Specifically,  there  is  a  range  of  ESG
policies milder than the first-best level 𝑊 ∗∗ that induce a shareholder-
value maximizing follower to respond by giving up on its own ESG
efforts.  In  contrast,  a  purposeful  follower  outdoes  any  ESG  that  its
competitor  adopts,  provided  only  that  it  is  less  than  the  first-best
𝑊 ∗∗. The difference between the two cases reflects the lower cost of
ESG policies for purposeful firms. Specifically, the increase in wages
engendered by ESG is not a cost for a purposeful firm; instead, it is
simply a transfer from shareholders to workers.

Similarly, part (ii) of Lemma 5 parallels part (ii) of Lemma 4: once
the  leader  adopts  a  sufficiently  aggressive  ESG  policy,  the  follower
responds by undercutting rather than outdoing the follower’s policy. In
the purposeful-firm case, the advantage of undercutting the ESG policy
is that it leads to more hiring, which the purposeful firm values.

Part  (iii)  of Lemma  5 is  new  to  the  purposeful-firm  case:  There
is  a  leader-ESG  policy  that  the  follower  simply  matches.  Moreover,
this policy is precisely the first-best wage 𝑊 ∗∗. The economics behind
part (iii) is that if the follower responds to 𝑊 ∗∗ by adopting a more
moderate policy then it hires less, because it is the “losing” ESG firm
(see Proposition 4), reducing surplus; but if instead it responds with a
more aggressive policy it again hires less, in this case because of the
anti-competitive effect of aggressive ESG, and again reducing surplus.
Paralleling Corollary 1, this is another case in which firm −𝑖’s board
wishes it had more tools at its disposal, since the marginal worker hired
produces strictly positive surplus for firm −𝑖, and so the firm would
ideally like to be larger. However, no choice of ESG policy exists that
leads firm −𝑖’s manager to actually hire more.

We use Lemma 5 to analyze the result of ESG competition between

purposeful firms:

Proposition 6. In the unique equilibrium, both purposeful firms adopt ESG
policy 𝑊 ∗∗, leading to the first-best outcome.

Proposition 6 is striking: competition in ESG policies between pur-
poseful firms entirely eliminates the monopsony distortion and delivers
the first-best industry surplus. This is true even though each individ-
ual  firm’s  objective  is  to  maximize  only  its  own  surplus,  which  as
Corollary 2 shows can have adverse welfare effects because firms do
not internalize the externalities that they inflict on competitors’ surplus
.

In Proposition 6 firm 𝑖 anticipates firm −𝑖 ’s best response. Firm 𝑖
would like to adopt an ESG policy that induces its manager to be more
aggressive in the labor market than firm −𝑖, but it cannot achieve this
because firm −𝑖 always responds with a more aggressive policy, 𝜔−𝑖 >
𝜔𝑖. Thus, the best firm 𝑖 can do is to adopt an ESG policy that maximizes
its  employment;  it  has  incentives  to  grow  larger.  In  principle,  since
purposeful firms do not internalize the externalities they inflict on their
competitors, they have incentives to grow beyond even above the first-
best  employment  level.  However,  since  the  hiring  decision  is  made
by  a  profit-maximizing  manager  and  the  firm  cannot  commit  to  an
employment level, the second-best is to choose the highest employment
such that marginal productivity is equal to the minimum wage imposed

by  its  ESG  policy.  This  force  pushes  each  firm  to  adopt  the  first-
best wage as its equilibrium ESG policy. Put differently, the strategic
complementarity in ESG policies between competing purposeful firms
achieves the first-best outcome. In this respect, ESG is a panacea to
market power.

Proposition 6’s conclusion that purposeful competition in ESG de-
livers the first-best outcome is robust to perturbing the weights that a
purposeful firm puts on shareholder and worker surplus. Specifically,
as long as a purposeful firm puts sufficiently large weight on worker
welfare, even if it does not fully internalize it as we currently assume,
then the firm has incentives to marginally outdo any ESG choice by
its competitor that is less than 𝑊 ∗∗. Moreover, as long as a purpose-
ful  firm’s  hiring  decision  is  made  by  a  profit-maximizing  manager,
a  purposeful  firm’s  board  never  sets  an  ESG  policy  more  aggressive
than 𝑊 ∗∗.  This  observation  highlights  that  if  the  purposeful  board
were to incentivize the manager to fully internalize worker surplus, the
first best would not be obtained in equilibrium. In fact, under these
circumstances, competition between purposeful firms “overshoots” rel-
ative  to  the  first  best,  resulting  in  higher  worker  surplus  but  lower
social  welfare.  Indeed,  the  misalignment  between  the  objectives  of
a  purposeful  board  and  a  profit-maximizing  manager  is  a  key  force
behind Proposition  6;  the  attempt  of  the  latter  to  mitigate  the  ESG
policy of the former imposes a robust balance on how the firm conducts
itself in the marketplace. See Section 6.4 for additional discussion.

We  have  established Proposition  6 in  the  same  leader–follower
framework that we used to analyze ESG competition between share-
holder  firms.  But  exactly  the  same  outcome  arises  if  two  purpose-
ful firms select ESG firms independently, as in a simultaneous-move
game.26

6.  Discussion and implications

6.1.  Other stakeholders: suppliers and consumers

For concreteness, we have described our analysis in terms of firms
adopting policies that constrain their managers to treat workers well.
But as emphasized in the introduction, our analysis has parallel impli-
cations for similar commitments to suppliers and to customers.

Especially for inputs obtained from lower-income countries, firms
face pressures to treat the suppliers of these inputs well, and sometimes
respond to such pressures by offering public commitments to do so.
Prominent  examples  include  coffee,  chocolate,  diamonds,  and,  more
recently, rare-earth elements. The outcomes of such policies are exactly
the same as those for analogous promises to treat workers well. Mod-
erate promises improve welfare both of an ESG firm’s own suppliers,
and also of suppliers to competing non-ESG firms. Moreover, moderate
policies raise the ESG firm’s profits, at the expense of competitors. In
contrast, aggressive ESG policies hurt the suppliers to non-ESG firms,
and reduce an ESG firm’s profits.

Similarly, firms face pressures to treat their customers better than
market conditions alone dictate. A prominent example is public pres-
sure  on  pharmaceutical  firms  to  moderate  their  prices.  In  other  in-
stances, the public’s “demand” is that firms offer higher quality (includ-
ing higher environmental standards and greater privacy protections)
without higher prices. These cases be can analyzed in a dual version
of our model in which firms acquire inputs from a competitive market,
but compete oligopolistically in the product market. Formally, let 𝑃 be
the inverse demand curve in a given industry, and 𝑐𝑖 be firm 𝑖 ’s cost
function; then firm 𝑖 chooses output 𝑞𝑖 to maximize profits
𝑃 (𝑞𝑖 + 𝑞−𝑖

) 𝑞𝑖 − 𝑐𝑖

(𝑞𝑖

(17)

) .

26 The proof of Lemma 5(i) also shows that if 𝜔𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗ then firm −𝑖′𝑠 best
, which establishes that the first best is the unique
response is 𝜔−𝑖 ∈
equilibrium outcome of the simultaneous-move game.

(𝜔𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗)

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399112P. Bond and D. Levit

In this context, an ESG policy is a promise to not charge customers
“excessive” prices relative to quality, i.e., to set prices no greater than
some  level 𝜌𝑖.  Our  analysis  implies  that  moderate  promises  reduce
prices  and  improve  welfare  for  an  ESG  firm’s  own  customers,  and
also  of  customers  of  competing  non-ESG  firms.  Moreover,  moderate
policies  raise  the  ESG  firm’s  profits,  at  the  expense  of  competitors,
by effectively committing the ESG to compete more aggressively. In
contrast, aggressive ESG policies lead an ESG firm to produce limited
quantities, softening product-market competition and leading to higher
prices for its competitors’ output.

Finally, the influence of ESG policies extends beyond their imme-
diate application, creating spillover effects in interconnected input and
product markets. For example, within the labor market, the adoption
of a pro-competitive ESG policy, exemplified by an aggressive hiring
strategy leading to increased employment, also leads to an expansion
in output. Thus, a pro-competitive hiring policy not only deters rivals in
the labor market but also generates a competitive edge in the product
market, as competitors anticipate larger production capacities resulting
from  increased  workforce.  Conversely,  anti-competitive  ESG  policies
have the potential to adversely impact both stakeholders. In essence,
ESG policies targeting different stakeholder groups and markets at least
partly substitute for one another.

6.2.  The evolution of ESG policies

Proposition 2 in particular highlights that even a shareholder firm
benefits from adopting ESG policies. This observation in turn begs the
question of why ESG policies have achieved such salience in recent
years.

One  possibility  is  simply  that  “ESG”  is  a  new  label  for  an  older
phenomenon.  That  is:  Firms’  promises  to  treat  workers,  customers,
and suppliers well have a long history, and predate the rise of both
ESG and the related concept of “Corporate Social Responsibility.” A
second possibility is that the increased prominence of ESG in the public
consciousness has led some firms to experiment with policies that they
had previously and wrongly believed to be unprofitable, only to then
discover that moderate ESG in fact increases profits. We believe both
possibilities have at least some explanatory power.

More interestingly, our model suggests two further possible drivers
for the recent rise in ESG. First, our analysis links the incentives for
both  shareholder  and  purposeful  firms  to  adopt  ESG  policies  to  the
competitiveness of the market. Specifically, equilibrium ESG policies
grow more aggressive as the supply curve becomes more elastic, and
in the limit in which markets are perfectly competitive, no ESG policy
is adopted. Similarly, a firm’s ESG policy is generally less aggressive
in  markets  with  more  competitors.27 Considerable  evidence  suggests
concentration has increased in many areas of the US economy (e.g.,
Autor et al. (2020) and De Loecker et al. (2020)), with the increase
occurring roughly contemporaneously to the rise of ESG.

27 It is immediate that the ESG policy adopted by a firm facing a single
competitor is more aggressive than the ESG policy adopted by a firm facing
𝑁 − 1 competitors for 𝑁 sufficiently large, relative to the benchmark wage
that arises absent ESG policies. In Appendix H of the Online Appendix, we
analytically establish that the elasticity comparative static holds monotonically
for the case of symmetric firms, Cobb–Douglas production, a constant-elasticity
of supply, and one-ESG firm—and regardless of whether the ESG firm is a
shareholder or purposeful firm. Using the same parameterization of our model,
in Appendix J of the Online Appendix we establish the comparative static with
respect to the number of competing firms—though here, the comparative static
for shareholder firms is established by exhaustive numerical simulation, while
the comparative static for purposeful firms is established analytically. These
comparative statics with respect to the number of firms hold starting from the
case of 𝑁 = 2 firms; in contrast, a shift from 𝑁 = 1 firms to 𝑁 = 2 firms is
fundamentally different, and is associated with a shift from no ESG policy an
ESG policy that binds.

Second, to the extent to which the rise of ESG reflects a real shift in
the strength of shareholders’ pro-social preferences, our comparison of
shareholder and purposeful firms predicts that purposeful firms adopt
more aggressive ESG policies (Propositions 2 and 3). One further impli-
cation is worth highlighting here. If firms’ shareholder bases (or boards)
are  heterogeneous  in  the  strength  of  their  pro-social  preferences,  so
that only a subset of firms are purposeful in our terminology, Lemma 4
nonetheless implies that shareholder firms also adopt more aggressive
ESG policies to keep up with their purposeful rivals.

6.3.  How do ESG firms react to productivity shocks?

Our analysis abstracts from uncertainty, but it nevertheless has some
interesting  implications  for  how  ESG  adopters  react  to  productivity
shocks. Specifically, suppose firm 𝑖 experiences a shock to its produc-
tivity before deciding how many workers to hire. Absent ESG policies,
the  firm  naturally  hires  more  (less)  workers  in  response  to  positive
(negative) productivity shocks. Next, consider a firm that has adopted a
)
moderate ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 ∈
(while firm −𝑖 is a non-ESG firm).
From Proposition 1, firm 𝑖 hires 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔); this is (locally) independent
of  firm 𝑖’s  productivity,  because  the  reaction  functions  intersect  in
the “residual” region of firm 𝑖’s reaction function (see Fig. 2). Hence
a  moderate  ESG  policy  reduces  firm 𝑖’s  sensitivity  to  shocks  to  its
productivity.

(𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖

In  contrast,  a  moderate  ESG  policy  increases  firm 𝑖’s  sensitivity
to  shocks  to  firm −𝑖’s  productivity,  relative  to  the  case  of  no-ESG.
This again follows from the fact the reaction functions intersect in the
residual region of the ESG firm’s reaction function.

From Proposition 2, a firm that seeks to maximize shareholder value
adopts  a  moderate  ESG  policy  in  the  range (𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖) for  which  the
above analysis applies. Moreover, this implication extends to the case
the firm anticipates the possibility of productivity shocks.

If  a  firm  adopts  an  aggressive  ESG  policy 𝜔𝑖 > ̂𝑊𝑖 then  its  re-
sponsiveness to own- and competitor productivity shocks is reversed.
Now,  the  ESG  policy  renders  the  firm more responsive  to  shocks  to
its  own  productivity,  but  unresponsive  to  shocks  to  its  competitor’s
productivity. This case is most likely to arise for the case of a purposeful
firm; Proposition 3 predicts that such a firm will adopt an ESG policy of
̂𝑊𝑖, i.e., exactly on the boundary between the moderate and aggressive
cases (see Fig. 4). Consequently, a further implication is that purposeful
ESG  firms  respond  asymmetrically  to  shocks,  viz.,  are  unresponsive
to positive shocks to their own productivity but highly responsive to
negative  shocks;  and  are  highly  responsive  to  positive  shocks  to  a
competitor’s productivity, but unresponsive to negative shocks.

6.4.  Alternative ESG tools

Our analysis shows that a purposeful firm – in contrast to a share-
holder firm – would gain from access to instruments that go beyond
promises to ensure the well-being of stakeholders. One such instrument
is ESG-linked executive pay structures, which redirect managerial ob-
jectives away from pure profit-maximization and toward internalizing
stakeholder  welfare.  As  such,  our  analysis  implies  that  purposeful
firms are more inclined to incorporate ESG metrics into compensation
contracts compared to shareholder firms. This prediction aligns with
empirical  findings  from Cohen  et  al. (2023),  which  show  a  higher
prevalence of ESG-linked executive pay in countries with more strin-
gent ESG regulations and greater societal sensitivity toward sustain-
ability. Moreover, given that purposeful firms embrace more aggressive
ESG  policies  than  shareholder  firms,  our  analysis  further  predicts  a
higher likelihood of ESG-linked executive pay adoption among firms
making more aggressive ESG commitments.

Nevertheless, given that purposeful firms already adopt ESG poli-
cies  that  are  excessively  aggressive  from  a  societal  standpoint  (see
Corollary 2), our analysis suggests that ESG-linked executive pay of-
fers no discernible social value. Specifically, our analysis implies that

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399113P. Bond and D. Levit

total  social  surplus  is  lowered  if  firms  compensate  managers  based
on  ESG-metrics.  More  broadly, Proposition  6 says  that  stakeholder
capitalism is most effectively implemented by managers focusing on
profit-maximization, with boards strategically setting ESG policies to
mitigate  any  adverse  impacts  this  objective  may  have  on  the  firm’s
other stakeholders.

6.5.  Alternative approaches to modeling ESG

Throughout,  and  motivated  by  our  reading  of  firms’  real-world
behavior, we have modeled a firm’s ESG policy in the S-dimension as
a commitment to treat its customers/employees/suppliers better than
market conditions alone dictate. At the same time, we acknowledge
that other ESG policies are feasible. Here, we briefly discuss three such
alternatives.

First,  one  might  think  of  a  firm  as  simply  increasing  the  weight
it places on stakeholder welfare; indeed, this is the class of policies
considered  by Stoughton  et  al. (2020),  discussed  in  detail  above  in
the  literature  review.  The  contrast  between  a  shareholder  firm  and
a purposeful firm in our analysis highlights the importance of distin-
guishing between the firm’s objective and the type of ESG policies it
implements. Second, a subcategory of employee-targeted ESG policies
is a pledge to develop employee human capital. If credible, such pledges
can help firms solve the much-studied “hold-up” problem associated
with relationship-specific investments. More generally, our modeling
approach  abstracts  from  any  direct  effects  of  firms’  ESG  policies  on
productivity.  However,  as  the  discussion  that  follows Proposition  2
highlights, ESG policies in our model have interesting indirect effects
on the firm’s productivity in equilibrium. Third, if stakeholders have
heterogeneous preferences over ESG policies, firms’ adoption of ESG
policies enhances their ability to price discriminate. The ultimate effect
on  firm  profits  and  stakeholder  welfare  is  nuanced,  and  is  likely  to
depend  on  the  substitutability  of  different  firms  from  stakeholders’
perspective; see, for example, Rhodes and Zhou’s (2024) analysis of
personalized pricing in oligopolistic competition.

6.6.  Supply effects of ESG policies

We  have  assumed  that  a  firm’s  wages  depend  only  on  the  com-
bination of its own ESG policy and total labor demand; specifically,
each firm pays its workers at least 𝑊 (𝐿). This represents a minimal
departure from the standard Cournot model and it ensures that ESG
policies affect other firms entirely through labor demand.28

In particular, this assumption rules out the possibility that firm 𝑖’s
ESG policy disproportionately draws workers with the highest outside
options, thereby expanding the supply of labor available to firm −𝑖. In
principle, if “supply effects” of this sort existed, then firm −𝑖’s demand
would depend on the firm 𝑖’s ESG policy above and beyond its hiring
decision.  For  example,  in  this  case,  if  firm −𝑖 reduces  its  hiring  to
a  point  at  which  its  competitor 𝑖’s  ESG  policy  binds,  then  firm −𝑖’s
wages would further fall because of the endogenous matching of the
lowest-outside-option workers with firm −𝑖.

Clearly, if firms benefit from hiring workers with low outside op-
tions (e.g., such workers are easier to retain and motivate), then they
will  compete  for  these  workers  regardless  of  ESG,  and  thereby  bid
the wage up to at least 𝑊 (𝐿), exactly as our analysis assumes. The
equilibrium outcome and the relevance of these intricate supply effects
are left for future research.

7.  Empirical predictions

Our analysis provides a framework to think through how the “S”
dimension of ESG policies affects the markets in which firms operate.
As such, it produces a large number of empirical predictions. Several
predictions  arise  from  our  analysis  when  the  firm’s  ESG  policy  is
exogenous (corresponding to cases in which external factors affect the
firm’s ESG polices), some when only one firm adopts an ESG policy
(i.e., becoming an industry leader in ESG practices), and others for cases
where firms compete and optimally select their ESG policies. Here, we
outline some of the key predictions.

1. The profits and market share of an ESG firm, as well as total
industry employment, are increasing and then decreasing in the
aggressiveness of its ESG policy.

2. The margins of an ESG firm are decreasing in the aggressiveness

of its ESG policy.

3. The  profits  and  market  share  of  a  non-ESG  firm  competing
with  an  ESG  firm  are  decreasing  and  then  increasing  in  the
aggressiveness of the ESG firm’s policy.

4. Welfare and wages of workers at the non-ESG firm are increasing
and  then  decreasing  in  the  aggressiveness  of  the  ESG  firm’s
policy.29 Similarly,  in  the  product  market  application  of  our
model, consumer welfare at the non-ESG firm is increasing and
then decreasing in the aggressiveness of the ESG firm’s policy,
and product prices of the non-ESG firm are decreasing and then
increasing in the aggressiveness of the ESG firm’s policy.

5. There is no wage difference between ESG and the non-ESG firms
at moderate ESG policies. For extreme ESG policies, the ESG firm
offers higher wages than the non-ESG firm, and the difference
increases with the aggressiveness of the ESG firm’s policy. Sim-
ilarly, in the product market application of our model, there is
no price difference between the ESG and the non-ESG firms at
moderate ESG policies. For extreme ESG policies, the ESG firm
offers lower prices than the non-ESG firm, and the difference
increases with the aggressiveness of the ESG firm’s policy.
6. ESG policy and firm size are positively correlated, with causality
running  in  both  directions:  moderate  ESG  policies  increase  a
firm’s size; while more productive firms are both larger and have
greater incentives to adopt ESG.30

7. ESG  policy’s  aggressiveness  is  negatively  correlated  with  the
elasticity  of  supply  (for  labor  and  supplier  applications)  and
demand (for customer applications).

8. Relative to a no-ESG firm, a moderate-ESG firm is more respon-
sive to shocks to competitor productivity and less responsive to
shocks to own-productivity.

9. Relative to shareholder firms, regulations that facilitate trans-
parency and disclosure of ESG policies have less effect on the
adoption of these policies by purposeful firms.

10. When  multiple  firms  adopt  ESG,  these  choices  are  generally

strategic complements .

11. Periods in which competing firms adopt moderate ESG policies
are followed by periods of aggressive ESG policies, which are
then followed again by periods of moderate ESG policies, and so
on.

28 Recall that absent ESG policies, each firm pays workers 𝑊 (𝐿), and the 𝐿
workers with lowest outside options are employed. One possible microfoun-
dation is that firms cannot observe workers’ outside options, but they have
an infinitesimal preference to hire workers with the lowest outside option.
Consequently, a situation in which firm 𝑖 hires the 𝑙𝑖 workers with lowest
outside options, and pays 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖) < 𝑊 (𝐿), cannot arise, since in this case firm
−𝑖 would try to poach firm 𝑖’s workers away.

29 Notice  that  total  employment  at  the  non-ESG  firm  is  decreasing  at
moderate levels of aggressiveness of the ESG firm’s policy. However, since
industry employment is increasing, all displaced workers can find a job at the
ESG firm.
30 Appendix F of the Online Appendix formally shows that more productive
firms has stronger incentives to adopt ESG policies.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399114P. Bond and D. Levit

8.  Concluding remarks

In  this  paper  we  study  the  “S”  dimension  of  ESG,  focusing  on
firm policies that effectively pledge to treat stakeholders better than
market  conditions  alone  dictate.  As  our  analysis  demonstrates,  it  is
far from obvious how such pledges affect equilibrium outcomes. We
elucidate  the  economic  forces  at  play,  both  in  the  determination  of
market outcomes, and in how firms select their ESG policies. A striking
result is that competition in ESG policies between socially conscious
firms eliminates market power distortions. Our analysis generates novel
empirical  predictions  and  a  rich  set  of  implications  regarding  the
drivers behind the recent rise in ESG, the desirability of ESG-linked
compensation, and the necessity/effectiveness of regulations promoting
transparency and disclosure of ESG policies.

We have deliberately structured our analysis to illuminate the “basic
economics”  of  ESG  policies.  As  such,  it  inevitably  bypasses  various
avenues of potential interest, and we hope that subsequent research
explores some of these. First, it would be interesting to explore how ESG
policies interact with heterogeneous stakeholders; for example, perhaps
some employees or costumers care more about pro-social policies than
others.  Indeed,  ongoing  advances  in  “big  data”  raise  the  prospect
of  price  discrimination  based  on  social  preferences  playing  a  larger
role  in  the  future.  Second,  while  our  analysis  is  equally  applicable
to  labor,  input,  and  product  markets,  it  treats  each  of  these  three
markets  in  isolation;  it  would  be  interesting  to  explore  interactions
between these markets, such as the possibility that a promise to treat
workers and suppliers better directly raises consumers’ valuations in
the  product  market,  or  alternatively,  that  promises  to  produce  safe
and environmentally friendly products increase a firm’s attractiveness
as  an  employer.  Third,  market  power  creates  a  dead  weight  loss  in
our framework due to the usual monopsony/monopolistic distortion.
However,  in  some  cases  market  power  results  from  investments  in
innovation; in these cases, reducing the fruits of market power, as we
have argued that ESG policies have the capacity to do, may carry the
cost of reducing incentives for innovation. Fourth, our analysis deals
with  firms  engaged  in  horizontal  competition,  and  leaves  open  the
question  of  how  ESG  policies  affects  firms  in  vertical  relationships,
and/or those selling complementary products. Last, since ESG policies
are strategic complements at moderate levels and strategic substitutes
at  extreme  levels,  a  dynamic  version  of  our  model  could  give  rise
to  “ESG-cycles:”  phases  where  moderate  ESG  policies  alternate  with
aggressive ones, and vice versa.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Philip Bond: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Resources, Project administration, Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Doron Levit:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Val-
idation, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation,
Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

No conflict to disclose.

Appendix A

A.1.  Proofs for Section 3

Proof of Lemma 1.
problem as

It is convenient to rewrite firm 𝑖’s maximization

max
𝐿

𝑓𝑖

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖

)

− 𝑊 (𝐿)

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖

) .

is strictly convex. If 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿) ≥ 0 then
We first note that 𝑊 (𝐿)
this is immediate. Otherwise, consider any 𝐿 such that 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿) < 0, and
note that

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖

)

)

𝜕2𝑊 (𝐿)

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖
𝜕 𝐿2
(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖
= 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿)
> 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿) 𝐿 + 2𝑊 ′ (𝐿) > 0,

)

+ 2𝑊 ′ (𝐿)

where the final inequality follows from (1). It follows that the firm’s
objective is strictly concave, and hence has a unique maximizer.
)
(𝑙−𝑖, 0

is decreasing. This follows from the

Next, we establish that 𝑟𝑖

FOC
(𝑙𝑖

)

)

) .

= 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖

) 𝑙𝑖 + 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖

= 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿)

+ 𝑊 ′ (𝐿) ,

𝑓 ′
𝑖
The derivative of the RHS with respect to 𝑙−𝑖 is
𝑊 ′′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
)
(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖
which is strictly positive: this is immediate if 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿) ≥ 0, and follows
from (1) if 𝑊 ′′ (𝐿) < 0. The result follows.

) 𝑙𝑖 + 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖

Finally, we establish that 𝑟𝑖

)
(𝑙−𝑖, 0
+ 𝑙−𝑖 is strictly increasing in 𝑙−𝑖.
This follows from the single-crossing property applied to firm 𝑖 profits
)
. Specifically, consider 𝐿 and ̃𝐿 > 𝐿 such
𝑓𝑖
that
𝑓𝑖( ̃𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖) − 𝑊 ( ̃𝐿)( ̃𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖) ≥ 𝑓𝑖
Then for any ̃𝑙−𝑖 > 𝑙−𝑖, we claim
𝑓𝑖( ̃𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖) − 𝑊 ( ̃𝐿)( ̃𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖) > 𝑓𝑖(𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖) − 𝑊 (𝐿) (𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖).
This holds because

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖

(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖

− 𝑊 (𝐿)

− 𝑊 (𝐿)

) .

)

)

𝑓𝑖( ̃𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖) − 𝑓𝑖(𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖)
)
(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖
> 𝑓𝑖( ̃𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖) − 𝑓𝑖
(𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖
≥ 𝑊 ( ̃𝐿)( ̃𝐿 − 𝑙−𝑖) − 𝑊 (𝐿)
> 𝑊 ( ̃𝐿)( ̃𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖) − 𝑊 (𝐿) (𝐿 − ̃𝑙−𝑖),
where the first inequality follows from the concavity of 𝑓𝑖, and the third
inequality follows from 𝑊 being strictly increasing.

■

)

)
(𝑟−𝑖 (𝑙 , 0) , 0
Proof of Lemma 2. In equilibrium, 𝑙𝐵
. Since
the slopes of 𝑟𝑖 (⋅, 0) and 𝑟−𝑖 (⋅, 0) are strictly below one (Lemma 1), the
slope of 𝑟𝑖
is
unique. Inada conditions ensure existence.

is strictly below one as well, and hence 𝑙𝐵
𝑖

)
(𝑟−𝑖 (⋅, 0) , 0

𝑖 solves 𝑙 = 𝑟𝑖

To establish (7), suppose to the contrary that 𝑙𝐵
(𝑙𝐵
𝑖

)

)

1 +𝑙𝐵

2

≥ 𝑙∗∗

1 +𝑙∗∗

2 . Then

2

2

𝑓 ′
𝑖

) 𝑙𝐵
)

which implies 𝑙𝐵

= 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝐵
> 𝑊 (𝑙∗∗

𝑖 + 𝑊 (𝑙𝐵
1 + 𝑙𝐵
1 + 𝑙𝐵
(𝑙∗∗
) ,
1 + 𝑙∗∗
= 𝑓 ′
𝑖
𝑖
2
, contradicting 𝑙𝐵
𝑖 < 𝑙∗∗
𝑖
≥ 𝑙𝐵
To establish 𝑙𝐵
2 , note that 𝑓 ′
1
1
Since 𝑟𝑖 (𝑙; 0) is a decreasing function,
)
𝑙𝐵
; 0
; 0
1 = 𝑟1
)
; 0

) ≥ 𝑟1
≥ 𝑟2

)
1 ; 0
)
1 ; 0

(𝑟1
(𝑟1

(𝑙𝐵
(𝑙𝐵

)
1 ; 0

(𝑟2

(𝑙𝐵

= 𝑙𝐵

2 . ■

1 + 𝑙𝐵
2
≥ 𝑓 ′

≥ 𝑙∗∗

1 + 𝑙∗∗
2 .

2 implies 𝑟1 (𝑙; 0) ≥ 𝑟2 (𝑙; 0).

(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

Proof of Lemma 3. Let
) ≡ 𝑓𝑖
𝜋𝑐
𝑖
We can write the profit of firm 𝑖 given ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 as

− 𝜔𝑖𝑙𝑖.

(𝑙𝑖

)

𝜋𝑖
= min
= min

(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
{𝜋𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖
{𝑓𝑖
Notice that 𝜋𝑖
of two concave functions. We make two useful observations:

)}
) 𝑙𝑖, 𝑓𝑖
is concave in 𝑙𝑖 since it is the lower envelope

) , 𝜋𝑐
− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

− 𝜔𝑖𝑙𝑖

(𝑙𝑖

} .

)

𝑖

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399115P. Bond and D. Levit

Fig. A.12. Case 1: 𝑙−𝑖

≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

)

− 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

)
.

Fig. A.14. Case 3: 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

)

− 𝑟𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖; 0

) ≤ 𝑙−𝑖.

Fig. A.13. Case 2: 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

)

− 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

) ≤ 𝑙−𝑖

≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

)

− 𝑟𝑖

)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
.

(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

)

𝜋𝑐
𝑖

and 𝑟𝑖

)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0

= ar g max𝑙𝑖

𝜋𝑖

)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0

= 𝜋𝑐
𝑖

⇔ 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

) >  𝜔𝑖.  If
and at this point,

)

= ar g max𝑙𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
1. Recall 𝜆𝑖
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
.
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
2. Note  that 𝜋𝑐
𝑖
𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
= 𝜔𝑖 then 𝜋𝑖
𝜕 𝜋𝑖

) >  𝜋𝑖

)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
𝜕 𝑙𝑖
− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
)
− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖

)

(𝑙𝑖
(𝑙𝑖

)

)

= 𝑓 ′
𝑖

< 𝑓 ′
𝑖

Hence 𝜋𝑖

(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
There are three cases to consider.

crosses 𝜋𝑐
𝑖

)

𝜕 𝜋𝑐
𝑖

− 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
)
𝜕 𝑙𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

=

)

) 𝑙𝑖

.

from above.

)

)

)

)

)

)]

[𝑟𝑖

) , 𝜋𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
)

(𝑙−𝑖; 0

) ≤ 𝜋𝑖

, 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖

≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
) ≤ 𝜋𝑖

) ≤ 𝜔𝑖,  which  holds  if  and  only  if
) ≤ 𝜔𝑖 and  so
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
)
from above
)
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
. Hence the

(𝜔𝑖
Case  1: Suppose 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
+ 𝑙−𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
)
.  At 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
𝑙−𝑖
− 𝜆𝑖
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
𝜋𝑐
crosses 𝜋𝑐
. So 𝜋𝑖
𝑖
𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
, which is the maximizer of 𝜋𝑐
to the right of 𝜆𝑖
𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
(see Fig. A.12).
maximum of 𝜋𝑖
is 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
) ≤ 𝜔𝑖
Case 2: Suppose 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖
≤ 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
, which
+ 𝑙−𝑖
+ 𝑙−𝑖
holds if and only if 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
) ≤ 𝑙−𝑖
≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
. Note
−𝜆𝑖
−𝑟𝑖
) ≤ 𝜆𝑖
that, in this case, 𝑟 (𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝜔𝑖
)
, 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
) ≤ 𝜔𝑖
. At 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
)
(𝜔𝑖
≤ 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
)
and so 𝜋𝑐
. At 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
+ 𝑙−𝑖
, 𝜔𝑖
,
𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
) ≤ 𝜋𝑐
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
and  so 𝜋𝑖
.  Hence  the  crossing  point  of  the
𝑖
)
)
) , 𝜆
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
functions 𝜋𝑐
occurs in the interval
and 𝜋𝑖
𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
) ≤ (≥) 𝜋𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
, with 𝜋𝑐
to the left (right) of the crossing
𝑖
)}
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
{𝜋𝑐
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
point. Hence min
is strictly increasing up to
𝑖
the crossing point, and strictly decreasing after the crossing point, and
so is maximized at the crossing point. The crossing point 𝑙𝑖 satisfies
𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
)
Case  3: Suppose 𝜔𝑖
)
≥ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
if 𝑙−𝑖
− 𝑟𝑖
) ≤ 𝜋𝑐
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
and  so 𝜋𝑖
𝑖
𝑙𝑖, it is immediate that the maximizer of min
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
crosses 𝜋𝑐
. Otherwise, 𝜋𝑖
is 𝑟𝑖
𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
)
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
. Hence 𝜋𝑐
point to the left of 𝑟𝑖
𝑖
{𝜋𝑐
crossing  point,  and  the  maximizer  of min
𝑖
again 𝑟𝑖

− 𝑙−𝑖 (see Fig. A.13).
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
≤ 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖
,  which  holds  if  and  only
+ 𝑙−𝑖
≤ 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
.  At 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖
, 𝜔𝑖
,
)
) ≤ 𝜋𝑐
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
for  all
.  If 𝜋𝑖
𝑖
) , 𝜋𝑖
{𝜋𝑐
)}
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
from above at a
is increasing up to this
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖
is

= 𝜔𝑖, i.e., 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

(see Fig. A.14).

(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0

Observe that it cannot be 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
.  If  it  did,  then 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
)
+ 𝑙−𝑖
) <  𝑟𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
, 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
+ 𝑙−𝑖
)
) , 𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝜆𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
, and 𝜔𝑖
) , 𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝑟𝑖
) >  𝜋𝑖

)
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
≤ 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖
)
. Since 𝜋𝑐
𝑖

≤ 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
+ 𝑙−𝑖
+
)
)
) ≤ 𝑊 (𝑟𝑖
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
+ 𝑙−𝑖
implies
) ≤
)
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜆𝑖
) ≤ 𝜔𝑖 implies 𝜋𝑐
; 𝜔𝑖
𝑖
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝑟𝑖
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
)
)
implies 𝜋𝑐
+ 𝑙−𝑖
;
𝑖
)
)
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜆𝑖
) ≤ 𝜋𝑐
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
(𝑟𝑖
; 𝜔𝑖
,
𝑖

) ≤ 𝜔𝑖

𝑙−𝑖
𝜆𝑖
𝜋𝑖
𝜔𝑖

)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0

) , 𝜋𝑖

; 𝜔𝑖

)}

)

)

(𝑟𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖; 0
the above implies 𝜋𝑖
tradicts the observation that 𝑟𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
) , 𝑙−𝑖; 0
) < 𝜋𝑖
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
is the maximizer of 𝜋𝑖
Finally, we rewrite the condition on 𝑙−𝑖 from Case 2. Note that
)
(𝜆𝑖
; 0
𝜋𝑖
) ,
(𝜆𝑖
= 𝜋𝑐
𝑖

) , 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
)
; 𝜔𝑖

)
) , 𝑙−𝑖; 0
, which con-
)
(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖; 0
.

(𝜔𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖; 𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖
𝜋𝑐
𝑖

(𝜆𝑖

)

= max
𝑙𝑖
)

)

)

(𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
implying 𝑟𝑖
𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
+ 𝑟𝑖
− 𝜆𝑖
i.e., at 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
𝑙−𝑖 + 𝑟𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
; 0
− 𝜆𝑖
)
(𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
− 𝜆𝑖
,
) .
) < 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

) < 𝜆𝑖
− 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖

)
. Hence
) < 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

; 0

) ,

)

− 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

Hence
𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
) < 𝛬−𝑖
Hence the condition on 𝑙−𝑖 is equivalent to
(𝜔𝑖
𝑙−𝑖 ∈

[𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

) , 𝛬−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

)] .

) .

)

This completes the proof of the first equality in the statement of the
result. The second equality follows from the property (Lemma 1) that
𝑟𝑖

+ 𝑙−𝑖 is strictly increasing.

)
(𝑙−𝑖, 0

■

A.2.  Proofs for Section 4

Proof of Proposition 1. Proposition 1 is a special case of Proposition 4
when 𝜔−𝑖 = 0, which we prove below.

■

Proof of Proposition 2. Proposition 2 follows directly from the argu-
ments that precede its statement in the main text. Here, we establish
the results about industry profits and industry surplus that we refer to
in the discussion that follows Proposition 2.

First, we prove that if firm 𝑖 is the (weakly) less-productive firm
(i.e., 𝑖 = 2), then total industry profits decrease relative to the No-ESG
benchmark. Industry profits are
(𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

)) 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑟−𝑖

+ 𝑓−𝑖

)) .

(𝑙𝑖

))

−

)

)

−

(𝑙𝑖
𝑓 ′
𝑖
(
1 + 𝑟′
−𝑖
(
1 + 𝑟′
−𝑖

𝑓𝑖
The derivative of industry profits with respect to 𝑙𝑖 is
(𝑙𝑖; 0
))
) 𝑓 ′
(𝑙𝑖; 0
(𝑟−𝑖
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
)) 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
)) (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
)) 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
From the FOC for firm −𝑖, this simplifies to
) 𝑓 ′
−𝑖

+ 𝑟′
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

)) .

))

))

−

)

(𝑙𝑖
𝑓 ′
𝑖
(
1 + 𝑟′
−𝑖
(
1 + 𝑟′
−𝑖

+ 𝑟′
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0
(𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
))
)) 𝑓 ′
(𝑙𝑖; 0
(𝑟−𝑖
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
)) 𝑙𝑖𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

))

−

−

(𝑙𝑖

(𝑟−𝑖

− 𝑓 ′
−𝑖

and hence to
)
1 + 𝑟′
𝑓 ′
−𝑖
𝑖
Suppose that firm 𝑖 is weakly less productive. The facts that 𝑙𝑖
𝑙𝐵
−𝑖

)) 𝑙𝑖𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

≥ 𝑙𝐵
𝑖

imply

)) .

))

−

(

(A.1)

≥ 𝑙𝐵

𝑖 and

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399116P. Bond and D. Levit

(𝑙𝑖

(𝑙𝐵
𝑖

) ≤ 𝑓 ′
𝑖

) ≤ 𝑓 ′
−𝑖

(𝑟−𝑖
𝑓 ′
𝑖
Hence expression (A.1) is strictly negative, i.e., total profits are decreas-
ing in 𝑙𝑖.

) ≤ 𝑓 ′
−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝐵
−𝑖

)) .

Next, we prove that industry surplus is always increasing if the more
productive firm chooses an ESG policy in the neighborhood of 𝑊 𝐵.
Industry surplus is

𝑙𝑖+𝑟−𝑖(𝑙𝑖;0)

)

(𝑙𝑖

(𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

))

𝑓𝑖

𝑊 (𝐿) 𝑑 𝐿.

+ 𝑓−𝑖

− ∫
0
The derivative of industry surplus with respect to 𝑙𝑖 is
(𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
) 𝑓 ′
−𝑖
)) 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
From the FOC for firm −𝑖, this simplifies to

))
(𝑙𝑖; 0
)) .
(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖
𝑓 ′
𝑖
(
1 + 𝑟′
−𝑖

+ 𝑟′
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0

−

)

)

))

𝑓 ′
𝑖
+ 𝑟′
−𝑖

− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
) 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
) 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
Evaluated at 𝑙𝐵
𝑖 , expression (A.2) equals
)) 𝑊 ′ (𝑙𝐵
) 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝐵
𝑖 ; 0

𝑖 + 𝑟′
−𝑖

𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

𝑖 ; 0

)) .

(𝑙𝐵

(𝑙𝐵

(𝑙𝐵

𝑖 ; 0

)) .

(A.2)

)
Suppose that firm 𝑖 is weakly more productive. Then 𝑙𝐵
𝑖 ; 0
,
𝑖
and  so  the  above  expression  is  (using Lemma  1)  strictly  positive,
i.e., total surplus is increasing in 𝑙𝑖 in the neighborhood of 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑙𝐵
𝑖 . ■

≥ 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝐵

Proof of Proposition 3. Firm 𝑖’s surplus is

𝑙𝑖

)

(𝑙𝑖

𝑓𝑖

− 𝜇 ∫
0

𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙 − (1 − 𝜇) ∫

𝑙𝑖+𝑟−𝑖(𝑙𝑖;0)

𝑟−𝑖(𝑙𝑖;0)

𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙 ,

The derivative of (A.3) with respect to 𝑙𝑖 is

(A.3)

))

)

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖
𝑓 ′
𝑖
− (1 − 𝜇)
+ (1 − 𝜇) 𝑟′
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖
= 𝑓 ′
𝑖
− (1 − 𝜇) 𝑟′
−𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖

− 𝜇 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖
)
(
(𝑙𝑖; 0
1 + 𝑟′
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
) 𝑊 (𝑟−𝑖
− 𝜇 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖; 0
− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

)) 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
− (1 − 𝜇) 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
) [𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
))
(𝑙𝑖; 0
)) ,
(𝑙𝑖; 0

> 𝑓 ′
𝑖

))

)

(𝑙𝑖; 0
))
− 𝑊 (𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

))]

(A.4)
) < 0 and 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

)
.

(𝑙𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

where  the  inequality  follows  because 𝑟′
−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0

)) > 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖
There  are  two  cases  to  consider.  First,  suppose 𝜔𝑖 ∈  [𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖).
(𝜔𝑖
) <
Increasing 𝜔𝑖 corresponds to increasing 𝑙𝑖. In this case, 𝑙𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖
))
. Hence
𝜆𝑖
(A.4) is strictly positive. It follows that 𝜔𝑖 = ̂𝑊𝑖 delivers higher firm
surplus than any choice in [𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖).

) > 𝜔𝑖; and 𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

)
, or equivalently, 𝑓 ′
𝑖

Second, consider 𝜔𝑖 > ̂𝑊𝑖. Decreasing 𝜔𝑖 corresponds to increasing
= 𝜔𝑖; and 𝜔𝑖 >
. Hence (A.4) is strictly positive. It follows that 𝜔𝑖 =

𝑙𝑖. In this case, 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
̂𝑊𝑖 delivers higher firm surplus than any choice in 𝜔𝑖 > ̂𝑊𝑖.

)
, or equivalently, 𝑓 ′
𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝜔𝑖

As in the proof of Proposition 2, firm 𝑖′𝑠 employment, total em-
ployment, wages, and workers’ surplus, are all higher in equilibrium
relative to the No-ESG benchmark. Moreover, firm’s −𝑖′𝑠 employment
and profitability are lower, and if 𝑖 = 1 then total profitability is also
lower.

(𝑙𝑖

))

■

)

Proof of Corollary 1. Note that
𝜕 𝑆𝑖
(𝑙𝑖

− 𝜇 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖

= 𝑓 ′
𝑖

)

)

)

(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖
𝜕 𝑙𝑖

− (1 − 𝜇) 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖

) ,

and hence, if 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖) and 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖
𝜕 𝑆𝑖

)

= ̂𝑊𝑖 − 𝜇 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖)
)
= 𝜇 ( ̂𝑊𝑖 − 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖)

− (1 − 𝜇) ̂𝑊𝑖
)) > 0,

(𝑙𝑖, 𝑙−𝑖
𝜕 𝑙𝑖

)
(𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖); 0
, then

as required.

■

(A.5)

To establish the claim in footnote 1, recall the derivative of (A.3)

with respect to 𝑙𝑖 is
− 𝜇 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖
𝑓 ′
𝑖

)

(𝑙𝑖; 0
))

))
− 𝑊 (𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖
− (1 − 𝜇) 𝑟′
−𝑖

− (1 − 𝜇) 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
) [𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0

)
(𝑙𝑖; 0
( ̂𝑊𝑖
(𝜆𝑖
Recalling 𝑓 ′
𝑖
)]
𝜇 [ ̂𝑊𝑖 − 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖)
(𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖); 0
− (1 − 𝜇) 𝑟′
−𝑖
) < 0 the second term is positive, as required.
(𝑙𝑖; 0

) [ ̂𝑊𝑖 − 𝑊 (𝑟−𝑖

(𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖); 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

))] .

))] .

Since 𝑟′
−𝑖

))

= ̂𝑊𝑖, this expression at 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊𝑖) evaluates to

Proof of Corollary 2.
(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑟−𝑖

+ 𝑓−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖

𝑓𝑖

)

))

Industry surplus is
𝑙𝑖+𝑟−𝑖(𝑙𝑖;0)

𝑊 (𝑙) 𝑑 𝑙 ,

− ∫
0

The derivative of (A.5) with respect to 𝑙𝑖 is

𝑓 ′
𝑖
+ 𝑟′
−𝑖
< 𝑓 ′
𝑖

)
(𝑙𝑖
(𝑙𝑖; 0
)
(𝑙𝑖

− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
) [𝑓 ′
− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

(𝑟−𝑖

−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0
))
(𝑙𝑖; 0

))
− 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
)) .

(𝑙𝑖; 0

))]

))

(𝑟−𝑖

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖; 0

where the inequality follows from the monopsony distortion in non-ESG
(𝑙𝑖; 0
firm’s hiring decisions, 𝑓 ′
, along with
−𝑖
) < 0.
the fact that 𝑟′
−𝑖

)) > 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖

From Proposition 3, the ESG policy that maximizes firm 𝑖’s surplus
̂𝑊𝑖,  and  the  associated  employment  level  is  such  that 𝑓 ′
=
is
𝑖
̂𝑊𝑖 = 𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑟−𝑖
. Hence the derivative of (A.5) with respect to
𝑙𝑖 is strictly negative at this point, implying that the ESG policy that
maximizes industry surplus must induce strictly lower employment at
firm 𝑖. (No ESG policy can induce strictly more employment.)

(𝑙𝑖; 0

(𝑙𝑖

))

■

)

A.3.  Proofs for Section 5.1

The next sequence of auxiliary results will be used for the proof of
Proposition 4. The proofs of these results can be found in Appendix B
of the Online Appendix.

Lemma A.6. If 𝜔1

≠ 𝜔2 then there is at most one labor market equilibrium.

Lemma A.7.
1 = 𝑊 ∗
𝑊 ∗

2 = 𝑊 𝐵.

If max𝑖 𝜔𝑖

≤ 𝑊 𝐵 then in any equilibrium, 𝑙∗

𝑖 = 𝑙𝐵

𝑖 and

Lemma A.8.

If 𝜔𝑖

≥ 𝑊 ∗∗ then 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

)
.

If 𝜔𝑖 ∈  (𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖] and 𝜔−𝑖
Lemma  A.9.
)
)
−𝑖 = 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
, and 𝑊 ∗
𝑙∗
1 = 𝑊 ∗
− 𝛬𝑖
is the unique equilibrium if 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝜔𝑖.

(𝜔𝑖

≤ 𝜔𝑖 then 𝑙∗

(𝜔𝑖
)
,
2 = 𝜔𝑖 is an equilibrium; and

𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖

Lemma A.10. Suppose 𝜔𝑖 ∈ ( ̂𝑊𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗ ] and 𝜔−𝑖

≤ 𝜔𝑖. Then,
(𝜔𝑖

)
, 𝑙∗

(𝑖) There is an equilibrium in which, 𝑙∗
)
)
, and 𝑊 ∗
(𝑖𝑖) If 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝜔𝑖 then the equilibrium in part (i) is the unique equilibrium

) ≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖.

−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

𝜔−𝑖

;

(𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

)

−𝑖 < 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
and 𝑙∗
(𝑎) If 𝑊 −1 (𝜔−𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔−𝑖
)
(𝑏) If 𝑊 −1 (𝜔−𝑖
)

− 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

)
; 0

)

− 𝜆𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖
)

(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
and 𝑊 ∗
(𝜔𝑖
− 𝜆𝑖
−𝑖 = 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
and 𝑊 ∗
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜆𝑖

)
. Moreover:
) ≥ 𝑟−𝑖
(𝜆𝑖
−𝑖 = 𝜔−𝑖.
(𝜆𝑖
) < 𝑟−𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
)

−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖

; 𝜔−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

)

)
; 0

then 𝑙∗

−𝑖 = 𝑊 −1

(𝜔𝑖
+ 𝑟−𝑖

)
)
; 0
then 𝑙∗
−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖
(𝜆𝑖
))
)
(𝜔𝑖
; 0
.
= 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

)

)

)

(𝜆𝑖

and

(𝑖𝑖𝑖) If 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 then 𝑙∗
−𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖.

𝑊 ∗

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399117P. Bond and D. Levit

Proof of Proposition 4. Part (i) follows from Lemma A.7. Part (ii)
follows from Lemma A.8. Consider part (iii). Suppose 𝜔2 = 𝜔1 = 𝜔 ∈
(𝑊 𝐵, 𝑊 ∗∗). As we show in the proof of Lemma A.9, inequality (B-5)
holds, that is
(𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) ; 0

) < 𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔) .

(A.6)

𝑟−𝑖

)
(𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) ; 0
Since 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) + 𝑟−𝑖
𝑊 −1 (𝜔) < 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) + 𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔) .

= 𝑊 −1 (𝜔), then (B-5) implies

Since 𝜔 > 𝑊 𝐵, repeating the arguments in the proof of Lemma A.9 that
shows (B-6), for 𝑖 = 1, 2 we have
𝑊 −1 (𝜔) < 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) + 𝛬−𝑖 (𝜔) .

Since 𝜔 < 𝑊 ∗∗, we have
𝑊 −1 (𝜔) < 𝑊 −1 (𝑊 ∗∗)

= 𝜆𝑖 (𝜔) + 𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔) .

Combined, these three inequalities establish the interval in (16) is not
empty.

Let 𝑙∗ be an element in interval (16). Then,
] .
[𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔) , 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔)

𝑙∗ ∈

Notice 𝑙∗ ≤ 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) implies 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑙∗ ≥ 𝑟−𝑖 (𝑙∗; 0) and 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) −
𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔) ≤ 𝑙∗ implies 𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔) ≤ 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑙∗.  Thus,  from Lemma  3,
𝑟−𝑖 (𝑙∗; 𝜔) = 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑙∗. Moreover
[𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝛬−𝑖 (𝜔) , 𝜆𝑖 (𝜔)
]
𝑙∗ ∈

and so

(𝑙∗; 𝜔)

𝑟−𝑖

= 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑙∗ ∈

[𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝜆𝑖 (𝜔) , 𝛬−𝑖 (𝜔)
] .

Thus, from Lemma 3
(𝑙∗; 𝜔)

; 𝜔)

(𝑟−𝑖

𝑟𝑖

establishing that
firms pay 𝜔 is immediate.

(𝑙∗; 𝜔)

= 𝑙∗,

= 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑟−𝑖
(𝑙∗, 𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑙∗)

is an equilibrium. The fact that both

(𝑟−𝑖 (⋅; 𝜔) ; 𝜔)

Finally, we show that there are no other equilibria. We have just
shown that the function 𝑟𝑖
has an interval of fixed points,
and that over this interval the function has slope 1. From the proof
(𝑟−𝑖 (⋅; 𝜔) ; 𝜔)
of Lemma A.6, it follows that the set of fixed points of 𝑟𝑖
coincides with the interval over which the function has slope 1. From
the proof of Lemma A.6, and from Lemma 3, this interval is defined by
the pair of conditions

𝑙𝑖 ∈
𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝑙𝑖 ∈

[𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝜆−𝑖 (𝜔) , 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔)
]
[𝑊 −1 (𝜔) − 𝜆𝑖 (𝜔) , 𝛬−𝑖 (𝜔)
]

which together is exactly the interval in (16). This completes part (iii).
Consider part (iv). If 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝜔𝑖 then the equilibrium is unique based
)
(𝜔𝑖
𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖. Based on Lemma A.10 part (i), if 𝜔𝑖 ∈ ( ̂𝑊𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗ ] then
(𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
≤ ̂𝑊𝑖 ⇔ 𝛬𝑖
, this can be
)}
𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 as required. Notice
and 𝑊 ∗
−𝑖 follow from the definition of equilibrium, and their explicit

on Lemma A.6. Based on Lemma A.9, if 𝜔𝑖 ∈ (𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖] then 𝑙𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖
and 𝑊 ∗
𝑙∗
𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
written as 𝑙∗
𝑙∗
−𝑖 and 𝑊 ∗
characterization is given in Lemmas A.9 and A.10.

𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖. Since 𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
{𝛬𝑖

and 𝑊 ∗
𝑖 = min

) ≤ 𝜆𝑖

) , 𝜆𝑖

)

−𝑖 ⇔ 𝛬𝑖

Finally, we prove that if firms 𝑖 are symmetric (i.e., have the same
production functions) or 𝑖 = 1 (the larger firm adopts a more aggressive
−𝑖. If 𝜔𝑖 ∈ (𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖] then based on Lemma A.9,
𝑖 > 𝑙∗
ESG policy), then 𝑙∗
)
) >  𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
.  Inequality  (B-6)  from
𝑖 >  𝑙∗
𝑙∗
the  proof  of Lemma  A.9 implies 𝛬𝑖 (𝜔) + 𝛬−𝑖 (𝜔) >  𝑊 −1 (𝜔).  Thus,
) > 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
must hold. If 𝜔𝑖 ∈ ( ̂𝑊𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗ ] then based
𝛬𝑖
)
)
on Lemma  A.10 𝑙∗
.  Recall
and 𝑙∗
𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗)+𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) = 𝑊 −1 (𝑊 ∗∗). If 𝜔𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗ and firms are symmetric
or 𝜆𝑖 (⋅) > 𝜆−𝑖 (⋅) then 𝜆𝑖

−𝑖 <  𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

) > 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

− 𝛬𝑖
𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖

− 𝛬𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

)
.

■

)

)

)

)

A.4.  Proofs for Section 5.2

Proof of Lemma 4. We consider separately upwards and downwards
responses by firm −𝑖 to firm 𝑖’s policy 𝜔𝑖. Let 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
)
(𝜔𝑖
respectively  denote  the  maximal  profits  that  firm −𝑖 can  obtain  if
≥ 𝜔𝑖. From Lemmas A.7–A.10,
restricted to policies 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝜔𝑖 and 𝜔−𝑖
both these functions are continuous in 𝜔𝑖. Further, for 𝑗 = 𝑖, −𝑖 define

and 𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

−𝑖

)

𝐿𝑗 (𝜔) =

{

min
𝑙𝐵
𝑗

}
{𝛬𝑗 (𝜔) , 𝜆𝑗 (𝜔)

if 𝜔 ≥ 𝑊 𝐵
if 𝜔 ≤ 𝑊 𝐵.

)

(𝜔𝑖

Consider first downwards responses 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝜔𝑖. From Lemmas A.7–A.10,
regardless of the specific value of 𝜔−𝑖. So firm −𝑖’s profits
𝑙∗
𝑖 = 𝐿𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
are maximized by playing the unconstrained best response to 𝐿𝑖
,
which can be achieved by choosing 𝜔−𝑖 = 0. Hence
𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
)
−𝑖

− 𝑙−𝑖𝑊 (𝐿𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖

+ 𝑙−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

𝑓−𝑖

) .

)

)

= max
𝑙−𝑖

−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

Consequently, 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
)
over 𝜔𝑖 ∈ [𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖]; and strictly increasing for 𝜔𝑖
that 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) + 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗)
)
the monopsony distortion, namely:

is constant for 𝜔𝑖

= 𝑊 ∗∗ = 𝑓 ′
−𝑖

≤ 𝑊 𝐵; strictly decreasing
≥ ̂𝑊𝑖. Moreover, note
)
(𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗)
, which implies

𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
−𝑖
> 𝑓−𝑖
− 𝜆−𝑖
= max
𝑙−𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗)

(𝜆−𝑖
(𝑊 ∗∗))
(𝑊 ∗∗) 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
(𝑙−𝑖
𝑓−𝑖

)

(𝑊 ∗∗)
− 𝑙−𝑖𝑊 ∗∗.

+ 𝜆−𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗))

(A.7)

≥ 𝜔𝑖. For 𝜔𝑖

We next consider upwards responses 𝜔−𝑖

≤ 𝑊 𝐵 is
immediate from Lemma A.7 and Proposition 2 that firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜑∗
−𝑖.
≥ 𝑊 𝐵, Lemmas A.8–A.10 imply that firm −𝑖’s profits from any
For 𝜔𝑖
) ̃𝜔−𝑖, and in particular, are
policy ̃𝜔−𝑖 > 𝜔𝑖 are 𝑓−𝑖
−𝐿−𝑖
independent of firm 𝑖’s policy 𝜔𝑖. Hence an increase in 𝜔𝑖 affects firm
−𝑖 solely by shrinking the set of upwards responses available, implying
(𝜔𝑖
both that the profit function 𝜋𝑢𝑝
is weakly decreasing in 𝜔𝑖 and
−𝑖
that firm −𝑖’s policy is weakly increasing in 𝜔𝑖 (conditional on firm −𝑖
adopting 𝜔−𝑖

≥ 𝜔𝑖).

(𝐿−𝑖

( ̃𝜔−𝑖

( ̃𝜔−𝑖

))

)

Moreover, from Lemma A.8, if 𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗ then any upwards response

𝜔−𝑖 yields profits
(𝜔−𝑖
𝑓−𝑖

(𝜆−𝑖

))

− 𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

) 𝜔−𝑖 = max
𝑙−𝑖

𝑓−𝑖

)

(𝑙−𝑖

− 𝑙−𝑖𝜔−𝑖,

(A.8)

(𝑊 ∗∗) .

which combined with (A.7) implies that
𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖
−𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗) > lim
𝜖→0
(𝜖 → 0 means 𝜔−𝑖 ↘ 𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗).
Below, we establish that
) > 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖
Continuity of 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
)
(𝜔𝑖
)
, combined with the observations
≥ ̂𝑊𝑖 while the latter is
that the former functions is increasing for 𝜔𝑖
weakly decreasing, along with (A.8), implies that there exists a unique
̌𝑊−𝑖 ∈ ( ̂𝑊𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗) such that lim𝜖→0 𝜋𝑢𝑝
if 𝜔𝑖 < ̌𝑊−𝑖 and
−𝑖
) < 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
lim𝜖→0 𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖
−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
if 𝜔𝑖 > ̌𝑊−𝑖.

≤ ̂𝑊𝑖.
(𝜔𝑖

) > 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛

and 𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

lim
𝜖→0

(A.9)

if 𝜔𝑖

−𝑖

−𝑖

−𝑖

)

)

)

−𝑖

(𝑊 𝐵)

−𝑖) at  wage 𝜑∗

(𝜔𝑖
)
) > 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛

−𝑖 then if
Proof of (A.9). There are three subcases. First, if 𝜔𝑖 <  𝜑∗
−𝑖 (see  Lemma A.9).
−𝑖 it  hires 𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗
firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜑∗
By Proposition  2,  firm −𝑖’s  profits  strictly  exceed  those  in  the  No-
ESG benchmark, which equal 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
, and which in turn exceeds
𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
≤ ̂𝑊𝑖. Hence
provided 𝜔𝑖
−𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
𝜋𝑢𝑝
if 𝜔𝑖 < min{𝜑∗
−𝑖
−𝑖, ̂𝑊𝑖} ≤ 𝜔𝑖 < min{ ̂𝑊𝑖, ̂𝑊−𝑖} then if firm −𝑖 adopts
Second, if min{𝜑∗
𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 + 𝜖 it hires 𝛬−𝑖
at wage 𝜔−𝑖 (see Lemma A.9). Moreover,
because 𝑊 𝐵 < min{𝜑∗
(𝑊 𝐵)
) > 𝛬−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖
)
−𝑖, ̂𝑊𝑖} ≤ 𝜔𝑖,
= 𝑙𝐵
−𝑖

−𝑖, ̂𝑊𝑖}.

(A.10)

(𝜔𝑖

𝛬−𝑖

−𝑖

)

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399118P. Bond and D. Levit

(𝛬𝑖

(𝑊 𝐵)

(𝑙𝐵

)
𝑖 ; 0

; 0

) > 𝑟−𝑖

(𝛬𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

)

) .

; 0

= 𝑟−𝑖

= 𝑟−𝑖

) < 𝜆−𝑖

)
(𝜔𝑖
)
)
; 0

(A.11)
(𝜔𝑖
)
.
) <
(𝛬𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
; 0
; and 𝑟−𝑖
(𝛬𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
from (A.11); and hiring levels 𝑙𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖
and 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝑟−𝑖
result in wage 𝜔𝑖. It follows that, for 𝜖 sufficiently small, firm

The function 𝑓−𝑖 (𝑙)−𝑙 𝜔𝑖 is concave with a unique maximizer at 𝜆−𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
Note that 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊−𝑖 implies 𝛬−𝑖
𝛬−𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
−𝑖’s profits from 𝜔−𝑖 strictly exceed
))
; 0
; 0
𝑓−𝑖
Consequently  (and  regardless  of  whether 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 + 𝜖 is  the  best
upwards response to 𝜔𝑖 for firm −𝑖),
) > 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
lim𝜖→0𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖
−𝑖, ̂𝑊𝑖} ≤ 𝜔𝑖 < min{ ̂𝑊𝑖, ̂𝑊−𝑖}.
if min{𝜑∗

) 𝜔𝑖 = 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛

(A.12)

(𝑟−𝑖

− 𝑟−𝑖

(𝛬𝑖

(𝛬𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

) .

−𝑖

−𝑖

)

)

)

Third, if min{ ̂𝑊𝑖, ̂𝑊−𝑖} ≤ 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊𝑖 then ̂𝑊−𝑖
𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛
)
(𝑙−𝑖
−𝑖

− 𝑙−𝑖𝑊 (𝛬𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

𝑓−𝑖

)

)

≤ 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊𝑖. Because 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊𝑖,
+ 𝑙−𝑖

(A.13)

) .

= max
𝑙−𝑖

)

(𝜔𝑖

Note that the wage 𝑊 (𝛬𝑖
+ 𝑙−𝑖
𝑙−𝑖 in (A.13) equals 𝜔𝑖. Because 𝜔𝑖
)
(𝜔−𝑖
it hires 𝜆−𝑖
from this policy. Hence
(𝜔𝑖
lim𝜖→0𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖

(𝑙−𝑖

at wage 𝜔−𝑖, and so 𝜋𝑢𝑝
−𝑖

𝑓−𝑖

)

) ≥ max
𝑙−𝑖

− 𝑙−𝑖𝜔𝑖 > 𝜋𝑑 𝑜𝑤𝑛

−𝑖

)

(𝜔𝑖

)
at the profit-maximizing choice of
≥ ̂𝑊−𝑖, if firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 + 𝜖
weakly exceeds the profits

(𝜔𝑖

)

if min{ ̂𝑊𝑖, ̂𝑊−𝑖} ≤ 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊𝑖.

(A.14)

Combined, (A.10), (A.12), and (A.14) establish (A.9), completing the
proof.

■

Proof of Proposition 5. To avoid excessive mathematical complication
we assume that the grid determining firm −𝑖’s policy choices includes
̌𝑊−𝑖.

[𝜑∗
𝜔𝑖

≠ ̌𝑊−𝑖 is dominated by 𝜔𝑖 = ̌𝑊−𝑖.

We show that, for the leader firm 𝑖: (A) any policy choice 𝜔𝑖 ∈
−𝑖, min{ ̂𝑊−𝑖, ̌𝑊−𝑖}) is dominated by 𝜔𝑖 < 𝜑∗
−𝑖; (B) any policy choice
≥ min{ ̂𝑊−𝑖, ̌𝑊−𝑖} with 𝜔𝑖
Proof  of  (A): This  case  only  arises  if 𝜑∗

−𝑖 < ̌𝑊−𝑖.  On  the  one
−𝑖 then, by Lemma 4, Lemma A.9, and
−𝑖. By Lemma A.9,
−𝑖) =
−𝑖) −𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗

hand, if firm 𝑖 adopts 𝜔𝑖 <  𝜑∗
Proposition 2, firm −𝑖 responds by adopting policy 𝜑∗
the labor market outcome is that firm 𝑖 hires 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑊 −1(𝜑∗
−𝑖); 0) at wage 𝜑∗
𝑟𝑖(𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗
)
(𝑙𝑖
− 𝑙𝑖𝑊 (𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗
𝑓𝑖
max
𝑙𝑖
−𝑖, min{ ̂𝑊−𝑖, ̌𝑊−𝑖}) then by
On the other hand, if firm 𝑖 adopts 𝜔𝑖 ∈ [𝜑∗
Lemma 4, firm −𝑖 responds by adopting 𝜔−𝑖 > 𝜔𝑖. From Lemma A.10,
≥ ̂𝑊−𝑖 is  a  strictly  worse
it  follows  straightforwardly  that  any 𝜔−𝑖
response for firm −𝑖 than 𝜔−𝑖 = ̂𝑊−𝑖. Hence firm −𝑖’s response satisfies
𝜔−𝑖 ∈ (𝜔𝑖, ̂𝑊−𝑖], and by Lemma A.9 the labor market outcome is that
(𝜔−𝑖
firm 𝑖 hires 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑊 −1 (𝜔−𝑖
at wage 𝜔−𝑖,
for firm 𝑖 profits of
)

−𝑖, for firm 𝑖 profits of
−𝑖) + 𝑙𝑖).

(𝛬−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

− 𝛬−𝑖

(A.15)

)
; 0

= 𝑟𝑖

)

)

)

)

(𝑙𝑖

𝑓𝑖

− 𝑙𝑖𝑊 (𝛬−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

) .

+ 𝑙𝑖

(A.16)

max
𝑙𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
Since 𝛬−𝑖
exceed profits ((A.16)), completing the proof of (A).

) ≥ 𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗

) >  𝛬−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

−𝑖) it follows that profits (A.15)

)

(𝜔𝑖

Proof of (B): First note that, by Lemma 4, if firm 𝑖 adopts 𝜔𝑖

≥ ̌𝑊−𝑖
then firm −𝑖 adopts a non-binding policy. From Lemma A.10, firm 𝑖
at  wage 𝜔𝑖.  The  resulting  profits  for  firm 𝑖 are  strictly
hires 𝜆𝑖
decreasing in 𝜔𝑖. Hence any policy 𝜔𝑖 > ̌𝑊−𝑖 is dominated from firm
𝑖’s perspective by 𝜔𝑖 = ̌𝑊−𝑖.

Next, we consider the case in which firm 𝑖 adopts 𝜔𝑖 ∈ [ ̂𝑊−𝑖, ̌𝑊−𝑖).
From Lemma 4 , firm −𝑖 responds by adopting 𝜔−𝑖 >  𝜔𝑖. Moreover,
≥ ̂𝑊−𝑖, it follows from the same argument as directly above
because 𝜔𝑖
that firm −𝑖’s unique best response 𝜔−𝑖 is the smallest value on the grid
that strictly exceeds 𝜔𝑖. From Lemma A.10, firm 𝑖’s profits are
𝑓𝑖

))

)

) 𝑊 (𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

)

+ 𝑟𝑖

(𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

)

; 𝜔𝑖

)) .

(A.17)

(𝑟𝑖
−𝑟𝑖

(𝜆−𝑖
(𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖
(𝜔−𝑖

; 𝜔𝑖
)

; 𝜔𝑖

Note that these profits are weakly below what firm 𝑖 would get under
the No-ESG policy 𝜔𝑖 = 0 if firm −𝑖 continues to hire 𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

)
,

(𝑟𝑖
(𝜆−𝑖
𝑓𝑖

𝑓𝑖
− 𝑟𝑖
= max
𝑙𝑖

(𝜆−𝑖
(𝜔−𝑖
)
(𝑙𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖
)
))
; 0
)
) 𝑊 (𝜆−𝑖
; 0
− 𝑙𝑖𝑊 (𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖
)
(𝜔−𝑖

)

+ 𝑟𝑖
) .

+ 𝑙𝑖

(𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

)

))

; 0

(A.18)

(𝜔−𝑖

)
, and

≤ ̌𝑊−𝑖 for 𝜖 sufficiently small, 𝜆−𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖) ≤ 𝜆−𝑖

Because 𝜔−𝑖
profits (A.18) are in turn weakly below
− 𝑙𝑖𝑊 (𝜆−𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖) + 𝑙𝑖).

(𝑙𝑖

𝑓𝑖

)

)

(A.19)

(𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

max
𝑙𝑖
Moreover, there exists some 𝛿 > 0 such that profits (A.19) exceed (A.17)
by at least 𝛿, regardless of 𝜔𝑖 ∈ [ ̂𝑊−𝑖, ̌𝑊−𝑖), as follows. For 𝜔𝑖 and hence
𝜔−𝑖 bounded  away  from ̂𝑊−𝑖,  firm −𝑖’s  hiring 𝜆−𝑖
is  bounded
)
(𝜔−𝑖
(𝜔−𝑖
, which by Lemma A.10 implies that 𝑟𝑖
below 𝛬−𝑖
; 𝜔𝑖
is
)
bounded away from 𝑟𝑖
and hence that (A.17) is bounded
; 0
away from (A.18). If instead 𝜔𝑖 and hence 𝜔−𝑖 is bounded away from
̌𝑊−𝑖 then (A.18) is bounded away from (A.19).

)
(𝜔−𝑖
(𝜆−𝑖

By the definition of

̌𝑊−𝑖, and the fact that we are in the case with
̌𝑊−𝑖 > ̂𝑊−𝑖, firm −𝑖’s profits from adopting a policy ̌𝑊−𝑖 against 𝜔𝑖 just
below ̌𝑊−𝑖 are the same as from adopting 𝜔−𝑖 = 0 against 𝜔𝑖 = ̌𝑊−𝑖,
i.e.,
𝑓−𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖)) − 𝜆−𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖) ̌𝑊−𝑖
(𝑙−𝑖

− 𝑙−𝑖𝑊 (𝜆𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖) + 𝑙−𝑖).

(A.20)

𝑓−𝑖

)

)

)

= max
𝑙−𝑖

If firm 𝑖 adopts 𝜔𝑖 = ̌𝑊−𝑖 its profits equal 𝑓𝑖(𝜆𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖)) − 𝜆𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖) ̌𝑊−𝑖.
≡ 𝑓−𝑖),  equality (A.20) implies
For  the  case  of  symmetric  firms  (𝑓𝑖
that these profits equal (A.19), which strictly exceeds the profits from
𝜔𝑖 ∈ [ ̂𝑊−𝑖, ̌𝑊−𝑖), given by (A.17). That is, any policy 𝜔𝑖 = [ ̂𝑊−𝑖, ̌𝑊−𝑖) is
dominated by 𝜔𝑖 = ̌𝑊−𝑖.

Because of the bound 𝛿 between profits (A.17) and (A.19), the same
conclusion  holds  whenever  the  two  firms’  production  functions  are
sufficiently similar. This completes the proof of part (i).

)

)

(𝑙∗

(𝑙∗

𝑖 , 𝑙∗
−𝑖

𝑖 , 𝑙∗
−𝑖

−𝑖)), or (B)

= (𝑟𝑖(𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗

−𝑖), 0), 𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗

𝑖 + 𝑙∗
−𝑖
−𝑖 > 𝑙𝐵

)
. So the worker welfare conclusion follows provided that
1 + 𝑙𝐵
2 .

Consider part (ii). From Lemma 4 and the arguments above, the la-
bor market equilibrium that follows the equilibrium choice of ESG poli-
cies is either (A),
=
(𝜆𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖), 𝑟−𝑖(𝜆𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖), 0)).  In  both  cases,  firms  pay  wages  of  at  least
𝑊 (𝑙∗
𝑖 + 𝑙∗
𝑙∗
In case (A), this follows immediately from Lemma 1 and 𝛬−𝑖(𝜑∗
(𝑊 𝐵)
𝛬−𝑖
𝜆𝑖( ̌𝑊−𝑖) > 𝜆𝑖
where the final inequality holds strictly for symmetric firms (𝑓𝑖
and hence holds for sufficiently similar firms also.

. In case (B), it follows from Lemma 1 and

(𝑊 ∗∗)

≡ 𝑓−𝑖)

≥ 𝑙𝐵
𝑖 ,

−𝑖) >

= 𝑙∗∗
𝑖

(A.21)

Regardless of whether case (A) or (B) holds, the industry profit con-
clusion follows from the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 2,
combined with the observation that the conclusion straightforwardly
extends to sufficiently similar firms (regardless of which one is more
productive).

■

A.5.  Proofs for Section 5.3

The next auxiliary lemma is used in the proof of Lemma 5. Its proof

is given in Appendix B of the Online Appendix.

Lemma A.11.
profitably deviate to some 𝜔 > 𝜔𝑖 = 𝜔−𝑖.

If 𝜔𝑖 = 𝜔−𝑖 ∈

(𝑊 𝐵, 𝑊 ∗∗)

then at least one firm can

Proof of Lemma 5. As an initial step we establish:

Claim. If 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊−𝑖 then firm −𝑖 hires 𝑙−𝑖
only if 𝜔−𝑖 = ̂𝑊−𝑖.

≤ 𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖), with equality if and

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399119P. Bond and D. Levit

))

)
)

) .

(𝑙−𝑖

− 𝛬𝑖
− 𝜆𝑖

≥ 𝜔𝑖. Suppose instead that 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝜔𝑖.
≤ 𝑊 𝐵.  If 𝜔𝑖 ∈  (𝑊 𝐵, ̂𝑊𝑖] then 𝑙−𝑖 =
) ≤ 𝛬−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖).  If 𝜔𝑖 > ̂𝑊𝑖 then 𝑙−𝑖 <

Proof of claim. Immediate if 𝜔−𝑖
The  result  is  immediate  if 𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

) <  𝛬−𝑖
) < 𝑊 −1( ̂𝑊−𝑖) − 𝜆𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖) < 𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖).
We next consider, sequentially, the cases 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊−𝑖, 𝜔𝑖 ∈ [ ̂𝑊−𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗),
≥ 𝑊 ∗∗.

𝜔𝑖
Case 1 : 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊−𝑖. If firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜔−𝑖 = ̂𝑊−𝑖 then (Lemma A.9)
the firms hire 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖)  = 𝛬−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖) and 𝑙𝑖 = 𝑟𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖); 𝜔𝑖)  =
𝑟𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖); 0). Note that
(𝑙−𝑖; 0
𝑊 (𝑙−𝑖 + 𝑟𝑖
= ̂𝑊−𝑖 = 𝑓 ′
−𝑖
Hence for any ̃𝑙−𝑖 < 𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖),
𝑆−𝑖(̃𝑙−𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖); 𝜔𝑖)) < 𝑆−𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖), 𝑟𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖); 𝜔𝑖)).
Since 𝑟𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖); 𝜔𝑖) ≤ 𝑟𝑖(̃𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖) and firm −𝑖’s surplus 𝑆−𝑖 is strictly
decreasing in firm 𝑖’s hiring,
𝑆−𝑖(̃𝑙−𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(̃𝑙−𝑖; 𝜔𝑖)) ≤ 𝑆−𝑖(̃𝑙−𝑖, 𝑟𝑖(𝜆−𝑖( ̂𝑊−𝑖); 𝜔𝑖)).
So from the claim, firm −𝑖’s strict best response to 𝜔𝑖 < ̂𝑊−𝑖 is to adopt
𝜔−𝑖 = ̂𝑊−𝑖.
Case  2: 𝜔𝑖 ∈  [ ̂𝑊−𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗).  Suppose  that 𝜔−𝑖 <  𝜔𝑖.  If 𝜔𝑖 > ̂𝑊𝑖 then
(𝜔𝑖
) <
(Lemma A.10) the firms hire 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
)
. If instead 𝜔𝑖
𝜆−𝑖
and 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖
)
) <  𝛬−𝑖
(𝜔𝑖
)
. In both cases,
)
𝑊 (𝑙𝑖 + 𝑙−𝑖
.  Hence  firm −𝑖’s  surplus  from 𝜔−𝑖 is
weakly below the surplus it obtains from adopting 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝜔𝑖 − 𝜖. From
Lemma A.11 it then follows that firm −𝑖’s surplus is maximized by some
𝜔−𝑖 ∈
Case 3: 𝜔𝑖
adopts 𝜔−𝑖
Since

(𝜔𝑖
≤ ̂𝑊𝑖 then (Lemma A.9) the firms hire 𝑙𝑖 = 𝛬𝑖
− 𝛬𝑖
) ≤ 𝜔𝑖 <  𝑓 ′

≥ 𝑊 ∗∗. By Lemma A.8, 𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
≥ 𝑊 ∗∗ then (Lemma A.8 again) 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝜆−𝑖

) ≤ 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗). If firm −𝑖
) ≤ 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗).

and 𝑙−𝑖 < 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗)
.

) ≤ 𝜆−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖
(𝑙−𝑖

(𝜔−𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

−𝑖

)

)

𝑓 ′
−𝑖

(𝜆−𝑖
≥ 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗))
)
(𝜔𝑖

= 𝑊 ∗∗ = 𝑊 (𝜆𝑖
(𝑊 ∗∗)) ,
+ 𝜆−𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗)

+ 𝜆−𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗))

(A.22)

it follows that adopting 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗ gives firm −𝑖 strictly greater surplus
than any 𝜔−𝑖 > 𝑊 ∗∗.

Subcase: 𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗. If firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗ then
(𝑊 ∗∗) , 𝑟−𝑖
≤ max

{𝑊 −1 (𝜔−𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗)

)} .

(𝜆𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

; 0

)

𝑙−𝑖

)

− 𝜆𝑖

− 𝜆𝑖

(𝑊 ∗∗)

(𝑊 ∗∗)

Note that
𝑊 −1 (𝜔−𝑖
= 𝜆−𝑖
) < 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗), and so 𝑙−𝑖 < 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗). By
while certainly 𝑟−𝑖
(A.22), it follows that adopting 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗ gives firm −𝑖 strictly greater
surplus than any 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗.

(𝑊 ∗∗) < 𝑊 −1 (𝑊 ∗∗)
(𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) ; 0

Subcase: 𝜔𝑖 >  𝑊 ∗∗. Note that 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) <  𝑊 −1 (𝑊 ∗∗) − 𝜆−𝑖
(𝜔−𝑖

)
(𝜔𝑖
.
) <
Hence for all 𝜔−𝑖 in an open neighborhood around 𝑊 ∗∗, 𝜆−𝑖
)
(𝜔𝑖
𝑊 −1 (𝜔−𝑖
, implying that if firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜔−𝑖 in a neigh-
)
borhood below 𝑊 ∗∗ it hires 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝜆−𝑖
. So firm −𝑖’s hiring strictly
decreases in 𝜔−𝑖 in the neighborhood below 𝑊 ∗∗. Since 𝜔𝑖 > 𝑊 ∗∗, the
inequality in (A.22) holds strictly. Hence firm −𝑖’s surplus is strictly
raised by reducing 𝜔−𝑖 below 𝑊 ∗∗. Moreover, note for use in the proof
of Proposition 6 that firm −𝑖’s surplus-maximizing choice of 𝜔−𝑖 must
lead to hiring 𝑙𝑖 > 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗).

(𝜔−𝑖

− 𝜆−𝑖

■

)

Proof  of Proposition  6.
If  the  leader  adopts 𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗ then  by
Lemma 5 the follower likewise adopts 𝜔−𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗, and the firms hire
𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) and 𝑙∗∗
𝑙∗∗

−𝑖 = 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗).

If  the  leader  adopts 𝜔𝑖 <  𝑊 ∗∗ then  by Lemma  5 the  follower
adopts 𝜔−𝑖 > 𝜔𝑖, where from the proof of Lemma 5, 𝜔−𝑖 ∈ [ ̂𝑊𝑖, 𝑊 ∗∗).
) >  𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗).  Note
(𝜔−𝑖
By Lemma  A.10,  firm −𝑖 hires 𝑙−𝑖 = 𝜆−𝑖
) <  𝑊 −1 (𝑊 ∗∗) − 𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) = 𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) and
(𝜔−𝑖
that 𝑊 −1 (𝜔𝑖

− 𝜆−𝑖

)

)

(𝜆−𝑖

(𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) ; 0
) < 𝑟𝑖
. Combined with 𝑙−𝑖 > 𝑙∗∗

) < 𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗). Hence firm 𝑖 hires 𝑙𝑖 <
(𝜔−𝑖
; 0
𝑟𝑖
)
)
, it
𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) = 𝑙∗∗
𝑖
follows that firm 𝑖′𝑠 surplus is strictly higher from adopting 𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗
then any 𝜔𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗.

−𝑖 and 𝑓 ′
𝑖

= 𝑊 (𝑙∗∗

𝑖 + 𝑙∗∗
−𝑖

(𝑙∗∗
𝑖

(𝜔𝑖

) < 𝜆𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) = 𝑙∗∗

Finally, if the leader adopts 𝜔𝑖 > 𝑊 ∗∗ then by Lemma A.8 it hires
. By Lemma 5, firm −𝑖 adopts 𝜔−𝑖 < 𝑊 ∗∗,
𝑙𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖
and as noted in the proof of Lemma 5, hires 𝑙−𝑖 >  𝜆−𝑖 (𝑊 ∗∗) = 𝑙∗∗
−𝑖 .
It again follows that firm 𝑖′𝑠 surplus is strictly higher from adopting
𝜔𝑖 = 𝑊 ∗∗ than any 𝜔𝑖 > 𝑊 ∗∗.
■

𝑖

Appendix B.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103991.

Data availability

Code used in "ESG: A Panacea for Market Power?" (Original data)
(Mendeley Data)

References

Albuquerque, Rui, Koskinen, Yrjo, Zhang, Chendi, 2019. Corporate social responsibility
and firm risk: Theory and empirical evidence. Manage. Sci. 65 (10), 4451–4469.
Allcott, Hunt, Montanari, Giovanni, Ozaltun, Bora, Tan, Brandon, 2023. An economic

view of corporate social impact. Available at NBER, 31803.

Allen,  Franklin,  Carletti,  Elena,  Marquez,  Robert,  2015.  Stakeholder  governance,

competition and firm value. Rev. Finance 19 (3), 1315–1346.

Autor, David, Dorn, David, Katz, Lawrence, Patterson, Christina, Van Reenen, John,
2020. The fall of the labor share and the rise of superstar firms. Q. J. Econ. 135
(2), 645–709.

Azar, José, Huet-Vaughn, Emiliano, Marinescu, Ioana, Taska, Bledi, von Wachter, Till,
2023. Minimum wage employment effects and labour market concentration. Rev.
Econ. Stud. 91 (4), 1843–1883.

Bebchuk,  Lucian,  Tallarita,  Roberto,  2020.  The  illusory  promise  of  stakeholder

governance. Cornell Law Rev. 106 (1), 91–177.

Besley, Timothy, Ghatak, Maitreesh, 2007. Retailing public goods: The economics of

corporate social responsibility. J. Public Econ. 91 (9), 1645–1663.

Brander, James A., Lewis, Tracy R., 1986. Oligopoly and financial structure: The limited

liability effect. Amer. Econ. Rev. 76 (5), 956–970.

Card, David, Krueger, Alan B., 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of

the Minimum Wage. Princeton University Press, New Jersey.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan, Davies, Shaun William, Waters, Brian, 2019. Investing for impact.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (3), 864–904.

Cohen, Shira, Kadach, Igor, Ormazabal, Gaizka, Reichelstein, Stefan, 2023. Executive
compensation tied to ESG performance: International evidence. J. Account. 61 (3),
805–853.

Davies, Shaun William, Van Wesep, Edward, 2018. The unintended consequences of

divestment. J. Financ. Econ. 128 (13), 558–575.

De Loecker, Jan, Eeckhout, Jan, Unger, Gabriel, 2020. The rise of market power and

the macroeconomic implications. Q. J. Econ. 135 (2), 561–644.

Dewatripont, Mathias, Tirole, Jean, 2024. The morality of markets. J. Polit. Econ. 132

(8), 2655–2694.

Available at SSRN, 4093518.

Econ. Rev. 77 (5), 927–940.

Available at SSRN, 4242137.

Rev. Finan. Econ. 14 (5), 1–27.

Finance forthcoming.

Edmans, Alex, Levit, Doron, Schneemeier, Jan, 2022. Socially responsible divestment.

Fershtman, Chaim, Judd, Kenneth L., 1987. Equilibrium incentives in oligopoly. Amer.

Geelen,  Thomas,  Hajda,  Jakub,  Starmans,  Jan,  2023.  Sustainable  organizations.

Gorton, Gary, Grennan, Jillian, Zentefis, Alexander, 2022. Corporate culture. Annu.

Green, Daniel, Roth, Benjamin, 2024. The allocation of socially responsible capital. J.

Gupta, Deeksha, Kopytov, Alexander, Starmans, Jan, 2022. The pace of change: Socially

responsible investing in private markets. Available at SSRN, 3896511.

Heinkel, Robert, Kraus, Alan, Zechner, Josef, 2001. The effect of green investment on

corporate behavior. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 36 (4), 431–449.

Huang,  Shiyang,  Kopytov,  Alexander,  2022.  Sustainable  finance  under  regulation.

Katz, Lawrence, 1986. Efficiency wage theories: A partial evaluation. NBER Macroecon.

Available at SSRN, 4231723.

Annu. 1, 235–290.

Kreps,  David,  Scheinkman,  Jose,  1983.  Quantity  precommitment  and  Bertrand

competition yield Cournot outcomes. Bell J. Econ. 14 (2), 326–337.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399120P. Bond and D. Levit

Lamadon,  Thibaut,  Mogstad,  Magne,  Setzler,  Bradley,  2022.  Imperfect  competition,
compensating differentials, and rent sharing in the US labor market. Amer. Econ.
Rev. 112 (1), 169–212.

Landier,  Augustin,  Lovo,  Stefano,  2020.  ESG  investing:  How  to  optimize  im-

pact? Available at SSRN, 3508938.

Piccolo, Alessio, Schneemeier, Jan, Bisceglia, Michele, 2022. Externalities of responsible

investments. Available at SSRN, 4183855.

Rey, Patrick, Tirole, Jean, 2019. Price caps as welfare-enhancing coopetition. J. Polit.

Econ. 127 (6), 3018–3069.

Rhodes,  Andrew,  Zhou,  Jidong,  2024.  Personalized  pricing  and  competition.  Amer.

Magill,  Michael,  Quinzii,  Martine,  Rochet,  Jean-Charles,  2015.  A  theory  of  the

Econ. Rev. 114 (7), 2141–2170.

stakeholder corporation. Econometrica 83 (5), 1685–1725.

Sklivas, Steven D., 1987. The strategic choice of managerial incentives. Rand J. Econ.

Mas-Colell, Andreu, Whinston, Michael, Green, Jerry, 1995. Microeconomic Theory.

18 (3), 452–458.

Oxford University Press.

Mayer, Colin, 2022. Shareholderism versus stakeholderism - A misconceived contra-
diction: A comment on the illusory promise of stakeholder governance, by Lucian
Bebchuk and Roberto Tallarita. Cornell Law Rev. 106 (7), 1859–1879.

Neumark, David, Wascher, William L., 2008. Minimum Wages. MIT Press, Cambridge,

Stoughton,  Neal,  Wong,  Kit  Pong,  Yi,  Long,  2020.  Competitive  corporate  social

responsibility. Available at SRRN, 3074776.

Tirole, Jean, 2001. Corporate governance. Econometrica 69 (1), 1–35.
Xiong, Yan, Yang, Liyan, 2024. Personalized pricing and firm incentives. Available at

SRRN, 4203294.

Yang,  Hanbin,  2024.  What  Determines  401(K)  Plan  Fees?  a  Dynamic  Model  of

Oehmke, Martin, Opp, Marcus, 2024. A theory of socially responsible investment. Rev.

Transaction Costs and Markups. Working Paper.

MA.

Econ. Stud.  forthcoming.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399121