Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Optimal illiquidity✩
John Beshears a,b, James J. Choi c,b
David Laibson a,b,∗, Brigitte C. Madrian e,b
a Harvard, United States of America
b NBER, United States of America
c Yale, United States of America
d Cambridge, United Kingdom
e BYU, United States of America

, Christopher Clayton c,b, Christopher Harris d,

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Replication Code for Optimal Illiq
uidity (Original data)

Keywords:
Self-control
Present bias
Illiquidity
Mandatory savings
Social Security

1.  Introduction

We study the socially optimal level of illiquidity in an economy populated by households with taste shocks
and present bias with naive beliefs. The government chooses mandatory contributions to accounts, each with
a different pre-retirement withdrawal penalty. Collected penalties are rebated lump sum. When households
have homogeneous present bias, 𝛽, the social optimum is well approximated by a single account with an
early-withdrawal penalty of 1 − 𝛽. When households have heterogeneous present bias, the social optimum is
well approximated by a two-account system: (i) an account that is completely liquid and (ii) an account that
is completely illiquid until retirement.

What are the liquidity characteristics of a socially optimal savings
system? Almost all developed economies have some form of compulsory
savings that is completely illiquid (e.g., U.S. Social Security). In many
countries, defined-contribution (DC) savings accounts have mandatory
contributions and balances that are completely illiquid during most of
working life (Beshears et al., 2015). In the United States, by contrast,
DC contributions are almost always voluntary (in IRA’s and 401(k)’s).
Moreover, certain types of withdrawals are allowed without penalty,
and, for IRAs, withdrawals may be made for any reason if a 10% penalty
is  paid.  Liquidity  engenders  significant  pre-retirement  “leakage”:  for

every $1 contributed to the DC/IRA retirement accounts of U.S. house-
holds  under  age  55,  $0.40  simultaneously  flows  out  of  the  DC/IRA
system for the same age group (Argento et al., 2015).12 It is not clear
whether allowing such leakage is consistent with overall social welfare
maximization, because leakage creates potentially valuable short-run
liquidity and depletes future retirement consumption, although most
media coverage bemoans leakage.3

Our paper evaluates the optimality of an 𝑁-account system com-
prised of liquid, partially illiquid, and completely illiquid accounts. The
illiquidity  is  obtained  with  compulsory  deposits  and linear account-
specific penalties for pre-retirement withdrawals: i.e., with 𝑁 accounts,
each account has an early withdrawal penalty of 𝜋𝑛 for 𝑛 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁.

✩
Toni Whited was the editor for this article. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from TIAA Institute and Wharton School’s Pension Research
Council/Boettner Center, the Eric M. Mindich Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, the National Institute on Aging (P30AG034532), the
Pershing Square Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, and the Social Security Administration (#RRC08098400-09). The views expressed in
this paper are not endorsed by the Social Security Administration or other funders. The authors received insightful comments from Toni Whited (editor), anonymous
referees, Manuel Amador, Marios Angeletos, Emmanuel Farhi, Mike Golosov, Francesco Lippi, Ben Lockwood, Greg Mankiw, Christian Moser, Matthew Rabin,
David Richardson, John Sabelhaus, Dmitry Taubinsky, Iván Werning, and seminar participants at the ASSA, Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance, Harvard
University, MIT, the SSA RRC, and the NBER.  We are very grateful to Santiago Medina Pizarro and Kartik Vira for outstanding research assistance.

∗ Corresponding author at: Harvard, United States of America.

E-mail addresses:

jbeshears@hbs.edu (J. Beshears), james.choi@yale.edu (J.J. Choi), christopher.clayton@yale.edu (C. Clayton), cjharris@econ.cam.ac.uk

(C. Harris), dlaibson@harvard.edu (D. Laibson), brigitte_madrian@byu.edu (B.C. Madrian).

1 Rollovers to an IRA are not counted as leakage for this calculation because rollovers are just a transfer within the DC system — from a 401(k) to an IRA.

Loans in the 401(k) system are also not counted as outflows because, on dollar-weighted basis, the overwhelming majority of 401(k) loans are repaid.

2 About half of leakage on a dollar-weighted basis occurs in categories that that avoid the 10% penalty.
3 See Anne Tergesen, “The Rising Retirement Perils of 401(k) ‘Leakage’”, The Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2017. For a similar industry perspective, see Hewitt

Associates (2009).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.103996
Received 14 June 2023; Received in revised form 4 January 2025; Accepted 5 January 2025

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)103996Availableonline18January20250304-405X/©2025ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.J. Beshears et al.

We  also  derive  the  welfare  obtainable  from  a  fully  general  account
system:  i.e.,  an  account  with  general  non-linear  penalties  for  pre-
retirement withdrawals. We show that a very simple two-account sys-
tem with one completely liquid account and one completely illiquid
account  approximately  attains  the  social  welfare  that  would  be  ob-
tained by a very complex fully general account system with non-linear
penalties.

We study preferences that include both normative taste shocks and
non-normative self-control problems due to present bias. Specifically,
we incorporate the discount function {1, 𝛽 𝛿 , 𝛽 𝛿2, … , 𝛽 𝛿𝑡}, where the
degree  of  present  bias  is 1 − 𝛽 (Phelps  and  Pollak, 1968; Laibson,
1997). Our model builds on the commitment vs. flexibility framework
of Amador et al. (2006), hereafter AWA. AWA studies households with
homogeneous  present  bias 1 − 𝛽 and  heterogeneous  taste  shocks 𝜃,
with  each  household’s 𝜃 being  private  information.  AWA  does  not
allow for policies that admit inter-household transfers, and finds that
mandatory minimum savings is optimal. Specifically, AWA find that the
socially optimal system consists of two accounts, where one account is
completely liquid and the other is completely illiquid until period 2.4
In the current paper, we revisit AWA’s setting and make two changes
that  reflect  important  economic  considerations  faced  by  real-world
policymakers. First, we allow the government to choose policies that
generate inter-household transfers. In other words, households are not
isolated economically: withdrawal penalties paid by one household can
be distributed back to all households (i.e., tax and transfer). Second, we
allow for unobserved heterogeneity in present bias: i.e., 𝛽 varies across
households  and  the  social  planner  knows  the  distribution  of 𝛽,  but
each household’s 𝛽 is private information to that household. We show
that, absent heterogeneity of 𝛽, a simple Pigouvian tax is approximately
optimal (i.e., a one-account system with an early withdrawal tax of 1 −𝛽
is approximately optimal). However, with sufficient heterogeneity of 𝛽,
which we view as the empirical benchmark, the optimal account system
is well-approximated by a two-account system, with one completely
liquid  account  and  one  completely  illiquid  account  (echoing  AWA’s
social optimum, but arising from different economic forces).

The central contribution of the current paper is therefore to show
that  a  simple  two-account  system  that  mirrors  actual  institutions  in
almost  all  middle-  and  high-income  economies  achieves  social  wel-
fare  that  is  very  close  to  the  welfare  that  would  be  achieved  by  a
fully general (non-linear) retirement saving system. We now provide a
map/summary of the argument that runs through the rest of this paper.
Our analysis is based on three nested classes of savings regimes. We
refer to these as mechanisms, adopting the language of the mechanism
design literature, which is the analytic framework that we use to derive
the upper bound for social welfare.

The  first  class  is  the  class  of  mechanisms  with 𝑁 accounts  and
account-specific linear penalties, in which households are free to draw
down the 𝑁 accounts in whatever order they prefer. The class of 𝑁-
Account Systems is restrictive (from the point of view of the planner)
in  two  ways.  First,  an 𝑁-Account  System  has  a  finite  number  of
accounts, each of which has a linear penalty for early (i.e., period 1)
withdrawals.  Second,  an 𝑁-Account  System  restricts  the  planner  by
allowing households to draw down the accounts in the order that the
households prefer. Because this system is closest to the actual set of
institutions/accounts that exist in almost all middle- and high-income
countries, this first class of mechanisms is the focus of our numerical
analysis.  We  denote  the  planner  social  welfare  achieved  under  an
𝑁-Account System as 𝑊 𝑁 .

The second class of mechanisms consists of general non-linear mech-
anisms.5 We denote the planner welfare achieved under this class of

4 Halac and Yared (2014) study the commitment vs. flexibility tradeoff with
persistent shocks and show that the second-best optimal mechanism features
history dependence. Bond and Sigurdsson (2018) study the commitment vs.
flexibility  trade-off  in  three  periods,  identifying  conditions  that  produce  a
first-best allocation. See also Beshears et al. (2020).

General  Mechanisms  as 𝑊 𝐺.  This  is  the  theoretical  (feasible)  social
optimum. This second class of mechanisms allows for arbitrary non-
linear budget sets rather than requiring piece-wise linear budget sets
(which were assumed in the first class of mechanisms).6

The third class of mechanisms consists of general non-linear mecha-
nisms satisfying the standard Local Incentive Compatibility Constraint
but omitting the Monotonicity constraint (both constraints are neces-
sary and sufficient for Global Incentive Compatibility). As is standard,
we  refer  to  this  solution,  which  drops  the  Monotonicity  constraint,
as the Relaxed Problem. Because Monotonicity is required for Global
Incentive Compatibility, the optimum in this third class of mechanisms
is not necessarily feasible. The third class is used in our paper as the
source  for  an  upper  bound  on  welfare.  This  upper  bound  is  useful
because  the  Relaxed  Problem  is  simpler  to  solve  than  the  General
Mechanism  due  to  the  absence  of  the  Monotonicity  constraint.  Our
numerical solution for the Relaxed Problem makes use of the ordinary
differential equation (ODE) that characterizes the planner’s solution to
the Relaxed Problem (see Appendix C). We denote the planner welfare
achieved under this Relaxed Problem as 𝑊 𝑅.

Because of the progressive relaxation of constraints, the three classes
of  mechanisms  generate  ranked  levels  of  welfare  (where  welfare  is
evaluated  from  the  perspective  of  the  social  planner).  To  provide  a
welfare benchmark (a baseline for comparison), we contrast all three
mechanisms to welfare achieved in an autarkic economy in which all
households are given a single liquid account (with a household storage
technology) and inter-household transfers are not possible. We denote
planner welfare under this autarkic benchmark by 𝑊 𝐴.7 We then have
𝑊 𝐴 ≤ 𝑊 𝑁 ≤ 𝑊 𝐺 ≤ 𝑊 𝑅.

In summary, we study the autarkic benchmark and three interven-
tionist policy regimes: 𝑁-Account System, General Mechanism, and a
Relaxed Problem (the last policy regime serves to generate an upper
bound on welfare). Our analysis finds de minimis welfare improvement
when moving from an 𝑁 ≤ 2 Account System to the Relaxed Problem.
Accordingly, the welfare improvement from the 𝑁 ≤ 2 Account System
to the General Mechanism must also be de minimis (because 𝑊 𝐺 − 𝑊 𝑁
is necessarily weakly smaller than 𝑊 𝑅 − 𝑊 𝑁 ). In other words, if 𝑁 ≤ 2
makes welfare under an 𝑁-Account System close to welfare under the
Relaxed  Problem,  then 𝑁 ≤ 2 must  also  make  welfare  under  that
𝑁-Account System close to welfare under the General Mechanism.

In Section 3, we study the homogeneous-𝛽 case. We show that a
single account, 𝑁 = 1, suffices to achieve a close welfare approximation
to  the  General  Mechanism.  In  particular,  the 1-account  system  that
approximates the theoretically optimal welfare consists of a partially
illiquid account with (Pigouvian) early-withdrawal penalty 𝜋 ≃ 1 − 𝛽.
In Section 4, we study the heterogeneous-𝛽 case. We show that two
accounts, 𝑁 = 2, suffice to achieve a close welfare approximation to
the General Mechanism. In particular, an 𝑁 = 2 Account system with
a completely liquid account and a completely illiquid account closely
approximates the welfare attainable under the General Mechanism. The
completely  illiquid  account  receives  a  substantial  mandatory  contri-
bution from the household — enough to almost smooth consumption

5 Technically,  this  solution  satisfies  the  standard  Global  Incentive  Com-
patibility constraint, re-expressed as usual as a Local Incentive Compatibility
constraint and a Monotonicity constraint.

6 Our first class of mechanisms – 𝑁 accounts with a flexible draw-down
rule – is mathematically equivalent to assuming a piece-wise linear, convex
budget set. Piece-wise linearity follows from the assumption that each account
has a specific (constant) early withdrawal penalty. Convexity follows from the
flexible draw-down rule, which implies that households will draw down the
accounts in order of increasing penalty.

7 Because  we  assume  naivete,  the  autarky  case  does  not  generate

self-imposed illiquidity.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039962J. Beshears et al.

between working life and retirement even if all other wealth is con-
sumed during working life.8 The completely illiquid savings account
generates  large  welfare  gains  for  households  with  relatively  low 𝛽
values.  These  welfare  gains  swamp  the  welfare  losses  of  the  high-𝛽
households (who are made only slightly worse off by being forced to
shift  some  of  their  wealth  from  completely  liquid  accounts  to  com-
pletely illiquid accounts; high-𝛽 households do lose some flexibility, but
this welfare loss is small in all of our calibrated cases).

As implied by the welfare bounds discussed above, extending the
𝑁 =  2 Account  System  by  adding  a  third  account  (on  top  of  the
completely liquid and completely illiquid accounts) delivers minimal
welfare  gains.  The  planner-optimized  penalty  on  this  third  account
is  approximately  13%.  Hence,  the  partially  illiquid  accounts,  which
are  derived  in  this  paper  from  first  principles,  look  remarkably  like
a  401(k)  account  in  the  U.S.,  which  has  a  10%  early  withdrawal
penalty. Moreover, the derived partially illiquid account generates a
high level of leakage in equilibrium: pre-retirement withdrawals are
commonplace. This leakage results in part from normative taste shocks
and in part from self-control problems (i.e., 𝛽 < 1). The partially illiquid
account  generates  modest  welfare  costs  to  households  with  low 𝛽
values (who end up paying most of the early-withdrawal penalties) and
generates  offsetting  (slightly  greater)  welfare  benefits  to  households
with relatively high 𝛽 values (who benefit from a fiscal externality and
flexibility).  Hence,  in  our  benchmark  model,  leakage  is  not  a  social
problem. However, we go on to show that leakage is not benign when
society relies heavily on 401(k)-style accounts for retirement wealth
formation.  In  our  benchmark  model,  leakage  from  partially  illiquid
accounts is not a social problem because 401(k)-style accounts have
small balances, with the overwhelming majority of retirement wealth
being  held  in  completely  illiquid  accounts  (e.g.,  illiquid  DC  systems
and/or illiquid DB/Social Security systems).

We also use our stylized two-period model with 𝑁 =  3 accounts
to generate an empirically calibrated model for the existing account
system in the U.S. economy (Section 4.5). Specifically, our calibration
values  are  chosen  to  match  the  empirically  observed  quantities  of
completely  illiquid  wealth,  partially  illiquid  wealth,  and  completely
liquid wealth for a typical household. Our stylized calibration generates
a leakage rate of 40%, consistent with historical empirical estimates.
Although we find that the existing accounts in the U.S. system are ap-
proximately optimal with respect to their different liquidity properties,
our stylized model implies that the allocations to those accounts are
not. Specifically, our model implies that a materially higher allocation
should be made to the completely illiquid account (including Social
Security claims): 48% more wealth accumulated during working life
in the completely illiquid account relative to the magnitude of wealth
accumulation in completely illiquid accounts under existing U.S. policy.
There is a growing literature that studies how present bias affects
retirement savings and how governments should optimally respond.9
Our model is related to the independent and contemporaneous work
of Moser and Olea de Souza e Silva (2019), who study an environ-
ment with unobservable earnings ability, unobservable 𝛽, and inter-
household transfers. Moser and Olea de Souza e Silva (2019) find that

8 In our model the planner collects all of the resources from households
and then deposits funds into accounts. This is equivalent to a model in which
households are themselves required to deposit funds into accounts (e.g., an
illiquid  account  functions  like  a  DB  pension,  Social  Security,  or  a  typical
(non-US) DC account that does not allow pre-retirement withdrawals).

9 For  example, Laibson  et  al. (1998, 2003)  study  the  design  of  U.S.
401(k)’s, Galperti (2015) studies optimal screening among agents with dif-
ferent levels of present bias, Paluszynski and Yu (2019) study the effects of
preference heterogeneity across educational groups, Yu (2021) studies screen-
ing between sophisticates and naives, Pavoni and Yazici (2016) study optimal
lifecycle  taxation, Maxted (2022)  identifies  isomorphisms  between  optimal
policies with time consistent and present-biased agents (in economies in which
agents are always in the interior of their action space). See also O’Donoghue
and Rabin (1999b).

optimal savings institutions include some forced savings, a result that
also emerges in AWA and in our own paper. Like Moser and Olea de
Souza  e  Silva (2019),  we  find  that  optimal  savings  mechanisms  are
characterized by more mandatory savings than currently exists in the
U.S. system. Most importantly, our paper is the first to show how highly
simplified  retirement  savings  systems  (e.g.,  two-  and  three-account
systems  with  linear  early-withdrawal  penalties)  come  very  close  to
generating welfare levels that arise under the fully general optimized
non-linear mechanism with transfers.10 We contribute to the literature
that identifies settings in which very simple mechanisms provide good
welfare approximations to arbitrarily complex, optimal mechanisms.11
Finally, a large literature studies how firms attempt to exploit agents
with present bias.12 By contrast, our paper studies how a benevolent
social planner would set up a simple socially optimal pension scheme.
Our  paper  proceeds  as  follows.  Section 2 describes  the  planner’s
problem – i.e., account allocations and early-withdrawal penalties that
maximize social welfare subject to information asymmetries between
the planner and households. Section 2 also analyzes the case of homo-
geneous present bias without inter-household transfers (AWA): i.e., re-
sources  collected  by  the  government  must  be  destroyed  rather  than
redistributed.

Sections 3, 4, and 5 all incorporate inter-household transfers, which
is a generalization from AWA. Sections 3 and 4 respectively analyze the
economy with homogeneous and heterogeneous present bias. Section 5
presents  robustness  analysis.  Section 6 highlights  the  many  strong
assumptions that we make and raises questions of generalizability. The
online appendix contain proofs and extensions, including a method for
calculating welfare for the Relaxed Problem (Appendix C).

2.  Model

We study a two-period model of consumption for a continuum of
households, with idiosyncratic taste shock 𝜃 and idiosyncratic present
bias 𝛽.  In  period 1,  a  household  consumes 𝑐1(𝜃 , 𝛽).  In  period 2,  a
household consumes 𝑐2(𝜃 , 𝛽). One can think of period 1 as working life
and period 2 as retirement. We will sometimes refer only to 𝑐1 and 𝑐2
for notational simplicity; dependence on 𝜃 and 𝛽 is implied.

In this model, we give households access to 𝑁 savings accounts with
initial mandatory balances (𝑥𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1 and linear early-withdrawal penal-
ties (𝜋𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1 (which will usually turn out to be positive). In equilibrium,
households  choose  to  withdraw  from  the  low-penalty  accounts  first.
An 𝑁-account System is equivalent to a budget set that is piecewise
linear and convex, whereas the General Non-linear Mechanism imposes
neither of these restrictions. To preview the results to come, we show
that the welfare that arises from the 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 ≤ 2
is  very  close  to  the  welfare  for  the  General  Non-linear  Mechanism.
We focus most of this paper on 𝑁-account Systems because of their
similarity to the actual retirement savings systems that are currently in
use globally.

10 There  is  a  literature  on  optimal  taxation  when  consumers  have
present  bias,  including Laibson  et  al. (1998), Gruber  and  Köszegi (2001,
2004), O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006), Allcott et al. (2019), Lockwood (2020)
and Farhi and Gabaix (2020). See Bernheim and Taubinsky (2018) for a review
of behavioral public economics.
11 For  example,  see Reichelstein (1992), Bower (1993), Sappington  and
Weisman (1996), Gasmi  et  al. (1999), McAfee (2002), Rogerson (2003),
and Chu and Sappington (2007).
12 For example, see DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004, 2006), Heidhues and
Kőszegi (2010), Sulka (2022), and several literature reviews: Heidhues and
Kőszegi (2018), Ericson and Laibson (2019), and Cohen et al. (2020).

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039963J. Beshears et al.

2.1.  Preferences of households

Preferences in period 1 are given by

𝜃 𝑢1(𝑐1) + 𝛽 𝛿 𝑢2(𝑐2),
where 𝜃 is a stochastic taste shifter,13 𝑢𝑡 ∶  (0, ∞) → R is the period-
𝑡 utility  function, 𝑐𝑡
is  period-𝑡 consumption, 𝛽 is  the  present-bias
discount factor, and 𝛿 is the standard discount factor.14 Preferences in
period 2 are given by 𝑢2(𝑐2).

2.2.  Information structure

We assume households are naive: they do not anticipate present bias
(see Strotz, 1955; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999a). The assumption of
naivete is broadly supported by the empirical literature (see reviews
in Ericson and Laibson, 2019; Cohen et al., 2020), although there are a
range of results (e.g., see Allcott et al., 2022). The assumption of naivete
is critical for the results of this paper because it eliminates the motive
for self-commitment as well as the opportunity for government/planner
screening in a hypothetical ‘pre-period’.15

We assume that taste shifters, 𝜃, and present bias, 𝛽, are private
information  of  each  household  in  the  economy.  The  social  planner
knows the aggregate distribution of (𝜃 , 𝛽) across households. We denote
the distribution function of 𝜃 by 𝐹 (⋅) and of 𝛽 by 𝐺(⋅). In our analysis,
we assume that 𝜃 and 𝛽 are independent.16

2.3.  Preferences of the social planner

with  high 𝜃 values.  The  first  motive  is  an  inter-temporal  realloca-
tion (within a household) and the second motive is an inter-personal
redistribution.

2.4.  Timing

Time 0: The planner sets up 𝑁 accounts, each with gross rate of return
𝑅, where 𝑁 is a constraint discussed in the next section. Each of the 𝑁
accounts is characterized by two variables: an initial allocation 𝑥𝑛 and
a linear withdrawal penalty 𝜋𝑛, which applies only to withdrawals in
period 1 (i.e., an early-withdrawal penalty).18 If a consumer withdraws
𝜔 dollars from account 𝑛 in period 1, the consumer actually receives
) 𝜔 dollars.19 A completely liquid account has 𝜋𝑛 = 0, a partially
(
1 − 𝜋𝑛
liquid account has 0 < 𝜋𝑛 < 1, and a completely illiquid account has
𝜋𝑛 =  1.  For  the  planner,  the  choice  variables  are  the  allocations  to
)𝑁
𝑛=1, and the respective early withdrawal penalties,
the 𝑁 accounts,
)𝑁
(𝜋𝑛
𝑛=1.  The  planner  chooses  the  account  allocations  in  a  way  that
respects the economy’s overall budget balance: ∑𝑁
𝑛=1 𝑥𝑛 will equal 𝑌
plus the aggregate value of the early withdrawal penalties collected in
equilibrium.

(𝑥𝑛

Time  1: Self 1 maximizes  welfare  from  the  perspective  of  time  1
(including present bias). This generates withdrawals from the accounts
established at time 0. Consumption is 𝑐1(𝜃 , 𝛽).
Time 2: Self 2 spends any remaining funds in their accounts. Consump-
tion is 𝑐2(𝜃 , 𝛽).

2.5.  Summary of the 𝑁-account system

The social  planner and  the household (with  taste  shifter 𝜃)  have
nearly identical preferences over consumption in periods 1 and 2. The
only difference is that the social planner does not normatively endorse
present bias, implying that the planner’s objective for a household is
𝜃 𝑢1(𝑐1) + 𝛿 𝑢2(𝑐2).
The assumption that the social planner maximizes an objective without
present  bias,  is  a  common  assumption  in  the  literature  (AWA).  The
social planner chooses policies that maximize the utilitarian17 social
objective:
(

)

∬

𝜃 𝑢1(𝑐1(𝜃 , 𝛽)) + 𝛿 𝑢2(𝑐2(𝜃 , 𝛽))

𝑑 𝐹 (𝜃) 𝑑 𝐺(𝛽).

(1)

The  social  planner  takes  account  of  the  (endogenous)  equilibrium
policy functions of the households, 𝑐1 and 𝑐2. The social planner creates
incentives  that  influence  these  policy  functions,  but  cannot  control
them directly because the planner does not directly observe 𝜃 and 𝛽 for
each household. The social planner’s mechanism uses total resources
bounded by the aggregate endowment 𝑌 .

Eq. (1) implies that the planner has two motives in changing the
allocations that emerge in an autarkic system. First, the planner would
like to generate more savings, because only households, and not the
planner, have present bias. Second, the planner would like to generate
inter-personal reallocations from agents with low 𝜃 values to agents

13 See Atkeson and Lucas (1992) for use of such taste shifters. There are also
other ways of modeling taste shifters.  For example, consider 𝑢(𝑐 − 𝜃), where
𝜃 is a taste shifter. This case is beyond the scope of the current paper.
14 This framework can be generalized WLOG by including a second indepen-
dent stochastic taste shifter (with mean 1, which is realized in period 2) that
multiplies period 2’s utility function.
15 Galperti (2015) studies screening in a contracting setting where agents
are sophisticated, have private information about their degree of present bias,
and contract with a firm. See also Moser and Olea de Souza e Silva (2019)
and Yu (2021).
16 We can generalize this framework to allow for a joint distribution (see
Appendix D.4).
17 We  can  generalize  this  framework  to  incorporate  Pareto  weights  (see
Appendix D.4).

We begin with the consumer’s problem, since consumer behavior
is an input to the planner’s problem. In period 1, the consumer with
parameters 𝜃 and 𝛽 maximizes
𝜃 𝑢1(𝑐1) + 𝛽 𝛿 𝑢2(𝑐2),

(2)

max
(𝜔𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1
where consumption is given by

𝑐1 =

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

(
1 − 𝜋𝑛

) 𝜔𝑛,

𝑐2 = 𝑅

𝑁
∑

𝑛=1

(𝑥𝑛 − 𝜔𝑛

) .

(3)

(4)

Conditional  on  the  policy  vectors (𝑥𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1,  this  generates
consumption levels 𝑐1(𝜃 , 𝛽) and 𝑐2(𝜃 , 𝛽), where we have suppressed the
dependency on (𝑥𝑛)𝑁

𝑛=1 and (𝜋𝑛)𝑁

We  assume  a  continuum  of  consumers  (with  measure  one),  so
integrating over taste-parameters, 𝜃 and 𝛽, is the same as integrating
over consumers. In period 0, the planner faces the problem

𝑛=1 and (𝜋𝑛)𝑁

𝑛=1.

(

)

∬

, (𝜋𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1

𝜃 𝑢1(𝑐1(𝜃 , 𝛽)) + 𝛿 𝑢2(𝑐2(𝜃 , 𝛽))

max
(𝑥𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1
subject  to  the  constraints  that  (i) 𝑐1(𝜃 , 𝛽) and 𝑐2(𝜃 , 𝛽) are  given  by
the consumer’s problem (Eqs. (2)–(4)) and (ii) economy-wide budget
balance is satisfied:

𝑑 𝐹 (𝜃) 𝑑 𝐺(𝛽)

(5)

(

𝑐1(𝜃 , 𝛽) +

𝑐2(𝜃 , 𝛽)
𝑅

)

∬

𝑑 𝐹 (𝜃) 𝑑 𝐺(𝛽) ≤ 𝑌 .

(6)

In other words, the planner chooses the account allocation vector,
(𝑥𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1, and the penalty vector, (𝜋𝑛)𝑁
𝑛=1, to maximize social surplus (Eq.
(5)) subject to the constraints that agents will exhibit present bias in
their choices (Eqs. (2)–(4)) and that total consumption does not exceed
social resources (Eq. (6)). Although we assume the planner implements
the 𝑁-account allocation through involuntary contributions, the planner
could  implement  the  same  allocation  under voluntary contributions

18 WLOG, there are no withdrawal penalties in period 2.
19 The  framework  admits negative penalties  for  period  1  consumption
(i.e., subsidies).

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039964J. Beshears et al.

through appropriate use of contribution subsidies (e.g., matching con-
tributions).20 We choose to use an involuntary framing in our model
presentation because it is without loss of generality and notationally
simpler (avoiding matching notation) and almost all developed coun-
tries have some involuntary retirement savings (e.g., Social Security in
the United States, superannuation in Australia, the Central Provident
Fund in Singapore, and the public pension system in Sweden, to pick a
few examples).21

The 𝑁-account System summarized here is a restricted version of
the General Non-linear Mechanism. We compare our welfare results to
bounds on the General Non-linear Mechanism below.

2.6.  Autarky reference case: 𝜋 = 0

In the analysis that follows, we always compare social welfare to
a reference case in which there are no early-withdrawal penalties –
in other words, the agent has access to only one account (𝑥1 = 𝑌 ),
and this account has no penalty for early withdrawal (𝜋1 =  0). This
is an autarkic system with a household storage technology, in which
the government does nothing to distort the decisions of each household
(implicitly ruling out redistribution).

2.7.  Special case of no transfers: AWA (2006)

We consider a first deviation from the autarkic reference case. We
allow the government to intervene by offering households a nonlinear
budget  set.  As  in  autarky,  we  continue  to  assume  that  each  budget
constraint holds at the household level (instead of economy-wide),

𝑐1 +

𝑐2
𝑅

≤ 𝑌 for each household,

(7)

ruling out inter-household transfers. As in AWA, households have ho-
mogeneous 𝛽.

In Appendix A, we prove a version of a proposition by AWA (2006).
In particular, we show that under a set of assumptions about 𝑢1, 𝑢2,
and 𝐹 , an optimal mechanism is a two-account system consisting of a
completely liquid account (that can be used in both period 1 and period
2) and a completely illiquid account (that can be used only in period
2). This system does not feature money burning, so, in equilibrium we
have 𝑐1(𝜃) + 𝑐2(𝜃) = 𝑌 for all households.22

We now embed the AWA result in the conceptual framework de-
scribed  in  the  introduction:  i.e.,  the  three  classes  of  welfare-ranked
mechanisms.23 The  AWA  result  implies  that  the  General  Non-linear
Mechanism turns out to be piecewise linear and unconstrained with
respect to the order of account depletion. Accordingly, the 𝑁-account
System and the General Non-linear Mechanism are identical,

𝑊 𝑁 = 𝑊 𝐺.

3.  Optimal  liquidity  with  homogeneous  present  bias  and  inter-
household transfers

We now study the case in which present bias 𝛽 is homogeneous
across households, but the government can make inter-household trans-
fers. Specifically, we now replace household-by-household budget bal-
ance (Eq. (7)) with overall budget balance (Eq. (6)). With overall budget
balance,  we  show  in  Appendix  B  that  a  combination  of  a  perfectly
liquid  and  a  perfectly  illiquid  account  is  not  sufficient  to  maximize
social surplus. Intuitively, when inter-household transfers are possible
(in  the  interior  case,  with  partial  separation),  we  can  use  an  incen-
tive compatible mechanism to redistribute 𝑐1 away from low-𝜃 types
(i.e., households with low marginal utility, ceteris paribus). To simplify
notation, we set 𝑅 = 𝛿 = 𝑌 = 1 for the remainder of the paper.24 We
now turn to studying socially optimal mechanisms in this environment.

3.1.  Optimal policy with quasi-linear utility

To gain intuition about socially optimal mechanisms, it is helpful to
begin by studying the special case of quasi-linear utility: 𝑢2(𝑐2) = 𝑐2. To
anticipate our results for this case, we find that the General Non-linear
Mechanism is a linear mechanism: i.e., a single account. Accordingly,
the 𝑁-account  System  and  the  General  Non-linear  Mechanism  are
identical.25

With quasi-linear utility, we obtain a useful exact result that cap-
tures the intuition behind the general case in which utility is concave
in both periods.26

Proposition  1.
Suppose  that  all  households  have  the  same  value  of
𝛽. Suppose that inter-household transfers are possible. Assume that utility
is  strictly  concave  in  the  first  period,  linear  in  the  second  period,  and
the  solution  is  interior.  Then  the  socially  optimal  retirement  system  is  a
1-account system with a Pigouvian tax on consumption in period 1:

𝜋 = 1 − 𝛽 .

This 1-account system is also first-best efficient.

The proof appears in Appendix D.
Quasi-linear utility in period 2 implies that all agents have the same
period-2 marginal utility (regardless of their period-2 consumption).
Because marginal transfers to period 2 have the same marginal value
for all agents, and because all agents have the same degree of present
bias, a homogeneous Pigouvian correction achieves the first best alloca-
tion. Although this is not exactly true in the general case in which the
utility function is concave in both periods, the special case of quasi-
linear utility turns out to be a good proxy for the case with strictly
concave utility in both periods. We next study that case.

3.2.  Optimal policy with strictly concave utility

We now return to the case in which the utility functions in periods
1 and 2, namely 𝑢1 and 𝑢2, are both strictly concave (as opposed to
the quasi-linear case). We explicitly solve for welfare in the 𝑁-account
System  and  the  Relaxed  Problem,  thereby  bounding  welfare  in  the
General Non-linear Mechanism.

20 For example, if the planner sets an account-specific match threshold of
𝑧 (i.e.,  the  maximum  voluntary  contribution  that  can  be  matched)  and  an
account-specific  match  rate  of 𝑚 (i.e.,  the  match  per  dollar  of  voluntary
contributions), then for all 𝑚 greater than some match rate 𝑚∗, the equilibrium
account contribution will produce a total account balance of 𝑥 = (1 + 𝑚) 𝑧.
21 Some of these systems are funded, some of are unfunded, and some are
hybrid. The key unifying feature (for the purposes of our model) is that they
are involuntary.
22 See Ambrus  and  Egorov (2013)  for  cases  (that  do  not  satisfy  our
assumptions) in which money burning arises.
23 Because we directly know the General Non-linear Mechanism, we do not
need to discuss the welfare bound provided by the Relaxed Problem.

24 This  involves  no  loss  of  generality  because  utility  functions  can  be
rescaled.
25 Because we directly know the General Non-linear Mechanism, we do not
need to discuss the welfare bound provided by the Relaxed Problem.
26 This  result  is  a  version  of  the  well  known  Pigouvian  logic  from  con-
sumption  externalities  (Diamond, 1973)  and  present  bias  (DellaVigna  and
Malmendier, 2004; Galperti, 2015). DellaVigna  and  Malmendier (2004)
and Galperti (2015)  study  a  setting  in  which  a  single  household  contracts
with  a  firm,  subject  to  a  participation  constraint. Diamond (1973)  studies
a  population  of  households  with  consumption  externalities,  subject  to  an
aggregate resource constraint.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039965J. Beshears et al.

We  begin  by  discussing  the  General  Non-linear  Mechanism  and
the Relaxed Problem. The General Non-linear Mechanism allows the
planner to offer households a non-linear budget set from which each
household can pick a consumption pair, (𝑐1, 𝑐2), rather than restricting
to an 𝑁-account system. Formally, this problem is transformed into a
selection of a utility pair, (𝑣1, 𝑣2), where 𝑣𝑡 = 𝑢𝑡(𝑐𝑡).

In the General Non-linear Mechanism, the planner’s problem can be

expressed as that of choosing 𝑣1, 𝑣2 ∶ 𝛩 → R to maximize welfare

(𝜃 𝑣1(𝜃) + 𝑣2(𝜃)

) 𝑓 (𝜃) 𝑑 𝜃

∫

(Planner Objective)

subject to the resource constraint
)
𝐶2(𝑣2(𝜃))

(
𝑌 − 𝐶1(𝑣1(𝜃)) −

∫

1
𝑅

𝑓 (𝜃) 𝑑 𝜃 ≥ 0

(Budget Constraint)

, that is 𝑐𝑡(𝜃) = 𝐶𝑡(𝑣𝑡(𝜃)), and the incentive-compatibility

where 𝐶𝑡 = 𝑢−1
𝑡
constraint, which now has two parts, namely a linear part,
0 = 𝜃 𝑣′

(Local IC)

2(𝜃)

1(𝜃) + 𝛽 𝑣′
and a monotonic part,
0 ≤ −𝑣′

2(𝜃).

(Monotonicity)

This completes our description of the General Non-linear Mecha-

nism.

The Relaxed Problem is obtained from the General Non-linear Mech-
anism by removing the Monotonicity constraint. The Relaxed Problem
generates  an  upper  bound  on  welfare  under  the  General  Non-linear
Mechanism.27 We  characterize  the  solution  to  the  Relaxed  Problem
using  a  system  of  differential  equations  (see  Appendix  C).  For  the
homogeneous-𝛽 cases that we solve, Monotonicity is actually satisfied,
implying that our calculations for the Relaxed Problem generate the
exact solution to the General Non-linear Mechanism.

We also numerically solve for the optimal 𝑁-account System with
𝑁 = 1 account (i.e., the linear tax case). To preview our results, there
is a very small welfare gap between the 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 1
account and the Relaxed Problem, implying that the 𝑁-account System
with 𝑁 = 1 account is approximately optimal.

In our benchmark simulations, we make the following functional
form assumptions, which are motivated in the paragraph that follows
and evaluated for robustness in Section 5.

S1. The utility functions in periods 1 and 2 are 𝑢1(𝑐) = 𝑢2(𝑐) = ln(𝑐);
S2. The density of the multiplicative taste shocks is a truncated nor-
mal distribution. Specifically: we start with a normal distribution
(mean 𝜇 = 1 and standard deviation 𝜎 = 0.25); truncate it at the
symmetrically placed points 1 − 𝜒 and 1 + 𝜒 (where 𝜒 = 2∕3,
resulting in a distribution with support [1 −𝜒 , 1 +𝜒]); and rescale
it to integrate to unit mass.

Our simulations use a coefficient of relative risk aversion of one
(Assumption S1), a magnitude that is consistent with structural econo-
metric estimates from lifecycle savings models (Gourinchas and Parker,
2002; Laibson et al., 2024).

Due  to  truncation  of  the  tails,  assumption S2 implies  that  a  one
standard  deviation  taste  shock  will  now  induce  marginal  utility  in
period 1 to vary by ±24.2%28 holding consumption constant. We view
this  as  a  plausible  magnitude  given  the  myriad  uninsurable  shocks
that buffet households during working life, but we are not aware of
structural estimates of this parameter; this is an important domain for
future research. To gain intuition for a quantitative interpretation of

27 We are interested in deriving a bound for welfare, not deriving the exact
solution. As we explain below, it turns out that our bound is exact for the
homogeneous-𝛽 case and close for the heterogeneous-𝛽 case.
28 This is slightly less than 𝜎 = 0.25 because of the truncation of the deep
tails.

this effect, under our benchmark assumption of 𝑙 𝑛 utility, a 𝑧% increase
in marginal utility due to a taste shock is equal in impact on marginal
utility to a 𝑧% fall in net resources available for regular consumption.29
Our parametric assumptions in S2 have three conceptual motivations.
First,  we  use  a  unimodal  density  that  is  bell-shaped  to  reflect  an
underlying assumption that our taste shock 𝜃 aggregates many separate
shocks to produce variation in spending needs. (Sources of variation
include categories like medical spending, support for parents and other
family members experiencing financial hardship, educational expenses
for children, local cost of living, stochastic durable depreciation like
the need for a new roof, spending norms established by peers, etc.)
Second,  we  truncate  the  tails  to  generate  a  strictly  positive  density
on a bounded support30 and to avoid a lifetime utility function with
a negative weight on 𝑢1. Third, we center the distribution of shocks
(i.e., 𝜇 = 1) so that marginal utility during working life (period 1) is on
average the same as marginal utility in retirement (period 2), holding
consumption fixed. This centering assumption implies that there are
counterbalanced reasons for marginal utility to be relatively high in
retirement (e.g., ample time to travel and elevated medical expenses,
including uninsured long-term care) and reasons for marginal utility
to be relatively low in retirement (e.g., health is a complement with
certain consumption activities, like travel). In Section 5, we evaluate
the  robustness  of  our  paper’s  findings  with  respect  to  variation  in
all  of  our  parametric  assumptions.  However,  there  is  considerable
uncertainty regarding the distribution of 𝜃.

Finally, the combination of S1 and S2 pins down the utility function;
hence, the assumption 𝛿 𝑅 = 1 is no longer made without loss of gen-
erality (because the utility function, once specified, cannot be adjusted
to offset the value of 𝛿 𝑅). Structural econometric models of lifecycle
behavior with present bias estimate 𝛿 values close to one when period
lengths are a year (e.g., Laibson et al. (2024) study a present-biased
model with annual periods and estimate 𝛿 = 0.99). The risk-free, short-
run (inflation-adjusted, annual) gross interest rate tends to be close to
1.01.31 Hence, the assumption 𝛿 𝑅 = 1 is consistent with the available
empirical evidence.32

We  begin  with Table  1,  which  reports  the improvement

in  total
welfare, relative to the autarkic benchmark, for different systems of
accounts where the planner chooses the optimal 𝑥𝑛 and 𝜋𝑛. Specifically,
each  entry  tells  us  how  much  social  welfare  improves  expressed  as
the equivalent percentage improvement in the societal resource endow-
ment; this is typically referred to as a money metric welfare criterion.
We use this welfare reporting framework throughout the rest of the
paper (with the autarky case as our benchmark in all analyses). The
columns of Table 1 represent different cases of homogeneous 𝛽, starting
with 𝛽 = 0.1 and progressing to 𝛽 = 1.0.33

The first two rows of Table 1 report welfare analyses for 𝑁-account
Systems with, respectively 𝑁 = 1 and 𝑁 = 2 accounts. In 𝑁-account
Systems, the planner sets the penalty-level for each account, 𝜋𝑛, and
the mandatory initial balance for each account, 𝑥𝑛. The third row of
Table 1 reports welfare analyses for the Relaxed Problem. Because the

29 For example, multiplying ln utility by 𝑧 has the same effect on marginal
utility of subtracting 𝑧% from the consumption bundle because those funds are
needed for a separable expense, like a home repair.
30 For technical reasons, we need 𝜃 to have a strictly positive density on
its support (including the boundaries) to make our general mechanism design
problem well-behaved.
31 For  example, Aswath Damodaran reports an  average  real  return  on
3-month Treasury Bills of 0.32% from 1928 to 2023.
32 Note the first period of our model is ‘‘working life’’, so if 𝛿 𝑅 = 1 for one
year, than a modeling period comprised of 𝜏 years of working life would still
have 𝛿 𝑅 = 1.
33 There  is  a  growing  literature  on  estimation  of  present  bias
(e.g., DellaVigna  and  Paserman, 2005; Shapiro, 2005; DellaVigna  and
Malmendier, 2006; Giné et al., 2010; Meier and Sprenger, 2010; Augenblick
et al., 2015; see Cohen et al., 2020 for a review of this literature).

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039966J. Beshears et al.

Table 1
Welfare gains from four versions of the homogeneous-𝛽 model: an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 1; an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2; the Relaxed
Problem, which is the relaxed version of the General Non-linear Mechanism; an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts that have exogenously
set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋2 = 1, thereby implying that the first account is completely liquid and the second account is completely
illiquid in period 1. In the columns we report welfare gains for 10 different values of 𝛽 (namely 0.1, 0.2, … , 1.0). The welfare gain is calculated
as the percentage increase in household wealth that would produce the same average welfare in the autarkic case. Welfare is calculated using
the planner’s welfare criterion (i.e., without present bias in the welfare objective).

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2
Relaxed Problem
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2
Relaxed Problem
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1

Value of 𝛽
0.1

69.658
71.648
71.674
71.633
Value of 𝛽
0.6

2.794
2.860
2.881
2.542

0.2

31.775
32.698
32.748
32.648

0.7

1.283
1.314
1.325
1.018

0.3

17.124
17.605
17.659
17.482

0.8

0.446
0.458
0.462
0.256

0.4

9.630
9.882
9.928
9.671

0.9

0.067
0.070
0.070
0.015

0.5

5.347
5.478
5.511
5.196

1.0

0.012
0.012
0.011
0.000

Relaxed Problem drops the Monotonicity restriction in the General Non-
linear Mechanism, welfare for the Relaxed Problem is an upper bound
for  welfare  improvements  obtained  by  moving  from  an 𝑁-account
System to the General Non-linear Mechanism. The fourth row of Table 1
returns to an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts. Because we are
interested in real-world analogs, in this row we study the special case
where we require the planner to set up a completely liquid account
(i.e., 𝜋1 = 0) and a completely illiquid account (i.e., 𝜋2 = 1).

Table 1 reveals that a simple 𝑁 = 1-account system generates most
of the obtainable welfare gains. For example, for 𝛽 =  0.6 (a natural
value for a homogeneous calibration in light of current estimates in
the empirical literature – see Cohen et al., 2020), this 𝑁 = 1 system
generates  a  social-welfare  gain  equal  to  2.794%  of  the  endowment
(relative  to  the  autarky  reference  case).  An 𝑁 =  2-account  system
generates  a  social-welfare  gain  equal  to  2.860%  of  the  endowment.
The Relaxed Problem generates an upper bound on the welfare gains
for the General Non-linear Mechanism. Because the Relaxed Problem
generates a welfare gain that is 2.881% of the endowment, the welfare
gains of extending beyond the 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 1 accounts
are quantitatively modest.

This  analysis  also  reveals  another  important  feature  of  the
homogeneous-𝛽 case: the optimal penalties are essentially Pigouvian
corrections to present bias. We can see this in Fig. 1, where we report
the optimal penalty for 𝑁 = 1 accounts, which turns out to be nearly
identical  to (1 − 𝛽),  both  of  which  are  plotted  in Fig.  1.  This  near-
Pigouvian result echoes the exact Pigouvian correction that arises in
the quasi-linear case (Section 3.1).34

However,  an exact Pigouvian  correction  (which did arise  in  the
quasi-linear case) is not generally socially optimal because, with con-
cave utility, the planner would like to reallocate resources from low-𝜃
types  to  high-𝜃 types.  This  redistributive  motive  is  reflected  in  the
fact  that  the  socially  optimal  penalties  in  the  1-account  system  (for
any given value of 𝛽) are all strictly below the corresponding value
of (1 − 𝛽). Intuitively, the households who will be paying the penalties
are those households with the higher 𝜃 values. To transfer resources
to these households, the planner lowers the socially optimal penalty
below the (1 − 𝛽) benchmark value. However, as one can see in Fig. 1,
this  downward  adjustment  is  small  in  magnitude.  Accordingly,  the
Pigouvian correction is the dominant force in these simulations.35

34 Similar  Pigouvian  taxes  also  arise  in  the  cases  with  more  than  one
account. For example, with 𝛽 = 0.6 and two accounts, the penalties on those
two accounts are respectively 0.32 and 0.42, straddling the exact Pigouvian
correction of 1 − 𝛽 = 0.4.
35 In fact, in our numerical simulations taste shocks are sufficiently large
that there are economically significant welfare gains that would be available

Fig. 1. The optimal penalty 𝜋∗ and the notional Pigouvian tax 1 − 𝛽 as a function of 𝛽
in the case in which: (i) the population has homogeneous 𝛽; (ii) the planner is confined
to the 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 1 accounts, with penalty 𝜋. Note that 𝜋∗ is always
lower than 1 − 𝛽. In particular, 𝜋∗ is negative at 𝛽 = 1. This is due to the redistributive
motive of the planner: she wishes to redistribute from types with low 𝜃 to types with
high 𝜃.

This highlights an important feature both here and throughout the
remainder of the paper: incentive compatibility plays an important role
in  limiting  the  scope  for  redistribution.36 In  this  section,  this  shows
up in the small gap between the Pigouvian correction and the optimal
correction, highlighting how inter-household transfers are used by the
planner to provide incentives for intertemporal consumption efficiency
but the limitations in their use for redistribution. This also plays an
important role in the next section on heterogeneous 𝛽: the planner’s
optimum will again involve very little redistribution.

to a planner with symmetric information. However, in our framework, taste
shocks are private and incentive compatibility limits the scope for efficient
redistribution of resources in the General Non-linear Mechanism. We could
extend our model to incorporate observable variation in resources/needs, and,
in that case, the planner would engage in full redistribution in those categories.
36 Mirrlees (1971) first formalized the tension between the goal of redis-
tribution and incentive compatibility constraints that limit the scope for that
redistribution.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039967J. Beshears et al.

4.  Optimal liquidity with heterogeneous present bias and inter-
household transfers

In this section, we continue to allow inter-household transfers. We
relax  our  assumption  of  homogeneous 𝛽 and  study  a  heterogeneous
population  of 𝛽-types.  We  continue  to  exploit  the  revelation  princi-
ple and study mechanisms in which agents reveal their intertemporal
preferences  (between  periods 1 and 2).  Household  utility 𝜃 𝑢1(𝑐1) +
𝛽 𝑢2(𝑐2) is maximized iff the following expression is also maximized over
consumption:
𝜃
𝛽
Roughly  speaking,  if  we  use  a  continuum  of  types,  the  revelation
principle can be implemented using variable 𝜙 = 𝜃∕𝛽.37 Accordingly,
we study mechanisms in which the agents each report 𝜙 and receive a
consumption pair (𝑐1, 𝑐2) that depends on their report of 𝜙. The social
planner’s objective function (1), therefore takes the form
] 𝑑 𝐻(𝜙).

[𝐸 [𝜃|𝜙] 𝑢1(𝑐1) + 𝑢2(𝑐2)

𝑢1(𝑐1) + 𝑢2(𝑐2).

∫

Here, 𝐸 [𝜃|𝜙] is the conditional expectation of 𝜃 , given a household’s
value of 𝜙. 𝐻(.) is the CDF of 𝜙.

This  representation  highlights  the  importance  of  the  conditional
expectation 𝐸 [𝜃|𝜙], which is the weight the planner assigns to period
1  utility  of  a  household  with  value 𝜙.  Given  heterogeneity  in  both
𝜃 and 𝛽,  taste  shock 𝜃 cannot  be  directly  inferred  from 𝜙.  For  a
given  impatient  choice  (i.e.,  high  revealed 𝜙),  the  planner  does  not
know whether the household is making that choice because of high 𝜃
(i.e., real need), or because of low 𝛽 (more present bias). The planner
wants to give higher period-1 consumption to a high-𝜃 household, but
not to a low-𝛽 household.

As in the previous section, we begin with the quasi-linear case and

then provide quantitative simulations.

4.1.  Optimal policy with quasi-linear utility

With homogeneous 𝛽, a planner knows 𝛽 even without observing
𝜙.  By  contrast,  in  the  heterogeneous-𝛽 case  that  we  are  now  study-
ing, the planner has to try to infer 𝛽 and 𝜃 from 𝜙. Because of this
inference problem, exact Pigouvian taxation cannot emerge. However,
Proposition  2 shows  that  conditionally  expected  Pigouvian  taxation
emerges as the socially optimal mechanism in a quasi-linear economy.38

Proposition 2. Suppose that inter-household transfers are possible. Assume
that utility is strictly concave in the first period and linear in the second
period, that the solution is interior and that E[ 𝜃 ∣ 𝜙 ] is non-decreasing in
𝜙 = 𝜃∕𝛽. Then the optimal allocation is characterized by
E[ 𝜃 ∣ 𝜙 ] 𝑢′
1

)
(𝑐1(𝜙)

= 1,

and the implied (local) marginal penalty rate for period 1 withdrawals is

𝜋(𝜙) = E[ 1 − 𝛽 ∣ 𝜙 ].

37 The primary assumption is that either 𝜃 or 𝛽 or both have non-atomic
distributions.  It  follows  that 𝜙 has  a  non-atomic  distribution.  Given  the
preferences that we have assumed, individual choices will be monotonic, so
there are only a countable number of values of 𝜙 where the set of optimal
choices is non-unique. Because 𝜙 is non-atomic, this set has measure zero. By
shifting from truth-telling in (𝜃 , 𝛽) to truth-telling in 𝜙, we reduce the feasible
set of mechanisms, but we do not change the optimal social welfare.
38 This result is connected to Diamond (1973), who shows that a uniform
consumption  tax  on  households  that  generate  heterogeneous  externalities
targets the average externality. This result is also related to Farhi and Werning
(2010) and to the independent work of Gerster and Kramm (2023).

The  proof  of Proposition  2 is  in  Appendix  D.  This  penalty  is  an
‘average Pigouvian correction,’ in the sense that the marginal dollar
of consumption in period 1 is penalized with the conditional expected
value  of 1 − 𝛽,  where  the  conditioning  is  done  with  respect  to  the
(truthfully) reported value of 𝜙. Heterogeneity in 𝛽 gives rise to a range
of marginal taxes needed to implement the optimum. It is only at the
extreme values of 𝜙, 𝜙 = 𝜃∕𝛽, and 𝜙 = 𝜃∕𝛽, that the planner can exactly
infer the values of 𝛽, respectively 𝛽 and 𝛽. Accordingly, at these extreme
values for 𝜙, the planner chooses the most extreme Pigouvian tax rates,
respectively, 𝜋 = 1 − 𝛽 and 𝜋 = 1 − 𝛽.39

4.1.1.  A case in which the support of 𝛽 is wide relative to the support of 𝜃
We now introduce a corollary that studies the case in which the
distribution of 𝛽 is uniform and the support of 𝛽 is wide relative to the
support of 𝜃. This gives rise to a mechanism that features a convexly
kinked budget set. In particular, in equilibrium households will pool
at the kink. This budget set, which is not in general piecewise linear,
nevertheless has a key similarity to a simple system of accounts: the
opportunity cost of period-one consumption is discretely higher to the
right of the pooling region than to the left.

Suppose that

𝜃∕𝛽 < 𝜃∕𝛽,

(8)

in other words that the support of 𝛽 is wide relative to the support of
𝜃. We call this the 𝛽-wide case. We emphasize that 𝛽-wide is a relative
property. We then have the following corollary of Proposition 2.

Corollary 3. Suppose that the assumptions of Proposition 2 are satisfied
and: (i) the support of (𝜃 , 𝛽) is 𝛽-wide and (ii) 𝛽 is uniform. Then, 𝐸[𝜃|𝜙]
is constant for all 𝜙 ∈ [𝜃∕𝛽 , 𝜃∕𝛽]. Consequently,

1. The optimal allocation pools all types 𝜙 ∈ [𝜃∕𝛽 , 𝜃∕𝛽].
2. There is a jump in the marginal penalty from just below the pooling

region to just above the pooling region, that is,

lim
𝜙 ↑ 𝜃∕𝛽

𝜋(𝜙) < lim
𝜙 ↓ 𝜃∕𝛽

𝜋(𝜙).

(9)

The key driver of Corollary 3 is that the conditional expectation
𝐸[𝜃|𝜙] is constant in 𝜙 over an interval, implying the existence of a
pooling region. We emphasize that Corollary 3 makes an assumption
about the joint support of (𝜃 , 𝛽) and an assumption about the density
of 𝛽 on its support. Corollary 3 places no restriction on the density of
𝜃 on its support. The proof of Corollary 3 is in Appendix D.

Proposition  2 and Corollary  3 are  expressed  in  terms  of  truth-
telling (second-best) optimal mechanisms. We now address the stan-
dard problem of reinterpreting these mechanisms in terms of a system
of  accounts  –  or  more  generally  a  budget  set  –  that  represents  the
institutional analog of the theoretical analysis that has been provided
in this subsection.

In  practice,  the  mechanism  described  in Corollary  3 would  be
implemented institutionally as a budget set, which is a set of (𝑐1, 𝑐2)
consumption bundles; each household picks a point in this budget set.
The  opportunity  cost  of  period  1  consumption  in  terms  of  period  2
consumption is the slope of the frontier of the budget set. Corollary 3
implies that the budget set has a kink, at which a mass of agents pool.

39 The assumption that 𝐸[𝜃|𝜙] increases in 𝜙 implies that 𝑐1(𝜙) is increasing
and  hence Proposition  2,  which  is  solved  as  usual  by  solving  the  Relaxed
Problem and verifying monoticity ex post, is in fact the optimal General Non-
linear Mechanism. Intuitively, 𝜙 represents the household’s relative valuation
of date 1 utility while 𝐸[𝜃|𝜙] represents the planner’s average valuation of date
1 utility across households of type 𝜙. The assumption that 𝐸[𝜃|𝜙] is increasing
implies these two valuations are everywhere positively related, or in other
words that 𝛽 does not fall too quickly as 𝜙 rises.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039968J. Beshears et al.

Table 2
Welfare gains from five versions of the heterogeneous-𝛽 model (with 𝛽 distributed uniformly between 0.2
and 1): an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 1 (row 1); an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2 (row 2); the Relaxed
Problem (row 3), which is the relaxed version of the General Non-linear Mechanism; an 𝑁-account System
with 𝑁 = 2 accounts that have exogenously set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋2 = 1 (row 4); and an
𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 3 accounts, where accounts 1 and 3 have exogenously set penalties, specifically
𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋3 = 1, and account 2 has an endogenous penalty (row 5).
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2
Relaxed Problem
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 3, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋3 = 1

3.569
6.136
6.145
6.105
6.137

Moreover, Corollary 3 implies that the opportunity cost of period 1
consumption jumps discretely as households move from just below to
just above the pooling point.

Finally, we note that a system of accounts is equivalent to a convex
budget set with a piecewise linear frontier. Each transition between
accounts  represents  a  kink  in  the  budget  set. Corollary  3 illustrates
that such kinks may also arise in special cases of general mechanisms
(i.e., the 𝛽-wide case).

4.2.  Optimal policy with strictly concave utility

We now switch from the case of quasi-linear utility to the case in
which the consumer has log utility in both periods. In the current and
the following subsections, we study optimal mechanisms using numer-
ical solutions. As before, each simulation has a different assumption
on the class of mechanisms studied – 𝑁-account System or the Relaxed
Problem. Within the class of 𝑁-account Systems, we also vary the num-
ber of accounts and the scope that the planner has to set withdrawal
penalties on those accounts. We maintain simulation assumptions S1
and S2 from the previous section. Existing evidence suggests 𝛽 has sub-
stantial variation with a mean close to 0.6 (Lockwood, 2020; Laibson
et  al., 2024),  which  we  capture  by  assuming  that 𝛽 is  uniformly
distributed on the interval [0.2, 1]. We show in Section 4.5 that when
we impose an account system whose penalties and account allocations
are in line with the existing U.S. system, our simulations are able to
match the historical leakage rate of approximately 40% (see Argento
et al. (2015)). We explore the robustness of these particular cases in
Section 5. Nevertheless, the literature measuring the distribution of 𝛽
is still at an early stage.

Table  2 reports  the  welfare  improvements  (again  using  a  money
metric)  that  are  obtained  when  the  planner  shifts  from  the  autarky
reference system to an 𝑁-account System or a Relaxed Problem. The
first row of Table 2 reports the case of an 𝑁 = 1 account system. The
second row reports the case of an 𝑁 =  2 account system. The third
row reports the case of the Relaxed Problem (see the earlier discussion
in Section 3.2 and the full derivation in Appendix C). The fourth row
reports the case of an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts where
we require the planner to set up a completely liquid account (𝜋1 = 0)
and a completely illiquid account (𝜋2 = 1). The fifth row reports the
case of an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 3 accounts, where the planner
has to set a completely liquid account (𝜋1 = 0) and a completely illiquid
account (𝜋3 = 1), but can choose the penalty for account 2 (𝜋2).

Table 2 reveals that an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 1 account no
longer obtains most of the feasible welfare gains: one account with a
flexible penalty generates a social-welfare gain of only 3.569% of the
endowment, well below the upper bound of 6.145% obtained with the
Relaxed Problem (row 3).

In contrast, an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts gets very
close  to  this  upper  bound:  two  flexible  accounts  generate  a  social-
welfare gain equal to 6.136% of the endowment. For the 𝑁 = 2 case,
we find that one penalty is close to zero and the other penalty is close
to  one.  Accordingly,  an 𝑁 =  2 account  system  with  a  completely
liquid  and  a  completely  illiquid  account  also  gets  very  close  to  the

upper bound, at a welfare gain of 6.105% of the endowment. Finally,
the 𝑁 =  3 account system with one completely liquid, one partially
liquid and one completely illiquid account generates a welfare gain of
6.137% of the endowment. The (money-metric) differences among the
mechanisms with more than a single account are small in economic
magnitude and a very simple 𝑁 =  2 account system – one perfectly
liquid  and  one  perfectly  illiquid  –  generates  approximately  optimal
welfare  gains.  Such  a  two-account  system  is  commonplace  in  most
countries in the developed world (Beshears et al., 2015).

The flat conditional expectation, pooling region, and kink in the
budget set documented in Corollary 3 provide one intuition for why
a  two-account  system  performs  better  than  a  single  account  in  this
case. We next offer a complementary framework to build intuition by
studying  comparative  statics  for  the  penalty  of  the  partially  illiquid
account.

4.3.  Comparative statics for the penalty of the partially illiquid account

To gain further intuition for this result, we report a related set of
analyses in Fig. 2. Here, we study a 2-account system. One account
is completely liquid (i.e., 𝜋1 =  0) and the other account has varying
illiquidity (i.e., 𝜋2 varies). As we vary the penalty 𝜋2 from 0 to 1, we re-
optimize the allocations 𝑥1 and 𝑥2 to the liquid and the partially illiquid
accounts. The horizontal axis shows the penalty 𝜋2, and the vertical
axis shows the average welfare of the cross sections of the population
obtained by fixing 𝛽 at one the five values 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0.
It should be emphasized that all households are treated identically ex
ante  and,  therefore,  receive  the  same  allocations  and  face  the  same
early-withdrawal penalties.

For the most inconsistent households, with 𝛽 = 0.2, money-metric
welfare  as  perceived  by  the  planner  rises  dramatically  as  the  early-
withdrawal  penalty  increases  (Fig.  2).  The  gain  to  these  households
from moving from completely liquid, 𝜋2 =  0, to completely illiquid,
𝜋2 = 1 is equivalent to an increase of about 30% in their wealth level
from the planner’s perspective.

Households  with  other 𝛽 values  experience  increasing and  then
decreasing welfare as 𝜋2 increases from 0 to 1. However, conditional
on 𝛽, all households experience a rise in expected welfare as 𝜋2 rises
from zero. For low-𝛽 households, this rise occurs because higher penal-
ties  prevent  low-𝛽 households  from  overconsuming  in  period 1.  For
high-𝛽 households, this rise occurs because higher penalties generate
larger  cross-subsidies  from  low-𝛽 households  to  high-𝛽 households.
Specifically, these cross-subsidies occur because higher penalty revenue
relaxes the planner’s budget constraint, thereby enabling the planner to
give agents higher endowments in period 1. High-𝛽 households are net
recipients of cross-subsidies because they tend to make smaller early
withdrawals and, therefore, pay fewer penalties than low-𝛽 households.
These differential penalty payments are shown in Fig. 3, which reports
the  gross  penalties  paid  by  households  with  different  values  of 𝛽
(again integrating over 𝜃).  Penalties are hump-shaped, with lower-𝛽
households being willing on average to withdraw more and pay more
at all penalty levels.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039969J. Beshears et al.

Fig. 2. The welfare of various 𝛽 cross sections of the population as a function of 𝜋2 in
the case in which: (i) the population has heterogeneous 𝛽; (ii) the planner is confined
to an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts, with penalties 𝜋1 and 𝜋2 respectively;
(iii) 𝜋1 = 0 (i.e., the first account is completely liquid); (iv) the account allocations
are chosen to maximize the welfare of the population as a whole. Note that the sub-
population with 𝛽 = 0.82 (not shown) is indifferent between the system with 𝜋2 = 0
and the system with 𝜋2 = 1.

Fig. 3. The total penalties paid by various 𝛽 cross sections of the population as a
function of 𝜋2 in the case in which: (i) the population has heterogeneous 𝛽; (ii) the
planner is confined to an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts, with penalties 𝜋1
and 𝜋2, respectively; (iii) 𝜋1 = 0 (i.e., the first account is completely liquid); (iv) the
account allocations are chosen to maximize the welfare of the population as a whole.

Unlike the welfare of low-𝛽 households, which rises monotonically
as 𝜋2 rises,  the  welfare  of  high-𝛽 households  eventually  peaks  and
thereafter  falls  with 𝜋2.  This  single-peaked  property  arises  because,
while  initial  rises  in 𝜋2 simply  result  in  greater  revenue  from  the
early-withdrawal penalties paid by low-𝛽 households, later rises tend
to eliminate early withdrawals altogether. Hence the cross-subsidy to
high-𝛽 households first rises and then falls. By the time 𝜋2 reaches 1, the
cross-subsidy has been completely eliminated, and high-𝛽 households
are now facing a binding constraint (if they have a sufficiently high 𝜃
value) that limits their ability to adjust consumption in period 1, so
high-𝛽 households  are  slightly worse off  on  average  than  they  were
when 𝜋2 was 0.  On  a  money-metric  basis,  the 𝛽 =  1 households

Fig. 4. The welfare of the population as a whole as a function of 𝜋2 in the case in
which: (i) the population has heterogeneous 𝛽; (ii) the planner is confined to an 𝑁-
account System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts, with penalties 𝜋1 and 𝜋2, respectively; (iii) 𝜋1 = 0
(i.e., the first account is completely liquid); (iv) the account allocations are chosen to
maximize the welfare of the population as a whole. Note that: (i) while this is not
immediately apparent from the figure, the function in question is non-monotone; (ii)
the optimal penalty 𝜋∗
2 yields a proportional increase of
approximately 0.00002% in money-metric welfare relative to the case in which 𝜋2 = 1
(i.e., the case in which the second account is completely illiquid). In particular, the
welfare cost of setting the penalty on the second account too low far exceeds that of
setting it too high.

2 is approximately 85%; (iii) 𝜋∗

experience a welfare loss equivalent to 0.23% of their income as the
planner moves from 𝜋2 = 0 to 𝜋2 = 1 in Fig. 2. However, this welfare
loss is swamped by the welfare gain experienced by the 𝛽 = 0.2 types
(which is two orders of magnitude larger).40

Fig. 4 shows the welfare of the population as a whole as a function
of the early-withdrawal penalty 𝜋2. It confirms that – as one would
expect – the enormous welfare gains for low-𝛽 households swamp the
modest welfare losses for high-𝛽 households, an example of asymmetric
paternalism (Camerer et al., 2003). Although it appears that total social
welfare  rises  monotonically  and  asymptotes,  social  welfare  actually
reaches a global maximum at 𝜋2 =  0.85 and then falls very slightly.
However, the fall in welfare between 𝜋2 = 0.85 and 𝜋2 = 1 is insignif-
icant:  it  is  0.00002%  of  wealth  using  a  money  metric.  Accordingly,
the social optimum is effectively obtained with one completely liquid
account and one completely illiquid account.

Optimal 𝜋2 in the quasilinear case. To further develop intuition, we map
the analysis of this section to the quasilinear case of Section 4.1. That
is, we study a 2-account system in which one account is completely
liquid, the second account has a penalty 𝜋2, and the planner optimizes
over the penalty 𝜋2 and the account allocations. In Appendix D.3, we
show that the planner’s optimal penalty in the quasilinear case satisfies

[[

E

E[1 − 𝛽|𝜙] − 𝜋2

]

⋅

𝜕 𝑐1(𝜙)
𝜕 𝜋2

|
|
|
|

𝜙 ≥ 𝜙2

]

= 0,

(10)

where 𝜙2 is the lowest 𝜙 type that withdraws from the second account
in equilibrium. Eq. (10) reveals two reasons why the optimal penalty
on the second account tends to be large. The first is that the penalty

40 In  Appendix  E,  we  show  that  this  asymmetry  in  welfare  impact  from
introducing a completely illiquid account is a general property. In particular,
starting  from  autarky,  we  show  that  it  is  always  possible  to  introduce  a
Pareto efficient completely illiquid account with a positive balance (with weak
efficiency for 𝛽 = 1 types). Welfare gains are larger for lower 𝛽 types, and
increasing  the  account  balance  beyond  the  Pareto  efficient  level  generates
second order losses for 𝛽 = 1 types and first order gains for 𝛽 < 1 types.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399610J. Beshears et al.

targets a conditional average Pigouvian correction among types that
withdraw from the second account, that is the Pigouvian correction is
among types with 𝜙 ≥ 𝜙2. Since higher 𝜙 = 𝜃
types tend to have low
values of 𝛽, this engenders larger penalties on the second account.

𝛽

−1

𝜕 𝑐1(𝜙)
𝜕 𝜋2

=  − 1

. Under constant relative risk aversion, 𝑢1(𝑐1) =

The second reason is that the Pigouvian correction is weighted by
the responsiveness of type-𝜙 consumption to variation in the penalty,
𝜕 𝑐1(𝜙)
, the con-
𝜕 𝜋2
𝑐1(𝜙),  implying  that  higher-𝜙
sumption  response  is
types, who have higher date 1 consumption levels, also decrease their
date 1 consumption  more  in  response  to  an  increase  in  the  early
withdrawal  penalty 𝜋2.  In  summary,  because  households  with  rela-
tively high consumption sensitivity to 𝜋2, tend to be households with
relatively low 𝛽 values, the optimal penalty is further raised because
the weighting term in the Pigouvian correction effectively puts greater
weight on low-𝛽 households.

𝑐1−𝛾
1
1−𝛾

𝛾(1−𝜋2)

Eq. (10) also sheds light on Figs. 2 and 3. Regarding Eq. (10), the
penalty  on  the  second  account  targets  types  that  withdraw  from  it,
that is with high 𝜙 (low 𝛽). These types are particularly dynamically
inconsistent. These types also tend to have large consumption responses
to increases in penalties, which can be seen from the drops in penalties
paid by low-𝛽 types when penalties are increased in the high-penalty
region (Fig. 3). Putting these observations together, this explains why
welfare increases sharply for low-𝛽 types, who are benefitting from a
large correction (consumption response) to a severe overconsumption
problem (arising from low 𝛽 values). In contrast, high 𝛽 types tend to
have low 𝜙 and do not withdraw from the second account. As a result,
variation in the second account penalty has no direct effect on them
(Eq. (10)), but changes in penalties paid affects their wealth level. Thus
their welfare starts to fall as the penalty on the second account rises far
enough and transfers fall. In the quasilinear model, these transfers are a
wash from a social welfare perspective, focusing the planner’s objective
only on correcting overconsumption from present bias. This helps to
understand the result of Fig. 4, that high penalties (if not necessarily
complete illiquidity) on the second account are desirable.

4.4.  A three-account system that has many of the institutional features of
the U.S. retirement savings system

The fifth row in Table 2 reports the welfare gains for an 𝑁-account
System with 𝑁 = 3 accounts. We will see that this analysis reproduces
some of the features of the U.S. system.

We constrain the first account to be completely liquid (𝜋1 = 0) and
the third account to be completely illiquid (𝜋3 = 1). We think of this
third account – the illiquid account – as Social Security or a defined-
benefit pension. The planner picks the penalty on the “middle” account
(0 <  𝜋2 < 1)  and  the  values  of  the  three  endowments  (𝑥1, 𝑥2 and
𝑥3) to optimize social welfare (while satisfying the budget constraint).
The “middle” account turns out to have an optimal penalty of 𝜋2 =
0.13, which is close to the actual penalty associated with a 401(k) or
IRA account, namely 0.10. Adding the optimized “middle” account to
the constrained two-account system (row 4 in Table 2) slightly raises
welfare, by 6.137% − 6.105% = 0.032% of wealth.

Our simulations reveal that the middle account is characterized by a
very high degree of leakage in equilibrium. Ninety percent of the assets
in the middle account are withdrawn to fund consumption in period 1.
Fig. 5 disaggregates this result, by plotting the cumulative distribution
function of the ratio 𝑐2∕𝑐1. Fig. 5 shows that 76% of households fully
draw down the partially illiquid account, while another 22% partially
withdraw from it. Only 2% of households choose to withdraw nothing
from the partially illiquid account.

In summary, our analysis finds that welfare is nearly as high in the
two-account system with a completely liquid account and a completely
illiquid account as it is in the three-account system that adds a partially
illiquid account.41 When a third account is added, it looks and performs

Fig. 5. The distribution function of the ratio 𝑐2∕𝑐1 of period-2 consumption to period-1
consumption in the population as a whole in the case in which: (i) the population has
heterogeneous 𝛽; (ii) the planner is confined to an 𝑁-account System with 𝑁 = 3
accounts, with penalties 𝜋1, 𝜋2 and 𝜋3, respectively; (iii) 𝜋1 = 0 (i.e., the first account
is completely liquid); (iv) 𝜋3 = 1 (i.e., the third account is completely illiquid); (v) both
𝜋2 and the account allocations are chosen to maximize the welfare of the population
as a whole. There are two atoms in the distribution: a large atom accounting for about
76% of the total mass near 𝑐2∕𝑐1 = 0.94; and a small atom accounting for about 1%
of the total mass near 𝑐2∕𝑐1 = 1.70. Individuals at the second atom have withdrawn
the entire balance from the first (liquid) account, but have not yet touched the second
account. Individuals at the first atom have withdrawn the entire balance from both
the first and the second accounts. In particular, they have paid the penalty 𝜋2 on the
entire balance of the second account.

somewhat like a U.S. 401(k) plan: the third account has an optimized
penalty of 0.13 and generates a very high rate of leakage in equilibrium.
This high leakage rate (90%) is even higher than the empirical leakage
rate (40%) observed in the U.S. system.

One explanation for this difference in leakage rates is that initial
account  balances  in  the  model  are  generated  by  government  fiat,
whereas almost all of the dollars in real-world 401(k)/IRA accounts are
voluntarily deposited, implying that they are coming from households
with higher 𝛽 values and lower 𝜃 values in the first place. In this sense,
one cannot directly compare the leakage rate in the model (which is the
aftermath of universal forced savings in a DC system) and the leakage
rate in the US economy (which is the aftermath of voluntary savings
in a DC system). Differential selection makes this an apples to oranges
comparison.

4.5.  Comparison with a calibrated model of the US system

Another  important  factor  that  explains  the  high  model-predicted
leakage rate is the fact that the planner optimally chooses to put 47.4%
of  each  household’s  resources  into  the  completely  illiquid  account,
36.4%  of  household  resources  into  the  completely  liquid  account,
and  16.2%  going  to  the  partially  illiquid  account.  Accordingly,  the
completely illiquid account alone is sufficient to generate nearly equal

41 The third account offers the welfare benefit of additional separation for
high-𝜃 households and low-𝜃 households.  However, the third account has two
effects that jointly offset the welfare gains from separation. First, the third
account enables low-𝛽 households to increase their period 1 over-consumption.
Second,  withdrawals  from  the  third  account  generate  (socially  inefficient)
transfers of resources from low-𝛽 and high-𝜃 households to high-𝛽 and low-
𝜃 households because of the penalties that are paid for period 1 withdrawals
from the third account. These tax revenues are redistributed in the mechanism.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399611J. Beshears et al.

consumption in periods 1 and 2, even if the household consumes all of
its completely liquid and partially illiquid assets in period 1. The high
level of completely illiquid retirement assets explains the high level of
equilibrium leakage from the partially illiquid account (in period 1).
The partially illiquid account is a source of retirement consumption that
can be used to supplement the consumption that will be generated by
the assets in the completely illiquid account. Because the mandatory,
completely illiquid retirement assets is so large (at the social optimum),
households  are  not  strongly  motivated  to  preserve  the  assets  in  the
partially illiquid account until retirement. Accordingly, the equilibrium
leakage  rate  from  the  partially  illiquid  account  is  90.2%.  This  also
explains why the presence of the partially illiquid account has such a
small effect on total social welfare.

In  the  United  States,  the actual allocation  to  completely  illiquid
accounts is lower than our optimized policy implies (e.g., mandatory
savings is not sufficient to generate approximate consumption smooth-
ing on its own in the United States). Relatedly, the completely liquid
account plays a far more important role in practice than it does in our
optimized  model  reported  in  Section 4.4.  In  addition,  in  the  United
States some withdrawals from retirement accounts are not penalized
(e.g.,  education  expenses,  large  unreimbursed  health  expenses,  the
purchase of a first home). To account for these factors, we now report
an  illustrative  calibration  of  the  model  where  we  exogenously  fix
the account balance allocations (rather than endogenously optimizing
them) to reflect the operation of the status quo system in the United
States.

We  base  our  calibrated  model  on  empirical  savings  flows  for  a
‘‘typical’’ household and then translate them into the theoretical ob-
jects in our stylized two-period model. For households with median
income, average defined contribution (gross) savings flows are 5.0%
of income.42 For households with median income (who are therefore
below the Social Security earnings cap), Social Security contributions
are 12.4% of income.43 For households age 60–69 who are within five
percentile points of median wealth in that age group, average home
equity at retirement is approximately $100,000, which represents an
average annual forced savings rate of [$100,000/(50 years of working
life)]/[$51,940×(1+0.062+0.33 × 0.05)] = 3.6%.44 We now translate
these savings flows from empirical data into stylized savings flows in
our two-period model. Assuming that the real rate of (risk free) return
is approximately zero, we therefore multiply savings flows by the ratio
of  the  duration  of  working  life  to  the  duration  of  retirement.45 (To

42 The National Compensation Survey - Employee Benefits (Table 2, March
2021) reports that 43% (53%) of civilian workers participate in their workplace
defined contribution plan in occupations with average wages in the second
(third) wage quartile. Averaging these two numbers yields a ‘‘middle income’’
participation  rate  of 48%. Brady (2017)  (Figure  A3)  uses  a  representative
sample of tax returns and finds that the average contribution rate to DC plans
was  6.4%  (7.4%)  among  contributing  workers  with  gross-income  between
$40,000  and  $50,000  ($50,000  and  $100,000)  in  2013.  Averaging  these
numbers  leads  to  a  ‘‘middle  income’’  contribution  rate  of  6.9%  .  Because
this contribution data omits employer contributions, we scale this by a factor
of 1.5, producing a total contribution rate of 10.4%. Our participation and
contribution  rates  jointly  imply  an  average  contribution  rate  of  5.0%  for
workers with median income.
43 This  combines  the  6.2%  employer  contribution  and  6.2%  employee
contribution.
44 Authors’ calculation using 2013 SCF for home equity and U.S. Census
Bureau Data for median household income. This calculation assumes a risk-
free return of zero percent. The denominator is scaled up to include employer
Social Security contributions and matches as part of income.
45 For  the  purposes  of  our  model,  what  matters  is  the  ratio  of  years  of
employment (pre-retirement) to years of retirement. For example, consider a
worker who starts working life at age 21, is out of work 20% of the time
during ‘‘working life’’ (due to unemployment and withdrawal from the labor
force), retires at age 65, and lives for 18 years in retirement (which matches
life expectancy conditional on living to age 65). For this example, the ratio of
years of employment to years of retirement is approximately two.

complete  this  argument,  we  are  also  using  the  homotheticity  of  the
CRRA utility class.) We find that illiquid savings translated into the
model  is  2×(12.4%  +  3.6%)  =  32.0%.  Likewise,  we  find  that  total
defined  contribution  savings  translated  into  the  model  is  2×(5.0%)
= 10.0%. Finally, to capture the fact that some defined contribution
savings can be withdrawn without paying a 10% penalty (e.g., for edu-
cational expenses or large medical costs), we assign 25% of the defined
contribution savings to a 1% penalty account (reflecting transactions
costs) and 75% to the standard 10% penalty account.

With  this  calibration,  we  obtain  an  aggregate  leakage  rate  (total
leakage divided by total balances in the two partially illiquid retirement
accounts)  of  40.7%,  which  is  within  the  range  of  historical  leakage
rates in the United States (see Argento et al., 2015). We find that the
optimized funding for the completely illiquid asset (47.4%) is greater
than the calibrated funding for completely illiquid assets in the U.S
economy (32.0%). In our illustrative calibrated model, the (certainty
equivalent) welfare gain of moving from the status quo U.S. system to
the optimized system is 2.7% of lifetime income.

In summary, our analysis of the existing U.S. retirement savings sys-
tem has generated two key results. First, the existing types of accounts
in the U.S. system are approximately optimal. Second, the allocations to
those accounts are not. Specifically, our model implies that a materially
higher allocation should be made to the completely illiquid account
(47.4%  in  our  second-best  optimum  vs.  32.0%  under  existing  U.S.
policy).

5.  Optimal policy with transfers and heterogeneous present bias:
Robustness

In  the  previous  section,  which  studied  the  case  in  which  inter-
household transfers are allowed and present bias is heterogeneous in
the population, three key findings emerged:

1. The constrained-efficient social optimum is approximated by a
two-account system, with one account that is completely liquid
and a second account that is completely illiquid. Little welfare
gain  is  obtained  by  moving  beyond  this  simple  two-account
system.

2. If  a  third  account  is  added,  its  optimized  early-withdrawal

penalty is 13%.

3. The equilibrium leakage rate from this third account is 90%.

In the current section, we document the robustness of these three
findings,  maintaining  the  assumptions  that  the  distribution  of 𝛽 is
heterogeneous  and  transfers  are  allowed.  With  respect  to  the  first
finding, the largest incremental welfare gain that we generate in our
robustness checks by extending the system of savings accounts beyond
one completely liquid and one completely illiquid account is 0.082%
of income. With respect to the second finding, the optimized penalty
on the partially illiquid account ranges from 9% to 16% across our
calibrated  economies,  similar  to  the  penalties  on  401(k)s  and  IRAs.
With respect to the third finding, the equilibrium leakage rates remain
very high, ranging from 80% to 99%.46

The detailed results are reported in Tables 3,, and , which report
the welfare gain (relative to the autarky benchmark) for (i) the two-
account system 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋2 = 1, (ii) the three-account system with
𝜋1 = 0, 0 < 𝜋2 < 1, and 𝜋3 = 1, and (iii) the Relaxed Problem described
in Appendix C. For case (ii), in addition to the welfare gain, we also
report the penalty 𝜋2 and the leakage rate.47

46 We also verify that our baseline results do not change when the support
of the truncated 𝜃 distribution, [1 − 𝜒 , 1 + 𝜒], is expanded by increasing 𝜒 from
𝜒 = 2
3
47 Note that the upper bound on the welfare gain – provided by the Relaxed
Problem – is economically close to the 𝑁-account Systems that we study.

to 𝜒 = 9
10

.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399612J. Beshears et al.

Table 3
Robustness checks for welfare gains, optimal penalties and leakage rates. In each sub-table: row 1 contains welfare gains from an 𝑁-account
System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts that have exogenously set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋2 = 1; row 2 contains welfare gains from an 𝑁-account
System with 𝑁 = 3 accounts, where accounts 1 and 3 have exogenously set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋3 = 1, and account 2 has an
endogenous penalty; rows 3 and 4 contain the optimal penalty and leakage rate from the endogenous-penalty account associated with the
system in row 2; and row 5 contains welfare gains from the Relaxed Problem. This table varies the value of the coefficient of relative risk
aversion 𝛾.

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 3, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋3 = 1
— — — —
— — — —
Relaxed Problem
Variation of the coefficient of relative risk aversion 𝛾

Penalty 𝜋∗
2
Leakage Rate

Table 3 varies the value of the coefficient of relative risk aversion
and 𝛾 = 4, with 𝛾 = 1 being our benchmark (for

(𝛾) between 𝛾 = 1
2
comparison).

varies the shape of the density of the taste shock 𝜃. Table 4 panel (a)
changes the variance of the (untruncated) normal distribution between
𝜎𝜃 =  0.40 and 𝜎𝜃 =  0.15,  with 𝜎𝜃 =  0.25 being  our  benchmark.
panel (b) varies the mean 𝜇𝜃 of the untruncated 𝜃 distribution while
holding the truncation fixed. It varies 𝜇𝜃 between 𝜇𝜃 =  0.8 (a more
right-skewed distribution after truncation) and 𝜇𝜃 = 1.2 (a more left-
skewed distribution after truncation), whereas our baseline model with
𝜇𝜃 = 1 has a symmetric truncated distribution.  panel (c) repeats the
same exercise but moves the truncated support in lockstep with changes
in  the  untruncated  mean,  which  varies  the  mean  of  the  truncated
distribution while maintaining symmetry.

In  our  benchmark  calibration,  we  studied  the  case  of  a  uniform
distribution of 𝛽 between 0.2 and 1.0. In , we study a truncated normal
distribution  on 𝛽 with  support  between  0.2  and  1.0.  Our  original
benchmark is equivalent to the (truncated) normal case with 𝜎𝛽 = ∞
and 𝜇𝛽 =  0.6.  In Table  5 panel  (a),  we  reduce 𝜎𝛽 to 1, 1∕2 and 0
(holding the truncation points and 𝜇𝛽 fixed). The case 𝜎𝛽 =  0 is the
degenerate case in which all agents have the same value of 𝛽 = 0.6. As
shown in Section 3, results do not generalize to the degenerate case of
homogeneous 𝛽 (the last column of Table 5 panel (a)), reinforcing that
(at least partially unobservable) heterogeneity in 𝛽 is necessary for a
completely illiquid account to be optimal. In  panel (b), we vary 𝜇𝛽 ,
while holding the support fixed, between 0.45 (a more right-skewed
distribution after truncation) and 0.75 (a more left-skewed distribution
after truncation).

5.1.  Observable types

Until now, we have assumed that heterogeneity in 𝛽 is not directly
observable by the planner (and can only be inferred from consumption
decisions).  However,  there  is  evidence  (see Lockwood, 2020 for  a
review)  that  variation  in 𝛽 is  positively  correlated  with  household
income.  Summarizing  the  available  evidence,  households  with  high
income are estimated to have 𝛽 values near one and households with
low income are estimated to have 𝛽 values with a mean around 0.5. In
this environment, the optimal mechanism would be income-contingent.
The planner would set up a minimum-savings system that would re-
quire households with high income to save a relatively small fraction
of their income while requiring households with low income to save
a relatively large fraction of their income. To illustrate this idea, we
consider a stylized example where households exogenously have high
or low income.48 To simplify exposition, we assume that high-income
households have 𝛽 = 1, and low-income households have a distribution
of 𝛽 values with a mean close to 0.6 (see column 1 of  panel (b), which

48 Because the income level 𝑌 rescales total utility under CRRA, we can leave
the exact income levels unspecified.

Value of 𝛾
0.5

8.853
8.920
0.13
0.89
8.935

1.0

6.106
6.137
0.13
0.90
6.145

2.0

3.261
3.274
0.11
0.99
3.279

4.0

1.623
1.633
0.13
0.88
1.634

generates a mean 𝛽 value of 0.57 due to truncation). In this illustrative
example, the planner would put no assets in the illiquid account for
high-income households, because those households have no self-control
problem. By contrast, the planner puts nearly half of lifetime resources
in the completely illiquid account for households with low income.

The  U.S.  Social  Security  system  has  properties  that  reflect  these
qualitative predictions. Workers with very low earnings (i.e., $16,537
in  2023  dollars)  make  payments  and  receive  benefits  that  yield  an
average Social Security retirement income replacement rate of 77.8%
for the 1955 birth cohort retiring at normal retirement age. By contrast,
workers in the same birth cohort and with same retirement age with
earnings at the Social Security earnings cap (e.g., $160,200 in 2023
dollars) have an average income replacement rate of 27.6%.49

5.2.  Extensions

In the appendix, we consider three extensions of the model, and
shed light on how they affect the key insights by studying the optimal
mechanism  in  the  quasilinear  case  with  heterogeneous 𝛽 (i.e.,  the
counterpart of Proposition 2).

First,  we  allow  for  the  social  planner  to  assign  welfare  weights
𝜔(𝜃 , 𝛽) to household types, rather than assuming a utilitarian objective,
in Appendix D.4. We show that the optimal penalties include not only
a welfare-weight-adjusted conditional Pigouvian correction, similar to
Proposition 2, but also an additive term reflecting the redistributive
motive. When welfare weights are on average higher at higher values
of 𝜙, the redistribution motive pushes for lower penalties at low 𝜙 and
higher penalties at high 𝜙 (and conversely the opposite when welfare
weights are lower at higher 𝜙). For example, higher welfare weights at
higher 𝜃 (and so generally at higher 𝜙) might be natural in a setting in
which taste shocks reflect resource needs (e.g., medical shocks).50

Second, we allow for correlation between 𝜃 and 𝛽 in Appendix D.4.
The  optimal  penalty  formula  is  the  same  as Proposition  2,  but  the
conditional expectation is affected by the correlation structure. Positive
correlations between 𝜃 and 𝛽 tend to push for flatter penalties, while
negative correlations tend to push for extreme penalties.

Third, in Appendix F we study an extension in which households
have unobservable heterogeneity in earnings ability and choose their
labor supply, receiving income allocated in the savings system. They
then realize their consumption type and make withdrawal choices as
in the baseline model. We show that the planner still sets penalties
according to a conditional average Pigouvian correction, but upweights

49 See Table D in Burkhalter and Chaplain (2023).
50 However, the choice of welfare weights is not obvious and requires the
planner to make normative assumptions. To illustrate the range of possibilities,
if a planner takes our model literally and additionally assumes that utility is
positive, then high 𝜃 implies greater utility. This means a social planner that
prioritizes households with low utility would adopt a welfare function with
welfare weights that are declining in the inferred value of 𝜃.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399613J. Beshears et al.

Table 4
Robustness checks for welfare gains, optimal penalties and leakage rates. In each sub-table: row 1 contains welfare gains from an 𝑁-account
System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts that have exogenously set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋2 = 1; row 2 contains welfare gains from an 𝑁-account
System with 𝑁 = 3 accounts, where accounts 1 and 3 have exogenously set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋3 = 1, and account 2 has an
endogenous penalty; rows 3 and 4 contain the optimal penalty and leakage rate from the endogenous-penalty account associated with the system
in row 2; and row 5 contains welfare gains from the Relaxed Problem. This table varies parameters of the distribution of 𝜃. Table 4 panel
(a) varies the parameter 𝜎𝜃 of the truncated-normal distribution of 𝜃.  panel (b) varies the parameter 𝜇𝜃 of the truncated-normal distribution
of 𝜃, without changing the truncated support.  panel (c) varies the parameter 𝜇𝜃 of the truncated-normal distribution of 𝜃, while moving the
truncated support to maintain a symmetric truncated distribution.

Value of 𝜎𝜃
0.40

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 3, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋3 = 1
— — — —
— — — —
Relaxed Problem
(a) Variation of the standard deviation 𝜎𝜃 of the taste shock

Penalty 𝜋∗
2
Leakage Rate

5.661
5.715
0.16
0.80
5.725

0.35

5.770
5.819
0.15
0.84
5.829

0.30

5.919
5.959
0.14
0.84
5.968

0.25

6.106
6.137
0.13
0.90
6.145

Value of 𝜇𝜃 (Fixed Support)
0.8

1.0

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 3, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋3 = 1
— — — —
— — — —
Relaxed Problem
(b) Variation of the mean 𝜇𝜃 of the taste shock holding fixed the support.

Penalty 𝜋∗
2
Leakage Rate

6.048
6.095
0.15
0.83
6.095

6.106
6.137
0.13
0.90
6.145

Value of 𝜇𝜃 (Moving Support)
0.8

1.0

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 3, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋3 = 1
— — — —
Penalty 𝜋∗
2
— — — —
Leakage Rate
Relaxed Problem
(c) Variation of the mean 𝜇𝜃 of the taste shock, with moving support.

5.970
6.016
0.15
0.82
6.027

6.106
6.137
0.13
0.90
6.145

0.15

6.531
6.541
0.09
0.99
6.544

0.20

6.323
6.344
0.12
0.89
6.349

1.2

6.103
6.125
0.12
0.88
6.136

1.2

6.052
6.072
0.11
0.95
6.078

Table 5
Robustness checks for welfare gains, optimal penalties and leakage rates. In each sub-table: row 1 contains welfare gains from an 𝑁-account
System with 𝑁 = 2 accounts that have exogenously set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋2 = 1; row 2 contains welfare gains from an 𝑁-account
System with 𝑁 = 3 accounts, where accounts 1 and 3 have exogenously set penalties, specifically 𝜋1 = 0 and 𝜋3 = 1, and account 2 has an
endogenous penalty; rows 3 and 4 contain the optimal penalty and leakage rate from the endogenous-penalty account associated with the system
in row 2; and row 5 contains welfare gains from the Relaxed Problem. This table varies parameters of the distribution of 𝛽 for a truncated
normal distribution of 𝛽 on support [0.2, 1.0]. Table 5 panel (a) varies the parameter 𝜎𝛽 of the truncated-normal distribution of 𝛽.  panel (b)
varies the parameter 𝜇𝛽 of the truncated-normal distribution of 𝛽.

Value of 𝜎𝛽
+∞

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1
6.106
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 3, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋3 = 1
6.137
— — — —
0.13
— — — —
0.90
Relaxed Problem
6.145
(a) Variation of the standard deviation 𝜎𝛽 of the present bias distribution

Penalty 𝜋∗
2
Leakage Rate

1.0

6.020
6.053
0.13
0.90
6.061

0.5

5.773
5.811
0.14
0.90
5.820

0.0

2.542
2.841
0.36
0.73
2.881

Value of 𝜇𝛽
0.45

𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 2, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋2 = 1
𝑁-account System: 𝑁 = 3, 𝜋1 = 0, 𝜋3 = 1
— — — —
— — — —
Relaxed Problem
(b) Variation of the mean 𝜇𝛽 of the present bias distribution

Penalty 𝜋∗
2
Leakage Rate

6.690
6.730
0.15
0.91
6.741

0.50

6.377
6.417
0.15
0.90
6.427

0.55

6.072
6.111
0.15
0.89
6.120

0.65

5.481
5.519
0.14
0.88
5.527

0.70

5.197
5.234
0.14
0.87
5.242

0.75

4.921
4.958
0.14
0.85
4.966

the magnitude of penalties for low-ability (low-income) households and
downweights the magnitude of penalties for high-ability (high-income)
households.  In  other  words,  the  planner  allows  more  liquidity  for

high-income households and requires more illiquidity for low-income
households. Intuitively, allowing high-ability households to consume
closer  to  their  preferred  (no-correction)  allocation  encourages  labor

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399614J. Beshears et al.

supply and allows the planner to achieve more income redistribution.51

6.  Conclusions and directions for future work

We  focus  our  summary  on  our  benchmark  case  in  which  agents
have heterogeneous present bias and the planner can implement mech-
anisms with inter-household transfers. Three findings emerge from our
analysis:

1. The constrained-efficient social optimum is well-approximated
by a two-account system, with one account that is completely
liquid and a second account that is completely illiquid. Little
welfare  gain  is  obtained  by  moving  beyond  this  simple  two-
account system. Accordingly, the two-account system identified
in AWA (in a model with homogeneous 𝛽 and no inter-household
transfers)  turns  out  to  be  approximately  optimal  in  our  new
setting (with heterogeneous 𝛽 and inter-household transfers).
2. If  a  third  account  is  added,  its  optimized  early-withdrawal

penalty is only slightly above 10%.

3. In  equilibrium,  the  leakage  rate  from  this  (partially  illiquid)
third account is high. We report a range of equilibrium leakage
rates,  depending  on  the  calibration.  With  optimal  allocations
to all three accounts – completely liquid, partially illiquid, and
completely illiquid – equilibrium leakage rates from the partially
illiquid account range from 80% to 99%. By contrast, when we
calibrate the model to match actual empirical allocations to the
completely illiquid account, the implied equilibrium leakage rate
from the partially illiquid account drops to 40%.

These properties have analogs in the U.S. retirement savings system.
The  United  States  has  completely  liquid  accounts  (e.g.,  a  standard
checking account), completely illiquid accounts (e.g., Social Security),
and a partially illiquid defined-contribution system with a 10% penalty
for early withdrawals (e.g., an IRA or a 401(k)). This partially illiquid
DC system has a leakage rate of approximately 40% (see Argento et al.,
2015).

Despite these similarities, there are important differences between
our  stylized  model  and  the  rich  institutional  environment  in  which
households make retirement savings decisions. Our theoretical model
includes  key  simplifications.52 First,  we  assume  a  particular  concep-
tual  formulation  of  self-defeating  behavior  (present  bias).53 Second,
we  assume  only  two  periods  (e.g.,  working  life  and  retirement).54
We anticipate that generalization to many periods without labor in-
come – i.e., decades of retirement – would engender optimal policy
characterized  by  a  stream  of  illiquid  payments  (instead  of  a  single
illiquid  account);  such  a  stream  mirrors  the  annuity  payments  that
characterize most defined benefit pension plans. Third, we assume a
particular form of multiplicative taste shifter, 𝜃.55 Fourth, we assume
that households are naive with respect to their present bias parameter,
𝛽. Fifth, our quantitative results study a limited set of distributions of 𝜃
and 𝛽 (see Appendix D.4 for analysis of correlated shocks).56 Sixth, our

51 See Moser  and  Olea  de  Souza  e  Silva (2019)  for  a  related  insight  on
providing incentives via different savings rates by income level, in a model
with heterogeneous earnings ability and present bias.
52 In addition, the U.S. system contains some scope for tax arbitrage, which
is not present in our model.
53 Other  models  of  self-control  include Thaler  and  Shefrin (1981), Gul
and  Pesendorfer (2001), Bernheim  and  Rangel (2004), Loewenstein  and
O’Donoghue (2004)  and Fudenberg  and  Levine (2006).  See Ericson  and
Laibson (2019) for a review of this wider class of ‘present-focused’ models.
54 Infinite  horizon  problems  introduce  technical  challenges  with  respect
to multiple equilibria. However, there has been progress on this issue. For
example, see Harris and Laibson (2013) and Cao and Werning (2018).
55 We assume 𝜃 𝑢(𝑐), but we could have instead assumed 𝑢(𝑐 − 𝜃).
56 Research  is  only  beginning  on  the  distribution  of  present  bias.  For
analysis of this issue, see Moser and Olea de Souza e Silva (2019), Lockwood
(2020), and Cohen et al. (2020).

quantitative evaluations have assumed a fixed endowment, 𝑌 , which
is  not  endogenously  responsive  to  the  tax  and  redistribution  system
(however, see Appendix F for a variation of the model that includes
endogenous income). Seventh, although our quantitative evaluations
omit observable type heterogeneity (e.g., high-income households tend
to have higher values of 𝛽), we show how to conceptually incorpo-
rate such observable heterogeneity in Section 5.1, which turns out to
reinforce our findings.

Our simulations imply that retirement consumption should not be
allowed  to  fall  far  below  working  life  consumption  (recall  that  the
illiquid account has a high funding level when we calculate the socially
optimal system). In the actual data on U.S. households, consumption
proxies appear to decline between working life and retirement,57 raising
the normative possibility that mandatory savings might be underuti-
lized in the U.S.58 However, there is an active debate about both the
existence and normative interpretation of the observed distribution of
consumption  changes  for  households  transitioning  from  work  life  to
retirement.59

Much  more  robustness  work  is  needed  to  interrogate  the  three
findings that we summarized above, as well as the additional finding
that more mandatory savings would be socially optimal. It is not clear
whether these results will continue to hold as future research enriches
and  expands  our  understanding  of  household  behavior  and  optimal
policy.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

John Beshears: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investiga-
tion, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. James
J. Choi: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding
acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Christopher Clayton:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Super-
vision,  Software,  Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,
Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Christopher
Harris: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation,
Supervision,  Software,  Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investi-
gation,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization. David  Laibson: Writing
– review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Resources,
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisi-
tion, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Brigitte C. Madrian: Writing
– original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

John Beshears

This research received funding from the TIAA Institute and Whar-
ton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The content
is  solely  the  responsibility  of  the  authors  and  does  not  necessarily
represent  official  views  of  the  TIAA  Institute  or  Wharton  School’s
Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge additional financial support from the Pershing Square Fund
for  Research  on  the  Foundations  of  Human  Behavior,  the  Eric  M.
Mindich Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, the
National Institutes of Health (P30AG034532), and the Social Security
Administration. The views expressed in this paper are not endorsed by
NIA, SSA, or any federal government agency.

57 See Stephens and Toohey (2018).
58 In our model, mandatory savings are achieved through a funded system.
Our  model  takes  no  position  on  the  distinction  between  funded  (e.g.,  the
superannuation scheme in Australia) and unfunded (e.g., U.S. Social Security)
mandatory savings systems.
59 See Beshears  et  al. (2018)  for  a  recent  review  of  the  literature  on
consumption dynamics at and through retirement.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399615J. Beshears et al.

I  have  received  additional  grant  support  from  Nest  Insight  and
the Smith Richardson Foundation. I have received research data from
Alight Solutions, Vanguard, Nest Insight, the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia, and Voya Financial.

I  was  an  advisor  to  and  equity  holder  in  Nutmeg  Saving  and
Investment, a robo-advice asset management company. I am a TIAA
Institute Fellow

James Choi

This research received funding from the TIAA Institute and Whar-
ton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The content
is  solely  the  responsibility  of  the  authors  and  does  not  necessarily
represent  official  views  of  the  TIAA  Institute  or  Wharton  School’s
Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge additional financial support from the Pershing Square Fund
for  Research  on  the  Foundations  of  Human  Behavior,  the  Eric  M.
Mindich Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, the
National Institute on Aging (P30AG034532), and the Social Security
Administration. The views expressed in this paper are not endorsed by
NIA, SSA, or any federal government agency.

I have received additional grant support from the National Employ-
ment  Savings  Trust  (NEST),  the  Pershing  Square  Fund  for  Research
on  the  Foundations  of  Human  Behavior,  and  the  Smith  Richardson
Foundation.  I  have  received  financial  compensation  from  American
Express.

I have received research data from Alight Solutions. I am a TIAA

Institute Fellow, an uncompensated position.

Christopher Clayton

This research received funding from the TIAA Institute and Whar-
ton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The content
is  solely  the  responsibility  of  the  authors  and  does  not  necessarily
represent  official  views  of  the  TIAA  Institute  or  Wharton  School’s
Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge additional financial support from the Pershing Square Fund
for  Research  on  the  Foundations  of  Human  Behavior,  the  Eric  M.
Mindich Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, the
National Institute on Aging (P30AG034532), and the Social Security
Administration. The views expressed in this paper are not endorsed by
NIA, SSA, or any federal government agency.

Christopher Harris

This research received funding from the TIAA Institute and Whar-
ton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The content
is  solely  the  responsibility  of  the  authors  and  does  not  necessarily
represent  official  views  of  the  TIAA  Institute  or  Wharton  School’s
Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge additional financial support from the Pershing Square Fund
for  Research  on  the  Foundations  of  Human  Behavior,  the  Eric  M.
Mindich Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, the
National Institute on Aging (P30AG034532), and the Social Security
Administration. The views expressed in this paper are not endorsed by
NIA, SSA, or any federal government agency.

David Laibson

This research received funding from the TIAA Institute and Whar-
ton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The content
is  solely  the  responsibility  of  the  authors  and  does  not  necessarily
represent  official  views  of  the  TIAA  Institute  or  Wharton  School’s
Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge additional financial support from the Pershing Square Fund
for  Research  on  the  Foundations  of  Human  Behavior,  the  Eric  M.
Mindich Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, the
National Institutes on Health (P30AG034532), and the Social Security
Administration. The views expressed in this paper are not endorsed by
NIA, SSA, or any federal government agency.

I have received additional grant support from the NEST Insight, and

the Smith Richardson Foundation.

I have received research data from NEST Insight, Alight Solutions,

Vanguard, and Voya Financial.

Brigitte Madrian

This research received funding from the TIAA Institute and Whar-
ton School’s Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The content
is  solely  the  responsibility  of  the  authors  and  does  not  necessarily
represent  official  views  of  the  TIAA  Institute  or  Wharton  School’s
Pension Research Council/Boettner Center. The authors gratefully ac-
knowledge additional financial support from the Pershing Square Fund
for  Research  on  the  Foundations  of  Human  Behavior,  the  Eric  M.
Mindich Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, the
National Institute on Aging (P30AG034532), and the Social Security
Administration. The views expressed in this paper are not endorsed by
NIA, SSA, or any federal government agency.

I have received additional grant support from the National Employ-
ment Savings Trust (NEST), the Pershing Square Fund for Research on
the Foundations of Human Behavior, the Smith Richardson Foundation,
and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.

I have received research data from NEST and Alight Solutions.

Appendix A.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.103996.

Data availability

Replication Code for Optimal Illiquidity (Original data) (Mendeley
Data)

References

Allcott, Hunt, Kim, Joshua, Taubinsky, Dmitry, Zinman, Jonathan, 2022. Are high-
interest loans predatory? Theory and evidence from payday lending. Rev. Econ.
Stud. 89 (3), 1041–1084.

Allcott, Hunt, Lockwood, Benjamin B., Taubinsky, Dmitry, 2019. Regressive sin taxes,
with an application to the optimal soda tax. Q. J. Econ. 134 (3), 1557–1626.
Amador,  Manuel,  Werning,  Iván,  Angeletos,  George-Marios,  2006.  Commitment  vs.

flexibility. Econometrica 74 (2), 365–396.

Ambrus,  Attila,  Egorov,  Georgy,  2013.  Comment  on  ‘‘Commitment  vs.  flexibility’’.

Econometrica 81 (5), 2113–2124.

Argento, Robert, Bryant, Victoria L., Sabelhaus, John, 2015. Early withdrawals from
retirement accounts during the great recession. Contemp. Econ. Policy 33 (1), 1–16.
Atkeson, Andrew, Lucas, Jr., Robert E., 1992. On efficient distribution with private

information. Rev. Econ. Stud. 59 (3), 427–453.

Augenblick,  Ned,  Niederle,  Muriel,  Sprenger,  Charles,  2015.  Working  over  time:
Dynamic inconsistency in real effort tasks. Q. J. Econ. 130 (3), 1067–1115.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Rangel, Antonio, 2004. Addiction and cue-triggered decision

processes. Amer. Econ. Rev. 94 (5), 1558–1590.

Bernheim,  B.  Douglas,  Taubinsky,  Dmitry,  2018.  Behavioral  public  economics.  In:
Bernheim, B. Douglas, DellaVigna, Stefano, Laibson, David (Eds.), In: Handbook of
Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations, vol. 1, Elsevier, pp. 381–516.
J.,  Harris,  Christopher,  Laibson,  David,
Madrian,  Brigitte  C.,  Sakong,  Jung,  2020.  Which  early  withdrawal  penalty
attracts the most deposits to a commitment savings account? J. Public Econ. 183,
104144.

John,  Choi, 

Beshears, 

James 

Beshears, John, Choi, James J., Hurwitz, Joshua, Laibson, David, Madrian, Brigitte C.,
2015. Liquidity in retirement savings systems: An international comparison. Amer.
Econ. Rev. 105 (5), 420–425.

Beshears, John, Choi, James J., Laibson, David, Madrian, Brigitte C., 2018. Behavioral
household finance. In: Bernheim, B. Douglas, DellaVigna, Stefano, Laibson, David
(Eds.), In: Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, vol.
1, Elsevier, pp. 177–276.

Bond, Philip, Sigurdsson, Gustav, 2018. Commitment contracts. Rev. Econ. Stud. 85

(1), 194–222.

Econom. Rev. 34 (4), 873–901.

Bower,  Anthony  G.,  1993.  Procurement  policy  and  contracting  efficiency.  Internat.

Brady, Peter J., 2017. Who participates in retirement plans. ICI Res. Perspect. 23 (5).
Burkhalter,  Kyle,  Chaplain,  Chris,  2023.  Replacement  rates  for  hypothetical  retired
workers. In: ASA Actuarial Note Number 2023.9. Social Security Administration,
Office of the Chief Actuary.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399616J. Beshears et al.

Camerer,  Colin,  Issacharoff,  Samuel,  Loewenstein,  George,  O’Donoghue,  Ted,  Ra-
bin, Matthew, 2003. Regulation for conservatives: behavioral economics and the
case for ‘asymmetric paternalism’. Univ. Pa. Law Rev. 151 (3), 1211–1254.
Cao,  Dan,  Werning,  Iván,  2018.  Saving  and  dissaving  with  hyperbolic  discounting.

Chu, Leon Yang, Sappington, David E.M., 2007. Simple cost-sharing contracts. Amer.

Econometrica 86 (3), 805–857.

Econ. Rev. 97 (1), 419–428.

Cohen, Jonathan, Ericson, Keith Marzilli, Laibson, David, White, John Myles, 2020.

Measuring time preferences. J. Econ. Lit. 58 (2), 299–347.

DellaVigna, Stefano, Malmendier, Ulrike, 2004. Contract design and self-control: Theory

and evidence. Q. J. Econ. 119 (2), 353–402.

Laibson,  David,  Lee,  Sean  Chanwook,  Maxted,  Peter,  Repetto,  Andrea,  Tobac-
man, Jeremy, 2024. Estimating discount functions with consumption choices over
the lifecycle. Rev. Financ. Stud. (forthcoming).

Laibson, David I., Repetto, Andrea, Tobacman, Jeremy, 1998. Self-control and saving

for retirement. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 1998 (1), 91–196.

Laibson,  David,  Repetto,  Andrea,  Tobacman,  Jeremy,  2003.  "A  debt  puzzle".  In:
Aghion,  Philippe,  Frydman,  Roman,  Stiglitz,  Joseph,  Woodford,  Michael  (Eds.),
Knowledge,  Information,  and  Expectations  in  Modern  Economics:  In  Honor  of
Edmund S. Phelps. Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 228–266.

Lockwood, Benjamin B., 2020. Optimal income taxation with present bias. Am. Econ.

J. : Econ. Policy 12 (4), 298–327.

DellaVigna, Stefano, Malmendier, Ulrike, 2006. Paying not to go to the gym. Amer.

Loewenstein, George, O’Donoghue, Ted, 2004. Animal spirits: Affective and deliberative

DellaVigna, Stefano, Paserman, M. Daniele, 2005. Job search and impatience. J. Labor

Maxted,  Peter,  2022.  Present  Bias  Unconstrained:  Consumption,  Welfare,  and  the

Econ. Rev. 96 (3), 694–719.

Econ. 23 (3), 527–588.

processes in economic behavior. Available At SSRN 539843.

Present-Bias Dilemma. Tech. Rep., Mimeo.

McAfee, R. Preston, 2002. Coarse matching. Econometrica 70 (5), 2025–2034.
Meier, Stephan, Sprenger, Charles, 2010. Present-biased preferences and credit card

borrowing. Am. Econ. J. : Appl. Econ. 2 (1), 193–210.

Mirrlees, James A., 1971. An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation.

Rev. Econ. Stud. 38 (2), 175–208.

Moser, Christian, Olea de Souza e Silva, Pedro, 2019. Optimal paternalistic savings

policies. Columbia Bus. Sch. Res. Pap. (17–51).

Diamond, Peter A., 1973. Consumption externalities and imperfect corrective pricing.

Bell J. Econ. Manag. Sci. 4 (2), 526–538.

Ericson,  Keith  Marzilli,  Laibson,  David,  2019.  Intertemporal  choice.  In:  Bern-
heim,  B.  Douglas,  DellaVigna,  Stefano,  Laibson,  David  (Eds.),  In:  Handbook  of
Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, vol. 2, Elsevier, pp. 1–67.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Gabaix, Xavier, 2020. Optimal taxation with behavioral agents. Amer.

Econ. Rev. 110 (1), 298–336.

(2), 635–673.

Econ. Rev. 96 (5), 1449–1476.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Werning, Iván, 2010. Progressive estate taxation. Q. J. Econ. 125

O’Donoghue, Ted, Rabin, Matthew, 1999a. Doing it now or later. Amer. Econ. Rev. 89

Fudenberg, Drew, Levine, David K., 2006. A dual-self model of impulse control. Amer.

O’Donoghue, Ted, Rabin, Matthew, 1999b. Incentives for procrastinators. Q. J. Econ.

Galperti,  Simone,  2015.  Commitment,  flexibility,  and  optimal  screening  of  time

O’Donoghue, Ted, Rabin, Matthew, 2006. Optimal sin taxes. J. Public Econ. 90 (10–11),

(1), 103–124.

114 (3), 769–816.

1825–1849.

inconsistency. Econometrica 83 (4), 1425–1465.

Gasmi, Farid, Laffont, Jean-Jacques, Sharkey, William W., 1999. Empirical evaluation of
regulatory regimes in local telecommunications markets. J. Econ. Manag. Strateg.
8 (1), 61–93.

Gerster,  Andreas,  Kramm,  Michael,  2023.  Optimal  internality  taxation  of  product

attributes.

Giné, Xavier, Karlan, Dean, Zinman, Jonathan, 2010. Put your money where your butt
is: a commitment contract for smoking cessation. Am. Econ. J. : Appl. Econ. 2 (4),
213–235.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Parker, Jonathan A., 2002. Consumption over the life cycle.

Paluszynski,  Radoslaw,  Yu,  Pei  Cheng,  2019.  Optimal  taxation  with  risky  human
capital and retirement savings. In: Proceedings. Annual Conference on Taxation
and Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the National Tax Association, vol. 112,
JSTOR, pp. 1–59.

Pavoni,  Nicola,  Yazici,  Hakki,  2016.  Optimal  Life-Cycle  Capital  Taxation  Under

Self-Control Problems. Econ. J. 127 (602), 1188–1216.

Phelps,  Edmund  S.,  Pollak,  Robert  A.,  1968.  On  second-best  national  saving  and

game-equilibrium growth. Rev. Econ. Stud. 35 (2), 185–199.

Reichelstein, Stefan, 1992. Constructing incentive schemes for government contracts:

An application of agency theory. Account. Rev. 67 (4), 712–731.

regulation. Amer. Econ. Rev. 93 (3), 919–926.

Gruber, Jonathan, Köszegi, Botond, 2001. Is addiction ‘‘rational’’? Theory and evidence.

Rogerson, William P., 2003. Simple menus of contracts in cost-based procurement and

Econometrica 70 (1), 47–89.

Q. J. Econ. 116 (4), 1261–1303.

69 (6), 1403–1435.

Econometrica 82 (5), 1557–1614.

(1), 205–248.

Gruber, Jonathan, Köszegi, Botond, 2004. Tax incidence when individuals are time-
inconsistent:  the  case  of  cigarette  excise  taxes.  J.  Public  Econ.  88  (9–10),
1959–1987.

Gul, Faruk, Pesendorfer, Wolfgang, 2001. Temptation and self-control. Econometrica

Sappington, David E.M., Weisman, Dennis L., 1996. Designing Incentive Regulation for
the Telecommunications Industry. American Enterprise Institute Press, Washington,
DC.

Shapiro, Jesse M., 2005. Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp

Halac, Marina, Yared, Pierre, 2014. Fiscal rules and discretion under persistent shocks.

Stephens,  Jr.,  Melvin,  Toohey,  Desmond,  2018.  Changes  in  Nutrient  Intake  at

Harris, Christopher, Laibson, David, 2013. Instantaneous gratification. Q. J. Econ. 128

Strotz, R.H., 1955. Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization. Rev.

nutrition cycle. J. Public Econ. 89 (2–3), 303–325.

Retirement. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Econ. Stud. 23 (3), 165–180. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2295722.

Heidhues,  Paul,  Kőszegi,  Botond,  2010.  Exploiting  naivete  about  self-control  in  the

Sulka, Tomasz, 2022. Exploitative contracting in a life cycle savings model. Available

At SSRN 3507413.

Polit. Econ. 89 (2), 392–406.

Thaler, Richard H., Shefrin, Hersh M., 1981. An economic theory of self-control. J.

Yu, Pei Cheng, 2021. Optimal retirement policies with present-biased agents. J. Eur.

Econom. Assoc. 19 (4), 2085–2130.

credit market. Amer. Econ. Rev. 100 (5), 2279–2303.

Heidhues, Paul, Kőszegi, Botond, 2018. Behavioral industrial organization. In: Bern-
heim,  B.  Douglas,  DellaVigna,  Stefano,  Laibson,  David  (Eds.),  In:  Handbook  of
Behavioral  Economics:  Applications  and  Foundations  1,  vol.  1,  Elsevier,  pp.
517–612.

Hewitt Associates, 2009. The erosion of retirement security from cash-outs: Analysis
and recommendations. http://www.aon.com/human-capital-consulting/thought-lea
dership/retirement/reports-pubsretirementcashouts.jsp. (Accessed: 18 April 2011).
Laibson, David, 1997. Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Q. J. Econ. 112 (2),

443–478.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399617