Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Q: Risk, rents, or growth?✩
Alexandre Corhay a, Howard Kung b, Lukas Schmid c,∗
a Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, 105 St. George Street, Toronto, M5S 3E6, ON, Canada
b London Business School and CEPR, Regent’s Park, Sussex Place, London, NW1 4SA, United Kingdom
c Marshall School of Business, USC and CEPR, 701 Exposition Blvd, Los Angeles, 90089, CA, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Tobin’s Q
Aggregate demand
Simulated method of moments
Corporate investment
Intangible capital
Innovation
Industry concentration

1.  Introduction

We document that the increasing polarization in Tobin’s 𝑄 within industries is closely connected to the growing
divergence in rents and the emergence of superstar firms over the past four decades, while discount rates and
growth rates did not exhibit the same increasing dispersion. We explain these industry polarization trends in
an estimated general equilibrium model where each industry consists of large superstar oligopolists and small
monopolistically competitive firms with endogenous transitions between them. Small firms make investments
in speculative innovation to increase their probability of becoming superstars. Our model estimation finds
that rising entry barriers in both small and superstar firms contribute to rising polarization in markups, but
the rising barriers to creating small firms and increasing tastes for goods produced by superstars account for
most of the divergence in 𝑄. Stunting the creation of small firms generates greater incentives for speculative
innovation, magnifying the impact of market power dispersion on industry polarization in 𝑄.

Aggregate stock market valuations relative to the replacement value
of physical capital (Tobin’s 𝑄) soared to unprecedented heights since
the  early  2000s  despite  a  slowdown  in  productivity  and  investment
rates. Recent literature links the divergence between aggregate funda-
mentals and 𝑄 to the rising average market power of firms (e.g., Farhi
and  Gourio (2018), Eggertsson  et  al. (2021),  and Gutiérrez  et  al.
(2021)). We find that the emergence of a few dominant firms (‘‘super-
stars’’) in each industry drives the surge in aggregate 𝑄, also leading
to  increasing  polarization.  The  rise  of  superstars  over  the  past  two
decades also accounts for the secular trends of increasing market power
and declining labor shares (e.g., Van Reenen (2018), De Loecker et al.
(2020) and Autor et al. (2020)).

We exploit the forward-looking nature of 𝑄 to identify the sources of
inequality within industries as we can link 𝑄 to the market expectations
of the future path of markups, profitability, intangible capital shares,

discount rates, and growth rates using identities. Fig. 1 plots these vari-
ables for superstars and the rest of the firms in an industry. We define
superstars as firms in the top 5th percentile of market capitalization
in each industry and small firms as the remaining firms.1 This figure
shows that 𝑄, markups, profitability, and the intangible capital share
diverged between superstars and the rest of the industry’s firms from
1978 to 2019, while sales growth and discount rates did not.2 We define
polarization as the difference in average firm characteristics between
superstars and small firms within industries. This figure suggests that
the rising polarization in 𝑄 is related to superstars’ increasing rents and
intangible capital share.

We  aim  to  explain  the  industry  polarization  trends  depicted  in
Fig.  1 using  a  general  equilibrium  model  featuring  an  endogenous
industry market structure of superstars and small firms. Superstars are
oligopolists that strategically compete on prices of differentiated super-
star goods and use intangible capital accumulated from fundamental

✩
Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for many insightful suggestions. We also thank Nicolas Crouzet,
Winston Dou, Gauti Eggertson, Neal Galpin, Francois Gourio, Ye Li, Erik Loualiche, and seminar participants at CUHK, HKUST, Duke, USC, American Finance
Association San Diego, European Finance Association Meetings Lisbon, Finance Down Under Melbourne, ITAM Finance Conference, Michigan Mitsui Symposium,
SFS Cavalcade, NBER Summer Institute, and Tepper/LAEF Macrofinance Conference at CMU for helpful comments and discussions.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: alexandre.corhay@rotman.utoronto.ca (A. Corhay), hkung@london.edu (H. Kung), lukas@marshall.usc.edu (L. Schmid).

1 Our main findings are robust to alternative definitions of superstars, such as defining superstars as the top 10th percentile of the market capitalization of
equity, excluding major technology firms (Alphabet, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, and Microsoft) from the sample, specifying industries at the NAICS 3-digit level,
and defining size as the sum of the market value of equity and the book value of debt.

2 These diverging patterns remain even if we adjust 𝑄 and profitability for intangible capital, although the trends are muted given the rising share of intangible

capital. Figure A.1 in the internet appendix plots these alternative definitions of 𝑄 and intangible capital.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103990
Received 13 December 2023; Received in revised form 15 December 2024; Accepted 16 December 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)103990Availableonline9January20250304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsarereserved,includingthosefortextanddatamining,AItraining,andsimilartechnologies.A. Corhay et al.

Fig. 1. Industry Polarization.
This figure plots the 5-year centered moving average of Tobin’s 𝑄, markups, profitability, intangible capital shares, sales growth, and discount rates for 1978–2019. The variable
definitions are provided in internet appendix C.2. We aggregate small and superstar firms across industries and then take a rolling five-year, centered moving average. Superstars
are defined as the top 5% ranked by market cap in each 4-digit NAICS industry. Small firms are defined as the remaining firms, excluding Superstars.

innovation  in  production.  Positive  spillovers  from  superstar  intangi-
ble  capital  generate  sustained  long-term  productivity  growth.  Small
firms are monopolistically competitive firms that produce differentiated
goods  and  engage  in  speculative  innovation  that  positively  affects
their  probability  of  making  a  breakthrough  to  become  a  superstar.
There is a competitive fringe of startups that are required to pay an
upfront fixed cost to enter an industry as a small firm. The endogenous
transitions between small firms and superstars produce rich variation
in the distribution of market power within industries.

We estimate the model in two subsamples,1978–1998 and 1999–
2019,  to  identify  the  economic  drivers  of  the  growing  inequality  in
𝑄, rents, and intangible capital between superstars and the rest of the
firms,  but  without  generating  polarization  in  discount  rates  or  sales
growth. We use a wide array of industry polarization and aggregate
trends  to  identify  the  structural  parameters  in  each  subsample.  We
derive  a 𝑄 decomposition  that  relates  the  differences  in 𝑄 between
superstars and small firms to differences in markups, sales to capital,
intangible  capital  shares,  discount  rates,  exit  rates,  fixed  costs,  and
growth  rates.  Guided  by  the  structural  decomposition,  we  perform
comparative statics highlighting how the model parameters contribute
to rising 𝑄 polarization.

Our estimation results find that increasing barriers to becoming a
superstar and to entering as a small firm jointly account for most of
the increasing gap between superstar markups and the rest of the firms
in the industry. Indeed, in the model, the equilibrium superstar markup
is increasing with respect to the sales share of an individual superstar
relative to the entire industry (small firms and superstars). Increasing
barriers  for  a  startup  to  enter  as  a  small  firm  reduces  the  mass  of
small firms, thereby increasing the relative sales share of an individual
superstar. Rising barriers to entry as a superstar reduce the number of
superstars, which also raises the relative sales share of an individual
superstar. Therefore, rising barriers to entry at each stage of the life
cycle contribute to rising differences in superstar markups relative to
other firms by consolidating the market share of incumbent superstars,
jointly explaining around 75% of the total increase in markup polariza-
tion. Increasing demand for superstar goods accounts for most of the
remaining markup differences.

While the two sources of barriers to entry contribute similarly to
industry polarization in markups, they have very different effects on 𝑄
polarization. We find that increasing barriers to becoming a small firm
explain over a third of the total rise in 𝑄 polarization. In contrast, the

increasing barriers to becoming a superstar have a negligible effect on
𝑄 polarization. A primary reason for the contrasting effects on 𝑄 is how
the barriers at different stages affect speculative innovation incentives
of small firms in opposite directions, which then affects the level of
technology and the intensity of the knowledge spillovers from superstar
intangible capital accumulated from fundamental innovation.

Higher barriers for a startup to become a small firm increase the
relative market power of superstars, making it more attractive for a
small firm to become a superstar to capture the higher expected rents.
This  leads  small  firms  to  engage  in  more  speculative  innovation  to
increase their likelihood of becoming superstars. Increasing the number
of  superstars  enhances  the  positive  spillover  effects  of  fundamental
innovation on technology, boosting trend growth. Higher growth mag-
nifies  the  effects  of  higher  superstar  markups  on 𝑄 polarization  by
lowering  the  growth-adjusted  discount  rate  in  the  present  value  of
rents.

In contrast, raising the barriers to entry to becoming a superstar
discourages speculative innovation by lowering the likelihood of suc-
cessful  transitions  as  superstars.  Superstars  consolidate  their  market
power with fewer competitors by charging higher markups and cut-
ting production. The fall in superstar production reduces demand for
fundamental innovation, lowering trend growth. Lower growth damp-
ens  the  effects  of  higher  superstar  markups  on 𝑄 by  increasing  the
growth-adjusted discount rate in the present value of rents. Therefore,
polarization in 𝑄 is highly informative about barriers at different stages
in the life cycle of firms because it reflects expectations of how the
innovation margins impact the valuation of future rents.

Rising demand for superstar goods and an increasing reliance on
intangible capital in superstar production technology each account for
around one-third of the rise in 𝑄 polarization, akin to the contribution
from the rising barriers to becoming small firms. These three channels
endogenously interact to reinforce the acceleration in 𝑄 polarization in
the second half of our sample. The rising barriers and increasing pref-
erence for superstar goods make the demand for superstar goods more
inelastic, increasing the expected future superstar rents. Increasing the
share of intangible capital in superstar production technology increases
𝑄 directly because we define 𝑄 as the market value of the firm rela-
tive to physical capital and indirectly through the endogenous growth
channel. Higher superstar intangible capital raises trend growth due to
knowledge spillovers. Higher trend growth lowers the growth-adjusted
discount rate and increases the present value of future rents.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039902A. Corhay et al.

We examine several policy implications of our model to illustrate
how  pro-competitive  regulation  at  different  stages  (i.e.,  encouraging
the  creation  of  new  firms  versus  directly  curbing  the  market  power
of superstars) can have disparate consequences for industry inequality
and  aggregate  growth.  While  lowering  barriers  to  entry  as  a  small
firm  and  as  a  superstar  would  help  reverse  the  rising  inequality  in
market power, only the former would reduce the widening gap in 𝑄
between superstars and the rest of the firms. However, encouraging
the entry of new small firms weakens superstar rents and discourages
speculative innovation, leading to fewer superstars. A small number
of  superstars  weakens  the  positive  spillover  effects  of  fundamental
innovation, generating a slowdown in trend growth.

In contrast, reducing the barriers to becoming a superstar stimulates
more speculative innovation, enhancing the spillover effects of funda-
mental innovation and boosting trend growth. Our policy experiments
suggest that pro-competitive policies targeting superstars versus new
firms distort innovation incentives and affect trend growth in opposite
directions.  They  also  caution  against  policies  targeting  inequality  in
valuation ratios like Tobin’s 𝑄. Directly curbing the market power of
superstars reduces inequality in markups but not in 𝑄 while stimulating
growth. Encouraging the creation of new small firms reduces inequal-
ity in markups and 𝑄 but dampens aggregate growth in our model.
In  short,  accounting  for  a  mixed  industry  structure  is  important  for
analyzing competition policy.

Our paper connects to the broad literature examining the drivers
and  implications  of  macroeconomic  trends  in  the  past  few  decades.
Existing research documents secular trends in interest rates (Caballero
et al., 2017), the labor share (Barkai (2020), Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2016), Rognlie (2015), Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019), Eisfeldt et al.
(2023), and Greenwald et al. (2024)), Tobin’s 𝑄 (Gutiérrez and Philip-
pon (2016), Eggertsson et al. (2021) and Farhi and Gourio (2018)),
(Andrei  et  al.,
investment-𝑄 relation 
in
competition ((Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2016), Grullon et al. (2019),
and De Loecker et al. (2020)), and intangible investment (Crouzet and
Eberly (2018), Crouzet and Eberly (2019)). Our paper shows how some
of these trends are driven by superstars and related to increasing indus-
try polarization. We focus on showing how the increasing polarization
in 𝑄 within industries is driven by the growing inequality in markups,
rents,  and  intangible  capital  using  an  estimated  general  equilibrium
model with mixed industries.

changes 

2019), 

We relate to studies highlighting the growing impact of superstars
on industries and the macroeconomy. There are papers showing that
the secular rise in markups (De Loecker et al., 2020) across industries,
the decline in the aggregate labor share (Autor et al., 2020), and rising
sales concentration (Van Reenen, 2018) are driven by superstars. Liu
et  al. (2022)  show  that  low-interest  rate  environments  can  induce
higher market concentration. We complement these papers by docu-
menting that the increasing trend in Tobin’s 𝑄 is driven by superstars,
reflecting the growing inequality in rents and intangible capital within
industries. Cavenaile et al. (2019) emphasize the role of antitrust poli-
cies for determining the endogenous industry structure in an estimated
model of superstars and small firms with endogenous growth and M&A.
We differ by focusing our estimation on explaining the increasing po-
larization in 𝑄 over our two sample periods. Ayyagari et al. (2024) find
that accounting for intangible capital in the return on invested capital
(ROIC)  explains  most  of  the  growing  differences  in  ROIC  between
superstars and small firms.3 We focus on documenting and explaining
the increasing polarization in 𝑄. While we find that intangible capital
plays  an  important  role  in  explaining  the  rising  polarization  in 𝑄
between superstars and small firms, our structural estimation shows
that increasing differences in markups and sales are equally important
as intangible capital in contributing to the polarization in 𝑄.

Our model elements of endogenous entry, imperfect competition,
and innovation connect our paper to the broader literature examining
the  asset  pricing  implications  of  firms’  intangible  capital  (Ai  et  al.
(2013) and Crouzet and Eberly (2023)), product market imperfections
(Corhay (2017), Lyandres and Palazzo (2016), Loualiche (2021), Opp
et  al. (2014), Iraola  and  Santos (2017), Dou  et  al. (2021), Wang
et al. (2022), Neuhann and Sockin (2020), and Chen et al. (2024)),
and  endogenous  growth  margins  to  generate  long-run  risks  (Kung
(2015), Kung and Schmid (2015), and Corhay et al. (2020)). In contrast
to these papers, we focus on documenting and identifying the drivers
of the growing inequality in 𝑄 in an estimated model with superstar
and small firms.

2.  Model

We build a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model featuring
industries  populated  with superstar  firms and small  firms to  explain
the polarization trends within industries. We assume that markets are
complete.  A  representative  household  accumulates  the  physical  and
R&D capital stocks in the economy.

Production  consists  of  two  tiers  (e.g., Jaimovich  and  Floetotto
(2008) and Eckel and Neary (2010)). The top tier contains a continuum
of industries of unit measure producing differentiated industry goods
packaged  together  into  final  goods  for  consumption.  In  the  bottom
tier,  each  industry  has  an  endogenous  mass  of  superstars  and  small
firms producing differentiated products in a mixed market framework
(e.g., Shimomura and Thisse (2012)).

We assume that superstars are oligopolistic competitive firms within
each industry that compete on prices. Each superstar firm has a positive
mass so that its actions affect industry demand. We assume that small
firms constitute a monopolistically competitive fringe within each in-
dustry. Each small firm is infinitesimal and, therefore, has a negligible
impact individually, but their collective decisions affect industry prices.
Our model endogenizes the industry market structure by allowing
for the entry of new small firms and the transition of some small firms
to superstars. A new small firm can enter an industry by paying an
upfront startup cost. A small firm can invest in speculative R&D each
period, which increases the probability that the small firm becomes a
superstar firm. Superstars can increase their likelihood of survival by
investing in strategic R&D. Households accumulate intangible capital
by investing in fundamental R&D, rented only to superstar firms. The
use of intangible capital in production by superstar firms is assumed
to generate positive aggregate knowledge spillovers across firms in the
economy, leading to sustained trend growth.

2.1.  Product demand

A competitive representative final goods firm produces final goods
by first packaging superstar and small firm products into industry goods
and then combining the industry goods into final goods. A constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregator with unit elasticity bundles
together a continuum of differentiated industry goods, 𝑌𝑗 𝑡, on a unit
measure, 𝑗 ∈ [0, 1] to produce the final goods, ̄𝑌𝑡:

)

( ̄𝑌𝑡

ln

= ∫

0

1

ln

(𝑌𝑗 𝑡

) 𝑑 𝑗 .

(1)

The  industry  good 𝑗 is  constructed  by  combining  the  superstar
composite (𝑋𝑗 𝑡) and small firm composite (𝑥𝑗 𝑡) with a CES aggregator:

[

𝑌𝑗 𝑡 =

(𝛶 ⋅ 𝑋𝑗 𝑡

) 𝜈−1

𝜈 + 𝑥

𝜈−1
𝜈
𝑗 𝑡

] 𝜈
𝜈−1

,

(2)

3 Note  that  our  classification  of  superstars  uses  market  cap  and  differs

from Ayyagari et al. (2024) who use ROIC.

where 𝛶 > 0 determines the relative preference for superstars, and 𝜈 >
0 is the elasticity of substitution between the two composite goods. The
two composite goods bundle the products of the superstars and small

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039903A. Corhay et al.

firms within industry 𝑗 according to the following CES aggregators:

𝑋𝑗 𝑡 =

𝜈
𝜈−1

𝑁𝑗 𝑡
∑

𝑖=0

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝜈−1
𝜈
𝑖𝑗 𝑡

𝑋

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

and 𝑥𝑗 𝑡 =

(

𝑛𝑗 𝑡

∫
0

𝜈−1
𝜈

𝑚𝑗 𝑡 𝑑 𝑚

𝑥

) 𝜈
𝜈−1

,

(3)

respectively,  where  the  elasticity  of  substitution  is  given  by 𝜈.  The
number 𝑁𝑗 𝑡 is the endogenous measure of superstar firms industry 𝑗,
each with a positive mass. The superstars are large oligopolistic firms
whose  individual  actions  impact  industry  demand.  The  number 𝑛𝑗 𝑡
corresponds to the endogenous measure of small firms that constitute
the monopolistic competitive fringe in industry 𝑗. Each small firm is
infinitesimal, whose individual actions are assumed to have a negligible
effect, but the small firms collectively impact the industry price.

The profit maximization problem of the representative final goods
firm yields the demand schedule for superstar 𝑖 and small firm 𝑚 in
industry 𝑗:

𝛩𝑗 𝑡(𝑃𝑖𝑗 𝑡) ≡

̄𝑌𝑡
𝛶

𝑃 𝜈−1
𝑗 𝑡

( 𝑃𝑖𝑗 𝑡
𝛶

)−𝜈

and 𝜃𝑗 𝑡(𝑝𝑚𝑗 𝑡) ≡ ̄𝑌𝑡𝑃 𝜈−1

𝑗 𝑡 𝑝−𝜈
𝑚𝑗 𝑡,

(4)

respectively, where 𝑃𝑖𝑗 𝑡 is the price of a superstar firm product 𝑖 in
industry 𝑗, 𝑝𝑚𝑗 𝑡 represents the price of a small firm product 𝑚 in industry
𝑗, and 𝑃𝑗 𝑡 corresponds to the price index of industry 𝑗, all of which
are defined in terms of the numeraire (final goods). Details of the final
goods firm’s problem are contained in internet appendix A.1.

2.2.  Industry competition

Each industry features superstar and small firm subsectors. Super-
stars are ‘‘large’’ within the industry but ‘‘small’’ relative to the overall
economy (e.g., Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008) and Eckel and Neary
(2010)), which is a tractable way of incorporating strategic interactions
among firms in general equilibrium. The individual actions of super-
stars, therefore, impact industry prices but not aggregate factor prices.
We assume  that the superstars are oligopolists  who compete on the
prices of differentiated products. The superstars account for strategic
interactions among superstars, the collective actions of the small firms
within the industry, and the aggregate states of the world. In contrast,
the small firms are ‘‘small’’ in the industry and, therefore, not strategic.
They produce differentiated products, but they take the industry price
index as given when setting prices in a monopolistically competitive
setting.

We feature the endogenous entry of entrepreneurs into an industry
as  a  small  firm  and  the  endogenous  transition  of  some  small  firms
to superstar firms. Entry as a small firm requires paying an upfront
fixed startup cost. Small firms spend on speculative R&D, increasing
their  probability  of  becoming  superstars  next  period.  Superstars  use
resources on strategic R&D, increasing the probability of survival into
the next period.

All firms hire labor and rent physical capital from the household
sector  in  competitive  factor  markets,  but  only  superstar  firms  can
rent intangible capital (e.g., blueprints of new innovations) from the
household sector. The private use of the intangible capital in superstar
production  is  assumed  to  generate  aggregate  knowledge  spillovers,
which  is  standard  in  endogenous  growth  models  (e.g., Aghion  and
Howitt (1992) and Grossman and Helpman (1993)).

In the ensuing discussion of the superstar and small firm problems,
we suppress the industry subscript 𝑗 for notational convenience. We use
uppercase for superstar variables and lowercase for small firm ones.

2.2.1.  Superstar firms

Superstar firm 𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑁𝑡] has access to the following technology to

produce a differentiated superstar product 𝑋𝑖𝑡:

[

(
̄𝐴𝑡𝑍𝜂
𝑖𝑡

𝐾 𝛼
𝑖𝑡

̄𝑍1−𝜂

𝑡 𝐿𝑖𝑡

)1−𝛼]𝜉

𝑋𝑖𝑡 =

,

(5)

where 𝐾𝑖𝑡 is the capital stock input, 𝑍𝑖𝑡 is the intangible capital input,
̄𝐴𝑡 is  an  aggregate  technology  shock,  and ̄𝑍𝑡
𝐿𝑖𝑡 is  the  labor  input,

≡ log ̄𝐴𝑡) evolves as:

is the aggregate superstar intangible capital stock.4 The log aggregate
technology stock ( ̄𝑎𝑡
̄𝑎𝑡 = (1 − 𝜌)𝑎⋆ + 𝜌 ̄𝑎𝑡−1 + 𝜎 𝜖𝑡,
where 𝜖𝑡 ∼ 𝑖𝑖𝑑 𝑁(0, 1). The superstar firms rent the capital stocks and
hire labor from households in competitive factor markets. The parame-
ter 1 −𝜂 dictates the degree of knowledge spillovers from the private use
of intangible capital, and 𝜉 affects the returns to scale of the production
function.5 The spillover effect in superstar technology captures the idea
that using new innovations in production raises the aggregate level of
technology, generating equilibrium endogenous growth.

(6)

A superstar firm can conduct strategic R&D, 𝐽𝑖𝑡, that increases its
conditional probability of survival. The conditional death probability
of a superstar is:

𝛥𝑛,𝑖𝑡 = 𝛥0 − 𝐻(𝐽𝑖𝑡),
where 𝛥0 > 0 is a constant denoting the average death rate of superstar
firms in the absence of strategic R&D and 𝐻(𝐽𝑖𝑡) is the endogenous
component affecting the conditional death rate next period, specified
as an exponential distribution function:

(7)

𝐻(𝐽𝑖𝑡) = 1 − 𝑒

− 1
𝛩

𝐽𝑖𝑡
̄𝐽𝑡 ,

(8)

≡ ∫ 𝑛

where 𝛩 > 0 is the scale parameter of the exponential distribution and
̄𝐽𝑡
0 𝐽𝑖𝑡 𝑑 𝑖. This specification implies that the probability of survival
is an increasing function of strategic R&D (𝐻 ′(𝐽𝑖𝑡) > 0). Scaling 𝐽𝑖𝑡 by
̄𝐽𝑡 captures  a  ‘‘crowding  out’’  effect  that  makes  strategic  innovation
less  effective  when  more  superstar  firms  engage  in  strategic  R&D.
An interpretation of superstars’ strategic innovation is that it relates
to the acquisition of potential new patents to eliminate competition
before the product is marketable (e.g., ‘‘killer innovations’’ in the sense
of Cunningham et al. (2021)) and Bao and Eeckhout (2023)).

Each superstar understands how their pricing decisions impact the
price index of their industry. They take as given the individual pricing
decisions of other superstars, the collective impact of the small firms,
aggregate states, and factor prices. A superstar maximizes profits, 𝛱𝑖𝑡,

max
𝑃𝑖𝑡,𝐾𝑖𝑡,𝑍𝑖𝑡,𝐿𝑖𝑡

𝛱𝑖𝑡

≡ 𝑃𝑖𝑡𝑋𝑖𝑡 − 𝑊 𝑡𝐿𝑖𝑡 − ̄𝑅𝑘

𝑡 𝐾𝑖𝑡 − ̄𝑅𝑧

𝑡 𝑍𝑖𝑡 − ̂𝐽𝑖𝑡 − 𝐹 ̄𝑍𝑡,

(9)

≤ 𝛩𝑡(𝑃𝑖𝑡),  where 𝑊 𝑡

is  the
subject  to  the  demand  constraint 𝑋𝑖𝑡
̄𝑅𝑘
𝑡 denotes the aggregate rental rate of physical
aggregate wage rate,
̄𝑅𝑧
capital for superstars,
𝑡 corresponds to the aggregate rental rate of
intangible capital for superstars, and 𝐹  > 0 is a fixed operating cost
that is scaled by aggregate technology so as not to become trivially
small along the balanced growth path. The static profit maximization
problem arises from the assumption that superstars rent capital from
households and, therefore, do not make any intertemporal decisions.
Instead,  we  assume  that  households  accumulate  capital  stocks.  We
make this assumption that superstars rent capital as a tractable way
to incorporate strategic interactions in a dynamic general equilibrium
model, as in Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008) and Corhay et al. (2020).
≡ 𝐽𝑖𝑡 −𝐽 ⋆, is the level of strategic R&D, in deviation
from the steady state 𝐽 ⋆, implying that superstars enjoy a baseline level
of strategic R&D. This specification assumes that superstars are granted
some natural entry barriers that ward off potential new threats. The
additional spending above this baseline reinforces their survival rate.
Factor markets are competitive, and the factor prices are defined in
terms of the final goods. A full characterization of a superstar’s problem
is outlined in the internet appendix A.2.

The variable, ̂𝐽𝑖𝑡

Each  superstar  is  ‘‘large’’  within  the  industry  but  ‘‘small’’  in  the
aggregate.  Their  individual  pricing  decisions,  therefore,  impact  the

𝑖=0

𝑍𝑖𝑗 𝑡) 𝑑 𝑗. This term captures the spillover effect.

4 The  aggregate  superstar  intangible  capital  stock  is  given  by
0 (∑𝑁𝑗 𝑡
∫ 1
5 The returns to scale is (1 + (1 −𝛼)𝜂)𝜉. We set 𝜉 to achieve constant returns to
scale in our calibration, which ensures that a superstar firm’s profit converges
to zero when the number of competitors gets large.

̄𝑍𝑡

≡

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039904A. Corhay et al.

industry price index but not the aggregate factor prices. The aggregate
actions of superstars across industries, however, do impact the overall
economy.  We  feature  strategic  interactions  among  the 𝑁𝑡 predeter-
mined superstars within an industry as they compete on the prices of
their differentiated products. The pricing decision of superstars yields
the following optimality condition:

[

𝑋𝑖𝑡 = 𝛬𝑑
𝑖𝑡

𝑌𝑡
𝛶

)−𝜈−1

−

𝜈
𝛶

( 𝑃𝑖𝑡
𝛶

𝜈−1 + (𝜈 − 1)

𝑃𝑡

)−𝜈

( 𝑃𝑖𝑡
𝛶

𝑃𝑡

𝜈−2 𝜕 𝑃𝑡
𝜕 𝑃𝑖𝑡

]

,

(10)

where 𝛬𝑑
𝑖𝑡 is  the  Lagrange  multiplier  on  the  demand  constraint  and
𝜕 𝑃𝑡∕𝜕 𝑃𝑖𝑡 is the partial derivative of the industry price index with respect
to superstar product 𝑖. The term, 𝜕 𝑃𝑡∕𝜕 𝑃𝑖𝑡, captures how a superstar firm
considers its price impact on the industry price index.

The incentives for superstar firms to engage in strategic R&D be-
come  more  attractive  when  the  market  valuations  of  superstars  are
high, which can be seen from the optimal strategic R&D condition given
by
1 = 𝐻 ′(𝐽𝑖𝑡)𝐸𝑡

[
𝑀 𝑡,𝑡+1𝑉𝑖𝑡+1

(11)

]

.

This  condition  equates  the  marginal  cost  of  innovating  to  the  net
marginal benefits from increasing the likelihood of surviving the next
period.

The presence of strategic interactions among superstars in our mixed
market structure endogenously relates superstar markups to the market
share of a superstar in the industry (including small firms). The price
markup for a superstar is defined as the ratio of the product price to the
≡ 𝑃𝑖𝑡∕𝑀 𝐶𝑖𝑡). The first-order condition with respect
marginal cost (𝛷𝑖𝑡
to price implies the following superstar markup policy:

,

(12)

𝛷𝑖𝑡 =

𝑖𝑡 + (𝜈 − 1)

−𝜈 𝛺−1
−(𝜈 − 1) 𝛺−1

𝑖𝑡 + (𝜈 − 1)
≡ 𝑃𝑖𝑡𝑋𝑖𝑡∕𝑃𝑡𝑌𝑡

is  the  market  share  of  superstar 𝑖 in  the
where 𝛺𝑖𝑡
industry. The composition of firms in the industry, therefore, matters
for the superstar markup policy. A higher concentration of superstars
or fewer small firms leads to a higher superstar markup. Given that
𝜈  > 0,  a  superstar  product  markup  is  increasing  with  respect  to  its
market share in the industry. Details of these derivations are presented
in internet appendix A.2.

The  remaining  first-order  conditions  yield  the  conditional  factor

demands for superstar physical capital, intangible capital, and labor:

̄𝑅𝑘

𝑡 =

𝜉 𝛼
𝛷𝑖𝑡

𝑃𝑖𝑡𝑋𝑖𝑡
𝐾𝑖𝑡

,

̄𝑅𝑧

𝑡 =

𝜉 𝜂(1 − 𝛼)
𝛷𝑖𝑡

𝑃𝑖𝑡𝑋𝑖𝑡
𝑍𝑖𝑡

, and 𝑊 𝑡 =

𝜉(1 − 𝛼)
𝛷𝑖𝑡

𝑃𝑖𝑡𝑋𝑖𝑡
𝐿𝑖𝑡

.

(13)

When  superstars  have  a  larger  market  share,  they  charge  a  higher
markup,  which  depresses  factor  demands.  Note  that  a  drop  in  the
demand for intangible capital of an individual superstar firm reduces
productivity within and across industries due to the aggregate spillover
effect  from  using  intangible  capital  in  production.  Changes  in  the
market power of superstars, therefore, have long-term effects on trend
growth in our model.

2.2.2.  Small firms

Small  firm 𝑚 ∈  [0, 𝑛𝑡] has  access  to  the  following  technology  to

,

)1−𝛼

( ̄𝐴𝑡

̄𝑍𝑡𝑙𝑚𝑡

produce a differentiated small good product 𝑥𝑚𝑡:
𝑥𝑚𝑡 = 𝑘𝛼
𝑚𝑡
̄𝐴𝑡 is the exogenous
where 𝑘𝑚𝑡 is the capital stock, 𝑙𝑚𝑡 is the labor input,
̄𝑍𝑡 is the aggregate superstar intangible
aggregate technology shock,
capital stock that determines aggregate trend growth. The presence of
̄𝑍𝑡 in the measured productivity of small firms captures how the aggre-
gate R&D decisions of superstars impact the technological progress of
small firms through knowledge spillovers.

(14)

A small firm can conduct speculative R&D, 𝑗𝑚𝑡, that increases the
conditional probability that they make a breakthrough innovation next
period, allowing the small firm to become a superstar firm. The payoff

for the successful breakthrough is the average value of a superstar firm
next period, 𝑉 ⋆
𝑡+1, which the small firm takes as given. The probability of
making a breakthrough next period, ℎ(𝑗), is modeled as an exponential
distribution function:

ℎ(𝑗𝑚𝑡) = 1 − 𝑒

− 1
𝜗

𝑗𝑚𝑡
̄𝑗𝑡 ,

(15)

≡ ∫ 𝑛

where 𝜗 > 0 is the scale parameter of the exponential distribution and
̄𝑗𝑡
0 𝑗𝑖𝑡 𝑑 𝑖. This specification implies that the probability of success is
an increasing function of speculative R&D (ℎ′(𝑗𝑚𝑡) > 0). Scaling 𝑗𝑚𝑡 by ̄𝑗𝑡
captures a ‘‘crowding out’’ effect that makes breakthrough innovation
more difficult when more small firms engage in speculative R&D.

Each  small  firm  is  infinitesimal  and  is,  therefore,  ‘‘small’’  in  the
industry and the aggregate. In contrast to a superstar firm, individual
actions of small firms have a negligible impact on the industry price
index. They take aggregate and industry states as given when setting
prices as a local monopolist. The collective actions of small firms do,
however,  impact  the  pricing  decisions  of  superstars,  which  can  be
seen through the superstar markup policy given in Eq. (12). A higher
industry  revenue  share  of  the  small  firms  reduces  the  markups  of
superstars.

The source of funds constraint of a small firm is:

𝜋𝑚𝑡 = 𝑝𝑚𝑡𝑥𝑚𝑡 − 𝑊 𝑡𝑙𝑚𝑡 − ̄𝑟𝑘

𝑡 𝑘𝑚𝑡 − 𝑗𝑚𝑡 − 𝑓 ̄𝑍𝑡,

(16)

where 𝜋𝑘𝑡 is the payout, 𝑙𝑘𝑡 is the labor input, ̄𝑟𝑘
𝑡 is the aggregate rental
rate of physical capital for small firms, 𝑓 > 0 is a fixed operating cost
scaled by aggregate technology. The small firms maximize the present
value of current and future payouts according to the following program:

𝑣𝑚𝑡 = 

max
{𝑙𝑚𝑡,𝑘𝑚𝑡,𝑗𝑚𝑡,𝑝𝑚𝑡}𝑡≥0
+ (1 − ℎ(𝑗𝑚𝑡))(1 − 𝛿𝑛)𝐸𝑡

𝜋𝑚𝑡 + ℎ(𝑗𝑚𝑡)(1 − 𝛥⋆

𝑛𝑡)𝐸𝑡

[

𝑀 𝑡+1𝑉 ⋆
𝑡+1

]

[
𝑀 𝑡+1𝑣𝑚𝑡+1

]

,

(17)

≤ 𝜃(𝑝𝑚𝑡)) and the source of funds
subject to the demand constraint (𝑥𝑚𝑡
constraint, where 𝑀 𝑡+1 is the stochastic discount factor, and 𝛿𝑛 is the
fraction of randomly chosen small firms, that exit at the end of each
period.  The  small  firm  takes  the  industry  and  aggregate  states,  the
average future market value of superstars, 𝑉 ⋆
𝑡+1, the average death rate
of superstars, 𝛥⋆
𝑛𝑡, and aggregate factor prices as given when making
the optimal pricing and production decisions. Details of the small firm’s
problem are presented in internet appendix A.3.

The incentives for small firms to engage in speculative R&D become
more  attractive  when  the  market  valuations  of  superstars  are  high
relative to small firms. This can be seen from the optimal speculative
R&D  decision  that  equates  the  marginal  cost  of  innovating  to  the
net  marginal  benefits  from  increasing  the  likelihood  of  becoming  a
superstar firm next period:
[
1 = ℎ′(𝑗𝑚𝑡)𝐸𝑡
𝑀 𝑡+1

𝑡+1 − (1 − 𝛿𝑛)𝑣𝑚𝑡+1

(
(1 − 𝛥⋆

𝑛𝑡)𝑉 ⋆

(18)

)]

.

Eq. (15) shows that the marginal probability of becoming a superstar
firm (ℎ′(𝑗𝑚𝑡)) depends inversely on the entry barrier parameter 𝜗 and
the total amount of speculative innovation in the industry ( ̄𝑗𝑡). Higher
barriers to entry into the superstar sector (higher 𝜗) discourage specu-
lative innovation and decrease competition in the superstar firm sector.
Fewer superstar competitors increase the market share of individual
superstars, leading to higher superstar markups, as shown in Eq. (12).
Higher  entry  barriers  for  startups  to  enter  as  small  firms  (described
below in Section 2.3), dampen the crowding-out effect (due to lower
̄𝑗𝑡) that encourages speculative innovation.

The optimal pricing decision implies a constant markup policy, 𝜑 =
. The first-order conditions with respect to the physical capital and

𝜈
𝜈−1
labor inputs yield the following inverse factor demands:

̄𝑟𝑘
𝑡 =

𝛼
𝜑

𝑝𝑚𝑡𝑥𝑚𝑡
𝑘𝑚𝑡

and 𝑊 𝑡 =

1 − 𝛼
𝜑

𝑝𝑚𝑡𝑥𝑚𝑡
𝑙𝑚𝑡

.

(19)

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039905A. Corhay et al.

2.3.  Endogenous industry structure

We assume that superstar and small firms make simultaneous pric-
ing and production decisions. We focus on a mixed market equilibrium
where superstars make identical decisions (𝑃𝑖𝑡 = 𝑃𝑡, 𝐿𝑖𝑡 = 𝐿𝑡, 𝐾𝑖𝑡 = 𝐾𝑡,
𝐽𝑖𝑡 = 𝐽𝑡, and 𝑍𝑖𝑡 = 𝑍𝑡, ∀𝑖) and small firms make identical decisions
(𝑝𝑚𝑡 = 𝑝𝑡, 𝑙𝑚𝑡 = 𝑙𝑡, 𝑘𝑚𝑡 = 𝑘𝑡, and 𝑗𝑚𝑡 = 𝑗𝑡, ∀𝑚).

The measure of small firms and superstar firms within each industry
is endogenously determined. There is a competitive fringe of startups
that can enter into an industry as a small firm by paying an upfront
≡ 𝜅 ̄𝑘𝑡.  The  entry  cost  parameter 𝜅 could  capture
fixed  cost, 𝑓 𝐸
𝑡
government regulations affecting entrepreneurship. The law of motion
for the measure of small firms in an industry is given by:
𝑛𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿𝑛)(𝑛𝑡 + 𝑛𝐸
where 𝑛𝐸
is  the  mass  of  small
𝑡
firms that make a breakthrough innovation to become a superstar next
period, and 𝛿𝑛 is the fraction of randomly chosen small firms (including
new  entrants  this  period  and  small  firms  that  are  transitioning  to  a
superstar firm next period) that exit at the end of the period.

is  the  entry  of  new  small  firms, 𝑁 𝐸
𝑡

𝑡 − 𝑁 𝐸
𝑡 ),

(20)

,

The free entry condition that pins down the number of new entrants
𝑡 ) equates the expected benefits of entering the industry to the costs:
(21)

(𝑛𝐸
(1 − 𝛿𝑛)𝐸𝑡[𝑀 𝑡+1𝑣𝑡+1] = 𝑓 𝐸
𝑡
where 𝑣𝑡 is the market value of a small firm in the symmetric equilib-
rium. The number of small firms that make a breakthrough innovation
to become a superstar is determined by the endogenous probability of
success times the number of small firms at the beginning of the period,
𝑁 𝐸
𝑡 = 𝑛𝑡ℎ(𝑗𝑡). The measure of superstars in an industry evolves as:
𝑁𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛥𝑛𝑡)(𝑁𝑡 + 𝑁 𝐸
𝑡 ),
where 𝛥𝑛𝑡 is the randomly chosen fraction of superstars that exit at the
end of each period.

(22)

2.4.  Households

)

̄𝐶𝑡, and labor, ̄𝐿𝑡:
) 1

We assume that there is a representative household with lifetime
utility given by Epstein–Zin recursive preferences defined over aggre-
gate consumption,
̄𝑈𝑡 = 𝑢 ( ̄𝐶𝑡, ̄𝐿𝑡
where 𝜃 ≡ 1 − 1−𝛾
, 𝛾 captures the degree of relative risk aversion,
1−1∕𝜓
𝜓 is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and 𝛽 is the subjective
discount rate. We assume that the utility kernel is additively separable
in consumption and leisure:

+ 𝛽 (𝐸𝑡[ ̄𝑈 1−𝜃
𝑡+1 ]

(23)

1−𝜃 ,

𝑢 ( ̄𝐶𝑡, ̄𝐿𝑡

)

=

𝑡

̄𝐶 1−1∕𝜓
1 − 1∕𝜓

+ ̄𝑍1−1∕𝜓
𝑡

𝜒0

(1 − ̄𝐿𝑡)1−𝜒
1 − 𝜒

,

is the aggregate investment in small firm physical capital, and 𝐺𝑘(⋅)
captures  capital  adjustment  costs.  The  aggregate  stock  of  superstar
intangible capital ( ̄𝑍𝑡+1) follows:
) ̄𝑍𝑡,
̄𝑍𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿𝑧) ̄𝑍𝑡 + 𝐺𝑧

( ̄𝑆𝑡∕ ̄𝑍𝑡

(26)

where 𝛿𝑧 is the obsolescence rate of intangible capital, ̄𝑆𝑡 represents the
aggregate fundamental R&D investment in intangible capital, and 𝐺𝑧(⋅)
captures adjustment costs in R&D. We assume that the functional form
for the adjustment costs follows:

𝐺𝑗 (𝑥) =

𝛼1𝑗
1 − 1
𝜁𝑗

1− 1

(𝑥)

𝜁𝑗 + 𝛼2𝑗

(27)

for 𝑗 = 𝑘, 𝑧 as in Jermann (1998). The parameters, 𝛼1𝑗 and 𝛼2𝑗 , are
chosen  so  there  are  no  adjustment  costs  in  the  deterministic  steady
state.

The household takes prices and aggregate states as given when max-
imizing lifetime utility by choosing aggregate consumption, investment
in the stock of superstar physical capital, investment in the stock of
small firm physical capital, fundamental R&D investment in the stock
of intangible capital, and labor supply subject to the budget constraint:

̄𝐶𝑡 + ̄𝐼𝑡 + ̄𝑖𝑡 + ̄𝑆𝑡 + ̄𝑓 𝐸

𝑡 = ̄𝛱𝑡 + ̄𝜋𝑡 + ̄𝐾𝑡

𝑡 + ̄𝑍𝑡
̄𝑅𝑘

𝑡 + ̄𝑘𝑡 ̄𝑟𝑘
̄𝑅𝑧

𝑡 + 𝑊 𝑡

̄𝐿𝑡,

(28)

where ̄𝛱𝑡 and ̄𝜋𝑡 represent the aggregate profits paid by superstar and
small firms, respectively, and ̄𝑓 𝐸
represents the aggregate resources
𝑡
devoted  to  new  firm  entry.  We  relegate  the  details  of  the  house-
hold’s problem and the corresponding optimality conditions to internet
appendix A.4.

The equilibrium stochastic discount factor is given by:

𝑀 𝑡+1 = 𝛽

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

̄𝑈𝑡+1
𝐸𝑡( ̄𝑈 1−𝜃
𝑡+1 )

1
1−𝜃

−𝜃

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

)− 1

𝜓

,

( ̄𝐶𝑡+1
̄𝐶𝑡

(29)

where the first term, involving the continuation utility, captures sensi-
tivity regarding uncertainty about long-run growth prospects.

2.5.  Aggregation and equilibrium

As there is no heterogeneity across industries, we can express aggre-
̄𝑆𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡𝑆𝑡,
̂𝐽𝑡, ̄𝑘𝑡 = 𝑛𝑡𝑘𝑡,

gate variables in the symmetric equilibrium as ̄𝑍𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡𝑍𝑡,
̄𝐾𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡𝐾𝑡,
̄𝛱𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡𝛱𝑡,
̄𝑋𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡𝑋𝑡,
̄𝑖𝑡 = 𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡, ̄𝑗𝑡 = 𝑛𝑡𝑗𝑡, ̄𝜋𝑡 = 𝑛𝑡𝜋𝑡, ̄𝐿𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡𝐿𝑡 + 𝑛𝑡𝑙𝑡, and

̄𝐼𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡𝐼𝑡,

≡ 𝑁𝑡

̄𝐽𝑡

(24)

[
𝑁𝑡

̄𝑌𝑡 =

(𝛶 ⋅ 𝑋𝑡

) 𝜈−1

𝜈 + 𝑛𝑡𝑥

𝜈−1
𝜈

𝑡

]𝜈∕(𝜈−1)

.

where 𝜒 captures  the  Frisch  elasticity  of  labor,  and 𝜒0 is  a  scaling
parameter.6 We assume that 𝜓 > 1
, so the agent prefers an early reso-
𝛾
lution of uncertainty following the long-run risks literature (e.g., Bansal
and Yaron (2004)).

The aggregate resource constraint is given by:

̄𝑌𝑡 = ̄𝐶𝑡 + ̄𝐼𝑡 + ̄𝑖𝑡 + ̄𝑆𝑡 + ̄𝐽𝑡 + ̄𝑗𝑡 + ̄𝑓 𝐸
𝑡

,

The household accumulates the aggregate stocks of capital that are
rented to firms in competitive factor markets. The aggregate stock of
superstar physical capital ( ̄𝐾𝑡+1) and small firm capital (̄𝑘𝑡+1) evolve as:
) ̄𝑘𝑡,
(25)

̄𝐾𝑡+1 = (1 −𝛿𝑘) ̄𝐾𝑡 +𝐺𝑘

̄𝑘𝑡+1 = (1 −𝛿𝑘)̄𝑘𝑡 +𝐺𝑘

( ̄𝐼𝑡∕ ̄𝐾𝑡

(̄𝑖𝑡∕̄𝑘𝑡

) ̄𝐾𝑡

and

̄𝐼𝑡
respectively, where 𝛿𝑘 is the depreciation rate of physical capital,
represents  the  aggregate  investment  in  superstar  physical  capital, ̄𝑖𝑡

where ̄𝑗𝑡 represents the aggregate resources devoted to breakthrough
innovation and ̄𝑓 𝐸

𝑡 are the aggregate fixed entry costs.7

𝑡 = 𝑛𝐸

𝑡 𝑓 𝐸

The equilibrium is defined as a sequence of prices and quantities
such that the following conditions are satisfied: (i) the representative
household maximizes lifetime utility, (ii) superstars maximize individ-
ual profits, (iii) small firms maximize the present value of current and
future profits, and (iv) entry of new small firms satisfies the free entry
condition.

6 We  scale  the  second  term  by  an  aggregate  productivity  trend ̄𝑍 1−1∕𝜓
to ensure that utility for leisure does not become trivially small along the
balanced growth path.

𝑡

7 We  assume  that  the  fixed  operating  costs  are  rebated  back  to  the
households in a lump sum so they do not lead to any aggregate output losses.

(30)

(31)

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039906A. Corhay et al.

2.6. 𝑄 decomposition

This  section  provides  a  decomposition  of  Tobin’s 𝑄 in  the  spirit
of Hayashi and Inoue (1991) and Crouzet and Eberly (2023) to illumi-
nate the economic margins generating the increasing polarization in 𝑄
between superstars and the rest of the firms in the industry documented
in Fig. 1. We define our primary measure of Tobin’s 𝑄 used in our
quantitative analysis as the ratio of the ex-dividend market value to
the book value of physical capital.

Key margins driving polarization in 𝑄 are differences in markups
and intangibles between superstars and small firms. Our model pro-
duces  time  variation  in  markup  differences  due  to  superstars  being
strategic  players,  implying  that  their  markups  endogenously  depend
on their relative market share. Economic forces affecting superstars’
market share (e.g., changes in relative entry costs or taste parameters),
therefore, generate variation in superstar markups. In contrast, small
firms are not strategic, with markups that only depend on the demand
elasticity and are independent of changes in industry market structure.
An  increasing  superstar  market  share  drives  a  more  significant  gap
between  the  markups  of  superstars  and  small  firms.  Superstars  also
have access to productive intangible capital as a factor of production
that  generates  higher  sales.  In  contrast,  intangibles  for  small  firms
are  expensed  without  directly  contributing  to  production.  For  small
firms, intangibles can be viewed as a lottery ticket that gives winners
the  opportunity  to  be  a  superstar  firm  in  the  next  period.  A  higher
intangible capital factor share in superstar production boosts superstar
valuations relative to physical capital compared to small firms.

A hypothetical claim to the profits of a particular superstar firm has

a present value defined recursively as:

𝑉𝑡

≡ 𝛱𝑡 + (1 − 𝛥𝑛𝑡)𝐸𝑡[𝑀 𝑡+1𝑉𝑡+1].

(32)

We define the aggregate dividend to the superstar sector as the ag-
gregate  profits  of  incumbent  superstars  minus  the  expected  costs  of
purchasing new superstars created during this period plus the net rental
income from physical and intangible capital:
̄𝐷𝑡

≡ ̄𝛱𝑡 − 𝑁 𝑆𝑡 + ( ̄𝑅𝑘
𝑡

̄𝐾𝑡 − ̄𝐼𝑡) + ( ̄𝑅𝑧
𝑡

̄𝑍𝑡 − ̄𝑆𝑡),

(33)

≡ 𝑁 𝐸

where 𝑁 𝑆𝑡
𝑡 (1 − 𝛥𝑛𝑡)𝐸𝑡[𝑀 𝑡+1𝑉𝑡+1] is the value of newly created su-
perstars. This definition of the aggregate superstar dividend represents
the net transfer of resources from the superstar sector to the households.
The ex-dividend value of the claim to the aggregate dividend to the
superstar sector, ̄𝑉 𝑒𝑥
̄𝑉 𝑒𝑥
𝑡

, is defined recursively as:

≡ 𝐸𝑡[𝑀 𝑡+1( ̄𝐷𝑡+1 + ̄𝑉 𝑒𝑥

(34)

𝑡+1)].

𝑡

We define Tobin’s 𝑄 for the aggregate superstar sector as the ratio of
the  ex-dividend  market  value  to  the  book  value  of  physical  capital,
̄𝑄𝑡
𝑡 ∕ ̄𝐾𝑡+1. We show in internet appendix B.1 that Tobin’s 𝑄 for
the superstar sector in the steady state can be expressed as:

≡ ̄𝑉 𝑒𝑥

̄𝑄 = 1 +

̄𝑍
̄𝐾

+

𝛱∕𝐾
̄𝑅 + ̄𝛥𝑛 − ̄𝐺

,

(35)

̄𝑅 is the average discount rate for superstars,

where ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 is  the  average  ratio  of  superstar  intangible  capital  to
physical capital, 𝛱∕𝐾 is the average superstar profit to physical capital
̄𝛥𝑛 is the average
ratio,
death rate of superstars, and ̄𝐺 is the average growth rate of superstars.8
We  focus  on  the  steady-state  relation  because  we  are  interested  in
decomposing the long-run trends in 𝑄.

We can also express aggregate superstar profits in terms of superstar
̄𝑃 ̄𝑋 − 𝐹 ̄𝑁 ̄𝑍.

markups ( ̄𝛷) at the steady state according to ̄𝛱 =

)

(
1 − 1
̄𝛷

8 More formally,

̄𝐺 ≡ 𝛥 ̄𝛱 represents the average growth rate of cash flows
in the steady state, and 1 + ̄𝑅 ≡ ̄𝛱∕ ̄𝐾+(1− ̄𝛥𝑛)(1+ ̄𝐺) ̄𝑉 𝑒𝑥∕ ̄𝐾
is the average superstar
discount rate. Since growth is endogenous, all these variables are functions of
the model’s deep parameters.

̄𝑉 𝑒𝑥∕ ̄𝐾

We can then rewrite Eq. (35) in terms of markups:

̄𝑄 = 1 +

̄𝑍
̄𝐾

+

)

(

1 − 1
̄𝛷

𝑆 𝐾 − 𝐹 𝐶

̄𝑅 + ̄𝛥𝑛 − ̄𝐺

(36)

where 𝑆 𝐾 ≡ ̄𝑃 ̄𝑋∕ ̄𝐾 is the ratio of superstar sales to physical capital
and 𝐹 𝐶 ≡ 𝐹 ̄𝑁 ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 is the ratio of superstar fixed costs to physical
capital. This expression illustrates how the rising trend in Tobin’s 𝑄 of
superstar firms can be attributed to an increasing share of intangible
capital  relative  to  physical  capital,  rising  markups,  increasing  sales,
falling discount rates, declining exit rates, or higher growth.

We define the aggregate dividend of the small firm sector as the
aggregate profits of incumbent small firms minus the costs of purchas-
ing new small firms created during this period (net of those becom-
ing superstars) plus the expected benefits of small firms successfully
transitioning as superstars, plus net small firm capital rental income:
̄𝑑𝑡

≡ ̄𝜋𝑡 − 𝑛𝑠𝑡 + 𝑒𝑏𝑡 + (̄𝑟𝑘
𝑡

̄𝑘𝑡 − ̄𝑖𝑡),

(37)

[
𝑀 𝑡+1𝑣𝑡+1

]

])

≡ (𝑛𝐸

≡ 𝑛𝑡𝛤 (𝑗𝑚𝑡)

𝑡 )(1 −𝛿𝑛)𝐸𝑡

(
(1 − 𝛥𝑛𝑡)𝐸𝑡

is the value of newly created
[
𝑀 𝑡+1𝑉𝑡+1

𝑡 −𝑁 𝐸
where 𝑛𝑠𝑡
small  firms  this  period  and 𝑒𝑏𝑡
[
(1 − 𝛿𝑛)𝐸𝑡
is the aggregate expected benefit of small firms
𝑀 𝑡+1𝑣𝑡+1
that will successfully become a superstar next period conditional on
the level of speculative R&D, 𝑗𝑡. This definition of the aggregate small
firm dividend represents the net transfer of resources from the small
firm sector to the households. The ex-dividend value of the claim to the
aggregate dividend to the small firm sector, ̄𝑣𝑒𝑥
, is defined recursively
𝑡
as:

−

]

̄𝑣𝑒𝑥
𝑡

≡ 𝐸𝑡[𝑀 𝑡+1( ̄𝑑𝑡+1 + ̄𝑣𝑒𝑥

𝑡+1)].

(38)

We  define  the  aggregate  Tobin’s 𝑄 for  the  small  firm  sector  as
the  ex-dividend  market  value  divided  by  the  physical  capital  stock,
̄𝚀𝑡 = ̄𝑣𝑒𝑥
𝑡 ∕̄𝑘𝑡+1. We show in internet appendix B.2 that Tobin’s 𝑄 of small
firms in the steady state can be expressed as:

̄𝚀 = 1 +

𝑣𝑧
̄𝑘

+

𝜋∕𝑘
̄𝑟 + 𝛿𝑛 − ̄𝑔

,

(39)

where 𝑣𝑧∕̄𝑘 is the average ratio of the present value of net benefits
from speculative R&D to physical capital, 𝜋∕𝑘 is the average small firm
profitability to capital ratio, ̄𝑟 is the small firm discount rate, and ̄𝑔 is
the average small firm growth rate of cash flows.

We can write aggregate small firm profits in terms of markups in the
steady state as ̄𝜋 = (1 − 1
) ̄𝑝 ̄𝑥 − ̄𝑗 − 𝑓 ̄𝑛 ̄𝑍. We also define the aggregate
̄𝜑
value of intangible capital in the small firm sector as the difference
between the present value of the aggregate benefits from speculative
R&D and the present value of the aggregate investment expenditures
in speculative R&D, ̄𝑧 ≡ 𝑣𝑧 − ̄𝑗∕(̄𝑟 + 𝛿𝑛 − ̄𝑔). Substituting the identity for
profits and the definition of ̄𝑧 in Eq. (39) yields:
𝑠𝑘 − 𝑓 𝑐

)

(
1 − 1
̄𝜑

,

(40)

̄𝚀𝑡 = 1 +

̄𝑧
̄𝑘

+

̄𝑟 + 𝛿𝑛 − ̄𝑔

where ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘 is  the  average  ratio  of  small  firm  intangible  capital  to
physical capital, 𝑠𝑘 ≡ ̄𝑝 ̄𝑥∕̄𝑘 is the average ratio of small firm sales to
physical capital, 𝑓 𝑐 ≡ 𝑓 ̄𝑛 ̄𝑍∕̄𝑘 is the average ratio of aggregate small
firm fixed costs to physical capital. Additional details of the derivation
are contained in internet appendix B.2.

The  sources  of  polarization  between  the  aggregate  Tobin’s 𝑄 of
superstars and small firms can, therefore, be viewed through the lens
of the decomposition:

̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀 =

( ̄𝑍
̄𝐾

−

̄𝑧
̄𝑘

)

+

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

(
1 − 1
̄𝛷

𝑆 𝐾 − 𝐹 𝐶

̄𝑅 + ̄𝛥𝑛 − ̄𝐺

)

(

1 − 1
̄𝜑

𝑠𝑘 − 𝑓 𝑐

̄𝑟 + 𝛿𝑛 − ̄𝑔

−

.

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(41)

This equation highlights how the increasing superstar 𝑄 relative to the
small firm 𝑄 can be attributed to an increasing share of intangible capi-
tal, rising markups, accelerating growth, increasing profitability, falling

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039907A. Corhay et al.

fixed costs, declining discount rates, or declining exit rates of superstars
relative to small firms. Fig. 1 suggests that the primary sources of the
increasing polarization in 𝑄 are attributed to growing differences in
the markups and intangible capital share. Each of these margins in the
decomposition is endogenous and, therefore, interrelated. We quantify
the role of these margins for explaining the patterns observed in Fig. 1
using our estimated model in the next section.

We can also compare Tobin’s 𝑄 and 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratios in the steady state
to  elucidate  potential  economic  channels  for  explaining  why  there
is increasing polarization in Tobin’s 𝑄 between superstars and small
firms but not 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratios, illustrated in Figure A.2 from the internet
appendix. Since all the earnings and benefits from owning the claims
to the superstar and small firm sectors are distributed to households,
earnings are equal to dividends. The aggregate 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratio for superstars
(𝑃 𝐸 ≡ ̄𝑉 𝑒𝑥∕ ̄𝐷) and small firms (𝑝𝑒 ≡ ̄𝑣𝑒𝑥∕ ̄𝑑) at the steady state are:

𝑃 𝐸 =

1
̄𝑅 − ̄𝐺

and

𝑝𝑒 =

1
̄𝑟 − ̄𝑔

.

(42)

The 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratios are only indirectly affected by the markup and intangi-
ble capital margins through the endogenous discount rate and growth
rate terms in the denominator, while Tobin’s 𝑄 ratios directly depend
on the markup and the intangible capital share. Fig. 1 illustrated how
growth  and  discount  rates  remained  similar  between  superstars  and
small  firms  while  markups  and  intangible  capital  diverged  strongly.
Through the lens of the 𝑄 and 𝑃 ∕𝐸 decompositions, these empirical
trends are consistent with the rising polarization in 𝑄 within industries
but not 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratios. Section 5.2 formalizes this interpretation in our
model estimation and quantitatively links the decomposition to shifts
in the structural parameters.

3.  Data

This section describes the data series and the construction of empir-

ical proxies used in the quantitative evaluation of our model.

3.1.  Macroeconomic data

Quarterly data for per capita consumption and output are obtained
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Consumption is measured
as  the  sum  of  services  and  nondurable  goods  consumption.  Output
is  measured  as  real  gross  domestic  product.  The  aggregate  stock  of
physical capital is computed as the sum of non-residential structures
and equipment, while intangible capital sums non-residential software
and R&D. Both series for the aggregate stock and investment in the two
types of capital are from the BEA.

The labor share is defined as the ratio of the total compensation
of employees to the gross value added for the non-financial corporate
business sector and is available from the BEA. Labor hours are obtained
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and measured as the aver-
age weekly hours of production within the private sector. Aggregate
productivity  is  measured  using  the  utilization-adjusted  total  factor
productivity method, as developed by Fernald (2014). The aggregate
death rate is defined as the total number of firms’ closures in a year,
divided by the total number of operating firms from the previous year.
Information about firm dynamics, including total operating firms and
closures, comes from the Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS) database.
Aggregate financial data is obtained from CRSP. The real one-year
interest rate is calculated by subtracting realized inflation (measured by
the year-on-year change in the consumer price index) from the one-year
Treasury yield. The dividend yield is computed following Campbell and
Shiller (1988) by dividing the total dividends paid over the past year
by S&P 500 firms by the current market value of the securities.

Internet appendix C provides additional details pertaining to these

data series, including the data sources.

3.2.  Microeconomic data

Firm-level accounting variables are sourced from Compustat. Firm
revenue  is  measured  by  sales  (SALE).  Firm  earnings  are  defined  as
net  income  (NI).  The  firm-level  stock  of  physical  capital  is  defined
as  the  gross  value  of  property,  plant,  and  equipment  (PPEGT).  The
stock of intangible capital is measured according to Peters and Tay-
lor (2017) and is directly obtained from the Wharton Research Data
Service  (K_INT).  Investment  in  physical  capital  is  defined  as  capital
expenditures  (CAPEX).  Investment  in  intangible  capital  is  measured
following Peters and Taylor (2017) as reported R&D expenses (XRD)
plus 30% of selling, general & administrative expenses (XSGA). The
market  value  of  the  firm’s  equity  is  defined  as  the  price  per  share
(PRCC_F)  multiplied  by  the  number  of  shares  outstanding  (CSHO).
Tobin’s 𝑄 is measured as the sum of debt value (DLTT+DLC-ACT) plus
equity value, divided by the total stock of physical capital. Profitability
is defined as the return on physical capital (ROK), obtained by dividing
net income by physical capital (NI/PPEGT).

Superstar  firms  are  identified  as  those  within  the  top  5th  per-
centile  of  the  market  capitalization  distribution  within  a  given  year
and industry.9 Small firms comprise the firms falling within the bottom
95th percentile. Industries are defined by the four-digit North Ameri-
can Industry Classification System (NAICS) code. Firm-level variables
are  aggregated  at  the  small  and  superstar  levels  by  summing  the
corresponding variables across all firms belonging to each respective
group.

3.3.  Markup construction

We construct our price markup measure using the production ap-
proach pioneered by Hall (1988). This method derives firm-level markups
by leveraging the cost-minimization principle of a variable input within
production, which is a necessary condition for firms’ problems in our
model. A notable advantage of this approach is its capability to derive
the price markup without necessitating the specification of a particular
demand system.

(43)

Under the assumptions that (i) the production function is differen-
tiable and (ii) factor prices are taken as given, a firm minimizing costs
equates  the  marginal  cost  of  each  production  input  to  the  marginal
product. We can then rearrange the first order conditions with respect
to any variable production inputs (as depicted in Eqs. (13) and (19)),
we can express the firm’s price markup as follows:
𝚖𝚊𝚛𝚔𝚞𝚙𝑖𝑡 = 𝜉𝑣
𝑖𝑡 represents the output elasticity of variable input 𝑣, and 𝚜𝚑𝚊𝚛𝚎𝑣
where 𝜉𝑣
𝑖𝑡
denotes the proportion of total firm revenues attributed to expenses
associated with variable input 𝑣. For example, when considering the
labor margin, the markup for small firms can be identified by setting
𝜉𝑙
𝑖𝑡 = (1 − 𝛼) and 𝚜𝚑𝚊𝚛𝚎𝑙

𝑖𝑡 = ( ̄𝑊𝑡𝑙𝑖𝑡)∕(𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑥𝑖𝑡).

𝑖𝑡∕𝚜𝚑𝚊𝚛𝚎𝑣
𝑖𝑡,

The Compustat database does not provide a breakdown of expendi-
tures by production inputs, such as labor, electricity, etc. Consequently,
following  the  methodology  of De  Loecker  et  al. (2020),  we  employ
the  reported  cost  of  goods  sold  (COGS)  as  the  total  variable  cost
for  measuring  expenditure  share.  Moreover,  we  directly  source  the
estimates  for  production  elasticities  from  the  aforementioned  paper.
Consistent with our model assumptions, these elasticities are derived
by estimating a Cobb–Douglas production function on COGS, while ac-
counting for various other production inputs, including capital (PPEGT)
and overhead costs (SG&A). The inclusion of overhead costs ensures
that the estimation effectively accommodates the documented rising
trend in overhead costs, as discussed by Traina (2018). Importantly,
these  estimates  allow  for  potential  variations  across  industries  and

9 To  ensure  that  our  results  are  not  influenced  by  small  industries,  we

require a minimum of 20 firms in each industry and year.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039908A. Corhay et al.

Table 1
Jacobian matrix.

𝑎⋆

𝜂

𝛼

𝛽

𝛾

𝛩

𝛿𝑛

𝜅

𝜗

𝜈

𝛶

𝐹

𝑓

Output growth
0.01
Intangible capital ratio
0.09
Labor share
−0.04
Risk-free rate
0.00
Earnings-price ratio
−0.00
Markup superstar firms
0.08
Firm death rate
−0.00
Relative size superstar
−0.51
𝑄 − 𝑞
3.83
Markup small firms
0.00
Sales share superstar
0.35
ROA superstar firms
0.02
ROA small firms
−0.02
This table shows the average of the two Jacobian matrices associated with the estimation of the model. Each entry of the matrix reports the percentage change in each moment
given a one percent increase in each parameter. To avoid null values, rate moments expressed in gross terms. Details regarding the definition and construction of variables can be
found in internet appendix C.

−0.02
−0.22
0.00
−0.01
0.02
0.04
0.00
−0.16
−0.28
0.00
−0.16
0.02
0.01

−0.06
−0.72
0.01
−0.03
0.06
0.10
−0.00
−0.47
0.67
0.00
−0.55
0.05
0.03

−0.00
0.06
0.00
−0.00
0.02
−0.00
0.00
0.06
0.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.09
0.91
0.10
0.04
−0.09
−0.21
0.00
1.08
2.32
0.00
−0.87
−0.03
−0.03

0.08
1.89
0.01
0.04
−0.07
−0.07
0.00
0.65
0.94
0.00
−0.18
−0.04
−0.03

0.14
1.68
−0.20
0.07
−0.12
0.40
0.00
3.09
26.01
0.00
1.76
0.17
−0.14

0.00
0.01
−0.02
−0.00
0.00
0.04
0.02
−0.23
1.10
0.00
0.11
0.01
0.00

0.06
0.73
−0.02
0.03
−0.03
0.16
−0.00
0.49
12.16
−0.19
2.00
0.07
−0.08

0.00
0.02
−0.02
0.00
−0.00
0.03
−0.00
−0.20
0.45
0.00
0.11
0.01
0.00

0.00
−0.00
−0.00
0.00
0.01
−0.00
−0.00
−0.00
−6.24
0.00
0.00
−0.07
0.02

1.64
11.23
1.62
−0.52
−4.72
−3.55
0.01
28.19
54.66
0.00
−8.07
−2.73
−2.10

0.05
−0.80
−0.20
0.03
−0.06
−0.12
0.00
0.51
1.01
0.00
−0.40
−0.02
−0.02

time, as the elasticities are estimated within five-year rolling windows,
pooling firms at the two-digit NAICS level.10 The aggregate markup for
small and superstar firms is computed by COGS-weighting firm-level
markups.

4.  Estimation and identification

period with standard errors are tabulated in Panel B, and the calibration
of the fixed parameters is presented in Panel C. Standard errors are
obtained as the square root of the diagonal elements of the covariance
matrix  of  the  parameter  estimates,  which  is  obtained  following  the
standard Generalized Method of Moments parameter variance formula,
adjusted  for  simulation  error.12 A  detailed  description  of  the  target
moments can be found in internet appendix C.

This  section  presents  how  we  estimate  and  identify  the  model

parameters for the quantitative evaluation.

4.2.  Identification

4.1.  Estimation

We estimate the majority of the structural parameters using a simu-
lated method of moments (SMM) approach. The remaining parameters
are calibrated and fixed across the subsamples.

The thirteen estimated parameters are ′ ≡ [𝑎∗, 𝛽 , 𝛾 , 𝛩 , 𝛿𝑛, 𝜅 , 𝜗, 𝜂 , 𝛶 ,
𝛼 , 𝐹 , 𝑓 , 𝜈]′. The SMM procedure chooses values for ̂ to minimize the
distance between a vector of identifying moments from the data and
the corresponding moments generated from model simulations:
̂ = arg min

[ ̂𝑚 − 𝑚()]′ 𝑊 [ ̂𝑚 − 𝑚()] ,

(44)



where 𝑊 is a weighting matrix,
̂𝑚 is a vector of empirical moments,
and 𝑚() is the vector of model-implied moments given a value of  for
the structural parameters.11 Although the estimator, ̂, is consistent for
any positive-definite weighting matrix, we follow the literature and set
𝑊 equal to the inverse of the covariance matrix of the moments. This
specification allocates more weight to moments estimated with greater
precision, and it has the advantage of minimizing the asymptotic vari-
ance of ̂. We estimate the covariance matrix of the moments for each
subperiod  using  the  influence  function  approach  (e.g., Erickson  and
Whited (2002)) and convert yearly data to quarterly frequency using
linear  interpolation  when  necessary.  In  addition,  we  correct  for  the
potential effect of serial correlation across target moments by adjusting
our covariance matrix following Newey and West (1987) with three
lags.

Using thirteen identifying moments (including those exhibiting in-
creasing polarization depicted in Fig. 1) computed in two subperiods
(1978–1998 and 1999–2019), we estimate the thirteen parameters ()
for each period. Our main objective is to uncover the sources of the
polarization trends in market power and Tobin’s Q. The target moments
by period are reported in Panel A of Table 3, the parameter estimates by

10 The data can be accessed here: http://dataverse.harvard.edu/file.xhtml?
persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/5GH8XO/ARHXW&version=1.1.  Missing  data
are forward-filled.
11 Model moments are computed for each subperiod using 200 samples of
length similar to the data, with a burning-in period of 50 quarters.

We use thirteen moments to identify the thirteen estimated param-
eters  by  period.  Identification  requires  that  the  simulated  moments
are sensitive to variations in the parameter values.  Our endogenous
growth  framework  implies  that  steady-state  growth  is  a  function  of
all structural parameters. The adjustment frictions in our model and
competitive environment also make other target moments affected by
all parameters in varying degrees. Table 1 presents the Jacobian matrix
to illustrate the sensitivity of target moments to a percentage change in
a specific estimated parameter. We next characterize how certain target
moments can be informative about particular estimated parameters.

We use the average small firm markup to identify the elasticity of
substitution across products (𝜈) since this parameter pins down small
firm markups in our model (𝜑 = 𝜈∕(𝜈 − 1)). The average sales share
of  the  superstar  sector  relative  to  the  industry  (𝑁 𝛺)  is  informative
about the superstar share parameter (𝛶 ) in the aggregator, capturing
the relative preference for the composite superstar good. The superstar
markup explicitly depends on the elasticity of substitution parameter
(pinned down by the small firm markup) and on the market share of
an individual superstar in the industry (𝛺), as shown in Eq. (12). Since
superstars are oligopolists, their market share and markups are sensitive
to the number of competitors in the industry. Consequently, the average
superstar markup (𝛷) is informative about the steady-state number of
superstar competitors in an industry (𝑁).

The average superstar competitors (𝑁) in an industry are endoge-
nous and depend on parameters affecting entry costs (𝜅 and 𝜗) and
exit rates (𝛩 and 𝛿𝑛) in both sectors due to the endogenous transitions
between and out of these sectors. The average superstar markup can
help to identify these four parameters since it is tightly linked to 𝑁,
as discussed above. As one moment cannot identify four parameters,
we need three additional moments to determine these four parameters
jointly. The second moment is the average sales ratio between a single
superstar  and  a  single  small  firm,  which  is  informative  about  the

)

1 + 1
𝑆

12 The covariance matrix of the parameter estimates is obtained as VAR( ̂) =
(
(𝐺′ ̂𝛺−1𝐺)−1, where ̂𝛺 is the covariance matrix of target moments,
1
𝑇
𝑇 is  the  sample  size, 𝑆 is  the  number  of  simulated  samples,  and 𝐺 =
𝜕 [ ̂𝑚 − 𝑚()] ∕𝜕.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)1039909A. Corhay et al.

Table 2
Parameters description.

𝑎⋆
𝜂
𝛼
𝛽
𝛾
𝛩
𝛿𝑛

Exogenous technology scale
Production elasticity intangible capital
Production elasticity physical capital
Subjective discount factor
Risk aversion
Superstar strategic R&D scale
Small firm death rate

A. Estimated parameters
𝜅
𝜗
𝜈
𝛶
𝐹
𝑓

𝜓
𝜒
𝛿𝑘
𝛿𝑧
𝜁𝑘
This table summarizes the definition of all model parameters.

Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
Labor elasticity
Depreciation rate physical capital
Depreciation rate intangible capital
Physical capital adjustment cost

B. Calibrated parameters
𝜁𝑧
𝜌
𝜎
𝛥0

Small firm entry cost
Small firm patent R&D scale
Elasticity of substitution across goods
Superstar goods taste
Superstar fixed cost
Small firm fixed cost

Intangible capital adjustment cost
Persistence of exogenous productivity
Volatility of exogenous productivity
Superstar death rate

average ratio of the number of small firms to the number of superstar
firms (𝑁∕𝑛). The ratio 𝑁∕𝑛 depends directly on the parameters 𝜗, 𝛿𝑛,
and 𝛩 in  the  steady  state.  The  third  moment  is  the  average  differ-
ence in Tobin’s 𝑄 between superstars and small firms ( ̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀). This
average difference is highly informative about the parameter inversely
affecting the probability that small firms become superstars (𝜗) as seen
in Eq. (18). The fourth moment is the average death rate of small firms
directly pins down the parameter governing the exit rate of small firms
(𝛿𝑛).

The average intangible capital share identifies the parameter deter-
mining the intangible capital share (𝜂) in the steady state. The average
labor share identifies the parameter inversely related to the labor share
(𝛼) in the steady state. The average return on capital of superstars and
small firms is informative for the fixed operating cost parameters for
superstars (𝐹 ) and small firms (𝑓 ). The average riskfree rate is inversely
related  to  the  subjective  discount  factor  (𝛽).  The  average  earnings-
price ratio helps to identify the parameter related to the coefficient
of relative risk aversion (𝛾). The risk aversion parameter affects the
average  earnings-price  ratio  through  the  discount  rate.  The  average
growth rate helps to identify the scale parameter (𝑎∗) in the level of
productivity.

5.  Results

We  first  describe  the  parameter  estimates,  followed  by  the  cali-
bration  of  the  fixed  parameters.  We  then  decompose  the  sources  of
polarization  in 𝑄 within  industries  using  our  estimation  results.  We
analyze aggregate trends and additional implications of the model in
the last part of this section. The definition of all model parameters is
summarized in Table 2.

5.1.  Parameter estimates

Panel B of Table 3 presents the parameter estimates in each subsam-
ple (1978–1998 and 1999–2019) with the standard errors reported in
parenthesis below.

The estimated technological parameters 𝑎∗, 𝜂, and 𝛼 are important
for explaining aggregate trends in growth and factor shares. The scale
parameter in the exogenous technology component (𝑎∗) has declined
over the two periods, contributing to the slowdown in economic growth
over the past few decades. The increasing estimates of the parameter
𝜂 over our sample reflect the rising share of intangible capital. This
pattern relates to the growing importance of the R&D-intensive high-
tech sector in the overall economy, highlighted in Alexander and Eberly
(2018). We set the returns to scale parameter (𝜉) so that superstar firms
have constant returns to scale. The fall in the labor share is reflected in
the drop in (1 −𝛼)𝜉, which could be capturing the growing trend toward
automation (e.g., Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019)).

The  estimated  preference  parameters  (𝛽 and 𝛾)  help  to  explain
aggregate  trends  in  discount  rates.  The  estimates  of  the  subjective
discount  factor  (𝛽)  increased,  helping  to  explain  the  steady  decline
in  real  rates.  The  increase  in 𝛽 could  be  capturing  the  effects  of
demographic change. Carvalho et al. (2016) highlight how an increase
in longevity causes agents to build up savings for a longer retirement,
pushing  interest  rates  down.  The  parameter  related  to  risk  aversion
(𝛾) falls, reducing aggregate risk premia to help explain the declining
earnings-price ratio, but the effects are modest compared to the change
in 𝛽.

The estimated parameters dictating entry and exit dynamics within
and across superstar and small firm sectors (𝛩, 𝛿𝑛, 𝜅, 𝜗) are important
for generating industry polarization.13 The decline in the death rate
parameter of small firms (𝛿𝑛) and the rising fixed cost of entry into
an industry as a small firm (𝜅) deter entry rates. These two margins
possibly capture rising regulations over our sample that have adversely
affected business dynamism highlighted in Gutiérrez et al. (2021). The
increase in the parameter inversely related to the probability that small
firms make breakthrough innovations (𝜗) reflects how novel ideas are
becoming harder to find (e.g., Bloom et al. (2020) and Cavenaile et al.
(2019)). We find that 𝛩 has increased, implying that strategic R&D by
superstars relative to the industry (𝐽𝑖𝑡∕ ̄𝐽 ) is becoming less efficient at
improving superstar survival rates. However, the increase in 𝜗 dampens
the crowding out effect, making strategic R&D by superstars relative to
the industry more efficient. We find that the increase in 𝜗 dominates
the effect of higher 𝛩 so that the average death rates of superstars ( ̄𝛥𝑛)
fall in our sample.

The remaining estimated parameters relate to goods demand (𝜈 and
𝛶 ) and fixed costs (𝐹 and 𝑓 ). The decline in the elasticity of substitution
parameter  between  products  (𝜈)  and  increasing  tastes  for  superstar
products  (𝛶 )  are  important  for  jointly  explaining  the  widening  gap
in markups and sales shares within industries. A fall in the demand
elasticity parameter increases superstar markups relative to small firms,
but it reduces the sales share of superstars. We then need the positive
shift  in  demand  for  superstar  goods  to  generate  a  higher  superstar
sales  share.  The  increase  in  taste  for  goods  produced  by  superstars
is consistent with micro-evidence. Neiman and Vavra (2023) find ris-
ing heterogeneity in consumption bundles across households over the
recent  two  decades,  reflecting  an  increasing  preference  for  variety
in  aggregate  demand. Clara  et  al. (2021)  show  that  the  increasing
demand  for  variety  is  mostly  supplied  by  superstar  firms  expanding
firm boundaries. While the parameters affecting the magnitude of fixed
overhead costs of superstars (𝐹 ) and small firms (𝑓 ) have declined, the
fixed operating costs incurred by superstars and small firms (𝐹 ̄𝑍𝑡 and

13 As external validation of our endogenous industry structure, the average
share of superstars as a proportion of the total number of firms in the industry
is 4.12% in the first sample period and 4.29% in the second sample period,
both close to our empirical superstar definition as the top 5% of each industry.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399010A. Corhay et al.

Table 3
Target moments and parameter estimates.

Mean risk-free rate
Mean output growth
Mean earnings-price ratio
Mean 𝑄 − 𝑞
Mean firm death rate
Mean markup superstar firms
Mean markup small firms
Mean intangible capital ratio
Mean sales share superstar
Mean relative size superstar
Mean labor share
Mean ROK superstar firms
Mean ROK small firms

Data

1978–1998

3.06%
2.10%
3.56%
0.28
9.48%
28.88%
18.97%
0.10
0.31
10.74
0.64
6.70%
4.79%

Panel A: Target moments

1999–2019

−0.12%
1.31%
1.83%
1.36
8.27%
51.60%
19.07%
0.43
0.32
10.45
0.60
11.46%
3.67%

Model

1978–1998

3.05%
2.10%
3.56%
0.28
9.48%
28.89%
18.97%
0.10
0.31
10.74
0.64
6.70%
4.79%

1999–2019

−0.13%
1.31%
1.83%
1.36
8.27%
51.61%
19.08%
0.43
0.32
10.45
0.60
11.47%
3.67%

Period 1

Period 2

Diff.

𝑎⋆

1.960
(0.150)
0.832
(0.058)
−1.128

𝜂

𝛼

𝛽

0.054
(0.007)
0.222
(0.016)
0.168

0.215
(0.005)
0.200
(0.008)
−0.015

0.993
(0.001)
0.998
(0.000)
0.00

𝛾

10.18
(1.59)
6.82
(0.64)
−3.36

𝛩

260.87
(123.21)
364.89
(76.98)
104.02

𝛿𝑛

2.40%
(0.03%)
2.09%
(0.03%)
−0.31%

𝜅

0.008
(0.002)
0.045
(0.007)
0.036

𝜗

62.5
(11.1)
122.9
(6.0)
60.4

𝜈

6.27
(0.11)
6.24
(0.17)
−0.03

𝛶

𝐹

𝑓

1.774
(0.025)
1.944
(0.050)
0.170

0.527
(0.090)
0.403
(0.029)
−0.125

0.034
(0.005)
0.015
(0.001)
−0.019

Panel B: Parameter estimates

𝜒 = 3.00

Panel C: Calibrated parameters
𝜓 = 1.50
𝛥0 = 2.13%
𝜁𝑘 = 0.53
This table reports the results of the moment matching procedure for each subsample. Structural parameters are estimated by matching simulated moments from the model to the
corresponding empirical moments. Panel A reports the simulated moments and the empirical targets. Panel B reports the estimated structural parameters for each subsample as
well as the difference between the estimates of the 1999–2019 subample and those of the 1978–1998 subsample. Standard errors are reported below each estimated parameter in
parentheses. Panel C reports the calibrates parameters. Details regarding the definition and construction of variables can be found in internet appendix C.

𝛿𝑘 = 3.00%

𝛿𝑧 = 7.25%

𝜎 = 1.00%

𝜌4 = 0.95

𝜁𝑧 = 0.92

𝑓 ̄𝑍𝑡) as a share of total expenditures have increased, consistent with
the evidence from De Loecker et al. (2020).

Panel  C  of Table  3 presents  the  calibrated  parameters.  The  in-
tertemporal  elasticity  of  substitution  (𝜓)  is  set  to  a  standard  value
in the long-run risks literature (e.g., Bansal and Yaron (2004)). The
labor elasticity parameter (𝜒) is calibrated to be consistent with the
estimates of the Frisch elasticity from the microeconomics literature
(e.g., Pistaferri (2003)). The quarterly depreciation rates of physical
capital (𝛿𝑘) and intangible capital (𝛿𝑧) are calibrated to their respective
average investment rates. The adjustment cost parameters determine
the elasticity of investment expenditures with respect to the shadow
rate of physical capital (𝜁𝑘) and intangible capital (𝜁𝑧) are set to values
from Corhay et al. (2020) and allow the model to be consistent with
the relative investment rate volatilities. The parameters governing the
persistence (𝜌) and volatility (𝜎) of the exogenous aggregate component
of technology are calibrated to match the persistence of expected TFP
growth and volatility of realized TFP growth. These macroeconomic
moments targeted by our calibration and additional key moments are
reported in Table 4.

5.2.  Sources of 𝑄 polarization

Using equilibrium conditions and identities from our model at the
steady state, in Section 2.6, we highlighted several potential margins
that  could  explain  why 𝑄 is  rising  at  a  substantially  faster  rate  for
superstars compared to small firms in the following decomposition of
𝑄 polarization:

̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀 =

( ̄𝑍
̄𝐾

−

̄𝑧
̄𝑘

)

+

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

)

(
1 − 1
̄𝛷

𝑆 𝐾 − 𝐹 𝐶

̄𝑅 + ̄𝛥𝑛 − ̄𝐺

)

(

1 − 1
̄𝜑

𝑠𝑘 − 𝑓 𝑐

̄𝑟 + 𝛿𝑛 − ̄𝑔

−

.

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(45)

This equation highlights how the rising trend in 𝑄 of superstars relative
to small firms ( ̄𝑄𝑡 − ̄𝚀) can be attributed to increasing differences in
markups ( ̄𝛷 − ̄𝜙), sales-to-capital ratio (𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘), growth rates ( ̄𝐺 − ̄𝑔),

or intangible capital share ( ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 − ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘) of superstars relative to small
firms or to increasing differences in fixed costs (𝑓 𝑐−𝐹 𝐶), discount rates
(̄𝑟− ̄𝑅), or death rates (𝛿𝑛− ̄𝛥𝑛) of small firms relative to superstars. These
margins interact with each other in our model and depend jointly on
the underlying structural parameters.

Fig.  1 provides  suggestive  evidence  that  rising  polarization  in 𝑄
within industries is related to increasing differences in rents and in-
tangible capital shares over the past few decades between superstars
and the rest of the firms in the industry. Panel B of Table 4 shows
that  our  model  can  quantitatively  explain  these  patterns  from  the
figure. The markup difference increased by around 230%, while the
intangible capital share difference increased by over 300%. Markups
and intangible capital shares are target moments in our estimation that
are closely related to profitability and sales to capital in our model. Of
the remaining four channels from our decomposition, two are target
moments (i.e., discount rates and growth rates), and the other two are
estimated parameters (i.e., fixed costs and death rates).

Table  5 shows  that  the  structural  parameters  accounting  for  the
increasing market power polarization (𝛩, 𝜗, 𝛿𝑛, 𝜅, 𝜈, 𝛶 ) can account
for the majority of the divergence in 𝑄 between superstars and small
firms within industries over the past four decades. Table 5 considers
counterfactual analysis by varying related groups of parameters from
their  period  one  (1978–1998)  estimated  values  to  the  period  two
(1999–2019) estimated values while keeping all other parameters fixed
at their period one values. We report how changing these parameters
affects the moments related to the 𝑄 decomposition.

We compute the comparative statics with different pairings of pa-
rameters  jointly  identified  by  related  moments,  as  outlined  in  Sec-
tions 4.2 and 5.1. The first column changes parameters related to the
superstar barriers to entry (𝛩, 𝜗). The second column varies the param-
eters related to small firm barriers to entry (𝛿𝑛, 𝜅). The third column
highlights the interaction effects of changing barriers to entry in both
sectors  (𝛩, 𝜗, 𝛿𝑛, 𝜅).  The  fourth  column  shows  how 𝑄 polarization
is  magnified  by  changing  the  taste  parameters  (𝛶 , 𝜈)  on  top  of  the
parameters considered in the third column. The final column shows

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399011A. Corhay et al.

Table 4
Model moments.

Panel A. Aggregate

I. Total factor productivity
𝜎[𝛥𝑡𝑓 𝑝]
AC1[𝐸[𝛥𝑡𝑓 𝑝]]

II. Investment
E[𝐼∕𝐾]
E[𝑆∕𝑍]
𝜎[𝐼∕𝐾]
𝜎[𝑆∕𝑍]∕𝜎[𝐼∕𝐾]
AC1[𝐼∕𝐾]
AC1[𝑆∕𝑍]

Data

1.48%
0.944

9.26%
32.09%
1.07%
1.41
0.978
0.964

Model

1.52%
0.928

13.75%
30.77%
0.58%
1.41
0.927
0.925

Data

III. Consumption and output
E[𝛥𝑦]
𝜎[𝛥𝑐]
𝜎[𝛥𝑦]∕𝜎[𝛥𝑐]
𝜎[𝛥𝑙]∕𝜎[𝛥𝑐]
AC1[𝛥𝑐]
AC1[𝛥𝑦]
AC1[𝛥𝑙]

1.70%
0.98%
1.48
0.61
0.459
0.345
0.005

Model

1.70%
1.14%
1.67
0.45
0.366
0.049
−0.064

Data

Model

Panel B: Industry polarization

1978–1998

1999–2019

Diff.

1978–1998

1999–2019

Diff.

0.28
9.84%
1.90%
0.10
0.60%
1.73%

1.11‡
22.58%‡
5.92%‡
0.34‡
−0.54%
0.42%

1.39
32.43%
7.82%
0.44
0.06%
2.14%

0.28
9.92%
1.92%
0.10
0.04%
−0.21%

𝛥𝑄
𝛥Markup
𝛥Profitability
𝛥Intangible ratio
𝛥Sales growth
𝛥Discount rate
This table presents several model moments compared with data. Panel A focuses on key macroeconomic moments, obtained by averaging
across the two subperiods: expected total factor productivity growth 𝐸[𝛥𝑡𝑓 𝑝], calculated using the method of Bansal et al. (2007) by projecting
one-period-ahead productivity growth on the risk-free rate and the log price-dividend ratio; the investment rate in physical capital (𝐼∕𝐾)
and intangible capital (𝑆∕𝑍); and the growth rates of aggregate consumption (𝛥𝑐), output (𝛥𝑦), and labor (𝛥𝑙). Panel B reports key industry
polarization variables, calculated as the difference between superstar and small firms in each subperiod. The ‘Diff.’ column shows the difference
between the second and first subperiods, with statistical significance (Newey–West adjusted) denoted by *, †, and ‡ for the 10%-, 5%-, and
1%-level, respectively. Sales growth in the data is normalized to have the same volatility as output growth in the model. The reported model
moments are computed for each subperiod using 200 samples of the same length as the data, with a burn-in period of 50 quarters. Growth rate
moments are annualized percentages. 𝐴𝐶1 denotes first-order autocorrelations. Details regarding the definition and construction of variables
are provided in internet appendix C.

1.36
32.54%
7.80%
0.43
0.05%
−0.23%

1.08‡
22.62%‡
5.88%‡
0.33‡
0.01%
−0.02%

Table 5
Sources of Q polarization.

𝛿𝑛, 𝜅
0.34
4.48%
2.87%
0.01
−0.02%
0.00%
1.24%
0.01

𝛩 , 𝜗
0.01
3.17%
−2.68%
−0.01
0.24%
−0.05%
−0.50%
−0.04

̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀
𝛷 − 𝜑
𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘
𝐹 𝐶 − 𝑓 𝑐
̄𝑅 − ̄𝑟
̄𝐺 − ̄𝑔
𝛥𝑛 − 𝛿𝑛
̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 − ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘
This table investigates the contribution of various deep model parameters to the variables driving the polarization in Q, namely, the difference in price
markup (𝛷 − 𝜑), sales-to-capital ratio (𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘), fixed cost of production (𝐹 𝐶 − 𝑓 𝑐), discount rates ( ̄𝑅 − ̄𝑟), growth rates ( ̄𝐺 − ̄𝑔), death rates (𝛥𝑛 − 𝛿𝑛), and
intangible capital share ( ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 − ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘). The contribution of each parameter set is determined by setting the parameter values to those of the 1999–2019
sample, while keeping all other parameters at their 1978–1998 values. All reported values are relative differences from the corresponding 1978–1999
sample moments, computed using simulated data from the model. Growth rates, death rates and returns are presented as annualized percentage rates.
Details regarding the definition and construction of variables can be found in internet appendix C.

All parameters
1.08
22.62%
32.53%
0.05
−0.03%
0.01%
0.74%
0.34

𝛩 , 𝜗, 𝛿𝑛, 𝜅 , 𝜈 , 𝛶
0.86
22.85%
8.67%
−0.00
0.15%
−0.05%
0.74%
−0.03

𝛩 , 𝜗, 𝛿𝑛, 𝜅
0.38
16.88%
3.62%
−0.00
0.23%
−0.06%
0.74%
−0.03

the total effect of varying all estimated parameters as a reference for
comparison.

We start by describing the comparative statics from varying 𝛩 and
𝜗 from their period one estimated values to the period two estimated
values while keeping the remaining estimated parameters fixed at their
period  one  values,  reported  in  column  1  of Table  5.  These  changes
in 𝛩 and 𝜗 lead  to  a  decline  in 𝛥𝑛,  which  in  turn  reduces  the  exit
rate  differential  (𝛥𝑛 − 𝛿𝑛).  The  estimated  changes  in  both 𝛥𝑛 and 𝜗
make it more difficult for small firms to become superstars within their
industry, increasing the market share of individual superstars who are
oligopolists  within  their  industry.  Superstar  markups  are  increasing
with respect to their individual market share within an industry, as
shown in Eq. (12). Small firms charge a constant markup since they
are atomistic within their industry and do not face frictions in adjusting
prices. The estimated changes in 𝛩 and 𝜗 increase the superstar markup
relative to the small firm markup ( ̄𝛷 − ̄𝜙) by 3.17 percentage points,
accounting for around 14% of the total increase in the superstar markup

difference over the two periods.

While the estimated changes in 𝛩 and 𝜗 increase the market power
of superstars, they charge higher prices and reduce production. The cut
in production dominates the higher prices, leading to a lower sales-to-
capital ratio (𝑆 𝐾 −𝑠𝑘) relative to small firms. The higher market power
of superstars also makes them more susceptible to entry risk, increasing
their exposure to aggregate risks affecting entry and leading to higher
discount rates. This entry risk propagation mechanism of oligopolists is
similar to Corhay et al. (2020). The discount rates of small firms are not
affected as much by changes in market shares since they have constant
markups. Thus, the rising barriers to entry increase superstar discount
rates relative to small firm discount rates ( ̄𝑅 − ̄𝑟). The higher market
power of superstars increases the incentives for small firms to engage
in speculative innovation and reduces the incentives for superstars to
rent intangible capital, thereby lowering the relative share of superstar
intangible capital ( ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 − ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘).

The higher barriers to becoming superstars from the changes in 𝛩
and 𝜗 produce significant polarization in markups and reduce the exit

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399012A. Corhay et al.

rates  of  superstars  relative  to  small  firms,  both  of  which  contribute
to  higher 𝑄 polarization  ( ̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀)  holding  all  other  variables  fixed
in  Eq.  (45).  However,  these  parameter  changes  only  account  for  a
small percentage of the total increase in superstar 𝑄 relative to small
firm 𝑄 ( ̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀) over the two periods. The modest impact on valuation
differentials is due to the changes in 𝛩 and 𝜗 also having opposing
effects on 𝑄 differentials from rising discount rates ( ̄𝑅 − ̄𝑟), declining
sales-to-capital ratios (𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘), and falling intangible capital shares
( ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 − ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘) of superstars relative to small firms that dampen the effects
of rising polarization in market power (𝛷 − 𝜙) on valuations in the
context of the 𝑄 decomposition provided in Eq. (45).

The  second  column  of Table  5 examines  the  comparative  statics
from varying 𝛿𝑛 and 𝜅 from their period one estimated values to the
period  two  estimated  values  while  keeping  the  remaining  estimated
parameters fixed at their period one values. The drop in the value 𝛿𝑛
increases the exit rate differential (𝛥𝑛 −𝛿𝑛). The estimated changes in 𝛿𝑛
and 𝜅 imply higher barriers for startups to enter an industry as a small
firm. The decrease in competitiveness does not affect the markups of
small firms because their optimal policy is to charge constant markups.
The total size of the small firm sector declines with less firm entry,
which  increases  the  market  share  of  an  individual  superstar  in  the
industry. The superstars are oligopolists whose markups are increasing
with respect to their individual market shares relative to both small
firms  and  superstars  in  their  industry.  The  estimated  changes  in 𝛿𝑛
and 𝜅 increase the superstar markup relative to the small firm markup
( ̄𝛷 − ̄𝜙) by 4.48 percentage points, accounting for around a fifth of the
total increase in the superstar markup difference over the two periods.14
Declining  competitiveness  in  the  small  firm  sector  from  the  esti-
mated changes in 𝛿𝑛 and 𝜅 increases the market share of superstars and
raises the returns to speculative innovation by alleviating the crowding
out effect featured in Eq. (15). Both margins make it more attractive
for  small  firms  to  engage  in  speculative  innovation.  An  increase  in
the number of superstars raises aggregate productivity, which depends
positively on the aggregate superstar stock of intangible capital. Higher
productivity also induces more fundamental innovation by superstars,
increasing aggregate trend growth for both superstars and small firms.
Consequently, the difference in growth rates ( ̄𝐺 − ̄𝑔) does not change
much. The higher aggregate productivity also offsets the dampening
effects of higher markups on superstar factor demands, leading to more
superstar  production.  The  increase  in  production  at  higher  markups
leads to an increase in the sales-to-capital ratio relative to small firms
(𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘).

The  rise  in  the  market  power  of  superstars  from  the  estimated
changes in 𝛿𝑛 and 𝜅 increases discount rate differentials ( ̄𝑅 − ̄𝑟) because
superstars behaving as oligopolists are more exposed to entry risk when
they have higher market power (same rationale as outlined above in
the context of the changes in 𝛩 and 𝜗). The higher barriers for startups
to enter an industry as a small firm (𝛿𝑛 and 𝜅) generate a significant
increase in superstar 𝑄 relative to small firm 𝑄 ( ̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀), accounting for
over a third of the total rise in 𝑄 polarization. In contrast, the rise in
the superstar barriers (𝛩 and 𝜗) to entry only accounts for around 1%
of the increase in 𝑄 polarization despite both types of barriers to entry
generating significant polarization in markups. There are two primary
reasons for this disparity. First, the spread in the sales to capital ratio
(𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘) increases with the estimated changes in 𝛿𝑛 and 𝜅 while it
decreases for 𝛥𝑛 and 𝜗. Second, the aggregate growth rate rises with
the changes in 𝛿𝑛 and 𝜅 but falls for 𝛥𝑛 and 𝜗. Higher growth reduces
the denominator ( ̄𝑅 + 𝛥𝑛 − ̄𝐺) in Eq. (45), magnifying the effects of
the markup and sales-to-capital differentials on 𝑄, generating larger 𝑄

14 We show in an extension of the benchmark model featuring heterogene-
ity  across  industries  with  respect  to  small  firm  entry  costs  that  industries
with higher small firm entry barriers exhibit greater valuation and markup
differences between superstar and small firms, aligning with our time series
evidence.

polarization for the rising barriers to entry as a small firm.

The third column of Table 5 analyzes the interaction effects between
both types of barriers to entry parameters (𝛩, 𝜗, 𝛿𝑛, and 𝜅) by varying
these four parameters from their period one estimated values to the
period  two  estimated  values  while  keeping  the  remaining  estimated
parameters fixed at their period one values. Raising barriers at both
stages of entry significantly reinforces and amplifies the market power
of superstars compared to only varying one type of barrier to entry.
Indeed, the estimated change in the four barriers to entry parameters
accounts for the majority (around 75%) of the rise in superstar markups
relative to small firms ( ̄𝛷 − ̄𝜙). However, the joint effect of varying the
four parameters does not increase the degree of polarization in 𝑄 much
beyond only increasing the barriers to entry as a small firm (𝛿𝑛 and 𝜅).
This is because increasing the barriers to entry as a superstar (𝛩 and 𝜗)
has offsetting effects from reducing the dispersion in sales (𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘),
intangible capital shares ( ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 − ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘), and growth ( ̄𝐺 − ̄𝑔), along with
lowering aggregate growth.

The  fourth  column  of Table  5 reports  the  incremental  effects  of
the estimated changes in the taste parameters (𝜈, 𝛶 ). Comparing the
third  and  fourth  columns  shows  how  the  taste  parameters  are  an
important source of industry polarization arising from the demand side.
The changes in the taste parameters increase the relative demand for
superstar goods, contributing to higher markups ( ̄𝛷 − ̄𝜙) and signif-
icantly boosting sales-to-capital differentials (𝑆 𝐾 − 𝑠𝑘). The increase
in superstar production induces more fundamental innovation, raising
aggregate growth, which amplifies the impact of the markup and sales
to capital differentials on 𝑄 in Eq. (45), akin to the higher barriers to
entry as a small firm.

The last column reports the effect of all estimated parameter changes
on the variables in the 𝑄 decomposition. Incorporating the remaining
five parameters (𝑎⋆, 𝛽 , 𝛾, 𝜂, 𝛼, 𝐹 , 𝑓 ) explains around 20% of the total
increase in 𝑄 polarization ( ̄𝑄 − ̄𝚀), capturing most of the remaining
difference.  The  factor  share  parameters  (𝛼 and 𝜂)  are  important  for
explaining the increasing gap between the superstar intangible capital
share relative to small firms ( ̄𝑍∕ ̄𝐾 − ̄𝑧∕̄𝑘).

While 𝑄 polarization increased, Figure A.2 in the internet appendix
shows that the 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratios of superstars and small firms closely tracked
each other over the past four decades, which our model is consistent
with. Eq. (42) showed that 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratios in the steady state only depend
on discount rates and growth rates, while 𝑄 also depends on markups,
sales  to  capital,  and  intangibles,  which  are  the  key  margins  driving
polarization in 𝑄. We showed in the context of the 𝑄 decomposition
(Table  5)  that  our  model  matches  the  observations  from  Figure  A.2
in the internet appendix, showing that growth and discount rates did
not  exhibit  increasing  polarization,  implying  that 𝑃 ∕𝐸 ratios  would
not diverge in our model estimation. Indeed, the change in the 𝑃 ∕𝐸
differential (𝑃 𝐸 − 𝑝𝑒) across the two periods generated by our model is
close to zero.

Our 𝑄 decomposition illuminates sources of rising inequality within
industries.  Our  estimates  suggest  the  importance  of  higher  barriers
to entry for both startups to become small firms and for small firms
to become superstars. Declining competitiveness at both stages in the
life  cycle  has  contributed  to  and  reinforced  the  increasing  polariza-
tion in market power between superstars and small firms in the last
four decades. However, the rising barriers of entry at the early stage
(startups becoming small firms) were far more important for creating
inequality in Tobin’s 𝑄 compared to the rising barriers at the later stage
(small firms becoming superstars).

The reason why the entry barriers at different stages of firms have
heterogeneous effects on 𝑄 is that the rising barriers for startups to
become small firms increase the returns to speculative innovation by
small firms. In contrast, the rising barriers for small firms to become
superstars decrease returns to speculative innovation. More speculative
innovation  increases  the  number  of  small  firms  that  make  success-
ful  breakthrough  innovations,  increasing  the  mass  of  superstars.  A
larger mass of superstars raises aggregate productivity and increases

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399013A. Corhay et al.

Fig. 2. Impulse response functions entry costs.
This figure compares the impulse response functions to a negative shock to the two entry costs parameters, 𝜗𝑡 and 𝜅𝑡, calibrated to generate a drop of 1% in the superstar firm
markup for a series of model variables: the superstar firm markup 𝛷, the valuation difference between a superstar and a small firm 𝐸[𝑉 − 𝑣], the firm investment in speculative
innovation relative to total speculative innovation 𝑗∕ ̄𝑗, the entry rate of small firms becoming superstars 𝑛𝐸 ∕𝑛, the aggregate investment rate in fundamental innovation 𝑠, the
annualized aggregate log-output growth rate 𝐸[𝛥𝑦]. All values on the 𝑦-axis are percentage deviations from the steady state, except for 𝛷 and 𝐸[𝑉 − 𝑣], which are expressed in
percentage points and levels, respectively.

aggregate knowledge spillovers, leading to increased superstar produc-
tion and higher aggregate growth. Higher aggregate growth magnifies
the  differences  in  markups  and  sales  on 𝑄 between  superstars  and
small firms (by making the denominator smaller in the decomposition
from  Eq.  (45)).  Rising  superstar  barriers  decrease  aggregate  growth
and  compress  the  dispersion  in  sales,  dampening  the  impact  of  the
differences in markups on 𝑄.

The results in this section highlight how pro-competitive policies
encouraging  the  creation  of  new  firms  and  those  curbing  the  mar-
ket power of superstars can have different implications for inequality
within industries. The next section shows how policies reducing small
versus superstar entry barriers have stark consequences for economic
growth.

5.3.  Policy discussion

This  section  qualitatively  considers  the  impact  of  surprise  policy
changes  on  the  entry  barriers  for  a  startup  to  become  a  small  firm
(𝜅, 𝛿𝑛) and for small firms to become superstars (𝜗, 𝛩) separately. We
extend our benchmark model by introducing shocks to each of these
entry  barrier  parameters,  modeled  as  autoregressive  processes.15 We
interpret  these  shocks  as  a  reduced-form  way  of  capturing  surprise
regulatory actions targeting new business creation (shocks to 𝜅 and 𝛿𝑛)
or the market power of superstars directly (shocks to 𝜗 and 𝛩). The 𝑄
decomposition above highlighted the differential impact of these entry
margins on valuations despite both contributing significantly to markup
polarization. We now focus on how pro-competitive policies can have
very different implications depending on the source.

Fig. 2 compares shocks to 𝜗 and 𝜅 that are each calibrated to pro-
duce a 1% drop in the superstar markup (𝛷) to facilitate comparison.
Lowering the barriers for small firms to become superstars (through
lower 𝜗) reduces the market share of individual superstars within an
industry, leading to reduced superstar markups. The lower barriers to
becoming a superstar have two opposing effects on the incentive for
small firms to engage in speculative innovation. First, lower 𝜗 reduces

15 We define the entry cost shock as 𝚙𝑡 = 𝚙 𝑒𝑥𝚙𝑡 , where 𝑥𝚙𝑡 = 𝜌𝚙𝑥𝚙𝑡−1 + 𝜎𝚙𝜖𝚙𝑡,
𝚙 = 𝜗, 𝜅, and 𝜖𝚙𝑡 are iid normal shocks. The steady values for the two processes
are set to match their estimated values in the second sample period.

superstar rents and depresses the expected superstar valuations relative
to small firms (𝐸(𝑉 −𝑣)), decreasing the expected benefits of speculative
innovation conditional on success. Second, lower 𝜗 also increases the
marginal return of speculative innovation on the probability of success.
The  second  effect  dominates  so  that  relative  speculative  innovation
(𝑗∕ ̄𝑗) goes up, increasing the success rate of small firms transitioning
as new superstars (𝑛𝐸 ∕𝑛). More superstars raise aggregate productiv-
ity  by  enhancing  aggregate  knowledge  spillovers  in  the  production
technology. Higher productivity increases factor demands for superstar
intangible capital and reinforces the effect of lower markups on factor
demands. The increase in factor demands leads to more fundamental
innovation (𝑠), raising expected growth (𝐸(𝛥𝑦)).

Lowering the barriers for startups to enter an industry as a small
firm (through lower 𝜅) increases the mass of small firms, decreasing the
relative market share of individual superstars, translating to reduced
superstar markups (𝛷). Reducing superstar rents lowers their valuations
relative to small firms (𝐸(𝑉 − 𝑣)), decreasing the incentives for small
firms to engage in speculative innovation. More small firms exacerbate
the crowding out effect, further discouraging speculative innovation.
A lower relative speculative innovation rate (𝑗∕ ̄𝑗) reduces the success
rate of small firms becoming new superstars (𝑛𝐸 ∕𝑛). Fewer superstars
depress aggregate productivity by lowering the aggregate accumulation
of intangible capital, which reduces knowledge spillovers in production
technology.  Lower  productivity,  in  turn,  decreases  factor  demands
for  superstar  intangible  capital  and  dominates  the  offsetting  effects
of  lower  markups  on  factor  demands,  leading  to  less  fundamental
innovation (𝑠) in the aggregate and lower expected growth (𝐸(𝛥𝑦)).

Figure A.3 in the internet appendix compares the impulse response
functions for shocks to 𝛩 and 𝛿𝑛, where the size of the shock is also set
to generate a 1% decline in superstar markups. The qualitative effects
on growth are similar to the shocks to 𝜗 and 𝜅. Lowering exit rates
for  superstars  (𝛥𝑛)  via  a  shock  to 𝛩 increases  growth,  but  lowering
exit rates for small firms (𝛿𝑛) decreases growth. These results highlight
the stark aggregate consequences of pro-competitive policies targeting
large versus small firms when there are endogenous firm transitions in
mixed market industries. These competition policies distort incentives
for  innovation  that  are  the  engine  of  growth.  Lowering  the  entry
barriers to becoming a superstar raises long-term growth, but reducing
entry  barriers  to  create  new  small  firms  has  the  opposite  effect  on
growth.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399014A. Corhay et al.

6.  Conclusion

We document increasing polarization in Tobin’s 𝑄 within industries
between superstars and the rest of the firms over the past four decades.
The  widening  gap  in 𝑄 mirrors  the  growing  inequality  in  markups,
sales, and intangible capital among firms. We endogenously link these
industry polarization trends using a general equilibrium model of mixed
industries comprising superstars and small firms, estimated separately
in each half of the sample. We quantify the sources of polarization in
𝑄 using a structural decomposition that relates 𝑄 to markups, sales,
intangible capital, discount rates, and growth rates, where the driving
forces of these margins are through the estimated changes in the deep
parameters of the model.

Our model estimation suggests that the parameters producing ris-
ing  barriers  to  becoming  small  firms,  increasing  factor  demand  for
superstar  intangible  capital,  and  rising  demand  for  superstar  goods
contributed equally to the increasing polarization in 𝑄. These margins
also  generated  growing  inequality  in  markups,  sales,  and  intangible
capital shares, but not in discount rates and growth rates like in the
data. While rising barriers to becoming small firms and superstars both
contribute to a widening gap in markups, only the small firm entry
barriers have significant effects on inequality in 𝑄 due to how these
barriers  distort  innovation  incentives  and  trend  growth  in  opposite
directions. 𝑄 polarization is, therefore, an informative moment about
the sources of industry inequality.

We  explore  how  surprise  changes  to  entry  barriers  at  the  super-
star  and  small  firm  stages  separately  to  examine  the  effects  of  pro-
competitive policies on industry inequality and aggregate growth. Our
policy  experiments  suggest  that  directly  curbing  the  market  power
of  superstars  by  lowering  superstar  barriers  reduces  polarization  in
markups  but  not  in 𝑄 while  stimulating  innovation  incentives  and
boosting trend growth. Lowering small firm barriers reduces inequality
in markups and 𝑄 but dampens innovation incentives and lowers trend
growth. These experiments highlight the importance of incorporating a
mixed industry structure for competition policy.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Alexandre  Corhay: Investigation. Howard  Kung: Investigation.

Lukas Schmid: Investigation.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have nothing to declare.

Appendix A.  Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103990.

References

108 (4), 426–461.

78 (4), 1873–1916.

649–702.

Bao, R., Eeckhout, J., 2023. Killer innovation. Princeton Working Paper.
Barkai, S., 2020. Declining labor and capital shares. J. Finance 75 (5), 2421–2463.
Bloom, N., Jones, C.I., Van Reenen, J., Webb, M., 2020. Are ideas getting harder to

find? Amer. Econ. Rev. 110 (4), 1104–1144.

Caballero,  R.,  Farhi,  E.,  Gourinchas,  P.-O.,  2017.  Rents,  technical  change,  and  risk
premia: Accounting for secular trends in interest rates, returns on capital, earning
yields, and factor shares. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107 (5), 614–620.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends. J.

Finance 43 (3), 661–676.

Carvalho,  C.,  Ferrero,  A.,  Nechio,  F.,  2016.  Demographics  and  real  interest  rates:

Inspecting the mechanism. Eur. Econ. Rev. 88, 208–226.

Cavenaile, L., Celik, M.A., Tian, X., 2019. Are markups too high? competition, strategic

innovation, and industry dynamics. University of Toronto Working paper.

Chen, H., Dou, W.W., Guo, H., Ji, Y., 2024. Feedback and contagion through distressed

competition. J. Finance (Forthcoming).

Clara, N., Corhay, A., Kung, H., 2021. Firm product concentration and asset prices.

Rotman School of Management Working Paper.

Corhay,  A.,  2017.  Industry  competition,  credit  spreads,  and  levered  equity  returns.

Rotman School of Management working paper.

Corhay, A., Kung, H., Schmid, L., 2020. Competition, markups, and predictable returns.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (12), 5906–5939.

Crouzet, N., Eberly, J., 2018. Intangibles, investment and efficiency. Amer. Econ. Rev.

Crouzet, N., Eberly, J., 2019. Understanding weak capital investment: the role of market
concentration and intangibles. In: Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium.
Crouzet, N., Eberly, J., 2023. Rents and intangible capital: A q+ framework. J. Finance

Cunningham, C., Ederer, F., Ma, S., 2021. Killer acquisitions. J. Polit. Econ. 129 (3),

De  Loecker,  J.,  Eeckhout,  J.,  Unger,  G.,  2020.  The  rise  of  market  power  and  the

macroeconomic implications. Q. J. Econ. 135 (2), 561–644.

Dou, W.W., Ji, Y., Wu, W., 2021. Competition, profitability, and discount rates. J.

Financ. Econ. 140 (2), 582–620.

Eckel, C., Neary, J.P., 2010. Multi-product firms and flexible manufacturing in the

global economy. Rev. Econ. Stud. 77 (1), 188–217.

Eggertsson, G.B., Robbins, J.A., Wold, E.G., 2021. Kaldor and piketty’s facts: The rise

of monopoly power in the united states. J. Monetary Econ. 124, S19–S38.

Eisfeldt, A.L., Falato, A., Xiaolan, M.Z., 2023. Human capitalists. NBER Macroecon.

Annual 37 (1), 1–61.

Erickson, T., Whited, T.M., 2002. Two-step GMM estimation of the errors-in-variables

model using high-order moments. Econometric Theory 18 (3), 776–799.

Farhi,  E.,  Gourio,  F.,  2018.  Accounting  for  macro-finance  trends:  Market  power,

intangibles, and risk premia. Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 147–223.

Fernald, J., 2014. A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity.

Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Greenwald, D., Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2024. How the wealth was won: Factor shares

as market fundamentals. J. Political Econ. (Forthcoming).

Grossman, G.M., Helpman, E., 1993. Innovation and growth in the global economy.

Grullon,  G.,  Larkin,  Y.,  Michaely,  R.,  2019.  Are  US  industries  becoming  more

concentrated? Rev. Finance 23, 697–743.

Gutiérrez, G., Jones, C., Philippon, T., 2021. Entry costs and aggregate dynamics. J.

Monetary Econ. 124, S77–S91.

Gutiérrez, G., Philippon, T., 2016. Investment-less growth: An empirical investigation.

Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hall,  R.E.,  1988.  The  relation  between  price  and  marginal  cost  in  US  industry.  J.

Political Econ. 96 (5), 921–947.

Hartman-Glaser, B., Lustig, H., Xiaolan, M., 2019. Capital share dynamics when firms

insure workers. J. Finance 74, 1707–1751.

Hayashi, F., Inoue, T., 1991. The relation between firm growth and q with multiple cap-
ital goods: Theory and evidence from panel data on Japanese firms. Econometrica
59 (3), 731–753.

Iraola, M., Santos, M., 2017. Asset price volatility, price markups, and macroeconomic

MIT Press.

Acemoglu, D., Restrepo, P., 2019. Automation and new tasks: How technology displaces

fluctuations. J. Monetary Econ. 90, 84–98.

and reinstates labor. J. Econ. Perspect. 33 (2), 3–30.

Jaimovich, N., Floetotto, M., 2008. Firm dynamics, markup variations, and the business

Aghion,  P.,  Howitt,  P.,  1992.  A  model  of  growth  through  creative  destruction.

cycle. J. Monetary Econ. 55 (7), 1238–1252.

Econometrica 60 (2), 323–351.

Ai,  H.,  Croce,  M.M.,  Li,  K.,  2013.  Toward  a  quantitative  general  equilibrium  asset
pricing model with intangible capital. Rev. Financ. Stud. 26 (2), 491–530.
Alexander, L., Eberly, J., 2018. Investment hollowing out. IMF Econ. Rev. 66, 5–30.
Andrei, D., Mann, W., Moyen, N., 2019. Why did the q theory of investment start

working? J. Financ. Econ. 133 (2), 251–272.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L.F., Patterson, C., Van Reenen, J., 2020. The fall of the

labor share and the rise of superstar firms. Q. J. Econ. 135 (2), 645–709.

Ayyagari,  M.,  Demirgüç-Kunt,  A.,  Maksimovic,  V.,  2024.  The  rise  of  star  firms:

Intangible capital and competition. Rev. Financ. Stud. 37 (3), 882–949.

Bansal, R., Kiku, D., Yaron, A., 2007. Risks for the long run: Estimation and inference.

Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research.

pricing puzzles. J. Finance 59 (4), 1481–1509.

Jermann, U.J., 1998. Asset pricing in production economies. J. Monetary Econ. 41 (2),

Karabarbounis, L., Neiman, B., 2016. The global decline of the labor share. Q. J. Econ.

257–275.

129 (1), 61–103.

Kung,  H.,  2015.  Macroeconomic  linkages  between  monetary  policy  and  the  term

structure of interest rates. J. Financ. Econ. 115 (1), 42–57.

Kung, H., Schmid, L., 2015. Innovation, growth, and asset prices. J. Finance 70 (3),

1001–1037.

Liu, E., Mian, A., Sufi, A., 2022. Low interest rates, market power, and productivity

growth. Econometrica 90 (1), 193–221.

Loualiche, E., 2021. Asset pricing with entry and imperfect competition. J. Finance

(Forthcoming).

Quant. Anal. 51 (6), 1–39.

Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset

Lyandres, E., Palazzo, D., 2016. Cash holdings, competition, and innovation. J. Financ.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399015A. Corhay et al.

15 (3), 224–264.

Neiman, B., Vavra, J., 2023. The rise of niche consumption. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon.

Rognlie, M., 2015. Deciphering the fall and rise in the net capital share: Accumulation

Neuhann, D., Sockin, M., 2020. Risk-sharing, investment, and asset prices according to

Shimomura, K.-I., Thisse, J.-F., 2012. Competition among the big and the small. Rand

cournot and arrow-debreu. Working paper, University of Texas.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and

autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 703–708.

Opp, M.M., Parlour, C.A., Walden, J., 2014. Markup cycles, dynamic misallocation, and

amplification. J. Econom. Theory 154, 126–161.

Peters, R.H., Taylor, L.A., 2017. Intangible capital and the investment-q relation. J.

Financ. Econ. 123 (2), 251–272.

Pistaferri,  L.,  2003.  Anticipated  and  unanticipated  wage  changes,  wage  risk,  and

intertemporal labor supply. J. Labor Econ. 21 (3), 729–754.

or scarcity? Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 1–54.

J. Econ. 43 (2), 329–347.

Traina,  J.,  2018.  Is  aggregate  market  power  increasing?  production  trends  using

financial statements. University of Chicago Working Paper.

Van Reenen, J., 2018. Increasing differences between firms: market power and the

macro-economy. London School of Economics Working Paper.

Wang, Y., Whited, T.M., Wu, Y., Xiao, K., 2022. Bank market power and monetary
policy  transmission:  Evidence  from  a  structural  estimation.  J.  Finance  77  (4),
2093–2141.

JournalofFinancialEconomics165(2025)10399016