Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Agency cost of free cash flow, capital allocation, and payouts

☆

Harry DeAngelo a,*
a Kenneth King Stonier Chair Emeritus, Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California, United States
b Ann Griffin Endowed Chair in Finance, Eller College of Management, University of Arizona, United States
c Sidney Davidson Distinguished Service Professor of Accounting, The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, United States

, Kathleen Kahle b, Douglas J. Skinner c

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

JEL codes:
G30
G32
G35 

Keywords:
Capital allocation
Free cash flow
Payouts
Politicization of finance

1. Introduction

Jensen’s  (1986)  analysis  of  the  agency  costs  of  free  cash  flow  radically  transformed  our  understanding  of 
corporate payout policy. This paper details the main pre-Jensen advances in the payout literature, explains how 
his analysis profoundly altered the way financial economists view payout policy, and discusses prominent reg-
ularities that provide real-world texture for understanding the importance of his insights about payout policy. 
These regularities include: (i) the dominance (measured as a percent of value or earnings) of the public equity 
markets by firms in the distribution phase of the corporate lifecycle; (ii) changes since the 1980s in aggregate 
cash payouts, the profitability of payers, payout rates, and the set of firms that dominate the payout supply; and 
(iii) the recent politicization of share repurchases.

Michael  Jensen’s  (1986) paper  “Agency  Costs  of  Free  Cash  Flow, 
Corporate  Finance,  and  Takeovers”  radically  advanced  our  under-
standing of corporate payout policy. Jensen’s insights in this paper are 
surely among the most important contributions to the post-Modigliani 
and Miller (1958) literature on corporate financial policy. He presented 
his analysis compactly in an unrefereed paper just over six pages long. 
His  insights  about  the  importance  of  firms  paying  out  free  cash  flow 
(FCF) emerged from his use of intuitive economic reasoning (rather than 
formal  modeling)  to  make  sense  of  the  high-leverage  takeovers  and 
restructurings – especially of large oil firms – that were front-page news 
in the 1980s.

Jensen’s message is that payouts matter because agency costs link 
them to the capital allocation process, with the value generated by a firm 
driven by the extent to which capital is invested wisely. When a firm has 
more resources than it can profitably invest, productive efficiency calls 
for the cash to be paid out. The reason is that retention of FCF in lieu of 
payout creates the opportunity for managers to destroy value by using 
excess resources in ways that serve their own self-interests.

This  paper  seeks to  put  in  perspective  Jensen’s (1986) analysis  of 
capital allocation and the importance of distributing FCF. We summarize 
the main pre-Jensen advances in the payout literature and explain how 
he profoundly altered the way financial economists view payout policy. 

We  then  highlight  several  empirical  regularities  about the  payouts of 
publicly  held  firms  to  provide  context  for  understanding  the  founda-
tional importance of Jensen’s contribution.

We find that firms that pay out cash (henceforth, payers) account for 
more than 85% of total market capitalization in all but two of the years 
between  1971  and  2023.  Public  equity  markets  in  the  U.S.  are  thus 
dominated by firms in the distribution stage of the corporate lifecycle, 
which are the focal point of Jensen (1986). The dominance of payers is 
even stronger in terms of earnings.

In Jensen’s day, payouts were concentrated among a relatively small 
set of firms that generated the bulk of earnings. That remains true today. 
For example, the top 500 payers account for 90.0% of payouts in both 
1986 and 2023 and for 85.6% and 92.8% of net income in those years, 
respectively. The top 500 payers account for about one-tenth of all firms 
(payers and nonpayers) in our CRSP/Compustat-based sample in 1986 
and roughly one-eighth of all firms in 2023.

The  identities  of  the  largest  payers  have  changed  markedly  since 
Jensen’s day due to a shift in the set of public firms and industries that 
generate the bulk of earnings and to a decline in hostile takeover activity. 
GM, IBM, and GE – three of the most successful firms of the 20th century – 
were dominant payers in 1986 but are far less important today. In 1986, 
four of the 10 largest payers made the top ten because of one-time re-
capitalizations and/or large repurchase tender offers, with hostile take-
over pressure visible in three cases. Such cases are largely absent today.

☆

We thank Eugene Fama, J.B. Heaton, Kevin J. Murphy, Jay Ritter, Richard Roll, and especially Ren´e Stulz for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: hdeangelo@marshall.usc.edu (H. DeAngelo). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104117
Received 21 May 2025; Accepted 1 June 2025  
Available online 12 August 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Technology firms, oil firms, and banks are now the most prominent 
contributors  to  the supply  of  payouts. Of  these  groups, only  oil firms 
were major distributors of cash in Jensen’s day. The rise of banks and 
technology firms reflects increased industry concentration (Kahle and 
Stulz, 2017; Kwan et al., 2024) and the emergence of superstar firms 
(Autor et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2024). Growth by acquisition played a role 
in today’s greater prominence of banks among the top distributors of 
cash and in the continued prominence of oil firms.

The payout mix has shifted away from dividends and toward share 
repurchases  in  the  years  since  Jensen  wrote  his  1986  FCF  paper, 
although dividends remain important. This shift was facilitated by the 
creation  in  1982  of  “safe-harbor”  regulatory  guidelines  that  enable  a 
firm to repurchase shares without exposing managers to charges of at-
tempts to manipulate the stock price.

The  aggregate  values  of  real  payouts,  real  earnings,  and  real  cash 
balances have increased markedly since the 1980s. Payout ratios (as a 
fraction of earnings) have increased materially since 2000, but there is 
no clear trend in the fraction of cash balances that firms typically pay 
out. Jensen’s (1986) analysis can help explain why today’s payouts are 
high,  with  the  increases  in  the  dollar  amount  of  payouts  and 
earnings-based payout ratios plausibly reflecting better monitoring due, 
e.g., to investor activism (Denes et al., 2017; Brav et al., 2022) and to a 
general improvement in corporate governance (Holmstrom and Kaplan, 
2001). Better monitoring also plausibly enabled the now much higher 
cash balances that firms typically hold by decreasing the likelihood that 
the cash would be wasted on bad projects. The increase in cash balances 
cannot be explained by Jensen’s (1986) analysis alone, which treats the 
absence of financial flexibility as a valuable means of limiting the ability 
of managers to spend corporate resources in self-interested ways.

The  last  10  years  or  so  have  seen  a  surge  in  political  attacks  on 
corporate  payouts.  These  criticisms  focus  on  share  repurchases,  but 
dividends  have  also  come  under  fire.  The  concentration,  scale,  and 
fungibility of cash payouts have made them attractive targets for poli-
ticians and social activists, who would prefer that firms fund causes they 
favor,  including greater  investment  in  workers, communities,  innova-
tion, and green energy.

Section 2 details the main pre-Jensen (1986) conceptual contribu-
tions  to  the  payout  literature.  Section  3 discusses  the  main  lessons 
Jensen  (1986) taught  us.  Section  4 presents  a  compact  descriptive 
portrait of the payout landscape that highlights the importance of Jen-
sen’s ideas as well as important changes since Jensen’s day. Section 5
discusses the politicization of share repurchases. Section 6 summarizes 
two general theoretical principles that emerge from Jensen (1986) and 
draws on other work by Jensen to discuss his likely views of the politi-
cization of payout policy.

2. A compact history of the payout literature before Jensen 
(1986)

In this section, we trace the main developments in the literature on 
payout  policy  that  laid  the  foundation  for  Jensen’s  (1986) important 
contribution. Over the three decades leading up to the publication of 
Jensen’s  FCF  paper,  corporate-finance  specialists  wrestled  with  two 
ideas about payout policy. First, publicly held firms made large taxable 
dividend payouts to shareholders. Second, Miller and Modigliani (1961, 
MM) showed that, holding investment fixed and in the absence of taxes 
and other frictions, a firm’s choice of payout policy is irrelevant. These 
ideas led researchers to search for a credible reason why firms would pay 
cash dividends when, absent taxes, the choice of payout policy doesn’t 
matter.  As  we  discuss  in  Section  3,  the  incentive-based  interplay  be-
tween  payouts  and  investment,  which  was  ruled  out  by  MM’s 
fixed-investment assumption, turned out to be Jensen’s critical insight.
Lintner’s (1956) managerial survey was the first important contri-
bution to the modern literature on payout policy. Lintner documented 
two regularities that have proved to be remarkably robust: (1) dividends 
are fundamentally connected to earnings, with managers believing that 

payouts  should  increase  as  earnings  increase,  and  (2)  managers  are 
reluctant  to  cut  regular  dividends  once  initiated.  In  a  rough  sense, 
finding  (1)  anticipates  the  importance  Jensen  (1986) placed  on  FCF 
distribution  because  earnings  drive  what  Wall  Street  refers  to  as  free 
cash flow (operating cash flow net of capital expenditures). The defi-
nitional distinction is that Jensen uses FCF to refer to net cash flow under 
an optimized (value-maximizing) investment/operating policy, whereas 
Wall Street and corporate executives typically use the term to refer to 
operating cash flow net of actual capital expenditures.

Regarding (2), the post-Lintner literature contains strong empirical 
support for the idea that managers assign great importance to avoiding 
cuts in regular dividends; see, e.g., Brav et al. (2005). The robust support 
for regular dividends as a credible payout-commitment device weakens 
the  case  that  Jensen  (1986) made  about  debt  playing  a  generally 
important role in forcing managers to disgorge FCF. We return to this 
issue in Section 3.4 below.

Miller and Modigliani (1961, MM) fundamentally altered the prism 
through which corporate-finance specialists viewed the payout policies 
of  firms whose  shares are  traded  in large  liquid  stock markets. MM’s 
main  point  was  that  dividend  policy  is  irrelevant  under  frictionless 
conditions (no taxes, etc.) with investment/operating policy held fixed. 
One shortcoming  of MM’s analysis is  that all payout variation occurs 
through  changes  in  net  stock  issuance,  which  dictates  that  no  incre-
mental cash retention is allowed (DeAngelo et al., 2008, chapter 2.1).

This  limitation  of  MM’s  (1961)  dividend-irrelevance  proof  is 
economically  significant.  Their  formal  analysis  establishes  the  irrele-
vance of (1) equity-financed dividends, and (2) the dividend-repurchase 
mix, holding constant the dollar amount of cash distributed each period 
(at 100% of FCF every period). However, no one cared about either of 
these issues in the early days of the development of modern corporate- 
finance theory because, in real-world firms, equity-financed dividends 
and share repurchases were not empirically important.

Instead, the empirically relevant focus was squarely on the payout- 
versus-retention  decision:  How  much  should  a  firm  distribute  in  the 
near-term as opposed to retain and reinvest to provide earnings to fund 
future  payouts?  MM’s  (1961)  dividend-irrelevance  proof  is  silent  on 
what  was  unquestionably  viewed  as  the  main  empirically  relevant 
component  of  payout  policy.  Brennan  (1971) and  Rubinstein  (1976)
addressed this issue with analysis that allows a firm to reduce its current 
dividend payout and invest the retained cash in zero-NPV projects. In 
these models, payouts are lower in the current period, but the firm has 
more  resources  to  fund  larger  future  payouts  due  to  the  incremental 
investment, with no change in the overall value of the payout stream. 
Deferral of payouts thus entails no loss of value under frictionless con-
ditions as long as the retained cash is invested in value-neutral ways and 
is eventually fully distributed.

This  view  of  payout  deferral  inadvertently  fostered  serious  and 
protracted  confusion  in  the  literature  about  the  incentives  to  defer 
taxable  payouts.  If  deferral  of  payouts  (with  reinvestment)  entails  no 
value loss for shareholders in the absence of taxes, why would a firm 
ever make a cash payout that would trigger an immediate tax liability? 
Deferral of taxable payouts would seem to be the optimal strategy. That 
intuition is the centerpiece of Black’s (1976) famous paper, “The Divi-
dend Puzzle.” Here is what Black said (with emphasis added): 

Under the assumptions of the Modigliani–Miller theorem, a firm has 
value even if it pays no dividends. Indeed, it has the same value it 
would have if it paid dividends.

If this theorem is correct, then a firm that pays a regular dividend 
equal to about half its normal earnings will be worth the same as an 
otherwise  similar  firm  that  pays  no  dividends  and  will  never  pay 
dividends.

In  a  world  where  dividends  are  taxed  more  heavily  (for  most  in-
vestors)  than  capital  gains,  and  where  capital  gains  are  not  taxed 
until  realized,  a  corporation  that  pays  no  dividends  will  be  more 

2 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

attractive to taxable individual investors than a similar corporation that 
pays  dividends.  This  will  tend  to  increase  the  price  of  the  non- 
dividend-paying  corporation’s  stock.  Many  corporations  will  be 
tempted to eliminate dividend payments.

Black’s argument also applies to share repurchases to the extent that 
they are taxable because they are priced to deliver a capital gain relative 
to  the  tax  basis  of  the  selling  shareholder.  The  general  claim,  in  a 
nutshell,  is  that  cash  retention  always  dominates  immediately  taxable 
payout of cash. In “Debt and Taxes”, another highly influential paper, 
Miller  (1977,  pp.  266  and  270)  invokes  intuition  advanced  by  Mod-
igliani  and  Miller  (1958,  fn  57)  about  the  tax  benefits  of  deferring 
payouts. Miller argued that it is reasonable to assume that the effective 
personal tax rate on equity is immaterial because long-term deferral of 
payouts will drive the present value of taxes on payouts close to zero.1
In  the  tax-capitalization  literature  of  public  finance,  Auerbach 
(1979) and Bradford (1981) pointed out that the existence of personal 
taxes on future payouts undermines the incentive to defer taxable pay-
outs. This argument gained virtually no traction for two reasons. First, 
Merton Miller and Fischer Black were brilliant and revered figures and 
so few, if any, corporate-finance specialists were open to the idea they 
both might have been wrong in their views of payout deferral. Second, 
the  tax-capitalization  argument  diminishes  the  incentive  for  firms  to 
defer payouts but does not provide a fully convincing motive for firms to 
make immediately taxable payouts.

The literature’s historical emphasis on the tax advantage of deferral 
also reflects a well-understood concern on the part of the government 
about tax-avoidance strategies, although Miller and Scholes (1978, p. 
334)  indicate  that  the  historical  record  shows  that  the  tax-code  pro-
visions designed to discourage corporate cash retention “pose no threat 
to  the  large,  widely  held  corporations  that  actually  pay  most  of  the 
dividends.” The important point is that the ostensible tax advantages of 
cash  retention  over  immediate  payout  dominated  the  thinking  of 
corporate-finance specialists in the 1970s.

Miller  and  Scholes  (1978,  MS)  sought  to  rationalize  immediately 
taxable dividend payments on the grounds that portfolio strategies using 
personal borrowing and insurance contracts could be used to convert 
dividend receipts into tax-deferred capital gains. Although MS’s argu-
ment was taken seriously, it failed to sustain traction in the literature for 
two related reasons. First, their argument was not about rationalizing 
dividend  payments  per  se,  as  it  could  be  applied  to  personal  interest 
income  and  capital-gains  realizations,  thus  effectively  turning  any 
personal-tax-inclusive model into the MM corporate-tax framework – an 
approach to modeling the tax code whose empirical credibility Miller 
(1977) had  recently undermined in “Debt and  Taxes.”  Second,  as MS 
highlighted (p. 335), their tax-deferral strategy would, if employed by 
investors at scale, gut the personal income tax and effectively convert it 
into a consumption tax, which obviously has not happened.

Rozeff (1982) and Easterbrook (1984) argued that immediate pay-
outs  are  beneficial  because  they  force  a  firm  to  raise  external  capital 
more  frequently,  which  fosters  more  effective  monitoring  by  outside 
investors  (because  of  the  threat  that  they  will  supply  funds  at  less 
attractive  terms  after  detecting  bad  managerial  behavior).  This  argu-
ment  resonated  with  corporate-finance  specialists  because  it  was  the 
first attempt to tie payout decisions to agency theory, which was in the 
process of transforming the field from the perfect-markets emphasis of 
MM (1958) to the framework of Jensen and Meckling (1976), which put 
the spotlight on contracting frictions and incentive problems.

1 There are problems with the reasoning of Black and Miller that were not 
identified  for  many  years.  They  are  detailed  in  DeAngelo,  DeAngelo,  and 
Skinner (2008, chapter 12). We ignore them here because our objective is to 
portray  the state  of  understanding  of  payout  policies  at  the time  that  Jensen 
(1986) was published. At that time, the view of the tax advantage of corporate 
retention  advanced  in  “The  Dividend  Puzzle”  and  in  “Debt  and  Taxes”  was 
treated as state-of-the-art understanding in the corporate-finance literature.

At the same time, however, Rozeff’s (1982) and Easterbrook’s (1984)
capital-market-monitoring  argument  was  not  widely  accepted  as  a 
first-order  motivation  for  firms  to  make  taxable  payouts.  This  assess-
ment  reflects  the  fact  that  it  is  hard  to  find  examples  of  managers 
deliberately  seeking  to  put  themselves  at  the  mercy  of  suppliers  of 
capital, while there is ample indication that managers seek to insulate 
themselves from pressures associated with raising outside funding. See, 
for example, the study by Donaldson (1984) that Jensen (1986) refer-
ences in his opening footnote.

Although the capital-market monitoring argument of Rozeff (1982)
and  Easterbrook  (1984) identifies  an  economically  sensible  “on-the--
margin” benefit of payouts, it is difficult to see that it, or for that matter 
any other argument advanced in the post-Lintner (1956) payout litera-
ture,  provides  a  first-order  affirmative  motive  for  firms  to  distribute 
substantial  amounts  of  cash  in  the  near-term.  That  changed  with  the 
publication of Jensen (1986).

3. How Jensen (1986) changed our view of corporate finance

Jensen’s (1986) key insight is that payout policy matters because of 
its connection to the capital allocation process and the incentives that 
govern the choice of a firm’s investment policy. In this respect, he built 
on the foundational insights of Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Myers 
(1977): When information and contracting costs are material, financial 
policy  matters  because  managerial  incentives  forge  a  connection  be-
tween the specific features of a firm’s ownership and capital structure 
and the investment decisions chosen by managers. Jensen highlighted 
managerial  opportunism  as  the  factor  that  forged  an  empirically 
important  connection  between  capital  allocation  and  payouts.  He 
advanced a compelling narrative about managers using cash retention 
(in  lieu  of  payout)  to  fund  investments  that  benefited  them  but 
destroyed value for shareholders.

Here, in Jensen’s (1986) words, is the nature of the important rela-
tion  between  capital  allocation  and  payouts  that  corporate-finance 
specialists had not yet appreciated: 

Free  cash  flow  is  cash  flow  in  excess  of  that  required  to  fund  all 
projects that have positive net present values when discounted at the 
relevant cost of capital. Conflicts of interest between shareholders 
and managers are especially severe when the organization generates 
substantial free cash flow. The problem is how to motivate managers 
to  disgorge  the  cash  rather  than  investing  it  at  below  the  cost  of 
capital or wasting it on organizational inefficiencies.

The main concern in Jensen (1986) is therefore getting excess cash 
out of the firm when there are significant risks of distortion in the capital 
allocation process. A secondary issue is the best way to do so, with the 
main options being regular dividend payments, special/extra dividends, 
share repurchases, and payments to holders of debt. Payments to debt-
holders are relevant here because, as Jensen (1986) emphasizes, debt is 
useful for forcing cash disgorgement when investors fear that managers 
will fail to distribute FCF through dividends and share repurchases. We 
discuss Jensen’s view of the control function of debt in Sections 3.4 and 
3.5.

Although all these  methods  can alleviate the problem  of potential 
FCF  waste,  total  (corporate  plus  personal)  tax  payments  will  differ 
depending on the mix of dividends, share repurchases, and payments to 
creditors.  Jensen  treated  these  tax-related  differentials  as  of  second- 
order  importance,  and  focused  instead  on  mechanisms  that  pressure 
managers to send cash out of the firm.

Dividends and share buybacks entail direct cash payment to share-
holders,  which  is  what  shareholders  expect  to  receive  at  some  point 
when they contribute capital to the firm. Jensen viewed the takeover 
market – and shareholder activism generally – as an important source of 
pressure on managers to deliver on this expectation by distributing FCF 
to  shareholders.  The  idea  is  that,  if  incumbent  managers  are  over- 
retaining  and  wasting  FCF,  outsiders have  incentives  to  replace  them 

3 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

with new managers.

3.1. Jensen’s (1986) theory: two interpretations

The  literature  has  two  interpretations  of  Jensen’s  (1986) theory, 

with #1 nested as a special case of #2: 

1. A theory that is important only for firms that lack profitable invest-

ment opportunities.

2.  A theory that is important for firms generally, including those with 
high current earnings and liquidity relative to the current level of 
profitable investments.

#1 is based on the examples Jensen used in his paper to illustrate the 
importance  of  paying  out  cash.  Those  examples  highlight  managers’ 
decisions to use current cash flow to fund new investments that are poor 
in an absolute sense. #2 is a natural – and arguably obvious – general-
ization of Jensen’s discussion of managerial waste of available cash. It’s 
not just firms with poor investment opportunities that have a potential 
agency problem with managers spending cash unwisely.

Firms  with  abundant  cash  relative  to  nontrivial  positive-NPV  in-
vestments  face  the  same  general  agency  problem,  although  it  likely 
manifests differently than at firms that have few good investments. The 
problem is not simply empire building (or theft) by managers. Resource 
abundance  can  also  foster  an  unduly  lax  managerial  attitude  about 
spending  in  general  –  e.g.,  project  experimentation,  adoption,  and 
oversight – and that, in turn, can lead to value losses from suboptimal 
investment/operating policies. Such laxity can plausibly survive because 
of  the  real-world  difficulties  of  measuring  and  evaluating  the  profit-
ability of alternative investment/operating policies.

We focus on interpretation #2. It’s not that #1 lacks empirical sup-
port. On the contrary, the literature contains evidence supporting #1. 
For example, Lang et al. (1991) report that firms with low Tobin’s Q 
ratios – a proxy for poor investment opportunities – have stock returns 
that  are  significantly  negatively  related  to  cash  flow  when  they 
announce tender offers to buy other firms.

The main reason we emphasize #2 is that #1 plausibly applies to a 
set of firms that is too narrow to explain the large aggregate cash payouts 
that  have  been  observed  in  publicly  held  firms  for  many  years  (see 
Section  4 below).  It  seems  unlikely  that  a  pervasive  absence  of  good 
investment  opportunities  at  firms  across  the  board  can  explain  the 
magnitude of aggregate payouts. On the contrary, flourishing technol-
ogy firms like Apple and Microsoft plausibly have ample good new in-
vestments  that  are  exceeded  by  their  even  larger  earnings  from 
previously undertaken investments.

Our decision to emphasize interpretation #2 also reflects Jensen’s 
(2005) discussion  of  the  agency  costs  of  overvalued  equity  (ACOE). 
Jensen’s ACOE argument is a straightforward generalization of #2 that 
recognizes a different source of cash abundance that can lead managers 
to make unwise investments: The ability to issue shares that are signif-
icantly overpriced by the stock market.

3.2. The sense in which Jensen (1986) is a foundational element of 
corporate-finance theory

In their pioneering work, MM (1958, 1961) insisted on maintaining a 
sharp conceptual distinction between a firm’s investment and financing 
decisions.  In  the  MM  framing  of  corporate  finance,  that  distinction 
effectively dictates that all value is generated through investment per se 
and that financing decisions have no impact on the value of the firm or 
shareholder wealth.

There  are  two  important  respects  in  which  Jensen’s  contribution 
should  be  viewed  as  foundational  to  the  way  financial  economists 
approach  issues  of  corporate  finance.  One  involves  the  link  between 
capital allocation and payouts and the other involves the basic building 
blocks of corporate-finance theory. Let us take these two points in turn.

Although managerial waste of FCF was central to the case that Jen-
sen  (1986) articulated,  the  more  general  issue  concerns  the  critical 
linkage  between  capital  allocation  and  payout  policy. That  linkage  is 
present  even  when  managers  act  in  shareholders’  best  interests,  as 
generating  maximum  value  for  shareholders  involves  the  (eventual) 
payout of cash that cannot be profitably reinvested.

The framing of corporate-finance theory usually begins with Mod-
igliani and Miller’s (1958) simple two-security (debt and equity) model 
of the firm. It then adds various frictions associated with the use of debt 
and  equity  financing  and  solves  for  a  capital  structure  optimum  as  a 
tradeoff of the posited frictions.

One could instead start with a firm that has a single security class 
(equity)  and  operates  in  a  frictionless  world,  and  then  examine  two 
broad categories of decisions, each with its own set of frictions, and how 
key frictions in each category affect the use of debt and equity financing. 
The first broad category entails corporate access to external funding, for 
which the asymmetric information analysis of Myers and Majluf (1984)
is  the  foundational  contribution.  The  second  broad  category  entails 
getting cash distributed by the firm to the suppliers of capital after earlier 
rounds of funding have been allocated to investment and the rewards 
from investment realized, for which Jensen’s (1986) FCF analysis is the 
foundational contribution.

Viewed from this perspective, the debt-versus-equity capital struc-
ture  choice  is  not  the  central  or  foundational  problem  of  corporate 
finance. Instead, corporate financial policy is driven by two principles: 
(i) getting cash into a firm in the most efficient way to finance produc-
tive investments, and (ii) distributing the rewards from investment to 
the suppliers of capital so that it is not wasted. The two principles are 
tightly linked, as textbook-level logic about share valuation indicates: 
Firms will be able to raise capital at attractive terms only to the extent 
investors expect they will eventually receive payouts that have a present 
value as least as large as that of the capital they contributed.

This  concern  about  the  linkage  between  capital  contributions  and 
expected future payouts is present in every financing scenario. It exists 
in the simplest scenario in which a firm has a single outstanding security 
class: Equity or common stock. Starting from that baseline, we can think 
of debt (and other securities and contractual mechanisms) as tools firms 
use to deal efficiently with the various frictions that are relevant for the 
interdependent  capital-infusion  and  distributional  components  of 
financial  policy  that  are  the  focus  of  Myers  and  Majluf  (1984) and 
Jensen (1986), respectively.

Importantly  then,  payout  policy  should  not  be  viewed  as  subordi-
nated in importance to a firm’s debt-equity mix, which is how Miller and 
Modigliani’s  (1961) dividend  policy  follow-up  to  their  1958  capital 
structure paper encouraged us to think. Rather, Jensen’s (1986) analysis 
has  helped  us  see  that  payout  policy  is  a  primary  building  block  of 
corporate financial policy central to value creation.

This  framing  of  corporate-finance  theory  illustrates  how  Jensen’s 
(2005) analysis of the Agency Costs of Overvalued Equity (ACOE) is the 
conceptual complement of his FCF paper. The FCF paper is concerned 
with  managerial  warping  of  investment  decisions  facilitated  by 
over-retention of cash while the ACOE paper is concerned with the same 
type of problem generated by infusions of cash made possible when the 
market overvalues a firm’s shares.

This alternative framing of theory also leads to an empirically more 
relevant  approach  to  understanding  capital  structure  and  cash  dy-
namics. The MM framing naturally leads to friction-inclusive tradeoff 
models  of  capital  structure  as  in  Robichek  and  Myers  (1966,  RM). 
RM-style  tradeoff  models  all  have  a  target  leverage  optimum  and 
counterfactually  predict  that  every  proactive  capital  structure change 
moves  a  firm  toward  its  target.  When  theory  is  instead  grounded  in 
principles (i) and (ii), debt and cash are used as transitory funding ve-
hicles, with firms issuing debt and drawing down cash balances to meet 
unanticipated funding needs and then deleveraging (repaying debt and 
rebuilding cash balances) as earnings realizations permit. That is a far 
more realistic portrait of debt and cash dynamics than RM-style tradeoff 

4 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

models predict. See the capital structure evidence cataloged in DeAngelo 
(2023, Section 4).

3.3. A lifecycle theory of corporate financial policy

This  re-framing  of  basic  theory  leads  immediately  to  a  predicted 
linkage between the scale of payouts and FCF generation over a corpo-
rate lifecycle and, more generally points to a lifecycle theory of firms, as 
Jensen (1993) emphasized in his AFA Presidential Address. The lifecycle 
payout-FCF linkage is obvious from the observation that young growth 
firms that are not yet generating FCF require external funds to pursue 
their  investment  opportunities,  and  so  are  poorly  suited  to  distribute 
large amounts of cash. In contrast, mature firms plausibly have generous 
payout policies because they generate more cash than they can profit-
ably invest. The implication is that growth firms should focus largely on 
cash  infusions  and  make  few  payouts  while  mature  firms  should  be 
distributing the FCF they generate.

The less obvious implication is Jensen’s (1993, Section 4) observa-
tion  that  there  is  a  fundamental  asymmetry  in  the  behavior  of  firms 
operating  in the  growth and  decline stages of  the corporate lifecycle. 
These different stages call not only for differences in capital raising and 
distribution, but also for fundamentally different management skills to 
navigate the different operational challenges that each stage presents. A 
discussion of the latter point is beyond the scope of this paper. We raise 
it here to highlight that an important general theme – one traceable to 
Jensen  (1986) –  connects  many  of  Jensen’s  important  insights  about 
corporate financial policy.

3.4. The control function of debt versus the value of financial flexibility

Jensen viewed a firm’s payout decisions as inherently linked to its 
capital structure through what he called the control function of debt. 
The  premise  is  that,  with  rare  exception,  debt  creates  a  legally 
enforceable obligation to pay cash out of the firm to claim holders. The 
control  function  idea  is  that  debt  can  be  useful  for  forcing  cash  dis-
gorgement when (i) managers are effectively reneging on their implicit 
contract to distribute FCF to shareholders (say with unduly low regular 
dividends) and (ii) pressures from activist shareholders are inadequate 
to  prevent  excess retention.  Jensen’s  point  is  that,  in  such  situations, 
debt is a vehicle for using the contract-enforcement power of the state as 
a device for disciplining managers to ensure that FCF is paid out.

There is clearly merit in the control function of debt idea. However, 
in our judgment, Jensen put too much emphasis on this factor as a driver 
of  corporate  capital  structures.  Yes,  he  recognized  that  increased 
leverage  also comes  with  agency  and  bankruptcy  costs  and  that  such 
costs  attenuate  the  incentive  to  use  debt  to  motivate  managers  to 
distribute  FCF.  But  he  ignored  the  benefits  of  financial  flexibility. 
Indeed, he treated the absence of financial flexibility as an unambigu-
ously positive feature, not a bug, because debt forces managers to pay 
out  rather  than  waste  firm  resources.  Although  Jensen  didn’t  discuss 
cash balances in his FCF paper, the spirit of his analysis indicates higher 
net-debt obligations (debt minus cash holdings) are desirable because of 
the discipline they impose on managerial decision-making. Corporate- 
finance specialists now recognize that there are countervailing economic 
forces at work that encourage firms to have more conservative financial 
policies,  as  manifested  in  lower  leverage  ratios  and/or  higher  cash 
balances, and as evidenced, e.g., by higher credit ratings.

The conceptual point that is missing in Jensen (1986) is recognition 
that there is value in untapped debt capacity and/or large cash balances 
because  they  provide  low  marginal  cost  access  to  resources  to  meet 
imperfectly anticipated funding or liquidity needs. This idea was made 
in  convincing  fashion  in  Myers  and  Majluf’s  (1984) breakthrough 
analysis  of  financial  policy  dynamics,  although  Higgins  (1972) previ-
ously discussed the value of corporate cash retention in anticipation of 
future funding needs.

Hindsight is  20-20, but it is  clear  from today’s vantage  point that 

Jensen’s (1986) discussion would have benefited from recognizing the 
value of financial flexibility and explicitly considering investment and 
payout decisions in a dynamic context. His discussion is framed in the 
spirit of a “one-shot” decision model, as in standard tradeoff theories of 
capital  structure  that  follow  the  modeling  template  of  Robichek  and 
Myers (1966).

The free cash  flow language encourages readers  to think narrowly 
about decisions made in a single period about whether to distribute or 
retain and immediately invest profits. A dynamic framing would have 
recognized that cash retention today can fund immediate investment or 
can stockpile internally available highly liquid resources to fund future 
investment outlays. It would have shifted emphasis away from a flow- 
based  measure  of waste potential and  put the  spotlight on the  extent 
of cash balances or some other such measure of liquid asset holdings that 
provide  managers  with  opportunities  to  make  distortionary  firm  in-
vestments that serve their narrow self-interests.

This  sort  of  dynamic  framing  of  Jensen  (1986) would  have  led 
immediately to the idea that, for all firms, there is an inherent tradeoff 
between preserving financial flexibility (to meet imperfectly anticipated 
funding and liquidity needs) and having  managers operate on a tight 
financial leash with strong pressures to distribute cash and not maintain 
either large cash balances or material untapped debt capacity. In short, 
this  approach  would  have  provided  an  empirically  more  powerful 
framework that combined (i) the narrow “one-shot” FCF waste problems 
central to Jensen (1986) with (ii) the financial flexibility considerations 
central to the dynamic framing of corporate finance in Myers and Majluf 
(1984).

The key empirical problem for the narrow way Jensen (1986) framed 
his argument is that it is easy to find firms that distribute large amounts 
of cash through stock repurchases and dividends despite having ample 
financial flexibility with high cash holdings and conservative leverage 
ratios.  See,  for  example,  the  discussion  below  of  the  cash  payouts  of 
prominent technology firms like Apple and Microsoft. These firms make 
large cash distributions while maintaining substantial cash holdings and 
facing no debt-related pressures to make large payouts.

3.5. What do LBOs tell us about the importance of the control function of 
debt?

Jensen’s (1986) assertion that debt plays an important disciplinary 
role (in mitigating FCF waste) gained traction in the literature because of 
his  seemingly  convincing  claims  about  the  motives  for  using  debt  in 
leveraged buyouts (LBOs): 

Many of the benefits in going private and leveraged buyout (LBO) 
transactions seem to be due to the control function of debt...

Desirable  leveraged  buyout  candidates  are  frequently  firms  or  di-
visions of larger firms that have stable business histories and sub-
stantial free cash flow (i.e., low growth prospects and high potential 
for  generating  cash  flows)  –  situations  where  agency  costs  of  free 
cash flow are likely to be high.

Although  Jensen’s  portrayal  of  the  characteristics  of  many  LBO 
candidates is correct, those characteristics do not conclusively establish 
a motive for LBO firms to be highly leveraged due to the control function of 
debt. There are two issues here. The first is that firms acquired in an LBO 
typically have concentrated equity ownership and boards of directors 
dominated by representatives of the private-equity firm(s) that supplied 
the bulk of the equity funding to make the acquisition. In terms of in-
centives,  these  post-acquisition  ownership  and  governance  features 
make the LBO firm close in substance to the single owner-manager case 
in Jensen and Meckling (1976) where agency costs are zero (and man-
agers do not waste FCF). That means that debt is largely a redundant 
control device for reducing FCF waste in firms that have undergone an 
LBO.

The second issue is that heavy reliance on debt in LBOs could reflect 

5 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

other factors. For example, it could reflect the attraction to prospective 
lenders of borrowers with strong and reliable cash flows. It could also 
reflect a desire by private-equity firms to treat their pool of investable 
equity capital as a scarce resource while capturing tax benefits from debt 
financing.

Our point here is not that Jensen’s (1986) control function of debt 
argument is wrong. Without a doubt, debt sometimes makes good sense 
as a disciplinary device to mitigate FCF waste, especially when managers 
have lost credibility with investors and regular dividend payments are 
not perceived as a strong commitment to distribute FCF. Our point is 
that Jensen’s argument is not convincing of the pervasive importance of 
the control function motive for firms that have undergone LBOs to have 
large amounts of debt.

The idea that LBOs are a means of addressing the FCF waste problem 
central  to  Jensen  (1986) is  compelling,  however.  The  target  firm’s 
now-high  concentration  of  equity  ownership  and  the  presence  of 
private-equity  owners  on  the  board  of  directors  create  stronger  in-
centives  for  managers  to  make  wise  capital  allocation  decisions  than 
under dispersed public ownership.

4. Prominent empirical features of the payout landscape

This section provides a descriptive portrait of the payout policies of 
publicly held firms that illustrates the importance of issues that Jensen 
(1986) analyzed  and  that  highlights  several  notable  changes  in  the 
payout  landscape  since  Jensen’s  day.  While  some  of  our  analysis  is 
novel, to a large degree we build on empirical work in prior studies. We 
analyze  all  firms  in  the  CRSP/Compustat  universe  over  1971–2023. 
While  prior  work  tends  to  exclude  financial  firms  and  utilities,  we 
include  those firms to  provide  a  comprehensive  view of  payouts.  Ap-
pendix A details our sampling criteria and data definitions.

4.1. Market value, net income, and aggregate dividend and share- 
repurchase payouts

Fig. 1 shows that public equity markets in the U.S. are dominated by 
firms that pay out cash. For almost two-thirds of the years from 1971 to 
2023, the market capitalization of payers exceeds 90% of total market 
capitalization, falling below 85% in just two years (when unsustainably 
high stock prices for young tech firms temporarily reduced the market 
capitalization of payers to around 80% of the total).

The dominance of payers is even more pronounced when we look at 
earnings. Fig. 2 reports earnings measured as net income (panel A) and 
operating  income  (panel  B).  These  figures  show  that  nonpayers 
contribute little or nothing to aggregate earnings. Some nonpayers, of 
course, generate earnings, but the losses reported by others are usually 
large enough to offset all such earnings and, in a few years are so large as 
to drive the aggregate earnings of nonpayers well into negative territory.
Fig. 2 also shows that the inflation-adjusted aggregate earnings of 
publicly held firms that pay out cash is substantial in every year from 
1971 to 2023 and has become much larger in the last two decades. For 
example, aggregate real net income essentially doubled from just below 
$1 trillion around the turn of the century to around $2 trillion in 2023.
Fig. 3 shows that the growth in aggregate earnings in the 21st century 
has been accompanied by a comparably impressive increase in aggre-
gate real payouts by publicly held firms. The figure shows that dividend 
payments  increased  markedly  over  the  full  period  1971-2023  and 
especially so over the last 20 years. The surge in share repurchases over 
the  last  20  years  or  so  has  been  even  greater,  with  repurchases  now 
accounting  for  more  than  half  of  aggregate  payouts  by  publicly  held 
firms. Increases in aggregate payouts and the impressive growth in share 
repurchases  have  been  documented  in  many  prior  studies;  see,  e.g., 
Kahle and Stulz (2021) for a recent tabulation.

Although  real  dividend  payments  have  grown  consistently  since 
1971, there has been substantial year-to-year variation in the number 
and percent of firms that pay dividends (not reported in Fig. 1). Fama 

and French (2001) document a sharp decrease in the fraction of firms 
that pay dividends from 1978 to 1999. Dividend payments, however, 
were  not  disappearing.  Larger  total  dollars  of  dividends  were  being 
delivered  by  a  smaller  number  of  payers,  with  growth-by  acquisition 
playing an important role in the consolidation of the dividend supply; 
see DeAngelo et al. (2004).

The resilience of dividends is an indication of the importance of the 
issues that Jensen (1986) emphasized. Although repurchases have tax 
and  flexibility  advantages  over  dividends,  regular  dividends  credibly 
convey managers’ commitment to distribute FCF rather than retain and 
fritter  it  on  dubious  projects  and  acquisitions.  This  commitment  is 
evident in (1) the large scale of dividend payments (per Fig. 3), and in 
(2) the asymmetric nature of dividend changes: Dividend cuts are rare 
and  large  (and  occur  mostly  in  situations  of  financial  distress)  while 
dividend  increases  are  small,  frequent,  and  regular  (some  firms  have 
increased  dividends  for  decades;  e.g.,  Coca-Cola  has  increased  its 
quarterly dividend every year since the early 1960s and paid a dividend 
each year since the 1920s). These findings are also borne out in mana-
gerial surveys; see, e.g., Brav et al. (2005).

Fig. 4 partitions the annual payouts from Fig. 3 into those made by 
financials,  utilities,  and  industrials  (defined  as  all  nonfinancial  and 
nonutility firms). In all years, industrials are by far the largest supplier of 
payouts, although the payouts of financial firms have grown over time 
and are now substantial in their own right. Utilities make only minor 
contributions to the aggregate supply of payouts.

Aggregate  payouts  by  publicly  held  firms  are  consistently  much 
larger  than the  equity infusions  provided  through  SEOs and  IPOs  –  a 
regularity that is evident by comparing our Figs. 3 and 4 to the equity 
infusions amounts for 1990–2023 reported by Huang et al. (2024, HRZ). 
For the median year over this period, total SEO+IPO infusions are 12.1% 
of aggregate payouts, and reach a maximum of 36.2% in the year 2000 
(during the hot-issue market of the tech-stock-bubble period).2

4.2. The corporate-payout cross-section in Jensen’s day versus today

Table 1 juxtaposes key features of the payout cross-section in 1986, 
the year Jensen’s FCF paper was published, against those for 2023, the 
most recent year with data available. The number of payers is roughly 
the  same  –  2,904  in  1986  versus  2,999  in  2023  –  but  the  fraction  of 
payers is substantially higher today (73.3% versus 54.8%).

For many years, payouts have been concentrated among a relatively 
small set of firms that generate the bulk of earnings – a signature feature 
of the payout landscape evident in both 1986 and 2023. In both years, 
the top 500 payers account for 90.0% of aggregate payouts while the top 
10 account for about 20.0% (panel A of Table 1). The top 10 and top 500 
payers respectively generate 25.0% and 92.8% of aggregate earnings in 
2023 – up from 14.9% and 85.6% in 1986 (panel B). The increase for the 
top 10 is a bit misleading because, as noted below, three of the 10 largest 
payers  in  1986  made  large  one-time  payouts  in  response  to  visible 
threats of hostile takeover. Firms that distribute cash in 1986 and 2023, 
respectively account for 92.5% and 92.3% of total market capitalization 
(panel C of Table 1).

Consistent  with  Fig.  3,  from  1986  to  2023  we  observe  substantial 
increases across the board in both the fraction of payouts made through 
share repurchases (panel D of Table 1) and the fraction of payers that 
repurchase (panel E). While the percent of payers that pay dividends has 
declined from 81.4% to 59.1%, this decline is much more muted among 
the largest payers (panel F) which says that dividends remain important, 
especially for the largest payers.

2 HRZ’s data are equity proceeds before the payment of banking fees and do 
not  include  IPOs  by  banks  and  S&Ls  and  issuances  by  OTC  firms.  The  latter 
considerations  are  minor  measurement  details  and  do  not  alter  the  basic 
inference that aggregate payouts consistently swamp total SEO+IPO infusions 
for publicly held firms.

6 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Fig. 1. Percent of aggregate market capitalization for firms that distribute cash in each year 1971-2023. The figure reports the total market capitalization for 
all firms that distribute cash in the year in question as a percent of the market capitalization of all firms in the full sample. For each firm, market capitalization is the 
year end value of all outstanding common shares. The full sample consists of firms that (i) are included in the CRSP/Compustat data file in at least one year over 
1970-2023, (ii) are incorporated in the U.S., (iii) have a CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and (iv) are listed on a major exchange (exchange code 1, 2, or 3). Firms in all 
industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not exclude financial firms and utilities. Appendix A provides relevant data definitions and describes requirements 
on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the sample.

Table 2 reports key features of the 10 firms that made the largest 
total real payouts over the five-year periods 1982–1986 (panel A) and 
2019–2023 (panel B), as well as in 1986 (panel C) and 2023 (panel D). 
We emphasize the five-year profiles because a firm’s distributions (and 
earnings) in a single year are sometimes affected by unusual events. The 
latter point will be clear from our discussion of panel C below.

A dramatic shift in the identity of the largest payers from Jensen’s 
day is evident when we compare panels A and B of Table 2. Five of the 
top 10 payers over 1982-1986 are oil firms while only one (IBM at #3) is 
a technology firm. Five of the top 10 payers over 2019-2023 are tech-
nology firms and all are much more important to the payout supply than 
IBM (which has fallen to #46). The more recent period’s top 10 includes 
three large, systemically important banks (all new to the highly ranked 
set of payers) and two oil firms (both prominent payers in the 1982-1986 
period).

ExxonMobil is the only firm to make the top 10 in both periods. The 
decline  from  panel  A  to  panel  B  in  the  number  of  oil  firms  is  a  bit 
misleading  because  the  industry  underwent  massive  consolidation 
through mergers in the years since Jensen’s day. Mergers account for the 
disappearance of Atlantic Richfield (#4), Conoco (#6), Amoco (#7), and 
Texaco (#10). In panel B’s top 10, the two oil firms – Exxon Mobil (#7) 
and Chevron (#10) – grew substantially through acquisition. Growth by 
acquisition also played a role in the emergence of banks among the most 
prominent distributors of cash in recent years.

Among the top 10 payers, the real dollar magnitudes of payouts and 
earnings  in  recent  years  are  far  greater  than  in  Jensen’s  day.  For 
example, over 2019-2023, Apple (ranked #1) paid out a bit over half a 
trillion  inflation-adjusted  dollars  while  reporting  real  earnings  of  just 
under that amount. In real terms, Apple’s payout is almost 10 times the 
cumulative real payouts of Exxon over 1982-1986, which ranked #1 for 
that period. Chevron, the #10 firm over 2019-2023, would have been by 
far the #1 cash distributor over 1982-1986 if it had made its recent real 
payouts of $90.9 billion in that period.

For  the  top  payers,  dividends  have  become  less  important  as  a 
percent  of  total  payouts  but  remain  substantial.  Eight  of  the  top  10 
payers over 2019-2023 paid dividends including the top five dividend 
payers.  The  other  two  firms  –  Alphabet  and  Meta  –  initiated  regular 
dividends  in  2024,  suggesting  that  dividends  remain  a  pervasively 

important  payout  vehicle,  at  least  for  prominent  firms.  Although 
repurchases now deliver more cash to shareholders, dividends remain a 
significant  part  of  the  payout  landscape.  The  ongoing  magnitude  of 
dividends and the implicit commitment inherent in regular dividends – a 
commitment  that  is  not  present  with  repurchases  and  extra/special 
dividends  –  suggests  they  play  a  nontrivial  role  in  mitigating  the 
resource-waste problem central to Jensen (1986).

The data for 1986 and 2023 in panels C and D of Table 2 support the 
inferences  we  have  drawn  from  panels  A  and  B.  The  important  new 
observation  is  that,  in  1986,  four  of  the  top  10  firms  made  the  list 
because of one-time payouts, three of which were motivated by visible 
hostile takeover activity. Such activity was regularly front-page news in 
the 1980s and loomed large in the way Jensen came to the ideas in his 
landmark paper on payout policy – a reality he highlighted by including 
the word “takeovers” in the title of his 1986 paper.

Table 2 further shows remarkably high cash-balance ratios in 2023 
for most of the top payers (panels B and D, far right column) – a fact that 
is especially notable for technology giants Apple, Alphabet, Microsoft, 
and  Meta.  Each  of  these  firms  distributed  a  large  fraction  of  their 
earnings over 2019-2023 (panel B) and in 2023 alone (panel D). Their 
high payout ratios are misleading in the sense that they are not indica-
tive  of  managers  having  limited  ability  to  spend  the  firm’s  liquid  re-
sources on unwise investments that serve their narrow self-interest. On 
the contrary, these firms maintain large reservoirs of cash and market-
able  securities.  Those  reservoirs  would  seem  to  give  managers  ample 
opportunity  to  make  unwise  investments,  which  was  Jensen’s  (1986)
central  concern.  This  phenomenon  is  not  unique  to  these  large  tech-
nology firms, as we next document.

4.3. Payout rates relative to earnings and cash balances

Fig. 5 reports payout ratios from 1971 through 2023 for all payers 
with  positive  earnings  in  a  given  year.  Panel  A  reports  the  ratio  of 
payouts  to  operating  income  (OI),  while  panel  B  reports  the  ratio  of 
payouts to net income (NI). The dashed line shows the sum of all firms’ 
payouts divided by the sum of their earnings. The solid line documents 
median  earnings-payout  ratios.  The  former  is  more  representative  of 
firms that have higher earnings and make larger payouts.

7 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Fig. 2. Aggregate real earnings ($ billions in 2023 dollars) for sample partitioned into firms that pay out and that do not pay out cash: 1971-2023. The 
dashed plots report total earnings – measured as net income in panel A and as operating income in panel B – for all firms that distribute cash in the year in question, 
while the solid plots report total earnings for firms that do not distribute cash. The full sample consists of firms that (i) are included in the CRSP/Compustat data file 
in at least one year over 1970-2023, (ii) are incorporated in the U.S., (iii) have a CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and (iv) are listed on a major exchange (exchange code 
1, 2, or 3). Firms in all industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not exclude financial firms and utilities. Appendix A provides relevant data definitions and 
describes requirements on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the sample.

The signature empirical regularity in Fig. 5 is that, in recent years, 
firms tend to pay out a larger fraction of earnings than they did 25 years 
ago. For both payout ratios, the aggregate and median ratios are roughly 
0.2 greater in recent years than they were around 2000 – firms now tend 
to distribute about 20% more of earnings than they did around the turn 
of the century. This increase in the rate at which earnings are distributed 
is very close to the increase since the year 2000 documented by Kahle 
and Stulz (2021, Fig. 2) for industrial firms.

Holdings  of  cash  (and  marketable  securities)  for  payers  have 
increased substantially since 2000. Fig. 6 indicates that aggregate real 
cash balances for payers were around $3 trillion in 2000 compared to 
numbers in excess of $7 trillion in recent years. Fig. 7 shows that these 
larger holdings of cash translate to roughly a 50% increase (from 0.08 to 
0.12) in the aggregate ratio of cash-to-total assets and to roughly a 100% 
increase in the median payer’s Cash/TA ratio (from 0.04 to 0.08) since 
the  turn  of  the  century.  This  recent  increase  in  Cash/TA  ratios  is  a 
continuation  of  a  trend  for  industrial  firms  from  1980  to  2006  docu-
mented by Bates et al. (2009).

Thus, although firms now tend to pay out a larger fraction of earn-
ings,  many  do  so  while  holding  considerably  more  cash.  The  secular 
increase in payout ratios in Fig. 5 therefore does not necessarily say that 
payout policies have become more attentive to agency costs of free cash 
flow, which is Jensen’s (1986) central concern. The reality instead, as 
Figs. 6 and 7 document, is that firms now tend to operate with greater 
cash  holdings,  which  indicates  that  managers  have  greater  command 
over resources that they could deploy in self-interested, unproductive 
ways.

The natural question then becomes: To what extent has there been a 
change in the rate at which firms draw down their (now much greater) 
cash holdings through payouts to shareholders? To address this ques-
tion,  we  calculate  a  cash-balance-based  payout  ratio,  defined  as  the 
dollar payout in a specified year divided by the sum of cash payouts and 
the year-end cash balance (i.e., the post-payout holdings of cash). Fig. 8
reports an aggregate version of this ratio (the sum of all firms’ payouts 
divided  by  the  sum  of  all  firms’  cash  balances  and  payouts)  and  the 
median firm’s ratio for each year in question.

8 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Fig. 3. Aggregate real payouts ($ billions in 2023 dollars) and their dividend and share-repurchase components: 1971-2023. The figure reports the total 
payouts  (dividends  plus  share  repurchases)  for  all  firms  that  distribute  cash  in  the  year  in  question,  partitioned  into  aggregate  dividend  and  share-repurchase 
components. All observations are converted to 2023 dollars using the consumer price index. The full sample consists of firms that (i) are included in the CRSP/ 
Compustat data file in at least one year over 1970-2023, (ii) are incorporated in the U.S., (iii) have a CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and (iv) are listed on a major 
exchange (exchange code 1, 2, or 3). Firms in all industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not exclude financial firms and utilities. Appendix A provides 
relevant data definitions and describes requirements on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the sample.

Fig. 4. Aggregate real payouts ($ billions in 2023 dollars) partitioned into their main industry components: 1971-2023. The figure reports the total payouts 
(dividends plus share repurchases) for all firms that distribute cash in the year in question, partitioned into financial firms, utilities, and the set of nonfinancial and 
nonutility  firms, which we  label industrials. All observations are  converted to 2023  dollars using  the consumer price  index. Appendix A provides  relevant data 
definitions and describes requirements on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the sample.

Fig. 8 indicates that the aggregate and median cash-balance-based 
payout  ratios  both  largely  remain  in  the  range  0.015  to  0.200  from 
the year 2000 to the present. The aggregate cash-balance-based payout 
ratio remains within that same range back to the early 1980s, while the 
ratio  for  the  median  firm  largely  remains  within  the  range  0.200  to 
0.250 from the early 1970s to the early 1990s. There is no sign in these 
data of a secular upward trend in cash-balance-based payout ratios.

We conclude that firms have not become more aggressive in recent 
years in the rate at which they typically pay out cash. Although the data 
indicate that payouts have trended higher relative to earnings, that trend 
has been accompanied by a substantial increase in cash holdings. The 
upshot is that the higher payout ratios are occurring against a backdrop 

of  now  much  larger  cash  holdings.  Firms  have  not  transitioned  to 
operating on a tighter financial leash, as would be the case if Jensen’s 
(1986) logic were the main driver of the trends documented in Figs. 5
through  8.  Instead,  the  trend  has  been  toward  firms  operating  with 
greater  financial  flexibility  (as  indicated  by  larger  holdings  of  cash), 
which provides a cushion to support their now-higher earnings-based 
payout ratios.

That is not to say that Jensen’s (1986) logic is unimportant for un-
derstanding the large scale of observed payouts by publicly held firms. 
On  the  contrary,  the  large  scale  of  firms’  cash  balances  provides  a 
plausible basis for concluding that his logic is of first-order importance 
for  understanding  the  scale  of  payouts.  Consider  the  counterfactual 

9 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Table 1 
Corporate payouts: 1986 versus 2023.
In each panel, the full sample for the year in question is partitioned according to 
the dollar value of the firm’s total payout in that year. So, for example, the first 
row in each panel reports data for the 10 firms that made the 10 largest total 
payouts, while the next row reports data for the 25 firms that made the 25 largest 
total payouts. Firms in all industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not 
exclude financial firms and utilities. Appendix A provides complete details on 
sample inclusion criteria.

Number of sample firms
Number of firms that paid out cash
Percent of firms that paid out cash

A. Percent of aggregate payouts made by:

10 largest payers
25 largest payers
100 largest payers
250 largest payers
500 largest payers
All payers pooled together

B. Percent of aggregate net income from:

10 largest payers
25 largest payers
100 largest payers
250 largest payers
500 largest payers
All payers pooled together

C. Percent of aggregate market capitalization for:

10 largest payers
25 largest payers
100 largest payers
250 largest payers
500 largest payers
All payers pooled together

D. Percent of payouts from share repurchases:

10 largest payers
25 largest payers
100 largest payers
250 largest payers
500 largest payers
All payers pooled together

E. Percent of payers that repurchased shares:

10 largest payers
25 largest payers
100 largest payers
250 largest payers
500 largest payers
All payers pooled together

F. Percent of payers that paid dividends:

10 largest payers
25 largest payers
100 largest payers
250 largest payers
500 largest payers
All payers pooled together

1986

5,297
2,904
54.8%

19.1%
30.5%
60.4%
79.1%
90.0%
100.0%

14.9%
24.0%
49.6%
71.7%
85.6%
104.1%

9.9%
17.4%
38.8%
56.3%
71.7%
92.5%

37.1%
36.6%
36.1%
33.5%
32.0%
30.5%

70.0%
72.0%
80.0%
68.0%
57.2%
31.7%

100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
99.2%
97.6%
81.4%

2023

4,091
2,999
73.3%

22.4%
34.9%
48.2%
79.5%
90.0%
100.0%

25.0%
36.2%
52.7%
82.5%
92.8%
101.2%

20.6%
30.9%
41.3%
66.2%
76.8%
92.3%

72.9%
70.6%
63.6%
61.5%
56.9%
55.9%

100.0%
100.0%
93.0%
88.8%
87.6%
68.3%

80.0%
92.0%
88.0%
89.2%
85.8%
59.1%

scenario of firms having retained rather than distributed large amounts 
of cash. Their large stockpile of cash that is evident in Fig. 6 would have 
been trillions of dollars greater, as can be seen from the annual scale of 
payouts  reported  in  Fig.  4.  The  result  of  this  hypothetical  additional 
retention (in lieu of payout) would be to create a scale of liquid-resource 
abundance  within  firms  that  seems  far  out  of  proportion  to  any 
reasonable assessment of their profitable near-term investments.

4.4. FCF and other explanations for corporate payouts

The literature contains three broad factors that potentially explain 

decisions to pay out cash: 

(1)  Free cash flow (FCF) distribution, with an emphasis on the agency 
costs that arise when managers have opportunities invest a firm’s 
liquid assets in self-interested, unproductive ways.

(2)  Other motives that receive major emphasis in the literature and 
finance textbooks: Signaling future earnings to outside investors, 
meeting the portfolio demands of specific investor clienteles for 
stable  cash  distributions,  and  the  exploitation  of  stock-market- 
timing opportunities.

(3)  Other more nuanced (and sometimes opportunistic) motives such 
as: (i) use of share repurchases to increase managerial bonuses 
that depend on EPS, (ii) use of repurchases to boost EPS and/or 
meet quarterly EPS expectations, (iii) use of repurchases to offset 
the  dilutive  effects  of  employee  stock  options,  (iv)  dividend 
avoidance because the exercise price on employee stock options 
are not dividend-protected, (v) share repurchases to increase the 
pay-performance  sensitivity  of  equity  held  by  managers,  (vi) 
share repurchases that deter takeovers by buying the shares of 
investors most willing to sell to a bidder, thereby concentrating 
ownership  among  non-selling  shareholders,  and  (vii)  dividend 
and repurchase payouts to increase leverage in the direction of an 
ostensible target ratio.

The literature on corporate payout policy is massive and a thorough 
review is well beyond what we can reasonably provide in this paper. For 
readers  interested  in  detailed  discussions  of  the  evidence  on  the 
importance of these factors, see Allen and Michaely (2003), Vermaelen 
(2005), Kalay and Lemmon (2008), DeAngelo et al. (2008), Farre et al. 
(2014), Bonaime and Kahle (2024), and Leary and Nukala (2024).

In our view, the data we summarize above provide a compelling basis 
for FCF distribution to be the foundational element of any empirically 
credible theory of payout policy. Aggregate payouts are simply too large, 
and the payouts of individual firms are too tightly linked to earnings, to 
be plausibly explained by the other factors in (2) and (3). Consider, for 
example, the large cash distributions and earnings of Apple reported in 
panels B and D of Table 2. Apple has many ways of communicating with 
investors about its future earnings and has a track record to make its 
disclosure statements credible, and so simply does not need to distribute 
billions  of  dollars  to  send  a  convincing  signal  about  future  profits  to 
investors.  See, for  example,  Lu  and Skinner  (2024),  who  discuss how 
managers  use  guidance  in  conjunction  with  payouts  to  convey  infor-
mation about their firms’ prospects.

In addition to the question of how much cash to pay out, the litera-
ture  frequently  asks:  What  explains  the  dividend-versus-repurchase 
mix?  In  terms  of  Jensen’s  (1986) analysis,  regular  dividends  entail  a 
stronger implicit commitment of continued distribution of cash. Many of 
the  other  factors  in  (2)  and  (3)  also  plausibly  exert  influence  on  the 
dividend-repurchase  mix.  As  with  the  level  of  payouts,  providing  a 
detailed assessment of the empirical importance of these other factors is 
well beyond the scope of this paper.

5. The political targeting of share repurchases

Throughout  his  career,  Jensen  viewed  political  interference  in 
corporate decision-making as a serious threat to the efficient functioning 
of the free-enterprise system. Jensen (1991) spoke out strongly against 
attempts by managers, organized labor, and politicians to influence laws 
and  regulations  that  would  benefit  incumbents  by  impeding  activist 
investors  who  sought  to  use  the  market  for  corporate  control  to 

10 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Table 2 
Top 10 firms ranked by payouts: 1986 versus 2023.
This table examines the 10 firms that made the largest total (dividend plus share repurchase) cash payouts cumulated over 1982-1986 (panel A), 2019-2023 (panel B), 
1986 alone (panel C), and 2023 alone (panel D). Firms in all industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not exclude financial firms and utilities. Appendix A 
provides relevant data definitions and describes requirements on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the full sample. In panel C, the symbol * denotes 
the firm was subject to visible hostile takeover activity. In all panels, an entry with — indicates the firm is not publicly held during the period in question. Cash/TA 
denotes the percent equivalent of the ratio of cash plus marketable securities to total assets at the end of the year in question. In the second column of Panel B, Oracle’s 
low rank reflects the fact that it repurchased a small amount of stock over 1982-1986 and 4,352 firms distributed cash in at least one year in that interval.

A. 1986: Top 10 firms ranked by their cash payouts cumulated over the five years ending in 1986 (amounts in constant 2023 $ billions)

Payout rank

1982-1986

2019-2023

Company

Dollar values and ranks for 1982-1986

Cumulated  
payout ($B)

Dividends as  
a % of payout

Dividend rank

Cumulated net  
income ($B)

Net income rank

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

7
—

46
—

90
37
—

144
—
—

Exxon
AT&T
IBM
Atlantic Richfield
General Motors
Conoco
Amoco
General Electric
Union Carbide
Texaco

58.7
46.4
39.8
22.6
20.5
19.2
19.1
17.7
15.9
15.4

66.1%
100.0%
89.6%
44.3%
91.0%
27.1%
64.7%
76.0%
38.7%
72.2%

2
1
3
11
4
37
7
5
24
9

72.9
32.4
81.3
12.8
46.9
8.4
25.3
32.0
1.9
14.1

2
4
1
20
3
37
7
5
240
17

B. 2023: Top 10 firms ranked by their payouts cumulated over the five years ending in 2023 (amounts in constant 2023 $ billions)

Payout rank

2019-2023

1982-1986

Company

Dollar values and ranks for 2019-2023

Cumulated  
payout ($B)

Dividends as  
a % of payout

Dividend rank

Cumulated net  
income ($B)

Net income rank

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

913
—
—

210
—

447
1
364
3584
13

Apple
Alphabet (Google)
Microsoft
JP Morgan Chase
Meta (Facebook)
Bank of America
Exxon Mobil
Wells Fargo
Oracle
Chevron

537.8
280.0
229.7
150.4
133.9
129.5
116.6
114.2
91.1
90.9

14.9%
0.0%
40.0%
47.4%
0.0%
33.2%
70.2%
29.8%
20.6%
61.5%

3
—

1
4
—

12
2
18
37
8

C. 1986: Top 10 firms ranked by their 1986 total payouts (amounts in constant 2023 $ billions)

439.4
307.9
316.9
219.5
162.8
144.0
109.7
83.7
53.6
72.2

1
4
3
5
6
7
9
15
26
20

Cash/TA at  
year-end 1986

5.5%
6.7%
12.6%
11.1%
5.5%
9.2%
1.9%
5.5%
3.9%
8.6%

Cash/TA at  
year-end 2023

17.5%
27.6%
27.0%
23.2%
28.5%
19.6%
8.4%
16.4%
7.6%
3.2%

Payout rank

1986

2023

Company

Payout 
($B)

Dividends as a % of 
payout

Dividend 
rank

Net Income 
($B)

Net Income 
rank

Cash/TA at year-end 
1986

Dollar values and ranks for 1986

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

—

54
4
24
558
—
—

45
—

58

Union Carbide*
IBM
Exxon
General Motors
FMC*
SmithKline Beckman
Colt Industries*
General Electric
AT&T
Ford Motor

12.6
11.6
9.4
6.5
5.0
4.5
4.3
3.9
3.8
3.6

26.4%
64.5%
76.6%
71.5%
100.0%
14.2%
100.0%
75.2%
100.0%
45.8 %

D. 2023: Top 10 firms ranked by their 2023 total payouts (amounts in constant 2023 $ billions)

7
1
2
4
3
74
5
8
6
27

1.4
13.3
14.9
8.2
0.4
1.4
0.3
6.9
0.4
9.1

65
2
1
4
257
60
362
5
275
3

3.9%
12.6%
5.5%
5.5%
6.9%
10.3%
5.0%
5.5%
6.7%
22.5%

Payout rank

2023

1986

Company

Payout 
($B)

Dividends as a % of 
payout

Dividend 
rank

Net Income 
($B)

Net Income 
rank

Cash/TA at year-end 
2023

Dollar values and ranks for 2023

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

360
—
—

3
—

24
185
358
12
63

Apple
Alphabet (Google)
Microsoft
ExxonMobil
Meta (Facebook)
Chevron
JP Morgan Chase
Wells Fargo
Johnson & Johnson
Procter & Gamble

97.7
71.3
42.3
32.7
26.8
26.3
23.4
19.5
16.8
16.4

2
—

1
3
—

6
4
24
5
11

96.7
73.8
72.7
36.0
39.1
21.4
49.6
19.1
35.2
14.7

1
3
4
7
6
13
5
14
8
20

17.5%
27.6%
27.0%
8.4%
28.5%
3.2%
23.2%
16.4%
13.7%
6.8%

15.3%
0.0%
47.1%
45.7%
0.0%
43.1%
57.8%
30.4%
70.0%
55.0%

11 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Fig. 5. Payouts as a fraction of operating income and net income: 1971-2023. The figure reports aggregate and median-firm payout ratios for firms with positive 
operating income (OI) in panel A and positive net income (NI) in panel B. The aggregate payout ratio is the sum of all payouts divided by the sum of all operating 
income or net income in the year in question. The full sample consists of firms that (i) are included in the CRSP/Compustat data file in at least one year over 1970- 
2023, (ii) are incorporated in the U.S., (iii) have a CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and (iv) are listed on a major exchange (exchange code 1, 2, or 3). Firms in all 
industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not exclude financial firms and utilities. However, the plots for industrial firms are very close to those show below for 
the full sample. Appendix A provides relevant data definitions and describes requirements on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the sample.

discipline firms’ capital allocation. Jensen’s analysis of activist investors 
in  the  corporate-control  market of  the  1980s  played  a  central  role  in 
helping him come to the insights in his 1986 paper on the importance of 
pressuring managers to distribute a firm’s free cash flow to investors.

As Jensen (1986) emphasized, in the 1980s, oil firms faced pressure 
from investors to increase cash payouts and curtail investment. While 
such pressures are surely present today, oil firms in recent years have 
also  faced  pressure  from  politicians  and  environmental  activists  to 
reduce their “large” payouts and instead use the retained cash to invest 
in green energy and benefits for their employees; see, e.g., Maloney and 
Khanna (2022) and Natural Resource Defense Council (2023).

Today’s  political  targeting  of  payouts  occurs  broadly  across  in-
dustries and focuses mainly on criticisms of share repurchases, although 
dividend payments have also been targeted. For example, in a 2019 New 
York Times op-ed titled “Schumer and Sanders: Limit Corporate Stock 
Buybacks”, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer and Senator Bernie 
Sanders state: 

…. corporate boardrooms have become obsessed with maximizing 
only shareholder earnings to the detriment of workers and the long- 

term strength of their companies, helping to create the worst level of 
income inequality in decades.

One way in which this pervasive corporate ethos manifests itself is 
the explosion of stock buybacks.

….Americans should be outraged that these profitable corporations 
are laying off workers while spending billions of dollars to boost their 
stock’s  value  to  further  enrich  the  wealthy  few.  If  corporations 
continue to purchase their own stock at this rate, income disparities 
will continue to grow, productivity will suffer, the long-term strength 
of  companies  will  diminish  —  and  the  American  worker  will  fall 
further behind.

That is why we are planning to introduce bold legislation to address 
this crisis. Our bill will prohibit a corporation from buying back its 
own  stock  unless  it  invests  in  workers  and  communities  first, 
including  things  like  paying  all  workers  at  least  $15  an  hour, 
providing seven days of paid sick leave, and offering decent pensions 
and more reliable health benefits.

12 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Fig. 6. Aggregate real cash balances ($ billions in 2023 dollars) for sample partitioned into firms that pay out and do not pay out cash: 1971-2023. The 
figure reports aggregate real holdings of cash plus marketable securities for the full sample of firms partitioned according to whether the firm pays out or does not pay 
out cash in the year in question. All observations are converted to 2023 dollars using the consumer price index. The full sample consists of firms that (i) are included 
in the CRSP/Compustat data file in at least one year over 1970-2023, (ii) are incorporated in the U.S., (iii) have a CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and (iv) are listed on a 
major exchange (exchange code 1, 2, or 3). Firms in all industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not exclude financial firms and utilities. Appendix A provides 
relevant data definitions and describes requirements on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the sample.

Fig. 7. Aggregate and median cash-balance ratios for firms that pay out cash: 1971-2023. The figure reports aggregate and median cash-balance ratios for the 
full sample of firms that pay out cash in each year over 1971 to 2023. The aggregate cash-balance ratio in a given year equals the sum of the holdings of cash plus 
marketable securities for all payers divided by sum of the book values of total assets for those firms. The median Cash/TA ratio is the cross-sectional median (for the 
year in question) across the ratios of cash plus marketable securities for all firms that pay out cash. The full sample consists of firms that (i) are included in the CRSP/ 
Compustat data file in at least one year over 1970-2023, (ii) are incorporated in the U.S., (iii) have a CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and (iv) are listed on a major 
exchange (exchange code 1, 2, or 3). Firms in all industries are included in the sample, i.e., we do not exclude financial firms and utilities. Appendix A provides 
relevant data definitions and describes requirements on specific data availability for a firm to be included in the sample.

More recently, Congress passed the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, 
which imposed a 1% excise tax on share repurchases to be paid by firms 
(in addition to the taxes paid by investors who sell their shares back to 
firms). In his 2023 State of the Union Address, President Biden proposed 
increasing the excise tax rate on share repurchases to 4%.

The  political  focus  on  repurchases  plausibly  reflects  the  facts  that 
they now dominate the payout supply and are typically announced as 
large dollar amounts while dividends are typically described in smaller 
per-share amounts. Another possible factor is that many members of the 

general  public  have  embraced  basic  agency  theory  and  thus  find  it 
credible that corporate managers would use share repurchases to further 
their narrow self-interests. Whatever the underlying explanations, it is 
clear that politicians and social activists have been able to promote a 
narrative  that  vilifies  repurchases  as  a  tool  managers  use  to  enrich 
themselves and wealthy shareholders, while ostensibly failing to make 
socially desirable investments.

Kolhatkar (2019) traces the politicization of buybacks to articles by 
Lazonick (2008, 2014), who was Jensen’s colleague at Harvard Business 

13 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Fig. 8. Payouts as a fraction of cash balances: 1971-2023. The figure reports aggregate and median-firm cash-balance-based payout ratios for all sample firms 
over  1971-2023.  The  aggregate  ratio  is  the  sum  of  all  firms’  payouts  divided  by  the  sum  of  (i)  all  firms’  end-of-year  (i.e.,  post-payout)  holdings  of  cash  plus 
marketable securities and (ii) all firms’ payouts in the year in question. The sample contains industrial, financial, and utility firms.

School  and  who,  as  far  back  as  the  1980s,  harbored  concerns  about 
Jensen’s focus on shareholder value. Kolhatkar details Lazonick’s early 
doubts about the shareholder-value philosophy, and how he eventually 
came to view share buybacks as promoting income inequality and pre-
venting firms from investing adequately in workers and innovation.

Lazonick (2008) highlighted large share repurchases by major banks 
right before the Financial Crisis. His key point is that these cash distri-
butions weakened banks and contributed to a need for large-scale equity 
infusions, including taxpayer-funded bailouts. He concluded: 

The crisis in the US financial sector demonstrates that the so-called 
“free cash flow” distributed as buybacks was not really free.

Although the bailout of large financial institutions clearly put share 
repurchases  on  the  political  radar,  political  concerns  over  buybacks 
increased  significantly  about  10  years  ago,  with  the  publication  of 
Lazonick’s (2014) article. That article received the 56th annual McKin-
sey  Award  for  the  most  influential  article  published  in  the  venerable 
(and  itself  highly  influential)  Harvard  Business  Review.  See  McKinsey 
(2015) for  a  description  of  the  impact  of  Lazonick’s  HBR  article.  As 
Kolhatkar (2019) reports: 

Lawmakers took note. Lazonick told me that, in 2015, he was con-
sulted  by  Hillary  Clinton’s  campaign  –  which  cited  his  Harvard 
Business Review article in its economic platform – as well as by Bernie 
Sanders’s campaign. Some Republicans have even started to point to 
buybacks as the cause of America’s political and economic ills. A year 
ago,  one  of  Senator  Marco  Rubio’s  policy  advisers  contacted  Laz-
onick  to  express  interest  in  his  research.  Rubio  later  published  a 
report called “American Investment in the 21st Century”, in which he 
expressed concern that economic growth was driven more by finance 
than by actual productivity, and mentioned the buyback phenome-
non  several  times.  Senator  Elizabeth  Warren  has  made  the  idea  a 
theme  of  her  campaign.  She  “picked  up  the  message  right  away”, 
Lazonick told me. “She said the reason we don’t have prosperity for 
workers is that companies aren’t sharing it. That is the critical point.”

Prominent politicians, environmental activists, and Lazonick (2008, 
2014)  have  one  common  theme  linking  their  criticisms  of  share 

repurchases. That theme is an attempt to influence corporate resource 
allocation in ways that they believe would be socially beneficial.

There are two problems with this anti-repurchase narrative. The first 
is that the narrative is rooted in allegations about share repurchases that 
are specious or unsupported empirically, as detailed by Edmans (2017), 
Asness et al. (2018), Fried and Wang (2018), and Guest et al. (2023).

The second is that this narrative will almost surely fail to accomplish 
its objective. As discussed by DeAngelo (2023), increasing taxes on share 
repurchases will backfire at growth-stage firms because it will under-
mine their ability to raise funding for investment. Nor is raising taxes on 
payouts likely to work at mature firms that generate positive FCF. The 
reason  is  that  these  firms  can  direct  retained  cash  to  investments  in 
liquid financial assets, which puts a high upper bound on the amount of 
value  managers  are  willing  to  sacrifice  to  avoid  taxes  on  immediate 
payouts.

These  predictions  are  borne  out  according  to  the  evidence  of 
Bargeron  et  al.  (2024),  who  study  how  firms  react  to  the  Inflation 
Reduction Act’s imposition of a 1% excise tax on net repurchases. They 
report that firms tend to reduce share repurchases and total payouts and 
increase  their  holdings  of  cash  and  marketable  securities,  but  do  not 
increase outlays for real investment.

6. Concluding thoughts

Michael  Jensen  was  famously  intolerant  of  research  focused  on 
technical minutia, which he often bluntly dismissed in colorful language 
that  can’t  be  repeated  here.  He  was  unequivocal  and  relentless  in 
advising faculty colleagues, PhD students, and authors  of papers  sub-
mitted to the Journal of Financial Economics to focus on issues of first- 
order importance for understanding the real world.

Jensen followed his own advice throughout his career, with his 1986 
FCF paper providing a stellar example of how to advance theory in a way 
that  fundamentally  alters  our  understanding  of  real-world  corporate- 
finance  behavior.  We  emphasize  two  general  principles  that  emerge 
from Jensen (1986): 

14 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

• Payout  policy  is  a  primary  building  block  of  corporate  financial 

policy and central to the process of value creation by firms.

• Payouts matter through their linkage to capital allocation, with the 
value generated by a firm driven by the extent to which capital is 
invested wisely and the fruits of that investment eventually distrib-
uted to the suppliers of capital.

In  our  view,  Jensen’s  (1986) paper  would  have  benefited  by 
including an analysis that takes into account firms for which the value of 
financial flexibility, as measured for example by cash holdings and un-
tapped debt capacity, is important. A richer dynamic theory of corporate 
financial  policy  emerges  from  considering  the  tradeoffs  inherent  in 
balancing the time-varying advantages of financial flexibility against the 
disciplinary advantages of having managers operate on a tight financial 
leash, with significant pressure to distribute rather than retain FCF.

Jensen  (1986) focused  on  the  value  destruction  that  arises  when 
managers retain FCF and allocate the funds to investments that further 
their own self-interests. His analysis provided an explanation for why, in 
the  1980s,  profit-oriented  activist  shareholders  used  takeover  threats 
and  restructuring  pressures  to  force  managers  to  pay  out  rather  than 
waste FCF. At a more general level, Jensen’s FCF argument provides a 
convincing explanation for the consistently large magnitude of payouts 
(and concentration among firms with high earnings) that we observe, as 
well  as  for  the  substantial  increases  in  payouts  that  have  occurred, 
especially since 2000.

Today,  Jensen  would  likely  be  concerned  about  value  destruction 
from the pressures firms face to reduce payouts and invest the retained 
cash in ways favored by politicians and social activists. More than two 
decades ago, Jensen (2002, p. 43) presciently anticipated attempts to 
affect the corporate allocation of capital on the part of special interest 
groups. Here is what he said (with emphasis added) when making the 
general  case  for  the  advantages  of  stockholder  capitalism  over  stake-
holder capitalism: 

Stakeholder theory plays into the hands of special interests that wish to 
use  the  resources  of  corporations  for  their  own  ends.  With  the  wide-
spread failure of centrally planned socialist and communist econo-
mies, those who wish to use nonmarket forces to reallocate wealth 
now see great opportunity in the playing field that stakeholder the-
ory opens to them. Stakeholder theory gives them the appearance of 
legitimate political access to the sources of decision-making power in 
organizations,  and  it  deprives  those  organizations  of  a  principled 
basis  for  rejecting  those  claims.  The  result  is  to  undermine  the 
foundations  of  value-seeking  behavior  that  have  enabled  markets 
and  capitalism  to  generate  wealth  and  high  standards  of  living 
worldwide.

These concerns about how stakeholder theory would be used revisit a 
general theme about political threats to the free-enterprise system that 
Jensen  consistently  viewed  as  a  serious  problem;  see,  e.g.,  Jensen 
(1976), Jensen and Meckling (1978), and Jensen (1991). It thus does not 
require a large leap of faith to believe that Jensen would view the recent 
politicization of corporate payouts as a threat to the efficient functioning 
of the free-enterprise system and therefore as a research topic worthy of 
careful attention by corporate-finance specialists.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Harry  DeAngelo:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  anal-
ysis,  Funding  acquisition,  Investigation,  Methodology,  Project  admin-
istration,  Resources,  Software,  Supervision,  Validation,  Visualization, 
Writing –  original draft, Writing – review &  editing. Kathleen Kahle: 
Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal  analysis,  Investigation, 
Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, 
Validation, Visualization, Writing –  original draft, Writing –  review & 
editing. Douglas J. Skinner: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal 

analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, 
Software,  Supervision,  Validation,  Visualization,  Writing  –  original 
draft, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

Appendix A: Sample composition and share-repurchase 
measurement issues

Our  sample  consists  of  firms  that  (i)  are  included  in  the  CRSP/ 
Compustat data file in at least one year over 1971-2023, (ii) are incor-
porated in the U.S., (iii) have a CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and (iv) are 
listed on a major exchange (exchange code 1, 2, or 3). Firms in all in-
dustries  are  included  in  the  sample,  i.e.,  we  do  not  exclude  financial 
firms and utilities. For inclusion of a given firm-year observation in the 
sample, we require non-missing values of total assets (AT), and market 
capitalization (CSHO and PRCC_F).

Accurate measures of the dollars spent repurchasing common shares 
can be difficult to extract from the Compustat file. The literature has an 
extensive discussion of this issue, and we draw on that discussion for the 
approach we employ to measure repurchase amounts.

Stephens  and  Weisbach  (1998) examine  a  variety  of  measures  to 
estimate the number of shares acquired by a firm, including measures 
based on decreases in the firm’s shares outstanding, dollars spent reac-
quiring securities, and increases in the dollar value of the firm’s treasury 
stock. Subsequent researchers have attempted to improve the accuracy 
of these estimates. For example, Jagannathan et al. (2000) examine both 
monthly decreases in CRSP shares outstanding and purchases of com-
mon and preferred stock reported in Compustat. They find that the CRSP 
measure understates actual repurchases while the Compustat measure 
overstates them. However, their final sample contains only 35 firms with 
both CRSP and Compustat data available and includes several outliers, 
which makes it of limited usefulness.

Because Compustat’s purchases of common and preferred stock data 
item  (PRSTKC)  includes  dollars  spent  repurchasing  preferred  stock, 
Grullon and Michaely (2002) and Kahle (2002) refine this measure by 
removing  changes  in  the  value  of  preferred  stock  to  obtain  a  better 
measure of common stock repurchases.

In 2004, the safe-harbor provision created under Rule 10b-18 began 
requiring firms to disclose actual repurchases on a quarterly basis. Banyi 
et al. (2008) hand collect data from these new disclosures to examine the 
accuracy of these various estimates of share repurchases. They note that 
the use of decreases in shares outstanding can understate repurchases 
when repurchases and distributions occur in the same month. Although 
stock  issues  are  relatively  infrequent  for  most  firms,  the  exercise  of 
employee  stock  options  is  not,  and  so  the  change  in  the  number  of 
outstanding shares will understate repurchases in firms with stock op-
tion activity.

Multiple problems plague the treasury stock method. First, as with 
decreases in shares outstanding, this measure understates repurchases 
when firms purchase and retire treasury shares in the same year. Second, 
many  companies  are  prohibited  by  state  corporate  laws  from  main-
taining  treasury  stock  accounts.  In  such  cases,  companies  record 
repurchases as retirements to common stock accounts (paid-in capital), 
and so the treasury stock measure misidentifies firms in this situation as 
having zero repurchases. Although Fama and French (2001) adjust the 
Stephens and Weisbach (1998) treasury stock measure  to account for 
firms that retire treasury shares, Banyi et al. (2008) find that Compustat 
frequently misidentifies the retirement-method firms. Finally, Compu-
stat did not start reporting treasury stock until 1982, and so this variable 
is always unavailable in the early years of our sample.

Because the Compustat repurchase variable (PRSTKC) is the cumu-
lated amount of all security repurchases and retirements during the year, 
it can overstate repurchases of common stock by including outlays for 

15 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

the retirement or redemption of preferred stock and/or the conversion of 
preferred  into  common  stock.  However,  firms  occasionally  report  net 
share repurchases and issuances in their cash flow statements. In such 
instances, Compustat also reports a netted figure and thus understates 
repurchases.

Despite these shortcomings, Banyi et al. (2008) find that Compustat 
purchases of common stock (adjusted for decreases in preferred stock) is 
the best estimate of actual repurchases.

We conduct an extended check on the adjusted-prstkc method using 
the 15 years of data that has become available since Banyi et al. (2008)
was published. We use the fact that, following the 2004 requirement that 
firms disclose actual repurchases, Compustat began collecting both the 
number  of  shares  repurchased  during  the  quarter  (CSHOPQ)  and  the 
average repurchase price (PRCRAQ). We refer to the product of shares 
repurchased during the quarter times average repurchase price as actual 
repurchases. We collect these data from 2004 through 2023 and cumu-
late the quarterly actual repurchase amounts during a given fiscal year 
to  arrive  at  an  annual  repurchase  amount  for  each  firm-year.  We 
compare  this  total  to  the  corresponding  firm-year  estimate  obtained 
from Compustat’s purchases of common stock, adjusted for decreases in 
preferred stock.

Consistent  with  Banyi  et  al.’s  (2008) finding  that  the  Compustat 
measure overstates repurchases on average, we find that this measure is 
6% higher (in the median year) than the measure obtained using the 
quarterly  data  on  the  number  of  shares  repurchased  and  the  average 
repurchase price. For a sample of firms with the most extreme differ-
ences between these two measures, we directly examine the firm’s 10-Qs 
and 10-Ks.

We  find  that  Compustat’s  PRSTKC  variable  often  overstates 
repurchases by including tax payments related to net share settlements 
of  equity  awards  and  redemptions  of  common  stock  due  to  business 
combinations.

However, the actual repurchase data from Compustat has its own set 
of problems. For one, the shares repurchased during the quarter, as re-
ported  by  Compustat,  is  sometimes  off  by  a  factor  of  1,000  due  to 
Compustat  recording  the  number  incorrectly.  We  also  find  that  the 
average repurchase price recorded in the quarterly Compustat data file 
can  be  zero  even  when  a  repurchase  takes  place,  resulting  in  un-
derstatements of actual dollars spent on repurchases. This problem can 
be severe. For example, Apple undertook repurchases in every quarter of 
fiscal  2022.  However,  in  the  first  and  second  quarter,  although  the 
shares  repurchased  is  correct  in  Compustat,  the  average  repurchase 
price  is  missing  from  the  file.  A  general  examination  of  observations 
with  positive  shares  repurchased  combined  with  missing  repurchase 
prices reveals that this recorded-data problem tends to occur when the 
repurchase takes place via an accelerated share repurchase that wasn’t 
settled during the quarter.

Because the average difference between the prstkc-based and actual 
repurchase measures is small and because we are mostly interested in 
aggregate  numbers,  we  use  Compustat  purchases  of  common  stock 
(PRSTKC) adjusted for decreases in preferred stock, since it is available 
for a longer time frame.

We also identify firm-year observations in which the adjusted-prstkc 
measure is negative during the period from 2004 through 2023 that the 
actual  shares  repurchased  number  is  available.  For  observations  in 
which the adjusted-prstkc measure is negative, we examine the distri-
bution of the actual repurchase measure. The number of observations 
with a negative estimate using the prstkc measure is small (ranging from 
61 to 170 in a year). The 90th percentile of the distribution of actual 
repurchases is less than 1% in each year, and the median of the 90th 
percentile across all years is 0.12%. The total dollar value of repurchases 
missed by the adjusted-prstkc measure is always very small relative to 
aggregate repurchases.

To measure dollars spent on dividends, we use Compustat variable 
DV, which is cash dividends from the cash flow statement. While these 
variables  are  often  the  same,  Compustat’s  DVC  (ordinary/common 

dividends) can include items such as spinoffs and dividends accrued on 
restricted stock but not paid. However, DV is sometimes missing when it 
shouldn’t  be.  Consequently,  if  DV  is  missing  but  DVC  is  not,  we  set 
dividends equal to DVC.

CRSP has its own set of problems with dividend data, which is why 
we  have  adopted  the  common  practice  in  the  literature  of  using  the 
dividend amounts reported by Compustat. Kahle and Williams (2018)
note that there are numerous errors in the raw CRSP distribution data. 
The CRSP problems include missing stock split information, annual and 
semi-annual  dividends  that  are  coded  as  quarterly  dividends,  special 
dividends  that  are  coded  as  regular  dividends,  data  entry  errors,  and 
distributions that are simply missing from the database.

References

Allen, F.M., 2003. Payout policy. Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Amsterdam: 

Elsevier, North-Holland, pp. 337–429.

Asness, C., Hazelkorn, T., Richardson, S., 2018. Buyback derangement syndrome. 

J. Portf. Manag. 44, 50–57.

Auerbach, A., 1979. Share valuation and corporate equity policy. J. Public Econ. 11, 

291–308.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L., Patterson, C., van Reenan, J., 2020. The fall of the labor 

share and the rise of superstar firms. Quart. J. Econom. 135, 645–709.

Banyi, M., Dyl, E., Kahle, K., 2008. Errors in estimating share repurchases. J. Corp. 

Finance 14, 460–474.

Bargeron, L., Bonaime, A., Guo, Y., Moore, S., Obernberger, S., Zhou, Y., 2024. Do taxes 
impact payout? Evidence from the first direct tax on repurchases. Downloadable at: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4981522.

Bates, T., Kahle, K., Stulz, R., 2009. Why do U.S. firms hold so much more cash than they 

used to? J. Finance 64, 1985–2021.

Black, F., 1976. The dividend puzzle. J. Portf. Manag. 2, 5–8.
Bonaime, A., Kahle, K., 2024. Share repurchases. Handbook of Corporate Finance. Edwin 

Elgar, UK chapter 4. 

Bradford, D., 1981. The incidence and allocation effects of a tax on corporate 

distributions. J. Public Econ. 15, 1–22.

Brav, A., Graham, J., Harvey, C., Michaely, R., 2005. Payout policy in the 21st century. 

J. Financ. Econ. 77, 483–527.

Brav, A., Jiang, W., Li, R., 2022. Governance by persuasion: hedge fund activism and 
market-based shareholder influence. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics 
and Finance. Oxford University Press.

Brennan, M., 1971. A note on dividend irrelevance and the Gordon valuation model. 

J. Finance 26, 1115–1121.

DeAngelo, H., 2023. The capital structure puzzle: What are we missing? J. Financ. Quant. 

Anal. 57, 413–454.

DeAngelo, H., 2023. The attack on share buybacks. Eur. Financ. Manag. 29, 389–398.
DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., Skinner, D., 2004. Are dividends disappearing? Dividend 
concentration and the consolidation of earnings. J. Financ. Econ. 72, 425–456.
DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., Skinner, D., 2008. Corporate payout policy. Found. Trends 
Finance 3, 95–287. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstrac 
t_id=1400682.

Denes, M., Karpoff, J., McWilliams, V., 2017. Thirty years of shareholder activism: a 

survey of empirical research. J. Corp. Finance 44, 405–424.
Donaldson, G., 1984. Managing Corporate Wealth. Praeger, NY, NY.
Easterbrook, F., 1984. Two agency-cost explanations of dividends. Am. Econ. Rev. 74, 

650–659.

Edmans, A., 2017. The case for stock buybacks. Harvard Business Review.
Fama, E., French, K., 2001. Disappearing dividends: changing firm characteristics or 

lower propensity to pay? J. Financ. Econ. 60, 3–43.

Farre-Mensa, J., Michaely, R., Schmalz, M., 2014. Payout policy. Annu. Rev. Financ. 

Econ. 6, 75–134.

Fried, J., Wang, C., 2018. Are buybacks really shortchanging investment. Harv. Bus. Rev. 

96, 88–95.

Grullon, G., Michaely, R., 2002. Dividends, share repurchase, and the substitution 

hypothesis. J. Finance 57, 1649–1684.

Guest, K., Venkat, 2023. Share repurchases on trial: large-sample evidence on share price 

performance, executive compensation, and corporate investment. Financ. Manage 
52, 19–40.

Higgins, R., 1972. The corporate dividend-saving decision. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 7, 

1527–1541.

Huang, R., Ritter, J., Zhang, D., 2024. Going public with IPOs and SPAC mergers. 

Forthcoming Research Handbook on the Structure of Private Equity and Venture 
Capital. Downloadable at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstrac 
t_id=4608607.

Holmstrom, B., Kaplan, S., 2001. Corporate governance and merger activity in the United 
States: making sense of the 1980s and 1990s. J. Econ. Perspect. 15, 121–144.
Jagannathan, M., Stephens, C., Weisbach, M., 2000. Financial flexibility and the choice 

between dividends and stock repurchases. J. Financ. Econ. 57, 355–384.

Jensen, M., 1976. Toward a theory of the press. In: Bruner, K. (Ed.), Third Interlaken 

Seminar on Analysis and Ideology, Switzerland. Reprinted in Economics and Social 
Institutions. Martinus Nijhoff Publishing Company. Editor1979. 

Jensen, M., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 76, 323–329.

16 

H. DeAngelo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104117 

Jensen, M., 1991. Corporate control and the politics of finance. J. Appl. Corp. Finance 4, 

13–33.

Jensen, M., 1993. The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of internal 

control systems. J. Finance 48, 831–880.

Lu, Y., Skinner, D. J., 2024. Do actions speak louder than words? The relation between 
payouts and guidance since 2000. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. 
cfm?abstract_id=4322036.

Ma, Y., Pugsley, B., Zimmerman, K., 2024. Superstar firms through the generations. 

Jensen, M., 2002. Value maximization, stakeholder theory, and the corporate objective 

Chicago Booth working paper, July.

function. Bus. Ethics Q. 12, 235–256.

Jensen, M., 2005. Agency costs of overvalued equity. Financ. Manage 34, 5–19.
Jensen, M., Meckling, W., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial, behavior, agency costs, 

and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3, 305–360.

Jensen, M., Meckling, W., 1978. Can the corporation survive? Financ. Anal. J. 34, 31–37.
Kahle, K., 2002. When a buyback isn’t a buyback: open-market repurchases and 

employee options. J. Financ. Econ. 63, 235–261.

Kahle, K., Stulz, R., 2017. Is the US public corporation in trouble? J. Econ. Perspect. 31, 

67–88.

Kahle, K., Stulz, R., 2021. Why are corporate payouts so high in the 2000s? J. Financ. 

Econ. 142, 1359–1380.

Maloney, C., Khanna, R., 2022. Letter to CEOs of four major oil firms. Congress of the 
United States, House Committee on Oversight and Reform. https://oversightdemo 
crats.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/democrats-oversight.house.gov, files/2022-04- 
04.CBM%20Khanna%20to%20Woods-Exxon%20et%20al.%20re%20Stock% 
20Buybacks.pdf.

McKinsey. 2015. The McKinsey award winner asks tough questions. https://www.mckin 
sey.com/about-us/new-at-mckinsey-blog/stock-buybacks-under-scrutiny-the-mckin 
sey-award-winner-asks-tough-questions.

Miller, M., 1977. Debt and taxes. J. Finance 32, 261–275.
Miller, M., Modigliani, F., 1961. Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of shares. 

J. Bus. 34, 411–433.

Kahle, K., Williams, R., 2018. Dividend Reductions, Reinstatements, and Substitution 

Modigliani, F., Miller, M., 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the theory 

With Repurchases. University of Arizona Working Paper.

Kalay, A., Lemmon, M., 2008. Payout policy, Handbook of Empirical Corporate Finance, 

volume 2, chapter 10, 3-57.

Kolhatkar, 2019. The economist who put stock buybacks in Washington’s crosshairs. The 

New Yorker (June 20).

Kwan, S., Ma, Y., Zimmerman, K., 2024. 100 years of rising corporate concentration. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 114, 2111–2140.

Lang, L., Stulz, R., Walkling, R.A., 1991. A test of the free cash flow hypothesis. J. Financ. 

Econ. 29, 315–355.

of investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 48, 261–297.

Miller, M., Scholes, M., 1978. Dividends and taxes. J. Financ. Econ. 6, 333–364.
Myers, S., 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. J. Financ. Econ. 5, 147–175.
Myers, S., Majluf, N., 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms 

have information that investors do not have. J. Financ. Econ. 13, 187–221.
National Resource Defense Council. 2023. Big oil still raking it in as public pays for 

pollution (June 1). https://www.nrdc.org/bio/zanagee-artis/big-oil-still-raking-it- 
public-pays-pollution.

Robichek, A., Myers, S., 1966. Problems in the theory of optimal capital structure. 

Lazonick, W., 2008. Everyone is paying the price for share buybacks. Financial Times 

J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 1, 1–35.

(September 25).

Lazonick, W., 2014. Profits without prosperity. Harv. Bus. Rev. 92, 46–55.
Leary, M., Nukalla, V., 2024. Corporate dividend policy. Handbook of Corporate Finance. 

Rozeff, M., 1982. Growth, beta and agency costs as determinants of dividend payout 

ratios. J. Financ. Res. 5, 249–259.

Rubinstein, M., 1976. The irrelevancy of dividend policy in an arrow- Debreu economy. 

Edwin Elgar, UK chapter 3. 

J. Finance 31, 1229–1230.

Lintner, J., 1956. Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained 

Stephens, C., Weisbach, M., 1998. Actual share reacquisitions in open-market repurchase 

earnings, and taxes. Am. Econ. Rev. 46, 97–113.

programs. J. Finance 53, 313–333.

Vermaelen, T., 2005. Share repurchases. Found. Trends Finance 1, 171–268.

17 

