Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Climbing and falling off the ladder: Asset pricing implications of labor market 
event risk
Lawrence D.W. Schmidt1
Finance Group, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States of America

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Administrative earnings data reveal that households are exposed to large, countercyclical idiosyncratic tail 
risks in labor earnings. I illustrate how these risks affect asset prices within an asset pricing framework with 
recursive preferences, heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets. Quantitatively, a model in which agents 
face a time-varying probability of experiencing a rare, idiosyncratic disaster, with parameters disciplined by 
data, matches the level and dynamics of the equity premium. Stock returns are highly informative about labor 
market event risk, and, consistent with model predictions, initial claims for unemployment, a proxy for labor 
market uncertainty, is a highly robust predictor of returns.

Dataset link: Replication Package for "Climbing
and Falling Off the Ladder: Asset Pricing Impli
cations of Labor Market Event Risk" (Original d
ata)

Keywords:
Asset pricing
Incomplete markets
State-dependent earnings risk
Return predictability
Equity risk premium

1. Introduction

Rare events play a crucial role in asset pricing despite their in-
frequency.  For  example,  in  theoretical  models  with  macroeconomic 
disasters (e.g., wars, depressions, financial crises, as in Rietz, 1988; 
Barro, 2006), tail risk is an order of magnitude more important than 
day-to-day fluctuations in consumption and can dramatically amplify 
the required rate of return on risky assets. Theoretically, time-varying 
disaster  risk  can  generate  time-varying  risk  premia  (Gabaix,  2012; 
Wachter, 2013) and stock prices that are substantially more volatile 
than dividends. However, aggregate tail risk is hard to quantify pre-
cisely because disasters are so rare. Hence, disaster risk is a key form 
of ‘‘dark matter’’ in asset pricing (Chen et al., 2024).

This paper considers an economic environment in which tail events 
are cross-sectional, rather than aggregate, phenomena. Most consump-
tion is financed by labor and entrepreneurial income, the cash flows 
from which are subject to substantial nondiversifiable risk. Discrete 
events, such as transitions between jobs, can induce changes in indi-
vidual income that are large, highly persistent, and largely uninsurable, 

effectively exposing households to idiosyncratic tail risk. Like aggregate 
tail events, these shocks can have a first order effect on household 
welfare  and,  in  turn,  asset  prices.  Unlike  aggregate  tail  risk,  large 
panels of earnings data imply that idiosyncratic tail risk is essentially 
observable, making it easier to estimate and falsify the model. When
uncertainty  about  future  tail  risk  varies  over  time,  state-dependent 
idiosyncratic tail risk can also rationalize time-varying, countercyclical 
risk premia.

In this paper, I argue that state-dependent idiosyncratic tail risk is 
a key driver of asset pricing dynamics. Empirically, I construct a new 
measure of idiosyncratic tail risk using US administrative data on the 
cross-sectional distribution of labor income growth rates. Labor market 
event risk is persistent, highly cyclical, and quantitatively large. Theo-
retically, I illustrate and quantify the role of uninsurable, idiosyncratic 
jumps (infrequent, large shocks) in a tractable endowment asset pricing 
framework. A calibrated model shows that plausible levels of this risk 

E-mail address:  ldws@mit.edu.

1 Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. I am particularly indebted to my advisor, Allan Timmermann, for his help and support throughout the writing 
of this paper. I am also grateful to the participants at many conference and seminar presentations, including Ravi Bansal, Brendan Beare, Jonathan Berk, Stéphane 
Bonhomme, Carter Braxton, John Campbell, John Cochrane, George Constantinides, Ian Dew-Becker, Martin Eichenbaum, Marjorie Flavin, Stefano Giglio, Fatih 
Guvenen, Bob Hall, James Hamilton, Lars Hansen, Kyle Herkenhoff, Hanno Lustig, Bryan Kelly, Leonid Kogan, Ralph Koijen, David Lagakos, Deborah Lucas, Magne 
Mogstad, Serdar Ozkan, Stavros Panageas, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Jonathan Parker, Chris Parsons, Monika Piazzesi, Luigi Pistaferri, Valerie Ramey, Jonathan 
Rothbaum, Martin Schneider, Jae Song, Harald Uhlig, Rossen Valkanov, Adrien Verdelhan, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Amir Yaron, for helpful discussions 
and comments. I am deeply indebted to Klakow Akepanidtaworn, Matthew Akuzawa, Samuel D’Amico, Kyle Kost, Alex Martin, Andrei Nagornyi, Damon Peterson, 
Maria Tiurina, and Xiao Yang for outstanding research assistance. This research benefited from funding from the MIT Sloan School of Management. All errors 
are my own.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104131
Received 10 October 2022; Received in revised form 17 June 2025; Accepted 20 June 2025
Available online 22 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
L.D.W. Schmidt

with state dynamics disciplined by the data can generate a large, time-
varying equity premium consistent with the data, even in a model in 
which aggregate consumption is essentially unpredictable. Finally, I 
show that stocks are a bad hedge against both the level of idiosyncratic 
tail risk and uncertainty about future tail risk, and motivated by the 
theory, I identify a new, robust predictor of stock returns.

The basic intuition for the mechanism is as follows. As the economy 
contracts,  the  left  tail  of  the  cross-sectional  distribution  of  income 
growth rates becomes fatter, and the right tail becomes thinner. Large, 
negative shocks loom larger, and lucrative outside job offers dry up. 
This cyclical tail risk effectively concentrates the effects of business 
cycles, ex post, among a small fraction of the population for whom 
recessions have ‘‘disastrous’’ consequences. As in Mankiw (1986), this 
concentration mechanism means that agents care much more about 
economic  downturns  than  they  would  if  idiosyncratic  labor  market 
shocks were insurable. Stocks fall in advance of and contemporaneously 
with increases in idiosyncratic tail risk, rationalizing a large risk pre-
mium. Moreover, investors demand higher compensation for investing 
in stocks when uncertainty about future idiosyncratic risk increases, 
generating time variation in the risk premium, return predictability, 
and excess volatility.

Theoretically, I work within a tractable asset pricing framework 
that integrates heterogeneous agents, incomplete markets, and state-
dependent cross-sectional consumption moments into a Lucas (1978) 
endowment  economy.  The  key  mechanism  is  the  link  between  the 
shape of the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks to consumption growth 
and aggregate state variables. As in Constantinides and Duffie (1996), 
agents are ex-ante identical and ex-post heterogeneous, yielding the 
same analytical tractability as a representative agent economy with 
the same aggregate dynamics. Unlike the representative agent econ-
omy, investors’ expected marginal utility – a cross-sectional certainty 
equivalent over the higher moments of a distribution of uninsurable 
idiosyncratic shocks – also enters the stochastic discount factor and 
therefore alters asset pricing dynamics. The key quantitative input is 
a model of how the higher moments of the distribution of idiosyncratic 
shocks varies over time and covaries with aggregate variables.

While state-dependent idiosyncratic risk has the potential to amplify 
the equity premium qualitatively, it is an empirical question whether 
the amount of risk agents face is sufficiently large for it to have a first 
order quantitative impact on asset prices. Thus, I build upon recent 
nonparametric evidence by Guvenen et al. (2014b) (hereafter, GOS) 
from the administrative earnings histories of millions of men in the US 
to develop a measure of idiosyncratic tail risk and its evolution over 
time that is conformable with my theoretical framework. Motivated 
by GOS’s evidence that the skewness of the distribution of income 
growth rates is highly procyclical, I develop a mixed-frequency ap-
proach to obtain a quarterly proxy for the extent of idiosyncratic tail 
risk faced by high-income workers at a given point in time, namely 
the third central moment of the cross-sectional distribution of growth 
rates in individuals’ permanent earnings. I then calibrate a model with 
time-varying labor market event risk that maps this index to a full 
distribution of idiosyncratic shocks to use in a quantitative model.

My resulting measure of persistent idiosyncratic tail risk is quantita-
tively large, fairly persistent and cyclical (skewness is procyclical, and 
downside risk is countercyclical), and it exhibits substantial time series 
variation, even in periods without recessions. While the center of the 
cross-sectional permanent earnings growth distribution is insensitive to 
the business cycle, its tails are highly responsive. Moreover, changes in 
aggregate labor income appear to be primarily driven by these changes 
in the tails. Finally, I show that the state variable governing idiosyn-
cratic tail risk is heteroskedastic, with considerably higher volatility 
in recessions. This heteroskedasticity is linked with time-varying risk 
premia in both the model and, as I illustrate below, the data.

Next, I quantify the importance of idiosyncratic tail risk in affecting 
the level and dynamics of the equity risk premium within a model 
in which agents are exposed to rare, idiosyncratic disasters, where the 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

probability  of  idiosyncratic  disaster  is  persistent  and  time  varying. 
While the structure of the model resembles that of the Bansal and Yaron 
(2004) long-run risk model, the state variables in my model are consid-
erably less persistent, and aggregate consumption growth is essentially 
unpredictable. In the model, risk premia are not driven by highly per-
sistent, small fluctuations in expected consumption growth; instead, the 
presence of idiosyncratic disaster risk and incomplete markets amplifies 
the price of risk on a business cycle-frequency component. My model, 
in which key parameters are disciplined by the data, matches a number 
of key asset pricing moments well; the equity premium is large (6.5%, 
more than double the comparable value in the analogous model under 
complete markets), and stock returns are more volatile than dividend 
growth and feature countercyclical, time-varying risk premia. Persistent 
fluctuations in idiosyncratic tail risk also generate a procyclical real 
interest rate with a similar volatility to its empirical counterpart.

Two key ingredients – recursive preferences and persistent, idiosyn-
cratic  jump  risk  –  combine  to  dramatically  amplify  the  equity  risk 
premium. First, due to the large negative skewness and high excess 
kurtosis of the idiosyncratic shock distribution, the expected marginal 
utility  of  consumption  increases  substantially  when  the  left  tail  of 
the  distribution  of  idiosyncratic  shocks  fattens.  Second,  when  state 
variables  governing  idiosyncratic  tail  risk  are  predictable,  investors 
with Epstein–Zin preferences and a preference for the early resolution 
of uncertainty require high compensation for investing in assets, such 
as stocks, whose prices tend to fall contemporaneously with bad news 
about future idiosyncratic risk. These hedging demands are important 
quantitatively, especially because stock markets tend to lead the id-
iosyncratic tail risk measures by several quarters in the data. Allowing 
agents to be fairly willing to substitute over time stabilizes the impact of 
idiosyncratic tail risk on the risk-free rate relative to a CRRA benchmark 
with comparable risk aversion.

In my model, risk premia are linked to uncertainty about cash flows 
and future state variables. Therefore, in order for idiosyncratic risk 
to induce time variation in the risk premium (return predictability), 
uncertainty about future idiosyncratic risk must be time varying. This 
necessary condition is indeed satisfied by the data. I show that initial 
claims  for  unemployment  –  the  rate  of  involuntary  job  loss  in  the 
US private sector – is a good proxy for the conditional volatility of 
my idiosyncratic risk index. If time variation in idiosyncratic risk is 
a key driver of asset prices, labor market uncertainty should forecast 
the equity risk premium. The last section of the paper tests this and 
other  implications  of  the  theory  by  providing  new  evidence  about 
interactions  between  idiosyncratic  risk  and  stock  returns.  First,  my 
uncertainty measure is a robust predictor of broad market returns at 
short to medium horizons. Over the 1967–2012 sample, initial claims 
produce more accurate forecasts of returns than many variables from 
the literature on return predictability, including the dividend yield, the 
book-to-market ratio, the earnings–price ratio, and the default yield. 
Furthermore, stock returns are highly informative about future labor 
market conditions – i.e., the level of and uncertainty about idiosyn-
cratic risk – whereas they convey less information about aggregate 
consumption growth.

Related Literature. This paper relates most closely to the literature 
on asset pricing with incomplete markets, building on the seminal con-
tributions of Mankiw (1986), Lucas (1994), Constantinides and Duffie 
(1996), and Heaton and Lucas (1996) (see Panageas, 2020, for a recent 
survey, including discussion of models with redistribution between ex-
ante heterogeneous agents). The debate in prior asset pricing literature 
centers  on  whether  the  degree  of  state  dependence  in  uninsurable 
idiosyncratic risk is big enough for these risks to play an important role. 
Many authors expressed skepticism about the quantitative importance 
of a closely related mechanism, countercyclical cross-sectional volatil-
ity (Storesletten et al., 2004, 2007, ‘‘CCSV’’), that was emphasized in 
earlier work on this question (see, e.g., Grossman and Shiller, 1982; 
Heaton and Lucas, 1996, 2008; Lettau, 2002; Cochrane, 2008; Guvenen 
et al., 2014b, for critiques on theoretical and empirical grounds). Also, 

2 

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

large state-dependent fluctuations in idiosyncratic risk also have the 
potential to generate risk-free rates that are far too volatile, exacerbat-
ing the risk-free rate puzzle. Hence, a key contribution of this paper 
is show the quantitative importance of empirically plausible variation 
in idiosyncratic tail risk for the level of and time variation in both the 
equity risk premium and the risk-free rate.

My theoretical mechanism combines elements from two complete 
markets  asset  pricing  models  that  provide  potential  mechanisms  to 
explain both the level and the dynamics of the equity risk premium: 
time-varying rare macroeconomic disasters (discussed above) and long-
run risks (see, e.g., Bansal et al., 2012, for a discussion of multiple 
extensions). In my model, person-specific tail events have large con-
sequences for individual utility even though only a subset experience 
them  each  period.  With  recursive  preferences,  predictability  in  the
higher moments of the idiosyncratic shock distribution – the idiosyn-
cratic disaster probability – affects asset prices in a manner similar 
to the effect of long-run risks (predictability in the mean) emphasized 
in  Bansal  and  Yaron  (2004).  However,  these  higher  moments  are 
potentially easier to identify from the data.

Two  recent  papers  also  study  the  asset  pricing  implications  of 
state-dependent idiosyncratic risk using models with Epstein–Zin pref-
erences. Herskovic et al. (2016) identify a common factor in the id-
iosyncratic volatility of firm-level shocks and demonstrate that this 
common  component  is  priced  in  the  cross-section  of  stock  returns. 
Most closely related is Constantinides and Ghosh (2017), who also find 
quantitative successes for a model in which aggregate consumption is 
i.i.d. but the higher moments of household consumption growth are 
persistent. While Constantinides and Ghosh (2017) primarily discipline 
state dynamics by asset pricing moments, my model calibrates them to 
match the time series properties of my estimated tail risk index which 
is extracted from administrative income data alone.

The  mechanism  I  emphasize  is  also  consistent  with  households’ 
stated preferences for avoiding stock market investments (Choi and 
Robertson,  2020)  and  portfolio  choices.  Catherine  (2022)  also  cali-
brates  an  income  process  to  match  GOS’s  evidence  and  finds  that 
countercyclical tail risk helps to quantitatively explain portfolio choices 
in a life cycle model (see also Meeuwis, 2022) and Catherine et al. 
(2024) provide evidence that heterogeneous exposures to countercycli-
cal tail risk have substantial explanatory power for stock market shares 
across Swedish households. Mitra and Xu (2024) argue that counter-
cyclical idiosyncratic risk helps to explain patterns in fixed income 
prices in a production setting. Lastly, Ai and Bhandari (2021) develop a 
model that identifies a complementary, though quite distinct, channel 
through which state-dependent tail risk can affect risk prices and risk 
premia.

2. General asset pricing framework

In this section, I present an incomplete-markets endowment econ-
omy with Epstein–Zin preferences and heterogeneous agents in order 
to  illustrate  the  role  of  state-dependent  idiosyncratic  risk  for  asset 
prices and risk premia. The model builds upon prior work by Toda 
(2014) and Constantinides and Duffie (1996). Section 2.1 describes the 
structure of the model. Section 2.2 discusses its equilibrium conditions 
and  stochastic  discount  factor.  See  Appendices  B.1–B.2  for  further 
technical details about the model, a simple example with deterministic 
aggregate consumption and a unitary elasticity of intertemporal sub-
stitution (EIS), as well as approximate analytical expressions for the 
stochastic discount factor, valuation ratios, and risk premia in a general 
affine jump-diffusion VAR setting. There, I place more structure on the 
stochastic environment, similar to Drechsler and Yaron (2011) and Er-
aker and Shaliastovich (2008), which leads to approximate analytical 
solutions.

2.1. Basic setup

Time, indexed by 𝑡, is discrete, and there are infinitely many pe-
riods.  There  is  a  continuum  of  infinitely  lived  agents,  indexed  by 
𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 = [0, 1]. Agents choose consumption and savings to maximize 
lifetime utility, with identical Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1989) 
preferences: 
[

]1∕(1−1∕𝜓)

𝑉 𝑖
𝑡 =

(1 − 𝛿)(𝐶 𝑖

𝑡 )1−1∕𝜓 + 𝛿(𝐸𝑡[(𝑉 𝑖

𝑡+1)1−𝛾 ])

1−1∕𝜓
1−𝛾

,

(1)

where 𝜓 governs the EIS, and 𝛾 is the coefficient of relative risk aver-
sion.2 Given agents’ identical homothetic preferences and the assumed 
process for endowments, there is an equilibrium with no savings each 
period, which implies that aggregate consumption and endowment are 
the same in each period. As such, to save on notation, I will use 𝐶𝑡 to 
denote both aggregate consumption and endowment in period 𝑡. Each 
person’s endowment 𝐶 𝑖

𝑡  evolves according to 

𝐶 𝑖
𝑡
𝐶 𝑖

𝑡−1

= exp(𝜂𝑖
𝑡 )

𝐶𝑡
𝐶𝑡−1

, ⇒ 𝛥𝑐𝑖

𝑡 = 𝛥𝑐𝑡 + 𝜂𝑖

𝑡 , where 𝜂𝑖

𝑡

𝑖𝑖𝑑
∼ 𝐹𝑡 with 𝐸[exp(𝜂𝑖

𝑡 )|

F

𝑡] = 1

(2)

where 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 is an idiosyncratic shock that redistributes resources across 
agents and F
𝑡 denotes the filtration capturing all agents’ information 
through time 𝑡 except for the realization of 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 across people. Throughout 
the paper, I denote levels with capital letters and logs with lower case 
letters, e.g., 𝑐𝑡 = log(𝐶𝑡).

Agents can invest in 𝐾 financial assets in zero net supply, each 
paying dividend 𝐷𝑘𝑡 (𝐷𝑘𝑡 is F
𝑡-measurable). As in Constantinides and 
Duffie (1996), shocks are structured so that no-trade is an equilibrium – 
i.e., agents choose to consume their endowments. These financial assets 
do not affect allocations, but they are priced in the model equilibrium. 
The  key  market  incompleteness  is  as  follows:  While  transacting  in 
financial markets may allow agents to transfer financial wealth from 
states with lower idiosyncratic risk to states with higher idiosyncratic 
risk, these trades do not allow for any form of insurance against the 
specific realization of 𝜂𝑖
𝑡+1 each person experiences.
Discussion of key assumptions.  A key assumption of the model is that 
all  agents  have  i.i.d.  draws  from  some  distribution  𝐹𝑡+1  (which  is 
measurable with respect to F
𝑡+1). While, the shock distributions faced 
by different individuals could be quite different in the data, this as-
sumption allows me to keep the model analytically tractable and focus 
on  the  role  of  idiosyncratic  shocks.  For  example,  the  idiosyncratic 
risk of unemployed individuals could be quite different from that of 
employed individuals. I rule out such individual-specific state depen-
dence. The model can capture unemployment-type events in reduced 
form, but it collapses all of the effects of unemployment into a single 
shock rather than allow for multiple shocks that unfold over time. A 
similar simplifying assumption is common in the literature on asset 
pricing with rare macroeconomic disasters. I also abstract away from 
heterogeneity in risks between individuals (e.g., skill heterogeneity, 
life cycle effects, etc.) and across industries/occupations, which would 
require a more complicated model.

Importantly, the dependence between the distribution of idiosyn-
cratic endowment shocks (𝐹𝑡+1), consumption, dividends on financial 

2 To my knowledge, Angeletos (2007) and Toda (2015, b) were the first 
to introduce these preferences into the incomplete markets setting. See Toda 
(2014)  and  Gârleanu  and  Panageas  (2015)  for  a  discussion  of  how  the 
assumption of infinitely lived agents may be relaxed. Absent a bequest motive, 
allowing for a constant probability of death each period is isomorphic to 
lowering the discount rate 𝛿 and would also guarantee a stationary income 
distribution. I abstract from these details for simplicity. In the background, 
we require mild regularity conditions to ensure that prices are finite and that 
the value function exists. For a more formal treatment, see Toda (2014).

3 

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

assets, and other aggregate state variables is essentially unrestricted. 
Thus,  the  model  preserves  flexibility  to  explore  the  key  insight  of 
asset  pricing  models  with  incomplete  markets  and  state-dependent 
uninsurable idiosyncratic risk: risk averse agents are willing to pay a 
premium in order to hedge aggregate states in which distributions of 
idiosyncratic shocks (𝐹𝑡+1) are particularly unfavorable.

Microfoundation for consumption process and an extension with assets in 
positive net supply.  Appendix B.4 provides a microfoundation in the 
spirit of Toda (2014) that delivers a consumption rule that satisfies the 
law of motion in (2) in equilibrium. Households invest in physical cap-
ital and human capital, where the former is subject to only aggregate 
risk (all agents receive the same ex-post return), and the latter is subject 
to aggregate and uninsurable idiosyncratic risk. Thus, an alternative 
interpretation of the consumption rule in (2) is that it characterizes the
post-trade allocations from this alternative model.

2.2. Equilibrium conditions

From Epstein and Zin (1989), equilibrium requires that for any asset 
return  ̃𝑅𝑡+1, each agent’s consumption profile must satisfy the Euler 
equation:

1 = 𝐸𝑡

⎡
𝛿𝜃
⎢
⎢
⎣
[

( 𝐶 𝑖
𝑡+1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡
( 𝐶 𝑖
𝑡+1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡

= 𝐸𝑡

𝛿𝜃

)− 𝜃

𝜓 (

)−(1−𝜃)

𝑅𝑖

𝑐,𝑡+1

̃𝑅𝑡+1

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

)−𝛾 ( 𝑊 𝐶𝑡+1 + 1

)−(1−𝜃)

]

𝑊 𝐶𝑡

̃𝑅𝑡+1

,

(3)

≡ 𝑊 𝑖

+𝐶𝑖
𝑊 𝑖
𝑡

𝑡+1

𝑡+1

𝑐,𝑡+1

, 𝑅𝑖

where 𝜃 = 1−𝛾
 is the return of an (nontraded) 
1−1∕𝜓
asset delivering an arbitrary agent’s consumption stream, and 𝑊 𝐶𝑡 is 
the wealth–consumption ratio. As in Constantinides and Duffie (1996), 
two key assumptions – permanent, proportional idiosyncratic shocks 
and homothetic preferences – keep the model highly tractable. Since 
agents’ endowments are i.i.d. in growth rates, they always have the 
same first order conditions, and there is an equilibrium in which agents 
consume their endowments. Then, 𝑊 𝐶𝑡 is identical across agents (I 
thus suppress 𝑖 superscripts), the wealth distribution does not enter the 
state space, and the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of an 
arbitrary household is a valid stochastic discount factor.

Plugging (2) into (3) yields 

[

1 = 𝐸𝑡

)

(

𝑡+1

−𝛾 ⋅ 𝜂𝑖
exp
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
uninsurable
idiosyncratic risk

𝛿𝜃

( 𝐶𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡

)−𝛾 ( 𝑊 𝐶𝑡+1 + 1

)−(1−𝜃)

𝑊 𝐶𝑡

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
‘‘representative agent" pricing kernel

]

̃𝑅𝑡+1

≡ 𝐸𝑡

[𝑀 𝑖

𝑡+1

̃𝑅𝑡+1

] ,

(4)

so that the pricing kernel, which I will denote by 𝑀 𝑖
𝑡+1, may be de-
composed into the product of the two terms in brackets. The first term 
is the standard pricing kernel from representative agent models with 
Epstein–Zin preferences, which only depends on aggregate quantities. 
The second term incorporates idiosyncratic consumption risk, which, 
since it is undiversifiable and uninsurable to the agent, also affects risk 
premia.

The change in each individual agent’s endowment is the result of 
a compound lottery. The first stage draws the aggregate state, which 
determines  the  higher  moments  of  the  distribution  from  which  the 
idiosyncratic shocks, 𝜂𝑖
𝑡+1, are drawn in the second stage. With the sole 
𝑡+1 is independent of  ̃𝑅𝑡+1 for 
exception of the consumption claim, 𝜂𝑖
financial assets. Accordingly, using the law of iterated expectations, I 
price financial assets (i.e., any assets with payoffs that do not depend 
on 𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1) by projecting out 𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1:

[

1 = 𝐸𝑡

𝛿𝜃 exp

[

)]

−𝛾 (𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 + 𝜈𝑡+1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
contemporaneous
consumption

(short run) risk

]

̃𝑅𝑡+1,

)−(1−𝜃)

( 𝑊 𝐶𝑡+1 + 1
𝑊 𝐶𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
hedging demands
(long-run risk)

4 

𝜈𝑡+1

]

̃𝑅𝑡+1

≡ −

[𝑀𝑡+1
≡ 𝐸𝑡
1
log 𝐸 [
𝛾
( ∞
∑

= −

log

exp

1
𝛾

𝑗=0

(

−𝛾 ⋅ 𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1

)

]

|F

𝑡+1

(−𝛾)𝑗
𝑗!

𝐸

[(𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1

)𝑗

|F

𝑡+1

)

]

.

(5)

(6)

𝑡+1) given F

𝜈𝑡+1 is the log of a CRRA expected utility maximizer’s (with a coefficient 
of relative risk aversion 𝛾 + 1) willingness to pay to avoid the second 
stage lottery – i.e., the distribution of exp(𝜂𝑖
𝑡+1. The certainty 
equivalent 𝜈𝑡+1, which is always a negative number for risk averse 
agents (𝛾 > 0), is a sufficient statistic that converts agents’ (identical) 
preferences over the higher moments of the second stage lottery into 
aggregate consumption units. The final expression in (6) shows that 
even moments such as volatility and kurtosis contribute negatively to 
𝜈𝑡+1, while odd moments such as skewness contribute positively. In 
reduced form, 𝜈𝑡+1 enters the SDF in a manner somewhat similar to 
the time preference shocks introduced by Albuquerque et al. (2016).

With  recursive  preferences,  the  presence  of  uninsurable  idiosyn-
cratic risk can have two, often complementary, effects on risk premia 
(expected excess returns) relative to the representative agent model 
(the version with complete markets is obtained as a special case where 
𝜂𝑖
𝑡+1 = 0). The first is a direct effect, coming from a cross-sectional 
correlation between the certainty equivalent 𝜈𝑡+1 and returns. Covari-
ance with 𝜈𝑡+1 is priced in exactly the same manner as covariance 
with  aggregate  consumption.  This  is  precisely  the  mechanism  that 
operates in Constantinides and Duffie (1996). All else constant, assets 
that perform well when idiosyncratic skewness is unexpectedly low 
provide a valuable hedging benefit, lowering the risk premium. When 
the 𝜂𝑖
𝑡+1 distribution is fat-tailed and highly negatively skewed, as in the 
data, 𝜈𝑡+1 can be much more volatile than 𝛥𝑐𝑡+1, potentially amplifying 
risk premia.

Due to substantial departures from normality – particularly very 
high excess kurtosis of the distribution of permanent income shocks 
– the magnitude of the certainty equivalent 𝜈𝑡+1 is substantial when 
calibrated to match the data. Declines in aggregate labor income in 
recessions are concentrated, ex post, on a small subset of workers who 
receive extreme draws from a distribution that has a fatter left tail 
relative to expansions. Allowing for a highly leptokurtic distribution 
of 𝜂𝑖

𝑡 thus contributes to the quantitative success of the model.
The second effect on risk premia relative to the representative agent 
model is an indirect effect coming from the impact of idiosyncratic 
risk on 𝑊 𝐶𝑡 (long-run risk; see Eq. (7)), which is only operative with 
Epstein–Zin preferences. 𝑊 𝐶𝑡 is pinned down by applying the Euler 
equation to the endowment itself and projecting out idiosyncratic risk, 
which yields the other key equilibrium condition 

1 = 𝐸𝑡

[( 𝑊 𝐶𝑡+1 + 1
𝑊 𝐶𝑡

)𝜃

exp(1 − 𝛾)

(𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 + 𝜈∗

𝑡+1

]
)

,

which depends on one additional sufficient statistic

𝜈∗
𝑡+1

≡ 1

1 − 𝛾

=

1
1 − 𝛾

log

log 𝐸𝑡
( ∞
∑

𝑗=0

[
exp

(
(1 − 𝛾)𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1

)

|

F

(1−𝛾)𝑗
𝑗!

[(𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1

)𝑗

F
|

𝐸

𝑡+1

]

𝑡+1
)
]

(7)

(8)

each period. Like 𝜈𝑡, 𝜈∗
𝑡+1 is also a certainty equivalent except that the 
associated CRRA coefficient is 𝛾. Unattractive distributions of idiosyn-
cratic shocks with higher even moments and lower odd moments (low 
𝜈∗
𝑡+1) change the wealth–consumption ratio in a manner analogous to 
having lower expected consumption growth going forward.

When the EIS (𝜓) exceeds the inverse of the risk aversion coefficient 
(1∕𝛾), investors have a preference for the early resolution of uncertainty 
and are willing to pay a premium for assets that offer a hedge against 
unfavorable news about higher moments of future idiosyncratic shocks. 
This preference configuration strengthens investors’ hedging demands, 
as captured by the 𝑊 𝐶𝑡+1 term in (5), relative to a model with complete 
markets. I provide approximate analytical expressions for these indirect 

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

effects within the context of my quantitative model, the setup and 
equilibrium conditions of which are the subject of the next section.

3. Quantitative model

In this section, I build on the general asset pricing framework by 
adding aggregate dynamics with an embedded specification of coun-
tercyclical idiosyncratic tail risk to highlight the amplification of risk 
premia from incomplete markets. The novel mechanism is that a time 
varying idiosyncratic disaster probability that covaries with aggregate 
expected cash flow growth. While it is easy to extend the model for 
richer aggregate dynamics, I work with a standard specification for 
aggregate risk for ease of comparability with the existing literature.

3.1. Endowments

My model for aggregate dynamics adopts the structure of the Bansal 
and Yaron (2004) long-run risk model. Aggregate cash flows evolve 
according to

𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 = 𝜇𝑐 + 𝜙𝑐 𝑥𝑡 + 𝜎𝑡𝜖𝑐,𝑡+1

𝛥𝑑𝑡+1 = 𝜇𝑑 + 𝜙𝑑 𝑥𝑡 + 𝜎𝑡𝜖𝑑,𝑡+1,

(9)

(10)

where 𝑑𝑡+1 is the log dividend on the market portfolio. Asset pricing 
dynamics are driven by two persistent state variables. The first is 𝑥𝑡, a 
small but persistent component governing expected cash flow growth. 
The  second,  𝜎2
𝑡 ,  captures  the  conditional  variance  of  shocks  in  the 
economy.

The persistent component, 𝑥𝑡, plays a second role in my model: 𝑥𝑡
also controls the higher moments of idiosyncratic shocks to consump-
tion. Specifically, endowments satisfy

𝛥𝑐𝑖

𝑡+1 = 𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 + 𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1,

where 𝜂𝑖

𝑡+1

≡ 𝐽 𝑖

𝜂,𝑡+1 − log 𝐸

[

exp

)

(

𝐽 𝑖
𝜂,𝑡+1

|𝑥𝑡+1

]

(11)

𝜂,𝑡+1 = 𝑁 𝑖
𝐽 𝑖

𝑡+1

[𝜇𝑏 + 𝜎𝑏𝜖𝑖

𝑡+1

] ,

where 𝑁 𝑖

𝑡+1

𝑖𝑖𝑑

∼ 𝑃 𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑛 (𝜆𝜂,𝑡+1

)  and 𝜖𝑖

𝑡+1

𝑖𝑖𝑑
∼ 𝑁(0, 1)

𝜆𝜂,𝑡+1 = 𝜆0 − 𝜆1𝑥𝑡+1.

(12)

(13)

Agents are exposed to a single jump component, 𝐽 𝑖
𝜂,𝑡+1, with a Poisson 
intensity 𝜆𝜂,𝑡+1 – approximately equal to the personal disaster probabil-
ity – which depends on 𝑥𝑡+1. 𝜆1 is positive, so that personal disasters 
become  more  likely  in  states  where  expected  cash  flow  growth  is 
low. I normalize 𝑥𝑡 to have mean zero and variance one, so that 𝜆0
and 𝜆1 can be interpreted as the unconditional disaster probability, 
and 𝜆1 is the sensitivity of the conditional disaster probability to a 
1 standard deviation change in 𝑥𝑡. 𝑁 𝑖
𝑡+1 denotes the number of tail 
events experienced at period, which is zero or one with very high 
probability in my calibration.3 The personal disaster magnitude (the 
jump size) is assumed to be normally distributed with mean 𝜇𝑏 and 
standard deviation 𝜎𝑏. When calibrated in Section 5, I find that 𝜇𝑏 is 
a large, negative number, and 𝜎2
𝑏  is very large relative to uncertainty 
about  aggregate  consumption.  Analogous  with  rare  macroeconomic 
disasters,  these  infrequent  labor  market  events  are  associated  with 
very high expected marginal utility, which is captured by the certainty 
equivalents 𝜈𝑡+1 and 𝜈∗

𝑡+1 (each is an affine function of 𝑥𝑡+1).

Similar  to  Bansal  and  Yaron  (2004),  the  state  variables  evolve 

according to

𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑡 + 𝜎𝑡𝜖𝑥,𝑡+1

(14)

3 Assuming a Poisson distribution leads to exact exponential affine for-
𝑡+1, facilitating tractability. The 

mulas for the certainty equivalents 𝜈𝑡+1 and 𝜈∗
probability of having more than one jump per period is
(
𝑃 [𝑁 𝑖
−𝜆𝜂,𝑡+1
so 𝑁 𝑖

(
−𝜆𝜂,𝑡+1

1 + 𝜆𝜂,𝑡+1

≤ 1|F

𝜂,𝑡+1 exp

= 1 − 𝜆2

𝑡+1 is very close to being a Bernoulli random variable when 𝜆𝜂,𝑡+1 is small.

exp

) ,

) [

𝑡+1

𝑡+1

]

]

(15)

𝑡 + 𝜎𝑡𝜖𝜎,𝑡+1

𝑡  is homoskedastic. I allow 𝜎2

𝑡+1 = 1 − 𝜌𝜎 + 𝜌𝜎 𝜎2
𝜎2
where I normalize 𝐸[𝑥𝑡] = 0 and 𝐸[𝜎2
𝑡 ] = 1. In Bansal and Yaron (2004), 
the shock to 𝜎2
𝑡  to follow a square-root 
process to be consistent with evidence I discuss in Appendix A.2.3 (see 
Table A.6). This restriction also guarantees that 𝜎2
𝑡  is nonnegative in the 
continuous time limit. Relative to Bansal and Yaron (2004), I allow for a 
richer correlation structure between shocks. Specifically, the covariance 
matrix for the shock vector 𝜖𝑡+1

≡ [𝜖𝑐,𝑡+1, 𝜖𝑑,𝑡+1, 𝜖𝑥,𝑡+1, 𝜖𝜎,𝑡+1]′ is 

𝜖𝑡+1 ∼ 𝑀𝑉 𝑁

0,

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝜑2
𝑐
𝜋𝑐 𝜑2
𝑐
0
0

𝑐 𝜑2
𝜋2

𝑐 + 𝜑2

𝑥 + 𝜋2

𝜎 𝜑𝜎

𝜋𝑐 𝜑2
𝑐
𝑑 + 𝜋2
𝑥𝜑2
𝜋𝑥𝜑2
𝑥
𝜋𝜎 𝜑2
𝜎

0
𝜋𝑥𝜑2
𝑥
𝜑2
𝑥
𝜒𝜑𝑥𝜑𝜎

0
𝜋𝜎 𝜑2
𝜎
𝜒𝜑𝑥𝜑𝜎
𝜑2
𝜎

.

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(16)

The Bansal and Yaron (2004) specification assumes that 𝜋𝑐 , 𝜋𝑥, 𝜋𝜎 , 
≠ 0, which permits for 
and 𝜒 are zero. Bansal et al. (2012) allow 𝜋𝑐
a nonzero covariance between consumption and dividend innovations. 
Analogously, 𝜋𝑥 and 𝜋𝜎 allow for a nonzero correlation between news 
about  dividend  growth  and  the  state  vector.  𝜒  permits  a  nonzero 
correlation  between  𝑥𝑡  and  𝜎2
𝑡   innovations,  which  has  considerable 
support in the data.

3.2. Properties of equilibrium asset prices

Next, I discuss several properties of asset prices, emphasizing dif-
ferences between my model and the comparable benchmark with com-
plete markets. Here, I highlight closed-form results which obtain in 
a log-linearized version of the model, though all results in Section 5 
use numerical solutions obtained by projection methods. In Appendix 
A.7,  I  provide  further  details  about  these  methods  and  also  show 
that the model is very close to log-linear (see Figure A.2). Thus, the 
approximations discussed below hold almost exactly.

Predictability and amplification of risk premia.  An application of Proposi-
tion 3 in Appendix B.2 implies that the risk premium in this framework 
approximately equals 

]

𝑡+1

(17)

log 𝐸𝑡

] 𝛬𝜎2
𝑡 ,

[𝜖𝑡+1𝜖′

− 𝑟𝑓𝑡+1 =

[𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1

[𝑆𝑑 + 𝜌𝑚𝐴𝑚

] 𝐸𝑡
where 𝑅𝑚,𝑡+1 is the return on the aggregate stock market, 𝑟𝑓𝑡+1 is the 
log risk-free rate, 𝑆𝑑 = [0, 1, 0, 0] is a vector that selects 𝜖𝑑,𝑡+1 from 𝜖𝑡+1, 
𝐴𝑚 is the loading of the log price–dividend ratio of the stock market 
≡ exp(𝑝𝑑)
on the state vector 𝑦𝑡, 𝛬 is a vector of risk prices, and 𝜌𝑚
exp(𝑝𝑑)+1
is a linearization constant for the market. Relatedly, the Sharpe ratio 
for log excess returns 𝐸𝑡[𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1]−𝑟𝑓𝑡+1
 is proportional to 𝜎𝑡 (see Appendix 
𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑡[𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1]
Figure A.3).

Under the above assumptions, the key term in the equity premium is 
𝜎2
𝑡 𝜑2
𝑥𝛬𝑥𝐴𝑥,𝑚, and the primary determinant of the equity premium is 𝛬𝑥, 
the price of risk on shocks to 𝑥𝑡 in the log SDF, which by an application 
of Proposition 2 in Appendix B.2 equals

𝛬𝑥 = 𝛾

𝜕𝜈𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡

+

= 𝛾

𝜕𝜈𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡
⏟⏟⏟
direct
effect

+

]

[

𝜙𝑐 + 𝜌𝑥

(𝛾 − 1
)𝜌𝑐
𝜓
1 − 𝜌𝑥𝜌𝑐
) ∞
∑

𝜕𝜈∗
𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡
[𝛥𝑐𝑡+𝑗
𝜕𝑥𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
indirect effect

[𝜈∗
𝑡+𝑗
𝜕𝑥𝑡

(
𝛾 − 1
𝜓

𝜕𝐸𝑡

𝜕𝐸𝑡

𝜌𝑗
𝑐

𝑗=1

+

[

]

]

]
,

(18)

where 𝜌𝑐 = exp(𝑤𝑐)
1+exp(𝑤𝑐)  is a linearization constant slightly smaller than 
1. State-dependent idiosyncratic risk creates both direct (first term, 
analogous to Constantinides and Duffie, 1996) and indirect (second 
term) effects, which I discuss in turn. While (18) holds from a loglinear 
approximation, it is exact in the case in which 𝜓 = 1 (see Appendix 
B.5 for a special case with deterministic aggregate consumption) or if 
investors have CRRA preferences.

5 

L.D.W. Schmidt

The direct effect of idiosyncratic risk on 𝛬𝑥 is 𝛾 𝜕𝜈𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡

 and is present 
regardless of the EIS 𝜓. If agents have CRRA utility (𝛾 = 1∕𝜓) – as 
in Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and the vast majority of prior 
work  on  asset  pricing  with  state-dependent  idiosyncratic  risk  –  the 
indirect effect is zero and only contemporaneous covariances between 
asset returns and the certainty equivalent 𝜈𝑡 impact risk premia. My 
estimates in Section 6.2 suggest that the direct effect is reasonably 
small in the data, which is perhaps unsurprising since stock returns and 
labor market measures tend to be leading and lagging business cycle 
indicators, respectively.4  Grossman and Shiller (1982) also provide 
conditions under which the direct effect often shrinks to zero when 
taking the continuous time limit of this model.

The remaining terms in (18) capture the indirect effect. When agents 
have a preference for early resolution for uncertainty (𝛾 > 1∕𝜓, a 
standard  assumption  in  the  long-run  risk  literature),  they  prefer  to 
hedge bad news about the future. Thus, the fact that a shock to 𝑥𝑡
conveys news about future expected consumption growth and future 
idiosyncratic risk increases 𝛬𝑥. The first term in the indirect effect is 
the standard long-run risk channel emphasized by Bansal and Yaron 
(2004), namely that small fluctuations in expected consumption growth 
can be associated with substantial risk prices when they are sufficiently 
persistent (𝜌𝑥 is high). My model additionally features a second term 
in the indirect effect capturing news about future cross-sectional cer-
tainty equivalents, which comes from the predictability of the higher 
moments of idiosyncratic consumption growth shocks. When 𝜆1 > 0 and 
𝜌𝑥 > 0, the contribution from this term is also positive. Idiosyncratic 
disaster states are associated with extremely high marginal utility, so 
one  does  not  need  𝜌𝑥  to  be  large  or  aggregate  consumption  to  be 
predictable for 𝛬𝑥 to be sizeable. Since incomplete risk sharing makes 
expected marginal utility more sensitive to 𝑥𝑡, households are willing to 
pay more to hedge news about 𝑥𝑡 than would be the case with complete 
markets.

The fact that a discounted sum of future certainty equivalents enters 
the stochastic discount factor – a key component of the indirect effect 
of idiosyncratic risk – holds in a general VAR setting. In Appendix B.3, I 
derive an intertemporal capital asset pricing (ICAPM) representation of 
the stochastic discount factor from my general affine model, generaliz-
ing a recent contribution by Campbell et al. (2018). There I show that, 
in addition to several risk factors which also appear in representative 
agent models, news about contemporaneous and future idiosyncratic 
risk enter the stochastic discount factor.

Empirically, there is scope for the indirect effect to be quite large. 
Stock returns are highly informative about future idiosyncratic risk, and 
my tail risk index is fairly persistent. Both features combine to generate 
large hedging demands and a large risk premium with moderate risk 
aversion. Moreover, due to the ex post concentration of shocks among 
a  subset  of  individuals,  the  model  does  not  require  𝑥𝑡  to  be  very 
persistent. Rather, it can vary at business cycle frequencies, consistent 
with the data.

Turning to the price–dividend ratio on the dividend claim, one can 

also show that 

[

(

𝜙𝑑 −

𝐴𝑥,𝑚 =

1
1 − 𝜌𝑥𝜌𝑚

𝜕𝜈𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡
The contribution from the first two terms in parentheses appears in 
the representative agent solution, whereas the last term (in brackets) 

(
𝛾 − 1
𝜓

𝜙𝑐
𝜓

− 𝜌𝑥

(19)

) 𝜕𝜈∗
𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡

−

𝛾

.

])

4 Along these lines, Cochrane (2008) summarizes a common view that dis-
misses uninsurable idiosyncratic risk as a key driver of the equity premium: ‘‘In 
order to generate risk premia, then, we need the distribution of idiosyncratic 
risk to vary over time...It needs to widen unexpectedly, to generate a covariance 
with returns, and so as not to generate a lot of variation in interest rates. And, 
if we are to avoid high risk aversion, it needs to widen a lot...Slow, business 
cycle-related variation in idiosyncratic risk [𝜈𝑡+1 in my notation] will give risk 
to changes in interest rates, not a risk premium’’.

6 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

emerges from incomplete markets and captures the precautionary sav-
ings effect that raises the prices of all financial assets (since they are 
not exposed to idiosyncratic risk). Eq. (19) reveals an amplification of 
precautionary savings due to incomplete markets, the state-dependent 
counterpart to the well-known result that state-independent idiosyn-
cratic risk lowers risk-free interest rates which I discuss further below. 
State-dependent idiosyncratic risk increases the price of risk 𝛬𝑥, but 
it pushes in the opposite direction for the price–dividend ratios (the 
quantity  or  risk)  due  to  a  stronger  precautionary  savings  channel. 
Fixing the degree of dividend predictability means that returns will 
tend to fall less in response to bad news relative to the representative 
agent case. Below, the increase in 𝛬𝑥 is more important quantitatively.

Implications for the risk-free rate and EIS estimation.  The stronger pre-
cautionary savings effect emphasized above also has important impli-
cations for both the level and dynamics of the risk-free interest rate. 
Beginning with its level, while the exact expression for the average 
risk-free rate is somewhat involved, the model generates a substantially 
lower risk-free rate relative to its complete market counterpart – a 
familiar result of most models with uninsurable idiosyncratic risk. Ap-
pendix Section B.5 provides weak conditions for this result to obtain in 
a special case of the model with 𝜓 = 1. Indeed, a primary effect of state-
independent idiosyncratic risk is to lower the risk-free rate (Krueger 
and Lustig, 2010).

Persistent, countercyclical tail risk creates an additional rationale 
for real interest rates to have a procyclical business cycle component, 
consistent with the data (see, e.g., estimates in Pflueger et al., 2020). 
In the model, the one period log risk-free rate approximately equals 

𝑟𝑓𝑡+1 = 𝑟𝑓0 +

𝜙𝑐
𝑥𝑡
𝜓
⏟⏟⏟
expected aggregate
consumption growth

+ 𝜌𝑥

]

[

𝛾

(

−

) 𝜕𝜈∗
𝜕𝜈𝑡
𝑡
𝛾 − 1
𝑥𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑡
𝜓
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
 expected idiosyncratic
consumption risk

−

,

𝐴𝜎,𝑓 𝜎2
𝑡
⏟⏟⏟
risk from
aggregate shocks

(20)

where 𝑟𝑓0 and 𝐴𝜎,𝑓  are positive constants obtained from expressions in 
Appendix B.7.5. Whereas the first and third terms also appear under 
complete markets, the second term in brackets reflects the additional 
downward pressure on bond prices from improvements in 𝑥𝑡 which 
comes from the decline in idiosyncratic tail risk. While this amplified 
precautionary  savings  effect  will  make  risk-free  rates  more  volatile 
and procyclical relative to a comparable complete markets model, my 
calibrated model does not predict a counterfactually high volatility of 
the real risk-free rate.

Eq. (20) also has implications for conventional approaches to es-
timating the EIS which rely on the consumption Euler equation. In 
a  model  with  complete  markets  and  iid  aggregate  shocks,  one  can 
estimate  the  EIS  𝜓  by  regressing  𝛥𝑐𝑡+1  on  𝑟𝑓𝑡+1,  the  risk-free  rate 
between 𝑡 and 𝑡 + 1 (Hall, 1988). Bansal and Yaron (2004) emphasize 
the how time-varying uncertainty about aggregate shocks 𝜎2
𝑡  (third term 
in (20)) introduces omitted variables bias into estimates of the EIS 𝜓
and leads to downward bias in EIS estimates from this approach.

Persistent variation in idiosyncratic tail risk creates an additional 
source of omitted variable bias in the same regression in incomplete 
markets.  Like  countercyclical  aggregate  volatility,  predictability  in 
uninsurable idiosyncratic risk induces extra variation in precautionary 
savings demand that influences the risk free rate, holding expected 
consumption growth constant. Accordingly, a researcher who ignores 
these effects of state-dependent idiosyncratic risk would likely conclude 
that the EIS is too low, even in a model with iid aggregate consumption. 
Under  such  assumptions,  seeing  that  an  interest  rate  that  is  very 
responsive to expected consumption growth would lead a researcher 
to conclude that households are unwilling to substitute over time. By 
contrast, in my model, a significant fraction of the variation in the 
risk-free  rate  reflects  other  correlated  drivers  of  expected  marginal 
utility.

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Taking stock on the impact of Epstein–Zin preferences.  The results dis-
cussed above illustrate that allowing for Epstein–Zin preferences with a 
preference for early resolution of uncertainty helps to increase the price 
of risk on persistent shocks to idiosyncratic risk – helping to resolve the 
equity premium puzzle – while simultaneously decreasing the impacts 
of the associated precautionary savings demands on the risk-free rate. 
Both impacts are similar to the role these preferences play in changing 
the manner in which persistent risks in aggregate consumption growth 
are  priced.  The  presence  of  indirect  effects  also  offers  a  resolution 
of Grossman and Shiller (1982) critique that the role of heterogeneity 
often vanishes in the continuous time limit. Recursive preferences are 
thus crucial for my quantitative results.

Pricing of time-varying volatility 𝝈2
𝒕 .  The impact of time-varying uncer-
tainty 𝜎2
𝑡  is comparable to the relevant complete markets benchmark, 
hence my discussion here is brief. When 𝜓 and 𝛾 are both greater than 
1, the wealth-consumption ratio falls in response to higher uncertainty 
and the price of volatility risk is negative. In the calibrated model, 
increases in 𝜎2
𝑡  lead to increases in the equity risk premium and declines 
in the risk-free rate. Quantitatively, the former effect dominates, and 
stock prices fall in response to 𝜎2
𝑡  shocks, as Appendix Figure A.2 shows.

4. Measuring idiosyncratic tail risk

Here, I leverage US administrative earnings data to construct esti-
mates of idiosyncratic labor income risk and its evolution over time that 
are conformable with the theoretical framework above. These estimates 
provide key inputs for my quantitative model in Section 3. Sections 4.1
and 4.2,  respectively,  describe  the  model  of  income  dynamics  and 
the data used for my estimation procedure, which then proceeds in 
two steps. In Section 4.3, I extract an empirical proxy for the con-
ditional skewness of the idiosyncratic income growth distribution. In 
Section 4.4, I calibrate a parametric model of how the distribution 
depends on this index.

4.1. Statistical framework for earnings dynamics

My statistical model for labor income is a generalized version of the 
canonical permanent income model (see, e.g., Meghir and Pistaferri, 
2011). Let 𝑤𝑖
𝑡 be individual 𝑖’s log labor income (after subtracting a 
deterministic life-cycle component) in period 𝑡. I assume

(21)

𝑤𝑖

𝑡 =

𝜉𝑖
𝑡
⏟⏟⏟
permanent
component

+ 𝜌(𝐿) ⋅ 𝜂𝑖
𝑡
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
state dependent 
transitory shock
𝜂𝑖
𝑡 |𝑦𝑡 ∼ 𝐹𝜂

+

𝜖𝑖
𝑡
⏟⏟⏟
state independent
transitory shock
) ,
(𝜂; 𝑦𝑡
𝜖𝑖
𝑡 ⟂ 𝑦𝑡,

(22)

𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 ,

𝑡 = 𝜉𝑖
𝜉𝑖
where 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 is a shock that is independently distributed over time condi-
tional on the aggregate state, which I assume to be a finite-dimensional, 
observable random vector, 𝑦𝑡. 𝜉𝑖
𝑡 is a permanent component to wages. 
As I discuss below, my theoretical model requires that 𝜉𝑖
𝑡 be a random 
walk. An alternative would be for 𝜉𝑖
𝑡 to follow a persistent, stationary 
process such as an AR(1). I impose the random walk restriction – which 
is crucial for aggregation in my theoretical model – throughout, noting 
that estimates of the AR(1) parameter in other studies are generally 
close to 1.5

My estimation exercises also allow for a transitory component in la-
𝑡 via 

bor income. The first term, which can depend on current and past 𝜂𝑖

5 GOS estimate a version of this model with an AR(1) persistent component, 
albeit with different distributional assumptions, and obtain an annual autocor-
relation coefficient of 0.979. An alternative specification yields an estimate of 
0.999. Whereas GOS focus on a simple model where income risk parameters 
only depend on whether the economy is in an expansion or a recession, I allow 
for a more continuous link between the macroeconomy and idiosyncratic risk, 
which helps to generate more realistic asset pricing dynamics.

7 

the lag polynomial 𝜌(𝐿), allows permanent shocks to have additional 
temporary effects on measured income. For example, large negative 
realizations of 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 could be accompanied by unemployment spells, lead-
ing to temporary interruptions in the flow of labor income. Signing 
bonuses could generate similar effects for large positive shocks. The 
second term, 𝜖𝑖
𝑡 , is a mean zero transitory component that is stationary 
and independent of the aggregate state. While it is straightforward to 
also allow for state dependence in the distribution of 𝜖𝑖
𝑡 , I maintain 
this assumption for parsimony. This result also obtains if, given the 
aggregate state, the third central moment of 𝜖𝑖

𝑡 is constant.

Linking back to the theory, the key object of interest is 𝐹𝜂(𝜂; 𝑦𝑡), the 
way in which the distribution of permanent shocks 𝜂 evolves over time – an 
empirical analog to 𝐹𝑡 in the model above. When financial assets are in 
zero net supply, the endowment process in (2) emerges naturally as a 
special case of the permanent income model here with no transitory 
shocks (or where household savings/government transfers essentially 
perfectly insure transitory risks). Further, as long as agents are fairly 
willing to substitute over time (EIS is not too close to 0), transitory 
dynamics often matter little for risk premia (see, e.g., Bansal et al., 
2010; Dew-Becker and Giglio, 2016).

4.2. Source data and target population of interest

My  analysis  uses  statistics  from  GOS  that  are  computed  from  a 
nationally representative, 10% sample of panels of earnings records 
for males aged 25–60 in the US population from the Detailed Earnings 
Record from the Master Earnings File (‘‘MEF’’) maintained by the Social 
Security Administration (‘‘SSA’’). The data provide uncapped (i.e., not 
top-coded), nominal annual earnings for each individual from 1978 
onward, which are adjusted to real terms using the personal consump-
tion  expenditure  deflator.  These  earnings  data  are  sourced  directly 
from Box 1 of W-2 forms mailed to the SSA and include wages and 
salaries, bonuses, and exercised stock options. GOS provide a number 
of summary statistics for the distribution of real earnings growth rates 
for each individual from an analysis sample with 163 MM worker-year 
observations. I make use of two pieces of information that they make 
available. First, GOS provide time series of cross-sectional moments 
for the entire US population. Second, they provide information about 
various percentiles of the distribution of income growth rates at various 
horizons overall and in expansions versus recessions. I calibrate my 
statistical model in Section 4.4 below to match this evidence. See Olsen 
and Hudson (2009) for details on coverage and the history of the MEF.
Given my focus on asset pricing, the nature of idiosyncratic risk 
faced by relatively high earners – i.e., those who are likely to partic-
ipate in financial markets – is of particular interest. My calibration in 
Section 4.4 targets averages of GOS’s statistics over the 91st through 
95th percentiles of the lagged earnings distribution. These individuals 
have sufficiently high earnings such that they are likely to participate in 
stock markets. However, labor income is still likely to be their primary 
source of non-housing wealth. In 2011, GOS report that the 90th and 
95th percentiles of wages are $125k and $172k per year, respectively, 
in 2019 dollars. Appendix A.1 shows that the moments that I target are 
relatively insensitive to the specific choice of the endpoints. (Including 
even higher income workers leads to more risk.)

Before turning to my estimates, I briefly summarize several points 
related to external validity, relegating a more detailed discussion to 
Appendix A.4. First, there is evidence for procyclical skewness and 
countercyclical tail risk across many countries. Second, stock market 
participation is strongly increasing in both income and wealth, and 
wealth is quite concentrated among the richest and highest earning 
households. Therefore, one could potentially argue that it is sensible 
to focus on a set of even higher income/net worth households relative 
to the 90–95th percentile households targeted above. However, most 
working-age households in this group still receive the vast majority of 
income from non-diversifiable sources, albeit with a large share from 
business income rather than wage and salary income. The data suggest 

L.D.W. Schmidt

that these workers likely face more exposure to this risk relative to the 
population I target in my calibration exercises above. Finally, there 
is little evidence to suggest that these workers effectively ‘‘save their 
way out of idiosyncratic risk’’. Contrary to the predictions of some 
theoretical models (see., e.g., Heaton and Lucas, 1996; Catherine, 2022) 
cross-sectional dispersion in total household income is increasing in 
wealth.

4.3. State dynamics calibration

GOS emphasize changes in skewness in recession years relative to 
expansion years. However, asset pricing tests tend to be conducted 
using high frequency (e.g., monthly or quarterly) data. Also, in order 
to better assess the potential linkages between labor income risk and 
asset pricing dynamics, it is helpful to have a more continuous, higher 
frequency  notion  of  idiosyncratic  risk,  particularly  since  recessions 
need not coincide neatly with calendar years. My skewness index is 
available at a quarterly frequency and is available over a longer time 
period, making it easier to understand its time series properties. In 
Section 5, I calibrate my theoretical model to match its dynamics.

To estimate such an index, I assume that the model in (21)–(22) 
holds at the quarterly frequency, then develop a mixed-frequency ap-
proach to estimate a quarterly skewness index using cross-sectional 
moments  from  the  SSA  data,  which  are  time  aggregated  and  only 
available on an annual basis. Motivated by evidence from GOS, which 
suggests that the variance of the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks 
is acyclical and the skewness of the distribution of income shocks is 
procyclical, my calibration will assume that, for each quarter, 

[(𝜂𝑖

𝑡 − 𝐸[𝜂𝑖

𝑡 |𝑦𝑡

𝐸

]

])3 |
𝑦𝑡
|
|

= 𝑎 + 𝑏′𝑦𝑡

≡ 𝑎 + 𝑥𝑡

(23)

with 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 ⟂ 𝑦𝑡|𝑥𝑡, so the skewness index 𝑥𝑡 is sufficient to capture the state 
dependence of the distribution of 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 . I include 109 quarterly time series 
in the vector 𝑦𝑡, all of which are available from 1960–2013, which also 
allows me (assuming the stability of Eq.  (23)) to extrapolate further 
back in time as well.

My preferred approach extracts 𝑥𝑡 using statistical methods that are 
designed to provide optimal forecasts in data-rich environments where 
the number of predictors is large (potentially much larger) relative to 
the sample size for the forecast target. I adapt the three-pass regression 
filter (3PRF) method of Kelly and Pruitt (2015) to extract the optimal 
linear predictor from a large number of macroeconomic and financial 
time series and also find similar results using forecast combinations 
with inverse mean-squared error weights (Timmermann, 2006). For 
brevity, I only summarize properties of the extracted 𝑥𝑡. See Appendix 
A.2.1 for further technical details and results.

Fig.  1, Panel A plots the estimated quarterly skewness index, 𝑥𝑡, 
obtained using the 3PRF, and the alternative combination estimate. 
Both  measures  are  visually  indistinguishable  from  one  another  and 
highly cyclical, peaking in expansions and bottoming out during (or 
immediately after) recessions. Note however that skewness dynamics 
appear to be considerably richer than the two-state (expansion and 
recession) Markov process typically assumed in the empirical literature 
on estimating earnings process. In addition to the overall skewness 
indices, Fig.  1 plots fitted values from the 40 best-performing univariate 
regression models, which are shaded from light to dark according to 
goodness of fit, where darker lines indicate better fit. These univariate 
forecasts are highly correlated with one another and generally track the 
overall indices quite closely, indicating a strong factor structure in the 
data. Note that the estimation sample begins in 1978, while the overall 
and univariate skewness measures track one another quite closely prior 
to 1978, suggesting that the identified factor is a genuine feature of 
the data, rather than an artifact of overfitting. The overall explanatory 
power of my skewness index is quite high: A single factor extracted 
from the 109 variables achieves 𝑅2s of 68% and 75% at the 1-year 
and 5-year horizons, respectively. Panels B and C plot the fitted values 

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

of the 1 and 5-year skewness measures which obtain from the 3PRF 
estimation. While the model fits the data quite well overall, the 1-year 
skewness implied by the model undershoots somewhat in the dot-com 
recession, and there is a tension between the model’s ability to match 1-
year (undershoots) and 5-year (overshoots) skewness measures around 
the Global Financial crisis at the end of the sample. In my calibration 
exercise described in the next section, this overshooting is somewhat 
attenuated by the fact that I truncate Poisson intensities during this 
period (see Fig.  3).

Appendix  Table  A.5  and  Section  A.2.3  provide  additional  detail 
about the goodness of fit and key variables on which the index loads. 
More  precisely,  I  use  forecast  combination  methods  to  construct
subindices  using  different  groups  of  the  macroeconomic  variables. 
Looking at correlations between the overall index and these subindices, 
I find that the skewness index loads most heavily on measures of real 
activity, providing strong empirical support for the concentration mech-
anism in Mankiw (1986). I conclude by establishing two properties of 
the extracted skewness index, the empirical counterpart to the state 
variable 𝑥𝑡 in the model.

Fact 1: The skewness index 𝑥𝑡 is persistent.  As emphasized in the litera-
ture on representative agent asset pricing models with long-run risks in 
aggregate consumption (Bansal and Yaron, 2004), shocks to persistent 
state variables often carry substantially higher risk prices when agents 
have a preference for the early resolution of uncertainty (𝛾 > 1∕𝜓). 
This amplification is also visible in Eq.  (18) from the model, which 
shows that the indirect effect of state-dependent idiosyncratic risk on 
the price of risk on shocks to 𝑥𝑡 is increasing in the persistence of 𝑥𝑡 (𝜌𝑥). 
With that context in mind, I note here that the extracted measures are 
quite persistent, exhibiting substantial variation at business cycle fre-
quencies. The first order autocorrelation, when expressed as a monthly 
number, is approximately 96% for both of the measures which appear 
in Fig.  1, Panel A. In the model, persistence in 𝑥𝑡 will imply that the 
risk-free rate varies over time and tends to fall in recessions (consistent 
with empirical evidence in Pflueger et al. (2020)).

Fact  2:  The  skewness  index  𝑥𝑡  is  heteroskedastic.  Up  to  a  loglinear 
approximation,  risk  premia  in  the  model  are  only  time-varying  if 
uncertainty,  especially  about  𝑥𝑡,  varies  over  time  (i.e.,  𝑉 𝑎𝑟[𝜎2
𝑡 ] >
0).  My  preferred  empirical  proxy  for  labor  market  uncertainty  𝜎2
𝑡 , 
which is plotted in Fig.  2, is initial claims for unemployment insurance 
(𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑚𝑠𝑡). I divide through by the lagged level of employment so that it 
can be interpreted as the rate of involuntary job loss in the cross-section 
of employed individuals in the private sector.

My motivation for this measure is twofold. First, time-varying dis-
count rates (which mostly reflect changes in risk premia) and unem-
ployment dynamics are tightly linked in search models (see, e.g., Hall, 
2017; Kilic and Wachter, 2018; Kehoe et al., 2019, 2022). Whereas 
many  models  emphasize  how  time-varying  risk  premia  lead  to  in-
creases in unemployment through lower vacancy creation, Meeuwis 
et al. (2025) and Mitra and Xu (2020) point to distinct theoretical 
mechanisms  through  which  time-varying  risk  premia  endogenously 
generate increases in separations into unemployment and present ev-
idence consistent with their proposed channels. Therefore, one would 
expect increases in risk premia (driven by rises in 𝜎2
𝑡  in my model) to 
drive increases in involuntary separations. Second, as I discuss further 
in Appendix A.2.3, the model of Ilut et al. (2018) provides another 
elegant justification for a link between aggregate productivity and labor 
market uncertainty. Moreover, 𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑚𝑠𝑡 is forward-looking in nature, 
available on a timely basis, and leads the other empirical proxies I 
consider.

Consistent with these motivations, Appendix A.2.3 provides direct 
evidence that my skewness index, denoted by 𝑥𝑡, is heteroskedastic 
and forecastable by initial claims. I also identify two other variables 
that capture uncertainty about future idiosyncratic risk, both of which 
comove with initial claims and are plotted in Fig.  2. The first is the 

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Fig. 1.  Time series of skewness indices estimated to match GOS evidence.
Panel A in the top panel plots estimates of quarterly conditional third central moments obtained by estimating (23) using a large cross-section of macroeconomic and financial 
variables. Dark lines plot the combined forecasts, which average over all univariate models using the 3PRF and inverse mean-squared-error combination weights, respectively. 
Thinner lines plot the implied indices from the 40 best-fitting univariate models (as measured by the total sum of squared residuals). Lines are color coded to correspond with 
overall goodness of fit, where the darkest lines indicate the best fit. Panels B and C in the bottom panel plot the fitted vs actual 1 and 5-year third central moment estimates 
obtained via the 3PRF method.

Fig. 2.  Time series of different labor market uncertainty proxies.
Top panel plots estimates of quarterly conditional third central moments obtained by estimating (23) using a large cross-section of macroeconomic and financial variables. Dark blue 
lines plot the combined forecasts, which average over all univariate models using the 3PRF and inverse mean-squared-error combination weights, respectively, while the red circles 
overlay annual skewness from GOS. Thinner lines plot the implied indices from the 40 best-fitting univariate models (as measured by the total sum of squared residuals). Lines are 
color coded to correspond with overall goodness of fit, where the darkest lines indicate the best fit. Bottom panel plots the comovement of initial claims for unemployment as a 
fraction of private payroll employment, my idiosyncratic skewness index, and a measure of cross-sectional employment growth volatility across US states. Series are standardized 
to have mean zero and unit variance.

9 

L.D.W. Schmidt

lagged skewness index, which would be a good uncertainty proxy if, 
e.g., 1−𝑥𝑡 followed a square-root process, analogous to the specification 
in  Constantinides  and  Ghosh  (2017).  The  second  is  a  measure  of 
cross-sectional volatility of employment growth across states. All three 
measures are persistent and vary substantially over the cycle, providing 
a strong rationale for risk premia to rise and stock prices to fall during 
economic downturns.

Motivated by these two facts, I calibrate the quantitative model in 
Section 5 to feature persistent fluctuations in the probability of expe-
riencing an ‘‘idiosyncratic disaster’’, which fattens the left tail of the 
idiosyncratic consumption growth distribution in recessions. Consistent 
with the observed dynamics of 𝑥𝑡, the probability of a disaster will 
fluctuate at business cycle frequencies and will also be heteroskedastic, 
with dynamics of labor market uncertainty 𝜎2
𝑡  selected to match the 
time series properties of 𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑚𝑠𝑡.

4.4. The shape of the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks

The analysis in the previous section was semiparametric, allowing 
me to make statements about the time-series behavior of idiosyncratic 
skewness without distributional assumptions. To close a quantitative 
asset pricing model, such assumptions are required (to calculate the 
certainty equivalents 𝜈∗
𝑡  and 𝜈𝑡). This section adopts a more parametric 
approach, fitting a model with labor market event risk to the data. 
My discussion here gives an heuristic view of the model; For further 
technical details, see Appendix A.3.1. When calibrating the model, I 
exploit numerical techniques which allow me to avoid simulation, a 
technical contribution described further in Appendix A.3.2. There, I 
provide closed-form expressions for characteristic functions of income 
growth rates at various horizons, then leverage Fractional Fast Fourier 
Transform  to  rapidly  compute  densities,  distribution  functions,  and 
quantiles.

𝑡 . I assume that 𝜂𝑖

Calibrated income process with tail events.  Maintaining the assumptions 
on the labor income process from above, state dependence manifests 
via the distribution of the permanent shock 𝜂𝑖
𝑡 is 
the sum of three, mutually independent shocks: two state-dependent 
jump (compound Poisson) shocks with time-varying intensities and a 
normally distributed state-independent neutral shock that hits every 
period.  The  first  jump  component  is  a  good  shock  with  a  positive 
mean, capturing infrequent, large upward adjustments in consumption 
– ‘‘climbing the ladder’’. These changes could come as a result of a 
promotion or the arrival of an attractive outside offer. The second jump 
component is a bad shock with a negative mean, capturing infrequent, 
large downward adjustments – ‘‘falling off the ladder’’ – likely driven 
by events such as job loss.6

I incorporate state dependence by allowing the probability of expe-
riencing a large shock (jump intensity) to vary over time. Empirically, 
I tie these intensities to my skewness index from Section 4.3. I assume 
that, as the skewness index increases, large positive and negative shocks 
become more and less likely, respectively. If the data are generated ac-
cording to my parametric model, my regression procedure will provide 
a consistent estimate of these intensities up to location and scale. As 
is common in the asset pricing literature, I assume the distribution of 
jump sizes does not vary over time, facilitating analytical tractability.

Goodness of fit.  Despite its simplicity, my model fits the data quite 
well. Table  1 provides some goodness-of-fit statistics for the calibrated 
model relative to moments which were targeted (see Appendix A.3.1 
for more details on their construction). These moments are computed 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

by taking averages of the data in all years, in expansions (E), and/or 
recessions (R), depending on the moment. The left panel compares the 
moments implied by the calibrated model with their counterparts in 
the data. The model replicates the negative unconditional asymmetry 
observed in the data. The model generates substantial cyclical variation 
in the 50–10 and 90–10 spreads, slightly overestimating variation in the 
former and underestimating that in the latter. It matches the level of 
the 90–10 spread at 1- and 5-year horizons almost perfectly. While the 
exact magnitudes of changes in the other quantiles do not match per-
fectly, particularly for the 99–50 percentile spread, the fit is reasonably 
close. The presence of rare, large shocks generates substantial cyclical 
variation in the tails of the distribution of income growth rates, while 
leaving the central quantiles essentially unchanged.

In addition to quantile-based measures, the calibration targets sev-
eral time series averages of cross-sectional moments from GOS. First, 
the model-implied standard deviation is relatively close, though slightly 
lower, to its value in the data. I also calculate the kurtosis of 5-year 
earnings growth. Guvenen et al. (2021) emphasize the extremely high 
degree of excess kurtosis observed in the SSA earnings data, which 
is at odds with the assumption of normally distributed shocks that is 
commonplace in the literature. Their estimates, which are constructed 
in an earlier working paper version using the same methods and data 
as GOS, suggest that the kurtosis of 5-year income growth rates for 
relatively high earners is approximately 10.8. My model with jump 
shocks  generates  an  average  kurtosis  of  10.5,  consistent  with  this 
evidence.

The right panel of Table  1 compares model-implied time series with 
their counterparts in the data. GOS report annual time series for the 
shape of the cross-sectional distribution of income growth rates, where 
the entire US population of male earners is treated as a single cross-
section. In contrast, my calibrated model targets the level of income 
risk faced by relatively high earners. However, I can still assess whether 
our fitted model qualitatively matches the time series dynamics of these 
cross-sectional moments. At 1-, 3-, and 5-year horizons, I report the 
𝑅2 from a univariate regression of the GOS data on model-implied 
statistics. I consider four different time series, two of which are plotted 
in Figure A.1: the difference between the mean and the median, the 
50–10 spread, the 90–10 spread, and Kelley’s skewness. Overall, my 
model matches essentially all of these time series moments quite well.

Properties of the fitted distribution of permanent shocks.  Fig.  3, Panel 
A plots the fitted probabilities of good and back shocks, respectively, 
over time. The probability of receiving a large shock is approximately 
8% per year. According to the fitted model, bad shocks are almost 
always more likely than good shocks, though the difference between 
the two probabilities is relatively small in expansions. As the econ-
omy moves into a recession, the probability of receiving a bad shock 
increases  substantially,  while  the  probability  of  a  good  shock  goes 
almost to zero. These probabilities remain elevated in the early part 
of the post-recession recovery, then revert back to lower levels.7 Fig. 
3, Panel B plots the several quantiles of model-implied distributions 
of year-on-year income growth rates. These estimates condition on the 
observed trajectory of the skewness index. To emphasize changes in 
higher moments, I subtract the median from each quantile – i.e., I 
normalize it to zero. At a 1-year horizon, the central quantiles barely 
move at all. The interquartile range is essentially unchanged, while the 
extreme quantiles (2.5, 5, 95, 97.5) are highly state dependent. The 
5th percentile varies between −40 and −50 log points, and the 2.5th 
percentile fluctuates even more, ranging between −55 and −80 log 

6 In  an  earlier  version  of  this  paper,  I  use  the  estimation  approach 
of Braxton et al. (2024) to illustrate that, using SSA records for a sample of 
high-income CPS respondents, the fattening of the left tail of the distribution of 
permanent shocks in recessions is more pronounced for the subset of workers 
who switch jobs. These results are omitted for brevity.

7 The fitted good intensity goes slightly negative during the financial crisis. 
For purposes of calculating the model-implied moments, I truncate the bad 
intensity so that the sum of the two intensities is always constant. The dashed 
line shows the untruncated path of the bad probability.

10 

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Table 1
Goodness-of-fit statistics for calibrated income process.
  Cross-sectional distribution of income growth rates
  Statistic
Data
  50–10 Percentile Spread

  90–50 Percentile Spread

  50–25 Percentile Spread
  75–50 Percentile Spread
  95–50 Percentile Spread
  99–50 Percentile Spread
  90–10 Percentile Spread
  Standard Deviation
  Skewness (Moment)

Period
5 yr E
5 yr R
5 yr R-E
5 yr E
5 yr R
5 yr R-E
5 yr R-E
5 yr R-E
5 yr R-E
5 yr R-E
1 yr E
5 yr E
5 yr E
5 yr R
5 yr R-E
5 yr

64.65
72.47
7.82
52.02
44.08
−7.94
3.00
−1.72
−15.40
−26.73
58.71
66.47
−1.18
−1.81
−0.63
10.85

Model

63.28
72.81
9.52
51.64
44.26
−7.39
1.81
−0.79
−15.18
−18.67
58.31
62.36
−0.29
−0.76
−0.47
10.53

Time series
Statistic
Mean - 50 Percentile

50–10 Percentile Spread

90–50 Percentile Spread

Kelley skewness

Horizon
1 yr
3 yr
5 yr
1 yr
3 yr
5 yr
1 yr
3 yr
5 yr
1 yr
3 yr
5 yr

𝑅2
0.790 
0.802 
0.794 
0.519 
0.703 
0.672 
0.658 
0.695 
0.668 
0.708 
0.763 
0.790 

  Kurtosis
This table presents goodness-of-fit statistics for the calibrated model for idiosyncratic labor income risk. The left panel compares model-implied 
moments with their counterparts in the data. These moments are averages of quantiles or moments of the cross-sectional distribution of income 
growth rates for individuals in the 91st through 95th percentiles of the income distribution, most of which are in Table A.1. The period column 
indicates the horizon of the growth rate and whether the statistic in question is computed as the average over all years (no suffix), expansion 
years (E suffix) or recession years (R suffix). The right panel calculates the 𝑅2 from univariate regressions of time series of model-implied 
statistics on the same statistics from GOS for the cross-section of income growth rates for male earners in the US population.

Fig. 3.  Fitted dynamics of idiosyncratic distributions.
Panel A plots the Poisson intensities for good and bad shocks from the estimated model for the income process. Panel B plots the difference between the median and several 
quantiles of the model-implied distributions of year-on-year changes in income.

points. These extreme quantiles move up and down together, increasing 
in expansions and falling significantly in recessions.

Fig.  4 characterizes the densities of the permanent component of 
year-on-year changes in wages in expansions and recessions. To gener-
ate the figures, I randomly sample with replacement from the observed 
values of 𝑥𝑡 in expansion quarters and recession quarters, then plot 
the  associated  densities  of  year-on-year  changes  in  the  permanent 

component of wages in recessions and expansions, respectively. For 
the graph, I also model the average log growth rate of labor income 
as an affine function in the change in aggregate private sector real 
compensation, choosing the slope and intercept to exactly match the 
median in expansions and recessions from GOS (reported in Table A.1).

The dashed vertical lines indicate the average change in log wages 
in  expansions  and  recessions.  Note  that,  despite  the  location  shift, 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Fig. 4.  Log densities of the permanent component of year-on-year income growth in expansions and recessions.
This figure plots the log of the densities of year-on-year changes in permanent income (∑3
𝑗=0 𝜂𝑖
change in log wages in expansions and recessions, respectively. See the text for further details.

𝑡−𝑗 ) in expansions and recessions. Dashed vertical lines correspond with the average 

the densities are essentially indistinguishable from one another in the 
center of the distribution. However, the behavior of the tails is radically 
different. In expansions, the density is relatively close to symmetric, 
though the left tail is slightly fatter than the right tail. As the economy 
moves from an expansion to a recession, the left tail becomes fatter, 
while the right tail shrinks substantially. This evidence again suggests 
that observed changes in aggregate wages are almost exclusively driven 
by changes in the tails.

5. Quantitative results

This section presents the results of a calibration of the model of 
Section 3, where the key parameters of the model are informed by 
my estimates from Section 4. I first discuss additional details about the 
calibration, followed by an overview of its quantitative performance.

5.1. Calibration

Table  2 provides an overview of the parameters in the quantitative 
model, along with the calibrated values. While the number of param-
eters is larger than Bansal and Yaron (2004) (hereafter, ‘‘BY’’), many 
key parameters are tied directly to the data. The model is quarterly, to 
match the frequency of the analysis in Section 4.

I begin with the parameters governing idiosyncratic shocks. The 
disaster probability parameters 𝜆0 and 𝜆1 are chosen to correspond 
with the state-dependent component of large negative shocks from the 
calibrated model in Section 4.4. I set 𝜆1, the sensitivity of the disaster 
probability to a change in 𝑥𝑡, exactly equal to its calibrated value from 
Table A.7. Given my emphasis only on the state-dependent component 
of idiosyncratic risk, I set the unconditional disaster probability equal 
to 2.5 × 𝜆1, which implies that the probability of the fitted intensity 
going negative is very small, though still nonzero. I choose the param-
eters capturing state dynamics, 𝜌𝑥, 𝜌𝜎 , 𝜑𝜎 , and 𝜒, to match the first 
order dynamics of my skewness index and initial claims.8 I choose the 

8 The OLS coefficient in an AR(1) model suffers from a downward finite 
sample bias, which can be nontrivial when the dependent variable is fairly 
persistent. I use a bias-correction method from Bauer et al. (2012), who show 
that it improves the ability of an estimated affine term structure model to fit 
the data. Analogously, the correlation between the AR(1) innovations, 𝜒, is 
estimated directly from the bias-corrected regression residuals.

0.0065
−0.0026

−0.18
0.115
0.8847
0.9446
0.02/4
0.0075/4
0.000366
0.025
0.0125
0.045
√

Table 2
Parameters of calibrated quantitative model.
  Parameter
Description
Value
Average idiosyncratic jump intensity
  𝜆0
Sensitivity of quarterly jump intensity to a one
  𝜆1
standard deviation change in 𝑥𝑡
Average consumption decline given a disaster
Standard deviation of disaster magnitude
Persistence of 𝑥𝑡 process
𝑡  process
Persistence of 𝜎2
Drift of consumption growth
Drift of dividend growth
Loading of expected consumption growth on 𝑥𝑡
Loading of expected dividend growth on 𝑥𝑡
Standard deviation of shock to 𝛥𝑐𝑡
Standard deviation of independent shock to 𝛥𝑑𝑡  
Standard deviation of shock to 𝑥𝑡
Standard deviation of shock to 𝜎2
Loading of dividend innovation on 𝛥𝑐𝑡 innovation 
Loading of dividend innovation on 𝑥𝑡 innovation  
𝑡  innovation  
Loading of dividend innovation on 𝜎2
Correlation of shocks to 𝑥𝑡 and 𝜎2
Relative risk aversion coefficient
Rate of time preference (quarterly)
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution

  𝜇𝑏
  𝜎𝑏
  𝜌𝑥
  𝜌𝜎
  𝜇𝑐
  𝜇𝑑
  𝜙𝑐
  𝜙𝑥
  𝜑𝑐
  𝜑𝑑
  𝜑𝑥
  𝜑𝜎
  𝜋𝑐
  𝜋𝑥
  𝜋𝜎
  𝜒
  𝛾
  𝛿
  𝜓
Table presents parameters of the quantitative asset pricing model, along with the cali-
brated values. The time horizon of the model is quarterly. Additional free parameters, 
𝜇𝜂 and 𝐹𝜂 , are assumed without loss of generality to equal the expressions given in 
Lemma 1.

0.1674
2.5
0.04
−0.0896
−0.66
11
0.9745
2

1 − 𝜌2
𝑥

𝑡

𝑡

volatility of 𝜎2
data.

𝑡  to match the Kelley’s skewness of initial claims in the 

I calibrate the parameters governing the severity of tail events – the 
mean and volatility of disaster sizes 𝜇𝑏 and 𝜎𝑏 – to be conservative. 
I  do  not  assume  that  income  shocks  pass  through  one-for-one  into 
consumption  shocks,  since  stockholders  have  other  assets  available 
to smooth consumption, and households often have more than one 
earner. I combine my calibrated parameters from Section 4.4 with an 
assumption about the elasticity of consumption growth with respect to 
permanent income growth. I set 𝜇𝑏 = −18% and 𝜎𝑏 = 11.5%, values that 
translate to an elasticity of approximately 23% (taken from Blundell 
et al., 2008).

For the preference parameters, I set 𝛾 = 11 and 𝜓 = 2, which 
fall in the standard range of choices in the literature with Epstein–
Zin preferences. Given that 𝜓 > 1, agents have a preference for the 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

early resolution of uncertainty, implying that they are willing to pay a 
premium for assets whose returns hedge against bad news about the 
state vector (low 𝑥𝑡 or high 𝜎2
𝑡 ). The discount factor 𝛿 is chosen to 
roughly match the real risk-free rate. As is standard, matching observed 
risk-free  rates  with  uninsurable  idiosyncratic  risk  requires  discount 
factors substantially lower than typical choices for representative agent 
models.9

Many of my calibration choices likely understate the quantity of 
state-dependent  uninsurable  consumption  risk.  First,  I  assume  that 
jump sizes are normally distributed, whereas my numerical calibration 
finds that a more fat-tailed exponential jump size distribution better 
fits the data. Second, I focus exclusively on downside risk and ab-
stract away from the reduction in the probability of large increases 
in  bad  times,  another  force  that  would  add  additional  variation  in 
the  certainty  equivalents  𝜈𝑡  and  𝜈∗
𝑡 .  Finally,  my  assumption  on  the 
elasticity of consumption growth to a permanent income shock also 
is likely conservative. In the model in Appendix B.4, this object cap-
tures the (unobservable) ratio of human wealth to total wealth. Since 
nondiversifiable income comprises a very high fraction of total income 
(see  Appendix  A.4),  even  for  very  high  earners,  one  would  expect 
this ratio to be high unless the subjective risk premium on income 
risk is extremely high. Thus, while my baseline calibration assumes a 
somewhat high level of risk aversion, one could likely obtain similar 
variation in the stochastic discount factor with lower risk aversion and 
higher levels of risk.

Next, I set 𝜇𝑐 and 𝜑𝑐 to generate a mean and volatility of aggre-
gate  consumption  growth  in  line  with  the  data.  I  choose  the  level 
of  consumption  predictability  𝜙𝑐  so  that  an  agent’s  consumption  is 
i.i.d. conditional on not receiving a jump shock. This choice implies 
that, unlike the (Bansal and Yaron, 2004) calibration, aggregate con-
sumption growth is essentially unpredictable. 𝜙𝑐 exactly offsets the 
location  adjustment  (𝐹𝜂),  which  is  subtracted  off  to  ensure  proper 
aggregation. Given this restriction, the only source of predictability in 
𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 is the conditional expectation of the jump shock – a restriction 
that approximately holds in the income data (see Fig.  4). Given that 
I have chosen the idiosyncratic risk parameters to correspond with 
the  income  risk  faced  by  relatively  high  earners,  it  is  not  obvious 
that ‘‘aggregate consumption’’ in the model should be tied to NIPA 
consumption data. For instance, Malloy et al. (2009) find evidence 
that the average consumption growth of stockholders is more highly 
correlated with returns relative to that of nonstockholders. Parker and 
Vissing-Jorgensen (2010), Guvenen et al. (2014b,a) provide additional 
evidence of the above-average cyclicality of high earners. Nonetheless, 
as the predictability of average consumption growth is not the main 
focus of the paper, I maintain the NIPA benchmark for conservatism 
and ease of comparison with the literature.

I set the drift of aggregate dividend growth (𝜇𝑑 ) equal to 75 basis 
points  per  year,  somewhat  lower  than  the  mean  of  aggregate  con-
sumption growth. I assume that a 1 standard deviation increase in 𝑥𝑡
increases expected dividend growth by 2.5% in the following quarter. I 
set the loading of the dividend innovation on the consumption growth 
innovation, 𝜋𝑐, equal to 2.5, which is identical to the value in Bansal 
et al. (2012). My choice of 𝜑𝑑 implies that the quarterly volatility of the 
dividend growth innovation is just shy of 6%. The parameters 𝜋𝑥 and 𝜋𝜎
imply that dividend innovations are moderately correlated with 𝑥𝑡 and 
𝜎2
𝑡  shocks; the pairwise correlations are 31% and −25%, respectively.

Table  3 compares my assumptions about state variable dynamics 
and cash flow predictability with two popular calibrations of the long-
run risk model, Bansal and Yaron (2004, ‘‘BY’’) and Bansal, Kiku, and 
Yaron (2012, ‘‘BKY’’), both of which generate large risk premia in line 
with the data. The top panel compares the persistence coefficients 𝜌𝑥

9 Using  the  formulation  of  stochastic  mortality  and  bequests  proposed 
by Gârleanu and Panageas (2015), 𝛿 can be interpreted as the product of the 
quarterly time discount factor and the survival probability.

Table 3
Comparison with benchmark long-run risk calibrations.
  Statistic
  Persistence of 𝑥𝑡 (monthly)
  Half-life of 𝑥𝑡 shocks (in years)

Baseline

0.96
1.4

BY

0.979
2.7

BKY

0.975
2.3

  Persistence of 𝜎2
  Half-life of 𝜎2

𝑡  (monthly)
𝑡  shock (in years)

0.981
3.0

0.987
4.4

0.999
57.7

[∑∞

  Std of expected consumption growth (annualized)
  Std of expected dividend growth (annualized)
  Dividend growth predictability: 𝐸𝑡
    𝜌 ⇒ 0% annual discount rate
    𝜌 ⇒ 5% annual discount rate
    𝜌 ⇒ 10% annual discount rate
Table compares several features of the calibrated model with comparable values implied 
by parameters in Bansal and Yaron (2004, BY) and Bansal et al. (2012, BKY).

0.19%
10.0%
𝑗=0 𝜌𝑗 [𝛥𝑑𝑡+1+𝑗 − 𝐸(𝛥𝑑𝑡+1+𝑗 )] | 𝑥𝑡 = 𝜎(𝑥𝑡)
21.7%
19.8%
18.1%

24.6% 12.6%  
20.6% 10.9%  
17.6% 9.5%

1.5%
3.7%
]

2.0%
6.1%

and 𝜌𝜎 . In my model, the half life of an 𝑥𝑡 shock is 1.4 years, which is 
considerably shorter than the half lives of 2.7 and 2.3 years in the BY 
and BY calibrations, respectively. 𝜎2
𝑡  shocks 
have a half life of 3.0 years versus 4.4 years in the BY model. BKY 
emphasizes very low frequency movements in volatility, so their choice 
of 𝜌𝜎 implies that a 𝜎2

𝑡  shock has a half life of 57.7 years.

𝑡  is also less persistent. 𝜎2

Next, I report the degree of cash flow predictability. Since I inten-
tionally shut off most 𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 predictability, the volatility of annualized 
𝛥𝑐𝑡+1 is 0.15%. Predictable variation in aggregate consumption is the 
primary source of the equity premium in BY and BKY, so comparable 
volatilities are considerably higher (2% and 1.5%, respectively) in their 
calibrations.  In  my  model,  dividends  are  more  predictable  at  short 
horizons  and  much  less  predictable  at  longer  horizons,  but  overall 
dividend predictability is similar to that in BY. Empirical estimates 
from Schorfheide et al. (2018) imply higher levels of long-run divi-
dend predictability relative to my calibration, though Pettenuzzo et al. 
(2020)’s estimates imply less predictability.

5.2. Performance

Table  4 demonstrates the ability of the calibrated model to match 
a  number  of  key  asset  pricing  moments.  I  aggregate  the  quarterly 
moments to the annual frequency to compare average model moments 
(computed using 50,000 simulations of  400 quarters) with data mo-
ments from BKY, who report statistics for annual time series of real 
returns  and  cash  flow  growth  rates  from  1930–2008.  To  highlight 
incremental contributions of incomplete markets, I also report moments 
from analogous specifications with complete markets. These specifica-
tions have the same cash flow dynamics and preference parameters, 
except that I raise the time discount factor 𝛿 to 0.996 to target a similar 
risk-free rate. Table A.11 in the Appendix reports the bootstrapped 
distribution of moments from the baseline model.

The  markets  column  indicates  whether  the  relevant  moment  is 
obtained from the incomplete markets or representative agent version 
of the model. When making comparisons with the complete markets 
model, I shut off idiosyncratic risk by setting 𝜆0 and 𝜆1 equal to zero. 
In addition, I raise the rate of time preference considerably to 0.992 
(for ‘‘Less CF vol’’ and ‘‘IID cons’’ cases) or 0.996 (for ‘‘Baseline’’ and 
‘‘No covariance’’ cases), to generate a similar risk-free rate. I target a 
higher risk-free rate because price–dividend ratios approach infinity if 
I try to match the observed risk-free rate in some specifications.

Looking at the baseline column, my model generates a large and 
time-varying equity premium of approximately 6.6% per year, which 
is  roughly  double  the  comparable  value  of  3.4%  for  the  complete 
markets model with identical aggregate dynamics. It easily replicates 
the excess volatility puzzle; the volatility of the market return is 10% 
larger than that of dividend growth. The incomplete markets models 
have a fairly volatile real interest rate in line with the data, whereas 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L.D.W. Schmidt

Data

Estimate

  𝐸[𝑅𝑚 − 𝑅𝑓 ] 7.1

Table 4
Data and model-implied moments for different specifications.
Simulated model-implied moments
  Moment
Markets Baseline No covariance Less CF vol
Inc
RA
Inc
RA
Inc
RA
Inc
RA

5.6
3.1
19.7
22.8
0.8
2.1
3.3
0.3

6.6
3.4
23.6
26.1
0.8
2.1
3.3
0.3

6.2
1.3
24.0
25.8
0.8
3.8
3.1
0.1

  𝐸[𝑅𝑓 ]

  𝜎(𝑅𝑚)

  𝜎(𝑅𝑓 )

20.3

2.9

0.6

  𝐸[𝑝𝑑]

  𝜎(𝑝𝑑)

  𝐴𝐶1(𝑝𝑑)

3.4

0.45

0.87

Inc
RA
Inc
RA
Inc
RA

3.3
4.4
0.21
0.24
0.55
0.53

3.4
4.0
0.19
0.23
0.58
0.56

3.4
4.6
0.20
0.22
0.53
0.51

IID cons 
5.4
0.5
23.7
25.5
0.9
3.8
3.1
0.0

3.6
5.8
0.19
0.22
0.52
0.50

2.0
2.0
0.20
0.91
12.2
0.44
0.46

2.0
2.0
0.20
0.95
13.6
0.48
0.42

2.0
2.1
0.20
0.90
14.7
0.44
0.39

Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both

  𝐸[𝛥𝑐]
1.9
  𝜎(𝛥𝑐)
2.2
  𝐴𝐶1(𝛥𝑐)
0.45
  𝐸[𝛥𝑑]
1.15
  𝜎(𝛥𝑑)
11.1
  𝐴𝐶1(𝛥𝑑)
0.21
  𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝛥𝑐, 𝛥𝑑) 0.55
This table presents several moments of aggregate cash flows and asset prices from the 
data and different versions of the model. The data moments are reproduced from BKY, 
who use real, annual data from 1930–2008. The remaining columns show the averages 
over 50,000 simulations of 400 quarters of analogous quantities, which are simulated 
from the calibrated model and time aggregated to an annual frequency. Please see 
the text for the parameter restrictions associated with the different specifications. The 
markets column denotes whether the relevant moments are taken from the incomplete 
markets (‘‘Inc’’) or representative agent (‘‘RA’’) model.

2.0
2.1
0.20
0.93
14.7
0.43
0.35

the complete markets models exhibit too little volatility. The model 
matches the level of the price–dividend ratio, though it understates its 
volatility (also a shortcoming of the BY and BKY models). Comparing 
several of the other asset pricing moments between the incomplete 
and complete market specifications, we see that returns are even more 
volatile and price–dividend ratios are somewhat more autocorrelated 
in the representative agent versions of the model. This follows from 
(19), the expression for 𝐴𝑥,𝑚. Holding dividend predictability constant, 
the additional precautionary savings motive associated with incomplete 
markets reduces the sensitivity of the price–dividend ratio to changes 
in 𝑥𝑡.

Looking  at  the  cash  flow  moments,  the  biggest  differences  be-
tween the model and the data are the first order autocorrelations of 
consumption and dividend growth, which are significantly lower and 
higher than the corresponding values in the data, respectively. The 
former is by design, since I deliberately shut off almost all consumption 
predictability. Turning to the autocorrelation of dividend growth, as 
noted above, dividends must be fairly forecastable at business cycle 
frequencies to ensure that, consistent with the data, valuation ratios are 
procyclical and stocks are a bad hedge against 𝑥𝑡 news. I achieve this by 
assuming that dividends are fairly predictable over short- to medium-
term horizons, increasing the autocorrelation of model-implied divi-
dend growth. As discussed above, the overall level of dividend growth 
predictability in my model is comparable with that in BY.

In the representative agent version of my baseline specification, 
the equity premium is generated by three distinct channels. The first 
is a contemporaneous covariance between consumption and dividend 
≠ 0, there is a small amount 
growth innovations. Second, since 𝜙𝑐
of  predictability  in  aggregate  consumption  growth.  Third,  there  is 
stochastic volatility about aggregate consumption innovations, as well 
as shocks to the state vector. The baseline column of Table  4 indicates 
that these channels combine to generate a complete markets equity 
premium of 3.4% per annum.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Next, I consider the role played by various channels in explaining 
the equity premium in the model. The baseline model allows for a 
contemporaneous  correlation  between  dividend  growth  innovations 
and shocks to 𝑥𝑡 and 𝜎2
𝑡  via the parameters 𝜋𝑥 and 𝜋𝜎 . The next column, 
titled ‘‘No covariance’’, sets both parameters to zero. Eliminating these 
covariances reduces the incomplete markets equity premium by 2% and 
leads to a more modest reduction in the representative agent equity 
premium. This restriction reduces the volatility of returns and cash 
flow growth and generates a mild reduction in the autocorrelation of 
dividend growth. The ‘‘Less CF vol’’ column reduces the importance of 
stochastic volatility relative to the baseline model. While shocks to 𝑥𝑡
and 𝜎2
𝑡  continue to be heteroskedastic, the terms involving 𝜑𝑐 and 𝜑𝑑 in 
the covariance matrix (16) are now assumed to be homoskedastic. This 
restriction reduces the incomplete markets equity risk premia by ap-
proximately 0.4% and the representative agent equity risk premium by 
approximately 2.1%. The final column of Table  4, ‘‘IID cons’’, keeps the 
restrictions on stochastic volatility from the ‘‘Less CF vol’’ column and 
also sets 𝜙𝑐 = 0. These restrictions imply that aggregate consumption is 
i.i.d. The associated reduction in the incomplete markets risk premium 
is approximately 1.2%, and the reduction in representative agent risk 
premium is approximately 3%.

Does  the  model  imply  an  unreasonable  premium  for  the  resolution  of 
uncertainty?  Epstein et al. (2014) demonstrate that parameter values 
that resolve the equity premium in BY imply a very large premium 
for the early resolution of uncertainty. They show that an agent from 
BY would relinquish 20%–30% of current and future consumption to 
resolve  all  uncertainty  in  the  next  period.  Following  Epstein  et  al. 
(2014),  I  calculate  the  fraction  of  current  and  future  consumption 
an  agent  would  relinquish  to  either  resolve  all  risk  next  period  or 
to resolve only aggregate risk next period. Resolving aggregate risk 
resolves uncertainty on aggregate state variables, including 𝑥𝑡, which 
is informative about the likelihood of idiosyncratic shocks but leaves 
uncertainty on the realizations of future idiosyncratic shocks. I find 
that  agents  would  pay  2.9%  of  current  and  future  consumption  to 
resolve all aggregate uncertainty. Thus, state-dependent idiosyncratic 
tail risk helps resolve the puzzle of Epstein et al. (2014), as individuals’ 
willingness to pay to resolve aggregate risk is fairly modest. Given the 
fat-tailed distribution of idiosyncratic shocks, agents would be willing 
to pay more – 17.7% – to additionally resolve all idiosyncratic uncer-
tainty, but these shocks cannot be directly insured against by trading 
in financial markets. Hence, my view is that the former comparison 
is more relevant when comparing against a comparable representative 
agent model. For additional details on this timing premium calculation, 
see Appendix B.6.

6. Idiosyncratic risk and stock returns

In this section, I test several key relationships between stock returns 
and idiosyncratic risk implied by my model. I first discuss the implica-
tions of my incomplete markets model for return predictability, then 
I consider dynamic interactions between proxies for idiosyncratic risk 
and asset returns.

6.1. Return predictability

As noted in Eq.  (17) and the associated discussion, the leading term 
in the equity premium is proportional to 𝜎2
𝑡 , which captures uncertainty 
about the key state variable 𝑥𝑡, a measure of labor market risk. Here, I 
test this necessary condition of the model via a sequence of predictive 
regressions  that  utilize  my  preferred  proxy  for  𝜎2
𝑡 ,  the  fraction  of 
workers filing initial claims for unemployment, 𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑖𝑚𝑠𝑡. Table  5 reports 
the 𝑅2 and the 𝑡-statistic on 𝛽ℎ from the following regression: 
ℎ
∑

𝑟𝑡+𝑗

≡ 𝑟𝑡∶𝑡+ℎ = 𝛼ℎ + 𝛽ℎ𝑥𝑡 + 𝑢𝑡∶𝑡+ℎ,

(24)

𝑗=1

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Table 5
Predictive regressions for Market, Dominant Market Factor, and Small Minus Big factor excess returns.

  Predictor
  Initial claims

Market excess return
3 mo
2.40∗∗
(2.42)

1 yr
6.37∗∗
(2.44)

2 yr
4.96
(1.58)

DMF return
3 mo
4.47∗∗∗
(3.42)

1 yr
12.45∗∗∗
(3.83)

  Univariate regressions with Goyal and Welch (2008) predictors
    Dividend yield (dy)
2.65∗
4.29
(1.31)
(1.65)
    Earnings–price (ep)
0.54
0.28
(−0.42)
(0.24)
    Book–to–market (bm)
0.38
1.75
(0.31)
(1.19)
    Realized var. (svar)
1.72∗∗
2.99∗∗
(2.26)
(2.42)
    Risk-free rate (tbl)
1.33
1.74
(−1.03)
(−1.07)
    Term spread (tms)
13.11∗∗∗
8.20∗∗∗
(3.45)
(2.77)
    Default yield spread (dfy)
7.97∗∗∗
3.62
(1.50)
(2.88)
    Long–term yield (lty)
0.91
0.21
(0.61)
(0.14)
    Net issuance (ntis)
0.43
0.43
(−0.34)
(−0.31)
    Inflation (infl)
1.57∗
1.44
(−1.90)
(1.26)
    Default ret. spread (dfr)
0.23
0.38
(0.55)
(1.15)
    Long-term ret. spread (ltr)
0.78∗∗∗
1.50∗∗∗
(2.74)
(3.05)
  Equal-weighted combinations of 1 yr Goyal and Welch (2008) market excess return forecasts
    1928–2012

1.06
(1.58)
0.19
(−0.11)
0.52
(0.91)
0.19
(0.12)
0.96
(−1.39)
1.80∗∗
(2.02)
2.90∗∗
(2.07)
0.29
(−0.54)
0.19
(−0.14)
0.72
(−0.88)
0.95
(1.47)
0.70
(1.45)

3.12
(1.47)
0.79
(−0.60)
0.76
(0.63)
0.85∗
(1.75)
1.13
(−0.84)
8.04∗∗∗
(2.67)
3.82∗
(1.88)
0.42
(0.40)
0.43
(−0.31)
2.95∗∗
(−2.09)
0.31
(0.88)
1.64∗∗∗
(3.41)

0.97
(1.44)
0.32
(−0.48)
0.29
(0.50)
0.31
(−0.44)
0.67
(−1.10)
1.76∗∗
(2.01)
1.29
(1.30)
0.19
(−0.17)
0.21
(−0.20)
0.70
(−0.94)
0.92
(1.46)
0.62
(1.27)

2 yr
10.93∗∗∗
(2.74)

2.24
(1.29)
0.18
(0.04)
1.20
(0.89)
5.16∗∗
(2.52)
1.65
(−1.07)
10.74∗∗∗
(2.67)
8.00∗∗∗
(2.62)
0.40
(0.37)
0.45
(−0.34)
0.27
(1.42)
0.20
(0.39)
0.63∗∗
(2.34)

SMB return
3 mo
4.29∗∗∗
(3.63)

1.16
(1.44)
0.36
(−0.70)
1.32∗
(1.73)
0.47
(1.58)
0.63
(−1.35)
0.98
(1.55)
2.89∗∗∗
(3.17)
0.26
(−0.63)
0.22
(−0.37)
0.35
(−0.88)
0.37
(1.21)
0.48
(1.31)

1 yr
10.82∗∗∗
(3.90)

1.71
(1.06)
0.50
(−0.48)
4.23∗
(1.91)
1.59∗∗
(2.06)
0.52
(−0.64)
1.48
(1.24)
5.22∗∗∗
(2.75)
0.18
(−0.04)
0.20
(−0.13)
0.82
(1.26)
0.44∗
(1.78)
0.23
(0.53)

2 yr
9.47∗∗∗  
(2.58)  

0.48
(0.33)  
0.31
(−0.21) 
4.18
(1.26)  
2.10∗
(1.84)  
0.24
(−0.19) 
0.20
(0.13)  
5.26∗∗  
(2.52)  
0.23
(−0.17) 
0.22
(−0.13) 
1.85
(1.42)  
0.23
(0.86)  
0.19
(−0.27) 

2.22∗∗
(2.07)
3.39∗∗
(2.05)

9.34∗∗
(2.15)
16.95∗∗∗
(3.38)

8.96∗∗∗
(2.71)
14.88∗∗∗
(4.19)

    1967–2012

2.69
(0.92)  
1.50
(0.96)  
This table plots the 𝑅2 values (in percentage points) from predictive regressions of cumulative real returns on a number of univariate state variables. I consider 
the market excess return, the Dominant Market Factor of Byun et al. (2024), as well as the Fama and French (1993) Small Minus Big portfolio capturing 
returns of small relative to large stocks (by market capitalization). I use overlapping monthly data for the regressions, and the sample period is 1967–2012. 
Newey–West 𝑡-statistics, with lag length equal to the forecast horizon minus 1, are in parentheses. Top panel uses the lagged ratio of initial unemployment 
claims to employment as a predictor. Middle panel shows estimates for the Goyal and Welch (2008) predictors. Bottom panel reports comparable values where 
the regressor included is an equal-weighted combination of the forecasts obtained by predicting 1 year cumulative returns for each variable, where univariate 
forecasts are computed using the date range indicated in the first column.

10.05∗∗∗
(3.51)
16.79∗∗∗
(5.25)

8.48∗∗∗
(2.91)
15.36∗∗∗
(3.91)

3.25∗∗∗
(2.61)
3.84∗∗∗
(3.30)

2.66∗∗
(2.41)
4.58∗∗
(2.57)

5.52∗
(1.91)
4.73∗∗
(2.27)

where 𝑟𝑡 is the log return on a given portfolio, 𝑥𝑡 is the predictor 
variable, and ℎ is the forecast horizon. Rows correspond with different 
predictors,  while  columns  capture  different  portfolios  and  forecast 
horizons. I consider forecasts of the log excess return on the CRSP 
value-weighted index, as well as two other variables which I discuss 
below. I report estimates for horizons (ℎ) of 3, 12, and 24 months; 
results are similar for other ℎ. My sample period is 1967–2012, the 
period for which initial claims data are available.

To benchmark the degree of predictability I find relative to existing 
work, I work with 12 monthly variables considered in Goyal and Welch 
(2008), which are compiled and updated regularly by Ivo Welch. All 
specifications are evaluated over the 1967–2012 period. In addition to 
these variables, I compare initial claims relative to two simple indices 
that summarizes the predictive content from all 12 variables. One is 
constructed using 1-year forecasts obtained using the full 1928–2012 
sample period. The second begins the estimation in 1967, the first 
period for which initial claims data are available.10

10 Each index is constructed by taking an equal-weighted average of the 
fitted values from a univariate regression of 1 year-ahead excess returns on 
each predictor. I emphasize these combination forecasts in lieu of estimating 
multivariate models because the finite sample properties of these forecasts 
are much more desirable, and, as emphasized by Goyal and Welch (2008), 
estimation error is a first-order concern within this context. Indeed, these 
combinations  generally  outperform  all  but  the  best  univariate  models  in-
sample, and Rapach et al. (2010) demonstrate that combinations perform much 
better out-of-sample.

I begin with the left columns of Table  5, which looks at excess 
returns on the value-weighted stock market. Initial claims for unem-
ployment is a powerful, highly robust predictor of broad market returns 
at  shorter  horizons.  At  a  3-month  horizon,  initial  claims  achieves 
an  𝑅2  of  2.4%,  outperforming  all  twelve  Goyal  and  Welch  (2008) 
predictors  (middle  rows).  Moreover,  its  performance  is  comparable 
with combination forecasts using the linear combination of predictors 
constructed using the long sample (1928–2012) predictive regression 
(bottom rows). At a 1-year horizon, the 𝑅2 is a statistically and eco-
nomically significant 6.4%. Once gain, initial claims outperforms all 
of the Goyal and Welch (2008) predictors except for the term spread. 
Coefficients are statistically insignificant and 𝑅2 values are modestly 
lower at a 2-year horizon, though the 𝑅2 remains higher than all other 
univariate predictors other than the term spread. This performance is 
notable especially since the 1967–2012 sample period is a tough one 
for the Goyal and Welch (2008) variables. Many of the most frequently 
emphasized predictors, including the dividend yield, book-to-market 
ratio, and the default yield fail to achieve statistical significance.

Table   5  also  reports  results  for  predictability  of  two  other  risk 
factors. The first is the Dominant Market Factor (DMF) of Byun et al. 
(2024), a first principal component of a large number of equal-weighted 
characteristics-sorted portfolios. The DMF is an alternative market fac-
tor which strips out an ‘‘idiosyncratic financial factor’’ – a component 
of the value-weighted market return that reflects its overweighting of 
very large stocks and which they show is essentially unrelated to the 
broader economy (including the skewness index from this paper). Byun 
et al. (2024) show that the DMF has a higher Sharpe ratio and exhibits 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Fig. 5.  Comovement of initial claims with equity premium proxies.
This figure plots the comovement of initial claims for unemployment, expressed as a fraction of private payroll employment, with two measures of the equity risk premium: the 
market dividend–price ratio and an equal-weight combination of univariate forecasts from the Goyal and Welch (2008) predictors. All series are standardized to have mean zero 
and variance 1.

stronger predictability in the time series relative to the value-weighted 
index return, then explain why such results can arise in a model with a 
significant fraction of wealth in nontradable assets like human capital. 
In the middle panel of Table  5, I show that initial claims is a particularly 
strong  predictor  of  the  future  DMF  return  at  both  short  and  long 
horizons. At all three horizons, 𝑅2 values from predictive regressions 
with initial claims are almost twice as high as their counterparts the 
aggregate market return. Initial claims outperforms every univariate 
predictor variable as well as the combination forecast constructed from 
the longer sample.

The final dependent variable I consider is the Fama and French 
(1993) Small Minus Big portfolio, capturing the difference between 
returns on small (by market capitalization) versus large stocks. One 
rationale for the inclusion of size factors in asset pricing models is 
that small firms may be more exposed to the business cycle (Fama 
and French, 1993; Crouzet and Mehrotra, 2020). Hence, one might 
expect the SMB factor to earn a high risk premium when aggregate 
labor market uncertainty is high. Once again, I find in the right panel 
of Table  5 that initial claims is a very strong predictor of the future 
SMB return, outperforming all of the univariate variables and both 
combination forecasts at all horizons.11

In Appendix Table A.10, I include initial claims in bivariate re-
gressions  along  with  each  of  the  Goyal  and  Welch  (2008)  predic-
tors, for each of the three dependent variables. In virtually all of the 
specifications, initial claims remains a positive, statistically significant 
predictor.

Further, as I discuss further in Appendix A.5, initial claims strongly 
comoves with other common variables that have been proposed in the 
literature on return predictability. Such a connection is not obvious 
ex ante given that these predictors tend to be constructed purely from 
financial data. To illustrate this, Fig.  5 overlays initial claims with the 
dividend yield – arguably the most influential predictor in the empirical 

11 In untabulated results, I find that results are qualitatively similar for 
the Fama and French (1993) High Minus Low (HML) book-to-market long-
short factor, though the statistical evidence is much weaker. None of the 
variables (including the combination indices constructed by predicting the 
market  return)  forecast  HML  well  at  short  horizons,  though  I  find  weak 
evidence that initial claims forecasts HML at long horizons.

16 

literature given its direct connection with risk premia via the Campbell 
and Shiller (1988) present value identity – as well as the first of the 
combination forecasts. These measures are highly correlated with one 
another; spikes or troughs in initial claims are generally accompanied 
by similar movements in one or both of the other risk premium mea-
sures. Initial claims has pairwise correlations with the combination 
forecast and the dividend yield of 67% and 74%, respectively. While 
these results could certainly reflect reverse causality (see, e.g., Hall, 
2017; Kehoe et al., 2023), they are very much consistent with the key 
mechanism in my model and suggest that many extant risk premium 
proxies capture uncertainty about future idiosyncratic tail risk.

6.2. Stocks are a bad hedge against tail risk and labor market uncertainty: 
Evidence from local projections

When investors have Epstein–Zin preferences, an asset’s risk pre-
mium depends on the covariance between its return and news about 
both contemporaneous and future idiosyncratic risk. In addition, agents 
are willing to pay a premium to hedge against labor market uncertainty 
shocks. In this section, I explore the covariance structure between mar-
ket return innovations and my proxies for the level of and uncertainty 
about idiosyncratic risk.

To demonstrate this relationship in as general a way as possible, 
I estimate model-free impulse response functions; See Appendix A.6 
for  technical  details.  Fig.   6  shows  the  estimated  impulse  response 
functions to market excess returns for three different macroeconomic 
variables over twelve quarters. The left panel shows the responses of 
real aggregate consumption growth (real consumption of nondurables 
and services from NIPA). The estimated response is positive and sig-
nificant for the first few quarters, though it quickly trails off to zero 
at longer horizons. Note, however, that the associated magnitudes are 
quite small. A 1 standard deviation (+8.5%) quarterly return innovation 
is associated with a cumulative consumption response of only approx-
imately 30 basis points, which is 15% of the standard deviation of 
annual consumption growth.

Next, I consider the response of my conditional skewness index, 
measured in standard deviation units. The response is small and in-
significant on impact, but peaks at a sizeable 1/3 of 1 standard de-
viation 3 to 4 quarters after the return innovation is observed. The 
response  turns  statistically  insignificant  approximately  7–8  quarters 

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Fig. 6.  Model-free impulse responses to market excess return innovations.
This figure plots the model-free impulse responses of key macroeconomic variables to market excess return innovations. The impulse response is the slope coefficient on the market 
return, 𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1, from a univariate regression of 𝑦𝑡+𝑘 on a vector of predictors, 𝑥𝑡, and 𝑟𝑚,𝑡+1. The vector of additional controls 𝑧𝑡 (see Appendix A.6 for further details) includes 𝑦𝑡, the 
dividend yield, initial claims for unemployment, the term spread, and the 3-month T-bill rate. Shaded regions are pointwise 95% confidence bands, calculated using Newey–West 
standard errors, where the number of lags equals the horizon minus 1.

later. The magnitude of the skewness response is large; the cumulative 
response over the first two years is 1.35 standard deviations.

Finally, I plot the response of my labor market uncertainty proxy, 
initial claims for unemployment, to return innovations. The response is 
hump-shaped and unambiguously negative. A positive return innova-
tion is associated with a decrease in future labor market uncertainty, 
where the news is most informative about initial claims 6–18 months in 
the future. Here, the magnitudes are fairly substantial, given the high 
persistence of initial claims.

In brief, I find that return innovations have little predictive content 
for contemporaneous measures but are highly informative about future 
labor market conditions, consistent with the key mechanism in my 
theoretical model.

risk sharing for rationalizing the risk prices on shocks that make it 
less costly to develop new technologies, a mechanism that can help to 
explain the value premium in the data.

Moreover, while I study an endowment economy, one can extend 
the  general  framework  proposed  in  Appendix  B.4  to  embed  state-
dependent uninsurable idiosyncratic risk into production economies. 
Common fluctuations in uninsurable risk trigger very large precaution-
ary savings demands, which can act as an important amplifying factor 
for real activity, especially in models with nominal rigidities. Moreover, 
if the uninsurability of labor market shocks causes discount rates on 
risky projects to rise more sharply in response to bad news than they 
would if markets were complete, firms’ incentives to invest can change 
substantially.

7. Conclusion

This  paper  presents  evidence  for  the  quantitative  importance  of 
idiosyncratic tail events as an important driver of the level of and 
time variation in the equity risk premium. Importantly, the increas-
ing availability of large panels of administrative data on individual 
households  allow  us  to  quantify  these  risks  quite  precisely.  While 
my analysis focuses on estimates constructed using labor income, the 
mechanism and approach I emphasize here applies to pricing the time-
varying  risks  associated  with  the  redistribution  of  consumption  and 
wealth more generally. These shocks could also come from households’ 
nondiversifiable exposures to the value of firms’ capital investments 
–  e.g.,  private  equity  and  entrepreneurial  investments  (Heaton  and 
Lucas (2000) and Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)). Indeed, 
this group of households holds a sizeable share of aggregate wealth and 
faces an above-average amount of overall idiosyncratic income risk, 
and there is evidence that entrepreneurs are also exposed to substantial 
countercyclical variation in idiosyncratic tail risk (Salgado et al., 2023; 
Mogstad et al., 2024). In my framework, redistribution risk varies over 
time and enters as a priced state variable. I show that the risk from 
redistribution is quite important quantitatively.

Though this paper focuses on risks related to the business cycle, a 
wide variety of other aggregate shocks are also likely to be associated 
with a similar concentration mechanism and, in turn, to have important 
implications for both asset prices and welfare in many other contexts 
as well. In the data, aggregate and idiosyncratic risks are tightly linked 
with one another. Consistent with this intuition, Herskovic et al. (2016) 
emphasize a potential common factor in the idiosyncratic volatility 
of stock returns and individual earnings growth. Kogan et al. (2020) 
and Green et al. (2024) emphasize the potential importance of limited 

17 

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Lawrence  D.W.  Schmidt:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing 
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources,  Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

A number of additional results and model derivations can be found 

online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104131.

Data availability

Replication Package for "Climbing and Falling Off the Ladder: Asset Pric
ing Implications of Labor Market Event Risk" (Original data) (Mendeley 
Data)

L.D.W. Schmidt

References

Ai, Hengjie, Bhandari, Anmol, 2021. Asset pricing with endogenously uninsurable tail 

risk. Econometrica 89 (3), 1471–1505.

Albuquerque, Rui, Eichenbaum, Martin, Luo, Victor Xi, Rebelo, Sergio, 2016. Valuation 

risk and asset pricing. J. Financ. 71 (6), 2861–2904.

Angeletos, George Marios, 2007. Uninsured idiosyncratic investment risk and aggregate 

saving. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 10, 1–30.

Bansal, Ravi, Kiku, Dana, Yaron, Amir, 2010. Long run risks, the macroeconomy, and 

asset prices. Am. Econ. Rev. 100, 542–546.

Bansal, Ravi, Kiku, Dana, Yaron, Amir, 2012. An empirical evaluation of the long-run 

risks model for asset prices. Crit. Financ. Rev. 1, 183–221.

Bansal, Ravi, Yaron, Amir, 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset 

pricing puzzles. J. Financ. 59, 1481–1509.

Barro, R.J., 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Q. J. Econ. 

121 (3), 823–866.

Bauer, Michael D., Rudebusch, Glenn D., Wu, Jing Cynthia, 2012. Correcting estimation 
bias in dynamic term structure models. J. Bus. Econom. Statist. 30 (3), 454–467.
Blundell, Richard, Pistaferri, Luigi, Preston, Ian, 2008. Consumption inequality and 

partial insurance. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (5), 1887–1921.

Braxton, J. Carter, Herkenhoff, Kyle F., Rothbaum, Jonathan L., Schmidt, Lawrence, 
2024. Changing income risk across the US skill distribution: Evidence from a 
generalized Kalman filter. Work. Pap..

Byun, Sung Je, Loudis, Johnathan, Schmidt, Lawrence D.W., 2024. The idiosyncratic 
financial  factor:  An  explanation  for  the  role  of  size  factors  and  the  weak 
intertemporal risk-return relation. Working paper.

Campbell,  John  Y.,  Giglio,  Stefano,  Polk,  Christopher,  Turley,  Robert,  2018.  An 
intertemporal CAPM with stochastic volatility. J. Financ. Econ. 128 (2), 207–233.
Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future 

dividends and discount factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1, 1–34.

Catherine, Sylvain, 2022. Countercyclical labor income risk and portfolio choices over 

the life cycle. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (9), 4016–4054.

Catherine, Sylvain, Sodini, Paolo, Zhang, Yapei, 2024. Countercyclical income risk and 

portfolio choices: Evidence from Sweden. J. Financ. 79 (3), 1755–1788.

Chen, Hui, Dou, Winston Wei, Kogan, Leonid, 2024. Measuring ‘‘dark matter’’ in asset 

pricing models. J. Financ. 79 (2), 843–902.

Choi, James J., Robertson, Adriana Z., 2020. What matters to individual investors? 

Evidence from the horse’s mouth. J. Financ. 75 (4), 1965–2020.

Cochrane, John H., 2008. Financial markets and the real economy. In: Handbook of 

the Equity Risk Premium. pp. 237–325.

Constantinides,  George  M.,  Duffie,  Darrell,  1996.  Asset  pricing  with  heterogenous 

consumers. J. Political Econ. 104, 219–240.

Constantinides, George M., Ghosh, Anisha, 2017. Asset pricing with countercyclical 

household consumption risk. J. Financ. 72 (1), 415–460.

Crouzet, Nicolas, Mehrotra, Neil R., 2020. Small and large firms over the business cycle. 

Am. Econ. Rev. 110 (11), 3549–3601.

Dew-Becker, Ian, Giglio, Stefano, 2016. Asset pricing in the frequency domain: Theory 

and empirics. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (8), 2029–2068.

Drechsler, Itamar, Yaron, Amir, 2011. What’s vol got to do with it. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Epstein, Larry, Farhi, Emmanuel, Stzalecki, Tomasz, 2014. How much would you pay 

to resolve long-run risk? Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (9), 2680–2697.

Epstein, Larry G., Zin, Stanley E., 1989. Susbstitution, risk aversion, and the temporal 
behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 
57, 937–969.

Eraker, Bjorn, Shaliastovich, Ivan, 2008. An equilibrium guide to designing affine 

pricing models. Math. Finance 18, 519–543.

Fama, Eugene F., French, Kenneth R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on 

stocks and bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 33, 3–56.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2012. Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten 

puzzles in macro-finance. Q. J. Econ. 127 (2), 645–700.

Gârleanu, Nicolae, Panageas, Stavros, 2015. Young, old, conservative, and bold: The 
implications of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing. J. Political Econ. 
123 (3), 670–685.

Goyal, Amit, Welch, Ivo, 2008. A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of 

equity premium prediction. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21, 1455–1508.

Green, Brice, Kogan, Leonid, Papanikolaou, Dimitris, Schmidt, Lawrence D.W., 2024. 
Winners  and  losers:  Competition,  creative  destruction,  and  labor  income  risk. 
Working Paper.

Grossman, Sanford J., Shiller, Robert J., 1982. Consumption correlatedness and risk 
measurement in economies with non-traded assets and heterogeneous information. 
J. Financ. Econ. 10 (2), 195–210.

Guvenen, Fatih, Kaplan, Greg, Song, Jae, 2014a. How risky are recessions for top 

earners? Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (5), 148–153.

Guvenen, Fatih, Karahan, Fatih, Ozkan, Serdar, Song, Jae, 2021. What do data on 
millions of US workers reveal about lifecycle earnings dynamics? Econometrica 89 
(5), 2303–2339.

Guvenen, Fatih, Ozkan, Serdar, Song, Jae, 2014b. The nature of countercyclical income 

risk. J. Political Econ. 122 (3), 621–660.

24, 1–45.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Hall, Robert E., 1988. Intertemporal substitution in consumption. J. Political Econ. 96 

Hall, Robert E., 2017. High discounts and high unemployment. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 

(2), 339–357.

(2), 305–330.

Heaton, John, Lucas, Deborah J., 1996. Evaluating the effects of incomplete markets 

on risk sharing and asset pricing. J. Political Econ. 104 (3), 443–487.

Heaton, John, Lucas, Deborah, 2000. Portfolio choice and asset prices: The importance 

of entrepreneurial risk. J. Financ. 55, 1163–1198.

Heaton, John, Lucas, Deborah, 2008. Can heterogeneity, undiversified risk, and trading 
frictions solve the equity premium puzzle? In: M. Rajnish: Handbook of the Equity 
Risk Premium. San Diego: Elsevier, pp. 535–557.

Herskovic, Bernard, Kelly, Bryan, Lustig, Hanno, Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, 2016. The 
common factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications. 
J. Financ. Econ. 119 (2), 249–283.

Ilut, Cosmin, Kehrig, Matthias, Schneider, Martin, 2018. Slow to hire, quick to fire: 
Employment dynamics with asymmetric responses to news. J. Political Econ. 126 
(5), 2011–2071.

Kehoe, Patrick J., Lopez, Pierlauro, Midrigan, Virgiliu, Pastorino, Elena, 2022. Asset 
prices and unemployment fluctuations: A resolution of the unemployment volatility 
puzzle. Rev. Econ. Stud. 90 (3), 1304–1357, rdac048.

Kehoe, Patrick J., Lopez, Pierlauro, Midrigan, Virgiliu, Pastorino, Elena, 2023. Asset 

prices and unemployment fluctuations. Rev. Econ. Stud. 90 (3).

Kehoe, Patrick J., Midrigan, Virgiliu, Pastorino, Elena, 2019. Debt constraints and 

employment. J. Political Econ. 127 (4), 1926–1991.

Kelly, Bryan, Pruitt, Seth, 2015. The three-pass regression filter: A new approach to 

forecasting using many predictors. J. Econometrics 186 (2), 294–316.

Kilic, Mete, Wachter, Jessica A., 2018. Risk, unemployment, and the stock market: A 
rare-event-based explanation of labor market volatility. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (12), 
4762–4814.

Kogan, Leonid, Papanikolaou, Dimitris, Stoffman, Noah, 2020. Left behind: Creative 
destruction, inequality, and the stock market. J. Political Econ. 128 (3), 855–906.
Krueger, Dirk, Lustig, Hanno, 2010. When is market incompleteness irrelevant for the 
price of aggregate risk (and when is it not)? J. Econom. Theory 145 (1), 1–41.
Lettau, Martin, 2002. Idiosyncratic risk and volatility bounds, or can models with 
idiosyncratic  risk  solve  the  equity  premium  puzzle?  Rev.  Econ.  Stat.  84  (2), 
376–380.

Lucas,  Robert  E.,  1978.  Asset  prices  in  an  exchange  economy.  Econometrica  46, 

1429–1445.

Lucas,  Deborah,  1994.  Asset  pricing  with  undiversifiable  income  risk  and  short 
sales constraints: Deepening the equity premium puzzle. J. Monet. Econ. 34 (3), 
325–341.

Malloy,  Christopher  J.,  Moskowitz,  Tobias  J.,  Vissing-Jorgensen,  Annette,  2009. 
Long-run stockholder consumption risk and asset returns. J. Financ. 64, 2427–2479.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1986. The equity premium and the concentration of aggregate 

Meeuwis, Maarten, 2022. Wealth fluctuations and risk preferences: Evidence from U.S. 

shocks. J. Financ. Econ. 17, 211–219.

investor portfolios. Work. Pap..

Meeuwis,  Maarten, 

L., 
Schmidt,  Lawrence  D.W.,  2025.  Time-varying  risk  premia  and  heterogeneous 
labor market dynamics. Work. Pap..

Papanikolaou,  Dimitris, 

Rothbaum, 

Jonathan 

Meghir, Costas, Pistaferri, Luigi, 2011. Chapter 9 - earnings, consumption and life 
cycle choices. In: Card, David, Ashenfelter, Orley (Eds.), In: Handbook of Labor 
Economics, vol. 4, Elsevier, pp. 773–854.

Mitra, Indrajit, Xu, Yu, 2020. Time-varying risk premium and unemployment risk across 

age groups. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (8), 3624–3673.

Mitra, Indrajt, Xu, Yu, 2024. A theory of the term structure of interest rates under 

limited household risk sharing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 37 (8), 2461–2509.

Mogstad, Magne, Schmidt, Lawrence, Schwartz, Mariel, Tiurina, Maria, Vestad, Ola, 
Von Turkovich, Nick, 2024. Background risk, self-insurance, and asset demand at 
the top of the wealth distribution. Manuscr. Prep..

Moskowitz, Tobias J., Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002. The returns to entrepreneurial 
investment: A private equity premium puzzle? Am. Econ. Rev. 92, 745–778.
Olsen, Anya, Hudson, Russell, 2009. Social security administration’s master earnings 

file: Background information. Soc. Sec. Bull. 69, 29.

Panageas, Stavros, 2020. The implications of heterogeneity and inequality for asset 

pricing. Found. Trends Financ. 12 (3), 199–275.

Parker, Jonathan A., Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2010. The increase in income cycli-
cality of high-income households and its relation to the rise in top income shares. 
Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 2010, 1–55.

Pettenuzzo, Davide, Sabbatucci, Riccardo, Timmermann, Allan, 2020. Cash flow news 

and stock price dynamics. J. Financ. 75 (4), 2221–2270.

Pflueger,  Carolin,  Siriwardane,  Emil,  Sunderam,  Adi,  2020.  Financial  market  risk 

perceptions and the macroeconomy. Q. J. Econ. 135 (3), 1443–1491.

Rapach, David E., Strauss, Jack K., Zhou, Guofu, 2010. Out-of-sample equity premium 
prediction: Combination forecasts and links to the real economy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 
23, 821–862.

Rietz, T.A., 1988. The equity risk premium - A solution. J. Monet. Econ. 22, 117–131.
Salgado, Sergio, Guvenen, Fatih, Bloom, Nicholas, 2023. Skewed business cycles. Work. 

Pap..

18 

L.D.W. Schmidt

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104131 

Schorfheide, Frank, Song, Dongho, Yaron, Amir, 2018. Identifying long-run risks: A 

Toda, Alexis Akira, 2014. Incomplete market dynamics and cross-sectional distributions. 

Bayesian mixed-frequency approach. Econometrica 86 (2), 617–654.

J. Econom. Theory 154, 310–348.

Storesletten, Kjetil, Telmer, Chris, Yaron, Amir, 2004. Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic 

Toda, Alexis Akira, 2015. Asset prices and efficiency in a Krebs economy. Rev. Econ. 

labor market risk. J. Political Econ. 112 (3), 695–717.

Storesletten,  Kjetil,  Telmer,  Christopher,  Yaron,  Amir,  2007.  Asset  pricing  with 
idiosyncratic risk and overlapping generations. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 10, 519–548.
Timmermann, Allan, 2006. Chapter 4 - forecast combinations. Handbook of Economic 

Forecasting, vol. 1, Elsevier, pp. 135–196, 

Dyn. 18 (4), 957–978.

Wachter, Jessica A., 2013. Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate 

stock market volatility? J. Financ. 68 (3), 987–1035.

Weil, Philippe, 1989. The equity premium puzzle and the risk-free rate puzzle. J. Monet. 

Econ. 24, 401–421.

19 

