Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Defunding controversial industries: Can targeted credit rationing choke 
firms?(cid:73)
Kunal Sachdeva a
a University of Michigan, Stephen M. Ross School of Business, 701 Tappan Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
b Federal Reserve Board, 20th St. & Constitution Ave NW, Washington, DC 20551, USA
c University of Maryland, R.H. Smith School of Business, 4427 Van Munching Hall, College Park, MD 20742, USA
d University of Rochester, Simon Business School, 300 Wilson Blvd, Rochester, NY 14620, USA

, André F. Silva b, Pablo Slutzky c

,∗, Billy Y. Xu d

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

This paper examines the effects of targeted credit rationing by banks on firms likely to generate negative 
externalities. We exploit an initiative of the U.S. Department of Justice, labeled Operation Choke Point, which 
compelled banks to limit relationships with firms in controversial industries. Using supervisory loan-level data, 
we show that, as intended, targeted banks reduced lending and terminated relationships with affected firms. 
However, most of these firms fully substituted credit through nontargeted banks under similar terms. Overall, 
we find no significant shifts in the performance and investment of affected firms, suggesting that targeted 
credit rationing is widely ineffective in promoting change.

Dataset link: Defunding Controversial Industries
- Code (Original data)

JEL classification:
G21
G28
G30
G32
G38

Keywords:
Targeted credit rationing
Firm–bank relationships
Controversial industries

1. Introduction

Stakeholders are increasingly seeking to hold companies account-
able for their negative societal externalities. A commonly used method 
has  been  the  active  divestment  of  equity,  where  investors  sell  off 
the stocks of firms perceived as socially irresponsible to raise firms’ 
cost of capital and pressure them to address the externalities. While 
this strategy has become popular, recent research has shown that it 
has limited effectiveness. In particular, equity divestments are mostly 
restricted to listed firms and may result in the loss of investor influence 

within a company (Broccardo et al., 2022; Edmans et al., 2024). Equity 
divestments can also stifle innovation (Cohen et al., 2024) and targeted 
firms may respond by offshoring or divesting parts of their controversial 
businesses (Ben-David et al., 2021; Duchin et al., 2025). Finally, the 
limited capital behind these efforts restricts their impact (Berk and van 
Binsbergen, 2025) and can even be counterproductive (Hartzmark and 
Shue, 2023).

In response to these limitations, stakeholders have turned to alter-
native strategies, including targeting access to bank credit for firms 

(cid:73)

We thank the editor, Philipp Schnabl, an anonymous referee, Salem Abo-Zaid (discussant), Thorsten Beck, Aymeric Bellon, Andrew Bird (discussant), Alex 
Butler, Charles Calomiris, Tony Cookson, Sergio Correia, Alan Crane, Kevin Crotty, Ralph De Haas, Joseph Kalmenovitz, Michael Faulkender, Mariassunta Giannetti 
(discussant), Stefano Giglio, Todd Gormley, Daniel Green (discussant), Ron Kaniel, Elena Loutskina (discussant), Max Maksimovic, Camelia Minoiu, Thomas Mosk 
(discussant), Karsten Muller, S. Lakshmi Naaraayanan, José-Luis Peydró (discussant), Alexander Popov, Robert Prilmeier (discussant), Bernd Schwaab (discussant), 
Janis Skrastins (discussant), Jessie Wang, Mitch Warachka (discussant), James Weston, Allan Wright (discussant), and Edison Yu (discussant) for their extremely 
helpful comments. We are also grateful to conference and seminar participants at the AFA Annual Meeting, SFS Cavalcade, EFA Annual Meeting, FIRS Conference, 
MoFiR Workshop on Banking, University of Kentucky Finance Conference, Lubrafin Meeting, University of Sydney, National University of Singapore, International 
Research Conference on Empirical Approaches to Anti-Money Laundering and Financial Crime, Loyola Financial Ethics Conference, Midwest Finance Association 
Annual Meeting, OCC Symposium on Emerging Risks in the Banking System, IBEFA Summer Meeting, Boca-ECGI Corporate Finance and Governance Conference, 
European University Institute, Baylor University, University of Michigan, Federal Reserve Board, University of Maryland, and Rice University. The views expressed 
in this paper solely reflect those of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or 
other members of its staff.
∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:  pslutzky@umd.edu (P. Slutzky).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104133
Received 2 January 2024; Received in revised form 24 June 2025; Accepted 29 June 2025
Available online 16 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

believed to be socially controversial. This approach, known as targeted 
credit rationing, has gained appeal in recent years due to its ability to 
impact both publicly traded and privately held firms, capitalizing on 
the persistent nature of firm–bank relationships. Unlike equity divest-
ments, such policies have the potential to influence a broader set of 
firms by directly affecting their access to credit. However, given the 
potential countermeasures that affected firms may take, little is known 
about the overall effectiveness of targeted credit rationing. In this pa-
per, we show that while the intended effects of targeted credit rationing 
on lending relationships are realized, this practice does not impact most 
firms’ overall credit availability, performance, or investment, indicating 
its potential limitations as a tool for promoting change.

The main challenge of studying targeted credit rationing is that a 
bank’s decision to extend credit depends not only on a firm’s past, 
current, and expected financial performance, but also on the bank’s 
nonfinancial  preferences,  such  as  ideological  considerations,  which 
may vary over time. Our paper addresses this issue by studying Opera-
tion Choke Point (OCP), a major initiative led by the U.S. Department of 
Justice (DOJ) which compelled a subset of banks to limit relationships 
with firms in certain industries that operated legally but were deemed 
socially controversial—including ammunition and firearms, tobacco, 
dating and escort services, pornography, and online gambling. This 
setting provides a near-ideal quasi-random experiment to study the 
causal effects of targeted credit rationing on firms’ operations. First, 
the operation was a large and credible shock to banks, as the DOJ 
threatened significant sanctions for noncompliant banks. Second, ac-
cording to court documents, the targeting of banks was not based on 
lending volumes to firms in targeted industries, a claim we confirm in 
an analysis that additionally finds no relation between the targeting of 
banks and several bank and firm characteristics, mitigating concerns 
surrounding a potential selection bias. Third, given that the operation 
impacted a subset of banks at different times, we can identify its effects 
by exploiting its staggered implementation in a dynamic difference-in-
differences setting. Finally, given that OCP was not a blanket ban on 
lending to the industries in question, it allows us to examine whether 
the actions of a single bank or a subset of banks can influence the 
operations of firms in particular industries.

To provide an in-depth analysis of the credit supply and real effects 
of targeted credit rationing, we employ confidential, quarterly loan-
level data for the U.S. from the Federal Reserve’s Y-14Q corporate loan 
schedule. This matched firm–bank supervisory credit register dataset 
covers corporate loans with commitment amounts over $1 million for 
banks with at least $50 billion in total assets, along with firm-level 
characteristics for both publicly-listed and private corporations.

Our study is organized into three parts. First, we show that banks 
targeted by OCP reduced their committed credit to firms in affected 
industries. This credit contraction was concentrated among small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which experienced a 10 percent re-
duction in committed credit. We find no changes in the share of drawn 
credit, implying a lower volume of credit utilized by SMEs. This effect 
is similar across SMEs with different levels of profitability, liquidity, 
and leverage prior to the shock. In contrast, we find that the level of 
committed credit and the share of drawn credit did not change for large 
firms — also irrespective of their profitability, liquidity, or leverage — 
suggesting that firm size was a key driver of banks’ decisions to cut 
lending.

These baseline results are robust to a battery of tests. First, we add 
firm–time fixed effects and thus focus on firms with relationships with 
multiple banks to better control for credit demand and the nonrandom 
matching between firms and banks (Khwaja and Mian, 2008). Second, 
we balance the panel data in a Poisson specification to examine the 
intensive and extensive margins, combined, while accounting for the 
issues involving an outcome variable that is positive but can often 
equal zero (Cohn et al., 2022; Correia et al., 2020; Chen and Roth, 
2024). Third, we use a stacked regression specification to address the 
potential biases in staggered difference-in-differences settings (Gormley 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

and Matsa, 2011, 2016; Baker et al., 2022b). We also conduct several 
falsification tests, such as considering unaffected industries, unaffected 
cash-intensive industries, and random treatment dates. Overall, we find 
consistent evidence that targeted banks reduced lending to firms in 
industries affected by the operation.

We  also  examine  how  the  initiative  affected  the  termination  of 
existing firm–bank relationships and the creation of new banking re-
lationships. We show that affected firms experience an increase in the 
frequency at which their relationships with targeted banks are termi-
nated, reinforcing our evidence that banks responded to regulatory 
pressure. In contrast, the existing relationships with nontargeted banks 
were preserved. When considering relationship creation, we find that 
affected firms responded by initiating new relationships with nontar-
geted banks and, consistent with the intent of the policy, that these 
firms did not initiate new relationships with already targeted banks.

Finally, we focus on affected firms’ aggregate access to credit, per-
formance, and investment, comprehensively assessing the initiative’s 
overall  impact.  We  find  that  there  were  no  statistically  significant 
changes in the aggregate level of credit following the initiative for the 
average affected firm. Nonetheless, when focusing on heterogeneous 
treatment  effects,  we  show  that  large  profitable  firms  managed  to 
increase  their  level  of  committed  credit,  suggesting  that  they  were 
hedging against future potential terminations. In contrast, highly lev-
ered SMEs experienced a modest reduction in committed credit. These 
results indicate that targeted credit rationing driven by OCP did not 
reduce overall credit for most firms, except for a small subset, making 
the  policy  broadly  ineffective.  Similarly,  we  find  no  impact  of  the 
operation on firms’ leverage, profitability, or investment. Together, our 
results indicate that targeted credit rationing is largely ineffective at 
imposing costs on firms in controversial industries.1

This paper contributes to several branches of literature. First, it con-
tributes to the broad and flourishing literature on responsible investing, 
which focuses on affecting change through divestment, negative selec-
tion, and investors’ attempts to discipline firms by raising their cost of 
capital.2 While these approaches are gaining popularity, several studies 
have identified shortcomings. For instance, Oehmke and Opp (2025) 
show that divestment only works if responsible investors are affected 
by externalities and coordinate, while (Broccardo et al., 2022) find that 
divestment reduces the ability to voice preferences. Another restricting 
factor is that these actions are mostly limited to publicly listed firms, 
leaving private firms largely unscathed. Instead, we examine the ef-
fectiveness of an alternative approach at the center of policymakers’ 
current discussions.

Second, our paper contributes to the literature on targeted credit 
rationing by focusing on an exogenous shock to study the causal effects 
of an externally driven targeted credit rationing program. This quasi-
random intervention allows us to answer the following question: can 
a single bank or a subset of banks effectively influence the operations 
of firms in particular industries such as those that potentially generate 
negative externalities? Our results show that OCP had an impact on 
bank lending to firms in affected industries at the intensive margin, 
but these firms substituted their relationships between targeted and 

1 While research in different contexts has documented the pivotal role of 
bank–firm relationships in influencing a firm’s access to credit, particularly for 
smaller firms (e.g., Beck et al., 2005, 2018), we find that the substitution was 
relatively seamless during a benign noncrisis period. This result holds for the 
majority of firms with loan commitments above $1 million, with the exception 
of highly levered SMEs, offering insights into the role of relationships when 
banks actively terminate accounts with firms in specific industries.

2 Empirical  evidence  includes  Teoh  et  al.  (1999)  and  Becht  et  al. 
(2025).  Theoretical  studies  of  impact  investing  include  Hart  and  Zingales 
(2017), Chowdhry et al. (2019), and Berk and van Binsbergen (2025).

2 

K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

nontargeted banks, offsetting the initiative’s effect.3 Overall, we find 
consistent evidence of no impact on the operations of firms.4

Our paper also complements a distinct but related literature cen-
tered  on  internally  driven  credit  rationing,  where  banks  themselves 
may  change  their  credit  policies  due  to,  for  instance,  environmen-
tal  concerns.  This  literature  has  provided  mixed  evidence.  On  the 
one hand, Green and Vallee (2025) find that banks with more strin-
gent environmental policies divest from the coal sector and that firms 
cannot fully substitute credit, experiencing significant operational con-
sequences. Relatedly, Kacperczyk and Peydró (2024) show that bank 
participation in the Science-Based Targets Initiative reduces borrowers’ 
ability to secure funds but does not significantly affect environmental 
outcomes. On the other hand, Haushalter et al. (2023) find that banks 
occasionally fail to adhere to their own policies on exiting mountaintop 
mining, leading to inconclusive effects on targeted companies. Simi-
larly, Giannetti et al. (2024) and Sastry et al. (2024) show that banks 
often do not divest from high-emission firms following environmental 
disclosures or net zero commitments.5 In contrast, we study the effects 
of credit rationing in response to an exogenous, externally driven shock 
that forces a subset of banks to terminate or limit relationships with 
specific firms, thereby mitigating concerns about selection. Moreover, 
the firms affected by OCP do not operate in high-polluting industries, 
which limits their ability to adjust their businesses to address investor 
concerns. Our results suggest a substitution of credit for borrowing 
firms following this exogenous shock. Together, these papers expand 
the understanding of the effectiveness of credit rationing.

Finally, this paper contributes to the broader literature examining 
the role of financial markets and intermediaries in driving environmen-
tal and social change. While research in this area has grown, much of 
it has focused on climate finance, examining how financial markets 
incorporate changes in preferences for climate change risks (Bolton 
and Kacperczyk, 2021) and beliefs (Baldauf et al., 2020; Stroebel and 
Wurgler, 2021), and how this is likely reflected in asset prices.6 In 
the context of credit markets, the literature has primarily concentrated 
on green bonds (Baker et al., 2022a; Flammer, 2021). Instead, our 
paper examines targeted credit rationing by exploring the implications 
of negative selection in bank-intermediated credit markets driven by 
ideological beliefs.7

3 Unlike Aiyar et al. (2014) and Kim et al. (2018), who examine macropru-
dential policies’ effects on banks and spillovers, our study focuses on direct 
impacts on firm operations. We also differ from Agca et al. (2023), who exploit 
changes to AML enforcement to study the effect of a shift in the banking sector 
composition on lending to small firms and households.

4 In a counterfactual scenario in which all regulated banks were simultane-
ously targeted, it is unclear whether we would have a different overall result, 
given the increasing importance of nonbank lending in recent years (e.g., Gopal 
and Schnabl, 2022; Chernenko et al., 2022) and potential substitute lending 
by foreign banks.

5 Bellon (2024) delves into the connection between lender liability and 
debtor behavior in environmental compliance, while (Laeven and Popov, 2023) 
explore how bank lending to foreign companies shifts with the introduction of 
carbon taxes. Alternative approaches are taken by Ivanov et al. (2024), who 
investigate the effect of carbon pricing policy on bank credit to greenhouse 
gas emitting firms, while (Miguel et al., 2024) study the impact of climate 
risk-related capital requirements on Brazilian banks.

6 Theoretical  papers  include  Pedersen  et  al.  (2021)  and  Pástor  et  al. 
(2021). Empirical evidence includes Pástor et al. (2022), Engle et al. (2020), 
and Bolton and Kacperczyk (2023).

7 Research addressing socially controversial issues and the impact of fi-
nancial intermediaries has examined different aspects. For instance, one line 
of research studies state government bans that exclude pro-social financial 
institutions from underwriting municipal bonds (Garrett and Ivanov, 2025). 
Separately, Berger and Seegert (2024) study how limitations on access to cash 
management services from financial intermediaries affect the profitability of 
firms in the marijuana industry. However, unlike these and other studies, our 
research centers on the effects of credit rationing directed at legal but socially 

2. Institutional background: Operation Choke Point

2.1. Timeline

OCP was a highly debated initiative led by the DOJ, in collabora-
tion with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), aimed at 
discouraging banks from providing financial services to firms in legal 
industries that were deemed socially controversial.8 In this section, we 
outline the timeline of OCP, discuss the affected firms and banks, and 
provide key institutional details, as summarized in Table A.1 of the 
Online Appendix.

In November 2012, attorneys within the DOJ’s Civil Division pro-
posed an internal initiative called Operation Choke Point, recognizing 
that the DOJ could potentially influence bank behavior through the 
threat of subpoenas and regulatory actions.9 For instance, an internal 
memo between DOJ employees, dated November 5, 2012, noted that 
‘‘banks [were] sensitive to the risk of civil and/or criminal liability 
and regulatory actions’’.10 The DOJ and the FDIC seemingly employed 
various methods, including regulatory threats and legal intimidation, 
to try to influence bank behavior (Figure A.1 of the Online Appendix).
Early  in  2013,  the  DOJ  began  issuing  subpoenas  to  banks  and 
payment  processors,  effectively  compelling  banks  to  restrict  certain 
merchants’ access to finance. These subpoenas were guided by a list of 
high-risk merchants, a list originally included in the FDIC’s publication 
of a Supervisory Insights article, ‘‘Managing Risks in Third-Party Pay-
ment Processor Relationships’’. This article warned of heightened risks 
for financial institutions engaged in services with certain industries, but 
was originally intended to serve as informal and educational guidance 
and had no direct policy implications.11 Indeed, the FDIC’s high-risk list 
was created in 2011, well before OCP was operationalized in 2013 and 
its creation was entirely unrelated to OCP itself.

While OCP was not an official law or regulation, banks perceived 
it as a credible threat, with the FDIC’s role and involvement in OCP 
raising concerns of ‘‘regulatory threats, undue pressure, coercion, and 
intimidation’’ (Figure A.1 of the Online Appendix). Under pressure, tar-
geted banks began terminating services and reducing lending to firms 
in  certain  industries  in  early  2013  (Calomiris,  2017).  Documentary 
and testimonial evidence produced during government investigations 
and lawsuits suggests that the initiative was seemingly unrelated to 
the underlying credit risk of the targeted industries (for example, see 
Figures A.1 and A.2 of the Online Appendix).

The program first came to public attention through an article in
The Wall Street Journal in August 2013 and, subsequently, members of 
Congress submitted a letter to the FDIC chairman and the U.S. attorney 
general  expressing  their  concerns  about  the  pressure  the  DOJ  was 
exerting to terminate lawful lending relationships. In December 2014, 
the U.S. House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform issued 

controversial industries. While not posing systemic financial risks, these firms 
often face social stigma unrelated to traditional risk factors considered in 
pricing models.

8 For example, see Letter from the Office of the Assistant Attorney General 
to  Honorable  Bob  Goodlatte,  Chairman  of  U.S.  House  Committee  on  the 
Judiciary  (August  16,  2017);  and  Office  of  Inspector  General,  The  FDIC’s 
Role  in  Operation  Choke  Point  and  Supervisory  Approach  to  Institutions 
that Conducted Business with Merchants Associated with High-Risk Activities 
(Office of Audits and Evaluations Report No. AUD-15-008, September 2015).
9 For example, see ‘‘Memorandum: Operation Choke Point’’, sent from Joel 
M. Sweet, assistant U.S. attorney, to Stuart F. Delery, acting assistant attorney 
general, U.S. Department of Justice Civil Division, dated November 5, 2012 
(HOGR-3PPP000017-21).
10 Operation Choke Point: Hearing before the Subcommittee on Oversight 
and Investigations, dated July 15, 2014.
11 Committee  on  Oversight  and  Government  Reform  Staff  Report,  dated 
December 8, 2014, ‘‘Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s Involvement in 
‘Operation Choke Point’.’’

3 

K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

a report titled Operation Choke Point (Calomiris, 2017). Growing public 
disapproval and government hearings led to the operation’s termination 
in August 2017.

expert report indicates that firms such as firearms and ammunition 
dealers were also affected by the initiative (Figure A.3 of the Online 
Appendix).16 For instance, as discussed by Calomiris (2017):

2.2. Objective and scope

The  intent  behind  OCP  has  been  debated  in  lawsuits  and  Con-
gressional hearings.12 While the official reason for OCP is linked to 
regulatory concerns regarding increased risk of fraud among certain 
merchants, documentary evidence suggests that OCP may have been 
motivated by reasons ‘‘entirely outside of FDIC’s mandate’’ (Calomiris 
(2017) and Figure A.1 of the Online Appendix). For instance, a 2014 
House Committee Staff Report noted the following:

In a particularly egregious example, a senior official in the Division 
of  Depositor  and  Consumer  Protection  insisted  that  FDIC  Chairman 
Martin Gruenberg’s letters to Congress and talking points always mention 
pornography when discussing payday lenders and other industries, in an 
effort to convey a ‘‘good picture regarding the unsavory nature of the 
businesses at issue’’.13

The firms affected by OCP were those on a list of high-risk mer-
chants, which included industries such as ammunition and firearms, to-
bacco, dating and escort services, pornography, and online gambling—
see Table A.2 of the Online Appendix for a complete list. The article 
listing  merchant  types  warned  of  heightened  reputational  risks  for 
financial  institutions  engaging  with  certain  industries  due  to  those 
industries’ potentially ‘‘questionable or fraudulent’’ nature.

Notably, OCP appeared to affect a random subset of banks, with 
no discernible evidence that the initiative had a systematic method for 
targeting financial institutions. Anecdotally, the indiscriminate nature 
of the targeting is highlighted in a report by the Office of Inspector 
General, which found ‘‘no evidence that the FDIC used the high-risk list 
to target financial institutions’’.14 This lack of clear criteria introduced a 
degree of arbitrariness into the initiative’s implementation, which this 
paper exploits in a staggered difference-in-differences setup to establish 
causality.

The  scope  of  the  initiative  had  broad  implications.  Indeed,  al-
though payday lenders were one of the main targets of OCP (Zywicki, 
2015; Stevenson, 2022), the effects of the initiative on other high risk 
merchants were also a subject of concern for Congress.15 Indeed, an 

12 See, for example, Second Declaration of Dennis Shaul in the matter of 
Community Financial Services Association of America, Ltd., et al. v. Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, et al. (Civil Action No. 14-953-GK); Committee 
on Oversight and Government Reform Staff Report, dated December 8, 2014, 
‘‘Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s Involvement in ‘Operation Choke 
Point’’’; Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of 
the U.S. House Committee of Financial Services, dated July 15, 2014, ‘‘The 
Department of Justice’s ‘Operation Choke Point’’’; and Hearing Before the 
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the U.S. House Committee 
of Financial Services, dated March 24, 2015, ‘‘The Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation’s Role in Operation Choke Point’’.
13 Committee  on  Oversight  and  Government  Reform  Staff  Report,  dated 
December 8, 2014, ‘‘Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s Involvement in 
‘Operation Choke Point’’’.
14 Office of Inspector General Report, dated September 2015, ‘‘The FDIC’s 
Role in Operation Choke Point and Supervisory Approach to Institutions that 
Conducted Business with Merchants Associated with High-Risk Activities’’.
15 For example, see U.S. House Committee on Oversight and Government 
Reform, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s Involvement in Operation 
Choke Point (Staff Report 113th Congress, December 2014). Baugh (2016) 
exploited  this  initiative  to  analyze  the  effect  of  limiting  credit  to  online 
payday lenders on households’ consumption and borrowing patterns, using 
data from an aggregator of financial transactions. In addition to the different 
research questions explored in this paper, we focus exclusively on nonfinancial 
firms since, as observed in our data, there are relatively few payday lenders 
borrowing from regulated banks with at least $50 billion in total assets.

The experience of one entry on the list — firearms and ammunitions 
merchants — effectively traces the downstream influence of the high-
risk merchants list. MOUs between supervised banks and FDIC Regional 
Offices, as well as bank policies submitted pursuant to FDIC Consent 
Orders, variously ‘‘prohibit’’ payment processing for firearms merchants, 
characterize loans to firearms dealers as ‘‘undesirable’’, and generally 
subject firearms and ammunitions merchants to significantly higher due 
diligence standards.17

Overall, while OCP was a controversial initiative, it provides a near-
ideal setting to study the effects of targeted credit rationing. In the next 
section, we discuss the data and target selection model.

3. Data and target selection

3.1. Federal reserve Y-14Q data

Our main data source is confidential quarterly loan-level data for 
the U.S. obtained from the corporate loan schedule H.1 of the Federal 
Reserve’s Y-14Q.18 These data have been collected to support the Dodd–
Frank  Act’s  stress  tests  and  assess  bank  capital  adequacy  for  large 
banks. The credit register provides information on credit exposures 
with commitment amounts exceeding $1 million for banks with at least 
$50 billion in total assets.19 These loans account for around 75% of 
all commercial and industrial lending volume during the period we 
analyze.20 In addition to the amount of committed credit for each firm–
bank pair, the dataset contains information on drawn amounts on credit 
lines, amounts past due, interest rate spreads, and maturities. It also 
provides information on each bank’s internal assessment of the default 
probability of a given firm, among other details. Finally, the dataset 
includes firm-level information such as total assets, net income, cash 
holdings, total debt, and capital expenditures.

We supplement this data with financial information at the bank 
holding company level from publicly available FR Y-9C reports, in-
cluding consolidated quarterly balance sheets, income statements, and 
detailed supporting schedules. Given that the Federal Reserve started 
collecting the Y-14Q data in the second quarter of 2012, we employ 
quarterly data spanning the period of the second quarter of 2012 to 
the second quarter of 2016.

Pivotal to our study, we also determine which banks were part 
of  Operation  Choke  Point  and  their  targeting  date.  We  accomplish 
this by manually reviewing publicly available government and legal 
documents. We present a timeline listing the targeted banks and the 
corresponding dates in Fig.  1.

16 See, for example, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Staff 
Report, dated December 8, 2014, ‘‘Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s 
Involvement in ‘Operation Choke Point’’ and Hearing Before the Subcommittee 
on Oversight and Investigations of the U.S. House Committee of Financial 
Services, dated March 24, 2015, ‘‘The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s 
Role in Operation Choke Point’’.
17 See Expert Report of Charles Calomiris, dated January 11, 2017, in the 
matter of Community Financial Services Association of America, Ltd., et al. v. 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, et al. (Civil Action No. 14-953-GK).
18 Recent studies using the Federal Reserve’s Y-14Q data include Brown et al. 
(2021), Chodorow-Reich et al. (2021), and Crosignani et al. (2023).
19 It is important to note that firms cannot avoid regulatory oversight by 
borrowing amounts below the $1 million threshold or from banks with total 
assets below $50 billion.
20 While we do not have information on this share for the subset of industries 
affected by OCP, using data on the universe of firms of similar size from the 
Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), we find that the Y-14Q 
data covers, on average, 73.6% of the number of firms within these industries.

4 

K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Fig. 1.  Timeline of targeting. This figure plots the timeline of the targeting of bank holding companies by the Department of Justice (DOJ) used in our paper.

Table 1
Summary statistics.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q.

  Panel A: Firm–Bank–Quarter
  Committed Credit
  Share of Drawn Credit

N
(1)

51,105
51,105

Mean
(2)

29.82
0.545

Median
(3)

5.981
0.604

SD  
(4)

90.07 
0.393 

  Panel B: Firm–Quarter
182.5 
  Committed Credit
0.386 
  Share of Drawn Credit
0.362 
  SME
0.362 
  Large Firm
0.308 
  Relationship Creation with Any Bank
0.214 
  Relationship Termination with Any Bank
0.254 
  Relationship Creation with Targeted Bank
0.154 
  Relationship Termination with Targeted Bank
0.194 
  Relationship Creation with Nontargeted Bank
0.155 
  Relationship Termination with Nontargeted Bank
0.248 
  Firm Debt to Assets
0.156 
  Firm Profitability
  Firm Investment
0.046 
This table reports summary statistics for the key variables in the firm–bank–quarter (Panel A) and firm–
quarter (Panel B) samples relating to lending by the 30 largest U.S banks to U.S. firms in industries 
affected by OCP. The table shows the number of observations (N), mean, median, and standard deviation 
(SD). The sample period is 2012:Q2 to 2016:Q2. Variable definitions are presented in Table A.3 of the 
Online Appendix.

41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891
41,891

3.867
0.767
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.260
0.063
0.000

36.38
0.637
0.845
0.155
0.106
0.048
0.069
0.024
0.039
0.025
0.298
0.095
0.022

We report key summary statistics for our main dataset focused on 
lending by U.S banks to firms in industries affected by OCP in Table 
1, with the variable definitions presented in Table A.3 of the Online 
Appendix. In Panel A, we provide details on the firm–bank–quarter 
sample, including information on committed credit and the share of 
drawn credit. For our analysis of the effect of the initiative on bank–
firm relationships and firm-level outcomes, we aggregate the informa-
tion at the firm–quarter level. Panel B summarizes this data, including 
firms’ financial information and summary statistics on the initiation and 
termination of bank relationships.

3.2. Targeted banks

Point’s targeting from expert witness testimonies and other supporting 
documents. As described above, we find administrative and regulatory 
documents  suggesting  that  the  selection  process  was  not  driven  by 
particular bank characteristics.

To test this claim, we collect information on targeted banks from 
documentary evidence produced during lawsuits, regulatory reports, 
internal  communications,  and  hearings.  In  particular,  the  empirical 
design in this paper is primarily based on expert witness testimony 
from Calomiris (2017), which identifies targeted banks and some of 
the first known dates in which those banks allegedly began terminating 
credit to firms in high-risk industries’ while under the influence of 
Operation Choke Point.21 Although the exact list of banks targeted by 

To  analyze  the  effect  of  credit  rationing  on  targeted  industries, 
a key issue is to understand the criteria employed by regulators to 
target banks, as this consideration can potentially introduce bias in 
our estimations. To this end, we analyze data on Operation Choke 

21 The affected firms engaged in legal disputes with banks in Calomiris 
(2017) were payday lenders, who were among the most vocal in addressing 
banking practices that they perceived as unfair.

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Table 2
Ex-Ante characteristics, targeted vs. nontargeted banks.
Data sources: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

Targeted
Banks
(1)

Nontargeted
Banks
(2)

Difference 
𝑡-stat
(3)

  Bank Size
  Bank Capital
  Bank Liquidity
  Bank Profitability
  Bank Share of Lending to Targeted Industries
  Bank Share of Relationships in Targeted Industries
  Profitability of Firms in a Bank’s Portfolio
  Liquidity of Firms in a Bank’s Portfolio
  Leverage of Firms in a Bank’s Portfolio
  PD of Firms in Bank’s Portfolio
  PD of Firms in Affected Industries in Bank’s Portfolio
This table compares pre-period characteristics of targeted banks (n=11) vs. nontargeted banks (𝑛 = 19) i.e., 
as of 2012:Q2. Variable definitions are presented in Table A.3 of the Online Appendix. ***, **, * denote 
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

0.231
0.984
0.289
0.115
0.416
0.875
0.682
0.330
0.996
0.706
0.678

19.04
0.086
0.345
0.004
0.062
0.060
0.043
0.075
0.311
0.015
0.018

19.58
0.085
0.278
0.007
0.071
0.061
0.045
0.106
0.311
0.016
0.020

the DOJ is redacted,22 we find corroborating evidence regarding the 
involvement of these lenders in other documents.23

We  formally  examine  Operation  Choke  Point’s  selection  criteria 
by comparing pre-period characteristics of targeted and nontargeted 
banks.  Specifically,  in  Table   2  we  compare  banks’  financial  mea-
sures  including  lenders’  size,  capital,  liquidity,  and  profitability  as 
of  2012:Q2—that  is,  prior  to  the  targeting  of  the  first  bank.  We 
further consider whether there are differences between targeted and 
nontargeted banks’ shares of lending to targeted industries, both in 
terms  of  volume  and  number  of  relationships  with  firms  in  those 
industries.  Finally,  we  compare  the  average  profitability  as  well  as 
the  average  liquidity,  leverage,  and  assessed  probability  of  default 
of the firms in the banks’ portfolios. Overall, we find that targeted 
and nontargeted banks do not differ significantly in any commonly 
observable characteristic.

3.3. Affected firms

We identify firms that were targeted by the DOJ using as a baseline 
the list of targeted sub-industries identified by the FDIC and listed 
in  the  expert  witness  report  (Calomiris,  2017).  Using  this  list,  we 
manually search for the NAICS codes corresponding to the targeted 
industries on the NAICS Association website. For each industry, we 
conduct  keyword  searches,  summarized  in  Table  A.4  of  the  Online 
Appendix,  to  obtain  the  associated  six-digit  industry  NAICS  codes. 
Given the potential illegality of certain targeted industries, we exclude 
firms in industries such as cable box de-scramblers, credit card schemes, 
debt consolidation scams, get rich products, government grants, home-
based charities, life-time guarantees and memberships, money transfer 
networks, Ponzi schemes, racist materials, and travel clubs. In addition, 
we remove financial firms which, in the context of our paper, implies 
excluding the relatively few payday lenders borrowing from regulated 
banks with at least $50 billion in total assets. Our final dataset contains 
5,670 affected firms, 595 of which are publicly listed.

4. Bank-level analysis

We start our analysis by examining whether Operation Choke Point 
affected  lending  to  firms  in  affected  industries  by  targeted  banks, 
relative to lending by nontargeted banks.

4.1. Empirical specification

Our baseline specification is a staggered difference-in-differences 
model, exploiting the fact that firms that operated in the same industry 
and location borrowed from banks that were targeted at different points 
in time or were never targeted. Specifically, we estimate: 

𝑌𝑓 ,𝑖,𝑏,𝑡 = 𝛽1 𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑃 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑡 + 𝑋𝑏,𝑡𝛾 + 𝛿𝑏 + 𝛿𝑓 + 𝛿𝑡,𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 + 𝜀𝑓 ,𝑖,𝑏,𝑡, (1)

where 𝑌𝑓 ,𝑖,𝑏,𝑡 is one of our outcomes of interest (e.g., total committed 
credit, share of drawn credit, interest rate spread) for firm 𝑓 , operating 
in industry (six-digit NAICS code) 𝑖, borrowing from bank 𝑏 in quarter 
𝑡. Our baseline specification includes bank, 𝛿𝑏, and firm fixed effects, 
𝛿𝑓 , to control for time-invariant heterogeneity of both banks and firms. 
We include time–firm size–industry–state fixed effects, 𝛿𝑡,𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒, 
with  size  attributed  by  quartiles  to  control  for  time-varying  trends 
that affect firms of similar size operating in the same six-digit NAICS 
code and state. 𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑃 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑡 is an indicator variable at the bank level 
and is set to one following the targeting of the bank by Operation 
Choke Point. The vector 𝛾 includes time-varying bank controls, such 
as size, capital, liquidity, and profitability. In the baseline analysis, we 
focus on the sample of loans to firms in industries affected by OCP.24 
As such, the primary coefficient of interest, 𝛽1, captures the within 
bank–firm changes following the targeting of the bank by Operation 
Choke Point. Standard errors are double clustered at the bank and state
levels.25

22 See U.S. Department of Justice Civil Division Communication, titled ‘‘Pay-
ment Processor Investigation – Request for Issuance of Subpoenas to Payment 
Processors and Banks used to Process Fraudulent Payments’’, from Michael 
S. Blume, Consumer Protection Branch, to Stuart F. Delery, principal deputy 
assistant attorney general, dated February 8, 2013 (HOGR-3PPP000029-34).
23 See, for example, ‘‘Statement of Financial Service Centers of America To 
the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Financial Services Regarding 
The  Impact  of  Recent  Regulator  Supervisory  and  Enforcement  Actions  on 
Consumer Financial Services’’, dated April 8, 2014.

24 As a robustness test, we also consider a triple-interaction specification 
using cash-intensive industries and firms from the same three-digit NAICS code 
as a control group.
25 The  state  in  which  firms  are  located  impacts  the  regulation  of  their 
activities in some cases. For instance, in 2011, the Department of Justice 
changed the way the federal government interpreted the Wire Act of 1961, 
which criminalized and prohibited the operation of certain betting or wagering 
businesses,  such  as  online  gambling.  Over  the  following  years,  six  states 
legalized online casino games, one of the targeted industries in our analysis.

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Table 3
Impact of operation choke point on bank lending.
Data sources: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × SME𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓

Log(Committed credit)
(1)

(2)

−0.034***
(0.012)

−0.046***
(0.015)

(3)

−0.095***
(0.026)
0.020
(0.040)

Share of drawn credit
(4)

(5)

−0.001
(0.004)

0.001
(0.006)

(6)

0.001  
(0.009) 
0.001  
(0.012) 

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
51,105

  Firm FE
Y
  Bank FE
Y
  Time FE
–
  Time × Firm Size Quartiles × Industry × State FE
Y
  Bank Controls
Y
  Observations
51,105  
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on bank lending. The regression uses firm–bank–quarter-level data to compare lending 
between targeted and nontargeted banks, within the same industries affected by OCP. The dependent variables are the log of committed credit 
in columns (1)-(3) and the share of drawn credit in columns (4)–(6). Choke Point is an indicator variable at the bank level and is set to one 
following the targeting of the bank by OCP. Large Firm is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is greater 
than or equal to $250 million in 2012:Q2. SME is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is less than $250 
million in 2012:Q2. Bank controls include bank size, capital, liquidity, and profitability. Standard errors are double clustered at the bank and 
state levels.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
51,105

Y
Y
–
Y
Y
51,105

Y
Y
–
Y
Y
51,105

Y
Y
–
Y
Y
51,105

4.2. Effect of Operation Choke Point on credit supply

4.3. Additional tests of Operation Choke Point on credit supply

We present the results of the estimation of Eq.  (1) in Table  3. The 
coefficient in column (1) is negative and statistically significant at the 
1% level, suggesting that banks targeted by the DOJ reduced their 
level of committed credit to firms in ‘‘high-risk’’ industries, relative 
to nontargeted banks, by approximately 3.4%. In column (2), we use 
our preferred specification including a tighter set of fixed effects (time–
firm size quartiles–six-digit NAICS industry code–state, all interacted), 
and  the  effect  remains  economically  large  (4.6%)  and  statistically 
significant at the 1% level.

Given the literature documenting the heterogeneous effect of fi-
nancing across firms based on their size, we consider how lending 
practices change across large firms and SMEs—as in Chodorow-Reich 
et al. (2021), for instance, firms are classified as SMEs if their assets 
are  less  than  $250  million.  As  reported  in  column  (3)  of  Table   3, 
we  find  that  the  reduction  in  lending  is  concentrated  among  these 
smaller firms, with a decline of 9.5% in committed credit. In contrast, 
we  find  no  significant  effect  for  large  firms.  We  next  consider  the 
share of drawn credit in columns (4) to (6), defined as the volume of 
utilized credit divided by the level of committed credit. We find no 
significant effect, suggesting that the level of credit drawn by firms 
changes proportionately to changes in committed credit.

We then analyze in Fig.  2 the effects of OCP on committed credit 
over time by plotting the dynamic coefficients relative to the quarter 
before the targeting. First, and crucial for our identification strategy, 
the results support the parallel trends assumption—that is, the point 
estimates before the program are close to zero and are statistically 
insignificant, indicating that there is no differential pre-trend in lending 
to firms in affected industries by targeted versus nontargeted banks. 
Second, there is a gradual and significant decrease in committed credit 
after OCP by targeted relative to nontargeted banks to affected firms.

Next, we explore the drivers of the decline in committed credit. 
As reported in Table A.5 of the Online Appendix, we find evidence 
that targeted banks reduce not only committed credit lines but also 
the rollover of term loans for affected firms. Lastly, we study whether 
the terms of the credit to affected firms are impacted, following the 
empirical specification described in Eq.  (1). The results in Table A.6 of 
the Online Appendix suggest no effect on interest rate spreads (columns 
1 and 2). In contrast, the results in columns (3) and (4) show that SMEs 
experience a decline in maturity of approximately 2.2 months or 4.5% 
of the mean maturity of 46 months. We also find that affected firms are 
more likely to post collateral, an effect driven by the terms imposed on 
small and medium-sized firms (columns 5 and 6).

The  previous  results  suggest  that  the  operation  reduced  lending 
by targeted banks to firms in affected industries. In this subsection, 
we conduct a series of additional tests to mitigate several concerns 
related to our tests and interpretation. First, we explore whether our 
results are biased based on our empirical specification. Second, we 
examine whether our results are biased due to the issues identified 
by the literature related to staggered differences in differences designs. 
Third, we consider whether spurious correlations may drive our results. 
Fourth, we assess whether events other than Operation Choke Point 
may drive our results. Finally, we assess whether loans with volumes 
close to the reporting threshold affect our results.

4.3.1. Empirical specification

We  first  rule  out  the  possibility  that  our  empirical  specification 
drives our estimates. In column (1) of Panel A of Table  4, we present 
the estimates of a fixed effects Poisson specification on the level of 
committed credit and find similar economics and statistical results as 
those in Table  3. Next, we balance our sample by adding zeros to bank–
firm–year observations with no reported loans to examine the intensive 
and extensive margins, combined, and estimate an OLS model.26 We 
report the estimates in column (2) of Panel A, where we find similar 
results to our baseline. In column (3), we present the estimates resulting 
from the balanced panel but using a Poisson specification to account 
for the issues involving an outcome variable that is positive but can 
often equal zero (Cohn et al., 2022; Correia et al., 2020; Chen and Roth, 
2024). We again find consistent evidence that there was a contraction 
in credit supply in response to Operation Choke Point. Finally, we use 
these three alternative estimation approaches for the share of drawn 
credit (columns 4 through 6) and estimate no statistical change around 
the initiation of Operation Choke Point, again matching our baseline 
estimates in Table  3.

4.3.2. Firm–bank matching

Another potential concern is that firms that borrow from targeted 
banks differ from those that borrow from other banks (e.g., have differ-
ent demand for credit), even if these two types of firms operate in the 
same six-digit NAICS industry, have similar size, and are headquartered 

26 In our baseline intensive margin specification, following a relationship 
termination, the bank–firm pair would exit the sample.

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Fig. 2.  Impact of operation Choke point on bank lending over time. This figure plots coefficients from a difference-in-differences specification comparing lending between targeted 
and nontargeted banks within the same industries affected by OCP. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of committed credit at the bank–firm–quarter level. The 
horizontal axis is in event time relative to the quarter before targeting by Operation Choke Point. The estimated coefficients and their corresponding 90% confidence intervals 
correspond to the difference in the committed credit lending between targeted and nontargeted banks, within the same industries affected by OCP.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

Table 4
Impact of operation choke point on bank lending—additional tests.
Data sources: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

  Panel A: Balanced Panel

(1)
Committed credit ($bn)
Poisson,
Unbalanced Panel

(2)

(3)

OLS,
Balanced Panel

Poisson,
Balanced Panel

(4)
Share of drawn credit
Poisson,
Unbalanced Panel

(5)

(6)

OLS,
Balanced Panel

Poisson,
Balanced Panel 

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡

  Observations

−0.067**
(0.033)

−3.640**
(1.373)

−0.158***
(0.049)

51,105

87,313

87,313

0.000
(0.014)

51,105

−0.017
(0.014)

−0.020
(0.047)

87,313

87,313

  Panel B: Robustness Tests

Log(Committed credit)
Firm × Time FE
(Khwaja–Mian)

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡

−0.073**
(0.029)

Stacked
Regression

−0.061***
(0.021)

Randomization
Test

Share of drawn credit
Firm × Time FE
(Khwaja–Mian)

0.000
(0.018)

0.003
(0.014)

Stacked
Regression

0.005
(0.006)

Randomization 
Test

0.000
(0.006)

12,884

  Observations
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on bank lending. The dependent variables are the committed credit (in USD billions in Panel A and in logs in 
Panel B) and the share of drawn credit. Choke Point is an indicator variable at the bank level and is set to one following the targeting of the bank by OCP. Bank controls 
include bank size, capital, liquidity, and profitability. Standard errors are double clustered at the bank and state levels.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% 
level, respectively.

241,617

241,617

51,105

51,105

12,884

in the same state. To mitigate this concern, in column (1) of Panel 
B  (Table   4),  we  present  the  results  of  a  specification  that  includes 
firm–time fixed effects to better control for credit demand and the 
nonrandom  matching  between  firms  and  banks  (Khwaja  and  Mian, 
2008).  Exploiting  variation  within  firms  that  borrow  from  multiple 
banks, we find that the coefficient is still negative, large, and statisti-
cally significant. This finding suggests that, for the same firm, targeted 
banks reduce lending more than nontargeted ones. As in our baseline, 
in column (4) of Panel B, we find no change in the share of drawn credit 
when using a similar approach.

4.3.3. Biases in differences-in-differences designs

We explore whether our results are affected by the biases iden-
tified by the recent literature on staggered differences-in-differences 
designs—see Roth et al. (2023) for a detailed review. We repeat our 

analysis using the stacked regression estimator methodology developed 
by Gormley and Matsa (2011, 2016) and described by Baker et al. 
(2022b) and present the results in columns (2) and (5), where we find 
estimates for the log of committed credit and share of drawn credit, 
respectively, that are largely consistent with those obtained using the 
two-way fixed effects methodology.

4.3.4. Minimum reporting threshold

The credit register provides information on credit exposures exceed-
ing $1 million for banks with more than $50 billion in assets. Thus, 
one potential concern is that data truncation affects our results. In our 
setting, if a bank reduces the committed amount from $1.01 million 
to $0.99 million, it would be identified as an account termination and 
bias our results.

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

To alleviate the concern that this feature of the data is biasing our 
results, we run an additional test excluding loans close to the reporting 
threshold. The idea behind this test is that, for a loan of $2 million 
to be dropped from our sample, it would need to be reduced by at 
least 50%. We sequentially exclude loans below the 25th percentile ($2 
million), the median ($6 million), $10 million, and $20 million and 
re-estimate our baseline specification. We report the results in Table 
A.7 of the Online Appendix, where we find evidence suggesting that 
our results are not driven by loans close to the reporting threshold. 
In particular, we find that, regardless of the threshold used, the level 
of credit commitment decreases for small firms in affected industries 
that borrow from targeted banks, relative to nontargeted banks, while 
we find no effect on large firms. These results resemble those in the 
baseline test, including all loans. Further, in columns (5) to (8), we 
still do not observe a change in the share of drawn credit, again similar 
to our baseline. Importantly, in contrast to the setting of Ivanov et al. 
(2023) where two-lender deals were excluded from supervision, banks 
cannot avoid supervision by lending below the $1 million threshold.27
An additional potential concern is that affected firms can initiate 
relationships with or increase borrowing from nonreporting banks, that 
is, those with assets below the $50 billion threshold. This would limit 
our  ability  to  measure  the  full  impact  of  the  initiative  on  affected 
firms. We address this potential issue in Section 6.2, where we show, 
using balance-sheet information, that affected firms, on average, do 
not experience a significant change in total debt. This suggests that 
nonreporting banks and other types of lenders do not play a significant 
role in the dynamics studied.

4.3.5. Banks and industry trends

A potential remaining concern is that Operation Choke Point tar-
geted banks that could have already been cutting lending to specific 
industries for reasons unrelated to the initiative. For instance, banks 
may have been de-risking following the effect of the Global Financial 
Crisis. We address this concern in several ways. First, we compare the 
riskiness of firms in industries affected by OCP with that of comparable 
cash-intensive  firms  in  industries  that  were  not  impacted  by  OCP 
and with that of other similar firms in the same three-digit NAICS 
industries. We find that the assessed probability of default of firms in 
industries affected by OCP (2.1%) was similar to that of the other two 
groups (1.9% and 2%, respectively) and that the small difference was 
statistically insignificant.

Second, we expand our analysis and estimate the impact of the 
initiative on affected firms using a triple-differences estimator, includ-
ing loans made by banks to firms in other industries. For robustness, 
we provide the results using two different sets of unaffected firms as 
controls. In the first group, we include as controls firms in comparable, 
cash-intensive  industries,  as  identified  by  the  NAICS  association  in 
conjunction with industry experts, that were not affected by OCP.28 In 
the second group, we include all the firms in the same three-digit NAICS 
industries as those affected by OCP. We present the results in Table A.8 
of the Online Appendix.

Using either set of control firms, we find results that suggest that 
our findings are not driven by contemporaneous events. When studying
Committed  Credit  in  columns  (1)  to  (4),  we  find  that  the  baseline 
coefficient for banks targeted by the initiative, Choke Point, is small 
and statistically insignificant. In contrast, the estimate for firms affected 
by the initiative, as measured by the interaction term Choke Point ×
OCP Industries is negative and statistically significant, suggesting that 
targeted banks only reduced lending to affected industries. Moreover, 

27 This serves only to identify loans to be included in the Y-14 data, which is 
used in the assessment of capital and stress testing, but bank examiners have 
access to information on all loans, regardless of size.
28 These include gas stations, convenience stores, liquor stores, and parking 
lots, among others.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

we find that the effect is concentrated among small firms (columns 2 
and 4). When we explore the impact on the share of drawn credit in 
columns (5) to (8), we find results similar to the ones in our baseline 
analysis. That is, there was no change in the share of drawn credit, 
suggesting  that  the  level  of  utilized  credit  reduced  proportional  to 
the reduction in committed credit. Overall, these sets of tests further 
suggest that targeted banks were limiting the supply of credit to firms 
in affected industries.

4.3.6. Other robustness

To test whether a specific industry drives our results, we iteratively 
drop  each  industry  from  our  sample  and  re-estimate  our  baseline 
specification.  We  present  the  estimates  in  Table  A.9  of  the  Online 
Appendix, where we show the effect on committed credit in Panel A 
and the effect on share of drawn credit in Panel B. In each column, 
we exclude from the sample firms in one industry (e.g., in Column (1) 
we exclude firms in the ammunition/firearms sales industry). Overall, 
we find that the effect of the policy remains similar in magnitude and 
statistically significant across columns, mitigating concerns that one 
industry drives the results. In the last column, we exclude firms in 
the three industries with significantly more firms (tobacco sales and 
paraphernalia, pharmaceutical sales, and ammunition/firearms Sales) 
and find that the results are not driven by firms in those industries.

Further,  we  address  the  concern  that  the  results  are  biased  by 
specific drivers of the timing of each bank’s targeting date. We conduct 
a placebo test to mitigate this concern by randomizing treatment dates 
for affected banks. We run our baseline test 1,000 times, randomizing 
the targeting dates, and present the mean coefficient in Panel B column 
(3) in Table  4, where we find no significant effect. Finally, we re-run 
this test for the share of drawn credit in column (6) and estimate no 
statistical relation. Overall, these tests provide further evidence that 
targeted banks were limiting the supply of credit to firms in affected 
industries in response to the initiative.

4.4. Heterogeneity across firm characteristics

We examine whether specific types of firms were more affected by 
Operation Choke Point. Specifically, we explore whether banks rationed 
credit  differently  for  firms  in  different  financial  situations.  To  test 
this, we expand our empirical specification by interacting our main 
explanatory variables with a series of firm-level ratios that proxy for 
financial strength. In particular, we include profitability, liquidity, and 
leverage measures, splitting the sample based on the pre-period values.
Testing the relationship between financial strength and committed 
credit, columns (1) to (3) of Table  5 show consistent evidence that SMEs 
were affected, irrespective of their profitability, liquidity, or leverage. 
These  results  underline  our  evidence  that  targeted  credit  rationing 
primarily sorted on firm size and not financial strength. We also find no 
differences across firms with different financial strengths when focusing 
on the share of drawn credit—as seen in columns (4) to (6).29

5. Bank–firm relationships

A core aspect of Operation Choke Point was to cut off banking 
relationships for affected firms. Having established that targeted banks 

29 The Y-14 data includes information on firms’ assessed probability of de-
fault, but this information is included for a subset of firms and is measured by 
each bank without providing information on how it is measured. Given these 
limitations, we use this measure as an additional cross-sectional characteristic 
and present the results in Table A.10 of the Online Appendix, where we find 
that a firm’s probability of default does not seem to affect the degree to which 
it is affected by the initiative and that it is size and not the probability of 
default that affects this, mitigating concerns of de-risking driving our results.

9 

K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Table 5
Impact of operation choke point by firm characteristics.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

Log(Committed credit)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Share of drawn credit
(4)

(5)

(6)

−0.102***
(0.024)
−0.083**
(0.034)
−0.020
(0.051)
0.110
(0.072)

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × Low Profitability𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × High Profitability𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × Low Profitability𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × High Profitability𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × Low Liquidity𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × High Liquidity𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × Low Liquidity𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × High Liquidity𝑓

−0.097***
(0.032)
−0.086***
(0.028)
0.045
(0.074)
−0.005
(0.090)

0.003
(0.009)
−0.002
(0.011)
0.012
(0.015)
−0.026
(0.020)

−0.003
(0.009)
0.013
(0.013)
0.014
(0.020)
−0.013
(0.020)

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × Low Leverage𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × High Leverage𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × Low Leverage𝑓

  Choke Point𝑏,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × High Leverage𝑓

−0.075**
(0.030)
−0.120***
(0.031)
−0.038
(0.063)
0.073
(0.051)

0.008  
(0.011) 
−0.007 
(0.009) 
−0.012 
(0.021) 
0.012  
(0.014) 
  Firm FE
Y
  Bank FE
Y
  Time × Firm Size Quartiles × Industry × State FE
Y
  Bank Controls
Y
  Observations
51,105  
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on lending by firm characteristics. The regression uses firm–bank–quarter level data 
to compare lending between treated and non-treated banks, within the same industries affected by OCP. The regressions use the following 
dependent variables to estimate the effects on lending: columns (1)-(3) use the natural logarithm of committed credit; and columns (4)-(6) use 
the share of drawn credit. Choke Point is an indicator variable at the bank level and is set to one following the targeting of the bank by OCP.
Large Firm is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is greater than or equal to $250 million in 2012:Q2.
SME is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is less than $250 million in 2012:Q2. High and low measures 
of firm profitability, liquidity, and leverage are split relative to pre-period mean values. Standard errors are double clustered at the bank and 
state level and are robust to heteroskedasticity.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Y
Y
Y
Y
51,105

Y
Y
Y
Y
51,105

Y
Y
Y
Y
51,105

Y
Y
Y
Y
51,105

Y
Y
Y
Y
51,105

reduced their supply of credit to firms in affected industries at the 
intensive margin, we turn our attention to bank–firm relationships. In 
this section, we first discuss our empirical strategy to explore this issue 
and then discuss the results of the termination and creation of bank 
relationships.

5.1. Empirical specification

To study bank–firm relationships, we aggregate data at the firm–
quarter level to examine whether Operation Choke Point had an overall 
impact on firms in affected industries. As before, our baseline specifi-
cation is a staggered difference-in-differences model, where we exploit 
the  fact  that  firms  that  operate  in  the  same  industry  and  location 
borrowed from banks that were targeted at different points or were 
never targeted. Specifically, we estimate: 

𝑌𝑓 ,𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽1 𝐹 𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑜𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑃 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑓 ,𝑡 +𝛿𝑏 +𝛿𝑓 +𝛿𝑡,𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 +𝜀𝑓 ,𝑖,𝑡,

(2)

where 𝑌𝑓 ,𝑖,𝑡 is our outcome of interest at the firm–quarter level, studying 
firm 𝑓 , operating in the industry 𝑖, at the calendar–quarter 𝑡 time. 
Our baseline specification includes main bank fixed effects, 𝛿𝑏, and 
firm fixed effects, 𝛿𝑓 , to control for time-invariant heterogeneity of 
banks  and  firms.  Main  bank  is  defined  as  the  bank  with  the  most 
lending  to  a  firm  in  a  quarter,  which  might  vary  over  time.  We 
include time–firm size quartiles–six-digit NAICS industry–state fixed 
effects,  𝛿𝑡,𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒,𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒,  to  control  for  time-varying  trends  that  af-
fect firms of similar size operating in the same industry and state. 
𝐹 𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑜𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑃 𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑓 ,𝑡 is the interaction of two variables, Firm 

Exposure to Treated Bank and Post. Firm Exposure to Treated Bank is a 
firm’s exposure to the shock, measured as the pre-period share of its 
total credit provided by banks that were subsequently targeted. Post
is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one following 
the  targeting  of  any  bank  that  lends  to  the  firm.  Importantly,  the 
specification in Eq.  (2) studies shocks at the firm level, whereas the 
specification  described  in  Eq.   (1)  allows  us  to  study  effects  at  the 
bank–firm level. Our primary coefficient of interest, 𝛽1, captures the 
within-firm changes following the targeting of a bank from which the 
firm borrows. Standard errors are double clustered at the main bank 
and state levels.

5.2. Termination and creation of relationships

We  start  by  examining  whether  firms  linked  to  targeted  banks 
experience account terminations and present the results in Table  6. We 
estimate a variation of Eq.  (2) with the outcome variable defined as 
a dummy equal to one if, for a given time period, a firm had a rela-
tionship terminated in the following quarter with any bank (columns 
1–2), with a targeted bank (columns 3–4), or with a nontargeted bank 
(columns 5–6) and zero otherwise. The coefficient reported in column 
(1) is small and statistically indistinguishable from zero, suggesting that 
affected firms did not experience a significant change in their number 
of account terminations following Operation Choke Point. This effect 
is similar across firm sizes, as shown in column (2). However, when 
we examine heterogeneous effects across bank types (targeted versus 
nontargeted), we find results that are consistent with our findings on 
the effectiveness of the initiative. Specifically, we show that affected 
firms did experience an increase in the frequency of the termination of 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Table 6
Termination of banking relationships.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓

Relationship termination
with Any Bank
(2)
(1)

with Targeted Banks
(3)

(4)

0.003
(0.008)

0.045***
(0.005)

0.005
(0.008)
−0.015
(0.020)

0.044***
(0.005)
0.056***
(0.017)

with Nontargeted Banks
(5)
−0.042***   
(0.007)

(6)

−0.039*** 
(0.007)
−0.073*** 
(0.010)

Y
Y
Y
41,891

  Time × Industry × Firm Size Quartiles × State FE
Y
  Main Bank FE
Y
  Firm FE
Y
  Observations
41,891
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on the termination of bank relationships. Columns (1)-(2) study relationships with any 
bank, columns (3)-(4) focus on relationships with targeted banks, and columns (5)-(6) focus on relationships with nontargeted banks. Firm 
Exposure to Choke Point is the interaction of two variables, Firm Exposure to Treated Bank and Post. Firm Exposure to Treated Bank is a firm’s 
exposure to the shock, measured as the pre-period share of its total credit provided by banks that were subsequently targeted. Post is an 
indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one following the targeting of any bank that lends to the firm. Large Firm is an indicator 
variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is greater than or equal to $250 million in 2012:Q2. SME is an indicator variable 
at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is less than $250 million in 2012:Q2. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm’s 
main bank and state level and are robust to heteroskedasticity.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

their accounts (column 3). This effect is significant, with an increase in 
the frequency of account terminations of 4.5 percentage points, corre-
sponding to an increase of 94% over the baseline level of 4.8 percent. 
This effect is driven by a significant increase in account terminations 
for  small  and  medium-sized  firms  and  by  a  similar  effect  on  large 
firms (column 4). In addition, we find that affected firms experience a 
reduction in the frequency with which their accounts with nontargeted 
banks are terminated (column 5), suggesting that these firms try to 
mitigate the impact of Operation Choke Point on credit availability. 
Specifically, this frequency declines by 4.2 percentage points, a decline 
equivalent  to  87.5%  of  the  baseline  level.  This  effect  is  large  and 
significant for both SMEs and large firms. This finding is consistent 
with the evidence presented in the expert witness report of Calomiris 
(2017) and with the idea that affected firms strive to preserve their 
relationships with nontargeted banks.

In Table  7, we explore the effect of the initiative on the development 
of new relationships. The outcome variable is now defined as a dummy 
equal to one if, in a given time period, a firm created a relationship with 
any bank (columns 1–2), with a targeted bank (columns 3–4), or with 
a nontargeted bank (columns 5–6) and zero otherwise. We find that, 
on average, affected firms increase the rate at which they initiate new 
relations with banks by 3.4 percentage points or approximately 32% of 
the baseline level (column 1). We find that this effect is driven by new 
accounts opened by SMEs (column 2). As with account terminations, 
we then explore heterogeneous effects across bank types. We find that, 
following  the  targeting  of  their  banks,  affected  firms  initiate  fewer 
relationships with banks singled out by Operation Choke Point (column 
3). This effect is large across firm sizes and statistically significant for 
SMEs (column 4). In addition, we find that these firms significantly 
increase the rate of initiation of new relationships with nontargeted 
banks, evidenced by the large and significant coefficients in columns 
(5) and (6), which translate into an average increase of 74% over the 
baseline level.

We provide the results of this analysis further split across different 
types of SMEs and large firms in Tables A.11 and A.12 of the Online 
Appendix. Overall, we find that targeted banks terminate relationships 
with all types of firms, regardless of their size and ratios of profitability, 
liquidity, or leverage. Similarly, firms of all types preserve relationships 
with nontargeted banks. When we study the creation of new relation-
ships with targeted banks, we find a large and similar decline across all 
firm types, although the effect is statistically significant only for SMEs. 
This effect does not depend on these firms’ profitability, liquidity, or 
leverage ratios. Last, we find that all types of firms increase the rate at 

which they initiate relationships with nontargeted banks, regardless of 
their type. This suggests that nontargeted banks still find it profitable 
to lend to firms terminated by targeted banks, given that they have not 
faced regulatory pressure.

Overall,  the  evidence  presented  in  this  subsection  suggests  that 
banks targeted by Operation Choke Point effectively terminated ac-
counts with firms in affected industries. In response, these firms ini-
tiated new relationships or preserved relationships with nontargeted 
banks  to  mitigate  or  offset  the  operation’s  effect.  However,  given 
the results presented so far, the net effect on firms’ access to credit 
remains unclear. On one hand, a long-term banking relationship can 
help borrowers, as it may lessen information asymmetries through the 
generation of private information, enabling the bank to offer improved 
loan  conditions  (Petersen  and  Rajan,  1994),  especially  within  ESG 
decisions (Houston and Shan, 2022). On the other hand, banks could 
potentially  leverage  this  exclusive  information  to  exploit  firms  and 
provide less favorable terms (Rajan, 1992). In the next section, we 
explore this issue.

6. Firm-level borrowing

We next explore the overall effect of Operation Choke Point on 
firms. We start by studying the initiative’s effect on firm-level access to 
credit and then analyze its impact on firm performance and operations.

6.1. Net effect on committed and utilized credit

We first examine the effect on committed credit and share of drawn 
credit  for  affected  firms.  As  before,  we  use  aggregate  data  at  the 
firm–quarter level.

The results are reported in Table  8. We find that affected firms 
experience no change in aggregate committed credit, with statistically 
insignificant coefficients across specifications in columns (1) through 
(3)—that is, for not only the average firm but also for large firms 
and SMEs. When we analyze the share of drawn credit in columns 
(4) through (6), we also find that all the coefficients are statistically 
indistinguishable from zero, pointing to no overall effect on total com-
mitted or drawn credit. Overall, these findings indicate that affected 
firms were generally able to offset the reduction in committed credit by 
targeted banks by obtaining more committed credit from nontargeted 
banks.

When we study the impact of firms with different characteristics, 
we find evidence of mostly homogeneous effects across firm types. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Table 7
Creation of banking relationships.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓

Relationship creation
with Any Bank
(2)
(1)

with Targeted Banks
(3)

(4)

0.034***
(0.012)

−0.042**
(0.016)

0.036***
(0.012)
0.015
(0.038)

−0.043**
(0.017)
−0.038
(0.032)

with Nontargeted Banks
(5)
0.079***   
(0.023)    

(6)

0.080***  
(0.023)
0.063**
(0.023)

Y
Y
Y
41,891

  Time × Industry × Firm Size Quartiles × State FE
Y
  Main Bank FE
Y
  Firm FE
Y
  Observations
41,891
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on the creation of bank relationships. Columns (1)-(2) study relationships with any bank, 
columns (3)-(4) focus on relationships with targeted banks, while columns (5)-(6) focus on relationships with nontargeted banks. Firm Exposure 
to Choke Point is the interaction of two variables, Firm Exposure to Treated Bank and Post. Firm Exposure to Treated Bank is a firm’s exposure to 
the shock, measured as the pre-period share of its total credit provided by banks that were subsequently targeted. Post is an indicator variable 
at the firm level and is set to one following the targeting of any bank that lends to the firm. Large Firm is an indicator variable at the firm 
level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is greater than or equal to $250 million in 2012:Q2. SME is an indicator variable at the firm level 
and is set to one if the firm’s assets is less than $250 million in 2012:Q2. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm’s main bank and 
state level and are robust to heteroskedasticity.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Table 8
Change in firm level borrowing.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡

Log(Committed credit)
(1)

(2)

−0.029
(0.017)

0.005
(0.013)

(3)

Share of drawn credit
(4)

(5)

(6)

0.009
(0.008)

0.003
(0.009)   

−0.003
(0.011)
0.084
(0.051)

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓

0.003  
(0.009) 
0.003  
(0.015) 
  Time × Industry × Firm Size Quartiles × State FE
Y
  Time FE
N
  Main Bank FE
Y
  Firm FE
Y
  Observations
41,891  
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on firm level borrowing. The regressions use firm–quarter level data to compare changes in 
total credit between treated firms of targeted and nontargeted banks. The dependent variable of columns (1)-(3) is the natural logarithm of committed 
credit, while columns (4)-(6) use the share of drawn credit. Firm Exposure to Choke Point is the interaction of two variables, Firm Exposure to Treated 
Bank and Post. Firm Exposure to Treated Bank is a firm’s exposure to the shock, measured as the pre-period share of its total credit provided by banks 
that were subsequently targeted. Post is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one following the targeting of any bank that lends to the 
firm. Large Firm is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is greater than or equal to $250 million in 2012:Q2. SME
is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is less than $250 million in 2012:Q2. Standard errors are double clustered 
at the firm’s main bank and state level and are robust to heteroskedasticity.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Y
N
Y
Y
41,891

N
Y
Y
Y
41,891

N
Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
N
Y
Y
41,891

Y
N
Y
Y
41,891

Specifically, we find that the majority of coefficients in Table  9 for both 
aggregate committed credit and the share of drawn credit are not statis-
tically significant, with two important exceptions. First, large profitable 
firms managed to increase their level of committed credit, suggesting 
that  they  hedged  against  future  potential  terminations  (column  1). 
In contrast, highly levered SMEs experienced a modest reduction in 
committed credit (column 3). These results indicate that targeted credit 
rationing  driven  by  Operation  Choke  Point  did  not  reduce  overall 
credit  for  most  firms,  except  for  a  small  subset,  making  it  broadly
ineffective.

Finally, we examine potential changes in firm loan terms and find 
that firms did not seem to experience aggregate changes in interest rate 
spreads, as evidenced in columns (1) and (2) of Table A.13 of the Online 
Appendix. However, they did experience a shortening in the maturity of 
the loans (column 3). This effect is concentrated among SMEs (column 
4). We also find an increase in the likelihood of these firms pledging 
collateral but again only among SMEs (columns 5 and 6).

6.2. Financial performance of affected firms

Given the impact of Operation Choke Point on banking relation-
ships, we additionally examine its impact on the financial and opera-
tional performance of affected firms. We follow the specification in Eq. 
(2) and analyze firm-level measures, such as leverage, profitability, and 
investment.

The estimates presented in Table  10 suggest no observable change, 
on average, for firms exposed to targeted banks. The coefficients in 
columns (1) and (2) suggest that there was no effect on leverage, as 
defined by total debt over assets. This finding is consistent across firm 
sizes  and  mitigates  concerns  related  to  the  truncation  of  our  data, 
given that this data includes lending by all banks. These firms also 
do not experience changes in profitability, as measured by return on 
assets (columns 3 and 4). Similarly, we find no effect on investment, as 
measured by capital expenditures scaled by assets (columns 5 and 6).
We find similar results across firm types. In particular, the coeffi-
cients in Table A.14 of the Online Appendix suggest that the initiative 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

Table 9
Change in firm level borrowing by firm characteristics.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Log(Committed credit)
(2)
(1)

(3)

Share of drawn credit
(5)
(4)

(6)

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × Low Profitability𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × High Profitability𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × Low Profitability𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × High Profitability𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × Low Liquidity𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × High Liquidity𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × Low Liquidity𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × High Liquidity𝑓

−0.009
(0.018)
0.006
(0.012)
0.047
(0.067)
0.225**
(0.083)

−0.004
(0.009)
−0.002
(0.028)
0.041
(0.050)
0.173
(0.136)

0.006
(0.005)
−0.001
(0.017)
0.026
(0.029)
−0.086
(0.066)

0.006
(0.009)
−0.005
(0.015)
−0.007
(0.012)
0.023
(0.045)

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × Low Leverage𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓 × High Leverage𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × Low Leverage𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓 × High Leverage𝑓

0.004  
(0.010) 
0.003  
(0.014) 
−0.015 
(0.025) 
0.028  
(0.023) 
  Time × Industry × Firm Size Quartiles × State FE
Y
  Main Bank FE
Y
  Firm FE
Y
  Observations
41,891  
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on firm level borrowing by firm characteristics. The regressions use firm–quarter level data to compare changes in total 
credit between treated firms of targeted and nontargeted banks. The dependent variable of columns (1)-(3) is the natural logarithm of committed credit, while columns (4)-(6) 
use the share of drawn credit. Firm Exposure to Choke Point is the interaction of two variables, Firm Exposure to Treated Bank and Post. Firm Exposure to Treated Bank is a firm’s 
exposure to the shock, measured as the pre-period share of its total credit provided by banks that were subsequently targeted. Post is an indicator variable at the firm level and 
is set to one following the targeting of any bank that lends to the firm. Large Firm is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is greater than or 
equal to $250 million in 2012:Q2. SME is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s assets is less than $250 million in 2012:Q2. High and low measures 
of firm profitability, liquidity, and leverage are split relative to pre-period mean values. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm’s main bank and state level and are robust 
to heteroskedasticity.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

0.017
(0.016)
−0.031**
(0.014)
0.077
(0.059)
0.098
(0.069)

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Table 10
Change in firm performance.
Data source: Federal Reserve Y-14Q and Y-9C.

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡

Total Debt/Assets
(2)
(1)

0.005
(0.007)

ROA

(3)

0.002
(0.004)

(4)

Capex/Assets

(5)

−0.002
(0.002)

(6)

0.002
(0.004)
0.004
(0.008)

0.007
(0.006)
−0.010
(0.022)

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × SME𝑓

  Firm Exposure to Choke Point𝑓 ,𝑡 × Large Firm𝑓

−0.002 
(0.002) 
−0.000 
(0.004) 
  Time × Industry × Firm Size Quartiles × State FE
Y
  Main Bank FE
Y
  Firm FE
Y
  Observations
41,891  
This table reports the impact of Operation Choke Point on firm performance. The dependent variables are total debt to assets (columns 1-2), 
return on assets (column 3-4), and total capital expenditures to assets (column 5-6). Firm Exposure to Choke Point is the interaction of two 
variables, Firm Exposure to Treated Bank and Post. Firm Exposure to Treated Bank is a firm’s exposure to the shock, measured as the pre-period 
share of its total credit provided by banks that were subsequently targeted. Post is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one 
following the targeting of any bank that lends to the firm. Large Firm is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s 
assets is greater than or equal to $250 million in 2012:Q2. SME is an indicator variable at the firm level and is set to one if the firm’s 
assets is less than $250 million in 2012:Q2. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm’s main bank and state level and are robust to 
heteroskedasticity.***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

Y
Y
Y
41,891

was ineffective at impacting firms of different characteristics. We find 
that the overall effect on leverage, profitability, and investment was 
economically  small  and  statistically  insignificant,  regardless  of  firm 
size, profitability, liquidity, and leverage ratios. Last, we test whether 
firms  adjust  trade  credit  or  banks  change  their  assessment  of  the 
affected firms’ default probability but still find no effect, as shown in 
Table A.17 of the Online Appendix.

Overall, our results show that targeted credit rationing had a neutral 
effect on firms’ performance. Although the operation had an initial 
effect on lending by targeted banks, affected firms responded by bor-
rowing from other banks. The terms of these new loans did not differ 
significantly  from  the  original  terms  that  those  firms  had  with  the 
targeted banks. More generally, we find that these firms did not expe-
rience an impact in terms of total committed or drawn credit, leverage, 
profitability, or investment, suggesting that credit rationing had an 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Sachdeva et al.

insignificant effect on firms in targeted industries. Our estimates un-
derscore the challenges of using targeted credit rationing to influence 
corporate behavior. While this approach can initially restrict access to 
credit for affected firms, the observed credit substitution limits its over-
all effectiveness. This suggests that stakeholders may need to explore 
alternative  or  complementary  strategies  to  hold  firms  accountable, 
especially larger ones.

6.3. Additional tests

Given the structure of the Y-14Q data, a natural concern with our 
analysis is that there might be an attrition bias that could affect our 
results. Indeed, our findings are conditional on firms continuing to 
receive credit from reporting banks, which could present a selection 
problem if some firms were more likely to be rationed to the point that 
their performance is unobservable ex post. Given the importance of this 
possibility, we investigate it in multiple ways.

First, we plot the evolution of the number of firms in industries 
affected by OCP in our sample over time. As counterfactual, we also 
plot the evolution of (i) the number of firms in cash-intensive industries 
not affected by OCP and (ii) the number of firms in industries not 
affected by OCP but within the same three-digit NAICS codes of those 
affected  by  OCP.  As  shown  in  Figure  A.4  of  the  Online  Appendix, 
the trends in the underlying data are similar, indicating comparable 
attrition rates and no considerable difference between these types of 
firms.

Second, we take a step further by estimating a Cox proportional 
hazard  model  to  measure  the  survival  rates  of  firms  in  industries 
affected by OCP relative to firms in unaffected industries. This model 
is chosen for its flexibility in providing a baseline hazard rate without 
relying on parametric assumptions. It handles right censoring in the 
data, using a maximum likelihood estimator to account for firms that 
have not yet dropped out of the sample. As reported in Table A.15 
of the Online Appendix, we reject the null hypothesis that firms in 
industries affected by OCP drop out of the sample at a different rate 
than unaffected firms in the two counterfactual groups. Indeed, both 
estimates are economically small and statistically insignificant, further 
mitigating concerns of possible selection bias.

Third, given the possibility that riskier firms might be rationed first 
or more stringently and thus be at a higher risk of dropping out from 
the sample, we show in Table A.16 of the Online Appendix this is also 
unlikely in our setting since firms in industries affected by OCP do 
not have a higher ex ante default probability than firms in unaffected 
industries. Specifically, the mean assessed default probability for firms 
in industries affected by OCP is 2.1% as of the second quarter of 2012 
(1.9% when considering only affected firms at targeted banks), while 
for firms in cash-intensive industries unaffected by OCP is 1.9% and 
for other firms in the same three-digit NAICS code is 2% in the same 
period.30 None of these differences is statistically significant.31

Finally, we also examine whether firms’ exposure to the shock has 
an  effect  on  attrition  rates  within  our  baseline  sample  of  firms  in 
industries affected by OCP, with the outcome variable set to one at 
time 𝑡 if a given firm 𝑓 no longer appears in the data in the following 
quarter (𝑡+1) and zero otherwise. As shown in column (5) of Table A.17 
of the Online Appendix, the main coefficient of interest is small and 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

statistically insignificant. In column (6), we observe the same pattern 
when disaggregating the effect across SMEs and large firms. Overall, 
our evidence suggests that the results are unaffected by attrition from 
the sample.32

6.4. Policy implications

Our findings have significant implications for understanding tar-
geted  credit  rationing  practices,  especially  in  the  context  of  finan-
cial intermediaries’ commitments to environmental and social goals 
e.g., through the Net Zero Banking Alliance, a UN-convened bank-led 
group. For banks aiming to limit lending to so-called brown firms — 
those whose activities contribute to higher carbon emissions — this 
paper highlights the potential substitution effects that may arise. Our 
paper also provides valuable insights into the contentious debate sur-
rounding the implementation of Operation Choke Point 2.0, with pre-
vious proposals suggesting that financial intermediaries could curtail 
lending to firms in cryptocurrency and digital assets industries (Forbes, 
2024).

More broadly, this paper sheds light on one of several tools avail-
able to regulators and governments aiming to drive societal change. 
Historical approaches have included blanket bans on banks operating 
within specific jurisdictions (Garrett and Ivanov, 2025) or restricting 
firms’ access to essential cash management systems (Berger and Seegert, 
2024). Our paper contributes to the broader environmental and social 
finance literature by documenting the efficacy of such programs and 
highlighting potential unintended consequences. In doing so, we pro-
vide a comprehensive analysis that situates targeted credit rationing 
within the larger framework of tools to achieve societal goals.

7. Conclusion

Over the last decade, stakeholders have increasingly searched for 
ways to affect the operations of firms that generate negative externali-
ties. These actions can be undertaken by shareholders, who can exercise 
voting rights or divest, or by banks, which can ration credit. Thus, 
assessing the effectiveness of targeted credit rationing in disrupting the 
operations of firms in controversial industries is crucial. Nonetheless, 
the empirical evidence on this issue is scarce.

We exploit a regulatory initiative that provides exogenous variation 
in credit rationing to firms in specific industries. Using supervisory 
loan-level data, we document that credit rationing does affect banking 
relationships, with targeted banks reducing lending and terminating 
relationships with firms in affected industries. However, these firms 
initiate new relationships with nontargeted banks and manage to obtain 
loans with similar terms to the ones they had. Indeed, we show that 
these  firms  do  not  experience  measurable  changes  in  performance, 
highlighting  that  target  credit  rationing  by  a  subset  of  banks  can 
be ineffective. Our findings have significant implications for current 
debates on whether credit rationing to specific industries is effective 
in promoting change.

30 Default probabilities when considering only affected firms at targeted 
banks  (1.9%)  and  that  in  Table   2  (default  probability=2.0%)  are  slightly 
different since the former is the mean across firms, while the latter is a mean 
of means with differences in portfolio sizes across banks.
31 As shown before in Table  2, we also do not find that the ex ante default 
probability of firms in industries affected by OCP borrowing from targeted 
banks is statistically different from that of firms borrowing from nontargeted 
banks. In addition, the results reported before in Table A.10 of the Online 
Appendix indicate that SMEs are impacted at the intensive margin to the same 
degree, regardless of differences in their ex ante default probability.

32 A  separate  possible  concern  in  our  study  is  that,  despite  using  com-
prehensive FR-Y14 data, we do not observe lending by smaller banks and 
nonbanks. While this is possible, substituting credit from traditional banks 
for other sources would bias against our finding that targeted credit rationing 
is ineffective. Second, some smaller banks not in the FR-Y14 data were also 
subject to OCP, so they were not immune to the shock. Moreover, in addition 
to finding that firms substitute credit within the traditional banking sector in 
our dataset, we find that firms’ leverage ratios remain unchanged, suggesting 
that smaller banks and nonbanks are not key actors in providing credit to 
targeted firms.

14 

K. Sachdeva et al.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kunal Sachdeva: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Conceptual-
ization. André F. Silva: Writing – review & editing, Writing – origi-
nal draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Pablo Slutzky: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. 
Billy Y. Xu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project 
administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the 
writing process

During the preparation of this work the authors used ChatGPT to 
polish the writing of certain paragraphs. After using this tool/service, 
the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full 
responsibility for the content of the publication.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104133.

Data availability

Defunding Controversial Industries - Code (Original data) (Mendeley 
Data)

References

Agca,  S.,  Slutzky,  P.,  Zeume,  S.,  2023.  The  weight  of  compliance:  Anti-money 

laundering enforcement, bank composition, and lending. Working Paper.

Aiyar, S., Calomiris, C.W., Wieladek, T., 2014. Does macro-prudential regulatory leak? 
Evidence from a UK policy experiment? J. Money, Credit. Bank. 46, 181–214.
Baker, M., Bergstresser, D., Serafeim, G., Wurgler, J., 2022a. The pricing and ownership 

of US green bonds. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 14 (1), 415–437.

Baker, A.C., Larcker, D.F., Wang, C.C., 2022b. How much should we trust staggered 

difference-in-differences estimates? J. Financ. Econ. 144 (2), 370–395.

Baldauf, M., Garlappi, L., Yannelis, C., 2020. Does climate change affect real estate 

prices? Only if you believe in it. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (3), 1256–1295.

Baugh, B., 2016. Payday borrowing and household outcomes: Evidence from a natural 

experiment. Working Paper.

Becht, M., Franks, J.R., Wagner, H.F., 2025. The benefits of access: Evidence from 

private meetings with portfolio firms. J. Finance (forthcoming).

Beck, T., Degryse, H., De Haas, R., Van Horen, N., 2018. When arm’s length is too far: 
Relationship banking over the credit cycle. J. Financ. Econ. 127 (1), 174–196.
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2005. Financial and legal constraints to 

growth: does firm size matter? J. Financ. 60 (1), 137–177.

Bellon,  A.,  2024.  Fresh  start  or  fresh  water:  The  impact  of  environmental  lender 

liability. Working Paper.

Ben-David, I., Jang, Y., Kleimeier, S., Viehs, M., 2021. Exporting pollution: where do 

multinational firms emit CO2? Econ. Policy 36 (107), 377–437.

Berger, E.A., Seegert, N., 2024. Half banked: The economic impact of cash management 

in the Marijuana industry. J. Financ. 79 (4), 2759–2796.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Calomiris, C., 2017. Expert report of charles calomiris in community financial services 
association of America, Ltd., et al. v. Federal deposit insurance corporation, et al. 
(Civil action no. 14-953-GK). pp. 1–49.

Chen, J., Roth, J., 2024. Logs with zeros? Some problems and solutions. Q. J. Econ. 

139 (2), 891–936.

Chernenko,  S.,  Erel,  I.,  Prilmeier,  R.,  2022.  Why  do  firms  borrow  directly  from 

nonbanks? Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4902–4947.

Chodorow-Reich, G., Darmouni, O., Luck, S., Plosser, M., 2021. Bank liquidity provision 

across the firm size distribution. J. Financ. Econ. 144 (3), 908–932.

Chowdhry, B., Davies, S.W., Waters, B., 2019. Investing for impact. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

32 (3), 864–904.

Cohen, L., Gurun, U.G., Nguyen, Q.H., 2024. The ESG-innovation disconnect: Evidence 

from green patenting. Working Paper.

Cohn, J., Liu, Z., Wardlaw, M., 2022. Count (and count-like) data in finance. J. Financ. 

Econ. 146 (2), 529–551.

Correia,  S.,  Guimarães,  P.,  Zylkin,  T.,  2020.  Fast  Poisson  estimation  with 

high-dimensional fixed effects. Stata J. 20 (1), 95–115.

Crosignani,  M.,  Macchiavelli,  M.,  Silva,  A.F.,  2023.  Pirates  without  borders:  The 
propagation of cyberattacks through firms’ supply chains. J. Financ. Econ. 147 
(2), 432–448.

Duchin, R., Gao, J., Xu, Q., 2025. Sustainability or greenwashing: Evidence from the 

asset market for industrial pollution. J. Financ. 80 (2), 699–754.

Edmans, A., Levit, D., Schneemeier, J., 2024. Socially responsible divestment. Working 

Paper.

2024.

Engle, R.F., Giglio, S., Kelly, B., Lee, H., Stroebel, J., 2020. Hedging climate change 

news. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (3), 1184–1216.

Flammer, C., 2021. Corporate green bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 499–516.
Forbes, 2024. The 5 most important promises Trump made at Bitcoin 2024. July 27, 

Garrett, D., Ivanov, I., 2025. Gas, guns, and governments: Financial costs of anti-ESG 

policies. J. Finance (forthcoming).

Giannetti, M., Jasova, M., Loumioti, M., Mendicino, C., 2024. ‘‘Glossy green’’ banks: 
The disconnect between environmental disclosures and lending activities. Working 
Paper.

Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2022. The rise of finance companies and fintech lenders in 

small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4859–4901.

Gormley, T.A., Matsa, D.A., 2011. Growing out of trouble? Corporate responses to 

liability risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24 (8), 2781–2821.

Gormley, T.A., Matsa, D.A., 2016. Playing it safe? Managerial preferences, risk, and 

agency conflicts. J. Financ. Econ. 122 (3), 431–455.

Green, D., Vallee, B., 2025. Measurement and effects of bank exit policies. J. Financial 

Hart,  O.,  Zingales,  L.,  2017.  Companies  should  maximize  shareholder  welfare  not 

Econ. (forthcoming).

market value. J. Law 2, 247–274.

Hartzmark, S.M., Shue, K., 2023. Counterproductive sustainable investing: The impact 

elasticity of brown and green firms. Working Paper.

Haushalter, D., Henry, J.J., Iliev, P., 2023. Can banks save mountains? Rev. Corp. 

Houston, J.F., Shan, H., 2022. Corporate ESG profiles and banking relationships. Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 12 (4), 761–791.

Financ. Stud. 35 (7), 3373–3417.

Ivanov, I.T., Kruttli, M.S., Watugala, S.W., 2024. Banking on carbon: Corporate lending 

and cap-and-trade policy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 37 (5), 1640–1684.

Ivanov, I.T., Ranish, B., Wang, J., 2023. Banks’ strategic responses to supervisory 
coverage: Evidence from a natural experiment. J. Money, Credit. Bank. 55 (2–3), 
503–530.

Kacperczyk, M.T., Peydró, J.-L., 2024. Carbon emissions and the bank-lending channel. 

Working Paper.

Khwaja, A.I., Mian, A., 2008. Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: Evidence 

from an emerging market. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (4), 1413–1442.

Kim, S., Plosser, M.C., Santos, J.A., 2018. Macroprudential policy and the revolving 
door of risk: Lessons from leveraged lending guidance. J. Financ. Intermediation 
34, 17–31.

Laeven, L., Popov, A., 2023. Carbon taxes and the geography of fossil lending. J. Int. 

Econ. 144, 103797.

Miguel, F., Pedraza, A., Ruiz-Ortega, C., 2024. Climate-change regulations: Bank lending 

and real effects. J. Financ. Stab. 70, 101212.

Oehmke, M., Opp, M.M., 2025. A theory of socially responsible investment. Rev. Econ. 

Pástor, L., Stambaugh, R.F., Taylor, L.A., 2021. Sustainable investing in equilibrium. J. 

Stud. 92 (2), 1193–1225.

Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 550–571.

Pástor, L., Stambaugh, R.F., Taylor, L.A., 2022. Dissecting green returns. J. Financ. 

Pedersen,  L.H.,  Fitzgibbons,  S.,  Pomorski,  L.,  2021.  Responsible  investing:  The 

ESG-efficient frontier. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 572–597.

Petersen, M.A., Rajan, R.G., 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: Evidence from 

Rajan,  R.G.,  1992.  Insiders  and  outsiders:  The  choice  between  informed  and 

Roth, J., Sant’Anna, P.H., Bilinski, A., Poe, J., 2023. What’s trending in difference-in-
differences? A synthesis of the recent econometrics literature. J. Econometrics 235 
(2), 2218–2244.

Berk, J.B., van Binsbergen, J.H., 2025. The impact of impact investing. J. Financ. Econ. 

Econ. 146 (2), 403–424.

Bolton, P., Kacperczyk, M., 2021. Do investors care about carbon risk? J. Financ. Econ. 

Bolton, P., Kacperczyk, M., 2023. Global pricing of carbon-transition risk. J. Financ. 

small business data. J. Financ. 49 (1), 3–37.

Broccardo, E., Hart, O., Zingales, L., 2022. Exit versus voice. J. Political Econ. 130 

arm’s-length debt. J. Financ. 47 (4), 1367–1400.

Brown, J.R., Gustafson, M.T., Ivanov, I.T., 2021. Weathering cash flow shocks. J. Financ. 

164, 103972.

142 (2), 517–549.

78 (6), 3677–3754.

(12), 3101–3145.

76 (4), 1731–1772.

15 

K. Sachdeva et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104133 

Sastry, P., Verner, E., Marqués Ibáñez, D., 2024. Business as usual: bank climate 

commitments, lending, and engagement. Working Paper.

Stevenson, D.D., 2022. Operation choke point: Myths and reality. Adm. Law Rev. 75.
Stroebel, J., Wurgler, J., 2021. What do you think about climate finance? J. Financ. 

Econ. 142 (2), 487–498.

Teoh, S.H., Welch, I., Wazzan, C.P., 1999. The effect of socially activist investment 
policies on the financial markets: Evidence from the South African boycott. J. Bus. 
72 (1), 35–89.

Zywicki, T., 2015. Rent-seeking, crony capitalism, and the crony constitution. Supreme 

Court. Econ. Rev. 23 (1), 77–103.

16 

