Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Household debt overhang and human capital investment(cid:73)
Gustavo Manso a, Alejandro Rivera b
a Haas Business School at University of California, Berkeley, United States of America
b University of Texas at Dallas, United States of America
c Bentley University, United States of America

,∗, Hui (Grace) Wang c, Han Xia b

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/vnbyftyjzn/1

JEL classification:
G28
G50
G51
J20
J24

Keywords:
Household indebtedness
Human capital investment
Labor skills acquisition
Debt overhang
Household default

1. Introduction

Unlike  labor  income,  human  capital  is  inseparable  from  individuals  and  does  not  completely  accrue  to 
creditors. Therefore, human capital investment is more resilient to ‘‘debt overhang’’ than labor supply. We 
develop a dynamic model displaying this difference. We find that while both labor supply and human capital 
investment are hump-shaped in household indebtedness, human capital investment declines less aggressively 
as indebtedness builds up. Importantly, because human capital is only valuable when households expect to 
supply labor, the greater reduction in labor supply due to debt overhang back-propagates into ex-ante human 
capital investment. We provide empirical support for the model.

The rising U.S. household debt has renewed interest among schol-
ars and policymakers in understanding the real effects of household 
balance sheets.1 Recent studies find that household leverage induces 
a  ‘‘debt  overhang’’  effect  on  individuals’  labor  supply,  particularly 
when default is expected. Households in the U.S. are often protected 
by limited liability. Therefore, any incremental income earned from 
labor supply is partially used to fulfill debt obligations (via liability 
repayment),  postponing  the  discharge  of  debt  through  bankruptcy. 
In this case, households bear the full cost of supplying labor while 

part of the benefits accrue to creditors. Such wealth transfer discour-
ages households from exerting effort ex ante (e.g., Donaldson et al., 
2019; Bernstein, 2021). Less well understood, however, is an equally 
important aspect of household decisions — human capital investment.
Human capital is inalienable from the household (Hart and Moore, 
1994) because attained knowledge cannot be completely transferred 
from individuals to creditors. Different from labor supply, human cap-
ital investment allows households to generate future incremental in-
come (even after default) by continuing to utilize their acquired skills. 
This preserved value of human capital investment mitigates the wealth 
transfer  from  households  onto  creditors,  and  thus,  makes  it  more 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, an anonymous referee, Asaf Bernstein, Tim de Silva, Jason Donaldson, Vadim 
Elenev, Menaka Hampole, Urban Jermann, Ankit Kalda, Amir Kermani, Yiming Ma, Nadya Malenko, Peter Maxted, Timothy McQuade, Irina Merkurieva, Stijn 
Van Nieuwerburgh, Christine Parlour, James Paron, Nathaniel Pattison, Giorgia Piacentino, Christopher Stanton, Yuri Tserlukevich, Johan Walden, Wei Xiong, 
Constantine Yannelis, and Jeffrey Zwiebel, as well as the audience at UC Berkeley, the 2024 SFS Finance Cavalcade, the 2024 AFA annual conference, the 2024 
RCFS winter conference, the 2024 EFA annual conference, the 2023 AEA annual conference, the 2023 ASU Winter Conference, the 2023 Edinburgh Corporate 
Finance conference, and the 2023 MFA annual conference for comments and suggestions. This research was conducted with restricted access to Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (BLS) data. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the BLS.

E-mail addresses:  manso@haas.berkeley.edu (G. Manso), axr150331@utdallas.edu (A. Rivera), huiwang@bentley.edu (H. Wang), han.xia@utdallas.edu 

∗ Corresponding author.

(H. Xia).

1 According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. household debt jumped by its largest amount in 14 years and passed $15 trillion for the first time 
as of the second quarter of 2021. See https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/hhdc. See also (Gomes et al., 2021) for a survey of the recent literature 
studying households’ choice and management of debt, including mortgages, credit cards, and payday loans.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104141
Received 28 June 2024; Received in revised form 6 July 2025; Accepted 10 July 2025
Available online 28 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
G. Manso et al.

resilient to debt overhang compared with labor supply. In addition, 
labor supply and human capital investment are inter-temporally linked. 
Because engaging in costly human capital investment is only valuable if 
households anticipate supplying labor in the future and thereby benefit 
from the market premium for skilled labor (Autor et al., 2006), the 
response of labor supply to debt overhang can feed back into human 
capital investment decisions.

In this paper, we examine how household debt differentially affects 
the incentives for human capital investment versus labor supply, and 
how  the  two  actions  are  interconnected.  We  focus  on  one  type  of 
human capital investment – households’ labor skills acquisition after 
they start their career – because an important part of human capital 
accumulation takes place within firms (Acemoglu, 1997), and because 
this is the type for which we have compelling empirical identification. 
Given the indisputable role of human capital in delivering sustained 
economic  growth  and  the  importance  of  mitigating  human  capital 
depreciation  (e.g.,  Goldin  and  Katz,  2010;  Dinerstein  et  al.,  2022), 
this study provides relevant implications for public policies regarding 
household wealth and social welfare.

We develop a dynamic model featuring inseparability of human 
capital and an inter-temporal link between human capital and labor 
supply.  We  start  by  showing  that  individual  incentives  to  acquire 
labor skills are hump-shaped with respect to the level of household 
indebtedness. Such behavior can be explained by the interplay of two 
opposing forces. The first force emerges directly from the conventional 
diminishing marginal utility of consumption implied by risk aversion. 
As household indebtedness increases, a larger fraction of its income 
accrues to creditors via debt repayment and the household’s overall 
level of consumption declines. In this case, the higher marginal utility 
of consumption incentivizes the household to acquire human capital 
and raise consumption. Under this diminishing marginal utility force, 
effort in skills acquisition is increasing in household indebtedness.

This first force interplays with the debt overhang force stating that 
households  do  not  fully  internalize  the  benefits  of  acquiring  labor 
skills. This is because such effort allows households to increase their 
earnings through improved productivity, and hence continue to fulfill 
debt obligations, instead of discharging them by bankruptcy (e.g., He, 
2011;  Diamond  and  He,  2014).  Thus,  debt  overhang  constitutes  a 
transfer of wealth from households to lenders, rendering effort in skills 
acquisition a decreasing function of indebtedness. This second force 
becomes dominant when household indebtedness surpasses a threshold 
and default becomes more probable. The two forces together yield a 
hump-shaped relation between indebtedness and skills acquisition.

Labor supply exhibits a similar hump-shape with respect to house-
hold indebtedness — reflecting the interplay of diminishing marginal 
utility and debt overhang, yet with notable differences. Because labor 
supply generates transitory income, no additional benefits accrue to 
the household once it is used to pay creditors. Thus, compared to skills 
acquisition, labor supply faces greater wealth transfer from households 
to lenders, making it more susceptible to debt overhang. This distinc-
tion results in an earlier decline in the supply of labor as households 
approach default — that is, labor supply begins to drop at a lower level 
of household indebtedness. We refer to this observation as an earlier 
manifestation of debt overhang. Once debt overhang takes place, labor 
supply also drops at a faster rate than skills acquisition. Compared 
to  a  benchmark  case  that  mutes  the  presence  of  default  (and  thus 
debt overhang), households’ labor supply decision exhibits a greater 
distortion than skills acquisition, attributable to the inalienability of 
human capital.

Importantly, the sharp decay of labor supply feeds back into house-
holds’ skills acquisition decisions ex ante. Because skills acquisition 
effort increases households’ marginal productivity, this effort is only 
valuable if households anticipate supplying labor in the future. As such, 
we find that when labor supply is expected to collapse due to debt 
overhang, it suppresses households’ incentives to acquire labor skills in 
the first place — a ‘‘back-propagation’’ effect. This is particularly the 

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

case when the cost of these two actions features high substitutability, 
i.e., when households are forced to choose one over the other. In this 
case, households optimally choose skills acquisition over labor supply 
near bankruptcy (because of human capital’s preserved value), and 
the anticipated reduction in labor supply discourages human capital 
investment ex ante. This finding suggests that studying the balance 
sheet effects on household policies needs to account for the fact that 
household  skills  acquisition  and  labor  supply  decisions  are  deeply 
intertwined.

The nuances between skills acquisition and labor supply are further 
illustrated by comparative statics analyses. For example, when skills 
depreciate quickly, that is, when the payoffs of skills acquisition are 
concentrated in the shorter term — leaving little value in the future and 
much like the case of transitory income from labor supply, the relation 
between skills acquisition and household indebtedness converges to 
that of labor supply. In such a case, the two actions resemble each other 
in terms of their low resilience to debt overhang. In addition, we find 
that when hourly wages become more volatile, risk-averse households 
not  only  boost  their  effort  in  acquiring  labor  skills  —  reflecting  a 
‘‘precautionary’’ motive to hedge against uncertainty, but also increase 
labor supply accordingly to materialize the premium for skilled labor.
In the next part of our study, we take the theoretical predictions 
to data. Our empirical analyses employ the 1979 National Longitu-
dinal Surveys (hereafter, NLSY79). NLSY79 is a longitudinal project 
conducted by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. It surveys a represen-
tative sample of American residents since their teen ages, and tracks 
various financial and professional information throughout their lives. 
The survey provides itemized balance sheet information, which allows 
us to measure household indebtedness.

Importantly, NLSY79 contains information about individuals’ par-
ticipation in training programs after the start of their careers — which 
we  employ  to  capture  labor  skills  acquisition  and  thereby,  human 
capital investment. This measurement is inspired by Acemoglu (1997), 
who posits that ‘‘in modern economics, a large portion of human capital 
investments takes place within firms in the form of training.’’2 By observing 
whether an individual participates in training and the duration of the 
participation,  we  can  study  how  skills  acquisition  varies  with  debt 
overhang arising from household indebtedness. In contrast, college ed-
ucation – another type of human capital investment – is mostly funded 
by federal student debt. Because this type of debt is non-dischargeable 
in bankruptcy, it largely mutes the debt overhang force that we aim to 
study.3

Several features of the training data are important for fitting our 
theoretical framework. First, NLSY79 indicates whether the training 
is  initiated  by  an  individual  or  requested  by  her  employer.  There-
fore, we can differentiate individual decisions – corresponding to the 
modeled  skills  acquisition  incentives  –  from  obligatory  behavior  to 
fulfill  employers’  requirements.  Second,  for  each  training  program, 
we observe which party pays for the training cost. By focusing on 
training programs not paid by individuals themselves (but by e.g., em-
ployers or the government instead), we can mute the effect of finan-
cial constraints (affordability) in explaining human capital investment 
(e.g., Chakrabarti et al., 2023; Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2012). In 
this case, we isolate how household indebtedness affects skills acqui-
sition by shaping individuals’ incentives — instead of their financial 
capacities. Lastly, the NLSY79 provides each individual’s week-by-week 
labor records, allowing us to measure labor supply and contrast it with 
skills acquisition.

We construct a sample of 6867 individuals surveyed by NLSY79. 
We find that our theoretical predictions are born in the data. We first 

2 Relatedly, Clifford and Gerken (2021) find that in the financial service in-
dustry, financial advisors advance their human capital through the attainment 
of professional licenses after starting their careers.

3 Section  3.4  provides  more  detailed  discussions  of  this  point.  See 

also (Yannelis, 2020) and Manso et al. (2024) for related analyses.

G. Manso et al.

document  a  hump-shaped  relation  between  household  indebtedness 
and skills acquisition. Training participation initially increases with 
indebtedness, and it peaks around 59% of household leverage.4 After 
that point, further increase in indebtedness switches to discouraging 
training take-up. Labor supply shows a similar hump shape. However, 
it  begins  to  decline  at  a  significantly  lower  level  of  household  in-
debtedness (around 33%), indicating the earlier manifestation of debt 
overhang predicted by the model.5

In  addition,  this  hump  shape  exhibits  variation  with  respect  to 
skills’  depreciation  rates  and  income  uncertainty,  in  line  with  the 
model’s comparative statics. We capture skills depreciation based on 
their exposure to technology in the spirit of Kogan et al. (2024), as 
well as changes in an individual’s wage path around the completion 
of skills acquisition. We find that skills with high depreciation rates – 
resembling the case of transitory income from labor supply – exhibit a 
pattern similar to that of labor supply. In such a case, skills acquisition 
begins to drop at a lower level of household indebtedness, giving rise 
to the earlier manifestation of debt overhang. This result reinforces the 
role of human capital’s inalienability in driving our results. We also 
find similar patterns regarding income uncertainty as per the model’s 
prediction.

Our empirical results are obtained after we include a host of con-
trol variables including individuals’ gender, ethnicity, education level, 
marital status, employment status, life-cycle related factors, as well 
as multiple layers of fixed effects. In addition, for any unobservable 
confounding factors to explain our results, they must correlate with 
household indebtedness in such a way as to differentially affect training 
participation (or labor supply) depending on the level of indebted-
ness. For instance, if certain characteristics encourage households to 
enroll  in  training  at  a  lower  household  indebtedness,  then  the  ef-
fect of these characteristics must reverse when indebtedness becomes 
higher. Nevertheless, to further filter out such possibilities, we perform 
an  instrumental  variable  analysis,  in  the  spirit  of  Bernstein  (2021) 
and  Gopalan  et  al.  (2021),  based  on  plausibly  exogenous  variation 
in individuals’ mortgage-loan-to-value ratio due to the dynamics of 
housing market conditions. We confirm our main findings.

The effect of household debt on individual decisions has received 
growing attention in recent literature. Using a labor-search model, Don-
aldson et al. (2019) study labor supply decisions of indebted households 
protected by limited liability. They show that a debt overhang problem 
makes households reluctant to work because they must use their wages 
to make debt repayments. This behavior is similar to indebted firms in 
corporate finance. Consequently, employers pay higher wages to attract 
workers and, in equilibrium, post fewer vacancies due to heightened 
labor costs, leading to low employment. Donaldson et al. (2019) posit 
that  policies  intended  to  reduce  household  debt  can  mitigate  debt 
overhang, restore labor supply incentives, and increase employment.

We perform a simulation analysis to derive implications regarding 
debt forgiveness, complementing those from Donaldson et al. (2019). 
We focus on the two extensions of our model relative to theirs: (i) 
household risk aversion and (ii) skills acquisition. We show that debt 
forgiveness programs may initially promote households’ skills acqui-
sition  and  labor  supply  –  due  to  the  mitigation  of  debt  overhang; 
however, excessive debt forgiveness undermines any benefits of moder-
ate indebtedness – due to the diminishing marginal utility force implied 
by risk aversion. Hence, an optimal level of debt forgiveness obtains 
for both actions. Furthermore, because the effect of household indebt-
edness switches (from encouraging to discouraging efforts) at different 
indebtedness levels for skills acquisition and labor supply, the optimal 
debt forgiveness varies accordingly across the two actions. There exists 
a region in which mitigating an additional dollar of debt promotes 

4 We discuss the measurement of household leverage in Section 3.3.
5 In supplementary analyses, we also find that the decline in labor supply 

is sharper than that in skills acquisition. See Online Appendix B.2.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

labor supply while impeding skills acquisition. To the extent that skills 
acquisition  entails  a  longer-term  impact  on  household  income  than 
labor supply, such a trade-off should be considered by policymakers 
regarding short-term and longer-term income generation. In Section 5, 
we discuss practical scenarios in which this trade-off can be relevant 
for policymakers.

Our  study  additionally  contributes  to  several  strands  of  litera-
ture. Hart and Moore (1994) highlights the role of the inalienabil-
ity  of  human  capital  in  corporate  finance  settings.  They  focus  on 
the human capital of entrepreneurs and characterize the associated 
optimal  financial  contracts  between  the  entrepreneur  and  external 
financiers. We build on this key insight about human capital to ra-
tionalize the relationship between household indebtedness and human 
capital investment.

More broadly, our paper is related to the theoretical literature study-
ing household work incentives. Lazear (2000) provides a framework 
to  study  on-the-job  incentives.  Lazear  et  al.  (2016)  rationalize  the 
finding that worker productivity increases during recessions thereby 
‘‘making do with less’’. Their key mechanism hinges upon the greater 
incentives to exert effort in workplaces since unemployment goes up 
in recessions, increasing the opportunity cost of shirking. Chetty and 
Szeidl (2007) explain high short-term elasticity of labor supply as a 
result of high risk-aversion induced by consumption commitment with 
respect to small and short-lived shocks. Our paper abstracts from the 
impact of macroeconomic conditions and consumption commitments 
on household work incentives, and instead focuses on the relationship 
between household balance sheets and skills acquisition.6

Our paper also borrows insights from the large corporate finance 
literature exploring the impact of debt financing on firms’ investment 
decisions. Myers (1977) seminal contribution shows the distortionary 
effect of debt overhang on firm investment in a static setting. Hennessy 
(2004)  develops  the  first  dynamic  setting  in  which  debt  overhang 
can be directly linked to Tobin’s Q and characterizes the magnitude 
of debt overhang throughout the life of the firm. Chen and Manso 
(2017) quantify debt overhang costs within a dynamic capital structure 
model endowed with systematic macro-economic risks.7 More recently, 
multiple  papers  have  studied  various  mechanisms  to  mitigate  debt 
overhang. For example, Hackbarth and Mauer (2012) explores debt pri-
ority, Diamond and He (2014) explores debt maturity, and Bensoussan 
et al. (2021) explores performance sensitive debt in the spirit of Manso 
et al. (2010), among others. Our paper contributes to this literature by 
developing the first dynamic household finance model examining debt 
overhang on human capital investment. Unlike canonical models of 
corporate finance — in which the firm ‘‘ceases to exist’’ or is transferred 
to creditors after bankruptcy, households carry on with their lives post 
bankruptcy, offering them opportunities to materialize the continuation 
value of acquired human capital.8

6 Our work is also related to the public finance literature analyzing financial 
constraints and human capital acquisition. Boldrin and Montes (2005) study 
the role of the welfare state in financing human capital acquisition in an in-
tergenerational model with exogenous borrowing constraints, while Andolfatto 
and Gervais (2006) provide additional insights when borrowing constraints are 
endogenous. Relatedly, Livshits et al. (2007) explore the impact of bankruptcy 
rules on household debt overhang and emphasize the importance of persistent 
versus transitory shocks. Chen and Zhao (2017) study the interaction of labor 
market and bankruptcy decisions and find that Chapter 7 filings lead to a 
higher labor supply compared to counterfactual repayment or Chapter 13 
filings. In a model without defaultable debt, Griffy (2021) shows that poorer 
households choose to increase labor supply at the expense of human capital 
acquisition, due to a high marginal utility of consumption.

7 Other papers studying firms’ dynamic investment and financing decisions 
include Mello and Parsons (1992), Mauer and Triantis (1994), Mauer and 
Ott (2000), Titman et al. (2004), Ju and Ou-Yang (2006), Moyen (2007), 
Sundaresan and Wang (2007), Tserlukevich (2008), Strebulaev and Whited 
(2012); and Hackbarth et al. (2022).

3 

G. Manso et al.

On  the  empirical  side,  existing  literature  finds  both  a  negative 
and positive effect of household indebtedness on individual decisions. 
Regarding  negative  effects,  the  growing  literature  finds  that  rising 
household debt reduces labor income and mobility.9 Household debt 
may also reduce residential home improvement (Melzer, 2017) and 
inventors’  productivity  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2021).  Regarding  positive 
effects, Zator (2025) shows that higher mortgage interest rates encour-
age households to work and earn more to cover increased mortgage 
payments.10 Our main contribution to this literature is to document, in 
a unified theoretical framework, that household indebtedness’s positive 
and negative effects co-exist and their presence depends on the regimes 
of  indebtedness.  As  such,  our  work  depicts  a  fuller  picture  of  the 
relationship between household indebtedness and decisions.

2. Model

2.1. Model setup

An infinitely lived household derives utility from consumption 𝐶𝑡, 
and  dis-utility  from  exerting  effort  in  acquiring  labor  skills  𝑎𝑡.  La-
bor skills increase the household’s productivity and hourly wage. The 
household is free to choose how many hours to work – i.e., its labor 
supply (𝑙𝑡) – at a given hourly wage. Similar to skills acquisition, labor 
supply is costly and generates dis-utility for the household.

Different from risk-neutral corporations (thanks to diversification), 
a typical household is assumed to be risk-averse. For tractability, we 
assume  logarithmic  consumption  preferences  and  quadratic  cost  of 
skills acquisition and labor supply, such that per-period utility is given 
by: 

𝑢(𝐶, 𝑎, 𝑙) = log 𝐶 − 𝑔(𝑎, 𝑙),

where

𝑔(𝑎, 𝑙) = 𝜃𝑎

𝑎2
2

+ 𝜃𝑙

𝑙2
2

+ 𝜃𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑙. (1)

𝜃𝑎  and  𝜃𝑙  denote  the  marginal  cost  of  skills  acquisition  and  labor 
supply, respectively. 𝜃𝑎𝑙 captures the relative complementarity between 
exerting effort in skills acquisition and supplying labor. A negative 𝜃𝑎𝑙
indicates that the cost of skills acquisition partially offsets the cost of 
labor supply (or vice versa), yielding a high level of complementarity. 
Conversely, a positive 𝜃𝑎𝑙 indicates a low level of complementarity (or 
a high level of substitution). In the baseline model, we focus on the 
case in which skills acquisition and labor supply costs are independent 
of each other (i.e., 𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0). We then explore the rich nuances of the 
model when 𝜃𝑎𝑙 varies. Importantly, to match our empirical focus on 
training programs not paid by individuals themselves (see Section 3), 
skills acquisition does not command a monetary cost in our model.

A household’s lifetime utility from consumption, skills acquisition, 

and labor supply, {𝐶𝑡, 𝑎𝑡, 𝑙𝑡}𝑡≥0, is given by 

E

[

∞

∫
0

𝑒−𝛿𝑡𝑢(𝐶𝑡, 𝑎𝑡, 𝑙𝑡)𝑑𝑡

]

,

(2)

where 𝛿 > 0 is the household’s subjective discount rate.

Denote 𝐾𝑡

≥ 0 as the hourly labor income per-period. The dynamics 
of 𝐾 are given by the (controlled) geometric Brownian motion (GBM) 
process: 

𝑑𝐾𝑡 = 𝐾𝑡[(𝑎𝑡 − 𝜌)𝑑𝑡 + 𝜎𝑑𝐵𝑡],

(3)

8 To this end, our implications can apply to an extended corporate model, 
in which the existing intangible assets (e.g., supplier or bank relationships) 
can be redeployed after bankruptcy, by the same set of prior shareholders for 
a new venture.

9 See Ferreira et al. (2010, 2011), Dobbie and Song (2015), Brown and 
Matsa (2020), Bernstein and Struyven (2022) and Gopalan et al. (2021), Di 
Maggio et al. (2024).
10 Studying lottery settings, Imbens et al. (2001) and Cesarini et al. (2017) 
find  that  increases  in  household  wealth  (ceteris  paribus  a  reduction  in 
household  indebtedness)  reduce  labor  supply.  On  the  other  hand,  Rizzo 
and  Zeckhauser  (2003)  find  that  wealth  shortfalls  from  a  reference  point 
incentivize households to boost earnings.

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

where 𝐵𝑡 is a standard Brownian motion, and 𝜎 > 0 is a proxy for 
labor income uncertainty, which we assume to be purely idiosyncratic. 
≥ 0 in acquiring labor skills makes 
Eq. (3) implies that exerting effort 𝑎𝑡
the household more productive, thereby increasing the future hourly 
wages. However, the value of acquiring labor skills declines over time, 
captured by a depreciation rate 𝜌 > 0. The depreciation reflects that in 
reality, acquired skills (or more broadly human capital) do not always 
retain the initial value as time goes by. Naturally, the depreciation rate 
varies across skills, and in later analyses, we study the comparative 
statics of our model with respect to 𝜌.

Total wages 𝑊𝑡 = 𝑙𝑡𝐾𝑡 are the product of hourly income and the 
number of working hours (labor supply). Initially, households have 
complete access to credit markets, and can borrow and save at the risk-
free rates in order to smooth consumption. Household savings 𝑆𝑡 evolve 
according to:

𝑑𝑆𝑡 = (𝑟(𝑆𝑡)𝑆𝑡 − 𝐶𝑡 + 𝑊𝑡)𝑑𝑡 if 𝑡 ≤ 𝜏𝐷,
𝑆𝑡 = 0 if 𝑡 > 𝜏𝐷,

(4)

(5)

where 𝜏𝐷 denotes the time at which the household chooses to default. 
Households face a maximum borrowing limit, which we model as a 
multiple |𝑠| of the household’s earnings upon default. At the time when 
the borrowing limit is reached, denoted by 𝜏, the household defaults, 
≤ 𝜏. This modeling choice reflects an exogenous bor-
implying that 𝜏𝐷
rowing limit akin to that in the dynamic corporate finance literature. 
See, e.g., Longstaff and Schwartz (1995) and Section V  in Bolton et al. 
(2011). We set the interest rate 𝑟(𝑆𝑡) = 𝑟𝐵 when the household is 
borrowing (i.e., when 𝑆𝑡 < 0) and 𝑟(𝑆𝑡) = 𝑟𝑆 < 𝑟𝐵 when the household 
≥ 0), reflecting the observation that interest 
is saving (i.e., when 𝑆𝑡
rates for household savings are lower than those of household debt.

Prior  to  default,  Eq.  (4)  states  that  wages  are  deposited  in  the 
savings  account.  Savings  accrue  interest  at  rate  𝑟(𝑆𝑡)  and  are  used 
to pay for household consumption. Upon default, Eq. (5) states that 
households discharge all of their debts and are henceforth shunned 
from credit markets, forcing their savings (and debts) to be zero. This 
equation  reflects  that  (i)  a  majority  of  households  that  go  through 
bankruptcy file Chapter 7 — in which case debtors discharge eligible 
debts, and (ii) default often hurts debtors’ creditworthiness, thereby 
limiting their ability to borrow (e.g., Dobbie and Song, 2015; Dobbie 
et al., 2020; Kleiner et al., 2021).11 In Online Appendix A.6, we consider 
the case when default is less punitive (when e.g., the household may 
partially access credit markets and saving technologies after default). 
Here due to the lack of credit market access, after default the household 
will become a hand-to-mouth household, whose consumption equals his 
total wages (i.e., 𝐶𝑡 = 𝑊𝑡 for all 𝑡 > 𝜏𝐷).12

The household’s problem consists of jointly choosing consumption, 
labor skills acquisition, labor supply, and a default policy to maximize 
lifetime utility. We denote the household’s value function by 𝐹 (𝑆, 𝐾): 

𝐹 (𝑆, 𝐾) = max

𝐶,𝑎,𝑙,𝜏𝐷≤𝜏

𝜏𝐷

[

E

∫
0

𝑒−𝛿𝑡𝑢(𝐶𝑡, 𝑎𝑡, 𝑙𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝑒−𝛿𝜏𝐷 𝐻(𝐾𝜏𝐷

]
)

.

(6)

The first part of Eq.  (6) pertains to the value prior to default. It is a 
function of savings, labor skills, labor supply, and the default decision. 
The second part of the equation, 𝐻(𝐾), is the value post default. This 
value function integrates an important feature of labor skills acquisi-
≥ 0, and the 
tion. Labor skills prior to default increase hourly wages 𝐾𝑡
higher hourly wages carry over to the post-default period — reflecting 
that acquired skills are inseparable from households and thus preserve 

11 Dobbie and Song (2015) report that almost 80% of debtors in their sample 
file Chapter 7, and 98.4% of Chapter 7 filings end with a discharge of debt. 
Under Chapter 7, almost all unsecured debts are eligible for discharge. Alter-
natively, debtors can file Chapter 13 in which case filers propose repayment 
plans in exchange of protection of most assets.
12 See Kaplan et al. (2014) for evidence that a large share of households live 
hand-to-mouth.

G. Manso et al.

their value even post default. This feature, as we discuss later, is key 
for the different relations between household indebtedness and skills 
acquisition versus labor supply.

In the main model, we assume that after default, the household’s 
human capital remains intact even though it can no longer rely on 
credit markets to smooth its consumption. This way of modeling is 
to match empirical findings by Dobbie et al. (2020), who show that 
personal bankruptcy information has an economically trivial impact on 
future earnings in the U.S. labor market.13 In Online Appendix A.5, 
we consider the possibility that the value of human capital declines 
moderately after default. This decline may arise because of resistance 
from  employers  to  the  household’s  unfavorable  credit  history  –  re-
sulting in reduced employment (e.g., Bos et al., 2018), or because of 
wage garnishment until the household’s debts are repaid – effectively 
lowering the hourly wage (e.g., Yannelis, 2020; Argyle et al., 2022; 
DeFusco et al., 2024). These possibilities would partially undo the value 
preservation of human capital post default due to its inalienability. 
We show in Online Appendix A.5 that our findings are qualitatively 
unchanged in the context of the empirical measurements in Bos et al. 
(2018).

As a baseline analysis, we focus on the case in which the costs of 
skills acquisition and labor supply are independent from each other 
(i.e., 𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0). In Online Appendix A.1, we show that the value function 
and optimal policies after default can be computed in closed-form:

𝛿2𝜃𝑎 log(𝜃𝑙) + 𝛿2𝜃𝑎 + 𝛿𝜃𝑎

2𝜌 + 𝜎2)
(

− 1

𝐻(𝐾) =

1
𝛿

log 𝐾 −

𝐶(𝐾) = 𝐾𝑙(𝐾),

𝑎(𝐾) =

2𝛿3𝜃𝑎

𝑙(𝐾) =

1
𝛿𝜃𝑎

,

1
√𝜃𝑙

.

,

(7)

(8)

Eq.  (8) follows a straightforward intuition. Because the household 
becomes hand-to-mouth, its consumption equals total wages. Effort in 
acquiring labor skills is inversely proportional to the cost 𝜃𝑎 and the 
discount rate 𝛿. Because labor skills increase human capital and have 
a lasting effect on future wages, patient households will exert more 
effort in acquiring skills. By contrast, labor supply – whose return only 
impacts current income – depends exclusively on the cost of supplying 
labor 𝜃𝑙.

To solve the household optimization problem (6), we first uncover, 
in the following lemma, an important simplification that characterizes 
the optimal endogenous default policy.

Lemma 1.   The household’s optimal default policy sets 𝜏𝐷 = 𝜏.

The proof is in Online Appendix A.2. Intuitively, because debt is 
dischargeable  upon  default,  a  household  has  nothing  to  gain  from 
defaulting prior to exhausting its debt limit, and therefore setting 𝜏𝐷 <
𝜏 is never optimal.

Next,  we  proceed  to  compute  the  value  function  before  default 

𝐹 (𝑆, 𝐾), which satisfies the dynamic programming equation:

{

𝛿𝐹 (𝑆, 𝐾) = max
𝐶,𝑎,𝑙

log 𝐶 − 𝑔(𝑎, 𝑙) + 𝐹𝑆 (𝑆, 𝐾)(𝑟(𝑆)𝑆 − 𝐶 + 𝑙𝐾)

(9)

+ 𝐹𝐾 (𝑆, 𝐾)𝐾(𝑎 − 𝜌) +

1
2

𝐹𝐾𝐾 (𝑆, 𝐾)𝐾 2𝜎2

}

.

The first two terms inside the brackets represent the household’s instan-
taneous utility from consumption, skills acquisition and labor supply. 
The third term captures the change in value for the household from 
changes in savings. The fourth and fifth terms are the change in value 
induced by the dynamics of human capital 𝐾. The household chooses 
consumption, skills acquisition, and labor supply in order to maximize 

13 The authors explain that it is likely because bankruptcy contains little 
incremental value in predicting individuals’ future job performance. However, 
the authors find some modest effects of bankruptcy information on job-finding 
rates. This latter finding is consistent with Friedberg et al. (2021).

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

the quantity inside the brackets, whose first order conditions are given 
by:

1
𝐶(𝑆, 𝐾)

= 𝐹𝑆 (𝑆, 𝐾),

𝜃𝑎𝑎(𝑆, 𝐾) = 𝐹𝐾 (𝑆, 𝐾)𝐾,

𝜃𝑙𝑙(𝑆, 𝐾) = 𝐹𝑆 (𝑆, 𝐾)𝐾.

(10)

Intuitively,  the  household  chooses  consumption  in  order  to  equate 
the marginal benefit of one additional unit of consumption with the 
marginal  cost  of  reducing  savings  by  one  unit.  The  level  of  skills 
acquisition is chosen so that the marginal cost equals the marginal 
benefit of higher hourly income 𝐾. Similarly, labor supply optimally 
trades off the cost of labor for the benefits of generating higher total 
income and thereby increasing savings 𝑆. Substituting (10) into (6) 
yields a differential equation for 𝐹 (𝑆, 𝑊 ), which is solved subject to 
the boundary condition at default 𝐹 (𝑠𝑊 , 𝐾) = 𝐻(𝐾).

This differential equation cannot be solved analytically. However, 
due  to  CRRA  preferences  and  controlled  GBM  dynamics  for  hourly 
income, the value function displays homogeneity of degree one. Hence, 
in Online Appendix A.3, we show that the two state variables 𝐾 and 𝑆
can be reduced to a single state variable 𝑑𝑡, defined as: 

𝑑𝑡 =

𝑆𝑡
𝑠𝑙𝜏𝐷

𝐾𝑡

.

(11)

As implied by Eq.  (5) and Lemma  1, the household defaults (at time 
𝜏𝐷) when reaching the maximum borrowing limit, and this limit is 
denoted  as  a  multiple  |𝑠|  of  the  household’s  earnings  upon  default 
— i.e., the denominator of 𝑑𝑡. Therefore, 𝑑𝑡 captures the household’s 
savings (𝑆𝑡 > 0) or borrowing (𝑆𝑡 < 0) relative to this borrowing 
limit. Its upper bound 𝑑 = 1 corresponds to the instance when the 
household  has  reached  the  borrowing  limit  and  defaults  (note  that 
𝑠 < 0). The region of 𝑑𝑡 < 1 implies that 𝑆𝑡 > 𝑠𝑙𝜏𝐷
𝐾𝑡 (for all 𝑡) and 
accordingly, the instance when the household is away from default. 
Theoretically, 𝑑𝑡 ∈ (−∞, 1], with the negative region indicating that 
household savings become arbitrarily large. In the following, we choose 
for cosmetic purposes to focus on values of 𝑑 ≥ 0 in such a way that 
the lower bound 𝑑 = 0 represents a debt free household.14

Importantly, as shown in Fig.  1, 𝑑𝑡 predicts the probability of a 
household entering default. More precisely, we define 𝑧 as the prob-
ability that the household eventually defaults given its current level of 
indebtedness: 
𝑧(𝑑) = P(𝜏𝐷 < ∞|𝑑𝑡 = 𝑑).
𝑧(⋅) is increasing in the level of indebtedness, implying that the house-
hold is more likely to default when 𝑑 is higher. Taken together, we 
interpret the state variable 𝑑 as household indebtedness. As discussed 
below in Section 3.3, our empirical counterpart for the state variable 𝑑
similarly predicts household default, resembling the pattern of Fig.  1.

(12)

In the next section we explore the implications of our model for 
the relation between 𝑑 (household indebtedness) and skills acquisition 
versus labor supply. With a slight overload of notation, we denote skills 
acquisition as a function of indebtedness as 𝑎(𝑑) and labor supply as 
𝑙(𝑑), where 

𝑎(𝑑𝑡) = 𝑎(𝑑(𝑆𝑡, 𝐾𝑡)) = 𝑎(𝑆𝑡, 𝐾𝑡),

𝑙(𝑑𝑡) = 𝑙(𝑑(𝑆𝑡, 𝐾𝑡)) = 𝑙(𝑆𝑡, 𝐾𝑡).

(13)

The parameters used in the following numerical solutions are de-
scribed in the caption of Fig.  1. We verify that the main mechanisms of 
our baseline findings are robust to variations of these parameter values.

14 The model is solved in the entire state space of 𝑑 ≤ 1. In Online Appendix 
A.8, we present figures expanding 𝑑𝑡 to the negative region. This expansion 
does not alter the main takeaway. Visually, however, the hump shape appears 
more clustered due to the long left tail — corresponding to the region of 
substantial household savings and where the optimal skills acquisition and 
labor supply policies are not influenced by debt overhang. For the ease of 
exposition, the figures hereafter are confined to 𝑑 ∈ [0, 1].

G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Fig. 1.  Household default probability as a function of the state variable 𝑑.
Parameter values are 𝛿 = 0.05, 𝑟𝐵 = 0.08, 𝑟𝑆 = 0.01, 𝜃𝑙 = 3, 𝜃𝑎 = 300, 𝜌 = 0.15, 𝜎 = 0.3, 𝑠 = −4.5. The discount rate 𝛿 is taken from the estimates in Laibson et al. (2007). Savings interest 
rate (𝑟𝑆 ) is based on the FDIC non-jumbo deposits interest rate, and the borrowing rate (𝑟𝐵 ) is chosen between the average bank prime (mortgage) lending rate and credit card 
rate within our sample period (Section 3). The cost of supplying labor (𝜃𝑙) is set such that the annual labor supply is around 2000 h. The cost of skills acquisition (𝜃𝑎) is set 
such that the growth rate in hourly wages is comparable to the skills’ depreciation rate (𝜌). Wage volatility (𝜎) is based on the recent literature examining household earnings 
volatility (e.g., Shin and Solon, 2011). We set the limit for borrowing (i.e., the negative of saving) 𝑠 to match approximately the 85th percentile of our sample distribution of the 
debt-to-income ratio when individuals file for bankruptcy.

Fig. 2.  Effort in skills acquisition and household labor supply. Parameter values follow those of Fig.  1.

2.2. Optimal skills acquisition policy

The solid lines in Fig.  2 illustrate the baseline results of the model. 
Panel A shows that there is a hump-shaped relation between house-
hold  indebtedness  (confined  between  0  and  1  as  discussed  in  Eq. 
(11)) and skills acquisition: increasing indebtedness initially encour-
ages  the  household  to  exert  higher  effort  in  acquiring  labor  skills, 
but discourages it from doing so after indebtedness reaches a certain 
threshold.

This relation arises from the interplay of two forces. The first force 
arises directly from the conventional diminishing marginal utility of 
consumption implied by risk aversion. When a household has high 
indebtedness and a large fraction of income accruing to creditors, the 
overall level of consumption is low, pushing up the marginal utility of 
an additional unit of consumption. As a result, the benefit of increasing 
human capital to raise consumption is large. Under this force, effort in 
skills acquisition increases with household indebtedness. When indebt-
edness is at a relatively low level, this force, which we refer to as the
diminishing marginal utility force, dominates.

However, when household indebtedness increases above a thresh-
old, the second force, debt overhang, becomes dominant. As the house-
hold gets close to bankruptcy, it fails to internalize all the benefits of 
effort in acquiring labor skills. Because the household discharges its 
debt in bankruptcy, a fraction of the incremental wages generated by 
skills acquired before default goes to paying debts, constituting a wealth 
transfer from the household onto lenders. Hence, the household will 
choose to exert less effort in acquiring skills when it is near bankruptcy. 
This debt overhang force makes effort a decreasing function of house-
hold indebtedness. It is dominant when indebtedness reaches a high 
level and default becomes more probable (Fig.  1).15 The combination 
of the two forces renders skills acquisition hump shaped with respect 
to indebtedness, as shown in Panel A.

15 Manso (2008) shows that in settings with high investment reversibility, 
the  cost  of  debt  overhang  can  be  arbitrarily  small.  In  our  model,  how-
ever, human capital investment is highly irreversible, making debt overhang 
economically significant.

6 

G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Fig. 3.  Illustration of dynamic complementarity between human capital and labor supply. Other parameter values follow those of Fig.  1.

To assess the extent of distortion in households’ skills acquisition 
driven by debt overhang, we include a dashed line in Panel A depicting 
the benchmark policies in the absence of default.16 Because the house-
hold always repays debt in this case, it becomes the residual claimant 
of effort and thus, its optimal skills acquisition policy is not distorted 
by the presence of debt overhang.

Panel A shows that the dashed line overlaps with the solid line 
when household indebtedness is low — i.e., when default (and debt 
overhang) is not an imminent consideration. As indebtedness increases 
to a higher level, the dashed line does not decline as the solid line does. 
This is because without debt overhang, only the diminishing marginal 
utility force is at play, rendering skills acquisition an increasing func-
tion of indebtedness across the entire regime. Accordingly, the wedge 
between the dashed and solid lines captures the distortionary impact of 
debt overhang on 𝑎(𝑑). As expected, when indebtedness increases, the 
debt overhang force becomes increasingly dominant, augmenting the 
extent of distortion.

benefits of enhanced human capital, which is inseparable from the 
household and preserves its value even after default (as reflected in Eq. 
(6)). Such different resilience to debt overhang in turn drives the asym-
metric manifestation of debt overhang — that is, the ‘‘switching point’’ 
of the hump shape for labor supply occurs at an earlier stage (a lower 
level of indebtedness) than that for skills acquisition. In Section 4.1, we 
provide empirical evidence supporting this asymmetric pattern.17

Incorporating skills acquisition extends the findings on labor supply 
in Donaldson et al. (2019). In Section 5, we build on this extension, 
along with household risk aversion introduced in our model, to derive 
policy implications for debt forgiveness policies.

We similarly plot households’ optimal policies in the benchmark 
case without default (the dashed line in Panel B). As expected, the 
wedge between the two lines is more prominent (at the high level of 
indebtedness) than that in Panel A, reflecting a larger extent of distor-
tion in the case of labor supply. This difference is again attributable to 
the inalienability of household human capital.18

2.3. Contrast between skills acquisition and labor supply

2.4. Dynamic complementarity between human capital and labor supply

In Panel B of Fig.  2, we plot the optimal policy for households’ 
labor supply. There is also a hump-shaped relation between household 
indebtedness and the supply of labor.  This relationship is similarly 
shaped by the interplay of the two forces: diminishing marginal utility
versus debt overhang. However, an important difference emerges.

Relatively to the case of skills acquisition, the debt overhang for 
labor supply emerges at a lower level of household indebtedness — an 
earlier manifestation of debt overhang. The intuition of this dissimilar-
ity is as follows. Labor supply generates only transitory income, and 
once it is used to pay creditors, no additional benefits accrue to the 
household. Given that the household is protected by limited liability, 
it is discouraged from supplying labor because any incremental income 
will be used to fulfill debt obligations, postponing debt discharge and 
benefiting the creditors. By contrast, the household will still reap the 

16 We do so by letting 𝐻(𝐾) → −∞ in Eq.  (8). That is, we assume that 
default is sufficiently punitive such that the household does not find it optimal 
to default on its debt.

We next expand the baseline analysis to incorporate the role of 
dynamic complementarity between skills acquisition and labor supply. 
In Fig.  3, we illustrate the role of this dynamic complementarity by 
changing the degree of substitutability between effort and labor supply, 
as captured by 𝜃𝑎𝑙. Panels A and B show the optimal policies of the 

17 In addition, we also observe that after debt overhang kicks in, labor supply 
decreases more substantially than skills acquisition — a sharper manifestation 
of debt overhang. This observation likewise follows the intuition that skills 
acquisition is more resilient to debt overhang.
18 In an unreported extension of the model, we consider the possibility 
of ‘‘learning-by-doing’’ (Arrow, 1962), in which individuals can accumulate 
labor  skills  at  work,  and  skills  acquired  this  way  similarly  increase  their 
hourly wages as does training. We show that as long as the increment in 
hourly wages induced by training outpaces that by labor supply — that is, as 
long as ‘‘learning-by-training’’ remains a more effective way to acquire skills 
than ‘‘learning-by-doing’’, the thrust of our main findings, i.e., human capital 
investment  is  more  resilient  to  debt  overhang  than  labor  supply,  remains 
qualitatively robust.

7 

G. Manso et al.

two actions when the costs are independent 𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0 (solid lines) versus 
when they are substitutes 𝜃𝑎𝑙 > 0 (dotted lines), respectively. In reality, 
households are often in need of choosing between skills acquisition 
and labor supply due to, e.g., time constraints. Thus, effort in one 
action inevitably raises the cost of performing the other, making them 
substitutes.

We start with Panel B. This panel shows that for high household 
indebtedness (>0.4), the supply of labor collapses more quickly for 𝜃𝑎𝑙 >
0 (the dotted line) than for 𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0 (the solid line). Intuitively, when 
labor supply and skills acquisition are substitutes, the household must 
focus on one of the two actions. Because human capital is inseparable 
and continues to generate value after default, the household chooses 
skills acquisition over labor supply near bankruptcy. This preference 
makes labor supply decline even faster – reflecting the aggravated debt 
overhang – compared to the baseline case (𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0). In contrast, by 
comparing the two lines in Panel A, we do not see such a fast collapse 
in skills acquisition during high indebtedness.

Importantly, this collapse of labor supply due to aggravated debt 
overhang feeds back into the skills acquisition policies. Because effort in 
skills acquisition increases hourly wages, such effort is only valuable if 
the household anticipates supplying labor in the future. Put differently, 
should the household decide to stop working, it would be suboptimal 
to increase hourly wages (through costly skills acquisition) in the first 
place. Such a ‘‘back-propagation’’ effect is shown in Panel A. Here we 
observe that the dotted line (𝜃𝑎𝑙 > 0) is below the black line (𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0) 
during lower levels of household indebtedness. It suggests that, in the 
case of substitution, the anticipation that the household will quickly 
reduce labor supply in the future discourages it from acquiring human 
capital ex ante.

In Panels C and D, we perform an analogous exercise for the case 
of 𝜃𝑎𝑙 < 0, that is, when the cost of labor supply alleviates the cost of 
skills acquisition, making them complements. In practice, the case of 
complementarity is arguably less common than the case of substitution. 
Nevertheless, complementarity may happen when, e.g., the intellectual 
improvement from training programs enhances an individual’s compe-
tence at work, thus lowering the psychological burden and the utility 
cost of labor supply.

Several differences emerge in the case of 𝜃𝑎𝑙 < 0. Unsurprisingly, 
Panel D shows that the decline in labor supply for high indebtedness 
(> 0.4) is less prominent under complementarity (𝜃𝑎𝑙 < 0) than the solid 
line (𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0). This pattern reflects that supplying labor now partially 
offsets the cost of accumulating more valuable human capital, thereby 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

making the household less averse to providing labor than the baseline 
case. Accordingly, the anticipated ample labor supply makes boosting 
hourly wages more fruitful, encouraging the household to acquire labor 
skills ex ante — the reverse of the back-propagation effect. Indeed, we 
see that in Panel C, the dotted line lies above the solid line, in contrast 
to Panel A. In Online Appendix A.4, we provide further nuances of this 
back-propagation effect in the expanded parameter space.

2.5. Comparative statics

In this section, we explore the heterogeneity of the baseline relation 
between household indebtedness and skills acquisition with respect to 
the model parameters. As discussed, one unique feature of labor skills 
acquisition is its inseparability. As long as the household can utilize 
acquired skills, they preserve the value and continue to generate incre-
mental earnings even after default. We therefore start by considering 
such preserved value, determined by the degree of skills depreciation 
𝜌.

2.5.1. Comparative statics with respect to 𝜌

To fix ideas, Panel A of Fig.  4 illustrates the effect of different 
depreciation rates on the preserved value of skills. It plots changes in 
the expected path of hourly wages, denoted 𝛥𝐾𝑡, when the household 
exerts one additional unit of effort at time 𝑡 = 0 (relative to its baseline 
effort level) for two values of 𝜌, high versus low. Even though hourly 
wages in the two cases increase by the same amount in the short term, 
in the long run, the increments decay more quickly in the case of high 
depreciation 𝜌. Therefore, a larger 𝜌 implies that the returns of skills 
acquisition are more front-loaded in time — that is, a larger proportion 
of the total benefit from acquiring labor skills is materialized in the 
shorter term. Therefore, with a higher value of 𝜌, a larger share of skills’ 
total benefits will be allocated to paying back debt (before default), 
creating a greater transfer of wealth from the household to lenders. 
In the extreme case when skills depreciate fast enough, all benefits of 
skills acquisition will be materialized immediately and thus, accrues to 
lenders, leaving no further benefit to the households. In this limiting 
case, skills effectively ‘‘lose’’ the inseparability attribute, and become 
similar to labor supply.

Panel B illustrates this intuition. The dashed (resp. solid) line rep-
resents skills acquisition as a function of household indebtedness when 

Fig. 4.  Comparative statics with respect to the depreciation rate of labor skills parameter 𝜌. Other parameter values follow those of Fig.  1.

8 

G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

3. Data, variable construction, and summary statistics

3.1. The 1979 National Longitudinal Survey Youth

Our main data source is the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey 
Youth (NLSY79), a program run by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
NLSY79 surveys a sample of Americans born between 1957 and 1964, 
and follows their lives through multiple rounds of interviews. The first 
interview was conducted in 1979, when the respondents aged between 
14 and 22. Follow-up interviews were conducted annually from 1979 
to 1994 (round 1 to round 16), and biennially since 1996 (round 17). 
As of the 2014 survey — the latest survey included in our analyses, the 
respondents had turned 49 to 58 years old. Our sample consists of the 
respondent-survey-year panel (hereafter, respondent-year panel). The 
detailed description of the survey and survey questions are available on 
the website of the National Longitudinal Surveys (https://www.nlsinfo.
org/).

3.2. Information on skills acquisition

Several sets of information from NLSY79 are important for testing 
the  model  predictions:  individuals’  on-career  training  participation, 
labor supply, and household balance sheets.

We  employ  individuals’  training  participation  after  the  start  of 
their careers to capture labor skills acquisition, and thus, human cap-
ital investments. This measurement is inspired by Acemoglu (1997), 
who posits that ‘‘in modern economics, a large portion of human capital 
investments  takes  place  within  firms  in  the  form  of  training.’’  In  each 
survey, respondents are asked to provide information about the training 
programs that they have taken since the last survey, including whether 
they have enrolled in any vocational or technical training designed to 
learn or improve job-related skills,20 whether the training participation 
is applied for by the respondents or are required by their employers, 
the entity that pays for the programs (e.g., employer, self or family, 
and government),21 the starting and completion date of each training 
program, and the average number of hours per week respondents spend 
on training.

This set of information is useful for fitting our empirical analyses 
to the theoretical framework. First, because we observe whether the 
training is initiated by individuals or requested by their employers, 
we can differentiate individuals’ incentives in skills acquisition from 
obligatory behavior to fulfill employer requirements. Second, because 
we  observe  which  party  pays  the  training  cost,  we  can  mute  the 
effect of financial constraints (affordability) in explaining our results 
— by focusing on programs not paid by individuals themselves. More 
specifically, households’ indebtedness often correlates with financial 
constraints: Those with high (low) indebtedness are more (less) likely 
constrained, which may in turn affect their human capital investment 
decisions (e.g., Chakrabarti et al., 2023; Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 
2012). By focusing on self-requested and non-self-paid training partic-
ipation, our empirical analyses speak to how household indebtedness 
affects skills acquisition through shaping individuals’ incentives.22

The NLSY79 begins to collect basic questions about training par-
ticipation  since  the  1979  survey  (round  1),  and  supplements  these 

20 More specifically, NLSY79 classifies training purposes into six categories: 
(1) to maintain and upgrade skills, (2) to learn new methods or processes, 
(3) to get job promotion or job advancement, (4) to obtain a license or a 
certificate, (5) to begin a job, and (6) to look for a new job.
21 Government is a funding source for government sponsored training pro-
grams, such as Job training Partnership Act (JTPA), Trade Adjustment Act 
(TAA), and Work Incentive Program (WIN).
22 In  complementary  studies,  Ji  (2021)  and  Hampole  (2024)  show  that 
financial frictions related to student debt borrowing affects individuals’ choice 
of major in college as well as job search decisions, driven by the trade off 
between initial earnings and lifetime earnings.

Fig. 5.  Comparative statics with respect to hourly wage volatility 𝜎. Other parameter 
values follow those of Fig.  1.

𝜌 is high (resp. low).19 We observe that when 𝜌 is high, the decline 
in skills acquisition due to debt overhang emerges relatively early (at 
𝑑 = 0.45), as indicated by the dotted vertical line. It is similar to 
the switching point of labor supply shown in Fig.  2 (at 𝑑 = 0.43). 
Such similarity reflects that skills acquisition under high depreciation 
is not as resilient to debt overhang, due to the partial loss of skills’ 
inseparability attribute. In contrast, when 𝜌 is low, the switching point 
of training is postponed to 𝑑 = 0.51 (the dashed vertical line), farther 
away from that of the labor supply. In our later empirical analyses (see 
Section 4.3), we confirm such a pattern with respect to 𝜌 in the data.

2.5.2. Comparative statics with respect to 𝜎

Fig.  5 depicts comparative statics with respect to the volatility of 
hourly wages 𝜎. It shows that households facing greater hourly wage 
volatility engage in higher skills acquisition uniformly across all levels 
of household indebtedness — a pattern that we confirm in empirical 
analysis (see Section 4.4). This pattern stems from two sources. First, 
higher volatility is welfare-reducing for a risk averse household because 
uncertainty in earnings limits its ability to smooth consumption. In 
response,  the  household  adjusts  its  policies  to  counter  the  reduced 
utility — a ‘‘precautionary action’’ documented in the literature. In our 
context, the household exerts higher effort in skills acquisition, such 
that the benefits from increased future wages can partially offset the 
reduced utility due to wage uncertainty.

The second source relates to the back-propagation effect that we 
document in Section 2.4. Higher volatility not only encourages skills 
acquisition out of precautionary incentives, but also increases house-
holds’ labor supply for a similar reason, as shown in Online Appendix 
A.7. Such an increase in labor supply in turn feeds back into the ex-ante 
skills acquisition decision, further raising the effort to acquire labor 
skills.

19 For the case of high 𝜌, we lower the cost of skills acquisition 𝜃𝑎 as a 
compensating variation to keep the payoff to the household unchanged when 
evaluated  at  𝑑 = 0.  This  adjustment  helps  neutralize  any  income  effects 
(whereby  the  higher  depreciation  rate  leads  to  lower  income  levels),  and 
thus isolate the impact of human capital depreciation on skills acquisition 
incentives.

9 

G. Manso et al.

questions over time. Since 1991 (round 13), most information needed 
for our study (such as which party initiates the training) becomes avail-
able. We therefore construct the main outcome variables from 1991. 
Independent  variables  (including  control  variables)  are  constructed 
with a one-year lag starting from 1990.

3.3. Proxying for the state variable 𝑑

NLSY79 collects detailed household balance sheet information. On 
the asset side, NLSY79 surveys each respondent’s estimated market 
value of residential and non-residential property, market value of vehi-
cles, and the amount of savings and various financial assets (e.g., stocks 
and bonds). On the debt side, NLSY79 surveys the amount of mortgage 
loans, auto loans, student loans, credit card loans, and money owed 
to other individuals or entities. See Online Appendix B.7 Table B4 and 
Table B5 for the list of surveyed items.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Our model characterizes optimal policies as a function of the state 
variable 𝑑 (household indebtedness), which economically captures the 
probability of a household entering default (Fig.  1). To find an em-
pirical  counterpart  of  the  state  variable,  we  need  a  measure  that 
analogously  captures  this  default  probability.  To  this  end,  we  use 
household  net  debt  scaled  by  the  total  assets  —  namely,  the  net 
debt-to-asset ratio. Net debt equals the household’s total debt minus 
cash and cash equivalents including (i) money assets such as savings 
accounts and (ii) liquid investments such as stocks, bonds, or mutual 
funds (Online Appendix B.7 Table B5). Different from total debt, net 
debt can take negative values — an attribute shared with the state 
variable 𝑑. This happens when the household has abundant cash (or 
cash equivalents) that exceeds the amount of debt, corresponding to the 
negative region of 𝑑 as shown by Eq.  (11). We scale net debt by total 
assets to control for the overall size of household wealth, following the 

Fig. 6.  Default probability and household leverage.
This figure plots the default probability for each household leverage bin based on data from the NLSY79. In Panel A, default is identified by whether a household has missed 
mortgage or rent payments as of a given year. Missed payments are those at least 60 days past due. The NLSY79 surveys whether an individual has missed payments in the past 
five years. In Panel B, default is identified by whether a household has filed for bankruptcy as of a given year. Household leverage (in percentage) is the ratio of net debt to asset, 
as defined in Section 3.3.

10 

G. Manso et al.

corporate finance literature. For an easier exposition, we refer to this 
net debt-to-asset measure simply as household leverage.23

Economically, this leverage measure is similar in spirit as Melzer 
(2017), who documents that the ratio of household mortgage to prop-
erty value – the largest components of debt and assets among U.S. 
households – are highly indicative of their default likelihood. In Fig.  6, 
we verify that such an indication continues to hold using our measure 
of household leverage.24

Specifically,  in  Fig.   6  Panel  A,  we  plot  the  average  household 
default probability for various leverage bins. Default is identified by 
whether a household has ever missed any bill payment as of a given 
year.25 Overall, default probability increases with leverage: it remains 
relatively flat when leverage is at a low level, and accelerates once 
leverage surpasses 40%–50% — a pattern largely resembling that in 
Fig.   1  of  Section  2.1.  In  Panel  B,  we  alternatively  identify  default 
by whether a household has filed for bankruptcy as of a given year. 
By nature, bankruptcy reflects more persistent and extreme financial 
hardships. The level of default probability therefore becomes lower 
than that captured by missed payments.26 Nevertheless, we continue 
to observe that leverage strongly predicts default.

Taken together, Fig.  6 verifies that our leverage measure is a rea-

sonable empirical counterpart of the state variable 𝑑 in the model.

3.4. Student loans

Different from other forms of consumer debt (e.g., mortgages and 
credit cards), student loans in the U.S. are almost completely non-
dischargeable  in  bankruptcy  nowadays  (Yannelis,  2020).27  Because 
delinquent  student  borrowers  are  expected  to  eventually  make  up 
missed  payments  (through,  e.g.,  wage  garnishment),  non-discha-
rgeability would discourage households from reducing effort in skills 
acquisition or labor supply, thereby mitigating the debt overhang force 
that we study. In a companion paper, Manso et al. (2024) formally 
derive such an effect of student loans.

This  prediction,  however,  is  unlikely  to  confound  our  empirical 
analyses for two reasons. First, student loans were made almost non-
dischargeable since 1998, when The Higher Education Amendments of 
1998 (P.L. 105–244) took effect. Prior to that, borrowers could fully 
or partially discharge student debt in bankruptcy. Our sample consists 
of individuals born between 1957 and 1964, and we track their life 
activities until 2014. Therefore, for a large proportion of this period, 
student debt is not different from other consumer debt in terms of 
dischargeability. Second and importantly, student loans only became 
a prominent part of household debt over the past two decades. For 
the generation of our sample individuals (who likely went to college 
in the early 1980s), merely about 10% of them reported outstanding 
student loans and the unconditional average student loan amount is 

23 In the 1991, 2002, 2006, and 2010 surveys, the balance sheet information 
is entirely missing. In this case, we take the average of a respondent’s leverage 
from  two  adjacent  surveys  to  estimate  the  leverage  of  the  missing  year. 
In addition, we assign the leverage as missing if the items determining its 
calculation are missing.
24 An alternative measure to capture household default probability is the 
debt-to-income ratio, defined as the monthly debt payment to gross income. 
This  measure,  however,  is  a  less  suitable  proxy  for  the  state  variable  𝑑. 
The existing literature often uses household income to capture labor supply 
(e.g., Bernstein, 2021; Zator, 2025). Therefore, the denominator of the debt-
to-income ratio would mechanically embed one of our outcome variables: labor 
supply.
25 Missed payments are those at least 60 days past due. The NLSY79 surveys 
whether an individual has missed payments in the past five years.
26 In addition, filing for bankruptcy is associated with significant costs — 
including fees, time, and stigma. See, e.g., Kleiner et al. (2021).
27 Iuliano (2012) finds that only about 70 borrowers successfully discharged 
their student loans out of nearly 30 million borrowers in 2007.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

about $1444. This small representation is consistent with Looney and 
Yannelis (2015) who show that student loan volume in the early 1980s 
was about one tenth of what it is in recent years. We therefore expect 
student loans to play a limited role in determining household leverage 
in our sample.28

3.5. Information on labor supply

Lastly, the NLSY79 provides detailed week-by-week records of the 
respondent’s labor force status and the associated job(s), if employed, 
as well as the total number of hours he/she works each week at any 
job. Labor supply during a survey year is measured as a respondent’s 
total working hours since the last survey. This information allows us 
to  contrast  the  relation  between  household  indebtedness  and  skills 
acquisition versus labor supply, as predicted in Section 2.3.

3.6. Sample and variable construction

Our main outcome variables on training and labor supply are con-
structed from 1991 to 2014. The independent variables are constructed 
with a one-year lag starting from 1990. We exclude respondent-years 
when the respondents are younger than 25 or older than 57 (about 
10 years before retirement). This filter ensures that our sample in-
dividuals are in the labor force and thus, the decision of on-career 
training participation is relevant. In addition, we exclude individuals 
without  employers  in  a  given  year  because  by  definition,  they  do 
not have opportunities to participate in on-career training programs. 
Our analyses sample consists of 52,016 respondent-year observations 
representing 6867 respondents. They constitute the basis for our anal-
yses. In untabulated analysis, we verify that this sample shares similar 
household characteristics as the initial NLSY79 sample.

As  described  in  Section  3.2,  we  identify  skills  acquisition  as  an 
individual’s training participation that is requested by the individual 
and is not self-paid. This identification not only differentiates volun-
tary decisions from employer requirements, but also helps mute the 
confounding effect of financial constraints on training. In each survey 
year,  we  generate  an  indicator,  𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔,  which  equals  one  if  the 
respondent has requested and participated in non-self paid training 
programs since the last survey, and zero if the respondent does not 
take any voluntary training in this period.29 To capture an individual’s 
labor supply, we generate 𝐿𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑆𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑦 as the total number of hours 
the individual has worked since the last survey. The key independent 
variable is 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒, which corresponds to the modeled state variable 
𝑑 (household indebtedness) and is defined as the ratio of net debt to 
assets (Section 3.3).

We construct a host of control variables. 𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒 and 𝑊 ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒 indicate a 
respondent’s gender and ethnicity. 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠 indicates whether the 
respondent is married and 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑔𝑒 indicates whether the respondent 
has attended college as of the previous survey year. To measure a re-
spondent’s family education background, we include 𝐹 𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝐸𝑑𝑢, which 
equals the number of years of schooling that a respondent’s father has 
completed. To control for factors related to the life cycle of households, 
we include the respondent’s age and its quadratic form, 𝐴𝑔𝑒 and 𝐴𝑔𝑒2. 
In addition, we include various fixed effects to control for macro (state 

28 As a robustness test, we repeat our main analyses in Table  2 — excluding 
individuals that have outstanding student debt in a given year. We confirm our 
findings in this subsample. That is, both actions exhibit a hump-shaped relation 
with household indebtedness; the switching points for skills acquisition and 
labor supply are 0.571 and 0.341, significantly different from each other at 
the 5% level.
29 Alternatively, we generate 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑇 𝑖𝑚𝑒, defined as the total number of 
hours a respondent spends on voluntary and non-self paid training programs 
since the last survey. By definition, 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑇 𝑖𝑚𝑒 equals zero if 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 is 
zero. In Online Appendix B.7 Table B8, we show that our main findings are 
robust to this alternative measure.

11 

G. Manso et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics.
  Variable
  Training (d)
  TrainingTime (h)
  TrainingTime (h),
  Conditional on training
  Labor supply (h)

  Leverage

N

Mean

S.D.

52,016
52,016
4552

0.088
4.278
48.885

0.283
28.096
82.710

p5

0
0
1

p50

0
0
20.500

52,016

3399.730

1561.520

616

3760

52,016

0.296

0.456

−0.500

0.331

p95  
1
16
200  

6052  

1.000 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

52
1
1
1
1
17

38
1
1
1
1
12

28
0
0
0
0
4

7.790
0.500
0.485
0.485
0.497
3.873

39.301
0.504
0.620
0.623
0.556
11.186

52,016
52,016
52,016
52,016
52,016
52,016

  Age
  Male (d)
  White (d)
  MaritalStatus(d)
  College (d)
  FatherEdu (years)
This table reports summary statistics of the sample. Training is an indicator variable that 
equals one if a respondent has participated in self-requested training programs that are 
not self-paid since the previous survey, and zero otherwise. TrainingTime is the number 
of hours a respondent spends on self-requested and non-self-paid training programs 
since the previous survey. Labor Supply is the total number of hours that a respondent 
has worked since the previous survey. Leverage is the ratio of net debt to asset, defined 
in Section 3.3 and measured as of the previous survey. Age is a respondent’s age as 
of the current survey. Male and White are indicators of a respondent’s gender and 
ethnicity. MaritalStatus is an indicator for whether a respondent is married, measured 
as of the previous survey. College is an indicator for whether a respondent has attended 
college as of the previous survey. FatherEdu is the number of years of schooling that 
a respondent’s father has completed. Dummy variables are denoted by (d).

or county), industry, and occupation factors (see more discussion in 
Section 4.2). We winsorize all continuous variables at the 2.5th and 
97.5th percentile to eliminate undue effects of outliers.

The geographic location of each respondent is obtained from the 
restricted-use NLSY79 Geocode files supplementing the main NLSY79 
survey. The Geocode files track each respondent’s location in a survey. 
We obtain a license to use this information from the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics.

3.7. Summary statistics

Table  1 reports summary statistics of the sample at the respondent-
year level. 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 has a mean of 0.088 and a standard deviation of 
0.283. Conditioning on participating in training (i.e., 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 1), the 
variable 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑇 𝑖𝑚𝑒 indicates that on average, an individual spends 
approximately 49 h on training. This duration is comparable to that of 
a three-credit hour course at a U.S. university (assuming three hours 
per week and 12 to 16 weeks per semester). 𝐿𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑆𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑦 (in hours) 
has a mean of 3400 and a standard deviation of 1562.30 These working 
hours represent, on average, 33% of available hours (based on 24 h a 
day and 5 days a week). The main independent variable 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 has a 
mean of 0.296 (29.6%) and a standard deviation of 0.456. As discussed 
in Section 3.3, 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 can take negative values when a household’s 
cash and cash equivalents exceeds the amount of debt, as shown by the 
5th percentile.

4. Empirical findings

4.1. The hump-shaped relation

Fig.  7 presents a univariate analysis to visually examine whether 
skills  acquisition  exhibits  a  hump-shaped  function  with  respect  to 
household indebtedness, and how this shape differs from that of labor 
supply. Following Section 3.3, household indebtedness (leverage) is 
proxied by the net debt-to-asset ratio. Panel A plots skills acquisition 

30 Because NLSY79 is conducted biennially since 1996, the total number of 
working hours since the last survey may reflect two years’ workload.

12 

Fig. 7.  Skills acquisition and labor supply over leverage.
Panel  A  reports  percentage  of  individuals  who  have  participated  in  self-requested 
training programs that are not self-paid since the previous survey among respondents 
from NLSY79. The first bin consists of respondents whose household leverage is in the 
lowest quintile of the sample distribution of household leverage. The second consists 
of respondents whose leverage is in the second quintile, and so forth. The numbers 
below each bin indicates the corresponding range of household leverage. Household 
leverage (in percentage) is the ratio of net debt to asset, as defined in Section 3.3. 
Panel B reports the average number of hours that individuals have worked since the 
previous survey across leverage bins.

for different leverage groups. The 𝑥-axis denotes household leverage by 
quintiles, where the numbers denote the range of household leverage 
(in percentage) within each quintile. For example, the bottom quantile 
consists of households with negative leverage — representing those 
that have more cash and cash equivalent than debt. The third quantile 
consists of households with leverage between 21% and 39%. The 𝑦-axis 
denotes the percentage of individuals who participate in self-requested 
and non-self-paid training (i.e., the mean of 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔).

Consistent with the model prediction in Panel A of Fig.  2, skills 
acquisition exhibits a hump shape in household leverage. Individuals 
are more likely to participate in training as leverage initially rises, 
but become less likely to do so once leverage is above the range of 
39%–64%.

Panel B plots the relation between labor supply and leverage. The 
𝑦-axis denotes the average hours of labor supply (i.e., the mean of 
𝐿𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑆𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑦). We observe a similar hump-shaped relation. However, 
labor supply exhibits an earlier manifestation of debt overhang, in line 
with the model prediction. Specifically, the switching point of the hump 
shape occurs as early as 21%–39%, compared to 39%–64% for skills 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Table 2
Baseline regressions of skills acquisition and labor supply on household leverage.
  Dep. Var.

Training

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.017***
(0.003)

−0.016***
(0.003)

0.017***
(0.003)

−0.016***
(0.003)

0.019***
(0.004)

−0.016***
(0.003)

  Leverage (𝛽1)

  𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒2 (𝛽2)

  Male

  White

  MaritalStatus

  College

  FatherEdu

  Age

  𝐴𝑔𝑒2

  Switching point

  Switching point diff 

−0.002
(0.003)

−0.001
(0.003)

−0.004
(0.003)

0.026***
(0.003)

0.001**
(0.000)

0.001
(0.003)

−0.000
(0.000)

0.540

(1)–(4)
0.231**
(0.107)

−0.002
(0.003)

−0.000
(0.003)

−0.004
(0.003)

0.026***
(0.003)

0.001**
(0.000)

0.001
(0.003)

−0.000
(0.000)

0.549

(2)–(5)
0.241**
(0.112)

−0.002
(0.003)

−0.007*
(0.004)

−0.004
(0.003)

0.025***
(0.003)

0.001**
(0.000)

−0.001
(0.003)

0.000
(0.000)

0.592

(3)–(6)
0.261**
(0.118) 
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES

Labor supply
(4)

0.122***
(0.020)

−0.198***
(0.025)

0.379***
(0.017)

−0.035**
(0.017)

−0.068***
(0.015)

0.126***
(0.015)

−0.001
(0.002)

0.035*
(0.019)

−0.001*
(0.000)

0.310

(5)

0.122***
(0.020) 
−0.197***
(0.025)

0.382***
(0.017)

−0.033**
(0.016) 
−0.070***
(0.015) 
0.125***
(0.015) 
−0.001
(0.002) 
0.035*
(0.019) 
−0.001*
(0.000) 
0.308

(6)
0.128***  
(0.021)
−0.194*** 
(0.025)
0.379***  
(0.018)

−0.030
(0.020)
−0.070*** 
(0.015)
0.125***  
(0.016)

−0.002
(0.002)

0.028
(0.020)

−0.000
(0.000)

0.331

52,016
0.038

52,016
0.040

NO
NO
YES
YES
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

NO
NO
NO
YES
YES

NO
NO
YES
YES
NO 
52,016
0.092

  Industry FE
  Occupation FE
  State × Year FE
  Industry × Occupation FE
  County × Year FE
  Observations
52,016
  R-squared
0.150
This table presents regression analyses of the effect of household leverage on skills acquisition (captured by training participation) and labor 
supply. Columns (1) to (3) pertain to training participation. The dependent variable, Training, is an indicator of whether the respondent has 
requested and participated in training programs that are not self-paid since the previous survey. Columns (4) to (6) pertain to labor supply. The 
dependent variable, Labor Supply, is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of hours that a respondent has worked since the previous 
survey. The quadratic regression model is specified in Eq.  (14). Leverage is the ratio of net debt to asset, defined in Section 3.3. 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒2
is the square of Leverage. The control variables include a respondent’s age, gender, ethnicity, marital status, college enrollment, and father’s 
education. Definitions of control variables are in Table  1. For each estimated hump-shape relation between household leverage and training 
or labor supply, the switching point of this relation is calculated as − 𝛽1
. The differences in the switching points of training versus labor 
2𝛽2
supply are tested using the Delta method. Switching points, along with the respective differences, are reported below the coefficient estimates, 
in the rows Switching point and Switching point diff. State FE are indicators of the respondent’s residential state. County FE are indicators of 
the respondent’s residential county. Year FE are indicators of survey years. Industry FE and Occupation FE are indicators of the respondent’s 
industry and occupation, respectively. Each regression includes a separate intercept. Standard errors are clustered at the state-year level and 
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

52,016
0.202

52,016
0.089

acquisition. In addition, the decline in labor supply appears sharper: 
by the highest leverage quintile (>64%), labor supply has decreased 
by over half of the previous run-up (during the first three quintiles of 
leverage), whereas in Panel A, skills acquisition remains at a relatively 
high level at the top leverage quintile.

4.2. Regression analyses

To formalize the graphical evidence, we next estimate a quadratic 
regression model, separately for training and labor supply. We then 
contrast the switching points of the hump shapes between the two 
actions. The regression specification for training participation takes the 
following form: 

𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼+𝛽1𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑡−1+𝛽2𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒2

𝑖,𝑡−1+𝛾1𝑍𝑖,𝑡−1+𝛾2𝑋𝑖+𝐹 𝐸+𝜖𝑖,𝑡. (14)

The dependent variable is the indicator 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔, which takes the 
value of one if respondent 𝑖 reports in survey year 𝑡 that he/she has 
participated in training programs since the last survey. 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 is 
the  net  debt-to-asset  ratio  of  respondent  𝑖  at  the  last  survey  year, 
𝑡 − 1, defined in Section 3.3. The quadratic function aims to capture 
the  hump-shaped  relation  between  training  participation  and  lever-
age, as shown in Fig.  7. The vectors 𝑍 and 𝑋 include time-varying 

and  time-invariant  respondent  characteristics.  Time-varying  charac-
teristics include respondent age, college enrollment, and marital sta-
tus. Time-invariant characteristics include gender, race, and father’s 
education.

We  include  various  fixed  effects,  such  as  survey  year  fixed  ef-
fects, respondent’s employer industry and occupation or industry × 
occupation fixed effects, as well as state, state ×  year or county ×  year 
fixed effects. These fixed effects help us control for industry/occupation 
shocks or state and county level economic conditions, which might 
affect both household leverage and training participation.

It is worth noting that generally, on-career training participation 
is  not  a  frequent  decision  —  and  in  fact,  the  vast  majority  (about 
85%) of households in our sample participate in training programs 
no more than once. As a result, our estimation mainly compares the 
training participation across households with varying leverage (ceteris 
paribus), rather than a household’s continuous training decisions over 
leverage cycles. Given this caveat, our results should be interpreted as 
an average effect from the cross-section, and they have limited power 
in speaking to the time-series variation.31

31 In Online Appendix B.1 Table B1, we repeat the main analyses including 
individual fixed effects. We confirm our results.

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G. Manso et al.

Based on Fig.  7, we expect 𝛽1 in Eq.  (14) to be positive and 𝛽2 to be 
negative, indicating a hump-shaped relation between skills acquisition 
and leverage. We estimate OLS regressions because they generate more 
precise estimates of the marginal effects when high-dimensional fixed 
effects are employed (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). Standard errors are 
clustered at the state-year level.

Table  2 presents the regression results. In column (1), we include 
household characteristics, as well as fixed effects for industry, occu-
pation and state ×  year.32 We observe that while parental education 
and college enrollment can significantly affect training decisions, nei-
ther 𝐴𝑔𝑒 or 𝐴𝑔𝑒2 is statistically significant. It indicates that factors 
associated with the life cycle of households are unlikely to drive the 
humped-shape relation between training and leverage.33 This lack of 
significance is likely because in our sample, the majority (almost 90%) 
of individuals are between 28 and 50 years old, and are relatively 
distant from designated retirement. Thus life-cycle considerations are 
less relevant in our setting.

In  column  (2),  we  substitute  the  industry  and  occupation  fixed 
effects with industry ×  occupation fixed effects to control for variation 
from occupations within an industry (such as the availability of training 
for  an  occupation  within  an  industry).  In  column  (3),  we  include 
county ×  year fixed effects, which subsume state ×  year fixed effects.34 
Overall, the results consistently show that households are more likely 
to participate in training when leverage initially increases, but this 
relation reverses when leverage reaches a higher level. Based on the 
coefficient estimations of 𝛽1 and 𝛽2, we calculate the switching point 
separating the two regimes (i.e., the peak of the hump shape): − 𝛽1
. 
2𝛽2
The switching points range from 0.540 to 0.592 (i.e., 54% to 59.2% 
of leverage), as reported below the coefficient estimates in the row
Switching point.

In columns (3) to (6), we repeat the estimation using labor supply 
as the dependent variable. We find that labor supply similarly exhibits 
a hump shape with respect to household leverage, as indicated by the 
positive 𝛽1 and negative 𝛽2. The switching points of the hump shape 
are from 30.8% to 33.1%.

To test the differences in the switching points between training and 
labor supply, we employ the Delta method (e.g., Rao, 1973; Oehlert, 
1992; Haans et al., 2016) — which uses the Taylor approximation to 
estimate the standard errors of the function of fitted model parameters 
(in  our  case,  the  function  of  − 𝛽1
  to  obtain  the  switching  points). 
2𝛽2
These differences are reported in the row Switching point diff. Based on 
columns (3) and (6), the switching point difference between training 
and  labor  supply  is  0.261  (26.1%),  and  it  is  significant  at  the  5% 
level. This observation suggests that labor supply exhibits an earlier 
manifestation of debt overhang than skills acquisition, in line with 
the model prediction. We obtain a similar interpretation from other 
columns.

Taken together, the regression analyses support the non-monotonic 
effect of household leverage on skills acquisition, and importantly, the 

32 We  employ  15  industries  categorized  by  NLSY79,  and  5  occupation 
categories including management occupations, professionals (such as engi-
neering and legal occupations), craftsmen/foremen/kindred (such as arts and 
design occupations), office employees (such as sales and administrative sup-
port occupations), and labor workers (such as maintenance and construction 
occupations). We use these broad occupation categories to avoid including 
numerous indicators in the specifications containing industry ×  occupation 
fixed effects.
33 For instance, one may be concerned that training participation is more 
prevalent for mid-aged individuals than either fresh college graduates or soon-
to-be retirees — rendering a hump-shaped relation between training and age. 
To the extent that households accumulate debt over time, leverage may simply 
pick up the effect of age in generating the hump shape.
34 We benchmark the regression samples to that of column (3) in order to 
keep the number of observations across specifications constant.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

significant differences between skills acquisition and labor supply due 
to the inseparability of human capital.35

4.3. Heterogeneity with respect to 𝜌

We  next  examine  cross-sectional  variations  of  the  hump  shape 
relation between household leverage and skills acquisition, based on 
the comparative statics analyses in Section 2.5. We start with 𝜌 — 
the degree of skills depreciation. We employ two complementary ap-
proaches  to  proxy  for  skills  depreciation,  first  based  on  the  skills’ 
exposure to technology inspired by the recent literature (e.g., Kogan 
et al., 2024), and second based on changes in the wage path as modeled 
in Section 2.5.1.

4.3.1. Exposure to technology

Recent work by Kogan et al. (2024) finds that technological ad-
vancement displaces labor either through the direct effect of automa-
tion (i.e., machine or software performing tasks previously handled by 
humans), or because it requires new skills that incumbent workers lack. 
Under the latter channel, workers’ existing skills set becomes obsolete 
as technology evolves into a new vintage, rendering faster skills depre-
ciation. This channel is particularly germane in our setting because the 
sample individuals – aged in their twenties or thirties during the 1980s 
– underwent an information technology revolution thanks to the rapid 
development of the internet. Therefore, we capture the degree of skills 
depreciation based on their exposure to the computer and information 
technology (CIT).

Specifically, for each training program, the NLSY79 specifies the 
type of skills acquired. We flag a training program as being exposed to 
CIT if the acquired skills include computer skills.36 We then aggregate 
the training level CIT exposure to the occupation level by calculating 
the percentage of CIT-exposed training programs taken by the sample 
individuals working in a given occupation, where occupation is pro-
vided by the NLSY79 and based on the classifications of the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics (BLS). We perform this occupation level aggregation 
because (i) it reduces idiosyncratic factors that drive individuals’ choice 
of training programs and CIT exposure, and (ii) we expect that variation 
in skills depreciation largely arises across occupations.

In Online Appendix B.7, Table B6 Panel A, we provide example oc-
cupations with the highest and lowest CIT exposure, as well as example 
job titles of each occupation. Perhaps unsurprisingly, occupations such 
as Healthcare Support and Lawyers, Judges and Legal Support Workers
exhibit a low CIT exposure — and are considered to have a low degree 
of skills depreciation. It is consistent with the finding that occupations 
associated with interpersonal tasks are less subject to disruption from 
technological  innovation  (Kogan  et  al.,  2024).  On  the  other  hand,
Architecture and Engineering is among the occupations with the highest 
CIT exposure and skills depreciation, consistent with MacDonald and 
Weisbach (2004).

According to Section 2.5.1, high depreciation (a larger 𝜌) implies 
that the returns of skills acquisition are more front-loaded in time, 
and thus, the total benefit from acquiring labor skills (via training) is 
materialized mostly in the shorter term. In such a case, training ‘‘loses’’ 
part of the inalienability attribute, making them resemble labor supply. 
Empirically, this result predicts that training programs associated with 
high skills depreciation should exhibit a similar hump shape as labor 
supply with respect to household indebtedness — and their switching 

35 In Online Appendix B.2, we supplement the quadratic regression model 
with a piece-wise linear model. We confirm the results in this section and 
find a sharper manifestation of debt overhang for labor supply — a secondary 
prediction of the model.
36 Other types of skills include Operate/repair equipment, Read/write/math, 
Teamwork/problem-solving,  Management  skills,  Statistical  quality  control, 
New information system, and New product service.

14 

G. Manso et al.

points should be relatively close to each other. On the other hand, 
low depreciation (a smaller 𝜌) preserves skills’ inalienability and their 
resilience to debt overhang. Training of such skills should therefore 
exhibit a significantly different switching point from labor supply. We 
find support for these predictions.

In  Table   3,  we  re-estimate  Eq.  (14)  in  columns  (1)  and  (2)  — 
separately for individuals working in occupations with a CIT exposure 
in the top tercile (i.e., high skills depreciation 𝜌) and for those working 
in the rest occupations (i.e., low skills depreciation 𝜌). We then contrast 
the switching points of these two subsamples, respectively, with the 
switching point of labor supply (column (5)). Columns (1) and (2) 
follow the specification in column (3) of Table  2. Column (5) of Table 
3 replicates column (6) of Table  2, and is reported here for easier 
comparison.37

Consistent with the model prediction, we find that the switching 
point  of  training  with  low  depreciation  is  notably  larger  than  that 
of labor supply (67.3% versus 33.1%), as shown by columns (2) and 
(5). The difference — 34.3% is statistically significant. In contrast, the 
switching point of training with high depreciation is smaller (49.5%), 
as shown in column (1). It is insignificantly different from that of labor 
supply.

4.3.2. Changes in the wage path

Our second approach to proxy for skills depreciation is based on 
Section 2.5.1. Specifically, we capture changes in the path of each 
individual’s wage after training completion. The intuition of this ap-
proach follows the illustration in Panel A of Fig.  4. That is, when skills 
have higher depreciation rates, an individual’s wage initially increases 
after training but the increments decay more quickly in the longer 
term. In contrast, when skills have lower depreciation rates, the wage 
increments after training experience smaller declines. Online Appendix 
B.3 details the steps of measuring such a wage path.

In  Table   3  columns  (3)  and  (4),  we  repeat  the  analyses  using 
this alternative measure of skills depreciation. That is, we examine 
individuals working in occupations with high depreciation (whose post-
training wage decay is relatively high) versus low depreciation. We 
then respectively compare the switching points of these two groups 
with that of labor supply in column (5). We obtain the same conclusion 
as before. The switching point difference between low depreciation 
training and labor supply stands at 30.1% (significant at the 5% level), 
whereas  that  between  high  depreciation  training  and  labor  supply 
shrinks to 18.7% (insignificant at the 10% level). Taken together, these 
findings provide support to our model predictions in Section 2.5.1.

4.4. Heterogeneity with respect to 𝜎

In Online Appendix B.4, we examine variation of the hump shape 
relation with respect to 𝜎 — the degree of labor income uncertainty. 
Our model (Section 2.5.2 and Fig.  5) predicts that households facing 
higher  𝜎  engage  in  more  skills  acquisition  in  order  to  counter  the 
reduced utility due to greater labor income uncertainty. We present the 
detailed empirical approach and results in support of this prediction.

4.5. Alternative theories

The hump-shaped relation between household leverage and skills 
acquisition stems from the interplay of diminishing marginal utility and 
debt overhang forces. This non-monotonic relation complements the 
growing literature that finds a negative effect of household leverage on 
individual decisions, positing that indebtedness reduces labor income 
and mobility, residential home improvements, and innovation. Besides 

37 The  numbers  of  observations  in  columns  (1)  and  (2)  do  not  add  up 
to that in Table  2 because the two columns share the same control group, 
i.e., individuals without taking training programs.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

debt overhang, these studies discuss several alternative explanations 
for the negative effect of household leverage, including ‘‘housing lock’’, 
‘‘mental distress’’, ‘‘inattentiveness’’. As an additional contribution, we 
examine  these  alternative  theories  by  taking  advantage  of  the  rich 
records provided in NLSY79. We discuss these theories in detail and 
provide empirical results in Online Appendix B.5.

4.6. Instrumental variable analysis

The inclusion of industry ×  occupation and county ×  year fixed 
effects helps control for industry and occupation conditions, as well 
as county-level economic conditions that might affect both household 
leverage and training participation (or labor supply). However, one 
might still be concerned about confounding factors occurring at the 
household level. As discussed in the Introduction, in order for these fac-
tors to explain the documented hump shape, they must correlate with 
household leverage in such a way that they differentially affect training 
participation  (or  labor  supply)  depending  on  the  level  of  leverage. 
For instance, if one argues that households with certain unobservable 
characteristics are more motivated to enroll in training as leverage 
initially increases, then one must also argue that the effect of these 
characteristics reverses when leverage surpasses a certain threshold.

Even though unlikely to drive the formation of the hump shape, 
such factors may bias the magnitude of this shape. For example, it is 
possible that individuals who are poorly-connected socially or finan-
cially are less able to discover available training opportunities. Such an 
‘‘opportunity cap’’ in turn mitigates their intended response to leverage 
changes, making the estimated hump shape unable to capture the full 
extent of household incentives in skills acquisition. To the extent that 
individuals’ connectedness is correlated with household indebtedness, 
the ‘‘opportunity cap’’ may bias our estimates.

To filter out this potential bias, we perform an instrumental vari-
able analysis based on the interaction of individuals’ home purchasing 
location and timing. The design of the instrumental variable analysis 
follows Bernstein (2021) and Gopalan et al. (2021). Intuitively, it com-
pares households purchasing properties at a relatively more fortunate 
time and location – which later experience a greater appreciation in 
housing  prices,  with  households  purchasing  properties  at  relatively 
less fortunate time and location – which later experience a smaller 
appreciation. This source of variation predicts different evolution of 
households’ mortgage loan-to-value ratios (𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ) — the largest part of 
household leverage (i.e., the inclusion criterion). On the other hand, 
because this variation comes from the interaction of home purchasing 
timing and location (instead of simply an earlier or later time overall, 
or simply different regions), it is plausibly exogenous to local shocks 
that might be correlated with training participation or labor supply 
(i.e., the exclusion criterion). In Online Appendix B.6, we describe the 
detailed procedures for constructing the instrument variable, i.e., the 
synthetic loan-to-value ratio (𝑆𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ) following Bernstein (2021), and 
the regression specifications for the two-stage least square (2SLS) IV 
analysis.38

One limitation of our IV analysis is the relatively small sample, 
which arises because we require a household to have purchased a home 
by a given point in time — the necessary condition for constructing the 
instrument. In light of this limitation, we estimate the IV models with 
sample weights provided by NLSY79, following Kuhnen and Melzer 
(2018) who similarly use the NLSY79 data. Sample weights account 
for the representativeness of each surveyed respondent. Adjusting for 

38 Following Bernstein (2021), here we replace 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 by 𝐿𝑇 𝑉  as the 
variable  of  interest,  based  on  the  assumption  that  mortgages  and  home 
value constitute a significant proportion of household leverage. To ensure the 
validity of this assumption, we require a household’s LTV ratio in a given year 
to be at least 5%. We obtain qualitatively similar results using 10% for this 
requirement.

15 

G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Table 3
Cross-sectional variation based on the degree of skills depreciation.
  Dep. Var.

Training
Exposure to technology
(1)
High depreciation
0.008***
(0.002)
−0.008***
(0.002)

(2)
Low depreciation
0.013***
(0.003)
−0.009***
(0.003)

  Leverage 

  𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒2

  Switching point 

  Switching point diff 

0.495

(1)–(5)
0.164
(0.126)

0.673

(2)–(5)
0.343*
(0.194)

Training
Changes in the wage path
(4)
(3)
Low depreciation
High depreciation
0.014***
0.006***
(0.003)
(0.002)
−0.011***
−0.006***
(0.003)
(0.002)

0.517

(3)–(5)
0.187
(0.182)

0.632

(4)–(5)
0.301**
(0.146)

Labor supply 

(5)

0.128***
(0.021)
−0.194***  
(0.025)

0.331

48,543
0.161

50,611
0.156

YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES

YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES

YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES

YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES

YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES

  Controls
  Industry FE
  Occupation FE
  State × Year FE
  Industry × Occupation FE
  County × Year FE
  Observations
  R-squared
This table presents analyses of the effect of household leverage on skills acquisition (captured by training participation), differentiating the 
degree of skills depreciation. In columns (1) to (4), the dependent variable is Training. For easier comparison, column (5) replicates Table  2 
column (6), in which the dependent variable is Labor Supply. The degree of skills deprecation is measured using two complementary approaches. 
Columns (1) and (2) measure depreciation based on exposure to computer and information technology (Section 4.3.1). Column (1) consists of 
individuals facing low skills depreciation, identified as those working in occupations with less exposure to computer and information technology 
(CIT). Column (2) consists of individuals facing high skills depreciation, identified as those working in occupations with greater CIT exposure. 
The detailed classification is described in Section 4.3.1. Columns (3) and (4) measure the degree of skills deprecation based on individuals’ 
changes in the wage path after training completion, and this approach is described in Section 4.3.2. Regression specifications follow equation 
(14). Switching points, along with their differences between training and labor supply, are obtained in the same manner as in Table  2 and 
are reported below the coefficient estimates, in the rows Switching point and Switching point diff. County FE are indicators of the respondent’s 
residential county. Year FE are indicators of survey years. Industry FE and Occupation FE are indicators of the respondent’s industry and 
occupation, respectively. Each regression includes a separate intercept. Standard errors are clustered at the state-year level and reported in 
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

48,736
0.198

50,421
0.149

52,016
0.202

these weights therefore allows us to obtain estimates closer to those 
from a broader population. Nevertheless, we interpret the IV analysis 
with caution.

Table  4 reports the second-stage regressions, using the instrumented 
𝐿𝑇 𝑉  as the independent variable of interest.39 Columns (1) and (2) 
pertain to training participation and columns (3) to (4) pertain to labor 
supply. Columns (1) and (3) report the specifications without individual 
characteristics as controls. Two findings are worth noting. First, both 
training and labor supply exhibit a hump shape with respect to the 
instrumented 𝐿𝑇 𝑉 . Second and importantly, the switching point for 
training is 79.8%, and that for labor supply is 45.6%. The difference 
(34.2%) is both economically and statistically significant. We obtain a 
similar interpretation from columns (2) and (4), which include addi-
tional control variables as in Table  2. The magnitude of the switching 
point difference is generally comparable with those estimated in Table 
2. These results assure that our baseline findings are unlikely to be 
driven by confounding unobservable factors.40

39 The first-stage regressions are presented in Online Appendix B.7 Table 
B7, in which we include the corresponding control variables as the second-
stage regressions. We see that for both skills acquisition and labor supply, the 
instruments significantly predict 𝐿𝑇 𝑉 -related variables (i.e., the endogenous 
dependent variables of interest). The Cragg-Donald Wald 𝐹  statistic for the 
first stages is over 16, greater than the 10% critical values.
40 The coefficients of the instrumented dependent variables are generally 
larger than those in Table  2. It suggests that certain unobservable factors 
associated with leverage – e.g., households’ (in)ability to discover available 
training opportunities as previously discussed (despite their motives to take on 
training) – may have flattened the relation between household decisions and 
leverage. After controlling for these factors using the instrument, we observe 
a more responsive relation.

Labor supply
(3)

(4)

8.304*
(4.899)
−9.110**
(3.862)
0.456 

8.655*
(4.441)
−8.856**
(3.704)
0.489  

Table 4
The instrumental variable analysis.
  Dep. Var.

Training

  Instrumented LTV

  Instrumented 𝐿𝑇 𝑉 2

  Switching point

  Switching point diff

(1)

(2)

2.227**
(0.967)
−1.395*
(0.741)

1.946**
(0.864)
−1.250*
(0.710)

0.798

0.778

(1)–(3)
0.342**
(0.160)

(2)–(4)
0.290*
(0.168) 
YES
YES
YES
YES

13,358

13,358

NO
NO
YES
YES

NO
NO
YES
YES 
13,358

  Controls
YES
  Industry × Occupation FE
YES
  Cohort FE
YES
  State × Year FE
YES
  Observations
13,358  
This table reports the second-stage regressions of the two-stage least squares (2SLS) 
instrumental variable analysis for the effect of household leverage on labor skills 
acquisition and labor supply. Household leverage is proxied by the loan-to-value (LTV ) 
ratio, which is instrumented using the synthetic loan-to-value (𝑆𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ) ratio, following 
(Bernstein, 2021). The construction of 𝑆𝐿𝑇 𝑉 , as well as the 2SLS specifications, are 
discussed in Section 4.6. 𝑆𝐿𝑇 𝑉 2 is the square of 𝑆𝐿𝑇 𝑉 . Switching points, along with 
their differences between training and labor supply, are obtained in the same manner as 
in Table  2 and are reported below the coefficient estimates, in the rows Switching point
and Switching point diff. Cohort FE are indicators of the survey year when the respondent 
becomes the owner of the house. Definitions of other variables are in Table  1 and Table 
2. Standard errors are clustered at the state-year level and reported in parentheses. ***, 
**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

5. Implications for debt forgiveness

In this section, we derive implications regarding debt forgiveness 
based  on  the  two  extensions  of  our  model  relative  to  Donaldson 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Fig. 8.  Present value of household income for different reset values of indebtedness 𝑑 and expected income difference path.
In Panel A, the present value of income is maximized at 𝑑 = 0.47 (vertical solid line). The dashed line corresponds to the value 𝑑 = 0.43 that maximizes labor supply. The dotted 
line corresponds to the value 𝑑 = 0.51 that maximizes skills acquisition. Panel B depicts the difference in expected income paths between resetting indebtedness to 𝑑 = 0.43 and 
𝑑 = 0.51. Other parameter values follow those of Fig.  1.

et al. (2019): (i) household risk aversion and (ii) skills acquisition. 
Intuitively, the first extension renders the hump-shaped relation that 
we have theoretically and empirically documented, that is, increasing 
household  indebtedness  starts  out  by  encouraging  skills  acquisition 
and labor supply (i.e., the diminishing marginal utility force) before it 
switches to suppressing them (i.e., the debt overhang force). Therefore, 
while  debt  forgiveness  may  initially  promote  skills  acquisition  and 
labor supply – due to the mitigation of debt overhang, excessive debt 
forgiveness undermines the beneficial effects of moderate indebtedness 
– due to the diminishing marginal utility. Hence, an optimal level of 
debt forgiveness obtains for both actions. The second extension, on the 
other hand, implies that the effect of household indebtedness switches 
(from beneficial to detrimental) at different levels for the two actions, 
reflecting the greater resilience of skills acquisition to debt overhang 
than labor supply (due to the inalienability of human capital). The 
optimal debt forgiveness varies accordingly across the two actions. In 
the sequel, we demonstrate these nuances around debt forgiveness.41

Specifically, denote 𝑑0 as the level of household indebtedness that 
a debt forgiveness policy resets to. We simulate the paths of skills 
acquisition (𝑎), labor supply (𝑙), hourly wage (𝐾), and total income 
(𝑊 = 𝑙𝐾) for households starting at different 𝑑0, and then take the 
average of these quantities as:

[
̄𝑎𝑡(𝑑) = E
[
̄𝑊𝑡(𝑑) = E

𝑎𝑡|𝑑0 = 𝑑

]

,

]

𝑊𝑡|𝑑0 = 𝑑

,

[
̄𝑙𝑡(𝑑) = E
[
̄𝐾𝑡(𝑑) = E

𝑙𝑡|𝑑0 = 𝑑

𝐾𝑡|𝑑0 = 𝑑

]
,

]
.

(15)

(16)

We perform the simulation for 5000 households over a three year 
period.42 We then compute the expected present value (PV) of the total 
income generated by households for a given value of 𝑑0. That is: 

[
𝑃 𝑉 (𝑑) = E

𝑇

∫

0

𝑒−𝑟𝐵 𝑡𝑊𝑡|𝑑0 = 𝑑

]

,

(17)

41 To remain focused on our model framework, we assume away moral 
hazard considerations from ex-post debt forgiveness — that is, households’ 
anticipation of debt forgiveness may foster ex-ante reluctance in spending 
effort, even in the absence of diminishing marginal utility and debt overhang.
42 Parameter values follow those in Fig.  1.

17 

where 𝑇 = 3 years.43 This computation allows us to explore how the PV 
of household income varies with the reset indebtedness levels and thus, 
the effectiveness of a debt forgiveness policy in optimizing household 
income.

Panel A of Fig.  8 depicts the PV of household income as a function 
of the reset indebtedness. The pattern inherits the hump shape from 
skills acquisition and labor supply depicted in our baseline result (Fig. 
2). Moving from the right end of the 𝑥-axis to the left – i.e., resetting the 
household debt to a lower level – initially increases the PV of income. 
This increase occurs because, in this region, the debt overhang force 
dominates; thus more aggressively forgiving debt revives households’ 
incentives to acquire skills and supply labor. Because total income is 
the product of labor supply and hourly wage (𝑊 = 𝑙𝐾), and because 
skills acquisition impacts the dynamics of hourly wage (via Eq. (3)), a 
boost in both actions increases household income. However, when debt 
is reset too aggressively – to the region where the diminishing marginal 
utility force dominates – debt forgiveness suppresses households’ efforts 
in the two actions and the income.

Therefore, our first takeaway is that for households deeply in debt, 
there exists an interior optimum of debt forgiveness that maximizes the 
PV of income. Debt forgiveness should be large enough to mitigate debt 
overhang, but not too large to interfere with the diminishing marginal 
utility force. In the context of Fig.  8, we find that such optimal debt 
forgiveness is to reset indebtedness level to 𝑑0 = 0.47 (solid vertical 
line) — corresponding to the ‘‘peak’’ of the hump shape.

Interestingly, the value 𝑑0 = 0.47 is between the peak of the hump 
shape  for  labor  supply  𝑙(𝑑)  at  𝑑 = 0.43  (dashed  vertical  line)  and 
the peak for skills acquisition 𝑎(𝑑) at 𝑑 = 0.51 (dotted vertical line), 
obtained from Fig.  2. The intuition is as follows. Both skills acquisition 
and labor supply are subject to debt overhang. However, because skills 
acquisition is more resilient to debt overhang, the peak of its hump 
shape  does  not  appear  until  a  higher  level  of  indebtedness.  Skills 
acquisition thus requires less aggressive debt forgiveness – resetting 
debt ‘‘only’’ to 0.51 – to reach its maximum. Further reducing debt 
beyond this point would result in ‘‘over-forgiveness’’. By contrast, labor 
supply is more sensitive to debt overhang. It requires resetting debt ‘‘all 
the way’’ to 0.43 to reach its maximum. Because 𝑙(𝑑) and 𝑎(𝑑) jointly 
determine income generation, forgiveness policies resetting household 

43 Setting the horizon to 𝑇 = 5 or 𝑇 = 10 does not qualitatively change the 
takeaways.

G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

debt to levels between those maximizing 𝑙(𝑑) and 𝑎(𝑑) (i.e., between the 
peaks of the two actions) would induce the highest PV of total income. 
This result constitutes the second takeaway from our analysis.

This takeaway suggests an interesting trade-off regarding optimal 
debt  forgiveness.  For  values  of  𝑑 > 0.51,  an  additional  dollar  of 
debt forgiveness mitigates debt overhang for both 𝑎(𝑑) and 𝑙(𝑑) and is 
unambiguously beneficial for income generation. For values of 𝑑 < 0.43, 
the diminishing marginal utility force is dominant for both actions, 
and  additional  debt  forgiveness  unambiguously  discourages  income 
generation.  However,  for  values  of  0.43 < 𝑑 < 0.51,  a  trade-off 
emerges: additional debt forgiveness encourages households to supply 
more labor (since labor supply is still dominated by debt overhang), but 
discourages households from acquiring skills (since skill acquisition is 
now dominated by the diminishing marginal utility force).

Discouraging  skills  acquisition  negatively  impacts  household  in-
come — especially over the long term. Different from labor supply, 
skills  acquisition  determines  the  growth  of  household  productivity 
(via Eq. (3)) and its effect accumulates in the long run. To see this 
intuition, we calculate the difference in the expected income paths 
when household debt is reset to 𝑑0 = 0.43 versus 𝑑0 = 0.51. Panel B 
of Fig.  8 depicts how this difference (i.e.,  ̄𝑊𝑡(0.43) − ̄𝑊𝑡(0.51)) evolves 
from the time of debt reset (𝑡 = 0) to three years later.

Following the previous discussion, resetting debt to 𝑑0 = 0.43 is 
considered ‘‘over-forgiving’’ with respect to skills acquisition, but not 
so with respect to labor supply. Thus, while this policy promotes labor 
supply (relative to 𝑑0 = 0.51), it impedes skills acquisition. We observe 
that even though in the short term, 𝑑0 = 0.43 generates a higher income 
than 𝑑0 = 0.51 (i.e.,  ̄𝑊0(0.43) − ̄𝑊0(0.51) > 0), in the longer term, 
impeded skills acquisition depresses income and  ̄𝑊𝑡(0.43) − ̄𝑊𝑡(0.51)
turns negative. The more modest debt forgiveness (resetting 𝑑0 = 0.51) 
would therefore benefit the household over time. It follows that in 
the  region  between  the  two  ‘‘peaks’’,  there  is  a  trade-off  between 
maximizing skills acquisition versus supplying labor.44

This trade-off has various practical applications. For instance, it 
speaks  to  the  optimal  debt  forgiveness  for  high-  versus  low-skilled 
workers. To the extent that low-skilled workers primarily seek to ex-
pand their working hours to generate short-term income, policymakers 
may consider prioritizing skills acquisition (i.e., longer-term income 
generation) for this group. Such a policy can help mitigate income 
inequality  and  foster  social  mobility  (e.g.,  Goldin  and  Katz,  2010; 
Chetty et al., 2014). Interestingly, this objective would entail a more 
modest debt forgiveness policy for low-skilled workers than for high-
skilled  workers  —  to  avoid  ‘‘over-forgiving’’  with  respect  to  skills 
acquisition.45  Another,  more  time-targeted  application  is  motivated 
by the ‘‘Great Resignation’’ during 2021 and 2022 (Gittleman, 2022) 
— a period characterized by many workers voluntarily leaving their 
jobs.46 In similar cases, policymakers could prioritize restoring labor 
supply; accordingly, a more aggressive debt forgiveness policy (that 
mitigates debt overhang all the way until the maximum of labor supply 
is reached) may help combat the shrinking labor pool and climbing 
wages in the near term.

44 Following Section 2.4, we repeat the analysis in this section separately for 
𝜃𝑎𝑙 = +8 (when the two actions are substitutes) and 𝜃𝑎𝑙 = −8 (when the two 
actions are complements). We obtain the same takeaways as in the baseline 
case (𝜃𝑎𝑙 = 0).
45 Relatedly, workers in sectors going through the clean energy transition 
– such as fossil fuel employees (Aklin and Urpelainen, 2022) – may face an 
emerging need to update their skill sets. For these workers, a modest debt 
forgiveness policy would be more effective in enhancing skills acquisition and 
employment resilience in the long term.
46 It is believed that the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath led workers 
to reconsider their jobs and priorities. Many workers sought better work-life 
balance, resulting in them quitting their jobs.

18 

6. Conclusion

In this paper, we study how household indebtedness affects human 
capital investment, and its interaction with labor supply. We develop a 
dynamic model featuring a risk-averse household investing in acquiring 
skills — which, unlike labor income, are largely inalienable from the 
household and do not accrue to creditors even at default. This attribute 
makes skills acquisition more resilient to debt overhang as household 
indebtedness  rises.  We  show  that  skills  acquisition  is  hump-shaped 
with  respect  to  the  level  of  household  indebtedness,  reflecting  the 
interplay of two forces: diminishing marginal utility and debt overhang. 
Although  labor  supply  exhibits  a  similar  hump  shape,  it  begins  to 
tail  off  at  an  earlier  stage  as  indebtedness  builds  up,  reflecting  its 
lower resilience to debt overhang. Moreover, the two actions interact 
with each other. Because skills acquisition is only valuable when the 
household expects to supply labor in the future, the response of labor 
supply to indebtedness propagates back in time, distorting the skills 
acquisition decision ex ante.

We test our model using longitudinal data from the NLSY79 survey 
and find empirical support for the model. When individuals face a 
relatively low level of indebtedness, increasing indebtedness initially 
encourages them to acquire labor skills, but this relation reverses after 
indebtedness reaches a certain level. Labor supply exhibits a similar 
hump shape but debt overhang emerges at a significantly lower level 
of household indebtedness. Further, we find that the hump-shaped rela-
tion between indebtedness and skills acquisition exhibits cross-sectional 
variation as predicted by the model. We derive implications regarding 
debt forgiveness based on the theoretical and empirical findings.

In the wake of the recent skilled labor shortage and historically 
high  level  of  household  indebtedness,  our  study  provides  a  unified 
theoretical framework, supplemented by empirical evidence, to study 
the relation and the interaction between these household decisions.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Gustavo Manso: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & edit-
ing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Alejandro Rivera: Writing – orig-
inal draft, Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis. 
Hui (Grace) Wang: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & edit-
ing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Han Xia: Writing – original draft, 
Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104141.

Data availability

Replication code for this study can be found at https://data.mendeley.

com/datasets/vnbyftyjzn/1 DOI: 10.17632/vnbyftyjzn.1.

References

Acemoglu, D., 1997. Training and innovation in an imperfect labour market. Rev. Econ. 

Aklin, M., Urpelainen, J., 2022. Enable a just transition for American fossil fuel workers 

Andolfatto, D., Gervais, M., 2006. Human capital investment and debt constraints. Rev. 

Stud. 64 (3), 445–464.

through federal action. Brookings.

Econ. Dyn. 9 (1), 52–67.

G. Manso et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104141 

Angrist, J.D., Pischke, J.-S., 2008. Mostly harmless econometrics. Princet. Univ. Press.
Argyle, B., Iverson, B.C., Nadauld, T., Palmer, C., 2022. Personal bankruptcy and the 

Hampole, M.V., 2024. Financial frictions and human capital investments. Work. Pap..
Hart, O., Moore, J., 1994. A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital. 

accumulation of shadow debt. Work. Pap..

Q. J. Econ. 109 (4), 841–879.

Arrow, K.J., 1962. The economic implications of learning by doing. Rev. Econ. Stud. 

He, Z., 2011. A model of dynamic compensation and capital structure. J. Financ. Econ. 

Autor, D., Katz, L.F., Kearney, M.S., 2006. The polarization of the US labor market. 

Hennessy, C.A., 2004. Tobin’s q, debt overhang, and investment. J. Financ. 59 (4), 

29 (3), 155–173.

Am. Econ. Rev. 96 (2), 189–194.

100 (2), 351–366.

1717–1742.

Chen, H., Manso, G., 2017. Macroeconomic risk and debt overhang. Rev. Corp. Financ. 

Econ. Rev. 97 (1), 402–418.

Chen, D., Zhao, J., 2017. The impact of personal bankruptcy on labor supply decisions. 

4, 225–256.

Stud. 6 (1), 1–38.

Rev. Econ. Dyn. 26, 40–61.

Bensoussan, A., Chevalier-Roignant, B., Rivera, A., 2021. Does performance-sensitive 

debt mitigate debt overhang? J. Econom. Dynam. Control 131, 104203.

Bernstein, A., 2021. Negative home equity and household labor supply. J. Financ. 76 

(6), 2963–2995.

Bernstein, S., McQuade, T., Townsend, R.R., 2021. Do household wealth shocks affect 
productivity?  Evidence  from  innovative  workers  during  the  great  recession.  J. 
Financ. 76 (1), 57–111.

Bernstein, A., Struyven, D., 2022. Housing lock: Dutch evidence on the impact of 
negative home equity on household mobility. Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 14 (3), 
1–32.

Boldrin, M., Montes, A., 2005. The intergenerational state education and pensions. Rev. 

Econ. Stud. 72 (3), 651–664.

Bolton,  P.,  Chen,  H.,  Wang,  N.,  2011.  A  unified  theory  of  Tobin’s  q,  corporate 

investment, financing, and risk management. J. Financ. 66 (5), 1545–1578.

Bos, M., Breza, E., Liberman, A., 2018. The labor market effects of credit market 

information. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (6), 2005–2037.

Brown, J., Matsa, D.A., 2020. Locked in by leverage: Job search during the housing 

crisis. J. Financ. Econ. 136 (3), 623–648.

Cesarini, D., Lindqvist, E., Notowidigdo, M.J., Östling, R., 2017. The effect of wealth 
on individual and household labor supply: Evidence from Swedish lotteries. Am. 
Econ. Rev. 107 (12), 3917–3946.

Chakrabarti, R., Fos, S., Liberman, A., Yannelis, C., 2023. Tuition, debt and human 

capital. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (4), 1667–1702.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., Saez, E., 2014. Where is the land of opportunity? 
The geography of intergenerational mobility in the United States. Q. J. Econ. 129 
(4), 1553–1623.

Chetty, R., Szeidl, A., 2007. Consumption commitments and risk preferences. Q. J. 

Econ. 122 (2), 831–877.

Clifford, C., Gerken, W., 2021. Property rights to client relationship and financial 

advisor incentives. J. Financ. 76 (5), 2409–2445.

DeFusco, A., Enriquez, B., Yellen, M., 2024. Wage garnishment in the United States: 
New facts from administrative payroll records. Am. Econ. Rev.: Insights 6 (1), 
38–54.

Di Maggio, M., Kalda, A., Yao, V., 2024. Second chance: Life without student debt. J. 

Financ. Forthcom..

Diamond, D.W., He, Z., 2014. A theory of debt maturity: The long and short of debt 

overhang. J. Financ. 69 (2), 719–762.

Dinerstein, M., Megalokonomou, R., Yannelis, C., 2022. Human capital depreciation 

and returns to experience. Am. Econ. Rev. 112 (11), 3725–3762.

Dobbie,  W.,  Goldsmith-Pinkham,  P.,  Mahoney,  N.,  Song,  J.,  2020.  Bad  credit,  no 
problem? Credit and labor market consequences of bad credit reports. J. Financ. 
75 (5), 2377–2419.

Dobbie, W., Song, J., 2015. Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the effects of 

consumer bankruptcy protection. Am. Econ. Rev. 105 (3), 1272–1311.

Donaldson, J.R., Piacentino, G., Thakor, A.V., 2019. Household debt and unemploy-

ment. J. Financ. 74 (3), 1473–1502.

Ferreira, F., Gyourko, J., Tracy, J., 2011. Housing busts and household mobility: An 

Urban Econ. 68 (1), 34–45.

update. Work. Pap..

Goldin, C., Katz, L.F., 2010. The Race Between Education and Technology. Harvard 

Gomes, F., Haliassos, M., Ramadorai, T., 2021. Household finance. J. Econ. Lit. 59 (3), 

Labor Stat..

University Press.

919–1000.

Gopalan, R., Hamilton, B.H., Kalda, A., Sovich, D., 2021. Home equity and labor 
income: The role of constrained mobility. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (10), 4619–4662.
Griffy, B.S., 2021. Search and the sources of life-cycle inequality. Internat. Econom. 

Rev. 62 (4), 1321–1362.

Haans, R.F.J., Pieters, C., He, Z.-L., 2016. Thinking about U: Theorizing and testing U- 
and inverted U-shaped relationships in strategy research. Strat. Manag. J. 37 (7), 
1177–1195.

Hackbarth, D., Mauer, D.C., 2012. Optimal priority structure, capital structure, and 

investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (3), 747–796.

Hackbarth, D., Rivera, A., Wong, T.-Y., 2022. Optimal short-termism. Manag. Sci. 68 

(9), 6477–6505.

19 

Imbens, G.W., Rubin, D.B., Sacerdote, B.I., 2001. Estimating the effect of unearned 
income on labor earnings, savings, and consumption: Evidence from a survey of 
lottery players. Am. Econ. Rev. 91 (4), 778–794.

Iuliano, J., 2012. An empirical assessment of student loan discharges and the undue 

hardship standard. Am. Bankruptcy Law J. 86, 495–526.

Ji, Y., 2021. Job search under debt: Aggregate implications of student loans. J. Monet. 

Ju, N., Ou-Yang, H., 2006. Capital structure, debt maturity, and stochastic interest 

Econ. 117, 741–759.

rates. J. Bus. 79 (5), 2469–2502.

Kaplan, G., Violante, G.L., Weidner, J., 2014. The wealthy hand-to-mouth. Work. Pap..
Kleiner,  K.,  Stoffman,  N.,  Yonker,  S.E.,  2021.  Friends  with  bankruptcy  protection 

benefits. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (2), 578–605.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L.D.W., Seegmiller, B., 2024. Technology and 
labor displacement: Evidence from linking patents with worker-level data. Work. 
Pap..

Kuhnen, C.M., Melzer, B.T., 2018. Noncognitive abilities and financial delinquency: The 
role of self-efficacy in avoiding financial distress. J. Financ. 73 (6), 2837–2869.
Laibson,  D.,  Repetto,  A.,  Tobacman,  J.,  2007.  Estimating  discount  functions  with 

consumption choices over the lifecycle. Work. Pap..

Lazear, E.P., 2000. The power of incentives. Am. Econ. Rev. 90 (2), 410–414.
Lazear, E.P., Shaw, K.L., Stanton, C., 2016. Making do with less: Working harder during 

recessions. J. Labor Econ. 34 (S1), S333–S360.

Livshits, I., MacGee, J., Tertilt, M., 2007. Consumer bankruptcy: A fresh start. Am. 

Lochner, L., Monge-Naranjo, A., 2012. Credit constraints in education. Annu. Rev. Econ. 

Longstaff, F.A., Schwartz, E.S., 1995. A simple approach to valuing risky fixed and 

floating rate debt. J. Financ. 50 (3), 789–819.

Looney,  A.,  Yannelis,  C.,  2015.  A  crisis  in  student  loans?  How  changes  in  the 
characteristics of borrowers and in the institutions they attended contributed to 
rising loan defaults. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. (Fall), 1–89.

MacDonald, G., Weisbach, M.S., 2004. The economics of has-beens. J. Political Econ. 

Manso, G., 2008. Investment reversibility and agency cost of debt. Econometrica 76 

Manso, G., Rivera, A., Wang, H.G., Xia, H., 2024. Student loans and labor supply 

Manso, G., Strulovici, B., Tchistyi, A., 2010. Performance-sensitive debt. Rev. Financ. 

112 (1), 289–310.

(2), 437–442.

incentives. Work. Pap..

Stud. 23 (5), 1819–1854.

Mauer,  D.C.,  Ott,  S.H.,  2000.  Agency  costs,  underinvestment,  and  optimal  capital 
structure. Proj. Flex. Agency, Compét.: New Dev. the Theory Appl. Real Options. 
Oxf. 151–179.

Mauer, D.C., Triantis, A.J., 1994. Interactions of corporate financing and investment 

decisions: A dynamic framework. J. Financ. 49 (4), 1253–1277.

Mello, A.S., Parsons, J.E., 1992. Measuring the agency cost of debt. J. Financ. 47 (5), 

Melzer, B.T., 2017. Mortgage debt overhang: Reduced investment by homeowners at 

risk of default. J. Financ. 72 (2), 575–612.

Moyen, N., 2007. How big is the debt overhang problem? J. Econom. Dynam. Control 

1887–1904.

31 (2), 433–472.

147–175.

Oehlert, G.W., 1992. A note on the delta method. Amer. Statist. 46 (1), 27–29.
Rao, C.R., 1973. Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications: Second Editon. John 

Shin, D., Solon, G., 2011. Trends in men’s earnings volatility: What does the panel 

study of income dynamics show? J. Public Econ. 95, 973–982.

Strebulaev, I.A., Whited, T.M., 2012. Dynamic models and structural estimation in 

corporate finance. Found. Trends Financ. 6 (1–2), 1–163.

Sundaresan, S., Wang, N., 2007. Investment under uncertainty with strategic debt 

service. Am. Econ. Rev. 97 (2), 256–261.

Titman,  S.,  Tompaidis,  S.,  Tsyplakov,  S.,  2004.  Market  imperfections,  investment 

flexibility, and default spreads. J. Financ. 59 (1), 165–205.

Tserlukevich, Y., 2008. Can real options explain financing behavior? J. Financ. Econ. 

89 (2), 232–252.

Yannelis, C., 2020. Strategic default on student loans. Work. Pap..
Zator, M., 2025. Working more to pay the mortgage: Household debt, interest rates, 

and family labor supply. J. Financ. 80 (2), 1171–1207.

Ferreira, F., Gyourko, J., Tracy, J., 2010. Housing busts and household mobility. J. 

Myers,  S.C.,  1977.  Determinants  of  corporate  borrowing.  J.  Financ.  Econ.  5  (2), 

Friedberg, L., Hynes, R.M., Pattison, N., 2021. Who benefits from bans on employer 

Wiley & Sons, Inc..

credit checks. J. Law Econ. 64 (4), 675–703.

Gittleman, M., 2022. The ‘‘Great Resignation" in perspective. Mon. Labor Rev. US Bur. 

behavior. Rev. Econ. Stat. 85 (4), 909–922.

Rizzo, J.A., Zeckhauser, R.J., 2003. Reference incomes, loss aversion, and physician 

