Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Information-based pricing in specialized lending(cid:73)
Kristian Blickle a, Zhiguo He b,c, Jing Huang d, Cecilia Parlatore e,c
a Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty St, New York, NY 10045, United States of America
b Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, 655 Knight Way, Stanford, CA 9430, United States of America
c National Bureau of Economic Research, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, United States of America
d Mays Business School, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, United States of America
e New york University, Stern School of Business, 44 W4th st., New York, NY 10012, United States of America

,∗

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We study how competition between asymmetrically informed banks, one specialized and one nonspecialized, 
affects loan prices. Both banks possess ‘‘general’’ signals regarding the borrower’s quality, which they use 
to screen loans. The specialized bank also has access to a ‘‘specialized’’ signal on which it bases its loan 
pricing. This private information-based pricing makes the specialized bank bid more aggressively, mitigating 
the informational rent effect that gives it monopolistic power. Our findings explain why loans from specialized 
lenders feature lower interest rates and better ex post performance. Supporting empirical evidence emphasizes 
the role of specialized information in shaping credit market outcomes.

Dataset link: Pseudo Data Y14 (Original data)

JEL classification:
G21
L13
L52
O33
O36

Keywords:
Credit market competition
Common value auction with asymmetric 
bidders
Winner’s curse
Winning bids versus bids
Information acquisition

Specialized lenders have deep expertise in particular borrower seg-
ments – whether defined by industry, geography, or firm size – and this 
focus endows them with higher-quality signals about creditworthiness. 
Armed  with  such  superior  information,  they  can  assess  loan  risks 
more accurately and bid more aggressively for high-quality borrowers, 
incurring lower adverse selection costs. In practice, this translates into 
lower average lending rates: a specialized bank, confident in its ability 
to identify good borrowers, will accept narrower margins. For exam-
ple, Blickle et al. (2025) show that specialized banks translate their 
informational advantage into loan portfolios more concentrated in their 
industry of specialization, in which loans are of higher quality with cor-
responding lower rates. This evidence highlights that the informational 
advantages of specialized banks directly shape price competition in the 
loan market.

Yet, classic theoretical frameworks of bank competition typically 
model informational asymmetries among banks in ways that do not 
yield such undercutting by better-informed lenders. By varying only 
the precision of a single signal to capture differences in screening abil-
ities, these models yield strong adverse selection effects (the ‘‘winner’s 
curse’’) and thereby preclude more aggressive rate-setting by the better-
informed bank. In contrast, this paper develops a model of information 
advantage that distinguishes between the different types of information 
held by specialized and nonspecialized banks. This richer formulation 
can  endogenously  deliver  the  observed  undercutting  by  specialized 
lenders, reconciling theory with evidence. As advances in information 
technologies continue to reshape the banking sector, this issue becomes 
increasingly pertinent.

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article, to whom we are grateful. For helpful comments, we thank Philip Bond, Christa Bouwman, Bruce Carlin, Christopher 
Hrdlicka, Dan Luo, Robert Marquez, Jidong Zhou, and participants at the Yale Junior Finance Conference, Texas A&M University, Tsinghua PBC, the Lone Star 
Finance Conference, WAPFIN at Stern, NYU Stern, University of Washington, FDIC, and AFA 2025 in San Francisco. Ningxin Zhang and Jialu Rao provided excellent 
research assistance. Zhiguo He acknowledges financial support from the John E. Jeuck Endowment at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, United 
States as most of this paper was completed when He worked at University of Chicago. The opinions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of 
the Federal Reserve System. All errors are our own. This paper was previously circulated as ‘‘Multi-Dimensional Information with Specialized Lenders’’.

∗ Corresponding author at: New york University, Stern School of Business, 44 W4th st., New York, NY 10012, United States of America.

E-mail addresses:  kristian.blickle@ny.frb.org (K. Blickle), hezhg@stanford.edu (Z. He), jhuang@mays.tamu.edu (J. Huang), cparlato@stern.nyu.edu 

(C. Parlatore).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104135
Received 14 July 2024; Received in revised form 26 June 2025; Accepted 29 June 2025
Available online 23 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Fig. 1.  Differences in interest rates and loan performance between specialized and nonspecialized lenders. We define specialized lenders as those with more than 4% 
overinvestment in an industry, where overinvestment is measured as the deviation from a diversified portfolio  𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑖,𝑡
 for bank 𝑏 in industry 𝑖 at time 𝑡. The 
𝑠 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑖,𝑡
red solid line (left-hand side scale) plots the average difference between loan annual interest rates in the bank’s specialized industry and those outside of its specialized industry. 
The dashed black line (right-hand side scale) plots the average annual differences in the fraction of nonperforming loans when comparing loans in a bank’s specialized industry 
against its other loans. For a more in-depth discussion of measures of bank specialization, see Blickle et al. (2025). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑖,𝑡
𝑖 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑖,𝑡

−

∑

∑

Specifically, we study the emergence of private information–based 
pricing  in  equilibrium  amid  competition  among  asymmetrically  in-
formed banks. Borrower quality depends on two fundamental states. 
Both  nonspecialized  and  specialized  lenders  observe  private  signals 
about one state, but the specialized lender is ‘‘more’’ informed, as it 
observes an additional private signal about the other state. This multi-
dimensional information directly shapes the lenders’ pricing strategies. 
Specialized  lenders  leverage  their  superior  information  to  improve 
risk  assessments,  leading  to  differentiated  loan  pricing  that  reflects 
borrower quality and the competitive dynamics in the credit market.

Building on the finding in Blickle et al. (2025) that banks specialize 
in certain industries, we motivate our mechanism of information-based 
pricing with a simple empirical exercise. Using regulatory loan-level 
data from the Y14-Q Schedule H database maintained by the Fed, for 
each year, we compute the difference between the average interest rate 
of loans granted by specialized banks in their industry of specialization 
and those of their loans in other industries. Fig.  1 shows that specialized 
lenders consistently charge around 40 basis points less for loans in their 
specialized industry and that, equally important, they are less likely to 
encounter nonperforming loans in their industry of specialization.

The empirical regularity in Fig.  1, robust to more stringent econo-
metric specifications and alternative SNC data (Section 3.4), suggests 
that specialized lenders can identify better borrowers and ‘‘undercut’’ 
nonspecialized  competitors.  The  existing  information-based  models, 
e.g., Broecker (1990) and Hauswald and Marquez (2003), however, 
fail to deliver this empirical regularity. As Section 3.2 shows, a stark 
information rent effect dominates in these canonical settings, where 
loans from a stronger lender (with a more precise signal) tend to have 
higher interest rates, contrary to Fig.  1.

In our model, presented in Section 1, specialized and nonspecialized 
banks have a ‘‘general’’ signal about loan quality (e.g., from analyzing 
the borrower’s financial statements). Moreover, the specialized lender 
also has access to an additional signal from ‘‘specialized’’ information 
about the borrower (e.g., from their personal interactions with loan 
officers). While the general signal is binary and decisive in that each 
lender considers making an offer only upon receiving a positive general 
signal, the specialized signal – which differentiates our paper from the 
existing literature – guides the fine-tuned interest rate offering of the 
specialized bank. When the specialized signal is sufficiently low, the 
specialized lender rejects the borrower, as we observe in practice.

We focus on a multiplicative structure (similar to O-ring theory 
in Kremer, 1993) where project success requires two distinct funda-
mental states, one ‘‘general’’ and one ‘‘specialized’’, to be favorable;1 
the two types of signals mentioned above inform the lenders regarding 
these two states. Section 2 characterizes in closed form the competitive 
credit market equilibrium, where the specialized bank’s interest rate 
schedule is decreasing in its specialized signal. In contrast, the non-
specialized bank, conditional on competing, fully randomizes its rate 
offers, just as in Broecker (1990). Combining these two, the specialized 
bank can undercut its nonspecialized opponent when receiving a good 
specialized signal. Hence, by incorporating a specialized signal, our 
model delivers the key result of private information–based pricing.2

In Section 2, we derive a unique credit market equilibrium that can 
fall into two distinct categories depending on the competitiveness of 
the banking industry. In the first category, the winner’s curse pushes 
the nonspecialized ‘‘weak’’ bank to earn zero profits. We therefore call 
them zero-weak equilibria, where the nonspecialized bank randomly 
withdraws upon a positive general signal, consequently yielding more 
monopoly power to its specialized opponent. In the second category, 
termed positive-weak equilibria, the nonspecialized bank earns positive 
profits  and,  therefore,  always  participates  upon  a  positive  general 
signal.

Section 3 examines the model implication on the ‘‘negative inter-
est rate wedge’’, referring to the empirical regularity in Fig.  1 that 
loans from specialized lenders tend to have lower interest rates. We 
emphasize that the wedge, like most empirical studies on banking, is on 
‘‘winning bids’’ (i.e., offered rates accepted by borrowers) rather than 
‘‘bids’’ (i.e., offered interest rates); this distinction is crucial when loan 
rejections are an important part of equilibrium strategies. Although 
the standard winner’s curse effect pushes the weak lender to quote 
higher interest rates, it also responds by rejecting loan applications. 

1 The  multiplicative  structure  can  be  quite  flexible  as  the  general  and 
specialized fundamental states can potentially overlap; see He et al. (2024a) 
who apply the setting of overlapped states to study the role of information 
span in credit market competition. In the extreme, these two fundamental 
states coincide entirely, and our model becomes the standard setting where 
one single fundamental state dictates the overall quality of the project.

2 Conceptually, this is similar to the common value auction setting in Mil-
grom and Weber (1982), where the informed buyer who privately observes 
a continuum of signal realizations bids monotonically based on its private 
information (see the literature review for more details).

2 

K. Blickle et al.

In  equilibrium,  the  strong  lender  exerts  its  monopolistic  power  by 
randomly quoting the maximum interest rate (which might be accepted 
in equilibrium), resulting in a higher expected rate for loans granted 
by  specialized  lenders.  We  call  this  the  information  rent  effect.  We 
show that this information rent effect is so strong that, under rele-
vant parameters calibrated to U.S. banking data, canonical models à 
la (Broecker, 1990) struggle to generate the empirical regularity of a 
negative interest rate wedge.

In contrast, by modeling specialized signals, we explicitly incor-
porate  the  specialized  lender’s  ‘‘undercutting’’  to  win  creditworthy 
borrowers, favoring a lower expected rate for granted loans by special-
ized lenders. We call this the private information–based pricing effect, 
which  prevails  especially  in  the  regime  of  positive-weak  equilibria. 
There, the specialized bank has less monopoly power and hence makes 
more aggressive offers to get good borrowers.3

We  consider  extensions  in  Section  4.  First,  we  endogenize  the 
information  structure  by  considering  two  ex  ante  symmetric  banks 
competing in two industries. Lenders can invest in aa general infor-
mation  technology  and  also  acquire  costly,  firm-specific  specialized 
information to become specialized. Each lender only needs to invest 
once in the general information technology for two industries but has to 
acquire the specialized signal separately for each industry. We provide 
conditions for a ‘‘symmetric’’ specialization equilibrium, where each 
industry has one specialized and one nonspecialized lender, as in our 
baseline. Second, we generalize the information structure to show the 
robustness of our results. Section 5 concludes.

Literature review

Lending market competition and common-value auctions. Our paper 
builds on Broecker (1990), who studies lending market competition 
with screening tests and symmetric lenders (i.e., with the same screen-
ing abilities). Relatedly, Hauswald and Marquez (2003) explore the 
competition between an inside bank that can conduct credit screenings 
and an outside bank without such access.4 In these canonical credit 
market competition models, it is often assumed that private screening 
yields a binary signal, and lenders participate (and randomize their 
offered rates) only when receiving the positive signal realization. In 
contrast, we consider competition between asymmetrically informed 
lenders with multiple information sources.

Conceptually, credit market competition models are an application 
of common-value auctions, which typically allow for general signal dis-
tributions (other than the binary signal in the aforementioned papers).5 
In terms of modeling, our framework can be viewed as a combination 
of Broecker (1990) (symmetric bidders with general signals) and Mil-
grom and Weber (1982) (asymmetric bidders, one with a specialized 
signal). However, lenders are privately informed with different general 
signals in our model, disrupting the Blackwell ordering of informa-
tion between two lenders as studied in Milgrom and Weber (1982) 

3 Consistent with information-based pricing, Butler (2008) finds local in-
vestment banks charge lower fees and issue municipal bonds at lower yields 
than nonlocal underwriters.

4 Asymmetric credit market competition arises naturally under the recent 
open banking policy proposal. He et al. (2023a) consider competition between 
asymmetric lenders with different screening abilities under open banking when 
borrowers control access to data, and Goldstein et al. (2022) highlight the 
endogenous response of banks’ liabilities once the incumbent bank’s borrower 
data become ‘‘open’’ to a ‘‘challenger bank’’, where maturity transformation of 
using short-term funding to support long-term loans plays an important role.
5 The  early  papers  on  this  topic  include  (Milgrom  and  Weber,  1982) 
and Engelbrecht-Wiggans et al. (1983), and later papers such as (Hausch, 
1987)  and  Kagel  and  Levin  (1999)  explore  information  structures  where 
each bidder has some private information, which is the information structure 
adopted in Broecker (1990). And, Riordan (1993) extends the 𝑁-symmetric-
lender  model  in  Broecker  (1990)  to  a  setting  with  continuous  private 
signals.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

and Engelbrecht-Wiggans et al. (1983). In that literature, one informed 
bidder (with public and private information) knows strictly more than 
the other uninformed bidder (only public information); this structure 
eliminates not only the winner’s curse for the informed bidder but also 
the possibility of equilibrium profit for the uninformed bidder. We relax 
both assumptions and allow for a richer set of economic outcomes, yet 
still obtain closed-form solutions.

Specialization  in  lending.  Existing  theories  in  relationship  lending 
give little guidance in predicting the interest rate wedge in an un-
ambiguous way. However, there is a growing literature documenting 
specialization in bank lending; for an early paper, see Acharya et al. 
(2006).  More  recently,  Paravisini  et  al.  (2023)  show  that  Peruvian 
banks specialize their lending across export markets, benefiting borrow-
ers who obtain credit from their specialized banks. Based on data for US 
stress-tested banks, Blickle et al. (2025) document that banks specialize 
their portfolios in different industries in a way consistent with them 
having informational advantages in industries in which they specialize. 
Besides providing a framework that rationalizes observed patterns, we 
also show empirically that specialized banks have fewer nonperforming 
loans issued at lower rates in their portfolios than nonspecialized banks 
in the same industry, and that this result is not due to competition 
among specialized banks.6

Pricing of bank loans. Our work joins a number of recent papers 
studying the pricing of loans. Chodorow-Reich et al. (2022) investigate 
the liquidity provision for small and large firms, focusing in part on 
the  rate  paid  by  different  types  of  firms  for  access  to  credit  lines. 
Much of the recent collateral-on-loan-pricing literature (Benmelech and 
Bergman, 2009; Cerqueiro et al., 2014; Luck and Santos, 2023) has 
attempted to resolve the puzzle of why collateralized loans often pay 
higher rates. Our paper highlights that observed rates are ‘‘winning 
bids’’,  and  arguably  adds  an  important  dimension  to  these  discus-
sions as bank specialization and the signals associated therewith are 
a dimension missing from much of this literature.

The  connection  to  the  IO  literature.  Our  analysis  of  the  negative 
interest rate wedge between asymmetrically informed lenders connects 
to the industrial organization (IO) literature on imperfect competition 
and  adverse  selection  (Mahoney  and  Weyl,  2017;  Crawford  et  al., 
2018).  There,  market  power  (of  lenders)  and  adverse  selection  (of 
borrowers) are treated as distinct frictions: market power arises from 
the demand for differentiated products, while adverse selection follows 
from the effective revenue of marginal consumers decreasing as the 
firm raises its price.7 Their interaction implies that firms with greater 
market power should charge higher prices, but this effect is dampened 
by adverse selection, which lowers marginal revenue as firms raise 
prices.  In  contrast,  our  model  takes  asymmetric  information  as  the 
sole primitive friction, with the winner’s curse faced by asymmetrically 
informed lenders as the only underlying force. Unlike in the IO frame-
work, our specialized lender does not enjoy ‘‘market power’’, as the 
funding sources of specialized and nonspecialized lenders are perfectly 
fungible. Similarly, there is no adverse selection on the borrower side, 
as both types of borrowers take loans at any interest rate. While market 
power  and  adverse  selection  could  broadly  relate  to  unobservable 
borrower types, they are conceptually distinct from our setting, where 
the primary friction stems from asymmetric information alone. A recent 

6 Our paper is related to the literature on the nature of information in 
lending. Berger and Udell (2006) study relationship and transaction lending 
for  SME,  related  to  information’s  role  in  lending  as  highlighted  by  Stein 
(2002) and Paravisini and Schoar (2016). Recently, He et al. (2023b) show a 
significant rise in IT investment for US banks, which enhanced banks’ capacity 
to generate and transmit soft information.

7 In the insurance market example in Mahoney and Weyl (2017), a higher 
insurance premium is associated with lower quality insurance buyers, and a 
higher service cost. In Crawford et al. (2018), who study the enterprise loan 
market, a higher interest rate may attract worse borrowers or induce riskier 
projects, leading to lower interest revenues.

3 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

paper by Cosconati et al. (2024) makes important progress toward our 
framework by modeling market power and adverse selection based on 
information asymmetries in the auto insurance market. Like us, they 
also highlight the difference between bids and winning bids.

1. The model

In this section, we present the model and define the equilibrium 

accordingly.

1.1. Economic environment

We consider a credit market competition model with two dates, one 
good, and risk-neutral agents (two lenders and one borrower). There 
are two lenders (banks) indexed by 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}, where Bank 𝐴 (𝐵) is 
the specialized (nonspecialized) lender.

Project.  At 𝑡 = 0, the firm needs to borrow one dollar to invest in a 
(fixed-scale) risky project that pays a random cash flow ̃𝑦 at 𝑡 = 1. The 
cash flow realization 𝑦 depends on the project’s quality, denoted by 
𝜃 ∈ {0, 1}. For simplicity, we assume that 

{

̃𝑦 =

1 + 𝑟, when 𝜃 = 1,
0, when 𝜃 = 0,

(1)

where 𝑟 > 0 is exogenously given. We will later refer to 𝑟 as the interest 
rate cap or the return of a good project. The project’s quality 𝜃 is 
unobservable to lenders, and the prior probability of a good project 
is 𝑞 ≡ P (𝜃 = 1).

Credit market competition.  At date 𝑡 = 0, each bank 𝑗 can choose to 
make a take-it-or-leave-it interest rate offer 𝑟𝑗 ≤ 𝑟 of a unit dollar loan 
to the borrower or to make no offer (i.e., exit the lending market), 
which we normalize as 𝑟𝑗 = ∞. The borrower accepts the offer with 
the lowest rate if receiving multiple offers.8

Information technology.  Banks have access to information about the 
borrower’s  project  quality  before  choosing  whether  to  make  an  of-
fer. We assume that both lenders have access to ‘‘general’’ data (say 
financial and operating data), which they can process to produce a
general information–based private signal 𝑔𝑗 . We call such information 
‘‘general’’ signals. We assume that these general signals are binary, 
i.e., 𝑔𝑗 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿}; and that, conditional on the (relevant) state, general 
signals are independent across lenders. Besides following the traditional 
structure presented in Broecker (1990), this modeling of general signals 
also captures the coarseness with which some general information is 
used in practice.9

Additionally, we endow Bank 𝐴 with another private signal 𝑠, which 
reflects this bank is ‘‘specialized’’. As our major departure from the ex-
isting literature, this additional signal is a specialized information–based 
private signal, which is collected, for example, after due diligence or 
face-to-face interactions with the borrower after on-site visits. The spe-
cialized signal 𝑠 is continuous, and its distribution is characterized by 
the cumulative distribution function (CDF) 𝛷(𝑠) and probability density 
function (PDF) 𝜙(𝑠). Besides providing mathematical convenience, the 
continuous distribution captures ‘‘specialized’’ signals resulting from 
research tailored to the particular borrower and, therefore, allows for 
a more granular assessment of the borrower’s quality.

8 We implicitly assume that borrowers obtain some (however small) private 
benefit, so it is strictly optimal to take the project even for the type 𝜃 = 0. One 
important implication is that it is irrelevant whether borrowers privately know 
𝜃 or not, as both types of borrowers always pool in equilibrium.

9 For example, as a leading example of ‘‘general information’’, credit scores 
are binned in five ranges even though scores are computed at a much more 
granular level and range from 300 to 850.

1.2. Information structure

The information structure is characterized by the correlations be-

tween the fundamental states and the two types of signals.

General and specialized fundamental states.  Following the O-ring theory 
of economic development (Kremer, 1993), we focus on a multiplicative 
structure for the state 𝜃, so that 

{

𝜃 ≡ 𝜃𝑔𝜃𝑠

≡

1, when 𝜃𝑔 = 𝜃𝑠 = 1,
0, when either 𝜃𝑔 = 0 or 𝜃𝑠 = 0.

(2)

Here, 𝜃𝑔 ∈ {0, 1} captures the ‘‘general’’ state and 𝜃𝑠 ∈ {0, 1} the 
‘‘specialized’’ state; they jointly determine the project’s success 𝜃, in 
that the project fails when either state fails.

≡ P (𝜃𝑔 = 1

We further assume that general and specialized states are indepen-
dent, so that the prior probability of the state being ‘‘1’’ is simply 
)
𝑞 = 𝑞𝑔𝑞𝑠 with 𝑞𝑔
. This independence, 
together with the independence of the noise across signals, implies 
complete independence between the generalized and specialized signals 
(for Bank 𝐴). (This assumption is only for convenience as we discuss in 
Section 1.3.)

≡ P (𝜃𝑠 = 1

) and 𝑞𝑠

The distribution of the signals conditional on the state reflects the 
information technology. We assume that conditional on the state, the 
signal realizations are independent across borrowers. It is straightfor-
ward to allow for correlated signals conditional on the state (see He 
et al., 2024a). For binary general signals, we assume
P (𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻|𝜃𝑔 = 1

= 𝛼𝑑 ∈ [0, 1] ,

)

)

= 𝛼𝑢 ∈ [0, 1] , P (𝑔𝑗 = 𝐿|𝜃𝑔 = 0
for 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵} .

1 − 𝛼𝑢

1 − 𝛼𝑑

) and (

(3)
Here, (
) capture the probabilities of Type I and 
Type II errors, respectively.10 The bad-news signal structure in He et al. 
(2023a) corresponds to 𝛼𝑢 = 1 and a symmetric signal structure has 
𝛼𝑢 = 𝛼𝑑 = 𝛼 ∈ (0.5, 1], as in Hauswald and Marquez (2003) and He 
et al. (2024b). Our equilibrium characterization focuses on the latter 
case, although our solution is robust to any {𝛼𝑢, 𝛼𝑑

} structure.

For the continuous specialized signal, without loss of generality, we 
directly work with the posterior of the specialized state being good 
𝜃𝑠 = 1; that is, 



𝑠] ∈ [0, 1],

𝑠 = Pr[𝜃𝑠 = 1|
where 
Note ∫ 1
denotes the PDF of 𝑠.

𝑠 is Bank 𝐴’s information set regarding the specialized state. 
0 𝑠𝜙 (𝑠) 𝑑𝑠 ≡ 𝑞𝑠 in order to satisfy prior consistency, where 𝜙(𝑠)

(4)

General signals being decisive.  Throughout, we assume that the general 
signal is ‘‘decisive’’ and serves as ‘‘prescreening’’ for lending. That is 
to say, Bank 𝐵 rejects the borrower upon 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐿; Bank 𝐴 rejects 
the borrower upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿 while upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 it makes a pricing 
decision based on its specialized signal 𝑠. (However, as shown shortly, 
a sufficiently low specialized signal 𝑠 can also induce Bank 𝐴’s rejection 
even if 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻.) We impose the following parameter restrictions to 
ensure the prescreening general signal is decisive.

Assumption 1 (Decisive General Signals).
(i)  Bank  𝐴  rejects  the  borrower  upon  𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿,  regardless  of  the 
specialized signal 𝑠: 

(
1 − 𝛼𝑢

) 𝑟 < (

) 𝛼𝑑 ;

1 − 𝑞𝑔

𝑞𝑔
(ii) Bank 𝐵 is willing to participate (i.e., 𝑟𝐵 < ∞) if its general signal 
𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻: 

(5)

𝑞𝑔𝛼𝑢𝑞𝑠𝑟 > 𝑞𝑔𝛼𝑢

(
1 − 𝑞𝑠

)

+

(
1 − 𝑞𝑔

) (

1 − 𝛼𝑑

) .

(6)

10 Here, the information technology is not indexed by lender 𝑗—that is to 
say, lenders have the same technology to process general information that 
comes from ‘‘general’’ sources like financial statements. This assumption can 
be easily relaxed in our model.

4 

K. Blickle et al.

These  two  conditions  are  about  the  loan  NPV  to  a  bank  when 
the bank is the monopolistic lender. They shed light on the bank’s 
incentive to participate in competition. Under condition (5), the loan 
has a negative NPV to Bank 𝐴 upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿, even for the most favorable 
specialized signal 𝑠 = 1. This condition implies that Bank 𝐵 with a prior 
belief 𝑞𝑠 < 1 (about 𝜃𝑠) also rejects the loan upon receiving 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐿. 
Condition (6) states that upon 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, Bank 𝐵 is willing to lend at 𝑟 if 
it were the monopolist lender. This implies that Bank 𝐵 will participate 
in equilibrium; otherwise, in the conjectured equilibrium with Bank 𝐴
being the monopolist lender, Bank 𝐵 would have an incentive to enter 
(and undercut).

1.3. Discussions of model assumptions

Multidimensional information structure and its general applications.  Our 
setting with multiple states admits many other interpretations besides 
general and specialized states. For instance, our model is equivalent to 
the following generalized setting: 

𝜃𝑔
⏞⏞⏞

𝜃𝑠
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞

̂𝑁
∏

𝑛=1

𝜃𝑛 ⋅

𝑁
∏

𝜃𝑛,

𝑛= ̂𝑁+1

𝜃 =

(7)

with independent binomial states (or characteristics) 𝜃𝑛 ∈ {0, 1} where 
𝑛 ∈ {1, 2, … , 𝑁}. One can always ‘‘relabel’’ to fit the specific applica-
tion; in a companion paper, (He et al., 2024a) interpret 𝜃𝑔 and 𝜃𝑠 as 
the ‘‘hard’’ and ‘‘soft’’ fundamental states, respectively.

Multiplicative structure for project success.  As explained in Section 4.2, 
the multiplicative structure in (2) or (7) makes the general signal more 
likely to be decisive, which is useful for tractability. But tractability 
does  not  rely  on  the  multiplicative  structure  per  se,  and  the  key 
economics of private information–based pricing are robust to relaxing 
it.

Independence between general and specialized states.  For ease of expo-
sition we assume that 𝜃𝑔 and 𝜃𝑠 are independent; Section 4.2 shows 
that this independence can be relaxed while maintaining tractability. 
In a companion paper exploring the ‘‘span of information’’, (He et al., 
2024a)  allow  for  the  two  ‘‘hard’’  and  ‘‘soft’’  fundamental  states  to 
overlap in (7), so that the general signals and the specialized signal 
for Bank 𝐴 are correlated. For more details, see Section 4.2.

Principal and supplementary signals.  The equilibrium loan-making rule 
of  the  specialized  bank  is  practically  relevant.  Essentially,  the  spe-
cialized bank has two signals: the general one is ‘‘principal’’ and it 
determines whether to lend; the other, specialized one is ‘‘supplemen-
tary’’ and it helps its loan pricing.11 As shown in Section 3, this is in 
sharp contrast to the existing canonical literature where lenders make 
loan offers randomly conditional on the most favorable realization of 
their (binary) signals.  By decoupling the lender’s ex post loan assess-
ment from its ex ante technology strength, our setting helps deliver the 
empirical regularity of lower granted loan rates by specialized banks, 
as shown in Fig.  1.

11 Alternatively, the principal signal represents the result of a credit screen-
ing test, while the supplementary signal serves the role of internal ratings 
(of borrowers who are qualified for credit). This ranking portrays the key 
role  played  by  hard  information  for  large  banks  when  dealing  with  new 
borrowers. Indeed, as documented on page 1677 of Crawford et al. (2018), 
large Italian banks list the factors they consider when assessing any new loan 
applicant’s creditworthiness, in the following order of importance: (i) hard 
information from the central bank (financial statement data); (ii) hard informa-
tion from Credit Register; (iii) statistical-quantitative methods; (iv) qualitative 
information (i.e., bank-specific soft information codifiable as data); (v) avail-
ability of guarantees; and (vi) first-hand information (i.e., branch-specific soft 
information).

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Endogenous information structure.  In our main analysis, we take the 
lenders’  information  technologies  –  Bank  𝐴  being  the  specialized
lender – as given. Section 4.1 endogenizes this ‘‘asymmetric’’ infor-
mation  technology  in  a  ‘‘symmetric’’  setting  with  two  firms,  𝑎  and 
𝑏, where Bank 𝐴 (𝐵) endogenously becomes specialized by acquiring 
both  ‘‘general’’  and  ‘‘specialized’’  signals  of  the  firm  𝑎  (𝑏),  while 
nonspecialized Bank 𝐵 (𝐴) only acquires the ‘‘general’’ signal of the 
firm 𝑎 (𝑏). There, the key difference between these two signals is that a 
lender 𝑗 only needs to invest once – say installing IT equipment – to get 
two general signals, one for each firm, while specialized signals need 
to be collected individually for each firm.

Nonzero loan recovery when default.  We follow the literature (Broecker, 
1990;  He  et  al.,  2023a)  and  assume  a  zero  recovery  for  defaulted 
loans—that is,  ̃𝑦 = 0 when 𝜃 = 0 in (1). Appendix  A.4 derives the 
equilibrium in closed form when loan recovery is nonzero, i.e.,  ̃𝑦 =
𝛿 ∈ (0, 1) when 𝜃 = 0. A nonzero recovery matters when we calibrate 
information  technology  parameters  to  match  empirical  moments  in 
Section 3.2.

1.4. Credit market equilibrium definition

We now formally define the credit market equilibrium with special-
ized lending. Before doing so, we define the banks’ strategies and their 
associated profits.

Bank strategies.  Under Assumption  1, each lender makes a potential 
offer only upon receiving a positive general signal 𝐻 in any credit 
market equilibrium. Define the space of interest rate offers by  ≡
0, 𝑟]
[
∪ {∞}. Here, 𝑟 is the exogenous interest rate cap (project return) 
imposed in Section 1.1 and ∞ captures the strategy of not making an 
offer.

, which is a subinterval of [

As we will show soon, there exists an endogenous lower bound 
𝑟 > 0, so that the endogenous support of equilibrium interest rates is 
[𝑟, 𝑟]
0, 𝑟]
. With a slight abuse of terminol-
ogy, we refer to that subinterval as the ‘‘support’’ of the interest rate 
distribution, even though loan rejection (𝑟 = ∞) could also occur along 
the equilibrium path.

Denote Bank 𝐴’s pure strategy by 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ∶ [0, 1] → ; from Bank 
𝐵’s perspective, it induces a distribution of Bank 𝐴’s offers denoted 
(𝑟𝐴 ≤ 𝑟) according to the underlying distribution of the 
by 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) ≡ Pr
specialized signal. We take as given that Bank 𝐴 uses a pure strategy, 
though later we formally prove this result in Proposition  1. On the other 
hand, Bank 𝐵 randomizes conditional on 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, in which case we 
(𝑟𝐵 ≤ 𝑟) the cumulative distribution of its offers. 
denote by 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) ≡ Pr
Since the domain of offers includes rejection 𝑟 = ∞, it is possible that 
𝐹 𝑗 (𝑟)

= P (𝑟𝑗 < ∞|𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻) ≤ 1 for 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}.

The borrower chooses the lower interest rate offered (if there is 
any). For example, conditional on 𝑔𝐴 = 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, if Bank 𝐵 quotes 𝑟𝐵, 
then its winning probability (
) equals the probability that 
1 − 𝐹 𝐴(𝑟𝐵)
Bank 𝐴 with a specialized signal 𝑠 offers a rate higher than 𝑟𝐵—note, 
this includes the event of Bank 𝐴 with 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 rejecting the borrower 
(𝑟𝐴(𝑠) = ∞),  presumably  due  to  an  unfavorable  specialized  signal. 
Upon ties 𝑟𝐴 = 𝑟𝐵 < ∞, the borrower randomly chooses the lender 
with probability one-half, although the details of the tie-breaking rule 
do not matter as ties are zero-measure events in equilibrium. When 
𝑟𝐴 = 𝑟𝐵 = ∞, no bank wins the competition as both reject the borrower.

Definition 1 (Credit Market Equilibrium). A competitive equilibrium 
in  the  credit  market  (with  decisive  general  signals)  consists  of  the 
following:

1. A lender 𝑗 rejects the borrower or 𝑟𝑗 = ∞ upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐿 for 

𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}; upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻,

(i) Bank 𝐴 offers 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ∶ [0, 1] →  to maximize its expected 
lending profits given 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠, which induces a 
distribution function 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) ∶  → [0, 1];

5 

K. Blickle et al.

(ii) Bank 𝐵 offers 𝑟𝐵 ∈  to maximize its expected lend-
ing profits given 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, which induces a distribution 
function 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) ∶  → [0, 1];

2. The borrower who receives at least one offer (i.e., min{𝑟𝐴, 𝑟𝐵} <

∞) chooses the lower one.

Lemma  1 establishes that the equilibrium strategies in our setting 
are well-behaved, as established in the literature (Engelbrecht-Wiggans 
et al., 1983; Broecker, 1990). The key steps of the proof are standard, 
though  we  make  certain  adjustments  due  to  the  presence  of  both 
discrete and continuous signals.

Lemma  1  (Equilibrium  Structure).  In  any  equilibrium,  there  exists  an 
endogenous lower bound 𝑟 > 0, so that the two distributions 𝐹 𝑗 (⋅), 𝑗 ∈
{𝐴, 𝐵} share a common support [𝑟, 𝑟] (besides ∞ as rejection). Over [𝑟, 𝑟)
both distributions are smooth with well-defined density functions, i.e., no 
gaps and atomless. At most one lender can have a mass point at 𝑟.

Bank profits and optimal strategies.  Denote by 𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 ∈ {𝐻𝐻, 𝐻𝐿, 𝐿𝐻,
𝐿𝐿} the event of two general signal realizations, where 𝐻𝐿 repre-
sents Bank 𝐴’s (𝐵’s) general signal being 𝐻 (𝐿). Denote by 𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵  the 
joint probability of any collection of realizations of general signals; 
) (
= 𝑞𝑔𝛼2
. Similarly, 
e.g., 𝑝𝐻𝐻
denote by 𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 ≡ P (𝜃𝑔 = 1 |
𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵 ) the posterior probability of the 
|
general state being one conditional on 𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵; for instance,

≡ P (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻, 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻)

(
1 − 𝑞𝑔

1 − 𝛼𝑑

𝑢 +

)2

𝜇𝐻𝐻 =

𝑞𝑔𝛼2
𝑢
) (

(
1 − 𝑞𝑔

.

)2

1 − 𝛼𝑑

𝑞𝑔𝛼2

𝑢 +

Since {𝜃𝑔, 𝜃𝑠} are independent, the posterior of project success given 
{𝐻𝐻, 𝑠} is 
P ( 𝜃 = 1| 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻, 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, 𝑠)

= 𝜇𝐻𝐻 ⋅ 𝑠.

(8)

If Bank 𝐴 receives 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠, its profit 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ) by quoting 

𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, 𝑟) equals
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ) ≡ 𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

+

𝑝𝐻𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐻,𝑔𝐵 =𝐿

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

]

[

]
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴 wins
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

] .

(9)

Bank 𝐴 can also choose to exit by quoting 𝑟 = ∞, in which case 
𝜋𝐴 (∞ |𝑠 ) = 0. We denote Bank 𝐴’s optimal interest rate offer by 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ≡
arg max𝑟∈ 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ).

To understand (9), recall that 𝐴 cannot observe 𝑔𝐵 when making an 
offer. With probability 𝑝𝐻𝐻 , both banks receive favorable general sig-
)
nals, and 𝐴 quoting 𝑟 wins with probability (
1 − 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟)
; whereas with 
probability 𝑝𝐻𝐿, it faces no competition as 𝐵 with 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐿 withdraws 
itself. Standard winner’s curse logic implies that 𝐵’s participation in 
the loan market affects 𝐴’s perceived borrower quality (regarding the 
general fundamental state) captured by 𝜇𝐻𝐻  or 𝜇𝐻𝐿. Importantly, since 
𝐵 randomizes its pricing upon 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, from 𝐴’s perspective winning 
the competition against 𝐵 is not informative about borrower quality.

This  last  observation  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  problem  of 
nonspecialized Bank 𝐵, which understands that the outcome of com-
petition against its specialized opponent is informative about 𝜃𝑠. More 
specifically, besides the possibility of the opponent’s unfavorable gen-
eral signal, when Bank 𝐵 quotes 𝑟, it also knows that winning the 
competition implies 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) > 𝑟. Hence, its expected lending profit when 
quoting 𝑟 is therefore
𝜋𝐵 (𝑟) ≡ 𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

E [ 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜃𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1|
|

]
𝑟 ≤ 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠)

]

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵 wins
[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

+

𝑝𝐿𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐿,𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

] .

(10)

6 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Bank 𝐵’s optimal strategy 𝐹 𝐵(⋅) maximizes its expected payoff max𝐹 𝐵 (⋅)
∫ 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟). As is standard in equilibria in mixed strategies, the 
profit-maximizing  Bank  𝐵  is  indifferent  between  any  offer  𝑟  in  its 
support.

An important equilibrium property, verified in Section 2.1, is that 
𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) is decreasing in 𝑠, so that Bank 𝐴 competes more aggressively 
once it knows the borrower is of better quality.12 The flip side of the 
‘‘cherry picking’’ by the specialized lender 𝐴 is the ‘‘winner’s curse’’ 
suffered by the nonspecialized lender 𝐵, which infers an unfavorable 
specialized signal (of 𝐴) when it wins.

2. Credit market equilibrium characterization

To characterize the equilibrium, Section 2.1 first takes the equilib-
rium profits 𝜋𝐵 as given and solves for the other equilibrium objects, 
and then it solves for the equilibrium 𝜋𝐵. Section 2.2 completes the 
construction of the credit market equilibrium.

2.1. Solving for the pricing strategies of the lenders

Solving for 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) as a function of 𝜋𝐵.  We start by showing that Bank 
𝐴’s equilibrium strategy 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) (upon receiving 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) is decreasing 
and characterized by two thresholds, 𝑥 and  ̂𝑠 (they may coincide). 
Specifically, Bank 𝐴 offers 𝑟𝐴 = ∞ if 𝑠 < ̂𝑠, offers 𝑟𝐴 = 𝑟 if ̂𝑠 ≤ 𝑠 ≤ 𝑥, 
and otherwise sets 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ∈

, which is strictly decreasing.

[𝑟, 𝑟)

To see this, suppose that 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) is decreasing, which we verify later. 
Then,  conditional  on  𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻,  when  𝐵  quotes  𝑟 = 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠),  it  wins 
the borrower only when 𝐴’s specialized signal is below 𝑠. Bank 𝐵, 
therefore, updates its beliefs about the borrower’s quality accordingly—
its posterior for the specialized state is ∫ 𝑠
0 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡. On the other hand, 
conditional  on  𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿,  𝐵  wins  the  borrower  for  sure.  Plugging 
𝑟𝐵 = 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) in 𝐵’s lending profits in Eq. (10), we have the following 
indifference condition of 𝐵:

[

𝜋𝐵 =

]

𝑠

0

)
(
1 + 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠)
𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠
𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 ∫
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵’s expected lending revenue
.

−

)

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛷 (𝑠) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵’s expected lending cost

Because Eq. (11) holds for any 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ∈
𝜋𝐵 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛷 (𝑠) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑠
0 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) =

(11)

[𝑟, 𝑟)

, therefore 

− 1,

for

𝑠 ∈ [ ̂𝑠, 1] .

(12)

The lower bound interest rate 𝑟 can be solved from evaluating 𝑟𝐴(𝑠) at 
𝑠 = 1: 

𝑟 = 𝑟𝐴 (1) =

𝜋𝐵 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻
(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 )𝑞𝑠

− 1.

(13)

Intuitively, Bank 𝐵 guarantees winning by quoting 𝑟, so its lending 
probability is 𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻  in the numerator, and the share of good bor-
rowers is (𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 +𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 )𝑞𝑠 in the denominator (recall ∫ 1
0 𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡 =
𝑞𝑠).

Proposition  1 below shows that Bank 𝐴’s strategy 𝑟𝐴(𝑠) is decreasing 
in equilibrium. Define its inverse function (correspondence) of 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) to 
be 

𝑠𝐴(𝑟) ≡

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝑟𝐴(−1)(𝑟), when 𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, 𝑟),
[𝑥, ̂𝑠),

when 𝑟 = 𝑟,
when 𝑟 = ∞.

[0, 𝑥),

(14)

12 This result is reminiscent of Milgrom and Weber (1982). Intuitively, the 
private specialized signal of Bank 𝐴 𝑠 is only informative about 𝜃𝑠 and does 
not provide any insight on the strategy of Bank 𝐵 (whose signal on 𝜃𝑔 is 
independent of 𝜃𝑠 in our main analysis). However, 𝑟𝐴′(𝑠) < 0 holds under the 
weaker assumption that independent signals are conditional on project success, 
as shown in Section 4.2.

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

The two relevant cutoffs for Bank 𝐴’s strategy can be rewritten 
as  ̂𝑠 = sup 𝑠𝐴(𝑟), i.e., the highest signal that Bank 𝐴 quotes 𝑟; and 
𝑥 = sup 𝑠𝐴(∞), i.e., the highest signal under which Bank 𝐴 rejects the 
borrower.

Solving for 𝐹 𝐵(⋅) as a function of 𝜋𝐵.  Recall Bank 𝐵 is indifferent among 
all rates on the support; we pin down 𝐵’s equilibrium strategy so that 
𝑟𝐴 (⋅) in (12) is 𝐴’s optimal strategy. To achieve this goal, define the 
total  effective  borrowers  (who  can  repay)  of  Bank  𝐴  and  𝐵  when 
offering interest rate 𝑟 as 𝑄𝐴(𝑟; 𝑠) and 𝑄𝐵(𝑟) respectively, which are 
given by
𝑄𝐴(𝑟; 𝑠) = 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 [

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠,

(15)

]
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝑠𝐴(𝑟)

𝑄𝐵(𝑟) = 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 ∫

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠.

0

(16)

𝑄𝐴 and 𝑄𝐵 differ in that 𝐴 observes 𝑠 while 𝐵 only knows that it gets 
borrower types with 𝑠 < 𝑠𝐴(𝑟) (if 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) or 𝑞𝑠 (if 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿), hence 
𝑄𝐴(𝑟; 𝑠) depends on the signal 𝑠.

Then, as Bank 𝐴 cuts the interest rate 𝑟 marginally, it loses 𝑄𝐴(𝑟; 𝑠)𝑑𝑟
from existing borrowers who repay but gains 𝑄𝐴′(𝑟; 𝑠)𝑑𝑟 more effective 
borrowers, where 𝑄𝐴′(𝑟; 𝑠) ≡ 𝑑𝑄𝐴(𝑟;𝑠)
. Therefore, Bank 𝐴’s first-order 
𝑑𝑟
condition (FOC) can be written as 

(

)

1
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠

.

=

(17)

1 + 𝑟 −

−𝑄𝐴(𝑟; 𝑠)
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
MC on existing borrower types

𝑄𝐴′ (𝑟; 𝑠) ⋅
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
MB on marginal borrower type
The term inside the parentheses on the left-hand side in (17) concerns 
the marginal borrower with quality 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠. Given imperfect screening, 
to serve each good borrower who repays 1 + 𝑟 for sure, Bank 𝐴 needs 
to incur a total lending cost 

𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠  due to lemons.
Similarly, for Bank 𝐵, any rate 𝑟 on support balances the change 
in its borrowers against the gain from existing borrowers. Combining 
(11), and the definition of 𝑄𝐵 in (16), we can rewrite (11) as a function 
of 𝑟: 

1

𝜋𝐵(𝑟) =

𝑄𝐵(𝑟) (1 + 𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵’s expected lending revenue

−

)
(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛷 (𝑠𝐴 (𝑟)
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵’s expected lending cost

)

.

(18)

Then, one can derive Bank 𝐵’s FOC in maximizing (18) to be 

𝑄𝐵′ (𝑟) ⋅

(

1 + 𝑟 −

)

=

1
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝐴(𝑟)

−𝑄𝐵(𝑟)
⏟⏟⏟
MC on existing borrower types

.

(19)

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
MB on marginal borrower type
The two FOCs in (17) and (19) take a similar form. In fact, evalu-
ating (17) at the equilibrium borrower type 𝑠 = 𝑠𝐴(𝑟) and combining it 
with (19), we arrive at the following: 
)
𝑄𝐴′ (𝑟; 𝑠𝐴(𝑟)
[ 𝑄𝐴 (𝑟; 𝑠)
) =
𝑄𝐴 (𝑟; 𝑠𝐴(𝑟)
𝑄𝐵(𝑟)

𝑄𝐵′ (𝑟)
𝑄𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑑
𝑑𝑟

(20)

= 0.

⇔

]|
|
|
|
|𝑠=𝑠𝐴(𝑟)

Eq. (20) is surprisingly clean but admits simple intuition. At any interest 
rate 𝑟, both lenders are competing for the same marginal borrower. As 
each lender balances this marginal borrower’s payoff with the payoff 
gain from existing customers, in equilibrium, their existing effective 
customers should change proportionally.

Factoring out 𝑠 in 𝑄𝐴(𝑟; 𝑠) in (20), we obtain the following ordinary 

differential equation: 

𝑑
𝑑𝑟

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

[

]
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑠𝐴(𝑟)
0

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

= 0,

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

(21)

which implies that the function inside the curly brackets is a constant 
independent of 𝑟. What is more, given that general signals are symmet-
ric across lenders, i.e., 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿 = 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 , 1 − 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) is proportional to 

∫ 𝑠𝐴 (𝑟)
0

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

. Using the boundary condition 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
we solve for 𝐹 𝑏(𝑟) in the interior strategy space, 

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

∫ 𝑠𝐴(𝑟)
0

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

,  for 𝑟 ∈ (𝑟, 𝑟).

= 0 where 𝑠𝐴(𝑟) = 1, 

(22)

Bank 𝐵’s strategy on 𝑟 depends on whether it is profitable in equilib-
∫ ̂𝑠
rium: it either places a mass of 1 − 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟−) = 1
0 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 > 0 there if 
𝑞𝑠
𝜋𝐵 > 0, or withdraws (𝑟 = ∞) if 𝜋𝐵 = 0.

Illustration of lenders’ pricing strategies.  Before we solve for the equilib-
rium 𝜋𝐵, Fig.  2 illustrates the lender strategies. Panel A (left) depicts 
Bank 𝐴’s pricing strategy 𝑟𝐴(𝑠), which is decreasing, while the right 
panel plots Bank 𝐵’s CDF of its rates 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟). We also plot the two signal 
cutoffs— ̂𝑠, at which 𝐴’s strategy hits 𝑟, and 𝑥, at which 𝐴 exits.

We highlight a key difference between the two types of equilibria: 
one with 𝜋𝐵 = 0, which we call the zero-weak equilibrium as the weak 
bank makes no profits; and the other with 𝜋𝐵 > 0, which we call the
positive-weak equilibrium as the weak bank makes positive profits. In 
Fig.  2, the case of 𝜋𝐵 > 0 is indicated by the subscript ‘‘+ ’’ and the 
case of 𝜋𝐵 = 0 by the subscript ‘‘0’’; the exogenous parameter that 
drives different 𝜋𝐵 is 𝑟, which we denote respectively by 𝑟+ and 𝑟0 with 
𝑟+ > 𝑟0. As expected, the greater the borrower surplus 𝑟, the higher the 
lender 𝐵’s profit. As shown, in a zero-weak equilibrium 𝐴 has a point 
mass at 𝑟0 (corresponding to 𝑠 ∈ (𝑥0, ̂𝑠0)) but 𝐵 does not, while in a 
positive-weak equilibrium the opposite holds. This reflects the fierce 
competition at the interest rate cap, which echoes the last point in 
Lemma  1 (otherwise, lenders will undercut each other at this point).

Solving for the equilibrium profit of bank 𝐵.  Lastly, depending on whether 
the equilibrium is zero-weak or positive-weak, 𝜋𝐵 can be determined 
as either 𝜋𝐵 = 0 or the break even condition of Bank 𝐴 upon 𝑠 = ̂𝑠 (in 
positive-weak equilibrium).

Intuitively, the sign of 𝜋𝐵 depends on which lender reaches zero 
profit first when quoting 𝑟 as 𝑠 decreases. We define 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴  as the spe-
cialized signal at which Bank 𝐴 quotes 𝑟 and breaks even (hence the 
superscript ‘‘𝑏𝑒’’), and it corresponds to ̂𝑠 in the conjectured positive-
weak equilibrium. Similarly, we define 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵  as the signal at which Bank 
𝐵 quotes 𝑟 and breaks even, which corresponds to ̂𝑠 in the conjectured 
zero-weak equilibrium. The expressions of 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵  are provided in 
Appendix  A.1. Lemma  2 shows that the relative ranking between 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴
and 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵  determines 𝜋𝐵 and ̂𝑠.

𝐴  and 𝑠𝑏𝑒

Lemma 2.  Given 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 profit is

𝐴  defined in (29) in Appendix  A.1, the equilibrium Bank 

{[

𝜋𝐵 = max

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 ∫

0

𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

]

1 + 𝑟)
(

−

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛷 (𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴

)

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

}

) , 0

.

𝐵 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒

When 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴  we are in the positive-weak equilibrium in which the weak 
≥ 𝑠𝑏𝑒
Bank 𝐵 makes a positive profit, and 𝑥 = ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴
we are in the zero-weak equilibrium where Bank 𝐵 earns zero profits, with 
𝑥 < ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 .

𝐴 . Otherwise, when 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵

2.2. Credit market equilibrium

Credit  market  equilibrium  characterization.  The  next  proposition  pro-
vides a full analytical characterization of the credit market equilibrium 
with  specialized  lending.  Appendix   A.4  generalizes  the  equilibrium 
characterization for the case of nonzero recovery.

Proposition 1 (Credit Market Equilibrium). In the unique equilibrium, 
Bank  A  follows  a  pure  strategy  as  in  Definition   1.  In  this  equilibrium, 
lenders reject the borrower upon a low general signal realization ℎ𝑗 = 𝐿 for 
𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}. Otherwise (i.e., when ℎ𝑗 = 𝐻), their strategies are characterized 
as follows, with the equilibrium 𝜋𝐵 given in Lemma  2.

7 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Fig. 2.  Equilibrium strategies 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) for Bank 𝐴 (left) and 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) for Bank 𝐵 (right). In both panels, strategies under ̄𝑟+ (i.e., positive-weak equilibrium) are depicted in red 
dashed lines while strategies with ̄𝑟0 (i.e., zero-weak equilibrium) are depicted in blue solid lines. In the zero-weak equilibrium, Bank 𝐴 (but not Bank 𝐵) has a point mass at 𝑟0
while in the positive-weak equilibrium, Bank 𝐵 (but not Bank 𝐴) has a point mass at 𝑟+. Parameters: 𝑞𝑔 = 0.75, 𝑞𝑠 = 0.95, 𝛼𝑢 = 𝛼𝑑 = 𝛼 = 0.85, and 𝜏 = 1, where 𝜏 captures the 
signal-to-noise ratio of Bank 𝐴’s specialized information technology as 𝑠 = E [𝜃𝑠|𝜃𝑠 + 𝜖] and 𝜖 ∼  (0, 1∕𝜏). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the 
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

1. Bank 𝐴 with a specialized signal 𝑠 offers 

𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) =

{

min

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝜋𝐵 +𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛷(𝑠)+𝑝𝐿𝐻

0 𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡+𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 ∫ 𝑠
∞,

}

− 1, 𝑟

for

𝑠 ∈ [𝑥, 1],

for

𝑠 ∈ [0, 𝑥).

(23)

The equation pins down 𝑟 = 𝑟𝐴 (1). If 𝑠 ∈ ( ̂𝑠, 1], where ̂𝑠 = sup 𝑠𝐴(𝑟), 
𝑟𝐴(⋅) is strictly decreasing and we can define its inverse function 
𝑠𝐴(⋅) = 𝑟𝐴(−1)(⋅) as in (14).

2. Bank 𝐵 makes an offer with cumulative probability given by 

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

∫ 𝑠𝐴(𝑟)
0

1 −

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠
1 − 𝟏{𝜋𝐵 =0

} ⋅

∫ ̂𝑠
0 𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

for

𝑟 ∈

[𝑟, 𝑟) ,

for

𝑟 = 𝑟,

(24)

where 𝟏{𝑋} = 1 is the indicator function that takes value one if 𝑋
= 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟−) is the probability that Bank 
holds. When 𝜋𝐵 = 0, 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
∫ ̂𝑠
𝐵 makes the offer (and with probability  1
0 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 it withdraws 
𝑞𝑠
by quoting 𝑟𝐵 = ∞); when 𝜋𝐵 > 0, 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
= 1 and there is a mass 
of  1
𝑞𝑠

∫ ̂𝑠
0 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 at 𝑟.

The proof of Proposition  1 mainly covers three theoretical issues. 
First, we show that the specialized lender always adopts a pure strategy 
in any equilibrium; that is, the pure strategy 𝑟𝐴(𝑠)—which is implicitly 
taken as given in Definition  1—is a result rather than an assumption. 
Second, we prove that the FOC conditions used in the equilibrium 
construction  detailed  in  Section  2.1  are  sufficient  to  ensure  global 
optimality. Third, somewhat surprisingly, thanks to the endogenous 
adjustment of 𝜋𝐵 and 𝑟, monotonicity holds without the need to ‘‘iron’’ 
à  la  (Myerson,  1981)  in  the  interior  range  for  equilibrium  interest 
rates.13 In fact, consistent with point 3 in Lemma  1, Bank 𝐴’s quotes 
never bunch at some endogenous threshold—except at the exogenous 
rate cap 𝑟 when the zero-weak equilibrium ensues.

Remark. (Binary specialized signal) The key equilibrium properties do 
not rely on Bank 𝐴’s specialized signal being continuous. In Appendix 
A.3, we reformulate the model with a binary specialized signal, 𝑠 ∈
{𝐻, 𝐿}. Upon a positive general signal 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻 where 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}, 
a lender offers a randomized interest rate from the common support 

13 This result follows from lending competition, not the choice of posterior 
of 𝜃𝑠 being the specialized signal. Of course, monotonicity per se requires the 
specialized signal to be monotone in the posterior of 𝜃𝑠.

8 

[𝑟, 𝑟] ∪ {∞}; and Bank 𝐴 additionally uses its specialized signal for 
pricing. More specifically, there exists a threshold ̂𝑟 ∈ (𝑟, 𝑟) such that, 
conditional on 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻, Bank 𝐴 randomizes its interest rates over the 
lower subinterval [𝑟, ̂𝑟] when receiving the favorable specialized signal 
𝑠 = 𝐻 and over the upper subinterval [̂𝑟, 𝑟] ∪ {∞} when 𝑠 = 𝐿.

Properties of the credit market equilibrium.  Fig.  3 illustrates the main 
properties of the credit market equilibrium with specialized lenders. 
For exposition purposes, we assume that Bank 𝐴’s specialized signal 𝑠
is obtained from observing 𝜃𝑠 + 𝜖, so that 
𝑠 = E [𝜃𝑠|𝜃𝑠 + 𝜖] ,
where  𝜖 ∼  (0, 1∕𝜏)  and  the  precision  parameter  𝜏  captures  the 
signal-to-noise ratio of Bank 𝐴’s specialized information technology.

(25)

The two top panels in Fig.  3 plot both lenders’ pricing strategies 
conditional on making an offer. Panel A is the same as that in Fig.  2 for 
convenience while Panel B plots the density 𝐹 𝐵 ′(𝑟). Formally, we refer 
to Bank 𝐴’s strategy of 𝑟𝐴(𝑠) decreasing in 𝑠 as ‘‘private information–
based pricing’’. When 𝐴’s private assessment of borrower quality is 
sufficiently low (𝑠 < 𝑥), it rejects the borrower. Panel C further plots 
the two specialized signal cutoffs for Bank 𝐴, i.e., ̂𝑠 at which it starts 
quoting 𝑟 and 𝑥 at which it starts rejecting the borrower.

Finally, Panel D plots the expected profits—E(𝜋𝐴) and 𝜋𝐵—for the 
two lenders, against the exogenous interest rate cap 𝑟. Recall that 𝑟
can also be interpreted as the return of a good project, capturing the 
surplus to be realized from a loan. Thus, a higher total surplus gives 
rise to less fierce competition, and as a result, both lenders—including 
the weak lender 𝐵—make positive expected profits upon a favorable 
general signal 𝐻. Put differently, the model features a positive-(zero-) 
weak equilibrium when 𝑟 is relatively high (low).

The equilibrium behaviors at the upper interest rate 𝑟 illustrate the 
competitive force in a sharp way. In the positive-weak equilibrium 
(high 𝑟’s), the nonspecialized Bank 𝐵 has a point mass on this rate, en-
joying some ‘‘local monopoly power’’ as it is the only lender when Bank 
𝐴 rejects the borrower upon 𝑠 < ̂𝑠 = 𝑥. In contrast, in the zero-weak 
equilibrium (low 𝑟’s), the nonspecialized Bank 𝐵 withdraws while the 
specialized Bank 𝐴 places a point mass at 𝑟 (when 𝑠 ∈ (𝑥, ̂𝑠), as shown 
in Panel C) and is the monopolistic lender there. It is possible to have 
positive-weak equilibria because when the project’s surplus (captured 
by 𝑟) is sufficiently large, the nonspecialized lender 𝐵 is still profitable 
by quoting 𝑟 despite the winner’s curse. We highlight that the weak 
lender’s profits come from its conditionally independent private signal, 
which could also arise in canonical models, say (Broecker, 1990). The 
weak lender’s ‘‘local monopoly power’’, however, is a unique feature of 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Fig. 3.  Equilibrium strategies and profits. In the top two panels, we plot equilibrium strategies for both lenders. Panel A depicts 𝑟𝐴(𝑠) as a function of 𝑠 and Panel B plots 𝐹 𝐵 ′(𝑟)
as a function 𝑟; strategies with ̄𝑟+ are depicted by red dashed lines while strategies with ̄𝑟0 are depicted by blue solid lines. Panel C depicts Bank 𝐴’s thresholds ̂𝑠 = sup 𝑠𝐴(𝑟) and 
𝑥 = sup 𝑠𝐴(∞), and Panel D depicts the expected profits for two lenders. Parameters: 𝑞𝑔 = 0.75, 𝑞𝑠 = 0.95, 𝛼𝑢 = 𝛼𝑑 = 𝛼 = 0.85, and 𝜏 = 1, where 𝜏 captures the signal-to-noise ratio 
of Bank 𝐴’s specialized information technology as 𝑠 = E [𝜃𝑠|𝜃𝑠 + 𝜖] and 𝜖 ∼  (0, 1∕𝜏). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to 
the web version of this article.)

our model; it arises from Bank 𝐴’s informed decision to withdraw given 
sufficiently low realizations of 𝑠.14

where {𝑟𝑖 < 𝑟𝑗 ≤ ∞
Bank 𝑗).15

} denotes the event that Bank 𝑖 wins the loan (over 

3. Specialized lending: Interest rate wedge

As suggested by Fig.  1, the loans on the balance sheets of spe-
cialized lenders tend to have higher quality and lower interest rates. 
That specialized lenders with informational advantages extend higher 
quality loans is a robust prediction of any information-based environ-
ment, including ours as well as canonical ones à la (Broecker, 1990) 
and Marquez (2002). In what follows, we focus on the implications of 
the model for interest rates.

We  define  the  ‘‘interest  rate  wedge’’  as  the  difference  between 
the rates of loans made by specialized and nonspecialized lenders. In 
Section 3.1 we first stress the difference between bids and winning 
bids, which explains why canonical models struggle to generate this 
empirical regularity (Section 3.2). Then, in Section 3.3, we show how 
our private information–based pricing mechanism helps generate the 
negative interest rate wedge observed in practice, for which we offer 
detailed evidence based on Y-14 supervisory data in Section 3.4.

3.1. Interest rate wedge: Bids vs. Winning bids

An economist observes bank loans granted that borrowers accept. 
Put differently, the loans we use to calculate loan interest rates are 
already on the books of the lender that won the bidding competition 
for the loan. In our setting, when Bank 𝐴 makes a loan offer (𝑟𝐴 < ∞), 
it is accepted by the borrower if 𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞—that is, either if there is 
no offer from Bank 𝐵 (e.g., when 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐿 so 𝑟𝐵 = ∞) or Bank 𝐴’s rate 
is below that offered by Bank 𝐵. Therefore, the theoretical counterpart 
of negative rate differentials in Fig.  1 is: 

𝛥𝑟 ≡

[

]

[

]

E

𝑟𝐴|
|
|

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
interest rate of 𝐴’s granted loan

− E

𝑟𝐵|
|
|

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
interest rate of 𝐵’s granted loan

< 0,

(26)

14 This point will be elaborated on later in footnote 3.3 in Section 3.3.

9 

We call 𝛥𝑟 in (26) the interest rate wedge. There is a crucial difference 
between the wedge calculated from ‘‘bids’’, i.e., banks’ offered interest 
rates, and the one calculated from ‘‘winning bids’’, i.e., banks’ rates 
on their granted loans. In our model, banks can reject loan applica-
tions by quoting ∞. Therefore, the winning bid, which is a first-order 
statistic (i.e., the smaller one given two quotes), necessarily requires 
conditioning 𝑟𝑖 < ∞ in (26).

Although the winner’s curse pushes the less informed Bank 𝐵 to bid 
higher (often in the form of withdrawals by quoting 𝑟 = ∞), it also leads 
to higher winning bids from the more informed Bank 𝐴. For example, 
in He et al. (2023a), conditional on quoting an interior interest rate 
𝑟 < 𝑟,  both  lenders  follow  exactly  the  same  bidding  strategy;  and 
the stronger bank quotes the monopoly rate 𝑟 with a strictly positive 
probability while the weaker lender withdraws from the market with 
the same positive probability. As a result, the interest rate wedge is 
typically positive.

Because  Bank  𝐴’s  monopoly  rent  comes  from  its  informational 
advantage, we call this economic force the ‘‘information rent’’ effect, 
which leads to a positive interest rate wedge 𝛥𝑟 > 0. In contrast, the 
‘‘private information–based pricing’’ effect 𝑟𝐴′ (𝑠) < 0 in our model 
naturally  favors  a  negative  interest  rate  wedge  𝛥𝑟 < 0.  We  next 
investigate these two effects in isolation by studying two classes of 
models separately.

15 There is a subtle distinction between 𝛥𝑟 and Fig.  1. The former represents 
the  wedge  between  loan  rates  of  specialized  and  nonspecialized  lenders, 
while the latter pertains to loan rates within the same lender but the wedge 
between specialized and nonspecialized industries. However, this difference 
is inconsequential. First, the regression analysis in Section 3.4 accounts for 
cross-lender differences. Second, in the extension presented in Section 4.1, 
where we endogenize the model’s information structure, Bank 𝐴 also issues 
nonspecialized loans to industry 𝑏 (employing the same strategy as Bank 𝐵 in 
industry 𝑎), perfectly aligning with the analysis in Fig.  1.

K. Blickle et al.

3.2. Canonical models: The information rent effect

Canonical credit market competition models parameterize the infor-
mation technology by the signal’s precision, which captures the lenders’ 
ability to screen out uncreditworthy borrowers. There, the natural way 
to capture ‘‘specialized lending’’ is by imposing asymmetric screen-
ing abilities on general signals (and setting a degenerate specialized 
fundamental state 𝜃𝑔 = 1).

Specification in canonical models.  The literature has primarily focused 
on the following two parameterizations for the general signals in (3). 
The first is the bad-news signal structure with 𝛼𝐴
𝑢 =
𝛼𝐵
𝑢 = 1) in He et al. (2023a); alternatively, Marquez (2002) and He 
et al. (2024b) adopt a symmetric signal structure in which 𝛼𝐴
𝑑 >
𝑢 = 𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐵
𝑑 . In the bad-news signal structure, 𝐴 makes fewer false positive 
mistakes than 𝐵, while in the symmetric signal structure 𝐴 also makes 
fewer false negative mistakes. For ease of exposition, in both cases, we 
suppress the subscript of 𝑢 or 𝑑 and simply use 𝛼𝐴 > 𝛼𝐵 to capture that 
𝐴 is better informed. We have the following proposition.

𝑑  (and 𝛼𝐴

𝑑 > 𝛼𝐵

𝑢 = 𝛼𝐴

Proposition 2 (Counterfactual Prediction in Canonical Models). In the 
canonical models of bank competition with unidimensional information:

1. Under a bad-news signal structure, there exists a threshold ̂𝑟 such 

that 𝛥𝑟 > 0 for 𝑟 < ̂𝑟;

2. Under a symmetric signal structure, when 𝛼𝐴 = 𝛼 and 𝛼𝐵 ↑ 𝛼, we 

have 𝛥𝑟 > 0 if either (i) 𝑟 ≤ 1
𝑞

− 1 or (ii) 𝑞 ≥ 1 − 𝛼 + 𝛼2 holds.

In canonical models, only quantity decisions (i.e., whether to lend 
or not) are based on the signal realizations, while pricing decisions 
(offered interest rates) are randomized. Since Bank 𝐴’s private signal is 
more precise, the weak lender 𝐵 is more concerned about the winner’s 
curse, that is, picking up a ‘‘lemon’’ that was rejected by the competitor 
lender.  As  a  result,  𝐵  randomly  withdraws  even  after  receiving  a 
favorable signal 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, effectively making Bank 𝐴 a monopolist. 
This corresponds to the information rent effect in Section 3.1 when 
both lenders participate, driving the specialized Bank 𝐴 to have higher 
expected winning bids (that is, rates on granted loans) than Bank 𝐵. 
This force favors a positive interest wedge.

The above discussion applies only to the event in which both lenders 
participate (𝐻𝐻). However, we also need to take into account the 
possibility that one lender receives a negative general signal 𝐿 and 
withdraws, in which case ‘‘bids’’ matter. Because by definition a bank’s 
‘‘bids’’  are  higher  than  its  ‘‘winning  bids’’,  a  negative  interest  rate 
wedge may arise if Bank 𝐵’s expected rates on granted loans receive 
relatively more weighting on its ‘‘bids’’ (the event of 𝐻𝐿) than those 
of Bank 𝐴. This relative weighting, together with the difference in 
bids  and  winning  bids,  is  the  counterforce  that  the  assumptions  in 
Proposition  2 aim to limit.

The first part of Proposition  2 concerns the bad-news signal struc-
ture. The lower the rate cap 𝑟, the more severe the winner’s curse in 
competition (𝐻𝐻), and therefore the weaker lender is more likely to 
reject loan applications. This intensifies the effect of the information 
rent. Meanwhile, as shown in Lemma  A.7 in Lemma  A.4, the difference 
between ‘‘bids’’ and ‘‘winning bids’’ also narrows for a lower 𝑟, weak-
ening the counterforce discussed above. Both forces explain the first 
part of Proposition  2 that 𝛥𝑟 > 0 when 𝑟 sits below a threshold; we will 
show shortly that this threshold is significantly higher than the usury 
rate cap in the U.S. under empirically relevant parameters calibrated 
to the U.S. banking industry.

The second part of Proposition  2 concerns the symmetric signal 
structure. We are unable to formally prove the general case; instead, 
we analyze only the limiting case of 𝛼𝐵 ↑ 𝛼𝐴. Our calibrated precision 
parameters  below  are  extremely  close  to  each  other  (𝛼𝐴 = 0.984
and 𝛼𝐵 = 0.977), confirming that this limit is empirically relevant. 
Moreover, the information rent effect is presumably minimized in this 
limiting case; indeed, as shown in Fig.  4, within the range of calibrated 

10 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

parameters, the information rent effect intensifies as the technology gap 
𝛼𝐴 − 𝛼𝐵 > 0 widens. Finally, regarding the two sufficient conditions, 
the first about 𝑟 is similar to that in the bad-news structure, while the 
second implies that Bank 𝐴 has a higher relative weighting on ‘‘bids’’ 
than Bank 𝐵 and so the counterforce is restrained.16

Calibrations and numerical examples.  We now show that the canonical 
model delivers the counterfactual prediction of 𝛥𝑟 > 0 under empiri-
cally relevant primitives that are calibrated to U.S. banking data. The 
key steps of our calibration are given below, while a more detailed 
description is available in Appendix  A.6.

We  set  𝑟  to  be  36%,  the  rate  cap  imposed  by  most  U.S.  usury 
laws. There are three other key parameters in canonical models: two 
signal precision parameters 𝛼𝐴 and 𝛼𝐵, and the loan quality prior 𝑞. 
We calibrate these parameters on the basis of three empirical moments. 
First, using Y14Q.H1 data for stress-tested banks, we calculate the non-
performing loan (NPL) rates of specialized and nonspecialized banks 
in our sample. This gives an NPL rate of 3% for specialized and 4% 
for nonspecialized banks, as reported in Table  B.1 in Appendix  B. The 
third empirical moment is the loan approval rate in U.S. banks, which is 
reported in Chart 11 of DeSpain and Pandolfo (2024). To be consistent 
with the data of Y14Q.H1 covering large banks tested for stress, we 
take the loan approval rate of about 50% for large banks during the 
2017–2024 period.

P(𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) + 1
2

We then calculate the model-implied moments based on canonical 
models, which allow us to back out the three primitive parameters of 
interest. For example, the overall loan approval rate is 50%, which 
is presumably averaged between both types of banks; but since there 
are no data on loan applications to specialized versus nonspecialized 
lenders, we match the overall loan approval rate in our model which 
is given by  1
P(𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻)𝐹 𝐵(𝑟). For the bad-news signal 
2
structure, the calibrated parameters are 𝛼𝐴 = 0.984, 𝛼𝐵 = 0.977, and 
𝑞 = 0.506, which imply 𝛥𝑟 = 0.26%. For the symmetric signal structure, 
we have 𝛼𝐴 = 0.984, 𝛼𝐵 = 0.977, and 𝑞 = 0.510, under which 𝛥𝑟 = 0.17%.
Fig.  4 plots the implied interest rate wedge (which is always posi-
tive) using these baseline parameters together with comparative statics 
in 𝛼𝐵 and 𝑞. Panel A concerns the bad-news signal structure, and the 
calibrated parameters are denoted by the ‘‘∗’’ marker in the figure. 
Recall that Proposition  2 states that 𝛥𝑟 > 0 holds as long as the interest 
rate cap 𝑟 is not too high. We then ask: How high would the interest 
rate cap need to be for 𝛥𝑟 to turn negative? Based on the calibrated 
parameters, the answer is 393%—a value significantly higher than the 
current U.S. usury rate of 36%.17

Panel B in Fig.  4 considers the symmetric signal structure; one can 
verify that Condition 1 in Part 2 of Proposition  2 holds under the cal-
ibrated parameters. Note that the two calibrated precision parameters 
are extremely close to each other in Panel B of Fig.  4, so the limit of 
Proposition  2 is empirically relevant. Presumably, the information rent 
effect is stronger when the technology gap 𝛼𝐴−𝛼𝐵 > 0 is larger, which is 
confirmed in Panel B of Fig.  4 as well as in all our numerical exercises.
Why do we always have a positive interest rate wedge in canon-
ical models for parameters that are close to the calibrated ones? As 
discussed right after Proposition  2, the counterforce manifests itself in 
the event of disagreement (𝐿𝐻 or 𝐻𝐿 so one lender exits, and hence 
‘‘bids’’ rather than ‘‘winning bids’’ prevail). But our calibrated precision 
parameters 𝛼’s are close to one. This implies highly correlated screening 
outcomes across banks with rare instances of disagreement, rendering 
the counteracting force quantitatively negligible.

16 As explained in Lemma  A.4, the condition 𝑞 ≥ 1 − 𝛼 + 𝛼2 ensures a 
sufficiently high prior so that the more informed Bank 𝐴 has a higher overall 
lending probability than Bank 𝐵 (see (63)). But with 𝛼𝐵 ↑ 𝛼𝐴 = 𝛼, in 𝐻𝐻 Bank 
𝐴 has a slightly lower lending probability  𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴 𝑝𝐻𝐻 as shown in (61) because 
𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴 < 1
. Combining both, we know that Bank 𝐴’s loan rates place relatively 
less weight on its ‘‘winning bids’’ (𝐻𝐻) and more weight on its ‘‘bids’’ (𝐻𝐿) 
than Bank 𝐵.
17 For more details, see ‘‘Calibration’’ in Appendix  A.6 on Page 63.

2

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Fig. 4.  Interest rate wedge under canonical models. We plot the interest rate wedge 𝛥𝑟 = E [ 𝑟𝐴|
] with calibrated parameters. We fix ̄𝑟 = 0.36
|
at the usury rate and calibrate 𝛼𝐴, 𝛼𝐵 , and 𝑞 based on empirical moments (𝑁𝑃 𝐿𝐴 = 3% and 𝑁𝑃 𝐿𝐵 = 4%, and loan approval rate 50%). We highlight the calibrated parameters 
in each panel with marker ‘‘∗’’. Panel A depicts 𝛥𝑟 as a function of 𝛼𝐵 while varying 𝑞 under the bad-news signal structure, with calibrated parameters 𝛼𝐴 = 0.984, 𝛼𝐵 = 0.977, 
𝑞 = 0.506. Panel B depicts 𝛥𝑟 as a function of 𝛼𝐵 while varying 𝑞 under the symmetric signal structure, with calibrated parameters 𝛼𝐴 = 0.984, 𝛼𝐵 = 0.977, and 𝑞 = 0.510.

]
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

− E [ 𝑟𝐵 |
|

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

Calibration with nonzero recovery rate.  So far, we have assumed that 
defaulted loans have no recovery, while in practice they typically have 
nonzero liquidation value. As mentioned in Section 1.3, Appendix  A.4 
provides a full characterization of equilibrium with nonzero recovery 
𝛿 ∈ (0, 1) for models with specialized lending as well as that for the 
canonical settings. We set 𝛿 = 0.6 which is approximately the average 
recovery rate in the Y-14 data (across all types of collateral), and then 
recalibrate our three parameters in the canonical models; the implied 
interest rate wedge, though smaller, is still positive.18

Two important conceptual points are worth mentioning. First, if 𝛿’s 
are heterogeneous in the data, then borrowers with lower 𝛿’s are more 
likely to be rejected, implying that 0.6 is an overestimate of 𝛿 due to 
selection. Second, for a higher 𝛿, the interest rate wedge is expected 
to be smaller as the equilibrium rates are lower. However, lower rate 
levels do not necessarily imply a negative interest rate wedge; at the 
extreme of 𝛿 = 1 the model converges to perfect Bertrand competition, 
leading to a zero interest rate wedge.

Combining Proposition  2, Fig.  4, and the results for the nonzero 
recovery case, we conclude that canonical models generate counter-
factual implications about the interest rate wedge. We show that our 
model with a specialized signal naturally delivers this result.

3.3. Our model: The private information–based pricing effect

As illustrated by Fig.  2 Panel A, the ‘‘private information–based 
pricing’’ effect pushes Bank 𝐴 with a more favorable specialized signal 
to offer a lower rate, which naturally gives rise to a negative interest 
rate wedge. What is more, the early discussion regarding ‘‘bids versus 
winning  bids’’  in  Section  3.1  suggests  that  whether  Bank  𝐵  rejects 
(quoting 𝑟𝐵 = ∞) or not plays a role; that is, 𝛥𝑟 > 0 is more likely to 
occur if 𝐵 rejects more often (so 𝐴 enjoys a higher information rent).19 
Hence, the private information–based pricing effect is more likely to 
prevail in a positive-weak equilibrium in which 𝐵 never rejects after 
receiving a high signal. In that equilibrium, 𝐵 even enjoys some ‘‘local 
monopoly power’’ as the only lender (when 𝐴 withdraws after 𝑠 < 𝑥) 
having a point mass at 𝑟. We stress that the endogenous point mass on 𝑟

18 For the bad-news (symmetric) signal structure, to match the observed 
moments, i.e., NPL ratios of 3% and 4% for specialized and nonspecialized 
lenders, and average approval rate of 0.5, the calibrated parameters are 𝑞 =
0.4967 (0.5006), 𝛼𝐴 = 0.9846 (0.9843), 𝛼𝐵 = 0.9788 (0.9790). The resulting 
interest rate wedge is 𝛥𝑟 = 5 × 10−4 (4 × 10−5).
19 This intuition is consistent with the discussion right after Proposition  2, 
where we explain an opposite result: Even in canonical models, the monopoly 
power of Bank 𝐵 in the event of 𝐿𝐻 favors a negative interest rate wedge. 
(But this force is quantitatively small in canonical models under calibrated 
parameters).

11 

placed by a weaker lender is a distinct feature of our setting compared 
to canonical settings à la (Broecker, 1990), which arises because a bank 
with greater ex ante technology strength in our model can have a worse 
ex post loan assessment.20 As a result, when Bank 𝐵 never withdraws 
after receiving 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, the better informed Bank 𝐴 undercuts to win 
higher-quality borrowers while leaving those lemons to Bank 𝐵 (who 
then makes loans with higher winning bids).

Comparative  statics  on  interest  rate  wedge.  Fig.   5  plots  the  compar-
ative  statics  of  𝛥𝑟  with  respect  to  model  parameters,  with  regions 
of zero-weak and positive-weak equilibria highlighted. Just as in the 
calibration exercise for canonical models in Section 3.2, we now choose 
our parameters 𝛼, 𝑞𝑔 and 𝑞𝑠 (given in the caption of Fig.  5) to fit 
three empirical moments (NPL ratios in specialized and nonspecialized 
lenders, which are 3% and 4% respectively, and a loan approval rate 
50%).21 Implicitly, we fix 𝑟 = 36% and 𝜏 = 1, but our results are robust 
to these choices.

As shown in Fig.  5 (marked with ∗ in all panels), our model gener-
ates a negative interest rate wedge under the calibrated parameters. We 
intentionally consider a wide parameter range to illustrate the workings 
of our model when credit market competition transitions between the 
zero-weak equilibrium and the positive-weak one.

The top two panels A and B concern information technology param-
eters 𝛼 (precision of general signals) and 𝜏 (precision of the specialized 
signal). The intuition of Panel B is clear: A higher specialized signal 
precision 𝜏 benefits lender 𝐴 and the economy is more likely to be in the 
zero-weak equilibrium. Note that 𝛥𝑟 is discontinuous when 𝜋𝐵 becomes 
zero, since Bank 𝐵 reallocates a probability mass of 1−𝐹 𝐵(𝑟−) > 0 from 
𝑟 to ∞ (see also Panel B in Fig.  3). Interestingly, when the precision 
of  general  signals  increases  (Panel  A),  it  first  helps  nonspecialized 
Bank  𝐵  in  that  the  economy  switches  from  zero-weak  to  positive-
weak; but eventually, when 𝛼 → 1 so that the general signal is public 
information, the equilibrium converges to a zero-weak one because 
Bank 𝐵 essentially becomes (effectively) uninformed.

20 In canonical models à la (Broecker, 1990), although the weak bank may 
earn some positive profits given a high borrower surplus (say, large 𝑞 and 
𝑟), it never has a point mass at 𝑟 to enjoy ‘‘local’’ monopoly power. To see 
the intuition, note that because in canonical settings information is used to 
determine participation only, the strong lender never withdraws upon 𝐻; and 
since only one lender can have a point mass at 𝑟 (a result that is similar to 
Lemma  1 for canonical models), it must be the strong lender that possesses 
such a point mass.
21 We need to adapt the formula for model-implied moments to the model 
with specialized signal. For instance, since Bank 𝐴 upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 will also reject 
loan applications for sufficiently low signal realizations, the model-implied 
loan approval rate becomes  1

P(𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻)(1 − 𝛷(𝑥)) + 1
2

P(𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻)𝐹 𝐵(𝑟).

2

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Fig. 5.  Interest rate wedge. Panels A through Panel D depict 𝛥𝑟 = E [ 𝑟𝐴|
] as a function of 𝛼, 𝜏, 1∕𝑞𝑔 and ̄𝑟. In Panel C, we vary 1∕𝑞𝑔 but fix 
]
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞
|
the project success probability 𝑞, i.e., we set 𝑞𝑠 = 𝑞∕𝑞𝑔 . The positive-weak equilibrium arises when 𝜏 lies below a certain value and 1∕𝑞𝑔 and ̄𝑟 exceed a certain value. Baseline 
calibrated parameters: ̄𝑟 = 0.36, 𝑞𝑔 = 0.508, 𝑞𝑠 = 0.990, 𝜏 = 1 and 𝛼𝑢 = 𝛼𝑑 = 𝛼 = 0.986. Note 𝜏 captures the signal-to-noise ratio of Bank 𝐴’s specialized information technology 
as 𝑠 = E [𝜃𝑠|𝜃𝑠 + 𝜖] and 𝜖 ∼  (0, 1∕𝜏).

− E [ 𝑟𝐵 |
|

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

Though not highly visible, 𝛥𝑟 in Panel B remains negative even 
in the region of zero-weak equilibria. This is consistent with Propo-
sition  A.2 in Appendix  A.7, in that we show that we do not need a 
positive-weak equilibrium to generate a negative interest rate wedge. 
This  result  highlights  the  robustness  of  our  mechanism  of  private 
information–based pricing.

Panel C conducts another comparative statics analysis that captures 
the relative importance of general versus specialized information. More 
specifically, consider varying 1∕𝑞𝑔 but fixing the project success prob-
ability 𝑞, which implies 𝑞𝑠 = 𝑞∕𝑞𝑔. The companion paper by He et al. 
(2024a) explains that this comparative statics exercise corresponds to 
the scenario in which general signals increase their span so that they 
cover more fundamental states critical to the success of the funded 
project.22 Interestingly, this exercise delivers a new economic force 
that is distinct from signal precisions in Panels A and B. Intuitively, 
now Bank 𝐵, equipped with general information technology that cov-
ers more fundamental states, becomes relatively stronger (rather than 
weaker when 𝛼 and/or 𝜏 increase), so the credit market equilibrium is 
more likely to be in the positive-weak region (and delivers a negative 
interest  rate  wedge).  Finally,  the  comparative  statics  of  𝑟  in  Panel 
D  is  intuitive:  When  the  total  surplus  increases,  the  credit  market 
equilibrium  moves  from  the  zero-weak  region  to  the  positive-weak 
region.

As a robustness check, we also calibrate our model with specialized 
lending for a positive recovery 𝛿 = 0.6 (for a full characterization of 
equilibrium, see Appendix  A.4). The newly calibrated parameters are 

≡ ∏𝑁

≡ ∏ ̂𝑁

𝑛=1 𝜃𝑛 (𝜃𝑠

22 As explained in Section 1.3 where we introduce multidimensional funda-
mental states, He et al. (2024a) interpret 𝜃𝑔
𝜃𝑛) as 
the borrower’s ‘‘hard’’ (‘‘soft’’) fundamental state, and model the expansion 
of the span of ‘‘hard’’ information by an increase in  ̂𝑁 (so 𝜃𝑔 covers more 
fundamental states). In the short-run, this expansion of  ̂𝑁 does not alter the 
span of the soft signal so that 𝜃𝑔 and 𝜃𝑠 overlap (as both have their own 
̂𝑁’s), but in the long-run the coverage of 𝜃𝑠 also shrinks so that 𝜃𝑔 and 𝜃𝑠 do 
not overlap. Panel C corresponds to the long-run scenario. For the short-run 
scenario, the expansion of  ̂𝑁 induces a correlation between 𝜃𝑔 and 𝜃𝑠, which 
makes the analysis a bit involved but still tractable. For more details, see He 
et al. (2024a).

𝑛= ̂𝑁+1

𝛼 = 0.9870, 𝑞𝑔 = 0.5012, 𝑞𝑠 = 0.9897, and consistent with the main 
prediction of our paper, the resulting interest rate wedge is negative 
(−1 × 10−4).

3.4. Lower rates and better performance: Empirical evidence

The two main testable predictions of our model relate to differences 
in loan pricing and performance between specialized and nonspecial-
ized banks. We have provided supporting evidence for these predic-
tions, based on raw differences, in Fig.  1. In this section, we conduct a 
more rigorous empirical analysis of these two testable hypotheses.

Our  empirical  study  uses  the  supervisory  data  collected  by  the 
Federal Reserve System (Y14Q-H.1) which covers all C&I loans (over 
one million USD) to which a stress-tested bank has committed between 
2012 and 2023. In Appendix  B, we provide more details on the data, 
variable construction, and regression specifications.

Throughout we consider both two-digit and four-digit NAICS codes 
for industry specifications. In our model a bank is either specialized 
in an industry or not, while in the data bank specialization can take a 
continuum of values as measured by ‘‘excess specialization’’ in Blickle 
et al. (2025). To incorporate their measure into our framework, we 
identify whether a bank specializes in a particular industry by assigning 
a binary specialization flag. This flag is set to 1 if ‘‘excess specialization’’ 
for bank 𝑏 in industry 𝑠, defined in Blickle et al. (2025), exceeds a 
certain threshold. For instance, when working with industries defined 
using two-digit NAICS codes, we set the threshold to be 4%, so a bank 
𝑏 is specialized in industry 𝑠 if it invests 4% more of its C&I lending 
relative to the overall share of industry 𝑠 in all C&I lending, i.e.,

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑠,𝑡
𝑠 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑠,𝑡

∑

−

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑠,𝑡
𝑠 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑠,𝑡

∑

≥ 4%.

Under this threshold, the average bank specializes in 2.8 industries; the 
average overinvestment is 8.9% for specialized banks, while only 0.2% 
for nonspecialized ones. Our results are robust to using 3% or 5% as a 
threshold (not reported for brevity).

12 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Table 1
Interest rate and loan performance.
  Panel A: Specialization defined at the 2-Digit NAICS Level

  Specialized Bank

  Log Loan Amount

  Year-Quarter FE
  Purpose FE
  Rating Category (1-3) FE
  Bank-Year FE
  Industry-Year FE
  𝑅2
  N

(2)

(3)

(1)
Interest Rate
−0.076***
[0.006]
−0.156***
[0.002]

X
X
X

−0.150***
[0.007]
−0.170***
[0.002]

X
X
X
X

0.31
353,544

0.39
353,537

−0.082***
[0.007]
−0.178***
[0.002]

X
X
X
X
X
0.4
351,776

(4)
(5)
Nonperforming Loans
−0.008***
[0.001]
−0.000
[0.000]

−0.005***
[0.001]
−0.000*
[0.000]

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

0.031
353,544

0.044
353,537

  Panel B: Specialization defined at the 4-Digit NAICS Level

  Specialized Bank

  Log Loan Amount

(1)
Interest Rate
−0.090***
[0.008]
−0.156***
[0.002]

(2)

(3)

−0.249***
[0.008]
−0.169***
[0.002]

−0.188***
[0.009]
−0.178***
[0.002]

(4)
(5)
Nonperforming Loans
−0.012***
[0.001]
−0.000
[0.000]

−0.006***
[0.001]
−0.000*
[0.000]

(6)

−0.005*** 
[0.001]
−0.001**  
[0.000]

X
X
X
X
X
0.047
351,776  

(6)

−0.007*** 
[0.001]
−0.001**  
[0.000]

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

0.31
353,544

X
X
X
X
X
0.4
351,776

  Year-Quarter FE
  Purpose FE
  Rating Category (1-3) FE
  Bank-Year FE
  Industry-Year FE
  R2
  N
Note: In Columns (1)–(3), we regress the loan rate paid by a firm on the fixed effects specified at the bottom of the table and a dummy 
denoting whether the firm is borrowing from a bank that is specialized in the industry in which said firm operates. In Columns (4)–(6), we 
use the same specifications as in previous columns, but use whether the loan in question ever becomes nonperforming at any date it is in our 
sample after its origination. A loan becomes nonperforming if it is ever in arrears, has not been paid down at maturity, or defaults outright. 
In Panel A, we define specialization using two-digit NAICS industries. We define a bank as specialized if it is overinvested by 4% or more 
in an industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification. In Panel B, we define specialization at the four-digit NAICS level. 
We define a bank as specialized if it is overinvested by 1% or more in an industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification. 
Standard errors are clustered at the firm-time level and are heteroskedasticity robust while *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 
5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

X
X
X
X
X
0.048
351,776  

0.38
353,537

0.03
353,544

0.044
353,537

Baseline results.  We consider the following specification that relates our 
variable of interest 𝑦𝑙𝑖𝑏𝑠𝑡, either the loan rate or performance, for a bank 
𝑏’s loan 𝑙 to borrower 𝑖 in industry 𝑠 in quarter-year 𝑡, to a dummy 
𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑡 that denotes whether bank 𝑏 in question is specialized in 
industry 𝑠 at time 𝑡:
𝑦𝑙𝑖𝑏𝑠𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ⋅ 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑𝑏𝑠𝑡 + 𝛽2 ⋅ 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑙𝑡 + 𝜉𝑏𝑡 + 𝜎𝑠𝑡 + 𝜙rating-category

𝑙𝑡

+ 𝜔loan-purpose

𝑙𝑡

+ 𝜖𝑙𝑖𝑏𝑠𝑡.

(27)

The inclusion of controls and fixed effects in (27) deserves further 
discussion. First, loans are of fixed size and have the same purpose 
in our model; hence, we control for the loan’s size and purpose to 
ensure that these characteristics do not drive our findings. Second, 
although firm-fixed effects are typically used in the literature to control 
for borrower-specific factors, it is inappropriate to include them in 
our setting. This is because whether firms sort into specialized and 
nonspecialized banks is a key feature of the mechanism that our model 
highlights; ideally, we should saturate our regression with as many 
observable borrower characteristics as possible, such as leverage and 
EBIT/Assets. However, as more than 50% of the firms in our sample 
are private firms, we do not have financial data for many of them.

To address this issue, in our regression (27) we include the time-
varying  rating  category  dummy  of  each  loan  based  on  the  bank’s 
internal risk rating to absorb borrower-specific time-varying factors. 
But extra care must be taken. Our model is conditional on firm char-
acteristics that are observable to both lenders; however, banks’ internal 
loan risk ratings potentially reflect private information (though the ex-
tent of private information is limited, as it must be defensible to Federal 

Reserve examiners). We mitigate this issue by classifying the loans as
high-risk, mid-risk, and safe based on their internal rating. As shown in 
Appendix Table  B.3 Panel B, for a subsample of firms for which we do 
have balance sheet characteristics (e.g., leverage and EBIT/Assets), the 
three internal risk categories indeed correspond to generally accepted 
metrics  of  firm  riskiness.  In  sum,  by  categorizing  these  risks  into 
broad buckets, we take advantage of the information they convey on 
borrower quality while curbing the unique bank-specific knowledge 
about borrowers reflected by them.

Consecutively introducing bank-year and industry-year fixed effects, 
columns (1)–(3) of Panel A in Table  1 show a negative relation between 
banks being specialized and loan rates in their industry of specializa-
tion. This is the empirical counterpart to the negative interest rate 
wedge we studied above in this section. In terms of magnitude, the 
identified negative wedge (8∼15 bps) is smaller than the raw difference 
of about 40 bps shown in Fig.  1, presumably due to better controls in 
our richer specification in (27). Interestingly, the magnitude identified 
in Table  1 matches squarely with the predicted interest rate wedge 
under calibrated parameters shown in Fig.  5 (about 10 bps). Finally, 
there is a significantly negative correlation between specialization and 
nonperformance reported in columns (4)–(6) in Table  1.23 In our model, 
specialization is driven by the banks’ informational advantage, and 

23 Nonperforming loans are those that fall into arrears, are not paid down 
by the end of their maturity, default or require renegotiation due to covenant 
violation issues.

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Blickle et al.

loans granted by specialized lenders are of higher quality and therefore 
less likely to turn nonperforming later.

So far, we have defined an industry using two-digit NAICS codes, 
which yields 23 distinct industries. Turning to four-digit NAICS codes, 
we have a far greater degree of granularity with 310 industries, and 
specialization at the four-digit level is much narrower. Accordingly, 
we define a bank as specialized if it is 1% overinvested relative to 
what would be assumed under full diversification. To put this threshold 
into perspective, it is equivalent to having levels of overinvestment 
equivalent to being in the top 20% of overinvestment by Y-14 lenders 
at any given time in any industry. Panel B of Table  1 confirms that 
all model predictions continue to hold in four-digit NAICS codes. The 
effects are somewhat larger at the four-digit level compared to those 
at the two-digit level, perhaps because of stronger specialization with 
narrower industry specifications.

Robustness tests.  In Appendix  B we offer a battery of robustness tests 
to  confirm  that  our  results  hold  under  various  specifications.  First, 
Appendix  B.3 considers alternative borrower risk measures. Panel A 
of Table  B.3 demonstrates that our findings hold when using dummies 
for a bank’s detailed 1–10 risk assessment instead of three broad cate-
gories. Panel B shows that our results are robust to controlling for risk 
measures based on observable firm characteristics, such as EBIT/Assets 
and leverage, using data from a subset of firms (approximately half) 
that report these metrics in the Y-14 dataset. Second, Appendix Table 
B.4 shows that our coefficients remain qualitatively unchanged after 
removing the COVID-19 period (2020–2021).

Multiple specialized lenders in an industry.  For simplicity, our model con-
siders only one specialized lender (and another nonspecialized lender). 
However, this assumption excludes an empirically relevant mechanism 
in which multiple specialized banks in the same industry compete for the 
same borrower. To ensure that our results are not driven by potential 
competition among multiple specialized banks, Table  2 expands Table 
1 with an additional control for a bank operating in an industry with 
multiple  specialized  lenders.  We  define  the  loan  market  as  having 
multiple specialized lenders as a dummy that takes the value of one if 
two or more banks specialize in a given industry and add this dummy 
‘‘Multiple Specialized Lenders’’ and its interaction with ‘‘Specialized 
Bank’’ to our baseline regression. Under this alternative mechanism, 
the specialized lender charges lower rates only because it faces fiercer 
competition from other specialized lenders, and therefore, the signifi-
cantly negative effect on ‘‘Specialized Bank’’ in Table  1 would be fully 
absorbed by the interaction term in Table  2.

Panel A of Table  2 reports the results at the two-digit NAICS level. 
In columns (1)–(3) of Table  2 we still observe a negative coefficient 
on ‘‘Specialized Bank’’, consistent with our model predictions. We also 
observe a negative coefficient for the dummy ‘‘Multiple Specialized 
Lenders’’, potentially because industries with more specialized lenders 
have better quality borrowers.24 But the coefficients of the interaction 
term are either positive or insignificant across all three specifications 
(Columns (1)-(3)), inconsistent with the alternative mechanism of com-
petition  among  specialized  lenders.  This  result  establishes  that  the 
bank’s specialization – as opposed to competition among specialized 
lenders – is the driving force behind how the specialized bank sets its 
rates.

In  Panel  B,  we  use  the  same  specifications  as  in  Panel  A,  but 
we define industry specialization at the four-digit NAICS-code level. 
Although the number of specialized lenders in four-digit industries is 
somewhat less stable (i.e., the degree of specialization can vary a little 
more from one quarter to another, as discussed in B), the coefficients on 
our interaction terms are still significantly positive (except Column (1) 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

without any fixed effects, which is negative at 10% level), supporting 
the mechanism proposed by our model.

Finally, recall that we have defined ‘‘Multiple Specialized Lenders’’ 
as a dummy that captures an industry with more than one specialized 
lender. As explained in Appendix  B.5, our results are robust to using 
the exact number of specialized lenders in an industry as an alternative 
definition of ‘‘Multiple Specialized Lenders’’ (Table  B.6).

Empirical results using SNC data and dealscan data.  For our last effort 
to show the robustness of our empirical findings, we confirm that the 
interest rate wedge is negative even outside the Y-14 data. Collected by 
the Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC, SNC (Syndicated National 
Credit Registry) data contain information on syndicated loans that are 
valued  over  20  million  USD  and  held  by  two  or  more  U.S.  banks. 
Compared to the 40 stress-tested banks represented in the Y-14 data, 
the SNC data cover 218 lenders that originate at least one syndicated 
loan in the U.S. between 1993 and 2018.25 Hence, one can use it to test 
whether our predictions hold for a sample that includes smaller lenders.
Unfortunately, the SNC data have several serious limitations (which 
we discuss in detail in Appendix  B.6). One key limitation, which is 
crucial to our study, is that the SNC data do not contain information 
on loan interest rates. To overcome these issues, we follow the steps 
detailed in Appendix  B.6 to merge SNC data with Dealscan following a 
methodology first laid out in Cohen et al. (2018). The merged sample 
does not represent the universe of loans, and these SNC tests serve as 
indicative additions to our main analyses. Nevertheless, Appendix Table 
B.7 confirms our key theoretical predictions: the specialization of the 
lead arranging bank in a syndicated loan is related to lower rates and 
better ex post loan performance.

4. Extensions

This  section  provides  two  important  model  extensions.  We  first 
endogenize the bank specialization structure that we have assumed so 
far—that is, Bank 𝐴 has both general and specialized signals while Bank 
𝐵 has only a general signal. We then show that our theoretical results 
are robust to a generalized information structure.

4.1. Information acquisition and endogenous specialization

By studying the lender’s information acquisition problem, we derive 
conditions under which the baseline model’s information structure is an 
equilibrium outcome.

Setting and information acquisition technologies.  We extend the baseline 
model by introducing another borrower firm, 𝑏, alongside the original 
borrower, 𝑎. Two technologies, ‘‘general’’ and ‘‘specialized’’, generate 
signals. The ‘‘general’’ information technology costs 𝜅𝑔 > 0 and allows 
a lender 𝑗 to process standardized data (e.g., credit reports, income 
statements) to produce private independent general signals 𝑔𝑗
𝑖 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿}
on the general fundamental 𝜃𝑔 for each firm 𝑖 ∈ {𝑎, 𝑏}. This reflects 
general information collected via standardized and transferable data, 
such as credit reports and income statements; so once the IT equipment, 
software, and APIs are installed, credit analysis is easy to implement 
in multiple firms. The ‘‘specialized’’ information technology requires 
a lender to collect firm-specific data individually. Lender 𝑗 specializes 
in firm 𝑖 by investing 𝜅𝑠 > 0 to obtain a private specialized signal 𝑠𝑗
𝑖 , 
distributed according to the CDF 𝛷(𝑠) and the PDF 𝜙(𝑠) for 𝑠 ∈ [0, 1]. 
Acquiring specialized information on both firms, incurs a cost 2𝜅𝑠.

We are interested in the equilibrium in which Bank 𝐴 only spe-
cializes in firm 𝑎, Bank 𝐵 only specializes in firm 𝑏 and both lenders 
acquire  the  general  information  technology.  Note  that  the  baseline 
model analyzed in Section 2 is the subgame for either firm following 
the equilibrium information acquisition strategies.

24 This hypothesis is further supported by the negative coefficients for ‘‘Mul-
tiple Specialized Lenders’’, in columns (4)–(6), where the dependent variable 
is nonperforming dummy.

25 In 2018 the thresholds of ‘‘20 million USD and being held by two or more 
U.S. banks’’ were raised to ‘‘100 million USD and three supervised U.S. banks’’. 
We cut our data in 2018 to avoid sample construction issues. Our results are 
unaffected if we keep years after 2018.

14 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Table 2
Interest rate and loan performance: Controlling for lending market competition among specialized banks. 
  Panel A: Specialization defined at the 2-Digit NAICS Level

  Specialized Bank

  Log Loan Amount

  Multiple Specialized Lenders

  Spec. Bank × Multiple Specialized Lenders

  Year-Quarter FE
  Purpose FE
  Rating Category (1–3) FE
  Bank-Year FE
  Industry-Year FE
  𝑅2
  N

(2)

(3)

(1)
Interest Rates
−0.454***
[0.037]
−0.157***
[0.002]
−0.149***
[0.008]
0.407***
[0.037]

X
X
X

−0.179***
[0.036]
−0.171*
[0.002]
−0.125***
[0.007]
0.047
[0.037]

X
X
X
X

0.31
353,544

0.39
353,537

−0.112***
[0.038]
−0.178**
[0.002]

0.032
[0.039]

X
X
X
X
X
0.4
351,776

(5)

(4)
Nonperforming Loans
−0.007
−0.019***
[0.005]
[0.005]
−0.001*
−0.000
[0.000]
[0.000]
−0.011***
−0.012***
[0.001]
[0.001]
0.004
0.012**
[0.005]
[0.005]

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

0.031
353,544

0.044
353,537

  Panel B: Specialization defined at the 4-Digit NAICS Level

  Specialized Bank

  Log Loan Amount

  Multiple Specialized Lenders

  Spec. Bank × Multiple Specialized Lenders

(1)
Interest Rates
0.141***
[0.020]
−0.154***
[0.002]
−0.327***
[0.006]
−0.041*
[0.022]

(2)

(3)

−0.214***
[0.019]
−0.168***
[0.002]
−0.253***
[0.006]
0.150***
[0.021]

−0.195***
[0.020]
−0.175***
[0.002]

0.144***
[0.022]

(5)

(4)
Nonperforming Loans
−0.028***
[0.002]
−0.000
[0.000]
0.003***
[0.001]
0.017***
[0.003]

−0.012***
[0.003]
−0.000*
[0.000]
0.002*
[0.001]
0.006**
[0.003]

(6)

−0.007  
[0.005]  
−0.001** 
[0.000]  

0.002
[0.005]  
X
X
X
X
X
0.047
351,776  

(6)

−0.019*** 
[0.003]
−0.001**  
[0.000]

0.014***  
[0.003]

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
0.4
351,776

  Year-Quarter FE
  Purpose FE
  Rating Category (1-3) FE
  Bank-Year FE
  Industry-Year FE
  𝑅2
0.39
  N
353,537
Note: In Columns (1)–(3), we regress the loan rate paid by a given firm on the fixed effects specified at the bottom of the table and 
a dummy denoting whether said firm is borrowing from a bank that is specialized in the industry where the firm operates. We interact 
our variable of interest with a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the industry in question is one where more than one specialized 
lender operates. In Columns (4)–(6), we use the same specifications as in previous columns, but with a ‘‘nonperforming’’ indicator as the 
dependent variable. A loan becomes nonperforming if it is ever in arrears, has not been paid down at maturity, or defaults outright. In 
Panel A, we define specialization using two-digit NAICS industries. We define a bank as specialized if it is overinvested by 4% or more in 
an industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification. In Panel B, we define specialization at the four-digit NAICS level. We 
define a bank as specialized if it is overinvested by 1% or more in an industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification. 
Standard errors are clustered at the firm-time level and are heteroskedasticity robust while *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 
5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

X
X
X
X
X
0.048
351,776  

0.031
353,544

0.045
353,537

0.31
353,544

Incentive  compatibility  conditions.  Banks  simultaneously  choose  their 
information acquisition, which we assume is observable when entering 
the credit market competition game. Since a lender’s deviation from the 
proposed equilibrium information acquisition will lead to a different 
information structure in the credit market competition, we need to 
derive equilibrium lending profits in all possible subgames following 
a deviation.

Bank 𝐴 can deviate in three ways: (i) it can choose not to acquire 
the general signal, (ii) it can choose not to acquire the specialized 
signal  about  firm  𝑎,  or  (iii)  it  can  choose  to  acquire  a  specialized 
signal  about  firm  𝑏.  Bank  𝐴’s  incentive  to  deviate  in  any  of  these 
directions depends on the information acquisition cost. The lower the 
cost of acquiring the general signal (𝜅𝑔), the greater incentives Bank 
𝐴 has to acquire the general signal and not deviate in direction (i). 
For deviations along the direction of the specialized signal, the cost of 
acquiring the specialized signal (𝜅𝑠) has to be low enough to make it 
worth acquiring the specialized signal for firm 𝑎 (thereby having an 
informational advantage over Bank 𝐵 in this firm), but high enough so 
that it is not worth acquiring a specialized signal for firm 𝑏 to stop being 
the least informed lender. This intuition is formally stated in Appendix 
A.8, where we also characterize the deviation payoffs.

An equilibrium with lending specialization emerges as long as 𝜅𝑔 is 
sufficiently low so that both lenders want to acquire general signals, 
and 𝜅𝑠 lies in some intermediate range so that the benefits of acquiring 
a specialized signal to become the more informed lender (e.g., getting 
𝑠𝐴
𝑎  for Bank 𝐴, which is part of the equilibrium strategy in the baseline) 
are greater than the benefits of acquiring a specialized signal to stop 
being  the  less  informed  lender  (e.g.,  getting  𝑠𝐴
𝑏   for  Bank  𝐴,  which 
deviates  from  our  equilibrium  in  the  baseline).  These  requirements 
are confirmed in Appendix Fig.  A.1, which shows the range of infor-
mation acquisition costs 𝜅𝑔 and 𝜅𝑠 for our conjectured credit market 
competition equilibrium with a specialized lender.

4.2. General information structure

Our modeling has two features that drive the tractability of our 
model—that  is,  under  these  two  weaker  assumptions,  the  solution 
technique in Section 2 can be readily applied. We discuss these two 
assumptions below, while relegating the detailed characterization of 
the model with a general information structure to Appendix  A.9.

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Blickle et al.

Decisive general signal.  Assumption  1 is motivated by the observation 
that in many practical scenarios, the decisive general signal is used as 
a prescreening signal for loan approval, while the specialized signal 
collected by the specialized bank tailors interest rate terms (see ). The 
multiplicative setting that we adopt in (2), where the ‘‘general’’ state 
is crucial for project success, makes such lending strategies more likely 
to arise in equilibrium, although, in principle, a signal can be decisive 
without the multiplicative structure.

Independence conditional on project success.  In our model, conditional 
on project success, all signals – including the specialized one of lender 
𝐴 and the two general ones of both lenders – are independent of each 
other. Formally, 

(28)

̃𝑔𝐴 ⟂⟂ ̃𝑔𝐵 ⟂⟂ ̃𝑠 | 𝜃 = 1 .
Because lenders only get paid from the good-type borrower, the ef-
fects of specialized and general signals on equilibrium strategies are 
separable if signals are independent conditional on project success. 
Satisfying (28), our setting in Section 1.3 in which general and special-
ized states are independent imposes a stronger notion of independence 
than needed, which is (28). Consider the following example studied 
by He et al. (2024a) with 𝜃 = 𝜃1𝜃2𝜃3, 𝜃𝑔 = 𝜃1𝜃2, and 𝜃𝑠 = 𝜃2𝜃3. This 
information structure generalizes (7) in Section 1.3 while satisfying 
(28);26 we provide a closed-form characterization of the equilibrium 
in  Appendix   A.9  under  this  weaker  assumption.  Since  our  general 
information structure allows the general and specialized signals to be 
correlated, it can be used to study credit market applications such as 
data sharing and credit registries that induce correlated lender signals.

5. Concluding remarks

This paper extends the classic credit market competition framework 
(à la Broecker, 1990) to explore the interplay between multidimen-
sional  information  and  equilibrium  loan  pricing.  We  focus  on  how 
these informational asymmetries shape the equilibrium strategies of 
specialized and nonspecialized lenders, thereby shedding light on the 
nuanced role of information in credit market outcomes. Beyond our 
theoretical analysis, we empirically explore the relationship between 
bank specialization and realized rates for large, stress-tested U.S. banks 
and link it to our theoretical findings.

We show that specialized lending can explain the robust empirical 
pattern of a negative interest rate wedge. In a companion paper with 
a similar credit market competition setting, He et al. (2024a) distin-
guish between the quality (signal precision) and breadth (information 
span) of information, a distinction that is crucial to understanding the 
changing landscape in the credit market due to technological advances 
related to data gathering and processing that lead to the hardening of 
soft information.

From a modeling perspective, including a continuously distributed 
signal in a credit market equilibrium enables us to examine private 
information–based pricing, an important and pertinent aspect in the 
banking sector. Furthermore, by incorporating both specialized and 
general  signals  –  which  potentially  reflect  many  more  underlying 
states  –  among  asymmetric  lenders,  our  paper  markedly  advances 
the  common-value  auction  literature  involving  such  asymmetrically 
informed lenders in which each lender possesses private information (in 
contrast to Milgrom and Weber (1982) where one bidder knows strictly 
more than the other). We fully characterize the equilibrium in closed 
form and anticipate broader applications based on our framework and 
solution methodology.

26 When 𝜃 = 1, {𝜃𝑛} for 𝑛 ∈ {1, … , 𝑁} take the value of one. Unconditionally, 
however, the pair-wise correlations of {𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵, 𝑠} are all positive, because the 
general and specialized states, 𝜃𝑔 and 𝜃𝑠, are correlated.

16 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Kristian Blickle: Writing – original draft. Zhiguo He: Writing – 
original draft, Conceptualization. Jing Huang: Writing – original draft. 
Cecilia Parlatore: Writing – original draft.

Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the 
writing process

During  the  preparation  of  this  work,  the  authors  used  Writefull 
in order to proofread and copy edit the paper. After using this tool, 
the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full 
responsibility for the content of the published article.

Declaration of competing interest

I have nothing to disclose.

Appendix A. Technical appendices

A.1. Credit competition equilibrium

Proof of Lemma  1
Proof.  Note that the property of no gaps implies common support [𝑟, 𝑟]
. 
This is because, if a bank’s interest rate offering has a larger lower 
bound or a smaller upper bound interest rate than its competitor’s, this 
is one example of gaps in the first bank’s support.

To show that the distributions have no gap, suppose that, say, the 
support of Bank 𝐵’s interest rate offering 𝐹 𝐵 has a gap (𝑟1, 𝑟2) ⊂ [𝑟, 𝑟]. 
Then 𝐹 𝐴 should have no weight in this interval either, as any 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ∈
(𝑟1, 𝑟2)  will  lead  to  the  same  demand  for  Bank  𝐴  and  so  a  higher 
𝑟 will be more profitable. It follows that at least one lender, whose 
competitor’s interest rate offering does not have a mass point at 𝑟1 (it 
is impossible that both distributions have a mass point at 𝑟1), has a 
profitable deviation by revising 𝑟1 to 𝑟 ∈ (𝑟1, 𝑟2). Contradiction.

[𝑟, 𝑟)

Regarding point mass, suppose that one distribution, say 𝐹 𝐵 has a 
. Then Bank 𝐴 would not quote any 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ∈
mass point at ̃𝑟 ∈
[̃𝑟, ̃𝑟 + 𝜖] and it would strictly prefer quoting 𝑟𝐴 = ̃𝑟 − 𝜖 instead. In other 
words, the support of 𝐹 𝐴 must have a gap in the interval [̃𝑟, ̃𝑟 + 𝜖]. This 
contradicts the property of no gaps which we have shown. Finally, it is 
impossible that both distributions have a mass point at 𝑟.  □
Proof of Lemma  2  We explicitly define 𝑠𝐴
receives 𝑠𝐴
𝑏𝑒 breaks even when quoting 𝑟,

𝑏𝑒 below. Bank 𝐴 that 

𝑏𝑒 and 𝑠𝐵

0 = 𝜋𝐴 (
𝑟 |
|
|

𝐴 , ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴

)

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑠𝑏𝑒
0

𝐴

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴

⋅

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴
] .

− 1

1 + 𝑟)
(

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

1 + 𝑟)
(

]

− 1

Similarly Bank 𝐵 quotes 𝑟 and breaks even under define 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 :
[

(

)

0 = 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

)

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝜇𝐻𝐻

𝐵

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡

1 + 𝑟)
(

− 𝛷 (𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵

𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵

∫

0
1 + 𝑟)
(

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

] .

− 1

(29)

]
)

(30)

𝐵 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 , then we know 𝑠 hits 𝑠𝑏𝑒

Before we delve into the details of proof we first explain its logic. 
Note that 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵  is the highest specialized signal under which Bank 𝐴’s 
offer hits 𝑟, given 𝜋𝐵 = 0. Moreover, recall that 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴  is the level of the 
specialized signal under which Bank 𝐴 just breaks even when quoting 
𝑟. If 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴  (i.e., Bank 𝐴 hits zero profit) 
first when 𝑠 goes down from the top, implying that Bank 𝐴 will lose 
money upon 𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵  must be off-equilibrium for Bank 
𝐴. Therefore in equilibrium 𝜋𝐵 > 0 and Bank 𝐴 withdraws itself upon 
𝑠 < 𝑥 = ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 , we are in the alternative 
scenario where ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵  and 𝜋𝐵 = 0; Bank 𝐴 who is making a positive 
profit at 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 , until 𝑠 < 𝑥 upon which it 
exits.

𝐵  will keep quoting 𝑟 for 𝑠 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 . If on the other hand 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴  and ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒

≥ 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

{𝑠 ∶ 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) ≥ 𝑟}
Proof.  First, we argue that equilibrium  ̂𝑠 ≡ arg sup𝑠
either equals 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵  by 
construction. If 𝜋𝐵 > 0, 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) has a point mass at 𝑟 because Bank 
𝐵 always makes an offer upon 𝐻, i.e., 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
=

𝐵 . To see this, if 𝜋𝐵 = 0, we have  ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

= 1, and 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟−)

𝐴  or 𝑠𝑏𝑒

∫ 𝑠𝐴 (𝑟)= ̂𝑠
0

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡

]

)

(

)

)

)

𝜋𝐵

− 1

𝐵 ) ≡

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐻

1 + 𝑟)
(

𝐵 . Let ̂𝜋𝐵(𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 , with 𝜋𝐴
[𝜇𝐻𝐿
+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

< 1 ( ̂𝑠 > 0 because Bank 𝐴 must reject the borrower 
1 −
𝑞𝑠
when  𝑠 → 0).  It  follows  that  𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)  is  open  at  𝑟,  so  ̂𝑠 = 𝑥  and 
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟𝐴 ( ̂𝑠) | ̂𝑠)
= 0, which is exactly the definition of 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 . In addition, 
(
)
𝑟 |
Eq. (29) gives a unique solution of 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴  inside (0, 1), because 𝜋𝐴
 is 
|
𝐴
|
(
𝑟 |
𝑟 |
strictly increasing in 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒
< 0 and 𝜋𝐴
𝐴 = 0
𝐴 = 1
=
|
|
|
|
] > 0—the latter is implied 
1 + 𝑟)
(
1 + 𝑟)
(
𝑝𝐻𝐻
− 1
by Bank 𝐴’s willingness to make an offer given 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻. Therefore, 
̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴  when 𝜋𝐵 > 0.
We check the property of Eq. (30) and its solution 𝑠𝑏𝑒
(
𝑟 |
𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
|
𝐵
|
̂𝜋𝐵′ (𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵
(
𝑟 |
|
|

 and we have
[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
)
 is strictly decreasing in 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
so 𝜋𝐵
)
𝐵
1
𝐵  when 𝑠𝑏𝑒
and strictly increasing in 𝑠𝑏𝑒
, 1]. At the endpoints 
𝐵 ∈ [
𝜇𝐻𝐻 (1+𝑟)
)
] > 0 according to 
1 + 𝑟)
(
[𝜇⋅𝐻 𝑞𝑠
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 = 0 and 1, 𝜋𝐵
= 𝑝⋅𝐻
)
(
𝑟 |
𝑠𝑏𝑒
Assumption  1, but the sign of 𝜋𝐵
= 𝑝𝐿𝐻 [𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠(1 + 𝑟) − 1] is 
𝐵 = 0
|
|
)
< 0, there is at most one solution 𝑠𝑏𝑒
ambiguous. When 𝜋𝐵
𝐵
)
inside (0, 1). On the other hand, when 𝜋𝐵
> 0, there are at 
1 + 𝑟)
(
most two solutions of 𝑠𝑏𝑒
−
1 + 𝑟)
(
1 < 0 and 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
−1 > 0. We argue that only the larger solution 
𝐵2
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵2 is a candidate for equilibrium  ̂𝑠. To see this, we first show that 
𝐵1: otherwise, if 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 > 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒
1 + 𝑟)
(
𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴

𝑟 |
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 = 0
|
|
𝐵2, with 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵1 and 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵1, then
1 + 𝑟)
(
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴

(
𝑟 |
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 = 0
|
|

𝐵  inside (0, 1), 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝑟 |
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 = 1
|
|

𝐵  when 𝑠𝑏𝑒

1
𝜇𝐻𝐻 (1+𝑟)

] 𝜙 (𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵

𝐵 ∈ [0,

𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵1

1 + 𝑟)

− 1 < 0,

− 1 <

− 1

− 1

) ,

− 1

𝐵1

(

(

(

𝐵

<
⏟⏟⏟
𝜇𝐻𝐿<𝜇𝐻𝐻

⏟⏟⏟
<𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴
𝐵1

]

𝐵

𝐴

)

)

)

)

− 1

𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴

𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵

𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴
∫
0

(
𝑟 |
|
|

1 + 𝑟)
(

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

𝐴 > 𝑠𝑏𝑒

[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠𝑏𝑒

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
⋅
𝐴
)
(
𝑟 |
𝑠𝑏𝑒
|
𝐴
|

1 + 𝑟)
(
+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
− 1
= 0.) Hence, 𝑠𝑏𝑒

which  leads  to  the  contradictory  implication  that  𝜋𝐴

𝐵1, Bank 𝐴 makes negative profits upon ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
< 𝜋𝐴

(
𝑟 |
|
|
] < 0 (by 
𝐵1. Then if equilibrium 
𝐵1, because 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 )
𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
= 0. 
𝐴
> 0 and there are at most 
𝐵  inside (0, 1), only the larger one is relevant. For 
≡
𝐵 , we define 

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻
construction 𝜋𝐴
̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
decreases  in  𝑠  and  𝜋𝐴
Therefore, in the case of 𝜋𝐵
two solutions of 𝑠𝑏𝑒
the following analysis, we restrict 𝑠𝑏𝑒
(
𝑟 |
sup{𝑠𝑏𝑒
|
|
𝐵 = 0 and the lemma implies that equilibrium ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 .

(
𝑟𝐴( ̂𝑠) = 𝑟 |
|
|
(
𝑟 |
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 = 0
|
|

𝐵  to be this largest solution 𝑠𝑏𝑒

= 0}. If there is no solution of 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵 ∈ (0, 1)|𝜋𝐵

̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵1
)

𝐴  and 𝑠𝑏𝑒

Now we show that equilibrium ̂𝑠 = max{𝑠𝑏𝑒

between 𝑠𝑏𝑒
weak or zero-weak. To see this, in the first case of 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 . Then Bank 𝐴’s equilibrium profit upon ̂𝑠, 𝜋𝐴
(
negative because 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ) increases in 𝑠 and 𝜋𝐴
(
𝑟 |
𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
= 0; this is a contradiction. Hence, when 𝑠𝑏𝑒
< 𝜋𝐴
|
𝐴
|
𝐴 . Because 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠) is strictly increasing in 𝑠 ∈ (𝑠𝑏𝑒
̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
discussed above, Bank 𝐵’s equilibrium profit 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠 = ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵 } and the comparison 
𝐵  determines whether the equilibrium is positive-
𝐵 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 , suppose ̂𝑠 =
(
𝑟𝐴( ̂𝑠) = 𝑟 |
̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
, is 
|
𝐵
|
)
𝑟𝐴( ̂𝑠) = 𝑟 |
𝑠 = ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
|
𝐵
|
𝐵 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 , 
𝐵 , 1) as 
) >
𝐴

= 0, i.e., the equilibrium is positive weak.
𝐵 , suppose ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴  and then Bank 𝐵’s equi-
librium profit (at 𝑟) is 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠 = ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
)
. From the discussion about 
Eq. (30) above, when Eq. (30) has one solution in (0, 1), 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠) is 
negative for 𝑠 ∈ (0, 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵 ; when Eq. (30) has 
two solutions in (0, 1), 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠) is negative for 𝑠 ∈ (𝑠𝑏𝑒
, 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵2), which 
applies to 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵2.) Hence, Bank 𝐵’s 
𝐵1
equilibrium profit 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟 = 𝑟; 𝑠 = ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒
) < 0, which is a contradiction. 
Therefore, when 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵  and the equilibrium is zero-weak by 

𝐵 ), which applies to 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵2. (Recall we took 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵
In the other case of 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵 , ̂𝑠 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵 = 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴 , 𝑠𝑏𝑒

< 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵1

)

)

)

𝐴

𝐴

construction. In addition,

𝑝𝐻𝐻

0 =

𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝑝𝐻𝐻

=

>

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

∫ 𝑠𝑏𝑒
0

𝐴

𝑞𝑠
∫ 𝑠𝑏𝑒
0

𝐵

𝑞𝑠
∫ 𝑠𝑏𝑒
0

𝐴

𝑞𝑠

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴

1 + 𝑟)
(

]

− 1

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐴

1 + 𝑟)
(

]

− 1

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑥 (

1 + 𝑟)

]

− 1

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑥 (

1 + 𝑟)

]

− 1

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑥 (

1 + 𝑟)

]

− 1

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑥 (

1 + 𝑟)

] .

− 1

)

(
𝑟 |
|
|

The first equality is the definition of 𝑠𝑏𝑒
equality is Bank 𝐴’s equilibrium break-even condition 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟|𝑥)
where winning probability in competition is 1 − 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟−) =
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐵
∫
0

𝐴 , 𝜋𝐴

𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴

= 0, the second 
= 0

, and the last inequality uses 𝑠𝑏𝑒

𝐵 > 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴  in this case. This means 
𝐵 = ̂𝑠), and the distribution of Bank 𝐴’s quote has a point 

∫ ̂𝑠
0 𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

=

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠
𝑥 < 𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴 (< 𝑠𝑏𝑒
mass at 𝑟.  □

A.2. Proof of Proposition  1

Proof.    Since  the  derivations  of  equilibrium  strategies  are  largely 
included in the main text, we provide only the missing details toward 
the end of this proof. This part proves that Bank 𝐴’s equilibrium interest 
rate quoting strategy as a function of specialized signal 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) is always 
decreasing; this implies that the FOC that helps us derive Bank 𝐴’s 
strategy also ensures the global optimality.

Write Bank 𝐴’s value 𝛱 𝐴 (𝑟, 𝑠) as a function of its interest rate quote 
and specialized signal, in the event of 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠. (We use 𝜋 to 
denote the equilibrium profit but 𝛱 for any strategy.) Recall that Bank 
𝐴 solves the following problem:

𝛱 𝐴 (𝑟, 𝑠) =

max
𝑟

𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐻,𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

]

]
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴 wins
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

]

(31)

+

𝑝𝐻𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐻,𝑔𝐵 =𝐿

with the following FOC:

[

0 = 𝑝𝐻𝐻

−

]

𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝑑𝑟

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
lost customer

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠.

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎤
⎥
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1
⎥
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎥
customer return
⎦

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

]
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
customer

𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠
⏟⏟⏟
MB of customer

(32)

One  useful  observation  is  that  on  the  support,  it  must  hold  that 
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1 > 0; otherwise, 𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1 < 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1 ≤ 0, 
implying that Bank 𝐴’s profit is negative (so it will exit). 

Lemma A.1.  Consider 𝑠1, 𝑠2 in the interior domain with corresponding 
interest rate quote 𝑟1 and 𝑟2. The marginal value of quoting 𝑟2 for type 
𝑠 = 𝑠1 is
(𝑟2, 𝑠1

)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[

{𝑝𝐻𝐻

=

}

)

𝛱 𝐴
𝑟

𝑠2 − 𝑠1
(
1 + 𝑟2

)

− 1

𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2

and its sign is determined by the sign of 𝑠2 − 𝑠1.

Proof.  Evaluating the FOC (32) of type 𝑠1 but quoting 𝑟2:
)

[

]

𝛱 𝐴
𝑟

(𝑟2, 𝑠1

)

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠1

(
1 + 𝑟2

)

]

− 1

−

𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
𝑑𝑟
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻

)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠1 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠1.

(33)

FOC at type 𝑠2 yields
[

(𝑟2, 𝑠2

)

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

−

𝛱 𝐴
𝑟

17 

)

]

𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
𝑑𝑟

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2

(
1 + 𝑟2

)

]

− 1

K. Blickle et al.

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[

)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠2 = 0,

.

(34)

or 
𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
𝑑𝑟

)

[

𝑝𝐻𝐻

=

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
𝑝𝐻𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2

)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠2
)

]

(
1 + 𝑟2
(𝑟2, 𝑠1

− 1
) becomes

Plugging in this term to (33), 𝛱 𝐴
𝑟

+𝑝𝐻𝐻
[

−

)

− 1

− 1

{𝑝𝐻𝐻

(
1 + 𝑟2
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠1
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[
(
)
1 + 𝑟2
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2
)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠1 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠1
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[
(
1 + 𝑟2
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠1
⋅ 𝑠2
(
)
1 + 𝑟2
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2
− 1
)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[
(
1 + 𝑟2
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2
− 1

{𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝑝𝐻𝐻

− 1

]

)

)

)

⋅

𝑠1 −

(𝑠2 − 𝑠1

=

=

,

)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠2 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠2

}

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[

)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

}

which is the claimed marginal benefit of quoting 𝑟2 for type 𝑠1. Its sign 
depends on 𝑠2 − 𝑠1 because the denominator is positive as we noted 
right after Eq. (32).  □

Lemma  A.1 has three implications. First, as long as 𝑟𝐴 (⋅) is (strictly) 
increasing in some segment, then Bank 𝐴 would like to deviate in this 
segment. To see this, suppose that 𝑟1 > 𝑟2 when 𝑠1 > 𝑠2 for 𝑠1, 𝑠2
arbitrarily close. Because Lemma  1 has shown that Bank 𝐴’s strategy 
) < 0, implying 
is smooth, 𝑟2 is arbitrarily close to 𝑟1. Then 𝛱 𝐴
𝑟
that the value is convex and the Bank 𝐴 at 𝑠1 (who in equilibrium is 
supposed to quote 𝑟1) would like to deviate further.

(𝑟2, 𝑠1

[𝑟, 𝑟)

Second, the monotonicity implied by Lemma  A.1 helps us show that 
Bank 𝐴 uses a pure strategy. To see this, for any ̂𝑠 ≥ 𝑠1 > 𝑠2 that induce 
interior quotes 𝑟1, 𝑟2 ∈
, however close, in equilibrium we must 
have sup 𝑟𝐴(𝑠1) < inf 𝑟𝐴(𝑠2) by monotonicity. Combining this with Part 
3 of Lemma  1, i.e., the induced distribution 𝐹 𝐴(⋅) is atomless except for 
at 𝑟 and has no gaps, we know that Bank 𝐴 must adopt a pure strategy 
in the interior of [𝑟, 𝑟), or for 𝑠 ≤ ̂𝑠. Finally, on 𝑠 < ̂𝑠 Bank 𝐴 can quote 
either 𝑟 or ∞ which generically gives different values; this then rules 
out randomization.

Third, if 𝑟𝐴 (⋅) is decreasing globally over [0, 1], then the FOC is 
sufficient to ensure global optimality. Consider a type 𝑠1 who would 
like to deviate to ̌𝑟 > 𝑟1; then
̌𝑟

𝛱 𝐴 (̌𝑟, 𝑠1

)

− 𝛱 𝐴 (𝑟1, 𝑠1

)

𝛱 𝐴
𝑟

(𝑟, 𝑠1

) 𝑑𝑟.

= ∫
𝑟1

Given the monotonicity of 𝑟 (𝑠), we can find the corresponding type 𝑠 (𝑟)
for 𝑟 ∈

[𝑟1, ̌𝑟]

. From Lemma  A.1 we know that
[

𝛱 𝐴
𝑟

(𝑟, 𝑠1

)

=

(𝑠 (𝑟) − 𝑠1

) 𝑝𝐻𝐻

] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (𝑟) (1 + 𝑟) − 1

,

which is negative given 𝑠 (𝑟) < 𝑠1. Therefore the deviation gain is 
negative. Similarly, we can show a negative deviation gain for any 
̌𝑟 < 𝑟1.

Next, we show that 𝑟𝐴 (⋅) is single-peaked over the space of [0, 1]. 

Lemma A.2.  Given any exogenous 𝜋𝐵 ≥ 0, 𝑟𝐴 (⋅) single-peaked over [0, 1]
with a maximum point.

[𝑟, 𝑟)

, the derivative of 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) in Eq. (12) with respect 

Proof.  When 𝑟 ∈
to 𝑠 is
𝑑𝑟𝐴 (𝑠)
𝑑𝑠

𝑠

[

(𝑠)<0

𝑀1(𝑠)<0, and 𝑀′
1

⎛
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
⎜
]
⎜
𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 − 𝑠𝛷 (𝑠)
𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

∫
0

+

(𝑠)<0

𝑀2 (𝑠)>0, but 𝑀′
2

⎞
⎟
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
⎟
) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠
𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 −
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(𝜋𝐵 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑠
0 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

)2

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜙 (𝑠)

=

.

18 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

As ∫ 𝑠
𝑀 ′

0 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 < 𝑠𝛷 (𝑠), the first term in the bracket 𝑀1 (𝑠) < 0, and

1 (𝑠) = −𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝛷(𝑠) < 0.
) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠,  it  has  an  ambiguous 
(𝜋𝐵 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻
For  𝑀2 (𝑠) = 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 −
sign,  but  is  decreasing  in  𝑠.  This  implies  that  𝑀1 (𝑠) + 𝑀2 (𝑠)  de-
creases  with  𝑠.  It  is  easy  to  verify  that  𝑀1(0) + 𝑀2(0) > 0  and 
𝑀1(1) + 𝑀2(1) < 0. Therefore 𝑟𝐴(𝑠) first increases and then decreases, 
i.e. single-peaked.  □

Suppose that the peak point is ̃𝑠; then Bank 𝐴 should simply charge 
𝑟 (𝑠) = ̃𝑟 for 𝑠 < ̃𝑠 for better profit. This is the standard ‘‘ironing’’ tech-
nique and we therefore define the following ironed strategy formally 
(here, we also take care of the capping 𝑟 ≤ 𝑟):
𝑟𝐴
𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑒𝑑 (𝑠) ≡ sup
𝑡∈[𝑠,1]

(𝑟𝐴 (𝑡) , 𝑟) .

min

By definition 𝑟𝐴

𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑒𝑑 (𝑠) is monotonely decreasing.

We now argue that in equilibrium, 𝜋𝐵 and 𝑟 adjust so that 𝑟𝐴 (⋅) is 
always monotonely decreasing over [𝑥, 1]. (Since we define 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) = ∞
for 𝑠 < 𝑥, monotonicity over the entire signal space [0, 1] immediately 
follows.) There are two subcases to consider.

1. Suppose that ̃𝑟 = 𝑟. In this case, 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) in Eq. (12) used in Lemmas 
A.1 and A.2  does  not  apply  to  𝑠 < ̃𝑠  because  the  equation 
is  defined  only  over  the  left-closed-right-open  interval  [𝑟, 𝑟)
. 
Instead, 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) in this region is determined by Bank 𝐴’s optimality 
condition:  as  𝑟𝐴  does  not  affect  the  competition  from  Bank 
𝐵 (which equals 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟−)
), Bank 𝐴 simply sets the maximum 
possible rate 𝑟𝐴 (𝑟) = 𝑟 unless it becomes unprofitable (for 𝑠 < 𝑥). 
(This is our zero-weak equilibrium with 𝜋𝐵 = 0, and there is no 
‘‘ironing’’ in this case.)

2. Suppose that  ̃𝑟 < 𝑟; then bank A quotes  ̃𝑟 for all 𝑠 < ̂𝑠. But 
this is not an equilibrium—Bank 𝐴 now leaves a gap in the 
interval [̃𝑟, 𝑟]
, contradicting with Lemma  1 (there, we rule out 
gaps in equilibrium). Intuitively, Bank 𝐴 is too aggressive, and 
Bank 𝐵 always would like to raise its quotes inside [̃𝑟, 𝑟] to 𝑟. 
In equilibrium, 𝜋𝐵 and 𝑟 adjust upward, so that the peak point 
̃𝑠 coincides with 𝑟, resulting in no ‘‘ironing’’ in this case either. 
(This is our positive-weak equilibrium with 𝜋𝐵 > 0.)  □

A.3. Binary specialized signal

We reformulate Bank 𝐴’s specialized signal as binary, 𝑠 ∈ {𝐻, 𝐿}, 

with distribution 
)
P (𝑠 = 𝐻 |
𝜃𝑠 = 1
|

= P (𝑠 = 𝐿 |
𝜃𝑠 = 0
|

)

= 𝛽 ∈ (0.5, 1] .

(35)

Consistent with the baseline, we impose the following parameter re-
strictions to ensure the pre-screening general signal to be decisive. Bank 
𝐴’s condition is adapted for the binary distribution of 𝑠 and Bank 𝐵’ 
condition remains the same. 

Assumption 2 (Decisive General Signals). (i) Bank 𝐴 rejects the borrower 
upon  an  𝐿  general  signal  and  is  willing  to  participate  upon  an  𝐻
general signal, regardless of its specialized signal 𝑠:

(
1 − 𝛼𝑢

𝑞𝑔

) 𝑞𝑠𝛽 ⋅ 𝑟 < (

𝑞𝑔𝛼𝑢𝑞𝑠(1 − 𝛽) ⋅ 𝑟 > 𝑞𝑔𝛼𝑢

) 𝛼𝑑 ,
1 − 𝑞𝑔
(
1 − 𝑞𝑠

) 𝛽 +

(
1 − 𝑞𝑔

) (

1 − 𝛼𝑑

)

(36)

(37)

(ii) Bank 𝐵 is willing to participate (i.e., 𝑟𝐵 < ∞) if its general signal 
𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻: 

𝑞𝑔𝛼𝑢𝑞𝑠𝑟 > 𝑞𝑔𝛼𝑢

(
1 − 𝑞𝑠

)

+

(
1 − 𝑞𝑔

) (

1 − 𝛼𝑑

)

;

(38)

We briefly explain Bank 𝐴’s conditions, which are new. The con-
ditions  are  about  the  loan  NPV  to  a  bank  when  the  bank  is  the 
monopolistic lender, which sheds light on the bank’s incentive to par-
ticipate in competition. Under condition (36), the loan has a negative 
NPV to Bank 𝐴 upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿 and the favorable specialized signal 𝑠 = 𝐻. 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Under condition (37), the loan has a positive NPV to Bank 𝐴 upon 
𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and the unfavorable specialized signal 𝑠 = 𝐿. Hence, Bank 
𝐴 participates if and only if 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻.

Since Bank 𝐴’s additional specialized signal 𝑠 is binary, we add ‘‘+’’ 
and ‘‘-’’ after superscript ‘‘𝐴’’ to denote Bank 𝐴’s strategy associated 
with 𝑠 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐿 respectively. We denote by 𝐹 𝐴+ (𝑟) Bank 𝐴’s 
cumulative distribution of its offers upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐻, and 
by 𝐹 𝐴− (𝑟) its cumulative distribution of its offers upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 
𝑠 = 𝐿. Moreover, let 𝐹 𝐴(𝑟) ≡ P(𝑠 = 𝐻)𝐹 𝐴+(𝑟) + P(𝑠 = 𝐿)𝐹 𝐴−(𝑟) denote 
Bank 𝐴’s cumulative distribution of its offers upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻. Similarly, 
(𝑟𝐵 ≤ 𝑟) represents Bank 𝐵’s cumulative distribution of 
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) ≡ Pr
offers upon 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻.

Definition 2 (Credit Market Equilibrium). A competitive equilibrium 
in  the  credit  market  (with  decisive  general  signals)  consists  of  the 
following:

1. A lender 𝑗 rejects the borrower or 𝑟𝑗 = ∞ upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐿 for 

𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}; upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻,

(a) Bank 𝐴 offers 𝑟𝐴+ ∶ [0, 1] →  (𝑟𝐴− ∶ [0, 1] → ) to 
maximize its expected lending profits given 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 
𝑠 = 𝐻 (𝑠 = 𝐿), which induces a distribution function 
𝐹 𝐴+ (𝑟) ∶  → [0, 1] (𝐹 𝐴− (𝑟) ∶  → [0, 1]);

(b) Bank 𝐵 offers 𝑟𝐵 ∈  to maximize its expected lend-
ing profits given 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, which induces a distribution 
function 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) ∶  → [0, 1];

2. The borrower who receives at least one offer (i.e., min{𝑟𝐴, 𝑟𝐵} <

∞) chooses the lower one.

The following lemma shows that lenders’ strategies upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻
in our setting are still well-behaved as established in the literature 
(Broecker, 1990).

Lemma A.3 (Equilibrium Structure). In any equilibrium, there exists an 
endogenous lower bound 𝑟 > 0, so that the two distributions 𝐹 𝑗 (⋅), 𝑗 ∈
{𝐴, 𝐵} share a common support [𝑟, 𝑟] (besides ∞ as rejection). Over [𝑟, 𝑟)
both distributions are smooth with well-defined density functions, i.e., no 
gap and atomless. At most one lender can have a mass point at 𝑟.

The following result is consistent with the property of information-

based pricing – monotone decreasing 𝑟𝐴(𝑠) – in the baseline model.

[𝑟, 𝑟] so 
Proposition A.1 (Banks’ Equilibrium Pricing). There exists ̂𝑟 ∈
that the support of Bank 𝐴’s offers, conditional on 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐻, is 
[𝑟, ̂𝑟]
, and the support of its offers, conditional on 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐿, is 
[̂𝑟, 𝑟]
∪ {∞}.

Proof.  Let 𝐴+ and 𝐴− denote the support of Bank 𝐴’s interest rate 
offerings besides ∞ as rejection, conditional on 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐻, 
and 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐿, respectively. Lemma  A.3 implies that the 
union of the supports of Bank 𝐴’s interest rate offerings (besides ∞) 
is 𝐴+ ⋃ 𝐴− =
. We now argue that the closure of two supports 
can only overlap by one point, i.e., 𝐴+ ⋂ 𝐴− = {̂𝑟} can only be a 
singleton.

[𝑟, 𝑟]

}

∈

Suppose, counterfactually, that there exist two points, 𝑟1 and 𝑟2, so 
[𝑟, 𝑟] lie in both supports 𝐴+ and 𝐴−. Without loss 
that {𝑟1, 𝑟2
of generality suppose that 𝑟1 < 𝑟2. Our goal is to show that if Bank 
𝐴 is indifferent between these two points for 𝑠 = 𝐿, then it must be 
strictly better off by quoting 𝑟1 when 𝑠 = 𝐻. This contradicts with the 
equilibrium requirement that Bank 𝐴 is indifferent between these two 
interest rate quotes both when 𝑠 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐿.

Recall that 𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 ≡ P(𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵) and 𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 ≡ P(𝜃𝑔 = 1|𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵) are 
respectively the joint probability of signal realizations and the posterior 
belief of the general state being one conditional on 𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵. Introduce 
≡ P(𝜃𝑠 = 1|𝑠 = 𝐿) to denote the posterior 
𝜇+
belief of the specialized state being one conditional on 𝑠 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐿

≡ P(𝜃𝑠 = 1|𝑠 = 𝐻) and 𝜇−

respectively. For Bank 𝐴 who receives 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠, its profit 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 )
by quoting 𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, 𝑟) equals
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ) ≡ 𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

]

[

]
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴 wins
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

] .

(39)

+

𝑝𝐻𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐻,𝑔𝐵 =𝐿

When Bank 𝐴 receives 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐿, it is indifferent between 
quoting 𝑟1 and 𝑟2,
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟1 |𝑠 = 𝐿 )
⇔ 𝑝𝐻𝐻
= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

= 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟2 |𝑠 = 𝐿 )
)] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝑠
1 + 𝑟1
)
(
)] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝑠
1 + 𝑟2

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟1
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[

[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇𝑠
(
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇𝑠

1 + 𝑟1
)
1 + 𝑟2

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

]
− 1
] .

− 1
]

− 1

− 1

(

)

(

)

]

Rearrange this term, (see Box  I). which says that Bank 𝐴’s difference in 
revenue when quoting these two rates is exactly offset by the difference 
in its lending costs. Note the right-hand-side of Eq. (40) is positive 
because we have assumed 𝑟1 < 𝑟2 and so 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟1) < 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟2), so the left-
hand-side is positive as well. Since 𝜇− > 0, this means that the curly 
bracketed term on the left-hand-side is positive.

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟1
(

Now using 𝜇+ > 𝜇− > 0 and Eq. (40), we have
)
{[𝑝𝐻𝐻
)) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿
(
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
[
)]
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟1
− 𝑝𝐻𝐻

)) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿
] (
)] .

1 + 𝑟1
)}

𝜇+
[𝑝𝐻𝐻
[
>𝑝𝐻𝐻

1 + 𝑟2

] (

−

This implies that given 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐻, Bank 𝐴 strictly prefers the 
lower rate 𝑟1 than 𝑟2, i.e.,
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟1 |𝑠 = 𝐻 ) > 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟2 |𝑠 = 𝐻 ) ,
a contradiction.

We have proven that the supports of Bank 𝐴’s interest rate offering 
overlap  in  only  one  point,  𝐴+ ⋂ 𝐴− = {̂𝑟};  in  other  words,  the 
supports are two sub-intervals of [𝑟, 𝑟]. Suppose Bank 𝐴 randomizes over 
the lower sub-interval [𝑟, ̂𝑟] when 𝑠 = 𝐿 and randomizes over the higher 
sub-interval when 𝑠 = 𝐻. This means, upon 𝑠 = 𝐿, Bank 𝐴 is indifferent 
between ̂𝑟 and a smaller 𝑟′ ∈ [𝑟, ̂𝑟). From the previous argument, if Bank 
𝐴 is indifferent between two rates when 𝑠 = 𝐿, it strictly prefers the
lower rate when 𝑠 = 𝐻. This means that Bank 𝐴 strictly prefers 𝑟′ < ̂𝑟
to ̂𝑟. However, this contradicts with ̂𝑟 being an optimal rate for Bank 𝐴
when 𝑠 = 𝐻, as ̂𝑟 ∈ +.

We hence conclude that in equilibrium, Bank 𝐴 has two connected 
subintervals and it quotes lower rate when its specialized signal is 
favorable: 

𝐴+ = [𝑟, ̂𝑟], 𝐴− = [̂𝑟, 𝑟].

(41)

Last, Bank 𝐴 must make positive profits and so always makes an 
offer when 𝑠 = 𝐻. Evaluating its profits at 𝑟 = ̂𝑟 both when 𝑠 = 𝐻 and 
𝑠 = 𝐿, we have
𝜋𝐴(̂𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐻) > 𝜋𝐴(̂𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐿) ≥ 0,
where the competition from Bank 𝐵 is a constant regardless of 𝑠, but 
Bank 𝐴’s posterior belief is strictly better when 𝑠 = 𝐻. This shows, 
upon 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻, Bank 𝐴 may randomly withdraw (i.e., 𝑟 = ∞) only when 
𝑠 = 𝐿.  □

Now we solve for the credit competition equilibrium. We first take 
Bank  𝐵’s  equilibrium  profits  𝜋𝐵  as  given  and  solve  for  the  other 
equilibrium objects. We then solve for 𝜋𝐵 by examining whether Bank 
𝐵 or Bank 𝐴 upon 𝐿 breaks even.

Solving for 𝐹 𝐴+(𝑟) and 𝐹 𝐴−(𝑟).  We use Bank 𝐵’s indifference condi-
tion to solve for Bank 𝐴’s equilibrium strategies, 𝐹 𝐴+(𝑟) and 𝐹 𝐴−(𝑟). 
≡ P(𝑠 = 𝐿)  denote  the  probability 
Let  𝑝+
that  the  specialized  signal  is  𝐻  and  𝐿,  respectively.  According  to

≡ P(𝑠 = 𝐻)  and  𝑝−

19 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

{[𝑝𝐻𝐻

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟1
(

[𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝜇−
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛥 lending revenues

)) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

)) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2
(

1 + 𝑟2

1 + 𝑟1

)}

] (

] (

−

)

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟1

)]

− 𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟2

)]
,

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
−𝛥 lending costs

Box I. 

(40)

Proposition  A.1, the support of Bank 𝐴’s interest rate besides ∞ is [𝑟, ̂𝑟]
upon 𝑠 = 𝐻 and is [̂𝑟, 𝑟] upon 𝑠 = 𝐿. This means, when Bank 𝐵 quotes an 
interest rate 𝑟 ∈ [̂𝑟, 𝑟) and faces competition from Bank 𝐴, it loses when 
Bank 𝐴’s specialized signal realizes as 𝑠 = 𝐻, and may win only when 
𝑠 = 𝐿 and Bank 𝐴 quotes 𝑟𝐴 > 𝑟. Hence, Bank 𝐵’s expected lending 
profit when quoting 𝑟 ∈ [̂𝑟, 𝑟) is
𝜋𝐵 = 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝−

1 − 𝐹 𝐴− (𝑟)

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[

] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇− (1 + 𝑟) − 1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
competition (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻): 𝑠=𝐿

]

]
[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1
,
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
no competition (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿)

𝑟 ∈ [̂𝑟, 𝑟).

(42)

Bank 𝐵 faces competition if Bank 𝐴 receives a favorable general signal 
𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻. In competition, Bank 𝐵 could only win when 𝑠 = 𝐿 (with 
probability 𝑝−) and 𝑟𝐴 > 𝑟 (with probability 1−𝐹 𝐴−(𝑟)); moreover, Bank 
𝐵 updates its belief regarding the borrower’s specialized fundamental 
to 𝜇−, recognizing that it can only win when 𝑠 = 𝐿. From Eq. (42), we 
solve for 

𝐹 𝐴− (𝑟) = 1 −

𝜋𝐵 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻
𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝−

]
[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1
] .
[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇− (1 + 𝑟) − 1

(43)

Similarly, when Bank 𝐵 quotes an interest rate 𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, ̂𝑟) and faces 
competition from Bank 𝐴, it wins when Bank 𝐴’s specialized signal 
realizes as 𝑠 = 𝐻 and Bank 𝐴 quotes 𝑟𝐴 > 𝑟, and always wins when 
𝑠 = 𝐿. Hence, Bank 𝐵’s expected lending profit when quoting 𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, ̂𝑟)
is

𝜋𝐵 = 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝+

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐴+ (𝑟)

] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇+ (1 + 𝑟) − 1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
competition (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻): 𝑠=𝐻

]

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝−

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇− (1 + 𝑟) − 1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
competition (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻): 𝑠=𝐿

]

.

(44)

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
no competition (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿)

]

From the indifference condition of Bank 𝐵, we solve for 

𝐹 𝐴+ (𝑟) = 1 −

𝜋𝐵 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1
𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝+

− 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝−
[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇+ (1 + 𝑟) − 1

]

]

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇− (1 + 𝑟) − 1

We can solve for 𝑟 from 𝐹 𝐴+(𝑟) = 0, 

𝑟 =

𝜋𝐵 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻
(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

) 𝑞𝑠

− 1.

(45)

(46)

From Lemma  A.3, the distribution of Bank 𝐴’s interest rate offering has 
no interior mass. This implies that 𝐹 𝐴+(̂𝑟) = 1, and then we can solve 
for ̂𝑟 from Eq. (45), 

̂𝑟 =

𝜋𝐵 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝−
𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑝−𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇−

− 1.

(47)

Solving for 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟).  We use Bank 𝐴’s indifference condition to solve for 
the CDF of Bank 𝐵’s equilibrium interest rate offering, 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟). For Bank 
𝐴 who receives 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠, its profit 𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ) by quoting 𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, 𝑟)
equals
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ) ≡ 𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

]

[

]
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴 wins
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) − 1

+

𝑝𝐻𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐻,𝑔𝐵 =𝐿

] ,

(48)

20 

where 𝜇𝑠 ∈ {𝜇+, 𝜇−}, depending on the realization of 𝑠. Bank 𝐴’s profits 
when 𝑠 = 𝐻 can be determined by evaluating at 𝑟 = 𝑟, and its profits 
when 𝑠 = 𝐿 can be determined by evaluating at 𝑟 = ̂𝑟,
𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐻) ≡ 𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐻),
Then Bank 𝐵’s equilibrium strategy is 
]
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇+(1+𝑟)−1

𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐿) ≡ 𝜋𝐴(̂𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐻).

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

1 −

1 −

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠=𝐻 )−𝑝𝐻𝐿
𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠=𝐿 )−𝑝𝐻𝐿
𝑝𝐻𝐻

]
[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇+(1+𝑟)−1

]
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇−(1+𝑟)−1

]
[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇−(1+𝑟)−1

,

𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, ̂𝑟],

,

𝑟 ∈ [̂𝑟, 𝑟),

(49)

where we have used the result of Bank 𝐴’s information-based pricing 
in Proposition  A.1.

Solving  for  the  equilibrium  profit  of  bank  𝐵.  The  value  of  Bank  𝐵’s 
equilibrium profit depends on whether Bank 𝐵, or Bank 𝐴 when 𝑠 = 𝐿, 
breaks even in competition.

1 + 𝑟)
(

We evaluate Bank 𝐴’s profits when 𝑠 = 𝐿 and it quotes 𝑟 = 𝑟. If 
− 1 > 0, Bank 𝐴 earns a positive profit even if it never 

𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇−
wins Bank 𝐵 in competition; evaluating Eq. (48) at 𝑟 = 𝑟,
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 = 𝐿 ) ≥ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
1 + 𝑟)
(
− 1 ≤ 0, then Bank 
In this case, 𝜋𝐵 = 0. Otherwise, if 𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇−
𝐴 earns a negative profit when 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻 and 𝑠 = 𝐿, unless Bank 𝐵’s 
strategy 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) has a mass at 𝑟—meaning 𝜋𝐵 > 0 and 𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐿) = 0. 
Since 𝜋𝐴 is a function of 𝜋𝐵, we can solve for 𝜋𝐵 from 𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠 = 𝐿) = 0
in this case.

] > 0.
1 + 𝑟)
(

[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇−

− 1

A.4. Equilibrium characterization for non-zero recovery

A.4.1. Specialized lending

In this part, we change our baseline model by assuming that a lender 
recovers 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1) from a borrower who defaults. The analysis below 
shows that non-zero recovery rate is isomorphic to our baseline with 
zero recovery rate where the lending cost per loan is changed from 1
to 1 − 𝛿.

]

.

We focus on the primitive conditions under which the general signal 
is decisive for screening. Specifically, Bank 𝐴 rejects the borrower upon 
𝑔𝐴 = 𝐿, regardless of its specialized signal realization,
) 𝛿 − 1
] ,
) 𝛼𝑑 (1 − 𝛿) ;

(
1 − 𝜇𝐿⋅
+
) 𝑟 < (
1 − 𝑞𝑔

[𝜇𝐿⋅
(
1 − 𝛼𝑢

𝑝𝐿⋅
⇔ 𝑞𝑔

1 + 𝑟)
(

in addition, Bank 𝐵 is only willing to participate when it receives a 
favorable general signal 𝐻,
1 + 𝑟)
(

𝑝⋅𝐻
> [𝑞𝑔
Intuitively, compared with our baseline conditions in Assumption  1, the 
above conditions change the loss of bad projects from 1 to 1 − 𝛿.

] > 0 ⇔ 𝑞𝑔𝛼𝑢𝑞𝑠𝑟
)]
(1 − 𝛿) .

(
1 − 𝜇⋅𝐻
+
(
) 𝛼𝑢 +
1 − 𝑞𝑔

[𝜇⋅𝐻
(
1 − 𝑞𝑠

) 𝛿 − 1
) (
1 − 𝛼𝑑

Lenders choose interest rate strategies to maximize their profits, 

which are
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟 |𝑠 ) ≡ 𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

1 − 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠) 𝛿 − 1
(

] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) +
1 − 𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠) 𝛿 − 1
(
]
] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 + 𝑟 − 𝛿) − (1 − 𝛿)

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠 (1 + 𝑟) +
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
]
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠 (1 + 𝑟 − 𝛿) − (1 − 𝛿)

]

]

(50)

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
[

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

K. Blickle et al.

𝜋𝐵 (𝑟) ≡ 𝑝𝐻𝐻
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻 ∫
0

] E [ 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜃𝑠 (1 + 𝑟 − 𝛿) − (1 − 𝛿)|
|

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
]
[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 (1 + 𝑟 − 𝛿) − (1 − 𝛿)
𝑠𝐴(𝑟)

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 [𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠 (1 − 𝛿 + 𝑟) − (1 − 𝛿)

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

] .
[𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠 (1 − 𝛿 + 𝑟) − (1 − 𝛿)

]
𝑟 ≤ 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠)

𝐹 𝑗 (𝑟) could be solved from its competitor indifference condition over 
common support [𝑟, 𝑟] ∶

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

]

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) =

(51)

1 −

1,

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝜋𝐵 −𝑝𝐿𝐻
𝑝𝐻𝐻

]
) ,

[𝜇𝐿𝐻 (𝑟+1−𝛿)−(1−𝛿)
(𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑟+1−𝛿)−(1−𝛿)

for 𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, 𝑟),
for 𝑟 = 𝑟,
]
[𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑟 + 1 − 𝛿) − (1 − 𝛿)
)
(𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑟 + 1 − 𝛿) − (1 − 𝛿)

,

𝜋𝐴 − 𝑝𝐻𝐿
𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) = 1 −

for 𝑟 ∈ [𝑟, 𝑟].

(52)

(53)

The  lenders’  problems  could  be  nested  in  our  baseline  model  after 
replacing lending cost from 1 to 1 − 𝛿, so the previous derivation of 
the equilibrium applies here. We first derive equilibrium strategies as 
a function of 𝜋𝐵 and then characterize 𝜋𝐵 in closed form. Bank 𝐴’s 
equilibrium strategy 𝑟𝐴(𝑠) over [𝑟, 𝑟) makes Bank 𝐵 indifferent, and 
Bank 𝐴 may offer 𝑟 or ∞ upon worse specialized signals:

𝑟𝐴 (𝑠) =

{

min

∞,

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛷(𝑠)+𝑝𝐿𝐻

)

(1−𝛿)

𝜋𝐵 +
𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 ∫ 𝑠𝐴 (𝑟)

0

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡+𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

}

− (1 − 𝛿) , 𝑟

,

for 𝑠 ∈ [𝑥, 1] ,

for 𝑠 ∈ [0, 𝑥) ,

where 𝑥 satisfies 𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑥) = 0 and 𝜋𝐴(𝑟|𝑠) is given in Eq. (50). The two 
lenders’ optimality conditions help us pin down Bank 𝐵’s strategy,

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

∫ 𝑠𝐴 (𝑟)
0

1 −

1 − 𝟏𝜋𝐵 =0⋅

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

,
∫ 𝑠𝐴 (𝑟)
0

𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

for 𝑟 ∈

[𝑟, 𝑟) ,

,

for 𝑟 = 𝑟.

Note that Bank 𝐴’s strategy 𝑟𝐴(𝑠), which makes Bank 𝐵 indifferent, 
adjusts for the positive recovery rate 𝛿 that affects Bank 𝐵’s profit. 
On the other hand, the functional form of 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) is the same as in 
the baseline and 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) is only affected via the endogenous 𝑟𝐴(𝑠). This 
is because the key ODE that pins down 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) involves the quality of 
lenders’ existing borrowers but is irrelevant of borrower payoffs.

Last, Bank 𝐵’s equilibrium profit is

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻 𝑞𝑠

]

1 − 𝛿 + 𝑟)
(

𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴

0

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 ∫
)

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

)

(1 − 𝛿) , 0

} ,

{[

𝜋𝐵 = max

−

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛷 (𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝐴
𝐴  satisfies

where 𝑠𝑏𝑒

∫ 𝑠𝑏𝑒
0

𝐴

)

0 = 𝜋𝐴 (
𝑠𝑏𝑒
𝑟 |
|
𝐴
|
[𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑠𝑏𝑒
+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
= 𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝑞𝑠
1 − 𝛿 + 𝑟)
(

𝐴

− (1 − 𝛿)

⋅

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝑠𝑏𝑒
] .

𝐴

1 − 𝛿 + 𝑟)
(

]
− (1 − 𝛿)

A.4.2. Canonical models

In this part, we formally characterize the credit competition equi-
librium under canonical setting with recovery 𝛿 ∈ [0, 1) from default 
borrowers. When 𝛿 = 0, the bad news signal case corresponds to He 
et  al.  (2023a)  and  the  symmetric  signal  structure  case  corresponds 
to Broecker (1990), Hauswald and Marquez (2003); the analysis in 
Lemma  A.4 rely on this equilibrium characterization under 𝛿 = 0.

First,  we  characterize  lender  strategies  𝐹 𝑗 (𝑟)  for  𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}  as 
functions of primitives 𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 , 𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵  and endogenous variables 𝜋𝐴, 𝜋𝐵, 𝑟. 
These functions apply to both bad news and symmetric signal structure. 
Then we characterize 𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 , 𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵  and endogenous variables 𝜋𝐴, 𝜋𝐵, 𝑟
for the two signal structures separately.

We focus on the primitive conditions under which a lender rejects 
the borrower upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐿 for 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}, and they are later sepa-
rately characterized for both bad news signal structure and symmetric 
structures. Upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻, lenders’ profits are
𝜋𝐴(𝑟) =𝑝𝐻𝐻

] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 (1 + 𝑟) + (1 − 𝜇𝐻𝐻 )𝛿 − 1

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟)

]

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐴(𝑟)

𝜋𝐵(𝑟) =𝑝𝐻𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐿(1 + 𝑟) + (1 − 𝜇𝐻𝐿)𝛿 − 1

] ,

] [𝜇𝐻𝐻 (1 + 𝑟) + (1 − 𝜇𝐻𝐻 )𝛿 − 1

]

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐿𝐻 (1 + 𝑟) + (1 − 𝜇𝐿𝐻 )𝛿 − 1

] .

Since both lenders use mixed strategies, they earn a constant profit 
𝜋𝑗  which  we  take  as  given  for  now.  Therefore,  a  lender’s  strategy 

21 

Since Bank 𝐴 with superior information technology must make a higher 
profit than Bank 𝐵, we have 𝜋𝐴 > 0 and 𝐹 𝐴(𝑟) = 1 while whether 
𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) = 1 depends on the endogenous profit 𝜋𝐵.

Bad-news  signal  structure  In  the  bad  news  signal  structure,  P(𝑔𝑗 =
𝐻|𝜃 = 1) = 1 for 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}. Under this structure, a lender always 
rejects a borrower upon 𝐿 because it reveals the borrower to be bad 
type and the loan has negative NPV (recovery 𝛿 < 1).

The signal probabilities 𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵  and posterior upon signals 𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵  in 

Eqs. (52) and (53) are

1 − 𝛼𝐵) ,

𝜇𝐻𝐻 =

𝑞
𝑝𝐻𝐻

,

𝑝𝐻𝐻 = 𝑞 + (1 − 𝑞)

1 − 𝛼𝐴) (
(
1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐵,
(
1 − 𝛼𝐵) ,

𝑝𝐻𝐿 = (1 − 𝑞)
𝑝𝐿𝐻 = (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴 (
The remaining equilibrium variables are

𝜇𝐻𝐿 = 0,
𝜇𝐿𝐻 = 0.

𝜋𝐵 = 0,

𝑟 =

(1 − 𝑞)

1 − 𝛼𝐵)
(
𝑞
1 − 𝛼𝐴)
(
𝜋𝐴 = 𝑞𝑟 − (1 − 𝑞)

(1 − 𝛿)

,

(1 − 𝛿) .

Symmetric  signal  structure  In  the  symmetric  signal  structure,  lender 
𝑗’s  signal  correctly  identifies  the  project  quality  with  precision  𝛼𝑗 , 
i.e., P(𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻|𝜃 = 1) = P(𝑔𝑗 = 𝐿|𝜃 = 0) = 𝛼𝑗 for 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}. We 
focus on the primitive condition under which a lender always rejects 
a borrower upon 𝐿. Because Bank 𝐴 with a higher precision 𝛼𝐴 > 𝛼𝐵
has a worse posterior upon 𝐿 than Bank 𝐵, it is sufficient to require the 
condition for Bank 𝐵,
𝑝⋅𝐿[𝜇⋅𝐿(1 − 𝛿 + 𝑟) + (1 − 𝜇⋅𝐿𝛿 − 1)] < 0 ⇔ 𝑞(1 − 𝛼𝐵)𝑟 < (1 − 𝑞)𝛼𝐵(1 − 𝛿).
The signal probabilities 𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵  and posteriors 𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵  in Eqs. (52) and (53) 
are

𝑝𝐻𝐻 = 𝑞𝛼𝐴𝛼𝐵 + (1 − 𝑞)

1 − 𝛼𝐴) (
(

1 − 𝑞𝐵) ,

𝜇𝐻𝐻 =

𝑝𝐻𝐿 = 𝑞𝛼𝐴 (

1 − 𝛼𝐵)

+ (1 − 𝑞)

1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝑞𝐵,
(

𝜇𝐻𝐿 =

𝑝𝐿𝐻 = 𝑞 (

1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐵 + (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴 (

1 − 𝑞𝐵) ,

𝜇𝐿𝐻 =

𝑞𝛼𝐴𝛼𝐵
𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝑞𝛼𝐴 (

,
1 − 𝛼𝐵)
,
𝑝𝐻𝐿
1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐵
𝑝𝐿𝐻

.

𝑞 (

The other equilibrium variables 𝜋𝐴, 𝜋𝐵, 𝑟 depend on whether the equi-
librium is zero weak or positive weak. When

𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐿𝐻

(𝑟 + 1 − 𝛿)

− (1 − 𝛿)

] ≤ 0,

the equilibrium is zero weak and

𝜋𝐵 = 0,

𝑟 =

(1 − 𝑞)

1 − 𝛼𝐵)
(
𝑞𝛼𝐵
𝜋𝐴 = 𝑞𝛼𝐴𝑟 − (1 − 𝑞)

(1 − 𝛿)

,

1 − 𝛼𝐴)
(

(1 − 𝛿) .

Otherwise, the equilibrium is positive weak and
[𝜇𝐻𝐿
] ,
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝜋𝐴 + (1 − 𝑞)

= 1 ⇒𝜋𝐴 = 𝑝𝐻𝐿

− (1 − 𝛿)

(𝑟 + 1 − 𝛿)
1 − 𝛼𝐴)
(
𝑞𝛼𝐴
𝜋𝐵 = 𝑞𝛼𝐵𝑟 − (1 − 𝑞)

1 − 𝛼𝐵)
(

(1 − 𝛿) .

(1 − 𝛿)

𝑟 =

,

K. Blickle et al.

A.5. Proof of Proposition  2

This part studies canonical models where each lender has a (gen-

eral) binary signal 𝑔𝑗 for 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵},
P(𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻|𝜃 = 1) = 𝛼𝑗
𝐹 𝑗 (𝑟) with 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵} indicates the distribution of lender 𝑗’s interest 
rate offering. 

𝑢, P(𝑔𝑗 = 𝐿|𝜃 = 0) = 𝛼𝑗
𝑑 .

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

]
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

and
[

E

𝑟𝐵|
|
|
𝑝𝐻𝐻

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

=

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

[

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

] 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

]
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟

] 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

] 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
[
𝑟𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
− ∫ 𝑟
] 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
}

]2

𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟

[
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

1
2

−

[

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
2

}

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

.

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

−

1
2
{

Lemma A.4.  For any 𝑟 ∈

[𝑟, 𝑟)

, we have

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

=

𝛼𝐴
𝑢
𝛼𝐵
𝑢

,

𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) ∕𝑑𝑟
𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) ∕𝑑𝑟

=

𝛼𝐴
𝑢
𝛼𝐵
𝑢

.

𝑝𝐻𝐻

= 𝑟 −

𝑝𝐻𝐻
{

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

𝑝𝐻𝐻

Proof.  For any 𝑟 ∈
𝜋𝐴 = 𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

[𝑟, 𝑟)
)
(
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴 wins

, lenders’ profit functions are
]
[𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑟 + 1) − 1

[𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑟 + 1) − 1

] ,

Hence,

[

𝛥𝑟 ≡ E

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐵 =𝐿

𝜋𝐵 = 𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐻

)
(
1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵 wins

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑟 + 1) − 1

]

[𝜇𝐿𝐻 (𝑟 + 1) − 1

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐿

=

(54)
] .

(55)

𝑟𝐴|
|
|
∫ 𝑟
𝑟

𝑝𝐻𝐻

{

]
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

[

− E

}

]2

[
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

−

1
2
{

−

1
2
{

𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝑝𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

}

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2

1
2

−

]2

[
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

]
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

𝑟𝐵|
|
|

𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
}

𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟

These two equations imply that 

− 𝜋𝐴
− 𝜋𝐵

]

]

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝑝𝐻𝐻

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑟 + 1) − 1
]
[𝜇𝐿𝐻 (𝑟 + 1) − 1

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑟 + 1) − 1
]
[𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑟 + 1) − 1

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
And, evaluating Eqs. (54), (55) at 𝑟 = 𝑟 and using 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
gives lenders’ profits:
𝜋𝐴 (𝑟)
𝜋𝐵 (𝑟)

[𝜇𝐻𝐻
[𝜇𝐻𝐻
Using these in Eq. (56), we have

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻
= 𝑝𝐻𝐻

(𝑟 + 1
(𝑟 + 1

(𝑟 + 1
(𝑟 + 1

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐻𝐿
[𝜇𝐿𝐻

] ,
] .

− 1

− 1

− 1

− 1

)

)

)

)

]

]

.

(56)

= 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

= 1

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

=

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿
(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

) (𝑟 − 𝑟)
) (𝑟 − 𝑟) =
𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) immediately implies that 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)∕𝑑𝑟
𝑑𝐹 𝐴(𝑟)∕𝑑𝑟

)
P (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻, 𝜃 = 1
) =
P (𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻, 𝜃 = 1

𝛼𝐴
𝑢
𝛼𝐵
𝑢

.

=

𝛼𝐴
𝑢
𝛼𝐵
𝑢

.  □

Here, 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

𝛼𝐴
𝑢
𝛼𝐵
𝑢

𝑢 = 1,

Proof of Proposition  2
Part 1: Bad-news signal structure.  This structure corresponds to
𝑢 = 𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴
i.e., lenders only make Type II mistakes. In this part, we use 𝛼𝑗 ≡ 𝛼𝑗
𝑑 as 
a lender’s signal precision, which captures the probability that bad-type 
borrowers are correctly identified as 𝐿, and 𝛼𝐴 > 𝛼𝐵.

𝑑 > 𝛼𝐵

𝑑 > 0;

1 > 𝛼𝐴

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

{

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) ,
𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟−) ,

𝑟 ∈

[

0, 𝑟) ,

𝑟 = 𝑟.

We use this result to express 𝛥𝑟 as a function of 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟). Specifically,

[

E

]
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

𝑟𝐴|
|
|
𝑝𝐻𝐻

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻
[

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

[

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

] 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

[

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

] 𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑝𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟
{

] 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑟 [
[

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[

] 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐻𝐻
}

𝑝𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

−

[

]2

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

1
2

𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟

[
𝑟 − ∫ 𝑟

𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

= 𝑟 −

{

𝑝𝐻𝐻

−

[

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
2

+ 1
2

}

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

,

−

{

[

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
2

−

+ 1
2

}

𝑝𝐻𝐻

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

.

(57)

Now we plug in the expressions of 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) to show that the canonical 
model leads to counterfactual predictions when 𝑟 is relatively small. 
From (He et al., 2023a),

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

𝑟 − 𝑟
1 − 𝛼𝐴) ,
and the key terms are accordingly

𝑟 − 𝑟 (

𝑟

∫
𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 = 𝑟 − 𝑟 − 𝛼𝐴𝑟 ln

)

− 1 + 𝛼𝐴

(

𝑟
𝑟

+ 𝛼𝐴𝑟 ln 𝛼𝐴,

{

𝑟

]2

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

1
2

−

}

∫

𝑟

𝑑𝑟 =

𝑟

2

⋅

( 𝑟
𝑟

)2

− 1

𝑟
𝑟

− 1 + 𝛼𝐴

.

−

1 − 𝛼𝐴)
(

Let 𝑀 (𝑟) ≡ 𝑟
. Multiply 𝛥𝑟 by both denominators in Eq. (57) 
(which are positive as the probability of lending), and one can show 
that

𝑟

𝛥𝑟 ∝𝑝𝐻𝐻 ⋅

𝑟𝛼𝐴
2

+

𝑝𝐻𝐻
2

⋅

[

(

𝑀 − 𝛼𝐴
𝑀

)2 ( 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝛼𝐴

𝑀

)

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

𝑟

]

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

(𝑝𝐿𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

)

)2

(

𝛼𝐴
𝑀

]

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

[

𝑟

∫
𝑟

(𝑝𝐻𝐿 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻

+

) 𝑝𝐻𝐻
2

⋅ 𝑟 ⋅

(𝑀 − 𝛼𝐴)2
𝑀

∫

𝑟

𝛼𝐴
𝑀

(𝑝𝐻𝐿 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻

−

) 𝑝𝐻𝐻
2

[

𝑟

∫
𝑟

]

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟

.

Note  that  only  the  last  term  −

(𝑝𝐻𝐿 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻

) 𝑝𝐻𝐻
2

negative. In addition, this term approaches zero as 𝑟 → 𝑟 =
and
]
[
∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟
𝜕𝑟

𝛼𝐴
𝑀

= 1 −

> 0.

𝜕

[
∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟
(1−𝑞)

]
  is 

1−𝛼𝐵 )
(
𝑞

, 

Therefore, there exists some threshold  ̂𝑟 such that when 𝑟 ≤ ̂𝑟, the 
canonical model has counterfactual prediction 𝛥𝑟 > 0.  □

Part 2: Symmetric signal structure.  This structure corresponds to

𝛼𝑗 ≡ 𝛼𝑗

𝑢 = 𝛼𝑗

𝑑 ∈

]
, 1

,

( 1
2

for

𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}.

]

22 

Proof.  From Lemma  A.4, lender bidding strategies 𝐹 𝐴 (⋅) , 𝐹 𝐵 (⋅) over 
0, 𝑟]
[

∪ {∞} satisfy

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝑝𝐻𝐿

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

In this context, the specialized lender Bank 𝐴’s signal is more precise, 
𝛼𝐴 > 𝛼𝐵.

[

E

Lemma A.5.  E [ 𝑟𝐴|
|
the following inequality

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

] ≥ E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

] is equivalent to 

P (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) 𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑟 𝛼𝐵
∫ 𝑟
+ 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

2𝛼𝐴

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2

≤

P (𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻) ∫ 𝑟

𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
− 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2 𝑟

.

Proof.  The expected rate of a lender’s loan is

[

E

𝑟𝐴|
|
|

]
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

≜

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
B gets H

]
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
A wins
[
∫ 𝑟
𝑟

𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
B gets L
] 𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

,

(58)

[

E

𝑟𝐵|
|
|

]
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

≜

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
A gets H

𝑝𝐻𝐻

]
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
B wins
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
A gets L
] 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

.

(59)
In the first step, we rewrite the equations as functions of 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) and 
𝑑𝑟 which are continuous at 𝑟. Using integration by parts and Lemma 
A.4, we have

𝑟

∫

𝑟

𝑟
𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) = 𝑟𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)|
|
𝑟
|

− ∫
𝑟

𝑟

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 = 𝑟 − ∫

𝑟

𝑟

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 = 𝑟 −

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴 ∫
𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟.

In the last step, although Lemma  A.4 does not apply at 𝑟 = 𝑟, it is of zero 
measure. Similarly, the probability of Bank 𝐴 winning in competition 
is

𝑟

∫

𝑟

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

] 𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) = ∫

𝑟

=
⏟⏟⏟
integration by parts

1 −

𝑟

𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) − ∫
[
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

− ∫

𝑟

𝑟

𝑟

𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

]

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴

+ ∫
𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

=
⏟⏟⏟
𝐹 𝐴= 𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴 𝐹 𝐵

=1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

+

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2

,

and thus the probability of Bank 𝐵 winning is the residual

𝑟

∫

𝑟

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)

] 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) = 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

−

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2

.

Similarly,

𝑟

∫
𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) = ∫

𝑟

𝑟−

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) + 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑟 [

1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟−)]

𝑟

𝐹 𝐴= 𝛼𝐵

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑟

=
⏟⏟⏟
𝛼𝐴 𝐹 𝐵 ,𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟−)
Plug these terms into Eqs. (58) and (59), and we have

=𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

1 −

∫
𝑟

(

)

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴

[

E

]

𝑟𝐴|
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞
|
|
P (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) ∫ 𝑟

=

= 𝑟 −

𝑝𝐻𝐻
P (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) 𝛼𝐵

𝛼𝐴

𝑟 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻
+ 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑟 𝛼𝐵
∫ 𝑟

2𝛼𝐴

+ 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

for Bank 𝐵,

]

𝑟𝐵 |
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞
|
|
P (𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻) ∫ 𝑟
[
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻
P (𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻) ∫ 𝑟

= 𝑟 −

𝑟 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝛼𝐵
∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻
2𝛼𝐴
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

− 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
− 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴
] ≥ E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2 𝑟

.

] is equivalent 

Therefore, E [ 𝑟𝐴|
|

to the stated inequality.  □

Lemma A.6.  In the case of 𝑞 > 1
1+𝑟
̂𝛼 (𝛼𝐴) < 𝛼𝐴 so that when 𝛼𝐵 > ̂𝛼 (𝛼𝐴) we have 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

, when 𝛼𝐵 ↑ 𝛼𝐴, there exists a threshold 

= 1.

Proof.  Let 𝛼𝐵 = 𝛼𝐴 −𝜖. Bank B’s profit could be pinned down by setting 
𝑟 = 𝑟−,

1 − 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟−)] [𝜇𝐻𝐻
[
)
(𝑟 + 1
(𝜇𝐿𝐻

− 1

)

𝜋𝐵 =𝑝𝐻𝐻
≥
𝑝𝐿𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝐹 𝐴(𝑟−)≤1

(𝑟 + 1

)

]

− 1

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

[𝜇𝐿𝐻

(𝑟 + 1

)

]

− 1

𝑞 (

1 − 𝛼𝐴) (𝛼𝐴 − 𝜖) 𝑟 − (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴 (

1 −

(𝛼𝐴 − 𝜖))

1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝑟 + (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴] .

− 𝜖 [𝑞 (

]
1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐴 [𝑞𝑟 − (1 − 𝑞)
(
(
1−𝛼𝐴)𝛼𝐴[𝑞𝑟−(1−𝑞)
1−𝛼𝐴)𝑟+(1−𝑞)𝛼𝐴 , or equivalently, when
𝑞(
1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐴 [𝑞𝑟 − (1 − 𝑞)
(
]
1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝑟 + (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴
𝑞 (

= 𝛼𝐴 −

,

]

Hence, when 𝜖 <

𝛼𝐵 > ̂𝛼 (𝛼𝐴)

we have 𝜋𝐵 > 0 and 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

= 1.  □

Now we prove the part 2 of Proposition  2. There are two cases 
, i.e., whether the project has a negative 

depending on whether 𝑞 < 1
1+𝑟
NPV at prior.

=
⏟⏟⏟
𝛼𝐵 =𝛼𝐴−𝜖
=

1+𝑟  is easier. When 𝛼𝐵 ↑ 𝛼𝐴 and 𝛼𝐴 − 𝛼𝐵 =
, Bank 𝐵’s signal distributions and strategies approach that 

)

Proof.  The first case of 𝑞 < 1
(
𝑞 − 1
𝑜
1+𝑟
of Bank 𝐴 except at 𝑟 = 𝑟 (Lemma  A.4):
[𝑟, 𝑟) ,
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) ↑ 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟)
Then from the expressions of E [𝑟𝐴
in Lemma  A.5,
𝑟 − E [ 𝑟𝐴|
|
𝑟 − E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
[

for any 𝑟 ∈

]
] =

𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝑝𝐻𝐻

[

≤
⏟⏟⏟
RHS set 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

=1

1
2
1
2

𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

= 1,

and 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) < 1 = 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) .
] and E [𝑟𝐵

|𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

]
|𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

− 1
2

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

+ 1
2

(60)

− 1
2

(𝐹 𝐵(𝑟)

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

where the last inequality holds because the ratio is increasing in 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
. 
)2 in both the numerator and denominator is mono-
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
tone increasing when 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) ∈ (0, 1].) Hence, E [ 𝑟𝐴|
] ≥
|
E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|
E [ 𝑟𝐴|
|
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
Lemma  A.5 holds under 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

. When 𝛼𝐵 → 𝛼𝐴, since 
]  increases  in 
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞
,  it  is  sufficient  to  show  that  the  equivalent  inequality  in

Now consider the second case 𝑞 ≥ 1
1+𝑟
]  decreases  while  E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|

] always holds in this case.

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

= 1, i.e.,

P (𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) 𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝑟 𝛼𝐵
∫ 𝑟
2𝛼𝐴

𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2

;

≤

23 

P (𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻) ∫ 𝑟

𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 + 𝑝𝐻𝐻
(
1 − 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

𝑝𝐻𝐻

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻
)

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴 𝑟

,

(61)

K. Blickle et al.

where both the LHS and RHS are positive. When 𝑞 > 1
, recall that 
1+𝑟
Lemma  A.6 shows 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
= 1 as 𝛼𝐵 → 𝛼𝐴 under 𝑞 > 1
1+𝑟  and so the 
inequality is also necessary.
Denote by 𝑁 ≜ ∫ 𝑟

𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 > 0, and 𝑀 ≜ 𝑟 𝛼𝐵

𝑟 𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟). 

2𝛼𝐴 − ∫ 𝑟

𝑀 > 0 because

𝑟

∫

𝑟

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) < 𝑟 ∫

𝑟

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) = 𝑟 ∫

𝑟

𝑟

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

= 𝑟

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴 ∫
𝑟

)

𝑟

𝑑

( 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2
2

= 𝑟

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

.

Collect terms in the key inequality (61), we have
]

(

)

{[

𝑝𝐻𝐻

1 −

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

)

(

−

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

𝑝𝐻𝐻
[
𝑝𝐻𝐻

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
(

1 −

≤𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻
(
)

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 −

𝑝𝐻𝐻

) 𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿
}
)

𝑁

)]

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

𝑀

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

(62)

Let 𝛼𝐵 = 𝛼𝐴 − 𝜖 and calculate the coefficients. Note that as 𝛼𝐵 =
𝛼𝐴 − 𝜖, we have 𝑝𝐻𝐿 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻 = (2𝑞 − 1) 𝜖.27 The coefficient on the LHS of 
(62):
[

(

)

]

1 −

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

𝑝𝐻𝐻
(

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻
)

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

) 𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴

)

−

=

−

𝑝𝐻𝐻

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴
𝜖
𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻
2𝛼𝐴
𝜖
2𝛼𝐴
(2𝑞 − 1) 𝜖 +

( 𝑝𝐻𝐻
+
2
( 𝑝𝐻𝐻
2
𝑝𝐻𝐻
2

) (𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿
) (𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻
𝜖
2𝛼𝐴
The coefficient on the RHS of (62):
(

𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿
𝜖
2𝛼𝐴

𝑝2
𝐻𝐻 −

= −

(

)

−

[

) (

1 −

)

𝜖
𝛼𝐴

)

𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝑝𝐻𝐻 −

𝜖
𝛼𝐴

𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝑝𝐻𝐿

𝑝𝐻𝐻

1 −

𝑝2
𝐻𝐻 − 𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝛼𝐵
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 −
2𝛼𝐴
(𝑝𝐻𝐿 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻

)

𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

)]

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝜖
𝛼𝐴
𝜖
𝛼𝐴

=

0 ≤

{ 𝜖
𝛼𝐴

}

𝑀

𝑝2
𝐻𝐻 − 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (2𝑞 − 1) 𝜖
{

−

−

(2𝑞 − 1) 𝜖 +

𝑝𝐻𝐻
2

𝜖
2𝛼𝐴

[
(2𝑞 − 1) −

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝛼

Note that

] 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑁 − 2𝑀)
2

𝑝2
𝐻𝐻 −

𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝑝𝐻𝐻 −

𝜖
𝛼𝐴

𝜖 +

𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝑝𝐻𝐻 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝑝𝐻𝐿

𝜖
2𝛼𝐴
( 1
2

}

𝑁

𝜖.

𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝑝𝐻𝐿
) 𝑁
𝛼

𝑟

𝑟

𝑟

𝑟

𝑁 − 2𝑀 = ∫
𝑟

= ∫
𝑟

= ∫
𝑟

= ∫
𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 − 2

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 − 2

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 − 2

(

(

(

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

)

𝐹 𝐴 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑟

− ∫

𝑟

)

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑟𝑑𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴 ∫
𝑟

𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴

𝑟 +

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴 ∫

𝑟

)2

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

)

𝑑𝑟

−

−

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 −

𝑟

𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐴 ∫
𝑟

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

)2

𝑑𝑟 > 0.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Collecting terms, the condition above requires 𝑞 ≥ 1 − 𝛼 + 𝛼2. Since 
)
1 − 𝛼 + 𝛼2 increases in 𝛼 for 𝛼 ∈
, this imposes a simple condition 
, 1
that prior needs to be sufficiently good and information technology 𝛼
cannot be too high.

( 1
2

Note that the above primitive condition implies that Bank 𝐴 has a 

higher overall lending probability, 

𝛼𝐵
𝑝𝐻𝐻
+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
2𝛼𝐴
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
)
P(𝑟𝐴<𝑟𝐵 ≤∞

−

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

(

)

⎤
⎥
𝛼𝐵
⎥
𝑝𝐻𝐻
+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻
⎥
2𝛼𝐴
⎥
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
⎥
P(𝑟𝐵 <𝑟𝐴≤∞
⎦

1 −

)

(𝛼𝐴 − 𝛼𝐵) (

=

2𝑞 − 1 −

)

.

𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝛼𝐴

(63)

In  addition,  Bank  𝐴’s  lending  probability  in  event  𝐻𝐻,  which  is 
2𝛼𝐴 𝑝𝐻𝐻  in Eq. (61), is slightly lower because  𝛼𝐵
𝛼𝐵
. Combining both, 
this primitive condition means that Bank 𝐴’s loan rates place relatively 
less weight on its ‘‘winning bids’’ (𝐻𝐻) and more weight on its ‘‘bids’’ 
(𝐻𝐿) than Bank 𝐵, which restricts the counterforce.  □

2𝛼𝐴 < 1

2

The next result shows that under the bad-news signal structure, a 
higher 𝑟 reduces the counterforces mentioned in the main text, thereby 
providing more insights into the primitive restrictions in Proposition  2.

Lemma A.7.  Under the bad-news signal structure, the gap between the non-
specialized Bank 𝐵’s bids and its winning bids, E [ 𝑟𝐵|
−
|
E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞, 𝐻𝐻] increases in 𝑟.

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 = ∞, 𝐿𝐻]

Proof.  From the proof of Proposition  2 in Lemma  A.4, we have the 
following expressions:

[

E

𝑟𝐵|
|
|

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞, 𝐻𝐻

[

E

𝑟𝐵|
|
|

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 = ∞, 𝐿𝐻

]

]

= 𝑟 −

= 𝑟 −

𝑑𝑟

,

{

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

1
2

−

[

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

}

]2

[

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
2

−

1
2
∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

.

𝑟𝐵|
|
|
∫ 𝑟
𝑟

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 = ∞, 𝐿𝐻

{

1
2

−

[

]2

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

}

𝑑𝑟

=

1
2

−

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

.

−

𝑞

𝑟−𝑟

Taking derivative w.r.t. 𝑟, (see Box  II). where the first ‘‘propotional to 
(∝)’’  omits  the  positive  denominator,  and  the  second  omits
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))′ 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2
,  which  is  positive  because  𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) =
𝑟−𝑟+𝑟𝛼𝐴   (𝑟 =
(1−𝑞)(1−𝛼𝐵 )  is a constant in 𝑟.)
Therefore, for the nonspecialized Bank 𝐵, the gap between its bids 
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞, 𝐻𝐻]
E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|
widens  as  𝑟  increases,  which  could  potentially  lead  to  a  negative 
interest rate wedge. For example, in the extreme case of 𝑟 → ∞, both 
approach infinity but the bids have a higher order; this combined with 
the fact that Bank 𝐵’s rate has a higher weight on its bids than Bank 
𝐴 (more likely to make mistakes, 𝑝𝐿𝐻 > 𝑝𝐻𝐿) generates a negative 
interest rate wedge when 𝑟 → ∞.  □

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 = ∞, 𝐿𝐻]  and  winning  bids  E [ 𝑟𝐵|
|

𝑝2
𝐻𝐻 − 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (2𝑞 − 1) 𝜖.

We show the following increase in 𝑟,

Plug the coefficients back into the inequality (62), so we need to show 
that

[

E

]

[

− E

𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞, 𝐻𝐻

]

𝑟𝐵|
|
|

Therefore, one sufficient condition is
𝑞𝛼2 + (1 − 𝑞) (1 − 𝛼)2
𝛼

𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝛼

2𝑞 − 1 ≥

=

.

27 We  have  𝑝𝐻𝐿
𝑞 (
1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐵 + (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴 (
(1 − 𝑞)

(𝛼𝐵 − 𝛼𝐴)

= (2𝑞 − 1) 𝜖.

= 𝑞𝛼𝐴 (

1 − 𝛼𝐵)

+ (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐵 (

1 − 𝛼𝐴)  and  𝑝𝐿𝐻

1 − 𝛼𝐵) and then therefore 𝑝𝐻𝐿 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻 = 𝑞 (𝛼𝐴 − 𝛼𝐵)

A.6. Calibration

In this section we explain the details of the empirical moments 
,  for  both  bad  news  and 

we  use  to  calibrate  parameters  {𝑞, 𝛼𝐴, 𝛼𝐵}
symmetric signal structures. We fix 𝑟 = 0.36.

The first two empirical moments that we aim to match are the 
NPL rates of specialized and non-specialized (stress-tested) banks in our 
Y14Q.H1 data for stress-tests banks (see Appendix  B for more details). 

=
+

24 

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

{

∫ 𝑟
𝑟

1
2

−

[
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

}

]2

𝑑𝑟

1
2

−

[

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
2

𝜕

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

−

/

𝜕𝑟

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

∫ 𝑟
𝑟 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 ⋅

(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))′

⋅

[

1
2

−

[

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
2

]2

− ∫ 𝑟
𝑟

{

1
2

−

[
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

}

]2

[

𝑑𝑟

1
2

−

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2

]′

⋅ 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2

=

∝ ∫

∝ ∫

= ∫

𝑟

𝑟

𝑟

[

1
2

−

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2

]2

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2

𝑟

𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 (𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))′

{ [

2 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)] 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

}2

[

𝑟

2 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)] 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2

− ∫

𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝑑𝑟 ⋅

2 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
4

𝑟

[

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) −

]

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2
2

− ∫
𝑟

𝑑𝑟 ⋅

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]
[

{

𝑟

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2
4

+

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2
2

[

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]

}

𝑑𝑟 > 0,

Box II. 

𝑑𝑟 [

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)] (𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))′

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)2

The two NPL rates are 3% (specialized) and 4% (non-specialized) as 
reported in Table  B.1.

The third moment is the average loan approval rate for large U.S. 
banks (Chart 11 in DeSpain and Pandolfo (2024); we take large banks to 
be consistent with Y14Q.H1 data which is for large stress test banks). 
Note this moment is average across banks and loan applications; but 
since  we  do  not  observe  the  proportions  of  loans  applications  that 
specialized and non-specialized lenders receive, we follow the theory 
with one specialized bank and one non-specialized bank to assign a 
weight of half for each bank.

Bad-news information structure.  Using results in Appendices  A.4 and
A.4.2, one can calculate the three model-implied moments under a 
bad-news information structure to be

(

3% = P

=

)

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 < ∞
𝜃 = 0 |
|
|

1

(

4% = P

=

𝑞
1−𝑞

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2

,

+ 1

(
+

1−𝛼𝐴)𝛼𝐵

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

𝑞
1−𝑞

+

1−𝛼𝐴)(
(

1
2
⎧
1−𝛼𝐵 )
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 < ∞
𝜃 = 0 |
|
|

1
2

+

)

1

,

+ 1

1−𝛼𝐵 )𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

1−𝛼𝐴)(
(

1
2

−

1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)]2
[
2

−

1
2

+𝛼𝐴(

⎧
1−𝛼𝐵 )
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1
P(𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻)𝐹 𝐵(𝑟)
2

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

0.5 =

=

P(𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) +

1
2
𝑞 + (1 − 𝑞)(1 − 𝛼𝐴)
2

+

[𝑞 + (1 − 𝑞)(1 − 𝛼𝐵)]𝐹 𝐵(𝑟)
2

,

𝑟
𝑟 −1

=

where 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
parameters are 𝛼𝐴 = 0.984, 𝛼𝐵 = 0.977, and 𝑞 = 0.506, under which 
𝛥𝑟 = 0.26%.

𝑟 −1+𝛼𝐴  and 𝑟 = (1−𝑞)(1−𝛼𝐵 )

. The resulting calibrated 

𝑞

𝑟

Symmetric information structure.  Using results in Appendices  A.4 and
A.4.2, one can calculate the three model-implied moments under a 
symmetric information structure to be

(

3% = P

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 < ∞
𝜃 = 0 |
|
|

)

25 

=

𝑞
1−𝑞

(

[
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

𝛼𝐴𝛼𝐵
1−𝛼𝐴)(

1−𝛼𝐵 )[

1
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]
+ 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴
+ 𝛼𝐵
1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
2𝛼𝐴
)

+𝛼𝐴(
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]

1−𝛼𝐵 )
(
+

1−𝛼𝐴)𝛼𝐵

(

4% = P

𝜃 = 0 |
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 < ∞
|
|

,

+ 1

,

=

𝑞
1−𝑞

(

𝛼𝐴𝛼𝐵
1−𝛼𝐴)(

− 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

1
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]
− 𝛼𝐵
2𝛼𝐴
P(𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻)𝐹 𝐵(𝑟)

(
+
(𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟))2]

[
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
1−𝛼𝐵 )[
1
2

0.5 =

=

P(𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻) +

1
2
𝑞𝛼𝐴 + (1 − 𝑞)(1 − 𝛼𝐴)
2

+

[𝑞𝛼𝐵 + (1 − 𝑞)(1 − 𝛼𝐵)]𝐹 𝐵(𝑟)
2

,

1−𝛼𝐴)𝛼𝐵 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

1−𝛼𝐵 )𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) + 1

+𝛼𝐴(

where

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

=

𝛼𝐴𝑟 − 𝑟
1 − 𝛼𝐴) (
(

𝛼𝐴𝛼𝐵𝑟 − 1−𝑞
𝑞

,

1 − 𝛼𝐵)

and

𝑟 =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

(1−𝑞)

𝑞𝛼𝐴(

(

1−𝛼𝐵 )
,
𝑞
1−𝛼𝐵 )𝑟+(1−𝑞)
𝑞𝛼𝐴

(

1−𝛼𝐴)(

1−𝛼𝐵 )

,

if 𝑞 (
if 𝑞 (

1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐵𝑟 < (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴 (
1 − 𝛼𝐴) 𝛼𝐵𝑟 ≥ (1 − 𝑞) 𝛼𝐴 (

1 − 𝛼𝐵) ,
1 − 𝛼𝐵) .

The resulting calibrated parameters are 𝛼𝐴 = 0.984, 𝛼𝐵 = 0.977, and 
𝑞 = 0.510, under which 𝛥𝑟 = 0.17%.

Non-zero recovery rate.  We have solved the model with non-zero recov-
ery in Appendix  A.4. For calibration we set the recovery to be 𝛿 = 0.6
which is about the average recovery rate in the Y-14 data (including 
all types of collateral). We then recalibrate our three parameters for 
canonical models.

Importantly, a positive recovery does not affect the functional forms 
of the key empirical moments and they are still the same as above. 
However, endogenous equilibrium variables such as 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) which en-
ter  these  moments  is  a  function  of  recovery  rate  𝛿.  For  instance, 
for bad-news information structure, 𝐹 𝐵(𝑟) =
1−𝛼𝐵 ) =

𝛼𝐴𝑟−𝑟
1−𝛼𝐴)(
(

𝛼𝐴𝛼𝐵 𝑟− 1−𝑞
𝑞

(

(1−𝑞)

𝑟−

1−𝛼𝐵 )
𝑞
)(

(1−𝛿)

)

(

(1−𝑞)

1−𝛼𝐴

1−𝛼𝐵

(1−𝛿)

; the resulting calibrated parameters are the cali-

𝑞

𝑟−
brated parameters are 𝑞 = 0.5006, 𝛼𝐴 = 0.9843, 𝛼𝐵 = 0.9789 which yield 
a positive interest rate wedge of 𝛥𝑟 = 4 × 10−4.

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

[

E

𝑟𝐴 + 1|
|
|

𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

]

= 2 ⋅

1
8
1
24

(1 + 𝜖)2 + 𝜖(1−𝜖)
(1 + 𝜖)2 + 𝜖(1−𝜖)

2

4

+ 3
8
+ 7
24

(1 − 𝜖)2

,

(1 − 𝜖)2

[

E

𝑟𝐵 + 1|
|
|

]
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

= 2 ⋅

1
8

(1 + 𝜖)2 + 𝜖(1−𝜖)

2

+ 3
8

(1 − 𝜖)2 + 𝜖2 (1 − 𝜖) ∫ 1
0.5

1
24

(1 + 𝜖)2 + 3𝜖(1−𝜖)

8

)

𝜖
2

(
𝑡− 1
+(1−𝜖)𝑡2 𝑑𝑡 + 𝜖 (1 − 𝜖)2 ∫ 1
2
+ 7
24

(1 − 𝜖)2

0.5

(
)
𝑡− 1
𝑡
2
+(1−𝜖)𝑡2 𝑑𝑡

𝜖
2

.

A.7. Is 𝜋𝐵 > 0 a necessary condition for 𝛥𝑟 < 0? A special case

Note that when 𝜖 = 0, 𝛥𝑟 = 0. When 𝜖 → 0, we have (ignoring higher 

Box III. 

The discussion above seems to suggest that a profitable weak bank is 
necessary for a negative interest rate wedge. This is not true, as shown 
by Proposition  A.2 which considers a degenerate general fundamental 
(so  Bank  𝐵  is  uninformed)  and  a  uniformly  distributed  specialized 
signal. 

Proposition A.2 (A Special Case of Uniform Distribution). Suppose 𝑟 = ∞
so that rejection is off equilibrium, general signals are degenerate (𝑞𝑔 = 1
or 𝛼𝑢 = 𝛼𝑑 = 0.5), and the specialized signal’s distribution follows 𝜙(𝑠) =
1 + 𝜖 [
. In equilibrium, (i) 𝜋𝐵 = 0 always, ii) 𝛥𝑟 = 0 when 
𝜖 = 0 (i.e., 𝑠 ∼ U[0, 1]), and (iii) 𝛥𝑟 > 0 (𝛥𝑟 < 0) when 𝜖 > 0 (𝜖 < 0) for 
infinitesimal 𝜖.

2 ⋅ 𝟏𝑠≤0.5 − 1

]

Proof.  Based on the credit competition equilibrium in Proposition  1, 
the expected rates of a lender’s issued loan are:

[

E

𝑟𝐴|
|
|

]
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞

=

[

E

𝑟𝐵|
|
|

∫ 1
𝑝𝐻𝐻
𝑥
]
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

∫ 1
𝑥

𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

[

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑡)−)]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴 wins
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑡)−)] 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿
[

𝑟𝐴 (𝑡) 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐿,𝑔𝐵 =𝐿
∫ 1
𝑥 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

∫ 1
𝑥 𝑟𝐴 (𝑡) 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

,

𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

=

𝑟 (𝑡) 𝑑 [

]
−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟 (𝑡))

∫ 1
̂𝑠 𝛷 (𝑡)
⏟⏟⏟
𝐵 wins

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐿,𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

𝑥 𝑟 (𝑡) 𝑑 [
∫ 1

−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟 (𝑡))

]

𝑝𝐻𝐻

̂𝑠 𝛷 (𝑡) 𝑑 [
∫ 1

]
−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟 (𝑡))

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

.

In positive weak equilibrium, 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟 (𝑠)) has a point mass of size 1 −
𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟−) at 𝑟 or 𝑟𝐴( ̂𝑠).

In this proposition, we impose the following conditions (a) general 
signals are degenerate with 𝑞𝑔 = 1 and (b) 𝑟 → ∞. (The logic for 
𝛼𝑢 = 𝛼𝑑 = 0.5 so that lenders ignore the general signals are the same.) 
Then

[

E

]

=

∫ 1
0

𝑟𝐴 + 1|
𝑟𝐴 < 𝑟𝐵 ≤ ∞
|
|
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑡)−)] 𝑟𝐴 (𝑡) 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑡)−)] 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
∫ 1
0
]
𝑟𝐵 < 𝑟𝐴 ≤ ∞

[

[

E

𝑟𝐵 + 1|
|
|

∫ 1
0 𝛷 (𝑡) 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
[
∫ 𝑡
0 𝜈𝜙 (𝜈) 𝑑𝑡

]

𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

,

=

∫ 1
0

=

0 𝛷 (𝑡) 𝑟 (𝑡) 𝑑 [
∫ 1
0 𝛷 (𝑡) 𝑑 [
∫ 1

−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟 (𝑡))
]
−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟 (𝑡))

]

=

[

∫ 1
0 𝛷 (𝑡)

𝑡𝛷(𝑡)
∫ 𝑡
0 𝜈𝜙(𝜈)𝑑𝜈

]

𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

∫ 1
0 𝛷 (𝑡) 𝑡𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡

,

where the first equality of both variables uses condition (a) degenerate 
signals and 𝑥 = ̂𝑠 = 0 which follows from condition (b), and the second 
equality uses equilibrium strategy 𝑟𝐴(𝑡) = 𝛷(𝑠)
=
∫ 𝑡
0 𝜈𝜙(𝜈)𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠
Additionally, (c) the specialized signal distribution is 𝜙 (𝑠) = 1 +
2 ⋅ 𝟏𝑠≤0.5 − 1

0 𝑡𝜙(𝑡)𝑑𝑡  and 1−𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑡)−)

]
. Then (see Box  III).

𝜖 [

∫ 𝑠

.

order terms of 𝜖)

𝜕𝛥𝑟
𝜕𝜖

= lim
𝜖→0

𝛥𝑟 (𝜖)
𝜖

=

1
𝜖

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

1
− 1
4

𝜖

1
3

−

1 + 𝜖 − 𝜖 ln 2
− 1
8

1
3

𝜖

= 3 ln 2 −

15
8

> 0.

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

Hence, when 𝜖 > 0 (𝜖 < 0), i.e., 𝜙(𝑠) tilts toward less (more) 

favorable realizations, we have 𝛥𝑟 > 0 (𝛥𝑟 < 0).  □

A.8. Information acquisition

In this section, we characterize the incentive compatibility condition 
and lending profits and then provide a numerical illustration in which 
the specialization equilibrium arises.

Incentive compatibility conditions.  Banks make their information acqui-
sition decisions simultaneously, and we assume that information acqui-
sition is observable when banks enter the credit market competition 
game. Therefore a lender’s deviation from the proposed equilibrium 
information acquisition will lead to a different information structure 
in the credit market competition, and we need to derive equilibrium 
lending profits in all possible subgames following a deviation.

) the expected lending profits of bank 
𝑗  in  firm  𝑖  when  the  information  structure  in  firm  𝑖  is  given  by 
(𝐼 𝑔
𝑗  take value of one if bank 𝑗 acquired 
general and specialized signals in firm 𝑖, respectively, and zero oth-
erwise.  The  symmetry  on  industries  implies  that  a  bank’s  expected 
lending profits in firm 𝑖 only depend on the information structure in 
that industry but not on the industry itself, i.e., 

Denote by 𝛱 𝑖
𝑗

)
, where 𝐼 𝑔

𝑗  and 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑠

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐵

𝐵

)

(𝐼 𝑔

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵

𝛱 𝑎
𝑗

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑠

= 𝛱 𝑏
𝑗

𝐵, 𝐼 𝑠
Therefore, we drop index 𝑖 from the expected lending profits. Moreover, 
we focus on Bank 𝐴’s incentives in what follows since the no deviation 
conditions for banks 𝐴 and 𝐵 are symmetric.

(64)

𝐵

) .

Bank 𝐴 can deviate along three dimensions: it can choose not to 
acquire general information, it can choose not to acquire specialized 
information about firm 𝑎, and it can choose to acquire specialized infor-
mation in firm 𝑏. Bank 𝐴’s incentives to deviate along these dimensions 
will depend on the costs of acquiring information. As one would expect, 
the lower the cost of acquiring general information, the more likely 
Bank 𝐴 has incentives to acquire general information and not deviate 
along this dimension. For deviations along the specialized information 
dimension, the cost of acquiring specialized information has to be low 
enough such that it is worth acquiring specialized information in firm 
𝑎 and having an informational advantage over Bank 𝐵 in this firm but 
high enough such that it is not worth acquiring specialized information 
in firm 𝑏 to stop being the less informed lender. This intuition can 
be formally stated in the following incentive compatibility constraints. 
Bank 𝐴 does not want to deviate by

1. not acquiring general information:

(𝐼 𝑔
(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔
𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

𝐵 = 1

𝛱𝐴

+𝛱𝐴

26 

)

)

− 𝛱𝐴

− 𝛱𝐴

(𝐼 𝑔
(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑠
𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔
𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

𝐵 = 1

)

) ≥ 𝜅𝑔 ;
(G)

K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Fig. A.1.  Specialization Equilibrium. This figure depicts the incentive compatibility constraints where Bank 𝐴 does not want to deviate from the specialization 
equilibrium. Parameters: ̄𝑟 = 0.36, 𝑞𝑔 = 0.8, 𝑞𝑠 = 0.9, 𝛼𝑢 = 𝛼𝑑 = 𝛼 = 0.7, and 𝜏 = 1. Note 𝜏 captures the signal-to-noise ratio of Bank 𝐴’s specialized information 
technology as 𝑠 = E [𝜃𝑠|𝜃𝑠 + 𝜖] and 𝜖 ∼  (0, 1∕𝜏).

2. not acquiring general information nor specialized information in 

firm 𝑎:
(𝐼 𝑔

𝛱𝐴

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

)

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

)

− 𝛱𝐴
)

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑠
(𝐼 𝑔

+ 𝛱𝐴

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 1

− 𝛱𝐴

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 1

≥ 𝜅𝑔 + 𝜅𝑠;

3. not acquiring specialized information in firm 𝑎: 

)

(NI)

𝛱𝐴

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

)

−𝛱𝐴

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

) ≥ 𝜅𝑠;
(S𝑎)

4. and, acquiring specialized information in firm 𝑏: 

𝛱𝐴

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 1

)

−𝛱𝐴

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 1

) ≤ 𝜅𝑠.
(NSb)

Essentially, constraints (G) and (NI) impose an upper bound on 𝜅𝑔
so that Bank 𝐴 wants to acquire general information. Analogously, 
constraints (NI) and (Sa) impose an upper bound on 𝜅𝑠 so that Bank 
𝐴 wants to acquire specialized information in firm 𝑎, while Constraint 
(NSb) imposes a lower bound on 𝜅𝑠 to ensure that it does not want to 
be specialized in firm 𝑏.

Fig.  A.1 illustrates the existence of a symmetric specialization equi-
librium. The lines in the figure represent the combination of informa-
tion acquisition costs such that the incentive compatibility constraints 
are satisfied with equality. The shaded area represents the combina-
tions  of  information  acquisition  costs  for  which  all  constraints  are 
satisfied, and hence, a specialization equilibrium exists. The figure uses 
the characterization of lending profits in the next section.

Lending profits

𝐵

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴, 𝐼 𝑔

We characterize lending profits as a function of information acqui-
) (we focus on Bank 𝐴 due to symmetry.) We 

sition, 𝛱𝐴
omit the case where there is an uninformed lender.
𝐈𝐠
𝐀 = 𝟏, 𝐈𝐬
𝐁 = 𝟎 (Specialization). This is the equilibrium 
that we focus on—each lender has a general information signal and 
only Bank 𝐴 has a specialized signal 𝑠. Bank 𝐴’s expected lending profit 
before signal realizations is thus

𝐀 = 𝟏, 𝐈𝐠

𝐁 = 𝟏, 𝐈𝐬

𝛱𝐴

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

)

= ∫

𝑥

1

𝜋𝐴 (

)
𝑠

𝑟𝐴 (𝑠)|
|
|

𝜙 (𝑠) 𝑑𝑠,

27 

where 𝜋𝐴 ( 𝑟𝐴 (𝑠)|
𝑠) is the profits for given signal realizations 𝐻 and 𝑠
|
and is given in Eq. (9). Using the equilibrium strategies in Proposition 
1, we have

𝜋𝐴 (

)
𝑠

𝑟𝐴 (𝑠)|
|
|

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻 ⋅

∫ max{𝑠, ̂𝑠}
0

(𝑠 − 𝑡) 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
𝑞𝑠

(𝜋𝐵 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

)

⋅

+

𝑠
𝑞𝑠

−𝑝𝐻𝐿,  for 𝑠 ≥ 𝑥.

The expression shows that Bank 𝐴 earns the information rent from 
the  specialized  signal.  Bank  𝐴  observes  𝑠,  while  Bank  𝐵  may  only 
negatively update the prior 𝑞𝑠 when winning the competition that 𝑠𝐴 ≤
𝑠 (𝑟); this is reflected in the terms  𝑠
 and  1
𝑞𝑠
𝑞𝑠
(𝐼 𝑔
𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
In this case, Bank 𝐵’s profit 𝛱𝐵
(𝐼 𝑔
is given in Lemma  2. By symmetry, 𝛱𝐴
(𝐼 𝑔
𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔
𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
= 𝜋𝐵.
= 𝛱𝐵
𝐈𝐠
𝐁 = 𝟏, 𝐈𝐬
𝐀 = 𝟎, 𝐈𝐬
𝐁 = 𝟎 (Asymmetric technology). In this case, 
Bank 𝐴 only collects specialized information while Bank 𝐵 only collects 
general information in industry 𝑎. This case is nested in the previous 
case of specialization (𝐼 𝑔
𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔
𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
𝐵 = 0), by reformulating 
Bank 𝐴 to have an uninformative general signal, e.g.,

(𝑠 − 𝑡) 𝜙 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡.
)
𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
𝐵 = 0
𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔
𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

∫ min{𝑠, ̂𝑠}
0
𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔
𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
𝐀 = 𝟏, 𝐈𝐠

= 𝜋𝐵
)
𝐵 = 1

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

)

(

P

𝜃𝑔 = 1

𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻|
|
|
𝐀 = 𝟎, 𝐈𝐠

)

= P

(

𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻|
|
|

)

= 1.

𝜃𝑔 = 0

𝐁 = 𝟏, 𝐈𝐬

𝐈𝐠
𝐀 = 𝟏, 𝐈𝐬
𝐁 = 𝟎  (General  information  only).  In 
this case, both lenders only acquire general information, i.e., investing 
in IT and data processing that apply to both industries. The credit 
competition corresponds to Broecker (1990) with two lenders. Lenders 
are symmetric and the lending profit of, say Bank 𝐴, is

𝛱𝐴

(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐴 = 0, 𝐼 𝑔

𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 0

)

= max

{𝑝𝐻𝐿

(𝜇𝐻𝐿𝑞𝑠𝑟 − 1

) , 0

} .

= 1.

𝐁 = 1, 𝐈𝐬

𝐀 = 1, 𝐈𝐠

The ‘‘max’’ operator arises because either both lenders withdraw with 
positive probability (zero profits), or both lenders make profits and 
neither has a point mass at 𝑟, i.e., 𝐹 𝑗 (𝑟−)
𝐈𝐠
𝐀 = 1, 𝐈𝐬
𝐁 = 1  (Acquire  all  information).  In  this  sym-
metric case, each lender invests in both information technologies and 
receives both the general and specialized signals. We characterize the 
credit market equilibrium based on (Riordan, 1993) which considers 
the competition between two lenders each with a continuous private 
signal. Here, each lender additionally has a binary signal that represents 
the general information. Following the modeling of Riordan (1993), 
we work with the direct specialized signal 𝑧. Specifically, let 𝑧 and 𝑍
denote the realization and the random variable of the specialized signal 

K. Blickle et al.

respectively, and let
̃𝐹 (𝑧) ≡ P ( 𝑍 ≤ 𝑧| 𝜃𝑠 = 1
denote the CDFs of 𝑍 conditional on the underlying state 𝜃𝑠, with the 
corresponding PDFs denoted by  ̃𝑓 and ̃𝑔. Introduce 𝜇 (𝑧) ≡ P ( 𝜃𝑠 = 𝑔|
𝑆)
|
as the posterior belief, which is 𝑠 in our baseline model.

̃𝐺 (𝑧) ≡ P ( 𝑍 ≤ 𝑧| 𝜃𝑠 = 0

) ,

)

A lender only bids when the general signal is 𝐻 and the specialized 
signal 𝑧 ≥ 𝑥. Let 𝑅 (𝑧) ≡ 𝑟 (𝑧)+1 denote the equilibrium gross rate quote. 
Given competitor’s strategy 𝑅 (𝑧), the lending profits from any 𝑅 is then

𝜋 (𝑅 |𝑧 ) =

[𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇 (𝑧) ̃𝐹 (𝑡 (𝑅)) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇 (𝑧)
− 𝑝𝐻𝐻

] 𝑅
]
(1 − 𝜇 (𝑧)) ̃𝐺 (𝑡 (𝑅)) + 𝜇 (𝑧) ̃𝐹 (𝑡 (𝑅))

[

− 𝑝𝐻𝐿,

(65)

where 𝑡 (𝑅) the signal such that the other bank offers 𝑅. The first order 
condition w.r.t. 𝑅 is
𝜕𝜋 (𝑅 (𝑡) |𝑧 )
𝜕𝑅

=

]

[𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇 (𝑧) ̃𝐹 (𝑡) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇 (𝑧)
[
{𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇 (𝑧) ̃𝑓 (𝑡) 𝑅 (𝑡) − 𝑝𝐻𝐻

+

(1 − 𝜇 (𝑧)) ̃𝑔 (𝑡) + 𝜇 (𝑧) ̃𝑓 (𝑡)

]} 𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑅

.

The equilibrium strategy satisfies
𝜕𝜋 (𝑅 (𝑡) |𝑧 )
𝜕𝑡

= 0.

|
|
|
|𝑡=𝑧

By symmetry, we have
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑅
These two conditions imply

1
𝑅′ (𝑡)

=

.

𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

̃𝑓 (𝑧) 𝑅 (𝑧) +

(𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

̃𝐹 (𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

) 𝑅′ (𝑧)

=

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (1 − 𝜇 (𝑧)) ̃𝑔(𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇 (𝑧) ̃𝑓 (𝑧)
𝜇 (𝑧)

,

or equivalently,
𝑑 {[𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

̃𝐹 (𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

}
] 𝑅 (𝑧)

𝑑𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (1 − 𝜇 (𝑧)) ̃𝑔(𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇 (𝑧) ̃𝑓 (𝑧)
𝜇 (𝑧)

.

=

Integrating over 𝑧, we have 

(66)

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Assumption 3.  (i) Bank 𝐴 rejects the borrower upon an 𝐿 general 
signal, regardless of any specialized signal 𝑧: 

(𝑧) (𝑟 + 1

)

𝜇𝐿⋅

− 1 < 0.

(69)

(ii) Bank 𝐵 is willing to participate if and only if its general signal 

𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻: 

𝑧

∫

𝑧

𝑝⋅𝐻 (𝑡)

[𝜇⋅𝐻 (𝑡)

(𝑟 + 1

)

] 𝑑𝑡 > 0.

− 1

(70)

Consider a specialized signal 𝑧 ∼ 𝜙𝑧 (𝑧) for 𝑧 ∈ [𝑧, 𝑧] where both 𝑧
𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵, 𝑧 ) the 
and 𝑧 can be unbounded. Denote by 𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 (𝑧) ≡ P (𝜃 = 1 |
|
posterior probability density for 𝜃 = 1, i.e., the state of project success. 
Without loss of generality, we assume that 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧) strictly increases 
in 𝑧 (as we can always use 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧) as a signal; recall the posterior 
𝑠 serves as the signal in the baseline model given in Section 1). This 
implies that just as in the baseline, there exists  ̂𝑧 at which Bank 𝐴
starts quoting 𝑟, and 𝑧𝑥 below which it starts rejecting borrowers. Let 
𝜇𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 ≡ P ( 𝜃 = 1| 𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵) denote the posterior probability of 𝜃 = 1
based on general signals.

≡

P (𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵)

≡

P (𝑔𝐴, 𝑔𝐵, 𝑧)

𝜃 = 1

,  𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵

,  and
Let  𝑝𝑔𝐴𝑔𝐵 (𝑧)
)  for  𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵}  (so  two  lenders  can  differ 
𝑢 ≡ P ( 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻|
𝛼𝑗
|
in their precisions in general signals). Finally, let 𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑧| 𝜃 = 1) be the 
density of 𝑧 conditional on 𝜃 = 1. The following proposition generalizes 
Proposition  1 by showing that the simple equilibrium structure survives 
under  the  more  generalized  information  structure.  This  is  because 
lenders only consider the marginal good type borrower who is payoff 
relevant, so the key argument in the baseline model still applies given 
signals’ independence conditional on project success. As a result, the 
effects of specialized and general signals on equilibrium strategies are 
separable, and a simple characterization as in Proposition  A.3 ensues.

Proposition A.3 (Credit Market Equilibrium under General Information 
Structure). Lender 𝑗 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵} rejects the borrower (by quoting 𝑟 = ∞) 
upon 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐿; when 𝑔𝑗 = 𝐻, lender 𝑗 may make offers from a common 
support [𝑟, 𝑟] (or reject) with the following properties.

∫ 𝑧
𝑧

𝑅 (𝑧) =

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (1−𝜇(𝑡)) ̃𝑔(𝑡)+𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇(𝑡) ̃𝑓 (𝑡)
𝜇(𝑡)
𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻

̃𝐹 (𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿

𝑑𝑡 + 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡

1. Bank 𝐴 who observes a specialized signal 𝑧 offers 

.

(67)

(
1 − 𝑞𝑠

) ̃𝑔 (𝑧)

] 𝑑𝑧,

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

The  unknown  constant  is  pinned  down  by  the  boundary  condition 
𝜋 (𝑟 + 1 |𝑥 )
= 0:  Upon  the  threshold  signal  𝑥,  a  lender  quotes  the 
maximum interest rate 𝑟 + 1 and makes zero profit,

0 =

𝛱𝐴

] (𝑟 + 1
[𝑝𝐻𝐻 𝜇𝐻𝐻 𝜇 (𝑥) ̃𝐹 (𝑥) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿𝜇𝐻𝐿𝜇 (𝑥)
]
(1 − 𝜇 (𝑥)) ̃𝐺 (𝑥) + 𝜇 (𝑥) ̃𝐹 (𝑥)
− 𝑝𝐻𝐻

− 𝑝𝐻𝐿.

[

)

Then a lender’s lending profit is
(𝐼 𝑔

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠

𝐵 = 1

)

𝐴 = 1, 𝐼 𝑔
𝐵 = 1, 𝐼 𝑠
[𝑞𝑠

̃𝑓 (𝑧) +

𝜋 ( 𝑅 (𝑧)| 𝑧)

𝑧

= ∫
𝑥

where 𝑅 (𝑧) is given by Eqs. (67) and (68), profit 𝜋 (𝑅 (𝑧) , 𝑧) is given by 
Eq. (65).

A.9. Generalized information structure

It is convenient to work with the direct specialized signal 𝑧 (now 
posterior 𝑠 may depend on the realizations of the general signals). 
We focus on the well-behaved structure (i.e., smooth distribution of 
interest rates over [𝑟, 𝑟) and decreasing 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)) and show that the lender 
strategies in Proposition  A.3 correspond to an equilibrium. We impose 
the following primitive conditions under which the general signal is 
decisive.

28 

𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

min

{ 𝜋𝐵 +∫ 𝑧

𝑧 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡)𝑑𝑡+𝑝𝐿𝐻

∫ 𝑧
𝑧 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡)⋅𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡)𝑑𝑡+𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

}

− 1, 𝑟

,

for

𝑧 ∈

∞,

for

𝑧 ∈

[𝑧𝑥, 𝑧]
) .
[𝑧, 𝑧𝑥

(71)

(68)

This equation pins down 𝑟 = 𝑟𝐴(𝑧),  ̂𝑧 = sup
𝑧𝑥 = sup

{𝑧 ∶ 𝑟𝐴(𝑧) = ∞

}
.

{𝑧 ∶ 𝑟𝐴(𝑧) = 𝑟}

, and 

2. Bank 𝐵 makes an offer by randomizing its rate according to: 

[

𝛼𝐴
𝑢
𝛼𝐵
𝑢

1 − 𝟏{

𝑧

]
1 − ∫ 𝑧𝐴(𝑟)
𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝜃 = 1) 𝑑𝑡
{
𝛼𝐴
𝑢
𝛼𝐵
𝑢

1 − ∫ ̂𝑧

𝜋𝐵 =0

1 −

} ⋅

[

,

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝑧 𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝜃 = 1) 𝑑𝑡

for

𝑟 ∈

[𝑟, 𝑟) ,

]}

,

for

𝑟 = 𝑟.

(72)

3. The endogenous non-specialized Bank 𝐵’s profit 𝜋𝐵 ≥ 0 is deter-
mined similarly as Lemma  2, with detailed expression provided in 
Appendix  A.9.

Proof.  Similar as the derivation in the baseline model, we first take 
𝜋𝐵 as given to characterize lender strategy, and then solve for 𝜋𝐵.
Bank 𝐴’s strategy

In the region of 𝑧 ∈ ( ̂𝑧, 1] that corresponds to 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) ∈

, 𝑟𝐴(⋅) is 
strictly decreasing so the inverse function 𝑧𝐴(⋅) ≡ 𝑟𝐴(−1)(⋅) is properly 

[𝑟, 𝑟)

K. Blickle et al.

defined. Bank 𝐵’s lending profit when quoting 𝑟 ∈

[𝑟, 𝑟) is

𝜋𝐵 (𝑟) = 𝑝𝐻𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐻

𝑧𝐴(𝑟)

𝑧

⋅ ∫
⏟⏟⏟
𝐵 wins

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡)
⏟⏟⏟
 repay

(1 + 𝑟) − 1

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝐻𝐻) 𝑑𝑡

+ 𝑝𝐿𝐻

⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐴=𝐿
[

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
𝑧𝐴(𝑟)

𝜇𝐿𝐻
⏟⏟⏟
 repay

(1 + 𝑟) − 1

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

]

= (1 + 𝑟)

∫

𝑧

𝑧𝐴(𝑟)

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

− ∫

𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝐿𝐻

(73)

Bank 𝐴’s equilibrium strategy 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) for 𝑧 ∈ [ ̂𝑧, 1] is such that Bank 𝐵 is 
indifferent across 𝑟 ∈

. Hence, 

[𝑟, 𝑟)

𝐵’s lending amount
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝜋𝐵 + ∫

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻

𝑧

𝑧

𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) =

𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) ⋅ 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

∫
𝑧
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐵’s customers who repay

− 1, where

̂𝑧 ≤ 𝑠 ≤ 𝑧.

(74)

Note that this pins down 𝑟 = (𝑟𝐴)−1(𝑧) which is a function of 𝜋𝐵.

In addition, 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) = 𝑟 for 𝑧 ∈

[𝑧𝑥, ̂𝑧) and Bank 𝐴 rejects the borrower 

)
, where 𝑧𝑥 satisfies

when 𝑧 ∈
𝜋𝐴 (
𝑟𝐴 (𝑧𝑥

[𝑧, 𝑧𝑥
)

= 𝑟|
|
|

)

𝑧𝑥

= 0.

This completes the proof of Bank 𝐴’s strategy in Proposition  A.3.
Bank 𝐵’s strategy

Bank 𝐴’s offered interest rate 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) upon 𝑧 ∈ [ ̂𝑧, 𝑧] maximizes

𝜋𝐴 (

)
𝑧

𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)|
|
|

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
𝑔𝐵 =𝐻

[

]

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝐴 wins

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
repay

(1 + 𝑟) − 1

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿 (𝑧)
⏟⏟⏟
𝑔𝐵 =𝐿

⎡
⎢
𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑧)
⎢
⏟⏟⏟
⎢
⎣
repay

(1 + 𝑟) − 1

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

The FOC with respect to 𝑟 is
]
[

−

]
𝑑 [𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)
𝑑𝑟
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛥winning prob
[
+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧) (1 + 𝑟) − 1
𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
profit upon winning

]

1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿 (𝑧) 𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑧)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
existing customer

= 0.

Bank 𝐴’s optimal strategy 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) satisfies this first-order condition,

0 = −

)]

𝑑 [𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
𝑑𝑟
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
[

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)

[𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)

)
(
1 + 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)

]

− 1

(75)

)] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿 (𝑧) 𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑧) .

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)

[(𝑟𝐴 (𝑧) + 1

) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧) − 1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
B: ↑existing customer revenue

]

= 0.

Plug this equation into the FOC (75), and we have

)]

𝑑 [𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
𝑑𝑧

−

[

𝑧

∫
𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

]

= 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑧)

[
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟)

] 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑧) + 𝑝𝐻𝐿 (𝑧) 𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑧) ,

which is equivalent to 
{
)
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
∫ 𝑧
𝑧 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

𝑑
𝑑𝑧

}

=

𝑝𝐻𝐿 (𝑧) 𝜇𝐻𝐿 (𝑧)

[
∫ 𝑧
𝑧 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

.

]2

(76)

Since signals are independent conditional on the state being 𝜃 = 1, the 
right-hand-side equals

)

[

]2

= −

𝜃 = 1

𝑞P ( 𝐻𝐿| 𝜃 = 1) 𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑧| 𝜃 = 1)
[
∫ 𝑧
𝑧 𝑞P ( 𝐻𝐻| 𝜃 = 1) 𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝜃 = 1) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻
P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐿|
1
|
P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
∫ 𝑧
𝑧 𝑞P ( 𝐻𝐻| 𝜃 = 1) 𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝜃 = 1) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻
|
Then the solution 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
) to the ODE (76) satisfies
)
1 − 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
∫ 𝑧
𝑧 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

𝑑
𝑑𝑧

𝜃 = 1

)

]

.

= −

P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐿|
|
P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
|

)

𝜃 = 1

)

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝜃 = 1
Using the boundary condition 𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
constant

1
∫ 𝑧
𝑧 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

+ 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡.

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦
= 0, we solve for the 

= 𝑟)

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡 =

1
P (𝜃 = 1)

1
P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
|

.

)2

𝜃 = 1

Therefore,

𝐹 𝐵 (𝑟) =

1

P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
|

) −

𝜃 = 1

1

=

P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
|

)

𝜃 = 1

∫ 𝑧𝐴 (𝑟)
𝑧

𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

P (𝜃 = 1) P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
|

)2

𝜃 = 1

=

P ( 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻|
|
P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
|

)

𝜃 = 1

)

𝜃 = 1

[
1 − ∫
𝑧

Bank 𝐵’s profit 𝜋𝐵

P (𝜃 = 1) P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
𝜃 = 1
|
]
𝑧𝐴 (𝑟)

)2

𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝜃 = 1) 𝑑𝑡

.

P (𝜃 = 1) P ( 𝐻𝐻| 𝜃 = 1) ∫ 𝑧𝐴 (𝑟)

𝑧

𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝜃 = 1) 𝑑𝑡 + P (𝜃 = 1) P ( 𝐿𝐻| 𝜃 = 1)

−

Now we are left with one unknown variable 𝜋𝐵 in Eq. (74). Sim-
ilar to the baseline model, the equilibrium could be positive-weak or 
zero-weak, depending on who—Bank A receiving threshold specialized 
signal 𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐴  and quoting 𝑟 or Bank 𝐵—breaks even first in competition. 
We define 𝑧𝑏𝑒

𝐴  and 𝑧𝑏𝑒
)

=𝑝𝐻𝐻

𝐵  as

)

(𝑧𝑏𝑒

𝐴

0 = 𝜋𝐴 (

𝑟 |
𝑧𝑏𝑒
|
𝐴
|

𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐴

1 − ∫
𝑧

]

𝜙𝑧 ( 𝑡| 𝜃 = 1) 𝑑𝑡

P ( 𝑔𝐴 = 𝐻|
|
P ( 𝑔𝐵 = 𝐻|
|
1 + 𝑟)
) (
(𝑧𝑏𝑒
(𝑧𝑏𝑒
) [𝜇𝐻𝐿

𝐴

𝐴

𝐴

)

[

𝜃 = 1

)

𝜃 = 1
]

− 1
) (

1 + 𝑟)

] ,

− 1

⋅

[𝜇𝐻𝐻
(𝑧𝑏𝑒

+ 𝑝𝐻𝐿
𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐵

0 = 𝜋𝐵 (𝑟; 𝑧𝑏𝑒

𝐵

)

= ∫
𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡)

(

1 + 𝑟) 𝑑𝑡

From Eq. (74) about 𝑟𝐴 (𝑧), we derive the following key equation by 
taking derivatives w.r.t. 𝑧,

𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐵

− ∫
𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

[𝜇𝐻𝐿

(

1 + 𝑟)

] .

− 1

𝑑𝑟𝐴 (𝑧)
𝑑𝑧

[

𝑧

∫

𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐿𝐻 𝜇𝐿𝐻

]

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
B: ↑marginal customer return 

29 

Equilibrium 𝜋𝐵 is then
𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐴

{

𝜋𝐵 = max

∫
𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝜇𝐻𝐻 (𝑡)

1 + 𝑟) 𝑑𝑡
(

K. Blickle et al.

Table B.1
Summary statistics of key variables.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

N

Mean

SD

Specialized

Non-Specialized

3.69
0.04
12.42

353,544
353,544
353,544

  Interest Rate
  Non-Performing
  Loan Amount
Note: This table shows summary statistics for loans in our sample. We count each bank-loan combination only once, on the date when it is 
first observed in our data (this may be a different date from the loan’s first origination date for a small subset of loans only as we censor our 
data and start in 2012, one year after collection began in 2011). Loan size is scaled by 1 million USD. The interest rate is the unadjusted cost 
of the loan, measured in percent. ‘‘Non performing’’ is a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the loan ever falls in arrears, has negative maturity 
or is otherwise in default after the first observation in our sample. The mean values of each variable data are split by whether a loan is made 
by a specialized bank or not.

3.69
0.04
12.99

1.64
0.19
5.43

3.55
0.03
10.5

Differential 
−0.13***  
−0.01***  
2. .5***

Table B.2
Summary statistics for rating categories.
  Rating group

Debt/EBITDA

Return on assets

2.9
3.31
3.92

  1
0.111
  2
0.109
  3
0.055
Note: For around (50%) of firms in our data that report EBITDA, ROA, or leverage 
information, we show how Debt/EBITDA, RoA, and Leverage relate to our three risk 
categories (‘‘high risk’’, ‘‘mid-risk’’, and ‘‘safe’’ – abbreviated as 1-3) in our data.

Leverage
(Assets to borrowing)
3.16
3.59
4.26

𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐴

− ∫

𝑧

𝑝𝐻𝐻 (𝑡) 𝑑𝑡 + 𝑝𝐻𝐿

[𝜇𝐻𝐿

1 + 𝑟)
(

− 1

}

] , 0

.

𝐴 > 𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐴 ; when 𝑧𝑏𝑒

When 𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝑧𝑥 = 𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝑧𝑏𝑒
𝐵 = ̂𝑧 > 𝑧𝑥.  □

𝐴

𝐵 , equilibrium is positive weak with 𝜋𝐵 > 0, and  ̂𝑧 =
𝐵 , equilibrium is zero weak with 𝜋𝐵 = 0, and 

≤ 𝑧𝑏𝑒

Appendix B. Empirical analysis

B.1. Data

We  use  Y14Q-H.1  data  that  is  collected  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
System as part of its stress-testing efforts, covering all C&I loans to 
which a stress-tested bank has committed more than 1 million USD 
(around 75% of all U.S. C&I lending). As such, the data covers 40 
banks – in an unbalanced panel – between 2011 and 2023 and includes 
millions of loan-quarter observations.

We focus on term loans and limit our sample to loans that are likely 
newly originated or new to the lender. We cut our data before 2012 
to avoid accidentally labeling a loan as ‘‘newly originated’’, simply 
because of the point at which the data collection begins. We define 
a loan as new when it first appears in our data. We remove loans to 
financial or insurance entities. Our final sample covers 350,000 new 
term loans. Besides loan amount, we can track key loan data such as 
the interest rate paid by the borrower, the loan’s purpose, and the 
performance of the loan while it remains in our sample, as we can see 
if it ever falls into arrears.

firms. Hence, to sidestep this issue, we use three rating categories (high-
risk, mid-risk, and safe) based on the banks’ internal ratings of a loan 
to proxy for observable loan qualities. Banks report loan risk on a 
scale of 1–10. We have created terciles (1–3), which allow us account 
for whether a loan is high, medium, or low risk without relying on 
bank-specific knowledge. For the subsample for which we have firm 
characteristics, however, we can confirm that our three risk categories 
capture aspects linked to (prior) expected loan quality. Table  B.2 shows 
the average borrower Debt/EBITDA, return on assets, and assets-to-debt 
for each of the three loan risk categories we use as risk metrics in our 
baseline regression. For instance, as expected, the high-risk category 
with Rating 3 has the highest Debt/EBITDA, lowest RoA, and lowest 
asset-to-debt.

B.3. Alternative risk controls

We can show that our results are not determined by the construction 
of our risk controls (see above). Instead of dummies for three risk 
categories, for instance, we can instead use dummies for the exact risk 
assigned to a loan by the lending bank. This gives us 10 dummies for 
the risk groups 1–10. We show the results of these specification in Table 
B.3. As can be seen, our results are unaffected by the choice of risk 
control. In Panel B of Table  B.3 we use firm characteristics for the 
subsample of firms that report these data to their Y14 lenders. This 
reduces our sample by 50%. Nevertheless, we can again show that our 
results are unaffected by the choice of risk control.

B.4. The COVID period

We have included the period between 2020 and 2021 in our analy-
ses discussed in Section 4, above. We recognize that this period may 
be unique in recent history, given the large-scale interventions that 
sought to help banks extend credit to shuttered businesses. As can be 
seen in Table  B.4, we are able to exclude these years from our data 
without  affecting  our  analyses.  Our  coefficients  are  not  statistically 
different  from  those  in  the  baseline  regression.  The  COVID  period 
neither drove nor severely impacted the difference between specialized 
and non-specialized banks. Lenders charge lower rates to borrowers 
in the industry in which they specialize without suffering worse loan 
performance as a consequence in both COVID and non-COVID periods.

B.2. Statistics

B.5. Multiple specialized lenders in one industry

Key  summary  statistics  for  loans  in  our  sample  are  outlined  in 
Table  B.1. The average loan commitment in our sample is just over 
12 million USD in size and the average loan interest rate is 3.7%. We 
define a loan as non-performing if it is ever 90+ days in arrears, ever 
has negative maturity (i.e. has not been repaid at maturity), or has 
outright defaulted. We then take a loan as ‘‘ever’’ non-performing if 
it becomes so at any point after origination. The percentage of non-
performing loans is around 4% in our data, which is slightly higher 
than the average default rate given our wider definition.

As we have explained in Section 3.4, we do not have data on firm 
characteristics typically used by banks to assess a loan’s risk for all 

We have studied the interaction between specialization and whether 
the industry has multiple specialized lenders, aiming to rule out the 
alternative hypothesis that negative interest wedge is driven purely 
by competition among specialized lenders within one industry. In the 
baseline we define an industry to have ‘‘Multiple Specialized Lenders’’ 
if two or more banks specialize in it.

Table  B.5 lists the number of banks that are specialized in two-digit 
industries in our data. We have obscured the exact industry definition 
in favor of stylized industry names in Table  B.5, though each represents 
a  two-digit  industry  (with  the  omission  of  finance  and  insurance). 
As shown in Table  B.5, the number of banks that are specialized in 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Table B.3
Interest rate and loan performance – Alternative risk definition.
  Panel A – Original (1-10) Credit Risk Rating

  Specialized Bank

  Log loan amount

  Year-Quarter FE
  Purpose FE
  Rating (1–10) FE
  Bank-Year FE
  Industry-Year FE
  𝑅2
  N

(2)

(3)

(1)
Interest rate
−0.064***
[0.006]
−0.158***
[0.002]

X
X
X

−0.142***
[0.006]
−0.169***
[0.002]

X
X
X
X

0.31
353,544

0.39
353,537

−0.083***
[0.007]
−0.176***
[0.002]

X
X
X
X
X
0.4
351,776

(4)
(5)
Non-performing loans
−0.005***
[0.001]
−0.000
[0.000]

−0.004***
[0.001]
0.000
[0.000]

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

0.031
353,544

0.044
353,537

  Panel B – Borrower Characteristics

  Specialized Bank

  Log loan amount

  Borrower leverage

  EBIT to ST-Debt

  EBIT to LT-Debt

(1)
Interest rate
0.053
[0.037]
−0.201***
[0.003]
0.006**
[0.003]
−0.016***
[0.003]
0.015***
[0.001]

(2)

(3)

−0.093***
[0.009]
−0.206***
[0.003]
0.007**
[0.003]
−0.019***
[0.003]
0.024***
[0.001]

−0.049***
[0.010]
−0.204***
[0.003]
0.007**
[0.003]
−0.017***
[0.003]
0.021***
[0.001]

(4)
(5)
Non-performing loans
−0.008***
[0.001]
−0.003***
[0.000]
0.006***
[0.000]
−0.006***
[0.000]
0.002***
[0.000]

−0.009***
[0.001]
−0.003***
[0.000]
0.005***
[0.000]
−0.006***
[0.000]
0.002***
[0.000]

(6)

−0.004*** 
[0.001]
−0.000
[0.000]

X
X
X
X
X
0.047
351,776  

(6)

−0.004*** 
[0.001]
−0.003*** 
[0.000]
0.005***  
[0.000]
−0.006*** 
[0.000]
0.002***  
[0.000]

X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

0.34
175,842

X
X
X
X
0.45
175,534

  Year-Quarter FE
X
  Purpose FE
X
  Bank-Year FE
X
  Industry-Year FE
X
  R2
0.031
  N
175,534  
Note: In Columns (1)–(3), we regress the loan rate paid by a given firm on the fixed effects specified at the bottom of the table and a 
dummy denoting whether the firm is borrowing from a bank that is specialized in the industry in which said firm operates. We define a 
bank as specialized if it is over-invested by 4% or more in an industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification. In Columns 
(4)–(6), we use the same specifications as in previous columns, but use whether the loan in question ever becomes non-performing at any 
date it is in our sample after its origination. A loan becomes non-performing if it is ever in arrears, has not been paid down at maturity, 
or defaults outright. We use rating dummies (high risk, medium risk, low risk) in columns (1)–(3) and interest rate in columns (4)–(6) as 
risk controls. Panel B replicates Panel A. It makes use of firm leverage (debt to assets) and short term as well as long term debt to EBIT 
as measures of borrower riskiness as opposed to loan interest rates or bank risk ratings. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-time 
level and are heteroskedasticity robust while *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

0.0091
175,842

0.025
175,840

0.43
175,840

Table B.4
Interest rate and loan performance – Excluding COVID period.

  Specialized Bank

  Log loan amount

(1)
Interest rate
−0.082***
[0.006]
−0.165***
[0.002]

(2)

(3)

−0.156***
[0.006]
−0.174***
[0.002]

−0.085***
[0.007]
−0.181***
[0.002]

(4)
Non-performing loans
−0.007***
[0.001]
−0.001**
[0.000]

(5)

(6)

−0.005***
[0.001]
−0.001*
[0.000]

−0.005*** 
[0.001]
−0.001**  
[0.000]

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

  Year-Quarter FE
X
  Purpose FE
X
  Rating Category (1–3) FE
X
  Bank-Year FE
X
  Industry-Year FE
X
  𝑅2
0.047
302,312  
  N
Note: In Columns (1)–(3), we regress the loan rate paid by a firm on the fixed effects specified at the bottom of the table and a dummy denoting whether the firm is borrowing 
from a bank that is specialized in the industry in which said firm operates. We define a bank as specialized if it is over-invested by 4% or more in an industry, relative to 
what would be expected from diversification. In Columns (4)–(6), we use the same specifications as in previous columns, but use whether the loan in question ever becomes 
non-performing at any date it is in our sample after its origination. A loan becomes non-performing if it is ever in arrears, has not been paid down at maturity, or defaults outright. 
We exclude loans originated in 2020 or 2021, as these are denoted as ‘‘abnormal COVID periods’’. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-time level and are heteroskedasticity 
robust while *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

X
X
X
X
X
0.4
302,312

0.39
302,312

0.031
302,312

0.044
302,312

0.31
302,312

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

industries varies greatly. Some industries are home to no specialized 
banks, while other industries see nine banks that are specialized. We 
do not show a similar table for four-digit specialization, as this would 

involve depicting over 300 industries. However, it is worth noting that 
the modal number of banks specialized in a single four digit industry 
is 0 (compared with a mode of 2 for 2-digit industries). The mean 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Table B.5
Number of banks specialized per industry.
  Industry

Number of specialized 
banks

0
1
3
0
2
2
4
3
7
0
2
0
3
9
2
1
0
2
9
1
4
3
5

Numb. loans by
specialized banks
0
263
1395
0
744
839
2818
4176
9187
0
2077
0
2400
18,338
1072
491
0
3018
10,830
137
2489
5972
7225

  A
  B
  C
  D
  E
  F
  G
  H
  I
  J
  K
  L
  M
  N
  O
  P
  Q
  R
  S
  T
  U
  V
  W
Note: We indicate the number of banks specialized in stylized 2-digit industries. We define a bank as specialized if it 
is over-invested by 4% or more in an industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification (i.e. a bank 
that invests 14% of its C&I portfolio in an industry that accounts for 10% of all C&I lending would be specialized in 
that industry.) An industry is competitive if 2 or more banks are specialized in it. Additionally, we show the number 
of loans made by specialized and non-specialized (ordinary) lenders in each industry.

Numb. loans by
ordinary banks
3406
5331
4899
12,936
10,459
17,909
25,478
21,253
17,543
3576
19,117
1327
7906
30,496
15,865
4792
6843
7627
16,879
6025
11,088
14,590
9933

Table B.6
Interest rate and loan performance – Alt. Def. of multi-specialized-lenders. 

  Specialized Bank

  # Specialized Banks in Ind. × Specialized

  Log loan amount

  # Specialized Banks in Ind.

(1)
Interest rate
−0.240***
[0.012]

0.038***
[0.002]

−0.157***
[0.002]

−0.020***
[0.001]

(2)

(3)

−0.084***
[0.014]

0.000
[0.002]

−0.176***
[0.002]

−0.245***
[0.013]

0.021***
[0.002]

−0.171***
[0.002]

−0.012***
[0.001]

(5)

(4)
Non-performing loans
−0.010***
[0.002]

−0.005**
[0.002]

0.000
[0.000]

−0.000
[0.000]

0.000
[0.000]

−0.000
[0.000]

−0.001***
[0.000]

−0.001***
[0.000]

(6)

−0.008*** 
[0.002]

0.001
[0.000]
−0.001**  
[0.000]

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

  Year-Quarter FE
X
  Purpose FE
X
  Rating Category (1–3) FE
X
  Bank-Year FE
X
  Industry-Year FE
X
  𝑅2
0.047
  N
351,776  
Note: In Columns (1)–(3), we regress the loan rate paid by a firm on the fixed effects specified at the bottom of the table and a dummy 
denoting whether the firm is borrowing from a bank that is specialized in the industry in which said firm operates. We define a bank as 
specialized if it is over-invested by 4% or more in an industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification. We interact the dummy 
of ‘‘Specialization’’ with ‘‘# Specialized Banks in Ind.’’ which is the number of specialized banks in the industry in question. In Columns (4)–(6), 
we use the same specifications as in previous columns, but use whether the loan in question ever becomes non-performing at any date it is 
in our sample after its origination. A loan becomes non-performing if it is ever in arrears, has not been paid down at maturity, or defaults 
outright. We interact our variable of interest with the number of banks that are considered ‘‘specialized’’ in an industry. Standard errors are 
clustered at the firm-time level and are heteroskedasticity robust while *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, 
respectively.

X
X
X
X
X
0.4
351,776

0.39
353,537

0.031
353,544

0.31
353,544

0.044
353,537

X
X
X
X

number of specialized banks is 1.7. There is some temporal variation, 
as  the  degree  to  which  a  single  lender  is  specialized  at  the  four-
digit level may be affected by individual large loans originated in a 
single quarter. However, the rank order of preferences (i.e. the degree 
to which individual banks prefer one industry over another) remains 
relatively stable across time.

Recognizing the great variation of the number of specialized lenders 
across industries, we introduce additional tests to show that our results 
discussed  above  (wherein  we  interact  our  variable  of  interest  with 
a dummy for lender multiplicity) are robust to alternative definition 
of the multiplicity of specialized lenders. In Table  B.6 we take the 

number of banks in an industry directly, and show that interacting 
bank specialization with this continuous measure does not change our 
baseline results. Results are the same at the four-digit level (not shown 
for brevity).

B.6. SNC vs. Y14 data

We have thus far made use of Y14 filings as the primary data source 
in the paper. Y14 has the advantage of recording a number of loan 
characteristics that are of use to us. However, as a tool for stress testing, 
it is inherently a data set focused on the largest banks. An alternative 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Table B.7
Interest rate and loan performance – SNC data. 

  Specialized Bank

  Log loan amount

(1)
Allindrawn spread
−0.109**
[5.436]

−0.013***
[0.001]

(2)

(3)

−0.104*
[4.731]

−0.013***
[0.002]

−0.031
[7.597]

−0.012***
[0.002]

(4)
(5)
Non-performing loans
−0.006**
[0.003]

−0.009**
[0.004]

0.000
[0.000]

0.000
[0.000]

(6)

−0.009** 
[0.004]  
0.000
[0.000]  

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

0.61
11,460

X
X
X
X
X
0.71
11,460

  Year-Quarter FE
X
  Purpose FE
X
  Rating FE
X
  Bank-Year FE
X
  Industry-Year FE
X
  R2
0.36
  N
32,391  
Note: In Columns (1)–(3), we regress the allindrawn spread (from Dealscan) on the fixed effects specified at the bottom of the table and a 
dummy denoting whether the firm is borrowing from a bank that is specialized in the industry in which said firm operates (i.e. whether the 
lead arranger in a syndicate is over-invested in the banks industry). We define a bank as specialized if it is over-invested by 3.5% or more in an 
industry, relative to what would be expected from diversification. This corresponds to being among the top 20% of lenders by over-investment 
at a given point in time. In Columns (4)–(6), we use the same specifications as in previous columns, but use whether the loan in question ever 
becomes non-performing at any date it is in our sample after its origination. A loan becomes non-performing if it is ever in arrears, has not 
been paid down at maturity, or defaults outright. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-time level and are heteroskedasticity robust while 
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

X
0.33
32,391

X
0.69
11,460

0.24
32,391

X
X
X

Fig. B.1.  Rates in SNC Data. This figure plots the difference in interest rates paid by borrowers for loans arranged by specialized vs. unspecialized banks in SNC data over 
time. We define specialized lenders as those with more than 3.5% over-investment in an industry, where over-investment is measured as deviations from a diversified portfolio 
𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑖,𝑡
 for bank 𝑏 in industry 𝑖 at time 𝑡. We use loans from SNC that have been merged with Dealscan as described in Cohen et al. (2018). The green line 
𝑠 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑏,𝑖,𝑡
does not account for loan characteristics while the blue line accounts for origination date, purpose, loan type, loan riskiness and agent fixed effects. (For interpretation of the 
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑖,𝑡
𝑖 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑖,𝑡

−

∑

∑

data set, which records loan characteristics and includes smaller banks, 
is the Syndicated National Credit (SNC) registry. This data set tracks 
all syndicated loans held by at least two (now three) banking entities 
with a total size of 20 (now 100) million USD (changes occurred in 
2018). Unfortunately, the SNC data has some short comings that make 
it less useful than the Y14 as a baseline data set. It is inherently focused 
on larger syndicated loans, which are a specific subset of all loans.28 
Perhaps more importantly, the SNC data does not include information 
on rates paid, which is a key variable in our analyses on information 
based loan pricing.

Nevertheless, the fact that we are able to use a larger set of banks 
as well as the fact that we are able to use a longer data series make the 

28 The specialization of the arranging entity may be less relevant in cases 
where hundreds of loan participants influence loan term flexing.

33 

SNC registry useful as a tool for confirming our above findings. In order 
to obtain rates paid for loans, we merge SNC data with Dealscan data. 
We follow the fuzzy matching approach laid out by Cohen et al. (2018), 
based on the borrower name and common loan variables. We keep all 
loans originated between 2000 and 2019 in order to obtain a consistent 
sample. We remove loans that have performance issues by the time they 
are first observed in the data and all loans that are originated more than 
a year before they are observed, as we are interested in new loans only. 
We include each loan only once – to avoid counting the large term B 
loans hundreds of times – and use the specialization of the arranging 
entity. Our sample comprises just over 11,000 loans for which we have 
rate data and just over 30,000 loans for which we have performance 
data. These loans are originated by 218 different banks (measured at 
the level of the high-holder). Though still large entities, many of these 
are smaller than the banks covered by the Y14.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K. Blickle et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104135 

Cerqueiro, G., Ongena, S., Roszbach, K., 2014. Collateralization, bank loan rates, and 

monitoring. J. Financ. 91.

Chodorow-Reich, G., Darmouni, O., Luck, S., Plosser, M., 2022. Bank liquidity provision 

across the firm size distribution. J. Financ. Econ. 144.

Cohen, G., Friedrichs, M., Gupta, K., Hayes, W., Lee, S.J., Marsh, W.B., Mislang, N., 
Shaton, M., Sicilian, M., 2018. The US syndicated loan market: Matching data. Fed. 
Reserv. Bank Kans. City Work. Pap. (18–09).

Cosconati,  M.,  Xin,  Y.,  Wu,  F.,  Jin,  Y.,  2024.  Competing  under  information 

heterogeneity: Evidence from auto insurance. Caltech.

Crawford, G.S., Pavanini, N., Schivardi, F., 2018. Asymmetric information and imperfect 

competition in lending markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 108 (7), 1659–1701.

DeSpain, D., Pandolfo, J., 2024. New small business lending declines as credit standards 

continue to tighten. Fed. Reserv. Bank Kans. City.

Engelbrecht-Wiggans, R., Milgrom, P.R., Weber, R.J., 1983. Competitive bidding and 

proprietary information. J. Math. Econom. 11 (2), 161–169.

Goldstein, I., Huang, C., Yang, L., 2022. Open banking with depositor monitoring. Work. 

Pap. 

611–621.

Work. Pap..

Hausch, D.B., 1987. An asymmetric common-value auction model. RAND J. Econ. 

Hauswald,  R.,  Marquez,  R.,  2003.  Information  technology  and  financial  services 

competition. Rev. Financ. Stud. 16 (3), 921–948.

He, Z., Huang, J., Parlatore, C., 2024a. Information span in credit market competition. 

He, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, J., 2023a. Open banking: Credit market competition when 

borrowers own the data. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 449–474.

He, Z., Jiang, S., Xu, D., 2024b. Tech-driven intermediation in the originate-to-distribute 

model. Stanf. Univ. Grad. Sch. Bus. Work. Pap. 

He, Z., Jiang, S., Xu, D., Yin, X., 2023b. Investing in lending technology: IT spending 
in banking. Univ. Chic. Becker Friedman Inst. Econ. Work. Pap. (2021–116).
Kagel,  J.H.,  Levin,  D.,  1999.  Common  value  auctions  with  insider  information. 

Econometrica 67 (5), 1219–1238.

Kremer, M., 1993. The O-ring theory of economic development. Q. J. Econ. 108 (3), 

Luck, S., Santos, J., 2023. The valuation of collateral in bank lending. J. Financ. Quant. 

Mahoney, N., Weyl, E.G., 2017. Imperfect competition in selection markets. Rev. Econ. 

551–575.

Anal. 

Stat. 99 (4), 637–651.

Marquez, R., 2002. Competition, adverse selection, and information dispersion in the 

banking industry. Rev. Financ. Stud. 15 (3), 901–926.

Milgrom, P., Weber, R.J., 1982. The value of information in a sealed-bid auction. J. 

Math. Econom. 10 (1), 105–114.

Myerson, R.B., 1981. Optimal auction design. Math. Oper. Res. 6 (1), 58–73.
Paravisini,  D.,  Rappoport,  V.,  Schnabl,  P.,  2023.  Specialization  in  bank  lending: 

Evidence from exporting firms. J. Financ. 78 (4), 2049–2085.

Paravisini, D., Schoar, A., 2016. The incentive effect of scores: Randomized evidence 

from credit committees. NBER Work. Pap. (19303).

Riordan, M.H., 1993. Competition and bank performance: A theoretical perspective. 
In:  Mayer,  C.,  Vives,  X.  (Eds.),  Capital  Markets  and  Financial  Intermediation. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 328–343.

Stein, J.C., 2002. Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized versus 

hierarchical firms. J. Financ. 57 (5), 1891–1921.

In Table  B.7 we show that the rates paid by borrowers for syndicated 
loans arranged by more specialized banks are lower, on average. (We 
use All-in-Drawn Spread; the base rate will be absorbed by year-quarter 
fixed effect anyway.) The difference is not always significant if we 
include a full set of detailed controls (see column (3)). In this case, 
including arranger×time fixed effects absorbs a lot of variation given 
the outsized role a few arrangers play in our data and the fact that our 
key variable varies at the arranger*time level. Even so, the coefficient 
remains strongly negative.

Fig.  B.1 replicates Figure  from the introduction, but focuses only on 
the spread paid for loans in our combined SNC/Delascan data. We plot 
the raw difference in rates paid to specialized vs un-specialized lenders 
as well as the difference accounting for controls. We can see from Fig. 
B.1 that the rate differential is almost always negative, even if it is 
insignificant at times. This adds strong corroboration to our regression 
results, discussed above. Moreover, the figure reveals that the crisis 
period of 2008–2010 does not change our results. In fact, borrowers 
are more likely to pay lower rates to specialized lenders during this 
time period.

In columns (4)–(6) of Table  B.7 we further show that the perfor-
mance of loans made by specialized lenders is always somewhat better 
than the performance of loans made by less specialized lenders. This 
difference is small, but nonetheless noteworthy given the small average 
default rate of loans in the SNC sample (< 4%). It is noteworthy that 
the magnitude of our coefficients in SNC analyses are highly similar to 
those in our baseline Y14 regressions, discussed above.

Data availability

Pseudo Data Y14 (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Acharya, V.V., Hasan, I., Saunders, A., 2006. Should banks be diversified? Evidence 

from individual bank loan portfolios. J. Bus. 79 (3), 1355–1412.
Benmelech, E., Bergman, N., 2009. Collateral pricing. J. Financ. Econ. 91.
Berger,  A.N.,  Udell,  G.F.,  2006.  A  more  complete  conceptual  framework  for  SME 

finance. J. Bank. Financ. 30 (11), 2945–2966.

Blickle, K., Parlatore, C., Saunders, A., 2025. Specialization in banking. J. Financ. 

Forthcoming.

Broecker, T., 1990. Credit-worthiness tests and interbank competition. Econometrica 

429–452.

Butler, A.W., 2008. Distance still matters: Evidence from municipal bond underwriting. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (2), 763–784.

34 

