Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Jensen and Meckling at 50(cid:73)

Patrick Bolton
Imperial College, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Agency costs
Capital structure
Limited liability
Corporate governance

1. Introduction

This article does three things: (1) it offers a slightly modernized treatment of the two well-known agency 
costs of external financing of Jensen and Meckling; (2) it provides a deeper exploration than they offer of the 
limited liability corporation, and of optimal control allocations when financial contracts are incomplete; and, 
(3) it assesses the lasting influence or their ideas, their multiple interpretations, as well as misinterpretations.

Fifty years ago Michael Jensen and William Meckling introduced 
several fundamental ideas on agency problems in corporate finance 
that are now cornerstones of modern corporate finance. These ideas 
were so path-breaking that they are still today seen as frontier material 
of corporate finance, often only taught in advanced courses. Yet for 
corporate finance practitioners these notions have by now been deeply 
integrated into financial analysis and the valuation of companies. Fifty 
years is a very long time in economic research and very few articles 
stand the test of time for so long. The thought experiment of looking 
back fifty years before 1976 reveals how remarkable an achievement 
this is. Which articles published half a century earlier were considered 
to be essential reading in 1976, you may ask. I can think of the classic 
articles of Ramsey (1928), Hotelling (1929, 1931) and Coase (1937) 
that are nearly that old, but that is about it. Of course, at that time the 
norm was still to write books rather than articles, but that just goes to 
show how much things can change in fifty years. Perhaps the world we 
live in today has gone through fewer changes in the past half century 
than in the previous one? It is difficult to say. One difference that is 
obvious, however, is that the volume of published research in corporate 
finance that has appeared in the past fifty years is orders of magnitude 
larger than it was in the previous fifty years. Many of these articles 
that have appeared since 1976 are based on Jensen and Meckling; they 
develop further but do not supersede their key ideas.

I first came across their article in 1982 thanks to my Ph.D. su-
pervisor Oliver Hart, who encouraged me to read a newly published 
book by Posner and Scott (1980), The Economics of Corporation Law and 
Securities Regulation, which contained excerpts of important recently 
published articles in finance and economics that are relevant to cor-
poration law, including Jensen and Meckling (1976). The whole book 
was a revelation but Jensen and Meckling’s contribution stood out. 

Their article was at the time part of a burgeoning literature on agency 
theory and information economics. This early literature, however, was 
mostly  concerned  with  market  inefficiencies  caused  by  asymmetric 
information, the three prominent examples being Akerlof’s (1970) mar-
ket for lemons, Spence’s (1973) job market signaling, and Rothschild 
and  Stiglitz’s  (1976)  equilibrium  in  competitive  insurance  markets. 
In comparison, the literature on agency problems relating to moral 
hazard was then much less developed. Moral hazard problems were 
mostly discussed in the context of insurance (Arrow, 1963; Pauly, 1968; 
Zeckhauser,  1970)  and  share-cropping  (Cheung,  1969,  and  Stiglitz, 
1974), and the first formal models of optimal contracting between a 
Principal and an Agent, where the agent chooses an unobserved action 
that affects performance, by Ross (1973), Mirrlees (1975), Holmstrom 
(1979)  and  Stiglitz  (1975),  considered  highly  stylized  and  abstract 
bilateral contracting problems.

Jensen and Meckling introduced agency theory into corporate fi-
nance in very concrete and practically relevant ways. Their starting 
point was Alchian and Demsetz (1972), who introduced incentive con-
siderations into the theory of the firm in a way that could accommodate 
a natural corporate finance extension. Indeed, Alchian and Demsetz 
take the view that the managerial firm is an organization designed to 
address incentive problems in production. They consider an incentive 
problem involving a team of workers that is needed for production. In 
their view the manager’s role is to ensure that all members of the team 
do their share of the work. However, the manager herself must also 
be given adequate incentives to monitor her team of workers. Since 
there is no monitor to monitor the manager, the manager’s incentives 
must come in the form of a financial interest in monitoring the team 
effectively. If the manager is also the sole shareholder then her interest 
is the profit the firm generates. By monitoring the team efficiently she 
maximizes the profit she can obtain.

(cid:73)

I am grateful to Ailsa Roell and René Stulz for their very helpful comments and suggestions.
E-mail address:  pb2208@columbia.edu.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104116
Received 21 May 2025; Accepted 1 June 2025
Available online 11 June 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. 

 
 
 
P. Bolton

Alchian and Demsetz leave out the question of how the firm is 
financed, where capital comes from. This is where Jensen and Meckling 
complete the analysis. Their focus is on the relation between the man-
ager and the providers of capital, creditors and shareholders. How does 
the mix of equity and debt financing affect the manager’s incentives, 
they ask, thereby redefining the capital structure choice question. The 
corporate finance literature prior to Jensen and Meckling (1976) had 
framed the choice of the mix of debt and equity financing exclusively 
in terms of a tradeoff between the tax shield benefits of debt (from 
the  interest  payment  deduction  for  corporate  income  taxation)  and 
the expected bankruptcy cost associated with high corporate indebt-
edness. The predictions of this tax tradeoff theory by and large did not 
match up with the empirical evidence on corporate choices of capital 
structure. Some important considerations determining this choice were 
clearly missing, and incentive issues associated with debt and equity 
financing seemed plausible additional material factors affecting this 
choice.

As Alchian and Demsetz observed, the manager would have the 
highest incentives to maximize profits if she were a full claimant to the 
firm’s profits, or residual cash flows after accounting for all production 
costs. But if the manager must raise funds for investment from outside 
capital markets she cannot appropriate all the profits. Then it would 
seem  that  the  next  best  arrangement  in  terms  of  maximizing  her 
incentive to run the firm efficiently is for her to raise funds in the 
form of debt, and to hold all the equity. That way she would still be a 
full claimant to the firm’s residual cash flows after accounting for all 
production costs, including interest payments. But, if all outside capital 
is raised by issuing debt claims, then the firm may not always be able to 
service all debt claims fully. If the firm incurs large losses the manager 
will not be able to fully repay all debts owed. How would such an 
eventuality affect the manager’s incentives? Would she still have the 
highest incentives to maximize profits?

Jensen and Meckling answer these questions in a highly original, 
insightful, and subtle way. Their insights have endured to this day. 
Jensen and Meckling argue that while maximizing the manager’s claims 
to residual cash flows is always good in terms of eliciting maximal 
incentives for the manager to provide effort, when debt is risky the 
manager may also have an incentive to take excessive risk–to shift risk
onto the firm’s creditors. Therefore, to avoid excess risk-taking it may 
be preferable to finance the firm’s investments in part by issuing equity. 
Below  I  begin  by  providing  the  simplest  illustration  of  Jensen  and 
Meckling’s two fundamental notions, managerial slack and risk shifting. 
I will then turn to their ideas on the firm as a “nexus of contracts” and 
point to important conceptual advances on this notion in recent years. 
Finally, I will turn to the key omission from their analysis, incomplete 
contracts and residual rights of control.

2. The agency cost of outside equity

Consider a start-up firm over three dates. At 𝑡 = 0 the firm is set 
up and requires financing of 𝐹 > 0 to get started. The entire amount 𝐹
must be raised from outside capital markets. At 𝑡 = 1 the entrepreneur 
operates the firm and chooses whether to slack off by setting 𝑒 = 0, or 
to double down on her efforts by setting 𝑒 = 1. Slacking off involves 
no private effort cost to the entrepreneur, so that her private cost is 
𝜅 (0) = 0. Doubling down her effort, however, involves a private cost 
𝜅(1) = 𝜅 > 0. At 𝑡 = 2 the firm’s cash flow is realized. There are only 
. If the cashflow is 𝐶 𝐻  the firm 
two possible outcomes, 𝐶 ∈
makes a profit: 𝐶 𝐻 > 𝐹 . If the cashflow is 𝐶 𝐿 it makes a loss, 𝐶 𝐿 < 𝐹 . 
I assume that 𝛥𝐶

≡ 𝐶 𝐻 − 𝐶 𝐿 > 0 and that 𝐶 𝐿 > 0.

{𝐶 𝐿, 𝐶 𝐻 }

The effort made by the entrepreneur at 𝑡 = 1 affects the probability 

of obtaining a high cashflow outcome at 𝑡 = 2. Let

Pr

[𝐶 = 𝐶 𝐻 ] ≡ 𝑝 + 𝑒 ⋅ 𝛥𝑝,

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

where, 𝑒 ∈ {0, 1}, 𝑝 > 0, and (𝑝 + 𝛥𝑝) < 1. The problem is interesting 
only if it is efficient for the entrepreneur to exert effort. Accordingly, I 
assume that

𝛥𝑝𝛥𝐶 > 𝜅.

The  expected  incremental  cash  flow  obtained  by  exerting  effort  is 
greater than the entrepreneur’s private cost of effort. The firm will 
only seek financing if it has a positive net present value when the 
entrepreneur exerts effort. Therefore, I also assume that the net present 
value, conditional on 𝑒 = 1, is strictly positive:

𝐶 𝐿 +

(𝑝 + 𝛥𝑝

) 𝛥𝐶 − 𝐹 − 𝜅 > 0.

Note that the entrepreneur’s personal cost of effort, 𝜅, is included in the 
cost of operating the firm. Note also that it is not possible to determine 
with certainty which effort choice 𝑒 the entrepreneur has made at 𝑡 = 1
from the observation of the cashflow realization 𝐶 at 𝑡 = 2.

The entrepreneur can raise funding from competitive capital mar-
kets by issuing claims against the firm’s cashflow. I denote a claim 
against cashflow 𝐶 𝐿 by 𝑅𝐿, and a claim against cashflow 𝐶 𝐻  by 𝑅𝐻 . 
The firm is protected by limited liability, so that 0 ≤ 𝑅𝑖 ≤ 𝐶 𝑖. For 
simplicity I set the discount rate equal to zero. To be able to raise 𝐹
from capital markets at date 𝑡 = 0 the claims {𝑅𝐿, 𝑅𝐻 } must be worth 
at least 𝐹  in expectation
(1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥𝑝)𝐶 𝐿 + (𝑝 + 𝛥𝑝)𝐶 𝐻 ≥ 𝐹 ,

so  that  investors  at  least  break  even.  Letting  𝛥𝑅 = 𝑅𝐻 − 𝑅𝐿,  the 
entrepreneur optimally sets 𝑅𝐻  and 𝑅𝐿 so that 

𝐹 = 𝑅𝐿 +

(𝑝 + 𝛥𝑝

) 𝛥𝑅.

(1)

If  investors  could  always  count  on  the  entrepreneur  being  dili-
gent (𝑒 = 1) then any financial contract {𝑅𝐿, 𝑅𝐻 } such that condi-
tion (1) holds would be adequate. That is simply a restatement of the 
Modigliani-Miller theorem. But, if the entrepreneur only chooses to 
exert effort if it is in her interest then the (weakly) optimal financial 
contract is a debt contract: 

𝑅𝐿 = 𝐶 𝐿 and 𝑅𝐻 = 𝐶 𝐿 + 𝛥𝑅 where 𝛥𝑅 =

𝐹 − 𝐶 𝐿
𝑝 + 𝛥𝑝

.

(2)

That is, in essence the first major observation in Jensen and Meckling 
(1976). The contract described in (2) is equivalent to a debt contract 
because investors get all the cash flow when 𝐶 = 𝐶 𝐿. A basic attribute 
of debt is that debt has priority over equity when the firm is in default. 
When the firm is unable to repay all its debt, creditors get all the cash 
flows.

To  see  why  this  debt  contract  is  weakly  optimal,  consider  the 
entrepreneur’s incentives to exert herself. If she chooses the high effort 
𝑒 = 1 her expected payoff is 

(1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥𝑝)(𝐶 𝐿 − 𝑅𝐿) + (𝑝 + 𝛥𝑝)(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 ) − 𝜅.

And, if she chooses the low effort 𝑒 = 0 her expected payoff is 

(1 − 𝑝)(𝐶 𝐿 − 𝑅𝐿) + 𝑝(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 ).

(3)

(4)

Subtracting (4) from (3), it is immediate to observe that exerting effort 
is better for the entrepreneur than not if and only if 

(𝛥𝐶 − 𝛥𝑅

) ≥ 𝜅.

𝛥𝑝

(5)

This condition is commonly referred to as the entrepreneur’s incentive-
compatibility  constraint  in  the  principal–agent  literature.  Note  that 
since 𝛥𝑝𝛥𝐶 > 𝜅 this condition always holds when 𝛥𝑅 = 0. When debt 
is safe, when there is no credit risk, the entrepreneur obtains all the 
residual claims and then always has full incentives to exert effort.

It is immediate from (5) that the entrepreneur’s incentives to exert 
effort  are  maximized  when  𝛥𝑅  is  minimized.  But,  for  any  contract 
{𝑅𝐿, 𝑅𝐻 } that satisfies (1), 𝛥𝑅 is minimized when 𝑅𝐿 = 𝐶 𝐿. In other 
words, among all the contracts that satisfy (1), the debt contract such 

P. Bolton

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

that 𝑅𝐿 = 𝐶 𝐿 is the one that maximizes the entrepreneur’s incentives 
to exert herself. The entrepreneur is more likely to have sufficient skin 
in the game under debt financing than under equity financing such that

However, it the firm is financed with debt the entrepreneur may 
prefer to choose project 𝐵 over project 𝐴. To see this, suppose first 
that project 𝐴 has a strictly positive net present value (NPV)

𝑅𝑖 = 𝛼𝐶 𝑖, 𝑖 = 𝐿, 𝐻, 

and for 𝛼 such that

(1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥𝑝)𝛼𝐶 𝐿 + (𝑝 + 𝛥𝑝)𝛼𝐶 𝐻 = 𝐹 .

For some parameter values equity financing is not incentive com-
patible, whereas debt financing is. Since equityholders do not get all 
the low cash flow 𝐶 𝐿, the entrepreneur is not fully punished for a 
bad performance (or sufficiently rewarded for a good performance). 
Jensen and Meckling’s general idea that debt financing provides the 
strongest incentives for the entrepreneur to perform has been hugely 
influential. In practice, of course, some of the value of higher leverage 
to investors comes in the form of a higher tax shield. But, as Jensen 
and Meckling have first articulated, another source of value is better 
operating performance by companies where management has stronger 
incentives to perform.

Jensen and Meckling’s observation raises the question, if debt fi-
nancing has such desirable incentive properties, why are not all corpo-
rations mostly financed with debt? The answer to this question is the 
second major insight in Jensen and Meckling (1976). There is also a 
dark side to high leverage: The incentives it gives to the entrepreneur 
to inefficiently shift risk onto debtholders.

3. The agency costs of debt

Consider the same example of a start-up firm, but with one change. 
At date 𝑡 = 1 the entrepreneur’s problem is not whether to exert herself 
or not, but instead how much operating risk to take. For simplicity, she 
has again two choices: she could choose project 𝐴, which is relatively 
safe or project 𝐵. To describe the risk shifting problem I need to extend 
the simple setup above to allow for three cashflow outcomes at date 
𝑡 = 2 rather than just two. The three possible cashflow outcomes are 
now:

𝐶 𝐿 = 0, 𝐶 𝑀 = 𝐶, 𝐶 𝐻 = 2𝐶 with 𝐶 > 0 ,

and the two projects 𝐴 and 𝐵 have the following probability distribu-
tions over these cashflow outcomes: 

Project A:
Project B:

Pr[𝐶 = 𝐶 𝐻 = 2𝐶]
𝑝1
𝑝1 + 𝛥1

[𝐶 = 𝐶 𝑀 = 𝐶]

Pr
1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2
1 − 𝑝1 − 𝛥1 − 𝑝2 − 𝛥2

]

[𝐶 = 𝐶 𝐿 = 0

Pr
𝑝2
𝑝2 + 𝛥2

 where 𝛥1 > 0 and 𝛥2 > 0. Thus, the difference between projects 
𝐴 and 𝐵 is that project 𝐵 has more probability mass at the tails of 
the cashflow distribution than project 𝐴. If 𝛥1 = 𝛥2, then project 𝐵
is a mean-preserving spread of project 𝐴 and is therefore riskier than 
project 𝐴 (see (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1970). Given that investors are 
assumed to be risk neutral, they do not care about risk per se, and are 
therefore indifferent between projects 𝐴 and 𝐵 when 𝛥1 = 𝛥2.

I will assume that 0 < 𝛥1 < 𝛥2, which means that the expected value 

of project 𝐴

𝑝12𝐶 + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶

is higher than the expected value of project 𝐵

(𝑝1 + 𝛥1)2𝐶 + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝛥1 − 𝑝2 − 𝛥2)𝐶.

The difference is

(𝛥2 − 𝛥1)𝐶 > 0.

On an expected value basis, project 𝐴 is therefore more desirable than 
project 𝐵.

3 

𝑝12𝐶 + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶 − 𝐹 > 0.

Suppose, in addition, that the entrepreneur raises the amount 𝐹  by 
issuing risky debt, which will be repaid in full only when cashflow 𝐶 𝐻
is realized. That is, suppose that the debt owed (principal plus interest) 
at date 2 is 𝐾 > 𝐶, but 𝐾 ≤ 2𝐶. In that case, the firm is forced to 
default when it receives cashflow 𝐶 𝐿 or 𝐶 𝑀 . On the assumption that 
the entrepreneur will choose project 𝐴 at date 𝑡 = 1, debtholders then 
expect to get

𝑝1𝐾 + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶.
Indeed, if the cashflow is 𝐶 𝐻  (which happens with probability 𝑝1) they 
get repaid 𝐾 in full, and if the cashflow is 𝐶 𝑀 , the firm defaults and 
they receive the entire realized cashflow 𝐶 𝑀 = 𝐶 (when the cashflow 
is 𝐶 𝐿 there is nothing to obtain since 𝐶 𝐿 = 0).

Suppose that

(𝑝1 + 1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶 < 𝐹 ,

but that

𝑝1𝐾 + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶 = 𝐹 ,

for some 𝐾 ∈ (𝐶, 2𝐶]. In that case project 𝐴 could be financed with 
the issuance of risky debt with promised repayment 𝐾 > 𝐶. But, the 
question is whether the entrepreneur will have an incentive to choose 
project 𝐴 over project 𝐵. The entrepreneur only gets a strictly positive 
payoff if cash flow 𝐶 𝐻  is realized. She then gets 2𝐶 − 𝐾. If she chooses 
project 𝐵 she is more likely to get this payoff. Her expected return on 
project 𝐵

(𝑝1 + 𝛥1)(2𝐶 − 𝐾)

is higher than on project 𝐴

𝑝1(2𝐶 − 𝐾),

so that she will choose project 𝐵. That behavior, in essence, is the 
risk shifting problem.  The entrepreneur prefers to choose a project 
of lower value because this project disproportionately shifts risk onto 
creditors. This is the dark side of debt financing according to Jensen 
and Meckling.

If instead the firm is financed with outside equity, the entrepreneur 
would not have this incentive to choose an inefficiently risky project. To 
see this, note first that on the assumption that the entrepreneur would 
select project 𝐴 under equity financing, the firm would issue an equity 
ownership stake 𝛼 to outside investors such that

𝛼(𝑝12𝐶 + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶) = 𝛼(1 + 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶 = 𝐹 .

The entrepreneur would then receive the expected payoff

(1 − 𝛼)(1 + 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐶

under project 𝐴, which is higher than the expected payoff under project 
𝐵:

(1 − 𝛼)(1 + 𝑝1 + 𝛥1 − 𝑝2 − 𝛥2)𝐶.

More generally, when the firm issues risky debt the entrepreneur in 
effect holds a call option on the firm’s underlying operating asset with 
the face value of the debt 𝐾 as the strike price. If the realized cash 
flow exceeds 𝐾 then the entrepreneur exercises the option by repaying 
the firm’s debts. If it is less than 𝐾 the entrepreneur does not exercise 
the option by defaulting on the debt. The value of this call option is 
increasing in the risk (or volatility) of the underlying cash flow. This is 
why the entrepreneur prefers more risk, other things equal.

Jensen and Meckling’s risk shifting notion pervades corporate fi-
nance. It is, for example, an important reason why highly levered banks 

P. Bolton

may actually take more risk when they are less well capitalized. This 
behavior is sometimes referred to as gambling for resurrection. Taking a 
risk that has a negative net present value could still pay off for the bank. 
If the bank’s shareholders are lucky and realize a profit, they obviously 
gain. If the bank is unlucky and the gamble fails, the bank’s creditors 
(or taxpayers) lose.

But risk shifting does not necessarily have to take the form of a risky 
bet, or going to the casino. A simple way in which an undercapitalized 
bank may shift risk is by paying out dividends to its shareholders in 
times of stress even though it might be more likely to survive by retain-
ing earnings and investing them in positive net present value assets. The 
shareholders of the bank, of course, benefit from the dividend payout, 
but should the bank fail then there would be fewer assets to take for 
the bank’s creditors. This particular risk-shifting behavior of banks was 
common practice during the financial crisis of 2007–2008 (see Cziraki 
et al., 2024). Jensen and Meckling suggest that to some extent such 
risk-shifting can be mitigated through debt covenants. Taking a leaf 
out of Jensen and Meckling, the regulatory response following the crisis 
has been to introduce a new capital requirement for banks, the capital 
conservation buffer, which prevents banks from paying out dividends 
when their equity capital falls below a minimum conservation ratio.

Another way of correcting risk shifting incentives first proposed by 
Green (1984) is to have the firm issue debt together with a warrant. 
The warrant gives the holder the right to purchase a fraction of equity 
at a pre-defined strike price. To see how debt plus a warrant can solve 
the risk-shifting problem suppose that the debt contract issued by the 
firm promises principal and interest repayment 𝐾 plus a warrant giving 
a fraction 𝛾 of the firm’s equity if the value of equity strictly exceeds 
(𝐶 − 𝐾). Suppose that 𝐾 is such that

𝐾 < 𝐶,

and 𝛾 is such that

𝑝1𝛾(2𝐶 − 𝐾) + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)𝐾 = 𝐹 .

The debt plus the warrant then provides investors an expected return 
which is equal to 𝐹 , allowing them to break even.

The entrepreneur would then have no incentive to choose project 𝐵

over project 𝐴 if
𝑝1(1 − 𝛾)(2𝐶 − 𝐾) + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝑝2)(𝐶 − 𝐾) ≥

(𝑝1 + 𝛥1)(1 − 𝛾)(2𝐶 − 𝐾) + (1 − 𝑝1 − 𝛥1 − 𝑝2 − 𝛥2)(𝐶 − 𝐾),
or if
(𝛥1 + 𝛥2)(𝐶 − 𝐾) ≥ 𝛥1(1 − 𝛾)(2𝐶 − 𝐾).

This condition is met if 𝛾 is sufficiently high. As Green (1984) explains, 
what the warrant does is to ‘concavify’ the investor’s convex payoff 
function, so as to eliminate the benefits of higher risk (or volatility).

Yet  another  way  of  correcting  risk-shifting  incentives  is  to  give 
the entrepreneur a stake in preserving the value of the debt issued 
to creditors. This can be done by requiring the entrepreneur to sell a 
credit default swap on the debt the firm issues (and to post the proceeds 
as collateral), as Bolton et al. (2015) have suggested. A credit default 
swap is a debt insurance contract promising the holders of the debt a 
payment proportional to the amount they lose in the event of a default.

4. The firm as a ‘nexus of contracts’ and limited liability

Jensen and Meckling’s analysis goes far beyond identifying some 
key agency costs of debt and equity. As they state in the abstract of their 
article, their aim is to integrate “elements from the theory of agency, 
the theory of property rights and the theory of finance to develop a 
theory of the ownership structure of the firm”.1 A central notion of their 

1 Jensen and Meckling (1976) page 305.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

theory of the firm is that “organizations are simply legal fictions which 
serve as a nexus for a set of contracting relationships among individuals”.2 
The term ‘legal fiction’ is somewhat unfortunate, as it suggests that the 
legal entity is just a shell and that the substance of the firm lies in 
the contractual relationships. It is not entirely clear that this is what 
they intended to say, however, as they further define ‘legal fiction’ in a 
footnote as “the artificial construct under the law which allows certain 
organizations to be treated as individuals”.3 Again, this is somewhat un-
fortunate wording. The terms ‘artificial construct’ reinforce the image 
of a shell, but the notion that organizations can be treated as individuals 
is far from innocuous. To be sure, they further add that the corporation 
“is also characterized by the existence of divisible residual claims on the 
assets and cash flows of the organization which can generally be sold 
without permission of the other contracting individuals”.4 This latter 
attribute of the corporation is fundamental both in practice and for 
their theory of capital structure.

Another fundamental attribute of the corporation is limited liability. 
This attribute also plays a key role in their theory of the (risk-shifting) 
agency costs of debt. For, without limited liability there is no risk 
shifting. It is thus only natural that they should ask why corporations 
are  structured  as  limited  liability  corporations?  Jensen  and  Meckling 
acknowledge the importance and difficulty of this question. They also 
point out that existing explanations are incomplete and conclude their 
discussion  of  limited  liability  by  saying:  “The  fact  is  that  no  well 
articulated answer to this question currently exists in the literature of 
either finance or economics”.5 Jensen and Meckling, however, do not 
attempt to provide their own well articulated answer.

The first main elements of an answer have been proposed recently. 
The key observation is that a necessary condition for many businesses 
to  be  able  to  flourish  is  that  they  can  credibly  commit  capital  for 
extended  periods  of  time.  This  means  that  investors  should  not  be 
allowed to redeem their investments at will, as they can when they 
put their money in a bank or in an investment fund. For if investors 
can ask to have their money back at (nearly) any time, there is no 
guarantee that the capital will remain committed. Counterparties to 
the business, who often need to make firm-specific investments, will 
then face the risk that the capital and the business may disappear on 
an investor’s whim. Accordingly, they will be more reluctant to make 
such investments, thereby hurting the business. As Steensgaard (1982) 
and Dari-Mattiacci et al. (2017) point out, historically the emergence 
of the corporate form as we know it today dates back to the 17th 
century, when it was adopted by Dutch and English trading companies 
to maintain permanent infrastructure capital to secure shipping routes 
from Europe to Asia. Until the corporate form was adopted, shipping 
companies  were  able  to  raise  capital  only  one  voyage  at  a  time, 
which made it difficult to maintain distant port facilities and to secure 
shipping routes. This required permanent capital, and there was no 
guarantee that funding could be obtained to maintain these outfits.

The key advantage of the corporate form thus is to guarantee a 
form of permanence of the business through the commitment of capital. 
Interestingly, Fama and Jensen (1983) hint at this feature when they 
write: “Unrestricted common stock, with its capacity for generating 
large amounts of wealth from residual claimants on a permanent basis
(emphasis added), is also attractive in activities more efficiently carried 
out with large amounts of risky assets owned within the organization 
rather than rented”.6 This benefit comes at a double price, lack of 
liquidity and weaker governance. Shareholders in a corporation can 
no longer get their investment back from the company should they 

2 Jensen and Meckling (1976) page 310.
3 Jensen and Meckling (1976) page 310, footnote 12.
4 Jensen and Meckling (1976) page 311.
5 Jensen and Meckling (1976) page 332.
6 Fama, E. F., and M. Jensen (1983) “Separation of Ownership and Control”,

The journal of law and Economics 26(2) page 312.

4 

P. Bolton

need it or want it if they lose trust in management. The only way 
to monetize their investment is for shareholders to sell their stake to 
other shareholders, provided this is allowed. Again, Fama and Jensen 
(1983) hint at this necessary requirement: “Most large nonfinancial 
organizations are open corporations .... and their residual claims are 
freely alienable”.7 But they do not fully develop the implications of 
these observations. Soon after the corporate form was first introduced 
by the Dutch Republic, secondary market trading of stocks also quickly 
emerged. This is where limited liability played a critical role, as a 
necessary feature to facilitate secondary market trading, by, in effect, 
standardizing shareholders’ common stock claims in the corporation so 
that they can be freely traded. By this logic it is not surprising that 
soon after the first corporate charter was granted to the Dutch East 
India company, the charter was further turned into a limited liability 
corporation (or LLC) (see Dari-Mattiacci et al., 2017). Interestingly, 
Jensen  and  Meckling  were  aware  that  a  key  characteristic  of  the 
corporation is the divisibility of claims and the free trading of these 
claims in a secondary market, although they did not explicitly link this 
feature to limited liability.

The other consequence of forsaking any redemption rights through 
the incorporation of a business is a weaker protection of shareholders. 
Incorporation, in effect, amounts to handing over control of the capital 
to the company. If this capital is mismanaged the only recourse is to dis-
miss the manager through a vote of the shareholders. But this involves 
some form of organized collective action, which is inherently more 
difficult than the individual action of pulling out one’s investment.

Given the twin liquidity and governance costs associated with in-
corporation, it is not obvious a priori that setting up an LLC is always 
better than the establishment of a partnership (with or without limited 
liability). Indeed, in sectors where permanent capital is less important, 
partnerships are often more prevalent than LLCs. This is the case in the 
asset management and in professional services industries, for example 
(these partnerships are also often protected by limited liability). Below, 
I provide a simple formal analysis of the costs and benefits of incor-
poration versus the formation of a partnership, by combining model 
elements from Myers (2000) and Dari-Mattiacci (2019).

4.1. Myers’ partnership model

Consider a partnership between an entrepreneur (the insider) and an 
investor (the outsider). The main defining feature of the partnership is 
that the partners, as joint owners of the operating assets and future cash 
flows, can redeem their respective investments from the partnership 
at  any  time.  A  prominent  example  of  partnerships  in  the  financial 
industry is hedge funds, where the limited partners can redeem their 
money. Other examples, such as private equity and venture capital 
funds, do put restrictions, or ban, redemptions, but then these funds 
have a limited life.

In Myers’ analysis, by withdrawing her investment the outside part-
ner has the option to deny the use of the operating asset to the insider. 
Although in principle the insider could continue operations with his 
share of the liquidation value of operating assets, assume for simplicity 
that when the outsider withdraws her investment the partnership is 
dissolved. Continuation of the partnership thus requires the agreement 
of the two partners. This agreement will specify among other things 
how cash flows are to be divided and distributed. But beyond that the 
partnership contract is assumed to be incomplete as in the property (or 
control) rights literature following Grossman and Hart (1986).

Jensen and Meckling were aware of the critical issue of contractual 
completeness. Indeed, in a remarkable paragraph on financial contract-
ing and debt covenants, Jensen and Meckling point to the fundamental 
incompleteness of financial contracts as follows: “In principle it would 
be possible for the bondholders, by the inclusion of various covenants 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

in the indenture provisions, to limit the managerial behavior which 
results in reductions in the value of the bonds. Provisions which im-
pose constraints on management’s decisions regarding such things as 
dividends, future debt issues, and maintenance of working capital are 
not uncommon in bond issues. To completely protect the bondholders 
from the incentive effects, these provisions would have to be incredibly 
detailed and cover most operating aspects of the enterprise includ-
ing limitations on the riskiness of the projects undertaken. The costs 
involved in writing such provisions, the costs of enforcing them and 
the reduced profitability of the firm (induced because the covenants 
occasionally  limit  management’s  ability  to  take  optimal  actions  on 
certain issues) would likely be non-trivial. In fact, since management 
is a continuous decision-making process it will be almost impossible 
to completely specify such conditions without having the bondholders 
actually perform the management function (emphasis added)”.8

In essence, as the above quote in emphasis makes clear, both the 
agency cost and the property rights approaches assume contractual in-
completeness. Under the agency cost approach of Jensen and Meckling 
delegation of decision-making to management, which gives rise to an 
agency problem, is due to the fundamental incompleteness of financial 
contracts. Action choice is delegated to a manager because it is too 
costly (or impossible) to specify it in advance under all contingencies. 
As they suggest, this incompleteness can be reduced by the addition of 
restrictive covenants, but it cannot be entirely eliminated. The property 
rights literature following Grossman and Hart (1986) goes one step fur-
ther in modeling contractual incompleteness and makes the additional 
distinction that although realized cash flows are observable they are not 
verifiable, so that even the managerial financial compensation part of 
the contract is incomplete. Myers (2000) adopts this latter distinction 
and assumes that only access to the use of the operating assets of the 
partnership is verifiable, so that only the dissolution of the partnership 
is enforceable. In the absence of any contractually enforceable division 
of realized cash flows between the two partners, it is the threat of 
dissolution that disciplines the insider to honor any implicit profit-
sharing  agreement  with  the  outsider.  That  is,  the  outsider’s  threat 
to redeem her investment is what disciplines the insider, and what 
gives the outsider a basic protection against the insider. However, a 
critical fragility in the partnership contract is that the outsider cannot 
commit not to redeem her investment, triggering a dissolution of the 
partnership, as long as the insider honors the terms of the implicit 
contract.

The partnership in Myers (2000) involves an entrepreneur, who 
contributes the idea, his human capital, and some private wealth 𝑊 . 
The other partner is an outside investor, who contributes the remaining 
funding  needed  to  acquire  an  essential  operating  asset.  While  the 
outside investor can dissolve the partnership at any time and reclaim 
her share of the liquidation value, she cannot prevent the insider from 
diverting operating cash flows, since these are not verifiable. The setup 
cost for the partnership at time 0 is given by 𝐹 > 0.

The partnership has a positive NPV project that is infinitely-lived 

and that generates every period the certain cash flow

𝐶 = 𝜇𝑟𝐹 ,

where 𝑟 is the safe interest rate, and 𝜇 > 1 is the net margin obtained by 
combining the entrepreneur’s human capital with the operating asset. 
The NPV of the partnership operating in perpetuity is then equal to
𝐶
𝑟

− 𝐹 = (𝜇 − 1)𝐹 .

𝜇𝑟𝐹
𝑟

− 𝐹 =

If the entrepreneur leaves, the partnership can no longer generate a 
positive NPV. All the outsider then gets is the liquidation value of the 
operating asset, which, for simplicity is assumed to always be worth 𝐹 . 
But, note the symmetry in the partnership arrangement. The outsider 

7 Fama and Jensen, supra note X, page 312.

8 Jensen and Meckling, supra note 1, 337.

5 

P. Bolton

here is also free to leave, in which case the insider can no longer 
generate a positive NPV either.

Let 𝑍𝑡 denote the cashflow that is ‘diverted’ by the insider at date 
𝑡, and 𝑌𝑡 = 𝐶 − 𝑍𝑡 the dividend paid by the partnership to the partners 
at date 𝑡. How is 𝑌𝑡 determined? The outsider’s best response is not to 
dissolve the partnership as long as the insider pays a sufficiently high 
dividend every period. That is, the outsider is happy to continue the 
partnership as long as the insider does not take too much advantage of 
her.

More formally, suppose that the outside investor obtains a share 
𝑥 ∈ (0, 1) of any dividends that the partnership pays out and of the 
liquidation value 𝐹  when the partnership is dissolved, in return for her 
investment of 𝐹 −𝑊  at time 0. Moreover, let 𝑉 𝑒𝑥
𝑡  denote the ex-dividend 
continuation value of the partnership at time 𝑡. Then the total payoff 
at date 𝑡 to the outsider under continuation is given by 𝑥(𝑌𝑡 + 𝑉 𝑒𝑥
). 
The outsider is thus better off continuing rather than dissolving the 
partnership if 

𝑡

𝑥(𝑌𝑡 + 𝑉 𝑒𝑥

𝑡

) ≥ 𝑥𝐹 .

(6)

Suppose that the insider makes a constant dividend payment 𝑌  at 
every date 𝑡 such that the outsider’s participation constraint (6) holds 
at every date 𝑡, then 

𝑡 = 𝑉 𝑒𝑥 =
𝑉 𝑒𝑥

𝑌
𝑟

.

(7)

Suppose, in addition, that the insider sets the constant dividend pay-
ment 𝑌  such that the outsider is just indifferent between continuing or 
dissolving the partnership. Then, we have

𝑌 +

or 

𝑌 =

𝑌
𝑟

= 𝐹 , 

𝑟𝐹
1 + 𝑟

.

Substituting for 𝑌  in (7) we further obtain that

𝑉 𝑒𝑥 =

𝐹
1 + 𝑟

.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

Under a constant per-period dividend payment 𝑌 , as long as the 

partnership is ongoing, the value 𝑉 𝑒𝑥 is then given by 

𝑉 𝑒𝑥 =

𝜆𝐹 + (1 − 𝜆)(𝑌 + 𝑉 𝑒𝑥)
1 + 𝑟

.

Solving for 𝑉 𝑒𝑥 we obtain that

𝑉 𝑒𝑥 =

𝜆𝐹 + (1 − 𝜆)𝑌
𝑟 + 𝜆

.

(10)

If we further assume that the insider sets the constant dividend payment 
𝑌   such  that  the  outsider  is  just  indifferent  between  continuing  or 
dissolving the partnership, we have

= 𝐹 , 

𝑌 +

𝜆𝐹 + (1 − 𝜆)𝑌
𝑟 + 𝜆
or, as before
𝑟𝐹
1 + 𝑟

𝑌 =

.

Substituting for 𝑌  in (10) we obtain again,

𝑉 𝑒𝑥 =

𝐹
1 + 𝑟

,

so that the continuation value for the outsider is independent of the 
realization of her liquidity shock.

The insider, on the other hand, is worse off the higher is 𝜆. To see 

this, note that on top of his share of dividends
(1 − 𝑥)𝑟𝐹
1 + 𝑟

the insider gets the flow of diverted cash flows worth9

𝜆𝐶 + (1 − 𝜆)(𝐶 − 𝑌 + 𝑉 𝐼 ),

where the continuation value of diverted cash flows 𝑉 𝐼  is given by

(8)

𝑉 𝐼 =

𝜆𝐶 + (1 − 𝜆)(𝐶 − 𝑌 + 𝑉 𝐼 )
1 + 𝑟

,

or

𝑉 𝐼 =

𝐶 − (1 − 𝜆)𝑌
𝑟 + 𝜆

.

Once the partnership is running, therefore, the outsider’s investment 

generates a present value of

𝑥

( 𝐹

1 + 𝑟

)

.

A necessary condition for the outsider to be willing to invest at time 0
is, therefore, that
)

( 𝐹

𝑥

1 + 𝑟

≥ 𝐹 − 𝑊 .

An important observation in Myers (2000) is that, of course,

< 𝐹 ,

𝐹
1 + 𝑟
so that a partnership is feasible if and only if the insider’s financial 
contribution  𝑊   is  large  enough.  A  necessary  condition  is  that  the 
insider’s wealth is such that 
)

(9)

𝑊 ≥ 𝐹

( 𝑟

1 + 𝑟

.

Besides providing leverage to discipline the insider, the right to 
dissolve the partnership at any time also gives the outsider insurance 
against liquidity shocks. Demand for such insurance is a primary reason 
why outside investors value and often require redemption rights. De-
mand for liquidity can be added in a simple way to Myers’ partnership 
model as follows. Suppose that the outside investor may face a liquidity 
shock with probability 𝜆 in any given period. When this shock is real-
ized the outside investor derives no utility from future consumption. 
She therefore optimally consumes all her available wealth immediately 
and gets 𝑥𝐹 . When the shock is not realized the partnership goes on 
and the outsider gets a dividend 𝑌  such that

𝑥(𝑌 + 𝑉 𝑒𝑥) ≥ 𝑥𝐹 .

6 

Differentiating 𝑉 𝐼  with respect to 𝜆, we observe that the sign of 𝜕𝑉 𝐼
given by the sign of

𝜕𝜆  is 

𝑌 (𝑟 + 𝜆) − (𝐶 − (1 − 𝜆)𝑌 ),

or, rearranging, the sign of

𝑌 (1 + 𝑟) − 𝐶.

Substituting for the value of 𝑌  given in (8) we obtain

𝑟𝐹 − 𝐶,

which is negative given that the partnership project has a positive NPV.
In sum, when the outsider is hit by a liquidity shock, the partnership 
is dissolved and there is a permanent loss in net present value at that 
point of
𝐶
𝑟
Could this loss be avoided if the project were structured differently than 
through a partnership? In particular, could this loss be avoided if the 
project were structured as a corporation?

− 𝐹 = (𝜇 − 1)𝐹 .

A key notion in corporate law is that a corporation is endowed with 
a separate “corporate personhood” which is the “owner” of the firm’s 
(operating) assets (Blair, 2003; Stout, 2005; Hansmann et al., 2005; 
Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, 2005; Ayotte and Hansmann, 2015). As dis-
cussed above, Dari-Mattiacci (2019) argues that premature dissolution 

9 When  the  outsider  dissolves  the  partnership  the  insider  responds  by 
diverting all the cash flows 𝐶 generated in that period. Since the partnership 
ends there is no reason for the insider to pay any dividends.

P. Bolton

can be avoided by setting the venture up as a corporation, and thereby 
transferring ownership of the assets from investors to the corporation. 
This transfer of rights has the effect of locking in the capital provided 
by investors. Once ownership is transferred to the corporation, the only 
way investors can get their capital back is to vote to return the assets 
to the investors. Dari-Mattiacci (2019) argues that in many situations 
structuring the venture as a corporation is better than setting it up as a 
partnership, precisely because the corporation can prevent premature 
dissolution.

But if the right to dissolve is taken away from the outsider, how can 
she hope to get any future repayments, and how can she insure herself 
against a liquidity shock? I turn to these questions next.

4.2. The LLC model

By many historical accounts, the first LLC to be created was the 
Dutch East India Company (Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie, or VOC). 
In 1612 the VOC was granted a separate corporate legal personality, 
with ownership rights to its operating assets, allowing it to perma-
nently  lock  in  its  capital.  Then,  in  1623  the  VOC  corporation  was 
also granted limited liability. This additional protection made it easier 
to create a liquid secondary market of its shares (see Dari-Mattiacci 
et al., 2017, for an extensive discussion and references). The main 
reason why the VOC was turned into a corporation with separate legal 
personhood is that it needed to commit substantial capital for the long 
term to maintain its harbors, and militarily defend its shipping routes 
from Northern Europe to Asia, via the Cape of Good Hope and the 
straight of Malacca. Until 1612, each voyage was structured as a single-
purpose partnership, which was dissolved once the ships returned to 
the Netherlands. Although, merchants would often reinvest their profits 
in new voyages, there was no way of committing resources on the 
ground needed to maintain shipping routes. This lack of commitment 
and the difficulties encountered in continuing the partnerships were 
increasingly jeopardizing the continuation of the very lucrative, albeit 
risky, trade with and within Asia. This is the main reason why the VOC 
was created. But once the capital was committed, the central questions 
became how to ensure that realized profits would be disgorged, and 
how to provide liquidity to investors.

As above, I begin the analysis by first assuming away any liquidity 
issues and by setting 𝜆 = 0. Later I extend the analysis of the LLC to the 
more general case with 𝜆 > 0. How do outside shareholders in an LLC 
ensure the disgorgement of profits by the insider? The short answer 
is that outside shareholders must have the (collective) right to wrest 
control from the insiders if they are unhappy with the way the company 
is run and with the payouts. A simple way of modeling the outside 
shareholder’s ability to wrest control from the insider is to assume 
that the outsider can force the insider to change his dividend payment 
decision by paying an intervention cost 𝑘 > 0. This is the approach 
taken for example by Burkart et al. (1997), Bolton and Von Thadden 
(1998), Myers (2000), and Hart (2001). Once the outsider has paid the 
cost 𝑘 she might as well insist on the maximum feasible payout 𝐶. 
Therefore, to avoid an intervention by the outsider, the insider must 
make a dividend payout 𝑌  that is large enough to forestall a costly 
intervention: 10
𝑥𝑌 ≥ 𝑥𝐶 − 𝑘

(11)

Assuming that condition (11) binds, and solving for 𝑌  we obtain

𝑌 = 𝐶 −

𝑘
𝑥

,

10 The outsider and insider are engaged in a repeated game, in which there 
are potentially many equilibria. For simplicity and greater realism we focus on 
the Markov Perfect equilibrium and rule rule out equilibria involving trigger 
strategies and the like (see Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991). In the Markov Perfect 
equilibrium the continuation value of the outsider is the same whether the 
outsider intervenes or not, so that condition (11) obtains.

so that the value 𝑉 𝑂 to the outsider from a stake 𝑥 in this LLC is: 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

𝑉 𝑂 =

𝐶
𝑟

−

𝑘
𝑟𝑥

.

(12)

≥ 𝐹 − 𝑊 .

A necessary condition for the outsider to be willing to invest in the LLC 
is thus 
𝐶 − 𝑘
𝑟
When both conditions (9) and (13) hold, then both the partnership 
model and the LLC model are feasible and can implement the first-
best outcome. When (9) holds, but not (13), then only the partnership 
is feasible and therefore uniquely optimal. Finally, when (13) holds, 
but not (9), then only the LLC model is feasible and optimal. More 
generally, what this simple analysis suggests is that, in the absence 
of any liquidity (or tax) concerns, the relative attraction of LLCs over 
partnerships resides in their respective governance systems and how 
well protected the outsider’s investment is under each structure.

(13)

When the outsider faces liquidity shocks it would seem that the 
partnership  is  more  likely  to  be  feasible,  as  the  outsider  can  then 
dissolve the partnership when needed. But dissolution comes at the 
expense of economic efficiency. The LLC is a better arrangement, as 
it avoids premature dissolution, if it can offer the outsider sufficient 
liquidity through the sale of her stake in the secondary market.

To capture these observations in the model, suppose now that when 
she faces a liquidity shock the outsider can sell her stake to another 
shareholder in the secondary market, and let 𝜂 denote the probability 
that she can sell her shares for a fair price. That is, suppose that with 
probability 𝜂 there are at least two new outside shareholders (with the 
same intervention costs 𝑘) that are competing to buy the incumbent 
outsider’s stake. With probability (1 − 𝜂) the outsider is not able to find 
a willing new buyer for her stake and only gets to consume the LLC’s 
dividend  payment.  In  this  situation  the  outsider’s  ex-ante  expected 
value 𝑉 𝑂 is given by

𝑥𝑉 𝑂 =

𝑥𝑌 + [𝜆𝜂 + (1 − 𝜆)]𝑥𝑉 𝑂
1 + 𝑟

,

or rearranging and substituting for 𝑌 = 𝐶 − 𝑘
𝑥

,

𝑉 𝑂 =

𝐶 − 𝑘
𝑥
𝑟 + 𝜆(1 − 𝜂)

.

The outsider is then willing to invest in the LLC if 

𝑉 𝑂 =

𝐶 − 𝑘
𝑥
𝑟 + 𝜆(1 − 𝜂)

≥ 𝐹 − 𝑊 .

(14)

Comparing (14) with (13), we observe that when the secondary 
market for shares is reasonably efficient (when 𝜂 is close to 1) the LLC 
structure provides the outsider a payoff that is close to the maximum 
achievable  payoff,  even  when  the  outsider  may  be  hit  by  liquidity 
shocks.

The key observation here is that the efficiency of the secondary 
market for shares depends in a crucial way on limited liability. This 
is the critical attribute that creates “divisible residual claims on the 
assets and cash flows of the organization which can generally be sold 
without permission of the other contracting individuals”.11 Indeed, if 
the  corporation  were  to  expose  its  shareholders  to  liability  beyond 
the capital they committed to the corporation, trade in the secondary 
market  would  involve    counterparty  risk,  because  the  value  of  any 
outstanding guarantee (or liability) of an individual shareholder would 
be closely tied to that investor’s wealth. If an individual investor trades 
her shares and liability with a new investor, that investor ought to have 
a similar level of wealth for other shareholders to be unaffected by that 
trade. The temptation for an existing shareholder is always to trade 
with someone poorer than her. This would, in effect, result in a form of 
dilution of other shareholders’ claims, as they would then be liable for 

11 Jensen and Meckling, supra note 1, 311.

7 

P. Bolton

more. The corporation, therefore, is likely to impose minimum wealth 
restrictions on eligible new shareholders, thereby significantly limiting 
secondary  market  liquidity.  Limited  liability  cuts  through  all  these 
complexities. It eliminates any risk of dilution resulting from secondary 
market trading of shares. This is a fundamental reason why nearly 
all corporations (that lock in capital and therefore require secondary 
market liquidity) are also LLCs.

Interestingly, when both a partnership and LLC structure are feasi-
ble (when both constraints (9) and (14) hold) the insider strictly prefers 
the LLC structure whenever 𝜆 > 0 and 𝜂 < 1, for the latter eliminates 
the risk of premature dissolution. Hence, whether a partnership or LLC 
structure is chosen depends on whether the LLC structure is feasible 
(whether constraint (14) is satisfied). As can be readily observed, this 
constraint is more likely to hold the lower is 𝜆 and the higher is 𝜂. It 
is straightforward to extend this simple reduced-form model to allow 
for multiple outside investors. The more outside investors 𝑁 there are, 
the higher is the probability 𝜆𝑁  that any one of these investors will be 
hit by a liquidity shock. Therefore, the risk of premature dissolution 
increases with the number of partners. As long as secondary market 
trading in shares is sufficiently liquid (or efficient), the LLC then is more 
likely to dominate, the larger the number of partners in the partnership.
Other  comparative  statics  predictions  can  be  derived  from  this 
simple model. Dari-Mattiacci et al. (2017) observe that the VOC was 
able to operate a highly liquid secondary market for its shares. They 
argue that one reason why the market was so liquid is that the VOC 
was able to attract many small investors, who had little information 
about the VOC’s operations, so that secondary market trading was not 
impeded by asymmetric information. Dari-Mattiacci (2019) builds this 
observation into a model and shows that the separation of ownership 
and control (Berle and Means, 1932) far from being a weakness of the 
corporation could be an essential feature supporting secondary market 
liquidity of stocks.

5. Incomplete contracts and control

As highlighted above, Jensen and Meckling were aware of the fact 
that  debt  contracts  are  highly  incomplete.  They  also  observe:  “The 
careful  reader  will  notice  that....we  have  assumed  that  all  outside 
equity is nonvoting. If such equity does have voting rights, then the 
manager will be concerned about the effects on his long-run welfare 
of reducing his fractional ownership below the point where he loses 
effective control of the corporation”.12 Thus, Jensen and Meckling were 
also aware that the allocation of control rights matters, and that control 
considerations might affect the choice of debt and equity financing. 
However, they stop short of undertaking an analysis of the control 
implications of capital structure choices, writing “A complete analysis 
of this issue will require a careful specification of the contractual rights 
involved on both sides, the role of the board of directors, and the 
coordination (agency) costs borne by the stockholders in implementing 
policy changes....Further analysis of these issues is left to the future”.13
The first analysis of incomplete contracts and control rights alloca-
tion was undertaken a decade later by Grossman and Hart (1986) in 
their celebrated article on the property rights theory of the firm. This 
analysis adds an extra dimension to, and reinforces, the agency cost per-
spective on capital structure. It addresses a concern about the agency 
cost approach to capital structure, which is that if there are no limits on 
how financial contracts can specify the division of cash-flows between 
the manager and outside investors, then a direct incentive scheme for 
the CEO in the form of an executive compensation contract (a topic 
that Jensen and Murphy (1990) extensively explored later on) could 
be specified that provides the same (or better) financial incentives as 
a given debt-equity financing structure. Indeed, Dybvig and Zender 

12 Jensen and Meckling, supra note 1, 351.
13 Jensen and Meckling, supra note 1, 352.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

(1991) have suggested that in principle agency costs can be addressed 
more efficiently and directly through such an executive compensation 
contract, in which case capital structure choice is irrelevant as far as 
agency costs are concerned. But if financial contracts and executive 
compensation schemes are fundamentally incomplete then they cannot 
fully substitute for the incentive effects of capital structure. Moreover, 
capital structure takes on new relevance in terms of its implications for 
control allocation and delegation.

5.1. The Aghion and Bolton model

The incomplete financial contracting theory of Aghion and Bolton 
(1992)  completes  part  of  the  agenda  set  by  Jensen  and  Meckling 
by analyzing the control allocation implications of capital structure 
choices. Aghion and Bolton (1992) adopt the incomplete-contracts as-
sumptions of Grossman and Hart (1986) to introduce control allocation 
considerations  into  Jensen  and  Meckling’s  framework,  and  analyze 
the following optimal incomplete financial contracting problem. They 
consider a similar funding problem as Jensen and Meckling between 
a risk-neutral manager of a start-up with setup cost 𝐹 > 0 and a risk-
neutral investor. After the start-up is set up at date 0, a non-contractable 
decision must be taken at date 1. There are two options, 𝐴 and 𝐵. If 
option 𝑒 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐵} is taken, project cash-flows at date 2 are given by 
, with Pr(𝐶 = 𝐶 𝐻 ) = 𝜃𝑒, and the manager’s private benefits 
𝐶 ∈
are 𝑍𝑒 > 0, so that the total expected surplus from the project under 
option 𝑒 is

0, 𝐶 𝐻 }

{

𝜃𝑒𝐶 𝐻 + 𝑍𝑒 − 𝐹 .

The project involves potentially conflicting objectives between man-

ager and investor if, as Aghion and Bolton assume,

𝛥𝜃 = 𝜃𝐴 − 𝜃𝐵 > 0,

and

𝛥𝑍 = 𝑍𝐵 − 𝑍𝐴 > 0.

Indeed, under these assumptions option 𝐴 maximizes financial benefits, 
and option 𝐵 maximizes private benefits.

The key problem in Aghion and Bolton (1992) is that contractual 
incompleteness together with the financial constraints of the manager 
may  prevent  the  attainment  of  ex-post  efficient  outcomes.  In  other 
words, the Coase theorem does not hold (Coase, 1960). Their key insight 
is that the ex-post inefficiencies caused by contractual incompleteness 
can be mitigated through the optimal allocation of control to either the 
manager or the investor.

Ex-post Optimal Control Allocation: In the absence of financial 
constraints, who controls the firm is irrelevant because ex-post effi-
ciency can always be attained. Together, the manager and investor will 
choose the option that maximizes total surplus, 

{𝜃𝑒𝐶 𝐻 + 𝑍𝑒},

max
𝑒

(15)

irrespective of who has control over the choice of 𝐴 or 𝐵. But, when the 
manager is financially constrained the allocation of control matters. A 
first general result in Aghion and Bolton (1992) is that it is (weakly) op-
timal to give control to the manager. Indeed under management control 
the firm always chooses the surplus-maximizing option, whereas under 
investor control the firm may choose the inefficient option.

Consider first the case of management control. The manager’s de-
cision at date 1 takes place after the manager has already issued a 
financial claim to the investor 𝑅𝐻 ∈ (0, 𝐶 𝐻 ) to obtain funding for 
the project at date 0 (note that under limited liability protection the 
manager owes nothing to the investor when 𝐶 = 0 is realized). The 
manager can do no worse than choosing her preferred option 𝑒 under 
the contract: 

{𝜃𝑒(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 ) + 𝑍𝑒}

max
𝑒

8 

(16)

P. Bolton

But she can do better than that when the solutions to problems (15) 
and (16) differ. Suppose that the solution to the problem (16) is 𝑒 = 𝐵
and solution to the problem (15) is 𝑒 = 𝐴. This is the case if 

𝛥𝜃𝐶 𝐻 − 𝛥𝑍 > 0.

(17)

By choosing option 𝐵 the manager gets
𝜃𝐵(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 ) + 𝑍𝐵 > 𝜃𝐴(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 ) + 𝑍𝐴,

the investor gets 𝜃𝐵𝑅𝐻 , and the total surplus is
𝜃𝐵𝐶 𝐻 + 𝑍𝐵 < 𝜃𝐴𝐶 𝐻 + 𝑍𝐴

under assumption (17).

How can the manager do better? She can renegotiate the contract 
by offering the investor to choose 𝑒 = 𝐴 in exchange for a reduction of 
her debt to:  ̃𝑅𝐻 < 𝑅𝐻  so that

𝜃𝐴

̃𝑅𝐻 ≥ 𝜃𝐵𝑅𝐻  and

𝜃𝐴(𝐶 𝐻 − ̃𝑅𝐻 ) + 𝑍𝐴 > 𝜃𝐵(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 ) + 𝑍𝐵 or

𝛥𝜃𝐶 𝐻 − 𝛥𝑍 > 𝜃𝐴

̃𝑅𝐻 − 𝜃𝐵𝑅𝐻 ,

which is always feasible. Renegotiation leads to an ex-post efficient 
outcome  because  the  investor  is  not  financially  constrained.  If  the 
manager prefers the option that maximizes private benefits (option 
𝐵) under the contract, but the socially efficient option is to maximize 
financial benefits (option 𝐴 under assumption (17)), then investor and 
manager can engage in a Pareto-improving renegotiation where the 
investor, in effect, pays the manager to switch her choice from 𝐵 to 
𝐴.14

The opposite situation, where the investor has control and where 
option 𝐵 is socially efficient, however, is not symmetric. In this latter 
situation a Pareto-improving renegotiation may not be possible. When 
the  investor  has  control  he  can  choose  his  best  action  under  the 
contract: 

{𝜃𝑒𝑅𝐻 }

max
𝑒

which is given by 𝑒 = 𝐴 since 𝛥𝜃 > 0. Under assumption 

𝛥𝜃𝐶 𝐻 − 𝛥𝑍 < 0

(18)

(19)

the socially efficient action, however, is 𝑒 = 𝐵. In this situation the 
manager may not be able to make a Pareto-improving offer to the 
investor  ̃𝑅𝐻 > 𝑅𝐻  such that

𝜃𝐵

̃𝑅𝐻 ≥ 𝜃𝐴𝑅𝐻  and

𝜃𝐵(𝐶 𝐻 − ̃𝑅𝐻 ) + 𝑍𝐵 > 𝜃𝐴(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 ) + 𝑍𝐴.
The highest possible offer the manager can make is  ̃𝑅𝐻 = 𝐶 𝐻 , but if

𝑅𝐻 >

)

( 𝜃𝐵
𝜃𝐴

𝐶 𝐻

this offer is not sufficiently high to induce the investor to switch from 
𝐴 to 𝐵.

The  manager  is  financially  constrained.  This  prevents  her  from 
making a sufficiently attractive offer to the investor. If such a situation 
can arise at date 1 it is strictly better to allocate control to the manager 
than to the investor. The general principle that this example illustrates 
is that, other things equal, control should be allocated to the more 

14 Note that when contracts are incomplete it is not always possible to 
write renegotiation-proof contracts. Moreover, Aghion and Bolton (1992) show 
that even when they are feasible, renegotiation-proof contracts are not always 
optimal. They do not necessarily give the best protection to the investor. The 
reason is that, to avoid renegotiation in all states of nature, the investor may 
have to give up a large share of cashflows to the manager, which may be 
excessive in some states of nature. The investor can do better by reducing the 
share of cashflows the manager gets under the financial contract, even if this 
means that renegotiation may be required in some states of nature.

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

financially  constrained  party.  Note  that  this  is  a  different  principle 
from the one emerging from the property rights theory of the firm, 
whereby  ownership  should  be  allocated  with  the  goal  of  reducing 
hold-up problems and protecting ex-ante investments.

Ex-ante  investment:  The  optimal  ex-post  allocation  of  control, 
however, does not maximize the firm’s ex-ante fund raising capacity. 
At date 0 the manager must raise 𝐹 > 0 to cover the start-up costs of 
the project. These funds are obtained by issuing a cashflow claim 𝑅𝐻
and possibly also by granting control rights to the investor. To focus 
on the most interesting case assume that the firm has a positive NPV 
project if option 𝐴 is taken at date 1,

𝜃𝐴𝐶 𝐻 − 𝐹 > 0,

but that the manager prefers option 𝐵:

+ 𝑍𝐴 < 𝜃𝐵

(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 )

+ 𝑍𝐵,

(𝐶 𝐻 − 𝑅𝐻 )

𝜃𝐴
for all 𝑅𝐻 ≥ 𝐹
𝜃𝐴

.

Investor Control: If it is the case that the social surplus is max-
imized  under  option  𝐴(assumption  (17)  holds)  then  obviously  it  is 
efficient to allocate control to the investor. This outcome can be im-
plemented by selling both cashflow rights and control rights to the 
investor, which would be the case if the firm were to raise funds 𝐹
by selling voting shares to the investor.

Manager control: Suppose now that assumption (19) holds, so that 
𝐵 is the socially efficient option. If 𝜃𝐵𝐶 𝐻 ≥ 𝐹  then manager control 
is both optimal and feasible. The manager then optimally only sells 
cashflow claims but no control rights. This can be accomplished, for 
example,  by  issuing  non-voting  shares  (or  preferred  stock).  But,  if 
𝜃𝐵𝐶 𝐻 < 𝐹 , then manager control is not feasible. The manager must 
then also grant some control rights to the investor in order to obtain 
sufficient financing at date 0.

Contingent allocation of control: Suppose that stochastic control 
allocations are possible and let 𝜈 denote the probability that the in-
vestor gets control. Then, the best feasible contract is to give control to 
the investor with probability ̂𝜈 given by the solution to: 

(̂𝜈𝜃𝐴 + (1 − ̂𝜈)𝜃𝐵)𝐶 𝐻 = 𝐹 .

(20)

The investor then gets the entire cash flow 𝐶 𝐻  and gets to impose 
option 𝐴 with a sufficiently high probability that he just breaks even 
in expectation.

Completely random control allocations are not very realistic. But 
contingent control allocations are quite common. These allocations are 
implemented with financial contracts that stipulate a change in control 
conditional on a triggering event occurring. Suppose that a random 
variable  𝑠 ∈ (𝑠, 𝑠)  with  density  ℎ  is  realized  at  date  1  and  that  𝑠
is verifiable. Then the financial contract between the manager and 
investor can specify a control allocation contingent on 𝑠. Suppose in 
addition that 𝛥𝜃(𝑠) is decreasing in 𝑠 and/or 𝛥𝑍 (𝑠) is increasing in 
𝑠. Then, the optimal contract is to give the investor all the cashflow 
𝑅𝐻 = 𝐶 𝐻 , and to transfer control for all 𝑠 ≤ 𝑠∗, where 𝑠∗ is given by 
the solution to:
(

)

𝑠∗

𝐶 𝐻 = 𝐹 .

𝛥𝜃(𝑠)ℎ(𝑠)𝑑𝑠

𝜃𝐵 + ∫
𝑠
Summarizing, when financial contracts are incomplete, the choice 
of financing does not boil down to a question of providing adequate 
incentives to the manager as in Jensen and Meckling (1976). It is also a 
question of allocation of control rights. The Aghion and Bolton analysis 
shows that it is (weakly) efficient to allocate control rights to the more 
financially constrained party (the manager or the founder), but that 
some transfer of control to the investor may be necessary to ensure the 
financial viability of the investment. It is generally optimal to transfer 
control on a contingent basis if either the difference in expected cash 
flows 𝛥𝜃(𝑠)𝐶 𝐻 , or the difference in private benefits 𝛥𝑍 (𝑠) varies across 
states 𝑠, or both.

P. Bolton

In the original version of their model, Aghion and Bolton (1986) 
formalized the conflict between the manager and investor in terms of 
differences in beliefs. The manager is taken to be more optimistic about 
the success of one of the two options than the investor. Concretely, 
suppose that the manager and investor have the same beliefs about the 
success of option 𝐴, but that the manager is more optimistic about the 
success of option 𝐵, so that the investor assigns probability 𝜃𝐵 to the 
cashflow realization 𝐶 𝐻 , while the manager assigns probability (𝜃𝐵 +𝜁), 
where 𝜁 > 0. The investor then attaches value 𝜃𝐵𝐶 𝐻  to option 𝐵, as 
above, but the manager attaches value (𝜃𝐵 + 𝜁)𝐶 𝐻 . Letting 𝜁𝐶 𝐻 = 𝑍𝐵, 
and setting 𝑍𝐴 = 0 without loss of generality, it is immediate to see that 
the formulation with differences of beliefs maps into the above model 
with private benefits.

The interpretation of differences in beliefs, with the manager being 
more optimistic than the investor is appealing. Founders of companies, 
entrepreneurs, managers start a new business because they believe in 
it. They believe in what they are undertaking, they are passionate, 
whereas investors tend to be more sceptical. Another common reason 
why people want to be entrepreneurs is that they do not want to be 
‘bossed around’. They feel they know what the best course of action is 
and they do not want to be in a position where they must seek approval 
from others and where they cannot do what they want because their 
boss disagrees with them.

In their study of French entrepreneurs, Landier and Thesmar (2008) 
find evidence of differences of beliefs between entrepreneurs and in-
vestors, with the former being relatively more optimistic. This finding 
is consistent with several other studies of entrepreneurial overconfi-
dence they cite. More interestingly, they further show that the most 
optimistic entrepreneurs obtain short-term debt financing, while the 
more circumspect entrepreneurs obtain more long-term financing. This 
is in line with a key prediction of their model of start-up financing 
under differences of opinion. They explain that the optimal financial 
contract between an optimistic entrepreneur and a pessimistic investor 
is for the entrepreneur to: first, issue claims on cash flows she believes 
to be relatively unlikely to occur, and second, to transfer control to the 
investor in states where “a realistic decision maker is needed”.15

Short-term debt financing achieves both of these goals under some 
conditions. Indeed, by definition the optimistic entrepreneur’s beliefs 
are such that low cashflow realizations that would force her to default 
on her debt obligations are relatively unlikely. She therefore strictly 
prefers to issue claims on those cash-flows, so that the optimal financial 
contract is, in effect, like a debt contract (𝑅(𝐶) = max{𝐶, 𝐾} for some 
face value 𝐾 ). Moreover, it is efficient to transfer control to the in-
vestor in those states where an unpromising venture can be terminated 
before too much cash has been burnt. This means that the contingent 
transfer of control to the investor following poor performance should 
occur  sooner,  explaining  why  short-term  debt  is  optimal  when  the 
entrepreneur is more optimistic than the investor. In the model above, 
the variable 𝑠 ∈ (𝑠, 𝑠) can be interpreted as short-term cashflow, and 
the transfer of control to the investor when 𝑠 < 𝑠∗ is optimal to the 
extent that the investor’s greater realism is most needed in those low 
cashflow states.

Risky debt is not the only way to allocate control on a contingent 
basis.  Another  context  in  which  contingent  control  allocations  are 
common is venture capital financing. In their study of venture capital 
contracts between a venture capital fund (VC) and a portfolio firm, 
Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) find that VC contracts explicitly specify 
both cash-flow and control rights. What is more, future financing and 
control  rights  are  often  contingent  on  observable  measures  of  firm 
performance. Generally, the VC lead partner obtains full control if the 
firm performs poorly, and if the firm performs well the entrepreneur 
gradually increases her control over the firm.

15 Landier and Thesmar (2008) page 118.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

Just as Jensen and Meckling (1976), the Aghion and Bolton model 
is best seen as a simple model of optimal financing of start-ups. While 
the model described above can be generalized in a number of direc-
tions, indeed Aghion and Bolton (1992) consider a much richer model, 
there are also limitations. An important methodological limitation is 
that contractual incompleteness is imposed exogenously, whereas in 
practice, as Jensen and Meckling suggest, contracts are endogenously 
incomplete. As they point out, debt contracts may be more or less 
‘covenant-lite’. Similarly, VC contracts may be more or less detailed. 
What  determines  the  variation  in  contractual  incompleteness  is  an 
important general question, which is still under-researched (see Bolton 
and Faure-Grimaud, 2010, for a first model with endogenously incom-
plete financial contracts).

6. Influence, interpretations, and misinterpretations

Jensen and Meckling (1976) has had a deep and lasting impact 
in  several  related  fields:  the  theory  of  the  firm,  corporate  finance, 
corporate governance, and corporate law. Above I have mostly focused 
on their lasting contribution to corporate finance, on their well-formed 
ideas on the agency costs of debt and outside equity. I have also pointed 
out that their notion of the firm as a ‘nexus of contracts’ was less well 
formed. As a result, it has been more open to different interpretations, 
even misinterpretations. These (mis)interpretations have arguably had 
an even bigger impact on corporate law and governance. To be sure, 
many scholars, including Michael Jensen himself in later writings, have 
associated Jensen and Meckling (1976) with the shareholder value and 
shareholder primacy doctrine that has dominated corporate law in the 
U.S. and elsewhere in the past decades.

Simply  put,  this  doctrine  holds  that  the  fiduciary  duty  of  man-
agement  is  to  maximize  shareholder  value  (i.e.,  the  firm’s  market 
capitalization). There is no other purpose for the firm than to maximize 
the residual claims (cash flows) of shareholders. A telling recent paper 
illustrating how Jensen and Meckling (1976) has come to be seen as a 
founding article of the shareholder value doctrine is the recent critique 
of the agency theory of the corporation by Hill (2024), who writes 
that “Jensen and Meckling’s article provided the springboard for the 
shareholder  primacy  movement...on  the  basis  that  shareholders  are 
‘residual’ claimants who, unlike other stakeholders, cannot sufficiently 
limit their risk by contract”.16 Hill further argues that “the fact that 
Jensen  and  Meckling  added  the  word  ‘simply’  before  the  reference 
to ‘legal fictions’ is revealing. It demoted the concept of legal per-
sonality, and indeed, in later interpretations of agency theory, there 
is  a  transformation  from  understanding  the  corporation  as  a  ‘legal 
fiction’ (i.e., artificial, but real) to viewing it as ‘fictitious’ (i.e., non-
existent). These later interpretations of Jensen and Meckling’s agency 
paradigm dissolved the corporation into nothing more than a ‘complex 
set of explicit and implicit contracts’17 between various self-interested 
resource holders”.18 Importantly, Hill observes that “This shift in the 
depiction of the corporation had important implications, generating a 
range of assumptions that subsequently became bedrock principles of 
modern US corporate law”,19 adding that “by interpreting contracts as 
the ‘essence’ of the firm, the paradigm enhanced the significance of 
private ordering over mandatory rules, . . . [and] optimistically assumed 
that market forces would do the heavy regulatory lifting as an economic 
constraint which forced managers to promote shareholder interests”.20
Two implications follow from this reduction of the corporate form to 
“nothing more than a ‘complex set of explicit and implicit contracts”’. 
First,  there  cannot  be  any  independent  purpose  of  the  corporation 

16 Hill (2024) page 8.
17 Easterbrook and Fischel (1989) page 1418.
18 Hill (2024) page 5.
19 Hill (2024) page 6.
20 Hill (2024) page 7.

10 

P. Bolton

beyond  the  motivations  of  all  the  contracting  parties  (as  they  are 
expressed  in  the  terms  of  the  contracts)  in  the  nexus  of  contracts. 
Indeed, there is no immutable state or objective of the corporation; it 
constantly evolves with the addition or expiration of contracts and with 
changes in the set of counterparties in the nexus of contracts. As Jensen 
and  Meckling  (1983)  have  emphatically  asserted:  “the  corporation 
cannot  be  socially  (or  otherwise)  responsible!  However  we  end  up 
defining it, the notion of “being responsible” is a normative concept 
strictly relevant only to human beings. A corporation can no more be 
responsible than can a lump of coal”.21 Second, there is no a priori 
reason to expect the public corporation to be inherently more efficient 
or inefficient than other forms of organization, if all that matters is the 
nexus of contracts.

Both  of  these  implications  are  problematic.  Especially  the  latter 
implication, which is difficult to reconcile both with Jensen and Meck-
ling’s  subsequent  reflections  on  the  corporation,  when  they  write 
“Wherever competition among organizational forms is open and unfet-
tered, the large corporation has demonstrated its strength and dura-
bility... The role which the corporation has come to play in society 
during the last 150 years suggests not that it is a social menace, but that 
it represents an enormously productive social invention”,22 and with 
Michael Jensen’s later writings on the eclipse of the public corporation, 
when he asserts in the abstract of Jensen (1989) that: “A central source 
of waste in the public corporation is the conflict between owners and 
managers over free cash flow”.

As I have argued above, much of the confusion generated by Jensen 
and Meckling’s theory of the firm as a nexus of contracts can be traced 
back  to  their  use  of  the  somewhat  unfortunate  term  ‘legal  fiction,’ 
which suggests that beyond the nexus of contracts the corporation is 
just a shell. Closer to what they must have had in mind is Fama and 
Jensen’s (1983) reference to the corporation as offering a permanent 
basis for generating wealth for shareholders. But even this reference 
remains ambiguous. It is only when, following Dari-Mattiacci et al. 
(2017), the corporation is seen as a mechanism to lock in permanent 
capital that the distinction between corporate personhood and the nexus 
of contracts becomes fully apparent. Once capital is permanently locked 
in, there is a meaningful distinction to be drawn between the purpose 
for which the capital has been locked in, and the motivations of all the 
counterparties of the firm. There is a meaningful notion of corporate 
responsibility  that  is  distinct  from  the  individual  responsibilities  of 
the counterparties of the firm. And there is a meaningful corporate 
governance problem that arises from the fact that shareholders cannot 
redeem their investments. Ever since Smith (1776), and more recently 
Berle and Means (1932), it is generally accepted that the source of 
all corporate governance problems is the separation of ownership and 
control.  But  even  when  ownership  is  largely  concentrated,  there  is 
a governance problem arising from the lock-in of permanent capital. 
Corporate governance ultimately boils down to the problem of how 
permanent capital is to be used. Admittedly, this problem may vary 
in  complexity  depending  on  how  dispersed  ownership  is,  and  how 
engaged shareholders are, but the ultimate source of the governance 
problem comes from the commitment of capital and the creation of a 
corporate personhood.

As  Cheffins  (2021)  points  out,  the  interpretation  of  Jensen  and 
Meckling (1976) the “springboard for the shareholder primacy move-
ment” is largely a based on a misreading: “While the received wisdom 
is that Jensen and Meckling were pressing for a full-scale rewiring of 
the public company in “Theory of the Firm”,  their agenda in fact 
was considerably more modest. They were seeking to explain firms 
rather than lobby for dramatic change”.23 Indeed, he observes that 
“Jensen and Meckling steered clear of urging executives to prioritize 

21 Jensen and Meckling (1983) page 9.
22 Jensen and Meckling (1983) page 6.
23 Cheffins (2021) page 13.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

shareholders”,24 further noting that “having sidestepped the corporate 
purpose issue Jensen and Meckling could hardly turn around and lobby 
companies to maximize shareholder value”.25 Jensen and Meckling’s 
more  modest  aim  of  calling  attention  to  the  importance  of  agency 
costs, and how these shape corporate finance choices, is their enduring 
legacy.  Their  article  may  have  had  a  greater  impact  on  corporate 
governance and corporate law, but their impact on corporate finance is 
more robust. As the title of Stern and Chew’s (1986) book of selected 
subsequent articles taking an agency perspective to corporate finance 
suggests, Jensen and Meckling’s agency cost perspective has revolution-
ized corporate finance. Even though much ground has been covered by 
this subsequent literature, Jensen and Meckling’s agenda is far from 
being exhausted. New generations of scholars will find inspiration in 
their analysis, especially those interested in institutional questions, and 
in questions at the intersection of law and finance. I have read and re-
read their article many times over the years and I still discover new 
insights.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Patrick Bolton: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – orig-

inal draft.

Declaration of competing interest

I hereby declare that I have no conflicts of interest to report for this 

submission.

References

Rev. 53 (5), 941–973.

Law Econ. 42, 1–12.

New York.

Aghion, P., Bolton, P., 1986. An incomplete contracts approach to bankruptcy and the 

optimal financial structure of the firm. working paper Harvard University.

Aghion, P., Bolton, P., 1992. An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting. 

Rev. Econ. Stud. 94–473.

Akerlof, G., 1970. The market for lemons. Q. J. Econ. 84, 488–500.
Alchian,  A.A.,  Demsetz,  H.,  1972.  Production,  information  costs,  and  economic 

organization. Am. Econ. Rev. 62, 777–795.

Arrow, K.J., 1963. Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care. Am. Econ. 

Ayotte, K., Hansmann, H., 2015. A nexus of contracts theory of legal entities. Int. Rev. 

Berle, A.A., Means, G., 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. Macmillan, 

Blair,  M.M.,  2003.  Locking  in  capital:  What  corporate  law  achieved  for  business 

organizers in the nineteenth century. UCLA Law Rev. 51 (387).

Bolton, P., Faure-Grimaud, A., 2010. Satisficing contracts. Rev. Econ. Stud. 77 (3), 

Bolton, P., Mehran, H., Shapiro, J., 2015. Executive compensation and risk taking. Rev. 

Bolton, P., Von Thadden, E.-L., 1998. Blocks, liquidity, and corporate control. J. Financ. 

937–971.

Financ. 19 (6), 2139–2181.

53 (1), 1–25.

Burkart, M., Gromb, D., Panunzi, F., 1997. Large shareholders, monitoring and the 

value of the firm. Q. J. Econ. 112, 693–728.

Cheffins, B.R., 2021. What jensen and meckling really said about the public company. 
In:  Research  Handbook  on  Corporate  Purpose  and  Personhood.  Edward  Elgar 
Publishing.

Cheung, S.N.S., 1969. Transaction costs, risk aversion, and the choice of contractual 

arrangements. J. Law Econ. 12 (1), 23–42.

Coase, R.H., 1937. The nature of the firm. Economica 38, 6–405.
Coase, R.H., 1960. The problem of social cost. J. Law Econ. 3 (1), 1–44.
Cziraki, P., Laux, C., Lóránth, G., 2024. Understanding bank payouts during the crisis 

of 2007–2009. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 13 (1), 191–234.

Dari-Mattiacci, G., 2019. Capital lock-in, liquidity, and the separation of ownership and 

control. Columbia Law and Economics Working Paper 607.

Dari-Mattiacci, G., Gelderblom, O., Perotti, E.C., 2017. The emergence of the corporate 

form. J. Law, Econ. Organ. 33 (2), 193–236.

Dybvig,  P.H.,  Zender,  J.F.,  1991.  Capital  structure  and  dividend  irrelevance  with 

asymmetric information. Rev. Financ. Stud. 4 (1), 201–219.

24 Cheffins (2021) page 15.
25 Cheffins (2021) page 16.

11 

P. Bolton

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104116 

Easterbrook, F.H., Fischel, D.R., 1989. The corporate contract columbia law review. 

89.

Green, R.C., 1984. Investment incentives, debt, and warrants. J. Financ. Econ. 13, 

115–136.

Grossman, S.J., Hart, O.D., 1986. The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of 

vertical and lateral integration. J. Political Econ. 94, 691–719.

Hansmann, H., Kraakman, R., Squire, Richard, 2005. Law and the rise of the firm. 

Harv. Law Rev. 119 (1335).

Hart, O.D., 2001. Financial contracting. J. Econ. Lit. 39 (4), 1079–1100.
Hill, J.G., 2024. Hidden fallacies in the agency theory of the corporation. European 

Corporate Governance Institute-Law Working Paper 799.

Holmstrom, B., 1979. Moral hazard and observability. Bell J. Econ. 10 (1), 74–91.
Hotelling, H., 1929. Stability in competition. Econ. J. 39 (153), 41–57.
Hotelling, H., 1931. The economics of exhaustible resources. J. Political Econ. 39 (2), 

137–175.

Jensen,  M.,  1989.  Eclipse  of  the  public  corporation.  In:  Tricker,  R.I.  (Ed.),  Har-
vard Business Review. http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9781315191157, 2000 Corporate 
Governance: Values, Ethics and Leadership Gower.

Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency 

costs and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3, 305–360.

Jensen, M., Meckling, W., 1983. Reflections on the corporation as a social invention. 

Midl. Corp. Financ. J. 1 (3), http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.244156.

Jensen, M.C., Murphy, K.J., 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives. J. 

Political Econ. 98, 225–264.

Kaplan, S., Stromberg, P., 2003. Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An 
empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. Rev. Econ. Stud. 70 (2), 281–315.
Lamoreaux,  N.R.,  Rosenthal,  J.-L.,  2005.  Entity  shielding  and  the  development  of 

business forms: A comparative perspective. Harv. Law Rev. 119 (238).

Landier, A., Thesmar, D., 2008. Financial contracting with optimistic entrepreneurs. 

Mirrlees, J.A., 1975. The theory of moral hazard and unobservable behaviour: Part i. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (1), 117–150.

Rev. Econ. Stud. 66, 3–21.

Myers, S.C., 2000. Outside equity. J. Financ. 55 (3), 1005–1037.
Pauly, M.V., 1968. The economics of moral hazard: comment. Am. Econ. Rev. 58 (3), 

Posner,  R.,  Scott,  K.,  1980.  The  Economics  of  Corporation  Law  and  Securities 

Regulation. Little Brown & Co Law, Boston, Massachusetts.

Ramsey, F.P., 1928. A mathematical theory of saving. Econ. J. 38 (152), 543–559.
Ross, S., 1973. The economic theory of agency:The principal’s problem. Am. Econ. Rev. 

531–537.

63, 134–139.

Rothschild, M., Stiglitz, J., 1970. Increasing risk 1, a definition. J. Econom. Theory 2, 

225–243.

Rothschild, M., Stiglitz, J., 1976. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An 

essay on the economics of imperfect information. Q. J. Econ. 90, 630–649.
Smith, Adam, 1776. The Wealth of Nations Cannan Edition. Modern Library, New York.
Spence, A.M., 1973. Job market signaling. Q. J. Econ. 87, 74–355.
Steensgaard, N., 1982. The dutch east India company as an institutional innovation. 
In: Aymard, Maurice (Ed.), Dutch Capitalism and World Capitalism. Cambridge 
University Press.

Stern, J., Chew, D., 1986. The Revolution in Corporate Finance. Wiley-Blackwell.
Stiglitz, J.E., 1974. Incentives and risk sharing in sharecropping. Rev. Econ. Stud. 41, 

219–255.

Stiglitz,  J.E.,  1975.  Incentives,  risk,  and  information:  notes  towards  a  theory  of 

hierarchy. Bell J. Econ. 6 (2), 552–579.

Stout, L.A., 2005. On the Nature of Corporations. University of Illinois Law Review, p. 

253.

Zeckhauser, R., 1970. Medical insurance: A case study of the tradeoff between risk 

spreading and appropriate incentives. J. Econom. Theory 2 (1), 10–26.

12 

