Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Loan guarantees, bank lending and credit risk reallocation(cid:73)
Carlo Altavilla a, Andrew Ellul b,∗, Marco Pagano c, Andrea Polo d, Thomas Vlassopoulos e
a European Central Bank, CSEF and CEPR, Germany
b Indiana University, CSEF, CEPR and ECGI, United States of America
c University of Naples Federico II, CSEF, EIEF, CEPR and ECGI, Italy
d Luiss University, EIEF, CEPR and ECGI, Italy
e European Central Bank, Germany

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Do banks extending government-guaranteed loans simultaneously reduce their risk exposure to firms? Using 
unique euro-area credit register data and the COVID-19 guarantee programs as a laboratory, we find that 1 euro 
of guaranteed lending was associated with a reduction of 28 cents in non-guaranteed credit, relative to other 
banks lending to the same firm. Substitution was highest for riskier and smaller firms in more affected sectors 
and for stronger banks. Nevertheless, banks offered cheaper credit and longer maturities to guaranteed loan 
recipients, especially more fragile ones. This improvement in lending terms is the flipside of credit substitution.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/34pj2x9r7z/2

JEL classification:
G18
G21
E63
H12
H81

Keywords:
Loan guarantees
Bank lending
Credit substitution
Credit risk
COVID-19 pandemic

1. Introduction

Loan guarantees are well-established policy tools: governments rely 
on them to encourage bank lending by shouldering borrowers’ default 
risk.  Their  typical  rationale  is  to  overcome  frictions  leading  to  the 
under-provision of credit to particular types of firms, especially during 
economic crises when default waves may propagate across debt chains 
interconnecting firms (Glode and Opp, 2023), leading even otherwise 
viable firms to be liquidated (Antill and Clayton, 2025). Loan guar-
antees provide the required backstop even to hard-hit firms, insofar 

as transferring default risk to the government encourages banks to in-
crease lending. They may also be a faster and more efficient way to sup-
port firms than direct government funding, as typically banks’ screening 
technologies and established relationships endow them with better in-
formation than the government about the quality of each firm: by lever-
aging banks’ knowledge provided they retain skin in the game, liquidity 
should more likely reach viable firms than if the government were to 
pick the firms to be saved and those to be liquidated (Philippon, 2021).

(cid:73)

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank for helpful comments and suggestions the editor, an anonymous referee, as well as Elena Carletti, 
Fabrizio Core, Filippo De Marco, Olivier Darmouni, Alex Guembel, Luigi Guiso, Uli Hege, Victoria Ivashina, Claudio Michelacci, Olivia Soohae Kim, Elena Loutskina, 
Jose Luis Peydro, Raghu Rajan, Fabiano Schivardi, Jeremy Stein, Adi Sunderam, Matteo Venesio, Jonathan Wallen, Teodoro Zaccaria, participants to conferences 
at the Banque de France and Banca d’Italia, the Bank of Italy & Bocconi Financial Stability Conference, CUNEF, the DNB-Riksbank-Bundesbank Macroprudential 
Conference, the 8th Conference on Financial Intermediation, the IBEO Workshop, the 2022 WFA Meetings, and seminars in Bonn, at the ECB, EIEF, HBS, Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Indiana and Toulouse. Marco Pagano and Andrea Polo acknowledge financial support from EIEF. We thank Bettina Farkas, Federica 
Mascolo, Maria Dimou and Damiano Saba for excellent research assistance. The opinions in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the ECB or the Eurosystem.

∗ Corresponding author.

(A. Polo), thomas.vlassopoulos@ecb.int (T. Vlassopoulos).

E-mail addresses:  carlo.altavilla@ecb.int (C. Altavilla), anellul@indiana.edu (A. Ellul), pagano56@gmail.com (M. Pagano), andreapolo@gmail.com 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104137
Received 7 December 2023; Received in revised form 27 June 2025; Accepted 30 June 2025
Available online 23 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Thus, the efficiency of such programs rests on bank lending being 
highly responsive to public guarantees. This is reduced if the banks pro-
viding guaranteed loans simultaneously reduce their non-guaranteed 
loans or credit lines to the same debtors, so as to decrease their credit 
risk exposure toward them by shifting it to the government. The main 
objective of this paper is to assess the extent to which banks engage in 
such ‘‘credit substitution’’, thus reducing public guarantees’ effective-
ness in expanding credit. For this purpose, we exploit the COVID-19 
guarantee programs as our laboratory. Bank loan guarantees were mas-
sively used to stabilize the economy in response to the pandemic shock 
and the resulting dry-up in firms’ liquidity. The possibility of credit 
substitution was indeed on policymakers’ minds when laying out eligi-
bility guidelines for these programs, as we explain in Section 3,1 and the 
media was also aware of such risk.2 In this respect, the pandemic can 
be regarded as a testing ground to study the effectiveness of a massive 
expansion of bank loan guarantees amid a major recession. In this study 
we consider how loan guarantees affected the overall conditions at 
which banks offered credit: not only the amount of lending, but also 
the interest rates and the maturities at which it was made available, 
taking into account the trade-offs between these dimensions of credit 
contracts.

At the aggregate level, net lending in the euro area grew less than 
one-for-one  with  the  expansion  of  guaranteed  loans  between  April 
and  August  2020,  i.e.  during  the  first  wave  of  the  pandemic  and 
following the launch of loan guarantee programs, as shown by Fig.  1. Of 
course, such a macro-level correlation is per se no evidence that credit 
substitution occurred upon the introduction of loan guarantee schemes. 
Hence, this paper bases the analysis on firm-bank matched data drawn 
from the euro-area Anacredit credit register.

The granularity and breadth of our data enables us to investigate 
various facets of the issue of substitution. First, data for firms with mul-
tiple lending relationships help us to address the issue of firms’ selection 
into loan guarantee programs. Second, the data enable us to investigate 
how credit substitution varied across firms and banks, depending on 
their characteristics, and whether it differed across countries adopting 
different loan guarantee programs. Finally, we can investigate whether 
the provision of public guarantees was associated with changes in the 
cost of credit and/or loan maturities and whether these were related to 
credit substitution.

To guide the empirical analysis, we propose a model of the effects of 
public loan guarantees on banks’ non-guaranteed lending and interest 
rates. The model shows that loan guarantees should be expected to 
have different effects across firms depending on their credit risk and 
bargaining power in renegotiating credit with their initial lender.

The model predicts that, by opening an avenue to transfer credit 
risk to the government, loan guarantees induce banks to reduce non-
guaranteed credit more to riskier firms than to safer ones. Moreover, if 
banks are competitive, credit substitution is predicted to correlate with 
a drop in the average interest rate charged to the relevant borrowers, 
who will thereby appropriate the benefit of the public guarantee. This 

1 Blanchard et al. (2020) describe this possible problem as follows: ‘‘The 
main danger is the transfer of pre-existing exposures. A bank with an exposure 
to a firm could ask it to use the guaranteed debt to repay its existing loans. 
This would be a transfer of risk to the state’’.

2 For instance, the Financial Times drew attention to Greensill Bank AG 
using  state-backed  loans  from  three  European  governments  to  reduce  its 
exposure to distressed companies owned by metal magnate Sanjeev Gupta (see 
‘‘Greensill used taxpayer loans to cut exposure to Sanjeev Gupta’’, Financial 
Times, 4 July 2021); similarly, Italian and Spanish newspapers flagged the 
risk that loan guarantees may end up shielding banks more than firms hit by 
the pandemic shock (see ‘‘Lo scudo delle garanzie fiscali copre più le banche 
delle imprese’’, La Repubblica, 1 March 2021 and ‘‘Una parte de los créditos 
avalados por el ICO para rescatar a las pymes se queda en manos de la banca 
para cubrir deudas de los empresarios’’, El Diario, 13 May 2020).

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

benefit is greater for high-risk clients, who enjoy a sharper credit cost 
reduction. This generates a positive correlation across firms between 
credit substitution and interest rate reduction upon the introduction 
of loan guarantees. However, the drop in credit costs will be lower if 
frictions in renegotiating loans enable the initial lender to share in the 
benefit from the guarantee via greater profits.

To take these predictions to the data, we measure credit substitu-
tion as (the negative of) the change in non-guaranteed credit in the 
pandemic period relative to its pre-pandemic level.3 To estimate the 
relationship between credit substitution and the supply of guaranteed 
loans, one must consider that the firms that received guaranteed loans 
are  not  a  random  sample,  but  one  whose  composition  depends  on 
eligibility rules. To overcome this selection issue, we exploit variation 
across firm-bank relationships for firms that received guaranteed loans, 
rather than variation across firms in the whole sample: for firms that 
borrow from multiple banks, we compare the change in non-guaranteed 
exposures between banks extending guaranteed loans and other banks 
lending to the same firm, using a methodology akin to that of Khwaja 
and Mian (2008). Exploiting such within-firm variation enables us to 
address the counterfactual problem of whether firms that experienced 
substitution upon receiving guaranteed loans would have faced a credit 
cut anyway. This concern is especially relevant for firms that were 
already financially weaker before the pandemic (but still in line with 
eligibility rules) and/or were severely hit by the shock: had they not 
received guaranteed loans, they would have been likely to face a credit 
reduction anyway. Our approach addresses this concern by effectively 
considering substitution by banks that did not extend guaranteed loans 
as the counterfactual credit response for banks that extended guaran-
teed loans. Exploiting such within-firm variation, we find that 1 euro 
of guaranteed lending is associated with a 28-cent reduction in non-
guaranteed credit by the bank offering the guaranteed loan relative to 
other banks lending to the same firm.

Estimates also show that credit substitution was largest for guar-
anteed lending to riskier and smaller firms in sectors and countries 
more affected by the pandemic, and borrowing from stronger banks, 
i.e., those with less NPLs. These results align with the model’s pre-
dictions, insofar as these firms have greater default probability and 
these banks have higher bargaining power vis-à-vis the corresponding 
borrowers.  The  regressions  also  include  bank-level  fixed  effects  to 
control for unobserved bank heterogeneity in the provision of credit 
during the pandemic.4 These results are qualitatively consistent across 
the four largest euro-area countries, although the extent of substitution 
differs across them, being largest in Italy and lowest in Germany.

A  potential  concern  with  our  estimates  is  that  observed  credit 
substitution could mechanically reflect the expiration of a previous 
loan  and  its  replacement  with  the  guaranteed  loan,  rather  than  a 
deliberate decision to reduce credit. However, several tests show that 
substitution  cannot  be  ascribed  to  this  mechanical  effect  from  the 
expiration of pre-existing non-guaranteed credit. Moreover, we find 
that credit substitution is significantly stronger for credit issued via 
revolving credit lines, which can be revoked unilaterally by the bank 
at any time, than for term loans and non-revolving credit lines, whose 
terms can be altered only by renegotiating them with clients.

Our results on firms with multiple bank relationships may be subject 
to two selection issues. First, banks issuing guaranteed loans are not 
randomly assigned among the lenders of a given firm. Second, the 
characteristics  of  firms  with  multiple  bank  relationships  may  differ 

3 Given this definition of credit substitution, we exclude from the analysis 
firms that access the credit market for the first time in the wake of the adoption 
of the loan guarantee program.

4 For example, some banks may have lent more aggressively during the 
guarantee  program  because  they  had  better  information  technology  capa-
bilities  to  handle  the  high  number  of  applications  (Core  and  De  Marco, 
2023).

2 

C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Fig. 1.  Guaranteed loans and net lending: country-level data (billion euros)
This figure shows the cross-country relation between the amount of take-up of guaranteed loans and the net loan flows at country level, over the period April-August 
2020. Each dot refers to a country in the euro area. Data sources: Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau for Germany, Instituto de Crédito Oficial for Spain, Ministère 
de l’Économie et des Finances for France, Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze and Banca d’Italia for Italy, various national authorities for other euro area 
countries, news sources, ECB and ECB calculations.

from those of the population. To sign the first potential selection bias, 
we investigate the characteristics of banks issuing guaranteed loans rel-
ative to other banks lending to the same firm, and find that banks with 
more capital, greater size and tighter relationships with the firm were 
more likely to extend guaranteed credit.5 As these banks’ characteristics 
are typically associated with a greater supply of credit at times of stress 
(Bolton et al., 2016, and Jiménez et al., 2012), our results, if anything, 
underestimate the extent of substitution by banks issuing guaranteed 
credit.  To  face  the  second  possible  selection  issue,  we  expand  the 
sample to include single-bank firms and estimate regressions that do 
not include firm fixed effects (as in the main specification) but include 
industry-location-size fixed effects. The estimates obtained using this 
expanded sample are qualitatively similar to our baseline ones, except 
that the estimates of credit substitution are approximately 2 to 6% 
higher.

As our model predicts that loan guarantees should affect not only 
the availability of credit, but also other lending conditions offered to 
the firm, we then investigate how the provision of guarantees corre-
lates with changes in the interest rates and loan maturities offered 
by banks providing guaranteed loans, considering the conditions that 
apply to their overall lending to the firm, i.e., both guaranteed and non-
guaranteed credit. We find that the bank providing guaranteed credit 
reduces the average interest rate and lengthens the average maturity 
of its credit relative to other banks lending to the same firm without 
guarantee, and these effects are stronger for weaker firms, i.e., those 
in  more  affected  sectors  and  countries,  with  smaller  size  and/or  a 
larger fraction of arrears. These results align with the predictions of 
our model, which predicts that riskier firms obtain a larger reduction in 
the cost of credit upon receiving guaranteed loans. Hence, in line with 
the model, the banks granting guaranteed loans offer more generous 
interest rate concessions to their riskier clients while reducing their 
non-guaranteed exposure to them by more. As a result, at the cross-
sectional level, the availability of loan guarantees generates a tradeoff: 
in  bank-firm  relationships  where  firms  are  faced  with  more  credit 
substitution,  they  obtain  comparatively  more  generous  interest  rate 
concessions. Consistent with the model, we find that this tradeoff is 
affected by the distribution of bargaining power between banks and 

5 This confirms the importance of healthy balance sheets and relationships 
as key mechanisms in liquidity provision at times of stress, consistently with 
U.S. evidence by Li and Strahan (2021).

firms: when the bank providing the guaranteed loan is the sole firm’s 
lender rather than one of several lenders, it grants a much smaller 
interest  rate  concession  to  the  firm  for  a  given  amount  of  credit 
substitution. Similarly, when the bank lent to the firm via a callable 
credit line, it grants a smaller interest rate concession upon extending 
a guaranteed loan than when it provided no callable credit to the firm, 
so that substitution requires renegotiating its non-guaranteed credit.

Finally,  we  ask  whether  the  substitution  observed  at  bank-firm 
level is also present at firm level. As these regressions rely on firm-
level variation rather than on within-firm variation, they also include 
single-bank firms. In firm-level estimates, larger guaranteed loans are 
associated with a smaller degree of substitution, 1 euro of additional 
guarantees being associated, on average, with a drop of 9 cents in 
non-guaranteed lending. This indicates that the drop in the supply of 
non-guaranteed credit by banks that provide the guaranteed loan is 
mitigated by the behavior of the banks that do not issue the guaranteed 
loan. Also at firm level, substitution is confirmed to be stronger for 
weaker firms and for stronger banks.

The  overall  thrust  of  our  results  is  that  in  the  euro  area,  gov-
ernment guarantees contributed to the continued extension of credit 
to relatively creditworthy firms hit by the pandemic. However, they 
also triggered a certain amount of credit substitution, by which pre-
existing credit risk was merely transferred from banks to taxpayers. 
This was not necessarily a policy failure, for three reasons. First, absent 
such programs, banks could have reduced their exposures even more, 
generating default waves that might have crippled otherwise viable 
firms. Second, by using these programs to de-risk their balance sheets, 
banks may have preserved more lending capacity to face the post-
pandemic recovery, reducing the risk of a cliff-effect credit crunch upon 
program termination. Third, since substitution moderated lending to 
the riskiest firms, these should have accumulated less leverage than in 
a counterfactual world where no substitution occurred (Brunnermeier 
and Krishnamurthy, 2020).

Our paper contributes to three recent strands of research. The first 
is  the  literature  on  the  effectiveness  of  public  guarantee  programs. 
Bachas et al. (2021) investigate the effectiveness of guarantees pro-
vided by the Small Business Agency in the U.S. and find significant 
bunching in the loan size distribution at thresholds where guarantee 
generosity decreases, showing that lenders prefer to issue loans with 
higher guarantee rates. After our work, other papers have focused on 
evidence from individual countries and particular aspects of Europe’s 

3 

C. Altavilla et al.

pandemic loan guarantee programs.6 Our contribution relative to this 
literature is to provide the first systematic investigation of the effects 
of these programs on the entire gamut of credit conditions in bank-firm 
relationships, exploring how these effects vary depending on firm and 
bank characteristics and taking into account the relationship between 
credit substitution and cost of credit.7 A further contribution is to show 
that our results hold across countries with different program designs 
and institutional characteristics.

Our paper also contributes to the literature on the variation of bank 
liquidity provision across firm sizes at times of stress. Previous work 
documents that, at the inception of the pandemic, large firms raised liq-
uidity by drawing down their credit lines (Acharya and Steffen, 2020; 
Li et al., 2020); instead, small and medium enterprises (SMEs), which 
were prevented from doing so, relied on guaranteed loans to mitigate 
their liquidity shortfall (Greenwald et al., 2020; Kapan and Minoiu, 
2021; Chodorow-Reich et al., 2022). Our paper adds to this literature 
by investigating how the effects of loan guarantee programs varied 
depending on firm characteristics, as smaller and riskier firms faced 
more severe credit substitution but benefited from greater interest rate 
reductions and maturity extensions. This underscores the importance 
of providing a complete picture of the effects of such programs by 
investigating all lending conditions rather than solely the amount of 
lending.

Finally, our paper is relevant for the effectiveness of policies aimed 
at counteracting the real effects of the pandemic. Our evidence for 
Europe differs from that for the United States, where Granja et al. 
(2022) find that the funds of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) 
were not channeled to the worst-hit sectors, and Cororaton and Rosen 
(2021) document that PPP targeted mostly firms with higher leverage, 
less cash and worse business prospects.8

The  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2  proposes  a  model 
to guide the empirical analysis. Section 3 describes the institutional 
framework of euro-area loan guarantees. Sections 4 and 5 present the 
data and the empirical methodology. Section 6 reports and discusses 
the results. Section 7 concludes.

2. A model of loan guarantees and credit substitution

This model is intended to guide the empirical analysis regarding the 
effects of the introduction of loan guarantees on the amount and cost 
of non-guaranteed credit. It shows how these effects vary depending 
on  firms’  default  risk  and  their  bargaining  power  in  renegotiating 
pre-existing loans.

First,  upon  extending  guaranteed  loans,  banks  are  predicted  to 
reduce non-guaranteed loans to riskier borrowers more than to com-
paratively safe ones; indeed, the latter may even obtain more non-
guaranteed  lending,  as  the  guarantee  induces  banks  to  relax  their 

6 Cascarino et al. (2022) study their effectiveness in Italy by exploiting 
variation in the fractional guarantees offered by different programs and find 
that programs with higher fractional guarantees triggered a greater expansion 
in credit. Jiménez et al. (2022) analyze the effect of relationship lending on 
guaranteed loans in Spain: they show that pre-existing relationships affect both 
the allocation of guaranteed loans and the substitution between guaranteed 
and non-guaranteed credit. Martin et al. (2023) develop a model that shows 
that banks have the incentive to allocate guarantees to captive and risky firms 
and test these predictions using Spanish credit register data.

7 The evidence in Chodorow-Reich et al. (2022) suggests that the issue of 
substitution may also have been relevant for the U.S. during the pandemic, 
as small firms that took PPP loans repaid significant non-PPP lending in the 
second quarter of 2020.

8 There is evidence that the PPP scheme had significant real effects: Autor 
et al. (2022) and Bartik et al. (2020) document that it raised employment 
at eligible firms and increased firms’ survival. Instead, our evidence for the 
euro area dovetails with that by Core and De Marco (2023) for Italy and 
Kozeniauskas et al. (2020) for Portugal and broadly in line with the evidence 
by Gourinchas et al. (2024).

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

borrowing constraints. Hence, credit substitution should correlate pos-
itively with firm risk.

Second,  the  model  predicts  that  if  non-guaranteed  loans  can  be 
renegotiated competitively, guaranteed loans trigger a drop in firms’ 
average cost of credit, especially for riskier borrowers. Hence, the drop 
in the cost of credit is predicted to correlate positively with credit 
substitution across firms. This interest rate response is muted if firms 
have low bargaining power in renegotiating pre-existing loans so that 
initial lenders appropriate most of the guarantee’s expected benefit.

2.1. Setup

There is a continuum of firms, each of which can undertake one of 
two investment projects that differ in size and payoff: small projects 
have an initial cost 𝐼𝑠 and pay 𝑌  if they succeed and zero otherwise, 
while large projects cost an amount 𝐼𝓁 > 𝐼𝑠 and pay 𝑋 if successful 
and zero otherwise. Firms are assumed to have no initial assets and 
must fund their projects entirely out of bank credit. Investors feature 
risk neutrality and no discounting.

Firms differ in their failure probability: projects run by good (𝑔) 
and  bad  (𝑏)  firms  fail  with  probabilities  𝑝  and  𝑝 + 𝛥,  respectively. 
Small projects have positive NPV even if carried out by a bad firm, 
i.e., (1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥)𝑌 > 𝐼𝑠, while large projects have negative NPV even if 
undertaken by a good firm, i.e., (1 − 𝑝)𝑋 < 𝐼𝓁. However, large projects 
generate a non-pledgeable payoff 𝐵, due to moral hazard arising from 
limited enforcement or private benefit extraction by firm owners. This 
non-pledgeable payoff is large enough that good firms would want to 
undertake a large project rather than a small one if they could fund it 
internally: 

𝐵 + (1 − 𝑝)(𝑋 − 𝑌 ) > 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐼𝑠.

(1)

We analyze two settings: one with no public guarantees and another 
where  guarantees  become  unexpectedly  available  after  financing  is 
issued. The guaranteed loan, 𝐿𝐺, is large enough to make funding the 
large project viable, but only if managed by a good firm: 

(1 − 𝑝)𝑋 > 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐿𝐺 > (1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥)𝑋,

(2)

where 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐿𝐺 is the part of the project’s cost not covered by the 
guaranteed loan. The rationale for this assumption is that the loan 
guarantee program is designed to avoid shifting excessive credit risk 
onto the government: the guarantee is sufficient to relax banks’ credit 
standards vis-à-vis good risks but not bad ones. For the same reason, the 
guaranteed loan is assumed not to exceed the cost of the small project, 
i.e., 𝐿𝐺 ≤ 𝐼𝑠.

2.2. Equilibrium with no guaranteed loans

Absent loan guarantees, only small projects are funded in equilib-
rium, as large ones have negative NPV. If the credit market is perfectly 
competitive, good and bad firms obtain term loans of amount 𝐼𝑠 with 
pledged repayments 𝐹𝑠𝑔 and 𝐹𝑠𝑏, respectively: 

𝐹𝑠𝑔 =

𝐼𝑠
1 − 𝑝

, 𝐹𝑠𝑏 =

𝐼𝑠
1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥

,

(3)

implying pledged interest rates  𝑝
. The value of debt issued 
to the two firm types equals the small project’s cost: 𝐷𝑠𝑔 = 𝐷𝑠𝑏 = 𝐼𝑠, and 
the expected firm payoffs equal the NPVs of their respective projects: 

1−𝑝  and  𝑝+𝛥

1−𝑝−𝛥

𝛱𝑠𝑔 = (1−𝑝)(𝑌 −𝐹𝑠𝑔) = (1−𝑝)𝑌 −𝐼𝑠, 𝛱𝑠𝑏 = (1−𝑝−𝛥)(𝑌 −𝐹𝑠𝑏) = (1−𝑝−𝛥)𝑌 −𝐼𝑠.

(4)

4 

C. Altavilla et al.

2.3. Equilibrium with guaranteed loans

Suppose now that guaranteed loans of size 𝐿𝐺 are offered after these 
contracts are signed. The availability of guaranteed loans induces firms 
and banks to change the terms of their initial contracts. In both cases, 
the outcome differs depending on the firm’s default risk and bargaining 
power vis-à-vis banks in the renegotiation of the initial contracts, as 
shown below.

2.3.1. Loan renegotiation

Consider first the terms at which firms can renegotiate their loans 
with  competitive  lenders:  upon  becoming  eligible  for  a  guaranteed 
loan, they will want to reduce their non-guaranteed loans by the full 
amount of the guaranteed loans, which carries a zero interest rate, 
as the government absorbs its default risk. For banks to break even, 
the pledged repayments required from good and bad firms respectively 
drop to: 

𝐹 ′
𝑠𝑔 =

𝐼𝑠 − 𝐿𝐺
1 − 𝑝

, 𝐹 ′

𝑠𝑏 =

𝐼𝑠 − 𝐿𝐺
1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥

.

(5)

As a result, the average interest rates pledged by the two firms on 
their overall (i.e., guaranteed and non-guaranteed) debt respectively 
drop to  𝑝
. The two firms’ expected payoffs 
1−𝑝
respectively rise to 

 and  𝑝+𝛥
1−𝑝−𝛥

𝐼𝑠−𝐿𝐺
𝐼𝑠

𝐼𝑠−𝐿𝐺
𝐼𝑠

⋅

⋅

𝛱 ′

𝑠𝑔 = (1 − 𝑝)(𝑌 − 𝐹 ′

𝑠𝑔 − 𝐿𝐺) = (1 − 𝑝)𝑌 − 𝐼𝑠 + 𝑝𝐿𝐺 = 𝛱𝑠𝑔 + 𝑝𝐿𝐺,

(6)

𝛱 ′

𝑠𝑏 = (1−𝑝−𝛥)(𝑌 −𝐹 ′

𝑠𝑏−𝐿𝐺) = (1−𝑝−𝛥)𝑌 −𝐼𝑠+(𝑝+𝛥)𝐿𝐺 = 𝛱𝑠𝑏+(𝑝+𝛥)𝐿𝐺,
(7)

𝑠𝑔 and 𝐹 ′

by substituting for 𝐹 ′
𝑠𝑏 from (5) in the second step of expressions 
(6) and (7). Hence, the guarantee benefits both firms by reducing their 
credit costs and shifting their default risk to the government. Bad firms 
benefit more than good ones: the former gains (𝑝+𝛥)𝐿𝐺, the latter 𝑝𝐿𝐺.
However, the loan guarantee also enables good firms to upgrade 
their investment from a small to a large project by complementing 
the guaranteed loan 𝐿𝐺 with a non-guaranteed loan 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐿𝐺, which 
may be smaller or larger than the pre-existing loan 𝐼𝑠 depending on 
whether the guaranteed loan exceeds the cost difference between the 
two projects (𝐿𝐺 > 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐼𝑠) or not (𝐿𝐺 < 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐼𝑠). In the first case, 
the  guaranteed  loan  would  still  trigger  credit  substitution,  but  less 
than for its full amount, because 𝐿𝐺 − (𝐼𝓁 − 𝐼𝑠) ∈ (0, 𝐿𝐺). Hence, 
substitution would be less than for bad firms undertaking small projects, 
for which substitution is complete. In the second case, the guaranteed 
loan would generate additional lending 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐼𝑠 − 𝐿𝐺 > 0 rather than 
credit substitution: banks are willing to relax good firms’ borrowing 
constraints by funding negative-NPV projects (at least based on their 
pledgeable cash flow) because guaranteed loans enable them to shift 
credit risk to the government.

From the banks’ zero-profit condition, the pledged repayment on 

these loans is 
𝐼𝓁 − 𝐿𝐺
1 − 𝑝

𝐹𝓁𝑔 =

,

(8)

so that the expected payoff for good firms becomes 

𝛱𝓁𝑔 = 𝐵+(1−𝑝)(𝑋−𝐹𝓁𝑔 −𝐿𝐺) = 𝐵+(1−𝑝)𝑋−𝐼𝓁 +𝑝𝐿𝐺 > 𝛱𝑠𝑔 = (1−𝑝)𝑌 −𝐼𝑠+𝑝𝐿𝐺.

(9)

This inequality, which follows from assumption (1), indicates that good 
firms prefer this loan contract to one funding a small project. The 
repayment (8) entails that the average rate pledged by good firms on 
their overall debt drops to  𝑝
1−𝑝  in the absence of 
1−𝑝
guaranteed loans. Interestingly, the implied drop in their cost of credit, 
𝑝
1−𝑝

𝐼𝓁 −𝐿𝐺 , down from  𝑝
, is less than that enjoyed by bad firms,  𝑝+𝛥
1−𝑝−𝛥

𝐼𝓁

⋅

.

⋅ 𝐿𝐺
𝐼𝑠

⋅ 𝐿𝐺
𝐼𝓁

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Hence, if the introduction of guaranteed loans is followed by com-
petitive renegotiation of the initial contract, it is predicted to entail 
complete substitution of non-guaranteed lending to riskier firms but 
incomplete substitution or even additional issuance of non-guaranteed 
lending to safer firms. In both cases, firms reap the entire benefit from 
public insurance of credit risk through reduced cost of credit. But riskier 
firms gain more than safer ones as they enjoy a more significant drop 
in their credit cost. Hence, the model predicts that the introduction 
of guaranteed loans generates changes in non-guaranteed credit and 
interest rates that are positively correlated across firms, being both 
larger for riskier firms. Otherwise stated, credit substitution should be 
cross-sectionally associated with credit cost reduction.

The above argument rests on firms being able to obtain credit at 
competitive  terms  from  other  banks  and  thus  threaten  their  initial 
lender with early repayment of the initial loan upon securing a new 
non-guaranteed loan 𝐼𝑠 − 𝐿𝐺 and a guaranteed loan 𝐿𝐺 at competitive 
terms.  But  if  this  assumption  does  not  hold,  the  firm  has  limited 
bargaining power in the renegotiation process, and the initial lender 
can capture at least part of the benefit from public insurance against 
default. In the limiting case in which the firm cannot contract with any 
bank other than its initial lender, this can make a take-it-or-leave-it 
offer  to  the  firm:  issue  the  guaranteed  loan  while  raising  the  non-
guaranteed loan rate enough to appropriate the entire benefit of the 
guarantee and leave the firm with an unchanged total cost of credit, and 
thus an unchanged payoff, so that the firm can be assumed to accept 
it. Such an offer will require bad firms to pledge a repayment 

𝐹 ′′
𝑠𝑏 =

𝐼𝑠
1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥

− 𝐿𝐺,

(10)

which exceeds the competitive repayment 𝐹 ′
𝑠𝑏 in (5), thus increasing 
the interest rate on the non-guaranteed loan. So the market value of the 
bank’s overall debt (inclusive of the guaranteed loan), 𝐷′′
𝑠𝑏, increases by 
(𝑝 + 𝛥)𝐿𝐺 above its value under competitive renegotiation, 𝐷′

𝑠𝑏 = 𝐼𝑠: 

𝐷′′

𝑠𝑏 = (1 − 𝑝 − 𝛥)(𝐹 ′′

𝑠𝑏 + 𝐿𝐺) + (𝑝 + 𝛥)𝐿𝐺 = 𝐼𝑠 + (𝑝 + 𝛥)𝐿𝐺.

(11)

A similar finding applies to the renegotiation of loans to good firms. 
By  assumption  (1),  good  firms  prefer  to  undertake  a  large  project, 
which they can fund by complementing the guaranteed loan 𝐿𝐺 with 
a non-guaranteed loan of size 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐿𝐺 rather than 𝐼𝑠 − 𝐿𝐺. In this case 
too, the initial lender’s bargaining power in renegotiation will enable 
it to benefit from the public guarantee. In the limiting case where it 
can make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the firm, the bank will fully 
appropriate the surplus by requiring the firm to pledge a repayment 
− 𝐿𝐺 on its non-guaranteed loan 𝐼𝓁 − 𝐿𝐺, which exceeds the 
𝐹 ′′
𝓁𝑔 =
competitive repayment 𝐹 ′
𝓁𝑚 and implies an increase in the interest rate 
on the non-guaranteed loan. This allows the bank to appropriate the 
entire expected value of the guarantee, 𝑝𝐿𝐺, as the value of the firm’s 
overall debt becomes 

𝐼𝓁
1−𝑝

𝐷′′

𝓁𝑔 = (1 − 𝑝)(𝐹𝓁𝑔 + 𝐿𝐺) + 𝑝𝐿𝐺 = 𝐼𝓁 + 𝑝𝐿𝐺,

(12)

as opposed to 𝐷′
𝓁𝑔 = 𝐼𝓁 under competitive renegotiation. Hence, also 
in this case, the banks’ bargaining power results in a higher cost of 
non-guaranteed credit (though smaller than for bad firms) and an un-
changed total cost of credit. Symmetrically, the firm’s expected payoff 
drops below its value 𝛱𝓁𝑔 under competition in (9) by the expected 
value of the loan guarantee, 𝑝𝐿𝐺.

In general, the renegotiation between the bank and the firm can 
be expected to lead to an intermediate outcome between the two polar 
cases in which the surplus created by the loan guarantee is appropriated 
entirely by either firms or banks. The new conditions of non-guaranteed 
loans will depend on the distribution of the bargaining power between 
the firm and its initial lender.

5 

C. Altavilla et al.

3. Institutional framework

As a preliminary step to our empirical analysis, this section provides 
information on the design of EU loan guarantee programs enacted in 
the wake of the COVID-19 outbreak, as the extent to which banks 
engage in credit substitution may be affected by the eligibility rules that 
determine the allocation of credit guarantees across firms. As we shall 
see, EU loan guarantee programs were structured so as to exclude firms 
whose viability could not benefit from such guarantees, namely, both 
those already close to insolvency before the outbreak of the pandemic, 
and those that were not negatively affected by the pandemic. Hence, 
the eligibility rules were designed so as to exclude from loan guarantee 
programs both the lower and the upper tail of the firm distribution by 
credit risk.

The design of loan guarantee schemes in European Union (EU) coun-
tries shares several common features defined by the EU Commission 
Regulation No. 651/2014, although national rules determine some of 
their details. Not all firms could benefit from loan guarantee programs 
in the EU. The Communication of the EU Commission about State aid 
during the pandemic (2020/C 91 I/01) stated: ‘‘The guarantee may be 
granted to undertakings that were not in difficulty . . . on 31 December 
2019’’, thus excluding firms already close to default before the start 
of the pandemic. The Commission’s definition of an ‘‘undertaking in 
difficulty’’ is one for which at least one of the following circumstances 
occurs:

(a) limited liability companies (other than SMEs that existed for less 
than three years), where more than half of their subscribed share 
capital has disappeared as a result of accumulated losses,

(b) companies where at least some members have unlimited liability 
for the debt of the company (other than an SME that existed for 
less than three years), where more than half of their capital as 
shown in the company accounts has disappeared as a result of 
accumulated losses,

(c) firms subject to collective insolvency proceedings or fulfilling the 
criteria for being placed in collective insolvency proceedings at 
the request of their creditors,

(d) firms that received rescue aid and have not yet reimbursed the 
loan or terminated the guarantee, or received restructuring aid 
and are still subject to a restructuring plan,

(e) large firms, whose book debt to equity ratio exceeded 7.5 and 
EBITDA interest coverage ratio was below 1 for the previous two 
years.

At the same time, the EU Commission required aid to be targeted to 
firms ‘‘that faced difficulties or entered in difficulty thereafter as a re-
sult of the COVID-19 outbreak’’, hence excluding those firms unaffected 
by the pandemic or even benefiting from it.

Regarding credit substitution, national regulators appeared to toler-
ate it at least to some degree. For instance, French regulation subjected 
the  guarantee  to  the  bank  evidencing  that  the  loan  granted  led  to 
an ‘‘increase in the bank’s commitments to the borrower compared 
to commitments that existed as at 16 March 2020’’. In Italy, loans 
guaranteed by Fondo Nazionale di Garanzia and designed for refinanc-
ing of existing loans were required to involve at least 25% of new 
lending. The media also appeared acutely aware of the risk that loan 
guarantee programs might benefit banks more than the firms hit by the 
pandemic.9

The EU Commission set minimum guarantee premia increasing in 
maturity and more stringent for large enterprises than for SMEs, as well 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

as a ceiling of 6 years on the maturity of all loans. It also mandated 
limits to the size of guaranteed loans: these could not exceed twice the 
annual wage bill of the beneficiary for 2019, or 25% of total turnover 
of the beneficiary in 2019. Interestingly, it designed the guarantees so 
as to leave banks with enough ‘‘skin in the game’’ to remain sensitive to 
firms’ creditworthiness when granting guaranteed loans: the guarantee 
could not exceed 90% of the loan principal if losses are sustained pari 
passu by the bank and the state, or 35% of the loan principal if the State 
is junior to the bank.

National governments introduced some differences in their respec-
tive programs: while they all designed schemes in which loans’ guaran-
teed fraction decreased with firm size (hence, more generous with SMEs 
than with large firms), different governments chose different schedules 
for the relationship between guaranteed loan fraction and firm size, as 
shown in Table A1. The Italian and German governments even provided 
100% guaranteed loans: in the case of Italy, this applied to all loans 
up to e30,000 given to small firms, and in the case of Germany to 
firms whose loans were issued under the KfW-Schnellkredit program. 
But, as shown by the table, for most loans the guaranteed fraction 
ranges between 70% and 90%, with lower percentages applying to 
larger firms. The table also reveals that the Italian, German and Spanish 
schemes allowed public guarantees even for loans exceeding the 6-year 
maturity limit prescribed by the EU Commission’s guidelines.

4. Data

We draw loan-level information obtained from AnaCredit, a pro-
prietary and confidential database of the ECB and the national central 
banks of euro-area countries (the Eurosystem). AnaCredit is a very gran-
ular (transaction-level) database that reports 94 loan-level attributes 
on a monthly frequency in a harmonized way across all euro area 
countries, with a common reporting threshold for company loans at 
e25,000. This database enhances the information obtained from na-
tional credit registers already present in several euro-area countries, 
as the common threshold ensures that cross-country studies, like ours, 
are  not  affected  by  sample  selection  bias  possibly  stemming  from 
the different reporting threshold of the national credit registers. For 
example, while there is no threshold for credit exposure in Spain (any 
credit exposure is reported), the German credit register has a 1 million 
euro threshold.10

AnaCredit covers a comprehensive set of credit instruments: term 
loans,  non-revolving  credit  lines,  financial  leases,  trade  receivables 
and revolving credit. Both the amount already drawn under a granted 
facility and the undrawn part are reported: in our analysis we consider 
their sum, i.e., the total commitment of the bank to the debtor with 
respect  to  an  instrument.  AnaCredit  also  reports  interest  rates  and 
maturities at loan level.

Importantly for our analysis, among the attributes of each loan, 
there is extensive information on the protection securing the bank’s 
credit exposure, including financial guarantees provided by govern-
ment entities.11 While in some countries special identifiers were intro-
duced to mark guarantees provided under specific COVID-19-related 
schemes, these are not consistently available for all the four countries 
considered in our sample, so we consider all guarantees provided by 
government entities. As a sanity check, we compare AnaCredit data for 
Italy with the publicly available list of government-guaranteed loans 
from  the  Italian  Fondo  Nazionale  di  Garanzia  (FNG).  Applying  the 
AnaCredit filter of loans above the 25,000 euro threshold to the FNG 

9 Also  in  U.S.  loan  guarantee  programs,  credit  substitution  is  tolerated 
according to the SBA 7(a) guidelines, which state that ‘‘7(a) loans can be 
used for: Refinancing current business debt’’ (https://www.sba.gov/partners/
lenders/7a-loan-program/terms-conditions-eligibility).

10 The reporting thresholds for the national credit register in France and 
Italy are e25,000 and e30,000, respectively.
11 The database also records guarantees provided by special entities includ-
ing Instituto de Crédito Oficial in Spain, Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau in 
Germany, Ministere de l’Action et des Comptes Publics in France.

6 

C. Altavilla et al.

data, we find a very similar number of firms receiving guaranteed credit 
in both databases (around 358,000 firms).12

We  supplement  these  data  with  bank  balance  sheet  information 
drawn  from  the  ECB  supervisory  data  to  measure  banks’  solvency 
(i.e., their capital ratio and fraction of non-performing loans), liquidity 
(coverage ratio), and size (total assets) as of December 2019.

Our  sample  from  AnaCredit  contains  a  total  of  2,527,108  firms 
present in the database before the inception of pandemic-related loan 
guarantee programs: 1,140,911 from France, 371,036 from Germany, 
608,672 from Italy and 406,489 from Spain. These firms borrow from 
838 banks in Germany, 106 in Spain, 104 in France and 158 in Italy. 
The subsample of firms that are recorded to have received guaranteed 
credit between March and August 2020 includes 500,013 firms. For 
about 13% of these firms, the guaranteed loan was issued by a new 
bank, namely, one not lending to the firm before the inception of the 
program. Recall that, while guaranteed credit can be of any amount, 
AnaCredit’s e25,000 reporting threshold implies that many micro firms 
that likely obtained credit below this threshold do not appear in the 
credit register. This could be one reason why only about one fifth of 
firms in AnaCredit are seen to obtain guaranteed credit.

Our initial sample of 2,527,108 firms excludes data for 227,738 
firms that received guaranteed loans by August 2020 but for which 
no loan data were recorded in AnaCredit before the inception of the 
loan guarantee program in February 2020. For these firms, we cannot 
estimate our measure of credit substitution. (To be precise, we do not 
know whether these firms did not receive any credit as of February 
2020  or  received  loans  below  the  Anacredit  reporting  threshold  of 
€25,000.)

As shown in Figs.  2 and 3, most guaranteed credit was granted in 
Spain and Italy, with France in third place and the smallest amount 
in Germany. The two figures also confirm that, as seen above, the loan 
guarantee schemes of all four countries were designed to channel funds 
preferentially to SMEs, which received around 85% of the credit in each 
of the four countries (Fig.  2). The prevalence of small firms is even more 
extreme in terms of their number, especially in Italy (Fig.  3). In terms of 
average guaranteed loan size, German firms received the largest loans, 
and Italian firms received the smallest, with guaranteed loan sizes in 
France and Spain being in the middle, as shown by Fig.  4.

Table  1 reports the descriptive statistics for the variables used in 
our  analysis.  Panel  (a)  shows  firm-level  statistics  for  the  full  sam-
ple, Panel (b) shows those for the subsample of firms that received 
guaranteed loans, Panel (c) presents bank-firm-level statistics for the 
subsample of firms that featured multiple bank relationships and re-
ceived  a  guaranteed  loan,  Panel  (d)  reports  loan-level  statistics  for 
guaranteed loans.

Firms that received guaranteed loans are not a random sample, 
but one whose composition depends on eligibility guidelines. This can 
be seen by comparing the statistics in Panel (a), which are for the 
entire sample of 2,527,108 firms, with those in Panel (b), which refer 
to  the  500,013  firms  that  received  guaranteed  credit.  On  average, 
firms that obtained guaranteed loans were those in industries more 
affected by the pandemic shock but ex-ante less risky than those in 
the whole sample. These differences are confirmed by the firm-level 
regressions  that  investigate  how  the  allocation  of  guaranteed  loans 
correlates with firm characteristics: the estimates shown in Table A2 
show that the likelihood of receiving guaranteed credit was greater for 
smaller and less risky firms, and for those in industries more affected 
by the pandemic shock, even after including country-level fixed effects 
to control for cross-country differences. Hence, consistent with the EU 
Commission eligibility guidelines, guaranteed loans were neither given 
indiscriminately  nor  adversely  selected:  they  were  targeted  toward 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

adversely hit and small firms that were not ex-ante riskier, as eligibility 
criteria leveraged banks’ information to screen out firms already close 
to distress before the pandemic.

Panel  (d)  of  Table   1  reports  loan-level  statistics  for  guaranteed 
loans. The average percentage of the government guarantee is around 
80 per cent, the average interest rate is 2 per cent and the average 
maturity  is  33  months.  The  characteristics  of  the  guaranteed  loans 
differed across the four countries, consistently with the rules reported 
in Table A1. The Appendix reports country-level descriptive statistics 
(in Tables A10, A11, A12 and A13) that, broadly speaking, confirm for 
each country the firm-level observations discussed above.

5. Empirical methodology

The  central  question  addressed  in  this  paper  is  whether  banks 
extending  guaranteed  loans  reduce  their  non-guaranteed  exposures 
toward them. Identifying credit substitution is challenging. The issue 
is the classical counterfactual problem: whether a firm that received 
a guaranteed loan would have faced a credit cut anyway. This is an 
important concern, especially for firms that were already weak before 
the pandemic and/or were severely hit by the shock: if they had not 
received guaranteed loans, presumably these firms would have been 
more likely than others to face a credit cut, and even loan foreclosure. 
Indeed, as mentioned above, the evidence reported in Table A2 indi-
cates that government guarantees were not randomly allocated across 
euro-area firms but carefully targeted to specific firm classes. We are 
able to address this selection issue owing to the granularity of our 
data, which allows us to exploit within-firm variation.  As data are 
at bank-firm level, for firms borrowing from multiple banks we can 
exploit variation in lending across banks lending to the same firm: 
specifically, we can compare the change in non-guaranteed exposures 
between banks extending guaranteed loans and other banks lending to 
a given firm, along the lines of Khwaja and Mian (2008).

Specifically, we define credit substitution as the negative of change 
in non-guaranteed credit (𝑁𝐺𝐶𝑖,𝑗 ) extended to firm 𝑖 by bank 𝑗, divided 
by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020 by all its 
lenders (𝑇 𝐶𝑖,𝑡−1):

𝑠𝑖,𝑗 = −

𝑁𝐺𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 − 𝑁𝐺𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1
𝑇 𝐶𝑖,𝑡−1

,

where 𝑡 is (end of) August 2020 and 𝑡 − 1 is (end of) February 2020. 
The reason why the change in non-guaranteed credit (𝑁𝐺𝐶𝑖,𝑗 ) is nor-
malized by total initial credit (𝑇 𝐶𝑖,𝑡−1) instead of bank 𝑗’s initial credit 
(𝑇 𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1) is that this enables us to retain in the sample firms whose 
guaranteed loan is issued by a new bank, namely, one that was not 
lending to the firm before the inception of the program.13 We estimate 
a specification at the bank-firm level, where variables vary across the 
lending relationships that a given firm 𝑖 has with its banks 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝐽 :

𝑠𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽1𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 + 𝛽2𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 × 𝛥𝑉 𝐴𝑖 + 𝛽3𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 × 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽4𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 × 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖 + 𝛽5𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 × 𝐵𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑗

(13)

+ 𝛽6𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 × 𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑗 + 𝛽7𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 × 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑗 + 𝛽8𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 × 𝑁𝑃 𝐿𝑗 + 𝛾𝑖 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗

For banks that do not grant guaranteed credit to firm 𝑖, the numerator 
of 𝑠𝑖𝑗 coincides with the change in their credit to the firm. Hence, 
if  bank  𝑗  grants  guaranteed  credit  to  firm  𝑖,  𝑠𝑖𝑗  measures  bank  𝑗’s 
substitution, while for other banks it measures the change in their credit 
to firm 𝑖. The main regressor, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount of the government-
guaranteed loan received by the firm 𝑖, divided by its total outstanding 
credit as of February 2020. The coefficient 𝛽1 measures the magnitude 

12 The number of firms that obtained a loan guarantee is smaller in our 
tables  since  we  only  consider  firms  present  in  the  AnaCredit  database  in 
December 2019.

13 Normalizing  by  𝑇 𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑡−1  would  mechanically  remove  the  observations 
related to these firms from the sample, as the denominator would equal zero 
if bank 𝑗 did not lend to the firm at 𝑡 − 1.

7 

C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Fig. 2.  Amount of guaranteed loans by firm size
The figure shows the amount of guaranteed loans (in million euros) issued to firms in different size classes based on their employment (small firms being those 
with less than 50 employees, medium firms those with 50 to 250 employees, and large firms as those with more than 250 employees). The sample includes firms 
present in the AnaCredit database as of December 2019 and considers guaranteed loans issued between March and August 2020.

Fig. 3.  Number of guaranteed loans by firm size
The figure shows the number of guaranteed loans issued to firms in different size classes to their employment size (small firms being those with less than 50 
employees, medium firms those with 50 to 250 employees, large firms as those with more than 250 employees). The sample includes firms recorded in the 
AnaCredit database as of December 2019 and considers guaranteed loans issued between March and August 2020.

of bank 𝑗’s substitution: it represents the change in the amount of non-
guaranteed lending per euro of guaranteed lending granted. Since the 
regression includes firm fixed effects, 𝛾𝑖, it exploits the variation in 
lending behavior across banks lending to the same firm. The other 
coefficients measure whether the magnitude of bank 𝑗’s substitution 
differs depending on firm, bank, and firm-bank characteristics.

The firm characteristics that we consider are: (a) the change in 
the value added of firm 𝑖’s industry and country during the sample 
period (𝛥𝑉 𝐴𝑖), (b) the log of firm 𝑖’s total outstanding bank loans as of 
December 2019 (𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖),14 and (c) the firm’s fraction of credit in arrears 

14 Owing  to  incomplete  reporting  of  other  metrics  of  firm  size  in  the 
Anacredit database (such as total assets or number of employees), we use total 
bank loans as a proxy.

8 

as of December 2019 (𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖), as a measure of the firm’s ex-ante credit 
risk. The interaction of the loan guarantee variable 𝐿𝑖𝑗 with the change 
in sectoral value added in specification (13) is meant to capture that 
credit substitution may have been affected by the extent to which the 
firm was exposed to the recessionary effects of the pandemic. To reduce 
endogeneity concerns, the change of value added is not measured at 
the firm level, but at the country-industry level, which also takes into 
account  that  the  pandemic  may  have  differently  affected  the  same 
industry in different countries. The interactions with firm size and risk 
are intended to allow for different degrees of credit substitution across 
firms, owing to banks’ lower willingness to grant credit to smaller and 
riskier firms, which are typically subject to tighter financial constraints 
(Beck et al., 2005), especially at times of economic stress.

The  regressions  also  include  four  bank  characteristics  measured 
before the pandemic to investigate whether bank size and balance sheet 

C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Fig. 4.  Distribution of guaranteed loan size
The figure reports the distribution of the size of guaranteed loans in million euro issued in different countries. We report the median, the interquartile range and 
the 16th and 84th percentile. The sample includes firms recorded in the Anacredit database as of December 2019 and considers guaranteed loans issued between 
March and August 2020.

strength  mattered  for  credit  substitution.  Our  specification  includes 
three measures of the balance sheet strength of banks lending to firm 
𝑖: liquidity (𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑗 ), capitalization (𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑗 ), and non-performing loans as a 
fraction of total loans (𝑁𝑃 𝐿𝑗 ). Finally, some specifications also include 
controls at bank-firm level: the credit granted by bank 𝑗 scaled by the 
total credit owed by the firm to all banks (as a proxy for relationship 
banking), the ratio between the drawn amount and credit granted, 
and the residual maturity of the loans issued by a bank to a given 
firm. All bank and bank-firm variables are measured as of December 
2019. The specification also includes bank fixed effects (𝜂𝑗 ) to control 
for unobserved bank heterogeneity in the provision of credit during 
the pandemic. Standard errors are double-clustered at the bank and 
firm level. We also estimate similar specifications where the dependent 
variables are interest rates and loan maturities.

While the main analysis is performed at the bank-firm level, thus 
exploiting within-firm variation, we also measure credit substitution 
at the firm level, to investigate whether and how guaranteed lending 
affected  the  overall  non-guaranteed  lending  to  firms.  The  analysis 
focuses only on firms that received loan guarantees to minimize the 
impact of selection due to eligibility criteria. We measure firm-level 
credit substitution by the drop in non-guaranteed loans to a given firm 
in response to an extra euro of guaranteed loans, i.e., the negative of the 
change in non-guaranteed credit (𝑁𝐺𝐶𝑖) to firm 𝑖, scaled by its initial 
total credit (𝑇 𝐶𝑖):

𝑠𝑖 = −

𝑁𝐺𝐶𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑁𝐺𝐶𝑖,𝑡−1
𝑇 𝐶𝑖,𝑡−1

,

where 𝑡 is (end of) August 2020 and 𝑡 − 1 is (end of) February 2020. 
Substitution occurs if non-guaranteed credit declines upon the firm 
receiving a guaranteed loan, i.e., if 𝑠𝑖 > 0. However, in principle, non-
guaranteed credit may increase, in which case the measure 𝑠𝑖 would 
turn negative. Fig.  5 shows how the variable 𝑠𝑖 is distributed across 
firms for the whole sample and separately for each of the four countries: 
it is positive for most firms, its median being positive in all countries, 
and larger in Italy and Spain than in France and Germany. In Italy and 
Spain, almost the whole distribution is in positive territory. Hence, this 
simple unconditional statistic suggests that substitution was larger in 
Italy and Spain than in France and Germany. However, this result may 
reflect cross-country differences in firm characteristics, as well as in the 
magnitude of the shock hitting them.

To account for such heterogeneity, we investigate how substitution 
is related to the size of the guaranteed loan scaled by total initial credit, 
𝐿𝐺
𝑖 , and to its interactions with firm and bank characteristics, for the 
subsample of firms that received a guaranteed loan:

𝑠𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐿𝐺

𝑖 + 𝛽2𝐿𝐺

𝑖 × 𝛥𝑉 𝐴𝑖 + 𝛽3𝐿𝐺

𝑖 × 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽4𝐿𝐺

𝑖 × 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑖 + 𝛽5𝐿𝐺

𝑖 × 𝐵𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖

(14)

+ 𝛽6𝐿𝐺

𝑖 × 𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑖 + 𝛽7𝐿𝐺

𝑖 × 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖 + 𝛽8𝐿𝐺

𝑖 × 𝑁𝑃 𝐿𝑖 + 𝛾𝑐 + 𝜀𝑖

While  firm  variables  are  defined  as  in  Eq.  (1),  bank  variables  are 
weighted averages of the corresponding values for the banks lending 
to firm 𝑖, with weights equal to their shares in the firm’s total credit as 
of December 2019. In estimating this specification, errors are clustered 
at the level of the relevant firm’s main bank.

6. Results

In this section we address the main issue of the paper, by assessing 
the extent to which guaranteed loans resulted in credit substitution, 
and investigating how it correlates with the firm and bank charac-
teristics highlighted as potentially relevant in the model presented in 
Section 2. To identify the effect of the loan guarantee program on the 
availability of non-guaranteed credit to firms that received guarantees, 
in  Section  6.1  the  analysis  is  carried  out  at  within-firm  level,  by 
comparing credit granted by lenders providing a guaranteed loan with 
that issued by other lenders catering to the same firm. For robustness, 
we inquire whether the results hold if we exclude non-guaranteed loans 
that mature around the inception of guaranteed loan programs, as these 
would mechanically generate the appearance of credit substitution. We 
also test whether the results differ between term loans that cannot be 
unilaterally revoked by the bank and callable credit lines.

In Section 6.2, we address further potential selection issues. First, 
we try to sign the possible selection bias arising from the non-random 
choice of the lender providing the guaranteed loan among the firm’s 
lenders. Second, we check whether our results hold in the full popula-
tion of firms, including single-bank firms.

Section  6.3  investigates  how  the  provision  of  guaranteed  loans 
correlates with changes in the interest rate and the maturity offered 
by the bank granting the guaranteed loan, and whether these changes 
are correlated with credit substitution as predicted by our model.

9 

C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖𝑗

p75

p50

p25

p75

p50

p25

Mean

Mean

Observations

Observations

Std. dev.

0.53
0.61
0.53
0.12
1.44
0.10
1.61
0.40
0.03
0.03

0.00
0.00
−0.21
−1.96
0.00
10.68
1.45
0.16
0.03

0.22
0.15
−0.18
−1.84
0.05
11.02
1.59
0.17
0.04

0.00
0.00
−0.04
−1.02
0.00
12.70
1.64
0.19
0.04

0.00
0.00
−0.28
−2.80
0.00
9.75
1.37
0.14
0.02

0.20
0.55
0.44
−0.28
−1.87
0.00
12.09
1.52
0.16
0.04

0.59
0.97
0.80
−0.25
−0.79
0.00
12.92
1.72
0.18
0.07

0.25
0.71
0.59
−0.27
−1.71
0.02
11.66
1.63
0.16
0.05

500,013
500,013
474,103
500,013
500,013
500,013
495,051
462,323
488,049
493,273

2,527,108
2,527,108
2,527,108
2,527,108
2,527,108
2,492,992
1,970,077
2,461,231
2,478,597

0.41
0.40
0.13
1.39
0.20
1.87
0.44
0.04
0.02
Std. Dev.

Table 1
Descriptive statistics.
  Variable
  Panel (a): Firm-level statistics for full sample
  𝐺𝑖
  𝐿𝐺
  Industry VA Growth
  Firm Size (ln)
  Firm Risk
  Bank Assets (ln)
  Bank Liquidity
  Bank Capital
  Bank NPL
  Variable
  Panel (b): Firm-level statistics for sample of firms receiving a guaranteed loan
  𝑠𝑖
0.01
  𝐿𝐺
0.26
  Guar. Amount
0.21
  Industry VA Growth
−0.30
  Firm Size (ln)
−2.77
  Firm Risk
0.00
  Bank assets (ln)
10.51
  Bank Liquidity
1.37
  Bank Capital
0.14
  Bank NPL
0.03
  Panel (c): Bank-firm-level statistics for sample of firms with multiple bank
relationships receiving a guaranteed loan
  𝑠𝑖𝑗
  𝐺𝑖𝑗
  𝐿𝐺
  Industry VA Growth
  Firm Size (ln)
  Firm Risk
  Bank assets (ln)
  Bank Liquidity
  Bank Capital
  Bank NPL
  Share of gran.
  Drawn/Granted
  Residual Maturity (ln)
  Residual Maturity
  Panel (d): Loan-level statistics for guaranteed loans
  Guar. Percent
0.21
  Interest Rate
1.34
  Maturity
26.20
This table reports the descriptive statistics for the variables used in our analysis. Panel (a) reports the statistics at the firm 
level for the full sample, Panel (b) reports them for the sample of firms receiving a guaranteed loan, Panel (c) reports 
bank-firm-level statistics for the sample of firms with multiple bank relationships receiving a guaranteed loan, and Panel (d) 
reports loan-level statistics for guaranteed loans. The dummy 𝐺𝑖 equal to 1 if firm 𝑖 receives a government guaranteed loan 
between March 2020 and August 2020, and 0 otherwise (at the bank-firm level, the dummy 𝐺𝑖𝑗 is equal to 1 if bank 𝑗 gives 
𝑖  is measured at the 
a government guaranteed loan to firm 𝑖 between March 2020 and August 2020, and 0 otherwise); 𝐿𝐺
firm level and is defined as the amount of the government guaranteed loan received by the firm, divided by total credit in 
February 2020, while 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 is defined at the bank-firm level and is defined as the amount of the government guaranteed loan 
received by the firm 𝑖 by bank 𝑗, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020; Industry VA Growth is 
defined as the percentage change in Valued Added in the relevant industrial sector in each country between February 2020 
and August 2020; Firm Size is proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk is proxied by the share of loans in arrears 
out of total loans; Bank Assets is defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity is defined as the bank Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital is defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio; Bank NPL is defined as the share of NPL loans out of its 
total loans; Credit substitution (𝑠𝑖) is measured at firm level and is defined as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed 
credit received by firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020, divided by its total credit as of February 2020, while 𝑠𝑖𝑗
is measured at the bank-firm level and is defined as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗
to firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020); Guar. 
Amount is defined as the amount of the government-guaranteed credit multiplied by the percentage of guarantee received 
by the firm, divided by total credit in February 2020; Share of granted is defined as the share of the bank 𝑗 out of the 
total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; Drawn/Granted is defined as the amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by the amount 
granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual Maturity is defined as the log of the number of remaining months until the expiration 
or the repayment of the credit by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Guar. Percent is the percentage of the guaranteed loan covered by the 
public guarantee. Interest Rate is the rate charged on the guaranteed loan; Maturity is the log of the number of months of the 
guaranteed loan’s maturity. In Panels (a) and (b) bank-level variables are measured as weighted averages of the values for 
the banks lending to a given firm, where the weights are the shares of the bank exposure toward the firm in the firm’s total 
bank exposure as of December 2019. All variables, apart from Guarantee, Industry VA Growth, Interest rate, and Maturity 
are measured as of December 2019.

817,808
817,808
817,808
813,774
806,194
812,803
813,781
670,763
791,748
803,958
817,808
808,512
737,745
816,112

0.11
1.00
0.25
−0.25
0.62
0.00
12.92
1.79
0.17
0.06
0.48
1.00
3.98
51.03

0.00
0.00
0.00
−0.30
−1.56
0.00
10.10
1.32
0.14
0.03
0.12
0.71
2.60
8.07

0.04
0.51
0.20
−0.28
−0.42
0.02
11.32
1.70
0.15
0.05
0.32
0.83
3.11
34.61

0.01
1.00
0.00
−0.27
−0.53
0.00
11.74
1.54
0.14
0.04
0.27
0.98
3.53
30.90

0.30
0.50
0.35
0.12
1.56
0.09
1.76
0.48
0.03
0.03
0.24
0.29
1.42
33.04

580,779
595,288
578,893

0.81
1.98
33

0.80
1.21
26

0.80
1.65
36

1.00
2.63
60

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Fig. 5.  Distribution of firm-level credit substitution
The figure shows the country-level distribution of the firm-level credit substitution defined as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit between 
February 2020 and August 2020, divided by total credit in February 2020 (𝑠𝑖 for firm 𝑖). Each box plot displays the median, the interquartile range and the 16th 
and 84th percentile. The sample includes all firms in the AnaCredit database as of December 2019 that received a guaranteed loan between March and August 
2020.

Finally, in Section 6.4, we repeat the estimation on firm-level data, 
including firms borrowing from a single borrower in the sample, to 
obtain a firm-level estimate of credit substitution.

6.1. Within-firm estimates

Fig.  6 shows the average degree of credit substitution for the sub-
sample  of  firms  that  received  a  guaranteed  loan  and  had  multiple 
bank relationships. Panel (a) of the figure plots credit substitution 𝑠𝑖,𝑗
for bank-firm relationships with a guaranteed loan and those without. 
The  figure  shows  that,  for  the  whole  sample  and  for  each  of  the 
four  countries,  the  banks  granting  guaranteed  loans  featured  much 
greater credit substitution than other banks lending to the same firm: 
indeed, while the former reduced their non-guaranteed exposures upon 
granting guaranteed loans, the latter on average increased their non-
guaranteed exposures, and thus mitigated total credit substitution. On 
average, for the four largest euro area countries, banks that granted 
guaranteed loans reduced their non-guaranteed credit by 12%, while 
banks that did not provide guaranteed loans increased their exposure 
by 5% during the sample period. Panel (b) of Fig.  6 displays the same 
statistics for a subsample that excludes firms that obtained a guaranteed 
loan from a new bank, namely, one not lending to the firm before 
the  inception  of  guaranteed  loan  programs.  These  are  cases  where 
credit substitution cannot be positive by definition, as the bank had 
no prior exposure to the relevant firm. Owing to the exclusion of these 
firms, in this subsample the banks granting guaranteed loans reduced 
non-guaranteed credit by 16% on average.

Table  2 reports estimates of substitution regressions at the within-
firm level. The specification in the first column includes only firm and 
bank fixed effects. Other columns show estimates based on specification 
(13) in Section 5. The specification in the last column also controls for 
variables that vary at the bank-firm level (share of granted credit, ratio 
between drawn and granted credit, and residual maturity). In the first 
column, a 1-euro increase in guaranteed lending is associated with a 
reduction of 29 cents in non-guaranteed credit. In the other columns, 

whose specifications include interaction terms, substitution ranges be-
tween 28 and 32 cents. The coefficient is statistically significant at the 
1% level in all specifications.

The coefficient estimates of interactions between 𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 and the three 
firm-level variables, i.e., industry-level value-added growth, size, and 
risk, reveal that substitution is larger for more fragile firms, namely, 
smaller and riskier ones, and those in sectors and countries more af-
fected by the pandemic. This evidence is consistent with the prediction 
of the model in Section 2 that riskier firms should face more credit 
substitution upon getting a guaranteed loan. Moreover, substitution is 
estimated to be larger for banks with more liquidity, more capital and 
fewer NPLs before the pandemic. Finally, upon interacting 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 with 
bank-firm level variables, we find that substitution is higher the longer 
the residual maturity in the bank-firm relationship, the smaller the size 
of the exposure of the issuing bank relative to the other banks lending 
to the same firm at the beginning of the period, and the lower the ratio 
between drawn and granted credit.

To take into account that guaranteed loans differ not only in size but 
also in their fractional guarantee, as explained in Section 3, Table A3 
presents results where the guaranteed loan size, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is replaced by the 
guaranteed amount, which is equal to 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 multiplied by the fractional 
guarantee. The results are very similar but, of course, the size of the 
substitution coefficient is larger, as the magnitude of the explanatory 
variable is smaller than in the baseline regressions of Table  2.

In the sample of firms obtaining guaranteed credit in the period 
under  analysis,  around  13%  received  it  from  a  bank  that  was  not 
lending to them before the program’s inception. In other words, these 
firms established a new banking relationship through the guaranteed 
loan program. Consistently with the statistics reported in Panel (b) 
of  Fig.   6,  removing  these  bank-firm  relationships  from  the  sample 
raises the estimated substitution. The estimate in the first column of 
Table A4 of the Appendix shows that a 1-euro increase in guaranteed 
lending is associated with a reduction of 43 cents in non-guaranteed 
credit compared to 29 cents in the baseline regression shown in Table 
2. Hence, the presence of banks offering guaranteed loans with no 
prior exposure to the firm reduces average credit substitution by about 
one-third.

11 

C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Fig. 6.  Credit substitution for bank-firm relationships with and without guaranteed credit
The figure reports bank-firm level descriptive statistics of the variable 𝑠𝑖𝑗 , defined as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗 to 
firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020. The figure shows the average value of 𝑠𝑖𝑗 for 
bank-firm relationships where bank 𝑗 issues a government-guaranteed loan to firm 𝑖 between March 2020 and August 2020, and 0 otherwise. Panel (a) is based 
on the sample of all firms in the Anacredit database as of December 2019 that received a government-guaranteed loan and had multiple bank relationships. Panel 
(b) is based on a subsample that excludes firms whose guaranteed credit was issued by new banks, i.e., banks not lending to them as of February 2020..

Table A5 of the Appendix presents the estimates for the most com-
plete specification (shown in column 5 of Table  2) separately for each 
of the four countries. The results are similar across the four countries, 
which is far from obvious in light of the cross-country differences in 
the designs of the programs, the magnitude of the pandemic shocks, 
the composition of firm populations, and the national banking systems. 
The coefficient of the 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 variable is positive and highly statistically 
significant in all four countries. Although the magnitude of substitution 
varies across countries, being largest in Italy (31 cents per euro of 
guaranteed lending) and smallest in Germany (14 cents), in all four 
countries firm and bank characteristics appear to play a similar role in 
affecting the extent of substitution: this is larger for more fragile firms 
(i.e. smaller and riskier ones in more affected sectors and countries) 
and for stronger banks. In some cases, the relevant coefficients are not 
statistically significant but their signs are consistent across countries.

A potential concern with these results is that credit substitution by 
the banks providing guaranteed loans may not be due to an active 
decision on their part but simply to the expiration of a preexisting 
loan contract that is not rolled over upon issuing a guaranteed loan. 
The result that substitution is larger for banks whose pre-existing loans 
had longer residual maturity mitigates this concern, as it suggests that 
substitution is unlikely to stem from the expiration of pre-existing non-
guaranteed  credit.  However,  to  address  this  concern  more  directly, 
in  Table   3  we  re-estimate  the  main  specifications  of  Table   2  on  a 
sample that excludes the bank-firm relationships with at least one loan 
maturing between March 2020 and August 2020. The results remain 
similar after applying this filter, which removes around 14% of the 
observations.  For  further  robustness,  in  Table  A6  of  the  Appendix, 
we instead remove all the firm-bank relationships where the weighted 
average residual maturity in February 2020 is below 6 months (the 
weights being based on the amounts of the various loan instruments 

12 

C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 2
Credit substitution: firm-bank level analysis.
  Dependent variable:

Credit Substitution (𝑠𝑖,𝑗 )
(1)

(2)

0.322***
(0.018)
−0.190**
(0.076)
−0.036***
(0.011)
0.341***
(0.062)
0.013**
(0.007)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.891*
(0.527)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Industry VA Growth

0.291***
(0.016)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank NPL

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Share of Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Drawn/Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Residual Maturity

(3)

0.278***
(0.016)
−0.089*
(0.051)
−0.033***
(0.010)
0.324***
(0.059)
0.002
(0.007)
0.000*
(0.000)

−2.757***
(0.510)

(4)

0.278***
(0.017)
−0.089*
(0.048)
−0.033***
(0.010)
0.311***
(0.060)
0.004
(0.008)
0.003***
(0.000)
1.046**
(0.478)
−2.953***
(0.540)

(5)
0.281***  
(0.016)
−0.118**  
(0.049)
−0.028*** 
(0.010)
0.132**
(0.057)
0.009
(0.007)
0.001***  
(0.000)
0.927**
(0.417)
−3.865*** 
(0.587)
−0.518*** 
(0.032)
−0.229*** 
(0.044)
0.046**
(0.020)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

0.497
599 360

0.495
599 302

0.502
817 808

  Firm FE
  Bank FE
  Non-interacted variables
  R2
  N
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of an equation whose dependent variable is the credit substitution 𝑠𝑖𝑗 , defined 
as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 
2020, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount 
of government-guaranteed credit received by the firm, divided by total credit granted to the firm as of February 2020. Other 
explanatory variables are: Industry VA Growth, defined as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each country 
between February 2020 and August 2020; Firm Size, proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by the share 
of loans in arrears out of total loans; Bank Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined as the 
bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital, defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of NPL 
loans out of its total loans; Share of granted, defined as the share of the bank 𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; 
Drawn/Granted, defined as the amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual 
maturity, defined as the log of the number of remaining months until the expiration or the repayment of the credit by bank 𝑗
to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 and Industry VA Growth are measured as of December 2019. Standard 
errors, double-clustered at the bank and firm level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

0.498
589 477

0.532
509 100

in the total credit within the bank-firm relationship): also in this case, 
the results remain stable. This evidence shows that our results are not 
mechanically driven by loans maturing immediately after the inception 
of the loan guarantee programs.

Next, we investigate whether credit substitution is greater for credit 
instruments  that  can  be  revoked  unilaterally  by  the  bank  than  for 
those that cannot. In our data, there are three main types of credit 
instruments: (i) term loans, (ii) non-revolving credit lines, which cannot 
be revoked unilaterally by the issuing bank before maturity, and (iii) 
revolving credit lines, which have no maturity and can be revoked by 
the bank at any time with no prior notice, and amount to about 7% 
of credit extended via the other two instruments. Hence, banks have 
a lower ability to renegotiate the first two types of credit instruments 
when issuing guaranteed loans. In Table  4, the dependent variable is 
re-defined as credit substitution referring to items (i) and (ii), whereas 
in Table  5 is defined as substitution regarding revolving credit lines. 
As one would expect, the callable nature of the revolving credit lines 
makes substitution easier than for term loans (and non-revolving credit 
lines): credit substitution is larger (indeed, over twice as large) for 
revolving  credit  lines  than  for  term  loans  and  non-revolving  credit 
lines.15 Using the estimates in column 5 of Tables  4 and 5, we find 

that for term loans and non-revolving credit lines, a 1-euro increase 
in guaranteed lending is associated with a reduction of 25 cents in 
non-guaranteed credit relative to other banks lending to the same firm, 
while for revolving credit lines the reduction is of about 43 cents.

6.2. Other potential selection issues

While the within-firm estimates shown in Table  2 avoid firm se-
lection issues, they are not entirely immune from selection bias. First, 
banks issuing guaranteed loans are not randomly assigned across a 
given firm’s pre-existing lenders. Second, the characteristics of firms 
with multiple bank relationships may differ from those of the popula-
tion.

To sign the first potential selection bias, we analyze the within-firm 
selection of the bank granting guaranteed credit: Table  6 investigates 
the characteristics of the banks granting guaranteed credit within the 
subsample of firms with multiple banking relationships. The dependent 
variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 for banks granting guaranteed 
credit, and 0 otherwise.

The coefficient estimates of the bank size and capitalization vari-
ables in Table  6 show that the banks that provide guaranteed credit 
are significantly larger and more capitalized. Moreover, these banks 

15 The results of Table  4 are robust to the exclusion of maturing loans as 
shown in Table A7 in the Appendix (an exercise that, of course, cannot be 
repeated for revolving credit lines since they have no maturity). Once maturing 

loans are removed, the difference between the estimates of credit substitution 
for callable and non-callable credit instruments becomes even larger.

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 3
Credit substitution: firm-bank level analysis, excluding relationships with maturing loans.
  Dependent variable:

Credit substitution (𝑠𝑖,𝑗 )
(1)

(2)

0.308***
(0.021)
−0.057
(0.050)
−0.034***
(0.009)
0.336***
(0.060)
0.005
(0.010)
0.016
(0.048)
1.045**
(0.480)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Industry VA Growth

0.281***
(0.015)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank NPL

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Share of Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Drawn/Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Residual Maturity

(3)

0.269***
(0.019)
−0.001
(0.044)
−0.032***
(0.009)
0.309***
(0.059)
0.004
(0.008)
0.022
(0.044)

−2.773***
(0.482)

(4)

0.259***
(0.020)
−0.016
(0.045)
−0.032***
(0.010)
0.302***
(0.060)
0.014
(0.011)
0.017
(0.046)
0.980*
(0.511)
−3.001***
(0.506)

(5)
0.262***  
(0.019)
−0.020
(0.036)
−0.028*** 
(0.010)
0.132**
(0.063)
0.015**
(0.008)
0.006
(0.035)
0.830**
(0.405)
−3.872*** 
(0.554)
−0.511*** 
(0.033)
−0.241*** 
(0.044)
0.045**
(0.021)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

0.498
491 345

0.497
500 477

0.494
510 099

0.503
705 965

  Firm FE
  Bank FE
  Non-interacted variables
  R2
  N
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of a regression whose dependent variable is the credit substitution 𝑠𝑖𝑗 , defined as 
the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020, 
divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020. The sample excludes bank-firm relationships where there 
is at least one loan maturing between March 2020 and August 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount of 
government-guaranteed credit received by the firm divided by the total credit granted to the firm as of February 2020. Other 
explanatory variables are: Industry VA Growth, defined as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each country 
between February 2020 and August 2020; Firm Size, proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by the share 
of loans in arrears out of total loans; Bank Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined as the 
bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital, defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of NPL 
loans out of its total loans; Share of granted, defined as the share of the bank 𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; 
Drawn/Granted, defined as the amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual 
Maturity is defined as the log of the number of remaining months until the expiration or the repayment of the credit by 
bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 and Industry VA Growth are measured as of December 2019. 
Standard errors, double-clustered at the bank and firm level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

0.531
417 784

are  more  likely  to  be  the  relevant  firms’  main  banks,  as  they  fea-
ture a significantly larger share of granted credit. Thus, relationship 
lending appears to have made it easier for firms to access government-
guaranteed credit, consistent with evidence by Li and Strahan (2021) 
that the bank supply of credit under the Paycheck Protection Program 
(PPP) was done mainly by relationship banks. The results in Table  6 
help us infer the sign of the potential bias in the substitution estimates 
of Table  2 arising from the selection of the banks providing guaranteed 
credit: these ‘‘selected’’ banks are stronger, and more likely to engage in 
relationship lending with the relevant firms: hence, they are precisely 
the type of banks that according to the literature (Bolton et al., 2016, 
and Jiménez et al., 2012) should be associated with greater supply of 
credit during economic shocks. By extension, these banks should also 
be associated with lower credit substitution. Hence, if anything, the 
estimates in Table  2 are a lower bound on the extent of substitution 
by banks providing guaranteed loans.16

16 Another reason why our within-firm estimates may underestimate credit 
substitution is that guaranteed loans may have a negative spillover effect 
on non-guaranteed lending by banks not issuing the guaranteed loan: these 
lenders may reassess the firm as being riskier because of reduced monitoring 
by the bank issuing the guaranteed loan, and thus reduce their non-guaranteed 
lending to the firm alongside with the bank issuing the guaranteed loan. If 
so, using these lenders as benchmarks for the credit response of the bank 

Moreover, the results in Table  6 provide further reassurance that 
our results are likely to stem from banks’ decision to cut their non-
guaranteed credit when issuing a guaranteed loan, rather than to casual 
concomitant  expiration  of  pre-existing  non-guaranteed  loans.  When 
residual maturity is included in the specifications of columns 4–6, its 
coefficient is positive and significant: the bank issuing the guaranteed 
loan tends to be the one whose credit to the firm had the longer residual 
maturity, confirming that the previous findings regarding substitution 
are not simply driven by expiring credit being rolled over in the form 
of guaranteed credit.

The regressions reported so far are estimated on the subsample that 
only contains firms that borrowed from multiple banks, one of which 
granted a guaranteed loan to them, so as to merely exploit within-
firm variation in non-guaranteed credit substitution. However, this not 
only greatly reduces the sample, but may introduce selection biases, 
as the characteristics of firms with multiple-bank relationships may 
differ from those of the population. To address this issue, in Table 
7 we estimate regressions that also include single-bank firms. Even 
though these regressions cannot include firm fixed effects, they include 
industry-location-size (ILS) fixed effects as in Degryse et al. (2019) and 
Acharya et al. (2019). The results show that the inclusion of single-bank 

issuing the guaranteed loan would underestimate the magnitude of its credit 
substitution.

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 4
Credit substitution: firm-bank level analysis. Term loans plus non-revolving credit lines.
  Dependent variable:

Credit substitution (𝑠𝑖,𝑗 )
(1)

(2)

0.249***
(0.044)
−1.180*
(0.615)
−0.241***
(0.082)
3.415***
(0.620)
0.412***
(0.133)
0.992**
(0.437)
5.540**
(5.630)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Industry VA Growth

0.138***
(0.018)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank NPL

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Share of gran.

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Drawn/Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Residual Maturity

(3)

0.212**
(0.073)
−0.695*
(0.386)
−0.147**
(0.069)
3.044***
(0.511)
0.501***
(0.118)
1.143***
(0.329)

−4.601***
(0.432)

(4)

0.266**
(0.056)
−0.533
(0.436)
−0.141*
(0.073)
3.083***
(0.510)
0.495***
(0.115)
0.995***
(0.323)
3.309
(2.429)
−4.855***
(0.413)

(5)

0.252**
(0.093)
−0.546
(0.422)
−0.136*  
(0.075)
3.503***  
(0.615)
0.391***  
(0.116)
0.726**
(0.311)
2.938
(2.830)
−5.101*** 
(0.436)
−2.647*** 
(0.306)
−0.807*** 
(0.209)
0.021
(0.103)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

237 284
0.720

241 806
0.718

239 588
0.716

335 266
0.678

  Firm FE
  Bank FE
  Non-interacted variables
  N
  r2
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of an equation whose dependent variable is the credit substitution 𝑠𝑖𝑗 , defined 
as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 
2020, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount 
of government-guaranteed credit received by the firm, divided by total credit granted to the firm as of February 2020. In 
these regressions, ‘‘credit" refers exclusively to term loans plus non-revolving credit lines. Other explanatory variables are: 
Industry VA Growth, defined as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each country between February 2020 and 
August 2020; Firm Size, proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by the share of loans in arrears out of 
total loans; Bank Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined as the bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; 
Bank Capital, defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of NPL loans out of its total loans; Share 
of granted, defined as the share of the bank 𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; Drawn/Granted, defined as the 
amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual maturity, defined as the log of 
the number of remaining months until the expiration or the repayment of the credit by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory 
variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 and Industry VA Growth, are measured as of December 2019. Standard errors, double-clustered at 
the bank and firm level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

213 349
0.545

firms in the sample does not qualitatively affect the main coefficients 
of interest (both in terms of credit substitution and its interactions 
with firm and bank characteristics), except that the estimates of credit 
substitution are approximately 2 to 6% higher.

6.3. Change in interest rate and loan maturity

The model in Section 2 shows that public loan guarantees should 
simultaneously affect both the amount of non-guaranteed lending and 
the interest rate offered by the bank issuing the guaranteed loan, and 
that firm and bank characteristics should affect both of them. Indeed, 
the model predicts that the renegotiation of preexisting credit contracts 
between  banks  and  firms  eligible  for  guaranteed  loans  generates  a 
positive cross-sectional correlation between credit substitution and the 
drop in the cost of credit, as both should be greater for riskier firms. A 
similar trade-off can be expected between substitution and loan matu-
rity: the bank can lengthen the maturity of the firm’s loans as another 
concession  to  clients  who  bring  loan  guarantees  to  the  negotiation 
table.

To analyze how interest rates and loan maturities respond to the 
availability of loan guarantees in our data, and how such response 
varies depending on bank and firm characteristics, we adopt the same 
econometric specification used to assess the extent of credit substitu-
tion, namely, Eq. (13) in Section 5, replacing the dependent variable 
with the change in the interest rate or in the loan maturity of the 

relevant bank-firm relationship over the relevant period. In line with 
the model’s setup, we consider how the bank providing the guaranteed 
loan modifies the interest rate and loan maturity that apply to its over-
all lending position to the firm, i.e., the respective weighted averages 
applying to all the loans and credit lines issued to the relevant firm.

In Table  8, the dependent variable is 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑗 , i.e., the change 
between  February  2020  and  August  2020  in  the  weighted  average 
interest rate charged by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖. The estimates indicate that 
firms that receive a loan guarantee face a reduction in the interest 
rate charged on the loans extended to the firm by the bank issuing 
the guaranteed loan. The interest rate reduction amounts to 17 basis 
points for the average bank-firm relationship featuring a guaranteed 
loan relative to other banks lending to the same firm.17

The interest rate drop is larger for more fragile firms, i.e., smaller 
and  riskier  ones  and  those  belonging  to  more  affected  sectors  and 
countries.  The  result  that  riskier  firms  obtain  a  larger  interest  rate 
concession is in line with the predictions of the model presented in 
Section 2, which highlights that the credit risk insurance provided by 
the government via loan guarantees is more valuable for riskier clients, 
and therefore should benefit more such clients via a lower credit cost, to 

17 This number is obtained by multiplying the coefficient of 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 (−0.426) 
by the average guaranteed loan scaled by the total initial credit for bank-firm 
relationships where there is a guaranteed loan (0.39).

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 5
Credit substitution: firm-bank level analysis. Revolving credit lines.
  Dependent variable:

Credit substitution (𝑠𝑖,𝑗 )
(1)

(2)

0.464***
(0.093)
−0.808***
(0.249)
−0.089***
(0.017)
0.777***
(0.219)
0.142***
(0.028)
0.552***
(0.133)
4.407***
(1.085)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Industry VA Growth

0.426***
(0.082)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank NPL

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Share of gran.

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Drawn/Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Residual Maturity

(3)

0.402***
(0.094)
−0.689***
(0.231)
−0.091***
(0.015)
0.830***
(0.216)
0.0942***
(0.030)
0.407***
(0.124)

−3.363***
(1.853)

(4)

0.424***
(0.106)
−0.634***
(0.222)
−0.088***
(0.017)
0.840***
(0.217)
0.112***
(0.031)
0.513***
(0.132)
3.930***
(1.017)
−3.862***
(1.863)

(5)
0.427***  
(0.115)
−0.367*  
(0.188)
−0.125*** 
(0.030)
1.790***  
(0.350)
0.111**
(0.043)
0.471***  
(0.161)
2.955***  
(1.081)
−3.386*** 
(2.309)
−0.574*** 
(0.212)
−0.609*** 
(0.222)
0.151**
(0.071)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

323 854
0.753

327 720
0.752

326 285
0.752

428 761
0.669

  Firm FE
  Bank FE
  Non-interacted variables
  N
  r2
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of an equation whose dependent variable is the credit substitution 𝑠𝑖𝑗 , defined 
as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 
2020, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount of 
government-guaranteed credit received by the firm, divided by total credit granted to the firm as of February 2020. In these 
regressions, ‘‘credit" refers exclusively to revolving credit lines. Other explanatory variables are: Industry VA Growth, defined 
as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each country between February 2020 and August 2020; Firm Size, proxied 
by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by the share of loans in arrears out of total loans; Bank Assets, defined as 
the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined as the bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital, defined as the Core 
Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of NPL loans out of its total loans; Share of granted, defined as the share 
of the bank 𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; Drawn/Granted, defined as the amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖
divided by the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual maturity, defined as the log of the number of remaining months 
until the expiration or the repayment of the credit by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 and 
Industry VA Growth, are measured as of December 2019. Standard errors, double-clustered at the bank and firm level, are 
in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

256 201
0.624

the extent that lending competition forces banks to transfer this benefit 
to them.

The  specifications  in  columns  5  and  6  of  Table   8,  which  also 
control for characteristics of the bank-firm relationship, indicate that 
the interest rate cut offered by the bank issuing the guaranteed loan is 
larger if the bank features a high NPL/loan ratio and supplies a large 
fraction of the firm’s total credit. These effects may be interpreted in the 
context of the bank-firm renegotiation when the firm becomes eligible 
for a guaranteed loan: the larger the firm’s preexisting exposure vis-à-
vis its bank and the worse the bank’s preexisting loan portfolio, the 
greater the benefit to the bank from a loan guarantee and thus its 
willingness to offer an interest rate cut to the firm. This aligns with the 
model’s prediction that banks with weaker bargaining power vis-à-vis 
their clients transfer to these firms a larger fraction of the benefit from 
loan guarantees.

Next, we investigate how the reduction in interest rate offered to 
firms with guaranteed loans between February and August 2020 corre-
lates with credit substitution in the sample of bank-firm relationships. 
Specifically, we take to the data two predictions of our model regarding 
the joint response of interest rates and loan amounts to the provision 
of  loan  guarantees.  First,  in  renegotiating  pre-existing  loans,  banks 
should offer larger interest rate concessions to clients to whom they 
reduce non-guaranteed credit by more, i.e., for whom they engage in 
more credit substitution, since the model predicts that riskier clients 
will  benefit  more  from  the  availability  of  loan  guarantees  but  also 

face  more  credit  substitution.  Second,  in  such  renegotiation,  banks 
with  greater  bargaining  power  should  grant  a  smaller  interest  rate 
concession to clients to whom they extend a guaranteed loan than 
banks with less bargaining power, in exchange for a given amount 
of credit substitution; symmetrically, clients with greater bargaining 
power should obtain a more favorable tradeoff between interest rate 
concessions and credit substitution.

We  consider  two  characteristics  of  bank-firm  relationships  that 
should affect the distribution of bargaining power between banks and 
firms with guaranteed loans. First, we distinguish between firms with a 
single lender and those borrowing from multiple banks: in the former 
case lenders can be expected to have more bargaining power than in 
the latter, and therefore should grant a lower interest rate concession. 
Second, we split the sample between firms with at least one revolving 
credit line as of February 2020 and those without a revolving credit 
line: the former were exposed to a unilateral withdrawal or reduction 
of their non-guaranteed credit by the bank, while the latter were not, 
so that in the former case we can expect the lender to offer a smaller 
interest rate concession.

To test these predictions, in Table  9 we estimate regressions in 
which the dependent variable is the change in the interest rate charged 
by the bank issuing the guaranteed loan, and the explanatory variable is 
the degree of credit substitution received by the firm from that specific 
bank. To be precise, the sample includes single-bank firms and firms 
with multiple banking relationships. For the latter, we only include the 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 6
Characteristics of banks providing guaranteed loans.
Guaranteed loan (𝐺𝑖,𝑗 )
  Dependent variable:
(1)

(2)

  Bank Assets

  Bank Liquidity

  Bank Capital

  Bank NPL

  Share of Granted

  Drawn/Granted

  Residual Maturity (ln)

0.055***
(0.001)
0.048
(0.282)
3.704***
(0.616)

0.648***
(0.036)
0.206***
(0.075)

0.071***
(0.023)
0.061
(0.040)

−1.215
(1.620)
0.676***
(0.044)
0.167***
(0.062)

(3)

0.059***
(0.013)
0.011
(0.030)
3.687***
(0.596)
−0.788
(1.372)
0.651***
(0.037)
0.207***
(0.075)

(4)

0.069***
(0.012)
0.002
(0.030)
4.281***
(0.784)

0.430***
(0.038)
0.0750
(0.059)
0.109***
(0.021)

(5)

0.086***
(0.026)
0.065
(0.043)

−1.090
(1.953)
0.466***
(0.049)
0.107**
(0.054)
0.103***
(0.026)

(6)
0.071*** 
(0.014)  
0.005
(0.033)  
4.257*** 
(0.762)  
−0.261  
(1.677)  
0.430*** 
(0.038)  
0.149*** 
(0.059)  
0.110*** 
(0.021)  
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.405
619 623

0.401
629 964

0.367
630 117

  Firm FE
  R2
0.445
  N
545 767  
The table reports bank-firm level estimates of a regression whose dependent variable is a dummy 𝐺𝑖𝑗 equal to 1 if bank 
𝑗 gives a government-guaranteed loan to firm 𝑖 between March 2020 and August 2020, and 0 otherwise. The explanatory 
variables are bank and firm characteristics. The bank variables are: Bank Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank 
Liquidity, defined as the bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital, defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined 
as the share of NPL loans out of total loans. The bank-firm variables are: Share of granted, defined as the share of the bank 
𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; Drawn/Granted, defined as the amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by 
the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual Maturity is defined as the log of the number of remaining months until 
the expiration or the repayment of the credit by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory variables are measured as of December 
2019. Standard errors, clustered at the bank level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

0.441
554 537

0.397
555 058

bank-firm relationship where the bank granted the guaranteed loan. 
Thus, the regressions cannot include firm fixed effects; however, they 
include  bank  fixed  effects.  In  the  specification  shown  in  column  1 
of the table, which refers to the whole sample described above, the 
coefficient of credit substitution is negative and precisely estimated, 
consistent with the model’s prediction that credit substitution should 
be cross-sectionally correlated with lower cost of credit to firms. The 
estimated coefficient implies that 100% credit substitution would be 
associated with an interest rate reduction of 79 basis points. In columns 
2  and  3,  where  the  sample  is  split  between  firms  borrowing  from 
one bank and those with multiple bank relationships, we find that 
the interest rate reduction associated with 100% credit substitution is 
significantly smaller for the former (28 bp) than for the latter (109 
bp): conditional on the same amount of credit substitution, firms with 
multiple lenders benefited from a much sharper reduction in the cost 
of credit. Insofar as a firm with multiple bank relationships faces more 
competitive  credit  supply  than  one  with  an  exclusive  relationship, 
this result dovetails with the model’s prediction that firms that can 
renegotiate non-guaranteed credit on a more competitive market obtain 
a greater interest rate concession upon receiving a guaranteed loan. 
In columns 4 and 5 instead the sample is split between firms with a 
revolving credit line as of February 2020 and those whose credit did not 
include a revolving credit line. The estimates indicate that the interest 
rate reduction associated with 100% credit substitution is smaller for 
the former (60 bp) than for the latter (74 bp), consistent with the idea 
that in the former case firms face banks with greater bargaining power 
than in the latter, again in line with the model’s predictions.

Finally, in Table  10, as done in Table  8 for interest rates, we present 
regressions whose dependent variable is the change in average residual 
maturity. The results are similar. For the average bank-firm relationship 
with a guaranteed credit, the increase in residual maturity associated 
with  the  guarantee  is  9  months  relative  to  other  banks  lending  to 
the  same  firm.  However,  in  this  case,  the  presence  of  a  bank-firm 
relationship appears to reduce (or even offset) the positive effect of 
the availability of the loan guarantee: the interaction with the share 
of granted credit has a negative and significant coefficient. Moreover, 

banks issuing guaranteed loans offer greater maturity extensions to 
firms that already have a longer residual maturity. The puzzle may be 
solved if relationship banks typically have longer maturity loans, so that 
in the estimates, residual maturity acts as the most relevant measure of 
the strength of the bank-firm relationship.

6.4. Firm-level estimates

Finally, we inquire whether the substitution observed at the bank-
firm  level  also  matters  at  the  firm  level,  by  investigating  whether 
the  size  of  the  firm-level  guarantee  affected  the  overall  amount  of 
non-guaranteed credit received by firms included in loan guarantee 
programs. To this purpose, we estimate the specification of Eq.  (14) 
at the firm level for the subsample of firms that received a guaranteed 
loan, including those borrowing from a single bank. While the resulting 
estimates of substitution are of interest as they consider the overall 
response of firm-level credit supply to loan guarantees, it is exposed to 
selection concerns because firm-level variation in the amount of loan 
guarantees is non-random, being dictated by eligibility rules.

The  firm-level  estimates  are  shown  in  Table   11  for  the  pooled 
sample of firms receiving guaranteed loans in all four countries, and 
in Table A8 separately in each country. The estimated coefficients of 
the 𝐿𝐺
𝑖  variable shown in Table  11 indicate that larger loan guarantees 
are associated with lower non-guaranteed firm-level credit, the mag-
nitude of substitution ranging between 0.09 and 0.12 depending on 
the specification: on average a 1-euro increase in a firm’s guaranteed 
lending is associated with substitution ranging between 9 and 12 cents, 
which  translates  into  an  average  increase  in  total  lending  ranging 
between  88  and  91  cents.  Even  in  this  different  specification,  firm 
and bank heterogeneity associated with credit substitution have similar 
implications for credit substitution to those seen in previous tables. 
The coefficients of interactions between the guaranteed loan amount 
and firm-level characteristics show that the response of substitution to 
guarantees is larger for firms in more affected sectors and countries, 
and for smaller and riskier firms. While the coefficients are statistically 
significant for size and risk, they are not for value-added growth. In 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 7
Substitution: firm-bank level analysis, including single-bank firms.
  Dependent variable:

Credit substitution (𝑠𝑖𝑗 )
(2)
(1)

0.342***
(0.025)
0.141
(0.103)
−0.009
(0.007)
0.493***
(0.052)
0.010
(0.015)
0.001***
(0.000)
1.080
(0.781)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Industry VA Growth

0.337***
(0.028)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank NPL

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Share of Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Drawn/Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Residual Maturity

(3)

0.343***
(0.019)
0.114
(0.103)
−0.007
(0.007)
0.463***
(0.043)
0.017
(0.015)
0.001***
(0.000)

−2.450***
(0.676)

(4)

0.326***
(0.021)
0.103
(0.082)
−0.009
(0.007)
0.456***
(0.046)
0.002
(0.012)
0.001**
(0.000)
1.613**
(0.685)
−3.138***
(0.828)

(5)
0.307***  
(0.019)
0.081*
(0.046)
−0.026*** 
(0.008)
0.453***  
(0.048)
0.000
(0.010)
0.001**
(0.000)
1.258**
(0.563)
−2.169*** 
(0.835)
−0.322*** 
(0.035)
−0.079
(0.117)
0.100***  
(0.033)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

0.127
2 563 497

0.126
2 555 452

0.130
3 561 108

  Industry-Location-Size FE
  Bank FE
  Non-interacted variables
  R2
0.157
2102 075  
  N
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of an equation whose dependent variable is the credit substitution 𝑠𝑖𝑗 , defined 
as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 
2020, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount 
of government-guaranteed credit received by the firm, divided by total credit granted to the firm as of February 2020. Other 
explanatory variables are: Industry VA Growth, defined as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each country 
between February 2020 and August 2020; Firm Size, proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by the share 
of loans in arrears out of total loans; Bank Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined as the 
bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital, defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of NPL 
loans out of its total loans; Share of granted, defined as the share of the bank 𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; 
Drawn/Granted, defined as the amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual 
maturity, defined as the log of the number of remaining months until the expiration or the repayment of the credit by bank 𝑗
to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 and Industry VA Growth, are measured as of December 2019. Standard 
errors, double-clustered at the bank and firm level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

0.130
2514 094

this firm-level specification as well, credit substitution is significantly 
greater for firms borrowing from stronger banks, i.e., those featuring 
fewer NPLs, more liquidity and stronger capitalization, confirming the 
results in previous tables.

Table  A8  of  the  Appendix  presents  the  estimates  for  the  most 
complete specification (shown in column 4 of Table  11) separately for 
each of the four countries. Larger loan guarantees are associated with 
lower non-guaranteed credit in all four countries, but the magnitude of 
the reduction varies across countries, being largest in Italy (0.16) and 
smallest in Spain (0.07): thus, on average a 1-euro increase in a firm’s 
guaranteed lending is associated with substitution ranging between 7 
and 16 cents depending on the country. Firm and bank characteristics 
appear to play a similar role across countries: in all of them, the extent 
of credit substitution is larger for weaker firms (i.e., smaller and riskier 
firms in more affected sectors and countries) borrowing from stronger 
banks (i.e., with fewer NPLs, larger, more capitalized and liquid banks). 
In some cases, the relevant coefficients are not statistically significant, 
but their signs are consistent across countries.

Table A9 reports estimates where the amount of each guaranteed 
loan is replaced by the corresponding guaranteed amount, calculated 
as the value of the loan multiplied by its guaranteed fraction. The 
results are similar to those shown in Table  11, although the average 
substitution  is  larger,  reflecting  the  smaller  size  of  the  explanatory 
variable:  the  coefficient  estimate  rises  from  0.11  (in  column  1  of 

Table  11) to 0.20 (in column 1 of Table A9). The results about how 
substitution varies depending on firm and bank characteristics are also 
qualitatively unchanged.

7. Conclusions

This paper investigates whether public credit guarantee schemes, 
used extensively after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic to support 
bank lending by shifting default risk to governments, led to substituting 
non-guaranteed with guaranteed credit. In principle, such substitution 
may be driven by banks exploiting public guarantees as an opportunity 
to reduce their pre-existing credit risk exposure, as well as by firms 
using them as an opportunity to reduce their credit costs. We provide 
a simple model of the effects of loan guarantees on banks’ lending 
policies, showing that banks should engage more in credit substitution 
vis-à-vis riskier borrowers and should give them comparatively large 
interest rate concessions.

We take these predictions to the data by exploiting a novel har-
monized credit register dataset for the entire euro area, AnaCredit, 
matched with supervisory bank balance-sheet data, and focus on the 
four largest euro area countries. We find that, on average, banks re-
duced non-guaranteed credit below its pre-pandemic level upon grant-
ing guaranteed lending. The point estimate of such credit substitution 
turns  out  to  depend  on  various  features  of  the  methodology  used, 
namely: (i) inclusion or exclusion from the sample of firms that received 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 8
Firm-bank level analysis of changes in interest rates.
  Dependent variable:

𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑗

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Industry VA Growth

−0.387***
(0.041)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank NPL

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Share of Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Drawn/Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Residual Maturity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Lending Rate

−0.449***
(0.074)
0.466***
(0.127)
0.072***
(0.016)
0.149
(0.442)
0.043
(0.028)
0.034
(0.127)
0.119
(0.915)

−0.488***
(0.073)
0.397***
(0.121)
0.076***
(0.017)
0.118
(0.431)
0.027
(0.026)
0.033
(0.126)

−3.145***
(1.209)

−0.515***
(0.079)
0.392***
(0.120)
0.076***
(0.016)
0.103
(0.449)
0.026
(0.029)
0.038
(0.129)
0.838
(0.980)
−3.172***
(1.336)

−0.559***
(0.070)
0.452***
(0.118)
0.066***
(0.016)
−1.513**
(0.674)
0.035
(0.029)
0.034
(0.133)
0.463
(1.066)
−4.399***
(1.429)
−1.170***
(0.139)
0.585***
(0.083)
−0.152*
(0.084)

(6)
−0.426***  
(0.066)
0.181***
(0.060)
0.060***
(0.016)
−0.382**
(0.181)
0.027
(0.021)
0.024
(0.132)
1.746***
(0.604)
−2.871***  
(0.953)
−0.773***  
(0.134)
0.457***
(0.052)
−0.040
(0.066)
−37.480*** 
(2.160)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

0.402
557 383

0.402
557 527

0.388
767 159

  Firm FE
  Bank FE
  Non-interacted variables
  R2
  N
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of an equation whose dependent variable is the 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑗 charged by bank 𝑗 to 
firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount of government-guaranteed 
credit received by the firm, divided by total credit granted to the firm as of February 2020. Other explanatory variables are: 
Industry VA Growth, defined as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each country between February 2020 and 
August 2020; Firm Size, proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by the share of loans in arrears out of 
total loans; Bank Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined as the bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; 
Bank Capital, defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of NPL loans out of its total loans; Share 
of granted, defined as the share of the bank 𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the firm 𝑖; Drawn/Granted, defined as the 
amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; Residual maturity, defined as the log of 
the number of remaining months until the expiration or the repayment of the credit by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory 
variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 and Industry VA Growth, are measured as of December 2019. Standard errors, double-clustered at 
the bank and firm level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

0.403
547 697

0.412
474 338

0.728
469 215

Table 9
Reduction in interest rate and credit substitution.
  Dependent
variable:

𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑗

Full Sample

(1)

−0.788***
(0.100)

Firms
borrowing
from one
bank
(2)

−0.281***
(0.0718)

Firms
borrowing
from multiple
banks
(3)

Firms with
revolving
credit

(4)

Firms
without
revolving
credit
(5)

−1.090***
(0.146)

−0.596***
(0.106)

−0.738***
(0.138)

  𝑠𝑖𝑗

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.0401
488 906

0.0493
421 591

0.0773
258 997

0.0539
680 665

  Bank FE
  R2
  N
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of an equation whose dependent variable is the 𝛥𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑗
charged by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020. The explanatory variable is credit 
substitution 𝑠𝑖𝑗 , defined as the negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖
between February 2020 and August 2020, divided by total initial credit granted to firm 𝑖 in February 2020. 
The sample is made by only those bank-firm relationships with a guaranteed loan between February 2020 
and August 2020. We include both firms with single and multiple banks. In column 1 we consider the full 
sample. In columns 2 and 3 we split the sample between firms borrowing only from one bank (column 
2) and firms borrowing from multiple banks (column 3). In columns 4 and 5 we split the sample between 
firms with at least one revolving credit instrument in February 2020 (column 4) and firms without revolving 
credit instruments in February 2020. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, 
* p < 0.1.

0.198
191 624

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 10
Firm-bank level analysis of changes in loan maturities.
  Dependent variable:

𝛥𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖𝑗

(1)

(2)

25.754***
(1.556)
−4.265
(5.058)
−0.255
(0.414)
16.742***
(3.952)
2.030***
(0.598)
0.018
(0.017)
−146.336***
(25.961)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Industry VA Growth

23.612***
(2.031)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Bank NPL

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Share of Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Drawn/Granted

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖𝑗 ×Residual Maturity

(3)

21.681***
(2.176)
−2.081
(5.555)
−0.104
(0.429)
19.401***
(4.368)
0.300
(0.796)
0.037
(0.024)

347.172***
(59.642)

(4)

21.513***
(1.931)
−2.078
(5.406)
−0.0315
(0.436)
19.374***
(4.514)
0.459
(0.721)
0.037*
(0.021)
−135.928***
(28.433)
327.514***
(56.341)

(5)
17.532***  
(2.325)
−3.358
(3.937)
−0.139
(0.560)
5.946
(4.945)
0.817
(0.819)
0.044**
(0.020)
−67.954*** 
(19.752)
201.025*** 
(45.061)
−54.382*** 
(5.272)
4.038*
(2.202)
8.129***
(1.115)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

0.371
597 205

0.371
597 034

0.348
814 348

  Firm FE
  Bank FE
  Non-interacted variables
  R2
  N
This table reports bank-firm level estimates of an equation whose dependent variable is the 𝛥𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖𝑗 in the bank-firm 
relationship between bank 𝑗 and firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the 
amount of government-guaranteed credit received by the firm, divided by total credit granted to the firm as of February 
2020. Other explanatory variables are: Industry VA Growth, defined as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each 
country between February 2020 and August 2020; Firm Size, proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by 
the share of loans in arrears out of total loans; Bank Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined 
as the bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital, defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of 
NPL loans out of its total loans; Share of granted, defined as the share of the bank 𝑗 out of the total bank exposure of the 
firm 𝑖; Drawn/Granted, defined as the amount of credit drawn by firm 𝑖 divided by the amount granted by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖; 
Residual maturity, defined as the log of the number of remaining months until the expiration or the repayment of the credit 
𝑖𝑗 and Industry VA Growth, are measured as of December 
by bank 𝑗 to firm 𝑖. All the explanatory variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
2019. Standard errors, double-clustered at the bank and firm level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

0.371
587 343

0.406
507 143

the guaranteed loan from banks not previously lending to them: when 
these  firms  are  included,  we  estimate  a  drop  of  28  cents  in  non-
guaranteed credit for 1 euro of guaranteed lending, against 46 cents 
when these firms are excluded; (ii) callability of preexisting credit: esti-
mates range from 25 cents for term loans and non-revolving credit lines 
to 43 cents for revolving credit lines, which are callable; (iii) estimation 
at within-firm or at firm level: in the first case, where the estimate 
refers to the credit reduction by the bank issuing the guaranteed loan 
relative to other banks lending to the same firm, the estimate is 28 
cents, while in the second, where it refers to the credit reduction by all 
banks lending to the recipient of the guaranteed loan, the estimate is 9 
cents. Within this range, we consider the 28-cent within-firm estimate 
to be the most reliable: first, it is better identified than the firm-level 
estimate; second, including observations regarding loans extended by 
new banks appears appropriate, as loan guarantees enabled some firms 
to access novel lenders; third, this estimate aggregates that referring 
to non-callable and callable credit, appropriately accounting for the 
relatively modest weight of the latter.

were given larger interest rate reductions upon receiving guaranteed 
loans.  As  a  result,  the  availability  of  loan  guarantees  generates  a 
tradeoff: in bank-firm relationships featuring more credit substitution, 
firms obtain comparatively more generous interest rate concessions. 
Consistent with the model, we find that this tradeoff is affected by the 
distribution of bargaining power between banks and firms: when the 
bank providing the guaranteed loan is the sole firm’s lender as opposed 
to one of several lenders, and when formerly lent to the firm only in the 
form of a callable credit line as opposed to non-callable credit, it grants 
a much smaller interest rate concession to the firm for given amount 
of credit substitution.

Instead, banks with stronger balance sheets, i.e., with more capital 
and/or  fewer  NPLs,  featured  both  greater  substitution  and  smaller 
interest rate reductions upon offering guaranteed loans. The finding 
that  these  banks  transferred  less  of  the  benefits  from  loan  guaran-
tees to client firms via reduced cost of credit is consistent with the 
model’s predictions if these banks feature greater bargaining power in 
renegotiating their initial loans.

Consistently  with  our  model,  we  find  credit  substitution  to  be 
higher for guaranteed loans granted to riskier firms, i.e., those with 
more  arrears,  smaller  sizes,  and  operating  in  more  affected  sectors 
and  countries.  Also  in  line  with  the  model,  the  evidence  reveals  a 
positive correlation between the interest rate reduction offered to firms 
receiving guaranteed loans and credit substitution by the corresponding 
lenders: riskier and smaller firms operating in more affected sectors 

Overall, the evidence suggests that, in the euro area, loan guar-
antees contributed to the continued extension of credit to relatively 
creditworthy  firms,  but  also  benefited  the  balance  sheet  of  banks, 
especially the comparatively stronger ones. It also highlights that the 
provision of credit to weaker firms was more severely hampered by 
credit substitution, although these firms obtained comparatively large 
interest rate cuts and loan maturity extensions.

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Table 11
Credit substitution: firm-level analysis.
  Dependent variable:

Credit substitution (𝑠𝑖)
(2)
(1)

0.120***
(0.026)
−0.041
(0.060)
−0.023***
(0.006)
0.340***
(0.057)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖  x Industry VA Growth

0.107***
(0.021)

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖  x Firm Size

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖  x Firm Risk

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖  x Bank assets

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖  x Bank Liquidity

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖  x Bank Capital

  𝐿𝐺

𝑖  x Bank NPL

(3)

0.113***
(0.020)
−0.052
(0.052)
−0.025***
(0.007)
0.352***
(0.061)
0.001
(0.012)
0.001***
(0.000)
1.222*
(0.625)

(4)

0.095***
(0.013)
−0.013
(0.055)
−0.020***
(0.006)
0.328***
(0.052)
0.006
(0.012)
0.000**
(0.000)

−2.870***
(0.487)

5
0.086***  
(0.013)
−0.018
(0.037)
−0.022*** 
(0.006)
0.318***  
(0.057)
0.010
(0.010)
0.002***  
(0.000)
1.639***  
(0.511)
−3.352*** 
(0.550)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.053
457 697

0.040
500 013

0.034
623 133

  Country FE
  Non-interacted variables
  R2
  N
The table reports firm-level estimates of a regression whose dependent variable is the credit substitution 𝑠𝑖, defined as the 
negative of the change in non-guaranteed credit received by firm 𝑖 between February 2020 and August 2020, divided by its 
total credit as of February 2020. The main explanatory variable, 𝐿𝐺
𝑖𝑗 , is the amount of government-guaranteed credit received 
by the firm, divided by total credit granted to the firm as of February 2020. Other explanatory variables are: Industry VA 
Growth, defined as the industrial sector change in Valued Added in each country between February 2020 and August 2020; 
Firm Size, proxied by the log of firm total debt; Firm Risk, proxied by the share of loans in arrears out of total loans; Bank 
Assets, defined as the log of total bank assets; Bank Liquidity, defined as the bank Liquidity Coverage Ratio; Bank Capital, 
defined as the Core Tier 1 Ratio and Bank NPL, defined as the share of NPL loans out of its total loans. Each of the bank 
related variables is calculated as a weighted average of the corresponding bank-level variable, where the weights are the 
shares of the banks’ exposure toward the firm out of total bank exposure of the firm at December 2019. All the explanatory 
variables, apart from 𝐿𝐺
𝑖  and Industry VA Growth, are measured as of December 2019. Standard errors, double-clustered at 
the main bank level, are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p<0.1.

0.046
460 275

0.060
456 306

CRediT authorship contribution statement

References

Carlo Altavilla: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Software, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Andrew Ellul: Writing – 
review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Methodology,  Investiga-
tion, Conceptualization. Marco Pagano: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, 
Conceptualization. Andrea Polo: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Thomas 
Vlassopoulos: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Software, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104137.

Data availability

The original data is available at: https://data.mendeley.com/datas

ets/34pj2x9r7z/2.

21 

Acharya, Viral V., Eufinger, Tim, Eisert, Christian, Hirsch, Christian, 2019. Whatever it 
takes: The real effects of unconventional monetary policy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 
3366–3411.

Acharya, Viral V., Steffen, Sascha, 2020. The risk of being a fallen angel and the 
corporate dash for cash in the midst of COVID. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 9 (3), 
430–471.

Antill, Samuel, Clayton, Christopher, 2025. Crisis interventions in corporate insolvency. 

Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Autor, David, Cho, David, Crane, Leland D., Goldar, Mita, Lutz, Byron, Montes, Joshua, 
Peterman, William B., Ratner, David, Villar, Daniel, Yildirmaz, Ahu, 2022. An eval-
uation of the paycheck protection program using administrative payroll microdata. 
J. Public Econ. 211, 104664.

Bachas, Natalie, Kimb, Olivia S., Yannelis, Constantine, 2021. Loan guarantees and 

credit supply. J. Financ. Econ. 139 (3), 872–894.

Bartik,  Alexander  W.,  Cullen,  Zoe  B.,  Glaeser,  Edward  L.,  Luca,  Christopher  T., 
Sunderam, Adi, 2020. The targeting and impact of paycheck protection program 
loans to small businesses. NBER Working Paper 27623, July.

Beck, Thorsten, Demirgüç-Kunt, A.S.L.I., Maksimovic, Vojislav, 2005. Financial and 

legal constraints to growth: Does firm size matter? J. Financ. 60, 137–177.

Blanchard, Olivier, Philippon, Thomas, Pisani-Ferry, Jean, 2020. A new policy toolkit 
is needed as countries exit COVID-19 lockdowns. Bruegel Policy Contrib. 12.
Bolton, Patrick, Freixas, Xavier, Gambacorta, Leonardo, Mistrulli, Paolo Emilio, 2016. 
Relationship  and  transaction  lending  in  a  crisis.  Rev.  Financ.  Stud.  29  (10), 
2643–2676.

Brunnermeier, Markus, Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2020. Corporate debt overhang and 
credit policy. pp. 447–488, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Summer.
Cascarino, Giuseppe, Gallo, Raffaele, Palazzo, Francesco, Sette, Enrico, 2022. Public 
guarantees and credit additionality during the COVID-19 pandemic. Bank of Italy 
Temi di Discussione (Working Paper) (1369).

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Darmouni, Olivier, Luck, Stephan, Plosser, Matthew, 2022. 
Bank liquidity provision across the firm size distribution. J. Financ. Econ. 144 (3), 
908–932.

Core, Fabrizio, De Marco, Filippo, 2023. Public guarantees for small businesses in Italy 

during COVID-19. Management Science, forthcoming.

Cororaton, Anna, Rosen, Samuel, 2021. Public firm borrowers of the US paycheck 

protection program. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 10 (4), 641–693.

Degryse, Hans, De Jonghe, Olivier, Jakovljevic, Sanja, Mulier, Klaas, Schepens, Glenn, 
2019.  Identifying  credit  supply  shocks  with  bank-firm  data:  Methods  and 
applications. J. Financ. Intermediation 40, 100813.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Altavilla et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104137 

Glode,  Vincent,  Opp,  Christian  C.,  2023.  Private  renegotiations  and  government 

interventions in debt chains. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (11), 4502–4545.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Kalemli-Özcan, S. ebnem, Penciakova, Veronika, Sander, Nick, 
2024. SME failures under large liquidity shocks: An application to the COVID-19 
crisis. Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Granja, João, Makridis, Christos, Yannelis, Constantine, Zwick, Eric, 2022. Did the 
paycheck protection program hit the target? J. Financ. Econ. 145 (3), 725–761.
Greenwald, Daniel L., Krainer, John, Paul, Pascal, 2020. The credit line channel. Federal 

Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper, 2020-26.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Laeven, Luc, Martinez-Miera, David, Peydró, José-Luis, 2022. Public 
guarantees, relationship lending and bank credit: Evidence from the COVID-19 
crisis. SSRN Working Paper No. 4057530.

Jiménez,  Gabriel,  Ongena,  Steven,  Peydró,  José-Luis,  Saurina,  Jesús,  2012.  Credit 
supply and monetary policy: Identifying the bank balance-sheet channel with loan 
applications. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (5), 2301–2326.

Kapan,  Tumer,  Minoiu,  Camelia,  2021.  Liquidity  insurance  vs.  Credit  provision: 
Evidence from the COVID-19 crisis. SSRN Working Paper (3773328) October.
Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, Mian, Atif, 2008. Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: 

Evidence from an emerging market. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (4), 1413–1442.

Kozeniauskas, Nicholas, Moreira, Pedro, Santos, Cezar, 2020. COVID-19 and firms: 

Productivity and government policies. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 15156.

Li, Lei, Strahan, Philip E, 2021. Who supplies PPP loans (and does it matter)? Banks, 
relationships, and the COVID crisis. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 
56 (7), 2411–2438.

Li, Lei, Strahan, Philip E., Zhang, Song, 2020. Banks as lenders of first resort: Evidence 

from the COVID-19 crisis. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 9 (3), 472–500.

Martin, Alberto, Mayordomo, Sergio, Vanasco, Victoria, 2023. Banks vs. firms: who 
benefits from credit guarantees?. Barcelona School of Economics Working Paper 
no. 1389.

Philippon, Thomas, 2021. Efficient programs to support businesses during and after 

lockdowns. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 10, 188–203.

22 

