Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Macroeconomic drivers and the pricing of uncertainty, inflation, and bonds(cid:73)
Brandyn Bok a, Thomas M. Mertens b,∗, John C. Williams c
a UCLA, Department of Economics, Bunche Hall, 315 Portola Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
b Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 101 Market Street, Mailstop 1130, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
c Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, New York, NY 10045, USA

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

The correlation between uncertainty shocks, as measured by changes in the VIX, and changes in break-even 
inflation rates declined and turned negative after the Great Recession. This estimated time-varying correlation 
is shown to be consistent with the predictions of a standard New Keynesian model with a lower bound on 
interest rates and a trend decline in the natural rate of interest. In one equilibrium of the model, higher 
uncertainty raises the probability of large shocks that leave the central bank constrained by the lower bound 
and unable to offset negative shocks. Resulting inflation shortfalls lower average inflation rates.

Dataset link: Macroeconomic Drivers and the P
ricing of Uncertainty, Inflation, and Bonds (Ori
ginal data)

JEL classification:
G12
E52

Keywords:
Uncertainty shocks
Inflation-uncertainty correlations
Zero lower bound

1. Introduction

Over the past quarter century, there has been a marked downward 
trend in the correlation between changes in market-based measures 
of  uncertainty  and  expected  inflation  in  the  United  States.  At  the 
beginning of this century, this correlation was essentially zero, but it 
has since turned negative. The emergence of a negative relationship 
between uncertainty shocks and expected inflation raises the concern 
that uncertainty shocks now have a more pronounced effect on the 
economy than two decades ago and thereby pose greater challenges 
for the conduct of monetary policy.

In this paper, we document this significant repricing in financial 
markets reflected in changes to financial correlations and analyze them 
within a macroeconomic model. Our main contributions are two-fold. 
The first is a theoretical analysis of the effects of uncertainty shocks on 
expected inflation and interest rates within a standard New Keynesian 
model. We show how the presence of a lower bound on interest rates 
affects this correlation. The second is an empirical analysis of the pre-
dictions of the theory, which indicate that the decline in the natural real 
rate of interest to low levels has contributed to the emergence of the 

negative relationship between uncertainty and inflation expectations 
evident in the data.

In  the  theoretical  section  of  the  paper,  we  use  a  standard  New 
Keynesian model with a lower bound on nominal interest rates for an 
analytical derivation of the theoretical predictions. For simplicity, we 
focus on demand shocks as the only source of disturbances. We show 
the implications of a change in the level of interest rates, as determined 
by the natural rate of interest, on the joint behavior of uncertainty and 
inflation expectations. The presence of the lower bound implies the 
existence of two distinct ergodic distributions for endogenous variables. 
The distinguishing feature between these equilibria is the probability of 
a binding lower bound which translates into different levels of inflation 
expectations. The equilibrium with the lower probability, which we 
refer  to  as  the  target  equilibrium,  leaves  the  central  bank  mostly 
unconstrained and able to stabilize inflation. In the second equilibrium, 
which we denote as the liquidity trap equilibrium, the lower bound 
binds more often which results in more frequent and larger inflation 
shortfalls. The presence of a lower bound and the type of equilibrium 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, an anonymous referee, Claudio Borio, Brent Bundick, Greg Duffee, Kathryn Holston, 
Oleksiy Kryvtsov, Marco Del Negro, Carolin Pflueger, Hyun Shin, Christian Wolf, and seminar participants at the Bank for International Settlements, the European 
Central Bank, and the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and San Francisco, as well as conference participants at the German Economists Abroad meeting, the 
SNB-BIS-FRS conference on Global Risk and Uncertainty, and the System Macro conference for helpful comments. The views expressed here are solely those of 
the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco, or the Federal Reserve System.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:  Thomas.Mertens@sf.frb.org (T.M. Mertens).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104130
Received 19 September 2024; Received in revised form 4 June 2025; Accepted 11 June 2025
Available online 21 July 2025 
0304-405X/Published by Elsevier B.V. 

 
 
 
B. Bok et al.

the economy is in are key determinants of the correlation between 
uncertainty shocks and changes in inflation expectations.

Without a lower bound on interest rates, a mean-preserving increase 
in uncertainty has no systematic effect on the unconditional means of 
expected inflation and interest rates. This is because the central bank 
can use its interest rate policy in response to positive and negative 
shocks symmetrically to stabilize inflation. In contrast, in the presence 
of  an  occasionally  binding  lower  bound  on  interest  rates,  a  mean-
preserving spread to the distribution of shocks affects the unconditional 
mean  rate  of  inflation,  decreasing  it  in  the  target  equilibrium  and 
increasing it in the liquidity trap equilibrium. In the case of the target 
equilibrium,  an  increase  in  uncertainty  implies  that  policy  is  con-
strained in a larger region of the state space. This asymmetric constraint 
on the ability to respond to negative shocks results in a reduction in the 
unconditional means of expected inflation and interest rates. In the case 
of the liquidity trap equilibrium, an increase in uncertainty contracts 
the region in which the lower bound binds and thereby increases the 
unconditional means of inflation and interest rates.

In the target equilibrium, a decline in the natural rate of interest 
leads to the observed effects of changes in uncertainty on inflation ex-
pectations when the probability of a binding lower bound is sufficiently 
small in the case of general distributions. Under additional assumptions 
such as Gaussian distributions, this result holds for any probability in 
the target equilibrium.

Second, we empirically assess these theoretical predictions using 
data from the United States. Therefore, we construct rolling-window 
correlations between changes in market-based measures of uncertainty, 
such as the VIX, and changes in expectations of far-forward future 
inflation and interest rates. The New Keynesian model predicts that, 
analogously to the correlation for inflation expectations, the correlation 
between  uncertainty  shocks  and  changes  in  expected  interest  rates 
should turn negative as well. Indeed, this correlation fell from close 
to  zero  to  around  −0.5  over  the  same  time  period.  These  changes 
took place as estimates of the natural rate of interest declined and 
the incidence of monetary policy being near or at the lower bound 
increased.

To test this prediction, we regress the correlations for interest rate 
and inflation expectations on estimates of the natural rate of interest 
and find that the empirical evidence is qualitatively consistent with 
the U.S. economy being in the target equilibrium, in line with evidence 
reported in Mertens and Williams (2021). We furthermore establish the 
robustness of the results. We show that we obtain consistent results 
with the target equilibrium of the model, including when removing 
term premia or using alternative measures of uncertainty shocks and in-
flation expectations. For the latter, we show that our results are robust 
to using survey-based measures of expected inflation from the Survey 
of Professional Forecasters and to using both an aggregate econometric 
measure of economic financial uncertainty and a news-based economic 
policy uncertainty index for uncertainty shocks (see Ludvigson et al. 
(2021) and Baker et al. (2016)).

Finally,  we  assess  the  implications  of  greater  uncertainty  about 
aggregate demand for the design of monetary policy. We show that, 
in the target equilibrium, the benefits of average-inflation targeting 
relative to standard inflation targeting increase with greater macroeco-
nomic uncertainty. We implement average-inflation targeting through 
an adjustment in the level of the policy rule for nominal interest rates. 
Lowering the intercept leads inflation to overshoot the target inflation 
rate during times when policy is unconstrained. This policy framework 
thereby makes up for shortfalls in inflation at times when the lower 
bound on interest rates is strictly binding.

We highlight one caveat to our analysis. To maintain analytical 
tractability, we do not model time variation in correlations explicitly. 
Instead, we study changes in the derivative of expectations with respect 
to uncertainty when there is an exogenous shift in the natural real rate 
of interest. Therefore, we do not generalize these findings to models 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

of  monetary  policy  with  richer  dynamics  nor  address  the  potential 
endogeneity of the decline in the natural real rate.

Our analysis relates to several strands of the literature.  First,  it 
relates to models that incorporate a lower bound on interest rates into 
a New Keynesian economy, such as Fuhrer and Madigan (1997), Eg-
gertsson and Woodford (2003), Adam and Billi (2006), Campbell et al. 
(2012), and Cochrane (2018). Papers in this literature that deal with 
the multiplicity of equilibria include Benhabib et al. (2001), Mendes 
(2011), Hills et al. (2016), Nie and Roulleau-Pasdeloup (2021), Cuba-
Borda and Singh (2022), and Bilbiie (2022). Our analysis relates to 
the work by Swanson and Williams (2014) and Mertens and Williams 
(2021) in that it measures the effects of the lower bound on inter-
est  rates  from  financial  market  data.  Second,  it  relates  to  a  litera-
ture that studies changing correlations in financial markets and links 
them to macroeconomic outcomes. Baele et al. (2010), Duffee (2022), 
and Pflueger (2023) document changing correlations between stocks 
and bonds. Campbell et al. (2020) point out macroeconomic drivers 
behind this phenomenon. And Bilal (2017) and Gourio and Ngo (2020) 
argue  that  the  lower  bound  on  interest  rates  might  be  behind  this 
finding, while Datta et al. (2021) link the lower bound to the changing 
equity-oil correlation. Third, this paper contributes to the large and 
fast-growing literature on uncertainty shocks and their effects on the 
economy. Seminal contributions on the measurement include Jurado 
et al. (2015) and Baker et al. (2016). Leduc and Liu (2016) study the 
effects of uncertainty shocks in a New Keynesian economy while Basu 
and Bundick (2017), Plante et al. (2017) and Nakata (2017) take the 
lower bound on interest rates into account.

2. Stylized fact

This  section  discusses  a  new  stylized  fact:  Since  the  mid-2000s, 
the correlation between uncertainty shocks and changes in long-run 
inflation expectations has turned negative from a level of close to zero. 
While we purposefully keep this section brief, Section 5 discusses the 
robustness of these findings.

To demonstrate these patterns, we measure uncertainty shocks as 
changes in expected volatility in the stock market via the VIX volatility 
index. For expected inflation, we use market-implied breakeven infla-
tion (BEI) rates, measured as the difference between yields of nominal 
and inflation-protected Treasury bonds. We use five-year inflation ex-
pectations five years ahead to focus on expectations of inflation in the 
longer term. We retrieve daily time series on each of these variables 
from Bloomberg.1 To get monthly observations, we construct changes 
in monthly averages of the daily market-close values and compute the 
correlation between these monthly changes in the VIX and changes 
in  inflation  expectations  for  five-year  rolling  windows.  The  overall 
sample for the monthly changes is restricted by the introduction of 
Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) in 1999, such that the 
five-year trailing-window correlations begin in January 2004. We end 
the sample in July of 2020 before the Federal Reserve’s announcement 
of its average-inflation targeting framework (FOMC, 2020).

Fig.  1 plots the Spearman and conventional (Pearson) correlations 
between these measures of uncertainty shocks and changes in inflation 
expectations at the monthly frequency. Spearman correlations are the 
conventional (Pearson) correlations of the rank of each observation 
in the sample. Since they use the rank rather than the observation 
itself, Spearman correlations are more robust to outliers and thus our 
preferred measure.2 The decline in this correlation occurred during the 
mid-2000s and accelerated as the federal funds rate was lowered to 

1 Appendix D.A summarizes the sources and details of all data used in this 

paper.

2 For the remainder of the paper, we only report Spearman correlations. 
The analogous charts for conventional Pearson correlations are in Internet 
Appendix B.A.

2 

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Fig. 1.  The dark blue line plots the five-year trailing-window correlation (Spearman correlation: solid line, Pearson correlation: dashed line) of monthly changes in the VIX with 
monthly changes in the five-year, five-year-forward breakeven inflation (BEI) rate; the underlying variables are monthly averages of daily market-close values. The light blue line 
plots the five-year trailing-window Spearman correlation of quarterly changes in the VIX with quarterly changes in the median SPF forecast of 10-year average CPI inflation. The 
yellow line plots the caps-implied probability of the zero lower bound binding ten years out. The pink shaded areas represent times when the zero lower bound was binding. The 
correlation between the probability of a binding lower bound (yellow line) and the baseline correlation (solid dark blue line) is −0.68. The sample period ranges from January 
2004 until July 2020. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

the effective lower bound. It remained highly negative throughout the 
initial lower bound period and increased after liftoff from the lower 
bound. After the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing 
recession, the correlation turned highly negative again.

These changes in the correlation do not seem to be primarily driven 
by risk premia. Fig.  1 contrasts the baseline correlation which uses 
breakeven inflation expectations as the main measure with the anal-
ogous correlation that uses the Survey of Professional Forecasters as a 
measure of inflation expectations. Specifically, we use the median fore-
cast for 10-year CPI inflation. The two time series comove quite closely, 
suggesting that there is a structural reason behind their movements.

In this paper, we argue that the lower bound on interest rates can 
lead to the observed pattern within a basic New Keynesian model. In 
such an environment, increases in uncertainty raise the possibility that 
monetary policy is unable to eliminate inflation shortfalls. Concerns 
about an increased likelihood of a binding zero lower bound and its 
impact  on  inflation  arose  in  the  late  1990s  and  early  2000s  (see, 
e.g., Bernanke (2002)). Fig.  1 puts the changing correlation and zero 
lower bound risk ten years out into perspective. Zero lower bound risk 
is measured as the probability of the 3-month LIBOR rate being at zero 
ten years out.3 We focus on long-term zero lower bound risk to ensure 
that transition dynamics are not driving the results, consistent with 
the model we present in the next section. As the figure shows, far-out 
zero lower bound risk tended to be high at times when the break-
even inflation-uncertainty correlation was low. Regressing the inflation 
expectation-uncertainty  correlation  on  the  lower  bound  probability 
results in a regression coefficient of −1.07 with a Newey–West standard 
error of 0.54 which is statistically significant at the 5% level.

In the following section, we formalize the link between changing 

correlation in this section and the lower bound on interest rates.

3 The measure is taken from the Center for Monetary Research (2024).

3 

3. Model

In this section we study a standard log-linearized three-equation 
New Keynesian model, as in, e.g., Woodford (2003), to which we add 
a lower bound on interest rates. For analytical tractability, our model 
features  only  demand  shocks  that  are  independent  and  identically 
distributed (i.i.d.) over time. The model is a simplified version of the 
one in Mertens and Williams (2021) in that it abstracts from supply-
side shocks.4 Compared to that paper, the model solution in this paper 
is more concise and facilitates the analysis of uncertainty shocks.
The Phillips curve describes the evolution of inflation 𝜋𝑡

𝜋𝑡 = 𝜅𝑥𝑡 + 𝛽E

𝑡𝜋𝑡+1,

(1)

where 𝜅 > 0 is the sensitivity of inflation to changes in the output gap, 
𝛽 ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, and inflation expectations are based on 
the information set available at time 𝑡.

The IS relation describes the behavior of the output gap 𝑥𝑡

𝑥𝑡 = 𝜖𝑡 − 𝛼(𝑖𝑡 − E

𝑡𝜋𝑡+1 − 𝑟∗) + E

𝑡𝑥𝑡+1,

(2)

where 𝛼 > 0 is the responsiveness of the output gap to deviations of the 
real interest rate from its long-run natural rate, 𝑟∗.

We specify the demand shock as 𝜖𝑡 = ̄𝜖 + 𝜈𝑡 such that we can take 
comparative statics with respect to its mean  ̄𝜖.5 The noise component 
𝜈𝑡  has  mean  zero,  is  assumed  to  be  i.i.d.  over  time,  and  follows  a 

4 The addition of supply-side shocks delivers consistent results but makes 

the exposition more cumbersome.

5 While changes in this mean can capture changes in the outlook for the 
economy, all results around the uncertainty go through if we set the mean to 
zero.

B. Bok et al.

distribution with infinite support, probability density function 𝑔(⋅), and 
cumulative density function 𝐺(⋅) that satisfies lim𝜈→−∞ 𝜈𝐺(𝜈) = 0.6

(1 − 𝛽)E
0

L = min
𝑖𝑡≥𝑖𝐿𝐵

The central bank sets the nominal rate 𝑖𝑡 optimally under discretion 
but is constrained by a lower bound 𝑖𝐿𝐵 that lies below the natural real 
rate of interest; that is, 𝑖𝐿𝐵 < 𝑟∗. The central bank aims to minimize 
a loss function L  that penalizes output gaps as well as deviations of 
inflation from its target, which is normalized to zero,7
[ ∞
∑

min
𝑖𝑡≥𝑖𝐿𝐵
where 𝜆 ≥ 0 is the relative weight the central bank places on the 
output gap relative to deviations of inflation from target. We focus 
on optimal monetary policy under discretion, when the central bank 
lacks the ability to commit to future actions and thus takes inflation 
expectations as given.8 The central bank and private sector are assumed 
to have full knowledge of the model, including the distribution of the 
shock processes.

𝑡 + 𝜆𝑥2
𝑡 )

𝛽𝑡(𝜋2

(3)

𝑡=0

]

,

The state space of the system consists only of the current realization 
of the shock 𝜖𝑡 and expectations about inflation and output gaps. Due 
to the shock being purely temporary, its current realization has no 
predictive content for future realizations of the shock process. As a 
result, conditional expectations of future variables based on the current 
information set coincide with unconditional expectations. We thus drop 
the time subscript 𝑡 from the expectations operator and solve for the full 
dynamic equilibrium with unconditional expectations.
It is convenient to define a shadow rate 𝚒𝑡 as

𝚒𝑡 = 𝜃 + 𝑟∗ + 𝜓E𝜋𝑡+1 +

𝜖𝑡,

1
𝛼
− 𝛽𝜆

𝛼𝜅(𝜅2+𝜆)

where 𝜓 = 1+ 1
> 1. For 𝜃 = 0, the shadow rate is the optimal 
𝛼𝜅
policy rate under discretion without the lower bound constraint. In a 
later section, we use the parameter 𝜃 to introduce different monetary 
policy frameworks.

In the presence of a lower bound, the optimal discretionary policy 
is to set the interest rate equal to the shadow rate whenever feasible 
and to the lower bound otherwise: 
𝑖𝑡 = max{𝚒𝑡, 𝑖𝐿𝐵} = 𝚒𝑡 + 𝑖𝛥
𝑡 .
We furthermore define the interest rate wedge 𝑖𝛥
𝑡  as the difference 
between the policy rate and the shadow rate, 𝑖𝛥
𝑡 = 𝑖𝑡−𝚒𝑡, as in the second 
part of the above equation. Since the policy rate 𝑖𝑡 is either equal to the 
shadow rate 𝚒𝚝 or set above the shadow rate at 𝑖𝐿𝐵 when the shadow 
rate falls below the lower bound, the interest rate wedge 𝑖𝛥
𝑡  is always 
nonnegative.

(4)

Equipped with this notation, we rewrite the model equations in 
𝑡  for the nominal 

terms of the interest rate wedge by substituting 𝚒𝑡 + 𝑖𝛥
rate 𝑖𝑡. The system of Eqs. (1) and (2) then becomes 

𝜆
𝜅2 + 𝜆

𝜋𝑡 =

and

𝛽E

𝑡𝜋𝑡+1 − 𝛼𝜅(𝑖𝛥

𝑡 + 𝜃)

(5)

𝑥𝑡 = −

𝜅
𝜅2 + 𝜆

𝛽E

𝑡𝜋𝑡+1 − 𝛼(𝑖𝛥

𝑡 + 𝜃).

In these equations for inflation and the output gap, written in terms 
of the interest rate wedge, the first terms reflect what holds when 
the lower bound is not binding and when 𝜃 = 0, as in the standard 
New Keynesian model (see Clarida et al. (1999)). Abstracting from the 
second terms for the moment, the demand shock is fully offset and there 

6 While the results hold more generally, we work with an infinite support 
of the shock to avoid the distinction of the cutoff for a binding lower bound 
lying within or outside the support of the distribution.

7 More generally, the same results follow if we assume a nonzero inflation 

target, with 𝜋𝑡 then representing deviations in inflation from target.

8 The logic of this paper also applies when the central bank follows a Taylor 

rule.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

is no tradeoff between stabilizing inflation and output, i.e., ‘‘divine 
coincidence’’ holds. However, the second terms in these equations show 
that a binding lower bound leads, ceteris paribus, to lower inflation and 
a negative output gap. Moreover, monetary policy can raise inflation on 
average by lowering interest rates on average, that is, by setting 𝜃 to 
be negative.

3.1. Model solution

Absent  a  lower  bound  and  assuming  𝜃 = 0,  there  is  a  unique 
equilibrium to Eq.  (5). Taking unconditional expectations of both sides 
of the equation yields an equilibrium where inflation is at target, E𝜋𝑡 =
0, and the nominal interest rate equals the long-run natural rate, 𝑖𝑡 = 𝑟∗.
The presence of a lower bound on interest rates in the model gives 
rise to the possibility of a second equilibrium.9 To see this, we split 
Eq. (5) into parts depending on whether the lower bound binds in the 
current period or not 

E

(6)

𝜋𝑡 =

𝑡𝜋𝑡+1

≥ 𝑖𝐿𝐵

𝑡𝜋𝑡+1 − 𝛼𝜅𝜃

 if 𝚒𝑡
 if 𝚒𝑡 < 𝑖𝐿𝐵.

𝛽𝜆
𝜅2 + 𝜆
𝜅𝜖𝑡 − 𝛼𝜅(𝑖𝐿𝐵 − 𝜃 − 𝑟∗) + (1 − 𝛼𝜅)E

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
In  the  deterministic  version  of  our  model,  each  part  of  Eq.   (6) 
delivers one equilibrium. When 𝜃 = 0, the deterministic steady state 
stemming from the upper equation is characterized by inflation equal 
to its target of zero (𝜋 = 0) and the nominal interest rate equal to the 
long-run natural real rate (𝑖𝑡 = 𝑟∗). The lower equation gives rise to 
an equilibrium in which monetary policy is constrained such that the 
interest rate is permanently at the lower bound, 𝑖𝑡 = 𝑖𝐿𝐵, as in Benhabib 
et al. (2001). The corresponding steady-state inflation is equal to the 
difference between the lower bound and the long-run natural real rate, 
𝜋 = 𝑖𝐿𝐵 − 𝑟∗ < 0, and thus below its target of zero when 𝜃 = 0.

Characterizing the equilibrium in the stochastic environment with 
demand shocks requires solving for expectations of future inflation, the 
output gap, and the interest rate wedge. To this end, we recognize that 
these expectations are linked in the model via 

E𝜋𝑡+1 =

𝜅
1 − 𝛽

E𝑥𝑡+1 = −

1
𝜓 − 1

(E𝑖𝛥

𝑡+1 + 𝜃).

Furthermore, the Fisher equation holds

E𝜋𝑡 = E𝑖𝑡 − 𝑟∗ −

1
𝛼

̄𝜖.

(7)

Appendix A contains details on the derivation of these equations.
Eq.  (7) and the Fisher equation imply that it is sufficient to char-
acterize one of the expectations. In the following analysis, we focus 
on solving for the expected interest rate wedge E𝑖𝛥, which translates 
into inflation expectations and, by the Fisher equation, into expected 
interest rates. We start by expressing the expected interest rate wedge 
as the integral over 𝑖𝐿𝐵 − 𝚒𝑡, which is the value of 𝑖𝛥
𝑡  when policy is at 
the lower bound and the interest rate wedge is non-zero. The expected 
interest rate wedge can then be expressed as 

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵

−∞

(𝑖𝐿𝐵 − 𝚒𝑡)𝑔(𝜈𝑡)𝑑𝜈𝑡 =

1
𝛼 ∫

−∞

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵

𝐺(𝜈𝑡)𝑑𝜈𝑡 =

G ( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵),

1
𝛼

E𝑖𝛥 = ∫

where 

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 = 𝛼

(

𝑖𝐿𝐵 − 𝜃 − 𝑟∗ +

)

(E𝑖𝛥 + 𝜃)

− ̄𝜖

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

(8)

(9)

defines the cutoff for the innovation to the demand shock below which 
the lower bound binds.

The reasoning behind Eq. (8) is as follows. The interest rate wedge 
is zero whenever policy is unconstrained.  When the innovation for 
the demand shock 𝜈𝑡 falls below the threshold  ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵, given by Eq.  (9), 

9 The optimal interest rate rule in Eq.  (4) depends on expectations and is 

optimal in both equilibria.

4 

B. Bok et al.

policy becomes constrained and the interest rate wedge is 𝑖𝐿𝐵 − 𝚒𝑡 =
1
( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 − 𝜈𝑡). Integration by parts leads us from the second term to 
𝛼
the third term in Eq.  (8) which is the integral over the cumulative 
distribution function of the demand shock.

As a result, expected interest rate wedges are the integral over the 
cumulative distribution function which we label the super-cumulative 
distribution function G , evaluated at the cutoff value ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 (fourth term 
in (8)). This is to say that G ′(𝜈) = 𝐺(𝜈) where 𝐺(⋅) is the cumulative 
distribution function associated with the probability density function 
𝑔(⋅). As such, the function G  is pinned down by the choice of the 
underlying distribution and does not depend on other parameter values.
Interest rate wedges arise only when the value of 𝜈𝑡 falls below the 
threshold  ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵. In that case, the interest rate wedge rises linearly as 
𝜈𝑡 falls. And the wedge is zero whenever the innovation to demand 
shocks 𝜈𝑡 is above the threshold. Consequently, the expected interest 
rate wedge is driven by the probabilities of shock realizations below 
the  threshold  ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵  which  can  be  captured  by  the  super-cumulative 
distribution function.

Translating this into the process for inflation, shocks above ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 get 
fully offset by policy and have no effect on inflation, as Eq. (6) shows. 
For shock realizations below the threshold, however, demand shocks 
affect inflation. In particular, the further the demand shock falls below 
the threshold, the lower inflation will be below target (second part 
of Eq.  (6)). The super-cumulative distribution function again captures 
the average effect from these negative shocks.

The super-cumulative distribution function has several properties 
that facilitate the analysis of the model. First, since one can obtain this 
function by integrating over the cumulative distribution function, the 
function converges to zero for ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 → −∞ and to infinity for ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 → ∞. 
Since its second derivative is the probability density function, it is 
nonnegative and G  is convex. The comparative statics with respect to 
uncertainty can be fully characterized as we show below.

Furthermore, the super-cumulative distribution function is available 
in explicit form for a range of distributions. For example, in the case 
of a normal distribution for the shock, the super-cumulative function 
takes the form 

G norm( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) = ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵𝛷

)

(

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝜎

+ 𝜎2𝜙

(

)

,

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝜎

(10)

where 𝛷(⋅) denotes the cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of the 
standard normal distribution, 𝜙(⋅) the corresponding probability density 
function (p.d.f.), and 𝜎 is the standard deviation of the demand shock.
Importantly, there is a single fixed-point equation involving the 
function G  that pins down the solution of the model. To see this, we 
plug the expected interest rate wedge in (8) into the definition of the 
cutoff and obtain the equilibrium correspondence 
)

(

( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 + ̄𝜖) − 𝑖𝐿𝐵 −

𝜃 + 𝑟∗

.

(11)

G ( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) =

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝛼

1
𝛼

1
𝜓 − 1

Solving  this  equation  for  cutoff  values  delivers  the  solution  to 
the model as the cutoff determines expected interest rate wedges via 
Eq. (8). Appendix A.1 contains the derivations and more details.

Fig.  2 depicts both sides of Eq.  (11) assuming a normal distribution 
for the demand shock. The blue line shows the super-cumulative distri-
bution on the left-hand side. The right-hand side is linear in the cutoff 
̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 and depicted in the black line.

Due to the convexity of the super-cumulative distribution function, 
there can be either zero, one (a knife-edge case), or two equilibria. As 
we saw above, the deterministic case features two equilibria. We label 
the equilibrium to the left the target equilibrium. In the deterministic 
case,  it  turns  into  the  equilibrium  in  which  the  lower  bound  does 
not bind. With uncertainty, however, the lower bound may become 
occasionally binding. The equilibrium to the right is a liquidity trap 
equilibrium  and  is  associated  with  the  deterministic  equilibrium  in 
which the lower bound binds.

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

The probability with which the lower bound binds is given by 

𝑃 𝐿𝐵 = 𝐺( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) = ∫

−∞

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵

𝑔(𝜈)𝑑𝜈.

(12)

With this definition, we get the following lemma. 

Lemma 1.  Depending on the amount of uncertainty, there exist two, one, 
or zero equilibria in this economy. Furthermore, in the case of two distinct 
equilibria, there is a threshold  𝜓−1
𝜓  such that the probability of a binding 
lower bound is always below the cutoff in the target equilibrium and always 
above the cutoff in the liquidity trap equilibrium.

Appendix A.A.2 contains the proof.
In the presence of uncertainty, the lower bound on interest rates 
may be occasionally binding in both equilibria. When there are two 
equilibria,  the  probability  of  a  binding  lower  bound  in  the  target 
equilibrium always falls below the cutoff value whereas it exceeds it in 
the liquidity trap equilibrium. In the knife-edge case of a unique equi-
librium, the probability of a binding lower bound is 𝜓−1
. We denote the 
𝜓
corresponding cutoff by  ̄𝜈∗. Increasing uncertainty beyond this knife-
edge case, any further increase in uncertainty leads to non-existence of 
equilibria.

Fig.  3 depicts the distributions for shadow rates in the case with un-
certainty. The target equilibrium (blue line) endogenously has a higher 
mean than in the liquidity trap (red line). In the target equilibrium, 
there is a cutoff for the demand shock below which the central bank 
becomes constrained by the lower bound. This is because the central 
bank aims at offsetting the demand shock and lower realizations cause 
it to cut interest rates. With the demand shock being sufficiently low, 
the shadow rate falls below the lower bound.

In the liquidity trap equilibrium, the lower bound always binds in 
the deterministic steady state. Adding uncertainty results in situations 
where the demand shock is so high that the shadow rate is above 
the lower bound and the central bank finds itself unconstrained. The 
anticipation of a lower probability of a binding lower bound in the 
future raises inflation expectations which, through the forward-looking 
Phillips curve, already raise inflation today. As a result, the compara-
tive statics in the liquidity trap go in the opposite direction compared 
to the ones in the target equilibrium.

The  predictions  of  the  liquidity  trap  equilibrium  are  not  borne 
out by the data (see Mertens and Williams (2021)). In fact, the ev-
idence presented in this paper can be interpreted as additional evi-
dence against the liquidity trap equilibrium. We therefore present our 
theoretical findings only for the target equilibrium of the model.

To summarize, without a lower bound on interest rates, the New 
Keynesian model results in a unique equilibrium where inflation expec-
tations are anchored at the target level. Introducing a lower bound adds 
a liquidity trap equilibrium that is characterized by a higher probability 
of a binding lower bound compared to the target equilibrium. We now 
turn to analyzing the effects of changes in uncertainty on the economy.

3.2. The effects of uncertainty and demand shocks

This section studies the impact of an increase in uncertainty on the 
economy. It shows that the lower bound plays a crucial role: Without it, 
an increase in uncertainty has no effect on inflation and output. With a 
lower bound, higher uncertainty increases the region of the state space 
in which the lower bound is binding in the target equilibrium. The 
comparative statics in the liquidity equilibrium have the opposite sign 
and are at odds with the data. We therefore omit the discussion of this 
equilibrium here.10

In the absence of a lower bound, uncertainty has no effect on the 
economy since demand shocks can be fully offset. Optimal interest rate 

10 The results for the liquidity trap equilibrium are in Internet Appendix A.C.

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Fig. 2.  Equilibrium correspondence. The solid straight black line plots G ( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 ) as a linear function of ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 , as given by Eq.  (11). The other lines plot the super-cumulative distribution 
function G norm( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 ) for the case of a normal distribution, as given by Eq.  (10), with mean zero and varying standard deviations 𝜎. The intersection points with the solid black 
line indicate equilibria for these various values of 𝜎 under normality.

Fig. 3.  Shadow interest rate distributions in the target (blue) and liquidity trap (red) equilibria. The lower bound on interest rates (dashed line) truncates these shadow rate 
distributions in the model. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

6 

B. Bok et al.

policy shields inflation and output from the effect of demand shocks. 
More volatile demand leads to more volatile interest rates but does not 
transmit to prices or the real economy.

The lower bound on interest rates changes these predictions. We 
show  that  the  expected  interest  rate  wedge  increases  in  the  target 
equilibrium. We demonstrate these effects for general distributions with 
unbounded support for which we consider increases in uncertainty. Let 
𝜑𝑡 = 𝜈𝑡 + 𝑠𝜂𝑡 be a series of mean-preserving spreads of 𝜈𝑡, indexed by 
𝑠 ≥ 0, where E[𝜂𝑡|𝜈𝑡] = 0. A larger value of 𝑠 implies a higher variance 
of the mean-preserving spread.

A general increase in uncertainty through a mean-preserving spread 
pushes mass into the tails. In that case, the distribution for the more 
volatile demand shock is said to second-order stochastically dominate 
the distribution without the mean-preserving spread. Consequently, the 
cumulative distribution function rises in the left tail, thereby increasing 
its  integral,  and  shifting  the  super-cumulative  distribution  function 
up.11

Fig.  2 depicts these effects for the case of the normal distribution. 
While the linear relationship between expected interest rate wedges 
and the cutoff  ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 in the black line is unaffected by an increase in 
uncertainty, the super-cumulative distribution function increases and 
the two equilibria move closer together. Further increases in uncer-
tainty eventually lead to a unique equilibrium and non-existence for 
yet higher levels of uncertainty.

From this figure, it is also evident that the cutoff  ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 rises with 
uncertainty in the target equilibrium (the point of intersection to the 
left) and, as a result, the lower bound binds over a larger portion of the 
support for the demand shock. Proposition  1 summarizes these results.

Proposition 1 (Effects of Uncertainty). Neither a mean-preserving spread 
nor lower average demand have an effect on inflation expectations absent 
the lower bound; in the presence of a lower bound, higher uncertainty raises 
the expected interest rate wedge in a target equilibrium.12

We now analyze the derivative of inflation expectations with respect 
to an increase in the mean-preserving spread dE𝑖𝛥∕d𝑠. We interpret this 
expression as the model’s analogue of the correlation of changes in 
expectations due to an uncertainty shock, as measured by a change in 
the mean-preserving spread. This expression formalizes the discussion 
of the effects of changes in uncertainty. When there is no lower bound, 
the function G (𝜈𝑡) is zero everywhere for all values of 𝑠. Thus, the 
derivative of the wedge vanishes as well, and changes in uncertainty 
have no effects on the inflation expectations absent the lower bound.
With a lower bound on interest rates, the sign of the effects of chang-
ing uncertainty on expectation is determined by the type of equilibrium 
the economy is in. Proposition  1 demonstrates that increases in uncer-
tainty raise interest rate wedges and thus lower inflation expectations.
We interpret an increase in the VIX as reflecting an increase in 
uncertainty. There is a literature documenting a negative relationship 
between  increases  in  the  VIX  and  stock  prices.  We  show  that  the 
mechanism in our model applies both when the mean of the shock is 
lower and when uncertainty is higher. Therefore, either potential driver 
of the VIX triggers the same mechanism in the model. And a negative 
correlation between uncertainty shocks and average demand would 
reinforce the effects of the lower bound. With a fall in the mean of 
the demand shock, inflation expectations fall in the target equilibrium 
due to a higher probability of a binding lower bound.
𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝑔( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

= −

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

The impact of changes in uncertainty on the probability of a binding 
lower bound is more subtle. While the region of the state space expands 

11 Lemma 3 in Internet Appendix A shows these implications.
12 Appendix  A.2 contains the proof.

7 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

with higher uncertainty in the target equilibrium, the probability of a 
binding lower bound does not always change in the same direction. 
The reason is that there can be two opposing forces. The cutoff  ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
increases with uncertainty, suggesting that the probability of a binding 
lower bound should increase. However, a mean-preserving spread has 
a direct effect on the distribution function that can result in a lower 
cutoff value.

Lemma  2 establishes that the lower bound probability and the cutoff 
always move in the same direction in response to increases in uncer-
tainty when the probability of a binding lower bound is sufficiently 
low.

𝜈 and ̄𝜈 such that an increase in uncertainty 
Lemma 2.  There are values 
̄
raises the probability of a binding lower bound whenever  ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 <
𝜈 in the 
̄
target equilibrium. When the demand shock is normally distributed, these 
results hold globally, i.e.,
𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

for ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 < ̄𝜈∗.

≥ 0

For any continuous distribution, lower average demand raises 𝑃 𝐿𝐵 in the 
target equilibrium. 

Appendix  A.4 contains a proof.
Intuitively, in the target equilibrium, the probability of a binding 
lower bound increases in the tails with uncertainty since the likelihood 
of  large  movements  increases.  When  the  demand  shock  follows  a 
normal distribution, any increase in volatility raises the probability of 
a binding lower bound, i.e., when the probability of a binding lower 
bound falls below the cutoff (𝜓 − 1)∕𝜓.13

Together these results indicate that changes in uncertainty should 
have an effect on inflation expectations only in close proximity to the 
lower bound. Looking at the stylized fact about changing correlations 
of uncertainty shocks and inflation expectations through this lens, the 
model is consistent with close to zero correlations in the early 2000s 
when  the  lower  bound  had  a  low  probability  of  binding.  Later  in 
the sample, when the lower bound became a more salient concern, 
the correlation between uncertainty shocks and inflation expectations 
turned negative. The following comparative statics show within the 
model that a decline in the natural real rate of interest is the most likely 
source of these developments.

3.3. Changes in the effects of uncertainty on expectations

This section explores the effects of a change in the natural real 
rate of interest on the relationship between uncertainty and inflation 
expectations. We find that, without the lower bound, our model cannot 
generate the observed change in the effects of increased uncertainty 
on  expected  inflation  and  interest  rates.  With  a  lower  bound,  the 
equilibrium of the economy again determines the sign of the effects. 
In the general case, we find that the target equilibrium is consistent 
with the stylized facts of Section 2, provided that the probability of 
a binding lower bound is sufficiently small. With normally distributed 
shocks, the results hold for any probability.

We now explore the changing impact of uncertainty on expectations 
when the natural real rate of interest falls. Therefore, we continue to 
interpret the correlation between expectations and changes in uncer-
tainty as the derivative of expected interest rate wedges with respect 
to uncertainty.

13 A similar set of results holds under more stringent assumptions. When 
the  distribution  is  unimodal  and  symmetric  and  𝜓 = 2,  the  results  hold 
globally. When 𝜓 ∈ (1, 2), we can show that the lower bound probability rises 
with uncertainty for all target equilibria and, when 𝜓 > 2, the lower bound 
probability declines for higher uncertainty across all liquidity trap equilibria. 
Internet Appendix A.B contains details.

B. Bok et al.

Proposition  2  (Changes  in  the  Natural  Real  Rate  and  the  Effects  of 
Changes in Uncertainty). Changes in uncertainty do not affect expected 
interest rate wedges in the absence of a lower bound on interest rates, 
independent of the level of the natural rate of interest 𝑟∗. In the presence of 
a lower bound, the sensitivity of the expected interest rate wedge to changes 
in uncertainty declines when the natural real rate of interest falls 

E𝑖𝛥
𝑑
𝑑𝑠
𝑑𝑟∗ =

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑𝑠

= −

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

.

(13)

The  analogous  expression  for  average  demand  𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
positive in the target equilibrium. 

𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖   is  unambiguously 

Appendix  A.5 contains the proof of these results.
This proposition allows us to sign the direction in which a fall in 
the natural rate pushes the sensitivity of the expected interest rate 
wedge to changes in uncertainty. The determining factor is whether 
uncertainty  raises  the  probability  of  a  binding  lower  bound.  Using 
Lemma  2, the right-hand side of Eq.  (13) is always negative in the 
target equilibrium, provided that shocks are normally distributed. The 
results furthermore hold for any distribution if the likelihood of being 
constrained is sufficiently low.

As  a  consequence,  the  sensitivity  of  inflation  expectations  with 
respect to uncertainty declines as the natural real rate of interest falls. 
In the liquidity trap equilibrium, this sensitivity rises. Measuring this 
sensitivity through the correlation of changes in inflation expectations 
and uncertainty shocks therefore shows that the results in Section 2 are 
consistent with the theoretical model presented here. We investigate 
this connection more formally in Section 4. In other words, a decline in 
the natural real rate of interest both increases the probability of a bind-
ing lower bound and lowers the correlation of inflation expectations 
with uncertainty shocks in the target equilibrium.

Intuitively, when the natural real rate falls, the policy rate is closer 
to  the  lower  bound,  making  it  more  likely  to  bind.  When  shocks 
display higher uncertainty, the probability of a binding lower bound 
increases, constraining the ability to offset negative demand shocks. As 
a consequence, the mean inflation rate declines.

A similar intuition applies to shifts in the distribution of the shock 
via its mean  ̄𝜖. Both an increase in uncertainty and a lower mean, 
i.e., a leftward shift, raise the probability of a binding lower bound. 
Consequently, both changes in the distribution have the same effect on 
expectations, as Proposition  2 demonstrates.

We  now  turn  to  the  question  of  whether  the  monetary  policy 
framework has an impact on the transmission of uncertainty to the real 
sector. Here, we allow the central bank to permanently commit to any 
policy parameter 𝜃 but follows optimal discretionary policy otherwise. 
Adjusting this parameter amounts to static average-inflation targeting, 
as laid out in Mertens and Williams (2019, 2020) and Diwan et al. 
(2020).

Through lowering the interest rate intercept, the central bank pro-
vides more stimulus whenever it is not constrained by the lower bound. 
Consequently,  it  runs  inflation  above  its  target  level  during  times 
when it is unconstrained to correct for the downward bias in inflation 
expectations due to the lower bound. That is, the central bank makes 
up for shortfalls during recessions by overshooting the inflation target 
during expansions. In that sense, it averages over the business cycle.

We are interested in the effect static average-inflation targeting has 
on the effects of changes in uncertainty on inflation expectations. We 
get the following result.

Proposition 3 (Static Average-Inflation Targeting and the Effects of Chan-
ges in Uncertainty). Changes in uncertainty do not affect expected interest 
rate wedges in the absence of a lower bound on interest rates, independent 
of the level of the policy intercept 𝜃. In the presence of a lower bound, 
the following expression determines whether the sensitivity of the expected 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

interest rate wedge to changes in uncertainty increases or falls with the policy 
intercept 𝜃

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃𝑑𝑠

=

1
𝜓 − 1

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

.

The  analogous  expression  for  average  demand  𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
negative in the target equilibrium. 

𝑑𝜃𝑑 ̄𝜖   is  unambiguously 

Appendix  A.6 contains the proof of these results.
Proposition  3 demonstrates that a change in the policy intercept can 
prevent the effects of a fall in the natural rate. A negative intercept 
𝜃 lowers the expected interest rate wedge and increases inflation on 
average.  This  is  because  the  central  bank  raises  inflation  above  its 
target when unconstrained to make up, on average, for shortfalls during 
episodes of a binding lower bound.

As a result, the derivative of the expected interest rate wedge with 
respect to uncertainty rises when the central bank lowers the intercept 
of the policy rule. These results hold globally for normally distributed 
shocks and for low probabilities of a binding bound for any distribution.

3.4. Discussion

The model in the previous section features demand shocks as a 
single source of disturbances. We intentionally leave out markup or 
other supply-side shocks to highlight a simple set of assumptions that 
gives rise to the mechanism discussed in this paper. The link between 
uncertainty shocks and inflation expectations would, however, survive 
in a model with both demand and markup shocks.

Adding markup shocks would lead to a negative correlation between 
inflation and the output gap absent a lower bound. Currently, the base-
line case has no correlation since interest rate policy can perfectly offset 
demand shocks away from the lower bound, a feature often referred 
to as ‘‘divine coincidence’’. The lower bound leads the output gap and 
inflation to comove together, irrespective of whether supply-side shocks 
are present or not.

Increases in uncertainty, as measured by the VIX, might be corre-
lated with negative news about the economic outlook. To the extent 
that this is occurring, the propositions in the previous sections show 
that  the  mechanisms  for  higher  uncertainty  and  a  lower  mean  are 
mutually reinforcing. Therefore, negative shocks to the first moment 
and higher second moments can lead to similar changes in correlations.
Although we do not study these implications here, these changing 
correlation patterns have implications for the correlation of stocks and 
bonds, a subject of significant attention in the macro-finance literature 
(see, e.g., Campbell et al. (2020), Duffee (2022), and Pflueger (2023)). 
The basic finding is that during the 1960s to mid-1990s, the correlation 
between stock returns and changes in interest rates was negative. This 
correlation flipped sign in the mid-1990s such that high stock returns 
have been associated with increasing interest rates since. This latter 
correlation is consistent with the lower bound being a more salient 
constraint. Negative shocks close to the lower bound lead to below-
target inflation and negative output gaps, consistent with the positive 
correlation since the mid-1990s (see also Bilal (2017)).

Another issue in comparing the model to the data is that increases 
in uncertainty measured by the VIX and other similar measures are 
typically short-lived. The empirical evidence suggests that temporary 
bursts of uncertainty affect longer-term expectations. For this to be 
the case in our model with i.i.d. shocks, uncertainty would need to be 
elevated for a long time. A simple extension of the model with highly 
persistent shocks could bridge that gap.14

In the following section, we document the empirical patterns around 
inflation  expectations  and  expected  interest  rates  and  link  them  to 
movements in the natural real rate of interest.

14 Internet Appendix C presents a highly stylized extension of the model in 
which short-lived increases in inflation expectations have lasting effects on 
inflation expectations.

8 

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Fig. 4.  Five-year trailing-window Spearman correlation of monthly changes in the VIX with monthly changes in the five-year ahead five-year forward Treasury constant maturity 
rate. The sample period ranges from January 1995 until July 2020.

4. Empirical implications

4.2. The macroeconomic driver behind changing correlations

We approach the empirical tests of the theoretical model in three 
steps. First, we recognize that the New Keynesian model predicts that 
the stylized fact should appear in the correlation of uncertainty shocks 
and changes in expectations of interest rates. After confirming this, we 
provide evidence that the natural real rate of interest fell during our 
sample period. Consistent with the theoretical predictions of our model, 
we show that the correlations of interest rates fell with it. And, lastly, 
we perform formal tests that link changes in the correlations with the 
natural real rate of interest.

4.1. Stylized fact for interest rates

The theoretical model of the previous section shows that the styl-
ized fact for inflation expectations should also apply to interest rate 
expectations. The reason behind this prediction is the Fisher equation: 
As uncertainty changes inflation expectations, interest rate expectations 
adjust accordingly.

Fig.  4 demonstrates that, as the correlation between uncertainty 
shocks and changes in inflation expectations turned negative, so did 
the correlation between uncertainty shocks and changes in expected 
interest rates. Here, expected interest rates are measured as the five-
year ahead five-year Treasury forward rate (TFR) that we compute 
using constant maturity Treasury yields.

We  interpret  this  declining  correlation  as  the  economy  initially 
being shielded from uncertainty shocks, while over time their impact 
spills over increasingly to the real sector. With monetary policy serving 
as  the  primary  tool  to  guard  the  economy  against  adverse  shocks, 
the negative correlation between uncertainty shocks and changes in 
interest rates and inflation expectations, respectively, suggest that the 
lower bound affected the ability to respond to negative shocks using 
the policy rate over the sample period.

There are two potential drivers behind the declining correlation 
in  the  model:  The  uncertainty  of  shocks  and  the  natural  real  rate 
of interest, 𝑟∗. We investigate the plausibility of a change in either 
parameter.

For the uncertainty to play an increasing role and lead to a larger 
probability of a binding lower bound, the distribution of shocks would 
need to widen. There are at least two ways to see that this is an unlikely 
source of variation in the data. First, the covariance between inflation 
expectations and uncertainty shocks is consistent with the one for the 
correlation. While we do not report any further results on this here, 
there is no obvious sign that there was a trend increase in uncertainty 
from this analysis.15 Second, estimates from options data show a decline 
in uncertainty after the Great Recession, the opposite of what would be 
necessary to explain the stylized facts in this paper (see Mertens and 
Williams (2021)).

Instead, we explore time variation in 𝑟∗. In recent years, a body of 
research has documented a decline in the natural real rate of interest 
in the United States and other advanced economies over the past few 
decades (Williams, 2017).16 Fig.  5 plots the natural interest rate from 
1999 to 2020, using daily estimates of the real natural rate from Chris-
tensen and Rudebusch (2019a) and daily five-year forward zero-coupon 
TIPS yields five years ahead from Gürkaynak et al. (2010) as a proxy 
for the natural rate. Over the sample period, estimates of the natural 
real rate of interest from Christensen and Rudebusch (2019a) declined 
by 8 basis points per year on average and five-year five-year forward 
zero-coupon TIPS yields started out from a higher level and declined 
by 18 basis points per year on average. The persistent downward trend 

15 See Figure A4 in Section B.B of the Internet Appendix for a chart.
16 See, for example, Laubach and Williams (2003), Kiley (2015), Lubik and 
Matthes (2015), Johannsen and Mertens (2016), Holston et al. (2017), Crump 
et al. (2017), Del Negro et al. (2017) and Christensen and Rudebusch (2019a). 
Estimates from these models for 𝑟∗ show a decline consistent with that from 
the measure used in this paper.

9 

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Fig. 5.  The green line depicts the effective federal funds rate at the daily frequency, while the dark blue line shows daily estimates of the natural real rate of interest from Christensen 
and Rudebusch (2019a) (CR), and the light blue line shows the five-year ahead five-year forward zero-coupon TIPS rate (TIPS) computed by Gürkaynak et al. (2010) from Treasury 
real yields. The sample period ranges from January 2004 until July 2020. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web 
version of this article.)

over time resulted in historically low levels of the natural rate at the 
end of the sample period.

The level of natural rates of interest tends to persist and expectations 
of future rates should thus, to a significant degree, reflect their current 
level. There are several reasons for this observation. First, measures 
of historical levels of 𝑟∗ display a significant amount of persistence. 
The estimates aim to capture the low frequency component of real 
short-term interest rates and, as such, are highly persistent. For ex-
ample, Holston et al. (2017) show that their estimates of the natural 
rate are nonstationary. Second, as a case in point, even well into the 
recovery from the Great Recession of 2007–2009, 𝑟∗ had not returned 
to  historically  normal  levels.  Therefore,  it  is  likely  that  long-term 
influences were holding the natural rate of interest down. Third, many 
possible explanations for the level of 𝑟∗, not only in the United States 
but internationally, reflect highly persistent forces affecting the global 
supply and demand for savings. For example, one potential explanation 
for the decline in 𝑟∗ during our sample period is a dramatic slowdown 
in trend real GDP growth in many advanced economies. For a more 
detailed  discussion  of  the  decline  in  the  natural  rate,  see  Williams 
(2017).

To investigate the possibility of a structural break in the level of 
𝑟∗, we apply the Andrews (1993) test, which shows the existence of a 
structural break in all measures of the natural rate.17 The test identifies 
July 2011 as the breakpoint for both the CR and TIPS measures of 
the natural rate. Based on this dating of the structural break in 𝑟∗, in 
the remainder of this subsection we split our overall sample into two 
subsamples: January 1999 through June 2011, and July 2011 through 
July 2020. We end the sample in July 2020 before the announcement 
of the flexible average-inflation targeting framework by the Federal 
Reserve.  Our  theoretical  analysis  suggests  that  the  new  framework 
should lead to a different data-generating process for our variables of 
interest.

Table   1  reports  the  average  𝑟∗  and  the  average  correlation  of 
changes in expected inflation and interest rates with changes in the 
VIX for each subsample. To test for differences across subsamples, we 
compute the 𝑡-statistic for the null hypothesis that the estimates are 
the same across subsamples, controlling for serial correlation using the 
methodology outlined by Wilks (1997).18 In the earlier subsample, the 
natural real rate of interest is higher than in the later sample. This 
feature allows us to assess the theoretical predictions of the model. 
In the target equilibrium of our theoretical model, a decline in the 
natural real rate lowers the correlation between uncertainty shocks and 
changes in expectations about inflation and interest rates further into 
negative territory, at least in the tails of the distribution. In the liquidity 
trap equilibrium, the predictions are reversed.

Consistent with the target equilibrium of our theoretical model, 
the mean daily correlation, measured over a one-year trailing-window, 
between changes in five-year ahead five-year forward breakeven infla-
tion expectations (BEI) and changes in the VIX declined from −0.08 in 
the earlier subsample to −0.27 in the later subsample. This decline is 
statistically significant at the 1% level.

The analogous mean correlation, again measured at the daily fre-
quency over a one-year trailing-window, between changes in five-year 
five-year forward Treasury constant maturity yields (TFR) and changes 
in the VIX declined from −0.15 in the earlier subsample to −0.31 in 
the later subsample. This difference across subsamples is significant at 
the 1% level.

These changes in the link between uncertainty shocks and interest 
rates and inflation, respectively, hold up at different frequencies. As 
Table  1 shows, the corresponding monthly correlation for breakeven 
inflation rates, measured over a five-year trailing window, fell from 
0.00 to −0.33 across subsamples, a statistically significant decline at 
the 1% level. Similarly, the correlation for interest rates declined as 
well with the changes being statistically significant at the 5% level.

17 For the CR measure of the natural rate, the sup 𝐹  value is 621.55 which 
occurs in July 2011, and for the TIPS measure, the sup 𝐹  value is 662.94 
which also occurs in July 2011. In both cases, the null hypothesis of structural 
stability in the level of 𝑟∗ is rejected at the 1% level.

18 Appendix  B.1 outlines the details of constructing the 𝑡-statistic as applied 
in this context.

10 

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Table 1
Differences in moments across subsamples.
Mean 𝑟*
  Frequency

Mean correlation 
with 𝛥VIX
BEI
daily

−0.93***

0.83
2.88

0.54
1.47

𝑟*TIPS
monthly

𝑟*CR
monthly

BEI
monthly

TFR
monthly 
  Jul 2011 – Jul 2020
−0.26  
  Jan 1999 – Jun 2011
−0.10  
−0.16** 
  Difference
Note: Correlations are the trailing-window Spearman correlation of the change in the variable with the change in the VIX (here referred to 
as 𝛥VIX). Spearman correlations are computed over one-year windows at the daily frequency and over five-year windows at the monthly 
frequency. 𝑟*CR denotes estimates of the natural rate from Christensen and Rudebusch (2019a), and 𝑟*TIPS is the five-year ahead five-year 
forward zero-coupon TIPS rate computed from Gürkaynak et al. (2010) used as a proxy for the natural rate. BEI is the five-year ahead five-year 
forward breakeven inflation rate, while TFR is the five-year ahead five-year forward Treasury constant maturity yield.
***  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 1% level, accounting for serial correlation.
**  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 5% level, accounting for serial correlation.
*  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 10% level, accounting for serial correlation.

−0.27
−0.08

−0.33
0.00

−0.31
−0.15

TFR
daily

−0.19***

−0.33***

−0.16***

−2.05***

Table 2
Regression of correlation between changes in VIX and BEI/TFR/TRR on the natural rate of interest.
  Dependent Variable:
corr (𝛥VIX𝑡, 𝛥𝑦𝑡)

𝑟*CR

  𝑟*

  constant

BEI𝑡
(1)

0.161***
(0.039)

-0.317***
(0.048)

TFR𝑡
(2)

0.129***
(0.046)

-0.334***
(0.058)

TRR𝑡
(3)

0.075*
(0.04)

-0.221***
(0.049)

BEI𝑡
(4)

0.077***
(0.018)

-0.298***
(0.043)

𝑟*TIPS

TFR𝑡
(5)

0.071***
(0.021)

-0.335***
(0.051)

TRR𝑡
(6)
0.041**  
(0.018)

-0.222*** 
(0.043)

daily
Jan 1999
Jul 2020
5,374
0.013

daily
Jan 1999
Jul 2020
5,374
0.054

daily
Jan 1998
Jul 2020
5,625
0.035

  Frequency
  Sample Start
  Sample End
  Observations
  R2
Note: The dependent variable in the regression is the time series correlation between changes in the VIX and changes in various variables 𝑦𝑡, 
denoted corr(𝛥VIX𝑡, 𝛥𝑦𝑡), where 𝑦𝑡 stands for BEI𝑡, TFR𝑡, and TRR𝑡 across columns as labeled. BEI is the five-year forward breakeven inflation 
rate five years ahead, TFR is the five-year forward Treasury constant maturity rate five years ahead, and TRR is the analogous real rate. The 
independent variable in the regression is the natural rate of interest, using the (Christensen and Rudebusch, 2019b) measure in columns (1)–(3) 
or the TIPS-based measure in columns (4)-(6). Estimated coefficients are reported with Newey–West (HAC) standard errors in parentheses.
***  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 1% level, accounting for serial correlation.
**  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 5% level, accounting for serial correlation.
*  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 10% level, accounting for serial correlation.

daily
Jan 1999 
Jul 2020  
5,371
0.017

daily
Jan 1999
Jul 2020
5,381
0.048

daily
Jan 1999
Jul 2020
5,371
0.059

4.3. Lower natural rates and the effects of uncertainty shocks on inflation 
and interest rates

This section tests the empirical prediction of our theoretical model 
that  the  correlation  between  uncertainty  shocks  and  movements  in 
inflation expectations and interest rates changes as the natural real rate 
of interest falls. The target equilibrium of our model predicts a fall in 
the correlation with a decline in the natural real rate.

To test this prediction, we run a time series regression of the correla-
tion between changes in the VIX and changes in inflation expectations 
on the real natural rate of interest and an intercept. We repeat this 
regression for both the nominal and real interest rates.

The correlation between uncertainty shocks and changes in break-
even  inflation  rates  (BEI)  serving  as  the  dependent  variable  is  our 
baseline correlation. We compute it as the correlation from daily data 
over a 14-day rolling window. Despite obtaining a noisier measure, 
we  choose  a  short  window  for  computing  the  correlation  to  avoid 
having a highly persistent regressor. We further compute the analogous 
correlation for changes in the VIX and changes in nominal interest rates 
as measured by five-year ahead five-year forward Treasury constant 
maturity yields (TFR). Lastly, we obtain a corresponding correlation for 
real interest rates. Our measure for the expected real rate (TRR) is the 
forward real interest rate obtained from Treasury Inflation Protected 
Securities (TIPS) prices. It is calculated as the difference between the 
nominal Treasury forward rate (TFR) and break-even inflation (BEI) 
over the same horizon.

Data for the natural rate of interest, 𝑟∗, are the daily estimates 
of Christensen and Rudebusch (2019a) and daily data on the five-year 
ahead five-year forward zero-coupon TIPS yield computed from Gürkay-
nak et al. (2010). The sample period for these regressions is January 
1999 to July 2020.

Table  2 shows the regression results for the three dependent vari-
ables regressed on the Christensen-Rudebusch measure – in Columns 
(1), (2), and (3) – as well as the TIPS proxy for 𝑟∗ – in Columns (4), (5), 
and (6). It reports the estimated coefficients with Newey–West standard 
errors for serial correlation.

Together, all empirical specifications show highly significantly posi-
tive coefficients on the natural rate of interest. This finding implies that, 
on average, the correlation between uncertainty shocks and changes in 
inflation expectations or interest rates falls when the natural rate de-
clines. Column (1) reports the results for the regression of the two-week 
trailing-window correlation between changes in the VIX and changes in 
inflation expectations on the CR estimates of 𝑟∗. The coefficient on the 
natural rate is estimated to be 0.161 with a standard error of 0.039. 
Column (4) runs the analogous specifications using the five-year five-
year zero-coupon TIPS rates as a proxy for 𝑟∗ and yields the same 
conclusions. The estimated coefficients on the TIPS-measure of 𝑟∗ in 
these regressions are slightly lower due to larger fluctuations in this 
measure compared to the Christensen-Rudebusch 𝑟∗ over the sample 
period.

As shown in Column (2) of the table, the regression of the two-week 
trailing-window correlation between changes in the VIX and changes 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Bok et al.

in  long-term  expected  interest  rates  on  the  CR  estimates  of  𝑟∗,  we 
estimate a positive and statistically significant relationship between the 
responsiveness of interest rate expectations to uncertainty shocks and 
the natural rate of interest. The estimated coefficient of 0.129 on the CR 
𝑟∗ is statistically significant at the 1% level. The same result holds for 
the regression on the TIPS proxy for 𝑟∗ at the daily frequency, shown 
in Column (5) of the table, with an estimated coefficient on the nat-
ural rate lower in magnitude but nonetheless positive and statistically 
significant.

The analogous regressions for forward real rates show a positive, yet 
somewhat smaller estimated coefficient on 𝑟∗.19 To investigate whether 
the theory is informative about this correlation, we compute expected 
real interest rates from the difference between nominal interest rates 
and inflation expectations
]
E [𝑖𝑡 − E[𝜋𝑡+1]

E𝑖𝛥 − E[𝜋𝑡+1]

𝜃 + 𝑟∗ +

= −

̄𝜖 −

1
𝛼

1
𝜓 − 1

1
𝜓 − 1
1
𝛼

̄𝜖,

= 𝑟∗ +

where the Fisher equation in the second line follows directly from Eq. 
(7).

As the theory section demonstrated, real interest rates are higher 
at  the  lower  bound  compared  to  a  model  without  a  lower  bound. 
However, the presence of a lower bound lowers inflation expectations 
overall and thus leads to lower real rates away from the lower bound. 
What the Fisher equation tells us is that, on net, the two effects cancel 
and the model does not speak directly to a correlation with uncertainty 
shocks. In other words, the expected real rate is pinned down by the 
exogenously given natural real rate of interest, 𝑟∗.

These results establish a significantly positive link between the natu-
ral real rate of interest and the impact of uncertainty shocks on inflation 
expectations and interest rates, in line with the theoretical model in this 
paper. The positive sign of the coefficient indicates that this correlation 
between changes in uncertainty and changes in inflation expectations 
or interest rates tends to decline when 𝑟∗ falls, as we observe broadly 
in the data over our sample period.

4.4. Uncertainty shocks and the stock market

The New Keynesian model is a model for the macroeconomy and, 
as such, has implications for the real side of the economy. Specifically, 
one would expect a distribution of output skewed to the downside when 
the lower bound is likely to bind as the economy moves along the 
Phillips curve. While there is no liquid financial market that would 
allow us to observe expectations about real side variables in our model, 
we can look at close proxies. In this section, we explore whether the 
link between uncertainty shocks and the stock market changed as the 
lower bound on interest rates became a more salient concern.

Following the literature on the stock-bond comovement (e.g., Camp-
bell et al. (2017) and Campbell et al. (2020)), we focus on a time series 
of slope coefficients from rolling-window regressions.20 We therefore 
run the following regression

𝛥VIX𝑡−ℎ = 𝛼𝑡 + 𝛽𝑡𝛥 log(S&P 500𝑡−ℎ) + 𝜂𝑡−ℎ

for daily data over the 12-month period leading up to time 𝑡 where 
𝛥  represents  the  daily  change  in  the  variable.  𝛥VIX𝑡−ℎ  is  the  daily 
change in the VIX at date 𝑡 − ℎ where ℎ runs through all the days 
over the prior year. 𝛥 log(S&P 500𝑡−ℎ) is the daily return as measured 

19 The sign of the relationship between the natural rate and the measured 
correlation between changes in the five-year five-year forward Treasury real 
rate and uncertainty shocks depends on the frequency at which the correlation 
is measured (see Internet Appendix B.C). Future research might be able to shed 
further light on our understanding of real rates.
20 For  comparison,  we  report  the  analogous  correlations  in  Internet 
Appendix Figure A6.

12 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

through the daily change in the logarithm of the S&P 500 valuation. 
The regression slope 𝛽𝑡 captures the time-varying relationship between 
uncertainty shocks and changes in stock market valuation.

Fig.  6 shows the regression slopes over time. Throughout the sam-
ple, increases in the VIX are associated with a decline in stock mar-
ket valuations. This pattern is in line with the standard risk-return 
trade-off.

This relationship between uncertainty shocks and changes in stock 
market valuations becomes more negative around the time that the 
correlation between uncertainty shocks and changes in inflation ex-
pectations turns negative. These movements are consistent with the 
theoretical model in this paper. As the lower bound becomes more 
likely to bind, higher uncertainty worsens the average outlook for the 
economy and stock valuations decline.

To  show  that  the  decline  in  the  slopes  of  the  regression  of  the 
VIX on stock market valuations is consistent with the model, we link 
the regression slopes to the natural rate of interest. We therefore run 
the  analogous  regression  to  the  ones  in  Table   2  where  we  regress 
the regression slopes on the natural rate of interest. As before, we 
measure 𝑟∗ both through the Christensen-Rudebusch as well as the TIPS 
measures. In the case of Christensen-Rudebusch, we obtain a regression 
coefficient of 0.36 with a Newey–West standard error of 0.16, which 
is statistically significant at the 5% level. For the TIPS measure, the 
regression coefficient is 0.17 with a Newey–West standard error of 0.06, 
which is statistically significant at the 1% level.

In sum, all the empirical results in this paper are consistent with 
the theoretical prediction of the target equilibrium described in the 
theoretical  section  of  this  paper,  and  inconsistent  with  being  in  a 
liquidity trap equilibrium. These results supporting the U.S. economy 
being in a target equilibrium are consistent with the findings of Mertens 
and Williams (2021) using data from derivatives markets.

5. Robustness of empirical results

We assess the robustness of our main empirical results along two 
dimensions, using alternative measures of uncertainty and of inflation 
expectations. Overall, we find that our qualitative results are robust to 
these alternative measures, although the level of statistical significance 
is weaker in some instances.

Our first robustness concerns the length of the sample period that 
was determined by data availability. To extend the time dimension, we 
use 5-year forward Treasury yields five years out as in Fig.  4. Instead 
of changes in the VIX, we study changes in realized volatility, a close 
substitute to the VIX.21 We compute realized volatility as the backward-
looking moving average over 30 days (21 trading days) of squared daily 
returns in the S&P 500 index starting in 1962.

Fig.  7 shows the Spearman correlation between changes in realized 
volatility and changes in five-year five-year ahead Treasury yield. This 
correlation broadly hovered around zero between the mid-sixties and 
the Great Recession. A small correlation is consistent with the natural 
real rate of interest being sufficiently large for the lower bound not 
to  be  a  significant  constraint  on  equilibrium  quantities.  Note  that 
this  prediction  is  only  consistent  with  the  target  equilibrium.  The 
correlation only turned substantially negative in the aftermath of the 
Great Recession when the correlation between uncertainty shocks and 
inflation expectations turned negative as well.

Our second robustness exercise examines alternative measures of 
inflation expectations. The breakeven inflation measure analyzed ear-
lier  is  potentially  contaminated  by  time-varying  liquidity  and  risk 
premiums. To assess the importance of these premiums on our results, 

21 Figure A1 in Internet Appendix B.A shows the close relationship between 
the VIX and realized volatility during the period when both measures are 
available.

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Fig. 6.  One-year trailing-window estimated slope coefficient for the regression of daily changes in the VIX on daily changes in the logarithm of the S&P 500 stock price index. 
The sample period ranges from January 2004 until July 2020.

Fig. 7.  Five-year trailing-window Spearman correlation of monthly changes in realized volatility [computed as the backward-looking moving average over 30 days (21 trading 
days) of squared daily returns in the S&P 500 index] with monthly changes in the five-year five-year ahead Treasury constant maturity rate. The sample period ranges from 
January 1967 until July 2020.

we consider two measures of inflation expectations that are arguably 
less prone to this type of mismeasurement.

The first alternative measure of inflation expectations is the five-
year, five-year forward expected inflation rates, which are constructed 
to remove estimated risk and liquidity premiums by D’Amico et al. 
(2018) (DKW). The third column of Table  3 reports the subsample 
mean correlations between changes in the VIX and changes in this 
measure  of  inflation  expectations  at  the  daily  frequency  over  one-
year  trailing  windows.  These  results  are  similar  to  those  using  the 

breakeven inflation rates, and the difference in the mean correlations 
across subsamples is statistically significant.

The time series for the DKW measure is available at the daily fre-
quency going back in time further than the BEI series. Consistent with 
our baseline specifications, we turn the DKW measure into monthly 
averages. This longer time series allows us see how the correlation 
between  changes  in  long-run  inflation  expectations  and  uncertainty 
shocks behaved in the 1990s. Fig.  8 shows that this correlation using 
the DKW estimates of inflation expectations was positive in the late 
1990s, before trending downward over the subsequent two decades.

13 

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Fig. 8.  Spearman correlation between changes in the VIX and changes in the five-year, five-year forward expected inflation rate, adjusted for risk premia and the liquidity premium 
using the estimates of D’Amico et al. (2018): monthly frequency, five-year trailing-window correlation. The sample period ranges from January 1995 until July 2020.

Our second alternative measure of inflation expectations is the me-
dian ten-year CPI inflation expectation from the Federal Reserve Bank 
of  Philadelphia’s  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  (SPF).22  Unlike 
the financial market data that can be analyzed at higher frequencies, 
the SPF data are collected quarterly. Therefore, for this measure, we 
average the VIX over each quarter up through the first month of the 
quarter to be broadly consistent with the information set available to 
survey participants. We compute five-year trailing-window correlations 
with changes in the VIX for this survey-based measure of expected 
inflation.

The fourth column of Table  3 shows that the results using the SPF 
measure of inflation expectations are broadly consistent with those 
using market-based measures. The difference in the mean correlations 
across subsamples using the SPF is both of similar size to those using 
market-based  measures  and  is  statistically  significant.  Fig.   1  shows 
the time series of the correlation using the SPF measure of inflation 
expectations, which declines starting in the mid-2000s and thus follows 
the same pattern as our baseline correlation.

Third, because VIX may be affected by risk premia and technical 
factors like dealer positioning, we consider two alternative measures 
of uncertainty: the one-year-ahead estimate of economic financial un-
certainty (EFU) from Ludvigson et al. (2021) and the economic policy 
uncertainty (EPU) index of Baker et al. (2016). Unlike the VIX, which 
is priced in financial markets, the EFU index is a weighted average 
of conditional standard deviations of one-year-ahead forecast errors 
across a variety of financial indicators, while the EPU index is a news-
based measure. The final two columns of Table  3 report subsample 
comparisons using these measures of uncertainty. These statistics are 
constructed as in Table  1.

22 The SPF also collects five-year ahead forecasts on CPI inflation, but this 
measure is only available for a shorter sample. We use ten-year inflation 
expectations for consistency with the sample used throughout this paper.

14 

As seen in the table, the subsample changes in mean correlations 
using these alternative measures of uncertainty are qualitatively con-
sistent with those using the VIX as the measure of uncertainty (shown 
in the first two columns of the table). That said, the magnitudes of the 
declines in the mean correlations are smaller than in the case of the 
VIX.

These robustness exercises demonstrate that our key findings are not 
sensitive to the presence of liquidity or risk premiums in breakeven 
inflation  expectations.  Although  the  results  using  these  alternative 
measures of uncertainty are not as quantitatively or statistically strong 
as for the market-based measure, qualitatively they are in the same 
direction and consistent with the model prediction for the target equi-
librium.

6. Conclusion

This paper documents a marked downward trend in the correlation 
between changes in market-based measures of uncertainty and changes 
in expected inflation and expected interest rates over the past quarter 
century. These changing correlations have occurred at the same time 
that estimates of the natural rate of interest declined significantly and 
the incidence of monetary policy being near or at the lower bound 
increased. In this paper, we show that this constellation of observations 
is consistent with the predictions of a standard New Keynesian model 
with  a  lower  bound  on  interest  rates  when  the  economy  is  in  the 
target equilibrium. The lower bound on interest rates is crucial because, 
absent the lower bound, the correlations studied here would be zero. 
We also show that average-inflation targeting policies can mitigate the 
effects of uncertainty shocks on the unconditional means of inflation 
and output.

Throughout  this  paper,  we  focus  on  the  theoretical  predictions 
for unconditional moments and empirical counterparts of far-forward 
expectations. A future extension of this analysis is to examine business-
cycle frequency comovements between uncertainty and inflation and 
interest rate expectations in the presence of persistent shocks to the 
economy.

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Table 3
Differences in moments across subsamples.
  Frequency

Mean correlation 
with 𝛥VIX
BEI
daily

BEI
monthly

DKW
monthly

SPF
quarterly

Mean correlation 
with 𝛥BEI
EFU
monthly

EPU
monthly

−0.15**

−0.19***

−0.33***

−0.27
−0.08

−0.24
−0.02

−0.30
−0.15

−0.33
0.00

  Jul 2011 – Jul 2020
  Jan 1999 – Jun 2011
  Difference
Note: Correlation is the trailing-window correlation of the change in the variable with the change in the breakeven inflation rate (here denoted 
as 𝛥BEI) or the change in the VIX (here denoted as 𝛥VIX), as labeled. Correlations are computed over one-year windows at the daily frequency 
and over five-year windows at the monthly and quarterly frequencies. EFU is the one-year ahead estimate of economic financial uncertainty 
from Ludvigson et al. (2021), and EPU is the economic policy uncertainty index of Baker et al. (2016). BEI is the five-year ahead five-year 
forward breakeven inflation rate, and DKW is the five-year ahead five-year forward breakeven inflation rate from D’Amico et al. (2018) which 
removes risk premia and liquidity premia from the Treasury-implied rate. SPF is the median ten-year ahead CPI inflation rate from the Survey 
of Professional Forecasters conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
***  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 1% level, accounting for serial correlation.
**  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 5% level, accounting for serial correlation.
*  Signify that the difference in means across subsamples is statistically significant at the 10% level, accounting for serial correlation.

−0.23
−0.09

−0.18
−0.09

−0.22***

−0.14*

−0.09

CRediT authorship contribution statement

A.2. Proof of Proposition  1

Brandyn Bok: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Software, Resources, Project administration, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization. Thomas M. Mertens: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding 
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. John 
C.  Williams:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Software, Resources, Project administration, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization.

Declaration of competing interest

All authors, declares that they has no known competing financial in-
terests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work in this paper.

Appendix A. Lemmas and Proofs

A.1. Effects of higher uncertainty

A mean-preserving spread is directly linked to the super-cumulative 
distribution  function  via  the  following  lemma.  The  lemma  further 
illustrates that a mean-preserving spread pushes mass into the tails of 
the distribution.

Lemma 3 (Mean-Preserving Spread and Second-Order Stochastic Domi-
nance).

The following statements are equivalent:

1. 𝜑𝑡 is a mean-preserving spread of 𝜈𝑡 with p.d.f. 𝑔(𝑠, 𝜑𝑡) and c.d.f. 

𝐺(𝑠, 𝜑𝑡).

2. 𝐺(𝑠, 𝜑𝑡) second-order stochastically dominates 𝐺(𝜈𝑡) for all 𝑠 > 0.
3. G (𝑠, 𝜑) ≥ G (𝜑) for all 𝜑 and 𝑠 > 0.
4. There exist 

𝜑 and  ̄𝜑 such that 𝐺(𝑠, 𝜑𝑡) ≥ 𝐺(𝜑𝑡) for all 𝜑𝑡
̄
𝐺(𝑠, 𝜑𝑡) ≤ 𝐺(𝜑𝑡) for all 𝜑𝑡

≥

≤

𝜑 and 
̄

𝜑.
̄

Proof.  For a proof, see Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970).  □

15 

Proof.   Denote  the  super-cumulative  distribution  function  of  𝜑𝑡  by 
G (𝑠, 𝜑𝑡). We analyze the derivative of inflation expectations with re-
spect to an increase in the mean-preserving spread

dE𝑖𝛥
d𝑠

=

1
𝛼

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

G 𝜑
1 (𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
𝜓−1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝜓

.

The  numerator  is  positive,  G
1(𝑠, 𝜈𝑡) > 0  (see  Lemma   3  in  Internet 
Appendix  A.1). We furthermore established that the lower bound prob-
ability is below the threshold (𝜓 −1)∕𝜓 when the economy is in a target 
equilibrium.

For the comparative statics with respect to the mean-preserving 

spread, take the derivative with respect to 𝑠.
dE𝑖𝛥
d𝑠

G 𝜑(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

=

2 (𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

d
d𝑠
1
𝛼

1
𝛼

1
𝛼

1
𝛼
1 (𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + G 𝜑
G 𝜑
G 𝜑
1 (𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
G 𝜑
1 − 𝜓
2 (𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
𝜓−1
G 𝜑
1 (𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
− G 𝜑

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

=

=

=

2 (𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

dE𝑖𝛥
d𝑠

□

Turning to changes in average demand, we compute the compara-

tive statics with respect to ̄𝜖. From the equilibrium correspondence,
)

(

G

2( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

=

+ 1

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝜓 − 1
𝜓
𝜓 − 1
𝜓
From the equation for the cutoff,

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

= −

⟺

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

= −1 + 𝛼

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

dE𝑖𝛥
d ̄𝜖

Together,

=

1
𝛼

1 −

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

dE𝑖𝛥
d ̄𝜖

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
To see that the sign of this expression switches depending on the 
equilibrium, notice that the sign is determined by the expression in 
parentheses. In the target equilibrium, this expression

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

.

1 −

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

= 1 −

1
1 − 𝜓
𝜓−1

𝑃 𝐿𝐵

is negative: for 0 < 𝑃 𝐿𝐵 < 𝜓−1
𝜓
expression less than 1 and the whole expression is thus negative.

, the denominator in the rightmost 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Bok et al.

A.3. Derivation of comparative statics to lower bound probability

Differentiating the equilibrium correspondence in Eq.  (11) on both 

sides with respect to 𝑠 yields

G

1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + 𝐺(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

=

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

.

Consequently, we get
1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
− 𝐺(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

=

G

𝜓−1
𝜓

.

To sign the derivative 𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵∕𝑑𝑠, we plug the expression for the deriva-
tive of the cutoff into the derivative of 𝑃 𝐿𝐵 to get 
𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

= 𝐺1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + 𝑔(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

= 𝐺1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + 𝑔(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

.

(14)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠
G
1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
− 𝐺(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝜓−1
𝜓

The analogous expression for the derivative with respect to ̄𝜖 is 

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

= 𝑔( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

= −

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝑔( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵).

(15)

A.4. Proof of Lemma  2

We start by differentiating the equilibrium correspondence in (11) 

to get
𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

= G

2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

+ G

1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵).

Rewriting this expression, we get
)
( 𝜓 − 1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) > 0.

= G

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵) and 𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵

Consequently, ( 𝜓−1
𝑑𝑠  are of the same sign. The cutoff is 
𝜓
thus increasing in the target equilibrium and decreasing in the liquidity 
trap equilibrium.

By Lemma  3, the function G (⋅) shifts up when uncertainty increases. 
G (𝜈) = 0 since G  is obtained by 
We furthermore know that lim𝜈→−∞
integrating over the cumulative density function. Furthermore, for the 
same reason, the slope of G  converges to 1 for large values

G ′(𝜈) = 1.

lim
𝜈→∞
Lastly, since G ′′(𝜈) = 𝑔(𝜈) is the probability density function and thus 
non-negative, the function G (⋅) is convex. At the same time, the right-
hand side of the equilibrium correspondence in (11) is independent of 
uncertainty.

The G -function intersects the right-hand side of the equilibrium 
correspondence from above to below in the target equilibrium (see Fig. 
2 for an illustration).

As a result, increasing uncertainty will weakly shift the intersection 
to the right in the target equilibrium. That is, the equilibrium cutoff ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
shifts to the right in the target equilibrium, thereby weakly increasing 
the part of the state space in which the lower bound binds.

Under normality, these results hold globally. The term that deter-
mines the sign of the change in the lower bound probability in response 
to higher uncertainty is

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

= 𝐺1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + 𝑔(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

G
1(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
− 𝐺(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝜓−1
𝜓

.

Assuming a normal distribution of the demand shock, i.e. 𝜈 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2), 
we write this term as
(

)2

)2

(

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

=

1
2𝜋𝜎

−

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝜎

− 𝛷

( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝜎

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝑒
𝜓−1
𝜓

− 1
2

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝜎

√

2𝜋

̄𝜈𝐿𝐵𝑒

) −

𝜎

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

,

16 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

where 𝛷(⋅) is the c.d.f. of the standard normal distribution. Substituting 
̄𝜈𝐿𝐵 = −
2𝜎𝜀 and recognizing that the term outside the bracket is 
always positive, we analyze the term in the bracket

√

𝐾(𝜀) =

1
2

1

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝛷(−

√

2𝜀)

+ 𝑒𝜀2 √

𝜋𝜀

that is independent of the volatility parameter 𝜎.

We now show that the sign of 𝐾(𝜀) is negative for 𝜀 < 𝜀∗ where 
 is the point of the singularity and positive for 𝜀 > 𝜀∗. 

𝜀∗ = 𝛷−1
To this end, we proceed in the following steps.

( 𝜓−1
𝜓

)

First, when 𝜀 approaches negative infinity, 𝐾(𝜀) < 0 approaches 
negative infinity, i.e. lim𝜀→−∞ 𝐾(𝜀) = −∞. Both terms in the expression 
are negative with one of them being bounded. On the other end, 𝐾(𝜀)
approaches infinity for large values of 𝜀, i.e. lim𝜀→∞ 𝐾(𝜀) = ∞.

Next, approaching the singularity from the left leads the function 
value to approach negative infinity, lim𝜀→− ̄𝜀∗ 𝐾(𝜀) = −∞. Approaching 
the singularity from the right leads to positive unbounded function 
values lim𝜀→+ ̄𝜀∗ 𝐾(𝜀) = ∞.

Third, the function has only one singularity where the denominator 
of the first term is zero. It is analytic otherwise. Therefore, the function 
starts from unbounded negative values, reaches a maximum, and then 
converges to negative infinity when approaching the singularity. On 
the right-hand side of the singularity, the function starts from a high 
value, falls to a minimum, and then converges to positive infinity. Next 
we compute the two extrema and show that the maximum to the left 
of the singularity sits below zero and the minimum to the right above 
zero.

To compute the extrema, we take first-order conditions and set them 

to zero, i.e., 𝐾 ′(𝜀) = 0, which results in
2𝜋𝑒2𝜀2 (

1 + 2𝜀2)

−

1

= 0.

( 𝜓−1
𝜓

√

)2

− 𝛷(−

2𝜀)

Rearranging the equation and taking the square root results in two 
conditions that hold at the extrema

1

1

√

− 𝛷(−

2𝜀1)

√

− 𝛷(−

2𝜀2)

𝜓−1
𝜓

and

𝜓−1
𝜓

= −𝑒𝜀2

1

√

2𝜋(1 + 2𝜀2
1)

= +𝑒𝜀2

2

√

2𝜋(1 + 2𝜀2
2).

Since the left-hand side is negative in the first and positive in the second 
equation, the two extrema are on opposite sides of the singularity at 𝜀∗.
Evaluating the function value shows that the function value at the 
maximum to the left of the singularity is below zero. Therefore, replace 
the first expression in 𝐾(⋅) with the expression from the first-order 
condition to arrive at

𝐾(𝜀1) =

√

𝜋𝑒𝜀2

1

(

√

𝜀1 −

)

1
2

+ 𝜀2
1

< 0.

As a result, 𝐾(𝜀1) < 0 for all 𝜀 < 𝜀∗. For 𝜀 > 𝜀∗, we get

𝐾(𝜀2) =

√

𝜋𝑒𝜀2

2

(

√

𝜀2 +

)

1
2

+ 𝜀2
2

> 0.

Since the maximum to the left of the singularity lies below zero, all 
function values for 𝜀 < 𝜀∗ are negative. And since the minimum to the 
right is above zero, all function values for 𝜀 > 𝜀∗ are positive.

The results for lower average demand follow directly from Eq.  (15).

A.5. Proof of Proposition  2

Proof.  We start from the derivative of the expected wedge with respect 
to the natural rate 
𝑑E𝑖𝛥
1
𝑑𝑟∗ =
𝛼

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗

2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

(16)

G

.

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

G

G

G

+

=

+

(

1
𝛼

1
𝛼

1
𝛼

2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

2,2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

1,2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

Now, computing the second mixed derivative as
𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑𝑠
𝑑𝑟∗
𝑑𝑠
where we get the last term by computing 
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝜓
𝑑𝑟∗ = −𝛼
𝜓 − 1
and
𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑𝑠
Plugging these expressions into the second mixed derivative yields 

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑𝑠

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑𝑠

𝑑E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑟∗

= 𝛼

1 −

)

.

,

(17)

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑𝑠

=

1
𝛼

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

(

G

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

1,2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + 𝑔(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗

.

= 𝛼

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃𝑑𝑠

and
𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃𝑑𝑠
Plugging these expressions into the second mixed derivative yields
𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃𝑑𝑠

1,2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + 𝑔(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

1
𝛼

)

(

=

G

.

.

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓
We combine Eqs. (20) and (21) to get
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝜓
𝑑𝜃
𝜓 − 1
𝑑𝜃

𝐺(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

=

+

,

𝛼
𝜓 − 1
or, rewritten,
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃

𝛼
𝜓

=

𝜓−1
𝜓

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

.

We combine Eqs. (16) and (17) to get
)
𝜓 − 1
𝜓

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗

2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

1 +

1
𝛼

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗

(

=

G

1
𝛼
or, rewritten, 

,

(18)

Taken together and using Eq. (14) results in

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃𝑑𝑠

=

1
𝜓 − 1

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

. □

Extending this proof to the mixed derivative of the interest rate 

(19)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗ = −𝛼

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

.

Taken together and using Eq. (14) results in

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑𝑠

= −

= −

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

1,2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵) + 𝑔(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)
G

)

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

2

(

2

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑠

. □

To extend this proof to the mixed derivative with respect to 𝑟∗ and 

.

=

1
𝛼

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗ +

𝑃 𝐿𝐵 𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖

̄𝜖, start again from Eq.  (16) and differentiate:
𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
1
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖
𝛼
Using Eq. (17), we get
𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖
Combining these equations with Eq. (15) to solve for the mixed deriva-
tive gives

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

= 𝛼

.

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖

= −

1
𝛼

𝜓 − 1
𝜓

1
− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝑔( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

−𝛼

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

+

1
𝛼

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

(

𝛼

𝑃 𝐿𝐵

)

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖

=

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

= −

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

3

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑔( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

.

A.6. Proof of Proposition  3

Proof.  We follow analogous steps as in Appendix  A.5. We start from 
the derivative of the expected wedge with respect to the intercept 𝜃 in 
the policy rule 
𝑑E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃

2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

(20)

1
𝛼

=

G

.

G

=

1
𝛼

1,2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

Now, computing the second mixed derivative as
𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃𝑑𝑠
𝑑𝑠
𝑑𝜃
𝑑𝜃
where we get the last term by computing 
𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

1
𝜓 − 1

𝑑E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃

2,2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

= 𝛼

1
𝛼

)

(

+

+

G

+

1
𝛼

G

2(𝑠, ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵)

𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃𝑑𝑠

,

=

1
𝛼

wedge with respect to 𝜃 and ̄𝜖
𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝑟∗𝑑 ̄𝜖
𝑑 ̄𝜖
where
𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝜓
𝜓 − 1

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃

= 𝛼

1
𝛼

+

.

𝑃 𝐿𝐵 𝑑2 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃𝑑 ̄𝜖

,

Therefore,

𝑑2E𝑖𝛥
𝑑𝜃𝑑 ̄𝜖

=

1
𝛼

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝑑 ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵
𝑑𝜃

=

1
𝜓 − 1

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

= −

1
𝜓 − 1

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑑𝑃 𝐿𝐵
𝑑 ̄𝜖

𝜓−1
𝜓

𝜓−1
𝜓

− 𝑃 𝐿𝐵

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

3

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝑔( ̄𝜈𝐿𝐵).

Appendix B. Technical details on time series analysis

B.1. Controlling for serial correlation in hypothesis testing on sample means

Above we compute sample means of various time series in adjacent 
subsamples and test the null hypothesis that these estimated means 
are the same across subsamples. Because the time series for which 
we  compute  the  mean  –  both  the  raw  time  series  for  𝑟∗  and  the 
trailing-window  correlations  –  are  highly  persistent,  we  control  for 
serial correlation to conduct valid inference. To this end, we construct 
the following 𝑡-statistic for this null hypothesis:

𝑡 =

̄𝑦2 − ̄𝑦1
Var( ̄𝑦2 − ̄𝑦1)

√

which is the ratio of the difference in subsample means to the standard 
error of this difference, where 𝑦1 is the first subsample with 𝑛1 obser-
vations and 𝑦2 is the second subsample with 𝑛2 observations, with  ̄𝑦𝑖
denoting the sample mean of subsample 𝑖.

Following Wilks (1997), we use a scaling factor approach to control 
for serial correlation in our setting. Hence, we compute the variance of 
the difference in means as follows:
𝑠2
2
𝑛2

Var( ̄𝑦2 − ̄𝑦1) = ̂𝜗2

+ ̂𝜗1

𝑠2
1
𝑛1

(21)

with 𝑠2
sample 𝑖, the scaling factor 𝜗𝑖 given by 𝜗𝑖 = 1 + 2 ∑𝑛𝑖−1

𝑖  denoting the sample variance of subsample 𝑖. For each sub-
𝑘=1 [1 − 𝑘∕𝑛𝑖]𝜌𝑘

17 

B. Bok et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104130 

Diwan, Renuka, Leduc, Sylvain, Mertens, Thomas M., 2020. Average-Inflation Targeting 
and the Effective Lower Bound. In: Economic Letter 2020-22, Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco.

Duffee, Gregory R., 2022. Macroeconomic news and stock–bond comovement. Rev. 

Financ. 1–24.

Eggertsson,  Gauti  B.,  Woodford,  Michael,  2003.  The  zero  interest-rate  bound  and 

optimal monetary policy. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. (1), 139–233.

FOMC, 2020. Federal Open Market Committee announces approval of updates to its 
Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Board Governors, 
Press Release, August 27, 2020, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/news
events/pressreleases/monetary20200827a.htm.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., Madigan, Brian F., 1997. Monetary policy when interest rates are 

bounded at zero. Rev. Econ. Stat. 79 (4), 573–585.

Gourio,  François,  Ngo,  Phuong,  2020.  Risk  premia  at  the  ZLB:  A  macroeconomic 

interpretation. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2020-01.

Gürkaynak, Refet S, Sack, Brian, Wright, Jonathan H, 2010. The TIPS yield curve and 

inflation compensation. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 2 (1), 70–92.

Hills, Timothy S., Nakata, Taisuke, Schmidt, Sebastian, 2016. The Risky Steady State 
and the Interest Rate Lower Bound. In: Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
2016-009, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Holston, Kathryn, Laubach, Thomas, Williams, John C., 2017. Measuring the natural 
rate of interest: International trends and determinants. J. Int. Econ. 108 (S1), 
S59–S75.

Johannsen, Benjamin K., Mertens, Elmar, 2016. A Time Series Model of Interest Rates 
with the Effective Lower Bound. In: Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
2016-033, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

Jurado, Kyle, Ludvigson, Sydney C., Ng, Serena, 2015. Measuring uncertainty. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 105 (3), 1177–1216.

Kiley, Michael T., 2015. What Can the Data Tell Us About the Equilibrium Real Interest 
Rate?. In: Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077, Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors.

Laubach, Thomas, Williams, John C., 2003. Measuring the natural rate of interest. Rev. 

Econ. Stat. 85 (4), 1063–1070.

Monet. Econ. 82, 20–35.

Leduc, Sylvain, Liu, Zheng, 2016. Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks. J. 

Lubik, Thomas A., Matthes, Christian, 2015. Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: 
A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches. In: FRB Richmond Economic Brief 
15-10.

Ludvigson, Sydney C., Ma, Sai, Ng, Serena, 2021. Uncertainty and business cycles: 
Exogenous impulse or endogenous response? Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 13 (4), 
369–410.

Mendes, Rhys R., 2011. Uncertainty and the zero lower bound: A theoretical analysis. 

In: Mimeo. Bank of Canada.

Mertens, Thomas M., Williams, John C., 2019. Monetary policy frameworks and the 

effective lower bound on interest rates. AEA Pap. Proc. 109, 427–432.

Mertens, Thomas M., Williams, John C., 2020. Tying down the anchor: Monetary policy 
rules and the lower bound on interest rates. In: Cochrane, John, Taylor, John (Eds.), 
Strategies for Monetary Policy. Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA, pp. 103–172.
Mertens, Thomas M., Williams, John C., 2021. What to expect from the lower bound 
on  interest  rates:  Evidence  from  derivatives  prices.  Am.  Econ.  Rev.  111  (8), 
2473–2505.

Center for Monetary Research, FRBSF, 2024. Interest Rate Probability Distributions. 

Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, (Accessed 15 November 2024).

Nakata, Taisuke, 2017. Uncertainty at the zero lower bound. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 

9 (3), 186–221.

Nie,  He,  Roulleau-Pasdeloup,  Jordan,  2021.  The  promises  (and  perils)  of  control-
contingent forward guidance. In: Mimeo. National University of Singapore.

Pflueger, Carolin, 2023. Back to the 1980s or not? The drivers of inflation and real 

risks in treasury bonds. NBER Working Paper No. 30921.

Plante, Michael, Richter, Alexander W, Throckmorton, Nathaniel A, 2017. The zero 

lower bound and endogenous uncertainty. Econ. J. 128 (611), 1730–1757.

Rothschild, Michael, Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1970. Increasing risk: I. a definition. J. Econom. 

Theory 2 (3), 225–243.

Swanson, Eric T., Williams, John C., 2014. Measuring the effect of the zero lower bound 
on medium- and longer-term interest rates. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (10), 3154–3185.
Wilks, D.S., 1997. Resampling hypothesis tests for autocorrelated fields. J. Clim. 10 

Williams, John C., 2017. Three Questions on R-star. In: Economic Letter 2017-05, 

Woodford, Michael, 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary 

Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Policy. Princeton University Press.

(1), 65–82.

accounts for serial correlation 𝜌𝑘 at various lags 𝑘, and the modified 
scaling factor ̂𝜗𝑖 = 𝜗𝑖 exp(2𝜗𝑖∕𝑛𝑖) corrects for potential bias in estimating 
this scaling factor.

Appendix C. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104130.

Data availability

Macroeconomic Drivers and the Pricing of Uncertainty, Inflation, and
Bonds (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Adam, Klaus, Billi, Roberto M., 2006. Optimal monetary policy under commitment with 
a zero bound on nominal interest rates. J. Money Credit. Bank. 38 (7), 1877–1905.
Andrews, Donald W.K., 1993. Tests for parameter instability and structural change with 

unknown change point. Econometrica 61 (4), 821–856.

Baele, Lieven, Bekaert, Geert, Inghelbrecht, Koen, 2010. The determinants of stock and 

bond return comovements. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (6), 2374–2428.

Baker, Scott R., Bloom, Nicholas, Davis, Steven J., 2016. Measuring economic policy 

uncertainty. Q. J. Econ. 131 (4), 1593–1636.

Basu,  Susanto,  Bundick,  Brent,  2017.  Uncertainty  shocks  in  a  model  of  effective 

Benhabib, Jess, Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, Uribe, Martín, 2001. The perils of taylor 

demand. Econometrica 85 (3), 937–958.

rules. J. Econom. Theory 96 (1), 40–69.

Bernanke, Ben S., 2002. Deflation: Making sure it doesn’t happen here. In: Board 
of  Governors  Federal  Reserve,  Speech  before  the  National  Economists  Club, 
Washington, D.C., November 21, 2002.

Bilal, Mohsan A., 2017. Zeroing in: Asset pricing at the zero lower bound. In: Mimeo. 

NYU Stern School of Business.

Macroecon. 

Bilbiie,  Florin  O.,  2022.  Neo-Fisherian  policies  and  liquidity  traps.  Am.  Econ.  J.: 

Campbell, Jeffrey R, Evans, Charles L, Fisher, Jonas D M, Justiniano, Alejandro, 2012. 
Macroeconomic effects of FOMC forward guidance. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. (1), 
1–80.

Campbell, John Y., Pflueger, Carolin, Viceira, Luis M., 2020. Macroeconomic drivers 

of bond and equity risks. J. Politi. Econ. 128 (8), 3148–3185.

Campbell, John Y., Sunderam, Adi, Viceira, Luis M., 2017. Inflation bets or deflation 
hedges? The changing risks of nominal bonds. Crit. Financ. Rev. 6 (2), 263–301.
Christensen, Jens, Rudebusch, Glenn, 2019a. A new normal for interest rates? Evidence 

from inflation-indexed debt. Rev. Econ. Stat. 101 (5), 933–949.

Christensen, Jens H.E., Rudebusch, Glenn D., 2019b. Replication data for: A new normal 
for interest rates? Evidence from inflation-indexed debt. Harv. Dataverse Rev. Econ. 
Stat.  https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/
QZY3JR, daily estimates updated through April 12, 2020.

Clarida, Richard, Gali, Jordi, Gertler, Mark, 1999. The science of monetary policy: A 

new keynesian perspective. J. Econ. Lit. 37 (4), 1661–1707.

Cochrane, John H., 2018. Michelson-morley, Fisher, and occam: The radical impli-
cations of stable quiet inflation at the zero bound. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 32, 
113–226.

Crump, Richard K., Eusepi, Stefano, Moench, Emanuel, 2017. The Term Structure of 
Expectations and Bond Yields, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, p. 
775.

Cuba-Borda, Pablo, Singh, Sanjay, 2022. Understanding persistent ZLB: Theory and 

assessment. In: Mimeo. University of California, Davis.

D’Amico, Stefania, Kim, Don H., Wei, Min, 2018. Tips from TIPS: The informational 
content of treasury inflation-protected security prices. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 53 
(1), 395–436.

Datta, Deepa D., Johannsen, Benjamin K., Kwon, Hannah, Vigfusson, Robert J., 2021. 
Oil, equities, and the zero lower bound. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 13 (2), 214–253.
Del Negro, Marco, Giannone, Domenico, Giannoni, Marc P., Tambalotti, Andrea, 2017. 
Safety, liquidity, and the natural rate of interest. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. (1), 
235–316.

18 

