Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104119 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Michael C. Jensen’s empirical work

☆

Eugene F. Fama a, Kenneth R. French b,*
a Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, United States
b Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, United States

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Asset pricing tests
Jensen’s alpha
Market efficiency
Stock splits
Performance evaluation

1. Introduction

Much of Mike Jensen’s research is foundational, including his early publications, which focus on empirical asset 
pricing. For example, Jensen’s alpha, which he developss in Jensen (1968 and 1969) to evaluate mutual fund 
managers,  is  the  foundation  for  most  measures  of  investment  performance.  Similarly,  in  Fama  et  al  (1969), 
Jensen and coauthors present the first event study, Thereafter, event studies play a major role in finance, ac-
counting,  and  legal  research.  Finally,  Black,  Jensen,  and  Scholes  (1972)  develop  a  key  insight  about  the 
importance of interdependence of sampling errors in the precision of asset pricing tests.

Michael (Mike) Jensen is primarily known for his theoretical work on 
agency theory, especially Jensen and Meckling (1976), but Mike’s early 
work  was  empirical  asset  pricing,  and  characteristically,  each  of  the 
three empirical papers is foundational.

1.1. Mutual fund portfolio performance

The first empirical paper is Mike’s Ph.D. thesis (Jensen, 1969), which 
is a study of the performance of mutual funds. Much of this paper is a 
review of early asset pricing theory, in particular, the CAPM of Sharpe 
(1964) and Lintner (1965). The novel material on performance evalu-
ation is in Jensen (1968).

In the CAPM investors choose combinations of borrowing or lending 
at the riskfree rate, Rf, with an investment in the value-weight market 
portfolio of risky assets, which has expected return E(Rm). The expected 
return relation of the CAPM is, 
[
E(Rm) (cid:0) Rf

E(Ri) (cid:0) Rf = βi

(1) 

]

.

In this equation βi is the sensitivity of the return of asset i to the re-
turn  of  the  market  and  is  estimated  by  the  slope  in  the  time-series 
regression, 
Rit (cid:0) Rft = ̂αi + ̂βi

Rmt (cid:0) Rft

+ eit.

(2) 

[

]

Jensen’s insight is that, since the average value of the disturbances eit 
in  (2)  is  zero,  ̂αi  estimates  the  abnormal  expected  return  on  asset  or 
portfolio i, that is, the expected return above or below that predicted by 
the CAPM. If asset i is a mutual fund portfolio, ̂αi  is an estimate of the 
expected return on the portfolio left unexplained by the CAPM.

Subsequent studies of the performance of managed portfolios adopt 
the framework developed in Jensen (1968, 1969), and ̂αi, the measure of 
performance in (2), becomes known as “Jensen’s alpha.”

Like  every  seminal  piece,  Jensen  (1968,  1969)  leaves  open  issues 
addressed in subsequent studies of investment performance that build 
on his approach. Most important, spurred by Roll (1977), asset pricing 
research eventually acknowledges that tests of the CAPM and its use in 
applications do not in fact test the CAPM since the market proxy used is 
always far from the market portfolio of all risky assets. In Jensen (1968, 
1969) the market proxy is the S&P 500. His tests thus ask whether a 
mutual fund’s average return beats a combination of the riskfree asset 
(one-year Government bonds) and the S&P 500 that replicates the fund’s 
S&P 500 β.

A second important issue left open in Jensen (1968, 1969) and most 
subsequent studies of investment performance is a multiple comparisons 
problem. How does one judge estimates of αi  in (2) when the sample 
includes many funds (114 in the Jensen papers)? The problem: one ex-
pects that in a sample of many funds, some ̂αi  estimates will be much 
different from zero, even if the expected (i.e., true) value of αi is zero for 
every fund. Jensen reports univariate t-statistics for the ̂αi  estimates of 
individual funds and says no more on the issue. Fama and French (2010)

☆

Booth School of Business, University of Chicago (Fama) and Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College (French). Fama and French are consultants to, board 

members of, and shareholders in Dimensional Fund Advisors. Thanks to G. William Schwert and Ren´e Stulz for helpful comments.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: KFrench@Dartmouth.edu (K.R. French). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104119
Received 29 May 2025; Accepted 1 June 2025  
Available online 21 June 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

E.F. Fama and K.R. French                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104119 

use  a  simulation  approach  to  produce  inferences  about  whether  the 
distribution  of  ̂αi  estimates  for  mutual  funds  differs  from  what  one 
would expect if expected ̂αi is zero for all funds. This says nothing about 
how to judge estimates for individual funds since with many funds in the 
sample, ̂αi  estimates much different from zero are expected by chance.
At the time of the Jensen (1968, 1969) papers, studies of investment 
performance  were  new  and  survival  bias  was  an  unrecognized  issue. 
Jensen’s sample is all funds that exist at the end of his sample period, 
1964, and have return data back to 1955 or earlier. Despite the obvious 
survivor  bias,  funds  typically  do  poorly  (negative  ̂αi  estimates)  when 
fund  returns  are  net  of  fees  and  expenses.  Measured  before  fees  and 
expenses, ̂αi  estimates are more randomly distributed about zero. Using 
a larger sample of funds and updated data free of survivor bias, Fama 
and French (2010) come to a stronger version of this conclusion. Spe-
cifically, they conclude that, before fees and expenses, the distribution of 
̂αi  estimates is close to what one would expect if true αi  is zero for all 
funds. Like Jensen (1968, 1969), Fama and French (2010) find that after 
fees and expenses ̂αi  estimates for funds are predominantly negative.

At the time of Jensen’s mutual fund research, professional investing 
is almost entirely active, dominated by stock pickers who charge high 
fees for their purported skills. Buttressed by early evidence on market 
efficiency,  the  direct  challenge  to  active  investing  posed  by  Jensen 
(1968,  1969)  is  instrumental  in  the  eventual  penetration  of  low  fee 
passive products into professional investment management.

1.2. Stock splits

Mike is a coauthor of the study of stock splits of Fama et al. (1969). 
This is the first of countless “event studies” in finance and accounting. 
The  history  of  the  paper  is  worth  telling.  After  much  conceptual  and 
programming work, mostly by Lawrence Fisher, The Center for Research 
in Security Prices (CRSP) database of NYSE stock prices and returns for 
1926–1960 became available. James Lorie, the motivating force behind 
CRSP and its first director, worried that the data would not be used. He 
came to Fama and suggested a study of stock splits to showcase the value 
of the CRSP data as a research tool. Fama enlisted Mike and Richard Roll 
(like Jensen, among the best of an outstanding crop of Ph.D. students) to 
do the lions’ share of the work.

The paper’s title, “The adjustment of stock prices to new informa-
tion,” indicates the intent for it to be a test of market efficiency – the first 
study of how well stock prices adjust to a firm-specific news event. The 
challenge was to develop a technique to blend together the adjustment 
of prices to the 940 splits that occur during the 1926–1960 period of 
widely  different variation  in market prices.  The FFJR solution to  this 
problem centers on the so-called market model time-series regression, 

Rit = ai + biRmt + eit.

(3) 

The  biRmt  term  in  (3)  captures  the  variation  in  the  return,  Rit,  in 
response to variation in the market return, Rmt, leaving eit to focus better 
on  the  response  of  Rit  to  company  specific  information  in  month  t. 
Examining the behavior of eit in the months around splits allows tests of 
how well stock prices adjust to the information in splits (which turns out 
to be about expected dividends).

With the perspective of the last 55+ years of asset-pricing research, 
lots of methodological details in FFJR could be improved. We close this 
section by focusing instead on a subtlety in the paper’s design that may 
be missed by readers. Fama (1970, 1998) emphasizes a joint hypothesis 
problem:  a  test  of  market  efficiency  must  implicitly  or  explicitly  be 
nested in an asset pricing model that specifies the benchmark expected 
return for an asset. Stated more directly, we can not test whether the 
market  does  what  it  should  do  without  a  model  of  what  the  market 
should do. A test of efficiency is thus always a joint test of efficiency and 
the assumed model of market equilibrium.

In the split study the main interest is market efficiency. The question 
is: how well do market prices adjust to the information in splits? The 

2 

goal  is  to  embed  the  tests  in  a  model  of  market  equilibrium  that  is 
constrained enough to identify unusual patterns in returns around splits 
but not so constrained that it obscures the results. We examine (3) from 
this perspective.

Taking expected values in the market model regression (3) yields, 

E(Rit) = ai + biE(Rmt).

(4) 

By way of comparison, rearranging Eq. (1), the CAPM expected re-

turn condition is, 

E(Ri) = Rf (1 (cid:0) βi

) + βiE(Rm).

(5) 

The CAPM expected return Eq. (5) says, given Rf  and E(Rm), differ-
ences in βi suffice to describe differences in expected returns on assets. In 
contrast, Eq. (4) says expected returns vary with the market model slope, 
bi, and with the unconstrained intercept, ai. Thus, unlike the CAPM, the 
market model of (3) and (4) imposes no constraint on the cross-section of 
expected returns. This works in event studies of market efficiency when 
the issue is the adjustment of stock prices to an event (like a stock split) 
specific to individual firms, so it is unnecessary to constrain differences 
in expected returns across stocks.

What is the model of market equilibrium implicit in (3) and (4)? The 
absence of a time subscript on ai  and bi  in (3) and (4) implies that the 
strong assumption about market equilibrium is that ai and bi are constant 
during the period used to estimate them and during the event period. 
FFJR use all available monthly returns for asset i except those for the 30 
months before and the 30 months after the split to estimate ai  and bi. 
Plugging these into the market model produces estimates of the residual 
eit  for  the  60  months  around  the  stock’s  split  month.  If  the  market 
equilibrium assumption (constant ai  and bi) is valid, the market model 
residual, eit, in the months around a split captures the effects of the split 
on  the  return  on  stock  i. If  the  market  equilibrium  assumption is  not 
valid, estimates of the residual, eit, are to some extent contaminated by 
variation in ai and bi. This is the joint hypothesis problem as it applies to 
the FFJR study of stock splits.

More generally, in any event study that uses the market model of (3) 
and  (4)  to  abstract  from  market  conditions,  the  implicit  assumption 
about equilibrium expected returns centers on the length of the period 
used to estimate the market model intercept and slope, ai  and bi. This 
issue is studied in Brown and Warner (1980). Suffice it to say that, on 
hindsight, the full-period estimates of FFJR (1969) are far from optimal.
FFJR (1969) compute the average residual across the 940 splits in 
their sample for each of the 60 months around the split. Their Fig. 2, 
which we repeat here, shows the monthly average residuals (our Fig. 1A) 
and  the  cumulative  average  residuals  (Fig.  1B).  Average  abnormal 
returns are positive in the 29 months before the split and they increase as 
the split approaches. The authors suggest that positive abnormal returns 
far before the split are the result of increases in expected earnings and 
dividends.  The  highest  abnormal  returns  are  immediately  before  the 
split and may in part be the result of information about future earnings 
and dividends communicated by announcement of the split.

FFJR (1969) explore their information hypothesis by partitioning the 
sample into firms that increase dividends after the split and those that do 
not.  Their  plots  of  cumulative  average  residuals  (CARs)  for  dividend 
increases and decreases are in Fig. 2. Initially, the CARs for the increases 
and  decreases  are  similar.  In  the  12  months  or  so  before  the  split, 
however, average residuals are higher for the firms that increase divi-
dends  after  the  split.  The  difference  is  dramatic  in  the  roughly  five 
months  before  the  split  and  average  residuals  of  dividend  increasers 
remain higher for at least 12 months after the split. FFJR (1969) suggest 
that the patterns in Fig. 2A and 2B are the result of the market incor-
porating new information into stock prices. They hypothesize that, when 
firms announce stock splits, the market can identify those that are more 
and less likely to increase dividends, and likely increasers are rewarded 
with higher abnormal returns on the split announcement. The difference 
in  abnormal  returns  continues  after  the  split,  as  the  market  rewards 

E.F. Fama and K.R. French                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104119 

Fig.  1. Average  residuals  and  cumulative  average  residuals  for  60  months 
around stock splits. 
Source: FFJR (1969), Fig. 2.

firms that do increase dividends (a high positive probability of an in-
crease rises to 1.0) and punishes firms that do not (a positive probability 
of an increase falls to 0.0).

The clarity of the differences between the abnormal returns of firms 
that increase dividends after a split and those that do not in Fig. 2 and 
the  simplicity  of  the  explanation  in  FFJR  (1969)  make  the  paper  a 
powerful example of the important role of information in the formation 
of security prices. Quoting Ball (2015), a contemporary of Jensen and 
Roll in the University of Chicago’s PhD program, “The paper’s impact 
has been enormous, because at the time the research was conducted it 
was instrumental in reframing how we think about asset prices.”  The 
paper’s impact on subsequent “event study” research also owes a lot to 
the  widespread  adoption  of  its  technique  for  assessing  the  impact  of 

Fig.  2. Average  residuals  around  stock  splits  for  dividend  increases  and  de-
creases.
Source: FFJR (1969), Fig. 3.

firm-specific information on asset prices.

1.3. Tests of the capital asset pricing model

Mike’s  third  empirical  asset  pricing  study, with  Fischer  Black  and 
Myron Scholes, is also foundational. Black, Jensen, and Scholes (BJS, 
1972) analyze in detail the central problem in the cross-section regres-
sion tests of the CAPM that were standard in empirical asset pricing at 
that  time.  Specifically,  the  standard  errors  of  risk  premium  estimates 
from cross-section regressions of average returns on estimates of market 
β  were substantially understated because they took no account of the 
interdependence of sampling errors in estimates of expected returns. BJS 

3 

E.F. Fama and K.R. French                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104119 

(1972)  develop  a  complicated  solution  to  the  problem.  The  simple 
alternative offered  by  Fama  and MacBeth  (1973) eventually wins the 
day,  but  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  it  is  a  solution  to  the 
problem unearthed by BJS (1972).

Shares outstanding are necessary to compute market cap weights of 
stocks in the value-weight market portfolio, which is center stage in the 
CAPM, but shares data are not on CRSP when BJS (1972) is produced. 
The proxy for the market portfolio in Jensen (1968, 1969) is the S&P 
500, which is at least a value-weight portfolio. The equal-weight port-
folio  of  NYSE  stocks  is  the  market  proxy  in  BJS.  Though  it  is  surely 
influential in their results, BJS never acknowledge that an equal-weight 
portfolio  is  far  from  the  CAPM  market  portfolio.  The  point  is  made 
forcefully by Roll (1977).

The lasting innovation in BJS (1972) is their time series test of the 
CAPM. Before their work, most tests of the CAPM are cross-section re-
gressions that ask whether the slope linking the average excess return 
and sample-period beta of individual stocks is distinguishable from the 
expected excess market return, as Eq. (1) predicts. In the spirit of Eq. (2), 
BJS (1972) ask whether the intercepts in time series regressions of excess 
security returns on excess market returns are distinguishable from zero. 
Time series regression tests like theirs remain important in asset pricing 
research.

Time series tests that assess the univariate CAPM alphas of hundreds 
of  individual  securities  suffer  a  more  extreme  multiple-comparisons 
problem  than  the  one  that  complicates  the  results  for  114  mutual 
funds in Jensen (1968, 1969). BJS (1972) reduce but do not eliminate 
the  problem  by  combining  stocks  into  ten  portfolios.  To  improve  the 
power of their tests, the authors sort stocks on estimated betas each year, 
putting the lowest 10% in the first portfolio, the next 10% in the second, 
and the highest 10% in the tenth. Measurement error in estimated betas 
biases the results if the same estimates are used to form portfolios and to 
measure the relation between average return and beta. The solution in 
BJS (1972) is to sort stocks into test portfolios each year t using betas 
estimated  with  returns  observed  before  t.  Post-sort  returns  are  then 
linked and used to produce the beta estimates for the tests of the CAPM. 
This pre-sort post-sort technique becomes a standard part of the asset 
pricing tool kit.

Black et al. (1972) conclude that their full-period tests of the CAPM 
are  “somewhat  inconclusive”  since  the  α  for  only  three  of  their  ten 

a 

solution 

Shanken 

(GRS,  1989)  provide 

portfolios  are  distinguishable  from  zero.  Their  inference,  however,  is 
based on univariate t-statistics. In a much later paper, Gibbons, Ross, 
the 
and 
multiple-comparisons problem in time-series asset pricing tests. Using 
the equivalence between (i) the hypothesis that the true α’s for all test 
assets are zero and (ii) the hypothesis that the market proxy used in the 
test regression is mean-variance efficient with respect to the test assets, 
GRS (1989) develop an F-test of the hypothesis that the test assets’ ex-
pected intercepts  are all zero. To illustrate their statistic, GRS (1989) 
replicate the tests in BJS (1972) and cannot reject the efficiency of the 
CRSP equal-weight market portfolio.

to 

The time-series tests in BJS (1972) support a general inference from 
earlier, cross-section tests: average returns are higher than the CAPM 
predicts on low beta stocks and lower on high beta stocks. The authors 
conclude that expected returns seem well-described by the Black (1972)
model  in  which  there  is  no  riskfree  borrowing  and  lending  and  the 
riskfree rate in the CAPM is replaced by E(Rz), which is the expected 
return on the zero-beta portfolio, that is, the portfolio on the minimum 
variance boundary whose return is uncorrelated with the return on m. 
The expected return condition of the Black (1972) model is, 

E(Ri) = E(Rz)(1 (cid:0) βi

) + βiE(Rm).

(6) 

The relatively flat relation between average return and beta for beta 
sorted portfolios is robust, apparent, for example, in U.S. stock returns 
for the 50 years after BJS (1972). Fig. 3 shows the relation between post- 
formation beta and average return for ten portfolios formed each June 
by sorting individual stocks on pre-ranking betas estimated with two to 
five years (as available) of prior monthly returns. Our method is much 
like that in Fama and French (2006). The data, from CRSP, are monthly 
returns for NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 
11. We use the CRSP value-weight market portfolio to estimate beta, the 
beta breakpoints for the portfolios are NYSE deciles, and the riskfree rate 
is  the  one-month  U.S.  Treasury  bill  rate.  The  points  in  Fig.  3 are  the 
post-sort  betas  and  annualized  average  monthly  returns  for  the  ten 
portfolios.  The line  in  Fig. 3 is  the CAPM’s  prediction  of  the  relation 
between  beta  and  average  return.  The  line’s  vertical  intercept  is  the 
annualized  average  monthly  riskfree  (one-month  T-Bill)  rate  and  the 
slope is the difference between the annualized average monthly market 
return and the annualized average riskfree rate. As in BJS (1972), but 

Fig. 3. Annualized average monthly return vs beta for portfolios formed on prior beta, 197307-202306.
Source: Authors’ calculations

4 

E.F. Fama and K.R. French                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104119 

with a much different market portfolio, the high beta portfolios’ average 
returns are generally lower than the CAPM predicts, and the low beta 
portfolios’  average returns are higher. Moreover, the ten portfolios in 
Fig. 3 lie on a relatively straight line, as the Black (1972) model predicts.
The Black (1972) model describes the returns on portfolios formed 
on market beta, but it breaks down on other sorts. The model does not 
explain, for example, the value effect (Fama and French, 1992; Lako-
nishok et al., 1994) and the momentum effect (Jagadeesh and Titman, 
1993).

2. Conclusions

Michael C. Jensen is primarily known for his pathbreaking work in 
agency theory, but at the beginning of his academic life, Mike was deep 
into empirical work. This work is foundational in three areas of empir-
ical  asset  pricing:  (i)  evaluation  of  the  performance  of  professionally 
managed  portfolios,  (ii)  event  studies,  and  (iii)  tests  of  assets  pricing 
models. These areas are central in empirical asset pricing research to this 
day.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Eugene F. Fama: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Supervi-
sion.  Kenneth  R.  French:  Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal 
analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, 
Supervision.

Declaration of competing interest

Eugene F. Fama is a consultant to, board member of, and shareholder 

in Dimensional Fund Advisors. He has no other conflicts of interest.

Kenneth R. French is a consultant to, board member of, and share-
holder  in  Dimensional  Fund  Advisors.  He  has  no  other  conflicts  of 

interest.

References

Ball, R., 2015. Fama, Fisher, Jensen and Roll (1969): Retrospective Comments. 

University of Chicago. Unpublished working paper. 

Black, F., 1972. Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing. J. Bus. 45 (3), 

444–455.

Black, F., Jensen, M.C., Scholes, M., 1972. The capital asset pricing model: some 

empirical tests. In: Jensen, M.C. (Ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets. 
Praeger, New York, pp. 79–121.

Brown, S.J., Warner, J.B., 1980. Measuring security price performance. J. Financ. Econ. 8 

(3), 205–258.

Fama, E.F., 1970. Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work. 

J. Financ. 25 (2), 383–417.

Fama, E.F., MacBeth, J.D., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests. 

J. Political Econ. 81 (3), 603–636.

Fama, E.F., 1998. Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance. J. Financ. 

Econ. 49 (25), 383–417.

Fama, E.F., Fisher, L., Jensen, M.C., Roll, R., 1969. The adjustment of stock prices to new 

information. Int. Econ. Rev. 10 (1), 1–21.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. J. Financ. 47 

(2), 427–465.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2006. The value premium and the CAPM. J. Financ. 61 (5), 

2163–2185.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2010. Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual fund 

returns. J. Financ. 65 (5), 1915–1947.

Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S., 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: 

implications for stock market efficiency. J. Financ. 48 (1), 65–91.

Jensen, M.C., 1968. The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964. 

J. Financ. 23 (2), 389–416.

Jensen, M.C., 1969. Risk, the pricing of capital assets, and the evaluation of investment 

portfolios. J. Bus. 42 (2), 167–247.

Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency 

costs and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3 (4), 305–360.

Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1994. Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and 

risk. J. Financ. 49 (5), 1541–1578.

Lintner, J., 1965. The valuation of risk asserts and the selection of risky investments in 

stock portfolios and capital budgets. Rev. Econ. Stat. 47 (1), 13–37.

Roll, R., 1977. A critique of the asset pricing theory’s tests Part I: On past and potential 

testability of the theory. J. Financ. Econ. 4 (2), 129–176.

Sharpe, W.F., 1964. Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under conditions 

of risk. J. Financ. 19 (3), 425–442.

5 

