Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Overvaluing simple bets: Evidence from the options market(cid:73)
Aaron Goodman a, Indira Puri b,∗
a Vanguard, 100 Vanguard Boulevard, Malvern, 19355, United States
b New York University, Leonard N. Stern School of Business, 44 West Fourth Street, NY, 10012, United States

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: https://www.openicpsr.org/openi
cpsr/project/234221/version/V3/view

Keywords:
Behavioral decision theory
Retail exchanges
Trading patterns

We document a new anomaly that we prove standard preference models are unable to capture, regardless of 
functional form or parametric specification used. Analyzing trading behavior in the binary option market 
for retail investors, we find that market participants purchase binary options although strictly dominant 
bull  spreads  are  available  at  lower  prices:  15%  of  S&P  index,  19%  of  gold,  and  25%  of  silver  trades 
violate no-dominance conditions consistently across three different asset classes. Buyers of dominated binaries 
lose  on  average  34%  of  the  contract  price  by  forgoing  the  dominating  product.  We  prove  that  neither 
prospect theory nor ambiguity aversion nor other popular theoretical justifications for retail anomalies such 
as rational inattention and salience, can capture these results. We also test for, and reject, standard financial 
explanations including trading costs, liquidity, exchange fixed effects, and noise trading. We show that our 
results are consistent with retail investors valuing simple, easy-to-understand binary bets. Our work provides 
a theoretically-grounded empirical impetus for research in behavioral finance which goes beyond historically 
pervasive utility frameworks.

1. Introduction

We document a new anomaly in retail option markets. We find two 
traded securities – let us call them A and B – where security A pays less 
than security B in all states of the world, and yet is often bought at a 
higher price than security B could be bought at.

In particular, Security A is a binary option. A binary option is a 
0-1 bet: it pays $0 to the buyer if the underlying asset price is below a 
specified strike at contract expiration, and a fixed positive amount if the 
underlying asset price finishes above the specified strike. Graphically, 
in  Fig.   1,  this  payoff  profile  is  the  solid  horizontal  line  extending 
rightward from the specified strike 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦. Security B is a bull spread. 
A bull spread is characterized by two strike prices: it pays $0 until the 
first strike 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟, a linearly increasing amount from the first strike 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟
to the second strike 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒, and levels off at a fixed positive payment 
above the second strike 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒. Graphically, it is depicted in Fig.  1 by 
the dashed line. As Fig.  1 shows, in our test, the bull spread yields a 

higher payoff profile in all states of the world. Nevertheless, we find 
that retail trades often feature a higher price for the dominated binary 
than for the counterfactual bull spread.

Specifically, our main result shows that traded prices for binary 
options are higher than those of state-by-state dominating bull spreads 
15%–20% of the time over the course of the year, regardless of which 
underlying asset one looks at. Buyers of these dominated binaries lose 
on average 34% of the contract price by forgoing the strictly better, 
non-0-1 product.

The  intuition  behind  why  standard  behavioral  theories,  such  as 
prospect theory and ambiguity aversion, cannot capture these results, 
is that the binary is state-by-state dominated by the bull spread. As a 
result, any theory that respects dominance cannot capture these results. 
Theories  that  allow  for  violations  of  dominance,  but  work  through 
distortions of the subjective probability space, also cannot capture these 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank audiences at Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, Caltech, Columbia, Cornell, Georgetown, HBS, 
Imperial, LSE, NYU, Northwestern Kellogg, Stanford, Toronto, UBC, USC, Wharton, and Yale, as well as the ESA, EFMA, FMA, AQR Top Finance Graduate, Milan 
Behavioral, and WFA conferences for valuable comments. We further thank Drew Fudenberg, David Laibson, Andrew Lo, Debbie Lucas, Abhimanyu Mukerji, 
Tavneet Suri, Adrian Verdelhan, and especially Jonathan Parker for their feedback. Both authors acknowledge financial support from the George and Obie Shultz 
Fund at MIT and the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program. Puri also acknowledges financial support from the Paul and Daisy 
Soros Fellowship for New Americans. Goodman began work on this paper before commencing employment at Vanguard. The opinions expressed here do not 
necessarily represent the views of Vanguard, nor those of the NSF or other institutions. This paper was formerly circulated under the titles ‘Bulls and Binaries’ 
and ‘Overvaluing 0-1 Bets.’ We are grateful to the editor and an anonymous referee for thoughtful and constructive feedback.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  aaron_goodman2@vanguard.com (A. Goodman), indira.puri@stern.nyu.edu (I. Puri).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104140
Received 19 October 2024; Received in revised form 27 June 2025; Accepted 4 July 2025
Available online 28 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Fig. 1.  A dominated 0–1 bet.
We test whether the traded price of the dominated binary option is higher than the counterfactual price to purchase the dominating bull spread at the same point in time.

results, because of the state-by-state nature of the dominance relation-
ship. We similarly prove that neither salience nor rational inattention 
can capture these results.

As  a  result,  other  theories  are  needed  to  capture  this  behavior. 
One explanation consistent with our results is that binary options are 
easier to understand, in many ways, than bull spreads. Binaries are 0-1 
bets that require no construction. Bull spreads within the same retail 
exchange as binaries also require no construction but may be harder 
for a retail trader to conceptualize, e.g. in terms of expected value 
or payoff structure, than a 0-1 bet. And bull spreads on large, highly 
liquid  exchanges  require  choice  of  the  two  strike  prices,  and  have 
many possible outcomes. We show that a theory of simplicity (Puri, 
2025), where investors value simplicity in addition to payoffs, accords 
with our empirical findings. This simplicity framework also aligns with 
anomaly patterns observed in the cross-section.

We next turn to a description of our data and provide more detailed 

explanations of each test.

Our  binary  option  data  comes  from  a  CFTC-regulated  exchange 
that offers derivative contracts to retail customers. The reason we can 
conduct a preference test in this market is that it is relatively small, 
oligopolistic, and explicitly targeted towards retail investors. As a re-
sult, traded prices are arguably more reflective of retail investors’ will-
ingness to pay than they would be in more competitive markets with 
a higher concentration of institutional capital.1 While these features 
may not be considered desirable were this an equilibrium asset pricing 
study, for the purpose of isolating retail willingness to pay as implied 
by preference models, they work in favor. At over $1 billion in notional 
value  traded  annually,  our  setting  is  also  much  larger  and  higher-
stakes than a typical laboratory experiment, providing real-world tests 
of utility theories that are often tested experimentally.

Which bull spread data should we use? There are two options. We 
could choose to use bull spreads on the same underlying which are also
on the same exchange, which immediately takes care of any knowledge 
or  barriers  to  entry  concerns,  since  both  products  are  immediately 
accessible, and prominently featured, on the same platform. However, 
these bull spreads cost more to enter (though possible net gains and 
losses  are  similar  to  binaries)  and  have  relatively  few  strike  price 

1 Precisely, according to a Commodity Futures Trading Commission report, 
around the time of our study, only two institutional investors had been licensed 
to practice as market makers at Nadex, and one of these firms was itself a 
subsidiary of Nadex’s parent company. The same CFTC report noted that one of 
these two market makers was on one side of 99 percent of all trades executed 
during the period under study, with the Nadex-affiliated market maker taking 
part in 70 percent of all trades (Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
Division of Market Oversight, 2017).

options. Alternatively, we could take bull spreads from the highly liq-
uid, both retail- and institutional-friendly Chicago Mercantile Exchange 
(CME),  one  of  the  world’s  largest  exchanges  for  futures  contracts. 
Barriers to entry to CME are also low, and there are many more strike 
prices than for the bull spreads on the retail exchange which makes a 
test resembling Fig.  1 tighter and more powered. The prices for CME 
bull spreads are also closer to those of the binaries which helps take 
care of leverage and liquidity constraint concerns. We conduct tests for 
both kinds of bull spreads - on- and off-platform - and show that the 
binary is over-priced regardless of which bull spread type we look at. In 
the main paper, to match more trades and for a cleaner test, we focus 
on the CME bull spreads. Section 5.4 re-conducts this analysis for the 
bull spreads within the retail exchange, and shows that the dominance 
violations we document continue to hold within-platform. As a result, 
exchange-specific fixed effects cannot explain our results.

In addition to the aforementioned preference theories, we also test 
for standard financial explanations for violations of the law of one 
price: random price volatility, liquidity premia, explicit trading fees, 
implicit trading costs arising from collateral requirements, trade size 
or  market  depth  as  reflecting  leverage  or  liquidity  constraints,  and 
barriers to entry for each product. We show that none of these standard 
explanations can fully explain the result. We now describe our tests for 
standard financial explanations for anomalies in greater detail.

Prior to explaining each of these financial tests, we note that our 
finding is not necessarily an arbitrage result, because to make money, 
one would have to take the other side of the trade, and bid–ask spreads 
in this market are so wide that this may not be profitable. We observe 
only traded prices in our data, but in our anecdotal experience with 
the retail exchange we study, spreads as high as 30% or more are not 
uncommon (we provide screenshots from the platform in Section 2). 
The message of our empirical result is primarily that buyers of bina-
ries overvalue them: they could do strictly better by buying cheaper, 
dominating products.

We first consider whether symmetric price noise, for example aris-
ing from noise traders, could explain overvaluation of binary options: if 
retail investors are trading at random without regard to fundamentals, 
overvaluation results may arise for all products, not just the binary 
options. To check this, we compute overvaluation anomaly frequency 
when the binary option is dominating, rather than dominated. If sym-
metric random price noise drives the result, then the overvaluation 
anomaly frequency for this companion test should be similar when 
the binary option is the better product. We show that this is not the 
case, as anomaly frequency is significantly smaller – both statistically 
and numerically – when the binary option is dominating, implying that 
there is a systematic overvaluation of the binary, over and above a noise 
trading explanation.

2 

A. Goodman and I. Puri

Regarding fees, our price comparisons include all explicit trading 
costs. Differences between the binary and bull in collateral require-
ments or market liquidity might create implicit trading costs, but we 
can reject these possibilities as well, both because of institutional detail 
as  well  as  through  a  statistical  test.  A  collateral-based  explanation 
would  posit  that  prices  are  higher  for  binaries  if  the  bull  spread 
requires collateral but the binary does not. In practice, however, neither 
requires collateral to buy since no downside losses are involved. For 
completeness,  we  nevertheless  test  whether  overvaluation  anomaly 
frequency is higher during periods of higher market volatility (when 
collateral at bull spread brokers may be more likely to be requested). 
The relationship between market volatility and anomaly frequency is 
too weak to play a substantial role in explaining our results.

Liquidity premia cannot account for our findings, either, since in-
vestors should be willing to pay a premium to trade in the more liquid 
CME market. Instead, we find that dominating bull spreads often cost
less than dominated retail-exchange binary options.

We  also  consider  the  possibility  that  retail  investors  are  asym-
metrically informed about binaries versus spreads. However, the re-
tail derivatives exchange offers both binaries and call spread variants 
prominently on its platform, with educational and intuitive explana-
tions provided for each. Call spreads on Nadex look similar to bull 
spreads, but the strike prices are predetermined by the exchange. As we 
document through screenshots, both products can be easily traded and 
are prominently displayed, at the top of the screen. Nevertheless, within
the retail exchange, we find that binaries are frequently overvalued.

Another possibility is that these results are restricted to one asset 
class, and perhaps falter in others. To ensure robustness, we conduct 
our tests across not one or two, but three asset classes and show that the 
results hold across all of them. For expositional ease, we simultaneously 
report the results across all three asset classes, so as to make it clear 
that the results are similar across them.

Our results document a novel anomaly – overvaluing 0-1 bets – in 
new observational data. Part of the message of our empirical paper is to 
show that there may be value in expanding beyond, or supplementing, 
well-accepted  behavioral  theories.  Future  work  may  wish  to  either 
further explore the role of simplicity, which we show is consistent with 
our results, in financial markets, or to develop alternative theories that 
can capture this anomaly.

We contribute to understanding of retail investors’ behavior, and 
in particular to literatures (1) documenting violations of the law of 
one price and (2) exploring behavioral biases and non-standard be-
havior in option markets. Examples of violations of the law of one 
price in other markets include Du et al. (2018) on covered interest 
parity; Rosenthal and Young (1990) on different share types; Lee et al. 
(1991) on closed-end mutual funds; and Klibanoff et al. (1998) on 
closed-end country funds; see Lamont and Thaler (2003) for a review. 
Examples of papers exploring anomalies and behavioral biases in option 
markets include Han (2008), Cheng (2019), and Cheng (2020). Here, 
we document a new anomaly in retail options markets that can inform 
models of individual choice. In addition to documenting the anomaly, 
we are able to reject standard behavioral models as explanations for 
the anomaly we document. While these behavioral models have found 
success in other settings (Barberis et al., 2005; Drechsler, 2013), we 
prove  rigorously  that  they  are  not  able  to  capture  the  anomaly  of 
overvaluation we document here. Our work also contributes to a lit-
erature on consumer product design (Célérier and Vallée, 2017; Allen 
and Barbalau, 2022; Eisfeldt et al., 2023), here by showing empirically 
that there is an excess willingness to pay for simple derivatives, over 
and above what can be explained by standard models or equilibrium 
frameworks.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of 
the  binary  option  market.  Section  3  details  our  empirical  strategy, 
including  our  trade-matching  algorithm.  Section  4  provides  the  re-
sults. Section 5 performs robustness tests as described above, including 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

within-exchange analysis to control for exchange fixed effects. Section 6 
concludes.

All  proofs  are  located  in  the  Appendix   A.  The  online  appendix 
contains additional supplemental tests that complement the main text, 
but  are  not  critical  for  our  results,  including  Black–Scholes-Merton 
pricing analysis of binary options and a small survey of binary option 
traders to elicit demographics and trading behavior.

2. Institutional detail

Despite their short history among retail traders, binary options have 
generated no end of controversy. Since their introduction to retail ex-
changes in 2008 (SEC, 2008), these derivatives have been temporarily 
or permanently banned by multiple countries including the European 
Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA,  2019),  Israel  (Weinglass, 
2019), Denmark (Finanstilsynet, 2019), and the United Kingdom (FCA, 
2019), amidst concerns that retail investors have lost too much money 
trading binary options.

In the U.S, however, the binary option market is both legal and 
growing. The largest binary option exchange in the US, Nadex, was 
founded in 2004 and started offering binaries in 2009. It offers binary 
options, call spreads, and knock-outs to its clients.

Our focus is on the binary options and call spreads. Fig.  2 shows 
sample  bid  and  ask  spreads  on  the  platform,  and  shows  that  both 
binary  options  and  call  spreads  are  offered  prominently  at  the  top 
of  the  screen.  Once  a  specific  product  is  selected,  Nadex  shows  a 
visual depiction of payoffs, and an order placement screen noting the 
maximum profit and loss from entering the trade (Figure OA.5 in Online 
Appendix OA.3.1).

The fraction of trades on the exchange in each type of contract 
is: binary options (94.1%); call spreads (5.2%); and bracket options 
(0.7%).2  The  outsize  fraction  of  trades  in  binaries  relative  to  call 
spreads  is  consistent  with  retail  investors  being  drawn  to  binaries, 
but in itself is not a clean well-identified test, and does not rule out 
either behavioral or rational theories. Our analysis will go further than 
descriptive statistics on trade volume.

The retail derivatives exchange provides a high-stakes real-world 
setting in which to study revealed preference. During our year of data 
between May 2018 and May 2019, the exchange executed over 4.2 
million  binary  option  trades.  The  aggregate  market  value  of  these 
trades (using trade prices at the time of execution) was over $513 
million, and the aggregate notional value (with all exchange binary 
options giving a $100 fixed payoff) was just over $1.04 billion. As 
observed in the Introduction, these real-world transactions are much 
higher stakes – at over 1 billion dollars – than would be found in any 
laboratory experiment. At the same time, the retail focus and relative 
lack of institutional capital makes the identification of retail-driven 
behavior in this market cleaner than in a larger and more competitive 
setting.

The binary option market itself has widened recently, with large 
institutional  players  entering  in  the  belief  that  retail  investors  are 
excessively drawn to these contracts. For example, crypto.com acquired 
the exchange in 2023, and the CME Group launched binary option 
contracts with the express goal of attracting more retail investors (Platt 
and Rennison, 2022). Online Appendix OA.3.4 re-conducts our anal-
ysis  for  the  year  post  expansion  and  shows  that  the  frequency  of 
price anomalies decreases after these large institutional players enter, 

2 A call spread is a bull spread. A bracket option specifies a floor and 
ceiling value for the underlying, expiring as soon as the underlying hits one of 
these. The payoff of a bracket option is calculated relative to a reference point 
specified at the time of purchase; the payoff to the trader is positive (negative) 
if the underlying ends above (below) the reference point. The retail derivatives 
exchange does not make transparent the algorithm used to calculate the payoff 
beyond specifying its sign (Nadex, 2024b).

3 

A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Fig. 2.  Sample bid–ask spreads on the retail derivatives exchange.
This figure shows sample bid and ask prices for weekly and daily binary option on S&P 500 futures, as well as daily call spreads on S&P 500 futures. Observe that both binary 
options and call spreads are offered prominently at the top of the screen.

consistent with supply-side effects and institutional capital differing 
from retail demand-side dynamics.3 This further validates our setting 
and period – prior to the expansion of the binary market – as well 
suited to studying revealed preference in a high stakes, observational, 
larger-than-laboratory setting.

3. Identification

3.1. Test

Fig.  1 illustrates the logic behind our empirical test for over-valuing 
binaries. A binary option with a strike price of 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦 pays 0 to the 
buyer if the underlying asset price is below 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦 at contract expi-
ration, and pays some fixed positive amount if the underlying asset 
price finishes above 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦. Graphically, this payoff profile is the solid 
horizontal line extending rightward from 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦.

Unlike the fixed payoff of a binary option, a call option that settles 
in the money pays the buyer the difference between the underlying 
asset  price  and  the  contract’s  strike  price.  Buying  a  call  option  at 
strike price 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 thus creates a payoff profile extending rightward from 
𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 with a slope of 1, as shown by the dashed line in Fig.  1. If the 
difference between the strike prices 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 and 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 is chosen to exceed 
the binary option’s fixed payoff amount, this upward-sloping dashed 
line levels off above the solid binary option payoff at 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒. If the 
buyer of the call option with strike price 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 also sells a call option 
with strike price 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒, the losses from the latter exactly cancel the 
winnings from the former as the underlying asset price moves above 
𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒. The net payoff profile of this two-contract portfolio (buying a 
call at 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 and selling a call at 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒) thus levels off and becomes 
higher than the horizontal binary option payoff for all underlying asset 
prices above 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒. Practically, this two-contract portfolio is called a 
‘bull spread,’ and on standard exchanges, the spread can be traded as 

a single unit (Ameritrade, 2021). This means that both legs execute, or 
neither does.

Comparing the payoff profiles in Fig.  1 shows that the payoff profile 
of the bull spread strictly dominates the payoff profile of the binary 
option, state-by-state.4 The payoffs are identical for all underlying asset 
prices below 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟, but the bull spread pays a strictly higher amount 
than the binary option for all underlying asset prices between 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 and 
𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦, as well as above 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦.

Any buyer whose preferences respect dominance must therefore be 
willing to pay more for the bull spread than the binary option. As we 
prove in Section 5, even theories that do not always satisfy dominance 
– prospect theory and ambiguity aversion – predict a higher willingness 
to pay for the bull spread than the binary. As a result, our theoretically-
motivated test for an overvaluation of binary options is simply whether 
the traded price on the dominated binary is strictly higher than the 
price the buyer could have paid for a dominating bull spread at the 
exact same point in time. The mathematical formulation is: 

dominance satisfying ⟹ 𝑃𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟

− 𝑃𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒
A violation of this condition implies that the buyer of the binary has 

> 𝐵𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦

(1)

.

overpaid for it.

3.2. Data

Our binary option data comes from Nadex; we downloaded, on a 
rolling basis, time and sales data from the ‘Market Data’ portion of the 
Nadex website. As discussed in the Introduction, data on bull spreads 
can come from two sources: Nadex (its call spreads) or the more liquid, 
highly competitive CME Globex market. We focus on the latter for its 
depth, more similar contract size, and ability to match quotes closely 
in time to the traded binaries. As a robustness check to account for 
exchange fixed effects, we also conduct analysis within-exchange and 

3 While some past work (see Allen and Barbalau (2022) for a review) finds 
complexity premia in more competitive settings, we find the opposite in our 
price-transparent retail market prior to expansion.

4 Dominance comparisons have been used as tools for analysis in other 
settings (ex. Stahl and Wilson (1995), Bhargava et al. (2017), Bhargava et al. 
(2017) and Vokata (2021)); here, we use this tool to document a new anomaly.

4 

A. Goodman and I. Puri

show in Section 5.4 that the over-valuation results we find continue 
to hold. For linguistic clarity and precision, we refer to Nadex as ‘the 
exchange’, ‘the retail exchange’, or ‘the retail derivatives exchange’ in 
the body of the paper.

We focus on three underlyings: the S&P 500 index, gold, and silver. 
The underlying asset for S&P index options is the near-month CME 
E-Mini S&P 500 Index futures price, and for gold and silver options, 
it is the near-month COMEX futures price. We focus on these three 
underlyings because they have comparable bull spreads at CME.

In the retail derivatives exchange data, we observe all trades in 
weekly and Friday daily contracts for the S&P, gold, and silver markets 
for one full year between May 17, 2018 and May 17, 2019.5 For each 
observed trade, the retail exchange data show the execution time, the 
strike price, the transaction price, and the number of contracts traded. 
The payoff profile for buyers of these options is exactly as shown in 
Fig.  1, with the fixed payoff amount equal to $100 for all contracts. 
There is a $1 trading fee per contract, as well as a $1 settlement fee 
per contract for positions that expire in the money. We factor these 
fees into our calculations when comparing retail exchange transaction 
prices to CME price quotes.

The CME weekly options we use expire on Friday afternoon6 and 
settle to the same underlying asset price (near-month CME E-Mini S&P 
500 Index futures price for S&P index options, near-month COMEX 
futures  price  for  gold  and  silver  options)  as  the  retail  derivatives 
exchange binary options described above.7 We purchase best bid and 
ask data from CME for the same yearlong sample period between May 
17, 2018 and May 17, 2019. The CME data show changes in the best 
bid and ask price quotes as well as executed trades. For each price 
quote or executed trade, we observe a time stamp, the strike price, 
the quoted or transaction price, and the number of contracts listed or 
traded. The side of the market (i.e., ask vs. bid) is indicated for changes 
in top-of-book price quotes, but not for executed trades. To price the 
dominating bull spread, we follow standard brokerages by pricing the 
bull as equivalent to buying a call option at one strike price and selling 
it at the next (Ameritrade, 2021).

If these call options settle out of the money, buyers receive nothing; 
if they settle in the money, buyers receive the difference between the 
underlying asset price and the strike price, multiplied by the notional 
amount of the contract. The notional amounts of the S&P, gold, and 
silver options are $50, 100 troy ounces, and 5000 troy ounces, respec-
tively. CME charged a trading fee of $0.55 per contract for weekly 

5 A weekly contract is one which, from creation to expiry, lives for one 
week. A daily contract is one which, from creation to expiry, lives for one 
day. A trader may enter a contract any time after its creation, so that it can be 
possible to hold a weekly contract for only a few days. On the retail exchange, 
both the weeklies and the Friday dailies expire on Friday afternoons, matching 
the expiration of CME’s weeklies.

6 Note  that  while  both  the  exchange  binary  options  and  the  CME  call 
options we study expire on Friday afternoon, they do not expire at exactly 
the same time. The exchange’s weekly and Friday daily contracts in gold 
expire  at  1:30  pm  ET,  and  those  in  silver  expire  at  1:25  pm  ET.  CME’s 
weekly gold and silver options both expire at 5:00 pm ET. Since options that 
expire later are more valuable, this difference in expiration times only makes 
the CME portfolios we construct more appealing relative to retail-exchange 
binary options, and thus cannot explain price anomalies where dominating bull 
spreads in gold and silver cost less than their corresponding binary options. As 
for the S&P index options, the exchange’s weekly and Friday daily contracts 
expire at 4:15 pm ET while CME’s weekly options expire at 4:00 pm ET. The 
difference in expiration times for the S&P index options thus works the other 
way and would tend to make the exchange’s binary options more valuable 
(all else equal) than corresponding CME portfolios. However, we expect any 
valuation difference arising from this 15 min discrepancy to be small, and 
incapable of explaining the frequent and large price anomalies we document 
in Section 4.

7 The CME exchange tickers for the S&P, gold, and silver options we use 

begin with ‘‘EW’’, ‘‘OG’’, and ‘‘SO’’, respectively.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

S&P options and $1.45 per contract for weekly gold and silver options 
during our sample period, which we factor into our calculations when 
computing price differences.8

3.3. Matching algorithm

We carry out our empirical strategy by matching observed binary 
option trades to call price quotes and trades around the same time, 
then computing price differences to test for violations of the dominance 
condition (1). In particular, for each binary option trade, we perform 
the following analysis:

1. Restrict attention to call option quotes and trades to those that 
occurred in the 10 min before the binary trade. We do this in 
order to identify the bull spread prices (and any resulting price 
anomalies) that the buyer of the binary option passed up in the 
minutes before executing his or her trade.

2. Further restrict attention to the quotes and trades at the two 
highest strike prices that are weakly less than the binary option 
trade’s  strike  price.  Formally,  denoting  𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦  as  the  binary 
trade’s strike price and {𝑆𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1 as the 𝑁 unique strike prices 
among the call option quotes and trades, define:

𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 = max{𝑆𝑖|𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 = max{𝑆𝑖|𝑆𝑖 < 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒}.

≤ 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦},

(2)

(3)

3. For both strike prices 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 and 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟, choose one quote or trade 
price to use in evaluating the dominance condition. Do so by 
using the following priority ordering:

• First, prioritize price quotes that are on the correct side of 
the market, assuming that the trades used to construct our 
dominating bull spread would be taking liquidity. In other 
words, since our bull spread is constructed by buying at 
𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 and selling at 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒, prioritize quotes at 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 that are 
on the ask side of the market, and quotes at 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 that are 
on the bid side of the market. Note that the call option data 
indicates market side for price quotes but not for executed 
trades; we thus use executed trade prices only if we cannot 
find an appropriate price quote in our 10 min window. We 
flag instances where we are forced to use a quote from the 
wrong side of the market or an executed trade price and 
exclude them in one of our robustness checks.

• Second, prioritize quotes and trades that occurred closer in 

time to the binary option trade.

4. Then compute the difference between the binary trade price and 
the price of the dominating bull spread, using the quote or trade 
prices chosen in the above steps.

• The price of the bull spread is 

− 𝑃𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟

+ 2𝐹𝐶𝑀𝐸 ,

𝑃𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒
where 𝑃𝑖 is the price of the call option with strike price 𝑖
and 𝐹𝐶𝑀𝐸 is the CME trading fee per contract ($0.55 for 
S&P options and $1.45 for gold and silver options).

(4)

• The difference in strike prices 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 − 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 determines the 
height at which the bull spread payoff profile levels off into 
a horizontal line (see Fig.  1). Since the fixed payoff amount 
of  binary  options  is  always  $100  (minus  the  exchange 
settlement fee that must be paid if the contract settles in 

8 We use the trading fees charged to non-members. This is a conservative 
assumption because fees charged to non-members are higher than fees charged 
to CME members, and we seek to find cases where buying the dominating bull 
spreads costs less than the traded price of the binary option.

5 

A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

the money), we must scale the binary option trade quantity 
to ensure that the binary and the bull payoff profiles are 
the same at all underlying asset prices above 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦. The 
price of the scaled binary trade is thus 
𝑀 ∗ (𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 − 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟)
)
100 − 𝐹𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒

𝐵𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦

+ 𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒

(5)

(

∗

,

where 𝑀 is the notional amount of the CME contract ($50 
for S&P options, 100 troy ounces for gold, and 5000 troy 
ounces for silver), 𝐵𝑖 is the price of the binary option with 
strike price 𝑖, 𝐹𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒 is the exchange settlement fee of $1 per 
contract, and 𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒 is the exchange trading fee of $1 per 
contract. The left-hand term in (5) is thus the number of 
binary contracts that must be purchased to match the bull 
spread payoff, and the right-hand term is the total trading 
cost per contract.

• Evaluating the dominance condition thus reduces to 

𝑀 ∗ (𝑃𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟

−𝑃𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒

)+2𝐹𝐶𝑀𝐸 ≶

𝑀 ∗ (𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 − 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟)
100 − 𝐹𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒

(
𝐵𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦

∗

+ 𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒

)

.

(6)

𝑀∗(𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟−𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒)
100−𝐹𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒

If the left-hand side of expression (6) is smaller, we con-
clude that the dominating bull spread costs less than the 
scaled binary trade and the dominance condition is vio-
lated. Note that the scale factor 
 is generally 
not an integer, and trading a fractional number of binary 
contracts is not possible under exchange regulations. We 
thus  adjust  fractional  scale  factors  down  to  the  closest 
possible integer scale factor that preserves the bull spread’s 
dominating status. Note also that the observed trade quan-
tity in the binary option data is usually smaller than the 
scale factor, so we are implicitly assuming that the binary 
option trader would have been willing to scale up his or 
𝑀∗(𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟−𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒)
her trade and purchase 
 contracts. We do not 
100−𝐹𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒
have to make this assumption when the observed trade 
quantity  is  actually  greater  than  or  equal  to  our  scale 
factor, so one robustness check below limits to these cases.

4. Results

4.1. Summary statistics

Table  1 presents summary statistics for our sample of binary option 
trades. Together, the S&P, gold, and silver binary options provide a 
sample of 55,008 total trades. Of these, 25,621 are weekly contracts 
while the remaining 29,387 are Friday daily contracts. Retail exchange 
traders during our sample period put moderate amounts of money at 
risk: the average trade price for all three option types is around $50 per 
contract, and the average sizes of S&P, gold, and silver trades are 4.24, 
3.77, and 2.10 contracts, respectively. Because the CME top-of-book 
data contain millions of price quotes and trades per day, our matching 
algorithm is successful most of the time, as we match 87% of S&P 
trades, 93% of gold trades, and 88% of silver trades to a dominating 
bull spread.9

9 CME does not list weekly S&P options with expiry dates on the third 
Friday of March, June, September, or December (because their quarterly S&P 
options expire on these dates). Most (69%) of the unmatched S&P trades are 
for contracts that expire on the third Friday of March, June, September, or 
December, and thus have no concurrent CME trading activity. Another 7% of 
the unmatched S&P trades occur on Fridays between 4:10 pm and 4:15 pm and 
thus have no CME trading activity within our 10 min window (since CME S&P 
options expire on Fridays at 4:00 pm ET; see again footnote 6). The rest of the 
unmatched S&P trades, and all of the unmatched gold and silver trades, are 
dispersed evenly throughout the sample period, mostly in the early-morning 
or late-evening hours when CME trading volume is relatively thin.

Table 1
Summary statistics for binary option trades.

  Trade price

  Quantity

  Matched to bull spread

  Time Diff. to close strike (secs)

  Time Diff. to far strike (secs)

  Time Btw. close/far strikes (secs)

  Close strike distance

  Far strike distance

  Scale factor

S&P

51.29
(24.08)
4.24
(13.83)
0.88
(0.33)
22.81
(77.00)
25.34
(81.17)
12.68
(45.27)
2.20
(1.68)
7.25
(2.17)
2.03
(0.53)

Gold

46.14
(24.72)
3.76
(10.45)
0.94
(0.25)
33.10
(77.44)
25.79
(64.83)
27.29
(67.80)
2.53
(7.43)
7.67
(8.63)
5.14
(4.43)

Silver

46.36
(26.95)  
2.11
(3.29)
0.88
(0.33)
57.84
(105.63) 
54.87
(104.69) 
29.53
(77.77)  
0.01
(0.05)
0.08
(0.11)
2.80
(4.16)

4814
3054
7868

1044
853
1897

19,407
25,055
44,462

  Weekly trades
  Friday daily trades
  Total trades
Note: All variable names are self-explanatory except those concerning close and far 
strike prices and the scale factor. The average for each variable is shown, with its 
standard deviation in parentheses. See Section 3.3 and Fig.  1 for definitions of the 
close and far strike prices in the matched bull spread. The distance variables here give 
the difference between the binary strike price and the close/far bull spread strike prices 
(in index points for the S&P options, in dollars per troy ounce for the gold and silver 
options). The scale factor is the number of binary contracts that must be purchased in 
order to match the height of the bull spread’s payoff profile; again see Section 3.3 and 
Fig.  1 for discussion of the scale factor.

Aside from showing the overall success rate in matching binaries 
to dominating bull spreads, Table  1 also summarizes how ‘‘close’’ the 
binaries are to their matched bull spreads, in terms of both time and 
strike price placement. The average time difference between a binary 
option trade and the price quotes or trades in its matched bull spread 
is about 25 s for S&P options, about 30 s for gold options, and about 
55 s for silver options. Our 10 min cutoff for locating bull spread prices 
is thus rarely binding, and tightening this cutoff does not noticeably 
change the results. The matched bull spreads also contain strike prices 
that on average are close to the binary strike price.

Table   1  summarizes  the  scale  factor  that  we  use  to  match  the 
payoff profiles of binary options and their corresponding bull spreads. 
As discussed in Section 3.3, to ensure that the payoff profiles of the 
binary and bull spread level off at the same height, we must purchase 
𝑀∗(𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒−𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟)
 (rounded down to the nearest integer) binary options. 
100−𝐹𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒
The average scale factor is 2.03, 5.15, and 2.80 for S&P, gold, and silver 
options, respectively.

4.2. Overvaluing 0–1 bets

Our matching algorithm produces, for each matched binary, the 
price of a dominating bull spread that was available just before the 
time of the binary trade. Cases where the dominating bull spread costs 
less than the (appropriately scaled) binary option constitute anomalies. 
Fig.  3 summarizes the distribution of these price differences, in both 
absolute dollar terms (bull spread price minus the scaled binary price) 
and relative terms (the absolute difference divided by the price of the 
scaled binary trade). In each case there is substantial mass to the left 
of zero, indicating that violations of the no-dominance condition arise 
often.

The  main  overvaluation  anomaly  results  are  presented  in  Table 
2.  The  baseline  results,  which  consider  all  binary  trades  that  were 
successfully matched to a dominating bull spread, show that anomalies 
occur often. We find that 15% of the 39,283 matched S&P options, 
19% of the 7434 matched gold options, and 25% of the 1681 matched 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Goodman and I. Puri

Table 2
Overvaluation of binaries: Baseline results.

  Overvaluation frequency
  Overvaluation size
    Mean
    Median
  Overvaluation size/price
    Mean
    Median
  Binary option trades considered

S&P

0.15

40.26
25.40

0.34
0.27

38,947

Gold

0.19

44.89
29.60

0.25
0.15

7362

Silver

0.26

28.76 
20.60 

0.35  
0.27  
1667  

silver options cost more than purchasing their dominating bull spread 
would.10

Furthermore, conditional on an overvaluation occurring, the price 
differences  between  dominated  binary  options  and  dominating  bull 
spreads are large. Because the distributions of price differences are gen-
erally right-skewed, we report means as well as medians. In the baseline 
sample the mean price differences for S&P, gold, and silver trades are 
$40.26, $44.89, and $28.76, while the median price differences are 
$25.40, $29.60, and $20.60, respectively. In relative terms, the price 
difference represents an average of 34%, 25%, and 35% of the binary 
option trade price for the S&P, gold, and silver asset classes, with the 
median figures slightly smaller.

Table  3 shows four robustness checks that were introduced during 
the discussion of the matching algorithm in Section 3.3. Columns 1–3 
restrict to cases where we are able to find price quotes on the correct 
side of the market – i.e., cases where the price quote at the far strike 
price comes from the ask side of the market and the price quote at 
the close strike price comes from the bid side of the market. Since 
we are almost always able to find price quotes on the correct side of 
the market, the sample sizes only decrease by a small amount and the 
results are largely unchanged. Columns 4–6, which drop daily binary 
options and consider only weekly binary options, see overvaluation 
anomaly rates increase modestly. Columns 7–9 limit to trades where 
the observed trade quantity in the binary data is at least as large as 
the scale factor: in these cases, our assumption that the binary trader 
would have been willing to purchase the scaled-up number of binary 
contracts is obviously true. The sample sizes decrease significantly but 
the results are again essentially unchanged relative to the baseline. 
Finally,  columns  10–12  allow  fractional  scale  factors.  Relaxing  the 
constraint on integer scale factors increases overvaluation rates but 
does not have much of an effect on conditional overvaluation size.

4.3. Disaggregated results

The results in Table  2 are an average taken over time. On their 
own, they do not necessarily imply that overvaluation is a consistent 
phenomenon over time. It may be the case that a particular day or hours 
within the day are driving the results. To check whether the results 
are consistent over our sample, or driven by certain days or times, we 
plot daily overvaluation frequency along with a smoothed local linear 
trend, for all three option types, in Figs.  4(a)–4(d). Gold overvaluation 
frequencies rates are noticeably higher in the second half of 2018, but 
remain around the average value of 19% throughout the sample period; 
S&P and silver overvaluation frequencies are roughly constant over 
time. Daily silver overvaluation frequencies do reach up to 100%, but 

10 For  a  small  number  of  binaries,  the  matched  call  option  at  the  far 
strike  price  actually  costs  less  than  the  matched  call  option  at  the  close 
strike price (see again Fig.  1). We still count these cases as price anomalies 
when computing anomaly frequency, but conservatively exclude them when 
computing conditional overvaluation anomaly sizes (since the overvaluation 
anomaly sizes for these trades are often large outliers).

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

this occurs on many days that are roughly uniformly distributed over 
the sample period. Large mispricings, (say, those where the price of 
the bull spread is less than half that of the binary) occur in 3% of our 
sample, and one pattern we find is that they arise when a large time 
gap (over 60 s) separate the bull spread and the binary; and when the 
quotes used to construct the bull spread are taken agnostic to whether 
they are bids or asks. We perform robustness checks for these cases in 
Section 5.2.3, where we show that similar overvaluation results hold 
even when considering only bull spreads and binaries matched within 
15 s of each other; and in Table  3, where the column ‘Correct Side’ 
treats bid and asks quotes separately. Overvaluation results persist for 
all robustness checks.

Fig.  4(d) plots average hourly overvaluation frequency (across all 
trading days in the sample period). For all three option types, over-
valuation frequencies show a noticeable jump after 18:00; this may 
relate to the fact that these markets resume trading at 18:00 after an 
hour-long break in the late afternoon. There is thus some evidence that 
overvaluation frequency may be driven partly by market thinness or 
price volatility during after-hours trading. But overvaluation frequen-
cies remain around their sample averages (15% for S&P, 19% for gold, 
and 25% for silver) during traditional trading hours.

5. Assessing possible explanations

In addition to the four robustness checks of Section 4, in this section 
we consider standard explanations for anomalies and show that they 
are unable to capture overvaluation of 0-1 bets.

The financial explanations we consider and reject are random price 
noise; implicit or explicit trading costs; liquidity premia; differential 
barriers to access; risks to execution; trade size or market depth; and 
constraints on the market maker side.

The behavioral explanations we prove are theoretically incompat-
ible with these results are prospect theory, ambiguity aversion, and 
rational  inattention,  as  well  as  more  recent  developments  such  as 
salience  and  horizon-based  risk  aversion.  In  the  final  part  of  this 
section, we note that the results are consistent with a premium on the 
easier-to-understand binary.

5.1. Random price noise

We start by considering a random price noise explanation. In partic-
ular, suppose that prices satisfy no-dominance conditions on average, 
but  are  subject  to  symmetric  price  noise,  for  example,  from  noise 
traders (Kyle, 1985; De Long et al., 1990). In that case, we might 
document overvaluation as a result of noise rather than as a consistent 
anomaly.

To  test  the  random  price  noise  hypothesis,  we  observe  that  if 
symmetric noise drives overvaluation anomalies, then price anomalies 
should exist just as often in the opposite direction. In other words, 
our empirical strategy thus far has constructed dominating bull spreads 
and looked for cases where they cost less than their corresponding 
binary options, but we could also reverse this logic by constructing
dominated bull spreads and looking for cases where they cost more than 
their corresponding binary options. Random and symmetric price noise 
should cause both types of price anomalies to arise at roughly the same 
rate.

For each binary trade in our sample, we re-run our matching algo-
rithm to look for call option price quotes at strike prices just above the 
binary strike price, construct a dominated bull spread, and determine 
how often the dominated bull spread costs more. The results are shown 
in Table  4: columns 1–3 reproduce our baseline results where the bull 
spread is dominating, while columns 4–6 report the new placebo results 
where the bull spread is dominated. Though anomaly frequencies are 
still nonzero in the placebo test, they are substantially smaller than 
the baseline results: the S&P anomaly frequency decreases from 15% 
to 8%, the gold anomaly frequency from 19% to 3%, and the silver 

7 

 
 
 
A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Fig. 3.  Price differences between dominating bull spreads and dominated binaries. The variable plotted is the bull spread price minus the binary option price. Negative values 
indicate potential mispricing of the binary. Absolute price difference is in dollars; relative difference is scaled by the binary price.

anomaly frequency from 25% to 14%. As indicated by the reported t-
statistics, the decrease in the anomaly frequency in the placebo test 
is highly significant (at the 1% level) for all three asset classes. The 
placebo results indicate that price noise is responsible for some, but 
not all, of our baseline overvaluation frequency.

5.2. Explicit or implicit trading costs

5.2.1. Collateral requirements

We also consider the possibility of differential trading costs between 
the  exchanges.  As  discussed  above,  we  have  already  accounted  for 
explicit trading fees when identifying cases of overvaluation anomalies. 
In derivatives markets, collateral requirements are another important 

source of trading costs, as exchanges often require traders to post collat-
eral (in proportion to the current value or riskiness of their positions) in 
order to minimize the risk of counterparty default. But because payoff 
profiles of a binary option and its dominating bull spread portfolio are 
always weakly positive (see Fig.  1), in neither case can the holder of 
the position lose more money than the initial trade price. As a result, 
neither the retail derivatives exchange nor CME requires traders to post 
collateral when maintaining the positions we consider in this paper.11 
On major brokerages, traders can obtain clearance to buy bull spreads 

11 See official exchange material on collateral requirements at Nadex and 
CME.

8 

A. Goodman and I. Puri

Table 3
Overvaluation of binaries: Robustness tests.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Prices on
Correct side
S&P
(1)

Gold
(2)

Weekly
Trades only
S&P
(4)

Gold
(5)

Silver
(3)

Scale factor
≤ Quantity
S&P
(7)

Gold
(8)

Fractional
Scale factors
S&P
(10)

Gold
(11)

Silver
(9)

Silver
(6)

Silver
(12)

0.18

0.14

0.17

0.15

0.19

0.23

0.25

0.28

0.27

0.33

38.43
25.40

43.47
28.35

29.35
21.60

36.68
22.40

  Overvaluation frequency
  Overvaluation size
    Mean
    Median
  Overvaluation size/price
0.34  
    Mean
0.30  
    Median
  Binary Option Trades Considered
1667  
Note (to Tables  2–3): Only binary options that were successfully matched to a dominating bull spread are considered. The overvaluation 
anomaly frequency is the fraction of the relevant binary options that cost more to buy than their dominating bull spread. Overvaluation size 
is the difference between the scaled binary trade price (i.e., the binary trade price times the scale factor) and the cost of the dominating bull 
spread, conditional on the binary option costing more and an overvaluation anomaly existing. Overvaluation size/price normalizes overvaluation 
size relative to the price of the scaled binary trade.

36.24 
23.67 

40.39
25.85

27.94
20.60

38.10
24.40

40.77
25.85

26.28
18.60

40.79
21.65

45.24
29.42

0.33
0.26

0.34
0.28

0.24
0.14

0.37
0.28

0.34
0.26

0.34
0.31

0.22
0.12

0.28
0.20

0.24
0.15

0.21
0.14

0.33
0.26

14,978

38,947

17,140

38,474

7362

7148

1578

4515

0.20

0.39

978

467

934

Fig. 4.  Overvaluation frequency by date and time. 

directly (Ameritrade, 2021). What this means is that either both legs 
execute or neither does, and as a result, the brokerage recognizes no 
downside risk and does not require collateral to be posted. Our survey 
in Appendix OA.2 directly asks binary option traders whether they have 
such clearance.

However, for completeness, we perform an additional test to de-
termine whether measures of price volatility for bull spreads predict 
overvaluation frequency; these would be periods in which, if a bro-
kerage requires collateral to be posted, which they should not – see 
the discussion in the preceding paragraph – that collateral requirement 
for bull spreads may increase while the collateral for the binary would 
remain constant. This may make trading bull spreads implicitly more 

costly than trading binaries, and if differential collateral requirements 
are driving our results, we would expect to see anomaly frequency 
increase as a result (since higher bull spread collateral requirements 
would deter traders from entering these contracts). Online Appendix 
OA.3.2 performs this statistical test and shows no statistical significance 
for two out of three asset classes, with limited explanatory power for 
the third asset class.

5.2.2. Liquidity

Market liquidity may be another factor that creates differences in 
implicit  trading  costs  between  the  two  products.  Trading  in  a  thin 
market is costly, since traders who wish to exit their positions be-
fore expiration face a larger bid–ask spread and must pay a larger 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Goodman and I. Puri

Table 4
Placebo test with dominated bull spreads.

Bull spread is
Dominating

Bull spread is
Dominated

S&P
(1)

Gold
(2)

Silver
(3)

S&P
(4)

Gold
(5)

Silver  
(6)

0.26

0.19

0.15

1667

38,947

0.08
(29.08)

0.03
(32.48)

  Anomaly frequency
0.14
(8.85) 
    𝑡-Statistic for difference
  Binary trades considered
1782  
7362
Note: Only binary trades that were successfully matched to a bull spread are considered. 
Columns  1–3  present  anomaly  measures  when  the  bull  spread  is  constructed  to 
dominate the binary option (the same baseline results shown in Table  2); an anomaly in 
these cases occurs when the bull spread costs less. Columns 4-6 present overvaluation 
measures when the bull spread is constructed to be dominated by the binary option; an 
anomaly in these cases occurs when the bull spread costs more. The 𝑡-statistic reported 
in parentheses tests the hypothesis that the anomaly frequency for each asset class is 
the same for the dominating-bull-spread and dominated-bull-spread cases.

38,975

7368

implicit cost by accepting a less favorable liquidation price. Investors 
should prefer to trade in more liquid markets, and should be willing 
to  pay  a  premium  (in  the  form  of  higher  asset  prices)  in  order  to 
do so Amihud (2002). While we are not able to compare binary and 
bull bid–ask spreads directly,12 CME is very clearly the more liquid 
exchange:  many  more  market  makers  compete  to  set  prices,  many 
more institutional investors have access, and trading volume is orders 
of magnitude higher than at the retail derivatives exchange. CME’s 
superior liquidity therefore makes our overvaluation anomaly results 
even more surprising: investors should be willing to pay a premium 
in order to trade there, but we find that dominating CME bull spreads 
often cost less than exchange binary options. In other words, liquidity 
considerations actually work against us and make the overvaluation 
anomalies we detect less likely to occur.

5.2.3. Timing considerations

We emphasize that bull spreads can be bought as a unit on standard 
brokerages (Ameritrade, 2021), and therefore the only risk to execution 
is the timing of the bull spread versus the timing of the binary. Most 
bull spreads are constructed just before the binary option trade, leaving 
little time for prices to move unfavorably before the binary transaction 
is completed. Precisely, among the matched trades in our sample, 44% 
have less than 1 s separating the bull spread and the binary, 60% have 
a gap of less than 5 s, and 74% have a gap of less than 15 s; only 12% 
have a gap greater than 60 s.

For completeness, we also compute risks to execution when the bull 
spread is traded sequentially, though we emphasize that in practice 
traders may purchase the bull spread directly, without sequential trades 
(on standard brokerages as Ameritrade (2021), and on the exchange by 
purchasing the call spread). Re-doing our analysis for the subsample 
where less than 15 s separate both legs of the bull spread and the 
binary option shows similar results to the baseline case, with 11% of 
S&P, 14% of silver, and 20% of gold trades displaying an overvaluation 
anomaly, with an average overvaluation size/price of 28%, 16%, and 
28%, respectively (Online Appendix OA.3.3).

5.3. Trade size

One may imagine binary option traders paying a premium to trade 
a smaller amount. To control for this, in Table  3 (Panel ‘Scale Factor ≤
Quantity’), we consider only trades where the observed binary option 
trade size is at least the size of the comparative bull spread. Even 
focusing on such trades, overvaluation results persist and are in fact 
slightly accentuated.

12 Our binary option data do not indicate the side of the market on which 
trades took place, so we cannot infer bid–ask spreads.

10 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

5.4. Exchange fixed effects

To test whether accessibility or other exchange fixed effects drive 
our results, we conduct a test within the retail derivatives exchange 
between its own call spreads and binary options. Since both products 
are offered prominently on the trading screen (see Fig.  2) and traders 
can access both on the same platform, finding overvaluation anomaly 
results here would show that they persist even after controlling for 
exchange fixed effects.

Two features distinguish exchange call spreads from binaries, in 
addition to payoff structure: first, the price to enter is higher than the 
price to enter a binary bet; and second, there are fewer options in 
terms of strike prices for call spreads than for binaries.13 To test for 
overvaluation, we therefore create a net profit diagram, rather than 
comparing payoffs and prices separately.

The intuition is shown in Fig.  5. For each bull spread traded on 
the  exchange,  we  find  a  binary  traded  near  the  same  time  whose 
positive payoffs are strictly dominated by the positive payoffs of the 
bull spread (e.g. as in Fig.  1). We then test whether the maximum 
profit:maximum loss ratio of the binary is higher than that of the bull 
spread. Violations of this condition indicate that the binary and the bull 
have the relationship depicted in Fig.  5: the net profit of the binary 
is strictly dominated by the net profit of the bull. As a result, under 
standard theory, the binary should not be traded in equilibrium: any 
trader who has access to both contracts – as everyone on the exchange 
does – should always prefer to enter the bull to entering the binary.

Note that if there were a significant gap in time between entry and 
expiry, then there might be a carry argument for entering the binary 
over the bull, but all trades we consider here are daily options, which 
expire within one day of entry. As a result, carry considerations should 
not matter for this analysis.

Table  5 provides the results of this exercise. There is a traded binary 
whose  net  profit  is  strictly  dominated  by  that  of  the  matched  bull 
spread 91% of the time, mirroring – and in fact exceeding – the results 
in our main test. The analysis suggests that within exchange, binary 
options are almost always overvalued relative to call spreads. Relative 
to the main test, there are fewer trades. Also relative to our main test, 
an implicit assumption in this analysis is that the trader can afford 
to enter both the bull spread and the binary.14 Nevertheless, the fact 
that we obtain strong overvaluation results within the retail derivatives 
exchange reinforces our findings.

5.5. Constraints on the market maker side

Delta hedging binary options is more difficult than delta hedging 
standard options, which may induce market makers to increase the 
price of the binary (Taleb, 1997); more generally, there may be insti-
tutional constraints on the supply side. However, our main finding is 
not simply that prices are higher on average, but rather a dominance 
relation. Regardless of the constraints on the market maker side, un-
der standard theory, a retail investor should never buy a dominated 
product at a higher price than a dominating alternative. Thus, hedging 
considerations do not explain buyer behavior in this context.

13 Intuitively, the exchange explains and prices these as if the trader tem-
porarily holds the index, with insurance against extreme movements (though 
no  ownership  of  the  underlying  is  involved).  To  illustrate,  we  provide  a 
hypothetical  example.  Suppose  a  binary  costs  $50  to  enter.  The  binary’s 
maximum net profit and maximum net loss are both $50. Suppose a call spread 
on the exchange costs $4000 to enter, and the range of payoffs is $3900-$4100 
at expiry (which happens within one day). Then the call spread’s net profit and 
loss are $100. Thus, net profit and loss profiles are similar, because both price 
and payoffs are higher for the spread.
14 In the main test, payoffs are the same order of magnitude by design (see 
Fig.  1) - therefore we can compare prices directly.

 
 
 
 
A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Fig. 5.  Within-exchange analysis.

Table 5
Overvaluation of binaries: Within exchange.

All trades
0.91
4.74

Time Diff. ≤ 5 min 
0.99
6.53

1.86
3044

67.41
9418

  Overvaluation frequency
  Average maximum-profit: 
Maximum-Loss difference
  Difference in trade time (minutes)
  Number of trades considered
Note: This table considers binary options and call spreads on the S&P 500, all traded 
within the retail derivatives exchange. Each traded call spread is matched to a traded 
binary within the exchange, and the trade size is scaled so that the binary makes the 
same maximum profit as the call spread, but starts making this profit at a strictly 
higher value of the underlying than the call spread does, making the weakly positive 
part of the binary state-by-state dominated by the call spread. Since the binary has 
only two payoffs, to compensate investors for buying the binary whose non-negative 
payoffs are dominated, the binary should offer a weakly lower loss than the bull spread. 
Overvaluation anomalies represent those matched trades where the binary’s maximum 
profit:maximum loss ratio is strictly lower than the bull spread’s ratio. The second row 
shows the average difference in ratios conditional on detecting an anomaly. The third 
row shows the average difference in trade time. The first column shows results for all 
call spreads. The second column restricts attention only to those call spreads which 
can be matched to a traded binary within five minutes of the traded time of the call 
spread.

5.6. Behavioral explanations

We show in this section that theories of retail behavior, including 
prospect theory, ambiguity aversion, rational inattention, and salience, 
cannot capture the phenomenon of overvaluing 0-1 bets. We stress that 
we are open to various concepts possibly being related to our results; 
our theoretical results apply only to theories of retail behavior as they 
have been written down and formalized in the literature. The point 
we make here is that our findings demonstrate an empirical need for 
formalized behavioral theories beyond typically appealed to decision 
theoretic models.

5.6.1. Theories respecting dominance

Cumulative prospect theory, and most other well-known revisions 
to  the  expected  utility  model,  do  not  allow  for  violations  of  dom-
inance  (Kahneman  and  Tversky,  1992).  The  overvaluation  anomaly 
result in this case is a violation of dominance. As a result, theories re-
specting dominance cannot explain it. These also include salience (Bor-
dalo et al., 2012), disappointment aversion (Gul, 1991), and standard 
expected utility theory (Von Neumann and Morgenstern, 2007).

5.6.2. Prospect theory

While original prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) al-
lows for violations of dominance, it does not accord with our empirical 
findings;  prospect  theory  agents  would  never  choose  a  dominated 
binary option over a dominant bull spread. The reason is that the way in 
which prospect theory allows for dominance violations is by distorting 
probabilities. However, in a state-by-state dominance relationship, no 

11 

matter how probabilities are distorted, the dominating bull spread still 
looks more appealing, because it provides a higher payoff in every state. 
We provide a formal mathematical proof in Proposition  1.

Proposition 1.   Given two derivatives 𝑂 and 𝐵, where 𝑂 state-by-state 
dominates 𝐵, original prospect theory predicts that the willingness to pay 
for 𝑂 should be higher than the willingness to pay for 𝐵, regardless of the 
probability weighting function, reference point, or utility function used.

5.6.3. Ambiguity aversion

Under subjective expected utility (Savage, 1972), the agent assigns 
subjective probability distribution to states of the world, which here are 
various underlying asset prices. However, in our test the bull spread 𝑂
pays out weakly more money than the binary option 𝐵 in all states 
of the world, and consequently for any probability distribution over 
underlying asset prices, it remains the case that 𝑂 should be weakly 
more attractive than 𝐵.

Max–min  preferences  (Gilboa  and  Schmeidler,  1989)  and  robust 
control (Hansen and Sargent, 2001) have the agent behave as though he 
were maximizing utility against adversarial nature, which can choose 
the worst possible probability distribution for the action chosen (subject 
to model-dependent constraints). However, since 𝑂 pays out weakly 
more money than the binary option 𝐵 in all states of the world, for 
any given probability distribution over underlying asset prices, 𝑂 is 
weakly more attractive than 𝐵; and in particular, this is also the case for 
the worst possible probability distribution. Consequently, these theories 
also predict that the price of 𝑂 should be weakly higher than the price 
of 𝐵.

We  provide  a  formal  proof  for  the  robust  control  formulation 
(Hansen and Sargent, 2001), which is a form of ambiguity aversion 
typically used in asset pricing (Ilut and Schneider, 2022). The intuition 
for max–min preferences is similar: no probability distortion changes 
the fact that the bull spread pays more in every state.

Proposition 2.   Given two derivatives 𝑂 and 𝐵, where 𝑂 state-by-state 
dominates 𝐵, robust control predicts that the willingness to pay for 𝑂 should 
be  higher  than  the  willingness  to  pay  for  𝐵  for  any  strictly  increasing 
Bernoulli utility function.

5.6.4. Rational inattention

As discussed earlier, investors have access to both binary options 
and bull spreads, with both prominently displayed within the same 
platform.

It may nevertheless be the case that they pay more attention to 
binaries than to bull spreads. If we were to try to capture this idea with 
a standard rational inattention model, per (Matějka and McKay, 2015), 
the probability of selecting an asset, say choosing to buy a binary versus 
a bull spread, is given by: 
𝑃 0
𝑎𝑖

𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑖 ∕𝜆

(7)

𝑃 (𝑎𝑖|𝑣) =

,

∑

𝑃 0
𝑎𝑗

𝑎𝑗

𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑗 ∕𝜆

 
 
 
 
 
A. Goodman and I. Puri

where 𝑎 is an asset, 𝑣 is the state of the world (for example, the current 
value of the underlying), 𝑣𝑎 is the asset’s payoff, and 𝑃  is the prior 
probability of selecting the asset.

This equation tells us that, under rational inattention, the probabil-
ity of selecting an asset is proportional to the asset’s payoff. By design, 
however, the bull spreads we consider have strictly higher payoffs than 
the binary options. Rational inattention would therefore predict more 
attention is paid to the better product, the bull spread, which is not in 
line with what we find in our data.

For completeness, we add a formal proof.

Proposition 3.   Rational inattention with an uninformative prior would 
predict a higher probability of selecting the dominating bull spread, rather 
than the dominated binary.

5.6.5. Search costs

One finding in the behavioral finance literature is that retail in-
vestors buy high-fee mutual funds when low-fee mutual funds are also 
available on the market (Campbell, 2006). This finding is typically 
attributed to search costs: the low-fee mutual fund may not be offered 
by the same broker or platform that the retail consumer is accustomed 
to using. Here, however, both bull spreads and binaries are offered 
within the same exchange, making the results of Section 5.4 harder to 
rationalize by a search cost framework.

5.6.6. Salience

Salience theory says that, when comparing to alternatives, the agent 
over-focuses on the states with the largest difference in payoffs between 
the two alternatives (Bordalo et al., 2012). Intuitively, consulting Fig. 
1, the states with the largest difference in payoffs are those where the 
binary pays zero and the bull spread pays a non-zero amount. However, 
were the agent to over-emphasize these, they would be even more 
drawn to the bull spread, contrary to our findings. More generally, 
salience theory respects dominance and our finding is a violation of 
dominance. We provide a formal proof for completeness.

Proposition  4.    Salience  theory  would  predict  a  preference  for  the 
dominating bull spread over the dominated binary.

5.6.7. Gambling

Past work hypothesizes that some investors may like to gamble in 
the sense of being risk-seeking over low-probability gains (Markowitz, 
1952; Kumar, 2009; Barberis, 2013). Regardless of the investor’s sub-
jective probability distribution, Section 5.6.2 shows that being risk-
seeking over low-probability gains (i.e., as prospect theory predicts) 
cannot  explain  our  results.  In  particular,  a  preference  for
low-probability gains cannot capture state-by-state dominance viola-
tions.

5.6.8. Horizon-based risk aversion

Prior work (van Binsbergen et al., 2012; Lazarus, 2022) finds that 
investors’ measured risk aversion can differ by expiry horizon. Here, 
however, we match the binary option and bull spread on expiry, so 
there is no horizon-based difference between them.

5.7. Simplicity as a consistent explanation

For completeness, we offer one consistent explanation for overvalu-
ation of 0-1 bets; other explanations may be equally valid. It is possible 
that the anomaly arises from cognitive constraints because the binary is 
easier to understand, in a number of ways, than the bull spread. First, 
it has only two outcomes, making computation of its expected value or 
other moments arguably easier than the multi-leg bull spread. Second, 
it may be linguistically easier to explain - a yes-no bet requires only 
a few words to conceptualize; the bull spread, even when described 
intuitively as the retail exchange does (Nadex, 2024a), requires more 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

words of explanation. Third, the binary has fewer kinks in its payoff 
and profit functions than the bull spread, which may make mentally 
visualizing it easier.

To elucidate, we develop the implications of a theory of simplicity 
for our setting, and show that it can capture the results documented 
here. In addition, this theory of simplicity accurately captures compar-
ative statics in the cross-section, and maps well to a small survey of 
binary option traders, described in the Appendix  A.

Using the theory of Puri (2025), suppose that the complexity of 
a bull spread is higher than that of a binary option, for the reasons 
described above; denote the complexity measures 𝐶(𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑙) and 𝐶(𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦), 
respectively. As an example to fix ideas, suppose that the complexity is 
given by the number of kinks in the payoff schedule. In that case:

𝑈 (binary) =

∑

𝑝(𝑥)𝑢(𝑥) − 𝐶(binary) and 

𝑈 (bull) =

𝑥∈binary
∑

𝑝(𝑥)𝑢(𝑥) − 𝐶(bull),

𝑥∈bull

where  𝑥  denotes  payoffs.  Since  𝐶(binary) < 𝐶(bull),  that  is,  the 
complexity of the binary is less than that of the bull spread, the agent’s 
willingness to pay for the binary will exceed their willingness to pay 
for the bull spread when the amount by which the bull spread payoff 
dominates is sufficiently small: 

∑

𝑥∈bull

𝑝(𝑥)𝑢(𝑥) −

∑

𝑥∈binary

𝑝(𝑥)𝑢(𝑥) < 𝐶(bull) − 𝐶(binary).

(8)

In  particular,  unlike  standard  theories  of  choice  (Section  5.6)  this 
theory of simplicity admits dominance violations towards the easier-
to-understand financial object, in line with what we find.

There are two additional predictions that the theory makes that we 
also find support for. First, Eq.  (8) has implications for the cross-section: 
it says that as the difference in payoffs between the bull spread and the 
binary option increases, there should be fewer dominance violations. 
Intuitively, the complexity cost here is fixed, and so as the dominance 
amount increases, retail investors should be more willing to pay the as-
if cost of dealing with complexity. To test this, we exploit heterogeneity 
within our sample: because our baseline analysis makes the restriction 
that an integer amount of contracts be traded, for some bull-spread–
binary pairs, the amount by which the bull spread dominates the binary 
is higher than for other pairs. To see this, consider Fig.  1. In cases 
where it is possible to scale the bull spread and binary so that their 
maximum payoff is identical, the bull spread only dominates the binary 
between 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 and 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦. However, in cases where the scale factor 
(i.e., the number of binary contracts that must be traded so that the 
binary payoff comes as close as possible to the payoff of the bull spread, 
without exceeding it) is not an integer, the bull spread dominates the 
binary both in the area between 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 and 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦 as well as in the area 
to the right of 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦, as depicted in the Figure. Further, the amount of 
dominance – which for the purpose of this exercise we conservatively 
define as the difference between the maximum bull spread payoff and 
the maximum binary option payoff – increases in the scale factor until 
the next integer is hit. As a result, our sample features variance in the 
amount of dominance arising from the natural integer constraint.

To check whether an increase in the dominance amount reduces 
the prevalence of overvaluation anomalies, we regress in Table  6 the 
presence of an overvaluation anomaly on the dominance amount for 
all three asset classes, with various controls. The first specification for 
each asset class, depicted (1), simply regresses overvaluation frequency 
on dominance amount. The second specification accounts for the fact 
that the overall amount of dominance can be affected not only by the 
maximum payoff, but also by the distance between 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟 and 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒. 
In particular, the second specification in each asset class, denoted (2), 
includes contract controls: the strike price of the binary, the close strike 
price of the bull spread, the time difference between the binary trade 
and the bull spread trade or quote, and whether the binary is a daily or 
weekly contract. As a result, in the second specification, the coefficient 

12 

A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Table 6
Overvaluation frequency and dominance amount.

  Dominance amount

S&P 500
(1)

−0.011∗∗∗
(0.001)

(2)

(3)

Gold

(1)

(2)

(3)

Silver

(1)

(2)

−0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)

−0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)

−0.001
(0.002)

−0.003∗
(0.002)

−0.004∗
(0.002)

−0.003∗∗
(0.002)

−0.003∗∗
(0.002)

No
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

  Contract controls
No
  Time fixed effects
No
∗∗∗p<0.01, ∗∗p<0.05, ∗p<0.1.
Note: This table shows the result of regressing an indicator for overvaluation on the dominance difference between the bull spread and the 
binary, under various specifications. Standard errors are in parentheses. This dominance difference is defined as the difference between the 
maximum bull spread payoff and the maximum binary payoff. Specification (1) in all three asset classes regresses an indicator for overvaluation 
(i.e, the cost of the bull spread being less than that of the binary) on dominance amount. Specification (2) in all three asset classes performs the 
same regression and adds controls for the binary strike price, the close bull spread strike price (𝑆𝑐 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 in Fig.  1), the time difference between 
the bull spread and the binary, and the periodicity of the binary contract. Specification (3) in all three asset classes includes all the controls 
of specification (2), and in addition includes year and weekday fixed effects.

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

No
No

(3)
−0.004∗∗ 
(0.002)  
Yes
Yes

on the dominance amount is identified off of variation in 𝑆𝑓 𝑎𝑟, holding 
fixed 𝑆𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 and 𝑆𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦. The third specification, denoted (3), includes 
all the controls in specification (2) and in addition includes year and 
weekday fixed effects.

Across all nine specifications and asset classes, we find a negative 
point  estimate:  in  line  with  the  theory  of  simplicity,  overvaluation 
frequency decreases as the dominance amount increases. An additional 
dollar of dominance amount of the bull spread over the binary reduces 
the overvaluation frequency by 0.3–1 percentage points. This negative 
point estimate is statistically significant across all three specifications 
for the S&P 500; across all three specifications for silver; and marginally 
statistically significant in two of three specifications for gold. While this 
prediction may not be unique to simplicity, the results are consistent 
with an as-if theory of tradeoffs between valuing simplicity on the one 
hand and maximizing monetary payoffs on the other.15

Second, the theory predicts that such violations of dominance (to-
wards simpler objects) should arise in general and not only in the 
choice of options. A small supplemental survey of binary option traders 
(Appendix OA.2) shows that, consistent with the predictions of the 
theory,  these  traders  violate  dominance  towards  simple  lotteries  in 
survey settings.

Our findings are thus consistent with, and provide one real-world 
impetus for, theories of valuing simplicity; and in general, theories of 
cognitive processing and constraints, over historically pervasive utility 
frameworks.

6. Conclusion

In this empirical paper, we document a new anomaly in an un-
studied  retail  market  which  provides  a  clean  real-world  setting  for 
preference tests. Trades in this market overvalue 0-1 bets at least fifteen 
percent of the time, both within and across platform. Using carefully 
designed tests, we show that our results cannot be captured by prospect 
theory or ambiguity aversion regardless of functional form used, nor 
by other popular behavioral preference models including salience and 
rational inattention. We also test for standard financial explanations 
for anomalies and show that none fully accounts for this overvaluation. 
Our results are consistent with a more cognitive explanation, as binaries 
are intuitively easier to understand than option spreads. For example, 
our results are consistent with retail traders valuing the simplicity of 
easy-to-understand 0-1 bets.

Our  work  informs  models  of  retail  behavior  by  documenting  a 
new anomaly. The contracts we study here, binary options, form an 
expanding market, with other retail platforms now starting to introduce 

15 As an example for how our results can aid in the development of future 
theoretical  and  empirical  work,  Ba  et  al.  (2025)  uses  our  binary  options 
findings as a datapoint against which to test one cognitive theory, which also 
includes a measure of simplicity (as in Puri (2025)).

0-1 contracts to their client base (Crypto.com, 2022; Robinhood, 2025). 
Our work also informs future research on decision making; there may 
be additional simplicity-related or other cognitive channels that are 
worth developing and exploring. For example, any cognitive microfoun-
dation that can capture overvaluation of 0-1 bets would, because of our 
theoretical results, immediately have observational value-add relative 
to the most prominent behavioral models.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Aaron Goodman: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & edit-
ing, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, 
Data curation. Indira Puri: Writing – original draft, Writing – review 
&  editing,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Funding  acquisition,  Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial 

interests that relate to the research in the paper.

The first author received research support from the George and Obie 
Shultz Fund at MIT and from the National Science Foundation Graduate 
Research Fellowship Program. The first author note this support on the 
title page of the paper.

The second author received research support from the George and 
Obie Shultz Fund at MIT, the National Science Foundation Graduate 
Research Fellowship Program, and the Paul and Daisy Soros Fellowship 
for New Americans. The second author note this support on the title 
page of the paper.

Appendix A. Proofs

Proof of Proposition  1.  Observe that for any probability weighting 
function 𝜋 and reference point 𝑅, the utility a prospect theory agent 
receives from a binary options or bull spread is 

𝑈 = ∫ 𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(𝑞(𝑠))𝑑𝑠,

(A.1)

where  𝑠  is  the  underlying  asset  price  at  contract  expiration,  𝑢𝑅  is 
a utility function with the 𝑅 subscript denoting dependence on the 
reference  point,  𝑝(𝑠)  is  the  probability  of  underlying  asset  price  𝑠
occurring, and 𝑞(𝑠) is the monetary payoff that the agent receives from 
the option portfolio when underlying asset price 𝑠 occurs. Consider a 
prospect theory agent who buys a binary option with strike price 𝐾. 
Since the binary option pays $100 if 𝑠 > 𝐾 and zero otherwise, the 
utility of the binary option is 

𝐾

∞

𝑈 (𝐵) = ∫

0

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(0)𝑑𝑠 + ∫
𝐾

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(100)𝑑𝑠.

(A.2)

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

In contrast, the comparable bull spread 𝑂 in our empirical test (con-
structed by buying a call option with strike 𝐾 − 𝜖 and selling a call 
option with strike 𝐾) gives utility16

𝐾−𝜖

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(0)𝑑𝑠

𝑈 (𝑂) = ∫

0

𝐾

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(𝑠 − (𝐾 − 𝜖))𝑑𝑠

𝐾−𝜖
∞
𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(100)𝑑𝑠.

+ ∫

+ ∫
𝐾

(A.3)

Because 𝜋(⋅) is weakly positive and 𝑢𝑅(⋅) weakly increasing in prospect 
theory, it follows that, for any 𝜖 > 0,

𝐾−𝜖

∫

0

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(0)𝑑𝑠 + ∫

𝐾

𝐾−𝜖

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(𝑠 − (𝐾 − 𝜖))𝑑𝑠

≥

𝐾−𝜖

∫

0

𝐾

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(0)𝑑𝑠

+ ∫

𝐾−𝜖

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(0)𝑑𝑠 = ∫

𝐾

0

𝜋(𝑝(𝑠))𝑢𝑅(0)𝑑𝑠,

(A.4)

and therefore that 𝑈 (𝑂) ≥ 𝑈 (𝐵) for any prospect theory agent, regard-
less of functional form. This shows that an original prospect theory 
agent cannot strictly prefer a dominated binary option to a comparable 
bull spread, and thus that prospect theory cannot explain overvaluation 
of 0-1 bets as documented here.

Proof of Proposition  2.  Let 𝑑 be a derivative mapping states (e.g. val-
ues of the underlying asset) to payoffs. The utility of derivative 𝑑 under 
∫ 𝑢(𝑑)𝑑𝑝 + 𝜃𝑅(𝑝 ∥ 𝑞), 
robust  control  is  given  by:  𝑈 (𝑑) = min𝑝∈𝛥𝑆
where 𝛥𝑆 is the set of possible subjective probability distributions, 𝑢
is the Bernoulli utility, 𝑞 is a best-guess probability distribution, and 
the function 𝑅 denotes the relative entropy.

Since 𝑂 state-by-state dominates 𝐵, it also first order stochastically 
dominates 𝐵 for any distribution 𝑝, e.g. ∫ 𝑢(𝑂)𝑑𝑝 > ∫ 𝑢(𝐵)𝑑𝑝 for all 
strictly increasing functions 𝑢. As a result,

𝑈 (𝑂) =min𝑝∈𝛥𝑆 ∫ 𝑢(𝑂)𝑑𝑝 + 𝜃𝑅(𝑝 ∥ 𝑞)

> min𝑝∈𝛥𝑆 ∫ 𝑢(𝐵)𝑑𝑝 + 𝜃𝑅(𝑝 ∥ 𝑞) = 𝑈 (𝐵),

completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition  3.  For every state of the world 𝑣, 𝑣𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑙 > 𝑣𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦
by construction. Given an uninformative (e.g. uniform) prior, from Eq. 
(7), the probability of selecting a bull spread is proportional to 𝑒𝑣𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑙 ∕𝜆, 
which for any cost of attention 𝜆 is strictly greater than 𝑒𝑣𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑦∕𝜆, the 
quantity proportional to the probability of selecting the bull spread.

Proof of Proposition  4.  We reproduce part of the proof of Proposition 
5  in  Puri  (2025)  to  prove  that  salience  cannot  capture  dominance 
violations.

In Bordalo et al. (2012), when comparing two lotteries 𝐿1 and 𝐿2
with a finite number of outcomes, which, under state 𝑠, give respective 
payoffs 𝑥1

𝑠 , 𝑥2

𝑠 , the salience of state 𝑠 is given by:
|𝑥1
𝑠 − 𝑥2
𝑠 |
𝑠 | + |𝑥2
𝑠 | + 𝜃

,

|𝑥1

𝜎(𝑥1

𝑠 , 𝑥2

𝑠 ) =

with 𝜃 > 0. This gives rise to a salience ranking over states 𝜅 ∶ 𝑆 → N, 
with 𝜅(𝑠) = 1 indicating that state 𝑠 has the highest salience. A salience 

16 For simplicity but without loss of generality, we assume that the notional 
value of the call options is such that the portfolio pays exactly 100 if the 
underlying asset price is above 𝐾 at expiration.

14 

agent then prefers 𝐿1 to 𝐿2 (both with a finite number of outcomes) if 
and only if:
∑

𝛿𝜅(𝑠)𝑝(𝑠)[𝑣(𝑥1

𝑠 ) − 𝑣(𝑥2

𝑠 )],

𝑠∈𝑆
where 𝑣 is linear and 𝛿 ≤ 1.

Let  𝑂  denote  the  dominating  bull  spread  and  𝐵  the  dominated 

binary, with 𝑆 the state space.

A salience agent prefers 𝑂 to 𝐵 if and only if ∫

𝑠∈𝑆 𝛿𝜅(𝑠)𝑝(𝑠)[𝑣(𝑂(𝑠)) −
𝑣(𝐵(𝑠))] ≥ 0, and all terms in this equation are weakly positive, with 
strictly positivity in some states.

Appendix B. Supplementary data

An  online  appendix  with  supplementary  analysis  can  be  found 

online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104140.

Data availability

Research  data  used  in  this  article  is  available  at  https://www.

openicpsr.org/openicpsr/project/234221/version/V3/view.

References

Allen, F., Barbalau, A., 2022. Security design: A review. SSRN Electron. J. http://dx.
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4258499, URL https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=4258499.
Ameritrade,  T.,  2021.  Vertical  spreads:  Lower  margin  requirement  hurdle  to  tar-
get  capital  efficiency.  https://tickertape.tdameritrade.com/trading/option-credit-
spreads-option-debit-spreads-17838.

Amihud, Y., 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. 
J. Financ. Mark. 5 (1), 31–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1386-4181(01)00024-6, 
URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1386418101000246.

Ba, C., Bohren, A., Imas, A., 2025. Over and underreaction to information. Work. Pap..
Barberis, N.C., 2013. Thirty years of prospect theory in economics: A review and 
assessment. J. Econ. Perspect. 27 (1), 173–196. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/jep.27.
1.173, URL https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/jep.27.1.173.

Barberis,  N.,  Huang,  M.,  Santos,  T.,  2005.  Prospect  theory  and  asset  prices.  In: 
Thaler, R.H. (Ed.), Advances in Behavioral Finance, Volume II. Princeton University 
Press,  pp.  224–270.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/9781400829125-010,  URL  https:
//www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/9781400829125-010/html.

Bhargava, S., Loewenstein, G., Sydnor, J., 2017. Choose to lose: Health plan choices 
from  a  menu  with  dominated  option.  Q.  J.  Econ.  132  (3),  1319–1372.  http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx011, URL https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/132/
3/1319/3769420.

van Binsbergen, J., Brandt, M., Koijen, R., 2012. On the timing and pricing of dividends. 
Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (4), 1596–1618. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.4.1596, 
URL https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/aer.102.4.1596.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2012. Salience theory of choice under risk. 
Q. J. Econ. 127 (3), 1243–1285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs018, URL https:
//academic.oup.com/qje/article/127/3/1243/1922202.

Campbell, J.Y., 2006. Household finance. J. Financ. 61 (4), 1553–1604. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2006.00883.x, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1111/j.1540-6261.2006.00883.x.

Célérier, C., Vallée, B., 2017. Catering to investors through security design: Headline 

rate and complexity. Q. J. Econ. 4, 1469–1508.

Cheng, I.-H., 2019. The VIX premium. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (1), 180–227. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy062, URL https://academic.oup.com/rfs/article/32/1/180/
5017289.

Cheng, I.-H., 2020. Volatility markets underreacted to the early stages of the COVID-19 
pandemic. In: Pontiff, J. (Ed.), Rev. Asset Pricing Stud. 10 (4), 635–668. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1093/rapstu/raaa010, URL https://academic.oup.com/raps/article/10/
4/635/5891670.

Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  Division  of  Market  Oversight,  2017. 
Trade practice rule enforcement review: North American derivatives exchange. 
https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/idc/groups/public/@iodcms/documents/
file/rernadex072817.pdf.

Crypto.com, 2022. Crypto.com agrees to acquire nadex and the small exchange from IG 
group. https://crypto.com/company-news/crypto-com-agrees-to-acquire-nadex-and-
the-small-exchange-from-ig-group.

De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1990. Noise trader risk in 
financial markets. J. Political Econ. 98 (4), 703–738. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/
261703, URL https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/261703.

Drechsler, I., 2013. Uncertainty, time-varying fear, and asset prices. J. Financ. 68 (5), 
1843–1889. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12068, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1111/jofi.12068.

A. Goodman and I. Puri

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104140 

Lazarus, E., 2022. Horizon-dependent risk pricing: Evidence from short-dated options. 

Lee, C., Shleifer, A., Thaler, R., 1991. Investor sentiment and the closed-end fund puzzle. 

Work. Pap..

J. Financ. 46.

Markowitz,  H.,  1952.  The  utility  of  wealth.  J.  Political  Econ.  60  (2),  151–158. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/257177,  URL  https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/
10.1086/257177.

Matějka, F., McKay, A., 2015. Rational inattention to discrete choices: A new foundation 
for the multinomial logit model. Am. Econ. Rev. 105 (1), http://dx.doi.org/10.
1257/aer.20130047, URL https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/aer.20130047.
Nadex, 2024a. What are Nadex Call Spreads and how do they work? https://www.

nadex.com/learning/what-is-a-nadex-call-spread-and-how-does-it-work/.

Nadex,  2024b.  What  are  Nadex  Knock-Outs  and  how  do  they  work?  URL  https:

//www.nadex.com/learning/what-are-knock-outs-and-how-do-they-work/.

Platt, E., Rennison, J., 2022. CME looks to lure retail traders with daily options frowned 
on in Europe. Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/9d793bf3-2c82-42a0-
a5fb-453968533b05.

Puri, I., 2025. Simplicity and risk. J. Financ. 80 (2), 1029–1080. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/jofi.13417, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jofi.13417.
Robinhood,  2025.  Target  fed  funds  rate  may  2025  event  contract.  URL  https://

robinhood.com/us/en/support/articles/target-fed-funds-may-25/.

Rosenthal, L., Young, C., 1990. The seemingly anomalous price behavior of Royal 
Dutch/Shell and Unilever N.V./PLC. J. Financ. Econ. 26 (1), 123–141. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(90)90015-R, URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/0304405X9090015R.

Savage, L.J., 1972. The Foundations of Statistics, 2d rev. ed Dover Publications, New 

York.

SEC, 2008. Self-regulatory organizations; American stock exchange llc; notice of filing 
and immediate effectiveness of a proposed rule change relating to the listing and 
trading of broad-based index binary options. Securities and Exchange Commission. 
https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/amex/2008/34-58272.pdf.

Stahl, D.O., Wilson, P.W., 1995. On players’ models of other players: Theory and 
experimental evidence. Games Econom. Behav. 10 (1), 218–254. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1006/game.1995.1031,  URL  https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0899825685710317.

Taleb, N.N., 1997. Dynamic Hedging: Managing Vanilla and Exotic Options. Wiley series 

in financial engineering, Wiley, New York.

Vokata, P., 2021. Engineering lemons. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 737–755. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.04.035,  URL  https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0304405X21001653.

Von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O., 2007. Theory of Games and Economic Behav-
ior, 60th anniversary ed Princeton classic editions, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, N.J. ; Woodstock, OCLC: ocm78989126.

Weinglass, S., 2019. Israel bans binary options industry, finally closing vast, 10-year 
fraud.  Times  of  Israel.  https://www.timesofisrael.com/israel-bans-entire-binary-
options-industry-finally-closing-vast-10-year-fraud/.

Du, W., Tepper, A., Verdelhan, A., 2018. Deviations from covered interest rate parity. 
J. Financ. 73 (3), 915–957. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12620, URL https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jofi.12620.

Eisfeldt, A., Lustig, H., Zhang, L., 2023. Complex asset markets. J. Financ. Forthcoming.
ESMA,  2019.  ESMA  ceases  renewal  of  product  intervention  measure  relating 
to  binary  options.  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority.  https:
//www.esma.europa.eu/press-news/esma-news/esma-ceases-renewal-product-
intervention-measure-relating-binary-options.

FCA,  2019.  FCA  confirms  permanent  ban  on  the  sale  of  binary  options  to  retail 
consumers. Financial Conduct Authority. https://www.fca.org.uk/news/statements/
fca-confirms-permanent-ban-sale-binary-options-retail-consumers.

Finanstilsynet,  2019.  Finanstilsynet  planlægger  forbud  mod  binære  optioner-
for  at  beskytte  detailkunder.  https://www.finanstilsynet.dk/Nyheder-og-Presse/
Pressemeddelelser/2019/Forbud-mod-binaere-optioner-for-at-beskytte-detailkunder.
Gilboa, I., Schmeidler, D., 1989. Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior. J. 
Math. Econom. 18 (2), 141–153. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-4068(89)90018-
9, URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0304406889900189.

Gul, F., 1991. A theory of disappointment aversion. Econometrica 59 (3), 667. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2307/2938223, URL https://www.jstor.org/stable/2938223?origin=
crossref.

Han, B., 2008. Investor sentiment and option prices. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (1), 387–414. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhm071, URL https://academic.oup.com/rfs/article-
lookup/doi/10.1093/rfs/hhm071.

Hansen, L.P., Sargent, T.J., 2001. Robust control and model uncertainty. Am. Econ. Rev. 
91 (2), 60–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.91.2.60, URL https://pubs.aeaweb.
org/doi/10.1257/aer.91.2.60.

Ilut, C., Schneider, M., 2022. Modeling Uncertainty as Ambiguity: a Review. Tech-
nical Report w29915, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 
p. w29915. http://dx.doi.org/10.3386/w29915, URL http://www.nber.org/papers/
w29915.pdf.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. 

Econometrica 47 (2), 263–291.

Kahneman,  D.,  Tversky,  A.,  1992.  Advances  in  prospect  theory:  Cumulative 

representation of uncertainty. J. Risk Uncertain. 5 (4), 297–323.

Klibanoff,  P.,  Lamont,  O.,  Wizman,  T.A.,  1998.  Investor  reaction  to  salient  news 
in closed-end country funds. J. Financ. 53 (2), 673–699. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/0022-1082.265570, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0022-
1082.265570.

Kumar, A., 2009. Who gambles in the stock market? J. Financ. 64 (4), 1889–1933. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2009.01483.x, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2009.01483.x.

Kyle, A.S., 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica 53 (6), 1315. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1913210,  URL  https://www.jstor.org/stable/1913210?
origin=crossref.

Lamont,  O.A.,  Thaler,  R.H.,  2003.  Anomalies:  The  law  of  one  price  in 
financial  markets.  J.  Econ.  Perspect.  17  (4),  191–202.  http://dx.doi.org/
10.1257/089533003772034952,  URL 
https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/
089533003772034952.

15 

