Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Polarization, purpose and profit(cid:73)
Daniel Ferreira a,b,c,∗, Radoslawa Nikolowa d
a London School of Economics, United Kingdom
b CEPR, United Kingdom
c ECGI, Belgium
d Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Labor markets
Job design
Compensating differentials
Socially responsible investment
Polarization

1. Introduction

We present a model in which firms compete for workers who value nonpecuniary job attributes, such as 
purpose, sustainability, political stances, or working conditions. Firms adopt production technologies that 
enable them to offer jobs with varying levels of these desirable attributes. Firms’ profits are higher when they 
cater to workers with extreme preferences. In a competitive assignment equilibrium, firms become polarized 
and not only reflect but also amplify the polarized preferences of the general population. More polarized sectors 
exhibit higher profits, lower average wages, and a reduced labor share of value added. Sustainable investing 
amplifies firm polarization.

Many workers want their jobs to have a higher purpose (e.g., ‘‘cha-
nging the world’’, ‘‘saving the planet’’, ‘‘helping people’’, ‘‘promoting 
diversity and inclusion’’, etc.). Purpose, sustainability, social respon-
sibility, political stances, and working conditions in general are all 
examples of nonpecuniary job attributes that may be valuable to work-
ers.  Sorkin  (2018)  shows  that  compensating  differentials  (i.e.,  wage 
premiums or discounts that compensate workers for negative or pos-
itive nonpecuniary job attributes) account for two-thirds of the firm 
component of the variance of earnings.1 Krueger et al. (2023) find 
that workers earn ten percent lower wages in firms that operate in 
more sustainable sectors. Colonnelli et al. (2023) find that job appli-
cants value ESG characteristics at about ten percent of average wages, 
which is more than what applicants value most other nonwage ameni-
ties.2 There is also significant heterogeneity in workers’ preferences for 
nonpecuniary job attributes (Cassar and Meier, 2018).3

We  present  a  model  in  which  firms  compete  for  workers  who 
value a nonpecuniary job attribute. We call this attribute 𝑠-quality. 𝑆-
quality may refer to job purpose or meaning, sustainability, ESG/CSR 
attributes, a firm’s political stance, working conditions, or any other 
positive job attribute with the following two features. First, workers 
vary in their willingness to pay for 𝑠-quality. Second, some investors 
(e.g., socially responsible investors) may also have preferences over 
𝑠-quality in their portfolio firms.

Our model builds on Rosen’s (1986) ‘‘equalizing differences’’ frame-
work. Models in this tradition typically assume that firms pay a variable 
cost to tailor their job characteristics to the preferences of their work-
ers. Unlike the previous literature, we assume that firms’ cost functions 
also have a fixed component. We can think of this cost as the cost of 
setting up a firm, investing in R&D, or entering a market. Because of 
this fixed cost, firms choose to cater only to some workers. Our main 
result shows that, in equilibrium, firms become polarized and hire only 
workers with extreme preferences—those with either strong or weak 

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, the anonymous referee, Jonathan Berk, Shaun Davies, Paolo Fulghieri, Bård Harstad, 
Magdalena Rola-Janicka, Dimitri Vayanos, seminar participants at the University of Bristol, EIEF, LSE, Queen Mary University of London, São Paulo School of 
Economics - FGV, Stanford GSB, and participants at the Delaware Corporate Governance Symposium, the HKU Summer Workshop, the CSEF-RCFS Conference on 
Finance, Labor and Inequality, and the EFA (Bratislava) for their comments.
∗ Corresponding author at: London School of Economics, United Kingdom.

E-mail addresses:  d.ferreira@lse.ac.uk (D. Ferreira), r.nikolowa@qmul.ac.uk (R. Nikolowa).

1 Further evidence of compensating differentials can be found in Stern (2004), Mas and Pallais (2017), Focke et al. (2017), Wiswall and Zafar (2018), Sockin 

2 Hedblom et al. (2019) find that advertising as a CSR firm increases job application rates by 24%. Similarly, Cen et al. (2022) find that CSR investments 

(2022), and Ouimet and Tate (2022), among others.

improve employee retention.

3 Krueger et al. (2023) find that about half of survey participants are willing to accept a wage cut to work for a more environmentally sustainable firm. Colonnelli 
et al. (2023) document that job applicants’ ESG preferences vary with education, ethnic background, and political leanings. Hedblom et al. (2019) find that 
heterogeneous preferences for CSR cause workers to vary by their propensity to select different jobs.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104147
Received 11 December 2024; Received in revised form 18 July 2025; Accepted 22 July 2025
Available online 4 August 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

preferences for 𝑠-quality. This result implies that firms not only reflect 
but also amplify the polarized preferences of the general population.

The model is as follows. Entrepreneurs develop or acquire technolo-
gies that allow them to create firms offering jobs of varying 𝑠-quality 
levels. After investing in such technologies, firms compete for workers 
by offering contracts specifying a wage and an 𝑠-quality level. High 
𝑠-quality  jobs  are  costly  for  firms.  For  example,  if  workers  prefer 
environmentally  sustainable  jobs,  a  firm  may  choose  low-emission 
technologies even when they are not cost-efficient.

The ability to design jobs that align with workers’ preferences allows 
firms to extract greater surplus from workers. This surplus is U-shaped 
in  the  underlying  preferences  for  𝑠-quality.  Thus,  firms’  profits  are 
higher when they employ workers with extreme preferences. Because 
firms  must  pay  a  fixed  cost  to  operate,  they  choose  to  hire  only 
those workers who derive the greatest value from the offered jobs—
namely, those with the most extreme preferences. In contrast, firms 
shun workers with moderate preferences.

We show that firms become more polarized when the cost of ac-
quiring  the  required  technology  is  larger.  We  also  show  that  more 
polarized  sectors  are  more  concentrated,  with  higher  profits,  lower 
average wages, and a reduced labor share of value added. Within a 
sector,  all  else  held  constant,  wages  decrease  with  𝑠-quality.  Thus, 
polarization in 𝑠-quality is positively related to wage polarization.

After modeling the labor market, we introduce financial markets. 
Entrepreneurs can sell shares of their firms to outside investors. There 
are two types of investors: profit-driven investors and socially respon-
sible investors. Profit-driven investors care only about the financial 
return  on  their  shares.  Socially  responsible  investors  are  willing  to 
sacrifice some financial gains to invest in companies with positive job 
attributes. Socially responsible investors may directly care about job 
quality because they prefer investing in companies offering better job 
conditions. They may also care about job quality indirectly if they share 
some of their employees’ values, such as a concern for sustainability, 
environmental responsibility, or political activism. In this extension, we 
show that sustainable investing increases firm polarization.

The model has no frictions: competition is perfect, information is 
symmetric, capital is plentiful, risk sharing is perfect, and there are no 
agency problems, incentive issues, or financial constraints. We make 
these assumptions not for realism but to show that the results are theo-
retically robust. Thus, the model can be used as a benchmark to assess 
whether frictions are needed to explain existing or future evidence. 
Similar to models of the assignment of heterogeneous workers to firms, 
jobs, or tasks (see, e.g., Tinbergen (1956), Sattinger (1993), Garicano 
and Rossi-Hansberg (2006)), our model considers the efficient alloca-
tion of workers to (endogenously) different firms. Similar to models of 
sustainable investment in which investors have preferences for some 
nonpecuniary characteristics of their portfolio firms (see, e.g., Heinkel 
et al. (2001), Pástor et al. (2021), Pedersen et al. (2021)), our model 
also considers the efficient allocation of heterogeneous investors to 
firms. Thus, our model integrates firms’ real and financial sides in a 
simple competitive assignment framework.

Our model predicts firm polarization as an equilibrium outcome. 
Polarization may occur for any characteristic that employees value. An 
emerging empirical literature studies firm polarization in social and 
political stances. Di Giuli and Kostovetsky (2014) find an association 
between stakeholders’ political views and firms’ CSR policies. Conway 
and  Boxell  (2023)  show  that  firms’  public  stances  on  controversial 
social issues align with the preferences of their consumers and employ-
ees. Giannetti and Wang (2023) show that heterogeneity in corporate 
cultures explains differences in corporate reactions to heightened public 
attention to gender equality. Colonnelli et al. (2025), Fos et al. (2023), 
and Duchin et al. (2023) analyze some of the economic consequences 
of firm political polarization. Steel (2024) provides evidence of grow-
ing polarization in the political preferences of companies and their 
executives.

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

The model generates cross-section relationships between employee 
satisfaction,  firm  value,  and  stock  returns.  While  the  link  between 
employee satisfaction and stock returns does not need to be monotonic, 
the model implies that firms with the highest levels of employee satis-
faction also deliver the highest returns. Similarly, firms with the lowest 
levels of employee satisfaction have the lowest returns. Edmans (2011) 
shows evidence that employee satisfaction is positively related to stock 
returns. His explanation is that the market does not fully recognize 
the value of intangibles. Our model provides an alternative explanation 
that does not require any friction or mispricing. This is not to say that 
frictions cannot explain some (or even all) of the evidence. Instead, the 
model illustrates that a link between employee satisfaction and stock 
returns can arise even without frictions. Edmans et al. (2024) show 
that the positive link between employee satisfaction and stock returns 
is stronger in countries with flexible labor markets. This finding is also 
consistent with our model of competition in a frictionless labor market.
In Section 2, we present our main model. In Section 3, we consider 
a version of the model where entrepreneurs choose among multiple 
productive  technologies.  Section  4  introduces  outside  investors.  We 
briefly review the related theoretical literature in Section 5. Section 6 
concludes. All proofs not in the text are in Appendix. The Internet 
Appendix presents several extensions and generalizations.

2. Model

2.1. Preferences

We consider an economy with a continuum of workers with mass 𝐿. 
Workers care about two attributes of their jobs: the wage (𝑤) and the 
job’s 𝑠-quality (or 𝑠-attribute, 𝑠). A worker of type 𝛼 has utility 𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤) =
𝛼𝑠 + (1 − 𝛼)𝑤, where 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1) measures the worker’s relative taste 
for the 𝑠-attribute.4 Workers are heterogeneous in their preferences for 
the 𝑠-attribute. We assume that 𝛼 is a continuous random variable with 
density 𝑝(𝛼) > 0 for all 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1). That is, 𝐿 ∫ 𝛼
0 𝑝(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 = 𝐿𝑃 (𝛼) is the 
mass of workers with type lower than 𝛼.

The linearity of preferences simplifies the analysis but is not nec-
essary  for  the  results.  In  the  Internet  Appendix,  we  show  that  our 
results  hold  for  quasi-concave  differentiable  utility  functions  of  the 
form  𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝑓 (𝑔1(𝛼)ℎ1(𝑠, 𝑤) + 𝑔2(1 − 𝛼)ℎ2(𝑠, 𝑤)),  provided  some 
conditions  on  the  curvature  of  𝑔1(.)  and  𝑔2(.)  hold.  This  family  of 
functions includes most of the commonly used utility functions, such 
as Cobb–Douglas, CES, quasi-linear utilities, and many others.

2.2. Technology

There is a large number of potential entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs 
are pure profit-maximizers.5 At Date 0, an entrepreneur can pay 𝐾 > 0
to set up a firm. At Date 1, the firm chooses its 𝑠-quality level, 𝑠 ≥ 0, 
at  cost  𝑐(𝑠).  We  assume  𝑐′(𝑠) > 0  and  𝑐′′(𝑠) > 0  for  𝑠 > 0,  and 
𝑐(0) = 𝑐′(0) = 0, the latter being an Inada condition to avoid corner 
solutions. The firm hires one worker by offering contract (𝑠, 𝑤) and 
generates revenue 𝑦 > 0. The net profit of a firm offering contract (𝑠, 𝑤)
is 𝛱(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝑦 − 𝑐(𝑠) − 𝑤 − 𝐾. For simplicity, we impose no constraints 
on 𝑤; the qualitative results are unchanged if 𝑤 is constrained to be 
non-negative (alternatively, we can interpret our analysis as the case 
in which non-negative wage constraints do not bind). Although we 
assume that all workers are equally productive, a natural extension 
–  not  pursued  here  –  is  to  consider  different  correlation  structures 
between 𝛼 and worker productivity.6

4 The  results  are  qualitatively  similar  if  we  use  the  alternative  utility 
𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝛼𝑠 + 𝑤. The only significant difference is how to interpret the 
comparative statics with respect to 𝛼, because an increase in 𝛼 unequivocally 
increases a worker’s utility for any pair (𝑠, 𝑤). Under our specification, the 
effect of 𝛼 on utilities depends on whether 𝑠 ≥ 𝑤 or 𝑠 ≤ 𝑤.

5 In the Internet Appendix we also consider the case where entrepreneurs 

have preferences for 𝑠-quality.

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

2.3. Benchmark: Efficient contracts

In  this  subsection,  we  characterize  the  set  of  efficient  contracts 
between a worker and a firm. Such contracts serve as a benchmark for 
assessing the efficiency properties of the equilibrium contracts, which 
we will describe in the next subsection.

Suppose a firm matches with a worker of type 𝛼 at Date 1. The 
firm (i.e., the entrepreneur) offers contract (𝑠, 𝑤) to the worker. Let 
𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) ∶= 𝑦 − 𝑤 − 𝑐(𝑠) denote the firm’s gross profit (i.e., ignoring the 
entry cost 𝐾, which is sunk at this stage) under this contract. Let 𝑢 > 0
denote the worker’s outside utility if she does not accept the contract 
(she either works for another firm or stays unemployed). Similarly, let 
𝜋 ≥ 0 denote the firm’s outside profit (the firm either hires another 
worker or shuts down). Because 𝑦 is a free parameter in the model, we 
make the following assumption:

Assumption 1.  𝑦 = 𝑢 + 𝑐(𝑢).

This assumption guarantees that at least one contract exists such 
that a firm with outside profit 𝜋 = 0 weakly prefers to hire the worker. 
This contract is (𝑠, 𝑤) = (𝑢, 𝑢), which gives gross profit exactly equal to 
zero. Assumption  1 is made only to streamline the presentation; it does 
not have any implications for the results.

To characterize the efficient contract set, we solve: 
max𝑠,𝑤 𝜔𝑓 (𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)) + (1 − 𝜔)𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤)
 s.t. 𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤) ≥ 𝑢  and 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) ≥ 𝜋

(1)

where 𝜔 ∈ [0, 1] and 𝑓 (.) is some strictly increasing and strictly concave 
function. Any Pareto-efficient contract (𝑠, 𝑤) is a solution to (1) for 
some 𝜔.7 Thus, changing 𝜔 allows us to trace the Pareto set of all 
efficient contracts. The first-order conditions for solving (1) imply: 

𝛼
1 − 𝛼

= 𝑐′(𝑠∗

𝛼).

(2)

The left-hand side of (2) is the worker’s marginal rate of substitution 
between 𝑠 and 𝑤. In an efficient allocation, this rate must equal the 
marginal cost of producing 𝑠, which is the right-hand side of (2). Thus, 
the efficient quantity of 𝑠 is at a tangency between a given indifference 
curve and an isoprofit, and is unique for a given worker type: 𝑠∗
𝛼 =
ℎ(𝛼) ∶= 𝑐′−1
𝛼 results from two properties 
of  the  technology  and  preferences:  (i)  the  profit  function  is  quasi-
linear, and (ii) the worker’s utility is linear. While this uniqueness is 
convenient, it does not drive our main results. In the Internet Appendix, 
we show how to solve the model with preferences that do not imply a 
unique 𝑠 for each 𝛼.

. The uniqueness of 𝑠∗

( 𝛼
1−𝛼

)

Let 𝐹  denote the mass of firms at Date 1. If 𝐹 < 𝐿, it is socially 
optimal for all existing firms to employ workers and offer 𝑠∗
𝛼. Pareto 
efficiency alone does not impose further conditions. Therefore, there 
are multiple efficient allocations. In general, at Date 1, an allocation is 
efficient if and only if (i) the mass of employed workers is min{𝐿, 𝐹 }
and (ii) a firm that employs a type-𝛼 worker offers 𝑠∗
𝛼.

In (1), set 𝜋 = 0 and suppose the firm has all the bargaining power 

(𝜔 = 0). Then, the problem reduces to 

𝑣(𝛼) ∶= max
𝑠,𝑤

𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤)  s.t. 𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤) ≥ 𝑢.

(3)

6 For example, Colonnelli et al. (2023) find that workers with stronger 

preferences for ESG tend also to be more qualified.

7 See the Appendix for a formal proof. Intuitively, program (1) is akin 
to maximizing a concave social welfare function of 𝑢 and 𝜋 subject to a 
linear Pareto frontier. Changing 𝜔 changes the slope of the iso-welfare curves, 
shifting its tangency with the frontier. The reason for using a strictly concave 
transformation  of  𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)  is  to  allow  for  interior  solutions.  If  we  do  not 
transform  𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤),  for  any  given  𝜔,  𝑤  will  adjust  to  make  at  least  one 
constraint bind, and the solution to (1) would not trace the whole Pareto 
frontier as we change 𝜔.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

The value function 𝑣(𝛼) is the maximum profit a firm could extract from 
a worker of type 𝛼. We call 𝑣(𝛼) the profit potential. The profit potential 
is the actual profit a monopsonist firm would enjoy if matched with a 
worker of type 𝛼. We then have the following result:

Proposition 1 (Profit Potential). The profit potential 𝑣(𝛼) is strictly U-
shaped.

This result is economically meaningful. It implies that firms create 
more surplus when they match with workers with extreme preferences. 
To understand the intuition, note that firms’ ability to choose 𝑠 is a real 
option: it allows them to create value by adapting to the preferences of 
their workers. The option’s value increases with the distance between 
the default position and the firm’s employment contract.

The shape of the profit potential function is the main force behind 
our results. Because 𝑠∗
𝛼 increases in 𝛼 in an efficient allocation, Propo-
sition  1 implies that the profit potential is also U-shaped in ‘‘purpose’’, 
i.e., 𝑠∗
𝛼. Intuitively, by offering jobs with higher 𝑠-quality, the firm pays 
higher direct costs but can also pay lower wages. We observe a U-
shaped pattern because the firm can create (and thus extract) more 
surplus when matched with workers with extreme preferences.

We note that Proposition  1 is robust to different assumptions on 
preferences and technology. In particular, preferences do not need to 
be linear in (𝑠, 𝑤). As we elaborate in the Internet Appendix, under 
some  conditions  on  how  𝛼  affects  utility,  any  quasi-concave  utility 
over (𝑠, 𝑤) implies that 𝑣(𝛼) is U-shaped. This implies that U-shaped 
profit potential functions are likely to feature in most compensating 
differentials  models  in  the  literature.  However,  to  the  best  of  our 
knowledge, this paper is the first to show this property.

2.4. Labor market equilibrium

We now characterize the equilibrium. There are two dates. At Date 
0, entrepreneurs simultaneously choose whether to set up a firm and 
pay cost 𝐾. At Date 1, firms compete for workers as described below.

At Date 1, we consider a competitive equilibrium involving all firms 
and workers. We can think of the model as a location game in which 
each contract (𝑠, 𝑤) on the plane ℜ+ × ℜ is a feasible location. In a 
competitive equilibrium, a Walrasian auctioneer chooses a set 𝛤 ⊆
ℜ+ × ℜ. Then, each firm chooses a location in 𝛤  that maximizes its 
profit. Workers also choose their location (i.e., they apply for a job) by 
maximizing their utility over the contracts in 𝛤 . For an allocation to 
be an equilibrium, the labor demand in each location must equal the 
labor supply.

Consider  an  equilibrium  in  which  a  worker  of  type  𝛼  chooses 
contract (𝑠, 𝑤). If 𝑠 ≠ ℎ(𝛼) (as given by (2)), the worker and a firm 
could renegotiate the contract so that both are better off. Thus, in 
equilibrium, if a worker of type 𝛼 chooses to locate at (𝑠, 𝑤), where a 
firm is also located, then we must have 𝑠 = ℎ(𝛼). In addition, all agents 
of type 𝛼 employed by firms must have the same 𝑤.8 Thus, without loss 
of generality, we can represent a given location by contract (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑤𝑗 ), 
which is the contract intended for type 𝑗 ∈ (0, 1), where 𝑠𝑗 = ℎ(𝑗).

The Walrasian auctioneer chooses a set of contracts (or locations) 

𝛤 = {(𝑠𝑗 , 𝑤𝑗 ) for 𝑗 ∈ (0, 1)}. Define 

𝐴(𝛤 ) ∶= arg max
(𝑠,𝑤)∈𝛤

𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤)  subject to  𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) ≥ 0.

(4)

𝐴(𝛤 ) is the set of locations that maximize firms’ profits, given the set 
of feasible locations 𝛤 . Define 

𝐵𝛼(𝛤 ) ∶= arg max
(𝑠,𝑤)∈𝛤

𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)  subject to  𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤) ≥ 𝑢.

(5)

8 Suppose  there  are  two  locations,  (𝑠, 𝑤)  and  (𝑠′, 𝑤′),  with  𝑠 = 𝑠′  and 
𝑤′ < 𝑤. Then all firms would choose location (𝑠′, 𝑤′), and no worker would 
be employed at (𝑠, 𝑤).

3 

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

𝐵𝛼(𝛤 ) is the set of locations that maximize type-𝛼’s utility, given the 
set of feasible locations 𝛤 .

Define the function 𝑝𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) ∶ 𝛤 → [0, 1] such that 𝐹 𝑝𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) denotes 
the mass of firms that choose to locate at (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈ 𝛤 . In other words, 
𝐹 𝑝𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤)  represents  the  labor  demand  at  location  (𝑠, 𝑤).  Similarly, 
define function 𝑝𝑙(𝑠, 𝑤) ∶ 𝛤 → [0, 1] such that 𝐿𝑝𝑙(𝑠, 𝑤) denotes the mass 
of workers who choose to locate at (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈ 𝛤 . In other words, 𝐿𝑝𝑙(𝑠, 𝑤)
represents the labor supply at location (𝑠, 𝑤). We define a competitive 
equilibrium at Date 1 as follows.

Definition 1.  For given 𝐹 > 0, a competitive equilibrium is a set of 
𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) and 𝑝∗
locations 𝛤 ∗ and functions 𝑝∗

𝑙 (𝑠, 𝑤) such that

1. Firms maximize profit: 𝑝∗
2. Workers maximize utility: 𝑝∗

𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) > 0 only if (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈ 𝐴(𝛤 ∗).

𝑙 (𝑠, 𝑤) > 0 only if (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈ 𝐵𝛼(𝛤 ∗)

 for some 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1).

3. Supply  equals  demand:  𝐹 𝑝∗

𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝐿𝑝∗

𝑙 (𝑠, 𝑤) for all (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈

𝐴(𝛤 ∗).

4. The assignment is efficient and feasible: (i) a worker of type 𝛼
𝛼 = ℎ(𝛼), and (ii) the 

𝛼) such that 𝑠∗

must choose location (𝑠∗
mass of employed workers must be:

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝐹 ∫

(𝑠,𝑤)∈𝛤 ∗

𝑝∗
𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤)𝑑(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝐿 ∫

(𝑠,𝑤)∈𝛤 ∗

𝑝∗
𝑙 (𝑠, 𝑤)𝑑(𝑠, 𝑤) = min{𝐿, 𝐹 }.

We first consider the case in which 𝐹 > 𝐿, i.e., the mass of firms at 

Date 1 is larger than the mass of workers: 

Lemma 1 (Excess Demand Implies Zero Profit). In an equilibrium where 
𝐹 > 𝐿, firms have zero profit.

This  result  follows  because  competition  for  scarce  workers  will 
dissipate profits. Because the cost of setting up a firm at Date 0 is 
positive (𝐾 > 0), firms must expect a strictly positive profit after entry. 
Lemma  1 thus implies that there is no equilibrium in which 𝐹 > 𝐿. 
Thus, from now on, we consider only the case in which 𝐹 < 𝐿 (ignoring 
the knife-edge case 𝐹 = 𝐿 for simplicity of exposition).

The next lemma is a consequence of profit equalization in compet-

itive markets. 

Lemma 2 (Profit Equalization). If 𝐹 < 𝐿, firms have strictly positive profit, 
𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝜋∗ > 0, for all (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈ 𝛤  such that 𝑝∗

𝑙 (𝑠, 𝑤) > 0.

Lemma  2 implies that profits are the same across all active locations, 
i.e., locations with positive labor supply, 𝑝∗
𝑙 (𝑠, 𝑤) > 0. Note also that, in 
the cross-section of firms, there is no relation between profit and the 
𝑠-attribute.

Let 𝑘 denote the type that minimizes the profit potential, i.e., 𝑘 ∶=
arg min𝛼∈[0,1] 𝑣(𝛼). The next proposition characterizes the equilibrium. 

Proposition 2 (Labor Market Equilibrium). The equilibrium is given by a 
unique type 𝑧 ∈ (𝑘, 1) such that 

(

𝜙(𝑧)

𝐹 = 𝐿

∫
0

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 + ∫
𝑧

)

1

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼

where 𝜙(𝛼) ∶ (𝑘, 1) → [0, 𝑘] is defined as 

𝜙(𝛼) ∶= arg max
𝑥∈[0,𝑘]

𝑣(𝑥) ≤ 𝑣(𝛼).

Fig. 1.  Equilibrium wage function and polarization.

The equilibrium implies unique employment levels in each location. 
Wages are also unique in all active locations (i.e., where 𝑝∗
𝛼) >
0). Proposition  2 shows that the Walrasian auctioneer chooses a set 
of contracts that (i) equalizes profits in all active locations and (ii) 
maximizes the profit potential of firms. There are two thresholds: 𝑧 ∈
(𝑘, 1) and 𝜙(𝑧) ∈ [0, 𝑘]. In an interior equilibrium (i.e., 𝜙(𝑧) > 0), (7) 
implies 𝑣(𝑧) = 𝑣(𝜙(𝑧)) = 𝜋∗, which is the equilibrium profit. All types 
𝛼 ≤ 𝜙(𝑧) and 𝛼 ≥ 𝑧 are employed.

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝑙 (𝑠∗

Because in equilibrium there is a one-to-one mapping between 𝛼
and 𝑠, we can also describe the equilibrium by a wage function, 𝑤∗(𝑠). 
The wage function is not uniquely determined in inactive locations. For 
simplicity and without loss of generality, we assume that all locations 
(active or inactive) are equally profitable. Thus, the equilibrium wage 
function becomes 𝑤∗(𝑠) = 𝑦 − 𝜋∗ − 𝑐(𝑠), which is the isoprofit for profit 
level 𝜋∗ = 𝑣(𝑘). Fig.  1 depicts the wage function on the (𝑠, 𝑤) plane. 
Note that 𝑐′′(𝑠) > 0 implies that the wage function is concave. For a 
given wage function, firms decide where to locate themselves. Since 
profits are the same everywhere, firms are indifferent about where they 
are located.

The wage function 𝑤∗(𝑠) is also a menu of choices for workers. A 

type-𝛼 worker solves the problem 

max
𝑠

𝛼𝑠 + (1 − 𝛼)𝑤∗(𝑠)  s.t.  𝛼𝑠 + (1 − 𝛼)𝑤∗(𝑠) ≥ 𝑢.

(10)

As shown in Fig.  1, the worker will choose the highest indifference 
curve given the wage function, and will thus choose 𝑠∗
𝛼 = ℎ(𝛼), where 
the (absolute value of the) slope of her indifference curve, 𝛼∕(1 − 𝛼), 
equals the slope of the wage function, 𝑐′(𝑠∗
𝛼). Because there are fewer 
firms than workers, there must be empty regions where workers and 
firms are not located. Because workers with extreme preferences enjoy 
greater surplus, that region must be an interval. Thus, the equilibrium 
is such that only the extreme types are employed in the sector.

(6)

(7)

Our main result is: 

The equilibrium locations are given by 𝛤 ∗ = {(𝑠∗
𝑠∗
𝛼 = ℎ(𝛼) and 
{

𝑤∗

𝛼 =

𝑦 − 𝑣(𝑧) − 𝑐(ℎ(𝛼))
𝑤 ∈ [𝑦 − 𝑣(𝑧) − 𝑐(ℎ(𝛼)),

𝑢−𝛼ℎ(𝛼)
1−𝛼

]

The supply and demand conditions imply 𝐹 𝑝∗

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝛼) for 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1)}, where 

if 𝛼 ∉ (𝜙(𝑧), 𝑧)
if 𝛼 ∈ (𝜙(𝑧), 𝑧)
𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝐿𝑝∗

𝑙 (𝑠, 𝑤) and 

.

(8)

𝑙 (𝑠∗
𝑝∗

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝛼) =

{ 𝑝(𝛼)
0

if 𝛼 ∉ (𝜙(𝑧), 𝑧)
if 𝛼 ∈ (𝜙(𝑧), 𝑧)

.

(9)

4 

Corollary 1 (Polarization). The equilibrium is polarized: firms cater to the 
most extreme preferences. That is, 𝑝∗
𝑑 (𝑠∗
𝛼) > 0 if and only if 𝛼 ∉ (𝜙(𝑧), 𝑧).

𝛼, 𝑤∗

This corollary is simply a restatement of (9). We define the equilib-
rium degree of polarization in 𝑠-quality as 𝜌∗ = 𝑠∗
𝜙(𝑧), which is the 
length of the interval shown in Fig.  1, where 𝑠∗
𝑧 is the minimum 𝑠 among 
high-𝑠 firms and 𝑠∗
𝜙(𝑧) is the maximum 𝑠 among low-𝑠 firms. The degree 
of firm polarization is a potentially observable equilibrium outcome. 
Thus, we use it as one of the outcome variables in our comparative 

𝑧 − 𝑠∗

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

statics exercises. Note that a corner solution may exist where 𝑠∗
in which case the degree of polarization is 𝜌∗ = 𝑠∗
𝑧.

𝜙(𝑧) = 0, 

Because firms are scarce (𝐹 < 𝐿), there must be some worker 
types  who  are  not  employed.  Corollary   1  shows  that  firms  do  not 
employ workers of intermediate types. Because firms cater to those with 
extreme preferences, these firms are polarized in equilibrium. That is, 
firms are more extreme than the underlying worker preferences for the 
𝑠-attribute. The next corollary makes precise the statement that firms 
amplify any underlying preference polarization. 

Corollary 2 (Amplification of Polarized Preferences). Suppose 𝑝(𝛼) = 0 for 
𝛼 ∈ [𝛼, 𝛼]. That is, the ‘‘underlying preference polarization’’ is 𝛼 − 𝛼. In 
equilibrium, we must have either 𝜙(𝑧) < 𝛼 or 𝑧 > 𝛼, or both. Thus, firms 
amplify the polarized preferences of the underlying population: 𝑝∗
𝛼) >
0 if and only if 𝛼 ∉ (min{𝜙(𝑧), 𝛼}, max{𝑧, 𝛼}).

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝑑 (𝑠∗

The next result confirms that wages fall with the 𝑠-attribute. 

Corollary 3 (Compensating Differentials). The equilibrium displays com-
pensating differentials: for 𝛼′ > 𝛼, if 𝑝∗
𝛼′ ) > 0, 
then 𝑠∗

𝛼) > 0 and 𝑝∗

𝛼′ , 𝑤∗

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝑑 (𝑠∗

𝑑 (𝑠∗

𝛼′  and 𝑤∗

𝛼 > 𝑤∗
𝛼′ .

𝛼 < 𝑠∗

That  is,  in  the  cross-section,  firms  with  higher  levels  of  the  𝑠-

attribute offer lower wages to their employees.

Let 𝑢𝛼∗ denote the equilibrium utility of a type-𝛼 worker and 𝑈 ∗
𝛼 ∶=
𝑢𝛼∗ − 𝑢 denote the equilibrium surplus enjoyed by a type-𝛼 worker. 
The next corollary summarizes the equilibrium welfare implications for 
workers. 

Corollary 4 (Workers’ Surplus Inequality). Workers with extreme prefer-
ences have higher surpluses: For any employed worker 𝛼, if 𝛼 < 𝑘, 𝑈 ∗
𝛼′ > 𝑈 ∗
for 𝛼′ < 𝛼; if 𝛼 > 𝑘, 𝑈 ∗
𝛼  for 𝛼′ > 𝛼.

𝛼′ > 𝑈 ∗

𝛼

In equilibrium, workers with extreme preferences benefit more from 
working in the sector than workers with more moderate preferences 
towards  the  𝑠-attribute.  Workers  in  jobs  with  more  surplus  have  a 
higher willingness to pay to keep their jobs. Thus, Corollary  4 implies 
the following empirical prediction.

Prediction 1. Employee satisfaction is higher in firms with extreme 
levels of the 𝑠-attribute.

To complete the characterization of the equilibrium, we now con-
sider the firms’ entry decision at Date 0. We have the following result. 

Proposition 3 (Equilibrium Number of Firms). The equilibrium mass of 
firms is 

𝐹 ∗ = 𝐿

(

𝜙(𝑧∗)

∫

0

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 + ∫

)

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼

,

1

𝑧∗

(11)

where 𝑧∗ is given by 𝑣(𝑧∗) = 𝐾 with 𝑣(𝛼) restricted to [𝑘, 1).

The proof is straightforward. Suppose that, at Date 0, entrepreneurs 
expect a mass 𝐹  of firms to enter. As discussed earlier, if 𝐹 > 𝐿, 
post-entry profits are zero. In this case, no entrepreneur would choose 
to enter. Thus, in equilibrium, we must have 𝐹 ≤ 𝐿. Let 𝑧 denote 
the  equilibrium  type  as  given  by  Proposition   2.  If  𝑣(𝑧) > 𝐾,  all 
entrepreneurs prefer to enter. If 𝑣(𝑧) < 𝐾, all entrepreneurs prefer to 
stay out. For an equilibrium with 0 < 𝐹 < 𝐿 to exist, we thus need 
𝑣(𝑧∗) = 𝐾. This solution exists because Assumption  1 implies 𝑣(𝑘) = 0
and because 𝑣(𝛼)|𝛼→1 → ∞. The case 𝐹 = 𝐿 cannot happen because 
𝑣(𝑘) = 0 implies that profit would be zero in this case, and no firm 
would be willing to pay the entry cost 𝐾 > 0. Thus, 𝐹 ∗ < 𝐿.

Finally,  we  note  that  we  can  generalize  the  model  by  allowing 
workers to view 𝑠 as a positive or negative attribute. In this case, 𝑠 is a
controversial good, such as political partisanship or stances.9 Suppose a 

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

firm invests in 𝑠 by donating to a specific political party. In a two-party 
system, 𝑠 < 0 represents donations to one party, and 𝑠 > 0 donations 
to the other party. We let 𝛼 ∈ (−1, 1) so that negative (positive) 𝛼
represents support for the first (second) party. In this case, the utility 
function becomes 𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝛼𝑠 + (1 − |𝛼|)𝑤. In this context, firms will 
either make significant donations to one party or the other. Again, we 
obtain that firms amplify the polarized preferences of the underlying 
population. We consider this generalization in the Internet Appendix.

3. A model with endogenous technology choice

In  this  section,  we  consider  a  version  of  the  model  where  en-
trepreneurs choose among multiple productive technologies. This al-
lows us to endogenize the workers outside utility as well as to consider 
how the available technologies affect polarization.

At  Date  0,  entrepreneurs  can  choose  from  a  set  of  technologies 
𝜄 ∈ {0, … , 𝑚} to set up a firm. A firm with technology 𝜄 chooses its 𝑠-
quality level, 𝑠 ∈ [𝑠𝜄, 𝑠𝜄], at cost 𝑐(𝑠).10 Technologies are indexed by their
degree of flexibility: 𝜄 > 𝜄′ ⇒ [𝑠𝜄′ , 𝑠𝜄′ ] ⊂ (𝑠𝜄, 𝑠𝜄), that is 𝜄 is more flexible 
than 𝜄′. A firm with a more flexible technology can design jobs with a 
broader range of 𝑠-qualities. For example, the flexible technology may 
allow a firm to produce goods with more or less emissions.11 Similarly, 
some flexible organizational forms make it possible for workers to work 
either at home or at the office. Because a more flexible technology can 
deliver anything that a less flexible one can, more flexible technologies 
are (weakly) more valuable. Our key assumption is that technological 
flexibility is costly to develop or acquire. Specifically, let 𝐾𝜄 denote the 
cost of acquiring technology 𝜄. Then, 𝜄 > 𝜄′ ⇒ 𝐾𝜄 > 𝐾𝜄′ . Without loss 
of generality, we set 𝐾0 = 0. When two technologies cannot be ranked 
by flexibility (e.g., 𝑠𝜄 < 𝑠𝜄′  and 𝑠𝜄 < 𝑠𝜄′ ), which one is more valuable 
depends  on  the  underlying  distribution  of  worker  types.  Our  main 
results (firm polarization and amplification of polarized preferences) 
are unchanged in this case, provided that more valuable technologies 
are costlier to acquire.

To simplify the analysis, we assume that there are only two types 
of technologies. Technology 0 is completely inflexible: 𝑠0 = 𝑠0 =∶ 𝑠0. 
Technology 1 is perfectly flexible, that is, 𝑠1 = 0 and 𝑠1 = ∞. In the 
Internet Appendix, we consider the more general case in which both 
types have some (but incomplete) flexibility and the case in which there 
are more than two technologies.

We refer to the set of firms adopting technology 𝜄 as Sector 𝜄. We 
call Sector 1 the flexible sector and Sector 0 the inflexible sector. Workers 
can work for a firm in one of the sectors or remain unemployed. We 
normalize the ‘‘unemployment contract’’ to (𝑠 = 0, 𝑤 = 0), thus workers 
of any type have zero utility when unemployed.

Now, at Date 1, firms with the inflexible technology all choose 
the same location. Let (𝑠0, 𝑤0) denote a contract intended for inflexible 
firms. We expand the definition of 𝛤  to include one such contract 
(𝑠0, 𝑤0) and several contracts (𝑠1, 𝑤1), which are intended for flexible 
firms. We assume that 𝑦 ≥ 𝑐(𝑠0) to ensure that inflexible firms always 

9 See  Wu  and  Zechner  (2024)  for  a  model  of  firm  polarization  when 
investors have positive or negative preferences over political stances (see also 
the discussion in Section 5).
10 We can easily generalize the model to allow the cost function to depend 
on 𝜄.
11 An example of an industry with high emissions flexibility is PET plastic 
bottle  production.  The  dirtiest  methods  of  producing  PET  bottles  involve 
petroleum-based feedstocks and incineration, leading to high emissions. How-
ever, the cleanest methods, using bio-based feedstocks and recycled materials, 
can significantly reduce emissions. In contrast, an industry with low emissions 
flexibility is cement production, which is inherently carbon-intensive due to 
the energy-intensive clinker production and calcination process. Even with the 
cleanest methods, such as innovative materials and carbon capture, cement 
production remains more challenging to decarbonize. Thus, PET plastic bottles 
offer a wider range of emissions outcomes than cement production.

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

prefer to operate. Our results remain unchanged if we assume that costs 
differ across technologies.

We note that the profit potential 𝑣(𝛼) of flexible firms is again U-
shaped; the proof is similar to that in the one-sector model (we provide 
a proof in the Internet Appendix). In addition, the profit potential is 
minimized at ℎ(𝑘) = 𝑠0, with 𝑣(𝑠0) = 0. Thus, Assumption  1 is no longer 
needed.

Workers choose a contract in 𝛤  or unemployment (with outside 
utility normalized to zero, 𝑢 = 0). Let 𝐹𝜄 denote the mass of firms in 
Sector 𝜄 ∈ {0, 1} a Date 1. We now use 𝐴(𝛤 ) to denote the set of profit-
maximizing locations for flexible (i.e., Sector 1) firms. Next, we define 
the  competitive  equilibrium  in  the  case  of  endogenous  technology 
choice.

Definition 2.  For given 𝐹0 and 𝐹1, a competitive equilibrium is a set 
of locations 𝛤 ∗ and functions 𝑝∗
𝑙0(𝑠0, 𝑤0), and 
𝑝∗
𝑙1(𝑠1, 𝑤1) such that

𝑑1(𝑠1, 𝑤1), 𝑝∗

𝑑0(𝑠0, 𝑤0), 𝑝∗

1. Firms maximize profit: 𝑝∗

𝑑1(𝑠1, 𝑤1) > 0 only if (𝑠1, 𝑤1) ∈ 𝐴(𝛤 ∗), 

and 𝑝∗

𝑑0(𝑠0, 𝑤0) > 0 only if 𝜋(𝑠0, 𝑤0) ≥ 0.
2. Workers maximize utility: For 𝜄 ∈ {0, 1}, 𝑝∗

(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄) ∈ 𝐵𝛼(𝛤 ∗) for some 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1).

𝑙𝜄(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄) > 0 only if 

3. Supply equals demand: 𝐹𝜄𝑝∗

𝑑𝜄(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄) = 𝐿𝑝∗

𝑙𝜄(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄), for all (𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄) ∈

𝛤 ∗, 𝜄 ∈ {0, 1}.

4. The assignment is efficient and feasible: (i) if a worker of type 
𝛼 chooses location (𝑠∗
1𝛼), then 𝑠∗
𝑑0(𝑠0, 𝑤0) = 1
1𝛼
(all inflexible firms choose the same location); and (iii) the mass 
of employed workers in each sector 𝜄 ∈ {0, 1} must be

1𝛼 = ℎ(𝛼); (ii) 𝑝∗

, 𝑤∗

𝐹𝜄 ∫

(𝑠𝜄,𝑤𝜄)∈𝛤 ∗

𝑝∗
𝑑𝜄(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄)𝑑(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄) = 𝐿 ∫

(𝑠𝜄,𝑤𝜄)∈𝛤 ∗

𝑝∗
𝑙𝜄(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄)𝑑(𝑠𝜄, 𝑤𝜄).

The argument of Lemma  1 continues to hold in the case where 
the entrepreneur chooses between the two technologies, which implies 
𝐹1 < 𝐿. Because there is no cost in setting up an inflexible firm (𝐾0 = 0), 
then we must have 𝐹0 + 𝐹1 = 𝐿, that is, all workers must be employed 
in equilibrium.12

We can now write the equivalent of Lemma  2 for the case with 

endogenous technology choice. 

Lemma 3.   Firms in the inflexible sector have zero profit (i.e. 𝜋(𝑠0, 𝑤0) =
0) and firms in the flexible sector have strictly positive profit 𝜋(𝑠1, 𝑤1) =
𝜋∗ > 0.

The next proposition shows the existence and uniqueness of the 

equilibrium. 

Proposition  4  (Equilibrium  Existence  and  Uniqueness).  A  competitive 
equilibrium exists for any 𝐾1 > 0. The equilibrium is given by a unique 
type 𝑧∗ ∈ (𝑘, 1) such that 𝑣(𝑧∗) = 𝐾1, and 𝐹 ∗
1  is given by (6) and (7). 
The equilibrium locations are 𝛤 ∗ = {(𝑠∗
0)}, 
1𝛼
where 𝑠∗
0 = 𝑦 − 𝑐(𝑠0), and 

1𝛼) for 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1)} ∪ {(𝑠0, 𝑤∗

1𝛼 = ℎ(𝛼), 𝑤∗

, 𝑤∗

𝑤∗

1𝛼 =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝑦 − 𝑐(𝑠∗

[

1𝛼) − 𝑣(𝑧∗)
𝑦 − 𝑐(𝑠∗

𝑤 ∈

1𝛼) − 𝑣(𝑧∗),

𝛼𝑠0+(1−𝛼)𝑤∗
0
1−𝛼

]

−𝛼𝑠∗
1𝛼

if 𝛼 ∉ (𝜙(𝑧∗), 𝑧∗)
if 𝛼 ∈ (𝜙(𝑧∗), 𝑧∗)

.

The supply and demand conditions imply 𝑝∗

𝑑1(𝑠1, 𝑤1) =

(12)

𝐹 ∗
1
𝐿

𝑝∗
𝑙1(𝑠1, 𝑤1), 

𝑙1(𝑠∗
𝑝∗

1𝛼, 𝑤∗

1𝛼) =

{ 𝑝(𝛼)
0

if 𝛼 ∉ (𝜙(𝑧∗), 𝑧∗)
if 𝛼 ∈ (𝜙(𝑧∗), 𝑧∗)
𝑙0(𝑠0, 𝑤∗

𝑑0(𝑠0, 𝑤∗
𝑝∗

0) = 1, and 𝐹 ∗

0 = 𝐿𝑝∗

0) = 𝐿(𝑃 (𝑧∗) − 𝑃 (𝜙(𝑧∗))).

,

(13)

12 If 𝐾0 > 0, then we can have 𝐹0 + 𝐹1 < 𝐿 in equilibrium. Because our 
main results are the same in this case, we leave the analysis of this case to 
the Internet Appendix.

6 

The  proof  of  this  proposition  essentially  replicates  the  steps  in 
the proof of Proposition  2 and is thus omitted. In equilibrium, en-
trepreneurs  in  the  flexible  sector  make  zero  ex-ante  profit:  𝛱 ∗
1 =
𝜋∗
1 − 𝐾1 = 0. Similarly, entrepreneurs will enter the inflexible sector 
until their ex-post profits are zero. Only workers end up with pos-
itive  surpluses  in  equilibrium.  This  makes  sense:  Labor  is  the  only 
scarce resource in this economy. As before, the equilibrium degree of 
polarization is 𝜌∗ = 𝑠∗

𝑧∗ − 𝑠∗

𝜙(𝑧∗).

When there are two sectors, it is natural to ask how the equilibrium 
changes with 𝑠0, the 𝑠-quality in the inflexible sector. The next corollary 
shows that a corner solution arises when 𝑠0 is sufficiently low.

Corollary 5 (Corner Solution).  There exists 𝑠′
𝑠∗
𝜙(𝑧) = 0.

0 such that, if 𝑠0

≤ 𝑠′

0, 

≤ 𝑠′

For 𝑠0 sufficiently low (i.e., 𝑠0

0), no low-𝛼 worker works in 
the flexible sector. The degree of polarization in the flexible sector 
becomes 𝜌∗ = 𝑠∗
𝑧. Thus, the flexible sector becomes ‘‘the high-𝑠 sector’’ 
and the inflexible sector ‘‘the low-𝑠 sector’’.13 In that case, a more 
appropriate polarization measure is 𝜌∗
𝑧 − 𝑠0, which captures the 
‘‘between-sector’’ polarization.

𝑏 ∶= 𝑠∗

The next result shows how the degree of polarization changes with 

the cost of acquiring the flexible technology. 

Corollary 6 (Technology Cost and Polarization). A higher cost of acquiring 
the flexible technology, 𝐾1, increases equilibrium polarization, 𝜌∗ (or 𝜌∗
𝑏 , in 
case of a corner solution), and decreases the equilibrium mass of flexible 
firms, 𝐹 ∗
1 .

Intuitively, an increase in the cost of flexibility reduces the equilib-
rium supply of flexibility. As flexibility becomes scarcer, it is allocated 
only to workers with extreme preferences, thus increasing polarization. 
An increase in 𝐾1 also increases the degree of polarization between 
sectors, 𝜌∗
𝑏 . Although polarization increases with 𝐾1, Sector 1 becomes 
smaller.  Thus,  the  effect  of  𝐾1  on  the  ‘‘average  dispersion’’  in  job 
attributes across sectors, 

𝐹 ∗
1
The distribution of preferences over the 𝑠-attribute may change over 
time. For example, some workers may become more concerned about 
the environmental impact of their firms. If 𝑠 measures the extent to 
which firms use green technologies, such workers would now have 
higher 𝛼. At the same time, it is possible that some workers become
less concerned about the environment, for example, if they think that 
environmental concerns have been overblown and politicized. Such 
workers would then have a lower 𝛼.

𝜌∗, is ambiguous.

𝐹 ∗
0
+𝐹 ∗
0

𝐹 ∗
1
+𝐹 ∗
0

× 0 =

𝜌∗ +

𝐹 ∗
1
𝐿

𝐹 ∗
1

What  would  happen  if  workers  became  more  polarized  in  their 
tastes for the 𝑠-attribute? To answer this question, we consider changes 
in 𝑃 (.) that shift density away from moderate preferences. Mas-Colell 
et al. (1995, p. 198) define an elementary increase in risk as follows: 
‘‘𝐺(.) constitutes an elementary increase in risk from 𝐹 (.) if 𝐺(.) is generated 
from 𝐹 (.) by taking all the mass that 𝐹 (.) assigns to an interval [𝑥′, 𝑥′′]
and transferring it to the end-points 𝑥′ and 𝑥′′ in such a manner that the 
mean is preserved.’’ We generalize the notion of increase in risk and say 
that  ̂𝑃 (.) is a generalized increase in risk from 𝑃 (.) if  ̂𝑃 (.) is generated 
from 𝑃 (.) by taking some of the mass that 𝑃 (.) assigns to an interval 
[𝑥′, 𝑥′′] and transferring it to points smaller than 𝑥′ and greater than 
𝑥′′ in such a manner that the mean is preserved. Formally,  ̂𝑃 (.) is a 
generalized increase in risk from 𝑃 (.) if (i) ∫ 𝑥′′
̂𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼

𝑥′ 𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 > ∫ 𝑥′′

𝑥′

13 In  this  case,  flexible  firms  match  with  workers  with  large  𝛼’s.  If  we 
had multiple technologies with varying degrees of flexibility, more flexible 
firms would match with workers with stronger preferences for 𝑠. Thus, the 
equilibrium would display assortative matching. This special corner-solution 
case does not arise in a more general model where 𝛼 ∈ [−1, 1], as discussed in 
the Internet Appendix. Generally, under an interior equilibrium, no intrinsic 
worker characteristic matches monotonically with firm characteristics. Thus, 
our model typically does not display positive or negative assortative matching.

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

0 𝛼𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 = ∫ 1

and (ii) ∫ 1
0 𝛼 ̂𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼. It is immediate that a generalized 
increase in risk is a mean-preserving spread (and thus 𝑃 (.) second-order 
stochastically dominates  ̂𝑃 (.)). Then, we have the following result:

Because a larger 𝐾1 implies a smaller number of flexible firms in 
equilibrium, we interpret an increase in 𝐾1 as an increase in ‘‘concen-
tration’’. Then, we have the following prediction: 

Corollary 7 (Taste Dispersion and Number of Firms). If  ̂𝑃 (.) is a gener-
alized increase in risk from 𝑃 (.) for 𝑥′ = 𝜙(𝑧∗) and 𝑥′′ = 𝑧∗, then the 
equilibrium mass of flexible firms is larger under  ̂𝑃 (.) than under 𝑃 (.).

Intuitively, all else equal, an increase in taste dispersion increases 
the  benefit  of  acquiring  the  flexible  technology.  Thus,  more  firms 
want to enter Sector 1. Notice that an increase in taste dispersion has 
no effect on equilibrium firm polarization. This result shows that firm 
polarization is primarily a technological phenomenon driven by the 
scarcity of flexible technologies.

. Let 𝑎 ∶= 𝛼

To derive further predictions, we now consider a parametric version 
of the model with a closed-form solution. The cost function is quadratic: 
𝑐(𝑠) = 𝑠2
1−𝛼  denote the marginal rate of substitution between 
2
𝑠 and 𝑤. For convenience, from now on, we refer to 𝑎 as the worker’s 
type. Zero profit in the inflexible sector (Lemma  3) implies 𝑤∗
. 
The optimal level of the 𝑠-attribute in the flexible sector is 𝑠∗ = 𝑎. The 
profit potential as a function of 𝑎 is 𝑣(𝑎) = 𝑦−𝑤∗
, 
which is strictly U-shaped in 𝑎 (consistent with Proposition  1). The 
type that minimizes 𝑣(𝑎) is 𝑎𝑘 = 𝑠0. Let 𝑎∗
𝑧 denote the equilibrium 
threshold for a given 𝐾1, assuming an interior equilibrium. That is, 
𝑣(𝑎∗

𝜙(𝑧)) = 𝐾1. Solving these conditions proves the next result. 

0 −𝑎𝑠0 + 𝑎2

−𝑎𝑠0 + 𝑎2

𝑧) = 𝑣(𝑎∗

0 = 𝑦 −

𝑠2
0
2

𝑠2
0
2

=

2

2

2𝐾1, 𝑠0 +
𝑠2
0
2

Proposition 5 (Equilibrium in the Quadratic Cost Case). In an interior 
)
equilibrium of the quadratic cost case, types 𝑎 ∈

√

√

(

𝑠0 −

2𝐾1

work in the inflexible sector and are paid wage 𝑤∗
𝑎 ≤ 𝑠0 −
wage 𝑤∗(𝑎) = 𝑦 − 𝐾1 − 𝑎2

2𝐾1 and 𝑎 ≥ 𝑠0 +
.

, and types 
2𝐾1 work in the flexible sector and are paid 

0 = 𝑦 −

√

√

2

Wages decrease with 𝑎 (consistent with Corollary  3). Consistent with 
Corollary  1, flexible firms are polarized. The equilibrium degree of 
polarization is 
√

(14)

𝜌∗ = 2

2𝐾1.

Consistent with Corollary  6, the degree of polarization increases with 
𝐾1.

To understand the effect of 𝐾1 on the average dispersion in 𝑠 across 
sectors, as well as the relation between polarization and average wages, 
we now assume that 𝑎 is uniformly distributed on [𝑎𝑘 − 𝛥, 𝑎𝑘 + 𝛥].14 
Parameter 𝛥 measures the dispersion of preferences for 𝑠 around the 
mean 𝑎𝑘. We focus on the case where 𝛥 >
2𝐾1, that is, an interior 
solution exists.

√

𝛥

√

√
)
2

(
2𝐾1
1 −
𝛥
)(2𝐾1)− 1

With uniform preferences the average dispersion in 𝑠 across sectors 
𝐹 ∗
𝜌∗ =
2𝐾1. The effect of 𝐾1 on the average dispersion 
is 
1
𝐿
is 2(1 − 𝜌∗
2 , which is positive if and only if 𝜌∗ < 𝛥. That is, the 
average dispersion in 𝑠 depends on the distribution of the underlying 
preferences for the 𝑠-attribute. Intuitively, if the underlying preferences 
are  extreme  (i.e.,  sufficiently  high  𝛥),  an  increase  in  𝐾1  increases 
both within-sector polarization and the average dispersion in 𝑠 across 
sectors.

Averaging  𝑤∗(𝑎)  over  all  types  employed  in  the  flexible  sector 

defines the average wage in that sector: 
𝑤∗ ∶= 𝑦 − 𝐾1 − 𝑀 ∗,
where 𝑀 ∗ is the average monetary cost of producing 𝑠: 

𝑀 ∗ ∶=

∫ 𝑎𝜙(𝑧∗)
𝑎𝑘−𝛥 𝑎2𝑑𝑎 + ∫ 𝑎𝑘+𝛥
)
2𝐾1
𝛥 −

(
4

𝑎𝑧∗

√

𝑎2𝑑𝑎

𝑠2
0
2

=

+

𝛥2
6

+

𝛥
6

√

2𝐾1 +

𝐾1
3

.

(15)

(16)

Prediction 2.   In more concentrated sectors, firms are more polarized, 
the profit is higher, and the average wage is lower.

In more concentrated sectors, i.e., sectors with higher entry costs 
and  therefore  fewer  firms  (𝐹1),  there  is  less  competition  for  those 
workers  qualified  to  work  in  the  sector.  Because  firms  first  target 
workers with extreme preferences, polarization in 𝑠-quality is more 
pronounced when there are fewer firms.

The dispersion in worker preferences for 𝑠-quality, measured by 𝛥, 
has no impact on polarization or profits because entry into the flexible 
sector offsets the effect of 𝛥 on profits. However, 𝛥 affects the average 
wage:

Prediction 3.   In sectors with more dispersion in worker preferences 
for 𝑠-quality, the average wage is lower.

This result is closely related to Corollary  7. An increase in 𝛥 is 
an increase in risk: it removes mass from intermediate values of 𝑎
and  reallocates  this  mass  to  the  tails  without  changing  the  mean. 
The average wage decreases because the average cost of producing 𝑠
increases due to the convexity of the cost function.

An extensive empirical literature documents a decline in the labor 
share of value added (Autor et al., 2020; Covarrubias et al., 2019; 
Barkai, 2020). Here, we consider the relationship between the flexible 
sector’s labor share and firm polarization in job quality. Formally, the 
flexible sector’s labor share is defined (in the general model) as 

Labor share ∶=

𝐿 ∫ 𝜙(𝛼𝑧)
0
𝐹1𝜋∗ + 𝐿 ∫ 𝜙(𝛼𝑧)

0

𝑤(𝛼)𝑑𝑃 (𝛼) + 𝐿 ∫ 1
𝛼𝑧

𝑤(𝛼)𝑑𝑃 (𝛼)

𝑤(𝛼)𝑑𝑃 (𝛼) + 𝐿 ∫ 1
𝛼𝑧

𝑤(𝛼)𝑑𝑃 (𝛼)

,

(17)

where the numerator is the sector’s aggregate wage bill, and the denom-
inator is the sector’s (financial) value added. In the quadratic-uniform 
case, we can rewrite the labor share as 
𝑦 − 𝐾1 − 𝑀 ∗
𝑦 − 𝑀 ∗

Labor share =

(18)

,

which is the average wage over the average value added. The next 
proposition shows that firm polarization is negatively related to the 
labor share. 

Proposition  6  (Polarization  and  the  Labor  Share).  In  the  quadratic-
uniform case, the labor share decreases with 𝐾1 and 𝛥.

If 𝐾1 increases, fewer firms enter the flexible sector, polarization 
increases, and the post-entry profit increases, pushing the labor share 
down. An increase in the dispersion in preferences for 𝑠 reduces the 
average wage (see Prediction  3) without changing profits, thus reducing 
the labor share.

4. Outside investors

In this section, we introduce a new type of agent: outside investors. 
Just like entrepreneurs and workers, investors are atomistic. For sim-
plicity, we assume that the outside investors’ identities do not overlap 
with those of other agents (workers and entrepreneurs). In the Internet 
Appendix,  we  consider  the  possibility  of  such  an  overlap.  Outside 
investors can buy shares from entrepreneurs; we normalize the number 
of shares in each firm to one. After acquiring shares, outside investors 
hold them until the end of the period, when firms are liquidated and 
profits  are  paid  out  as  dividends.  There  is  no  time  discounting  or 
uncertainty.15

14 Equivalently,  𝛼  is  distributed  according  to  c.d.f.  𝑃 (𝛼) =
[ 𝑎𝑘−𝛥
1+𝑎𝑘−𝛥

𝑎𝑘+𝛥
1+𝑎𝑘+𝛥

].

,

𝛼

1−𝛼   on 

15 The lack of risk in our model can be alternatively interpreted as perfect 
risk sharing. Suppose that each firm produces 𝑦 + 𝜖, with 𝜖 idiosyncratic. One 
can perfectly diversify away all risks by holding shares in a mass of firms.

7 

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

We assume that an investor who holds a share of a firm that offers 
contract (𝑠, 𝑤) and pays 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) as a dividend enjoys utility 𝛺(𝑠, 𝑤) =
𝛽𝑠 + (1 − 𝛽)𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤), where 𝛽 ∈ [0, 1]. Just as with 𝛼, we can interpret 𝛽 as 
an investor’s relative preference over 𝑠-quality and money.16 Investors 
may care about 𝑠-quality directly if they prefer to invest in companies 
offering  better  job  conditions.  They  may  also  care  about  𝑠-quality 
indirectly  if  they  share  some  of  their  employees’  values,  such  as  a 
concern for sustainability or environmental responsibility.

To simplify the analysis while conveying the main message, we 
assume only two types of outside investors: 𝛽 = 0 and 𝛽 > 0. We 
call investors of the first type ‘‘profit-driven investors’’ (or 𝜋-investors) 
and the second ‘‘socially responsible investors’’ (or 𝑠-investors). Using 
Stark’s (2023) terminology, profit-driven investors care about financial
value, while socially responsible investors also care about values.17 We 
assume that both investor types are in large supply. This assumption 
implies that, unlike much (but not all) of the literature, introducing 
socially responsible investors expands the set of financing choices, thus 
increasing the options available to all flexible entrepreneurs.

Outside  investors  can  buy  shares  in  both  flexible  and  inflexible 
firms. To introduce a trading stage, we assume that entrepreneurs first 
set up their firms and then sell shares to outside investors. Operating 
costs, 𝑤 + 𝑐(𝑠), are paid out of current cash flows, 𝑦, whenever possible. 
If 𝑦 < 𝑤 + 𝑐(𝑠), the firm uses its working capital to plug the difference. 
To invest in working capital, a firm needs to raise funds from outside 
investors. Let 𝑒1(𝑠, 𝑤) + 𝑒2(𝑠, 𝑤) denote the total amount that outside 
investors  pay  in  exchange  for  one  share  of  a  company  that  offers 
contract (𝑠, 𝑤), where 𝑒1(𝑠, 𝑤) is the amount raised in a primary offering 
(i.e., the funds stay in the firm) and 𝑒2(𝑠, 𝑤) is the secondary offering 
amount (i.e., the proceeds go to the entrepreneur).

Suppose first that 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝑦−𝑤−𝑐(𝑠) ≥ 0, so that there is no need to 
raise primary funds (i.e., 𝑒1(𝑠, 𝑤) = 0). Then, an investor may acquire a 
share by paying 𝑒2(𝑠, 𝑤) to the entrepreneur. The investor later collects 
𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) as a dividend. If 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) < 0, the investor funds the expected loss 
by paying 𝑒1(𝑠, 𝑤) = −𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) into the firm when acquiring the share 
and later receives zero dividends. In either case, the shareholder’s net 
utility from buying one share is 𝛺(𝑠, 𝑤) − 𝑒2(𝑠, 𝑤).

For simplicity, we proceed with the quadratic cost function (none 
of  the  results  in  this  section  depend  on  the  type  distribution).  To 
characterize the equilibrium, we note first that the efficient 𝑠 level for a 
firm owned by a socially responsible investor depends on 𝛽. Suppose a 
socially responsible investor matches with a worker of type 𝑎. Using 
the same reasoning as before, we can show that, under a quadratic 
cost function (𝑐(𝑠) = 𝑠2
), 𝑠∗(𝑎, 𝑏) = 𝑎 + 𝑏, where 𝑏 = 𝛽
. The socially 
1−𝛽
responsible investor increases the efficient 𝑠 level by 𝑏.

2

Do socially responsible investors affect 𝑠 levels through ‘‘impact’’ 
(i.e.,  voice)  or  ‘‘divestment’’  (i.e.,  exit)?  Because  the  model  has  no 
frictions, either channel delivers the same result. To see this, suppose 
the entrepreneur cannot commit to a contract; any contract between a 
worker and an entrepreneur can be renegotiated after the firm is sold to 
a socially responsible investor, and either party can unilaterally exit. In 
this case, the socially responsible investor and the worker will always 
renegotiate  the  contract  and  agree  to  the  efficient  𝑠  level,  𝑠∗(𝑎, 𝑏). 
Under this interpretation, socially responsible investors are ‘‘impact 
investors’’.

16 More generally, let 𝛺(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) + 𝛽𝐻(𝑠, 𝑤). Here we consider the 
case of 𝐻(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝑠 − 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤). In the Internet Appendix, we also consider two 
alternative cases: 𝐻(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝑠 − 𝑠0 and 𝐻(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝑠 + 𝑤 − 𝑠0 − 𝑤0. In the latter 
case, investors may care about wages due to concerns about workers’ welfare.
17 This preference is of a ‘‘warm-glow’’ type. Investors may also care about 
the aggregate value of 𝑠 in the economy, regardless of their shareholdings 
(in Oehmke and Opp’s (2025) language, they could have a ‘‘broad mandate’’). 
However, because investors are atomistic, such preferences would have no 
impact on firm outcomes. Pástor et al. (2021) reach a similar conclusion in an 
asset pricing model with atomistic investors; Dangl et al. (2025) also make a 
similar point.

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

Suppose, instead, an entrepreneur commits to a contract (𝑠, 𝑤). To 
maximize the price of the share, the entrepreneur should choose con-
tract (𝑠∗(𝑎, 𝑏), 𝑤∗(𝑎, 𝑏)) because it maximizes the surplus for a socially 
responsible  investor.  That  is,  the  most  profitable  way  of  attracting 
investors is choosing the efficient 𝑠 level. Socially responsible investors 
would not invest at an attractive price unless the entrepreneur commits 
to (𝑠∗(𝑎, 𝑏), 𝑤∗(𝑎, 𝑏)).

The next result characterizes the equilibrium outcomes in the inflex-

ible sector.

Proposition 7 (Inflexible Sector Equilibrium). In an equilibrium with two 
types of shareholders and 𝑐(𝑠) = 𝑠2
, only 𝑠-investors buy shares of inflexible 
𝑠2
firms. The equilibrium wage in the inflexible sector is 𝑤∗
2  and 
0
firm profit is 𝜋(𝑠0, 𝑤∗

0 = 𝑏𝑠0 + 𝑦 −

0) = −𝑏𝑠0.

2

Proposition  7 shows two important results. First, because socially 
responsible investors accept lower profits in exchange for ‘‘purpose’’, 
zero-entry  costs  in  the  inflexible  sector  imply  that  the  equilibrium 
profit in that sector is negative. Second, because the profit is negative, 
profit-driven investors do not buy shares in inflexible firms.

We now consider the equilibrium in the flexible sector. Let 𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏)
denote the profit potential when an 𝑠-investor matches with a type-𝑎
worker. As in Proposition  1, it is easy to verify that 𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏) is U-shaped 
in 𝑎. We use 𝑣(𝑎, 0) to denote the profit potential under a 𝜋-investor. 
We have the following result: 

Proposition 8 (Profit Potential and Investor Type). Let 𝑐(𝑠) = 𝑠2
𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏) ≥ 𝑣(𝑎, 0) if and only if 𝑎 ∈

[𝑎−, 𝑎+]

, where18

2

. We have 

{𝑎−, 𝑎+}

∶= 1 + 𝑠0 ±

√

1 + 2𝑠0
1 − 𝛽

.

This proposition implies that 𝑠-investors create more value if matc-
hed  with  workers  with  intermediate  preferences,  while  𝜋-investors 
create more value if matched with workers with extreme preferences. 
This  result  holds  because  the  profit  potential  function  is  U-shaped; 
workers with intermediate preferences should be matched with socially 
responsible investors because such investors care less about profits. Fig. 
2 illustrates 𝑣(𝑎, 0) (solid line) and 𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏) (dashed line). The unique 
equilibrium is given by 𝑣(𝑎) = 𝐾1, once we define 𝑣(𝑎):19
 for 𝑎 ∉ (𝑎−, 𝑎+)
 for 𝑎 ∈ (𝑎−, 𝑎+)

𝑣(𝑎) ∶= max {𝑣(𝑎, 0), 𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏)} =

{ 𝑣(𝑎, 0)
𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏)

(19)

.

That is, 𝑣(𝑎) is the upper envelope (in red) in Fig.  2.

Let 𝑎𝑧 denote the equilibrium marginal worker type. Firm (𝑠∗(𝑎𝑧),
𝑤∗(𝑎𝑧)) will be sold for 𝑒2(𝑠∗(𝑎𝑧), 𝑤∗(𝑎𝑧)) = 𝑣(𝑎𝑧), which will also be the 
price for all other flexible firms (all flexible entrepreneurs must make 
the same profit from selling their shares). Because 𝑣(𝑎) ≥ 𝑣(𝑎, 0), the 
entrepreneurs’ are (weakly) better off when 𝑠-investors are available.

If 𝑎𝑧

min{𝑎−, 𝜙(𝑎𝑧)}, 𝑎+]

≥ 𝑎+, then 𝑠-investors do not invest in the flexible sector. If 
𝑎𝑧 < 𝑎+, 𝑠-investors buy shares in firms that hire workers of types 
, while 𝜋-investors buy shares in firms that 
𝑎 ∈
hire workers of types 𝑎 ≤ min{𝑎−, 𝜙(𝑎𝑧)} and 𝑎 ≥ 𝑎+. In either case, 
the equilibrium displays perfect segmentation: 𝜋-investors buy shares in 
firms where workers have extreme preferences for 𝑠 and 𝑠-investors buy 
shares in firms matched with workers with intermediate preferences.20

[

[𝛼−, 𝛼+]

}

, where 𝛼− ∶= max{ 𝑎−

1+𝑎− , 0} and 𝛼+ ∶=

18 Equivalently, we have 𝛼 ∈
𝑎+
1+𝑎+ .
19 The analysis can be easily generalized to any number 𝑚 of different types 
of investors, {𝑏1, … , 𝑏𝑚
20 Perfect segmentation is a consequence of the assumption of no uncertainty 
(or, equivalently, perfect risk-sharing). If we instead assume that risk exists 
and the number of firms is finite, then diversification would give investors 
incentives to hold shares of all firms. In that case, 𝑠-investors would ‘‘tilt’’ 
their portfolios towards stocks in which 𝑎 ∈
, while 𝜋-investors would 
tilt their portfolio away from such stocks.

, by defining 𝑣(𝑎) = max

{𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏1), … , 𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏𝑚)

[𝑎−, 𝑎+]

}
.

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Fig. 2.  Profit potential with socially-responsible investors.

Fig. 3.  Perfect segmentation in equilibrium.

Fig.  3 illustrates this result for the case in which 𝑎𝑧 < 𝑎+ and 𝜙(𝑎𝑧) < 𝑎−. 
At first glance, the equilibrium in Fig.  3 may seem counterintuitive. 
Why  wouldn’t  socially  responsible  investors  be  more  likely  to  buy 
shares in high-𝑎 firms? Aren’t they willing to pay more for firms with 
high 𝑠 levels? Our model reveals that the equilibrium effects are subtler 
than this intuition. Firms that hire workers with very strong preferences 
for  𝑠  create  large  surpluses  (see  Proposition   1).  Thus,  profit-driven 
investors  will  target  such  firms  because  of  the  potential  to  extract 
large profits. Although competition among profit-driven investors will 
drive their returns to zero,21 profit-driven investors have a comparative 
advantage over socially responsible investors in companies where the 
profit potential is high. Similarly, socially responsible investors have a 
comparative advantage in the market for low-profit firms.22

21 Note there is no risk or time discounting in our environment, thus zero 
return is the fair compensation for their investments.
22 In the Internet Appendix, we show that when workers are also investors, 
they typically do not invest in firms of the same type of the firms they work 
for.

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

An  increase  in  𝑏–the  intensity  of  socially  responsible  investors’ 
preferences  for  the  𝑠-attribute–decreases  𝑎−  and  increases  𝑎+,  thus 
widening the range of worker types for which 𝑠-investors have an ad-
vantage relative to 𝜋-investors. A larger 𝑏 also indicates more extreme 
shareholder preferences with respect to the 𝑠 attribute. Thus, all else 
constant, an increase in risk in shareholder preferences increases the 
number of entrepreneurs willing to sell shares to 𝑠-investors and the 
flexible firms’ market values. Conversely, a generalized increase in risk 
in worker preferences would reduce the number of entrepreneurs who 
sell to socially responsible investors but also increases market values.

Our main result in this section is: 

Proposition 9.   Sustainable investing amplifies firm polarization.

With sustainable investing, some investors have greater tolerance 
for financial losses, which increases the workers’ relative bargaining 
power. Thus, for a given location 𝑗, flexible firms are less profitable 
when the economy features both 𝑠-investors and 𝜋-investors. Fewer 
firms  find  it  profitable  to  acquire  the  flexible  technology,  reducing 
the equilibrium supply of flexibility. Because flexible firms cater to 
workers with more extreme preferences, polarization increases when 
the number of flexible firms decreases.

The next proposition compares market valuations and stock returns 

between flexible and inflexible firms. 

Proposition 10 (Flexibility, Firm Value, and Stock Returns). Relative to 
inflexible firms, flexible firms have higher market valuations and higher 
expected stock returns.

While it is not always clear which sectors or industries have flexible 
technologies, such sectors can be empirically identified by their within-
sector 𝑠-attribute polarization (i.e., how polarized they are in their 
𝑠 choices), which can be measured by ESG metrics or other similar 
variables.  The  model  then  predicts  high  firm  valuations  in  sectors 
with high polarization in ESG scores. Similarly, expected stock returns 
should be higher in sectors where firms are more polarized in their ESG 
choices (or other similar variables that are viewed positively by both 
workers and investors).

If 𝑠0 is sufficiently low, in equilibrium we have 𝑠∗(𝜙(𝑎𝑧), 𝑏) = 0, im-
plying that the flexible sector has only high 𝑠-quality firms. Thus, if the 
inflexible sector has very low 𝑠-quality or if the cost of producing 𝑠 falls 
sufficiently, we have a segmented equilibrium that is also monotonic: 
all firms with 𝑎 < 𝑎𝑧 are held by socially responsible investors and those 
with 𝑎 > 𝑎𝑧 are held by traditional investors (in Fig.  3, the first region 
disappears). In that case, expected returns are (weakly) increasing in 𝑠
and predictable: even if 𝑠 is not observed by investors, wages are.

The model also predicts a link between employee satisfaction and 
expected  stock  returns.  In  particular,  firms  with  the  highest  stock 
returns are flexible firms sold to profit-driven investors. These firms 
also have the highest levels of employee satisfaction (measured by 𝑈 ∗
𝛼 , 
which is the willingness to pay for a job). Because employee satisfaction 
is also 𝑈 -shaped in equilibrium, the firms with the lowest employee 
satisfaction scores are inflexible firms. Such firms also have the lowest 
stock returns. While the relationship between firm-level employee sat-
isfaction and stock returns does not need to be monotonic, the model 
predicts that firms at the upper end of employee satisfaction will have 
higher returns than firms at the low end of employee satisfaction.

5. Related literature

While the empirical literature on compensating differentials is vast, 
there are few works on the theory of compensating differentials. Our 
model is inspired by Rosen (1986), who models firms that compete by 
offering bundles of wages and non-wage attributes (see Lavetti (2023) 
for a recent review of the Rosen framework). Unlike Rosen (1986) and 
the subsequent literature, we assume that firms need to pay a fixed 
cost to operate. As a consequence, firms will not employ workers with 

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

intermediate preferences. Thus, firm polarization arises in our setup, 
but not elsewhere in the compensating differentials literature.

Berk et al. (2010) make an important contribution to the theory 
of compensating differentials in competitive markets by developing a 
model in which risk-averse workers accept lower wages in exchange 
for job stability. They show that firms that commit to job stability 
choose lower debt levels. If workers are heterogeneous in risk aversion, 
firms will cater to them by offering different bundles of wages and debt 
levels. In our model, firms cater to heterogeneous workers by offering 
different bundles of 𝑠-quality and wages, but this catering is incomplete 
because workers with intermediate preferences are excluded. Because 
of this exclusion, firms become polarized.23

Our paper is also related to the vast theoretical literature on socially 
responsible investing, which has developed since the pioneering work 
of Heinkel et al. (2001). As in the compensating differentials literature, 
in those models, firms typically can choose the level of some nonpecu-
niary attribute, such as ESG levels, to cater to investor preferences (see, 
e.g., Heinkel et al. (2001), Pástor et al. (2021), Berk and van Binsbergen 
(2025), Pedersen et al. (2021), Goldstein et al. (2022), Landier and 
Lovo  (2025),  Piatti  et  al.  (2023)).24  Our  paper  contributes  to  this 
literature in three ways. First, we analyze the interaction between labor 
markets and financial markets, and show that if workers also have 
social preferences, in equilibrium, firms will cater to both workers and 
investors. Second, we show that firms become polarized in equilibrium 
and  employ  only  workers  with  extreme  preferences.  Third,  socially 
responsible investing amplifies firm polarization.

Related  to  our  work,  Wu  and  Zechner  (2024)  develop  a  model 
in  which  firms  cater  to  the  political  preferences  of  their  investors. 
A political stance is a ‘‘controversial good:’’ it is liked by some and 
disliked by others. Firms become polarized by catering to these dif-
ferent preferences. In our model, 𝑠-quality is an uncontroversial good. 
Firm polarization arises only because the cost of entering an industry 
implies that workers with moderate preferences are excluded. Thus, 
firms amplify the polarization in underlying preferences.

Our model is related to models of sustainable investing that con-
sider the interactions between financial markets and corporate insiders, 
such as employees and managers (e.g., Davies and Van Wesep (2018), 
Stoughton et al. (2020), Xiong and Yang (2025), Albuquerque et al. 
(2019), Bisceglia et al. (2022), Bucourt and Inostroza (2023)). Our 
paper is also related to a small theoretical literature on the impact of 
organization and job design on labor market sorting (Van den Steen, 
2005; Van den Steen, 2010; Henderson and Van den Steen’s 2015; Song 
et al., 2023; Geelen et al., 2022). Different from these works, our focus 
is on firm polarization.

Our model is related to models of product differentiation and spatial 
competition. In particular, our model resembles Hotelling’s (1929) in 
that firms choose a location along a straight line. In strategic models of 
spatial competition, such as Hotelling (1929), Salop (1979), firms have 
incentives to ‘‘maximally differentiate’’ themselves by locating as far 
apart from one another to gain local market power. Such incentives are 
absent in our model because there are no strategic interactions. Thus, 
the model is closer to Rosen’s (1974) model of product differentiation 
under pure competition. Our firms are price-takers and, thus, most 
firms  choose  to  locate  near  or  at  the  same  point  as  others.  Firm 
polarization nevertheless arises in equilibrium because workers (or in 
the case of product differentiation, consumers) do not enter the market 
in intermediate locations.

23 Ferreira and Nikolowa (2024) provide another example of a compensating 
differentials model à la Rosen. In a dynamic model of careers within firms, 
firms compete for workers who have preferences over money and prestige.
24 A related literature considers the consequences of socially responsible 
investing on corporate outcomes, for example, Chowdry et al. (2019), Oehmke 
and Opp (2025), Edmans et al. (2023), Dangl et al. (2025).

6. Conclusion

When workers prefer purposeful or socially responsible jobs, profit-
maximizing firms will cater to these preferences. By designing jobs with 
these positive attributes, firms can reduce their wage bills. Conversely, 
firms may also benefit from making a job less socially responsible or 
sustainable, as it may be cheaper to produce using ‘‘dirty’’ technologies. 
When dealing with workers who have heterogeneous preferences for 
job attributes, firms will target those with the most extreme prefer-
ences, thereby amplifying the polarized preferences of the underlying 
population.

Firm polarization has several normative and positive implications. 
In the cross-section, firms in more polarized sectors are more valuable. 
This polarization is particularly advantageous for workers with extreme 
preferences. As the distribution of worker preferences becomes more 
polarized, more firms will enter a market, resulting in a greater surplus 
for workers in polarized sectors. Consequently, workers with extreme 
preferences may welcome the dissemination of conflicting information 
that polarizes opinions and entrenches extreme views.

Our model is relevant to the discussion on corporate greenwashing 
and sustainability disclosures by companies. Concerned about firms 
engaging in ‘‘climate cheap talk’’, the SEC has adopted rules to stan-
dardize climate-related disclosures.25 However, firms have few credible 
signals of green credentials at their disposal. Since workers are better 
informed about firms’ green initiatives, if they value these efforts, wage 
concessions can act as a credible signal of such commitments.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Daniel Ferreira: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization.  Radoslawa 
Nikolowa: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Method-
ology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A

Proof (Pareto-efficient Contracts). The Lagrangian for the problem in (1) 
is: 

𝜔𝑓 (𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)) + (1 − 𝜔)𝜋(𝑤, 𝑠) − 𝜆(𝑢 − 𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)) − 𝜇(𝜋 − 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤)). (A.1)

max
𝑠,𝑤

The first-order conditions are: 
𝜔𝛼𝑓 ′(𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)) − (1 − 𝜔)𝑐′(𝑠) + 𝜆𝛼 − 𝜇𝑐′(𝑠) = 0
𝜔(1 − 𝛼)𝑓 ′(𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)) − (1 − 𝜔) + 𝜆(1 − 𝛼) − 𝜇 = 0.

(A.2)

Only one of the two participation constraints can bind, so there are 
three cases: 𝜆 = 𝜇 = 0, 𝜆 > 0 and 𝜇 = 0, or 𝜆 = 0 and 𝜇 > 0. In each of 
these three cases, from (A.2) we find that  𝛼
= 𝑐′(𝑠𝛼), and therefore 
1−𝛼
)
𝛼 = ℎ(𝛼) = 𝑐′−1( 𝛼
𝑠∗
.

The Pareto frontier is given by 𝜋 = 𝑦 − 𝑢
1−𝛼

𝑠∗(𝛼) − 𝑐(𝑠∗(𝛼)). 
Replacing 𝜋 into 𝜔𝑓 (𝑢𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)) + (1 − 𝜔)𝜋(𝑤, 𝑠) and maximizing it with 
respect  to  𝑢  implies  the  first-order  condition  (assuming  an  interior 
solution): 

+ 𝛼
1−𝛼

1−𝛼

.

𝑓 ′(𝑢∗) =

1
1 − 𝛼

𝜔
1 − 𝜔
The right-hand side is the slope of the Pareto frontier. By construction, 
𝑢∗ is on the Pareto frontier. If 𝜔 increases, then 𝑢∗ must increase. Thus, 

(A.3)

25 https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2024-31.

10 

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

by changing 𝜔, we have  𝜔
1−𝜔  varies from zero to infinity, thus we can 
obtain any value for 𝑢∗ on the frontier. This implies that any point on 
the Pareto frontier can be achieved as we vary 𝜔.  □

Proof  of  Proposition   1.    For  𝜔 = 0,  the  worker’s  participation 
constraint binds, i.e., 𝑢𝛼(𝑠∗
𝛼) = 𝑢. Thus, using the envelope theorem, 
we obtain 

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝑣′(𝛼) = 𝜆(𝑠∗

Since 𝑤∗

𝛼 =

𝛼 − 𝑤∗
𝛼).
𝑢
− 𝛼
1−𝛼
1−𝛼

𝑣′(𝛼) = 𝜆(𝑠∗

𝛼 − 𝑤∗

𝛼) =

𝑠∗
𝛼, we can simplify Eq. (A.4) as follows 
𝑠∗
𝛼 − 𝑢
(1 − 𝛼)2

.

(A.4)

(A.5)

For 𝛼 ∈ (𝜙(𝑧), 𝑧), 𝑣(𝛼) < 𝑣(𝑘) = 𝜋∗ and 𝑝∗
𝑑 (𝑠∗
must be equal to demand, 𝑧 must be given by 

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝛼) = 0. Because supply 

(

𝜙(𝑧)

𝐹 = 𝐿

∫
0

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 + ∫
𝑧

1

)

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼

.

(A.7)

Note  that  the  right-hand  side  of  (A.7)  is  continuous  and  is  strictly 
decreasing in 𝑧. For 𝑧 = 𝑘 the right-hand side is equal to 𝐿 > 𝐹 , and for 
𝑧 = 1, the right-hand side is equal to 0 < 𝐹 . Thus, a unique 𝑧 must exist. 
The equilibrium wages in (8) then follow from the equality of profits 
condition.  □

Proof of Corollary  2.  In equilibrium, 𝐹 < 𝐿, and 𝑧 and 𝜙(𝑧) are such 
that 

Define 𝑘 such that 𝑢 = ℎ(𝑘). For 𝛼 < 𝑘, 𝑣′(𝛼) < 0, and for 𝛼 > 𝑘, 𝑣′(𝛼) > 0, 
that is 𝑣(𝛼) is strictly U-shaped and reaches its minimum value at 𝑘.  □

𝐹 = 𝐿

(

𝜙(𝑧)

∫
0

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 + ∫
𝑧

1

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼

)

.

(A.8)

Proof of Lemma  1.  If 𝐹 > 𝐿, some firms will not employ any workers 
and thus must have zero profit. If firms operating in a location (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈
𝛤  have positive profits, then profit maximization implies that firms 
without workers should instead locate at (𝑠, 𝑤), implying that demand 
is greater than supply and thus not an equilibrium. We conclude that if 
𝐹 > 𝐿, profits must be zero in all active locations (i.e., locations where 
firms operate).  □

𝑗 , 𝑤∗

Proof of Lemma  2.  To show that 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝜋∗ > 0 for all (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈ 𝛤 ∗
such that 𝑝∗
𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) > 0, note first that profit maximization implies that 
all firms must have the same profit in equilibrium, i.e., 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝜋∗ for 
𝑑 (𝑠, 𝑤) > 0. Suppose (𝑠∗
all (𝑠, 𝑤) ∈ 𝛤 ∗ such that 𝑝∗
𝑗 ) is an equilibrium 
location such that 𝜋(𝑠∗
𝑗 ) = 0 and 𝑝∗
𝑗 , 𝑤∗
𝑑 (𝑠𝑗 , 𝑤𝑗 ) > 0. Then, profits must be 
zero in all active markets. Note that the profit potential at its minimum 
is 𝑣(𝑘) = 𝑦 − 𝑢 − 𝑐(𝑢) = 0 (from Assumption  1). Because 𝑣(.) is U-shaped 
and reaches its minimum at 𝑘, we have 𝑣(𝑗) > 𝜋(𝑠∗
𝑗 ) = 0 for all 
𝑗 ), workers of type 𝑗 ≠ 𝑘
𝑗 ≠ 𝑘. This implies that, for a contract (𝑠∗
must enjoy a surplus relative to their outside utility: 𝑢𝑗 (𝑠∗
𝑗 , 𝑤∗
𝑗 ) − 𝑢 > 0. 
Such workers strictly prefer to apply for work. Thus, the only workers 
who do not strictly prefer to apply for positions are those of type 𝑘. 
Because these workers have measure zero, the aggregate labor supply 
is 𝐿. Because 𝐿 > 𝐹 , the labor supply must exceed labor demand, and 
this is not an equilibrium. Thus, we must have 𝜋∗ > 0.  □

𝑗 , 𝑤∗

𝑗 , 𝑤∗

Proof of Proposition  2.  Lemma  2 implies that all active firms must 
have  the  same  profit  𝜋∗ > 0.  Assumption   1  and  Eq.   (A.5)  imply 
𝑣(𝑘) = min[𝛼∈(0,1)] 𝑣(𝛼) = 0. So we must have 𝜋∗ > 𝑣(𝑘) in equilibrium. 
By continuity, there exists 𝑧 > 𝑘 such that 𝑣(𝑧) = 𝜋∗. Suppose that 
𝜋(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) < 𝑣(𝑧) = 𝜋∗. Then, no firm will locate at (𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) (i.e., 𝑝𝑑 (𝑧) =
0), but the workers with 𝛼 = 𝑧 would strictly prefer (𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) to being 
unemployed, implying that the labor supply exceeds the labor demand 
at location (𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧). Thus, we cannot have 𝜋(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) < 𝑣(𝑧). Suppose, 
instead, that 𝜋(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) > 𝑣(𝑧). Then, all firms would like to locate at 
(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧), implying that the labor demand exceeds the labor supply at 
that location. We thus conclude that location (𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) must be such that 
𝜋(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) = 𝑣(𝑧).

Since 𝜋(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) = 𝑣(𝑧), 𝑧 > 𝑘 implies that 𝑧 is in the increasing region 
of the profit potential. Then, from Eq.  (A.5), we have 𝑠𝑧 > 𝑤𝑧. The 
utility of a worker of type 𝛼 who chooses contract (𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) is 𝑢𝛼(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) =
𝑤𝑧 + 𝛼(𝑠𝑧 − 𝑤𝑧). It then follows that 𝑢𝛼(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) > 𝑢𝑧(𝑠𝑧, 𝑤𝑧) = 𝑢 for any 
𝛼 > 𝑧, implying that all 𝛼 > 𝑧 must be employed.

Define 

𝜙(𝛼) ∶= arg max
𝑥∈[0,𝑘]

𝑣(𝑥) ≤ 𝑣(𝛼).

(A.6)

If  𝜙(𝑧) > 0,  then  the  same  argument  applies  and  𝜋(𝑠𝜙(𝑧), 𝑤𝜙(𝑧)) =
𝑣(𝜙(𝑧)) = 𝑣(𝑧). Since 𝜙(𝑧) < 𝑘 then 𝑠𝜙(𝑧) < 𝑤𝜙(𝑧). It then follows that 
𝑢𝛼(𝑠𝜙(𝑧), 𝑤𝜙(𝑧)) > 𝑢𝜙(𝑧)(𝑠𝜙(𝑧), 𝑤𝜙(𝑧)) = 𝑢 for any 𝛼 < 𝜙(𝑧). It then follows 
that all 𝛼 < 𝜙(𝑧) must also be employed.

11 

For 𝑧 = 𝛼 and 𝜙(𝑧) = 𝛼, the right-hand side of Eq.  (A.8) is equal to 𝐿, 
which then contradicts 𝐿 > 𝐹 . It then follows that either 𝜙(𝑧) < 𝛼 or 
𝑧 > 𝛼, or both.  □

Proof of Corollary  3.  Since profits are the same across all active 
locations, the equilibrium wages in locations 𝛼 and 𝛼′ are such that: 

𝑤∗

𝛼 = 𝑤∗

𝛼′ + 𝑐(ℎ(𝛼′)) − 𝑐(ℎ(𝛼)),

(A.9)

where ℎ(𝛼′) > ℎ(𝛼), and 𝑐(ℎ(𝛼′)) > 𝑐(ℎ(𝛼)). It follows that 𝑤∗

𝛼 > 𝑤∗

𝛼′ .  □

Proof of Corollary  4.  Define the 𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑠 𝑝𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 as 

𝜗(𝛼) ∶= max
(𝑠,𝑤)

𝑈𝛼(𝑠, 𝑤)  subject to 𝑦 − 𝑤 − 𝑐(𝑠) = 𝜋∗.

(A.10)

In an equilibrium with profit 𝜋∗, the surplus of a type-𝛼 employed 
𝛼 − 𝑤∗
by a firm is 𝜗(𝛼). By the Envelope Theorem, 𝜗′(𝛼) = 𝑠∗
𝛼, where 
𝑑𝑠∗
𝑤∗
𝛼)) > 0, thus the utility 
𝛼
𝑑𝛼
surplus potential is strictly convex in 𝛼.

𝛼). We have 𝜗′′(𝛼) =

𝛼 = 𝑦 − 𝜋∗ − 𝑐(𝑠∗

(1 + 𝑐′(𝑠∗

Suppose first that the equilibrium is such that type 𝛼 ∈ (0, 𝜖) for 
𝜖 > 0 arbitrarily small is employed (i.e., 𝜙(𝑘) > 0). As 𝛼 → 0, we 
𝛼 = −𝑦 + 𝜋∗.  We  must  have  𝑦 > 𝜋∗  otherwise 
have  𝜗′(𝛼) → −𝑤∗
lim𝛼→0 𝑈 (𝑠∗
𝛼) = 𝑦 − 𝜋∗ − 𝑢 < 0, implying that locations intended for 
worker types close to 0 cannot simultaneously support profit 𝜋∗ and 
a non-negative worker surplus. Thus, 𝜗′(𝛼) < 0 for 𝛼 → 0. Because 
lim𝛼→1 𝜗′(𝛼) = ∞, 𝜗(𝛼) is strictly U-shaped, and the result follows.

𝛼, 𝑤∗

𝑘. (A.5) implies 𝑠∗

Suppose, instead, type 𝛼 ∈ (0, 𝜖) for 𝜖 > 0 arbitrarily small is not 
employed (i.e., 𝜙(𝑘) = 0). The equilibrium threshold type 𝑧 is such that 
𝑧 > 𝑠∗
𝑠∗
𝑘 = 𝑢. Because 𝜗(𝑘) < 0 (because otherwise 
a worker of type 𝑘 would want to be employed), it then follows that 
𝑤∗
𝑧. Thus, 0 < 𝜗′(𝑘) < 𝜗′(𝑧) (the latter inequality follows from 
the strict convexity of 𝜗(𝛼)), and the result follows.  □

𝑘 < 𝑢 = 𝑠∗

Proof of Lemma  3.  Firms in Sector 0 have zero entry costs. Thus, an 
infinite amount of these firms would enter unless their profits are zero 
after entry. The proof for 𝜋∗
> 0 in Sector 1 is the same as in Lemma 
1
2.  □

Proof of Corollary  5.  Use 𝑤0 = 𝑦 − 𝑐(𝑠0) to write the profit potential 
as 𝑣(𝛼) = 𝑐(𝑠0) − 𝑐(ℎ(𝛼)) + 𝛼
(ℎ(𝛼) − 𝑠0). The profit potential’s intercept 
1−𝛼
is 𝑣(0) = 𝑐(𝑠0), which is positive and strictly increasing in 𝑠0. As 𝑠0 → 0, 
𝑐(𝑠0) → 0. Because 𝜋∗ > 0, we have 𝑣(𝑧) = 𝜋∗ and 𝜙(𝑧) = 0 (i.e., a corner 
solution).  □

Proof of Corollary  6.  From 𝑣(𝑧∗) = 𝐾1 and 𝑣′(𝛼) > 0 for 𝛼 > 𝑘, 
it follows that  𝜕𝑧∗
> 0. From Eq.  (7) and 𝑣′(𝛼) < 0 for 𝛼 < 𝑘, it 
𝜕𝐾1
follows that  𝜕𝜙(𝑧∗)
≤ 0. It then immediately follows that polarization 
𝜕𝐾1
𝑧 − 𝑠∗
(i.e., 𝜌∗ = 𝑠∗
𝜙(𝑧)) increases with 𝐾1. As the equilibrium mass of firms 
in the flexible sector is given by (6), it then follows that 

< 0.  □

𝜕𝐹 ∗
1
𝜕𝐾1

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

Proof of Corollary  7.  First, we show that for a given 𝐹1 < 𝐿, if ̂𝑃 (.) is 
a generalized increase in risk from 𝑃 (.) for 𝑥′ = 𝜙(𝑧) and 𝑥′′ = 𝑧, then 
the equilibrium under  ̂𝑃 (.) has higher profits than under 𝑃 (.).

Note that 𝑣(𝛼) does not depend on the distribution and, thus, it 
is  not  affected  by  a  generalized  increase  in  risk.  Let  𝑧  denote  the 
equilibrium threshold when the distribution is 𝑃 (.). From the definition 
of a generalized increase in risk, we have ∫ 𝜙(𝑧)
̂𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼, 
and therefore 
(
𝜙(𝑧)

𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 > ∫ 𝜙(𝑧)

)

1

𝑧

𝑧

𝐹1 < 𝐿

∫

0

̂𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 + ∫

𝑧

̂𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼

.

(A.11)

(

Since  the  right-hand  side  of  Eq.   (A.11)  is  continuous  and  strictly 
decreasing in 𝑧, it follows that  ̂𝑧 > 𝑧, where  ̂𝑧 is given by: 𝐹1 =
. Parts (ii) and (iii) of the proposition fol-
𝐿
low directly from ̂𝑧 > 𝑧.

̂𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼 + ∫ 1

̂𝑧 ̂𝑝(𝛼)𝑑𝛼

∫ 𝜙(̂𝑧)
0

)

If 𝐹 ∗

1  did not change, Date 1 profits would have increased. Thus, the 
number of firms must increase, so that competition brings the profit 
back to 𝜋∗ = 𝐾1.  □

Proof of Prediction  2 and 3.  Polarization is 𝜌∗ = 2
average wage is 

√

2𝐾1 and the 

𝑠2
0
2

−

−

√

𝛥
6

𝛥2
6

2𝐾1 −

𝑤∗ = 𝑦 − 𝐾1 −

𝐾1
3
From Proposition  5, we see that if 𝐾1 increases, less employees work 
for flexible firms, that is there are less flexible firms entering Sector 1. 
From Eq.  (A.12) it follows that 𝜕𝑤∗
𝜕𝐾1

< 0 and 𝜕𝑤∗

< 0.  □

(A.12)

𝜕𝛥

Proof of Proposition  6.  The expression for the Labor share can be 
rewritten as follows: 

Labor share =

𝑠2
0
2
− 𝛥2
6
We now find the effect of 𝐾1 and 𝛥 on the labor share. 

𝑦 − 𝐾1 −
𝑠2
0
2

− 𝛥2
6
− 𝛥
6

2𝐾1 − 𝐾1

2𝐾1 − 𝐾1

− 𝛥
6
√

𝑦 −

√

3

3

𝜕Labor share
𝜕𝐾1

=

𝜕Labor share
𝜕𝛥

=

(
−(𝑦−𝑀 ∗)−

)
𝐾1

+ 1
3

)2

𝐾1
3

√
6

𝛥
2𝐾1
√

− 𝛥
6
√

+

2𝐾1−
)
𝐾1

2𝐾1
6

− 𝛥
6

√

2𝐾1−

𝐾1
3

)2

(
𝑦−

(
𝑦−

𝑠2
0
2

− 𝛥2
6
( 𝛥
−
3
𝑠2
− 𝛥2
0
6
2

< 0

< 0 □

(A.13)

(A.14)

(A.15)

Proof of Proposition  7.  Suppose that 𝜋(𝑠0, 𝑤∗
0) = 0. While 𝜋-investors 
would pay zero for an inflexible firm, 𝑠-investors would be willing to 
pay up to 𝛽𝑠0 > 0. Thus, only 𝑠-investors buy shares in inflexible firms 
in equilibrium and 𝜋(𝑠0, 𝑤∗
0) < 0. These investors are in excess supply 
and will thus pay to the entrepreneur 𝑒2(𝑠0, 𝑤∗
0) = 𝛽𝑠0 + (1 − 𝛽)𝜋(𝑠0, 𝑤∗
0)
for  each  share.  Competition  among  inflexible  entrepreneurs  should 
drive their profits from selling shares to zero: 𝑒2(𝑠0, 𝑤∗
0) = 0, implying 
0 = 𝛽𝑠0
𝜋(𝑠0, 𝑤∗

0) = − 𝛽𝑠0

1−𝛽  and 𝑤∗

𝜎0𝑠2
0
2

.  □

+ 𝑦 −

1−𝛽

Proof of Proposition  8.  The profit potential function of the socially 
responsible investors

𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏) = 𝑦 − 𝑤0 +

𝑎2
2

− 𝑎𝑠0 −

𝑏2
2

+ 𝛽(𝑎 + 𝑏 − 𝑦 + 𝑤0 −

𝑎2
2

+ 𝑎𝑠0 +

𝑏2
2

)

2

is U-shaped in 𝑎 and reaches a minimum at 𝑎 = 𝑠0 − 𝑏. 𝑣(𝑎, 0) =
𝑦 − 𝑤0 + 𝑎2
− 𝑎𝑠0 is the profit potential of a profit-driven investor. From 
𝑠2
Proposition  7, we know that 𝑤0 = 𝑦 −
+ 𝑏𝑠0. It then follows that 
0
2
𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏) ≥ 𝑣(𝑎, 0) for any 𝑎 ∈ [𝑎−, 𝑎+], where 
√

{𝑎−, 𝑎+} ∶= 1 + 𝑠0 ±

1 + 2𝑠0
1 − 𝛽

□

(A.16)

Proof of Proposition  9.  The equilibrium values for 𝑎𝑧 and 𝑎𝜙(𝑧) are 
given by 𝑣(𝑎) = 𝐾1. From 𝑣(𝑎, 0) = 𝐾1, we have 𝑎1,2 = 𝑠0 ±
2𝐾1 + 2𝑏𝑠0, 
.  It  follows  that 
from  𝑣(𝑎, 𝑏) = 𝐾1  we  have  𝑎1,2 = 𝑠0 − 𝑏 ±

√

√ 2𝐾1
1−𝛽

2𝐾1 + 2𝑏𝑠0, 𝑠0 − 𝑏 −

2𝐾1 + 2𝑏𝑠0, 𝑠0 − 𝑏 +

𝑎𝑧 = min{𝑠0 +
√

} and 𝜙(𝑎𝑧) = max{𝑠0 −
}. In all possible scenarios for the values 
of 𝑠∗(𝑎(𝑠)) and 𝑠∗(𝜙(𝑎𝑧)), the degree of polarization in 𝑠-quality (𝜌∗) is 
increasing in 𝛽.  □

√ 2𝐾1
1−𝛽

√ 2𝐾1
1−𝛽

√

Proof of Proposition  10.  After investment 𝑒1(𝑠, 𝑤) is made, all flexible 
firms can be sold for 𝑒2(𝑠, 𝑤) = 𝑣(𝑎𝑘) > 0, while inflexible firms are 
sold for 𝑒2(𝑠, 𝑤) = 0. Thus, flexible firms have higher market valuations 
than inflexible firms. To prove that flexible firms have higher expected 
stock returns, note first that inflexible firms cost 𝑏𝑠0 and return −𝑏𝑠0 in 
profit (see Proposition  7). Thus, investors in such firms obtain a −100% 
return, i.e., they lose all their (financial) investment. For flexible firms, 
we have both 𝜋-investors and 𝑠-investors. 𝜋-investors always get zero 
return (which is the fair risk-adjusted return), otherwise, they do not 
invest. 𝑠-investors earn negative returns, which can be no lower than 
−100%.  □

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104147.

References

Albuquerque, R., Koskinen, Y., Zhang, C., 2019. Corporate social responsibility and firm 

risk: Theory and empirical evidence. Manag. Sci. 65 (10), 4451–4469.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L.F., Patterson, C., Van Reenen, J., 2020. The fall of the 
labor share and the rise of superstar firms. Quaterly J. Econ. 135 (2), 645–709.
Barkai, S., 2020. Declining labor and capital shares. J. Financ. 75 (5), 2421–2463.
Berk, J.B., Stanton, R., Zechner, J., 2010. Human capital, bankruptcy, and capital 

structure. J. Financ. 65, 891–926.

Berk, J., van Binsbergen, J.H., 2025. The impact of impact investing. J. Financ. Econ. 

164, 103972.

Bisceglia, M., Piccolo, A., Schneemeier, J., 2022. Externalities of responsible invest-
ments. Working paper, Toulouse School of Economics, Indiana University, and 
Michigan State University.

Bucourt, N., Inostroza, N., 2023. ESG investing and managerial incentives. Working 

paper, U. of Toronto.

Cassar, L., Meier, S., 2018. Nonmonetary incentives and the implications of work as a 

source of meaning. J. Econ. Perspect. 32, 215–238.

Cen,  X.,  Qiu,  Y.,  Wang,  T.Y.,  2022.  Corporate  social  responsibility  and  employee 

retention. Working paper, Texas A&M, Temple U., and U. of Minnesota.

Chowdry, B., Davies, S.W., Waters, B., 2019. Investing for impact. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

32 (3), 864–904.

Colonnelli,  E.,  McQuade,  T.,  Ramos,  G.,  Rauter,  T.,  Xiong,  O.,  2023.  Polarizing 
corporations: Does talent flow to ‘‘good’’ firms?. Working Paper, U. of Chicago, 
U. of California at Berkeley, and Imperial College.

Colonnelli,  E.,  Pinho  Neto,  V.,  Teso,  E.,  2025.  Politics  at  work.  Am.  Econ.  Rev. 

(forthcoming).

Conway, J., Boxell, L., 2023. Consuming values. Working Paper, U. of Chicago.
Covarrubias, M., Gutiérrez, G., Philippon, T., 2019. From good to bad concentration? 

US industries over the past 30 years. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 34, 1–46.

Dangl, T., Halling, M., Yu, J., Zechner, J., 2025. Social preferences and corporate 

investment. J. Financ. Econ. (forthcoming).

Davies, S.W., Van Wesep, E.D., 2018. The unintended consequences of divestment. J. 

Financ. Econ. 128 (3), 558–575.

Di Giuli, A., Kostovetsky, L., 2014. Are red or blue companies more likely to go green? 
Politics and corporate social responsibility. J. Financ. Econ. 111 (1), 158–180.
Duchin, R., Farroukh, A.E.K., Harford, J., Patel, T., 2023. The economic effects of 
political polarization: Evidence from the real asset market. Working Paper, Boston 
College, Indiana U., U. of Washington, and Southern Methodist U..

Edmans, A., 2011. Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee satisfaction 

and equity prices. J. Financ. Econ. 101 (3), 621–640.

Edmans, A., Levit, D., Schneemeier, J., 2023. Socially responsible divestment. ECGI 

Finance Working Paper 823/2022.

Edmans,  A.,  Pu,  D.,  Zhang,  C.,  Li,  L.,  2024.  Employee  satisfaction,  labor  market 
flexibility, and stock returns around the world. Manag. Sci. 70 (7), 4167–4952.
Ferreira, D., Nikolowa, R., 2024. Prestige, promotion, and pay. J. Financ. 79 (1), 

505–540.

12 

D. Ferreira and R. Nikolowa

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104147 

Focke, F., Maug, E., Niessen-Ruenzi, A., 2017. The impact of firm prestige on executive 

Pástor, L., Stambaugh, R.F., Taylor, L.A., 2021. Sustainable investing in equilibrium. J. 

compensation. J. Financ. Econ. 123, 313–336.

Fos,  V.,  Kempf,  E.,  Tsoutsoura,  M.,  2023.  The  political  polarization  of  corporate 
america. Working Paper, Boston College, Harvard U., and Washington U. in St. 
Louis.

Garicano, L., Rossi-Hansberg, E., 2006. Organization and inequality in a knowledge 

economy. Q. J. Econ. 121 (4), 1383–1435.

Geelen, T., Hajda, J., Starmans, J., 2022. Sustainable organizations. Working paper, 
Copenhagen Business School, HEC Montreal, and Stockholm School of Economics.
Giannetti, M., Wang, T.Y., 2023. Public attention to gender equality and board gender 

diversity. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 58 (2), 485–511.

Goldstein, I., Kopytov, A., Shen, L., Xiang, H., 2022. On ESG investing: Heterogeneous 
preferences, information, and asset prices. Working Paper, U. of Pennsylvania, U. 
of Hong Kong, INSEAD, and Peking University.

Hedblom, D., Hickman, B.R., List, J.A., 2019. Toward an understanding of corporate 
social responsibility: Theory and field experimental evidence. NBER Working Paper 
26222.

Heinkel, R., Kraus, A., Zechner, J., 2001. The effect of green investment on corporate 

behavior. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 36 (4), 431–449.

Henderson, R., Van den Steen, E., 2015. Why do firms have ‘‘purpose’’? The firm’s 
role as a carrier of identity and reputation. Am. Econ. Rev.: Pap. Proc. 105 (5), 
326–330.

Hotelling, H., 1929. Stability in competition. Econ. J. 39 (153), 41–57.
Krueger, P., Metzger, D., Wu, J., 2023. The sustainability wage gap. ECGI Working 

Landier, A., Lovo, S., 2025. Socially responsible finance: How to optimize impact? Rev. 

Paper 718/2020.

Financ. Stud. 38, 1211–1258.

Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 550–571.

Pedersen,  L.H.,  Fitzgibbons,  S.,  Pomorski,  L.,  2021.  Responsible  investing:  The 

ESG-efficient frontier. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2), 572–597.

Piatti, I., Shapiro, J., Wang, J., 2023. Sustainable investing and public goods provision. 
Working paper, Queen Mary University of London, University of Oxford, and SBE 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.

Rosen, S., 1974. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure 

competition. J. Political Econ. 82 (1), 34–55.

Rosen, S., 1986. The theory of equalizing differences. Handb. Labor Econ. 1, 641–6922.
Salop, S.C., 1979. Monopolistic competition with outside goods. Bell J. Econ. 10 (1), 

Sattinger, M., 1993. Assignment models of the distribution of earnings. J. Econ. Lit. 31 

141–155.

(2), 831–880.

CESifo Working Paper 9842.

Intermediation 55.

1331–1393.

Sockin, J., 2022. Show me the amenity: Are higher-paying firms better all around?. 

Song, F., Thakor, A., Quinn, R., 2023. Purpose, profit and social pressure. J. Financ. 

Sorkin,  I.,  2018.  Ranking  firms  using  revealed  preference.  Q.  J.  Econ.  133  (3), 

Steel,  R.S.,  2024.  The  political  transformation  of  corporate  america,  2001–2022. 

Working Paper, Columbia University.

Stern, S., 2004. Do scientists pay to be scientists? Manag. Sci. 50, 835–853.
Stoughton, N.M., Wong, K.P., Yi, L., 2020. Competitve corporate social responsibility. 
Working paper, WU-Vienna University of Economics and Business, University of 
Hong Kong, and Hong Kong Baptist University.

Tinbergen, J., 1956. On the theory of income distribution. Weltwirtschaftliches Arch. 

Lavetti,  K.,  2023.  Compensating  wage  differentials  in  labor  markets:  Empirical 

77, 155–175.

challenges and applications. J. Econ. Perspect. 37 (3), 189–212.

Van den Steen, E.J., 2005. Organizational beliefs and managerial vision. J. Law Econ. 

Mas, A., Pallais, A., 2017. Valuing alternative work arrangements. Am. Econ. Rev. 107, 

Organ. 21 (1), 256–283.

Mas-Colell,  A.,  Whinston,  M.D.,  Green,  J.R.,  1995.  Microeconomic  Theory.  Oxford 

Sci. 56 (10), 1718–1738.

Oehmke, M., Opp, M., 2025. A theory of socially responsible investment. Rev. Econ. 

and gender. Q. J. Econ. 133 (1), 457–507.

3722–3759.

University Press.

Stud. 92 (2), 1193–1225.

Ouimet,  P.,  Tate,  G.A.,  2022.  Firms  with  benefits?  Nonwage  compensation  and 
implications  for  firms  and  labor  markets.  Working  paper,  University  of  North 
Carolina and University of Maryland.

Van den Steen, E.J., 2010. Culture clash: The costs and benefits of homogeneity. Manag. 

Wiswall, M., Zafar, B., 2018. Preference for the workplace, investment in human capital, 

Wu,  Y.,  Zechner,  J.,  2024.  Political  preferences  and  financial  market  equilibrium. 
Working Paper, University of Oregon and Vienna University of Economics and 
Business.

Xiong, Y., Yang, L., 2025. Personalized pricing, network effects, and commitment. J. 

Econom. Theory 207, 106036.

13 

