Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Stakes and investor behaviors

, Baolian Wang b,*

Pengfei Sui a
a Shenzhen Finance Institute, School of Management and Economics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
b Warrington College of Business, the University of Florida, United States

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link:  Stakes and Investor 
Behaviors_Pseudo Data and Replication Code 
(Reference data)

JEL classification:
C91
D91
G41
G50 

Keywords:
Stakes
Behavioral biases
Individual investors
Household finance

1. Introduction

We examine how stakes affect investor behaviors. In our unique setting, investors trade stocks in real accounts 
using  their  own  money  and  simultaneously  in  a  simulated  setting.  Our  real-world  within-investor  estimation 
shows  that  investors  exhibit  stronger  biases  and  perform  worse  in  higher-stakes  real  accounts  than  in  lower- 
stakes simulated accounts. Investors exhibit strong biases in both types of accounts, and the biases in both are 
strongly positively correlated. Such behavioral consistency suggests that low-stakes experiments are informative 
about real-world behaviors. Using additional account-level datasets, we demonstrate external validity by doc-
umenting a stronger (reverse) disposition effect on stocks (funds) with greater portfolio weights.

Understanding the effects of stakes on human behaviors is of great 
interest to economists. First, understanding the stakes effect can shed 
light  on  the  mechanisms  that  underlie  the  observed  behaviors.  For 
example, if a behavioral bias is driven largely by weak incentives, high 
stakes may increase the effort level such that the bias will be eliminated 
or  significantly  muted.  Second,  it  also  informs  us  whether  insights 
gained in laboratories can be generalized to the real world. Economists 
have  increasingly  turned  to  the  experimental  method  to  understand 
human  behaviors.  Lab  experiments  enable  investigators  to  conduct 
research  under  highly  controlled  conditions.  Critics  of  the  generaliz-
ability of lab studies have argued, though, that human behaviors may be 
sensitive to various factors that differ systematically between the lab and 

the real world (Thaler, 1986; Levitt and List, 2007; Benjamin, 2019). 
One of these factors is stakes.

This paper explores the effects of stakes on behaviors in a real-world 
stock  market  environment  using  data  from  a  Chinese  investor  social 
network called Snowball. One unique feature of our setting is that many 
investors carry two types of stock accounts: real brokerage accounts in 
which investors trade using their own money and simulated accounts in 
which  no  real  money  is  involved.  Except  for  the  fact  that  trades  in 
simulated accounts do not involve real money, almost the same rules 
apply to these accounts as to real accounts. Such a unique setting enables 
us to construct a within-subject estimate of stakes effects. Using a sample 
of >4000 investors over a three-year period, we compare the two types 
of  accounts  with  reference  to  a  standard  set  of  prominent  behavioral 
patterns that have been documented in the finance literature (Barberis 

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank Nicholas Barberis, Justin Birru, Daniel Bradley, Colin Camerer, Kalok Chan, Cary Frydman, Rawley 
Heimer (discussant), Sam Hartzmark, Sam Hirshman (discussant), Alex Horenstein (discussant), Conghui Hu (discussant), Zongbo Huang, Lawrence Jin, Jennifer Li 
(discussant), Abhiroop Mukherjee, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Cameron Peng, Jay Ritter, Tao Shu (discussant), Kelly Shue, David Solomon, Changcheng Song, Chen 
Wang, Yongxiang Wang, Jinfan Zhang, and seminar participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the University of Florida, The University of Macau, Nankai 
University, Peking University, Shenzhen University, the CFRC conference, the CICF conference, the FRA conference, the HEC-McGill Winter Conference, the Florida 
Finance  Conference,  Helsinki  Finance  Summit,  and  the  SME  Research  Conference  of  CUHK-Shenzhen  for  their  valuable  comments.  Sui  acknowledges  financial 
support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China [Grants 72203194 and 72342020]. All errors are our own.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: psui@cuhk.edu.cn (P. Sui), baolian.wang@warrington.ufl.edu (B. Wang). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104146
Received 1 June 2024; Received in revised form 16 July 2025; Accepted 18 July 2025  
Available online 25 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

and  Thaler,  2003;  Barber  and  Odean,  2013).  As  these  patterns  are 
typically considered suboptimal and most evidence shows that they are 
detrimental  to  investor  performance  (see  Section  4.1),  in  this  paper, 
following the finance literature, we often refer to them as biases.

Our  setting  is  nearly  ideal  for  studying  the  effects  of  stakes  on 
investor behaviors. First, real accounts undoubtedly involve more sub-
stantial  stakes  than  simulated  accounts.  Our  conservative  estimate 
suggests  that  the  average  real-account  value  is  worth  several  times 
China’s annual disposal income per capita. Second, critics believe that, 
in  addition  to  being  affected  by  high  stakes,  biases  are  likely  to  be 
eliminated or significantly muted by experience and competition in the 
real world, and it is plausible that the cognitive processes underlying 
belief  formation  and  revision  operate  differently  in  natural  environ-
ments and in abstract lab settings (Thaler, 1986; Levitt and List, 2007; 
Benjamin,  2019).  Third,  although  our  sample  is  non-random,  we 
emphasize that there is actual interest in studying populations that select 
endogenously  into  high-stakes  decisions.  A  related  criticism  is  that 
experimental  subjects—typically  students—may  not  accurately  repre-
sent the relevant population in the real world. In other words, even if 
researchers can increase the stakes to the real-world level in labs, the 
effects observed in a lab may still differ from those in the real world as a 
result of other lab–field differences. Our real-world setting enables us to 
circumvent these criticisms.

Our  headline  result  is  surprising.  In  contrast  to  the  conventional 
wisdom that higher stakes should reduce biases, we find that investors 
exhibit  stronger  behavioral  biases  in  their  real  accounts  than  in  their 
simulated accounts. In other words, investors do better when they care 
less.  We  observe  in  the  real  accounts  a  stronger  disposition  effect  (a 
stronger tendency to sell stocks that earn capital gains than to sell those 
that incur capital losses), stronger lottery preferences (buying lottery- 
type  stocks,  which  are  lower-priced,  more  volatile,  and  more  posi-
tively  skewed  than  non-lottery  stocks),  greater  extrapolation  (buying 
stocks  with  high  past  returns),  greater  underdiversification  (holding 
smaller sets of stocks in portfolios), and more active trading. Real ac-
counts perform worse than their simulated accounts. The only behav-
ioral pattern with respect to which we do not find a significant difference 
between real and simulated accounts involves local bias (the tendency to 
hold stocks in firms located relatively near where one lives).

Given  our  sample  size  and  the  advantage  of  the  within-investor 
estimation  strategy,  we  can  estimate  the  effects  of  stakes  precisely. 
Except for local bias, the differences in biases between real and simu-
lated accounts are both statistically and economically significant. Even 
with  respect  to  local  bias,  given  the  small  standard  error,  we  can 
confidently conclude that the difference between the two types of ac-
counts,  if  any,  is  small.  Consider  extrapolation,  underdiversification, 
and  performance  as  examples.  In  real  accounts,  the  average  past-six- 
month return on purchased stocks is 15.60 % higher than the market 
return,  while  it  is  12.66  %  above  the  market  return  in  simulated  ac-
counts. On average, investors hold 2.96 stocks in their real accounts and 
4.36  stocks  in  their  simulated  accounts.  In  the  two  months  following 
purchases,  the  sample  stocks  deliver  average  returns  for  real  and 
simulated accounts that are 0.66 % and 0.15 % lower, respectively, than 
returns on similar-sized stocks on the market.

These behaviors have been attributed to a range of cognitive biases 
(see Section 2 and Table 2). Although some heuristics and biases (e.g., 
prospect theory) can contribute to explaining more than one behavior 
(Barberis, 2013), the headline finding from this literature is that these 
behaviors  are  likely  driven  by  distinct  factors  (Barberis  and  Thaler, 
2003;  Barberis,  2018).  Consistent  with  this  point,  we  find  that  these 
biases are only weakly correlated with each other. The fact that these 
biases are distinct and that we cover most of the widely studied investor 
behaviors in finance suggests the broad applicability of our findings, at 
least to stock markets.

The  evidence  also  reveals  systematic  individual  differences  in  the 
stakes effect. In other words, an investor for whom we find a greater 
real–simulated  difference  with  respect  to  one  bias  typically  exhibits 

greater  real–simulated  differences  with  respect  to  other  biases.  The 
findings  of  cross-investor  heterogeneities  in  stakes  effects  naturally 
suggest that it would be sensible to explore individual characteristics to 
uncover the microfoundation underlying the importance of stakes. Our 
results show that stakes effects are weaker for investors who hold larger 
portfolios and those based in relatively developed regions. As our data 
largely lack individual characteristics, we await future research for re-
sults pertaining to this important question.

It is possible that stakes strengthen biases because, insofar as no real 
money is involved in simulated accounts, investors may trade randomly 
and  hence  show  no  systematic  biases.  We  present  several  sets  of  evi-
dence  that  are  inconsistent  with  this  conjecture.  First,  even  though 
biases are generally weaker in simulated accounts than in real accounts, 
the biases we find in simulated accounts are strong in their own right. 
Second, we find strong positive correlations between investor biases in 
the two types of accounts, suggesting behavioral consistency even with 
no  monetary  stakes  involved.  These  findings  indicate  that  low-stakes 
experimental  methods,  although  imperfect,  can  be  informative  about 
real-world human behaviors.

The  real(cid:0) simulated  account  comparison  juxtaposes  investor  de-
cisions involving high monetary stakes with counterpart decisions that 
involve no monetary stakes. Ideally, we hope to gather information that 
sheds light  on investor  behaviors  at all  stakes  levels. To  this  end,  we 
provide evidence using two additional account-level datasets—one from 
a  US  brokerage  company  and  the  other  from  a  Chinese  brokerage 
company. In this setting, the variations in stakes involve distinct posi-
tions  in  an  investor’s  portfolio.  Positions  that  carry  greater  portfolio 
weights  are  thought  to  involve  higher  stakes.  We  find  that  investors 
exhibit a stronger disposition effect with regard to stock positions that 
carry  greater  portfolio weights.  Positions  where  the  portfolio  weights 
vary all involve positive and, typically, high monetary stakes. Hence, the 
evidence we analyze from the two brokerage datasets shows that, with 
high-stakes  investment  decisions,  increasing  the  stakes  strengthens 
biases.  Overall,  with  the  caveat  that  portfolio  weights  are  not  deter-
mined randomly, these findings provide additional evidence supporting 
the  proposition  that  higher  stakes  strengthen  biases  and  also  provide 
external validity supporting our analysis based on the real(cid:0) simulated 
account comparison.

The psychology and experimental economics literature has proposed 
several  mechanisms  through  which  stakes  may  affect  biases.1 One 
widely held view is that raising the stakes induces greater attention and 
effort,  and  greater  effort  can  lead  to  more  accurate  translation  of  in-
dividuals’ beliefs or preferences into their behaviors. The proposal that 
beliefs  and  preferences  are  elicited  through  financially  incentivized 
designs is built on this view (Grether and Plott, 1979; Grether, 1980).2
The  conventional  wisdom that  higher  stakes  should  reduce  biases  as-
sumes that greater attention and effort leads people to shift from using 
heuristics  to  engage  in  more  deliberative  processing,  form  less  noisy 
expectations,  and  make  better  decisions  (Stanovich  and  West,  2008; 
Gabaix, 2014, 2019; Imas et al., 2022).

There  are  at  least  two  nonexclusive  mechanisms  through  which 
higher stakes may instead strengthen biases in the financial context. The 
first  mechanism  challenges  the  assumption  underlying  the  above-
mentioned conventional wisdom. The marginal effects of stakes can be 
negative  if  individuals  carry  incorrect  mental  models  and  greater 
attention leads to the more careful application of those incorrect models 
(Dawes,  1979,  1989;  Giglio  et  al.,  2021;  Hartzmark,  Hirshman,  and 

1 We review the stakes literature more comprehensively in Section 2.
2 This  mechanism  relies  on  the  assumption  that  decision-making  is  costly. 
When the cost of decision-making is zero, investors will always translate their 
beliefs and preferences perfectly into their behaviors and their actions will not 
differ regardless of the stakes. That decisions in the financial context are costly 
seems obvious because investors need to collect information, form beliefs, and 
perform utility-maximizing calculations.

2 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Imas,  2021).  For  example,  if  investors  believe  in  price  momentum, 
higher  stakes  can  induce  greater  effort  in  locating  stocks  that  have 
earned  higher  past  returns,  strengthening  extrapolation  bias.  Similar 
arguments  also  apply  to  cases  involving  intrinsic  but  nontraditional 
preferences,  such  as  prospect  theory,  realization  utility,  cognitive 
dissonance, and sensation-seeking. Higher stakes may lead investors to 
make  decisions  that  conform  more  closely  to  their  preferences  but 
deviate further from normative benchmarks. In other words, as simu-
lated accounts are less important than real accounts, simulated account 
trades may be more random than real account trades.

The second mechanism through which stakes may strengthen biases 
is by strengthening the features of nontraditional preferences.3 Cogni-
tive dissonance and self-image seem particularly relevant (Chang, Sol-
omon, and Westerfield, 2016; Heimer, 2016).4 Investors may find that 
admitting to a mistake regarding a real account is much more embar-
rassing and wounding to one’s self-image than admitting to a mistake 
with a simulated account. Higher cognitive dissonance provides a nat-
ural explanation for the real–simulated difference in the disposition ef-
fect (Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield, 2016). It may also explain other 
biases. When investors really want to do well, feel smart, and show off, 
they may trade more to make that happen. They may also hold a smaller 
number  of  stocks  (especially  volatile  and  positively  skewed  lottery 
stocks) where they believe gains are likely to be greater. In other words, 
investors might worry that diversifying their portfolios will equate to 
admitting they do not have good ideas and so want to hedge their bets. 
Cognitive dissonance may also explain the non-presence of a significant 
real–simulated difference in local bias. Such discomfort from cognitive 
dissonance  largely involves  an  investor’s  self-image,  and  the  decision 
whether or not to buy local stocks does not seem to relate strongly to 
self-image.

The first mechanism that links high stakes with strong biases predicts 
that higher stakes affect the translation of incorrect beliefs or nontra-
ditional preferences into behaviors but do not predict changes in pref-
erences per se. The second mechanism predicts changes in preferences. 
Section 2 (in particular Table 2) summarizes prominent interpretations 
of the studied biases and indicates how these mechanisms may play a 
role. Distinguishing between these mechanisms runs beyond the scope of 
this paper, but we provide some suggestive evidence that is consistent 
with  both.  For  example,  both  mechanisms  predict  that  investors  will 
exert greater effort on and pay more attention to their real accounts than 
their  simulated  accounts.  Consistent  with  results  reported  in  the 
experimental literature (Enke et al., 2021), we find compelling evidence 
that higher stakes generate greater effort/attention. Trading volume has 
been used as a proxy for attention (Barber and Odean, 2008). As dis-
cussed above, investors trade significantly more frequently in real ac-
counts, suggesting that they pay greater attention to those accounts.

We  take  advantage  of  another  data  feature  to  examine  whether 
attention strengthens biases. Our main tests focus on the period during 
which an investor carries both types of accounts. Most of our sample 
investors  do  not  open  the  two  types  of  accounts  simultaneously.  We 
conjecture that investors in our sample will pay more attention to their 
real (simulated) accounts when they carry only one type of account than 
when  they carry  both types  of  accounts. We predict  that, if  attention 
strengthens biases, investors in our sample will exhibit stronger biases in 
their real (simulated) accounts when they do not carry a second type of 
account than when they do carry a second type of account. Our empir-
ical results support these conjectures.

3 For  example,  Rottenstreich  and  Hsee  (2001) and  Hsee  and  Rottenstreich 
(2004) show that probability weighting is more pronounced when lottery-like 
payoffs are more affect-rich. Compared with outcomes in simulated accounts, 
payoffs  in  real  accounts  may  be  more  affect-rich,  potentially  explaining  the 
findings pertaining to biases related to probability weighting.

4 Consistent  with  cognitive  dissonance,  Elia  (2024)  documents  that  hedge 

funds react to unrealized losses on their passive positions with activism.

3 

The  cognitive  dissonance  mechanism  generates  additional  pre-
dictions that we can test. First, Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield (2016)
document that, when investors trade actively managed mutual funds, 
they exhibit a reverse disposition effect instead of the disposition effect. 
They  explain  both  the  disposition  effect  on  stocks  and  the  reverse 
disposition  effect  on  funds  based  on  cognitive  dissonance—whereby 
investors avoid realizing losses because they dislike admitting that past 
purchases were mistakes, but delegation reverses this effect by allowing 
the  investors  to  blame  fund  managers  instead.  If  stakes  strengthen 
cognitive dissonance, we expect to find a stronger reverse disposition 
effect  on  equity  mutual  funds  with  high  stakes.  Consistently,  in  US 
brokerage data, we find a stronger reverse disposition effect on equity 
mutual  funds  with  higher  portfolio  weights.  Second,  in  our  Snowball 
data, we find that, conditional on selling, investors are more likely to 
broadcast  their  selling  of  winners  than  their  selling  of  losers.  Such  a 
winner–loser  difference  is  more  pronounced  with  real  accounts  than 
with simulated accounts, which is consistent with the fact that trading 
for real money is more relevant to self-image than simulated trading. 
These two findings are consistent with the notion that stakes strengthen 
the  effects  of  cognitive  dissonance  and  self-image  and  support  the 
conjecture  that  cognitive  dissonance  and  self-image  may  explain  the 
stakes  effects.  It  is  hard  to  explain  these  findings  through  other 
mechanisms.

A  caveat  is  that  we  do  not  know,  with  certainty,  why  investors 
maintain simulated accounts. In an ideal experiment we would like in-
vestors to hold the two types of account for the same purposes. Snowball 
investors may, however, also use simulated accounts for purposes other 
than performance maximization, such as using them as “watch lists” for 
exploring  or  trading  for  fun.  How  likely  is  it  that  the  real(cid:0) simulated 
differences are caused by distinct purposes? First, we emphasize that our 
findings that biases are stronger in real accounts than in simulated ac-
counts  operate  on  many  biases,  which  correspond  to  a  variety  of  un-
derlying  theories,  making  it  more  likely  that  this  is  actually  a  direct 
effect of stakes and not of something else. For example, if investors use 
simulated accounts as watch lists to explore or for fun, we should expect 
that they take higher risks in simulated accounts than in real accounts, 
but the opposite is true in the data. Second, the existence of a real ac-
count  may  make  it  more  likely  that  investors  use  their  simulated  ac-
counts for purposes other than performance maximization. So, trading 
in a simulated account before one opens a real account is more likely to 
indicate  what  investors  are  thinking  about  doing  with  real  money. 
Comparing  trading  in  real  accounts  with  simulated  trading  before  an 
investor  opens  a  real  account  yields  similar  results.  Third,  many  in-
vestors offer short descriptions of the purpose of a given account. We 
document  a  similar  result  based  on  the  subsample  of  investors  who 
explicitly  stated  performance  maximization  as  the  purpose  (for  addi-
tional discussion, see Section 3.1 and Section 5.1.2). Overall, the results 
strongly point to a stakes-based interpretation. Although we cannot rule 
out all other possible interpretations, the results challenge the plausi-
bility of such alternatives.

Our research  contributes, in the first instance, to the literature on 
how stakes affect biases. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to 
document a negative effect of stakes on real-world financial investment 
tasks.  Even  in  the  broader  economics  literature  our  study  is  novel  in 
several  respects.  The  idea  that  lab  experiments  should  be  dismissed 
because of their small economic incentives is a frequently cited claim but 
one that has not been widely tested. Very few studies use within-subject 
designs that can rule out population differences of this sort. And very 
few studies examine a range of mistakes or examine them in high-stakes 
environments. In the next section, we discuss the related literature in 
greater detail.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 pro-
vides an overview of related research. We also discuss the mechanisms 
that might underlie our findings. In Section 3 we describe our data and 
methodology. In Section 4 we define our measures of investor biases and 
report  summary  statistics  for  those  measures.  Section  5 presents  the 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

results. In Section 6 we report results based on the two brokerage ac-
count datasets. We conclude in Section 7.

2. Overview of related research

We  review  the  related  literature  on  stakes  effects  and  discuss  dif-
ferences between ours and related studies as well as plausible mecha-
nisms that could explain our findings, including discussions of the roles 
stakes might play in affecting each bias. We also explain how our find-
ings  shed  light  on  the  mechanisms  that  underlie  investor  biases.  To 
conclude, we discuss the external validity of our findings.

best of our knowledge, Andersen, Mukherjee, and Nielsen (2022) have 
conducted the only other field study that examines the causal effects of 
stakes.  They  exploit  exogenous  variation  in  stakes  resulting  from  un-
expected  inheritances  following  sudden  parental  death  and  report 
economically small effects on biases, with most bias reductions passive 
(i.e., from an inheritance per se). For example, inheriting assets from 
parents mechanically reduces a beneficiary’s underdiversification if the 
inherited assets are weakly correlated with the beneficiary’s portfolio. In 
their setting, it is also difficult to differentiate between stakes effects and 
wealth  effects,  while  wealth  effects  have  been  shown  to  affect  stock 
market participation in the same setting (Andersen and Nielsen, 2011).

2.1. Most studies on stakes are lab studies

2.2. The effects of stakes depend on the nature of the tasks involved

The  great  bulk  of  the  stakes  literature  consists  of  experimental 
studies  conducted  in  labs.5 As  a  result  of  budget  considerations,  the 
standard method for studying the effects of stakes on behaviors involves 
using  payments  that  amount  to  a  couple  of  hours  of  an  individual’s 
wages  to  incentivize  experimental  subjects—typically  students—to 
commit time and effort to participating. In some studies, researchers can 
pay subjects up to several times their normal monthly incomes, typically 
when  experimenting  in  low-income  countries.6 Despite  decades  of 
research on the stakes effect, empirical evidence that compares biases 
under no or small stakes and those under very large stakes is scant (Enke 
et  al.,  2021).  Our  study  provides  novel  evidence  based  on  a 
non-experimental setting in which we compare the effects of no mone-
tary stakes with the effects of high monetary stakes. We study a standard 
set of prominent behavioral biases that financial market investors typi-
cally  exhibit.  The  great  bulk  of  this  literature  examines  behaviors 
different from the behavior observed in our study.7

Field studies on stakes are almost always based on cross-individual 
comparisons.  Chetty  et  al.  (2014) show  that  individuals  in  Denmark 
are inattentive with respect to their pension contributions regardless of 
the  economic  stakes.  Gathergood  et  al.  (2019) find  evidence  that  in-
dividuals’  credit card debt repayments are not allocated to cards that 
charge higher interest rates, and the degree of misallocation is invariant 
with the economic stakes. Cross-individual comparisons are affected by 
omitted variables such as financial sophistication, wealth, and IQ. To the 

5 See  Camerer  and  Hogarth  (1999) and  Enke  et  al.  (2021) for  more 

comprehensive reviews of this literature.

6 Most of these studies on high stakes examine subjects’ behaviors in strategic 
games  such  as  the  ultimatum  game  or  coordination  games.  Slonim  and  Roth 
(1998), Cameron (1999), and Andersen et al. (2011) study the ultimatum game. 
Parravano  and  Poulsen  (2015) study  coordination  games.  Rapoport  et  al. 
(2003) study a three-person centipede game. Cooper et al. (1999) study gaming 
against  managers.  Binswanger  (1980),  Kachelmeier  and  Shehata  (1992),  and 
Holt and Laury (2002) study risk preferences. Kachelmeier and Shehata (1992)
conducted a study in China where they can offer very large monetary incentives 
relative to the cost of living for most subjects. They report that the revealed risk 
preferences  vary  with  the  magnitudes  of  monetary  incentives.  Even  with 
extremely  high  monetary  incentives  (when  subjects  earned  three  times  their 
normal  monthly  revenues  in  the  course  of  a  two-hour  experiment),  subjects 
exhibit probability weighting.

7 There is also a body of literature documenting that some biases survive in 
the  high-stakes  real  world.  Individuals  exhibit  various  biases  on  game  shows 
(Metrick, 1995; Berk et al., 1996; Levitt, 2004; Post et al., 2008; Belot et al., 
2010;  Van  den  Assem  et  al.,  2012;  Jetter  and  Walker,  2017),  in  art  auctions 
(Beggs and Graddy, 2009; Graddy et al., 2014), in professional golf competition 
(Pope  and  Schweitzer,  2011),  and  among  asylum  judges,  loan  officers,  and 
baseball  umpires  (Chen  et  al.,  2016).  The  behavioral  finance  field  has  docu-
mented many biases (Barberis and Thaler, 2003; Campbell, 2006; Barber and 
Odean,  2013;  Beshears  et  al.,  2018;  Malmendier,  2018)  that  we  study.  Our 
contribution is not to document the existence of biases in high-stakes financial 
markets  but  to  document  that,  in  real-world  financial  markets,  higher  stakes 
can strengthen biases, while the studies cited in this note do not compare what 
occurs in high- and low- stakes situations.

4 

In  contrast  to  conventional  wisdom,  according  to  which  higher 
stakes  should  reduce  biases,  existing  studies  show  that  the  effects  of 
stakes on behavior and performance depend on the nature of the tasks 
involved.  Table  1 provides  a  summary  of  this  literature.  We  classify 
existing studies into five groups based on stakes effects—the first three 
involve mainly beliefs and judgments, while the last two involve mainly 
preferences. We further classify three groups into subgroups to reflect 

Table 1 
Literature on the effects of stakes. This table summarizes studies on the effects of 
stakes. We classify these studies into five groups (and eight subgroups) and list 
the relevant tasks and representative studies.

Stakes effects

Tasks and representative studies

Higher stakes improve performance.

Higher stakes do not have significant 

effects.

Higher stakes can hurt performance.

Higher stakes reduce the weight of 
nonpecuniary factors in decision- 
making.

Higher stakes change risk preferences.

A. Memory or recall tasks and clerical tasks 
(e.g., coding words or building things) (
Camerer and Hogarth, 1999); the Cognitive 
Reflection Test (Enke et al., 2021); 
academic performance (Levitt et al., 2016)
B. Tasks involving high cognitive effort 
costs, such as tasks testing base rate 
neglect, anchoring, and failure of 
contingent thinking (Enke et al., 2021)
C1. Tasks involving creativity or tasks in 
which simple intuition or habit provides 
optimal answers and thinking harder 
makes things worse (Arkes, Dawes, and 
Christensen, 1986; Ashton, 1990; Hogarth 
et al., 1991; Ariely et al., 2009).
C2. Tasks in which subjects form incorrect 
mental models, such as clinical judgments (
Dawes, Faust, and Meehl, 1989), 
predictions of faculty ratings of graduate 
students (Dawes, 1971), product valuations 
plus learning from new information and the 
formation of stock market expectations (
Hartzmark, Hirshman, and Imas, 2021)
D1. The ultimatum game (Slonim and Roth, 
1998; Cameron, 1999; Andersen et al., 
2011); coordination games (Parravano and 
Poulsen, 2015); a three-person centipede 
game (Rapoport et al., 2003); gaming 
against managers (Cooper et al., 1999).
D2. Extrinsic monetary incentives crowd 
out intrinsic incentives such as 
volunteering and other pro-social 
behaviors (Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000; 
Gneezy et al., 2011; Bowles and 
Polania-Reyes, 2012).
E1. Choice of risky gambles (Kachelmeier 
and Shehata, 1992; Tversky and 
Kahneman, 1992; Holt and Laury, 2002, 
2005; Hershey and Schoemaker, 1980; 
Scholten and Read, 2014; Fehr-Duda et al., 
2010; Khaw, Li, and Woodford, 2022)
E2. Choice of risky gambles involving 
features of affect or emotion (Rottenstreich 
and Hsee, 2001; Hsee and Rottenstreich, 
2004; Faro and Rottenstreich, 2006; 
Andersson et al., 2016)

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

their relatively distinct mechanisms.

First, the first group of studies indicates that higher stakes improve 
performance.  Such  findings  concentrate  on  tasks  where  greater  effort 
can  improve  performance  (Camerer  and  Hogarth,  1999).  Such  tasks 
include  memory  or  recall  tasks  as  well  as  clerical  tasks  (e.g.,  coding 
words  or  building  things).  There  is  also  some  evidence  that  stakes 
improve academic performance (Levitt et al., 2016). In a recent study, 
Enke et al. (2021) find that higher stakes also help subjects taking the 
Cognitive Reflection Test, which is a task designed to measure a person’s 
tendency  to  override  an  impulsive  incorrect  response  and  engage  in 
further reflection to find a correct answer.8 Second, stakes do not change 
average  behavior  substantially  with  respect  to  tasks  involving  high 
cognitive  effort  costs,  such  as  tasks  testing  base  rate  neglect  and 
anchoring (Camerer and Hogarth, 1999; Enke et al., 2021).

Third, stakes can hurt performance. Such phenomena were typically 
found with tasks that involve creativity or tasks in which simple intui-
tion  or  habit  provides  optimal  answers  and  more  extensive  effort  in 
thinking about options makes things worse (Arkes, Dawes, and Chris-
tensen, 1986; Ashton, 1990; Hogarth et al., 1991; Ariely et al., 2009). 
These  findings  suggest  that  individuals  may  “choke  under  pressure” 
(Baumeister,  1984;  Ariely  et  al.,  2009).  “Choking  under  pressure”  is 
most likely to happen when the pressure a situation imposes on an in-
dividual overwhelms his or her capacity to cope with it. Such pressure 
causes individuals, involuntarily, to think consciously about the task and 
worry, reducing the mental capacity to process task-relevant informa-
tion  (Baumeister  and  Showers,  1986).  “Choking  under  pressure”  can 
explain why stakes hurt performance, but the mechanism does not seem 
particularly  relevant  in  our  financial  context.  For  instance,  “choking 
under pressure” is typically associated with stress and anxiety, in sharp 
contrast  with  the  finding  that  investors  are  typically  overconfident 
(Odean, 1998).9

Another mechanism through which stakes might hurt performance 
occurs  when  subjects  form  incorrect  mental  models  (Dawes,  1979, 
1989). Raising stakes stimulates greater attention and effort, facilitating 
the translation of incorrect beliefs into behaviors. A recent experiment 
conducted by Hartzmark, Hirshman, and Imas (2021) documents that 
individuals react in more extreme ways to information about a good they 
own than to the same information about a non-owned good, consistent 
with the idea that investors harbor incorrect beliefs, with the result that 
attention actually hurts those investors. Giglio et al. (2021) document 
direct evidence that attention strengthens the sensitivity of portfolios to 
beliefs.  Although  these  studies  focus  on  belief-updating  models,  the 
same arguments can apply to cases involving nontraditional preferences, 
including preferences that have been proposed to explain many of the 
studied  biases  (such  as  prospect  theory,  realization  utility,  cognitive 
dissonance, and sensation-seeking). Higher stakes may lead investors to 
make decisions that conform more closely to their beliefs or preferences 
but deviate further from normative benchmarks.

Fourth,  high  stakes  affect  behaviors  involving  nonpecuniary  con-
siderations.  High  stakes  seem  to  reduce  the  weight  of  nonpecuniary 
factors such as moral costs or reputational concerns and shift subjects’ 
behaviors in strategic games toward the predictions of rational-choice 
models (Smith and Walker, 1993; Camerer and Hogarth, 1999; Levitt 
and List, 2007; Andersen et al., 2011). Andersen et al. (2011) find that, 
in the ultimatum game, sufficiently high stakes lead responder behaviors 
to converge almost perfectly on full acceptance of low offers. In some 
cases, extrinsic monetary incentives crowd out intrinsic incentives such 
as volunteering and other pro-social behaviors (Gneezy and Rustichini, 

8 Enke et al. (2021, p33-34) write that, “. . . reducing reliance on ‘system 1‘ is 
not enough to overcome biases because these are often limitations of the more 
deliberative ‘system 2.’”

9 Additionally,  “choking  under  pressure”  is  typically  associated  with 
unpracticed tasks (Beilock et al., 2004), while a typical investor in our sample 
trades frequently.

5 

2000; Gneezy et al., 2011; Bowles and Polania-Reyes, 2012).

Fifth,  several  studies  examine  the  effects  of  stakes  on  risk  prefer-
ences. Tversky and Kahneman (1992) find no significant effect of stakes 
on  risk  preferences.  More  recent  studies,  however,  find  a  significant 
stakes  effect:  when  the  stakes  are  high,  individuals  are  risk-averse  in 
gains and risk-seeking in losses, but risk preferences reverse when the 
stakes  are  low,  with  individuals  exhibiting  risk-seeking  in  gains  and 
risk-aversion in losses (Fehr-Duda et al., 2010; Scholten and Read, 2014; 
Khaw, Li, and Woodford, 2022).10 Such stakes effects do not seem to 
explain our findings. For example, an increase in stakes is expected to be 
associated with a decrease in demand for lottery-type stocks, which is 
the opposite of what we find.

The “risk as feeling” literature has also identified a relevant mech-
anism.  Higher  emotion  strengthens  the  elements  of  prospect  theory 
(Rottenstreich and Hsee, 2001; Hsee and Rottenstreich, 2004). Faro and 
Rottenstreich (2006) find that individuals predict that others hold less 
pronounced  prospect-theory  preferences  than  actually  prevail,  and 
Andersson et al. (2016) find that deciding for others reduces loss aver-
sion; both of these findings are consistent with the notion that deciding 
for  others  or  predicting  what  others  will  do  is  less  emotional  than 
deciding for oneself or predicting one’s own behavior. It is natural to 
think  that  trading  for  real  money  is  more  emotional  than  trading  in 
simulated accounts and higher emotion can potentially lead to a more 
pronounced 
pronounced 
probability-weighting function. A more pronounced value function and 
a more pronounced probability-weighting function can, in turn, lead to a 
stronger  disposition  effect  (Shefrin  and  Statman,  1985;  Odean,  1998; 
Barberis  and  Xiong,  2009)  and  greater  demand  for  lottery  stocks 
(Barberis  and  Huang,  2008).  A  stronger  lottery  preference  may  also 
explain underdiversification because an investor may need to sacrifice 
diversification to gain portfolio skewness (Barberis and Huang, 2008).

a  more 

function 

value 

and 

2.3. Mechanisms that are most relevant to our findings

Table 2 summarizes prominent interpretations of the studied biases 
and the roles that stakes may play. Perhaps the most promising mech-
anisms that could explain our findings are the incorrect mental model 
mechanism  (including  nontraditional  preferences)  and  the  stakes- 
strengthening nontraditional preferences mechanism. These two mech-
anisms are not mutually exclusive, and both likely play a role.

The incorrect mental model mechanism can potentially explain the 
results for all the biases we study, as it applies to both belief-based and 
preference-based  biases.  As  discussed  above,  higher  stakes  may 
strengthen  the  features  of  prospect  theory  and  help  explain  prospect 
theory–related biases. Higher stakes may also strengthen the effects of 
cognitive dissonance and self-image (Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield, 
2016; Heimer, 2016) and help explain the findings for the disposition 
effect, underdiversification, turnover, and lottery preferences as well as 
the  non-result  for  local  bias.  The  findings  for  the  reverse  disposition 
effect and investor postings can be explained naturally by reference to 
cognitive dissonance and self-image but are hard to explain by reference 
to other mechanisms.

2.4. Investor biases

Our study also contributes to the literature that studies mechanisms 
that underlie investor biases. Any explanation of a bias should also be 
able  to  explain  why  the  bias  worsens  at  higher  stakes  or  at  least  be 
consistent with this prediction. Cronqvist and Siegel (2014) document 
that  genetic  differences  explain  a  large  portion  of  cross-investor 

10 Such  a  pattern  in  risk  preferences  had  been  conjectured  as  early  as  in 
Markowitz (1952).

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Table 2 
Stakes and each bias. This table summarizes prominent interpretations in the 
literature of the studied biases and the roles that stakes may play. See Section 2 
for a fuller discussion.

Prominent Interpretation

The Role of Stakes

Disposition effect

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

An incorrect belief in the mean 
reversion of prices (Odean, 
1998)
The diminishing sensitivity of 
prospect theory (Shefrin and 
Statman, 1985; Barberis and 
Xiong, 2009)
Cognitive dissonance (Chang, 
Solomon, and Westerfield, 
2016)
Realization utility (Barberis 
and Xiong, 2012; Ingersoll and 
Jin, 2013)
Probability weighting function 
of prospect theory (Barberis 
and Huang, 2008)
Salience theory (Bordalo, 
Gennaioli, and Shleifer, 2012)
Representativeness heuristics (
Kahneman and Tversky, 1972; 
Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny, 
1998)
Belief in the “law of small 
numbers” (Tversky and 
Kahneman, 1971)
Ambiguity aversion

Mere exposure effect (Zajonc, 
1968; Bornstein, 1989)
Probability weighting (
Barberis and Huang, 2008)

Local Bias

Ambiguity aversion

Turnover

Mere exposure effect

Overconfidence (Odean, 1998; 
Barber and Odean, 2000; 
Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003)
Sensation-seeking (Grinblatt 
and Keloharju, 2009)

Stakes lead to more 
careful application of an 
incorrect belief.
Stakes lead to a more 
pronounced value 
function.

Stakes make cognitive 
dissonance more painful.

Stakes make gain (loss) 
realization more joyful 
(painful).
Stakes lead to a more 
pronounced probability 
weighting function.
Stakes increase the 
salience of a jackpot.
Stakes lead to more 
careful application of an 
incorrect belief.

Stakes lead to more 
careful application of an 
incorrect belief.
Stakes increase the 
disutility of unknown 
risks.
Stakes may not affect the 
mere exposure effect.
Stakes lead to more 
pronounced probability 
weighting and investor 
sacrifice diversification 
for skewness exposure.
Stakes increase the 
disutility of unknown 
risks.
Stakes may not affect the 
mere exposure effect.
Stakes lead to more 
careful application of an 
incorrect belief.
Stakes make decisions 
more sensational.

variations  in  biases.11 Grinblatt,  Keloharju,  and  Linnainmaa  (2011, 
2012)  show  that  underdiversification  and  the  disposition  effect  are 
stronger  in  individuals  with  lower  IQs.  Barberis  (2013) argues  that 
prospect theory can explain several investor biases. Gabaix (2014, 2019) 
provides a unifying framework for considering inattention as a common 
source of several biases, and Birru et al. (2024) provide evidence that is 
consistent with this framework, which assumes that individuals carry 
the correct mental models but cognitive costs lead them to form noisy 
expectations. Such a bounded rationality framework predicts that higher 
stakes will induce greater effort and hence reduce biases. Our findings 
and  those  of  several  recent  studies  (Enke  et  al.,  2021;  Hartzmark, 
Hirshman, and Imas, 2021) suggest that many individuals may not carry 
the correct mental models, and that poor decisions are driven in part by 
deeply  rooted  biases  that  strong  motivations,  at  least  alone,  cannot 

11 Cronqvist and Siegel (2014) also review the literature on the association of 
specific genes with biases.

improve.12 Our  findings  also  shed  light  on  the  existence—and  persis-
tence—of  so  many  biases  and  asset-pricing  anomalies  in  high-stakes 
real-world financial markets.

Our  paper  also  addresses  investor  protection  policies.  If  investor 
biases  are  deeply  rooted,  policies  that  make  trading  easier  may  hurt 
investor  welfare,  as  evidenced  when  investors  switched  from  phone- 
based  to  online  trading  in  the  1990s  (Baber  and  Odean,  2002)  and 
more recently to smartphone-based trading (Kalda et al., 2023). In this 
spirit, our finding is also related to those of Heimer and Simsek (2019)
and Heimer and Imas (2022), who document that leverage constraints 
can  discourage  retail  investors  from  trading  excessively,  weaken  the 
disposition effect, and improve welfare.

2.5. External validity

Finally, we stress that we do not expect our stakes-strengthen-biases 
results to extend to all other biases or all other settings. As discussed 
above,  stakes  have  effects  that vary  with  the  nature  of  specific  tasks. 
When discussing the generalizability issue, it is useful to emphasize one 
important feature of financial markets. Stock returns are characterized 
by  a  low  information-to-noise  ratio.  Such  a  feature  may  prevent  in-
vestors  from  learning.  Accurate  learning  takes  place  only  when  in-
dividuals  receive  timely  and  organized  feedback  (Thaler,  1986). 
Competition  does  not  seem  to  work  effectively  at  eliminating  biased 
investors from financial markets (De Long et al., 1990). In addition, in 
financial markets, nonpecuniary factors may not exist or are unimpor-
tant factors in investor trading. As discussed above, evidence shows that 
high stakes tend to reduce the consideration of nonpecuniary factors. 
Last, our data are drawn from an investor social network and, as a result, 
our  investors’  trades  can  be  observed  by  their  peers.  Although  our 
within-subject estimates remain valid because both types of accounts are 
observable, we note that stakes effects may be a function of context. The 
biases in our real accounts are similar to what have been documented 
using  other  account-level  datasets,  and  we  find  similar  results  for  in-
vestors  who  have  no  followers,  mitigating  this  concern.  Our  analysis 
based on the two additional account-level datasets confirms the finding 
that  stakes  strengthen  biases,  providing  external  validity  to  the  real-
(cid:0) simulated account comparison analysis.

3. Data and methodology

Our primary data source is Snowball Finance (Xueqiu.com; Snowball 
hereafter), supplemented with stock price, return, and volume data from 
the China Stock Market & Accounting Research Database (CSMAR).13 In 
this section, we discuss background information pertaining to Snowball 
and the data.

3.1. Snowball finance

Snowball is one of the most popular social networks among Chinese 
investors. Founded in 2010, it has 12 million active users. Although the 
users range from small retail investors to professionals, including sell- 
side analysts and fund managers, Snowball is well known to be over-
populated  with  relatively  sophisticated  retail  investors.  On  Snowball, 
investors can access real-time price and volume information on financial 
securities. Like Twitter, Snowball allows its users to share information, 
post their opinions on investment and financial issues, and interact with 
other users.

12 Evolutionary  models  of  biases  provide  insights  into  this  phenomenon. 
Proponents  of  these  models  argue  that  behaviors  that  represent  investment 
biases today might have been advantageous in ancient times (Rayo and Becker, 
2007).
13 Sui and Wang (2025) also use Snowball data. They focus on real accounts 
and study self-enhancing transmission bias.

6 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Uniquely,  Snowball  allows  users  to  carry  two  types  of  investment 
accounts: real and simulated. Users can register at Snowball and obtain 
one  or  more  simulated  accounts.  They  can  also  link  their  brokerage 
accounts  with  Snowball  and  reveal  their  transactions  on  the  website. 
Third-party brokerage companies manage the brokerage accounts, and 
Snowball does not profit from trades made by these investors.14 Around 
half a million users hold stock accounts with Snowball, either real or 
simulated.

Users  may  link  their  brokerage  accounts  for  several  reasons,  and 
some benefits and website functions are available only if they do. For 
example,  only  linked  investors  can  observe  other  linked  investors’ 
trading records. Through collaboration with brokerage firms, Snowball 
helps  linked  users  participate  in  IPO  subscriptions  and  enhance  the 
returns  on  their  cash  balances  (i.e.,  by  participating  in  reverse 
repurchase agreements or money market mutual funds). Investors may 
also  enjoy  the  experience  of  interacting  with  others  and  feeling 
influential.

Although Snowball’s simulated accounts do not involve real money, 
representatives of the platform informed us that most investors trade in 
simulated accounts to maximize performance. Many investors post short 
descriptions of the purposes of their simulated accounts. Our analysis of 
these purpose descriptions confirms what Snowball representatives said. 
This is not surprising, given Snowball’s design. To incentivize investors 
to maximize performance with simulated accounts, Snowball maintains 
three lists of top-ten accounts. The three lists are based on performance 
in  the  preceding  day,  week,  and  year.  There  are  similar  lists  for  real 
accounts.  The  lists  of  best  performers  are  updated  in  real  time  and 
featured prominently on the Snowball homepage. Moreover, Snowball 
records  are  verifiable  and  many  users  report  the  performance  they 
achieve with both types of accounts on their r´esum´es.

Another  possible  utility  that  simulated  accounts  might  provide 
would involve using them as “watch lists.” Almost all brokerage trading 
platforms  in  China  (including  brokerages  that  manage  real  Snowball 
accounts) offer investors a dedicated “watch list”  function. Therefore, 
Snowball users do not have to use simulated accounts as “watch lists.” 
Consistently, we find that, across all purchases in the real accounts, only 
16.8 % of the purchased stocks were already held in simulated accounts 
at the time of purchase.

Snowball  follows  real  stock  market  rules  as  closely  as  possible  to 
manage  trading  in  simulated  accounts.  There  are,  however,  several 
differences. First, orders from simulated accounts are matched with the 
prevailing exchange order book, but simulated trades will not change 
the  order  book  or  have  a  price  impact.15 Second,  Snowball  does  not 
consider brokerage commissions (about 0.25 % of the value of a trans-
action) or stamp-duty taxes (0.1 % of transaction value, for sales only) in 
calculating the values of positions in the simulated accounts. Third, cash 
dividends are automatically reinvested in those dividend-paying stocks.
We do not expect these differences to have important effects on our 
results. The sample investors are retail investors. Treating them as price- 
takers (i.e., with no impact on an order book) is approximately correct. 
Given  that  Snowball  does  not  consider  commissions  or  taxes  with 
simulated accounts, we expect investors to trade more actively in those 
accounts. As we show later, however, investors trade significantly more 
frequently in real accounts.

3.2. Snowball data

The data we collected from Snowball are very similar to those used 
by Odean (1998) and Barber and Odean (2000). We created a user file 
and a trade file. We also collected a file with all the posts. The first real 

14 Most of the brokerage accounts are held at Ping’an Securities, one of the 
largest securities firms in China.
15 Both the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange are 
pure limit-order markets.

account was opened on June 24, 2016 and the first simulated account 
was opened on October 22, 2014. Our sample period starts on June 24, 
2016 and ends in May 2019, when we began collecting data.

At the user level, we collected information on user identifications, 
the  list  of  accounts  a  user  holds  (including  closed  accounts),  a  real/ 
simulated flag for each account, an active/closed flag for each account 
(measured at the time we collected data), an account’s initiation date, an 
account’s  close  date  (if  applicable),  and  user  locations  if  available. 
About  half  of  the  users  in  our  main  sample  reported  their  locations, 
either at the province level or the prefecture-city level.

We also created a trade file. The trade file contains such information 
as investor identification, account identification, trade date, trade time, 
asset  symbol,  type  of  record  (dividend  payment,  buy/sell,  IPO  sub-
scription, etc.), and trade price.16 The data do not include information 
indicating the number of shares for each asset or the total value of an 
account. Instead, the data include the value of one asset as a fraction of 
the total portfolio value. For each trade, we collect the fractions before 
and after the trade. We infer the direction of a trade by comparing the 
change in fractions. For example, if the fraction of a stock drops from 50 
% to 20 % after a trade, we infer that this is a sale. Information indicating 
changes in fractions also enables us to calculate portfolio turnover. The 
sum of a change in fractions within a given period gives us a measure of 
portfolio turnover.

Once the link between an investor’s brokerage account and Snowball 
is set up, all subsequent real-account trades will be disclosed on Snow-
ball. Trades that occur before the link are not disclosed, which avoids 
selective disclosure based on ex-post performance. All trades from the 
simulated accounts are disclosed.

The data are subject to several limitations. First, users can close their 
simulated accounts or real accounts at any time. Trading records and 
daily portfolio performance data for closed simulated accounts are kept 
on the website but are removed for closed real accounts. For closed real 
accounts,  the  website  keeps  account  initiation  dates,  account  close 
dates, and portfolio performance as of account close dates. The fact that 
the trading histories of closed real accounts are unavailable to us raises a 
sample-selection concern. We argue that this sample-selection concern 
may not be particularly problematic. First, Sui and Wang (2025) find 
that real account closings do not seem to correlate with performance. 
Second, as documented later, investors achieve worse performance and 
exhibit stronger biases in their real accounts than in their simulated ac-
counts. If an investor is more likely to close a real account when per-
formance falls or when biases are stronger, we would expect the sample 
selection process to lead to underestimation of the stakes effects.

Second, Snowball sets limits on the total number of trades available 
on the website. If the number of trades from a real account is above 200, 
only the most recent 200 trades will be visible. The limit is 1000 for 
simulated accounts. The majority of accounts do not reach these limits, 
and therefore we have data on their entire trading histories for most of 
the accounts in our sample. Truncation is more likely to affect users who 
trade very frequently. Our data overweight their trading in the period 
immediately before May 2019, when we collected our data. We evaluate 
how this truncation affects our results later in the paper.

3.3. Summary statistics

We focus on investors who hold both real and simulated accounts. In 
our main analyses, for each investor who holds accounts of both types 

16 We use raw trade prices before fees or commissions. The two Chinese stock 
exchanges  are  both  pure  limit-  order  book  markets.  Chinese  brokerage  com-
panies  collect  client  orders  and  pass  them  to  the  exchanges.  Fees  and  com-
missions  are  collected  separately,  not  through  spreads.  We  selected  200 
transactions randomly and compared them with prices from intraday trade-by- 
trade data provided by RiceQuant. In almost all cases, the prices are exactly the 
same or within a one-cent difference.

7 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

we restrict our analysis to the period when both types of accounts are 
active.  In  some  tests,  we  examine  whether  the  presence  of  the  other 
account  affects  the  biases.  To  collect  sufficiently  voluminous  data  to 
measure investor behaviors, we require that the overlapping period lasts 
for at least one year.

We start with 13,993 investors with real accounts. Of these investors, 
8732 also hold simulated accounts. To be included in our sample, an 
investor has to trade stocks listed on the two domestic exchanges in both 
types  of  accounts.  As  a  result,  398  investors  are  excluded.  Lastly,  we 
exclude 3921 investors whose real and simulated accounts overlap for 
less than one year. Our final sample includes 4413 investors. Virtually 
every investor holds one real account, but many hold multiple simulated 
accounts.17 In total, the 4413 investors hold 20,603 simulated accounts. 
Among  the  final  sample,  1081  investors  hold  only  one  simulated  ac-
count. Our results are similar if we focus on these 1081 investors.

In Table 3, we report summary statistics for the sample investors. The 
average  length  of  the  overlapping  period  is  668  days.  The  average 
number of trades in the real accounts is 99.66. For investors with mul-
tiple simulated accounts, we first calculate the number of trades for each 
simulated account and then average it across all the simulated accounts 
an investor holds. We obtain an average number of trades in a simulated 
account of 39.77.

We also report how often investors hold the same stocks in both types 
of accounts. Overlapped holdings are the number of stock-days when an 
investor holds a stock in both types of accounts on the same day. Real 
holdings  (simulated  holdings)  are  the  number  of  stock-days  in  real 
(simulated) accounts. On average, the overlapped holdings are 35.6 % of 
all  real  account  holdings,  indicating  that  many  investors  carry  out  a 
similar  thought  process  when  trading  in  both  types  of  accounts.  The 
ratio is much smaller as a fraction of simulated account holdings because 
more stocks are held in the simulated accounts. It is unsurprising to see 

Table 3 
Summary Statistics. In this table, we report summary statistics for the sample 
investors. These investors include all those whose real accounts and simulated 
accounts overlap for more than a year. We report summary statistics for these 
investors  for  the  overlapping  period.  Active  period  is  the  length  of  an  active 
period in days. Number of trades is the total number of trades in the overlapping 
period. Overlapped holdings are the number of stock-days on which an investor 
holds a stock in both types of accounts on the same day. Real holdings (simulated 
holdings) are the number of stock-days in real (simulated) accounts. We report 
the total numbers (N), means, standard deviations (STD), first quartiles (Q1), 
medians, and third quartiles (Q3).

N

Mean

STD

Q1

Median

Q3

overlapped holdings as retail investors have limited attention. We also 
observe  sizeable  cross-sectional  variation  in  the  ratio  of  overlapped 
holdings. In Section 5.1.2, we report that our main results are robust in 
all subsamples split by this ratio.

Although Snowball does not reveal account values, our conservative 
estimates suggest that the average real account value is worth four to six 
times the annual disposable income per capita in China. We estimate the 
value of each real account by taking advantage of the exchange trading 
rule, according to which a stock’s minimum trading unit is 100 shares. 
First, we estimate the value of each trade by assuming that the trade size 
is 100 shares. This is the lowest possible trade value. Second, Snowball 
reports the size of each trade as a fraction of a trader’s total portfolio 
value. We divide the trade value by that fraction, obtaining an estimate 
of the lower bound of the portfolio value at the time of the trade. Third, 
we calculate the highest portfolio value across all the trades executed by 
a  given  investor  and  use  this  figure  as  our  final  measure  of  portfolio 
value.  The  estimated  mean  (median)  portfolio  value  is  244,000  RMB 
(106,000 RMB) or approximately 35,030 US dollars (15,218 US dollars). 
The  mean  (median)  annual  disposable  income  per  capita  in  China  in 
2019 (the last year of our sample) was 30,733 RMB (26,523 RMB) or 
approximately 4412 US dollars (3808 US dollars).

4. Investor behaviors and methodology

In this section, we introduce the investor behaviors that we examine 
in this paper. All the behaviors we examine have been widely studied in 
the  finance  literature  (Barberis  and  Thaler,  2003;  Barber  and  Odean, 
2013).  For  some  behaviors,  there  may  be  alternative  measures.  We 
discuss these alternative measures in the Internet Appendix, where we 
report the results of robustness tests conducted with these measures.

We calculate each investor behavior measure at the individual level 
and  separately  for  real  accounts  and  simulated  accounts.  As  noted 
above,  virtually  all the  investors  in  our sample  hold just  one real  ac-
count,  but  many  hold  multiple  simulated  accounts.  We  estimate  the 
disposition  effect  by  pooling  data  from  all  the  simulated  accounts 
together. We first calculate other bias measures for each simulated ac-
count  and then  take the  average across all  of an  investor’s simulated 
accounts. For diversification analysis, in addition to the average-across- 
accounts approach we also measure diversification by treating all the 
simulated accounts as one and report this result in the Internet Appen-
dix. Our results are qualitatively similar if we focus on investors who 
hold  just  one  simulated  account.  To  mitigate  the  effects  of  extreme 
values, we winsorize all the measures at the 1 % and the 99 % levels 
separately for real accounts and simulated accounts.

4413
4413

667.867
99.661

197.555
62.729

491.000
43.000

642.000
91.000

833.000
160.000

4.1. Investor behaviors

Active period
Number of 
trades in 
real 
accounts
Number of 
trades in 
simulated 
accounts
Overlapped 
holdings/ 
Real 
holdings
Overlapped 
holding/ 
Simulated 
holdings

4413

39.772

158.106

6.429

14.000

33.667

4413

0.356

0.315

0.049

0.298

0.602

4413

0.149

0.196

0.011

0.072

0.208

17 One  common  reason  for  holding  multiple  simulated  accounts  is  to  trade 
different  types  of  stocks  in  separate  accounts.  For  example,  one  can  have  an 
account for value stocks and another for momentum stocks.

8 

4.1.1. The disposition effect

The disposition effect—the tendency to sell stocks that earn capital 
gains rather than stocks that incur capital losses—is perhaps the most 
robust empirical finding on investor trading (Shefrin and Statman, 1985; 
Odean, 1998).

To examine whether investors in our sample are likely to sell winner 
stocks  and  hold  loser  stocks,  we  first  use  the  transaction  dataset  to 
construct a holding sample that contains observations for all investor- 
stock-day pairs (Ben-David and Hirshleifer, 2012). For example, if an 
investor bought Stock A on January 2, 2018, and held it until January 
31, 2018, there will be 22 observations (22 business days). Purchases 
and sales are aggregated on a daily basis for each account-stock. We flag 
the days when a position is opened and when shares are sold (including 
partial  sales).  We  use  the  weighted  average  purchase  price  and  take 
stock splits and dividends into account to calculate the holding-period 
returns.  We  exclude  positions  for  which  we  do  not  have  the  initial 
purchase price, mainly because those positions were established before a 
Snowball link was made.

We estimate the disposition effect using the following model, 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Selli,j,t = α + βiGaini,j,t(cid:0) 1 + εi,j,t,

(1) 

4.1.4. Underdiversification

where i, j, and t denote investor i, position j, and day t, respectively. Selli,j, 
t is a dummy variable that equals 1 if investor i sells position j (partially 
or fully) on day t and 0 otherwise. Gaini,j,t-1  is a dummy variable that 
equals 1 if investor i experiences a gain in stock j at the end of day t-1 and 
0 otherwise. We estimate Eq. (1) using a linear probability model. The 
coefficient, βi, is our measure of the disposition effect for investor i. To 
facilitate the presentation of the reported results, we multiply βi by 100.
An alternative specification involves focusing on investor-days when 
an investor sells at least one stock and has at least two stocks available 
for sale (Odean, 1998). The individual-level disposition effect estimates 
may be noisy. We could, alternatively, estimate the disposition effect by 
pooling all real accounts or all simulated accounts together. We can also 
estimate  Eq.  (1) using  a  hazard  model  instead  of  a  linear  probability 
model. We find qualitatively similar results with all these methods and 
report them in the Internet Appendix.

4.1.2. Lottery preference

We  define  lottery  stocks  following  Kumar  (2009).  Specifically,  we 
consider  three  stock  characteristics  to  identify  stocks  that  might  be 
perceived  as  lotteries:  idiosyncratic  volatility,  idiosyncratic  skewness, 
and stock price. At the end of month t, we compute both idiosyncratic 
volatility and idiosyncratic skewness using daily data from t-6 through 
t-1. The idiosyncratic volatility measure is the variance of the residuals 
obtained by fitting a one-factor model to the daily stock returns, where 
the factor is market excess returns. We measure idiosyncratic skewness 
following  Harvey  and  Siddique  (2000).  Specifically,  idiosyncratic 
skewness is a scaled measure of the third moment of the residuals ob-
tained by fitting a two-factor model to daily stock returns, where the two 
factors are excess market returns and squared excess market returns.

We consider all listed domestic Chinese stocks and define stocks in 
the  lowest  50th  stock  price  percentile,  the  highest  50th  idiosyncratic 
volatility  percentile,  and  the  highest  50th  idiosyncratic  skewness 
percentile as lottery-type stocks (Kumar 2009).

At the individual investor level, we calculate the strength of lottery 
preferences separately for real accounts and simulated accounts, using 
the percentage of lottery stocks an investor buys over the sample period. 
We weigh each purchase with a purchase’s dollar amount as a fraction of 
the total portfolio value at the time of purchase. For example, if a pur-
chase represents 20 % of the total portfolio value at the time of purchase 
and another purchase represents 40 % of the total portfolio value at the 
time of purchase, the second purchase is assigned a weight that is twice 
that of the first purchase. We obtain qualitatively similar results if we 
weigh separate purchases equally or measure lottery preferences based 
on holdings instead of purchases.

We report the results based  on the three characteristics (price per 
share,  idiosyncratic  volatility,  and  idiosyncratic  skewness)  in  the 
Internet Appendix.

4.1.3. Extrapolation

Investors tend to buy stocks that have abnormally high past perfor-
mance  (Barber  and  Odean,  2013).  We  expect  investors  harboring 
stronger extrapolation bias to buy stocks that have earned higher recent 
past returns. For each stock an investor bought on day t, we calculate the 
excess return on this stock, defined as the return on the stock net of the 
market return over the preceding 126 trading days. We aggregate these 
excess  returns  (in  percentages)  across  all  of  an  investor’s  purchases 
separately  for  real  and  simulated  accounts.  As  we  do  for  the 
lottery-preference measure, here we weigh each purchase by its dollar 
amount as a fraction of the total portfolio value at the time of purchase. 
We use average past excess returns as the proxy for investors’ tendency 
to follow extrapolation strategies. Our results, which we report in the 
Internet Appendix, are not sensitive to window choices.

Our  measure  of  diversification  is  the  number  of  stocks  in  an  in-
vestor’s portfolio. We count the number of stocks in a portfolio every day 
and use the time-series average as our measure of diversification. For all 
other bias measures, a higher value is associated with a stronger bias. To 
be consistent, and for ease of exposition, we use the negative value of the 
natural  logarithm of the  average number  of stocks as  our measure  of 
underdiversification.

4.1.5. Local bias

It has been documented that investors prefer holding stocks in firms 
that are located geographically near to them (Ivkovic and Weisbenner, 
2005; Massa and Simonov 2006).

To test whether investors in our sample tend to hold local stocks, we 
collect the headquarters locations of all the listed firms and the residence 
cities  of  the  investors.18 We  obtain  firm  headquarters  locations  from 
WIND. We then identify the latitude and longitude of each location by 
relying  on  the  Baidu  map  Application  Programming  Interface  and 
calculate the distance (in kilometers) between the headquarters cities 
and investors’ residence cities using the haversine formula. The haver-
sine formula determines the great-circle distance between two points on 
a sphere, given their longitudes and latitudes.

Our primary measure of local bias is the benchmark-adjusted average 
distance (in kilometers) between an investor’s location and the head-
quarters of the stocks the investor bought over our sample period. We 
first  calculate  the  volume-weighted  average  distance  between  an 
investor  and  his/her  purchased  stocks.  The  benchmark  is  the  market 
capitalization-weighted average distance between this investor’s loca-
tion and the headquarters locations of all the listed stocks. Investors for 
whom  the  average  distance  is  shorter  than  the  benchmark  are  more 
likely to exhibit local biases. Our main local bias measure is calculated as 
log (1 + benchmark distance) – log (1 + average distance). We add 1 to 
the average distance because there are cases where investors buy only 
stocks  located  in  their  cities  of  residence  and  therefore  exhibit  an 
average distance of 0. Our results are also similar if we measure local 
bias using the excess weight by which an investor buys stocks in his/her 
own province or prefecture city.

4.1.6. Turnover

Barber and Odean (2000) find that investors trade too frequently. We 
investigate the frequency of trading for the investors in our sample using 
portfolio turnover.

We  calculate  turnover  at  the  account  level  through  the  following 
steps. First, we define the date for the first and last observations in one 
portfolio within the overlapping period as the start and end dates. We 
obtain the duration of one portfolio as the total number of days between 
the  end  date  and  the  start  date.  Notice  that  we  measure  duration  in 
calendar days rather than trading days. We aggregate the corresponding 
fractions across all trades within the duration of one portfolio and divide 
the  sum  by  two.  Finally,  we  obtain  the  daily  account  turnover  by 
dividing the aggregated fraction by the total number of duration days. 
We report the annualized turnover rate by multiplying daily turnover by 
365.

4.1.7.

Investor performance

For each purchase we calculate the stock’s buy-and-hold returns (in 
percentages) over the following two months. We adjust this figure by 
size-decile portfolio returns. As we do for lottery preferences, extrapo-
lation, and local bias, here we weigh each purchase with the purchase’s 

18 About 50% of our sample investors report their locations. Of the investors 
who report their locations, about 80% report at the prefecture-city level and the 
other  20%  report  at  the  province  level.  We  drop  the  latter  from  the  analysis 
when  calculating  the  benchmark-adjusted  distance  and  when  calculating  the 
excess weight of stocks in an investor’s city of residence.

9 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

dollar amount as a fraction of the total portfolio value at the time of 
purchase. Our results are similar if we measure performance over the 
following  one,  three,  or  six  months.  Size-decile  portfolios  are  formed 
based  on market capitalization at the  end of the previous month and 
rebalanced monthly.19 Our performance measure is not affected by the 
difference in the treatments of commissions and taxes between the real 
and simulated accounts.

4.1.8. Discussions

Most  investor  behavior  literature  regards  the  abovementioned  be-
haviors as suboptimal. The theoretical literature has proposed various 
mechanisms to explain these behaviors based on irrational beliefs, non- 
traditional preferences, or bounded rationality. The empirical evidence 
shows predominately that these behaviors are associated with inferior 
investor  performance.20 For  example,  Barber,  Lee,  Liu,  and  Odean 
(2009) show that, in aggregate, the portfolios of individual investors in 
Taiwan suffer an annual performance loss equivalent to 2.2 % of Tai-
wan’s  gross  domestic  product,  and  at  least  two-thirds  of  the  losses 
(commissions  and  transaction  taxes  paid)  are  attributable  to  heavy 
trading.

Evidence  from  mainland  Chinese  data  also  points  in  the  same  di-
rection. For the disposition effect, studies have argued that it could be 
motivated  by  a  desire  to  rebalance  portfolios  or  to  avoid  the  higher 
trading  costs  associated  with  low-priced  stocks.  These  rational  in-
terpretations have been dismissed both in the US data and in mainland 
Chinese data (Odean, 1998; An et al., 2024). Lottery stocks underper-
form other stocks both in the US (Kumar 2009) and in mainland China 
(Jiang et al., 2022) and therefore a lottery preference is costly. Investors 
can  exhibit  extrapolation  (i.e.,  buy  past  winners)  if  past  winners 
continue to perform better (i.e., return momentum). The literature re-
ports no momentum effect or a reverse-momentum effect in China (Liu, 
Stambaugh, and Yuan, 2019; Jiang et al., 2022). Investors can exhibit 
local bias if they are well informed about local stocks, a finding that is 
not supported by the data either in the US (Seasholes and Zhu, 2010) or 
in mainland China (Seasholes, Tai, and Yang, 2010). Not surprisingly, as 
we show later, all these biases are negatively correlated with investor 
performance.

4.2. Summary statistics and correlation coefficients of biases

In Table 4, we report the summary statistics for the biases. For each 
behavioral bias measure, we report, separately for the real and simu-
lated accounts, the first quartile, the median, the third quartile, and the 
number of investors for whom we can construct the measure as well as 
the means and standard deviations. It is evident that, in both simulated 
and real accounts, investors exhibit a strong disposition effect, extrap-
olation, and local bias. They also hold a small number of stocks in both 
types  of accounts. The average fraction of lottery stocks in the entire 
stock market is 6.09 %, so our investors exhibit a strong lottery prefer-
ence  in  real  accounts  but  not  in  simulated  accounts.  Investors  earn 
negative abnormal returns in both types of accounts.

The  biases  in  real  accounts  are  qualitatively  similar  to  those 

19 Snowball reports portfolio performance on its website. As stated on the site, 
though,  its  calculation  “may  be  affected  by  special  cases.”  Our  calculation 
shows that there are an unusually high number of days with extreme returns. 
For  example,  about  14%  of  real  portfolios  experience  a  daily  return  that  is 
higher  than 22.22%  or lower than  (cid:0) 22.2%. With  the daily ±10%  price-limit 
rule,  22.22%  and  (cid:0) 22.2%  are  the  maximum  and  minimum  possible  daily 
portfolio  returns.  Our  further  analysis  suggests  that,  in  some  cases,  Snowball 
does  not  properly  observe  cash  flows  into  or  out  of  an  account.  Our  private 
communications with Snowball confirm this conjecture. Therefore, we decided 
to calculate portfolio returns by ourselves instead of using the reported returns.
20 See the references in the Introduction as well as Barberis and Thaler (2003)
and Barber and Odean (2013) for reviews of both the theoretical and empirical 
contributions to this literature.

documented in the literature: the disposition effect (Feng and Seasholes, 
2005; Frydman and Wang, 2020; An et al., 2024), lottery preference (Liu 
et  al.,  2022),  extrapolation  (Liao,  Peng,  and  Zhu,  2022),  under-
diversification (Feng and Seasholes, 2008; Frydman and Wang, 2020), 
local bias (Feng and Seasholes, 2008), turnover (Frydman and Wang, 
2020; Liu et al., 2022), and performance (An et al., 2024). In cases where 
the estimates are comparable, the biases in the real accounts are also 
quantitatively similar: the disposition effect (Frydman and Wang, 2020), 
underdiversification  (Feng  and  Seasholes,  2008;  Frydman  and  Wang, 
2020), turnover (Liu et al., 2022), and performance (An et al., 2024). 
Such a finding mitigates the concern that our online investors may not 
be representative of the relevant population of investors. This finding 
also  mitigates  the  concern  that  the  observability  of  the  trades  on  the 
online  investor  social  network  may  dramatically  change  investors’ 
behaviors.

In Table 5, we report the pairwise correlation coefficients between 
behavioral biases in real accounts (Panel A) and in simulated accounts 
(Panel B). First, in general, the biases are positively correlated with each 
other and are negatively correlated with performance. Most of the cor-
relation coefficients are statistically significant. One exception is local 
bias,  whose  correlations  with  other  variables  are  weak  and  do  not 
exhibit a clear pattern. Local bias also does not strongly correlate with 
performance. The general negative correlations between the biases and 
performance are consistent with the view that these investor behaviors 
involve  costly  mistakes.  Second,  the  correlations  are  not  very  strong. 
They are all lower than 0.3, suggesting that these biases are distinct from 
each other.21 Third, the correlation coefficients between biases/perfor-
mance are higher in real accounts than in simulated accounts.

5. Results based on Snowball data

5.1. Stakes effects: differences between real and simulated accounts

5.1.1. Main results

Table 6 presents the study’s main results. We conduct the within- 
subject  comparison  at  the  level  of  biases  between  real  accounts  and 
simulated  accounts.  For  each  behavioral  bias  measure,  we  report  the 
means of both real accounts and simulated accounts. We also report the 
means  of  investor-level  differences,  their  t-statistics,  and  Wilcoxon  p- 
values.

Investors exhibit stronger biases in their real accounts than in their 
simulated accounts, with the exception that they do not exhibit a dif-
ference in local bias between the two types of accounts. These differ-
ences  are  highly  statistically  significant,  as  indicated  by  the  high  t- 
statistics. The differences are also sizable. In real accounts, the proba-
bility that investors sell winners is, on a daily basis, 4.16 % higher than 
the probability that they sell losers. In the simulated accounts, the dif-
ference is only 0.49 %. In the real accounts 6.49 % of purchases involve 
lottery  stocks,  while  in  the  simulated  accounts  4.26  %  of  purchases 
involve those stocks. On average, investors hold 2.96 (i.e., exp(1.086)) 
stocks in their real accounts and 4.36 (i.e., exp(1.473)) in their simu-
lated accounts. Annual turnover is 596 % in real accounts and 84 % in 
simulated accounts. In the two months after being purchased, the stocks 
investors  hold  in  their  real  accounts  underperform  their  size-decile 
portfolio  by  0.656  %,  while  the  stocks  they  hold  in  their  simulated 

21 The generally weak positive correlations between investor biases and weak 
negative  correlations  between  investor  biases  and  performance  is  consistent 
with findings reported in the literature. See Bailey, Kumar, and Ng (2011) for 
an example. Liu et al. (2022) report a similar correlation table but their investor 
biases are calculated based on survey data. Attempts to consolidate many biases 
into  fewer  dimensions  have  also  been  made  in  the  experimental  economics 
literature  (see  Dean  and  Ortoleva,  2019;  Chapman  et  al.,  2023;  Stango  and 
Zinman, 2023), but these studies typically examine biases other than those we 
examine.

10 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Table 4 
Summary statistics for biases. In this table, we report the mean, standard deviation (STD), Q1 (the first quartile), median, and Q3 (the third quartile) for each type of 
bias. We also report t-statistics for and Wilcoxon p-values of the investor-level bias measures. See Section 4.1 for the bias definitions. All biases are calculated at the 
individual investor level and separately for real accounts and simulated accounts. We winsorize each measure separately for the real and simulated accounts at the 1 % 
and 99 % levels.

Panel A. Real accounts

Disposition effect
Lottery preference
Extrapolation
Underdiversification
Local Bias
Turnover
Performance

Panel B. Simulated accounts

Disposition effect
Lottery preference
Extrapolation
Underdiversification
Local Bias
Turnover
Performance

N

4371
4369
4373
4394
1739
4386
4375

N

4371
4369
4373
4394
1739
4386
4375

Mean

4.163
6.491
15.599
(cid:0) 1.086
0.630
5.960
(cid:0) 0.656

Mean

0.489
4.264
12.660
(cid:0) 1.473
0.645
0.839
(cid:0) 0.148

STD

7.532
9.130
26.191
0.657
0.880
7.382
4.685

STD

1.575
8.792
25.200
0.688
0.970
1.624
5.921

Q1

0.160
0.000
0.121
(cid:0) 1.536
0.055
1.501
(cid:0) 3.181

Q1

0.000
0.000
(cid:0) 0.199
(cid:0) 1.967
0.048
0.070
(cid:0) 2.858

Median

1.868
2.495
9.224
(cid:0) 1.041
0.366
3.180
(cid:0) 0.285

Median

0.000
0.068
7.403
(cid:0) 1.539
0.354
0.304
0.219

Q3

5.908
9.708
22.374
(cid:0) 0.580
0.907
7.166
2.174

Q3

0.353
4.441
18.028
(cid:0) 1.073
0.914
0.784
2.936

t

(36.54)
(46.99)
(39.39)
((cid:0) 109.61)
(29.84)
(53.47)
((cid:0) 9.27)

t

(20.54)
(32.06)
(33.22)
((cid:0) 141.96)
(27.74)
(34.22)
((cid:0) 1.65)

Wilcoxon p

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Wilcoxon p

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.020

Table 5 
Correlation coefficients of biases. In this table, we report pairwise correlation coefficients between behavioral biases: Panel A lists the correlation coefficients of real 
accounts and Panel B lists the correlation coefficients of simulated accounts. See Section 4.1 for the bias definitions. Reported in parentheses are the p-values of the 
correlation coefficients.

Panel A. Real accounts

Disposition effect

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

Local bias

Turnover

Performance

Disposition effect

1

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

Local bias

Turnover

Performance

0.213
(0.000)
0.115
(0.000)
0.237
(0.000)
0.050
(0.039)
0.306
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.209
(0.000)

Panel B. Simulated accounts

1

0.157
(0.000)
0.211
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.068
(0.005)
0.234
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.260
(0.000)

1

0.117
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.044
(0.067)
0.269
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.259
(0.000)

1

(cid:0) 0.007
(0.774)
0.368
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.180
(0.000)

1

(cid:0) 0.021
(0.390)
(cid:0) 0.003
(0.915)

1

(cid:0) 0.229
(0.000)

1

Disposition effect

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

Local bias

Turnover

Performance

Disposition effect

1

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

Local bias

Turnover

Performance

0.119
(0.000)
0.137
(0.000)
0.104
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.028
(0.250)
0.413
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.093
(0.000)

1

0.045
(0.003)
0.063
(0.000)
0.036
(0.131)
0.124
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.099
(0.000)

1

0.042
(0.006)
(cid:0) 0.030
(0.209)
0.230
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.129
(0.000)

1

0.048
(0.045)
0.052
(0.001)
(cid:0) 0.094
(0.000)

1

(cid:0) 0.027
(0.268)
(cid:0) 0.041
(0.088)

1

(cid:0) 0.082
(0.000)

1

accounts underperform that portfolio by 0.148 %.

In Fig. 1, we present the estimated kernel densities for behavioral 
biases in real and simulated accounts. Each plot uses a Gaussian kernel. 
The  distributions  of  the  biases  reveal  the  contrast  between  real  and 
simulated accounts. With respect to all the biases except local bias, the 
distribution  of real  accounts exhibits  a  clear  rightward shift from the 
distribution of simulated accounts. The performance distribution of real 

accounts exhibits a clear leftward shift. These graphs make it clear that 
the differences between the two types of accounts are sizable and sys-
tematic, echoing the strong statistical power associated with Table 6.

Investors’  trading  decisions  can  deteriorate  for  two  reasons:  they 
conduct more bad trades or each trade is worse. Our results show that 
both  contribute  to  stronger  biases  and  worse  performance  in  real  ac-
counts.  The  higher  turnover  observed  in  real  accounts  indicates  that 

11 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Table 6 
Differences between the real and simulated accounts. In this table, we report differences between real and simulated accounts. See Section 4.1 for the bias definitions. 
For each type of bias we report the mean of the real accounts, the mean of the simulated accounts, and the mean of the differences between them. For the differences, 
we report t-statistics and Wilcoxon p-values. In column “N” we report the number of investors.

Disposition effect
Lottery preference
Extrapolation
Underdiversification
Local Bias
Turnover
Performance

N

4371
4369
4373
4394
1739
4386
4375

Real

Mean

4.163
6.491
15.599
(cid:0) 1.086
0.630
5.960
(cid:0) 0.656

Simulated

Difference

Mean

0.489
4.264
12.66
(cid:0) 1.473
0.645
0.839
(cid:0) 0.148

Mean

3.674
2.228
2.939
0.386
(cid:0) 0.015
5.121
(cid:0) 0.509

t-stat

(32.43)
(13.88)
(6.49)
(32.67)
((cid:0) 0.64)
(47.44)
((cid:0) 4.95)

Wilcoxon p

0.000
0.000
0.006
0.000
0.810
0.000
0.001

stakes increase the frequency of mistakes. Given that we measure several 
biases  (lottery  preference,  extrapolation,  and  performance)  on  a  per- 
trade  basis,  the  results  also  show  that  the  average  trade  quality  is 
lower in real accounts.22

5.1.2. Robustness tests for the main results

We  report  the  results  of  several  robustness  tests  for  the  baseline 

results. 

A. Using simulated accounts that explicitly identify performance maxi-
mization as the purpose

As discussed in Section 3.1, most simulated accounts are created to 
maximize performance. In this section, we present a robustness test in 
which  we  keep  only  the  subsample  of  simulated  accounts  where  in-
vestors  explicitly  identify  performance  maximization  as  the  purpose. 
Many investors have a short description of the purposes of their simu-
lated  accounts.  We  hired  eight  students  to  read  through  all  the  de-
scriptions. For each account we assigned two students to read its purpose 
description independently. Our students were asked to minimize false 
positives  when  identifying  accounts  for  performance-maximization 
purposes.  Ultimately,  we  classify  an  account  as  designed  for  perfor-
mance maximization only if both students identify this purpose as the 
rationale. Of 21,866 simulated accounts, 6357 are classified as explicitly 
stating performance maximization as the purpose. Please note that most 
others include purpose statements that are either too short or otherwise 
uninformative.23 In Internet Appendix Section A, we present the base-
line analysis based on this subsample and document a result similar to 
that reported in Table 6. 

B. Watch list

22 The two types of accounts differ dramatically in turnover. The disposition 
effect measure can be directly affected by turnover (Feng and Seasholes, 2005). 
We find that such a mechanical relationship does not drive our results because 
we  find  similar  results  using  an  alternative  disposition  effect  measure  that  is 
free of such a mechanical relationship. See Appendix Section H for additional 
discussion and results. Many other biases are not directly affected by turnover. 
For  example, the lottery preference and extrapolation measures  are averaged 
across purchases and are not functions of sales or the frequency of purchases.
23 In addition to performing manual classification, we adopt a keyword-based 
classification  method.  We  compile  a  list  of  keywords  from  all  the  purpose 
statements  that  reflect  trading  for  money  as  the  purpose.  These  keywords 
include  Chinese  phrases  such  as  “ying”  (“win”)  and  “zhuanqian”  (“making 
money”).  Any  simulated  account  with  a  description  that  contains  such  key-
words is classified as a trading-for-performance account. Using this method we 
classify 8,445 accounts as trading-for-performance accounts. The results based 
on this subsample are similar (Appendix Section A). The number of accounts 
classified as trading-for-performance accounts is 33% higher than that based on 
the manual method, a finding that is consistent with the conservatism we adopt 
in the manual classification process.

As discussed in Section 3.1, some investors may use simulated ac-
counts as “watch lists.” As discussed in Section 3.1, fewer than 17 % of 
real account purchases are suspected of being driven by the watch-list 
motivation, so we view it as unlikely that the watch-list hypothesis ex-
plains  the  purpose  for  which  Snowball  investors  use  their  simulated 
accounts. Nevertheless, in Appendix Section B, we conduct a robustness 
test  in  which  we  exclude  investors  who  are  suspected  of  using  their 
simulated accounts as watch lists. We define such investors as those who 
ever purchase, in our sample period, any stock for a real account when 
the stock was held in a simulated account at the time of the purchase. 
Such  a  definition  is  perhaps  too  broad,  as  it  may  exclude  many  false 
positives. We use this criterion to ensure that the remaining sample is 
free of the “watch-list” issue. Overall, the evidence is inconsistent with 
the  “watch-list”  hypothesis.  The  “watch-list”  hypothesis  also  predicts 
that adding a simulated account should facilitate searching and stock 
selection  and  hence  strengthen  biases  such  as  lottery  preference  and 
extrapolation. In Section 5.4, we show that the results are exactly the 
opposite to this prediction. 

C. Time-series design

For the main tests, we restrict our sample to periods during which an 
investor  holds  both  real  and  simulated  accounts.  Choosing  the  same 
period enables us to control for time-varying effects. The existence of 
real  accounts  may,  however,  indicate  that  investors  are  using  their 
simulated accounts for purposes other than performance maximization. 
In Internet Appendix Section C, we report a time-series test comparing 
the  two  types  of  accounts  across  different  periods.  Specifically,  we 
compare a real account with simulated trading before an investor opens 
a real account. Please note that this remains a within-subject test. Again, 
we find very similar results. 

D. By the ratio of overlapped holdings

In Section 3.3, we observe that investors tend to hold the same stocks 
in both types of accounts, but the ratio of overlapped holdings varies 
significantly across investors. In this subsection, we report results by the 
ratio of the number of overlapped holdings to the total number of real 
account  holdings.24 Specifically,  we  split  the  sample  into  three  sub-
samples.  Investors  with  no  overlapped  holdings  are  classified  as  a 
separate group. The remaining investors are split into two equal-sized 
subsamples.  The  results  presented  in  Internet  Appendix  Section  D 
demonstrate that our results are robust across the overlapped-holdings 
subsamples.  High  values  of  the  overlapping-holdings  ratio  may  indi-
cate that a similar thought process is associated with both types of ac-
counts. The fact that the results are robust even when the ratio is very 
high indicates that the real(cid:0) simulated differences likely reflect differ-
ences in stakes instead of other differences. 

24 The results based on the ratio of the number of overlapped holdings to the 
total number of simulated account holdings are very similar.

12 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Fig.  1. Graphic  views  of  differences  between  real  and  simulated  accounts.  This  figure  presents  the  estimated  kernel  densities  for  behavioral  biases  in  real  and 
simulated accounts. The red lines represent real accounts and the blue lines represent simulated accounts. Each plot uses a Gaussian kernel. The x-axis for turnover is 
the log scale.

E. Between-subject design

Our within-subject design can identify the causal effects of stakes and 
carry  strong  statistical power.  Experimental results may, however,  be 

sensitive  to  whether  a  design  is  within-subject  or  between-subject 
(Charness, Gneezy, and Kuhn, 2012). For example, consider ambiguity 
aversion. In Fox and Tversky (1995), one set of gambles is associated 
with clear odds of winning while the other set of gambles is vague in this 

13 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

respect. The within-subject analysis (when individuals are given both 
clear  and  vague  gambles)  indicates  ambiguity  aversion,  while  the 
between-subject  analysis  does  not.  To  assess  whether  our  results  are 
sensitive to the choice between a within- and a between-subject design, 
in Internet Appendix Section E, we calculate the biases for investors who 
hold only simulated accounts and for those who hold only real accounts. 
The results are similar to the baseline results. 

Overall,  the  results  reported  in  Table  6 and  Sections  A–J  of  the 
Internet Appendix indicate clearly that biases are stronger and perfor-
mance is worse in real accounts than in simulated accounts. Such find-
ings are inconsistent with the argument that higher stakes will weaken 
biases. In fact, they point in the opposite direction: biases are stronger 
when the stakes are higher.

F. Peer effect

5.2. Behavioral consistency between real and simulated accounts

Our  data  are  drawn  from  an  investor  social  network  and  our  in-
vestors’ trades can be observed by their peers. Such observability may 
affect investor behaviors (Heimer, 2016). In Internet Appendix Section 
F,  we  examine  whether  such  observability  has  any  impact  on  stakes 
effects. Specifically, we replicate our baseline results by restricting our 
sample to investors who lack followers. Presumably, these investors are 
those least affected by the observability of trades. The results are similar 
to the baseline results. 

G. Other robustness tests

First, in Internet Appendix Section G, we present robustness tests in 
which  we  use  alternative  measures  of  the  behavioral  biases  and  find 
qualitatively similar results. Second, in Internet Appendix Section H, we 
report  the  results  for  the  disposition  effect  using  a  pooled  regression 
approach.  The  individual-level  disposition  effect  estimates  may  be 
noisy. The pooled regression results confirm that the disposition effect is 
stronger in real accounts. Third, as discussed in Section 3.3, among the 
4413  investors,  3332  hold  multiple  simulated  accounts.  In  Internet 
Appendix  Section  I,  we  replicate  the  results  reported  in  Table  6 by 
restricting the sample to investors who hold only one simulated account 
and find similar patterns. Fourth, as discussed in Section 3.2, Snowball 
limits the total number of trades that are available on the website. We 
then consider the 19 % of the sample whose trades are truncated on the 
Snowball website. We replicate Table 6 by restricting the sample to in-
vestors whose trades are not truncated or were executed in the final year 
of  our  sample,  when  such  data  truncation  is  least  likely.  The  results, 
which  are  reported in  Internet Appendix Section J,  are similar to the 
main results.

The  findings  reported  in  Table  6 have  strong  implications  for  the 
experimental  method  as  a  means  of  understanding  human  behaviors. 
Consistent with many skeptical criticisms, our findings show that biases 
documented in low-stakes lab settings may differ from those that emerge 
in high-stakes real-world settings. Instead of observing that high stakes 
eliminate biases, however, as many skeptical scholars have argued, we 
observe that the low-stakes lab method may underestimate the biases 
harbored by real-world humans, at least in the case of stock markets. 
Can we learn anything, then, from lab methodology about real-world 
human behaviors?

For  Table  7,  we  examine  whether  and  how  biases  are  correlated 
between high-stakes real accounts and low-stakes simulated accounts. 
Although  the  lab  method  may  underestimate  or  overestimate  bias,  it 
may still contain information about heterogeneity across investors. For 
example, if investor A holds a stronger lottery preference than investor 
B, she/he may exhibit a stronger lottery preference in both her/his real 
and simulated accounts than investor B, leading to positive correlations 
across  investors  between  the  real-account  lottery  preference  and  the 
simulated-account lottery preference.

This is indeed what we document. In the columns labeled “Correla-
tions” and “p-values” we report the correlation coefficients of the biases 
between real accounts and simulated accounts as well as their p-values. 
It is evident that, between the same investors’  real and simulated ac-
counts,  the  biases  are  strongly  positively  correlated.  The  correlation 
coefficients are all highly statistically significant, ranging from 0.132 for 
the disposition effect to 0.444 for local bias.

We then consider  another  method for  testing  the correlations.  We 
first sort all investors into five quintiles based on the value of a given bias 
in their real accounts. For each quintile, we then calculate the average 
value  of  the  bias  for  both  their  real  accounts  and  their  simulated 

Table 7 
Correlations between real and simulated accounts. In this table, we report results indicating how biases are correlated between real and simulated accounts. In the 
“Correlation” column, we report the correlation coefficients and their p-values between a type of bias in an investor’s real account and the same type of bias in her/his 
simulated account. In the next five columns, we report the mean of each bias measure by quintiles sorted by the value of the bias in an investor’s real account. In the 
High–Low column, we report the mean differences between the high and low groups as well as the t-statistics (in parentheses).

Correlation

Low 1

2

3

4

High 5

High–Low

Coefficient

p

0.132

0.000

0.300

0.000

0.320

0.000

0.321

0.000

0.444

0.000

0.251

0.000

0.195

0.000

Disposition effect
Real accounts
Simulated accounts
Lottery preference
Real accounts
Simulated accounts
Extrapolation
Real accounts
Simulated accounts
Underdiversification
Real accounts
Simulated accounts
Local bias
Real accounts
Simulated accounts
Turnover
Real accounts
Simulated accounts
Performance
Real accounts
Simulated accounts

(cid:0) 2.434
0.332

0.000
2.090

(cid:0) 7.638
3.478

(cid:0) 2.067
(cid:0) 1.797

(cid:0) 0.175
0.280

0.802
0.351

(cid:0) 7.407
(cid:0) 2.010

0.454
0.176

0.042
2.146

1.964
7.507

(cid:0) 1.432
(cid:0) 1.612

0.111
0.329

1.788
0.536

(cid:0) 2.524
(cid:0) 0.679

14 

1.903
0.407

2.511
3.121

9.338
11.035

(cid:0) 1.044
(cid:0) 1.421

0.371
0.491

3.258
0.732

(cid:0) 0.322
(cid:0) 0.268

4.859
0.609

8.069
5.276

19.306
16.170

(cid:0) 0.671
(cid:0) 1.355

0.775
0.775

6.130
0.996

1.669
0.727

16.041
0.923

21.829
8.684

55.014
25.110

(cid:0) 0.217
(cid:0) 1.177

2.067
1.349

17.829
1.582

5.301
1.491

Mean

t-stat

18.476
0.591

21.829
6.594

62.652
21.631

1.851
0.620

2.242
1.069

17.028
1.231

12.708
3.501

(62.00)
(6.62)

(75.26)
(14.03)

(56.58)
(15.46)

(168.35)
(19.30)

(48.03)
(13.21)

(57.03)
(13.89)

(87.78)
(11.59)

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

accounts. We also report the means of and t-statistics for the differences 
between biases in the highest quintile and those in the lowest quintile. 
For all seven measures, we see that sorting by the value of a bias in real 
accounts leads to a sizable difference in the value of the bias in simulated 
accounts. These differences are wider than the interquartile ranges of 
these biases (see Table 4), except with respect to underdiversification 
and performance, for which the difference/interquartile range ratio is 
above 60 %.

The  results  reported  in  Table  7 indicate  strong  behavioral  consis-
tency. These results also suggest that, even when there are low stakes in 
simulated accounts, investors are not trading randomly and lab experi-
ments can still help researchers study behaviors.

5.3. Investor heterogeneity in stakes effects

Do  some  investors  exhibit  stronger  stakes  effects  than  others?  We 
examine this possibility and report the results in Table 8. For each bias, 
we  calculate  the  individual-level  differences  between  the  real  and 
simulated  accounts.  In  Table  8,  we  report  the  correlation  coefficients 
between these differences across investors. We expect the correlations to 
be  positive  if  the  stakes  effects  have  an  investor-level  component.  In 
other  words,  if  higher  stakes  increase  a  bias  of  a  given  investor  to  a 
significant  (small)  extent,  it  may  also  increase  other  biases  of  this 
investor to a significant (small) extent.

The results reported in Table 8 show that, across all the bias mea-
sures, most of the correlation coefficients are positive and all of them are 
negatively correlated with performance. As is the case with other tables, 
here local bias is an exception: the real–simulated difference in local bias 
is not strongly correlated with the real–simulated differences in other 
biases  or  performance.  The  real–simulated  difference  in  under-
diversification  is  also  negatively  correlated  with  the  real–simulated 
differences in lottery preferences and extrapolation, although this result 
is not statistically significant. Overall, the evidence suggests that there is 
an individual component of the stakes effects.

In Table 9, we report correlations between investor characteristics 
and their stakes effects. For each bias, the stakes effects are measured as 
real–simulated  differences.  We  consider  four  investor  characteristics: 
portfolio size (calculated based on the max-min rule method discussed at 
the end of Section 3), the number of followers on Snowball, the number 
of posts on Snowball, and GDP per capita in the investor’s city of resi-
dence. The results show that the stakes effects are weaker for investors 
who hold larger portfolios and investors based in relatively developed 
areas, while they are stronger for investors who are more active on social 
media as measured by  the number of posts. The number of  followers 
does not consistently correlate with the effects of the stakes.

The  findings  regarding  the cross-investor  heterogeneities  in  stakes 
effects shed valuable light on the mechanisms underlying those effects. 
Given  the data,  we have limited  demographic information to analyze 

Table 9 
Investor characteristics and stakes effects. For this table we first calculate the 
difference between real and simulated accounts for each bias. In this table, we 
report the correlation coefficients between these differences and investor char-
acteristics. GDP per capita is measured at the city level. We report p-values of the 
correlation coefficients in parentheses.

Log 
(Portfolio 
size)

Log(1 +
Number of 
followers)

Log(1 +
Number of 
posts)

Log(GDP 
per 
capita)

Disposition effect

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

Local Bias

Turnover

Performance

(cid:0) 0.071
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.028
(0.029)
(cid:0) 0.007
(0.410)
(cid:0) 0.124
(0.000)
0.017
(0.791)
(cid:0) 0.084
(0.000)
0.038
(0.009)

(cid:0) 0.032
(0.145)
(cid:0) 0.013
(0.411)
0.044
(0.086)
0.007
(0.802)
(cid:0) 0.051
(0.288)
(cid:0) 0.028
(0.205)
0.000
(0.349)

0.068
(0.000)
0.007
(0.169)
0.009
(0.996)
0.042
(0.022)
(cid:0) 0.040
(0.104)
0.106
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.031
(0.228)

(cid:0) 0.025
(0.084)
(cid:0) 0.077
(0.004)
(cid:0) 0.004
(0.353)
(cid:0) 0.041
(0.058)
(cid:0) 0.040
(0.180)
(cid:0) 0.055
(0.017)
0.019
(0.687)

and await future studies to examine this question more thoroughly.

5.4. Stakes, attention, and adding a second type of account

An often implicit assumption in discussions of the stakes–behaviors 
relationship is that raising the stakes will lead to greater attention and 
greater effort. Recall our findings that investor turnover is higher in real 
accounts than in simulated accounts. Trading volume is a widely used 
proxy for attention (Barber and Odean, 2008). To the extent that trading 
volume is a valid proxy for investor attention, the results pertaining to 
turnover are consistent with the idea that higher stakes are associated 
with greater attention. In this section, we take advantage of the fact that 
the real and simulated accounts are not opened at the same time and 
present analyses to explore how adding a second type of account affects 
investors’ trading behavior in an existing account. Adding a second type 
of account may reduce investor attention to the existing account. If the 
stakes effects are driven partially by attention, we expect to find that 
adding a second type of account will reduce biases in the existing ac-
count if attention strengthens biases.

Specifically, we compare biases between the overlapping periods and 
the  non-overlapping  periods,  i.e.,  periods  when  an  investor  has  not 
opened a second type of account. Such an estimate remains a within- 
subject  estimate  but  it  is  calculated  across  periods.  Most  (3807  of 
4413) of the investors opened their simulated accounts first, with only 
606 having opened their real accounts first. For the latter, most opened 
their  real  accounts  not  long  before  they  opened  their  simulated 

Table 8 
The effects of stakes across investors. For this table we first calculate the difference between real and simulated accounts for each bias. In this table, we report the 
correlation coefficients between these differences across investors. The p-values of the correlation coefficients are reported in parentheses.

Disposition effect

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

Local bias

Turnover

Performance

Disposition effect

1

Lottery preference

Extrapolation

Underdiversification

Local bias

Turnover

Performance

0.126
(0.000)
0.131
(0.000)
0.064
(0.000)
0.013
(0.597)
0.296
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.098
(0.000)

1

0.089
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.002
(0.897)
0.016
(0.505)
0.096
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.077
(0.000)

1

(cid:0) 0.016
(0.305)
(cid:0) 0.017
(0.471)
0.187
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.159
(0.000)

15 

1

0.030
(0.218)
0.125
(0.000)
(cid:0) 0.034
(0.025)

1

0.008
(0.728)
(cid:0) 0.022
(0.367)

1

(cid:0) 0.086
(0.000)

1

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

accounts.

We  exclude  investors  whose  non-overlapping  periods  are  shorter 
than 90 days. As is the case with our main results, such a requirement 
ensures  that  we  can  obtain  meaningful  estimates  of  the  bias/perfor-
mance  measures.  Differing  from  the  main  test  in  which  we  require  a 
minimum  365-day  window,  however,  here  we  use  a  90-day  window. 
Whether we require a 180-day or a 365-day window, the results derived 
by  comparing  the  simulated  accounts  between  non-overlapping  and 
overlapping  periods  are  similar.  If  we  require  a  180-day  window, 
however,  the sample for the real-account  comparison will be roughly 
halved and become too small for a meaningful statistical comparison. 
With  the  90-day  requirement,  we  obtain  2538  investors  for  the 
simulated-account  comparison  and  203  investors  for  the  real-account 
comparison.

We report the results in Table 10. The results reported in Panel A 
enable us to compare the results for simulated accounts between non- 
overlapping  and  overlapping  periods.  The results  reported in  Panel  B 
enable us to compare the results for real accounts. Maintaining an ac-
count of the other type is associated with significantly lower turnover in 
both simulated and real accounts, consistent with our conjecture that 
adding a second account distracts an investor’s attention from existing 
accounts.  Consistent  with  our  hypothesis  that  increased  attention 
strengthens biases, we find that maintaining an account of the other type 
is  associated  with  weaker  biases  in  both  simulated  accounts  and  real 
accounts.  For  simulated  accounts,  only  the  differences  for  those  per-
taining to local bias lack statistical significance. For real accounts, the 
differences  are  statistically  significant  only  for  lottery  preference, 
underdiversification, and turnover, perhaps reflecting the smaller sam-
ple.  The  existence  of  an  account  of  the  other  type  is  associated  with 
inferior  portfolio  performance  for  both  simulated  accounts  and  real 
accounts.

These  results  also  shed  doubt  on  the  above-discussed  mechanism 
whereby investors use simulated accounts as “watch lists.” If simulated 
accounts  are  used  as  “watch  lists,”  we  expect  to  find  that  holding  a 
simulated account strengthens the selection of lottery stocks and stocks 
that have earned high past returns, leading to stronger lottery prefer-
ences and extrapolation. The results reported in Panel B contradict these 
predictions.25

5.5. Stakes, cognitive dissonance, and self-image

We  conduct  additional  analyses  of  cognitive  dissonance  and  self- 
image by taking advantage of the feature in virtue of which Snowball 
is a social platform that allows investors to write posts. Investors may 
find  that admitting a mistake  in a real account is much more embar-
rassing and wounding to one’s self-image than admitting a mistake in a 
simulated  account.  If  cognitive  dissonance  and  self-image  affect  in-
vestors, we expect them to post more often for winners than for losers. If 
investors care about real accounts more than they care about simulated 
accounts, we expect to find that the winner–loser difference in postings 
is greater for real accounts than for simulated accounts.

In Table 11, we report results pertaining to the probability that an 

investor writes a post within the next three days about a stock he/she has 
just traded.26 We report the results for buying and selling separately. 
With real accounts the probabilities of posting are 3.74 % and 2.41 % for 
buying  and  selling,  respectively.  With  simulated  accounts  the  proba-
bilities are 1.14 % and 1.08 %, respectively. The real–simulated differ-
ences are highly statistically significant.

In  the  next  three  rows  of  Table  11,  we  report  the  probability  of 
posting conditional on selling a winner, selling a loser, and winner–loser 
differences.  Investors  are  significantly  more  likely  to  broadcast  their 
investment successes than their failures. The winner–loser differences 
are 1.33 % and 0.53 % for real and simulated accounts, respectively. The 
positive  winner–loser  differences  are  consistent  with  the  presence  of 
self-enhancing  transmission  bias  (Hirshleifer,  2020;  Han,  Hirshleifer, 
and Walden, 2022; Sui and Wang, 2025). Interestingly, the difference in 
winner–loser postings is greater in the real accounts than in the simu-
lated  accounts,  suggesting  the  presence  of  a  stronger  self-enhancing 
transmission  bias  when  trading  for  real  money.  Overall,  these  results 
confirm  the  prediction  that  stakes  strengthen  the  effects  of  cognitive 
dissonance and self-image.

6. Results based on two brokerage datasets

In  this  section,  we  present  analyses  using  two  brokerage  account 
datasets. One motivation for this analysis is to provide external validity. 
There are concerns regarding whether our results can be generalized to 
other settings to mitigate the concern that accounts carrying no mone-
tary stakes may constitute a special case. Conceptually, the stakes effect 
does not have to be monotonic. The marginal effect of stakes on per-
formance may be negative when stakes are zero or very low if raising the 
stakes reduces decision noise and leads investors with incorrect beliefs 
or  nontraditional  preferences  to  make  decisions  that  conform  more 
closely to how they think and what they prefer. When stakes are suffi-
ciently high, the marginal effect may become positive if additional effort 
shifts  investors  from  the  use  of  heuristics  to  a  more  deliberative 
approach to processing. Although such a non-monotonicity possibility 
does not invalidate our identification’s internal validity, it raises ques-
tions about the study’s external validity, i.e., whether we can generalize 
the results to other settings. The analysis in this section addresses this 
concern.

The  second  motivation  of  the  brokerage  account  analysis  is  to 
examine another bias—the reverse disposition effects of mutual funds. 
Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield (2016) document that when investors 
trade actively managed mutual funds, they exhibit a reverse disposition 
effect instead of the disposition effect and explain the findings based on 
cognitive  dissonance.  The  Snowball  data  include  very  few  actively 
managed  funds.27 The  brokerage  dataset  allows  us  to  examine  the 
reverse disposition effect.

We collect one dataset from a large US discount brokerage company 
that has been widely used in retail investor studies (Barber and Odean, 
2000).  The  raw  data  include  trading  activity  for  roughly  78,000 
households between January 1991 and November 1996. We collect a 
similar dataset from a large Chinese brokerage company for a sample 
period that runs from 2000 through 2009 (Frydman and Wang, 2020; An 

25 These results also shed light on the co-existence effect discussed in Section 
5.1.2.  In  our  main  tests,  we  restrict  our  sample  to  periods  during  which  an 
investor holds both real and simulated accounts. This design provides within- 
subject  and  within-the-same-period  estimates  of  stakes  effects.  Our  within- 
subject  estimates  avoid  the  impact  of  investor  heterogeneities.  Choosing  the 
same period enables us to control for time-varying effects. The co-existence of 
both  types  of  accounts  may  also,  however,  affect  investor  behaviors.  For 
example, evidence shows that ambiguity aversion exists mainly when a more 
ambiguous  choice  and  a  less  ambiguous  choice  co-exist  (Fox  and  Tversky, 
1995).  Recall  that  our  results  are  robust  to  a  between-subject  design  (see 
Internet Appendix Section E). The results presented in this section also suggest 
that the co-existence of both types of accounts does not drive the results.

26 The  results  are  similar  if  we  vary  the  window  for  measuring  posting  ac-
tivities to one day or seven days. Appendix Section K presents these robustness 
results.
27 Snowball  covers  only  exchange-traded  securities.  The  funds  it  covers 
include  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  listed  open-end  funds  (LOFs),  and 
closed-end funds, most of which are passive index funds. As argued by Chang, 
Solomon, and Westerfield (2016), an index fund’s fund manager may not be a 
credible  target  to  blame  for  the  fund’s  poor  performance.  Of  our  4,413  in-
vestors, only 13 have traded actively managed funds (defined as general equity 
funds, balanced funds, or flexible allocation funds) in both real and simulated 
accounts.

16 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Table 10 
Adding a second type of account. In this table, we report the effects of adding a second type of account on investor biases in existing accounts. For Panel A, we analyze 
biases in simulated accounts: before adding real accounts and after adding real accounts. For Panel B, we analyze biases in real accounts: before adding simulated 
accounts and after adding simulated accounts. We require the before periods to last at least 90 days.

Panel A. Simulated accounts

Non-Overlapping: Before adding real accounts

Overlapping: After adding real accounts

Difference

N

2491
2422
2429
2505
1068
2443
2435

Mean

0.573
4.466
16.155
(cid:0) 1.411
0.617
2.326
0.369

Disposition effect
Lottery preference
Extrapolation
Underdiversification
Local Bias
Turnover
Performance

Panel B. Real accounts

Mean

0.446
3.853
10.348
(cid:0) 1.495
0.625
0.846
0.004

Mean

t-stat

Wilcoxon p

0.127
0.613
5.806
0.084
(cid:0) 0.008
1.481
0.365

(2.33)
(2.80)
(8.69)
(9.11)
((cid:0) 0.26)
(17.18)
(2.05)

0.002
0.302
0.000
0.000
0.168
0.000
0.209

Non-Overlapping: Before adding simulated accounts

Overlapping: After adding simulated accounts

Difference

Disposition effect
Lottery preference
Extrapolation
Underdiversification
Local Bias
Turnover
Performance

N

205
206
206
208
58
208
206

Mean

2.650
7.384
15.473
(cid:0) 0.886
0.746
7.640
0.732

Mean

2.294
5.157
13.851
(cid:0) 1.188
0.699
3.599
(cid:0) 0.602

Mean

t-stat

Wilcoxon p

0.356
2.228
1.622
0.302
0.047
4.041
1.334

(0.47)
(2.15)
(0.80)
(7.63)
(0.36)
(6.25)
(2.31)

0.141
0.187
0.444
0.000
0.694
0.000
0.043

et al., 2024). For the reverse disposition effect analysis, we can use only 
the US dataset because the Chinese brokerage dataset does not include 
non-stock trades.

6.1. The disposition effect in stocks

In the setting, we measure stakes by a position’s portfolio weight and 
compare the disposition effect between positions. If stakes strengthen 
investor biases, we expect to find a stronger disposition effect on stocks 
allocated  higher  portfolio  weights.  The  unit  of  observation  is  an 
investor-stock-day triple. Please see An et al. (2024) for details regarding 
portfolio construction. As our empirical model, we use Eq. (2),  

where Selli,j,t  and Gaini,j,t(cid:0) 1  are defined in the same way as in Section 
4.1.1. Weighti,j,t(cid:0) 1  is position j’s value as a percentage of total portfolio 
value at the end of day t-1. The value of position j at the end of day t-1, if 
measured using the price at t-1, will be mechanically correlated with the 
Gain dummy. To avoid such confoundedness, we measure the value of a 
position at the end of day t-1 as the product of the number of shares at t-1 
and  the  purchase  price  instead  of  the  price  at  t-1.28 We  exclude 
investor-days with one only stock in a portfolio.

We report the results in Table 12. For both US data (Panel A) and 
Chinese data (Panel B), we estimate Eq. (2) in five distinct subsamples 
based on the number of holdings. We conduct the analysis by reference 

Selli,j,t = β1Gaini,j,t(cid:0) 1 + β2Weighti,j,t(cid:0) 1 + β3Gaini,j,t(cid:0) 1 ∗ Weighti,j,t(cid:0) 1 + controls + εi,j,t,

(2) 

Table 11 
Postings. In this table, we report results indicating the likelihood (in %) that an 
investor writes posts about his/her transaction on Snowball in the three days 
following  a  transaction.  Each  row  corresponds  to  a  distinct  transaction  type: 
buying, selling, selling winners, and selling losers. In the last row, we also report 
the difference between selling winners and selling losers. The analyses for real 
and simulated accounts are conducted separately. For each type of transaction 
we  report  the  mean  value  of  real  accounts,  the  mean  value  of  simulated  ac-
counts, and the mean value of the differences between them. For the differences, 
we  report  t-statistics  and  Wilcoxon  p-values.  In  column  “N,”  we  report  the 
number of investors.

Real

Simulated

Difference

N

Mean

Mean

Mean

t-stat

Wilcoxon 
p

4409
4400
4337
4306
4243

3.741
2.413
3.093
1.763
1.332

1.140
1.084
1.271
0.724
0.531

2.607
1.577
2.203
1.303
0.948

(21.76)
(10.64)
(11.32)
(8.61)
(4.96)

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Buying
Selling
Selling winners
Selling losers
Selling winners 
– Selling 
losers

to numbers of holdings because the number of holdings is mechanically 
correlated with PortWeight. For example, the average PortWeight is 0.5 
(0.25)  when  the  number  of  holdings  is  2  (4).29 In  all  regressions  we 
include investor fixed effects, stock fixed effects, and date fixed effects. 

28 Calculating PortWeight using the Snowball data is difficult. As discussed in 
Section 3.2, we have data only on the fraction of trades at trade time, not at the 
end of every day. Inferring the portfolio weights at the end of each day requires 
information on stock price changes since the last trade as well as cash inflows 
and outflows. Unfortunately, data on cash outflows and inflows are not avail-
able.  Nevertheless,  in  Appendix  Section  L,  we  measure  PortWeight  with  the 
portfolio weight at the time a position was established. In the Snowball data, 
the coefficients on Gain*PortWeight are positive and statistically significant in 
most  cases,  which  is  consistent  with  the  results  based  on  the  two  brokerage 
company datasets.
29 Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield (2016) find that the disposition effect in 
stocks and the reverse disposition effect in funds are both greater in magnitude 
for investors who hold fewer assets. This finding is consistent with our findings, 
as holding fewer assets is positively associated with a higher average value of 
PortWeight.  We conduct our analysis  based on  the number of  assets, showing 
that the portfolio weight effect is robust even after controlling for the effect of 
the number of assets.

17 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Table 12 
The disposition effect in stocks based on two brokerage data sets. This table presents the pooled regression results of the disposition effect analysis. Specifically, we 
report  the  regression  results  obtained  with  the  following  model  by  the  number  of  stocks  in  an  investor’s  portfolio,  Selli,j,t = β1Gaini,j,t(cid:0) 1 + β2PortWeighti,j,t(cid:0) 1 +
β3Gaini,j,t(cid:0) 1 ∗ PortWeighti,j,t(cid:0) 1 + controls + εi,j,t  where observations occur at the investor (i), position (j), and date (t) levels. Selli,j,t is a dummy variable that equals 1 if 
investor i sells position j (partially or fully) on day t. Gaini,j,t-1  is a dummy variable that equals 1 if investor i experiences a gain on stock j at the end of day t-1. 
PortWeighti,j,t(cid:0) 1  is the portfolio weight of position j in investor i’s portfolio on day t-1. We measure the value of a position using the purchase price of a stock instead of 
the current price. We add three control variables, following Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012): the log purchase price, the square root of the number of days since 
purchase, and stock volatility calculated using daily returns during the 250 days preceding a purchase. For ease of presentation the coefficients are multiplied by 100. 
We cluster standard errors at the investor, stock, and day levels. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % levels, respectively.

Panel A. US

Gain

PortWeight

Gain*PortWeight

Log(Price)

Sqrt(Time owned)

Volatility

Investor FE
Stock FE
Date FE

Adj-R2
Obs.

Panel B. China

Gain

PortWeight

Gain*PortWeight

Log(Price)

Sqrt(Time owned)

Volatility

Investor FE
Stock FE
Date FE

Adj-R2
Obs.

(1)

#Stocks=2
0.171***
(15.36)
0.030**
(2.24)
0.184***
(8.59)
0.027***
(2.74)
0.005***
(8.61)
0.202
(0.55)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.027
26,617,606

(1)

#Stocks=2
3.225***
(51.99)
0.694***
(20.90)
0.562***
(7.42)
0.790***
(17.56)
(cid:0) 0.169***
((cid:0) 51.76)
0.635**
(2.45)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.078
21,425,932

(2)

#Stocks=3
0.164***
(16.09)
0.036*
(1.86)
0.218***
(7.14)
0.042***
(4.85)
0.002***
(4.26)
0.253
(0.71)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.027
20,301,759

(2)

#Stocks=3
3.126***
(51.40)
1.102***
(23.01)
0.767***
(6.45)
0.668***
(15.13)
(cid:0) 0.157***
((cid:0) 48.90)
0.109
(0.50)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.073
17,241,913

(3)

#Stocks=4
0.168***
(15.93)
0.083***
(3.20)
0.200***
(5.53)
0.036***
(3.75)
0.001
(1.60)
0.387
(0.97)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.027
15,062,752

(3)

#Stocks=4
3.070***
(51.75)
1.531***
(23.92)
1.061***
(6.30)
0.587***
(13.37)
(cid:0) 0.153***
((cid:0) 45.53)
(cid:0) 0.093
((cid:0) 0.37)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.071
12,422,938

(4)

#Stocks=5
0.169***
(14.32)
0.092***
(2.98)
0.269***
(5.61)
0.032***
(2.90)
0.001
(1.49)
0.458
(1.04)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.026
10,987,406

(4)

#Stocks=5
3.007***
(47.17)
2.018***
(22.42)
1.407***
(5.99)
0.562***
(13.01)
(cid:0) 0.152***
((cid:0) 42.25)
(cid:0) 0.121
((cid:0) 0.44)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.070
8593,206

(5)

#Stocks>5
0.106***
(9.01)
(cid:0) 0.040
((cid:0) 1.02)
0.493***
(8.40)
0.035***
(3.81)
(cid:0) 0.002***
((cid:0) 3.13)
(cid:0) 0.170
((cid:0) 0.64)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.012
45,530,542

(5)

#Stocks>5
2.514***
(38.58)
3.880***
(23.78)
4.395***
(12.30)
0.559***
(12.88)
(cid:0) 0.157***
((cid:0) 37.83)
0.205
(0.86)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.053
20,759,206

In all subsamples, the coefficients on Gain*PortWeight are positive and 
highly  statistically  significant.  The  lowest  t-statistic  is  above  5.  The 
economic effect is also sizable. Based on the estimates reported in col-
umn (5), when PortWeight increases from 25 % to 75 %, the disposition 
effect increases from 0.23 to 0.48 in the US data and from 3.61 to 5.81 in 
the Chinese data. These changes represent a 107 % increase and a 61 % 
increase, respectively.

6.2. The reverse disposition effect in equity mutual funds

If  stakes  strengthen  investor  biases,  we  expect  to  find  a  stronger 
reverse disposition effect on equity mutual funds with greater portfolio 
weights. As in the disposition effect analysis, here we use Eq. (2) as our 
empirical model. As with stocks, an investor’s purchase price for a fund 
is calculated as the volume-weighted average price using the trades file. 
Daily  price  information  for  mutual  funds  is  not  available  during  the 
sample  period.  Hence,  following  Chang,  Solomon,  and  Westerfield 
(2016), we use the most recent trade price from the trades file and define 

the variable Gain as equal to one if this most recent price is greater than 
an investor purchase price and zero otherwise. The results reported in 
Table 13 show that the coefficients on Gain*PortWeight are negative in 
all subsamples and are statistically significant in four cases. Based on the 
estimates reported in column (5), when PortWeight increases from 25 % 
to 75 %, the reverse disposition effect changes from (cid:0) 0.13 to (cid:0) 0.26, a 
sizable 100 % change.

The results are robust if we use Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield’s 
(2016) specifications. Chang, Solomon, and Westerfield (2016) conduct 
the  analysis  only  with  investor-months  when  an  investor  sold  some 
position  in  their  overall  portfolios.  The  results,  reported  in  Internet 
Appendix Section M, are robust to this alternative specification.

6.3. Discussion

Overall, these results show that investors exhibit a stronger dispo-
sition  effect  with  regard  to  stocks  that  are  allocated  higher  portfolio 
weights  and  they  exhibit  a  stronger  reverse  disposition  effect  with 

18 

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Table 13 
The reverse disposition effect in funds based on the US brokerage dataset. This table presents the pooled regression results of the reverse disposition effect analysis. 
Specifically,  we  report  the  regression  results  obtained  with  the  following  model  by  the  number  of  funds  in  an  investor’s  portfolio,  Selli,j,t = β1Gaini,j,t(cid:0) 1 +
β2PortWeighti,j,t(cid:0) 1 + β3Gaini,j,t(cid:0) 1 ∗ PortWeighti,j,t(cid:0) 1 + controls + εi,j,t  where  observations  occur  at the  investor (i),  position  (j),  and date  (t)  levels. Selli,j,t  is  a dummy 
variable that equals 1 if investor i sells position j (partially or fully) on day t. Gaini,j,t-1 is a dummy variable that equals 1 if investor i experiences a gain on fund j at the 
end of day t-1. PortWeighti,j,t(cid:0) 1  is the portfolio weight of position j in investor i’s portfolio on day t-1. We measure the value of a position using the purchase price of a 
stock instead of the current price. We add two control variables, following Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012): the log purchase price and the square root of the number 
of days since purchase. For ease of presentation the coefficients are multiplied by 100. We cluster standard errors at the investor, stock, and day levels. *, **, and *** 
indicate statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % levels, respectively.

Gain

PortWeight

Gain*PortWeight

Log(Price)

Sqrt(Time Owned)

Investor FE
Stock FE
Date FE

Adj-R2
Obs.

(1)
#Funds=2

(cid:0) 0.014
((cid:0) 1.33)
0.160***
(4.68)
(cid:0) 0.113***
((cid:0) 3.18)
0.246***
(6.58)
0.014***
(15.03)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.018
7766,602

(2)
#Funds=3

(cid:0) 0.056***
((cid:0) 4.30)
0.096*
(1.82)
(cid:0) 0.053
((cid:0) 1.02)
0.256***
(7.26)
0.013***
(13.98)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.016
6368,504

(3)
#Funds=4

(cid:0) 0.034**
((cid:0) 2.57)
0.223***
(3.10)
(cid:0) 0.185**
((cid:0) 2.54)
0.235***
(5.31)
0.013***
(15.25)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.016
4936,451

(4)
#Funds=5

(cid:0) 0.045***
((cid:0) 2.71)
0.437***
(4.03)
(cid:0) 0.211*
((cid:0) 1.93)
0.159***
(4.25)
0.012***
(14.12)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.016
3621,131

(5)
#Funds>5

(cid:0) 0.062***
((cid:0) 5.53)
0.501***
(3.63)
(cid:0) 0.270**
((cid:0) 1.97)
0.078
(1.22)
0.009***
(11.38)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.010
10,809,225

regard to funds that are allocated higher portfolio weights. Both sets of 
results are consistent with our results based on Snowball data, indicating 
that higher stakes are associated with stronger biases. The results based 
on the two brokerage datasets provide external validity, showing that 
the higher-stakes-stronger-biases results are not restricted to data from 
the online investor platform or high-monetary and no-monetary com-
parisons. The findings pertaining to the reverse disposition effect also 
provide  additional  evidence  supporting  the  stakes  effect  and  the 
cognitive dissonance mechanism.

more  closely  to  investors’  preferences  but  deviate  from  traditional 
benchmarks.  Higher  stakes  can  also  strengthen  the  elements  of 
non-traditional  preferences,  such  as  prospect  theory  and  cognitive 
dissonance. We report two findings that are consistent with cognitive 
dissonance and self-image. First, we find a stronger reverse disposition 
effect on equity mutual funds that are allocated higher portfolio weights. 
Second, investors are more likely to broadcast their selling of winners 
than their selling of losers. Such a winner–loser difference is more pro-
nounced with real accounts than with simulated accounts.

7. Conclusion

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Our study’s headline finding is that investors exhibit stronger biases 
and  worse  performance  in  higher-stakes  real  accounts  than  in  lower- 
stakes  simulated  accounts.  The  results  hold  for  both  a  within-subject 
design and a between-subject design. These results support the notion 
that stakes affect behaviors. In contrast to the conventional wisdom that 
higher stakes should weaken biases, our evidence suggests that higher 
stakes can strengthen biases. We also find that investors exhibit strong 
biases and their simulated accounts perform poorly even though these 
accounts do not involve real money. Across investors, biases are strongly 
correlated  between  the  two  types  of  accounts,  suggesting  behavioral 
consistency.  These  findings  suggest  that  low-stakes  lab  methods, 
although  imperfect,  can  still  be  informative  about  real-world  human 
behaviors.

Our  results  indicate  that  attention  should  be  considered  when 
examining  stakes  effects.  Evidence  from  investor  trading  shows  that 
investors pay greater attention to their real accounts than their simu-
lated accounts. Opening a real (simulated) account predicts the weak-
ening of biases in an existing simulated (real) account, perhaps because 
attention is partially reallocated from the existing account to the new 
account.

The expectation that higher stakes will affect behaviors rests on two 
assumptions.  First,  raising  the  stakes  leads  to  greater  attention  and 
effort.  Second,  such  an  increase  in  attention  and  effort  can affect  be-
haviors. Overall, our findings imply that, in the stock market, the mar-
ginal  effect  of attention  is  negative.  Perhaps investors  carry  incorrect 
mental models and greater attention impairs decision-making (Dawes, 
1979,  1989).  It  is  also  possible  that  investors  have  non-traditional 
preferences  and  that  higher  stakes  lead  to  behaviors  that  conform 

Pengfei  Sui:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Methodology,  Investiga-
tion,  Conceptualization.  Baolian  Wang:  Writing  –  review  &  editing, 
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

Nothing to disclose.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 

the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104146.

Data availability

Stakes  and  Investor  Behaviors_Pseudo  Data  and  Replication  Code 

(Reference data) (Mendeley Data).

References

An, L., Engelberg, J., Henriksson, M., Wang, B., Williams, J., 2024. The portfolio-driven 

disposition effect. J. Finance 79, 3459–3495.

Andersen, S., Ertaç, S., Gneezy, U., Hoffman, M., List, J.A., 2011. Stakes matter in 

ultimatum games. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 3427–3439.

Andersen, S., Mukherjee, A., Nielsen, K.M., 2022. Stakes and Mistakes. Working Paper.
Andersen, S., Nielsen, K.M., 2011. Participation constraints in the stock market: evidence 

from unexpected inheritance due to sudden death. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24, 
1667–1697.

19 

​
​
​
​
​
P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Andersson, O., Holm, H.J., Tyran, J.R., Wengstr¨om, E., 2016. Deciding for others reduces 

loss aversion. Manag. Sci. 62, 29–36.

Ariely, D., Gneezy, U., Loewenstein, G., Mazar, N., 2009. Large stakes and big mistakes. 

Rev. Econ. Stud. 76, 451–469.

Arkes, H.R., Dawes, R.M., Christensen, C., 1986. Factors influencing the use of a decision 

rule in a probabilistic task. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 37, 93–110.
Ashton, R.H., 1990. Pressure and performance in accounting decision settings: 

paradoxical effects of incentives, feedback, and justification. J. Account. Res. 28, 
148–180.

Cooper, D.J., Kagel, J.H., Lo, W., Gu, Q.L., 1999. Gaming against managers in incentive 
systems: experimental results with Chinese students and Chinese managers. Am. 
Econ. Rev. 89, 781–804.

Cronqvist, H., Siegel, S., 2014. The genetics of investment biases. J. Financ. Econ. 113, 

215–234.

Dawes, R.M., 1971. A case study of graduate admissions: application of three principles 

of human decision making. Am. Psychol. 26, 180–188.

Dawes, R.M., 1979. The robust beauty of improper linear models in decision making. 

Am. Psychol. 34, 571–582.

Bailey, W., Kumar, A., Ng, D., 2011. Behavioral biases of mutual fund investors. 

Dawes, R.M., Faust, D., Meehl, P.E., 1989. Clinical versus actuarial judgment. Science 

J. Financ. Econ. 102, 1–27.

(1979) 243, 1668–1674.

Barber, B.M., Odean, T., 2000. Trading is hazardous to your wealth: the common stock 

De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J., 1990. Noise trader risk in 

investment performance of individual investors. J. Finance 55, 773–806.

financial markets. J. Polit. Econ. 98, 703–738.

Barber, B.M., Odean, T., 2002. Online investors: do the slow die first? Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Dean, M., Ortoleva, P., 2019. The empirical relationship between nonstandard economic 

15, 455–488.

behaviors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 16262–16267.

Barber, B.M., Odean, T., 2008. All that glitters: the effect of attention and news on the 
buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21, 
785–818.

Enke, B., U. Gneezy, B. Hall, D. Martin, V. Nelidov, T. Offerman, and J. van de Ven, 2021, 
Cognitive biases: mistakes or missing stakes? Review of Economics and Statistics 
forthcoming.

Barber, B.M., Odean, T., 2013. The behavior of individual investors. In: Handbook of the 

Faro, D., Rottenstreich, Y., 2006. Affect, empathy, and regressive mispredictions of 

Economics of Finance, 2. Elsevier, pp. 1533–1570.

others’ preferences under risk. Manag. Sci. 52, 529–541.

Barber, B.M., Lee, Y.T., Liu, Y.J., Odean, T., 2009. Just how much do individual investors 

lose by trading? Rev. Financ. Stud. 22, 609–632.

Barberis, N.C., 2013. Thirty years of prospect theory in economics: a review and 

assessment. J. Econ. Perspect. 27, 173–196.

Barberis, N., 2018. Psychology-based models of asset prices and trading volume. In 
Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations (Vol. 1, 
pp.79–175). North-Holland.

Barberis, N., Huang, M., 2008. Stocks as lotteries: the implications of probability 

weighting for security prices. Am. Econ. Rev. 98, 2066–2100.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment. J. Financ. 

Econ. 49, 307–343.

Fehr-Duda, H., Bruhin, A., Epper, T., Schubert, R., 2010. Rationality on the rise: why 
relative risk aversion increases with stake size. J. Risk. Uncertain. 40, 147–180.

Feng, L., Seasholes, M.S., 2005. Do investor sophistication and trading experience 
eliminate behavioral biases in financial markets? Rev. Financ. 9, 305–351.
Feng, L., Seasholes, M.S., 2008. Individual investors and gender similarities in an 

emerging stock market. Pac.-Basin Finance J. 16, 44–60.

Fox, C.R., Tversky, A., 1995. Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance. Q. J. Econ. 

110, 585–603.

Frydman, C., Wang, B., 2020. The impact of salience on investor behavior: evidence from 

a natural experiment. J. Finance 75, 229–276.

Gabaix, X., 2014. A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality. Q. J. Econ. 129, 

Barberis, N., Thaler, R., 2003. A survey of behavioral finance. In: Handbook of the 

1661–1710.

Economics of Finance, 1. Elsevier, pp. 1053–1128.

Barberis, N., Xiong, W., 2009. What drives the disposition effect? An analysis of a long- 

standing preference-based explanation. J. Finance 64, 751–784.

Barberis, N., Xiong, W., 2012. Realization utility. J. Financ. Econ. 104, 251–271.
Baumeister, R.F., 1984. Choking under pressure: self-consciousness and paradoxical 
effects of incentives on skillful performance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 46, 610–620.
Baumeister, R.F., Showers, C.J., 1986. A review of paradoxical performance effects: 

choking under pressure in sports and mental tests. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 16, 361–383.
Beggs, A., Graddy, K., 2009. Anchoring effects: evidence from art auctions. Am. Econ. 

Rev. 99, 1027–1039.

Gabaix, X., 2019. Behavioral inattention. In Handbook of Behavioral Economics: 
Applications and Foundations 1 (Vol. 2, pp. 261–343). North-Holland.

Gathergood, J., Mahoney, N., Stewart, N., Weber, J., 2019. How do individuals repay 

their debt? The balance-matching heuristic. Am. Econ. Rev. 109, 844–875.
Giglio, S., Maggiori, M., Stroebel, J., Utkus, S., 2021. Five facts about beliefs and 

portfolios. Am. Econ. Rev. 111, 1481–1522.

Gneezy, U., Meier, S., Rey-Biel, P., 2011. When and why incentives (don’t) work to 

modify behavior. J. Econ. Perspect. 25, 191–210.

Gneezy, U., Rustichini, A., 2000. Pay enough or don’t pay at all. Q. J. Econ. 115, 

791–810.

Beilock, S.L., Kulp, C.A., Holt, L.E., Carr, T.H., 2004. More on the fragility of 

Graddy, K., Loewenstein, L., Mei, J., Moses, M., Pownall, R.A., 2014. Anchoring or Loss 

performance: choking under pressure in mathematical problem solving. J. Exp. 
Psychol.: Gen. 133, 584–600.

Aversion? Empirical Evidence from Art Auctions. Working Paper.

Grether, D.M., 1980. Bayes rule as a descriptive model: the representativeness heuristic. 

Belot, M., Bhaskar, V., van de Ven, J., 2010. Promises and cooperation: evidence from a 

Q. J. Econ. 95, 537–557.

TV game show. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 73, 396–405.

Ben-David, I., Hirshleifer, D., 2012. Are investors really reluctant to realize their losses? 
Trading responses to past returns and the disposition effect. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25, 
2485–2532.

Benjamin, D.J., 2019. Errors in probabilistic reasoning and judgment biases. In 
Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations (Vol. 2, 
pp.69–186). North-Holland.

Berk, J.B., Hughson, E., Vandezande, K., 1996. The price is right, but are the bids? An 

investigation of rational decision theory. Am. Econ. Rev. 86, 954–970.

Beshears, J., Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., 2018. Behavioral household 

finance. In Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations (Vol. 
1, pp. 177–276). North-Holland.

Grether, D.M., Plott, C.R., 1979. Economic theory of choice and the preference reversal 

phenomenon. Am. Econ. Rev. 69, 623–638.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., 2009. Sensation seeking, overconfidence, and trading 

activity. J. Finance 64, 549–578.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., Linnainmaa, J., 2011. IQ and stock market participation. 

J. Finance 66, 2121–2164.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., Linnainmaa, J.T., 2012. IQ, trading behavior, and 

performance. J. Financ. Econ. 104, 339–362.

Han, B., Hirshleifer, D., Walden, J., 2022. Social transmission bias and investor behavior. 

J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 57, 390–412.

Hartzmark, S.M., Hirshman, S.D., Imas, A., 2021. Ownership, learning, and beliefs. Q. J. 

Econ. 136, 1665–1717.

Binswanger, H.P., 1980. Attitudes toward risk: experimental measurement in rural India. 

Harvey, C.R., Siddique, A., 2000. Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. J. Finance 

Am. J. Agric. Econ. 62, 395–407.

55, 1263–1295.

Birru, J., Chague, F., De-Losso, R., Giovannetti, B., 2024. Attention and biases: evidence 

Heimer, R., 2016. Peer pressure: social interaction and the disposition effect. Rev. 

from tax-inattentive investors. Manag. Sci. 70, 7101–7119.

Financ. Stud. 29, 3177–3209.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2012. Salience theory of choice under risk. Q. J. 

Heimer, R., Imas, A., 2022. Biased by choice: how financial constraints can reduce 

Econ. 127, 1243–1285.

financial mistakes. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35, 1643–1681.

Bornstein, R.F., 1989. Exposure and affect: overview and meta-analysis of research, 

Heimer, R., Simsek, A., 2019. Should retail investors’ leverage be limited? J. Financ. 

1968–1987. Psychol. Bull. 106, 265–289.

Econ. 132, 1–21.

Bowles, S., Polania-Reyes, S., 2012. Economic incentives and social preferences: 

Hershey, J.C., Schoemaker, P.J., 1980. Risk taking and problem context in the domain of 

substitutes or complements? J. Econ. Lit. 50, 368–425.

losses: an expected utility analysis. J. Risk Insur. 47, 111–132.

Camerer, C.F., Hogarth, R.M., 1999. The effects of financial incentives in experiments: a 
review and capital-labor-production framework. J. Risk. Uncertain. 19, 7–42.
Cameron, L.A., 1999. Raising the stakes in the ultimatum game: experimental evidence 

from Indonesia. Econ. Inq. 37, 47–59.

Campbell, J.Y., 2006. Household finance. J. Finance 61, 1553–1604.
Chang, T.Y., Solomon, D.H., Westerfield, M.M., 2016. Looking for someone to blame: 
delegation, cognitive dissonance, and the disposition effect. J. Finance 71, 267–302.
Chapman, J., Dean, M., Ortoleva, P., Snowberg, E., Camerer, C., 2023. Econographics. 

J. Polit. Econ. Microecon. 1, 115–161.

Hirshleifer, D., 2020. Presidential address: social transmission bias in economics and 

finance. J. Finance 75, 1779–1831.

Hogarth, R.M., Gibbs, B.J., McKenzie, C.R., Marquis, M.A., 1991. Learning from 

feedback: exactingness and incentives. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn., Mem. Cognit. 17, 
734–752.

Holt, C.A., Laury, S.K., 2002. Risk aversion and incentive effects. Am. Econ. Rev. 92, 

1644–1655.

Holt, C.A., Laury, S.K., 2005. Risk aversion and incentive effects: new data without order 

effects. Am. Econ. Rev. 95, 902–912.

Charness, G., Gneezy, U., Kuhn, M.A., 2012. Experimental methods: between-subject and 

Hsee, C.K., Rottenstreich, Y., 2004. Music, pandas, and muggers: on the affective 

within-subject design. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 81, 1–8.

psychology of value. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. 133, 23–30.

Chen, D.L., Moskowitz, T.J., Shue, K., 2016. Decision making under the gambler’s 

Imas, A., Kuhn, M., Mironova, V., 2022. Waiting to choose: the role of deliberation in 

fallacy: evidence from asylum judges, loan officers, and baseball umpires. Q. J. Econ. 
131, 1181–1242.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Leth-Petersen, S., Nielsen, T.H., Olsen, T., 2014. Active vs. 
passive decisions and crowd-out in retirement savings accounts: evidence from 
Denmark. Q. J. Econ. 129, 1141–1219.

intertemporal choice. Am. Econ. J.: Microecon. 14, 414–440.

Ingersoll, J.E., Jin, L.J., 2013. Realization utility with reference-dependent preferences. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 26, 723–767.

Ivkovi´c, Z., Weisbenner, S., 2005. Local does as local is: information content of the 
geography of individual investors’ common stock investments. J. Finance 60, 
267–306.

20 

P. Sui and B. Wang                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104146 

Jetter, M., Walker, J.K., 2017. Anchoring in financial decision-making: evidence from 

Post, T., Van den Assem, M.J., Baltussen, G., Thaler, R.H., 2008. Deal or no deal? 

Jeopardy! J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 141, 164–176.

Jiang, L., Liu, J., Peng, L., Wang, B., 2022. Investor attention and asset pricing anomalies. 

Rev. Financ. 26, 563–593.

Kachelmeier, S.J., Shehata, M., 1992. Examining risk preferences under high monetary 
incentives: experimental evidence from the People’s Republic of China. Am. Econ. 
Rev. 82, 1120–1141.

Decision making under risk in a large-payoff game show. Am. Econ. Rev. 98, 38–71.

Rapoport, A., Stein, W.E., Parco, J.E., Nicholas, T.E., 2003. Equilibrium play and 
adaptive learning in a three-person centipede game. Games. Econ. Behav. 43, 
239–265.

Rayo, L., Becker, G.S., 2007. Evolutionary efficiency and happiness. J. Polit. Econ. 115, 

302–337.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1972. Subjective probability: a judgment of 

Rottenstreich, Y., Hsee, C.K., 2001. Money, kisses, and electric shocks: on the affective 

representativeness. Cogn. Psychol. 3, 430–454.

psychology of risk. Psychol. Sci. 12, 85–190.

Kalda, A., Loos, B., Previtero, A., Hackethal, A., 2023. Smart(Phone) Investing? A within 
Investor-Time Analysis of New Technologies and Trading Behavior. working paper.

Khaw, M.W., Li, Z., Woodford, M., 2022. Cognitive Imprecision and Stake-Dependent 

Risk Attitudes. NBER working paper.

Kumar, A., 2009. Who gambles in the stock market? J. Finance 64, 1889–1933.
Levitt, S.D., 2004. Testing theories of discrimination: evidence from weakest link. J. Law 

Econ. 47, 431–452.

Levitt, S.D., List, J.A., 2007. What do laboratory experiments measuring social 
preferences reveal about the real world? J. Econ. Perspect. 21, 153–174.

Levitt, S.D., List, J.A., Neckermann, S., Sadoff, S., 2016. The behavioralist goes to school: 
leveraging behavioral economics to improve educational performance. Am. Econ. J.: 
Econ. Policy 8, 183–219.

Scheinkman, J.A., Xiong, W., 2003. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. J. Polit. 

Econ. 111, 1183–1220.

Scholten, M., Read, D., 2014. Prospect theory and the “forgotten” fourfold pattern of risk 

preferences. J. Risk. Uncertain. 48, 67–83.

Seasholes, M.S., Zhu, N., 2010. Individual investors and local bias. J. Finance 65, 

1987–2010.

Seasholes, M.S., Tai, M., Yang, Z., 2010. Individual Investors, Location, and Portfolio 

Choice. Working paper.

Shefrin, H., Statman, M., 1985. The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers 

too long: theory and evidence. J. Finance 40, 777–790.

Slonim, R., Roth, A.E., 1998. Learning in high stakes ultimatum games: an experiment in 

the Slovak Republic. Econometrica 66, 569–596.

Liao, J., Peng, C., Zhu, N., 2022. Extrapolative bubbles and trading volume. Rev. Financ. 

Smith, V.L., Walker, J.M., 1993. Monetary rewards and decision cost in experimental 

Stud. 35, 1682–1722.

economics. Econ. Inq. 31, 245–261.

Liu, H., Peng, C., Xiong, W.A., Xiong, W., 2022. Taming the bias zoo. J. Financ. Econ. 

Stango, V., Zinman, J., 2023. We are all behavioral, more, or less: a taxonomy of 

143, 716–741.

consumer decision-making. Rev. Econ. Stud. 90, 1470–1498.

Liu, J., Stambaugh, R.F., Yuan, Y., 2019. Size and value in China. J. Financ. Econ. 134, 

Stanovich, K., West, R., 2008. On the relative independence of thinking biases and 

48–69.

Malmendier, U., 2018. Behavioral corporate finance. In Handbook of Behavioral 

Economics: Applications and Foundations (Vol. 1, pp. 277–379). North-Holland.
Massa, M., Simonov, A., 2006. Hedging, familiarity and portfolio choice. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 19, 633–685.

Metrick, A., 1995. A natural experiment in" Jeopardy!".  Am. Econ. Rev. 85, 240–253.
Markowitz, H., 1952. The utility of wealth. J. Polit. Econ. 60, 151–158.
Odean, T., 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? J. Finance 53, 

1775–1798.

Parravano, M., Poulsen, O., 2015. Stake size and the power of focal points in 

coordination games: experimental evidence. Games. Econ. Behav. 94, 191–199.
Pope, D.G., Schweitzer, M.E., 2011. Is Tiger Woods loss averse? Persistent bias in the face 

cognitive ability. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 94, 672–695.

Sui, P., Wang, B., 2025. Social Transmission Bias: Evidence from an Online Investor 

Platform. Review of Finance forthcoming.

Thaler, R.H., 1986. The psychology and economics conference handbook: comments on 

Simon, on Einhorn and Hogarth, and on Tversky and Kahneman. J. Bus. 59, 
S279–S284.

Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1971. Belief in the law of small numbers. Psychol. Bull. 76, 

105–110.

Tversky, A., Kahneman, D., 1992. Advances in prospect theory: cumulative 

representation of uncertainty. J. Risk. Uncertain. 5, 297–323.

Van den Assem, M.J., Van Dolder, D., Thaler, R.H., 2012. Split or steal? Cooperative 

behavior when the stakes are large. Manag. Sci. 58, 2–20.

of experience, competition, and high stakes. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 129–157.

Zajonc, R.B., 1968. Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 9, 1–27.

21 

