Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

The invention of corporate governance

☆

Yueran Ma a,*
a University of Chicago Booth School of Business and NBER, USA
b Harvard University and NBER, USA

, Andrei Shleifer b

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

keywords:
Corporate governance
Agency Problems

The  analysis  of  corporate  governance  begins  with  a  central  feature  of  modern  capitalism  –  the  separation  of 
ownership and control in large corporations –  first empirically documented by Berle and Means (1932). Such 
separation entails several agency problems reflecting conflicts between managers and shareholders, such as self- 
dealing by managers, low effort, consumption of perquisites, and excessive growth and diversification. Berle and 
Means saw self-dealing as the central agency problem and stressed the law as the fundamental mechanism of 
addressing it. Jensen and Meckling (1976) considered the consumption of perquisites and emphasized private 
mechanisms, such as financial incentives for managers, to counter wasteful perks. Jensen (1986) instead focused 
on excessive growth and diversification, which led him to count on leverage and takeovers. The combination of 
public  corporate  governance  mechanisms,  mostly  the  law,  and  market  governance  shaped  both  theory  and 
practice.

1. Introduction

In an oft-quoted passage, Adam Smith (1776) wrote:
The directors of such [joint stock] companies, however,  being the 
managers rather of other peoples’  money than of their own, it cannot 
well be expected, that they should watch over it with the same anxious 
vigilance  with  which  the  partners  in  a  private  copartnery  frequently 
watch over their own…. Negligence and profusion, therefore, must al-
ways prevail, more or less, in the management of the affairs of such a 
company. (p. 700)

This brief passage raises many questions. What is the nature of what 
came to be known as the agency problem? Is it just low effort, or is there 
more? How prevalent is the separation of ownership and control, where 
managers  are  put  in  charge  of  other  people’s  money?  What  are  the 
benefits of such separation, and what are the costs, which presumably 
are not so high as to bring the capitalist system to a halt? And which 
mechanisms, either public or private, mitigate this cost? Despite Smith’s 
pessimism, the “other” people whose money corporate managers control 
have usually gotten it back, often with a handsome return. This, after all, 
is where economic growth comes from.

The issues Smith raised eventually turned into a field of study and 
practice known as corporate governance. The separation of ownership 

and control entailed substantial agency costs. The early writers, most 
prominently Berle and Means (1932), saw the law as the best hope for 
containing  these  costs.  Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976) instead  brought 
market rather than public solutions to the forefront of the analysis, two 
centuries  after  Smith.  The  interplay  of  public  and  private  solutions 
shaped the field as we know it.

We divide our analysis into seven sections. In Section 2, we begin 
with a discussion of agency costs, and of how different writers thought 
about them. These costs come in many forms, from low effort mentioned 
by  Smith  and  central  to  modern  research  on  incentives,  to  the  con-
sumption  of  perquisites,  to  excessive  growth  and  diversification,  to 
outright  expropriation  of  investor  wealth.  How  corporate  governance 
solves agency problems turns critically on what agency costs happen to 
be.

In  Section  3,  we  discuss  the  first  classic  of  corporate  governance, 
Berle  and  Means  (1932) The  Modern  Corporation  and  Private  Property. 
Berle and Means were the first to document systematically the extent of 
separation of ownership and control in large US corporations. As Smith 
and others have surmised, people running major companies, unless they 
are founders or their heirs, often own at most a percent or two of equity, 
so they are very different from proprietors. Unlike for Smith, however, 
for Berle and Means the central problem of corporate governance is not 

☆

We thank Harry DeAngelo, Oliver Hart, Steve Kaplan, Kevin J. Murphy, Raghuram Rajan, Jeremy Stein, Ren´e Stulz, and Adi Sunderam for extremely helpful 

comments, and Aria Liu, Jingyi Jia, and Mengdi Zhang for excellent research assistance.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: yueran.ma@chicagobooth.edu (Y. Ma), ashleifer@harvard.edu (A. Shleifer). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104115
Received 21 May 2025; Accepted 1 June 2025  
Available online 18 June 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

insufficient effort, but rather self-dealing –  the diversion of corporate 
resources  for  the  private  benefit  of  the  controlling  shareholders  or 
managers. Berle and Means stress public solutions, most importantly the 
law, to limit self-dealing by such controlling shareholders or managers. 
They see common law in the US, as practiced by the states, as good but 
insufficient for meeting the challenges of governance. Their book is the 
manifesto  for  strengthening  legal  protection  of  investors,  especially 
through securities laws enacted shortly after the book was published.

The Berle and Means narrative of corporate governance dominated 
American views for the next forty years. Some writers, such as Baumol 
(1959), focused on other agency costs, such as sales maximization and 
excessive growth. But what prevailed is Berle-and-Means suspicion of 
markets and their emphasis on public solutions.

All  of  this  changed  as  part  of  the  Chicago  Economics  Revolution, 
inspired  by  Hayek,  Friedman,  and  Coase,  which  replaced  the 
Depression-era and postwar statism with market solutions. As we discuss 
in Section 5, in corporate governance this revolution was led by Jensen 
and  Meckling  (1976).  They  start  with  separation  of  ownership  and 
control, stress perquisites as the fundamental agency problem, but then 
point to many market solutions that mitigate agency costs. These include 
product  market  competition,  governance  by  creditors,  managerial  in-
centives, corporate boards, accounting rules that force disclosure of in-
formation,  and  crucially  –  following  Manne  (1965) –  the  market  for 
corporate control. Jensen and Meckling see agency costs as unavoidable 
but bring up the many market mechanisms that contain them. Unlike 
Berle and Means, they see no role for the state.

The  decade  of  the  1980s  witnessed  a  tremendous  takeover  boom, 
during which 143 or 28 percent of the Fortune 500 companies lost their 
independence  (Shleifer  and  Vishny  1991).  Through  the  Journal  of 
Financial Economics, Jensen championed the empirical study of market 
solutions to corporate governance problems, especially takeovers. What 
much  of  this  work  shares  is  the  embrace  of  market  effectiveness  in 
promoting efficiency.

In  the  middle  of  the  takeover  boom,  Jensen’s  own  thinking  on 
market governance turns from pollyannish to frustrated. Jensen (1986)
moves  away  from  the  perquisites  model  of  agency  costs  to  excessive 
growth,  empire  building,  and  overdiversification.  This  leads  him  to 
propose  a  new  view  of  corporate  debt  as  the  mechanism  for  forcing 
managers to disgorge rather than waste free cash flows. The next step is 
to  embrace  leveraged  buyouts  (Jensen  1989),  later  known  as  private 
equity,  as  the  more  efficient  organizational  form.  Jensen’s  (1993)
Presidential Address to the American Finance Association comes back to 
the fundamental role of market solutions – in this case corporate take-
overs and LBO’s – to meeting the challenge of corporate governance.

Jensen’s work fundamentally shaped the field. Literally thousands of 
papers documented, described, and explained the market mechanisms of 
corporate  governance  following  in  his  footsteps.  But  several  issues 
remained open. In Section 5, we offer a highly selective overview of a 
few,  including  the  theoretical  and  empirical  work  on  the  market  for 
corporate ownership and control, and a revisit of the social objectives of 
the firm.

In Section 6, we look briefly – with deep awareness of the impossi-
bility  of  establishing  causality  –  on  the  consequences  of  the  Jensen- 
Meckling  revolution  for  the  world.  We  show  that  corporate  gover-
nance  has become a  key phrase  in media discussions of  business. We 
describe the growth of leveraged buyouts and private equity. We take a 
brief look at executive compensation and the growth of high-powered 
incentives.  The  revolution  had  a  lasting  impact.  The  radical  ideas  of 
the  1970s  became  conventional  wisdom  among  both  academics  and 
practitioners a few decades later.

Section 7 concludes with the major  lessons we learned. Corporate 
governance today is a mature field, with substantial empirical evidence 
supporting its main tenets.

2. The nature of agency problems

The analysis of corporate governance typically focuses on large joint 
stock companies controlled by a manager and owned by a substantial 
number  of  outside  shareholders  with  minimal  influence  on  corporate 
decisions.  Such  companies  have  existed  for  centuries  but  became 
prominent in the 19th century in the UK, and a bit later in the US, so 
much  so that they came to dominate economic activity. The growing 
role  of  these  firms  led  to  the  obvious  question:  does  separation  of 
ownership and control entail agency costs, created by the divergence of 
interests between managers and shareholders?

Early writers on agency costs answered with a resounding yes (e.g., 
Marshall 1919). Their descriptions fall into four broad categories. The 
first is lack of effort, also known as laxity or negligence or easy life by the 
managers,  resulting  from  their  inability  to  earn  full  returns  on  their 
effort,  since  such  returns  mostly  accrue  to  shareholders.  This  type  of 
agency  costs  concerned  Smith  (1776),  but  also  Marshall  (1919) and 
many others.

The second type is perquisites. The idea, also in Marshall (1919), is 
that  corporate  insiders  make  choices  that  please  them  for  reasons  of 
comfort  or  prestige  or  enjoyment,  but  that  are  paid  for  by  investors. 
Marshall  is  clear  that  a  sole  proprietor  of  a  business  might  regularly 
make  many  non-value  maximizing  choices,  but  he  is  fine  with  that 
because the proprietor pays for them. Not so for managers, whose perks 
shareholders pay for.

A third type of important agency costs is sales maximization, over- 
investment,  excessive  growth,  or  diversification.  Marshall  already 
mentions this, but the idea was most prominently developed by Baumol 
(1959),  who  however  does  not  see  the  growth  focus  as  a  problem. 
Excessive growth may be seen as a form of perks, in that it may benefit 
insiders  who  seek  power,  or  influence,  or  glory,  or  respect,  or  even 
higher compensation that comes with larger firm size, even if it does not 
serve shareholders.

A final type of agency costs is outright expropriation of outside in-
vestors  by  managers  or  controlling  shareholders,  also  known  as  self- 
dealing or tunneling. Tunneling can take the form of outright theft of 
corporate  wealth,  targeted  security  issues,  excessive  compensation, 
minority  freezeouts  in  takeovers  or  equity  issues,  or  related  party 
transactions whereby the controller buys goods or assets of a publicly 
held firm at excessive prices from an entity he owns or sells goods or 
assets of such a firm at too low prices to an entity he owns. In all these 
examples, the controllers benefit themselves at the expense of outside 
investors.

A brief tour through some of the 20th century corporate governance 
studies highlights the agency problems that various authors focus on. 
The aging Marshall (1919) is a bit vague, but hints at each of the agency 
problems we mentioned, including effort, perks, excessive growth, but 
also  expropriation.  Ripley  (1927) and  Berle  and  Means  (1932),  the 
protagonists of the next section, are instead focused on investor expro-
priation  and  how  to  stop  it.  They  are  worried  about  theft  not  effort. 
Williamson (1964) and Galbraith (1967) summarize the post-war con-
ventional  wisdom,  and  both  find  space  for  each  of  tunneling,  effort, 
empire building, and perks. Modern formulations of incentive theory, 
such as Ross (1973), Stiglitz (1975), and Holmstrom (1979), go back to 
effort.  They  are  interested  in  effort  elicitation  in  general,  rather  than 
specifically in corporate governance.

As we detail in Section 4, Jensen and Meckling (1976) focus on perks. 
It is not clear whether this is an analytical convenience or an empirical 
conviction,  but  much  of  their  analysis  depends  on  that  formulation. 
Jensen  (1986) switches  gears,  and  focuses  Baumol-style  on  excessive 
growth and empire building. These distortions in corporate choices play 
a much larger role in his work than either effort provision or investor 
expropriation (Table 1).

2 

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

Table 1 
Early works on agency problems.

Author

Title

Smith (1776)
Marshall (1919)

Wealth of Nations
Industry and Trade

Ripley (1927)
Berle and Means 

(1932)

Baumol (1959)
Williamson 
(1964)

Galbraith (1967)

Main Street and Wall Street
The Modern Corporation and Private 
Property
Business Behavior, Value, and Growth
The Economics of Discretionary 
Behavior
The New Industrial State

Manne (1965)

Ross (1973)

Stiglitz (1975)

Holmstrom 
(1979)

Mergers and the Market for Corporate 
Control
The Economic Theory of Agency: The 
Principal’s Problem
Incentives, Risk, and Information: 
Notes Towards a Theory of Hierarchy
Moral Hazard and Observability

Type

Effort
Effort, tunneling, 
empire building
Tunneling
Tunneling

Empire building
Perks, empire 
building
Tunneling, perks, 
empire building
Effort

Effort

Effort

Effort

Notes:  This  table  summarizes  early  discussions  of  agency  problems.  The  first 
column shows the author and publication year. The second column shows the 
title. The third column shows the types of agency problems discussed.

3. Berle and Means: the supremacy of the law

Berle  and  Means  (1932) is  the  first  serious  scientific  study  of 
corporate  governance.  Before  getting  into  details,  we  note  that  this 
honor partly belongs to William Ziemba Ripley (1927), a colorful Har-
vard  economics  professor  (and  the  original  occupant  of  a  house  in 
Newton, MA where one of the present authors has lived for the past 35 
years). Ripley’s book, “Main Street and Wall Street” –he invented that 
expression – is in part a serious treatise, in part an expose of the evils of 
Wall Street financiers and their tunneling of firms. To quote Galbraith 
(1967) on Ripley and Berle:

Professor William Z. Ripley of Harvard, the leading authority on the 
corporation  in  the  twenties,  warned  President  Coolidge  that  “presti-
digitation,  double-shuffling,  honey-fugling,  hornswoggling,  and  skull-
duggery” were threatening the entire economic system. Adolph A. Berle 
Jr.,  Ripley’s  successor  as  the  prime  authority  on  the  corporation, 
concluded that the mature corporation accorded no effective rights to 
the owners of the enterprise. There could, in consequence, be only one of 
two results. Managers would become trustees, properly supervised, on 
behalf  of  the  “inactive  and  irresponsible”  owners.  Or  they  would 
“operate it in their own interests and divert a portion of the asset fund to 
their own uses.”  There would develop “a corporate oligarchy coupled 
with a probability of an era of corporate plundering.”

Both  Berle  and  Means  (1932) and  Galbraith  (1967) acknowledge 

their debts to Ripley.

Berle and Means (1932) made four contributions to the study of large 
corporations. First, they documented empirically the patterns of sepa-
ration of ownership and control, by putting together the lists of largest 
shareholders and their holdings and showing that top managers were 
often  trivial  shareholders.  They  also  described  ownership  structures, 
such as pyramids, that further separated ownership from control. The 
term “Berle and Means corporation”  refers to firms with low manage-
ment holdings and became the default view of corporate ownership and 
control.

Second,  Berle  and  Means  saw  diversion (or  tunneling,  or  theft) of 
corporate  assets  by  managers  or  controlling  shareholders  as  the  prin-
cipal agency problem. “If we are to assume that the desire for personal 
profit is the prime force motivating control, we must conclude that the 
interests  of  control  are  different  from  and  often  radically  opposed  to 
those  of  ownership;  that  the  owners  most  emphatically  will  not  be 
served  by  a  profit-seeking  controlling  group  (p.  122)”.  “When  their 
holdings amount to only such a fractional percent as the holdings of the 

management  in  management-controlled  corporations,  profits  at  the 
expense of the corporation become practically clear gain to the persons 
in control and the interests of profit-seeking control run directly counter 
to  the  interests  of  the  owners  (p.  115).”  Berle  and  Means  give  many 
examples of such conflict and diversion of profits.

Third, Berle and Means do not put much trust in markets to address 
conflicts  of  interest.  They  briefly  discuss  external  fundraising  as  a 
disciplining  force,  but  do  not  see  this  as  sufficient.  Rather,  they 
emphasize the law protecting shareholders as the best hope for gover-
nance. Logically, this stands to reason. If the agency problem is over-
expansion,  or  perquisites,  or  low  effort,  then  incentives  would  be 
effective, since the benefits to the managers with low ownership stakes 
are  modest.  A  manager  spending  $1  on  unnecessary  investments  or 
perks  might  get  only  a  few  cents  worth  of  private  benefits  such  as 
prestige, which even a modest ownership stake or incentive pay package 
would  cause  him  to  internalize.  But  the  benefit  of  diverting  a  $1  of 
profits  to  one’s  own  pocket  is  exactly  $1,  and  it  takes  powerful  and 
expensive incentives to discourage such diversion. For Berle and Means, 
self-dealing can only be stopped by the law.

Indeed, Berle was a law professor, and most of the book is devoted to 
the ability of common law to control investor expropriation. “We are 
thus  led  to  conclude  the  strength  of  law  in  this  regard  is  the  only 
enforceable  safeguard  which  a  security  owner  really  has”  (p.  197). 
Although Berle and Means praise prevailing law, they do not feel it is up 
to the task against the insiders. Their book is often seen as the manifesto 
for securities laws in the US, although the authors do not mention them 
directly.

The Berle and Means take on corporate governance dominated aca-
demic  thinking  for  the  next  40  years.  It  may  or  may  not  have  been 
central to the passage of securities laws. Their pessimism in the depths of 
the Great Depression was perhaps in part countered by the extraordinary 
performance of the US economy after the war. Berle remained skeptical 
and, according to Lehmann (2019), moved in the direction of greater 
state control. Yet the intellectual response had to wait. It came in the 
1970s,  as  part  of  the  Chicago  assault  on  government  control  of  the 
economy. In the special issue of the Journal of Law and Economics on the 
40th anniversary of Berle and Means, Stigler and Friedland (1983) felt 
the book is important enough to really rip it to shreds.

4. Jensen: the power of markets

Hayek’s  (1944) manifesto  precipitated  a  half-century  intellectual 
response to the Depression-era and post-war skepticism about capitalism 
and markets. Much of that response centered at the University of Chi-
cago, but Columbia and Rochester played major roles as well. Friedman 
(1959) and  Lucas  (1972) in  macroeconomics,  Coase  (1960) in  law, 
Becker (1956) and Mincer (1974) in labor, Harberger (1962) in public 
finance, Stigler (1958) in industrial organization, TW Schultz (1964) in 
development, and Modigliani-Miller (1958) and Fama (1965) in finan-
cial economics all transformed their disciplines. The common theme of 
this research is the recognition of market solutions and competition as 
sources  of  efficiency  and  prosperity.  Another  common  theme  is 
emotional hostility to the statist ideas this research replaced. Economics 
would never be the same.

In corporate governance, this transformative role fell to Jensen and 
Meckling (1976) who created the field in its current form. The paper 
places  corporate  governance  in  a  market  setting  and  stresses  private 
mechanisms  of  controlling  agency  costs.  Shareholders  are  no  longer 
ignorant victims of managers, to be saved by the state and the law. They 
monitor  entrepreneurs-managers,  who in  turn  use bonding  devices to 
get  funding  on  better  terms.  The  paper  disparages  Berle  and  Means, 
referring to them only once as “popularizers.” (Recall they were the first 
empiricists in the field.) In his Presidential Address to the AFA in 1993, 
Jensen cites dozens of studies, but not Berle and Means.

Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976) present  a  formal  model  of  corporate 
ownership  inspired  by  Alchian  and  Demsetz’s  (1972) idea  that  the 

3 

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

corporation is a nexus of contracts. The agency problem they model is 
the  consumption  of  perquisites  by  managers,  such  as  “physical  ap-
pointments of the office, the attractiveness of secretarial staff, the level 
of employee discipline, the kind and amount of charitable contributions, 
personal relations (“love”, “respect”, etc.) with employees, a larger than 
optimal  computer  to  play  with,  purchase  of  production  inputs  from 
friends, etc.” (p. 312). They are not interested in shareholder expropri-
ation – perhaps because they feel this problem is solved in the US by the 
time they are writing. Nor, except for a brief mention in the conclusion, 
are they interested in the law. This is a major departure from Berle and 
Means.

Instead,  Jensen  and  Meckling  stress  private  solutions  to  agency 
problems. They see agency costs as unavoidable: no solution eliminates 
them completely. A firm that needs outside capital to invest can issue 
equity, but that diminishes the equity stake of the entrepreneur. Such 
dilution in turn raises the divergence between the benefits of perks and 
their  costs  to  the  entrepreneur,  since  outsiders  pay  for  some  of  the 
benefits (and all of them as a manager’s stake approaches zero). This 
firm  can  also  issue  debt,  but  debt  entails  potential  costs  of  financial 
distress  and  creates  another  agency  problem  –  the  incentive  for  the 
manager to take excessive risk since the downside falls on the creditors.
Jensen and Meckling derive an optimal capital structure that mini-
mizes  total  inefficiencies,  including  perquisites,  excessively  risky  in-
vestments, and costs of financial distress. As with Berle and Means, who 
saw the law as the remedy for self-dealing, Jensen and Meckling’s focus 
on  perquisites  leads  them  to  solutions  that  are  appropriate  for  that 
problem.  For  if  perks  are  the  problem,  then  management  incentives, 
some shareholder oversight, the need to return to capital markets, all 
work  to  discourage  excess  spending  on  perks.  The  solutions  fit  the 
problem.

Perhaps  more  important  than  the  specific  modeling  assumptions, 
Jensen and Meckling redefine corporate governance as private solutions 
to containing agency costs. These solutions, both in their paper and later 
work,  include  product  market  competition,  incentive  contracts  for 
managers, corporate boards, shareholder voting, the need to return to 
capital  markets  to  raise  additional  funds,  contractual  governance  by 
debt  holders,  disclosure  systems,  competition  between  managerial 
teams both to attain reputations for excellence and probity and to con-
trol more assets, and takeovers. Like Moses with the tablets, corporate 
governance received its commandments for decades to come.

Indeed,  research  in  corporate  finance  since  Jensen  and  Meckling 
(1976) has been dominated by their ideas. Fama and Jensen (1983a,b) 
expanded  the  Jensen  Meckling  analysis,  which  focused  on  the  rela-
tionship between an entrepreneur and outside investors, to the study of 
large corporations and other organizational forms such as non-profits, 
and  described  managerial  decisions  as  checked  by  corporate  boards 
and other approval mechanisms. Fama (1980) stressed the importance 
of managerial reputations and competition between management teams 
in controlling agency problems. Murphy (1985) and others whose work 
is summarized by Jensen and Zimmerman (1985) argued that executive 
compensation aligns the interests of managers and shareholders.

The Jensen and Meckling paper was written at the very beginning of 
a takeover boom that, during the 1980s, reshaped American corporate 
landscape,  including  the  patterns  of  corporate  ownership  and  gover-
nance.  On  the  one  hand,  many  of  largest  American  firms  were  taken 
over, and had their management teams replaced, by other firms or in-
dependent  investors  using  debt  to  finance  acquisitions.  On  the  other 
hand,  incumbent  management teams  adopted many  anti-takeover  de-
vices designed to stop these challenges. As the takeover boom expanded, 
so did research about it. In 1983, the Journal of Financial Economics 
published a set of papers on the market for corporate control. Jensen and 
Ruback (1983) summarized the evidence and presented a highly opti-
mistic picture of the takeover boom in the spirit of Manne (1965), which 
saw takeovers as replacement of inefficient management teams by better 
ones, and resistance to takeovers as attempts by incumbent managers to 
keep their rents.

Motivated  by  the  takeover  boom  and  aggressive  resistance  by 
incumbent  managers  to  takeovers,  Jensen  (1986) moves  beyond  the 
Jensen-Meckling  model.  The  agency  problem  he  focuses  on  is 
over-expansion and over-diversification by large corporations motivated 
by power, fame, and increased management pay, since pay is empirically 
related to size (Murphy 1985). Jensen criticizes the prevalent corporate 
governance mechanisms, such as incentive pay and boards of directors, 
as serving rather than disciplining the incumbents and thus failing to 
reduce agency costs. Instead, he focuses on governance tools that force 
firms with modest investment opportunities to disgorge free cash flows.
The  first  of  these  tools  are  dividends,  which  serve  the  purpose  of 
returning  cash  flows  to  shareholders  (Easterbrook,  1984).  But  Jensen 
(1986) further identifies a new role for debt as a governance device: it 
forces managers to return free cash flow to outside investors, in this case 
creditors who have bankruptcy and other threats if not paid back. This 
powerful mechanism is reflected in Jensen’s logic in the rise of leveraged 
buyouts  –  debt-financed  acquisitions  combining  leverage  and  high 
ownership by insiders – in the mid and late 1980s (Kaplan 1989). Both, 
of course, are powerful motivating devices.

Jensen’s (1986) rethinking of corporate governance again links the 
nature of the perceived agency problem to its solution. Just as Berle and 
Means focused on tunneling and saw the law as a remedy, and Jensen 
and Meckling (1976) focused on perquisites and saw incentives as the 
solution,  Jensen  (1986) focuses  on  excessive  investment  by  highly 
profitable firms with limited growth opportunities and wants them to 
disgorge free cash flows. With incentive pay failing in its role, dividends 
and leverage emerge as the logical solutions to this agency problem.

Jensen  stayed  with  this  line  of  thinking  the  next  several  years.  In 
1990,  he  argued  empirically,  with  Kevin  J.  Murphy  (1990),  that  in-
centives  coming  from  management  compensation  contracts  are 
extremely weak, because a typical CEO with a low ownership stake in 
the  company  benefits  only  to  a  miniscule  extent  from  changes  in 
shareholder  wealth.  This  again  departs  from  earlier  work,  such  as 
Murphy  (1985) and  Jensen  and  Zimmerman  (1985),  which  assessed 
incentive pay more optimistically.

The  Jensen-Murphy  logic  turns  heavily  on  the  cost  of  perquisites 
being small in large companies (Baker and Hall 2004), or a high value of 
perquisites or glory if the costs are more substantial. The same CEO with 
a small percentage stake may have most of his personal wealth in the 
shares of the company, as is surely often the case. Imagine a company 
with a $1 billion market capitalization, in which the CEO owns 5 % or 
$50 million. Suppose the CEO is considering a $100 million investment 
that will pay off zero – a clearly bad opportunity he would only pursue 
for the sake of perks or empire-building. If the CEO’s wealth is entirely in 
the shares of the company, his personal cost of this investment is pro-
portional to that to the shareholders, or 10 % of his wealth. Unless the 
perks or empire building are worth more than $5 million, which seems 
implausible,  the  investment  will  not  be  made.  Although  US  data  on 
manager wealth is scarce, Elsila et al. (2013) for Swedish firms find that 
45 % of average CEO’s wealth is in the shares of the company they run. 
Value-destroying growth seems less plausible if managers lose wealth in 
proportion with other shareholders.

As  the  takeover  boom  and  managerial  resistance  to  it  progressed, 
Jensen took his arguments further in both academic and public spheres. 
In “Eclipse  of  the Public  Corporation”,  Jensen (1989) argues that the 
dominant organizational form of a widely held publicly traded corpo-
ration  has  become  obsolete  in  solving  agency  problems  because  in-
centives  it  provides  to  top  managers  are  feeble.  A  highly  leveraged 
corporation such as an LBO would do a better job and is set to replace 
public  firms,  both  because  it  allowed  CEO’s  to  own  higher  fractional 
ownership  stakes,  and  because  debt  would  force  the  disgorgement  of 
free cash flows. Jensen (1993) takes this reasoning further. He sees the 
takeover boom as the Third Industrial Revolution in America. Like the 
consolidation of industry in the late 19th century, the boom would force 
the  restructuring  of  American  firms,  cut  out  fat  and  inefficiency,  and 
precipitate exit. It would replace the lazy and uncompetitive firms of the 

4 

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

post-war era protected by American economic leadership and political 
dominance in an open world with leaner and meaner organizations.

A decade later, Jensen’s research on corporate governance took one 
more  turn.  Early  in  his  career,  Jensen  became  one  of  the  staunchest 
supporters of the efficient markets hypothesis, himself making impor-
tant contributions (Jensen 1968; Fama et al. 1969). “I believe there is no 
other proposition in economics which has more solid empirical evidence 
supporting it than the Efficient Market Hypothesis,”  he wrote (Jensen 
1978).

Yet witnessing the internet bubble of the late 1990s, he reconsidered. 
In “Agency Cost of Overvalued Equity”, Jensen (2005) denounces stock 
market  overvaluation  for  wreaking  havoc  in  incentive  systems  so 
essential  for  effective  governance.  Corporate  managers  of  course  are 
happy with overvalued equity, because it brings them higher compen-
sation and higher valuations of their equity and options. To sustain the 
expectation of rapid earnings growth needed to keep stock prices up, 
managers  then  make  bad  investments  and  acquisitions  that  destroy 
long-run  value  (Moeller  et  al.  2005).  They  also  manipulate  earnings 
through  dubious  accounting  practices  and  short-termism  driven  in-
vestments, buy back shares, and otherwise drive-up share prices. The 
very  incentive  mechanisms  that  Jensen  saw  as  essential  for  good 
governance,  such  as  compensation  linked  to  equity  prices  and  distri-
butions of cash to investors, are hijacked to destroy value.

Jensen left an extraordinary legacy. He replaced the Berle and Means 
state-centered  approach  to  corporate  governance  with  a  mosaic  of 
market  solutions,  each  of  which  by  itself  generated  a  vast  literature 
probing its effectiveness. The term corporate governance is now asso-
ciated with these private solutions. As his career evolved, so did Jensen’s 
ideas  about  the  effectiveness  of  alternative  strategies  of  corporate 
governance. It is quite remarkable in retrospect to see the great scholar 
revising his earlier ideas in light of new evidence. We could use a bit 
more of that in finance.

5. Intellectual follow-ups

The  takeover  boom  of  the  1980s  eventually  ended,  but  not  the 
research on corporate governance. In this section, we offer an extremely 
selective  summary  of  some  of  the  highlights  that  we  see  as  directly 
related to the themes we stressed already. These include five topics: 1) 
theoretical developments on corporate control, 2) an empirical revisit of 
the nature of the agency problems and the return of Berle and Means, 3) 
an empirical revisit of separation of ownership and control, 4) the role of 
debt in corporate governance, and 5) an increased interest in the ob-
jectives of the firm.

In their model of optimal corporate ownership, Jensen and Meckling 
(1976) assume that shareholders do not vote, and hence are powerless to 
defend their rights through voting mechanisms. But that left a key issue 
open: the market for corporate control is after all the consolidation of 
voting  rights  to  gain  the  majority  of  votes  and  replace  management. 
What is the role of shareholder voting in governance?

Following early insights of Easterbrook and Fischel (1983), funda-
mental  answers  to  this  question  came  from  the  theoretical  work  of 
Grossman and Hart (1986) on incomplete contracts, and subsequently 
Grossman  and  Hart  (1988) and  Harris  and  Raviv  (1988) on  optimal 
security  design.  Grossman  and  Hart  (1986) explained  why  complete 
contingent contracts are infeasible in many settings, including the firm. 
Grossman and Hart (1988) and Harris and Raviv (1988) then applied 
this idea to corporate securities and argued that what defines these se-
curities is not just cash flows they receive, but also the rights and powers 
they  give  their  owners.  For  shareholders,  these  are  voting  rights.  For 
creditors,  these  are  the  rights  in  bankruptcy  or  in  violations  of 
contractual debt covenants.

Of  course,  for  corporate  voting,  individual  voting  rights  are  not 
particularly valuable because a small shareholder, just like a voter, has a 
trivial  effect  on  the  outcome  of  the  vote.  Yet  unlike  in  the  political 
domain,  corporate  votes  can  be  traded,  for  instance  when  shares  are 

traded, which makes it possible to accumulate enough votes to change 
outcomes  (see,  e.g.  Shleifer  and  Vishny  1986).  More  broadly,  this 
formulation opened the question of how best to package voting and cash 
flow rights together into securities. To address it, Grossman and Hart 
asked  what  agency  problem  needs  to  be  solved.  They  introduced  the 
concept of private benefits of control, a mix of perquisites and expro-
priation opportunities for the controllers. “These include synergy ben-
efits  realized  by  the  acquirer,  the  return  to  being  able  to  freeze  out 
minority shareholders at a price below the value of their shares, per-
quisites of control, and in extreme cases the diversion of resources from 
the security holders to subsidiaries of management or the acquirer (p. 
177).”

Grossman  and  Hart  (1988) show  that  the  most  efficient  security 
design links cash flow benefits of equity with voting rights. Since a vote 
is of little value to a small shareholder, if votes are not tied to cash flows 
a potential acquirer seeking control would bid only for votes. To get the 
acquirer to pay for the cash flows, it is efficient to tie them together with 
votes. This design forces an acquirer who only wants control to pay for 
the cash flow rights as well. One share one vote works best.

These ideas have major implications. Cash flows accruing to different 
types  of  claims  are  no  longer  their  defining  feature,  but  rather  a 
byproduct of their powers. Shareholders receive dividends not because 
dividends define equity, but because votes give them power via proxy 
fights or takeovers. Creditors get paid not because interest defines debt, 
but  because  creditors  can  resort  to  bankruptcy  to  obtain  control  or 
pursue liquidation if a firm defaults. This research clarified the Jensen- 
Meckling intuition that capital structure is not separate from investment 
choices:  it  shapes  the  powers  of  different  claimholders,  and  thus 
corporate investment and the value of the firm. The MM propositions are 
irrelevant.

The  implications  go  much  further.  Once  we  think  about  “private 
benefits of control” as the agency cost, the question of what keeps them 
down comes knocking. Perhaps not surprisingly, the answer turns out to 
be the law – corporate law, securities law, bankruptcy law, etc. In the 
1990s, it became possible to measure the laws protecting shareholders 
and  creditors  from  insider  self-dealing  in  different  countries,  and  to 
connect these laws to tunneling and financial market development (see 
LaPorta  et  al.  1997,  1998,  Djankov  et  al.  2007,  2008).  This  research 
found that countries in different legal traditions show different levels of 
investor  protection,  with  common  law  countries  generally  exhibiting 
higher levels than civil law countries, and consequently different levels 
of financial development, as measured by numbers of listed firms, val-
uations  of  debt  and  equity  markets,  and  so  on.  The  laws  limiting 
self-dealing enable outside investors to get their money back, perhaps 
with a return, and thus enable firms to raise outside funds (Shleifer and 
Vishny 1997). After 60 years, we returned to Berle and Means.

These developments encouraged academics to revisit the question of 
whether the Berle and Means corporation, with managers in full control 
with  virtually  no  cash  flow  ownership,  and  shareholders  with  all  the 
ownership but no interest or capacity to exercise their rights, describes 
reality.  Demsetz  and  Lehn  (1985) and  Morck  et  al.  (1988) show  that 
even among US Fortune 500 firms relatively concentrated ownership is 
not  uncommon, usually  in  cases where  founders  or  their descendants 
kept significant ownership stakes. Berle and Means corporations were 
dominant, but not universal.

Morck et al. (1988) also show that, over much of the range, higher 
management  ownership  is  associated  with  higher  performance  as 
measured  by  Tobin’s  Q,  although  at  very  high  levels  of  ownership, 
where  the  controlling  shareholders  are  not  subject  to  any  challenges, 
performance appears to decline. This suggests that complete control by a 
dominant  shareholder,  despite  high  traditional  incentives,  may  spell 
trouble for minorities. Consistent with this evidence, Stulz (1988) shows 
theoretically the potential adverse effects of high insider ownership of 
control  rights.  More  broadly,  one  cannot  take  the  Berle  and  Means 
ownership  structure,  which  Jensen  and  Meckling  also  embraced,  as 
universal.  Large  shareholders  and  managers  are  often  the  same,  and 

5 

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

both can engage in self-dealing.

Such instances were relatively rare in the US, the focus of most of the 
research  on  corporate  governance  until  the  1990s.  The  theoretical 
studies of ownership, control, and private benefits encouraged econo-
mists to look elsewhere. What they discovered is that in other parts of 
the  world  the  Berle  and  Means  corporation  was  truly  exceptional. 
Rather, ownership was heavily concentrated among controlling share-
holders, and control – through pyramids, shares with multiple classes of 
votes, and so on – was even more concentrated than cash flow owner-
ship. Moreover, direct measures of the magnitude of tunneling, such as 
the premium on the market price of shares with superior voting rights, 
showed that private benefits of control are high, and higher in countries 
with  poor  investor  protection  (Zingales  1994;  Johnson  et  al.  2000; 
Nenova 2003; Dyck and Zingales 2004). The Berle and Means corpora-
tion was an exception not the rule in Continental Europe, Latin America, 
Asia, Africa – nearly all countries that had financial markets (La Porta 
et al. 1999).

Nor is this all. As scholars began to look closer, they saw two further 
things.  First,  consistent  with  highly  concentrated  control  and  large 
control premia, the principal agency problem in much of the world was 
not the consumption of perquisites, lack of effort, or overexpansion – it 
was tunneling. The controllers of large corporations – through trading 
assets, issuing securities, changing capital structures and other means – 
worked hard to separate outside investors from their cash flows. In the 
words of a Belgian billionaire Albert Frere, “small minority shareholder, 
small fool; big minority shareholder, big fool” (The Economist, 1998). 
While tunneling might have been successfully addressed in the US – in 
part by securities laws and in part by the fiduciary duty of managers to 
shareholders – it remained the central problem of corporate governance 
in much of the rest of the world.

This research led to an updated view of agency problems and equi-
librium ownership structures. Perquisites seem minor compared to other 
agency  problems.  With  poor  legal  protection  of  investors,  the  central 
agency  problem  is  self-dealing  by  insiders.  In  that  environment, 
dispersed ownership cannot be sustained in equilibrium because as Berle 
and  Means  feared  minority  shareholders  are  regularly  expropriated. 
Ownership and control are concentrated in equilibrium, and financial 
markets are small. As legal protection improves, tunneling recedes, and 
ownership in equilibrium become more dispersed. The central agency 
problems  become  effort  and  over-expansion.  The  solutions  to  these 
problems (once legal protection is in place) are incentives and debt, just 
as  Jensen  has  argued. There  is  a  fundamental  complementarity  –  not 
antagonism  –  between  private  and  public  approaches  to  corporate 
governance,  between  Berle-Means  and  Jensen.  Investors  need  legal 
protection  from  expropriation  to  provide  capital,  as  well  as  private 
governance mechanisms to make sure this capital is used well. Different 
agency problems require different but complementary solutions.

We  have  also learned  a  great deal  about  governance by  creditors. 
Traditional debt contracts involve physical collateral, which is seized by 
creditors when debt is not paid (Hart and Moore 1994). Such contracts 
are extremely inefficient when liquidation values of assets are substan-
tially below market values (Shleifer and Vishny 1992). They also do not 
work when self-dealing opportunities are unlimited because debtors can 
transfer collateral out of the firm, unless it is something unmovable like 
land  or  real  estate.  As  investor  protection  (and  accounting  methods) 
improve, however, so do opportunities to write debt contracts based not 
only  on  physical  assets,  but  also  on  cash  flows.  Creditors  can  then 
introduce conditions or covenants into debt contracts and monitor the 
firm  for  violations  (Diamond  1984;  Aghion  and  Bolton  1992;  Dewa-
tripont and Tirole 1994). The evidence shows that such governance by 
creditors can be effective (Chava and Roberts 2008; Roberts and Sufi 
2009;  Nini,  Smith,  and  Sufi  2009,  2012),  and  that  cash  flow-based 
borrowing is becoming common for large firms (Lian and Ma 2021).

One further recurring issue in corporate governance is the objectives 
of the firm. Financial economists have historically accepted Friedman’s 
(1970) argument that the objective of the firm should be to maximize 

profits or market value. During the 1980′s takeover boom, this objective 
was questioned from the perspective of stakeholder interests, raising the 
possibility that managers should attend to the welfare of employees and 
other constituencies (e.g., Shleifer and Summers 1988). Jensen (2002)
confronts  these  concerns  and  argues  forcefully  that  multiplicity  of 
corporate  goals  would  lead  to  chaos,  and  dilute  accountability  of 
corporate managers. He also claims that properly attending to the in-
terests of stakeholders would if anything serve to increase the value of 
the firm.

More  recently,  inspired  by  the  ESG  movement,  some  have  argued 
that firms should maximize the goals of their shareholders, even if these 
goals  differ  from  value  maximization  (Hart  and  Zingales  2022).  This 
argument is still evolving. For if shareholders indeed have goals other 
than value maximization, such as environmental or labor policies, they 
would  pay  more  for  the  shares  of  a  company  pursuing  their  goals, 
leading to higher market values. It has been challenging to come up with 
shareholder goals that entail deliberate market value reductions. Much 
of the evidence on shareholder activism suggests that value maximiza-
tion remains the primary objective of shareholders (Brav, Jiang, and Kim 
2015).

6. Impact

The impact of the two classics in corporate governance, Berle and 
Means (1932) and Jensen and Meckling (1976), on academic research 
has been immense. But so, crucially, has been their impact on the world, 
in their respective domains. We have already mentioned securities laws 
in the US. We do not have direct evidence, but Berle takes some credit in 
the preface to the 1968 edition of their book for these laws.

Jensen and Meckling and Jensen’s subsequent work have likewise 
had  an  enormous  impact  on  private  corporate  governance.  We  can 
provide a few illustrations. First, management pay changed radically in 
the United States. Fig. 1, taken from Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter (2017), 
uses  data  from  Frydman  and  Saks  (2010) and  shows  the  share  of 
incentive pay in total management pay in the form of stock options or 
share  grants  following  good  performance.  Equity-based  incentive  pay 
increased dramatically from non-existent in the early 20th century to 
most compensation in the sample firms by the 21st century. These in-
creases in incentive pay often came on top of salaries, rather than as a 
substitute  as  recommended  by  Jensen  and  Murphy  (1990).  Jensen 
recognized  some  of  the  adverse  consequences  and  manipulations 
entailed  by  high-powered  incentives.  Nonetheless,  the  impact  of  his 
work on management pay is clear.

Second, leveraged buyouts grew substantially from the cottage in-
dustry to an active private equity sector with a massive deal volume. 
Private Equity did not replace publicly traded firms, as Jensen (1989)
predicted, but the deals reached $350 billion in 2019, about 0.6 % of 
GDP and roughly comparable to the M&A volume – surely a significant 
impact.

Finally, Fig. 2 shows the fraction of articles published in The Econ-
omist  that  contains  the  phrase  “corporate  governance”  or  “corporate 
control.” Since the 1980s, these two phrases have become much more 
frequent in the coverage of business. The core topics of Jensen’s work 
have prominently entered the public domain.

7. Conclusion

A century after corporate governance has been invented as a field, 
large  firms  are  as  important  as  ever  (Kwon,  Ma,  and  Zimmermann 
2024), and so is their governance. Thankfully, we learned many lessons. 
First, the solutions to corporate governance challenges depend critically 
on which agency problem matters. In this regard, managerial effort and 
consumption of perquisites have receded as plausibly important agency 
problems,  whereas  managerial  self-dealing  and  empire  building  have 
gained  prominence.  Corporate  governance  aims  to  solve  the  latter 
problems.

6 

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

Fig. 1. The structure of CEO compensation.
Notes: This figure from Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter (2017) shows the average composition of CEO pay in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990 (for a total of 
101 firms). The figure shows salaries and current bonuses, payouts from long-term incentive plans (including the value of restricted stock), and the grant-date values 
of option grants (calculated using Black-Scholes).

Fig. 2. Articles in The Economist mentioning “Corporate governance”.
Notes:  The  figure  shows  the  fraction  of  articles  published  in  The  Economist  every  year  that  contains  the  phrase  “corporate  governance.”  Data  are  shared  by 
Zhang (2018).

Second, the principal solution to the problem of self-dealing is the 
law. Legal protections of investors enable firms to raise external funds 
and allow firms to issue debt and equity and grow. Without such pro-
tections, ownership remains concentrated, firms are smaller and closely 
held, and capital markets are stunted. We owe these ideas about public 
corporate governance to Berle and Means.

But  the  law  is  not  enough.  Left  to  their  own  devices,  corporate 
managers  can  still  pursue  self-serving  strategies.  They  need  market 
discipline.  Such  discipline  is  provided  by  the  private  mechanisms  of 
corporate governance, such as incentive pay, leverage, and the market 
for corporate control. We owe to Michael Jensen the central ideas in this 
domain.

Between the public mechanisms of Berle and Means, and the private 
mechanisms of Jensen, the corporate governance problem in the US has 

7 

been reduced, especially compared to the rest of the world. There are 
surely major remaining problems, such as earnings manipulations, cut-
ting  corners,  short-termism,  and  other  distortions  from  high  powered 
incentives  schemes,  which  Jensen  himself  acknowledged.  Yet  we  see 
governance working, as seen both in high profitability and market val-
uations and in the shorter tenure and faster aging of corporate execu-
tives (Borgschulte et al., 2024). In many other parts of the world, there 
has been considerable progress, but much more remains to be done. The 
central point, however, is that at least in this sphere, we roughly un-
derstand how things work. And we owe this knowledge to the amazing 
inventors of the field.

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Yueran  Ma:  Writing  –  original  draft,  Writing  –  review  &  editing. 

Andrei Shleifer: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

I  declare  that  I  have  no  material  financial  interests  related  to  the 

research in this paper.

Yueran Ma
I  declare  that  I  have  no  material  financial  interests  related  to  the 

research in this paper.
Andrei Shleifer

References

Aghion, Philippe, Bolton, Patrick, 1992. An incomplete contracts approach to financial 

contracting. Rev. Econ. Stud. 59 (3), 473–494.

Alchian, Armen A., Demsetz, Harold, 1972. Production, information costs, and economic 

organization. Am. Econ. Rev. 62 (5), 777–795.

Baker, George P., Hall, Brian J., 2004. CEO Incentives and firm size. J. Labor. Econ. 22 

(4), 767–798.

Baumol, William J., 1959. Business Behavior, Value and Growth. Macmillan, New York. 
Becker, Gary S., 1956. The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press, 

Chicago. 

Berle, Adolf A., Means, Gardiner C., 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. 

Macmillan, New York. 

Borgschulte, M., Guenzel, M., Liu, C., Malmendier, U., 2024. CEO stress, aging, and 

death. J. Finance. Forthcoming. 

Brav, Alon, Jiang, Wei, Kim, Hyunseob, 2015. Recent advances in research on hedge fund 
activism: value creation and identification. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 7 (1), 579–595.
Chava, Sudheer, Roberts, Michael, 2008. How does financing impact investment? the 

role of debt covenants. J. Finance 63 (5), 2085–2121.

Coase, Ronald H., 1960. The problem of social cost. J. Law Econ. 3, 1–44.
Demsetz, Harold, Lehn, Kenneth, 1985. The structure of corporate ownership: causes and 

consequences. J. Political Econ. 93 (6), 1155–1177.

Dewatripont, Mathias, Tirole, Jean, 1994. A Theory of debt and equity: diversity of 

securities and manager–shareholder congruence. Q. J. Econ. 109 (4), 1027–1054.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Rev. 

Econ. Stud. 51 (3), 393–414.

Djankov, Simeon, McLiesh, Caralee, Shleifer, Andrei, 2007. Private credit in 129 

countries. J. Financ. Econ. 84 (2), 299–329.

Djankov, Simeon, Porta, Rafael La, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, 2008. 

The law and economics of self-dealing. J. Financ. Econ. 88 (3), 430–465.
Dyck, Alexander, Zingales, Luigi, 2004. Private benefits of control: an international 

comparison. J. Finance 59 (2), 537–600.

Easterbrook, Frank H., 1984. Two agency-cost explanations of dividends. Am. Econ. Rev. 

74 (4), 650–659.

Easterbrook, Frank, Fischel, Daniel, 1983. Voting in corporate law. J. Law Econ. 26 (2), 

395–427.

Edmans, Alex, Gabaix, Xavier, Jenter, Dirk, 2017. Executive compensation: a survey of 
theory and evidence. In: Hermalin, Benjamin E., Weisbach, Michael S. (Eds.), The 
Handbook of the Economics of Corporate Governance, The Handbook of the 
Economics of Corporate Governance, 1. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 383–539.
Elsil¨a, Anna, Kallunki, Juha-Pekka, Nilsson, Henrik, Sahlstr¨om, Petri, 2013. CEO 

Personal wealth, equity incentives and firm performance. Corp. Gov.: Int. Rev. 21 
(1), 26–41.

Fama, Eugene F., 1965. The behavior of stock-market prices. J. Bus. 38 (1), 34–105.
Fama, Eugene F., Fisher, Lawrence, Jensen, Michael C., Roll, Richard, 1969. The 

adjustment of stock prices to new information. Int. Econ. Rev. (Phila.) 10 (1), 1–21.
Fama, Eugene F., 1980. Agency problems and the theory of the firm. J. Political Econ. 88 

(2), 288–307.

Fama, Eugene F., Jensen, Michael C., 1983a. Agency problems and residual claims. 

J. Law Econ. 26 (2), 327–349.

Fama, Eugene F., Jensen, Michael C., 1983b. Separation of ownership and control. J. Law 

Econ. 26 (2), 301–325.

Friedman, Milton., 1959. The demand for money: some theoretical and empirical results. 

J. Political Econ. 67 (4), 327–351.

Friedman, Milton. 1970. “The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits.” 

New York Times.

Frydman, Carola, Saks, Raven E., 2010. Executive compensation: a new view from a 

long-term perspective, 1936–2005. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (5), 2099–2138.

Galbraith, John Kenneth, 1967. The New Industrial State. Houghton Mifflin, Boston. 
Grossman, Sanford J., Hart, Oliver D., 1986. The costs and benefits of ownership: a 
theory of vertical and lateral integration. J. Political Econ. 94 (4), 691–719.
Grossman, Sanford J., Hart, Oliver D., 1988. One share–one vote and the market for 

corporate control. J. Financ. Econ. 20, 175–202.

Harberger, Arnold C., 1962. The incidence of the corporation income tax. J. Political 

Econ. 70 (3), 215–240.

Harris, Milton, Raviv, Artur, 1988. Corporate governance: voting rights and majority 

rules. J. Financ. Econ. 20, 203–235.

Hart, Oliver D., Moore, John, 1994. A Theory of debt based on the inalienability of 

human capital. Q. J. Econ. 109 (4), 841–879.

Hart, Oliver D., Zingales, Luigi, 2022. The new corporate governance. Univ. Chic. Bus. 

Law Rev. 1 (1), 196–216.

Hayek, Friedrich A., 1944. The Road to Serfdom. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Holmstrom, Bengt., 1979. Moral hazard and observability. Bell J. Econ. 10 (1), 74–91.
Jensen, Michael C., 1968. The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945–1964. 

J. Finance 23, 389–416.

Jensen, Michael C., 1978. Some anomalous evidence regarding market efficiency. 

J. Financ. Econ. 6 (2/3), 95–101.

Jensen, Michael C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and 

takeovers. Am. Econ. Rev. 76 (2), 323–329.

Jensen, Michael C., 1989. Eclipse of the public corporation. Harv. Bus. Rev. 67 (5), 

61–74.

Jensen, Michael C., 1993. The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of 

internal control systems. J. Finance 48 (3), 831–880.

Jensen, Michael C., 2002. Value maximization, stakeholder theory, and the corporate 

objective function. Bus. Ethics Q. 12 (2), 235–256.

Jensen, Michael C., 2005. Agency costs of overvalued equity. Financ. Manage 34 (1), 

5–19.

Jensen, Michael C., Meckling, William H., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial 

behavior, agency costs and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3 (4), 305–360.
Jensen, Michael C., Murphy, Kevin J., 1990. Performance pay and top-management 

incentives. J. Political Econ. 98 (2), 225–264.

Jensen, Michael C., Ruback, Richard S., 1983. The market for corporate control: the 

scientific evidence. J. Financ. Econ. 11 (1–4), 5–50.

Jensen, Michael C., Zimmerman, Jerold L., 1985. Management compensation and the 

managerial labor market. J. Account. Econ. 7 (1–3), 3–8.

Johnson, Simon, La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, 2000. 

Tunneling. Am. Econ. Rev. 90 (2), 22–27.

Kaplan, Steven N., 1989. The effects of management buyouts on operating performance 

and value. J. Financ. Econ. 24 (2), 217–254.

Kwon, Spencer, Ma, Yueran, Zimmermann, Kaspar, 2024. 100 Years of rising corporate 

concentration. Am. Econ. Rev. 114 (7), 2111–2140.

La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1997. 

Legal determinants of external finance. J. Finance 52 (3), 1131–1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1998. 

Law and finance. J. Political Econ. 106 (6), 1113–1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1999. 

Corporate ownership around the world. J. Finance 54 (2), 471–517.

Lehmann, Nicholas., 2019. Transaction Man: The Rise of the Deal and the Decline of the 

American Dream. Macmillan, New York. 

Lian, Chen, Ma, Yueran, 2021. Anatomy of corporate borrowing constraints. Q. J. Econ. 

136 (1), 229–291.

Lucas, Robert E., 1972. Expectations and the neutrality of money. J. Econ. Theory. 4 (2), 

103–124.

Manne, Henry G., 1965. Mergers and the market for corporate control. J. Political Econ. 

73 (2), 110–120.

Marshall, Alfred, 1919. Industry and Trade. Macmillan, London. 
Mincer, Jacob A., 1974. The Human Capital Earnings Function. Schooling, Experience, 

and Earnings. National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 83–96.

Modigliani, Franco, Miller, Merton, 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance, and 

the theory of investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 48 (1), 261–297.

Moeller, Sara B., Schlingemann, Frederik P., Stulz, Ren´e M., 2005. Wealth destruction on 
a massive scale? a study of acquiring-firm returns in the recent merger wave. 
J. Finance 60 (2), 757–782.

Morck, Randall, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1988. Management ownership and 

market valuation: an empirical analysis. J. Financ. Econ. 20, 293–315.

Murphy, Kevin J., 1985. Corporate performance and managerial remuneration: an 

empirical analysis. J. Account. Econ. 7 (1–3), 11–42.

Nenova, Tatiana., 2003. The value of corporate voting rights and control: a cross-country 

analysis. J. Financ. Econ. 68 (3), 325–351.

Nini, Greg, Smith, David C., Sufi, Amir, 2009. Creditor control rights and firm investment 

policy. J. Financ. Econ. 92 (3), 400–420.

Nini, Greg, Smith, David C., Sufi, Amir, 2012. Creditor control rights, corporate 

governance, and firm value. Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (6), 1713–1761.
Ripley, William Z., 1927. Main Street and Wall Street. Little, Brown, Boston. 
Roberts, Michael R., Sufi, Amir, 2009. Control rights and capital structure: an empirical 

investigation. J. Finance 64 (4), 1657–1695.

Ross, Stephen A., 1973. The economic theory of agency: the principal’s problem. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 63 (2), 134–139.

Schultz, Theodore W., 1964. Transforming Traditional Agriculture. Yale University Press, 

New Haven, CT. 

Shleifer, Andrei, Summers, Lawrence H., 1988. Breach of trust in hostile takeovers. In: 
Auerbach, Alan J. (Ed.), Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences. The 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 33–56.

Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1986. Large shareholders and corporate control. 

J. Political Econ. 94 (3), 461–488.

Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1991. Takeovers in the ’60s and the ’80s: evidence 

and implications. Strateg. Manage J. 12 (S2), 51–59.

Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1992. Liquidation Values and debt capacity: a 

market equilibrium approach. J. Finance 47 (4), 1343–1366.

Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert W., 1997. A survey of corporate governance. J. Finance 

52 (2), 737–783.

Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. 

London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell.

8 

Y. Ma and A. Shleifer                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104115 

Stigler, George J., 1958. The economies of scale. J. Law Econ. 1, 54–71.
Stigler, George J., Friedland, Claire, 1983. The literature of economics: the case of Berle 

and Means. J. Law Econ. 26 (2), 237–268.

The Economist, 1998. “Closing the Deals.” December 3, 1998. https://www.economist. 

com/business/1998/12/03/closing-the-deals.

Williamson, Oliver E., 1964. The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial 

Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1975. Incentives, risk, and information: notes toward a theory of 

Objectives in a Theory of the Firm. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 

hierarchy. Bell J. Econ. 6 (2), 552–579.

Stulz, Ren´e M., 1988. Managerial control of voting rights: financing policies and the 

Zhang, Xiao. 2018. “Expectation Error”.
Zingales, Luigi., 1994. The value of the voting right: a study of the milan stock exchange 

market for corporate control. J. Financ. Econ. 20 (1), 25–54.

experience. Rev. Financ. Stud. 7 (1), 125–148.

9 

