Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

The lessons of Michael C. Jensen

Ren´e M. Stulz a,b,c,1
a Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, 2100 Neil Avenue, 806A, Fisher Hall, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
b National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge, USA
c European Corporate Governance Institute, Brussels, Belgium

A R T I C L E  I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Agency costs
Managerial ownership
Free cash flow
Governance
Jensen’s alpha

1. Introduction

This paper assesses the contributions of Michael C. Jensen to financial economics and to American business. His 
work on agency theory is the cornerstone of modern corporate finance. He influenced how American business 
operates  by  helping  make  the  internal  and  external  governance  of  firms  more  efficient.  He  changed  how 
knowledge in financial economics is diffused both through the founding of the Journal of Financial Economics and 
of the Social Science Research Network. I question the claim made by some that he recanted his ideas in the 
2000s.

From the 1950s to the middle of the 1970s, a few scholars built the 
foundations  for  a  new  field  of  scholarship,  the  field  of  financial  eco-
nomics. Michael C. Jensen is one of these scholars. Most of these scholars 
have been rewarded with a Nobel prize, but the award escaped Jensen. 
Yet, among the fathers of our field, he ranks second in citations, below 
only  his  advisor,  Eugene  Fama.  He  also  has  the  distinction  of  having 
written the most highly cited paper in our field, his paper with William 
Meckling on the theory of the firm. The impact of this paper is so broad 
that the agency theory of the firm is described as “the dominant theory 
of modern corporate law” (Hill, 2025).

Over his career, Jensen had a constant goal as a scholar and teacher: 
Make the world a better place. He believed that to succeed he had to 
pursue the truth relentlessly and fearlessly. He was not writing papers to 
build  a  resume,  but  to  change  the  world.  After  making  important 
empirical contributions to asset pricing that provided support for market 
efficiency,  he  decided that he  could have  more of an  impact through 
theoretical work in corporate finance and the theory of organizations. 
He thought that agency theory was important for other fields that he 
wanted to influence, such as accounting, economics, law, and manage-
ment. He also sought to change the world outside academia by helping 
make  the  corporate  world  more  productive  by  fighting  obstacles that 
made it harder to monitor, control, and reduce agency costs. In pursuit 
of  the  truth,  prodded  by  empirical  observation,  he  paid  increasing 

attention  to  behavioral  factors  and  market  inefficiencies.  His  most 
important lesson for corporate finance is that the productivity of firms 
depends directly on corporate finance, so that corporate financial policy 
is not a side-show but a critical factor in the success of corporations.

In this paper, I assess Jensen’s impact on the field of financial eco-
nomics  and  academia  more  broadly,  as  well  as  the  world  outside 
academia.  I  also  examine  how  his  thinking  evolved.  Jensen  was 
controversial throughout his career. The New York Times published an 
article following his death that highlighted both his accomplishments 
and the controversy that followed him. The article was titled “Michael C. 
Jensen,  84,  who  helped  reshape  modern  capitalism,  dies.”  The  title 
captures his enormous influence, but then the article blames him for the 
“greed-is-good  era.”  Some  have  argued  that  Jensen  late  in  his  career 
changed  his  mind  on  a  number  of  issues.  Wooldridge  (2024),  after 
calling  him “Gekko with  a doctorate,”  goes on to say that in the  late 
1990s “he underwent the equivalent of a religious conversion,” leading 
him to regret or recant some of his earlier ideas. He started talking about 
what he called “enlightened value maximization,” a concept described 
as having “some remarkable similarities with ESG” (Smith, 2024). Jen-
sen  cared  more  about  the  truth  than  consistency.  He  was  willing  to 
change  his  mind  and  did  so  when  new  facts,  ideas,  and  arguments 
convinced him to do so, but I will argue that claims that he recanted are 
not accurate.

The central idea that motivated him was that individuals pursue their 
own objectives, and that those objectives rarely align across members of 

E-mail address: stulz.1@osu.edu. 

1 I thank Kris Shen for valuable scientific assistance. This paper started as a keynote address to the Eastern Finance Association. I am grateful for conversations with 
and/or comments from Don Chew, Harry DeAngelo, Eugene Fama, Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Ken French, Natalie Jensen-Noll, Lee Pinkowitz, Robert Merton, Michael 
Weisbach, Karen Wruck, Kris Shen, Andrei Shleifer, and Bill Schwert.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104118
Received 22 May 2025; Accepted 1 June 2025  
Available online 23 June 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

an  organization.  These  different  interests  create  conflicts  that  impose 
costs  on  organizations.  Organizations  must  manage  these  conflicts  to 
minimize  their  costs.  Because  the  costs  of  conflicts  of  interest  differ 
across organizational forms, different activities will be organized using 
different organizational forms. His most famous article, “Theory of the 
Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” co- 
authored with Meckling (Jensen and Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm), 
shows  how  financial  policy  helps  corporations  to  reduce  the  costs  of 
conflicts of interest. The article focuses on conflicts of interest between 
the manager of a firm and its shareholders, as well as conflicts of interest 
between bondholders and shareholders. It uses the language of agency 
costs to characterize the costs of these conflicts of interest.

Theory  of  the  Firm  was  a  contribution  to  positive  economics 
(Friedman, 1953). It helps explain the existence of debt and the role of 
managerial ownership of shares. This was a seminal contribution as it 
showed  that  there  is  an  optimal  level  of  debt  even  in  the  absence  of 
corporate  taxes.  Previous  theories  of  an  optimal  level  of  debt  were 
tradeoff theories, which trade off the tax benefit of debt against the costs 
of  financial  distress  potentially  resulting  from  leverage.  Tradeoff  the-
ories have no explanation for why firms have debt even when there are 
no corporate taxes. Much of Jensen’s subsequent work is more norma-
tive, pointing out instances where agency costs are poorly controlled and 
highlighting  actions  that  can  control  them  better.  Poorly  managed 
agency costs make corporations less efficient through misallocation of 
resources.  Hence,  to  make  corporations  more  efficient,  obstacles  to 
controlling agency costs must be removed and solutions must be found 
to reduce agency costs. Throughout his career, Jensen studied agency 
costs caused by a variety of factors, such as entrenched management, 
free cash flow, and overvalued equity. He also investigated how agency 
costs  could  be  controlled  through  devices  internal  to  the  corporation 
such as the choice of capital structure, the choice of payout policy, the 
distribution of ownership, the role of corporate boards and compensa-
tion policy, as well as through devices external to the corporation, such 
as the market for corporate control.

In  this  paper,  I  first  assess  the  impact  of  Jensen’s  work  within 
academia. To measure this impact, I focus on citations. Jensen was al-
ways a strong believer in citations as a measure of impact. For him, in 
any endeavor, it was critical to be able to define success in a way that 
could be measured. I show the citations of his most cited articles. I then 
compare his lifetime citations to the citations of winners of the Nobel 
Prize for Economics2 and of Fellows of the American Finance Associa-
tion  (AFA).  Citation  distributions  are  extremely  skewed.  Not  surpris-
ingly,  Jensen  is  at  the  extreme  right-tail  of  the  distribution  for  both 
benchmarks  I  consider.  Only  a  handful  of  financial  economists  have 
more total citations than Jensen’s most cited paper.

I then examine Jensen’s main contributions, focusing on their impact 
on  the  finance field,  on other  fields,  and on  practice. Throughout  his 
career, Jensen focused on big impactful ideas. Identifying these ideas 
makes it possible to divide his career into distinct periods. Before Theory 
of the Firm, Jensen published papers that, viewed from today, are asset 
pricing papers. Yet, these papers are important both for their contribu-
tion  to  asset  pricing  (see  Fama  and  French,  2025)  and  for  how  they 
helped make his ideas in corporate finance more impactful. His disser-
tation  showed  how  what  became  known  as  Jensen’s  alpha  makes  it 
possible to measure the performance of mutual funds. He is a co-author 
of “The Adjustment of Stock Prices to New Information”  with Eugene 
Fama,  Lawrence  Fisher  and  Richard  Roll.  The  paper  introduced  the 
event  study  method.  These  papers  laid  foundations  for  short-run  and 
long-run event studies. Event studies are the main method used to assess 
how  corporate  actions  impact  shareholder  wealth  and,  for  Jensen, 
shareholder wealth is the metric of success for corporate actions.

2 Following common usage, I abbreviate the formal name of the Nobel prize 
for  economics.  The  formal  name  is  the  Nobel  Memorial  Prize  in  Economic 
Sciences.

2 

I turn next to Theory of the Firm. This paper underpins all of Jensen’s 
subsequent thinking in financial economics. Though Jensen thought of 
himself as an organization theorist, the main contribution of that paper 
is how a firm’s equity ownership and capital structure can be used to 
reduce agency costs. While Theory of the Firm is focused on corporations 
with  residual  claims  owned  by  shareholders,  three  papers  Jensen  co- 
authored with Fama use a broader lens to show how conflicts of inter-
est are inherent in activities that involve many participants and how the 
choice of organizational form and of control and monitoring devices for 
these activities can minimize agency costs.

An important theme in these agency papers is the role of the market 
in controlling agency costs. In the early 1980s, Jensen’s focus was on the 
role of the market for corporate control. He argued forcefully that this 
market had to be left to do its work, so that capital would not be wasted 
in suboptimal uses. Mergers and acquisitions are valuable in allocating 
resources to the firms that could have the best use for them. They also 
can play a key role in displacing incompetent or entrenched manage-
ment,  when  the  board  of  directors  fails  to  discipline  or  replace  such 
management.  Eventually,  one  expects  firms  with  incompetent  or 
entrenched management to fail. However, many firms have a cash cow, 
a set of assets that produces high cash flows. Unfortunately, managers 
can use these high cash flows wastefully with little risk of having their 
firm fail. In one of his most famous papers (Jensen, 1986), Jensen calls 
this issue the agency costs of free cash flow. He argues that one way to 
force managers to commit to pay out free cash flow is to have them issue 
large amounts of debt, so that they have to use the free cash flow for debt 
service.

While the use of debt is one prong in Theory of the Firm to reduce 
managerial  agency  costs,  there  is  a  second  prong,  namely  aligning 
managerial incentives with shareholder interests. Increasing managers’ 
exposure to the firm’s stock price is one way to improve their incentives 
so  that  they  are  better  aligned  with  maximizing  shareholder  wealth. 
Jensen was a vocal defender of paying CEOs according to their impact on 
shareholder wealth. In a famous paper, Jensen and Murphy (1990) made 
the case that CEOs were paid like bureaucrats and should not be paid 
that  way.  Managerial  incentives  can  be  better  aligned  with  those  of 
shareholders through compensation contracts or through ownership of 
shares. In Theory of the Firm, more debt at the firm level makes it possible 
for managers to own a greater proportion of the equity and hence to 
have incentives better aligned with the interests of shareholders. More 
debt has a potential cost, as it makes distress and its associated costs 
more likely. Theory of the Firm focuses on the costs of asset substitution, 
namely the incentives that shareholders have to increase the risk of the 
firm at the expense of the debtholders when the firm is more levered. 
Despite their high leverage, Jensen argued that leveraged buyouts are 
organized so that the costs of asset substitution are low. He concluded 
that the high leverage of these buyouts prevents managers from wasting 
free cash flow and focuses them on the task of generating enough cash 
flow to service the debt. These buyouts also make it possible to have 
concentrated equity ownership that facilitates monitoring of managers 
by shareholders. This led Jensen to advocate for leveraged buyouts and 
private  equity  at  a  time  when  these  practices  were  under  attack.  He 
concluded that the public firm organization form is not well suited to 
allocate resources efficiently for some types of firms, namely those that 
have  potentially  high  agency  costs  that  could  be  reduced  through 
monitoring  of  management  and  with  sharper  constraints  on  manage-
ment  through  debt.  His presidential  address  to  the American  Finance 
Association shows that firms in markets that are in decline are especially 
vulnerable to agency costs (Jensen, 1993).

I  then  turn  to  Jensen’s  last  act.  Much  of  what  he  said  before  was 
controversial, even among financial economists. The controversies sur-
rounding Jensen and his positions played out at center stage in financial 
economics as well as in the business world. After his presidential address 
and after the Jensen and Murphy paper, Jensen developed a research 
agenda focused on two connected ideas. The first idea was the concept of 
integrity.  He  did  not  have  a  normative  view  of  integrity.  Instead,  he 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

sought to understand practices and attitudes that, using more current 
language, are sustainable. As a result, he viewed his inquiry as a positive 
rather than normative inquiry. He wanted to understand what type of 
behavior  a  corporate  leader  could  have  that  would  lead  to  outcomes 
consistent with the outcomes that the corporate leader is seeking. The 
second idea was the concept of enlightened firm value maximization. 
His basic point was that value maximization is “not a vision or a strategy 
or even a purpose, it is the scorecard for the organization.”  Hence, to 
actually succeed in achieving a high firm value, managers have to do 
better than saying that they will maximize firm value. They have to offer 
a vision or a strategy towards which the organization is working and by 
doing so they will maximize firm value. These ideas have been viewed 
by some as a renunciation of his earlier ideas or, at least, a radical de-
parture from his earlier ideas. I will argue, however, that these ideas are 
just a deepening of his thinking about how to make organizations ach-
ieve their goals efficiently.

Jensen understood that he could not change the world alone. When 
he realized that established journals were not sufficiently receptive to 
what at the time was modern finance, he founded the Journal of Financial 
Economics (JFE) with the help of Robert Merton and Eugene Fama. As 
editor of JFE, he viewed part of his role to encourage research on topics 
that he thought important. With the arrival of the World Wide Web, he 
understood quickly that the Web would offer a way to share scientific 
research that would be much more efficient. He became an entrepreneur 
and,  with  Wayne  Marr,  started  the  Social  Science  Research  Network 
(SSRN). SSRN completely changed how research in financial economics 
is diffused. People anywhere in the world could post new working pa-
pers  and  learn  about  new  working  papers.  The  market  for  ideas  in 
financial  economics  became  global  and  access  to  new 
ideas 
instantaneous.

Jensen was so impactful because he focused on developing big ideas 
and  on  pushing  these  ideas  relentlessly.  He  made  his  ideas  known 
through  refereed  academic  papers,  but  also  through  wide-ranging 
proselytization.  He  wrote  articles  for  practitioners,  gave  speeches  to 
business audiences, and interacted with leading practitioners. He orga-
nized  what  may  be  the  most  influential  conference  in  the  history  of 
financial  economics, namely  the  conference  organized  under the  aus-
pices of JFE on the market for corporate control. This conference focused 
on  how  acquisitions  and  mergers  impact  shareholder  wealth.  Jensen 
strongly argued that unsolicited offers create value when agency costs 
are excessive because of entrenched management. Boone Pickens, who 
was at the height of his career in making unsolicited acquisition offers 
through his company Mesa Petroleum, was one of the attendees at the 
conference.

An important way for Jensen to present and develop his ideas was 
through his teaching. His teaching was focused on how to make orga-
nizations more effective. The Harvard Business School recruited him to 
teach the course on the economics of organizations that he and Meckling 
had developed in Rochester. At HBS, this course was enormously suc-
cessful. Even though it was an elective, at its peak almost all MBA stu-
dents took it. It was taught by Jensen and Professors Baker, Baldwin, 
Salter, and Wruck. A rough estimate is that more than 5,000 students 
took that course.

The  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2 focuses  on  impact 
metrics.  Section  3 is  a  brief  history  of  the  birth  of  modern  financial 
economics and Jensen’s place in that history before Theory of the Firm. 
Section 4 is about the development of agency theory in Jensen’s work 
with  Meckling  and  then  Fama.  Section  5 is  about  Jensen’s  work  on 
identifying  agency  problems  and  solutions  to  reduce  the  associated 
agency costs in the 1980s and 1990s. Section 6 is about Jensen’s last act. 
I then discuss in Section 7 Jensen’s contributions through his founding 
and editing of JFE, founding and managing of SSRN, and his teaching. I 
conclude in Section 8 by summarizing Jensen’s lessons.

2. Measuring impact

Jensen’s  work  emphasizes  the  importance  of  metrics  to  measure 
success. He often  asked the question: How do we know how well  we 
have done? When it comes to academic papers or to academic journals, 
his metric was the number of citations. This metric became available two 
years before the first issue of JFE. Merton, one of the co-founders of JFE, 
told Jensen about Eugene Garfield and the Social Science Citation Index 
that he established in 1972.3 Jensen saw the value of citations to guide 
his  editorial  policy  and  measure  the  success  of  the  Journal.  Jensen’s 
focus on citations was at times criticized. Colleagues pointed out that 
citations are not a measure of how widely read a paper is. Further, a 
paper that is wrong can have many citations. They also pointed out that 
review  papers  often  have  large  numbers  of  citations.  They  further 
argued that different subfields have different citation patterns. The top 
papers  in  governance  have  more  citations  than  the  top  papers  in 
microstructure.  All  these  caveats  should  be  taken  into  account  when 
comparing  citations  across  scholars.  At  the  same  time,  what  is  the 
alternative? Colleagues often argue that citations do not measure qual-
ity. However, what is quality if not impact? What is the value of a paper 
that some readers find to be a tour-de-force but nobody cites? Does a 
perfect uncited paper really impact the world? It is important to note 
that  Jensen  did  not  argue  for  using  citations  as  a  metric  of  scholarly 
achievement only after he became a huge winner in citations. He was 
consistent throughout  his life in arguing  that citations are  the proper 
metric.

To  assess  Jensen’s  citation  count,  I  follow  the  approach  used  by 
Schwert and Stulz (2017) in their paper on Fama’s impact. The two main 
sources for citations are the Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI) and 
Google Scholar. The number of citations for a paper is higher in Google 
Scholar than in SSCI. At least one factor contributing to this difference is 
that Google Scholar counts citations in working papers and journals that 
are not included in SSCI. I use Google Scholar for the simple reason that 
rankings  using  Google  Scholar  are  generally  highly  correlated  with 
rankings using SSCI but are much easier to obtain than rankings using 
SSCI. For lifetime citations, I start with a scholar’s Google Scholar page. 
Google Scholar pages can include papers that the scholar did not write 
and fail to include papers that the scholar did write. I try to correct these 
issues.  I  also  use  Semantic  Scholar  and  Publish  or  Perish  as  additional 
sources.4 These efforts can make large differences. An extreme example 
is Stewart Myers, whose total Google citations are roughly 50% higher 
than the total citations on his Google Scholar page.

Table 1 shows the citation counts for Jensen’s ten most cited papers. 
Not surprisingly, the most cited paper is Theory of the Firm with 138,678 
Google cites. To understand the significance of this number, it is useful 
to note that only 13 of the 53 winners of the Nobel Prize for Economics 
from 2000 to 2024 have more lifetime citations than the number of ci-
tations of Theory of the Firm. And it is not at the tail end of its influence. 
In  Google  Scholar,  the  largest  number  of  citations  for  the  paper  is  in 
2022.  It  collected  9,361  citations  that  year.  From  2019  to  2023,  the 
paper had more than 8,000 citations each year. Further, out of 74 AFA 
Fellows, only 12 have more lifetime citations than Theory of the Firm. 
Kim, Morse, and Zingales (2006) used SSCI citations instead of Google 
Scholar  citations  to  rank  economics  articles  published  from  1970  to 
2005. Jensen and Meckling (1976) is the third paper in that ranking. 
Kahneman and Twersky (1979) ranks just above Jensen and Meckling 

3 The father of Robert C. Merton, Robert K. Merton, wrote several theoretical 
papers on citations as a measure of impact and importance that guided Garfield 
as he created the Social Science Citation Index.

4 A  difficulty  with  using  Google  Scholar  is  that  citation  counts  change 
continuously.  With  the  number  of  counts  used  in  this  article,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  have  all  counts  collected  the  same  day.  All  counts  I  use  are 
collected during a two-month window from November 15, 2024, to January 15, 
2025.

3 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

Table 1 
Jensen’s Top 10 Cited Papers Using Google Scholar Citations.

Citations

Authors

Title

Year

Publication

138,678

MC Jensen, 
WH Meckling

41,414

MC Jensen

35,400*

15,904

EF Fama, MC 
Jensen
MC Jensen

11,094

MC Jensen, 
KJ Murphy

10,371*

MC Jensen

9,653

MC Jensen

9,349

9,155

8,296

EF Fama, MC 
Jensen
EF Fama, L 
Fisher, MC 
Jensen, R 
Roll
MC Jensen, 
RS Ruback

Theory of the firm: 
Managerial behavior, 
agency costs and 
ownership structure
Agency costs of free cash 
flow, corporate finance 
and takeovers
Separation of ownership 
and control
The modern industrial 
revolution, exit, and the 
failure of internal control 
systems
Performance pay and 
top-management 
incentives
Value maximization, 
stakeholder theory, and 
the corporate objective 
function
The performance of 
mutual funds in the 
period 1945-1964
Agency problems and 
residual claims
The adjustment of stock 
prices to new 
information

The market for corporate 
control: The scientific 
evidence

1976

1986

1983

1993

1990

2001

1968

1983

1969

1983

Journal of 
Financial 
Economics

American 
Economic Review

Journal of Law 
and Economics
Journal of 
Finance

Journal of 
Political 
Economy
Journal of 
Applied 
Corporate 
Finance
Journal of 
Finance

Journal of Law 
and Economics
International 
Economic Review

Journal of 
Financial 
Economics

Note: Citations marked with an asterisk (*) include multiple versions in Google 
Scholar.

(1976). Most of the other top ten papers are econometric methods pa-
pers. The exception is Black and Scholes (1973) that is the sixth paper. A 
major reason for the citation success of Theory of the Firm is its multi-
disciplinary  appeal.  The  article  is  widely  cited  in  law  reviews,  in  ac-
counting  journals,  in  general  economic  journals,  as  well  as  in 
management journals.

The second most cited paper in Jensen’s top ten list is the paper titled 
“Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers.” 
Few finance papers have more cites than that paper. It is published in the 
Papers and Proceedings of the American Economic Review, so it was not 
refereed as it would have been had it been published in a regular issue of 
that journal or of a top finance journal. As mentioned, Fama and Jensen 
wrote three papers on agency theory. Two of these three papers are in 
the top ten list. The most cited is titled “Separation of Ownership and 
Control”  and was published in the Journal of Law and Economics. The 
second, also published in that Journal, is titled “Agency Problems and 
Residual Claims.”5 Jensen’s fourth most highly cited paper is his AFA 
presidential address, titled “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and 
the Failure of Internal Control Systems.”  The presidential address has 
15,904 citations. It is the second most cited presidential address. Myers 
gave the most cited address. His “Capital Structure Puzzle” has 17,240 
citations (Myers, 1984). The third most successful address is Merton’s 
address  titled  “A  Simple  Model  of  Capital  Market  Equilibrium  with 
Incomplete Information” with 8,303 citations (Merton, 1987). The paper 
with Murphy on “Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives” is 
next with 11,094 cites (Jensen and Murphy, 1990). Jensen has six papers 
with  more  than 10,000  citations.  Very  few financial  economists have 

5 Oddly, the second Fama-Jensen paper is not on the Google Scholar home-
page of Jensen and the number of citations in the homepage to the first paper is 
41,003. The number when looking up the paper individually in Google Scholar 
is the number used in the table.

one paper that exceeds the 10,000 citation threshold. Using this metric, 
Jensen ranks third among financial economists, following Fama with 8 
and Shleifer with 7.

I now compare Jensen’s lifetime citations to two benchmark groups. 
The  first  group  is  the  group  of  scholars  awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  for 
Economics from 2000 to 2024 and the second group is the fellows of the 
AFA.6 For both groups, I show the top ten scholars in Table 2. Panel A 
shows the lifetime citations of Jensen. Panel B shows the top ten scholars 
awarded the Nobel prize from 2000 to 2024. Half of these scholars have 
a connection with finance. The top scholar on the list is Kahneman, who 
has 558,277 citations. He is followed by Fama who has 393,623 citations 
and Stiglitz who has 389,098. These scholars are the only ones out of 53 
winers of the Nobel Prize for economics from 2000 to 2024 who have 
more lifetime citations than Jensen. Turning to the fellows of the AFA in 
Panel C, the top two fellows are Shleifer, with 432,029 citations, and 
Fama, with 393,623 citations. The third on the list is Jensen. The list has 
six winners of the Nobel prize. Overall, the average number of citations 
for an AFA fellow is 83,161 and the median is 59,334.

3. The birth of financial economics and Jensen’s contributions

Markowitz’s paper titled “Portfolio Selection” was published in the 
Journal of Finance in 1952. The paper came from Markowitz’s disserta-
tion in the economics department at the University of Chicago. Friedman 
was on the committee in front of which Markowitz had to defend his 

Table 2 
Comparison of Jensen’s Lifetime Citations to Two Benchmark Groups.
The table uses Google Scholar citations. For each scholar, the starting point is the 
scholar’s  Google  Scholar  page  if  available.  The  total  count  from  the  page  is 
cleaned  up  to  exclude  papers  the  scholar  did  not  author  and  papers  that  are 
missing  are  added.  I  use  Semantic  Scholar  and  Publish  or  Perish  as  additional 
sources  to  make  adjustments  to  the  scholar’s  Google  Scholar  page  or  as  the 
starting point if the scholar does not have a Google Scholar page.

Panel A. Lifetime Citations of Michael C. Jensen

Citations

327,099

Name

Michael C. Jensen

Panel B. Economics Nobel Prize Laureates since 2000 (Top 10)

Citations

558,277
393,623
389,098
289,315
281,290
263,798
263,275
250,449
215,411
210,105

Name

Nobel Prize Year

Daniel Kahneman
Eugene F. Fama
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Paul Krugman
Oliver E. Williamson
Elinor Ostrom
James J. Heckman
Daron Acemoglu
Richard H. Thaler
Clive W.J. Granger

2002
2013
2001
2008
2009
2009
2000
2024
2017
2003

Panel C. AFA Presidents and Fellows (Top 10)

Citations

Name

AFA President or Fellow Election Year

432,029
393,623
327,099
261,896
217,387
215,886
208,251
198,666
187,574
166,261

Andrei Shleifer
Eugene F. Fama
Michael C. Jensen
Kenneth Arrow
Robert W. Vishny
Richard Thaler
Robert F. Engle
Jean Tirole
Kenneth R. French
Paul A. Samuelson

2012
2001
1992
2003
2018
2009
2005
2022
2007
2002

6 The fellows of the AFA include all former presidents since 1970 and elected 

fellows since 2000.

4 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

dissertation.  He  argued  that  the  dissertation  should  not  be  accepted 
because portfolio theory was not economics. As Markowitz stated when 
he received his Nobel prize in economics, “at the time I defended my 
dissertation, portfolio theory was not part of Economics. But now it is.” 
(Markowitz,  1990). Friedman  was  right  that Markowitz’s  dissertation 
was a radical departure, but that departure involved the application of 
economics to understand finance. Markowitz’s paper is widely credited 
as  the  start  of  modern  finance  or  financial  economics.  As  Rubinstein 
(2002) points out, the “Portfolio selection” paper seemed to come from 
nowhere.

that 

there 

for  a  given  expected  return, 

Earlier authors had talked about the benefit of diversification. They 
generally took the view that diversification would eliminate risk. Mar-
kowitz (1952) showed that risk cannot be eliminated through diversi-
fication,  but 
is  a 
minimum-variance portfolio. As a result, the risk of a security depends 
on the other securities held in the portfolio. This portfolio theory forms 
the basis for many important developments in financial economics over 
the  next  twenty  years.  Still  in  the  1950s,  Tobin  (1958) enriched  the 
theory by adding a risk-free asset to the choice set and established his 
separation  theorem  according  to  which  mean-variance  investors  with 
different attitudes towards risk will all hold the same portfolio of risky 
assets.  In  the  1960s,  Sharpe  (1964) was  the  first  to  publish  a  paper 
showing that, in a mean-variance setting, the expected return of a se-
curity is linearly related to the contribution of the security to the vari-
ance  of  the  return  of  the  efficient  portfolio  that  all  mean-variance 
investors hold when there is a risk-free asset. Sharpe (1964) called his 
model the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). Sharpe already had the 
key results in his dissertation in 1961 at UCLA. Publication took time as 
the paper was first rejected by the Journal of Finance but was published 
after the editor of the Journal of Finance changed. Lintner (1965) pub-
lished a paper with similar asset pricing results five months after Sharpe. 
Mossin  added  his  own  version  in  1966.  Treynor  had  these  key  asset 
pricing results in a paper that he wrote in 1961, but that was published 
many years later. As editor and teacher, Jensen always emphasized that 
how a paper is written is almost as important as its results. As Rubinstein 
(2006) points out, the Sharpe paper is easy to read, but the Lintner paper 
is  not.  Sharpe  received  the  Nobel  Prize  in  2002  with  Markowitz  and 
Miller.

For the CAPM to apply, it must be that available information about a 
stock’s value is incorporated in its price. Otherwise, the stock’s expected 
return would also depend on the future incorporation of this public in-
formation in the stock price. A market in which available information is 
incorporated in security prices quickly is an efficient market. The theory 
of market efficiency became a critical pillar of financial economics in the 
1960s through the work of Fama. Fama (1965) starts from the insight 
that equilibrium in securities markets has implications for the statistical 
properties of security returns. Specifically, if unexpected returns arise 
only because of new unexpected information, as should be the case in an 
efficient  market, prices  should  follow  a  random  walk.7 He  found  evi-
dence  supporting  this  random  walk  theory.  If  stock  prices  follow  a 
random walk, then investment funds should follow a random walk as 
well.  In  his  study,  he  finds  no  evidence  that  the  average  fund  out-
performs the market.

A growing literature attempted to assess the performance of mutual 
funds in the 1960s, but it did not directly assess whether mutual funds 
performed  better  than  the  market  after  accounting  for  risk.  Jensen’s 
dissertation introduced a direct measure of the performance of mutual 
funds relative to the market adjusting for risk. He wanted to test whether 
mutual funds could “predict security prices well enough to outperform a 
buy-the-market-and-hold policy” (Jensen, 1968). His direct measure is 
now called Jensen’s alpha. It measures the average excess return of a 
fund over an investment in the risk-free asset and the market that has the 

7 Subsequent  developments  in  the  field  enriched  this  view  by  allowing  for 

predictable changes in risk premia and interest rates.

5 

same  beta.  Jensen  (1968) estimates  the  risk-adjusted  performance  of 
more than one hundred funds. He finds no evidence of a positive alpha 
for mutual funds on average and no convincing evidence that there were 
individual funds that beat the market (only one fund in his sample has a 
t-statistic greater than 2 for alpha).

Jensen’s  approach  to  evaluating  the  performance  of  mutual  funds 
has been used repeatedly by scholars and practitioners. Over the years, 
researchers  have  developed  greater  statistical  sophistication  and  the 
quality and comprehensiveness of the data have improved. One of the 
most  highly  cited  papers  is  Carhart  (1997),  that  examines  the  persis-
tence of performance and has 24,135 citations. He concludes that evi-
dence of persistence is almost completely explained by common factors 
in  stock  returns  and  investment  expenses.  In  2010,  Fama  and  French 
published an analysis of mutual fund performance concluding that “few 
active funds produce benchmark-adjusted expected returns that cover 
their costs” (Fama and French, 2010).

Almost sixty years after Jensen’s paper, his assessment of the per-
formance of mutual funds generally still holds. The evidence on the poor 
performance of active mutual funds has played a large role in the growth 
of indexed funds. As the history of indexed funds from Wigglesworth 
(2021) shows, the birth of indexed funds was closely tied to academic 
research. In particular, John McQuown, an MIT graduate, was hired by 
Wells Fargo to set up and manage a Management Sciences department 
that would use computers to solve problems and design products for the 
bank. At MIT, he had worked as an assistant for a professor who wanted 
to  forecast  stock prices.  In  1968,  Scholes  recommended  to  McQuown 
that he start a passive investment vehicle that would hold the market. 
McQuown  wanted  groundwork  to  establish  how  such  a  fund  would 
work. At one time, Jensen consulted for Wells Fargo and so did Sharpe, 
Markowitz,  Miller,  Treynor,  Black,  and  Scholes.  The  bulk  of  the 
consulting  work  was  done  by  Black  and  Scholes  –  after  Jensen  intro-
duced Black to his classmate Scholes. Fama did not consult, but he did 
send  David  Booth  to  work  for  McQuown. In  July  1971,  the  first-ever 
passively  managed  index-tracking  fund  was  born.  It  was  housed  in  a 
new unit within the bank called Wells Fargo Investment Advisors that 
eventually was bought by Barclays, which introduced the iShares brand 
of ETFs, and then was acquired by BlackRock in 2009. David Booth and 
his  partner  Rex  Sinquefield  subsequently  founded  Dimensional  Advi-
sors,  a  highly  successful  asset  management  firm  focused  on  building 
passive portfolios inspired by Fama’s work and the work of his students. 
As  of  this  writing,  the  assets  under  management  by  indexed  mutual 
funds and ETFs are as large as those under management by active mutual 
funds and ETFs.

The availability of stock return data through CRSP at the University 
of Chicago in the 1960s made possible much empirical research and led 
to the development of the event study method. An event study “mea-
sures the impact of a specific event on the value of a firm” (MacKinlay, 
1997). Fama, Fisher, Jensen, and Roll (1969) study the impact of stock 
splits  on  firm  value.  Though  the  paper  was  published  in  1969  in  the 
International Economic Review, it was accepted by the Review on May 31, 
1966 – the Review had roughly a three-year publication lag. The idea for 
the paper originated from Lorie (as stated in footnote 1 of the paper), 
who was then director of CRSP, and suggested the idea as a test of the 
Miller  and  Modigliani  (1961) proposition  on  the  irrelevance  of  divi-
dends  (see  Ball,  2017).  That  paper  is  the  first  statistical  event  study 
published in an academic journal. It shows how to conduct such a study 
estimating  abnormal  returns  using  the  market  model.  The  study  uses 
monthly returns. Eventually, event studies started to use daily returns. 
Event studies that examine abnormal returns for a few days surrounding 
an event, or even only on the event day, have the advantage that the 
expected return  on a  stock for a  few days is  small, so that having an 
inadequate model for the expected return is unlikely to affect the con-
clusions of an event study using daily data. The literature using event 
studies is extremely large and includes papers with considerable influ-
ence both in financial economics and in the business world. It is likely 
the empirical method most used by financial economists. Searching for 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

“event  study”  with  “stock”  under  Google  Scholar  returns  143,000  re-
sults. As we will see, event  studies play a  critical role in the work  of 
Jensen in the 1980s and 1990s.

Jensen’s alpha  turns out to  be useful not just to evaluate the per-
formance of mutual funds but also to evaluate the performance of firms 
following corporate actions. For instance, starting in the 1980s, much 
research  examines  the  long-run  performance  of  firms  following  a 
corporate event – for instance, an acquisition. This research belongs to 
what is often called long-run event studies (Kothari and Warner, 2007) 
and uses, among other approaches, Jensen’s alpha.

4. Corporate finance and agency theory

In Section 3, I discussed the revolution in the study of investments 
and asset pricing that followed Markowitz (1952). During that time, the 
field of corporate finance lived through its own revolution. John Burr 
Williams, in his dissertation at Harvard written under the direction of 
Schumpeter  and  published  in  1938  under  the  title  of  “The  Theory  of 
Investment Value,” already incorporated key ideas that are at the heart 
of the revolution in corporate finance started in the 1950s. In this book, 
Williams presented a theory of fundamental value based on the present 
value of dividends and a theory of leverage irrelevance. The Harvard 
University publishing company asked him to help pay the cost of pro-
ducing the book because it had too many formulas. Williams never had a 
regular academic appointment.

Though Williams was an important pioneer, he left plenty of room 
for Miller and Modigliani to make their famous contribution (Modigliani 
and Miller, 1958; Miller and Modigliani, 1961). The fundamental dif-
ference  between  the  work  of  Williams  and  the  subsequent  work  of 
Modigliani  and  Miller  is  the  role  of  equilibrium  and  arbitrage.  With 
Modigliani and Miller (1958), a firm cannot create value by changing 
financial policies if investors can achieve the same outcomes by making 
the same changes in their portfolios. The concept of arbitrage led to the 
leverage  irrelevance  proposition.  However,  the  leverage  irrelevance 
proposition seemed a supremely elegant result that was hard to recon-
cile  with  reality.  Most  firms  have  some  debt.  To  address  this  issue, 
Modigliani and Miller focused on the tax benefits of debt, but their work 
was  incomplete  as  it  suggested  that  firms  would  be  extremely  highly 
levered and they could not explain why firms are generally levered even 
when taxes are not an issue. Robichek and Myers (1965, 1966) formu-
late what is now known as the tradeoff theory of capital structure, where 
firms trade off the tax benefits of debt against costs of financial distress.8
In Robichek and Myers (1965), the disadvantage of debt is that a more 
levered firm might not be able to carry out its investment plans (“The 
firm  may  not  undertake  all  planned  investment.”),  and  such  in-
terruptions will be costly if the firm was planning to invest in positive 
NPV projects. With Modigliani and Miller as well as with Robichek and 
Myers  (1965),  there  is  no  advantage  of  debt  other  than  the  tax 
advantage.

Jensen joined the faculty of the business school at the University of 
Rochester in 1967. The dean of the business school was Bill Meckling. 
Meckling had been a graduate student in the economics department at 
the University of Chicago. He left without earning a Ph.D. and joined the 
Rand  Corporation.  At  the  Rand  Corporation,  he  was  a  colleague  of 
Armen Alchian. Alchian eventually joined UCLA. Meckling and Alchian 
remained close over time. Alchian’s work was not in finance. Instead, he 
was  focused  on  how  firms  are  organized  and  why  they  exist.  Coase 
(1937) had  developed  a  theory  of  firms  where  transactions  are  orga-
nized  within  firms  when  it  is  too  expensive  to  carry  out  these  trans-
actions  in  markets.  Alchian  and  his  colleague  Demsetz  thought  that 
Coase’s  approach  was  flawed.  They  published  in  1972  a  highly  cited 
paper that addresses the issue. The paper’s main claim is that firms exist 

8 Myers,  in  an  interview  with  Emery  (Emery,  2013),  says  that  the  tradeoff 

theory “was first laid out in a 1966 article by Alex Robicheck and me.”

6 

when  joint  production  or  team  production  is  involved.  In  the  case  of 
team production, team members have incentives to shirk. Monitoring is 
required to decrease the incidence of shirking. At the heart of Alchian 
and Demsetz (1972) is the view that individuals in teams pursue their 
own interests. This divergence of interests is costly and must be managed 
well for team production to be profitable.

Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976) develop  a  theory  of  the  firm  and  a 
theory of firm ownership based on the role of conflicts of interest. Their 
approach builds on Alchian and Demsetz (1972) but differs in funda-
mental  ways.  They  do  not  focus  on  team  production  and  conflicts  of 
interest.  Instead,  they  consider  a  firm  that  has  an  entrepreneur  with 
limited resources who must raise capital to organize production. This 
setup creates agency costs in that the providers of capital cannot cost-
lessly ensure that the entrepreneur will act fully to their benefit. As a 
result, the providers of capital must monitor the entrepreneur, which 
imposes on them monitoring costs, and the entrepreneur may expend his 
own resources  in the  form of bonding costs  to commit  to a course of 
action favorable to the capital providers. However, neither monitoring 
nor bonding results in a situation where the entrepreneur does exactly 
what the capital providers would like him to do, so that there is a re-
sidual  loss.  In  Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976),  the  agency  costs  are  the 
monitoring costs, the bonding costs, and the residual loss.

Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976) did  not  introduce  agency  theory  to 
economics. Ross (1973) formulates the agency problem and investigates 
contracts  that  solve  the  principal’s  problem  and  are  Pareto  efficient. 
Jensen and Meckling (1976), however, use agency theory to derive a 
positive theory of corporate ownership that is empirically testable while 
Ross (1973) constructs a normative theory of principal-agent contracts.
In Jensen and Meckling (1976), there are no agency costs of equity if 
the  entrepreneur  finances  the  firm  with  his  own  funds.  As  the  entre-
preneur issues equity to outside shareholders, his interests will in gen-
eral differ to some extent from the interests of the outside shareholders. 
Specifically, the entrepreneur may indulge in perks that are valuable to 
him but costly to outside shareholders. More generally, the entrepreneur 
may derive private benefits from his role in the firm. An entrepreneur 
who owns a fraction α of the firm’s shares and consumes private benefits 
that reduce the value of the firm’s equity, pays $α per dollar of private 
benefits.  Hence,  the  lower  the  stake  of  the  entrepreneur,  the  more 
outside shareholders pay for the private benefits of the entrepreneur. It 
follows agency costs are lower if the entrepreneur has a greater stake in 
the firm, but the stake of the entrepreneur is intrinsically limited by his 
wealth.

A  wealth-constrained  entrepreneur  can  have  a  larger  stake  in  the 
firm’s equity if the firm issues debt. As a firm borrows, it has to issue less 
equity and the entrepreneur can own a larger fraction of the equity. It 
follows  that  debt  makes  it  possible  to  reduce  the  magnitude  of  the 
agency costs of equity. However, there are agency costs associated with 
debt  financing.  Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976) focus  on  what  they  call 
agency costs of asset substitution. These costs arise because shareholders 
can increase the value of equity by increasing its volatility, but by doing 
so  they  decrease  the  value  of  the  debt.  When  a  firm  becomes  highly 
levered,  the  incentives  to  take  riskier  projects  that  benefit  equity  but 
hurt the debtholders increase. Jensen and Meckling (1976) were aware 
of drafts of the theory of Myers (1977) showing that shareholders may 
be unwilling to raise funding for positive net present value projects for 
the firm when the firm is highly levered because the funds raised will 
mainly benefit the debtholders. They viewed this well-known underin-
vestment problem as another agency costs of debt.

Jensen  and  Meckling  (1976) is  an  extremely  rich  paper.  Bolton 
(2025) shows how the paper influences the theoretical corporate finance 
and  governance  to  this  day  and  explains  why.  Whole  literatures  are 
devoted to investigating predictions from the paper. What is perhaps the 
most cited empirical corporate finance paper testing predictions from 
the paper is the study by Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny titled “Manage-
ment Ownership and Market Valuation: An Empirical Analysis” with 12, 
700 citations (Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1988). The success of Jensen 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

and Meckling (1976) is in part explained by the literatures it spawned in 
corporate  finance.  However,  the  paper’s  influence  is  not  limited  to 
corporate  finance.  Lawyers  debate  “What  Jensen  and  Meckling  really 
said about the public company” (Cheffins, 2021) almost fifty years after 
publication of Jensen and Meckling (1976). The paper contributes to the 
theory of corporate finance, but it is broader in that it proposes a theory 
of what makes organizations efficient.

The important limitation of the Theory of the Firm is that it is a theory 
of the entrepreneurial firm. It does not address the issues of large firms 
where  management  has  small  stakes  and  where  shareholders  are 
atomistic. Jensen and Meckling (1976) were aware of this limitation and 
stated  it  explicitly  (p.  356).  They  thought  that  the  broad  principles 
presented in the Theory of the Firm apply to the large diffuse corporation, 
but they explain that the issues “remain to be worked out in detail and 
will be included in a future paper.” No such paper was written by Jensen 
and  Meckling.  However,  Jensen  collaborated  with  his  dissertation 
advisor, Fama, on three agency papers. The first one of these three pa-
pers  addresses  the  issues  of  the  large  diffuse  ownership  corporation. 
That paper distinguishes carefully between the various tasks that must 
be  carried  out  in  corporations  in  the  presence  of  agency  costs.  These 
tasks involve decision management and decision control. Management 
takes decisions but, because of agency costs, these decisions may not be 
the ones that the outside shareholders would want. One solution to this 
problem  is  to  concentrate  decision  rights  and  residual  claims,  which 
corresponds to the entrepreneurial firm studied in Theory of the Firm. 
This solution is limited by the wealth of the managers and forces them to 
bear  more risk.  Another  solution is  to  separate  ownership  of  residual 
claims from decision management. In this case, decision control to limit 
the extent to which decisions by management can hurt the interests of 
the outside shareholders becomes essential. The “apex of the decision 
control system” is the board of directors. Hence, for the corporation to 
work efficiently, the board has to do its job well. Another way to put it is 
that good governance is essential for corporations to be as productive as 
they can be.

5. Identifying and reducing agency costs

Theory of the Firm is a study in positive economics in that it explains 
why corporations exist and are organized as they are. It is also at the 
start of a new epoch in the governance literature. As Ma and Shleifer 
(2025) show, in the 40 years before Jensen and Meckling, the focus was 
on the ideas of Berle and Means (1932) about the importance of the law 
to solve the corporate governance problem that the providers of capital 
should be receiving a return on their investments (Shleifer and Vishny, 
1997).  Jensen  and  Meckling  is  the  starting  gun  for  a  new  epoch  in 
corporate  governance  centered  on  the  importance  of  private,  market 
solutions, to the problem of governance.

Different  firms  can  manage  agency  costs  differently  and  some  ap-
proaches are more efficient than others. This issue is especially impor-
tant when it comes to large firms where management has a relatively 
small  stake  in  the  firm.  In  such  firms,  management  may  have  more 
ability  and  inclination  to  pursue  courses  of  action  detrimental  to  the 
interests of outside shareholders. It was, therefore, a natural evolution 
for Jensen to focus on identifying agency costs, finding obstacles to the 
reduction  of  agency  costs,  and  highlighting  approaches  that  control 
agency costs better. All of this work is grounded in empirical work from 
financial economists and the conclusions have a strong empirical basis. 
Jensen did not conduct this work isolated in academia. It would have 
been nonsensical from his perspective to identify issues that called for 
actions to control agency costs better and not communicate his findings 
to the business world to make the world a better place by making cor-
porations more efficient through better control of agency costs. There-
fore, he set out to not only impact academia, but also the world outside 
academia.

5.1. The market for corporate control

The US had a spectacular period of economic growth after World War 
II. This period extended to the end of the 1960s. However, after that, the 
US started experiencing high inflation, lower growth, and a collapsing 
stock market. While US firms faced little competition from abroad for 
many years after World War II, the situation changed in the 1970s and 
many firms were not ready for that competition. Further, firms in some 
industries were protected by regulation which prevented price compe-
tition. Anti-trust actions  had been extremely aggressive, so that firms 
could  not  grow  through  acquisitions  within  their  industry  and  chose 
often to acquire outside their industry to grow. This led to inefficiencies. 
It was clear by the second half of the 1970s that the rules of the game had 
to change. The Carter administration started the deregulation process 
with the deregulation of air travel. The Reagan administration kept this 
process going and also changed the rules concerning anti-trust actions. 
Firms had to operate in a different environment from the one they were 
used to.

Many firms did not understand the new state of play or hoped that 
they  could operate  without  changes.  However,  greater economic  effi-
ciency  required a  reallocation of assets across firms and an increased 
emphasis by management on increasing shareholder wealth instead of 
wasting it. Assets can be reallocated across firms through mergers and 
acquisitions.  The market for corporate  control  can increase discipline 
management  by  reducing  the  cost  of  replacing  existing  management. 
The early 1980s saw the emergence of so-called “raiders”, namely in-
vestors who were not afraid to attempt hostile takeovers of companies 
when they thought current management was wasting a company’s re-
sources and opportunities. Considerable opposition to hostile takeovers 
emerged quickly. State governments started helping firms in their states 
by adopting laws that gave them additional tools to defend themselves 
against hostile takeovers.

With this evolution, there was much interest in better understanding 
the implications of mergers and acquisitions. Jensen and Ruback (1983)
defined the market for corporate control as one where managerial teams 
compete for control of corporate resources. In their view, shareholders 
have  a  passive  role.  This  definition  was  well-suited  for  the  1980s  as 
acquisition  battles  were  fights  between  managerial  teams.  The  main 
question  was  then  whether  such  fights  ended  up  benefitting  share-
holders of the acquiring and acquired companies. Jensen had a toolkit 
that could be used to answer the question. It was the event study method 
introduced in Fama, Fisher, Jensen, and Roll (1969) discussed in Section 
3. This technique was used extensively to measure the gains to share-
holders of the target firm and shareholders of the acquiring firm in ac-
quisitions.  A  striking  result  of  this  literature  is  how  much  target 
shareholders generally gain from acquisitions.

Jensen took to the pages of the Harvard Business Review to make the 
case that takeovers create value and pointed out that the existing evi-
dence at the time suggested that target shareholders gained on average 
30 % from an acquisition (Jensen, 1984). This is a huge increase in the 
value  of  corporations,  suggesting  that  the  assets  of  acquired  corpora-
tions were seriously misused unless the acquirers made an equivalent 
loss. Much of the literature has presented results that are less clear for 
acquirers.  As  my  co-authors  and  I  show  in  a  paper  titled  “Wealth 
destruction on a massive scale?,” acquirers do at times make acquisitions 
that  destroy  substantial  amounts  of  wealth  for  their  shareholders 
(Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz, 2005). However, when considering 
both the acquirer and the target, the evidence is generally that acqui-
sitions  create  wealth  in  total, so  that  potential  losses  incurred  by  the 
acquirer, if any, do not offset the gains to the target. Another way to put 
this  in  a  language  that  rapidly  became  almost  universal:  acquisitions 
increase  shareholder  wealth.  Not  surprisingly,  Jensen’s  views  were 
controversial. The Institutional Investor magazine devoted an article to 
his views saying that Jensen “has come out in favor of corporate raiders 
and greenmailers to the point of developing an economic rationale for 
takeovers”  and  went  on  to  call  the  Journal  of  Financial  Economics 

7 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

Jensen’s “fan-club newsletter” (VerMuelen, 1985).

In a world of efficient markets, increases in shareholder wealth result 
from increases in expected future cash flows generated by firms. As long 
as  these  increases  in  expected  future  cash  flows  do  not  result  from 
redistribution of resources away from stakeholders, but instead grow the 
pie, the increase in shareholder wealth represents an increase in welfare. 
However, even at the time, some papers raised concerns about potential 
redistribution (Shleifer and Summers, 1988). Jensen made sense of an 
increasing amount of evidence using the framework of agency theory. In 
so  doing,  he  created  a  research  agenda  within  academic  finance  and 
helped the worlds of business, law, and policy understand that takeovers 
have  an  important  role  to  play  in  making  the  firms,  and  thereby  the 
economy, more productive.

5.2. The agency costs of managerial discretion

In  Theory  of  the  Firm,  the  entrepreneur’s  incentives  were  rather 
narrowly  defined.  The  owner-manager  could  choose  more  attractive 
perquisites and work less hard than outside shareholders would want 
him to. Such a view is rather limiting for managers of large corporations. 
These  managers  choose  what  projects  the  firm  invests  in.  They  may 
choose projects that are valuable to them but may be wealth-destroying 
to  outside  shareholders.  In  Fama  and  Jensen  (1983),  managers  have 
decision rights, but there are control mechanisms. For management to 
destroy substantial wealth, the internal control mechanisms as well as 
the market for corporate control have to fail. Jensen wrote important 
papers  where  he  identified  situations  where  managers  used  their 
discretion  for  projects  that  destroyed  wealth.  These  papers  have  in 
common situations where management commands large resources but 
does not have good uses for these resources.

Absent  agency  costs,  management  would  return  resources  that 
cannot be used productively within the firm to shareholders, but with 
agency costs, such an outcome may not happen unless control mecha-
nisms are put in place that limit management’s discretion. As already 
mentioned, Jensen’s second most highly cited paper is “Agency Costs of 
Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers” (Agency costs of free 
cash  flow,  Jensen,  1986).  The  Agency  costs  of  free  cash  flow  paper  is 
focused on poor acquisitions by oil companies in industries outside of oil 
and gas. These acquisitions arise because these companies benefit from 
extremely  large  cash  flows,  but  do  not  have  valuable  investment  op-
portunities in oil and gas. To make use of the funds they accumulated, 
these companies decided to make acquisitions outside of their industry 
and  become  conglomerates.  In  this  case,  had  these  companies  had 
valuable  investment  opportunities,  they  would  likely  not  have  made 
such diversifying acquisitions and the problem Jensen focuses on would 
not  have  arisen.  It  follows  that  the  importance  of  agency  costs  of 
managerial discretion depends on the growth opportunities the firm has 
as well as on the cash flows generated by assets in place. If the assets in 
place generate little cash flow, management has little ability to make 
expensive investments of dubious quality. In that case, the firm would 
have to raise cash in capital markets and Easterbrook (1984) explains 
why being forced to resort to the capital markets for funding involves 
monitoring that can prevent the adoption of poor projects.

In the Agency costs of free cash flow, Jensen makes the case that firms 
that generate large cash flows but do not have good investment oppor-
tunities should pay out the cash flow to shareholders, thereby, as shown 
by  DeAngelo,  Kahle,  and  Skinner  (2025) providing  a  foundation  for 
theories of capital allocation, and should be forced to do so if they do not 
do so voluntarily. Doing so would prevent management from investing 
in poor projects. One way for managers to pay out cash flows is to use 
dividends or repurchases. Another way, which is likely more binding, is 
to  increase  the  firm’s  leverage.  With  debt,  management  is  forced  to 
make payouts since otherwise the firm would default on debt. Conse-
quently, the firm can issue debt and pay out the proceeds from the debt 
to  shareholders  in  a  leveraged  recapitalization.  In  Theory  of  the  firm, 
leverage makes it possible for the entrepreneur to issue less equity to 

outside shareholders, so that the agency costs of outside equity are less. 
In Jensen (1986), the advantage of leverage is that it constrains man-
agement  by  reducing  the  resources  at  its  command.  Again,  this  is  a 
theory of debt that does not require a tax benefit of debt for leverage to 
exist. However, it is a theory where the benefit of debt can be increased 
through risk management (Stulz, 1990).

At the heart of Jensen (1986) is the problem created by the existence 
of large cash flows from assets in place in firms that do not have valuable 
growth opportunities internally. Instead of paying out these cash flows, 
managers may try to use them to invest in projects outside of the firm’s 
industry where they have no particular expertise, so that these projects 
are quite likely to destroy shareholder wealth. In his AFA presidential 
address titled “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure 
of  Control  Systems”  (The  Modern  Industrial  Revolution,  Jensen,  1993), 
Jensen embeds the free cash flow problem in a much broader setting, 
namely  shocks  to  productivity  from  innovation  and  globalization. 
Globalization  saw  the  emergence  of  low-cost  producers  in  low  wage 
countries.  Though  The  Modern  Industrial  Revolution  was  written  years 
before the China shock, Jensen was prescient about the effects of glob-
alization  on  the  US  industry.  He  argues  that  the  arrival  of  low-cost 
producers  makes  it  necessary  for  high-cost  producers  to  exit  an  in-
dustry. He also reviews a vast array of technological innovations that 
changed  the cost  structure of  industries and  led to overcapacity.  One 
example is the improvement in tires that extended considerably the life 
of tires, so that existing production capacity became too large. With both 
innovation and globalization, firms that were profitable and successful 
with their assets in place become high-cost producers that, absent the 
ability to change into low-cost producers, should shrink and exit. Jensen 
(1993) makes  the  case,  however,  that  too  many  firms  destroy  share-
holder wealth instead of shrinking and exiting. As evidence, he estimates 
the productivity of firms with their R&D and capital expenditures. He 
finds a large number of firms with valuation changes that do not reflect 
the  vast  amounts  they  spent  on  R&D  and  capital  expenditures.  For 
instance, over the 1980s, he finds that General Motors spent $100 billion 
on R&D and capital expenditures in excess of the change in its value.

Jensen (1993) argues that four control forces can resolve the prob-
lems caused by the divergence of interests between managers, who value 
continuation, and those of shareholders and society as a whole. These 
forces are capital markets, through the market for corporate control, the 
legal/political/ regulatory system, product and factor markets, and the 
internal control system  headed by  the board of directors. He thought 
that the role of capital markets had been somewhat neutered at the end 
of  the  1980s,  in  part  by  the  collapse  of  the  investment  bank  Drexel 
Burnham  Lambert  in  1990,  state  antitakeover  statutes,  and  various 
regulations. Part  of  the paper  discusses  the problems  of  boards of  di-
rectors and why they were not performing well. However, Jensen (1993)
concludes that a new form of organization can replace public corpora-
tions to make possible the restructuring that is necessary to cope with 
technological and globalization shocks. This type of organization is the 
LBO organization. These organizations are structured so that they can 
only reap their rewards if they succeed in the necessary restructuring.

An important conclusion from The Modern Industrial Revolution is that 
to change the inefficiencies of internal control systems in corporations, 
we have to understand better how and why decisions are made. Jensen 
points out that there is much normative research about how to compute 
NPVs. However, such research does not help to understand why firms do 
not follow the NPV rule in their decisions.

All the Jensen papers we have discussed so far implicitly or explicitly 
assume that financial markets are efficient. In what appears to be his last 
paper published in a finance academic journal in 2005, he explores what 
he calls the agency costs of overvalued equity (Jensen, 2005). In that 
paper, equity can be misvalued. He argues that overvaluation gives in-
centives to management to engage in tactics that destroy value in the 
long run but help maintain the overvaluation. One such tactic is earnings 
manipulation to meet analyst expectations. He was also concerned that 
in some cases managers could have incentives to misrepresent a firm’s 

8 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

prospects to increase their pay when the firm is not misvalued.

5.3. Politics, providing sharper incentives to managers, and LBOs

The papers discussed in the previous section are hugely influential. 
Together, they have more than 50,000 citations. Not a single of these 
papers crossed the desk of a referee. In 1990, Jensen and Kevin Murphy 
published in the Journal of Political Economy a paper titled “Performance 
Pay  and  Top-Management  Incentives”  (Performance  Pay,  Jensen  and 
Murphy, 1990) that has an extremely large number of citations, but the 
citation total vastly understates the impact of the paper. The paper is 
closely linked to the analysis in The Theory of the Firm. In that paper, 
Jensen and Meckling focus on the entrepreneur’s fractional ownership 
of equity and argue that higher  fractional ownership results in better 
alignment between the interests of outside shareholders and the entre-
preneur. In Performance Pay, Jensen and Murphy find that CEO wealth 
changes by $3.25 for every $1,000 change in shareholder wealth. They 
further show that most CEOs “hold trivial fractions of their firm’s stock.”
Providing  sharper  incentives  for  managers  reduces  agency  costs. 
Hence,  a  carefully  designed  compensation  plan  that  provides  proper 
incentives, even if it involves large payments to the CEO if some out-
comes  arise,  benefits  outside  shareholders  because  it  makes  it  more 
likely that their shares will gain value. Given that paying executives well 
when they perform well is generally in the interest of shareholders, the 
important question to answer is why CEO wealth had such low sensi-
tivity to firm value creation in the 1980s. The answer put forth by Jensen 
and  Murphy  is  politics.  The  argument  is  that  political  forces  make  it 
costly for CEOs to have large pay even when they have earned it. Spe-
cifically, they conclude that “Public disapproval of high rewards seems 
to have truncated the upper tail of the earnings distribution of corporate 
executives.”

Politics can get in the way of actions that reduce agency costs and can 
directly worsen agency costs by providing cover for managers to take 
actions  that reduce shareholder wealth.  The impact  of politics affects 
public firms in a way that it does not affect private firms. When it comes 
to  compensation,  the  compensation  of  executives  of  private  firms  is 
typically  not  public,  while  the  compensation  of  executives  of  public 
firms is subject to disclosure rules. More generally, private firms can take 
actions without the glare of public opinion. In the famous Eclipse of the 
Public Corporation and then in his presidential address, Jensen explained 
why public corporations are ill-suited to drastic restructuring to respond 
to  technological  and  globalization  shocks.  As  Chew  (2021) has  justly 
pointed  out,  Jensen  did  not  predict  in  1989  that  public  corporations 
would disappear. He explicitly stated that “The current trends do not 
imply  that  the  public  corporation  has  no  future.  The  conventional 
twentieth-century  model  of  corporate  governance—dispersed  public 
ownership, professional managers without substantial equity holdings, a 
board  of  directors  dominated  by  management-appointed  out-
siders—remains a viable option in some areas of the economy, partic-
ularly for growth companies whose profitable investment opportunities 
exceed the cash they generate internally. (…) The public corporation is 
not suitable in industries where long-term growth is slow, where inter-
nally generated funds outstrip the opportunities to invest them profit-
ably, or where downsizing is the most productive long-term strategy.”

LBOs bring together themes from Theory of the Firm in that with their 
high leverage they increase the fractional stake of management and from 
Jensen and Murphy (1990) in that they give managers high incentives 
outside the glare of public opinion. Jensen’s Eclipse paper predates the 
recent trends of a decrease in the number of listed firms and of firms 
often wanting to stay private.

6. Did Jensen recant?

“Later  in  life,  after  Wall  Street  had  been  besieged  by  corporate  stock 
option  scandals and  politicians derided excessive  compensation pack-
ages, Professor Jensen acknowledged that his ideas had spiraled out of 
control.”  The  book  by  Nicholas  Lemann  titled  “Transaction  Man” 
contributed  much  to  this  view  (Lemann,  2019).  Jensen’s  work  after 
2000 includes a highly cited paper titled “Value Maximization, Stake-
holder Theory, and the Corporate Objective Function”  (Value Maximi-
zation, Jensen, 2001). The paper puts forth the view of enlightened value 
maximization. Chew (2021) argues that we can see “these precepts at 
work everywhere in today’s burgeoning ‘ESG’ movement.” Besides that 
paper, Jensen spent considerable time and energy developing a research 
agenda centered on the concept of integrity. This research had minimal 
impact  on  the  finance  profession  as,  in  total,  the  papers  related  to 
integrity have less than 500 citations. I discuss first the Value Maximi-
zation paper and then the integrity work, focusing on whether Jensen 
recanted after leaving Harvard.

6.1. Value maximization and stakeholder theory

Though there has been much attention paid to the purpose of cor-
porations in recent years, especially following the Business Roundtable 
statement supporting a stakeholder model in 2019 and the fiftieth an-
niversary of Friedman’s famous New York Times article stating that the 
objective of management should be to maximize profits, the debate on 
corporate  purpose  has  been  going  on  for  decades.9 In  a  post  titled 
“Stakeholder  governance  and  the  eclipse  of  shareholder  primacy,” 
Martin Lipton, a lawyer credited with the invention of the poison pill, 
blames Friedman, Jensen, and Easterbrook for the shareholder-primacy 
narrative, argues that it constitutes an existential threat to society, and 
points out that he has “supported stakeholder governance for more than 
50 years.” (Lipton, 2024). Many observers in recent years have argued 
that  the  period  of  shareholder  dominance  has  ended.  In  his  paper, 
Jensen reiterated that value-increasing actions by managers are welfare 
enhancing in the absence of externalities. As he had discussed in earlier 
papers, he pointed out that value maximization offers an unambiguous 
metric of performance for a corporation that aligns with welfare for the 
economy. After all, generating higher profits means that more value is 
created out of inputs, which benefits the economy. Jensen goes on to 
argue that stakeholder objectives suffer from a fundamental problem, 
which is that they do not tell managers how to make tradeoffs. It typi-
cally  is  not  possible  to  take  actions  that  necessarily  benefit  all  stake-
holders,  so  decisions  have  to  be  made.  Stakeholder  models  have  no 
metric for success. One can draw a straight line through his earlier pa-
pers to the statement that “By failing to provide a definition of better, 
stakeholder  theory  effectively  leaves  managers  and  directors  unac-
countable for their stewardship of the firms resources.”  To make sure 
that  his  point  would  be  understood,  he  also  added  that  “Stakeholder 
theory plays into the hands of special interests that wish to use the re-
sources of the corporations for their own ends.”

After  reiterating  why  value  maximization  is  the  best  way  to  keep 
score for corporations, Jensen goes on and argues that maximizing value 
does entail paying attention to stakeholders. It is not clear why he felt 
the  need  to use  the  language  of “enlightened  value  maximization”  to 
argue that corporations have to pay attention to stakeholders to maxi-
mize  value. In  fact,  his  main  statement of  enlightened  value  maximi-
zation that “it is a basic principle of enlightened value maximization that 
we  cannot  maximize  the  long-term  market  value  of  an  organization  if  we 
ignore or mistreat any important constituency”  would be equally correct 
without the use of the word “enlightened.”  To succeed, a corporation 
typically must have a motivated workforce, it must have satisfied cus-
tomers, and it must have good relationships with communities. The crux 
of the issue is how managers make decisions when the interests of the 

Jensen  retired  from  the  Harvard  Business  School  and  became  a 
professor emeritus in 2000. He then joined the Monitor Group where he 
worked until 2009. The New York Times obituary of Jensen asserts that 

9 “A Friedman doctrine – The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase 

Its Profits,” by Milton Friedman, The New York Times, September 13, 1970.

9 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

various  stakeholders  have  to  be  traded  off  against  each  other.  Value 
maximization  provides  a  way  to  make  these  tradeoffs.  Stakeholder 
theory does not.

There is a theme in the Value Maximization paper that would not have 
shown  up  with  a  much  younger  Jensen.  It  is  related  to  some  of  the 
discussion in the  Agency Costs of Overvalued Equity. Jensen  argues for 
maximizing  long-term  value.  The  Agency  Costs  of  Overvalued  Equity 
paper allows for misvaluation. The arguments in Value Maximization are 
deeper. He does allow for misvaluation, but in part because the market 
does not have all the information that management has. He points out 
that “financial markets, although forward-looking, may not understand 
the full implications of a company’s policies until they begin to show up 
in cash flows over time” and that the “market is inevitably ignorant of 
many managerial actions and opportunities, at least in the short run. In 
those  situations  where  the  financial  markets  clearly  do  not  have  this 
private competitive information, directors and managers must resist the 
pressures of those markets while making every effort to communicate 
their expectations to investors.” A younger Jensen might have worried 
that management arguing for a course of action because it knows more 
than the markets might just be entrenching itself. It is without doubt one 
of the toughest issues in assessing the actions of management to figure 
out  whether  management  does  something  that  appears  to  destroy 
shareholder  wealth  because  it  has  information  it  cannot  credibly 
communicate that justifies its course of action or because it values that 
course  of  action  for  reasons  unrelated  to  maximizing  shareholder 
wealth.

6.2. Integrity: An incomplete project

Jensen was a superb communicator. This made him a great writer, a 
great  teacher,  and  a  great  mentor.  However,  his  last  major  research 
project was cut short before he could successfully apply these skills to 
the project. Starting in 2004, he embarked on a project that focused on 
what  he  viewed  as  a  missing  factor  of  production  that  financial  eco-
nomics had to take seriously and incorporate in its models. He called this 
missing factor integrity. Jensen stated that there is a “straight line from 
where I started back with Bill Meckling working on efficiency in orga-
nizations and people” to his integrity work (Walkling, 2011). The idea of 
the integrity work is that people and organizations have to behave in a 
way  that  they  are  in  “the  state  of  being  whole,  complete,  unbroken, 
unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition.” He thought that he needed to 
develop  a  new  language  to  build  his  theory.  However,  this  language 
constituted a formidable obstacle to interested readers. The first reaction 
of readers would be to think of integrity as a moral, normative value. 
This is not what he was after. He viewed his definition as reflecting a 
purely positive approach. To use his analogy, a car with a flat tire has no 
integrity. As a result, the car cannot perform its function as expected. 
This is not an issue of morality. One can observe the car and know that it 
will not perform well. One can do a study of cars that lack integrity and 
find the  impact of the lack of integrity on production. He viewed his 
theory of integrity as a factor of production as testable. It is possible to 
investigate how productivity is positively related to integrity. With his 
theory, “integrity is a necessary but not sufficient condition for long-run 
value maximization.” He argued that “As integrity (whole and complete) 
declines, workability (capable of producing the desired effect or result) 
declines, and as workability declines, the opportunity for performance 
declines  (however  one  chooses  to  define  performance).  Thus  value 
maximization requires integrity” (Erhard and Jensen, 2014).

Jensen thought he was onto something really important, perhaps as 
important as his agency theory. However, his theory might have been 
much more successful using a simpler and more intuitive language. To 
see this, it helps to relate his theory to work on corporate culture, or-
ganization capital, and sustainability. There is much discussion about 
the  importance  of  corporate  culture.  The  difficulty  with  work  on 
corporate culture is how to measure corporate culture and how to assess 
its impact on firms’ value. Jensen’s integrity work offers a way to assess 

corporate  culture  and  its  impact  on  value.  A  culture  that  produces 
integrity contributes to value maximization. What does integrity mean 
in  that  context?  A  better  term  might  be  sustainability.  What  Jensen 
defines as integrity is well described as practices that are sustainable. 
Practices are sustainable when they can be repeated without damage to 
value. Sustainability has no normative or moral dimension. It is a quality 
that is observable. Using sustainability instead of integrity bypasses the 
normative  baggage  that  comes  with  integrity.  A  corporation  that  has 
practices with a high degree of sustainability is one with high organi-
zation capital. It has developed these practices and maintains them.

The bottom line of Jensen’s integrity work is that there are behaviors 
and practices that increase corporate value. It is important to understand 
what these practices are, to be able to measure them, and to be able to 
show that they affect corporate value. Such knowledge is important to 
managers  and  shareholders.  It  offers  a  scientific  basis  for  theories  of 
leadership and corporate culture.

7. Editor, teacher, and entrepreneur

A brilliant paper that nobody knows about is useless. It is not evi-
dence  of  a  superior  mind.  It  is  evidence  of  a  wasted  effort.  Jensen 
throughout  his  life  believed  that  good  research  changes  the  world. 
Research that draws the admiration of a small circle of scholars does not 
change the world. For research to change the world, it has to be known 
broadly. This means that it has to be published in journals that draw 
attention, that it has to be taught, and that it has to be accessible. In his 
career, he worked hard on these three dimensions.

7.1. The Journal of Financial Economics

The development of financial economics faced an important obstacle 
in the 1960s and early 1970s, which is that existing journals were not 
receptive  to  financial  economics  contributions.  The  CAPM  paper  of 
Sharpe was rejected by the Journal of Finance before a new editorial team 
was  more  welcoming.  The  paper  by  Black  and  Scholes  on  the  option 
formula only got published after the intercession of Fama and Miller at 
the Journal of Political Economy (Scholes, 1998). Some important papers 
were published in the Journal of Business and not the Journal of Finance. 
Some of the most highly cited papers, such as Fama’s paper on market 
efficiency and Jensen’s paper on mutual fund performance, were pub-
lished in the Papers and Proceedings of the American Finance Associa-
tion rather than in the Journal of Finance. There was an enormous need of 
a new journal that would be welcoming to financial economics papers. 
Together with Fama and Merton, Jensen started the Journal of Financial 
Economics  (JFE).  After  securing  a  contract  with  what  was  then 
North-Holland to publish the journal, he led JFE from its first issue in 
1974 until the early 1990s. Schwert replaced him formally as editor in 
1997. He documents the history of JFE in Schwert (2021).

It is hard to understate the immense success of JFE in the 1970s and 
the 1980s. This success is obvious using the metric of citations, as the 
gap in the most commonly used metric, the citation impact factor, be-
tween JFE and the Journal of Finance is simply enormous in the 1980s as 
can be seen in Fig. 1.10 No finance journal has such a leadership position 
after 1990. Among interesting statistics, Alexander and Mabry (1994)
show citations from 1987 to 1991 for the top fifty papers cited in the top 
four finance journals. None of the top ten papers were published in the 
Journal  of  Finance,  but  five  of  the  top  ten  were  published  in  the  JFE. 
Alderson, Nasseh, and Saporoschenko (2009) rank the twenty-five pa-
pers that garner the most citations in the top four finance journals from 
2003 to 2008. Ten papers on the list were published before 1990. Five of 
these papers are in JFE. None are in the Journal of Finance. Though the 
landscape of the top finance journals became more competitive after the 

10 I am grateful to Bill Schwert for making available the data from 1977 to 
2019 from Schwert (2021).

10 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

Fig. 1. Impact Factor for Three Finance Journals: JFE, JF, and RFS. 
The data from 1977 to 2019 is from Schwert (2021). The data for 2020–2023 was obtained from the Journal Citation Reports.

late 1980s, JFE stayed among the top three finance journals competing 
for  the  top  spot  until  today.  Fittingly,  in  the  last  calendar  year  that 
Jensen was alive, Fig. 1 shows that JFE had the highest citation impact 
factor among finance journals.

What  explains  the  success  of  JFE?  Some  factors  are  simply  the 
practices that JFE introduced in journals that are now common. Jensen 
wanted to compete on turnaround time and quality of service. He started 
the  now  common  system  of  paying  referees  if  their  reports  met  the 
deadline set by the Journal. He viewed the time of referees to be valu-
able, so that they had to be compensated and authors had to pay sub-
mission fees. The goal of submission fees was in part to keep the volume 
of  papers  manageable  so  that  authors  could  get  the  attention  of 
knowledgeable  referees.  He  introduced  transparency  concerning  sub-
missions and turnaround times. He published statistics for turnaround 
times  in  each  issue.  Jensen  also  had  the  view  that  articles  had  to  be 
written so that they could have an impact. This meant that the quality of 
the writing was important. As editor, he would often carefully annotate 
submitted manuscripts to help improve the writing as well as the con-
tent.  He  had  a  hands-on  approach.  This  approach  helped  grow  the 
financial economics profession and its influence. He was vocal that what 
is important about a paper is what it teaches us about the world, not its 
mathematical or econometric sophistication. This view helped launch a 
huge  literature  on  governance  that  had  considerable  impact  on  the 
business and legal world. To attract attention to this growing literature, 
he organized conferences in the 1980s. The first one, with papers pub-
lished in 1983, may be the most important conference in the history of 
financial  economics  as  it  established  the  foundations  for  our  under-
standing of the market for corporate control.

It may well be, however, that the most important attribute of Jensen 
as  editor  was  his  judgement  about  what  he  thought  was  important 
research  and  what  was  not.  He  was  not  shy  about  exercising  that 
judgement. That judgement guided the evolution of the field. It affected 
what  scholars  worked  on  and  how  they  wrote  papers.  Absent  that 
judgement, the field would be different today. His views about what was 
important and what was not were controversial. I doubt that there is a 
day in his life that he shied from controversy. However, his strong and 

well-defined views about what is important also led to the creation of a 
competitor  to  JFE,  showing  that  the  market  for  ideas  was  open  and 
competitive. The Review of Financial Studies was created explicitly as a 
journal  that  would  not  espouse  the  values  of  Jensen.  Jensen  never 
thought much of most theory work. He was vocal about that – at times 
using language not suitable for an academic journal. The birth of the 
Review was motivated by the need to create a journal that would be more 
welcoming to theory than JFE was.

7.2. Teacher

Rochester had the distinction of being a business school without a 
traditional  management  faculty  –  by  choice.  Jensen  and  Meckling 
introduced and developed a course at Rochester that eventually became 
called  “Coordination,  control,  and  the  management  of  organizations” 
(CCMO). The course was first taught in 1974. Initially, it was mostly a 
price theory for managerial issues course, but rapidly evolved in a richer 
course focused on how to manage organizations from an agency theory 
perspective. Eventually, after Jensen moved from Rochester to Harvard 
part-time in 1985 and then full-time in 1989, the course was summa-
rized as: 

“CCMO presents a new theory of organizations that draws on eco-
nomics,  finance,  psychology,  neuroscience,  and  human  resource 
management. In developing our theory, we focus particularly on four 
interrelated areas: 1) the nature of human beings and their behavior; 
2) compensation, career systems, and performance measurement; 3) 
task  structure,  organizational  boundaries,  and  technology;  and  4) 
governance,  corporate  finance,  and  organizational  performance.” 
(Jensen, Baker, Wruck, and Baldwin, 1997).

Most faculty members anywhere could not possibly attract a crowd 
with a course that has such ambition and reach, or a course with ma-
terial that includes the statement “We do not just teach; we are devoted 
to  making  a  difference  in  peoples’  lives.”  (Jensen,  Baker,  Wruck  and 
Baldwin, 1997). However, CCMO had an incredible success at the Har-
vard  Business  School  as  an  elective.  At  its  peak,  in  1996,  it  had  six 

11 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

sections and about 600 students. This means that most students at the 
Harvard Business School chose to take that course. Five faculty members 
were involved in the teaching and the course was then the product of a 
new  interdisciplinary  unit  within  the  School,  Organizations  and  Mar-
kets,  led  by  Jensen.  A  large  number  of  future  leaders  of  American 
business  were  exposed  to  the  course  and  were  directly  influenced  by 
Jensen’s thinking. In an interview for an article posted on the Alumni 
page of the Harvard Business School website, Jensen summarized the 
course by saying that “This course changes how people view the world in 
fundamental ways. It gives them a set of general principles for managing 
and for living.”11

7.3. Entrepreneur

When I was a graduate student at MIT in the late 1970s, the way to 
learn about working papers was through a sheet distributed weekly that 
listed the new working papers the library received. We could then go 
and fish out papers from boxes where they were kept. If we were aware 
of a working paper that the library had not received, we could write to 
the  author (which meant we put a letter in a stamped envelope) and 
hope that he would send the paper. My main recollection of doing so is 
writing  to  a  well-known  financial  economist  and  never  receiving  a 
response. Things did not change much until the arrival of the internet. 
The internet offered a wonderful opportunity to make access to working 
papers easy and global. Jensen realized that early and created SSRN with 
another financial economist, Wayne Marr.

SSRN fundamentally changed how new ideas are diffused in financial 
economics. Now, anybody interested in working papers on a given topic 
can go to the internet and do a search. Most of the time, if the paper is 
unpublished, the search will lead to SSRN. Anybody anywhere on the 
globe with the  ability to access  the internet efficiently is in  the same 
situation in terms of finding the most recent work on a given topic and in 
making papers accessible to the global community. With regular news-
letters listing new working papers, academics and non-academics can 
easily  know  what  the  new  working  papers  are.  This  evolution  has 
reduced  the  geographic  segmentation  of  the  profession.  An  academic 
from  Boston  who  visits  a  university  in  China  ends  up  talking  about 
working papers from her University that are a few weeks old with faculty 
members there who are knowledgeable about them. Forty years ago, the 
academic  would  have  had  the  unique  advantage  of  knowing  about 
working papers at her university and being able to enlighten her hosts on 
these papers. This advantage is gone.

More  than  one  million  papers  have  been  uploaded  on  SSRN.  The 
papers on the site have been downloaded more than 200 million times. 
SSRN was sold in 2016 to Elsevier. While the site is a huge success, it has 
not lived up to expectations. The famous saying of Peter Thiel about the 
internet (“We wanted flying cars, instead we got 140 characters.”) ap-
plies here as well. The hope was that the site would create a way for 
researchers  to  communicate  and  comment  on  new  papers,  so  that  it 
could lead to a form of crowdsourced referee reports. It has not led to a 
decrease in the importance of journals. On the contrary, publication in 
the top three journals has become the only way for academics across the 
world to get tenure in the better departments or those departments that 
aspire to become better departments.

8. Conclusion

This paper attempts to evaluate Jensen’s contribution to the field of 
financial economics and to American business. This contribution is large 
compared  to  the  contribution  of  almost  all  financial  economists.  Few 
others have made contributions at Jensen’s level. Of these few, almost 

11 “Organizations  and Markets: A  Challenging View of the World”  by Susan 
Young,  December  1,  1996.  See  https://www.alumni.hbs.edu/stories/Pages/ 
story-bulletin.aspx?num=6173

all were rewarded by Nobel prizes. However, Jensen’s story is a uniquely 
American story that should be celebrated as such. He was the son of a 
blue collar worker in Minnesota who, through hard work, intelligence, 
and the  force of his personality, made an indelible  mark on financial 
economics  and  American  business.  As  Wooldridge  (2024) wrote  in 
Bloomberg, “Nobody can deny his extraordinary influence.”

Throughout  his  academic  career,  he  insisted  that  research  worth 
doing was research that had the objective of changing the world. For 
him, research was not an avocation. It was a matter of life and death. 
Research that impacted the world could make the world a better place. 
Few  others  in  the  field  of  financial  economics  have  had  this  burning 
ambition to impact the world through research. Even fewer have suc-
ceeded. Compared to other Nobel-caliber financial economists, he is in 
many  ways  unique  in  that  much  of  his  work  did  not  go  through  the 
crucible of the refereeing process. I leave it to others to draw lessons 
from this. No doubt, there are financial economists who take a dim view 
of his papers because they typically have neither a conventional theory 
model  nor  conventional  empirical  work.  However,  none  of  these  cri-
tiques have impacted how scholars and businesspeople think about the 
main issues of financial economics in the way that Jensen’s work has. If 
he were still with us, he would argue vigorously with those critiques, 
trying  to  convince  them  that  scholars  should  develop  new  ideas  in 
financial economics to help make the world a better place rather than 
meet some tenure threshold. After all, he did give his dean an undated 
signed resignation letter that the dean could put a date on anytime.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Ren´e  M.  Stulz:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Project  adminis-

tration, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

None.

References

Alchian, A.A., Demsetz, H., 1972. Production, information costs, and economic 

organization. Am. Econ. Rev. 62 (5), 777–795.

Alderson, M.J., Nasseh, A., Saporoschenko, A., 2009. The relative significance of finance 

journals, authors and articles: An update. Adv. Financ. Educ. 2009.

Alexander Jr, J.C., Mabry, R.H., 1994. Relative significance of journals, authors, and 

articles cited in financial research. J. Financ. 49, 697–712.

Ball, R., 2017. Fama, Fisher, Jensen, and Roll (1969): Retrospective Comments. In: 
Cochrane, J.H., Moskowitz, T.J. (Eds.), The Fama Portfolio: Selected Papers of 
Eugene F. Fama. University of Chicago Press.

Berle, A.A., Means, G.C., 1932. The Modern Corporate and Private Property. New York, 

McMillan. 

Black, F., Scholes, M., 1973. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. J. Political 

Econ. 81 (3), 637–654.

Bolton, P., 2025. Jensen and Meckling at 50. J. Financ. Econ., this issue.
Carhart, M.M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. J. Financ. 52, 57–82.
Cheffins, B.R., 2021. What Jensen and Meckling Really Said About the Public Company. 
In: Pollman, E., Thompson, R. (Eds.), Research Handbook on Corporate Purpose and 
Personhood. Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 2–26.

Chew, D., 2021. Misreading Michael Jensen: The case of Nicholas Lemann’s Transaction 
Man: The rise of the deal and the decline of the American dream. J. Appl. Corp. Fin. 
33 (3), 130–139.

Coase, R.H., 1937. The nature of the firm. Economica 4, 386–405.
DeAngelo, H., Kahle, K., Skinner, D.J., 2025. Agency costs of free cash flow, capital 

allocation, and payouts. J. Financ. Econ., this issue.

Easterbrook, F.H., 1984. Two agency-cost explanations of dividends. Am. Econ. Rev. 74 

(4), 650–659.

Emery, D., 2013. Pioneers in finance: an interview with Stewart Myers. J. Appl. Financ. 

23, 6–14.

Erhard, W., Jensen, M.C., 2014. Putting integrity into finance: A purely positive 

approach. Natl. Bur. Econ. Res.

Fama, E.F., 1965. The behavior of stock-market prices. J. Bus. 38 (1), 34–105.
Fama, E.F., Fisher, L., Jensen, M.C., Roll, R., 1969. The adjustment of stock prices to new 

information. Int. Econ. Rev. 10 (1), 1–21.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2010. Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual fund 

returns. J. Financ. 65, 1915–1947.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2025. Michael Jensen’s empirical work. J. Financ. Econ., this 

issue.

12 

R.M. Stulz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104118 

Fama, E.F., Jensen, M.C., 1983. Separation of ownership and control. J. Law Econ. 26 

Modigliani, F., Miller, M.H., 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory 

(2), 301–325.

Friedman, M., 1953. Essays in Positive Economics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Hill, J.G., 2025. Hidden Fallacies in the Agency Theory of the Corporation. In: 

Andhov, A., Hill, C., Omarova, S. (Eds.), Hidden Fallacies in Corporate Law and 
Financial Regulation: Reframing the Mainstream Narratives. Hart Publishing.
Jensen, M.C., 1968. The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964. 

J. Financ. 23 (2), 389–416.

Jensen, M.C., 1984. Takeovers: Folklore and science. Harv. Bus. Rev. Nov.-Dec., 

109–121.

of investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 48 (3), 261–297.

Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., 2005. Wealth destruction on a massive 
scale? A study of acquiring-firm returns in the recent merger wave. J. Financ. 60, 
757–782.

Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1988. Management ownership and market 

valuation: An empirical analysis. J. Financ. Econ. 20 (1), 293–315.

Myers, S.C., 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. J. Financ. Econ. 5 (2), 147–175.
Myers, S.C., 1984. The capital structure puzzle. J. Financ. 39, 574–592.
Robichek, A.A., Myers, S.C., 1965. Optimal Financing Decisions. Prentice-Hall, 

Jensen, M.C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. Am. 

Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 

Econ. Rev. 76 (2), 323–329.

Robichek, A.A., Myers, S.C., 1966. Problems in the theory of optimal capital structure. 

Jensen, M.C., 1993. The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of internal 

J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 1 (2), 1–35.

control systems. J. Financ. 48 (3), 831–880.

Ross, S.A., 1973. The economic theory of agency: The principal’s problem. Am. Econ. 

Jensen, M.C., 2001. Value maximization, stakeholder theory, and the corporate objective 

Rev. 63 (2), 134–139.

function. J. Appl. Corp. Fin. 14 (3), 8–21.

Rubinstein, M., 2002. Markowitz’s “portfolio selection”: A fifty-year retrospective. 

Jensen, M.C., 2005. Agency costs of overvalued equity. Financ. Manag. 34 (1), 5–19.
Jensen, M.C., Baker, G.P., Baldwin, C.Y., Wruck, K.H., 1997. Organizations and markets: 

History and development of the CCMO course and the field (1st of 4 CCMO 
documents).

J. Financ. 57, 1041–1045.

Rubinstein, M., 2006. A History of the Theory of Investments: My Annotated 

Bibliography. John Wiley & Sons.

Scholes, M.S., 1998. Derivatives in a dynamic environment. Am. Econ. Rev. 88 (3), 

Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency 

350–370.

costs and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3 (4), 305–360.

Schwert, G.W., 2021. The remarkable growth in financial economics, 1974–2020. 

Jensen, M.C., Murphy, K.J., 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives. 

J. Financ. Econ. 140 (3), 1008–1046.

J. Political Econ. 98 (2), 225–264.

Jensen, M.C., Ruback, R.S., 1983. The market for corporate control: The scientific 

evidence. J. Financ. Econ. 11 (1–4), 5–50.

Schwert, G.W., Stulz, R.M., 2017. Gene Fama’s Impact. In: Cochrane, J.H., Moskowitz, T. 
J. (Eds.), The Fama Portfolio: Selected Papers of Eugene F. Fama. University of 
Chicago Press.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. 

Sharpe, W.F., 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions 

Econometrica. 47 (2), 263–291.

of risk. J. Financ. 19 (3), 425–442.

Kim, E.H., Morse, A., Zingales, L., 2006. What has mattered to economics since 1970. 

J. Econ. Perspect. 20 (4), 189–202.

Kothari, S.P., Warner, J.B., 2007. Econometrics of Event Studies. In: Eckbo, B.E. (Ed.), 

Handbook of Empirical Corporate Finance: Handbooks in Finance. Elsevier, 
pp. 3–36.

Lemann, N., 2019. Transaction Man: The Rise of the Deal and the Decline of the 

Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., 1988. Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers. In: Corporate 
Takeovers: Causes and Consequences. University of Chicago Press, pp. 33–68.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. A survey of corporate governance. J. Financ. 52 (2), 

737–783.

Smith, C.W., 2024. Michael C. Jensen: Scholar, mentor, colleague. J. Appl. Corp. Fin. 36, 

9–15.

American Dream. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York. 

Stulz, R.M., 1990. Managerial discretion and optimal financing policies. J. Financ. Econ. 

Lintner, J., 1965. The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in 

stock portfolios and capital budgets. Rev. Econ. Stat. 47 (1), 13–37.

Lipton, M., 2024. Stakeholder governance and the eclipse of shareholder primacy. Harv. 

Law Sch. Forum Corp. Gov.

Ma, Y., Shleifer, A., 2025. The invention of corporate governance. J. Financ. Econ., this 

issue.

26 (1), 3–27.

Tobin, J., 1958. Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk. Rev. Econ. Stud. 25 (2), 

65–86.

VerMeulen, M., 1985. Mergers and Acquisitions: Economist Michael Jensen Defends 

Corporate Raiders and Greenmailers and Has Developed an Economic Rationale for 
Takeovers. Institutional Investor.

MacKinlay, A.C., 1997. Event studies in economics and finance. J. Econ. Lit. 35 (1), 

Walkling, R., 2011. Pioneers in finance: An interview with Michael C. Jensen, part II. 

13–39.

J. Appl. Financ. 21 (1), 6–17.

Markowitz, H., 1952. Portfolio selection. J. Financ. 7 (1), 77–91.
Markowitz, H., 1990. Foundations of Portfolio Theory. Nobel Lecture.
Merton, R.C., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete 

Wigglesworth, R., 2021. Trillions: How a Band of Wall Street Renegades Invented the 

Index Fund and Changed Finance Forever. Penguin Books, Limited, United Kingdom. 

Wooldridge, A., 2024. How ‘shareholder value’ became a Wall Street mantra. Bloom. 

information. J. Financ. 42, 483–510.

Opin.

Miller, M.H., Modigliani, F., 1961. Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of shares. 

J. Bus. 34 (4), 411–433.

13 

