Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The value of financial intermediation: Evidence from online debt 
crowdfunding(cid:73)
Fabio Braggion a
a Finance Department, Tilburg University, Warandelaan 2, P.O. Box 90153, Tilburg, 5000 LE, Netherlands
b Finance Department, Bocconi University, Baffi-Carefin, and CEPR, via Sarfatti 25, Milan, 20136, Italy
c China Europe International Business School, 699 Hongfeng Rd, Shanghai, 201203, China

, Alberto Manconi b

, Nicola Pavanini a

,∗, Haikun Zhu c

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Most online marketplaces are peer-to-peer. Credit ones, however, are not and they have resurrected many 
features of traditional financial intermediaries. To understand why, we use online credit as a laboratory to 
investigate the value of financial intermediation. We develop a structural model of online debt crowdfunding 
and estimate it on a novel database. We find that abandoning the peer-to-peer paradigm raises lender surplus, 
platform profits, and credit provision, but exposes investors to liquidity risk. A counterfactual where the 
platform resembles a bank by bearing liquidity risk can generate larger lender surplus and credit provision 
when liquidity is low and lenders are risk averse.

Dataset link: The Value of Financial Intermedia
tion: Evidence from Online Debt Crowdfunding
(FINEC-D-23-00120) (Reference data)
JEL classification:
D14
D61
G21
G51
L21

Keywords:
Financial intermediation
Marketplace credit
Structural estimation

1. Introduction

Many online marketplaces, such as Uber, Airbnb, and eBay, operate 
on a peer-to-peer paradigm focused on matching buyers with sellers. 
In the early days, online credit marketplaces — commonly known as 
debt crowdfunding platforms — adopted a similar approach, where in-
dividual lenders would fund specific loans, holding them until maturity. 
This peer-to-peer setup has since evolved. Most debt crowdfunding plat-
forms now operate under a ‘‘marketplace credit’’ paradigm, where they 
aggregate loans into portfolios that are sold to investors, eliminating the 
need for investors to select loans individually. Because the portfolios 
often have shorter maturities than the underlying loans, the maturity 
mismatch introduces liquidity risk, i.e., the risk associated with the 

need to refinance the loans when the portfolio matures. Under the 
marketplace credit paradigm, investors have borne liquidity risk; yet 
many platforms have recently begun offering ‘‘bank-like’’ products that 
resemble traditional deposits, thereby shifting the liquidity risk onto 
the platforms themselves.

We ask why online credit evolved differently from other online 
marketplaces, and what is the welfare value of its unique features. 
These questions are important, because online debt crowdfunding is 
an increasingly large investment and consumer credit channel (Rau, 
2020).  Moreover,  it  provides  a  clean  environment  to  quantify  the 
welfare value of financial intermediation in general as, in comparison 
to traditional intermediaries, it is exclusively focused on intermediating 

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We thank Dmitry Arkhangelsky, Matteo Benetton, Chiara Farronato, Alessandro Gavazza, Jean-François Houde, 
Yi Huang, Panle Jia Barwick, Emiliano Pagnotta, Stefano Sacchetto, Amit Seru, Roberto Steri, Lei Xu, as well as participants at the 2019 ‘‘Regulating Financial 
Markets’’, 7th Workshop in Macro Banking and Finance (Collegio Carlo Alberto), 2020 TSE Digital Economics, 2020 Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics 
Summer Workshop on Financial Regulation, BPI-Fundação La Caixa-Nova 2020 FinTech, 2021 EFA, 3rd Cemfi Financial Stability conferences, Online Digital 
Economics Seminar Series, 2021 Norges Bank-CEPR Workshop ‘‘Frontier Research in Banking’’, and seminar participants at the universities of Zurich, McGill, 
Graduate Institute Geneva, LUISS, Rochester (Simon), HEC, Tilburg, Michigan, Vienna, Cornell-Wisconsin (IO seminar), Bocconi, Nova SBE, and at the Banque 
de France and Banco de España. Nicola Pavanini gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council under the Grant Agreement 
No. 101042069.

E-mail addresses:  f.braggion@tilburguniversity.edu (F. Braggion), alberto.manconi@unibocconi.it (A. Manconi), n.pavanini@tilburguniversity.edu 

∗ Corresponding author.

(N. Pavanini), hkzhu@ceibs.edu (H. Zhu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104113
Received 14 February 2023; Received in revised form 27 May 2025; Accepted 31 May 2025
Available online 9 July 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
F. Braggion et al.

credit and it is less exposed to the potential confounding impact of 
regulation (Buchak et al., 2018).

To address our questions, we build and estimate a structural equilib-
rium model of online debt crowdfunding that rationalizes its develop-
ment. The key forces in our model are maturity mismatch and liquidity 
risk. By funding longer-maturity loans while also allowing lenders to 
liquidate their investments in the short term, the loan portfolios offered 
under the marketplace and bank-like credit paradigms increase credit 
provision and create value for lenders, borrowers, and the platform 
itself. However, the extent to which marketplace credit and bank-like 
credit generate value varies based on liquidity risk and how much 
investors are willing to tolerate it.

We estimate our model on a novel, hand-collected micro database of 
the universe of loan applications, actual loans, and loan portfolios on a 
leading Chinese online debt crowdfunding platform, Renrendai. During 
our sample period, Renrendai both sold loan portfolios to investors 
bearing liquidity risk (under the marketplace paradigm) and allowed 
direct investment in loans (under the peer-to-peer paradigm). The data 
show lenders’ investment choices: whether they invest directly or buy a 
portfolio product, and which portfolios they choose if they opt for the 
latter. We can match this information with the maturity of the loans in 
the portfolios products, and thus compute a precise measure of maturity 
mismatch. Renrendai, moreover, allows lenders who do not want to 
roll over their portfolio investments to sell the underlying loans on its 
internal secondary market. Our data contain every transaction in the 
primary and secondary markets, and reveal how fast a loan is resold, 
thus quantifying its liquidity.

Our  main  findings  are  as  follows.  First,  similar  to  online  credit 
platforms in the U.S. and other countries, we observe the transition 
from peer-to-peer to marketplace credit. In 2010, when Renrendai was 
launched, 100% of lending was peer-to-peer; but by the end of our 
sample in early 2017, over 98% of the loans on Renrendai are funded as 
part of a marketplace loan portfolio. The key feature of these portfolios 
is maturity mismatch: whereas their most common maturities are 3, 6, 
and 12 months, the underlying loans typically mature in 36 months. 
This exposes the lenders to non-trivial liquidity risk. Moreover, lender 
investments have become more diversified and less exposed to defaults, 
especially for portfolio products purchased on the platform, consistent 
with a change in the platform’s clientele towards investors that are 
more averse to risk.

Second, the estimates of our structural model shed light on lender 
preferences for loan and portfolio product characteristics, as well as 
on the platform’s preferences for individual loan attributes when as-
sembling portfolios. Lenders prefer higher returns, especially for peer-
to-peer loans, and portfolio products with lower liquidity risk (shorter 
resale time on the secondary market). Moreover, lender preferences are 
heterogeneous: the more sophisticated, active lenders have a stronger 
preference for yield and a weaker disutility from liquidity risk, whereas 
the opposite is true for less frequent investors.

Third, we combine our estimates of the lender demand model with 
a platform profit function to simulate counterfactuals. We compare the 
baseline marketplace credit with two counterfactual scenarios: peer-to-
peer credit, where only direct lending is allowed, and bank-like credit, 
where the platform sells portfolio products but bears liquidity risk. In 
the marketplace and bank-like scenarios, the platform maximizes prof-
its by choosing portfolio product target return, the mismatch between 
portfolio duration and the maturity of the underlying loans, and the 
resale time of portfolio loans on the secondary market. Marketplace 
credit appears welfare-improving relative to the peer-to-peer paradigm: 
the counterfactual allowing only direct lending generates a 73% drop 
in  credit  provision  and  a  45%  decline  in  lender  surplus.  We  find 
that this is driven by the fact that under the marketplace paradigm, 
maturity mismatch allows the platform to offer a broader assortment 
of portfolios, more closely tailored to the lenders’ maturity preferences; 
on the other hand, the platform’s ability to search, screen, and monitor 
borrowers plays a lesser role. We also find that, when the platform’s 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

cost of generating liquidity is low—i.e., it can easily repurchase loans 
for its portfolio products without bearing significant costs, bank-like 
credit yields similar outcomes to marketplace credit, with only a small 
drop in platform profits (0.2%).

That comparison is different, however, when we raise the platform’s 
cost of generating liquid loans. Under higher liquidity costs, relative 
to bank-like credit, the marketplace paradigm exhibits lower credit 
provision  and  lender  surplus,  but  higher  platform  profits.  In  other 
words, when liquidity is low marketplace credit is preferable from the 
platform’s point of view, but worse for lenders and borrowers. Finally, 
in counterfactuals where the lenders have weaker utility from yields 
and stronger disutility from liquidity risk, the bank-like paradigm is a 
Pareto improvement, raising platform profits too.

These results are consistent with a narrative in which, in the early 
days of online debt crowdfunding, the platform mainly attracts risk-
tolerant  lenders,  who  seek  higher  returns  and  have  higher  welfare 
under the peer-to-peer and marketplace paradigms. As the platform’s 
clientele grows, it comes to encompass more risk-averse lenders, who 
are  more  sensitive  to  liquidity  risk  and  have  higher  welfare  under 
bank-like  credit.  Our  findings  are  in  line  with  anecdotal  evidence 
about the most mature platforms such as LendingClub, Funding Circle, 
RateSetter, or Zopa, which have shut down peer-to-peer credit, offering 
instead securitized (marketplace) loan portfolios to a more risk-tolerant 
institutional investor clientele as well as, in recent years, traditional 
banking products to more risk-averse retail investors.

Our  paper  makes  three  main  contributions.  First,  it  contributes 
to the literature on the value of financial intermediation. Since the 
seminal work of Diamond and Dybvig (1983), the theory of financial 
intermediation points to maturity transformation as a central tool to 
facilitate the provision of credit for longer-term investment. Empirical 
work in this literature has used bank-level data to develop liquidity 
risk indexes (Berger and Bouwman, 2009; Brunnermeier et al., 2012; 
Bai et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2020) and has estimated the costs and 
benefits of maturity transformation (Fuster et al., 2017; Segura and 
Suarez, 2017; Drechsler et al., 2021), focusing on the relation between 
liquidity risk and financial stability. We also measure liquidity risk; but 
our focus is different, as we study how it affects credit provision and 
welfare. With our detailed data, we can construct a precise measure 
of liquidity risk both at the individual loan and portfolio product level 
and estimate lenders’ preferences. We are also able to simulate a rich 
set of counterfactual scenarios, illustrating potential conflicts of interest 
of the platform vis-à-vis lenders and borrowers. In addition, online 
debt crowdfunding constitutes a comparatively clean and tractable set-
ting, as its business model is entirely focused on intermediating loans, 
and, during our sample period, it was less exposed to the potential 
confounding impact of regulation (Buchak et al., 2018).

(Vallée 

and  Zeng,  2019), 

Second, our paper provides new results on the design of online 
debt crowdfunding platforms. Much of the literature has focused on 
the information aspects of platform design: information provision to in-
vestors 
efficiency  of  pricing
mechanisms (Franks et al., 2021), and the welfare losses associated 
with  asymmetric  information  (Kawai  et  al.,  2022;  DeFusco  et  al., 
2022).  We  take  a  different,  complementary  angle.  Building  on  the 
evidence that online credit platforms increasingly offer a combination 
of marketplace loan portfolios and traditional bank-like products, we 
focus on maturity mismatch and liquidity risk, and their impact on 
welfare.  In  that  respect  we  also  relate  to  the  literature  comparing 
online and offline credit intermediaries (Buchak et al., 2018; de Roure 
et al., 2022), as well as to the industrial organization literature on 
online marketplaces reviewed by Einav et al. (2016). Our results help 
rationalize the evolution of the design of online debt crowdfunding 
platforms  from  peer-to-peer  to  a  combination  of  marketplace  and 
bank-like credit.

Third, our paper contributes to the literature on structural estima-
tion in financial intermediation (Egan et al., 2017; Crawford et al., 
2018;  Wang  et  al.,  2022),  online  credit  (Kawai  et  al.,  2022;  Xin, 

2 

F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

2020; Tang, 2020; DeFusco et al., 2022), and online marketplaces in 
general (Dinerstein et al., 2018; Einav et al., 2018; Fréchette et al., 
2019; Farronato and Fradkin, 2022). Work in this literature has so far 
focused on buyers and sellers or lenders and borrowers, placing less 
emphasis on an active role for platforms. In contrast, our approach 
directly models the design of portfolio products by the platform.

2. Institutional background, data, and descriptive evidence

2.1. Development of the business model of online debt crowdfunding

China, the U.S., and the U.K. are the largest markets for online 
credit, accounting for about two-thirds of total lending volume (Cor-
nelli et al., 2020). Over 2014–2019, online credit accounted for about 
7.5% of total consumer credit in China.1

Initially,  online  credit  platforms  operated  solely  through  direct, 
peer-to-peer lending, where lenders selected and held loans until matu-
rity. Over time, two key innovations emerged: platforms began offering 
portfolio products, often assembled by robo-advisors, and established 
secondary markets where loans could be traded before maturity. These 
features define a new ‘‘marketplace credit’’ paradigm of online debt 
crowdfunding. Marketplace credit enables maturity mismatch in port-
folio products, allowing them to include longer-term loans that can be 
resold on the secondary market when the portfolio matures. A defining 
aspect of this paradigm is that investors bear liquidity risk, meaning 
they might have to sell at a discount or wait longer to liquidate their 
investments. In the U.S., LendingClub introduced a secondary market 
for loans in 2008 and Prosper in 2009; in the U.K., Funding circle, 
RateSetter, and Zopa opened a secondary market in 2010, whereas 
in continental Europe, Bondora launched it in 2013. Virtually every 
Chinese online credit platform offered portfolio products and set up 
secondary markets shortly after their establishment.

More recently, many online credit platforms have increased their 
reach to retail investors by selling bank-like savings products. In bank-
like products, the investor can liquidate at any time, but the interme-
diary bears the liquidity risk. The platform still provides marketplace 
portfolio products, but they are targeted to institutional investors. For 
instance, in 2021 LendingClub acquired Radius Bank and started to of-
fer deposit services to retail investors; but at the same time, institutional 
investors on LendingClub can still invest in portfolio products where 
they bear the liquidity risk.

Online debt crowdfunding in China experienced a similar evolution 
despite recently undergoing a restructuring driven by regulation. A 
number of platforms have shut down, and others have become ‘‘loan 
aid agencies’’ selling services to traditional intermediaries. However, 
several Chinese platforms that continue to operate offer bank-like prod-
ucts. For instance, in 2019 FinVolution (formerly Paipaidai) acquired 
a 4.99% stake in Fujian Strait Bank and formed an alliance with the 
bank focused on consumer lending, and 9fgroup Tech invested in Hubei 
Consumer Finance Company through its wholly-owned subsidiary; in 
2023, Lufax Holding announced its acquisition of Ping An OneConnect 
Bank (Hong Kong) Limited.2 Despite the regulatory tightening, Chinese 
online credit companies continue to pursue bank-like activities through 
alliances, acquisitions, and by shifting their focus to Hong Kong.

1 Source: Elaborated from data from the Wang Dai Zhi Jia webpage.
2 ‘‘FinVolution  acquires  stake  in  Fujian  Strait  Bank’’,  Sina  Finance,  19 
December 2019; ‘‘Lufax Holding achieved operating income of 6.964 billion 
yuan in the first quarter of this year’’, Shanghai Securities News, 23 April 2024.

3 

2.2. Renrendai

We base our analysis on a novel, hand-collected database cover-
ing  the  universe  of  loan  applications  and  credit  outcomes  on  debt 
crowdfunding platform Renrendai (
). During our sample period, 
Renrendai was the fifth largest player in the sector in China, and as of 
2019 it had a 5% market share.3 Between its launch in 2010 and the 
end of our sample period in February 2017, Renrendai had a cumulative 
turnover of ¥25 bn ($3.7 bn) and registered over 1 million active users 
between borrower and lender accounts.

During our sample period, Renrendai is representative of a typical 
debt  crowdfunding  platform  as  it  operates  like  most  online  credit 
platforms in China as well as other countries. In Renrendai, users can 
be borrowers or lenders. Borrowers pay a small participation fee to 
apply for a loan on the platform.4 When submitting a loan application, 
a prospective borrower specifies the amount she seeks, and proposes 
an interest rate and maturity. Renrendai pre-screens loan applications, 
assigning a credit rating to borrowers. Following this step, loan ap-
plications become visible to prospective lenders, and are available on 
Renrendai’s platform for one week. If an application is not fully funded 
within that time window, it is considered unsuccessful and it is turned 
down; Renrendai then removes the application from its website and the 
borrower does not receive the funds she requested.

Lenders pay no fees and can invest on Renrendai via two channels: 
direct  (peer-to-peer)  credit,  where  the  lender  selects  the  individual 
loans she intends to fund, and marketplace credit, where the platform 
sells the lender a share in a diversified portfolio of loans. Marketplace 
lenders can choose from a menu of portfolios known as Uplan (U
). 
Renrendai offers every day a new set of Uplan portfolios, differentiated 
by  target  annual  return  (ranging  between  6%  and  11%),  maturity 
(between 3 and 24 months), and minimum investment amount (¥1000 
or ¥10,000). At maturity, Uplan lenders can roll their investment over 
or liquidate it. If they liquidate, the platform places the underlying 
loans on the secondary market, and does not bear the liquidity risk: 
the lenders do not receive a payment until all the corresponding loans 
have been resold. The loan is sold ‘‘at par’’, i.e., at a fixed price of ¥1 
for each ¥ loaned. As the price does not adjust to market conditions, 
the seller may not be able to find immediately a buyer and might be 
forced to wait before disposing of the loan. Renrendai makes a profit 
on Uplan based on the spread between the interest payments it receives 
on the underlying loans and the returns it pays to the lenders.

Fig.   1  breaks  down  credit  at  Renrendai  during  our  sample  pe-
riod between direct and marketplace loans. When Renrendai was first 
launched, online debt crowdfunding was based on the older peer-to-
peer paradigm, and 100% of loans were direct. Portfolio investment 
was introduced in December 2012, and since then we observe a steady 
rise of marketplace credit, reaching 98% of total investment at the 
end of our sample period in February 2017. We build on this stylized 
fact,  and  investigate  the  welfare  effects  of  the  marketplace  credit 
model in comparison to alternative platform designs. In October 2020, 
regulatory pressure to limit online lending led to withdrawals and low 
liquidity in Renrendai’s secondary market. Since this happened more 
than three years after our sample period, it is unlikely that loans from 
before March 2017 are the root of these developments.5

3 ‘‘China’s Renrendai sees future in SMEs as P2P industry reels’’, Financial 

Times, 7 January 2019.

4 There are no detailed data on these fees, which implies that we cannot 
explicitly include them in our analysis. However, this is unlikely an issue as 
they have been constant over the sample period and across borrowers, and 
very small in magnitude.

5 The  available  evidence  from  industry  regulatory  bodies  such  as  the 
National  Internet  Finance  Registration  and  Disclosure  Service  Platform 
)  indicates  that  the  withdrawals  were  not 
(
driven by the fundamentals of the loans (‘‘What is the key to the steady 

F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

Table 1
Summary statistics, loans.
The table reports summary statistics for loan applications (panel A) and funded loans (panel B) on Renrendai, over the period 
2010–2017. One observation corresponds to a loan. All variables are defined in detail in Appendix A.

  A. Loan applications
  Loan amount (’000 ¥)
  Interest rate (%)
  Maturity (months)
  Financed (0/1)
  B. Funded loans
  Loan amount (’000 ¥)
  Interest rate (%)
  Maturity (months)
  Number of lenders
  Open to 1st investment (min.)
  1st to last investment (min.)
  Default (0/1)

N. obs.

955,405
955,405
955,405
955,405

376,219
376,219
376,219
376,219
376,219
376,219
376,219

Mean

64.54
12.56
21.44
0.39

70.10
11.27
29.96
81.52
1,372
30.80
0.01

St. dev.

80.34
2.62
11.56
0.49

50.40
1.40
9.46
108.80
3,229
247.10
0.10

P10

P50

P90

5.00
10.00
6
0

20.00
9.60
18
12
3.18
0.03
0

50.00
12.00
24
0

62.00
10.80
36
45
221.31
0.47
0

124.50 
15.00  
36
1

126.20 
13.20  
36
189
4,103  
13.1  
0

Fig. 1.  Direct and marketplace loans at Renrendai, 2010Q4–2017Q1.
The figure plots the outstanding volumes of loans at Renrendai, for each calendar 
quarter over the period 2010–2017. The dark bars denote direct, or peer-to-peer, loans, 
and the lighter-shaded bars loans that are part of portfolio products, i.e., marketplace 
loans.

2.3. Data; loan applications, funded loans, and portfolio products

Our  data  cover  955,405  loan  applications  and  376,219  funded 
loans,  associated  with  358,383  borrowers  and  351,333  lenders  on 
Renrendai.  They  report  detailed  information  on  loan  applications, 
funded  loans,  portfolio  products,  borrower  characteristics,  and  in-
dividual  lender  IDs.  Table   1  presents  descriptive  statistics  for  loan 
applications and funded loans. Around 40% of loan applications ul-
timately  obtain  funding,  and  among  those  the  average  default  rate 
is  1%.  The  median  loan  funded  on  the  platform  has  size  of  about 
¥62,000 ($9000) and maturity of 36 months; it pays a 10.8% annual 
interest rate, and is financed by 45 lenders. To contain dimensionality, 
we aggregate these data into categories based on loan size, maturity, 
interest rate, and borrower creditworthiness, defined in Appendix A. 

Table  2 provides descriptive statistics for the portfolio products sold 
on Renrendai. The median portfolio product offers an 8.5% return, has 
a maturity of 6 months, a total size of ¥3 million, and a minimum in-
vestment amount of ¥1000. For each portfolio product, we also observe 

Fig. 2.  Maturity mismatch on Renrendai’s portfolio products.
The figure plots the outstanding amounts of portfolio products sold by Renrendai and 
their underlying loans by maturity bins. The light bars represent the total outstanding 
amounts of portfolio products. The dark bars represent the total amount of outstanding 
loans underlying the portfolio products.

every investment that the platform makes on behalf of each lender 
and the exact time of the investment, as well as whether the lenders 
roll  their  investments  over  at  maturity;  just  over  12%  of  portfolio 
investments are rolled over on average. When lenders liquidate their 
investment, we can measure the time until the portfolio share is sold 
on the secondary market, or resale time: on average, about half a day.6
The resale time of portfolio shares at maturity plays an important 
role in our analysis, as it captures the liquidity risk that lenders face 
when investing in a portfolio product. On average the secondary market 
for loans is liquid, but the resale time distribution has a thick right tail. 
Out of 2810 portfolio products in our data, around 9.5% have resale 
time in excess of one day. For these cases, the mean resale time is 
4.2 days and the maximum is 88 days. Note that all lenders investing 
in the same portfolio face the same resale time, as the platform waits 
until all non-rolled over loans are sold on the secondary market before 
liquidating lenders. 

development of Renrendai?’’, Tencent, 15 August 2019. ‘‘Renrendai Yang Yifu: 
Compliant operation is the most basic capability of online lending platforms’’,
China Finance, 10 May 2019). This is confirmed by the low default rates of 
the loans issued by Renrendai right before 2020, which were 0.67% in 2018, 
0.19% in 2019 and 0.10% in the first quarter of 2020 (source: Renrendai’s 
annual reports).

6 Table   2  reports  resale  time  in  units  of  days,  which  are  immediately 
interpretable. In the regressions reported below in Tables  4 and 7, we express 
it as a fraction of one year for consistency with the other explanatory variables, 
which are in annual terms.

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

Table 2
Summary statistics, portfolio products.
The table reports summary statistics for portfolio products offered on Renrendai, over the period 2010–2017. One observation 
corresponds to a portfolio product. The number of observations is smaller for Rollover rate and amount, because portfolio 
products in the earlier years did not provide the rollover option, and for Resale time because around one third of portfolio 
products have not reached maturity by the end of our sample period, so that a resale time cannot be observed.
Mean

P10

P50

  Size (million ¥)
  Target return (%)
  Maturity (months)
  Loans per portfolio
  Lenders per portfolio
  Investment time (minutes)
  Rollover rate (%)
  Rollover amount (’000 ¥)
  Resale time (days)

N. obs.
3,973
3,973
3,973
3,971
3,973
3,973
3,383
3,383
2,810

5.07
8.27
8.46
8,767
286
1,120
12.34
872
0.53

St. dev.
6.78
1.50
5.76
7,982
263
1,597
13.57
2,296
2.57

0.20
6.00
1
1,475
62
14
0.00
0.00
0.00

3.00
8.50
6
6,908
216
712
9.20
165
0.01

P90
10.00  
10.00  
12
17,916 
603
2,832  
32.67  
1,820  
0.88  

Table 3
Summary statistics, borrowers and lenders.
The table reports summary statistics for borrowers (panel A) and lenders (panel B) on Renrendai, over the period 2010–2017. 
One observation corresponds to one borrower in panel A, and in panel B respectively to one day for the first two variables, 
a day-lender for the third, and to one lender for the remaining four. All variables are defined in detail in Appendix A.
P90
Mean

P10

P50

St. dev.

N. obs.

  A. Borrowers
  Credit rating
  Age
  Homeowner (0/1)
  Mortgage (0/1)
  Male (0/1)
  Monthly income (’000 ¥)
  Tier 1 city (0/1)
  B. Lenders
  Active lenders (%)
  Tot. invest./day (mln. ¥)
  Investment/day (’000 ¥)
  Tot. investment (’000 ¥)
  Active days
  Portfolios invested
  Loan categories invested

746,735
746,735
740,082
740,082
700,620
598,820
568,755

2,299
2,299
17,551,212
367,154
367,154
374,809
111,140

4.71
34.18
0.37
0.19
0.78
12.52
0.13

5.89
17.80
2.33
111.48
47.80
4.01
51.43

2.48
10.79
0.48
0.39
0.42
13.00
0.34

4.57
26.53
15.50
462.53
90.20
6.39
179,84

2
26
0
0
0
3.50
0

2.80
0.02
0.05
1.10
1
1
1

7
32
0
0
1
7.50
0

5.15
4.31
0.25
17.32
11
2
5

7
46
1
1
1
35.00  
1

9.44  
57.15  
3.75  
233.20 
135
9
108

2.4. Borrowers and lenders; maturity mismatch and liquidity risk

Table  3 displays descriptive statistics for Renrendai’s borrowers and 
lenders. The average borrower is 34 years old, male, and has a monthly 
gross income of ¥12,520 ($1880). Annual income per capita in China 
as of the end of our sample in 2017 is ¥25,974 ($3900; ¥2,165 per 
month), and in Beijing, the wealthiest part of the country, ¥57,230 
($8600; ¥4,769 per month; source: National Bureau of Statistics of 
China). 

Fig.  2 describes the distribution of the maturities of portfolio prod-
ucts and their underlying loans. The most popular portfolio products 
have maturities under 12 months, and no portfolio has maturity beyond 
24 months. Their underlying loans, on the other hand, have longer 
maturities, with the bulk of the distribution beyond 15 months. This 
evidence indicates the extent of maturity mismatch and the potential 
exposure to liquidity risk: portfolio products with maturity 3, 6, or 
12  months  comprise  loans  with  maturity  almost  exclusively  24  or 
36 months, and the weighted-average portfolio product maturity mis-
match is about 22 months. This value is close to estimates of maturity 
mismatch  for  consumer  credit  at  traditional  banks  reported  in  the 
literature (e.g., Drechsler et al., 2021, Table A.2). Only a small portion 
of the loans in the average portfolio product (0.14%) matures prior to 
the product’s expiration; in those cases, the proceeds on those loans are 
reinvested by the platform.

The data, moreover, suggest that changes in investor population 
accompany  the  growth  of  Renrendai  (and  of  debt  crowdfunding  in 
general).  We  observe  a  downward  trend  among  investor  portfolios 
in  concentration  (with  the  HHI  going  from  17%  in  2010–2013  to 
12% in 2014–2017) and default rates (from 2.4% in 2010–2013 to 
0.5% in 2013–2017), driven especially by the Uplan portfolios. That is 
consistent with the arrival on the platform of investors who are more 

focused on limiting risk than on seeking yield. These new lenders are 
less likely to pick individual loans, but prefer to delegate their portfolio 
choices to Renrendai.

To capture those changes and reflect the increased investor hetero-
geneity, we focus on the percentage of active lenders on the platform 
on a given day. We define a lender as active if she is in the top 5% of 
the distribution of platform use, defined as the number of times she 
invested up to that date.7 This variable reflects familiarity with the 
platform and/or laxer financial constraints: because Renrendai requires 
a minimum investment amount, more frequent investments indicate 
that the lender has greater financial resources, and should therefore 
be  less  liquidity  risk-averse.  We  compute  the  daily  share  of  active 
investors as the ratio of active investors to the total number of lenders 
investing on the platform on a given day. Descriptives for this variable 
are reported in Table  3.

3. Model

Our model features three players: borrowers, lenders, and a debt 
crowdfunding platform. Appendix Figure D.1 provides a graphical sum-
mary of the model.

7 To control for the time trend in this measure, which might skew the 
frequency of active lenders towards the end of the sample period, we define the 
top 5% based on the platform use distribution within each calendar quarter. 
As an alternative, we replace the active lenders share by 1 minus the share 
of first-time platform users; the underlying assumption is that first-time users 
may be more risk averse. We find that it has a qualitatively similar relation 
to lender preferences as the active lenders share. These results are omitted for 
brevity but available upon request.

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
F. Braggion et al.

3.1. Borrowers

Borrowers post loan applications and, conditional on the loan being 
funded,  make  monthly  repayments.  We  treat  borrowers  as  passive 
agents, which keeps the model tractable and helps us highlight the key 
drivers in the counterfactuals, where we compare marketplace credit 
to the alternative lending paradigms, peer-to-peer and bank-like credit. 
This assumption is justified by three reasons. First, default rates are 
low (1% on average). This suggests that even if the platform shifts 
to  a  bank-like  paradigm  and  attracts  a  different  type  of  borrower, 
those borrowers would be at best only marginally safer than under 
marketplace credit. Second, nearly 80% of loan applications and over 
95%  of  funded  loans  are  made  by  individuals  active  on  Renrendai 
only once. These individuals are unlikely to be so familiar with the 
platform as to condition their decisions on expected lender demand or 
on the platform’s business model. Moreover, as they typically appear 
only once, it also unlikely that the platform will face an insolvency–
illiquidity  spiral,  where  borrowers  struggle  to  roll  over  their  loans 
due to lenders’ concerns about rising default rates. Third, borrower 
characteristics do not exhibit much variation over time, particularly 
around 2014, when marketplace loan portfolios became the main fund-
ing  channel.8  This  attenuates  the  possibility  that,  even  though  the 
typical borrower interacts with the platform only once, different types
of borrowers may approach the platform in response to a change in the 
lending model.

3.2. Lenders

We model the lenders’ investment decisions using a discrete choice 
framework, where the lenders choose among loans and portfolio prod-
ucts based on their characteristics. Conditional on investing in a portfo-
lio product, lenders can decide to roll their investment over at maturity, 
or cash it out facing the liquidity risk. Every day 𝑡 a set of lenders 
𝑖 = 1, … , 𝐼𝑡  can  invest  on  the  platform.  Each  lender  can  choose 
between investing in direct loans, identified by superscript 𝐷, or in 
a  portfolio  product,  identified  by  superscript  𝑃 ;  if  she  invests  in  a 
portfolio product, at maturity she also faces the choice between rolling 
over and liquidating.

In principle, lenders can choose among a large set of direct loans, 
either newly posted or trading in the secondary market. Those loans 
are differentiated by observable characteristics such as yield, maturity, 
amount, and a number of borrower attributes. To keep the lenders’ 
choice set computationally tractable, we group direct loans in discrete 
categories 𝑐 = 1, … , 𝐶 𝐷
𝑡 , which include loans that are homogeneous in 
terms of observable characteristics and are available to direct lenders 
on day 𝑡. Each day a lender can invest in at most one portfolio product 
or one direct loan category; she can, however, still form a portfolio of 
direct loans by investing in different categories across multiple days.9 
A direct lender chooses to invest in a given loan category based on the 
utility she derives from its characteristics. The indirect utility of lender 
𝑖 investing in loan category 𝑐 on day 𝑡 is: 
(𝑚𝑐𝑡
)
+ 𝛾 𝑚
+ 𝛾 𝑎
𝑖𝑡 ln
𝐷
𝑐𝑡 + 𝛾 𝑧
𝑖𝑡𝑧𝑐𝑡 + 𝜁𝑐𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛿𝐷
𝑖𝑐𝑡

)
+𝛾 
𝑖𝑡

𝛾 𝑟
𝑖𝑡 ln

+𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑡,

(𝑎𝑐𝑡

(𝑟𝑐𝑡

𝑖𝑐𝑡 =

𝑖𝑡 ln

𝑈 𝐷

(1)

)

8 For example, borrowers’ monthly income is on average ¥8,600 (USD 
1290) up to 2014 and ¥8,800 (USD 1320) after 2014, borrowers’ age is about 
34 years on average both before and after 2014, and 43.37% (47.51%) of the 
borrowers have a college (or higher) degree up to (after) 2014.

9 This assumption is justified by the data, as conditional on investing, the 
median number of loan categories or portfolio products in which a lender 
invests on a given day is 1. It is also motivated by the potential search costs 
that lenders face when searching through a large number of loans on the 
platform. If a category has no loan applications on a given day 𝑡, then that 
category will not be part of the lenders’ choice set on day 𝑡. Notice however 
that throughout the sample period there are always multiple loan categories 
and multiple portfolio products available for lenders on each day.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

where 𝑟𝑐𝑡 denotes the loan category’s yield, 𝑚𝑐𝑡 its maturity, 𝑎𝑐𝑡 its 
amount, and 𝑧𝑐𝑡 are other characteristics of the loan category observ-
able to the lender (all variables in Panel A of Table  3, plus time to 
first investment and time from first to last investment from Table  1). 𝐷
𝑐𝑡
denotes loan category c’s liquidity, defined as the time it takes for 
category 𝑐’s loans to be resold on the secondary market at maturity, or 
resale time. We group log-yield, log-maturity, log-amount, resale time, 
and 𝑧𝑐𝑡 in a vector 𝑥𝑐𝑡; 𝜁𝑐𝑡 are normally distributed demand shocks at the 
loan category–day level unobserved by the econometrician, and 𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑡 is a 
Type 1 Extreme Value shock; letting 𝛾𝑖𝑡 denote the vector of coefficients, 
we  define  𝛿𝐷
𝑖𝑡𝑥𝑐𝑡 + 𝜁𝑐𝑡.  We  do  not  explicitly  model  lenders’ 
sensitivity to a single variable capturing borrower’s default risk, but 
rather assume that the borrower and loan characteristics included in Eq. 
(1) are used by lenders to predict risk, with credit rating likely the best 
predictor.

𝑖𝑐𝑡 = 𝛾 ′

To allow for heterogeneity in lender preferences, in Eq.  (1) the 
coefficients can vary across lenders 𝑖 and over time 𝑡. This approach 
captures the stylized facts described in Section 2, specifically any shift 
in the composition of the lender population towards those with a lower 
tolerance for liquidity risk. It also serves as an additional proxy for 
regarding lenders as patient or impatient as in Diamond and Dybvig 
(1983), with investors with lower tolerance being more impatient. As 
a proxy for liquidity risk-tolerance we use a measure of the lenders’ 
activity on the platform.

Each lender can also invest in a portfolio product 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾𝑡
among  those  available  on  a  given  day  𝑡.  As  remarked,  we  observe 
lenders funding both portfolio products and direct loans simultaneously 
only very rarely; we thus treat these two options as mutually exclu-
sive.10 The indirect utility of lender 𝑖 choosing portfolio product 𝑘 on 
day 𝑡 is: 

𝑈 𝑃

𝑖𝑘𝑡 =

)

(

𝛼
𝑖𝑡 ln

+ 𝛼
𝑖𝑡


)
𝑘𝑡
+𝛼
𝑖𝑡

(
+ 𝛼
ln
𝑘𝑡
𝑘𝑡 + 𝛼

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜉𝑘𝑡
𝑖𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛿𝑃
𝑖𝑘𝑡

(
𝑘𝑡

𝑖𝑡 ln

)

+𝜂𝑖𝑘𝑡,

(2)

𝑘𝑡 its maturity, and 

where 
𝑘𝑡 denotes the target return of portfolio product 𝑘, offered 
on the platform on day 𝑡, 
𝑘𝑡 its target size; 

𝑘𝑡 are other portfolio characteristics observable to the lender that 
we describe in detail in Section 5. 
𝑘𝑡 denotes the portfolio product’s 
liquidity, defined as the time it takes for its underlying loans to be 
resold on the secondary market at maturity, and it embodies the cost 
of early liquidation as in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). We assume 
the lenders and the platform have perfect foresight about portfolio 
liquidity. As in Eq.  (1), the model’s coefficients are allowed to vary 
across  lenders  and  over  time  and  we  group  log-target  return,  log-
maturity,  log-investment  amount,  liquidity,  and  
𝑘𝑡  in  a  vector  of 
characteristics 
𝑘𝑡. 𝜉𝑘𝑡 are normally distributed shocks to demand at the 
portfolio product–day level unobserved by the econometrician, and 𝜂𝑖𝑘𝑡
is a Type 1 Extreme Value shock; 𝛼𝑖𝑡 denotes the vector of coefficients, 
and 𝛿𝑃

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜉𝑘𝑡.



𝑖𝑘𝑡 = 𝛼′
𝑖𝑡

When  the  portfolio  product  reaches  maturity,  lenders  decide
whether  to  roll  it  over  (at  the  same  conditions  as  they  originally 
invested) or to liquidate their investment. The indirect utility from 
rolling over is: 
𝑖𝑘𝑡 = 𝜏
𝑈 𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙
where 𝜈𝑗𝑘𝑡 is a normally distributed shock.

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜈𝑖𝑘𝑡,

(3)

Finally, lenders have the outside option of investing outside the 
platform or not investing at all. Ideally, we would like to capture what 
part of the population of potential lenders (market size) does not invest 
on the platform on a given day. To proxy for that, we assume that 
the day with the largest amount invested in a given calendar quarter 

10 Out of 13,398,102 lender–date observations, we observe lenders holding 
both a portfolio product and direct loans in 155,604 cases (1.16%).

6 

F. Braggion et al.

corresponds to the potential market size in that quarter and define that 
as 
𝑡; on a given day 𝑡, the market share of the outside option is 
𝑡
minus the lenders’ total invested amount. We normalize the indirect 
utility from choosing the outside option to zero.

The indirect utility from Eq.  (1) determines the probability that 

lender 𝑖 invests in loan category 𝑐 on day 𝑡: 

 𝐷
𝑖𝑐𝑡(𝑥𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡 ∣ 𝛾𝑖𝑡, 𝛼𝑖𝑡) =

1 + ∑

𝑐∈𝐶𝐷
𝑡

exp(𝛿𝐷
𝑖𝑐𝑡)
𝑖𝑐𝑡) + ∑

exp(𝛿𝐷

𝑘∈𝐾𝑡

.

exp(𝛿𝑃

𝑖𝑘𝑡)

(4)

Similarly, the indirect utility from Eq.  (2) determines the probability 
that  lender  𝑖  invests  in  portfolio  product  𝑘  at  time  𝑡,   𝑃
𝑖𝑘𝑡,  whose 
expression is analogous to Eq.  (4); and the indirect utility from Eq.  (3) 
determines the probability that she rolls over her investment in port-
folio 𝑘 as opposed to cashing out,  𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙
. The fact that the denominator 
𝑖𝑘𝑡
of Eq.  (4) includes the direct-lending terms (superscript 𝐷) as well as 
the marketplace-lending terms (superscript 𝑃 ) indicates that our model 
allows lenders to consider a direct substitution between direct lending 
loan categories and portfolio products.

3.3. Platform

The platform maximizes profits by choosing three variables: (i) the 
target return, (ii) the maturity mismatch of each portfolio product and 
(iii) the resale time of the underlying loans.

We treat the platform’s portfolio choice as an asset demand model 
based on loan characteristics. Each day 𝑡, the platform decides on the 
features of each portfolio product 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾𝑡 that it offers and selects 
the underlying loans accordingly. We assume that the loan character-
istics 𝑥𝑐𝑡, as defined in Section 3. 3.2, also identify the loan categories 
𝑐 = 1, … , 𝐶 𝑃
𝑡   that  the  platform  considers  when  creating  portfolio 
products. However, the set of loan categories available to the platform 
for its portfolios, 𝐶 𝑃
𝑡 , can differ from those available to direct lenders, 
𝐶 𝐷
𝑡 , because the platform invests only in loans to AA or A borrowers. 
This restriction mechanically eliminates all categories with borrowers 
rated below A, and it reflects how the platform internalizes investors’ 
aversion towards default risk when choosing portfolio products.

The platform receives a total renminbi amount 

 𝑃
𝑘𝑡 on 
day 𝑡 to invest in portfolio products. That amount is allocated across 
portfolios based on their market shares  𝑃
𝑘𝑡, which aggregate the in-
dividual lender demands  𝑃
𝑖𝑘𝑡 defined in the previous section. For a 
given portfolio product 𝑘, the total investment amount 
 𝑃
𝑘𝑡 is entirely 
allocated across loan categories, with 𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡 being the weight of loan 
category 𝑐 in portfolio 𝑘.

𝑡 × ∑

𝑘∈𝐾𝑡

𝑡

To  determine  the  weights  𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡,  we  assume  that  the  platform’s 
demand for loan categories depends on their characteristics in a way 
similar  to  the  discrete-choice  framework  discussed  in  the  previous 
section. This allows us to match observed portfolio weights to recover 
the platform’s ‘‘preferences’’ for those characteristics. The weight 𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡
of loan category 𝑐 in portfolio product 𝑘 offered on the platform on day 
𝑡 is: 

𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡 =

∑

exp(𝛿𝑘𝑐𝑡)

𝑔∈𝐶𝑃
𝑡

exp(𝛿𝑘𝑔𝑡)

,

where: 
𝛿𝑘𝑐𝑡 = 𝛽𝑟

𝑘𝑡𝑟𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽𝑚

𝑘𝑡𝑚𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽𝑎𝑎𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽𝑧𝑧𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽𝑑 𝑑𝑐𝑡 + 𝜐𝑘𝑐𝑡,

(5)

(6)

and 𝜐𝑘𝑐𝑡 are normally distributed demand shocks at the portfolio–loan 
category–day level unobserved by the econometrician. This functional 
form and approach are similar in spirit to Koijen and Yogo (2019).11 
Eq.  (6)  describes  the  platform’s  preferences  for  loan  characteristics 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

associated with a given portfolio product. We let the platform have 
heterogeneous  preferences,  varying  across  portfolio  products  𝑘  and 
days 𝑡, for the most relevant loan characteristics: yield and maturity. 
𝛽𝑟
𝑘𝑡 indicates the platform’s preference for loans with higher yields, 
and 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 the platform’s preference for loans with longer maturities in 
portfolio 𝑘. A larger 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 will generate portfolios containing a larger 
proportion of loans with longer maturities. As a result, 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 drives the 
maturity mismatch in a given portfolio product, and thus determines 
the exposure to liquidity risk.12 For these reasons, we focus our analysis, 
and the platform’s optimization problem discussed below, on these two 
parameters.

We assume that the platform predicts the average default rate 𝑑𝑐𝑡
for each loan category 𝑐 on each day 𝑡 based on past defaults in that 
category up to day 𝑡. We operationalize this by including defaults rates 
in Eq.  (6), whereas we do not include them in Eq.  (1). The assumption 
is justified by the fact that the platform has access to the complete 
performance history of all loans, whereas individual lenders only have 
access to partial information on past performance and face higher costs 
in collecting and processing these data. Additionally, the borrower and 
loan characteristics observed by lenders represent the information they 
use to assess a loan’s default risk. The platform’s preference for using 
the average default rate of a loan category reflects how it internalizes 
investors’ aversion to default risk in its portfolio choices.

In our counterfactual analysis of Section 6, we combine the esti-
mates of the lender demand model with the structure of the platform’s 
portfolio choice to simulate the welfare effects of alternative scenarios. 
That requires modeling how the platform adjusts its target return, ma-
turity mismatch, and resale time to maximize profits. On each portfolio 
product, the platform earns a profit 𝛱𝑘𝑡 given by: 

𝛱𝑘𝑡 = 

𝑡

 𝑃
𝑘𝑡

[

∑

𝑐∈𝐶𝑃
𝑡

𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡

(𝑟𝑐𝑡 − 

1𝑐𝑡

) 𝑚𝑐𝑡 − 

𝑘𝑡



𝑘𝑡

−

1 + ln


2𝑘𝑡
(
1 + 𝑃
𝑘𝑡

) − 

3𝑘𝑡

]

(7)

where 
 𝑃
𝑘𝑡 is the renminbi amount invested in portfolio product 𝑘. The 
𝑡
terms in square brackets denote the percentage return that the platform 
earns on that investment net of its costs. Revenues on portfolio 𝑘 are 
measured by ∑
𝑐 𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑐𝑡𝑚𝑐𝑡, i.e., the platform earns an annualized return 
𝑟𝑐𝑡 on loan category 𝑐, over a duration of 𝑚𝑐𝑡 years.13 From that amount, 
we subtract (i) a marginal cost 
1𝑐𝑡, capturing the cost of locating and 
monitoring loans in a given category 𝑐; (ii) the target return 
𝑘𝑡 paid 
out to lenders for a duration of 
2𝑘𝑡, capturing 
the cost of increasing the liquidity 
𝑘𝑡 of loans in portfolio product 
𝑘; and (iv) an administrative cost 
3𝑘𝑡 net of borrowers’ fees, which 
characterizes portfolio 𝑘 and does not vary across loan categories.

𝑘𝑡 years; (iii) a cost 

1+ln

The profit function includes a separate term for the cost of gener-

) . The functional form is motivated by three 
ating liquidity, 
2𝑘𝑡
(
1+𝑘𝑡
considerations. First, 
𝑘𝑡 in the denominator ensures that an increase 
in resale time reduces the cost of providing liquidity. 
𝑘𝑡 should be 
part of the cost, for otherwise the platform would always want to set 

𝑘𝑡 to zero to maximize market shares. Second, given the skewed dis-
tribution of 
𝑘𝑡, the logarithm helps capture the diminishing marginal 
reduction in liquidity cost as 
𝑘𝑡 is small 
the denominator approaches 1, which justifies adopting the form 1 +
ln

(
1 + 
The platform can provide liquidity by buying a loan and including 
it in a new portfolio product, or indirectly by increasing its marketing 
efforts. Incorporating a given loan in a new portfolio product more 

𝑘𝑡 increases. Third, when 

)
.

𝑘𝑡

11 Koijen and Yogo (2019) formally derive the multinomial logit demand 
as the solution to a mean–variance portfolio choice problem. We abstract 
from such a formal derivation and rely on the flexibility of (6) to capture the 
relationship between loan characteristics and the portfolio products weights.

12 We take the set of available portfolio product maturities as given, as it 
remains fixed throughout our data.
13 As in Benetton (2021), in Eq.  (7) we abstract from discounting given the 
short duration of the underlying loans (1 month to 4 years in our data, 2 to 
5 years in Benetton, 2021).

7 

F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

quickly  can  be  difficult,  however,  because  there  is  only  a  limited 
amount of funds that investors put into the platform to finance new 
portfolios; as a result, there is an opportunity cost of liquidating a given 
loan faster relative to another one. The term in 
2𝑘𝑡 in Eq.  (7) captures 
this cost.

The platform chooses portfolio product characteristics and compo-
sition so as to maximize its overall profit. Operationally, the platform 
optimally determines the target return 
𝑘𝑡, preference for underlying 
loan maturity 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 for each portfolio product.14 The 
platform solves: 

𝑘𝑡, and resale time 

max
{𝑘𝑡,𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡

,𝑃

𝑘𝑡}

𝛱𝑡 =

∑

𝑘

𝛱𝑘𝑡.

(8)

The solution to problem (8) determines the composition of each port-
folio product.

3.4. Equilibrium

Every day 𝑡, lenders can invest in 𝐶 𝐷

𝑡  loan categories, available both 
in the primary and secondary markets for direct loans, and in 𝐾𝑡 loan 
portfolios. The equilibrium is characterized by the conditions defining 
the lenders’ utility maximization problem, together with the platform’s 
portfolio allocation and profit maximization problems.

In the primary market, the supply of loans is exogenously given as 
we treat borrowers a passive agents. The demand for loans is defined 
by  the  direct  lenders’  market  share  Eq.  (4)  and  the  loan  portfolio 
product weights given by Eq.  (5). The lenders and the platform take 
loan promised interest rates, amounts, and maturities as given, and 
decide whether to fund the application.

In the secondary market, the supply of loans is given by the fraction 
of loan portfolios that are not rolled over, which in turn is determined 
by Eq.  (11). An institutional feature of Renrendai is that loans are resold 
at their face value. Because the resale price cannot be adjusted, lenders 
who do not roll over their portfolios may have to hold their loans until 
a buyer is available; the resale time variable 
𝑘𝑡 captures this feature 
of the secondary market for each portfolio 𝑘 at its maturity.

The demand for loans is defined, as in the primary market, by the 
direct lenders’ market share Eq. (4) and the platform’s portfolio weights 
(5). For each portfolio product 𝑘 on day 𝑡, demand equals supply in 
equilibrium.  The  supply  of  portfolio  products  is  determined  by  the 
platform maximization problem (8), and the demand by their market 
shares  𝑃
𝑘𝑡.

We define the equilibrium as a set of target returns 

𝑘𝑡, resale times 
𝑃
𝑘𝑡, and maturity preferences 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 such that (i) the platform maximizes 
the profit function in Eq.  (8); (ii) for each 𝑘 and 𝑐, the portfolio weight 
of loan category 𝑐 in portfolio product 𝑘 satisfies Eq.  (5); (iii) for each 
𝑘, the portfolio product market share satisfies Eq.  (10); (iv) the market 
share of loans in the secondary market satisfies Eq.  (11); and (v) the 
market share of direct loans satisfies Eq.  (4).

4. Estimation

We estimate the model outlined above to recover lender prefer-
ences  for  loans  and  portfolio  products,  the  determinants  of  the  in-
vestment  rollover  decision,  and  the  platform’s  preferences  for  loan 
characteristics.

Our approach builds on the logit demand model for differentiated 
products by Berry (1994), which estimates preference parameters from 

14 We solve the platform’s optimization problem as a function of the maturity 
preference parameter 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 rather than portfolio product maturity for tractability. 
There  are  only  a  handful  of  portfolio  maturity  options  available  on  the 
platform (3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months), whereas focusing on 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 allows us 
to work with a continuous variable. Moreover, given portfolio maturity, 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡
determines the extent of maturity mismatch, so that optimizing with respect 
to 𝛽𝑚

𝑘𝑡 is isomorphic to optimizing with respect to portfolio maturity.

8 

market shares. We define market shares based on the probability that a 
given lender chooses a particular loan category, as specified in Eq.  (4), 
and similarly for portfolio products. To account for heterogeneity in 
lender preferences, we use activity on Renrendai as an index of lender 
sophistication and liquidity risk tolerance. Intuitively, only lenders with 
greater financial capacity and higher liquidity risk tolerance can fre-
quently meet the minimum investment cost. To aggregate this measure 
across  all  lenders  in  Eq.   (4),  we  focus  on  the  percentage  of  active 
lenders (those in the top 5% of the active investing distribution in a 
given calendar quarter) among all investors on the platform on a given 
day 𝑡, denoted by 
𝑡. This represents the probability that a lender is 
active. We can express the coefficients in Eqs. (1) and (4) as 𝛾𝑡 =
̄𝛾 +𝜍
𝑡, dropping the subscript 𝑗, where ̄𝛾 captures the preferences of the 
most inactive lenders, and 𝜍 measures the deviation from this baseline 
driven by a higher probability of lender activity. This approach allows 
us to capture the average preferences of lenders, ranging from active 
to inactive, and thus control for the potential non-stationarity of the 
distribution of lender preferences.

𝑐𝑡 ) − ln(

Next, denote by  𝐷
𝑐𝑡  the market share of loan category 𝑐 on day 𝑡 and 
0𝑡 the market share of the lenders’ ‘‘outside option’’ of not investing 
𝑐𝑡  and 
0𝑡

by 
on Renrendai. The natural logarithm of the ratio between  𝐷
is linear in the preference parameters, so that we can estimate: 
ln( 𝐷

ln(𝑚𝑐𝑡) + 𝛾 𝑎
𝑡 𝑧𝑐𝑡 + 𝜇𝐷 + 𝜇𝑡 + 𝜁𝑐𝑡,
where the main explanatory variables are loan return 𝑟, maturity 𝑚, 
amount 𝑎, and liquidity , and 𝑧 collects other loan attributes; 𝜇𝐷 is 
an indicator for the direct loans investment channel, 𝜇𝑡 are day fixed 
effects, and 𝜁𝑐𝑡 are shocks.

𝑡 ln(𝑟𝑐𝑡) + 𝛾 𝑚
𝑐𝑡 + 𝛾 𝑧


0𝑡) = 𝛾 𝑟
+ 𝛾 
𝑡

𝑡 ln(𝑎𝑐𝑡)

(9)

𝑡

A similar expression obtains for the lenders’ investment in portfolio 

products: 
ln( 𝑃

𝑘𝑡) − ln(

0𝑡) = 𝛼
ln(
𝑡
𝑘𝑡 + 𝛼
+ 𝛼

𝑡

𝑘𝑡) + 𝛼


𝑘𝑡) + 𝛼
𝑡
𝑘𝑡 + 𝜇𝑃 + 𝜇𝑡 + 𝜉𝑘𝑡,

ln(

𝑡

𝑡

ln(

𝑘𝑡)

(10)

where  denotes the portfolio’s target return,  its maturity,  the tar-
get size of the portfolio, 
𝑘𝑡 liquidity risk (resale time on the secondary 
market), and  collects other observable attributes of the portfolio; 
𝜇𝑃  is an indicator for the portfolio investment channel, 𝜇𝑡 are day 
fixed effects, and 𝜉𝑘𝑡 are shocks. We write Eqs. (9) and (10) separately 
for expositional convenience, but they are actually part of a single 
demand system that combines lender choices to invest in direct loans 
and portfolio products, and allows for direct substitutability between 
the two channels. The two equations are hence jointly estimated as part 
of one regression model.15

We estimate the determinants of the rollover decision using ordi-
nary least squares. In this case, the dependent variable is the proportion 
of investment portfolio product 𝑘 that is rolled over by investors, which 
we denote with  𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙
𝑘𝑡 = 𝜏
 𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙
where 𝜓𝑡 denote day fixed effects and 𝜈𝑘𝑡 are shocks.

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜓𝑡 + 𝜈𝑘𝑡,

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

𝑘𝑡 + 𝜏

(11)

: 

𝑘𝑡

Finally, we estimate the platform’s demand for loans in a similar 
fashion  as  for  Eqs.  (9)  and  (10),  but  with  the  difference  that  the 

15 Alternative approaches could be a mixed logit model (Train, 2009) or 
the random coefficients logit demand model of Berry et al. (1995). We do 
not choose the mixed logit approach to contain dimensionality and because it 
would be difficult to identify individual lenders’ choice of an outside option. 
We also do not implement the Berry et al. (1995) approach as it would increase 
computational complexity, since it does not have a closed form solution for the 
market shares, and because our strategy already captures similar heterogeneity 
in lender preferences. The Berry et al. (1995) approach would identify the 
mean and standard deviation of the lender preferences’ distribution, while our 
approach delivers estimates of baseline preference parameters and deviations 
from the baseline.

F. Braggion et al.

platform does not have an outside option, as it needs to invest the whole 
amount raised from lenders across loan categories. Hence, to be able to 
identify the preference parameters we normalize all 𝛿𝑘𝑐𝑡 with respect to 
one of the alternatives within portfolio 𝑘 issued on day 𝑡. This leads to 
the following specification: 
ln(𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡) − ln(𝑤𝑘0𝑡) = 𝛽𝑟
𝑘𝑡

)

(𝑟𝑐𝑡 − 𝑟0𝑡
)
+ 𝛽𝑎 (𝑎𝑐𝑡 − 𝑎0𝑡
+ 𝛽𝑑 (𝑑𝑐𝑡 − 𝑑0𝑡

(𝑚𝑐𝑡 − 𝑚0𝑡
)

)
+ 𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡
+ 𝛽𝑧 (𝑧𝑐𝑡 − 𝑧0𝑡
+ 𝜙𝑡 + 𝜐𝑘𝑐𝑡,

)

(12)

where 𝑤𝑘0𝑡 represents the share invested in the loan category with 
respect to which all other categories are normalized, 𝑟0𝑡, 𝑚0𝑡, 𝑎0𝑡, 𝑧0𝑡, 
𝑑0𝑡 are its corresponding attributes, 𝜙𝑡 are day fixed effects, and 𝜐𝑘𝑐𝑡 are 
shocks.

Identifying the lenders’ preference parameters and the platform’s 
demand for loans relies on the assumption that the demand shocks 
𝜁𝑐𝑡,  𝜉𝑘𝑡,  and  𝜈𝑘𝑡  are  uncorrelated  with  interest  rates,  loan  amounts, 
and maturities, conditional on the control variables 𝑧 (), the channel 
(direct loan/portfolio), and day fixed effects. This assumption could 
be violated if there are omitted variables, where the demand shocks 
capture  loan  or  portfolio  qualities  known  only  to  lenders  and  cor-
related with interest rates, loan amounts, or maturities. We address 
this concern by leveraging the institutional features of our setting: our 
detailed data allows us to observe the same information available to 
lenders. Thus, we can control for every product or loan attribute that 
investors see when accessing the platform, significantly reducing the 
risk of omitted variables.

A second potential challenge to identification is simultaneity. This 
could be an issue if the borrowers are able to observe a loan category–
day specific demand shock faced by the lenders (Eqs. (9)–(10)) or the 
platform (Eq. (12)) and strategically adjust their loan applications. Such 
a degree of sophistication, however, is unrealistic: around 80% of loan 
applications are submitted by borrowers using the platform for the first 
time, and Renrendai provides them with no information on the lenders’ 
or the platform’s past choices.

Although the platform’s institutional setting helps mitigate potential 
identification concerns, we also use instrumental variables for portfolio 
returns and loan interest rates in the lenders’ demand model to ensure 
the robustness of our findings. We employ the heterogeneous pass-
through  of  monetary  policy,  measured  by  the  Shibor  index,  across 
portfolio products and loan categories, following Villas-Boas (2007) 
and Egan et al. (2017). The idea is that when Shibor rises, the cost 
of credit for borrowers at traditional intermediaries increases, which 
subsequently raises the interest rates posted by borrowers on the plat-
form and the returns offered by the platform on its portfolios. This 
pass-through varies across portfolio products and loan categories due to 
differences in maturity structures and the diverse maturity preferences 
of borrowers and lenders. By including day fixed effects, we control 
for the direct effect of Shibor changes on lenders’ demand, ensuring 
Shibor impacts demand only through changes in portfolio returns and 
loan interest rates.

5. Results

In this section we present the estimates of the models from Sec-
tion 4.  Table  4 describes the lenders’ demand for direct loans and 
portfolio products, both for the OLS (columns 1 and 3) and IV (columns 
2 and 4) estimates. As we find that almost all OLS and IV coefficients 
are not statistically different from each other, we focus on the OLS 
estimates in this section and in the discussion of the counterfactuals 
in Section 6 (we provide counterfactual results using the IV estimates 
in the Appendix).

Lender utility is an increasing function of yields for direct loans 
(columns 1 and 2) as well as for portfolio products (column 3 and 
4), even more so when there are more active lenders on Renrendai. 
Moreover,  the  sensitivity  to  direct  loans  returns  is  higher  than  for 
portfolio product returns. As a gauge for that, we look at the estimates 

9 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

of the elasticity of demand with respect to loan and portfolio returns 
reported in the first two rows of Table  5, which assess the economic 
significance of the results of Table  4 considering different percentiles 
in the distribution of the daily proportion of active lenders. A 10% 
(83 bps) higher target return increases the demand for a given loan 
category by 12.1% on average; in comparison, a 10% higher return 
raises portfolio product demand on average by only 6.5%. We find that 
lenders prefer larger loans and portfolios, and such preference does not 
depend on their level of activity on the platform. 

The sensitivity of lenders’ utility to the resale time of loans under-
lying portfolio products is higher compared to loans invested through 
direct lending; however, it declines when we focus on active investors. 
The corresponding demand elasticity is reported in Table  5; on average, 
a 10% increase in resale time  (about 1.3 h) reduces portfolio product 
demand by 0.030%. However, that same 10% increase in resale time 
reduces demand from less active lenders (10th percentile) by 0.073%, 
while it reduces demand from more active lenders (90th percentile) by 
less than 0.001%. In contrast, as shown in Table  4, the coefficients on 
resale time for direct lenders are always smaller and never statistically 
significant.16

The  estimates  of  the  platform’s  demand  for  loan  categories  are 
summarized in Table  6 and Appendix Figure D.2. Table  6 shows that 
on average the platform favors loans offering lower returns and longer 
maturities. We interpret these results as suggesting that the platform 
uses both the interest rates and maturities set by the borrowers to 
alleviate adverse selection problems. Riskier borrowers offer high in-
terest  rates  and  shorter  maturities  as  they  may  struggle  to  obtain 
funding otherwise. In the spirit of Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), by forming 
portfolios with loans offering lower interest rates and longer maturities, 
the platform obtains lower returns on the average loan but extends 
credit to a pool of safer borrowers.17 This interpretation is corroborated 
by the results in Table  6, which show that the platform avoids loan 
categories with higher default rates.18 We also find that, ceteris paribus, 
the platform prefers primary market loans to loans available on the 
secondary market. This makes intuitive sense because primary market 
loans are more profitable to the platform, as the borrowers pay a fee 
when they obtain a loan, but not when the loan is resold.

Finally, Table  7 describes the lenders’ rollover decision. Rollover 
probability for a portfolio product is increasing in its return and size, 
and  decreasing  in  maturity.  The  estimates  of  Table   7  suggest  that 
portfolio product characteristics have little impact on the fraction of the 

16 The differences in the Table  4 coefficients between direct lending and 
portfolio products can be due to characteristics such as return or maturity 
having a different impact on indirect utilities depending on whether they are 
associated to direct loans or portfolio products (‘‘treatment’’), or to different 
investor types selecting into direct lending or portfolio product investment 
(‘‘selection’’). Under the ‘‘treatment’’ interpretation, for a given level of the % 
of active lenders all investors are ex-ante similar, in line with the assumptions 
of Diamond and Dybvig (1983); under the ‘‘selection’’ interpretation, investors 
are ex-ante similar within each investment channel (direct loans or portfolio 
products).
17 Hertzberg et al. (2018) find that on LendingClub, a U.S. marketplace 
credit platform, riskier borrowers tend to choose longer maturities and pay 
higher interest rates to be insured against unfavorable refinancing conditions. 
On Renrendai, however, borrowers have more flexibility, and interest rates are 
only required to be within a broad range, so maturity is not used as a screening 
tool. Interestingly, that contrasts with the behavior of direct lenders, who, as 
we discussed, favor higher returns. Our interpretation of these results for the 
borrowers is that the latter do not learn that by posting lower interest rates 
they may increase their chances of being funded. This argument is backed by 
our institutional setting: Over 95% of funded loans are granted to borrowers 
using the platform for the first time.
18 Note that we use the realized default rates in each loan category up to 
time 𝑡. In other words, we assume that the platform can predict the average 
defaults in each category using the information it holds about the past records 
on loan performance.

F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

Table 4
Lenders’ demand for portfolio products and direct loans.
The table reports the estimates of Eqs. (9) and (10), estimated as one regression model, encompassing both. 
One observation is one loan category or portfolio product on one day. Portfolio product controls include 
indicators for two special portfolios launched in the early days of the platform called ‘‘Beginner Uplan’’ 
and ‘‘Bonus Uplan’’. Loan category controls include the borrower characteristics in Table  3 and Appendix 
A. Channel fixed effects include indicators for Direct lending (reported), Uplan (reported), and Salary Plan 
(excluded category). The first and third columns report the OLS estimates, the second and fourth columns the 
corresponding IV estimates. The standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered around interactions 
of days, channel, and promotional portfolio products, for a total of 3697 clusters.

  Log Return (𝑟𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡)

  Log Return (𝑟𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡) ×Active lenders %

  Log Maturity (𝑚𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡)

  Log Maturity (𝑚𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡) ×Active lenders %

  Log Amount (𝑎𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡)

  Log Amount (𝑎𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡) ×Active lenders %

  Resale Time (

𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡)

  Resale Time (

𝑐𝑡, 

𝑘𝑡) ×Active lenders %

  Channel f.e.

  Portfolio product controls
  Loan category controls
  Day f.e.
  N. obs.
  Adj. 𝑅2 (OLS estimates)
  Kleibergen–Paap F Statistic (IV estimates)

IV

0.34
(0.12)
10.37
(1.81)
0.27
(0.02)
–1.28
(0.29)
0.55
(0.01)
0.69
(0.16)
–0.68
(3.38)
16.41
(48.14)
1.42
(0.45)

Direct loan
OLS

0.58
(0.13)
11.36
(1.90)
0.23
(0.02)
−1.02
(0.26)
0.57
(0.01)
0.59
(0.15)
−1.49
(3.40)
34.49
(48.48)
2.22
(0.40)

Yes
Yes
Yes
75,810
0.708
71.81

Portfolio product
IV
OLS

0.24
(0.15)
8.72
(1.62)
0.28
(0.04)
0.06
(0.30)
0.63
(0.04)
−2.30
(0.46)
−8.73
(2.72)
108.19
(44.94)
2.25
(0.04)

0.11
(0.18)  
10.99
(2.05)  
0.24
(0.04)  
0.44
(0.39)  
0.55
(0.04)  
–0.55
(0.50)  
–11.04  
(3.29)  
148.08  
(54.98)  
2.23
(0.05)  

Table 5
Lenders’ demand elasticities with respect to return and liquidity risk.
𝑡, 𝛾 𝑟
The table reports the distribution of the coefficients 𝛾 
proportion of active lenders on the platform.

𝑡 = ̄𝛾  + 𝜍

𝑡 = ̄𝛾 𝑟 + 𝜍𝑟

𝑡, 𝛼

𝑡 = ̄𝛼 + 𝜍

𝑡 depending on the distribution of 

𝑡, the daily 

  Direct Loans Return
  Portfolio Return
  Portfolio Resale Time

N. Obs.
1,131
718
718

Mean

1.2101
0.6455
−0.0030

St. Dev.
0.2158
0.2041
0.0106

P10

1.0053
0.4517
−0.0073

Median

1.1626
0.6230
–0.0007

P90
1.4764  
0.8776  
−0.0000 

portfolio that is rolled over. The coefficients on target return and resale 
time are insignificantly different from zero at conventional levels, and 
the coefficients on maturity and portfolio size, although significantly 
different from zero, imply small economic effects.19

These estimates allow us to compute the relative market shares of 
each portfolio product 𝑘 and each loan category 𝑐 and back out the 
structural parameters in the platform’s profit function 
2𝑘, and 

3𝑘 and to perform a further check against the data providing some 
indications about the validity of our framework. The cost 
2𝑘 should 
be inversely related to the expected liquidity available on the platform 
when portfolio 𝑘 reaches maturity. We thus relate the values of 
2𝑘
implied by the model to the renminbi inflow of new investments on 
the platform on the days when each portfolio matures. Appendix Figure 
D.3 illustrates this check. Consistent with our model, we find a negative 

1𝑐 , 

Table 6
Platform’s demand for direct loans.
The table reports the estimates of Eq.  (12). One observation is one day–loan category. 
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the day level. Loan Category Controls 
include the variables listed in the Borrowers panel of Table  3.

Standard deviation 
1.49
0.08

  Return (𝑟𝑐𝑡)
  Maturity (𝑚𝑐𝑡)
  Amount (𝑎𝑐𝑡)

  Default rate borrowers (𝑑𝑐𝑡)

  Secondary market loan

  Loan category controls
  Day f.e.
  N. obs.
  Adj. 𝑅2

Mean

−0.31
0.10
0.69
(0.09)
−0.56
(0.12)
−0.31
(0.17)
Yes
Yes
95,028
0.630

19 In the estimates of Table  7, maturity is expressed in years. The coefficient 
estimate of −0.01 implies that a one-year shorter maturity is associated with a 
1 percentage point larger share of the portfolio that is rolled over. Given that 
the longest portfolio product maturity in our data is three years, the effect is 
very modest. Similarly, a one-standard deviation (¥6.78 million) increase in 
portfolio size is associated with a 6 percentage points higher rollover rate.

and statistically significant relation between 
2𝑘 and new investment 
flow: where new investment is more modest, providing liquidity is more 
costly for the platform. We overlay a linear regression on top of the 
scatterplot of 
2𝑘–log-investment inflow pairs; the slope of the line is 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

𝑘𝑡)

Table 7
Rollover rate of portfolio products.
The table reports the estimates of Eq.  (11). One observation is 
one day–portfolio product. Standard errors in parentheses are 
clustered at the day level. Portfolio product controls include 
indicators  for  two  special  kinds  of  Uplan  launched  in  the 
early days of the platform called ‘‘Beginner Uplan’’ and ‘‘Bonus 
Uplan’’, and indicators for other types of promotional plans.
0.69  
  Target return (
(0.87) 
−0.01 
(0.00) 
0.01  
(0.00) 
−0.32 
(0.54) 
Yes
Yes
2,928  
0.515  

  Portfolio product controls
  Day f.e.
  N. obs.
  Adj. 𝑅2

  Resale time (

  Maturity (

  Amount (

𝑘𝑡)

𝑘𝑡)

𝑘𝑡)

–0.0012 (standard error: 0.0006), which implies that a one-standard 
deviation higher log-inflow is associated with a 19.5% lower in 

2𝑘. 

6. Counterfactuals

6.1. Design of the counterfactual scenarios

We simulate scenarios changing three key features of the platform. 
First, we eliminate portfolio products, so that lenders can only choose 
between peer-to-peer credit and the outside option. That allows us to 
quantify the welfare value of intermediation by the platform. Second, 
we simulate a ‘‘bank-like’’ scenario where the platform sells loan port-
folio products as under the marketplace model, but bears liquidity risk 
like a traditional bank. That allows us to study the impact of the matu-
rity mismatch between portfolio products and their underlying loans. 
We simulate several versions of this counterfactual, corresponding to 
different levels of the platform’s cost of generating liquidity. Third, 
we replicate the bank-like counterfactual, changing the composition 
of the lender population by reducing the incidence of active lenders. 
That  allows  us  to  understand  which  lenders  benefit  the  most  from 
marketplace credit and which from bank-like credit.

In the bank-like counterfactuals, we modify our model to attribute 
liquidity risk-bearing to the platform. That involves two changes. First, 
the resale time variable  is removed from the lenders’ indirect utility 
and rollover decision equations. Second, the profit on a given portfolio 
product 𝑘 is now written as: 

{

𝛱𝑘𝑡 = 
𝑡

 𝑃
𝑘𝑡

∑

𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡

) 𝑚𝑐𝑡
(𝑟𝑐𝑡 − 
𝑐∈𝑚≤
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Not exposed to
liquidity risk

1𝑘𝑐𝑡

+

[
𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡

∑

1𝑘𝑐𝑡

(𝑟𝑐𝑡 − 

) 𝑚𝑐𝑡 − 𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑐𝑡
𝑐∈𝑚>
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Exposed to
liquidity risk
}

(
1 −  𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙

𝓁𝑘𝑐𝑡



𝑘𝑡

𝑘𝑡

) 𝑚𝑐𝑡

𝑘𝑡

]

− 

𝑘𝑡



𝑘𝑡 −

1 + ln


2𝑘𝑡
(
1 + 

𝑘𝑡

) − 

3𝑘𝑡

(13)

The profit function can be divided into two revenue and two cost 
components, respectively the first two and last two terms in the braces 
on the right hand side of Eq.  (13). The first revenue term denotes 
platform’s net returns on loans with maturity 𝑚 ≤ , i.e. shorter than 
or equal to the portfolio product’s maturity . In this case there is no 
mismatch between portfolio and loan maturities and no liquidity risk. 
The return obtained by the platform is a weighted average of the annual 

11 

𝑘𝑡

𝑘𝑡

return paid by borrowers 𝑟𝑐𝑡 times the maturity (expressed in years) of 
each loan category 𝑚𝑐𝑡, where the weights are given by the portfolio 
weights 𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡 defined in Eq.  (5).

The second revenue term denotes loans with maturity 𝑚 > , 
i.e., longer than the portfolio maturity . In this case the platform 
is exposed to liquidity risk, and will have to refinance the underlying 
loans when the portfolio product reaches its maturity. A loan can be 
refinanced in two ways. First, the original lender may roll her portfolio 
investment over; that happens with probability  𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙
 from Eq.  (11). In 
that case, the lender’s investment is prolonged, and the platform keeps 
receiving the borrower’s interest payments as revenues. Second, the 
lender may not roll her investment over; that happens with probability 
1 −  𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙
. In that case, the underlying loans are moved to the secondary 
market, where they can be bought by a direct lender or they can be 
taken up to become part of a new marketplace loan portfolio. Either 
way, a resale time elapses, which comes with a loss of revenue for 
𝑘𝑡.  In 
the platform,  captured by the term 𝑤𝑘𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑐𝑡
that term,  𝑚𝑐𝑡
 reflects the maturity mismatch between portfolio 𝑘 and 
𝑘𝑡
the underlying loan category 𝑐.20 The larger the maturity mismatch 
between the portfolio and the underlying loans, the larger the loss of 
revenues, which the platform incurs  𝑚𝑐𝑡
𝑘𝑡 is the portfolio’s 
𝑘𝑡
resale time, corresponding to the maximum resale time among all loan 
categories included in portfolio 𝑘. 𝓁𝑘𝑐𝑡 is a number between 0 and 1, 
corresponding to the ratio between the resale time of loan category c 
and resale time of the loan category that takes the longest to be resold 
(equivalent to 

(
1 −  𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙

 times. 

) 𝑚𝑐𝑡
𝑘𝑡

𝓁𝑘𝑐𝑡

𝑘𝑡).21



𝑘𝑡

Note  that  the  platform  knows  the  aggregate  distribution  of  the 
liquidity shocks indicated by  𝑅𝑜𝑙𝑙
 and tilts portfolio weights towards 
more vs less maturity mismatch via the maturity preference parameter 
𝛽𝑚
𝑘𝑡 to maximize profits. This further aligns our model with the Diamond 
and Dybvig (1983) framework, as the platform applies the law of large 
numbers with the intention of ensuring sufficient liquidity for investors 
wishing to liquidate.

𝑘𝑡

6.2. Comparing the three paradigms

In Table  8 we document how the outcomes predicted by our model 
change between the baseline case (i.e., marketplace lending, base cost 
of liquidity, and base proportion of active lenders) and the alternative 
scenarios (direct lending and bank-like, both with base cost of liquidity 
and proportion of active lenders).22

In the first place, restricting credit to direct (peer-to-peer) lending 
induces a welfare loss. In Table  8 we show that it is associated with a 
73% drop in credit provision and a 31% lower lender surplus in com-
parison to the baseline case.23 That highlights the substantial benefits 
of platform intermediation through portfolio products, and provides 
a rationale for the transition to the marketplace model. The drop in 

20 For simplicity, our model assumes that the platform’s refinancing cost 
is equal to the weighted average of the interest rates of the loans in the 
portfolio product. We also conducted robustness checks allowing for different 
external financing costs, both lower and higher than this average, but the main 
conclusions of our counterfactuals remain unchanged.
21 If the platform assumed default risk in addition to liquidity risk under 
the bank-like paradigm, the effects would be ambiguous. While credit supply 
might expand to include lower-quality borrowers, the platform would have 
stronger incentives to screen them, potentially improving the creditworthiness 
of marginal borrowers. Importantly, Renrendai’s portfolio products are limited 
to highly rated loans (AA or A), suggesting that even with an expanded credit 
supply, the platform prioritizes high-quality loans. Moreover, given that our 
data is from a single platform and that measures of Renrendai’s default risk, 
such as CDS spreads, are not available during our sample period, we cannot 
directly analyze platform default risk as in Egan et al. (2017).
22 In Appendix Tables D.1 and D.2 we report the same counterfactual results, 
but based on the IV estimates of Table  4 instead of the OLS ones. Results are 
qualitatively and quantitatively very similar.

 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

Table 8
Base liquidity cost: marketplace, bank-like, and peer-to-peer credit.
Changes are always relative to the baseline case of marketplace lending with base liquidity cost and base 
percentage of active lenders. The levels of lenders’ surplus and platform’s profit for the baseline case are 
normalized to zero.
  Outcome
  Average return (%)
  Average maturity mismatch (months)
  Average resale time (days)
  Amount lent (bn ¥)
  Amount lent Uplan (bn ¥)
  Average change lenders’ surplus (%)
  Average change platform profit (%)

8.79
17.07
38.95
19.67
16.64
0.34
−1.68

8.15
20.94
0.42
19.64
16.55
0.00
0.00

5.32
0.00
−31.44

Peer-to-peer 

Marketplace

Bank-like

lender surplus and credit provision can be due to three, non-mutually 
exclusive factors: (a) a search cost advantage, if the platform is able to 
locate loans in which to invest faster than peer-to-peer lenders, (b) an 
information advantage, if the platform is better able to screen and/or 
monitor borrowers, or (c) the bigger choice set under the marketplace 
model for the lenders, as portfolio products can have a shorter maturity 
than the underlying loans.

The median time until the first investment is 245 min for loans 
funded by peer-to-peer investors and 307 min for loans that become 
part of portfolio products, suggesting that search costs are not econom-
ically very different between peer-to-peer investors and the platform. 
To determine the impact of the platform’s information, we simulate 
an additional counterfactual, in which we remove the default rate 𝑑𝑐𝑡
from the determinants of the platform’s portfolio weights in Eq.  (6), so 
that the peer-to-peer lenders and the platform have access to identical 
information. The results of this counterfactual are virtually identical to 
those reported in Table  8. This suggests that the platform’s information 
is also not the main driver of the difference in lender surplus and 
credit provision between the marketplace and peer-to-peer models. This 
is  perhaps  not  surprising:  the  platform  can  only  invest  in  loans  to 
borrowers with credit rating A or AA, which are less subject to adverse 
selection problems. The main driver appears to be the fact that maturity 
mismatch allows the platform to offer a greater assortment of portfolios 
to the lenders, who are not constrained to invest in loans matching their 
investment horizon.24

Table  8 also shows that under base liquidity and base active lenders 
bank-like  credit  has  very  similar  outcomes  relative  to  marketplace 
credit. Credit provision levels are almost identical and lender surplus 
increases by 0.34% in relative terms. The platform’s profits are only 
1.68% lower than under the marketplace model, and resale time in the 
secondary market is significantly longer. This can be explained by the 
platform having a lower cost of refinancing compared to individual 
investors.  For  example,  the  platform  can  access  external  financing 
more cheaply to refinance loans that are not rolled over. Note that in 
this counterfactual, the bank-like platform bears liquidity risk but not 
default risk; in this sense, what we attempt to identify is the value of 
an intermediary specifically taking liquidity risk and we do not capture 
default risk. 

6.3. Increasing liquidity costs and inactive lenders

The differences between the marketplace and bank-like paradigms 
become more visible in Table  9, where we examine the impact of liq-
uidity risk and lender population composition on outcomes generated 

23 Under direct credit the platform makes no profits other than through fees, 
which we omit as they are minimal on the lender side (¥2 for a ¥10,000 with-
drawal). Borrower fees are also small for the high-rated borrowers targeted by 
the platform’s portfolio products, and we leave them outside our analysis as 
our focus is on the lenders. The average daily profit for the platform under 
the marketplace paradigm is around ¥1.7 bn, which would be lost under the 
peer-to-peer scenario.
24 The ‘‘maturity mismatch’’ outcome reports the simple average of portfolio 
products’ maturity mismatch.

under the two paradigms. In all the scenarios simulated in Table  9, we 
assume that the platform’s cost 
2𝑘𝑡 of generating liquidity increases 
by 10% relative to the baseline scenarios of Table  8. We also consider 
alternative  compositions  of  the  lender  population,  captured  by  the 
proportion of active lenders 
𝑡. In columns (1)–(2), we set that to the 
same level as in the baseline of Table  8; in columns (3)–(4), we reduce 
it by 30%, so that the average lender is expected to be less active, and 
hence less sensitive to yield and more liquidity risk-averse.

We begin by examining the impact of increased liquidity risk while 
keeping the proportion of less active (risk-averse) investors constant. 
Relative to the baseline scenario in Table  8 (baseline level of liquidity 
cost), we observe notable differences between the marketplace and 
bank-like paradigms. Under the bank-like paradigm, returns offered 
to portfolio investors increase, while they decrease under the market-
place paradigm. Returns decrease under marketplace credit because 
the platform passes-through the higher liquidity costs to lenders. Un-
der bank-like credit instead, the increase in returns is driven by two 
factors. First, some portfolios become unprofitable due to the higher 
liquidity costs, and the platform offers near-zero returns on those to 
minimize losses. Second, to make up for the loss of investment in those 
unprofitable portfolios, the platform increases returns on the portfolios 
that  are  still  profitable,  leading  to  an  average  increase  in  returns. 
Conversely, the liquidity gap (measured by resale time) narrows as 
resale time increases under marketplace credit, since in the marketplace 
model the platform does not bear the liquidity risk. The gap in maturity 
mismatch between the two paradigms remains close to Table  8. The 
gap  in  the  amount  lent  expands,  with  credit  provision  decreasing 
in the marketplace paradigm and rising in the bank-like paradigm. 
Similarly, lender surplus declines under marketplace credit, because 
of the lower returns and the higher resale time, but it grows under 
bank-like credit, due to the higher returns. Platform profits, however, 
decrease more substantially under bank-like credit due to the platform 
incurring higher liquidity generation costs. In sum, with a higher cost 
of generating liquidity, the marketplace model yields higher profits for 
the platform compared to the bank-like model. The opposite is true for 
lenders and borrowers. 

The  welfare  comparison  changes,  however,  in  columns  (3)–(4), 
where we reduce the proportion of active lenders skewing the lender 
population towards having greater liquidity risk aversion and a lower 
sensitivity  to  yields  on  average.  Under  that  scenario,  the  bank-like 
paradigm is welfare-improving across all three dimensions: we observe 
greater credit provision, lender surplus, and platform profits than under 
the marketplace paradigm. This happens because less active lenders in-
crease the amount they invest in the portfolio products as the platform 
insures them against liquidity risk. Higher lending volumes more than 
compensate the cost of bearing the liquidity risk, thus increasing the 
platform’s profits. This results provides a rationale for the existence 
of marketplace credit alongside traditional banks. When liquidity risk 
is limited and online credit platforms attract more sophisticated, less 
liquidity  risk-averse  investors,  the  marketplace  model  can  be  opti-
mal. In contrast, when liquidity risk is higher and/or when investors 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

Table 9
High liquidity cost: marketplace and bank-like, base and low active lenders.
Changes are always relative to the baseline case of marketplace lending with base liquidity cost and base percentage 
of active lenders. The levels of lenders’ surplus and platform’s profit for the baseline case are normalized to zero.
  Active lenders share:
  Outcome
  Average return (%)
  Average maturity mismatch (months)
  Average resale time (days)
  Amount lent (bn ¥)
  Amount lent Uplan (bn ¥)
  Average change lenders’ surplus (%)
  Average change platform profit (%)

Bank-like 
8.61
16.97
40.68
22.48
18.76
21.73
–8.02

8.08
20.94
12.85
18.69
15.48
−3.56
−18.27

6.47
20.94
73.57
21.10
17.16
18.42
−11.27

9.17
17.14
39.55
19.93
16.93
2.55
–24.20

Marketplace

Marketplace

Bank-like

Base

Low

6.4. Sensitivity analysis

Fig.  3 compares the bank-like and marketplace paradigms across 
varying  liquidity  costs  and  fractions  of  inactive  lenders.  Typically, 
platform profits are higher in the bank-like paradigm, except when 
fewer lenders are inactive. The bank-like paradigm becomes less dom-
inant for the platform when liquidity costs rise. This happens because, 
although the platform generally attracts more lenders under the bank-
like scenario, it still incurs liquidity costs through a higher value of 
2𝑘. 
As liquidity costs rise, the bank-like model incurs an additional expense 
to raise external funds (as shown in Eq.  (13)). When the increase in 

2𝑘 is large enough, these additional costs outweigh the extra revenue 
generated by attracting more lenders in the bank-like scenario.

The bank-like paradigm benefits lenders more than the marketplace 
paradigm  because  it  protects  them  from  liquidity  risk.  As  a  result, 
lenders receive a higher surplus and are more willing to invest, leading 
to more borrowers being financed. This effect is particularly strong 
when liquidity costs are low or moderate, and when the proportion 
of inactive, risk-averse lenders is not too high. When liquidity costs 
are high and many lenders are inactive, the bank-like model is still 
preferred, but its advantage becomes less pronounced. This is because 
the platform faces high external financing costs, forcing it to offer lower 
returns. With a higher proportion of inactive lenders, more are willing 
to accept lower returns in exchange for avoiding liquidity risk. While 
this protection benefits inactive lenders, it does not fully offset the 
losses experienced by active lenders, who prioritize higher returns over 
risk insurance.

Taken  together,  these  results  are  consistent  with  a  narrative  in 
which,  in  the  early  days  of  online  debt  crowdfunding,  the  sector 
mainly attracts risk-tolerant lenders, who seek higher returns and have 
higher welfare under the peer-to-peer and marketplace models. As the 
clientele  of  lenders  grows,  it  comes  to  encompass  more  risk-averse 
investors, who are more sensitive to liquidity risk and have higher 
welfare under the bank-like model. Moreover, our findings are in line 
with anecdotal evidence about the most developed platforms such as 
LendingClub,  Funding  Circle,  Zopa,  or  RateSetter,  which  have  shut 
down peer-to-peer credit, while offering securitized (marketplace) loan 
portfolios to a more risk-tolerant institutional investor clientele as well 
as,  more  recently,  traditional  banking  products  to  more  risk-averse 
retail investors.26

7. Conclusion

We  develop  and  estimate  an  equilibrium  model  of  online  debt 
crowdfunding as a laboratory to study the value of financial intermedi-
ation. We exploit the fact that under different online lending paradigms 
the crowdfunding platform plays different roles: under the peer-to-peer 
paradigm it merely provides a trading venue to lenders and borrowers; 

26 An important caveat to this interpretation is that, during our sample 
period, Renrendai’s lenders were essentially all retail and comprised, to our 
knowledge, no institutional investors.

Fig. 3.  Sensitivity analysis.
The figure summarizes the results of counterfactuals simulated under different values 
of the increase in the cost of generating liquidity 
2 (5%, 10%, and 15%) and the 
increase in the portion of less active lenders (10%, 30%, 50%) relative to the baseline 
that assumes the marketplace paradigm and average cost of generating liquidity. The 
graphs plot the difference in platform profits, lender surplus, and amount lent under the 
bank-like paradigm minus the corresponding quantity under the marketplace paradigm; 
positive values imply that the bank-like paradigm dominates, negative values that the 
marketplace paradigm dominates.

are  more  liquidity  risk-averse,  traditional  intermediation  dominates 
(corresponding to the bank-like paradigm in our counterfactual).25

25 The bank-like model can be fragile under conditions of extreme illiquidity. 
Appendix Table D.3 reports an additional counterfactual, where the rollover 
probability is set to zero. As a result, platform profits, lender surplus, and 
amount lent drop substantially, suggesting that the bank-like model can be 
suboptimal under such a scenario.

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Braggion et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104113 

under the marketplace credit paradigm it sells to investors loan port-
folios that exhibit maturity mismatch, but bears no liquidity risk; and 
more recently under the bank-like paradigm if offers to retail investors 
products that resemble traditional bank deposits. Our empirical setting 
attenuates the potential confounding effects of regulation, since online 
credit was very lightly regulated in China during our sample period, 
and of the complexity of the business of traditional intermediaries, 
since  online  lending  platforms  focus  exclusively  on  intermediating 
credit in our sample.

We estimate our model using the universe of loans and loan ap-
plications on Renrendai, a leading Chinese marketplace credit plat-
form. Our approach recovers lender preferences from observed invest-
ment choices, and allows us to simulate counterfactuals to contrast 
marketplace credit to the peer-to-peer lending and bank-like paradigms.
We show a transition away from peer-to-peer lending and towards 
marketplace credit, and we document and quantify the exposure to 
liquidity risk that it creates. Moreover, we provide evidence of lender 
heterogeneity: less active investors on the platform are less focused on 
yields and more averse to liquidity risk. Our counterfactual analysis 
points to two main results. First, moving from the peer-to-peer to the 
marketplace model raises lender surplus, platform profits, and credit 
provision, suggesting a Pareto improvement. Second, the marketplace 
and bank-like models have similar welfare performance when the cost 
of generating liquidity and lender liquidity-risk aversion are low, but 
the bank-like model is welfare-increasing when the cost of generating 
liquidity and lender liquidity-risk aversion are high. Note that, whereas 
the  bank-like  paradigm  can  offer  advantages  in  terms  of  liquidity 
provision, our results show that it can be more exposed to rollover risk 
under stress scenarios. The history of banking crises shows that banks’ 
commitment to providing liquidity can be costly in bad times.

Overall, our findings highlight the importance of liquidity risk on 
debt crowdfunding platforms, in particular, and financial intermedi-
aries more in general. They also contribute to the ongoing regulatory 
debate, especially relevant as online credit intermediaries increasingly 
compete with traditional players.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Fabio Braggion: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Con-
ceptualization. Alberto Manconi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Nicola Pavanini: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, 
Data curation, Conceptualization. Haikun Zhu: Writing – review & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests that relate 

to the research described in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104113.

Data availability

The Value of Financial Intermediation: Evidence from Online Debt Cro
wdfunding (FINEC-D-23-00120) (Reference data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Bai, P., Krishnamurthy, A., Weymuller, C.-H., 2018. Measuring liquidity mismatch in 

the banking sector. J. Financ. 73 (1), 51–93.

Benetton, M., 2021. Leverage regulation and market structure: An empirical model of 

the U.K. mortgage market. J. Financ. 76 (6), 2997–3053.

Berger, A.N., Bouwman, C.H.S., 2009. Bank liquidity creation. J. Financ. Intermediation 

Berry, S., 1994. Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. RAND J. 

22 (9), 3779–3837.

Econ. 25 (2), 242–262.

Econometrica 63 (4), 841–890.

Macroecon. Annu. 26, 149–176.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., Pakes, A., 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium. 

Brunnermeier, M.K., Gorton, G., Krishnamurthy, A., 2012. Risk topography. NBER 

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and 

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Cornelli, G., Frost, J., Gambacorta, L., Rau, R., Wardrop, R., Ziegler, T., 2020. Fintech 

and Big Tech Credit: A New Database, BIS Working paper No. 887.

Crawford, G.S., Pavanini, N., Schivardi, F., 2018. Asymmetric information and imperfect 

competition in lending markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 108 (7), 1659–1701.

de Roure, C., Pelizzon, L., Thakor, A., 2022. P2P lenders versus banks: Cream skimming 

or bottom fishing? Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 11 (2), 213–262.

DeFusco, A.A., Tang, H., Yannelis, C., 2022. Measuring the welfare costs of asymmetric 
information in consumer credit markets. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (6), 821–840.
Diamond, D.W., Dybvig, P.H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. J. 

Political Econ. 91 (3), 401–419.

Dinerstein, M., Einav, L., Levin, J., Sundaresan, N., 2018. Consumer price search and 
platform design in internet commerce. Am. Econ. Rev. 108 (7), 1820–1859.
Drechsler, I., Savov, A., Schnabl, P., 2021. Banking on deposits: Maturity transformation 

without interest rate risk. J. Financ. 76 (3), 1091–1143.

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A., Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility: 

Evidence from the U.S. banking sector. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (1), 169–216.

Einav, L., Farronato, C., Levin, J., 2016. Peer-to-peer markets. Annu. Rev. Econ. 8, 

615–635.

Einav, L., Farronato, C., Levin, J., Sundaresan, N., 2018. Auctions versus posted prices 

in online markets. J. Political Econ. 126 (1), 178–215.

Farronato, C., Fradkin, A., 2022. The welfare effects of peer entry: The case of airbnb 

and the accommodation industry. Am. Econ. Rev. 112 (6), 1782–1817.

Franks, J.R., Serrano-Velarde, N., Sussman, O., 2021. Marketplace lending, information 

aggregation, and liquidity. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (5), 2318–2361.

Fréchette, G.R., Lizzeri, A., Salz, T., 2019. Frictions in a competitive, regulated market 

evidence from taxis. Am. Econ. Rev. 109 (8), 2954–2992.

Fuster,  A.,  Lo,  S.H.,  Willen,  P.S.,  2017.  The  time-varying  price  of  financial 

intermediation in the mortgage market, NBER Working Paper No. 23706.

Hertzberg, A., Liberman, A., Paravisini, D., 2018. Screening on loan terms: Evidence 
from maturity choice in consumer credit. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (9), 3532–3567.
Kawai, K., Onishi, K., Uetake, K., 2022. Signaling in online credit markets. J. Political 

Koijen, R.S.J., Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. J. Political 

Econ. 130 (6), 1585–1629.

Econ. 127 (4), 1475–1515.

Ma, Y., Xiao, K., Zeng, Y., 2020. Bank Debt versus Mutual Fund Equity in Liquidity 

Provision. Columbia University, Working Paper.

Rau, P.R., 2020. Law, Trust, and the Development of Crowdfunding. University of 

Cambridge Judge Business School, Working Paper.

Segura, A., Suarez, J., 2017. How excessive is banks? Maturity transformation? Rev. 

Stiglitz, J., Weiss, A., 1981. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information. 

Financ. Stud. 30 (10), 3538–3580.

Am. Econ. Rev. 71 (3), 393–410.

Tang, H., 2020. The Value of Privacy: Evidence from Online Borrowers. London School 

of Economics and Political Science, Working Paper.

Train, K.E., 2009. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University 

Vallée, B., Zeng, Y., 2019. Marketplace lending: A new banking paradigm? Rev. Financ. 

Press.

Stud. 32 (5), 1939–1982.

Villas-Boas,  S.B.,  2007.  Vertical  relationships  between  manufacturers  and  retailers: 

Inference with limited data. Rev. Econ. Stud. 74 (2), 625–652.

Wang, Y., Whited, T.M., Wu, Y., Xiao, K., 2022. Bank market power and monetary 
policy  transmission:  Evidence  from  a  structural  estimation.  J.  Financ.  77  (4), 
1971–2527.

Xin,  Y.,  2020.  Asymmetric  Information,  Reputation,  and  Welfare  in  Online  Credit 

Markets. Johns Hopkins University, Working Paper.

14 

