Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Why do portfolio choice models predict inelastic demand?(cid:73)
Carter Davis a
a Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, United States
b Gies College of Business, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, United States
c David Eccles School of Business, University of Utah, United States

, Mahyar Kargar b

,∗, Jiacui Li c

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Classical asset pricing models predict that optimizing investors exhibit extremely high demand elasticities, 
while empirical estimates are significantly lower—by three orders of magnitude. To reconcile this disparity, we 
introduce a novel decomposition of investor demand elasticity into two key components: ‘‘price pass-through’’, 
which captures how price movements forecast returns, and ‘‘unspanned returns’’, reflecting a stock’s lack of 
perfect substitutes. In a factor model framework, we show that unspanned returns become significant when 
models include ‘‘weak factors’’. Classical models overestimate demand elasticity by assuming both very low 
unspanned returns and high price pass-throughs, assumptions that are inconsistent with empirical evidence.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/5tz5fgjmxg/2

JEL classification:
G11
G12
G14

Keywords:
Demand elasticity
Price pass-through
Spanning
Weak factors
Demand-based asset pricing

1. Introduction

In classical asset pricing models, stock-level investor demand curves 
are nearly flat, implying virtually no price impacts from flows and 
supply shocks (e.g., Gabaix and Koijen, 2022). In stark contrast, empir-
ical estimates indicate that flows can create sizable price impacts and 
that investor demand is inelastic. This gap is large: theoretical mod-
els often predict demand elasticity in the thousands, while empirical 
estimates are lower by three orders of magnitude.1 Why do investors 
exhibit low demand elasticities in practice? One might hypothesize that 
this gap arises from severe portfolio frictions or behavioral deviations 
from rational portfolio choice. For example, prior research has shown 
that investors face benchmarking incentives, leverage constraints, and 

transaction  costs,  and  they  also  exhibit  behavioral  deviations  from 
optimal portfolio choice, all of which can dampen demand elasticities 
(e.g., Gromb and Vayanos, 2010; Basak and Pavlova, 2013; Haddad 
et al., 2025).

In this paper, we show that, without relying on the aforementioned 
frictions, the bulk of the demand elasticity gap can be explained by 
two factors: (1) stocks are poor substitutes for each other, and (2) 
the limited effect of price changes on next-period returns. In a partial 
equilibrium framework, we analytically study investors who form op-
timal portfolios, and present a novel decomposition of their demand 
elasticity into these two components. We find that classical models 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank Yu An, Aditya Chaudhry, Mike Chernov, Winston Dou, Zhiyu Fu, Xavier Gabaix, Andrei 
Gonçalves, Valentin Haddad, Leyla Han, Christian Heyerdahl Larsen, Da Huang, Tim Johnson, Ralph Koijen, Serhiy Kozak, Daniel Neuhann, Stavros Panageas, 
Lubos Pastor, Markus Pelger, Nick Roussanov, Dejanir Silva; the editor; an anonymous referee; and conference and seminar participants at AFA 2024, MFA 
2024, NBER New Developments in Long-Term Asset Management Spring 2024 Meeting, University of Connecticut Finance Conference, University of Maryland 
Young Scholars Conference, 2022 Wabash River Finance Conference, Indiana University, OSU, University of Rochester, UCSD, and University of Utah for valuable 
feedback. We thank Andrea Tamoni and Michael Weber for sharing data. Davis gratefully acknowledges the Indiana University Pervasive Technology Institute 
(Stewart et al., 2017) for providing supercomputing, database, and storage resources that have contributed to the research results reported within this paper. 
Earlier versions of this paper were circulated under the titles ‘‘Why is Asset Demand Inelastic?’’ and ‘‘Why is Stock-Level Demand Inelastic? A Portfolio Choice 
Approach’’. All errors are our own responsibility.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  carter.davis@fisher.osu.edu (C. Davis), kargar@illinois.edu (M. Kargar), jiacui.li@eccles.utah.edu (J. Li).

1 To appreciate the difference in magnitude, note that for a 1% change in share supply, classical models predict a price movement of approximately 0.02 basis 

points (1%∕5000), which is very close to zero, whereas empirical estimates imply a price impact of around 1%.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104096
Received 25 October 2024; Received in revised form 2 May 2025; Accepted 17 May 2025
Available online 2 June 2025 
0304-405X/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

predict extremely high demand elasticities due to unrealistic assump-
tions about the magnitude of these two factors.  When we use em-
pirically estimated values, the predicted demand elasticity decreases 
dramatically from approximately 7000 to about 5, much closer to the 
empirical estimates around one.2

We begin by studying an investor with constant relative risk aver-
sion (CRRA) utility who chooses an optimal portfolio, subject to short-
sale constraints.3 We analytically show that, for this optimizing in-
vestor, the stock-level demand elasticity can be decomposed into two 
components. For any stock 𝑖, the elasticity of share demand (𝑄𝑖) to price 
(𝑃𝑖) is approximately equal to one plus the product of two terms: 

−

𝜕 log(𝑄𝑖)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖)

≈ 1 +

(

)

−

𝜕𝜇𝑖
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
price pass-through

×

,

𝜕 log(𝑤𝑖)
𝜕𝜇𝑖
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
=1∕𝜇𝑖,unspanned

(1)

where  the  first  term,  ‘‘price  pass-through’’,  measures  the  extent  to 
which  price  movements  unrelated  to  cash  flows  affect  next-period 
expected returns (𝜇𝑖). The second term captures how the investor’s log 
portfolio weight responds to changes in next-period expected return 
and equals the reciprocal of the ‘‘unspanned return’’ of stock 𝑖—defined 
as the residual expected return of the stock not explained by a linear 
projection onto other stocks. Unspanned return measures the degree 
to which stock 𝑖 is substitutable. If it has near-perfect substitutes, its 
unspanned return will be close to zero, as assumed in classical asset 
pricing models like the CAPM. Otherwise, its unspanned return can be 
non-negligible. Importantly, both terms in Eq. (1), price pass-through 
and unspanned return, depend only on the properties of stock returns 
and can be estimated from data.

Using our decomposition, we find that classical models predict ex-
tremely high demand elasticities because they assume high price pass-
through and low unspanned returns. Are these assumptions supported 
by the data? To investigate, we estimate the two components using 
monthly U.S. stock return data. First, we estimate price pass-through 
using Fama–MacBeth regressions to predict next-month stock returns 
based on lagged log prices, while controlling for other return-predicting 
stock characteristics. This yields an estimate of approximately 0.01 
at the monthly horizon—meaning that each 1% drop in cash flow-
unrelated prices leads to a 1 basis points increase in expected returns 
the  following  month.  For  robustness,  we  also  estimate  price  pass-
through using price variation previously identified by prior research as 
unrelated to cash flow movements, and these methods yield similar or 
lower estimates. Incorporating the estimated price pass-through of 0.01 
reduces the demand elasticity prediction from 7000 to approximately 
800, as illustrated in the second bar of Fig.  1.

We  then  estimate  unspanned  returns,  which  requires  models  of 
expected returns and covariance matrices for stocks. We estimate stock 
expected returns using Fama–MacBeth regressions with commonly used 
stock characteristics, and estimate covariance matrices using rolling 
one-year windows of daily stock returns with Ledoit and Wolf (2004) 
shrinkage. Our results indicate that a non-negligible amount of stock 
returns are unspanned. For an average stock held in the optimal port-
folio, we estimate its monthly unspanned return to be around 0.3%. 
This contrasts sharply with classical models, which typically assume 
monthly unspanned returns around 0.001% (Gabaix and Koijen, 2022). 
When we incorporate empirical estimates, the predicted demand elas-
ticity decreases sharply from 800 to approximately 5, as shown in Fig. 
1.

2 For empirical estimates of demand elasticities, see Shleifer (1986), Lou 
(2012), Chang et al. (2015), Koijen and Yogo (2019), Haddad et al. (2025), 
and Pavlova and Sikorskaya (2023), among others.

3 It is important to emphasize that our results are not driven by the short-
sale constraints. All of our conclusions remain unchanged even in the absence 
of short-sale constraints, as demonstrated in previous versions of this paper.

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Thus, we find that the majority of the demand elasticity gap — from 
7000 to 5 — can be explained by incorporating empirical features of 
stock returns. What about the remaining gap from 5 to 1? One plausible 
explanation is the consideration of transaction costs. However, there 
are many other possibilities, and we do not take a definitive stance on 
the exact mechanism.

For robustness, we also examine additional factors that may affect 
investor  demand  elasticity.  Our  two-part  decomposition  in  Eq.  (1) 
focuses on the effects driven by changes in expected returns, but one 
might naturally question the impact of changes in return volatility or 
correlations. We extend our model to incorporate those effects and 
empirically show them to be small. Additionally, we consider Epstein–
Zin preferences with dynamic optimization, which account for wealth 
effects and intertemporal hedging. We find that the difference is also 
quantitatively small for the purpose of studying demand elasticities. We 
also discuss the effect of uncertainty in return parameter estimates in 
Bayesian frameworks and find those effects to be quantitatively small.
Our paper finds that stocks exhibit low price pass-throughs and 
high unspanned returns. How can we interpret these empirical facts? 
The former simply implies that variations in expected returns are often 
persistent, a common feature in many dynamic asset pricing models. 
The latter may seem less familiar to researchers accustomed to working 
within factor model frameworks. To clarify the connection, we show 
that stocks with high unspanned returns can be understood as reflecting 
the  presence  of  ‘‘weak  factors’’,  as  described  by  Lettau  and  Pelger 
(2020), which refer to factors that explain cross-section of expected 
returns but not much of the time-series variation of returns. While early 
classical factor models, such as the CAPM, assume the absence of weak 
factors, subsequent research found that more (and weaker) factors are 
necessary to describe the cross-section. Recent asset pricing models 
have incorporated a large number of stock characteristics (e.g., Kelly 
et al., 2019; Lettau and Pelger, 2020; Chen et al., 2023). We show that 
these models can accommodate weak factors, and when the number 
of factors is sufficiently large, they invariably imply high unspanned 
returns and low demand elasticities.

In interpreting our results, two clarification are in order. First, we 
do  not  consider  our  estimate  of  demand  elasticity  to  be  extremely 
precise. For instance, investors may use different models of expected 
returns and covariance in practice, which could lead them to identify 
different unspanned returns. However, our findings remain within the 
same order of magnitude across various estimation techniques. Regard-
less of the specific estimation method, we find that using empirically 
estimated properties of stock returns can explain the majority of the gap 
between classical theory predictions and empirical estimates of demand 
elasticity.

Second, why do we focus on optimizing investors with short-sale 
constraints, even though many real-life investors face many additional 
constraints, frictions, or exhibit behavioral biases? It is not because 
we believe those considerations are unimportant. Rather, we aim to 
ensure that our results are not driven by those additional factors, all 
of which can further reduce demand elasticities. We find that, once 
we account for empirically estimated return processes, even optimizing 
investors  exhibit  relatively  inelastic  demand.  Thus,  the  demand  of 
investors with additional constraints is likely even more inelastic. In 
other words, our paper provides a simple frictionless benchmark for 
asset-level demand elasticities, similar to how Modigliani and Miller 
(1958)  offers  a  benchmark  for  frictionless  capital  structure  choice. 
Related to this point, we clarify that our paper focuses on how optimal 
investor demand theoretically responds to price movements. While we 
empirically estimate statistical properties of stock returns, we do not 
empirically estimate demand elasticity and therefore do not need or 
propose a new price instrument.

This paper offers an explanation for the majority of the gap between 
the extremely high predictions of demand elasticity in classical models 
and the low empirical estimates. Specifically, we show that optimizing 

C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Fig. 1.  Explaining the gap between theoretical and empirical demand elasticities.
This figure illustrates our explanation of the gap between high demand elasticity values in classical asset pricing models and low values from empirical estimates. The leftmost bar 
illustrates predictions from classical models with high price pass-through and low unspanned return (e.g., Gabaix and Koijen, 2022; Petajisto, 2009, ≈ 7000). Taking into account 
empirically estimated price pass-through reduces elasticity by a factor of 9 to approximately 800, as shown by the second bar from the left. Taking into account empirically 
estimated unspanned returns, we arrive at elasticity estimates of around 5, further reducing elasticity by a factor of approximately 160, as shown by the third bar from the left. 
Therefore, taking into account empirical estimates of price processes can explain the gap from 7000 to 5. The remaining gap from 5 to 1 (empirical estimates) may be explained 
by transaction costs as discussed in Section 5.4, or additional frictions or behavioral factors that are not considered in this paper.

investor demand elasticity depends on two components — price pass-
through  and  unspanned  return  —  and  that  incorporating  empirical 
estimates  can  lower  theoretical  demand  elasticity  predictions  from 
7000 to around 5. Of the two components, incorporating empirically 
estimated  unspanned  returns  have  the  greatest  impact.  Empirically, 
stocks are not perfect substitutes, which results in significantly lower 
demand elasticities.

There is an extensive literature estimating demand elasticities in 
stocks  using  the  price  impacts  of  demand  or  supply  shocks:  index 
exclusion (Shleifer, 1986; Chang et al., 2015; Pavlova and Sikorskaya, 
2023), dividend payments (Schmickler, 2020), mutual fund flows (Lou, 
2012), and transaction costs of realized trades (Frazzini et al., 2018; 
Bouchaud et al., 2018). More recently, structural approaches have been 
employed to estimate demand elasticities using asset demand systems 
(Koijen and Yogo, 2019; van der Beck, 2022; Haddad et al., 2025). 
Related to our paper, Davis (2024) shows that a wide range of statistical 
arbitrage models exhibit inelastic demand, but we show why this is the 
case.

Our  finding  that  most  stock  price  movements  exhibit  low  pass-
through to future expected returns is consistent with existing evidence 
from the cross-section of stock returns. Stock returns typically exhibit 
reversals within a month (Jegadeesh, 1990), momentum over quarterly 
to annual frequency (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993), and reversals over 
multiple years (De Bondt and Thaler, 1985). These effects are far less 
than one-for-one and are consistent with our estimates. The innovation 
of our paper lies not in estimating price pass-throughs, but in clarifying 
that weak price pass-throughs lead to low demand elasticities.

We  show  that  demand  elasticity  should  be  low  because  stocks 
are not perfect substitutes, a topic that has received attention since 
the early days of capital markets theory. Scholes (1972) argues that 
stocks should be highly substitutable and not ‘‘unique works of art’’. 
However, our findings suggest that stocks are also not as substitutable 
as classical theory assumes. Early factor models, such as the CAPM 
or the Fama–French three factor model, assume that only systematic 
risk factors, which explain a large fraction of common return variation, 
are priced. However, subsequent research has discovered an increasing 
number  of  factors,  and  more  recent  factor  models  are  designed  to 
flexibly  incorporate  ‘‘weak  factors’’  (e.g.,  Kelly  et  al.,  2019;  Lettau 

and  Pelger,  2020;  Chen  et  al.,  2023).  Researchers  find  that  stock 
returns are poorly spanned by systematic risk factors (e.g., Lopez-Lira 
and Roussanov, 2023; Dello-Preite et al., 2024) or a range of factor 
models (e.g., Baba Yara et al., 2021). We contribute to the literature 
by showing that weak factors lead to high unspanned returns, which, 
in turn, explain low demand elasticities.

The remainder of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we show 
that optimizing investor demand elasticity depends on two components, 
price pass-through and unspanned return. In Section 3, we show that 
using empirical estimates of these two components lowers theoretical 
predictions of demand elasticities by three orders of magnitude. Sec-
tion 4 shows that high unspanned returns in stocks can be understood as 
the existence of weak factors. Section 5 discusses additional influences 
on demand elasticities. Section 6 concludes.

2. Determinants of demand elasticities in portfolio choice

In this section, we show that asset-level demand elasticities in stan-
dard portfolio choice can be decomposed into two components: price 
pass-through and unspanned return. The former measures how price 
changes ‘‘pass-through’’ to expected returns, while the latter depends on 
the extent to which assets are substitutable in the cross-section. We then 
apply our decomposition framework to explain why classical models 
predict  very  high  demand  elasticities.  Our  analysis  takes  a  partial 
equilibrium approach, focusing on portfolio choice with exogenously 
given price properties rather than attempting to endogenize prices in 
general equilibrium.

Our portfolio choice approach is motivated by the simple insight 
that demand for assets is fundamentally different from demand for 
consumption goods, such as bananas. A consumer’s demand elasticity 
for bananas is determined directly by their primitive preference for 
bananas.  In  contrast,  an  investor  only  has  indirect  preference  over 
assets—they do not care about the assets themselves but rather the
returns those assets generate, which ultimately affect their consumption 
or wealth. Thus, how an investor adjusts their portfolio in response 
to price changes primarily depends on their perception of how returns 
have changed.

3 

C. Davis et al.

Motivated by this discussion, our subsequent results focus on the 
portfolio choice of optimizing investors. We do not consider any addi-
tional portfolio constraints or frictions, such as benchmarking consider-
ations and indexing, or behavioral biases, such as return extrapolation, 
all of which tend to further reduce demand elasticities (e.g., Pavlova 
and Sikorskaya, 2023; Haddad et al., 2025). We make this modeling 
choice not because of realism, but to ensure that our results are not 
driven by additional frictions.

Our benchmark model assumes that the investor has constant rela-
tive risk aversion (CRRA) utility and conducts one-period optimization. 
Some researchers emphasize dynamic optimization and intertemporal 
hedging  considerations.  Later  in  Section  5.2,  we  find  that  the  im-
pact of intertemporal hedging on demand elasticity is quantitatively 
small.  Therefore,  for  analytical  simplicity,  we  focus  on  one-period 
optimization in this section.

2.1. A two-part decomposition of demand elasticity

Definition.  Consider an investor who holds 𝑄𝑖,𝑡 shares of asset 𝑖 at time 
𝑡. The investor’s demand elasticity 𝜂𝑖,𝑡 for asset 𝑖 is defined as: 

𝜂𝑖,𝑡

≡ −

𝜕 log(𝑄𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

,

(2)

where 𝑃𝑖,𝑡 represents the per-share asset price, and the price change is 
driven by non-cash flow-related reasons.4 For example, an elasticity of 
4 means that a 1% drop in price, unrelated to cash flows, leads to a 4% 
increase in the demand for shares currently held.

To express demand elasticity in terms of portfolio weight, 𝑤𝑖,𝑡, we 
can write 𝑄𝑖,𝑡 = 𝐴𝑡𝑤𝑖,𝑡∕𝑃𝑖,𝑡, where 𝐴𝑡 denotes assets under management 
(AUM)  or  the  investor’s  wealth.  Substituting  this  into  Eq.  (2)  and 
assuming that 𝐴𝑡 is exogenous,5 we obtain: 

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = −

𝜕 log(𝐴𝑡𝑤𝑖,𝑡∕𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

= 1 −

𝜕 log(𝑤𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

.

(3)

Decomposition.  We now apply the chain rule to Eq. (3) to derive our 
decomposition based on the effect of changes in expected return 𝜇𝑖,𝑡: 

(

)

.

×

−

(4)

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 ≈ 1 +

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
price pass-through

𝜕 log(𝑤𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
weight responsiveness
The  first  term,  𝜕 log(𝑤𝑖,𝑡)
,  which  we  refer  to  as  ‘‘weight  responsive-
ness’’, describes how responsive the investor’s portfolio weights are 
to expected returns. The second term, −
, which we refer to as 
‘‘price pass-through’’, measures the fraction of price movements that 
are ‘‘passed through’’ to changes in expected return. For instance, if a 
1% decrease in price leads to a 0.3% increase in next-period expected 
return, the price pass-through would be 0.3.

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡

The equality in Eq. (4) is approximate because our decomposition 
only considers the demand response to changes in expected returns. Of 
course, price changes can also lead to changes in other aspects, such as 
the asset’s return volatility or its consumption-hedging properties, all of 
which may also impact demand. However, under reasonable assump-
tions, as shown in Section 5, these additional terms are quantitatively 
small. Therefore, in this section, we focus on the effects driven by 
expected returns.

4 In  line  with  the  ceteris  paribus  definition  of  demand  elasticity,  we 
consider  price  changes  while  holding  fundamentals  constant,  focusing  on 
non-cash-flow-related price movements.

5 This means that we ignore wealth effects and assume, as in Koijen and 
= 0. Appendix  B.1 shows that wealth effects are 

Yogo (2019), that  𝜕 log(𝐴𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
small for reasonably diversified portfolios.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

2.2. Weight responsiveness depends on unspanned returns

What  determines  the  two  terms  in  Eq.  (4)?  Price  pass-through 
clearly depends on price dynamics. If a price movement is expected to 
largely revert in the next period, the pass-through will be close to one. 
However, if the price movement is more persistent, the pass-through 
will be lower.

The determinants of weight responsiveness are less clear. In this 
section, we show that for an investor with constant relative risk aver-
sion (CRRA) utility, weight responsiveness is inversely proportional to 
‘‘unspanned return’’, which measures the distinctiveness of the asset.

Portfolio choice problem.  We consider a portfolio choice problem with 
constant  relative  risk  aversion  (CRRA)  utility  and  log-normally  dis-
tributed  returns,  with  short  sale  constraints.  As  shown  in  Internet 
Appendix  IA.1,  this  set  up  results  in  approximately  mean–variance 
portfolio choice.

Suppose there are 𝑁 risky assets and a risk-free asset with an ex-
ogenously given gross return 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡. The investor’s optimization problem 
is:

[

E

𝑡

]

,

𝐴1−𝛾
𝑡+1
1 − 𝛾

max
𝑤𝑡

where  𝐴𝑡  is  investor’s  wealth,  𝛾  is  the  coefficient  of  relative  risk 
aversion, and 𝑤𝑡 is the 𝑁 dimensional vector of risky asset weights. 
The budget constraint is 𝐴𝑡+1 = (1 + 𝑅𝑝,𝑡+1)𝐴𝑡, where 𝑅𝑝,𝑡+1 is the 
simple return on investor’s portfolio. Assuming next period wealth is 
log-normal, maximizing the objective function above is equivalent to

[
log E

max
𝑤𝑡

𝑡(1 + 𝑅𝑝,𝑡+1) −

]

,

𝜎2
𝑝,𝑡

𝛾
2

where 𝑟𝑝,𝑡+1 = log(1 + 𝑅𝑝,𝑡+1) is the log portfolio return and 𝜎2
conditional variance of log portfolio return.

𝑝,𝑡 is the 

Investors also face short-sale constraints, 𝑤𝑡

≥ 0, where 0 represents 
a vector of zeros with conforming dimension. As in Koijen and Yogo 
(2019) and without loss of generality, we group the assets into those 
for which the short-sale constraint is not binding versus binding as:
]

[

[

]

𝑤𝑡 =

]

[ 𝑤(1)
𝑡
0

,

𝜇𝑡 =

,

𝛴𝑡 =

𝜇(1)
𝑡
𝜇(2)
𝑡

𝛴(1,1)
𝑡
𝛴(2,1)
𝑡

𝛴(1,2)
𝑡
𝛴(2,2)
𝑡

,

where 𝜇𝑡 is the 𝑁-dimensional conditional mean vector and 𝛴𝑡 is the 
𝑁 × 𝑁 conditional covariance matrix of log excess returns.

As we show in Internet Appendix IA.1, the approximate solution to 

the portfolio choice problem above is 

𝑤(1)

𝑡 ≈

1
𝛾

𝛴(1,1)−1

𝑡

𝜇(1)
𝑡

.

(5)

Since  this  reduces  to  the  familiar  mean–variance  portfolio  weights 
when  restricted  to  the  set  of  assets  where  the  short-sale  constraint 
does not bind, we will henceforth focus on assets held by the optimal 
portfolio.

Unspanned return determines weight responsiveness.  To determine asset-
level weight responsiveness, we need to examine how the portfolio 
weight in asset 𝑖, 𝑤𝑖,𝑡, responds to 𝜇𝑖,𝑡. As shown in Stevens (1998), 
the key is to isolate the component of asset 𝑖 that is not spanned by 
other assets. Specifically, we focus on the set of assets for which the 
short-sale constraint does not bind and let 𝑁 denote the number of 
such assets (with a slight abuse of notation). Consider the regression of 
asset 𝑖 excess return, 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1, on the 𝑁 − 1 dimensional vector of excess 
returns of all other assets, 𝑟−𝑖,𝑡+1: 

𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
non-replicable part

+ 𝛽′

−𝑖,𝑡𝑟−𝑖,𝑡+1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
replicable part

+ 𝜖𝑖,𝑡+1,

(6)

where  𝛽−𝑖,𝑡  is  the  (𝑁 − 1)  dimensional  vector  of  conditional  slope 
coefficients, 𝜖𝑖,𝑡+1 is the mean-zero error term, and 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 is the 

4 

C. Davis et al.

conditional intercept term—representing the component of asset 𝑖’s re-
turn that cannot be replicated by other assets. Taking time-𝑡 conditional 
expectation of both sides yields 

𝜇𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
unspanned returns

,

+ 𝛽′

−𝑖,𝑡𝜇−𝑖,𝑡
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
spanned returns

(7)

where 𝜇𝑖,𝑡 and 𝜇−𝑖,𝑡 are the conditional expectations of 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1 and 𝑟−𝑖,𝑡+1, 
respectively.

Our key result, Proposition  1, shows that the weight responsiveness 

for asset 𝑖 is equal to the reciprocal of 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡.

Proposition 1.   If the investor forms optimal portfolios, then for all assets 
held, weight responsiveness is given by 
𝜕 log(𝑤𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡

1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

(8)

=

.

Thus, the demand elasticity takes the following form: 

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = 1 +

×

1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
weight responsiveness

Proof.  See Appendix  A.

)

(

−

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
price pass-through

.

(9)

Eq. (9) follows directly from Eqs. (4) and (8). Eq. (8) shows that 
the sensitivity of an investor’s portfolio to changes in expected return 
is inversely proportional to the asset’s unspanned return. Therefore, 
investor demand is more inelastic for assets that are more distinctive 
and have larger unspanned returns.

Where does Eq. (8) come from? In the proof of Proposition  1 in 
Appendix  A, we show that optimal demand for asset 𝑖 can be written 
as: 

𝑤𝑖,𝑡 =

1
𝛾

( 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

)

𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

,

(10)

where  the  numerator  is  the  unspanned  return  of  asset  𝑖,  and  the 
denominator, 𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡, is the conditional variance of 𝜖𝑖,𝑡+1 in Eq. (6), 
which we refer to the ‘‘unspanned variance’’ of asset 𝑖. This expression 
is similar to the result one would obtain if there were only a single risky 
asset in the economy, where demand is linear in the expected return 
divided by the return variance. The only difference is that, instead of
standalone expected return and variance of asset 𝑖, Eq. (10) involves the
unspanned return and variance of asset 𝑖, which arises from considering 
the impact of other assets on portfolio choice.

If we assume that the unspanned variance, 𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡, remains 
constant, applying the logarithm and then taking the derivative with 
respect to 𝜇𝑖,𝑡 yields Eq. (8). Later, we relax this assumption and also 
consider changes in unspanned variance in Section 5.1, finding that the 
difference is quantitatively small.

Intuition and clarifications.  What does unspanned return, 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡, 
measure?  We  propose  that  it  captures  the  distinctiveness,  or  non-
substitutability, of asset 𝑖. The higher 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡, the less replicable 
the asset is by other assets, making it a more important position in the 
investor’s portfolio.

As an intuitive example, consider an investor who believes that 
Tesla stock has high expected returns. What is the investor’s demand 
elasticity on Tesla? Our result suggests that it depends on whether the 
investor views Tesla as a unique investment opportunity. If the investor 
believes that a significant portion of Tesla’s high expected returns is 
specific to Tesla and cannot be achieved using other assets, her demand 
elasticity for Tesla will be low. Conversely, if the investor thinks Tesla’s 
returns can be replicated by a combination of other stocks, her demand 
elasticity will be high.

It is important to clarify that unspanned return is not the same as 
asset pricing alpha in factor models such as the CAPM. In the CAPM, 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

the  explanatory  variable  —  the  market  portfolio  —  is  constructed 
using all assets, while in Eq. (7), asset 𝑖 itself is excluded from the 
explanatory variables. Therefore, even in a world where the CAPM 
holds, 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 can be non-zero, albeit small, despite the CAPM 
alpha  being  zero  by  definition.  Section  4  further  explains  how  to 
interpret unspanned returns within the framework of factor models.

2.3. Why do classical models predict extremely high demand elasticities?

In this section, we offer a benchmark calibration that shows how 
classical assumptions yield demand elasticities of approximately 7000. 
While this is a specific calibration, it reflects the key features of many 
classical models. Gabaix and Koijen (2022) reach a similar conclusion, 
showing that asset-level demand elasticities in classical pricing models 
are on the order of 5000 or higher. Similarly, Petajisto (2009) finds a 
demand elasticity exceeding 6,000.

Our  goal  is  to  explain  why  these  models  predict  high  demand 
elasticities.  Using  our  decomposition  framework,  we  show  it  arises 
from assuming high price pass-throughs and, more importantly, low 
unspanned returns. Below, we outline the steps in our calibration.

1. Price pass-through. Many asset pricing models used for study-
ing  demand  elasticities  are  static,  assuming  that  payoffs  are 
realized in the next period. As a consequence, they assume that 
all current period price movements must revert, leading to a 
price pass-through of one. In the monthly calibration below, we 
follow this practice and assume that all price movements revert 
within one year, implying a monthly price pass-through of 1/12 
(e.g., Petajisto, 2009).

2. Unspanned returns. More importantly, classical models often 
implicitly  assume  that  unspanned  returns  are  very  small.  To 
provide a calibration, we solve for the unspanned return of an 
asset 𝑖: 

𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 =

(𝜄′𝛴−1

𝑡 𝜇𝑡

) 𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

(

)

,

𝑤𝑖,𝑡
𝑗=1 𝑤𝑗,𝑡

∑𝑁

(11)

where 𝜄 is a column vector of ones. The expression above is 
derived by solving Eq. (10) for the unspanned return and using 
Eq. (5) to substitute out 𝛾.
We use Eq. (11) to calibrate for unspanned returns using values 
that are often assumed for U.S. stocks (e.g. Petajisto, 2009). 
Suppose there are 𝑁 = 1000 stocks, each with a monthly return 
volatility of 10% and a monthly expected excess return of 0.5%. 
Further, assume that all pairwise correlations are 0.3. Under 
these assumptions, the 𝑅2 from regressing the return of asset 𝑖
on all other assets, as in Eq. (6), is approximately 30%, leading 
0.7 × 0.12 ≈ 8.4%. 
to an unspanned volatility of 𝜎𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 =
The average portfolio weight, 𝑤𝑖,𝑡∕(∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝑤𝑗,𝑡), is simply 1∕𝑁 =
1∕1000. The first scalar in Eq. (11) is 𝜄′𝛴−1
𝑡 𝜇𝑡 ≈ 1.66. Combining 
these values gives an unspanned return for this asset of 0.0012% 
(≈ 1.66 × 0.0842 × (1∕1000)).6
Unspanned returns of 0.0012% indicate that stocks are highly 
substitutable. For comparison, the monthly average excess re-
turn of stocks is on the order of 0.5%, which is two orders of 
magnitude higher. Therefore, such classical calibrations assume 
that only a tiny fraction of expected return is unique to stock 𝑖
itself, while the vast majority of its expected return can be repli-
cated using a linear combination of other stocks (e.g., Scholes, 
1972).

√

6 For simplicity, this calibration assumes all stocks are symmetric. Internet 
Appendix  IA.2.5  shows  that  calibrations  with  heterogeneous  stocks  yield 
similar results.

5 

C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Table 1
Summary statistics.
The sample consists of CRSP monthly U.S. stocks from 1970 to 2019. We excluded stocks smaller than the monthly 
NYSE 20% percentile. The first column reports the average number of stocks in each month. The next two columns 
report the mean and the standard deviation, and the last five columns report percentiles.
  Variable
50%

Mean

75%

25%

5%

SD

N

  Market cap ($ bn)
  Monthly excess return
  Lagged monthly return
  Log(B/M)
  Asset growth
  Dividend/book
  Profitability

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

1,633
1,633
1,633
1,633
1,633
1,633
1,633

4.58
0.72%
1.49%
−0.59
0.13
2.91%
0.24

13.96
9.77%
9.88%
0.82
0.19
2.84%
0.22

0.30
−13.83%
−12.82%
−2.02
−0.09
0.00%
−0.03

0.51
−4.68%
−4.16%
−1.06
0.03
0.74%
0.15

1.08
0.38%
0.86%
−0.52
0.09
2.11%
0.24

3.02
5.67%
6.31%
−0.06
0.19
4.30%
0.34

95%  
(8)
17.65  
16.24% 
17.69% 
0.63
0.52
9.36%  
0.59

We are now ready to calibrate the implied demand elasticity of 
classical models. Substituting the calibrations of price pass-throughs 
and  unspanned  returns  into  our  decomposition  in  Eq.  (4)  yields  a 
demand elasticity of 1 + 1∕12
≈ 7000. Naturally, demand elasticity 
0.0012%
depends on the model parameters, but experimenting with a range of 
parameter values typically produces an average elasticity across assets 
in the thousands. As mentioned earlier, our conclusion is consistent 
with Petajisto (2009) and Gabaix and Koijen (2022).

3. Empirical estimates

In Section 2, we showed that demand elasticities for optimizing 
investors are determined by price pass-throughs and unspanned re-
turns, both of which depend solely on the properties of asset returns. In 
this section, we empirically estimate these two terms in the U.S. stock 
market.

It  is  important  to  note  that  we  do  not  claim  our  estimates  are 
perfectly precise. Rather, they provide insights into reasonable ranges
for price pass-throughs and unspanned returns. However, across various 
estimation approaches, our estimates consistently differ from those as-
sumed in classical models. Incorporating these estimates helps explain 
a substantial portion of the gap between theoretical predictions and 
empirical estimates of demand elasticities.

3.1. Data

We use the standard CRSP-Compustat merged dataset for returns 
and basic stock characteristics, with the sample spanning from 1970 
through  2019.  To  prevent  our  results  from  being  driven  by  micro-
cap stocks, we exclude stocks with market capitalization lower than 
the 20th percentile of NYSE stocks each month. Quarterly and annual 
returns are calculated by compounding monthly returns. We obtain 
risk-free rate and factor returns from Ken French’s website. The return-
predicting stock characteristics data is from Freyberger et al. (2020). 
The resulting sample has an average of 1,633 stocks in each month. 
Table  1 reports the summary statistics.

3.2. Estimates of price pass-through

In this section, we use forecasting regressions to estimate the price 
pass-through term in Eq. (9). Here, we present one approach to es-
timating price pass-through, while Appendix  B.4 outlines alternative 
approaches. Although we do not claim that any of these estimates are 
exact, collectively, they all indicate that empirically estimated price 
pass-throughs are lower than those assumed by classical theoretical 
models.

In Table  2, we estimate Fama–MacBeth regressions that forecast 
one-month-ahead stock excess returns. Price pass-through is captured 
by (the negative of) the coefficient on the log split-adjusted stock price. 
To  assess  robustness,  we  progressively  add  commonly  used  return-
forecasting characteristics as controls from the first to the last column. 
The two most important controls are one-quarter-lagged log prices and 

log of split-adjusted book equity per share, which allows us vary recent 
prices, holding fixed these variables. Adding more controls increases 
the  regression  R-squared,  indicating  that  these  variables  are  useful 
for explaining expected returns. Across all specifications, the highest 
estimated price pass-through is 0.01 in specifications (4) through (6).
As a robustness check, in Appendix  B.4, we follow the demand-
based asset pricing literature to isolate cash flow-unrelated price varia-
tion using structural or reduced-form methods. We then estimate price 
pass-through using forecasting regressions based on these isolated price 
variations. The results similarly indicate low price pass-through, with 
the highest point estimate equal to 0.015.

Collectively, these results indicate that empirically estimated price 
pass-through is on the order of 0.01 at a monthly frequency. This is 
much lower than typical theoretical calibrations, such as in Petajisto 
(2009), which assumes a monthly price pass-through of 1/12 (annual 
pass-through of 1). Therefore, incorporating empirically estimated price 
pass-through would reduce the predicted demand elasticity by a factor 
of approximately 1∕12
0.01

Why would price pass-through be low? As detailed in Appendix 
B.2, low price pass-throughs suggest that price variations associated 
with expected returns are relatively persistent. While we do not take 
a specific stance on the microfoundations driving this persistence, it 
is a natural prediction of many dynamic asset pricing models. It is 
important to note that stocks are long-lived assets, and the use of a one-
period model, such as in Petajisto (2009), inherently assumes a price 
pass-through of one.

≈ 8.3.

3.3. Estimates of unspanned returns

We now estimate the second term — unspanned returns — in our 
decomposition of demand elasticity. Recall that, for each asset 𝑖, its 
unspanned return is defined as the component of its expected return 
that is not spanned by other assets in a linear regression. To compute 
this, we need estimates for both the vector of expected excess stock 
returns 𝜇𝑡 and the covariance matrix 𝛴𝑡. We first describe a list of 
models for 𝜇𝑡 and 𝛴𝑡 in Section 3.3.1 and then present results using 
a benchmark model in Section 3.3.2. Section 4 further discusses how 
and why unspanned returns vary across models.

For the factor models below, we use a standard factor model as-
sumption with 𝐹  factors, where 𝜇𝑡 = 𝛼𝑡 + 𝐵𝑡𝜇𝑓 . Here, 𝛼𝑡 is an 𝑁-
dimensional vector of alphas, 𝐵𝑡 is an 𝑁 × 𝐹  matrix of betas for the 𝐹
factors, and 𝜇𝑓  is an 𝐹 -dimensional vector of factor portfolio expected 
returns. We also let 𝛺 denote the 𝐹 ×𝐹  covariance matrix of the factors. 
To empirically estimate 𝜇𝑓  and 𝛺, we use the mean and covariance 
estimates of the factors over the entire sample period. The factor models 
and  our  implementation  details  are  described  in  Internet  Appendix 
IA.2.3.

3.3.1. Models

We consider three types of models. The first is a benchmark model 
motivated  by  the  approach  commonly  used  by  quantitative  funds, 
which estimates expected returns and covariance separately. The next 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Table 2
Estimating price pass-through.
We estimate price pass-through using Fama–MacBeth regressions to forecast monthly stock returns. The 
independent characteristics represent, in order, log split-adjusted stock price, one-quarter lagged split-
adjusted log stock price, log split-adjusted book equity per share, beta, asset growth, profitability, and 
dividend-to-book ratio.

(1)

−0.006∗
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)

  log(𝑃 )

  log(𝑃lag)

  log(𝐵𝐸)

  Beta

  AssetGrowth

  Profitability

  Dividend/Book

Dependent variable: next-month return
(2)

(3)

(4)

−0.007∗∗
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
0.001∗
(0.001)

−0.009∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.004
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
−0.162
(0.128)

−0.010∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.005∗
(0.003)
0.000
(0.001)
−0.112
(0.126)
−0.009∗∗∗
(0.001)

(5)

−0.010∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.005∗
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
−0.083
(0.123)
−0.009∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.008∗∗∗
(0.002)

  Obs
  𝑅2
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.

968,634
2.48%

968,634
3.82%

968,634
6.16%

968,634
6.49%

968,634
7.03%

(6)
−0.010∗∗∗ 
(0.003)  
0.005∗
(0.003)  
0.000
(0.001)  
−0.105  
(0.113)  
−0.010∗∗∗ 
(0.001)  
0.008∗∗∗  
(0.001)  
−0.019  
(0.015)  
968,634  
7.55%  

two  types  are  factor  models  —  classical  and  principal  component 
analysis (PCA)-based — that impose a relationship between expected 
returns and covariance. We implement the first model in this section 
and the other two types in Section 4. Below, we briefly discuss each 
type.

The benchmark model.  To estimate expected return 𝜇𝑡, we follow a 
long literature on the cross-section of stock returns (e.g., Lewellen, 
2015) and predict expected returns using stock characteristics in Fama–
MacBeth  regressions.  Our  main  specification  follows  column  (6)  in 
Table  2. As the characteristics vary over time, so do the return forecasts. 
We estimate a full-sample Fama–MacBeth regression for simplicity, but 
the results are similar when using rolling-window regressions.

∑

𝑗≠𝑖

∑𝑁
𝑖=1

To estimate the time-varying covariance matrix 𝛴𝑡, we follow Lopez-
Lira  and  Roussanov  (2023)  to  use  a  one-year  lag  of  daily  returns, 
and then shrink the sample covariance matrix using the methodology 
of Ledoit and Wolf (2004). Specifically, we compute 𝛴𝑡 = (1 − ℎ𝑡) ̂𝛴𝑡 +
ℎ𝑡𝛴𝑡, where  ̂𝛴𝑡 is the sample covariance matrix estimate, 𝛴𝑡 is the 
shrinkage target, and ℎ𝑡 is the optimal shrinkage weight (average is 
0.324) that is computed following Ledoit and Wolf (2004). The shrink-
age target 𝛴𝑡 has the average stock-specific return variance along the 
diagonal ( 1
̂𝛴𝑖,𝑖,𝑡) and the average covariance on the off-diagonal 
𝑁
∑𝑁
1
̂𝛴𝑖,𝑗,𝑡).
(
𝑖=1
𝑁(𝑁−1)
Classical factor models.  We consider classical factor models with an 
increasing  number  of  factors.  These  include  the  CAPM,  Fama  and 
French (1993) (FF3), Hou et al. (2015) (HXZ), Fama and French (2015) 
(FF5), and Fama and French (2015) with the momentum factor (FF6).7
We model the time-varying covariance matrix of stock returns as 
𝛴𝑡 = 𝐵𝑡𝛺𝐵′
𝑡 + 𝐸𝑡, where 𝛺 is the covariance matrix of factor returns 
estimated  from  the  full  sample,  𝐵𝑡  are  time-varying  betas,  and  𝐸𝑡
is a diagonal matrix containing the unspanned variances. Betas are 
estimated using five-year rolling window time-series regressions. The 
diagonal terms of 𝐸𝑡 are then estimated using five-year rolling windows 
after subtracting the factor-explained components from stock returns.

PCA  factor  models.  We  implement  three  types  of  PCA-based  factor 
models. As discussed in the Internet Appendix IA.2.3, we use data on 
𝐾 = 62 stock characteristics from Freyberger et al. (2020) and apply a 
standard data normalization technique. For each model, we specify the 
number of factors. The models are as follows:

7 For model implementation, we follow the methodology outlined in the 

original papers to construct the factor portfolio weights.

7 

1. RPCA.  Chen  et  al.  (2023)  develop  a  method  where
characteristic-based portfolio returns are obtained by projecting 
stock returns onto characteristics, creating regressed or projected 
portfolio-level returns 𝑦𝑡. The first principal component portfo-
lios of 𝑦𝑡 are then used as the factors. We model the covariance 
matrix of stocks returns as 𝛴𝑡 = 𝐵𝑡𝛺𝐵′
𝜖 ⋅ 𝐼𝑁 , where 𝛺
represents  the  covariance  matrix  of  factor  returns,  𝐵𝑡  is  the 
vector of betas estimated from Chen et al. (2023), and 𝜎2
𝜖  is the 
average stock-level residual variance.

𝑡 + 𝜎2

2. RP-PCA. We also implement the risk-premium PCA (RP-PCA) 
model in Lettau and Pelger (2020) on the regressed portfolio re-
turns, 𝑦𝑡. We use the same method for calculating the covariance 
matrix and residual variance as in the RPCA model.

3. IPCA.  Finally,  we  implement  the  instrumented  PCA  (IPCA) 
model from Kelly et al. (2019). Their methodology produces 
estimates for factor portfolio weights and betas as by-products 
of the optimization process. We use the same approach as in the 
RPCA model to calculate the covariance matrix and the residual 
variance.

We implement versions of these PCA-style factor models without 
alpha terms. In other words, we assume that the factors fully explain 
the cross-section of expected returns. The results that include alphas 
are presented in Internet Appendix IA.2.6.

3.3.2. Unspanned returns

We now compute unspanned returns using the benchmark model 
of 𝜇𝑡 and 𝛴𝑡 discussed above. We first identify the subset of assets 
with strictly positive weights where the short-sale constraint does not 
bind, excluding those with zero positions.8 The proof of Proposition  1 
in Appendix  A shows how to calculate unspanned returns from 𝜇𝑡 and 
𝛴𝑡.9 Analysis of the classical and PCA-style factor models is presented 
in Section 4.

We compute the spanned and unspanned returns, 𝛽′

−𝑖,𝑡𝜇−𝑖,𝑡 and 𝜇𝑖,𝑡 −
𝛽′
−𝑖,𝑡𝜇−𝑖,𝑡, respectively, for each stock-month and graphically illustrate 

8 Internet Appendix IA.2.1 gives more details about portfolio optimization 

with short-sale constraints.

9 The steps are straightforward. First, calculate the vector, 𝑤𝑡 = 𝛴−1

which contains the terms 𝑤𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡∕𝜎2
diagonal of 𝛴−1
𝑡
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 = 𝑤𝑖,𝑡𝜎2

, which consists of the terms 1∕𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 using the first two steps.

𝑡 𝜇𝑡, 
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡. Second, compute the 
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡. Finally, solve for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

Fig. 2.  Decomposing spanned and unspanned returns
This figure examines the fraction of expected excess return that is spanned by other 
stocks. We implement the benchmark model described in Section 3.3.1. Specifically, we 
estimate expected excess returns 𝜇𝑡 using stock characteristics-based Fama–MacBeth 
predictions,  and we estimate the covariance matrix 𝛴𝑡 using daily returns in the 
previous 12 months with Ledoit and Wolf (2004) shrinkage. We enforce short-sale 
constraints and consider stocks held by the resulting portfolio. We sort the full sample 
of portfolio holdings into 50 bins based on each stock’s estimated excess return 𝜇𝑖,𝑡 and 
plot the average spanned component (𝛽′
−𝑖𝜇−𝑖,𝑡) on the vertical axis. The red line with 
round markers represents the spanned returns estimated from data and, for comparison, 
the blue line with triangular markers shows the unspanned returns assumed by classical 
theory (e.g., Petajisto, 2009).

the  results  in  Fig.   2.  We  sort  the  sample  by  each  stock’s  total  ex-
pected excess return, 𝜇𝑖,𝑡, into 50 bins and plot the average spanned 
component, 𝛽′
−𝑖,𝑡𝜇−𝑖,𝑡, on the 𝑦-axis. The gap between the 45-degree 
black dotted line and the red ‘‘Estimated’’ line with round markers 
represents the asset’s unspanned return. For example, in the top bin, 
the monthly excess return is 3.95%, while the spanned component is 
3.11%, resulting in an unspanned return of 3.95% − 3.11% = 0.84%. Due 
to the short-sale constraint, only stocks with positive unspanned returns 
are held and included in the Figure.

To highlight the difference with classical models, we also plot the 
spanning implied by the model of Petajisto (2009) in Fig.  2, shown 
by  the  blue  line  with  triangular  markers.  In  that  model,  which  is 
representative of classical models, approximately 99.8% of all returns 
are spanned, meaning the line nearly overlaps with the 45-degree line.
Overall, our empirical results indicate that while a substantial frac-
tion of expected return is spanned, the spanning is far from complete. 
In column (1) of Table  3, we report the average unspanned returns 
for stocks held in the short sale-constrained portfolio with different 
covariance shrinkage parameters. When using the optimal shrinkage 
parameter, computed using the formula from Ledoit and Wolf (2004), 
the average monthly unspanned return is 0.282%. A comparison of 
the results in column (1) shows that unspanned returns are relatively 
insensitive to alternative shrinkage parameters for estimating the co-
variance matrix. To assess robustness with respect to different ways 
for model expected returns, columns (3) and (4) present results using 
only the Fama–French three characteristics (FF3) to forecast returns. 
Additionally, columns (2) and (4) use 10-year rolling windows, rather 
than the full sample, to estimate expected returns. While the results ex-
hibit some variation, they remain two orders of magnitude higher than 
those assumed in classical models. In Section 4.2, we further show that 
the presence of non-trivial unspanned returns remains robust across a 
wide range of factor pricing models that capture characteristics-implied 
return predictability.

8 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

In columns (5) through (8) of Table  3, we report the realized annual 
Sharpe ratios of the optimized portfolios. In our implementation, we 
scale the portfolio weights to have the same L1 norm across all periods. 
When using the benchmark model with all characteristics to forecast 
returns, these strategies achieve Sharpe ratios of around 0.9 to 1.1 
when expected returns are estimated using either the full sample or 
using rolling windows. The Sharpe ratio when using the FF3 factors to 
predict returns are also similar. Overall, these Sharpe ratio results are 
comparable to, or lower than, those obtained in other academic studies 
that use stock characteristics to predict returns (e.g., Kelly et al., 2019; 
Kim et al., 2021).

3.4. Demand elasticity implied by empirical estimates

We now show that incorporating empirical estimates of price pass-
throughs and unspanned returns significantly reduces the demand elas-
ticity prediction. This process is visually shown in the waterfall chart 
in Fig.  1.

On the left side of the figure, we start from the classical calibration 
in  Section  2.3,  which  yields  a  demand  elasticity  of  approximately 
7000. First, we incorporate our price pass-through estimate into the 
decomposition (Eq. (4)), reducing demand elasticity to approximately 
800  (≈ 1 + 0.01∕0.000012),  as  shown  by  the  second  bar  in  Fig.   1. 
Next, we apply our empirical estimate of unspanned returns of 0.282%, 
which is significantly larger than the 0.0012% assumed in classical 
models. This further reduces demand elasticity to approximately 5 (≈ 1 
+ 0.01/0.00282), as illustrated by the next drop in the waterfall chart. 
While  incorporating  estimated  price  pass-throughs  reduces  demand 
elasticity by a factor of about 8, incorporating empirical unspanned 
returns decreases it by another two orders of magnitude.

So far, we use the same average unspanned returns across stocks 
for simplicity and find low demand elasticity. A discerning reader may 
note  that  stocks  have  heterogeneous  unspanned  returns,  and  those 
with near-zero unspanned returns would exhibit much higher demand 
elasticities (Eq. (9)). This is true; however, since an investor’s portfolio 
weight is proportional to unspanned returns (Eq. (10)), the investor 
would hold negligible positions in those stocks. When considering more 
economically relevant measures, such as the portfolio size-weighted 
average demand elasticity, we obtain an estimate of around 4.9, which 
is similar to our baseline elasticity of 5.

Positions constrained to zero by the short-sale constraint are ex-
cluded, as elasticity is undefined for such positions since log quantities 
are undefined. However, it is worth noting that these positions are 
entirely unresponsive to price changes, as the derivative of portfolio 
weights with respect to prices is zero.

4. Understanding high unspanned returns

Analysis using the benchmark model of expected returns and covari-
ance in Section 3.3. shows that unspanned returns are high, indicating 
that demand elasticities are low. In finance, factor models are tradi-
tionally employed to explain the cross-section of expected returns, and 
one might question how high unspanned returns fit within the factor 
model context. At first glance, our findings may seem contradictory—If 
factor models accurately price assets, then unspanned returns should, 
in principle, be zero. Additionally, it is important to assess whether the 
high unspanned returns observed in our empirical results are specific 
to our benchmark model in Section 3.3.

In  this  section,  we  address  these  two  questions.  First,  we  theo-
retically show that, even if expected returns are fully captured by a 
factor model, unspanned returns remain large if the model exhibits 
‘‘weak factors’’, as defined by Lettau and Pelger (2020). Second, we 
empirically implement a broad set of factor models from the literature. 
We show that, once these models are allowed to incorporate weak 
factors, they all predict high unspanned returns.

C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Table 3
Unspanned returns and Sharpe ratio.
This table reports the unspanned return and annual portfolio Sharpe ratio for different mean–variance portfolio implementations. We estimate 
the return covariance matrix using one-year lag of daily returns and apply (Ledoit and Wolf, 2004) shrinkage, with results for different 
shrinkage parameters presented in different rows. The row where we follow the Ledoit–Wolf optimal shrinkage is marked and the resulting 
average shrinkage parameter is reported in parenthesis. Columns (1) through (4) report the average monthly unspanned returns of stocks with 
positive portfolio weights. To estimate expected returns, we use Fama–MacBeth regressions to predict stock returns using either a larger set of 
characteristics (beta, size, book-to-market, profitability, investment, momentum, reversal) in columns (1) through (2) or just the Fama–French 
three characteristics (FF3) in columns (3) through (4). Columns (5) through (8) report the resulting portfolio-level annual Sharpe ratios. In 
forming the mean–variance efficient portfolios over time, we scaled the portfolio so that the L1 norm of portfolio weights is equal through all 
time periods.

  Expected return

  Shrinkage
  0.050
  0.100
  0.200
  optimal (0.324)
  0.500
  0.750
  0.900
  0.950

Monthly unspanned return
All characteristics
Full sample
(1)

Rolling

(2)

0.438%
0.365%
0.308%
0.282%
0.262%
0.253%
0.251%
0.252%

0.439%
0.368%
0.313%
0.287%
0.271%
0.260%
0.258%
0.259%

FF3
Full sample
(3)

0.330%
0.295%
0.270%
0.255%
0.253%
0.244%
0.246%
0.248%

Rolling

(4)

1.395%
1.185%
1.014%
0.928%
0.881%
0.871%
0.887%
0.904%

Sharpe ratio
All characteristics
Full sample
(5)

0.936
0.991
1.050
1.079
1.110
1.079
1.028
1.003

Rolling

(6)

0.936
0.980
1.037
1.061
1.077
1.009
0.956
0.941

FF3
Full sample
(7)

1.179
1.211
1.230
1.268
1.233
1.167
1.049
0.982

Rolling 
(8)
1.124  
1.161  
1.199  
1.216  
1.242  
1.247  
1.214  
1.178  

4.1. Theoretical results

In  this  section,  we  introduce  a  proposition  that  helps  interpret 

unspanned returns within the context of factor models.

We  begin  by  introducing  factor  model  notation,  dropping  the  𝑡
subscripts for simplicity. Let 𝑟 be the 𝑁 dimensional vector of stock 
excess returns, and as before, 𝐹  is the number of factors, with excess 
returns contained in the vector 𝑓 . The 𝑁 × 𝐹  matrix 𝑊  is are the factor 
model weights, such that 𝑓 = 𝑊 ′𝑟. 𝜇 and 𝛴 are the stock-level mean 
vector and covariance matrix, respectively, while 𝜇𝑓  and 𝛺 represent 
the factor-level mean vector and covariance matrix, respectively. Let 
𝜔𝑓 = 𝛺−1𝜇𝑓 . As before, we model stock-level returns as 𝜇 = 𝛼 + 𝐵𝜇𝑓 , 
where 𝛼 and 𝐵 are the alphas and betas respectively.

Proposition   2  connects  the  stock-level  unspanned  returns  to  the 

factor model.

Proposition 2.   The unspanned return of asset 𝑖 can be decomposed into 
two terms: 

𝜇𝑖,unspanned = 𝛼𝑖 − 𝛽′

−𝑖𝛼−𝑖
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛼𝑖,unspanned

+ 𝛴′

−𝑖)𝜔𝑓
𝑖 (𝑊 − 𝑊 ∗
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
weak factor term for asset 𝑖

,

where 𝛴𝑖 is the 𝑖th column of the covariance matrix 𝛴 and 

(

𝑊 ∗

−𝑖 =

−𝑖𝛴−1
𝐼 ′

−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴

)

𝑊 ,

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
projection-like matrix

(12)

(13)

where 𝐼−𝑖 is the identity matrix with the 𝑖th row removed (resulting in an 
(𝑁 − 1) × 𝑁 matrix), and 𝛴−𝑖,−𝑖 is the (𝑁 − 1) × (𝑁 − 1) covariance matrix 
excluding asset 𝑖.

Proof.  See Appendix  A.

Proposition  2 shows that unspanned returns consist of two compo-
nents: the unspanned alpha and the weak factors term. The unspanned 
alpha is intuitive: if an asset’s alpha cannot be replicated by other 
assets, finding substitutes becomes difficult, contributing to unspanned 
returns. However, this is not our primary focus.

The weak factors term in Eq. (12) reflects the incremental contribu-
tion of asset 𝑖 to the factor model. Mathematically, this term depends 
on 𝑊 − 𝑊 ∗
−𝑖 adjusts factor weights by removing asset 𝑖
and redistributing its contribution based on the projection-like matrix 
(
)
−𝑖𝛴−1
𝐼 ′
. If asset 𝑖 is unimportant, the resulting adjustment is 

−𝑖, where 𝑊 ∗

−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴

negligible, making 𝑊 ∗
−𝑖 ≈ 𝑊  and the weak factors term small.10 In 
models like the CAPM, systematic market risk is the only factor, so 
removing a single asset has minimal impact on the market portfolio 
(i.e., 𝑊 −𝑊 ∗
−𝑖 is small). In contrast, models with weak factors (e.g., Let-
tau and Pelger, 2020) allow even small contributions from individual 
assets to significantly influence the factor structure, making the weak 
factors term substantial.

4.2. Empirical illustrations

In  this  section,  we  examine  the  demand  elasticities  implied  by 
a  range  of  classical  and  PCA-style  factor  models  described  in  Sec-
tion  3.3.1.  This  analysis  illustrates  the  central  intuition  from  Sec-
tion  4.1:  factor  models  with  more  weak  factors  exhibit  higher  un-
spanned returns and, consequently, lower demand elasticities. To iso-
late the effect of unspanned returns, we apply the same price pass-
through of 0.01 from Section 3.2 when calculating demand elasticities 
across all models. To compute the unspanned returns of any factor 
model, we use the corresponding 𝜇𝑡 and 𝛴𝑡 and follow the empirical 
procedure outlined in Section 3.3.2.

Table  4 presents the results. Classical factor models exhibit highly 
elastic demand, consistent with the notion that these models predict 
assets to be highly substitutable, as returns are driven by only a few 
systematic factors. In contrast, data-driven PCA factor models show 
lower  demand  elasticities,  consistent  with  the  idea  that  stocks  are 
imperfect substitutes for one other.

In Fig.  3, we plot the demand elasticity of these asset pricing models 
as the number of factors increases. Among the classical factor models, 
the CAPM exhibits the highest demand elasticity, reaching into the 
thousands, consistent with the discussion in Section 2.3.11 Notably, as 
additional factors are incorporated, demand elasticity steadily declines, 
reflecting larger unspanned returns. The FF3 model, which adds size 
and value factors to the CAPM, already shows demand elasticity below 

−𝑖,−𝑖 is the inverse of the covariance matrix 
10 The (𝑁 − 1) × (𝑁 − 1) matrix 𝛴−1
−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖 expands this back up to an 𝑁 × 𝑁
without asset 𝑖. The matrix 𝐼 ′
−𝑖𝛴−1
matrix, by placing zeros in all positions related to asset 𝑖. Thus, this matrix 
can be viewed as the inverse covariance matrix that excludes asset 𝑖. Thus, if 
the asset matters little in the covariance matrix, 𝐼 ′
−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴 will be close to 
the identity matrix.
11 The demand elasticity of CAPM here is lower than that in Section 2.3 
because we have already incorporated a lower price pass-through of 0.01.

−𝑖𝛴−1

9 

 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Fig. 3.  Demand elasticity for different factor models
This figure plots demand elasticity for various factor models with different numbers of factors. The 𝑥-axis displays the number of factors, while the model-implied demand elasticity 
is plotted on a log scale on the 𝑦-axis, using a price pass-through of 0.01. In the legend, ‘‘Classic’’ refers to traditional factor models. RPCA refers to the model in Chen et al. 
(2023), RP-PCA refers to the model in Lettau and Pelger (2020), and IPCA refers to the model in Kelly et al. (2019).

Table 4
Demand elasticity across factor models.
This table presents the demand elasticity, calculated using Eq. (9) with price pass-
through of 0.01, for various factor models. The first set consists of classical factor 
models. The next three sets are PCA-style models, where RPCA refers to the regression 
PCA model in Chen et al. (2023), RP-PCA refers to the risk-premium PCA model in 
Lettau and Pelger (2020), and IPCA is the instrumented PCA model in Kelly et al. 
(2019). For the PCA factor models, we vary the number of factors included. The second 
column reports the average monthly unspanned returns for stocks held in the portfolio. 
The third column reports the weight responsiveness, calculated as the reciprocal of 
unspanned returns (Eq. (8)). The last column reports the implied demand elasticity.
  Factor model

Number of
factors

Unspanned
return

Weight
responsiveness

Elasticity 

  Classical factor models
  CAPM
  FF3
  HXZ
  FF5
  FF6
  RPCA
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  RP-PCA
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  IPCA
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model
  PCA Factor Model

1
3
4
5
6

5
10
15
20
50
60

5
10
15
20
50
60

5
10
15
20
50
60

0.0006%
0.0033%
0.0230%
0.0347%
0.0303%

0.0262%
0.0420%
0.1053%
0.1098%
0.2760%
0.3271%

0.0436%
0.0651%
0.1032%
0.1306%
0.2585%
0.3219%

0.1591%
0.1923%
0.2310%
0.2463%
0.2969%
0.3294%

170 027
30 714
4356
2886
3303

1701.3  
308.1
44.6
29.9
34.0

3813
2383
950
910
362
306

2292
1535
969
765
387
311

628
520
433
406
337
304

39.1
24.8
10.5
10.1
4.6
4.1

23.9
16.4
10.7
8.7
4.9
4.1

7.3
6.2
5.3
5.1
4.4
4.0

one thousand, while the subsequent models with more factors have 
elasticities below one hundred.

Compared  to  classical  factor  models,  PCA  factor  models  exhibit 
lower demand elasticities, particularly as the number of factors in-
creases. Among the three PCA models, RPCA shows the highest demand 

10 

elasticity, followed by RP-PCA, with IPCA exhibiting the lowest, drop-
ping to below 10 with just four factors. As additional weaker factors 
are included, the demand elasticity of all PCA models steadily declines, 
converging to approximately 4 as the number of factors approaches the 
number of characteristics.12 Notably, this is quantitatively similar to the 
demand elasticity estimated in Section 3.4.

In Internet Appendix IA.2.6, we also show that, consistent with 
Proposition  2, when alphas are included, unspanned returns increase, 
and demand elasticities decline further.

In summary, this section shows that high unspanned returns are 
consistent with factor models that include weak factors. We empirically 
implement  several  recently  proposed  PCA-style  factor  models,  and 
when these models include weak factors, they consistently exhibit high 
unspanned returns and predict low demand elasticities. This suggests 
that our previous findings in Section 3 are not specific to a particular 
model but rather a common feature of factor models with weak factors.

5. Additional considerations

This section presents additional considerations in portfolio choice 
and find that they are not large enough to significantly impact our main 
conclusion.

Our analysis thus far focuses on how demand responds to changes in 
expected returns. However, price movements can also lead to changes 
in  volatilities  and  covariances,  which  may,  in  turn,  affect  demand. 
Additionally, long-horizon investors may be concerned about hedging 
future consumption risk. We study these effects in Sections 5.1 and
5.2 and find that their impact is small under reasonable calibrations. 
Furthermore, in Section 5.3, we discuss the impact of parameter un-
certainty in portfolio optimization, while Section 5.4 addresses several 
additional considerations.

5.1. Volatility and correlation effects

In Section 2, we assume that the covariance matrix is fixed. We 
relax this assumption here. When the price of asset 𝑖 changes, it may 
also affect volatilities and correlations. Considering these additional 
adjustments results in the inclusion of two additional terms in our 
demand elasticity decomposition, as shown in Proposition  3.

12 Note that we do not force these models to include weak factors. If the 
true model only contains 𝐾 factors, even if we allow for 𝐹 > 𝐾 factors, the 
estimation will show that the factors 𝐾 + 1, … , 𝐹  have little variation.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

Proposition 3.   The demand elasticity of an optimizing investor can be 
decomposed into three parts:

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = 1 +

1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

(

−

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

)

+

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
main component

1

𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

𝜕𝜎2
⎛
⎞
𝑖,𝑡
⎜
⎟
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⎜
⎟
⎝
⎠
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
volatility component

+

𝜇′
−𝑖,𝑡

𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

1
−𝑖,𝑡
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
correlation component

𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

−

1

𝜕𝜎2

.

(14)

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

relationship between the price of a single asset and future consumption 
should remain small.

We follow Campbell et al. (2003) to study EZ multivariate demand 
for 𝑁 risky assets. This leads to Proposition  4 which augments our 
demand elasticity expression with an additional consumption-hedging 
term. The derivations follow in Appendix  B.3.

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = 1 +

Proposition 4.   The elasticity of demand for an EZ investor is given by: 
)

(

−

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
main component

+

⋅

𝜕𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡
𝜃
1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
𝜓
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
consumption-hedging component

⋅

(15)

𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)  is an 𝑁 − 1 dimensional vector and the scalar 𝜎2
−𝑖,𝑡 =
−𝑖,𝑡𝑟−𝑖,𝑡+1) is the conditional variance of the replicating portfolio of 

where 
Var(𝛽′
asset 𝑖.

where  𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡  is  the  covariance  between  asset  𝑖  return  and  the  log
consumption-to-wealth ratio, 𝛾 > 0 is the relative risk aversion coefficient, 
𝜓 > 0 is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and 𝜃 ≡ (1−𝛾)∕(1−𝜓 −1).

Proof.  See Appendix  A.

In Eq. (14), the first term is the same as in Proposition  1. The 
second term accounts for the effect of prices on the return volatility 
of asset 𝑖. The third term considers the effect on 𝛽−𝑖,𝑡, the loading of 
asset 𝑖 on other assets. The variance of the replicating portfolio, 𝜎2
−𝑖,𝑡, 
is included because it is influenced by 𝛽−𝑖,𝑡, as 𝜎2
−𝑖,𝑡𝑟−𝑖,𝑡+1) =
𝛽′
−𝑖,𝑡𝛴−𝑖,−𝑖,𝑡𝛽−𝑖,𝑡.

−𝑖,𝑡 = Var𝑡(𝛽′

How  large  are  these  two  additional  terms?  As  discussed  below, 
we estimate that incorporating these two effects changes the demand 
elasticity prediction by −2.2 and +1.4, respectively. Therefore, these ef-
fects are quantitatively small in explaining the substantial gap between 
theoretical and empirical estimates of demand elasticities, which is the 
central research question of this paper.

The  volatility  component.  Accounting  for  volatility  further  decreases 
demand elasticity. Since Black (1976), it has been well-documented 
that asset return volatility increases as prices decrease, a phenomenon 
often referred to as the ‘‘leverage effect’’. In Appendix  B.5, consistent 
𝜕𝜎2
𝑖,𝑡
with the literature, we find that 
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)  is approximately −0.06 for 
monthly return variance. Meanwhile, the average monthly 𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
is approximately 0.027. Thus, this ‘‘volatility component’’ of demand 
elasticity is approximately  1
× (−0.06) ≈ −2.2. Hence, considering 
0.027
the volatility effect slightly lowers the predicted demand elasticity.

The correlation component.  The correlation effect is analyzed by Davis 
(2024),  who  specifies  a  model  where  the  stock  covariance  matrix 
contains both systematic and idiosyncratic components, with the sys-
tematic components parameterized by stock characteristics. When a 
stock’s price changes, it affect the price-related characteristics such as 
the book-to-market ratio, thereby influencing the systematic compo-
nent of the covariance matrix.13 Davis (2024) empirically estimates the 
model’s coefficients and finds that accounting for the correlation effect 
increases optimizing investor demand elasticity by approximately 1.4. 
Further details are provided in Appendix  B.5.

5.2. Consumption hedging effects

While our analysis this far focuses on one-period portfolio optimiza-
tion, some researchers derive demand from Epstein–Zin (EZ) utility 
functions and consider dynamic optimization. In this section, we adopt 
a similar approach, which allows for incorporating wealth effects and 
intertemporal hedging considerations. We find that these factors have 
only a minor impact on demand elasticities. This result is intuitive, 
as we are examining the demand elasticity for an individual asset. As 
long as the investor holds a reasonably large number of assets, the 

Proof.  See Appendix  A.

If assets have a stable covariance with the consumption-to-wealth 
ratio, the consumption hedging component becomes zero. It can only 
play a role if the covariance varies with prices. To assess the signifi-
cance of the component, we provide a calibration in Appendix  B.6. We 
find the effect to be quantitatively small, approximately two orders of 
magnitude smaller than the demand elasticity value.

5.3. Parameter uncertainty and Bayesian learning

Thus far, we have assumed an investor who is certain about the 
parameters governing returns. In reality, investors recognize that pa-
rameter estimates can be noisy. In this section, we discuss how uncer-
tainty about these estimates affects demand elasticity within a Bayesian 
framework. We summarize our conclusions and key insights below, 
with detailed analysis provided in Internet Appendix IA.2.7.14 Overall, 
we find that while parameter uncertainty matters, its impact on demand 
elasticity is not large enough to alter the main conclusions of the paper.

Uncertainty about mean return (𝜇𝑡).  A Bayesian investor who is un-
certain  about  mean  returns  would  shrink  their  estimates  toward  a 
more informed prior (e.g., Brandt, 2010). This is approach already 
implemented in the PCA factor models we considered in Section 3.3.1, 
where expected returns are determined by factor models. An alternative 
way is to allow for stock-specific alphas, which is studied in Internet 
Appendix  IA.2.6.  In  Internet  Appendix  IA.2.7,  we  further  examine 
how demand elasticity varies with different degrees of shrinkage and 
find that demand elasticity slightly increases with higher shrinkage. 
However, relative to the large gap between theoretical and empirical 
demand elasticities that we aim to explain, the variation induced by 
different levels of shrinkage (e.g., over a range of 3 to 8) is relatively 
small.

Uncertainty about the covariance matrix (𝛴𝑡).  Due to estimation errors, 
directly using the sample covariance matrix in portfolio optimization 
often  results  in  poorly  behaved  portfolios  (Michaud,  1989).  In  re-
sponse, Ledoit and Wolf (2004) develop a shrinkage approach with 
a Bayesian interpretation, where different levels of uncertainty corre-
spond to varying degrees of shrinkage. As discussed in Section 3.4, we 
find that our demand elasticity estimate ranges from 5 to 6, depending 
on the degree of shrinkage applied, as shown in column (1) of Table  3.
(
)
Uncertainty about price pass-through 
.  We also consider the 
case of a Bayesian investor who is uncertain about stock-specific price 
pass-throughs. This type of uncertainty leads to an asymmetric impact 
on demand elasticities, depending on whether the recent price change 
is positive or negative. In our calibration in Internet Appendix IA.2.7, 
we find that its effect on demand elasticity is on the order of 0.1.

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

−

13 For example, if a stock’s price declines, its book-to-market ratio increases, 
leading the stock to comove more with value stocks.

14 It is important to note that our approach may not be the only way to 
formulate the Bayesian inference problem, as alternative setups may exist.

11 

C. Davis et al.

5.4. Other considerations

Restricted investment universe.  So far, we have considered a portfolio 
optimization problem that includes the full set of stocks. In practice, 
some investors (e.g., technology sector mutual funds) have restricted 
investment universes. In Appendix  B.7, we show that this can further 
reduce demand elasticities. The result is intuitive: when the invest-
ment universe is limited, the unspanned return of each stock tends to 
increase, as the set of other stocks available to span it becomes smaller.

Transaction costs.  Our baseline demand elasticity estimate for optimiz-
ing investors is approximately 5, which is much closer to the empirical 
estimates of around 1 but still notably different. What might explain the 
remaining gap? Several frictions or behavioral factors may contribute, 
many of which have been discussed in the literature. As one illustration, 
Internet Appendix IA.2.4 shows that incorporating realistic transaction 
costs is sufficient to align the elasticity prediction with empirical esti-
mates roughly 0.3 to 1.6 (Gabaix and Koijen, 2022). Of course, there 
may be other explanations, and we do not take a strong stance on which 
is correct.

6. Conclusion

⇒

Classical  asset  pricing  models  predict  extremely  high  stock-level 
demand elasticities, often in the thousands, implying that trading flows 
would have minimal impact on asset prices. However, empirical studies 
find demand elasticities around one, which is three orders of magnitude 
lower. In this paper, we show that this gap is largely explained by 
incorporating  empirically  estimated  properties  of  stock  returns.  For 
investors forming optimized portfolios, using empirically estimated — 
rather than assumed — moments of stock returns reduces the predicted 
demand elasticity from approximately 7000 to around 5.

We  begin  by  analytically  showing  that,  in  a  partial  equilibrium 
optimal  portfolio  choice  setting,  investor  demand  elasticity  can  be 
decomposed into two components: price pass-through and the recip-
rocal  of  unspanned  returns.  The  former  measures  how  much  cash 
flow-unrelated price movements predict future returns, and demand 
elasticity increases in price pass-through. The latter captures the extent 
to which assets are substitutable. The less substitutable an asset is, the 
less its returns are spanned by others, and lower the demand elasticity.
Guided by this analytical result, we then empirically estimate these 
two components for U.S. stocks. We estimate the price pass-through to 
be around 0.01, meaning that a 1% cash flow-unrelated price drop leads 
to an increase in next-month return of approximately 1 basis point. 
Using  this  empirically  estimated  pass-through,  rather  than  classical 
theoretical assumptions, reduces the predicted demand elasticity from 
7000 to 800. More importantly, when estimating unspanned returns, 
we find that stocks are far from being perfect substitutes, as typically 
assumed  by  theory.  Incorporating  empirically  estimated  unspanned 
returns further reduces the demand elasticity to around 5. We show that 
stocks exhibiting high unspanned returns can be understood as exhibit-
ing ‘‘weak factors’’, and our finding that stocks are imperfect substitutes 
is consistent with the literature showing that the cross-section of stock 
returns is poorly spanned by systematic risk factors.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Carter Davis: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Mahyar Kargar: Writing 
–  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization,  Valida-
tion, Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Jiacui Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial 

interests that relate to the research described in this paper. 

Appendix A. Proofs of propositions

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Proof of Proposition  1.  In this proof, we drop the 𝑡 subscripts and tildes 
for notational simplicity. Without loss of generality, just consider the 
last asset, asset 𝑁. Subdivide the matrix into blocks 

𝛴 =

[𝛴−𝑁,−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁
𝜎2
𝑁

𝛴′

−𝑁

]

.

(A.1)

Using the block diagonal matrix formula, note that: 

[

𝛴−1 =

−𝑁,−𝑁 + 𝜏𝑁 𝛴−1
𝛴−1
−𝜏𝑁 𝛴′

−𝑁,−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁 𝛴′
−𝑁 𝛴−1
−𝑁,−𝑁

−𝑁 𝛴−1

−𝑁,−𝑁

]

−𝜏𝑁 𝛴−1
−𝑁,−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁
𝜏𝑁

(A.2)

where  𝜏𝑁 = (𝜎2
−𝑁 𝛴−1
weights are (up to a multiplicative constant) given by:

−𝑁,−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁 )−1.  The  MV  optimal  portfolio 

𝑁 − 𝛴′

𝑤 = 𝛴−1𝜇

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

𝑤−𝑁 =

(

𝛴−1

−𝑁,−𝑁 + 𝜏𝑁 𝛴−1

−𝑁,−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁 𝛴′

−𝑁 𝛴−1

−𝑁,−𝑁

𝑤𝑁

= −𝜏𝑁 𝛴′

−𝑁 𝛴−1

−𝑁,−𝑁 𝜇−𝑁 + 𝜏𝑁 𝜇𝑁

(A.3)

)

𝜇−𝑁 − 𝜏𝑁 𝛴−1

−𝑁,−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁 ⋅ 𝜇𝑁

(A.4)

To  make 

these  expressions  more 

that
−𝑁,−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁  is the 𝑁 − 1 vector of the beta of asset 𝑁 to all 

intuitive,  note 

𝛽−𝑁 = 𝛴−1
other assets. Therefore, we can simplify  into:

𝑤−𝑁 = (𝛴−1
𝑤𝑁 = −𝜏𝑁 𝛽′

−𝑁,−𝑁 + 𝜏𝑁 𝛽−𝑁 𝛽′
+𝜏𝑁 𝜇𝑁
−𝑁 𝜇−𝑁
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
=𝜇𝑁,spanned

−𝑁 )𝜇−𝑁 − 𝜏𝑁 𝛽−𝑁 𝜇𝑁

(A.5)

(A.6)

These  expressions  make  clear  the  ‘‘hedging  relationship’’:  if  𝜇𝑁
changes,  the  investor  responds  by  increasing  holdings  𝑤𝑁   but  also 
reduces 𝑤−𝑁  in a way that is proportional to 𝛽−𝑁 , the portfolio that 
hedges 𝑁 using all other assets. This can be thought of as an arbitrage 
trade with asset 𝑁 on the long side and the other assets on the short 
side (with portfolio weights 𝛽−𝑁 ). Also, 𝜏−1
−𝑁 𝛴−𝑁,−𝑁 ⋅ 𝛽−𝑁  is 
the residual variance of 𝑁 after hedging out exposure to other assets.

𝑁 = 𝜎2

𝑁 − 𝛽′

We  are  now  ready  to  derive  Eq.  (8)  in  Proposition   1.  Rewrite 

Eq. (A.6) and take derivatives:

(

𝑤𝑁 = 𝜏𝑁 ⋅

)

𝜇𝑁 − 𝛽′

−𝑁 𝜇−𝑁
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟
=𝜇𝑁,spanned

= 𝜏𝑁 ⋅ 𝜇𝑁,unspanned.

(A.7)

⇒

𝜕 log(𝑤𝑁 )
𝜕𝜇𝑁
Also, note that: 

=

1
𝑤𝑁

⋅

𝜕𝑤𝑁
𝜕𝜇𝑁

=

1
𝜇𝑁,unspanned

.

1

𝜏𝑁 =

𝜇𝑁,unspanned
𝜎2
𝑁,unspanned
which also shows that Eq. (10) holds.  □

𝜎2
𝑁,unspanned

⟹ 𝑤𝑁 =

,

(A.8)

(A.9)

Proof  of  Proposition   2.  From  Eq.  (7),  the  unspanned  return  is
𝜇𝑖,unspanned = 𝜇𝑖 − 𝛽′
−𝑖𝜇−𝑖. Under a factor model, we can write the 
expected return on asset 𝑖 as: 
𝜇𝑖 = 𝛼𝐹
𝑖 )′ E[𝑓 ],

𝑖 + (𝛽𝐹

(A.10)

where 𝐹  is the expected return of the factors. Similarly, we can write: 
𝜇−𝑖 = 𝛼𝐹

(A.11)

−𝑖)′ E[𝑓 ]

−𝑖 + (𝛽𝐹

Plugging this into the expression for 𝜇𝑖,unspanned, we can write the 

unspanned return as: 
−𝑖𝛼𝐹
𝜇𝑖,𝑢𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑑 = 𝛼𝐹
𝑖 − 𝛽′
−𝑖
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡𝛥𝛼𝑖

12 

+ (𝛽𝐹

−𝑖(𝛽𝐹

𝑖 )′E[𝑓 ] − 𝛽′

−𝑖)′𝐸[𝑓 ]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
≡𝛥𝛽𝑖

(A.12)

C. Davis et al.

We calculate:

𝛽𝐹
𝑖 = Var−1(𝑓 ) Cov(𝑓 , 𝑟𝑖)
= Var−1(𝑓 ) Cov(𝑊 ′𝑟, 𝜄′
= Var−1(𝑓 )𝑊 ′𝛴𝜄𝑖
= Var−1(𝑓 )𝑊 ′𝛴𝑖

𝑖𝑟)

where 𝜄𝑖 is a vector of zeros, but 1 in the 𝑖th spot.

We can also calculate

𝛽−𝑖 = Var−1(𝑟−𝑖)Cov(𝑟−𝑖, 𝑟𝑖) = Var−1(𝑟−𝑖)Cov(𝐼−𝑖𝑟, 𝜄′
−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴𝑖
𝛽𝐹
−𝑖 = Var−1(𝑓 )Cov(𝑓 , 𝑟−𝑖) = Var−1(𝑓 )Cov(𝑊 ′𝑟, 𝐼−𝑖𝑟)

−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴𝜄𝑖 = 𝛴−1

= 𝛴−1

𝑖𝑟)

(A.13)

(A.14)

= Var−1(𝑓 )𝑊 ′𝛴𝐼 ′
−𝑖

Then putting this together we have: 

(A.15)

𝑤𝑖,𝑡 ≈

−𝑖(𝛽𝐹
−𝑖)′E[𝑓 ] = 𝛴′
𝑖 𝐼 ′
𝛽′
Thus if we define:

−𝑖𝛴−1

−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴𝑊 Var−1(𝑓 )E[𝑓 ]

(A.16)

𝑊 ∗

−𝑖 = 𝐼 ′

−𝑖𝛴−1
−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
projection-like matrix

𝑊 ,

we have:

𝜇𝑖,unspanned = 𝛼𝑖 − 𝛽′

−𝑖𝛼−𝑖
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝛼𝑖,unspanned

+ 𝛴′

−𝑖)𝜔𝑓
𝑖 (𝑊 − 𝑊 ∗
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
weight dependence on 𝑖

It should be noted that pre-multiplying by 𝐼 ′

−𝑖 changes the 𝑁 − 1
dimensional vector to be 𝑁 dimensional, with all terms unchanged 
but zero in the 𝑖th spot. So the projection-like matrix 𝐼 ′
−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴 is 
close to the identity matrix if dropping the asset does not change the 
covariance matrix very much. Another way to see this is to note that: 
)−1 𝐼−𝑖𝛴. □

−𝑖,−𝑖𝐼−𝑖𝛴 = 𝐼 ′
−𝑖

(𝐼−𝑖𝛴𝐼 ′

−𝑖𝛴−1
𝐼 ′

−𝑖𝛴−1

(A.17)

−𝑖

+

+

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 
) 𝜕𝜎2

(

𝜇′
−𝑖,𝑡

𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

1
−𝑖,𝑡
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
correlation component

𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

−

1

. □

(A.20)

1

(

) 𝜕𝜎2
𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
volatility component

𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

Proof of Proposition  4.  To prove this proposition, we use the notation 
and equations from Appendix  B.3 below. To focus on the demand for 
asset 𝑖, we modify Proposition  1 by using the Epstein–Zin demand in 
Eq. (B.5): 

)

−𝑖,𝑡𝜇−𝑖,𝑡

( 𝜇𝑖,𝑡 − 𝛽′
𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

1
𝛾
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
main component

+

)

(

⋅

𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡 − 𝜎−𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡

𝜃
𝛾𝜓
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
consumption-hedging component

𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

,

(A.21)

where 𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡 and 𝜎−𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡 are the covariances between 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 and 𝑦−𝑖,𝑡 with 
the log consumption-to-wealth ratio, respectively. We continue to use 
the notation of 𝜇𝑖,𝑡, 𝛽−𝑖,𝑡, and 𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 from Eq. (10). They are now 
based on 𝑦𝑡, rather than 𝑟𝑡, but the difference is quantitatively minor. 
Plugging in Eq. (A.21) into Eq. (9) leads to the following modified 
demand elasticity:

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = 1 +

(

1
𝑤𝑖,𝑡

1

𝛾𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

) (

−

)

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

1

+

𝑤𝑖,𝑡𝛾𝜎2

𝜃
𝜓

𝜕𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
)
𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
(

−

1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
main component

= 1 +

+

𝜕𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡
𝜃
𝜓𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
consumption-hedging component

⋅

□

(A.22)

Proof of Proposition  3.  We take the derivative of Eq. (10) as a function 
of prices:

Appendix B. Additional details

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = 1 −

= 1 −

1
𝑤𝑖,𝑡

1
𝑤𝑖,𝑡

⋅

(

𝜕𝑤𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕𝑤𝑖,𝑡
𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

)′

+

( 𝜕𝑤𝑖,𝑡
𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡

𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

𝜕𝑤𝑖,𝑡

+

𝜕𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
[

)

𝜕𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

= 1 +

1
𝑤𝑖,𝑡
( 𝜇𝑖,𝑡 − 𝛽′
𝛾𝜎4

+

1

𝛾𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
) 𝜕𝜎2

−𝑖,𝑡𝜇−𝑖,𝑡

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

= 1 +

1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

(

−

(

+

1

𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

) 𝜕𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

,

(

−

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
]

)

(

+

)′

𝜇−𝑖,𝑡

𝛾𝜎2

𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

+ 𝜇′

−𝑖,𝑡

)

𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

(A.18)

B.1. Wealth effects

Our  derivations  in  Section  2  ignore  wealth  effects.  This  section 
shows that the effect of wealth changes on asset-level demand elasticity 
is minimal, as the effect of price changes in an individual asset has 
limited effect on overall wealth for reasonably diversified portfolios.

Let 𝐴𝑡 represent the assets under management (AUM) for a fund or 
the wealth for an investor. Recall that the quantity of shares demanded, 
𝑄𝑖,𝑡, is given by 𝑄𝑖,𝑡 =
. The demand elasticity that incorporates 
wealth effects is: 
𝜕 log(𝑄𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

𝐴𝑡𝑤𝑖,𝑡
𝑃𝑖,𝑡

= 1 −

(B.1)

≡ −

𝜂𝑖,𝑡

−

.

𝜕 log(𝑤𝑖,𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
original term

𝜕 log(𝐴𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
wealth effect

Focusing on the wealth effect, 𝐴𝑡 can be expressed as: 

(A.19)

𝐴𝑡 = 𝐴𝑡−1

[𝑤′

𝑡−1(𝑟𝑡 + 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡𝜄) + (1 − 𝜄′𝑤𝑡−1)𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡

] ,

(B.2)

where the last step uses the result from Proposition  1 that 𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 =
𝑤𝑖,𝑡𝛾𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡. Here, 𝜕𝑤𝑖,𝑡∕𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡 and 𝜕𝛽−𝑖,𝑡∕𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡) are (𝑁 − 1) di-
mensional vectors, while the other terms are scalars. Using Eq. (6), we 
can write 𝜎2
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡 = 𝜎2
−𝑖,𝑡 is the scalar conditional 
variance of the replicating portfolio, 𝜎2
−𝑖,𝑡𝑟−𝑖,𝑡+1). Plugging 
this into Eq. (A.19) gives:

−𝑖,𝑡, where 𝜎2

−𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑉 𝑎𝑟𝑡(𝛽′

𝑖,𝑡 − 𝜎2

𝜂𝑖,𝑡 = 1 +

1
𝜇𝑖,unspanned,𝑡

)

(

−

𝜕𝜇𝑖,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
main component

where 𝑟𝑡 represents the vector of excess returns, 𝑅𝑓 ,𝑡 the gross risk-free 
rate, and 𝜄 a vector of ones. In response to the change of the price of 
asset 𝑖, the wealth effect on demand elasticity is given by: 

−

𝜕 log(𝐴𝑡)
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

= −

( 𝐴𝑡−1
𝐴𝑡

) ( 𝑃𝑖,𝑡
𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1

)

𝑤𝑖,𝑡−1.

(B.3)

Typically, both AUM and stock prices exhibit only minor fluctua-
tions, keeping the first two terms close to one. Additionally, 𝑤𝑖,𝑡−1 is 
small in a well-diversified portfolio. Thus, wealth effects on demand 
elasticities are negligible.

13 

C. Davis et al.

B.2. Understanding low price pass-through

Section 3.2 found price pass-through to be significantly lower than 
one in empirical estimates. How should we understand this result? 
We first provide intuition that low price pass-through means that the 
variation of expected returns is persistent. We then note that many 
dynamic equilibrium models feature low price pass-throughs.

Persistent variation in expected returns.  For the simplest example with 
persistent  expected  return  variation,  consider  the  Gordon  growth
model: 
𝐷
𝑟 − 𝑔

(B.4)

𝑃 =

where 𝐷 is the current dividend, 𝑟 is the expected return, and 𝑔 is 
the dividend growth rate. Consider a cash flow-unrelated price move-
ment  driven  by  a  permanent  change  in  𝑟.  Then,  the  implied  price 
pass-through is simply the dividend yield,

−

𝑑𝑟
𝑑 log(𝑃 )

=

𝐷
𝑃

.

To quantify this, note that after World War II, the average annual 
dividend yield of the U.S. stock market is 0.032. At a monthly fre-
quency,  this  translates  to  price  pass-through  of  approximately
0.032∕12 = 0.0027, which is a fraction of the point estimate of 0.01 
in Section 3.2. While this is an extreme example with fully persistent 
expected  return  variation,  many  important  stock  return  predictors 
that  explain  a  large  amount  of  price  variation  —  size,  value,  etc. 
— are associated with slowly-varying expected return variation (van 
Binsbergen et al., 2023).

Equilibrium models with low price pass-through.  Because our goal is to 
study demand elasticity as a portfolio choice problem, in this paper, we 
take expected return variation as given and do not take a stance on its 
origin. However, one may still wonder whether low price pass-throughs 
can be sustained in equilibrium. The answer is yes: many dynamic 
models explicitly predict low price pass-throughs. In fact, whenever ex-
pected return variation is induced by slow-moving preferences changes 
and trading flows, price pass-through is naturally low. Such models 
are featured in Duffie (2010), Kozak et al. (2018), Gabaix and Koijen 
(2022), among others.

B.3. Dynamic optimization with Epstein–Zin

We follow Campbell et al. (2003) to study EZ multivariate demand 
for  𝑁  risky  assets.  Let  𝑦𝑡  denote  the  𝑁  dimensional  vector  of  log 
asset returns minus the log risk-free return. After log-linearization, the 
authors demonstrate that portfolio weights can be approximated by 

1
𝛾

̃𝛴−1

̃𝜇𝑡 −

(B.5)

𝑤𝑡 =

̃𝛴−1
𝑡

𝑡 𝜎𝑐−𝑤,𝑡,

𝜃
𝜓𝛾
𝑡[𝑦𝑡+1] + 1
𝑡 ,  ̃𝛴𝑡 is the 𝑁 × 𝑁 conditional covariance 
where  ̃𝜇𝑡 = E
̃𝜎2
2
matrix of 𝑦𝑡+1, ̃𝜎2
𝑡  is the 𝑁 dimensional vector containing the diagonal 
elements of  ̃𝛴𝑡, and 𝜎𝑐−𝑤,𝑡 is the 𝑁 dimensional vector of the conditional 
covariance between the log consumption-to-wealth ratio and 𝑦𝑡+1.15 The 
preference parameters are as follows: 𝛾 > 0 is the relative risk aversion 
coefficient, 𝜓 > 0 is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and 
𝜃 ≡ (1−𝛾)∕(1−𝜓 −1). Note that CRRA is a special case of EZ with  𝜃
= 1.
𝜓𝛾
In Eq. (B.5), the first term is the same as the expression for one-
period CRRA investor optimal portfolio. The second term introduces 
a new component that captures consumption-hedging considerations, 

15 See equation (20) in Campbell et al. (2003). Their expression is more 
general and includes additional terms, as they consider 𝑦𝑡 as the log return 
relative to a benchmark with possible additional covariance terms. In our case, 
the benchmark is the risk-free rate which simplifies the expression by omitting 
those extra terms.

14 

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

which leads to an additional term in demand elasticity in Proposition 
4. The proof is given in Appendix  A.

B.4. Estimating price pass-through using cash flow-unrelated price variation

In Section 3.2, we use forecasting regressions with prices and stock 
characteristics  to  estimate  price  pass-through.  This  section  presents 
alternative  approaches  for  pass-through  estimates.  Many  studies  in 
demand-based asset pricing emphasize isolating price variation that is 
unrelated to cash flow variation (e.g. Koijen and Yogo, 2019). Adapting 
to our context, we use such variation to forecast next-period expected 
returns.

The price wedge measure.  The first measure we use is the ‘‘price wedge’’ 
from van Binsbergen et al. (2023), which is designed to isolate price 
movements unrelated to cash flows. We briefly discuss their methodol-
ogy and refer readers to their paper for details. For each stock, their 
goal is to compute its ‘‘fundamental price’’,  ̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡, via a present-value 
framework:
[ 𝐽
∑

]

̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡 = 𝐸𝑡

𝑚𝑡+𝑠
𝑚𝑡

𝑠=1

⋅ 𝐷𝑖,𝑡+𝑠 +

𝑃𝑖,𝑡+𝐽

,

𝑚𝑡+𝐽
𝑚𝑡

where 𝑚𝑡 is the stochastic discount factor implied by the CAPM, 𝐷𝑖,𝑡+𝑠
denotes  dividend  payments  𝑠  periods  ahead,  𝐽 = 15  years  is  the 
terminal period, and 𝑃𝑖,𝑡+𝐽  is the terminal stock price. van Binsbergen 
et al. (2023) define the ‘‘price wedge’’ as: 

𝑃 𝑊𝑖,𝑡 = log

(

)

,

𝑃𝑖,𝑡
̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡

(B.6)

where 𝑃𝑖,𝑡 is the actual price of stock 𝑖 at time 𝑡. Thus, for example, 
a price wedge 𝑃 𝑊𝑖,𝑡 = 5% indicates that the current stock price is 5% 
higher than the model-implied fundamental value.

Crucial for our analysis, van Binsbergen et al. (2023) estimate price 
wedges using portfolios sorted on 57 cross-sectional stock character-
istics known to predict returns, and then project these portfolio-level 
price wedges onto the stock level. As a result, the price wedges are 
approximately equal to the present value of future expected excess 
returns above that implied by the CAPM. Stocks with high (low) price 
wedges are, by construction, those with low (high) subsequent excess 
returns.  In other words, price wedges are designed to isolate price 
movements that are unrelated to cash flows.

Estimating  price  pass-through.  We  estimate  price  pass-through  using 
Fama–MacBeth regressions: 
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1→𝑡+𝐻 = 𝛼𝐻 − 𝛽𝐻 ⋅ log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡∕ ̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
=𝑃 𝑊𝑖,𝑡

+𝜖𝑖,𝑡+1→𝑡+𝐻 ,

(B.7)

where 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1→𝑡+𝐻  is the log stock return over months 𝑡 + 1 through 𝑡 + 𝐻. 
We estimate standard errors using the Newey–West procedure with 𝐻
lags.

The estimated price pass-through 𝛽𝐻  for horizons 𝐻 = 1, 3, 6, and 
12 months are reported in the first four columns of the first row of Table 
B.5. We find positive price pass-through that increases with the horizon, 
although the estimate at 12-month horizon loses statistical significance 
due to larger standard errors. To make the estimates comparable across 
horizons, columns (6) through (9) report the pass-through per month 
(𝛽𝐻 ∕𝐻), which turns out to be roughly constant across horizons at 
approximately 0.015, with the tightest 95% confidence interval ranging 
from 0.009 to 0.021. This estimate implies that if a stock’s price is 
1% lower due to cash flow-irrelevant reasons, its subsequent expected 
return is higher by 0.015% in the following month.

Other price variation measures.  We also consider alternative measures 
of cash flow-unrelated price variation. Bartram and Grinblatt (2018) 
measure the fundamental value-justified price  ̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡 using ‘‘kitchen sink’’ 
regressions that incorporate various accounting variables. We apply 

C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Table B.5
Estimating price pass-through using different measures of cash flow-unrelated price variation.
We estimate price pass-through using Fama–MacBeth regressions: 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1→𝑡+𝐻 = 𝛼𝐻 − 𝛽𝐻 ⋅ log
+ 𝜖𝑖,𝑡+1→𝑡+𝐻 , where the dependent variable is the log 
return of stocks from months 𝑡 + 1 to 𝑡 + 𝐻. The independent variable captures cash flow-unrelated price variation as of time 𝑡, where  ̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡 is a measure of 
fundamental valuation, and 𝑃𝑖,𝑡 is the actual price. In the first two rows, the independent variables are the ‘‘price wedge’’ measures in van Binsbergen 
et al. (2023) and Bartram and Grinblatt (2018), respectively. In the last two rows, the independent variables are the log market capitalization of stocks 
instrumented by the Koijen and Yogo (2019) instrument and the flow-induced-trading (FIT) measure in Lou (2012), respectively. Columns (1) through 
(4) report the estimated regression coefficients 𝛽𝐻 for horizons 𝐻 = 1, 3, 6, and 12 months. Column (5) reports the number of stock-months used in each 
regression. Columns (6) through (9) report 𝛽𝐻 ∕𝐻, which can be interpreted as the monthly price pass-through estimate. Throughout, standard errors of 
the Fama–MacBeth forecasting coefficients are calculated using the Newey–West procedure, with the number of lags equal to the forecasting horizon 𝐻.
  Independent
  variable

Implied monthly price pass-through (𝛽𝐻 ∕𝐻)
𝐻 = 1

Estimated coefficient 𝛽𝐻
𝐻 = 1
3

(𝑃𝑖,𝑡∕ ̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡

Obs

12

12

6

3

6

)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

  van Binsbergen et al. (2023)
  price wedge
  Bartram and Grinblatt (2018)
  price wedge
  Koijen and Yogo (2019)
  instrumented log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
  FIT-instrumented
  log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.

0.015∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
−0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.004
(0.004)

0.037∗∗
(0.014)
0.002
(0.002)
−0.006∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.014
(0.014)

0.068∗
(0.038)
0.002
(0.005)
−0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.026
(0.039)

0.125
(0.099)
0.005
(0.012)
−0.030∗∗∗
(0.011)
0.056
(0.076)

1,383,397

835,941

2,000,587

1,566,322

0.015∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
−0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.004
(0.004)

0.012∗∗
(0.005)
0.001
(0.001)
−0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.005
(0.005)

0.011∗
(0.006)
0.000
(0.001)
−0.002∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.004
(0.007)

0.010
(0.008)
0.000
(0.001)
−0.003∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.005
(0.006)

their  methodology  to  compute  price  wedges  and  report  the  corre-
sponding  price  pass-throughs  in  the  second  row  of  Table   B.5.  The 
point estimates are all positive but statistically insignificant, and the 
magnitudes are smaller than those associated with the van Binsbergen 
et al. (2023) price wedge.16

We  also  consider  two  price  instruments  to  isolate  cash
flow-unrelated price variation. The first one follows Koijen and Yogo 
(2019), who develop an instrument for the market capitalization of 
stocks using institutional holdings. We download their data and use 
their instrument in a two-step procedure. Specifically, we regress the 
log of stock market capitalization on the log of their instrument, and 
then use the predicted values as the independent variable in the Fama–
MacBeth regression (B.7) to estimate price pass-through. The results, 
reported in the third row of Table  B.5, indicate a slightly negative 
price  pass-through.  In  other  words,  the  price  variation  isolated  by 
the Koijen and Yogo (2019) instrument exhibit slight momentum rather 
than reversals.

The second instrument is the flow-induced trading (FIT) measure 
in Lou (2012). In short, FIT captures the mechanical trading responses 
by mutual funds as they scale up or down existing holdings in response 
to fund flows. The resulting FIT variable has been shown to create price 
effects that tend to revert over time. In the first stage, we regress the 
log of stock price on the most recent four quarterly values of FIT. The 
second stage Fama–MacBeth results, shown in the last row of Table  B.5, 
indicate a positive pass-through of slightly less than 0.01 per month, 
though the results are not statistically significant.

Overall, across four different specifications of cash flow-unrelated 
price variation, we do not find very strong price pass-throughs. The 
highest monthly pass-through, associated with the van Binsbergen et al. 
(2023) price wedge measure, is 0.015, which is consistent with the 
results in Section 3.2.

B.5. Quantifying the volatility and correlation components

In this section, we quantify the ‘‘volatility’’ and ‘‘correlation’’ com-

ponents of demand elasticity in Proposition  3.

The volatility component.  We need to estimate the unspanned variance 
𝑖,unspanned,𝑡) and how the stock return variance 𝜎2
of stocks (𝜎2
𝑖,𝑡 responds 
to price movements. For the first term, we obtain the daily return 
residuals for each stock-year after controlling for the Fama–French five 
factors using time-series regressions, and then compute the average 
monthly residual variance to be 0.027 in our sample. For the second 
term, we regress the monthly return variance 𝜎2
𝑖,𝑡 (computed from daily 
returns) for each stock 𝑖 and month 𝑡 in a panel regression:

𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝑏2𝜎2
𝜎2

𝑖,𝑡−1 + Controls𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡,

where 𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1 is the lagged monthly log stock return. We cluster standard 
errors by year-month and stock, and the results are reported in Table 
B.6. Consistent with the ‘‘leverage effect’’ of Black (1976), stock return 
variance co-moves negatively with returns. Over the full sample, when 
controlling for both stock and year-month fixed effects, we estimate 
the response of monthly return variance to log returns to be around 
−0.064. Results in columns (4) through (9) show that the relationship 
is relatively stable over subsamples.

The correlation component.  Davis (2024) considers an 𝑁 ×𝐾 matrix of 𝐾
characteristics for stocks in time 𝑡, 𝑍𝑡. He estimates a model where the 
covariance matrix and vector of expected returns are linear functions 
of characteristics: 

𝜇𝑡 = 𝑍𝑡𝛩𝜇, 𝛤𝑡 = 𝑍𝑡𝛩𝛤 , 𝛴𝑡 = 𝛤𝑡𝛤 ′

𝑡 + 𝛩𝜁 𝐼,

(B.8)

where 𝛩𝜇 and 𝛩𝛤  are vectors of parameters that govern the mean and 
covariance matrix, respectively, and 𝛩𝜁 > 0 is a positive scalar that 
controls idiosyncratic variance. Some characteristics are functions of 
prices (e.g. book-to-market), and therefore a movement in asset price 
changes both the mean returns 𝜇𝑡 and the covariance matrix through 
𝛤𝑡. In Davis (2024), the model in Eq. (B.8) is estimated using maximum 
likelihood with monthly return data and normalized versions of the 
characteristics  from  Freyberger  et  al.  (2020).  The  implied  demand 
elasticity due to price-induced changes in covariance is approximately 
1.4.

B.6. Impact of consumption hedging

16 This is largely expected, as the model in Bartram and Grinblatt (2018) is 
built to estimate fundamental valuation and only yields return predictability 
as a secondary outcome, whereas the price wedges in van Binsbergen et al. 
(2023) are directly estimated using characteristics known to predict returns. 
The degree of return predictability implied in our price pass-through estimate 
is consistent with the original findings in Bartram and Grinblatt (2018).

To assess the quantitative importance of the consumption-hedging 
component in Eq. (15), we perform a calibration using data. Specif-
ically,  we  estimate  the  sensitivity  of  the  covariance  between  stock 
returns and the log consumption-to-wealth ratio, 𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡, to changes in 
stock prices. Our approach involves three steps:

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Table B.6
Estimating the effect of prices on return variance.
We estimate the Black (1976) ‘‘leverage effect’’ using panel regressions of monthly stock return variance on the lagged monthly log stock return. Stock return variance is estimated 
using daily Fama–French 5-factor model residuals. Columns (1) through (3) uses the full sample. Columns (4) through (6) use the first half of the sample. Columns (7) through 
(9) use the second half of the sample. When using the same sample, the regressions differ in whether they include stock- or year-month-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered 
by year-month and stock.

Full sample
(1)

−0.075∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.654∗∗∗
(0.009)
N
N
2,955,027
39.73%

(2)

−0.063∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.520∗∗∗
(0.010)
Y
N
2,955,027
44.39%

(3)

−0.064∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.503∗∗∗
(0.010)
Y
Y
2,955,027
45.44%

  𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1

  𝜎2

𝑖,𝑡−1

  Stock FE
  Time FE
  obs
  𝑅2

Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.

Dependent variable: 𝜎2

𝑖,𝑡

1970–1994

(4)

−0.068∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.703∗∗∗
(0.011)
N
N
1,389,759
46.06%

(5)

−0.059∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.584∗∗∗
(0.012)
Y
N
1,389,759
49.72%

(6)

−0.063∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.572∗∗∗
(0.012)
Y
Y
1,389,759
50.43%

1995–2019

(7)

−0.079∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.619∗∗∗
(0.012)
N
N
1,565,268
35.52%

(8)

−0.062∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.434∗∗∗
(0.012)
Y
N
1,565,268
42.51%

(9)
−0.059∗∗∗  
(0.003)
0.408∗∗∗
(0.010)
Y
Y
1,565,268 
43.96%  

Step 1: Estimating unexpected returns.  First, we estimate the unexpected 
component  of  stock  returns,  𝑟unex
𝑖,𝑡+1 ,  by  regressing  realized  quarterly 
returns on the (log) price wedge instrument from van Binsbergen et al. 
(2023), controlling for stock fixed effects: 

𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽1 𝑃 𝑊𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡+1,

(B.9)

(𝑃𝑖,𝑡∕ ̃𝑃𝑖,𝑡

where 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+1 is the realized return for stock 𝑖 in quarter 𝑡 + 1, 𝑃 𝑊𝑖,𝑡 =
) is the (log) price wedge from van Binsbergen et al. (2023), 
log
and 𝛼𝑖 captures stock fixed effects. The residuals from this regression, 
𝜀𝑖,𝑡+1, represent the unexpected returns: 𝑟unex

𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝜀𝑖,𝑡+1.

Step 2: Estimating the sensitivity of the consumption-hedging term.  Next, 
we estimate the sensitivity of the covariance between unexpected re-
turns and the log consumption-to-wealth ratio deviations, 𝑐𝑎𝑦𝑡+1, with 
respect to the price wedge. We achieve this by regressing the product 
of  unexpected  returns  and  𝑐𝑎𝑦𝑡+1  on  the  (log)  price  wedge,  again 
controlling for stock fixed effects: 

𝑟unex
𝑖,𝑡+1 ⋅ 𝑐𝑎𝑦𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽2 𝑃 𝑊𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑖,𝑡+1,

(B.10)

( 𝜕𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡
𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡)

where  𝑐𝑎𝑦𝑡+1  is  the  consumption-to-wealth  ratio  log  deviations
from  Lettau  and  Ludvigson  (2001).  Since  the  cay  data  is  available 
quarterly, we use quarterly returns. We obtain the cay data from Amit 
Goyal’s website (https://sites.google.com/view/agoyal145), as the data 
is  frequently  updated  there.  In  regression  (B.10),  𝛽2  captures  the 
sensitivity of the consumption-hedging term to (cash flow-unrelated) 
)
changes in the asset price 
. Note that the expected value of 
the left-hand side is E
𝑡[𝑟unex

𝑖,𝑡+1 ⋅ 𝑐𝑎𝑦𝑡+1] = 𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡.
Results.  Table   B.7  presents  the  results  of  the  regressions  discussed 
above. In column (1), we report the estimates from Eq. (B.9). The neg-
ative and significant coefficient 𝛽1 indicates that higher price wedges 
are associated with lower expected returns, as expected.17 In column 
(2), we present the estimates from Eq. (B.10). The coefficient 𝛽2 is 
small  in  magnitude  and  not  statistically  significant,  suggesting  that 
the sensitivity of the consumption-hedging term to price changes is 
negligible.

When  we  convert  the  quarterly  estimate  of  𝛽2 = −0.0005  to  a 
monthly value (by dividing by 3), we get approximately −0.00017. This 
value is about two orders of magnitude smaller than our pass-through 
estimate of 0.01, indicating that the consumption-hedging component 
has a minimal impact on overall demand elasticity.

Table B.7
Consumption hedging term price sensitivity regressions.
This table presents the regression estimates used to calibrate the 
importance of the Epstein–Zin intertemporal hedging term for 
demand elasticity. First, we regress stock-level quarterly returns 
on the (log) price wedge from van Binsbergen et al. (2023) at 
time 𝑡, with stock fixed effects, as shown in column (1). We 
then take the residual for this regression, labeled 𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑒𝑥
𝑡+1 . Next, 
we regress 𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑒𝑥
𝑐𝑎𝑦𝑡+1 on the (log) price wedge with stock fixed 
effects, which is a quarterly measure of 𝜕𝜎𝑖,𝑐−𝑤,𝑡∕𝜕 log(𝑃𝑖,𝑡) from 
Eq. (15), as shown in column (2). 

𝑡+1

  (log) price wedge

Dependent variable:
𝑟𝑡+1

(1)

−0.1918∗∗∗
(0.0167)

  Observations
425,777
  𝑅2
0.0104
  Stocked fixed effects
Yes
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.

𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑒𝑥
𝑡+1

𝑐𝑎𝑦𝑡+1 

(2)
−0.0005  
(0.0004)  
425,777  
0.0001
Yes

Table B.8
Demand elasticity with randomly restricted investment universes.
Each month, we randomly sample a fraction of all stocks to be investable and re-
optimize the portfolio. The inputs to portfolio optimization is the same as column (1) 
in Table  3 with the optimal Ledoit–Wolf shrinkage parameter. In this table, columns (1) 
and (2) report the fraction and number of stocks in the sampled investment portfolio. 
Columns (3) and (4) report the median and mean number of stocks chosen by the 
short sale-constrained portfolio optimization. Column (5) reports the average unspanned 
monthly return and column (6) reports the corresponding demand elasticity estimate.
Optimized portfolio
  Investment universe
Num of stocks
Num of
  Fraction
Median
stocks

Unspanned

return

Mean

  (1)
  100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%

(2)

1,615
1,453
1,291
1,130
968
807
646
484
323
161

(3)

69
68
65
63
60
58
54
50
44
35

(4)

80
78
76
74
72
68
65
60
53
41

(5)

0.29%
0.29%
0.29%
0.30%
0.30%
0.31%
0.31%
0.33%
0.34%
0.38%

B.7. Restricted investment universes

Demand  
elasticity 
(6)

4.48
4.45
4.41
4.37
4.32
4.25
4.18
4.06
3.90
3.60

17 It is worth noting that this coefficient should not be interpreted as the 
quarterly price pass-through, as we also control for stock fixed effects. By 
doing so, we incorporate information from the future, and thus this is not 
a true forecasting regression.

In this section, we show that restricting investment universes can 
further reduces demand elasticities to some extent. The intuition is 
straightforward: demand elasticity decreases with unspanned returns 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Table B.9
Demand elasticity with sector mutual fund investment universes.
We redo portfolio optimization after restricting to the investment universes of mutual funds that specialize 
in specific sectors. The sample period is 1991 to 2019. Column (2) reports the number of unique mutual 
funds in each sector. Column (3) reports the number of stocks in the associated investment universe for 
a median month. Column (4) reports the number of holdings of a median sector mutual fund. Column 
(5) reports the number of holdings of our optimized portfolio after restricting to the corresponding sector 
investment universe. Column (6) reports the average unspanned monthly return and column (7) reports the 
corresponding demand elasticity estimate, which is equal to 1 + 0.01∕unspanned return. The next-to-last row 
reports the average across all sectors, while the last row reports the optimal portfolio with the full universe 
of stocks over the same sample period. To make results comparable to other exercises in this paper, we 
have restricted attention to stocks above the 20% NYSE size cutoff.
  Category

Unspanned

Num

Num of stocks
Inv Universe
(3)

  (1)
  Communications
  Energy
  Financial
  Health
  Natural resources
  Technology
  Utilities
  Average
  Full universe

funds

(2)

19
23
37
61
26
129
37
47

416
369
579
327
415
978
556
520
1793

Fund

(4)

Opt Port
(5)

29
32
39
41
30
39
37
35

35
29
38
34
32
42
36
35
57

return

(6)

0.378%
0.358%
0.364%
0.389%
0.366%
0.383%
0.374%
0.373%
0.250%

Demand  
elasticity 
(7)

3.65
3.79
3.75
3.57
3.74
3.61
3.67
3.68
4.99

(Eq. (9)). If the asset universe is restricted, the unspanned return of 
each stock 𝑖 increases because the set of other stocks available to span 
becomes smaller. In the extreme case where the investment universe 
consists of only a single stock, the entire expected excess return of that 
stock would be unspanned.

Random restrictions.  We first illustrate this mechanism by imposing 
random  restrictions.  Each  month,  we  randomly  select  a  fraction  of 
stocks to define the investable universe and then recompute the opti-
mized portfolio. For each fraction, we resample 10 times and report 
averages.  The  results  are  reported  in  Table   B.8.  As  the  investment 
universe becomes more restricted, the number of chosen stocks de-
creases  from  a  median  of  69  to  35.  Intuitively,  as  the  investment 
universe shrinks from 100% of stocks to 10%, the average monthly 
unspanned returns increase monotonically from 0.29% to 0.38%, which 
leads to a decrease in the implied demand elasticity from 4.5 to 3.6. 
These findings suggest that a restricted investment universe can further 
reduce demand elasticity to some extent.

Restricting to mutual fund investment universes.  We now also consider 
restricting  investment  universes  to  match  specialized  sector  mutual 
funds. Morningstar classifies a subset of non-diversified stock mutual 
funds  by  sectors  (e.g.,  technology).  We  obtain  sector  classifications 
from  Morningstar  Direct  and  merge  them  with  holdings  data  from 
Thomson Reuters S12. Additionally, we examine the overlap between 
mutual fund holdings and the set of stocks considered in this paper. The 
resulting sample starts from 1991, due to availability of Morningstar 
data. For each sector, we identify investment universe using the set of 
stocks ever held by funds in that sector. To avoid sectors that are overly 
small, we only consider sectors with at least 10 unique funds.

The results are presented in Table  B.9. For an average sector, a 
median month includes 520 stocks in its investment universe, which 
is significantly smaller than the 1793 stocks of the full universe over 
the same sample period. Correspondingly, the median sector mutual 
fund  holds  only  35  stocks,  while  our  optimized  portfolio  —  when 
restricted onto the same investment universe — holds also 35 stocks. 
The resulting average unspanned return is 0.373%, corresponding to 
a  demand  elasticity  of  3.7,  which  is  lower  than  the  demand  elas-
ticity of approximately 5 estimated for the full investment universe. 
Thus, we conclude that restricting the investment universe to align 
with specialized mutual funds slightly reduces demand elasticity, as 
predicted.

17 

Appendix C. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104096.

Data availability

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/5tz5fgjmxg/2 

(Mendeley

Data).

References

Paper, Indiana.

Econ. 128 (1), 125–147.

103 (5), 1728–1758.

Baba Yara, F., Boyer, B.H., Davis, C., 2021. The factor model failure puzzle. Working 

Bartram, S.M., Grinblatt, M., 2018. Agnostic fundamental analysis works. J. Financ. 

Basak, S., Pavlova, A., 2013. Asset prices and institutional investors. Am. Econ. Rev. 

van Binsbergen, J.H., Boons, M., Opp, C.C., Tamoni, A., 2023. Dynamic asset (mis) 
pricing: Build-up versus resolution anomalies. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (2), 406–431.
Black, F., 1976. Studies of stock price volatility changes. In: Proceedings of the Business 

and Economic Statistics Section. pp. 177–181.

Bouchaud, J.-P., Bonart, J., Donier, J., Gould, M., 2018. Trades, Quotes and Prices: 

Financial Markets Under the Microscope. Cambridge University Press.

Brandt, M.W., 2010. Portfolio choice problems. In: Handbook of Financial Econometrics: 

Tools and Techniques. Elsevier, pp. 269–336.

Campbell, J.Y., Chan, Y.L., Viceira, L.M., 2003. A multivariate model of strategic asset 

allocation. J. Financ. Econ. 67 (1), 41–80.

Chang, Y.-C., Hong, H., Liskovich, I., 2015. Regression discontinuity and the price 

effects of stock market indexing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (1), 212–246.

Chen, Q., Roussanov, N., Wang, X., 2023. Semiparametric Conditional Factor Mod-
els: Estimation and Inference. Working Paper Series 31817, National Bureau of 
Economic Research.

Davis, C., 2024. Elasticity of quantitative investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. (forthcoming).
De Bondt, W.F., Thaler, R., 1985. Does the stock market overreact? J. Financ. 40 (3), 

793–805.

Dello-Preite, M., Uppal, R., Zaffaroni, P., Zviadadze, I., 2024. Cross-Sectional Asset 

Pricing with Unsystematic Risk. Working Paper, ICL, EDHEC, and HEC.

Duffie, D., 2010. Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital. 

J. Financ. 65 (4), 1237–1267.

J. Financ. Econ. 33 (1), 3–56.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. 

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116, 

1–22.

Frazzini, A., Israel, R., Moskowitz, T.J., 2018. Trading costs. Working Paper, AQR and 

Yale 14–05, Working Paper, AQR and Yale.

Freyberger, J., Neuhierl, A., Weber, M., 2020. Dissecting characteristics nonparametri-

cally. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 2326–2377.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Davis et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 172 (2025) 104096 

Gabaix, X., Koijen, R.S., 2022. In Search of the Origins of Financial Fluctuations: 
The Inelastic Markets Hypothesis. Working Paper Series 28967, National Bureau 
of Economic Research.

Gromb, D., Vayanos, D., 2010. Limits of arbitrage. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 2 (1), 

251–275.

Haddad, V., Huebner, P., Loualiche, E., 2025. How competitive is the stock market? 
theory, evidence from portfolios, and implications for the rise of passive investing. 
Am. Econ. Rev. 115 (3), 975–1018.

Hou, K., Xue, C., Zhang, L., 2015. Digesting anomalies: An investment approach. Rev. 

(1), 1–44.

Lewellen, J., 2015. The cross section of expected stock returns. Crit. Financ. Rev. 4 

Lopez-Lira,  A.,  Roussanov,  N.L.,  2023.  Do  Common  Factors  Really  Explain  the 

Cross-Section of Stock Returns?. Working Paper, Florida and Wharton.

Lou, D., 2012. A flow-based explanation for return predictability. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

25 (12), 3457–3489.

nanc. Anal. J. 45 (1), 31–42.

Michaud, R.O., 1989. The Markowitz optimization enigma: Is ‘optimized’ optimal? Fi-

Modigliani, F., Miller, M.H., 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the 

theory of investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 48 (3), 261–297.

Financ. Stud. 28 (3), 650–705.

45 (3), 881–898.

Jegadeesh, N., 1990. Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. J. Financ. 

Pavlova, A., Sikorskaya, T., 2023. Benchmarking intensity. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (3), 

Jegadeesh,  N.,  Titman,  S.,  1993.  Returns  to  buying  winners  and  selling  losers: 

Petajisto, A., 2009. Why do demand curves for stocks slope down? J. Financ. Quant. 

Implications for stock market efficiency. J. Financ. 48 (1), 65–91.

Anal. 44 (5), 1013–1044.

Kelly, B.T., Pruitt, S., Su, Y., 2019. Characteristics are covariances: A unified model of 

Schmickler, S., 2020. Identifying the Price Impact of Fire Sales Using High-Frequency 

risk and return. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (3), 501–524.

Surprise Mutual Fund Flows. Working Paper, Princeton.

Kim, S., Korajczyk, R.A., Neuhierl, A., 2021. Arbitrage portfolios. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Scholes, M.S., 1972. The market for securities: Substitution versus price pressure and 

859–903.

Koijen, R.S., Yogo, M., 2019. A demand system approach to asset pricing. J. Political 

Kozak, S., Nagel, S., Santosh, S., 2018. Interpreting factor models. J. Financ. 73 (3), 

Financ. 53 (5), 1821–1827.

34 (6), 2813–2856.

Econ. 127 (4), 1475–1515.

1183–1223.

Manag. 30 (4), 110–119.

Ledoit, O., Wolf, M., 2004. Honey, I shrunk the sample covariance matrix. J. Portf. 

Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2001. Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected stock 

returns. J. Financ. 56 (3), 815–849.

Lettau, M., Pelger, M., 2020. Factors that fit the time series and cross-section of stock 

returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 2274–2325.

the effects of information on share prices. J. Bus. 45 (2), 179–211.

Shleifer, A., 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? J. Financ. 41 (3), 579–590.
Stevens, G.V.G., 1998. On the inverse of the covariance matrix in portfolio analysis. J. 

Stewart, C.A., Welch, V., Plale, B., Fox, G., Pierce, M., Sterling, T., (2017). Indiana 
University  Pervasive  Technology  Institute.  Bloomington,  IN.  https://doi.org/10.
5967/K8G44NGB.

van der Beck, P., 2022. On the estimation of demand-based asset pricing models. 

Working Paper, HBS.

18 

