Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

CRISK: Measuring the climate risk exposure of the financial system(cid:73)
Hyeyoon Jung a,∗, Robert F. Engle b, Richard Berner b
a Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 33 Liberty Street, 10045, NY, United States
b New York University, 44 West Fourth Street, 10012, NY, United States

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We develop a market-based methodology to assess banks’ resilience to climate-related risks and study the 
climate-related risk exposure of large global banks. We introduce a new measure, CRISK, which is the expected 
capital shortfall of a bank in a climate stress scenario. To estimate CRISK, we construct climate risk factors 
and dynamically measure banks’ stock return sensitivity (that is, climate beta) to the climate risk factor. We 
validate the climate risk factor empirically and the climate beta estimates by using granular data on large US 
banks’ loan portfolios. The measure is useful in quantifying banks’ climate-related risk exposure through the 
market risk and the credit risk channels.

Dataset link: CRISK: Measuring the Climate Ris
k Exposure of the Financial System (Original d
ata)

JEL classification:
Q54
C53
G20

Keywords:
Climate risk
Financial stability
Systemic risk

1. Introduction

During the past three decades, the number of climate-related poli-
cies adopted globally has increased significantly (see Fig.  1). The risk 
to economic activity from changes in policies in response to climate 
risks, such as carbon taxes and green subsidies, is often referred to 
as transition risk. Transition risk can adversely affect the real economy 
through the banking sector. For example, a shock to borrowers’ transi-
tion risk can impair their ability to repay, which can then lead to an 
amplified effect on banks’ current and expected future profits, resulting 

in a systemic undercapitalization of banks. It is well known that such 
undercapitalization  of  the  financial  system  could  hamper  economic 
growth through a decrease in credit supply.

Despite the widespread adoption of climate policies and the impor-
tance of understanding their effect on the banking sector, there has 
been little understanding of the potential impact of climate change on 
the financial system due to several challenges, as noted by Bolton et al. 
(2020). In fact, while the literature on the measurement of systemic 
risk (e.g., Brownlees and Engle, 2017; Acharya et al., 2016; Adrian and 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for their insightful comments. We appreciate being 
recognized as a finalist for the Berkeley Haas Sustainability Research Prize. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from National Science Foundation, United 
States grant 2218455, Inter-American Development Bank, United States, and Norges Bank, Norway. We also thank Marcin Kacperczyk, Jaehoon Jung, Kris Jacobs, 
Michael Barnett, Jennifer Dlugosz, Kristian Blickle, Nina Boyarchenko, Lee Seltzer, Linda Goldberg, Joao Santos, Viral Acharya, Felipe Cordova, Andrew Lo, Jose 
Fillat, Loriana Pelizzon, Harrison Hong, and discussants and participants at the American Economic Association Meeting, European Finance Association Meeting, 
MIT GCFP Conference, Cornell University ESG Investing Research Conference, University of Oklahoma Energy and Climate Finance Research Conference, NYU VRI 
Conference, Central Bank Research Association Meeting, European Banking Authority EAIA Seminar, Green Swan Conference, IFABS Oxford Conference, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Seminar, Federal Reserve Stress Testing Research Conference, Central Bank of Chile Workshop, European Central Bank Workshop, 
European Conferences of the Econometrics Community Conference, Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Seminar, 
ESSEC-Amundi Chair Webinar, Federal Reserve Cross-bank Climate Risk Community Seminar, Banque de France Workshop, Federal Reserve Board CREST Seminar, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Columbia University Conference, European Systemic Risk Board Workshop, Federal Reserve System Climate Meeting, Office 
of the Comptroller of the Currency Symposium, Banco de Portugal Conference on Financial Intermediation, International Journal of Central Banking Conference, 
Office of Financial Research Climate Implications for Financial Stability Conference, UN PRI Academic Network Week, and Paris December Meeting for valuable 
comments. We thank Georgij Alekseev, Janavi Janakiraman, Oliver Hannaoui, Yihao Zhao, Xuran Zeng, and Neil Kapoor for their excellent research assistance. 
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve 
System. Any errors are the responsibility of the authors. This paper was previously circulated as ‘‘Climate Stress Testing’’.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  hyeyoon.jung@ny.frb.org (H. Jung), rengle@stern.nyu.edu (R.F. Engle), rberner@stern.nyu.edu (R. Berner).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104076
Received 8 March 2023; Received in revised form 7 April 2025; Accepted 12 April 2025
Available online 27 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 1.  The number of climate-related policies across the world  The climate-related policies include climate-related laws, as well as regulations promoting low carbon 
transitions.
Source: Climate Change Laws of the World Data

Brunnermeier, 2016; Allen et al., 2012) has produced useful indices of 
systemic distress in the context of financial crises, there are no such 
measures to analyze climate-related risks.

In this paper, we focus on a particular dimension of climate risk, 
transition risk, and seek to answer the following question: are banks 
sufficiently capitalized to absorb losses during stressful conditions due 
to heightened climate transition risk? To answer this question, we take 
a novel approach to measuring the potential adverse effect of transition 
risk on banks’ capitalization. Transition risk can arise from changes 
in policies, technological advancements, and shifts in consumer pref-
erences. While these components are inherently interconnected and 
evolve together, our analysis is primarily motivated by policy changes.
Measuring the climate risk exposure of financial institutions faces 
several challenges. First, analyses based on past climate events may not 
effectively capture the changes in the perception of risk. For example, 
market expectations may change without direct experience of climate 
change events, and asset prices today can reflect changes in future cli-
mate risk even though damages or impacts are decades away. Second, 
both the climate risk itself and how firms, banks, and markets respond 
to the perceived risk change over time. Third, the lack of reliable data 
sources to systematically assess climate-related risks poses a significant 
challenge. Although voluntary climate-related disclosures exist, they 
often suffer from incompleteness and inconsistencies in quality.1

Our approach addresses the aforementioned challenges. We address 
the first challenge by constructing climate transition risk factors by 
forming portfolios designed to decline in value as the transition policy 
risk rises and then measuring the banks’ stock return sensitivity, called 
the transition climate policy beta, to the climate policy risk factor. For 
brevity, we use ‘‘transition climate policy beta’’ and ‘‘climate beta’’ in-
terchangeably throughout the paper. We address the second challenge 
by estimating the climate beta dynamically, which allows us to avoid 
making strong assumptions such as a static balance sheet and time-
invariant responses of firms and investors to change in the transition 
risk. Our methodology addresses the third challenge, as it uses only the 
market data that are consistent in quality, comparable across firms, and 
less susceptible to the noise and bias inherent in voluntary disclosures. 

1 See  Brainard  (2021),  Financial  Stability  Board  (2021),  and  European 

Systemic Risk Board (2020) among others.

2 

The importance of these elements was also envisioned in Bolton et al. 
(2020) and Brainard (2021) among others.

We introduce a novel measure, CRISK, defined as the expected cap-
ital shortfall of a financial firm under a climate stress scenario. CRISK 
is a function of a given financial firm’s size, leverage, and expected 
equity loss conditional on a climate stress event, which is calculated 
using the estimated climate beta. We define a climate stress event as 
a shock to a given climate risk factor, an equity portfolio designed to 
decline in value as climate risk rises. To consider a sufficiently severe 
yet plausible stress scenario, we take the lowest one percentile of the 6-
month return distribution of a climate risk factor to calibrate the stress 
level.2, 3 Additionally, we introduce marginal CRISK (mCRISK), which 
isolates the effect of climate stress from concurrent undercapitalization 
by subtracting CRISK under zero climate stress from CRISK. CRISK 
assesses the total capital shortfall under climate stress given leverage, 
whereas mCRISK measures the additional capital shortfall specifically 
due to climate stress.

We  apply  our  methodology  to  assess  the  climate  transition  risk 
exposure of large global banks. While it can also be used to analyze 
the physical climate risk arising from property damage due to extreme 
weather events, this paper focuses on its application to the transition 
risk. We use ‘‘transition CRISK’’ interchangeably with ‘‘CRISK’’ for the 
rest of the paper.4 The estimated CRISK and mCRISK vary depending 
on the severity of the scenario and the climate transition risk factors. 
We summarize our findings using the stranded asset factor developed 
by Litterman (2021) as the climate transition risk factor, which serves 
as a proxy for market expectations on future transition risk, as fossil 
fuel energy firms’ assets are likely to become ‘‘stranded’’ along most 
transition paths.

We begin by documenting that the climate beta varies over time, 
underscoring the importance of dynamic estimation. Notably, we find 
that the climate beta increased significantly across banks starting in 
2019 and peaked in 2020. We explain the variation in the bank climate 

2 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2018) describes as part of stress 
testing principles that a stress testing framework should consider ‘‘scenarios 
that are sufficiently severe but plausible’’.

3 Future  work  of  scientific  and  economic  analyses  could  suggest  other 

approaches to calibrate the stress level.

4 For an application to physical risk, see Jung et al. (2023).

H. Jung et al.

beta  using  granular  data  on  large  US  banks’  loan  portfolios,  taken 
from Federal Reserve Y-14 Q (Y-14) forms. From this data set, we 
construct a panel of loan portfolio climate betas by taking the loan size-
weighted average climate beta of the borrowers’ sector stock returns. 
We find that the constructed loan portfolio climate betas are strongly 
aligned with the climate betas based only on the market data of bank 
stock returns and their conditional covariance with climate risk factors. 
This relationship remains robust when merging the climate beta at 
the  firm  level  instead  of  the  industry  level  (accounting  for  within-
industry  heterogeneity),  when  using  the  unlevered  climate  beta  of 
borrowers (accounting for borrower leverage), when considering the 
utilized loan amount instead of the committed amount, and it does not 
vary significantly across specific periods, such as during COVID. This 
suggests that the composition of the bank loan portfolio is important in 
explaining the bank climate beta variations.

Next, we highlight key factors driving the increase in the bank cli-
mate beta. First, we document that industries with the highest climate 
beta are ‘‘brown’’, and their climate beta increased sharply starting 
from 2019, coinciding with the timing of an increase in the climate 
beta of banks. Second, we show that the climate beta predicts a higher 
risk for brown loans, measured by their probability of default. As a 
result, shocks to borrowers’ transition risk can affect banks’ current 
and future profits, increasing their stock return sensitivity to climate 
risk.  Third,  we  find  that  banks  are  slow  to  adjust  loan  prices  and 
quantities in response to rising climate beta. This delayed response 
leaves banks more exposed to climate risk as brown loans become more 
risky. Finally, attention to climate change likely plays an important 
role. In 2020, not only did fossil fuel prices collapse, but attention 
to  climate  change  surged.  Starting  in  2019,  the  number  of  climate 
regulations increased, and indicators of climate risk uncertainty and 
firm exposure to climate risk began to trend upward.

These results highlight two channels through which transition risk 
affects banks’ capitalization: the credit risk and market risk channels. 
A shock to borrowers’ transition risk raises their probability of default 
(credit risk channel), particularly due to banks’ slow adjustments in 
loan  prices  and  quantities  caused  by  frictions  such  as  relationship 
lending  and  specialization.  Moreover,  borrowers’  increased  climate 
exposure amplifies the impact on banks’ profits and equity valuations, 
aligning banks’ stock return sensitivity with their loan portfolio climate 
beta (market risk channel).

One may be concerned that the climate factor is capturing the effect 
of the concurrent COVID outbreak rather than the transition risk. To 
address this concern, we validate the climate factors in event study 
analysis, where we find that they respond to transition events that 
materialized (but are not sufficiently severe for stress tests, such as the 
Paris Agreement or the 2016 Trump election). Furthermore, we find 
that our results are robust after controlling for the nonenergy-related 
COVID  effect.  In  addition,  we  document  out-of-COVID-sample  pre-
dictability of climate betas; banks with higher pre-COVID climate betas 
had higher mCRISK during the COVID period, further corroborating the 
validity of our measures.

Having  established  the  validity  of  the  climate  beta,  we  use  cli-
mate beta  estimates  to  compute  mCRISK and CRISK. To assess  the 
marginal effect of climate stress on the expected capital shortfalls, we 
first analyze mCRISK. We find that mCRISK turned positive in 2019 
and reached $45-90 billion for the top four US banks at the end of 
2020. The aggregate mCRISK for these banks is approximately $260 
billion. These correspond roughly to 28% of their equity, indicating the 
significant potential impact of climate stress from transition policies. To 
estimate the total expected capital shortfall including the concurrent 
undercapitalization, we also calculate CRISK. In 2020, the aggregate 
CRISK of the top four US banks increased by $425 billion. For context, 
their aggregate systemic risk (SRISK), which represents the expected 
capital shortfall conditional on market stress, increased by $460 billion 
during the global financial crisis of 2007–2008.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Furthermore, we extend our analysis to financial institutions beyond 
banks  and  aggregate  the  results  at  the  economy  level.  To  measure 
the system-wide climate risk, we compute the aggregate mCRISK and 
CRISK of 105 financial firms in the US, including banks, broker-dealers, 
and insurance companies. We find that the aggregate mCRISK exceeded 
$500 billion in 2020 and remained as high as $400 billion at the end 
of 2021, indicating that the effect of climate stress from transition 
policies could potentially be substantial in the future if banks are not 
sufficiently capitalized. The aggregate CRISK of the US reached nearly 
$500 billion in 2020 but declined to under $150 billion by the end 
of 2021. To provide context on the magnitude, the aggregate SRISK of 
the US peaked at approximately $940 billion during the global financial 
crisis.

In  addition,  we  analyze  various  transition  scenarios.  Given  that 
there has been no consensus on what constitutes sufficiently severe 
yet plausible scenarios in the context of climate risk, we perform a 
sensitivity  analysis.  For  example,  moving  from  a  stress  level  corre-
sponding to the 1% quantile to less severe scenarios such as the 5% 
quantile, 10% quantile, and median, the peak mCRISK of the top four 
US banks in 2020 falls from $260 billion to $140, $120, and $10 billion, 
respectively. The results discussed so far are based on the stranded asset 
factor. We find similar but slightly higher mCRISK in a scenario where 
a broader set of firms, beyond those included in the stranded asset 
portfolio, are adversely affected by transition policies (e.g., carbon tax). 
In contrast, scenarios where brown companies face negative impacts 
while green companies benefit (e.g., a combination of carbon tax and 
green subsidy) result in significantly lower mCRISK.

We conduct a battery of exercises to verify the robustness of our 
estimates  of  bank  climate  betas.  First,  we  find  that  our  results  are 
robust to including additional bank stock return factors, such as interest 
rates, housing, and COVID. Second, our results remain similar when 
we use close alternative climate transition and market factors. Third, 
we confirm that our results are robust to various details of the estima-
tion procedure, such as correcting for asynchronous trading, using an 
annual sample instead of a full sample, or using a common dynamic 
conditional beta parameter across banks to reduce estimation error.

Contribution to the literature.  This paper contributes to the literature 
studying the effect of transition risk on banks. Studies have documented 
that banks respond to transition risk through the credit risk channel 
by adjusting loan prices and quantities. Kacperczyk and Peydro (2021) 
find that high-emission firms receive less bank credit from banks that 
make commitments. Chava (2014) finds that banks charge higher in-
terest rates to firms with environmental issues. Ivanov et al. (2021) 
show that banks reduce their transition risk exposure by shortening 
maturities and limiting access to permanent financing for high-emission 
firms. Delis et al. (2019) document that banks charge higher rates to 
fossil fuel firms, and Laeven and Popov (2022) show that banks shift 
lending to high-emission sectors in countries with laxer policies. While 
these papers suggest that banks respond to transition risk, it is not clear 
to what extent banks could manage their risk of undercapitalization 
in the face of a sudden transition. This paper thus contributes to this 
literature by estimating systemic climate risk, despite the means banks 
currently employ to mitigate climate risk. Moreover, we incorporate 
not only the credit risk channel, but also the market risk channel.

Current  research  on  measuring  systemic  climate  risk  only  offers 
measures that are backward-looking, static, and based on deterministic 
transition scenarios, unlike the more developed literature on measuring 
the systemic risk of financial institutions in the context of financial 
crises (e.g., Brownlees and Engle, 2017; Allen et al., 2012; Adrian and 
Brunnermeier, 2016; Acharya et al., 2016). Reinders et al. (2023) use 
Merton’s contingent claims model to assess the impact of a carbon 
tax shock on the value of corporate debt and residential mortgages in 
the Dutch banking sector. Battiston et al. (2017) provide a network-
based approach and Nguyen et al. (2023) employ a bottom-up approach 
to climate stress tests. Many regulators also have conducted climate 

3 

H. Jung et al.

stress tests,5 relying on the book values and projections of realized 
losses of loans using confidential supervisory data. These tests typically 
assume  that  the  impacts  of  climate  risk  on  firms’  cash  flows  (and 
therefore the impacts on the banking sector) only appear far in the 
future (e.g., in 30 years), without incorporating the possibility that 
banks’  balance  sheets  and  policies  can  change  within  such  a  long 
horizon. In contrast, our approach incorporates market expectations, 
and thus yields measures that are forward-looking, time-varying, can 
be estimated in real time, and requires only publicly available data.

We introduce a novel application of the SRISK framework from
(Brownlees and Engle, 2017), adapted to assess the resilience of fi-
nancial institutions to climate risk. While our approach builds on the 
established framework, we implement key modifications to specifically 
assess  climate-related  risks.  First,  while  the  SRISK  uses  the  market 
return as the only risk factor, we employ a variety of climate risk 
factors to design stress scenarios. We also validate climate transition 
risk factors by showing that they negatively respond to events that are 
associated with a movement toward a greener economy. Second, we 
introduce several new market-based metrics of climate risk exposures 
of financial institutions. On top of CRISK, we also introduce mCRISK, 
which isolates the effect of climate stress from market stress. To test 
for a scenario where market stress and climate stress arrive at the same 
time, we introduce a compound risk metric, S&CRISK.6 This measure is 
useful because when market risk and climate risk are correlated, CRISK 
alone can underestimate risk. Third, we validate our analysis using Y-14 
data and link climate beta variation to banks’ loan composition.

Outline  of  the  paper.  The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  structured  as 
follows: Section 2 describes the data. In Section 3, we develop and 
validate climate transition risk factors. Section 4 estimates bank cli-
mate betas, and Section 5 validates these estimates and proposes a 
mechanism. Section 6 analyzes mCRISK, CRISK, and S&CRISK at both 
the institution and aggregate levels, demonstrating further applications 
of the framework. Section 7 presents robustness checks, and Section 8 
concludes.

2. Data

We use various data sets for analyses. For the main analyses, we use 
market data for estimating climate betas and CRISKs of large global 
banks in the US, the UK, Canada, Japan, and France for the sample 
period from 2000 to 2021. We focus on large global banks, as they 
hold  more  than  80%  of  syndicated  loans  made  to  the  oil  and  gas 
industry.7 In the systemic climate risk analysis, we analyze the metrics 
aggregated across large financial firms, including banks, broker-dealers, 
and insurance companies.8 We use carbon emissions data to construct 
some of the climate factors and bank-level data on financial variables 
and loan portfolio composition to validate our measures.

Market data.  Our market-based approach only requires publicly avail-
able  data.  In  the  construction  of  climate  factors,  we  use  the  daily 
return on financial stocks, S&P 500 index, and other ETFs, including 
VanEck Vectors Coal ETF (KOL), Energy Sector SPDR ETF (XLE), and 
iShares Clean Energy ETF (ICLN) downloaded from Datastream. To 
form industry portfolios, we use a CRSP-Compustat merged data set.

5 Based on a survey of 53 institutions from 36 jurisdictions conducted by 
the Financial Stability Board and Network for Greening the Financial System 
(2022), 54 climate stress tests or scenario analyses were completed or in 
progress, and 12 exercises were in the planning stage.

6 It is a sum of three components: marginal SRISK, marginal CRISK, and 
the undercapitalization of the bank under zero climate stress and zero market 
stress.

7 This  is  based  on  the  syndicated  loan  data  from  LPC  DealScan  and 

Bloomberg League Table.

8 The real-time measures for all major financial firms across the world 
are published on the V-Lab website (https://vlab.stern.nyu.edu/climate) on a 
regular basis.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Carbon emissions data.  Some climate risk factors are constructed based 
on past carbon emissions, calculated as the sum of Scope 1 and Scope 
2 emissions, downloaded from Bloomberg. The data set includes emis-
sions reported by firms in disclosure as well as emissions reported to the 
carbon disclosure project. Scope 1 emissions are direct emissions from 
sources controlled by or owned by the company. Scope 2 emissions are 
indirect emissions associated with the purchase of electricity, steam, 
heat, or cooling. We use both emission levels and emission intensities 
(total emissions relative to revenue), as both metrics are commonly 
studied in the literature (e.g., Bolton and Kacperczyk, 2021, 2022). We 
additionally use carbon emissions data by S&P Global Trucost to test 
for robustness.

Financial variables and loan portfolio data of US banks.  We use data 
from FR Y-14Q (Y-14) and FR Y-9C (Y-9C) to validate climate beta 
measures  by  examining  the  relationship  between  climate  beta  esti-
mates and bank loan composition, as well as bank characteristics. Y-14 
provides granular data on banks’ loan holdings, and Y-9C provides 
consolidated financial statement data of bank holding companies at 
a quarterly frequency. Data from both forms are maintained by the 
Federal Reserve.

Specifically,  the  Y-14  data  set  provides  detailed  information  on 
asset holdings, capital elements, and income components in various 
categories for selected bank holding companies (BHC) and intermediate 
holding companies (IHC). These include top-tier BHCs or IHCs with 
$50 billion or more in total consolidated assets, as well as any other 
banks  subject  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  stress  tests.  We  use  its  sub-
database ‘‘Schedule H.1’’, which provides granular information on all 
commercial and industrial (C&I) loans over $1 million in size.9 This 
data set is the closest data to the credit registry in the US, covering 
more than 75% of all corporate lending in the US. In the sample period 
between 2012:Q2 and 2021:Q4, we observe more than 5 million loans 
for 19 listed banks.10

We  primarily  make  use  of  data  on  the  borrower’s  information, 
including its primarily industry as classified by the North American 
Industry Classification System (NAICS), and loan-level information in-
cluding the size of the committed and utilized amount, interest rate 
spread, and the probability of default. The probability of default vari-
able is based on each bank’s internal assessment and reported as part 
of the stress testing requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act.11

Compared to other commonly used loan-level data sets like DealScan 
or the Shared National Credit (SNC) program, which primarily focus 
on syndicated loans, the Y-14 encompasses both syndicated and non-
syndicated loans. This inclusion allows for the examination of loans 
to small and medium-sized firms. Moreover, unlike DealScan, which 
only provides data at the time of loan origination and lacks detailed 
information  on  the  syndicate  participants’  loan  shares,  Y-14  offers 
comprehensive details on banks’ loan portfolios at any given time.

Other data.  To test the robustness of climate beta measures, we use 
an index measuring seated diners downloaded from OpenTable and an 
index measuring air passengers downloaded from the Transportation 
Security Administration (TSA) to proxy for the effect of COVID on the 
leisure and hospitality sector.

9 While small loans with less than $1 million in size are not included in 

the Y-14, on average, it covers over 80% of reported banks’ C&I loan book.
10 The bank-quarter panel is unbalanced.
11 A  growing  number  of  papers  (e.g.,  Correa  et  al.,  2022;  Howes  and 
Weitzner,  2018)  have  used  this  variable  from  Y-14.  In  particular,  Howes 
and Weitzner (2018) shows that the banks’ PD estimates are statistically and 
economically significant predictors of realized default.

4 

H. Jung et al.

3. Climate transition risk factors and climate stress scenarios

Every stress test begins with designing scenarios. To build market-
based climate stress scenarios, we build upon studies on forming cli-
mate hedge portfolios (e.g., Engle et al., 2020; Alekseev et al., 2022; 
Nard et al., 2024; Litterman, 2021). These studies construct portfolios 
that are expected to rise in value as climate risk increases. Focusing 
on policy-driven climate transition risks, we form climate risk factors
by taking a short position in such climate hedge portfolios or in the 
factors correlated with them. While our framework is flexible, so that 
other existing measures can be used, market-based return factors have 
distinctive benefits in that they are forward-looking and time-varying. 
Compared to unsigned news-based measures that mainly capture at-
tention to climate news, our measures can differentiate attention to 
a tightening transition policy from attention to a loosening transition 
policy.

3.1. Climate transition risk factors

We construct four climate transition risk factors: a stranded asset 
factor, an emission factor, a brown minus green factor, and a climate 
efficient factor mimicking portfolio. Each of these factors can be asso-
ciated with stylized versions of climate transition scenarios, and all of 
these factors can be easily computed on a daily basis. We validate the 
factors by assessing their response to climate transition events.

Stranded asset factor

The first factor we consider is the stranded asset factor. McGlade 
and Ekins (2015) find that, globally, a third of oil reserves, half of 
gas  reserves,  and  more  than  80%  of  current  coal  reserves  should 
remain unused from 2010 to 2050 to meet the target of limiting global 
warming to 2 degrees Celsius. This implies that fossil fuels would likely 
become ‘‘stranded assets’’ more quickly as economies move into a less 
carbon environment. Indeed, van der Ploeg and Rezai (2020) find that 
the assets in the fossil fuel industries are at risk of losing market value 
due to the transition risk triggered by changes in renewable technology 
and climate policies in light of the Paris commitments. In this sense, the 
return on a stranded asset portfolio is a useful proxy measure reflecting 
market expectations on future climate transition risk.

The stranded asset portfolio, which was developed by Litterman 
(2021) and the World Wildlife Fund, whose investment committee he 
chairs, takes a short position to get a climate hedge.12 The stranded 
asset factor is composed of a 70% long position in VanEck Vectors 
Coal ETF (KOL), a 30% long position in Energy Select Sector SPDR 
ETF (XLE), and a short position in SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY). 
After KOL became unavailable in December 2020, we use the weighted 
average return of its top five constituent coal companies, with weights 
that approximate its composition prior to liquidation.13 We use the 
performance of firms, not the performance of commodities, to reflect 
the firms’ responses to a commodity shock, such as hedging.

Based on the stranded asset factor, we build a scenario. We consider 
a scenario where the stranded asset factor declines by 50% over a six-
month period. This can be considered a sufficiently severe yet plausible 
scenario suitable for a market-based stress test because a 50% decline 
in the stranded asset factor corresponds to the left tail (1% quantile) of 
the past realized return distribution. We note that this scenario may not 
materialize in the short run. For example, a high carbon tax without 

12 The stranded asset portfolio return acts as a proxy for the World Wildlife 
Fund stranded assets total return swap.
13 Before KOL’s inception in 2008, we construct the stranded asset factor as 
a long position in XLE and a short position in SPY. An alternative approach 
would be to use coal industry returns to replicate KOL, which we adopt in 
Appendix  G. The estimated climate betas, and the subsequent analyses, remain 
consistent across approaches. See Section 7.2 for a more detailed discussion of 
alternative climate transition risk factors.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

alternative energy can lead to an increase in energy prices. Indeed, 
not only energy prices, but also fossil fuel stock prices rose in 2022 
due to a reduction in supply. While it is unlikely that policymakers 
would implement a disruptive policy like a high carbon tax imminently 
due to a lack of alternative energy in place, it is likely that regulatory 
interventions will eventually be implemented to shift into a less carbon-
intensive economy (e.g., to meet the Paris agreement goal). If such 
implementations were never to arrive, there would be no transition 
risk at all to consider, by definition. In fact, a rapidly growing number 
of climate-related policies have been adopted globally (as presented in 
Exhibit 1). As such measures become tighter and broader, it is plausible 
that producers and consumers alike will be incentivized to reduce fossil 
fuel energy use and shift to lower carbon fuels or renewable energy 
sources through investment or consumption. When a tighter and/or 
faster than expected measure is implemented, the value of the stranded 
asset portfolio can fall sharply over a short horizon in a sufficiently 
severe ‘‘1% of the time’’ stress event.

For the rest of the factors, we use the same approach to build sce-
narios. We consider scenarios in which each factor falls substantially, 
corresponding to a 1% quantile of the return distribution, over six 
months.

Emission factor

While the stranded asset factor is intuitive, the portfolio weights 
are not optimized to best reflect transition risks. Moreover, a carbon 
tax can affect a broader set of firms than just fossil fuel firms. Firms 
with higher emissions are expected to bear greater financial burdens 
under a carbon tax regime, exposing them to heightened regulatory 
risks and potentially affecting their competitiveness and valuations. 
Motivated by this reasoning, we construct an emission factor using the 
following steps. We first compute daily industry returns by calculating 
the value-weighted stock returns of US firms in the CRSP-Compustat 
database.14 Industries are classified by 4-digit SIC. Then, for each year 
and industry, we compute the average carbon emissions (sum of Scope 
1  and  Scope  2  emissions).15  Lastly,  we  compute  weighted  average 
industry returns where the weight is the carbon emissions. Because the 
Bloomberg emissions data are available only from 2010, we apply the 
same emission weights as 2010 for the pre-2010 period.16

Brown minus Green factor

Transition-related policies, such as subsidizing the production and 
consumption of renewable energy (‘‘green subsidy’’), can affect not 
only brown firms but also green firms. To consider scenarios where 
transition policies affect both brown and green firms, we construct a 
brown minus green (BMG) factor. For example, in a scenario with both 
a carbon tax and a green subsidy, high-emission firms are expected to 
be penalized by a carbon tax, while firms advancing the green transition 
are likely to benefit from green subsidies. The BMG factor is useful for 
considering such scenarios by capturing the performance gap between 
brown  and  green  firms.17  We  use  the  emission-based  factor  as  the 
brown factor, and the iShares Global Clean Energy ETF (ICLN) return 
as the green factor.

14 We focus on ordinary common shares (share codes 10 and 11) traded on 
the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ (exchange codes between 1 and 3).
15 Here, we confine the sample to S&P 500 constituents following Ilhan et al. 
(2020) to address the time-varying coverage of emissions data.
16 The results are robust to using emissions data from S&P Trucost.
17 A carbon tax alone can also drive the performance gap between brown 
firms and green firms, so the BMG factor is not limited to scenarios combining 
carbon taxes and green subsidies. It is broadly applicable to transition policies 
that affect both brown and green firms by capturing the net effect. Future 
research could explore how factors like the BMG are directly linked to specific 
transition policy implementations.

5 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 2.  Climate Factor Responses to Climate Change Events Each panel plots the cumulative coefficient 𝛾 on 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡 in 𝐶𝐹𝑡 = 𝛼 + ∑5
𝑛=0 𝛾𝑛 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡−𝑛 + 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡 for each climate 
factor 𝐶𝐹 . 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡 takes a value of 1 if there was a green event, a value of −1 if there was a brown event, and a value of 0 if there was no transition-related climate event on 
the day 𝑡. Each climate factor series is standardized by its volatility. The standard errors are Newey–West adjusted and the band shows 95% confidence interval.

Climate efficient factor mimicking portfolio factor

To  consider  climate  stress  besides  stranded  assets,  we  construct 
a climate-efficient factor mimicking portfolio (CEP) factor by taking a 
short  position  in  the  CEP  formed  by  Nard  et  al.  (2024).  The  CEP 
portfolio is a long-only portfolio of publicly available sustainable funds 
selected based on two criteria: (1) minimum variance and (2) maximum 
correlation with climate news after controlling for standard financial 
risks, the price of oil, and the stranded assets portfolio.

In robustness analysis, we consider the oil ETF factor as an alter-
native to the stranded asset factor and the emission intensity factor 
(emissions scaled by revenue). They behave similarly to the stranded 
asset and emission factors, and therefore, we focus on the four main 
factors. For additional results, refer to Section 7.

3.2. Climate factor responses around climate change events

To test whether the constructed climate risk factors capture climate 
transition risk, we conduct an event study analysis. We take the list 
of climate transition risk events from Barnett (2019), which goes until 
March 2019, and extend it to the end of 2021. This gives us 107 events, 
including electoral events, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) meetings, climate-related policy events, and others.18 The list 
includes the sign of the shock, where a positive sign is associated with 
a movement toward a greener economy (‘‘green’’ event), such as the 
Paris agreement, and a negative sign is associated with a movement 
away from a greener economy (‘‘brown’’ event), such as the withdrawal 
from the Paris agreement. The climate factor summary statistics (Table 
B.1), correlation table (Table  B.2), and the full list of events (Table  C.1) 
are included in the appendix.

We use the following specification to test the climate transition risk 

factors’ responses to the transition events:

𝐶𝐹𝑡 = 𝛼 +

5
∑

𝑛=0

𝛾𝑛 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡−𝑛 + 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

where 𝐶𝐹  denotes the climate transition risk factor, either the stranded 
asset, emission, BMG, or CEP factor. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡 takes a value of 1 if there 
was a green event, a value of −1 if there was a brown event, and a value 
of 0 if there was no event on the day 𝑡. We use the SPDR S&P 500 ETF 
for the market return, 𝑀𝐾𝑇 . The expected sign of 𝛾 is negative because 
a rise in transition risk is associated with a positive 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 and a lower 
value of 𝐶𝐹 . The standard errors are Newey–West adjusted for serial 
correlation. Fig.  2 plots the cumulative coefficient 𝛾 and shows that all 
proposed climate transition risk factors respond negatively to greener 
events, as expected. The coefficients 𝛾 are statistically significant for the 
emission and BMG factors and marginally significant for the stranded 
asset factor. The insignificant response of the CEP factor may be due to 
an asymmetric response to green events versus brown events, which 
we document in Fig.  C.2 for all four factors. If the market tends to 
respond more to brown events than to green events, the CEP factor is 
not likely to respond significantly to transition events because the CEP 
factor is designed to capture green news after taking out the stranded 
asset factor.

To address a potential concern that geopolitical risk is a confound-
ing factor, we include the global common volatility, COVOL, of Engle 
and Campos-Martins (2023) as a control variable. We find that the 
coefficients 𝛾 remain close (Fig.  C.1). Furthermore, for robustness, we 
take a two-step approach closer to the standard event study analysis. 
Specifically, we construct nonoverlapping data around the event dates 
and first obtain the abnormal return on climate factor, 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝐶𝐹𝑡 −
̂𝐶𝐹 𝑡, from a market model 𝐶𝐹𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝑏𝑀𝐾𝑇 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡 on a 1-year 
rolling window basis. Then we regress the cumulative abnormal return 
on 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘: 𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑡−1,𝑡+𝑛 = 𝛼 + 𝛾 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡. Based on this alternative 
specification, we find consistent results (Appendix  C).19

18 Among these events, 12 occurred during weekends or market holidays and 
therefore were excluded, as the research design focuses on measuring market 
responses.

19 With this approach, the number of observations drops even for 1-day 
abnormal returns, because (1) we estimate the market model based on the 
rolling-window regression and (2) we include only one observation per 5-day 
window after the shock, following the standard event study approach.

6 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 3.  Climate Beta of US Banks The sample banks are the top 10 large US banks by the average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

4. Climate beta estimation

Following the standard factor model approach, we model bank 𝑖’s 

stock return as: 

𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡

𝑖𝑡 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒

𝑖𝑡

𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(1)

where 𝑟𝑖𝑡 is the stock return of bank 𝑖, 𝑀𝐾𝑇  denotes market return, 
and 𝐶𝐹  denotes climate risk factor. We include the market factor in 
the model to control for confounding factors, such as the COVID shock 
and aggregate demand shock, that influence both the bank stock returns 
and the climate risk factor. The market beta and the climate beta, in this 
regression, measure the sensitivity of bank 𝑖’s return to overall market 
risk and to the climate risk factor, respectively.

The expected sign of the climate beta is positive for banks that 
hold loans and/or financial assets that are exposed to transition risk 
because the banks’ loan portfolios would likely deteriorate as transition 
risk rises (the climate transition risk factor falls). The rise in credit 
risk, either due to the borrower’s outright inability to repay or the 
deterioration of the borrower’s ability to repay, would negatively affect 
the banks’ current and expected future profits and therefore the banks’ 
stock returns.

We use the DCB model to estimate the time-varying climate betas 
on a daily basis. The GARCH-DCC model of Engle (2002, 2009, 2016) 
allows volatility and correlation to vary over time. The details of the 
estimation steps and the parameter estimates are reported in Appendix 
D. For stock markets with a closing time different from that of the New 
York market, we take asynchronous trading into consideration.20

20 Consider the following specification including the lags of the independent 
variables:

2𝑖𝑡

1𝑖𝑡

𝐶𝐹𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒

1𝑖𝑡 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡

2𝑖𝑡 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡−1 + 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒

𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
Assuming that returns are serially independent, we estimate the following two 
specifications separately and sum the coefficients.
𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
The  sum,  𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
+ 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
2𝑖𝑡
1𝑖𝑡

1𝑖𝑡 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
2𝑖𝑡 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡−1 + 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
1𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡

,  is  the  estimate  of  the  market  beta  and  the  sum, 

, is the estimate of the climate beta.

𝐶𝐹𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

2𝑖𝑡

1𝑖𝑡

2𝑖𝑡

Fig.  3 presents the 6-month moving average climate betas of the 10 
largest US banks in the scenario using the stranded asset factor. They 
show that climate betas vary over time, suggesting that it is important 
to estimate the betas dynamically. The climate betas of banks started 
from zero in early 2000, fell slightly below zero during the beginning of 
the global financial crisis, and spiked during 2019–2020. We find that 
this pattern was common for banks in other countries as well (Appendix 
E). The climate betas during 2019–2020 are statistically significant, 
based on the full sample OLS regression results and the rolling window-
based OLS regression results.21 In the validation exercise in Section 5, 
we show that a high climate beta is associated with a bank loan port-
folio’s high exposure to industries with high climate betas or industries 
with high carbon emissions, as well as the probability of default of those 
industries. While those results are based on US banks, it is likely that 
the climate beta of other countries also increased in 2020 because the 
loans they made to brown industries became riskier as the demand for 
fossil fuel energy fell. The proximity of climate betas to zero could be 
related to nonlinearity. We expect that the values of bank stocks are 
relatively insensitive to fluctuations in the stock prices of oil and gas 
firms as long as those firms are sufficiently far from default.

5. Climate beta validation

In this section, we explain the variation in the market-based bank 
climate beta with banks’ loan portfolio composition by using granu-
lar loan-level information of large US banks from Y-14. The sample 
includes 19 listed banks in Y-14 for the sample period from 2012:Q2 
to 2021:Q4.22 For the main analysis, we use the committed amount 
(covering both used and unused credit), and for the robustness test, we 
use the utilized credit amount. We complement these data with bank-
level financial variables from the consolidated financial statements for 
bank holding companies (Y-9C). The bank-level variables’ summary 
statistics and correlation tables are reported in Table  B.3.

This merged data set allows us to investigate several key questions: 
Do banks with greater exposure to brown loans have a higher climate 

21 See Tables IA.A.1 - IA.A.4 for fixed beta estimation results and Figures 
IA.A.1 - IA.B.10 for rolling window regression results.
22 Since  most  banks  begin  reporting  data  after  2012:Q3,  we  exclude 
observations before that period.

7 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 4.  Binned Scatter Plot of Bank Climate Beta and Loan Portfolio Climate Beta after controlling for the time fixed effects and the bank fixed effects, based on quarterly 
data from 2012:Q2 to 2021:Q4 for listed US banks in Y-14. The loan portfolio climate beta of bank 𝑖 at time 𝑡 is defined as: Loan Portfolio Climate Beta𝑖𝑡 = ∑
 where 
𝑤𝑗 denotes the fraction of bank 𝑖’s loan made to industry 𝑗 at time 𝑡. The industry 𝑗 is at the 3-digit NAICS code level.

𝑗∈𝐽 𝑤𝑗𝑡 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒

𝑗𝑡

beta? Does a higher climate beta of the borrower lead to a higher prob-
ability of loan default? How do banks adjust loan prices and quantities 
in response to an increased borrower climate beta and default risk? In 
Section 5.2, we examine these questions that help us understand the 
mechanism driving the variation in the bank climate beta.

5.1. Loan portfolio climate beta

We start by testing whether the market valuation of banks’ exposure 
to climate transition risk factors, proxied by climate beta, reflects banks’ 
loan portfolio composition from Y-14.23 To test this, we construct a 
bank-quarter-level panel of loan portfolio climate beta by computing 
the weighted average climate beta for each bank: 

Loan Portfolio Climate Beta =

∑

𝑗∈𝐽

𝑤𝑗 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑗

,

(2)

𝑗

where the weight, 𝑤𝑗 is the proportion of loans made to the respec-
tive industry 𝑗. 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
 denotes the climate beta of industry 𝑗 and is 
computed as the value-weighted average climate beta of firms in each 
3-digit NAICS industry.24 Industry climate betas are computed based on 
all listed firms in the US. While they are based on the listed firms, we 
incorporate all firms including nonlisted firms in the Y-14 by applying 
the same industry climate beta for nonlisted firms in the respective 
industry. This is a benefit of focusing on the industry-level rather than 
the firm-level composition of banks’ loan portfolios, as only about 45% 
of loans (or less in the earlier sample) are made to listed firms. For 
robustness, we also merge Y-14 with firm-level climate betas to address 
potential within-industry variation in climate exposure.

Consistent with the hypothesis, Fig.  4 shows that the market-based 
climate beta and the loan portfolio climate beta are strongly aligned, 
after controlling for the time fixed effect and the bank fixed effect. We 
formally test this hypothesis with the following OLS specification:

23 Though  Y-14  data  are  confidential,  publicly  available  sources  like 
DealScan and annual reports can provide insights into banks’ corporate loan 
portfolios.
24 For  some  banks  and  periods,  the  borrowers’  industries  are  classified 
primarily  based  on  SIC  code  instead  of  NAICS  code.  For  these  cases,  we 
compute the value-weighted average climate beta of firms in each 3-digit SIC 
industry. We drop observations (bank-quarter level) if industry classification 
by SIC or NAICS is not available. See Section IA.D for more details on data 
cleaning steps.

𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑖𝑡

= 𝛼+𝑏⋅𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓 𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑡+𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑖𝑡+𝛿𝑖+𝛾𝑡+𝜀𝑖𝑡

(3)

𝑖𝑡

While climate betas are estimated daily, loan portfolio climate betas are 
computed quarterly, as Y-14 data are reported on a quarterly basis. To 
align frequencies, we aggregate the daily climate beta to a quarterly 
measure, defining the dependent variable, 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
, as bank 𝑖’s time-
averaged daily climate beta during the last month of quarter 𝑡. Bank 
control variables include: log assets, leverage, return on assets (ROA), 
loans/assets,  deposits/assets,  book/market,  loan  loss  reserves/loans, 
noninterest income/net income, and market beta. Table  1 shows the 
result. Columns (2)–(4) include bank control variables, and Columns 
(3) and (4) add bank fixed effects to control for unobservable time-
invariant bank characteristics. Column (4) adds year fixed effects to 
control for any potential trends. Standard errors are clustered at the 
bank level. Consistent with the hypothesis, we find that the coefficient 
𝑏 for the loan portfolio climate beta is positive and significant in all 
specifications.

This relationship remains consistently strong (1) when we use the 
unlevered climate beta of firms to account for the firm’s leverage (Table 
F.1), (2) when we compute loan shares based on utilized exposure 
instead of committed exposure (Table  F.2), and (3) when we use the 
firm-level climate beta instead of industry level (Table  F.3). To confirm 
that the COVID period or year 2012 with a higher bank climate beta 
was not particularly different from other years, we regress the bank 
climate beta on the interaction between the loan portfolio climate beta 
and those periods. As a result, we find that the coefficients on the 
interaction terms are not significant (Table  F.4).

One might be concerned that the alignment between the market-
based climate beta and the loan portfolio climate beta is driven solely 
by rising climate betas. To address this, we conducted a placebo test 
to  show  that  the  alignment  does  not  hold  with  arbitrary  portfolio 
weights, 𝑤𝑗 in Eq.  (2). For example, we shuffled the climate betas 
so that industries receiving the largest loans had the lowest climate 
betas, and vice versa, while keeping the beta distribution and industry 
exposure  unchanged.  The  results  show  that  the  coefficient  on  the 
placebo portfolio climate beta is not significant when portfolio weights 
are shuffled (Table IA.E.1), suggesting that portfolio weights are also 
important and that the alignment is not solely due to the increase in 
climate transition risk across industries during 2020.

The results in this subsection also imply that the empirical model 
of Eq.  (3) provides a potential framework for estimating the climate 

8 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table 1
Bank climate beta and loan portfolio climate beta Quarterly data from 2012:Q2 to 2021:Q4 for listed US banks in Y-14. 
Standard errors are clustered by banks.

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

(1)
Climate beta
1.718∗∗∗
(5.67)

(2)
Climate beta
1.524∗∗∗
(5.80)

(3)
Climate beta
1.400∗∗∗
(6.37)

(4)
Climate beta
1.112∗∗∗
(3.58)

  Log Assets

  Leverage

  ROA

  Loans/Assets

  Deposits/Assets

  Loan Loss Reserves/Loans

  Non-interest Income/Net Income

  Market Beta

  Book/Market

  N
  Bank Controls
  Bank FE
  Year FE
  Adj R2
t statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

666
N
N
N
0.314

0.0109
(0.67)

3.958∗∗∗
(3.24)

8.595∗∗∗
(4.84)

0.115
(0.94)

0.232∗∗
(2.37)

−2.155
(−0.88)

0.00144
(0.90)

0.139∗∗∗
(4.62)

0.202∗∗∗
(4.19)

666
Y
N
N
0.429

0.389∗∗∗
(6.25)

1.395
(1.19)

5.947∗∗∗
(4.56)

−0.222
(−0.53)

0.0422
(0.18)

5.367∗∗∗
(4.48)

0.00184
(1.39)

0.113∗∗∗
(5.90)

0.113∗∗∗
(4.19)

666
Y
Y
N
0.592

0.0827
(1.14)

−0.810
(−0.75)

2.345∗
(2.10)

−0.286
(−1.06)

−0.550∗∗
(−2.42)

3.068∗
(1.74)

0.00157
(1.11)

0.00793
(0.41)

−0.00816  
(−0.21)

666
Y
Y
Y
0.701

beta of nonlisted banks. While it is not possible to estimate the market-
based climate beta of nonlisted banks, they can be approximated by 
using balance-sheet information along with granular information on 
loan composition to the extent that the relationship between the loan 
beta and the bank beta is consistent across listed banks and nonlisted 
banks.25

A caveat in interpreting these results is that, while the Y-14 data 
provide the most granular information on loan holdings available – 
similar to a credit registry – the data set covers only banks subject 
to stress tests, which are typically the largest banks in the US Con-
sequently, the findings should be interpreted within this context, as 
their applicability to smaller banks is unclear. On the one hand, smaller 
banks’ loan portfolio composition may be less transparent to public 
investors, leading to a less strong alignment between the climate beta 
and  the  loan  composition.  On  the  other  hand,  smaller  banks’  loan 
portfolio  composition  is  likely  more  concentrated,  which  may  lead 
to stronger results. While this would be interesting to examine, our 
analysis is constrained by data availability.

5.2. Mechanism

Although the climate beta was highest in 2020, there was a notable 
increase in the climate betas prior to 2020. This variation is captured 
by the regression results presented in the previous section. Table  1 in-
dicates that economic variables, even without any fixed effects, explain 
43% of variations in the climate beta. Fig.  5 shows that the predicted 
values of the regression indeed pick up the rise in the climate beta 
before 2020, further alleviating concerns that COVID is not the sole 

25 Engle and Jung (2018) applied this approach to nonlisted banks in Latin 
America in the SRISK framework.

driver  of  climate  betas.  We investigate this  increase  in  the climate 
beta observed in 2019 and highlight several important potential drivers 
behind it.

We first document that industries with the highest climate beta are 
consistent with the industries commonly perceived as being ‘‘brown’’. 
The  top  five  NAICS  industries,  ranked  by  either  average  full-time 
climate beta or their 2019 values, include Support Activities for Mining 
(213),26 Oil and Gas Extraction (211), Mining except Oil and Gas (212), 
Primary Metal Manufacturing (331), and Petroleum and Coal Products 
Manufacturing (324) - all associated with high emissions. Fig.  6 shows 
the time series of the climate beta for these industries. In particular, 
the climate betas for Oil and Gas Extraction (211) and Mining Support 
(213) rose sharply in 2019, coinciding with the timing of an increase 
in the climate beta of banks. This supports the loan portfolio climate 
beta regression results in the previous section: as ‘‘brown’’ borrowers’ 
climate betas rise, lending banks’ climate beta increases as well.

Next, we examine whether loan risk increases with the borrower’s 
climate beta. Using banks’ estimates of loan PD values reported as 
part of stress testing requirements, we find that loan PD increases with 
lagged climate beta, as shown in panel (a) of Fig.  7. Regressing the loan 
PD on decile bin dummies of the lagged climate beta, we find that the 
coefficient increases as presented in panel (b).27 These results suggest 

26 NAICS  code  213  includes  establishments  performing  exploration  for 
minerals.
27 It is worth noting that the PD nonlinearly increases in the climate beta. 
We estimate the loan portfolio climate beta linearly, which can be considered 
a linear approximation. We find that this is a reasonable approach, as most 
of our data are in the region where the relationship is largely linear. The 
implication  of  the  nonlinearity  is  that  our  result  can  be  interpreted  as  a 
lower bound; if transition risk pushes the PD of brown loans into the strongly 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 5.  Climate Beta Fitted vs. Actual These plots compare the climate beta values of the top 4 large US banks predicted by the loan portfolio beta regression Eq. (3) with the 
actual climate beta values.

Fig. 6.  Climate Beta of Top 5 NAICS Industries This figure plots the climate beta of five industries with the highest climate beta as of 2019:Q1. They are also the top five 
industries ranked by the average climate beta for the sample period.

Fig. 7.  Loan Probability of Default vs. Lagged Climate Beta Panel (a) presents a binned scatterplot of loan probability of default (PD) against the lagged climate beta by one 
quarter, with industry fixed effects controlled. A quadratic fit is superimposed on the scatterplot. Panel (b) presents the coefficients on decile bin dummies, 𝑏𝑛, from regression: 
𝑃 𝐷𝑖𝑡 = ∑

1{𝑛-th Bin of Lagged Climate Beta} + 𝛼i + 𝜀𝑖𝑡 where 𝑖 denotes industry, 𝑡 denotes quarter, and 𝛼𝑖 denotes industry fixed effects. PD estimates are from Y-14 data.

𝑛 𝑏𝑛

10 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 8.  Brown Loan Price and Quantity Adjustments Coefficient on the interaction between time dummy and brown dummy. The vertical line at 2019:Q1 indicates the period 
when climate betas of brown industries started to increase. Interest rate spread and committed loan size are from Y-14 data.

that the climate beta predicts an increase in the riskiness of brown 
loans, with the effect becoming more pronounced when the climate 
beta is high. Therefore, a shock to borrowers’ transition risk can impact 
banks’ current and future profits and, consequently, their stock return 
sensitivity to climate transition risk.

Having  documented  that  the  bank  climate  beta  moves  with  the 
brown borrowers’ exposure to climate transition risk (proxied by their 
climate beta) and the riskiness of the brown loans (measured by their 
PD), we examine whether and how banks respond to the rise in the risk 
of brown loans. It is natural to hypothesize that banks raise prices or 
reduce quantities of loans to react to a rise in the climate beta and PD. 
To test this, we run the following specification: 

𝑌𝑖𝑏𝑡 =

∑

𝑡

𝜆𝑡𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛𝑖 × 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛽1𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛𝑖 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛼𝑏 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

(4)

where outcome variable, 𝑌𝑖𝑏𝑡 at the loan 𝑖, bank 𝑏, and quarter 𝑡 level, is 
interest rate spread or committed exposure. 𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛𝑖 takes a value of 1 
if the borrower’s industry belongs to one of the top 5 NAICS industries 
by climate beta, and 0 otherwise. 𝛼𝑏 denotes bank fixed effects and 
𝛾𝑡 denotes time fixed effects. Fig.  8 shows the time series of 𝜆𝑡 for 
the interest rate spread on the top panel and that for the size of the 
committed loan on the bottom panel.

Consistent with the hypothesis, we find evidence that banks adjust 
both the price and the quantity of loans following an adverse shock. 
However, this adjustment begins only in 2020:Q1, despite the rise in 
climate betas starting in 2019:Q1 as shown in Fig.  6. There is little 
variation in both interest rate spread and size of loans between 2019:Q1 
and 2020:Q1. These findings indicate that banks’ responses to increases 
in their borrowers’ climate betas are slow, likely due to frictions in the 
loan market, such as relationship banking and specialization in lending. 
Although formally testing the effect of these frictions on banks’ loan 
price and quantity adjustments is beyond the scope of this paper, we use 
the same specification as Eq. (4) to document suggestive evidence. We 

nonlinear region, the impact of climate transition risk on loan defaults would 
be even higher than our results.

find that, following an increase in the climate beta of brown borrowers, 
banks specializing in brown lending made relatively gradual adjust-
ments to both the interest rate spread and the quantity of brown loans 
(Figure IA.F.1 and Figure IA.F.2), likely due to the high costs of seeking 
lending  opportunities  outside  their  specialized  industry.  Because  of 
these frictions, as brown loans become more risky, adjustments in price 
and quantity of those loans can be delayed, thereby increasing banks’ 
exposure to climate transition risk.

In addition to borrowers’ climate betas, attention to climate change 
is likely also a factor contributing to the rise in banks’ climate betas 
starting in 2019. Fig.  9 shows that the number of climate regulations 
increased sharply in 2019, the news-based climate policy uncertainty 
index (constructed by Gavriilidis, 2021) trended higher around 2019, 
and the average exposure to climate change (constructed by Sautner 
et al., 2023) increased during 2019–2021. The correlations of these 
indices with the coefficients on the time fixed effects from Eq.  (3) 
are high: 0.89, 0.86, and 0.76, respectively. Although not a causal 
identification, these factors likely have contributed to an increase in 
banks’ climate betas starting from 2019. It is also worth noting that 
even if we extend the climate beta back to 1960, such a significant 
increase in the climate beta is observed only during 2019–2021 (see 
Fig.  G.1).

These results collectively shed light on channels – the credit risk 
channel and the market risk channel – through which transition risk 
affects banks’ capitalization. A shock to borrowers’ transition risk can 
adversely  affect  their  ability  to  repay  even  within  a  short  horizon 
(credit risk channel), as evidenced by the increase in the PD of the 
brown borrowers as a function of brown borrowers’ climate transi-
tion risk exposure, which could reasonably occur under a sudden and 
disorderly transition. Borrowers’ credit risk can affect banks beyond 
the  maturity  of  loans  because  (1)  banks’  lending  relationships  are 
typically persistent (e.g., Beck et al., 2018; Liberti and Sturgess, 2018; 
Nakashima and Takahashi, 2018) and (2) banks tend to ‘‘specialize’’ by 
concentrating their lending disproportionately in one industry (Blickle 
et al., 2021), which implies that finding lending opportunities outside 
the specialized industry would likely be costly. These plausibly explain 

11 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

where 𝑊𝑖𝑡 is the market value of equity and 𝐷𝑖𝑡 is the book value 
of debt, and 𝑘 is the prudential ratio of equity to assets. The sum of 
𝐷𝑖𝑡 and 𝑊𝑖𝑡 can be considered the value of quasi assets. {𝑅𝐶𝐹
<
𝐶} is associated with a climate stress scenario. Assuming that banks’ 
liabilities are immune to the stress, 𝐸[𝐷𝑖,𝑡+ℎ|𝑅𝐶𝐹
< 𝐶] = 𝐷𝑖𝑡, CRISK 
for each financial institution can be expressed as the following:28

𝑡+1,𝑡+ℎ

𝑡+1,𝑡+ℎ

𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾 𝑖𝑡 = 𝑘 ⋅ 𝐷𝑖𝑡 − (1 − 𝑘) ⋅ 𝑊𝑖𝑡 ⋅ (1 − 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆𝑖𝑡)

(5)

where 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆 is the long-run marginal expected shortfall, the ex-
pected firm equity multiperiod arithmetic return conditional on a sys-
temic climate change event: 
𝑡,𝑡+ℎ|𝑅𝐶𝐹
𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆𝑖𝑡 = −𝐸𝑡[𝑅𝑖
Based on Eqs. (1)–(6), CRISK can be written as:29

𝑡+1,𝑡+ℎ < 𝐶]

(6)

𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡 = 𝑘 ⋅ 𝐷𝑖𝑡 − (1 − 𝑘) ⋅ 𝑊𝑖𝑡 ⋅ exp

(𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑖𝑡

)
log(1 − 𝜃)

(7)

CRISK is higher for banks that are larger, are more leveraged, and have 
a higher climate beta. We set the prudential capital fraction 𝑘 to 8% 
(5.5% for European banks to account for accounting differences) and 
the climate stress level 𝜃 to 50%, as discussed in Section 3.

Marginal CRISK.  We propose a measure, marginal CRISK, to capture 
the effect of climate stress, in isolation from the realized undercapi-
talization as well as the effect of market stress. The marginal CRISK, 
𝑚𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾, is defined as the difference between CRISK and non-stressed 
CRISK, where the non-stressed CRISK is simply the capital shortfall of 
a bank without any climate stress (𝜃 = 0). From Eq.  (5), 

𝑚𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾 = (1 − 𝑘) ⋅ 𝑊 ⋅ 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆

(8)

Put differently, CRISK is the sum of the bank’s undercapitalization and 
the bank’s marginal CRISK. To focus on the impact of climate stress, 
we use mCRISK as the primary measure and CRISK as a complemen-
tary measure to capture the total effects, accounting for concurrent 
capitalization.

S&CRISK.  We also offer an approach to compute a compound risk, 
S&CRISK, based on a value of market stress, 𝜃𝑀𝑘𝑡, and that of cli-
mate stress, 𝜃𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒.30 Eq. (7) can be extended to compute compound 
S&CRISK:

𝑆&𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡 = 𝑘 ⋅ 𝐷𝑖𝑡 − (1 − 𝑘) ⋅ 𝑊𝑖𝑡 ⋅ exp
+ 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑖𝑡

)
log(1 − 𝜃𝑀𝑘𝑡)

(𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑖𝑡

log(1 − 𝜃𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒)

This measure is useful because when the market risk and transition 
climate risk are correlated, the CRISK alone can underestimate the risk.

Systemic climate transition risk.  We introduce two measures to under-
stand a system-wide transition climate risk. First, we use the marginal 
CRISK measure across all firms to construct a system-wide measure of 
exposure to transition climate risk, in isolation from the concurrent 
capitalization:

𝑚𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑡 =

𝑁
∑

𝑚𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡.

𝑖=1

Second, we use the CRISK measure across all firms to construct 
a system-wide measure of climate risk. The total amount of systemic 
climate risk in the financial system is measured as:

𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑡 =

𝑁
∑

(𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡)+,

𝑖=1

28 This is not a strong assumption given that the liabilities of banks are 
largely deposits, which are relatively immune to the stress.
29 See Appendix  H for the derivation.
30 We note that this metric does not model the tail dependence. While it 
is certainly possible that a large climate stress would be more damaging in a 
recession than in a period of strong growth, calibrating the tail dependence 
requires  an  equilibrium  model,  given  that  there  has  been  no  such  event 
realized in the past.

Fig. 9.  Climate Indices The top panel is from Climate Change Laws of the World, the 
middle panel is from Gavriilidis (2021), and the bottom panel is from Sautner et al. 
(2023). The climate policy uncertainty and the average climate change exposure are 
standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of 1.

our findings that banks are slow to adjust the quantity and the price of 
loans to borrowers with high exposure to climate transition risk.

Even if those loans are small relative to the bank’s entire balance 
sheet, it should be noted that the banks’ credit risk increases nonlin-
early in the borrowers’ climate exposure, to the detriment to the bank, 
a detriment that may persist even beyond maturity. It is therefore not 
surprising that such loans have an amplified effect on the bank’s current 
and expected future profits, and thus the bank’s equity valuation. As 
a  result,  a  bank’s  stock  return  sensitivity  to  climate  transition  risk 
moves in tandem with its borrowers’ exposure to climate transition 
risk (market risk channel), as evidenced by the strong alignment of the 
climate beta and the loan portfolio climate beta.

6. CRISK

With the validity of the climate beta established, we proceed to es-
timate the bank’s expected capital shortfall measures (CRISK, mCRISK, 
S&CRISK) and aggregate measures. We first outline the methodology 
and then apply it to large global banks.

6.1. Methodology

CRISK.  Building upon the SRISK methodology in Acharya et al. (2011),
Acharya et al. (2012), and Brownlees and Engle (2017), we define 
CRISK as the expected capital shortfall conditional on a systemic cli-
mate change event:
𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡 = 𝐸𝑡[𝐶𝑆𝑖,𝑡+ℎ|𝑅𝐶𝐹
where 𝐶𝑆𝑖𝑡 is the capital shortfall of bank 𝑖 on day 𝑡. We define capital 
shortfall as the capital reserves the bank needs to hold minus the firm’s 
equity:

𝑡+1,𝑡+ℎ < 𝐶]

𝐶𝑆𝑖𝑡 = 𝑘(𝐷𝑖𝑡 + 𝑊𝑖𝑡) − 𝑊𝑖𝑡

12 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 10.  Marginal CRISK of US Banks The sample banks are the top 10 large US banks by the average total assets in 2019. Marginal CRISK is difference between the stressed 
CRISK and non-stressed CRISK. The stressed CRISK is computed as: 𝑘 ⋅ 𝐷 − (1 − 𝑘) ⋅ exp
⋅ 𝑊  and the non-stressed CRISK is computed as: 𝑘 ⋅ 𝐷 − (1 − 𝑘) ⋅ 𝑊  where 𝑘
is prudential capital ratio, 𝐷 is debt, and 𝑊  is market equity of each bank. The marginal CRISK values are truncated at zero. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 
2021.

)
(𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒 log(1 − 𝜃)

where (𝑥)+ denotes 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑥, 0). We ignore the contribution of negative 
CRISK in computing the aggregate CRISK because it is unlikely that 
the capital surplus can easily be transferred from one institution to 
another, especially during the distress period. The aggregate CRISK 
of an economy can be interpreted as the amount of capital injection 
needed for the financial system in climate stress.

6.2. Application

6.2.1. Marginal CRISK and CRISK

To estimate the marginal effect of climate stress on expected capital 
shortfall, we first examine banks’ mCRISK. Fig.  10 plots the mCRISK of 
the top 10 US banks, in the scenario using the stranded asset factor. 
It shows that mCRISKs opened up before 2020 and reached $45 −90 
billion  for  the  top  four  US  banks  at  the  end  of  2020.  The  period 
when mCRISK started to increase is aligned with the increase in the 
climate beta for brown borrowers, as examined in Section 5.2 (Fig.  6). 
The aggregate mCRISK of the top four banks is approximately $260 
billion. This corresponds roughly to 28% of their equity, suggesting 
that the effect of climate stress in 2020 would have been economically 
substantial. In other countries, we find that the mCRISKs of some banks 
increased during 2020, although they are much lower than those of US 
banks mainly because they are smaller than the US banks (Appendix  I).
To understand the total expected capital shortfall, including the 
concurrent undercapitalization, we also estimate the CRISK. Fig.  11 
presents the estimated CRISKs of the top 10 largest US banks in the 
scenario using the stranded asset factor. Since CRISK is the expected 
capital shortfall, a negative CRISK indicates that the bank holds a capital 
surplus. The CRISK of banks being negative or low until 2019 is mainly 
driven by the low climate beta until 2019. Additionally, the nonlinear 
relationship between the borrower climate beta and the loan PD (Fig. 
7) suggests that a bank may not have a capital shortfall if its climate 
beta is small and will therefore have a negative CRISK. We observe 
the substantial increase in CRISK during 2020 across banks in other 
countries as well (Appendix  J).

Since CRISK is a function of the climate beta, as well as a function 
of the size and leverage of a bank, the ranking of CRISKs can differ 
from that of climate beta estimates. For example, in December 2020, 

the  climate  betas  of  the  top  10  US  banks  declined  to  below  0.5; 
however, the CRISKs of some banks (e.g., the bank anonymized as 
‘‘C’’) were substantial, as high as $100 billion. To put this magnitude 
into context, the SRISK, which represents the expected capital shortfall 
during market stress, of bank ‘‘C’’ was $110 billion in December 2020.
Focusing on the top four US banks, their aggregate CRISK increased 
by $425 billion in 2020. For comparison, their aggregate SRISK in-
creased by $460 billion during the 2007–2008 global financial crisis. 
This suggests that the increase in banks’ expected capital shortfall in 
the climate stress scenario – a 1% tail event – can be comparable in 
magnitude to the increase in their expected capital shortfall during 
the  global  financial  crisis.31  In  less  severe  scenarios,  the  expected 
capital shortfall is lower; a sensitivity analysis on CRISK across scenario 
severity is discussed in Section 6.4.

We see high CRISKs during the global financial crisis and the Eu-
ropean financial crisis because when banks are undercapitalized, they 
are vulnerable to both overall market risk and the climate transition 
risk. In contrast, mCRISKs were close to zero during these periods, 
differentiating the latest peak in CRISK from the earlier two peaks in 
Fig.  11.

6.2.2. CRISK decomposition

To better understand what drives the substantial increase in CRISK 
in 2020, we decompose CRISK into three components based on Eq. (5):

𝑑𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾 = 𝑘 ⋅ 𝛥𝐷
⏟⏟⏟
𝑑𝐷𝐸𝐵𝑇

−(1 − 𝑘)(1 − 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆) ⋅ 𝛥𝑊
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑𝐸𝑄𝑈 𝐼𝑇 𝑌

+ (1 − 𝑘) ⋅ 𝑊 ⋅ 𝛥𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑑𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾

(9)

The first component, 𝑑𝐷𝐸𝐵𝑇 = 𝑘 ⋅ 𝛥𝐷, is the contribution of the 
firm’s debt to CRISK. CRISK increases as the firm takes on more debt. 
The second component, 𝑑𝐸𝑄𝑈 𝐼𝑇 𝑌 = −(1 − 𝑘)(1 − 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆) ⋅ 𝛥𝑊 , is 
the effect of the firm’s equity on CRISK.32 CRISK increases as the firm’s 
market capitalization deteriorates. The third component, 𝑑𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾 =

31 Brownlees and Engle (2017) show that pre-crisis SRISK predicts the capital 
injections carried out by the Federal Reserve Banks during the crisis.

13 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 11.  CRISK of US Banks The sample banks are the top 10 large US banks by the average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Table 2
CRISK decomposition (US Banks)  CRISK(𝑡) is the bank’s CRISK at the end of 2020, 
and CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is CRISK at the end of year 2019. dCRISK= CRISK(𝑡)-CRISK(𝑡 − 1)
is the change in CRISK during 2020. dDEBT is the contribution of the firm’s debt to 
CRISK. dEQUITY is the contribution of the firm’s equity position on CRISK. dRISK is 
the contribution of increase in volatility or correlation to CRISK. All amounts are in 
billions USD. Top 4 banks include F:US, A:US, C:US, and J:US.
  Bank
CRISK(t-1) CRISK(t)
  F:US
  A:US
  C:US
  J:US
  E:US
  G:US
  I:US
  H:US
  B:US
  D:US
  Top 4

37.63
24.63
17.49
117.30 −0.84
9.90
3.65
4.13
3.80
4.11
3.25
78.91

−146.58
−52.35
13.34
−47.11
9.86
4.09
−41.33
−26.66
−7.42
−10.48
.

63.80 
36.15 
33.03 
47.57 
9.52 
13.50 
15.67 
8.29 
4.77 
8.54 
180.55 

35.65
35.37
29.85
70.56
−6.72
−27.91
16.21
4.97
5.94
0.22
171.43

−9.49
43.80
93.70
70.18
22.56
−6.68
−5.32
−9.60
7.40
1.53
.

12.70
−10.77
36.01
17.06
14.82
12.00
430.89

dCRISK dDEBT dEQUITY dRISK

137.08
96.15
80.36

(1 − 𝑘) ⋅ 𝑊 ⋅ 𝛥𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆, is the contribution of an increase in the climate 
beta to CRISK.33

Table  2 decomposes the change in CRISK of the top 10 US banks 
during the year 2020 into three components. For the top 4 banks, the 
deterioration in equity and the risk (due to the climate beta) each 
contributed  about  40%  to  the  increase  in  CRISK  during  2020.  On 
average across the banks, equity deterioration contributed 32% and 
the risk contributed 47% to the change in CRISK during 2020. We 
find similar results for the UK banks (Table  K.1). For banks in Canada, 
France, and Japan, where the increase in CRISK was relatively small, 
we find that debt deterioration was the primary component and the 
risk due to the climate beta contributed to approximately a third of the 
increase in CRISK during 2020 (Appendix  K).

6.2.3. Systemic climate transition risk

We aggregate mCRISK and CRISK across large financial firms, in-
cluding banks, broker-dealers, and insurance companies. To focus on 
large  financial  firms,  we  analyze  all  financial  firms  with  a  market 
capitalization greater than the 25th percentile in each country at the 
end of 2019. This sample includes 105 firms in the US, 34 firms in the 
UK, 50 firms in Japan, 24 firms in France, and 18 firms in Canada. The 
complete list of tickers and company names for each country is reported 
in Appendix  L.

Fig.  12 reports the aggregate mCRISK by country. This measure 
takes  out  the  effect  of  concurrent  capitalization,  and  therefore,  we 
interpret this measure as a system-wide exposure to climate transition 
risk. The aggregate mCRISK in the US was substantial in 2020, reaching 
over $500 billion, while it was not as high in other countries. Fig.  13 
plots the aggregate CRISK, stacked by country. The aggregate CRISK of 
the sample firms reached almost $2 trillion in November 2020. This 
amount  can  be  interpreted  as  the  total  amount  of  capital  injection 
needed in climate stress.

Fig.  14 plots the aggregate mCRISK across the financial industry 
group. At the peak, the mCRISK of banks was greater than $400 billion, 
while that of broker-dealers and insurance companies was about $80 
billion each. Based on this measure, we find that the climate tran-
sition risk exposure of all financial industry groups increased during 
2019–2020. Fig.  15 plots the US financial firms’ CRISK aggregated by 
industry group. The aggregate CRISK of the US reached nearly $500 
billion in 2020 but declined to under $150 billion at the end of 2021. 
For context on the magnitude, the aggregate SRISK of the US peaked 
at approximately $940 billion during the global financial crisis.

During times of stress, CRISK was concentrated in the banking sec-
tor. We compute the Herfindahl index associated with the CRISK shares 
to measure the degree of systemic climate transition risk concentration 
in the system. The CRISK share is defined as:

𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾% =

𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡
𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑡

if 𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡 > 0.

32 Here, 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆 represents the average value of 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆𝑡 and 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆𝑡+1. 
In the 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆 calculation, we use the monthly average climate beta to reduce 
the volatility of climate beta.
33 Here, 𝑊  represents the average value of 𝑊𝑡 and 𝑊𝑡+1.

We construct the index for each month and find that the index mostly 
stayed above 0.1 from January 2009 to December 2021 when the aggre-
gate CRISK was not negligible. This suggests that CRISK is concentrated 
among a relatively small number of financial firms.

14 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 12.  Aggregate marginal CRISK across Country The figure plots the marginal CRISK aggregated by country. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Fig. 13.  Aggregate CRISK, Stacked by Country  The figure plots the (positive) CRISK aggregated by country. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

6.3. Out-of-sample predictability

To further corroborate the validity of the climate beta measure, 
we test the predictability of pre-COVID estimated climate betas on the 
maximum drawdown and the maximum mCRISK during COVID. If the 
climate beta captures the exposure to climate transition risk, it should 
predict the extent to which each financial firm will be impacted by 
the climate shock when it arrives. We test this hypothesis with cross-
sectional regressions, focusing on maximum drawdown and maximum 
mCRISK  (scaled  by  market  cap)  to  isolate  the  effects  of  size  and 
leverage. Maximum drawdown measures the largest decline in the stock 
price from peak to peak over a specified period. We use maximum 
mCRISK to summarize mCRISK during the COVID window into a single 
statistic representing the most adverse outcome, avoiding reliance on 

arbitrary timing, dilution from recovery, or predicting the exact timing 
of the worst outcome.34 Maximum drawdown, a widely used measure 
in finance for assessing risk and performance, provides an independent 
metric to corroborate the predictability results, ensuring that they do 
not follow mechanically from our CRISK framework or methodology.

Consistent with the hypothesis, Fig.  16 shows that firms with higher 
climate beta before COVID experienced greater maximum drawdowns, 
indicating worse realized outcomes, across 105 US financial firms. The 

34 Other analyses in the paper examine outcomes at specific points in time 
and do not require collapsing data across a time window. Thus, the use of 
maximum mCRISK in this section is merely an adaptation of the same measure 
used throughout the paper, as opposed to being an alternative measure.

15 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 14.  US Aggregate Marginal CRISK across Financial Industry  The figure plots the marginal CRISK aggregated by financial industry group. The sample period is from June 
2000 to December 2021.

Fig. 15.  US Aggregate CRISK, Stacked by Financial Industry The figure plots the (positive) CRISK aggregated by country. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 
2021.

pre-COVID climate betas are estimated as average daily values during 
2019:Q3, and we define the COVID period as 2019:Q4-2020:Q2, based 
on the business cycle defined by the National Bureau of Economic 
Research (NBER). In Table  3, column (1) confirms the predictability of 
climate beta on maximum drawdowns. Although column (2) shows that 
the pre-COVID market beta also predicts the maximum drawdowns, 
the R-squared is significantly lower. In column (3), when both the 
climate beta and the market beta are included, the market beta becomes 
insignificant, suggesting that the climate beta has predictive power 
beyond that of the market beta.

Similarly,  pre-COVID  climate  betas  also  predict  the  maximum
mCRISK (scaled by market cap) during COVID, as shown in Fig.  17. We 
scale mCRISK by market cap to isolate the size effect, as the mCRISK is 
proportional to the market cap. Table  4 corroborates the predictability. 
Column  (1)  confirms  that  the  pre-COVID  climate  beta  predicts  the 
maximum mCRISK during COVID. While column (2) shows that the 
market beta also has predictive power, column (3) indicates that the 

coefficient on the market beta becomes insignificant when both the 
climate  beta  and  the  market  beta  are  included.  Also,  compared  to 
column (1), column (3) shows that the market beta has little extra 
explanatory power over the climate beta.

These results on the out-of-sample predictability of climate betas 

add validity to our measures.

6.4. Further applications

The results discussed so far have been based on the scenario in 
which the stranded asset factor falls by 50% over 6 months. In this 
section, we explore a range of additional scenarios.

Severity of scenario.  Given that there has been no consensus in terms 
of what constitutes sufficiently severe yet plausible scenarios in the 
context of climate transition risk, we conduct a sensitivity analysis. Fig. 
18 plots the aggregate mCRISK of the top 4 US banks with respect to 

16 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 16.  Cross-sectional Predictability of Climate Beta Pre-COVID climate beta is defined as time-averaged daily climate beta during 2019:Q3. Drawdown is defined as the 
|𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ − 𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘|∕𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘, and the COVID period is defined as 2019:Q4 to 2020:Q2 following the NBER business cycle definition.

Fig. 17.  Cross-sectional Predictability of Climate Beta Pre-COVID climate beta is defined as time-averaged daily climate beta during 2019:Q3. Marginal CRISK (mCRISK) is 
scaled by the market cap. The COVID period is defined as 2019:Q4 to 2020:Q2 following the NBER business cycle definition.

the severity of the scenario. Moving from the stress level corresponding 
to the 1% quantile to less severe levels corresponding to a 5% quantile 
and a 10% quantile, the peak mCRISK of the top four US banks in 2020 
falls from $260 billion to $140 and $120 billion, respectively. If we do 
not use a tail scenario, where a stress level corresponds to the median 
of the stranded asset factor, the peak mCRISK of the top four US banks 
in 2020 is only about $10 billion.

Various transition scenarios.  The same set of measures can be computed 
using other factors constructed in Section 3, each motivated by stylized 
versions of transition scenarios. We highlight the key findings here and 
with detailed results provided in Appendix  M.

In a carbon tax scenario, high-emission firms are expected to face 
greater adverse effects, making the emission factor relevant. Using this 
factor, we find that mCRISKs are slightly higher than those based on the 
baseline stranded asset factor, with the aggregate mCRISK of the top 
four US banks reaching approximately $270 billion at the end of 2020. 

This increase likely stems from the emission factor’s broader inclusion 
of high-emission firms beyond the coal sector.

In  a  transition  scenario  where  both  brown  and  green  firms  are 
affected, such as a combination of a carbon tax and a green subsidy, the 
BMG factor would be more useful. Using the BMG factor, the mCRISKs 
of the top four US banks are significantly lower, ranging between $10 
and $30 billion in 2020. This is consistent with green subsidies partially 
offsetting the negative effect of a carbon tax on bank stock returns.

For  analyzing  the  effects  of  climate  stress  beyond  the  stranded 
asset factor, the CEP factor would be more relevant. Based on this 
factor, mCRISKs are lower by $30 billion, suggesting that the effect of 
climate stress after controlling for the stranded asset factor is relatively 
low. The climate beta and mCRISK plots for these three scenarios are 
presented in Appendix  M.

Compound risk scenarios.  We also apply the compound risk framework. 
We consider a scenario where the market stress and the climate stress 

17 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 18.  Sensitivity Analysis The figure plots the aggregate marginal CRISK of the top 4 US banks across different severities of the scenario. The stranded asset factor is used. 
The scenario with 1% quantile is the most severe and the scenario with 50% quantile (median) is the least severe.

Fig. 19.  Marginal S&CRISK of US Banks The sample banks are the top 10 large US banks by the average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to Dec 
2021.

are severe at the same time. Specifically, we calibrate the market stress 
level (𝜃𝑀𝑘𝑡) to 40% and the climate stress level (𝜃𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒) to 50%. Each 
level corresponds to the 1% quantile of the 6-month return distribution 
of the market factor and that of the climate factor, respectively. This 
is the scenario that was realized during the global financial crisis and, 
therefore, can be considered a sufficiently severe yet plausible scenario. 
Figs.  19 and 20 show the S&CRISK and the marginal S&CRISK of the 
top ten US banks. The aggregate marginal S&CRISK of the top four US 
banks reached approximately $590 billion at the end of 2021.

7. Robustness tests

We perform several tests to ensure that our results are robust to 
including additional bank stock return factors, using close alternative 
climate factors, and taking alternative estimation procedures.

7.1. Robustness on factors

One may be concerned about missing important factors that explain 
bank stock returns. Since banks manage a portfolio of interest-rate-
related products, we test whether our results are robust to including 
interest rate factors. Following (Gandhi and Lustig, 2015), we consider 
a long-term government bond factor (LTG) and a credit factor (CRD). 
We use excess return on the long-term US government bond index 
for  the  long-term  interest  rate  factor  and  the  excess  return  on  the 
investment-grade corporate bond index for the credit factor. To test 
how these factors affect the climate beta estimates, we first regress 
each bank stock return 𝑟𝑖𝑡 on 𝐿𝑇 𝐺𝑡 and 𝐶𝑅𝐷𝑡, and then regress the 
residual on 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 and 𝐶𝐹𝑡. In Fig.  N.7, we plot the coefficient on 𝐶𝐹𝑡, 
and it shows that the climate beta estimates based on the baseline 
specification (1) are robust to including the interest rate factors. We 

18 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. 20.  S&CRISK of US Banks The sample banks are the top 10 large US banks by the average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to Dec 2021.

Table 3
Cross-sectional predictability of climate beta Pre-COVID beta is defined as time-
averaged daily beta during 2019:Q3. Drawdown, denoted as DD, is defined as the 
|𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ − 𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘|∕𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘, and the COVID period is defined as 2019:Q4 to 2020:Q2 following 
the NBER business cycle definition.

(1)
Max DD (COVID) Max DD (COVID) Max DD (COVID)

(2)

(3)

  Climate Beta (Pre-COVID) 0.180∗∗∗

(6.18)

  Market Beta (Pre-COVID)

  Constant

0.474∗∗∗
(48.74)

  N
  Adj R2
t statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

105
0.264

0.176∗∗∗
(5.13)

0.00880
(0.23)

0.465∗∗∗
(12.07)

105
0.257

0.111∗∗∗
(3.05)

0.381∗∗∗
(9.79)

105
0.0741

find that the results are also robust to including the housing factor 
measured by the return on a bond fund specializing in government 
mortgage-backed securities (Figs.  N.8 and N.9).

One  may  be  concerned  that  the  COVID-related  factor  is  a  con-
founding factor. For example, the restaurant, travel, and entertainment 
industries were hit hard during the COVID pandemic, but they may 
not be the industries most affected by climate change. To address this 
concern, we construct the COVID industry factor by taking the value-
weighted return on stocks that belong to the NAICS 3-digit industries 
most affected by COVID, selected by Fahlenbrach et al. (2021). We 
exclude five industries that are in the top 20 by emissions in 2020 
because carbon-intensive sectors are likely to be most affected by cli-
mate change.35 We first regress bank stock return on a COVID industry 
factor. Then, we regress the residual from the first step on 𝑀𝐾𝑇  and 
𝐶𝐹   and  plot  the  coefficient  on  𝐶𝐹   using  a  1-year  rolling  window 
regression. We find that our results remain similar after including the 
COVID industry factor (Fig.  N.10). For a limited sample period, we 
use an index measuring seated diners from OpenTable and an index 

35 The excluded SIC industry codes are 211, 486, 483, 481, and 324.

19 

measuring air passengers from the TSA as non-transition-related COVID 
proxy variables, and we find that our results are robust.36

We do not include the HML factor of Fama and French (1993), 
because it is not clear that the HML is exogenous in the context of our 
model. Pástor et al. (2022) find that value stocks tend to be brown and 
growth stocks green, and their two-factor model with a market factor 
and a green factor explains much of the recent underperformance of 
value stocks. In addition, we find that the HML factor is significant 
only in the post-GFC period, and this is likely due to changes in the 
regulatory framework following the GFC. This also suggests that the 
correlation between bank stock returns and the HML factor is poten-
tially an endogenous outcome of the GFC. Instead, we include banks’ 
book-to-market ratio as an independent variable to explain variation in 
the climate beta. Table  1 displays the results of the analysis. We find 
that the book-to-market ratio becomes small and insignificant when we 
control for year fixed effects in column (4).

7.2. Alternative climate transition risk factors

We test for robustness to using close alternative climate transition 
risk factors. We examine the oil ETF factor as an alternative to the 
stranded asset factor, since there has been a substantial shift away from 
coal in the US.37 The results based on stranded assets and oil ETFs 
are broadly similar. Both factors respond similarly to climate events, 
although the stranded asset factor shows a slightly stronger response 
(see Fig.  N.11). The correlation between the two betas computed for 
the financial sector ETF is 0.83 (see Fig.  N.12).

We also consider emission intensity-based factors to adjust for size 
by scaling emissions relative to revenue. Instead of weighting industry 
returns by total emissions, we use emission intensity to construct the 

36 See Figures IA.C.1- IA.C.3.
37 While coal energy consumption in the US has declined significantly—
from  more  than  20%  in  2000  to  8%  in  2023  (see  Figure  IA.G.1,  Panel 
(a))—the reduction in emerging economies such as China is still ongoing (see 
Panel (b)). In light of this, developing region-specific factors may enhance 
this analysis; however, it would complicate cross-country comparisons due 
to differing scenarios. We leave this for future research, as it would require 
addressing trade policies, industrial structures, and cross-border spillovers from 
environmental policies, which is beyond the scope of this paper.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table 4
Cross-sectional predictability of climate beta Pre-COVID beta is defined as time-averaged daily beta during 2019:Q3. 
Marginal CRISK (mCRISK) is scaled by the market cap. The COVID period is defined as 2019:Q4 to 2020:Q2 following the 
NBER business cycle definition.

(1)
Max mCRISK (COVID)
0.414∗∗∗
(9.26)

(2)
Max mCRISK (COVID)

(3)
Max mCRISK (COVID)
0.450∗∗∗
(8.62)

0.235∗∗∗
(15.76)

105
0.449

0.184∗∗∗
(2.84)

0.0962
(1.38)

105
0.0636

−0.0772
(−1.33)

0.311∗∗∗
(5.29)

105
0.453

  Climate Beta (Pre-COVID)

  Market Beta (Pre-COVID)

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2
t statistics in parentheses
∗ 𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

emission intensity factor. We find that this factor is highly correlated 
with the emission factor (0.97), primarily due to the strong correlation 
between emissions and emission intensity at the industry level. Con-
sequently, the emission intensity factor shows significant responses in 
the event study (Fig.  N.13). The two betas estimated for the financial 
sector ETF are also highly correlated (0.95).

Moreover, using the MSCI All Country World Index (ACWI) instead 

of SPY yields similar results, since they are highly correlated.38

7.3. Robustness on estimation procedure

We corroborate that the results are not driven by a certain detail of 
our estimation procedure. First, we find that the procedure to adjust for 
the time-zone difference makes a small difference. When asynchronous 
trading is not corrected, the betas are slightly smaller in absolute value. 
Second, we test whether our results are sensitive to the choice of the 
sample window. When betas are dynamically estimated based on an 
annual sample (by calendar year) instead of the full sample, the results 
remain consistent. Based on the annual sample, some extreme returns 
are picked up by time variation in the intercept; for instance, betas are 
slightly less negative during the early global financial crisis. Third, one 
might be concerned that the dynamic parameters that govern the speed 
of  adjustment  of  the  correlations  through  the  dynamic  conditional 
correlation estimation may be too noisy and introduce errors for some 
banks. To test this, we took a two-step approach, where each bank’s 
DCB  parameter  is  estimated  in  the  first  step  and  the  median  DCB 
parameter is used to estimate the betas in the second step. We find 
that  this  makes  almost  no  difference.  We  further  confirm  that  our 
DCB  estimation  results  are  consistent  with  the  rolling-window  OLS 
estimation results.

8. Conclusion

We  use  a  market-based  methodology  to  assess  the  resilience  of 
financial institutions to policy-driven climate transition risk. The pro-
cedure involves three steps. The first step is to measure the climate 
transition risk factor. The second step is to estimate the time-varying 
climate betas of financial institutions. The third step computes CRISK, 
the total capital shortfall of financial institutions under a climate stress 
scenario, and mCRISK, the additional capital shortfall attributable to 
climate stress.

We focus on the application of the framework to the transition risk 
dimension. We empirically validate the climate transition risk factors 

in event study analyses, by documenting that they negatively respond 
to transition events associated with movement toward a less carbon-
intensive economy. We validate the climate beta measure by comparing 
it with banks’ loan portfolio composition, using Y-14 data. We find 
that  climate  beta  reflects  the  loan  portfolio  composition  of  banks, 
corroborating the validity of climate beta estimates.

We use the methodology to study the climate transition risks of large 
global banks. Based on a sufficiently severe yet plausible scenario in 
which stranded assets sharply fall in value over a short horizon, we 
document a substantial rise in climate betas and mCRISKs across banks 
during 2020. Combined with the results from the validation exercise, 
our findings are consistent with the following mechanism. When fossil 
fuel  energy  prices  collapsed  to  zero,  which  would  happen  under  a 
sudden and disorderly transition, ‘‘brown’’ borrowers’ loans became 
riskier relative to other loans, and banks’ stock returns became more 
sensitive to the transition risk, thereby affecting banks’ climate risk 
exposure.

There are several promising directions for future research. While 
our application of the CRISK framework focuses on transition risk, an 
interesting extension would be to isolate the contribution of physical 
risk by constructing a common physical risk factor directly tied to the 
damages from extreme weather events. However, this lies beyond the 
scope of this paper, as it would require identifying market expectations 
of a systemic component of physical risk. Another valuable avenue for 
future work involves modeling the interaction between market stress 
and climate stress.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Hyeyoon  Jung:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original 
draft, Visualization, Validation, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cu-
ration. Robert F. Engle: Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Funding 
acquisition, Conceptualization. Richard Berner: Resources, Funding 
acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the 
writing process

During the preparation of this work the author(s) used ChatGPT in 
order to find typos. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed 
and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the 
content of the publication.

Declaration of competing interest

38 Using a common market factor across countries facilitates cross-country 
comparisons;  however,  a  country-specific  market  factor  may  not  be  fully 
incorporated.

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Appendix A. Variable definitions

See Table  A.1.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table A.1
Variable definitions.
  Variable
  Log Assets
  Leverage
  ROA
  Loans/Assets
  Deposits/Assets
  BTM
  Loan Loss Reserves/Loans
  Non-interest Income/Net 
Income
  Market Beta

  Climate Beta

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta 
(Unlevered)

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta 
(Utilized)

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta 
(Firm-level)

Definition
Log of total assets
Liabilities/Assets
Return on assets; Net Income/Assets
Loans (gross)/Assets
Deposits/Assets
Book to market; Book Value of Equity/Market Capitalization  
Loan Loss Reserves/Loans (gross)
Non-interest Income/Net Income

Average market beta over the quarter-end months (March, 
June, September, December)
Average climate beta over the quarter-end months (March, 
June, September, December); Climate beta is the bank’s stock 
return sensitivity to the stranded asset factor.
Committed-loan-size-weighted industry climate beta; Climate 
beta for each 3-digit NAICS industry is the value-weighted 
average climate beta of firms in the industry. The climate 
beta of each firm is the firm’s stock return sensitivity to the 
stranded asset factor.
Committed-loan-size-weighted unlevered industry climate 
beta; Climate beta for each 3-digit NAICS industry is the 
value-weighted average unlevered climate beta of firms in 
the industry. The climate beta of each firm is the firm’s 
stock return sensitivity to the stranded asset factor.
Utilized-loan-size-weighted industry climate beta; Climate 
beta for each 3-digit NAICS industry is the value-weighted 
average climate beta of firms in the industry. The climate 
beta of each firm is the firm’s stock return sensitivity to the 
stranded asset factor.
Committed-loan-size-weighted firm-level climate beta; The 
climate beta of each firm is the firm’s stock return sensitivity 
to the stranded asset factor.

Appendix B. Summary statistics

See Tables  B.1–B.4.

Table B.1
Factors summary statistics The sample is daily from 2000 to 2021. Stranded, Emission, BMG, CEP each denotes stranded asset factor, emission factor, brown minus green factor, 
and climate efficient factor mimicking portfolio factor. 

  Stranded
  Emission
  BMG
  CEP
  SPY
  COVOL

(1)
Mean

−0.00
0.00
0.00
−0.00
0.00
0.60

St.dev.

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.30

25th percentile
−0.01
−0.01
−0.01
−0.01
−0.00
0.41

75th percentile
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.73

Count 
5536  
5536  
3404  
5158  
5536  
5431  

Table B.2
Factors correlations The sample is daily from 2000 to 2021. Stranded, Emission, BMG, CEP each denotes stranded asset factor, emission factor, brown minus green factor, and 
climate efficient factor mimicking portfolio factor. 

  Stranded
  Emission
  BMG
  CEP
  SPY
  COVOL

(1)
Stranded

1.00
0.31
−0.21
−0.28
0.10
−0.04

Emission

BMG

CEP

SPY

COVOL 

1.00
−0.79
0.02

1.00
−0.02

1.00

1.00
−0.09
−0.77
0.89
−0.01

1.00
0.33
−0.20
0.06

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table B.3
Bank-level data summary statistics Quarterly data from 2012:Q2 to 2021:Q4 for listed US banks in Y-14. The first nine 
variables (from Log Assets to Non-interest Income Ratio) are from FR Y-9C. All variables are defined in Table  A.1.

  Log Assets
  Leverage
  ROA
  Book/Market
  Loans/Assets
  Deposits/Assets
  EPS
  Loan Loss Reserves/Loans
  Non-interest Income/Net Income
  Climate Beta
  Market Beta
  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

Mean

19.63
0.89
0.01
1.02
0.52
0.68
0.00
0.01
2.19
0.12
1.04
0.11

St.dev.

1.22
0.02
0.00
0.35
0.20
0.16
0.01
0.01
4.11
0.24
0.23
0.08

25th percentile
18.64
0.88
0.00
0.76
0.36
0.64
0.00
0.01
1.37
−0.03
0.88
0.05

75th percentile
20.67
0.90
0.01
1.21
0.68
0.78
0.00
0.02
2.59
0.25
1.17
0.14

Count 
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  
666  

Table B.4
Bank-level data correlations Quarterly data from 2012:Q2 to 2021:Q4 for listed US banks in Y-14. The first eight variables (from Log Assets to Non-interest Income Ratio) are 
from FR Y-9C. All variables are defined in Table  A.1.
(1)

(10)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(11) 

  (1)
  (2)
  (3)
  (4)
  (5)
  (6)
  (7)
  (8)
  (9)
  (10)
  (11)

Log Assets
Leverage
ROA
Loans/Assets
Deposits/Assets
Book/Market
Loan Loss Reserves/Loans
Non-interest Income/Net Income
Market Beta
Climate Beta
Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

1.00
0.23
−0.02
−0.58
−0.61
0.16
0.18
0.10
0.18
0.12
0.16

1.00
−0.15
−0.56
−0.29
−0.20
−0.29
0.14
0.12
0.15
0.06

1.00
0.12
0.10
−0.36
−0.01
−0.10
−0.15
−0.08
−0.12

Appendix C. Event study: Supplementary results

See Figs.  C.1 and C.2 and Tables  C.1–C.11. 

1.00
0.60
0.04
0.28
−0.21
−0.20
−0.10
0.03

1.00
−0.25
0.03
−0.15
−0.22
0.06
−0.03

1.00
0.44
0.12
0.35
0.30
0.40

1.00
−0.05
0.11
0.25
0.45

1.00
0.08
0.14
0.10

1.00
0.28
0.21

1.00
0.61

1.00 

Fig. C.1.  Climate Factor Responses to Climate Change Events, after Controlling for COVOL Each panel plots the cumulative coefficient 𝛾 on 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡 in 𝐶𝐹𝑡 = 𝛼+∑5
𝑛=0 𝛾𝑛 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡−𝑛 +
𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝐶𝑂𝑉 𝑂𝐿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡 for each climate factor 𝐶𝐹 . 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑡 takes a value of 1 if there was a green event, a value of −1 if there was a brown event, and a value of 0 if there was no 
transition-related climate event on the day 𝑡. 𝐶𝑂𝑉 𝑂𝐿 denotes the global common volatility of Engle and Campos-Martins (2023) and we use it as a proxy for geopolitical risk. 
Each climate factor series is standardized by its volatility. The standard errors are Newey–West adjusted and the band shows the 95% confidence interval.

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. C.2.  Climate Factor Responses to Climate Change Events Left panels show the factor responses to brown events; right panels show the responses to green events.

23 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table C.1
List of Climate Transition Risk Related Events.
  Date
  11/7/2000
  11/25/2000
  3/28/2001
  7/27/2001
  9/29/2001
  11/10/2001
  5/13/2002
  11/1/2002
  2/6/2003
  2/27/2003
  12/12/2003
  11/2/2004
  12/17/2004
  1/1/2005
  2/16/2005
  7/8/2005
  8/8/2005
  11/9/2005
  12/9/2005
  1/1/2006
  10/30/2006
  11/17/2006
  2/16/2007
  6/7/2007
  7/31/2007
  8/3/2007
  8/31/2007
  9/24/2007
  11/17/2007
  12/17/2007
  12/19/2007
  1/1/2008
  1/30/2008
  5/22/2008
  10/7/2008
  11/4/2008
  12/12/2008
  12/22/2008
  2/17/2009
  4/22/2009

Event
George W. Bush Elected POTUS
COP 6, The Hague, Netherlands
President George W. Bush withdraws from the Kyoto negotiations
COP 6, Bonn, Germany
IPCC Third assessment report
COP 7, Marrakech, Morocco
Farm Security and Rural Investment Act
COP 8, New Delhi, India
President Bush Unveils the Hydrogen Fuel Initiative
Plans Announced to Build World’s First Zero Emissions Coal Power Plant
COP 9, Milan, Italy
George W. Bush Elected POTUS
COP 10, Buenos Aires, Argentina
EU Emissions Trading Scheme is launched, the first such scheme
Kyoto Protocol comes into force (not including the US or Australia)
G8 summit discusses climate change, relatively little progress made
Energy Policy Act
US House Prevents Drilling for Oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
COP 11/CMP 1, Montreal, Canada
IPCC’s Clean Development Mechanism Opens
The Stern Review is published
COP 12/CMP 2, Nairobi, Kenya
February 2007 Washington Declaration
33rd G8 summit
2007 UN General Assembly plenary debate
September 2007 Washington conference
2007 Vienna Climate Change Talks and Agreement
September 2007 United Nations High-Level-Event
IPCC Fourth assessment report
COP 13/CMP 3, Bali, Indonesia
Energy Independence and Security Act
IPCC’s Joint Implementation Mechanism Starts
First Commercial Cellulosic Ethanol Plant Goes Into Production
Food, Conservation, and Energy Act
National Biofuel Action Plan Unveiled
Barack Obama Elected POTUS
COP 14/CMP 4, Poznan, Poland
Worst Coal Ash Spill in US History in Kingston, Tennessee
ARRA (2009) Contains Funding for Renewable Energy
First Framework for Wind Energy Development on the US Outer Continental Shelf 
Announced
President Obama Issues Presidential Directive to USDA to Expand Access to Biofuels
US Announces Funding in Recovery Act for Solar and Geothermal Energy 
Development
US House of Representatives passes the American Clean Energy and Security Act 
(Waxman)
September 2009 United Nations Secretary General’s Summit on Climate Change
US Invests $3.4 Billion to Modernize Energy Grid
COP 15/CMP 5, Copenhagen, Denmark
BP Oil Rig Explodes & Causes Largest Oil Spill in US History
COP 16/CMP 6, Cancún, Mexico
Earthquake off Coast of Japan Damages Six Power Plants at Fukushima
Solar Power Company Solyndra Declares Bankruptcy

  5/5/2009
  5/27/2009

  6/26/2009

  9/22/2009
  10/27/2009
  12/18/2009
  4/20/2010
  12/10/2010
  3/11/2011
  9/1/2011

24 

Shock

−1

1

−1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

−1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

−1

Source
U.S. Presidential Elections
IPCC

Wikipedia

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC

Wikipedia

IPCC

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

IPCC
U.S. Presidential Elections
IPCC

Wikipedia/IPCC

Wikipedia/IPCC

Wikipedia

Wikipedia

ProCon.org

Wikipedia/IPCC

IPCC

Wikipedia

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC/ProCon.org

IPCC

Wikipedia

IPCC

ProCon.org

Wikipedia

ProCon.org
U.S. Presidential Elections
IPCC

ProCon.org

ProCon.org/Wikipedia

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

Wikipedia

IPCC

ProCon.org

IPCC

ProCon.org

IPCC

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

Type
election 
ipcc
policy  
ipcc

ipcc

ipcc
policy  
ipcc
policy  
policy  
ipcc
election 
ipcc
policy  
policy  
misc
policy  
policy  
ipcc

ipcc

misc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc
policy  
ipcc

misc
policy  
policy  
election 
ipcc

misc
policy  
policy  

policy  
policy  

policy  

ipcc
policy  
ipcc

misc

ipcc

misc

misc

(continued on next page)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Table C.1 (continued).
  Date
  11/22/2011
  12/9/2011
  2/9/2012
  3/27/2012

  4/17/2012
  11/6/2012
  12/7/2012
  1/1/2013
  6/25/2013
  9/20/2013
  9/27/2013
  11/23/2013
  2/13/2014
  3/31/2014
  4/14/2014
  5/9/2014
  6/2/2014

  9/22/2014
  9/23/2014
  11/1/2014
  12/12/2014
  1/1/2015
  8/3/2015
  9/29/2015
  10/23/2015
  12/12/2015
  12/22/2015
  11/8/2016
  11/18/2016
  3/28/2017

  6/1/2017
  7/31/2017

  11/17/2017
  12/12/2017
  12/22/2017
  5/9/2018
  10/8/2018
  12/14/2018
  3/22/2019
  12/2/2019
  3/31/2020
  4/1/2020
  4/15/2020
  9/23/2020
  11/3/2020
  12/9/2020

  12/15/2020
  1/20/2021
  3/29/2021
  4/22/2021

Event
California cap-and-trade passed
COP 17/CMP 7, Durban, South Africa
US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) Approves New Nuclear Power Plants
EPA Announces First Clean Air Act Standard for Carbon Pollution from New Power 
Plants
EPA Issues First Ever Clean Air Rules for Natural Gas Produced by Fracking
Barack Obama Elected POTUS
COP 18/CMP 8, Doha, Qatar
California cap-and-trade effective
President Obama Releases His Climate Action Plan
EPA Issues New Proposed Rule to Cut Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Power Plants
IPCC Releases Fifth Assessment Report
COP 19/CMP 9, Warsaw, Poland
Ivanpah, the World’s Largest Concentrated Solar Power Generation Plant, Goes Online
IPCC Releases 1st Part of Fifth Assessment Report, Working Group 2
IPCC Releases 3rd Part of Fifth Assessment Report, Working Group 3
President Obama Announces Solar Power Commitments and Executive Actions
EPA Proposes First Ever Rules to Reduce Carbon Emissions from Existing Power 
Plants
Rockefellers and over 800 Global Investors Announce Fossil Fuel Divestment
Climate Summit 2014
IPCC Fifth assessment report
COP 20/CMP 10, Lima, Peru
California cap-and-trade effective for fuel suppliers
President Obama Announces Clean Power Plan
Carney Speech
Clean Power Plan Finalized
COP 21/CMP 11, Paris, France
Clean Power Plan Becomes Active
Donald Trump Elected POTUS
COP 22/CMP 12/CMA 1, Marrakech, Morocco
President Trump Signs Executive Order to Begin Reversal of President Obama’s Clean 
Power Plan
President Donald Trump withdraws the United States from the Paris Agreement
Two Nuclear Power Reactors in South Carolina Abandoned Before Construction 
Completed
COP 23, Bonn, Germany
One Planet Summit
Tax Bill Opens Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for Oil Drilling
Solar Power to Be Required on All New California Homes by 2020
Special Global Warming 1.5 Degree Celsius Report by IPCC Released
Katowice Climate Package adopted by Governments at COP 24, Katowice, Poland
New Mexico Commits to 100% Renewable Energy for Electricity by 2050
COP 25, Madrid, Spain
EPA Lowers Fuel Economy Standards
Big Banks Refuse Funds for Some Fossil Fuel Projects
Oil and Electricity Demands Drop during COVID-19 Pandemic
California to Ban New Gas-Powered Cars by 2035
Biden Election
New York Says Employee Pension Fund Will Divest from Oil and Gas Companies if 
Not Aligned with Paris Agreement
Fed joins NFGS
Joe Biden signs executive order for the United States to rejoin the Paris Agreement
Biden Administration Announces Offshore Wind Initiative
Biden Administration Pledges to Cut Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 50%, to 52%, by 
2030

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Shock

Source

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

−1

1

−1

−1

−1

1

1

−1

1

1

1

1

1

−1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

Misc

IPCC

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

ProCon.org
U.S. Presidential Elections
IPCC

Misc

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

IPCC

IPCC

ProCon.org

IPCC

IPCC

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

IPCC

IPCC

IPCC

Misc

ProCon.org

Misc

ProCon.org

Wikipedia/IPCC

ProCon.org
U.S. Presidential Elections
IPCC

ProCon.org

Wikipedia

ProCon.org

IPCC

IPCC

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

IPCC

IPCC

ProCon.org

IPCC

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

Elections

ProCon.org

Misc

Wikipedia

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

Type
policy  
ipcc
policy  
policy  

policy  
election 
ipcc
policy  
policy  
policy  
ipcc

ipcc

misc

ipcc

ipcc
policy  
policy  

misc

ipcc

ipcc

ipcc
policy  
policy  
misc
policy  
ipcc

ipcc
election 
ipcc
policy  

policy  
misc

ipcc

ipcc
policy  
policy  
misc
policy  
policy  
ipcc
policy  
misc

misc
policy  
election 
policy  

misc
policy  
policy  
policy  

(continued on next page)

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Table C.1 (continued).
  Date
  4/30/2021
  5/11/2021
  5/18/2021
  8/7/2021
  9/21/2021
  11/9/2021
  11/10/2021
  12/15/2021

Event
Indian Nuclear Plant to Close
US Approves First Major American Offshore Wind Project
International Energy Agency Calls for No New Fossil Fuel Projects
IPCC Sixth Assessment Report predicting 1.5 in Warming
China Announces End to Building Coal-Burning Power Plants Abroad
Major Automakers and Countries Pledge to Phase Out Gas-Powered Cars
COP 26, Edinburgh, Scotland
New York City to Ban New Natural Gas Connections

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Shock

Source

−1

1

1

−1

1

1

1

1

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

Wikipedia

ProCon.org

ProCon.org

Misc

ProCon.org

Type  
misc  
policy 
misc  
misc  
policy 
policy 
ipcc  
policy 

Table C.2
Responses of climate factor (stranded) to transition-related climate events The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 events are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes 
a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes value of −1 if the event is associated with a movement 
away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on a non-overlapping data. Standard errors are Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal 
return 𝑎𝑟 is based on the market model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.

  shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

−0.00144
(−1.14)

−0.000108
(−0.57)

4828
0.0000705

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

−0.00233
(−1.41)

−0.000196
(−0.50)

2466
0.000231

(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

−0.00380*
(−1.85)

−0.000370
(−0.63)

1677
0.00106

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

−0.00174
(−0.68)

−0.000312
(−0.40)

1282
−0.000460

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

−0.00113
(−0.41)

−0.000517
(−0.53)

1048
−0.000819

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.000367 
(−0.12)

−0.000784 
(−0.68)

892
−0.00111  

Stranded.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01

Table C.3
Responses of climate factor (stranded) to transition-related climate events after controlling for COVOL The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 
events are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the 
event is associated with a movement away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are 
Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal return 𝑎𝑟 is based on a two-factor model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis; 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.
(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

  shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

−0.00139
(−1.07)

−0.0000997
(−0.52)

4733
0.0000536

−0.00230
(−1.35)

−0.000188
(−0.48)

2418
0.000216

−0.00359*
(−1.76)

−0.000344
(−0.58)

1644
0.000903

−0.00123
(−0.49)

−0.000304
(−0.39)

1258
−0.000630

−0.00105
(−0.37)

−0.000469
(−0.48)

1028
−0.000855

Stranded.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.000567 
(−0.18)

−0.000725 
(−0.64)

875
−0.00111  

Table C.4
Responses of climate factor (emission) to transition-related climate events The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 events are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes 
a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the event is associated with a movement 
away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal 
return 𝑎𝑟 is based on the market model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.

  shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

−0.00120**
(−2.45)

0.00000253
(0.03)

4828
0.000729

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

−0.00262***
(−3.28)

0.0000215
(0.13)

2466
0.00380

Emission.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

−0.00289***
(−2.97)

−0.0000465
(−0.19)

1677
0.00452

26 

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

−0.00302**
(−2.44)

−0.0000559
(−0.16)

1282
0.00429

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

−0.00254**
(−2.00)

−0.000139
(−0.33)

1048
0.00258

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.00253* 
(−1.87)

−0.000288 
(−0.61)

892
0.00272

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table C.5
Responses of climate factor (emission) to transition-related climate events after Controlling for COVOL The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 
events are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the 
event is associated with a movement away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are 
Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal return 𝑎𝑟 is based on a two-factor model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.
(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

  shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

−0.00124**
(−2.56)

0.0000234
(0.29)

4733
0.000822

−0.00258***
(−3.19)

0.0000564
(0.34)

2418
0.00379

−0.00291***
(−2.97)

0.0000118
(0.05)

1644
0.00476

−0.00293**
(−2.41)

0.0000335
(0.10)

1258
0.00420

−0.00238*
(−1.86)

−0.0000565
(−0.13)

1028
0.00219

Emission.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.00260* 
(−1.87)

−0.000177 
(−0.38)

875
0.00303

Table C.6
Responses of climate factor (brown minus green) to transition-related climate events The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 events are included. 
𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the event is associated with 
a movement away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are Newey–West adjusted. 
Abnormal return 𝑎𝑟 is based on the market model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.

  shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

−0.00385**
(−2.30)

0.0000988
(0.43)

2884
0.00202

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

−0.00912***
(−3.76)

0.000223
(0.47)

1474
0.0111

(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

−0.0148***
(−4.33)

0.000428
(0.58)

1004
0.0284

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

−0.0139***
(−3.78)

0.000318
(0.32)

766
0.0232

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

−0.0134***
(−3.07)

0.000575
(0.48)

630
0.0215

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.0130*** 
(−2.62)

0.000714  
(0.48)

535
0.0176

BMG.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

Table C.7
Responses of climate factor (brown minus green) to transition-related climate events after controlling for COVOL The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. 
Total of 107 events are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of 
−1 if the event is associated with a movement away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard 
errors are Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal return 𝑎𝑟 is based on a two-factor model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis; 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.

  shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

−0.00396**
(−2.37)

0.000189
(0.84)

2884
0.00218

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

−0.00929***
(−3.84)

0.000408
(0.86)

1474
0.0117

(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

−0.0149***
(−4.35)

0.000699
(0.94)

1004
0.0291

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

−0.0141***
(−3.82)

0.000714
(0.73)

766
0.0240

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

−0.0136***
(−3.09)

0.00104
(0.86)

630
0.0223

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.0133*** 
(−2.68)

0.00126
(0.84)

535
0.0188

BMG.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

Table C.8
Responses of climate factor (CEP) to transition-related climate events The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 events are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a 
value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the event is associated with a movement 
away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal 
return 𝑎𝑟 is based on the market model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.

  shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

0.000741
(0.83)

0.0000105
(0.09)

4480
−0.0000276

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

−0.000101
(−0.08)

0.000105
(0.44)

2289
−0.000434

CEP.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

−0.000602
(−0.35)

0.000286
(0.76)

1557
−0.000526

27 

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

−0.00151
(−0.81)

0.0000994
(0.20)

1192
−0.000145

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

−0.00128
(−0.60)

0.000410
(0.69)

973
−0.000519

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.00126  
(−0.53)

0.000436  
(0.60)

829
−0.000763 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table C.9
Responses of climate factor (CEP) to transition-related climate events after Controlling for COVOL The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 events 
are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the event 
is associated with a movement away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are 
Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal return 𝑎𝑟 is based on a two-factor model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.
(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

   shock

  Constant

  N
  Adj R2

0.000704
(0.80)

−0.00000564
(−0.05)

4480
−0.0000444

−0.000150
(−0.12)

0.0000719
(0.30)

2289
−0.000429

−0.000629
(−0.37)

0.000227
(0.61)

1557
−0.000513

−0.00146
(−0.80)

0.0000231
(0.05)

1192
−0.000172

−0.00116
(−0.55)

0.000297
(0.51)

973
−0.000600

CEP.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

Table C.10
Responses of emission intensity to transition-related climate events The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 events are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a value 
of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the event is associated with a movement away 
from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal return 𝑎𝑟
is based on the market model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.
(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

  shock

  Constant

−0.00180**
(−2.39)

−0.00000350
(−0.03)

  N
  Adj R2
Emission Intensity.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

4828
0.00117

−0.00351***
(−3.24)

−0.0000182
(−0.09)

2466
0.00444

−0.00306**
(−2.31)

−0.000146
(−0.46)

1677
0.00291

−0.00311*
(−1.80)

−0.000115
(−0.26)

1282
0.00247

−0.00259
(−1.49)

−0.000204
(−0.37)

1048
0.00123

Table C.11
Responses of emission intensity to transition-related climate events after Controlling for COVOL The list of events is from Barnett, extended to 2021. Total of 107 events 
are included. 𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑐𝑘 takes a value of 1 if the event is associated with a movement toward a greener economy (e.g., Paris Agreement) and it takes a value of −1 if the event 
is associated with a movement away from a greener economy (e.g., withdrawal from the Paris Agreement). The regressions are on non-overlapping data. Standard errors are 
Newey–West adjusted. Abnormal return 𝑎𝑟 is based on a two-factor model: 𝑟𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑠𝑝𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡, estimated on a 1-year rolling window basis: 𝑎𝑟𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 − ̂𝑟𝑡.
(3)
car(t−1,t+2)

(4)
car(t−1,t+3)

(5)
car(t−1,t+4)

(2)
car(t−1,t+1)

(1)
ar(t−1,t)

  shock

  Constant

−0.00192**
(−2.55)

0.0000430
(0.41)

  N
  Adj R2
Emission Intensity.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.1, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

4733
0.00139

−0.00362***
(−3.29)

0.0000729
(0.34)

2418
0.00486

−0.00329**
(−2.44)

−0.00000229
(−0.01)

1644
0.00356

−0.00325*
(−1.86)

0.0000886
(0.21)

1258
0.00287

−0.00275
(−1.56)

0.0000235
(0.04)

1028
0.00154

28 

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.00111  
(−0.47)

0.000306  
(0.43)

829
−0.000857 

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.00228  
(−1.27)

−0.000419 
(−0.68)

892
0.000696  

(6)
car(t−1,t+5)
−0.00268  
(−1.47)

−0.000133 
(−0.22)

875
0.00142

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Appendix D. DCB model estimation

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

(D.1)

(D.2)

(D.3)

(D.4)

(D.5)

𝑟𝑖𝑡 = log(1 + 𝑅𝑖𝑡), 𝑟𝑚𝑡 = log(1 + 𝑅𝑚𝑡), 𝑟𝑐𝑡 = log(1 + 𝑅𝑐𝑡)
Conditional on the information set 

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
We use a GJR-GARCH volatility model and DCC correlation model. The GJR-GARCH model for volatility dynamics are: 

𝑡−1, the return triple has a distribution  with zero mean and time-varying covariance:
𝜌𝑖𝑚𝑡𝜎𝑖𝑡𝜎𝑚𝑡
𝜎2
𝑚𝑡
𝜌𝑚𝑐𝑡𝜎𝑚𝑡𝜎𝑐𝑡

𝜌𝑖𝑐𝑡𝜎𝑖𝑡𝜎𝑐𝑡
𝜌𝑚𝑐𝑡𝜎𝑚𝑡𝜎𝑐𝑡
𝜎2
𝑐𝑡

𝜎2
𝑖𝑡
𝜌𝑖𝑚𝑡𝜎𝑖𝑡𝜎𝑚𝑡
𝜌𝑖𝑐𝑡𝜎𝑖𝑡𝜎𝑐𝑡

𝑡−1 ∼ 

𝟎, 𝐻𝑡 =

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

|
|
|
|
|



𝑟𝑖𝑡
𝑟𝑚𝑡
𝑟𝑐𝑡

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

𝑖𝑡 = 𝜔𝑉 𝑖 + 𝛼𝑉 𝑖𝑟2
𝜎2

𝑖𝑡−1 + 𝛾𝑉 𝑖𝑟2

𝑖𝑡−1

𝐼 −
𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽𝑉 𝑖𝜎2

𝑖𝑡−1

,

𝑚𝑡 = 𝜔𝑉 𝑚 + 𝛼𝑉 𝑚𝑟2
𝜎2

𝑚𝑡−1 + 𝛾𝑉 𝑚𝑟2

𝑚𝑡−1

𝐼 −
𝑚,𝑡−1 + 𝛽𝑉 𝑚𝜎2

𝑚𝑡−1

,

𝑐𝑡 = 𝜔𝑉 𝑐 + 𝛼𝑉 𝑐 𝑟2
𝜎2
where 𝐼 −

𝑐𝑡−1 + 𝛾𝑉 𝑐 𝑟2
𝑖𝑡 = 1 if 𝑟𝑖𝑡 < 0, 𝐼 −

𝐼 −
𝑐,𝑡−1 + 𝛽𝑉 𝑐 𝜎2
𝑚𝑡 = 1 if 𝑟𝑚𝑡 < 0, and 𝐼 −

𝑐𝑡−1

𝑐𝑡−1

𝑐𝑡 = 1 if 𝑟𝑐𝑡 < 0.

The correlation of the volatility-adjusted returns 𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝑟𝑖𝑡∕𝜎𝑖𝑡, 𝑒𝑚𝑡 = 𝑟𝑚𝑡∕𝜎𝑚𝑡, and 𝑒𝑐𝑡 = 𝑟𝑐𝑡∕𝜎𝑐𝑡 is:

Cor

𝜖𝑖𝑡
𝜖𝑚𝑡
𝜖𝑐𝑡

1

𝜌𝑖𝑚𝑡
1

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

= 𝑅𝑡 =

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
The DCC model specifies the dynamics of the pseudo-correlation matrix 𝑄𝑖𝑚𝑐𝑡 as: 

= diag(𝑄𝑖𝑚𝑐𝑡)−1∕2 𝑄𝑖𝑚𝑐𝑡 diag(𝑄𝑖𝑚𝑐𝑡)−1∕2

𝜌𝑖𝑚𝑡
𝜌𝑖𝑐𝑡

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

𝜌𝑚𝑐𝑡

𝜌𝑖𝑐𝑡
𝜌𝑚𝑐𝑡
1

′

𝑄𝑖𝑚𝑐𝑡 = (1 − 𝛼𝐶𝑖 − 𝛽𝐶𝑖)𝑆𝑖 + 𝛼𝐶𝑖

𝑒𝑖𝑡
⎡
⎤
⎢
⎥
𝑒𝑚𝑡
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
𝑒𝑐𝑡
⎣
⎦
where 𝑆𝑖𝑡 is the unconditional correlation matrix of adjusted returns.

𝑒𝑖𝑡
⎡
⎢
𝑒𝑚𝑡
⎢
⎢
𝑒𝑐𝑡
⎣

+ 𝛽𝐶𝑖𝑄𝑖𝑚𝑐𝑡−1

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

The market beta 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
[

]

𝑖𝑡

 and the climate beta 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
]−1 [

]

𝑖𝑡

[

 are: 

𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑖𝑡
𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑖𝑡
Estimation procedure is as follows:

𝜎2
𝑚𝑡
𝜌𝑚𝑐𝑡𝜎𝑚𝑡𝜎𝑐𝑡

𝜌𝑚𝑐𝑡𝜎𝑚𝑡𝜎𝑐𝑡
𝜎2
𝑐𝑡

=

𝜌𝑖𝑚𝑡𝜎𝑖𝑡𝜎𝑚𝑡
𝜌𝑖𝑐𝑡𝜎𝑖𝑡𝜎𝑐𝑡

(1) For each bank 𝑖 = 1 ⋯ 𝑁, estimate GARCH parameters and DCC parameters.
(2) Take the median DCC parameters, 𝛼 ̄𝐶 = median(𝛼𝐶𝑖) and 𝛽 ̄𝐶 = median(𝛽𝐶𝑖).
(3) Compute 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡

 and 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡

 based on the median DCC parameters, 𝛼 ̄𝐶 and 𝛽 ̄𝐶 , and the volatility parameters.39

39 The results are robust to using an individual bank’s DCC parameters instead of the median DCC parameters.

29 

H. Jung et al.

Appendix E. Climate betas of non-US banks

See Figs.  E.1–E.4.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. E.1.  Climate Betas of UK Banks The sample banks are the top 5 largest UK banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Fig. E.2.  Climate Betas of Canadian Banks The sample banks are the top 6 largest Canadian banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to 
December 2021.

30 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. E.3.  Climate Betas of Japanese Banks The sample banks are the top 3 largest Japanese banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to 
December 2021.

Fig. E.4.  Climate Betas of French Banks The sample banks are the top 3 largest French banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 
2021.

31 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Appendix F. Loan portfolio climate beta: Robustness results

This section presents robustness results of the loan portfolio climate beta regression in Section 5.

Table F.1
Bank climate beta and loan climate beta (unlevered beta)

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta (Unlevered)

(1)
Climate beta
2.817∗∗∗
(3.50)

(2)
Climate beta
1.997∗∗∗
(3.04)

(3)
Climate beta
2.347∗∗∗
(5.10)

(4)
Climate beta
1.866∗∗∗
(3.29)

  Log Assets

  Leverage

  ROA

  Loans/Assets

  Deposits/Assets

  Loan Loss Reserves/Loans

  Non-interest Income/Net Income

  Market Beta

  Book/Market

  N
  Bank Controls
  Bank FE
  Year FE
  Adj R2
t statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.
Table F.2
Bank climate beta and loan climate beta (utilized exposure)

666
N
N
N
0.150

0.0153
(0.82)

4.468∗∗∗
(4.71)

8.518∗∗∗
(4.88)

0.0160
(0.13)

0.398∗∗
(2.46)

1.738
(0.71)

0.00286
(1.65)

0.155∗∗∗
(4.56)

0.214∗∗∗
(4.28)

666
Y
N
N
0.321

0.457∗∗∗
(6.05)

2.347∗
(1.95)

5.419∗∗∗
(3.55)

−0.577
(−1.44)

0.382
(0.97)

7.597∗∗∗
(5.57)

0.00287∗
(2.04)

0.104∗∗∗
(5.90)

0.121∗∗∗
(5.19)

666
Y
Y
N
0.561

0.0461
(0.58)

−0.661
(−0.61)

1.942
(1.71)

−0.408
(−1.59)

−0.546∗
(−2.05)

3.883∗
(2.09)

0.00229
(1.65)

0.00318
(0.17)

−0.0248
(−0.67)

666
Y
Y
Y
0.690

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta (Utilized)

(1)
Climate beta
1.588∗∗∗
(6.64)

(2)
Climate beta
1.361∗∗∗
(6.14)

(3)
Climate beta
1.089∗∗∗
(5.31)

(4)
Climate beta
0.715∗∗∗
(3.02)

0.00918
(0.59)

3.640∗∗∗
(3.05)

8.595∗∗∗
(4.97)

0.105
(1.03)

0.279∗∗∗
(3.48)

−1.746
(−0.74)

0.00214
(1.32)

0.151∗∗∗
(5.33)

0.189∗∗∗
(4.09)

666
Y
N
N
0.419

0.387∗∗∗
(5.98)

1.111
(0.80)

5.588∗∗∗
(4.10)

−0.546
(−1.21)

0.216
(0.84)

4.940∗∗∗
(3.81)

0.00235
(1.73)

0.112∗∗∗
(5.84)

0.130∗∗∗
(5.18)

666
Y
Y
N
0.572

0.0396
(0.54)

−1.204
(−1.01)

1.979∗
(1.89)

−0.470
(−1.65)

−0.483∗∗
(−2.20)

2.758
(1.43)

0.00200
(1.47)

0.00751
(0.39)
−0.00141  
(−0.04)

666
Y
Y
Y
0.687

  Log Assets

  Leverage

  ROA

  Loans/Assets

  Deposits/Assets

  Loan Loss Reserves/Loans

  Non-interest Income/Net Income

  Market Beta

  Book/Market

  N
  Bank Controls
  Bank FE
  Year FE
  Adj R2
t statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

666
N
N
N
0.313

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table F.3
Bank climate beta and loan climate beta (firm level)

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

(1)
Climate beta
0.752∗∗∗
(3.97)

(2)
Climate beta
0.624∗∗∗
(4.04)

(3)
Climate beta
0.649∗∗∗
(6.57)

(4)
Climate beta
0.528∗∗∗
(5.83)

  Log Assets

  Leverage

  ROA

  Loans/Assets

  Deposits/Assets

  Loan Loss Reserves/Loans

  Non-interest Income/Net Income

  Market Beta

  Book/Market

  N
  Bank Controls
  Bank FE
  Year FE
  Adj R2
t statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

664
N
N
N
0.234

0.0188
(1.11)

3.964∗∗∗
(3.94)

8.797∗∗∗
(4.09)

−0.0704
(−0.73)

0.357∗∗
(2.63)

0.975
(0.44)

0.00308∗
(1.97)

0.130∗∗∗
(3.87)

0.198∗∗∗
(4.49)

664
Y
N
N
0.385

0.453∗∗∗
(6.31)

0.648
(0.45)

5.539∗∗∗
(3.48)

−0.293
(−0.66)

0.405∗
(1.81)

7.247∗∗∗
(4.98)

0.00315∗
(2.09)

0.0987∗∗∗
(5.53)

0.128∗∗∗
(5.89)

664
Y
Y
N
0.592

0.0976
(1.17)

−1.899
(−1.68)

2.441∗
(1.88)

−0.307
(−1.10)

−0.357
(−1.60)

3.366∗
(2.00)

0.00252∗  
(1.85)

0.00324
(0.17)

−0.00840  
(−0.24)

664
Y
Y
Y
0.708

Table F.4
Testing for 2012 effect and COVID period effect.

  Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

  Year 2012=1

  Year 2012=1 ×Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

  Post 2019:Q4=1

  Post 2019:Q4=1 ×Loan Portfolio Climate Beta

  N
  Bank Controls
  Bank FE
  Year FE
  Adj R2
t statistics in parentheses.
∗ 𝑝 < 0.10, ∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.05, ∗∗∗ 𝑝 < 0.01.

(2)
Climate beta
0.827∗∗∗
(2.98)

0.0606
(1.13)

0.487
(1.46)

666
Y
Y
Y
0.706

(1)
Climate beta
1.113∗∗∗
(3.57)

−0.111
(−1.40)

0.0468
(0.07)

666
Y
Y
Y
0.701

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Appendix G. Extended climate beta time series

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

We obtain a long time-series of climate beta of the banking sector by using oil and coal industry returns:

𝑟𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
𝑡

= 𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡

𝑡 𝑀𝑘𝑡𝑡 + 𝛽𝐶𝐹

𝑡 𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

in a rolling window regression. We find that the climate beta was the highest during 2020.

Fig. G.1.  Climate Beta over a Long Period.

]

− 1 = 0

𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+1

]

Appendix H. CRISK derivation

[

1 − 𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆𝑖𝑡 = 𝐸𝑡

1 + 𝑅𝑖

𝑡+1,𝑡+ℎ

𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+1

|
|
|
|
|
|

− 1 = −𝜃,

𝑟𝑖
𝑡+𝑗

) |
|
|
|
|
|

𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+1

− 1 = −𝜃,

𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+1

− 1 = 0

𝑖,𝑡+𝑗 𝑟𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡

𝑡+𝑗 + 𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒

𝑖,𝑡+𝑗

𝑟𝐶𝐹
𝑡+𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡+𝑗

) |
|
|
|
|
|

𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+1

− 1

[

= 𝐸𝑡

exp

[

= 𝐸𝑡

exp

( ℎ
∑

𝑗=1

( ℎ
∑

𝑗=1

= −𝜃,

𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+1

[

(

]

− 1 = 0

= 𝐸𝑡

exp

𝛽𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑖𝑡

log

)

( 𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡

𝑡+1,𝑡+𝑗
𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+1

+ 𝛽𝐶𝐹
𝑖𝑡

log

( 𝑃 𝐶𝐹

𝑡+1,𝑡+𝑗
𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+1

)) |
|
|
|
|
|

𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝐶𝐹
𝑡+1

− 1

]

− 1 = 0

= −𝜃,

= exp

𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+ℎ
𝑃 𝑀𝑘𝑡
𝑡+1
(𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑖𝑡

)
log(1 − 𝜃)

Therefore,

𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖𝑡 = 𝑘𝐷𝑖𝑡 − (1 − 𝑘)𝑊𝑖𝑡 {1 + 𝐸𝑡[𝑅𝑖

𝑡+1,𝑡+ℎ|𝑅𝐶𝐹
𝑡+1,𝑡+ℎ < 𝐶]}
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
1−𝐿𝑅𝑀𝐸𝑆𝑖𝑡

= 𝑘𝐷𝑖𝑡 − (1 − 𝑘)𝑊𝑖𝑡 exp

(𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒
𝑖𝑡

)
log(1 − 𝜃)

34 

H. Jung et al.

Appendix I. Marginal CRISKs of non-US banks

See Figs.  I.1–I.4. 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. I.1.  Marginal CRISKs: UK The sample banks are the top 5 largest UK banks by average total assets in 2019. Marginal CRISK is the difference between the stressed CRISK 
) 𝑊  and the non-stressed CRISK is computed as: 𝑘𝐷 − (1 − 𝑘)𝑊  where 𝑘 is prudential 
(𝛽𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒 log(1 − 𝜃)
and non-stressed CRISK. The stressed CRISK is computed as: 𝑘𝐷 − (1 − 𝑘) exp
capital ratio, 𝐷 is debt, and 𝑊  is market equity of each bank. The marginal CRISK values are truncated at zero. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Fig. I.2.  Marginal CRISKs: Canada The sample banks are the top 6 largest Canadian banks by average total assets in 2019. The marginal CRISK values are truncated at zero. 
The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

35 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. I.3.  Marginal CRISKs: Japan The sample banks are the top 3 largest Japanese banks by average total assets in 2019. The marginal CRISK values are truncated at zero. The 
sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Fig. I.4.  Marginal CRISKs: France The sample banks are the top 3 largest French banks by average total assets in 2019. The marginal CRISK values are truncated at zero. The 
sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

36 

H. Jung et al.

Appendix J. CRISKs of non-US banks

See Figs.  J.5–J.8.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. J.5.  CRISKs of UK Banks The sample banks are the top 5 largest UK banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Fig. J.6.  CRISKs of Canadian Banks The sample banks are the top 6 largest Canadian banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 
2021.

37 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. J.7.  CRISKs of Japanese Banks The sample banks are the top 3 largest Japanese banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 
2021.

Fig. J.8.  CRISKs of French Banks The sample banks are the top 3 largest French banks by average total assets in 2019. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

38 

H. Jung et al.

Appendix K. CRISK decomposition of non-US banks

See Tables  K.1–K.4.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table K.1
CRISK Decomposition (UK) CRISK(𝑡) is the bank’s CRISK at the end of 2020, and CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is CRISK at the end of year 
2019. dCRISK= CRISK(𝑡)-CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is the change in CRISK during 2020. dDEBT is the contribution of the firm’s debt to 
CRISK. dEQUITY is the contribution of the firm’s equity position on CRISK. dRISK is the contribution of an increase in climate 
beta to CRISK. All amounts are in billions USD.
  Bank
  A:LN
  B:LN
  C:LN
  D:LN
  E:LN

dRISK
6.00 
19.64 
9.82 
3.23 
1.58 

13.39
21.75
1.88
3.59
3.64

79.60
93.01
41.24
39.27
27.50

3.54
33.90
11.90
5.89
5.93

22.92
75.30
23.60
12.72
11.15

56.68
17.70
17.64
26.55
16.35

CRISK(t-1)

dEQUITY

CRISK(t)

dCRISK

dDEBT

Table K.2
CRISK decomposition (Canada) CRISK(𝑡) is the bank’s CRISK at the end of 2020, and CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is CRISK at the end of 
year 2019. dCRISK= CRISK(𝑡)-CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is the change in CRISK during 2020. dDEBT is the contribution of the firm’s debt 
to CRISK. dEQUITY is the contribution of the firm’s equity position on CRISK. dRISK is the contribution of an increase in 
climate beta to CRISK. All amounts are in billions USD.
  Bank
  A:CN
  B:CN
  C:CN
  D:CN
  E:CN
  F:CN

dRISK
4.92 
8.41 
−2.48 
1.60 
1.84 
5.44 

11.34
5.26
12.18
−0.40
−7.06
6.42

0.51
2.57
−0.63
−0.26
−2.38
−0.06

7.37
5.60
7.09
2.58
15.62
16.42

12.80
16.58
3.98
3.92
15.08
21.79

24.14
21.84
16.15
3.52
8.02
28.22

CRISK(t-1)

dEQUITY

CRISK(t)

dCRISK

dDEBT

Table K.3
CRISK decomposition (Japan) CRISK(𝑡) is the bank’s CRISK at the end of 2020, and CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is CRISK at the end of 
year 2019. dCRISK= CRISK(𝑡)-CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is the change in CRISK during 2020. dDEBT is the contribution of the firm’s debt 
to CRISK. dEQUITY is the contribution of the firm’s equity position on CRISK. dRISK is the contribution of an increase in 
climate beta to CRISK. All amounts are in billions USD.
  Bank
  A:JP
  B:JP
  C:JP

dRISK
6.76 
7.11 
6.57 

186.03
125.99
125.30

160.28
101.70
108.16

9.42
11.27
5.19

25.75
24.29
17.13

9.57
5.90
5.37

CRISK(t-1)

dEQUITY

CRISK(t)

dCRISK

dDEBT

Table K.4
CRISK decomposition (France) CRISK(𝑡) is the bank’s CRISK at the end of 2020, and CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is CRISK at the end of 
year 2019. dCRISK= CRISK(𝑡)-CRISK(𝑡 − 1) is the change in CRISK during 2020. dDEBT is the contribution of the firm’s debt 
to CRISK. dEQUITY is the contribution of the firm’s equity position on CRISK. dRISK is the contribution of an increase in 
climate beta to CRISK. All amounts are in billions USD.
  Bank
CRISK(t)
  A:FP
  B:FP
  C:FP

dRISK
10.73 
17.39 
6.39 

104.17
126.22
82.23

33.56
60.31
23.91

19.67
37.71
10.22

70.62
65.91
58.32

3.16
5.21
7.30

CRISK(t-1)

dEQUITY

dCRISK

dDEBT

39 

H. Jung et al.

Appendix L. Full list of financial firms

See Tables  L.1–L.5.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Ticker

BNS
CM
FNV
IAG
IGM
NA
POW
SLF
X

Company name
Bank of Nova Scotia
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce 
Franco-Nevada Corp
iA Financial Corp Inc
IGM Financial Inc
National Bank of Canada
Power Corp of Canada
Sun Life Financial Inc
TMX Group Ltd

Ticker

7167
7181
7186
8253
8304
8308
8316
8334
8354
8359
8369
8377
8382
8410
8418
8439
8570
8591
8601
8628
8725
8766
8801
8804
8905

Ticker

ALTA
COFA
CNF
COVH
CRSU
FLY
GLE
LI
MF
ODET
RF
SCR

Company name
Mebuki Financial Group Inc
Japan Post Insurance Co Ltd
Concordia Financial Group Ltd
Credit Saison Co Ltd
Aozora Bank Ltd
Resona Holdings Inc
Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group Inc  
Gunma Bank Ltd
Fukuoka Financial Group Inc
Hachijuni Bank Ltd
Bank of Kyoto Ltd
Hokuhoku Financial Group Inc
Chugoku Bank Ltd
Seven Bank Ltd
Yamaguchi Financial Group Inc
Tokyo Century Corp
AEON Financial Service Co Ltd
ORIX Corp
Daiwa Securities Group Inc
Matsui Securities Co Ltd
MS&AD Insurance Group Holdings Inc 
Tokio Marine Holdings Inc
Mitsui Fudosan Co Ltd
Tokyo Tatemono Co Ltd
Aeon Mall Co Ltd

Company name
Altarea SCA
Coface SA
Caisse Regionale de Credit Agricole Mutuel Nord de France 
Covivio Hotels SACA
Credit Agricole Sud Rhone Alpes
Societe Fonciere Lyonnaise SA
Societe Generale SA
Klepierre
Wendel SA
Compagnie de L’Odet SA
Eurazeo SA
SCOR SE

Table L.1
Canadian financial firms.
  Ticker
  BMO
  CIX
  FFH
  GWO
  IFC
  MFC
  ONEX
  RY
  TD

Company name
Bank of Montreal
CI Financial Corp
Fairfax Financial Holdings Ltd
Great-West Lifeco Inc
Intact Financial Corp
Manulife Financial Corp
Onex Corp
Royal Bank of Canada
Toronto-Dominion Bank

Table L.2
Japanese financial firms.
  Ticker
  3231
  7180
  7182
  7327
  8303
  8306
  8309
  8331
  8341
  8355
  8366
  8370
  8379
  8385
  8411
  8421
  8473
  8572
  8593
  8604
  8630
  8750
  8795
  8802
  8830

Company name
Nomura Real Estate Holdings Inc
Kyushu Financial Group Inc
Japan Post Bank Co Ltd
Daishi Hokuetsu Financial Group Inc
Shinsei Bank Ltd
Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc
Sumitomo Mitsui Trust Holdings Inc
Chiba Bank Ltd
77 Bank Ltd
Shizuoka Bank Ltd
Shiga Bank Ltd
Kiyo Bank Ltd
Hiroshima Bank Ltd
Iyo Bank Ltd
Mizuho Financial Group Inc
Shinkin Central Bank
SBI Holdings Inc
Acom Co Ltd
Mitsubishi HC Capital Inc
Nomura Holdings Inc
Sompo Holdings Inc
Dai-ichi Life Holdings Inc
T&D Holdings Inc
Mitsubishi Estate Co Ltd
Sumitomo Realty & Development Co Ltd

Table L.3
French financial firms.
  Ticker
  ACA
  BNP
  CAF
  COV
  CRAV
  CS
  GFC
  ICAD
  MERY
  NXI
  PEUG
  ROTH

Company name
Credit Agricole SA
BNP Paribas SA
Caisse Regionale de Credit Agricole Mutuel de Paris et d’Ile-de-France
Covivio
Credit Agricole Atlantique Vendee
AXA SA
Gecina SA
ICADE
Mercialys SA
Nexity SA
Peugeot Invest
Rothschild & Co

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Table L.4
United Kingdom financial firms.
  Ticker
  ABDN
  ASHM
  BLND
  CAPC
  DLG
  GPE
  HMSO
  ICP
  III
  LAND
  LLOY
  NWG
  PRU
  SGRO
  STAN
  SVS
  UTG

Company name
Abrdn Plc
Ashmore Group PLC
British Land Co PLC
Capital & Counties Properties PLC
Direct Line Insurance Group PLC
Great Portland Estates PLC
Hammerson PLC
Intermediate Capital Group PLC
3i Group PLC
Land Securities Group PLC
Lloyds Banking Group PLC
Natwest Group PLC
Prudential PLC
Segro PLC
Standard Chartered PLC
Savills PLC
UNITE Group PLC

Table L.5
United States financial firms.
  Ticker
  AFG
  AIG
  AJG
  ALL
  AMP
  APO
  AXP
  BEN
  BLK
  BPOP
  BX
  CACC
  CBRE
  CFG
  CI
  CMA
  CNA
  DFS
  ERIE
  FAF
  FHN
  FNF
  GL
  HBAN
  HIG
  ICE
  JEF
  JPM
  KKR
  L
  LPLA
  MCO
  MKL
  MS
  MTB
  NTRS
  ORI
  PFG
  PNC
  PRU
  RGA
  SBNY
  SEIC
  SNV
  TFC
  THG
  TRV
  UNM
  V
  WAL
  WFC
  WTW
  ZION

Company name
American Financial Group Inc
American International Group Inc
Arthur J Gallagher & Co
Allstate Corp
Ameriprise Financial Inc
Apollo Global Management Inc
American Express Co
Franklin Resources Inc
BlackRock Inc
Popular Inc
Blackstone Inc
Credit Acceptance Corp
CBRE Group Inc
Citizens Financial Group Inc
Cigna Corp
Comerica Inc
CNA Financial Corp
Discover Financial Services
Erie Indemnity Co
First American Financial Corp
First Horizon Corp
Fidelity National Financial Inc
Globe Life Inc
Huntington Bancshares Inc
Hartford Financial Services Group Inc
Intercontinental Exchange Inc
Jefferies Financial Group Inc
JPMorgan Chase & Co
KKR & Co Inc
Loews Corp
LPL Financial Holdings Inc
Moody’s Corp
Markel Corp
Morgan Stanley
M&T Bank Corp
Northern Trust Corp
Old Republic International Corp
Principal Financial Group Inc
PNC Financial Services Group Inc
Prudential Financial Inc
Reinsurance Group of America Inc
Signature Bank/New York NY
SEI Investments Co
Synovus Financial Corp
Truist Financial Corp
Hanover Insurance Group Inc
Travelers Cos Inc
Unum Group
Visa Inc
Western Alliance Bancorp
Wells Fargo & Co
Willis Towers Watson PLC
Zions Bancorporation

Ticker

ADM
BARC
BYG
CBG
DLN
GRI
HSBA
IGG
JUP
LGEN
LSEG
PHNX
SDR
SHB
STJ
TCAP
VMUK

Ticker

AFL
AIZ
AL
ALLY
AON
ARCC
BAC
BK
BOKF
BRO
C
CBOE
CBSH
CFR
CINF
CME
COF
EFX
EWBC
FCNCA
FITB
FRC
GS
HHC
HUM
IVZ
JLL
KEY
KMPR
LNC
MA
MET
MMC
MSCI
NDAQ
NYCB
PB
PGR
PRI
RF
RJF
SCHW
SIVB
STT
TFSL
TROW
UNH
USB
VOYA
WBS
WRB
WU

41 

Company name
Admiral Group PLC
Barclays PLC
Big Yellow Group PLC
Close Brothers Group PLC
Derwent London PLC
Grainger PLC
HSBC Holdings PLC
IG Group Holdings PLC
Jupiter Fund Management PLC
Legal & General Group PLC
London Stock Exchange Group PLC 
Phoenix Group Holdings
Schroders PLC
Shaftesbury PLC
St James’s Place PLC
TP ICAP Group PLC
Virgin Money UK PLC

Company name
Aflac Inc
Assurant Inc
Air Lease Corp
Ally Financial Inc
Aon PLC
Ares Capital Corp
Bank of America Corp
Bank of New York Mellon Corp
BOK Financial Corp
Brown & Brown Inc
Citigroup Inc
CBOE Global Markets Inc
Commerce Bancshares Inc
Cullen/Frost Bankers Inc
Cincinnati Financial Corp
CME Group Inc
Capital One Financial Corp
Equifax Inc
East West Bancorp Inc
First Citizens BancShares Inc
Fifth Third Bancorp
First Republic Bank
Goldman Sachs Group Inc
Howard Hughes Corp
Humana Inc
Invesco Ltd
Jones Lang LaSalle Inc
KeyCorp
Kemper Corp
Lincoln National Corp
MasterCard Inc
MetLife Inc
Marsh & McLennan Cos Inc
MSCI Inc
Nasdaq Inc
New York Community Bancorp Inc 
Prosperity Bancshares Inc
Progressive Corp
Primerica Inc
Regions Financial Corp
Raymond James Financial Inc
Charles Schwab Corp
SVB Financial Group
State Street Corp
TFS Financial Corp
T Rowe Price Group Inc
UnitedHealth Group Inc
US Bancorp
Voya Financial Inc
Webster Financial Corp
WR Berkley Corp
Western Union Co

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. Jung et al.

Appendix M. More scenarios

M.1. Emission factor

See Figs.  M.1 and M.2.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. M.1.  Climate Betas based on emission factor. The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. The emission-based factor is constructed 
by weighting emissions across industries and weighting stock returns by market value within each industry. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Fig. M.2.  Marginal CRISKs based on emission factor. The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. The emission-based factor is constructed 
by weighting emissions across industries and weighting stock returns by market value within each industry. The sample period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

42 

H. Jung et al.

M.2. Brown minus Green factor

See Figs.  M.3 and M.4.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. M.3.  Climate Betas based on Brown minus Green factor. The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. We use the emission-based 
factor as brown factor and the iShares Global Clean Energy ETF return as green factor. The sample period is from June 2008 to December 2021.

Fig. M.4.  Marginal CRISKs based on Brown minus Green factor. The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. We use the emission-based 
factor as brown factor and the iShares Global Clean Energy ETF return as green factor. The sample period is from June 2008 to December 2021.

43 

H. Jung et al.

M.3. Climate efficient factor mimicking portfolio factor

See Figs.  M.5 and M.6.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. M.5.  Climate Betas based on climate efficient factor mimicking portfolio factor. The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. The 
sample period is from July 2001 to December 2021.

Fig. M.6.  Marginal CRISKs based on climate efficient factor mimicking portfolio factor. The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. The 
sample period is from July 2001 to December 2021.

44 

H. Jung et al.

Appendix N. Robustness tests

See Figs.  N.7–N.13.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. N.7.  Climate Beta after Controlling for LTG and CRD The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. First, we regress bank stock 
return on LTG and CRD. Second, we regress the residual from the first step on MKT and CF and plot the coefficient on CF using 252-day rolling window regression. LTG is log 
daily return on long-term US government bond index. CRD is log daily return on investment-grade corporate bond index and can be downloaded from Bloomberg. The sample 
period is from June 2000 to December 2021.

Fig. N.8.  Climate Beta after Controlling for HOUSE The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. First, we regress bank stock return on 
HOUSE. Second, we regress the residual from the first step on MKT and CF and plot the coefficient on CF using 252-day rolling window regression. HOUSE is the log daily return 
on a bond fund specializing in government mortgage-backed securities (VFIJX). The sample period is from February 2001 to December 2021.

45 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. N.9.  Climate Beta after Controlling for LTG, CRD, and HOUSE The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. First, we regress bank 
stock return on HOUSE, LTG, and CRD. Second, we regress the residual from the first step on MKT and CF and plot the coefficient on CF using 252-day rolling window regression. 
HOUSE is the log daily return on a bond fund specializing in government mortgage-backed securities (VFIJX). LTG is log daily return on long-term US government bond index 
and CRD is the log daily return on investment-grade corporate bond index. The sample period is from February 2001 to December 2021.

Fig. N.10.  Climate Beta after Controlling for COVID Industry Factor The sample banks are the top 10 largest US banks by average total assets in 2019. First, we regress bank 
stock return on a COVID industry factor. The COVID industry factor is a value-weighted return on stocks that belong to the NAICS 3-digit industries most affected by COVID 
(selected by Fahlenbrach et al., 2021). We exclude five industries that are in the top 20 by emissions in 2020. Second, we regress the residual from the first step on MKT and CF 
and plot the coefficient on CF using 252-day rolling window regression. The sample period is from January 2001 to December 2021.

46 

H. Jung et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Fig. N.11.  Factor Responses to Climate Events This plot compares the oil ETF (XLE) factor with the coal ETF (KOL) factor.

Fig. N.12.  Climate Beta for Financial Sector: Stranded Asset Factor vs. Oil ETF This plot compares the financial sector ETF’s climate beta using the stranded asset factor 
versus the oil ETF (XLE) as the climate factor.

Fig. N.13.  Factor Responses to Climate Events Panel (a) compares emission factor and emission intensity factor. Panel (b) compares brown-minus-green factor with its emission 
intensity counterpart.

Appendix O. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104076.

Data availability

CRISK: Measuring the Climate Risk Exposure of the Financial System (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

47 

Financ. 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104076 

Engle, Robert F., Giglio, Stefano, Kelly, Bryan, Lee, Heebum, Stroebel, Johannes, 2020. 

Hedging climate change news. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (3), 1184–1216.

Engle, Robert F., Jung, Hyeyoon, 2018. Estimating SRISK for Latin America. Working 

Paper.

European Systemic Risk Board, 2020. Positively Green: Measuring Climate Change Risks 

to Financial Stability. Report.

Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, Rageth, Kevin, Stulz, René M., 2021. How valuable is financial 
flexibility when revenue stops? Evidence from the COVID-19 crisis. Rev. Financ. 
Stud..

Fama, Eugene F., French, Kenneth R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on 

stocks and bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 33 (1), 3–56.

Financial Stability Board, 2021. The Availability of Data with Which to Monitor and 

Assess Climate-Related Risks to Financial Stability. Report.

Financial Stability Board, Network for Greening the Financial System, 2022. Climate 
Scenario Analysis by Jurisdictions: Initial Findings and Lessons. Technical Report, 
Financial Stability Board, Network for Greening the Financial System.

Gandhi, Priyank, Lustig, Hanno, 2015. Size anomalies in U.S. bank stock returns. J. 

Gavriilidis, Konstantinos, 2021. Measuring climate policy uncertainty. Working Paper.
Howes,  Cooper,  Weitzner,  Gregory,  2018.  Bank  information  production  over  the 

Ilhan, Emirhan, Sautner, Zacharias, Vilkov, Grigory, 2020. Carbon tail risk. Rev. Financ. 

business cycle. Working Paper.

Stud. 34 (3), 1540–1571.

Ivanov, Ivan, Kruttli, Mathias S., Watugala, Sumudu W., 2021. Banking on carbon: 

Corporate lending and cap-and-trade policy. Working Paper.

Jung, Hyeyoon, Engle, Robert F., Ge, Shan, Zeng, Xuran, 2023. Physical Climate Risk 
Factors and an Application to Measuring Insurers’ Climate Risk Exposure. FRB of 
New York Staff Report No. 1066.

Kacperczyk, Marcin T., Peydro, Jose-Luis, 2021. Carbon emissions and the bank-lending 

Laeven,  Luc,  Popov,  Alexander,  2022.  Carbon  Taxes  and  the  Geography  of  Fossil 

channel. Working Paper.

Lending. Rochester, NY.

Liberti, José María, Sturgess, Jason, 2018. The anatomy of a credit supply shock: 
Evidence from an internal credit market. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 53 (2), 547–579.
Litterman,  Robert,  2021.  Selling  stranded  assets:  profit,  protection,  and  prosper-
ity.  https://www.intentionalendowments.org/selling_stranded_assets_profit_protecti
on_and_prosperity [Accessed: 2021].

McGlade, C., Ekins, P., 2015. The geographical distribution of fossil fuels unused when 

limiting global warming to 2 ◦c. Nat. 517, 187– 190.

Nakashima, Kiyotaka, Takahashi, Koji, 2018. The real effects of bank-driven termination 
of relationships: Evidence from loan-level matched data. J. Financ. Stab. 39 (C), 
46–65.

Nard, Gianluca De, Engle, Robert F., Kelly, Bryan, 2024. Factor-mimicking portfolios 

for climate risk. Financ. Anal. J. 80 (3), 37–58.

Nguyen, Quyen, Diaz-Rainey, Ivan, Kuruppuarachchi, Duminda, McCarten, Matthew, 
Tan, Eric K.M., 2023. Climate transition risk in U.S. loan portfolios: Are all banks 
the same? Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 85, 102401.

Pástor, L’uboš, Stambaugh, Robert F., Taylor, Lucian A., 2022. Dissecting green returns. 

J. Financ. Econ. 146 (2), 403–424.

Reinders, Henk Jan, Schoenmaker, Dirk, van Dijk, Mathijs, 2023. A finance approach 

to climate stress testing. J. Int. Money Financ. 131, 102797.

Sautner,  Zacharias,  Van  Lent,  Laurence,  Vilkov,  Grigory,  Zhang,  Ruishen,  2023. 

Firm-level climate change exposure. J. Financ. 78 (3), 1449–1498.

van der Ploeg, Frederick, Rezai, Armon, 2020. Stranded assets in the transition to a 

carbon-free economy. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 12 (1), 281–298.

H. Jung et al.

References

Acharya, Viral V., Brownlees, Christian T., Farazmand, Farhang, Richardson, Matthew, 
2011. Measuring systemic risk. In: Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and 
the New Architecture of Global Finance. (Chapter 4).

Acharya, Viral V., Engle, Robert F., Richardson, Matthew, 2012. Capital shortfall: A new 
approach to ranking and regulating systemic risks. Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. Proc. 
Acharya, Viral V., Pedersen, Lasse H., Philippon, Thomas, Richardson, Matthew, 2016. 

Measuring systemic risk. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (1), 2–47.

Adrian, Tobias, Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2016. CoVaR. Am. Econ. Rev. 106 (7), 

1705–1741.

Alekseev, Georgij, Giglio, Stefano, Maingi, Quinn, Selgrad, Julia, Stroebel, Johannes, 
2022. A quantity-based approach to constructing climate risk hedge portfolios. 
Working Paper.

Allen, Linda, Bali, Turan G., Tang, Yi, 2012. Does systemic risk in the financial sector 
predict future economic downturns? Rev. Financ. Stud. 25 (10), 3000–3036.
Barnett, Michael, 2019. A run on oil? The implications of climate policy and stranded 

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2018. Stress Testing Principles. Bank for 

assets risk. Working Paper.

International Settlements.

Battiston,  Stefano,  Mandel,  Antoine,  Monasterolo,  Irene,  Schütze,  Franziska, 
Visentin,  Gabriele,  2017.  A  climate  stress-test  of  the  financial  system.  Nat. 
Clim. Chang. 

Beck, Thorsten, Degryse, Hans, De Haas, Ralph, Van Horen, Neeltje, 2018. When arm’s 
length is too far: Relationship banking over the credit cycle. J. Financ. Econ. 127 
(1), 174–196.

Blickle,  Kristian  S.,  Parlatore,  Cecilia,  Saunders,  Anthony,  2021.  Specialization  in 

Banking. New York Fed Staff Report 53 (967).

Bolton, Patrick, Despres, Morgan, Pereira da Silva, Luiz Awazu, Samama, Frédéric, 
Svartzman, Romain, 2020. The Green Swan. Bank for International Settlements.
Bolton, Patrick, Kacperczyk, Marcin T., 2021. Do investors care about carbon risk? J. 

Bolton, Patrick, Kacperczyk, Marcin T., 2022. Global pricing of carbon-transition risk. 

Financ. Econ. 

J. Financ. 

Brainard, Lael, 2021. Building climate scenario analysis on the foundations of economic 
research.  10,  Speech  by  Governor  Lael  Brainard  at  the  2021  Federal  Reserve 
Stress  Testing  Research  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  Boston, 
Massachusetts (via webcast).

Brownlees, Christian T., Engle, Robert F., 2017. SRISK: A conditional capital shortfall 

index for systemic risk measurement. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Chava, Sudheer, 2014. Environmental externalities and cost of capital. Manag. Sci. 60 

(9), 2223–2247.

Correa, Ricardo, He, Ai, Herpfer, Christoph, Lel, Ugur, 2022. The rising tide lifts some 
interest rates: Climate change, natural disasters and loan pricing. Working Paper.
Delis, Manthos D., De Greiff, Kathrin, Ongena, Steven, 2019. Being stranded with fossil 
fuel reserves? Climate policy risk and the pricing of bank loans. Climate Policy 
Risk and the Pricing of Bank Loans (September 10, 2019). EBRD Working Paper 
231.

Engle, Robert F., 2002. Dynamic conditional correlation: A simple class of multivariate 
generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity models. J. Bus. Econom. 
Statist..

Engle,  Robert  F.,  2009.  Anticipating  Correlations:  A  New  Paradigm  for  Risk 

Management. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Engle, Robert F., 2016. Dynamic conditional beta. J. Financ. Econ..
Engle, Robert F., Campos-Martins, Susana, 2023. What are the events that shake our 
world? Measuring and hedging global COVOL. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (1), 221–242.

48 

