Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Economic links from bonds and cross-stock return predictability(cid:73)
Jian Feng a,b, Xiaolin Huo c, Xin Liu d, Yifei Mao e,∗, Hong Xiang f
a Peking University HSBC Business School, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, 518055, China
b Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China
c School of Insurance and Economics, University of International Business and Economics, No. 10 Huixing Dongjie, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100029, China
d Department of Finance and Business Economics, Faculty of Business Administration, University of Macau, Avenida da Universidade, Macao Special Administrative 
Region of China
e Leavey School of Business, Santa Clara University, Lucas Hall, 500 El Camino Real, Santa Clara, 95053, CA, United States
f School of Accounting and Finance, Faculty of Business, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of 
China

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Economic Links from Bonds and C
ross-Stock Return Predictability (Original data)

Keywords:
Market segmentation
Cross-asset information spillover
Economic linkage
Cross-firm return predictability
Bond rating comovement

1. Introduction

Identifying firms’ bond-market-specific economic links through credit-rating comovement of their corporate 
bonds, a long-short strategy for stocks based on these links generates a risk-adjusted alpha of 0.45% per 
month, which cannot be explained by existing economic links in the literature. Market segmentation between 
the equity and bond markets appears to be the underlying mechanism: (𝑖) The cross-return predictability is 
muted in the bond market; (𝑖𝑖) The cross-return predictability is mitigated in the presence of cross-holding 
investors; (𝑖𝑖𝑖) Equity analysts slowly incorporate information from rating-comovement links to their forecasts.

Firms are economically linked to each other through various types 
of relationships. If investors have limited attention, then the price of 
a firm would respond sluggishly to value-relevant news from firms 
to which it is linked economically, generating cross-firm return pre-
dictability.  Using  a  variety  of  proxies  for  interfirm  economic  links, 
existing  literature  has  documented  cross-firm  return  predictabilities 
among  firms  within  the  same  industries  (Moskowitz  and  Grinblatt, 
1999; Hou, 2007; Cohen and Lou, 2012; Huang, 2015), along supply 

chains (Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Menzly and Ozbas, 2010), within 
the  same  geographic  area  (Parsons  et  al.,  2020),  adopting  similar 
technologies (Lee et al., 2019), and sharing analyst coverage (Ali and 
Hirshleifer, 2020).

A central goal of this literature is to understand the frictions that 
prevent investors from fully appreciating the pricing implications of 
the economic links. In this paper, we study a novel channel of market 
friction that leads to equity market investors’ inattention to economic 
links from bond markets, namely, market segmentation across equities 
and bonds. Specifically, we propose credit-rating comovement, which

(cid:73)

Nikolai Roussanov was the editor for this article. We thank the anonymous reviewer, Philip Drummond, Haoyu Gao, Shingo Goto, Hui Guo, Allaudeen 
Hameed, Thang Ho, Shiyang Huang, Chanik Jo, Wei Li, Frank Weikai Li, Jinyu Liu, Dong Lou, Justin Murfin, David Ng, Xiaoran Ni, Xianhua Peng, Vesa 
Pursiainen, Zhigang Qiu, Hanwen Sun, Chi-Yang Tsou, Jianfeng Yu, Yanjie Wang, Ke Wu, Kun Zhao, Hong Zhang, Weinan Zheng, and seminar participants at 
2022 Financial Management Association Annual Meeting, 2022 Annual Meeting of Academy of Behavioral Finance & Economics, 2022 SWUFE Finance Doctoral 
Student Forum, the 2nd Credit Scoring and Credit Rating Conference, RUC-VUW Joint Virtual Research Workshop, 2022 China International Risk Forum, 2022 
Financial Management Association European Conference, 2022 Asian Finance Annual Conference, 2022 Asian Meeting of the Econometric Society in China, the 
4th Financial Engineering and Quantitative Finance Forum, the 6th PKU-NUS Annual International Conference on Quantitative Finance and Economics, 2022 
Financial Markets and Corporate Governance Conference, 2022 PKU-THU-RUC Joint Ph.D. Forum, Cornell University, Zhejiang University, Tsinghua University, 
Renmin University of China, UC Davis, University of Florida, Santa Clara University, University of Macau, and the University of Hong Kong for helpful comments. 
Xin Liu acknowledges financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China [NSFC Grant Numbers 72303226 and 72472154] , the Key Program 
of National Natural Science Foundation of China [NSFC Grant Number 72233003], and the research grant from the University of Macau [SRG2024-00051-FBA]. 
Hong Xiang acknowledges financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China [NSFC Grant Numbers 72495152 and 72495150]. All errors are 
our own.

E-mail addresses:  jianfeng9512@gmail.com (J. Feng), huoxl@uibe.edu.cn (X. Huo), liuxin@um.edu.mo (X. Liu), yifeimao0202@gmail.com (Y. Mao), 

∗ Corresponding author.

hong.xiang@polyu.edu.hk (H. Xiang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104110
Received 13 July 2022; Received in revised form 14 May 2025; Accepted 23 May 2025
Available online 27 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
J. Feng et al.

refers to the pattern that credit-ratings of economically related firms 
tend to comove, as a novel measure for economic links among firms.1 
We argue that such economic links identified from bond market in-
formation can generate cross-stock return predictability due to market 
segmentation. The rationales are as follows.

First, we expect that credit-rating comovement captures firms’ fun-
damental  linkages  since  credit  ratings—as  evaluations  provided  by 
rating agencies based on both qualitative and quantitative information 
of firms—are used to predict firms’ debt repayment ability and default 
probability. As a result, credit-rating updates reflect the opinions of 
credit rating agencies regarding changing firm fundamentals. Given the 
tendency towards comovement of fundamentals among firms with eco-
nomic links, there is likely to be credit-rating comovement regarding 
their corporate bonds. Thus, credit-rating comovement can serve as a 
measure for firms’ economic connections arising from the bond market.
Second, we argue that, though credit-rating comovement provides 
meaningful information about economic links among firms, this in-
formation  tends  to  be  overlooked  by  investors  and  analysts  in  the 
equity  market.  This  is  because  investor  attention  is  limited  due  to 
the segmentation between the equity market and the bond market. 
Abundant studies have discussed the lack of integration between equity 
and bond markets from several different perspectives; these include 
low correlation between the equity returns and bond returns at the 
firm level (Collin-Dufresn et al., 2001), different risk factors of the 
two markets (Chordia et al., 2017), different risk premiums of the risk 
factors (Choi and Kim, 2018), limits to arbitrage (Kapadia and Pu, 
2012), and the presence of heterogeneous investors (Chien et al., 2011). 
Therefore  integrating  information  from  the  two  markets  presents  a 
significant challenge. As Kevin Giddis, head of fixed income at the 
investment  banking  and  wealth  management  firm  Raymond  James 
Financial, told The Wall Street Journal, ‘‘there is obviously a separation 
between where the equity market sees the world and where the bond 
market sees the world’’.2

Furthermore, while Ali and Hirshleifer (2020) find shared analyst 
coverage is a unifying economic link that can explain many existing 
economic links, we argue that the economic links identified through 
credit-rating comovement should capture a novel perspective. This is 
because the focus of credit rating agencies is different from that of 
equity analysts, as debt and equity represent different claims to firms’ 
cash flows. Given that bond investors claim fixed incomes, credit rating 
agencies should be more concerned with default risks; given that equity 
investors claim residuals, equity analysts are likely to focus more on 
growth  options.  As  a  result,  the  economic  links  identified  through 
credit-rating comovement are likely to provide incremental information 
regarding the links identified through shared analyst coverage.

Based on the above rationales, we hypothesize that there is a signif-
icant cross-stock return predictability among firms connected through 
credit-rating comovement. Specifically, when value-relevant informa-
tion about a firm arrives and causes it to have a high (low) stock return, 
this information should be value-relevant for its economically linked 
firms as well. However, due to the segmentation between equity and 
bond markets, equity investors slowly react to this information. As a 
result, the linked firm will experience a high (low) stock return that is 
delayed, causing cross-firm return predictability in the equity market.

To  test  our  hypothesis,  we  start  by  constructing  the  economic 
links based on credit-rating comovement (dubbed by rating-comovement 
links, hereafter). First, we track the bond credit-rating update events 

1 Throughout  the  paper,  we  use  the  term  ‘‘credit-rating  comovement’’ 
and ‘‘rating comovement’’ interchangeably. We define two firms as having 
economic links if they have credit-rating comovement within a short window 
more than once in the past few years. Please refer to Section 3.1 for the specific 
criterion.

2 https://www.wsj.com/articles/bond-rally-suggests-the-stock-market-

honeymoon-is-on-borrowed-time-11549202400

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

of corporate bonds issued by US firms.3 We identify a credit-rating 
comovement between two firms if the ratings of their corporate bond 
issues are updated in the same direction within a calendar window of 
± 10 days. Second, in each month, we connect pairs of firms that had 
credit-rating comovements at least three times in the past three years. 
Through this procedure, a focal firm is linked to a portfolio of peer 
firms in each month.4

Our measure of the economic links has several important features 
for  cross-firm  predictability.  First,  a  credit-rating  update  is  salient 
information in the bond market because bond investors use it to form 
expectations about future cash flows and default risk. As shown by 
stylized empirical evidence, bond prices react significantly to credit 
rating  updates  (Grier  and  Katz,  1976;  Hand  et  al.,  1992;  Hite  and 
Warga, 1997; May, 2010). However, the market segmentation discussed 
above indicates that equity investors tend to overlook this information. 
Second,  since  the  linkage  is  constructed  on  a  monthly  basis  using 
historical public information, we can construct a tradeable cross-firm 
investment strategy to examine the lead–lag relation in stock prices 
without look-ahead biases.

We  proceed  to  verify  that  firms  connected  through  rating-
comovement links have correlated fundamentals. Intuitively, economic 
links from bond markets should not only capture firms’ commonalities 
in  upside  potentials  but  also  capture  the  commonalities  in  default 
probabilities. Thus, we examine two sets of fundamental variables: (𝑖) 
the growth rates in profitability, sales, earnings per share (EPS), and 
new capital, and (𝑖𝑖) changes in proxies for firm default probability, 
including  O-score  (Ohlson,  1980),  Z-score  (Altman,  1968),  and  the 
expected  default  frequency  (Merton,  1974;  Bharath  and  Shumway, 
2008). Panel regressions based on the two sets of fundamental vari-
ables suggest that the linked firms indeed have strong connections in 
fundamentals. This finding provides a building ground for cross-firm 
return predictability.

We then examine cross-firm return predictability among firms linked 
through rating comovement. To set the stage, for each focal firm in 
each month, we use average monthly returns from peer firms in that 
month (dubbed by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡) to measure the value-relevant information 
from rating-comovement links. Then, in each month, we sort all focal 
firms into quintile portfolios by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 and hold the portfolios over 
the subsequent month. We find strong cross-firm return predictability. 
The average portfolio returns monotonically increase from the bottom 
quintile to the top quintile in the holding period. In particular, a value-
weighted long-short portfolio that buys stocks in the top quintile and 
sells short stocks in the bottom quintile generates an average excess 
return  of  0.45%  per  month  (𝑡-statistic  =  3.20)  during  the  holding 
period of January 2001 through December 2019. More importantly, 
this result survives various risk adjustments. For example, after con-
trolling for Fama and French (2015) five factors and Carhart (1997) 
momentum factor (‘‘six-factor’’ hereafter), the long-short portfolio still 
earns a monthly alpha of 0.45% (𝑡-statistic = 3.47). In addition, we 
conduct Fama–MacBeth cross-sectional regressions and confirm that 
𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 positively and significantly forecasts one-month-ahead returns 
of focal firms after controlling for a set of prominent characteristics 
related to expected stock returns.

We argue that the above cross-firm return predictability essentially 
reflects slow information diffusion across economically linked firms. 
To clarify the prediction channel, we next investigate the direction 
of information flows and return predictability among firms connected 
through  rating-comovement  links.  Our  analysis  suggests  that  when 
common value-relevant information about the connected firms arrives 
at the market, such information is first incorporated into the stock 

3 Credit-rating update event refers to the point at which a credit rating 

agency assigns a credit rating to a bond issue.

4 We  consider  alternative  ways  to  identify  rating  comovement  links  in 

Section 6.3, and the results are qualitatively similar.

J. Feng et al.

prices of big firms (with a better information environment) and then 
diffuses to small firms (with a poorer information environment) with 
a delay, leading to a return lead–lag pattern that we observe in the 
previous portfolio analysis and Fama–MacBeth regressions.

To show that our novel cross-firm return predictability is not a redis-
covery of existing interfirm linkages, we conduct spanning regressions 
by controlling cross-firm return predictability effects (cross-firm mo-
mentums) from prior studies, including shared analyst momentum (Ali 
and Hirshleifer, 2020), industry momentum (Moskowitz and Grinblatt, 
1999), geographic momentum (Parsons et al., 2020), customer momen-
tum (Cohen and Frazzini, 2008), segment momentum (Cohen and Lou, 
2012), foreign information momentum (Huang, 2015), and technology 
momentum (Lee et al., 2019). After controlling for all these cross-firm 
return predictability effects, the long-short portfolio based on rating-
comovement links (rating-comovement momentum factor, hereafter) 
still earns a statistically significant and economically sizeable six-factor 
alpha. This suggests that the connection identified from credit-rating 
comovement captures a new dimension of economic linkage that has 
not been documented in prior literature.

We further investigate the nature of this new dimension of economic 
linkage, and find that rating-comovement linkages summarize a variety 
of concrete and specific firm relationships in the bond market. This 
is because interfirm relationships in the bond market essentially re-
flect connection in credit risks. As information intermediaries, credit 
rating  agencies  synthesize  the  information  in  the  bond  market  and 
update ratings in response to changes in firm creditworthiness. The 
connection in credit risks is ultimately converted into comovement in 
credit ratings. Thus, rating-comovement links can potentially summa-
rize various types of firm relationships arising from the bond market. 
To shed light on this point, we explore four concrete examples of firm 
economic relationships in the bond market: (𝑖) firms with direct trade-
credit relation; (𝑖𝑖) firms with common bank lenders; (𝑖𝑖𝑖) firms with 
common  corporate  bond  fund  owners;  (𝑖𝑣)  firms  with  shared  bond 
analysts. By combining them into one composite bond market cross-
momentum  factor  (the  composite  factor,  for  brevity),  we  show  that 
rating-comovement momentum factor has a significantly positive load-
ing on the composite factor, which confirms that rating comovement 
links indeed capture the aforementioned concrete firm relationships 
in bond markets.5 Moreover, we find rating comovement momentum 
factor can largely subsume the composite factor, but not vice versa. 
This suggests rating comovement is a sufficiently strong measure that 
can capture firm economic relationships in the bond market.

After showing the novel cross-firm return predictability based on 
rating-comovement links, we set out to investigate its underlying mech-
anism: Due to segmentation between bond and equity markets, equity 
investors overlook the economic links from bond markets, leading to 
a slow incorporation of value-relevant information from economically 
linked firms. We test four empirical predictions derived from this mar-
ket segmentation mechanism. First, the cross-predictability based on 
rating-comovement links should only exist in the equity market, not in 
the bond market. This is because the economic connection reflected by 
rating comovement is salient information to bond investors. As long as 
there is no market segmentation within the corporate bond market, any 
information embedded in the bond prices of peer firms will be quickly 
incorporated into the focal firm’s bond price. To test this prediction, 
for each month and for each focal firm, we compute the average bond 
returns from peer firms as the sorting variable and sort all focal firms 
into quintile portfolios. We compute portfolio alphas by adjusting for 
the corporate bond market factor. The long-short strategy that buys 
bonds in the top quintile and sells bonds in the bottom quintile yields 
an insignificant alpha of around 0.1% per month with a 𝑡-statistic less 
than 1.5. This result is consistent with the prediction that there exists 

5 At firm-pair level, we also find rating comovement links exhibit significant 

overlap with these four bond market-specific links.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

no robust cross-bond return predictability and serves as a placebo test 
to further strengthen our argument that market segmentation leads to 
cross-stock return predictability.

The second prediction is that the cross-stock return predictability 
should depend on the degree of market segmentation. That is, if there 
exist investors who own a significant portion of both the stock and 
the bonds of the focal firm (termed as dual holders, hereafter), the 
economic link between the focal firm and the peer firms is more likely 
to be revealed to the stock market; consequently, the sluggish stock 
price reaction between the peer firms and the focal firm should be 
largely mitigated. To identify dual holders empirically, we follow Chen 
et al. (2019) and define dual holders as asset management companies 
that  hold  more  than  1%  of  both  the  stock  and  the  bonds  from  a 
focal firm. We then perform a two-way sorting portfolio analysis based 
on 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 and on the existence of dual holders. Consistent with the 
prediction, the return predictability of 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 comes mainly from the 
subsample of focal firms without dual holders. This result is in the 
same spirit of Auh and Bai (2020), who argue that the organizational 
structure  of  mutual  fund  families  facilitates  information  integration 
between shareholders and creditors.

The third prediction regards how equity analysts update their be-
liefs  on  a  firm  in  response  to  value-relevant  information  from  its 
linked firms. An investigation into equity analysts’ belief-updating pro-
cess provides direct evidence on how market segmentation impedes 
cross-market information integration.6 Specifically, market segmenta-
tion arises due to differences in the nature of the job duties of equity 
analysts and of credit rating agencies: While credit rating agencies are 
more concerned with information about default risk, equity analysts 
are  more  focused  on  growth  options.  Thus,  we  expect  that  equity 
analysts will not pay close attention to information from linked firms 
until the information prevails in the stock market. Through regression 
analyses, we find 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 indeed significantly and positively predicts 
equity analysts’ consensus EPS forecast revisions on focal firms over 
the next month. This result also suggests that as a result of market seg-
mentation, shared equity analyst coverage (Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020) 
cannot explain return predictability from rating-comovement links.

We  further  strengthen  the  argument  that  credit  market  specific 
information leads to stock return predictability among connected firms, 
by using firms with risk-shifting problem as a testing ground. That is, 
potential risk-shifting on high default probability firms could generate 
opposite effects on the firms’ equity values and debt values and distort 
the positive association in equity values among linked firms. As a result, 
rating-comovement momentum would be muted among a sub-sample 
of firm links that are inclined to risk-shifting, and it should remain 
significant among other firm links. We indeed find consistent evidence 
for this conjecture, which highlights the nature of rating-comovement 
links as capturing inter-firm connections in the bond markets.

Finally, we examine the dynamics of rating-comovement links, rat-
ing heterogeneity, and alternative empirical specifications to further 
explore the information content of rating comovement and corroborate 
our main findings.

Our paper is mainly related to two strands of literature. First, there 
is a growing literature on cross-firm return predictability for firms with 
different  economic  connections.7  Unlike  existing  interfirm  linkages, 
which are mainly factual or contractual information extracted from 

6 Since analysts do not suffer from any trading frictions in issuing forecasts, 
the results here also help rule out the possibility that trading frictions drive 
our main findings.

7 Prior  literature  has  discovered  cross-firm  return  predictability  among 
various types of firm economic linkages, such as firms in the same indus-
try (Moskowitz and Grinblatt, 1999; Hou, 2007; Hoberg and Phillips, 2018), 
customer–supplier firms (Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Menzly and Ozbas, 2010), 
conglomerate and standalone firms in the same industry (Cohen and Lou, 
2012), firms with common ownership (Anton and Polk, 2014; Bartram et al., 
2015;  Yu,  2022),  multinational  firms  and  foreign  firms  operating  in  the 

3 

J. Feng et al.

public sources (such as annual reports), a credit-rating change is a 
purely market-based signal that reflects the professional judgment of 
credit rating agencies on default risks and that arises from their inde-
pendent analyses of both public and nonpublic information. Therefore, 
credit-rating comovement provides a different angle for identifying eco-
nomic connections among firms. Indeed, cross-predictability generated 
from credit-rating comovement cannot be merely explained by any of 
the existing interfirm linkages.

Second, we complement the literature by emphasizing market seg-
mentation  as  the  main  friction  that  hampers  equity  investors  from 
obtaining economic connections in the corporate bond market. In par-
ticular, our argument is based primarily on the common observation 
that  the  equity  market  and  the  corporate  bond  market  are  largely 
disconnected and have different sets of investors (Duarte et al., 2007; 
Kapadia and Pu, 2012; Choi and Kim, 2018). In this sense, our findings 
are broadly consistent with the theoretical literature on how market 
segmentation and limited information affect asset prices (e.g., Merton, 
1987; Hong and Stein, 1999).

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2 
presents  the  hypotheses  development.  Section  3  describes  the  data 
and methodology. Section 4 presents our main results on the cross-
firm return predictability. Section 5 explores the underlying mechanism 
behind our results. Section 6 conducts further investigations on the 
information content of rating-comovement links. Section 7 concludes.

2. Hypotheses development

The lead–lag relation in stock returns documented in our paper is 
motivated by two important elements in the financial markets. First, as 
with any lead–lag relation, we identify an economic link that groups 
firms by their sensitivity to common fundamental shocks. In this pa-
per, we identify such commonality from the bond market, utilizing 
credit-rating comovements (see Section 2.1 for more details on the 
informational contents of credit rating updates). Second, the common-
ality in firm fundamentals identified from the bond market should not
generate substantial attention to stock investors. That is, even though 
stock investors follow news updates at the level of individual firms, 
they largely overlook the fundamental connections between pairs of 
firms. This limited attention is driven by the segmentation between the 
stock market (where investors trade) and the bond market (where the 
commonality is identified). This argument is consistent with the obser-
vation that investors in the stock market may have limited ability to 
evaluate the information in other markets, particularly information in 
the bond market, due to market segmentation or specialization (Menzly 
and Ozbas, 2010).

In the two sections below (Section 2.1 and Section 2.2), we first 
explain why we can identify firms with common fundamentals through 
credit-rating comovements, and we then discuss what leads to market 
segmentation between the stock market and the bond market. Com-
bining these two points, we reach the key hypothesis: Firms connected 
through credit-rating comovement share commonalities in fundamen-
tals; However, stock investors overlook the economic link arising from 
the bond market due to market segmentation; As a result, stock in-
vestors underreact to the value-relevant information from economically 
linked firms, leading to cross-stock return predictability.

same industry (Huang, 2015), firms in the same geographic area (Parsons 
et  al.,  2020;  Jin  and  Li,  2020),  firms  with  strategic  alliance  (Cao  et  al., 
2016), firms with shared analyst coverage (Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020), firms 
with  similar  technologies  (Lee  et  al.,  2019),  and  firms  with  production 
complementarity (Lee et al., 2024).

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

2.1. Credit-rating comovements and common fundamentals

Credit rating agencies (CRAs) serve as information intermediaries 
that aim to mitigate the information asymmetry between borrowers 
(i.e., issuers) and lenders (i.e., investors) in the financial market. Specif-
ically, information asymmetry induces two types of problems. First, 
prior  to  lending,  borrowers  are  more  likely  than  lenders  to  know 
whether a loan will be repaid. This could lead to adverse selection 
problems.  Second,  after  the  lender  has  made  a  loan,  the  borrower 
may take actions that reduce the likelihood of repayment; these are 
called moral hazard problems. These two problems are at the heart of 
a borrower–lender relationship, and CRAs play an important role in 
mitigating the problems.

Critical to fulfilling CRAs’ role as information intermediaries is their 
ability to provide creditworthiness advisory services to the financial 
market. The primary credit advisory service provided by CRAs is their 
issuance of credit ratings. As described by Standard and Poor’s (S&P), 
‘‘credit ratings are forward-looking opinions about the ability and will-
ingness of debt issuers, like corporations or governments, to meet their 
financial obligations on time and in full’’.8 Credit ratings are typically 
in the form of a letter grade (e.g., AAA, B, CC), which represents the 
CRAs’ judgment on the creditworthiness of the bond issuer.

After assigning a credit rating, CRAs may update it if they perceive 
market-wide or issuer-specific changes that could impact the credit risk 
of firms. These updates fall into three categories: firstly, a reduction 
in  credit  risk  leads  to  credit  upgrades;  secondly,  an  escalation  in 
credit risk results in credit downgrades; and thirdly, if the credit risk 
remains unchanged, CRAs will issue an affirmation of the existing credit 
ratings.9 Credit-rating affirmations are similar to reiterations of ana-
lysts’ recommendations, which could lead to reductions in information 
uncertainty (Chen et al., 2017).10

CRAs use all available information to determine credit ratings. It is 
worth noting that CRAs have access to private information unavailable 
to equity analysts. This is because CRAs are exempt from Regulation 
Fair Disclosure (FD), which was implemented on October 23, 2000. 
FD prohibits U.S. public companies from releasing private information 
to investment professionals. FD, however, allows disclosure of private 
information to CRAs. As stated at S&P’s 2002 public hearing, ‘‘It is 
common during the credit rating process and ongoing surveillance for 
companies to provide S&P’s with nonpublic information, such as bud-
gets and forecasts, financial statements on a standalone basis, internal 
capital allocation schedules, contingent risks analyses and information 
relating to new financings, acquisitions, dispositions and restructur-
ings’’.11  Consistent  with  the  information  advantage  that  CRAs  have 
relative to equity analysts after Regulation FD, Jorion et al. (2005) 
show that rating changes cause larger stock price movements after 
Regulation FD was adopted.

Having access to both public and private information provides CRAs 
with  a  competitive  edge  when  assessing  companies  in  the  market. 
CRAs consolidate information and communicate their assessments of 

8 See  https://www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/about/understanding-credit-

ratings.

9 According to Moody’s Rating Symbols and Definitions (May 2023),‘‘an 
Affirmation is a public statement that the current Credit Rating assigned to an 
issuer or debt obligation, which is not currently under review, continues to 
be appropriately positioned’’. and ‘‘a Confirmation is a public statement that a 
previously announced review of a rating has been completed without a change 
to the rating’’. For simplicity, we refer to these public announcements of no 
changes in credit ratings as ‘‘rating affirmations’’. See Moody’s Rating Symbols 
and Definitions (May 2023) for more information.
10 For  a  rating  affirmation  example,  see  Fitch  affirms  the  credit 
rating  of  Midcap  on  April  4,  2023.  News  is  available  at  https:
//www.fitchratings.com/research/non-bank-financial-institutions/fitch-
affirms-idr-of-midcap-at-bb-outlook-stable-04-04-2023.

11 https://www.sec.gov/news/extra/credrate/standardpoors.htm

J. Feng et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

Fig. 1.  Distribution of rating update time. Panel (a) plots the distribution of day-of-the-month of credit-rating updates. Panel (b) plots the distribution of month-of-the-year of 
credit-rating updates. The sample period is 1998–2019.

companies by assigning credit ratings. Hence, their updates on credit 
ratings signify the arrival of significant information that prompts them 
to reevaluate the company.

Credit-rating updates provide us with an opportunity to identify 
firms with common fundamentals. This is because when two firms share 
common fundamentals, they are susceptible to similar economic shocks 
that may lead to changes in credit risk. As a result, these firms tend to 
be reviewed by CRAs at similar times and thus to receive concurrent 
credit-rating updates. For simplicity, we call the concurrent updates of 
credit ratings within a brief time span ‘‘credit-rating comovements’’.

The challenge of using credit-rating comovements to identify firms 
with common fundamentals is that we may capture unrelated firms 
whose credit ratings accidentally comove. To overcome the challenge, 
we use repeated credit-rating comovements. Intuitively, while unrelated 
firms may experience occasional credit rating comovement by chance, 
it  is  more  probable  that  related  firms  will  consistently  experience 
repeated credit-rating comovements.

We  find  that  credit-rating  updates  in  the  market  are  consistent 
with the above assumption. First, we show that credit-rating updates 
do not cluster at a particular day-of-the-month or month-of-the-year 
(Fig.  1). Second, we find that firms do not appear to have frequent 
credit-rating updates on a regular basis: an average firm experiences a 
credit rating update every 297 days, with a standard deviation of 304 
days. In summary, the observed credit-rating update pattern indicates 
that, due to their dispersed and unpredictable nature, repeated credit-
rating comovements are more likely to occur among firms with shared 
fundamentals.

Based on the above rationale, we argue that firms with repeated 
credit-rating comovements are connected in fundamentals. In Section 3, 
we discuss in detail the specific criterion we use to identify firms with 
common fundamentals, and we verify in Section 4.1 and Section 5.1 
that the firms we identified using repeated rating comovements are 
indeed firms with common fundamentals.

5 

J. Feng et al.

2.2. Market segmentation

Our argument relies on the empirical fact that the stock market 
and the bond market are largely disintegrated. This observation can be 
supported from three perspectives: institutional details, informational 
frictions,  and  risk  preferences.  To  start,  the  stock  market  and  the 
bond market have very different institutional details. First, investor 
composition in the two markets is completely different. From a macro 
perspective, according to Federal Reserve Flow of Funds (Z.1), in 2022, 
the US household sector was the largest holder of corporate equities, 
while life insurance companies and mutual funds were the top two 
domestic holders of corporate bonds.12 From a micro perspective, this 
separation of investors can also be observed within financial institu-
tions. Auh and Bai (2020) report that for every 100 firms held by equity 
funds in a fund family, only 13 have bonds held by bond funds in the 
same family. Second, anecdotal evidence suggests that, among financial 
institutions, there is a large operational gap between equity and bond 
investments. Auh and Bai (2020) interview several fund managers from 
large investment companies; interviewees claimed that the equity side 
and the fixed-income side use two completely different systems, and are 
often strictly separated with independent boards of trustees and fund 
managers. Finally, the positions of equity analysts and credit analysts 
are separated and require different skill sets. According to the CFA 
Institute, ‘‘credit analysts focus on analyzing bonds and default risk, 
while equity analysts assess investment performance or management 
performance’’.13 To sum up, as Kevin Giddis, head of fixed income at 
the investment banking and wealth management firm Raymond James 
Financial, told The Wall Street Journal, ‘‘There is obviously a separation 
between where the equity market sees the world and where the bond 
market sees the world’’.

Second, significant informational frictions exist between the stock 
market and the bond market. In other words, stock investors and bond 
investors of the same firm have different information sets. One impor-
tant indicator for such informational frictions is the low correlation 
between stock returns and bond returns at the firm level (Collin-Dufresn 
et al., 2001; Blanco et al., 2005). These empirical results are in contrast 
to the implication of Merton’s (1974) structural model, in which stock 
price and credit spread changes must be precisely related. Kapadia and 
Pu (2012) argue that this low correlation is partially the result of the 
disintegration of the two markets due to limits to arbitrage. In addition 
to the low correlation phenomenon, cross-asset return predictability 
can also serve as further evidence of informational frictions. At the 
stock level, Gebhardt et al. (2005) document a momentum spillover 
from equities to investment-grade corporate bonds of the same firm, 
consistent with the notion that stocks lead bonds in reflecting infor-
mation. At the aggregate level, Li et al. (2023) show that the first and 
third cross-sectional moments of corporate bond returns significantly 
and  positively  predict  future  stock  market  returns,  especially  when 
the lack of integration between the two markets is more severe. They 
argue that this phenomenon arises because bond traders have valuable 
information for future aggregate firm fundamentals and real economic 
activities that are not yet reflected in the stock market. Overall, both 
the low correlation between the two asset markets and the cross-asset 
return  predictability  lend  support  to  the  existence  of  informational 
frictions, further justifying the disintegration between stock and bond 
markets.

Finally, stock and bond investors have different risk preferences. If 
the stock market and bond market were integrated, the same set of 
risk factors should appear in both markets and their respective risk 
premia should be largely similar in magnitude. However, this is not 
the case. Chordia et al. (2017) find that many stock characteristics do 

12 See L.213 (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/release/tables?rid=52&eid=808044
) and L.223 (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/release/tables?rid=52&eid=808373)
13 https://shorturl.at/mGTU8

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

not impact bond returns, while some others (such as one-month lagged 
stock return and profitability) have the opposite impact on bonds. In 
addition, Choi and Kim (2018) find that, even for factors with the same 
directional predictability in both markets, the risk premia in the bond 
market tend to be too large compared to their equity counterparts. 
Overall, the pervasive evidence that risk factors do not consistently 
price the cross-section of equity and corporate bond returns further 
justifies the disintegration between the stock and bond markets.

Based on the above rationale, we argue that there exists a significant 
segmentation across equity and bond markets; consequently, equity 
investors could overlook firms’ economic linkages that arise from bond 
market information.

3. Data and methods

3.1. Bond data and construction of rating comovement link

The  primary  data  used  to  construct  the  rating-comovement  link 
are historical bond ratings from the Mergent Fixed Income Securities 
Database (FISD) database. At the time each bond rating is updated, 
FISD records the bond identifier, the date of the rating update, the 
credit rating, and the credit rating agency. We use individual bond 
ratings provided by S&P, Moody’s, and Fitch, and we focus on bonds 
issued by US companies that can be matched to the Center for Research 
in Security Prices (CRSP) database.

To  construct  rating-comovement  firm  linkage,  we  connect  firms 
whose bond ratings tend to move in the same direction. To this end, 
for each rating update, we convert the credit ratings into numerical 
rating values and calculate the change in numerical rating between a 
bond’s two consecutive rating updates.14 Since credit-rating agencies 
usually update ratings on bonds of the same issuer on the same day, 
we aggregate bond-rating updates into the issuer-by-date level. Specif-
ically, if an issuer’s bonds receive rating updates on a given day, we 
compute the issuer-level rating change as the mean of the numerical 
rating change across the issuer’s bond issues. We consider two issuers 
to have a ‘‘rating comovement’’ if their issuer-level rating changes in the 
same direction within a calendar window of ± 10 days. For each month, 
we consider two firms to be connected through rating-comovement firm 
linkage if they experienced rating comovements at least three times in 
the past 36 months. For each focal firm 𝑖 in each month 𝑡, we proxy for 
the common value-relevant information arriving at its connected firms 
as the equal-weighted average stock returns of the peer firms (firm 𝑗
belonging to the set of 𝑁 peer firms) in this month15 : 

𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 =

1
𝑁

𝑗

∑

𝑅𝑗,𝑡.

(1)

We  combine  the  data  of  corporate  bond  returns  from  different 
databases. We use bond prices from the Trade Reporting and Compli-
ance Engine (TRACE) enhanced database and the DataStream database. 
Specifically, TRACE provides bond transaction data starting from July 
2002.16 We also use bond prices from the DataStream database, in 
which bond prices are mostly dealer quotes. We merge corporate bond 
pricing data with that from the FISD database and apply several filters 
that are standard in the literature: (i) remove bonds issued under the 
144A rule; (ii) remove bonds that do not trade in US dollars; (iii) 
require the coupon type to be fixed or zero; (iv) require bond type 

14 The numerical rating value increases with credit-rating risk: 1 = AAA, 2 
= AA+, . . . , 22 = D.
15 We can more precisely measure the common value-relevant information 
on the connected firms by using the returns of a portfolio of peer firms, since 
the firm-specific component of stock returns will be largely canceled out at 
portfolio-level.
16 We follow Dick-Nielsen (2014) to clean the TRACE transaction data; this 
procedure mainly corrects for data errors such as cancellations, corrections, 
and reversals in the trade reports by dealers.

6 

J. Feng et al.

in  US  Corporate  Debentures  or  US  Corporate  Medium  Term  Notes 
(Mergent FISD bond types CDEB, CMTN, CMTZ, or CZ); (v) exclude 
any remaining bonds that are convertible, asset-backed, pay-in-kind, or 
part of unit deals. Finally, we exclude bond-month observations with 
less than one year of maturity in the empirical analysis.

We use bond returns calculated from the TRACE and DataStream 
databases. For TRACE data, we compute the bond return in month 𝑡 as 
follows: 

𝑅𝑖,𝑡 =

𝑃𝑖,𝑡 + 𝐴𝐼𝑖,𝑡 + 𝐶𝑖,𝑡
𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝐴𝐼𝑖,𝑡−1

− 1.

(2)

𝑃𝑖,𝑡 is the bond clean price at the end of month 𝑡, 𝐴𝐼𝑖,𝑡 is accrued interest 
at the end of month 𝑡, and 𝐶𝑖,𝑡 is any coupon payment between the 
end of month 𝑡 − 1 and the end of month 𝑡. Following Bessembinder 
et al. (2008), the daily clean price is computed as the volume-weighted 
average of intraday prices. Then, we consider two scenarios for defining 
monthly returns: (i) returns from the end of month 𝑡 − 1 to the end 
of month 𝑡, and (ii) returns from the beginning of month 𝑡 to the end 
of month 𝑡. In particular, the end (beginning) of a month refers to 
the latest (earliest) day with trading records within the last (first) five 
trading days of a month. If both types of returns are available for a 
bond-month, we use the first one. For DataStream data, we compute 
monthly bond returns as the monthly percentage change in the total 
return index of each bond provided by DataStream. If both the TRACE 
return  and  the  DataStream  return  are  available  for  a  bond-month, 
we use the TRACE return. To estimate risk-adjusted corporate bond 
returns, we follow Dickerson et al. (2023) and use a corporate bond 
market CAPM model, where the corporate bond market factor return is 
computed as value-weighted sample corporate bond returns minus the 
risk-free rate.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

quarter-end, we compute equity ownership by each asset management 
company as the total number of shares held by the asset management 
company divided by the number of total shares outstanding. For the 
outstanding  bonds  of  each  issuer  at  each  quarter-end,  we  compute 
issuer-level bond ownership by each asset management company as 
the total par value amount of bonds held by the asset management 
company divided by the total par value offering amount of these bonds. 
Finally, we define an asset management company as a dual holder of a 
firm if it has more than 1% equity ownership and more than 1% bond 
ownership on the firm.

In addition to rating-comovement firm linkage, we construct a set 
of equity market firm linkages following prior literature (e.g., shared-
analyst link of Ali and Hirshleifer (2020)) and several novel bond-
market firm linkages. Detailed descriptions of the construction of these 
firm linkages are in Internet Appendix Section B.

3.3. Summary statistics

Table  1 provides summary statistics on the sample firms and the 
characteristics of rating comovement link during 2001–2019. An im-
portant feature of firms in our sample is that they are, on average, large 
firms with value-tilt. For example, both the focal firms and peer firms 
in our sample are on average above the 70th size percentile of NYSE 
stocks. This is partially because the ratings of large firms are updated 
more often. One can see that an average firm receives a rating update 
less than once per year; thus, an average firm is not likely to form a 
rating-comovement firm linkage by chance. It is also worth noting that 
the mean/median number of peer firms connected to a focal firm in a 
month is 27/7, which is much smaller than the number of peer firms 
detected in the typical common industry firm linkage.17

3.2. Stock and other data

4. Return predictability

The sample stocks contain common stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, 
and Nasdaq. The sample period is from January 2001 through De-
cember 2019 due to the availability of bond data from TRACE. We 
use stock prices from CRSP database and firm financial information 
from Compustat database. In the empirical analyses on stock return 
predictability, we exclude stocks with share prices below $1 and stocks 
with market capitalizations below the NYSE 10th percentile value to 
mitigate the effects of liquidity. In the empirical analysis, we control for 
a set of firm characteristics. Size is measured by the natural logarithm 
of market capitalization. Book-to-market ratio (BM) is the ratio of book 
equity to the market value of equity. Reversal (RVSL) and momentum 
(MOM)  refer  to  the  past  one-month  return  and  past  twelve-month 
returns (skipping the most recent month), respectively. Asset growth 
(AG) is measured by year-to-year percentage change in total assets. 
Gross profitability (GP) is measured by revenue minus cost of goods 
sold, scaled by total assets.

In the analysis of equity analyst forecast revisions, we use consensus 
analyst forecasts on Fiscal Year One EPS of US firms from the Unad-
justed Summary Statistics dataset of the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate 
System (I/B/E/S) database. Firms in the I/B/E/S database are linked 
to the CRSP database through ICLink file from Wharton Research Data 
Services (WRDS). We define consensus analyst forecast revision in a 
month as the mean/median of consensus EPS forecast value in this 
month minus that in the previous month, scaled by the share price at 
the previous month-end.

To identify institutions that are dual holders of a firm’s equity and 
its bonds, we use equity mutual fund holding data from the Thomson 
Reuters S12 Holding (S12) database and corporate bond mutual fund 
holding data from Morningstar. The funds in S12 database are linked 
to the CRSP Mutual Fund Database (MFDB) through MFlink files from 
WRDS,  and  the  funds  in  Morningstar  are  linked  to  MFDB  through 
Ticker. We use the management company code from MFDB to identify 
the asset management companies of the funds. For each stock at each 

In  this  section,  we  turn  to  the  main  results  of  the  paper.  We 
first confirm that firms connected through rating-comovement links 
share commonalities in fundamentals (Section 4.1). We then exam-
ine the return predictability based on rating-comovement links (Sec-
tion 4.2). Finally, we investigate the direction of information flows and 
rating-comovement momentum (Section 4.3).

4.1. Fundamentals comovement

We start by examining whether firms connected through rating-
comovement links share commonality in their fundamentals. To this 
end, we perform regression analysis at focal-firm-by-year level obser-
vations. We regress the focal firm’s change in a fundamental variable 
in a given year on the average value of contemporaneous change in 
the fundamental variable of its peer firms, controlling for focal-firm 
fixed effects and year fixed effects. A positively significant coefficient 
estimate would suggest a comovement in fundamentals between a focal 
firm and its peer firms.

We focus on two sets of fundamental variables here: (𝑖) growth 
of  firm  profit,  sales,  earnings,  and  capital;  and  (𝑖𝑖)  change  in  firm 
default probability measures. For the first set of variables, we include: 
𝛥Profit, which is the year-to-year change in operating income before 
depreciation, scaled by total assets; 𝛥Sales, which is the year-to-year 
change in sales scaled by total assets; 𝛥EPS, which is the year-to-year 
change in EPS standardized by the lagged stock price; and New Capital, 
which is defined as the sum of net equity issuance plus net debt issuance 
scaled  by  lagged  total  assets.  For  the  second  set  of  variables,  we 

17 Under Fama–French 48 industry classification, a focal firm was connected, 
on average, to 243 industry peer firms during 2001–2019. This comparison 
suggests rating-comovement links are not likely to be formed under waves of 
industry-wide or macroeconomic shocks.

7 

J. Feng et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

Table 1
Summary statistics.

  Firm characteristics:
  Focal firm size (NYSE percentile)
  Peer firm average size (NYSE percentile)
  Focal firm BM
  Peer firm average BM
  Focal firm numeric credit rating
  Peer firm average numeric credit rating

Mean

SD

P25

P50

0.71
0.77
0.75
0.88
9.54
9.25

0.24
0.14
0.82
0.72
3.43
2.29

0.55
0.72
0.32
0.58
7.00
7.98

0.78
0.80
0.58
0.71
9.00
8.80

P75  

0.90  
0.86  
0.91  
0.96  
12.00 
10.25 

7.00
0.00
0.00

2.00
0.00
0.00

27.37
0.79
1.05

48.75
1.79
2.03

  Rating-comovement link:
27.00 
  # Peer firms
1.00  
  # Rating updates per year (firms with ≥ 1 rating update)
2.00  
  # Rating updates per year (focal and peer firms)
This table reports summary statistics. Statistics on firm characteristics are generated based on focal-firm-
by-month level observations of the sample period of Jan 2001 through Dec 2019. Firm-month observations 
with stock prices smaller than $1 or market capitalization smaller than the NYSE 10th percentile value are 
excluded. For a focal firm in a given month, we compute the average value of the characteristics of its peer 
firms (peer-firm average characteristics), and we count the number of peer firms connected to the focal 
firm in the month as # Peer firms. Size is market capitalization. BM is the book-to-market ratio. Numeric 
credit-rating increases with credit risk (1 = AAA, 2 = AA+, . . . , 10 = BBB−, . . . , 22 = D). A firm’s numeric 
credit rating in a month is computed as the average numeric credit rating of its outstanding corporate bond 
issues. The statistics on rating update frequency are produced based on firm-year level observations in the 
sample period of 1998 through 2019. For each firm in each year, # Rating updates per year is the number 
of times the firms’ bond issues were updated in this year (0 indicates no rating update). We report the 
frequency of rating updates based on the sample of firms with at least one rating update separately from 
those based on the sample of focal and peer firms in the rating-comovement linkage.

consider: 𝛥O-score, which is year-to-year change in O-score of Ohlson 
(1980); 𝛥Z-score, which is year-to-year change in Z-score of Altman 
(1968); and 𝛥EDF, which is year-to-year change in expected default 
frequency (EDF). EDF is the implied default probability from Merton 
(1974) distance-to-default model, and it is estimated following Bharath 
and Shumway (2008). One can see that the second set of variables on 
default probability is relatively more important for bond investors.

Table  2 reports the regression results. Panel A shows that there 
is indeed a significant contemporaneous relation between focal and 
peer firms in terms of growth in profit, sales, earnings, and capital. 
For example, column (1) indicates a one-percentage-point increase in 
the average operating profit of peer firms is associated with a con-
temporaneous increase of 0.365% in the focal firm’s operating profit 
(𝑡 = 5.77). Panel B shows that focal and peer firms also exhibit a 
significant contemporaneous correlation in the probability of default. 
For instance, Column (3) suggests that a one-percentage-point increase 
in the average expected default frequency of peer firms translates into 
a 0.226% increase in the expected default frequency of focal firms.

Overall, results here confirm that firms connected through rating-
comovement  links  indeed  share  commonalities  in  fundamentals.  In 
particular, rating-comovement links not only capture firms’ common-
alities in sales and profit growth but also capture firms’ commonalities 
in default probability, a perspective that is of particular importance to 
bond investors. More importantly, as we will discuss in more detail 
in Section 5.1, rating-comovement links capture a variety of concrete 
firm relationships arising from the bond market, such as firms with 
direct trade credit relations, common bank lenders, common corporate 
bond fund owners, and shared bond analysts. All these relationships 
are specific and important in the bond market, and are distinct from 
existing firm linkages in the literature.

4.2. Portfolio analysis and Fama-MacBeth regressions

We  proceed  to  test  the  cross-stock  return  predictability  among 
firms connected through rating-comovement links. The rationales are 
as follows. Due to the segmentation between the equity market and the 
bond market, the economic link arising from the corporate bond market 
is not salient to equity investors. Therefore, value-relevant information 
about one firm only diffuses slowly into the stock price of its connected 
firms. As a result, there should be a cross-stock return predictability.

To test this return predictability, we start with a univariate portfolio 
sorting analysis. Specifically, at the end of each month, we sort all 
focal firms into quintile portfolios by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡, which is the average 
stock return of their peer firms in the same month. We hold the equal-
weighted or value-weighted portfolios over the next month and track 
the average monthly portfolio returns and alphas in the holding period 
of January 2001 through December 2019.18 In addition, we construct a 
long-short strategy that buys stocks in the top quintile and sells stocks 
in the bottom quintile.

Table   3  presents  the  cross-stock  return  predictability  results.  In 
all columns, the average portfolio returns increase monotonically in 
accordance with the past returns of peer firms. For example, in terms 
of  value-weighted  portfolio  returns  (Panel  A),  stocks  in  the  lowest 
𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 quintile earn an average excess return of 0.61% per month, 
while  the  average  excess  return  from  stocks  in  the  top  quintile  is 
1.06% per month. The long-short portfolio yields an average return 
of 0.45% per month (𝑡 = 3.20). Moreover, this result survives various 
risk adjustments. For example, the value-weighted long-short portfolio 
alpha under Fama and French (2015) five-factor model augmented with 
a  momentum  factor  (six-factor  alpha)  is  0.45%  (𝑡 = 3.47).  Similar 
results are obtained using equal-weighted portfolio returns. The equal-
weighted FF5+UMD alpha from the long-short portfolio is 0.56% (𝑡 =
4.65). It is worth noting that the sample stocks are generally large firms 
with an average market capitalization above the 70th size percentile 
of NYSE stocks. We also exclude small-caps and penny stocks from the 
portfolio analysis. Thus, liquidity issues should not be a severe concern.
The above results from portfolio analysis support the stock return 
predictability based on rating-comovement link. The primary advan-
tage of the portfolio analysis is that it provides a simple picture of 
how  average  returns  from  focal  firms  vary  across  the  spectrum  of 
past returns from peer firms without imposing a functional form on 
the relations. However, in the portfolio analysis, we cannot directly 
control for other well-documented firm characteristics that affect stock 
returns  in  the  cross  section.  Therefore,  we  perform  Fama–MacBeth 

18 When forming the value-weighted portfolio, we follow (Jensen et al., 
2023) to winsorize the stock market capitalizations above the NYSE 80th 
percentile value in the same month. This winsorization in portfolio weight 
is to avoid portfolio returns being dominated by a few mega-cap stocks. The 
results are robust if we do not winsorize the portfolio weight.

8 

 
 
 
 
 
J. Feng et al.

Table 2
Fundamentals comovement.
  Panel A: Growth Comovement

(1)
𝛥Profit

0.365***
(5.77)

  DepVar:
  Peer 𝛥Profit

  Peer 𝛥Sales

  Peer 𝛥EPS

  Peer New Capital

Y
Y

Y
Y

  Firm FE
  Time FE
  No. Obs.
5,681
  Adj. R2
0.191
  Panel B: Default Probability Comovement
(2)
𝛥Z-score

(1)
𝛥O-score

5,620
0.113

0.098**
(2.39)

0.114**
(2.36)

  DepVar:
  Peer 𝛥O-score

  Peer 𝛥Z-score

  Peer 𝛥EDF

(2)
𝛥Sales

(3)
𝛥EPS

(4)
New Capital 

0.163**
(2.72)

0.110***
(3.82)

Y
Y

5,154
0.117

0.089***
(8.16)

Y
Y

5,678
0.103

(3)
𝛥EDF

0.226***
(5.52)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5,672
0.172

4,321
0.025

  Firm FE
  Time FE
  No. Obs.
4,290
  Adj. R2
0.171
This table reports results from panel regressions of focal firms’ fundamental variables 
on the average value of its peer firms’ contemporaneous fundamental variables. The 
unit of observation is at the firm-by-year level, and the sample period is from 2001 
to  2019.  Panel  A  reports  results  based  on  fundamental  variables  concerning  firm 
growth.  In  column  (1),  profitability  is  measured  by  the  operating  income  before 
depreciation (Compustat item: OIBDP). 𝛥Profit in a given year is defined as the change 
in profitability from the previous year to the current year, scaled by total assets. In 
column (2), 𝛥Sales is the year-to-year change in sales scaled by total assets. In column 
(3), 𝛥EPS is the year-to-year change in EPS standardized by the lagged stock price. 
In column (4), new capital is defined as the sum of net equity issuance plus net debt 
issuance scaled by lagged total assets. Peer 𝛥Profit is the average profit growth among 
peer firms in the same year. Peer 𝛥Sales is the average sales growth among peer firms 
in the same year. Peer 𝛥EPS is the average EPS growth among peer firms in the same 
year. Peer 𝛥New Capital is the average new capital among peer firms in the same 
year. Panel B reports results based on fundamental variables concerning default risk. In 
column (1), 𝛥O-score is the year-to-year change in O-score of Ohlson (1980). In column 
(2), 𝛥Z-score is the year-to-year change in Z-score of Altman (1968). In column (3), 
𝛥EDF is year-to-year change in expected default frequency estimated following Bharath 
and Shumway (2008). Peer 𝛥O-score is the average change of O-score among peer 
firms in the same year. Peer 𝛥Z-score is the average change of Z-score among peer 
firms in the same year. Peer 𝛥EDF is the average change of EDF among peer firms in 
the same year. In all regressions, firm and time fixed effects are included. 𝑡-statistics 
in parentheses are computed based on standard errors clustered by time. *, **, *** 
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

cross-sectional regressions to examine whether the previous results still 
hold. Specifically, we conduct the following cross-sectional regressions 
for each month: 
𝑅𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑖,𝑡,

(3)

where 𝑅𝑖,𝑡+1 is the return of the focal firm in month 𝑡 + 1, 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡
is average return for peer firms in month 𝑡, and 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 is a vector of 
control  variables  as  of  month  𝑡,  including  focal  firm  size,  book-to-
market ratio, past one-month/twelve-month returns (skipping the most 
recent month), asset growth, and gross profitability.

Table  4 reports the time-series average coefficient estimates from 
the cross-sectional regressions and the corresponding 𝑡-statistics. Col-
umn (2) shows that 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 positively and significantly predicts the 
one-month-ahead focal firm return after controlling for a set of promi-
nent characteristics related to stock expected returns (𝑡 = 2.25). We 
also convert 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 into cross-sectional quintile ranking (𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘) 

9 

Table 3
Performance of stock portfolios sorted by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡.
  Panel A: Value Weighted
  RCRet Portfolios
  1 (Low)

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

Excess Ret
0.61
(1.55)
0.56
(1.38)
0.71
(1.89)
0.78
(2.19)
1.06
(3.33)

0.45
(3.20)

Excess Ret
0.71
(1.60)
0.78
(1.83)
0.88
(2.21)
0.99
(2.48)
1.21
(3.03)

0.50
(3.41)

FFC4
−0.07
(−0.59)
−0.09
(−0.86)
0.11
(1.08)
0.20
(1.72)
0.45
(6.46)

0.52
(3.95)

FFC4
−0.08
(−0.65)
0.03
(0.28)
0.20
(1.58)
0.33
(2.59)
0.49
(5.44)

0.57
(4.34)

FF5
−0.15
(−1.11)
−0.20
(−1.60)
0.03
(0.27)
0.07
(0.65)
0.31
(3.54)

0.45
(3.39)

FF5
−0.21
(−1.72)
−0.12
(−1.07)
0.05
(0.37)
0.19
(1.42)
0.35
(3.68)

0.56
(4.20)

FF5+UMD 
−0.15
(−1.10)
−0.20
(−1.60)
0.03
(0.25)
0.06
(0.63)
0.30
(2.96)

0.45
(3.47)

FF5+UMD 
−0.21
(−1.57)
−0.12
(−1.06)
0.04
(0.37)
0.18
(1.74)
0.35
(3.51)

0.56
(4.65)

  2

  3

  4

  5 (High)

  5−1

  2

  3

  4

  5 (High)

  5−1

  Panel B: Equal Weighted
  RCRet Portfolios
  1 (Low)

This table reports the performance of stock portfolios sorted by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 in the holding 
period  from  Jan  2001  through  Dec  2019.  At  each  month-end,  stocks  are  sorted 
into quintiles by their 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 in that month. The quintile portfolios are held over 
the next month. Stocks with share prices below $1 or market capitalizations below 
the NYSE 10th percentile value are excluded at the portfolio formation. We report 
average monthly portfolio excess returns and portfolio alphas under the Fama–French-
Carhart four-factor model (FFC4), the Fama–French five-factor model (FF5), and the 
Fama–French five-factor model augmented with momentum factor (FF5+UMD). Panel 
A  reports  the  performance  of  value-weighted  portfolios,  and  Panel  B  reports  the 
performance of equal-weighted portfolios. 𝑡-statistics in parentheses are computed based 
on standard errors with Newey–West correction of 12 lags.

in each month and re-perform the Fama–MacBeth regressions. Column 
(4) shows that an increase in 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 quintile ranking from one to five 
is associated with an increase in a one-month-ahead focal firm return 
of 28 bps (𝑡 = 2.04) after controlling for other characteristics related to 
expected returns.

Taken together, the results from the portfolio analysis and Fama–
MacBeth regressions show a statistically significant and economically 
sizeable cross-stock return predictability based on rating-comovement 
firm linkages (termed as rating-comovement momentum). This pattern 
is consistent with equity market investors overlooking the economic 
link  arising  from  the  bond  market,  leading  to  a  cross-stock  return 
predictability. Additional robustness checks on the return predictability 
are presented in Section 6.3.

4.3. Information diffusion and rating-comovement momentum

In this section, we clarify our prediction channel by investigating 
the  direction  of  information  flows  and  return  predictability  among 
firms connected through rating-comovement links. To identify the in-
formation flow, it is important that the positions of focal firms and peer 
firms do not switch in the empirical design. Therefore, we divide the 
firms into two non-overlapping groups, and draw peer firms and focal 
firms separately from these two groups.

This design fully eliminates the concern that focal and peer firms 
can switch positions in return prediction and the concern about circular 
problems in return prediction. The division of the two non-overlapping 
groups is based on how common value-relevant information transmits 
from peer firms to focal firms. We hypothesize that when common 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Feng et al.

Table 4
Fama–MacBeth regressions.

  RCRet

  RCRet Rank

  Size

  BM

  RVSL

  MOM

  AG

  GP

(1)

0.0323***
(3.29)

(2)

0.0202**
(2.25)

(3)

(4)

0.0012***
(3.00)

0.0007**  
(2.04)
−0.0010*  
(−1.68)
−0.0002  
(−0.08)
0.0050
(0.51)
−0.0033  
(−0.66)
−0.0079** 
(−2.33)
0.0058
(1.24)

−0.0010*
(−1.66)
−0.0001
(−0.06)
0.0050
(0.51)
−0.0031
(−0.63)
−0.0078**
(−2.36)
0.0059
(1.29)

65,453
0.003

65,453
0.108

65,453
0.004

65,453
0.107

  No. Obs.
  Adj. R2
This table reports results from Fama–MacBeth forecasting regressions of future stock 
returns. The sample period is from Jan 2001 through Dec 2019. The dependent variable 
is stock returns in month 𝑡+1, and the key independent variable is 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 or the quintile 
ranking of 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 (𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘) in month 𝑡. Stocks with share prices below $1 or market 
capitalizations below the NYSE 10th percentile value at month 𝑡 end are excluded. 
Control variables include the natural logarithm of market capitalization (𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒), book-to-
market ratio (𝐵𝑀), past one-month return (𝑅𝑉 𝑆𝐿), past 12-month returns skipping the 
most recent month (𝑀𝑂𝑀), asset growth (𝐴𝐺), and gross profitability (𝐺𝑃 ), measured 
at the end of month 𝑡. All continuous variables at right-hand-side are winsorized at 
1% and 99% levels in each month. 𝑡-statistics in parentheses are computed based on 
standard errors with Newey–West correction of 12 lags. *, **, *** indicate significance 
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

value-relevant information about the connected firms arrives at the 
market,  such  information  is  first  incorporated  into  the  stock  prices 
of firms with better information environments and then diffuses to 
firms with poorer information environments. Therefore, we divide the 
non-overlapping groups based on their information environment; we 
then retain peer firms from the group with better information environ-
ment, and retain focal firms from the group with poorer information 
environment.

Following the well-known empirical regularity documented in prior 
literature  that  information  usually  travels  slowly  from  big  firms  to 
small firms (e.g., Zhang, 2006; Hou, 2007), we require the peer firms 
to be big firms and the focal firms to be small firms.19 Specifically, 
to implement the split of firms, we first identify the median size (as 
measured  by  market  capitalization)  of  firms  in  each  month.  Then, 
among all the focal-peer firm links in each month, we retain the firm 
links where the focal firm has below median size and the peer firm 
has above median size. Afterwards, we re-compute 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 for each 
focal firm in each month and perform the portfolio sorting analysis 
as in Table  3. The prediction is that return predictability based on 
𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 should be stronger if the peer firms are large and the focal firms 
are small; that is, the peer firms have better information environment 
and incorporate information faster than the focal firm. Table  5 reports 
the  performance  of  the  𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡-sorted  portfolios  within  each  group 
separately.

Table  5 Panel A reports the results based on the sub-sample of 
large peer firms and small focal firms. A trading strategy that buys 
the  top  𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡  quintile  and  short  sells  the  bottom  𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡  quintile 
(i.e., RCMOM) earns a monthly return/six-factor alpha of 0.73%/0.69% 
(𝑡-statistics = 2.11/2.71). By contrast, Panel B shows that, if we require 
peer firms to be small firms and require focal firms to be big firms, 

19 Size is a natural choice for capturing the information environment because 
it  is  straightforward  to  measure  and  less  prone  to  variable  construction 
issues. Therefore, to illustrate information diffusion, we use size to divide 
non-overlapping groups.

10 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

Table 5
Information environment and return predictability.
  Panel A: Large Peer Firms and Small Focal Firms
  RCRet Portfolios
  1 (Low)

  5−1

0.73
(2.11)
  Panel B: Small Peer Firms and Large Focal Firms
  RCRet Portfolios
  1 (Low)

0.83
(2.76)

Excess Ret
0.69
(1.37)
1.03
(2.46)
1.07
(2.50)
1.07
(1.98)
1.42
−2.80

Excess Ret
0.47
(1.05)
0.47
(1.04)
0.66
(2.01)
0.58
(1.47)
0.80
(2.73)

FFC4
−0.16
(−0.91)
0.25
(1.39)
0.35
(1.83)
0.26
(1.17)
0.67
(2.98)

FFC4
−0.16
(−0.81)
−0.15
(−0.89)
0.11
(0.90)
0.02
(0.16)
0.26
(3.49)

FF5
−0.29
(−1.70)
0.09
(0.44)
0.19
(1.07)
0.12
(0.44)
0.40
(1.74)

0.70
(2.17)

FF5
−0.25
(−1.14)
−0.22
(−1.31)
0.05
(0.43)
−0.12
(−0.75)
0.09
(0.87)

0.35
(1.75)

FF5+UMD 
−0.30
(−1.60)
0.08
(0.41)
0.18
(0.98)
0.11
(0.46)
0.39
(2.62)

0.69
(2.71)

FF5+UMD 
−0.25
(−1.14)
−0.22
(−1.31)
0.05
(0.43)
−0.12
(−0.73)
0.09
(0.70)

0.34
(1.73)

  2

  3

  4

  5 (High)

  2

  3

  4

  5 (High)

  5−1

0.33
(1.63)

0.41
(2.05)

This table reports results from a sub-sample analysis on the return predictability of 
𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 from Jan 2001 through Dec 2019. At each month-end, we identify the median 
size (market capitalization) of the sample firms. Then, among all the focal-peer firm 
links in each month, we assign the firm links where the focal firm has below median 
size and the peer firm has above median size into the group of ‘‘large peer firms and 
small focal firms’’; we assign the firm links where the focal firm has above median size 
and the peer firm has below median size into the group of ‘‘small peer firms and large 
focal firms’’. Within each group of firm links, for each focal firm in each month, we 
re-compute 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡; we then sort focal firms into quintiles by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 in the month and 
track the value-weighted portfolio returns over the next month. Panel A reports the 
results from the sub-sample of firm links with large peer firms and small focal firms. 
Panel B reports the results from the sub-sample of firm links with small peer firms and 
large focal firms. Average monthly excess returns and FF5+UMD alphas are reported. 
𝑡-statistics in parentheses are computed based on standard errors with Newey–West 
correction of 12 lags.

RCMOM yields a monthly return/six-factor alpha of 0.33%/0.34% (𝑡-
statistics = 1.63/1.73). This pattern is consistent with our hypothesis 
that the lead–lag return pattern mainly reflects the slow information 
diffusion from firms with better information environment to firms with 
worse information environment.

To further pin down the source of information in the return pre-
dictability, we design a firm-level identification strategy. Instead of 
using peer-firm portfolio returns to predict focal firm returns, we iden-
tify the source of information using each peer firm’s earnings surprise 
and examine whether the peer firms’ earnings surprises can predict 
focal firms’ returns. To this end, we construct a firm-pair-by-month 
level regression sample based on rating-comovement links; we further 
follow Table  5 to retain the sub-sample of firm links where the focal 
firm  is  small  and  the  peer  firm  is  large;  we  run  panel  regressions 
using the large peer firms’ earnings surprises in month 𝑡 to predict 
the small focal firms’ stock returns in month 𝑡 + 1. Internet Appendix 
Table A.1 shows that peer firms’ earning surprises indeed positively and 
significantly forecast future stock returns of the focal firms.20

In sum, the two sets of results presented in this subsection directly 
highlight  the  transmission  of  value-relevant  information  from  peer 
firms to focal firms.

20 This finding is robust when we conduct the regression analysis in the full 
sample of all focal-peer firm pairs.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

J. Feng et al.

Table 6
Spanning regressions.

  Intercept

  Composite BondMKT MOM

  Shared-Analyst MOM

  Industry MOM

  Geographic MOM

  Customer MOM

  Segment MOM

  Technology MOM

  Foreign Info MOM

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.482***
(3.74)

0.415***
(3.14)
0.198**
(2.35)

0.472***
(3.60)

0.474***
(3.70)

0.469***
(3.70)

0.415***
(3.02)

0.461***
(3.47)

0.499***
(3.76)

0.461***
(3.49)

0.112***
(3.09)

0.150***
(3.74)

0.070
(1.45)

0.108**
(2.35)

0.153***
(5.19)

0.058*
(1.84)

0.075**
(1.98)

(10)
0.402*** 
(2.64)
0.030
(0.40)
0.010
(0.22)
0.056
(1.63)
−0.009  
(−0.22)  
0.068
(1.63)
0.111*** 
(3.34)
−0.044  
(−0.95)  
−0.011  
(−0.42)  
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

222
0.179

222
0.119

  FF5+UMD
  No. Obs.
  Adj. R2
This table reports results from the spanning regressions of rating-comovement momentum long-short returns on other cross-momentum long-short returns, controlling for Fama 
and French (2015) five factors and the UMD factor. The construction of these factors is described in Internet Appendix B. The sample period is from July 2001 through December 
2019 due to the availability of composite bond market cross-momentum factor returns. The dependent variable is the return of rating-comovement momentum factor. The key 
independent variables in columns (2)—(9) are the contemporaneous returns of composite bond market cross-momentum, shared analyst momentum (Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020), 
industry momentum (Moskowitz and Grinblatt, 1999), geographic momentum (Parsons et al., 2020), customer momentum (Cohen and Frazzini, 2008), segment momentum (Cohen 
and Lou, 2012), technology momentum (Lee et al., 2019), and foreign information momentum (Huang, 2015), respectively. Contemporaneous Fama and French (2015) five factors 
and momentum factor (UMD) are controlled for. 𝑡-statistics in parentheses are computed based on standard errors with Newey–West correction of 12 lags. *, **, *** indicate 
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

222
0.191

222
0.127

222
0.173

222
0.205

222
0.136

222
0.245

222
0.182

222
0.13

Y

Y

Y

Y

Table 7
Performance of bond portfolios.

(4)

(2)

  4

  2

  3

(1)
Equal Weighted
0.06
(0.80)
−0.02
(−0.34)
0.01
(0.11)
0.08
(1.31)
0.19
(2.58)

(3)
Value Weighted
−0.01
(−0.29)
−0.06
(−1.22)
−0.02
(−0.35)
0.00
(−0.02)
0.10
(1.24)

  5−1

0.17
(1.41)

0.13
(1.23)

  1 (Low)

  5 (High)

0.04
(0.47)
−0.02
(−0.27)
−0.05
(−0.63)
0.04
(0.61)
0.21
(2.76)

−0.01  
(−0.25) 
−0.07  
(−1.39) 
−0.10  
(−1.85) 
−0.06  
(−1.05) 
0.05
(0.68)  
0.06
(1.41)  
This table reports the performance of bond portfolios sorted by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡_𝐵𝑜𝑛𝑑 in the 
holding period from Jan 2001 through Dec 2019. For each firm in each month, we 
compute firm-level bond returns as the average returns of outstanding corporate bonds 
issued by the firm; equal-weighted returns are reported in columns (1) and (3) and 
offering-amount-weighted returns are reported in columns (2) and (4). Then, for a 
focal firm in a given month, 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡_𝐵𝑜𝑛𝑑 is defined as the average firm-level bond 
returns across its peer firms in that month. At each month-end, focal firms are sorted 
into quintiles by their 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡_𝐵𝑜𝑛𝑑 in that month. We track the average firm-level 
bond returns for the quintile portfolios over the next month; equal-weighted returns are 
reported in columns (1) and (2) and value-weighted returns are reported in columns (3) 
and (4). We report the average monthly portfolio alpha relative to the corporate bond 
market factor, where the corporate bond market factor return is the value-weighted 
returns of all outstanding US corporate bonds in excess of the risk-free rate. 𝑡-statistics 
in parentheses are computed based on standard errors with Newey–West correction of 
12 lags.

0.11
(1.47)

5. Mechanism

In this section, we examine the market-segmentation mechanism for 
the return predictability arising from rating-comovement links. To set 
the stage, we show that rating-comovement links capture information 
that is specific to the bond market; in addition, rating-comovement 
momentum cannot be subsumed by other cross-firm momentum factors 

11 

Table 8
Dual holder and return predictability.
Excess Returns
No

FF5+UMD Alpha
No

Yes

0.28
(1.23)

0.50
(3.47)

  High−Low

  Dual Holder:
  Low RCRet

  High RCRet

0.42
(0.97)
0.69
(1.93)

0.38
(1.04)
0.88
(2.88)

−0.34
(−2.95)
0.14
(1.47)

Yes
−0.28  
(−3.03) 
0.01
(0.05)  
0.29
(1.74)  
This table reports the performance of stock portfolios two-way sorted by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 and by 
the existence of dual holders during the holding period of Jan 2001 through Dec 2019. 
A firm has dual holders if at least one asset management company owns more than 
1% of the firm’s outstanding stock shares and more than 1% of the firm’s outstanding 
bond issues. At each month-end, we split the focal firms into two groups based on the 
existence of dual holders, and we also split the focal firms into two even groups by 
their 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 this month. The two-way sorted portfolios are held over the next month, 
and value-weighted portfolio returns are computed. Average monthly excess returns 
and FF5+UMD alphas are reported. 𝑡-statistics in parentheses are computed based on 
standard errors with Newey–West correction of 12 lags.

0.48
(3.22)

documented in prior literature (Section 5.1). Next, we show that cross-
bond return predictability based on rating comovement links is muted 
(Section 5.2). We further show that the existence of institutions that 
hold both a firm’s stock and its bonds can alleviate market segmen-
tation (Section 5.3). Furthermore, we show that equity analysts react 
in delay to information from rating-comovement links (Section 5.4). 
Finally,  we  corroborate  the  credit  risk  channel  by  examining  how 
results change when risk-shifting problem is present (Section 5.5). The 
evidence in this section collectively highlights the bond market nature 
of rating-comovement links and suggests market segmentation is the 
mechanism underlying return predictability.

5.1. Spanning regressions

We start by validating rating-comovement links as reflecting firm 
relationships that are specific in the bond market. We explore four 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Feng et al.

Table 9
Predicting equity analyst forecast revisions.
(1)

(2)

  DepVar:
  RCRett

  Revision_Meant

  Revision_Medt

  Size

  BM

  RVSL

  MOM

Revision_Meant+1

0.0074***
(3.03)

0.0052**
(2.43)
0.0416***
(2.76)

−0.0000
(−0.34)
−0.0007
(−1.65)
0.0078***
(5.20)
0.0043**
(2.15)

(3)

(4)

Revision_Medt+1

0.0056**
(2.39)

0.0046**  
(2.51)

0.0589*
(1.85)
−0.0000  
(−0.08)
−0.0009** 
(−2.12)
0.0068***  
(5.22)
0.0035**  
(2.49)

62,452
0.0053

62,452
0.1587

62,452
0.0068

62,452
0.1441

  No. Obs.
  Adj. R2
This table reports results from Fama–MacBeth forecasting regressions of future equity 
analyst forecast revisions. The unit of observations is at firm-by-month level, and the 
sample period is from Jan 2001 through Dec 2019. The dependent variable, equity 
analyst forecast revision for a given firm in month 𝑡 + 1, is the consensus analyst 
forecast of fiscal year one EPS in month 𝑡 + 1 minus consensus analyst forecast of fiscal 
year one EPS in month 𝑡, scaled by share price at month 𝑡 end. The consensus EPS 
forecast is measured by the mean of EPS forecasts in columns (1)–(2); and is measured 
by the median of EPS forecasts in columns (3)–(4). The key independent variable is 
𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 in month 𝑡. Control variables include consensus forecast revision in month 𝑡, 
the natural logarithm of market capitalization (𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒), book-to-market ratio (𝐵𝑀), past 
one-month return (𝑅𝑉 𝑆𝐿), and past 12-month returns skipping the most recent month 
(𝑀𝑂𝑀). All variables are winsorized at 1% and 99% levels in each month. 𝑡-statistics 
in parentheses are computed based on standard errors with Newey–West correction of 
12 lags. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

types of firm linkages: (𝑖) firms with direct trade-credit relation (trade-
credit  links);  (𝑖𝑖)  firms  with  common  bank  lenders  (common  bank 
lender links); (𝑖𝑖𝑖) firms with common corporate bond fund owners 
(common fund owner links); and (𝑖𝑣) firms with shared bond analysts 
(shared bond analysts links). Intuitively, these links arise from firm 
relationships  in  the  credit  market  and  are  of  particular  interest  to 
the credit market participants rather than to equity market investors. 
A natural question is whether rating-comovement links reflect these 
specific bond-market firm relationships.21

More importantly, these links can potentially identify firms with 
commonalities in fundamentals. First, in trade-credit links, the linked 
firms  are  directly  exposed  to  each  other’s  credit  risk  and  thus  are 
connected  in  fundamentals.  Second,  in  common  bank  lender  links, 
the default of one firm impacts the balance sheet of the bank lender 
and induces the bank to shift away from lending to other firms. As 
a result, credit events from one firm impose refinancing difficulty for 
other firms that deal with the common bank lender. Thus, firms with 
common bank lenders are subject to common credit shocks.22 For the 
third  and  fourth  types  of  links,  we  borrow  the  insight  of  Ali  and 
Hirshleifer (2020) and hypothesize that bond analysts (bond mutual 
funds) tend to cover (invest in) corporate bonds issued by firms with 
commonalities in fundamentals due to complementarities in acquiring 
and  processing  information  about  the  related  firms.  Hence,  we  use 
bond analyst co-coverage and bond mutual fund common ownership 
to identify connected firms in these two settings. Detailed descriptions 
of the construction of these links are in Internet Appendix Section B.1. 

21 We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this test. As far as we 
know, these four types of firm relationships have not been studied in the 
context of cross-firm return predictability.
22 For  instance,  Kaminsky  and  Reinhart  (2001)  show  that  an  important 
source of contagion in the 1997 Asian financial crisis was due to common 
bank lenders.

12 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

  1 (Low)

Table 10
Robustness: link tightness and stock filters.
  Panel A: Link Tightness
(1)
Tight Link
−0.18
(−1.21)
−0.09
(−0.84)
0.08
(0.81)
0.10
(0.72)
0.33
(2.47)

  5 (High)

  2

  4

  3

  5−1

0.51
(2.29)

  Panel B: Stock Filters

  1 (Low)

  2

  3

  4

  5 (High)

  5−1

(1)

−0.17
(−1.30)
−0.18
(−1.48)
0.03
(0.27)
0.08
(0.82)
0.31
(2.96)

0.48
(3.69)

(2)
Original Link
−0.15
(−1.10)
−0.20
(−1.60)
0.03
(0.25)
0.06
(0.63)
0.30
(2.96)

0.45
(3.47)

(2)

−0.16
(−1.21)
−0.19
(−1.47)
−0.03
(−0.33)
0.02
(0.18)
0.23
(2.03)

0.39
(3.08)

(3)
Loose Link 
−0.13
(−1.70)
−0.05
(−0.57)
−0.05
(−0.56)
0.06
(0.62)
0.21
(2.45)

0.34
(3.42)

(3)

−0.20
(−1.45)
−0.14
(−1.21)
−0.03
(−0.30)
0.00
(−0.00)
0.22
(2.08)

0.42
(3.41)

This table shows robustness checks for the performance of stock portfolios sorted by 
𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 (Table  3) in the holding period from Jan 2001 to Dec 2019. In Panel A, we 
use alternative criteria for constructing the rating-comovement link. In column (1), 
we define a rating comovement as two firms receiving a rating co-update within a 
seven-day window, and we identify the firm linkage if the two firms experienced 
rating comovements at least three times in the past two years (Tight Link). In column 
(2), we define rating comovements as two firms receiving rating co-updates within a 
10-day window, and we identify the firm linkage if the two firms experience rating 
comovements at least three times in the past three years (Original Link). In column 
(3), we define rating comovement as two firms receiving rating co-updates within a 
14-day window, and we identify the firm linkage if the two firms experience rating 
comovements at least three times in the past four years (Loose Link). At each month-
end, stocks with share prices above $1 and market capitalizations above the NYSE 10th 
percentile value are sorted into quintiles by their 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 in this month. The value-
weighted quintile portfolios are held over the next month. We report average monthly 
portfolio alphas under the Fama–French five-factor model augmented with momentum 
factor (FF5+UMD). Panel B examines portfolio sorting results under alternative stock 
filters. In column (1), no stock filter has been imposed. In column (2), stocks with a 
share price lower than $5 or market capitalization below the NYSE 10th percentile 
value have been excluded. In column (3), stocks with share price lower than $5 
or market capitalization below the NYSE 20th percentile value have been excluded. 
𝑡-statistics in parentheses are computed based on standard errors with Newey–West 
correction of 12 lags.

In Internet Appendix Table B.1, we show that firm pairwise rating-
comovement links exhibit a significant overlap with the above four 
types of links.

To better exploit the information from the four bond-market-firm 
links in a spanning test, we follow Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) to 
combine them and generate a composite bond market cross-momentum 
factor.23 Specifically, in each individual link, for each focal firm in each 
month, we use average returns from linked firms as the sorting variable, 
and then we generate percentile rankings for focal firms based on the 
sorting variable. Next, we take the average percentile ranking across 
the four links as the composite ranking for the focal firm-month.24 

23 By combining the individual links, we can reduce the noise in measure-
ment and precisely identify the bond-market economic linkage.  The same 
approach is taken in Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) to construct a mispricing 
factor by combining individual anomalies.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Feng et al.

Finally, for each month, we sort stocks into quintiles based on the 
composite ranking. We long the top quintile, short the bottom quintile, 
and hold the value-weighted long-short portfolios over the next month. 
We compute the monthly returns of the long-short portfolio as returns 
of the composite bond-market cross-momentum factor.25 Similarly, we 
construct other cross-firm momentum factors as returns from value-
weighted  quintile  long-short  portfolios  using  corresponding  sorting 
variables (e.g., 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 for the construction of the rating-comovement 
momentum factor).

Table  6 presents the results from time-series regression of rating-
comovement momentum factor returns on contemporaneous returns of 
other cross-firm momentum factors, controlling for Fama and French 
(2015) five factors and momentum factor. The intercept in this table 
is interpreted as the average monthly alpha of the rating-comovement 
momentum factor relative to the controlled factors. Column (1) shows 
rating-comovement  momentum  factor  has  an  average  monthly  six-
factor alpha of 48.2 bps during the sample period of July 2001 to 
December  2019.26  In  column  (2),  we  add  composite  bond  market 
cross-momentum as an additional explanatory variable. We find rating-
comovement momentum has a significantly positive loading on com-
posite bond market cross-momentum (𝑡 = 2.35), and its alpha is mildly 
reduced to 41.5 bps and remains significant (𝑡 = 3.14).27 This pattern 
confirms that rating-comovement momentum indeed captures informa-
tion from the four specific firm linkages underlying the composite bond 
market cross-momentum. One can note that composite bond market 
cross-momentum only explains a small portion of returns from rating-
comovement momentum. By contrast, in Internet Appendix Table A.4, 
we find rating-comovement momentum can largely subsume composite 
bond market cross-momentum.

These results suggest the rating-comovement link is a sufficiently 
strong measure of firm linkages in the bond market, and it can po-
tentially capture other firm linkages arising from the bond market. 
This finding is intuitive since firms connected through bond market 
economic linkages are generally subject to common credit shocks, and 
their connectedness in fundamentals would be ultimately reflected by 
comovement in credit ratings. Thus, we opt to focus on the rating-
comovement link as a unifying economic link from the bond market.

Prior  studies  have  documented  various  types  of  economic  links 
that generate cross-firm return predictability, so one would naturally 
wonder whether rating-comovement links carry incremental informa-
tion beyond these other economic links. To this end, we examine a 
representative and comprehensive list of cross-firm momentums from 
prior studies, including shared-analyst momentum (Ali and Hirshleifer, 
2020),  industry  momentum  (Moskowitz  and  Grinblatt,  1999),  geo-
graphic momentum (Parsons et al., 2020), customer momentum (Cohen 
and  Frazzini,  2008),  segment  momentum  (Cohen  and  Lou,  2012), 
technology  momentum  (Lee  et  al.,  2019),  and  foreign  information 

24 We require a composite ranking to be calculated using percentile rankings 
from at least two individual links, which is a balance between reducing noise 
in measurement and keeping a large enough stock sample with composite 
ranking.
25 In Internet Appendix Table B.2, we find the composite bond market cross-
momentum factor earns a significant six-factor alpha of 0.37% per month with 
a 𝑡-statistic of 3.43.
26 This number is slightly different from the value-weighted six-factor alpha 
reported in Table  3 because, due to the availability of the composite bond 
market momentum factor returns, our spanning regressions start from July 
2001, while our baseline results in Table  3 start from January 2001. In Internet 
Appendix Table A.2, we show that the results are robust to extending the 
sample period to January 2001.
27 In Internet Appendix Table A.3, we also find rating-comovement momen-
tum loads positively on the cross-firm momentum factors constructed by trade 
credit links, common bank lender links, common fund owner links, shared 
bond analysts links.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

momentum (Huang, 2015). Each cross-firm momentum factor is con-
structed  as  the  value-weighted  quintile  long-short  portfolio,  and  a 
detailed description of the construction of these factors is in Internet 
Appendix Section B.2.

We conduct spanning regressions of rating-comovement momentum 
on  each  one  of  the  aforementioned  cross-firm  momentum,  control-
ling for Fama and French (2015) five factors and momentum factor. 
Columns (3)–(9) show that the alpha of rating-comovement momen-
tum remains economically sizable and statistically significant in the 
regressions. In particular, column (3) shows that the monthly alpha of 
rating-comovement momentum is almost unchanged after controlling 
for the shared-analyst momentum of Ali and Hirshleifer (2020), which 
is found to be a unifying cross-firm momentum factor for many pre-
viously documented cross-firm momentum factors. In column (10), we 
include all cross-firm momentum factors, including the composite bond 
market cross-momentum factor, as explanatory variables. We find these 
factors collectively explain a small portion of rating-comovement factor 
returns, as the alpha remains highly significant with 40 bps per month 
(𝑡 = 2.64).

In sum, we show that the rating-comovement link indeed reflects 
firm relationships that are specific to the bond market. The spanning 
tests  suggest  that  the  rating-comovement  link  is  an  economic  link 
of sufficient strength to potentially capture the firm linkages in the 
bond market. In addition, cross-firm momentums documented in prior 
studies cannot explain rating-comovement momentum.

5.2. Cross-bond return predictability

If the segmentation between bond and equity markets is the mecha-
nism for the cross-firm return predictability based on rating-comovement 
links, such return predictability should exist only in the equity market 
and not in the corporate bond market. This is because the credit-rating 
update is salient information for bond investors; thus, compared with 
equity investors, bond investors are much more likely to be aware 
of firm linkages reflected in rating comovement. As a result, value-
relevant information embedded in the bond prices of one firm will 
be quickly incorporated into the bond prices of linked firms through 
trading by bond investors. We therefore predict that cross-bond return 
predictability based on rating-comovement links should be muted.

To test this prediction, we perform a portfolio analysis using bond 
returns. Empirically, sorting on corporate bonds is different from sort-
ing  on  stocks  since  a  firm  can  have  multiple  corporate  bonds  out-
standing. Therefore, we consider two different methods for aggregating 
bond  returns  at  the  firm  level.  In  the  first  method,  for  each  firm, 
we compute the equal-weighted average monthly returns from all of 
the  firm’s  outstanding  corporate  bonds.  In  the  second  method,  for 
each firm, we compute the offering-amount-weighted average monthly 
returns from all of the firm’s corporate bonds. Then, similar to the 
analysis in Table  3, at the end of each month, for each focal firm, 
we compute the average bond returns for peer firms as the sorting 
variable (𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡_𝐵𝑜𝑛𝑑) and sort all focal firms into quintile portfolios. 
We compute equal-weighted and value-weighted bond portfolio returns 
in the subsequent month and rebalance the portfolio by month. Similar 
to what we have done earlier, we construct a long-short strategy that 
buys bonds in the top quintile and sells bonds in the bottom quintile. 
Table  7 reports the average monthly portfolio alphas, where the alphas 
are  computed  relative  to  the  corporate  bond  market  factor.28  Each 
column corresponds to one of the aforementioned ways to aggregate 
bond returns at the firm level.

28 As shown in Dickerson et al. (2023), many newly proposed bond market 
factor model specifications can hardly outperform the simple bond market 
CAPM. Given the simplicity and transparency of constructing a corporate bond 
market factor, we report the corporate bond market CAPM alpha here.

13 

J. Feng et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

Table  7 confirms that there exists no significant cross-bond return 
predictability based on a rating-comovement link. Across all specifi-
cations, the long-short bond trading strategy yields only economically 
small and statistically insignificant alphas. This evidence supports mar-
ket segmentation as the economic mechanism behind the cross-stock 
return predictability documented in Section 4.

on focal firms should respond in delays to value-relevant information 
arriving at the connected firms.

To test this prediction, we examine whether the information from 
peer firms, proxied by 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡, can positively predict equity analysts’ 
EPS forecast revisions on the focal firm over the next month. Specifi-
cally, we conduct the following Fama–MacBeth regressions: 

5.3. Dual holder and return predictability

Based on our hypothesis development, the cross-stock return pre-
dictability documented in Section 4 should depend on the degree of 
market segmentation. That is, the existence of dual holders who own 
a significant portion of both equities and bonds of the focal firm could 
facilitate the information integration between bond markets and equity 
markets.29 As a result, the sluggish price reaction to value-relevant 
information from linked firms should be largely mitigated.

We conduct bivariate sorting to examine this auxiliary prediction. 
First, at the end of each month, we sort all focal firms into two subsam-
ples based on whether they have dual holders that own a significant 
fraction of both equity and bonds from the same firm. To identify 
dual holders empirically, we follow Chen et al. (2019) and define an 
asset management company as a dual holder if it holds more than 
1% of both the stock and bonds from a focal firm. Meanwhile, we 
also divide focal firms into two groups (Low vs. High 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡) based 
on their 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 in the month. We hold the two-way sorted portfolios 
over the next month and compute value-weighted portfolio returns. 
Similar to previous analyses, we also track the 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 high-minus-low 
spread across the two-way sorted portfolios. Table  8 reports the average 
monthly excess returns and six-factor alphas from these portfolios.

Consistent with our prediction, the return predictability of 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡
comes mainly from the subsample of focal firms with no dual holder. 
For example, within the subsample where focal firms have dual holders, 
the  𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡  high-minus-low  return  spread  is  only  0.28%  per  month 
and is insignificant (𝑡 = 1.23). However, within the subsample where 
focal firms do not have dual holders, the 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 high-minus-low return 
spread is 0.50% per month (𝑡 = 3.47). Similar results are obtained 
with six-factor alphas. These findings further support that segmentation 
between bond and equity markets is the underlying mechanism for the 
return predictability documented in Section 4.

5.4. Delayed reactions by equity analysts

While previous analyses focused on asset returns, in this section, we 
directly examine how market segmentation affects the belief-updating 
process  of  equity  analysts.30  As  analysts  are  important  information 
intermediaries  in  financial  markets,  an  investigation  into  how  they 
incorporate information into their forecasts can provide more direct 
evidence that market segmentation impedes information integration 
between bond and equity markets.

We conjecture that equity analysts tend to neglect information from 
rating-comovement  links  as  a  result  of  market  segmentation.  Here, 
market segmentation arises due to inherent differences in job nature 
between equity analysts, who issue stock-related forecasts and recom-
mendations, and credit rating agencies, who produce credit ratings. 
While  credit  rating  agencies  are  more  concerned  with  default  risk 
because bond investors claim fixed incomes, equity analysts are more 
focused on growth options because equity investors claim residuals. 
Thus, we expect that equity analysts will not pay close attention to 
information from linked firms until the information prevails in the stock 
market. A testable prediction is that equity analysts’ forecast revisions 

29 In a similar spirit, Auh and Bai (2020) argue that the organizational 
structure of mutual fund families facilitates information integration between 
shareholders and creditors.
30 In this section, we refer to analysts in I/B/E/S database as equity analysts.

𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑖,𝑡,

(4)

where 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑖,𝑡+1 is the consensus equity analyst forecast of 
fiscal year one EPS for firm 𝑖 in month 𝑡+1 minus the consensus forecast 
value in month 𝑡, scaled by the share price at the end of month 𝑡. 
We measure the consensus equity analyst forecast value by either the 
mean or median forecast value across analysts in a month, provided 
by I/B/E/S database. 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 is defined as in Table  3. We control for 
the one-month-lagged consensus forecast value and a set of standard 
firm characteristics in the regressions. Table  9 reports results from the 
Fama–MacBeth regressions.

Consistent with our conjecture, we find 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 significantly and 
positively predicts one-month-ahead equity analysts’ consensus forecast 
revisions on focal firms. For example, column (1) shows that a 10% 
increase in 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 in month 𝑡 is associated with a 0.074% increase in 
consensus EPS forecast in month 𝑡 + 1 (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑖,𝑡+1) with a 𝑡-
statistic of 3.03. This effect is not only statistically significant but also 
economically sizable, given that the interquartile of 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑖,𝑡+1
is 0.09%. This confirms our conjecture that equity analysts, due to 
market segmentation, tend to overlook the economic links arising from 
the corporate bond market. In addition, the findings also explain why 
shared equity analyst coverage (Ali and Hirshleifer, 2020) cannot cap-
ture the return predictability of rating-comovement links: under market 
segmentation, equity analysts fail to identify firm linkages arising from 
the bond market.

5.5. Risk-shifting problem

If rating-comovement links indeed capture inter-firm connections 
associated with credit risks, a unique prediction is that our proposed 
cross-stock return predictability could be affected by risk-shifting incen-
tives. The influence of risk-shifting problem on the cross-stock return 
predictability can be illustrated in two cases: (1) a low-leverage focal 
firm  linked  with  high-leverage  peer  firm;  (2)  a  high-leverage  focal 
firm linked with low-leverage peer firm. Examining the heterogeneity 
regarding cross-stock return predictability among firms with different 
leverage levels helps differentiate rating-comovement links from other 
existing economic links.

For the first case, consider a low-leverage focal firm linked with 
a high-leverage peer firm through credit rating comovement. In this 
example, high-leverage peer firm is subject to risk-shifting. A negative 
shock to the high-leverage peer firm reduces its asset value and induces 
risk-shifting activities; this generates both an increase in equity value 
(a higher stock return) and a decrease in debt value (a higher default 
probability/credit risk) of the peer firm. In this sense, the negative 
shock to the peer firm may lead to a high stock return of peer firm. 
However, as the focal and peer firms are connected in credit risks, a 
higher credit risk of the peer firm negatively impacts the value of the 
focal firm, leading to a low stock return of the focal firm. As a result, 
stock returns of the high-leverage peer firm may not positively predict 
stock returns of the low-leverage focal firm.

For the second case, consider a high-leverage focal firm linked with 
a low-leverage peer firm. A negative shock to the peer firm reduces 
its asset value and results in a lower stock return and higher credit 
risk of the peer firm. In this sense, the negative shock may lead to 
decreasing stock return of peer firm. Meanwhile, the higher credit risk 
of peer firm transmits to the high-leverage focal firm and induces risk-
shifting activities, which further leads to a higher stock return of the 
focal  firm.  As  a  result,  stock  returns  of  the  low-leverage  peer  firm
may not positively predict stock return of the high-leverage focal firm. 

14 

J. Feng et al.

Both scenarios would contaminate the positive return lead–lag relations 
among rating-comovement linked firms.

Based on the above illustrations, we hypothesize that the return 
predictability  based  on  rating-comovement  links  should  be  muted 
among the subsample where high-leverage (low-leverage) focal firms 
are  linked  with  low-leverage  (high-leverage)  peer  firms;  the  return 
predictability  should  remain  significant  among  the  rest  of  the  firm 
sample. To test this hypothesis, in each month, we define the top 20% 
firms with the highest leverage ratio as high-leverage firms inclined to 
risk-shifting, and we define the rest of the firms as low-leverage firms. 
Then, we divide all firm links into three groups: The first group consists 
of high-leverage focal firms linked with low-leverage peer firms; the 
second group consists of low-leverage focal firms linked with high-
leverage peer firms; the third group consists of the rest of the firm links. 
By this classification, groups one and two are likely to be affected by 
the risk-shifting problem, and group three is not likely to be affected. 
Within each group, we compute 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 for each focal firm in each 
month. Then, we re-run Fama–MacBeth regressions using 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 to 
predict one-month-ahead return of the focal firm (similar to Table  4). 
Internet Appendix Table A.5 reports the results. Columns (1)–(2) show 
that the return predictability of 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 is indeed muted among group 
one and group two, which are affected by the risk-shifting problem. 
By contrast, column (3) shows that return predictability remains eco-
nomically and statistically significant for firm links in group three, 
which are not affected by risk-shifting. These results are consistent with 
predictions generated from the risk-shifting problem and highlight the 
bond-market nature of rating-comovement links.

In addition, we further examine whether negative news from peer 
firms has a stronger return predictability than positive news. As rating-
comovement links are derived from bond market information, such 
economic links should largely capture firms’ downside risk information, 
which is likely to be ignored by equity investors and generates stronger 
cross-stock return predictability (relative to upside information). Thus, 
we conjecture that in the absence of risk-shifting, negative news from 
peer firms should have stronger cross-stock return predictability than 
positive news; however, the risk-shifting problem would distort infor-
mation contents of positive and negative news and undermine such an 
asymmetric pattern. We find consistent evidence in Internet Appendix 
Table A.6.

6. Further discussions on rating-comovement links

One unique feature of the rating-comovement links is that they are 
affected by the considerable time-series and cross-sectional variations 
in credit ratings; these variations could affect the information content 
of rating-comovement links in terms of capturing inter-firm economic 
links. In this section, we explore these variations to further corroborate 
our mechanism.

In Section 6.1, we conduct a comprehensive analysis on the dy-
namics of rating-comovement links and its impact on cross-stock return 
predictability; in Section 6.2, we investigate how cross-sectional credit 
rating heterogeneity affects cross-stock return predictability; in Sec-
tion 6.3, we examine the robustness of cross-stock return predictability 
under alternative empirical specifications.

6.1. Dynamics of rating-comovement links

Rating agencies exhibit different degrees of activeness under dif-
ferent market conditions (e.g., Bar-Isaac and Shapiro, 2013), and this 
would drive the dynamics of rating-comovement links in two aspects: 
(1) the number of rating-comovement links (i.e. the net creation of 
links driven by rating agencies’ activeness in reassessing risks); and 
(2) the informativeness of rating-comovement links (i.e., information 
content regarding inter-firm connections). An investigation into these 
two dynamics and their implications on cross-stock return predictabil-
ity not only helps deepen our understanding of the information content 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

of  rating  comovement  links  but  also  better  relate  our  measure  to 
the nature of credit rating business and existing literature of credit 
ratings.31

First, we study the determinants of link number and confirm that 
there are significant variations in the number of firm links over busi-
ness cycle. To this end, we compute the net change in the number 
of firm links each month (#𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘_𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒), which is the difference in 
number between the establishment and disappearance of firm links 
in the month. We run time-series regressions of #𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘_𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 on the 
following independent variables related to market conditions: (1) 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑚, 
a  dummy  variable  that  equals  one  if  there  exists  no  NBER-defined 
recession period in the past 36 months and equals zero elsewhere; 
(2)  𝐹 𝑟𝑎𝑐_𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑚,  the  fraction  of  non-NBER  recession  months  in  the 
past 36 months; (3) 𝑀𝑘𝑡𝑅𝑒𝑡, the average monthly return of the US 
equity market (in percent) in the past 36 months; (4) 𝐺𝐷𝑃 _𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ, 
the average quarterly growth rate of US GDP (in percent) in the past 
36 months. Note that all independent variables are measured in a 36-
month window because we identify rating-comovement links within the 
same window. Results from Panel A of Internet Appendix Table A.8 
show that the net creation of firm links is pro-cyclical: there are more 
net firm link creations in boom periods, in periods with higher stock 
market returns, or in periods with higher GDP growth.

After analyzing the driving forces of time-variations in the number 
of links, one would naturally wonder if the same driving forces would 
also impact the informativeness of links (i.e., the information content 
of rating-comovement links). Since rating-comovement links are de-
signed to capture inter-firm connections in credit risks, we can measure 
their informativeness by the correlations in default probabilities among 
linked firms. Thus, for each pair of linked firms, we compute partial 
correlations in their Expected Default Probabilities (𝐸𝐷𝐹 _𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠); 
Expected Default Probabilities (EDF) are computed based on the Merton 
(1974) model and estimated following Bharath and Shumway (2008), 
and the partial correlation controls for the market-level EDF.32 Here, we 
use 𝐸𝐷𝐹 _𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 to measure link informativeness mainly because 
EDF  is  less  affected  by  business  cycles  and  can  be  estimated  at  a 
monthly frequency for the majority of stocks in our sample. This allows 
us to detect the time-varying informativeness of rating commitment 
links.33  It  is  also  worth  noting  that  EDF  correlations  are  computed 
using information already incorporated into stock prices and known 
by equity investors. Thus, we do not expect it to generate cross-stock 
return predictability. This is confirmed in Internet Appendix Table A.9.
Using this proxy for link informativeness, we compute the average 
EDF  correlations  of  newly  established  links  in  each  month
(𝐴𝑣𝑔_𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘_𝐼𝑛𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠),  and  run  time-series  regressions  on  the 
same set of aforementioned independent variables. Panel B of Internet 
Appendix Table A.8 shows that the link informativeness is counter-
cyclical: links established following boom periods, periods with higher 
stock market returns and higher GDP growths have lower correlations 
in EDF (lower informativeness).34

Second, the above analyses on the dynamics of firm links inspire us 
to examine the resulting impact on the dynamics of rating-comovement 

31 We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this test.
32 We control for market-level EDF in the 𝐸𝐷𝐹 _𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 measure to 
avoid that changes in market conditions mechanically generate comovement 
in firms’ EDF.
33 We do not use variables constructed from rating updates to measure 
link informativeness for two reasons. First, rating updates have a pro-cyclical 
nature. Second, rating updates are less frequent and are not as periodical as 
EDF.
34 In addition, we decompose the net change in the number of firm links 
each month into two parts: the net change from high-informativeness links 
and low-informativeness links. Then, we re-conduct the time-series analysis 
and report the results in Internet Appendix Table A.10. We find that variations 
in market conditions mainly drive less informative firm links.

15 

J. Feng et al.

momentum. Specifically, we conjecture that when certain market con-
ditions lead to a worse (better) link informativeness, the return pre-
dictability based on the links should be weaker (stronger). To this end, 
we re-run the time-series regression of 𝐴𝑣𝑔_𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘_𝐼𝑛𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 on 
the set of market condition measures from Internet Appendix Table 
A.8  (𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑚,  𝐹 𝑟𝑎𝑐_𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑚,  𝑀𝑘𝑡𝑅𝑒𝑡,  and  𝐺𝐷𝑃 _𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ),  and  we  obtain 
the predicted values of 𝐴𝑣𝑔_𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘_𝐼𝑛𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 in each month. The 
predicted link informativeness captures the component of link informa-
tiveness that is driven by market conditions. Next, we split all months 
into two halves based on the average predicted link informativeness 
in the past 36 months and examine rating-comovement momentum in 
these two sample periods. Intuitively, if certain market conditions lead 
to a low average informativeness of links established in the past 36 
months, then the return predictability based on these links should be 
weaker. Internet Appendix Table A.11 shows that this is indeed the 
case. The average monthly returns/FF5+UMD alphas of RCMOM are 
0.28%/0.31% when predicted link informativeness is low, while they 
are 0.61%/0.48% when predicted link informativeness is high.

Third,  considering  that  rating  comovement  links  may  not  con-
sistently measure inter-firm connections, we propose two additional 
empirical analyses to improve our baseline results. In the first analysis, 
excluding less informative firm links from our sample can improve 
the precision of identifying true inter-firm linkages. To this end, we 
exclude  the  bottom  20%  pairwise  firm  links  with  the  lowest  link 
informativeness (𝐸𝐷𝐹 _𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛), we then use the rest of the firm 
links to perform the portfolio sorting analysis as in Table  3.35 Internet 
Appendix Table A.12 shows that excluding low quality links indeed 
improves the performance of RCMOM.

In the second analysis, we adopt dynamic link construction criteria 
to account for the time-varying nature of link number. Specifically, 
during periods when CRAs are reluctant to update ratings, the rating 
comovements are identified based on only a few numbers of rating 
updates. In this scenario, we should apply a relatively looser criterion 
for rating-comovement links. On the contrary, during periods when 
rating agencies actively update ratings, we may identify excessively 
more rating comovements. In this scenario, we should apply a rela-
tively more stringent criterion for rating-comovement links.36 Internet 
Appendix Table A.13 shows this dynamic link construction criterion 
indeed improves rating-comovement momentum, as the monthly six-
factor alpha of the RCMOM becomes 0.62% (𝑡-statistic = 4.02), nearly 
40% higher than our baseline result reported in Table  3.

Finally, we show that rating-comovement momentum diminishes 
quickly  after  linked  firms’  credit  ratings  cease  to  comove  (Internet 
Appendix Table A.21). The results suggest that the rating-comovement 
links indeed capture the dynamic inter-firm economic links that evolve 
gradually over time.

6.2. Rating heterogeneity

In addition to the time-series variation, rating-comovement links 
may also capture different levels of information due to the hetero-
geneity of credit ratings in the cross section. To investigate how cross-
sectional  credit  rating  heterogeneity  affects  cross-stock  return  pre-
dictability, we explore the following three dimensions of rating het-
erogeneity: (𝑖) salient vs. non-salient rating updates; (𝑖𝑖) investment 
grade vs. non-investment grade rating levels; (𝑖𝑖𝑖) more vs. less rating 
competitions.

First, we examine salient rating update events. That is, rating down-
grades from investment-grade to non-investment grade (from BBB− or 
above to BB+ or below), or rating upgrades from non-investment grade 

35 The results are robust to excluding the bottom 30% firm links with the 
lowest link informativeness.
36 The  loose  and  tight  criterion  for  defining  rating  comovement  exactly 
follows that in Table  10.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

to investment grade (from BB+ or below to BBB− or above). Given the 
broad definition, these rating updates contain more observations, and 
at the same time these rating updates attract significant attention in the 
market and are more likely to be perceived by equity market investors. 
Therefore, if two firms are linked through rating comovements which 
contain  such  salient  rating  update  events,  the  two  firms’  economic 
linkage  is  more  likely  to  be  perceived  by  equity  market  investors. 
In other words, the market segmentation between the bond market 
and the equity market is less severe in this case, and as a result, the 
cross-firm return predictability should be less pronounced.

We  find  consistent  results  in  the  Internet  Appendix  Table  A.14. 
Specifically, we examine the rating comovements underlying each pair 
of rating comovement-linked firms. If the rating comovements under-
lying a pair of firms involve at least one salient rating update, we 
define such rating comovements as salient rating comovements. We 
assign such focal-peer firm pairs into the salient rating comovement 
group, and we assign the rest of the focal-peer firm pairs into the non-
salient group. Our portfolio sorting tests show that the cross-firm return 
predictability is much weaker among the subsample of firms identified 
as connected by salient rating-comovement links.

Second, the aforementioned test on rating changes also motivates 
us to examine heterogeneities on rating levels, as investment grade 
and non-investment grade themselves are also very important signals 
to bond investors. We conjecture that non-investment grade bonds are 
more sensitive to firm-level information (e.g., Gredil et al. (2022)); 
thus,  rating  comovement  among  firms  with  non-investment  grade 
bonds can be a stronger indicator for economic linkage. Considering 
this, our main results should be mainly concentrated on the subsample 
where both focal firms and peer firms are non-investment grade. To 
test this conjecture, we perform a double-sort analysis based on the 
average returns of peer firms (𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡) and the average numeric credit 
rating across the focal firm and its peer firms. Results from Internet 
Appendix Table A.15 confirm this conjecture.

Third, we examine the degree of competition among credit rating 
agencies.  In  the  context  of  credit  rating  industry,  a  larger  number 
of rating agencies leads to a higher degree of competition of rating 
agencies on the limited market space. Prior literature has suggested 
that, higher degree of competition among information producers could 
lead to more bias in information production (e.g., Hong and Kacperczyk 
(2010)). In the credit rating industry, as shown in Becker and Milbourn 
(2011), when Fitch entered the market space and intensified competi-
tion among rating agencies, credit rating quality dropped significantly. 
Therefore,  we  hypothesize  that  in  a  less  competitive  credit  rating 
market, credit rating updates are more informative, and credit rating 
comovement identified in a less competitive environment will capture 
a more informative economic link. As a result, there should be stronger 
return predictability for firm pairs facing less competition from credit 
rating agencies. To test this conjecture, we follow Becker and Milbourn 
(2011) and construct an industry-level Fitch market share as a proxy 
for the level of competition among credit rating agencies. We double-
sort our sample by average peer firm return and the median value of 
focal-peer average Fitch market share. Internet Appendix Table A.16 
shows that our results are indeed concentrated on the subsample with 
relatively low competition from credit rating agencies.

6.3. Robustness

In  this  section,  we  present  robustness  checks  for  the  cross-firm 
return predictability. First, we use alternative methods to construct 
rating-comovement links. In our main results, we define a rating co-
movement event as two firms receiving a rating co-update within a 
10-day window, and we identify a firm pair connected through rating 
comovement if the two firms experienced rating comovements at least 
three times in the past three years. Here, by narrowing the ‘‘10-day rat-
ing comovement window’’ and the ‘‘three-year lookback window’’, we 
can more precisely identify firms with commonalities in fundamentals; 

16 

J. Feng et al.

however, this is at the cost of identifying a smaller number of firm pairs 
and reducing the power of tests in our sample.

As robustness checks, we vary the measurement window for rat-
ing comovements. We first adopt a tighter measurement window by 
requiring rating comovement to occur within a 7-day window and by 
identifying only the firm linkage when the two firms experienced rating 
comovements at least three times in the past two years. Second, we 
adopt a looser measurement window by requiring rating comovements 
to occur within a 14-day window and only identifying the firm linkage 
if the two firms experienced at least three times of rating comovements 
in the past four years. We reconstruct rating-comovement links under 
different measurement windows and re-perform the portfolio analysis 
as in Table  3. Table  10 reports the results.

In  Table   10  Panel  A,  one  can  see  that  the  long-short  portfolios 
formed based on rating-comovement links deliver significant six-factor 
alphas under alternative methods of link construction. Consistent with 
the intuition that we can more precisely identify firms with correlated 
fundamentals under a narrower measurement window for rating co-
movements, we indeed find the average monthly six-factor alphas of 
the long-short portfolio are higher under the tighter link construction 
method than under the looser link construction method (0.51% versus 
0.34%). In Panel B, we adopt alternative sample stock filters and re-
perform the portfolio sorting analysis as in Table  3. We find the results 
are robust. For example, Column (3) shows that, after excluding stocks 
with market capitalization smaller than NYSE 20th percentile value or 
stocks with share price below $5, the 𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑒𝑡 long-short portfolio still 
earns an average monthly six-factor alpha of 0.42% (𝑡-statistic = 3.41).
We conduct several additional robustness checks based on the port-
folio sorting exercise in Table  3. Given that macro or industry shocks 
usually affect many firms at the same time, focal firms that are linked to 
many peers are more likely to be connected through macro or industry 
shocks, in the Internet Appendix Table A.17, we exclude focal firms that 
are linked to more than 40/50/60 peer firms. In the Internet Appendix 
Table A.18, we exclude credit ratings issued during the NBER-defined 
crisis period. In the Internet Appendix Table A.19, we exclude firms in 
the top three industries (Fama–French 30 industry classification) with 
the most rating updates in each year. In the Internet Appendix Table 
A.20, we exclude the firm pairs that are in the same industry (Fama–
French 30 industry classification). In the four tests, we still find strong 
cross-firm return predictability.

7. Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a new way to identify economic connec-
tions among firms by examining the repeated credit-rating comove-
ments  of  their  corporate  bonds.  Unlike  previously  documented  in-
terfirm linkages, these connections are salient to bond investors but 
not to stock investors due to market segmentation. As a result, stock 
investors underreact to the value-relevant information embedded in the 
prices of connected firms, generating a cross-stock return predictability. 
Moreover,  this  effect  mainly  concentrates  on  focal  firms  that  have 
poorer information environment than their peer firms.

To provide content to what bond market specific information credit 
rating  updates  reflect,  we  explore  four  types  of  firm  linkages  that 
arise from the bond market: (i) firms with direct trade credit rela-
tion; (ii) firms with common bank lenders; (iii) firms with common 
corporate  bond  fund  owners;  (iv)  firms  with  shared  bond  analysts. 
We find our rating-comovement momentum factor positively loads on 
the composite factor constructed based on the four aforementioned 
links. Furthermore, rating-comovement momentum factor can largely 
subsume  the  composite  factor,  but  not  vice  versa,  suggesting  that 
rating-comovement  can  summarize  the  firm  economic  relationships 
underlying the composite factor.

Further, we conduct in-depth analyses to show that our results are 
not a rediscovery of existing interfirm linkages. Our risk-adjusted long-
short returns constructed from firms with linked bonds survive after 

17 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

controlling for various interfirm linkages. In particular, shared analyst 
coverage discovered by Ali and Hirshleifer (2020) cannot explain our 
finding, because equity analysts due to market segmentation tend to 
overlook  the  economic  connections  arising  from  the  bond  market, 
and hence their forecasts respond slowly to value-relevant information 
observed from firms with connected bonds.

Interestingly, in the context of market segmentation, some novel 
results  arise.  First,  we  find  that  the  cross-firm  return  predictability 
arising from linked bonds is asymmetric across markets. That is, the 
cross-predictability exists only in the equity market where the economic 
connection is not salient; it does not exist in the bond market where the 
connection is more likely to be well-recognized. Second, we find that 
the cross-stock return predictability depends on the degree of market 
segmentation.  Dual  holders  who  own  a  significant  portion  of  both 
equities and bonds of the focal firm could facilitate the information 
integration between bond markets and equity markets, as a result, the 
sluggish price reaction can be largely mitigated. These two findings, 
together with the evidence on equity analysts’ slow forecast updates, 
distinguish  our  results  from  prior  studies  on  cross-firm  return  pre-
dictability, and further support market segmentation as the mechanism 
behind cross-firm return predictability.

Our study provides important implications regarding market seg-
mentation  and  market  (in)efficiency.  For  policymakers,  our  results 
suggest that, to facilitate information flows and price discovery, in-
stitutional investors should be encouraged to trade more actively in 
both equity and bond markets. For institutional investors, it may be 
beneficial  to  break  cultural  norms  by  integrating  equity  teams  and 
fixed-income teams together to explore more mispricing opportunities 
that arise from market segmentation.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jian  Feng:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Data  curation.  Xiaolin 
Huo: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Data curation. Xin 
Liu:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Supervi-
sion,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation, 
Conceptualization.  Yifei  Mao:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing 
– original draft, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project adminis-
tration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Hong Xiang: 
Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visualization, 
Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Xin Liu reports financial support was provided by National Natural 
Science Foundation of China. Hong Xiang reports financial support was 
provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China. If there 
are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104110.

Data availability

Economic Links from Bonds and Cross-Stock Return Predictability (Ori
ginal data) (Mendeley Data)

J. Feng et al.

References

Ali, U., Hirshleifer, D., 2020. Shared analyst coverage: Unifying momentum spillover 

effects. J. Financ. Econ. 136 (3), 649–675.

Altman,  E.I.,  1968.  Financial  ratios,  discriminant  analysis  and  the  prediction  of 

corporate bankruptcy. J. Financ. 23 (4), 589–609.

Anton, M., Polk, C., 2014. Connected stocks. J. Financ. 69 (3), 1099–1127.
Auh, J.K., Bai, J., 2020. Cross-asset information synergy in mutual fund families. 

National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 26626.

Bar-Isaac, H., Shapiro, J., 2013. Ratings quality over the business cycle. J. Financ. Econ. 

108 (1), 62–78.

Bartram, S.M., Griffin, J.M., Lim, T.-H., Ng, D.T., 2015. How important are foreign 
ownership linkages for international stock returns? Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (11), 
3036–3072.

Becker, B., Milbourn, T., 2011. How did increased competition affect credit ratings? J. 

Financ. Econ. 101 (3), 493–514.

Bessembinder, H., Kahle, K.M., Maxwell, W.F., Xu, D., 2008. Measuring abnormal bond 

performance. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (10), 4219–4258.

Bharath, S.T., Shumway, T., 2008. Forecasting default with the Merton distance to 

default model. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21 (3), 1339–1369.

Blanco, R., Brennan, S., Marsh, I.W., 2005. An empirical analysis of the dynamic 
relation between investment-grade bonds and credit default swaps. J. Financ. 60 
(5), 2255–2281.

Cao, J., Chordia, T., Lin, C., 2016. Alliances and return predictability. J. Financ. Q. 

Anal. 51 (5), 1689–1717.

Carhart, M.M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. J. Financ. 52 (1), 

57–82.

Chen,  J.,  Jung,  M.J.,  Ronen,  J.,  2017.  The  confirmation  effect  of  analyst 

recommendation reiterations. J. Acc. Audit. Financ. 32 (4), 576–592.

Chen, T., Zhang, L., Zhu, Q., 2019. Dual ownership and risk-taking incentives in 

managerial compensation. Available at SSRN 3427030.

Chien, Y., Cole, H., Lustig, H., 2011. A multiplier approach to understanding the macro 

implications of household finance. Rev. Econ. Stud. 78 (1), 199–234.

Choi, J., Kim, Y., 2018. Anomalies and market (dis) integration. J. Monet. Econ. 100, 

16–34.

Chordia, T., Goyal, A., Nozawa, Y., Subrahmanyam, A., Tong, Q., 2017. Are capital 
market anomalies common to equity and corporate bond markets? An empirical 
investigation. J. Financ. Q. Anal. 52 (4), 1301–1342.

Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., 2008. Economic links and predictable returns. J. Financ. 63 

(4), 1977–2011.

Cohen, L., Lou, D., 2012. Complicated firms. J. Financ. Econ. 104 (2), 383–400.
Collin-Dufresn, P., Goldstein, R.S., Martin, J.S., 2001. The determinants of credit spread 

changes. J. Financ. 56 (6), 2177–2207.

Dick-Nielsen,  J.,  2014.  How  to  clean  enhanced  TRACE  data.  Available  at  SSRN 

Dickerson, A., Mueller, P., Robotti, C., 2023. Priced risk in corporate bonds. J. Financ. 

2337908.

Econ. 150 (2), 103707.

Duarte, J., Longstaff, F.A., Yu, F., 2007. Risk and return in fixed-income arbitrage: 

Nickels in front of a steamroller? Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (3), 769–811.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116 

Gebhardt,  W.R.,  Hvidkjaer,  S.,  Swaminathan,  B.,  2005.  Stock  and  bond  market 

interaction: Does momentum spill over? J. Financ. Econ. 75 (3), 651–690.

(1), 1–22.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104110 

Gredil, O.R., Kapadia, N., Lee, J.H., 2022. On the information content of credit ratings 
and market-based measures of default risk. J. Financ. Econ. 146 (1), 172–204.
Grier, P., Katz, S., 1976. The differential effects of bond rating changes among industrial 

and public utility bonds by maturity. J. Bus. 49 (2), 226–239.

Hand, J.R., Holthausen, R.W., Leftwich, R.W., 1992. The effect of bond rating agency 

announcements on bond and stock prices. J. Financ. 47 (2), 733–752.

Hite, G., Warga, A., 1997. The effect of bond-rating changes on bond price performance. 

Financ. Anal. J. 53 (3), 35–51.

Manag. Sci. 64 (8), 3735–3755.

Hoberg, G., Phillips, G., 2018. Conglomerate industry choice and product language. 

Hong, H., Kacperczyk, M., 2010. Competition and bias. Q. J. Econ. 125 (4), 1683–1725.
Hong, H., Stein, J.C., 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and 

overreaction in asset markets. J. Financ. 54 (6), 2143–2184.

Hou, K., 2007. Industry information diffusion and the lead-lag effect in stock returns. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (4), 1113–1138.

Huang, X., 2015. Thinking outside the borders: Investors’ underreaction to foreign 

operations information. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (11), 3109–3152.

Jensen, T.I., Kelly, B., Pedersen, L.H., 2023. Is there a replication crisis in finance? J. 

Jin, Z., Li, F.W., 2020. Geographic links and predictable returns. Available at SSRN 

Financ. 78 (5), 2465–2518.

3617417.

Jorion, P., Liu, Z., Shi, C., 2005. Informational effects of Regulation FD: Evidence from 

rating agencies. J. Financ. Econ. 76 (2), 309–330.

Kaminsky, G.L., Reinhart, C.M., 2001. Bank lending and contagion: Evidence from the 
Asian crisis. In: Regional and Global Capital Flows: Macroeconomic Causes and 
Consequences. University of Chicago Press, pp. 73–99.

Kapadia, N., Pu, X., 2012. Limited arbitrage between equity and credit markets. J. 

Financ. Econ. 105 (3), 542–564.

Lee,  C.M.,  Shi,  T.T.,  Sun,  S.T.,  Zhang,  R.,  2024.  Production  complementarity  and 

information transmission across industries. J. Financ. Econ. 155, 103812.

Lee, C.M., Sun, S.T., Wang, R., Zhang, R., 2019. Technological links and predictable 

returns. J. Financ. Econ. 132 (3), 76–96.

Li, S.Z., Yuan, P., Zhou, G., 2023. Can asymmetric information in corporate bonds 

predict equity market return? Available at SSRN 4374753.

May, A.D., 2010. The impact of bond rating changes on corporate bond prices: New 
evidence from the over-the-counter market. J. Bank. Financ. 34 (11), 2822–2836.
Menzly, L., Ozbas, O., 2010. Market segmentation and cross-predictability of returns. 

J. Financ. 65 (4), 1555–1580.

rates. J. Financ. 29 (2), 449–470.

information. J. Financ. 42 (3).

Merton, R.C., 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest 

Merton, R.C., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete 

Moskowitz, T.J., Grinblatt, M., 1999. Do industries explain momentum? J. Financ. 54 

Ohlson, J.A., 1980. Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy. J. 

(4), 1249–1290.

Acc. Res. 18, 109–131.

Stud. 33 (10), 4721–4770.

1270–1315.

Available at SSRN 4307421.

Parsons, C.A., Sabbatucci, R., Titman, S., 2020. Geographic lead-lag effects. Rev. Financ. 

Stambaugh,  R.F.,  Yuan,  Y.,  2017.  Mispricing  factors.  Rev.  Financ.  Stud.  30  (4), 

Yu, J., 2022. Getting the banks on board: Accounts receivable financing in the US. 

Zhang,  X.F.,  2006.  Information  uncertainty  and  stock  returns.  J.  Financ.  61  (1), 

105–137.

18 

