Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Private equity in the hospital industry(cid:73)
,∗, Yongseok Kim b, Merih Sevilir c,d
Janet Gao a
a Georgetown University, McDonough School of Business, 37th and O Streets, WA, 20057, DC, United States
b Tulane University, Freeman School of Business, 7 McAlister Dr, New Orleans, 70118, LA, United States
c Halle Institute, Kleine Maerkerstrasse 8, Halle, 06108, Saxony-Anhalt, Germany
d ESMT-Berlin, Schlossplatz 1, Berlin, 10178, Germany

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Private Equity in the Hospital Ind
ustry (Original data)

Keywords:
Private equity
Hospital acquisitions
Employment
Operational efficiency
Real patient outcomes
Hospital prices

1. Introduction

We examine the survival prospects, employment profiles, and patient outcomes at private equity (PE)-acquired 
hospitals. Target hospitals maintain their survival rates while significantly reducing employment and wage 
expenditures. The number of core medical workers drops temporarily, but returns to its pre-acquisition level 
in  the  long  run.  However,  administrative  job  and  wage  cuts  persist  over  the  long  term,  particularly  at 
previously nonprofit hospitals. Using proprietary insurance claims data, we find no significant changes in 
patient demographics or inpatient prices at PE-acquired hospitals. While patient satisfaction declines, there is 
no evidence of increased patient mortality or readmission rates at PE-acquired hospitals.

It is estimated that private equity (PE) firms invested around $200 
billion into the U.S. healthcare industry over the past decade, a large 
fraction of which is invested in hospitals.1 There are opposing views 
regarding  the  growing  presence  of  PE  firms  in  the  hospital  indus-
try. Proponents claim that they provide hospitals with much-needed 
managerial expertise and operational reforms, which help turn around 
struggling hospitals. Opponents voice concerns that PE firms load hos-
pitals with debt, sell assets, lay off workers, and, in some cases, even 
close hospitals. This debate is particularly important given the eco-
nomic significance of the healthcare industry. This industry contributes 
to nearly 20% of total U.S. GDP, provides critical healthcare to local 
communities, and ranks among the top ten job providers in the U.S. In 
this paper, we seek to shed light on this important debate by examin-
ing outcomes for key stakeholders including investors, employees and 
patients at hospitals acquired by PE firms.

We  study  the  survival  prospects,  employee  profiles,  and  patient 
outcomes at PE-acquired hospitals. Our findings show that PE-acquired 
hospitals do not exhibit higher closure rates, but experience substantial 

cost-cutting.  Cost-cutting  is  focused  on  administrative  expenditures 
instead of core medical functions, reflecting the operational expertise of 
PE (Jensen, 2019; Kaplan and Stromberg, 2009). Our analysis reveals 
no changes in inpatient prices, patient composition, or patient mortality 
and readmission rates. At the same time, patient satisfaction declines, 
possibly due to the reduction in administrative staff.

We compile a sample of 1218 M&A deals in the hospital industry 
over the period from 2001 to 2018. Our focus is on 281 deals where 
the acquirer is a for-profit organization, either a PE firm, a PE-owned 
hospital or a hospital with no PE ownership. These deals involve 610 
unique target hospitals. We analyze PE-acquired hospitals relative to 
a control group of non-acquired hospitals that are closely matched by 
location, time, and pre-event characteristics. We also benchmark the 
effects of PE buyers against non-PE, for-profit buyers by comparing the 
outcomes of the hospitals they acquire. This comparison helps address 
concerns that our results may capture simply the treatment effects or 
target selection by for-profit acquirers that is not specific to PE.

We track target and control hospitals over two horizons around the 
events: a short-run horizon where we compare outcomes during the 
four-year pre-event window ([−4, −1]) with those in the four-year

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank the editor, the referee, Tania Babina, Greg Brown, Alex Edmans, Matthew Grennan, Abhinav 
Gupta, Steve Kaplan, Katharina Lewellen, Xuelin Li, Tong Liu, Song Ma, Stefan Obernberger, Michael Weisbach, Ting Xu, and seminar and conference participants 
at the EFA 2023, AEA 2023, AFA 2022, CICF 2022, CFEA 2021, UNC PERC 2021 conferences, Virtual Corporate Finance Conference, and Humboldt University, 
Indiana University, Nova Business School, University of Oxford, Tilburg University, University of Mannheim for comments and suggestions which improved the 
paper significantly. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from Indiana University. All remaining errors are our own.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  janet.gao@georgetown.edu (J. Gao), ykim10@tulane.edu (Y. Kim), Merih.Sevilir@iwh-halle.de (M. Sevilir).

1 Source: A city’s only hospital cut services. How locals fought back. Wall Street Journal, Aug. 2020.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104107
Received 13 December 2024; Received in revised form 19 May 2025; Accepted 23 May 2025
Available online 26 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. 

 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

post-event window ([0, 4]), and a long-run horizon where we contrast 
the pre-event window with a second post-event window spanning years 
[5, 8] after the event. This choice is motivated by the consideration 
that restructuring events often involve large-scale transformation and 
take a long time to implement. Looking only at the short-term effects 
could mask important implications of reforms conducted in acquired 
hospitals.2

We start our analysis with the survival and profitability of acquired 
hospitals. Contrary to the concerns raised in the popular press that PE 
firms tend to close hospitals, we find no evidence of excessive closure 
of PE-acquired hospitals. PE-acquired hospitals significantly improve 
their operating profitability, although this effect becomes statistically 
insignificant in the long-run. These results do not imply, however, that 
all jobs are preserved at PE-acquired hospitals. We find that employ-
ment at PE-acquired hospitals declines by 6% over the first four-year 
event window and stays at a similar level over the long-term horizon. 
As a natural consequence, the total wage bill goes down by 7% over 
the first four years and becomes 9% lower than its pre-acquisition level 
at the end of the eight-year window following the deal. Together, our 
findings suggest that PE substantially cuts costs at acquired hospitals, 
and target hospitals do not experience a greater likelihood of closure 
compared to the control group.

Although  employment  cuts  can  reduce  operating  costs  and  im-
prove profitability, they can compromise the quality of healthcare and 
the long-term viability of acquired hospitals if they involve essential 
medical workers. Therefore, we examine the employment outcomes 
separately  for  administrative  workers  and  core  workers.  We  define 
core workers as nurses, pharmacists and physicians—those critical for 
healthcare delivery. We find that the number of core workers at PE-
acquired hospitals temporarily drops over the first event window but 
bounces back over the second event window. In other words, at the 
end of our eight-year horizon, the number of core workers does not 
differ from its pre-acquisition level. The short-term reduction of core 
workers may arise from the temporary disruption of operations due 
to corporate restructuring, the re-sorting of workers based on their 
preferences for the work environment in a PE-owned hospital, or a need 
to restructure hospitals’ skilled labor force following PE acquisitions. 
These factors, combined with labor market frictions related to searching 
and  hiring  skilled  workers,  can  result  in  the  temporary  decline  of 
medical workers. Our examination of administrative workers reveals 
different dynamics from those of core workers. We observe a large 
decline in administrative workers, by 17% over the first event window. 
Unlike core workers, the drop in administrative workers does not revert 
back, but stays at 20% below the pre-acquisition level by the end of the 
second event window.

Next, we compare the estimated effects across the samples of PE 
and non-PE, for-profit acquirers. Non-PE, for-profit acquirers serve as a 
basis for comparison because they also have profit motives, but may not 
possess the same level of operational expertise, financial engineering 
capability, or governance discipline as do PE firms. Thus, we expect 
the targets of non-PE, for-profit acquirers to exhibit a lower degree of 
efficiency improvement. We find that target hospitals of non-PE acquir-
ers exhibit a 16% closure likelihood during the eight years after their 
acquisitions. Subsequent to being acquired, these hospitals also reduce 
their total employment, but such a reduction is relatively small and 
statistically insignificant. In terms of worker composition, we observe a 
significant reduction in core workers, but no decline in administrative 

2 Prior  studies  on  the  roles  of  PE  examine  both  the  short-run  effects 
following PE buyouts (e.g., Kaplan, 1989; Davis et al., 2014; Lerner et al., 
2011; Bernstein, 2022) and long-term outcomes (e.g., Kaplan and Stromberg, 
2009). Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) report that the holding periods of PE 
firms have increased substantially since the 1990s, with only 12% of deals 
being  exited  within  24  months  and  around  half  of  the  deals  having  PE 
ownership for over 6 years.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

workers at hospitals acquired by non-PE acquirers, during either the 
short-run or the long-run event window. Our results from this set of 
analyses suggest that the operational changes documented above are 
unique to PE acquirers, but not present for other for-profit acquirers in 
general.

One concern is that our findings may be driven by PE firms selecting 
targets  that  show  signs  of  improved  operational  performance  prior 
to being acquired. We address this concern in two ways. First, we 
examine the pre-acquisition changes in profitability, employment, and 
core and administrative workers at target hospitals. If PE acquirers 
select  hospitals  already  in  the  process  of  cutting  employment,  we 
should observe changes in profitability and employee profiles in the 
pre-acquisition period. However, we do not find this to be the case. In 
particular, the changes in profitability and workers do not occur prior 
to PE acquisitions, but start only after the acquisitions.

Second,  we  follow  the  methodology  in  Liu  (2021)  and  exploit 
the staggered changes in the Corporate Practice of Medicine (CPOM) 
doctrine across states. CPOM prohibits people or business corporations 
without medical licenses, such as PE firms, from practicing medicine 
or employing physicians to perform medical services. The stringency 
of CPOM enforcement varies widely across states and changes over 
time. We compile a list of state-level changes in CPOM stringency by 
manually searching and filtering through state legislation changes, case 
laws, and informal comment letters from state attorney generals that in-
dicate changes in a state government’s strictness towards implementing 
CPOM. Our identification assumption is that the changes in CPOM doc-
trines in a state are not driven by the performance and the operational 
characteristics of hospitals in that state. To verify this assumption, we 
show that many state-level characteristics, such as healthcare spending, 
income, and mortality do not predict changes in the CPOM doctrine. 
Importantly, we document that following a relaxation of CPOM doc-
trines in a state, hospitals in that state are more likely to be acquired 
by PE firms.3 Target hospitals also experience improved profitability 
and declines in employment and wages. Moreover, hospitals in states 
with relaxed CPOM enforcement experience a significant reduction in 
administration  workers,  by  over  9%,  subsequent  to  the  changes  in 
CPOM statute, while having virtually no change in their core workers. 
While these results do not fully eliminate endogeneity concerns, they 
lend  further  support  for  the  argument  that  PE  acquirers  affect  the 
employment profiles and profitability of target hospitals.

We design two additional analyses to strengthen the inferences from 
our employment results. To start, we examine wage rates offered to core 
and administrative workers, which help separate the effects of hospital 
labor demand from the effects of labor supply. We do not observe a 
meaningful change in the wage rate paid to core workers, but a sub-
stantial decline in the wage rate of administrative workers, by around 
7% over the long run. This result supports our interpretation that PE 
acquirers trim spending related to administrative functions. In addition, 
we consider an alternative definition of core workers that consists only 
of nurses and pharmacists, excluding physicians. This helps address 
the concern that cost reports may not track physician hours correctly, 
since physicians may be hired through part-time contracts, employed 
by multiple hospitals, or work under flexible contracts like independent 
contractor agreements.

We subject our results to several robustness analyses. For example, 
we control for commuting zone-year interactive fixed effects to remove 
the confounding effects of changing local conditions. We examine alter-
native employment variables, measured by the ratio of employee counts 
by the number of patients treated. We also test the sensitivity of our 

3 We do not find a tightening of CPOM doctrines in a state to reduce PE 
acquisitions of hospitals in that state. This may be due to the fact that the pre-
existing CPOM doctrine was already restrictive, creating a significant hurdle 
for PE acquisitions. Hence, further restrictions may have not generated further 
effect.

2 

J. Gao et al.

results to the sampling procedure in two ways. In one test, we change 
the hospital characteristics used in the matching process. In the other, 
we exclude cases where the target hospital and its matched control 
are located nearby, so as to mitigate the spillover effects from local 
acquisitions. Our results remain largely unchanged in these alternative 
measurements or samples.

Next, we compare target hospitals with nonprofit status to those 
with for-profit status prior to being acquired. We expect that nonprofit 
targets may experience a greater reduction in administrative workers 
after PE takeover, for at least two reasons. First, nonprofit hospitals 
face no investor scrutiny and may operate less efficiently by employing 
excessive amount of administrative workers prior to being acquired. 
Second,  nonprofit  hospitals  may  prioritize  patient  satisfaction  over 
profitability  and  thus  maintain  substantial  administrative  functions. 
Our evidence is consistent with this conjecture. Over the short-term 
horizon,  total  employment  declines  more  substantially  at  formerly 
nonprofit hospitals than for-profit ones after PE acquisitions. Over the 
long-term, administrative workers experience a 33% decline while core 
workers revert back to their pre-acquisition level at previously non-
profit targets. In contrast, target hospitals with previous for-profit status 
experience significantly smaller reductions in administrative workers.
What are the implications of PE acquisitions of hospitals for pa-
tients? On the one hand, the reduction in overall employment may 
result in worse patient experiences and outcomes. On the other hand, 
patient  outcomes  may  not  deteriorate,  given  that  employment  cuts 
largely consists of administrative workers and not core workers, espe-
cially in the long run. To answer this question, we examine multiple 
dimensions of patient characteristics and outcomes, including patient 
composition, hospital pricing, patient satisfaction, and patient health 
outcomes, including mortality and readmission rates.

To start, we look at how PE acquisitions affect patient composition 
in terms of the case mix index (CMI) (i.e., the measure of resource 
intensive patients treated at a hospital), the outpatient ratio (i.e., the 
ratio  of  patients  treated  in  outside  clinics  relative  to  those  treated 
inside  the  hospital),  the  percentage  of  patients  with  Medicare  and 
Medicaid insurance, and patient demographics such as gender, age, and 
income. We find that the CMI remains unchanged and the outpatient 
ratio decreases significantly in hospitals acquired by PE, suggesting 
that acquired hospitals do not move away from complex procedures 
or focus more on outpatient services to generate greater profit (Baugh 
and Schuur, 2013). Although the fraction of Medicare patients at target 
hospital declines in the initial four-year window, this effect disappears 
in the long run.

We further investigate the changes in patient demographics at PE-
acquired hospitals using information from a large, proprietary database 
on insurance claims from the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI). The 
HCCI database includes health insurance claims for individuals with 
coverage  from  four  large  private  insurance  companies  in  the  U.S.: 
Aetna, Humana, Kaiser Permanente, and Blue Health Intelligence. The 
data cover healthcare services paid for by these insurers from 2012 to 
2018 (the end of our acquisition sample). Analyzing these data, we 
do not find that PE-acquired hospitals shift to serving younger and 
wealthier patients.

We next ask whether PE acquirers are associated with higher prices 
at  target  hospitals.  Our  analysis  focuses  on  inpatient  prices,  which 
account  for  the  most  expensive  procedures,  and  a  major  source  of 
hospital income. We focus on a sample consisting of all inpatient proce-
dure prices as well as seven procedure-specific samples, each focusing 
on one relatively homogeneous procedure (C-section, vaginal delivery, 
hip  replacement,  knee  replacement,  PTCA,  MRI,  and  colonoscopy). 
Compared to matched control hospitals, we do not find evidence that 
PE-acquired hospitals increase inpatient prices significantly. Among the 
seven procedures that we examine, prices do not increase for six of 

3 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

them, with the exception of colonoscopy, where the price increases by 
around 29%, after PE takeovers.4

Overall,  our  results  on  patient  composition  and  pricing  suggest 
that PE-acquired hospitals do not appear to attract or focus more on 
wealthier and younger patients who potentially have lower health risks. 
They do not significantly raise inpatient prices either. In additional 
analyses, we do not detect any evidence that PE-acquired hospitals 
shift towards more profitable operations (such as C-section over vaginal 
birth for child delivery, or catheterization over intensive drug treatment 
for heart attack patients).

We next examine the changes in patient satisfaction. Although PE-
acquired  hospitals  manage  to  restore  their  core  medical  employees 
over the long-term window, the decline in administrative employees 
may lead to poor outcomes in serving patients. We utilize data on 
patient satisfaction from the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Health-
care Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) survey. Our finding suggests 
that patient satisfaction indeed declines across many dimensions at PE-
acquired hospitals compared to control hospitals. At the same time, 
hospitals acquired by non-PE firms also experience similar declines in 
patient satisfaction. Thus, our findings likely capture the interruption 
in services following any takeover by for-profit acquirers.

Finally, we analyze patient mortality rates and readmission rates 
related to heart attack, heart failure, and pneumonia at acquired hos-
pitals. We do not find that patients at PE-acquired hospitals experience 
significant increases in mortality rates. Readmission rates do not in-
crease for PE-acquired hospitals across any of the health conditions 
we  examine  either.  The  lack  of  deterioration  in  patient  outcomes, 
combined with the evidence that patient characteristics do not change, 
suggests that healthcare quality does not deteriorate at PE-acquired 
hospitals. This finding is in line with the evidence presented by con-
temporaneous research such as Liu (2021), Craig et al. (2021), Cerullo 
et al. (2022b), and Bruch et al. (2022).

2. Relation to existing literature

A number of studies in financial economics, health economics and 
medical research examine the effects of PE in the hospital industry.5 
Our study differs from the existing literature in several ways. First, 
our paper is the first study to provide a comprehensive examination 
of the effects of PE on patients, prices, and employees together, using 
a uniform sampling process and empirical methodology. Second, we 
provide the first piece of evidence regarding the survival prospects of 
PE-acquired hospitals, addressing an important policy concern that PE 
may excessively close acquired hospitals. Third, our analysis provides 
unique insights on how PE selectively reduces labor costs, which re-
flects their operational expertise. Our finding that PE substantially and 
persistently reduces administrative workers is particularly noteworthy, 
given that over-sized administrative functions are a major source of 
operating inefficiency in the hospital industry.6 Finally, our evidence 

4 Liu (2021) examine how PE acquisitions affect outpatient prices. Our 
results add to the literature by looking at inpatient prices, which account for 
on average 58 percent of total charges in our matched sample.

5 Borsa et al. (2023) identify 9 recent papers studying various effects of 
PE in the hospital industry, among which only (Liu, 2021) is in the area of 
financial economics and the remaining 8 are in the field of health economics 
and medicine. Out of the 8 papers outside financial economics, La France 
et al. (2021), La Forgia et al. (2022) do not represent direct comparisons to 
our paper as the former provides a qualitative case comparison and the latter 
provides an analysis of outpatient anesthesia facilities acquired by PE.

6 Shrank et al. (2019) review estimates from 54 unique academic articles 
and government-based reports and estimate that administrative complexity 
contributes to $265.6 billion of annual wasteful expenditure, the largest across 
all  estimated  categories.  Consistent  with  our  findings,  both  Cerullo  et  al. 
(2022a) and Offodile II et al. (2021) document a reduction in total employment 
at PE-acquired hospitals, but do not separate core workers from administrative 
workers or distinguish short-term from long-term effects.

J. Gao et al.

suggests that a channel through which PE improves hospital efficiency 
is by converting nonprofit hospitals into for-profit ones, thus providing 
hospitals with investor accountability.

Different from most studies in this area, Liu (2021) and our study 
provide a causal interpretation of how PE affects hospitals beyond a 
selection effect. We further differentiate from Liu (2021) by looking 
into how PE acquisitions affect core and administrative workers, and by 
examining the changes in inpatient prices instead of outpatient prices. 
In our sample of hospitals, inpatient charges account for around 58% of 
total patient charges. Inpatient care also tends to be significantly more 
costly than outpatient care. Thus, examining if PE acquisitions lead to 
changes in inpatient prices is crucial in understanding their impact on 
patients.

Our paper is also related to the contemporaneous studies on the 
role of PE in the nursing home industry. Gandhi et al. (2020b) doc-
ument positive effects of PE on nursing homes in highly competitive 
markets. Gupta et al. (2021), on the other hand, find that PE reduces 
the quality of care at nursing homes. Gandhi et al. (2020a) document 
worse patient outcomes at PE-acquired nursing homes during COVID-
19. Our analysis complements these studies by examining PE acquirers 
in the hospital industry, an industry accounting for a large fraction of 
employment in many labor markets.

The difference in our findings and those in Gandhi et al. (2020a) 
and Gupta et al. (2021) can be attributed to the fundamental differences 
between the nursing home industry and the hospital industry. To start, 
nursing homes serve older patients, with an average patient age above 
80. These patients face relatively fewer options in selecting nursing 
homes  and  often  choose  ones  close  to  home.  They  are  often  unin-
formed of nursing home quality and have lower ability to advocate for 
themselves. This means that PE investors in the nursing home industry 
may  be  able  to  cut  cost  at  the  expense  of  patient  welfare  without 
damaging nursing homes’ revenue or long-term reputation. In contrast, 
the average hospital patient is younger and more mobile. Hence, PE 
investors in the hospital industry may be constrained in the extent to 
which they can cut expenditures on healthcare services, as drastic cost-
cutting may push away patients and reduce revenue. Another unique 
feature of PE investors in the hospital industry is that they transition 
nonprofit hospitals to for-profit hospitals in some deals. We document 
that providing hospitals with investor accountability is potentially an 
important mechanism through which PE can institute changes in target 
hospitals. In contrast, the vast majority of nursing homes are already 
owned by for-profit firms, leaving little room for this mechanism.7

More broadly, our study adds to the literature examining the effect 
of financial and credit constraints on hospital outcomes (e.g., Adelino 
et al., 2015, 2021; Aghamolla et al., 2021; Cornaggia et al., 2021) and 
the literature on hospital mergers. Studies on hospital mergers typically 
do not separate acquirers into PE or non-PE, but mainly focus on the 
impact of mergers on hospital prices and costs (Dafny, 2009; Lewis 
and Pflum, 2017; Schmitt, 2017; Cooper et al., 2019; Dafny et al., 
2019; Craig et al., 2021).8 We extend this line of research by focusing 
on PE acquirers and examining their impact on prices, employees and 
patients.

More generally, we contribute to the broad literature examining 
the operational and employment effects of PE buyouts (see, among 
others, Kaplan, 1989; Bernstein and Sheen, 2016; Boucly et al., 2011; 
Davis et al., 2014; Olsson and Tåg, 2017; Antoni et al., 2019), as well 

7 Griffin  and  Priest  (2024)  show  that  opportunistic  over-billing  is 
widespread  among  profit-oriented  nursing  homes  and  exists  beyond  those 
nursing homes acquired by PE. Morris et al. (2022) link aggressive cost-cutting 
efforts at nursing homes to high financial leverage and show that the link is 
not unique to PE ownership.

8 Beaulieu  et  al.  (2020)  examine  the  quality  of  healthcare  at  acquired 
hospitals,  but  do  not  focus  on  PE  acquirers.  Prager  and  Schmitt  (2021) 
investigate  the  implication  of  hospital  mergers  on  the  local  labor  market 
concentration for nurses and pharmacists.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

as the burgeoning research documenting PE involvement in specific 
industries (Bernstein and Sheen, 2016; Spaenjers and Steiner, 2021; 
Fracassi et al., 2022; Ewens et al., 2022; Howell et al., 2022). The 
hospital industry provides us with unique advantages to investigate the 
role of PE firms in transforming acquired companies. First, we study the 
community impact of PE acquisitions by looking into their influence 
on hospital survival, healthcare quality, and hospital prices. Second, 
we have detailed information regarding the operational profile of hos-
pitals, including operating performance, the number of beds, patient 
composition, and clinical complexity. Such granular information allows 
us to investigate in-depth how PE reshapes the operations of acquired 
companies in ways that have not been feasible in earlier studies. Third, 
although the PE literature analyzed the labor profile of acquired firms 
extensively, our paper provides a more nuanced perspective as we are 
able to observe administrative and core workers separately—arguably 
the two most important occupations in the industry.

3. Data and sample

3.1. Hospital m&as and the classification of acquirers

To  compile  a  list  of  hospital  M&As,  we  start  from  the  merger 
roster during the period of 2001 through 2014 provided by Cooper 
et  al.  (2019),  and  then  extend  the  sample  to  2018  following  their 
methodology.

First, we use the American Hospital Association (AHA)’s Annual 
Survey of Hospitals and identify the changes in system identifiers of in-
dividual hospitals, which likely suggest changes in hospital ownership. 
Next, we manually verify whether a change in system identifier is in-
deed associated with an acquisition by manually validating these events 
across several M&A databases, including SDC, Factset, and Becker’s 
Hospital Review. In this process, we match the list of AHA system 
changes with acquisitions recorded in these databases based on the 
names and locations of target hospitals and acquirers, as well as the 
completion date of the deals. We also supplement the acquisition list 
based on information from these databases and record deals that are 
not correctly captured by changes in the AHA system IDs. When the 
matching  between  Becker’s  and  the  AHA  is  ambiguous,  we  search 
internet resources including local newspaper articles and the American 
Hospital Directory (AHD) to verify the accuracy of the matches.

The above process yields a sample of 1,218 M&A deals that occurred 
during the period of 2001 through 2018. The deals involve 478 unique 
acquirers and 1,686 unique target hospitals. Among these deals, we fo-
cus on 281 acquisitions where the acquirer is a for-profit organization. 
These deals involve 610 unique target hospitals.

There are two types of hospital acquisitions where the acquirer is 
associated with a PE firm. First, a PE firm directly acquires a hospital 
or a system of hospitals. Second, PE-acquired hospitals conduct acqui-
sitions themselves, commonly referred to as ‘‘roll-up acquisitions.’’ We 
label acquirers in both types of deals as ‘‘PE acquirers.’’ To identify PE 
acquirers, we obtain information from Preqin, CapitalIQ, and descrip-
tions in Becker’s Hospital Review, and manually verify this information. 
In the manual verification process, we supplement our data regarding 
the identities of hospital acquirers from news articles. We identify 117 
deals where the acquirer is either a PE firm or a PE-owned hospital, 
with 419 unique target hospitals. We refer to the rest of the for-profit 
acquirers, who are for-profit hospitals or hospital systems that have had 
no PE ownership, as Non-PE Acquirers. In our analysis, we distinguish 
PE acquirers from non-PE, for-profit acquirers to understand the unique 
roles of PE investors in selecting targets and in implementing changes 
at acquired hospitals. There are 164 deals by non-PE acquirers in our 
sample, involving 191 target hospitals.

4 

J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

3.2. Hospital characteristics data

3.3. Patient information

We obtain hospital characteristics data from the Healthcare Cost 
Report  Information  System  (HCRIS)  maintained  by  the  Centers  for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). Medicare-certified institutional 
providers are required to submit their annual cost report to a Medi-
care administrative contractor. Such information is then compiled into 
the  HCRIS.  From  these  reports,  we  gather  data  regarding  hospital 
characteristics, employment, and workforce composition.

Hospital characteristics include financial performance metrics such 
as gross margin, operating income over total assets (OI/TA), and returns 
on assets (ROA). It also includes other operational characteristics such 
as hospital size as measured by the log number of beds (Log(Beds)), 
the log gross (net) patient sales (Log(Gross (Net) Patient Sales)), and 
the log number of patients (Log(Patients)), the complexity of operations 
measured by case mix index (CMI ), the outpatient ratio given by the 
ratio of outpatient charges over total charges, as well as the percentage 
of patients that have Medicare (%Medicare) and Medicaid insurance 
(%Medicaid).9

We compile various measures of hospital employment, worker com-
position, and wages to study changes in the operational profile of target 
hospitals. To start, we construct a measure of total employment. The 
HCRIS provides data on paid work hours and wages for employees in 
various occupations. Paid work hours are then converted to full-time 
equivalent (FTE) employee counts based on the total number of work 
hours in a year. Specifically, annual employment is defined as the total 
paid work hours divided by 2,080 (40 hrs/week × 52 weeks), then 
converted to log terms (Log(Employment)).

For  employee  composition,  we  focus  on  core  medical  workers 
and administrative workers. Core medical workers include physicians, 
nurses, and pharmacists, who are essential in providing quality health 
care.10  The  list  encompasses  roles  related  to  both  Medicare  Part  A 
(inpatient services) and Medicare Part B (primarily outpatient services). 
It also includes contract physicians, who are not directly employed by 
hospitals but work as independent contractors or through physician 
group practices. Administrative employees are a subset of non-core 
workers, whose wages constitute an important component of hospital 
overhead costs (Shrank et al., 2019). Employees outside these cate-
gories include maintenance and repair staff, housekeeping, cafeteria 
employees, etc.

Based on HCRIS wage breakdown across employee categories, we 
construct various metrics of worker composition. First, we examine 
the log number of core workers (Log(Core Workers)) as well as the 
log  number  of  administrative  workers  (Log(Admin  Workers)).  In  ro-
bustness tests, we also scale the number of employees, core workers, 
and administrative workers by the number of patients treated at the 
hospital.

Finally, we measure the hourly wages paid to core workers and ad-
ministrative workers, Log(Core Wage Rate) and Log(Admin Wage Rate). 
Hourly wage rate is computed as the total wages paid divided by the 
total paid hours within each worker category.

9 We follow Schmitt (2017) and impute the number of treated patients 
as the number of inpatient discharges multiplied by (1 + 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑠
). This 
adjustment is necessary because (1) information on outpatient discharges is not 
available in the CMS, and (2) it accounts for the fact that outpatient treatment 
generally takes up less hospital resources than inpatient treatment.
10 See Appendix  A for detailed job categories. In Table IA5 of the Internet 
Appendix,  we  show  that  our  results  are  robust  when  we  apply  a  more 
restrictive definition of core workers.

𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑠

5 

Data on patient characteristics and hospital procedure prices come 
from the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI). The HCCI data include 
insurance claims from patients who obtain employer-sponsored health-
care  insurance  from  four  large  private  insurance  companies  in  the 
U.S.: Aetna, Humana, Kaiser Permanente, and Blue Health Intelligence. 
The data cover one-third of U.S. individuals with employer-sponsored 
health insurance population, representing over 50 million individuals 
in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. We utilize the information 
from 2012 to 2018, the beginning of the data coverage till the end of 
our acquisition sample.

We start with a sample of 407.1 million insurance claims, including 
patients receiving both inpatient and outpatient services. We require 
each claim observation to have information on the hospital delivering 
the service, leaving us with a sample of 386.8 million insurance claims.
We examine patient gender, age, and income and define the follow-
ing variables: Female, an indicator for female patients; Age, an integer 
ranging from 1–7, indicating seven age bands;11 and Income, the log 
of the average individual income in the zipcode of the patient. We 
infer  patient  income  from  their  residential  location  because  we  do 
not directly observe patients’ income levels. Zipcode-level income data 
come from IRS’ adjusted gross income (AGI).12 For each hospital-year, 
we compute the average patient characteristics by taking the simple or 
weighted average across all patients treated at the hospital-year, with 
weights being the total amount paid to the hospital for the services 
delivered to each patient during that year.

We follow Cooper et al. (2019) and create 8 samples, where the unit 
of observation is at the hospital-year level. The first is a full inpatient 
sample that includes all inpatient admissions. We focus on inpatient 
treatment  prices  because  inpatient  treatments  are  highly  costly  to 
households, and account for a major revenue source for hospitals. To 
create this sample, we first aggregate inpatient claims to the level of a 
single hospital admission characterized by a unique Diagnosis-Related 
Group (DRG) code. For each hospital-year, we compute a risk-adjusted 
inpatient price index following the procedure laid out in Cooper et al. 
(2019), using data from all inpatient admissions in that hospital-year. 
The adjustment accounts for patient characteristics such as gender and 
age, with more details provided in Section I.A of the Internet Appendix.
Each of the other seven samples includes one procedure, namely, 
Hip  Replacement,  Knee  Replacement,  C-Section,  Vaginal  Delivery,
PTCA  (Percutaneous  Transluminal  Coronary  Angioplasty),  MRI,  and
Colonoscopy.  These  seven  procedures  are  relatively  homogeneous, 
minimizing concerns about patient and case heterogeneity in our price 
analysis.  For  hip  and  knee  replacements,  we  focus  on  procedures 
delivered to inpatients between 45 and 64 years old. For C-section and 
vaginal delivery, we limit our analysis to inpatient mothers between 25 
and 34 years old.

Patient satisfaction scores come from the Hospital Consumer As-
sessment  of  Healthcare  Providers  and  Systems  (HCAHPS)  survey,  a 
standardized survey of patients’ perspective of hospital care conducted 
nationally at the annual frequency. The survey contains questions about 
patients’  experience  and  satisfaction  levels  with  each  hospital.  The 
questions relate to many aspects of patient experience, and we focus 
on the ones most representative of the quality of care provided by a 
hospital: quality of communication with nurses and doctors, whether 
patients  get  timely  help,  the  overall  rating  that  patients  assign  to 
a hospital, and whether patients would recommend the hospital to 

11 Age bands are defined as the following: 1: 0–17, 2: 18–24, 3: 25–34, 4: 
35–44, 5: 45–54, 6:55-64, 7:65+
12 IRS Individual Income Tax Zip Code Data comes from https://www.irs.
gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-individual-income-tax-statistics-zip-code-data-soi. 
We compute the average individual income in a zipcode using the total AGI 
over the number of filers.

J. Gao et al.

someone else. For each survey question, the database classifies the 
responses into three categories (top box, middle box, and bottom box) 
and discloses the percentage of respondents in each category. We com-
pute the average response by assigning scores of 1–3 to the categories, 
with 3 corresponding to top box and 1 to bottom box. We then take 
the weighted average of these scores for each question, hospital, and 
year, with the weight being the percentage of respondents in a given 
category. Appendix  B provides more detailed explanation and examples 
for this classification scheme.

We obtain information on patient outcomes such as mortality and 
readmission rates from Hospital Compare Outcome Measures, which is 
publicly disclosed by the CMS and the Hospital Quality Alliance (HQA). 
These databases provide rich information including details of medical 
treatment provided, patient recovery, complications during treatment, 
readmission  rates,  and  mortality  rates.  Hence,  we  follow  the  prior 
literature and focus primarily on mortality and readmission rates as 
proxies for the quality of health care provision (e.g., Ho and Hamilton, 
2000; Propper et al., 2004; Cooper et al., 2011; Gaynor and Town, 
2011; Aghamolla et al., 2021). Mortality rate is the most commonly 
used indicator for the quality of care in hospitals. Readmission rate is 
also used as a measure of the effectiveness of treatment.

Our main measures of healthcare quality include 30-day mortality 
rates  from  heart  attack  (AMI),  heart  failure  (HF),  and  pneumonia 
(PN), as well as 30-day readmission rates following treatment for the 
same conditions. Those measures have been adjusted for patient risk 
using statistical models. Patient risk includes clinical (e.g., types of 
treatments, severity of conditions), demographic (e.g., age and sex), 
and socioeconomic (e.g., race, income, ethnicity) factors.13

3.4. Initial sample construction

With data gathered from the above sources, we compile a hospital-
year panel. Each standalone hospital and each hospital that belongs to 
a system has its own, separate observation. This allows us to follow 
and track an individual hospital after it is acquired. Following Cooper 
et al. (2019), we restrict our sample to general medical and surgical 
hospitals. Military and Veteran Health (VA) hospitals are excluded from 
the sample. For hospitals acquired more than once, we keep the first 
acquisition if those deals are over five years apart. We remove the 
hospitals that experience more than one acquisition within a five-year 
period.  Target  hospitals  are  required  to  have  at  least  two  years  of 
observations before and after the acquisition year, so we can track the 
same hospital around the event.

3.5. Univariate analysis

The hospital industry has experienced growing M&A activity over 
the past two decades. Fig.  1 illustrates this time trend. Panel A reports 
the total number of U.S. hospitals acquired each year and Panel B 
reports the natural logarithm of total asset values of hospitals acquired 
each year. In both panels, white (patterned) columns represent deals 
conducted by for-profit (nonprofit) acquirers. Over our sample period, 
46.5% of the target hospitals were acquired by for-profit organizations. 
Deal volume peaked in 2013, when nearly 240 hospitals were acquired, 
and again in 2018, when the total asset value of acquired hospitals 
reached $175 billion. Overall, hospitals acquired by for-profit organiza-
tions have a combined asset value of $79 billion, a substantial fraction 
of the total value across all acquisitions. These statistics suggest that 
for-profit acquirers play an economically important role in the M&A 
landscape in the hospital industry.

Fig.  2 reports the composition of deals involving different types of 
target hospitals acquired by for-profit organizations. We separate deals 

13 See  more  detailed  explanation  regarding  risk  adjustment  in 
CMSMMSBlueprint.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 1
Summary statistics for the initial (unmatched) sample.
This table reports the summary statistics for the main variables used in our study. 
The  sample  includes  target  hospital  observations  during  the  four  years  prior  to 
their acquisition and all observations from non-target hospitals. Target − Non Target 
represents the difference between the two groups. Detailed variable definitions are 
provided by Appendix  A. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 
5%, and 1%, respectively.

  Log(Employment)
  Log(Core Workers)
  Log(Admin Workers)
  Log(Total Wages)

  Beds
  CMI
  %Medicare
  %Medicaid
  %Outpatient
  Obs

Non Target
6.58
3.97
4.39
17.36

142.24
1.38
0.44
0.13
0.55

49 230

Target

6.38
3.84
4.11
17.10

168.18
1.36
0.41
0.14
0.41

1140

Target−Non Target
−0.20∗∗∗
−0.12∗∗∗
−0.28∗∗∗
−0.26∗∗∗

25.94∗∗∗
−0.02∗∗∗
−0.03∗∗∗
0.02∗∗∗
−0.14∗∗∗

Fig. 1.  Hospital M&A activity by acquirer type. This figure shows the time series 
patterns of hospital M&A activity in our sample. We classify acquired hospitals into two 
groups based on whether the acquirer is a for-profit or a nonprofit institution. Panel A 
reports the number of hospitals acquired by each acquirer type in a given year. Panel 
B reports the log of total asset values (in $) of target hospitals associated with each 
acquirer type.

based on whether the acquirer is a PE firm, and count the number 
of for-profit and nonprofit targets within each category. PE acquirers 
account for the majority of the deals made by for-profit entities (74%), 
and around 70% of target hospitals had for-profit status.

In Table  1, we report and compare the characteristics of all target 
hospitals during the four years prior to their acquisition and hospitals 
that are never acquired during our sample period. Target hospitals 
have a smaller employment size, with fewer core and administrative 
workers, compared to never-acquired hospitals. Target hospitals also 
have lower wage bills than never-acquired hospitals.

We also observe that target hospitals have more beds, lower CMI, 
and a lower outpatient ratio (the ratio of outpatient charges over total 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Fig. 2.  Composition of target hospitals. This figure reports the number of target 
hospitals in our sample taken over by PE acquirers and non-PE, for-profit acquirers. 
Within each acquirer type, we classify targets into two groups based on whether they 
operated as for-profit or nonprofit hospitals prior to being acquired. The height of the 
each column represents the number of target hospitals within each classification.

charges). While target hospitals treat a greater proportion of Medicaid 
patients (those with limited financial resources to pay for health care), 
but a smaller proportion of Medicare patients (65 years or older) than 
non-target hospitals.

4. Empirical methodology

Given  that  target  and  non-target  hospitals  differ  significantly  in 
many dimensions, we follow the existing work on hospital mergers 
such as Schmitt (2017) and Prager and Schmitt (2021) and conduct 
a matched sample analysis. We match each target hospital to a control 
hospital in the following steps. We start with an initial pool of hospitals 
that have not been acquired in the corresponding event window, and 
have at least two years of data prior to the event year. Within this pool, 
we find one ‘‘nearest neighbor’’ hospital based on a Mahalanobis match-
ing method with replacement. The matched control hospital needs to 
locate in the same Census Division and have the same Metropolitan 
area status as the target hospital. It also needs to have the closest 
Mahalanobis  distance  to  the  target  hospital  based  on  their  average 
hospital characteristics (i.e., Log(Beds), CMI, %Medicare, %Medicaid, 
outpatient ratio, and profitability) during the four-year period prior 
to  the  acquisition,  as  well  as  the  log  number  of  core  workers  and 
administrative workers and profitability during the year prior to the 
deal. There are multiple ways to measure profitability, including gross 
margin, operating income over total assets, and return on assets (ROA), 
and these measures are highly correlated. We match on the first prin-
cipal component of the three measures. Matching based on core and 
administrative workers at 𝑡 − 1 helps us control for pre-existing trends 
in the hospitals’ labor force conditions prior to the acquisition.14

Fig.  3 summarizes the covariate balance before and after matching, 
measured by the standardized difference of each variable. The stan-
dardized difference is the average difference between the matched pairs 
(target − control) divided by the standard deviation computed over all 

14 The idea of matching on an outcome variable is also found in other 
matching methodologies such as entropy balancing or synthetic control meth-
ods, whereby the researcher identifies the control group by minimizing the 
difference  in  the  sample  moments  of  the  outcome  variable  between  the 
treatment and control groups (Abadie et al., 2010; Hainmueller, 2012). In 
Section 6 of the Internet Appendix, we verify the robustness of our results 
using alternative matching variables.

7 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

observations. The literature suggests a threshold of 0.1 for the absolute 
standardized differences, under which the treated and control groups 
can be considered comparable (Austin, 2009, 2011). After matching, we 
observe that the standardized differences between target and control 
hospitals fall below 0.1 across all dimensions.

We track each matched pair of hospitals over two event horizons, 
the short-run and the long-run horizon. The short-run horizon tracks 
changes in hospital characteristics from four years prior to the takeover 
([−4, −1]) to four years after ([0, +4]). This horizon conforms to the lit-
erature on the short- to medium-term effects of PE firms (Kaplan, 1989; 
Lerner et al., 2011). The long-run horizon compares hospital conditions 
during the pre-acquisition period ([−4, −1]) to the second four-year 
period after the acquisition (i.e., [+5, +8]), excluding the [0, +4] period. 
This horizon is motivated by Kaplan and Stromberg (2009), which show 
that PE firms have increased their holding periods since the 1990s, 
exiting less than half of the deals within 72 months of their acquisitions. 
Examining the long-run effects helps uncover whether the changes we 
observe in the short run persist, amplify, or revert back in the longer 
term. Finally, we stack these observations associated with all matched 
pairs together. Our testing sample is thus an event-hospital-year panel, 
whereby an event refers to the acquisition of a hospital. We focus on 
private target hospitals by excluding observations related to hospitals 
that become publicly traded.

Table  2 reports the summary statistics related to key variables in 
our matched sample over the [−4, +8] event window. Panel A summa-
rizes employment variables and hospital characteristics. The average 
hospital in this sample has 866 employees, 181 beds, and an outpatient 
ratio of 0.42 on average. Among all job categories of which working 
hours are tractable in the HCRIS, 16% of aggregated working hours 
correspond to core workers and 22% to administrative workers in an 
average hospital. We note that these fractions rank among the highest 
across the 53 occupations provided by the HCRIS. Panel B summarizes 
patient mortality, readmission rates, and patient satisfaction scores in 
the matched sample. In Panel C, we present the summary statistics for 
hospital prices and patient characteristics (extracted from the HCCI 
data) in the matched sample. The price statistics suggest that there 
are significant variations in inpatient treatment and procedure prices 
across hospitals. In addition, we note that female patients account for 
nearly 60% of the overall patient population. The average adjusted 
gross income is approximately 60,000 USD per year.

We examine post-acquisition outcomes at target hospitals relative 
to their matched control hospitals in a difference-in-difference frame-
work. Specifically, we estimate the following regression, both for the 
short-run and the long-run windows: 

𝑌𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝑃 𝐸 𝑇 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡+𝛽2𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑃 𝐸 𝑇 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝑡+𝛾⋅𝑋𝑖,𝑡+𝛼𝑖+𝜇𝑒+𝜏𝑡+𝜖𝑒,𝑖,𝑡, (1)

where 𝑒 indicates an acquisition event, 𝑖 indicates a hospital, and 𝑡
indicates a year around the event. 𝑌𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 represents a variety of hospital 
outcomes that we examine, including operating performance, the log 
of employment, core and administrative workers, the log of wage rates, 
hospital patient characteristics, patient satisfaction, and hospital inpa-
tient prices. PE Target indicates whether hospital 𝑖 has been acquired by 
a PE acquirer in event 𝑒 as of year 𝑡, and zero otherwise. NonPE Target
is an indicator for whether hospital 𝑖 has been acquired by a non-PE 
acquirer in event 𝑒 as of year 𝑡. Both indicators equal zero for years 
[−4, −1] prior to the event.

We control for hospital fixed effects (𝛼𝑖), matched pair fixed effects 
(𝜇𝑒), and event-time fixed effects (𝜏𝑡). Hospital fixed effects allow us 
to trace the same hospital over the event horizon. Matched pair fixed 
effects  are  separate  indicators  for  each  pair  of  matched  target  and 
control hospitals. Including these fixed effects helps us compare within 
a pair of treated and control hospitals. Event time fixed effects are a 
set of 9 indicators for each year in the event window. They absorb 
common time-series changes across the matched pair around the event. 
We  also  include  a  multitude  of  hospital  and  county  controls  (𝑋𝑖𝑡). 
Hospital controls include all variables in the matching process. County 

J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Fig. 3.  Covariate balance. This figure shows the values of standardized differences between target and matched control hospitals. Standardized difference is computed as the 
average difference between the matched pairs (target − control) divided by the standard deviation computed over all observations. Profitability is the first principal component of 
three variables: gross margin, operating income over total assets, and return on assets (ROA). Detailed variable definitions are provided by Appendix  A.

Fig. 4.  Survival analysis of PE and non-PE targets. This figure shows the survival rates of target hospitals in each year after the acquisition. Panel A (B) reports the survival 
likelihoods of target hospitals of PE (non-PE) acquirers. The solid lines represent the Kaplan–Meier estimates, while the dashed lines show their 95-percent confidence intervals.

controls  include  population  size,  one-bedroom  rent,  and  population 
demographics  (e.g.,  the  percentage  of  residents  that  are  Asian  and 
Black)  in  the  county  that  the  target  hospital  is  located.  Similar  to 
existing studies (e.g., Schmitt, 2017; Gupta et al., 2021; Liu, 2021), we 
cluster standard errors by hospital.15

The coefficients of interest are 𝛽1 and 𝛽2, which measure how a 
target hospital changes subsequent to being acquired, compared to the 
concurrent changes in the conditions of its matched control hospital. 
We also report 𝑝 values from the Wald Chi-square test for 𝛽1 = 𝛽2, 
i.e., evaluating whether the changes associated with PE and non-PE 
acquisitions are statistically significantly different from each other.

Non-PE, for-profit acquirers are for-profit hospitals or hospital sys-
tems that do not have PE ownership. Similar to PE acquirers, they 
focus on profit generation and can enhance the operational efficiency of 
target hospitals if the targets previously operated as nonprofit entities 
or were managed inefficiently prior to the takeover. At the same time, 
we note that non-PE, for-profit acquirers may not have the same level 
of operating expertise, financial engineering capability, or governance 
discipline  as  PE  acquirers.  For  example,  non-PE  acquirers  may  not 

15 Our results are robust to several alternative clustering methods, including 
clustering by hospital-system, double clustering by hospital and system, and 
double clustering by hospital and acquirer.

have experience managing a large hospital system, or they may not 
impose high-powered incentives on hospital management. Such differ-
ences may lead to differential target outcomes between PE and non-PE 
acquirers.

5. Main results

5.1. Hospital survival and profitability

There  are  concerns  in  the  popular  press  that  PE  firms  acquire 
hospitals,  close  them,  and  subsequently  sell  assets  owned  by  those 
hospitals.  We  investigate  the  validity  of  such  concerns  using  large-
scale data and tracing the survival likelihood of target hospitals in Fig. 
4. In Panel A (B), we plot the survival rates of PE (non-PE)-acquired 
hospitals. The solid lines indicate the survival rate of a hospital from 
the acquisition event to the eighth year after the event. Higher values 
indicate that the hospital is more likely to remain open. The dotted 
lines indicate the confidence intervals of the estimated survival rates.

The patterns suggest that the survival rate of PE-acquired hospitals 
does not drop statistically significantly from one, as the upper bound 
of the confidence interval overlaps with one. In contrast, the survival 
rate of non-PE-acquired hospitals is statistically significantly lower than 
one. This observation is at odds with the anecdotal claim that PE firms 

8 

J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 2
Summary statistics for the matched sample.
This table reports the summary statistics for the matched sample of targets and controls. We track target and control hospitals 
during the [−4, +8] event period, where an event is defined by the acquisition of a hospital. Panel A reports hospital 
characteristics. Panel B presents summary statistics on patient satisfaction and outcomes. Panel C documents the summary 
statistics for risk-adjusted prices and patient demographics, obtained from the HCCI dataset. Detailed variable definitions are 
provided by Appendix  A.

(A) Hospital Characteristics

  Employment
  Log(Employment)

  Core Workers
  Log(Core Workers)

  Admin Workers
  Log(Admin Workers)

  Total Wages (mil.$)
  Log(Total Wages)

  Beds
  CMI
  %Medicare
  %Medicaid
  %Outpatient

Obs

4,329
4,329

4,328
4,328

4,328
4,328

4,344
4,344

4,399
4,309
4,399
4,399
4,398

Mean

865.54
6.52

67.14
3.86

82.02
4.21

48.21
17.39

181.09
1.38
0.38
0.15
0.42

Std

626.10
0.72

62.70
0.88

59.74
0.66

37.89
0.83

121.64
0.21
0.13
0.11
0.15

Median

708.58
6.56

47.86
3.89

67.81
4.23

38.60
17.47

148.00
1.38
0.38
0.12
0.40

(B) Patient Satisfaction and Patient Outcomes
Mean

Obs

Std

Median

  Mortality for Heart Attack (AMI)
  Mortality for Heart Failure
  Mortality for Pneumonia

  Readmission for Heart Attack (AMI)
  Readmission for Heart Failure
  Readmission for Pneumonia

  Nurse Comm.
  Doctor Comm.
  Receive Help
  Hospital Rating
  Recommendation

1,659
1,852
1,864

1,244
1,566
1,579

2,427
2,427
2,427
2,427
2,427

15.36
11.20
12.22

18.90
23.91
17.93

2.67
2.73
2.47
2.53
2.58

1.70
1.49
2.44

1.70
2.07
1.59

0.10
0.08
0.13
0.13
0.12

15.30
11.00
11.80

19.00
24.00
18.00

2.68
2.73
2.48
2.54
2.59

P25

451.88
6.12

25.32
3.27

42.91
3.78

21.76
16.90

101.00
1.25
0.29
0.06
0.30

P25

14.10
10.00
10.40

17.70
22.30
16.90

2.61
2.68
2.38
2.45
2.51

P75
1083.62 
6.99

89.51  
4.51

102.29  
4.64

62.13  
17.94  

235.00  
1.54
0.47
0.21
0.53

P75  
16.40 
12.00 
13.60 

20.00 
25.40 
19.00 

2.74  
2.78  
2.56  
2.61  
2.67  

(C) Hospital Prices and Patient Characteristics (Source: HCCI)

Obs

Mean

Std

Median

P25

P75

  Price For:
  Inpatient
  Hip Replacement
  Knee Replacement
  C-Section
  Vaginal Delivery
  PTCA
  Colonoscopy
  MRI
  Log(Price) For:
  Inpatient
  Hip Replacement
  Knee Replacement
  C-Section
  Vaginal Delivery
  PTCA
  Colonoscopy
  MRI
  Patient Characteristics:
  Female (Simple Average)
  Female (Weighted Average)
  Age (Simple Average)
  Age (Weighted Average)
  Income (Simple Average)
  Income (Weighted Average)
  Log(Income (Simple Average))
  Log(Income (Weighted Average))

606
425
500
516
532
276
673
619

606
424
500
516
530
276
671
618

769
769
769
769
769
741
769
741

15 580.81
24 909.85
24 261.13
9510.26
6103.88
26 632.11
1902.95
1121.82

9.62
10.05
10.02
9.00
8.64
10.12
7.41
6.89

0.59
0.57
4.06
4.44
61 514.45
59 871.64
10.99
10.96

4064.60
9417.38
9311.91
3839.28
2418.38
9555.16
996.96
568.70

0.24
0.43
0.42
1.98
0.40
0.37
0.57
0.54

0.05
0.07
0.40
0.47
19 472.13
18 392.87
0.28
0.27

15 162.60
23 930.30
22 598.13
9145.81
5936.74
24 799.47
1723.64
1035.83

9.63
10.09
10.03
9.12
8.69
10.12
7.45
6.95

0.59
0.57
4.11
4.50
55 949.80
54 685.72
10.93
10.91

13 079.04
18 749.61
17 790.12
6803.50
4313.72
19 545.93
1147.37
648.95

9.48
9.84
9.79
8.83
8.37
9.88
7.05
6.48

17 361.56 
29 869.37 
29 782.37 
11 432.77 
7431.08  
32 864.82 
2448.31  
1501.72  

9.76
10.31
10.30
9.34
8.91
10.40
7.81
7.31

0.57
0.54
3.91
4.29
48 291.93
47 455.93
10.79
10.77

0.63
0.60
4.29
4.71
68 470.64 
66 483.43 
11.13
11.10

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 3
Profitability at target hospitals.
This table examines changes in profitability at target hospitals around acquisitions. The dependent variable for columns (1) and (2) is Gross 
Margin, which is net income from service to patients (as given in HCRIS) over net patient revenues (as given in HCRIS). The dependent variable 
for columns (3) and (4) is OI/TA, which is net income from service to patients (as given in HCRIS) over total assets. The dependent variable 
for column (5) and (6) is ROA, which is net income (total income−total other expenses, as given in HCRIS) over total assets. PE Target turns to 
one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. Non-PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 𝐻0’s 
provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether two coefficients are statistically significantly different from each other. Hospital 
Controls include the log of total beds (Log(Beds)), case mix index (CMI ), percentage of patients with Medicare (%Medicare), percentage of 
patients with Medicaid (%Medicaid), and the percentage of patients that are outpatients (%Outpatient ). County Controls include the percentage 
of Black residents (%Black), the percentage of Asian residents (%Asian), log of population (Log(Pop)), and the log of one bedroom rent in a 
county (Log(FMR)). See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors are heteroskedasticity 
robust and clustered by hospital. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
  Dep. Var.:

OI/TA

ROA

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

Gross Margin
(1)
[0, 4]

0.0015
(0.14)

0.0206
(1.00)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.36

3,685
0.58

(2)
[5, 8]

0.0214
(0.86)

0.0321
(0.79)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.81

2,230
0.56

(3)
[0, 4]

0.0399∗∗
(2.36)

0.0465
(1.23)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.87

3,677
0.56

(4)
[5, 8]

0.0333
(0.88)

0.0021
(0.04)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.61

2,225
0.55

(5)
[0, 4]

0.0399∗∗∗
(2.65)

0.0013
(0.05)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.15

3,677
0.54

(6)
[5, 8]
0.0343  
(1.09)
−0.0133 
(−0.35)  
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.30

2,225
0.50

acquire hospitals with the purpose of closing them and profiting from 
the sale of their assets.

In Figure IA1 of the Internet Appendix, we compare the survival 
rates of acquired hospitals and their matched control group. For both 
PE and non-PE target hospitals, there is an overlap between the con-
fidence  intervals  of  their  survival  rates  with  those  of  their  control 
group’s survival rates. This is not surprising given the limited statistical 
power. Among our matched sample of 444 hospitals, there are only 
20 hospitals that closed within 8 years after the acquisition events, 
including 4 PE target hospitals, 7 targets of non-PE acquirers, and 9 
hospitals in the control group.

In Table  3, we examine the profitability of acquired hospitals, mea-
sured by gross margin, operating income over total assets, and return on 
assets (ROA). We find that PE-acquired hospitals become significantly 
more profitable than their matched control hospitals shortly after the 
acquisition. Our estimates suggest that PE-acquired hospitals increase 
their  operating  income  and  return  on  assets  each  by  4  percentage 
points in the first four years after the acquisition. This profitability 
boost seems to persist over the [5, 8]-year post-event window, although 
the effect becomes statistically insignificant. The profitability effects 
of non-PE, for-profit acquirers are somewhat mixed. The gross margin 
and operating income of the target hospitals exhibit some positive, yet 
statistically insignificant changes, potentially due to a smaller sample 
size. Their ROA declines slightly over the long-run window.

5.2. Employment outcomes

We next examine changes in the number and composition of em-
ployees  at  acquired  hospitals,  relative  to  those  at  matched  control 
hospitals. To the extent that PE firms are efficiency-driven acquirers 
with expertise in shaving off excess costs, we expect employment and 
total wage costs to decline at acquired hospitals. Yet, the employment 
effects may not be uniform across worker types. On the one hand, 
PE firms may reduce core medical workers more than other workers, 
as core workers require higher wages. On the other hand, PE firms 
could retain core medical workers to sustain healthcare quality, but cut 
administrative workers given the documented evidence that hospitals 
suffer from administrative inefficiency.

5.2.1. Total employees and wage expenditures

We  examine  the  changes  in  the  total  number  of  employees  as 
well as total wage expenditures at acquired hospitals following the 
specification in Eq.  (1). Table  4 reports the results. In columns (1) and 
(2), we examine the changes in the total number of employees, and in 
columns (5) and (6), we look into total wage expenditures. Both total 
employment and total wages are in log terms, so the coefficients inform 
us of the percentage changes in these outcomes after acquisitions. For 
each  outcome  variable,  we  first  present  results  over  the  short-term 
window ([−4, −1] to [0, +4]), and then we present effects from a longer 
horizon ([−4, −1] to [+5, +8]).

We  find  a  large  and  significant  decline  in  employment  at  PE-
acquired hospitals. After being acquired, the average target hospital 
reduces its employment by over 6% over the next four years, and main-
tains the reduced employment level over the next four-year window. 
Consistently, the wage costs of PE-acquired hospitals decline by 7% 
over the four years following their acquisitions, and continue to drop 
over the next four years, to a level that is around 9% lower than their 
pre-acquisition level. In Table IA2 of the Internet Appendix, we show 
that the total employee-to-patient ratio of target hospitals also drops 
significantly after PE acquisitions, suggesting that the cost-cutting at 
PE-backed hospitals is not simply driven by a reduction in healthcare 
demand from patients.

We find that the employment of non-PE targets exhibit relatively 
small and statistically insignificant declines. While total wage bills of 
those hospitals decrease initially, such a decline becomes economically 
smaller and statistically insignificant in the long run. Constrained by 
the sample sizes, we are unable to detect statistical differences in the 
decline of employment and wages between PE and non-PE acquirers.

Overall, our results suggest that PE acquirers undertake substantial 
employment cuts and generate wage savings at target hospitals. These 
findings  could  explain  the  improved  profitability  and  the  sustained 
survival rates of target hospitals documented earlier.

5.2.2. Employee composition

According to the HCRIS reporting convention, hospital employees 
are classified into 53 different occupations, reflecting the complexity 
and multidimensionality of the services hospitals provide. Among these 
occupations, we focus on two types of hospital employees: (1) core 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 4
Employment and wage expenditures at target hospitals.
This table examines the changes in employment and wages at target hospitals around acquisitions. The dependent variable in column (1) and 
(2) is the log of total employees (measured in full-time equivalent employees based on employed hours). The dependent variable in column 
(3) and (4) is the log of total wages. PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE Target turns to one after 
a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether two coefficients 
are statistically significantly different from each other. Hospital Controls and County Controls are defined in the same way as in Table  3. See 
Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by 
hospital. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
  Dep. Var.:

Log(Employment)

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

(1)
[0, 4]

−0.0612∗∗∗
(−4.08)

−0.0259
(−0.91)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.23

3,691
0.98

(2)
[5, 8]

−0.0630∗
(−1.80)

−0.0282
(−0.54)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.52

2,231
0.98

Log(Total Wages)
(3)
[0, 4]

−0.0721∗∗∗
(−3.67)

−0.0604∗
(−1.93)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.71

3,691
0.98

(4)
[5, 8]
−0.0855∗∗ 
(−2.01)
−0.0489  
(−0.83)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.54

2,231
0.98

medical workers that include physicians, nurses, and pharmacists, and 
(2) administrative workers. Core medical workers are critical at provid-
ing quality health care. While administrative employees support key 
functions of hospitals such as finance and accounting, U.S. hospitals 
are often criticized for having a bloated overhead structure, employing 
too many administrative workers and spending excessively on overhead 
costs (e.g., Shrank et al., 2019; Kocher, 2013).

We track the changes in worker composition in acquired and control 
hospitals after the year of acquisition. Table  5 reports the results. From 
columns (1) and (2), we find that PE-acquired hospitals experience a 
temporary drop in the number of core workers by around 16% over 
the first event window. This effect almost completely disappears over 
the second event window spanning from year 5 to year 8 following 
the acquisition. Comparing the core workers during this period to the 
pre-acquisition window, the difference is only 1% and is statistically 
insignificant from zero.

There can be multiple explanations for the temporary reduction of 
core workers. First, large corporate restructuring events can be chaotic 
and severely disruptive to operations, leading employees to become 
discontent and even leave the firm. Once the initial restructuring period 
is over, firms may regain their employment to a certain extent. Second, 
PE acquisitions of hospitals may lead to a re-sorting of medical workers 
based on their preference for the culture or work environment of PE-
owned organizations. Third, following acquisitions, hospitals may shift 
and re-focus their operations, demanding different types of skilled labor 
from before. All three explanations are consistent with PE acquisitions 
leading to the departure of some existing employees and the hiring 
of new ones. These reasons, combined with substantial labor market 
frictions related to searching and hiring skilled workers, can result in 
an initial drop and later recovery of medical workers.

Columns (3) and (4) provide results for administrative workers. We 
find a significant and persistent decline in administrative workers at 
PE-acquired hospitals. Within the first four years after the acquisition, 
the number of administrative workers drops by around 17% at acquired 
hospitals. The reduction aggravates in the next four years, reaching 
over 20%.

In Table IA2 of the Internet Appendix, we scale the number of 
core and administrative workers by the number of patients, and find 
consistent effects as those from the log number of workers.

In Panel B, we directly compare the number of core workers in PE 
target hospitals during the short-run and long-run horizons following 
the takeover. To do so, we pool together the full sample period from 

[−4, 8]-year around the acquisition, and regress Log(Core Workers) and
Log(Admin Workers) on the interaction of PE Target × Long-run, whereby
Long-run turns to one for year [5, 8] following the acquisition event. In 
column (1), we find a positive, significant coefficient on this interaction 
term, in contrast to the negative coefficient on the standalone term
PE Target. This result shows that the number of core workers in PE 
target hospitals recovers in the long run from the short-run decline in 
a statistically significant way. In column (2), we show that the number 
of administrative workers in PE targets becomes significantly lower in 
the long-run window than in the short-run post-acquisition window, 
confirming the continuing decline of administrative workers shown in 
columns (3) and (4) in Panel A.

Turning to target hospitals of non-PE, for-profit acquirers, we find 
that their core worker counts exhibit a substantial and persistent de-
cline, with no reversal in the long run. Our estimates in columns (1) and 
(2) of Panel A suggest that non-PE targets see their core workers drop 
by 29% in the first four years after acquisitions, and by another 7% in 
the next four years (=0.3598−0.2868). Such declines of core workers are 
statistically significantly stronger than those of PE targets. In contrast, 
we do not observe a decline in administrative workers at non-PE targets 
in either horizon we examine (columns (3) and (4) of Panel A).

We note that, while the coefficients for PE acquirers and non-PE 
acquirers differ substantially for the changes in administrative work-
ers in the long-run (column (4) of both panels), they do not appear 
statistically significant from each other. This is because of the wide 
confidence intervals of the non-significant results from non-PE acquir-
ers. In Table IA3 of the Internet Appendix, we compute the minimum 
detectable effect size (MDES) regarding the difference in coefficients 
between PE and non-PE acquirers. The MDES indicates the minimum 
size of the differential effects for there to be statistical significance, 
given our sample size and the standard error of the coefficients (Bloom, 
1995). We find that the difference in the long-term reduction in the log 
of administrative workers between PE and non-PE targets needs to be at 
least 0.34 to 0.40 for us to detect statistical significant differences with 
80% and 90% confidence using our sample. This is a large magnitude, 
which suggests that we may have limited statistical power to detect the 
statistical significance of such a differential effect.

We also evaluate the concern that our results may be driven by 
changes in local conditions concurrent with PE acquisitions, such as 
the changes in local resident demographics, health conditions, income, 
or other preferences. These changes may drive hospital performance, 
employment, and even survival. We address this concern by imposing 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 5
Core and administrative workers at target hospitals.
This table examines the changes in core workers and administrative workers at target hospitals around acquisitions. Panel 
A reports the results for the number of core and administrative workers. The dependent variable for columns (1) and (2) 
is the log of total number of core workers, i.e., Log(Core Workers). The dependent variable for columns (3) and (4) is the 
log of total number of administrative workers, i.e., Log(Admin Workers). Panel B reports the results contrasting short-run 
and long-run changes in core workers and administrative workers at target hospitals. The dependent variable for column (1) 
is Log(Core Workers), while that for column (2) is Log(Admin Workers). Long-run turns to one for year [5, 8] following the 
acquisition event. PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE Target turns to one after a 
hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether 
two coefficients are statistically significantly different from each other. Hospital Controls and County Controls are defined in 
the same way as in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard 
errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, 
and 1%, respectively.

  Dep. Var.:

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

  Dep. Var.:

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  PE Target × Long-run

  NonPE Target

  NonPE Target × Long-run

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

(A) Log Number of Core and Administrative Workers
Log(Core Workers)
(1)
[0, 4]

(2)
[5, 8]

Log(Admin Workers)
(3)
[0, 4]

−0.1620∗∗∗
(−4.74)

−0.2868∗∗∗
(−4.49)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.05

3,691
0.91

−0.0120
(−0.16)

−0.3598∗∗
(−2.20)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.05

2,231
0.90

−0.1656∗∗∗
(−5.56)

−0.0310
(−0.59)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.01

3,691
0.90

(4)
[5, 8]
−0.2027∗∗∗ 
(−3.31)

−0.0314
(−0.23)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.21

2,231
0.90

(B) Long-run versus Short-run Changes

Log(Core Workers)
(1)
[0, 8]

Log(Admin Workers)
(2)
[0, 8]

−0.1598∗∗∗
(−4.75)

0.0943∗
(1.82)

−0.2938∗∗∗
(−4.69)

−0.0666
(−0.62)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

4,281
0.90

−0.1663∗∗∗
(−5.65)

−0.0649∗
(−1.82)

−0.0330
(−0.64)

−0.0355
(−0.48)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

4,281
0.90

commuting zone-year fixed effects in our baseline analysis. In Table IA4 
of the Internet Appendix, we find our results to be robust to including 
this stringent fixed effect structure.

5.3. Dynamic effects of PE acquisitions

We  track  how  the  profitability  and  employment  of  PE-acquired 
hospitals evolve over each year during our event horizon, compared to 
their matched control group. This examination allows us to infer when 
changes start taking place around the involvement of PE acquirers, and 
more importantly, evaluate whether PE buyers select hospitals based 
on their pre-event characteristics. If they do, the changes in operating 
performance and worker composition we document should start prior 
to their acquisition.

We track PE targets and their matched control hospitals over the 
[−4,  +8]  event  horizon.  With  this  sample,  we  extend  the  baseline 

regression model (Eq. (1)) by creating separate indicators of each year 
in the event horizon and interacting these indicators with PE Target. 
The estimation includes the same set of fixed effects and controls as 
in the baseline analysis, and further imposes commuting zone-by-year 
interactive fixed effects to help remove potential confounding effects 
from local conditions.

Fig.  5 depicts the results. Panels A and B present results for hos-
pital profitability, including Operating Income/TA and ROA.16 Panels 
C through E present results regarding hospital employment profiles, 
including the log of total employees, the log of total core workers, 
and the log of total administrative workers. In each panel, the dots 
represent point estimates, surrounded by 95% confidence intervals. The 
year prior to the event (i.e., year −1) is omitted as the benchmark year. 

16 We do not present results for Gross Margin here because we do not find 
PE investors to significantly affect acquired hospitals’ gross margin.

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

We do not observe any significant pre-event changes in most of the out-
come variables for PE targets. The exception is that total employment 
exhibits an increase in year −2, but the effect is economically small 
(0.041). After PE acquisitions, target hospitals experience a temporary 
boost in profitability, but this effect diminishes in the long run.

Panel  C  shows  that  target  hospitals  experience  a  significant  re-
duction in total workers. We then focus on core and administrative 
workers separately. Panel D suggests that PE acquisitions are followed 
by a significant dip in core workers at target hospitals, but this effect 
dissipates in the longer term. Starting Year 5, PE target hospitals no 
longer have significantly fewer core workers compared to the pre-event 
level of core workers or relative to the control hospitals. Panel E shows 
that  target  hospitals  experience  a  sizable  decline  in  the  number  of 
administrative employees, and this effect persists and deepens in the 
long run.

Results from our dynamic analyses indicate little pre-event trend 
in hospital characteristics prior to PE acquisitions, but significant post-
event effects after the acquisitions. They are consistent with PE improv-
ing the operating efficiency of the acquired hospital without excessively 
cutting  core  workers  in  the  long  run.  These  results,  together  with 
evidence of covariate balance, help alleviate concerns regarding PE 
selecting targets based on observable characteristics such as profitabil-
ity, size, employee composition, and patient composition. To further 
address  this  concern,  we  provide  additional  analyses  in  Section  IV 
of the Internet Appendix that other hospital characteristics, including 
charity  services  and  healthcare  quality  (Lewellen  et  al.,  2023),  are 
unlikely to drive our results. Still, we acknowledge that our approach 
does not entirely rule out the possibility that PE acquirers may select 
hospitals  based  on  factors  unobservable  to  researchers  that  predict 
future performance improvement of hospitals. We continue to address 
this possibility in the next section.

5.4. Addressing endogeneity concerns

We further address the selection concern following the approach 
designed in Liu (2021). Specifically, we take advantage of the staggered 
changes in the Corporate Practice of Medicine (CPOM) doctrine across 
states  and  over  time.  The  CPOM  doctrine  prohibits  non-physician-
owned corporations (including PE firms) from practicing medicine or 
employing a physician to provide professional medical services. It was 
adopted under the concern that corporations with no healthcare expe-
rience and for-profit motivations may influence medical judgment for 
physicians and compromise the fiduciary relationship between physi-
cians and patients. The implementation of CPOM doctrine varies state-
by-state,  depending  on  numerous  factors  including  anti-competition 
concerns,17 shortage of healthcare provision, as well as technological 
innovation in care delivery.

Although CPOM enforcement in each state may be driven by un-
derlying socioeconomic conditions, changes in its stringency are often 
driven by the lobbying efforts of interest groups, as well as judicial 
decisions. Key events that mark such changes include landmark cases, 
legislatures, and the issuance of opinions by key agents (including state 
medical boards and attorneys general) (Silverman, 2015; Gustavson 
and Taylor, 2010). The timing of these events are often difficult to 
predict precisely.18

17 In 1975, the Federal Trade Commission found the CPOM doctrine to be 
anti-competitive in nature and charged the AMA with violations of Section 
5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (FTC Act). The FTC’s decisions were 
confirmed by the United States Second Circuit Court of Appeals and the United 
States Supreme Court. For more details of FTC v. AMA, 1975, see Gustavson 
and Taylor (2010), Ameringer (2000).
18 For  example,  Texas  enacted  a  legislation  in  2011  that  created  new 
provisions that relaxed CPOM, to enable the employment of physicians by 
certain county hospital districts. The State Medical Board in Ohio in 2012 

Fig. 5.  Dynamic effect of PE acquirers. This figure shows the changes in profitability, 
total employment, and worker composition for PE-acquired hospitals relative to their 
matched control hospitals over the [−4, +8]-year event window. All regressions include 
the same set of fixed effects and controls as in the baseline analysis, and further include 
commuting zone-by-year interactive fixed effects to help remove potential confounding 
effects  from  local  conditions.  In  each  panel,  the  dots  and  intervals  represent  the 
coefficients and the associated 90-percentile confidence intervals, respectively. Year 
−1 is absorbed as the base year.

13 

J. Gao et al.

We consider three types of events that can strengthen or relax CPOM 
in a given state: (i) state statutes or regulations, (ii) case law, and (iii) 
opinions issued by the state attorney general or medical board. Follow-
ing the method described by Liu (2021), we identify a list of events 
whereby CPOM implementation becomes more lax or stricter during 
our sample period 2001–2018. Information regarding the changes to a 
state’s CPOM status comes from several sources. The primary source 
is  Corporate  Practice  of  Medicine:  A  Fifty  State  Survey,  a  publication 
by the American Health Lawyers Association that details changes and 
the  status  of  CPOM  regulations  across  states.  We  also  supplement 
this  source  with  news  articles  from  Nexis  Uni  and  Permit  Health’s 
guidelines and carefully verify their contents and relevance through 
additional manual internet searches. We present the detailed manual 
search process and list the identified changes in CPOM doctrines in 
Section V.A of the Internet Appendix.

We define a CPOM event to be a state-year where the state ex-
periences changes in legislation, case laws, or opinions that relax or 
tighten  the  implementation  of  the  CPOM  doctrine.  We  label  states 
that experienced a CPOM event during our sample period as treated 
states. If a state experiences more than one CPOM event in the same 
direction, we only consider the first event. If a state experiences both 
tightening and relaxation of the CPOM doctrine during our sample 
period, we exclude it from the sample, because the post-event years 
of earlier changes may overlap with pre-event years for later changes. 
Control states are ones that did not experience any CPOM event dur-
ing our sample period. In Internet Appendix V.B, we explicitly test 
whether state-level characteristics predict the changes in the stringency 
of CPOM doctrines, including hospital care and other healthcare spend-
ing, population, income per capita, unemployment rates, the number of 
hospitals, and age-adjusted mortality rates. All covariates are measured 
contemporaneously (𝑡) and with a one-year lag (𝑡 − 1). In Table IA8, we 
examine the determinants of CPOM relaxation and tightening events, 
but do not find a significant effect from any characteristics that we 
consider.

We examine how the CPOM events affect the likelihood that hospi-
tals in treated states are acquired by PE, and the subsequent changes 
in their operating performance and employment profiles. To do so, we 
construct a matched sample, matching each hospital in treated states 
with a hospital in control states using the same matching procedure 
in the main analysis (see Section 4). We then compare each pair of 
matched treated and control hospitals throughout the event window 
[−4, 8] around the CPOM event year. Note that we no longer separately 
examine the short-run and long-run effects, because in this analysis, the 
treatment comes from the changes in CPOM doctrines at the state level 
instead of PE acquisition. Thus, we do not track the precise timing when 
the effects of PE-acquisitions set in. We also drop hospitals acquired 
by non-PE, for-profit acquirers. This is because the non-PE acquirers 
in  our  sample  are  either  hospital  systems  or  standalone  hospitals, 
whose acquisitions are unlikely to be directly restricted by the CPOM 
doctrine.19 We estimate the following regression model:

𝑌𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽1𝐶𝑃 𝑂𝑀 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑥𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑒,𝑖,𝑡 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒,𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐶𝑃 𝑂𝑀 𝑇 𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒,𝑖,𝑡

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

𝑡 indicates a year around the event. CPOM Relaxation is an indicator 
that  turns  to  one  for  hospitals  in  states  that  relaxed  their  CPOM 
doctrines  during  our  sample  period,  and  0  otherwise.  Analogously,
CPOM  Tightening  is  an  indicator  that  turns  to  one  for  hospitals  in 
states that tightened their CPOM doctrine during our sample period, 
and 0 otherwise. Post indicates years following the changes in CPOM 
doctrines. The dependent variable 𝑌  includes PE Target, an indicator for 
whether a hospital is acquired by a PE firm. It also includes operating 
income over total assets, return on assets, log of total employment, the 
log of core workers, and the log of administrative workers. We control 
for the same set of hospital and county characteristics as in our main 
analysis. In addition, we control for hospital fixed effects (𝛼𝑖), matched 
pair fixed effects (𝜇𝑒), and event time fixed effects (𝜏𝑒,𝑡). Standard errors 
are clustered by state.

Results from this analysis are presented in Table  6. Panel A re-
ports the results regarding the effect of CPOM implementation on the 
likelihood of local hospitals being acquired by PE investors. Panel B 
examines the effects of CPOM implementation on the performance and 
employment profiles of hospitals in treated states.

In Panel A, we find that CPOM relaxation leads to a significant 
increase in PE takeover likelihood of hospitals, but CPOM tightening 
does not significantly reduce PE takeover likelihood. This asymmetric 
effect may be due to the fact that in tightening states, existing enforce-
ment of the CPOM doctrine already present significant obstacles to PE 
investors, and hence, additional restrictions likely had limited effects. 
It is also worth mentioning that some states created exemptions to the 
CPOM doctrine, or choose not to enforce it without explicitly rejecting 
them (Gustavson and Taylor, 2010). These factors could add substantial 
noise in our estimation, preventing us from finding a significant effect 
from changes in CPOM enforcement.

Results in Panel B suggest that hospitals in states that relax their 
CPOM doctrines exhibit improved profitability measured by ROA. In 
contrast, there is little effect from the tightening of the CPOM doctrine. 
Hospitals in CPOM-relaxation states also significantly reduce their total 
employment by 4.3%. Importantly, we show that a relaxation in CPOM 
doctrines leads to no change in core workers in local hospitals, but 
a significant and large reduction of administrative workers, by over 
9%. These results, while not definitively eradicating all endogeneity 
concerns, help bolster our causal inferences.

We note that the above results can also be generated through a 
two-stage-least-square framework, whereby the first stage examines the 
effect  of  CPOM  doctrines  on  PE  acquisitions,  and  the  second  stage 
examines how the predicted changes in PE acquisition likelihood affect 
target hospitals. We provide the results in Table IA10. The two-stage 
framework generates similar results in terms of statistical significance, 
but the coefficients generally have much larger magnitudes. This is 
because in the first stage, changes in CPOM doctrines only lead to small 
changes in PE acquisition likelihood, while in the data, such changes 
correspond to binary realizations of PE Target, i.e., the difference in 
acquired and non-acquired hospitals. Thus, the magnitudes from the 
second stage are artificially inflated.

×𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒,𝑡 + 𝛾 ⋅ 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝜇𝑒 + 𝜏𝑒,𝑡 + 𝜈𝑒,𝑖,𝑡,

(2)

5.5. Nonprofit and for-profit targets

where 𝑒 indicates a matched pair that includes a hospital located in 
a treated state (i.e., a state that changes its CPOM doctrine) and a 
matched ‘‘similar’’ hospital in control states, 𝑖 indexes a hospital, and 

declared an end to the corporate practice ban after determining the doctrine 
being essentially obsolete in the state. Effective 2017, California Governor 
Jerry Brown relaxed CPOM as part of the amendment to California Business 
and  Professions  Code  (Section  2401),  which  aims  to  help  rural  hospitals 
attract physicians. Prior to our sample period, an exception to the CPOM was 
established by the seminal case of Berlin v. Sarah Bush Lincoln Health Center.
19 We show in Table IA9 of the Internet Appendix that changes in CPOM 
doctrines do not affect the takeover likelihood of non-PE acquirers.

We compare post-acquisition outcomes between targets that oper-
ated as for-profit and nonprofit organizations prior to being acquired. 
We expect that nonprofit targets will experience a greater reduction 
in administrative workers following PE acquisitions for at least two 
reasons. First, nonprofit hospitals are not subject to investor scrutiny 
and may operate less efficiently by employing a larger administrative 
workforce. PE firms can enhance the operational efficiency of nonprofit 
hospitals by introducing investor accountability. Second, nonprofit hos-
pitals may prioritize patient satisfaction over profitability, leading them 
to  maintain  extensive  administrative  functions.  A  PE  takeover  may 
shift this priority, resulting in more significant cuts to administrative 
services at nonprofit targets compared to for-profit ones.

14 

J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 6
CPOM analysis.
This table examines the changes in profitability, employment, and core and administrative workers at hospitals around CPOM reforms at the 
state level. The analysis uses a matched sample of hospitals, where each hospital in treated states (i.e., states that changed their CPOM doctrines) 
is matched with a hospital in control states (i.e., states without any CPOM events during our sample period). We analyze changes at hospitals 
around the [−4,+8] CPOM event window. In Panel A, we examine how the relaxation and tightening of CPOM enforcement at the state level 
affect the likelihood that a hospital is acquired by PE investors. In Panel B, we examine changes in hospital profitability, employment, and core 
and administrative workers around CPOM events. CPOM Relaxation is an indicator for states that experienced a relaxation in CPOM doctrines.
CPOM Tightening is an indicator that turns to one for states that experienced a tightening in CPOM doctrines. Post indicates years after the 
relaxation or tightening event. PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. Hospital Controls and County Controls are 
defined in the same way as in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors are 
heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by state. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively. 

(A) The Effects of CPOM Events on PE Acquisition

  Dep. Var.: PE Target
  CPOM Relaxation × Post

  CPOM Tightening × Post

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

  Dep. Var.:

  CPOM Relaxation × Post

  CPOM Tightening × Post

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

(1)

0.0914∗∗
(2.09)

0.0096
(0.79)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5,287
0.57

(B) The Effects of CPOM Events on Profitability and Employment

OI/AT
(1)

0.0108
(1.12)

0.0134
(1.14)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5,278
0.45

ROA
(2)

0.0205∗
(1.85)

0.0069
(0.81)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5,278
0.36

Log(Total Employment)
(3)

Log(Core Workers)
(4)

Log(Admin Workers) 
(5)

−0.0431∗∗
(−2.28)

0.0376
(1.66)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5,287
0.99

0.0267
(0.91)

0.0571
(1.56)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5,286
0.95

−0.0916∗∗
(−2.56)

0.0171
(0.47)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5,282
0.92

We  focus  on  five  outcomes,  operating  income  over  total  assets, 
return on assets, the log of total employment, the log of core medi-
cal workers, and the log of administrative workers. We regress each 
outcome on the interaction terms PE Target × For-profit Target and
PE Target × Nonprofit Target, whereby For-profit Target and Nonprofit 
Target represent target hospitals’ for-profit status prior to the deal. The 
differences between these interaction terms as well as the statistical sig-
nificance of the differences are calculated. Our regressions also include 
the indicator of non-PE acquisition, but we suppress the coefficient for 
brevity.

Table  7 reports the results from this analysis. Both previously for-
profit  and  nonprofit  target  hospitals  see  a  temporary  improvement 
in profitability, but the effect becomes insignificant in the long run, 
consistent with our baseline results (Table  3). Both types of targets 
also experience significant declines in employment counts after being 
acquired, but the magnitudes of the declines are larger for nonprofit 
targets than for-profit ones over the first four-year window. Both non-
profit and for-profit targets exhibit a drop in core worker counts, which 
rebound over the longer term.

Importantly,  nonprofit  and  for-profit  targets  exhibit  different
changes in the number of administrative workers. Estimates in column 
(10) suggest that administrative workers decline by 33% at previously 
nonprofit targets over the [5, 8]-year window after PE acquisitions. This 
sizable reduction likely reflects the substantial restructuring efforts at 
nonprofit hospitals, which did not have investor accountability prior to 
being acquired. This magnitude stands in contrast to the 10%, statisti-
cally insignificant reduction at for-profit targets over the same horizon. 

This finding reveals a novel role for PE firms in transforming non-profit 
organizations into for-profit ones, and improving their efficiency by 
trimming the administrative burden of acquired hospitals.

5.6. Additional robustness checks

In this section, we perform multiple analyses to test whether our 
inferences are robust to empirical choices regarding measurement and 
sampling procedures.

First, we vary the definition of core medical workers, which in our 
main analysis are defined as physicians, nurses and pharmacists. As 
physicians may be hired through part-time contracts and be affiliated 
with multiple hospitals simultaneously, their hours may not be tracked 
in the cost reports in the same way as other full-time employees. To 
mitigate potential measurement errors, we restrict our definition of 
core workers to only nurses and pharmacists and examine changes in 
the log number of nurses and pharmacists. In Table IA5 of the Internet 
Appendix, we show that our results are robust to this alternative defini-
tion of core workers. As before, we observe that the number of nurses 
and pharmacists at PE-acquired hospitals temporarily drops in the short 
run, but reverts back in the longer horizon. In contrast, at non-PE 
targets, the number of nurses and pharmacists experiences a persistent 
and statistically significant decline subsequent to the acquisition. The 
initial decline does not reverse, but aggravates in the long run.

Our second test explores several alternative matching approaches. 
To start, we use the total number of workers during the year prior to 
acquisitions, rather than core and administrative workers separately, as 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 7
Nonprofit vs. for-profit targets.
This table presents heterogeneity of our results across previously nonprofit and for-profit targets. We report the results for OI/AT (columns (1) and (2)), ROA (columns (3) and 
(4)), the log of total employment (columns (5) and (6)), the log of core medical workers (columns (7) and (8)), and the log of administrative workers (columns (9) and (10)) at 
target hospitals around acquisitions. Target hospitals’ for-profit status is characterized based on its status prior to the acquisition. All regressions include the indicator of non-PE 
acquisition, but we suppress the coefficients for brevity. Rows with 𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether two coefficients are statistically significantly 
different from each other. Hospital Controls and County Controls are defined in the same way as in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in 
parentheses and standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
  Dep. Var.:

Log(Employment)

OI/TA

ROA

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target × Nonprofit Target

  PE Target × For-profit Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

(1)
[0, 4]

0.0627∗∗
(2.35)

0.0336∗
(1.82)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(2)
[5, 8]

0.0489
(0.86)

0.0213
(0.48)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(3)
[0, 4]

0.0320
(1.17)

0.0421∗∗∗
(2.61)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(4)
[5, 8]

0.0461
(0.95)

0.0251
(0.71)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(5)
[0, 4]

−0.1259∗∗∗
(−4.43)

−0.0431∗∗∗
(−2.82)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(6)
[5, 8]

−0.0902∗
(−1.77)

−0.0420
(−1.04)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Log(Core Workers)
(8)
(7)
[5, 8]
[0, 4]

−0.1399∗∗
(−2.46)

−0.1681∗∗∗
(−4.62)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

−0.0080
(−0.07)

−0.0151
(−0.17)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Log(Admin Workers)
(10)
(9)
[5, 8]
[0, 4]
−0.3346∗∗∗ 
(−4.67)

−0.2214∗∗∗
(−4.07)

−0.1501∗∗∗
(−4.83)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

−0.1004
(−1.33)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.01

2,231
0.90

  𝐻0: For-Profit = Nonprofit

0.30

0.68

0.73

0.70

0.00

0.41

0.63

0.96

0.19

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

3,677
0.56

2,225
0.55

3,677
0.54

2,225
0.50

3,691
0.98

2,231
0.98

3,691
0.91

2,231
0.90

3,691
0.90

our employment matching variable. Next, we match acquired hospitals 
and control hospitals based on a smaller set of variables, in two differ-
ent analyses. In one, we match them based on the pre-event average 
of outpatient ratio, the CMI, and the log of total employment during 
the year prior to the acquisition. We also require acquired and control 
hospitals  to  be  in  the  same  Census  division  and  to  have  the  same 
metropolitan area status. In the other, hospitals are matched based on 
the pre-event average of outpatient ratio and the CMI. We then require 
them to be in the same census division, have the same metropolitan 
area status, and to be in the same decile of the number of beds. Results 
in Table IA11 of the Internet Appendix show that our results remain 
qualitatively unchanged across all the alternative matching methods.
Third, we address the concern that control hospitals may be in-
fluenced by the spillover effects from the acquisition of local, peer 
hospitals by PE firms. For example, as PE firms cut employment at 
target hospitals, those employees losing their jobs may switch to other 
hospitals in the same region, leading to an increase in employment in 
the control units. In Table IA12 of the Internet Appendix, we address 
this concern using two alternative samples, based on the assumption 
that switching is less likely across hospitals that are far away. First, 
we delete all matched target-control pairs where the control hospital is 
located in the same hospital referral regions (HRR) as the target (Panel 
A). Next, we remove from our sample matched pairs where the control 
hospital is located in an HRR where over 25 percent of hospitals in that 
region are acquired by PE over the [−4, +8]-year event period (Panel B). 
Our inferences remain unchanged in these samples.

6. Other changes in hospital operations

In this section, we continue to examine other types of operational 
changes  at  PE-acquired  hospitals.  In  particular,  we  investigate  the 
changes in wage rates paid, hospital beds, revenues, the complexity of 
hospital operations, and the composition of treated patients.

6.1. Wage rates

We  examine  whether  core  and  administrative  workers  are  paid 
lower wages at PE-acquired hospitals. This examination helps us ad-
dress  possibilities  such  as  whether  PE  acquirers  may  lay  off  some 
administrative workers but offer higher wages to remaining ones, or 
that they may suppress the wages of core medical workers.

We  compute  the  hourly  wage  rates  for  core  and  administrative 
workers  separately.  Wage  rates  are  transformed  to  log  terms,  i.e.,

Log(Core Wage Rate) and Log(Admin Wage Rate). From Table  8, we 
find no change in core workers’ wage rate at PE-acquired hospitals. 
In contrast, administrative workers’ wage rate drops significantly to 
7% lower than its pre-acquisition level in the long-run window. These 
results are consistent with PE acquirers reducing the costs associated 
with administrative functions. For hospitals acquired by non-PE, for-
profit acquirers, wage rates drop in the short-run but reverts in the 
long run. In the [5,8]-year window, the wage rates of administrative 
workers in non-PE target hospitals are significantly higher than those 
in PE target hospitals.

6.2. Hospital size, procedures, and patient insurance types

We follow Schmitt (2017) and examine several aspects of oper-
ational changes in target hospitals around acquisitions. To start, we 
examine changes in hospitals’ operating scale, including the number of 
beds, patients, and revenues. Hospital revenue is measured by the log 
of gross sales as well as net sales, which is gross sales after deducting 
rebate and discounts offered to patients. Panel A of Table  9 reports the 
results. We do not find target hospitals to exhibit changes in the number 
of beds after PE acquisitions, although the number of patients declines 
by around 10% in the long run. Importantly, we note that PE target 
hospitals do not generate significantly higher revenue, which suggests 
that the increased profitability documented in Table  3 likely arises from 
reduced costs.

We next investigate the changes in the type of hospital treatments 
by looking at changes in the CMI and the outpatient ratio. The CMI 
is a weighted average across diagnosis codes of hospital discharges, 
with the weights corresponding to the associated costs of the treatment. 
It  seeks  to  capture  the  diversity,  clinical  complexity,  and  resource 
needs of all the patients treated in a hospital. One concern with PE’s 
involvement in the hospital industry is that PE acquirers might engage 
in ‘‘upcoding’’ practice, i.e., healthcare providers submitting codes for 
more severe conditions than the actual diagnoses in order to receive 
higher reimbursement. Such behaviors can push up CMI. Counter to 
this concern, we do not find significant changes in CMI at PE-acquired 
hospitals in columns (1) and (2). Our findings are consistent with those 
in Offodile II et al. (2021), which also documents no upcoding behavior 
at PE-owned hospitals.

Results in columns (3) and (4) suggest significant declines in out-
patient ratio at PE-acquired hospitals. Because outpatient procedures 
are a more cost-efficient source of revenue for hospitals, a declining 
ratio suggests that PE-acquired hospitals do not shift their operations 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 8
Wage rates for core and administrative workers at target hospitals.
This table examines the changes in per hour salary paid to core workers and administrative workers at target hospitals around acquisitions. 
In columns (1) and (2), we present results related to Log(Core Wage Rate), the log of hourly wage rate for core workers. In columns (3) and 
(4), we present results related to Log(Admin Wage Rate), the log of hourly wage rate for administrative workers. PE Target turns to one after 
a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 𝐻0’s provide 
𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether two coefficients are statistically significantly different from each other. Hospital Controls 
and County Controls are defined in the same way as in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses 
and standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 
1%, respectively.
  Dep. Var.:

Log(Core Wage Rate)
(1)
[0, 4]

Log(Admin Wage Rate)
(3)
[0, 4]

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

−0.0049
(−0.33)

−0.0531∗
(−1.83)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.10

3,643
0.71

(2)
[5, 8]

−0.0455
(−1.41)

0.0139
(0.29)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.24

2,203
0.71

−0.0196
(−1.29)

−0.0414∗
(−1.68)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.38

3,581
0.81

(4)
[5, 8]
−0.0708∗∗  
(−2.35)

0.0253
(0.54)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.05

2,174
0.79

to outpatient services to generate revenue at lower costs compared to 
other hospitals.

Finally, we examine whether hospitals treat a greater or smaller 
fraction of patients enrolled in Medicare or Medicaid programs follow-
ing PE acquisitions. We find that PE-acquired hospitals experience a 
small decline (by 1 percentage point) in the proportion of Medicaid 
patients as well as Medicare patients, although the latter effect dissi-
pates over the longer horizon. In the next section, we provide a more 
detailed analysis on patient demographics using insurance claim data.

demographics at target hospitals prior to PE takeovers. Following the 
acquisitions, we observe a slight, statistically insignificant decline in 
the fraction of female patients, which reverses in the long run. There is 
also a mild drop in patient age in the first few years after the takeover, 
although the effects are rarely significant and reverse in the long run. 
We do not observe any significant changes in the income levels of 
patients’  residential  areas.  If  anything,  patients  served  after  the  PE 
acquisitions tend to come from lower-income areas.

7. Implications of PE acquisitions for patients

7.2. Changes in hospital prices

How  do  PE  acquisitions  of  hospitals  affect  patients?  To  explore 
this question, we look into changes in patient demographics, hospital 
prices,  patient  satisfaction,  and  mortality  and  readmission  rates  at 
target hospitals.

7.1. Changes in patient demographics

We leverage the HCCI data to investigate whether after PE acqui-
sitions patient demographics at target hospitals change. We merge our 
sample of matched target and control pairs outlined in Section 4 with 
hospitals covered in the HCCI database, and estimate Eq. (1) using 
the matched sample, regressing the patient characteristics of a hospital 
on the indicators PE Target and NonPE Target. Our estimation controls 
for hospital fixed effects, match-pair fixed effects and event-time fixed 
effects.  We  do  not  distinguish  short-run  and  long-run  outcomes  in 
analyses with the HCCI data, since the data is only available from 
2012, leaving at most seven years of observations for each hospital. 
Instead, we estimate the average differences between pre- and post-
event periods during the [−4, +8]-year window, and compare changes 
between acquired hospitals and their matched control units.

Results are presented in Table  10. We do not find patient demo-
graphics  to  change  at  PE-acquired  hospitals  around  the  acquisition 
events compared to their matched control hospitals. All coefficients are 
statistically insignificant and economically negligible.

Fig.   6  presents  the  evolution  of  patient  characteristics  at  target 
hospitals relative to those at control hospitals over time. We control 
for hospital-level and county-level factors as defined in Table  3, and 
include hospital fixed effects, matched-pair fixed effects, and event time 
fixed effects. We do not see significant shifts in any dimension of patient 

We next analyze the changes in hospital inpatient prices following 
PE takeovers. As explained in Section 3.3, we compute a price index 
for each hospital over time, forming a hospital-year panel. We then 
estimate Eq. (1), switching the dependent variables to the price index. 
We continue to use the Mahalanobis matched sample for this analysis 
and focus on the price index for the average inpatient treatment as well 
as each of the seven procedures.

Panel A of Table  11 reports the results for prices on all inpatient 
procedures. We add controls in stages. In column (1), we control for 
hospital, event, and event time fixed effects. In column (2), we add 
hospital characteristics as controls, including the log of total beds, CMI, 
the percentage of patients with Medicare and Medicaid insurance, and 
the fraction of outpatient charges relative to total charges. In column 
(3), we further control for county characteristics, including the fraction 
of  Black  and  Asian  residents,  the  log  of  population  and  the  log  of 
one-bedroom rent. Across all specifications, we do not find prices of 
inpatient services at target hospital to deviate from those at control 
hospitals in a meaningful way following PE acquisitions. If anything, 
inpatient prices drop slightly by around 5%.

In Fig.  7, we report the dynamic effects of PE acquisitions on hospi-
tal inpatient prices. We do not observe significant deviations between 
the prices charged by target and control hospitals prior to the year of 
PE acquisitions. After the acquisitions, the inpatient prices at target 
hospitals experience a mild decline, but remain statistically similar with 
the inpatient prices at control hospitals for all post-event years.

In Panel B of Table  11, we examine the changes in hospital prices 
for each of the seven procedures. We find that following acquisitions, 
PE target hospitals do not change prices differently relative to their 
matched control hospitals for six out of seven major procedures. The 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 9
Size and operating characteristics at target hospitals.
This table examines changes in scale and operating characteristics at target hospitals around acquisitions. Panel A examines hospitals’ operating scale, measured by the log number 
of beds, patients, and sales. Panel B examines the composition of hospitals patients or hospital operations, measured by CMI, outpatient ratio, and the percentage of Medicare and 
Medicaid patients. PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 
𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether the two coefficients are statistically significantly different from each other. Control variables are the same as 
in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, **, and 
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

  Dep. Var.:

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

  Dep. Var.:

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

Log(Beds)

(1)
[0, 4]

−0.0068
(−0.40)

−0.0588∗∗
(−2.33)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.04

3,771
0.97

CMI

(1)
[0, 4]

−0.0026
(−0.30)

−0.0244∗
(−1.82)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.10

3,705
0.91

(A) Hospital Operating Scale

Log(Patients)

(3)
[0, 4]

−0.0215
(−1.06)

−0.1033∗∗
(−2.53)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.04

3,766
0.96

(4)
[5, 8]

−0.1008∗
(−1.69)

−0.1051
(−1.42)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.96

2,269
0.96

Log(Gross Patient Sales)
(6)
(5)
[5, 8]
[0, 4]

−0.0149
(−0.61)

−0.0880∗∗
(−2.26)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.07

3,765
0.98

−0.0619
(−0.93)

−0.0617
(−0.76)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1.00

2,269
0.97

(B) Hospital Operation and Patient Composition

Outpatient Ratio
(3)
[0, 4]

−0.0159∗∗∗
(−3.41)

−0.0122
(−1.51)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.64

3,770
0.95

(4)
[5, 8]

−0.0344∗∗∗
(−2.80)

−0.0304∗∗
(−2.27)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.77

2,269
0.94

%Medicare

(5)
[0, 4]

−0.0125∗∗
(−2.18)

0.0116
(1.42)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.00

3,771
0.89

(6)
[5, 8]

0.0062
(0.43)

0.0305∗
(1.75)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.18

2,270
0.88

(2)
[5, 8]

0.0225
(0.45)

−0.0011
(−0.02)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.68

2,270
0.96

(2)
[5, 8]

0.0167
(0.78)

−0.0167
(−0.62)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.27

2,240
0.89

Log(Net Patient Sales)
(7)
[0, 4]

−0.0685∗∗∗
(−3.00)

−0.1100∗∗∗
(−2.95)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.27

3,765
0.97

%Medicaid

(7)
[0, 4]

−0.0116∗
(−1.83)

−0.0064
(−0.72)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.58

3,771
0.79

(8)
[5, 8]
−0.0173  
(−0.27)  
−0.0312  
(−0.39)  

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.88

2,269
0.97

(8)
[5, 8]
−0.0134 
(−0.73)  
−0.0319 
(−1.51)  

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.42

2,270
0.75

Table 10
Patient demographics at target hospitals.
This table examines the changes in patient demographics at target hospitals around the [−4,+8] acquisition event window. Columns (1) and 
(2) examine changes in the proportion of female patients, while columns (3) and (4) examine the average age of patients. In columns (5) 
and (6), we investigate the average income of patients, as determined by the income level of their residential area. When aggregating patient 
information at the hospital level, we use either a simple average or a weighted average, with the weights being the total amount paid to the 
hospital for the service delivered to each patient during the year. PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE 
Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating 
whether two coefficients are statistically significantly different from each other. Control variables are the same as in Table  3. See Appendix  A 
for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, 
**, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
  Dep. Var.:

Female

Age

  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs
  𝐻0: PE = NonPE
  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

Simple
(1)

−0.001
(−0.12)

−0.003
(−0.30)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.81
752
0.81

Weighted
(2)

−0.010
(−0.56)

0.001
(0.06)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.59
752
0.23

Weighted
(4)

−0.013
(−0.28)

−0.078
(−1.28)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.67
752
0.88

Simple
(3)

−0.078
(−1.56)

−0.055
(−1.12)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.67
752
0.91

18 

Income (IRS, in log)
Simple
(5)

Weighted  
(6)

−0.014
(−1.40)

−0.006
(−0.55)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.37
752
0.98

0.003
(0.21)

−0.006
(−0.40)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.50
724
0.97

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Fig. 6.  Dynamic changes in patient demographics around PE acquisition. This figure shows the changes in patient demographics for PE-acquired hospitals relative to their 
matched control hospitals over the [−4, +8]-year event window. The left (right) column presents the changes in the simple (weighted) average of patient characteristics at 
PE-acquired hospitals relative to the control hospitals. We control for hospital-level and county-level factors as defined in Table  3, and include hospital fixed effects, matched-pair 
fixed effects, and event time fixed effects. In each panel, the dots and intervals represent the coefficients and the associated 95-percentile confidence intervals, respectively. Year 
−1 is absorbed as the base year.

Fig. 7.  Dynamic changes in hospital inpatient prices around PE acquisition. This 
figure shows the changes in the average inpatient prices at PE-acquired hospitals 
relative to their matched control hospitals over the [−4, +8]-year event window. We 
control for hospital-level and county-level factors as defined in Table  3, and include 
hospital fixed effects, matched-pair fixed effects, and event time fixed effects. The dots 
and intervals represent the coefficients and the associated 95-percentile confidence 
intervals, respectively. Year −1 is absorbed as the base year.

exception is colonoscopy, where prices increase by 29% after PE acqui-
sitions, compared to control hospitals. Given that colonoscopy is often 
performed as an outpatient procedure, our finding is consistent with the 
evidence in Liu (2021) that PE acquirers increase outpatient prices.20

In Section I.B of the Internet Appendix, we follow Adelino et al. 
(2021)  and  examine  whether  PE-acquired  hospitals  are  more  likely 
to choose more intensive and profitable procedures, such as cesarean 
sections (C-section) in lieu of vaginal delivery for child delivery, and 
catheterization instead of intensive drug treatment for heart attacks 
(AMI). We do not find evidence that PE-acquired hospitals are more 
likely to opt for profitable procedures.

Recent  studies  have  made  important  progress  on  understanding 
how PE influences healthcare prices (Liu, 2021; Cerullo et al., 2022b) 
and  hospital  charges  (Offodile  II  et  al.,  2021;  Bruch  et  al.,  2020). 
We contribute to these studies in several ways. First, our findings are 

20 Among the seven procedures that we examine, only colonoscopy and 
MRI are typically performed as outpatient procedures. Consistent with our 
evidence, Liu (2021) also finds that PE acquisition generates limited effects 
on MRI prices.

19 

J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 11
Inpatient and procedure prices at target hospitals.
This table examines the changes in prices charged by target hospitals for overall inpatient procedures and seven specific procedures around the [−4,+8] acquisition event window. 
In Panel A, we analyze inpatient price changes. In Panel B, we analyze price changes for each of seven procedures, namely, hip replacement, knee replacement, C-section, vaginal 
delivery, PTCA, colonoscopy, and MRI. The dependent variable is the log of prices. PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE Target turns to 
one after a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether two coefficients are statistically significantly 
different from each other. Control variables are the same as in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors are 
heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

(A) Inpatient Prices (in log)

  Dep. Var.: Inpatient
   PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs
  𝐻0: PE = NonPE
  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

  Dep. Var.:

  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs
  𝐻0: PE = NonPE
  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

Hip Replacement
(1)

0.128
(1.28)

0.306
(1.00)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.56
424
0.52

(1)

−0.042
(−1.05)

0.012
(0.18)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.40
606
0.84

(2)

−0.049
(−1.32)

0.013
(0.21)
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.30
605
0.84

Knee Replacement
(2)

(B) Procedure Prices (in log)
C-Section

Vaginal Delivery
(4)

0.014
(0.22)

−0.064
(−0.41)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.57
499
0.68

(3)

−0.121
(−1.03)

−0.050
(−0.34)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.70
515
0.15

−0.010
(−0.13)

−0.143
(−1.62)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.17
528
0.74

(3)
−0.048  
(−1.20) 
0.022  
(0.34)  
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.27
605
0.84

MRI  
(7)
0.101  
(0.76) 
0.052  
(0.45) 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.68  
607  
0.76  

PTCA

(5)

0.029
(0.20)

0.351*
(1.70)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.17
275
0.50

Colonoscopy

(6)

0.294***
(2.60)

0.150
(1.07)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.30
662
0.63

derived from private insurance claims data, which complement (Cerullo 
et al., 2022b) that use medicare claims data. Both studies document no 
significant changes in average inpatient procedure prices. Second, our 
price analyses control for patient risk, representing an advancement 
from other studies that directly compare the charges across hospitals 
without controlling for patient heterogeneity (Offodile II et al., 2021; 
Bruch et al., 2020). It is also worth noting that hospital level charges 
could deviate substantially from the actual prices paid by patients, 
suggesting that investigating insurance claims rather than charges can 
more accurately uncover the effects of PE on hospital prices. Third, 
our analysis focuses on inpatient prices, a major component of hospital 
revenue. It complements (Liu, 2021), who finds that PE acquisitions of 
hospitals increase outpatient prices.

What explains the differential effect of PE on inpatient and out-
patient prices? One potential explanation is that public attention and 
regulatory scrutiny may be particularly strong for inpatient prices, as 
inpatient services are more likely to involve expensive treatments such 
as intensive care and major surgeries. Such intense scrutiny can lead 
to relatively uniform prices and less room for PE to push up inpatient 
prices. Consistent with this conjecture, Wang et al. (2024) document 
that inpatient procedure prices are more uniform than outpatient ser-
vice prices. We leave it to future research to further investigate the 
mechanisms through which hospital ownership differentially affects the 
pricing of inpatient and outpatient treatments.

7.3. Changes in patient satisfaction

In this section, we investigate patient satisfaction at acquired hos-
pitals relative to the matched control group. We utilize data from the 

HCAHPS  survey,  which  includes  patients’  evaluation  of  the  quality 
of communication with doctors, the quality of communication with 
nurses, whether they receive help as soon as they need it, an overall 
rating of the hospital, and whether they would recommend the hospital 
to others.

Table  12 reports the results. We find that patient satisfaction scores 
across all dimensions decline significantly at hospitals acquired by PE 
acquirers, both in the short-run and long-run. These observations are 
potentially connected to our earlier results on the decline in the quan-
tity and wages of administrative employees at PE-acquired hospitals. 
It is possible that the administrative job cuts lead target hospitals to 
operate less smoothly, with impaired non-medical services (scheduling, 
dining,  etc.).  It  is  also  possible  that  the  acquisitions  lead  to  many 
operational changes, and could have disrupted services in the target 
hospitals.

7.4. Patient mortality and readmission rates

We consider two measures of patient outcomes, mortality and read-
mission rates. Mortality rate is an ultimate measure of patient welfare, 
and  has  been  used  frequently  in  prior  studies  as  a  metric  of  the 
effectiveness of healthcare quality (see Gaynor and Town, 2011 for 
a  review).  The  most  widely  used  mortality  metric  is  30-day  acute 
myocardial infarction (AMI) mortality rate, that is, the death rate of 
heart-attack patients during the 30-day period following hospitaliza-
tion. We construct two supplementary mortality measures related to 
heart failure and pneumonia, defined analogously. Each aspect of mor-
tality rate is based on the 30-day risk standardized rates, in percentage 
points.

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 12
Patient satisfaction at target hospitals.
This table examines the changes in patient satisfaction at target hospitals around acquisitions. In columns (1) and (2), we analyze patient satisfaction with nurses’ communication, 
while in columns (3) and (4), we focus on satisfaction with doctors’ communication. Columns (5) and (6) report patient satisfaction concerning whether patients received help 
as soon as they wanted, and Columns (7) and (8) report patients’ overall rating of the hospital. In columns (9) and (10), we investigate patients’ willingness to recommend the 
hospital to friends and family. PE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. 
Rows with 𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether two coefficients are statistically significantly different from each other. Control variables are the 
same as in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, 
**, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
  Dep. Var.:

Recommendation

  Post-Event Window
  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls
  County Controls
  Hospital FEs
  Matched Pair FEs
  Event Time FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

Nurse Comm.
(1)
[0, 4]

−0.0298∗∗∗
(−3.08)

−0.0446∗∗∗
(−3.51)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.28

1,833
0.81

(2)
[5, 8]

−0.0450∗∗∗
(−2.67)

−0.0465
(−1.43)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.96

934
0.79

Doctor Comm.
(3)
[0, 4]

−0.0130∗
(−1.89)

−0.0211∗∗
(−2.08)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.45

1,833
0.76

(4)
[5, 8]

−0.0268∗
(−1.86)

−0.0208
(−0.92)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.80

934
0.78

Receive Help
(5)
[0, 4]

−0.0358∗∗
(−2.42)

−0.0517∗∗
(−2.46)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.47

1,833
0.80

(6)
[5, 8]

−0.0618∗∗
(−2.20)

−0.0405
(−1.00)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.59

934
0.76

Hospital Rating
(7)
[0, 4]

−0.0267
(−1.58)

−0.0507∗∗
(−2.54)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.26

1,833
0.75

(8)
[5, 8]

−0.0714∗∗
(−2.40)

−0.0582
(−1.35)

(9)
[0, 4]

−0.0322∗∗
(−2.13)

−0.0488∗∗∗
(−3.12)

(10)
[5, 8]
−0.0544∗∗ 
(−2.09)
−0.0548  
(−1.40)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.76

934
0.74

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.37

1,833
0.80

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.99

934
0.80

Readmission rates after discharge are also an important indicator 
of the effectiveness of medical treatment (Ho and Hamilton, 2000). 
Similar to mortality rates, we also evaluate readmission rates using a 
30-day window after discharge, and we focus on the same illnesses as 
before — heart attack, heart failure, and pneumonia.

In the CMS Hospital Compare database, mortality and readmission 
rates are reported with 3-year rolling windows. In other words, for 
year  2007,  we  observe  the  cumulative  mortality/readmission  rates 
calculated based on data from 2005–2007. We collect mortality rates 
reported  over  several  time  intervals,  including  a  pre-event  window 
[𝑡 − 3, 𝑡 − 1] and four post-event windows reported in year 3 through 6: 
[𝑡+1, 𝑡+3], [𝑡+2, 𝑡+4], [𝑡+3, 𝑡+5], and [𝑡+4, 𝑡+6]. We exclude the windows 
that straddle the year of the acquisition because patient outcomes in 
those windows reflect partly pre-event conditions and partly treatment 
effects.

Because the pre-event window does not overlap with post-event 
ones, we adopt a first-difference approach to examine the effect of an 
acquisition on patient mortality and readmission rates. For each post-
event window, we compute the change in mortality rate for a given 
hospital from the pre-event window to each of the four post-event win-
dows. This gives us up to four observations for each hospital-acquisition 
event. The first-difference approach allows us to directly measure the 
changes in mortality/readmission rates following hospitalization from 
pre-acquisition years to post-acquisition years.

We  regress  the  changes  in  mortality  and  readmission  rates  for 
PE and non-PE acquirers, with all control variables transformed in a 
first-difference approach. We also remove hospital fixed effects, which 
are absorbed by the first-difference approach. Our specification is as 
follows: 

𝛥𝑌𝑒,𝑖,𝜏 = 𝛽1𝑃 𝐸 𝑇 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝜏 + 𝛽2𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑃 𝐸 𝑇 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡𝑒,𝑖,𝜏 + 𝛾 ⋅ 𝛥𝑋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜇𝑒 + 𝜈𝑒,𝑖,𝜏 , (3)

where 𝛥𝑌𝑒,𝑖,𝜏 represents the changes in mortality and readmission rates 
from the pre-event to a post-event window, indexed by 𝜏. 𝛥𝑋𝑖,𝑡 repre-
sents the first-difference in control variables, and 𝜇𝑒 stands for matched 
pair fixed effects. In this specification, PE Target equals one for target 
hospitals of PE acquirers, and NonPE Target indicates target hospitals 
of non-PE acquirers.

Table  13 reports the results from estimating Eq. (3). We present 
coefficients  from  regressions  with  and  without  matched  pair  fixed 
effects.

Panel A reports results regarding patient mortality. We do not find 
PE-acquired hospitals to exhibit significant increases in any of the three 

types of mortality rates we examine. There are mixed evidence regard-
ing the effect of non-PE acquirers. While target hospitals of non-PE 
buyers have lower mortality rates regarding heart attacks compared to 
their control group, they exhibit higher mortality rates related to heart 
failures. Panel B presents results regarding readmission rates. We again 
do not find PE acquirers to be associated with significant changes in any 
type of readmission rates. Non-PE acquirers are associated with a 0.8 
percentage point decrease in readmission rates following pneumonia, 
but no changes in other readmission rates.

In untabulated analyses, we also look into other patient outcomes, 
including stroke, complications and infection during hospitalization. 
We do not find evidence that PE-acquired hospitals differ from the 
control group, or from non-PE-acquired hospitals along these dimen-
sions. Overall, our evidence does not support the argument that patients 
at PE-acquired hospitals exhibit worse treatment outcomes or higher 
readmission rates compared to those at targets of non-PE acquirers as 
well as those at control hospitals. This finding complements the results 
from Liu (2021) that there is no significant change in the service quality 
of PE target hospitals.

8. Conclusion

Hospitals are an important sector of the economy. They not only 
provide  essential  healthcare,  but  are  also  key  job  providers  in  the 
U.S. As PE firms are increasingly involved in the hospital industry, in-
depth research is needed to understand how such activity affects jobs, 
efficiency and patient outcomes at acquired hospitals.

We find that PE-acquired hospitals exhibit significant employment 
cuts,  reduced  wage  expenses,  and  improved  operating  profitability. 
Yet, the employment cuts largely involve administrative workers. In 
the  longer  term,  the  number  of  core  medical  workers  (e.g.,  nurses 
and physicians) recovers to pre-acquisition levels, while the decline 
in administrative workers persists. Such reductions in administrative 
workers is unique to PE acquirers, and not observed for other for-profit 
acquirers in the hospital industry.

Perhaps as a result of preserving core workers in the long run, 
we do not observe a deterioration in real patient outcomes such as 
mortality or readmission rates at PE-acquired hospitals. Nor do we see 
significant shifts in patient demographics or hospital inpatient prices. 
These results alleviate the concerns that PE firms improve efficiency 
and  profitability  at  the  expense  of  patients.  At  the  same  time,  we 
find  that  patients  at  PE  target  hospitals  express  lower  satisfaction, 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Table 13
Mortality and readmission rates at target hospitals.
This table examines the mortality and readmission rates at target hospitals around acquisitions. Panel A reports the results for mortality rates. 
The dependent variables are the 30-day risk-standardized mortality rate following heart attack hospitalization, heart failure hospitalization, and 
pneumonia hospitalization. Panel B reports the results for readmission rates. The dependent variables are the 30-day risk-standardized readmission 
rates for patients discharged from the hospital with a principal diagnosis of heart attack, heart failure, and pneumonia, respectively. Mortality 
rates and readmission rates are presented in percentage points. The regressions take a first-difference approach, with both the dependent 
variables and continuous control variables representing changes from the pre-acquisition window to a post-acquisition window. PE Target turns 
to one after a hospital is acquired by a PE acquirer. NonPE Target turns to one after a hospital is acquired by a non-PE acquirer. Rows with 
𝐻0’s provide 𝑝-values from Wald Chi-square tests indicating whether two coefficients are statistically significantly different from each other. 
Control variables are the same as in Table  3. See Appendix  A for variable definitions. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses and standard errors 
are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by hospital. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

  Dep. Var.:

   PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls (differenced)
  County Controls (differenced)
  Matched Pair FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

  Dep. Var.:

  PE Target

  NonPE Target

  Hospital Controls (differenced)
  County Controls (differenced)
  Matched Pair FEs

  𝐻0: PE = NonPE

  Obs
  Adj. 𝑅2

(A) Changes in Mortality

Heart Attack (AMI)
(1)

(2)

Heart Failure
(3)

−0.0702
(−0.14)

−1.2259∗
(−1.87)
Yes
Yes

0.11

175
0.10

0.4779
(0.99)

−2.1883∗∗∗
(−4.80)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.00

175
0.55

0.2126
(0.36)

0.9621
(1.47)
Yes
Yes

0.27

199
0.06

(B) Changes in Readmission

Heart Attack (AMI)
(1)

(2)

Heart Failure
(3)

0.3644
(0.65)

−0.3770
(−0.58)
Yes
Yes

0.20

126
0.13

−0.0570
(−0.11)

−0.3371
(−0.95)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.63

126
0.57

0.4897
(0.77)

0.6336
(0.89)
Yes
Yes

0.85

163
0.18

(4)

−0.5163
(−0.87)

0.5946
(1.12)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.22

199
0.53

(4)

0.2870
(0.54)

0.0371
(0.06)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.75

163
0.57

Pneumonia

(5)

0.6729
(1.29)

0.6779
(0.79)
Yes
Yes

0.99

199
0.07

Pneumonia

(5)

−0.1837
(−0.39)

−0.5383
(−0.92)
Yes
Yes

0.55

163
0.09

(6)
−0.1525 
(−0.33)  
1.0721∗  
(1.78)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.14

199
0.57

(6)
−0.7147  
(−1.46)
−0.8393∗∗ 
(−2.03)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.86

163
0.52

suggesting that hospital services may be running less smoothly due to 
the reduction in supporting, non-medical staff.

Overall, our evidence suggests that PE acquirers improve the oper-
ating efficiency of target hospitals without significantly compromising 
healthcare quality. Targets of non-PE acquirers do not exhibit the same 
improvement in their operating efficiency. Thus, our analysis reveals a 
unique role of PE investors in shaping the hospital industry.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Janet Gao: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Yongseok Kim: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Soft-
ware, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, 
Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. 
Merih Sevilir: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Val-
idation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, 
Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

22 

Appendix A. Variable definitions

A.1. Employment variables

• Log(Employment): The log of total employees (measured in full-
time equivalent employees based on paid hours). The information 
is obtained from the HCRIS Worksheet S-3, Part II.

• Log(Total  Wages):  The  log  of  total  wages.  The  information  is 

obtained from the HCRIS Worksheet S-3, Part II.

• Log(Core Workers): The log number of nurses, physicians, and 
pharmacists (measured in full-time equivalent employees based 
on  paid  hours).  The  information  is  obtained  from  the  HCRIS 
Worksheet S-3, Part II. Core workers include Non-physician anes-
thethist Part A (Line Number 2), Non-physician anesthethist Part 
B (Line Number 3), Physician - Part A - Administrative (Line 
Number 4), Physician - Part A - Teaching (Line Number 4.01), 
Physician and Non Physician-Part B (Line Number 5), Interns & 
residents (in an approved program) (Line Number 7), Contracted 
interns & residents (in an approved program) (Line Number 7.01), 
Contract labor: Direct Patient Care (Line Number 11), Contract 
labor:  Physician  -  Part  A  -  Administrative  (Line  Number  13), 
Home office: Physician Part A - Administrative (Line Number 15), 
Home office & Contract Physician Part A - Teaching (Line Number 
16), Nursing Administration (Line Number 38), and Pharmacy 
(Line Number 40).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
J. Gao et al.

• Log(Core Wage Rate): The log of hourly wages for nurses, pharma-
cists, and physicians. The information is obtained from the HCRIS 
Worksheet S-3, Part II. Core workers include Non-physician anes-
thethist Part A (Line Number 2), Non-physician anesthethist Part 
B (Line Number 3), Physician - Part A - Administrative (Line 
Number 4), Physician - Part A - Teaching (Line Number 4.01), 
Physician and Non Physician-Part B (Line Number 5), Interns & 
residents (in an approved program) (Line Number 7), Contracted 
interns & residents (in an approved program) (Line Number 7.01), 
Contract labor: Direct Patient Care (Line Number 11), Contract 
labor:  Physician  -  Part  A  -  Administrative  (Line  Number  13), 
Home office: Physician Part A - Administrative (Line Number 15), 
Home office & Contract Physician Part A - Teaching (Line Number 
16), Nursing Administration (Line Number 38), and Pharmacy 
(Line Number 40).

• Log(Admin Workers): The log number of administrative and gen-
eral workers (measured in full-time equivalent employees based 
on  paid  hours).  The  information  is  obtained  from  the  HCRIS 
Worksheet S-3, Part II. Administrative and general workers in-
clude Administrative & General (Line Number 27) and Adminis-
trative & General under contract (Line Number 28).

• Log(Admin Wage Rate): The log of hourly wages for administrative 
and general workers (including contract labor). The information 
is obtained from the HCRIS Worksheet S-3, Part II. Administra-
tive and general workers include Administrative & General (Line 
Number 27) and Administrative & General under contract (Line 
Number 28).

A.2. Patient outcome variables

• Mortality for Heart Attack (AMI): 30-day risk-standardized mor-
tality rate following heart attack hospitalization, in percentage 
points.

• Mortality for Heart Failure: 30-day risk-standardized mortality rate 

following heart failure hospitalization, in percentage points.

• Mortality for Pneumonia: 30-day risk-standardized mortality rate 

following pneumonia hospitalization, in percentage points.

• Readmission for Heart Attack (AMI): 30-day risk-standardized read-
mission rates for patients discharged from the hospital with a 
principal diagnosis of heart attack, in percentage points.

• Readmission for Heart Failure: 30-day risk-standardized readmis-
sion rates for patients discharged from the hospital with a princi-
pal diagnosis of heart failure, in percentage points.

• Readmission for Pneumonia: 30-day risk-standardized readmission 
rates for patients discharged from the hospital with a principal 
diagnosis of pneumonia, in percentage points.

• Nurse Comm.: A variable computed by 3×(‘‘Top-box’’ Answer %) 
+2 × (‘‘Middle-box’’ Answer %) + 1 × (‘‘Bottom-box’’ Answer %) for 
the Communication with Nurses questions.

• Doctor Comm: A variable computed by 3×(‘‘Top-box’’ Answer %) 
+2 × (‘‘Middle-box’’ Answer %) + 1 × (‘‘Bottom-box’’ Answer %) for 
the Communication with Doctors questions.

• Receive Help: A variable computed by 3×(‘‘Top-box’’ Answer %) 
+2 × (‘‘Middle-box’’ Answer %) + 1 × (‘‘Bottom-box’’ Answer %) for 
the Responsiveness of Hospital Staff questions.

• Hospital Rating : A variable computed by 3×(‘‘Top-box’’ Answer %) 
+2 × (‘‘Middle-box’’ Answer %) + 1 × (‘‘Bottom-box’’ Answer %) for 
the Overall Rating of Hospital questions.

• Recommendation: A variable computed by 3×(‘‘Top-box’’ Answer 
%) +2 × (‘‘Middle-box’’ Answer %) + 1 × (‘‘Bottom-box’’ Answer %) 
for the Willingness of Recommendation questions.

A.3. HCCI risk-adjusted prices and patient characteristics

• Female (Simple): The fraction of female patients at a hospital in a 

given year.

23 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

• Female (Weighted): The proportion of the total amount paid by 

female patients at a hospital in a given year.

• Age (Simple): The average age of patients’ age at a hospital in a 
given year. Age is an integer ranging from 1–7, indicating the 
following seven age bands: 1: 0–17, 2: 18–24, 3: 25–34, 4: 35–44, 
5: 45–54, 6: 55–64, 7: 65+.

• Age (Weighted): The weighted average age of patients at a hospital 
in a given year, where the weights are based on the total amount 
paid  by  each  patient  to  the  hospital  during  that  year.  Age  is 
an integer ranging from 1-7, indicating the following seven age 
bands: 1: 0–17, 2: 18–24, 3: 25–34, 4: 35–44, 5: 45–54, 6: 55–64, 
7: 65+.

• Income (Simple): The average income of patients at a hospital 
in a given year. We infer patient income from their residential 
location  because  we  do  not  directly  observe  patients’  income 
levels. Zipcode-level income data come from IRS’ adjusted gross 
income (AGI).

• Income (Weighted): The weighted average income of patients at a 
hospital in a given year, where the weights are based on the total 
amount paid by each patient to the hospital during that year. We 
infer patient income from their residential location because we do 
not directly observe patients’ income levels. Zipcode-level income 
data come from IRS’ adjusted gross income (AGI).

• Price for Inpatient : A hospital-year level inpatient price index, 
adjusted for the risk associated with variations in patient mix, as 
described in Internet Appendix Section I.

• Price for Hip Replacement : A hospital-year level hip replacement 
price index, adjusted for the risk associated with variations in 
patient mix, as described in Internet Appendix Section I.

• Price for Knee Replacement : A hospital-year level knee replace-
ment price index, adjusted for the risk associated with variations 
in patient mix, as described in Internet Appendix Section I.

• Price for C-Section: A hospital-year level C-section price index, 
adjusted for the risk associated with variations in patient mix, as 
described in Internet Appendix Section I.

• Price for Vaginal Delivery: A hospital-year level vaginal delivery 
price index, adjusted for the risk associated with variations in 
patient mix, as described in Internet Appendix Section I.

• Price for PTCA: A hospital-year level PTCA price index, adjusted 
for the risk associated with variations in patient mix, as described 
in Internet Appendix Section I.

• Price  for  Colonoscopy:  A  hospital-year  level  colonoscopy  price 
index, adjusted for the risk associated with variations in patient 
mix, as described in Internet Appendix Section I.

• Price for MRI : A hospital-year level MRI price index, adjusted for 
the risk associated with variations in patient mix, as described in 
Internet Appendix Section I.

A.4. Independent variables

• PE Target : An indicator variable that turns to one for a target 
hospital after it is acquired by a PE firm or a PE-owned hospital.
• NonPE Target : An indicator variable that turns to one for a tar-
get hospital after it is acquired by a non-PE owned, for-profit 
acquirer.

A.5. Other variables

• Log(Beds): The log of number of beds.
• Log(Patients): The log of number of patients. The number of pa-
tients is estimated by adjusted discharges, defined as the number 
of  discharged  inpatients  multiplied  by  total  charges/inpatient 
charges.

• Log(Gross Patient Sales): The log of gross patient sales.
• Log(Net Patient Sales): The log of net patient sales, which is gross 
sales after deducting rebate and discounts offered to patients.

J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

• CMI : The case mix index.
• %Medicare: The ratio of discharges with Medicare insurance rel-

Data availability

ative to total discharges.

• %Medicaid: The ratio of discharges with Medicaid insurance rel-

ative to total discharges.

• %Outpatient :  The  ratio  of  outpatient  charges  relative  to  total 

charges.

• %Black: The fraction of Black in a given county at a given year.
• %Asian: The fraction of Asian in a given county at a given year.
• Log(Pop): The log of population in a given county at a given year.
• Log(FMR): The log of one bedroom rent price in a give county in 

a given year.

Appendix B. Patient satisfaction survey questions

HCAHPS  categorizes  survey  responses  into  ‘‘top-box,’’  ‘‘middle-
box,’’ and ‘‘bottom-box’’ for each question, with top-box indicating the 
most positive response and bottom-box indicating the least positive. 
Accordingly,  we  assign  a  numerical  score  of  3  for  top-box,  2  for 
middle-box, and 1 for bottom-box. The list below reports our numerical 
classification scheme.

COMMUNICATION WITH NURSES

• During this hospital stay, how often did nurses treat you with 

courtesy and respect?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

• During 

this  hospital 

stay,  how  often  did  nurses

listen carefully to you?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

• During this hospital stay, how often did nurses explain things in 

a way you could understand?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

COMMUNICATION WITH DOCTORS

• During this hospital stay, how often did doctors treat you with 

courtesy and respect?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

• During 

this  hospital 

stay,  how  often  did  doctors

listen carefully to you?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

• During this hospital stay, how often did doctors explain things in 

a way you could understand?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

RESPONSIVENESS OF HOSPITAL STAFF

• During this hospital stay, after you pressed the call button, how 

often did you get help as soon as you wanted it?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

• How often did you get help in getting to the bathroom or in using 

a bedpan as soon as you wanted?
1 – Never or Sometimes; 2 – Usually; 3 – Always

OVERALL RATING OF HOSPITAL

• Using any number from 0 to 10, where 0 is the worst hospital 
possible and 10 is the best hospital possible, what number would 
you use to rate this hospital during your stay?
1 – 6 or lower; 2 – 7 or 8; 3 – 9 or 10

WILLINGNESS TO RECOMMEND HOSPITAL

• Would you recommend this hospital to your friends and family?
1 – Definitely no or Probably no; 2 – Probably yes; 3 – Definitely yes

24 

Private Equity in the Hospital Industry (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Abadie, A., Diamond, A., Hainmueller, J., 2010. Synthetic control methods for compar-
ative case studies: Estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program. J. 
Amer. Statist. Assoc. 105 (490), 493–505.

Adelino, M., Lewellen, K., McCartney, W.B., 2021. Hospital financial health and clinical 

choices: evidence from the financial crisis. Manag. Sci..

Adelino, M., Lewellen, K., Sundaram, A., 2015. Investment decisions of nonprofit firms: 

Evidence from hospitals. J. Financ. 70 (4), 1583–1628.

Aghamolla, C., Karaca-Mandic, P., Li, X., Thakor, R.T., 2021. Merchants of death: The 

effect of credit supply shocks on hospital outcomes. Working Paper.

Ameringer, C.F., 2000. Organized medicine on trial: The federal trade commission vs. 

the American Medical Association. J. Policy Hist. 12 (4), 445–472.

Antoni, M., Maug, E., Obernberger, S., 2019. Private equity and human capital risk. J. 

Financ. Econ. 133 (3), 634–657.

Austin, P.C., 2009. Using the standardized difference to compare the prevalence of 
a binary variable between two groups in observational research. Comm. Statist. 
Simulation Comput. 38 (6), 1228–1234.

Austin, P.C., 2011. An introduction to propensity score methods for reducing the effects 
of confounding in observational studies. Multivar. Behav. Res. 46 (3), 399–424.
Baugh, C.W., Schuur, J.D., 2013. Observation care—high-value care or a cost-shifting 

loophole? N. Engl. J. Med. 369 (4), 302–305.

Beaulieu, N.D., Dafny, L.S., Landon, B.E., Dalton, J.B., Kuye, I., McWilliams, J.M., 2020. 
Changes in quality of care after hospital mergers and acquisitions. N. Engl. J. Med. 
382 (1), 51–59.

Bernstein, S., 2022. The effects of public and private equity markets on firm behavior. 

Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 14, 295–318.

Bernstein, S., Sheen, A., 2016. The operational consequences of private equity buyouts: 
Evidence from the restaurant industry. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (9), 2387–2418.
Bloom, H.S., 1995. Minimum detectable effects: A simple way to report the statistical 

power of experimental designs. Eval. Rev. 19 (5), 547–556.

Borsa, A., Bejarano, G., Ellen, M., Bruch, J.D., 2023. Evaluating trends in private equity 
ownership and impacts on health outcomes, costs, and quality: systematic review. 
Bmj 382.

Boucly, Q., Sraer, D., Thesmar, D., 2011. Growth LBOs. J. Financ. Econ. 102 (2), 

432–453.

Bruch, J.D., Gondi, S., Song, Z., 2020. Changes in hospital income, use, and qual-
ity  associated  with  private  equity  acquisition.  JAMA  Intern.  Med.  180  (11), 
1428–1435.

Bruch, J.D., Nair-Desai, S., Orav, E.J., Tsai, T.C., 2022. Private equity acquisitions 
of ambulatory surgical centers were not associated with quality, cost, or volume 
changes: Study examines private equity acquisitions of ambulatory surgical centers 
and potential impact on quality of care, cost, or volume. Health Aff. 41 (9), 
1291–1298.

Cerullo, M., Lin, Y.L., Rauh-Hain, J.A., Ho, V., Offodile II, A.C., 2022a. Financial 
impacts and operational implications of private equity acquisition of US hospi-
tals: Study examines the impacts and operational implications of private equity 
acquisitions of US hospitals. Health Aff. 41 (4), 523–530.

Cerullo, M., Yang, K., Maddox, K.E.J., McDevitt, R.C., Roberts, J.W., Offodile, A.C., 
2022b. Association between hospital private equity acquisition and outcomes of 
acute medical conditions among medicare beneficiaries. JAMA Netw. Open 5 (4), 
e229581–e229581.

Cooper, Z., Craig, S.V., Gaynor, M., Van Reenen, J., 2019. The price ain’t right? Hospital 
prices and health spending on the privately insured. Q. J. Econ. 134 (1), 51–107.
Cooper, Z., Gibbons, S., Jones, S., McGuire, A., 2011. Does hospital competition save 
lives? Evidence from the English NHS patient choice reforms. Econ. J. 121 (554), 
228–260.

Cornaggia, K., Li, X., Ye, Z., 2021. Virtual competition and cost of capital: Evidence 

from telehealth. Available At SSRN 3833193.

Craig, S.V., Grennan, M., Swanson, A., 2021. Mergers and marginal costs: New evidence 

on hospital buyer power. Rand J. Econ. 52 (1), 151–178.

Dafny, L., 2009. Estimation and identification of merger effects: An application to 

hospital mergers. J. Law Econ. 52 (3), 523–550.

Dafny, L., Ho, K., Lee, R.S., 2019. The price effects of cross-market mergers: Theory 

and evidence from the hospital industry. Rand J. Econ. 50 (2), 286–325.

Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J., Handley, K., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J., Miranda, J., 2014. 
Private equity, jobs, and productivity. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (12), 3956–3990.
Ewens,  M.,  Gupta,  A.,  Howell,  S.T.,  2022.  Local  journalism  under  private  equity 

ownership.

Fracassi, C., Previtero, A., Sheen, A., 2022. Barbarians at the store? Private equity, 

products, and consumers. J. Financ. 77 (3), 1439–1488.

Gandhi, A., Song, Y., Upadrashta, P., 2020a. Have private equity owned nursing homes 

fared worse under COVID-19? Available At SSRN 3682892.

J. Gao et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104107 

Gandhi,  A.,  Song,  Y.,  Upadrashta,  P.,  2020b.  Private  equity,  consumers,  and 

Lerner, J., Sorensen, M., Strömberg, P., 2011. Private equity and long-run investment: 

competition: Evidence from the nursing home industry. Work. Pap..

The case of innovation. J. Financ. 66 (2), 445–477.

Gaynor, M., Town, R.J., 2011. Competition in health care markets. Handb. Heal. Econ. 

Lewellen, K., Phillips, G., Sertsios, G., 2023. Control Without Ownership: Governance 

Griffin, J., Priest, A., 2024. Overbilling and killing? An examination of skilled nursing 

Lewis, M.S., Pflum, K.E., 2017. Hospital systems and bargaining power: Evidence from 

2, 499–637.

facilities. Working Paper.

Gupta, A., Howell, S.T., Yannelis, C., Gupta, A., 2021. Does private equity investment 
in healthcare benefit patients? Evidence from nursing homes. Working Paper.
Gustavson, M., Taylor, N., 2010. At death’s Door-Idaho’s corporate practice of medicine 

doctrine. Ida. L. Rev. 47, 479.

Hainmueller, J., 2012. Entropy balancing for causal effects: A multivariate reweighting 
method to produce balanced samples in observational studies. Political Anal. 20 
(1), 25–46.

Ho,  V.,  Hamilton,  B.H.,  2000.  Hospital  mergers  and  acquisitions:  Does  market 

consolidation harm patients? J. Heal. Econ. 19 (5), 767–791.

of Nonprofit Hospitals. Technical Report, Working Paper..

out-of-market acquisitions. Rand J. Econ. 48 (3), 579–610.

Liu, T., 2021. Bargaining with private equity: Implications for hospital prices and 

patient welfare. Working Paper.

Morris, P., Phalippou, L., Wu, B.H., 2022. How deadly is financial leverage? Evidence 
from care homes during the COVID-19 crisis. Evidence from Care Homes During 
the COVID- 19 Crisis (January 25, 2022).

Offodile II, A.C., Cerullo, M., Bindal, M., Rauh-Hain, J.A., Ho, V., 2021. Private equity 
investments in health care: an overview of hospital and health system leveraged 
buyouts, 2003–17. Health Aff. 40 (5), 719–726.

Olsson, M., Tåg, J., 2017. Private equity, layoffs, and job polarization. J. Labor Econ. 

Howell, S.T., Jang, Y., Kim, H., Weisbach, M.S., 2022. All clear for takeoff: Evidence 

35 (3), 697–754.

from airports on the effects of infrastructure privatization.

Prager,  E.,  Schmitt,  M.,  2021.  Employer  consolidation  and  wages:  Evidence  from 

Jensen, M.C., 2019. Eclipse of the public corporation. In: Corporate Governance. Gower, 

hospitals. Am. Econ. Rev. 111 (2), 397–427.

pp. 239–252.

Kaplan, S., 1989. The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and 

value. J. Financ. Econ. 24 (2), 217–254.

Kaplan, S.N., Stromberg, P., 2009. Leveraged buyouts and private equity. J. Econ. 

Perspect. 23 (1), 121–146.

Kocher, R., 2013. The downside of health care job growth. Harv. Bus. Rev..
La Forgia, A., Bond, A.M., Braun, R.T., Yao, L.Z., Kjaer, K., Zhang, M., Casalino, L.P., 
2022. Association of physician management companies and private equity invest-
ment with commercial health care prices paid to anesthesia practitioners. JAMA 
Intern. Med. 182 (4), 396–404.

La France, A., Batt, R., Appelbaum, E., 2021. Hospital ownership and financial stability: 
a matched case comparison of a nonprofit health system and a private equity–
owned health system. In: The Contributions of Health Care Management To Grand 
Health Care Challenges, vol. 20, Emerald Publishing Limited, pp. 173–220.

Propper, C., Burgess, S., Green, K., 2004. Does competition between hospitals improve 
the quality of care?: Hospital death rates and the NHS internal market. J. Public 
Econ. 88 (7–8), 1247–1272.

Schmitt, M., 2017. Do hospital mergers reduce costs? J. Heal. Econ. 52, 74–94.
Shrank, W.H., Rogstad, T.L., Parekh, N., 2019. Waste in the US health care system: 

Estimated costs and potential for savings. JAMA 322 (15), 1501–1509.

Silverman, S.I., 2015. In an era of healthcare delivery reforms, the corporate practice 

of medicine is a matter that requires vigilance. Heal. L. & Pol’ Y Brief 9.

Spaenjers, C., Steiner, E., 2021. The value of specialization in private equity: evidence 

from the hotel industry. HEC Paris Research Paper No. FIN-2020-1410.

Wang,  Y.,  Xu,  J.,  Anderson,  G.,  2024.  Within-hospital  price  gaps  across  national 

insurers. JAMA Netw. Open 7 (12), e2451941–e2451941.

25 

