Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Surviving the fintech disruption(cid:73)
,∗, Rachel J. Xiao c, Vincent Yao d
Wei Jiang a
, Yuehua Tang b
a Emory University Goizueta Business School, NBER, and ECGI, 1300 Clifton Rd, Atlanta, 30322, GA, USA
b Warrington College of Business, University of Florida, 1454 Union Rd, Gainesville, 32611, FL, USA
c Gabelli School of Business, Fordham University, 45 Columbus Ave, New York, 10023, NY, USA
d J. Mack Robinson College of Business, Georgia State University, 35 Broad St NW, Atlanta, 30303, GA, USA

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Fintech Disruption JFE Replication
Package (Reference data)

Keywords:
Fintech
Creative destruction
Jobs
Tasks
Technology
Innovation

1. Introduction

We examine the impact of fintech on firm labor demand, job turnover, and firm performance. Occupations 
with higher exposure to fintech experience a net decline in job postings and employment, though both 
complementary and substitutive effects emerge across different sectors. Fintech blurs traditional industry 
boundaries, creating demand for workers with a combination of finance and technology skills. In response, 
firms upskill through hiring, reallocate talent internally, and pivot innovation to new areas. As a result, firms 
are better equipped to absorb the shock than individual workers, with innovative firms even experiencing 
growth in employment, sales, and productivity upon fintech disruption.

Economists have long debated the trade-off between the new oppor-
tunities that technological advancements bring to businesses and con-
sumers and the labor force displacements they cause—a phenomenon 
often referred to as ‘‘creative destruction’’, first coined by Schumpeter 
(1942). In this paper, we examine the relationship between techno-
logical innovations and changes in the labor market by focusing on 
the recent wave of fintech. Our research setting offers several distinc-
tive advantages for exploring this topic. First, financial services have 
emerged as the primary target for disruption and enhancement during 
this fintech wave that features decentralization (e.g., distributed ledger 
technology) and disintermediation (e.g., crowdfunding) in the financial 
industry,  although  they  have  remained  largely  intact  while  numer-
ous technological waves have disrupted many other industries since 
1886 (Philippon, 2015). This provides us with a unique opportunity 
to study the creative destruction effect of fintech innovations. Second, 

the most recent fintech wave involves inter-industry competition from 
the  information  technology  (IT)  sector  as  a  primary  force  driving 
innovation and new entrants that aim to provide core financial services, 
such as payment, more efficiently outside the realm of the incumbent 
financial sector. Therefore, we anticipate that the labor market effects 
of  fintech  innovations  may  be  complex,  including  adjustments  and 
changes both within and across firms and sectors.

The common empirical challenge to quantifying the effect of tech-
nologies is a general lack of ex ante measures for exposure to tech-
nology at the micro-level. To overcome this challenge, we take the 
first step in developing a novel measure of an occupation’s exposure 
to fintech innovations by cross-analyzing the textual information in 
the description of job tasks under an occupation and that in fintech 
patent filings in the past years. Such exposure captures not only the 
similarity between the two text corpora, but also the intensity of fintech 
innovations (e.g., the amount of fintech patent filings in the recent 

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. This study benefits from comments and suggestions from the editor, two anonymous referees, Tania 
Babina, Will Cong, Gerard Hoberg, Yukun Liu, Ernst Maug, Song Ma, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Ben Zhang, and the participants at the following seminars and 
conferences: Kadir Has (Istanbul), Webinar on Labor and Finance, Workshop on Entrepreneurial Finance and Innovation, Atlanta Rising Scholar Symposium 
in Finance (ARSS), Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance Annual Conference, Annual Ph.D. Student Symposium on Financial Market Research and Policy 
Development, 20th Annual Bank Research Conference, Northern Finance Association (NFA) Annual Conference, SFS Cavalcade Conference, Western Finance 
Association (WFA) Meeting, Asian Finance Association (AsianFA) Annual Meeting, China International Conference in Finance, Renmin University of China, and 
University of Mannheim. We thank Mark Chen, Qinxi Wu, and Baozhong Yang for sharing the list of fintech patent filings. Ryan Chen, Mathew Evancho, Freddy 
Fang, Aisulu Munkina, Benjamin Nagoshi, Ryan Owens, and Mingyin Zhu provided excellent research assistance.

E-mail addresses:  wei.jiang@emory.edu (W. Jiang), yuehua.tang@warrington.ufl.edu (Y. Tang), rachelxiao@fordham.edu (R.J. Xiao), wyao2@gsu.edu 

∗ Corresponding author.

(V. Yao).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104071
Received 25 September 2022; Received in revised form 2 April 2025; Accepted 6 April 2025
Available online 27 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

past). The exposure can also be aggregated to the firm or industry level. 
We discover non-monotonic relations between fintech disruption and 
the common demographic characteristics. The most negatively affected 
are occupations that pay middle-range salaries, require intermediate 
education  attainments,  and  middle-aged  workers,  a  pattern  that  is 
different from that in previous studies of technology disruptions such as 
automation and AI. We further verify that there is little correlation be-
tween our fintech exposure and several widely recognized occupational 
exposures to general technology, including AI, software, offshorability, 
and routine vs. abstract task content (e.g., Autor et al., 2003; Firpo 
et  al.,  2011;  Autor  and  Dorn,  2013;  Webb,  2019),  confirming  that 
fintech has generated a unique wave of technological shocks.

Our first main objective is to characterize and quantify how talent 
demand changes in response to fintech disruption. A priori, we are 
agnostic about whether fintech innovations directed at certain occupa-
tions’ tasks are substitutes or complements to the current task takers. 
Seeking to frame our empirical tests, we present three iconic fintech 
patents representing the technologies underlying Venmo, Zelle, and 
blockchain, and highlight the key aspects and channels through which 
fintech disrupts traditional ways of providing financial services and 
eliminates jobs, but at the same time open up new occupations and 
change skill requirements.

Using data from Burning Glass Technology (‘‘BG’’), our baseline 
analysis  at  the  occupation-year  level  reveals  a  significant  negative 
relationship  between  fintech  exposure  and  changes  in  job  postings, 
after controlling for alternative occupational exposures. When fintech 
exposure increases by one percentile in a given year, occupation-level 
job postings decrease by 7.1 bps annually. If fintech exposure moves 
from  20th  to  80th,  the  equivalent  loss  of  job  posting  amounts  to 
1642 in an average occupation-year cohort. The aggregate effect, as 
estimated, indicates a loss of approximately 483,600 job postings in 
occupations with the highest quartile of fintech exposure from 2010 to 
2018. We cross-validate the results with employment and wages pro-
vided by the Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS). 
The negative and significant relationship is confirmed, although the 
magnitude with respect to employment is reduced to about a third. 
The negative impact of fintech on wages is only significant after 2014, 
when fintech innovations accelerated. A one percentile rank increase in 
fintech exposure is associated with a 2.1 bps decrease in average wages 
during 2015–2018. The lagged and moderated impact on employment 
and wage is consistent with the large labor literature documenting 
that employment is much stickier than new hiring and that wages are 
downward rigid. Job postings, which reflect firms’ desire to hire, are 
the closest proxy for the demand for talent.

The  aggregate  net  negative  impact  of  fintech  on  jobs  does  not 
rule out rich cross-sectional variations, which also shed light on the 
underlying  economic  mechanisms.  First,  we  classify  fintech  patents 
along  a  spectrum,  from  those  most  likely  to  replace  (substitute)  a 
given occupation to those likely to enhance (complement) it, with the 
help of ChatGPT using textual information of job tasks and fintech 
patents. In the bottom (top) quartile of complementarity (substitution), 
a one percentile increase in exposure to the technologies embedded in 
these patents is associated with a 17.6 bps decrease in job postings. 
The coefficient increases monotonically as we move up the quartiles 
and approaches zero (becoming insignificant) at the top quartile. This 
variation  suggests  a  nuanced  relationship  between  technology  and 
workers.

We thus turn to the ‘‘creative’’ part of the fintech disruption, that 
is, the creation of new occupations associated with fintech innovations, 
since companies need people to invent, adopt, operate, and maintain 
the new technology. We identify detailed suboccupation categorized at 
the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) 8-digit level by compar-
ing various waves of the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) 
taxonomy reports, and confirm its positive relation with fintech ex-
posure of the occupation to which each 8-digit SOC suboccupation 
belongs. Moving fintech exposure from 20th to 80th fintech exposure 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

will  lead  to  an  increase  of  7.14%  (0.119% ×  60)  in  the  likelihood 
of suboccupation creation (relative to the unconditional probability 
of 7.1%). Newly created occupations with high fintech exposure gen-
erally  fall  into  two  groups:  the  first  provides  technical  support  for 
fintech innovations, while the second group adopts fintech innovations 
for task fulfillment. Among the seven fintech categories, exposure to 
blockchain  technology  is  associated  with  the  highest  likelihood  of 
creation, followed by cybersecurity and peer-to-peer technology.

The disruption of fintech embodies an upskilling element even for 
existing jobs. Fintech exposure is associated with a higher requirement 
for work experience as well as educational attainment in job postings. 
The mix of skill sets also matters: Employers are 13.6% (significant 
at the 1% level) more likely to require ‘‘finance + tech’’ combination 
skills  if  fintech  exposure  moves  from  20th  to  80th,  relative  to  the 
unconditional probability of 72%.

Similarly, in our cross-sectoral analysis, banking and payment firms 
exhibit stronger demand for talent when facing fintech disruption com-
pared to other industries. This sectoral difference remains significant 
even after controlling for variations in occupations with high and low 
complementarity to fintech, suggesting that sectoral differences and 
occupational characteristics are two distinct channels through which 
fintech disruption influences job demand. We further examine the im-
pact of fintech exposure in the specific industries where fintech patents 
are most likely to be applicable. In most subsector-fintech pairings, 
occupations with low complementarity to fintech witness a significant 
drop in job demand, but those in the same subsector but with high 
complementarity to fintech have experienced a significant increase in 
job postings, offsetting the negative impact on low-complementarity 
roles.

Due  to  the  nuanced  relationship  between  technology  and  labor 
and the differential ability of firms to adapt to external shocks, the 
impact of fintech on firms is a priori unclear. We thus complete this 
study with a firm-occupation-year level analysis. Overall, the negative 
relation  between  fintech  exposure  and  job  posting  remains,  but  is 
weaker at the firm-occupation level, raising the question of how firms 
can neutralize the more negative impact fintech has demonstrated on 
the  labor  and  job  side.  The  first  difference  we  observe  is  between 
‘‘incumbent’’ firms, defined as firms in the finance sector with above-
median age (measured by the number of years listed on Compustat with 
asset information), and new entrants. Young and technology firms are 
potential ‘‘challengers’’ for the established business models and prac-
tices of incumbents. Indeed, we find that the negative relation between 
fintech exposure and job postings is primarily driven by ‘‘incumbent’’ 
firms, while young finance firms and technology firms are well adapted.
We also explore with-in firm transfers using LinkedIn data, which 
constitute an important way for talent to be redeployed, but which 
job posting may fail to capture. We define ‘‘internal transfer’’ as the 
same employee moving to a different occupation but remaining with 
the  same  firm.  We  discover  a  positive  and  significant  relationship 
between internal transfer and fintech exposure, and an even stronger 
effect among employees with ‘‘finance + tech’’ combination skills. In 
other words, employees with the right skills are able to move to a 
different  role  that  benefits  from  fintech  complementarity  or  is  less 
fintech-exposed without leaving the firm. Moreover, the fact that they 
are able to do so without changing employers signifies firms’ ability 
to redeploy talent facing technological shocks. When employees expe-
rience separations from a firm in response to fintech disruption, they 
are more likely to move to occupations that either have lower fintech 
exposure or are complementary to fintech.

We conclude our empirical analysis with an examination of firm 
responses and performance. Firms, both public and private, adapt to 
fintech disruption by recruiting talent with desired skills, reallocating 
existing employees into roles that benefit from or created by fintech 
innovations, and pivoting their innovation efforts into new areas. Firms 
adjust their workforce composition to enhance overall skill comple-
mentarity with fintech. This enables them to absorb the shock more 

2 

W. Jiang et al.

effectively than individual workers, who face a greater risk of indi-
vidual job displacement. Finally, truly innovative firms — those that 
invent and file patents rather than merely acquiring them — emerge as 
winners, experiencing growth in employment, sales, and productivity 
as their exposure to fintech increases.

Our paper contributes to the literature on the impact of technolog-
ical changes, especially on the job market. Our focus on one specific 
technology shock allows us to provide insight into a much-discussed 
shock, complementing earlier papers that focused on different shocks, 
such as Acemoglu et al. (2022), Babina et al. (2024) on AI; Acemoglu 
and  Restrepo  (2018),  Graetz  and  Michaels  (2018),  Benmelech  and 
Zator (2022) on industrial robots; and Vona et al. (2018), Darendeli 
et al. (2022), Cohen et al. (2020) on green technologies. When taken 
together with other papers, our paper enables us to extract common 
themes while also recognizing the distinctive features inherent in each 
disruptive  wave.  The  key  essence  of  fintech  is  that  it  changes  the 
way  that  financial  services  are  provided  (e.g.,  peer-to-peer  lending 
instead of traditional bank lending), instead of merely automating an 
existing task (such as computerized bookkeeping). Although fintech 
often incorporates automation as a means to achieve its goals; fintech 
nevertheless encompasses a wider scope of innovation and technology-
driven  solutions  beyond  just  automation.  The  additional  dimension 
includes the development of new financial products, the digitization of 
financial services, the application of advanced analytics and artificial 
intelligence, and the integration of technologies such as blockchain. 
While automation improves efficiency within industries, fintech aims to 
revolutionize the entire financial industry by introducing new products 
and services.1

Our  analysis  is  closely  related  to  two  papers  by  Webb  (2019) 
and Kogan et al. (2023), both of which introduce occupation-specific 
measures of technological innovations. Webb (2019) explores the re-
lationship between occupational exposure to general technologies and 
industry-level employment and wages, while Kogan et al. (2023) inves-
tigates the connection between breakthrough innovations, as identified 
by Kelly et al. (2021), and subsequent worker-level earnings growth 
rates. Our paper differs in two important ways. First, it centers on 
the  recent  fintech  wave,  which  directly  targets  providers  of  finan-
cial services, an industry that has remained largely untouched by the 
past  waves  of  general  technological  innovations  examined  in  prior 
research. This unique setting allows us to delve into the creative de-
struction process of innovations. Second, our study explores a different 
set of economic questions compared to previous research. Our approach 
shifts  the  perspective  to  firms,  investigating  their  labor  market  re-
sponses as a major channel through which creative destruction unfolds. 
Consequently,  our  findings  provide  insights  into  multiple  economic 
mechanisms that underlie the impact of innovations on labor market 
outcomes.

This paper is broadly related to the growing literature at the inter-
section between labor and finance. One strand of this literature explores 
how capital structure is affected by labor-related factors (Matsa, 2010; 
Agrawal and Matsa, 2013; Simintzi et al., 2015; Serfling, 2016). Other 
studies examine labor and corporate decisions such as M&A (Tate and 
Yang, 2016; Ma et al., 2022), firm growth (Mueller et al., 2017), and 
investments (Bai et al., 2020). Another strand of the literature studies 
the impact of technological change on employees in the context of 
private equity buyouts (e.g., Agrawal and Tambe, 2016; Antoni et al., 
2019). Our paper adds to this literature by showing that firms actively 
adjust their hiring strategy and demand for talent in response to labor 

1 Our findings reveal that exposure to other general technologies accounts 
for approximately 29% of the total effect of fintech exposure. This overlap 
is expected given that fintech incorporates elements of general technology, 
such as automation. However, the effect not explained by general technology 
remains  both  statistically  and  economically  significant,  demonstrating  the 
unique elements of this new technological wave.

3 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

market exposure to fintech advancements, and thereby surviving the 
fintech disruption.

Our paper also naturally belongs to the burgeoning literature on 
fintech. One strand of literature in this field explores design and func-
tioning of blockchain technology and its applications in finance.2 An-
other strand examines the real effect of fintech entry in various lending 
markets.3  An  important  input  to  our  paper  by  Chen  et  al.  (2019) 
develops machine-learning algorithms to identify fintech patents and 
then  estimates  the  value  of  fintech  patents  to  innovators  and  the 
overall financial sector. Different from these papers, our study focuses 
on the relationship between fintech disruptions and firms’ hiring and 
innovation strategies through occupational exposure.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We describe 
data sources in Section 2 and explain the construction of the occupa-
tional fintech exposure measures in Section 3. We present our analysis 
on fintech exposure and demand for labor in Section 4 and firm-level 
analysis in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.

2. Data sources and overview

2.1. Fintech patents and inventors

2.1.1. Fintech patents

The first key data input is a comprehensive sample of fintech-related 
patent applications published by the USPTO between January 1, 2003 
and September 7, 2017.4 These were retrieved from the US Patent 
and Trademark Office (USPTO) and shared by the authors of Chen 
et al. (2019) which provides a detailed description of their multistep 
procedure to filter out fintech-related patent filings from the universe of 
US patent filings. For completeness, we summarize their methodology 
as follows. In the first step, a textual search was used with a list of 
financial terms to narrow down the entire set of Class G (Physics) & 
H (Electricity) patent filings to a subset that is plausibly related to 
financial services. Second, the authors constructed a training sample 
of 1800 filings which they manually classified as fintech related, non-
fintech financial related, and unrelated to financial services. Lastly, the 
authors apply several supervised machine learning algorithms (includ-
ing neural networks and support vector machines) to the textual data 
of all patent filings to classify those related to fintech. In addition, we 
supplement the sample discussed above with a list of fintech-related 
patents identified by Lerner et al. (2024) as those associated with major 
finance innovations over our sample period (see Table 2 of their study).
These procedures result in a total of 6526 fintech patent filings 
that  fall  into  one  of  seven  categories:  (i)  cybersecurity,  (ii)  mobile 
transactions, (iii) data analytics, (iv) blockchain, (v) peer-to-peer (P2P), 
(vi) robo-advising, and (vii) Internet of Things (IoT). The textual in-
formation from the title and abstract of each fintech patent allows us 
to extract information about the scope and content of the underlying 
innovations from text corpora. This information is then matched to 
occupations to assess the latter’s exposure to fintech.

2 For example, see Biais et al. (2019), Chiu and Koeppl (2019), Cong and 

He (2019), Foley et al. (2019).

3 For  example,  see  Iyer  et  al.  (2016),  Balyuk  (2016),  Cornaggia  et  al. 
(2017), Balyuk and Davydenko (2018), Buchak et al. (2018), Danisewicz and 
Elard (2018), De Roure et al. (2018), Hertzberg et al. (2018), Vallee and Zeng 
(2019), Balyuk (2019), Havrylchyk et al. (2019), Tang (2019), Berg et al. 
(2020), Di Maggio and Yao (2021) and Gopal and Schnabl (2022).

4 Since the data for 2017 is incomplete, we adjust the fintech exposure 
and  patent  counts  by  multiplying  them  by  1.5  to  reflect  a  full  year  in 
the  calculation  of  fintech  exposure  and  the  regression  analysis  of  fintech 
innovations.

W. Jiang et al.

2.1.2. Fintech innovators

Because we eventually relate fintech exposure to firm performance, 
we require accurate identification of inventors and assignees of the 
fintech patents, which could be different from the entity that manages 
the application. The inventor has the exclusive right to their discoveries 
prior to any transfers, and the assignee is the owner or recipient of a 
transfer of the legal rights to the invention. For this reason, we track 
each patent throughout its life cycle, from the filing date to granting 
and to assignments/transfer, using a variety of information from the 
USPTO.

Among 6526 fintech patents in our sample, 1384 were filed and 
held by individuals, while 5142 fintech patents are filed by 987 unique 
firms or their employees who transfer the patent to their employers. 
Additionally, we identify 1820 fintech patents assigned to 555 assignees 
(or acquirers) after the publication of patent filings. We focus on these 
firm-invented/acquired patents and classify a firm as an ‘‘inventor’’ if 
it files at least one fintech patent during the past five years. Among 
non-inventor firms, we classify ‘‘acquisition-driven innovators’’ as firms 
that acquired any fintech patents during the past five years. We then 
match these innovative firms with public companies in the Compustat 
database and private firms in the BG database. Our algorithm identi-
fies 485 fintech inventors, including 256 public companies, and 307 
acquisition-driven innovators (161 are public companies). Panel A of 
Table OA.1 of the Online Appendix shows that fintech innovators are 
typically large financial and tech firms.5 Panel B shows that fintech 
patent filers are primarily concentrated in three sectors: finance, tech 
and manufacturing. Furthermore, the financial and tech sectors are 
leading acquirers of fintech patents.6

2.2. O*NET occupation data

The second key data input comes from the O*NET database main-
tained by the US Department of Labor. O*NET outlines specific tasks 
performed in individual occupations identified by an 8-digit SOC and 
annotated with descriptions of the occupation’s job tasks.7 For exam-
ple, tasks associated with occupation ‘‘accountants’’ (SOC 13-2011.00) 
entail ‘‘to review accounts for discrepancies and reconcile differences’’, 
‘‘establish tables of accounts and assign entries to proper accounts and 
assign entries to proper accounts’’, and ‘‘examine inventory to verify 
journal and ledger entries’’. Each occupation typically includes 20 tasks, 
with a full range from 5 to 40. A numerical value is assigned to each 
task to indicate its importance, relevance, and frequency within the 
occupation. These values serve as weights when aggregating.

2.3. Burning Glass (BG) job postings data and validation

The third critical input is a proprietary dataset that covers more 
than 174 million job postings in the United States during 2010–2018. 
The dataset, provided by Burning Glass Technology (BG), gathers job 
postings from over 40,000 online job boards and company websites 
using a sophisticated deduplication algorithm.

5 We define the finance sector (NAICS 52) and tech sector (NAICS 51 and 

54) following Acemoglu et al. (2022).

6 Figure OA.1 of the Online Appendix illustrates that between 2003 and 
2017, financial firms acquired 370 fintech patents while tech firms acquired 
a total of 534 patents, with 246 of them being transferred between eBay and 
Paypal in 2015.

7 The O*NET database has been explored extensively by studies in labor 
economics (e.g., Howell and Wolff, 1991; Autor and Dorn, 2013; Deming, 
2017; Webb, 2019) but rarely used in finance studies till recently (Bates et al., 
2021; Ma et al., 2022). Kogan et al. (2023) focuses on a longer and earlier 
sample period and relies on job task descriptions from the fourth edition of the 
Dictionary of Occupation Titles (DOT) database last updated in 1991, which 
had since been replaced by O*NET.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

2.3.1. Data coverage and validation

The BG data set captures a near universe of online job postings 
and  covers  60%–70%  of  the  jobs  posted  in  the  US,  online  or  of-
fline (Carnevale et al., 2014). Existing research has shown that BG 
data track well the evolution of overall vacancies in the US economy 
based  on  official  statistics  (e.g.,  Job  Openings  and  Labor  Turnover 
Survey (JOLTS) and employment reports) (Templin and Hirsch, 2013; 
Hershbein and Kahn, 2018; Acemoglu et al., 2022), and it has been used 
in the literature as a leading data source for demand for labor/talent 
and skill requirements (see, e.g., Deming and Kahn (2018), Dillender 
and Forsythe (2022)). In Figure OA.2 and Section A.1 of the Online 
Appendix, we verify that the BG data have maintained a balanced cov-
erage of sectors and occupation types, while overall coverage improved 
over time.

As  noted  in  Acemoglu  et  al.  (2022),  the  BG  data  represent  va-
cancy flows, while the employment data from the OEWS (released by 
BLS) report employment stocks. For this reason, we expect the two 
data sources to be correlated but not perfectly aligned. To mitigate 
any potential coverage and measurement bias and to validate repre-
sentativeness, we cross-check the two data sources and confirm, in 
Table OA.2, a significantly positive correlation between the number of 
postings and total employment, in levels and logarithmic terms. Fur-
thermore, to directly address whether job postings are converted into 
actual hirings, we examine the relationship between BG job postings 
and new hires from Job-to-Job Flows (J2J) data provided by Longitu-
dinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD).8 Figure OA.3 represents 
these positive correlations using scatter plots of log-growth, where the 
correlation is 0.84.

2.3.2. Skill requirements, unique postings, and number of positions

We  make  use  of  BG’s  granular  occupation  information,  such  as 
occupation classification code, occupation title, and the location of the 
job postings. Available information also includes employer identity and 
skill requirements scraped from the text of the advertised vacancy. 
Relevant to our analyses, we can identify job openings that require 
different skills (e.g., finance, technology, and other skills), different 
years of experience (e.g., no experience required, one to four years, or 
more than four years), and educational attainment (e.g., high school, 
bachelor’s, and master’s degrees).

Some job postings may be duplicates or re-postings for the same 
position. Following Cen et al. (2018), we classify job postings as reposts 
when there is a prior posting by the same firm in the same county 
location within a year, while all others are considered first-time job 
postings that capture distinct new positions. Meanwhile, a single job 
posting could potentially target multiple positions. We infer multiple 
positions embedded in a job posting by identifying plurals used to 
describe the occupation or position using the textual analysis method 
outlined in Section A.2 of the Online Appendix. We make a simplifying 
assumption that such postings are aimed at filling two positions, but 
also  experiment  with  a  range  of  three  to  five  positions  to  ensure 
robustness.

2.4. LinkedIn data

LinkedIn, launched in 2003, is the leading professional networking 
platform with over one billion users worldwide. We obtain LinkedIn 
data from RevelioLab, which provides user profile information in a 
more structured, resume-like format, including education, employment 
history, and skills. Further helpful to our study is the data structure 
that allows us to aggregate information at both the job or occupation 
level and the employer level. Most LinkedIn profile owners have the 
incentive to keep the information up-to-date given the motivation to 

8 Because the base unit for J2J new hire data is at the NAICS 2-digit by 

year level, we aggregate job postings to the same level.

4 

W. Jiang et al.

set up the profile in the first place. We rely on the most recent snap 
shot (in 2023) to trace the employment history of individuals who ever 
worked for a public firm in financial sectors (NAICS 52) or tech sectors 
(NAICS 51 and 54) from 2010 to 2018 using the beginning and end 
years associated with each employer. This creates a worker-occupation-
firm-year level panel of four million individuals in 1298 unique publicly 
traded firms.9 Analyses at different unit levels (occupation or firm) 
could be aggregated from this most disaggregated panel.

LinkedIn identifies and maps self-reported skills into 50 categories, 
such as ‘‘accounting/ financial reporting/ auditing’’ and ‘‘analytics/ 
data warehousing/ data mining’’. Such information allows us to map 
employee  skills  to  broader  categories  such  as  ‘‘finance’’,  ‘‘tech’’,  or 
‘‘finance + tech’’.10

2.5. Other data

Several additional databases complete our setup. First, we obtain 
the annual employment and average wage at the occupation (6-digit 
SOC) level and the occupation × industry level from the OEWS. The 
OEWS program produces employment and wage estimates annually for 
approximately 830 occupations based on a survey of about 1.1 million 
nonfarm business establishments (employers) collected over a 3-year 
period.11

The second is data from the American Community Survey (ACS) 
provided by Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) which has 
sampled 1% of the U.S. population every year since 2005. Our IPUMS 
sample represents 1.3 million individuals (age between 16 and 64 and 
currently employed) in 2010, covering individual-level demographic 
information including gender, age, occupation (identified by Census 
occupation code), location, education (e.g., less than high school, com-
pleted high school, college and above), and degree major (e.g., busi-
ness, technology, etc.). The detailed information can be collapsed into 
occupation × year-level variables, with weights commensurate with 
those in the IPUMS surveys.

Finally, the information on all patents granted to US public firms 
during 2003–2017 is obtained from (Kogan et al., 2017).12 The finan-
cial information and stock returns of public firms in our sample are 
retrieved from standard databases, in particular Compustat and CRSP.

3. Measuring fintech exposure

3.1. Methodology

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

has not existed in the literature. We develop the measure by exploiting 
the overlap between the textual information of fintech patent filings 
from the USPTO and that of job descriptions from O*NET. Note that the 
text of fintech patents contains key information about what the tech-
nological inventions accomplish and that of job descriptions contains 
specific task-level definitions for each occupation. Thus, juxtaposing the 
two text corpora can inform the extent to which much a body of fintech 
patents (over a specific period of time) has been directed at the tasks of 
each occupation. Fig.  1 provides an overview of our process to quantify 
occupational exposure to fintech innovations.

To  assess  the  scope  and  content  of  fintech  innovations,  we  ex-
tract the text from the titles and abstracts of fintech patent filings, 
the sections where the most critical and concise information about 
innovation is deposited.13 Fig.  2 plots the clouds of the most frequent 
keywords in fintech patent filings in three periods: 2003–2006, 2017, 
and 2003–2017. While ‘‘transaction’’ is among the frequent keywords 
in all panels, the frequencies of other keywords such as ‘‘information’’, 
‘‘device’’, and ‘‘payment’’ vary over time.

Our fintech exposure measure builds on the correlation between the 
textual description of a fintech patent filing and that of an occupation’s 
job task. We apply natural language processing (NLP) tools to represent 
the text information from fintech patents and occupations using word 
embedding, which captures both exact and semantically similar words 
in a reduced-dimensional space. for both overlaps in exact words and in 
words with similar meanings in a much lower-dimensional space than 
the original text. As in Kogan et al. (2023) and Seegmiller et al. (2023), 
we use the word vectors developed by Pennington et al. (2014), which 
consist of a vocabulary of 1.9 million word meanings. Each document 
(either  a  fintech  patent  filing  or  an  occupation  task  description)  is 
reduced to a numerical vector, which is a weighted average of the set 
of word vectors for the terms contained in the document. We weigh 
each word contained in a document based on ‘‘term-frequency-inverse-
document-frequency’’ (TF–IDF) following the recent developments in 
NLP using the same procedures as detailed in Online Appendix A.2 
of Kogan et al. (2023). Such an approach overweighs word terms that 
occur relatively frequently within a given document and underweighs 
terms that occur commonly across all documents.

With  the  procedures  described  above,  we  calculate  a  given  oc-
cupational task’s exposure to a fintech patent, 𝐹 𝑇𝑖,𝑜,𝑗,𝑡, as the scalar 
projection of the vector of fintech patent 𝑗, 𝑏𝑗 onto the vector of task 𝑖
of occupation 𝑜, 𝑎𝑜,𝑖: 

The prerequisite for studying firm response to fintech shock is a 
measure characterizing fintech exposure at the occupation level, which 

𝐹 𝑇𝑜,𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = cos(𝜃)‖𝑏𝑗,𝑡‖ =

𝑎𝑜,𝑖 ⋅ 𝑏𝑗,𝑡
‖𝑎𝑜,𝑖‖

,

(1)

9 As part of data cleaning and validation procedures, we keep observations 
where  there  are  more  than  3  workers  per  firm-occupation,  more  than  3 
occupations in the firm, and more than 10 workers per firm on LinkedIn in 
a given year to eliminate the impact of coverage biases and allow for a fixed 
effect estimation.
10 Table OA.3 in the Online Appendix provides a list of finance and tech 
skills we classify from LinkedIn Data.
11 The OEWS data for 2010 and 2011 were collected based on the 2010 SOC 
code. However, there were several cases where occupations from the SOC 2000 
and 2010 codes had to be combined into a hybrid occupation, used temporarily 
in OEWS only (referred as OEWS 2010 code). 52 occupations identified by 
the SOC 2010 code are combined into 22 OEWS 2010 occupations. OEWS 
provides a crosswalk from the OEWS 2010 code to SOC 2010 at https://www.
bls.gov/oes/may_2010_occs.xls. To maintain data consistency from 2010 to 
2018, we estimate the employment for these 52 SOC 2010 occupations in 2010 
and 2011 as follows: First, we calculate the proportion of employment that 
each SOC 2010 occupation represents within its corresponding OEWS 2010 
occupation based on the OEWS 2012 data. We then use these employment 
shares to proportionally allocate 2010 and 2011 employment from OEWS 2010 
occupations to SOC 2010 occupations.
12 The  data  is  available  at  https://github.com/KPSS2017/Technological-
Innovation-Resource-Allocation-and-Growth-Extended-Data.

where 𝑎𝑜,𝑖 is the vector of job task 𝑖 of occupation 𝑜, 𝑏𝑗,𝑡 is the vector of 
fintech patent 𝑗 filed during the five-year period ending in year 𝑡, and 
𝜃 is the angle between the two vectors.

The sum of the individual impact of fintech patents in a given period 
gives the aggregate impact of a cluster of fintech innovations on a given 
occupational task. Intuitively, this procedure adds up the amount of 
‘‘shadow‘‘ that each patent casts on a given job task to capture the 
overall impact from a cloud of fintech innovations. Lastly, we aggregate 
fintech exposure at the task level into the occupation level at time 𝑡, 

13 As  a  standard  practice,  we  filter  the  set  of  tokens  by  first  removing 
over 1000 ‘‘stop words’’ from both fintech and job task text corpora. Stop 
words include prepositions, pronouns, and other common words with little 
content.  We  use  a  comprehensive  list  from  the  union  of  frequently  used 
lists,  following  Kogan  et  al.  (2023),  including  (i)  https://pypi.python.org/
(ii)  https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/fulltext-
pypi/stop-words, 
stopwords.html, (iii) http://www.lextek.com/manuals/onix/stopwords1.html, 
(v)  https:
(iv)  http://www.lextek.com/manuals/onix/stopwords2.html, 
//msdn.microsoft.com/zh-cn/library/bb164590, 
http://www.text-
analytics101.com/2014/10/all-about-stop-words-for-text-mining.html, 
(viii) 
http://www.webconfs.com/stop-words.php,  and  (ix)  http://www.nltk.org/
book/ch02.html.

(vii) 

5 

W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Fig. 1.  Process of constructing fintech exposure measure at occupation level.
This diagram illustrates the process of constructing the fintech exposure measure at the occupation level. We extract the textual information in the titles and abstracts of fintech 
patent filings, and the textual information in the description of each job task in the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) occupation data. We then examine the overlap 
between the two using the textual analysis. The fintech exposure measure captures both the cosine similarity between the two text corpora and the intensity of fintech innovations 
(i.e., the amount of fintech patents). The task-level score is aggregated to the occupation level using the weights based on task importance, relevance, and frequency in the O*NET 
occupation data.

denoted as 𝐹 𝑇𝑜,𝑡, using task weights (𝜔𝑖) of each occupation in the 
O*NET database as follows.14

𝐹 𝑇𝑜,𝑡 =

∑

𝑖∈𝑂

𝜔𝑖 ⋅ 𝐹 𝑇𝑜,𝑖,𝑡 =

∑

𝑖∈𝑂

𝜔𝑖 ⋅

∑

𝑏𝑗,𝑡∈𝐴𝑡

𝐹 𝑇𝑜,𝑖,𝑗,𝑡.

(2)

Based on Eq. (2), exposure to fintech is an increasing function of 
the following two factors: (i) the cosine similarity (i.e., cos(𝜃)) between 
the task and fintech patents, and (ii) the amount/intensity of fintech 
innovations as captured by the number of fintech patents in a given 
period (i.e., 𝑏𝑗,𝑡 ∈ 𝐴𝑡). When there are many fintech patent applications 
that highly overlap with a job task, the latter is deemed to have a high 
exposure to fintech innovations. Due to the five-year moving window 
for patent filings, fintech exposure scores are time-varying but slow 
moving.15

Table OA.4 lists the ten occupations with the highest and the ten 
with the lowest fintech exposure scores. On the top of the list are 
sales agents of securities and commodities, brokerage clerks, software 
developers (applications), and electronics engineers; whereas at the 
bottom are dentists, slaughterers, sewers, tailors, and maids. Moreover, 
personal financial advisors have the highest exposure to innovations in 
robo-advising according to our measure.

Panel A of Fig.  3 shows the time series of the following three fintech 
exposure  scores  constructed  based  on  (i)  cumulative  fintech  patent 
applications since 2003 (i.e., 2003 to the current year 𝑡); (ii) fintech 
patent applications during the five-year period ending in year 𝑡; and (iii) 
fintech patents granted during the five-year period. By construction, 

14 We use the average value of the weights on importance, relevance, and 
frequency for each task within the occupation in the calculation. Our results 
are consistent regardless of which weight is used.
15 We perform various sensitivity checks to ensure that our inferences are not 
sensitive to the specific parameter of five years. An all-time exposure measure 
using fintech patent applications from 2003 to 2017 is an alternative, and 
so is a measure based on granted (rather than filed) fintech patents during 
the previous five years. Furthermore, disaggregated measures of exposure to 
each of the seven subsets of fintech innovations (i.e., cybersecurity, mobile 
transactions, data analytics, blockchain, P2P, robo-advising, and IoT) could be 
constructed analogously.

series (i) increases steadily over time, since it is cumulative. Both series 
(ii) and (iii) incur more time variation but still show growth most of 
the time. Series (iii) commands a smaller magnitude, as only a fraction 
(about 48%) of fintech patent applications are granted, while other 
applications are either rejected (34%) or still pending (18%) at the end 
of 2019.

Panel B of Fig.  3 disaggregates fintech exposure into the seven fin-
tech categories based on patents filed during the most recent five-year 
period. The figure features staggered waves over time. Cybersecurity 
led innovations in other fields and has caused the greatest shock to oc-
cupations. Mobile transactions started around 2010 after the financial 
crisis and grew exponentially after 2012. Data analytics gained momen-
tum after the financial crisis. Fintech patents for P2P and blockchain 
began in 2012 and 2015, respectively, while robo-advising and IoT 
have maintained stable exposure levels since 2009.

3.2. Fintech vs. general technology exposure

Fintech covers both technology innovations and technology-enabled 
business model innovations in the financial sector. Although fintech 
often incorporates automation as a means to achieve its goals; fintech 
nevertheless encompasses a wider scope of innovation and technology-
driven  solutions  beyond  just  automation.  The  additional  dimension 
includes the development of new financial products, the digitization of 
financial services, the application of advanced analytics and artificial 
intelligence, and the integration of technologies such as blockchain. 
Fintech  aims  to  transform  the  financial  industry  as  a  whole,  while 
automation is a tool or technique used within industries to improve 
operational efficiency and productivity.

As an illustration of the difference between fintech and alternative 
technologies, Fig.  4 plots fintech exposure against the four existing 
occupational exposure measures: the AI and software exposure mea-
sures  developed  by  Webb  (2019),  routine  task  input  (a  proxy  for 
computerization and the level of routine cognitive skills) and abstract 
task input (a measure of nonroutine cognitive skill levels) constructed 
by Autor et al. (2003) and Autor and Dorn (2013), and an offshorability 
score developed by Firpo et al. (2011) and standardized by Autor and 
Dorn (2013). In general, there is no strong correlation between fintech 

6 

W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Fig. 3.  Fintech exposure measures.
The  figure  plots  the  average  fintech  exposure  measures  over  time.  Panel  A  plots 
three overall fintech exposure intensities: (i) one constructed using all fintech patent 
applications ending in a given year (green line), (ii) one constructed using fintech patent 
applications in the five-year period ending in a given year (red, the default used in our 
analysis), and (iii) one constructed using granted fintech patents in the five-year period 
ending in a given year (blue line). Panel B plots the time series of average disaggregated 
fintech exposure intensities constructed using the subset of fintech patents in each of 
the seven fintech subcategories in the five-year rolling window. The intensity of fintech 
exposure is calculated as a standardized mean zero score derived from the raw fintech 
exposure scores.

A striking finding is that all four sets of relations exhibit an inverse 
U-shape. Fig.  5 plots the percentile of fintech exposure measure in 
relation  to  these  variables.  Panel  A  shows  that  occupations  paying 
60th–80th percentile wages are most exposed to fintech innovations. 
A similar pattern prevails in Panel B in that individuals with inter-
mediate educational attainment (some college and college) are more 
exposed to fintech than their less (high school) or more (master’s and 
above) educated peers. Panel C shows that occupations with a median 
representation of women workers (that is, occupations with balanced 
gender composition) exhibit the highest exposure to fintech innova-
tions. Finally, Panel D shows that fintech innovations affect prime-aged 
workers (40–45) the most. These nonmonotone patterns are in sharp 
contrast to those of occupational exposure to general technology. For 
instance,  Autor  and  Dorn  (2013)  and  Webb  (2019)  document  that 
occupations whose workers are predominantly males and low educated 
are much more exposed to general technology innovations including 
routine task content, AI, and software; exposure to those technologies 
is either increasing or decreasing in age.

Fig. 2.  Most frequent keywords in fintech patents
This  figure  presents  the  clouds  of  top  keywords  in  the  fintech  patents  filed  in 
2003–2006 (Panel A), 2017 (Panel B), and 2003–2017 (Panel C). Font size indicates 
the frequency of the keywords. We only display the most frequent 75 keywords in each 
panel.

and other occupational exposure measures, suggesting a distinct impact 
of fintech. Because correlations might vary in different segments of the 
data, we control for these alternative occupational exposure measures 
in our main analyses. We further provide sensitivity checks excluding 
occupations  that  have  the  highest  exposure  to  the  five  alternative 
sources, with the results reported in Table OA.5 in the Online Appendix.

3.3. Demographic characteristics

Although  not  a  focus  of  this  study,  we  take  a  glimpse  of  the 
demographics sorted by fintech exposure, as such a relation has not 
been documented before. We map fintech exposure to 2010 (beginning 
of our sample period) IPUMS individual-level data of occupations and 
demographics, especially average hourly wage, educational attainment, 
percent of female workers, and average age, all at the occupation level. 

7 

W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Fig. 4.  Fintech exposure vs. General technology exposure. 
The figure presents the correlation between occupational fintech exposure and five occupational exposure measures including the ones on AI and software constructed by Webb 
(2019), routine and abstract-task content from Autor and Dorn (2013), and offshorability from Firpo et al. (2011). All data series are at the 𝑜𝑐𝑐1990𝑑𝑑 occupation level. The 
authors transform all occupation-level exposure scores to percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010 and plot the average fintech exposure percentile over the 
other five exposure measures. The fintech exposure measure is constructed by the authors based on fintech patent filings from 2003 to 2017.

4. Fintech exposure and demand for labor

4.1. Job posting panel setup

codes (‘‘𝑜𝑐𝑐1990𝑑𝑑’’) that aggregates US Census occupation codes to a 
balanced panel of occupations.16 This classification allows us to con-
trol for other occupational exposure measures developed in the same 

Our primary goal is to examine how firms adjust their hiring de-
mand  in  response  to  fintech  disruptions.  Therefore,  a  fundamental 
aspect of our empirical approach involves linking job postings to the 
exposure of specific occupations to fintech innovations. Our default 
measure  of  fintech  exposure  relies  on  fintech  patents  filed  over  a 
rolling five-year period. Unless otherwise stated, our occupation clas-
sification  follows  Dorn  (2009),  who  developed  a  set  of  occupation 

16 This classification system has been widely employed in labor economics 
studies, such as Autor and Dorn (e.g., 2009, 2013), Webb (e.g., 2019). We map 
O*NET-SOC 2019 codes to 2010 SOC codes using the crosswalk provided by 
O*NET (available at https://www.onetcenter.org/taxonomy/2019/walk.html). 
To match SOC 2010 codes to 𝑜𝑐𝑐1990𝑑𝑑, we first map SOC 2010 codes to 
the 2010 census occupation codes using the crosswalk provided by Webb 
(2019), and then map the 2010 census occupation codes to 𝑜𝑐𝑐1990𝑑𝑑 using 

8 

W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Fig. 5.  Fintech exposure by demographic characteristics.
The figure plots the average fintech exposure in 2010 over the demographic characteristics of occupations derived from the 2010 American Community Survey (ACS) provided by 
the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS). Panel A presents the average percentile rank of fintech exposure by the percentile of average annual wages at the occupation 
level. Panel B presents the average fintech exposure percentile rank across workers’ educational attainment. Panel C and D plot the average fintech exposure percentiles by the 
percentage of females and the average age of workers in each occupation, respectively. All the data series are at the occupation level. Predictions in Panel A, C, and D are estimated 
using fractional-polynomial regressions weighted by occupational employment in 2010. The authors construct the fintech exposure measure based on fintech patent filings from 
2003 to 2017. The raw score for fintech exposure and annual wage are transformed into percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010.

series of work (Autor and Dorn (2013) and Webb (2019)). Moreover, 
𝑜𝑐𝑐1990𝑑𝑑 results in 286 unique occupations in our sample that are far 
more balanced panels compared to the SOC codes, mitigating statistical 
issues associated with size-skewed groups. Details on the data cleaning 
and validation processes can be found in Section A.1 of the Online 
Appendix.

Our  base  sample  comprises  panel  data  of  2288  cohorts  at  the 
occupation-year level, which include 103.1 million vacancies posted 
during 2010–2018. Following Webb (2019), our fintech exposure mea-
sure  is  calculated  as  the  employment-weighted  percentile  rank  for 
each year, the weight based on employment figures from 2010. Our 
central outcome variable quantifies the change in the logarithm (or 
log-growth rate) of job postings within the occupation 𝑜 during the 
year 𝑡. On average, each occupation records approximately 38,540 job 
postings per year, with an annual log-growth of 0.184 (see Table OA.8 
for detailed summary statistics). Such a high growth rate is mostly 
a  reflection  of  increasing  sample  coverage  of  BG.  Furthermore,  we 
monitor changes in the skill requirements of job postings and identify 
‘‘upskiling’’  occupations  that  incur  a  year-over-year  increase  in  BG 

the crosswalk provided by Autor (2015) (available at https://www.ddorn.net/
data.htm).

job postings requiring specialized skills, experiences, or educational 
qualifications.

For more granular analyses, we further track job postings at the 
occupation × firm × year level, so that we can resort to firm fixed 
effects to absorb unobserved heterogeneity. The resulting 1,653,804 
observations involve 67,977 distinct firms, 3516 of which are publicly 
traded.17

4.2. Job postings and employment in response to fintech exposure

4.2.1. Baseline results with job posting

In this section, we estimate how firms adjust their job postings in 
response to occupational fintech shock. Our baseline analysis, at the 
occupation (𝑜) × year (𝑡) level, is as follows: 

𝛥𝑌𝑜,𝑡 = 𝛽1 ⋅ 𝐹 𝑇𝑜,𝑡−1 + 𝛽2 ⋅ 𝑋𝑜 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝜀𝑜,𝑡.

(3)

17 As part of data cleaning and validation procedures, we exclude obser-
vation cells with fewer than 5 postings or firms that hire in fewer than 3 
occupations in a given year, in order to have statistical power with saturated 
fixed effects. We also exclude firms in the public sector (NAICS greater than 
90) to focus on the private sector.

9 

W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 1
Fintech exposure and job postings.
The table reports the baseline regressions that estimate the effect of fintech exposure on changes in job postings at the occupation (𝑜𝑐𝑐1990𝑑𝑑, 
𝑜) × year (𝑡) level. The sample covers job postings based on the BG database from 2010–2018. The dependent variable is 100 times the 
year-over-year change in the natural logarithm of job posting in columns (1)–(2). The main explanatory variable, fintech exposure measure, is 
constructed using fintech patent applications in five-year rolling windows. We control for five competing occupational exposure measures to 
general technology innovations: AI and software exposure developed by Webb (2019); routine and abstract task content by Autor and Dorn 
(2013) and offshorability from (Firpo et al., 2011). All the occupation-level exposure scores are transformed to percentile ranks weighted by 
occupational employment in 2010. We additionally control for year fixed effects and weight the regressions by the underlying postings in the 
current year in columns (1)–(2). In columns (3)–(5), the dependent variable is the cumulative change in the natural logarithm of job postings 
over the specified period and the fintech exposure measure is constructed using fintech patent applications published during the corresponding 
sample period. To improve the precision in columns (3)–(5), we follow the approach proposed by Acemoglu et al. (2022) and use the average of 
the annual data from 2010–12, 2013–15, and 2016–18 as proxies for postings in 2010, 2015, and 2018, respectively, when calculating the long 
differences. We also control for the five competing occupational exposure measures to general technology innovations and weight regressions 
using the averaged underlying postings at the start and end of each period in columns (3)–(5). Standard errors in all columns are clustered at 
the occupation group level defined by Autor and Dorn (2013). Asterisks denote the significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
  Dep Var

Panel regressions
𝛥Log(Postings)𝑜,𝑡 × 100
2010–2018

Long differences
𝛥Log(Postings)𝑜 × 100
2010–2014

2015–2018

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year FE
  Observations
  R2

(1)

−0.100***
(−3.22)

No
Yes

2,288
0.416

(2)

−0.071***
(−3.46)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.433

(3)

−0.125**
(−2.08)

Yes
No

286
0.382

(4)

−0.153**
(−2.26)

Yes
No

286
0.567

2010–2018 
(5)
−0.330***  
(−2.90)

Yes
No

286
0.670

In the equation above, the key independent variable, 𝐹 𝑇𝑜,𝑡−1, is fintech 
exposure, expressed in percentiles, at the occupation level based on a 
five-year moving time window of fintech patents. The outcome vari-
able, 𝛥𝑌𝑜,𝑡, is the log-growth rate in job postings from year 𝑡 − 1 to 𝑡 in 
occupation 𝑜. 𝑋𝑜 is a vector of control variables, notably occupation-
level exposure to general technologies that have been studied in the 
literature, including software, AI, routine-task content, abstract-task 
content, and offshorability. The regression incorporates year (𝛾𝑡) fixed 
effects  to  absorb  the  macro  supply  and  demand  conditions  of  the 
labor market each year, respectively. Following Modestino et al. (2019) 
and  Webb  (2019),  we  resort  to  weighted  regressions  as  our  main 
specification,  where  weights  are  the  number  of  posts,  to  mitigate 
the  influence  of  outliers  (e.g.,  small  occupations).  Unless  otherwise 
stated, all potentially unbounded variables are winsorized at the 1%
extremes. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation-group level 
following Autor and Dorn (2013).18

Table  1 presents the estimation results for Eq.  (3). The first two 
columns represent panel regressions based on annual data from 2010 
to 2018 with yearly fixed effects. Estimates of the coefficient associated 
with fintech exposure are consistently statistically significant at the 
1% level. The estimate decreases in magnitude, moving from −0.100 
to −0.071, after including other occupational exposure measures. This 
variation suggests that 29% of the impact of fintech exposure could be 
attributed to the effects of general technologies. Such an overlap is ex-
pected, as fintech contains elements of general tech such as automation 
and AI. However, the effect of fintech exposure after controlling for 
exposure to general technologies remains statistically and economically 
significant.

The coefficient in the panel regression (column 2) indicates that 
when fintech exposure increases by one percentile, occupation-level job 
postings decrease by 7.1 bps.19 If fintech exposure moves from the 20th 
percentile to the 80th, occupation-level job postings decrease by about 
4.26% (0.071% × 60), equivalent to an average loss of 1642 job postings 
(38,540 × 4.26%) at the occupation-year level. Based on the coefficient 

18 Autor and Dorn (2013) classify related occupations into 26 groups such as 
‘‘management related occupations’’, ‘‘professional specialty occupations’’, and 
‘‘sales occupations’’.
19 When growth rates are small, log growth rates are indistinguishable from 
growth rates.

associated with the dummy variable for top-quartile fintech exposure 
(in an untabulated regression), 2.53%, the effect for an average top-
quartile  occupation  would  be  a  loss  of  7800  job  postings  over  the 
eight years (38,540 × 2.53% × 8), relative to the three lower quartiles. 
Aggregating over 62 occupations in the top quartile, the total loss is on 
the magnitude of 483,600.

Following Acemoglu et al. (2022) and Webb (2019), we also present 
the ‘‘long difference’’ (cumulative differences during a multi-year pe-
riod)  regressions  in  the  last  three  columns,  covering  2010–2014,
2015–2018,  and  the  full  period  of  2010–2018.20  We  weight  long 
difference regressions using the averaged underlying postings at the 
start and end of the time period following Webb (2019). The effect is 
greater in the later subperiod, but remains significant during the earlier 
period.21 Anecdotal evidence suggests that the fintech wave emerged in 
the early 2010s. In fact, quite a few iconic fintech patents were early 
trailblazers, including the technologies underlying Venmmo and Zelle’s 
payment system. On the other hand, some categories of fintech, such as 
blockchain, emerged after 2014. Figure OA.5 in the Online Appendix 
shows the history of Google search about fintech topics and separately 
for the seven categories, showing substantial fintech interest in the 
early 2010s, followed by a tremendous take-off around 2014.

4.2.2. Cross-validation with positions, employment, and wage

In this section, we analyze alternative job-related variables for cross-
validation. Panel A of Table  2 presents the estimation results taking 
into account that a job posting may be looking for multiple positions. 
Specifically, we identify job postings aimed at filling multiple positions 
using the textual analysis method outlined in Section A.2 of the Online 
Appendix.  Under  the  simplifying  assumption  that  such  ‘‘multi-hire’’ 
postings are intended to fill two positions while all other job postings 
pertain to a single position, we calculate the number of positions from 

20 To enhance precision, we follow the approach of Acemoglu et al. (2022) 
and average the annual data from 2010–12, 2013–15, and 2016–18 as proxies 
for  the  number  of  postings  in  2010,  2015,  and  2018,  respectively,  when 
calculating the corresponding long differences.
21 Figure OA.4 in the Online Appendix also plots the ‘‘long difference’’ of 
job postings by fintech exposure percentile, which shows similar patterns as 
the regression results.

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 2
Positions, employment and wages.
The table repeats the baseline regressions and estimates the effect of fintech exposure on changes in the number of positions posted, employment, and annual 
wages at the occupation (𝑜) × year (𝑡) level. The sample covers BG posting data in Panel A and the Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics (OEWS) 
employment and wage data in Panels B and C from 2010–2018, respectively. The dependent variable is 100 times the year-over-year change in the natural 
logarithm of the number of positions, employment, and annual wages in columns (1)–(2) of Panels A-C, respectively. The main explanatory variable, fintech 
exposure measure, is constructed using fintech patent applications in five-year rolling windows. All the occupation-level exposure scores are transformed 
to percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010. We control for year fixed effects in columns (1)–(2) of each panel and also the five 
competing occupational exposure measures in the latter as in Table  1. We weight the regressions by the underlying positions in the current year in Panel 
A columns (1)–(2) and by employment in columns (1)–(2) of Panels B and C, respectively. In columns (3)–(5) of each panel, the dependent variable is the 
cumulative change in the natural logarithm of the outcome variable over the specified period and the fintech exposure measure is constructed using fintech 
patent applications published during the corresponding period. To enhance precision in columns (3)–(5) of each panel, we follow the approach of Acemoglu 
et al. (2022) and use the average of the annual data from 2010–12, 2013–15, and 2016–18 as proxies for postings in 2010, 2015, and 2018, respectively, 
when calculating the long differences. We also control for the five competing occupational exposure measures as in Table  1 and weight regressions using 
the averaged underlying positions at the start and end of each period in columns (3)–(5) of Panel A and using the averaged underlying employment in 
columns (3)–(5) of Panels B and C, respectively. We estimate the number of positions in job postings used in Panel A using a textual analysis method 
outlined in Section A.2 of the Online Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation group level defined by Autor and Dorn (2013). Asterisks 
denote the significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). 

  Dep Var

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year FE
  Observations
  R2

  Dep Var

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year FE
  Observations
  R2

  Dep Var

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year FE
  Observations
  R2

Panel A: Positions

Panel Regressions
𝛥Log(Positions)𝑜,𝑡 × 100
2010–2018

Long Differences
𝛥Log(Positions)𝑜 × 100
2010–2014

(1)

−0.092***
(−3.38)

No
Yes

2,288
0.389

(2)

−0.065***
(−3.40)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.402
Panel B: Employment

(3)

−0.073
(−1.32)

Yes
No

285
0.373

2015–2018

(4)

−0.178**
(−2.50)

Yes
No

285
0.501

Panel Regressions
𝛥Log(Employment)𝑜,𝑡 × 100
2010–2018

Long Differences
𝛥Log(Employment)𝑜 × 100
2010–2014

2015–2018

(1)

−0.009
(−1.02)

No
Yes

2,288
0.017

(2)

−0.019*
(−1.83)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.044

(3)

−0.039
(−1.40)

Yes
No

286
0.058

Panel C: Annual Wages

Panel Regressions
𝛥Log(Wages)𝑜,𝑡 × 100
2010–2018

Long Differences
𝛥Log(Wages)𝑜 × 100
2010–2014

(1)

−0.003
(−1.58)

No
Yes

2,288
0.561

(2)

−0.001
(−0.47)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.573

(3)

0.007
(0.95)

Yes
No

286
0.058

(4)

−0.055*
(−2.00)

Yes
No

286
0.044

2015–2018

(4)

−0.021**
(−2.38)

Yes
No

286
0.303

2010–2018 
(5)
−0.285**  
(−2.52)

Yes
No

285
0.617

2010–2018 
(5)

−0.109*
(−1.75)

Yes
No

286
0.059

2010–2018 
(5)

−0.016
(−1.50)

Yes
No

286
0.109

all the job postings.22 We then re-estimate the same specifications as 
in Table  1 but with dependent variables and corresponding regression 
weights  constructed  using  the  estimated  number  of  positions.  The 
results closely mirror those in Table  1. With control for alternative oc-
cupational exposure to general technologies, a one percentile increase 
in fintech exposure is associated with a 6.5-bps decrease in the number 
of open positions in the occupation.

Although job posting is a better proxy for firm demand for talent in 
different occupations, employment is the ultimate outcome for workers. 
To examine whether the effect of labor demand translates into equi-
librium employment, we present regression results in Panel B based 

22 We  also  experiment  with  a  range  of  assumptions  from  three  to  five 
positions per multi-hire job posting to ensure robustness.

on the OEWS occupational employment data, where the dependent 
variable is the log growth of total employment and the weights for 
these regressions are constructed to match each dependent variable 
based on underlying employment. In general, both the magnitude and 
significance of the key coefficient drop relative to the baseline results. 
As shown in Panel B, a one percentile increase in fintech exposure 
is  associated  with  a  1.9  bps  decrease  in  total  employment  in  that 
occupation, and the effect is significant only after 2014. A comparison 
of this table with Table  1 shows that employment, which is an equilib-
rium between labor supply and demand and incorporates labor market 
frictions, responds to fintech disruption at a delayed and moderated 
pace.

In addition to the quantity of jobs, fintech exposure also affects their 
price or wages. Based on OEWS wage data, Panel C shows a negative 
but insignificant relationship between fintech exposure and wages at 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

the occupational-year level for the full sample period, which becomes 
significant during the 2015–2018 subperiod.23 A one percentile rank 
increase in fintech exposure is associated with a 2.1 bps decrease in 
average wages during the latter period. The fact that wage adjusts 
some, but not fully, to absorb a negative shock is consistent with the 
large literature indicating wage rigidity (e.g., Tobin, 1972).

4.2.3. Robustness checks

In this section, we conduct a series of robustness tests using alterna-
tive specifications of both dependent and key independent variables. All 
results are reported in Table OA.5 in the Online Appendix. Column (1) 
experiments with unweighted regressions. Column (2) incorporates ad-
ditional dummy variables for occupation groups. Column (3) includes 
the lagged dependent variable as an additional control. Columns (4) 
through (7) adopt alternative measures of fintech exposure, using input 
from only granted (instead of applied) fintech patents, an unweighted 
fintech exposure percentile rank, a normalized z-score derived from 
the raw fintech exposure scores, and an alternative score based on 
cosine similarity between the fintech keyword and job task vectors, 
respectively. All key coefficients are significantly negative, confirming 
robustness.

Next, we exclude occupations with the highest exposure (top decile) 
to AI, software, routine-task, abstract-task and offshorability, respec-
tively, so that these potentially confounded effects are mitigated even 
without their control. The resulting estimates for the effect of fintech 
exposure are qualitatively similar to those in the baseline specification. 
In addition, we adopt a refined method, following Cen et al. (2018), 
to extract first-time job postings in a series of postings aimed at the 
same positions.24 We also exclude innovative firms that have invented 
or acquired more than one fintech patent in the past five years to 
address the reverse causality concern. We find similar results in both 
tests, suggesting that the decline in fintech-exposed occupations is not 
driven by duplicate postings or firms’ innovation strategy.

4.2.4. How fintech patents lead to job disruption and creation: Case study 
I

To gain insight into the main findings of this section, we feature 
a few exemplary fintech patents and illustrate their disruption of the 
associated job tasks and occupations. More details can be found in 
Section A.3 of the Online Appendix.

Venmo is an American mobile payment service founded in 2009 and 
acquired by PayPal (NAICS 51 - Information) in 2013. Their patented 
technology, ‘‘Trust Based Transaction System’’, (US201101379A1) filed 
in  2010,  utilizes  users’  personal  and  financial  information  to  vali-
date and generate trusted financial profiles and links. This technology 
improves creditworthiness assessment, streamlines electronic transac-
tions, and benefits users with limited credit or transaction history. Zelle, 
on the other hand, is a digital payments network owned by Early Warn-
ing Services, LLC., backed by major banks (NAICS 52 - Financial sector) 
including Bank of America, Truist, Capital One, JPMorgan Chase, PNC 
Bank, US Bank, and Wells Fargo. The key patent, ‘‘System and method 
for transferring funds’’, (US9626664B2) filed in 2013, enables recipient 
identification,  retrieval  of  account  number  information,  and  secure 
fund transfers via financial links supported by participating financial 
institutions, enhancing trust and reliability.

These patented peer-to-peer payment services offer convenience, 
speed,  affordability,  and  ease  of  use.  Transactions  occur  electroni-
cally without the need for intermediaries, resulting in cost-effective 

23 The dependent variables are constructed based on occupational wages in 
2018 dollars and these regressions are weighted by underlying employment 
following Webb (2019).
24 We classify a job posting as a re-posting if there is a previous posting with 
the same job title and job hours by the same firm in the same county location 
within a year.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

fees.  They  also  automate  transaction  recording,  disrupting  occupa-
tions involved in transaction/payment intermediation. For example, 
job tasks under the bookkeeping, accounting, and auditing clerks (SOC 
43-3031)  occupation,  including  ‘‘Calculate,  prepare,  and  issue  bills, 
invoices, account statements, and other financial statements according 
to established procedures’’, should have a great exposure to Venmo. 
Consequently, the demand for workers in the payment and recording 
processes has declined due to the substituting effect of fintech innova-
tions. The ‘‘bookkeeping, accounting, and audit clerks’’ experienced a 
−7.4% drop in job postings and −10.9% in employment in the financial 
sector. The same figures are −2.9% and −6.0% in the tech sectors, from 
the Venmo filing year to 2018.25

Similarly,  Zelle’s  technology  replaces  bill  and  account  collectors 
(SOC 43-3011) in certain tasks. Zelle’s digital payment system auto-
mates payments and records funds between sender and recipient bank 
accounts, effectively fulfilling the job task ‘‘Receive payments and post 
amounts paid to customer accounts’’. Following the introduction of 
Zelle, bill and account collectors experienced a decrease of 24.2% and 
24.7% in job postings and employment, respectively, in the financial 
sector during the 2013–2018 period. They also saw a decline of 12.5%
and 15.6% in job postings and employment, respectively, in the tech 
sector at the same time.

The  case  of  Venmo  and  Zelle  also  supports  the  hypothesis  that 
fintech disruption is not all negative on jobs; instead, there is simul-
taneously an increase in demand for talent to invent, adopt, operate, 
and  maintain  the  new  processes.  This  is  the  enabling  channel  for 
fintech innovations. Information security analyst job postings (SOC 15-
1122) have experienced significant increases of 109.1% and 36.8% in 
the financial and tech sectors, respectively, from 2013 to 2018. The 
growth was related to the new payment system in at least three ways. 
First, the competitive landscape of P2P payment applications drives 
constant development, security enhancements, and platform improve-
ments. Second, technological advances require the integration of new 
functionalities and support for emerging technologies such as biometric 
authentication. Third, collaboration with e-commerce websites, social 
media platforms, and financial institutions requires software developers 
to create and maintain essential components such as the application 
programming interface (API) and software development kits (SDKs) 
and  other  technical  components  at  the  Venmo/Zelle  interface  and 
other  platforms,  leading  to  a  greater  demand  for  specialized  soft-
ware developers. We thus devote the next section to explore creative 
destruction.

4.3. Creative destruction

4.3.1. Substitution and complements: A motivating case study (II)

Job displacement due to technology is the most studied aspect of 
technology disruption, which also explains a large part of our main 
finding. Some job tasks performed by finance jobs are directly sub-
stituted by technological advancement, not just via automation, but 
also due to a fundamental change in the process in which the services 
are rendered. Case studies presented in Section 4.2.4 illustrate that the 
relationship could work in both directions. Additional examples include 
the patent ‘‘Method and system for integration of market exchange and 
issuer processing for blockchain-based transactions’’ filed by Master-
card describes a method for blockchain transaction authorization that 

25 In  all  case  studies,  we  calculate  the  percentage  change  between  two 
periods by converting the corresponding log growth. To enhance precision 
in the calculation of log growth values, we follow the approach of Acemoglu 
et al. (2022) and use the average of the annual data from 2010–12, 2011–2013, 
2013–15, and 2016–18 as proxies for postings in 2010, 2013, 2015, and 2018, 
respectively. All log growth values are estimated as the predicted residuals 
from  regressing  the  raw  log-growth  rate  on  sector  indicators  and  SOC  2-
digit code indicators, weighted by the underlying postings/employment in the 
starting period.

12 

W. Jiang et al.

increases the demand for job tasks of ‘‘blockchain engineers’’ (SOC 
15-1299.07). The patent ‘‘Risk Unit-Based Policies’’ filed by Allstate 
Insurance Company establishes a system for determining and imple-
menting insurance policies based on risk units. It complements the work 
of ‘‘data scientists’’ (SOC 15-2051) using sensor data to assess risk and 
adjust insurance policy terms, which will require data science expertise 
for effective analysis and implementation. More details can be found in 
Section A.3 of the Online Appendix.

4.3.2. Complementary vs. substitutive effects

A common limitation of our baseline fintech exposure measure and 
other technology exposure measures in the literature is their inability 
to distinguish between substitutive or complementary effects embedded 
in the exposure. Our analyses so far established an aggregate negative 
net effect, supporting an overall substitution hypothesis, but not ruling 
out complementarity between technology and labor in some settings.

Following a recent trend in finance research (e.g., Eisfeldt et al., 
2023; Kogan et al., 2023; Lopez-Lira and Tang, 2023) that resorts to 
ChatGPT  to  provide  input  to  research  based  on  unstructured  infor-
mation, we use ChatGPT (with proper prompting) to obtain a binary 
classification  of  whether  a  fintech  patent  is  more  likely  to  replace 
(substitute) or enhance (complement) the job tasks of a particular occu-
pation based on the textual descriptions of the patent filing (i.e., titles 
and abstracts) and job tasks. Given constraints in time and resources, 
we focus our analysis on the 500 most relevant fintech patents that 
generate the highest exposure for each occupation. A new variable, 
‘‘complementarity’’, is defined as the difference between exposure to 
all complementary fintech patents and that to all substitutive fintech 
patents  in  the  last  five  years.  Section  A.4  of  the  Online  Appendix 
provides more details about this classification based on ChatGPT.

We now address the effect of fintech exposure by categorizing it into 
categories of technology substitution and complementarity. First, we 
add an interaction term between fintech exposure and an indicator vari-
able for the employment-weighted percentile rank of 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦
being above the median in Eq.  (3). The results are presented in Panel 
A of Table  3.

Column (1) displays a significantly negative coefficient on fintech 
exposure but a positive coefficient on the interaction term with the 
employment-weighted  percentile  rank  of  𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦  above  the 
median, after accounting for all alternative occupational exposure con-
trols. A one-percentile increase in fintech exposure is associated with 
a 10.1 bps decrease in job postings for occupations that lack a com-
plementary relationship with fintech innovations. This effect is about 
42% stronger than the full-sample effect (7.1 bps) presented in Table  1. 
Importantly, for occupations with a complementary relationship with 
fintech innovations, there is a significant (at the 1% level) 5.9 bps 
relative increase in job postings.

In column (2), we find that increasing the rank of fintech exposure 
by one percentile is associated with an 17.6 bps decrease in job postings 
for occupations in the bottom quartile of 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 (i.e., the 
highest quartile of substitution), significant at the 1% level and more 
than  2.5  times  the  full-sample  effect.  However,  when  we  move  to 
occupations in the top quartile (i.e., the highest complementarity), the 
magnitude of the effect (i.e., the sum of the base and interaction coeffi-
cients) decreases in magnitude monotonically and becomes statistically 
insignificant for the two upper quartiles. Columns (3)–(4) repeat the 
tests in columns (1)-(2) using a subperiod of 2015–2018 and uncover 
a  more  pronounced  relation,  consistent  with  the  documented  time 
trend in Table  1. These results reveal cross-sectional heterogeneity, 
sorted by degree of complementarity between innovation and existing 
occupations.

We  cross-validate  the  complementary  vs.  substitutive  effects  on 
employment and wage using the OEWS data. Results are presented in 
Table  3 Panel B and C. The unconditional results based on employment 
data are qualitatively similar to those based on job postings and re-
main significant. However, the cross-sectional heterogeneity sorted by 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

complementarity is no longer significant. This highlights the difference 
between job posting (a flow variable that responds quickly to demand 
for talent) and employment (a stock variable that reflects the joint 
force of supply and demand). As seen in Table  2, the change in job 
demand due to fintech exposure does not translate into wage changes, 
underscoring the well-documented phenomenon of wage rigidity.

4.3.3. Newly created occupations

Despite the net negative impact of the fintech shock on jobs, fintech 
disruptions could also have been associated with job creation, since 
companies need people to invent, adopt, operate, and maintain the new 
technology. We identify occupation creation (at the SOC eight-digit 
level) by comparing various waves of O*NET taxonomy reports.26 There 
are four major waves of new occupation categorization in 2006, 2009, 
2011 and 2020. Occupations emerging in these waves, especially dur-
ing the latest one, have seen a significant increase in demand. Although 
we  are  not  able  to  identify  employment  for  SOC-8  suboccupations 
because the finest unit for OEWS employment data is the SOC-6 occu-
pation, we find that the SOC-6 occupations with SOC-8 suboccupations 
newly categorized in 2020 employed 11.3 million people in 2022. From 
2021 to 2022, the employment of occupations with new suboccupations 
increased by 8.2%, nearly doubling the number of occupations without 
suboccupation creation (4.7%).27

To empirically connect occupation creation and fintech exposure, 
we employ a Probit regression at the suboccupation (SOC-8 digit) ×
wave level (2006, 2009, 2011 and 2020). The dependent variable is an 
indicator that equals one if a suboccupation is newly categorized in a 
given wave (year) and zero otherwise. The independent variable is the 
lagged occupational fintech exposure based on fintech patent fillings, 
or a subfield of fintech patents, over the previous five years. Given that 
many new suboccupations lack information on job tasks and thus have 
missing fintech exposure proxies, we measure the fintech exposure of a 
given suboccupation using the fintech exposure percentile ranks of the 
occupation to which this suboccupation is associated. In all regressions, 
we control for the five competing occupational exposure measures as 
in Table  1 and a set of dummies for occupation groups as well as 
for all waves of occupation redefinition (except in column (5) where 
blockchain emerged after 2014.) Standard errors are clustered at the 
occupation-group level. The results are presented in Table  4.

Column  (1)  presents  the  regression  result  based  on  exposure  to 
all fintech innovations while exposure to seven fintech subfields pre-
sented  are  explored  in  columns  (2)–(8).  Column  (1)  indicates  that 
each  one  percentile  increase  in  fintech  exposure  is  associated  with 
an  11.9  bps  higher  likelihood  (marginal  probability)  of  suboccupa-
tion creation. Among all fintech subfields, exposure to blockchain is 
linked  to  the  highest  likelihood  of  new  suboccupations  being  cre-
ated  (20.6  bps),  followed  by  robo-advising  (12.0  bps).  Exposure  to 
all other fintech subfields is associated with similar likelihoods, rang-
ing  between  8.0–11.5  bps.  Upon  closer  examination  of  the  list  of 
newly  created  suboccupations  in  the  highest  fintech-exposed  occu-
pations,  we  find  that  they  generally  fall  into  two  categories.  The 
first category involves providing technical support for fintech inno-
vations,  such  as  web  and  digital  interface  designers  (15–1255.00), 
information security engineers (15–1299.05), and blockchain engineers 
(15–1299.07).28  The  second  category  encompasses  occupations  that 
adopt fintech innovations to fulfill new tasks, including financial risk 

26 The O*NET-SOC Taxonomy Development Report describes the process for 
updating the occupation descriptions, tasks, alternate titles, and exclusionary 
titles for rolled-up occupations, split-out occupations, and new O*NET-SOC 
occupations. Details can be found at https://www.onetcenter.org/taxonomy.
html
27 We are not able to construct growth relative to earlier years because the 
base number is either zero or very low for newly categorized professions.
28 See Table OA.9 of the Online Appendix for a full list of newly-categorized 
suboccupations.

13 

W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 3
Job Complementary vs. Substitutive Effect.
The table reports the regressions that estimate the creative destruction effect of fintech exposure on changes in job postings at the occupation 
(𝑜)× year (𝑡) level from 2010–2018. The dependent variable is 100 times the year-over-year change in the natural logarithm of the number of 
positions, employment, and annual wages in Panels A-C, respectively. The main explanatory variable, fintech exposure measure, is constructed 
using fintech patent applications or a subcategory of fintech patents, in five-year rolling windows. I(Complementarity - Above Median) equals 
one for occupations where the employment-weighted percentile rank of their net complementary exposure, calculated as the difference between 
exposure to complementary fintech patents and substitute fintech patents over the past five years, is above 50 and zero otherwise. We also 
generate four quartile indicators based on the percentile rank of net complementary exposure, with the bottom (top) quarter representing 
occupations with the lowest (highest) level of net complementarity. In all regressions, we control for the interactions of the variables, five 
competing occupational exposure measures and include year dummies as in Table  1. Regressions are weighted using the underlying job postings 
in the current year in Panel A, and the underlying employment in Panel B and C. All occupational-level exposure scores are transformed to 
percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation group level defined by Autor 
and Dorn (2013). Asterisks denote the significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

  Dep Var
  Sample

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Above Median)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q2)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q3)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Most Complementarity/Least Substitute - Q4)𝑜,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year Dummy
  Observations
  R2

  Dep Var
  Sample

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Above Median)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q2)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q3)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q4)𝑜,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year Dummy
  Observations
  R2

  Dep Var
  Sample

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Above Median)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q2)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q3)𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Q4)𝑜,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year Dummy
  Observations
  R2

Panel A: Postings
𝛥Log(Postings)𝑜,𝑡 × 100
2010–2018

(1)

−0.101***
(−3.89)
0.059**
(2.41)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.435

(2)

−0.176***
(−3.27)

0.100*
(1.76)
0.137**
(2.70)
0.136**
(2.76)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.437

Panel B: Employment

𝛥Log(Employment)𝑜,𝑡 × 100
2010–2018

(1)

−0.024*
(−2.07)
0.007
(0.44)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.047

(2)

−0.036***
(−2.86)

0.015
(1.12)
0.019
(0.98)
0.022
(1.20)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.055

Panel C: Annual Wages

𝛥Log(Wages)𝑜,𝑡 × 100
2010–2018

(2)

−0.002
(−0.57)

0.007
(1.29)
−0.001
(−0.13)
0.002
(0.30)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.581

(1)

0.002
(0.93)
−0.004
(−1.55)

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.576

14 

2015–2018

(3)

−0.151**
(−2.27)
0.118*
(1.73)

Yes
Yes

858
0.540

2015–2018

(3)

−0.022*
(−1.93)
−0.002
(−0.10)

Yes
Yes

858
0.045

2015–2018

(3)

−0.003
(−0.74)
−0.004
(−1.16)

Yes
Yes

858
0.435

(4)
−0.289** 
(−2.10)  

0.189
(1.44)
0.254*
(1.84)
0.276*
(1.94)

Yes
Yes

858
0.543

(4)
−0.022  
(−1.20)  

−0.004  
(−0.16)  
−0.010  
(−0.29)  
0.007
(0.25)

Yes
Yes

858
0.049

(4)
−0.010  
(−1.44)  

0.011
(1.64)
0.007
(1.09)
0.000
(0.04)

Yes
Yes

858
0.444

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 4
Occupation creation amid disruption.
The table reports the Probit regression results based on data at the suboccupation (8-digit SOC code) × wave level in 2006, 2009, 2011 and 2020. The dependent variable 
is a dummy that equals one if the suboccupation is newly categorized in a given wave (year) and zero otherwise. The main explanatory variable, fintech exposure measure, 
is constructed using fintech patent applications or a subcategory of fintech patents, in five-year rolling windows. Fintech exposure of a given suboccupation is measured as the 
employment-weighted percentile rank of the occupation (𝑜𝑐𝑐1990𝑑𝑑) to which that suboccupation belongs. In all regressions, we control for the five competing occupational exposure 
measures as in Table  1. We also include dummies for the occupation group level defined by Autor and Dorn (2013), as well as indicators for each wave, except in column (5) 
where blockchain emerged after 2014. All the occupation-level exposure scores are transformed to percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010. We report the 
marginal probabilities corresponding to the coefficient estimates. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation group level. Asterisks denote the significance levels (***=1%, 
**=5%, *=10%).
  Dep Var
  Fintech
  Subcategory

I(New SOC-8 Occupation)𝑜,𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒

Mobile
Transaction

Data
Analytics

Robo-
advising

Cyber-
security

Block-
chain

P2P

IoT

All

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

  Marginal Prob
  Other Occupational Exposure
  Observations
  R2

(1)

0.011***
(6.69)

0.119%

Yes

3,968
0.249

(2)

0.010***
(4.72)

0.107%

Yes

3,968
0.247

(3)

0.010***
(4.58)

0.103%

Yes

3,968
0.246

(4)

0.011***
(5.79)

0.115%

Yes

3,968
0.246

(5)

0.014***
(3.27)

0.206%

Yes

757
0.070

(6)

0.011***
(3.39)

0.115%

Yes

3,968
0.244

(7)

0.011***
(5.86)

0.120%

Yes

3,968
0.246

(8)
0.007*** 
(3.00)
0.080%  
Yes

3,968
0.244

Table 5
Upskilling.
The table reports the results of Probit regressions that examine the effect of fintech exposure on skill requirements in job postings at the occupation (𝑜) × year 
(𝑡) level from 2010–2018. The dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if a given occupation sees a year-over-year increase in BG job postings that 
require specific types of skills in columns (1)–(3), four and more year working experiences in column (4), and bachelor and above degree in column (5), 
and zero otherwise. The main explanatory variable, fintech exposure measure, is constructed using fintech patent applications in five-year rolling windows. 
In all regressions, we control for the five competing occupational exposure measures and year dummies as in Table  1. All occupation-level exposure scores 
are transformed to percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation group level defined by 
Autor and Dorn (2013). We also report the marginal probabilities corresponding to the coefficient estimates in the table. Asterisks denote the significance 
levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
  Dep Var

I(Increases in Postings Requiring)𝑜,𝑡
Finance + Tech
(1)

Finance only
(2)

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

  Marginal Prob
  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year FE
  Observations
  Pseudo R2

0.008***
(5.88)

0.226%

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.131

0.001
(0.99)

0.041%

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.095

Tech only
(3)

0.006***
(4.61)

0.150%

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.147

4+ Year Experience
(4)

BA+ Education 
(5)

0.003**
(2.24)

0.082%

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.096

0.007***
(3.17)

0.210%

Yes
Yes

2,288
0.126

specialists  (13–2054.00)  and  data  scientists  (15–2051.00).  We  also 
conduct a subsample analysis using waves after 2010, yielding similar 
results.

In summary, fintech innovations not only replace some existing jobs, 
but also create occupations that perform new tasks and are likely to 
grow over time. The combined results could potentially explain the 
findings in Table  1 that the disruption of jobs from fintech did not 
worsen in the second sub-period (2015–2018) although fintech inno-
vations occurred at an accelerated pace during that period compared 
to the early 2010s.

4.4. Upskilling

Demand for talent is not restricted to quantities (i.e., job postings 
and  employment),  but  is  skill-specific.  Therefore,  the  next  question 
naturally becomes whether there are discernible shifts in firms’ skill 
requirements  in  response  to  the  fintech  waves.  Specifically,  we  in-
vestigate whether exposed firms’ hiring strategies manifest upskilling 
or downskilling tendencies amid the broader trend of downsizing. To 
formalize our analysis, we conduct a Probit regression in which the 
dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if a given occupation 
sees a year-over-year increase in BG job postings that require specific 
types of skills, levels of education, or experience, and zero otherwise. 
We  use  Eq.  (3)  as  our  framework  and  employ  unweighted  Probit 
regressions. Table  5 presents the results.

Columns (1) through (3) reveal that ‘‘finance + tech’’ skills are 
the most likely to be in demand, increasing by 22.6 bps (marginal 
probability, significant at the 1% level) for each one percentile increase 
in  fintech  exposure.  Following  closely,  there  is  a  15.0  bps  higher 
likelihood of job postings requiring ‘‘tech-only’’ skills. However, the 
likelihood of requiring ‘‘fin-only’’ skills does not reach statistical sig-
nificance. These findings suggest that while fintech innovations disrupt 
existing occupations, they also create job opportunities for individuals 
who are skilled in both finance and technology. Columns (4) and (5) 
demonstrate a positive relationship between fintech exposure and the 
length of work experience required and the level of education required. 
Specifically, for each one percentile increase in fintech exposure, the 
likelihood of job postings requiring more than four years of working 
experiences and a bachelor’s degree and above increases by 8.2 bps 
and 21.0 bps, respectively.

The findings in Table  5 suggest that firms tend to adopt an upskilling 
approach to their recruiting strategy in response to the disruption of 
fintech. In particular, the impact of fintech exposure differs from the 
effects associated with general technological innovations. For example, 
research  by  Autor  and  Dorn  (2013)  has  shown  that  in  the  United 
States, employment and wages have experienced greater gains in skill 
requirements in both the upper and lower tails since 1980, driven by 
the declining cost of automating routine job tasks. Similarly, Graetz and 
Michaels (2018) demonstrated that the impact of industrial robots is 
concentrated among low-skilled and less educated workers, while Webb 
(2019)  found  that  AI  innovations  disproportionately  disrupt  highly 
educated and experienced workers in the software industry.

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

4.5. Heterogeneity across sectors and fintech categories

Our  baseline  results  indicate  that  fintech  exposure  reduces  firm 
labor demand unconditionally. At the same time, the cross-sectional 
heterogeneity results are just as important and interesting if not more 
so. To study the dynamics across industries, we interact the fintech 
exposure measure with indicators for the finance sector (NAICS 52) 
and tech sector (NAICS 51 and 54) defined following Acemoglu et al. 
(2022) in our regression analysis. We also interact the fintech exposure 
measure with indicators for three finance subsectors following Chen 
et al. (2019) (see, e.g., their Table 5 Panel B): Banking & Payment 
(NAICS 522), Asset Management& Brokerage (NAICS 523) and Insur-
ance (NAICS 524). Specifically, we conduct regression analysis follow-
ing Eq. (3), using aggregated job posting data at the occupation (𝑜) 
× industry (NAICS 3-digit, 𝑗) × year (𝑡) level.29 We control for the 
five competing occupational exposure measures to general technology 
innovations, the interaction variables by themselves, and industry and 
year fixed effects. The regressions are weighted by the industry’s annual 
postings, and standard errors are double clustered at the occupation 
group and industry level. The results are presented in Panel A of Table 
6.30

In column (1), we replicate the baseline regression to establish a 
benchmark estimate. It shows that a one percentile increase in fintech 
exposure  is  associated  with  a  5.3  bps  decrease  (significant  at  the 
1% level) in job postings within that occupation within the industry. 
Column  (2)  introduces  interaction  terms  between  fintech  exposure 
and two sectoral dummy variables. While the unconditional negative 
relationship between fintech and job postings remains significant, the 
cross-sectional heterogeneity sorted on finance and tech sectors is not 
significant. In column (3), we replace the finance sector dummy with 
indicators for the three subsectors in the financial industry. We find 
a positive coefficient, significant at the 10% level, on the interaction 
term between fintech exposure and the banking and payment subsector 
dummy, indicating that the demand for talent of banking and payment 
firms is stronger when weathering fintech disruption relative to that of 
other industries.

Column (4) incorporates an interaction term between fintech ex-
posure and the 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 indicator, as defined in Section 4.3.2. 
Consistent with Table  3 Panel A, we find a significantly negative coeffi-
cient on fintech exposure but a positive coefficient (significant at the 5%
level) on the interaction term with the 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 dummy. That 
is, the negative relationship between fintech exposure and job posting 
is driven by occupations with low complementarity (high substitutive-
ness)  to  technology,  after  accounting  for  industry  heterogeneity.  In 
column (5), we include all the interaction items in columns (3) and 
(4). The coefficients of the interaction between fintech exposure and 
the 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 dummy, as well as the interaction between fintech 
exposure and the banking and payment dummy, are both significantly 
positive. This further validates that complementarity is an attribute of 
individual occupations instead of a sector-wide characteristic, and it 
also suggests that differences across sectors and occupations are two 
independent channels through which job demand responds to fintech 
disruption.

We  further  examine  the  impact  of  fintech  exposure  in  the  spe-
cific industries where fintech patents are most likely to be applicable. 
Specifically, we link the seven fintech patent categories to the three 
finance subsectors based on the industry distribution of fintech patent 

29 We exclude the public sector (NAICS greater than 90) to focus on the 
private sector and exclude observation cells with fewer than 5 postings or 
industries that hire fewer than 5 occupations in a given year, in order to have 
statistical power with saturated fixed effects at the industry × occupation level.
30 We also conduct a similar analysis on the heterogeneity effect on employ-
ment and wages. The regression results are reported in Tables OA.6 and OA.7 
of the Online Appendix, respectively.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

filings as shown in Table 5 Panel B of Chen et al. (2019). Each of 
the subsectors is matched to the most relevant fintech categories. For 
example,  P2P  is  most  relevant  to  Bank  &  Payment;  Robo-Advising 
innovations are primarily applicable in Asset Management & Brokerage, 
and IoT most relevant for Insurance. We then analyze the technology 
category-subsector pairings at the occupation (𝑜) × subsector (NAICS 3-
digit, 𝑗) × year (𝑡) level, as presented in Table  6 Panel B. In columns (1) 
through (5), the occupational fintech exposure is constructed based on 
five fintech categories, namely cybersecurity, mobile transactions, data 
analytics, blockchain, and P2P, over the previous five years. The sample 
is restricted to occupations in the banking & payment subsector, where 
these fintech categories are most relevant. In columns (6) and (7), the 
sample focuses on the subsectors of asset management & brokerage and 
insurance, with fintech exposure constructed based on robo-advising 
and IoT patents, respectively.

All  columns  in  Panel  B  report  a  negative  coefficient  of  fintech 
exposure while a positive coefficient on the interaction term between 
fintech  exposure  and  the  𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦  indicator,  although  these 
coefficients are not significant in data analytics (column (3)) and IoT 
(column (7)). This suggests that, in most subsector-fintech pairings, 
occupations with low complementarity to fintech witness a significant 
drop in job demand, but those in the same subsector but with high 
complementarity to fintech have seen a significant relative increase in 
job postings. Four fintech categories — cybersecurity, mobile transac-
tion, blockchain, and P2P — are associated with a significant increase 
in job postings for high-complementarity occupations, fully offsetting 
the negative impact on low-complementarity roles. For example, in 
column (2), each one percentile increase in occupational exposure to 
mobile transactions corresponds to a 19 bps decrease in job postings for 
low-complementarity occupations but a 23.8 bps relative increase for 
high-complementarity occupations, resulting in a positive net growth 
for the latter. This finding suggests that the impact of fintech exposure 
depends on whether an occupation is exposed to a patent and employed 
in an industry where that patent is likely to be utilized.

5. Firm-level analysis

In this section, we transition to firm-level analyses so that we can 

trace out the ultimate impact of labor market disruption on firms.

5.1. Responses to fintech disruption at the firm level

5.1.1. Incumbents vs. entrants

Given the disruptive nature of the fintech wave in reshaping how 
financial  services  are  delivered  to  users,  one  hypothesis  is  that  in-
cumbent firms with long-established business practices may embrace 
more negative impacts than newcomers, who could better adapt to 
new technologies. To test such a hypothesis, we classify ‘‘incumbents’’ 
as firms in the finance sector whose age (the number of years listed 
on Compustat with asset information) is above the median in a given 
year. And young finance and technology firms are potential ‘‘entrants’’ 
or  disruptors.  We  also  use  an  alternative  definition  of  ‘‘incumbent 
firms’’ based on the product life cycle (PLC). We identify the PLC stage 
of a given firm in a given year following the procedure developed 
in Hoberg and Maksimovic (2022). Then we define a firm as ‘‘mature’’ 
if  it  belongs  to  the  two  final  stages  of  its  PLC.  We  then  examine 
cross-sectional variations in the relationship between fintech exposure 
and changes in job postings at the firm × occupation × year level. 
We introduce interactions between fintech exposure and the indicator 
variable for ‘‘incumbents’’ or ‘‘mature’’ firms in Eq.  (3). We also control 
for interaction variables by themselves and include firm × year fixed 
effects to absorb any time-varying firm attributes. The regressions are 
weighted by firms’ annual postings and standard error clusters at the 
occupation group × firm level.

Table  7 presents the regression results. Columns (1) and (3) repli-
cate the baseline regression for the samples of all firms and all public 

16 

W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 6
Heterogeneity across Sectors and Fintech Categories.
The table reports the regression results examining the effect of fintech exposure on job postings at the occupation (𝑜) × sector (NAICS 3-digit, 𝑗) × year (𝑡) level from 2010–2018. 
The dependent variable is 100 times the year-over-year change in the natural logarithm of job postings. The main explanatory variable, occupational fintech exposure measure, is 
constructed using all fintech patent applications in five-year rolling windows in Panel A – B, while it is measured based on a subcategory of fintech patents specified in the second 
row in Panel C. I(Complementarity - Above Median) equals one for occupations where the employment-weighted percentile rank of their net complementary exposure, calculated 
as the difference between exposure to complementary fintech patents and substitute fintech patents over the past five years, is above 50 and zero otherwise. I(Financial Sector) 
equals one for NAICS sectors 52 (Finance) and zero otherwise, while I(Tech Sector) equals one for NAICS sectors 51 (Information) and 54 (Professional Services) and zero otherwise 
following (Acemoglu et al., 2022). We also break the financial sector into three subsectors following (Chen et al., 2019): I(Banking & Payment) equals one for NAICS sectors 522; 
I(Asset Mgm. & Brokerage) equals one for NAICS sectors 523; I(Insurance) equals one for NAICS sectors 524. In all regressions, we control for interaction variables by themselves, 
year fixed effects, and the five competing occupational exposure measures as in Table  1. All the occupation-level exposure scores are transformed to percentile ranks weighted by 
occupational employment in 2010. Full sample regressions in Panel A additionally control for industry (NAICS 3-digit) fixed effects and are weighted by the industry-year level 
postings; the subsample regressions in Panel B are weighted by the underlying postings averaged over the prior and current year. Standard errors are double clustered at the 
occupation group defined by Autor and Dorn (2013) level and industry level in Panel A and at the occupation group level in Panel B. Asterisks denote the significance levels 
(***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

  Dep Var

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Above Median)𝑜,𝑡−1

Panel A: By Sector and Job Type
𝛥Log(Postings)𝑜,𝑗,𝑡 × 100
(1)

(2)

−0.053***
(−6.83)

−0.049***
(−4.31)

(3)

−0.049***
(−4.19)

    × I(Financial Sector)𝑗

    × I(Banking & Payment)𝑗

    × I(Asset Mgmt. & Brokerage)𝑗

    × I(Insurance)𝑗

    × I(Tech Sector)𝑗

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Industry FE
  Year FE
  Observations
  R2

0.014
(0.56)

−0.023
(−1.32)

Yes
Yes
Yes

46,238
0.120

0.048*
(1.99)
0.026
(1.10)
−0.015
(−0.86)
−0.023
(−1.30)

Yes
Yes
Yes

46,238
0.120

Yes
Yes
Yes

46,238
0.120

(4)

−0.069***
(−9.57)
0.051**
(2.75)

(5)
−0.065*** 
(−6.77)
0.050**
(2.63)

0.046*
(1.80)
0.015
(0.57)
−0.018
(−0.64)
−0.023
(−1.33)

Yes
Yes
Yes

46,238
0.121

Yes
Yes
Yes

46,238
0.121

  Dep Var

  Indep Var
  Subsample

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Complementarity - Above Median)

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Year FE
  Observations
  R2

Panel B: By Fintech Category, Sector and Job type

𝛥Log(Postings)𝑜,𝑗,𝑡 × 100
Mobile
Cyber-
security
Transaction
Bank & Payment

(1)

(2)

−0.189**
(−2.53)
0.228**
(2.34)

Yes
Yes

656
0.385

−0.190**
(−2.45)
0.238**
(2.33)

Yes
Yes

656
0.387

Data
Analytics

Blockchain

P2P

(3)

−0.057
(−1.03)
0.080
(1.12)

Yes
Yes

656
0.378

(4)

−0.235**
(−2.30)
0.332*
(1.76)

Yes
Yes

258
0.303

(5)

−0.194***
(−3.22)
0.194**
(2.18)

Yes
Yes

656
0.385

Robo-
Advising
Asset Mgmt. &
Brokerage

(6)

−0.343***
(−3.96)
0.245***
(3.88)

Yes
Yes

493
0.329

IoT

Insurance 
(7)
−0.020  
(−0.45)  
0.018
(0.44)

Yes
Yes

935
0.202

firms, respectively. The restriction to public firms is necessitated by the 
requirement of firm age information in order to classify ‘‘incumbents’’. 
We first confirmed the baseline result that more exposed firms reduced 
their job postings.

Columns (2) and (4) introduce interaction terms between fintech 
exposure and sector indicators. Column (5) introduces the interaction 
term  between  fintech  exposure  and  an  indicator  for  incumbents.  It 
turns out that these firms experience an additional 3.1 bps decrease 
in job postings with a one-percentile increase in fintech exposure. In 
column (6), we include the triple interaction terms involving fintech 
exposure, sector, and incumbent firm indicators. We find that while 
the coefficient on the double interaction term is positive and significant, 
the coefficient on the triple interaction term is significantly negative. In 
other words, young financial firms remain robust in hiring when facing 
fintech exposure, but their job growth seems to come at the cost of 
incumbents, who suffer a significant incremental decrease (−14.4 bps) 

in job postings. Columns (7) and (8) replace the indicator for incumbent 
firms with that for mature firms. The triple interaction involving fintech 
exposure, finance, and mature firms is significantly negative. Mature 
financial firms experience a significant incremental drop (−14.5 bps) 
in job postings, relative to younger competitors in the same industry.

5.1.2. Separations and within-firm transfers

One mechanism of firm adjustment that does not necessarily man-
ifest itself in job posting and employment is internal redeployment of 
talent. For example, someone with valuable underlying skills may move 
from an occupation that is disrupted by fintech to a new occupation 
that becomes a bright spot due to new technologies. This raises the 
concern  that  the  net  change  in  job  postings  may  not  fully  reflect 
changes in demand for talent. LinkedIn employment history data allow 
us to address this issue with a panel at the occupation (𝑜) × firm (𝑖) ×
year (𝑡) level. Furthermore, we use the same employment history data 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 7
Job postings of entrants, incumbents and mature firms.
The table reports the regressions estimating the effect of fintech exposure on changes in job postings at the firm (𝑖) × occupation (𝑜) × year (𝑡) level from 2010 to 2018. The 
sample covers 67,977 unique firms in the BG database and 3,516 of them are public firms. Columns (1)–(2) are based on all firms, while columns (3)–(8) are based on public 
firms. The dependent variable is 100 times the year-over-year change in the natural logarithm of job postings. The main explanatory variable, occupational fintech exposure 
measure, is constructed using fintech patent applications in five-year rolling windows. In columns (2), (4), (6), and (8), we include the interaction of fintech exposure with sector 
dummies, including the financial sector (NAICS 52) and the tech sector (NAICS 51 and 54), as defined by Acemoglu et al. (2022). In columns (5) and (6), we incorporate the 
interaction of fintech exposure with an indicator for incumbent firms whose age falls into the top 50%. Additionally, in columns (7) and (8), we include the interaction of fintech 
exposure with an indicator for mature firms, defined as those whose product life cycle is primarily in the mature or decline stage according to Hoberg and Maksimovic (2022). 
Column (6) features a triple interaction of fintech exposure, sector dummy, and incumbent firm dummy, while column (8) includes a triple interaction of fintech exposure, sector 
dummy, and mature firm dummy. In all regressions, we control for the five competing occupational exposure measures as in Table  1. All the occupation-level exposure scores 
are transformed to percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010. We additionally control for interaction variables by themselves, and firm × year fixed effects 
and weight regressions using the firm total postings in the current year. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation group, defined by Autor and Dorn (2013), × firm level. 
Asterisks denote the significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
  Dep Var
  Sample

𝛥Log(Postings) × 100
All Firms
(1)

(2)

Public Firms
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(Financial Sector)𝑖

    × I(Financial Sector)𝑖 × I(Incumbent)𝑖,𝑡

    × I(Financial Sector)𝑖 × I(Mature Firm)𝑖,𝑡−1

    × I(Tech Sector)𝑖

    × I(Incumbent)𝑖,𝑡

    × I(Mature Firm)𝑖,𝑡−1

  Other Occupational Exposure
  Firm × Year FE
  Observations
  R2

−0.043***
(−6.07)

−0.041***
(−5.57)
−0.005
(−0.21)

−0.063***
(−5.67)

−0.063***
(−5.17)
0.001
(0.03)

−0.042***
(−2.94)

−0.016
(−0.88)

−0.003
(−0.13)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1,002,968
0.356

1,002,968
0.356

Yes
Yes

213,817
0.265

Yes
Yes

213,817
0.265

−0.031*
(−1.88)

Yes
Yes

213,413
0.264

−0.048***
(−3.10)
0.130***
(3.45)
−0.144***
(−2.93)

−0.005
(−0.21)
−0.023
(−1.31)

Yes
Yes

213,413
0.264

−0.057***
(−4.39)

−0.019
(−0.96)

Yes
Yes

213,817
0.265

(8)
−0.059*** 
(−4.45)
0.146**
(2.32)

−0.145**  
(−2.01)
0.001
(0.04)

−0.018
(−0.74)

Yes
Yes
213,817  
0.265

to study job separations into different occupations to better understand 
whether fintech exposure affects job changes across occupations.

A job change involves an ‘‘origination’’ and a ‘‘destination’’ position. 
We code 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑓 𝑒𝑟 as an indicator that equals one if an em-
ployee moves to a role associated with a different occupation within 
the same firm in a given year, while 𝑆𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 is an indicator that 
equals one if an employee leaves for a different occupation in another 
firm in a given year. Among separations, we consider a departure to 
be voluntary if the employee joins a firm that is larger in LinkedIn 
headcount with the same or higher seniority level based on the seniority 
metric provided by Revelio.31 Next we aggregate the number of internal 
transfers and separations to the occupation (𝑜) × firm (𝑖) × year (𝑡) level.
With  the  data  set  up,  we  can  then  relate  the  internal  transfer 
and separation with fintech exposure of the originating occupation, 
and employee skills. Because job relocation generates count data, we 
employ Poisson regressions for the analyses. The variables of interest 
are  the  lagged  fintech  exposure  of  the  originating  occupation  and 
its interaction with an indicator that equals one if the proportion of 
employees with ‘‘fin + tech’’ skills within an occupation-firm cohort 
falls in the top quartile for a given year. We additionally control for 
the interaction variables by themselves, the lagged employment of a 
given firm-occupation-year cohort, the occupation group fixed effects, 
and the firm × year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the 
occupation group × firm level. Results are presented in Table  8.

The  first  two  columns  of  Panel  A  include  all  cases  of  internal 
transfers (from the perspective of the originating positions). We observe 
a positive and statistically significant relationship between fintech ex-
posure of the originating occupation and the number of employees who 
are redeployed to a different role in the same firm. Specifically, a one 

31 The Revelio seniority metric quantifies an individual’s career progression 
in seven distinct levels based on their current job characteristics, employment 
history, and age.

percentile increase in fintech exposure is associated with 2.59% more 
internal job transfers, significant at the 1% level, amounting to 1.38%
of the sample mean (1.88). Column (2) shows that his relationship is 
stronger if more existing employees in this firm-occupation cohort with 
‘‘finance + tech’’ skills. Moving from the bottom three quartiles to the 
top quartiles regarding the proportional of employees having ‘‘finance 
+ tech’’ skills additionally increases the number of internal transfers to 
a different occupation without leaving the firm by 1.85%.

For the analysis of the remaining columns, we examine job moves to 
destination occupations that are more likely to be in growth following 
a technology shock. Columns (3) and (4) focus on internal transfers to 
occupations with higher fintech complementarity scores, while columns 
(5)  and  (6)  examine  occupations  that  are  less  exposed  to  fintech. 
We  document  the  same  patterns  as  those  in  columns  (1)  and  (2). 
Overall,  firms  tend  to  retain  employees  with  relevant  skills  after  a 
technology shock, allowing them to transition to new roles without 
changing employers. This finding highlights the importance of within-
firm  adjustments  in  mitigating  the  impact  of  technology  shocks  on 
firms.

We also analyze job separations across occupations in response to 
fintech disruption. We run regressions at the occupation × firm × year 
level similar to those in Panel A, but replace the dependent variables 
with the number of all separations across occupations in Panel B and 
the number of voluntary separations across occupations in Panel C. The 
results show a positive and statistically significant relationship between 
fintech exposure in the originating occupation and employee departures 
to a different occupation and a significant relationship on joining a new 
occupation that is more complementary to or less exposed to fintech. 
These relationships hold whether the separations are voluntary or not. 
The commonality between internal transfers and separations suggests 
that fintech disruption displaces workers in highly exposed occupa-
tions unconditionally and that within-firm adjustments have been more 
effective in reallocating workers to new growth opportunities.

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 8
Separations and within-firm transfers.
The table reports Poisson regressions estimating the effect of fintech exposure on job transfers within firms and separations. The sample covers employees of public firms in the 
financial and tech sectors from 2010 to 2018, based on LinkedIn data. The analysis is performed at the occupation (𝑜) × firm (𝑖) × year (𝑡) level. In Panel A, the dependent 
variable is the number of internal transfers to different occupations (employees move to a different occupation within the same firm) in a given year. In Panel B, the dependent 
variable is the number of job separations to different occupations (employees leave for another firm and a different occupation) in a given year. In Panel C, the dependent variable 
is the number of voluntary separations to different occupations, where the destination firm has no fewer employees than the originating firm or the destination position’s seniority 
level is the same or higher than that of the originating position based on Revelio’s seniority metric. In all three panels, the first two columns analyze job moves to all kinds of 
destination occupations, while columns (3) and (4) focus on moves to occupations with higher fintech complementarity percentile ranks, and columns (5) and (6) focus on moves 
to occupations with lower fintech exposure percentile ranks. The main explanatory variable is the lagged fintech exposure measure of the originating occupation constructed using 
fintech patent applications in five-year rolling windows. I(% Fin + Tech skills - Q4) is equal to one if the proportion of employees with both finance-related and tech-related 
skills within an occupation-firm cohort falls in the top quartile for a given year. In all regressions, we control for the five competing occupational exposure measures and year 
dummies as in Table  1. All the occupation-level exposure scores are transformed to percentile ranks weighted by occupational employment in 2010. We additionally control for 
interaction variables by themselves, the lagged employment of a given firm-occupation-year cohort, the occupation group fixed effects, and firm × year fixed effects. Standard 
errors are clustered at the occupation group × firm level. Asterisks denote the significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

  Dep Var

No. of Internal Transfers𝑜,𝑖,𝑡
All

(1)

0.011***
(13.63)

2.59%

Yes
Yes
Yes

187,546
0.474

(2)

0.007***
(8.22)
0.008***
(4.66)

1.59%
1.85%

Yes
Yes
Yes

187,546
0.479

No. of Separations𝑜,𝑖,𝑡
All

(1)

0.015***
(14.98)

1.17%

Yes
Yes
Yes

179,649
0.403

(2)

0.009***
(9.62)
0.008***
(4.67)

0.71%
0.65%

Yes
Yes
Yes

179,649
0.41

Panel A: Internal Transfers

To Greater Complementarity
(4)
(3)

0.010***
(9.45)

1.22%

Yes
Yes
Yes

155,474
0.37

0.007***
(6.13)
0.006***
(3.84)

0.79%
0.76%

Yes
Yes
Yes

155,474
0.373

Panel B: Separations

To greater complementarity
(4)
(3)

0.014***
(11.95)

0.60%

Yes
Yes
Yes

145,826
0.304

0.009***
(7.59)
0.007***
(3.78)

0.39%
0.29%

Yes
Yes
Yes

145,826
0.308

Panel C: Voluntary Separations

No. of Voluntary Separations𝑜,𝑖,𝑡
All

(1)

0.015***
(15.59)

1.02%

Yes
Yes
Yes

179,399
0.376

(2)

0.009***
(9.57)
0.009***
(5.03)

0.60%
0.61%

Yes
Yes
Yes

179,399
0.383

To greater complementarity
(4)
(3)

0.014***
(12.57)

0.54%

Yes
Yes
Yes

145,509
0.284

0.009***
(7.92)
0.007***
(3.70)

0.35%
0.26%

Yes
Yes
Yes

145,509
0.288

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(% Fin + Tech Skill - Q4)𝑜,𝑖,𝑡−1

  Incremental effect on DV
  Fintech Exposure
    × I(% Fin + Tech Skill - Q4)
  Occupational Controls
  Occupation Group FE
  Firm × Year FE
  Observations
  Pseudo R2

  Dep Var

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(% Fin + Tech Skill - Q4)𝑜,𝑖,𝑡−1

  Marginal Incremental effect on DV
  Fintech Exposure
    × I(% Fin + Tech Skill - Q4)
  Occupational Controls
  Occupation Group FE
  Firm × Year FE
  Observations
  Pseudo R2

  Dep Var

  Fintech Exposure𝑜,𝑡−1

    × I(% Fin + Tech Skill - Q4)𝑜,𝑖,𝑡−1

  Marginal Incremental effect on DV
  Fintech Exposure
    × I(% Fin + Tech Skill - Q4)
  Occupational Controls
  Occupation Group FE
  Firm × Year FE
  Observations
  Pseudo R2

5.1.3. Innovation responses

To Lower FT Exposure
(6)
(5)
0.043*** 
(29.65)  
0.024*** 
(4.85)

0.050***
(31.29)

5.16%

Yes
Yes
Yes

155,168
0.500

4.45%  
2.45%  
Yes
Yes
Yes
155,168  
0.504

To lower FT exposure
(5)

0.057***
(32.08)

2.18%

Yes
Yes
Yes

144,397
0.441

0.057***
(32.75)

1.91%

Yes
Yes
Yes

143,886
0.418

To lower FT exposure
(5)

(6)
0.048*** 
(30.40)  
0.027*** 
(5.84)

1.84%  
1.04%  
Yes
Yes
Yes
144,397  
0.445

(6)
0.048*** 
(29.94)  
0.029*** 
(6.36)

1.60%  
0.97%  
Yes
Yes
Yes
143,886  
0.422

Although fintech is widely considered to be originated from out-
side  the  finance  sector,  the  latter  is  far  from  a  passive  player.  We 
explore their innovation strategies in this section. We employ Poisson 
regressions to accommodate the count-format of patent volume data 

19 

at the firm (𝑖) × year (𝑡) level. The sample covers all firms, public 
and private, from the Compustat and BG database from 2010–2017. 
The sample ends a year earlier than 2018 because our patent filings 
data  is  up  to  2017.  The  dependent  variable  is  the  number  of  fin-
tech patents, invented or acquired by individual firms collected from 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 9
Firm innovation responses.
The table reports Poisson regressions examining the effect of fintech exposure on innovation activities at the firm (𝑖) × year (𝑡) level. The sample includes both public and private 
firms in columns (1)–(4) and only public firms in columns (5)–(8) covered by the Compustat and BG data in 2010–2017, respectively. The dependent variable is the number of 
fintech patents invented in columns (1)–(2) and (5)–(6) and the number of fintech patents acquired in columns (3)–(4) and (7)–(8), respectively, identified from the USPTO data. 
The main explanatory variable, lagged fintech exposure of a given firm, is measured using the average annual fintech exposure of its industry (NAICS 3-digit) over a three-year 
rolling period. The annual industry-level fintech exposure is calculated as the employment-weighted average of occupational fintech exposure percentile constructed using fintech 
patent filings in the 5-year rolling windows. The employment data at the industry-occupation level is from the OEWS database. In columns (2), (4), (5), and (7), we interact the 
lagged industry-level fintech exposure with sector dummies including the financial sector (NAICS sector 52) and the tech sector (NAICS sectors 51 and 54). In columns (6) and (8), 
we interact the lagged industry-level fintech exposure with an indicator for growth firms whose lagged Tobin’s Q falls in the top quartile among all public firms. Firm attributes 
include interaction variables by themselves and lagged employment of public firms or job postings of private firms. We additionally control for interaction variables by themselves, 
the industry (NAICS 2-digit) by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. We also report the marginal effects corresponding to the coefficient estimates 
in the table. Asterisks denote the significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
All Firms
  Sample
Number of Fintech Patents𝑖,𝑡
  Dep Var
Invented

Public Firms

Acquired

Acquired

Invented

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

  Fintech Exposure𝑖,𝑡−1

    × I(Financial Sector)𝑖

    × I(Tech Sector)𝑖

    × I(Growth Firm)𝑖,𝑡−1

  Incremental effect on DV
  Fintech Exposure
    × I(Financial Sector)
    × I(Tech Sector)
    × I(Growth Firm)
  Firm Attributes
  Industry × Year FE
  Observations
  Pseudo R2

0.187***
(5.48)

0.22%

Yes
Yes

194,881
0.415

0.109***
(7.24)
0.218***
(14.42)
0.069***
(4.81)

0.13%
0.25%
0.08%

Yes
Yes

194,881
0.419

0.128***
(6.33)

0.04%

Yes
Yes

155,843
0.285

0.113***
(3.42)
0.103***
(3.09)
−0.005
(−0.15)

0.04%
0.04%
0.00%

Yes
Yes

155,843
0.287

0.105***
(6.48)
0.258***
(14.45)
0.077***
(4.99)

1.06%
2.61%
0.78%

Yes
Yes

21,844
0.270

0.170***
(4.84)

0.106**
(2.55)

1.79%

1.12%

Yes
Yes

20,634
0.348

(7)

0.142***
(6.09)
0.124***
(6.03)
−0.044*
(−1.92)

0.33%
0.29%
−0.10%

Yes
Yes

20,494
0.196

(8)
0.130*** 
(5.70)

0.023
(0.36)

0.51%  

0.09%  
Yes
Yes
19,314  
0.214

USPTO. Following the previous literature (e.g., Donangelo, 2014; Ghaly 
et  al.,  2017;  Ma  et  al.,  2022),  we  calculate  the  main  independent 
variable, fintech exposure at the industry × year level, as the average 
of occupational fintech exposure weighted by the industry-occupation 
employment from OEWS data from 2010 to 2017. Moreover, we take 
the three-year moving average of the industry’s annual fintech exposure 
following Ouimet et al. (2025), taking into account that disruptions 
take time to accumulate for the labor market to absorb.32 We further 
control for firm size measured as the Compustat employment for public 
firms or total annual BG job postings for private firms, the interaction 
variables by themselves, and the industry (NAICS 2-digit) by year fixed 
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. Results are 
presented in Table  9.

Columns (1)–(4) correspond to the all-firm sample. Columns (1) and 
(3) reveal that higher fintech exposure is positively and significantly as-
sociated with fintech patents invented or acquired. Column (2) suggests 
that such a positive relationship is more pronounced in the financial 
and tech sectors, with the financial sector experiencing a larger impact. 
Column (4) indicates that the financial sector is actively purchasing 
fintech patents, whereas the tech sector shows less engagement in fin-
tech patent acquisition. Columns (5)–(8), based on a sample comprising 
only public firms, show qualitatively similar results. In columns (6) and 
(8), we introduce an additional element of ‘‘growth firms’’, defined as 
those whose Tobin’s Q ranks in the top quartile in a given year. Such 
an addition is motivated by Kogan et al. (2020) which suggests that 
growth firms are more innovative than value firms in creating and 
implementing new blueprints, making higher aggregate investment as 
well as generating stronger returns. Our results confirm that, relative 
to other firms, growth firms invent (not acquire) more fintech patents 
when facing fintech exposure.

32 For years prior to 2012, the average is calculated using available data, 
while a full three-year average is applied from 2012 onward.

5.2. Operating performance

While our main analysis estimates firms’ adjustments in hiring and 
innovative activities concerning fintech exposure, a natural question to 
explore at last is whether such adjustments translate to real outcomes 
including operating performance and employment. Due to within-firm 
adjustments, including innovation, reallocation of investment and pro-
duction, and restructuring of hiring, there is no clear ex ante prediction 
on the direction of the net effect at the firm level. To answer this 
question,  we  perform  additional  tests  based  on  a  sample  of  public 
firms during 2010–2017. Results are reported in Table  10. The de-
pendent  variable  is  100  times  the  annual  change  in  the  logarithm 
of employment, sales, and total factor productivity (TFP) calculated 
following Ackerberg et al. (2015). The main explanatory variables are 
the firm’s fintech exposure, 𝐹 𝑇𝑖,𝑡−1, measured as the three-year moving 
average of the industry-level fintech exposure defined in Table  9.

To isolate the effect of fintech innovations from general innovative-
ness of the firm, we identify non-fintech patents by excluding fintech 
patents from all patents granted to a given public firm (data provided 
by Kogan et al. (2017)) and control for a non-fintech inventor indicator, 
which equals one if the firm was granted any non-fintech patents in 
the past five years. Additional controls for firm attributes include sales 
(in logarithm and in constant 2018 dollar), Tobin’s Q, cash flow over 
lagged assets, presence of R&D (an indicator equal to one if the firm 
reports non-missing R&D), market leverage, payout over sales, prof-
itability, and net fixed assets over the number of employees (logarithm) 
following Chen et al. (2010) and Kale et al. (2019). Finally, industry 
(NAICS 2-digit) by year fixed effects are present in all regressions. 
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

We classify firms into three categories: ‘‘Inventors’’ are those that 
have  filed  at  least  one  fintech  patent  in  the  past  five  years;  ‘‘Ac-
quirers’’ are firms that have not filed patents but have acquired at 
least one fintech patent during the same period; and the remainder 
are classified as ‘‘non-innovating firms’’. We find that non-innovating 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Table 10
Firm performance.
This table reports the regression results examining the relationship between fintech exposure and firm outcomes based on firm (𝑖) × year (𝑡) level data. The sample covers 6,886 
unique public firms in Compustat from 2010 to 2018. We define three types of firms based on inventor and assignee names of fintech patents (as described in Section 2.1.2): 
inventors, acquisition innovators, and non-innovators (reference group). The dependent variable is 100 times the year-over-year change in the natural logarithms of firm outcomes: 
(i) employment, (ii) sales, and (iii) total factor productivity (TFP) following (Ackerberg et al., 2015). The main explanatory variable, lagged fintech exposure of a given firm, is 
measured using the average annual fintech exposure of its NAICS 3-digit industry over a three-year rolling period. The annual industry-level fintech exposure is calculated as the 
employment-weighted average of occupational fintech exposure percentile constructed using fintech patent filings in the five-year rolling windows. In columns (2), (5), and (8), 
we interact the lagged fintech exposure with lagged inventor and acquisition innovator dummies that equal one if a firm has filed or acquired fintech patents in the past five 
years, respectively. In columns (3), (6) and (9), we interact the lagged fintech exposure with an indicator for firms whose lagged percentage of fintech-complementary occupations, 
defined using the same method as fintech exposure, is in the top quartile within their industry (NAICS 2-digit). Fintech-complementary occupations are those where the percentile 
rank of net complementary exposure (the difference between exposure to complementary and substitute fintech patents over the past five years) is above 50. The employment data 
at the industry-occupation level is obtained from the OEWS database. We control for firm attributes, including interaction variables by themselves, an indicator for non-fintech 
inventors (have non-fintech patent grants in the past five years), sales in 2018 dollars (logarithm), Tobin’s Q, cash flow over lagged assets, an indicator for R&D expenditure, 
market leverage, payout over sales, profitability (operating income before depreciation over assets), net fixed assets over the number of employees (logarithm) and industry (NAICS 
2-digit) by year fixed effects in all regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
  Sample
  Dep Var

Public Firms
𝛥𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑌 )𝑖,𝑡 × 100
Employment

  Fintech Exposure𝑖,𝑡−1

    × I(Inventor)𝑖,𝑡−1

    × I(Acquirer)𝑖,𝑡−1

    × I(% of Complementary Occ. - Q4 )𝑖,𝑡−1

  I(Non-Fintech Inventor)𝑖,𝑡−1

  Firm Attributes
  Industry × Year FE
  Observations
  R2

(1)

−0.009
(−0.32)

(2)

−0.010
(−0.37)
0.168*
(1.91)
−0.061
(−0.40)

−1.084**
(−2.17)

−1.097**
(−2.17)

Yes
Yes

24,787
0.034

Yes
Yes

24,787
0.034

(3)

−0.013
(−0.45)

0.108*
(1.66)
−1.079**
(−2.16)

Yes
Yes

24,787
0.034

firms experience no significant changes in employment (column (1)) 
or productivity (column (7)), but show a decline in sales (significant 
at  the  10%  level)  as  fintech  exposure  increases  (column  (4)).  The 
lack of a severe disruption effect is likely due to adjustments such 
as changing the composition of occupations and replacing disrupted 
jobs, both internally and externally, with employees with the desired 
skill-set. More importantly, results in columns (2), (5), and (8) suggest 
that inventors see significantly better outcomes (at the 10% or below 
level) across all three performance measures relative to non-innovators 
in the same industry. Interestingly, firms that innovate through patent 
acquisitions (but without inventions of their own) do not see significant 
improvements in performance, suggesting that innovation via acqui-
sition may not be sufficient to drive meaningful performance gains 
without the built-in capability to fully leverage these technologies.

Finally, we measure a firm’s workforce complementarity to fintech 
by aggregating the complementarity score at the occupation level using 
employment weights at the industry level. Columns (3), (6), and (9) 
of Table  10 show that firms with a workforce largely complemented 
by fintech innovations enjoy relative expansions in employment, sales, 
and productivity. This finding is consistent with evidence documented 
in  different  settings  in  the  earlier  sections.  It  further  supports  the 
argument that firms can survive or even benefit from disruptive shocks 
by reallocating resources within the firm toward areas complemented 
by shock.33

6. Conclusion

This study provides a comprehensive empirical analysis of whether 
and how the fintech wave has been both disruptive and presenting 

33 Cen et al. (2023) and Bena et al. (2022) demonstrate such an effect with 
the shock of China’s production capacity expansion on U.S. manufacturing 
industries.

21 

Sales

(4)

−0.076*
(−1.89)

1.309*
(1.82)

Yes
Yes

24,644
0.050

(5)

(6)

−0.083**
(−2.03)
0.193**
(2.29)
0.041
(0.34)

1.171
(1.61)

Yes
Yes

24,644
0.050

−0.080**
(−1.97)

0.231**
(2.09)
1.293*
(1.79)

Yes
Yes

24,644
0.050

TFP

(7)

−0.042
(−1.23)

(8)

−0.048
(−1.39)
0.103**
(2.07)
0.127
(0.87)

2.658***
(4.34)

2.529***
(4.09)

Yes
Yes

22,500
0.038

Yes
Yes

22,500
0.038

(9)
−0.040  
(−1.18)  

0.199**  
(2.28)
2.633*** 
(4.29)

Yes
Yes
22,500  
0.038

new  opportunities  for  workers  and  firms.  Using  a  new  occupation-
level fintech exposure measure, we document that occupations with 
high fintech exposure experience a net decline in job postings, em-
ployment, and wages, but complementary and substitutive effects are 
both present in the cross section. The spread between complementary 
and substitutive effects is much larger in the specific industries where 
fintech are most likely to be applicable. We also uncover the ‘‘creative’’ 
part of the fintech disruption, that is, the creation of new occupations 
associated with fintech innovations. Fintech has blurred the boundaries 
of  traditional  finance  and  technology  sectors  and  favored  workers 
with ‘‘finance + tech’’ combination skills regardless of where they are 
currently employed. Importantly, firms respond to the fintech shock by 
adjusting their new hiring strategies, reallocating talent internally, and 
pivoting innovations to new areas enabled by fintech. In the end, firms 
do not incur as negative an impact as workers from fintech exposure 
due to their ability to adjust and adapt, and those innovative firms 
emerge as winners with gains in employment, sales, and productivity.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Wei Jiang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Yuehua Tang: Writing – 
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, 
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Con-
ceptualization. Rachel J. Xiao: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding 
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Vincent 
Yao: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, 
Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration, 
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data 
curation, Conceptualization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W. Jiang et al.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104071.

Data availability

Fintech Disruption JFE Replication Package (Reference data) (Mende-
ley Data)

References

Acemoglu, D., Autor, D., Hazell, J., Restrepo, P., 2022. Artificial intelligence and jobs: 

evidence from online vacancies. J. Labor Econ. 40 (S1), S293–S340.

Acemoglu, D., Restrepo, P., 2018. Artificial intelligence, automation, and work. http:

//dx.doi.org/10.3386/w24196, NBER Working Paper 28257.

Ackerberg, D.A., Caves, K., Frazer, G., 2015. Identification properties of recent pro-
duction function estimators. Econometrica 83 (6), 2411–2451. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3982/ecta13408.

Agrawal, A.K., Matsa, D.A., 2013. Labor unemployment risk and corporate financing 

decisions. J. Financ. Econ. 108 (2), 449–470.

Agrawal, A., Tambe, P., 2016. Private equity and workers’ career paths: The role of 

technological change. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (9), 2455–2489.

Antoni, M., Maug, E., Obernberger, S., 2019. Private equity and human capital risk. J. 

Financ. Econ. 133 (3), 634–657.

Autor,  D.H.,  2015.  Why  are  there  still  so  many  jobs?  The  history  and  future  of 

workplace automation. J. Econ. Perspect. 29 (3), 3–30.

Autor,  D.,  Dorn,  D.,  2009.  This  job  is  ‘‘getting  old’’:  measuring  changes  in  job 
opportunities using occupational age structure. Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (2), 45–51.
Autor, D., Dorn, D., 2013. The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of 

the US labor market. Am. Econ. Rev. 103 (5), 1553–1597.

Autor, D., Levy, F., Murnane, R., 2003. The skill content of recent technological change: 
An empirical exploration. Q. J. Econ. 118 (4), 1279–1333. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1162/003355303322552801.

Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A., Hodson, J., 2024. Artificial intelligence, firm growth, and 

product innovation. J. Financ. Econ. 151, 103745.

Bai, J., Fairhurst, D., Serfling, M., 2020. Employment protection, investment, and firm 

growth. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (2), 644–688.

Balyuk, T., 2016. An empirical study of related-party lending. http://dx.doi.org/10.

2139/SSRN.2803750, SSRN Working Paper 2803750.

Balyuk,  T.,  2019.  Financial  innovation  and  borrowers:  Evidence  from  peer-to-peer 
lending. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.2802220, SSRN Working Paper 2802220.
Balyuk, T., Davydenko, S.A., 2018. Reintermediation in fintech: Evidence from online 
lending. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.3189236, SSRN Working Paper 3189236.
Bates, T.W., Du, F., Wang, J.J., 2021. Workplace automation and corporate financial 

policy. SSRN Working Paper 3556935.

Bena,  J.,  Ortiz-Molina,  H.,  Simintzi,  E.,  2022.  Shielding  firm  value:  Employment 

protection and process innovation. J. Financ. Econ. 146 (2), 637–664.

Benmelech, E., Zator, M., 2022. Robots and Firm Investment. Technical Report, National 

Bureau of Economic Research.

Berg, T., Burg, V., Gombović, A., Puri, M., 2020. On the rise of fintechs: Credit scoring 

using digital footprints. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (7), 2845–2897.

Biais, B., Bisiere, C., Bouvard, M., Casamatta, C., 2019. The blockchain folk theorem. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1662–1715.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and 
the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jfineco.2018.03.011.

Carnevale, A.P., Jayasundera, T., Repnikov, D., 2014. Understanding Online Job Ads 
Data. Technical Report (April), Georgetown University, Center on Education and 
the Workforce.

Cen, X., Fos, V., Jiang, W., 2018. A race to lead: How Chinese government interven-
tions shape the Sino-US production competition. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.
3564494, SSRN Working Paper 3564494.

Cen, X., Fos, V., Jiang, W., 2023. How do firms withstand a global economic shock: 
Evidence  from  within-firm  responses.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.4418407, 
SSRN Working Paper 4418407.

Chen, H.J., Kacperczyk, M., Ortiz-Molina, H., 2010. Labor unions, operating flexibility, 

and the cost of equity. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 46 (1), 25–58.

22 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Chen, M.A., Wu, Q., Yang, B., 2019. How valuable is fintech innovation? Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 32 (5), 2062–2106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy130.

Chiu, J., Koeppl, T.V., 2019. Blockchain-based settlement for asset trading. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 32 (5), 1716–1753. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy122.

Cohen, L., Gurun, U.G., Nguyen, Q.H., 2020. The ESG-Innovation Disconnect: Evidence 
from Green Patenting. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cong, L.W., He, Z., 2019. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

32 (5), 1754–1797. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz007.

Cornaggia,  J.,  Wolfe,  B.,  Yoo,  W.,  2017.  Crowding  out  banks:  Credit  substitution 
by peer-to-peer lending. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.3000593, SSRN Working 
Paper 3000593.

Danisewicz, P., Elard, I., 2018. The real effects of financial technology: Marketplace 
lending and personal bankruptcy. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.3208908, SSRN 
Working Paper 3208908.

Darendeli, A., Law, K.K., Shen, M., 2022. Green new hiring. Rev. Account. Stud. 27 

(3), 986–1037.

De Roure, C., Pelizzon, L., Thakor, A.V., 2018. P2P lenders versus banks: Cream skim-
ming or bottom fishing?. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.3174632, SSRN Working 
Paper 3174632.

Deming, D.J., 2017. The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. Q. J. 

Econ. 132 (4), 1593–1640. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx022.

Deming,  D.,  Kahn,  L.B.,  2018.  Skill  requirements  across  firms  and  labor  markets: 
Evidence from job postings for professionals. J. Labor Econ. 36 (S1), S337–S369.
Di  Maggio,  M.,  Yao,  V.,  2021.  Fintech  borrowers:  Lax  screening  or  cream-

skimming? Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (10), 4565–4618.

Dillender, M., Forsythe, E., 2022. Computerization of White Collar Jobs. Technical 

Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Donangelo, A., 2014. Labor mobility: Implications for asset pricing. J. Financ. 69 (3), 

1321–1346. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12141.

Dorn, D., 2009. Essays on Inequality, Spatial Interaction, and the Demand for Skills 

(Ph.D. thesis). Verlag nicht ermittelbar.

Eisfeldt, A.L., Schubert, G., Zhang, M.B., 2023. Generative AI and firm values. NBER 

Working Paper 31222.

structure. IZA Discussion Paper.

Firpo, S., Fortin, N.M., Lemieux, T., 2011. Occupational tasks and changes in the wage 

Foley,  S.,  Karlsen,  J.R.,  Putnin, š,  T.J.,  2019.  Sex,  drugs,  and  bitcoin:  How  much 
illegal activity is financed through cryptocurrencies? Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 
1798–1853.

Ghaly, M., Anh Dang, V., Stathopoulos, K., 2017. Cash holdings and labor heterogeneity: 
The role of skilled labor. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (10), 3636–3668. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/rfs/hhx045.

Gopal, M., Schnabl, P., 2022. The rise of finance companies and fintech lenders in 

small business lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4859–4901.

Graetz, G., Michaels, G., 2018. Robots at work. Rev. Econ. Stat. 100 (5), 753–768. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_00754.

Havrylchyk,  O.,  Mariotto,  C.,  Rahim,  T.-U.,  Verdier,  M.,  2019.  The  expansion  of 
the peer-to-peer lending. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.2841316, SSRN Working 
Paper 2841316.

Hershbein, B., Kahn, L.B., 2018. Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technological 
change? Evidence from vacancy postings. Am. Econ. Rev. 108 (7), 1737–1772. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.20161570.

Hertzberg, A., Liberman, A., Paravisini, D., 2018. Screening on loan terms: Evidence 
from maturity choice in consumer credit. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (9), 3532–3567.
Hoberg, G., Maksimovic, V., 2022. Product life cycles in corporate finance. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 35 (9), 4249–4299.

Howell, D.R., Wolff, E.N., 1991. Trends in the growth and distribution of skills in the 
U.S. Workplace, 1960–1985. Ind. Labor Relations Rev. 44 (3), 486–502. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1177/001979399104400306, URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.
1177/001979399104400306.

Iyer, R., Khwaja, A.I., Luttmer, E.F.P., Shue, K., 2016. Screening peers softly: Inferring 
the quality of small borrowers. Manag. Sci. 62 (6), 1554–1577. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1287/mnsc.2015.2181.

Kale, J.R., Ryan, Jr., H.E., Wang, L., 2019. Outside employment opportunities, employee 

productivity, and debt discipline. J. Corp. Financ. 59, 142–161.

Kelly,  B.,  Papanikolaou,  D.,  Seru,  A.,  Taddy,  M.,  2021.  Measuring  technological 

innovation over the long run. Am. Econ. Rev.: Insights 3 (3), 303–320.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L.D., Seegmiller, B., 2023. Technology and Labor 
Displacement: Evidence from Linking Patents with Worker-Level Data. Technical 
Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., Stoffman, N., 2017. Technological innovation, 
resource allocation, and growth. Q. J. Econ. 132 (2), 665–712. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/qje/qjw040.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Stoffman, N., 2020. Left behind: Creative destruction, 

inequality, and the stock market. J. Political Econ. 128 (3), 855–906.

Lerner, J., Seru, A., Short, N., Sun, Y., 2024. Financial innovation in the 21st century: 

Evidence from us patents. J. Political Econ. 132 (5), 1391–1449.

Lopez-Lira, A., Tang, Y., 2023. Can ChatGPT forecast stock price movements? Return 

predictability and large language models. SSRN Working Paper 4412788.

Ma, W., Ouimet, P., Simintzi, E., 2022. Mergers and acquisitions, technological change 
and inequality. European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI)-Finance Working 
Paper 485.

W. Jiang et al.

Matsa, D.A., 2010. Capital structure as a strategic variable: Evidence from collective 

bargaining. J. Financ. 65 (3), 1197–1232.

Modestino, A.S., Shoag, D., Ballance, J., 2019. Upskilling: Do employers demand greater 
skill when workers are plentiful? Rev. Econ. Stat. 1–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
rest_a_00835.

Mueller, H.M., Ouimet, P.P., Simintzi, E., 2017. Wage inequality and firm growth. Am. 

Econ. Rev. 107 (5), 379–383.

Ouimet, P., Simintzi, E., Ye, K., 2025. The impact of the opioid crisis on firm value 

and investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 38 (5), 1291–1332.

Pennington,  J.,  Socher,  R.,  Manning,  C.D.,  2014.  Glove:  Global  vectors  for  word 
representation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing. EMNLP, pp. 1532–1543.

Philippon, T., 2015. Has the US finance industry become less efficient? On the theory 
and measurement of financial intermediation. Am. Econ. Rev. 105 (4), 1408–1438. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.20120578.

Schumpeter, J.A., 1942. II. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper & Brothers, 

Seegmiller, B., Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L.D., 2023. Measuring document similarity 
with weighted averages of word embeddings. Explor. Econ. Hist. 87, 101494.

New York.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104071 

Serfling, M., 2016. Firing costs and capital structure decisions. J. Financ. 71 (5), 

2239–2286.

Simintzi, E., Vig, V., Volpin, P., 2015. Labor protection and leverage. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

28 (2), 561–591.

Tang, H., 2019. Peer-to-peer lenders versus banks: Substitutes or complements? Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1900–1938. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy137.

Tate, G.A., Yang, L., 2016. The human factor in acquisitions: Cross-industry labor 
mobility and corporate diversification. US Census Bureau Center for Economic 
Studies Paper No. CES-WP-15-31.

Templin, T., Hirsch, L., 2013. Do online job ads predict hiring? New York City Labor 

Tobin, J., 1972. Inflation and unemployment. Am. Econ. Rev. 62 (1/2), 1–18.
Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2019. Marketplace lending: A new banking paradigm? Rev. Financ. 

Market Information Service.

Stud. 32 (5), 1939–1982.

Vona, F., Marin, G., Consoli, D., Popp, D., 2018. Environmental regulation and green 
skills: an empirical exploration. J. Assoc. Environ. Resour. Econ. 5 (4), 713–753.
Webb,  M.,  2019.  The  impact  of  artificial  intelligence  on  the  labor  market.  http:

//dx.doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.3482150, SSRN Working Paper 3482150.

23 

