Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

The economics of ‘‘Buy Now, Pay Later’’: A merchant’s perspective(cid:73)
Tobias Berg a, Valentin Burg b, Jan Keil c
a Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
b Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, School of Business and Economics, Germany
c Indian School of Business, India
d Duke University, Indian School of Business, United States
e NBER, United States

,1, Manju Puri d,e,∗

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Economics_of_BNPL_JFE (Referenc
e data)
JEL classification:
D12
G40
G50

Keywords:
BNPL
FinTech Lending
Payment
Consumer Credit

‘‘Buy Now, Pay Later’’ (BNPL) is a key innovation in consumer payments. It bundles the sale of a product 
with a subsidized loan, effectively offering lower prices to low-creditworthiness customers. BNPL thereby 
allows merchants to price-discriminate among customers with different willingness-to-pay. Consistent with 
a price-discrimination mechanism, we show that BNPL increases sales by 20%, driven by low-creditworthiness 
customers and products where market power is larger. We find that the benefits of offering BNPL significantly 
outweigh  the  costs  for  the  merchant.  Our  findings  help  to  explain  the  surge  in  popularity  of  BNPL  in 
e-commerce around the world.

Buy-Now-Pay-Later (BNPL) volumes have increased more than six-
fold between 2019–2023, from USD 50 Billion globally in 2019, USD 
210 Billion in 2021, to USD 370 Billion in 2023, with further growth 
expected (Times, 2022; Dikshit et al., 2021; Cornelli et al., 2023). This 
compares to just over USD 50 Billion in FinTech consumer lending 
worldwide  in  2020  (Ziegler  et  al.  (2021),  the  latest  global  report 
available).  Actors  from  all  sides  are  pouring  into  this  dramatically 
expanding  market  —  including  merchants,  dedicated  BNPL  service 
providers, payment firms, FinTechs, big tech companies/TechFins, and 
traditional banks.

The largely unregulated nature of the BNPL market is increasingly 
catching the attention of lawmakers and regulators, who worry about 
excess consumption and payment default risks. Hearings and investiga-
tions in the US Congress, at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 
and other agencies in the US and the UK have placed BNPL into the 
spotlight.2

We attempt to inform the debate by analyzing the economics of 
BNPL from a merchant’s perspective. We develop a simple model to 
guide our empirical analysis. We argue that BNPL bundles the sale 
of a product with a subsidized loan, effectively offering lower prices 
to low-creditworthiness customers. BNPL thereby allows merchants to 
price-discriminate among customers with different willingness-to-pay. 
Price-discrimination  via  BNPL  is  feasible  if  the  merchant  has  some 
market power and if there is positive correlation between creditwor-
thiness and willingness-to-pay. Our model predicts that BNPL increases 
sales, particularly at the lower end of the creditworthiness spectrum; it 
predicts that BNPL is offered more when market power is high; and it 
predicts that BNPL is offered more in an e-commerce setting than in-
store (due to both a screening channel as well as due to an operational 
cost channel). 

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. For helpful feedback we thank Tony Whited and two anonymous referees at the JFE. We also thank the 
discussants Victoria Böhnke, Wilko Bolt, Martin Brown, Yi Huang, and Huan Tang. We thank Xiao Yin and seminar participants at FIRS, the 7th Annual Conference 
on Alternative Finance in Cambridge, Humboldt-Universität, SMU Lee Kong Chian, NTU NBS, the Münster Banken-Forschungsworkshop, the BIS-CEPR-SCG-SFI 
Conference on Financial Intermediation at Gerzensee, the Deutsche Bundesbank’s International Conference on Payments and Securities Settlement, and the SFS 
Cavalcade Asia-Pacific.

∗ Corresponding author at: Duke University, Indian School of Business, United States.

E-mail addresses:  berg@finance.uni-frankfurt.de (T. Berg), valentin.burg@hu-berlin.de (V. Burg), jan_keil@isb.edu (J. Keil), mpuri@duke.edu (M. Puri).

1 Jan Keil is supported by grant number KE 2661/1-1 (‘‘Geschäftszeichen’’) from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Germany.
2 For example, the California Department of Business Oversight has taken on BNPL cases; the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK started working on 

regulatory action; the German BAFIN issued official warnings and started to provides information for consumers.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104093
Received 8 July 2023; Received in revised form 6 May 2025; Accepted 6 May 2025
Available online 26 May 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

We access micro data from a German e-commerce company selling 
furniture, using both a randomized control trial where BNPL is made 
available for some randomly selected customers, as well as observa-
tional  data  on  the  provision  of  BNPL  by  the  merchant.  The  BNPL 
payment option allows for a single payment delay, which resembles 
the popular ‘‘pay in 30’’ (days) BNPL product.3

We provide several empirical findings in line with our interpretation 
of BNPL being a tool for price discrimination. First, we analyze whether 
BNPL availability affects sales. We confirm that making available BNPL 
increase  sales  by  20%.  Effects  at  the  extensive  margin  account  for 
60%–70% of the total margin (the remainder is driven by the intensive 
margin). Offering BNPL to low-creditworthiness-customers has greater 
effects  on  sales  than  offers  to  any  other  group:  purchases  of  low-
creditworthiness-customers are twice to three times as responsive as 
purchases of high-creditworthiness-customers.

In the second step, we analyze the merchant’s lending function. In 
line with the model’s predictions, we find that customers with high 
credit  scores  and  customers  interested  in  products  with  high  profit 
margins are more likely to be approved. While the merchant offers 
BNPL on its online platform, it is not available in its physical stores 
due to technical difficulties and costs.

Finally,  we  provide  a  merchant  profitability  analysis  of  offering 
BNPL, taking into account increases in sales, losses from providing a 
zero-interest loan, and substitution effects from customers switching 
from cheaper payment options to BNPL. Since BNPL is offered in our 
setting entirely in-house by the merchant, we observe both economic 
benefits  and  costs  associated  with  this  service.  We  find  that  BNPL 
significantly increases merchant profitability. Interestingly, the effect 
of BNPL on merchant profitability follows an inverse u-shape: offering 
BNPL is most profitable in the middle of the creditworthiness spectrum 
and less at the extreme ends: for high-creditworthiness customers, BNPL 
has little effect on sales, but is also cheap to offer because default rates 
are low. For low-creditworthiness customers, the merchant offers BNPL 
up to the point where marginal costs (driven mainly from defaults) 
are equal to marginal gains (driven by additional sales and the profit 
margin on the respective products).

Our empirical analysis is limited to data from a single e-commerce 
firm, raising questions about external validity. We expect our mech-
anism to be relevant when it is primarily the merchant and not the 
customer who pays for BNPL. The fact that the merchant subsidizes 
the zero-interest loan is pivotal for the price discrimination mechanism 
that we describe. We use this intuition to discuss two settings: First, 
our  mechanism  is  not  generally  applicable  to  purchases  made  via 
credit card. While purchases made via credit card involve short-term 
financing as well, the interest on credit card balances is paid by cus-
tomers according to their creditworthiness, and it is not subsidized by 
merchants. Second, our mechanism is generally applicable to external 
BNPL providers, such as Klarna and Affirm. Using data and quotes from 
annual reports, we verify that short-term loans provided by external 
BNPL providers are typically subsidized by merchants.

Our paper contributes to the burgeoning literature on BNPL. The 
literature so far has taken a consumer perspective, documenting that 
BNPL  increases  spending  and  showing  that  BNPL  is  used  more  by 
households  with  a  lower  creditworthiness.  Di  Maggio  et  al.  (2022) 
and Bian et al. (2023) document that BNPL boosts consumer spending, 
while (deHaan et al., 2024) document that the additional spending can 
facilitate overborrowing. Both Bian et al. (2023) and Guttman-Kenney 
et al. (2023) provide evidence that BNPL users are liquidity-constrained 
and have below-average creditworthiness, while (Boshoff et al., 2022) 
document  that  BNPL  users  typically  have  to  refinance  BNPL  debt 

3 BNPL is a form of short-term unsecured consumer finance usually offered 
by merchants at the point-of-sale, tied to a specific product, and with little 
to no background checks. Two popular schemes are a single 30-day payment 
delay and a loan with 4 installments over 6 or 8 weeks.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

using  credit  cards.  We  contribute  by  taking  a  merchant’s  perspec-
tive: BNPL facilitates price-discrimination, effectively offering lower 
prices to households with a lower creditworthiness. Our paper thereby 
connects the provision of BNPL to the literature on bundling in gen-
eral (Stigler, 1963; Adams and Yellen, 1976; McAfee et al., 1989), 
as well as to studies describing vendor financing as a tool for price 
discrimination  (Brennan  et  al.,  1988;  Bertola  et  al.,  2005;  Bouvard 
et al., 2022).

More generally, we contribute to the literature on economics of 
payments (Baxter, 1983; Rochet and Tirole, 2002; Shy and Wang, 2011; 
Wang, 2023) and the use of payment methods (Alvarez and Argente, 
2022; Koulayev et al., 2016; Quinn and Roberds, 2008; Agarwal et al., 
2019;  Bounie  and  Camara,  2020;  Brown  et  al.,  2022;  Berg  et  al., 
2024). We document that BNPL effectively provides lower prices to 
low-creditworthiness  customers.  This  mechanisms  explains  both  the 
appeal of BNPL to merchants (extraction of consumer surplus) as well 
as the appeal of BNPL to low-creditworthiness customers (benefit of 
zero-interest loan).

Our mechanism can also help to shed light on the distributional 
consequences of BNPL. The subsidy from zero-interest loans needs to be 
factored into higher prices – which are paid by all customers – yet the 
low-creditworthiness customers have most to gain from zero-interest 
loans. If low-creditworthiness customers act rationally, BNPL benefits 
them unequivocally because they effectively pay lower prices. BNPL 
therefore induces distributional effects opposite of those documented 
for credit cards (Schuh et al., 2010; Felt et al., 2020). However, if low-
creditworthiness customers are more susceptible to behavioral biases, 
such as present bias, the distributional consequences are less clear. In 
this case, low-creditworthiness customers benefit from lower effective 
prices, but BNPL can induce overborrowing. The net effect depends on 
the relative magnitude of both effects.

BNPL is a form of FinTech lending. FinTech lending has been associ-
ated with the use of alternative data (see, for example Berg et al., 2020; 
Agarwal et al., 2020) and with lower operational costs (see, for example 
Buchak et al., 2018; Fuster et al., 2019). Our simple model suggests 
that BNPL is facilitated by both channels and should be offered more in 
an e-commerce setting than in-store. This prediction is consistent with 
the fact that the merchant from our study offers BNPL on its online 
platform, but not in its physical stores.

More generally, our paper speaks to the competition between Fin-
Tech lenders and traditional banks (Chen et al., 2019; De Roure et al., 
2022; Tang, 2019). Compared to consumer loans and credit cards, BNPL 
allows for price discrimination via subsidized lending. The availability 
of BNPL can be tailored to specific products, allowing the merchant 
to improve profits by extracting a larger share of the consumer sur-
plus.  Parlour  et  al.  (2022)  model  adverse  effects  on  bank  lending 
caused by a loss of information that is derived from observing payments 
flows. Ghosh et al. (2021) reveal informational synergies between cash-
less payments and lending empirically. Mester et al. (2007), Norden and 
Weber (2010), and Puri et al. (2017) show that bank accounts and the 
associated inflows and outflows are informative of borrower quality. 
The rise of BNPL redirects the information from payment flows to new 
intermediaries and away from traditional lenders, with a potential to 
impact traditional intermediaries.

In the rest of the paper we discuss our conceptual motivation and 
present a theoretical model (Section 1), provide some background on 
BNPL and our setting (Section 2), analyze empirically how BNPL affects 
sales  (Section  3),  what  drives  BNPL  application  approval  decisions 
(Section  4),  how  costs  and  overall  economics  of  merchants  are  af-
fected (Section 5), discuss external validity (Section 6), and conclude 
(Section 7).

1. Conceptual motivation

In this section, we argue that bundling a product together with a 
zero-interest loan effectively allows a merchant to price-discriminate 

2 

T. Berg et al.

among customers with different willingness-to-pay (WTP). The basic 
idea behind bundling has been explored in seminal papers (Stigler, 
1963; Adams and Yellen, 1976; McAfee et al., 1989): bundling can 
improve profits when merchants have market power, and when the 
WTP is negatively correlated across products. Assume two products P1 
and P2, with a WTP of customer A of $1 (P1) and $2 (P2), and the 
opposite WTP by customer B ($2 for P1, $1 for P2). A merchant that 
bundles both products at a price of $3 can extract the entire consumer 
surplus, even if first-degree price discrimination is not possible. In the 
setting of BNPL, the two products are the actual product (e.g., a piece 
of furniture) and a loan. If customers that value a loan highly have a 
lower willingness-to-pay for the actual product, bundling can increase 
merchants’ profits.

The key assumption is that creditworthiness is positively correlated 
with WTP: customers with a poor creditworthiness are plausibly willing 
to pay less for the same product than customers with a good credit-
worthiness. Offering a zero-interest rate loan to all customers implies 
a larger subsidy for poor-creditworthiness customers and thus serves 
as a mechanism to effectively price-discriminate between high- and 
low-creditworthiness customers.

The fact that the merchant subsidizes the zero-interest rate loan sets 
BNPL apart from other consumer loan products such as credit cards. We 
also argue further below that this mechanism interacts with technology, 
explaining why it has gained traction over the last decade across the 
world.

1.1. Price-discrimination via BNPL: A simple example

We start with a simple example to highlight the mechanism at play: 
Assume there are two customers, a high-income customer with a high 
willingness-to-pay (WTP) of 𝑤 = 100 and a low-income customer with 
a low WTP of 𝑤 = 95. The merchant’s marginal costs are 𝑐 = 92. If the 
merchant is unable to price-discriminate, she can sell either at a price 
of 𝑃 = 100 or at a price of 𝑃 = 95, making a profit of

𝜋(𝑃 = 100) = 1 ⋅ (100 − 92) = 8

𝜋(𝑃 = 95) = 2 ⋅ (95 − 92) = 6.

(1)

(2)

Thus, under these assumptions, the merchant will sell at a high price 
and only the customers with a high WTP will buy in equilibrium.

Now further assume the merchant can offer a bundle consisting of 
the product and a zero-interest rate loan (‘‘BNPL’’). We assume that the 
low-income customer values a zero-interest loan more than the high-
income customer. To make this explicit, we assume the high-income 
customer has a low probability of default (𝑝 = 0%) and the low-income 
customer has a high probability of default (𝑝 = 5%), and customers’ 
expected payment for a bundle of a product with a price 𝑃  and a zero-
interest loan is equal to 𝑃 ⋅ (1 − 𝑝). In this case, the merchant can 
improve profitability by bundling the product at a price of 𝑃 = 100 with 
a zero-interest loan. The effective price for the low-WTP customers is 
𝑃 = 100 ⋅ (1 − 𝑝) = 95 which is exactly equal to her WTP. The effective 
price for the high-WTP customer is 𝑃 = 100 (as she never defaults), 
which is also exactly equal to her WTP. The profit to the merchant from 
selling the bundle (product + BNPL) is equal to

𝜋𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿(𝑃 = 100) = (100 ⋅ (1% − 0%) − 92)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
profit from
high-income customer

+ (100 ⋅ (1% − 5%) − 92)
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
profit from
low-income customer

= 8 + 3 = 11

(3)

The key point of our model is that the effective price (price of the 
product minus subsidy from the zero-interest rate loan) is lower for low-
income customers. We provide a general model in Appendix  A.1. The 
model closely follows the trade credit model by Brennan et al. (1988) 
which shows that – even in the presence of a perfectly competitive 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

banking industry – it can be optimal for firms with market power to 
engage in trade credit financing. Notes:

• Positive  correlation  between  WTP  and  creditworthiness:  Even 
if both customers choose BNPL, the bundle (product + BNPL) 
price-discriminates because the high-income customer has a lower 
probability of default than the low-income customer. The key 
assumption that allows price discrimination via BNPL is the exis-
tence of a positive correlation between income and WTP. Empir-
ical research often finds a lower price-sensitivity for high-income 
customers, see Nevo (2001) for cereals, Nakamura and Zerom 
(2010) for coffee, Grieco et al. (2024) for automobiles and San-
gani (2023) using a wide range of consumer products from the 
NielsonIQ Retail Scanner data set.

• Observability of creditworthiness: For BNPL to improve merchant 
profits, the merchant does not need to be able to observe credit-
worthiness. However, if the default probability of the low-income 
customer is too high (above 𝑝 = 8% in the example above), BNPL 
no longer increases merchant profits. Thus, having access to an 
estimate of the probability of default is beneficial to the merchant 
as we discuss in Appendix  A.1. The existence of digital footprints 
significantly facilitates the prediction of default probabilities in 
the e-commerce sphere (Berg et al., 2020).

• Product margin and BNPL: The merchant needs to have market 
power to allow for price discrimination. In a fully competitive 
market,  prices  are  equal  to  marginal  costs  and  the  merchant 
does not earn any surplus. Our model predicts that BNPL will be 
offered more when the merchant has market power, i.e., when 
the merchant can set prices above marginal costs.

• Cross-subsidization: When selling to the low-income customer, 
the merchant makes a profit on the product (100 − 92 = 8) and 
a loss on the zero-interest loan (5 ⋅ %100 = 5). Thus, even with a 
perfectly competitive consumer loan market, it is optimal for the 
merchant to provide a loan directly to the customer.

• Robin Hood effect and distributional consequences: If all con-
sumers  act  rationally,  the  bundling  mechanism  benefits  low-
creditworthiness  customers  most  because  they  have  the  high-
est  borrowing  costs  on  non-subsidized  lending  products  such 
as  credit  cards.  Distributional  consequences  are  therefore  op-
posite to the ‘‘Reverse Robin Hood’’-effect observed for credit 
card  payments  (Schuh  et  al.,  2010;  Felt  et  al.,  2020).  How-
ever, if customers are subject to present bias, the provision of 
zero-interest loans can induce overborrowing. For distributional 
and welfare implications, one therefore needs to understand the 
relative importance of the subsidy effect (the subsidy from a zero-
interest loan is negatively correlated with creditworthiness) and 
behavioral aspects (for example, present bias might be negatively 
correlated with creditworthiness).

• Perfect price discrimination: In the example above, the merchant 
is able to perfectly price discriminate, charging the WTP to both 
the  high-income  customer  (𝑃 = 100,  zero  value  of  the  loan) 
and to the low-income customer (𝑃 = 100, benefit of 5 from 
the  zero-interest  rate  loan).  Thus,  the  merchant  captures  the 
entire consumer surplus. If the probability of default of the low-
income customer is smaller than 𝑝 = 5%, the merchant is not 
able to capture the entire surplus from the high-income customer 
(because the merchant would need to charge a price below 100
to entice the low-income customer to buy); if the probability of 
default is higher than 𝑝 = 5%, the merchant cannot capture the 
entire surplus from the low-income customer.4

4 In the latter case, the merchant could charge an interest rate on the BNPL 
loan to fully capture the consumer surplus; in the first case, the merchant 
would not be able to perfectly price-discriminate.

3 

T. Berg et al.

1.2. Price-discrimination via BNPL: Effect on sales

The example in Section 1.1 and our model in Appendix  A.1 predicts 
that BNPL leads to an increase in sales volume. This prediction holds 
both in equilibrium (where BNPL increases prices and sales volumes) 
and off-equilibrium (randomization of BNPL while holding the price 
constant).

More specifically, the model allows for two theoretical limit cases: 
in the first case, the merchant – absent BNPL – finds it optimal to sell 
at a high price to high-income customers only (this is the case from our 
the example in Section 1.1). In this case, BNPL allows the firm to attract 
additional low-income customers by offering low-income customers a 
price subsidy via a zero-interest loan. In the other case, the merchant 
– absent BNPL – finds it optimal to sell at a low price to all customers. 
In this case, BNPL allows the merchant to effectively raise prices only 
for high-income customers. This is because the merchant bundles a 
higher price with a zero-interest rate loan that is worthless to high-
income customers but valuable for low-income customers. Empirical 
observations are likely to be within these two theoretical limit cases, 
suggesting that BNPL increases both prices and sales in practice.

In Section 3, we empirically analyze the effect of BNPL on sales. 
In  our  empirical  setting  we  randomize  BNPL  while  holding  prices 
constant. We expect an increase in sales, and the random experiment 
will inform us about the economic magnitude of the effect.

1.3. Price-discrimination via BNPL: When is BNPL offered?

The example in Section 1.1 and our model in Appendix  A.1 predicts 
that  BNPL  provision  varies  across  customers,  across  products,  and 
across technologies. First, we predict that BNPL is offered more to high-
creditworthiness customers. This prediction is intuitive: if default rates 
of customers are very high, the loss on the zero-interest rate loan is 
too high to compensate for the profit from selling the product. Second, 
we predict that BNPL is offered more when a product’s profit margin 
is higher, i.e., when the merchant has more market power. Without 
market power, prices equal marginal costs and there is no room for any 
price discrimination across customers. A high market power enables 
merchants to price-discriminate: If the merchant makes a large profit 
from selling the product, the merchant can afford to make a large loss 
on the zero-interest rate loan, and the merchant will find it optimal to 
offer this bundle if it entices low-income customers to buy in the first 
place. Third, BNPL interacts with technology. We expect BNPL to be 
offered less in-store than in an e-commerce setting, both because of a 
screening channel (predicting defaults with digital footprints is easier 
in an e-commerce setting) as well as an operational costs channel (fully 
automated process).

We  test  the  first  two  predictions  (BNPL  offered  more  for  high-
creditworthiness customers, BNPL offered more for high-margin prod-
ucts) using observational data in Sections 4.1–4.4. We provide anecdo-
tal within-firm evidence for the third prediction in Section 4.5.

2. Background

2.1. BNPL in general

BNPL is a type of short term unsecured consumer credit. It is mostly 
offered at the point-of-sale. This financial service is either designed 
and offered by a merchant directly in-house or in cooperation with an 
external service provider (in which case the merchant usually pays for 
the service and is involved in the lending decision). BNPL is most visible 
in the e-commerce sector. It is usually offered at low or no fees and 
interest payments for the customer. Since BNPL is a relatively vaguely 
defined concept it covers differently structured products. These may 
differ between countries depending on the institutional background 
and on how payments have been organized in the past. Some BNPL 
providers offer different BNPL schemes in different markets or multiple 

4 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Table 1
Assignment to treatment and control groups.
Unavailable

Available

N
(3)

N
(1)

Mean
(4)

Mean
(2)

𝑝-value 
(5)
(0.953) 
  Initial Cart Balance (e )
392.90
(0.122) 
  Credit score (min. 0, max. 1)
0.735
(0.634) 
  Age (Years)
43.941
(0.759) 
  Male (1/0)
0.300
(0.663) 
  Returning customer (1/0)
0.308
(0.141) 
  System: Apple (1/0)
0.423
(0.068) 
  County Mean Income (e )
22,028
  County Population Density
(0.171) 
1152
This table compares selected characteristics of customers randomly assigned to the 
group in which BNPL was either unavailable (Columns 1-2) or available (3-5). See 
Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of variables and A.2 for a comparison 
of  all  variables  and  more  descriptive  statistics.  ***,  **,  and  *  indicate  statistical 
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%. P-values are between parentheses.

392.00
0.746
43.445
0.295
0.315
0.447
22,192*
1212

74,124
70,155
8601
74,124
74,124
74,124
73,696
73,696

948
907
119
948
948
948
940
940

alternatives in the same market. For example, Klarna offers an interest 
free ‘‘pay in 30 days’’ short-term loan with just one single final payment 
after 30 days in an invoice payment-like structure. It also provides ‘‘pay 
in 4’’ loans with four bi-weekly installments where the first payment 
is due at check-out and maturity is 6 weeks. The former scheme is 
very  popular  in  continental  Europe  while  the  latter  dominates  the 
Anglo-American space.

2.2. BNPL in our setting

To understand the importance of BNPL, we analyze data from a Ger-
man e-commerce company selling furniture through its own website. 
Customers browse the product pages of the website, add one or more 
items to their shopping cart, and proceed to a check-out site, where 
they view all available payment options. Prices do not depend on the 
payment option chosen. There are no discounts offered only for some 
but not for other payment options.

The e-commerce company offers BNPL similar to the ‘‘pay in 30 
days’’ scheme. It looks as follows: once customers receive the purchased 
items they are required to pay the bill 14 days upon delivery; shipping 
times are displayed before payment options are accessed by customers 
and are on average (value weighted) equal to 25.8 days, adding up to a 
total formal average loan duration of 40 days. If the customer does not 
pay on time, a reminder is sent via email two days after the payment is 
due (i.e. a 2 days grace period). This reminder does not cause any fees 
for late payment for another 14 days. 14 days after the first reminder, 
there will be a second reminder via email and a penalty fee of e 2. 
A final payment reminder is sent out via mail 14 days after that. If 
a customer does not pay 14 days after the last reminder, the claim is 
forwarded to a debt collection agency and we define these claims as 
being in default. Around 2% of all BNPL transactions default, depending 
on the period. The average BNPL transaction volume is e 300-400 (see 
Tables  1 and A.2 — to be discussed in more detail below), in line with 
‘‘pay in 4’’ BNPL loans offered in other markets (Dikshit et al., 2021).

We observe a rich set of information — which payment options 
are available for the customer, whether a website visit is successfully 
converted into a purchase order (‘‘conversion’’ in the following), what 
payment  options  are  selected  throughout  a  visit,  and  which  option 
is actually used for a conversion. Furthermore, we also have access 
to detailed information on customer and shopping cart characteristics 
(like the shipping address or the cart’s gross profit margin). We use the 
internal credit score in our two empirical analyses (Sections 3 and 4). It 
is computed in real time, designed to capture default risk, and ranges 
from 0 (highest risk) to 1 (lowest). The e-commerce company relies 
primarily on information from the digital footprint a customer leaves 
behind, such as the device used or the shopping cart balance.5 Table 

5 See Berg et al. (2020) for details on credit scoring using digital footprints.

 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Selecting BNPL
Mean
N
(4)
(3)

Table 2
Customers Selecting BNPL and Other customers.
Other customers
N
(1)

Mean
(2)

178
20,443 0.346
20,443 0.436
20,311 22,234
20,311 1309

𝑝-value 
(5)
(0.000) 
  Initial Cart Balance (e )
20,443 352.06
(0.056) 
  Credit Score (min. 0, max. 1) 19,195 0.710
(0.086) 
  Age (Years)
42.191
(0.000) 
  Male (1/0)
(0.000) 
  System: Apple (1/0)
(0.000) 
  County Mean Income (e )
  County Population Density
(0.000) 
This table compares selected characteristics of customers reaching the check-out website 
and selecting either PayPal, credit card, pre-payment, or installments (Columns 1-2) 
or BNPL (3-5). The sample is based on the treatment group (for which all payment 
options are available) in the experiment. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the 
definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 
10%. P-values are between parentheses. Note that the sample is based on first-time 
customers, as information on payment method selections for customers that visited the 
website before is unreliable.

23,348 375.84***
22,982 0.706*
222
40.248*
23,348 0.232***
23,348 0.405***
23,215 22,120***
23,215 1039***

Fig. 1.  BNPL and other payment options.
This figure plots the shares of Buy-Now-Pay-Later (BNPL) and all other payment options 
used at the e-commerce company. The sample is based on the treatment group (for 
which all payment options are available) in the experiment.

A.1 in the Appendix contains a list and description of all variables used. 
Summary statistics for the two main estimation samples of this study 
are in Tables  A.2 and A.3. Continuous variables that are not in percent 
are winsorized at 1% and 99%.

In Fig.  1 we plot shares of payment options used when all options 
are available. BNPL is the most important payment option with 51%. It 
is followed by PayPal (39%), credit card (6%), prepayment (3%), and 
installment credit (1%).6

6 Note that customers can pay via card directly or indirectly via PayPal. 
We do not observe if a customer uses a credit card or a bank wire transfer 
when paying via PayPal. The category ‘‘credit card’’ includes all payment cards 
including credit and debit cards. We are not able to differentiate between 
these. For simplicity we call the entire category ‘‘credit card’’ in this paper 
and treat all payment cards as if they were credit cards throughout. Also note 
that PayPal is a very prominent payment option throughout Germany (not only 
limited to our e-commerce firm). 30% of e-commerce purchases are made via 
PayPal in this market (Handelsblatt, 2023), which is not far from our number. 
A reason why credit cards are not as popular in Germany is that they typically 
do not offer ‘‘point’’-type benefits as in the U.S.

5 

3. Does BNPL affect sales?

3.1. Setting

To analyze the effects of BNPL on sales, we utilize an AB-test or 
randomized controlled trial conducted by the e-commerce company in 
early 2022, which we refer to as the ‘‘experiment’’ in the remainder 
of  the  paper.7  BNPL  was  made  either  available  or  unavailable  for 
customers  on  a  random  basis  without  regards  to  any  customer  or 
shopping visit characteristics (see the Appendix for technical detail). 
This yields two distinct experimental groups. In the first group (which 
we call treatment group) all payment options are shown to customers 
(74,128 distinct customers). In the other group (which we call control 
group) BNPL is not shown as a selectable option for customers (948 
distinct customers). Once a customer is in one group, she will stay 
in it irrespectively of whether the customer returns another day after 
converting or after leaving the website without a conversion. In Table  1 
we compare selected descriptive statistics in the two groups of interest. 
It shows that treatment and control group are similar along almost 
all observable characteristics, suggesting that randomization was not 
impeded.

In  Table   2  we  compare  characteristics  of  customers  that  either 
choose BNPL to those that select any other payment option.8 Customers 
choosing BNPL have somewhat lower credit scores (corresponding to 
higher default probabilities), live in poorer and less densely populated 
areas, are slightly younger (unfortunately we have no age information 
for most customers), considerably less likely to use an expensive Apple 
device, and substantially more likely to be female. In Table  A.4, we 
confirm this with a more formal regression analysis.

In Panel A, Fig.  2 we explore the relationship between credit scores 
and preference for BNPL in more detail. We find a u-shaped relation-
ship, with both customers with very low credit scores and customers 
with very high credit scores being more likely to choose BNPL than 
customers  in  the  middle  of  the  creditworthiness  spectrum.  Possible 
explanations are financial constraints at the low and financial literacy 
at the high end (we come back to this in more detail later on in this 
section).9

BNPL is shown to every customer in the treatment group (for which 
all payment options are generally available). However, not every cus-
tomer in the treatment group selecting BNPL will actually be allowed to 
use this payment method. The e-commerce company exploits the credit 
score to decide whether to accept a BNPL application or not. Customers 
with a high default risk are filtered out and not approved for BNPL 
(around 13% of customers; we analyze the lending function in the next 
section).10

If  an  application  is  approved,  the  customer  can  purchase  items 
using BNPL. If it is rejected, there will be a message reading that the 
payment method is not available (it cannot be selected again). She is 
directed back to the check-out website (with all items still included 

7 The  randomized  controlled  trial  was  conducted  for  the  period  from 
February 23rd 2022 until March 3rd 2022. It was resumed on March 18th 
and up until March 23rd. Note that since the experiment was conducted by 
the company, we could not pre-register it. The rationale of the e-commerce 
company to conduct an RCT was to gain insights of the cost-benefit of offering 
BNPL.

8 We focus on choices for new, first-time, customers due to a technical 
limitation: in cases where customers with prior purchases return, the variable 
capturing which payment method they select can represent their past choice 
from the last transaction instead of the choice of the current website visit, not 
allowing for a clear interpretation.

9 See Table  A.10 for correlations of the credit score with other variables.
10 Note that in Germany, the e-commerce company is not allowed to do 
credit checks unless a customer has selected a BNPL payment option. Since 
the e-commerce company could not prescreening for eligibility, it randomized 
the decision to display BNPL across all customers.

 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Fig. 2.  Credit score heterogeneity.
Panel A plots the share of customers selecting either BNPL (coded as a dummy variable value of 1) or some other payment option (coded as 0). We display it by quintile bins of 
the internal credit score (ranging from 0 to 1, where larger values correspond to lower default likelihoods). Whiskers correspond to 95% confidence intervals. The sample is based 
on first-time customers in the treatment group (for which all payment options are available) in the experiment. Panel B plots the coefficient of the interaction term Credit Score 
× BNPL Offered as in Table  4 from regressions explaining the likelihood that a customer’s shopping visit at the e-commerce company’s website is converted into a purchase. See 
Table  4 for details. Whiskers correspond to 95% confidence intervals.

in the shopping cart) and allowed to select any other payment option 
instead to complete the purchase. Thus, our setting is essentially an 
intention-to-treat design that enables us to estimate a local average 
treatment  effect  (LATE)  for  the  subpopulation  of  customers  with  a 
sufficient creditworthiness. We believe this is a valuable feature of our 
setting, because eligible customers represent the vast majority that is 
also representative of customers using credit cards or mortgages. This 
increases external validity for consumer finance in general. In contrast, 
customers ineligible for BNPL represent only a small minority in our 
sample and a corner case at the low end of the market. Such customers 
are less likely to participate in the largest consumer finance markets. 
The advantage is that we can analyze the introduction of a mainstream 
payment and financing scheme as a whole, which commonly excludes 

some  extreme  segment  of  the  market.  The  Appendix  discusses  the 
technical details of the randomization.

A main explanatory variable of interest in our analysis of sales is 
the conversion, coded as a dummy variable that is one if a check-out 
website visit converts into a purchase. Since it is fairly common for 
customers to interrupt and resume shopping sessions on the website, 
we allow for a customer to complete a conversion not just immediately, 
but within a time period of one week. This dummy variable allows 
us to assess the extensive margin of BNPL availability on sales. Other 
dependent variables measure the total revenue by customer during that 
same period (in e ). We either use the unconditional amount as the 
measure of the total margin, or the amount conditional on a conversion 

6 

T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

occurring to capture effects at the intensive margin of sales. All these 
measures are net of cancellations.11

3.2. Analysis

To understand effects on sales, we first analyze the experiment with 
a simple mean comparison based on treatment status 𝑊𝑖 (1: BNPL is 
available; 0: BNPL is not available) of a customer 𝑖 via 

𝑌𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑊𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖.

(4)

In our baseline estimations 𝑌𝑖 is a dummy variable indicating a conver-
sion to capture the extensive margin of sales. Analyzing the intensive 
and total margins of sales we use revenue per customer (either con-
ditional or unconditional on a conversion taking place). We do not 
strictly need to include any covariates in order to estimate average 
treatment effects: our randomization was well-conducted without tak-
ing covariates into account (see Table  1 and the discussion above); we 
do not restrict the analysis to customers with non-missing variables 
or  certain  other  values  that  might  introduce  a  bias  ex-post.  With 
White robust standard errors (the error term is not independent of the 
treatment assignment) and our observation counts of several hundreds 
for  the  smallest  of  our  groups,  the  estimator  from  Eq.   (4)  will  be 
unbiased (Athey and Imbens, 2017). However, to increase statistical 
power and obtain more precise estimates we also run regressions with 
covariates (again, we believe covariates are not required to address 
any other problem, since randomization was not compromised) via 
equation 

𝑌𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑊𝑖 + 𝛿𝑋𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖.

(5)

Covariates  𝑋𝑖  include  the  internal  credit  score,  amount  of  the  cart 
value (in e ) at the first check-out of the shopping visit, county level 
per capita GDP, county population density, and dummy variables for 
whether the customer purchased anything before, indicated to be a 
male, as well as dummies for the device type and for the operating 
system used. In yet another set of regressions we further add fixed 
effects for county (c), date (d), and time-of-day (t) via equation 

𝑌𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑊𝑖 + 𝛿𝑋𝑖 + 𝛾𝑐 + 𝜃𝑑 + 𝜎𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖.

(6)

Eqs. (4)–(6) are reduced-form models. The coefficient 𝛽 measures 
the impact of showing the BNPL option to a customer on a customer’s 
purchase  behavior  (for  simplicity  we  call  this  variable  ‘‘BNPL  Of-
fered (1/0)’’ in all tables). Showing BNPL is not the same as using 
BNPL because some customers are not approved for BNPL (also when 
it is displayed to customers in the treatment group) and some cus-
tomers choose not to use BNPL despite being offered to use it. Overall, 
showing BNPL increases the likelihood of using it by approximately 
40%–50% (that is, 0% of customers in the control group use BNPL, 
while 40%–50% in the treatment group use BNPL). We can measure 
a LATE (effect on customers interested in BNPL who have a sufficient 
creditworthiness) by estimating an IV regression where the first stage 
estimates the effect of showing BNPL on actually selecting BNPL and 
being approved to use BNPL. We believe it is more natural to analyze 
the reduced-form model, as this directly informs us about the effect 
of showing BNPL on a merchants’ sales volume (or the effect of in-
troducing a scheme as a whole). As a robustness check, we report IV 
regressions in Table  A.5 in the Appendix where we instrument selection 
and approval of BNPL using the randomized decision to show BNPL. 
First-stage regressions have F-stats in excess of 900 and second-stage 
results have similarly high statistical significance but naturally show 
higher coefficients (the IV is basically a scaled-up version of the reduced 
form model).

11 This  means  that  a  conversion  is  any  transaction  where  the  ordered 
revenue is greater than 0 and the cancelled revenue (if any) is smaller than 
the ordered revenue. Revenue is the total amount purchased minus the value 
of items cancelled.

Table 3
Effects of BNPL offers on sales.
  Panel (A) Dependent variable: Conversion (1/0)

(1)

(2)

  BNPL offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (B) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Conditional on a Conversion
  BNPL offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (C) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Unconditional on a Conversion
  BNPL offered (1/0)

0.091***
(0.015)
75,072

24.530*
(12.942)
60,036

47.156***
(10.286)
75,072

0.086***
(0.014)
75,072

15.811**
(6.345)
60,036

44.963***
(9.008)
75,072

(3)
0.086***  
(0.014)
75,072

13.720**  
(6.357)
60,036

40.806*** 
(9.123)
75,072

Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
Regressions in Panel A explain the likelihood that a customer’s shopping visit at the 
e-commerce company’s website is converted into a purchase (the extensive margin). 
Results are linear probability estimates. In Panel B (C) the dependent variable is total 
realized revenue by customer conditional (unconditional) of a conversion taking place 
as a measure of the intensive (total) margin. The independent variable of interest is 
the treatment dummy equal to 1 (0) if BNPL was made available (unavailable) for a 
randomly selected customer. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of 
variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust 
White standard errors (between parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed 
by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes

3.3. Results

Exploring the effect of BNPL on sales we start analyzing the ex-
tensive  margin  as  our  baseline,  explaining  conversions  (purchasing 
something  or  nothing).  At  the  intensive  and  total  margins  of  sales 
we analyze revenue by customer conditional and unconditional on a 
conversion. Results for our main regressions are in Table  3. Column 1 
represents the simple mean comparison (as in Eq.  (4)). We add controls 
in Column 2 (Eq.  (5)) and controls and fixed effects in Column 3 (Eq. 
(6)).

In  Panel  A,  Table   3  we  analyze  the  extensive  margin  of  sales 
using the conversion dummy as the dependent variable. The regression 
coefficient  in  Column  1,  Panel  A  suggests  making  BNPL  generally 
available (conditional on the e-commerce company’s lending function) 
increases the total number of conversions at the e-commerce company 
by 9 percentage points (or 13%) — which is a considerable economic 
magnitude.

To explore whether there is also an effect at the intensive margin of 
sales, we focus on customers that would have converted their website 
visits into a purchase also if BNPL was unavailable. Thus, we analyze 
the  total  revenue  per  customer  conditional  on  a  conversion  taking 
place.  When  BNPL  is  not  offered,  the  average  converting  customer 
purchases  items  worth  e 314  (Table   A.2).  Offering  BNPL  increases 
the amount converting customers spend (conditional on the company’s 
lending function) by around e 13.7–24.5 (Table  3, Panel B), or 4%–8%.
The  sum  of  the  extensive  and  intensive  margins  of  sales  is  the 
revenue per customer unconditional on a conversion taking place (on 
average this is e 222). Results in Table  3, Panel C suggest offering 
BNPL increases this amount by e 40.8–47.2 or 18%–21% (statistical 
significance is high). This is consistent with the implication from our 
model that BNPL increases sales. A smaller fraction of this effect is 
driven by the intensive margin. Since only 71% of customers convert, 
the coefficients in Panel B fall to e 9.7–17.4 or a 4%–8% increase 
in  unconditional  revenue.  The  extensive  margin  boosts  revenue  by 
13%–14%, dominating the overall effect by a factor of 2–3.

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

It is important to note that we have analyzed reduced-form results. 
These results provide the answer to a simple question: How much more 
revenues can the e-commerce company expect if it introduces a BNPL 
scheme to its customers? This is not the same as offering BNPL to every 
single possible customer, as approximately 13% are rejected. The local 
average treatment effect (LATE) of offering BNPL to all customers with 
a sufficient creditworthiness is therefore slightly higher (by a factor of 
100/(1%–13%) = 1.15).

Prior literature provides some context for the magnitude of a 20% 
sales increase in our analysis. Agarwal et al. (2018) find that a $1 
increase in credit card limits raises spending by 58 cents at the low end 
of the credit score spectrum over a period of 12 months, while there is 
no significant effect on the higher end. Our estimate of 20% is thus well 
within this (large) range. For used subprime car dealerships, Adams 
et al. (2009) report that a $100 change in down payment requirements, 
equivalent to a $100 increase in the car loan, implies a 9% change in 
demand. Given an average used car price of $11.000 in their sample, a 
$100 increase in the car loan thus increases sales by more than $100, 
suggesting quite significant financial constraints.

Note that in our setting, in contrast to both (Agarwal et al., 2018; 
Adams et al., 2009), loans have an interest rate of 0%, implying both 
a  credit  access  channel  (BNPL  provides  credit  access  to  financially 
constrained customers) as well as an interest savings channel (even if 
customers have access to credit, BNPL offers a subsidized credit at a 
zero interest rate). On the other hand, BNPL loans are very short-term 
and can only be used for purchases at this e-commerce shop. Overall, 
the 20% increase in sales in our analysis does not seem implausibly 
high in light of results from the prior literature.

3.4. Robustness

Randomization of availability of PayPal:
There might be the concern that our results can be expected for
any popular payment method. We address this with a placebo test, 
where we re-estimate our baseline regressions using another experi-
ment where availability of PayPal was varied (PayPal did not yet have 
established BNPL services). Results in Appendix  D show that there is 
no comparable effect on sales.

Prior knowledge on BNPL availability:
Another problem could occur if prior (differential) knowledge about 
BNPL generated a bias: if it was advertised upfront, more website traffic 
may be directed to check-out, average inclinations to convert may fall, 
and customers may respond strategically to self-control behavioral bi-
ases. This is of little concern in our setting, as customers view payment 
options upon reaching the check-out site for the very first time in a 
regular shopping journey and are unlikely to adjust their decision to 
proceed to check-out accordingly. Our randomized availability of BNPL 
is at check-out — not before when customers browse product pages. 
There is no variation in prior knowledge about payment option between 
our control and treatment groups. To ensure that our results are not 
driven by returning customers – who might have used BNPL before at 
the e-commerce firm and may remember this – we exclude all returning 
customers in Table  A.7 in Appendix  A. Reassuringly, this exercise shows 
that baseline results are little affected (the extensive and total margins 
are more robust than at the intensive margin).

IV results and variable definitions:
We also include some robustness checks. IV-results are in Table 
A.5. In Table  A.8 we show that results are similar when we define 
all dependent variables net of items eventually sent back. We are as 
conservative as possible in our baseline analysis, not counting subse-
quent conversions to the same address by another customer, but only 
analyzing the first customer within a unique address (see the Appendix 
for more technical detail). In Table  A.9 we use a more liberal definition, 
counting such visits by other customers from the same address towards 
conversions and revenue. Results are similar.

Table 4
Differential effect of BNPL on conversions by credit score.
  Dependent Variable: Conversion (1/0)
(1)

(2)

  BNPL offered × Credit score

  BNPL offered (1/0)

  Credit score (min. 0, max. 1)

−0.153**
(0.072)
0.198***
(0.057)
0.644***
(0.071)

−0.154**
(0.069)
0.197***
(0.055)
0.643***
(0.069)

(3)
−0.143** 
(0.069)  
0.190***  
(0.054)  
0.611***  
(0.069)   
71,061   

71,061

71,061

Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
Regressions explain the likelihood that a customer’s shopping visit at the e-commerce 
company’s website is converted into a purchase. Results are linear probability estimates. 
The independent variables of interest are the treatment dummy equal to 1 (0) if BNPL 
was made available (unavailable) for a randomly selected customer, the internal credit 
score (ranging from 0 to 1, where larger values correspond to lower default likelihoods), 
and their interaction term. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of 
variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust 
White standard errors (between parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed 
by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 5
Effects of profit margins and credit scores on BNPL approvals.
  Dependent variable: BNPL application approved (1/0)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
0.658*** 
(0.036)  
0.093*** 
(0.009)  
224,570  

  Score (min. 0, max. 1)

  Gross Margin (in %)

0.679***
(0.039)
0.065***
(0.020)
590,994

0.629***
(0.038)
0.084***
(0.020)
590,994

0.651***
(0.037)
0.081***
(0.018)
590,994

Yes
Yes

Yes
–

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
  Cart Item Categories
  Customer
Regressions explain the likelihood that the e-commerce company approves a customer’s 
application for using BNPL. Results are linear probability estimates. The independent 
variables of interest are the customer’s credit score (ranging from a high default risk 
value of 0 to a low default risk value of 1) and the gross profit margin (revenue −
purchase costs) of customer 𝑖’s shopping cart at time 𝑡 The estimation sample includes 
all customers applying for BNPL in 2021. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the 
definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 
10% for standard errors (between parentheses) that allow for clustering by product 
category and county. ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

3.5. Heterogeneity

Our  model  predicts  that  BNPL  has  a  greater  effect  on  sales  for 
customers with a lower creditworthiness (because the subsidy from the 
0% loan is larger for these customers).

We regress the conversion dummy against the internal score, the 
BNPL availability dummy, and their interaction term. Results are in Ta-
ble  4. Without BNPL being offered, customers with a higher score (that 
is, a better creditworthiness) are more likely to convert (as indicated 
by the positive coefficient on credit score). Making BNPL available for 
customers with a lower credit score (that is, a lower creditworthiness) 
has a significantly larger effect on the conversion likelihood than for 
customers with a high credit score (the coefficient from the BNPL ×
Credit Score interaction term is negative and significant). High default 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

risk customers with scores at the 10th percentile are two to three times 
as responsive as low default risk customers with scores at the 90th 
percentile.12 BNPL increases the conversion rate for customers at the 
10th percentile by over 13 percentage points (conditional on rejections 
by the lending function). For customers at the 90th percentile, the effect 
is less than a 5 percentage point increase. The positive effect of BNPL 
on sales at the merchants’ online shop is thus driven by BNPL offers to 
customers at the lower credit score spectrum.

The specification in Table  4 assumes that the credit score affects 
conversion rates from offering BNPL in a monotonic form. Panel B of 
Fig.  2 plots the effect non-parametrically by plotting the coefficients 
for the interaction term between BNPL availability and credit score 
quintile. The results suggest that the effect of BNPL on the conversion 
likelihood indeed falls monotonically in the credit score quintile.

Contrasting this result with the U-shaped relationship in Panel A 
of Fig.  2 provides an interesting finding: customers with high credit 
scores use BNPL frequently, but switch to other forms of payments 
when BNPL is not available. In contrast, low-credit-score customers use 
BNPL frequently, but do not switch to other forms of payment when 
BNPL is not available.

4. What drives BNPL approvals?

In  this  section,  we  analyze  if  BNPL  is  offered  more  to  low-risk 
customers and if it is offered more when margins are high, i.e., when 
the merchant has higher market power.

4.1. Setting

The e-commerce company decides for each individual application 
whether to approve or reject it. While we have no direct access to 
the lending function’s algorithm, we do observe the outcome (BNPL 
approved or rejected), the customers’ credit scores, the products profit 
margins, as well as other customer and product item characteristics.

In the last section, we accessed a data set where BNPL was randomly 
made available in order to understand the effect of BNPL on sales. We 
now access a much larger sample preceding the experiment in order 
to understand when BNPL is made available by the e-commerce firm: 
the universe of all 594,859 BNPL applications in the year 2021. We 
also access additional variables containing information on BNPL loan 
approvals and shopping cart level gross profit margins. Note that the 
lending function is the same as in the control group in our analysis of 
sales: the merchant approves 87% of BNPL applications on average and 
rejects slightly less than 13% of BNPL applications. We provide variable 
definitions in Table  A.1 and summary statistics for this sample in Table 
A.3.

4.2. Analysis

We  explain  the  likelihood  that  the  merchant  approves  a  BNPL 
application by customer 𝑖 at time 𝑡 in a multivariate regression. The 
dependent variable is an approval dummy. The independent variables 
of interest are a customer’s credit score – discussed in the prior section 
already – and the cart level gross profit margin. The cart level gross 
profit margin is the difference between the cart value (before value 
added tax) and the purchase cost of the item, scaled by the cart value 
(before value added tax).  It has a mean of 43.7% and varies both 
between different products as well as within product over time, with 
a p10-p90 range of [16.7%,64.3%], see Table  A.3.

We estimate equation 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Greater  tendencies  to  offer  BNPL  to  low-risk  customers  and  when 
margins  are  high  hold  unconditionally  in  our  model.  We  therefore 
initially present results without further controls and fixed effects. To 
ensure robustness, we also report specifications where we add customer 
and county characteristics as well as customer and item category fixed 
effects. Item categories are 15 broad categories (such as ‘‘bath room’’), 
where each product is assigned to exactly one item category. We cluster 
standard errors two-way by county and item category.

4.3. Results

Estimation results for versions of Eq.  (7) are in Table  5. As ex-
pected, the credit score is positively related to BNPL approvals. The 
merchant becomes 29–32 percentage points more likely to approve 
BNPL  applications  when  a  customers’  credit  score  moves  from  the 
bottom to the top decile (see Table  A.3 for the distribution of the 
credit  score).  The  substantial  coefficient  magnitude  is  stable  across 
specifications (statistical significance is high). Note that item category 
plus customer fixed effects in Column 4 decrease the observation count 
substantially by more than half. For comparability and consistency with 
the preceding analysis of sales (especially Table  3) we do not enforce 
a harmonized estimation sample across all regressions of Table  5.

In  the  same  table  we  also  analyze  if  approvals  depend  on  the 
gross profit margin of the shopping cart. We find that higher margins 
are associated with a higher approval rate. The coefficient in tightest 
specification, Column (4), suggests that when the gross profit margin 
of the shopping cart shifts from the bottom to the top decile (from 17 
to 64%), the approval rate increases by 5%. Relative to the average 
approval rate in the bottom decile (which is 54%), this constitutes more 
than an 8% increase.

4.4. Robustness

Table   A.11  documents  that  coefficients  hardly  change  when  we 
analyze first time customers only. Likewise, results are equivalent when 
we swap the continuous credit score variable for a bottom credit score 
quintile dummy in Table  A.12.

One concern is that margins and credit score are correlated. For 
example,  customers  with  higher  default  risk  might  happen  to  also 
be interested in higher margin products, making profit margins just 
another proxy for default risk. We test this with regressions in Panel 
A, Table  A.13, where the dependent variable is the product cart level 
profit margin. The independent variable is our credit score. Overall, 
the results suggest that credit score and margin have a low correlation. 
The coefficient is always statistically insignificant throughout and the 
economic magnitude is small — implying at most a 1.8 percentage 
point higher profit margin when a customer moves from the bottom 
to the top decile of the credit score.

Another concern is that customers with interest in BNPL are inter-
ested in higher margin products. We explore this by swapping the in-
dependent variable in Panel B, Table  A.13 for a dummy for a customer 
selecting BNPL. The coefficient is negative throughout and economically 
small — the profit margin of BNPL selectors is at 1–1.7 percentage 
points lower. This suggests that customers interested in BNPL are if 
anything slightly less interested in higher margin products. This makes 
intuitive sense: customers with a low creditworthiness are plausibly 
more interested in cheaper run-of-the-mill products, which tend to have 
lower margins.

𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡.

(7)

4.5. BNPL in the brick and mortar space?

12 The calculation behind this statement is based on the coefficients from 
Column 1, Table  4 (0.198 − 0.153 ∗ 0.422)∕(0.198 − 0.153 ∗ 0.968) = 2.67. See A.2 
for score values at the percentiles.

We now provide some anecdotal evidence for the idea that BNPL is 
offered less in-store than in an e-commerce setting. Interestingly, the 
merchant also operates physical stores. While other payment options 
are available in this space, BNPL is not offered for any customer or 

9 

T. Berg et al.

product.  Thus,  holding  the  merchant  fixed,  we  observe  drastic  dif-
ferences in BNPL offering (87% are offered BNPL in the e-commerce 
setting, 0% in the in-store setting). As a caveat, this information is from 
only one single merchant.

To better understand the rationale, we have talked to company 
representatives. According to their information, the unavailability of 
BNPL in-store is due to technical complexities and associated costs, 
as  well  as  more  limited  credit  scoring  abilities.  This  is  exactly  in 
line with our expectation that lower costs and more powerful tech-
nological capability enables merchants to offer BNPL more easily and 
economically online. On the merchant’s website, BNPL is offered in a 
highly automated way. This includes not only the algorithmic approval 
via a lending function. It also extends to the entire processing and 
management of BNPL loans thereafter. If a customer does not pay in the 
required timeframe, payment reminders will be sent out automatically 
via email. In cases of defaults when customers fail to pay 2 weeks after 
the third reminder, recovery attempts are completely outsourced to a 
third party debt collection agency. Such steps are processed without 
employee involvement or significant other incremental organizational 
effort.

5. Merchant profitability analysis

In the two preceding sections we tested predictions from our model, 
documenting that BNPL increases sales and showing that it is offered 
more for customers with a better creditworthiness and for products 
where the merchant has more market power. In this section, we quan-
tify both costs and benefits to the merchant, allowing us to assess the 
profitability of BNPL from a merchant’s perspective. A feature of our 
setting is that the merchant offers BNPL entirely in-house. This means 
we observe both the benefits and costs for the merchant, allowing us 
to assess merchant profitability.

5.1. Costs of BNPL

Variable costs of BNPL:
The key variable costs stem from defaults on BNPL loans as well 
as from the cost of capital of financing BNPL loans. To assess these 
costs we again access data from 2021. In this section we work with 
a matched subsample of the data from the preceding analysis of loan 
approval decisions.

The default rate on BNPL loans was 2.46% in 2021 (see Table  A.3). 
Default is defined as non-payment 14 days after the third payment 
reminder, which is approximately 56 days after payment was initially 
due. At this point, the e-commerce firm transfers the claim to a debt col-
lection agency. Ultimate losses are roughly half of this value (1.17%), 
because the debt collection agency is able to collect payments from 
a considerable fraction of customers. We further show in Fig.  3 that 
defaults increase dramatically at the low end. For the worst 5% of credit 
scores, 8.6% of revenue ends up in default. For this group the share of 
unrecovered in total default revenue increases to 67% (implying 5.8% 
of revenue is lost). See Fig.  A.3 for recovery rates across the credit score 
spectrum.

To assess capital costs we need (i) the maturity of the loans, (ii) an 
estimate of the cost of capital for the merchant. The value weighted 
average delivery time is over 26 days and customers pay on average 
22 days upon delivery (also value weighted), adding up to 48 days 
of maturity. We assume a 7% p.a. cost of capital for the merchant, 
implying an 0.89% capital costs for the 48 days period of the BNPL 
loans. Since the lending process is highly automated in loan approval 
and management, we are not aware of any other significant variable 
unit costs of providing BNPL in our setting. Taken together, unrecov-
ered defaults and capital costs add up to 2.1% variable costs (0.89% 
+1.17%) of providing BNPL.
Set up costs of BNPL:

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

In addition to variable costs, the merchant incurred set up costs 
as  well.  These  costs  can  be  split  into  two  parts:  operational  costs 
(personnel costs and costs for building the IT infrastructure) and costs 
from training a credit scoring model, i.e., higher default rates before 
enough data for a proper model is collected. We focus on the latter part, 
mainly driven by data availability, but also because the e-commerce 
firm indicated they were their biggest concern.

Our analysis suggests that the e-commerce firm suffered a 7.16% 
default rate during the training period, which is 6.15 PP higher than the 
default rate after the model was trained (7.16% in the training period 
versus 1.01% after the model is used for screening). This loss is equal 
to approximately 0.1% of aggregate BNPL volume in the eight years 
since BNPL introduction. While not negligible, these numbers are still 
small compared to the benefits from offering BNPL. We discuss the set 
up costs in more detail in Appendix  E.

5.2. Costs of other payment options

Most other payment options involve transaction costs paid by the 
merchant to companies providing payment services. Assessing the eco-
nomics of BNPL thus requires comparing the costs of offering BNPL 
to  the  costs  of  offering  PayPal,  credit  card,  installment  credit,  or 
prepayment.

According to information form the merchant, costs for using the 
second  most  popular  option,  PayPal,  amount  to  1%.  This  is  lower 
than the standard terms described on the company’s website, but it is 
common that larger online shops get better conditions.

For the third largest category, credit cards (used for 6.5% of total 
sales), fees are on average 1.33% (average in Germany, taken from data 
from Bundesbank, see Cabinakova et al., 2019). The two least popular 
payment options are installment payment and prepayment (which costs 
of 2.8% and 0%).

We summarize all variable operational costs in Column 1, Table  6. 
Taken together, the table shows that the value weighted cost of all al-
ternatives to BNPL amounts to 0.9% on average, which is substantially 
less than the 2.1% costs of BNPL.

5.3. Substitution effects and displacement costs

BNPL induces some customers to purchase who would have oth-
erwise not purchased at all, but it also induces some customers to 
use BNPL who would have otherwise bought using cheaper payment 
methods. Table  6 compares the use of payment methods when BNPL 
is not available (in the control group of the RCT) to usage when it is 
available (in the treatment group). Results are in Columns 2 and 3, 
Table  6.13

The  exercise  reveals  that  availability  of  BNPL  decreases  use  of 
PayPal  (−24PP),  prepayment  (−10.6PP),  and  credit  card  payments 
(−5.1PP). Combining the substitution effects with variable payment 
costs of all payment options reveals that the merchant pays on average 
93 cents on e 100 sales when BNPL is not available (Column 4, Table 
6). Introducing BNPL (Column 5) raises variable transaction costs for 
these e 100 that would have been spent anyways (also if BNPL was not 
offered) by 54 cents to e 1.47 (or by 0.5% of sales to 1.5%).

5.4. Merchant profitability analysis

We assess the economics of BNPL by focussing on the two most 
important factors. The first is the profit on additional sales generated by 
BNPL. It is the product of the additional revenue from offering BNPL, 
and the difference between the net margin and the costs of offering 
BNPL for these sales. The second are the additional costs for sales that 

13 As an alternative with similar implications we analyze selections (not 
actual use) of payment options in Table  A.15.

10 

T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Fig. 3.  Payment defaults.
This figure plots the share of a BNPL financed revenue that ends up in payment default. We display it by 20 percentile bins of the internal credit score (ranging from a high 
default value 0 to a low default value of 1). The sample is based on all BNPL conversions in 2021.

Table 6
Displacement costs.
  Option

Costs
in %

(1)

Revenue
per e 100
Unavailable
(2)

Available
(3)

Costs × Revenue
per e 100
Unavailable
(4)

Available 
(5)

2.1
2.1
0.9
1.0
1.3
2.8
0.0

0.0
0.0
100
67.9
13.3
2.7
16.0

21
38.9
61.3
43.9
8.2
3.7
5.4

  BNPL
    New Revenue
    Displaced Revenue
  Other
    PayPal
    Credit Card
    Installment
    Prepayment
  Sum (BNPL Displaced + Other)
  Sum (BNPL All + Other)
Column (1) contains variable transaction costs, expressed in % of transaction volume. Information comes from both external 
sources and the merchant. BNPL costs include losses due to unrecovered defaults and capital costs. Payment option use when 
BNPL is either not shown or shown is in Columns (2) and (3), respectively and expressed per e 100 of purchase volume. 
Column (4) is the product of Columns (1) and (2), representing total variable transaction costs per e 100 purchase volume 
when BNPL is unavailable. Column (5) is the same number for when BNPL is available. BNPL - New Revenue in Column (3) 
is the estimate from the effect on the total margin in Table  3, scaled to e 100. BNPL - Displace Revenue in Column (3) is 
the share of BNPL when this option is available, minus the new revenue generated by BNPL.

0.00
0.00
0.93
0.68
0.17
0.08
0.00

0.44
0.82
0.65
0.44
0.11
0.10
0.00

0.93
0.93

1.47
1.91

100
100

100
121

would have occurred anyways, but are now paid with more expensive 
BNPL. More formally, 

𝛱𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 = 𝛥𝑅 ⋅ (𝑚 − 𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿) − 𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑 ⋅ (𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 − 𝑐𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟)

(8)

where  𝛥𝑅  is  the  change  in  revenues  from  offering  BNPL,  𝑚  is  the 
merchant’s margin, and 𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 are the costs associated with offering 
BNPL in % of BNPL revenue; 𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑 is the revenue from customers 
with unaffected shopping decisions switching to BNPL; 𝑐𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 are the 
costs associated with offering other payment options in % of revenue.
We illustrate the overall economics in a simplified, stylized example 

in Table  7 where we make the following assumptions:

• 𝛥𝑅 = 21% on average (see Section 3.3 and Panel C of Table  3). 
We assume 𝛥𝑅 ranges from +14% (highest quintile by creditwor-
thiness) to +30% (lowest quintile by creditworthiness; +35% for 
the worst 1%) using the results from Table  4, adopted to reflect 
both the intensive and extensive margin.

• 𝑚 = 20% as an illustrative example for a product with a margin 

of 20%.

• 𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 = 2.1% on average (see Table  6), as the sum of cost of 
capital (0.89%) and costs of defaults (1.17%). We assume 𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿
varies  between  1.0%  (highest  quintile  by  creditworthiness)  to 
4.3% (lowest quintile by creditworthiness; 8.2% for the worst 
1%), assuming a cost of capital of 0.89% and costs of defaults 
according  to  default  rates  by  credit  score  quintile  (using  the 
sample from Table  A.3.

• 𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑 = 39% based on Table  6.
• 𝑐𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 = 0.9% based on Table  6.

We also provide estimates in Column (7) for the worst 1% by creditwor-
thiness (conditional on being eligible for BNPL) in order to highlight the 
economics for the marginal customers that is allowed to use BNPL.

Table  7 highlights two countervailing effects: For customers with a 
low creditworthiness, BNPL only offers a large subsidy and therefore 
has a large effect on sales; at the same time, costs of providing BNPL is 
high for these customers, because default rates are high. For customers 
with a high creditworthiness, the increase in sales is smaller, but the 
costs of providing BNPL is small as well. In our example, these effects 

11 

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Table 7
Economics of BNPL.
  Per e 100

Mean

Quintiles

p1

Q5
(2)

Q4
(3)

Q3
(4)

Q2
(5)

Q1
(6)

(1)

e 24
20%
1.9%
e 4.3
e 39
1.7%
0.9%
e 0.3
e 3.9

e 30
20%
4.3%
e 4.7
e 39
3.9%
0.9%
e 1.2
e 3.4

e 14
20%
1.0%
e 2.7
e 39
1.1%
0.9%
e 0.1
e 2.6

e 21
20%
2.1%
e 3.8
e 39
2.1%
0.9%
e 0.5
e 3.3

e 20
20%
1.4%
e 3.7
e 39
1.3%
0.9%
e 0.2
e 3.5

(7)
  ΔR
e 35  
e 17
  m
20%  
20%
  𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿
8.2%  
1.2%
  𝜋 on new R
e 4.1  
e 3.2
  𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑
e 39  
e 39
  𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿
8.2%  
1.1%
  𝑐𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟
0.9%  
0.9%
  Δ𝜋 on old R
e 2.9  
e 0.1
e 1.3  
  𝛱𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿
e 3.1
This table illustrates the overall economics of offering BNPL in a simplified and stylized 
way. Rows contain values for the respective variable in equation
𝛱𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 = 𝛥𝑅 ⋅ (𝑚 − 𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿) − 𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑 ⋅ (𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 − 𝑐𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟).
𝛥𝑅⋅(𝑚−𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿) is the profit on new revenue generated by BNPL. 𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑 ⋅(𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 −𝑐𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟)
is the change in profit on revenue that would have occurred without BNPL, where 
customers chose to use the more expensive BNPL if available (without altering their 
shopping decisions). Column 1 contains mean values for the entire sample. Means by 
bin for credit score quintiles are in Columns 2-6. Q5 is the highest quintile with the 
best credit scores. The worst 1% are in Column 7. All e -values are expressed on the 
basis of e 100 of shopping cart value at check out. For simplicity we assume constant 
margins, periods between order and payment, displacement revenue, costs of alternative 
payment methods. We instead focus on the dominating drivers behind the credit score 
heterogeneity: differential effects on revenue and differential losses due to payment 
default. The value in Column 1 for 𝛥𝑅 comes from Panel C, Table  3. For the other 
Columns it is based on calculations not included in any table or figure (available upon 
request). The value in Column 1 for 𝑐𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿 comes from Table  6 (additional calculations 
for the other Columns; available upon request). We assume a value for 𝑚 for a standard 
product. The value for 𝑅𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑 comes from Table  6. 𝑐𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 it comes from Table  6.

(2)

0.002**
(0.001)
1588
106

(3)

0.001
(0.001)
1588
106

(4)
0.001  
(0.001) 
1588  
106

Table 8
How do recessions affect BNPL?
  Dependent variable: BNPL defaults (%)
  Panel (A) Counties with negative GDP growth

(1)

  Recession County (1/0)

  Observations
  Recession Counties
  Panel (B) Counties with GDP Growth < −2%
  Recession County (1/0)

0.003***
(0.001)
1588
106

0.003*
(0.002)
1588
28

0.002
(0.002)
1588
28

0.003*
(0.002)
1588
28

0.002  
(0.002) 
1588  
28

Yes

  Observations
  Recession Counties
  Fixed Effects
  Year Fixed Effects
  County Fixed Effects
Regressions in this table are estimated from a county-year panel with 400 counties 
between 2016 and 2019. The independent dummy variable identifies recession counties. 
It equals 1 if annual GDP growth is negative. The dependent variable in Panel A) is the 
share of BNPL financed conversions that end up in default. In Panel B) it is the share 
of customers selecting BNPL (in % of all customers selecting some payment option). 
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust White 
standard errors (between parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed by fixed 
effects.

Yes
Yes

Yes

combined reveal an inverted u-shape: offering BNPL is most profitable 
in the middle of the creditworthiness spectrum and less at the extreme 
ends (see bottom row of Table  7).

This illustrative example is consistent with our theory which also 
predicts an inverse u-shape: BNPL has no effect on sales and costs for 
the customers with no default risk, and the merchant offers BNPL at 
the lower end of the credit spectrum up to the point where marginal 
costs equal marginal gains. Our model is obviously only an abstraction, 
assuming, for example, a zero percent risk-free interest rate. However, 
it is comforting to see that the shape of the cost/benefit example aligns 
well between our theory model and a realistic example in practice.

12 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

5.5. Does BNPL survive a business and monetary cycle?

One might imagine that the BNPL business model is just a temporary 
phenomenon. It might only be profitable when both interest rates and 
defaults are extremely low and unable to survive a monetary cycle or 
interest rate increases.

To explore this, we first recall our previous assumption that the 
merchant has capital costs of 7% p.a. This implied 0.89% capital for 
the average 48 day maturity period. Assuming a value of 14% that is 
twice as high would imply that costs rise by 0.85 percent of sales to 
1.74%. This suggests that cost of capital effects can be significant for 
higher interest rates, albeit much smaller than the profits we derive in 
our example in Table  7.

Second,  we  analyze  defaults  as  the  second  potential  cost  driver 
during a business cycle downturn empirically. For this we access all 
check-out visits for the four years from 2016 until 2019. We aggregate 
data into a panel of 400 counties and 4 years. Since we do not have 
any ‘‘suited’’ crisis (social distancing in the COVID shock promoted e-
commerce and government support prevented companies largely from 
laying off workers) we instead exploit heterogeneity in the cross-section 
of counties to find localized economic recessions. We regress the share 
of defaulting BNPL transactions against a dummy for counties where 
GDP growth is either negative (Panel A, Table  8) or less than −2% 
(Panel B). Default rates increase by 0.1–0.3 percentage points in these 
recession counties (albeit not always statistically significant). Assuming 
a rate at the higher end of the spectrum implies a modest increase 
in default rates from 1.17% to 1.47%. Again, this is smaller than the 
profits we derive in our example in Table  7.

As an extreme assumption, we can use increases in delinquency 
rates from U.S. credit card borrowers during the Global Financial Crisis. 
These spiked at 6.77% in Q2 2009, up by 3 percentage points from 
the years before the Global Financial Crisis (see https://fred.stlouisfed.
org/series/DRCCLACBS). Based on our merchant profitability analysis 
in Table  7, this would, ceteris paribus, make BNPL unprofitable for the 
lowest end by creditworthiness, but not for the middle spectrum.

6. External validity

We have analyzed one specific setting where BNPL was provided 
in-house by a German e-commerce firm. Our model helps to structure 
a discussion on external validity: The price discrimination mechanism 
is relevant when it is primarily the merchant and not the customer 
who pays for BNPL. The fact that the merchant subsidizes the zero-
interest loan is therefore pivotal for the price discrimination mechanism 
that we have in mind. In contrast to credit cards, the merchant can 
subsidize a BNPL loan with both BNPL that is provided in-house and 
with BNPL that is provided through external service providers. We 
therefore believe our model is also generally applicable to external 
BNPL providers and we discuss this in more detail in the following.

Information from 2023 annual reports of external BNPL providers 
provides support for the key assumption that BNPL is subsidized by 
merchants:  78.7%  of  Klarna’s  primary  revenue  source  (commission 
income) is paid by retailers (the rest by consumers). Interest income 
makes up just 15.7% of total revenue (they offer some products where 
customer pay interest or late fees). This shows that its BNPL schemes 
are overwhelmingly financed by merchants, not customers, just as in 
our in-house setting.

Affirm even explicitly describes that merchants or manufacturers 
subsidize  BNPL  finance  as  an  alternative  sales  promotion  tool  that 
supports profit margins. Affirm writes in its 2023 annual report:

‘‘Offering 0% APR financing to their customers is a compelling revenue 
accelerator  for  merchants,  who  are  able  to  solve  affordability  for  their 
customers  without  resorting  to  discounts.  Merchants  have  the  ability  to 
subsidize  and  determine  the  range  of  interest  rates  to  be  paid  by  their 
customers.’’
and

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
T. Berg et al.

‘‘We have the ability to work with manufacturers on brand-specific pro-
motional financing offers. These promotions are funded by suppliers and 
then made available through our merchants. The suppliers cover the costs of 
the lowered APR for their products... This gives our merchants a powerful 
alternative to markdowns as they can increase sales with no impact to their 
margins’’.

In addition to merchants paying for BNPL, there are schemes where 
the merchant and the service provider are both involved in the lending 
decision (applications require simultaneous approval of both). Note 
that this implies that our mechanism holds for the broader variety of 
different BNPL schemes offered by these BNPL companies (including 
‘‘pay in 4’’) and is not just applicable for the ‘‘pay in 30’’ days scheme 
analyzed in our empirical setting.

Apart from the theoretical argument, we also provide some evidence 
that the data from our setting and our empirical estimates are is in line 
with what external BNPL service providers report. Regarding variable 
costs of providing BNPL we access data from Klarna’s 2023 annual re-
port. The company is the best comparison due to a similar geographical 
focus and comparable services. To derive average costs for merchants 
we divide transaction and service revenue by gross merchandise value. 
This implies costs of 2.02% — strikingly similar to the 2.1% we find in 
our in-house setting. 2023 consumer credit losses amount to just 0.4%, 
which is less than half of our setting. However, losses were 0.55% for 
the 2021, which is more comparable to our number (that also comes 
from 2021). We impute capital costs as the product of total assets and 
an annual 7% interest rate, divided by gross merchandise value. The 
resulting 0.91% of BNPL financed revenue are again very close to the 
0.89% from our setting.

An equivalent calculation for the report from the second leading 
BNPL service provider, Affirm, implies slightly higher total costs for 
merchants of 2.51% of gross merchandise value. A higher number is 
expected,  as  the  company  provides  more  pay  in  4  and  installment 
schemes, which have longer maturities and accrue more risk than pay 
in 30, where Klarna is more present.

Taken together, the key mechanism that we document – BNPL is a 
subsidized credit by the merchant – has external validity beyond our in-
house setting. Overall costs of providing BNPL are also roughly in line 
in our in-house setting compared with published numbers from BNPL 
providers’ annual reports.

7. Conclusion

In this paper, we argue that offering BNPL enables merchants to 
price discriminate between customers with different willingness-to-pay. 
We show this in a stylized model and find empirical evidence in support 
of  it.  We  show  that  BNPL  increases  sales  by  20%,  driven  by  low-
creditworthiness customers and products where market power is larger. 
BNPL thereby significantly increases merchant profitability.

Our  results  have  distributional  consequences.  The  subsidy  from 
zero-interest loans needs to be factored into higher prices – which are 
paid by all customers – yet the low-creditworthiness customers have 
most to gain from zero-interest loans. If low-creditworthiness customers 
act rationally, our mechanism thus implies a ‘‘Robin Hood’’ effect and 
thus has the opposite distributional consequences compared to those 
observed for credit card payments. If low-creditworthiness customers 
are more susceptible to behavioral biases, such as present bias, the 
distributional consequences are less clear. Welfare analysis of BNPL 
in the presence of both bundling and behavioral biases might be an 
interesting avenue for future research.

While our empirical results are limited to data from a single mer-
chant, we expect our price-discrimination mechanism to be externally 
valid whenever it is primarily the merchant, and not the consumer, 
who pays for BNPL. This suggests that our mechanism is not generally 
applicable to credit cards (because consumers pay credit card interest 
rates accordingly to their creditworthiness), but applicable to external 
BNPL providers as well. Taken together, our findings help to explain 
the surge in popularity of BNPL in e-commerce around the world.

13 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Tobias Berg: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Valentin Burg: Val-
idation, Data curation. Jan Keil: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu-
alization. Manju Puri: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Methodology, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

All authors have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported 
in this paper.

Valentin Burg was working as a data scientist at the online furniture 
merchant whose data we analyzed until September 2022. As part of my 
regular renumeration at this company I received stock options. Neither 
my function in the company, nor my renumeration inappropriately 
influence or bias any of my work.

Jan Keil research is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (grant number/‘‘Geschäftszeichen’’ KE 2661/1-1). This funding 
has no inappropriate influence or bias on any of my work.

Appendix A

A.1. Model

This Appendix generalizes the example from Section 1. The model 
closely follows the trade credit model by Brennan et al. (1988) which 
shows that – even in the presence of a perfectly competitive banking 
industry – it can be optimal for firms with market power to engage in 
trade credit financing. We differ in two crucial aspects from Brennan 
et al. (1988). First, Brennan et al. (1988) model trade credit as non-
recourse: a trade credit lender only has access to the product sold in 
case of bankruptcy. This makes bankruptcy endogenous to the profits 
generated from the piece of equipment bought via trade credit. This 
setting seems implausible for BNPL as products are typically bought 
for consumption, and not to generate profits. We therefore model the 
probability of default of a customer as an exogenous variable. Second, 
we extend the model by Brennan et al. (1988) by assuming fixed per-
transaction costs of offering BNPL. For larger trade credit products, 
e.g. a tractor, transaction costs might be negligible. BNPL is offered 
for smaller amounts, making fixed per-transaction costs important to 
understand. The transaction cost assumption also helps to understand 
the effect of technology on BNPL as we discuss in detail below.

A.1.1. No BNPL

Assume there are two types customers: high-income customers with 
a high willingness-to-pay (WTP) which – without loss of generality – 
we set equal to 𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ = 1, and low-income customers with a low WTP 
of 𝑤𝑙𝑜𝑤 = 1 − 𝛥 (𝛥 ≥ 0). The merchant’s marginal cost of the product 
is 𝑐 = 1 − 𝛥 − 𝑚 (𝑚 ≥ 0). The parameter 𝑚 has the interpretation of the 
margin of the product if the product is sold at the willingness-to-pay of 
the low-income-customer. The fraction of high-income and low-income 
customers is assumed to be both equal to 1∕2. The merchant is not 
able to price-discriminate directly and therefore needs to set a uniform 
price to both types of customers. The inability to price-discriminate can 
either be because willingness-to-pay is unobservable to the merchant, 
or because of technological and organizational costs.

The merchant’s profit 𝜋(𝑃 ) depends on the price she sets. A profit-
maximizing firm will set the price either equal to 𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ = 1 or 𝑤𝑙𝑜𝑤 =
1 − 𝛥, with profits in each case given by

𝜋(1 − 𝛥) = (1 − 𝛥) − (1 − 𝛥 − 𝑚) = 𝑚
1
2

(1 − (1 − 𝛥 − 𝑚)) =

𝜋(1) =

1
2

(𝛥 + 𝑚)

(9)

(10)

T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Table A.1
Variable definitions.
  Variable
  Dependent Variables
  Conversion (1/0)

  Conditional Revenue (e )

  Unconditional Revenue (e )

  Other Variables of Interest
  BNPL Used (1/0)
  PayPal Used (1/0)
  Credit Card Used (1/0)
  Prepayment Used (1/0)
  Installment Used (1/0)
  BNPL Selected (1/0)
  PayPal Selected (1/0)
  Credit Card Selected (1/0)
  Prepayment Selected (1/0)
  Installment Selected (1/0)
  BNPL Application Approved (1/0)
  Credit Score (min. 0, max. 1)

  Payment Default (1/0)
  Unrecovered Loss/Default (%)
  Unrecovered Loss/Sales (%)
  Gross Profit Margin (%)
  Net Profit Margin (%)
  Net Profit Margin 2 (%)

  Recession County (1/0)

  Miscellaneous & (Other) Covariates
  Initial Cart Balance (e )
  Returning Customer (1/0)
  Age (Years)
  Male (1/0)
  Device: Desktop (1/0)
  Device: Phone (1/0)
  Device: Tablet (1/0)
  Device: Unknown (1/0)
  System: Apple (1/0)
  System: Windows (1/0)
  System: Android (1/0)
  System: Other (1/0)
  County Population Density
  County Mean Income (e )
  Time: Morning (1/0)
  Time: Day (1/0)
  Time: Evening (1/0)
  Time: Night (1/0)

Definition

Dummy equal to 1 if a check-out website visit converts into a purchase (up to 1 
week thereafter)
Euro amount of revenue (net of cancellations) by customer; conditional on a 
conversion occurring
Euro amount of revenue (net of cancellations) by customer at check-out; 
unconditional on a conversion occurring

Dummy equal to 1 if a conversion is paid with BNPL
Dummy equal to 1 if a conversion is paid with PayPal
Dummy equal to 1 if a conversion is paid with credit card
Dummy equal to 1 if a conversion is paid with prepayment
Dummy equal to 1 if a conversion is paid with an installment credit scheme
Dummy equal to 1 if a new customer selects BNPL
Dummy equal to 1 if a new customer selects PayPal
Dummy equal to 1 if a new customer selects credit card
Dummy equal to 1 if a new customer selects prepayment
Dummy equal to 1 if a new customer selects installment credit
Dummy equal to 1 if a customer selecting BNPL is allowed to use BNPL
numeric internal score computed from the customer’s digital footprint; ranging from 
0 to 1; larger values indicate lower payment default probabilities
Dummy equal to 1 if a converting customer using BNPL defaults on a payment
share of defaulted BNPL revenue lost after failed recovery attempts
share of BNPL revenue lost after failed recovery attempts
(cart value net of VAT - purchase costs)/cart value net of VAT
(cart value net of VAT - purchase costs - shipping costs) / cart value net of VAT
(cart value net of VAT - purchase costs - shipping costs - predicted return costs)/cart 
value net of VAT
Dummy equal to 1 if a county had GDP growth that was negative or smaller than 
−2 (depending on the analysis)

Euro value of the shopping cart at the first check-out during a website visit
Dummy equal to 1 if the customer converted on the website previously
age of customer in years (not used in regressions due to many missing values)
Dummy equal to 1 if the customer selects Mr. as form of address
Dummy equal to 1 if the device used to access the website is a desktop
Dummy equal to 1 if the device used to access the website is a phone
Dummy equal to 1 if the device used to access the website is a tablet
Dummy equal to 1 if the device used to access the website is unknown
Dummy equal to 1 if the operating system accessing the website is Mac OS or iOS  
Dummy equal to 1 if the operating system accessing the website is Windows
Dummy equal to 1 if the operating system accessing the website is Android
Dummy equal to 1 if the operating system accessing the website is any other system 
Average number of inhabitants per square kilometer in a county in 2017
Average per capital e income of inhabitants in a county in 2017
Dummy equal to 1 if check-out time is after 6 am and before 12 pm
Dummy equal to 1 if check-out time is after 12 pm and before 6 pm
Dummy equal to 1 if check-out time is after 6 pm and before 12 am
Dummy equal to 1 if check-out time is after 12 am and before 6 am

The merchant will therefore set an equilibrium price 

A.2. BNPL

{

𝑃 ∗ =

1 − 𝛥 if 𝑚 ≥ 𝛥
if 𝑚 < 𝛥.
1

(11)

This makes intuitive sense: Ceteris paribus, if the high-income cus-
tomer’s  WTP  is  much  higher  than  the  low-income  customer’s  WTP 
(that is, 𝛥 is high), the merchant will offer the product at a high price 
(𝑃 ∗ = 1) and only sell to the high-income customer. If, on the other 
hand, the margin of selling to the low-income customers at her WTP is 
high (that is, 𝑚 is high), the merchant will offer the product at a lower 
price (𝑃 ∗ = 1 − 𝛥) and sell to both customers. The merchant makes a 
profit of 

{

𝜋(𝑃 ∗) =

𝑚
1
2

(𝛥 + 𝑚)

if 𝑚 ≥ 𝛥
if 𝑚 < 𝛥.

Assume the merchant offers a bundle consisting of the product and a 
zero-interest rate loan (‘‘BNPL’’). The probability of default of the high-
income customer is assumed to be 0%, the probability of default of the 
low-income customer is 𝑝. We assume that 𝑝 is known to the merchant. 
To avoid unnecessary complexity, we assume that 𝑝 ≥ 𝛥. In addition 
to  losses  from  default,  the  merchant  incurs  a  fixed  per-transaction 
cost 𝛾 for offering BNPL which can be interpreted as operational costs 
for providing the loan. If the price 𝑃  is set in such a way that both 
customers are willing to buy the bundle at the price 𝑃 , profits for the 
merchant are equal to the price minus marginal cost minus default 
costs:

(12)

𝜋𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿(𝑃 ) =

1
2

[𝑃 (1% − 0%) − (1 − 𝛥 − 𝑚) − 𝛾]

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
𝑝-value 
(13)
(0.000) 
(0.058) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.550) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.000) 
(0.239) 
(0.276) 
(0.122) 

T. Berg et al.

Table A.2
Descriptive statistics – Sales analysis.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

BNPL Not Available
p10
N
(2)
(1)

Median
(3)

p90
(4)

SD
(5)

Mean
(6)

BNPL Available
p10
N
(8)
(7)

Median
(9)

p90
(10)

SD
(11)

Mean
(12)

948
673
948
673
673
673
673
673
656
656
656
656
656
16
907

1.000
779.00
600.00
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.968

1.000
198.00
110.00
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.776

0.000
49.990
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.422

0.454
333.70
314.40
0.039
0.441
0.327
0.339
0.108
0.154
0.491
0.313
0.317
0.225
0.447
0.205

0.710
313.60
222.40
0.001
0.736
0.122
0.132
0.012
0.024
0.595
0.110
0.113
0.053
0.750
0.735

  Conversion (1/0)
  Conditional Revenue (e )
  Unconditional Revenue (e )
  BNPL Used (1/0)
  PayPal Used (1/0)
  Credit Card Used (1/0)
  Prepayment Used (1/0)
  Installment Used (1/0)
  BNPL Selected (1/0)
  PayPal Selected (1/0)
  Credit Card Selected (1/0)
  Prepayment Selected (1/0)
  Installment Selected (1/0)
  BNPL Approved (1/0)
  Credit Score (min. 0, max. 1)
  Payment Default (1/0)
(0.953) 
  Initial Cart Balance (e )
392.90
(0.663) 
  Returning Customer (1/0)
0.308
(0.634) 
  Age (Years)
43.941
(0.759) 
  Male (1/0)
0.300
(0.439) 
  Device: Desktop (1/0)
0.389
(0.187) 
  Device: Phone (1/0)
0.584
(0.123) 
  Device: Tablet (1/0)
0.007
(0.303) 
  Device: Unknown (1/0)
0.019
(0.141) 
  System: Apple (1/0)
0.423
(0.662) 
  System: Windows (1/0)
0.262
(0.176) 
  System: Android (1/0)
0.275
(0.728) 
  System: Other (1/0)
0.040
(0.171) 
  County Population Density
1152
(0.068) 
  County Mean Income (e )
22,028
(0.447) 
  Time: Morning (1/0)
0.269
(0.988) 
  Time: Day (1/0)
0.363
(0.476) 
  Time: Evening (1/0)
0.338
  Time: Night (1/0)
(0.966) 
0.031
Observations come from the experiment. See Table  A.1 for details on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust 
White standard errors.

0.801***
338.10*
269.60***
0.510***
0.392***
0.059***
0.030***
0.014
0.517***
0.343***
0.056***
0.033***
0.043
0.868
0.746
0.019
392.00
0.315
43.445
0.295
0.402
0.563
0.012
0.024
0.447
0.255
0.256
0.042
1212
22,192*
0.280
0.363
0.327
0.030

0.000
53.990
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.430
0.000
57.980
0.000
29.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
106.70
19,174
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

1.000
800.00
700.00
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.968
0.000
935.30
1.000
58.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
4055
25,135
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000

0.399
367.40
350.10
0.500
0.488
0.235
0.172
0.119
0.500
0.475
0.229
0.179
0.203
0.339
0.210
0.136
441.80
0.464
11.667
0.456
0.490
0.496
0.108
0.152
0.497
0.436
0.436
0.201
1351
2750
0.449
0.481
0.469
0.172

1.000
210.00
145.00
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.793
0.000
235.00
0.000
42.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
503.70
21,901
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

74,128
59,365
74,128
59,365
59,365
59,365
59,365
59,365
50,807
50,807
50,807
50,807
50,807
26,243
70,159
30,255
74,128
74,128
8,603
74,128
74,128
74,128
74,128
74,128
74,128
74,128
74,128
74,128
73,699
73,699
74,128
74,128
74,128
74,128

448.80
0.462
11.325
0.458
0.488
0.493
0.086
0.137
0.494
0.440
0.447
0.196
1338
2736
0.444
0.481
0.473
0.172

230.00
0.000
44.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
501.80
21,796
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

980.00
1.000
60.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
4055
25,251
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000

55.980
0.000
29.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
107.30
18,927
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

948
948
119
948
948
948
948
948
948
948
948
948
940
940
948
948
948
948

+

1
2

[𝑃 (1 − 𝑝) − (1 − 𝛥 − 𝑚) − 𝛾]

The maximization problem for the merchant is:

𝜋𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿(𝑃 )

max
𝑃

𝑠.𝑡.

𝑃 ≤ 1

(Part. constraint of high-income customer)
𝑃 (1 − 𝑝) ≤ 1 − 𝛥 (Part. constraint of low-income customer)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Given our assumption 𝑝 ≥ 𝛥, the participation constraint of the high-
income customer (15) is binding. The merchant therefore sets a price 
equal to 𝑃 ∗ = 1 and makes equilibrium profits of

𝑝𝑖𝐵𝑁𝑃 𝐿(𝑃 ∗ = 1) =

1
2

[1 − (1 − 𝛥 − 𝑚) − 𝛾] +

1
2

[1 − 𝑝 − (1 − 𝛥 − 𝑚) − 𝛾]

(17)

=

1
(𝛥 + 𝑚)
2
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
profit from high-income customers

+

1
(𝛥 + 𝑚 − 𝑝)
2
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
profit from low-income customers

= 𝛥 + 𝑚 −

1
2

𝑝 − 𝛾

(18)

(19)

The merchant’s profits are equal to the surplus of the high-income 
customer (𝛥 + 𝑚), minus the loss from the  1
2  mass of customers that 
defaults with probability 𝑝, minus the fixed per-transaction cost for 
offering BNPL 𝛾. If 𝑝 > 2(𝛥 + 𝑚 − 𝛾), the merchant makes a loss when 
offering the bundle (product + zero-interest rate loan) to all customers.

A.3. Endogenous choice to offer BNPL

The choice to offer BNPL will be determined by whether the mer-
chant makes more profits by offering BNPL or not, e.g., by comparing 

(19) to . For 𝑚 ≥ 𝛥, BNPL increases profits iff 𝛥 + 𝑚 − 1
2
2𝛥 − 2𝛾. For 𝑚 < 𝛥, BNPL increases profits iff 𝛥 + 𝑚 − 1
𝑝 − 𝛾 ≥ 1
2
2
𝑝 ≤ 𝛥 + 𝑚 − 2𝛾. Taken together, there are three potential outcomes

𝑝 − 𝛾 ≥ 𝑚 ⇔ 𝑝 ≤
(𝛥 + 𝑚) ⇔

• Case 1 (BNPL): If 𝑝 ≤ max(𝛥 + 𝑚 − 2𝛾, 2𝛥 − 2𝛾), the merchant 
maximizes profits by offering a bundle of the product with a 
zero-interest rate loan (‘‘BNPL’’).

• Case 2 (No BNPL): If 𝑝 > max(𝛥 + 𝑚 − 2𝛾, 2𝛥 − 2𝛾) the merchant 

maximizes profits by not offering BNPL.

– Case 2a (No BNPL, high price): If 𝑚 < 𝛥, the merchant sells 
at a high price (𝑃 ∗ = 1) and only sells to the high-income 
customers.

– Case 2b (No BNPL, low price): If 𝑚 ≥ 𝛥, the merchants sells 
at a low price (𝑃 ∗ = 1 − 𝛥) and sells to both high-income 
and low-income customers.

Fig.   A.1  illustrates  the  resulting  equilibrium  without  fixed  per-
transaction costs of offering BNPL (𝛾 = 0). BNPL is offered more when 
default probabilities (𝑝) are low and when margins (𝑚) are high. Higher 
margins (𝑚) in particular expand BNPL when probabilities of default are 
high. A model without fixed per-transaction costs can be interpreted as 
an e-commerce model, where BNPL provision is fully automated and 
all the information necessary for scoring and lending (name, address, 
digital footprint) are available to the merchant in any case. In contrast, 
in-store provision of credit is plausibly subject to higher fixed per-
transaction  costs.  Fig.   A.2  illustrates  the  resulting  equilibrium  with 
fixed per-transaction costs of offering BNPL (𝛾 > 0), documenting that 
BNPL is provided less when fixed per-transaction costs are higher.

15 

 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Table A.3
Descriptive statistics – Approval analysis.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

SD
(5)

N
(1)

p90
(4)

p10
(2)

Median
(3)

Mean  
(6)
0.878  
  BNPL Approved (1/0)
0.200  
  Low Credit Score (1/0)
0.757  
  Credit Score (min. 0, max. 1)
0.437  
  Gross Profit Margin (%)
0.347  
  Net Profit Margin (%)
0.298  
  Net Profit Margin 2 (%)
0.025  
  Payment Default (1/0)
0.453  
  Unrecovered Loss/Default (%)
0.012  
  Unrecovered Loss/Sales (%)
432.00 
  Initial Cart Balance (e )
45.396 
  Age (Years)
0.286  
  Male (1/0)
0.397  
  Device: Desktop (1/0)
0.568  
  Device: Phone (1/0)
0.024  
  Device: Tablet (1/0)
0.011  
  Device: Unknown (1/0)
0.407  
  System: Apple (1/0)
0.266  
  System: Windows (1/0)
0.286  
  System: Android (1/0)
0.040  
  System: Other (1/0)
1073  
  County Population Density
22,095 
  County Mean Income (e )
0.265  
  Time: Morning (1/0)
0.373  
  Time: Day (1/0)
0.331  
  Time: Evening (1/0)
0.030  
  Time: Night (1/0)
0.356  
  >1 Item in Cart (1/0)
0.135  
  Item: Dining Room (1/0)
0.190  
  Item: Bedroom (1/0)
0.118  
  Item: Other (1/0)
0.157  
  Item: Auxiliary Rooms (1/0)
0.145  
  Item: Lighting (1/0)
0.245  
  Item: Couches, Cushions (1/0)
0.163  
  Item: Living Room (1/0)
Observations come from the analysis of profit margins. See Table  A.1 for details on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical 
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust White standard errors. Note that descriptive statistics for payment defaults, and unrecovered losses 
are weighted by cart value.

594,859
592,849
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
352,313
7934
352,313
594,859
238,816
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
591,944
591,944
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859
594,859

0.327
0.400
0.182
0.178
0.178
0.219
0.155
0.481
0.105
454.90
10.778
0.452
0.489
0.495
0.152
0.104
0.491
0.442
0.452
0.196
1263
2679
0.441
0.484
0.471
0.172
0.479
0.342
0.392
0.322
0.364
0.352
0.430
0.370

0.000
0.000
0.492
0.167
0.167
0.128
0
0
0
66.990
29.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
102.10
18,990
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

1.000
1.000
0.958
0.643
0.550
0.529
0
1
0
1000
55.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
3007
25,135
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

1.000
0.000
0.796
0.465
0.340
0.304
0
0.042
0
280.00
51.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
441.80
21,845
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table A.4
Selecting BNPL and consumer characteristics.
  Dependent variable: BNPL Selected (1/0)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

  Initial Cart Balance (ln(e ))

  Credit Score (min. 0, max. 1)

0.023***
(0.002)

  Male (1/0)

  System: Apple (1/0)

  County Mean Income (ln(e ))

  County Population Density (ln)

−0.023*
(0.012)

−0.140***
(0.005)

−0.032***
(0.005)

−0.079***
(0.020)

(8)
[0.064]  

[−0.014] 

[−0.132] 

[−0.032] 

[−0.013] 

[−0.080] 

0.032***
(0.002)
−0.036***
(0.012)
−0.146***
(0.005)
−0.033***
(0.005)
−0.056***
(0.020)
−0.031***
(0.002)
43,791    

−0.038***
(0.002)
43,791

43,791

  Observations
Regressions explain the likelihood that a customer selects BNPL during a shopping visit at the e-commerce company’s website. Results are 
linear probability estimates. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 
1%, 5%, and 10% for robust White standard errors (between parentheses). In Column (8) we plot beta weights from Column (7), where all 
variables are standardized to have a SD of one and the interpretation is that a one SD increase of one of the independent variables leads to 
an X (indicated by the corresponding coefficient) SD increase in the dependent variable.

43,791

43,791

43,791

43,791

Appendix B. Technical detail on experimental randomization

The assignment decision into the different groups in the experiment 
was randomized and based on customer IDs. During the experiment and 
any other time, the e-commerce company assigns identifying numbers 
based on the sequential arrival of customers at the website. For the 
experiment it retained the second-last and the third-last digits of these 
IDs, resulting in numbers from 0 to 99 in this digit sequence. For cus-
tomers with numbers from 50 to 54, BNPL was not offered (the control 

group). For customers with numbers from 60 to 64, PayPal was not 
offered (the alternative control group). The treatment group contained 
the remaining customers visiting check-out during that period. The 
experimentally unavailable payment option is still visible, but sorted to 
the bottom, is only shown in less visible gray, and cannot be selected.

Appendix C. Experimental validity

The experiment was conducted by the e-commerce company with-
out any knowledge by the customers. Thus, for our analysis there are 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Fig. A.1.  Equilibrium provision of BNPL (𝛾 = 0).
This figure illustrates the equilibrium provision of BNPL as a function of 𝑚 (margin) and 𝑝 (probability of default for low-income customers) assuming no fixed per-transaction 
costs of providing BNPL (𝛾 = 0).

Fig. A.2.  Equilibrium provision of BNPL (𝛾 > 0).
This figure illustrates the equilibrium provision of BNPL as a function of 𝑚 (margin) and 𝑝 (probability of default for low-income customers) assuming fixed per-transaction costs 
of providing BNPL (𝛾 > 0).

is not a statistical problem regarding informed consent, where partic-
ipants might self-select into an experiment. Due to the e-commerce 
company’s fully randomized treatment assignment mechanism, there is 
also no problem related to sample selection by the researcher either 
(where treatment assignment may correlate with observable character-
istics of individuals and potential outcomes). Given the large pool of 
customers, the heterogeneity regarding age and geographic locations, 
and  the  short  duration  of  the  experiment,  we  further  believe  it  is 
realistic to assume that the potential outcome of customer 𝑖 depends 
exclusively on the treatment received by customer 𝑖 and not on the 
treatment received by another individual 𝑗 in our sample. In other 
words, we assume the no-interference or stable unit treatment value 
assumption to hold (Athey and Imbens, 2017; Rubin, 1978).

Nevertheless, customers might attempt to circumvent the unavail-
ability of BNPL and ‘‘try again’’ by either attempting a guest check-out, 
opening a new account, or using the account of a family member. In 

these cases a different customer ID will be applied and the customer 
has the chance to fall into a different group in the experiment where 
BNPL is available.

We analyze this by defining duplicates as those observations for 
which two or more distinct customer IDs match exactly the zip code, 
fuzzily the street name, and exactly the house number within the time 
of the experiment. However, we only find duplicates for 3% of all 
shipping addresses, with no significantly higher share in the control 
group for which BNPL was not available (we assume that customers 
which attempt to circumvent the experiment still use the same shipping 
address).

Nevertheless, we provide two answers. First, we exploit the idea 
that customers which have used BNPL at the shop before are likely 
still aware of the availability of this option when it is switched off. 
These returning customers are thus presumably more likely to attempt 
circumventing the experiment than first-time customers which have not 

17 

T. Berg et al.

Table A.5
Effects of BNPL offers on sales – IV regressions.
  Panel (A) Dependent variable: Conversion (1/0)

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Table A.6
Effects of PayPal availability on sales.
  Panel (A) Dependent variable: Conversion (1/0)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

60,036

75,072

75,072

60,036

75,072

60,036

75,072

(0.046)

(0.050)

(0.047)

71.501*

(30.376)

(19.068)

(34.929)

(37.706)

(19.218)

0.288***

0.309***

0.291***

47.254**

41.300**

150.823***

160.047***

137.780*** 

  BNPL Selected & Approved 
(1/0)
  Kleibergen–Paap Robust 
F-Statistic
  Observations
  Panel (B) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Conditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Selected & Approved 
(1/0)
  Kleibergen–Paap Robust 
F-Statistic
  Observations
  Panel (C) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Unconditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Selected & Approved 
(1/0)
  Kleibergen–Paap Robust 
F-Statistic
  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
Regressions in Panel A explain the likelihood that a customer’s shopping visit at the 
e-commerce company’s website is converted into a purchase (the extensive margin). 
Results are linear probability estimates. In Panel B (C) the dependent variable is total 
realized revenue by customer conditional (unconditional) of a conversion taking place 
as a measure of the intensive (total) margin. The independent variable of interest is a 
dummy that is equal to 1 (0) if BNPL a customer selects BNPL and the e-commerce 
company approves this BNPL application. We instrument this variable via 2SLS from 
the dummy variable indicating if BNPL was made available (1) or unavailable (0) 
for a randomly selected customer (in Table  3 and elsewhere this latter variable is 
used as the independent variable of interest and called ‘‘BNPL Offered (1/0)’’). See 
Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate 
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust White standard errors (between 
parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

(30.945)

Yes
Yes

75,072

75,072

used this payment option before. In alternative regressions in Table 
A.7 in the Appendix we only analyze such new customers and find 
equivalent results.

Second, in our analysis in the main body of the paper we retain 
only the first observation of every address and discard all subsequent 
appearances.  If  a  customer  attempts  to  circumvent  the  experiment 
by using a guest check-out or another person’s account, this will be 
coded as ‘‘no conversion’’, which is the most conservative way we can 
treat this phenomenon in our setting. This may be too conservative 
and create an error whenever a customer uses a quest account for 
any reason other that circumventing the experimental unavailability of 
BNPL. As a liberal alternative we again retain the very first customer 
ID for a unique shipping address, but count any subsequent conversion 
with the same address as a conversion of this customer during the 
respective shopping visit. Equivalent results in Table  A.8 reinforce our 
assumption that possible circumventing attempts are not driving our 
findings.

While we believe internal validity is of no concern in our experi-
mental setting, another problem for randomized controlled trials can 
be their external validity. In our case it could be that the experiment 
period happened to be unusual in some way. We are not aware of any 
such problem. Available upon request are statistics comparing mean 
values of variables to other periods. It may also be that the e-commerce 
company is in a niche business and that the customers are somehow 
special and different from the general population. This is unlikely, since 
more than 5 Million customers or over 6% of the German population 
purchased something at the online shop during the 7 years leading 

(3)
0.013  
(0.011) 
75,429  

0.588  
(4.588) 
60,392  

−3.882 
(7.108) 
75,429  

  PayPal Offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (B) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Conditional on a Conversion
  PayPal Offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (C) Dependent Variable: e -Revenue Unconditional on a Conversion
  PayPal Offered (1/0)

0.011
(0.011)
75,429

6.365
(11.162)
60,392

8.354
(9.440)
75,429

0.013
(0.011)
75,429

1.204
(4.492)
60,392

−3.404
(7.120)
75,429

Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
Regressions in Panel A explain the likelihood that a customer’s shopping visit at the 
e-commerce company’s website is converted into a purchase (the extensive margin). 
Results are linear probability estimates. In Panel B (C) the dependent variable is total 
realized revenue by customer conditional (unconditional) of a conversion taking place 
as a measure of the intensive (total) margin. The independent variable of interest is 
the treatment dummy equal to 1 (0) if PayPal was made available (unavailable) for a 
randomly selected customer. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of 
variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust 
White standard errors (between parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed 
by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes

Table A.7
Effects of BNPL offers on sales – 1st time customers.
  Panel (A) Dependent variable: Conversion (1/0)

(1)

(2)

  BNPL Offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (B) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Conditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (C) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Unconditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Offered (1/0)

0.112***
(0.018)
51,461

16.677
(16.430)
40,771

48.836***
(12.659)
51,461

0.106***
(0.017)
51,461

8.535*
(4.951)
40,771

52.664***
(11.193)
51,461

(3)
0.103***  
(0.017)
51,461

7.161
(5.034)
40,771

46.586*** 
(11.417)  
51,461

Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
Regressions in Panel A explain the likelihood that a first-time customer’s shopping 
visit at the e-commerce company’s website is converted into a purchase (the extensive 
margin). Results are linear probability estimates. In Panel B (C) the dependent variable 
is total realized revenue by customer conditional (unconditional) of a conversion taking 
place as a measure of the intensive (total) margin. The independent variable of interest 
is the treatment dummy equal to 1 (0) if BNPL was made available (unavailable) for 
a randomly selected customer. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of 
variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust 
White standard errors (between parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed 
by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes

up to the experiment (and this number does not include visitors not 
purchasing anything). This implies a quite popular use, suggesting that 
results are likely to be relevant for other businesses as well.

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Table A.8
Effects of BNPL offers on sales – Net of returns.
  Panel (A) Dependent variable: Conversion (1/0)

(1)

(2)

  BNPL Offered (1/0)

(3)
0.074***  
(0.014)
75,072

11.909*  
(6.635)
56,858

37.634*** 
(9.068)
75,072

  Observations
  Panel (B) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Conditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (C) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Unconditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Offered (1/0)

0.081***
(0.014)
75,072

14.897**
(6.631)
56,858

43.678***
(8.948)
75,072

0.085***
(0.015)
75,072

26.007*
(13.398)
56,858

45.755***
(10.233)
75,072

Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
Regressions in Panel A explain the likelihood that a customer’s shopping visit at the 
e-commerce company’s website is converted into a purchase (the extensive margin). 
Results are linear probability estimates. In Panel B (C) the dependent variable is total 
realized revenue by customer conditional (unconditional) of a conversion taking place 
as a measure of the intensive (total) margin. All dependent variable are net of items sent 
back eventually. The independent variable of interest is the treatment dummy equal to 
1 (0) if BNPL was made available (unavailable) for a randomly selected customer. See 
Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate 
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for robust White standard errors (between 
parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes

Table A.9
Effects of BNPL offers on sales – Defining conversions more liberally.
  Panel (A) Dependent variable: Conversion (1/0)

(1)

(2)

  BNPL Offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (B) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Conditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Offered (1/0)

  Observations
  Panel (C) Dependent variable: e -Revenue Unconditional on a Conversion
  BNPL Offered (1/0)

0.058***
(0.013)
75,072

11.981*
(6.688)
60,995

35.635***
(9.307)
75,072

0.063***
(0.014)
75,072

21.663*
(12.847)
60,995

38.055***
(10.673)
75,072

(3)
0.059***  
(0.013)
75,072

12.593*  
(6.733)
60,995

33.933*** 
(9.420)
75,072

Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
Regressions in Panel A explain the likelihood that at least one shopping visit by 
persons from a unique address at the e-commerce company’s website is converted into a 
purchase (the extensive margin). Results are linear probability estimates. In Panel B (C) 
the dependent variable is total realized revenue by address conditional (unconditional) 
of  a  conversion  taking  place  as  a  measure  of  the  intensive  (total)  margin.  The 
independent variable of interest is the treatment dummy equal to 1 (0) if BNPL was 
made available (unavailable) for a randomly selected customer (using the first customer 
from every unique address appearing in the data). See Appendix Table  A.1 for details 
on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, 
and 10% for robust White standard errors (between parentheses). ‘‘–’’ indicates that 
controls are absorbed by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Table A.10
Correlations of variables with the internal credit score.

Correlation

Coefficient
(1)

−0.115***
−0.079***
0.089***
−0.009**
0.000
0.075***
0.023***
0.265***
−0.009*
0.377***
0.023***
−0.015***
0.034***
−0.038***
−0.047***

𝑝-value 
(2)
(0.000) 
  Payment Default (1/0)
(0.000) 
  Initial Cart Balance (e )
(0.000) 
  Age (Years)
(0.016) 
  Male (1/0)
(0.915) 
  System: Apple (1/0)
(0.000) 
  County Mean Income (e )
(0.000) 
  County Population Density
(0.000) 
  Conversion (1/0)
(0.057) 
  BNPL Selected (1/0)
(0.000) 
  BNPL Approved (1/0)
(0.000) 
  BNPL Used (1/0)
(0.000) 
  PayPal Used (1/0)
(0.000) 
  Credit Card Used (1/0)
(0.000) 
  Installment Used (1/0)
(0.000) 
  Prepayment Used (1/0)
Column 1 contains correlation coefficients of the internal credit score with selected 
variables of interest. P-values are in Column 2. The score ranges from a minimum of 
0 to a maximum of 1. Larger values correspond to a lower probability of a future 
payment default. Observations come from the treatment group (for which all payment 
options were available). For the BNPL selection and approval variables, the sample 
only consists of first-time customers due to technical reasons. See Appendix Table  A.1 
for details on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance 
at 1%, 5%, and 10%.

Table A.11
Effects of profit margins and credit scores on BNPL approvals – Analyzing 1st time 
customers.
  Dependent variable: BNPL Application Approved (1/0)

  Score (min. 0, max. 1)

  Gross Margin (in %)

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.762***
(0.043)
0.063***
(0.022)
386,172

0.669***
(0.043)
0.087***
(0.024)
386,172

0.684***
(0.042)
0.087***
(0.023)
386,172

(4)
0.655*** 
(0.046)  
0.079*** 
(0.017)  
386,172  

Yes
Yes

Yes
–

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
  Cart Item Categories
  Customer
Regressions explain the likelihood that the e-commerce company approves a first time 
customer’s application for using BNPL. Results are linear probability estimates. The 
independent variables of interest are the customer’s credit score (ranging from a high 
default risk value of 0 to a low default risk value of 1) and the gross profit margin 
(revenue − purchase costs) of customer 𝑖’s shopping cart at time 𝑡 The estimation sample 
includes all customers applying for BNPL in 2021. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details 
on the definition of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, 
and 10% for standard errors (between parentheses) that allow for clustering by product 
category and county. ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Appendix D. Do other payment options have similar effects?

We framed results in this section as effects of financing character-
istics of BNPL on consumer behavior. One might imagine that these 
effects  could  alternatively  be  explained  rather  by  a  higher  level  of 
convenience offered by this payment option. It could also be the result 
of a lack of trust in the online shop combined with the higher degree 
of  safety  offered  by  paying  for  a  product  after  it  is  delivered.  To 
explore these alternative explanations, we ideally would like to analyze 
random variation in the availability of another popular payment option 
with comparable convenience and safety features, but which is not 
predominantly used for financing. If results would lead to similar effects 
on shopping behavior as BNPL does, then this would suggest that the 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Table A.12
Effects of profit margins and credit scores on BNPL approvals – Using a low credit 
score dummy.
  Dependent variable: BNPL Application Approved (1/0)
(1)

(3)

(2)

(4)
−0.219*** 
(0.009)
0.093***  
(0.010)
223,334   

  Low Score (1/0)

  Gross Margin (in %)

−0.275***
(0.015)
0.072***
(0.023)
589,005

−0.246***
(0.014)
0.091***
(0.023)
589,005

−0.253***
(0.013)
0.085***
(0.020)
589,005

Yes
Yes

Yes
–

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
  Cart Item Categories
  Customer
Regressions explain the likelihood that the e-commerce company approves a customer’s 
application for using BNPL. Results are linear probability estimates. The independent 
variables of interest are a dummy that is 1 if the customer’s credit score is in the bottom 
quintile (‘‘low’’) and the gross profit margin (revenue − purchase costs) of customer 𝑖’s 
shopping cart at time 𝑡 The estimation sample includes all customers applying for BNPL 
in 2021. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition of variables. ***, **, and 
* indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for standard errors (between 
parentheses) that allow for clustering by product category and county. ‘‘–’’ indicates 
that controls are absorbed by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Table A.13
Are high default risk or BNPL customers more interested in higher margin products?
  Dependent variable: Gross Margin (in %)

(1)
  Panel (A) Are low credit score customers more interested?
  Score (min. 0, max. 1)

(2)

(3)

0.026
(0.023)
594,859

0.039
(0.025)
594,859

0.030
(0.023)
594,859

  Observations
  Panel (B) Are BNPL Customers more interested?
  BNPL Selected (1/0)

−0.010*
(0.006)
1,049,291

−0.017***
(0.006)
1,049,291

−0.015***
(0.003)
1,049,291

(4)

0.004
(0.009)
228,582  

−0.015*** 
(0.003)
436,013  

Yes
–

Yes
Yes

Yes
– 

  Observations
  Controls
  Customer
  County
  Fixed Effects
  County
  Date
  Time-of-Day
  Cart Item Categories
  Customer
Regressions explain the gross profit margin (revenue − purchase costs) of customer 𝑖’s 
shopping cart at time 𝑡. The independent variable of interest in Panel A is the customer’s 
credit score (ranging from a high default risk value of 0 to a low default risk value of 
1). In Panel B it is an indicator for a customer selecting BNPL (1) or another payment 
method (0) when first visiting check-out. The estimation sample includes all customers 
applying for BNPL in 2021. See Appendix Table  A.1 for details on the definition 
of variables. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% for 
standard errors (between parentheses) that allow for clustering by product category 
and county. ‘‘–’’ indicates that controls are absorbed by fixed effects.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

effects of BNPL uncovered in the previous subsection may have nothing 
to do with BNPL’s financing character but with convenience or safety 
concerns.

To investigate this, we utilize an additional experiment conducted 
by the e-commerce company during the same period in which the BNPL 
experiment was conducted. This second experiment randomized the 
availability of PayPal, which is the most popular payment option right 
behind BNPL (at the e-commerce company) and a useful comparison 
for several reasons.

20 

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

The PayPal and BNPL experiments were equivalent in their setup, 
sharing the same treatment group also used in the BNPL analysis in the 
previous subsection (74,128 distinct customers). However, analyzing 
PayPal relies on a new control group for which PayPal was not available 
(1304 customers). With estimations equivalent to those in Table  3, 
we analyze the effects of adding PayPal on the total margin of sales 
(conversions) and on the intensive and extensive margins (revenue per 
customer conditional and unconditional on a conversion taking place). 
Results in Table  A.6 show that this alternative payment option does not 
have effects remotely equivalent to those of BNPL. All coefficients of 
PayPal availability are statistically insignificant, economic magnitudes 
are just a fraction of those from BNPL regressions, and coefficients even 
switch signs in some estimations. This suggests that BNPL is indeed 
different than other popular payment options and that this difference 
is likely to have something to do with financing, and not just with 
convenience and trust.

Appendix E. Cost for setting up BNPL

In addition to the marginal cost of running a BNPL scheme, firms 
occur costs from setting up a BNPL payment option from scratch. These 
costs can be split into two parts: operational costs (personnel costs 
and costs for building the IT infrastructure) and costs from training a 
credit scoring model, i.e., higher default rates before enough data for a 
proper model is collected (see also Berg et al. (2020) for how the use of 
digital footprint scoring models decreases default rates). We focus on 
the latter part, mainly driven by data availability, but also because the 
e-commerce firm indicated they were their biggest concern.

The e-commerce firm set up a BNPL payment option in 2015. In 
the first 4.5 months, the e-commerce firm extended BNPL generously 
to train its scoring model. In the subsequent months, the e-commerce 
firm used its model to provide BNPL to customers of sufficient credit-
worthiness. As more data came in, the e-commerce firm continuously 
refined its credit scoring model. In Table  A.14, we provide default rates 
for the 4.5 months training period, the subsequent 2.5 months of model 
refinement, as well as for the subsequent 9 months. Our analysis sug-
gests that the e-commerce firm suffered a 7.16% default rate during the 
training period, a 1.49% default rate during the subsequent 2.5 months, 
and default rate between 0.94%–1.07% (average: 1.01%) during the 
subsequent 9 months.14

These numbers allow to assess the additional costs of BNPL during 
the training period: the default rate during the training period was 6.15 
PP higher than the default rate after the model was trained (7.16% 
versus 1.01%). In absolute terms, the e-commerce firm suffered excess 
losses of e1.91 mn during the initial 2.5 months when it provided BNPL 
broadly in order to collect data that allowed for training the model. 
This loss is equal to approximately 0.1% of aggregate BNPL volume 
in the eight years since BNPL introduction. While not negligible, these 
numbers are small compared to the benefits from offering BNPL that 
we document in the rest of the paper.

Note that the training period was chosen in an ad-hoc manner by 
the e-commerce firm, without a clear model in mind that would trade-
off costs and benefits from a longer or shorter training period, or from 
a more or less generous provision of BNPL during the training period. 
This suggests that the costs estimated above are an upper bound of the 
costs that are needed to collect the necessary data to properly train a 
scoring model (see Fig.  A.3 and Table  A.10).

Data availability

Economics_of_BNPL_JFE (Reference data) (zenado)

14 The default rates in our main sample is 1.9%, see Table  A.2, and therefore 
somewhat higher than in 2015/2016. This is plausibly due to an expansion of 
the eligibility criteria as a response to the success of the BNPL offering.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Table A.14
Default rates during the training phase.
  Sample Period
Date

  Training (4.5 months)

  Post 1 (2.5 months)

Jun–Oct 2015

Oct–Dec 2015

Default
rate

7.16%

1.49%

Δ to
Post2-Post4

6.15%

0.48%

BNPL
volume (emn)
28.62

Excess
defaults (emn)
1.76

15.71

0.08

  Post 2 (3 months)
  Post 3 (3 months)
  Post 4 (3 months)
This table provides BNPL volumes and default rates during the training period (generous provision of BNPL without a proper scoring model) 
as well as during the subsequent periods.

Jan–Mar 2016
Apr–Jun 2016
Jul–Sep 2016

−0.07%
0.00%
0.06%

0.94%
1.01%
1.07%

−0.01
0.00
0.01

18.58
15.73
17.49

Fig. A.3.  Share of unrecovered sales in total defaults.
This figure plots lost BNPL financed revenue (that defaults and is never recovered) as a share of all defaulting BNPL financed revenue up in payment default. We display it by 20 
percentile bins of the internal credit score (ranging from a high default value 0 to a low default value of 1). The sample is based on all BNPL conversions in 2021.

Table A.15
Net effect on variable costs – Using selections.
  Option

Costs
in %

(1)

Selections
per e 100
Unavailable
(2)

Available
(3)

Costs × Selections
per e 100
Unavailable
(4)

Available 
(5)

100

100

2.1
1.2
1.0
1.3
2.8
0.0

56.1
43.9
28.9
5.2
6.7
3.1

0.00
1.16
0.59
0.18
0.39
0.00

1.18
0.55
0.29
0.07
0.19
0.00

0.0
100.0
58.8
13.9
14.1
13.3

  BNPL
  Other
  PayPal
  Credit Card
  Installment
  Prepayment
  Sum
Column (1) contains variable transaction costs, expressed in % of transaction volume. 
Information comes from both external sources and the merchant. BNPL costs include 
losses due to unrecovered defaults and capital costs. Payment option selections by first 
time customers for which BNPL is either not shown or shown are in Columns (2) and 
(3), respectively and expressed per e 100 of shopping cart volume at check out. Note 
that selecting a payment option does neither imply a conversion, nor a use of this 
payment option conditional on a conversion. Check outs may be aborted. Transactions 
might be declined by the merchant or external payment service providers. Customers 
may not provide credentials required for using PayPal or a credit card. Column (4) is 
the product of Columns (1) and (2), representing total variable transaction costs when 
BNPL is unavailable and the e 100 cart volume in is actually spend. Column (5) is the 
same number for when BNPL is available.

1.73

1.16

21 

References

Adams, W., Einav, L., Levin, J., 2009. Liquidity constraints and imperfect information 

in subprime lending. Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (1), 49–84.

Adams, W.J., Yellen, J.L., 1976. Commodity bundling and the burden of monopoly. Q. 

J. Econ. 90 (3), 475–498.

Agarwal, S., Alok, S., Ghosh, P., Gupta, S., 2020. Financial inclusion and alternate 
credit scoring for the millennials: role of big data and machine learning in fintech. 
Natl. Univ. Singap. Work. Pap. 3507827.

Agarwal,  S.,  Chomsisengphet,  S.,  Mahoney,  N.,  Stroebel,  J.,  2018.  Do  banks  pass 
through credit expansions to consumers who want to borrow? Q. J. Econ. 133 
(1), 129–190.

Agarwal, S., Qian, W., Yeung, B.Y., Zou, X., 2019. Mobile wallet and entrepreneurial 

growth. In: AEA Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 109, pp. 48–53.

Alvarez, F., Argente, D., 2022. On the effects of the availability of means of payments: 

The case of uber. Q. J. Econ. 137 (3), 1737–1789.

Athey,  S.,  Imbens,  G.W.,  2017.  The  econometrics  of  randomized  experiments.  In: 

Handbook of Economic Field Experiments. Vol. 1, Elsevier, pp. 73–140.

Baxter,  W.F.,  1983.  Bank  interchange  of  transactional  paper:  Legal  and  economic 

perspectives. J. Law Econ. 26 (3), 541–588.

Berg, T., Burg, V., Gombović, A., Puri, M., 2020. On the rise of FinTechs: Credit scoring 

using digital footprints. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (7), 2845–2897.

Berg, T., Keil, J., Martini, F., Puri, M., 2024. CBDCs, Payment Firms, and Geopolitics. 

NBER Working Paper 32857.

Bertola, G., Hochguertel, S., Koeniger, W., 2005. Dealer pricing of consumer credit. 

Internat. Econom. Rev. 46 (4), 1103–1142.

Bian, W., Cong, L.W., Ji, Y., 2023. The Rise of E-Wallets and Buy-Now-Pay-Later: 
Payment Competition, Credit Expansion, and Consumer Behavior. Working Paper.
Boshoff, E., Grafton, D., Grant, A.R., Watkins, J., 2022. Buy Now Pay Later: Multiple 

Accounts and the Credit System In Australia. Working Paper.

Bounie, D., Camara, Y., 2020. Card-sales response to merchant contactless payment 

acceptance. J. Bank. Financ. 119, 105938.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T. Berg et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 171 (2025) 104093 

Bouvard, M., Casamatta, C., Xiong, R., 2022. Lending And Monitoring: Big Tech Vs 

Brennan, M.J., Maksimovics, V., Zechner, J., 1988. Vendor financing. J. Financ. 43 (5), 

Banks. Working Paper.

1127–1141.

Brown, M., Hentschel, N., Mettler, H., Stix, H., 2022. The convenience of electronic 
payments  and  consumer  cash  demand  –  causal  evidence  from  the  staggered 
introduction of contactless debit cards. J. Monet. Econ. 130, 86–102.

Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., 2018. Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and 

the rise of shadow banks. J. Financ. Econ. 130 (3), 453–483.

Koulayev, S., Rysman, M., Schuh, S., Stavins, J., 2016. Explaining adoption and use of 

payment instruments by US consumers. Rand J. Econ. 47 (2), 293–325.

McAfee, R.P., McMillan, J., Whinston, M.D., 1989. Multiproduct monopoly, commodity 

bundling, and correlation of values. Q. J. Econ. 104 (2), 371–383.

Mester,  L.J.,  Nakamura,  L.I.,  Renault,  M.,  2007.  Transactions  accounts  and  loan 

monitoring. Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (3), 529–556.

Nakamura, E., Zerom, D., 2010. Accounting for incomplete pass-through. Rev. Econ. 

Stud. 77 (3), 1192–1230.

Nevo, A., 2001. Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econom. 

Cabinakova, J., Knümann, F., Horst, F., 2019. The Costs of Cash Payments in the Retail 

69 (2), 307–342.

Sector. Technical report, Deutsche Bundesbank.

Norden, L., Weber, M., 2010. Credit line usage, checking account activity, and default 

Chen, M.A., Wu, Q., Yang, B., 2019. How valuable is FinTech innovation? Rev. Financ. 

risk of bank borrowers. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (10), 3665–3699.

Cornelli, G., Gambacorta, L., Pancotto, L., 2023. Buy now, pay later: a cross-country 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 4985–5024.

Stud. 32 (5), 2062–2106.

analysis. BIS Q. Rev. 61–75.

De Roure, C., Pelizzon, L., Thakor, A., 2022. P2P lenders versus banks: Cream skimming 

or bottom fishing? Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 11 (2), 213–262.

deHaan, E., Kim, J., Lourie, B., Zhu, C., 2024. Buy now pay (pain?) later. Manag. Sci. 

70 (8), 5586–5598.

Di  Maggio,  M.,  Williams,  E.,  Katz,  J.,  2022.  Buy  Now,  Pay  Later  Credit:  User 
Characteristics and Effects on Spending Patterns. Working Paper, National Bureau 
of Economic Research.

Dikshit,  P.,  Goldshtein,  D.,  Kaura,  U.,  Tan,  F.,  Karwowski,  B.,  2021.  Buy 
now,  pay  later:  Five  business  models  to  compete.  McKinsey  &  Company, 
URL  https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/buy-no
w-pay-later-five-business-models-to-compete.

Felt, M.-H., Hayashi, F., Stavins, J., Welte, A., 2020. Distributional effects of payment 
card pricing and merchant cost pass-through in the United States and Canada. Fed. 
Reserv. Bank Kans. City Res. Work. Pap. 20–18.

Fuster,  A.,  Plosser,  M.,  Schnabl,  P.,  Vickery,  J.,  2019.  The  role  of  technology  in 

mortgage lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1854–1899.

Ghosh, P., Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2021. FinTech lending and cashless payments. In: 

Proceedings of Paris December 2021 Finance Meeting EUROFIDAI-ESSEC.

Grieco, P.L., Murry, C., Yurukoglu, A., 2024. The evolution of market power in the us 

automobile industry. Q. J. Econ. 139 (2), 1201–1253.

Guttman-Kenney, B., Firth, C., Gathergood, J., 2023. Buy now, pay later (BNPL)... On 

your credit card. J. Behav. Exp. Financ. 37, 100788.

Handelsblatt, 2023. Paypal beliebter als der Kauf auf Rechnung. Handelsblatt URL htt
ps://www.handelsblatt.com/finanzen/banken-versicherungen/banken/zahlungsver
kehr-onlineshopping-erstmals-ist-paypal-beliebter-als-der-kauf-auf-rechnung/29143
098.html.

Parlour, C.A., Rajan, U., Zhu, H., 2022. When FinTech competes for payment flows. 

Puri, M., Rocholl, J., Steffen, S., 2017. What do a million observations have to say about 
loan defaults? Opening the black box of relationships. J. Financ. Intermediation 31, 
1–15.

Quinn, S., Roberds, W., 2008. The evolution of the check as a means of payment: A 

historical survey. Econ. Rev. 93.

Rochet, J.-C., Tirole, J., 2002. Cooperation among competitors: Some economics of 

payment card associations. Rand J. Econ. 549–570.

Rubin, D.B., 1978. Bayesian inference for causal effects: The role of randomization. 

Sangani,  K.,  2023.  Markups  across  the  income  distribution:  Measurement  and 

Ann. Statist. 34–58.

implications. Work. Pap..

Econ. Rev. 101 (4), 1575–1590.

Court. Rev. 1963, 152–157.

Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1900–1938.

Schuh, S., Shy, O., Stavins, J., 2010. Who gains and who loses from credit card 
payments? Theory and calibrations. Fed. Reserv. Bank Boston Public Policy Discuss. 
Pap. 10–03.

Shy, O., Wang, Z., 2011. Why do payment card networks charge proportional fees? Am. 

Stigler, G.J., 1963. United States v. Loew’s Inc.: A note on block-booking. Supreme 

Tang, H., 2019. Peer-to-peer lenders versus banks: substitutes or complements? Rev. 

Times, F., 2022. Rise and rise of buy now, pay later. Financ. Times  https://www.ft.co
m/video/4b904ff6-03aa-4c45-a6d6-43731aea2948, (retrieved 14 November 2022).
Wang, L., 2023. Regulating competing payment networks. https://luluywang.github.io

/PaperRepository/payment_jmp.pdf (Last Accessed 10 November 2023).

Ziegler, T., Shneor, R., Wenzlaff, K., Suresh, K., Paes, F.F.d., Mammadova, L., Wanga, C., 
Kekre, N., Mutinda, S., Wang, B., et al., 2021. The 2nd global alternative finance 
market benchmarking report. Camb. Cent. Altern. Financ..

22 

