Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Financial constraints and the racial housing gap(cid:73)
Arpit Gupta a,∗, Christopher Hansman b, Pierre Mabille c
a NYU Stern, United States of America
b Emory University, United States of America
c INSEAD, France

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Racial Housing Gap Repository (O
riginal data)

JEL classification:
D15
E21
G11
G21
G51
J15
R20

Keywords:
Housing
Mortgages
Leverage
Financial constraints
Racial wealth gap
Spatial macro-finance

1. Introduction

We show that financial constraints lead to spatial misallocation and contribute to racial disparities in housing 
and wealth accumulation. Using bunching and difference-in-differences designs, we document that down 
payment  constraints  disproportionately  limit  the  ability  of  Black  households  to  access  housing  in  high-
opportunity areas. We build a dynamic life-cycle model to examine the long-term wealth effects of these 
leverage distortions on group differences in wealth accumulation. Black households are more affected by 
financial and spatial frictions, limiting wealth building opportunities. Improving mortgage access and housing 
supply in high-opportunity areas helps reduce racial wealth disparities, emphasizing the need for access to 
geographic opportunities rather than homeownership alone.

Standard models of spatial equilibrium (e.g., Rosen, 1979; Roback, 
1982) assume that any durable advantages to living in particular re-
gions should be arbitraged away through moving. However, a large 
literature points to persistent differences in access to opportunity across 
areas in the form of labor market prospects and human capital accu-
mulation (e.g., Chetty and Hendren, 2018; Bilal and Rossi-Hansberg, 
2021; Boustan, 2016). In this paper, we argue that down payment con-
straints act as a key friction generating spatial misallocation, rationing 

households with limited initial resources out of more expensive housing 
markets. Because high-cost areas typically offer better jobs, schools, 
and intergenerational prospects, geographic sorting leads to persistent 
differences in access to wealth building opportunities.

We combine quasi-experimental evidence with a new spatial life-
cycle model to show how financial constraints can result in persistent 
group differences in wealth and access to geographical opportunities. 
We do so by building and calibrating a rich dynamic model which 
generates realistic choices for migration, home ownership, and mort-
gage leverage decisions. In the model, households with low starting 

(cid:73)

Toni Whited was the editor for this article, and we are indebted to her and to an anonymous referee for their guidance. We thank Louiza Bartzoka, Ki Beom 
Lee, and Karin Hobelsberger for superb research assistance. We are grateful to Daniel Greenwald, Christopher Palmer, Tarun Ramadorai, Venky Venkateswaran, and 
our discussants Anastasia Girshina, Marianna Kudlyak, Franklin Qian, Tess Scharlemann, Spencer Barnes, Manuel Adelino, Amrita Kulka, and Charles Nathanson 
for comments. This paper benefited from participants at the NBER Summer Institute, the SITE Conference, the Adam Smith Workshop, the AFA Annual Meeting, the 
EFA Annual Meeting, the RCFS Winter Conference, the Conference on Economic Opportunity (Harvard), the ECHOPPE Conference (Toulouse School of Economics), 
BINS, the Eastern Finance Association, the CEPR Household Finance Seminar, the Conference on Market-Based Solutions for Reducing Wealth Inequality (UNC 
Kenan-Flagler), the Boulder Summer Conference, the Bank of England/Imperial Workshop on Household Finance and Housing, the INSEAD Finance Symposium, 
the CBS Conference on Household Savings and Macroprudential Regulation; and from seminars at UCLA, Chicago Booth, Dartmouth Tuck, Fordham, NYU Wagner, 
FHFA, University of Illinois (Chicago), NYU Stern, the Fed Board, Clemson, CUHK, Peking University, Bonn, Durham University, Emory, Georgia Tech, Berkeley 
Haas, University of Regensburg, Frankfurt School of Finance, WashU Olin, and EIEF. We thank Zillow and Infutor for data access and helpful conversations.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:  arpit.gupta@stern.nyu.edu (A. Gupta).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104142
Received 3 November 2023; Received in revised form 8 July 2025; Accepted 12 July 2025
Available online 1 September 2025 
0304-405X/Published by Elsevier B.V. 

 
 
 
A. Gupta et al.

wealth and worse initial conditions remain persistently disadvantaged 
because  down  payments  requirements  create  frictions  to  accessing 
high-opportunity areas. Leverage constraints therefore generate a spa-
tial poverty trap that sustains historically determined differences in 
outcomes between groups.

We apply this framework to a particularly salient and well-measured 
example of persistent inequality: racial differences in wealth and home-
ownership.  We  begin  by  presenting  empirical  evidence  that  down 
payment constraints differentially bind for Black households, distorting 
borrowing, home purchase, and location choices. Black households tend 
to start life with less wealth and are more likely to grow up in under-
resourced neighborhoods, making it difficult to come up with the down 
payment necessary to buy homes in high-opportunity areas (see, e.g., 
Bhutta et al., 2020; Chetty and Hendren, 2018). We document a striking 
stylized fact in the form of a racial leverage gap, with Black borrowers 
taking on substantially more leverage when purchasing homes. Black 
households are more likely to reach the maximum allowable leverage 
limit, which is suggestive of a tighter overall borrowing constraint.

We then implement two reduced form empirical strategies to show 
that leverage constraints are more likely to bind for Black households, 
distorting their location and housing choices away from neighborhoods 
with better income prospects. Both approaches exploit regulatory limits 
on loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). FHA 
loans come with less stringent down payment requirements — 3.5% 
instead of 20% for conventional mortgages — but are subject to max-
imum loan caps so can only be used for relatively inexpensive homes. 
These caps are set yearly at the county level, generating variation in 
the size of the down payment requirement across the housing stock. 
Our first strategy is a bunching estimator showing that Black borrowers 
disproportionately cluster precisely at the FHA loan cap, indicating a 
greater distortion in borrowing relative to a frictionless benchmark.

Our second strategy focuses on a natural experiment created by a 
major reduction in FHA caps, which occurred when temporary mea-
sures put in place during the global financial crisis were rolled back 
in  2014.  This  unforeseen  policy  reversal  caused  down  payment  re-
quirements to increase sharply in many high-cost areas, while access 
to leverage was effectively unchanged in low-cost areas. Difference-
in-differences estimates indicate sizable impacts on home buying and 
location choices. After losing access to high leverage mortgages, the 
share  of  new  mortgage  originations  to  Black  borrowers  in  affected 
areas dropped by roughly 8 percent. These prospective borrowers did 
not switch to the rental market, leading to a decline in the overall 
Black population. We show that high-cost areas provide better income 
prospects  and  test  scores,  highlighting  the  disproportionate  impact 
of  down-payment  requirements  on  access  to  opportunity  for  Black 
households.

Motivated by this evidence, we build a dynamic model to evaluate 
and quantify the role of financial constraints in perpetuating racial 
group  differences  in  wealth  and  housing.  The  economy  consists  of 
high- and low-opportunity areas, which are populated by overlapping 
generations of heterogeneous risk-averse households that are divided 
into Black and white demographic groups. Throughout their life-cycles, 
households choose to either purchase housing or rent in one of the 
two types of areas. Households have an intergenerational wealth ac-
cumulation motive with voluntary bequests, which are redistributed to 
the next cohort within the same racial group and create an incentive 
for the current cohort to move to opportunity. Purchases are financed 
with long-term defaultable mortgages that are subject to the same down 
payment constraint across areas.

The down payment requirement is lower (3.5%) for relatively small 
mortgages  below  a  fixed  geography-specific  loan  cap  to  match  the 
structure of FHA mortgages. It is higher for mortgages above the cap 
(20%).  Households  also  face  idiosyncratic  moving  and  homeowner-
ship shocks, which capture residual exogenous motives for relocating 
and owning (including moving frictions, discriminatory barriers, and 
location-specific housing quality). The two areas differ in their loan 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

caps, their levels and price elasticities of housing supply, and in their 
income processes which endogenously depend on the local composition 
of households through the presence of high-productivity workers via an 
agglomeration externality. The two groups differ in their initial wealth, 
income processes, and the probabilities of being born in each area. In 
equilibrium, differences in house prices and rents arise endogenously 
across areas as a result of local housing supply and demand.

The central friction we analyze comes from down payment require-
ments. Low-wealth agents, many of whom are current and future Black 
borrowers,  cannot  access  homeownership  because  of  high  prices  in 
high-opportunity areas. As a result, Black households are caught in a 
spatial version of a poverty trap: they cannot afford down payments to 
own housing in high-opportunity areas, and hence are limited in their 
ability to accumulate wealth and afford down payments to begin with.
This new framework accounts for spatial and racial heterogene-
ity in the data from which life-cycle models typically abstract (see, 
e.g., Gomes (2020) for a survey). The model generates 2 × 2 cross-
sectional distributions over individual state variables for the two area 
types and demographic groups, which are key for evaluating the effects 
of spatial misallocation on wealth accumulation across groups.

We calibrate the model using indirect inference to match our quasi-
experimental estimate of the elasticity of Black borrowing to the level of 
the down payment constraint, which is obtained from our difference-
in-differences approach. To do so, we replicate the same experiment 
in the model that we examine in our reduced form analysis, a change 
in the loan cap in high-opportunity areas, as part of our calibration. 
This is a numerically challenging step which significantly improves 
the realism of the model.1 The model matches targeted differences in 
income, homeownership, and moving rates across groups and areas. In 
our calibration, income differences arise due to both the endogenous 
spatial income shifter and endogenous skill sorting across areas. One 
component of the difference in income across areas is due to the causal 
effect of place while the other is due to sorting of higher-productivity 
workers to higher-income areas (see, e.g., Bilal and Rossi-Hansberg, 
2021; Card et al., 2025). Overall, the model is able to closely match 
racial differences in leverage and more than 75% of the racial gap in 
wealth, despite not targeting these moments. We then use the model 
as a laboratory and run several counterfactual experiments to quantify 
the role of financial constraints as a driver of racial disparities in U.S. 
data.

The first counterfactual experiment demonstrates the importance 
of leverage constraints by relaxing the down payment requirement. 
Specifically, we compare our baseline model with an economy in which 
the  loan  cap  is  raised  in  the  high-opportunity  area,  which  allows 
borrowers in the high-opportunity area to purchase more expensive 
homes with as little as 3.5% down. Relaxing the constraint has positive 
effects for Black households across financial and real measures, re-
ducing Black–white gaps in wealth, income, homeownership, leverage, 
and consumption. On average, Black household wealth is higher by 
9.6%. To help contextualize the effect of financial constraints in terms 
of  spatial  mobility,  we  show  that  a  15%  reduction  in  the  costs  to 
moving to high-opportunity areas is necessary to generate a comparable 
increase in Black wealth.

The  key  mechanism  is  a  flow  of  Black  households  to  high-
opportunity areas. This result underscores the main insight of our pa-
per: the presence of leverage requirements adversely impacts Black bor-
rowers and leads to spatial misallocation, which in turn persistently im-
pairs income prospects and wealth building. Importantly, our estimates 
account  for  equilibrium  price  adjustments,  and  we  find  that  house 

1 This paper is the first to calibrate a dynamic spatial model with en-
dogenous  house  prices  and  rents  and  heterogeneous  households  to  match 
an empirically identified elasticity, which is itself endogenous in the model. 
This step can help discipline the quantification of this class of models (see, 
e.g., Nakamura and Steinsson (2018)).

2 

A. Gupta et al.

prices grow much more than rental prices in high-opportunity areas. 
Reductions in the wealth gap are in part driven by an influx of Black 
homeowners. Due to a complementarity between the individual and 
location-specific components of the income process, high productivity 
Black households particularly benefit in this counterfactual.

High  home  prices  in  high-opportunity  areas  are  at  the  core  of 
the  spatial  distortion  created  by  down  payment  requirements.  Our 
second set of counterfactual experiments examines the role of spatial 
constraints, in the form of housing supply restrictions, in exacerbating 
this  distortion  (see  also  Hsieh  and  Moretti,  2019).  We  consider  an 
economy where the level of housing supply is increased by 10% in high-
opportunity areas, relative to the baseline model. This modification 
corresponds, for example, to less stringent regulatory requirements on 
zoning.  Our  contribution  is  to  show  that  the  impact  of  changes  in 
housing supply is strongly heterogeneous across demographic groups. 
The expansion — and corresponding decline in home prices — results 
in 1.7% higher average wealth for Black households, more of whom are 
able to overcome the down payment requirement and purchase homes 
(or rent more cheaply) in high-opportunity areas. The consequences 
are  different  for  white  households  because  they  are  more  likely  to 
own  homes  in  the  baseline.  The  reduction  in  home  prices  actually 
increases  their  average  wealth  by  less,  further  reducing  the  racial 
gap. Furthermore, we show that increasing only rental housing supply 
in high-opportunity areas can also address the spatial mismatch and 
increase Black income, but has a less pronounced impact on Black 
wealth and actually reduces Black homeownership.

Finally, our third set of counterfactual experiments combines the 
first  two  modifications  to  consider  the  interaction  of  financial  and 
housing supply constraints. We simultaneously relax the loan cap and 
increase housing supply by 10% in high-opportunity areas. A higher 
level of housing supply alleviates one of the main drawbacks of relax-
ing leverage constraints: an increase in prices due to higher housing 
demand. As a result of the complementarity between the two modifica-
tions, the increase in the average wealth of Black households (12.4%) 
is larger than the sum of the changes that occur in each experiment 
individually (11.3%), largely owing to their much higher presence in 
high-opportunity areas in the combined experiment.

Our results are robust to various alternative specifications of the 
baseline  model.  First,  the  effects  of  relaxing  the  FHA  loan  cap  are 
nearly identical when introducing discrimination in mortgage rates. 
The spatial misallocation due to leverage constraints generates per-
sistent wealth gaps even absent explicit racial discrimination in the 
financial system. Our results remain comparable when idiosyncratic 
moving and homeownership shocks are the same across groups, which 
shows that preference differences are not the main driver of racial 
disparities  in  the  model.  We  also  that  show  that  our  findings  are 
stronger when households have access to a higher rate of return on 
financial assets as a complementary way to accumulate wealth. Higher 
returns make it easier to build the down payment necessary to access 
housing, pointing to important complementarities between housing and 
financial assets. Finally, extending the model to allow for Payment-
to-Income (PTI) limits in addition to LTV limits leads to very similar 
conclusions.

There are two important caveats to our analysis. First, our con-
clusions should not be construed as advocating for the unrestricted 
expansion of access to leverage. The results highlight important trade-
offs between down payment requirements and considerations of equity 
across groups. However, analyzing the implications for the optimal 
design of mortgage policy would require taking into account a range 
of factors that go beyond the scope of our model, particularly the con-
sequences for financial stability.2 Nevertheless, the model does account 
for the effects of financial constraints on house prices and default risk, 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

and we find that the effects on credit risk vary substantially across 
areas. Default rates increase when the FHA down-payment requirement 
is lowered (from 3.5% to 1%), which disproportionately impacts low-
opportunity areas. Alternatively, relaxing the FHA cap by $75,000 in 
the high-opportunity area actually improves spatial allocation and in-
comes. This, in turn, helps borrowers absorb shocks and lowers average 
default rates. These findings suggest that while increasing leverage may 
add to household risk, all else equal, it is also critical where borrowers 
locate.

Second, the reduced form analysis exploits variation in FHA limits 
and down payment constraints in the model that replicate the FHA 
system. While these choices are useful for identification, they do not 
imply that the distortions we examine are only a consequence of the 
availability of FHA lending (or lack thereof). Given the distribution of 
wealth for Black households, even a 3.5% down payment requirement 
puts a large fraction of the housing stock out-of-reach (see Appendix 
Figure A.I). As such, the spatial distortion we highlight is first and 
foremost a consequence of down payment requirements and relevant 
even  within  areas  that  are  entirely  eligible  for  the  FHA.  A  related 
concern  is  that,  in  principle,  the  FHA  system  relaxes  credit  score 
requirements alongside leverage constraints. However, average credit 
scores for FHA borrowers have consistently exceeded 660 since the 
financial crisis, suggesting that a large fraction of FHA borrowers have 
the option to access mortgage lending through conventional channels, 
and that leverage is the key driver of demand for FHA loans.3

Related literature.  Our paper contributes directly to several broad lit-
eratures. The first is a resurgence of work studying the Black–white 
wealth gap and the role of housing. While there has long been both em-
pirical and theoretical work considering disparities in housing wealth
(see, e.g. Gyourko et al., 1999; Charles and Hurst, 2002; Collins and 
Margo, 2011; Garriga et al., 2017; Stein and Yannelis, 2020), including 
older  work  examining  FHA  borrowing  by  race  (e.g.  Canner  et  al., 
1991),  a  new  wave  of  studies  using  rich  historical  microdata  has 
brought new insights into both the historical persistence of the racial 
wealth gap overall (Derenoncourt et al., 2022; Boerma and Karabar-
bounis, 2023; Bartscher et al., 2022) and the nature of housing gaps 
faced by Black borrowers (Bayer et al., 2021, 2014; Eldemire et al., 
2022). This literature has emphasized specific barriers to the accumu-
lation of housing wealth for Black households based on differences 
in house price appreciation (Kermani and Wong, 2021; Kahn, 2021; 
Wolff, 2022), property tax assessments (Avenancio-Leon and Howard, 
2022), refinancing propensities (Gerardi et al., 2023, 2021a), and credit 
supply (Fuster et al., 2022). Recent studies have also explored the role 
of racial disparities in mortgage access, with mixed results—Ghent et al. 
(2014) and Giacoletti et al. (2022) show evidence of discrimination 
in pricing and approvals and Bartlett et al. (2022) finds evidence of 
disparities in interest rates, while Bhutta and Hizmo (2021) argues rate 
differences can be accounted for by racial differences in the take-up of 
mortgage points.

We add to this literature by highlighting the racial leverage gap, and 
analyzing its consequences for wealth accumulation using a dynamic 
model that accounts for home price responses and endogenous moving 
decisions. Combined with our reduced-form evidence, the model allows 
us to quantify a new channel that perpetuates wealth differences: the 
spatial misallocation generated by leverage constraints. By analyzing 
the role of leverage, our paper also relates to recent work that has 
emphasized  the  ambiguous  effects  of  financial  variables  on  wealth 
inequality,  focusing  particularly  on  interest  rates  (e.g.  Gomez  and 
Gouin-Bonenfant, 2020; Greenwald et al., 2021).

Second, we add to the macro-finance literature that analyzes the 
impacts  of  financial  constraints  in  life-cycle  models  with  heteroge-
neous households and incomplete markets. This includes Cocco (2005), 

2 This  exercise  would  require  fully  modeling  the  banking  system,  and 

introducing aggregate risk and default externalities.

3 See Goodman and Kaul (2017).

3 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2006), Corbae and Quintin (2015), Greenwald 
(2018), Gete and Zecchetto (2018), Chen et al. (2019), and Greenwald 
et al. (2020). We depart from existing models by introducing a new 
type of 2 × 2 heterogeneity across geographic areas and demographic 
groups, which accounts for spatial and racial differences in the data that 
these models typically abstract from. Endogenizing prices and location 
decisions in this context is a challenging exercise, which we tackle using 
methods from the dynamic demand literature. The resulting richness is 
key for evaluating the real effects of financial and spatial constraints for 
long-run outcomes, which would be difficult to measure and identify in 
the data. Another contribution of our work is to significantly improve 
the quantification of this class of models by calibrating the model to 
match an empirically identified elasticity, which is endogenous in our 
setting. This approach can help improve the realism of recent spatial 
macro-finance models with heterogeneous agents (e.g., Favilukis and 
Van Nieuwerburgh, 2021; Favilukis et al., 2023; Mabille, 2023) and 
with identification in macro-finance more broadly (e.g. Nakamura and 
Steinsson, 2018).

Many of these papers explicitly focus on collateral constraints and 
inequality. On the housing side, Favilukis et al. (2017), Kaplan et al. 
(2020) emphasize the role of down payments constraints in limiting 
housing access for poor households, thereby contributing to inequal-
ity. Kiyotaki et al. (2024, 2011) highlight the role of down payment 
constraints on wealth and housing consumption. We complement these 
papers by focusing on the spatial consequences of down payment con-
straints, and the resulting misallocation due to lost income generation 
and  wealth  building  prospects.  On  the  firm  side,  Midrigan  and  Xu 
(2014) analyze how collateral constraints limit firm entry decisions and 
drive misallocation. Chaney et al. (2012) have estimated this channel 
empirically, focusing on firms’ real estate collateral. Constrained en-
trepreneurship decisions have also been studied for smaller firms, as 
in Schmalz et al. (2017). While this literature has demonstrated the 
relevance of collateral constraints for inequality in the distribution of 
firms on the corporate finance side, we focus on the role of down 
payment requirements for homeownership and location choice.

Finally, the persistence of a racial wealth gap in the data is at odds 
with the predictions of workhorse frameworks such as infinite-horizon 
models in which initial conditions dissipate in steady state. Theoretical 
and empirical work has emphasized the role of self-saving to over-
come financial constraints (e.g., Moll, 2014; Blattman et al., 2020), 
suggesting the possibility of long-run convergence for agents who begin 
with low initial wealth. Our findings suggest a possible resolution of 
this tension by highlighting the role of leverage constraints, which can 
generate persistent wealth differences through spatial misallocation.

The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present stylized 
facts on the Black–white leverage gap. In Section 3, we present quasi-
experimental evidence on the contribution of down payment require-
ments to the spatial allocation of Black households. Section 4 describes 
our dynamic model of housing choice and Section 5 discusses the cali-
bration. Section 6 reports the results and Section 7 provides robustness 
around these estimates. We conclude in Section 8.

2. Data and stylized facts: The Black–white leverage gap

We begin by documenting the main stylized fact that motivates 
our analysis: Black borrowers have substantially higher leverage than 
white borrowers at the time of mortgage origination. We exploit re-
cent changes in Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data report-
ing to accurately and comprehensively measure this racial leverage 
gap. We show that higher leverage comes because Black households 
make smaller down payments in dollar terms, and that it is facilitated 
by mortgages originated through the Federal Housing Administration 
(FHA),  which  are  disproportionately  used  by  Black  borrowers.  The 
differential use of high leverage mortgages and the FHA suggests that 
leverage constraints — the maximum size of home a buyer can purchase 
with a given down payment — bind more tightly for Black households.

4 

2.1. Data

We combine several sources of micro-data. Our primary source is 
loan-level HMDA data. HMDA captures close to the full universe of 
mortgage originations and contains comprehensive information on race 
and ethnicity. Crucially for our analysis, HMDA began to include home 
prices and loan-to-value ratios in 2018, allowing a direct window into 
leverage differences by race in recent years. Our benchmark sample 
focuses on owner-occupied, first-lien, new origination mortgages. We 
supplement this with American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year esti-
mates at the census tract and county level. We use a series of additional 
datasets for the calibration of our model. To connect information on 
borrowers over time and measure moving rates, we use Infutor data (as 
discussed in Diamond et al., 2019). We also use the Current Population 
Survey (CPS), the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), and the Survey 
of Consumer Finances Plus (SCF+) as described in Kuhn et al. (2020).

2.2. The racial leverage gap

Panel A of Fig.  1 presents the racial leverage gap: Black borrowers 
have strikingly higher leverage ratios at mortgage origination. This plot 
shows the distribution of combined loan-to-value ratios at origination 
for  Black  and  white  borrowers  from  HMDA  in  2018.  A  substantial 
fraction of Black borrowers — roughly 60% — have initial combined 
loan-to-value-ratios (CLTV) above 95 (implying a down payment of 
less  than  5%).  This  stands  in  contrast  to  less  than  30%  of  white 
borrowers. Indeed, the median CLTV for Black borrowers is 96.5 (vs. 90 
for white borrowers). These differences persist and even grow beyond 
origination. For example, the median LTV for Black borrowers with 
mortgage debt in the SCF+ in 2016 is roughly 66, compared to 52 for 
white borrowers.4

The presence of large Black–white differences in leverage shows that 
racial housing gaps go beyond well-studied differences in homeowner-
ship. A disproportionate share of black borrowers take effectively the 
maximum leverage available in the U.S. mortgage system (an initial 
CLTV of 96.5). This suggests that Black households are more likely to 
be close to their leverage limits.5

Appendix Table A.I shows that leverage differences are robust to 
controlling for geography, income, or other borrower characteristics 
(although wealth is not observable in our data). This is not to suggest 
that the leverage gap represents a causal effect of race. Differences in 
leverage likely reflect pre-existing and historically determined dispar-
ities in wealth and access to capital that go beyond current income.6 

4 The concentration of minority borrowers in high leverage loans — par-
ticularly Black borrowers, but also Hispanic borrowers — is especially stark 
when examining the composition of borrowers across the LTV distribution by 
race and ethnicity. As shown in Panel B of Fig.  1, white borrowers make up 
roughly 80% of the total borrower pool across the distribution below 90 CLTV, 
but only 64% of the borrower pool among those with CLTV over 95.

5 Borrowers typically face two explicit financial constraints when originat-
ing a mortgage. One is a leverage (LTV) constraint, which reflects the extent to 
which borrowers have access to capital to make a down payment. The other is 
a payment-to-income (PTI) constraint, which captures the loan burden relative 
to current flow income. We find that racial differences in PTI are significantly 
less salient than for LTV (see Appendix Figure A.II), which motivates our focus 
on the LTV constraint.

6 For example, SCF data from 2019 shows that Black and Hispanic fam-
ilies  are  much  less  likely  to  receive  inheritances,  gifts,  and  other  family 
support (Bhutta et al., 2020). Close to 30% of white families received an 
inheritance in the survey, compared to 10% of Black families and just 7% 
of Hispanic families. Charles and Hurst (2002) emphasize the role of parental 
transfers as drivers of racial differences in housing behavior (see also Benetton 
et al., 2022). Expected family transfers are much higher for white households 
in the SCF as well. In addition to formal bequests, which tend to be received 
later in the life-cycle, white families also experience higher levels of family 
support;  72%  report  being  able  to  receive  $3000  from  family  or  friends, 
compared to just 41% of Black households.

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 1.  The Black–white leverage gap. 
Notes: Panel A plots the distribution of leverage at origination for Black and white borrowers. Panel B plots the share of borrowers by race and ethnicity across the leverage 
distribution. Data includes all owner occupied, first lien, new purchase mortgages, excluding VA, FSA, and RHS loans in the 2018 HMDA data with combined loan to value ratios 
from 20–100. In Panel A Black and white categories are inclusive of Hispanic households, while in Panel B these categories refer to non-Hispanic households.

Racial disparities also persist when analyzing down payments in dollar 
terms—Black borrowers typically purchase homes with much smaller 
down payments, and are much more likely to post less than $10,000 
when purchasing a home. This confirms that the leverage gap is not a 
consequence of Black households choosing more expensive homes.

In the presence of a down payment requirement, available wealth 
determines the set of possible housing and location choices for prospec-
tive  homeowners.  As  a  result,  the  very  presence  of  a  leverage  gap 
suggests  that  down  payment  requirements  have  differential  spatial 
consequences for Black households. There are two potential concerns 
with this interpretation. First, higher leverage by Black borrowers could 
potentially reflect higher preferences for debt or other demand side 
factors. Second, it could reflect supply-side factors, like the availability 
of FHA loans in Black neighborhoods. An examination of the wealth 
distribution in the SCF data helps to mitigate these concerns. Panel A 

of Appendix Figure A.I shows the fraction of households with enough 
liquid wealth to post the required down payment at various points in 
the national wealth distribution. A large fraction (nearly 70%) of Black 
individuals appear constrained in their ability to purchase a house in 
the 25th percentile of the national distribution, and less than 10% have 
the wealth to meet the down payment requirement for the median 
home. Panel B of this figure indicates that constraints also bind within 
MSAs.

2.3. The FHA provides the dominant channel for high leverage loans

The  Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA)  is  the  largest  source 
of high leverage loans for all borrowers, including Black households. 
Panels A and B of Appendix Figure A.III show that the majority of very 
high leverage loans are originated through the FHA (and that nearly all 

5 

A. Gupta et al.

FHA loans are high leverage). In our 2018 sample, FHA loans represent 
under 2 percent of mortgages with initial CLTV below 80 but nearly 70 
percent of those with initial CLTV over 95.

The FHA system was created in the wake of the Great Depression, 
when private lenders typically required much higher down payments 
for private mortgages. In its current form, the FHA provides approved 
lenders with 100% guarantees against default for qualifying loans. In 
exchange for an upfront fee and recurring insurance payment, borrow-
ers with credit scores above 580 may make down payments as low 
as 3.5% (an initial LTV of 96.5).7 While it is possible to get a high 
leverage loan through a conventional channel (including conforming 
loans sold to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac) doing so requires costly 
private mortgage insurance that varies substantially with borrower risk. 
There is a significant clustering precisely at the limit of 96.5 for FHA 
loans, while the modal conventional loan has an initial CLTV of 80.

Given the relatively high leverage taken by Black borrowers, the 
FHA is the key origination channel. As panel C of Appendix Figure A.III 
shows, more that 50% of loans to Black households in our 2018 sample 
were through the FHA, compared to roughly 20 percent of loans to 
white households. While the FHA allows borrowers a relatively low-
cost way of accessing high leverage loans, only certain loans qualify. 
Perhaps the most important constraint is that the FHA imposes county-
specific loan caps that limit the amount a household is able to borrow. 
As it currently stands, these caps are set at 115 percent of last year’s 
median home price for the local area subject to a nationwide floor 
($356,362  for  the  year  2021)  and  a  nationwide  ceiling  ($822,375 
in 2021).8 As a consequence, the relaxed down-payment requirement 
enabled by the FHA is only relevant for a portion of the housing stock.

3. Reduced  form  evidence:  Leverage  constraints  bind  more  for 
black households

We next show direct evidence that leverage limits differentially dis-
tort the borrowing, purchase, and location choices of Black borrowers, 
with real consequences for access to opportunity. The presence of a 
leverage constraint forces borrowers to make large down payments 
to  access  homeownership.  The  upfront  burden  tends  to  be  largest 
in  geographic  areas  with  strong  labor  markets,  good  schools,  and 
high  intergenerational  mobility.  Leverage  constraints  may  therefore 
generate spatial rationing on the basis of current wealth, rather than 
productivity or permanent income. We exploit variation in the down 
payment  requirement  generated  by  FHA  loan  caps  using  bunching 
and difference-in-difference approaches. Ultimately, we also produce 
moments from this estimation that help calibrate our model.

3.1. Down payment requirements distort loan sizes for black borrowers

We  begin  by  showing  that  Black  households  are  more  likely  to 
choose a loan precisely at the FHA cap, generating excess bunching for 
Black versus white borrowers. Below the cap, most borrowers qualify 
to put as little as 3.5 percent down, but lenders typically require larger 
down payments — often 20 percent — for loans above the cap. This 
generates  a  kink  in  the  down  payment  requirement  at  the  county-
specific  loan  cap.  The  concentration  of  borrowers  at  the  threshold 
indicates that the leverage constraint disproportionately binds for Black 
households, and that loan sizes are differentially restricted relative to 
a world with no leverage limit.

We present graphical evidence of this excess bunching in Fig.  2. 
The solid lines and dots present the distribution of originated loans 
for Black and white borrowers in $10,000 intervals, relative to the 
county-specific FHA cap (which is normalized to 0). The dashed lines 

7 Borrowers with credit scores as low as 500 can also qualify for FHA 

mortgages, but must have down payments of 10 percent.

8 See: https://archives.hud.gov/news/2020/pr20-201.cfm.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

represent estimates of the counterfactual distribution for each group in 
the absence of the cap, calculated following Chetty et al. (2011) and 
explained in more detail below.9

A first observation is that there is more mass in the left portion of 
the distribution for Black borrowers. These households tend to choose 
smaller loans (relative to the FHA cap) but the proportion of white 
borrowers begins to exceed that of Black borrowers for loans roughly 
$50,000 below the limit. Following this trend, the counterfactual dis-
tributions indicate that a substantially greater share of white borrowers 
would choose loans in the vicinity of the FHA cap in the absence of a 
limit.

The presence of the FHA cap generates substantial bunching for both 
groups, but there is noticeably more bunching for Black households. 
Despite the fact that the counterfactual density for Black households 
is  well  below  that  for  white,  the  fraction  of  loans  at  the  limit  is 
effectively identical. A relatively standard bunching estimator allows 
us to quantify this excess mass. We first fit a 7th order polynomial to 
the number of loans 𝐶𝑗 in each $10,000 bin of loan sizes, considering 
$150,000 on either side of the county-specific FHA threshold 

𝐶𝑗 =

7
∑

𝑖=0

𝑖 (𝑍𝑗 )𝑖 +
𝛽0

1
∑

𝑖=−1

𝑖 ⋅ 𝟏{𝑍𝑗 = 𝑖} + 𝜀0
𝛾 0
𝑗 .

(1)

Here, 𝑍𝑗 is the loan size relative to the threshold in $10,000 intervals. 
The inclusion of the 𝛾 0
𝑖  coefficients allows us to exclude a bunching 
region (the threshold itself and the $10,000 bins above and below) from 
influencing our 𝛽0
𝑖  estimates. A basic estimate of the counterfactual 
̂𝛽0
distribution is then  ̂𝐶 0
𝑖 (𝑍𝑗 )𝑖, and a basic estimate of quantity 
of bunching is given by  ̂𝑏0 = ∑1
𝑖=−1 𝛾𝑖. However, this overstates the 
number  of  bunchers,  because  it  does  not  account  for  the  fact  that 
borrowers at the threshold will relocate above the threshold in the 
counterfactual.  We  correct  this,  following  Chetty  et  al.  (2011),  by 
shifting the counterfactual to the right of the threshold to satisfy: 

𝑗 = ∑7

𝑖=0

(

𝐶𝑗 ⋅

1 + 𝟏{𝑗 > 𝑅}

̂𝐵𝑁
𝑗>1 𝐶𝑗

∑

)

=

7
∑

𝑖=0

𝛽𝑖(𝑍𝑗 )𝑖 +

1
∑

𝑖=−1

𝛾𝑖 ⋅ 𝟏{𝑍𝑗 = 𝑖} + 𝜀𝑗 ,

(2)

where  ̂𝐵𝑁 = ∑1
𝑖=−1 ̂𝛾𝑖. This is computed with an iterative, fixed point 
approach,  and  standard  errors  are  bootstrapped  as  in  Chetty  et  al. 
(2011). Our bunching estimates are the excess mass in the bunching 
region

̂𝑏 =

̂𝐵𝑁

∑1

𝑖=−1

̂𝐶𝑗
3

.

We compute this separately for Black and white households.

Fig.  3 presents the estimates of ̂𝑏 separately for both groups. The 
excess mass near the threshold is over 107% of the counterfactual mass 
for black households, and under 60% of the counterfactual mass for 
white households. We get similar estimates when considering only a 
period in which FHA limits were relatively tight (2014–2019). This 
evidence indicates that FHA caps are differentially binding for Black 
households. Strict leverage constraints above the threshold lead Black 
borrowers to take smaller loans than they would in an unconstrained 
world.

To  clarify  the  concept  of  leverage  constraints  for  Black  house-
holds, we draw a distinction between the leverage constraint itself and 
the leverage limit. The leverage constraint sets a maximum borrow-
ing amount relative to house value, while the leverage limit defines 
the  required  down  payment.  When  we  say  Black  households  face 
tighter leverage constraints, we mean they are relatively more likely 
to take loans near the maximum allowed loan-to-value ratio, even if 
this maximum is higher through programs like the FHA.

9 See Heilbron (2022) for further analysis on unconditional bunching at the 

FHA cap.

6 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 2.  Differential bunching at county FHA limits for black households.
Notes: Solid lines and dots show the fraction of Black and white households in with mortgages in each $10,000 interval surrounding the county specific FHA limit. Dashed lines 
denote counterfactual distributions constructed following Chetty et al. (2011), with the excluded bunching region defined as the $10,000 above or below the limit itself. Data 
includes all owner occupied, first lien, new purchase mortgages, excluding VA, FSA, and RHS loans in the 2010–2020 HMDA data.

The binding nature of these leverage requirements is amplified as 
a consequence of minimum housing requirements and down payment 
constraints. Houses are not available in a continuous price distribution, 
resulting in a minimum cost for starter homes. This fact, combined 
with down payment requirements, means Black households are more 
likely to hit their borrowing limit when purchasing homes. Therefore, 
the higher leverage ratios observed for Black borrowers cannot be in-
terpreted as indicating fewer financial constraints. Instead, they reflect 
households using the maximum available leverage to afford even lower-
cost housing, indicating a more binding overall financial constraint 
compared to other groups who might have more flexibility in their 
borrowing and housing choices.

3.2. Down payment requirements distort location choices for black house-
holds

We next ask whether leverage limits have real consequences for the 
home buying and location choices of Black households. It is possible, 
in principle, that the distortions in loan size shown in Section 3.1, have 
minimal geographic consequences. Prospective buyers may select less 
expensive housing in the same location, finance the purchase with other 
means, or switch to the rental market.

The  basic  descriptive  patterns  in  the  data  suggest  that  leverage 
constraints meaningfully impact where Black households buy and live. 
The analysis in Appendix Tables B.I and B.II, which we describe in 

7 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 3.  Excess mass at the FHA threshold for black and white borrowers.
Notes: Estimates of excess mass at the county specific FHA limit for Black and white borrowers. Estimates and bootstrapped standard errors (shown in parenthesis) constructed 
following Chetty et al. (2011), with the excluded bunching region defined as the $10,000 bin above or below the limit itself. Sample includes all owner occupied, first lien, new 
purchase mortgages, excluding VA, FSA, and RHS loans in the 2010–2019 HMDA data within $150,000 of the FHA limit. Error bars in plots represent 95% confidence intervals. 
∗𝑝 < .1; ∗∗𝑝 < .05; ∗∗∗𝑝 < .01.

detail in Appendix B, shows that looser leverage limits, as measured by 
access to 3.5% down FHA loans, are closely related to the presence of 
Black borrowers. Less restrictive FHA loan caps coincide with a greater 
share of Black mortgage borrowers, and increases in loan caps correlate 
with increases in the Black share. Furthermore, when a given location 
or property value becomes eligible for an FHA loan (e.g., because FHA 
loan caps rise) the likelihood a buyer is Black increases. These patterns 
hold even with rich fixed effects aimed at isolating within-location 
variation in eligibility driven by year-to-year changes in FHA loan caps.

Natural experiment: A major reduction in FHA loan caps

The main concern with the descriptive patterns presented in Ap-
pendix B is that FHA loan caps are not exogenously given. They are 
determined, to some degree, by local home prices, and are thus closely 
associated with gentrification, urbanization, and other factors that co-
vary with local demographics. To address these potential endogeneity 
concerns,  we  present  results  from  a  natural  experiment  to  demon-
strate that leverage constraints causally impact where Black households 
choose to buy and live. Specifically, we show that plausibly exogenous 
changes in FHA caps impact the composition of borrowers and residents 
in a geographic area. When leverage constraints are tighter (FHA caps 
are lower) fewer Black households originate mortgages and the Black 
population falls.

Our strategy is built around a major reduction in FHA loan caps 
that came when temporary measures enacted during the 2008 financial 
crisis were rolled back. The Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 expanded 
loan caps for high cost areas, temporarily setting the cap at 125% of the 

area median, with a nationwide ceiling of $729,250. From 2009–2013, 
these  caps  remained  at  125%  of  the  pre-2008  median  price,  even 
in areas that experienced declining home prices over the intervening 
period. In 2013, the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD) announced that these expansions would expire at the beginning 
of 2014, with FHA caps dropping to 115% of the local median and the 
nationwide ceiling dropping to $625,500.10

This drop is evident in the red line in Panel A of Fig.  4, which shows 
the average FHA cap for treated census tracts (all those that experienced 
a 2014 decline in the FHA cap, representing 41% of tracts that appear 
in our 2014 HMDA sample). The limits were effectively unchanged 
from 2008 to 2013, but fell sharply in 2014 (by roughly $75,000) 
after the expansions were rolled back. The blue line, which captures 
all other tracts, is similarly flat from 2008 to 2013, but displays no 
corresponding reduction in 2014. We label these control tracts.11

https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/EFFFHALLIADJUST2014-

10 See 
FINAL.PDF.
11 Defining treatment vs. control in this manner invites a potential endo-
geneity concern. For example, a moderately high cost area that experiences a 
sharp increase in home prices in 2013 might be labeled as control if 115% of 
median prices exceeds the limits set in 2008. In principle, this could induce 
a correlation between treatment status and post-2008 home price trends. To 
address this, we consider an alternative ex-ante definition in our regressions, 
defining all tracts above the nationwide minimum in 2008 as treated and 
assigning all others to the control group. This assigns in 38% of tracts to the 

8 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 4.  Reduction in FHA caps alter mortgage and location choices for black households.
Notes: Panel A shows the average FHA cap for single unit properties across treated (in red) and control (in blue) census tracts. Treated units are those with reductions in the FHA 
cap in 2014. Panels B and C show coefficients from event study regressions comparing treated and control units. Specifically, we plot 𝛽𝑘 from the following regression, with 2012 
as the omitted year.

y𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛾𝑡 +

2020
∑

𝑘=2008

𝛽𝑘(Treated𝑗 ⋅ 𝟏{𝑡=𝑘}) + 𝜀𝑗𝑡.

In panel B, 𝑦𝑗𝑡 is the share of black borrowers ×100 at the tract level in our HMDA sample, which includes all owner occupied, first lien, new purchase mortgages. In Panel C, 𝑦𝑗𝑡
is the share of black residents×100 in the tract in the 5 year ACS (which began to be reported in 2009). Solid vertical line denotes 2014 reduction in FHA caps, dashed vertical 
line denotes announcement of the reduction in 2013. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

A difference-in-differences approach

We implement a difference-in-differences approach to test whether 
this reduction in FHA caps differentially impacted Black households. 
We consider the following regression specification for tract 𝑗 in year 𝑡:

Share Black𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛽(Treated𝑗 × 𝟏{𝑡≥2014}) + 𝜀𝑗𝑡.

(3)

Here,  𝛼𝑗  and  𝛾𝑡  are  tract  and  year  fixed  effects,  respectively.  We 
define Share Black𝑗𝑡 either as the share of originations in the tract by 
Black households in HMDA data (to examine the impact on mortgage 
borrowing)  or  as  the  share  of  Black  residents  relative  to  the  tract 
population in ACS data (to examine the impact on the spatial allocation 
of households).

treatment group. The plot in Panel A and our results below are essentially 
unchanged under this definition.

Results: Black home-buying and population share fall

Panels B and C of Fig.  4 present event study versions of the specifi-
cation in Eq.  (3) that interact the 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑗 indicator with each calendar 
year. We do not see evidence of pre-trends in either outcome (although 
there are fluctuations in the Black share of mortgage borrowers in 
the years immediately following the financial crisis). However, we see 
meaningful declines in treated tracts in terms of mortgage borrowing 
and residency for Black households after the FHA caps were reduced. 
This effect appears to grow over time, particularly when considering 
the population share (perhaps unsurprising, given that this variable 
represents a stock rather than a flow and the structure of the ACS).

The  results  in  Panel  A  of  Table   1  show  that  tighter  leverage
constraints differentially impact the homeownership choices of Black 
households. The dependent variable is the tract-level share of mortgage 
borrowers.  Our  estimates  indicate  that  the  2014  reduction  in  FHA 
caps caused the share of Black borrowers to drop by roughly half a 

9 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Table 1
Impact of FHA cap reduction on mortgage origination and location choices for black borrowers.

  Treated × Post

  Mean of Dep. Var.
  N
  Tract FEs
  Year FEs

  Treated × Post

Panel A: Impact of FHA Cap Reduction on Share
Black Mortgage Borrowers (%)
Treated=Any Reduction in 2014
Full Sample
−0.487***
(0.179)

High Black Pop.
−1.159***
(0.378)

6.20
700778

12.1
252281

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Panel B: Impact of FHA Cap Reduction on Share
Black Population (%)
Treated=Any Reduction in 2014
Full Sample
−0.145**
(0.072)

High Black Pop.
−0.421***
(0.157)

Treated=Above Floor in 2008
Full Sample
−0.545***
(0.173)

6.20
699710

Yes
Yes

High Black Pop.  
−1.291***
(0.365)

12.0
252001

Yes
Yes

Treated=Above Floor in 2008
Full Sample
−0.174**
(0.071)

High Black Pop.  
−0.475***
(0.155)

Yes
Yes

13.3
675204

  Mean of Dep. Var.
  N
  Tract FEs
  Year FEs
 Notes: Coefficients from difference-in-difference regressions comparing treated census tracts before and after the 2014 reduction in FHA caps. Specifically, we show 𝛽 from the 
following regression:
y𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛽(Treated𝑗 ⋅ 1{𝑡≥2014}) + 𝜀𝑗𝑡.
We consider two definitions of treatment. Any reduction in 2014 refers to all tracts that experience a reduction in the FHA cap in 2014. Above floor in 2008 refers to all tracts with 
an FHA cap above the nationwide floor in 2008. In panel A, 𝑦𝑗𝑡 is the share of black borrowers ×100 at the tract level in our HMDA sample, which includes all owner occupied, 
first lien, new purchase mortgages. In Panel B, 𝑦𝑗𝑡 is the share of black residents×100 in the tract in the 5 year ACS. Standard errors, clustered at the county level, are included in 
parentheses. ∗𝑝 < .1; ∗∗𝑝 < .05; ∗∗∗𝑝 < .01.

26.2
252000

26.2
252280

13.3
674158

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

percentage point in treated tracts (relative to controls). Because Black 
borrowers are responsible for a small share of all mortgage originations, 
this  represents  a  decline  of  nearly  8  percent  of  the  mean.  When 
restricting to tracts with comparatively large Black populations (those 
above the national median in 2010), the impact is even larger: a decline 
of over 1.1 percentage points, almost 10 percent of the mean. The fact 
that the Black share of all mortgage borrowing declined indicates that 
Black households did not substitute to other conventional high-leverage 
mortgage products as access to FHA lending declined.

This drop in homeownership in turn distorts location choices for 
Black households (Panel B). Our estimates suggest that treated areas 
experienced a decline in the Black share of the population, with even 
larger effects in areas with a high initial concentration of Black resi-
dents. Our findings therefore indicate that the tightening of leverage 
constraints has real geographic consequences. Adjustment to the rental 
stock does not substitute for homeownership, so the impacts of tighter 
leverage affect where Black households live.

Sensitivity of mortgage borrowing to the FHA

The  implicit  assumption  underlying  our  difference-in-differences 
approach is that reductions in FHA lending were the source of changes 
in borrowing and location decisions for Black borrowers. Panel A of 
Appendix Table A.II shows a basic prerequisite for this assumption to 
hold: the 2014 tightening in FHA caps led to a differential reduction 
in FHA lending in treated areas. FHA lending fell by 5 percentage 
points, or roughly 15 percent of the mean, in impacted census tracts. 
This effect is statistically significant at any conventional level, with 
an F-statistic over 65. In Panel B of Appendix Table A.II, we combine 
this result with our previous evidence to estimate the sensitivity of 
mortgage borrowing by Black households to the presence of the FHA. 
Specifically, we estimate the following IV regression:
Share Black𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛽 ̂FHA Share𝑗𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗𝑡.

In the first stage, we predict the fraction of originations in a tract 
that are originated through the FHA channel using our difference-in-
difference approach.

This provides an estimate of 

𝛥(𝜋𝑗𝑡
)
, a (linearized) version of the 
Black
𝛥(𝓁𝐿𝑇 𝑉 +
𝑗𝑡
sensitivity. Our estimates indicate that a 10 percentage point reduction 
in  the  share  of  FHA  loans  generates  a  roughly  1  percentage  point 
reduction in the share of Black borrowers. Crucially, this also provides 
us with a moment that we are directly able to match in our structural 
model. We discuss our calibration in more detail in Section 5.

)

3.3. Leverage constraints and opportunity

Treated  census  tracts  have  stronger  labor  markets,  compared  to 
control  tracts.  For  example,  median  income  was  30  percent  higher 
in treated versus control areas in 2014. The reduction in the Black 
population in treated tracts generated by the 2014 FHA cap reduction 
therefore represents a shift of Black households away from more pros-
perous locations. While the causal effect of place is a complex notion 
that we consider in more detail in our structural model, the pattern 
in this natural experiment reflects a broader relationship across the 
country. Leverage constraints bind most tightly in locations with more 
robust labor markets, better test scores, and greater intergenerational 
mobility.

In particular, larger down payments are required in locations that 
appear to offer the greatest opportunity. Panel A of Appendix Table 
A.III shows that borrowers make larger down payments in census tracts 
with higher incomes, a larger number of reachable high-paying jobs, 
higher test scores for children, and greater intergenerational mobility 
(as  measured  by  the  predicted  income  rank  of  local  children  with 
parents in the 25th percentile of the distribution, as estimated in Chetty 
et al. (2018)). These higher down payments reflect two factors. The first 
is simply higher home prices. Unsurprisingly, labor market prospects 
and other amenities are capitalized into home values. The second is 
the  tightness  of  the  leverage  constraint.  Given  the  structure  of  the 
mortgage market and the FHA system, access to high-leverage loans 
disappears as prices rise and, consequentially, as labor markets, test 
scores, and mobility improve. The remaining panels of Appendix Table 
A.III show that these measures of opportunity negatively correlate with 
(i) borrower leverage, (ii) the fraction of the housing stock that is 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 5.  Opportunity and leverage constraints in the San Francisco bay and Sacramento metro areas.
Notes: County level characteristics in the San Francisco Bay and Sacramento Metro Area. Median down payment, share FHA eligible, and Black share of mortgages derived from 
2018 owner occupied, new purchase mortgages in HMDA, where share FHA eligible refers to the fraction properties that satisfy 0.965 × Price𝑖𝑗𝑡
≤ FHA Limit𝑗𝑡. Median income based 
on 2018 5-year ACS county level estimates.

eligible  for  FHA  loans,  and  (iii)  the  fraction  of  mortgages  that  are 
actually originated through the FHA.

This pattern indicates that leverage constraints may ration access 
to opportunity, at least for those who value homeownership. Buying in 
a high-opportunity area requires substantial upfront wealth. Because 
potential buyers cannot borrow against future earnings to finance the 
down payment, this creates differences in access to homeownership, 
and therefore opportunity, on the basis of current liquidity rather than 
lifetime  earnings.  The  maps  in  Fig.   5  provide  one  example  of  this 
phenomenon, contrasting the San Francisco Bay Area — one of the 
nation’s most expensive and productive regions — with the Sacramento 
Metro Area.

There is a substantial leverage burden in San Francisco: the median 
down payment exceeded $300,000 in much of the region in 2018, in 
part because a small fraction of homes can be purchased via the FHA. 
In contrast, the median down payment in Sacramento county was close 
to $25,000 in 2018 and a large fraction of homes were eligible for 
financing via the FHA, at least in principle. The leverage burden goes 
hand in hand with labor markets: median income in San Francisco 
county exceeds $100,000, but falls below $65,000 in Sacramento. Fi-
nally, these patterns reflect where Black households ultimately choose 

to buy and live. Less than 1% of mortgage originations in core Bay 
Area  counties  went  to  Black  households,  compared  to  over  5%  in 
Sacramento County. While the Bay Area provides a particularly striking 
case, the same pattern exists in relatively strong labor markets across 
the country.

4. A dynamic model of housing markets

This section describes a life-cycle model of the cross-section of hous-
ing markets with overlapping generations of heterogeneous households, 
incomplete markets, and endogenous house prices and rents. Motivated 
by  our  empirical  findings,  the  key  feature  is  a  new  type  of  2  ×  2 
heterogeneity. Households belong to two demographic groups, which 
correspond to Black and white populations. Over their life-cycles, they 
move and locate across two types of housing areas, which correspond to 
low- and high-opportunity locations. The degree to which households 
accumulate wealth depends jointly on their choices of area, housing, 
leverage, and financial assets. These choices, in turn, depend on their 
initial groups and areas, and within those, on their age, income, wealth, 
and homeownership.

11 

A. Gupta et al.

The main friction is that, in the presence of leverage constraints, 
groups with low levels of initial wealth will find it difficult to access 
more expensive properties in high-opportunity areas, especially when 
expensive properties have tighter leverage requirements. This limits 
income opportunities and wealth accumulation for households with 
worse initial conditions for two reasons. First, these areas offer more 
valuable housing units as investment assets in dollar terms. Because 
households have a finite lifespan, the value of the house that they 
are able to buy determines the wealth they accumulate over their life-
cycles, and the value of bequests left to the next generation in the same 
group. Second, these areas offer higher labor market returns, which 
allow households to save more every period and accumulate wealth 
faster for themselves and for future cohorts within the same group.

4.1. Environment

The economy is populated by overlapping generations of heteroge-
neous risk-averse households. Markets are incomplete, and house prices 
and rents are endogenous. Population size is stationary, and there is a 
continuum of measure 1 of households with rational expectations. Time 
is discrete.

Life-cycle.  Households live for twenty periods, which each correspond 
to four years. They work for the first eleven periods and then retire. 
Workers earn labor income and retirees earn pension income, which is 
lower on average. Shares 𝜋𝑔 of households are born into demographic 
groups 𝑔 = 𝐵, 𝑊  (Black or white).  In each of those, shares 𝜋𝑗
𝑔 of 
households are born into areas 𝑗 = 𝐿, 𝐻 (low- or high-opportunity).

Preferences.  Households have constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) 
preferences over a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregator 
of nondurable consumption 𝑐𝑖𝑡 and housing services ℎ𝑖𝑡. Homeowners 
can own one home in a single size, which delivers a fixed flow of 
services ℎ. Renters consume continuous quantities of housing services 
]
. Homeownership status and location are determined by 
ℎ𝑖𝑡 ∈
households’ optimal discrete choices and two i.i.d. idiosyncratic shocks, 
whose  realizations  differ  across  households,  which  capture  residual 
exogenous motives for owning and moving.12 The instantaneous utility 
function of household 𝑖 at date 𝑡 is given by: 

0, ℎ

(

𝑢 (𝑐𝑖𝑡, ℎ𝑖𝑡

)

=

[

(
(1 − 𝛼)𝑐𝜖

𝑖𝑡 + 𝛼ℎ𝜖
𝑖𝑡

) 1
𝜖

]1−𝛾

1 − 𝛾

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

housing consumption for the next cohort to be richer.13 Households 
derive utility 𝑢 from leaving a bequest 𝐵𝑡+1: 

)1−𝛾

(

1+

𝐵𝑡+1
𝐵
1−𝛾

,

)

(5)

(
0, Wealth𝑡+1 − 𝐵𝑒𝑥

𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1) = 𝛹
where 𝐵𝑡+1 = Wealth𝑡+1 − 𝜏𝐵 max
and Wealth𝑡+1 = Financial Wealth𝑡+1 + Housing Wealth𝑡+1.
Bequests consist of financial and housing wealth, net of estate taxes 
𝜏𝐵 that apply to wealth levels above the exemption threshold 𝐵𝑒𝑥. The 
parameter 𝛹 reflects parents’ concern for leaving wealth to the next 
cohort, which differ between demographic groups 𝑔, and 𝐵 measures 
the extent to which bequests are a luxury good. When households die, 
bequests 𝐵𝑔,𝑡+1 are redistributed to young households within the same 
group as a function of their age, which accounts for how the probability 
of  receiving  a  transfer  varies  with  age.  The  bequest  redistribution 
schedule determines households’ initial endowments by age, 𝐵𝑔,𝑎.

𝜀

)

𝑖𝑖𝑑

) .

(6)

= 𝑔𝑎 + 𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜇𝑗 ,

Income and agglomeration externality.  Households face idiosyncratic in-
come risk. For workers, the logarithm of income for a household of age 
𝑎 whose demographic group is 𝑔 and whose current area type is 𝑗 is 
given by: 
(𝑦𝑖,𝑎,𝑗,𝑔,𝑡

log
𝑒𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜌𝑒𝑒𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡,
∼  (𝜇𝑔, 𝜎2
𝜀
Households receive income depending on their age, idiosyncratic 
productivity, demographic group, and area. First, 𝑔𝑎 is the log of the 
deterministic, hump-shaped life-cycle income profile. Second, workers 
from different demographic groups have different income processes: 
𝑒𝑖,𝑡  is  the  log  of  the  persistent  idiosyncratic  component  of  income, 
and 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 is the log of the corresponding shock, which is drawn from a 
Normal distribution whose mean 𝜇𝑔 differs between Black and white 
households. Importantly, a lower mean 𝜇𝑔 for the log of income 𝑒 for 
Black households implies both a lower mean and more downside risk 
for the level of income 𝑦 that enters the household problem (given the 
same volatility of idiosyncratic log income 𝜎𝜀), which matches the data. 
Third, 𝜇𝑗 is an endogenous spatial income shifter that differs between 
low- and high-opportunity areas as a function of their respective shares 
of high-productivity workers: 

+ ̃𝛯𝑖𝑡 − ̃𝑚𝑖𝑡.

(4)

𝜇𝑗 = 𝜁 𝑗

0 × (Share high 𝑒 in 𝑗)𝜁1 ,

(7)

Idiosyncratic shocks.  The homeownership shock  ̃𝛯𝑖𝑡 captures residual 
unmodeled benefits (when positive) and costs (when negative) of home-
ownership. The moving cost shock  ̃𝑚𝑖𝑡 affects households’ propensity 
to switch between areas, in addition to local fundamentals. The two 
shocks follow type I Extreme Value distributions, and cancel out in the 
aggregate. Their respective means 𝛯𝑗
𝑔 differ between groups 
and areas if they own or move (they are zero otherwise). The scale 
parameters are fixed to 1.

𝑔 and 𝑚𝑗

Intergenerational wealth accumulation.  Households face mortality risk, 
with  survival  probabilities  {𝑝𝑎
}  that  vary  over  the  life-cycle.  They 
make realistic voluntary and accidental bequests that account for each 
cohort’s intergenerational wealth accumulation motive, which creates 
an incentive for moving to opportunity. The voluntary bequest motive 
captures the fact that some parents sacrifice their own non-durable and 

12 Idiosyncratic shocks are a standard feature of structural models of hous-
ing (e.g., Guren and McQuade, 2020) and migration (e.g., Kennan and Walker, 
2011). As we show in the robustness section, group variability in these shocks 
is helpful for the quantitative fit of the model but is not necessary for the 
mechanism. They are calibrated to match the residual home ownership and 
moving rates for each demographic group and area type that are not accounted 
for by households’ rational discrete choices.

where Share high 𝑒 in 𝑗 is the area share of high-productivity workers, 
and 𝜁 𝑗
0 and 𝜁1 respectively determine average income differences be-
tween  areas  and  the  strength  of  the  agglomeration  externality
(e.g., Moretti (2004)). Households living in different areas, as a conse-
quence, receive different income boosts (e.g., Bilal and Rossi-Hansberg, 
2021).  The  distribution  of  income  across  areas  reflects  a  dynamic 
relationship between spatial income shifters and population composi-
tion, with the shifters themselves reflecting endogenous skill sorting. 
This creates a feedback loop where area incomes and resident skill 
levels mutually reinforce each other. For retirees, income is modeled 
to replicate the main features of the U.S. pension system (see Appendix 
C).

Financial  asset.  Households  can  invest  in  a  financial  asset  with  an 
exogenous rate of return 𝑟 > 0 to accumulate wealth. Investments in 
the financial asset face a no-borrowing constraint, such that households 
cannot borrow against their future income unless they buy a house.

13 We consider a warm-glow bequest motive as in most life-cycle models 
with overlapping generations, following De Nardi (2004). A more sophisticated 
form of altruism would generate strategic interactions between cohorts and 
increase the number of state variables (already six in this setup).

12 

A. Gupta et al.

Mortgages.  Households can invest in housing. Home buyers can use 
long-term amortizing mortgages to borrow, subject to LTV constraints 
which only apply at origination. As in the data, the LTV constraints are 
the same across areas but they depend on loan sizes. Loans (negative 
positions 𝑏𝑡+1 < 0) that are below the area-dependent FHA loan cap 
𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐿𝑇 𝑉  (equivalently, a lower 
𝑗
down payment requirement), which corresponds to FHA loans, than 
loans that are above the cap and are subject to a tighter LTV limit 
𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉
𝐿𝑇 𝑉

 are subject to a looser LTV limit 𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴

, which corresponds to conventional loans: 

{

𝜃𝐿𝑇 𝑉 (𝑏𝑡+1) =

𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 ,
𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 < 𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴

𝐿𝑇 𝑉 , otherwise.

if |𝑏𝑡+1|

≤ 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝑗

.

(8)

Borrowers face an exogenous mortgage rate 𝑟𝑏 > 𝑟, which depends 
on  the  loan  size  such  that  𝑟𝑏
𝐹 𝐻𝐴 > 𝑟𝑏
𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉 .  We  denote  ̃𝑟 = 𝑟𝑏  if 
households borrow, and ̃𝑟 = 𝑟 if net savings 𝑏𝑡+1 are positive. The amor-
tization schedule of mortgages is exogenous, and they must be fully 
repaid when old households die. Default is endogenous and mortgages 
are non-recourse. If borrowers default, they face a utility cost 𝑑 and 
subsequently become renters in the same area.

Homeownership.  Homeownership  comes  with  three  benefits.  First,
owning allows buyers to access larger homes producing more valu-
able housing services, as the owner-occupied and the rental markets 
are segmented (e.g., Greenwald and Guren, 2021).  Second, owning 
can improve consumption smoothing, since buying with a mortgage 
allows  owners  to  only  pay  a  fraction  of  the  purchase  price  in  the 
current period while renters have to pay the full rent.14 Third, owning 
gives households idiosyncratic utility benefits captured by  ̃𝛯. These 
motives are consistent with the empirical literature on the benefits of 
homeownership (e.g., Goodman and Mayer, 2018; Sodini et al., 2023).

2  ×  2  housing  markets.  The  two  demographic  groups  differ  in  the 
probability that a household is born in low- or high-opportunity areas 
𝜋𝑗
𝑔, in their initial wealth 𝑏0,𝑔, and in income processes.

Every period, households can move and choose to live in either of 
the two area types. Areas differ in their income boost 𝜇𝑗 , in the level 
𝐼 𝑗 and the price-elasticity 𝜌𝑗 of housing supply, and in the FHA loan 
cap 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
. They also differ in the shares of mortgages with the two LTV 
𝑗
limits 𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴
, which are endogenous. Equilibrium differences 
in house prices 𝑃𝑗 and rents 𝑅𝑗 across areas arise endogenously as a 
result of differences in local housing supply and demand due to these 
features.

𝐿𝑇 𝑉  and 𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉

𝐿𝑇 𝑉

Housing supply.  The total quantities of owner-occupied housing 𝐻 𝑜
rentals 𝐻 𝑟
form function of the house price, 

𝑗  and 
𝑗  in area 𝑗, in square feet, are supplied according to a reduced 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Household choices.  Every period, households make discrete choices on 
whether to move between areas, to buy or own within each area, and to 
default on their mortgage if they have one. They choose their housing 
size ℎ𝑡, nondurable consumption 𝑐𝑡, and save in a liquid and risk-free 
financial asset 𝑏𝑡+1 > 0 or borrow with a long-term mortgage 𝑏𝑡+1 < 0. 
Fixed costs of moving and of housing transactions lead to inaction 
regions (e.g., Arrow et al., 1951), in which households with a given 
combination of state variables keep their current discrete choices, while 
others switch between areas and homeownership statuses.

Timing.  A household located in a given area chooses their next area 
and homeownership, earns labor and financial income in their area of 
origin, and then chooses consumption and housing size, as well as debt 
or savings.

4.2. Household problem

This subsection describes the household problem in recursive form. 

The individual state variables are their demographic group 𝑔 = 𝐵, 𝑊
(Black  or  white),  area  type  𝑗 = 𝐿, 𝐻  (low-  or  high-opportunity), 
homeownership status  = 𝑜, 𝑟 (renter or owner), age 𝑎, net savings 𝑏, 
and endowment 𝑦. We describe the problem for low-opportunity areas 
𝐿 and any group 𝑔. The problem is similar for high-opportunity areas 
𝐻.

4.2.1. Renter

A renter chooses the area where they will move at the end of the 
period, and whether to rent or own in this new area. Denote the value 
function of a renter from group 𝑔, age 𝑎, with savings 𝑏𝑡 and income 𝑦𝑡, 
who starts the period in an area 𝐿, as 𝑉 𝑟𝐿
(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡). The envelope value 
of the value functions for each option is: 
{

}

𝑔

𝑉 𝑟𝐿
𝑔

(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max

𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑟𝐿
𝑔

, 𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑟𝐻
𝑔

, 𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑜𝐿
𝑔

, 𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑜𝐻
𝑔

.

(10)

Denote 𝑑𝑟𝐿

𝑔 ∈ {𝑟𝐿, 𝑟𝐻, 𝑜𝐿, 𝑜𝐻} the resulting policy function for the 
discrete choice problem. Then, renters choose consumption, housing 
size, and savings or mortgage debt if they borrow to purchase a house.

Inactive  renter.  The  value  of  being  inactive  and  staying  a  renter  in 
housing stock 𝐿 is given by the Bellman equation:

𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑟𝐿
𝑔

𝑢 (𝑐𝑡, ℎ𝑡

)

(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max
𝑐𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
+ (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

+ 𝛽E
𝑡

] ,

[
𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑟𝐿
𝑔

(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1)

(11)

subject to the constraint that the household’s total income, which con-
sists of labor market earnings, financial income, and intergenerational 
transfers must be sufficient to cover, and at the optimum exactly match, 
the combined costs of consumption, rental housing, and savings: 

𝑐𝑡 + 𝑅𝐿ℎ𝑡 + 𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡 + (1 + 𝑟)𝑏𝑡 + 𝐵𝑔,𝑎,

(12)

𝐻 𝑜
𝐻 𝑟

𝜌𝑗
𝑗 = 𝐼 𝑜𝑗 𝑃
𝑗
𝜌𝑗
𝑗 = 𝐼 𝑟𝑗 𝑃
𝑗

,
.

(9)

and subject to a no-borrowing constraint, as well as a constraint on the 
size of rental housing: 

The levels 𝐼 𝑗 and the price-elasticities 𝜌𝑗 of the housing supply curves 
differ between owner-occupied and rental housing  = 𝑜, 𝑟 as well as 
areas 𝑗 = 𝐿, 𝐻. The higher 𝐼, the lower the price level required to 
produce a given level of housing supply. The higher 𝜌, the lower the 
price change required to induce a given change in housing supply.

14 When the owner-occupied and rental markets are integrated, the price is 
a multiple of the rent given by the user cost equation, such that households 
are indifferent between renting and owning. With segmented markets and 
long-term mortgages, buying may be cheaper, hence more attractive than 
renting, since it allows buyers to slowly pay for their homes. The fact that 
owners can better smooth their housing expenditures captures the fact that 
owner-occupied  housing  is  a  hedge  against  rent  risk  (Sinai  and  Souleles 
(2005)).

13 

𝑏𝑡+1

≥ 0,

ℎ𝑡 ∈

(

0, ℎ

]

.

(13)

Expectations are taken with respect to the conditional distribution of 
idiosyncratic income, homeownership, and moving shocks at date 𝑡. 
Since the household does not own a house, voluntary and accidental 
bequests 𝐵𝑡+1 only consist of financial wealth (1 + 𝑟)𝑏𝑡+1.
Renter moving between areas. When moving to an area 𝐻 while remain-
ing a renter, a household incurs an idiosyncratic moving cost shock 
with mean 𝑚𝐻  included in utility 𝑢 and faces the continuation envelope 
value function in area 𝐻: 
𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑟𝐻
(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max𝑐𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
𝑔
[
+𝛽E
𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑟𝐻
𝑔
s.t. 𝑐𝑡 + 𝑅𝐿ℎ𝑡 + 𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡 + (1 + 𝑟)𝑏𝑡 + 𝐵𝑔,𝑎,
]
.
0, ℎ
𝑏𝑡+1

]
(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

𝑢 (𝑐𝑡, ℎ𝑡

ℎ𝑡 ∈

≥ 0,

(14)

(

)

,

𝑡

A. Gupta et al.

Home buyer in the same area. When buying a house in the same area, 
the renter’s value function is:

𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑜𝐿
𝑔

𝑢 (𝑐𝑡, ℎ𝑡
(𝑎, ℎ𝑡, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max
𝑐𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
[
𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑜𝐿
+ 𝛽E
𝑔

𝑡

)

]
(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

.

𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑜𝐿
𝑔

(15)

In addition to rental housing purchased at rate 𝑅𝐿, the household buys 
a house at price 𝑃𝐿, 

𝑐𝑡+𝑅𝐿ℎ𝑡+𝐹𝑚+𝑃𝐿ℎ(1+𝑓𝑚)+𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡+(1+𝑟𝑓 )𝑏𝑡+𝐵𝑔,𝑎,

ℎ𝑡 ∈

]

(

0, ℎ

, (16)

using a mix of savings accumulated over the life-cycle, and of long-
term mortgage debt 𝑏𝑡+1 at rate 𝑟𝑏, subject to fixed and proportional 
origination fees 𝐹𝑚 and 𝑓𝑚, and an LTV limit that depends on the loan 
size, 

𝑏𝑡+1

≥ −𝜃𝐿𝑇 𝑉 (𝑏𝑡+1)𝑃𝐿ℎ.

(17)

𝜃𝐿𝑇 𝑉 (𝑏𝑡+1)  is  the  maximum  fraction  of  the  house  price  that  the 
household  can  borrow,  so  1 − 𝜃𝐿𝑇 𝑉 (𝑏𝑡+1)  is  the  down  payment  re-
quirement.  If  the  loan  size  |𝑏𝑡+1|  is  below  the  area-dependent  FHA 
loan cap 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
, then the borrower is subject to a looser LTV limit 
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 , otherwise it is subject to a tighter limit 𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉
𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴
. As in the data, 
the  constraint  only  applies  at  origination,  and  may  be  violated  in 
subsequent periods if income and house prices change.

𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝐿

Eq.  (17) indicates the leverage constraint faced by borrowers, while 
𝜃𝐿𝑇 𝑉 (𝑏𝑡+1) indicates the leverage limit. The leverage constraint sets a 
maximum limit on borrowing relative to the value of the house, while 
the leverage limit expresses the down payment requirement.

Every period, homeowners with a mortgage pay interests and roll 
over their current debt subject to the requirement of repaying at least 
a fraction 1 − 𝜃𝑎𝑚 of the principal, 
] .
[𝜃𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑡, 0

≥ min

(18)

𝑏𝑡+1

1 + 𝑟𝑏 − 𝜃𝑎𝑚

The lowest payment that households can make in a period therefore 
) 𝑏𝑡.  Since  the  household  is  now  a  homeowner, 
equals  (
voluntary and accidental bequests 𝐵𝑡+1 consist of both financial and 
housing wealth (1 + ̃𝑟)𝑏𝑡+1 + 𝑃𝐿ℎ.

Home buyer moving between areas. The value of moving to an area 𝐻 and 
buying a house is similar, with the addition of an idiosyncratic moving 
cost shock with mean 𝑚𝐻  included in 𝑢:

𝑉 𝑟𝐿,𝑜𝐻
𝑔

𝑢 (𝑐𝑡, ℎ𝑡
(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max
𝑐𝑡,ℎ𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
[
𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑜𝐻
+ 𝛽E
𝑡
𝑔

)

]
(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

,

(19)

subject to the budget constraint, and an LTV limit that depends on the 
loan size. If the loan size |𝑏𝑡+1| is below the area-dependent FHA loan 
cap 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 , 
otherwise it is subject to a tighter limit 𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉

𝐻 , then the borrower is subject to a looser LTV limit 𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴

. 

𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝑐𝑡 + 𝑅𝐿ℎ𝑡 + 𝐹𝑚 + 𝑃𝐻 ℎ(1 + 𝑓𝑚) + 𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡 + (1 + 𝑟𝑓 )𝑏𝑡 + 𝐵𝑔,𝑎,
𝑏𝑡+1

≥ −𝜃𝐿𝑇 𝑉 (𝑏𝑡+1)𝑃𝐻 ℎ.

(

]
0, ℎ

,

ℎ𝑡 ∈

(20)

4.2.2. Homeowner

The problem for existing homeowners has a similar structure. The 
value  function  for  an  owner  starting  the  period  in  an  area  𝐿  is 
𝑉 𝑜𝐿
(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡). They choose to either default, remain an owner, or sell the 
𝑔
house and become a renter. If they leave their residence, they choose 
the area to which they move over the period: 

𝑉 𝑜𝐿
𝑔

(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max

{

𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑜𝐿
𝑔

, 𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑜𝐻
𝑔

, 𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑟𝐿
𝑔

, 𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑟𝐻
𝑔

, 𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑑
𝑔

}

.

(21)

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Denote the resulting policy function for the discrete choice problem as 
𝑑𝑜𝐿
𝑔 ∈ {𝑜𝐿, 𝑜𝐻, 𝑟𝐿, 𝑟𝐻, 𝑑}.
Inactive owner. The value of staying a homeowner in an area 𝐿 is given 
by the Bellman equation with fixed housing services ℎ:

)

(

𝑐𝑡, ℎ

𝑢

(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max
𝑐𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
+ 𝛽E

[
𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑜𝐿
𝑔

𝑡

]
(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

,

subject to the budget constraint: 

𝑐𝑡 + 𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡 + (1 + ̃𝑟)𝑏𝑡 + 𝐵𝑔,𝑎,

and the mortgage amortization constraint: 

𝑏𝑡+1

≥ min

] .
[𝜃𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑡, 0

(22)

(23)

(24)

Voluntary and accidental bequests 𝐵𝑡+1 consist of both financial and 

housing wealth, (1 + ̃𝑟)𝑏𝑡+1 + 𝑃𝐿ℎ.
Owner moving between areas. When selling their house and purchasing 
a house in another area 𝐻, an owner incurs an idiosyncratic moving 
cost with mean 𝑚𝐻  included in 𝑢:

𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑜𝐻
𝑔

𝑢

(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max
𝑐𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
+ 𝛽E
𝑡

)

(
𝑐𝑡, ℎ

[

𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑜𝐻
𝑔

]
(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

.

(25)
The new house is purchased with a mix of housing equity, savings 
in liquid assets (if they have no debt), and a new mortgage 𝑏𝑡+1, subject 
to the same origination fees 𝐹𝑚 and 𝑓𝑚 and an LTV limit that depends 
on the loan size. If the loan size |𝑏𝑡+1| is below the area-dependent FHA 
loan cap 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 , 
otherwise it is subject to a tighter limit 𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉
. In addition, they face 
sales transaction costs 𝑓𝑠 on the house sold in area 𝐿. 

𝐻 , then the borrower is subject to a looser LTV limit 𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴

𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝑐𝑡 + 𝐹𝑚 + 𝑃𝐻 ℎ(1 + 𝑓𝑚) + 𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡 + (1 + ̃𝑟)𝑏𝑡 +
𝑏𝑡+1

≥ −𝜃𝐿𝑇 𝑉 (𝑏𝑡+1)𝑃𝐻 ℎ.

(
1 − 𝑓𝑠

) 𝑃𝐿ℎ + 𝐵𝑔,𝑎,

(26)
Home seller. An owner selling their house and becoming a renter in the 
same area incurs a proportional selling transaction cost 𝑓𝑠:
)

𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑟𝐿
𝑔

(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max
𝑐𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
+ 𝛽E

(
𝑐𝑡, ℎ

𝑢

[

𝑡

𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑟𝐿
𝑔

]
(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

,

(27)

≥ 0.

) 𝑃𝑡ℎ + 𝐵𝑔,𝑎,

subject to the budget and no-borrowing constraints 
(
1 − 𝑓𝑠

𝑐𝑡 + 𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡 + (1 + ̃𝑟)𝑏𝑡 +
𝑏𝑡+1
Because  owners  sell  their  houses  during  the  period,  voluntary  and 
accidental bequests 𝐵𝑡+1 only consist of financial wealth (1 + 𝑟)𝑏𝑡+1.
Home seller moving between areas. The value of selling their house to 
move and become a renter in another area 𝐻 is similar to the previous 
one, with the subtraction of an idiosyncratic moving cost shock with 
mean 𝑚𝐻 .

(28)

Mortgage defaulter. Owners who default on their mortgages immediately 
incur a utility cost of default 𝑑, are only left with their current income 
to consume, and become renters in the same area in the next period:

𝑉 𝑜𝐿,𝑑
𝑔

(𝑎, 𝑏𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = max
𝑐𝑡,𝑏𝑡+1
+ 𝛽E

)

(

𝑐𝑡, ℎ

− 𝑑

𝑢

[
𝑝𝑎𝑉 𝑟𝐿
𝑔

𝑡

]
(𝑎 + 1, 𝑏𝑡+1, 𝑦𝑡+1) + (1 − 𝑝𝑎)𝑢(𝐵𝑡+1)

,

(29)

subject to the budget and no-borrowing constraints 
𝑐𝑡 + 𝑏𝑡+1 = 𝑦𝑡,
≥ 0.
𝑏𝑡+1

(30)

14 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Because they lose their houses during the period, voluntary and acci-
dental bequests 𝐵𝑡+1 left only consist of financial wealth (1 + 𝑟)𝑏𝑡+1.

4.3. Equilibrium

This subsection defines a spatial equilibrium for this economy.

Definition.  A stationary competitive spatial equilibrium consists of the 
following objects, which are defined for demographic groups 𝑔, areas 
𝑗 = 𝐿, 𝐻, and homeownership  = 𝑜, 𝑟:

}

{

𝑉
{

(i) prices and rents {𝑃𝑗 , 𝑅𝑗
}
𝑗
(ii) value functions 
𝑔
𝑗
𝑗
(iii) policy functions 
𝑔 , 𝑏
𝑑
𝑔
(iv) 2 × 2 cross-sectional distributions of households 𝜆 (𝑔, 𝑗, , 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑦)
over groups 𝑔, areas 𝑗, homeownership , age 𝑎, net savings 𝑏, 
and income 𝑦,

𝑗
𝑔,𝑡+1

𝑗
𝑔

, ℎ

, 𝑐

}

such that households optimize given prices, the distributions of house-
holds are consistent with their choices and prices, markets clear, and 
intergenerational transfers made and received are consistent with each 
other.15

Housing markets.  The market-clearing conditions for owner-occupied 
housing in areas 𝑗 = 𝐿, 𝐻 are 

∫
𝛺𝑜𝑗 ℎ𝑑𝜆 =

𝑝𝑜𝑝𝑗 × ℎ𝑜ℎℎ
𝑗 × ℎ
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
owner-occupied housing demand in 𝑗

=

𝐻 𝑜
𝑗
⏟⏟⏟
owner-occupied housing supply in 𝑗

.

(31)

The market-clearing conditions for rental housing in areas 𝑗 = 𝐿, 𝐻 are 

.

=

𝛺𝑟𝑗

𝐻 𝑟
𝑗
⏟⏟⏟
rental supply in 𝑗

ℎ𝑗 𝑑𝜆
∫
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
rental demand in 𝑗
𝑝𝑜𝑝𝑗 = 𝑝𝑜𝑝𝑗 (𝐏, 𝐑) denotes the population share of areas 𝑗 and ℎ𝑜ℎℎ
𝑗 =
ℎ𝑜ℎℎ
(𝐏, 𝐑)  the  homeownership  rate.  𝛺𝑜𝑗 = 𝛺𝑜𝑗 (𝐏, 𝐑)  and  𝛺𝑟𝑗 =
𝑗
𝛺𝑟𝑗 (𝐏, 𝐑) are the sets of households who are owners and renters in 
areas 𝑗. They depend on the vectors of prices and rents in both area 
types, because households sort across areas in spatial equilibrium.

(32)

Intergenerational wealth transmission.  Within each demographic group 
𝑔 = 𝑊 , 𝐵, voluntary and accidental bequests that are left should be 
equal to the bequests that are received: 

∫

𝐵𝑔,𝑡+1𝑑𝜆 = ∫

𝐵𝑔,𝑎𝑑𝜆.

𝛺𝑔

𝛺𝑔
Solving  such  a  rich  model  is  numerically  challenging.  Appendix  C 
describes the solution. As in the dynamic demand literature, we use 
the  additive  idiosyncratic  shocks  to  households’  value  functions  to 
smooth the computation of the laws of motion for the cross-sectional 
distributions implied by policy functions.

(33)

5.1. Calibration

Table  2 summarizes the calibration. Parameters are split between 
external and internal parameters. Within each category, they are split 
between aggregate and area- and group-dependent parameters that are 
specific to our 2 × 2 model. Tables  3 and 4 report the results.

5.1.1. Approach

We proceed in four steps. First, we fix the externally calibrated 

parameters from the data.

𝐌𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎

Second, we choose the internally calibrated parameters to match 
empirical targets. There are 20 parameters and targets, so the model 
is exactly identified conditional on the external parameters. We com-
pute the vector of percentage differences between the model moments 
𝐌𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 and their empirical counterparts 𝐌𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎, and we iteratively up-
date internal parameters to minimize the 𝐿∞ norm (i.e., the largest 
absolute value) of that vector, ∣ 𝐌𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙−𝐌𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎
∣∞. Thus, for the fit of the 
main aggregate moments of the model, we rely on the same calibration 
approach  as  for  other  life-cycle  models  without  housing  or  with  a 
single housing market, as described in Gomes (2020). All moments 
are jointly determined, but some parameters have a larger effect on 
specific moments (e.g., Andrews et al., 2017). For the moments that are 
specific to our 2 × 2 structure, and to exactly match house prices and 
rents by area, we exploit two technical features of our model. First, the 
assumption of additive i.i.d. idiosyncratic shocks to households’ value 
functions; second, the homogeneity of the housing supply functions 
in the price 𝑃𝑗 and the structure of the market-clearing conditions as 
in Mabille (2023). Appendix C.2 describes this step in detail.

Third, we calibrate the model to match the empirical effect iden-
tified in Section 3, which measures the elasticity of Black borrowing 
to the availability of high-leverage mortgages in the data. This new 
step involves computing the model counterpart of this elasticity. Our 
baseline sets 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐻  to be $388,000, which is the average FHA cap in 
2018 in the treatment areas from the difference-in-differences analysis 
in Section 3. We compare this baseline to a model which sets a looser 
FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas. Specifically, we raise 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
by $75,000, which replicates the policy shift discussed in Section 3. 
We keep the FHA loan cap in low-opportunity areas fixed at $301,000 
throughout, corresponding to the average FHA loan cap in the control 
areas in 2018 from the same reduced form analysis.

𝐻

This  step  requires  adding  an  outer  loop  to  the  calibration  and 
running the corresponding counterfactual experiment for each combi-
nation of parameters tried until convergence. Specifically, we compute 
both our baseline model with the tighter high-opportunity loan cap 
𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐻  and a counterfactual experiment with the looser high-opportunity 
loan cap. The effect of comparing the counterfactual with the baseline 
corresponds to the effect of the reduction in the FHA cap in high-
opportunity areas in the data. Then, we measure the reduction in the 
share of high-leverage loans in high-opportunity areas in the model 
with a tighter loan cap (in percentage points), 𝛥(𝓁𝐿𝑇 𝑉 +
). We also mea-
sure the reduction in the share of Black households in high-opportunity 
areas (in percentage points), 𝛥(𝜋ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ
the model and the data.

𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘). Finally, we compare 

(
𝜋ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ
𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘
𝓁𝐿𝑇 𝑉 +
𝑠ℎ

)
)  in 

𝛥
(

𝑠ℎ

𝛥

5. Calibration and baseline results

In this section, we describe the calibration and the fit of the dy-
namic model outlined in Section 4, and how it is connected to the 
quasi-experimental evidence from Section 3.

15 We write the market-clearing conditions in terms of the total housing 
stocks supplied and demanded, which eases computations. Given the structure 
of the model, it is strictly equivalent to write them in terms of flows and focus 
on new housing purchased, sold, and built.

Fourth, we evaluate the out-of-sample fit of the model using addi-

tional moments.

5.1.2. External parameters

We start by highlighting aggregate parameters common to the two 

demographic groups and area types.

Preferences  and  income.  We  set  risk  aversion  𝛾  to  2,  a  standard 
value. The persistence of the labor income process is set to 𝜌𝑒 = 0.700, 
and its volatility to 𝜎𝑒 = 0.39, which are the four-year equivalents of 
the estimates in Floden and Lindé (2001). We follow Moretti (2004) 
to endogenize the spatial income shifter 𝜇𝐻 , which is increasing in 
the share of high-productivity workers in high-opportunity areas and 

15 

A. Gupta et al.

Table 2
Calibration.
  Parameter

Description

Value

Source/Target

External

Preferences, income, bequests:

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

  𝛾
  𝜌𝑒
  𝜎𝜀
  𝜁1
  {𝐵𝑔,𝑎
  𝜏
  𝐵𝑒𝑥

}

Risk aversion
Autocorrelation income process
Std. dev. income process
Agglomeration externality high-opportunity
Bequest redistribution schedule by group and age
Estate tax rate
Estate tax exemption threshold

𝐹 𝐻𝐴

𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉

  𝑟
  𝑟𝑏
  𝑟𝑏
  𝐹𝑏
  𝐹𝑠
  𝑓𝑠
  𝜃𝑎𝑚

𝐿

𝐻

𝐿𝑇 𝑉

𝐿𝑇 𝑉

  𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
  𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
  𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴
  𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉
  𝜋𝐻
  𝜋𝐻
  𝜌𝐻
  𝜌𝐿

𝑊

𝐵

Financial asset rate of return
Mortgage rate FHA loans
Mortgage rate conventional loans
Selling transaction cost
Proportional buying transaction cost
Fixed buying transaction cost
One minus amortization rate

FHA loan cap in high-opportunity
FHA loan cap in low-opportunity
LTV limit on loans below cap
LTV limit on loans above cap
Share white born in high-opportunity
Share Black born in high-opportunity
Housing supply elasticity high-opportunity
Housing supply elasticity low-opportunity

  𝜋𝐵

Population share Black

Standard value
From Floden and Lindé (2001)
From Floden and Lindé (2001)
From Moretti (2004)
Expected bequest received by age (2019 SCF)
From De Nardi (2004)
From De Nardi (2004)

Avg 5-year Treasury rate (1990–2018)
Avg 30-year mortgage rate (2018 Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Survey) 
Avg 30-year mortgage rate (2018 Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Survey) 
Share of purchase price (Boar et al., 2022)
Share of mortgage size (Favilukis et al., 2017)
Mortgage origination fee (Favilukis et al., 2017)
Minimum amortization (Greenwald et al., 2020)

Average FHA Cap in Treatment Group (Section 3)
Average FHA Cap in Control Group (Section 3)
FHA mortgage LTV limit (2018)
Conforming mortgage LTV limit (2018)
Share white born in high-opportunity (2018 5-Year ACS)
Share Black born in high-opportunity (2018 5-Year ACS)
Elasticity in high-opportunity (Baum-Snow and Han, 2024)
Elasticity in low-opportunity (Baum-Snow and Han, 2024)

Population share Black (2018 5-Year ACS)

2

0.70

0.39

0.40
See text
0.10

$2,600,000

Mortgages:

4.00%

4.93%

4.08%

6.00%

0.60%

1200

0.96

Housing areas:
$388,000

$301,000

0.965

0.800

0.19

0.08

0.59

0.59

Demographic groups:

0.15

Internal

Preferences and bequests:

  𝛽
  𝛼
  𝜖
  𝑑
  𝛹𝑊
  𝐵
  𝛯 𝐻
  𝛯 𝐿
  𝛯 𝐻
  𝛯 𝐿

𝑊

𝑊

𝐵

𝐵

Discount factor
Housing utility weight
CES housing and consumption
Utility cost of default
Voluntary bequest weight white
Voluntary bequest as luxury good
Mean homeownership shock white in high-opportunity
Mean homeownership shock white in low-opportunity
Mean homeownership shock Black in high-opportunity
Mean homeownership shock Black in low-opportunity

0.88

0.41

0.42

1.25

4.22

1.00

1.46

0.90

0.86

−0.42

Avg wealth/avg income (Mabille, 2023)
Avg rent/avg income (Mabille, 2023)
Quasi-exp. treatment effect (Section 3)
Avg default rate (Mabille, 2023)
Avg bequests white/Black (Jones and Neelakantan, 2022)
Median bequest/income (2019 SCF)
Avg high-opportunity homeownership white (2018 5-Year ACS)
Avg low-opportunity homeownership white (2018 5-Year ACS)
Avg high-opportunity homeownership Black (2018 5-Year ACS)
Avg low-opportunity homeownership Black (2018 5-Year ACS)

Housing areas and demographic groups:

0

0.16

0.21

  𝜁 𝐻
  𝜇𝑊
  𝐼 𝑜𝐻
  𝐼 𝑜𝐿
  𝐼 𝑟𝐻
  𝐼 𝑟𝐿
  𝑚𝐻
  𝑚𝐻
  𝑚𝐿
  𝑚𝐿
Notes: One model period corresponds to four years. Targets and interest rates are annualized.

Income shifter intercept high-opportunity
Mean income process white
Supply curve intercept high-opportunity owner-occupied
Supply curve intercept low-opportunity owner-occupied
Supply curve intercept high-opportunity rentals
Supply curve intercept low-opportunity rentals
Mean moving cost shock white to high-opportunity
Mean moving cost shock Black to high-opportunity
Mean moving cost shock white to low-opportunity
Mean moving cost shock Black to low-opportunity

−5.30

−1.84

0.73

0.12

0.37

0.05

4.60

7.13

𝑊

𝑊

𝐵

𝐵

Avg income high/low-opportunity (2018 5-Year ACS)
Avg income white/Black (2018 Current Population Survey)
Median house price high-opportunity (2018 HMDA)
Median house price low-opportunity (2018 HMDA)
Avg rent high-opportunity (2018 5-Year ACS)
Avg rent low-opportunity (2018 5-Year ACS)
Moving rate white to high-opportunity (Infutor)
Moving rate Black to high-opportunity (Infutor)
Share white living in high-opportunity (2018 5-Year ACS)
Share Black living in high-opportunity (2018 5-Year ACS)

generates  a  positive  agglomeration  externality.  The  strength  of  the 
externality depends on the share of workers in the top 50% of the 
productivity distribution, and it is controlled by 𝜁1 = 0.40. The intercept 
of the spatial income shifter is internally calibrated as described below.

Intergenerational  wealth  accumulation.  Bequests  are  redistributed
within each group as a function of age, which determines households’ 

endowments at each stage of their life cycles. We calibrate the bequest 
redistribution schedule by age {𝐵𝑔,𝑎
} to replicate how the probability 
of receiving a bequest varies with age in each demographic group. 
In the SCF data, this probability increases with age until retirement 
and ranges from 5% for households under 26 years old to 12% for 
households aged 56–65 years old (in annual terms). We also account 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Gupta et al.

Table 3
Model fit: Targeted moments.
  Variable
  House price high-opportunity
  House price low-opportunity
  Rent high-opportunity
  Rent low-opportunity
  Avg income high/low-opportunity
  Avg income white/Black
  Avg intergenerational wealth transfer white/Black
  Share white living in high-opportunity
  Share Black living in high-opportunity
  Moving rate white to high-opportunity
  Moving rate to Black high-opportunity
  Avg high-opportunity homeownership white
  Avg high-opportunity homeownership Black
  Avg low-opportunity homeownership white
  Avg low-opportunity homeownership Black
  Avg wealth/avg income
  Avg house price/avg income
  Avg rent/avg income
  Avg default rate
  Quasi-exp. treatment effect:  𝛥
𝛥(
Notes: Moments are annualized. For sources, see Table  2.

(
𝜋ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ
𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘
𝓁𝐿𝑇 𝑉 +
𝑠ℎ

)

)

Data

455,000
225,000
1588
1008
1.73

Model  
455,000 
225,000 
1588
1008
1.74

1.71
3.57
0.19
0.08
0.02
0.02
0.68
0.48
0.67
0.45

5.60
4.05
0.20
0.02

1.73
3.59
0.20
0.12
0.02
0.02
0.72
0.53
0.68
0.45

6.76
4.13
0.19
0.01

0.098

0.089  

Data

0.81
0.72
0.10
0.10

Table 4
Model fit: Non-targeted moments.
Model 
  Variable
0.73  
  Share owned sq. ft. high-opportunity
0.66  
  Share owned sq. ft. low-opportunity
0.09  
  Avg moving rate to low-opportunity white
0.12  
  Avg moving rate to low-opportunity Black
1.08  
  Avg LTV Black/white
1.00  
  P90 LTV Black/white
0.01  
  Avg default rate white
0.03  
  Avg default rate Black
1.88  
  Avg housing wealth white/Black
  Avg total wealth white/Black
3.12  
Notes: Moments are annualized. Sources: Infutor (2018), SCF+ (2016), HMDA (2018). 
Total wealth is computed from Derenoncourt et al. (2022), excluding businesses, equity, 
other financial and non-financial assets, and educational debt to correspond to the 
model. Racial differences in default rates are taken from Kermani and Wong (2021).

1.08
1.01
0.01
0.03

3.54
4.12

for the taxation of large bequests. The estate tax rate 𝜏 is 10% and the 
exemption threshold 𝐵𝑒𝑥 is 40 years of average income as in De Nardi 
(2004).

𝐿

Mortgages. The LTV caps are the same across areas but they depend 
on loan size. We set the area-dependent FHA loan caps 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐻  and 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
to $388,000 and $301,000, respectively, to match average 2018 FHA 
caps across treatment and control areas as defined in Section 3. The 
caps on FHA loans are set to 𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 = 0.965 and the caps on conventional 
loans are set to 𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉
𝐿𝑇 𝑉 = 0.80. These values are consistent with the LTV 
thresholds of 96.5 for FHA mortgages and 80 for conforming loans. 
The mortgage rate 𝑟𝑏 is 4.08% for conventional loans and 4.93% for 
FHA loans. The 85 basis point premium captures the required annual 
ongoing mortgage insurance premium (MIP) for FHA borrowing above 
95 LTV in 2018. The level of both rates are centered around the average 
30-year  U.S.  mortgage  rate  in  2018  of  roughly  4.5%  (Freddie  Mac 
Primary Mortgage Market Survey). Using evidence from Favilukis et al. 
(2017), we set the fixed transaction cost of buying a house to $1200 and 
the proportional cost to 0.6% of the loan value. Following Boar et al. 
(2022), we set the proportional transaction cost of selling to 6%. The 
minimum amortization rate 𝜃𝑎𝑚 is set to 0.96, such that the fraction 
of the principal to be repaid each period, 1 − 𝜃𝑎𝑚, is at least 4%, close 
to the four-year equivalent of the value reported by Greenwald et al. 
(2020).

17 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Financial asset. The real rate of return 𝑟 at which households can 
save in financial assets is 4%. This is based on the average of 5-year 
Treasury rates from 1990–2018 (Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, H.15 Selected Interest Rates).

Next, we consider 2 × 2 parameters which differ between areas and 
demographic groups. While, in general, access to opportunity (defined 
as labor market prospects which raise the income of current and future 
generations) varies continuously across regions, we group regions into 
two types of areas for tractability. Following the empirical evidence in 
Appendix Table A.III, we classify areas into high- and low-opportunity 
by contrasting regions with high and low availability of FHA loans. We 
classify census tracts as high-opportunity areas if the tract-level median 
house price in HMDA (2018) is above the applicable county-level FHA 
limit for that year, indicating that the typical house is out of reach 
for most FHA buyers. Low-opportunity areas are similarly classified 
as those tracts for which the median house price is below the FHA 
limit. While high-opportunity areas defined in this way account for 18% 
of the population, they are disproportionately responsible for income 
prospects (accounting for 28% of aggregate household income) and 
especially for wealth building prospects (43% of housing equity). The 
goal of this geographic classification is to capture an important aspect 
of  neighborhood  choice  that  is  tied  to  income  and  wealth-building 
prospects.

Housing Areas. We use the data from Baum-Snow and Han (2024) 
to compute the price elasticity of housing supply in each area. To cor-
respond to the model, we use the elasticity in terms of floor space, and 
compute the average across tracts within each area type. To measure 
the shares of Black and white households born in each area type, we 
consider the racial composition of individuals in the 5-year 2018 ACS 
data across high- and low-opportunity areas. These statistics, along with 
all other local statistics drawn from ACS, are Census tract-weighted.

Demographic Groups. We define the overall Black population share as 
the non-Hispanic Black population share divided by the non-Hispanic 
population share, which is 15% in the 2018 5-year ACS.

5.1.3. Internal parameters

The remaining parameters are calibrated internally to match tar-
geted moments in the data, which are reported in Table  3 along with 
their model counterparts.

Preferences. We calibrate the discount factor 𝛽 to match the average 
wealth to income ratio of 5.60 in the economy, and we choose the 
preference for housing 𝛼 to match the average rent to income ratio of 
0.20 (Mabille, 2023). The utility cost of default 𝑑 is chosen to match 
the average default rate of 2% on U.S. mortgages in a recent sample of 
foreclosures which includes the Great Recession (RealtyTrac, as cited 
in Mabille (2023)).

We  calibrate  the  CES  parameter  𝜖,  which  governs  the  elasticity 
of substitution between consumption and housing, to match the em-
pirical effect measured in Section 3. The response of Black borrow-
ers  to  a  change  in  the  FHA  cap  is  determined  both  by  area-  and 
group-dependent parameters and by households’ willingness to substi-
tute between consumption and housing. A higher 𝜖 implies that more 
financially-constrained Black households are willing to sacrifice some 
consumption to live in high-opportunity areas when the LTV limit is 
looser. They may, as a result, have a higher willingness to pay for 
housing in the high-opportunity area either immediately, or after ac-
cumulating enough savings to overcome down payment requirements. 
Conversely, when the LTV limit is tighter, a higher 𝜖 may make living in 
that area less valuable, leading to a larger decrease in the share of Black 
households. The value that we obtain corresponds to an elasticity of 
substitution between consumption and housing that is close to standard 
estimates (for instance, our estimate of 1.72 is very close to the estimate 
of 1.75 in McGrattan et al. (1997) and slightly higher than the estimate 
in Piazzesi et al. (2007)).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Gupta et al.

Intergenerational wealth accumulation. We calibrate the strength of 
the voluntary bequest motive 𝛹 𝑊  for white relative to Black house-
holds to match the ratio of average bequests between these groups 
in  the  data.  Bequests  in  each  group  are  computed  from  Jones  and 
Neelakantan (2022) as the probability of receiving a bequest (35% 
for white and 13% for Black households) times the median bequest 
conditional on receiving one ($100,830 for white and $74,460 for Black 
households). We choose the extent to which bequests are a luxury good, 
𝐵, to match the average bequest to income ratio at the lowest 30th 
percentile as in De Nardi (2004).

Housing Areas: We normalize the spatial income shifter 𝜇𝐿 in low-
opportunity areas to zero, and we choose the intercept 𝜁 𝐻
0 = 0.21
of  the  shifter  in  high-opportunity  areas  𝜇𝐻   to  match  the  ratio  of 
average income between the two area types in the baseline, including 
the agglomeration effects described earlier. In spatial equilibrium, the 
higher income distribution in high-opportunity areas results both from 
skill sorting, with higher income households choosing to live in more 
expensive areas, and from the residual income boost in those areas 
created by the spatial income shifter. Our estimates imply that high-
opportunity areas deliver an average income boost of 23%, in line 
with quasi-experimental evidence in the literature (e.g Bilal and Rossi-
Hansberg, 2021). Combined with the effect of sorting, these estimates 
imply a total income difference of 74% between areas that closely 
matches our data. This approach explicitly accounts for the fact that 
part of the income differences across areas is attributable to selection, 
rather than causal treatment effects.

We choose the levels 𝐼 𝑗 of the housing supply curves for owner-
occupied and rental units to match equilibrium house prices and rents 
across areas. When examining non-targeted moments, we verify that 
the resulting quantities of housing, in terms of square feet, are in line 
with the data.

Income Differences. We calibrate the racial income shifter 𝜇𝑊  for 
white households to match the ratio of average incomes between white 
and Black households of 1.71 (Current Population Survey, 2018).16 
The resulting value implies a boost of 17% for white households. The 
remaining income difference arises due to the location choices of Black 
and white households across high- and low-opportunity areas, as well 
as pensions. In spatial equilibrium, the complementarity between the 
racial and the spatial income shifters in workers’ income processes 
creates an incentive for more productive households (in terms of id-
iosyncratic and group-level productivity) to locate in high-productivity 
areas.17

Because the average log income 𝜇𝑔 differs across race, we find that 
the income process for Black households has both a lower mean as 
well as higher risk, which is consistent with empirical patterns (e.g., 
Kermani and Wong, 2021).

Areas × demographic groups. The remaining parameters depend on 

both households’ groups and areas.

The 2 × 2 vector for the means 𝛯 𝑗

𝑔 of the idiosyncratic homeown-
ership shocks is chosen to match the residual differences in home-
ownership rates relative to the data (SCF) that are not accounted for 
by households’ optimal homeownership choices. The resulting values 
account for unmodeled exogenous motives for owning or renting, such 
as changes in family size, the mortgage interest rate deduction, the 
behavioral motive of committing to saving in anticipation of lower 
income in retirement, or a ‘‘warm glow’’ motive of owning their own 
shelter.

The  2  ×  2  vector  for  the  means  𝑚𝑗

𝑔  of  the  idiosyncratic  mov-
ing  cost  shocks  is  chosen  to  match,  first,  the  shares  of  Black  and 
white households living in high-opportunity areas (computed from ACS 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

data); second, their respective moving rates to those areas (computed 
from Infutor data). These shocks allow to match the residual differ-
ences in these shares and moving rates relative to the data that are 
not explained by households’ optimal location choices. They account 
for exogenous motives for or barriers to moving, such as unmodeled 
household life events (e.g., marriage to someone from another area, 
post-retirement moves driven by weather or tax differences), the accu-
mulation of neighborhood-specific capital (e.g., Diamond et al., 2019), 
and reference dependence in the housing market (e.g., Andersen et al., 
2022).

5.2. Baseline results

Table   3  reports  targeted  moments,  which  are  divided  into  four 
panels. The first and second panels report area- and group-dependent 
moments that are specific to the 2 × 2 model. The third panel re-
ports aggregate wealth and housing market moments. The fourth panel 
presents the model counterpart of the quasi-experimental treatment 
effect in Section 3.

Table  4 reports moments that are not targeted by the calibration. 
The first panel describes differences between housing areas. The second 
panel describes mortgage differences between Black and white borrow-
ers. The third panel reports the resulting gaps between Black and white 
households, in terms of housing and total wealth.

Targeted moments.  As shown in Table  3, the model exactly matches 
house prices and rents in both low- and high-opportunity areas. Equilib-
rium prices and rents are higher in high-opportunity areas ($455,000 
and $1588 per month) than in low-opportunity areas ($225,000 and 
$1008). These differences arise endogenously as a result of differences 
in  local  housing  supply  and  demand  for  owner-occupied  units  and 
rentals. These are important moments to match because they are key 
determinants of the location choices of Black and white households 
across  areas,  and  ultimately  of  differences  in  wealth  accumulation 
patterns between groups.

The model also closely matches the income difference between high- 
and low-opportunity areas of ×1.73 in the data, which results both 
from the higher spatial income shifter 𝜇𝐻  in high-opportunity areas, 
and  from  skill  sorting  that  induces  more  productive  households  to 
locate there. In spatial equilibrium and with risk aversion, productive 
households  choose  to  stay  in  or  move  to  those  areas  because  it  is 
less  costly  for  them  to  sacrifice  non-durable  consumption  to  bene-
fit from a higher income and higher idiosyncratic utility shocks on 
average.18 In addition, these households benefit relatively more than 
less productive households from the productivity boost 𝜇𝐻  because 
of the complementarity between the spatial income shifter and their 
individual productivity in the income process.

Similarly, the model generates almost the same income gap between 
Black and white households of ×1.71 as exists in the data. This dif-
ference  arises,  first,  because  of  the  higher  racial  income  shifter  of 
white households 𝜇𝑊 ; second, because of differences in initial locations 
𝜋𝐻
𝑊 > 𝜋𝐻
𝐵 ; third, because of subsequent location choices of Black and 
white households. We target the shares of Black and white households 
living in each area type (0.08 vs. 0.19 for high-opportunity areas), 
and also their average moving rates between areas (on average 2% 
of households in the Infutor data move to high-opportunity properties, 
defined as those with a mortgage size above the local FHA limit. 10% 
move to low-opportunity properties below the FHA limit.). In spatial 
equilibrium, group shares in each area are determined both by the share 
of each group that is born there and by their propensity to move over 

16 In 2018, the real median income of non-Hispanic white households was 
$70,642, compared to $41,361 for Black households.
17 This property comes from the log-supermodularity of the income process 
for workers in the age, idiosyncratic, racial, and spatial components.

18 In  contrast,  in  standard  urban  economics  models  with  linear  utility, 
households with different wealth are indifferent across locations in equilibrium 
because it is not more costly for poor than for rich households to sacrifice 
consumption to locate in an area with expensive housing.

18 

A. Gupta et al.

their life-cycle. Moving frictions add to the difficulty of accessing the 
more valuable housing stock, especially for Black households who need 
to overcome a higher average moving cost shock 𝑚𝐻
𝐵 , both in absolute 
terms and compared to their lower average level of utility.

Our model estimates that 12% of Black households reside in the 
high-opportunity area, compared to 8% in the data. This is a reasonably 
accurate estimate, particularly given the challenge of jointly estimating 
moving  rates  and  location  shares  by  group.  However,  our  estimate 
does  slightly  overstate  the  proportion  of  Black  households  in  high-
opportunity areas. As a result, when we analyze policy counterfactuals, 
we might slightly underestimate the impact of policies aimed at en-
couraging Black households to move to high-opportunity areas. This is 
because our baseline calibration already places a higher number of such 
households in these areas compared to the data.

Importantly,  the  model  matches  differences  in  intergenerational 
wealth transfers, which create an additional incentive for moving to 
opportunity. Because of differences in housing wealth and savings, the 
bequests left by white households are 3.57× higher on average than 
for Black households in the data, which we match closely at 3.59 in 
our model. Because they are redistributed within groups and affect 
households’ wealth endowment, bequests tend to perpetuate differences 
in initial conditions between racial groups.

In aggregate, the model successfully replicates wealth and housing 
patterns which we draw from external sources. It generates a high 
average wealth to income ratio (6.76 in the model, compared to 5.60 
in the data, Mabille (2023)). It also matches the ratios of average house 
price and rent to income (4.13 and 0.19 in the model). These are very 
close to their data counterparts of 4.05 and 0.20 (Mabille, 2023), which 
are key determinants of the financial constraints faced by households. 
In addition, the model closely matches the average default rate of 2% 
in the data (RealtyTrac, as cited in Mabille (2023)).

Across demographic groups and areas, the model also successfully 
replicates differences in housing wealth. As in the data, it generates 
a large homeownership gap between Black (with a homeownership rate 
of roughly 45%) and white households (with a homeownership rate of 
roughly 70%), both in high- and low-opportunity areas.

Finally, the model matches the elasticity of Black borrowers to the 
LTV limit in high-opportunity areas that we estimated empirically in 
Section 3. Our calibration produces an elasticity of 0.089 that is very 
close to the value of 0.098 in the data.19

Non-targeted moments.  Table  4 shows that the model also successfully 
matches moments that are not targeted by the calibration.

𝐿𝑇 𝑉 = 0.965 and 𝜃𝐶𝑂𝑁𝑉

The model generates substantial racial inequality in the mortgage 
market. Despite not targeting it, the model exactly matches the leverage 
gap, measured here as the ratio between the average LTV of Black 
and white households. Across areas, Black borrowers have a higher 
average LTV, and the high LTV limit of 0.965 binds for both groups 
at the 90th percentile of the LTV distribution. As in the data, there 
is considerable bunching in the leverage distributions of Black buyers 
at the two LTV limits 𝜃𝐹 𝐻𝐴
= 0.80. Accessing 
home ownership in high-opportunity areas requires many Black buyers 
to lever up as much as possible. Because they have lower savings as the 
result of initial wealth and income conditions, some buyers borrow as 
much as the LTV limit allows. An even larger fraction is rationed out 
of high-opportunity areas altogether. The LTV constraint forces them to 
exit the owner-occupied market. Since house prices are on average 2×
higher in high-opportunity ($455,000) than in low-opportunity areas 
($225,000), those that do purchase in the former tend to be relatively 
richer due to endogenous sorting. Finally, as Kermani and Wong (2021) 
document, Black borrowers in the U.S. are exposed to higher labor 

𝐿𝑇 𝑉

19 Note that we observe similar expansions in living space in response to an 
increase in household income for both white and Black households in the data 
(Appendix Figure A.IV).

19 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

market risk, resulting in higher default rates. Our model captures this 
phenomenon. Despite not targeting default rates, our calibration gen-
erates greater default probabilities for Black borrowers (3%) relative to 
white borrowers (1%), as in the data. In the model, default wipes out 
existing housing wealth.

Ultimately, the combination of the racial gaps generated by the 
model  lead  to  differences  in  wealth  accumulation  between  groups, 
and in particular to a substantial housing gap. On average, the model 
generates  1.88×  greater  housing  wealth  for  white  households.  This 
is more than 50% of the corresponding gap in the data. Combined, 
differences in housing wealth, intergenerational wealth transfers, and 
savings between groups generate a sizable gap in total wealth, which 
is around 3.12× higher for white households and represents more than 
75% of the corresponding gap in the data.

The model replicates a large fraction the total wealth gap in the data 
without including explicit sources of discrimination in the financial sys-
tem. These and other forces outside of our model can likely account for 
the remaining fraction of the wealth gap, including racial disparities in 
housing returns (Kermani and Wong, 2021), in savings rates and equity 
investments (Derenoncourt et al., 2022), property taxes (Avenancio-
Leon and Howard, 2022), rents (Early et al., 2018) and housing market 
expectations (Adelino et al., 2018), as well as other unmodeled labor 
market factors. However, the 2 × 2 structure of U.S. housing markets 
that we highlight can alone generate a large racial wealth gap.

Finally, the model provides estimates of the life-cycle profiles for 
homeownership and renting across groups and areas, which are dis-
played in Fig.  6. It generates a hump-shaped pattern for homeowner-
ship in high-opportunity areas, as agents accumulate wealth to make 
down payments, before moving to low-opportunity areas in retirement 
(when the income benefits of geographic location are diminished). The 
age of first home purchase is higher for Black households compared 
to white households, particularly in high-opportunity areas. This de-
lay is because, with worse initial wealth and income, it takes Black 
households more time to accumulate savings for a down payment. This 
is  particularly  the  case  in  high-opportunity  areas  where  prices  and 
resulting down payments are high. These statistics broadly match the 
empirical lifecycle distributions for households (ACS data, shown in 
Appendix Figure A.V). In particular, we match two key stylized facts 
about racial differences in accessing homeownership: white households 
are  more  likely  to  be  present  in  high-opportunity  areas  across  the 
lifecycle, and home ownership transitions are accelerated for white 
households.

Our model abstracts from two details about housing markets. We 
match the average levels of house prices and rents across regions in the 
cross-section, and allow for shifts in prices and rents based on relative 
demand and observed housing supply elasticities in our counterfactuals. 
However, we do not allow for other kinds of aggregate trends in house 
prices over time. To the extent that homeowners are exposed to such 
house price trends in addition to the shocks we consider, that will 
lead to further changes in housing wealth, which may affect the extent 
to which financial constraints bind across groups. Additionally, while 
our model does not explicitly incorporate differences in housing qual-
ity across regions, it indirectly accounts for these through calibrated 
area-specific moving shocks (both positive and negative) and home-
ownership shocks whose means vary across area and race. However, 
future research could explore more direct modeling of housing quality 
differences to potentially refine our understanding of their impact on 
spatial allocation and wealth accumulation.

6. Structural estimation: Financial and spatial constraints exacer-
bate racial gaps

This section outlines our main results, which consist of three sets 
of  counterfactual  experiments.  First,  we  demonstrate  the  impact  of 
financial constraints on racial inequality — the central contribution 
of our paper — by analyzing a counterfactual economy with a higher 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 6.  Life-cycle profile of location and housing choices.
Notes: This figure shows the model implied rates of ownership and renting, across the two housing stocks (low and high-opportunity), for the two demographic groups (Black and white 
agents). The four lines sum up to 1 for a given demographic group and age.

FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas. Second, we study the role of 
spatial constraints — focusing on housing supply — and show that the 
high prices resulting from restricted supply amplify the geographic and 
wealth distortions created by leverage constraints. Finally, we analyze 
the interaction of these two constraints, and show that jointly relaxing 
them has complementary benefits for the wealth accumulation of Black 
households.

6.1. Changing leverage limits

To demonstrate the importance of financial constraints for Black–
white disparities, our first set of experiments analyzes the equilibrium 
of a counterfactual economy where the leverage constraint on high-
value loans is relaxed in high-opportunity areas. Relative to our base-
line calibration with an FHA loan cap 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
𝐻  of $388,000, we increase 
this  by  $75,000  to  match  the  policy  change  in  our  reduced  form 
analysis in Section 3. This means that borrowers can take out higher 
loan balance mortgages with an LTV limit of 0.965, rather than 0.80, 
up to the new cap.

Fig.  7 reports the main results of this counterfactual, with a more 
comprehensive accounting in Table  5. We find that relaxing the lever-
age  constraint  leads  to  substantial  improvements  in  outcomes  for 
both groups, but the improvements are far more significant for Black 
households. This shows that financial constraints differentially distort 
choices across demographic groups. Each sub-panel shows the percent-
age change in outcomes for Black and white households under this 
counterfactual, relative to the equilibrium of the baseline model.

Our central result is that Black wealth increases substantially in 
response  to  the  relaxation  of  the  leverage  constraint,  leading  to  a 
reduction  in  the  wealth  gap.  Average  wealth  for  Black  households 
across both areas rises by9.6% in response to the experiment. Aver-
age wealth for white households also rises, but by a much smaller 
amount (roughly0.7%). This confirms that financial constraints play an 
important role in perpetuating wealth disparities in the data.

Wealth  gains  are  driven  by  two  main  channels.  First,  increased 
homeownership for Black households, especially in high-opportunity 
areas, leads to wealth accumulation through the forced savings gener-
ated by mortgage amortization (as in Bernstein and Koudijs, 2024). For 
Black households, homeownership grows by 16.1% in high-opportunity 
areas and by1.4% in low-opportunity areas. Second, Black households 
move to high-opportunity areas and benefit from higher incomes on 
average across the life-cycle (+0.6%). The presence of Black households 
goes up by over 34.4% when the FHA loan cap is relaxed (compared to 
around 12.0% for white households). The effect is especially large for 

high-productivity households with little initial wealth. The migration 
of  households  demonstrates  the  spatial  misallocation  generated  by 
leverage constraints. In an unconstrained economy, a larger fraction 
would live, earn, consume, and own in high-opportunity areas.

Interestingly, moving patterns are not only driven by homebuyers 
taking advantage of relaxed leverage limits. The increase in the number 
of Black households in high-opportunity areas overall is larger than the 
increase in homeownership. This reflects an increase Black renters in 
high-opportunity areas. Some Black households move in response to an 
increase in the option value of purchasing housing. These households 
incur the costs of moving even before they can fully afford a down 
payment, anticipating the greater feasibility of homeownership in the 
future.

One caveat behind these results is that they are based on a baseline 
calibration which slightly overstates the number of Black households 
in high-opportunity areas (12% vs. 8% in the data). If this difference 
results in lower fraction of Black households in low-opportunity ar-
eas that are sensitive to down-payment requirements, then we likely 
underestimate the impacts of our policy counterfactual.

The net effect of relaxed leverage constraints depends on the re-
sponses of prices and rents. Home prices in high-opportunity areas rise 
by 19.7% in this counterfactual, reflecting the entry of new home-
owners, while rents increase by much less. In low-opportunity areas, 
both prices and rents fall due to a migration accelerator effect: both 
owners and renters shift to becoming owners now or later in high-
opportunity areas. These results are consistent with theoretical and 
empirical evidence that changing credit conditions can affect house 
prices  (e.g.,  Favilukis  et  al.,  2017;  Johnson,  2020;  Greenwald  and 
Guren, 2021). Our contribution is to emphasize the consequences for 
the spatial allocation of financially constrained agents, especially Black 
borrowers, who are sensitive to such changes.

Finally, beyond closing gaps in homeownership, wealth, and in-
come, relaxed leverage constraints substantially increase consumption 
for Black households (over 3%). While we would generically expect 
relaxing  the  constraint  to  improve  households’  outcomes  in  partial 
equilibrium (and absent externalities), the key finding is that these ben-
efits disproportionately accrue to Black households, even accounting 
for price adjustments and agglomeration externalities, indicating their 
greater sensitivity to financial constraints.

To quantify the effect of financial constraints on spatial mobility, 
we next show that a 15% reduction in the costs of moving to high-
opportunity  areas  for  Black  households  is  necessary  to  generate  a 
similar  increase  in  Black  wealth.  In  Appendix  Figure  D.I,  we  show 
results from an alternative counterfactual where the moving cost is 

20 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 7.  Increase in the FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas.
Notes: Variables are conditional averages in percentage deviation from the baseline model equilibrium. This figure plots the result for a counterfactual economy with an expanded FHA loan 
cap, so that mortgages are subject to an LTV limit of 0.965 in high-opportunity areas. We plot outcomes including: wealth, income, consumption, and house prices and rents across areas 
for white (blue) and Black borrowers (red). We also plot home ownership in high-opportunity areas, the fraction of each group that is present in high-opportunity areas, and the LTV at 
origination for purchases made in high-opportunity areas. Column 1 of Table  5 shows a fuller set of results for this counterfactual. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

(3)

(1)
9.6 (0.7)
0.6 (0.2)
34.4 (12.0)
5.0 (1.0)
16.1 (1.6)
1.4 (0.6)
−1.0 (0.6)
94.2 (52.1)
−1.4 (−1.3)
7.9 (5.8)

(2)
−1.6 (−0.9) 10.0 (1.0)
0.0 (−0.0)
0.5 (0.1)
−2.0 (−1.2) 33.4 (9.3)
5.1 (1.2)
7.4 (1.4)
14.2 (1.2)
2.7 (0.8)
1.9 (1.1)
8.2 (1.6)
−0.8 (0.7)
4.9 (4.3)
98.8 (52.5)
2.7 (0.5)
4.8 (4.2)
−1.4 (−1.3)
−3.9 (−2.7) 6.4 (3.9)

(6)
(5)
(4)
12.4 (1.3)
10.1 (−0.2)
1.7 (0.8)
1.0 (0.6)
1.1 (−0.0)
0.1 (0.1)
53.5 (26.0)
46.5 (−2.2)
8.7 (5.4)
6.8 (1.5)
−0.5 (0.1)
0.7 (0.3)
20.8 ( 3.6)
−3.3 (0.1)
1.2 (0.8)
1.2 (0.2)
−1.1 (0.2)
0.3 (0.1)
0.3 (−0.2)
−1.4 (0.2)
−1.5 (0.2)
−0.5 ( 6.2) −5.9 (−7.4) 99.9 (55.9)
0.4 (−0.1)
−0.9 ( 0.1) −1.9 (−2.0)
−0.0 (−0.6) 13.6 (0.4)

Table 5
Detailed model results.
  Variable (% change)
  Wealth Black (white)
  Income Black (white)
  Presence high opp. Black (white)
  Homeownership Black (white)
  Homeownership high opp. Black (white)
  Homeownership low opp. Black (white)
  LTV Black (white)
  LTV high opportunity Black (white)
  LTV low opportunity Black (white)
  Buyer consumption Black (white)
  Buyer consumption high opp. Black (white) −27.3 (−13.1) 0.5 (0.4)
7.0 (3.8)
  Buyer consumption low opp. Black (white)
  Renter consumption Black (white)
2.8 (−0.2)
  Renter consumption high opp. Black (white) 4.3 (0.6)
  Renter consumption low opp. Black (white) −0.1 (−1.3)
  Renter housing Black (white)
  Renter housing high opp. Black (white)
  Renter housing low opp. Black (white)
  Default rate Black (white)
0.3 (−0.0)
  House prices high (low) opportunity
  Rents high (low) opportunity
−14.3 (−0.4) 
Notes: Variables are conditional averages in percentage deviations from the baseline model equilibrium. Column (1): Increase in FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas. (2): 
Increase in FHA maximum LTV ratio from 0.965 to 0.99. (3): Increase in FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas + PTI constraint. (4): Higher housing supply in high-opportunity 
areas. (5): Lower moving costs for Black households. (6): Increase in FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas + higher housing supply in high-opportunity areas. (7): Increase in 
FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas + higher housing supply elasticity in high-opportunity areas. (8): Increase in FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas + lower moving costs 
for Black households. (9): Higher rental supply in high-opportunity areas.

(9)
0.3 (0.3)
0.0 (−0.0)
4.8 (0.7)
−0.2 (0.1)
−3.6 (−0.4)  
0.3 (0.3)
0.1 (−0.2)
4.0 (7.8)
0.1 (−0.2)
−0.9 (−1.3  
−29.8 (−15.7) −6.6 (−8.6) 21.4 (14.8) −32.4 (−18.9) −30.4 (−17.4) −11.8 (−11.3) −9.0 (−11.4) 
−0.4 (−0.3)  
0.0 (0.0)
−0.0 ( 0.2)  
0.1 (−0.2)
0.2 (0.1)
0.2 (0.2)
0.1 (0.0)

0.4 (0.1)
0.3 (0.1)
0.7 (0.0)
−15.4 (−7.1) 41.3 (25.8) −16.4 (−8.3) −3.2 (−2.6) −17.5 (−0.3) −20.2 (−10.0) −16.8 (−7.4) −28.3 (−7.0) −0.8 (−1.0)  
19.7 (−2.4)
3.5 (−2.4)

−3.8 (−2.5) 6.0 (3.1)
2.9 (−0.1)
3.2 (0.7)
4.3 (0.6)
0.9 (−0.0)
0.2 (−1.0)
7.9 (1.7)
0.8 (0.3)
4.8 (1.5)
0.7 (0.4)
2.7(1.1)
0.9 (0.1)
8.8 (2.1)

(7)
10.0 (0.7)
0.8 (0.4)
43.2 (18.8)
5.5 (1.0)
18.3 (2.4)
0.9 (0.2)
−1.1 (0.5)
98.4 (55.2)
−1.5 (−1.5)
8.9 (5.9)

(8)
22.2 (0.6)
1.4 (0.1)
74.5 (8.2)
6.2 (1.0)
15.2 (1.0)
0.9 (0.9)
−1.8 (0.7)
68.7 (51.9)
−1.9 (−1.2)
19.4 (5.2)

−5.2 (−0.7) 1.8 (−0.4)
4.6 (−2.7)
−10.0 (−0.6) 19.5 (−3.2) −0.9 (−2.4)

8.0 (3.8)
3.2 (−0.1)
5.1 (1.1)
−0.4 (−1.7)
0.4 (0.0)
0.3 (0.1)
0.6 (−0.0)

11.5 (−0.7)
2.0 (−0.1)
3.0 (−0.3)
0.2 (0.1)
−0.4 (0.0)
−0.4 (0.0)
−0.4 (0.1)

18.8 (3.3)
6.5 (−0.3)
8.4 (0.3)
3.7 (−1.1)
0.4 (0.2)
0.4 (0.2)
0.6 (0.1)

0.2 (−0.1)
1.2 (0.7)
1.1 (1.0)
1.1 (0.4)
0.2 (0.1)
0.2 (0.1)
0.1 (0.1)

8.8 (4.4)
4.8 (0.7)
6.9 (2.1)
0.7 (−1.2)
0.6 (0.1)
0.5 (0.2)
1.0 (0.0)

23.5 (−3.1)
−5.5 (−4.8)

12.1 (−1.8)
2.4 (−1.6)

24.3 (−3.0)
4.9 (−3.7)

0.0 (0.0)
0.0 (0.0)

9.5 (6.4)

lowered (detailed results are reported in column 5 of Table  5). This 
experiment mirrors the impact of natural shocks that induce migra-
tion  (Nakamura  et  al.,  2021;  McIntosh,  2008),  and  more  directly, 
explicit policy incentives for migration (Bergman et al., 2024; Bryan 
et al., 2014). Given our focus, this counterfactual also relates to the 
Great Migration studied in Derenoncourt (2022). When moving costs 
are lower, more households move to high-opportunity areas, resulting 
in  an  increased  presence  of  Black  households.  With  lower  moving 
frictions, spatial misallocation is reduced, which significantly increases 

income (+1.1%) and wealth (+10.1%) for Black households and reduces 
the corresponding gaps. However, white income falls slightly reflecting 
the agglomeration externalities generated by migration.

While this first experiment allows us to quantify the contribution 
of leverage constraints to spatial misallocation and racial gaps in the 
data, it does not necessarily imply that relaxing constraints is desirable 
from a policy viewpoint. Relaxing constraints as a standalone policy 
may  have  adverse  implications  for  the  stability  of  asset  prices  and 
default risk, which have been explored in prior work (e.g., Greenwald, 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Gupta et al.

2018; DeFusco et al., 2019; Adelino et al., 2025; Johnson, 2020; Gupta 
and Hansman, 2022). Nevertheless, the model does account for the 
effects of financial constraints on prices and rents, and on households’ 
endogenous default. In fact, default rates decrease for both Black and 
white households (by -−15.4% and -−7.1%, respectively) as shown in 
Table  5. The decrease in defaults is due to higher incomes, a major 
determinant of default decisions (e.g. Ganong and Noel, 2023), which 
in turn come from the improved spatial allocation of workers. This 
suggests that relaxing constraints can be reconciled with lower credit 
risk, at least in principle, if it allows borrowers to improve labor market 
prospects. However, beyond this channel, the model does not allow 
us to study further consequences of modifying constraints for financial 
stability. Given these limitations, our emphasis in this experiment is 
to highlight the contribution of leverage constraints to inequality and 
racial wealth gaps in the data; not to directly advocate for changes in 
leverage unconditionally, which would require modeling the banking 
system, aggregate risk, and default externalities.

Policymakers who wish to take equity considerations into account 
may be interested in alternative forms of macro-prudential regulation 
that impose less stringent requirements in terms of up-front wealth. To 
illustrate this idea, we consider a counterfactual in which we introduce 
PTI  constraints  alongside  the  relaxation  in  the  leverage  constraint. 
Doing so results in similar impacts on house prices, and lowers Black 
default  risk  by  −16.4%.  Despite  the  additional  leverage  restriction, 
we still observe a large increase in Black wealth under this counter-
factual  (+10.0%;  see  Appendix  Figure  D.II).20  Similar  policies  have 
been studied in the literature that seek to address leverage constraints 
with  minimal  macro-prudential  implications.  For  example,  financial 
assistance to first-time buyers (Berger et al., 2020; Mabille, 2023), or 
equity assistance to top up down payments (Benetton et al., 2018) can 
relieve down payment constraints, in line with our experiment, without 
depleting borrower equity. Finally, the locations in which borrowers 
have access to leverage matters a lot. In Appendix Figure D.III, we show 
that relaxing leverage constraints in the FHA program overall (from 
0.965 to 0.99) increases household defaults, as this leads to higher 
leverage by borrowers concentrated in low-opportunity areas. Increas-
ing homeownership in areas with weaker labor markets has adverse 
consequences for credit risk. Thus, it is critical where households are 
able to buy when credit is easier.

6.2. Housing supply restrictions

Down  payment  constraints  are  more  likely  to  bind  when  home 
prices are high. As a result, the spatial frictions that lead to high prices 
are at the core of the distortions generated by financial constraints. 
We next consider counterfactual experiments that analyze the role of 
housing  supply.  We  first  consider  a  10%  upward  shift  in  the  level 
of  the  housing  supply  curve  in  high-opportunity  areas,  detailed  in 
column  4  of  Table   5.  This  modification  can  be  interpreted  as  the 
result of policies that seek to address housing affordability by removing 
regulatory barriers to construction in these areas (Glaeser and Gyourko, 
2002; Gyourko et al., 2008). Such policies are frequently proposed and 
endorsed by both policymakers and economists. We are interested in 
their implications for wealth building through financial constraints and 
spatial allocation.

The  key  feature  of  this  modification,  as  shown  in  Fig.   8,  is  its 
heterogeneous impact across demographic groups, despite not targeting 
them separately. Increasing housing supply increases Black wealth on 
average (+1.7%), but has a weaker impact on white wealth (+0.8%). 
The policy has similar effects on the income and consumption of Black 
and white households, though Black presence increases substantially 

20 As in the data, the constraint only applies at origination: 𝑏𝑡+1

≥ −

𝜃𝑗
𝑃 𝑇 𝐼
1+𝑟𝑏−𝜃𝑎𝑚

𝑦𝑡.

22 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

more in high-opportunity areas (+8.7%, compared to +5.4% for white 
households).

While both Black and white borrowers respond to the change in 
housing  supply  due  to  its  relaxation  of  financial  constraints,  Black 
households are more sensitive in migrating in response to the change 
in housing conditions, and their wealth increases by more as a result. 
White households also see a boost in wealth from a greater presence 
in high-opportunity areas, but this gain is offset by a decrease in home 
equity due to a drop in house prices in these areas. Contrasting gains 
for entrants and losses for homeowners mitigate the overall impact on 
white wealth.

These findings have direct implications for the distributional con-
sequences of housing supply policies. While both racial groups benefit 
on average from changes in housing supply, our results suggest that 
wealth and locational outcomes improve more for Black households 
and  for  households  who  do  not  currently  live  in  high-opportunity 
areas. House price declines in such areas, by contrast, may lead incum-
bent homeowners to oppose such policies. More broadly, our results 
underscore  the  importance  of  considering  financial  constraints  and 
heterogeneity in the population when studying the incidence of housing 
supply policies.

In addition to examining the effects of increasing overall housing 
supply, we also consider a targeted increase in rental housing supply in 
high-opportunity areas. Column 9 of Table  5 (also see Appendix Figure 
D.IV) shows the results of this counterfactual, in which we increase 
the supply of rental housing by 10% in the high-opportunity area. This 
policy leads to a substantial decrease in rents in high-opportunity areas, 
resulting in increased presence of both Black and white households. The 
effect is more pronounced for Black households, consistent with our 
previous findings that they are more responsive to changes in housing 
market conditions. Interestingly, this policy increases wealth for both 
groups, with a slightly larger effect for white households. This is partly 
due to Black households substituting away from homeownership in 
high-opportunity areas towards renting, which may limit their wealth 
accumulation through housing equity.

However, the rental supply increase has some unexpected effects 
on income and consumption. Unlike our previous counterfactuals, we 
observe minimal income gains for Black households and even slight de-
clines in white household income. Consumption also decreases for both 
groups. These results can be attributed to the agglomeration economies 
incorporated in our model. The increase in rental supply disproportion-
ately attracts lower-productivity workers to high-opportunity areas, di-
luting agglomeration effects and leading to lower average incomes. For 
Black households, the income gains from migration to high-opportunity 
areas outweigh the losses among Black homeowners, resulting in a 
small net positive effect. White households, by contrast, experience 
slight income declines on average.

These findings highlight the importance of considering population 
composition effects when evaluating different policies. While increasing 
rental housing supply can also address spatial mismatch, it may have 
different effects on productivity and income compared to policies that 
affect leverage constraints. In our model, policies which affect hous-
ing leverage or increases in housing supply broadly appear to select 
relatively higher-productivity workers, minimizing possible negative 
agglomeration effects on destination areas.

6.3. Interaction of financial and spatial constraints

Finally, we analyze the joint role of financial and spatial constraints 
for two reasons. First, this set of counterfactual experiments allows us 
to understand the relationship between financial and spatial frictions. 
Housing supply constraints may be more distortionary if households are 
also unable to finance mortgages. Second, a relaxation of financial and 
spatial constraints in tandem may alleviate asset pricing concerns that 
come with an increase in household debt by keeping prices low. Indeed, 
unless housing supply is allowed to respond, increasing leverage may 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 8.  Higher housing supply in high-opportunity areas.
Notes: Variables are conditional averages in percentage deviation from the baseline model equilibrium. The panels show the consequences of a vertical shift in the supply curve in 
high-opportunity areas that increases the quantity of housing by 10%. We plot outcomes including: wealth, income, consumption, and house prices and rents across areas for white (blue) and 
Black borrowers (red). We also plot homeownership in high-opportunity areas, the fraction of each group that is present in high-opportunity areas, and the LTV at origination for purchases 
made in high-opportunity areas. Table  5 shows a fuller set of results for this policy counterfactual. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred 
to the web version of this article.)

be self-defeating if it causes equilibrium house price run-ups that erode 
affordability.

Leverage limits and housing supply restrictions.  In this counterfactual, we 
combine an increase in the FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas 
(resulting in a maximum LTV limit of 0.965, as in Section 6.1) with a 
10% vertical shift in the level of the housing supply curve also in high-
opportunity areas (as in Section 6.2). Fig.  9 reports the main results 
and column 6 of Table  5 presents detailed results. The first takeaway is 
that spatial constraints amplify the effect of leverage constraints alone: 
Black wealth increases by more in this policy counterfactual (+12.4%) 
than in the sum of the two experiments individually (+11.3%). This 
is not ex ante obvious: increases in leverage limits increase housing 
access to high-opportunity areas (raising house prices), while increases 
in housing supply reduce house prices; hence, the net effect on the 
wealth  position  may  be  ambiguous.  Furthermore,  the  relocation  of 
Black households to high-opportunity areas (+53.5%) is greater than 
in the sum of the two counterfactuals separately (+43.1%), further 
demonstrating the complementarity of the two constraints.

The complementary effect on Black households’ location decisions 
can be attributed to the more moderate increase in housing prices in 
this  counterfactual.  Specifically,  when  both  down  payment  require-
ments and housing supply are adjusted, house prices rise by 4.6% in 
the high-opportunity areas rather than the 19.7% increase observed 
when only leverage requirements are relaxed. Because there is more 
housing supply, the increase in housing demand is more easily accom-
modated on the quantity side rather than through prices. As a result, 
more Black households are present in high-opportunity areas. Many 
of these households are renters as more housing supply also induces 
substantially lower rents.

We also find similar effects in a counterfactual simulation in which 
we increase housing elasticity in the high-opportunity area by 50% as 
well as the FHA cap in high-opportunity areas in tandem (column 7 
of Table  5), rather than shifting the level of housing supply. We see 
increases in Black wealth, income, presence in high-opportunity areas, 
and homeownership as a result of the combination of changes in both 
FHA loan caps and the housing supply elasticity.

From a policy viewpoint, jointly relaxing financial and spatial fric-
tions addresses several problems. First, reducing financial frictions — 
though valuable in improving housing market access — also increases 
housing demand and house prices, which has the potential to undo the 
benefits of credit access through higher prices. Accommodating housing 
demand  through  increased  supply  addresses  this  challenge,  thereby 
enabling the same loosening in leverage limits to go further in improv-
ing wealth accumulation. Second, increasing housing supply alone also 
improves housing access, but still leaves many households unable to 
afford housing in high-opportunity areas. Even households who always 
remain renters are indirectly affected by financial constraints, which 
influence the size of the total renter population and hence result in 
pressure on rents. Providing additional financing opportunities there-
fore allows households to take advantage of increased housing supply. 
Finally, increased prices which result from more leverage may be seen 
as undesirable or unsustainable in other ways. The combination of both 
supply expansion and looser financial constraints mitigates the house 
price increases, hence limiting the adverse macroeconomic implications 
of credit expansions.

Leverage limits and black households’ moving costs.  To further illustrate 
the  complementarity  between  financial  and  spatial  constraints,  we 
analyze the interaction of leverage constraints with Black households’ 
moving costs. We consider an economy in which the FHA loan cap is 
increased in the high-opportunity area and moving costs are 10% lower 
for Black households. This type of experiment can be motivated by the 
need to jointly address moving and financing frictions; for instance, 
through a first time homebuyer credit accompanied by a moving credit. 
The results are reported in Appendix Figure D.V and column 8 of Table 
5.

Of all the experiments we consider, this one is the most effective 
at reducing the racial wealth gap, with average wealth increasing by 
22.2% for Black households but only by 0.6% for white households. 
The reason is that leverage constraints and moving costs are strongly 
complementary. Relaxing them jointly increases average Black wealth 
by more than the sum of the underlying policies separately (+19.7%), 
and  the  same  is  true  for  Black  presence  in  high-opportunity  areas. 

23 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Fig. 9.  Increase in FHA cap and higher housing supply in high-opportunity areas.
Notes: Variables are conditional averages in percentage deviation from the baseline model equilibrium. This figure plots the result for a counterfactual economy with a higher FHA loan cap 
(resulting in a max LTV limit of 96.5%) combined with a 10% higher housing supply curve in high-opportunity areas. We plot outcomes including: wealth, income, consumption, and house 
prices and rents across areas for white (blue) and Black borrowers (red). We also plot home ownership in high-opportunity areas, the fraction of each group that is present in high-opportunity 
areas, and the LTV at origination for purchases made in high-opportunity areas. Table  5 shows a fuller set of results for this policy counterfactual. (For interpretation of the references to 
color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

There are policy synergies in jointly addressing financial and moving 
frictions. Even when purchasing homes is made financially more viable, 
many Black households may be disinclined to migrate due to pecuniary 
and non-pecuniary moving costs. Similarly, reducing moving frictions 
may not address challenges faced by households who lack the down 
payments to purchase homes in high-opportunity areas, especially with 
potential negative agglomeration externalities. Addressing both fric-
tions at the same time allows for greater reallocation than either policy 
considered individually.

7. Robustness

In this last section, we show that our results are robust to various 
alternative specifications of the baseline model. In each case, we fully 
recalibrate the model to match the same targets as in Section 5, and 
repeat our main counterfactual experiment: increasing the FHA loan 
cap in high opportunity areas.

We consider eight robustness tests. First, we consider the possible 
role  of  mortgage  market  discrimination,  which  increases  borrowing 
costs for Black buyers. Second, we extend the model with PTI limits. 
Third, we allow households to save in a financial asset with a higher 
rate of return than in the baseline. Fourth, we eliminate differences in 
idiosyncratic moving and homeownership shocks across groups to show 
that they do not drive our results. Fifth, we explore the sensitivity of 
our results to racial differences in income processes. Sixth, we allow the 
present value of the next cohort’s future income to enter the bequest 
motive.  Seventh,  we  study  an  economy  where  the  income  benefits 
of moving to opportunity accrue immediately to the current cohort 
of  movers,  instead  of  being  delayed  as  in  the  baseline.  Eighth,  we 
consider a higher interest rate premium for FHA loans of 100 bps. The 
results are summarized in Table  6. In Appendix E, we also consider a 
comparison with reparation-style policies that equate initial conditions 
across demographic groups to serve as a point of reference.

Mortgage rate discrimination.  We follow Bartlett et al. (2022) and as-
sume that the rate paid by Black borrowers is 10 basis points higher 
𝐵 = 𝑟𝑏
than for white borrowers, i.e., 𝑟𝑏
𝑊 + 10 bps. Outcomes of our 

counterfactual  experiment  are  almost  identical  after  accounting  for 
mortgage rate discrimination.

PTI limit.  We add PTI limits 𝜃𝑃 𝑇 𝐼 (𝑏𝑡+1) = 0.43 if |𝑏𝑡+1| > 𝑏𝐹 𝐻𝐴
 and 
𝜃𝑃 𝑇 𝐼 (𝑏𝑡+1) = 0.57 otherwise, which correspond respectively to PTI limits 
for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and for FHA mortgages. As in the data, 
we consider a case where PTI limits apply only at origination: 

𝑗

𝑏𝑡+1

≥ −

𝜃𝑗
𝑃 𝑇 𝐼
1 + 𝑟𝑏 − 𝜃𝑎𝑚

𝑦𝑡.

(34)

The impact on Black wealth of relaxing LTV limits in high-opportunity 
areas through a higher FHA loan cap remains large, and it is only partly 
dampened by PTI constraints now rationing some low-income borrow-
ers.  Between  the  two  constraints,  LTV  limits  generate  more  spatial 
misallocation because they ration high-productivity households with 
low wealth out of high-opportunity areas. As a caveat, PTI amounts can 
exceed these limits for loans with certain underwriting characteristics, 
especially for conforming loans. In the case of these higher limits, PTI 
constraints are less likely to bind, and therefore less likely to impact 
our results as LTV remains the main binding constraint.

Higher financial rate of return.  Our baseline model focuses on a risk-
free asset for computational tractability. In reality, households also 
have access to risky financial assets. To explore the robustness of our 
results, we introduce financial assets with a higher rate of return than 
in the baseline to capture their role in wealth accumulation.21 This 
assumption provides a conservative upper bound: real world assets, 
which  carry  greater  risk,  will  be  less  beneficial  for  households  for 
wealth-building purposes. An alternative interpretation is that this asset 
reflects a bundle of a genuinely risk-free as well as a risky asset with 

21 Fully incorporating a risky asset would require introducing aggregate risk, 
which is currently not feasible in a spatial life-cycle model with endogenous 
housing prices due to computational limitations. For instance, Favilukis and 
Van Nieuwerburgh (2021) incorporates spatial heterogeneity to consider ag-
gregate risk, but abstracts from racial heterogeneity, which is central to our 
analysis, and assumes that financial assets are risk-free. We follow the same 
approach in this robustness test.

24 

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

Table 6
Robustness.
  Variable (% change)

Higher
Main
spread
model
10.2 (0.6)
10.2 (−0.3)
9.6 (0.7)
  Wealth Black (white)
0.6 (0.2)
0.5 (0.2)
0.6 (0.2)
  Income Black (white)
3.5 (−0.2)  
3.7 (−0.5)
  Consumption Black (white)
3.4 (−0.1)
17.2 (1.5)
14.4 ( 0.5)
  Homeownership high opp. Black (white) 16.1 (1.6)
35.4 (11.6)  
26.6 (10.3)
  Presence high opp. Black (white)
105.5 (64.9) 101.3 (56.1) 
  LTV high opportunity Black (white)
19.5 (−2.4)  
17.0 (−2.4)
  House prices high (low) opportunity
  Rents high (low) opportunity
3.5 (−2.4)  
4.3 (−2.6)
Notes: Variables are conditional averages in percentage deviations from the baseline model equilibrium. Results are for a counterfactual economy with a higher FHA loan cap 
which relaxes LTV limits.

Higher Black Bequest
High financial Same
Immediate
high-opp. income inc. boost
income risk
rate of return shock means
10.1 (0.7)
8.5 (1.4)
10.1 (2.3)
17.7 (2.0)
9.2 ( 0.6)
0.6 (0.2)
0.5 (0.1)
0.4 (0.1)
0.3 (0.1)
0.5 (0.2)
3.7 (−0.2)
2.3 (−0.4)
3.6 (0.1)
3.2 (−0.0)
6.6 (0.4)
17.2 ( 1.4)
16.5 (1.1)
6.0 (2.6)
16.5 ( 2.1) 19.7 (2.1)
34.5 (12.4)
26.3 (9.1)
30.9 (10.5)
34.2 (11.7) 35.6 (11.4)
137.9 (55.0) 92.4 (50.6)
112.3 (63.1)
94.7 (55.8) 7.7 (58.7)
21.6 (−2.0) 29.6 (−1.7)
20.5 (−2.7)
25.3 (−2.5)
27.0 (−2.6)
3.2 (−2.1) −14.5 (−5.2) −21.0 (−11.3) −14.6 (−9.0) 3.9 (−2.6)

Mortgage rate PTI
discrimination limit
9.3 ( 0.7)
0.6 (0.2)
3.4 (−0.1)
16.2 (1.6)
34.4 (12.0) 34.6 (12.0)
94.2 (52.1) 95.9 (52.2)
19.7 (−2.4) 19.7(−2.4)
3.5 (−2.4)
3.5 (−2.4)

a guaranteed high expected rate of return as in Favilukis and Van 
Nieuwerburgh (2021).

Our robustness test raises the rate of return on the financial asset 
to 4.5%. We then fully recalibrate the model while giving households 
access to this new savings vehicle. Table  6 reports the results for this 
analysis.  Notably,  the  results  of  our  main  experiment  of  increasing 
FHA loan caps in high-opportunity areas is stronger compared to our 
baseline model. Increasing FHA loan availability increases wealth for 
Black households by more when they have access to a higher rate of 
return. The reason for this amplification is that households, in this 
new economy, have access to a better savings technology, and so can 
more  easily  attain  the  down  payment  requirements  for  housing  in 
high-opportunity areas.

Because  of  the  limitations  in  fully  modeling  the  risk  associated 
with  the  higher  rate  of  return  asset,  we  view  these  results  as  an 
upper bound, since in practice risk-averse households would likely not 
invest  as  much  in  this  asset  as  in  this  counterfactual.  Importantly, 
however, these results qualitatively highlight an economic channel that 
operates with an improved savings technology that is complementary 
to homeownership. In particular, they underscore the complementarity 
between financial and housing wealth.

Moving and homeownership shocks.  We show that our results are not 
driven by differences in idiosyncratic moving (𝑚) and homeownership 
shocks (𝛯) between Black and white households. We compute our main 
experiment in a model where the means 𝛯 and 𝑚 are identical across 
groups. The results are similar to the baseline model: wealth, income, 
homeownership and presence in high-opportunity areas improve sub-
stantially, and particularly so for Black households. This leads to a 
reduction in disparities across outcomes. Financial constraints play an 
important role in limiting access to high-opportunity areas even in 
this simpler model. Differences in idiosyncratic shocks across groups, 
while important for the quantitative fit of the model, are not solely 
responsible for spatial misallocation.

Black households’ income risk.  Black and white households have differ-
ent income processes in the baseline model. The higher racial income 
shifter 𝜇𝑊  for the log income process of white households implies that 
the level of income for Black households has both a lower mean and 
higher risk. In this robustness test, we further explore the sensitivity 
of our results to the income risk of Black households by increasing 
the volatility of their income process 𝜎𝜀,𝐵 by 10%, while fixing it at 
the baseline level for white households. We find that the results are 
essentially unaffected. The response of Black households to a relaxation 
of the FHA loan cap in high-opportunity areas is weaker than in the 
baseline, because facing a higher income risk makes these households 
more reluctant to move to high-opportunity areas for precautionary 
reasons.

Including children’s income benefits from moving to opportunity into parents’ 
bequest motive.  In our baseline model, households can sacrifice their 
current  non-durable  and  housing  consumption  to  move  into  high-
opportunity areas and leave higher bequests to the next cohort within 

the same racial group. They internalize the value for the next cohort 
of starting off with more wealth when deciding whether to move into 
high-opportunity areas and how much consumption to sacrifice.

However, households may also move to high-opportunity areas to 
improve the income prospects of the next generation. In this robustness 
test, we assume that households internalize the income benefits for 
the  next  cohort  of  living  in  high-opportunity  areas.  To  do  so,  we 
incorporate the present value of the spatial income shifter 𝜇𝐻  in house-
holds’ bequest motive 𝑢, weighted by the next cohort’s age-dependent 
survival rates 𝑝𝑎 and discounted at the interest rate 𝑟. We assume that 
households have utility over an augmented form of bequests ( ̃𝐵) which 
are calculated as the sum of wealth and the net present value of the next 
generation’s income benefits. However, the following generation only 
receives the wealth component of this transfer as a bequest. Specifically 
we  modify  the  bequest  utility  as  follows,  with  an  additional  term 
𝑁𝑃 𝑉 (𝜇𝐻 ) corresponding to this present value component:

𝑢( ̃𝐵𝑡+1) = 𝛹

)1−𝛾

(

1 +

̃𝐵𝑡+1
𝐵

1 − 𝛾

,

where  ̃𝐵𝑡+1 = Wealth𝑡+1 − 𝜏𝐵 max

(
0, Wealth𝑡+1 − 𝐵𝑒𝑥

)

+ 𝑁𝑃 𝑉 (𝜇𝐻 )

and Wealth𝑡+1 = Financial Wealth𝑡+1 + Housing Wealth𝑡+1

and 𝑁𝑃 𝑉 (𝜇𝐻 ) =

20
∑

𝑎=1

𝑝𝑎𝜇𝐻
(1 + 𝑟)𝑎

.

We find that the effect of a higher FHA loan cap in high-opportunity 
areas on average Black wealth is slightly amplified because of stronger 
intergenerational motives (+10.1% increase in wealth for Black house-
holds, compared to +9.6% in our baseline).

Immediate  income  boost  from  moving  to  opportunity.  In  the  baseline 
model, the income benefits of moving into high-opportunity areas are 
delayed by four years. Therefore, as in the data, households cannot 
immediately use their higher income in these areas to finance their 
home purchase in the exact period when they move. In this robustness 
test, we assume that households immediately receive the higher spatial 
income shifter 𝜇𝐻  when moving to high-opportunity areas. We find 
that the effect on Black wealth of increasing the FHA loan cap in high 
opportunity areas is slightly stronger than in the baseline (+0.6 pp). 
Households have an extra incentive to move to high-opportunity areas 
because they immediately receive a higher income boost, which also 
makes it easier for them to move and afford more expensive housing. 
Our baseline results can be interpreted as a lower bound relative to this 
alternative scenario.

Incorporating higher FHA loan premiums.  Our baseline assumption is 
that differences in loan pricing between FHA and non-FHA loans are 
captured  by  the  85  basis  point  annual  MIP  which  borrowers  pay 
through the life of their mortgage. Borrowers may also be subject to 
additional origination fees, which are commonly rolled into the loan 
balance. In this robustness analysis, we approximate additional charges 
by assuming that FHA borrowers are subject to a 100 basis point higher 
interest relative to conventional loan borrowers, representing a 15 basis 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

point higher rate than our baseline. We find a slightly larger impact on 
the average wealth of Black households from increasing the FHA loan 
cap in high opportunity areas under this counterfactual.

References

Adelino,  M.,  Schoar,  A.,  Severino,  F.,  2018.  Perception  of  house  price  risk  and 

homeownership.

8. Conclusion

Our paper highlights the role of financial constraints resulting from 
down payment requirements as a driver of spatial misallocation and 
hence persistent wealth disparities across groups with different initial 
allocations  of  wealth  and  location.  Though  our  analysis  focuses  on 
racial disparities as a setting in which differences in housing and wealth 
are salient, our approach can also be applied broadly to understand 
group differences in other contexts. The main contributions of our work 
are to uncover a racial leverage gap — Black borrowers purchase homes 
with substantially higher LTV ratios than white borrowers — and show 
that down payment restrictions limit the ability of Black borrowers 
to  purchase  homes  in  high-opportunity  neighborhoods.  Empirically, 
we consider regulatory variation in loan caps in the FHA system to 
identify the impacts of down payment constraints on the spatial allo-
cation of Black borrowers using bunching and difference-in-differences 
estimators.

We quantify the implications of the resulting spatial mismatch for 
wealth  accumulation  across  groups  using  a  new  dynamic  life-cycle 
model. The model explicitly accounts for geographic and racial het-
erogeneity, and is calibrated using our quasi-experimental estimates of 
the sensitivity of Black borrowing to the availability of high leverage 
mortgages. Access to leverage is a necessary condition to access both 
valuable housing and high-quality job opportunities. Down payment 
requirements distort the choices of Black borrowers, leading them to 
purchase homes and live in areas with reduced opportunities. This, in 
turn, generates a spatial poverty trap that perpetuates initial differences 
in wealth.

Potential  policies  to  address  financial  and  spatial  constraints,
through  better  mortgage  access  or  higher  housing  supply  in  high-
opportunity neighborhoods, can therefore lower spatial misallocation 
and  help  reduce  racial  wealth  disparities.  In  contrast,  policies  that 
alleviate leverage constraints in low-opportunity areas turns out to be 
detrimental for credit risk and, ultimately, minority wealth. Thus, our 
analysis points to the need for access to geographic opportunities rather 
than an increase in leverage and homeownership unconditionally.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Arpit Gupta: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Formal analysis, Data curation. Christopher Hansman: Writing – re-
view & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Pierre Mabille: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Formal analysis, Data curation.

Declaration of competing interest

The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  known  competing  finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104142.

Data availability

Racial Housing Gap Repository (Original data) (Mendeley Data)

26 

Adelino, M., Schoar, A., Severino, F., 2025. Credit supply and house prices: evidence 

from mortgage market segmentation. J. of Fin. Econ. 163, 103958.

Andersen,  S.,  Badarinza,  C.,  Liu,  L.,  Marx,  J.,  Ramadorai,  T.,  2022.  Reference 

dependence in the housing market. Am. Econ. Rev. 112 (10), 3398–3440.

Andrews, I., Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J.M., 2017. Measuring the sensitivity of parameter 

estimates to estimation moments. Q. J. Econ. 132 (4), 1553–1592.

Arrow, K.J., Harris, T., Marschak, J., 1951. Optimal inventory policy. Econometrica 19 

(3), 250–272.

Avenancio-Leon,  C.,  Howard,  T.,  2022.  The  assessment  gap:  Racial  inequalities  in 

property taxation. Q. J. Econ. 137 (3), 1383–1434.

Bartlett, R., Morse, A., Stanton, R., Wallace, N., 2022. Consumer-lending discrimination 

in the FinTech era. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 30–56.

Bartscher, A., Kuhn, M., Schularick, M., Wachtel, P., 2022. Monetary policy and racial 

inequality. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 

Baum-Snow, N., Han, L., 2024. The microgeography of housing supply. J. Political 

Econ. 132 (6), 1897–1946.

Bayer, P., Charles, K.K., Park, J., 2021. Separate and Unequal: Race and the Geography 
of the American Housing Market. Technical Report, Mimeo., Duke University.
Bayer, P., Fang, H., McMillan, R., 2014. Separate when equal? Racial inequality and 

residential segregation. J. Urban Econ. 82, 32–48.

Benetton, M., Bracke, P., Garbarino, N., 2018. Down Payment and Mortgage Rates: 

Evidence from Equity Loans. Bank of England Working paper.
Benetton, M., Kudlyak, M., Mondragon, J., 2022. Dynastic home equity.
Berger, D., Turner, N., Zwick, E., 2020. Stimulating housing markets. J. Financ. 75 (1), 

277–321.

Bergman, P., Chetty, R., DeLuca, S., Hendren, N., Katz, L.F., Palmer, C., 2024. Creating 
moves to opportunity: Experimental evidence on barriers to neighborhood choice. 
Am. Econ. Rev. 114 (5), 1281–1337.

Bernstein, A., Koudijs, P., 2024. The mortgage piggy bank: Building wealth through 

amortization. Q. J. Econ. 139 (3), 1767–1825.

Bhutta, N., Chang, A.C., Dettling, L.J., et al., 2020. Disparities in wealth by race and 

ethnicity in the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances.

Bhutta, N., Hizmo, A., 2021. Do minorities pay more for mortgages? Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Bilal,  A.,  Rossi-Hansberg,  E.,  2021.  Location  as  an  asset.  Econometrica  89  (5), 

34 (2), 763–789.

2459–2495.

Blattman, C., Fiala, N., Martinez, S., 2020. The long-term impacts of grants on poverty: 
Nine-year evidence from Uganda’s youth opportunities program. Am. Econ. Rev.: 
Insights 2 (3), 287–304.

Boar, C., Gorea, D., Midrigan, V., 2022. Liquidity constraints in the U.S. housing market. 

Boerma, J., Karabarbounis, L., 2023. Reparations and persistent racial wealth gaps. 

Rev. Econ. Stud. 89 (3), 1120–1154.

NBER Macro. Annual 37 (1), 171–221.

Boustan, L.P., 2016. Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migrants in Northern 

Cities and Labor Markets. 39, Princeton University Press.

Bryan,  G.,  Chowdhury,  S.,  Mobarak,  A.M.,  2014.  Underinvestment  in  a  profitable 
technology: The case of seasonal migration in Bangladesh. Econometrica 82 (5), 
1671–1748.

Canner, G.B., Gabriel, S.A., Woolley, J.M., 1991. Race, default risk and mortgage 
lending: A study of the FHA and conventional loan markets. South. Econ. J. 58 
(1), 249–262.

Card, D., Rothstein, J., Yi, M., 2025. Location, location, location. Am. Econ. J.: Applied 

Econ. 17 (1), 297–336.

Chaney, T., Sraer, D., Thesmar, D., 2012. The collateral channel: How real estate shocks 

affect corporate investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 102 (6), 2381–2409.

Charles, K., Hurst, E., 2002. The transition to home ownership and the black/white 

wealth gap. Rev. Econ. Stat. 84 (2), 281–297.

Chen, H., Michaux, M., Roussanov, N., 2019. Houses as ATMs: Mortgage refinancing 

and macroeconomic uncertainty. J. Financ. 75 (1), 323–375.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hendren, N., Jones, M.R., Porter, S.R., 2018. The Oppor-
tunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility. Technical Report, 
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chetty,  R.,  Friedman,  J.N.,  Olsen,  T.,  Pistaferri,  L.,  2011.  Adjustment  costs,  firm 
responses, and micro vs. macro labor supply elasticities: Evidence from danish tax 
records. Q. J. Econ. 126 (2), 749–804.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., 2018. The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational 

mobility II: County-level estimates. Q. J. Econ. 133 (3), 1163–1228.

Cocco, J.F., 2005. Portfolio choice in the presence of housing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 18 

Collins, W.J., Margo, R.A., 2011. Race and home ownership from the end of the civil 

war to the present. Am. Econ. Rev. 101 (3), 355–359.

Corbae, D., Quintin, E., 2015. Leverage and the foreclosure crisis. J. Political Econ. 

De Nardi, M., 2004. Wealth inequality and intergenerational links. Rev. Econ. Stud. 71 

(2), 535–567.

123 (1), 1–65.

(3), 743–769.

A. Gupta et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104142 

DeFusco, A.A., Johnson, S., Mondragon, J., 2019. Regulating household leverage. Rev. 

Econ. Stud. 87 (2), 914–958.

Derenoncourt,  E.,  2022.  Can  you  move  to  opportunity?  Evidence  from  the  great 

migration. Am. Econ. Rev. 112 (2), 396–408.

Derenoncourt, E., Kim, C.H., Kuhn, M., Schularick, M., 2022. Wealth of Two Nations: 
The  US  Racial  Wealth  Gap,  1860-2020.  Technical  Report,  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research.

Diamond, R., McQuade, T., Qian, F., 2019. The effects of rent control ex- pansion on 
Tenants, Landlords, and inequality: Evidence from San Francisco. Am. Econ. Rev. 
109 (9), 3365–3394.

Early, D.W., Carrillo, P.E., Olsen, E.O., 2018. Racial rent differences in U.S. housing 
markets: Evidence from the housing voucher program. J. Reg. Sci. 59 (4), 669–700.
Eldemire, A., Luchtenberg, K.F., Wynter, M.M., 2022. Does homeownership reduce 
wealth disparities for low-income and minority households?. Rev. Corp. Finance 
Stud. 11 (3), 465–510.

Favilukis, J., Ludvigson, S., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2017. The macroecononomic effects 
of housing wealth, housing finance, and limited risk sharing in general equilibrium. 
J. Political Econ. 125 (1), 1177–1215.

Favilukis, J., Mabille, P., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2023. Affordable housing and city 

welfare. Rev. Econ. Stud. 90 (1), 293–330.

Gyourko, J., Saiz, A., Summers, A., 2008. A new measure of the local regulatory 
environment for housing markets: The wharton residential land use regulatory 
index. Urban Stud. 45 (3), 693–729.

Heilbron, J.W., 2022. Essays in Household and Housing Finance (Ph.D. thesis). The 

University of Chicago.

J.: Macroecon. 11 (2), 1–39.

Hsieh, C.-T., Moretti, E., 2019. Housing constraints and spatial misallocation. Am. Econ. 

Johnson, S., 2020. Mortgage leverage and house prices. Available At SSRN 3538462.
Jones, J.B., Neelakantan, U., 2022. How Big Is the Inheritance Gap Between Black and 
White Families?. Economic Brief 22–49, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
Kahn, M.E., 2021. Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Financial Returns to Home 
Purchases from 2007 to 2020. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Kaplan, G., Mitman, K., Violante, G.L., 2020. The housing boom and bust: Model meets 

Kennan, J., Walker, J.R., 2011. The effect of expected income on individual migration 

evidence. J. Political Econ. 128 (9).

decisions. Econometrica 79 (1), 211–251.

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kermani, A., Wong, F., 2021. Racial Disparities in Housing Returns. Technical Report, 

Kiyotaki, N., Michaelides, A., Nikolov, K., 2011. Winners and losers in housing markets. 

Favilukis, J., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. Out-of-town home buyers and city welfare. 

J. Money, Credit. Bank. 43 (2–3), 255–296.

J. Financ. 76 (5), 2577–2638.

Kiyotaki, N., Michaelides, A., Nikolov, K., 2024. Housing, distribution, and welfare. J. 

Floden, M., Lindé, J., 2001. Idiosyncratic risk in the United States and Sweden: Is there 

Money, Credit. Bank. 56 (5), 981–1020.

a role for government insurance? Rev. Econ. Dyn. 4, 406–437.

Fuster,  A.,  Goldsmith-Pinkham,  P.,  Ramadorai,  T.,  Walther,  A.,  2022.  Predictably 
unequal? The effects of machine learning on credit markets. J. Financ. 77 (1), 
5–47.

Ganong, P., Noel, P., 2023. Why do borrowers default on mortgages? Q. J. Econ. 138 

(2), 1001–1065.

Garriga, C., Ricketts, L.R., Schlagenhauf, D.E., 2017. The homeownership experience 
of minorities during the great recession. Fed. Reserv. Bank St. Louis Rev. 99 (1), 
139–167.

Gerardi, K.S., Lambie-Hanson, L., Willen, P.S., 2021a. Racial differences in mortgage 
refinancing,  distress,  and  housing  wealth  accumulation  during  COVID-19.  FRB 
Phila. Paym. Cards Cent. Discuss. Pap. (21–2).

Gerardi, K., Willen, P.S., Zhang, D.H., 2023. Mortgage prepayment, race, and monetary 

policy. J. Financ. Econ. 147 (3), 498–524.

Gete, P., Zecchetto, F., 2018. Distributional implications of government guarantees in 

mortgage markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31 (3), 1064–1097.

Ghent, A.C., Hernández-Murillo, R., Owyang, M.T., 2014. Differences in subprime loan 
pricing across races and neighborhoods. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 48, 199–215.
Giacoletti, M., Heimer, R., Yu, E.G., 2022. Using high-frequency evaluations to estimate 

disparate treatment: Evidence from mortgage loan officers.

Glaeser,  E.L.,  Gyourko,  J.,  2002.  The  Impact  of  Zoning  on  Housing  Affordability. 

Working Paper 8835, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kuhn, M., Schularick, M., Steins, U.I., 2020. Income and wealth inequality in america, 

1949–2016. J. Political Econ. 128 (9), 3469–3519.

Mabille,  P.,  2023.  The  missing  homebuyers:  Regional  heterogeneity  and  credit 

contractions. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (7), 2756–2796.

McGrattan, E.R., Rogerson, R., Wright, R., 1997. An equilibrium model of the business 
cycle with household production and fiscal policy. Internat. Econom. Rev. 267–290.
McIntosh,  M.F.,  2008.  Measuring  the  labor  market  impacts  of  Hurricane  Katrina 

migration: Evidence from Houston, Texas. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (2), 54–57.

Midrigan, V., Xu, D.Y., 2014. Finance and misallocation: Evidence from plant-level data. 

Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (2), 422–458.

Moll, B., 2014. Productivity losses from financial frictions: Can self-financing undo 

capital misallocation? Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (10), 3186–3221.

Moretti,  E.,  2004.  Workers’  education,  spillovers  and  productivity:  Evidence  from 

plant-level production functions. Am. Econ. Rev. 94 (3), 656–690.

Nakamura, E., Sigurdsson, J., Steinsson, J., 2021. The gift of moving: Intergenerational 

consequences of a mobility shock. Rev. Econ. Stud. 89 (3), 1557–1592.

Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2018. Identification in macroeconomics. J. Econ. Perspect. 

32 (3), 59–86.

Ortalo-Magne, F., Rady, S., 2006. Housing market dynamics: On the contribution of 

income shocks and credit constraints. Rev. Econ. Stud. 73 (2), 459–485.

Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., Tuzel, S., 2007. Housing, consumption, and asset pricing. 

Econ. 12, 277–304.

Gomes, F., 2020. Portfolio choice over the life cycle: A survey. Annu. Rev. Financ. 

Roback, J., 1982. Wages, rents, and the quality of life. J. Political Econ. 90 (6), 

Gomez, M., Gouin-Bonenfant, E., 2020. A Q-theory of inequality.
Goodman, L., Kaul, K., 2017. Sixty Years of Private Mortgage Insurance in the United 

States. Technical Report, Urban Institute.

Rosen, S., 1979. Wage-based indexes of urban quality of life. In: Current Issues in Urban 

Economics. Johns Hopkins University Press.

Schmalz, M.C., Sraer, D.A., Thesmar, D., 2017. Housing collateral and entrepreneurship. 

Goodman, L.S., Mayer, C., 2018. Homeownership and the American dream. J. Econ. 

J. Financ. 72 (1), 99–132.

Sinai, T., Souleles, N.S., 2005. Owner-occupied housing as a hedge against rent risk. 

Greenwald, D., 2018. The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission. 

Q. J. Econ. 120 (2), 763–789.

Perspect. 32 (1), 31–58.

MIT Sloan Research Paper.

J. Financ. Econ. 83, 531–569.

1257–1278.

Greenwald, D.L., Guren, A., 2021. Do credit conditions move house prices?.
Greenwald, D.L., Landvoigt, T., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2020. Financial fragility with 

SAM? J. Financ. 76 (2), 651–706.

Greenwald, D.L., Leombroni, M., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2021. Financial and 

total wealth inequality with declining interest rates.

Gupta, A., Hansman, C., 2022. Selection, leverage, and default in the mortgage market. 

Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (2), 720–770.

Guren,  A.,  McQuade,  T.,  2020.  How  do  foreclosures  exacerbate  housing  down-

turns? Rev. Econ. Stud. 87 (3), 1331–1364.

Gyourko, J., Linneman, P., Wachter, S., 1999. Analyzing the relationships among race, 

wealth, and home ownership in america. J. Hous. Econ. 8 (2), 63–89.

Sodini, P., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Vestman, R., von Lilienfeld-Toal, U., 2023. Identifying 
the benefits from homeownership A Swedish experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 113 (12), 
3173–3212.

Stein, L., Yannelis, C., 2020. Financial inclusion, human capital, and wealth accumu-
lation: Evidence from the Freedman’s Savings Bank. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (11), 
5333–5377.

Wolff, E.N., 2022. Heterogenous Rates of Return on Homes and Other Real Estate: Do 
the Rich Do Better? Do Black Households Do Worse?. Technical Report 30543, 
National Bureau of Economic Research.

27 

