Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Resilience in collective bargaining(cid:73)
Carlos F. Avenancio-León a, Alessio Piccolo b,∗, Roberto Pinto c
a University of California – San Diego, Rady School of Management, USA
b Indiana University – Bloomington, Kelley School of Business, USA
c Lancaster University Management School, UK

A R T I C L E   I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Dataset link: Replication package for Resilience
in Collective Bargaining (Reference data)

JEL classification:
G32
J51
C78

Keywords:
Labor unions
Right-to-work laws
Bargaining
Debt structure

A central finding of the theoretical literature on bargaining is that parties’ attitudes towards delay influence 
bargaining outcomes. However, the ability to endure delays, resilience, is often private information and hard 
to measure in most real-world contexts. In the context of collective bargaining, we show firms actively attempt 
to become financially resilient in anticipation of labor negotiations. Firms adjust their financial resilience to 
respond to the passage of right-to-work laws (RWLs). Unions’ financial structure also responds to RWLs. Our 
findings suggest resilience is key to understanding the process through which collective bargaining determines 
wages.

‘‘The length of the walkout may hinge on the answers to two crucial 
questions: How long can the United Auto Workers afford to stay out? 
And how long can General Motors endure a strike?’’ 
‘In GM strike, both sides see defining moment,’

[The New York Times, September 2007]

1. Introduction

A central finding of the theoretical literature on bargaining is that 
parties’ attitudes towards delay influence bargaining outcomes: parties 
for whom haggling is less costly (i.e., more resilient) are able to refuse 
unfavorable offers and, therefore, are better able to extract more fa-
vorable concessions during negotiations (Rubinstein, 1982; Rubinstein 

and Wolinsky, 1985; Abreu and Gul, 2000). Resilience in negotiations, 
however, is often private information and consequently hard to mea-
sure  in  most  real-world  contexts.  It  is  thus  unsurprising  that  there 
is little empirical evidence on the connection between resilience and 
negotiations and, specifically, evidence on whether, in practice, parties 
do actively try to strengthen their resilience to negotiations.

To make progress on this question, we revisit collective bargaining, 
a classic bargaining setting by antonomasia. Labor union support is at 
its highest point since the 1960s1 while strike activity has been near its 
30-year high.2 And labor costs are meaningful for firms and the econ-
omy: the labor share of GDP is around 50%; for publicly-traded firms, 
labor costs represent around 60% of expenses (Donangelo et al., 2019). 
Prior work has documented that unionization is associated with higher 
wages  (e.g.,  Blanchflower  and  Bryson 2003,  Card  et  al. 2003)  and 
lower wage inequality (Fortin and Lemieux, 1997; Card et al., 2004).

(cid:73)

Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank Ashwini Agrawal, Ilona Babenko, Luigi Balletta, Snehal Banerjee, Efraim Benmelech, Julie 
Cullen, Gregorio Curello, Gordon Dahl, Andrew Ellul, Itzik Fadlon, Janet Gao, Benjamin Herbert, Camille Hebert, Troup Howard, Vasso Ioannidou, Elisabeth 
Kempf, Hyunseob Kim, Spyridon Lagaras, Eben Lazarus, Gyöngyi Lóránth, David Matsa, William Mullins, Marco Pagano, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Vincenzo Pezone, 
Alessandro Previtero, Jiaping Qiu, Michael Reher, Jacob Saagi, Benjamin Sand, Annalisa Scognamiglio, Elena Simintzi, Noah Stoffman, Philip Strahan, Günther 
Strobl, Jesse Wang, Jessie Jiaxu Wang, Tony Whited, Josef Zechner, Jeffrey Zwiebel, and two anonymous referees; seminar participants at MIT Junior Finance 
Conference, Finance Theory Group Conference, University of California – San Diego Applied Micro Seminar, University of Texas – Dallas, Indiana University, 
Tilburg University, University of Oregon, University of Vienna, University of Naples Federico II, Finance Labor and Inequality Conference, Lancaster University, 
Vienna University of Economics and Business, NFA, CSEF-RCFS Finance, CICF, FIRS and EFA for useful comments.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses:  cavenancioleon@ucsd.edu (C.F. Avenancio-León), apiccol@iu.edu (A. Piccolo), r.pinto@lancaster.ac.uk (R. Pinto).

1 Gallup (2022); available at: gallup.com.
2 ‘A Summer of Strikes,’ New York Times, September 2023. See also, ‘Auto Strike Looms, Threatening to Shut Detroit’s Big 3,’ New York Times, September 2023.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104157
Received 19 January 2024; Received in revised form 15 August 2025; Accepted 20 August 2025
Available online 29 August 2025 
0304-405X/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

 
 
 
C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Fig. 1. Firm operating profitability around strikes.
The  figure  displays  the  average  profitability  of  firms  five  quarters  before 
and after a labor strike. Strikes are centered at date zero, and the average 
profitability is computed for firms that have experienced such an event. The 
data on strikes is sourced from the Work Stoppages database available on the 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics website. We use the detailed monthly listing 
for work stoppages involving 1,000 or more workers spanning from 1993 to 
2019. The Compustat quarterly database is used to compute the operating 
profitability variable, defined as the ratio between Operating Income Before 
Depreciation and Amortization (oibda variable in Compustat) and total asset 
value. The figure is based on 57 strikes, with an average duration of 20 days.

Yet, the effect on wages may understate the total effects of collective 
bargaining as firms and unions attempt to increase resilience to help 
them improve their position during negotiations. Firms’ anticipatory 
measures in particular can then affect workers indirectly, for exam-
ple, through changes in unemployment risk.3 Echoing (Freeman and 
Medoff, 1984), it seems that assessing the collective bargaining process 
itself is critical for our understanding of ‘‘under what conditions’’ and 
‘‘with what effects to the economy’’ firms and unions determine wages.4
In  this  article,  we  theoretically  and  empirically  evaluate  firms’ 
attempts to gain resilience and unions’ financial response in the context 
of collective bargaining. We identify financial resilience as the key 
lever firms target in anticipation of labor negotiations, and union fee 
increases as the unions’ main channel of response. Financial resilience 
is key to firms because financial obligations make firms more finan-
cially vulnerable during strikes (DiNardo and Hallock 2002, Becker 
and Olson 1986; Fig.  1). Firm financial resilience can take on many 
forms, including changes in the debt structure, and accumulation of 
inventory or cash. A key finding of this paper is that financial resilience 
operates mostly through extending the term to maturity. For unions, we 
identify changes in total fees and fees per member as the key margin of 
adjustment to changes in the collective bargaining environment, with 
total fees decreasing for unions in the bottom half of size distribution 
but significantly increasing for the largest ones.

To illustrate the relationship between resilience and bargaining in 
our setting, we incorporate financial default into a traditional model 
of non-cooperative bargaining (Rubinstein 1982, Binmore 1987).5 The 
model describes how the possibility of default can act as a double-
edged sword in negotiations: on the one hand, committing resources 

3 Giroud and Mueller (2017) document that local consumer demand shocks 
during the financial crisis led to sharper declines in employment for highly lev-
ered firms. Benmelech et al. (2019) showed that, during the Great Depression, 
greater need to refinance maturing bonds was linked to larger reductions in a 
firm’s workforce.

4 ‘‘Everyone ‘‘knows’’ that unions raise wages. The questions are how much, 
under what conditions, and with what effects on the overall performance of 
the economy’’ (Freeman and Medoff, 1984).

2 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

to prevent default (e.g., repayment of debt (Bronars and Deere, 1991)) 
helps firms push surplus off the bargaining table; on the other hand, 
being  vulnerable  to  default  during  a  strike  reduces  their  ability  to 
push back on the workers’ demands over the surplus left on the table. 
We  then  show  this  relationship  empirically  by  showing  firms  aim 
to improve resilience following changes in the collective bargaining 
environment: the passage of right-to-work laws (RWLs). Our findings 
showcase financial resilience as an important margin of response to 
changes  in  labor  regulation,  which  has  important  implications  for 
understanding the collective bargaining process as well as exposure to 
unemployment risk (Giroud and Mueller 2017, Benmelech et al. 2019).
Our theoretical model features workers and shareholders bargaining 
over the partition of a firm’s surplus. Workers halt production until 
they secure an agreement, so the longer it takes to finalize a deal, 
the less revenues the firm generates. A debt obligation poses a limit 
to the length of negotiations: if production is delayed for too long, the 
firm cannot meet its debt obligation and goes bankrupt. We refer to 
this limit as the firm’s resilience to negotiations. Workers discount future 
payments more than shareholders, so that they are (all else being equal) 
relatively more eager to reach an agreement. Shareholders can then use 
the threat of long negotiations to hold back workers’ wage demands in 
equilibrium. Since this threat is only credible when long negotiations 
are feasible, workers obtain lower wages when the firm is more resilient 
to negotiations.

We model two dimensions of the firm’s debt structure: debt maturity 
and leverage. Resilience increases with debt maturity (the firm has 
more time to pay its debt as maturity increases),6 and it decreases with 
leverage (a more levered firm can afford fewer losses from strikes). By 
increasing resilience, longer maturity unambiguously reduces equilib-
rium wages. Leverage has two contrasting effects: on the one hand, it 
reduces the surplus available for negotiations (say 𝑥), which, all else 
equal, decreases wages.7 This first effect captures the idea of ‘‘strategic 
leverage’’, which also arises in static bargaining models (e.g., Bronars 
and Deere 1991). On the other hand, workers receive a larger fraction 
of 𝑥 when leverage increases, as the firm becomes less resilient. This 
second effect uncovers a strategic cost for firms of using leverage as 
a bargaining tool, which derives from its impact on the negotiation 
dynamics. While building resilience to strikes, firms also gain resilience 
to  other  potential  cash  flow  shocks.  Thus,  bargaining  with  strong 
labor can make firms safer in our model, with implications for our 
understanding of unemployment risk.

Following the insights of our theoretical model, our strategy is to 
empirically measure the relationship between worker bargaining power 

5 The role of resilience is often observed anecdotally in collective bar-
gaining  events.  For  instance,  during  General  Motors  (GM)  2019  workers’ 
strike, financial analysts and rating companies worried about the impact of 
a prolonged strike on the firm’s ability to fulfill its obligations, as GM entered 
the talks with a large outstanding debt (i.e., high leverage) with a significant 
portion due just months later (i.e., short debt maturity). Moody’s, for example, 
stated that GM’s rating could topple into junk bond status if the strike lasted 
more  than  a  week  or  two.  Shortly  thereafter,  the  strike  ended  with  the 
company urging the union to "engage in ‘around-the-clock’ bargaining to reach 
a deal’’. (See ’GM strike, Day 2: Nearly 50,000 workers off the job in 19 states,’
CNN Business, September 2019; ’GM urges UAW to engage in ’around-the-clock’ 
bargaining to reach a deal, potentially end strike,’ CNBC, October 2019.) Other 
salient collective bargaining events have shown similar narratives (e.g., ’GM 
2007 strike,’ New York Times, 2007).

6 Longer debt maturity also reduces the frequency of refinancing, since the 
firm has to roll over on its debt less frequently when maturity is longer (He 
and Xiong, 2012). Less frequent refinancing reduces the likelihood of having 
to raise capital in the middle or the aftermath of negotiations.

7 That wage bargaining does take place within firms, and that financial 
distress plays a role in negotiations is supported by previous work. Hall and 
Krueger (2012) found evidence supporting bargaining for wages inside firms. 
Using a detailed dataset on wages in the airline industry, Benmelech et al. 
(2012) show that firms in financial distress obtain more wage concessions.

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

and financial resilience. We do so in three steps. First, we evaluate 
the firm’s financial resilience response to the adoption of RWLs. We 
interpret these changes in financial resilience as the firms’ response to 
changes in the collective bargaining environment, and provide empir-
ical support to the mechanism formalized in the model. Second, we 
evaluate unions’ financial response to the adoption of RWLs. Lastly, 
we show that other potential mechanisms that may connect RWLs and 
financial resilience fail to have empirical support in the data.

First, we evaluate firms’ financial resilience responses in anticipa-
tion of future labor negotiations.  We follow the common approach 
in the literature (Matsa 2010, Fortin et al. 2023) and examine the 
effects of an exogenous decrease in workers’ bargaining power (𝛼) using 
the introduction of state RWLs. We show that firms unambiguously 
reduce their debt maturity after the passage of RWLs (decrease in 𝛼). 
Importantly, the reduction in debt maturity is more pronounced for (a) 
firms in highly unionized industries and unionized firms themselves, 
and (b) firms for which strikes are more costly, as they are less able to 
access additional borrowing or liquidate inventory during or following 
a strike. This set of results strengthens the interpretation of collective 
bargaining as the trigger catalizing financial resilience following RWLs.
Second, we evaluate unions’ financial resilience response following 
hostile legislation. Using data on union financials from the Office of 
Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) of the U.S. Department of Labor, 
we  evaluate  unions’  margins  of  response  following  the  passage  of 
RWLs. We find that unions keep cash constant despite, on average, 
experiencing a drop in membership and total fees. Instead, large unions 
increase their fees per member, which leads them to raise higher total 
fees than prior to the passage of RWLs; meanwhile, smaller unions 
increase leverage. This suggests that larger unions are better able to 
retain support following the passage of RWLs and thus mitigate the 
legislation’s impact.

Third, we evaluate other potential mechanisms that may connect 
RWLs  to  financial  resilience.  We  do  not  find  empirical  support  for 
changes in credit conditions; among other tests, we show that there 
is no significant change in debt pricing around the passage of RWLs, 
which supports the view that changes in debt structure are directly 
taken in response to labor negotiations rather than being indirectly 
mediated by credit markets’ response to negotiations. We also fail to 
find supporting evidence for operating flexibility materializing as a 
mechanism.

Contributions. We make three main contributions to the literature. 
First,  we  provide,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  the  first  study  of 
financial resilience of firms and unions during collective bargaining and 
provide a theoretical framework that incorporates financial resilience 
into the wage-setting process. While the relationship between unions 
and wages has been long-studied (Freeman and Medoff 1984, Card et al.
2003, Fortin and Lemieux 1997, Card et al. 2004), the conditions under 
which collective bargaining leads to higher wages is less understood. 
Because financial resilience is specific to each firm and union, under-
standing its role in bargaining also offers an alternative mechanism 
through which firm-specific heterogeneity spills over to wages (Abowd 
et al., 1999; Card et al., 2018; Bonhomme et al., 2023). Other work has 
shown that financial frictions affect wages, but not directly through the 
collective bargaining process (Michelacci and Quadrini, 2005; Michaels 
et al., 2019; Schoefer, 2022).

Second,  we  contribute  to  a  growing  literature  on  the  effects  of 
nonfinancial stakeholders on firms’ decision-making (e.g., Matsa 2010, 
Berk et al. 2010, Agrawal and Matsa 2013, Simintzi et al. 2015, Brown 
and Matsa 2016, Serfling 2016, Ellul and Pagano 2019, Chava et al.
2020, Graham et al. 2023). From a theoretical angle, our contribution is 
to offer a general theory of the link between financial decisions and la-
bor negotiations, by blending the dynamics inherent to noncooperative 
bargaining (Rubinstein, 1982; Binmore, 1987) against the intuition of 
strategic leverage that arises in Nash-Bargaining frameworks (Bronars 
and Deere, 1991; Perotti and Spier, 1993; Matsa, 2010). We show that 
these are sometimes at odds: In our model, financial obligations affect 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

both the surplus available to negotiate and how this surplus is allocated 
across parties. Accounting for the latter effect, we uncover a tension 
between the traditional idea of strategic leverage, where firms increase 
debt strategically to obtain concessions during negotiations, and that 
of financial resilience, where firms shape their financial obligations to 
make strikes less costly and, thus, limit workers’ ability to obtain wage 
increases.

Our model harmonizes this tension and offers comparative statics 
that  can  then  be  used  to  shed  light  on  the  empirical  relationship 
between labor and financial decisions. We document how this tension 
shapes firms’ financing decisions in the data, by showing that firms 
tend to borrow at longer maturities when dealing with more powerful 
workers.  Importantly,  we  also  shed  light  into  the  union’s  efforts  to 
remain financially resilient, and show there is substantial heterogeneity 
across size in the levers they use to stay resilient. Our results offer a 
more nuanced view of the relationship between organized labor and 
financing  decisions,  both  in  terms  of  more  general  mechanics  that 
parsimoniously account for the tradeoff between strategic leverage and 
resilience, and also in including the financial response of unions as part 
of the collective bargaining process.

Last, we contribute to the literature on bargaining games. By show-
ing that firms (and unions) actively attempt to become resilient in 
anticipation of collective bargaining, we provide evidence that par-
ties’  ability  to  delay  the  resolution  of  negotiations  influences  their 
outcomes (Rubinstein, 1982; Rubinstein and Wolinsky, 1985; Abreu 
and Gul, 2000). Our theoretical model is also of interest in itself. A 
number of papers show that players may make costly commitments 
to refuse certain offers to improve their bargaining position in nego-
tiations (Schelling, 1956; Crawford, 1982). More recent work argues 
that the pressure to reach an agreement may force players to accept 
bad deals, so they may choose to pay a cost to maintain the flexibility 
to reject unfavorable offers (Spier, 1992; Ma and Manove, 1993). In 
the context of financial obligations, we show that there is an inherent 
tension  between  these  two  objectives  (commitment  and  flexibility) 
and characterize how this tension shapes firms’ financing decisions in 
anticipation of collective bargaining.

2. Bargaining with financial resilience

This section illustrates the role of financial resilience in collective 
bargaining. To simplify the exposition, the model described here fo-
cuses on the firm’s (or shareholder’s) choice of resilience and abstracts 
from the union’s (or workers’) response. In Internet Appendix B.1, we 
allow both parties to choose their resilience to negotiations; we show 
that our main insights continue to hold.

The model features two types of risk-neutral agents: the sharehold-
ers (𝑠) and workers (𝑤) of a firm. Time is discrete, indexed by 𝑡 = 0, 1, .., 
and the horizon is infinite. The firm has access to an investment project 
that generates a revenue 1 and requires both a capital investment 𝑘, 
where 1 > 𝑘 > 0, and 𝑤’s labor input. Shareholders use both equity 𝑒
and debt to fund the project. They raise an amount 𝑑 ∈ [0, 𝑘] in debt at 
𝑡 = 0, against a promise to pay back to debtholders an amount 𝐷 ≥ 0
at some time 𝑇 ≤ 𝑇 , where 𝑇  is a nonnegative integer that captures 
debt maturity. Shareholders set the firm’s debt structure (𝐷, 𝑇 ) at the 
beginning of time 𝑡 = 0, before negotiations with 𝑤 start. Given this 
debt structure, a credit market pins down the amount 𝑑 raised by the 
firm.

Our objective is to explore how 𝑠 chooses (𝐷, 𝑇 ) strategically to 
influence the outcome of the wage negotiations with workers. For sim-
plicity, here we capture the nonstrategic costs of leverage and maturity 
– due, for example, to bankruptcy costs or information frictions – in 
a reduced-form way, through Assumption  1 below. Internet Appendix 
B.2 considers a simple extension of the model where these nonstrategic 
costs arise endogenously and shows that our results carry through.

3 

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Assumption 1. The amount raised in debt 𝑑 is a continuous, increasing, 
and concave function of 𝐷, and a decreasing function of 𝑇 , and it 
satisfies 𝑑 ≤ 𝐷 and 𝑑(𝐷 = 0) = 0 for any value of 𝑇 .

Assumption  1 implies that debtholders require a premium 𝐷 − 𝑑
that increases in the amount of borrowing 𝑑 and in the debt maturity 
𝑇 . The firm’s leverage is  𝑑
. Since 𝑑 increases with 𝐷, we will use the 
𝑘
terms leverage, debt level, and 𝐷 interchangeably in the remainder 
of this section. We allow for the possibility that 𝑠 incurs nonstrategic 
costs also when raising equity — due, for example, to transaction costs 
and information frictions. The overall cost to shareholders of raising 
an amount 𝑒 in equity is 𝜅𝑒, where 𝜅 ∈ [1, ∞) and 𝜅 − 1 represents the 
transaction cost.

The bargaining between 𝑠 and 𝑤 unfolds according to a dynamic 
version of the random-proposer model of Binmore (1987). At time 𝑡 = 0, 
with probability 𝛼, 𝑤 makes an offer to 𝑠, where an offer is a proposed 
partition of the firm’s profits. If 𝑠 accepts the offer, then an agreement 
is struck: 𝑤 engages in production and a revenue of 1 is realized; 𝐷 is 
paid back to creditors, and 1−𝐷 is distributed among 𝑠 and 𝑤 according 
to the accepted offer. With probability 1 − 𝛼, 𝑠 makes the offer at time 
𝑡 = 0, and 𝑤 decides whether to accept. If the party receiving the offer at 
time 𝑡 = 0 declines it, another round of negotiations takes place at time 
𝑡 = 1, with 𝑤 and 𝑠 having again probabilities 𝛼 and 1 − 𝛼 of making 
an offer, respectively. If the offer made at time 𝑡 = 1 is accepted, an 
agreement is struck then: 𝑤 engages in production and the revenue 𝛿
is realized, where 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1); 𝐷 is paid back to creditors, and 𝛿 − 𝐷 is 
distributed among 𝑠 and 𝑤 according to the accepted offer. The delay in 
reaching an agreement reduces the firm’s revenue: 𝑤 halts production 
until an agreement is reached, resulting in foregone revenues 1 − 𝛿.

This process of making offers and counteroffers continues until an 
offer is accepted. An agreement reached at time 𝑡 consists of a sharing 
rule 𝑦𝑡 of the residual surplus 𝛿𝑡 − 𝐷. We adopt the convention that 
𝑦𝑡 is the share of surplus that goes to 𝑠. The share of surplus that 
goes to 𝑤 is 𝛿𝑡 − 𝐷 − 𝑦𝑡. As is typical in bargaining models, making 
offers grants relatively greater bargaining power than responding to 
offers. The probability with which each player makes offers at each 
period thus captures its relative (exogenous) bargaining power in the 
negotiations.

A key feature of the model is that the firm’s ability to meet its debt 
obligations depends on the unfolding of negotiations. If an agreement 
between 𝑠 and 𝑤 is yet to be reached at time 𝑇 , the firm cannot repay 𝐷
to debtholders and goes bankrupt, in which case both 𝑠 and 𝑤 receive 
a payoff of 0. If an agreement is yet to be reached at time 𝑡 such that 
𝛿𝑡 ≥ 𝐷 but 𝛿𝑡+1 < 𝐷, the firm cannot repay its future obligations 
and goes bankrupt as well, even if 𝑡 < 𝑇 . If 𝐷 = 0, there is no debt 
obligation, so the firm never goes bankrupt. The maximal length of 
{𝑡, 𝑇 } if 𝐷 > 0, and 𝑡∗ = ∞ if 𝐷 = 0. 
negotiations is thus 𝑡∗ = min
We refer to 𝑡∗ as the firm’s resilience to negotiations.

Shareholders and workers are impatient, as they discount future 
payoffs. The delay in reaching an agreement has, thus, private costs 
for both parties, on top of the destruction of revenues due to walkouts. 
Let (𝛿𝑠, 𝛿𝑤) ∈ [0, 1]2 denote 𝑠’s and 𝑤’s discount factors, respectively.

Assumption 2. Shareholders are more patient than workers, that is, 
𝛿𝑠 > 𝛿𝑤.

The assumption that workers are more impatient than shareholders 
is common in the literature on contracting (e.g., DeMarzo and Sannikov
2006, Opp and Zhu 2015) and reflects a lower degree of diversification 
for workers.8 If an agreement 𝑦𝑡 is reached at time 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡∗, 𝑠’s payoff is 

8 Workers rely more heavily on labor income for their livelihood, so they 
are (all else equal) arguably more eager to end a strike than shareholders. 
In practice, however, a firm’s management negotiates on behalf of its share-
holders, so 𝛿𝑠 may represent a weighted average of the shareholders’ and 
management’s discount factors. If managers are relatively more eager to end 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

𝑢𝑠 = 𝛿𝑡
𝑠𝑦𝑡 − 𝜅𝑒, where 𝑒 is the equity 𝑠 has invested into the project, and 
)
𝑤’s payoff is 𝑢𝑤 = 𝛿𝑡
. Otherwise, the firm goes bankrupt, 
𝑤
and 𝑠’s and 𝑤’s payoffs are equal to 0. The equilibrium concept is 
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium (SPE).

(𝛿𝑡 − 𝐷 − 𝑦𝑡

In the baseline model described above, we make a number of sim-
plifying assumptions to streamline the exposition. Internet Appendix 
B shows that our main insights are robust to relaxing many of these 
assumptions. Internet Appendix B.1 studies the choice of resilience of 
a union that represents 𝑤 in the negotiation with 𝑠. Internet Appendix 
B.2 adds credit market frictions to endogenize the interest rate on debt. 
Internet Appendix B.3 studies the role of outside options. Finally, Inter-
net Appendices B.4 and B.5 allow for the possibility of debt rollover and 
debt renegotiation, respectively.

2.1. Equilibrium analysis

Proceeding by backward induction, we first characterize the equi-
librium of the bargaining game for given values of the debt structure 
𝐷 and 𝑇 . We then use this characterization to describe how the debt 
structure that maximizes 𝑠’s total payoffs changes with 𝑤’s bargaining 
power.9

Proposition 1. Fix (𝐷, 𝑇 ) and let 𝑡∗ denote the firm’s resilience to negotia-
tions — the last period before the firm goes bankrupt. An equilibrium always 
exists, is unique, and has the following features:

0 is reached immediately, that is, at time 𝑡 = 0.

1. An agreement 𝑦∗
2. For any time 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡∗, the equilibrium offers are such that the player 
receiving the offer is indifferent between accepting and refusing. If 
𝑡∗ = ∞, each player makes the same offer at each time.

To build intuition, first consider the case where 𝑡∗ is finite, so that 
there is a limit to the length of negotiations. At each period 𝑡 < 𝑡∗, the 
player receiving an offer chooses between: (i) accepting the offer; (ii) 
refusing the offer, and having a chance to make its own offer in the next 
round. The offer made at 𝑡∗ is always accepted, since the alternative is 
to decline the offer and drive the firm to bankruptcy. The equilibrium is 
then obtained moving backward, as a sequence of offers that make play-
ers indifferent between accepting and refusing the offer at each period.
The equilibrium outcome is Pareto efficient: the two parties avoid 
the costs of delay and reach an agreement immediately in equilib-
rium. The equilibrium allocation of surplus, however, depends on the 
sequence of offers players would make if a deal was not struck until 
the last possible period 𝑡∗. The agreed-upon allocation then reflects the 
relative costs that a prolonged negotiation would impose on each party, 
even though the first offer is always accepted in equilibrium.

Since making an offer confers relative bargaining power, the exact 
0 depends on which of the two players is selected to make the 
0] denote the expected share of surplus 𝑠 receives 

value of 𝑦∗
offer at 𝑡 = 0. Let E[𝑦∗
in equilibrium; we have: 

E[𝑦∗

0] = (1 − 𝛼)

{

1 − 𝐷 + 𝛼 (𝛿𝑠 − 𝛿𝑤

)

𝑡∗
∑

𝑗=1

(𝛿𝑗 − 𝐷) [

(1 − 𝛼) 𝛿𝑤 + 𝛼𝛿𝑠

]𝑗−1

}

,

(1)

a strike, and 𝛿𝑠 is sufficiently close to the managers’ discount factors, we 
may then have 𝛿𝑠 < 𝛿𝑤. In the model with union’s resilience in Internet 
Appendix B.1, we show that our main qualitative predictions continue to hold 
also if 𝛿𝑠 < 𝛿𝑤 but the two are sufficiently close to each other. In Internet 
Appendix D, we present empirical analysis where we proxy for heterogeneity 
in 𝛿𝑠. In particular, in Internet Appendix Tables IA4 and IA5, we use empirical 
proxies for shareholders’ and management’s discount factors and show that 
the resilience response to changes in 𝛼 is more pronounced in firms where 
shareholders or management are more patient.

9 Proofs are in Internet Appendix A.

4 

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

for 𝑡∗ > 0, and E[𝑦∗
expected amount of surplus that goes to 𝑤 is then 1 − 𝐷 − E[𝑦∗
0].

0] = (1 − 𝛼) (1 − 𝐷) for 𝑡∗ = 0. For any 𝑡∗ ≥ 0, the 

For the sake of exposition, first treat 𝑡∗ as a parameter that does 
not depend on (𝐷, 𝑇 ). Since 𝛿𝑠 > 𝛿𝑤 and 𝛿𝑡 − 𝐷 ≥ 0 for any 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡∗, 
the expected surplus 𝑠 receives from negotiations E[𝑦∗
0] increases with 
𝑡∗. Being more patient than 𝑤 gives 𝑠 a relative advantage: refusing 
an offer and waiting for the next round of negotiations is relatively 
less costly for 𝑠. This is reflected in the equilibrium allocation, with 𝑠
receiving, all else being equal, a relatively larger share of surplus for 
any 𝑡∗ > 0. The more rounds of negotiations are potentially feasible 
(i.e., the larger 𝑡∗), the more surplus 𝑠 receives in equilibrium: the threat 
of prolonged negotiations helps shareholders to hold back workers’ 
wage  demands.  So  𝑠  receives  more  surplus  when  the  firm  is  more 
resilient.

In equilibrium, 𝑡∗ is a function of the firm’s debt structure, so it 
varies when 𝐷 or 𝑇  change. Debt maturity only affects E[𝑦∗
0] through its 
effect on 𝑡∗ (𝑡∗ increases with 𝑇 ). Leverage instead also directly affects 
the firm’s equilibrium surplus 1 − 𝐷. E[𝑦∗
0] thus decreases when 𝐷 goes 
up both because (a) there is less surplus on the bargaining table and (b) 
the firm is less resilient to strikes (𝑡∗ decreases with 𝐷), so 𝑠 extracts 
less of the surplus available in the negotiations with 𝑤.

If 𝑡∗ = ∞, there is no limit to the length of negotiations. Players’ 
equilibrium  strategies  are  stationary  in  this  case,  with  each  player 
making the same offer whenever it is its turn to make one. Similar 
to before, an agreement is reached immediately, but the equilibrium 
allocation reflects the relative costs that continuing the negotiation 
indefinitely would impose on each party.

It is worth noticing that, when 𝑡∗ = 0, E[𝑦∗

0] corresponds to the 
expected surplus 𝑠 would receive in a traditional static bargaining game 
(e.g., one where the protocol is Nash Bargaining or players make take-
it-or-leave-it offers). The firm approaches an infinitely resilient debt 
structure (𝑡∗ → ∞) in the limit as 𝐷 tends to 0 and 𝑇  tends to infinity. 
In this case, E[𝑦∗
0] converges to the expected surplus 𝑠 receives when 
the firm is fully equity funded and there is no limit to the length of 
negotiations. So our model collapses to a static bargaining model when 
only a single round of negotiations is feasible, and it converges to the 
model with infinite horizon as 𝑡∗ tends to infinity.
In equilibrium, 𝑠’s total expected payoff E[𝑢∗

𝑠 ] equals the sum of its 
expected share of surplus net of the equity 𝑠 has invested in the firm. 
That is, E[𝑢∗
0] − 𝜅𝑒, where 𝑒 = 𝑘 − 𝑑. Next, we describe how 
the firm’s debt structure impacts E[𝑢∗
𝑠 ] through its effect on negotiation 
outcomes. 

𝑠 ] = E[𝑦∗

Proposition 2. Suppose 𝑑 = 𝐷 for any (𝐷, 𝑇 ) and 𝜅 = 1; shareholders’ 
expected equilibrium payoff E[𝑢∗
𝑠 ] always increases with the debt maturity 
𝑇 , while it may increase or decrease with the debt level 𝐷.

To focus on the strategic effects, Proposition  2 assumes that 𝑑 = 𝐷
and 𝜅 = 1 for any value of (𝐷, 𝑇 ). This corresponds to the case where 
there are no direct costs of raising debt or equity, so the firm’s financing 
choices  affect  𝑠’s  payoff  only  through  their  effect  on  negotiations. 
Longer debt maturity increases the firm’s resilience to negotiations, as 
it delays the date 𝐷 is due to debtholders. Since 𝑠 extracts more surplus 
when 𝑡∗ is larger, E[𝑢∗
𝑠 ] always increases with 𝑇 .
Higher leverage has instead two contrasting effects on E[𝑢∗
𝑠 ]. On 
the  one  hand,  due  to  the  negotiation  with  𝑤,  𝑠  earns  only  a  frac-
tion of the return on the equity invested in the project. Holding the 
firm’s resilience fixed, a debt-for-equity swap (i.e., increasing 𝐷) thus 
increases 𝑠’s payoff. This first effect captures the traditional idea of 
strategic  leverage,  which  also  arises  in  static  models  of  bargaining 
(see, e.g., Bronars and Deere 1991, Perotti and Spier 1993). On the 
other hand, a higher 𝐷 reduces the firm’s resilience, as it lowers the 
revenue losses the firm can withstand before going bankrupt (𝑡 and, 
thus,  𝑡∗  decrease  with  𝐷).  Since  𝑠  captures  a  smaller  share  of  the 
surplus available for negotiations when 𝑡∗ is smaller, this second effect 
is negative. Put differently, when leverage increases: less of the firm’s 

5 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

revenue is exposed to wage negotiations, but shareholders capture a 
smaller share of the revenue on the negotiation table. We show that 
either of these two effects can be stronger, so that E[𝑢∗
𝑠 ] may increase 
or decrease with 𝐷.

Notice that maturity and leverage work as (imperfect) substitutes as 
strategic tools in our model. If 𝐷 > 𝛿𝑇 +1, we have 𝑡∗ = 𝑡, which does not 
depend on 𝑇 . In this case, if negotiations go on for too long, the firm 
goes bankrupt before its debt expires — due to the loss in revenues. 
Longer debt maturity then improves 𝑠’s bargaining position only if the 
firm is not too levered and can withstand a relatively long negotiation 
(at least longer than 𝑇 ). Similarly, if 𝑇 < 𝑡, an increase in leverage does 
not shorten negotiations, as the firm’s debt is due before 𝑡. Hence, when 
the firm’s debt expires very close to negotiations, increasing leverage 
does not hurt 𝑠’s bargaining position.

Having  characterized  how  shareholders’  payoff  depends  on  the 
firm’s debt structure, we can now describe how their choice of 𝐷 and 
𝑇  changes with the workers’ bargaining power (𝛼). 

Proposition 3. Consider 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1
2
results hold in equilibrium:

); the following comparative statics 

1. Holding  the  debt  level  𝐷  fixed,  the  debt  maturity  𝑇   that  maxi-
𝑠 ] increases with the workers’ 

mizes shareholders’ expected payoff E[𝑢∗
bargaining power 𝛼.

2. Holding 𝑇  fixed, the value of 𝐷 that maximizes E[𝑢∗

𝑠 ] may increase 

or decrease with 𝛼.

Proposition  3 studies how 𝑠’s choice of debt structure changes with 
𝛼 for a generic function 𝑑 satisfying Assumption  1 and any value of 
𝜅 ≥ 1. That is, when the firm’s borrowing cost 𝐷 − 𝑑 depends on the 
choices of 𝐷 and 𝑇 , and there are transaction costs associated with 
raising equity.10 The proposition focuses on the conditional responses, 
that is, holding fixed 𝐷, how the optimal choice of 𝑇  changes with 
𝛼, and vice-versa. Debt maturity increases the firm’s resilience and, 
thus, 𝑠’s expected share of surplus in the negotiations. Holding fixed 
𝐷, 𝑠 can then increase 𝑇  to curb the effects of an increase in 𝑤’s 
bargaining  power.  As  discussed  before,  leverage  has  an  ambiguous 
effect on shareholders’ expected equilibrium payoff. It follows that 𝑠’s 
best response to an increase in 𝛼 may be instead to increase or decrease 
𝐷, depending on the parameters of the model.11,12

The joint responses of 𝐷 and 𝑇  to changes in 𝛼 are more nuanced. 
Suppose  debtholders  require  a  larger  premium  for  longer  maturity 
when the firm is more levered (for example, because shorter maturity 
facilitates monitoring by lenders (Flannery, 1986; Diamond, 1991)). 
Suppose also that 𝑠 finds it optimal to increase 𝐷 when 𝛼 goes up. 𝑠 may 
then also choose to decrease 𝑇 , since long maturity may be too costly at 
the new choice of 𝐷. It is worth emphasizing, however, that a decrease 
in maturity is never a direct strategic response to the wage negotiations, 
since shorter maturity always hurts shareholders’ bargaining position 
(at least weakly) for any value of 𝐷.

By a similar logic, the leverage reaction to changes in 𝛼 may be 
an indirect effect of the strategic response in debt maturity. Suppose 
the interest rate 𝐷 − 𝑑 increases less with leverage when 𝑇  is larger 
(for example, because the firm is less exposed to rollover risk when 

10 As 𝛼 approaches 1, shareholders’ share of surplus vanishes in equilibrium, 
so that 𝑠 has lower incentives to take costly actions to affect the negotiations. 
Therefore, we restrict our attention to values of 𝛼 between 0 and  1
11 In Internet Appendix B.1, we model an alternative measure of workers’ 
bargaining power: their ability to organize and sustain a walkout (𝑡𝑤). Our 
qualitative results about the response of 𝐷 and 𝑇  to an increase in 𝛼 also 
apply to an exogenous increase in 𝑡𝑤.
12 In Internet Appendix B.2, we introduce a stochastic component to the 
firm’s revenue, which allows for the possibility of bankruptcy on the equilib-
rium path. When 𝛼 increases and 𝑠 responds by choosing a more resilient debt 
structure, the firm becomes safer in that version of the model, as bankruptcy 
occurs with a smaller probability.

.

2

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

its debt has longer maturity (e.g., He and Xiong 2012)). When 𝛼 goes 
up, all else equal, 𝑠 wants to increase 𝑇  to gain bargaining power with 
𝑤. Since increasing leverage is cheaper when 𝑇  is larger, 𝑠 may then 
also increase 𝐷 as an indirect effect of the strategic response in 𝑇 . We 
prove the results discussed above, about the joint responses of 𝐷 and 
𝑇  to changes in 𝛼, in Internet Appendix A.4. Of course, 𝐷 and 𝑇  may 
also both increase with 𝛼 for strategic considerations: 𝑠 may prefer to 
increase 𝐷 to reduce surplus on the negotiation table, while at the same 
time increasing 𝑇  to gain resilience to strikes.

Altogether, our results suggest that the conditional responses of 𝐷
and 𝑇  to changes in 𝛼 (i.e., the response in 𝑇  holding fixed 𝐷, and vice-
versa) are generally more informative about the firm’s strategic motive, 
as it is otherwise hard to disentangle whether one moves for strategic 
reasons and the other follows mechanically through the interest rate 
channel.

2.2. From theory to empirics: Measuring resilience

Our model links the firm’s financing choices to the frequency 𝛼
with which workers make offers in the negotiation, where 𝛼 captures 
the bargaining power of workers. The model has two main empirical 
implications regarding the two components of resilience:

P1. Resilience’s Maturity Component (Intensive Margin). In re-
sponse to an increase in 𝛼, holding leverage fixed, firms increase 
their debt maturity.

P2. Resilience’s Leverage Component (Extensive Margin). In re-
sponse to an increase in 𝛼, firms either increase leverage (con-
sistent with the strategic leverage channel) or reduce leverage 
(consistent with the resilience channel).

The main object of our model is the firm’s resilience to negotiations 
(𝑡∗), which is a function of both leverage (𝐷) and debt maturity (𝑇 ). 
Formally, we have 

𝑡∗ ∶  ×  → Z+,

(2)

where 𝑡∗ decreases with 𝐷 and increases with 𝑇 , and   and  denote 
the set of possible choices for 𝐷 and 𝑇 , respectively.

Intuitively, a high-leverage firm is less resilient than a low-leverage 
firm, and long-term maturity provides more resilience than short-term 
maturity. A simple and intuitive way to account for 𝑡∗ in the data 
is based on the maturity profile of all outstanding liabilities of the 
firm, which includes both debt maturity (calculated as the firm’s debt 
maturities 𝑇𝑞 weighted by amounts 𝐷𝑞, where 𝑞 is an index for different 
debt instruments) and the implied equity maturity 𝑇𝐸 , weighted by 
equity, all as a fraction of assets 𝐴.13 This writes as 
𝐴 − ∑
𝐴

𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 ∶=

𝐷𝑞
𝐴

𝑇𝐸 =

𝑇𝑞 +

𝑞 𝐷𝑞

(3)

∑

∑

𝑞 𝐷𝑞 𝑇𝑞
𝐴
⏟⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏟
Maturity Component

+ (1 − 𝐿𝑒𝑣)𝑇𝐸 .
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Leverage Component

𝑞

Eq.   (3)  provides  an  accounting  decomposition  of  resilience  into 
maturity and leverage components that map to the predictions of our 
model summarized in P1 and P2. In the model, we implicitly assume 
𝑇𝐸 > max𝑞 𝑇𝑞, so that, when leverage (𝐿𝑒𝑣) increases, the weight on 
equity decreases and the firm’s resilience is reduced. In the empirical 
analysis, 𝐷𝑞, 𝑇𝑞, and 𝐴 are observed by the econometrician, but 𝑇𝐸 is 
not. However, the resilience’s leverage component can be evaluated by 
directly estimating effects on leverage. In addition, in line with the the-

13 Debt  maturity  measures  alone  are  not  well  suited  to  describe  firms’ 
resilience, since they cannot capture the idea that firms are more resilient 
when they have less debt. This problem is overcome when we consider a 
weighted average of the maturity of all the firm’s liabilities, which include 
equity and its contribution to the firm’s resilience 𝑇𝐸 . A different line of 
literature (e.g., Dechow et al. 2004) directly evaluates the implied duration 
dimension of equity.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

oretical framework, estimating the effects of RWLs on the resilience’s 
maturity component conditional on leverage provides an estimate that 
is consistent. We describe these estimations in Section 3.

To test P1 and P2, we measure resilience using the decomposition 
in Eq.  (3), and use changes in 𝛼 stemming from changes in the collective 
bargaining environment. As we discuss in the next section, RWLs reduce 
the bargaining power of unions. Thus, we interpret the passage of RWLs 
as a decrease in the value of 𝛼 in future negotiations with management.

3. Data description and empirical methodology

The adverse effect of RWLs on union power has been documented 
in the literature (Ellwood and Fine, 1987; Abraham and Voos, 2000;
Chava et al., 2020). RWLs forbid union security agreements between 
unions and employers, which compel employees to join the union or 
pay union dues as a condition in the employment contract. In states 
with RWLs, unions then cannot force new employees to join a union or 
pay union dues. Employees have little private incentives to join a union, 
since  they  can  enjoy  the  potential  benefits  of  collective  bargaining 
without having to contribute to the funding of the union. Therefore, 
unions have fewer members and less funding when employees are not 
forced to join a union (Moore and Newman, 1985; Fortin et al., 2023). 
Both these effects limit the bargaining power of unions, since they can 
convince fewer workers to join a strike and have less funding to sustain 
operations and those that participate in strikes.14

Our analysis follows (Fortin et al., 2023), who use the adoption of 
RWLs in five U.S. states since 2011 to estimate the effect of these laws 
on wages and unionization rates. Their findings indicate that RWLs 
lower both wages and unionization rates. We use the same sample pe-
riod and methodologies but focus on different outcome variables: firms’ 
debt structures and union financials. Our estimation strategy exploits 
the staggered adoption of RWLs to estimate a difference-in-differences 
model. The model compares the debt structures of firms headquartered 
in states introducing RWLs with those of firms headquartered in states 
that did not adopt these laws. Specifically, we estimate the following 
fixed effects model: 

𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑎𝑗𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑅𝑊 𝐿𝑠𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 + 𝜈𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡,

(4)

where the variable 𝑅𝑊 𝐿 is a state-level indicator that takes value one 
since the year a state 𝑠 introduces these laws, and zero otherwise. We 
saturate the model by including firm controls 𝑋, firm fixed-effects 𝑎𝑖 to 
absorb unobservable time-invariant firm heterogeneity, and industry-
by-year fixed effects 𝑎𝑗𝑡 to capture time-varying unobservable industry 
characteristics. The error term 𝜈 contains the unexplained variation 
of  the  dependent  variable  𝑦  (e.g.,  leverage  or  debt  maturity).  The 
coefficient 𝛽1 has a causal interpretation if the residual variation in 𝜈
is uncorrelated with states’ decisions to introduce RWLs.

When our outcome of interest is assessing resilience, the dependent 
variable 𝑦 takes on each of the components prescribed by Eq.  (3), which 
are captured by a firm’s leverage and debt maturity relative to assets. In 
addition, when measuring jointly the two components of resilience, Eq. 
(4) takes the form:

𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑎𝑗𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑅𝑊 𝐿𝑠𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 + 𝜈𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡,
𝑞 𝐷𝑞 𝑇𝑞
𝐴

where 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 =

∑

+ (1 − 𝐿𝑒𝑣)𝑇𝐸 as defined in Section 2.2.

Since 𝑇𝐸 is unknown, it needs to be accounted for in the estimation. 
, our 

Rewriting 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 𝑅𝐷 + (1 − 𝐿𝑒𝑣)𝑇𝐸 , with 𝑅𝐷 =
estimating equation becomes: 
𝑅𝐷

𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑎𝑗𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑅𝑊 𝐿𝑠𝑡 − 𝜂𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 + 𝜈𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡,

𝑞 𝐷𝑞 𝑇𝑞
𝐴

(5)

∑

We can interpret the effects of 𝑅𝑊 𝐿 on 𝑅𝐷 according to Eq.  (5) as the 
effects on resilience’s maturity component, or intensive margin. While 

14 Unions typically distribute funds (strike funds) to striking workers to 
partially substitute their regular paychecks.

6 

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics - Compustat.

Std. Dev.

Mean
Min
Panel A. Dependent variables
0.000
0.216
0.163
0.000
0.161
0.097
0.000
0.122
0.064

Median

Max

0.033
0.000
0.000

0.998
0.989
0.989

0.031

10.145

  Book leverage
  LT debt ratio (>3Y)
  LT debt ratio (>5Y)
  Resilience Intensive
  Margin

0.863
1.411
0.000
Panel B. Firm characteristics
0.361
3197.434
0.000
885.468
−2.364
5.342
0.000
0.322
0.000
0.040
−1.995
−0.015
0.520
2.780
0.000
0.259
0.000
0.194
0.000
0.091

  Total asset ($M)
  Total Debt ($M)
  Firm size
  Cash
  Investment
  Profitability (ROA)
  Market-to-book
  Collateral
  Tangibility
  Inventory
The  table  presents  summary  statistics  for  the  sample  used  in  the  difference-in-
differences analysis discussed in Section 4.1. The statistics are derived from a sample 
of firms with complete data for the maturity and leverage variables, which are our 
main outcome variables. This sample is used to estimate the difference-in-differences 
specification presented in Eq.  (4). Financial variables are winsorized at the 1% tails.

37 125.238 
10 445.342 
10.361
0.952
0.436
0.625
23.209
1.000
0.919
2.316

7728.518
2204.452
2.906
0.295
0.058
0.350
3.566
0.242
0.225
0.182

236.269
1.169
5.536
0.221
0.023
0.089
1.680
0.188
0.104
0.056

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Table 2
Summary statistics – Labor organizations membership and financials.
Max

Median

Mean

Min

Std. Dev.
3.060
1069.662
5274.532
1406.982
0.178
0.304
998.322
597.682
1820.205
0.204
0.291

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.029
0.406
0.000
1.198
0.000
0.000

0.092
69.596
254.000
66.731
0.000
0.963
262.198
359.555
384.038
0.000
0.937

1.058
423.122
1709.454
541.121
0.060
0.780
591.360
528.541
1014.446
0.043
0.803

19.152
6496.515  
36 083.000 
8529.291  
1.122
1.000
6350.002  
3475.877  
11 130.178 
1.000
1.000

  Assets ($M)
  Cash ($K)
  Members
  Fees ($K)
  Leverage
  Cash-to-assets
  Cash-to-members
  Fees-to-members
  Assets-to-members
  Strike funds
  Fees-to-receipts
This table reports summary statistics for labor organization variables. Data is collected 
from the U.S. Department of Labor website: https://www.dol.gov/agencies/olms/Regs/
Compliance/formspage. Labor organizations are required to file the forms LM-2 and 
LM-3 according to their total annual receipts. The term ‘‘total annual receipts’’ refers to 
all financial receipts of the labor organization during its fiscal year, regardless of the 
source. The form LM-2 is required for labor organizations with $250,000 or more in 
total annual receipts, the form LM-3 is required for labor organizations with total annual 
receipts of $10,000 or more, but less than $250,000 and the form LM-4 is required for 
labor organizations which have total annual receipts of less than $10,000. Our sample 
includes all labor organizations filing forms LM-2 and LM-3. The sample comprises 
717 unique labor organizations, 13,447 union-filing pairs, and 132,088 union-filing-
year observations with no missing total assets. Financial variables are winsorized at 
1% tails.

𝜂 is not a consistent estimate of 𝑇𝐸 (e.g., 𝑅𝑊 𝐿 will have effects on 
resilience’s leverage component/extensive margin), 𝛽1 is still a consis-
tent estimate of the intensive margin effects of 𝑅𝑊 𝐿 on 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒. 
Debt maturity relative to assets can be measured with error in our 
data. Alternatively, we can simplify the analysis by measuring the long-
term debt ratio, thus avoiding the mismeasurement inherent in refined 
measures of maturity (i.e., 𝑇𝑞). Throughout the paper, we include both 
measures (in addition to leverage).

To  prevent  cross-contamination  between  treatment  and  control 
groups, we estimate the model using all the firms in Compustat whose 
historical  headquarter  location  did  not  change  during  our  sample 
period,15 and use the information about their headquarter locations 
to match companies and U.S. states.16 Data on firms’ historical head-
quarter locations are sourced from the SEC Analytics Suite database 
provided  by  Wharton  Research  Data  Services,  which  extracts  this 
information from companies’ 10-K filings, similar to Ellul et al. (2024) 
and Bena et al. (2022). Currently, 26 U.S. states have RWLs in place.17 
A total of 14 states adopted RWLs between 1950 and 2019, with 8 
of these adoptions occurring after 1974 (the data about firms’ debt 
maturity is available starting in 1974). Following (Fortin et al., 2023), 
we focus our estimation on a recent wave of RWLs adoptions: Indi-
ana, Michigan, Kentucky, West Virginia, and Wisconsin (see details 
in  Internet  Appendix  Table  IA3).  We  restrict  our  sample  period  to 
2007–2019 and exclude states that introduced RWLs before 2007. Table 
1 contains detailed statistics. For some analyses, using company names, 
we  matched  Compustat  data  with  data  on  all  union  certifications 
of establishments within U.S. firms. The data is collected from two 
different  sources:  data  from  1977  to  1999  is  provided  by  Holmes 
(2006), and data from 2000 to 2020 is hand-collected from the National 
Labor Relations Board (NLRB). Summary statistics for union financials 
are presented in Table  2.

15 Our  results  carry  through  almost  identically  if  we  do  not  adjust  for 
historical headquarter location.
16 A similar matching strategy can be found in Matsa (2010), Agrawal and 
Matsa (2013), Heider and Ljungqvist (2015), and Klasa et al. (2018), among 
others.
17 Internet Appendix Table IA3 reports the list of states and the year of 
adoption of RWLs. Missouri passed a right-to-work bill in 2017, but the bill 
never became effective as it was blocked by a popular referendum in 2018.

The internal validity of our DID model relies on the assumption that, 
absent the adoption of RWLs, the differences in the outcome variables 
are likely to remain constant (parallel trends assumption). To investigate 
the validity of this assumption in our setting, we estimate a dynamic 
version of the model in Eq.  (4) by introducing state-specific relative 
time indicator variables up to four years before and after the RWLs 
adoptions. A recent literature argues that two-way fixed effects models 
in frameworks with staggered treatments can be biased in the pres-
ence of treatment effect heterogeneity (e.g., Callaway and Sant’Anna, 
2021; Sun and Abraham, 2021; Goodman-Bacon, 2021; Borusyak et al., 
2024; Baker et al., 2022; Cengiz et al., 2019). This bias undermines the 
testing of pretrends using lead and lag coefficients.18 To alleviate these 
concerns, and given the unbalanced nature of our panel dataset, we 
estimate the dynamic DID model based on (Sun and Abraham, 2021).

Fig.  2 plots the point estimates for every indicator variable in our 
dynamic DID model, and the 95% confidence interval, using alternative 
measures of financial resilience as the dependent variable. None of 
the specifications display pretrends. There is no statistical difference 
between measures of financial resilience for treated and controls firms 
before the RWLs’ adoptions.

4. Empirical analysis: Financial responses to the passage of RWLs

In this section, we empirically test the implications of the model. 
Section  4.1  shows  that  firms  adjust  their  financial  resilience  when 
the bargaining power of workers decreases: following the passage of 
RWLs, firms decrease the maturity length of their debt obligations. 
We also show that the main lever for changing financial resilience 
is  adjusting  debt,  rather  than  hoarding  cash  or  building  inventory. 
Altogether, the evidence presented in this section is consistent with 
firms increasing financial resilience in response to, or in anticipation of, 
labor negotiations. Finally, Section 4.2 evaluates the unions’ financial 
response to the passage of RWLs.

18 It is worth noting that bias is unlikely to be large in our setting since 
most control observations are in ‘‘never-treated states,’’ which provides a large 
number of controls throughout the 2007–19 period.

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Fig. 2. Parallel trends DiD - All industries.
The figure depicts the dynamic effect of RWLs using the estimation procedure outlined in Sun and Abraham (2021). Panel (a) plots the dynamic effect of RWLs 
the long-term debt ratio (i.e, LT debt ratio > 5𝑌  variable). Panel (b) plots the dynamic effect of RWLs on book leverage (i.e., Leverage variable). Panel (c) plots 
the dynamic effect of RWLs on the debt maturity component of resilience (i.e., Resilience Intensive Margin variable), which measures the fraction of debt ×
maturity at different maturity intervals scaled by the total value of firm assets (see details in Section 2.2). We centered the Right-to-Work law in the year before 
its adoption and estimated a model with indicators for each year relative to that reference date. Consistent with Fortin, Lemieux, and Lloyd (2023), the sample 
excludes states that adopted RWLs before 2007. The regressions include industry-by-year and firm fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level. 
Refer to the Variable List and Description table for more details about variables’ definition and computation.

Table 3
Debt structure response to RWLs.
(1)
LT debt ratio(>5Y)

(2)

(3)
Book leverage

(4)

(5)
Resilience Intensive Margin

(6)

  A. Unconditional
    Specification
   RWL

  B. Theory-driven
    Specification
   RWL

   Book Leverage

   LT debt ratio(>5Y)

−0.020***
(0.007)

−0.023***
(0.008)

−0.029*
(0.015)

−0.030*
(0.016)

−0.232**
(0.090)

−0.246**
(0.094)

−0.011***
(0.003)
0.328***
(0.021)

−0.011***
(0.004)
0.391***
(0.022)

−0.017
(0.011)

−0.016
(0.012)

0.620***
(0.050)

0.611***
(0.061)

−0.106***
(0.035)
4.292***
(0.237)

−0.096**
(0.035)
5.000***
(0.180)

Yes
12,507
28

No
15,200
28

  Firm controls
No
  Obs.
15,200
  Cluster
28
The table presents results from a difference-in-differences estimation, following Eq.  (4), which exploits staggered adoptions of RWLs at the state level. In columns 
(1) and (2), the results are displayed for debt with maturity longer than five years, labeled as LT debt ratio(>5Y). Columns (3) and (4) show the findings for book 
leverage, while columns (5) and (6) present the results for the debt maturity component of resilience (i.e., Resilience Intensive Margin variable), which measures 
the fraction of debt × maturity at different maturity intervals scaled by the total value of firm assets (see details in Section 2.2). Panel A reports baseline 
estimates, while Panel B regression specifications are based on our theoretical model and condition on leverage or maturity, according to each comparative 
static. Some specifications include financial controls such as Size, Profitability (ROA), Collateral, and Market-to-book ratio. All regressions include two-digit SIC 
industry-by-year and firm fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level.
*  indicate significance at the 10% level.
**  indicate significance at the 5% level.
***  indicate significance at the 1% level.

Yes
12,507
28

No
15,200
28

Yes
12,507
28

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

4.1. Firms’ financial response

4.1.1. DID results: Direct response

According  to  our  model,  in  response  to  an  increase  in  unions’ 
bargaining power, firms should increase debt maturity to become more 
resilient. Conversely, in response to a decrease in unions’ bargaining 
power, firms would decrease maturity. In contrast, responses through 
leverage are indeterminate, because the firm can choose to increase 
leverage strategically to push surplus off the bargaining table or de-
crease leverage to become more resilient.

We evaluate this direct response in Table  3. Because leverage and 
maturity are jointly determined, Proposition  3 of our theoretical frame-
work shows that the conditional response of maturity holding leverage 
fixed, and leverage holding maturity fixed are the objects of interest. 
A similar logic holds when we measure the maturity component of 
our measure of firms’ resilience (𝑅𝐷 in Eq.  (5); Resilience Intensive 
Margin in Table  3). For completeness, we present both conditional and 
unconditional estimates. Both sets of results tell a very similar story.

Panel A of Table  3 presents unconditional estimates of the debt 
structure response of firms to the passage of RWLs, which we interpret 
as  a  decrease  in  the  bargaining  power  of  workers.  A  decrease  in 
workers’ bargaining power implies that firms will reduce their debt 
maturity. Columns (1) and (2) show that firms reduce their long-term 
debt ratio (LT debt ratio (>5Y) dependent variable) by between 2.0 and 
2.3 percentage points, which corresponds to approximately 31% of the 
sample mean (6.4%). Unconditionally, that reduction in long-term debt 
is achieved through an overall reduction in leverage of about 2.9–3.0 
percentage points (columns 3 and 4). These unconditional estimates 
on leverage are in line with prior estimates reported in Chava et al. 
(2020) who, using a different set of RWL adoptions, find a reduction 
of  2.8  percentage  points.  The  intensive  margin  of  firms’  resilience 
also decreases: 0.23 years across all liabilities, which corresponds to 
around 27% of the sample mean (columns 5 and 6). These results are 
economically meaningful: When translated in terms of average maturity 
of  debt  specifically,  this  corresponds  to  the  maturity  of  preexisting 
debt decreasing by over 1 year. The change in debt maturity does not 
reflect changes in the composition of debt caused by a substitution 
of public debt with private debt (Internet Appendix E.2). In addition, 
Internet Appendix Figure IA3 provides evidence on alternative margins 
of response to increase financial resilience following changes in RWLs. 
Inventory and cash are not the main margins of response following the 
passage of RWLs.

As we discussed in Section 2.1 of our theoretical framework, the 
joint  response  of  leverage  and  maturity  is  confounded  by  the  fact 
that the strategic use of leverage must accommodate changes in matu-
rity and, conversely, increased resilience must accommodate changes 
in leverage. The more theoretically precise object to look at is the 
responses of maturity and leverage conditioning on each other (Propo-
sition   3).  Still,  Panel  A  serves  an  important  function  as  it  shows 
that firms’ interest in increasing resilience is indeed accommodating 
changes in leverage, and it is thus a first-order channel of response 
within our framework.

To directly test Proposition  3, Panel B of Table  3 presents condi-
tional estimates of the debt structure response of firms to the passage 
of RWLs. This empirical specification stems directly from the model. 
This is fundamental, as leverage and maturity are jointly determined 
in equilibrium and, thus, exhibit simultaneous causality (Heckman and 
Pinto, 2024).19 In columns (1) and (2), we show that, conditioning on 
leverage, firms reduce their long-term debt ratio (LT debt ratio (>5Y) 
dependent variable) by a statistically significant 1.1 percentage points. 
Leverage declines by about 1.6–1.7 percentage points (columns 3 and 

19 Using economic theory to determine the accurate empirical specification 
describing  a  problem  is  commonplace  in  economics  (Heckman  and  Pinto, 
2024). For a recent example in labor economics, see Beaudry et al. (2012).

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

4); however, this decline is not statistically significant once we condi-
tion on long-term debt. In the conditional specification, the coefficients 
in Columns (5) and (6) represent a consistent estimate of the effect of 
RWLs on the intensive margin of resilience (see the discussion below 
Eq.  (5)). The intensive margin of resilience decreases by 0.106 years 
across all liabilities (around 12% of the sample mean). Translated in 
terms of average maturity of debt specifically, this corresponds to the 
maturity of preexisting debt changing by around 6 months.

4.1.2. Heterogeneous response to RWLs conditional on unionization expo-
sure

Incentives to adjust resilience are likely to be stronger in firms that 
are more exposed to the collective bargaining process.20 In this section, 
we present estimates of firms’ debt structure response to the passage of 
RWLs conditional on different proxies for their exposure to collective 
bargaining. Fig.  3 presents results for industries with low and high levels 
of unionization (similar to Matsa (2010) and Fortin et al. (2023)). Fig.  4 
presents results for unionized firms, which are the most directly exposed 
to collective bargaining.

In Fig.  3, panels (a), (c) and (e) show results for low-union in-
dustries,  while  panels  (b),  (d),  and  (f)  show  results  for  high-union 
industries. For all outcome variables (long-term debt, leverage, and 
the intensive margin of resilience), firms in low-union industries show 
smaller effects than high-union industries, and the effects for the matu-
rity measures are statistically indistinguishable from zero. In contrast, 
high-union industries show significantly larger maturity responses rel-
ative to our baseline estimates (Fig.  2). Table  4 paints a similar picture, 
showing that the maturity responses in Table  3 are driven by high-
union  industries.  In  terms  of  average  debt  maturity,  our  estimates 
for the intensive margin of resilience correspond to the maturity of 
preexisting  debt  changing  by  around  2.1  years  for  firms  in  highly 
unionized industries.21

In Fig.  4, panels (a), (c), and (e) show effects on a sample restricted 
to only unionized firms, regardless of industry. Results show a large 
maturity  response  (panels  a  and  e),  while  the  effects  on  leverage 
are significantly smaller and indistinguishable from zero (Panel c). In 
panels (b), (d), and (f), we pool unionized firms with those in high-
union industries, to increase precision, and obtain qualitatively similar 
results.

In general, our results so far show that leverage and resilience do 
not need to go hand in hand. For unionized firms or firms in industries 
with high levels of unionization, the maturity response is significantly 
larger than the leverage response. It is worth emphasizing that our 
evidence speaks only about the resilience channel, and is not evidence 
against the strategic use of debt. In fact, as we argued and showed 
formally in our model, effects on leverage should be ambiguous when 
both resilience and strategic use of debt are operating.

4.1.3. Heterogeneous response to RWLs conditional on firm-level built-in 
resilience

In the last subsection, we showed that industry-level exposure to 
unionization and firm-level unionization status affects firms’ debt struc-
ture decisions. Another way to evaluate the importance of resilience for 
firms’ debt structure decisions is to examine how specific firms have 
built-in resilience that lowers their need to build resilience through debt 
structure.

We  use  three  dimensions  that  capture  this  firm-specific  built-in 
resilience: asset tangibility, collateral, and inventory differences across 
firms within the same industry. Firms with more access to debt markets 

20 This likelihood relies, of course, on several other variables being kept con-
stant, including, for example, a monotonic relationship between the likelihood 
and cost of negotiations, and the degree of network effects.
21 This takes into account that the average leverage for firms in highly 
unionized industries is 21%.

9 

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Fig. 3. Parallel trends DiD - High and low industry unionization coverage.
The figure depicts the dynamic effect of RWLs using the estimation procedure outlined in Sun and Abraham (2021). Figures on the left column, (a), (c), and 
(e), plot the dynamic effect of RWLs estimated on firms in industries with a low union coverage. Figures on the right column, (b), (d), and (f), plot the dynamic 
effect of RWLs estimated on firms in industries with a high union coverage. We use firm-level unionization activity obtained from the Union elections data to 
compute industry-level rates of union prevalence; we then categorize broad industries at the one-digit CIC code level, as in Fortin et al. (2023). The regressions 
include broad industry-by-year and firm fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level.

are  less  exposed  to  the  costs  of  strikes  since,  on  the  margin,  they 
are better able to obtain additional borrowing in the aftermath of a 
strike (see Internet Appendix B.4 for a formal analysis in the context 
of debt roll-over). Following the literature (Williamson, 1988; Shleifer 
and Vishny, 1992), we use asset tangibility and collateral as proxies for 
access to debt markets. Similarly, firms with higher levels of inventory 
are also ex-ante more resilient, as they can stabilize their cash flows fol-
lowing production disruptions (Reder and Neumann, 1980; Coles and 
Hildreth, 2000). Since these firms have more built-in resilience, their 
financing choices should be less responsive to changes in the collective 
bargaining environment. Consequently, the incentives to shorten debt 
maturity  and/or  increase  leverage  (consistently  with  the  resilience 
motive) following the passage of RWLs should be more muted in these 
firms.

To evaluate the effect of firm-specific built-in resilience on mitigat-
ing the firm’s financial resilience response, we implement a model ex-
tending Eq.  (4) to include heterogeneity across firms built-in resilience. 
In particular, we estimate the following equation: 

𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑎𝑠𝑗𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑅𝑊 𝐿𝑠𝑡 × 𝐵𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑡𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑒 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡 + 𝜈𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑡,

(6)

where we add 𝐵𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑡𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑒 to capture firm-specific asset tangibility, col-
lateral, or inventory the year prior to treatment, and state-industry-year 
fixed effects, 𝑎𝑠𝑗𝑡, to capture industry-state responses to RWLs due to 
other factors – e.g., last section’s union exposure effects — that are 
triggered by RWLs and correlated with 𝐵𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑡𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑒, but are not the main 
mechanism of interest for this subanalysis. Our hypothesis is that, for 
measures of maturity, 𝛽1 > 0; that is, built-in resilience mitigates any 

10 

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Fig. 4. Parallel trends DiD - Unionized firms.
The figure depicts the dynamic effect of RWLs using the estimation procedure outlined in Sun and Abraham (2021). Figures on the left column, (a), (c), and 
(e), plot the dynamic effect of RWLs estimated on a sample of unionized firms. Figures on the right column, (b), (d), and (f), plot the dynamic effect of RWLs 
estimated on a pooled sample of unionized firms and firms in industries with high union coverage. We use firm-level unionization activity obtained from the 
Union elections data to compute industry-level rates of union prevalence; we then categorize broad industries at the one-digit CIC code level, as in Fortin et al. 
(2023). The regressions include broad industry-by-year and firm fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level.

response through the resilience channel we document throughout the 
paper.22

Table   5  presents  heterogeneity  estimates  of  RWLs  on  maturity, 
leverage, and resilience across measures of firm-specific, pre-RWL lev-
els of asset tangibility, collateral, and inventory. We find that tangibil-
ity, collateral, and inventory all generally have a mitigating effect on 
firms’ response through the use of long-term debt and our resilience 
measure. For long-term debt (columns 1–2) and resilience intensive 
margin (columns 5–6), the mitigating effect of tangibility is statistically 
significant  (Panel  A);  that  of  collateral  is  positive  but  statistically 
significant only when we include firm controls (Panel B); and that 
of  inventory  is  statistically  significant  for  long-term  debt,  but  only 

marginally so for our resilience measure (Panel C). In contrast, the 
mitigating effect of these measures on leverage is always statistically 
insignificant. And while some estimates are not necessarily econom-
ically insignificant, their magnitudes are strictly smaller than those 
of  long-term  debt  across  all  specifications,  highlighting  the  role  of 
maturity.

4.2. Unions’ financial response

All our analysis so far, as well as the literature on RWLs at large, 
assumes that, consistent with intent, RWLs decrease the bargaining 
power of unions.23 Nevertheless, it is worth evaluating the process and 

22 Since changes in leverage can reflect either strategic or resilience motives, 
the sign of 𝛽1 is ex-ante ambiguous for leverage.

23 See,  for  example,  Ellwood  and  Fine  (1987),  Farber  et  al.  (2021), 
and Fortin et al. (2023).

11 

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Table 4
Debt structure response to RWLs - Heterogeneity by industry unionization.

(1)

Baseline

(2)

(3)

High

(4)

(5)

Medium

(6)

(7)

Low

(8)

(9)
Medium + Low

(10)

  A. Unconditional
    Specification

   RWL

   RWL

   RWL

  B. Theory-driven
    Specification

   RWL

   RWL

   RWL

−0.023***
(0.008)

A.1 – LT debt ratio(>5Y)
−0.020***
(0.007)
A.2 – Book Leverage
−0.029*
(0.015)
A.3 – Resilience Intensive Margin
−0.232**
(0.090)

−0.246**
(0.094)

−0.030*
(0.016)

−0.011***
(0.004)

B.1 – LT debt ratio(>5Y)
−0.011***
(0.003)
B.2 – Book Leverage
−0.017
(0.011)
B.3 – Resilience Intensive Margin
−0.106***
(0.035)

−0.096**
(0.035)

−0.016
(0.012)

−0.037
(0.030)

−0.045**
(0.018)

−0.017
(0.011)

−0.019*
(0.010)

−0.023
(0.017)

−0.021
(0.018)

−0.018*
(0.009)

−0.012
(0.016)

−0.015
(0.015)

−0.036*
(0.019)

−0.037*
(0.019)

−0.013
(0.022)

−0.004
(0.020)

−0.032*
(0.019)

−0.367
(0.283)

−0.448**
(0.178)

−0.220*
(0.129)

−0.225*
(0.125)

−0.183
(0.194)

−0.134
(0.194)

−0.214*
(0.115)

−0.031
(0.025)

−0.039**
(0.017)

−0.005
(0.005)

−0.004
(0.004)

−0.019
(0.014)

−0.020
(0.017)

−0.007*
(0.004)

0.008
(0.011)

0.009
(0.015)

−0.024*
(0.013)

−0.024*
(0.013)

−0.001
(0.018)

0.006
(0.019)

−0.021
(0.013)

−0.299
(0.214)

−0.369**
(0.152)

−0.060
(0.050)

−0.040
(0.041)

−0.123
(0.159)

−0.113
(0.187)

−0.069
(0.041)

No
1,434
23

No
9,613
27

Yes
1,258
22

Yes
12,507
28

No
15,200
28

  Firm controls
  Obs.
  Cluster
The table presents results from a difference-in-differences estimation, following Eq.  (4), which exploits staggered adoptions of RWLs at the state level. The table includes results for 
long-term debt ratio (i.e., LT debt ratio(>5Y) variable), book leverage, and the debt maturity component of resilience (i.e., Resilience Intensive Margin variable), which measures 
the fraction of debt × maturity at different maturity intervals scaled by the total value of firm assets (see details in Section 2.2). We use firm-level unionization activity obtained 
from the Union elections data to compute industry-level rates of union prevalence; we then categorize broad industries at the one-digit CIC code level, as in Fortin et al. (2023). 
Panel A reports baseline estimates, while Panel B regression specifications are based on our theoretical model and condition on leverage or maturity, according to each comparative 
static. Some specifications include financial controls such as Size, Profitability (ROA), Collateral, and Market-to-book ratio. All regressions include two-digit SIC industry-by-year 
and firm fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level.
*  indicate significance at the 10% level.
**  indicate significance at the 5% level.
***  indicate significance at the 1% level.

No
12,943
28

Yes
8,042
27

No
3,309
26

Yes
2,796
26

−0.019** 
(0.009)  

−0.032*  
(0.018)  

−0.212*  
(0.108)  

−0.007*  
(0.004)  

−0.019  
(0.013)  

−0.054  
(0.041)  
Yes
10,856  
28

Table 5
Debt structure response to RWLs - Heterogeneity by built-in resilience.

  A. Tangibility
   RWL × Tangibility

  B. Collateral
   RWL × Collateral

  C. Inventory
   RWL × Inventory

(1)
LT debt ratio(>5Y)

(2)

(3)
Book leverage

(4)

(5)
Resilience Intensive Margin

(6)

0.077*
(0.043)

0.045
(0.026)

0.200**
(0.087)

0.121**
(0.046)

0.075***
(0.022)

0.248***
(0.068)

0.054
(0.053)

0.017
(0.051)

0.120
(0.247)

0.111
(0.089)

0.049
(0.061)

0.111
(0.246)

1.017***
(0.347)

0.530
(0.332)

1.827
(1.315)

1.504***
(0.425)

0.835**
(0.309)

2.179*
(1.163)

Yes
10,476
22

No
12,937
22

  Firm controls
No
  Obs.
12,937
  Cluster
22
This table presents the results from estimating the cross-sectional model specified in Eq.  (6). We interact our main explanatory variable, RWL, with firm-level 
measures of tangibility, collateral, and inventory, all measured in the year prior to the implementation of Right-to-Work laws. Some specifications include financial 
controls such as Size, Profitability (ROA), and Market-to-book ratio. All regressions include two-digit SIC state-industry-year and firm fixed effects, with standard 
errors clustered at the state level. Sample means for tangibility, collateral, and inventory are 0.19, 0.26, and 0.09, respectively.
*  indicate significance at the 10% level.
**  indicate significance at the 5% level.
***  indicate significance at the 1% level.

Yes
10,476
22

No
12,937
22

Yes
10,476
22

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Fig. 5. Parallel trends DiD – Union memberships.
The figure shows the dynamic effect of RWLs on union membership (computed as the natural logarithm of the number of union members) using the estimation 
procedure described in Sun and Abraham (2021). In panel (a), the model is estimated using only unions with non-missing observations within the estimation 
window. In panel (b), the model is estimated by replacing zero members for unions that exited the sample anytime from the RWLs adoption date onward (e.g., 
if a union is in the sample until time 𝑡 = +1, then from 𝑡 = +2 onward, union membership is recorded as zero). The regressions include year and union fixed 
effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level.

degree through which unions’ financials are affected, as it is possible 
that unions could adjust their financials to mitigate the impact of RWLs, 
just as firms do adjust their financials differently in the presence or 
absence of RWLs. Using data on union financials from the Office of 
Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) of the U.S. Department of Labor, 
we evaluate changes in membership and changes in the fee structure of 
unions. We find significant and sharp declines in overall membership. 
We also find that unions’ fee structure is significantly changed after the 
passage of RWLs, with an expected average drop in total fees driven by 
the bottom half of unions in terms of total fees but with statistically 
significant  increases  in  fees  for  the  largest  unions.  Union  dues  are 
used to finance the operations of the union, including bargaining on 
behalf of workers, providing member benefits, organizing efforts, legal 
representation, and other union activities.

First, we confirm that union membership does indeed decline fol-
lowing the passage of RWLs, which lends support to a decline in 𝛼
in our theoretical framework. Results are presented in Fig.  5. Panel 
A presents declines in membership for unions that survive for at least 
four years following the passage of RWLs. Panel B accounts for declines 
in membership due to union exits by assigning zero membership to a 
union that ceased to exist after the passage of RWLs. Panel A shows 
that  surviving  unions  become  progressively  weaker,  with  drops  in 
membership reaching approximately 7 log points after year four. Panel 
B shows that this effect is significantly larger if we account for declines 
in membership due to some unions disappearing entirely. Total decline 
in membership including union exits is around 12 log points after year 
four.

Second, we evaluate whether RWLs affect other key direct measures 
of union health (total fees and fees per member) as well as potential 
variables they could have adjusted to mitigate the impact of RWLs. Re-
sults are shown on Table  6. Panel A presents the relationship between 
RWLs and union financials. As expected, the total number of members 
and the total fees collected decreases significantly. This decrease is to 
the tune of 3.5 and 3.7 log points, respectively (columns 1 and 2). While 
statistically insignificant, there seems to also be a slightly smaller, but 
of similar order, drop in the average assets and average cash of unions 
(columns 3 and 4). While the decline in average cash of unions of 2.4 
log points is statistically indistinguishable from the decline in fees (t-
stat of differences in means: −0.316), the small differences between fees 
and cash can correspond to differences in past fee revenue. In contrast 
to our results for firms, there does not appear to be a change in unions’ 
financial leverage (column 5).

4.2.1. Heterogeneous union response by size

Looking at unions of different sizes, however, paints a slightly more 
nuanced picture. Panel B in Table  6 presents heterogeneity by union 
size as measured by total fees just prior to the passage of RWLs. As 
before, effects on assets (column 3), cash (column 4), total cash per 
member (column 6), fees relative to receipts (column 8), and funds used 
to support strikers (column 9) are all statistically insignificant. How-
ever, the drop in membership and fees that we document in Panel A 
is stronger for smaller unions, although that relationship is statistically 
significant only for fees. In fact, for the top 10% largest unions, total 
fees actually exhibit a statistically significant increase (Fig.  6), both in 
terms of total fees and fees per member. In terms of total fees, each 
log point increase in pre-RWLs total fees is linked to an increase of 
2 basis points in total fees. This effect is not just mechanically linked 
to changes in membership: in contrast to Panel A, fees per member 
exhibit statistically significant effects, there is a drop of 212 dollars for 
the average union, but each log point increase in pre-RWLs total fees 
is associated with an increase in fees per member of about 19 dollars. 
These increases are monotonically increasing in the pre-RWLs size of 
the union, as measured by total fees (Fig.  6). In contrast, smaller unions 
exhibit large declines in membership, total fees, and fees per member. 
These differences in response are also seen in leverage, as expected, in 
an opposite direction: smaller unions significantly increase leverage but 
this increase is significantly mitigated the larger the union is.

4.2.2. Other margins of adjustment for unions

It is worth highlighting that unions’ cash per member (column 6), 
fees relative to receipts (column 8), and funds used to support strikers 
(column 9) do not respond to RWLs and do not present heterogeneous 
responses by size.24 This is in contrast to what we observe for fees 
per member (column 7) and leverage (column 5). The results above 
would suggest that the main margins of response for unions are their 
dues and membership, and that unions jointly adjust their fee and debt 
structure to keep short-term funds relatively stable. Fees relative to 
total receipts (column 8) is particularly informative of this — when 
we  consider  receipts  (all  cash  inflows  and  outflows,  including  fees 
but also other revenues and paying off liabilities), the fee to receipt 

24 The estimates capturing a decline in cash-to-members and its positive 
interaction  with  union  size,  although  both  statistically  insignificant,  are 
consistent with a reduction in fees that is heterogeneous across union size.

13 

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Table 6
DiD: Effects of RWLs on labor organizations memberships and financials.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Log(Assets)

Log(Cash)

Leverage

Cash-to-members

Fees-to-members

Fees-to-receipts

  RWL

  Obs.
  Cluster

  RWL

  RWL × Pre-RWL fees

Log(Fees)

Log(Members)
Panel A: RWL Baseline Specification
−0.035**
(0.013)

−0.037*
(0.021)

−0.023
(0.016)

128,167
28

122,709
28

127,467
28
Panel B: Cross-sectional using Pre-RWL Log(Fees)
−0.253***
−0.088*
(0.056)
(0.043)
0.020***
0.005
(0.004)
(0.003)

−0.102
(0.080)
0.008
(0.006)

−0.024
(0.032)

127,827
28

−0.118
(0.075)
0.009
(0.007)

0.001
(0.002)

127,850
28

0.022***
(0.007)
−0.002**
(0.001)

5.397
(15.702)

127,282
28

−99.645
(73.584)
9.737
(7.965)

−11.125
(7.009)

127,288
28

−211.731***
(35.298)
18.564***
(3.263)

−0.000
(0.004)

129,848
28

−0.012
(0.007)
0.001
(0.001)

(9)
Strike funds

−0.005
(0.004)

45,110
28

−0.014
(0.031)
0.001
(0.002)

124,599
28

125,191
28

120,516
28

  Obs.
  Cluster
The table presents results from a difference-in-differences estimation, following Eq.  (4), which exploits staggered adoptions of RWLs at the state level, using labor organization 
characteristics as outcome variables. Panel A displays the results of the baseline specification for each outcome variable. Panel B presents the results of the cross-sectional analysis, 
where the RWL indicator interacts with the natural logarithm of union fees in the year before the law is adopted. Labor organizations’ data is sourced from Form LM-2 and LM-3 
filed with the Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) and maintained by the U.S. Department of Labor. All regressions include year and union fixed effects, with standard 
errors clustered at the state level.
*  indicate significance at the 10% level.
**  indicate significance at the 5% level.
***  indicate significance at the 1% level.

124,871
28

124,884
28

124,418
28

124,447
28

126,786
28

44,476
28

Fig. 6. Heterogeneous response in union fees after RWLs adoptions.
The figure displays the coefficient estimates of the DiD model in Eq.  (4), where we interact the explanatory variable with dummies capturing heterogeneity in 
union fees. Unions are divided into 20 groups based on their fee levels one year before the adoption of RWLs. The Low group consists of unions with the lowest 
fees, while the High group includes those with the highest fees. We estimate the model using the logarithm of union fees (Panel a) and the ratio between fees 
and the number of union members (Panel b) as outcome variables. Each coefficient represents the sum of the baseline effect and the interaction term. Vertical 
lines indicate a 95% confidence interval. The regressions include year and union fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level.

structure stays constant, indicating a matching of inflows and outflows, 
regardless of union size. Overall, larger unions appear to be better able 
to retain support following the passage of RWLs, mitigate some of the 
legislation’s impact and, for a nonnegligible number of unions improve 
their financial position.

5. Mechanisms with no response and potential confounders

In this section, we briefly examine other potential mechanisms con-
necting RWLs and financial resilience for which we find no empirical 
support, and additional confounders to our analysis. We reserve a more 
detailed discussion of these results to Internet Appendix E.

Credit Markets. One major concern in our setting is the possibil-
ity that RWLs might produce changes in how creditors perceive the 
creditworthiness of firms. To the extent that these laws reduce labor 
rigidities within the firm, creditors might perceive the firm to be less 
risky, lowering the cost of debt and potentially leading to more and 
riskier borrowing by the firm. We provide several pieces of evidence, 
however, that weigh against credit markets mediating our results.

We first explore the relevance of this channel by directly looking at 
the response of credit ratings, bond prices, and CDS spreads following 
the passage of RWLs. Changes in the perceived riskiness of a firm’s 
debt are likely to be reflected in its credit ratings, bond prices, or CDS 
spreads. In Internet Appendix Table IA7, we show that credit ratings 
remain unchanged following the passage of RWLs, which suggests that 
these laws did not change rating agencies’ assessment of firm risk. Still, 
it is possible that markets differ from rating agencies in their perception 
of firms’ creditworthiness. To evaluate this possibility, we explore the 
response of bond prices following the passage of RWLs. In Fig.  7, we 
present results showing that bond prices do not change either post 
RWLs.25

RWLs may have affected the price differential for similar quality 
bonds at different maturities (by changing the relative riskiness of debt 
with longer maturity compared to debt with shorter maturity), even 

25 We must note that bonds might be less liquid than other instruments. 
However, that would also mitigate their effects on the firm.

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Fig. 7. Bond pricing around RWLs’ adoptions.
The figure plots averages and standard deviations of firms’ cumulative ab-
normal bond returns for a five-month window around the RWLs’ adoptions. 
Corporate bond data is from TRACE.

though they did not affect average bond prices or ratings. The post-
RWLs adjustments in firms’ debt maturity could be then driven by 
changes in the cost of maturity rather than firms’ attempt to improve 
their bargaining position in negotiations with labor. To inquire this 
possibility, we use the spread differentials across CDS contracts with 
different maturities as proxies for the perceived differences in the credit 
risk  of  the  underlying  debt  contracts.  Internet  Appendix  Table  IA8 
shows that these spread differentials do not meaningfully change post 
RWLs, which suggests that the passage of these laws did not have a 
significant effect on firms’ cost of maturity either.26

A more subtle version of credit markets as a potential confounder is 
that firms might optimize differently across sources of debt, regardless 
of the effect that RWLs may have on the cost of credit for each of these 
sources. The argument runs as follows: firms facing more powerful 
employees may substitute bank loans with public debt, since the latter 
is harder to renegotiate with creditors and is thus more effective in 
pushing surplus off the negotiation table with workers (Qiu, 2016). 
Given that public debt tends to have longer maturity, our results may 
be driven by this substitution rather than the firms’ interest in financial 
resilience. To test for this alternative mechanism, we use data on firms’ 
debt  structure  to  separate  different  sources  of  financing.  Results  in 
Internet Appendix Table IA6 show that firms do not adjust the relative 
weights of their sources of debt (including the fractions of bank and 
public debt), which suggests that this alternative mechanism is not at 
play either.

Operating Flexibility. A different potential concern is that the con-
nection between firms’ financing choices and labor negotiations might 
be  driven  to  some  degree  by  substitution  between  operational  and 
financial leverage (Simintzi et al., 2015; Serfling, 2016). Simintzi et al. 
(2015) argue for this trade-off using cross-country variation in employ-
ment protection. In Internet Appendix E.5, we test for this by evaluating 
whether there exists a heterogeneous response to the passage of RWLs 
in firms that have high fixed costs and thus higher operational leverage. 
Following  the  literature  standard  (e.g.,  Gorodnichenko  and  Weber, 
2016),  we  measure  fixed  costs  by  using  Compustat  variables:  sell-
ing, general and administrative expenditures (Compustat item XSGA), 

26 The lack of credit market response is consistent with the documented lack 
of short-term equity response and subsequent long-term slow equity market 
response following unionization events (Lee and Mas, 2012), response that 
takes over a year to materialize. We show that this lack of short-term equity 
market response extends to passage of RWLs (Internet Appendix Table IA9). 
Slow diffusion of information to investors or slow resolution of uncertainty are 
consistent with the empirical patterns documented here and in Lee and Mas 
(2012).

15 

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

advertising  (Compustat  item  XAD),  and  research  and  development 
expenses (Compustat item XRD). We then normalize these by sales. 
We report results in Internet Appendix Table IA10. Firms with high 
fixed costs do not respond differently to the passage of RWLs than other 
firms.

6. Conclusion

This paper investigates the use of financial resilience as a strategic 
tool in labor negotiations. We develop a dynamic model of employer-
employee negotiations and derive two main results. Longer debt matu-
rity improves financial resilience and, thus, shareholders’ bargaining 
position. Increasing debt reduces financial resilience and, thus, may 
hurt shareholders in the negotiations, contrary to the standard intuition 
of strategic leverage. As a consequence of the interplay of these two 
factors, leverage has an ambiguous effect on shareholders’ bargaining 
position

We  empirically  show  that  changes  in  the  bargaining  power  of 
workers lead to changes in the financial resilience of the firm: firms 
decrease their debt maturity following the passage of RWLs, which 
decrease workers’ ability to organize. These results demonstrate that 
firms respond to more powerful employees by increasing their financial 
resilience to negotiations and strikes and, hence, that regulation that 
decreases the bargaining power of workers, such as RWLs, has the 
potential pernicious implication of increasing unemployment risk for 
workers.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Carlos F. Avenancio-León: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding 
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Alessio 
Piccolo:  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Vi-
sualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Roberto Pinto: Writing – 
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, 
Supervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors have nothing to disclose neither do they have financial 

stakes in this paper nor in any of the subject areas covered therein.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104157.

Data availability

Replication package for Resilience in Collective Bargaining (Reference
data) (Mendeley Data)

References

Abowd, J.M., Kramarz, F., Margolis, D.N., 1999. High wage workers and high wage 

Abraham, S.E., Voos, P.B., 2000. Right-to-work laws: New evidence from the stock 

firms. Econometrica 67 (2), 251–333.

market. South. Econ. J. 67, 345–362.

Abreu, D., Gul, F., 2000. Bargaining and reputation. Econometrica 68 (1), 85–117.
Agrawal, A.K., Matsa, D.A., 2013. Labor unemployment risk and corporate financing 

decisions. J. Financ. Econ. 108 (2), 449–470.

C.F. Avenancio-León et al.

Journal of Financial Economics 173 (2025) 104157 

Baker, A.C., Larcker, D.F., Wang, C.C., 2022. How much should we trust staggered 

difference-in-differences estimates? J. Financ. Econ. 144 (2), 370–395.

Beaudry, P., Green, D.A., Sand, B., 2012. Does industrial composition matter for wages? 

A test of search and bargaining theory. Econometrica 80 (3), 1063–1104.

Becker, B.E., Olson, C.A., 1986. The impact of strikes on shareholder equity. ILR Rev. 

39 (3), 425–438.

Bena,  J.,  Ortiz-Molina,  H.,  Simintzi,  E.,  2022.  Shielding  firm  value:  Employment 

protection and process innovation. J. Financ. Econ. 146 (2), 637–664.

Benmelech, E., Bergman, N.K., Enriquez, R.J., 2012. Negotiating with labor under 

financial distress. Rev. Corp. Financ. Stud. 1 (1), 28–67.

Benmelech,  E.,  Frydman,  C.,  Papanikolaou,  D.,  2019.  Financial  frictions  and 
employment during the great depression. J. Financ. Econ. 133 (3), 541–563.
Berk, J.B., Stanton, R., Zechner, J., 2010. Human capital, bankruptcy, and capital 

structure. J. Financ. 65 (3), 891–926.

Binmore,  K.G.,  1987.  Perfect  equilibria  in  bargaining  models.  In:  Binmore,  K.G., 
Dasgupta, P. (Eds.), The Economics of Bargaining. Basil Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 
77–105.

Blanchflower, D.G., Bryson, A., 2003. Changes over time in union relative wage effects 

in the UK and the US revisited. Int. Handb. Trade Unions 197–245.

Bonhomme, S., Holzheu, K., Lamadon, T., Manresa, E., Mogstad, M., Setzler, B., 2023. 
How much should we trust estimates of firm effects and worker sorting? J. Labor 
Econ. 41 (2), 291–322.

Borusyak, K., Jaravel, X., Spiess, J., 2024. Revisiting event-study designs: Robust and 

efficient estimation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 91 (6), 3253–3285.

Bronars, S.G., Deere, D.R., 1991. The threat of unionization, the use of debt, and the 

preservation of shareholder wealth. Q. J. Econ. 106 (1), 231–254.

Brown,  J.,  Matsa,  D.A.,  2016.  Boarding  a  sinking  ship?  An  investigation  of  job 

applications to distressed firms. J. Financ. 71 (2), 507–550.

Farber, H.S., Herbst, D., Kuziemko, I., Naidu, S., 2021. Unions and inequality over the 
twentieth century: New evidence from survey data. Q. J. Econ. 136 (3), 1325–1385.
Flannery, M.J., 1986. Asymmetric information and risky debt maturity choice. Econ. J. 

41 (1), 19–37.

Fortin, N.M., Lemieux, T., 1997. Institutional changes and rising wage inequality: Is 

there a linkage? J. Econ. Perspect. 11 (2), 75–96.

Fortin, N., Lemieux, T., Lloyd, N., 2023. Right-to-work laws, unionization, and wage 

setting. Res. Labor Econ. (50th Celebr. Volume) 50, 285–326.
Freeman, R., Medoff, J., 1984. What Do Unions Do. Basic Books, N.Y.
Giroud, X., Mueller, H.M., 2017. Firm leverage, consumer demand, and employment 

losses during the great recession. Q. J. Econ. 132, 271–316.

Goodman-Bacon, A., 2021. Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing. 

J. Econometrics 225 (2), 254–277.

Gorodnichenko, Y., Weber, M., 2016. Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from the stock 

market. Am. Econ. Rev. 106 (1), 165–199.

Graham, J.R., Kim, H., Li, S., Qiu, J., 2023. Employee costs of corporate bankruptcy. 

J. Financ. 78 (4), 2087–2137.

Hall, R.E., Krueger, A.B., 2012. Evidence on the incidence of wage posting, wage 

bargaining, and on-the-job search. Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon. 4 (4), 56–67.
He, Z., Xiong, W., 2012. Rollover risk and credit risk. J. Financ. 67 (2), 391–430.
Heckman,  J.,  Pinto,  R.,  2024.  Econometric  causality:  The  central  role  of  thought 

experiments. J. Econometrics 243 (1), 105719.

Heider, F., Ljungqvist, A., 2015. As certain as debt and taxes: Estimating the tax 
sensitivity of leverage from state tax changes. J. Financ. Econ. 118 (3), 684–712.

Holmes, T.J., 2006. Geographic spillover of unionism. NBER Working Paper Series.
Klasa, S., Ortiz-Molina, H., Serfling, M., Srinivasan, S., 2018. Protection of trade secrets 

and capital structure decisions. J. Financ. Econ. 128 (2), 266–286.

Lee, D.S., Mas, A., 2012. Long-run impacts of unions on firms: New evidence from 

Callaway,  B.,  Sant’Anna,  P.H.,  2021.  Difference-in-differences  with  multiple  time 

financial markets, 1961–1999. Q. J. Econ. 127 (1), 333–378.

periods. J. Econometrics 225 (2), 200–230.

Ma, C.t.A., Manove, M., 1993. Bargaining with deadlines and imperfect player control. 

Card, D., Cardoso, A.R., Heining, J., Kline, P., 2018. Firms and labor market inequality: 

Econ.: J. Econ. Soc. 1313–1339.

Evidence and some theory. J. Labor Econ. 36 (S1), S13–S70.

Card,  D.,  Lemieux,  T.,  Riddell,  W.C.,  2003.  Unionization  and  Wage  Inequality:  A 
Comparative Study of the US, the UK, and Canada. National Bureau of Economic 
Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Card, D., Lemieux, T., Riddell, W.C., 2004. Unions and wage inequality. J. Labor Res. 

25, 519–559.

Matsa, D.A., 2010. Capital structure as a strategic variable: Evidence from collective 

bargaining. J. Financ. 65 (3), 1197–1232.

Michaels,  R.,  Page,  T.B.,  Whited,  T.M.,  2019.  Labor  and  capital  dynamics  under 

financing frictions. Rev. Financ. 23 (2), 279–323.

Michelacci, C., Quadrini, V., 2005. Borrowing from employees: Wage dynamics with 

financial constraints. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 3 (2–3), 360–369.

Cengiz, D., Dube, A., Lindner, A., Zipperer, B., 2019. The effect of minimum wages on 

Moore, W., Newman, R., 1985. The effects of right-to-work laws : A review of the 

low-wage jobs*. Q. J. Econ. 134 (3), 1405–1454.

Chava,  S.,  Danis,  A.,  Hsu,  A.,  2020.  The  economic  impact  of  right-to-work  laws: 
Evidence from collective bargaining agreements and corporate policies. J. Financ. 
Econ. 137 (2), 451–469.

Coles, M.G., Hildreth, A.K.G., 2000. Wage bargaining, inventories, and union legislation. 

Rev. Econ. Stud. 67 (2), 273–293.

Crawford, V.P., 1982. A theory of disagreement in bargaining. Econ.: J. Econ. Soc. 

measure of equity risk. Rev. Account. Stud. 9, 197–228.

DeMarzo,  P.M.,  Sannikov,  Y.,  2006.  Optimal  security  design  and  dynamic  capital 
structure in a continuous-time agency model. J. Financ. 61 (6), 2681–2724.
Diamond, D.W., 1991. Debt maturity structure and liquidity risk. Q. J. Econ. 106 (3), 

607–637.

709–737.

literature. ILR Rev. 38 (4), 571–585.

Opp,  M.M.,  Zhu,  J.Y.,  2015.  Impatience  versus  incentives.  Econometrica  83  (4), 

1601–1617.

Perotti, E.C., Spier, K.E., 1993. Capital structure as bargaining tool: The role of leverage 

in contract renegotiation.  Am. Econ. Rev. 83 (5), 1131–1141.

Qiu, Y., 2016. Debt structure as a strategic bargaining tool. Working paper.
Reder, M.W., Neumann, G.R., 1980. Conflict and contract: The case of strikes. J. 

Political Econ. 88 (5), 867–886.

97–109.

Rubinstein, A., Wolinsky, A., 1985. Equilibrium in a market with sequential bargaining. 

Econ.: J. Econ. Soc. 1133–1150.

Schelling, T.C., 1956. An essay on bargaining. Am. Econ. Rev. 46 (3), 281–306.
Schoefer, B., 2022. The Financial Channel of Wage Rigidity. Technical Report, National 

Dechow,  P.M.,  Sloan,  R.G.,  Soliman,  M.T.,  2004.  Implied  equity  duration:  A  new 

Rubinstein, A., 1982. Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model. Econometrica 50 (1), 

DiNardo, J., Hallock, K.F., 2002. When unions ‘‘mattered’’: the impact of strikes on 

Bureau of Economic Research.

financial markets, 1925–1937. ILR Rev. 55 (2), 219–233.

Donangelo, A., Gourio, F., Kehrig, M., Palacios, M., 2019. The cross-section of labor 

leverage and equity returns. J. Financ. Econ. 132 (2), 497–518.

2239–2286.

Serfling, M., 2016. Firing costs and capital structure decisions. J. Financ. 71 (5), 

Shleifer,  A.,  Vishny,  R.W.,  1992.  Liquidation  values  and  debt  capacity:  A  market 

Ellul, A., Pagano, M., 2019. Corporate leverage and employees’ rights in bankruptcy. 

equilibrium approach. J. Financ. 47 (4), 1343–1366.

J. Financ. Econ. 133 (3), 685–707.

Simintzi, E., Vig, V., Volpin, P., 2015. Labor protection and leverage. Rev. Financ. Stud. 

Ellul, A., Wang, C., Zhang, K., 2024. Labor unemployment risk and CEO incentive 

28 (2), 561–591.

compensation. Manag. Sci. 70 (2), 885–906.

Ellwood, D.T., Fine, G., 1987. The impact of right-to-work laws on union organizing. 

J. Political Econ. 95 (2), 250–273.

Spier, K.E., 1992. The dynamics of pretrial negotiation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 59 (1), 93–108.
Sun, L., Abraham, S., 2021. Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies with 

heterogeneous treatment effects. J. Econometrics 225 (2), 175–199.

Williamson, O.E., 1988. Corporate finance and corporate governance. J. Financ. 43 (3), 

567–591.

16 

