Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Capital budgeting, uncertainty, and misallocation
Ben Charoenwong a, Yosuke Kimura b, Alan Kwan c, Eugene Tan d,∗
a NUS Business School, Singapore
b Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
c The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
d Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Canada

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Dataset link: Capital Budgeting , Uncertainty ,
and Misallocation - Source Files (Original
Data ).

JEL classiﬁcation:
E22
G31
O16

Keywords:
Corporate investment
Expectations
Formation
Intangible capital
Information
Learning

1.  Introduction

In canonical models of investment dynamics under uncertainty, “time-to-build” in investment decisions implies 
that uncertainty negatively impacts ﬁrm values and aggregate capital productivity. However, capital budgeting, 
which  involves  ex-ante  information  acquisition  and  state-contingent  investment  decisions,  can  potentially 
ameliorate  time-to-build  frictions.  Reduced-form  evidence  using  ﬁrm-level  data  on  sales  and  investment 
expectations and errors supports both mechanisms. Incorporating capital budgeting into a standard investment 
model,  our  calibrated  model  reveals  that  state-contingent  investment  planning  and  information  acquisition 
reduce aggregate productivity losses by 41% and 17%, respectively. Moreover, gains from planning accrue 
primarily to less productive ﬁrms, while information acquisition beneﬁts higher productivity ones.

A standard assumption of workhorse models of investment dynamics 
in macroeconomics and ﬁnance is that investment decisions are made 
ahead of time and are diﬃcult to change even after new information 
is received. This assumption, commonly referred to as “time-to-build” 
(Kydland and Prescott (1982)), means that incorrect forecasts today of 
future fundamentals can lead to under- or over-investment, reducing 
ﬁrm values and aggregate productivity (e.g., David et al. (2016); Bloom 
et al. (2018); Tanaka et al. (2020)).

However,  capital  budgeting,  which  determines  investment  deci-
sions, is more ﬂexible in practice. While capital budgeting cannot undo 
the technological constraint of time-to-build, investment plans can of-
ten be structured to vary to some extent in response to new information. 
For instance, in 2020, two months after the onset of the Covid-19 pan-

demic,  Emirates  Airlines  sought  to  cancel  ﬁve  of  its  original  Airbus 
A380  orders.  While  doing  so  would  incur  a  penalty  of  US$350  mil-
lion, canceling their orders would avoid over-investment when demand 
for large long-haul ﬂights is low.1 Although it may be costly, such in-
vestment ﬂexibility partially insures the ﬁrm against uncertainty and 
reduces the impact of uncertainty on ﬁrm values and aggregate produc-
tivity.

Despite  its  practical  importance,  to  our  knowledge,  no  model  in 
macroeconomics or ﬁnance incorporates investment ﬂexibility along-
side information frictions when studying how uncertainty aﬀects ﬁrm 
performance. Instead, recent literature has focused on information fric-
tions  in  isolation,  which  overstates  the  role  of  information  frictions 
if ﬁrms can adjust investment expenditures to a signiﬁcant degree in 
response to real-time information. In this paper, we combine these el-
ements into a model of investment under uncertainty. Together with a 

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: eugene.tan@rotman.utoronto.ca (E. Tan).

1 Emirates discussed canceling orders in May 2020 due to the pandemic (link, retrieved summer 2023). In addition, Emirates did so on another occasion in 2014 
(link, retrieved summer 2023).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103779
Received 8 April 2022; Received in revised form 4 January 2024; Accepted 4 January 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)103779Availableonline16January20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

novel dataset, we quantify the impact of uncertainty and the value of 
investment ﬂexibility in the capital budgeting process for ﬁrm perfor-
mance and aggregate productivity.

The  contribution  of  our  paper  is  two-fold.  First,  we  provide  new 
evidence on how ﬁrms’ investment adjusts to new information about 
idiosyncratic  productivity  shocks.  Our  evidence  suggests  that  while 
ﬁrms do acquire information to reduce uncertainty when making in-
vestment  plans,  actual  investment  also  responds  to  new  information 
after plans are made regarding proﬁtability, indicating that ﬁrms rely 
on  both  mechanisms  to  mitigate  the  negative  impact  of  uncertainty 
on  ﬁrm  value.  Second,  building  upon  our  stylized  facts,  we  develop 
a parsimonious model with endogenous investment plan formation and 
information acquisition to jointly analyze the value of investment ﬂex-
ibility and information acquisition to mitigate losses from uncertainty. 
Our calibrated model, which replicates empirical moments that are in-
formative of investment ﬂexibility and information acquisition, reveals 
that investment ﬂexibility reduces aggregate productivity losses due to 
uncertainty  by  about  41%  after  accounting  for  endogenous  informa-
tion acquisition. This translates to about a 1.13% increase in aggregate 
corporate value when holding aggregate wages ﬁxed, suggesting that 
accounting for state contingency in investment decisions is important 
for quantifying the impact of uncertainty on ﬁrm value and aggregate 
productivity.

The starting point of our paper is unique ﬁrm-level microdata from 
the  Japanese  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF).  These  data  cover  11  years, 
and one of their key characteristics is that they contain information on 
ﬁrms’ annual internal forecasts of sales and proﬁts, investment plans, 
and actual investment expenditures. This dataset allows us to compare 
ﬁrms’ forecasted and actual sales and proﬁts, as well as their investment 
plans and actual investment expenditures.

From this dataset, we establish three stylized facts. First, we ﬁnd that 
ﬁrms’ internal forecasts for revenue productivity are substantially more 
accurate than a standard AR(1) forecast (the workhorse assumption of 
models of investment dynamics). For instance, in the cross-section, fore-
cast errors have a standard deviation of about 49% of the volatility of 
productivity. This implies that ﬁrms resolve some of their uncertainty 
before making an investment decision, echoing prior ﬁndings in the lit-
erature that managers, broadly speaking, have better information about 
their own ﬁrm than outside observers.2 Second, the accuracy of ﬁrms’ 
forecasts is positively related to ﬁrms’ past productivity; for instance, 
in the cross-section, a standard deviation increase in past productivity 
is associated with a 16% standard deviation decrease in the absolute 
size of forecast errors. Finally, ﬁrms partially adjust their investment 
spending relative to initially budgeted levels in response to real-time 
shocks, suggesting some ﬂexibility in investment spending. For instance, 
after controlling for initial investment plans, we ﬁnd that a 1% increase 
in realized productivity is associated with a 2.1% increase in invest-
ment rates. Altogether, our data suggest that ﬁrms rely to some extent 
on both investment ﬂexibility and information acquisition to mitigate 
losses from uncertainty.

To  quantify  the  importance  of  these  mechanisms,  we  develop  a 
general-equilibrium neoclassical investment model with heterogeneous 
ﬁrms and capital budgeting to capture the main facts in the data. In 
our  model,  capital  budgeting  involves  time-to-build  (hereafter  TTB) 
between an investment planning stage, where ﬁrms have limited infor-
mation on demand or productivity and only make partial commitments 
to some initial investment purchases, to an intermediate stage, where 

2 While our paper focuses on the accuracy of private forecasts over revenue 
productivity, other papers have also broadly observed empirically that man-
agers provide informative forecasts over ﬁrm outcomes with information likely 
not available to outside researchers (e.g. Bloom et al. (2020, 2021); Barrero 
(2022); Chen et al. (2023)). Likewise, recent papers (e.g., David et al. (2016); 
David and Venkateswaran (2019)) make similar theoretical points using quanti-
tative models informed by indirect inference without direct observation of ﬁrm 
forecast errors.

ﬁrms  have  more  information  and  investment  decisions  are  ﬁnalized, 
and the ﬁnal stage when capital is installed and becomes productive.

We emphasize three dimensions of capital budgeting. First, in the 
planning stage, ﬁrms do not observe current productivity but use in-
formation on past productivity and new information acquired—at some 
cost—during the initial periods of the current year to forecast current 
productivity. Second, during an intermediate stage, ﬁrms observe actual 
current productivity and can choose to deviate from their initial invest-
ment plans, again at some cost. These two dimensions imply that in the 
planning stage, ﬁrms have an incentive to acquire better information to 
formulate more precise forecasts of the return on investment, but these 
incentives depend on the cost of deviation. Third, we allow the costs of 
information acquisition to be a function of ﬁrm productivity, capturing 
the idea that diﬀerent types of ﬁrms might have access to diﬀerent tech-
nologies for information acquisition. These three dimensions are key to 
matching the stylized facts above.

Based on these primitives, our model further derives a novel theoret-
ical result: The marginal beneﬁt of an additional “unit” of information 
for  a  ﬁrm  always  increases  in  its  productivity,  meaning  that  higher 
productivity  ﬁrms  have  intrinsically  greater  incentives  for  acquiring 
information. Our result implies that information and productivity are 
complements in production at both the ﬁrm and aggregate levels. This 
is analogous to the predictions of a standard model of physical factor 
inputs, leading us to interpret information as an intangible factor of 
production. Moreover, this endogenously gives rise to a distribution of 
information, which we denote “information allocation”. Given the dif-
ferent incentives to acquire information, our results imply that given 
a ﬁxed aggregate quantity of resources for information acquisition, the 
impact  of  uncertainty  on  ﬁrm  values  and  aggregate  productivity  de-
pends on both the degree of investment ﬂexibility and the distribution 
of resources for information acquisition. Because both dimensions of 
uncertainty are new to the literature, we will evaluate the quantitative 
relevance of these two mechanisms.

Our calibrated baseline model targets empirical moments that are 
informative of both channels and suggests that aggregate total factor 
productivity (TFP) loss due to uncertainty is around 0.20%. To estimate 
the value of investment ﬂexibility, we construct a counterfactual cal-
ibrated model replicating the information allocation across ﬁrms, but 
which imposes complete inﬂexibility in investment. The counterfactual 
predicts TFP losses of around 0.34%, suggesting that investment ﬂex-
ibility alone reduces the aggregate losses due to uncertainty by about 
41%. Along the same lines, holding wages ﬁxed, we ﬁnd that investment 
ﬂexibility alone improves aggregate corporate values by around 1.13%. 
Moreover, while the eﬃciency gains accrue to all ﬁrms, we ﬁnd that 
lower-productivity ﬁrms are the primary beneﬁciaries, implying that 
lower-productivity ﬁrms rely substantially more on investment ﬂexibil-
ity to mitigate uncertainty.

Finally, we quantify how the distribution of resources for informa-
tion acquisition aﬀects the impact of uncertainty on ﬁrms and aggregate 
productivity.  Motivated  by  the  standard  assumption  that  ﬁrms  face 
homogeneous uncertainty, our counterfactual imposes a degenerate dis-
tribution of information, holding ﬁxed both the level of resources spent 
on information acquisition and the degree of investment ﬂexibility. The 
counterfactual predicts TFP losses of around 0.24%–about 20% higher 
than our baseline. Along the same lines, holding prices ﬁxed, we ﬁnd 
that the information allocation channel improves aggregate corporate 
values by around 0.32%. Therefore, our model reveals that reallocating 
the resources for information acquisition to higher-productivity ﬁrms, 
as observed in the data, reduces the aggregate impact of uncertainty. 
However, unlike investment ﬂexibility, the eﬃciency gains accrue only 
to the minority of ﬁrms with very high productivity.

After discussing the related literature below, the rest of our paper 
proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes our data and presents stylized 
evidence that motivates our model; Section 3 describes our model and 
presents our main theoretical results; Section 4 presents our calibration 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037792B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

and results; Section 5 discusses the quantitative model’s results; and 
ﬁnally, Section 6 concludes.

Related literature

Our results connect to several strands of the macroeconomics and 
ﬁnance  literature.  First,  our  paper  builds  on  the  large  literature  in 
macroeconomics emphasizing the role of time-to-build in investment 
as  a  source  of  business  cycle  ﬂuctuations  and  ﬁrm  risk.3 Beginning 
with Kydland and Prescott (1982), the canonical assumption of most 
macroeconomic models of investment under uncertainty is an exoge-
nously ﬁxed period of TTB, following early evidence that TTB is largely 
technological and insensitive to business cycle shocks (Mayer (1960); 
Hall (1977); Montgomery (1995)). For instance, in research closely re-
lated to our paper, David et al. (2016) assume a TTB of three years when 
studying the role of information frictions for capital misallocation.

In contrast, our paper reﬁnes the microfoundation for TTB, postu-
lating that it partly arises from a lag time between when investment 
plans are made and when investment expenses are accrued. While sim-
ilar to early research on “time-to-plan” (Christiano and Todd (1996)), 
part of our contribution is to present new empirical evidence regarding 
this dimension of TTB. Moreover, our microfoundation connects to and 
extends classic work on corporate ﬁnance regarding capital budgeting 
practices, showing that shocks to productivity can lead to ineﬃcient 
investment  because  it  is  diﬃcult  to  adjust  actual  investment  in  real 
time relative to budgeted capital expenses (e.g., Harris and Raviv 1996; 
Malenko 2019; Graham 2022). In this sense, our paper is similar to re-
search that studies the degree to which TTB is variable, and its impact 
on investment decisions (e.g., Bar-Ilan and Strange (1996); Kalouptsidi 
(2014); Oh and Yoon (2020)). The existing literature has primarily stud-
ied variability in the lead time of investment. In contrast, we study a 
diﬀerent aspect of TTB – that even for a ﬁxed lead time, ﬁrms do not 
bear the full risk of their investment because they can vary investment 
sizes in a state-contingent fashion. Moreover, we show that the aggre-
gate losses due to information frictions can be overstated if one does 
not account for this form of risk mitigation.

Second, our paper connects to the large literature on informational 
rigidity and rational inattention (e.g., Sims 2003; Reis 2006; Coibion 
and Gorodnichenko 2015; see, in particular, the handbook chapter by 
Baley and Veldkamp 2021). While largely focused on business cycles 
and inﬂation dynamics (e.g., Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp 2009; 
Ma´ckowiak and Wiederholt 2015; Baley and Blanco 2019; Ilut and Saijo 
2020), a small but growing body of related research now studies the role 
of information frictions as a source of capital misallocation (e.g., David 
et al. (2016); Tanaka et al. (2020); Gondhi (2023)). Unlike earlier re-
search, a key contribution of our paper is to show theoretically how 
information acts like an intangible asset and to demonstrate the quan-
titative relevance of information allocation across ﬁrms as a source of 
aggregate  eﬃciency  gains.  In  this  context,  our  research  is  similar  to 
Veldkamp (2023) and Farboodi and Veldkamp (2022) in emphasizing 
information as a ﬁrm asset. However, these studies do not focus on the 
distributional consequences of information allocation, nor do they ac-
count for investment ﬂexibility as a substitute for information.

Our theoretical results also help inform recent empirical ﬁndings on 
ﬁrm expectations formation. Recent ﬁndings suggest that higher pro-
ductivity ﬁrms tend to make better forecasts over microeconomic and 
macroeconomic variables. For instance, Bloom et al. (2021) ﬁnd that 
high-productivity ﬁrms make better forecasts of future ﬁrm revenue, 
and Tanaka et al. (2020) ﬁnd similar results for macroeconomic aggre-
gates. Unlike these papers, our model endogenizes information acquisi-
tion, explaining empirically observed patterns of managerial forecasting 

based on rational agents with costly learning. Moreover, our model al-
lows us to relate ﬁrm characteristics to the cross-sectional distribution 
of forecast errors. We argue that this heterogeneity is important for the 
overall aggregate eﬀects of managerial beliefs. Our framework also al-
lows for several interesting extensions examining the interplay between 
how ﬁrms choose to acquire information and other variables, such as 
corporate ﬁnancial policy. In this sense, our approach and inferences 
are similar to Farboodi et al. (2022), who study the incentives for in-
vestors to acquire information and present a comprehensive framework 
to measure the private value of ﬁnancial information.

Third, our ﬁndings relate to the voluminous research studying the 
sources of capital misallocation following the seminal work of Restuccia 
and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Our paper most 
directly relates to the literature emphasizing the role of uncertainty, 
TTB, and capital adjustment frictions as sources of capital misallocation 
(Asker et al. 2014; David et al. 2016; David and Venkateswaran 2019). 
However, we additionally emphasize the role of information allocation 
as a determinant of capital misallocation. Our emphasis on studying the 
underlying intangible factors backing the distribution of tangible factors 
of production mirrors recent research in the literature (e.g., Bhandari 
and McGrattan 2020; Whited and Zhao 2021).

Finally, we present new evidence using a unique novel dataset of 
ﬁrm expectations. The setting is also useful because it should provide 
researchers with a long panel of capital budgets, sales, and proﬁt fore-
casts, which could be useful broadly in studying corporate investment 
behavior. Prior studies with investment plans use managerial forecasts 
made by a small and selected subset of public ﬁrms or ﬁrm panels with 
qualitative forecasts regarding sales or investment (e.g., Bachmann et 
al. 2013; Bachmann and Elstner 2015; Gennaioli et al. 2015; Bachmann 
et al. 2017; Barrero 2022; Bloom et al. 2021). Other studies involve 
experiments  designed  to  elicit  the  expectations  formation  process  of 
private individuals but do not study capital investment behavior and 
ﬁrm proﬁtability (e.g., Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2015; Coibion et al. 
2020; Fuster et al. 2022).

2.  Supporting and motivating evidence

In this section, we ﬁrst introduce our data source and measurement 
strategy, and then show stylized facts motivating our study of invest-
ment  ﬂexibility  and  information  acquisition  as  strategies  that  ﬁrms 
adopt during the capital budgeting process to mitigate the negative ef-
fects of uncertainty.

2.1.  Data source, sample selection, and summary statistics

Our sample merges two distinct datasets from the Japanese Ministry 
of Finance (MoF): the Business Outlook Survey (BOS) and the Annual 
and Quarterly Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Indus-
try. The ﬁrst dataset contains ﬁrm-level forecasts for sales, proﬁts, and 
investment spending plans and their realizations. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrms are 
surveyed around six weeks into the ﬁrst ﬁscal quarter about their fore-
casted sales, proﬁts, and investment spending plans for the full ﬁscal 
year. At the end of the year, they are surveyed again regarding their 
actual  sales,  proﬁts,  and  investment  spending.  We  focus  on  planned 
and realized plants, property, and equipment (PP&E) as our deﬁnition 
of  “investment”.  The  second  dataset  provides  year-end  (quarter-end) 
ﬁnancial statistics such as total assets, cash holdings, debt, total employ-
ment, and cost of labor for the ﬁscal period. Although the two surveys 
are distinct, they follow the same sampling procedure, target the same 
ﬁrms, and use the same anonymized ﬁrm identiﬁers.

Responding to both surveys is mandatory per the Japanese Statis-
tics Act, and the response rates for large ﬁrms over our sample period 
are between around 87% and 89%.4 This similarity in survey proce-

3 “Time-to-build” refers to the idea that there is a lead time between when 
investment decisions are made and when capital becomes productive, which 
means that the returns to capital are uncertain and investment is thus risky.

4 This high response rate points to an advantage of the BOS as a data source. 
In terms of data reliability, Charoenwong et al. (2020) use the same dataset 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037793B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

Table 1
Summary statistics. The table shows the summary statistics of our ﬁrm-year panel. Our sample of 
interest is the manufacturing sector, deﬁned in accordance with the Japanese Standard Industrial 
Classiﬁcation. The total number of ﬁrms in our sample is 2,040, of which 46% are publicly listed 
and the rest are private companies. Capital stock is the Net Plants, Property & Equipment. Proﬁts 
are “ordinary proﬁts” according to Japanese Generally-Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). 
The Wage Bill is the sum of total salary cost for employees and company oﬃcers as well as the 
bonus for employees and company oﬃcers. Employment is the number of full-time equivalent 
workers and may include fractions. All monetary values are reported in current yen and we 
winsorize all variables at the 1% level.

Variable

Mean

SD

Total Assets (mn)
Capital Stock (mn)
Employment (count, FTE)
COGS (mn)
Wage Bill (mn)
Sales (mn)
Expected Sales (mn)
Proﬁts (mn)
Expected Proﬁts (mn)
Total Capital Investment (mn)
Total Capital Investment Plan (mn)
Investment (% Capital)
Capital Investment Plan (% Capital)

87,223.8
46,816.1
1,052.0
65,209.1
7,501.9
99,450.9
100,556.2
5,585.2
5,493.50
3,909.4
4,347.10
10.1
12.3

368,988.8
225,075.7
2,872.6
290,962.3
26,098.2
390,199.6
386,181.3
43,170.5
37,757.00
14,365.9
15,627.40
44.2
62.8

Percentile
25𝑡ℎ

7,957.5
2,840.2
190.0
5,847.0
989.0
12,389.2
12,889.5
223.0
300
273.0
300
3.0
3.0

50𝑡ℎ

75𝑡ℎ

20,554.0
8,579.0
428.0
15,267.0
2,485.0
27,096.0
27,700
1062.0
1,070
821.5
900
6.0
6.6

56,933.0
26,003.2
946.0
40,751.0
5,935.0
68,015.0
69,000
3,521.0
3,400
2,533.8
2,730.50
11.4
12.8

dures and high response rates permit a high-quality merge of the data 
that creates a nationally representative panel of both large public and 
large private ﬁrms in Japan with information on their expectations and 
ﬁnancial statements accounting for over 60% of total employment. Ap-
pendix A.1 presents more details of these two data sources and our data 
processing procedures.

Our ﬁnal sample for analysis spans ﬁscal years 2005 to 2016 and 
includes  only  ﬁrms  from  the  manufacturing  industry  based  on  the 
Japanese Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation (J-SIC) codes. We exclude 
ﬁrm-year  observations  with  zero  sales  or  missing  information  on  la-
bor  costs  or  PP&E.  The  manufacturing  ﬁrms  in  our  dataset  account 
for roughly 7 million employees per year, which is about 10% of the 
Japanese workforce.

Table 1 reports  the  general  characteristics  of  our  sample,  includ-
ing the mean, standard deviation, skewness, and the 25th, 50th, and 
75th percentiles of key balance sheet variables. The average total as-
sets of a ﬁrm in our sample is 87,223.8 million yen (approx. US$615 
million) with a median of 20,554 million yen (approx. US$145.5 mil-
lion), and the average capital stock of 46,816.1 million yen (approx. 
US$330.2 million) with a median of 8,579 billion yen (approx. US$60.5 
million). On average, ﬁrms plan to invest 10% of capital and actually 
invest around 12% of capital.

2.2.  Measurement strategy for empirical analysis

2.2.1.  Investment plans and investment ﬂexibility

A  key  feature  of  the  BOS  is  that  we  observe  planned  investment 
spending as of the start of the ﬁscal year as well as actual investment 
spending over the course of the ﬁscal year. In the context of our focus on 
capital budgeting, we interpret “planned investment spending” as pre-
committed  capital  purchases.  For  instance,  in  our  previous  example, 
Emirates Airlines anticipates capital expenditures associated with pur-
chasing Airbus A380 planes and sets aside that money at the beginning 
of the year, pre-committing. In turn, actual investment spending reﬂects 
the actual number of A380s Emirates Airlines paid for over the course 
of the year after re-negotiating their contract in response to Covid-19.

as this paper and argue that the publicly-listed respondents on the BOS appear 
to provide more accurate forecasts compared to public manager guidance to in-
vestors, suggesting that ﬁrms take reasonable eﬀort to accurately report internal 
projections.

Our  main  focus  in  this  study  is  the  degree  to  which  investment 
spending deviates from investment plans. We deﬁne “investment plan 
deviation” as the diﬀerence between realized investment at the end of 
the ﬁscal year and planned investment as of the beginning of the ﬁs-
cal  year,  deﬂated  by  initial  capital  stock.  Deviations  may  be  zero  if 
investment is entirely inﬂexible or ﬁrms perfectly forecast their need 
for investment, so realized expenditures never deviate from plans even 
if investment was perfectly ﬂexible. As such, we next show how ﬁrm 
uncertainty over (revenue) productivity forecasts interacts with ﬁrms’ 
demand for investment.

A  caveat  for  our  empirical  analysis  is  that  the  investment  values 
in the survey data only reﬂect capital expenses. This means that ﬁrms 
that plan to and/or actually disinvest will report planned investment 
and/or actual investment of zero. This censoring biases our measure of 
investment plan deviations toward zero. We discuss this bias in more 
detail in Appendix A.2.1 and argue that based on simulations, we do 
not believe that this bias meaningfully aﬀects our empirical results.

2.2.2.  Productivity and ﬁrm uncertainty

Investment plans are made at the beginning of the ﬁscal year in the 
BOS, so our analysis on ﬁrm uncertainty likewise focuses on uncertainty 
over ﬁrm outcomes within the ﬁscal year. We study uncertainty over 
own-ﬁrm productivity, since the typical assumption is that productivity 
is the main exogenous variable driving investment demand. Forecast 
errors—the diﬀerence between realized and forecasted productivity—
serve as a measure of ﬁrm uncertainty. Therefore, two key objects that 
we need to measure are the ﬁrm’s forecast of productivity as of the 
beginning of the ﬁscal year and realized productivity as of the end of 
the ﬁscal year based on realized sales.

For realized productivity, we follow the literature (e.g., Hsieh and 
Klenow (2009)) by assuming that ﬁrms operate Cobb-Douglas “value-
added production functions”, using capital (𝑘) and labor (𝑙) as inputs 
with  capital  intensity  𝛼,  such  that  output  𝑦 is  given  by  𝑦 = ̃𝑧𝑘𝛼𝑙1−𝛼
and where  ̃𝑧 is physical productivity. In addition, they face isoelastic 
demand curves with elasticity 𝜂. Given values for 𝛼 and 𝜂, we can back 
out physical productivity using the identity

𝜂
(𝑝𝑦)
𝜂−1
𝑘𝛼𝑙1−𝛼

,

̃𝑧 =

(1)

where 𝑝𝑦 is the ﬁrm’s total value-added for the ﬁscal year. For measure-
ment purposes, 𝑘 is the ﬁrm’s physical capital stock measured at the end 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037794B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

of the last ﬁscal year, and 𝑙 is the number of full-time equivalent labor 
hired as of the end of the current ﬁscal year.5 In this framework, we 
cannot distinguish between “revenue” productivity and “physical” pro-
ductivity (Syverson (2011)), since we only observe income and balance 
sheet  items.  Therefore,  we  simply  term  ̃𝑧 generically  as  “productivi-
ty” henceforth, and study uncertainty around  ̃𝑧, which forms a single 
suﬃcient summary statistic capturing overall uncertainty over demand 
and output. We use the “tilde” variable for productivity ( ̃𝑧) to denote 
that this is productivity measured as a residual of the revenue func-
tion, which itself is a combination of both a transitory and permanent 
component of ﬁrm productivity. This distinguishes it against 𝑧 without 
the “tilde”, which we use to denote only the transitory component of 
productivity in Section 3 onwards.

We  are  interested  in  quantifying  the  ﬁrm’s  uncertainty  around  ̃𝑧
while investment plans are made at the start of the ﬁscal year. To that 
end, we make two standard assumptions. First, we follow convention 
and assume that log ̃𝑧 follows a Gaussian AR(1) process with volatil-
ity 𝜎𝜖 . Second, we assume that ﬁrms have rational expectations and 
thus perfect understanding of the data generating process for  ̃𝑧. There-
fore, uncertainty arises because ﬁrms do not have information over the 
innovation to  ̃𝑧, which we denote by 𝜖. Consequently, the standard de-
viation of forecast errors for 𝜖, relative to 𝜎𝜖 , gives us a measure of a 
ﬁrm’s actual uncertainty while making investment plans.

Because  we  do  not  directly  observe  forecasted  ̃𝑧,  only  forecasted 

sales, we compute an approximate forecast error using the formula

𝜂
𝜂−1

𝜂
(𝑝𝑦𝑒)
𝜂−1
𝑘𝛼𝑙1−𝛼

,

̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 ≡ log

(𝑝𝑦)
𝑘𝛼𝑙1−𝛼 − log
where 𝑝𝑦𝑒
is the ﬁrm’s forecasted value-added for the year (which we 
compute  from  forecasted  sales),  and  where  for  notation,  we  use  the 
“hat” variable to denote that this is only an approximate of the true
forecast error (which we denote by 𝜖𝐹 𝐸
in the rest of the paper). This 
formula has a natural interpretation of  (𝑝𝑦𝑒)
productivity.

𝑘𝛼 𝑙1−𝛼 as the ﬁrm’s expected 

𝜂
𝜂−1

(2)

It is important to point out that our formula contains measurement 
error due to Jensen’s inequality. We show in Appendix A.2.2 that in 
the context of our model, ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 is related to the true forecast error 𝜖𝐹 𝐸
through the following formula,

̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 =

1

1 − (1 − 𝛼)

𝜂−1
𝜂

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝜖𝐹 𝐸 −

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

1
2

𝜂−1
𝜂

1 − (1 − 𝛼)

𝜂−1
𝜂

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

𝕍

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

,

(3)

where 𝕍 is the variance of 𝜖𝐹 𝐸
dard deviation of ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 is overstated by (i) a factor 
by variations in 𝕍 across ﬁrms. Appendix A.22 provides more detail 
for this derivation. Finally, operationalizing our measurement requires 
values for 𝛼, 𝜂, and 𝜎𝜖 , which are reported in Table 5.6

. Importantly, this implies that the stan-
, and (ii) 

1−(1−𝛼)

𝜂−1
𝜂

1

5 Unfortunately, we do not directly observe value added because the BOS 
only provides information on sales and proﬁts and we do not have a direct 
measure of intermediate inputs. Therefore, to compute value added, we impute 
a ﬁrm’s material share based on industry input-output tables provided by the 
Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (analogous to those produced by the 
Bureau of Economic Analysis in the United States), and then impute value-
added by constructing it using total sales scaled by one minus the aggregate 
material share. This follows standard approaches in the literature (e.g., David 
and Venkateswaran 2019).
6 Our estimation strategy regarding these three parameters build on struc-
tural assumptions of our model, and are discussed in more detail in Appendix 
D.1.1 and Appendix A.2 after we present the model. In robustness exercises 
documented in Appendix F, we also show that our estimates are consistent with 
conventional approaches to estimating these parameters.

)

𝑠𝑑

(
̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 | ̃𝑧

Fig. 1. The distribution of ﬁrm-level uncertainty in Japan. Fig. 1a plots the 
histogram of TFP forecast errors ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 , and Fig. 1b plots the density of ﬁrm-level 
uncertainty in Japan (
per 
the discussion in Section 2.2.2. To construct Fig. 1b, we construct a histogram 
by sorting ﬁrms into centiles ranked by TFP. Each data point represents the 
standard deviation of ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 relative to the standard deviation of 𝜖 within each 
centile.

), where we construct ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 and 

(
̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 | ̃𝑧

𝜎𝜖|𝑧

𝜎𝜖|𝑧

𝑠𝑑

)

−1

−1

−1

−1

2.3.  Stylized facts

2.3.1.  Firm uncertainty

We begin by presenting new evidence regarding ﬁrm-level uncer-
tainty, documenting two general ﬁndings: (i) that ﬁrms face substantial 
uncertainty during the investment planning stage, but some degree of 
this uncertainty is partially resolved, and (ii) that there is substantial 
heterogeneity in uncertainty across ﬁrms, and in particular, that higher 
productivity ﬁrms face lower uncertainty.

Fig. 1a shows a histogram of  ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 . To make it more interpretable, 
we pre-multiply ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 by 1 − (1 − 𝛼)
𝜂−1
following the motivation given 
𝜂
by Equation (3) and normalize it by 𝜎𝜖 . The summary statistics for this 
normalized ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 are shown in the ﬁrst row of Table 2.

The distribution reveals two ﬁndings. First, there is substantial dis-
persion, indicating ﬁrms face uncertainty at the start of the ﬁscal year 
with  regards  to  their  productivity  for  the  full  year.  In  other  words, 
investment plans are made under uncertainty. Second, the standard de-
viation of forecast errors is around half that of 𝜎𝜖 . In other words, ﬁrms 
make forecasts that are on average more accurate than an econometri-
cian using solely the data-generating process of ̃𝑧 as a forecasting tool.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037795B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

Table 2
Statistics of distributions of TFP and investment plan deviations. The table reports statistics associated 
with the distributions reported in Figs. 1 and 2. In the ﬁrst row, TFP forecast errors have been deﬂated 
𝜂−1
𝜂 and normalized by 𝜎𝜖 . In the second row, standard deviation of TFP forecast 
by a factor of 1 −(1 − 𝛼)
errors is normalized by the volatility of TFP within the same centile of TFP. In the third and fourth rows, 
we report investment plan deviations, where the fourth row excludes zero planned investment. 𝐾 refers 
to initial period capital stock. Both are reported in decimals. We winsorize all variables at the 1% level.

Variable

TFP Forecast Error
SD of TFP Forecast Errors | ̃𝑧
(fraction of 𝜎𝜖 | ̃𝑧
Investment Plan Deviations (fraction of 𝐾)
Investment Plan Deviations
(fraction of 𝐾, excl. 𝑖𝑝 = 0)

−1)

−1

Mean

-0.099
0.509

-0.003
-0.008

SD

0.488
0.085

0.062
0.061

Percentile
25𝑡ℎ

-0.361
0.446

-0.024
-0.025

50𝑡ℎ

-0.079
0.513

-0.005
-0.006

75𝑡ℎ

0.152
0.568

0.01
0.009

Given our interest in studying ﬁrm-speciﬁc uncertainty, we would 
like to also quantify the degree of uncertainty a ﬁrm faces at the start 
of the ﬁscal year. Ideally, we would directly observe the empirical dis-
tribution of ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 for each ﬁrm, and then compute the dispersion of ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸
for each ﬁrm (for instance, as in Barrero (2022); Altig et al. (2022)). 
Unfortunately, the survey design of the BOS implies that we only ob-
serve a single forecast error per ﬁrm (and year). Therefore, we instead 
bin ﬁrms into centiles according to their beginning-of-period measured 
productivity (which we denote by ̃𝑧
−1), and then compute the standard 
deviation of forecast errors within each bin, which (with abuse of nota-
tion) we denote by 𝑠𝑑

Fig. 1b  shows  a  histogram  of  𝑠𝑑

(
̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 | ̃𝑧
normalized  by  the 
−1
volatility of ̃𝑧 computed within each centile of 𝑧
−1. The summary statis-
tics for this ratio are shown in the second row of Table 2. Similar to 
before, we also pre-multiply ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 by 1 − (1 − 𝛼)
𝜂−1
𝜂 . Table 2 shows that 
the average ratio is around 51%, with a standard deviation of around 
8.5%.

(
̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 | ̃𝑧

−1

)

)

.

For the vast majority of ﬁrms, the standard deviation of forecast 
errors  is  smaller  than  its  corresponding  volatility.  For  instance,  at  3 
standard deviations above the mean, the ratio is around 76.5%, imply-
ing that most ﬁrms resolve some degree of uncertainty over productivity 
in their forecasting. However, they continue to face non-trivial amounts 
of remaining uncertainty. For instance, at 3 standard deviations below 
the mean, the ratio is around 25.5%. Importantly, the analysis reveals 
that there is substantial heterogeneity in uncertainty across ﬁrms of dif-
ferent productivity.

To formally investigate this relationship, we estimate the following 

relationship using ordinary least-squares (OLS),

(

)
1 + |̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸
𝑗,𝑡 |

log

= 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛼𝑡 + 𝛽 log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗,𝑡,

(4)

where for notation, 𝑗 and 𝑡 index ﬁrm and year, 𝛼𝑗 represents ﬁrm- (or 
industry-) ﬁxed eﬀects and 𝛼𝑗 represents year-ﬁxed eﬀects where ap-
propriate, and 𝜂𝑗,𝑡 is the error term. We use the absolute size of ﬁrm 
forecast errors as a proxy for uncertainty in this case. The coeﬃcient 
of interest is 𝛽, capturing the correlation between initial period produc-
tivity and uncertainty. In addition, comparing speciﬁcations with and 
without ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects allows us to decompose a ﬁrm’s uncertainty 
based on a cross-sectional versus ﬁrm-level component.

Table 3 reports our regression results. Column 1 does not include 
ﬁrm-ﬁxed  eﬀects  and  Column  2  includes  ﬁrm-ﬁxed  eﬀects.  In  both 
cases, the estimated relation is negative, meaning that higher produc-
tivity ﬁrms face lower uncertainty. Interestingly, we also see that the 
relationship is stronger with ﬁrm-ﬁxed eﬀects, implying that most of 
the heterogeneity documented in Fig. 1b is driven by within-ﬁrm dif-
ferences in uncertainty. The estimate in Column 2 shows that a one-
standard-deviation  increase  in  past  productivity  is  associated  with  a 
16% decrease in a standard deviation of the absolute size of forecast 
errors.

)
1 + |̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸
𝑗,𝑡 |

Table 3
Uncertainty and correlation with TFP. The table reports our estimation of 
(
= 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽 log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑗,𝑡. Columns 1 and 2 report the OLS spec-
log
iﬁcations while Columns 3 and 4 report Poisson regression speciﬁcations. ̂𝜀𝐹 𝐸
𝑖𝑡
refers to TFP forecast errors and log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡−1 refers to realized productivity at 
𝑡 − 1. Observations are at the ﬁrm-year level. All variables are winsorized at 
the 1% level. Fixed eﬀects used across speciﬁcations as indicated. Standard 
errors are presented in parentheses and clustered by ﬁrm.

(1)
log(1 + | ̂𝜀𝐹 𝐸
𝑖𝑡

|)

(2)

-0.012***
(0.003)

OLS
Y
N
Y
15,230
0.180

-0.021***
(0.007)

OLS
Subsumed
Y
Y
15,230
0.465

(3)
| ̂𝜀𝐹 𝐸
𝑖𝑡

|

-0.060***
(0.016)

Poisson
Y
N
Y
15,230
0.033

(4)

-0.105***
(0.029)

Poisson
Subsumed
Y
Y
15,230
0.079

log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡−1

Method
Industry FE
Firm FE
Year FE
Observations
𝑅2

For robustness, we estimate a version of Equation (4) via a Pois-
son regression using |̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸
𝑖,𝑡 | as the dependent variable. Columns 3 and 
4 report our results without and with ﬁrm-ﬁxed eﬀects respectively. 
Like with our ﬁrst speciﬁcation estimated using OLS, we ﬁnd a negative 
correlation between the size of forecast errors and productivity, and 
that this relationship is stronger within-ﬁrm. Finally, we also present 
alternative versions of the above analysis in Appendix F Table F.6 and 
F.7 using alternative methodologies for calculating 𝑧.7 We also present 
evidence using binscatter plots that shows the same relationship graph-
ically.8

2.3.2.  Investment ﬂexibility

We now present new evidence regarding ﬁrm investment ﬂexibility, 
documenting two general facts: (i) that there is substantial deviation 
in ﬁrm investment relative to planned investment, and (ii) that these 
deviations reﬂect updates to investment decisions having received new 
information on productivity.

7 In untabulated analysis, we also use OLS and run alternative speciﬁcations, 
such as directly using the absolute values of forecast errors or taking the inverse 
hyperbolic sine of absolute forecast errors. Our results are consistent across all 
speciﬁcations.
8 In addition, we examine the relationship between volatility and ﬁrm size, 
as innate ﬁrm volatility (𝜎𝜖 ) has been documented to decline with size (e.g., 
Davis et al. (2006)), and thus more productive ﬁrms may simply face lower 
uncertainty given a less volatile productivity process. In untabulated analysis, 
we look at 𝜎𝜖 across deciles of 𝑧. In our sample, reassuringly, there does not 
appear to be any quantitatively signiﬁcant decline in the volatility of TFP across 
ﬁrm sizes, potentially because our sample comprises primarily mature ﬁrms.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037796B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

Table 4
The  correlation  of  expected  and  realized  investment  with  productiv-
ity.  Columns  1  and  2  below  report  our  estimation  of 
= 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 +
)
𝑗,𝑡] + 𝜂𝑗,𝑡 with  industry,  year and  ﬁrm,  year ﬁxed  eﬀects,  re-
𝛽
1
spectively. Columns 3 and 4 below report our estimation of 
= 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 +

log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡

𝐸[

𝑖𝑝
𝑘

)

)

(

(

𝑗,𝑡

(

𝑖
𝑘

𝑗,𝑡

2

𝑗,𝑡
)

+ 𝜂𝑗,𝑡. Column 2 reports a linear model that omits invest-
𝛽
1 log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽
ment plans, while Column 3 includes investment plans. Observations are at the 
(
ﬁrm-year level. 
refer to realized and planned investment. 
log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡 refers to realized productivity using our baseline method. All variables 
are winsorized at the 1% level. All speciﬁcations include ﬁrm and time ﬁxed 
eﬀects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses and clustered by ﬁrm.

(
and 

𝑖𝑝
𝑘

𝑖
𝑘

)

𝑗,𝑡

𝑗,𝑡

(

)

𝑖𝑝
𝑘

Fig. 2. Distribution of investment plan deviations. Fig. 2 plots the histogram of 
investment plan deviations, deﬁned as  𝑖−𝑖𝑝
, for the full sample of manufactur-
𝑘𝑡,𝑖−1
ing ﬁrms.

𝐸[log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡]

First, Fig. 2 shows the distribution of investment plan deviations nor-
malized by beginning-of-year capital stock for our full sample of ﬁrms. 
We see that there is substantial dispersion in investment plan devia-
tions, with the typical deviation a downward adjustment. As reported 
in the third row of Table 2, the median ﬁrm reports a downward ad-
justment of around 0.5% of capital stock with a standard deviation of 
around 6%. This adjustment is large, given that the median investment 
is around 6% of capital stock. This comparison implies many ﬁrms re-
tain the option to adjust their spending over the course of the ﬁscal 
year, as the average ﬁrm calls oﬀ almost 10% of planned investment.9

As mentioned earlier, one potential issue with our above analysis 
is the problem of truncation bias, which might overstate the frequency 
of ﬁrms reporting zero adjustment. In the last row of Table 2, we re-
port statistics of the same distribution, but now with only ﬁrms that 
report planning on making some amount of positive investment. The ta-
ble shows that with the truncation bias partly addressed, the dispersion 
of investment plan deviations remains similar (Fig. B.1 in Appendix B 
further plots a histogram of this distribution).

Another concern might be that these distributions do not necessar-
ily reﬂect ﬁrm ﬂexibility. Speciﬁcally, if ﬁrms are simply reporting an 
arbitrary investment plan (that is not related to productivity and thus 
pre-committed expenses), then there is no cost to deviating from invest-
ment plans, and large deviations are not surprising. We now show some 
evidence that (i) these investment plans are related to internal forecasts 
of productivity, and (ii) these deviations are also meaningful responses 
to new information. To that end, to reject the null the investment plans 
are arbitrary, we ﬁrst estimate the following equation
(
]

)

[

= 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽
1

𝔼

log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡

+ 𝜂𝑗,𝑡,

]

[
denote investment plans, 𝔼 
log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡

𝑗,𝑡
where 𝑖𝑝
denotes measure expected 
productivity following the logic of equation (2), 𝑗 and 𝑡 index ﬁrm and 
year, 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 are ﬁrm- and year- speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects, and 𝜂𝑗,𝑡 is the error 
term.10 We report the results in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4, where we 
estimate the equation using both industry- and year- ﬁxed eﬀects, and 
then ﬁrm-ﬁxed eﬀects. As hypothesized, planned investment is corre-
lated with expected productivity.

Next, to show that these deviations are also meaningful responses to 

new information on productivity, we estimate the following equation
)
(

)

(

= 𝛼𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽

1 log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽
2

𝑗,𝑡

+ 𝜂𝑗,𝑡,

𝑗,𝑡

(6)

𝑖𝑝
𝑘

𝑖
𝑘

𝑖𝑝
𝑘

(5)

9 We also report additional statistics in Table A.3 regarding the distribution 
of investment deviations.
[
10 Speciﬁcally, 𝔼 
log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡

≡ log (𝑝𝑦𝑒)

]

.

𝜂
𝜂−1
𝑘𝛼 𝑙1−𝛼

)

(1)
(

𝑖𝑝
𝑘

𝑗,𝑡

2.399***
(0.234)

(2)

2.301***
(0.279)

(3)
(

𝑖
𝑘

)

𝑗,𝑡

4.245***
(0.452)

log ̃𝑧𝑗,𝑡
)
(

𝑖𝑝
𝑘

𝑗,𝑡

Industry FE
Firm FE
Year FE
Observations
𝑅2

Y

Y
18,624
0.055

Subsumed
Y
Y
18,624
0.687

Y
Y
17,926
0.545

(4)

2.085***
(0.319)

0.633***

(0.018)

Y
Y
14,959
0.752

where 𝑖 denotes actual investment. In Column 3 of Table 4, we report 
a speciﬁcation where we drop investment plans as a regressor, while in 
Column 4, we report the full speciﬁcation.

Two results stand out. First, Column 4 shows realized investment 
is positively correlated with both realized productivity and investment 
plans. Under the null hypothesis of no ﬂexibility, realized productivity 
would have no correlation with investment once we control for planned 
investment. Importantly, since investment plans are made prior to the 
observation of  ̃𝑧, this result shows that actual investment is responsive 
to new information. Second, comparing our estimate for 𝛽
1 in Column 4 
with that in Column 3, we see that the estimate is about twice as large 
when investment plans are not in the estimating equation. Moreover, 
this diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant. In other words, the inclusion 
of investment plans attenuates the importance of productivity for actual 
investment. This implies that investment plans are made incorporating 
some information about productivity, and are relevant for investment.11
To summarize, we have uncovered evidence that (i) ﬁrms face sub-
stantial uncertainty when making investment plans, but some uncer-
tainty  is  partially  resolved  through  their  initial  forecasting,  (ii)  ﬁrm 
uncertainty is heterogeneous, but this heterogeneity is more strongly 
associated with the transitory component of productivity, and (iii) in-
vestment plans are partially ﬂexible such that ﬁrms can respond some-
what to new information, but not completely. While much of the extant 
research, such as the literature on rational inattention, has focused on 
studying the ability of ﬁrms to partially resolve uncertainty, there is 
little prior research to help explain the source of heterogeneity in in-
formation acquisition that we document. Likewise, there is sparse prior 
research quantifying the extent of investment ﬂexibility and its impli-
cations for ﬁrm values and aggregate eﬃciency. As such, we next turn 
to describing our model which we build to quantify these mechanisms.

11 In Appendix F, we also present robustness checks of the above analysis using 
alternative methods for calculating total factor productivity, as well as binscat-
ter plots for visual exposition.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037797B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

Sub-period I / II (Noisy 𝑧)

Sub-period III (Actual 𝑧)

∙ Make investment plans 𝑘𝑝

∙ Begin period up with 𝑧
∙ Signal 𝑠 = 𝜖 + 𝑢, 𝑢 ∼ 𝑁(0, 𝜎2)
∙ Costly learning: MC 𝜉𝜇𝜁𝜇 𝑧𝜁𝑧
of ↑ precision

−1

−1

∙ Choose actual investment 𝑘′
subjected to adjustment cost

(

𝜒

2

𝑘′
𝑘𝑝 − 1

)
2

𝑘𝑝

Fig. 3. Model timing. This ﬁgure illustrates the three sub-periods of our model.

3.  Model

Our model is a standard neoclassical investment model that incor-
porates capital budgeting parsimoniously by incorporating three com-
ponents: (i) information acquisition, where ﬁrms can invest in better 
information to improve the accuracy of their investment plans; (ii) in-
vestment plan formation, where ﬁrms lay out their investment plans for 
the year; and (iii) capital expensing, where ﬁrms decide how much cap-
ital to actually purchase, subject to costly deviation from initial plans. 
After presenting the model, we characterize the value of information at 
the ﬁrm and aggregate level in such an economic environment to guide 
our counterfactual analyses later.

3.1.  Economic environment

We  use  a  standard  setup  for  agents,  households,  and  ﬁnal  goods 
producers.  We  consider  a  discrete  time  inﬁnite  horizon  model  with 
inﬁnitely lived agents. The economy is populated by a representative 
household and a representative ﬁnal goods producing ﬁrm, and hetero-
geneous intermediate goods producing ﬁrms. Each model period is 1 
year, corresponding to our sample frequency. Although the household 
and ﬁnal goods ﬁrms play a limited role in our analysis, we present 
their setup as they are necessary for studying the impact of information 
allocation on aggregate productivity. The representative household dis-
counts time at rate 𝛽, inelastically supplies a ﬁxed quantity of labor 
𝑁 = 1, and has preferences over consumption of a ﬁnal aggregate con-
sumption good. The representative ﬁnal goods ﬁrm produces the ﬁnal 

(

) 𝜂
𝜂−1

𝜂−1
𝜂
𝑖,𝑡 𝑑𝑖

aggregate good given by 𝑌𝑡 =

∫ 1
0
intermediate good and 𝜂 is the elasticity of substitution across goods. 
The usual cost minimization problem for the ﬁnal goods ﬁrm yields the 

, where 𝑖 is a speciﬁc 

𝑦

− 1
𝜂
𝑖,𝑡 𝑃𝑡𝑌
𝑡

1
𝜂

, where 

standard demand schedule for each good 𝑖 as 𝑝𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑦

(

) 1
1−𝜂

∫ 1
0

𝑝1−𝜂
𝑖,𝑡 𝑑𝑖
𝑃𝑡 ≡
dex, giving us 𝑃𝑡𝑌𝑡 = ∫ 1
0
the ﬁnal consumption good as the numeraire and normalize 𝑃 to 1.

is the constant elasticity of substitution price in-
𝑝𝑖,𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑡𝑑𝑖. For the rest of the paper, we will set 

𝑖,𝑡𝑙1−𝛼
𝑖,𝑡

,  where  𝜇𝑖

Each intermediate goods ﬁrm 𝑖 produces a diﬀerentiated good based 
on  the  production  function  𝑦𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜇𝑖𝑧𝑖,𝑡𝑘𝛼
is  a  ﬁrm-
speciﬁc long-run productivity, 𝑧𝑖,𝑡 is idiosyncratic stochastic productiv-
ity, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡 is the beginning-of-period capital stock, 𝑙𝑖,𝑡 is labor hired by 
the ﬁrm, and 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1) is the capital share of the ﬁrm. For the perma-
nent component of productivity 𝜇𝑖, we assume that 𝜇𝑖 is drawn from a 
log-normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 𝜎2
𝜇. For the persistent 
component of productivity 𝑧𝑖,𝑡, we assume it follows the AR(1) process 
log 𝑧𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜌 log 𝑧𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡, where 𝜖𝑖,𝑡 ∼ 𝑁
. In addition, capital de-
preciates at a geometric rate 𝛿. Finally, each unit of labor costs a wage 
𝑤, and we assume that 𝑙𝑖,𝑡 is chosen after 𝑧𝑖,𝑡 has been observed. As such, 
ﬁrms choose labor to maximize static proﬁts which are determined by 

(
0, 𝜎2
𝜖

)

the residual demand function above. Under these assumptions, without 
loss of generality, we can directly rewrite the ﬁrm’s gross proﬁt function 
net of labor cost as

(7)

𝜋 = 

)

(

𝑤𝑡, 𝑌𝑡

where Θ𝑧 ≡

𝑖,𝑡 𝑘Θ𝑘
𝑖,𝑡 ,

𝑖 𝑧Θ𝑧
𝜇Θ𝑧
𝜂−1
𝜂

1−(1−𝛼)

𝜂−1
𝜂

, Θ𝑘 ≡

𝛼 𝜂−1
𝜂
1−(1−𝛼)

𝜂−1
𝜂

, and  (𝑤, 𝑌 ) > 0 is a function 

of the endogenous aggregate wage and output.

Besides  labor,  managers  also  decide  on  capital  inputs,  which  are 
quasi-ﬁxed and determined in the previous period. The role of the man-
ager is to make a sequence of investment decisions to maximize the 
ﬁrm’s net present value, which the manager discounts at constant rate 
1
1+𝑟 .12 Below, we conceptualize the capital budgeting and investment 
decision of the manager and discuss how capital budgeting aﬀects the 
value of the ﬁrm.

3.2.  Capital budgeting and investment

Fig. 3 illustrates how the investment problem is broken down into 
3 sub-periods to reﬂect capital budgeting (sub-period I and II) and ex-
pensing (sub-period III). First, a manager begins a ﬁscal year with full 
information on last period productivity 𝑧𝑖,𝑡−1 but no information about 
the realization of TFP innovation 𝜖𝑖,𝑡 (and thus, no information about 
𝑧𝑖,𝑡). Second, the manager must make a capital budget for the year; but 
before laying out the budget, she has the option to purchase better in-
formation about the year’s prospects 𝜖𝑖,𝑡 (e.g., by doing costly market 
research). Finally, after setting a budget, the manager observes the cur-
rent year’s productivity and decides how much labor to hire and how 
much actual capital to spend on investment. Importantly, any deviation 
of investment from the capital budget is costly, providing an incentive 
to make better investment plans at the beginning of the ﬁscal year. We 
now discuss each sub-period in more detail below.

Sub-period I: information acquisition The manager begins with full in-
formation  on  last  period’s  productivity  𝑧𝑖,𝑡−1,  but  does  not  observe 
𝜖𝑖,𝑡.  However,  she  is  able  to  improve  on  her  information  by  acquir-
ing  a  signal  with  precision  1∕𝜎2
𝑖,𝑡.  For  some  choice  of  𝜎𝑖,𝑡,  the  man-
ager  will  receive  a  signal  𝑠𝑖,𝑡 about  current  productivity,  given  by 
(
)
𝑠𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑢𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡, where 𝑢𝑖,𝑡 ∼ 𝑁
0, 𝜎2
. The manager learns by Bayesian 
𝑖,𝑡
updating: after observing the signal, the manager’s belief over the pos-
terior  distribution  of  𝑧𝑖,𝑡 is  given  by  log 𝑧𝑖,𝑡 ∼ 𝑁
,  where 
𝜎2
𝑠𝑖,𝑡.  ̂𝑧𝑖,𝑡 is the expected current period pro-
log ̂𝑧𝑖,𝑡 ≡ 𝜌 log 𝑧𝑖,𝑡−1 +
𝜖
𝑖,𝑡+𝜎2
𝜎2
𝜖
ductivity and 𝕍𝑖,𝑡 is the posterior variance of productivity (equivalently, 

log ̂𝑧𝑖,𝑡, 𝕍𝑖,𝑡

(

)

12 Because managers do not have any agency costs in our model, we inter-
changeably use the term “manager” or “ﬁrm” when discussing corporate policy.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037798B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

is the signal precision). The ratio 

𝕍 −1
captures the amount of learn-
𝑖,𝑡
ing, reﬂecting the amount of chosen uncertainty relative to the prior. 
Given our information structure, we can deﬁne a TFP shock as follows:

𝕍𝑖,𝑡
𝜎2
𝜖

Deﬁnition 1. (TFP shock) A TFP shock (forecast error) is deﬁned as 
𝜖𝐹 𝐸 ≡ log 𝑧𝑖,𝑡 − log ̂𝑧𝑖,𝑡, that is, the log-diﬀerence between realized and 
forecasted TFP.

However, information acquisition is costly, and the cost function has 

the following parametric form:
)

(



𝜎𝑖,𝑡, 𝑧𝑖,𝑡−1

, 𝜇𝑖

= 𝜉𝜇

𝜁𝜇
𝑖 𝑧𝜁𝑧

𝑖,𝑡−1

𝑖,𝑡 ,
𝜎−2

(8)

where 𝜁𝑧 and 𝜁𝜇 control the degree to which information acquisition 
costs depend on initial productivity 𝑧𝑖,𝑡−1 and long-run productivity 𝜇𝑖
respectively. This reduced-form speciﬁcation implies that the private 
marginal cost of improving signal precision is 𝜉𝜇
𝑖,𝑡−1, and allows us 
to  nest  a  variety  of  potential  learning  costs.  For  instance,  one  could 
interpret them as only arising from dynamic- and ﬁrm- speciﬁc distor-
tions in the spirit of David and Venkateswaran (2019); in this case, the 
fundamental marginal cost is constant (𝜉). Alternatively, they could re-
ﬂect that the learning technology is fundamentally associated with both 
components of productivity.13

𝜁𝜇
𝑖 𝑧𝜁𝑧

Sub-period II: investment plan formation After observing the signal and 
forming  an  updated  belief  over  the  distribution  of  𝜖𝑖,𝑡,  the  manager 
makes an investment plan 𝑘𝑝
𝑖,𝑡+1. We assume as a model primitive that 
these investment plans have to be made prior to making an actual in-
vestment in order to achieve next-period capital stock 𝑘𝑖,𝑡+1. In turn, 
managers have an incentive to make accurate plans because it is costly 
to deviate from the plan. Speciﬁcally, given some plans and actual in-
vestment, the manager faces the following cost function 𝜙(𝑘𝑝
, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡+1)
for any deviation from the plan:

𝑖,𝑡+1

(
𝑘𝑝
𝑖,𝑡+1

𝜙

)

, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡+1

=

𝜒

2

(

𝑘𝑖,𝑡+1
𝑘𝑝
𝑖,𝑡+1

)
2

− 1

𝑘𝑝
𝑖,𝑡+1

,

(9)

where 𝜒 ≥ 0 captures the ﬂexibility of the manager to deviate from the 
initial planned investment.

Although the parametrization of the cost function is analogous to a 
traditional convex physical adjustment cost function, it is a penalty for 
investment plan deviations rather than deviations from the ﬁrm’s current 
capital stock.14 We show later that our qualitative insights regarding in-
formation acquisition do not hinge on this functional form assumption, 
but this assumption permits us to more closely match the data in our 
quantitative exercise.

13 We present a simple microfoundation in Appendix E to aid interpretation of 
. Importantly, as we will show, our model structure allows us to identify these 
two parameters, which will allow us to conduct our key counterfactual analysis 
later in the paper. There is no clear evidence in extant research as to whether 
the marginal cost of learning should be increasing, constant, or decreasing in 
ﬁrm productivity, and uncovering these parameters is a goal of our paper. In 
general, increasing marginal costs can happen if larger (and thus higher produc-
tivity) ﬁrms also have more complicated management structures, which leads 
to greater coordination failure across production units and chains of command 
(Harris et al. (1982); Malenko (2019)). Constant marginal costs arise in stan-
dard rational inattention models which formulates a capacity constraint or ﬁxed 
costs of learning that are independent of productivity (e.g., Sims (2003); Reis 
(2006)). Finally, decreasing marginal costs can occur if high-productivity man-
agers naturally are better at information processing due to the implementation 
of better management systems (e.g., Bloom et al. (2007)), or if information ac-
quisition has a degree of increasing returns to scale (e.g., Begenau et al. (2018)).
14 This assumption also means that there are no physical adjustment costs 
inducing inertia in ﬁrm investment decisions.

Sub-period III: investment After making an investment plan, the man-
ager perfectly observes current period productivity 𝑧𝑖,𝑡. Knowing that 
𝑧𝑖,𝑡 follows an AR(1) process, the manager uses her updated information 
to decide how much capital to invest for use in the next period, subject 
to the aforementioned adjustment cost 𝜙(𝑘𝑝
, 𝑘𝑖,𝑡+1) in Equation (9). 
Given our functional form assumption, it is convenient to deﬁne an in-
vestment plan deviation as follows:

𝑖,𝑡+1

Deﬁnition 2. (Investment Plan Deviation) An investment plan devia-
tion is deﬁned as 𝑥𝑖,𝑡 ≡ log 𝑘𝑖,𝑡+1 − log 𝑘𝑝
𝑖,𝑡+1, that is, the log-diﬀerence 
between realized and planned next-period capital.

and the cost of deviating from 𝑘𝑝

Before moving on to the next subsection, we clarify the interpreta-
tion of 𝑘𝑝
. While we have termed 
𝑘𝑝
as an “investment plan”, in practice, it captures a multitude of real-
world decisions associated with capital budgeting and investment. For 
instance, it might reﬂect pre-committed capital purchases, as in our ex-
ample  in  the  introduction;  in  turn,  the  cost  of  deviation  reﬂects  the 
penalty to cancel or restructure these purchases. Alternatively, it can 
also be micro-founded by operational ineﬃciencies such as those mod-
eled by Harris and Raviv (1996) and Malenko (2019); in turn, the cost 
of deviation reﬂects the renegotiation costs involved between a project 
manager and upper management.

In  the  broader  context  of  the  macroeconomics  literature,  our  as-
sumption on investment timing relates to the idea of time-to-build and 
time-to-plan (e.g., Kydland and Prescott (1982); Christiano and Todd 
(1996)). Our investment problem implies a total time-to-build of two 
years,  which  maps  directly  to  our  empirical  analysis,  and  is  consis-
tent with empirical research (e.g., Mayer (1960); Montgomery (1995); 
Kalouptsidi (2014)). In turn, 𝜒 captures the ability of the ﬁrm to struc-
ture investment decisions in a state-contingent fashion in the ﬁrst year, 
and thus quantiﬁes the degree to which time-to-build or time-to-plan is 
in fact constraining to the ﬁrm. This is unique to our model, contrast-
ing with standard assumptions where completely inﬂexible investment 
plans (i.e., 𝜒 → ∞) are model primitives, and a key focus of our later 
quantitative analysis.

3.3.  Bellman equations

We  can  now  deﬁne  the  problem  recursively.  For  a  ﬁrm  with  a 
generic 𝜇, let 𝐽 𝜇(𝑧, 𝑘, 𝑘𝑝) denote the value function of the manager af-
ter all shocks have been realized (i.e., at sub-period III), 𝑊 𝜇(𝑧
, 𝑠, 𝑘, 𝜎)
the value function of the manager after a signal has been observed (i.e., 
sub-period II), and ﬁnally 𝑉 𝜇(𝑧
, 𝑘) the value function of the manager 
at the beginning of the period (i.e., sub-period I). To simplify notation, 
we denote variables in the future with a ′ (e.g., 𝑘′), drop both 𝑖 and 𝑡
subscripts, and denote past productivity with 𝑧

−1

−1

−1.

The manager’s Bellman equation at sub-period III is given by

(

𝜒

)

2

𝑘′
𝑘𝑝 − 1

𝑘𝑝 +

1
1 + 𝑟

(

)

𝑉 𝜇

𝑘′, 𝑧

(10)

𝐽 𝜇 (𝑧, 𝑘, 𝑘𝑝) = max
𝑘′

𝜋 + (1 − 𝛿) 𝑘 − 𝑘′ −

2
where next-period capital 𝑘′ is chosen to maximize expected proﬁts, 
taking into account that deviations from investment plans are costly. 
While costs show up in the dynamic program of the manager, we as-
sume as a baseline that they are “utility” costs. Therefore, they do not 
consume any resources, and do not directly aﬀect ﬁrm value.15

Thus, the Bellman equation in sub-period II, after the signal has been 

observed, is given by

(

𝑧

𝑊 𝜇

)

, 𝑠, 𝑘, 𝜎

−1

= max
𝑘𝑝

[
𝐽 𝜇 (𝑧, 𝑘, 𝑘𝑝) |𝑧

𝔼

]

, 𝑠, 𝜎

−1

(11)

15 In our quantitative model, we also explored the alternative assumption that 
these are real costs that compete for labor. We ﬁnd that their impact is relatively 
small. Appendix H summarizes the alternative equilibrium deﬁnition under the 
assumption that these are real costs, and also presents our quantitative results.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037799B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

(

𝑠.𝑡.

log 𝑧 ∼ 𝑁

𝜌 log 𝑧

−1 +

)

𝑠, 𝕍

,

𝜎2
𝜖
𝜎2 + 𝜎2
𝜖

where the manager chooses investment plan 𝑘𝑝
, taking into account the 
potential future need to deviate from the plan. The manager makes a 
capital budget 𝑘𝑝
accounting for the full distribution of possible invest-
ment choices, since she does not know what current productivity is at 
this point.

Finally,  in  anticipation  of  the  ﬁnal  two  sub-periods,  the  Bellman 

equation in sub-period I is given by

(

𝑉 𝜇

)

𝑘, 𝑧

−1

= max
𝜎

−𝜉𝜇𝜁𝜇 𝑧𝜁𝑧

−1

𝜎−2 + 𝔼

[
𝑊 𝜇

(
𝑧

, 𝑠, 𝑘, 𝜎

−1

)

]

|𝑧

−1

(12)

𝑠.𝑡.

𝑠 = 𝑢 + 𝜖
(

𝑢 ∼ 𝑁

0, 𝜎2

)

,

where the manager chooses the signal quality 𝜎 of today’s productivity, 
whereby a more precise signal is costlier to acquire but adds value to 
the ﬁrm by reducing the size of ex post investment plans deviations. 
The manager knows the productivity from the previous period 𝑧

−1.

𝑀𝐵 ≡ 1

1 + 𝑟

2. the value of increasing signal precision (i.e., decreasing 𝕍 ) is increasing 
−1 and long-run productivity 𝜇. That is, 

in initial ﬁrm productivity 𝑧
information and productivity are complements at the ﬁrm-level.

Proposition 1 summarizes two aspects of information. First, it points 
out  that  information  is  desirable,  and  all  ﬁrms  prefer  to  face  lower 
uncertainty since it increases ﬁrm value. This eﬀect can be seen in Equa-
tion (13), which expresses the overall marginal beneﬁt of information 

(
𝜇𝑧𝜌2
as a constant multiplied by two terms, 
, that 
−1
correspond to a productivity eﬀect and information eﬀect, respectively. 
> 0, therefore capturing the desirability of in-
We show that 
formation for all ﬁrms.16

1−Θ𝑘 and 

(
𝕍 −1

) Θ𝑧

𝜕𝕍 −1

𝜕𝕍 −1

𝜕 𝜋

𝜕 𝜋

𝕍 −1

(

)

)

[

𝜕𝔼

𝑉

(

)]

′

𝜕𝕍 −1

=

̄ℎ

1
1 + 𝑟

) Θ𝑧
1−Θ𝑘

(
𝜇𝑧𝜌2
−1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

)

(
𝕍 −1

𝜕 𝜋

𝜕𝕍 −1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

pure productivity eﬀect

pure information eﬀect

(13)

3.4.  Equilibrium deﬁnition

−1

a 

set 

of 
, 𝑘, 𝑠; 𝑤, 𝑌 ), 𝑘′(𝜇, 𝑧

A  stationary  competitive  equilibrium  is  deﬁned  by  a  measure  of 
, 𝑘; 𝑤, 𝑌 ),
policy 
ﬁrms  Λ; 
𝑘𝑝(𝜇, 𝑧
, 𝑘, 𝑠, 𝑧; 𝑤, 𝑌 )};  a  set  of  value  functions 
{𝑉 𝜇, 𝑊 𝜇, 𝐽 𝜇};  intermediate  good  prices 
𝑖∈Λ;  wage  𝑤;  and  a 
Markov  transition  function  Γ induced  by  the  policy  function  𝑘′ and 
exogenous productivity 𝑧′ such that (1) the distribution of ﬁrms is in-
variant (Λ = Γ (Λ)), (2) the labor market clears, and (3) the intermediate 
goods market clears.

functions 
}
{

{𝜎(𝜇, 𝑧

𝑝𝑖,𝑡

−1

−1

3.5.  Characterizing the value and costs of information

In our model, information frictions depress ﬁrm value and lead to 
capital misallocation because investment is subject to a time-to-build 
friction. As such, the impact of information frictions must be decreasing 
in investment ﬂexibility. In the latter sections, our quantitative model 
will allow us to quantify the value of investment ﬂexibility accounting 
for such information frictions.

However, it is unclear how the information frictions aﬀect the value 
of information on net, holding ﬁxed investment ﬂexibility. Speciﬁcally, 
we are interested in using our model to rationalize our empirical ob-
servation that there is a negative correlation between productivity and 
uncertainty in the data, as well as to why the correlation of productiv-
ity and uncertainty is stronger within ﬁrm. As such, for the rest of this 
subsection, we will focus on presenting a characterization of the value 
of information for ﬁrms and the aggregate economy with the simplify-
ing assumption that 𝜒 = ∞. We then build on these insights to examine 
their quantitative implications in Section 5. Appendix C.3 shows that 
these same insights apply to our more general model with investment 
ﬂexibility.

3.5.1.  What drives heterogeneity in information acquisition?

To begin, we ﬁrst state the following formal proposition, which will 
be useful for the discussion. Importantly, we show that under standard 
assumptions on the proﬁt function, heterogeneity in uncertainty already 
arises independently of the technology for information acquisition. Ap-
pendix C contains all relevant formal proofs for the propositions below. 
Appendix C.3 shows that the following results also apply to our more 
general model.

Proposition 1. (Marginal Beneﬁt of Learning) Suppose 𝜒 = ∞. Then,

1. the ex ante (sub-period I) expected value of the ﬁrm is strictly decreasing 

in the posterior uncertainty 𝕍 , and

) Θ𝑧
1−Θ𝑘

Second,  we  can  see  from  the  expression  above  that  the  term 

is  increasing  in  both  𝑧

(
𝜇𝑧𝜌2
−1 and  𝜇;  in  other  words,  the 
−1
marginal  beneﬁt  from  lowering  uncertainty  (i.e.,  incentive  for  infor-
mation  acquisition)  increases  in  both  the  permanent  and  persistent 
component  of  productivity.  Fig. 4 illustrates  the  marginal  beneﬁt  of 
information acquisition for a high- and low- productivity ﬁrm.

Fundamentally, this formula measures the marginal product of infor-
mation, and is analogous to the marginal product of factor inputs. For 
instance, just as Θ𝑘 captures the overall decreasing returns to capital 
in our model (Equation (7)), the term 
captures the degree of 
decreasing returns to information. Likewise, just as the marginal prod-
uct of capital increases in productivity, so does the marginal product of 
information.

𝜕𝕍 −1

𝜕 𝜋

𝕍 −1

(

)

Our  main  result  here  is  that  while  information  is  not  an  explicit 
input into production, we can re-express all physical factor inputs as 
functions of information choices because the investment decision is tied 
back to the information set of the ﬁrm during the capital budgeting 
process. Thus, one can interpret information as an intangible asset and 
price the value of a ﬁrm in terms of its sequence of information choices.
Moreover,  this  reveals  that  even  if  ﬁrms  had  access  to  the  same 
technology for information acquisition, we would already see an en-
dogenous distribution of uncertainty because ﬁrms invest diﬀerentially 
into information acquisition based on their productivity. Therefore, this 
allows us to interpret heterogeneity in uncertainty as a form of factor 
allocation, which we term “information allocation”.

It is important to point out that the impact of 𝜇 and 𝑧

−1 on the value 
of information derives from fundamentally diﬀerent mechanisms. In the 
case of 𝜇, this has the standard interpretation that permanently higher 
productivity ﬁrms have higher incentives to invest in more assets, and 
are thus larger ﬁrms in the longer run.

In contrast, the correlation of the marginal beneﬁt with 𝑧

−1 cap-
tures how ﬁrm incentives ﬂuctuate with idiosyncratic shocks to ﬁrm 
productivity. In turn, this reﬂects the incentives of a ﬁrm to dynami-
cally reallocate resources dedicated to information acquisition, invest-
ing more in good times and less in bad times. Noticeably, unlike 𝜇, the 

16 For 
(

exp
(

− 1
2
)

2

the 
(
𝜌Θ𝑧
1−Θ𝑘

interested 
)
)
(
2
𝕍 −1

reader,  note 
)
−1

,  and 

in 

Θ𝑘
(

)

(

)

that   𝜋
𝜕 𝜋

𝕍 −1
)
(

𝕍 −1

turn 

𝜕𝕍 −1

evaluates 

evaluates 

to 

to 

𝜌Θ𝑧
1−Θ𝑘

𝕍 −1

Θ𝑘𝕍 2 𝜋

.  Appendix C.1  provides  the  relevant  derivations 
1
2
(see, in particular, Equations C.2 and C.3). Importantly, this is diﬀerent from 
the Abel-Hartmann-Ooi eﬀect, which emphasizes a volatility eﬀect. This eﬀect 
is captured in the ̄ℎ constant, which is a function of 𝜎2
𝜖 . The exact derivation of 
̄ℎ is detailed in Appendix C.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377910B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

Fig. 4. Marginal beneﬁt and marginal cost of improving signal precision. The ﬁgures plot illustrative graphs of how the marginal beneﬁt and cost of learning vary 
with ﬁrm productivity. Graphs are plotted against 𝕍 −1 (i.e., increasing signal precision). Panel a plots two representative solutions when marginal costs are constant 
(i.e., 𝜁𝜇 = 𝜁𝑧 = 0). Panel b plots two representative solutions when the net beneﬁt is constant in productivity (i.e., 𝜁𝑧 = ̄𝜁𝑧 and 𝜁𝜇 = ̄𝜁𝜇 ). Vertical dash lines indicate 
where the marginal cost meets marginal beneﬁt for each value of productivity.

−1 is a function of 𝜌, the persistence of productivity. 
dependence on 𝑧
This reﬂects the fact that 𝑧
−1 aﬀects information acquisition decisions 
only to the extent that it aﬀects the ex-dividend net present value of the 
ﬁrm. This mechanism is analogous to a standard neoclassical model of 
investment under uncertainty, where the marginal propensity to invest 
is a decreasing function of 𝜌.

Given the above discussion, Equation (13) implies that if ﬁrms had 
homogeneous technologies for information acquisition, it must be that 
productivity  is  more  strongly  associated  with  the  permanent,  rather 
than transitory, component of productivity. While this theoretical result 
runs against our empirical ﬁndings at ﬁrst blush, our theoretical analy-
sis so far has only focused on the beneﬁt side of the equation, but actual 
investment decisions trade oﬀ both marginal beneﬁts and costs. In our 
model, the indiﬀerence condition that determines the ﬁrm’s choice of 
𝕍 is given by

≡ 𝜉𝜇𝜁𝜇 𝑧𝜁𝑧 =

) Θ𝑧
1−Θ𝑘

(
𝜇𝑧𝜌2
−1

̄ℎ

1
1 + 𝑟

)

(
𝕍 −1

𝜕 𝜋

𝜕𝕍 −1

≡ 1

1 + 𝑟

[

𝑉

)]

(

′

𝜕𝔼

𝜕𝕍 −1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟
𝑀𝐵

,

𝜕
𝜕𝕍 −1
⏟⏟⏟
𝑀𝐶

Proposition 2. For any given marginal distributions of initial period pro-
ductivity 𝑧
−1, long-run productivity 𝜇, and information choice 𝕍 , aggregate 
TFP is decreasing in the correlation between productivity and 𝕍 .

The result is analogous to a model where the distribution of phys-
ical factor inputs is arbitrarily imposed, and the total stock of factors 
is  ﬁxed  such  that  TFP  gains  arise  solely  from  factor  reallocation.  In 
the context of physical factors, because productivity and factors of pro-
duction are explicitly modeled as complements, it is obvious that TFP 
would increase if relatively more factors are reallocated towards higher 
productivity ﬁrms.

One of our contributions is to show that a similar result holds for 
productivity and information—an implicit factor of production—where 
such  complementarity  is  neither  explicit  nor  obvious  at  face  value. 
Importantly,  based  on  our  empirical  ﬁndings,  this  implies  that  con-
ventional models of investment under uncertainty must overstate the 
degree of misallocation due to uncertainty since the standard assump-
tion is that productivity and uncertainty are uncorrelated. Quantifying 
the importance of this channel will be a key part of our quantitative 
exercise.

(14)

4.  Model calibration

where  it  becomes  clear  that  to  rationalize  our  empirical  ﬁndings,  it 
must be that the marginal cost of information acquisition is rising more 
sharply in 𝜇 than 𝑧

−1 (i.e., 𝜁𝜇 > 𝜁𝑧).

Finally, our derivations also reveal a fundamental assumption that 
extant models of investment under uncertainty make. Because standard 
models  impose  homogeneous  uncertainty,  it  must  be  that  𝜁𝜇 = Θ𝑧
1−Θ𝑘
and 𝜁𝑧 = 𝜌2 Θ𝑧
; that is, marginal cost and beneﬁt exactly balance out. 
1−Θ𝑘
Viewed through the lens of our model, this implies a unique assump-
tion on the allocation of information across ﬁrms. We now turn to the 
aggregate implications of such an assumption.

3.5.2.  Information allocation and aggregate productivity

We  begin  by  ﬁrst  presenting  an  aggregation  result  relating  arbi-
trary allocations of information to aggregate total factor productivity 
(TFP), using the simpliﬁed version of our model with 𝜒 = ∞. We de-

) 𝜂

𝜂−1

(

∫ 𝑦

𝜂−1
𝜂 𝑑Λ
)𝛼 (

ﬁne TFP ≡
∫ 𝑘𝑑Λ
Proposition 2 states the result.

)
∫ 𝑙𝑑Λ

(

1−𝛼 , where Λ is the distribution of ﬁrms, and 

In this section, we discuss our model calibration and results. Our 
model parameter values are determined using the data discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1. We then use our calibrated model to conduct counterfactual 
analyses in the next section.

4.1.  Calibration strategy

We follow standard approaches in the macroeconomics literature in 
calibrating our model. First, we ﬁx a subset of parameters based on 
values from existing literature: 𝑟 = 0.02, consistent with an annual real 
interest rate of 2%; 𝛿 = 0.06 consistent with an annual depreciation rate 
of 6%; and set 𝑁 = 1 and 𝑃 = 1 as a normalization. Next, we set another 
subset of parameters (𝛼, 𝜂, 𝜎𝜖, 𝜌, 𝜎𝜇) based on direct estimation from the 
)
data. Finally, we set the remaining four key parameters 
in general equilibrium by matching key moments that identify these 
parameters.

(
𝜉, 𝜒, 𝜁𝑧, 𝜁𝜇

4.1.1.  Externally estimated parameters

In order to obtain 𝛼 and 𝜂, we need values of both the labor and 
capital revenue elasticities (which evaluate to (1 − 𝛼)
re-
spectively in our model). The parameter values are derived from an 

𝜂 and 𝛼 𝜂−1
𝜂−1

𝜂

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377911B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

Table 5
Calibrated  parameters.  The  table reports  our  parame-
ter values taken directly from our data (externally es-
timated), ﬁxed parameters, or internally calibrated. Ex-
ternally  estimated  parameters  follow  the  methodology 
outlined in Appendix D.1.

Parameter Description

Values

Externally Estimated Parameters
𝜂
𝛼
𝜌
𝜎𝜖
𝜎𝜇

Elasticity of substitution
Capital share
Autocorrel. of physical TFP
Volatility of physical TFP
Dispersion of ﬁxed eﬀects

Fixed Parameters
𝑟
𝛿
𝑁
𝑃

Interest rate
Depreciation rate
Labor supply
Price of output good

4.682
0.360
0.426
0.246
0.546

0.02
0.06
1
1

Internally Estimated Parameters
𝜒
𝜉
𝜁𝑧
𝜁𝜇

Flexibility of investment
Average marginal cost
Correlation of marginal cost with 𝑧
Corrrelation of marginal cost with 𝜇

0.110
1.678 × 10−5
0.255
3.460

identiﬁcation strategy that draws on both static and dynamic moment 
conditions based on our model. For brevity, we summarize our method 
here and relegate the details of our estimation strategy to Appendix D.1.
First, using the static optimality condition for labor, the labor rev-

enue elasticity is equal to the labor cost share at the ﬁrm level:

𝑤𝑙
𝑝𝑦 = (1 − 𝛼)

𝜂 − 1
𝜂

.

(15)

𝜂−1
We follow Asker et al. (2014) and compute (1 − 𝛼)
𝜂 using the within-
industry median. Next, we estimate 𝛼 and 𝜂 using two moment condi-
tions relating realized investments, investment plans, expected TFP:

[

𝔼

log

𝑘′
𝑘𝑝 − 𝑎

0 − 𝑎

1

̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 − 𝑎

2

̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸

2

|̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸

[

𝔼

log 𝑘′ − 𝑏

0 − 𝑏

1

̂log 𝑧 − 𝑏

2 log 𝑘𝑝|̂log 𝑧, log 𝑘𝑝

]

]

= 0

= 0,

(16)

(17)

where  ̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 is the forecast error measured using Equation (2) and 
̂log 𝑧 is TFP measured using Equation (1) for a given arbitrary value of
𝜂 . This distinction between an arbitrarily measured TFP (̂log 𝑧) and 
𝛼 𝜂−1
the correctly identiﬁed TFP (log 𝑧) is crucial. Equation (16) is a ﬁrst 
order condition, characterizing the responsiveness of investment plan 
̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸 ) and uncertainty (proxied by 
deviations (
̂𝜖𝐹 𝐸
, per Equation D.3 in the Appendix). Equation (17) is related to the 
investment Euler equation (see Equation C.6 in the Appendix), mapping 
the ﬁrms’ ﬁnal investment decisions to realized productivity and initial 
investment plans.

𝑘′
𝑘𝑝 ) to new information (

2

1 =

In our model, we show that the identity 𝑎

1
only holds when we have correctly identiﬁed TFP - or, in other words, 
𝜂 . Therefore, to estimate 𝛼 𝜂−1
when we have correctly identiﬁed 𝛼 𝜂−1
𝜂 , 
𝜂−1
we combine the estimate for (1 − 𝛼)
(from (15)), and use an itera-
𝜂
tive approach to recover the best estimate for 𝛼 𝜂−1
𝜂 . We then back out 
𝛼 and 𝜂 once we have both revenue elasticities.

𝑏

Next, using these parameters, we impute ﬁrm productivity as a resid-
ual per Equation (1) (i.e., obtaining ̃𝑧). Then, to obtain 𝜌 and 𝜎𝜖 , we ﬁt ̃𝑧
to an AR(1) process in logs allowing for ﬁrm- and year- ﬁxed eﬀects us-
ing OLS. Finally, we compute the standard deviation of the ﬁrm-speciﬁc 
ﬁxed eﬀects from our regression to obtain 𝜎𝜇 . The estimated parameters 
are reported in Table 5.

(
1 − (1 − 𝛼)

)

𝜂−1
𝜂

Table 6
Targeted moments. The table reports the moments targeted in the calibration 
routine.

Moments

)

)

𝜎

(
𝜖𝐹 𝐸
𝑠𝑑
(
𝜎𝜖
𝑘′
𝑘𝑝
𝑧
−1
𝑧
−1

(

(

𝜌

𝜌

Ratio of TFP Forecast Error to TFP Shock

1.342

)
, | ̃𝜖|
)
, | ̃𝜖|

Volatility of Investment Plan Deviation

Corr. of Past TFP with TFP Forecast Error

without ﬁrm FE

Corr. of Past TFP with TFP

Forecast Error, no Firm FE

0.043

-0.021

-0.012

For robustness, and to help gauge the comparability of our estimates 
to other conventional methods of production function estimation, we 
also provide estimates for 𝛼 and 𝜈 using three complementary meth-
ods that have been applied more widely in the literature. Appendix F 
summarizes these alternative strategies and Table F.11 summarizes our 
results. The estimates and the inferences drawn from them are generally 
similar across all methods.

Finally, it is well known that estimating autoregressive coeﬃcients 
in dynamic panel models using OLS leads to a downward bias for 𝜌
when  𝜌 > 0 (Nickell  1981).  Because  the  value  of  information  is  de-
creasing  in  𝜌 in  our  model  (Equation  (13)),  our  estimates  will  be  a 
conservative  lower  bound  for  the  value  of  information.  Appendix  G 
shows alternative estimates for 𝜌 (and 𝜎) using two complementary dy-
namic panel approaches.

4.1.2.  Internally calibrated parameters

These parameters necessitate calibration via indirect inference of the 
structural model. We now brieﬂy summarize our identiﬁcation strategy. 
Fig. 5 also plots the relevant comparative static exercises, where the 
model is perturbed around the calibrated parameter values.

Focusing ﬁrst on 𝜒 , we identify this parameter by targeting the stan-
dard deviation of investment plan deviation. This is a natural target 
since holding all else constant, changes in  𝜒 directly change the in-
centives to deviate ex post. Fig. 5a plots this intuition, showing that the 
standard deviation in investment plan deviation is most strongly related 
to 𝜒 .

Next,  we  identify  𝜉 via  the  standard  deviation  of  forecast  errors, 
since this parameter is directly associated with the average cost of learn-
ing, which in turn aﬀects the aggregate dispersion of forecast errors. 
Fig. 5b illustrates this intuition, showing that changes in the standard 
deviation of forecast errors are strongly associated with 𝜉.

However, visual inspection of Fig. 5b also reveals that the standard 
deviation of investment plan deviation is associated equally strongly 
with 𝜉. This is logical since the value of investment plan deviations is 
highly tied to the cost of information acquisition: the more costly it is 
to acquire information, the greater the incentives to adjust investment 
plans, and thus the larger the investment plan deviations. That said, vi-
sual inspection of both Figs. 5a and 5b show that these two moments 
can jointly identify 𝜒 and 𝜉, because the incentives to acquire informa-
tion are less sensitive to the cost of investment plan deviation. Appendix 
D.2 presents a proof of this.

We now turn to identifying 𝜁𝜇 and 𝜁𝑧, which we vary to match the 
two estimates of 𝛽 in Table 3. Recall that the two estimates of 𝛽 capture 
jointly the within- and across- ﬁrm correlation of productivity and ﬁrm 
uncertainty. In the model, 𝜁𝜇 directly varies the incentives to acquire 
information as a function of  𝜇, while  𝜁𝑧 varies the incentives to ac-
quire information as a function of 𝑧
−1. Therefore, 𝜁𝜇 is associated with 
the across-ﬁrm component, while 𝜁𝑧 is associated with the within-ﬁrm 
component, of the correlation between productivity and uncertainty, 
making the two  𝛽′𝑠 a natural target. Figs. 5c and 5d reﬂect this in-
tuition, with Fig. 5c showing that variations in 𝜁𝑧 are most strongly 
associated with 𝛽 with ﬁrm-ﬁxed eﬀects, while Fig. 5d show that vari-
ations in 𝜁𝜇 are most strongly associated with variations in 𝛽 without 
ﬁrm-ﬁxed eﬀects.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377912B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

(

)

𝑠𝑑

𝜖𝐹 𝐸
𝜎𝜖

Fig. 5. Comparative statics. The ﬁgures plot a series of comparative statics exercises for each parameter. The y-axis reports the predicted moments relative to their 
corresponding target: “
” (red line with crosses) refers to the 
(
dispersion of investment plan deviations, “𝜌 
” (yellow line with circles) corresponds to the correlation of productivity with forecast errors having accounted 
(
for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, and “𝜌 
no FE” (purple line with triangles) corresponds to the correlation of productivity with forecast errors without accounting for 
ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects. The black vertical solid dashed line is a reference line indicating our estimated parameter. 𝜒 refers to the ﬂexibility of investment, 𝜉 refers to the 
average marginal cost, 𝜁𝑧 refers to the correlation of marginal cost with 𝑧

” (solid blue line) refers to the dispersion of forecast errors relative to TFP volatility, “𝜎

−1, and 𝜁𝜇 the correlation of marginal cost with 𝜇.

)
, | ̃𝜖|

)
, | ̃𝜖|

𝑘′
𝑘𝑝

)

(

−1

−1

𝑧

𝑧

The relevant statistics we target are reported in Table 6. Note that 
for investment plan deviations, we use Deﬁnition 2 by imputing next-
period capital stock using the perpetual inventory method with a ﬁxed 
geometric  rate  of  depreciation.17 Finally,  in  the  calibration  routine, 
we also simultaneously solve for the endogenous wages and aggregate 
output, such that these values are consistent with our market-clearing 
conditions at each evaluated set of parameter values. Appendix D.3 dis-
cusses more details of the calibration procedure.

We now address an important concern with matching our model mo-
ments to the empirical measures of TFP and investment. As explained 
in Section 2.2, TFP shocks and investment plan deviations are mismea-
sured due to the exact variable deﬁnitions in the survey. To address 
the issue of constructing TFP forecast errors from expected sales, we 
recreate the exact same mismeasurement in our calibration. Similarly, 
to address the truncation bias in investment expenditures, for any sim-
ulated ﬁrms that made (or planned on making) a negative investment, 
we replace 𝑖 and 𝑖𝑝

with zeros in our calibration.

17 Moreover, both statistics discussed here are computed after residualizing 
the forecast errors and deviations on ﬁrm- and year-ﬁxed eﬀects. In our model, 
this step is not necessary because ﬁrms do not make systematically biased fore-
cast errors; in the data, however, we do ﬁnd that ﬁrms exhibit some degree of 
systematic bias, similar to the ﬁnding in Barrero (2022).

4.2.  Calibration results

All  parameter  values  are  reported  in  Table 5.  We  ﬁnd  that  our 
model ﬁts the data nearly perfectly, and so omit reporting correspond-
ing model-implied statistics.

Appendix B Fig. B.2 plots the full distribution of ﬁrm residual uncer-
tainty (i.e.,  𝕍
) implied by our model, our model counterpart to Fig. 2. 
𝜎2
𝜖
Correspondingly, Table B.5 reports the broad statistics associated with 
it. In general, we see that an average ﬁrm has a residual uncertainty 
of around 47% of its prior uncertainty and an interquartile range of 
around 11.6%. Our overall ﬁndings suggest that there is substantial res-
olution of uncertainty, which is similar in magnitude to recent ﬁndings 
in the literature that rely on indirect inference techniques.18

Both  𝜁𝑧 and  𝜁𝜇 are  positive  in  our  baseline,  implying  that  the 
marginal cost of learning increases in ﬁrm productivity in both the per-
manent  and  persistent  components  of  productivity.  Moreover,  as  we 
report in Appendix F Table F.11, these values are robust to alternative 
estimates of the revenue function parameters. In other words, our ﬁnd-
ing implies that the typical high-productivity ﬁrm faces a disadvantage 
in information acquisition relative to low-productivity ﬁrms, regardless 
of the source of productivity diﬀerences. This result presents an interest-
ing contrast to recent research that hypothesize that high-productivity 
ﬁrms  have  an  absolute  advantage  in  forecasting  (i.e.,  lower  cost  for 

18 For instance, David et al. (2016) develop a model with similar timing re-
strictions to ours and ﬁnd  𝕍

≈ 0.41 in the United States.

𝜎2
𝜖

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377913B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

higher productivity ﬁrms) as a reason for why high-productivity ﬁrms 
make more precise forecasts of proﬁtability and related fundamentals 
(e.g., Tanaka et al. (2020); Bloom et al. (2021)).

While both 𝜁𝜇 and 𝜁𝑧 relate the cost of learning to productivity, the 
economic mechanisms they capture are diﬀerent. For 𝜁𝜇 , this implies 
that permanently higher productivity ﬁrms ﬁnd it increasingly harder 
to  learn  about  their  future  productivity,  suggesting  sharp  decreasing 
returns to learning. In contrast, 𝜁𝑧 > 0 implies that ﬁrms ﬁnd it harder 
to learn when the previous period’s productivity is high, meaning they 
ﬁnd it hard to smooth learning over time. In other words, 𝜁𝜇 reﬂects a 
“distortion” to the static allocation of information, while 𝜁𝑧 reﬂects a 
“distortion” to the dynamic allocation of information. In Appendix E.2, 
we provide some potential economic interpretation of 𝜁𝜇 and 𝜁𝑧 when 
these parameters are positive.

5.  Quantitative model implications

In this section, we use our calibrated model to separately evaluate 
the impact of uncertainty on ﬁrm values and aggregate productivity 
when investment decisions are partially ﬂexible, and when the distribu-
tion of resources towards information acquisition is allocated towards 
higher productivity ﬁrms, as in the data. For each exercise, we begin 
by formalizing the appropriate counterfactual for comparison, then an-
alyze the impact of these channels on private ﬁrm value and aggregate 
productivity in both partial and general equilibrium.

5.1.  The value of investment ﬂexibility

5.1.1.  Deﬁning counterfactuals

To quantify the value of investment ﬂexibility, we set 𝜒 = ∞ and 
impose two constraints: Across both baseline and counterfactual, (i) the 
total “quantity of information” in the economy is constant and (ii) the 
allocation of information is constant. By imposing these constraints, we 
ensure that we are purely isolating the impact of investment ﬂexibil-
ity rather than conﬂating its impact with changes in the total level of 
resources in aggregate on acquiring information or the distribution of 
those resources.

(

𝜇, 𝑧

To  implement  the  ﬁrst  constraint,  we  deﬁne  the  aggregate  quan-
)
tity of information as ∫ 𝕍 −1
𝑑Λ. For some generic information 
−1
acquisition policy function 𝕍 −1 and distribution of ﬁrms Λ, total infor-
mation is quantiﬁed as the average precision of information across all 
ﬁrms. Therefore, the aggregate resource constraint for information can 
be deﬁned as ∫ 𝕍 −1
𝑜 𝑑Λ𝑜, where the subscripts 𝑜 and 𝑛 re-
fer to the baseline (original) and counterfactual (new) models, and the 
constraint implies that we cannot create more information than already 
exists.

𝑛 𝑑Λ𝑛 ≤ ∫ 𝕍 −1

To implement the second constraint, we impose the condition that 
the correlation of productivity with a ﬁrm’s uncertainty is identical to 
the baseline model. As a result, because the only source of heterogeneity 
in uncertainty derives from heterogeneity in productivity, this implies 
that the allocation of information is identical in both economies. Im-
posing both constraints therefore amounts to ﬁnding a new set of 𝜉, 𝜁𝜇, 
and 𝜁𝑧 until we ﬁnd a set of policy functions 𝕍 −1
such that the above 
constraints hold with equality.19

𝑛

5.1.2.  Private value of ﬂexibility

We now analyze the importance of investment ﬂexibility for ﬁrm 
value. We deﬁne ﬁrm value from an ex ante perspective, where for a 
ﬁrm of type 𝜇 and prior productivity 𝑧

−1, ﬁrm value is computed as:
)

)

𝜇, 𝑧𝑡, 𝑘𝑡

− (𝑟 + 𝛿) 𝑘𝑡

.

(18)

(

Π

𝜇, 𝑧

−1

)

≡ 𝔼𝑧

−1

∞∑

(

𝑡=1

1
1 + 𝑟

)𝑡 (

(

𝜋

In other words, we compute the ex-dividend value of a ﬁrm using our 
Bellman equations (Equations (10) to (12)), subtracting the dollar cost 
of capital but not information acquisition or investment plan adjustment 
costs, since we do not consider them as direct costs of operations in our 
baseline. We net out the dividend ﬂow at period 0 (i.e., 𝜋
0) 
because it does not depend on the capital budgeting decision of the ﬁrm 
at time 0. Appendix B.3 shows the details of the numerical computation. 
We report the value of investment ﬂexibility as the change relative to the 
counterfactual:

0 − (𝑟 + 𝛿) 𝑘

(

ΔΠ

𝜇, 𝑧

−1

)

= 100 ×

(

(
𝜇, 𝑧
(

Π𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒
Π𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑓 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙

)

−1
𝜇, 𝑧

−1

)

) − 1

,

(19)

−1

−1.20

which shows how ﬁrm value increases due to the ability to adjust in-
vestment plans ex post.
)

In Panel A of Table 7, we report statistics associated with the dis-
(
𝜇, 𝑧
. To decompose the variation in ΔΠ that arises 
tribution of ΔΠ 
from changes in 𝜇 against changes in 𝑧
−1 in a simple way, we estimate a 
linear regression of the form ΔΠ = 𝛽
−1 + 𝛽𝜇 log 𝜇, and report 
the coeﬃcients in Columns 7 and 8. For illustration, we also plot ΔΠ
for our partial equilibrium analysis in Fig. 6a as a function of 𝜇 where 
the x-axis covers three standard deviations of 𝜇, and for three values of 
−1, also covering three standard deviations of 𝑧
𝑧

0 + 𝛽𝑧 log 𝑧

We  ﬁnd  that  investment  ﬂexibility  generates  gains  to  ﬁrm  value 
across-the-board, which is not surprising since we have also constrained 
ﬁrms from acquiring more information to bypass their restriction on ex 
post  adjustments.  Moreover,  the  value  of  ﬂexibility  decreases in  pro-
ductivity. In other words, the relative gains to ﬁrm value from being 
ﬂexible is lower for a higher productivity ﬁrm. This reﬂects the fact 
that in our data, uncertainty is decreasing in ﬁrm productivity and con-
sequently implies that high-productivity ﬁrms rely on reducing ex ante 
uncertainty to improve ﬁrm value rather than adjusting their invest-
ment decisions ex post. We also ﬁnd that the magnitude of 𝛽𝜇 is almost 
ten times that of 𝛽𝑧; in other words, the value of ﬂexibility primarily 
diﬀers across ﬁrms of diﬀerent types, but varies much less across id-
iosyncratic states. This result is also reﬂected in our illustrative plot 
(Fig. 6b), where one can see visually that while ΔΠ varies widely with 
𝜇, the variation along 𝑧
−1 is much smaller. Therefore, the value of ﬂex-
ibility primarily comes from static diﬀerences across ﬁrms.

Finally, we ﬁnd that the value of ﬂexibility is more muted in general 
equilibrium. For instance, average gains to ﬁrm value is about one-third 
that in the partial equilibrium counterfactual (Column 5), while aggre-
gate gains to the value of the corporate sector is around one-tenth that 
in  the  partial  equilibrium  counterfactual  (Column  6).  The  diﬀerence 
between the two analyses arises from net changes in the demand for 
labor and our assumption that labor supply is inelastic. Due to better 
capital allocation in the baseline, labor demand is substantially higher 
(Fig. B.4 in Appendix B.3 provides an illustrative plot), which translates 
to  much  higher  wages  in  the  baseline  due  to  inelastic  labor  supply. 
Consequently, ﬁrm revenue and proﬁts are relatively lower when we 
account for general equilibrium eﬀects. Notably, while demand for ﬁrm 
output is also higher in equilibrium (which in turn increases ﬁrm value 
across-the-board), the rise in labor cost is sharper than that of demand 
(decreasing ﬁrm proﬁts on net).

5.1.3.  Aggregate value of ﬂexibility

Finally, we quantify the aggregate value of investment ﬂexibility. 
We build on the discussion above by computing TFP in the model of 
interest relative to a model where ﬁrms face no uncertainty about cur-
rent productivity. We ﬁnd that our baseline model predicts about 0.20% 
TFP loss due to uncertainty (Column 1 of Table 8), whereas our coun-
terfactual model with no investment ﬂexibility predicts TFP losses that 
are around 0.34% (Column 2 of Table 8). Put diﬀerently, this result 

19 In Appendix E, we present a simple model of information production via 
employment of specialized “knowledge-producing” workers, and show that such 
a framework can provide a microfoundation for the above constraints.

20 In Appendix B, we also plot in Figs. B.3a and B.3b ΔΠ as a function of 𝜇
and 𝑧

−1 for illustration of the entire function.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377914B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

−1. The range of 𝜇 covers three standard deviations 
Fig. 6. The value of ﬂexibility and information across ﬁrms. The ﬁgures plot ΔΠ against 𝜇 for three values of 𝑧
−1 = 0, dashed red line plots 
around the mean, while the three values of 𝑧
ΔΠ for 𝑧
−1 three standard deviations right of the mean. Fig. 6a reports ΔΠ
for our counterfactual analysis of the value of investment ﬂexibility, while Fig. 6b plots ΔΠ for our counterfactual analysis of the value of information allocation. 
Both ﬁgures are plotted for the analysis under partial equilibrium.

−1 three standard deviations left of the mean, and dashed-dotted black line plots ΔΠ for 𝑧

−1 around the mean. Solid blue line plots ΔΠ for 𝑧

−1 cover three standard deviations of 𝑧

implies that investment ﬂexibility alone reduces capital misallocation 
due to uncertainty by about 41% (i.e., 0.20/0.34). In terms of tangi-
ble output, these aggregate productivity gains imply that GDP in our 
baseline model is 0.85% higher in the partial equilibrium comparison, 
and 0.36% higher in the general equilibrium comparison (Column 2 of 
Table 8).

5.2.  The value of information reallocation

5.2.1.  Deﬁning counterfactuals

The data (and thus our calibrated model) are consistent with the 
notion that more productive ﬁrms endogenously acquire more infor-
mation, and thus implies that resources for information acquisition are 
allocated towards higher productivity ﬁrms. This diﬀers from the stan-
dard assumption that ﬁrms face homogeneous uncertainty where, as a 
result, the distribution of information is implicitly degenerate. Our goal 
is to quantify the beneﬁts of such information reallocation, in light of 
our earlier theoretical result.

To conduct this exercise, we impose in the counterfactual that the 
net  beneﬁt  of  information  is  homogeneous,  following  the  standard 
assumption  in  the  extant  literature  that  uncertainty  is  homogeneous 
across ﬁrms. This amounts to setting 𝜁𝜇 = Θ𝑧
(Equa-
1−Θ𝑘
tion (14)). We then further impose two constraints: across both baseline 
and counterfactual models, (i) the total quantity of information in the 
economy is constant (like in the earlier exercise) and, (ii) the average 
degree of investment ﬂexibility is identical. For the second constraint, 
we recalibrate 𝜒 such that the dispersion of investment plan deviations 
is identical across both models, since we interpret investment plans de-
viations as a measure of ﬂexibility.

and 𝜁𝑧 = 𝜌2 Θ𝑧
1−Θ𝑘

5.2.2.  Private gains to information reallocation

Our ﬁrst analysis focuses on the impact of information allocation 
on ﬁrm value. As with the investment ﬂexibility analysis, we use Equa-
tion (18) to deﬁne ﬁrm value, and Equation (19) to quantify the gains 
from heterogeneous information allocation relative to the counterfac-
tual (i.e., relative to the economy with homogeneous uncertainty).

)

In Panel B of Table 7, we report statistics associated with the dis-
(
tribution of ΔΠ 
, similar to our analysis earlier; and in Fig. 6b, 
display illustrative plots of ΔΠ as a function of 𝜇 for three values of 
𝑧
−1.21

𝜇, 𝑧

−1

21 Likewise, in Appendix B, we also plot in Figs. B.3c and B.3d ΔΠ as a function 
of 𝜇 and 𝑧

−1 for illustration purposes.

In  general,  we  see  that  there  is  a  mix  of  gains  and  losses  across 
ﬁrms,  unlike  in  the  case  of  investment  ﬂexibility.  In  partial  equilib-
rium, we see that around 52.7% of ﬁrms report a loss; that is, they 
prefer an economy where information is homogeneously allocated. The 
values for 𝛽𝑧 and 𝛽𝜇 are positive, indicating that the gains are increas-
ing (losses are decreasing) in productivity. This implies that the gains 
to better information allocation accrue to ﬁrms with higher productiv-
ity. Moreover, because we imposed an aggregate resource constraint on 
information, our calibration implies a reallocation of information from 
low- to high-productivity ﬁrms. In other words, the losers of this reallo-
cation are lower productivity ﬁrms.

Like  with  investment  ﬂexibility,  we  also  ﬁnd  that  the  magnitude 
of 𝛽𝜇 is almost ten times that of 𝛽𝑧. In other words, the gains to in-
formation  allocation  accrue  primarily  to  ﬁrms  of  permanently higher 
productivity. In contrast, there are much smaller gains to be made from 
dynamic reallocation. This follows from the fact that the autocorrelation 
of productivity is quite small in the data. Hence, the dynamic gains from 
information acquisition are also small. Importantly, as we discussed in 
Section 4, our results are a lower bound to the dynamic gains, as we 
likely underestimate the persistence of productivity.

Finally, comparing the partial and general equilibrium results, we 
again see that gains are much more muted in general equilibrium. In 
the latter, we see that around 91.8% of ﬁrms report a loss. Like before, 
this diﬀerence arises because of a sharp rise in wages due to higher 
labor demand induced by the better capital allocation. In particular, 
labor demand by high-productivity ﬁrms increases while that by low-
productivity ﬁrms decreases, since information gets reallocated from 
low-productivity ﬁrms to high-productivity ﬁrms in this counterfactual 
(Fig. B.4 in Appendix B.3). But since aggregate labor demand is dispro-
portionally driven by high-productivity ﬁrms, aggregate labor demand 
increases, driving up equilibrium wages.

5.2.3.  Aggregate gains to information reallocation

We now turn to quantifying the aggregate value of improved infor-
mation allocation. Here, our counterfactual model with homogeneous 
information allocation predicts TFP losses that are around 0.24% (Row 
1, Column 3 of Table 8), implying that improved information alloca-
tion alone reduces capital misallocation due to uncertainty by about 
17% (0.20/0.24). Translating these aggregate productivity gains into 
tangible output, we ﬁnd that having an allocation of information that is 
skewed towards higher productivity ﬁrms leads to an increase in GDP 
of around 0.24% in partial-equilibrium, and a smaller increase of 0.10% 
in general-equilibrium (Column 3 of Table 8).

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377915B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

)

Table 7
The impact of investment ﬂexibility and information allocation on ﬁrm value. Panel A reports distribu-
(
tional statistics associated with ΔΠ 
for the counterfactual experiment quantifying the value of 
investment ﬂexibility, while Panel B reports the same distributional statistics for the counterfactual exper-
iment quantifying the value of information reallocation. Probabilities might not sum to 1 due to rounding. 
Column (5) reports the change in average ﬁrm value, while Column (6) reports the change in aggregate
corporate value (Eq. (18)). The coeﬃcients in Columns (7) and (8) refer to changes in proﬁt attributed to 
the equation: ΔΠ = 𝛽

−1 + 𝛽𝜇 log 𝜇.

0 + 𝛽𝑧 log 𝑧

𝜇, 𝑧

−1

Panel A: Investment Flexibility

𝑃 𝑟(ΔΠ < 0)
(1)

𝑃 𝑟(ΔΠ > 0)
(2)

𝔼(ΔΠ|ΔΠ < 0)
(3)

𝔼(ΔΠ|ΔΠ > 0)
(4)

PE
GE

0
0

1
1

—
—

0.759
0.272

Panel B: Information Allocation

𝑃 𝑟(ΔΠ < 0)
(1)

𝑃 𝑟(ΔΠ > 0)
(2)

𝔼(ΔΠ|ΔΠ < 0)
(3)

𝔼(ΔΠ|ΔΠ > 0)
(4)

PE
GE

0.527
0.918

0.473
0.082

-0.098
-0.169

0.081
0.041

𝔼(ΔΠ)
(5)

0.759
0.272

𝔼(ΔΠ)
(5)

-0.013
-0.152

Δ ∫ Π
(6)

1.133
0.137

Δ ∫ Π
(6)

0.321
0.040

𝛽𝑧
(7)

𝛽𝜇
(8)

-0.016
-0.016

-0.149
-0.148

𝛽𝑧
(7)

𝛽𝜇
(8)

0.023
0.023

0.209
0.209

Table 8
The impact of investment ﬂexibility and information allocation on aggregate 
productivity. The ﬁrst row of the table below reports aggregate TFP losses 
computed relative to a model where ﬁrms do not face any uncertainty re-
garding their contemporaneous productivity. The measures are reported as 
percentage decreases relative to the reference. The second and third rows re-
port the gains to aggregate output relative to the relevant counterfactual.

Baseline

(1)

-0.199
—
—

No Investment
Flexibility
(2)

-0.338
0.848
0.359

Homogeneous
Net Beneﬁt
(3)

-0.239
0.240
0.102

TFP losses
GDP (PE)
GDP (GE)

5.3.  Sensitivity analyses

We now brieﬂy describe three sets of sensitivity analyses that we 

report and discuss in the Appendix.

Alternative  estimates  for  𝛼 and  𝜈 As  discussed  in  Section 4,  we  use 
three complementary methods for estimating the production function 
parameters (and thus for calculating TFP), and ﬁnd that our motivating 
evidence is consistent across all three methods. We conduct an anal-
ogous exercise using moments constructed from all three alternatives. 
Our moments and parameter estimates are listed in Appendix F.3.1 and 
Appendix F.3.2. We report the results of our quantitative exercise in 
Appendix F.3.4. Overall, the range of results support a generally robust 
conclusion that ﬂexibility provides a majority of ﬁrms, but particularly 
small ﬁrms, signiﬁcant protection against uncertainty, while informa-
tion allocation provides a smaller but sizeable beneﬁt to larger ﬁrms.

Alternative estimates for 𝜌 and 𝜎𝜖 We explore alternative estimates of 𝜌
(and 𝜎𝜖 ) to account for the possibility that the 𝜌 estimated via OLS is 
biased downwards. In analyses summarized in Appendix G, we obtain 
separate estimates using the dynamic panel approaches of Arellano and 
Bond (1991) and Han and Phillips (2010). As expected, both estima-
tors give rise to higher values of 𝜌. Because the quantitative importance 
of the information allocation eﬀect is increasing in 𝜌, we ﬁnd that the 
information allocation eﬀect is larger when we parametrize our model 
with these alternative estimates. However, the quantitative importance 
of investment ﬂexibility is robust across these speciﬁcations. In general, 
we show that our results are similar in that they emphasize both ﬂexibil-
ity and information allocation as playing important roles in mitigating 
the impact of uncertainty for ﬁrm values and aggregate productivity.

Real costs instead of utility costs We explore an alternative assumption 
where the cost of information acquisition and investment plan adjust-
ments are real costs, instead of utility costs. While these assumptions 
do not fundamentally aﬀect the partial equilibrium inferences (whether 
the costs are utility or real is irrelevant in the ﬁrm’s problem), they 
can aﬀect ﬁrm learning and investment decisions through general equi-
librium eﬀects because they compete for resources. In Appendix H, we 
consider a version where these costs are paid out in labor units, building 
on our microfoundation in Appendix E. We ﬁnd largely similar results 
to our baseline exercise, and importantly, that the parameter estimates 
are not meaningfully diﬀerent relative to our baseline.

6.  Conclusion

In this paper, we develop a theory of capital budgeting as a source 
of time-to-build and uncertainty, featuring a trade-oﬀ between infor-
mation acquisition for improved capital budgeting against the cost of 
adjusting  investment  expenditures  ex  post  to  address  mistakes  made 
during  the  capital  budgeting  process.  We  theoretically  and  quantita-
tively examine the interplay of these two forces and further uncover 
that information can be thought of as a factor of production like labor 
and capital: Firms of higher productivity beneﬁt more from better in-
formation. We show that holding ﬁxed aggregate resources devoted to 
information acquisition ﬁxed and reallocating resources for information 
acquisition towards higher productivity ﬁrms can reduce aggregate cap-
ital misallocation due to uncertainty and time-to-build. Importantly, we 
ﬁnd empirical support for this channel.

Although  both  channels  of  investment  ﬂexibility  and  information 
allocation can theoretically mitigate the impact of uncertainty on aggre-
gate productivity and ﬁrm value, the data suggest investment ﬂexibility 
as a more dominant mechanism. These results sharpen our understand-
ing of the costs of uncertainty for ﬁrms and emphasize the quantitative 
importance of the capital budgeting process when studying ﬁrm invest-
ment decisions. Finally, given the parsimonious model structure and 
conservative assumptions, our quantitative results are a lower-bound 
estimate of the importance of investment ﬂexibility as a source of self-
insurance against unexpected shocks.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Ben Charoenwong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Funding acquisition, For-
mal analysis, Conceptualization. Yosuke Kimura: Writing – review & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Resources, Project ad-
ministration,  Methodology,  Formal  analysis,  Conceptualization. Alan 
Kwan: Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Writing  –  original  draft,  Visual-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377916B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

ization, Software, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, 
Conceptualization. Eugene Tan: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, 
Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The author declares that he has no relevant or material ﬁnancial 
interests that relate to the research described in this paper. Eugene Tan

Data availability

The data that has been used is conﬁdential. Capital Budgeting, Un-
certainty, and Misallocation - Source Files (Original Data) (Mendeley 
Data).

Acknowledgements

We  would  like  to  thank  the  editor  (Toni  Whited)  and  an  anony-
mous referee for guidance and helpful advice in writing this article. 
The  authors  also  thank  Jose  Maria  Barrero,  Bernardo  Blum,  Laurent 
Cavenaile, Murat Celik, Guojun Chen, Russell Cooper, Xiang Fang, Zu 
Yao Hong, Heski Bar-Isaac, Alexander Kopytov, Francois Gourio, Cos-
min Ilut, Yueran Ma, Pamela Medina, Brent Meyer, William Strange, 
Stephen Terry, Xu Tian, Jincheng Tong, and Choongryul Yang, as well 
as multiple conference and seminar participants, for extensive discus-
sions  and  comments  that  greatly  improved  the  paper.  Any  views  or 
opinions expressed herein are not representative of those of the Policy 
Research Institute, Ministry of Finance, or the Cabinet Oﬃce of Japan. 
The content in this article has been reviewed by the Ministry of Finance 
of Japan to ensure the anonymity of survey respondents. Eugene Tan 
thanks the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta for hosting him during part 
of the writing of this paper. Ben Charoenwong acknowledges ﬁnancial 
support from the Singapore Ministry of Education AcRF Tier 1 Research 
Grant No. A-8000760-00-00. Alan Kwan acknowledges support from the 
Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR, China (Project #C7105-
20G, Project No. T35-710/20-R). This paper was previously circulated 
as “Investment Plans, Uncertainty, and Misallocation.” Any remaining 
errors are our own.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103779.

References

Bhandari, A., McGrattan, E.R., 2020. Sweat equity in U.S. private business. Q. J. Econ.
Bloom, N., Bond, S., Reenen, J.V., 2007. Uncertainty and investment dynamics. Rev. Econ. 

Stud. 74, 391–415. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /cje /bem005.

Bloom, N., Floetotto, M., Jaimovich, N., Saporta-eksten, I., Terry, S.J., 2018. Really un-

certain business cycles. Econometrica 86, 1031–1065.

Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., Foster, L., Lucking, B., Ohlmacher, S., Saporta Eksten, I., 2020. 
Business-Level Expectations and Uncertainty. BFI Working Paper. https://doi .org /10 .
2139 /ssrn .3085377.

Bloom, N., Kawakubo, T., Meng, C., Mizen, P., Riley, R., Senga, T., Van Reenen, John, 

2021. Do Well Managed Firms Make Better Forecasts?.

Charoenwong, B., Kimura, Y., Kwan, A., 2020. How and Why do Managers Use Public 

Forecasts to Guide the Market? Working Paper.

Chen, C., Senga, T., Sun, C., Zhang, H., 2023. Uncertainty, imperfect information, and 

expectation formation over the ﬁrm’s life cycle. J. Monet. Econ.

Christiano, L.J., Todd, R.M., 1996. Time to plan and aggregate ﬂuctuations. Federal Re-

serve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review.

Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., 2015. Information rigidity and the expectations forma-
tion process: a simple framework and new facts. Am. Econ. Rev. 105, 2644–2678.
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Ropele, T., 2020. Inﬂation expectations and ﬁrm deci-

sions: new causal evidence. Q. J. Econ. 135, 165–219.

David, J.M., Venkateswaran, V., 2019. The sources of capital misallocation. Am. Econ. 

Rev. 109, 2531–2567.

David, J.M., Hopenhayn, H.A., Venkateswaran, V., 2016. Information, misallocation, and 
aggregate productivity. Q. J. Econ. 131, 943–1005. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /qje /
qjw006 .Advance.

Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., Miranda, J., 2006. Volatility and dispersion in 
business growth rates: publicly traded versus privately held ﬁrms. NBER Macroecon. 
Annu. 21, 107–156. https://doi .org /10 .1086 /ma .21 .25554954.

Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2022. A model of the data economy. https://doi .org /10 .

2139 /ssrn .3781314.

Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., Singal, D., Venkateswaran, V., 2022. Valuing ﬁnancial data. 

SSRN Electron. J., 1–43. https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3947931.

Fuster, A., Perez-Truglia, R., Wiederholt, M., Zafar, B., 2022. Expectations with endoge-
nous information acquisition: an experimental investigation. Rev. Econ. Stat. https://
doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3200073.

Gennaioli, N., Ma, Y., Shleifer, A., 2015. Expectations and investment. NBER Macroecon. 

Annu. 30, 379–442. http://www .journals .uchicago .edu /t -and -c.

Gondhi, N., 2023. Rational inattention, misallocation, and the aggregate economy. J. 
Monet. Econ. 136, 50–75. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jmoneco .2023 .01 .010. https://
www .sciencedirect .com /science /article /pii /S030439322300017X.

Graham, J., 2022. Presidential address: corporate ﬁnance and reality. J. Finance.
Hall, R.E., 1977. Investment, interest rates, and the eﬀects of stabilization policies. Brook-

ings Pap. Econ. Act., 61–121.

Han, C., Phillips, P.C., 2010. Gmm estimation for dynamic panels with ﬁxed eﬀects and 

strong instruments at unity. Econom. Theory 26, 119–151.

Harris, M., Raviv, A., 1996. The capital budgeting process: incentives and information. J. 

Finance 51, 1139–1174.

Harris, M., Kriebel, C.H., Raviv, A., 1982. Asymmetric information, incentives and in-
traﬁrm resource allocation. Manag. Sci. 28, 604–620. https://doi .org /10 .1287 /mnsc .
28 .6 .604.

Hsieh, C.-T., Klenow, P.J., 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India. 

Q. J. Econ. 124, 6. https://doi .org /10 .21648 /arthavij /2013 /v55 /i3 /111235.
Ilut, C., Saijo, H., 2020. Learning, conﬁdence, and business cycles. J. Monet. Econ.
Kalouptsidi,  M.,  2014.  Time  to  build  and  ﬂuctuations  in  bulk  shipping.  Am.  Econ. 

Rev. 104, 564–608. https://doi .org /10 .1257 /aer .104 .2 .564.

Kydland, F.E., Prescott, E.C., 1982. Time to build and aggregate ﬂuctuations. Economet-

Altig, D., Barrero, J.M., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., Meyer, B., Parker, N., 2022. Surveying 
business uncertainty. J. Econom. 231, 282–303. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jeconom .
2020 .03 .021.

Arellano, M., Bond, S., 1991. Some tests of speciﬁcation for panel data: Monte Carlo 
evidence and an application to employment equations. Rev. Econ. Stud. 58, 277–297.
Asker, J., Collard-Wexler, A., De Loecker, J., 2014. Dynamic inputs and resource (mis)al-

location. J. Polit. Econ. 122, 1013–1063.

Bachmann, R., Elstner, S., 2015. Firm optimism and pessimism. Eur. Econ. Rev. 79, 

297–325. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .euroecorev .2015 .07 .017.

Bachmann, R., Caballero, R.J., Engel, E.M., 2013. Aggregate implications of lumpy invest-

ment: new evidence and a DSGE model. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 5, 29–67.

Bachmann, R., Elstner, S., Hristov, A., 2017. Surprise, surprise - measuring ﬁrm-level 
investment innovations. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 83, 107–148. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /
j .jedc .2017 .07 .009.

Baley, I., Blanco, A., 2019. Firm uncertainty cycles and the propagation of nominal shocks. 
Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 11, 276–337. https://doi .org /10 .1257 /mac .20170402.
Baley, I., Veldkamp, L., 2021. Bayesian learning. In: Handbook of Economic Expectations.
Bar-Ilan, A., Strange, W.C., 1996. Investment lags. Am. Econ. Rev. 86, 610–622. https://

doi .org /10 .2307 /2118214.

doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3196761.

Begenau, J., Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2018. Big data in ﬁnance and the growth of 

large ﬁrms. J. Monet. Econ. 97, 71–87.

rica 50.

tention. Am. Econ. Rev.

Ma´ckowiak, B., Wiederholt, M., 2015. Real business cycle dynamics under rational inat-

Malenko, A., 2019. Optimal dynamic capital budgeting. Rev. Econ. Stud. 86, 1747–1778. 

https://doi .org /10 .1093 /restud /rdy043.

Mayer, T., 1960. Plant and equipment lead times. J. Bus. 33, 127–132.
Montgomery, M.R., 1995. ‘Time-to-build’ completion patterns for nonresidential struc-
tures, 1961-1991. Econ. Lett. 48, 155–163. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /0165 -1765(94 )
00596 -T.

Nickell,  S.,  1981.  Biases  in  dynamic  models  with  ﬁxed  eﬀects.  Econometrica 49, 

1417–1426.

Oh, H., Yoon, C., 2020. Time to build and the real-options channel of residential invest-
ment. J. Financ. Econ. 135, 255–269. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2018 .10 .019.
Reis, R., 2006. Inattentive producers. Rev. Econ. Stud. 73, 793–821. https://doi .org /10 .

1111 /j .1467 -937X .2006 .00396 .x.

Restuccia, D., Rogerson, R., 2008. Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with het-
erogeneous establishments. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 11, 707–720. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .
red .2008 .05 .002.

Sims, C.A., 2003. Implications of rational inattention. J. Monet. Econ. 50, 665–690. 

Syverson, C., 2011. What determines productivity? J. Econ. Lit. 49, 326–365.
Tanaka, M., Bloom, N., David, J.M., Koga, M., 2020. Firm performance and macro forecast 

accuracy. J. Monet. Econ. 18, 1–38. https://doi .org /10 .3386 /w24776.

Barrero, J.M., 2022. The micro and macro of managerial beliefs. J. Financ. Econ. https://

https://doi .org /10 .1016 /S0304 -3932(03 )00029 -1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377917B. Charoenwong, Y. Kimura, A. Kwan et al.

Van  Nieuwerburgh,  S.,  Veldkamp,  L.,  2009.  Information  immobility  and  the  home 
bias puzzle. J. Finance 64, 1187–1215. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /j .1540 -6261 .2009 .
01462 .x.

Veldkamp, L., 2023. Valuing data as an asset. Rev. Finance.

Whited, T.M., Zhao, J., 2021. The misallocation of ﬁnance. J. Finance 76. https://doi .

org /10 .1111 /joﬁ .13031.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377918