Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Collateral eligibility of corporate debt in the Eurosystem
Loriana Pelizzon a,b, Max Riedel a, Zorka Simon a,∗, Marti G. Subrahmanyam c
a Leibniz Institute for Financial Research SAFE, Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3, 60323, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
b Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Cannaregio 873, Fondamenta S.Giobbe, 30121, Venezia, Italy
c New York University, Stern School of Business, 44 West Fourth Street, New York, NY, 10012, USA

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Dataset link: Replication Code /Pseudo Data
for : ‘‘Collateral eligibility of corporate debt in
the Eurosystem ’’ (Reference Data)

JEL classiﬁcation:
G12
G18
G28
E58

Keywords:
Collateral policy
European Central Bank (ECB)
Corporate bonds
Eligibility premium

1.  Introduction

We study the many implications of the Eurosystem collateral framework for corporate bonds. Using data on 
the evolving collateral eligibility list, we identify the ﬁrst inclusion dates of bonds and issuers and use these 
events to ﬁnd that the increased supply and demand for pledgeable collateral following eligibility (a) increases 
activity in the corporate securities lending market, (b) lowers eligible bond yields, and (c) aﬀects bond liquidity. 
Thus, corporate bond lending relaxes the constraint of limited collateral supply and thereby improves market 
functioning.

In March 2020, the U.S. Federal Reserve System (“the Fed”) intro-
duced  its  Primary  and  Secondary  Market  Corporate  Credit  Facilities, 
as part of its response to alleviate the ﬁnancial consequences of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. These facilities were designed to encourage more 
widespread use of corporate bonds as collateral in the monetary policy 
operations of the Fed and were expected to have an impact on collat-
eral money markets, bond cash markets, and corporations’ borrowing 
strategies by eliminating frictions and improving market liquidity.

While the Fed’s facilities are relatively new, similar arrangements 
have been in place in the euro area for over two decades and provide 
an ideal historical parallel to investigate the impact of such facilities. 
We study the impact channels in the context of the euro area, where 
the European Central Bank (ECB) has been accepting corporate bonds 
as a signiﬁcant fraction of eligible collateral since the inception of the 

euro in 1999. Thus, the ECB has a fairly long history of accepting cor-
porate debt in its open market operations (OMOs) and its associated 
overnight lending facility. These two monetary instruments are espe-
cially important in providing short-term funding to the banking sector.
The cornerstone of funding liquidity provision to banks in the euro 
area is the Eurosystem Collateral Framework (ESCF), a set of guidelines 
for adequate collateral. The framework serves a vital policy function 
in normal times but is especially important during crises. The ECB’s 
collateral framework is comprehensive in both scale and scope, as it 
permits a large number of counterparties to partake of collateralized 
lending by pledging a variety of assets. Two distinctive features of the 
Eurosystem’s collateral policy, however, are the ease of pledgeability of 
corporate debt with the central bank and the consequent borrowing in 
the marginal lending facility by banks that are unable or prefer not to 
obtain funding from the interbank lending market.1 An examination of

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: pelizzon@safe-frankfurt.de (L. Pelizzon), riedel@safe-frankfurt.de (M. Riedel), simon@safe-frankfurt.de (Z. Simon), msubrahm@stern.nyu.edu

(M.G. Subrahmanyam).
1 Unlike the repo facility at the Fed, ﬁnancial market participants in the euro area do not attach any stigma to banks accessing the ECB’s marginal lending facility. 
Lee and Sarkar (2018) attribute this diﬀerence in perception partly to clear central bank communication and transparent regulation. More speciﬁcally, the ECB 
does not solely portray the marginal lending facility as the lender of last resort. Additionally, under its disclosure policy, the ECB only publishes daily aggregates of 
marginal lending activities (and not the identities and positions of individual borrowing banks). Moreover, the ECB imposes the same collateral and counterparty 
requirements for OMOs and the standing facility (SF), allowing for similar terms across borrowers and, therefore, more widespread use of the overnight facility.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2023.103777
Received 16 November 2021; Received in revised form 31 December 2023; Accepted 31 December 2023

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)103777Availableonline9January20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NClicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).L. Pelizzon et al.

the collateral eligibility of corporate bonds and especially its eﬀects on 
collateral money markets, bond cash markets, and corporations’ bor-
rowing  strategies  would  be  instructive  in  ascertaining  the  impact  of 
similar facilities at other central banks, including the Fed. Corporate 
bond pledgeability is an exceptionally versatile and powerful policy tool 
by which banks in the Eurosystem can obtain funding against eligible 
assets (EAs) through collateralized lending operations: OMOs achieved 
through repurchase agreements (“repos”) and collateralized borrowing.
Focusing on the period from 2010 until 2016, we investigate 160 
unique eligibility events with multiple bonds treated at one time. We 
study whether the inclusion of an asset on the Eurosystem’s list of el-
igible collateral (“EA list”) has an impact on the secondary market for 
collateral; that is, the securities lending (SL) market. We also investigate 
the yield and liquidity reaction in the secondary market for corporate 
bonds (bond cash market). Finally, we analyze the eﬀect of eligibility 
on the primary market for bond issuance by the underlying ﬁrms.

There  are  several  advantages  of  using  the  euro  area  as  a  labora-
tory to study the eﬃcacy of collateral policy as a monetary policy tool. 
First, in this context we can measure the direct eﬀect of central bank 
operations  on  the  SL  market,  given  the  virtual  absence  of  an  active 
(private) corporate bond repo market in Europe. Second, by comparing 
the eligibility premium in secondary bond market yields across bonds 
that are active on the SL market and those that are not, we can in-
vestigate whether the SL market mitigates the demand pressure on EA 
prices (yields). Third, we can analyze ﬁrms’ supply response by examin-
ing the capital structure decisions of bond-issuing ﬁrms, since the ECB’s 
eligibility framework permits us to identify the precise inclusion date 
of individual corporate bonds on the EA list and the ﬁrst-ever inclusion 
date at the issuer ﬁrm level. Additionally, non-ﬁnancial corporate bonds 
seem to be the most appropriate asset class for studying the concept of 
eligibility, since EUR-denominated sovereign bonds are automatically 
included on the EA list at issuance, while bank bonds might suﬀer from 
multiple confounding eﬀects, such as cross-holdings across banks, that 
may diminish the eﬀects of eligibility. Furthermore, there is an active 
repo market for both sovereign and bank bonds in Europe, which is not 
the case for corporate bonds.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to examine the 
many implications resulting from a central bank’s collateral policy use 
as a monetary tool in a general setting. Speciﬁcally, we contribute to 
the literature on collateral and SL in two distinct ways. First, we study 
how the ECB improves market functioning and induces a spillover ef-
fect between the overnight lending facility and the collateral money 
market (the SL market). Second, we examine the extent to which cor-
porate bond eligibility aﬀects European capital market development in 
terms of the pricing and liquidity of corporate bonds and the subse-
quent debt ﬁnancing decisions of ﬁrms. Thus, our paper ﬁlls a gap in 
the literature, which has recently focused primarily on unconventional 
monetary policies – that is, actual central bank purchases of corporate 
debt securities – and has given limited attention to the role that con-
ventional monetary policy and within it central bank collateral eligibility
might play in primary and secondary capital markets.

In this paper, we consider the channels through which the ECB’s 
collateral framework aﬀects eligible bonds and bond-issuing ﬁrms, as 
shown in Fig. 1. The direct eﬀect of collateral eligibility arises due to 
banks’ increased demand for pledgeable assets, either in the SL market, 
which is a money market and serves as the secondary market for col-
lateral, or in the secondary cash market for corporate bonds. Demand 
aﬀects SL activity, as measured by borrowing costs and quantities sup-
plied for borrowing and lending, in addition to secondary bond market 
liquidity and yields. Moreover, following the initial inclusion of its bond 
on the EA list, the issuing ﬁrm responds to increased capital market de-
mand by increasing its issuance of bond debt, an action that inﬂuences 
the primary market for its corporate bonds.

First, our empirical analysis tackles the activity of eligible bonds in 
the SL market, by which banks that do not own Eurosystem pledge-
able corporate bonds can borrow them from this secondary market for 

collateral  in  exchange  for  other  assets  that  are  not  on  the  EA  list.2
Studying the activity of newly eligible bonds, we ﬁnd that a large frac-
tion of bonds that were hitherto not lendable in the SL market become 
lendable on or after the day these bonds are included on the EA list 
(more than 50% of the considered bonds). For bonds that were already 
lendable in the SL market, we ﬁnd that ECB eligibility triggers an in-
crease in the supply of and demand for EAs. The higher supply of EAs 
beneﬁts banks, since they can access the SL market to convert their 
ECB-ineligible  assets  into  eligible  holdings.  This  improves  banks’  ac-
cess  to  central  bank  funding  and  consequently  their  overall  lending 
capacity  for  the  economy.  The  increase  in  the  demand  for  EAs  also 
beneﬁts long-term buy-and-hold investors, such as pension funds, in-
surance companies, and mutual funds, which can generate additional 
income from lending their passive portfolio holdings. Our results show 
that the borrowing costs per unit of security decrease after the eligibil-
ity event. Nevertheless, the overall lending income to the bondholders 
will increase due to the signiﬁcant spike in demand for EAs. Observ-
ing higher demand, long-term investors are more likely to bid on the 
primary market for bonds that are potential candidates for eligibility 
(i.e., newly issued bonds of issuers with outstanding EAs), anticipat-
ing that these assets can later be repeatedly posted on the SL market 
in  exchange  for  a  fee.3 Stronger  investor  demand  in  turn  improves 
ﬁrms’ access to capital markets. Overall, our SL market results suggest 
that eligibility relaxes the constraint of limited collateral supply and 
thus improves market functioning. Moreover, in the integrated capital 
market of the euro area, cross-border investors buying eligible bonds in-
directly support the ECB’s objective of moving toward a capital market 
union.

Second,  we  study  the  eﬀect  of  eligibility  on  bond  yields  and  liq-
uidity in the secondary market. We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant and robust yield 
decline of 4.6–20 basis points (bps) for eligible bonds compared to their 
not-yet-eligible counterparts. This drop in the yield constitutes an “eligi-
bility premium” that arises due to the liquidity service or fungibility of 
the bond used as collateral, meaning that eligible bonds acquire “cash-
like” features because of their pledgeability at the ECB in exchange for 
overnight  funding.  Thus,  eligibility  beneﬁts  both  long-term  investors 
and banks, whose portfolio values increase. However, we ﬁnd that the 
yield eﬀect is mitigated by the presence of the SL market. When diﬀer-
entiating between lendable and non-lendable bonds in the SL market, 
we observe that the latter group experiences a larger eligibility-induced 
yield drop of 14 bps. It should be emphasized that the inclusion of a 
bond on the EA list should be predictable by ﬁnancial market partici-
pants. Therefore, our results may well be an underestimate of the true 
impact of collateral eligibility on yields.

Third,  we  study  the  impact  on  liquidity,  which  is  measured  by 
changes in the bid-ask spread in the secondary market. We ﬁnd that 
bond-level liquidity improves for non-lendable bonds and deteriorates 
slightly for bonds that are available for lending. This conﬁrms both the 
well-known positive link between funding and market liquidity docu-

2 We believe it is worthwhile to stress that the SL market takes on the role 
of an active, private over-the-counter (OTC) repo market, which does not ex-
ist to any signiﬁcant extent for corporate bonds in the euro area, in contrast to 
the situation in the United States. Therefore, corporate bond-backed repo trans-
actions can take place in the ECB’s overnight lending facility in exchange for 
cash or in the SL market, where such deals are less common and bond-for-bond 
deals constitute the euro area standard. The presence of an active corporate 
repo market like the one in the United States is the exception rather than the 
rule, which is why the European setup serves as a model for many other juris-
dictions. However, our results indicate that central bank eligibility could play a 
role in mitigating dysfunctional repo market dynamics, such as those observed 
in the U.S. Treasury repo market during the COVID-19 pandemic (Duﬃe, 2020).
3 This has been conﬁrmed to us in conversations with pension fund and in-
surance company representatives.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037772L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 1. The channels of corporate bond pledgeability. The ﬁgure depicts the channels of corporate bond eligibility and the response at the bond-issuing ﬁrm level. 
Banks’ demand aﬀects the secondary market for corporate bonds (yield and liquidity) and the securities lending market. Firms react to the increased demand for 
their bonds by adjusting their ﬁnancing decisions, and further increasing bond supply that can later become eligible.

mented by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and the presence of a 
scarcity eﬀect in the secondary bond cash market.

Fourth, we investigate the implications of eligibility for the primary 
bond market and more particularly ﬁrms’ supply response to the inclu-
sion of their ﬁrst bonds on the EA list. We ﬁnd that bond eligibility 
improves ﬁrms’ access to the capital market and that this has an im-
pact on ﬁrms’ capital structure. In the four quarters following their ﬁrst 
EA list inclusion event, ﬁrms shift their debt structure in favor of bond 
debt and away from bank loans. We also ﬁnd that they increase their 
overall debt level and issue bonds with longer maturities. This latter ef-
fect is likely driven by demand from long-term investors who bid for 
these longer-maturity EA candidate bonds. In addition, since the yield 
eﬀect of eligibility is mitigated by the presence of the SL market, ﬁrms 
whose bonds are not traded on the SL market might beneﬁt more from 
improved  funding  costs.  Thus,  eligibility  furthers  capital  market  de-
velopment and growth and reduces bond-issuing ﬁrms’ dependence on 
bank ﬁnancing. Moreover, not only is the size of the euro area corporate 
bond market positively aﬀected, but its functioning is also enhanced: 
being  able  to  lend  (borrow)  these  bonds  through  the  SL  market  im-
proves immediacy and therefore the overall liquidity of non-ﬁnancial 
corporate bonds, including those that are not eligible.

In sum, our ﬁndings indicate that eligibility can have diverse eco-
nomic implications: Corporate bond eligibility increases the overall pool 
of fungible assets in the economy and should thus improve bank funding 
conditions. In addition, the eﬀect of eligible bond-issuing ﬁrms moving 
away from bank ﬁnancing toward bond issuance in the capital markets 
can have a two-fold positive eﬀect on banks. First, it can deleverage a 
bank’s balance sheet, since long-term investors become the new debt 
holders. Second, it makes room for banks to ﬁnance new and poten-
tially  innovative  ﬁrms  and  projects,  thus  channeling  funds  to  where 
they  are  most  needed  while  diversifying  banks’  loan  portfolios.  This 
can both greatly improve the stability of the banking system from a 
macro-prudential perspective and contribute to overall ﬁnancial inno-
vation and economic growth.

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 reviews 
the literature, and Section 3 provides a detailed account of the ESCF. 
Section 4 describes the data set and presents the descriptive statistics. 
In Section 5, we study the direct eﬀects of eligibility on the bonds of 
non-ﬁnancial corporations, and in Section 6, we present tests of the par-
allel trends assumption of treated and control bonds and of our analyses 
accounting for ﬁrm-level fundamentals potentially driving eligibility se-
lection and conduct further robustness exercises. Section 7 summarizes 
the ﬁrm-level eﬀects of eligibility, and Section 8 concludes.

2.  Related literature

We contribute to multiple research strands. First, our study is part of 
a broader literature that examines the eﬀect of monetary policy on ﬁ-
nancial markets. Part of this strand examines how banks access central 
bank liquidity through collateralized market funding (BIS, 2013, 2015). 
In the euro area, Allen and Moessner (2012) document that collateral-
ized borrowing became more important following the global ﬁnancial 
crisis than uncollateralized interbank lending. Consequently, eligibility 
under the central bank’s collateral framework emerged as an economic 
driving force behind not only bank funding costs and interbank mar-
ket rates (Cassola and Koulischer, 2019; Kacperczyk et al., 2021) but 
also, as our results show, prices and liquidity in the secondary cash and 
collateral SL markets of corporate bonds. Additionally, we ﬁnd that el-
igibility signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the composition of corporate leverage 
and the conditions under which ﬁrms access the capital market.

Several studies explore the collateral frameworks of central banks 
within a broader context (Eberl and Weber, 2014; Fecht et al., 2016; 
Bindseil et al., 2017), with some pointing to the potential direct eﬀects 
of collateral policy on sovereign bond markets (Bindseil and Papadia, 
2009; Nyborg, 2016, 2017), while we provide detailed empirical sup-
port for the non-ﬁnancial corporate bond market.

Our analysis is complementary to prior event studies that concen-
trate on unexpected changes in collateral requirements of a given asset 
type, like Van Bekkum et al. (2018) for Dutch residential mortgage-
backed securities, or Buraschi et al. (2014) and Corradin and Rodriguez-
Moreno (2016) for USD-denominated sovereign bonds, which focused 
on either bank lending or bond yields and the law of one price. In con-
trast to these studies, we focus on the ECB’s discretionary decision to 
include a bond on the list and use staggered events (160 in total) in-
stead of a single announcement date, which has a signiﬁcant advantage: 
We can alleviate concerns that contemporaneous trends may confound 
the treatment eﬀect, which makes our identiﬁcation strategy more ro-
bust than single-event studies. Moreover, we contribute to this research 
strand by examining the eﬀect of eligibility on the collateral money 
market; that is, the SL market.

Considering how demand pressure on eligible collateral from banks 
aﬀects  asset  prices,4 our  results  are  generally  similar  to  studies  on 
asset  pricing  and  repo  market  specialness  (Duﬃe,  1996;  Jordan  and 

4 Ai et al. (2020) investigate a stock’s collateral premium and focus on ﬁrms 
that own assets that could be used as collateral and can thus easily relax their 
credit constraints. The authors investigate whether the stock market acknowl-
edges  this  asset  feature  and  show  that  ﬁrms  with  pledgeable  assets  on  the 
balance sheet carry a return premium relative to other ﬁrms in the cross-section 
of stock returns.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037773L. Pelizzon et al.

Jordan,  1997),  the  on-the-run  premium  (Krishnamurthy,  2002),  the 
convenience yield documented in U.S. Treasuries (Longstaﬀ, 2004; Kr-
ishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012) and in euro area sovereign 
bonds (Jiang et al., 2020), and the pledgeability premium in the cor-
porate  bond  market  in  China  (Chen  et  al.,  2023).5 However,  unlike 
the literature cited above, we study the interaction between the ECB’s 
overnight lending facility and the collateral money market, the SL mar-
ket,6 which is a funding market available for corporate bond lending 
and asset-for-asset collateralization.

Finally, our work relates to the growing literature on unconventional 
monetary policy actions. Although inclusion on the EA list is part of 
(normal) daily monetary policy conduct, some of its market eﬀects are 
similar to those of unconventional monetary interventions. Following 
the inception of large-scale asset purchase programs, early research on 
quantitative easing aimed to disentangle the channels through which 
it  aﬀects  asset  prices  and  risk  premia  (Krishnamurthy  and  Vissing-
Jorgensen,  2011;  Krishnamurthy  et  al.,  2013).  Often,  speciﬁc  asset 
classes (Di Maggio et al., 2019) or purchase programs are considered 
(Eser and Schwaab, 2016; Acharya et al., 2019; von Rüden et al., 2023; 
Altavilla et al., 2021). More speciﬁcally, an increasing number of stud-
ies examine the Corporate Sector Purchase Programme (CSPP), some 
document  how  prices  are  aﬀected  by  the  announcement  (Abidi  and 
Miquel-Flores, 2018; Grosse-Rueschkamp et al., 2019; Todorov, 2020; 
Pegoraro and Montagna, 2021), and others focus on actual purchases 
(Arce et al., 2020; Adelino et al., 2022; Galema and Lugo, 2021).

By contrast, we investigate a monetary policy instrument that aims 
to provide bank funding liquidity as opposed to directly aﬀecting long-
term interest rates. The economic impact, the eﬀect over time, and the 
interaction associated with the SL market are quite diﬀerent in our case.

3.  The Eurosystem’s collateral framework

3.1.  Monetary policy implementation in the Eurosystem

The  ECB  employs  three  monetary  instruments  to  achieve  its  pol-
icy goals: OMOs, minimum reserve requirements, and SFs. The most 
relevant tool for this study is the set of SFs that based on market con-
ditions, provides or absorbs overnight liquidity while constraining the 
upper bound on overnight market interest rates. The facilities therein 
are (a) the deposit facility, which allows a wide range of counterparties 
to make overnight deposits at the central bank, and (b) the marginal 
lending facility, which is mostly collateralized overnight lending against 
EAs between the central bank and ﬁnancial institutions.

Lending  under  the  marginal  lending  facility  takes  the  form  of 
overnight repurchase agreements and overnight collateralized loans.7
The interest rates are determined daily, and payments are made on the 
collateralized loan each business day. The marginal lending facility is 

5 In contrast to Chen et al. (2023), we address central bank collateral eligibility
and not private repo market pledgeability. Although both relax credit constraints, 
they diﬀer in their purpose, size, and scope. Repo market pledgeability largely 
depends on market conditions and the ability of a borrower to ﬁnd a willing 
counterparty. In contrast, central bank eligibility is more reliable and less lim-
ited, since transactions are not proﬁt-driven; hence, the composition of the EA 
list is stable or even accommodative to cushion market-wide funding shocks. 
Unlike the repo market, where both quantity and price ﬂuctuate according to 
market conditions and are thus unpredictable – that is, risky – central bank 
eligibility is reliable in terms of both quantity and price.
6 The SL market facilitates short-selling (Foley-Fisher et al., 2020; Muravyev 
et al., 2022) and provides a source of wholesale funding to ﬁnancial institutions, 
some of which lack direct access to the repo market (Foley-Fisher et al., 2016; 
Huszar and Simon, 2018).
7 This policy diﬀers from that of the Fed, where OMOs are outright asset 
purchases. Furthermore, only a limited set of counterparties – namely, primary 
dealer banks – can access the Fed’s repo facility, whereas all (private) banks can 
participate in the ECB’s overnight collateralized lending.

accessible at the discretion of counterparties and provides full allotment 
as long as the claim can be collateralized.

To contain risk to the central bank, collateralizing temporary reﬁ-
nancing operations like overnight lending is essential. The Eurosystem 
operates and employs a single EA list in all its liquidity-providing oper-
ations, so risk mitigation and monitoring are crucial. The essential tools 
for this monitoring are frequent valuation and margin calls, haircuts on 
pledged collateral, and limits on exposure to (a) counterparties, (b) the 
use of collateral by individual counterparties, and (c) the total submit-
ted collateral by an individual issuer, all of which are aimed at reducing 
the concentration of risk in the ECB’s collateral portfolio.

3.2.  The ECB’s collateral policy

The ECB permits various asset types to be pledged and allows a large 
number  of  counterparties  to  take  part  in  collateralized  lending.  The 
foundation of the Eurosystem’s marginal lending facility is its collateral 
policy, a set of guidelines for adequate collateral, and a framework that 
is comprehensive in both scale and in scope. The ECB diﬀers from other 
major central banks in that it accepts a variety of asset classes across 
a  wide  range  of  credit  ratings,  including  corporate  and  government 
bonds, covered and uncovered bank bonds, and asset-backed securities. 
Moreover, the ECB is among the few central banks with a single collat-
eral list that is used for both OMOs and SFs. The single-list approach 
greatly simpliﬁes banks’ access to this liquidity channel. Consequently, 
the ECB maintains a relatively large and diversiﬁed list of eligible col-
lateral, which includes about 25,000 securities on a daily average.

Corporate bonds have been on the EA list since the ECB’s incep-
tion. This policy encourages more eﬃcient utilization of collateral for 
counterparties and allows the use of higher-quality collateral such as 
government bonds in private collateral markets like interbank repo or 
SL markets that are often more proﬁtable. At the time of writing, corpo-
rate bonds comprise a signiﬁcant fraction of EAs, representing around 
10% of all assets pledged to the ECB at a value of about EUR 1.8 trillion. 
Indeed, the widespread use of corporate bond collateral has contributed 
to the growth of the European corporate bond market and to capital 
market development more generally (Bindseil et al., 2017).

In the period under consideration, a fraction (about 6%) of all assets, 
equivalent to a daily average of 1,450 individual securities, composes 
the universe of eligible corporate bonds. In recent years, the collateral 
eligibility criteria for corporate bonds have undergone both permanent 
and  temporary  adjustments,  as  depicted  in  Fig. 2,  resulting  in  some 
ﬂuctuations in the number of EAs. The beginning of our sample period 
corresponds to the introduction of the single EA list in 2007, when all 
Eurosystem central banks began using a single EA list published by the 
ECB. Our sample extends until June 2016, the onset of the CSPP. By 
focusing solely on the period preceding quantitative easing (QE), we 
can estimate the eligibility eﬀects alone rather than the joint impact 
of eligibility and purchase announcements or, ultimately, actual asset 
purchases.

In general, asset eligibility is contingent on an asset’s potential to 
trade on either a regulated or unregulated market that is accepted by 
the ECB. The most commonly accepted currency of EAs is the euro, and 
a ﬁxed coupon is preferred.

An  essential  feature  of  EAs  is  credit  quality,  as  overseen  by  the 
Eurosystem Credit Assessment Framework. This framework assigns cat-
egories called ECB credit steps to the following credit ratings: Step 1 
includes AAA–AA, Step 2 A, and Step 3 BBB ratings. This rating scale is 
harmonized across the major rating agencies (S&P, Moody’s, Fitch, and 
the Morningstar’s Dominion Bond Rating Services); as a rule of thumb, 
the ECB always considers the highest available credit rating for any mar-
ketable asset.

To mitigate credit risk in its portfolio, the ECB not only requires 
a minimum credit rating threshold but also applies haircuts that are 
based on maturity, coupon payments, and asset category. In response 
to the ﬁnancial crisis, the ECB made several changes to this rating re-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037774L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 2. Timeline of eligibility list. The ﬁgure depicts the evolution of the ECB’s collateral framework, the set of rules that determine eligibility criteria in the Eurosystem, 
over time; only the most relevant changes are presented.

quirement as time passed: following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, 
the ECB announced its Temporary Framework in October 2008 and a 
reduction in the minimum rating requirement from A- to BBB- until the 
end of 2009. However, in May 2009, that deadline was extended, and 
the lower requirement remains in place.

For a more detailed overview of rules driving asset eligibility, eli-
gible counterparties, ratings, applicable haircuts, and the overall legal 
framework, we refer the interested reader to Online Appendix A.1.

3.3.  Identiﬁcation strategy

The  source  of  variation  that  we  exploit  for  our  empirical  identi-
ﬁcation  strategy  comes  from  the  structure  of  the  Eurosystem’s  Col-
lateral Assessment Framework (per General Documentation Guideline 
ECB/2014/60). This framework allows for some element of surprise in 
the ECB’s inclusion decisions. It stipulates that (a) the ECB never con-
ﬁrms eligibility prior to an asset’s issuance, (b) the Eurosystem reserves 
the right to not include otherwise suitable assets on the EA list due to 
risk management, operational, or any other discretionary reasons, and 
(c) an asset must meet the minimum criteria to be eligible, which means 
the corporate bond is (typically) a plain-vanilla bond issued in the Eu-
ropean Economic Area, denominated in EUR, and carries a credit rating 
above the minimum threshold of BBB-.

To ensure a certain element of surprise for market participants, we 
exclude bonds entering the EA list for mechanical reasons; that is, due 
to rating upgrades that move them above the minimum threshold. Our 
investigation of the drivers of eligibility reveals that credit rating, bond 
age, and bond size are important determinants of eligibility, while coun-
try of origin appears not to matter. We account for this observation 
in our subsequent analyses. These covariates, however, cannot explain 
why some bonds enter the list soon after their issuance, while others 
become eligible only months or years later, despite their meeting all 
the formal eligibility criteria. We study this source of variation in de-
tail in Online Appendix A.2 and conclude that the ECB and the national 
central banks occasionally exercise discretionary judgement in the eli-
gibility assessment process. This discretionary decision making can be 
motivated by risk management considerations or ﬁnancial stability con-
cerns that are not explicitly revealed to the market. We therefore exploit 
this institutional setup and consider a bond’s inclusion on the EA list as 
a (partially) unpredictable event.8

8 Given the limited size of the non-ﬁnancial corporate bond universe in the 
Eurozone, it is inevitable that bonds fulﬁlling all the eligibility criteria will 
enter the list at some point. The truly unpredictable part of EA inclusion is thus 
the timing of such inclusion. However, from the perspective of our research 
question, which is centered on our interest in the market and pricing impact 
of eligibility studied in a cross-sectional panel setting, this timing component 
does not aﬀect the results. To put it diﬀerently, our analysis is agnostic about 
whether the uncertainty surrounding eligibility list inclusion stems from the 
timing of list inclusion or the actual inclusion of speciﬁc EA candidate bonds.

4.  Data and descriptive statistics

The starting point of our analysis is the ECB’s list of eligible collat-
eral. We merge information from this list with bond-level characteris-
tics, price data, and data on activity in the SL market.

4.1.  The list of eligible marketable assets

Our main data set is the ECB’s list of eligible marketable assets.9 We 
restrict the sample to bonds issued by non-ﬁnancial corporations and fo-
cus on the period from 8 April 2010 to 30 June 2016. For that time 
frame, we have daily eligibility information that allows us to observe 
the precise inclusion date of eligible bonds. The list includes informa-
tion on the security identiﬁer (ISIN) of an EA, asset category, issuance 
and maturity dates, haircuts, coupon, issuer residence, reference mar-
ket, and currency denomination. For our main analyses, we restrict our 
sample to EUR-denominated bonds from the EU-28 countries. In the ﬁ-
nal EA sample, about 65% of corporate bonds become eligible in the 
ﬁrst month after their issuance.

Fig. 3 illustrates the diverse composition of the EA data set in terms 
of country of origin, principal amount, maturity, and rating. Panel A 
shows that the majority of EAs originate in Germany, France, or Spain. 
The principal amount of EAs has decreased in recent years (Panel B), 
while  bond  maturity  has  increased  over  time  (Panel  C).  The  ratings 
(Panel D) indicate a decline in bond quality, a ﬁnding that is in line 
with the looser collateral requirements introduced in October 2008. In 
general, the EA list has become much broader in scope over time. Fig. 3
illustrates that the composition of the EA list evolves dynamically, sug-
gesting that the ECB actively manages the list in response to market 
conditions.

4.2.  Corporate bonds

For all ECB-eligible corporate bonds in our sample period, we ob-
tain information from Bloomberg on bond characteristics, daily yield to 
maturity, and prices. Furthermore, we complement the sample with cor-
porate bonds that were issued by the same issuer but not included on the 
ECB’s eligibility list during our sample period. Our analysis concentrates 
on bonds with suﬃcient liquidity and trading activity, so that reported 
yields do not stay constant for 14 or more consecutive days within a 
month. In addition, we include only bonds with bid-ask price data and 
credit rating information available from S&P, Fitch, Moody’s, or DBRS. 
Online Appendix B describes the bond selection procedure in detail. We 
complement the data with SL information from IHS Markit. The lending 
data contain daily aggregate values across all reported transactions of 
supplied and demanded quantities, as well as lending fees (borrowing 
costs) at the individual bond (ISIN) level.

9 The daily historical lists and descriptions of the variables are available on 
the ECB website. We also have monthly data for the period from 30 May 2007 to 
31 December 2009 from Eberl and Weber (2014), which we use for additional 
ﬁrm-level analysis.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037775L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 3. The ECB’s eligibility list: Bond characteristics. Panel A presents the distribution of eligible bonds across EEA countries. Panel B reports the distribution of bond 
issue size over time for the following six categories: below EUR 100 million, 100–250 m, 250–500 m, 500–750 m, and above EUR 1 billion. Panel C reports the 
maturity distribution of bonds over time. Maturity is measured as the diﬀerence between maturity and issuance date. The bar chart reports six maturity categories: 
1 year or less, 1–3 years, 3–5 years, 5–7 years, 7–10 years, and 10 years or more. Panel D reports the initial rating distribution over time, where initial rating is 
deﬁned as the highest initial bond rating given by Moody’s, S&P, Fitch, or DBRS. Bonds with missing initial ratings are assigned to category “N/A”. All panels are 
based on the period between April 2010 and June 2016. Our data come from Bloomberg.

We perform our analysis on all bonds that fulﬁll the ECB’s eligibility 
criteria and therefore could become eligible at some point in time. In 
practice, the ECB eventually includes all eligible candidate bonds on its 
list, resulting in a bond panel that consists of 932 ISINs. These bonds 
can be divided along two dimensions: eligibility (EA) and availability 
for securities lending (SL). Table 1 shows the composition of the sample 
along these dimensions.

Looking at EA, 783 bonds were included on the eligibility list during 
the  sample  period  (EA=1),  while  the  remaining  149  bonds  (EA=0) 
became eligible only after 30 June 2016, meaning that they met all the 
requirements to become eligible collateral during our sample period, 
but the ECB did not include them on the list due to one or more of 
the  reasons  described  in  Section 3.2.  Next,  we  shift  our  focus  to  SL 
availability, SL: 811 bonds are traded on the SL market (SL), while 121 
are not (NoSL). Examining the intersection of EA and SL among the 
783 eligible bonds, only 699 were also lendable, of which 273 were 
already present in the SL market prior to the eligibility event (SL prior 
EA), while 426 bonds became eligible and lendable at or within 30 days 
after being included on the list (SL at EA). There are also 112 bonds that 
were traded on the SL market but not eligible during our sample period 
(EA=0).

To measure the “pure” impact of EA inclusion, we focus on bonds 
that were lendable prior to their inclusion. This leaves us with 385 in-
dividual bonds, of which 273 became eligible during our sample period 

Table 1
Sample composition.

Total

EA=1

EA=0

NoSL

Total
SL

783
699
273
426
84

149
112
112
0
37

SL prior EA
SL at/post EA

932
811
385
426
121
The table presents the number of bonds with unique ISINs in the sample. We 
focus on bonds that are issued by non-ﬁnancial corporate entities and are in-
cluded on the ECB’s eligibility list after 8 April 2010. We break down the total 
number of bonds (indicated in bold) along two dimensions: central bank eligi-
bility (EA) and availability for SL. EA is a dummy that equals one if on a given 
day a bond is included on the EA list and zero otherwise. SL and NoSL denote 
bonds that are lendable or not present in the SL market, respectively. SL prior EA
(SL at/post EA) counts the number of bonds that were available in the SL sam-
ple before (on the day of the event or shortly thereafter) they were included on 
the EA list. The sample period ranges from April 2010 to June 2016.

and 112 were not (but did become eligible after the end of our sample 
period). In addition, to assess the role of the SL market in Section 5.3, 
we supplement these bonds with 121 additional issues that were not 
present in the SL market.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037776L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 4. Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences with variation in treatment timing: Illustration with three bond groups. The ﬁgure plots the potential eligibility outcomes in three bond 
groups. Candidate group C comprises bonds that fulﬁll all eligibility criteria and yet are not treated during the sample period but only at time 𝑡∗
𝐶 ; that is, they 
became eligible in the out-of-sample period. The early treatment group E contains bonds that receive a binary treatment at time 𝑡∗
𝐸 , and the late treatment group L 
comprises bonds that are treated at a later date, 𝑡∗
𝐿, for E and L bonds, respectively. In 
the event window, we examine the treated bonds relative to their matched counterparts, following the matching procedure described in Section 4.3. When the same 
control is matched to multiple treated bonds, we estimate our regressions using non-overlapping event windows.

𝐿. The ﬁgure also indicates the windows surrounding the event dates: 𝑡∗

𝐸 and 𝑡∗

4.3.  Matching treated and control bonds

We  estimate  the  eﬀect  of  the  ECB’s  collateral  policy  based  on  a 
matched sample approach. To accurately measure the impact of eligi-
bility, we require that treated and control bonds be similar enough that 
any diﬀerences in outcomes are not driven by underlying bond or is-
suer characteristics. To achieve this, we restrict our analysis to eligible 
(treated) bonds such that “not-yet-eligible” bonds serve as controls. This 
allows us to make an “apples-to-apples” comparison since such controls 
are likely to be similar to their treated counterparts. At any point in 
time, there are numerous potential not-yet-treated bonds available. We 
resort to matching each treated bond to a single control bond that is 
most similar to the treated bond in question.

A  distinctive  feature  of  inclusion  on  the  EA  list  is  that  it  occurs 
frequently;  that  is,  treatment  events  in  our  panel  data  are  staggered 
throughout the sample period, as illustrated in Fig. 4. While this does 
not allow us to implement the canonical 2 × 2 diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences 
approach with two time periods and two groups, we can rely on the 
procedure proposed by Baker et al. (2022). For each treatment date – 
that is, the date on which a bond ﬁrst appears on the EA list – we de-
ﬁne an event window with a length of ±30 days around the event. Each 
event window can be regarded as an individual, event-speciﬁc 2 × 2
data set, containing bonds that either are treated or can serve as po-
tential controls. For instance, in the ﬁrst event window in Fig. 4, bond 
“E” is treated and bonds “L” and “C” are candidate controls. Among the 
(many) candidate controls, we look for the single best match using the 
coarsened exact matching (CEM) method (Iacus et al., 2012). Assume 
bond “L” is a better match for bond “E”. We would call all matched 
bonds (here, the pair “E” and “L”) that are associated with the corre-
sponding treatment window a cohort. The cohort variable serves as an 
identiﬁer of the event-speciﬁc 2 × 2 data sets. In a ﬁnal step, we stack 
the CEM-matched bond cohorts together to obtain the ﬁnal data set for 
the analysis.

To reduce the imbalance in covariates between treated and control 
bonds, we apply CEM matching on three variables: ECB credit steps, Issue 
size, and Time to maturity. ECB credit steps is a categorical variable based 
on  the  rating  categorization  that  the  ECB  uses  for  risk  management 
and  to  assign  haircuts.  It  relies  on  time-varying  issuer  credit  ratings 

Table 2
Quality of matching.

Variable

Treated (EA=1)

Control (EA=0)

Diﬀerence

p-Value

ECB credit steps
Issue size
Time-to-maturity

Age

1.883
712.270
7.019

0.337

1.888
712.800
5.015

2.963

-0.005
-0.529
2.004

-2.626

0.954
0.983
0.000

0.000

The table presents the mean values of the matching variables across treated 
(EA=1) and control (EA=0) bonds, as a result of the CEM matching described 
in Section 4.3. ECB credit steps is a categorical variable based on the rating 
categorization that the ECB uses for risk management (to assign haircuts) and is 
based on time-varying issuer credit ratings in four categories (AAA–AA, A, BBB, 
and not rated or non-investment grade). Issue size is measured as the logarithm 
of the issued amount in EUR millions. Time to maturity and Age are measured as 
years until maturity and since issuance, respectively. The p-values correspond 
to two-sided t-tests. The sample period ranges from April 2010 to June 2016. 
The data come from Bloomberg and IHS Markit.

and takes one of four categories: AAA–AA (baseline), A, BBB, and not 
rated or non-investment grade. Issue size is measured as the logarithm 
of the issued amount, and Time to maturity is a bond’s remaining time 
to maturity. The latter two covariates are coarsened; that is, they are 
divided into four bins using three uniformly distributed cut points. Since 
we have fewer controls than treated bonds, we allow bonds to be used 
multiple times as controls if the CEM algorithm identiﬁes them as the 
most appropriate match.

After applying this matching procedure, our data set shrinks to 268 
individual bonds: 196 of which are treated, i.e., eligible in the sample 
period. In total, there are 160 unique eligibility events, with multiple 
bonds being treated on the same day.10 Table 2 reports the quality of 
the resulting matching: it compares the mean values of the matching 
variables across treated and controls bonds using two-sided t-tests.

10 Online Appendix B.3 provides additional tests on the representativeness of 
the diﬀerent subsamples relative to the total universe of non-ﬁnancial corporate 
bonds that became eligible during the period between April 2010 and June 
2016.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037777L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 3
Descriptive statistics of corporate bonds.

Variable

Obs.

Mean

SD

p5

Median

p95

Panel A: Lendable EUR-denominated bonds after matching

Issue size
Coupon
Time to maturity
Time to maturity/tenor
Initial rating
Yield spread
Bid-ask spread
Lendable value
On Loan
Indicative fee

11,534
11,534
11,534
11,534
11,452
11,534
11,534
11,534
11,534
11,534

718.291
4.276
5.709
0.722
A-
1.620
0.471
106.768
8.306
72.071

242.742
1.746
2.879
0.277
-
1.143
0.261
66.121
9.927
34.065

400.000
1.477
0.893
0.180
BBB-
0.581
0.128
23.212
0.541
50.000

750.000
4.375
5.581
0.790
BBB
1.184
0.432
93.359
4.853
62.500

1250.000
7.250
10.162
0.998
A
3.904
0.913
233.368
27.092
137.500

Panel B: Lendable and non-lendable EUR-denominated bonds

Issue size
Coupon
Time to maturity
Time to maturity/tenor
Initial rating
Yield spread
Bid-ask spread

Issue size
Coupon
Time to maturity
Time to maturity/tenor
Initial rating
Yield spread
Bid-ask spread
Lendable value
On Loan
Indicative fee

13,902
13,902
13,902
13,902
11,956
13,902
12,753

Obs.

5,065
5,065
5,065
5,065
4,923
5,065
5,065
4,855
4,594
4,594

Obs.

Mean

SD

611.164
4.201
6.630
0.740
A-
1.628
0.480

324.579
1.695
4.305
0.270
-
1.128
0.264

p5

50.000
1.375
0.989
0.189
BBB-
0.581
0.128

Median

p95

600.000
4.154
6.000
0.828
BBB
1.217
0.441

1000.000
7.250
14.671
0.998
A
3.897
0.923

Panel C: GBP-denominated bonds

Mean

SD

p5

Median

p95

460.000
6.078
11.427
0.616
A
1.339
0.805
241.000
14.100
63.115

241.000
1.001
8.837
0.225
-
1.007
0.549
193.000
13.500
42.401

200.000
4.875
1.488
0.186
BBB-
0.762
0.191
54.300
319.056
50.000

400.000
5.875
8.493
0.638
A-
1.136
0.680
202.000
9.263
50.000

975.000
8
28.337
0.939
AA-
3.165
1.904
624.000
40.300
100.000

The table presents summary statistics for corporate bond-level variables for the period from April 2010 to 
June 2016, diﬀerentiating between lendable EUR, non-lendable EUR, and GBP-denominated bonds (Panels 
A, B, and C, respectively). Issue size is measured in EUR (GBP) million, Coupon rate is a percentage, while 
Age and Time to maturity are measured as years since issuance and until maturity, respectively. Time to 
maturity/tenor is the ratio of time to maturity to original maturity, a variable between zero and one that 
captures the age of a bond. The Initial rating is deﬁned as the highest initial bond rating given by S&P, 
Moody’s, Fitch, or DBRS. Yield spread is the diﬀerence between yield to maturity and the maturity matched 
risk-free rate derived from the German Bund curve. Bid-ask spread is the diﬀerence between bid and ask 
prices. Lendable value is the supply and On loan the demand in the securities lending market, both measured 
in USD million. Indicative fee captures the borrowing costs, measured in basis points. The sample period 
ranges from April 2010 to June 2016. The data come from Bloomberg and IHS Markit.

We  ﬁnd  that  the  credit  rating  and  the  issue  size  are  statistically 
indistinguishable between the treated and control groups, while the re-
maining time to maturity of control bonds is consistently lower. This is 
due to the fact that these bonds are generally older and thus mechan-
ically lead to this diﬀerence because they have less time to maturity. 
Although we do not use the Age variable for matching, we report it in 
the table to conﬁrm this observation.

In fact, our treated bonds tend to be younger and often on the run, 
with longer remaining maturity, while control bonds are seasoned and 
older. The shorter maturity of the controls might create a bias in the 
yield,  driven  by  their  lower  yield  with  respect  to  the  treated  bonds 
and their longer maturity. This goes against our prediction that treated 
bonds should have lower yields than controls. Second, the higher age 
of controls might create a bias in liquidity. Seasoned bonds might have 
lower liquidity than their newly issued counterparts, so the controls in 
our sample might have lower liquidity than the treated bonds. Again, 
this  would  go  against our  prediction  that  treated  bonds  should  have 
higher bid-ask spreads than the controls.

4.4.  Descriptive statistics

Table 3 reports the summary statistics for our bond panel. Panels A 
and B correspond to the benchmark analysis of lendable bonds (SL), and 

a sample extended by non-lendable bonds (NoSL), respectively. Panel C 
provides the statistics for bonds denominated in pound sterling (GBP) 
and used for further analysis in Section 6.3.

The summary statistics of Panel A indicate that, on average, a bond 
in the sample has an issue size of EUR 718 million, about 5.7 years to 
maturity, and a coupon rate of 4.27%. These variables are quite dis-
persed, especially Size, whereas Time to maturity suggests that initial 
bond tenors are between 1 and 15 years. The ratio of time to maturity 
to initial maturity, Time to maturity/tenor, indicates whether the bond 
is newly issued or seasoned. In the analyses, we not only consider the 
overall sample but also compare new to seasoned/old bonds; we set the 
cutoﬀ value at 0.95. The average value of Time to maturity/tenor sug-
gests that most bonds enter the sample shortly after issuance, although 
some are included on the list about halfway through their tenure. The 
average Initial rating in our sample is A-, but credit ratings range from 
BBB- to A. The average yield is 1.62% above the maturity-matched risk-
free (Bund) curve, but this varies widely. The average Bid-ask spread is 
47 bps. In the SL market, we observe an average borrowing cost, the In-
dicative fee, of 72.07 bps. This variable indicates the current market rate 
and is calculated based on observed borrowing costs between lenders 
and prime brokers, along with hedge funds. Average lending supply, 
which  is  captured  by  Lendable  value,  is  about  USD  106.77  million, 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037778L. Pelizzon et al.

whereas demand, as captured by On loan, is about USD 8.31 million. 
That is, the ratio between supply and demand is roughly 12 to 1. Lend-
able value is deﬁned as the value of stock inventory available to lend 
on a given day, and On loan is the total value of stock on loan, net of 
double counting (as reported in IHS Markit’s data dictionary).

5.  The secondary market for collateral and corporate bonds

Financial institutions should prefer to hold collateral-eligible or fun-
gible  assets  that  can  be  easily  converted  into  cash  to  hedge  against 
funding liquidity shocks. If faced with an adverse liquidity shock, banks 
will  tap  the  corporate  bond  market  and  boost  the  demand  for  ECB-
eligible bonds (see, e.g., Hildebrand et al., 2012; BIS, 2013; Acharya 
and Merrouche, 2013; Gale and Yorulmazer, 2013; Crosignani et al., 
2020;  Boermans  and  Vermeulen,  2020).  Allen  and  Moessner  (2012)
show that, following the ﬁnancial crisis, European banks increased their 
reliance on collateralized market funding, an action that drove up de-
mand and hence the value of pledgeable collateral. In extreme cases, 
this increased demand could reduce the bond supply to an extent that 
leads to a scarcity of high-quality liquid assets (HQLAs).

Banks have multiple channels through which they can obtain ade-
quate collateral (see Fig. 1): They can either purchase such bonds on 
the secondary (cash) market or borrow them on the collateral (SL) mar-
ket. Thus, banks do not necessarily need to hold ECB-eligible bonds, 
because they can also borrow them on the SL market in exchange for 
other, ineligible assets in their portfolios. For this reason, we investigate 
in this section not only how increased demand for pledgeable collateral 
around an eligibility event aﬀects secondary (cash) market liquidity and 
prices but also its spillover into the collateral SL market.

In equilibrium, these linkages aﬀect both the secondary (cash) mar-
ket yield and the liquidity of corporate bonds, along with the quantities 
supplied and demanded and the fees charged in the SL market. To illu-
minate the economic mechanism reinforcing these linkages, we provide 
a bare-bones model in Online Appendix C, where we derive the bond-
eligibility component of the premium.11 Our model predicts that the 
inclusion of a bond on the eligibility list reduces the borrowing con-
straints of banks. For this reason, even if the cash ﬂows of that bond are 
identical to those of another bond not included on the EA list, the price 
of the eligible bond is higher; conversely, its yield is lower. In the fol-
lowing subsection, we provide evidence of the economic magnitude of 
this yield reduction.

However, many previous theoretical models have ignored the pos-
sibility that banks can hedge against funding liquidity shocks even if 
they do not hold ECB-eligible corporate bonds on their balance sheets. 
This assumption is grounded in the fact banks can convert other, ineli-
gible, on-balance-sheet assets into ECB-eligible ones via money markets 
like the SL market and then use these fungible assets to borrow at the 
ECB. We ﬁll this gap by allowing banks to borrow an ECB-eligible bond 
in the SL market in exchange for another not-yet-eligible bond for a 
fee  (and  with  a  haircut).  This  valuable  opportunity  increases  banks’ 
demand for ECB-eligible bonds in the SL market while reducing their 
demand in the secondary (cash) bond market. This has a positive im-
pact on the borrowing activity in the collateral (SL) market and leads 
to a diminished eligibility premium in the secondary bond market. Our 
model predicts that the price diﬀerence between two bonds with iden-
tical cash ﬂows might still represent an eligibility premium, but this 
premium is lower if the bond is available in the SL market. The intu-
ition behind the price diﬀerential between the two bonds is that a bank’s 

11 The model’s prediction is largely in line with the “specialness” premium 
(Duﬃe, 1996; Jordan and Jordan, 1997), the on-the-run-premium (Krishna-
murthy, 2002), the convenience yield documented in U.S. Treasuries (Longstaﬀ, 
2004; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012), and the pledgeability pre-
mium due to borrowing constraints (see, e.g., Gârleanu and Pedersen, 2011; 
Chen et al., 2018, 2023).

borrowing constraints could be relaxed due to the option of borrowing 
from the SL market. This ﬂexibility reduces the extent to which borrow-
ing constraints are binding and therefore their impact on the price. We 
test these predictions by performing the following analyses.

5.1.  The secondary market for collateral

Regulatory reforms following the ﬁnancial crisis have increased the 
need  for  collateral  in  the  form  of  HQLAs.  Amid  the  resulting  HQLA 
shortage, a secondary market for collateral emerged, with the OTC repo 
and SL markets facilitating the short- and long-term borrowing of col-
lateral. According to Aggarwal et al. (2021), market participants in the 
euro area access the SL market mainly to obtain eligible collateral via 
borrowing or collateral swaps rather than to directly seek short-term 
funding (cash).

In addition to the repo and SL markets, many central banks are us-
ing their growing balance sheets to maintain their lending facilities for 
liquidity provision to banks. Even though these facilities may appear to 
be a redundant platform to obtain liquidity, they play an important role 
by providing both a benchmark for borrowing costs and a far greater 
liquidity capacity than bonds available in the private money markets. 
Moreover, the ECB facility for the corporate bond market in Europe is 
not redundant; on the contrary, a repo market for European corporate 
bonds is virtually non-existent.12

5.1.1.  The securities lending market

The SL market has grown substantially in both scale and scope in 
the  past  decade  (IHS  Markit,  2020).  On  the  supply  side  of  the  mar-
ket, lenders that are typically large passive investors, such as mutual 
funds, pension funds, and insurance companies, oﬀer their long-term 
holdings for lending. On the demand side, borrowing institutions typi-
cally seek HQLAs, but they also seek other speciﬁc assets; for example, 
hedge funds may short certain stocks, and dealers/market-makers may 
ﬁll orders on assets that are not in their inventory.13

To examine the eﬀect of the initial inclusion of a bond on the EA 
list  on  the  SL  market,  we  use  proprietary  SL  data  from  IHS  Markit. 
The advantage of performing this analysis is that we are able to disen-
tangle the direct eﬀect of ECB eligibility on the SL market, given the 
virtual absence of a (private) corporate bond repo market in Europe. 
The ﬁrst evidence of the linkage between eligibility and SL market can 
be found in Table 1, where we observe that 426 of 811 bonds were 
oﬀered for lending shortly after they became eligible. However, we can-
not use these bonds for either the SL market analysis (since there are 
no data for the pre-eligibility period) or the yield and liquidity analysis 
(since the results would be aﬀected by the joint eﬀect of eligibility and 
inclusion in the SL market). We therefore focus on bonds that were al-
ready present in the SL market prior to the eligibility event and estimate 
the following model:

𝐸𝐴𝑏𝑐 × Post𝑏𝑡𝑐 + 𝑋𝑏𝑡𝑐 + 𝜖𝑏𝑡𝑐,

Y𝑏𝑡𝑐 = 𝛼𝑏𝑐 + 𝛼𝑡𝑐 + 𝛽
1
where Y𝑏𝑡𝑐 is the SL market variable at time 𝑡 of bond 𝑏 that belongs to 
cohort 𝑐. Cohorts are deﬁned in Section 4.3; EA𝑏𝑐 is an indicator that 
equals one for bonds that are on the EA list (treated) throughout the 
event window of cohort 𝑐 and zero otherwise. Post𝑏𝑡𝑐 is a dummy vari-
able that equals one for the post-treatment period and zero otherwise. 
𝑋𝑏𝑡𝑐 controls for the diﬀerent ECB credit step categories. 𝛼𝑏𝑐 and 𝛼𝑡𝑐 are 
bond-cohort and day-cohort ﬁxed eﬀects, respectively.

(1)

12 Nyborg and Rösler (2019) report that only about 1% of the total volume of 
general collateral repo transactions are based on pledged corporate bond col-
lateral. This suggests that the (private) corporate bond repo market is virtually 
absent from the euro area, except for collateralized lending operations provided 
by the ECB.
13 We refer the interested reader to Online Appendix D, where we provide 
details on SL market size, the institutional background, and the characteristics 
of lendable bonds.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037779L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 4
The eﬀect of corporate bond eligibility on the securities lending market.

EA*Post

Observations
R-squared

EA*Post

Observations
R-squared

EA*Post

Overall sample

0.229***
[0.016]

8,688
0.983

0.419***
[0.081]

8,688
0.865

Panel A: Lendable value

New bonds

0.357***
[0.023]

7,467
0.982

Panel B: On loan

0.682***
[0.117]

7,467
0.872

0.238***
[0.017]

8,688
0.983

0.506***
[0.085]

8,688
0.867

Panel C: Indicative fee

Seasoned bonds

0.356***
[0.023]

7,467
0.982

0.697***
[0.117]

7,467
0.873

0.013
[0.009]

1,192
0.995

0.009
[0.077]

1,192
0.847

-0.205***
[0.021]

-0.204***
[0.022]

-0.280***
[0.030]

-0.279***
[0.030]

-0.084***
[0.025]

Observations
R-squared

8,688
0.772

8,688
0.772

7,467
0.766

7,467
0.766

1,192
0.823

0.012
[0.008]

1,192
0.995

0.122
[0.090]

1,192
0.848

-0.048*
[0.027]

1,192
0.824

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Controls
Day-cohort FE
Bond-cohort FE

No
Yes
Yes
The table presents the results of daily panel regressions of the 30-day event study on the eﬀect of ECB 
eligibility list inclusion on bond-level SL market proxies. In panel A, the dependent variable is Lendable 
value, the lending market supply that we proxy as the natural logarithm of the $ amount (stock) of a given 
bond available for lending. In panel B, the dependent variable is On loan, the lending market demand deﬁned 
as the logarithm of the total USD amount of the bond borrowed on a given day. In panel C, the dependent 
variable is Indicative fee, deﬁned as the logarithm of the lending fee or borrowing cost measured in bps. EA
is a dummy that equals one if a bond is included on the EA list on a given day and zero otherwise. Post is 
the 30-day post-treatment dummy. Controls are dummy variables for the ECB credit steps. Bond-cohort and 
day-cohort ﬁxed eﬀects are included where indicated, with cohorts deﬁned for each eligibility treatment 
date. Three samples are considered: all bonds, newly issued bonds, and seasoned bonds. The sample period 
ranges from April 2010 to June 2016. The data come from Bloomberg and IHS Markit. Robust standard 
errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance is denoted by ***, **, and * at the 1%, 5%, and 
10% levels, respectively.

We have three key variables of interest: lending demand, proxied 
by On loan; lending market supply, as captured by Lendable value; and 
Indicative fee, which represents borrowing costs on a given day for a 
speciﬁc security. Table 4 presents the results for the period between 
April 2010 and June 2016.

In panel A of Table 4, we see that an eligibility event triggers an 
increase in the Lendable value of eligible bonds relative to their matched 
but not-yet-eligible counterparts in the overall sample. This increase in 
supply  might  be  generated  due  either  to  existing  lenders  raising  the 
amount  allocated  for  lending  or  to  new  lenders  entering  the  market 
to capitalize on the income-generating potential of SL. However, once 
we diﬀerentiate between new and old bonds, we see that the lending 
supply increase is largely concentrated in the new bond segment (with a 
roughly 35.6% increase upon eligibility).14 Demand, proxied for by On 
loan, also increases, as shown in panel B. While the ﬁrst two columns 
of the overall sample suggest a 41.9%–50.6% increase in demand, the 
rest of the table shows that new bonds account for 68.2%–69.7% of the 
shift, while the implied increase for seasoned bonds is both negligible 
and  statistically  insigniﬁcant.  Table 3 suggests  that  even  though  the 
percentage change is larger in terms of demand, the overall lending 
supply is an order of magnitude larger, which is why we observe an 
average short-term drop of 20% in Indicative fees, with about 28.0% 
for newly issued bonds (see panel C). Nevertheless, the increase in the 
total volume should compensate lenders for the drop in fees, making 
post-eligibility lending more proﬁtable overall.

14 In general, our main ﬁndings are robust with respect to the inclusion of a 
“week since issuance” categorical control variable. These results are available 
upon request.

Our results suggest that the secondary (cash) corporate bond market 
alone cannot meet the increased demand for collateral, as SL activity 
is on average more concentrated around newly issued bonds. With the 
participation  of  collateral-seeking  banks  in  the  SL  market,  corporate 
bond lending opens a channel through which collateral shortages can 
be mitigated. Eligibility not only promotes SL but also improves mar-
ket functioning. Moreover, we observe that many bonds in our sample 
become eligible and lendable at roughly the same time. Although we 
exclude these bonds from our analysis, since we cannot measure the 
“pure”  eﬀect  of  eligibility  inclusion,  their  presence  serves  as  further 
evidence for the spillover between the ECB’s monetary policy and the 
secondary market for collateral; that is, the SL market for corporate 
bonds.

5.2.  The secondary (cash) market for corporate bonds

5.2.1.  Secondary market yield reaction

Following the inclusion of a bond on the EA list, bond demand from 
banks seeking adequate collateral will increase in the secondary cash 
and collateral markets. Hedging demand against unexpected funding 
liquidity shocks and the buildup of precautionary collateral reserves by 
banks are likely to put downward pressure on bond yields. Moreover, 
ECB eligibility should also decrease yields, as an EA provides a liquid-
ity service, allowing for it to be repeatedly pledged at the central bank 
against overnight funding (cash). As predicted by our model in Online 
Appendix C, this feature should increase the price of the bond, pushing 
down its yield to account for the present value of its fungibility. How-
ever, this eﬀect should be mitigated by the possibility of exchanging an 
ineligible bond for an eligible one in a collateral swap on the SL market.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377710L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 5
The eﬀect of corporate bond eligibility on the secondary market yield and liquidity.

Panel A: Yield spread

Overall sample

New bonds

Seasoned bonds

EA*Post

-0.078***
[0.011]

-0.046***
[0.010]

Observations
R-squared

8,688
0.994

8,688
0.994

-0.005
[0.012]

7,467
0.996

-0.006
[0.012]

7,467
0.996

-0.201***
[0.022]

-0.090***
[0.014]

1,192
0.971

1,192
0.975

Panel B: Bid-ask spread

EA*Post

Observations
R-squared

0.046***
[0.006]

8,688
0.931

0.058***
[0.006]

8,688
0.932

0.095***
[0.008]

0.096***
[0.008]

-0.040***
[0.008]

7,467
0.939

7,467
0.939

1,192
0.901

-0.008
[0.007]

1,192
0.903

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Controls
Day-cohort FE
Bond-cohort FE

No
Yes
Yes
The table presents the results of daily panel regressions of the 30-day event study on the eﬀect of eligibility 
list inclusion on secondary market bond yield and liquidity. In panel A, the dependent variable is Yield 
spread, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the bond’s daily mid yield to maturity and the matched risk-free 
yield that is derived from the German Bund curve provided by Bundesbank. In panel B, the dependent 
variable is Bid-ask spread, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the bond’s quoted bid and ask prices. EA is a 
dummy that equals one if a bond is on the EA list on a given day and zero otherwise. Post is the 30-day post-
treatment dummy. Controls are dummy variables for the ECB credit steps. Bond-cohort and day-cohort ﬁxed 
eﬀects are included where indicated, with cohorts deﬁned for each eligibility treatment date. Three samples 
are considered: all bonds, newly issued bonds, and seasoned bonds. The sample period ranges from April 
2010 to June 2016. The data come from Bloomberg and IHS Markit. Robust standard errors are reported in 
parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance is denoted by ***, **, and * at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

To investigate the eligibility premium for bonds made available in 
the SL market, we use Yield spread as the dependent variable in equation 
(1); it is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the bond’s end-of-day yield 
to maturity and the maturity-matched risk-free rate, derived from the 
German Bund yield curve.15

Panel A of Table 5 presents the results for the Yield spread. In the 
overall sample, we ﬁnd that the EA*Post coeﬃcient is negative, statisti-
cally signiﬁcant, and robust to the inclusion of controls and ﬁxed eﬀects. 
This suggests that once a bond becomes eligible, its yield decreases by 
4.6–7.8 bps on average relative to its matched, not-yet-eligible counter-
part. Untabulated regression results suggest that Time to maturity/tenor
is also signiﬁcant, hinting that an examination of the yield eﬀect in the 
subsamples of new versus more mature bonds is warranted. We ﬁnd that 
the yield drop is smaller for newly issued bonds and not statistically dif-
ferent from zero, compared to the 9.0–20.1 bps observed for their older, 
seasoned counterparts. This pattern likely emerges because of the large 
amount of new bonds being supplied and demanded in the SL market 
after the eligibility event, consistent with the evidence in the previous 
section. By contrast, the eligibility of seasoned bonds can revive their 
trading activity by focusing investors’ attention on them, given the lack 
of a signiﬁcant SL market response.

Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the presence of an eligibility premium in line 
with  the  previous  literature  on  bond  specialness,  convenience  yield, 
and pledgeability premium. The observed decline in yields is a form 
of compensation for the fungibility of adequate collateral. This means 
that once a bond is eligible, it acquires cash-like features because it is 
easier to sell and can be pledged at the ECB in exchange for overnight 
funding.16 We ﬁnd that the two important aspects driving the size of the 

eligibility premium are (a) the relevance of the absence of the private 
corporate repo market and (b) the importance of activity in the SL mar-
ket. Regarding the latter, we have shown that the demand pressure on 
EAs in the SL market is larger for new bonds, which could explain why 
the eligibility premium is substantially larger for older bonds, where SL 
activity is less pronounced, even following an eligibility event. In the 
absence of the SL market’s mitigating eﬀect, we can capture the unbi-
ased size of the eligibility premium.

5.2.2.  Secondary market liquidity reaction

While extending the range of ECB-eligible assets constitutes a posi-
tive shock to funding liquidity, the accompanying impact on bond-level 
market liquidity is less clear. We expect that when a corporate bond 
becomes eligible collateral for (central bank) repo transactions, its liq-
uidity should improve in line with Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), 
who argue that market liquidity and funding liquidity are tightly linked. 
As such, when a bond becomes good collateral, it will not be subject to 
ﬁre sales, thus making it less costly for dealers to hold that bond in their 
inventory. All these mechanisms appear to suggest that market liquid-
ity should improve after eligibility. On the contrary, as a hedge against 
future liquidity shocks, banks may have an incentive to lock EAs into 
their portfolios by increasing their holdings (Hildebrand et al., 2012; 
Acharya and Merrouche, 2013; Gale and Yorulmazer, 2013; Crosignani 
et al., 2020), which would reduce the free ﬂoat of eligible bonds in the 
market. This “hoarding eﬀect” decreases bond-level liquidity and could 
lead to scarcity and eventually a drying up of liquidity if the bond sup-
ply remains unchanged. However, an increase in the lendable value in 
the SL market should mitigate the scarcity channel, as suggested by the 
theoretical model in Huh and Infante (2021). An alternative explanation 

15 The risk-free rate is based on the Nelson-Siegel-Svensson yield curve, with 
the  parameters  estimated  from  the  Bund  yield  curve  and  taken  from  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank website. We compute the yield spread following Dick-
Nielsen et al. (2012) and Friewald et al. (2012). See Online Appendix B for 
more information.
16 In terms of economic magnitude, the eligibility premium is comparable to 
the estimates for sovereign bonds by Buraschi et al. (2014) and Corradin and 
Rodriguez-Moreno (2016), who ﬁnd an eﬀect of 13 bps for eligible USD bonds 

during the global ﬁnancial crisis. However, this comparison is somewhat su-
perﬁcial due to the confounding eﬀect of the active private repo market of 
sovereign bonds. For these bonds, inclusion on the ECB’s eligible list has a sim-
ilar eﬀect to that on the highly overlapping general collateral list of the repo 
market (see Nyborg and Rösler, 2019). Therefore, it is diﬃcult to distinguish 
whether the observed premium is driven by the ECB’s lending facility or by the 
private repo market.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377711L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 6
The eﬀect of corporate bond eligibility in the absence of securities lending.

Yield spread

Bid-ask spread

EA*Post*NoSL

EA*Post

Observations
R-squared

-0.108***
[0.026]
-0.079***
[0.011]

10,609
0.994

-0.139***
[0.026]
-0.048***
[0.010]

10,609
0.994

-0.058*
[0.033]
0.046***
[0.007]

9,350
0.926

-0.070**
[0.033]
0.058***
[0.006]

9,350
0.927

0.052***
[0.007]

9,350
0.927

-0.077***
[0.009]

10,609
0.994

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Controls
Day-cohort FE
Bond-cohort FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
The table presents the results of daily panel regressions of the 30-day event study on the eﬀect of eligibility 
list inclusion in conjunction with availability for securities lending. The dependent variable Yield spread is 
deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the bond’s daily mid yield to maturity and the matched risk-free yield 
that is derived from the German Bund curve provided by Bundesbank. The Bid-ask spread is the diﬀerence 
between the bond’s quoted bid and ask prices. EA is a dummy that equals one if a bond is included on the 
EA list on a given day and zero otherwise. Post is the 30-day post-treatment dummy, and NoSL is a dummy 
that equals one for the subset of corporate bonds that are not available for securities lending. Controls are 
dummy variables for the ECB credit steps. Bond-cohort and day-cohort ﬁxed eﬀects are included where 
indicated, with cohorts deﬁned for each eligibility treatment date. The sample period ranges from April 
2010 to June 2016. The data come from Bloomberg and IHS Markit. Robust standard errors are reported in 
parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance is denoted by ***, **, and * at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

could involve the changing composition of traders. A bank that holds 
an eligible bond and is subject to a liquidity shock will pledge it with 
the ECB to borrow cash instead of selling it in the secondary market. 
This should reduce the number of traders engaged in bond transactions 
for liquidity purposes and tilt the composition of traders toward those 
that  are  motivated  to  trade  for  informational  reasons.17 As  a  conse-
quence, the bid-ask spread oﬀered by market-makers should increase. 
In the event that a bank is holding an eligible bond without an immedi-
ate need for liquidity, it can decide to post the bond on the SL market, 
which increases the lendable bond supply in the SL market. In this case, 
we should therefore observe, unlike what is theoretically predicted in 
Huh and Infante (2021), that an increase in the bid-ask spread is asso-
ciated with an increase in the lendable value on the SL market. Clearly, 
the interaction of these elements is quite complex, and we leave it to 
the empirical evidence to indicate which one prevails.

We investigate whether liquidity signiﬁcantly changes around EA 
list inclusion in a setting similar to equation (1). We use Bid-ask spread
as our liquidity measure, a standard proxy for trading costs and dealer 
inventory risk, measured as the diﬀerence between a bond’s quoted bid 
and ask prices. Panel B of Table 5 presents the results.

We  ﬁnd  that  Bid-ask  spread exhibits  either  a  positive  or  non-
signiﬁcant impact across most speciﬁcations. Once included on the EA 
list, bonds experience an increase in trading costs on average, as their 
Bid-ask spread widens by about 4.6–5.8 bps relative to not-yet-eligible 
bonds. This eﬀect is more pronounced for newly issued bonds. There-
fore, in this case, the empirical evidence points to the traders’ compo-
sition hypothesis.18 For seasoned bonds, we observe a slight improve-
ment in liquidity, which becomes insigniﬁcant in the most conservative 
model speciﬁcation, in line with the funding and market liquidity chan-
nel documented by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and positive but 
not signiﬁcant changes in the supply and demand of these bonds in the 
SL market, slightly supporting the theoretical predictions in Huh and 
Infante (2021). These results conﬁrm that there are several forces at 
play in the complex interactions around the market liquidity of bonds’ 
secondary market, and there is no dominant eﬀect for all bonds.

17 We thank the anonymous referee for pointing out this potential eﬀect.
18 Unfortunately, due to a lack of data, we cannot test or quantify this eﬀect 
because we do not have access to good data on trade volumes and trader iden-
tiﬁcation. The corporate bond market in Europe is largely an OTC market and 
there are no data available in the manner that TRACE provides for the United 
States.

5.3.  Bonds without securities lending activity

In the previous subsections, we argue that the size of the eligibility 
premium is diﬀerent for bonds that are also available in the SL market, 
a statement theoretically based on our model. We test this empirical 
prediction  by  repeating  the  yield  and  liquidity  analyses  through  the 
inclusion of a set of bonds that are not available for SL. Overall, we 
have 121 such bonds in our data set, of which 84 entered the EA list 
during the sample period, while the remaining 37 became eligible after 
June 2016. After applying the matching algorithm, our sample consists 
of 36 pairs of treated and control bonds.

We expect that for bonds without the mitigating eﬀect of the SL 
market, both the secondary market liquidity reaction and the yield im-
pact should be more pronounced. Empirical support for this hypothesis 
would verify our claim that the presence of an SL market for euro area 
corporate bonds alleviates the collateral shortage by oﬀering investors 
access to short-term eligible collateral borrowing. We perform this anal-
ysis on an extended sample that contains lendable securities as well 
as non-lendable matched bond pairs. To capture the diﬀerential eﬀect 
stemming from SL, we include the dummy variable NoSL that equals one 
for bonds that are not available for SL and its interaction with EA*Post. 
Table 6 presents the results.

Table 6 replicates  the  analyses  presented  in  Table 5 but  studies 
the  eﬀect  of  eligibility  in  conjunction  with  a  bond’s  availability  in 
the SL market. Our variable of interest is the triple interaction term 
EA*Post*NoSL, which captures the diﬀerential impact between lendable 
and non-lendable bonds. The negative and statistically signiﬁcant coef-
ﬁcient on this term conﬁrms our expectation that the yield eﬀect is more 
substantial for non-lendable bonds. While the average yield reaction of 
bonds available for lending is 4.6–7.8 bps, this eﬀect is larger for non-
lendable bonds, with 18.7 bps (i.e., a diﬀerence of about 14 bps). Again, 
the results are driven by seasoned bonds. We also test the potential dif-
ferential liquidity impact between lendable and non-lendable bonds and 
ﬁnd that while eligibility slightly increases the Bid-ask spread, this ef-
fect is reversed for the non-lendable bonds. That is, a bond that is not 
traded in the SL market and is therefore less liquid might experience liq-
uidity improvement due to increased investor attention resulting from 
the positive eligibility news.

6.  Further evidence on causality and robustness

In the following, we summarize our ﬁndings on additional analyses 
and robustness exercises. First, we investigate the presence of parallel 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377712L. Pelizzon et al.

trends between eligible and control bonds prior to treatment. Second, 
we  aﬃrm  the  robustness  of  the  main  ﬁndings  with  respect  to  event 
window  length  and  sample  period  choice.  Third,  we  account  for  ef-
fects stemming from ﬁrm fundamentals by focusing on a subset of bond 
issuers who issue EAs in multiple currencies. Fourth, we study the in-
troduction of a new haircut regime to address any concerns regarding 
biases stemming from haircut changes. Finally, we switch perspectives 
and delve into the impact of bank liquidity shocks.

6.1.  Parallel trends

To test the matching quality and argue that our results can be re-
garded as causal evidence, we show the existence of parallel trends in 
treated and control bonds prior to treatment. For this test, we focus 
on a nine-week window around the eligibility event. Similar to equa-
tion (1), we regress our variables of interest on EA and their interaction 
with dummies for each week in the event window, in addition to bond-
cohort and day-cohort ﬁxed eﬀects.

Panel A of Fig. 5 plots the impact of collateral eligibility on Lendable 
value. We ﬁnd that the SL market supply is somewhat (although not 
signiﬁcantly) lower for treated bonds than for controls, most likely be-
cause the majority of treated bonds are new issues, and it takes time for 
lending supply to build up. Following the eligibility event, the diﬀer-
ence reverses and increases signiﬁcantly, indicating that eligible bond 
holders post more of these more desirable EAs for lending. For lend-
ing demand (On loan amount) in panel B, treated bonds have somewhat 
higher demand in the four weeks prior to eligibility; that is, around 
the  time  of  issuance  for  most  bonds.  This  diﬀerence  declines  in  the 
weeks preceding the treatment date and widens signiﬁcantly after EA 
list inclusion. As depicted in panel C, for the borrowing cost measure 
Indicative fee, the pre-eligibility trend is less clear prior to treatment, 
which is followed by a sharp decline in the fees of control bonds due to 
eligibility. Panel D depicts the Yield spread, which gradually declines fol-
lowing treatment, while in panel E, the Bid-ask spread increases slightly 
for treated bonds relative to the pre-treatment period, in line with the 
results  of  Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2.  Generally,  we  conclude  that  the 
pre-treatment trends of eligible and not-yet-eligible control bonds are 
rather similar, supporting the causal nature of the empirical evidence 
presented in Section 5.

6.2.  Event and rolling window analyses

To conﬁrm that the choice of event window length does not aﬀect 
the results, we run the main analysis with a shorter window length of 
±15 days. The results are both qualitatively and quantitatively similar 
to the benchmark speciﬁcations (see Online Appendix E.1).

There may be concerns that the eligibility eﬀect observed during 
the sample period is driven by the ECB’s adoption of an increasingly 
accommodating monetary policy to combat the euro area debt crisis 
and the period that followed. To address these concerns, we conduct an 
analysis of sub-periods. The purpose of this approach is to disentangle 
the potentially disparate eﬀects of two major events that could aﬀect 
our results: The period between 2010 and 2014 is likely to be inﬂuenced 
by the eﬀects of the euro area debt crisis, while post-2014, the Targeted 
Longer-Term Reﬁnancing Operations could bias our ﬁndings. We run 
three-year rolling window regressions and conﬁrm that our main results 
are robust with respect to diﬀerent periods of ﬁnancial and economic 
stress in the euro area. Online Appendix E.2 presents and discusses these 
ﬁndings in more detail.

For these multi-currency issuers, we compare the eligibility eﬀect across 
diﬀerent  currency  denominations,  controlling  for  within-ﬁrm  eﬀects, 
among other factors.19 This analysis is close in spirit to the approach 
of  Chen  et  al.  (2023),  who  address  the  endogeneity  stemming  from 
the correlation in changes in asset fundamentals with changes in as-
set pledgeability.

The ECB is the only major central bank that as a general rule does 
not accept foreign currency-denominated bonds as collateral at all times 
(ECB, 2013). It ﬁrst accepted foreign currency, more speciﬁcally, USD-, 
pound sterling (GBP)-, and Japanese yen (JPY)-denominated assets that 
were issued and held in the euro area as part of the Temporary Frame-
work that was in eﬀect between 17 November 2008 and 31 December 
2010.  Following  the  termination  of  the  framework,  the  eligibility  of 
these assets was discontinued until their reintroduction to the EA list 
in 2012. This (re)inclusion was announced on 6 September 2012, while 
the ﬁrst non-EUR collateral-eligible assets were included on the list on 
8 November 2012. Since then, the ECB has considered USD-, GBP-, and 
JPY-denominated collateral for eligibility, in addition to the euro. For 
our analyses, we focus on GBP corporate bonds, which constitute over 
95% of non-EUR EAs in the sample. Panel C of Table 3 reports descrip-
tive statistics for the GBP bonds.

This institutional setup allows us to test various features of foreign 
currency-denominated collateral. More speciﬁcally, we can examine the 
eﬀect of non-technical (i.e., not related to a rating downgrade or ma-
turity expiration) exclusions from the EA list, as well as the eﬀect of 
inclusion announcements. However, compared to previous analyses, our 
identiﬁcation strategy has to be adjusted to accommodate the debt port-
folio composition of multi-currency issuers.20

We  measure  the  eﬀect  of  the  eligibility  event  using  a  simple 
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences regression: the treated bonds are denominated 
in GBP, while the control group is comprised of already-eligible EUR-
denominated  bonds  issued  by  the  same  ﬁrm.  When  conducting  this 
analysis,  we  focus  on  133  bonds  of  11  ﬁrms  that  have  at  least  two 
eligible EUR-denominated and at least two eligible GBP-denominated 
bonds. In addition, we include daily time, bond, and ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects. 
Controlling for bond ﬁxed eﬀects is important in this setting because 
diﬀerent levels of haircuts apply to diﬀerent bond features, such as cur-
rency denominations, in the eligibility framework. Firm ﬁxed eﬀects 
are included to absorb all information related to ﬁrm fundamentals that 
could help drive bond selection or the eligibility eﬀect. In this setup, the 
observed SL and secondary market eﬀects can be interpreted as the dif-
ference between the newly eligible GBP bonds relative to the previously 
eligible EUR-denominated bonds.

6.3.1.  The eﬀect of list exclusion

For the EUR bonds in the main analysis, it is not possible to test the 
eﬀect of removal from the EA list, as bonds are excluded only for tech-
nical reasons; that is, when they either no longer fulﬁll the eligibility 
criteria because of declining credit quality or when they reach maturity. 
By contrast, the ECB’s decision to accept (or reject) collateral denom-
inated in foreign currencies is a monetary policy question that is not 
necessarily linked to the fundamental characteristics of the relevant as-
set or its issuer and constitutes a shock to both market participants and 
bond-issuing ﬁrms.

We can thus examine the eﬀect of eligibility delisting in the sam-
ple  of  GBP  bonds.  We  observe  70  event  dates  for  the  169  treated 
bonds, with 48 exclusion events due to the suspension of the Temporary 
Framework. When we match these treated bonds with EUR counterparts 

6.3.  GBP-denominated eligible bonds

In this section, we address the potential concern that the issuing 
ﬁrms’ fundamental characteristics could signiﬁcantly contribute to the 
selection of EAs and thus aﬀect or even drive our results. We turn to a 
particular subset of bond issuers that issue EAs in multiple currencies. 

19 We observe that the group of multi-currency issuers is heterogeneous: they 
are typically large, can be domiciled in either the United Kingdom or continen-
tal Europe, and come from a variety of sectors.
20 We also examine the inclusion of GBP bonds on the eligibility list and ﬁnd 
qualitatively similar eligibility eﬀects to the main analysis; these results are 
available on request.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377713L. Pelizzon et al.

Fig. 5. Dynamic coeﬃcient plots. The ﬁgure plots the impact of collateral eligibility on bonds’ securities lending activity (Panels A to C), secondary market yield 
spreads (Panel D), and liquidity (Panel E). We consider a nine-week window from four weeks before and after the week of the eligibility event. The vertical gray lines 
represent 95% conﬁdence intervals. The estimated coeﬃcients come from the following regression: 𝑌𝑏𝑡𝑐 = 𝛼𝑏𝑐 + 𝛼𝑡𝑐 + 𝛽
𝐸𝐴𝑏𝑐 × 𝑊 𝑒𝑒𝑘(−3) +
1
… + 𝛽
𝐸𝐴𝑏𝑐 × 𝑊 𝑒𝑒𝑘(+4) + 𝑋𝑏𝑡𝑐 + 𝜖𝑏𝑡𝑐 , where Y𝑏𝑡𝑐 is the securities lending or secondary market variable at time 𝑡 of bond 𝑏 of cohort identiﬁer 𝑐. EA𝑏𝑐 is a time-
9
invariant indicator that equals one for bonds that are on the eligibility list (treated) and zero otherwise. 𝑊 𝑒𝑒𝑘(𝑖) is a dummy variable for week 𝑖, where 𝑖 measures 
the distance to the event week. Controls are dummy variables for the ECB credit steps. Bond-cohort and day-cohort ﬁxed eﬀects are also included. We plot the 
diﬀerence in estimated coeﬃcients relative to the announcement week 𝑖 = 0. The control group comprises coarsened exact-matched bonds that are eligible candidate 
bonds; that is, those that fulﬁll all eligibility criteria but are not yet treated. All panels are based on the period between April 2010 and June 2016. The data come 
from Bloomberg and IHS Markit.

𝐸𝐴𝑏𝑐 × 𝑊 𝑒𝑒𝑘(−4) + 𝛽
2

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377714L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 7
The GBP exclusion.

Lendable value

On loan

Indicative fee

Yield spread

Bid-ask spread

EA*Post

-0.026***
[0.004]

Observations
R-squared

2,949
0.995

-0.176***
[0.030]

2,949
0.902

0.009
[0.012]

2,949
0.777

0.060***
[0.004]

2,949
0.993

-0.016***
[0.004]

2,949
0.955

The table presents the results of daily panel regressions of the event study on the eﬀect of the exclusion 
of multi-currency issuers’ GBP-denominated bond from the EA list on 31 December 2010. The dependent 
variables are Lendable value, On loan, Indicative fee, Yield spread, and Bid-ask spread. Lendable value is the 
natural logarithm of the value of a given bond available for lending. On loan is the logarithm of the amount 
of the bond borrowed on a given day. Indicative fee is the logarithm of the indicative lending fee in bps. 
Yield spread is the diﬀerence between the bond’s daily mid yield to maturity and the matched risk-free 
yield that is derived from the German Bund curve provided by Bundesbank. Bid-ask spread is the diﬀerence 
between the bond’s quoted bid and ask prices. EA is a dummy that equals one for GBP-denominated bonds 
that are aﬀected by the announcement and zero otherwise. Post is the 30-day post-treatment dummy. For 
each measure, we report the results for ﬁrms that have at least two GBP and at least two EUR bonds on the 
eligibility list. The sample period ranges from 1 December 2010 to 1 January 2011. The data come from 
Bloomberg and IHS Markit. Firm, bond, and daily time ﬁxed eﬀects are included in all regressions. Robust 
standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance is denoted by ***, **, and * at the 1%, 
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

issued by the same issuer, we end up with 36 separate events that take 
place on 31 December 2010, with an average of 2.5 previously eligible 
EUR control bonds per ﬁrm. In this subsample, we run an analysis sim-
ilar to that in Tables 4 and 5, except that in this case we are looking at 
the delisting eﬀect. Table 7 presents the results.

The ﬁrst three columns of Table 7 present the delisting eﬀect on 
measures of SL activity. The descriptive statistics in Panel C of Table 3
demonstrate that, on average, both lending market supply and demand 
of GBP bonds are higher than those of EUR-denominated bonds, while 
Indicative fees diﬀer by 10 bps across the two subsamples. In light of 
this  ﬁnding,  negative  coeﬃcients  on  the  Lendable  value and  On  loan
suggest that diﬀerences in lending market activity of GBP- and EUR-
denominated bonds of the same ﬁrm decrease in the 30 days following 
a bond’s exclusion from the EA list by 2.6% and 17.6%, respectively. 
The Indicative fee does not change. Shifting our focus to the respective 
secondary bond market measures, we expect a bond’s exclusion from 
the EA list to widen the cross-currency yield diﬀerential, as the yield of 
EUR bonds is lower due to the eligibility premium, while the exclusion 
should cause a similar eﬀect to vanish in GBP yields. Indeed, we observe 
that the relative Yield spread increases, or the price declines, when a 
bond loses its eligibility status and its corresponding liquidity service to 
banks. Furthermore, the Bid-ask spread indicates that list exclusion leads 
to an improvement in liquidity, a ﬁnding that is in line with the scarcity 
channel explanation from Section 5.2.2 (i.e., banks stop hoarding these 
bonds and release them back into the market). Each speciﬁcation con-
trols for daily time, bond, and – most importantly – ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects 
to ﬁlter out any information related to having a common issuer of the 
treated and control bonds.

6.3.2.  The eligibility announcement

The ECB has included corporate bonds on its EA list almost since 
the list’s inception; thus, we could not investigate any announcement 
eﬀect. Nevertheless, the introduction of foreign currency collateral con-
stitutes a change to the collateral framework; therefore, these instances 
were covered in ECB press releases. Although the announcements about 
the introduction and ﬁnal suspension of the Temporary Framework fall 
outside our observation period, the re-inclusion of foreign collateral as 
a change in ECB monetary policy was announced on 6 September 2012, 
two months before the new rule came into eﬀect.

We study this event by identifying those bonds that were previously 
eligible but were excluded with the suspension of the Temporary Frame-
work.  This  covers  43  announcement  events,  all  of  which  took  place 
on 6 September 2012. For the treated bonds, we can match three or 
more eligible EUR control bonds per ﬁrm. In this setup, we expect that 

the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis of the announcement event would 
highlight a reduction in the diﬀerence between the treated and the con-
trol groups for all measures considered. Table 8 reports the results.

The ﬁrst three columns of Table 8 present the announcement ef-
fect on measures of SL activity. Considering the diﬀerence in lending 
market activity levels, we expect that the eligibility announcement will 
further increase the existing diﬀerential supply and demand in the SL 
market. In line with this result, we observe that in the 30 days follow-
ing the eligibility announcement, the GBP relative to the EUR lending 
market supply, as captured by the Lendable value, increases by 5.1%, 
along with the demand (On loan), which also expands by about 22.1%. 
The relative borrowing costs (Indicative fee) also exhibit a highly sig-
niﬁcant positive reaction following the announcement. The secondary 
bond market measures show that the announcement causes the diﬀer-
ence in the Yield spread to decrease, whereas liquidity does not change.
Overall, the foreign currency subsample helps us demonstrate that 
the eﬀect of eligibility – whether that is actual collateral list inclusion, 
delisting, or the announcement of a near-future inclusion – is not driven 
by ﬁrm-level fundamentals. Ultimately, even after accounting for these 
factors, we ﬁnd statistically and economically meaningful eﬀects of EA 
list inclusion.

6.4.  Haircut analysis

There may be concerns that haircut changes could aﬀect our results. 
In general, haircut adjustments are infrequent and occur for mechani-
cal reasons like credit rating changes, a phenomenon that is absorbed by 
our control variables. Nevertheless, the announcement and implementa-
tion of a new haircut regime in 2010 and 2011 might have an impact on 
our ﬁndings. We focus on these two events and conduct an analysis akin 
to the one performed on GBP-denominated bonds. Our ﬁndings suggest 
that the haircut policy change should not bias our main ﬁndings due to 
three reasons. First, the eﬀect of a haircut change is generally smaller 
than the eligibility eﬀect. Second, the given haircut policy change is a 
one-time occurrence, whereas the eligibility events are spread out from 
2010 to 2016. Third, the rolling window analysis suggests that the eli-
gibility eﬀect also holds for sub-periods, excluding the years 2010 and 
2011. Online Appendix F presents and discusses these ﬁndings in more 
detail.

6.5.  Shock to bank liquidity

To this point, we have focused on eligibility as a signal to the mar-
ket. As a ﬁnal exercise, we now shift our perspective and examine how 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377715L. Pelizzon et al.

Table 8
GBP eligibility announcement.

Lendable value

On loan

Indicative fee

Yield spread

Bid-ask spread

EA*Post

Observations
R-squared

0.051***
[0.005]

2,619
0.996

0.221***
[0.045]

2,619
0.833

0.122***
[0.015]

2,619
0.622

-0.055***
[0.013]

2,619
0.981

0.010
[0.007]

2,619
0.982

The table presents the results of daily panel regressions of the event study on the eﬀect of the announcement 
prior to EA list inclusion for GBP-denominated bonds of multi-currency issuers on 6 September 2012. The 
dependent variables are Lendable value, On loan, Indicative fee, Yield spread, and Bid-ask spread. Lendable value
is the natural logarithm of the value of a given bond available for lending. On loan is the logarithm of the 
amount of the bond borrowed on a given day. Indicative fee is the logarithm of the indicative lending fee in 
bps. Yield spread is the diﬀerence between the bond’s daily mid yield to maturity and the matched risk-free 
yield that is derived from the German Bund curve provided by Bundesbank. Bid-ask spread is the diﬀerence 
between the bond’s quoted bid and ask prices. EA is a dummy that equals one for GBP-denominated bonds 
that are aﬀected by the announcement and zero otherwise. Post is the 30-day post-treatment dummy. For 
each measure, we report the results for ﬁrms that have at least two GBP and at least two EUR bonds on 
the eligibility list. The sample period ranges from 7 August 2012 to 6 October 2012. The data come from 
Bloomberg and IHS Markit. Firm, bond, and daily time ﬁxed eﬀects are included in all regressions. Robust 
standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance is denoted by ***, **, and * at the 1%, 
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

a sudden change in banks’ liquidity requirements would impact the SL 
and  price  response  of  eligible  bonds.21 As  a  suitable  event,  we  take 
the largest debt restructuring in the history of sovereign defaults and 
the ﬁrst such instance in the euro area: the European Council’s 21 July 
2011 decision on restructuring Greek debt. Given that Greek debt was 
primarily held by non-Greek banks within the euro area (Zettelmeyer et 
al., 2014), this decision heightened the fragility of the European ﬁnan-
cial system and raised concerns about its overall stability. We would 
thus expect higher demand for eligible corporate bonds following the 
announcement,  and  our  results  support  this  hypothesis.  We  observe 
increased SL activity, which is reﬂected by a signiﬁcant rise in the lend-
able amount and a drop in lending fees, and there is a secondary market 
reaction in terms of lower yield spreads. Online Appendix G presents 
and discusses these ﬁndings in more detail.

7.  Firm-level implications of eligibility

In addition to the market-level analysis, we investigate ﬁrms’ supply 
response to inclusion on the EA list, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We study 
changes in the debt structure of ﬁrms that experience ﬁrst-time eligi-
bility inclusion of their bonds under the collateral framework. In this 
context, ﬁrst-time eligibility at the ﬁrm level refers to a bond’s inclu-
sion on the EA list, assuming the ﬁrm’s other outstanding bonds were 
not eligible for a minimum of two years preceding that inclusion. Due to 
space constraints, we brieﬂy outline the main ﬁndings here and present 
a thorough analysis in Online Appendix H.

Our  results  indicate  that  ECB  eligibility  triggers  a  corporate  debt 
restructuring  process  at  the  ultimate  parent  ﬁrm  level.  More  specif-
ically,  during  the  four  quarters  following  EA  list  inclusion,  aﬀected 
bond-issuing ﬁrms simultaneously increase their bond debt and reduce 
their bank debt. Eligibility creates a more favorable market environ-
ment for future debt issuances; that is, lower yields and increased bond 
demand. This, in turn, leads to a corporate debt structure that is tilted 
more toward bond debt and potentially carries reduced reﬁnancing risk. 
As a result, ﬁrms not only replace bank loans with corporate bond is-
suance but actually increase their overall supply of marketable bonds, 
particularly those with longer maturities.

Our ﬁndings suggest that eligibility improves ﬁrms’ access to the 
capital market, thus helping them to maintain higher levels of leverage. 
These results are comparable to studies on the announcement (Abidi 
and  Miquel-Flores,  2018;  Grosse-Rueschkamp  et  al.,  2019;  Todorov, 

21 We thank the anonymous referee for this suggestion.

2020) and implementation (Arce et al., 2020; Galema and Lugo, 2021) 
eﬀects of the CSPP. The signiﬁcance of eligibility, however, stems from 
its nature: It is a more frequently occurring event that aﬀects a wide(r) 
range of corporate issuers and has impacts along the entire business 
cycle.

Overall, corporate bond eligibility appears to help capital market de-
velopment by ameliorating ﬁrms’ dependence on bank funding and has 
ultimately proven to be an eﬀective tool to achieve the goal of a capital 
market union in the euro area. Indeed, collateral pledgeability of cor-
porate bonds has already bolstered the development of the European 
corporate bond market, which has doubled in size in the past decade, 
reaching EUR 1.3 trillion, or about 10% of the euro area gross domestic 
product, by 2017 (EC, 2017). Moreover, the euro area corporate bond 
market not only grew in size but also improved in market quality: be-
ing able to lend or borrow these bonds through the SL market improved 
immediacy and therefore the overall liquidity of non-ﬁnancial corpo-
rate bonds across all market segments. Lending bonds also strengthened 
market integration between the secondary (cash) bond and SL (funding) 
markets.

8.  Conclusion

We examine the array of implications of a central bank’s collateral 
policy  as  a  monetary  tool.  More  speciﬁcally,  we  study  the  extent  to 
which central bank eligibility of non-ﬁnancial corporate bonds aﬀects 
collateral availability, secondary bond and collateral market prices, and 
primary bond market activity. By analyzing the ECB’s collateral frame-
work, we disentangle the extent to which eligibility aﬀects the euro 
area capital market and the subsequent debt ﬁnancing decisions of non-
ﬁnancial ﬁrms. Moreover, we can identify the direct eﬀect of central 
bank operations on the SL market, thereby showcasing how the col-
lateral  framework  improves  market  functioning,  in  particular  by  the 
spillover between the ECB’s overnight lending facility and a funding 
market segment.

Our empirical analysis identiﬁes a persistent eligibility premium in 
bond yields following a bond’s inclusion on the ECB collateral list. This 
premium is a compensation for the fungibility of pledgeable collateral. 
Studying the liquidity of eligible bonds, we ﬁnd that newly issued bonds 
especially  experience  a  deterioration  in  liquidity.  Increased  demand 
from banks seeking pledgeable assets also spills over into the SL market, 
where we ﬁnd increased lending market activity in terms of both prices 
and  quantities  traded.  In  the  absence  of  an  active  OTC  repo  market 
for corporate bonds in Europe, central bank eligibility signiﬁcantly in-
creases demand for corporate bonds in the SL market. We also show that 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377716L. Pelizzon et al.

the possibility of borrowing an eligible bond on the SL market reduces 
its eligibility premium in the secondary market of corporate bonds.

Additionally, we investigate ﬁnancing decisions of ﬁrms after they 
experience a ﬁrst-time eligibility event under the collateral framework. 
Our ﬁndings suggest that the aﬀected ﬁrms tilt their ﬁnancing toward 
bond debt while reducing their bank debt. Although the primary role 
of the collateral policy is to stimulate bank lending, we document that 
such eligibility also provides ﬁrms with a more favorable market envi-
ronment for future debt issuances, leading to a corporate debt structure 
that favors bond debt. We further observe that ﬁrms not only replace 
bank debt with bond debt but also increase the overall volume of mar-
ketable bonds, especially those with longer maturities.

Our  empirical  results  highlight  the  relevance  of  corporate  bond 
eligibility and its externalities, which have clear policy implications. 
Policymakers in general and those in the Eurosystem in particular are 
advised  to  take  account  of  our  documented  eﬀects  on  the  corporate 
bond market when managing the size of their EA pools. In particular, 
aside from the eﬀects on SL market activity, bond yields, and liquidity, 
central bank pledgeability triggers a change in the relative production 
of collateral. Firms with bonds that become eligible capitalize on their 
improved access to the credit market immediately and in their future 
ﬁnancing decisions.

Overall,  our  analysis  conﬁrms  that  central  bank  eligibility  is  a 
counter-cyclical  monetary  policy  tool  that  has  a  positive  market  im-
pact, especially during periods of relaxed eligibility criteria. However, 
it is advisable to keep the size of the EA pool at a moderate level dur-
ing calm market periods in order to leave room for expansion during 
periods of stress. The eﬀectiveness of this monetary policy tool also al-
lows for intervention during crises as a macro-prudential device, as is 
demonstrated by the ECB’s immediate reaction to the COVID-19 pan-
demic: it expanded its collateral list in April 2020, paving the way for 
other central banks like the Fed to act similarly.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Loriana Pelizzon: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project 
administration, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Max Riedel: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Vi-
sualization, Validation, Software, Project administration, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Zorka 
Simon: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualiza-
tion, Validation, Software, Resources, Project administration, Method-
ology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Marti G. Subrahmanyam: Writing – review & 
editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, 
Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

Loriana Pelizzon acknowledges that she has been appointed for the 
next four years as a full member and Co-Chair of the Advisory Scien-
tiﬁc Committee of the European Systemic Risk Board. Marti G. Sub-
rahmanyam acknowledges that until recently he was on the board of 
Nomura Asset Management USA Inc., and was the Chairman of the Risk 
Committee of Nomura Global Alpha Inc., which participate in sovereign 
debt markets by themselves or through their various aﬃliates. He was 
also  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  and  committees  of  AION  India  In-
vestment Advisers Private Ltd., a private equity ﬁrm, and was on the 
board and committees of ICICI Venture Funds Management Co. Ltd., 
another venture capital-private equity ﬁrm, which may also participate 
in sovereign debt markets. He is on the Financial Markets Consultative 
Committee of the Reserve Bank of India, India’s central bank, which 
deals with the regulation of sovereign debt markets and institutions, 
as well as the management of its own reserves. He is on the board of 
the United Nations Foundation, whose endowment may have invest-
ments in sovereign bond markets. He serves or has recently served on 

the boards and advisory boards, and the board committees, of several 
other companies, including ICICI Prudential Life Insurance Co. Ltd., LIC 
Nomura Mutual Funds Asset Management Co. Ltd., ICICI Bank Ltd., and 
Infosys Ltd., which also participate in sovereign bond markets.

Data availability

The data that has been used is conﬁdential.

Replication Code/Pseudo Data for: “Collateral Eligibility of Corpo-

rate Debt in the Eurosystem” (Reference Data) (Mendeley Data)

Acknowledgements

Toni Whited was the editor for this article. The authors are very 
grateful for their feedback and guidance, as well as for the excellent 
suggestions from the anonymous referees. We thank seminar and con-
ference participants at the 2022 EFA Annual Meeting, the 2020 AFA 
Annual Meeting, the 2019 AFML Conference, the 2nd Annual CoPFiR 
Conference of the JCR of the European Commission, the 2nd Asset Pric-
ing Conference by LTI@UniTo, the University of Florence, NYU Stern, 
the University of Bonn, Goethe University, and the Final Conference on 
Quantitative Easing and Financial (In)Stability for valuable comments 
and feedback. In particular, we are grateful for fruitful discussions with 
Daniel Streitz (discussant), Zhigou He (discussant), Guillaume Vuille-
mey (discussant), Jan Pieter Krahnen, Andrea Modena, Francesco Pa-
padia, Angelo Ranaldo, Sascha Steﬀen, Christian Schlag, Martin Götz, 
Marie Lalanne, Vincenzo Pezone, and Michael Schmidt. We gratefully 
acknowledge research and ﬁnancial support from the Leibniz Institute 
for Financial Research SAFE and the Volkswagen Stiftung, who funded 
the project Quantitative Easing and Financial (In)Stability (grant num-
ber: 90 806). Subrahmanyam acknowledges generous ﬁnancial support 
from the Anneliese Maier Research Award of the Alexander von Hum-
boldt Foundation and from NYU Center for Global Economy and Busi-
ness. The views in this paper do not constitute investment advice, nor 
do they represent the views of Simon’s current employer. We are re-
sponsible for all remaining errors.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2023 .103777.

References

Abidi, N., Miquel-Flores, I., 2018. Who beneﬁts from the Corporate QE? A Regression 
Discontinuity Design Approach. Working Paper Series 2145. European Central Bank. 
https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .2914911.

Acharya, V.V., Euﬁnger, C., Hirsch, C., Eisert, T., 2019. Whatever it takes: the real eﬀects 
of unconventional monetary policy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32, 3366–3411. https://doi .
org /10 .1093 /rfs /hhz005.

Acharya, V.V., Merrouche, O., 2013. Precautionary hoarding of liquidity and interbank 
markets: evidence from the subprime crisis. Rev. Finance 17, 107–160. https://doi .
org /10 .1093 /rof /rfs022.

Adelino, M., Ferreira, M.A., Giannetti, M., Pires, P., 2022. Trade credit and the trans-
mission of unconventional monetary policy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36, 775–813. https://
doi .org /10 .1093 /rfs /hhac040.

Aggarwal, R., Bai, J., Laeven, L., 2021. Safe-asset shortages: evidence from the European 
government bond lending market. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 56, 2689–2719. https://
doi .org /10 .1017 /S0022109020000770.

Ai, H., Li, J.E., Li, K., Schlag, C., 2020. The collateralizability premium. Rev. Financ. 

Stud. 33, 5821–5855. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /rfs /hhaa063.

Allen, W.A., Moessner, R., 2012. The Liquidity Consequences of the Euro Area Sovereign 
Debt Crisis. BIS Working Papers 390. Bank for International Settlements. https://
www .bis .org /publ /work390 .pdf.

Altavilla,  C.,  Carboni,  G.,  Motto,  R.,  2021.  Asset  purchase  programmes  and  ﬁnan-
cial  markets:  lessons  from  the  euro  area.  Int.  J.  Cent.  Bank. 17,  1–48. https://
www .ijcb .org /journal /ijcb21q4a1 .pdf.

Arce, O., Mayordomo, S., Gimeno, R., 2020. Making room for the needy: the credit-
reallocation eﬀects of the ECB’s corporate QE. Rev. Finance. https://doi .org /10 .
1093 /rof /rfaa020.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377717L. Pelizzon et al.

Baker, A.C., Larcker, D.F., Wang, C.C., 2022. How much should we trust staggered 
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates? J. Financ. Econ. 144, 370–395. https://doi .org /
10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2022 .01 .004.

Bindseil, U., Corsi, M., Sahel, B., Visser, A., 2017. The eurosystem collateral framework 
explained. Occasional Paper Series 189. European Central Bank. https://doi .org /10 .
2866 /176048.

Bindseil, U., Papadia, F., 2009. Risk management and market impact of central bank 
credit operations. In: Bindseil, U., Gonzalez, F., Tabakis, E. (Eds.), Risk Management 
for Central Banks and Other Public Investors. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
pp. 271–302.

BIS, 2013. Asset encumbrance, ﬁnancial reform and the demand for collateral assets. 
CGFS  Papers  49.  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  https://www .bis .org /publ /
cgfs49 .pdf.

BIS, 2015. Central bank operating frameworks and collateral markets. CGFS Papers 53L. 

Bank for International Settlements. https://www .bis .org /publ /cgfs53 .pdf.

Boermans, M.A., Vermeulen, R., 2020. International investment positions revisited: in-
vestor  heterogeneity  and  individual  security  characteristics.  Rev.  Int.  Econ. 28, 
466–496. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /roie .12460.

Brunnermeier, M.K., Pedersen, L.H., 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Rev. 

Financ. Stud. 22, 2201–2238. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /rfs /hhn098.

Buraschi, A., Menguturk, M., Sener, E., 2014. The geography of funding markets and 
limits to arbitrage. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28, 1103–1152. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /rfs /
hhu090.

Cassola, N., Koulischer, F., 2019. The collateral channel of open market operations. J. 

Financ. Stab. 41, 73–90. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jfs .2019 .03 .002.

Chen, H., Chen, Z., He, Z., Liu, J., Xie, R., 2023. Pledgeability and asset prices: evidence 
from the Chinese corporate bond markets. J. Finance. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /joﬁ .
13266.

Chen, H., Cui, R., He, Z., Milbradt, K., 2018. Quantifying liquidity and default risks of 
corporate bonds over the business cycle. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31, 852–897. https://
doi .org /10 .1093 /rfs /hhx107.

Corradin, S., Rodriguez-Moreno, M., 2016. Violating the law of one price: the role of non-
conventional monetary policy. Working Paper Series 1927. European Central Bank. 
https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .2803125.

Crosignani, M., Faria–e–Castro, M., Fonseca, L., 2020. The (unintended?) consequences 
of the largest liquidity injection ever. J. Monet. Econ. 112, 97–112. https://doi .org /
10 .1016 /j .jmoneco .2019 .01 .020.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Palmer, C.J., 2019. How quantitative easing works: evi-
dence on the reﬁnancing channel. Rev. Econ. Stud. 87, 1498–1528. https://doi .org /
10 .1093 /restud /rdz060.

Dick-Nielsen, J., Feldhuetter, P., Lando, D., 2012. Corporate bond liquidity before and 
after the onset of the subprime crisis. J. Financ. Econ. 103, 471–492. https://doi .org /
10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2011 .10 .009.

Duﬃe, D., 1996. Special repo rates. J. Finance 51, 493–526. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /j .

1540 -6261 .1996 .tb02692 .x.

Duﬃe, D., 2020. Still the world’s safe haven? - Redesigning the US treasury market after 
the COVID-19 crisis. Hutchins Center Working Paper 62. Hutchins Center on Fis-
cal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. https://www .brookings .edu /articles /still -the -
worlds -safe -haven.

Eberl, J., Weber, C., 2014. ECB Collateral Criteria: A Narrative Database 2001-2013. ifo 
Working Paper Series 174. ifo Institute - Leibniz Institute for Economic Research at 
the University of Munich. https://ideas .repec .org /p /ces /ifowps /_174 .html.

EC, 2017. Report: Improving European Corporate Bond Markets. Report from the Com-
mission  Expert  Group  on  Corporate  Bonds.  The  European  Commission.  https://
ﬁnance .ec .europa .eu /system /ﬁles /2017 -11 /171120 -corporate -bonds -report _en .pdf.
ECB, 2013. Collateral eligibility requirements: A comparative study across speciﬁc frame-
works. Report on Collateral Frameworks. European Central Bank. https://www .ecb .
europa .eu /pub /pdf /other /collateralframeworksen .pdf.

Eser, F., Schwaab, B., 2016. Evaluating the impact of unconventional monetary policy 
measures: empirical evidence from the ecb’s securities markets programme. J. Financ. 
Econ. 119, 147–167. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2015 .06 .003.

Fecht, F., Nyborg, K.G., Rocholl, J., Woschitz, J., 2016. Collateral, central bank repos, and 
systemic arbitrage. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 16-66 16-66. Swiss 
Finance Institute, pp. 16–66.

Foley-Fisher, N., Narajabad, B., Verani, S., 2016. Securities Lending as Wholesale Funding: 
Evidence from the U.S. Life Insurance Industry. Finance and Economics Discussion 
Series 2016-050. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington. 
https://doi .org /10 .17016 /FEDS .2016 .050.

Foley-Fisher, N., Narajabad, B., Verani, S., 2020. Who Limits Arbitrage? Unpublished 

working paper. https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3361902.

Friewald, N., Jankowitsch, R., Subrahmanyam, M.G., 2012. Illiquidity or credit deterio-
ration: a study of liquidity in the US corporate bond market during ﬁnancial crises. 
J. Financ. Econ. 105, 18–36. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2012 .02 .001.

Gale, D., Yorulmazer, T., 2013. Liquidity hoarding. Theor. Econ. 8, 291–324. https://

doi .org /10 .3982 /TE1064.

Galema, R., Lugo, S., 2021. When central banks buy corporate bonds: target selection 
and impact of the European corporate sector purchase program. J. Financ. Stab. 54, 
100881. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jfs .2021 .100881.

Gârleanu, N., Pedersen, L.H., 2011. Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the 
law of one price. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24, 1980–2022. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /rfs /
hhr027.

Grosse-Rueschkamp, B., Steﬀen, S., Streitz, D., 2019. A capital structure channel of mon-
etary policy. J. Financ. Econ. 133, 357–378. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2019 .
03 .006.

Hildebrand, T., Rocholl, J., Schulz, A., 2012. Flight to where? Evidence from bank in-
vestments during the ﬁnancial crisis. AFA 2013 San Diego Meetings Paper. https://
doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .2023846.

Huh, Y., Infante, S., 2021. Bond market intermediation and the role of repo. J. Bank. 

Finance 122, 105999. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jbankﬁn .2020 .105999.

Huszar, Z.R., Simon, Z., 2018. The Pricing Implications of Oligopolistic Securities Lending 
Market: A Beneﬁcial Owner Perspective. SAFE Working Paper Series 215. Leibniz 
Institute for Financial Research SAFE. https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3203304.
Iacus, S.M., King, G., Porro, G., 2012. Causal inference without balance checking: coars-
ened exact matching. Polit. Anal. 20, 1–24. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /pan /mpr013.
IHS Markit, 2020. Looking back to look forward: a retrospective look at Securities Lending 

over the last 10 years. Unpublished internal report. IHS Markit.

Jiang, Z., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Xiaolan, M.Z., 2020. Bond convenience yields 
in the eurozone currency union. Columbia Business School Research Paper Forthcom-
ing. https://doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3797321.

Jordan, B.D., Jordan, S.D., 1997. Special repo rates: an empirical analysis. J. Finance 52, 

2051–2072. https://doi .org /10 .2307 /2329473.

Kacperczyk, M., Périgon, C., Vuillemey, G., 2021. The private production of safe assets. 

J. Finance 76, 495–535. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /joﬁ .12997.

Krishnamurthy, A., 2002. The bond/old-bond spread. J. Financ. Econ. 66, 463–506. 

https://doi .org /10 .1016 /S0304 -405X(02 )00207 -6.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. The Eﬀects of Quantitative Easing on In-
terest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Ac-
tivity 42(2 Fall). The Brookings Institution. https://www .brookings .edu /wp -content /
uploads /2016 /07 /2011b _bpea _krishnamurthy .pdf.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The aggregate demand for treasury debt. 

J. Polit. Econ. 120, 233–267. https://doi .org /10 .1086 /666526.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., et al., 2013. The ins and outs of LSAPs. In: 
Kansas City Federal Reserve Symposium on Global Dimensions of Unconventional 
Monetary Policy, pp. 57–111. https://hdl .handle .net /10398 /8258698b -8829 -4b8f -
b2fd -f750c6c50b7a.

Lee, H., Sarkar, A., 2018. Is Stigma Attached to the European Central Bank’s Marginal 
Lending Facility? Liberty Street Economics 20180416. Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York. https://ideas .repec .org /p /ﬁp /fednls /87252 .html.

Longstaﬀ,  F.,  2004.  The  ﬂight-to-liquidity  premium  in  U.S.  treasury  bond  prices.  J. 

Bus. 77, 511–526. https://doi .org /10 .1086 /386528.

Muravyev, D., Pearson, N.D., Pollet, J.M., 2022. Is there a risk premium in the stock 
lending market? Evidence from equity options. J. Finance 77, 1787–1828. https://
doi .org /10 .1111 /joﬁ .13129.

Nyborg, K.G., 2016. Collateral Frameworks: The Open Secret of Central Banks. Cambridge 

University Press, Cambridge.

Nyborg, K.G., 2017. Central bank collateral frameworks. J. Bank. Finance 76, 198–214. 

https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jbankﬁn .2016 .12 .010.

Nyborg, K.G., Rösler, C., 2019. Repo rates and the collateral spread: Evidence. Swiss 
Finance Institute Research Paper Series 13547. Swiss Finance Institute. https://doi .
org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3335201.

Pegoraro, S., Montagna, M., 2021. Issuance and valuation of corporate bonds with quan-
titative easing. ECB Working Paper Series 2520. European Central Bank. https://
doi .org /10 .2139 /ssrn .3797140.

von Rüden, S.L., Subrahmanyam, M.G., Tang, D.Y., Wang, S.Q., 2023. Can central banks 
boost corporate investment? Evidence from ECB liquidity injections. Rev. Corp. Fi-
nance Stud. 12, 402–442. https://doi .org /10 .1093 /rcfs /cfad006.

Todorov, K., 2020. Quantify the quantitative easing: impact on bonds and corporate debt 
issuance. J. Financ. Econ. 135, 340–358. https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2019 .08 .
003.

Van Bekkum, S., Gabarro, M., Irani, R.M., 2018. Does a larger menu increase appetite? 
Collateral eligibility and credit supply. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31, 943–979. https://doi .
org /10 .1093 /rfs /hhx112.

Zettelmeyer, J., Trebesch, C., Gulati, M., 2014. The Greek debt restructuring: an autopsy. 

Econ. Policy 28, 513–563. https://doi .org /10 .1111 /1468 -0327 .12014.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377718