Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Delayed creative destruction: How uncertainty shapes corporate assets ✩
Murillo Campello a,∗, Gaurav Kankanhalli b, Hyunseob Kim c
a Cornell University & NBER, 114 Feeney Way, Ithaca, 14853, NY, USA
b University of Pittsburgh, 3950 Roberto & Vera Clemente Drive, Pittsburgh, 15260, PA, USA
c Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 230 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, 60604, IL, USA

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

We show how uncertainty shapes corporate asset allocation, composition, and productivity using data from 
the shipping industry. Firms curtail both ship acquisitions and disposals when uncertainty increases, primarily 
through cuts in new ship orders and ship demolitions — decisions that are costlier to reverse vis-à-vis secondary 
market transactions. Uncertainty also prompts ﬁrms to concentrate their ﬂeets into narrower, less productive 
portfolios. We corroborate our ﬁndings using the 2009–2011 spike in Somali pirate attacks as an uncertainty 
shock to shipping activity. Uncertainty hampers “creative destruction,” slowing both the adoption of innovation 
embodied in new capital and the disposal of old capital.

JEL classiﬁcation:
G31
D22
D25

Keywords:
Uncertainty
Capital allocation
Productivity
Technology
Investment
Disinvestment

1.  Introduction

Recent macroeconomic models emphasize the role of asset alloca-
tion in shaping the impact of uncertainty on aggregate productivity and 
growth (see, e.g., Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al. (2018)). This body of 
research stresses that investigating the link between uncertainty and 
ﬁrms’  capital  adjustment  decisions  at  a  micro-level  is  key  to  under-
standing  the  dynamics  at  work.  In  a  similar  fashion,  vintage  capital 
models emphasize the importance of ﬁrm investment in new, eﬃcient 
assets in fostering productivity (Solow (1960) and Hsieh (2001)). In this 
paper, we show how uncertainty aﬀects corporate asset allocation, com-
position, and productivity through the lens of capital-intensive ﬁrms’ 
decisions to invest and disinvest. We do so by looking at ﬁrms in the 

shipping industry. In this industry, investment and disinvestment deci-
sions (buying, selling, and demolishing ships) are discrete, well-deﬁned, 
and fully documented. The industry’s singularly most important capital 
input, the ship vessel, is actively traded in worldwide markets.

Our  study  uses  ship-level  data  over  the  2006–2019  period  from 
Clarksons Research (the “Clarksons data”), the world-leading maritime 
research ﬁrm. The Clarksons data cover the near-universe of commer-
cial vessels in the global market, encompassing both public and private 
ﬁrms across over one hundred countries. The data are unique in allow-
ing us to measure three distinct, but related, concepts: asset allocation, 
asset composition, and asset productivity. On the dimension of asset 
allocation, the Clarksons data contain detailed information (including 
quantities and prices) on four key margins along which shipping ﬁrms 

✩ Toni Whited was the editor for this article. We are grateful to two anonymous referees, Kevin Aretz, Nick Bloom, Jason Faberman, Alex Fakos, Huseyin Gulen 
(discussant), Charlie Hadlock, Candace Jens, Andrea Lanteri (discussant), Howard Kung, Roni Michaely, Ryan Peters (discussant), Roberto Pinto (discussant), Frederik 
Schlingemann, Toni Whited, as well as conference and seminar participants at the 2020 ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference, Auburn University, Bayes Business 
School, Baylor University, Boston University, 2019 Bristol Corporate Finance Conference, Cornell University, 2022 EFA, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Frankfurt 
School of Finance & Management, 2020 ITAM Finance Conference, 2023 LUBRAFIN Conference, Michigan State University, Seoul National University, University 
of Cambridge, University of Florida, University of Glasgow, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Notre Dame, University of Pittsburgh, and 
2020 WFA for helpful comments. We thank David Jordan and Darren Liew at Clarksons Research for data support and Byung-Ryul Ahn at Hyundai Samho Heavy 
Industries for helpful discussions on the shipping industry. This research was funded in part by the Cornell Center for the Social Sciences and Smith Family Business 
Initiative at Cornell University. Heewon Ahn, Ikchan An, Penghao Chen, Eric Kim, Jason Lee, Phillip Lee, Boyao Li, Yao Lu, Youngjun Song, and George Sun provided 
excellent research assistance. Any views expressed are those of the authors and not those of the Federal Reserve System.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: campello@cornell.edu (M. Campello), gkankanhalli@katz.pitt.edu (G. Kankanhalli), hyunseob.kim@chi.frb.org (H. Kim).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103786
Received 21 June 2021; Received in revised form 6 January 2024; Accepted 7 January 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)103786Availableonline21January20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

can alter their asset base: new ship orders, secondary market purchases 
and sales, and demolitions. Regarding asset composition, the database 
records individual ships with identiﬁers linked to owner ﬁrms, allowing 
us to track the evolution of shipping ﬁrms’ asset portfolios (ﬂeets) over 
time. The data also contain several measures of asset productivity, such 
as ship age, dead-weight tonnage, and engine revolutions per minute. 
Using the ownership and transactions information, we further measure 
the liquidity of the secondary market for ships at a detailed level, which 
we demonstrate is a key factor modulating the eﬀect of uncertainty on 
ﬁrms’ asset-level decisions. Finally, the database provides information 
that allows us to infer the maritime routes that diﬀerent ships travel, 
enabling us to develop an empirical approach that plausibly identiﬁes 
the impact of uncertainty on shipping ﬁrms’ asset allocation.

We lay out our priors on the links between uncertainty and ﬁrms’ 
decisions to alter their asset portfolios through investment in and dis-
investment of ships using a real-options conceptual framework. As in 
standard  models,  it  predicts  a  negative  relation  between  uncertainty 
and both investment and disinvestment activities. The framework ad-
ditionally implies that these relations are stronger when decisions are 
costlier to reverse (see Bernanke (1983) and Leahy and Whited (1996)). 
The costly reversibility arises from two primary sources: secondary as-
set market illiquidity (Gavazza (2011)) and the ﬁxed costs of investing 
and disinvesting (Hackbarth and Johnson (2015)). Under this frame-
work, a liquid secondary market modulates the negative uncertainty–
investment (–disinvestment) relation, as market liquidity makes it eas-
ier for ﬁrms to undo their investment (disinvestment) decisions by sell-
ing (buying) ships. Importantly, because new ship orders and ship de-
molitions entail high ﬁxed costs, ﬁrms will exhibit a more pronounced 
response to uncertainty along these two decision margins, relative to de-
cisions involving the straight-up purchase or sale of ships in secondary 
markets.1 These ﬁxed costs imply that uncertainty hinders “creative de-
struction:” it delays ﬁrms’ acquisition of new, technologically-advanced 
capital and disposal of old, obsolete capital. The resulting uncertainty-
driven misallocation of corporate resources across young and old assets 
has not been explored in prior work.

We begin our empirical analysis by showing how uncertainty gen-
erally shapes shipping ﬁrms’ investment and disinvestment decisions. 
We measure investment using the total number of ships a ﬁrm orders 
new  or  purchases  used  in  the  secondary  market  in  a  given  subsec-
tor.  Analogously,  we  measure  disinvestment  as  the  number  of  ships 
the  ﬁrm  demolishes  or  sells.  Our  speciﬁcations  incorporate  forward-
looking metrics of a shipping ﬁrm’s expected investment opportunities 
in each of the subsectors in which it operates based on forward freight 
agreement prices (“ﬁrst moment”).2 As discussed in detail below, we 
operationalize the concept of business uncertainty faced by a shipping 
ﬁrm (“second moment”) using the equity option-implied volatility of 
ﬁrms in each of the subsectors the ﬁrm operates. Our base empirical re-
sults show a negative relation between uncertainty and both investment 
and disinvestment decisions (measured independently). These base re-
sults are new and revealing since papers in the literature largely report 
the “combined, net eﬀect” of investment and disinvestment. We fur-
ther show that asset liquidity (measured by the secondary market price 
premium and price dispersion) plays a central role in modulating the 
impact of uncertainty on ﬁrm investment and disinvestment.

1 New ship orders incur additional ﬁxed costs due to time-to-build, customiza-
tion, and ﬁnancing frictions. Concurrently, demolition entails higher search 
costs when replacing a demolished ship in the future (that ship cannot be later 
reacquired and reintegrated into the ﬂeet), high environmental costs, and losses 
from asset disassembling (very few components of a demolished ship ﬁnd alter-
native uses).
2 Derivatives on shipping rate indexes, such as the Baltic Dry Index (BDI), 
trade on the Baltic Exchange, and we obtain their prices from Bloomberg. Kel-
logg (2014) uses a similar proxy for expected investment opportunities in the 
oil industry.

In our main tests, we leverage our asset-level data to shed new light 
on the role that uncertainty plays in capital allocation at a granular 
level. We begin this examination by decomposing investment and dis-
investment into new ship orders, used ship purchases, ship demolitions, 
and used ship sales; alternatives that entail diﬀerent ﬁxed costs and 
thus diﬀerent degrees of irreversibility. In this analysis, it is particu-
larly informative to focus on ship age since it serves as a convenient 
proxy for a wide range of technological advances in the shipping indus-
try. Consistent with irreversibility being higher for new-vintage capital 
investment, we ﬁnd that the negative relation between uncertainty and 
investment is almost entirely driven by new ship orders. In stark con-
trast, used ship purchases are largely unaﬀected by uncertainty. Analo-
gously, among the two margins of disinvestment, the negative eﬀect of 
uncertainty is driven in large part by demolition, with sales playing a 
marginal role. Notably, the negative relation between uncertainty and 
new ship orders and ship demolitions is ampliﬁed when asset liquid-
ity is low. These results point to a novel eﬀect of uncertainty on ﬁrms’ 
asset composition and vintage. In particular, the irreversibility-driven 
asset-level responses to increased uncertainty that we document may 
lead to a deterioration in the portfolio of assets ﬁrms retain.

We  strive  to  provide  more  causal  evidence  for  the  link  between 
business  uncertainty  and  ﬁrm  investment  and  disinvestment  using  a 
quasi-experimental test design. Speciﬁcally, we examine shipping ﬁrms’ 
responses to a sudden increase in uncertainty caused by the escalation 
in Somali pirate attacks between 2009 and 2011. That local piracy ac-
tivity introduced considerable uncertainty to shipping routes that cross 
the Suez Canal by increasing the likelihood of both very negative (being 
attacked) and very positive (high proﬁts from reduced competition) out-
comes. Our discontinuity-based strategy exploits pre-determined vessel 
size limitations imposed by the Suez Canal to identify ships that are 
likely  exposed  to  the  heightened  risk  of  Somali  pirates  and  others 
that are similar in size and type of service, but unlikely aﬀected. In 
a matched-sample diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms 
signiﬁcantly reduce both their investment in ships (particularly new or-
ders) and disinvestment of ships (particularly demolition) belonging to 
the aﬀected group, relative to the control group, during the period of 
heightened uncertainty in the Suez Canal route, but not before or after-
wards. Complementary tests employing synthetic control units provide 
additional corroborating evidence.

We next study the impact of uncertainty on asset productivity. We 
show that the negative eﬀect of uncertainty on investment is more pro-
nounced  for  the  purchase  of  high-productivity  ships  (those  that  are 
newer, carry bigger loads, and have more eﬃcient engines). At the same 
time, ﬁrms cut back more on demolishing their less productive ships 
(older,  smaller,  with  ineﬃcient  engines).  We  further  show  that  low 
asset  liquidity  ampliﬁes  these  uncertainty-led  declines  in  investment 
and disinvestment along the lines of asset productivity. Our analysis 
demonstrates that uncertainty adversely aﬀects the overall productivity 
of shipping ﬁrms’ asset base by disproportionately reducing investments 
in new technology and more productive equipment, as well as the dis-
posal of outdated, less productive assets.

We supplement our asset-level (ﬁrm-by-ship subsector) analyses with 
a host of ﬁrm-level tests to characterize the economic implications of 
the decisions we document for ﬁrms’ asset composition. We ﬁrst show 
that ﬁrms reduce their exposure across diﬀerent markets when uncer-
tainty is high: they consolidate their ship holdings into fewer subsectors 
in response to increased uncertainty, and the average productivity of 
assets kept in their portfolios declines. Notably, low asset liquidity is 
associated with more pronounced ﬁrm-level responses along these mar-
gins. In addition to their novelty, these results show that our inferences 
do not simply reﬂect ﬁrms reallocating investment and disinvestment 
from less liquid into more liquid segments without altering the over-
all productivity of their ﬂeets when uncertainty rises. That is, ﬁrms’ 
asset-level (“marginal”) allocation decisions in the face of uncertainty 
do not “oﬀset” each other; rather, these decisions cumulatively aﬀect 
their  ﬁrm-level  (“overall”)  asset  composition.  Our  results  show  that 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037862M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

high uncertainty, combined with low asset liquidity, has a particularly 
deleterious eﬀect on the eﬃciency of ﬁrms’ asset mix.

Our paper contributes to the literature on the eﬀect of uncertainty 
on economic activity on several fronts. Existing empirical work primar-
ily examines the eﬀects of uncertainty on aggregate output (Baker and 
Bloom (2013)) and ﬁrm investment, often conditional on the degree 
of irreversibility (e.g., Julio and Yook (2012), Gulen and Ion (2016), 
and Jens (2017)). This paper is the ﬁrst to empirically show that uncer-
tainty slows down ﬁrms’ asset allocation across both the investment and 
disinvestment margins, particularly through cuts in purchases of new, 
productive assets and in the demolition of older assets. Our ﬁndings im-
ply that increased economic uncertainty has negative consequences for 
corporate productivity and growth by deteriorating the quality of the 
ﬁrm’s asset base, consistent with theoretical work showing that uncer-
tainty reduces economic eﬃciency by slowing down capital allocation 
(e.g., Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al. (2018)). This contribution is made 
possible by the detailed asset-level data we use, which provide informa-
tion on asset ownership, transactions, prices, and productivity. We also 
contribute to the literature by developing empirical measures of asset 
liquidity that closely resemble the theoretical deﬁnition of investment 
(and disinvestment) irreversibility.

Our ﬁndings are also related to the literature on the cyclical ﬂuctu-
ations of investment. Existing studies establish relations between these 
dynamics and learning (Fajgelbaum et al. (2017) and Jeon (2022)) and 
extrapolative  expectations  (Greenwood  and  Hanson  (2015)),  among 
other factors. Relative to these papers, our work emphasizes the real-
options eﬀects of uncertainty on asset allocation and mix, encompassing 
both investment and disinvestment across several margins. At the same 
time,  our  paper  is  complementary  to  this  literature  since  alternative 
mechanisms  (such  as  learning)  may  be  consistent  with  some  of  our 
ﬁndings (particularly on investment). Our paper is also related to the 
theoretical (Benhabib and Rustichini (1991) and Hsieh (2001)) and em-
pirical (Benmelech and Bergman (2011) and Ma et al. (2022)) literature 
on vintage capital. Existing theories posit that investing in new capital 
while scrapping old capital (“creative destruction”) is key to promoting 
productivity and growth. Our paper is the ﬁrst to provide micro-level 
evidence that uncertainty adversely aﬀects productivity by hampering 
the adoption of technological progress embodied in newer-vintage cap-
ital.3 In doing so, we shed light on a novel dimension of uncertainty’s 
deleterious impacts on the nature of assets ﬁrms invest in and dispose 
of, in addition to the quantity of investment.

2.  Conceptual framework

We use a simple, real-options-based conceptual framework to guide 
our analysis of the impact of uncertainty on the capital allocation de-
cisions of shipping ﬁrms. Appendix A provides a formal analysis of the 
framework, in which we explicitly derive the optimal investment and 
disinvestment decisions of a representative shipping ﬁrm. In what fol-
lows, we describe the framework’s underlying economic intuition and 
use it to motivate several empirical predictions that we subsequently 
take to the data.

Consider a ﬁrm that operates a ﬂeet of ships across eight “subsec-
tors.” These subsectors correspond to four size-based categories of the 
two key sectors of the shipping industry: dry bulk carrier ships, or “bulk-
ers,”  and  tanker  ships,  or  “tankers”  (Section 3.1 provides  details  on 
shipping subsectors). Within each subsector, the ﬁrm makes capital al-
location decisions along four margins, two corresponding to investment 
and two corresponding to disinvestment. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrm may in-
vest by ordering a new ship or buying a used ship in the secondary 
market, and it may disinvest by demolishing a ship or selling a ship in 

the secondary market. The ﬁrm incurs diﬀerent costs and beneﬁts from 
investing and disinvesting along these margins.

We  ﬁrst  discuss  the  costs  and  beneﬁts  associated  with  investing 
and disinvesting; either through trade in the secondary ship market or 
through new ship orders and ship demolition. Assuming the secondary 
ship market is segmented by subsectors, the price paid (received) by 
the buyer (seller) of a used ship in the market is a function of two at-
tributes. The ﬁrst is a ship’s productivity, which determines the present 
value of cash ﬂows that the ﬁrm can generate from it, or its “fundamen-
tal value.” The second determinant is the time-varying “liquidity” of the 
secondary ship market corresponding to the ship’s subsector. Secondary 
market liquidity, in turn, is a function of market thickness, motivated 
by the idea that search frictions between buyers and sellers are smaller 
in “thicker” (or larger) asset resale markets (see Gavazza (2011)). Ac-
cordingly, more liquid used ship markets are characterized by higher 
resale prices due to the increased likelihood of ﬁnding matches between 
buyers and sellers in a given time window. Appendix A and Internet Ap-
pendix B, respectively, analyze the microfoundations for, and empirical 
validity of, our notion of secondary market liquidity.

The costs and beneﬁts associated with ordering a new ship may dif-
fer from those corresponding to purchasing a used ship primarily along 
two dimensions.4 First, the ﬁrm incurs ﬁxed costs when ordering a new 
ship.  The  ﬁxed  costs  arise  from  time-to-build,  customization,  and  ﬁ-
nancing frictions, among others. See Chapter 15 of Stopford (2009) for 
a discussion of the ﬁxed costs associated with ordering new ships, as 
well as demolishing existing ships. Second, new ships are likely more 
productive  (i.e.,  generate  greater  cash  ﬂows  for  a  given  investment) 
than used ones. We can use our data to illustrate that newly ordered 
ships are more productive. Fig. 1 shows that while the speed of new 
ships ordered in each year remained constant between 2006 and 2019, 
their engines’ revolutions per minute (RPM) declined by over 20% over 
that same period (Panel a). Average dead-weight tonnage (DWT) per 
ship also increased over time (Panel b). These trends reﬂect the ongo-
ing technological development in maritime engineering towards vessels 
with more fuel-eﬃcient and powerful (more productive) engines and 
greater cargo capacity.

The costs and beneﬁts associated with demolishing a ship diﬀer from 
those involved with selling a ship in the secondary market along three 
dimensions. First, the scrap value is determined by supply and demand 
in the broader scrap metal market. Second, demolishing ships incurs 
ﬁxed costs, arising from environmental costs and legal exposures, as 
well as the loss in value from disassembling a ship into its components 
and raw materials. Third, demolished ships are likely less productive 
than ships sold in the secondary market.

In our framework, the ﬁrm evaluates whether to “invest now” (al-
ternatively, “disinvest now”) or “invest later” (alternatively, “disinvest 
later”) in its capital allocation decisions. It does so by comparing the 
aforementioned  costs  and  the  expected  cash  ﬂows  generated  by  its 
ﬂeet of ships based on current and future demand conditions. The irre-
versible costs of investment and disinvestment arise from two sources: 
relevant ﬁxed costs and illiquidity in secondary markets. Together, they 
imply negative relationships between uncertainty and both ﬁrm invest-
ment and disinvestment. We test this more standard prediction using 
our data, noting that the existing empirical literature does not investi-
gate the impact of uncertainty on disinvestment, nor on capital com-
position — decisions that are critical for replacing outdated assets with 
those that embed new technology — using micro data. We state our ﬁrst 
testable prediction as follows.

Prediction 1. Shipping ﬁrms will reduce their investment and disinvestment 
in response to increases in uncertainty.

3 Models that relate uncertainty to misallocation (e.g., Bloom et al. (2018)) 
may  capture  some  of  the  forces  that  drive  the  uncertainty–technological 
progress link we explore.

4 The prices of new and used ships may also be aﬀected by common factors 
like liquidity in the used ship market, albeit with potentially diﬀerent sensitivi-
ties.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037863M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Fig. 1. Speed, RPM, and DWT of New Ships. Panel a shows the median speed (in knots, primary Y-axis) and engine revolutions per minute (RPM, secondary Y-axis), 
and Panel b shows the median dead-weight tonnage (DWT, in thousands of long tons) for new ships ordered in each year in our sample period. (For interpretation 
of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The  economic  intuition  for  Prediction  1  relies  on  the  optionality 
inherent  in  the  ﬁrm’s  investment  and  disinvestment  decisions  when 
they are costly to reverse. The option to delay investment (disinvest-
ment) represents a call (put) option from the ﬁrm’s perspective (see, 
e.g., Pindyck (1991) and Abel and Eberly (1996) for classical contribu-
tions to the theoretical real-options literature). Naturally, the value of 
these options to “wait-and-see” increases in uncertainty. The framework 
also implies that because ﬁxed, irreversible costs are higher for new 
ship purchases and ship demolition (relative to used ship purchases and 
sales), the negative eﬀects of uncertainty arising from increased “wait-
and-see” option values should be more pronounced along these action 
margins. Our second prediction below summarizes this intuition, which 
is novel to the literature in illuminating the link between uncertainty 
and various dimensions of investment and disinvestment.

Prediction 2. Shipping ﬁrms will reduce their relatively irreversible invest-
ment and disinvestment (new ship purchases and ship demolition) more than 
they will reduce their relatively reversible investment and disinvestment (used 
ship purchases and sales) in response to increases in uncertainty.

Our analysis further implies that the negative relationship between 
uncertainty and investment and disinvestment is modulated by asset 
liquidity. The probability of successfully ﬁnding a trading counterparty 
is lower in thinner — and therefore less liquid — markets. Accordingly, 
the option to “wait-and-see” is more valuable in less liquid markets, 
as investment (disinvestment) decisions taken now are more costly to 
reverse in the future, should shipping demand be lower (higher) than 
expected. We state our third prediction.

Prediction 3. Shipping ﬁrms will reduce their investment and disinvestment 
in response to increases in uncertainty by a larger degree when the secondary 
ship market liquidity is lower.

Relatedly,  because  investing  in  more  productive  assets  or  disin-
vesting  less  productive  assets  is  associated  with  a  greater  degree  of 
irreversibility,  the  framework  implies  that  the  eﬀects  of  increases  in 
uncertainty will diﬀer along the lines of asset productivity. This leads 
to our fourth prediction.

Prediction 4. Shipping ﬁrms will reduce their investment (disinvestment) 
in more (less) productive ships by a larger degree in response to increases in 
uncertainty.

We set out to test these empirical predictions in the remainder of the 

paper.

3.  Data and empirical methodology

3.1.  Ship-level data

We  obtain  near-universal  data  on  shipping  ﬁrms’  ownership  and 
transactions  of  ships  over  the  2006–2019  period  from  Clarksons  Re-
search.  We  use  four  databases  compiled  by  Clarksons.  The  ﬁrst  is  a 
panel  dataset  on  ship  ownership.  This  dataset  allows  us  to  observe 
characteristics of each ship, including unique ship identiﬁers (e.g., the 
International  Maritime  Organization,  or  IMO,  number),  the  date  the 
ship was built, the identity and country of its builder, and engine char-
acteristics such as speed (nautical miles per hour) and revolutions per 
minute (RPM). We also observe a ship’s dead-weight tonnage (DWT), 
which  speciﬁes  how  much  weight  the  ship  can  carry,  including  pri-
marily cargo, but also fuel, crew, passengers, food, and water. DWT is 
expressed in long tons and is customarily used in the industry to deﬁne 
ship size. The dataset also contains point-in-time information on the 
identity of a ship’s owning ﬁrm, allowing us to construct a ﬁrm-quarter 
panel of ship holdings. The Clarksons dataset covers 3,966 unique ﬁrms, 
both public and private, domiciled in 109 countries.5 These ﬁrms own 
on average seven ships in a given quarter, worth $412 million (in av-
erage purchase price terms). The average aggregate value of the ship 
holdings across our sample ﬁrms in a given year is $378 billion.

The second dataset provides information on new vessel orders and 
allows us to observe ﬁrms’ investment in new ships. The third dataset 
contains records on secondary market ship transactions; i.e., purchases 
and sales of used ships. We observe the ship identiﬁers, buyer and seller 
identities, transaction date, and resale price, and calculate ﬁrms’ invest-
ment in used ships and disinvestment of existing ships through sales. 
The ﬁnal dataset contains information on ship demolition activity, in-
cluding the ship identiﬁers, owner identity, demolition date, and scrap 
value.

5 As state-owned enterprises may have diﬀerent objectives than private-sector 
ﬁrms, in Internet Appendix Table C.1 we verify that our results are robust to 
the exclusion of any shipping ﬁrm with ownership of over 51% attributable to 
state-owned entities. We obtain data on ﬁrms’ ownership structure from Orbis 
and conduct manual searches to verify whether each owner is a state-owned 
entity.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037864M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Following the industry standard, we classify ships into two sectors, 
dry bulkers and tankers, and eight size-based subsectors (four within 
each  sector).  The  four  subsectors  within  dry  bulkers  are:  Handysize 
(DWT < 40,000), Handymax (DWT 40,000–59,999), Panamax (DWT 
60,000–109,999),  and  Capesize  (DWT  ≥ 110,000).  The  four  subsec-
tors within tankers are: Medium Range (or MR, DWT < 45,000), Long 
Range 1 (or LR1, DWT 45,000–79,999), Long Range 2 (or LR2, DWT 
80,000–159,999),  and  Very  Large  Crude  Carriers  (or  VLCC,  DWT  ≥
160,000). Ships within each of these subsectors are operated for special-
ized purposes and routes due to physical size limitations and economic 
viability. Dry bulker ships, by design, hold dry cargo such as iron ore, 
coal, other minerals and grains. Tankers, on the other hand, hold liquid 
cargo, primarily crude oil and its reﬁned derivatives. Further, ships in 
diﬀerent subsectors generally operate diﬀerent routes and carry diﬀer-
ent subsets of dry or wet cargo. For instance, within tankers, the largest 
ships (VLCC) tend to exclusively carry crude oil, whereas the smaller 
ships tend to carry a wider variety of reﬁned products (e.g., propane, 
automobile fuel, and jet fuel). In addition, ships are limited in the routes 
they can navigate due to their size. For example, Panamax ships are so 
named because they are the largest bulkers that are able to traverse 
the Panama Canal. Capesize ships must navigate around the Cape of 
Good Hope as they are too large to transit through the Suez or Panama 
Canals. As a result, markets for shipping services and used ships are 
segmented between these subsectors. We deﬁne the unit of our analy-
sis at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level. Our ﬁnal panel of ship holdings 
consists of approximately 100,000 observations.

The aforementioned features of the shipping market lead to segmen-
tation in the types of ships a ﬁrm operates. We show this by plotting 
our  sample  ﬁrms’  ship  ownership  by  subsector  in  Internet  Appendix 
Fig. C.1. Panel A plots the number of ﬁrms operating in each subsector, 
with subsectors within the bulker or tanker sectors shown in ascend-
ing order of ship size. The panel indicates that there are a relatively 
large number of ﬁrms that operate smaller ships. Panel B plots the dis-
tribution of ﬁrms by the number of subsectors in which they operate 
ships. The vast majority of ﬁrms operate ships in one to four subsec-
tors. Most shipping ﬁrms operate ships within just the bulker or tanker 
sector, with 24% of ﬁrms operating across both of those two sectors.

3.2.  Variable construction and measurement

3.2.1.  Ship investment and disinvestment

We construct three measures of investment at the ﬁrm-subsector-
quarter level. First, we compute the new ship investment rate as the 
number of new ships a given ﬁrm orders in a given subsector in a given 
quarter, scaled by the number of ships the ﬁrm owns in that subsector 
in the previous quarter. We calculate the used ship investment rate in a 
similar fashion, by summing the number of used ships in each subsector 
that a given ﬁrm purchases in a given quarter in the secondary market, 
scaled by the number of ships the ﬁrm owns in each subsector in the pre-
vious quarter. We calculate the total investment rate as the sum of the 
new and used ship investment rates in a given ﬁrm-subsector-quarter.
We construct measures of ﬁrm disinvestment in an analogous fash-
ion. The ﬁrst is the demolition rate, deﬁned as the number of ships a 
given ﬁrm demolishes in a given subsector and quarter, scaled by the 
number of ships the ﬁrm owns in that subsector in the previous quarter. 
Firms can also disinvest ships through sales in the secondary market. 
We calculate the used ship sale rate as the number of ships a given ﬁrm 
sells in each subsector in a given quarter, scaled by the number of ships 
the ﬁrm owns in each subsector in the previous quarter. We calculate 
the total disinvestment rate as the sum of the demolition and used ship 
sale rates in a given ﬁrm-subsector-quarter.

3.2.2.  Uncertainty in the shipping industry

We construct an ex-ante measure of uncertainty in shipping at the 
subsector-quarter level for our tests. We do so using implied volatili-
ties from publicly-traded options for shipping ﬁrms’ stocks taken from 

OptionMetrics. This measure is constructed according to the following 
steps.  First,  for  each  shipping  ﬁrm  with  publicly-traded  options,  we 
identify for each day in a given quarter the nearest-to-money Amer-
ican call option expiring at the end of the next quarter. Second, we 
obtain the annualized implied volatility for this option on each day of 
the quarter. Third, this daily implied volatility is averaged across all 
days in a quarter for each ﬁrm. Fourth, we identify all the subsectors in 
which each ﬁrm operates in a given quarter. For each subsector-quarter, 
we ﬁnally take the average of the quarterly implied volatility across all 
ﬁrms operating in that subsector-quarter, weighted by the number of 
ships each ﬁrm operates in the subsector-quarter. The resulting metric 
is our baseline measure of subsectoral-quarter uncertainty (labeled Un-
certainty).6 In later tests, we aggregate the subsector-quarter Uncertainty
measure to the ﬁrm level using the number of ships a ﬁrm operates in 
each subsector-quarter as the weight.

In  robustness  tests  reported  in  Table 9,  we  employ  the  realized 
(ex-post) volatility of the subsectoral forward freight agreement price 
changes (deﬁned in Section 3.2.4) as an alternate proxy for uncertainty 
in the shipping subsector, which we label Volatility(ΔSubsectoral BDI). 
Reassuringly, and consistent with rational expectations among options-
market investors, the correlation between the ex-ante and ex-post uncer-
tainty measures is very high, on the order of 0.82. This high correlation 
suggests that our preferred, ex-ante measure based on the subset of ﬁrms 
with publicly-traded options in a shipping subsector is representative 
of  uncertainty  in  the  subsector  as  a  whole.  Notably,  the  ﬁrms  with 
publicly-traded options, whose implied volatilities form the basis for 
our Uncertainty measure, represent 38% of the aggregate shipping ﬂeet 
in dead-weight tonnage. We further address the possibility that hetero-
geneity in the representativeness of ﬁrms with publicly-traded options 
across subsectors may inﬂuence our results in Section 7.6.

3.2.3.  Secondary ship market liquidity

We compute two key measures of secondary ship market liquidity, 
i.e., the ease at which ships sell in the secondary market. Our ﬁrst liq-
uidity  measure  aims  to  directly  capture  investment  irreversibility  as 
in Arrow (1968), deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the purchase and 
resale  prices  of  capital.  Speciﬁcally,  we  deﬁne  Price Premium as  the 
resale price minus the purchase price divided by the purchase price, 
averaged across all secondary market transactions in a subsector and 
year-quarter. Our second (reverse) measure of liquidity is Price Disper-
sion, deﬁned as the year-quarterly mean absolute deviation of resale 
prices divided by the mean resale price of all transactions in a given 
subsector and year-quarter. The idea behind this measure is that the 
dispersion of transaction prices is lower when it is easier to ﬁnd a coun-
terparty for transactions.

We validate our secondary ship market liquidity proxies by exam-
ining whether variation in these liquidity measures is driven by diﬀer-
ences in the thickness of asset resale markets.7 To do so, we construct 
three measures of market thickness. The ﬁrst (# Ships) is the log total 
stock of ships in each subsector-quarter. The second measure (# Firms) 
is the log total number of ﬁrms in each subsector-quarter. These two 
proxies are motivated by our conceptual framework as well as Gavazza 
(2011). The second measure, in particular, captures the number of po-
tential buyers in the secondary market (as in Benmelech (2009)). The 

6 We also consider an alternative weighting scheme that decomposes each 
ﬁrm’s implied volatility across subsectors based on the distribution of its own 
ﬂeet across the subsectors, as opposed to the fraction of total ships in a subsector 
made up by its own ships as we do in our baseline Uncertainty measure (see 
Internet Appendix D.1). We further replicate our baseline results under various 
alternative option maturities in Internet Appendix D.2.
7 The notion that the thickness of a market aﬀects transaction prices dates 
back to Diamond (1982). His search-and-bargaining model has been adapted to 
real asset (e.g., Gavazza (2011)), ﬁnancial (e.g., Duﬃe et al. (2005)), and labor 
markets (e.g., Rogerson et al. (2005)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037865M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

third measure (# Transactions) is the number of secondary market trans-
actions completed in a given subsector-quarter divided by the lagged 
stock of ships in that subsector-quarter. This last measure captures ex-
post trading frequency (or turnover) in the used ship market (see also 
Schlingemann et al. (2002)).

Verifying the relation is important as it directly builds on the con-
ceptual link between trading frictions and investment irreversibility. To 
wit, our framework implies that the incentive to “wait-and-see” before 
investing or disinvesting under uncertainty is heightened when these 
decisions are costlier to reverse through trade in less liquid secondary 
markets. For this validation analysis, we regress each of our two liquid-
ity measures, Price Premium and Price Dispersion, on each of our three 
measures  of  market  thickness,  #  Ships,  #  Firms,  and  #  Transactions, 
along with controls for demand conditions and ship-level determinants 
of secondary market prices. Internet Appendix B reports the results. The 
estimates in Table B.1 imply that secondary ship markets are more liq-
uid — and thus, investment and disinvestment decisions are less costly 
to reverse — when secondary markets are thicker.

3.2.4.  Control variables

We control for a number of variables that are likely to inﬂuence 
shipping  ﬁrms’  demand  for  capital.  First,  we  proxy  for  the  expected 
shipping  demand  using  a  forward-looking  measure  of  shipping  rates 
at  the  subsector  level.  Speciﬁcally,  ΔSubsectoral  BDI is  the  quarterly 
return on the shipping rate indices derived from forward freight agree-
ment prices for commonly-served routes in a given subsector. Forward 
freight agreements (FFAs) are derivatives that allow to lock in a price 
for a given freight shipping route at some future date. The Baltic Dry In-
dex (BDI) is an example of a shipping index constructed from FFA prices 
that is widely used as a proxy for business prospects in the shipping 
industry. We obtain the forward rates quoted on the Baltic Exchange 
from Bloomberg. Second, Cash Flow is the quarterly income before ex-
traordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged 
total assets, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector, 
weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. To con-
struct this variable, we manually match ﬁrms in the Clarksons data to 
public and private ﬁrms in Compustat and Orbis. We also construct con-
trols for lagged ﬂeet characteristics at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level. 
Speciﬁcally, we calculate the average log of age, DWT, and RPM, across 
all ships that a ﬁrm holds in a given subsector-quarter.

3.3.  Descriptive statistics

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for our investment and dis-
investment measures as well as other variables described above. The 
average total quarterly investment rate for our sample of shipping ﬁrms 
is around 1.4%, whether calculated using number of ships acquired or 
their DWT. New ship orders account for approximately 82% of the av-
erage ﬁrm’s total investment, and used ship purchases account for the 
rest. Firms in our sample have average quarterly total disinvestment 
rates of 1.3%. About 51% of disinvestment occurs through ship sales in 
the secondary market, the rest is via demolition. Translating these rates 
into numbers of ships per ﬁrm-year implies that the average ﬁrm in-
vests in 5.5 ships per year, out of which new ship orders account for 
4.5. The average ﬁrm disinvests around 5.1 ships a year, out of which 
2.5 ships are demolished. The annualized implied equity volatility, our 
base measure of uncertainty in a subsector, has a mean of 9% and a 
standard deviation of 2.9%.

3.4.  Empirical speciﬁcation

We use an empirical model that relates ﬁrms’ capital allocation deci-
sions with uncertainty and asset liquidity to test the predictions outlined 
in Section 2. We do so controlling for other drivers of ﬁrm investment 
and disinvestment, including proxies for expected shipping demand and 
cash ﬂows. Our base speciﬁcation takes the form:

𝑌𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽

2Liquidity𝑗,𝑡

+ 𝛽

1Uncertainty𝑗,𝑡 + 𝛽
3Uncertainty𝑗,𝑡 × Liquidity𝑗,𝑡
+ 𝜃Controls𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝐹 𝐸𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑗,𝑡,

(1)

where  𝑌𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 refers to the investment and disinvestment measures de-
scribed in Section 3.2.1 for ﬁrm 𝑖, in subsector 𝑗, and year-quarter 𝑡. 
Uncertainty𝑗,𝑡 is subsectoral-quarter uncertainty measured by average 
implied equity volatility, and Liquidity𝑗,𝑡 is one of the two subsectoral-
quarter ship market liquidity measures (Price Premium and Price Dis-
persion). The vector Controls𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 contains proxies for the ﬁrst moment 
of  investment  opportunities,  ΔSubsectoral  BDI and  Cash  Flow at  the 
subsector-quarter level, as well as lagged ﬂeet characteristics, including 
the  average  log  age,  log  DWT,  and  log  RPM  in  the  ﬁrm-subsector-
quarter. We estimate several variants of Eq. (1) controlling for unob-
servables at multiple levels by including ﬁxed eﬀects for: ﬁrm, subsec-
tor, (headquarter) country, year-quarter, country × year-quarter, and 
ﬁrm  × subsector.  Standard  errors  are  double-clustered  at  the  ﬁrm-
subsector and year-quarter levels. Our results are robust to clustering at 
various levels including at the subsector level and double-clustering at 
the subsector and year-quarter levels, corresponding to the level of vari-
ation in our key variables of interest (see Internet Appendix Tables C.2 
and C.3). We stress that our inferences continue to obtain when we re-
calculate 𝑡-statistics based on standard errors obtained by applying the 
wild bootstrap method of resampling clusters at either the subsector or 
subsector and year-quarter levels. This ﬁnal check is particularly rele-
vant in our setting in light of work by Cameron et al. (2008) showing 
that bootstrap-based resampling of clusters provides asymptotic reﬁne-
ment to inferences when the number of clusters is small. Such concerns 
could arise with respect to the aforementioned subsector-level cluster-
ing in which there are eight clusters corresponding to the eight shipping 
subsectors (see Section 7.6 for more details).

4.  Uncertainty, investment, and disinvestment

4.1.  Total investment, new ship orders, and used ship purchases

We estimate Eq. (1) ﬁrst using total investment and then its dis-
aggregated components (new ship orders and used ship purchases) as 
dependent variables. We report the results in Table 2, Panel A.

In  line  with  our  conceptual  framework,  the  coeﬃcient  estimates 
on  our  subsector-level  uncertainty  measure,  Uncertainty,  in  columns 
(1) and (4) show that total investment is negatively related to uncer-
tainty in a given industry subsector. As expected, investment in ships 
is  positively  associated  with  ΔSubsectoral  BDI and  Cash  Flow.  How-
ever, only the former variable is statistically signiﬁcant, suggesting that 
the industry-speciﬁc, forward-looking measure of shipping rates better 
captures ﬁrst-moment expectations for shipping ﬁrms’ investment op-
portunities.

Importantly, our real-options framework predicts that the eﬀect of 
uncertainty on investment should be particularly strong for ordering 
new ships — as opposed to buying used ships — given the associated 
ﬁxed costs. We test this prediction by estimating Eq. (1) with investment 
rates in new and used ships as separate dependent variables. Results in 
columns (2), (3), (5), and (6) of Table 2, Panel A show that the eﬀect 
of uncertainty on total investment is driven almost entirely by new ship 
investments (columns (2) and (5)), rather than used ships acquisitions 
(columns (3) and (6)). New to the literature, this ﬁnding suggests that 
sunk costs lead ﬁrms to respond to increased uncertainty by reducing 
investment in the newest-vintage capital the most. In Section 5, we fur-
ther investigate how measures of asset productivity — including vintage 
— aﬀect ﬁrms’ capital allocation decisions when uncertainty varies.

One  advantage  of  our  setting  is  that  we  are  able  to  examine  the 
role of secondary asset market liquidity in shaping the dynamics of in-
vestment under uncertainty. For narrative purposes, we transform all 
liquidity measures such that higher values indicate higher liquidity. Us-
ing the resale price premium in a subsector as a proxy for liquidity, we 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037866M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics. This table presents descriptive statistics for the main variables used in our empirical 
analyses over the 2006–2019 period. Dependent variables are indicated in normal-type font and independent 
variables are denoted in italics. The investment measures are calculated at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level 
by dividing the number (alternatively, dead-weight tons) of new, used, and the sum of new and used ships 
acquired by the lagged number (alternatively, dead-weight tons) of ships held, and are obtained from Clarksons 
Research. The disinvestment measures are calculated at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number 
(alternatively, dead-weight tons) of ships demolished, sold, and the sum of ships demolished and sold by the 
lagged number (alternatively, dead-weight tons) of ships held, and are obtained from Clarksons Research. Age
is the average of the logarithm of the years since a ship was built, calculated across all ships in a given ﬁrm-
subsector-quarter. DWT is the average of the logarithm of dead-weight tons of a ship, calculated across all ships 
in a given ﬁrm-subsector-quarter. RPM is the average of the logarithm of ship engine’s revolutions per minute, 
calculated across all ships in a given ﬁrm-subsector-quarter. ΔSubsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change 
in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in 
each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange, and is obtained from Bloomberg. Cash Flow is the quarterly 
income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged 
across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector, 
and is obtained from Compustat and Orbis. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of the annualized daily implied 
volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across 
all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector, and is 
obtained from OptionMetrics. The Liquidity measures are deﬁned as the price premium, which is the quarterly 
average resale price minus the purchase price divided by the purchase price, across all used ship transactions 
in a given subsector, and the (reverse of the) price dispersion, which is the quarterly mean absolute deviation 
of resale prices divided by the mean resale price of all transactions involving ships of a given subsector. All 
variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.

Variable

Investment Measures (Quarterly)

Investment (Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)
Investment (DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)
Investment (New Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)
Investment (New DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)
Investment (Used Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)
Investment (Used DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)

Disinvestment Measures (Quarterly)

Disinvestment (Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)
Disinvestment (DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)
Disinvestment (Ships Sold)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)
Disinvestment (DWT Sold)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)
Disinvestment (Ships Demolished)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)
Disinvestment (DWT Demolished)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)

Firm Fleet Characteristics (Quarterly)

N

Mean

SD

Median

IQR

99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928

99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928

1.360
1.378
1.115
1.128
0.245
0.250

1.262
1.257
0.642
0.639
0.620
0.618

9.712
9.988
9.317
8.614
2.534
2.540

7.994
8.004
5.167
5.198
6.128
5.218

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

Age (Log # Years)
DWT (Log)
RPM (Log)

Control Variables (Quarterly)

ΔSubsectoral BDI (%)
Cash Flow (%)
Uncertainty (%)
Liquidity (Price Premium, %)
Liquidity (Price Dispersion, %)

99,928
99,928
99,928

2.873
11.436
4.769

0.886
0.795
0.386

2.929
11.422
4.742

1.387
1.033
0.284

99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928
99,928

0.215
1.065
9.039
−0.711
4.545

24.947
2.516
2.893
2.486
2.388

−0.144
1.091
8.234
−2.182
2.412

28.173
1.719
3.628
8.360
7.198

ﬁnd that the negative relation between uncertainty and total investment 
is signiﬁcantly mitigated by secondary market liquidity; see column (1) 
of  Panel  A.  When  liquidity  is  at  its  25th percentile,  a  one-standard-
deviation increase in Uncertainty decreases investment by 41% relative 
to mean rates, which translates into 2.3 fewer ships invested per year. 
In contrast, when secondary market liquidity is at its 75th percentile, 
it has virtually no eﬀect on investment.8 We observe similar dynamics 

8 These magnitudes are calculated using the marginal eﬀect of Uncertainty
assuming liquidity measured by the price premium is at its 25th and 75th per-
centiles, −5.34 and 3.02, respectively. The marginal eﬀects of Uncertainty at 
these percentiles are −0.081 + 0.021 × −5.34 = −0.193 and −0.081 + 0.021 ×
3.02 = −0.018, respectively. Multiplying these marginal eﬀects with the stan-
dard deviation of Uncertainty (2.893), we obtain −0.193 × 2.893 = −0.56 and 
−0.018 × 2.893 = −0.05. Finally, dividing by the average investment rate of 
1.36%, we get −0.56∕1.36 = −41% and −0.05∕1.36 = −4%.

when employing the dispersion of resale prices as a measure of liquid-
ity (see column (4) of Panel A) or other measures motivated by market 
thickness (see Section 7.2 and Internet Appendix E). These results verify 
our prediction that heightened uncertainty increases ﬁrms’ incentives to 
delay investment, particularly when the decisions are costly to reverse 
due to low asset market liquidity. They are also consistent with prior lit-
erature examining these dynamics in diﬀerent settings (see, e.g., Gulen 
and Ion (2016) and Kim and Kung (2017)).

Fig. 2 provides  a  graphical  illustration  of  our  ﬁndings.  In  it,  we 
plot regression-ﬁtted investment rates, disaggregated across new and 
used  ship  purchases,  against  percentiles  of  Uncertainty at  low  (25th
percentile, Panel a) and high (75th percentile, Panel b) levels of Liq-
uidity. The ﬁgure shows that new ship orders (blue solid line) respond 
more  pronouncedly  to  variation  in  uncertainty  than  used  ship  pur-
chases (red dashed line). A comparison of the two panels shows that 
the  response  is  considerably  stronger  when  asset  market  liquidity  is 
low. The ﬁgure also reveals a non-linear eﬀect of uncertainty on new 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037867M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 2
Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Investment and Disinvestment. This table reports output from Eq. (1). The dependent variable in 
Panel A is the investment rate, both the total rate and disaggregated into its components. The investment rate is calculated at the 
ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired (total, new ships acquired, or used ships acquired) by the 
lagged number of ships held. The dependent variable in Panel B is the disinvestment rate, both the total rate and disaggregated into 
its components. The disinvestment rate is calculated at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships disinvested 
(total, ships demolished, or ships sold) by the lagged number of ships held. ΔSubsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the 
sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the 
Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged 
total assets, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. 
Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the 
end of the next quarter, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the 
subsector. The Liquidity measures are deﬁned as the price premium, which is the quarterly average resale price minus the purchase 
price divided by the purchase price, across all used ship transactions in a given subsector, and the (reverse of the) price dispersion, 
which is the quarterly mean absolute deviation of resale prices divided by the mean resale price of all transactions involving ships of 
a given subsector. Firm ﬂeet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the ﬁrm-subsector in the lagged quarter. 
Fixed eﬀects for headquarter country, ﬁrm, subsector, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over 
the 2006–2019 period. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm-subsector and 
year-quarter.

Panel A: Investment (Ships Acquired)

Total

(1)

0.006***
(4.18)
0.318
(1.47)
−0.081***
(−3.23)
0.221***
(3.77)
0.021***
(3.56)

New

(2)

0.006***
(3.82)
0.281
(1.37)
−0.078***
(−3.64)
0.208***
(3.85)
0.018***
(3.84)

Used

(3)

0.001
(1.58)
0.037
(1.11)
−0.004
(−0.17)
0.013**
(2.11)
0.002
(0.20)

Δ Subsectoral BDI

Cash Flow

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

Total

(4)

0.012***
(4.21)
0.481
(0.72)
−0.143***
(−4.99)
0.072***
(5.88)
0.014***
(4.24)

New

(5)

0.009***
(4.91)
0.299
(1.18)
−0.142***
(−5.17)
0.049***
(6.76)
0.011***
(5.16)

Used

(6)

0.003
(1.22)
0.182
(0.64)
−0.001
(−0.12)
0.023***
(7.92)
0.003
(1.15)

Liquidity Measure

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Dispersion

Price Dispersion

Price Dispersion

Controls
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm × Subsector

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

99,928
0.049

99,928
0.052

99,928
0.024

Panel B: Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)

Total

(1)

−0.010*
(−1.81)
−0.708
(−0.12)
−0.208***
(−3.99)
0.142***
(2.82)
0.018***
(4.05)

Demolished

(2)

−0.008**
(−2.10)
−0.687
(−0.78)
−0.149***
(−3.77)
0.095**
(2.46)
0.013***
(3.75)

Sold

(3)

−0.002*
(−1.65)
−0.021
(−0.25)
−0.059*
(−1.73)
0.047
(1.46)
0.005*
(1.83)

Δ Subsectoral BDI

Cash Flow

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.062

Total

(4)

−0.037*
(−1.91)
−0.897
(−0.65)
−0.268***
(−3.87)
0.124
(1.40)
0.014**
(2.41)

Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.077

Demolished

(5)

−0.024*
(−1.82)
−0.581
(−0.31)
−0.227***
(−4.31)
0.129**
(2.00)
0.010**
(2.28)

Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.041

Sold

(6)

−0.013*
(−1.80)
−0.316
(−0.96)
−0.041
(−0.91)
−0.005
(−0.18)
0.004
(0.49)

Liquidity Measure

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Dispersion

Price Dispersion

Price Dispersion

Controls
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm × Subsector

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

99,928
0.048

99,928
0.077

99,928
0.025

Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, * 𝑝 <0.1.

Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.048

Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.077

Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.025

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037868M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Fig. 2. Relationship between Uncertainty and Investment for Low and High Secondary Market Liquidity. Each panel depicts the ﬁtted investment rate from the 
speciﬁcation in Eq. (1) estimated at the 25th (“Low”) and 75th (“High”) percentiles of Liquidity measured as the resale price premium of secondary ship transactions 
in a subsector-quarter.

investment: an eﬀect that is pronounced at the highest levels of uncer-
tainty.

4.2.  Total disinvestment, demolition, and used ship sales

We next examine the eﬀect of uncertainty on disinvestment; both 
total disinvestment, as well as disaggregated into its components, de-
molition and sales. Our framework predicts that when disinvestment 
decisions are costly to reverse, uncertainty increases ﬁrms’ incentive to 
delay them and that this eﬀect is mitigated by asset market liquidity. 
The estimates in Table 2, Panel B conﬁrm this prediction. In particular, 
the results in columns (1) and (4) show that uncertainty is negatively as-
sociated with total disinvestment. They also show that the ﬁrst-moment 
proxies are generally negatively associated with disinvestment. In ac-
cordance with our framework, the negative uncertainty–disinvestment 
relation is mitigated by asset market liquidity, indicating that when dis-
investment decisions are less costly to reverse, uncertainty has only a 
limited impact on disinvestment. The associated economic magnitudes 
are signiﬁcant. According to the estimates in column (1), when asset 
liquidity is at its 25th percentile, a one-standard-deviation increase in 
uncertainty is associated with a 70% decline in disinvestment rates, rel-
ative to the mean. In contrast, when liquidity is at its 75th percentile, it 
is associated with a more modest 35% decline from the mean.

Our framework further implies that the impact of uncertainty on 
disinvestment is particularly high for ship demolitions (the more irre-
versible margin) compared to ship sales. Accordingly, we study disin-
vestment in the forms of demolition and sales separately in columns (2) 
and (3) (alternatively, columns (5) and (6)) of Panel B. We ﬁnd that the 
negative eﬀect of uncertainty is far more pronounced for demolition: 
the magnitude of the eﬀect on demolition is 72% of the total disin-
vestment eﬀect, with sales making up the balance. These results are 
consistent with greater sunk costs making ﬁrms more cautious about 
demolishing relative to selling ships when uncertainty is high in the 
relevant industry subsector.

In all, the results in Table 2 conﬁrm several of our framework’s pre-
dictions. Further, they provide early insight into an important result 
that  uncertainty  bears  a  compositional  eﬀect on  shipping  ﬁrms’  asset 
base: when uncertainty rises, ﬁrms invest less in new vessels (which 
likely embody new technology) and dispose less of ships intended for 
demolition (containing old-vintage technology). We study this eﬀect in 
further depth in Section 5.

4.3.  A quasi-natural experiment: the Somali piracy wave

The evidence so far is consistent with shipping ﬁrms delaying their 
capital  allocation  in  the  face  of  uncertainty.  In  this  section,  we  em-
ploy a design-based empirical approach to support that assertion (Card 
(2022)). Speciﬁcally, we use the escalation of piracy oﬀ the coast of So-
malia between 2009 and 2011 as a quasi-natural experiment. The event 
represented a signiﬁcant, positive innovation to uncertainty in particu-
lar shipping subsectors for three reasons. First, the escalation in piracy 
increased the downside risk (costs from being attacked) as well as the 
potential upside from successfully passing through (due to a reduction 
in competition), acting as a mean-preserving spread. Second, the in-
crease in uncertainty aﬀected some subsectors of ships, while leaving 
others largely unaﬀected, generating plausible “treated” and “control” 
groups for testing. To wit, the waters surrounding Somalia are traversed 
primarily by ships entering and exiting the Suez Canal, whose physical 
features limit the size of ships that can pass through it. Accordingly, the 
increase in uncertainty only aﬀected ships that could pass through the 
Canal. Using this discontinuity, we deﬁne treated and control subsectors 
as those falling immediately below (Panamax bulkers and LR2 tankers) 
and above (Capesize bulkers and VLCC tankers) the size thresholds for 
using the Canal, respectively.9

Third, there was a clear period of heightened risk of pirate attacks, 
providing a discrete, identiﬁable shock to uncertainty in the industry. 
Panel  a  of  Fig. 3 shows  that  the  number  of  attacks  dramatically  in-
creased from 24 in 2008 to 163 in 2009, and remained high at 174 and 
176 in 2010 and 2011, respectively. Contemporary accounts suggest 
that the escalation in attacks was viewed as potentially long-lasting.10
Due to historical ambiguities of maritime jurisdictions in the area and 

9 The large-scale disruption caused by an incident involving a single ship, the 
Ever Given, made explicit the importance of this route for the global economy, 
as well as its fragility to extraneous factors. See The Wall Street Journal, March 
24, 2021, “Suez Canal Is Blocked by Container Ship Causing Huge Traﬃc Jam.”
10 See the testimony by the Acting Deputy Administrator of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Transportation’s Maritime Administration, James Caponiti, before the 
U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee on May 5, 2009. Mr. Caponiti states that 
the “serious threat stemming from the ongoing piracy problem in the waters oﬀ of 
Somalia [...] has grown substantially worse.” Supporting the view that there was 
no reason to expect the threat to naturally subside, Mr. Caponiti notes, “One 
reason for the success of seajackings and ransom taking is that the government in So-
malia is ineﬀective and this has enabled pirates to operate with virtual impunity.” On 
the topic of piracy mitigation eﬀorts, Mr. Caponiti’s testimony outlines several 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037869M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Fig. 3. Frequency of Somali Attacks, Shipping Demand Levels, and Uncertainty. Panel a depicts the number of Somali pirate attacks per year based on statistics 
compiled by the International Maritime Bureau. Panel b shows the diﬀerences in the levels and volatilities of ΔSubsectoral BDI between treated and control 
subsectors. Panel c shows the diﬀerences in Uncertainty between treated and control subsectors. Treated subsectors consist of Panamax bulkers and LR2 tankers. 
Control subsectors consist of Capesize bulkers and VLCC tankers.

the lack of a functional government in Somalia, the international com-
munity had to coordinate a response to the heightened risk of pirate 
attacks (Weitz (2009)). These eﬀorts led to an increase in multi-lateral 
law enforcement in the area, which virtually ended the pirate attacks 
by 2012, a full three years after the escalation began.

To verify that the escalation in Somali piracy represents a diﬀer-
ential  shock  to  uncertainty  in  shipping  demand  for  the  treated  ver-
sus control subsectors, we examine changes in shipping rate volatility 
around the event period. Panel b of Fig. 3 shows a marked increase in 
the diﬀerence in the volatility of ΔSubsectoral BDI for treated relative 
to control subsectors during the 2009–2011 window. Panel c shows a 
similar dynamic using our option-implied measure, Uncertainty. Impor-
tantly, Panel b shows that the diﬀerence in ΔSubsectoral BDI between 
treated and control subsectors is largely ﬂat around zero, suggesting 
that the escalation did not embed a concurrent ﬁrst-moment shock for 
treated subsectors (see Internet Appendix Fig. F.2 for dynamics of the 
ﬁrst-moment proxy separately for the two subsectors).

We  analyze  the  eﬀect  of  the  increase  in  uncertainty  due  to  the 
rise  in  piracy  by  comparing  the  investment  and  disinvestment  rates 
of treated and matched control ﬁrm-subsectors. In particular, for each 
treated ﬁrm-subsector, we assign a matched control ﬁrm-subsector as 
its nearest neighbor in terms of treatment propensity. We estimate the 
propensity score as a function of ﬁrm-subsector ﬂeet characteristics, in-
cluding  the  average  log  age,  log  DWT,  and  log  RPM.  This  matching 
ensures that we compare ﬁrm-subsectors that are otherwise similar in 
ﬂeet characteristics, except that they lie on either side of the pre-deﬁned 
size threshold. Consequently, ships belonging to the treated and control 
groups are likely to be similar in the commodities they carry and the 
destinations they serve, diﬀering only in the routes taken. We perform 
detailed checks in Internet Appendix Table F.1 and Fig. F.1 to verify that 
the matched treated and control ﬁrm-subsectors are comparable along 
ﬂeet characteristics, ownership, and common origin–destination pairs 
served. The observed similarity across these various dimensions implies 
that demand conditions across the treated and control subsectors are 
likely to be driven by common trends in commodity prices (such as iron 
ore and crude oil). Importantly for our experiment, these trends were 
unrelated to the emergence of piracy in Somalia, which was driven by 
domestic political conﬂicts. As we test explicitly, the common demand 
conditions (see Panel b of Fig. 3 and Internet Appendix Fig. F.2) lend 
credibility to our identifying assumption that the trends in outcomes 
for treated and control ﬁrm-subsectors would have evolved in paral-

current and planned U.S.-led initiatives that would require the coordination of 
international bodies, concluding that “Combating international piracy is no small 
eﬀort. [...] much remains to be done, before international piracy can be eliminated.”

lel absent the unexpected increase in Somali piracy. Using the matched 
sample, we estimate the following diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences model:

(2)

1Treat𝑗 × Piracy𝑡 + 𝜃Controls𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 + 𝐹 𝐸𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑗,𝑡,

𝑌𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 =𝛽
where  𝑌𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 refers  to  the  investment  and  disinvestment  measures  for 
ﬁrm 𝑖, in subsector 𝑗, and year-quarter 𝑡. Treat𝑗 is an indicator equal 
to one for the Panamax bulker and LR2 tanker subsectors, and zero for 
the Capesize bulker and VLCC tanker subsectors. Piracy𝑡 is an indica-
tor equal to one during 2009–2011, and zero for all other years from 
2006 through 2013. The vector  Controls𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is deﬁned as in Eq. (1). 
We include the ﬁrm’s headquarter country × year-quarter and ﬁrm ×
subsector ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the match level 
(see Abadie and Spiess (2022)). The coeﬃcient of interest is 𝛽
1, which 
represents the diﬀerence in investment or disinvestment rates between 
aﬀected and control ﬁrm-subsectors during the period of heightened un-
certainty due to Somali piracy relative to all other years between 2006 
and 2013.

Table 3, Panel A reports the results from estimating Eq. (2). While 
piracy risk is heightened, treated ﬁrms cut both their investment and 
disinvestment in subsectors exposed to the risk, relative to the unaf-
fected subsectors. The economic magnitude of the eﬀects is signiﬁcant. 
In the three years of heightened uncertainty, the cut in quarterly in-
vestment rates implied by the estimate in column (1) is 1.30 percentage 
points, which represents 38% of the mean investment rate of 3.43% for 
treated ﬁrm-subsectors during the pre-event period (2006–2008). Like-
wise, treated ﬁrms cut their disinvestment rates by 18% of the pre-event 
mean. These cuts are more pronounced among new ship purchases and 
demolition, where the degree of irreversibility is likely to be higher.

Fig. 4 shows the dynamic eﬀects of the escalation in piracy on invest-
ment and disinvestment by plotting annual coeﬃcients from a variant 
of Eq. (2). Notably, the ﬁgure provides evidence of parallel pre-trends in 
investment and disinvestment, a key assumption underlying our exper-
iment. We further verify that our results are not driven by diﬀerential 
pre-trends using a synthetic diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences approach in which 
control units are reweighted to achieve parallel pre-trends in outcome 
variables with treated units (see Arkhangelsky et al. (2021)). The in-
vestment  and  disinvestment  dynamics  depicted  in  Internet  Appendix 
Fig. F.3 resemble those in Fig. 4. Reassuringly, both Figs. 4 and F.3 
show signiﬁcant drops in investment and disinvestment coinciding with 
the event window.

In  order  to  compare  the  magnitude  of  the  eﬀect  of  uncertainty 
from the quasi-natural experiment with our baseline results, we esti-
mate a version of Eq. (1) (without Liquidity) using Treat𝑗 × Piracy𝑡 as 
an instrument for Uncertainty𝑗,𝑡. Table 3, Panel B reports the second-
stage  estimates  (ﬁrst-stage  estimates  are  in  Internet  Appendix  Table 
F.5). A comparison of the economic magnitudes implied by the coef-
ﬁcients on Uncertainty in columns (1) and (4) of Panel B in Table 3

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378610M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 3
Uncertainty, Investment, and Disinvestment: A Quasi-Natural Experiment. This table reports output from 
Eq. (2) in a matched sample in Panel A. In Panel B, we report the second stage output from a simpliﬁed 
version of Eq. (1) estimated using instrumental variables. The dependent variable is the investment (disin-
vestment) rate. The investment rate is calculated at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number 
of ships acquired (disinvested) by the lagged number of ships held. Treat is an indicator that takes the value 
of one for the Panamax and LR1 subsectors and zero for the Capesize and VLCC subsectors. Piracy is an in-
dicator that takes the value of one for the years 2009–2011, and zero for all other years from 2006–2013. 
Subsector controls are ΔSubsectoral BDI and Cash Flow, and are deﬁned in Table 2. Uncertainty is the quar-
terly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the 
end of the next quarter, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of 
ships they operate in the subsector. Firm ﬂeet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by 
the ﬁrm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Each treated ﬁrm-subsector is matched to one control ﬁrm-subsector 
(with replacement) which is its nearest neighbor in terms of treatment propensity. The propensity score is a 
function of the ﬁrm-subsector ﬂeet controls. In Panel B, Uncertainty is instrumented by Treat × Piracy. Fixed 
eﬀects for headquarter country, ﬁrm, subsector, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions 
are estimated over the 2006–2013 period. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust 
standard errors clustered by match in Panel A and by ﬁrm-subsector and year-quarter in Panel B.

Panel A: Matched Sample Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences

Investment (Ships Acquired)

Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)

Total

(1)

New

(2)

Used

(3)

Total

(4)

Demolish

(5)

Sale

(6)

Treat × Piracy

−1.299***
(−2.97)

−1.197***
(−3.41)

−0.102
(−0.89)

−0.252***
(−3.28)

−0.166***
(−3.44)

−0.086
(−1.17)

Controls
Subsector
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm × Subsector

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

14,651
0.045

14,651
0.055

14,651
0.043

14,651
0.066

14,651
0.085

14,651
0.053

Panel B: Instrumental Variables Regression (Second Stage)

Investment (Ships Acquired)

Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)

Total

(1)

New

(2)

Used

(3)

Total

(4)

Demolish

Sale

(5)

(6)

Uncertainty

−0.187***
(−2.80)

−0.168***
(−2.88)

−0.019
(−0.91)

−0.038**
(−2.14)

−0.025**
(−2.29)

−0.013
(−1.58)

Controls
Subsector
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm × Subsector

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Lee et al. (2022) Diagnostics
First Stage F-ratio
5% Adjustment Factor
1% Adjustment Factor

153.23
1.00
1.00

Observations

14,651
Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, * 𝑝 <0.1.

14,651

14,651

14,651

14,651

14,651

with those under column (1) of Panels A and B in Table 2 indicates that 
they are of similar orders of magnitudes. The escalation in piracy is a 
strong instrument for Uncertainty (ﬁrst-stage F-ratio of 153.23, see Ta-
ble F.5), and thus the inferences drawn from the second-stage estimates 
are likely valid (Lee et al. (2022)). Overall, our quasi-natural experi-
ment provides evidence supporting a causal argument that uncertainty 
dampens corporate capital allocation across both investment and disin-
vestment.

One caveat for the external validity of our empirical design is that 
the escalation in piracy took place during a period of somewhat de-
clining ﬁrst moments across shipping subsectors (see Internet Appendix 

Fig. F.2). Accordingly, our estimates should be interpreted as represent-
ing local average treatment eﬀects (LATE) of increased uncertainty on 
investment and disinvestment when ﬁrst moments are declining. Never-
theless, the fact that we continue to ﬁnd a strong, negative uncertainty–
disinvestment relationship  in  the  quasi-natural  experimental  design  is 
reassuring for the validity of our inferences. Speciﬁcally, this relation-
ship would be, if anything, attenuated during periods of declining ﬁrst 
moments as ﬁrms would have greater incentives to disinvest under such 
conditions. Our unique data on ﬁrms’ granular disinvestment decisions 
enable us to shed light on the dynamics of capital allocation under un-
certainty even conditional on ﬁrst-moment shocks.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378611M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Fig. 4. Investment and Disinvestment Dynamics around the Escalation in Somali Piracy. This ﬁgure displays coeﬃcient estimates and 95% conﬁdence intervals for 
Treat𝑗 interacted with yearly indicators estimated from a modiﬁed version of the speciﬁcation in Eq. (2) (coeﬃcients are taken from Internet Appendix Table F.4). 
The modiﬁed speciﬁcation replaces the single treatment period indicator (Piracy𝑡) with annual indicator variables and the country × year-quarter ﬁxed eﬀects with 
country × year ﬁxed eﬀects. The dependent variables are investment (Panel a) and disinvestment (Panel b).

5.  Uncertainty and asset productivity

In this section, we test the prediction that uncertainty dispropor-
tionately  aﬀects  ﬁrms’  investment  in  (disinvestment  of)  more  (less) 
productive assets. The analysis provides insight into the impact of un-
certainty on the productivity of ﬁrms’ entire asset base (ﬂeets). We study 
the asset composition dynamics in further detail in the next section.

We  consider  a  number  of  individual  ship  characteristics  as  prox-
ies for asset productivity. We do so utilizing widely accepted industry 
standards. We start by estimating a battery of hedonic pricing regres-
sions to identify ship attributes that attract higher secondary-market 
prices, reﬂecting their greater productivity (see Internet Appendix Ta-
ble B.1). These attributes are: DWT (larger ships carry a greater volume 
of goods per trip), RPM (ships with lower RPM are more fuel-eﬃcient), 
and Age (new ships incorporate an array of technological advancements, 
ranging from safety to automation, to navigational and docking capa-
bilities).  We  then  adopt  two  approaches  to  gauging  the  productivity 
of ships ﬁrms invest in. First, we identify whether a given ship’s pro-
ductivity proxies are above or below its subsector-median numbers for 
two metrics: (1) DWT and (2) −1× RPM. A ship is classiﬁed as “high-
productivity”  if  it  is  above  the  median  on  at  least  one  of  those  two 
metrics,  and  “low-productivity”  otherwise.  Second,  we  consider  ship 
Age separately as it captures a collection of technological advances in 
shipping. We compute investment rates separately for high- and low-
productivity ships based on each of the two classiﬁcations and gauge 
the impact of uncertainty on these types of investment. We report the 
results of this analysis in Table 4.

The  estimates  in  Panel  A  show  that  uncertainty  most  negatively 
impacts investment in high-productivity ships, as captured by ship size 
(DWT)  and  engine  eﬃciency  (RPM),  particularly  when  these  ships 
are  new  (see  column  (1)).  In  contrast,  investments  in  new  but  low-
productivity  ships  and  used  ships  in  general  are  largely  unaﬀected 
by  uncertainty.  These  results  are  consistent  with  the  prediction  that 
ﬁrms delay investment in high-productivity ships more when faced with 
higher uncertainty. Importantly, they point to a slowdown in ﬁrms’ up-
grading of their ﬂeets under uncertainty. We next focus on ship age in 
Panel B. The estimates show that the negative eﬀect of uncertainty on 
investment becomes monotonically weaker as age increases. New ship 
orders and purchases of used ships with ages less than 16 years are 
signiﬁcantly negatively aﬀected by increases in uncertainty, while pur-
chases of older ships are not at all impacted. Our results ﬂesh out in 
great detail the deleterious eﬀect of uncertainty on the productivity of 
ﬁrms’ asset base: it operates through delayed investment in larger, more 
fuel-eﬃcient ships, as well as newer ships with the latest technological 
advances.

We conclude this section by examining whether uncertainty diﬀer-
ently aﬀects ﬁrms’ disinvestment of ships of diﬀerent productivity. To 
condense this analysis, we classify a ship as “high-productivity” if it sat-
isﬁes at least two of the following three criteria in its subsector-quarter: 
(1) above median DWT, (2) below median RPM, and (3) below median 
Age; and “low-productivity” otherwise. Table 5 reports results for the 
demolition and sales of high- and low-productivity ships.

The  estimates  in  Table 5 show  that  the  negative  eﬀect  of  uncer-
tainty on disinvestment, and its interactive eﬀect with asset liquidity, 
are  driven  by  the  demolition  and  sales  of  low-productivity ships  (see 
columns (3) and (4)). Our framework would predict this exact result 
if the costs of reversing demolition and sales of low-productivity ships 
are higher than those of high-productivity ships. Although we cannot 
directly test this sensible conjecture, we ﬁnd evidence that sunk costs 
are indeed higher for disinvestment of low-productivity ships. For de-
molition, we calculate an analogue to the resale price premium as the 
scrap value minus the most recent purchase price scaled by the purchase 
price. The higher this variable, the lower the degree of irreversibility. 
The  average  is  −67%  for  low-productivity  ships  and  only  −42%  for 
high-productivity ones. Similarly, the price premium conditional on sale 
is lower for low-productivity (−5%) than for high-productivity ships 
(22%). Firms appear to incur a greater loss from demolishing or selling 
low-productivity ships. The greater costs of demolishing these ships are 
likely due to their poorer conditions and environmental and regulatory 
restrictions on where and how they can be demolished (see Stopford 
(2009) for a detailed discussion).

6.  Uncertainty and ﬁrm asset composition

The  ﬁrm-subsector-level  analyses  in  the  previous  sections  reveal 
considerable heterogeneity in ﬁrms’ investment and disinvestment re-
sponses to changes in uncertainty based on the vintage and productivity 
of the assets they operate. The diﬀerential responses across individual 
assets suggest that uncertainty may signiﬁcantly aﬀect ﬁrms’ overall as-
set composition. In this section, we explicitly test how ﬁrms alter their 
asset portfolios when uncertainty in the industry changes.

We ﬁrst investigate whether ﬁrms alter the concentration of their 
asset  holdings  in  response  to  uncertainty.  Assuming  the  existence  of 
ﬁxed  costs  associated  with  operating  diﬀerent  ships  across  multiple 
subsectors at the same time (e.g., arising from informational frictions 
and coordination of ﬂeets with speciﬁc cargo-route combinations), our 
framework would imply that a ﬁrm will concentrate its ﬂeet into fewer 
subsectors in the face of higher uncertainty. We employ the (log) num-
ber of distinct market subsectors the ﬁrm operates in during a given 
quarter as an (inverse) measure a ﬁrm’s ﬂeet concentration and use it 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378612M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 4
Uncertainty and Productivity – Investment. This table reports output from Eq. (1). The dependent variable is 
the investment rate conditioning on measures of productivity. The investment rate is calculated at the ﬁrm-
subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired (high- or low-productivity) by the lagged 
number of ships held. Panel A reports results on investment (new or used) conditioning on a ship’s productiv-
ity. High-productivity ships are deﬁned as ships that are above (below) the median on at least one out of two 
characteristics: DWT (RPM). Low-productivity ships are analogously deﬁned. Panel B reports results on invest-
ment conditioning on a ship’s Age at the time of investment. Subsector controls are ΔSubsectoral BDI and Cash 
Flow, and are deﬁned in Table 2. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility 
of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all ﬁrms 
operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity
measure is the price premium, and is deﬁned in Table 2. Firm ﬂeet controls are the average Age, DWT, and 
RPM of ships held by the ﬁrm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed eﬀects for headquarter country, ﬁrm, sub-
sector, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006–2019 period. 
𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm-subsector and 
year-quarter.

Panel A: Investment (Ships Acquired) by Productivity (DWT and RPM)

New

Used

High-Productivity
(1)

Low-Productivity
(2)

High-Productivity
(3)

Low-Productivity
(4)

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

−0.055***
(−4.15)
0.143**
(2.35)
0.013***
(4.45)

−0.022
(−1.44)
0.064*
(1.72)
0.005
(1.34)

−0.004*
(−1.74)
0.026*
(1.94)
0.002
(0.15)

−0.002
(−0.19)
0.006*
(1.76)
0.000
(0.69)

Liquidity Measure

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Controls
Subsector
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm × Subsector

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.055

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.055

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.045

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

99,928
0.044

Panel B: Investment (Ships Acquired) by Age

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

New
(1)

−0.078***
(−3.64)
0.208***
(3.85)
0.018***
(3.84)

1-5 Years
(2)

−0.003**
(−2.92)
0.007**
(2.04)
0.001
(1.06)

6-15 Years
(3)

−0.001**
(−1.79)
0.004
(1.25)
0.001
(0.18)

16-25 Years
(4)

26+ Years
(5)

−0.000
(−0.63)
0.001
(1.57)
0.000
(0.39)

−0.000
(−1.04)
0.001
(0.35)
0.000
(0.46)

Liquidity Measure

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Controls
Subsector
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm × Subsector

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

99,928
0.052

99,928
0.051

99,928
0.055

99,928
0.053

99,928
0.050

Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, * 𝑝 <0.1.

as the dependent variable in a ﬁrm-level variant of Eq. (1). We also use 
the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of the number of ships a given 
ﬁrm-quarter operates across subsectors as a complementary measure. 
The coeﬃcient on uncertainty, therefore, captures the extent to which 
ﬁrms concentrate their ﬂeets into a smaller number of market subsec-
tors when uncertainty increases. Table 6 reports the results.

The results in Panel A show that ﬁrms reduce the number of sub-
sectors  they  operate  in  when  faced  with  heightened  uncertainty;  or 
equivalently, ﬁrms expand into new subsectors in periods of lower un-

certainty. This ﬁnding suggests that the eﬀects of uncertainty on ﬁrms’ 
capital allocation are in part driven by changes in extensive margin expo-
sures to market subsectors (Williamson (1975, 1985) and Teece (1980)). 
In addition, Panel B shows that the coeﬃcient on uncertainty is signif-
icantly positive and the coeﬃcient on its interaction with liquidity is 
signiﬁcantly negative when the dependent variable is the HHI, indicat-
ing that ﬁrms’ holdings become more concentrated as uncertainty rises, 
particularly  when  asset  liquidity  is  low.  These  results  are  consistent 
with ﬁxed costs associated with operating ships across multiple mar-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378613M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 5
Uncertainty and Productivity – Disinvestment. This table reports output from Eq. (1). The de-
pendent variable is the disinvestment rate conditioning on measures of productivity. The disin-
vestment rate is calculated at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships 
disinvested (high- or low-productivity) by the lagged number of ships held. High-productivity 
ships are deﬁned as ships that are above (below) the median on two out of three characteristics: 
DWT (Age, RPM). Low-productivity ships are analogously deﬁned. Subsector controls are ΔSub-
sectoral BDI and Cash Flow, and are deﬁned in Table 2. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of 
annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end 
of the next quarter, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the 
number of ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is the price premium, and 
is deﬁned in Table 2. Firm ﬂeet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by 
the ﬁrm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed eﬀects for headquarter country, ﬁrm, subsector, 
and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006–2019 pe-
riod. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by 
ﬁrm-subsector and year-quarter.

High-Productivity Ships

Low-Productivity Ships

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

Demolition

(1)

−0.024
(−0.46)
0.018
(1.24)
0.002
(0.16)

Sale

(2)

−0.013
(−0.29)
0.021
(1.50)
0.001
(0.70)

Demolition

(3)

−0.125***
(−4.89)
0.077*
(1.84)
0.011***
(4.40)

Sale

(4)

−0.046*
(−1.83)
0.026
(0.54)
0.004*
(1.66)

Liquidity Measure

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Controls
Subsector
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm × Subsector

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

99,928
0.075

99,928
0.022

99,928
0.077

99,928
0.021

Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, * 𝑝 <0.1.

kets, which lead ﬁrms to concentrate their ship portfolios in subsectors 
with greater importance when uncertainty rises. Low asset liquidity ac-
centuates this eﬀect as it makes the ex-post retreat from subsectors more 
costly. Viewed together, these results show that ﬁrms’ asset-level alloca-
tion decisions in the face of heightened uncertainty do not “oﬀset” each 
other; rather, these decisions cumulatively aﬀect their ﬁrm-level asset 
composition and, ultimately, the boundaries of the ﬁrm.

We  next  explore  how  the  productivity  of  a  ﬁrm’s  ship  portfolio 
changes during periods of heightened uncertainty. Building upon the 
analysis of Section 5, we gauge whether ﬁrms’ marginal asset allocation 
decisions along the lines of productivity (see Tables 4 and 5) translate 
into signiﬁcant changes in the average productivity of their ﬂeets. We 
do so by estimating a ﬁrm-level version of Eq. (1) in which the depen-
dent variables are the average log Age, log DWT, and log RPM across 
all ships held by a given ﬁrm-quarter. We also consider three compos-
ite measures of technical eﬃciency: the average ratios of Speed/RPM, 
DWT/RPM, and DWT/Speed. Table 7 reports the results.

The within-ﬁrm estimates point to a signiﬁcant worsening in the av-
erage ﬁrm-level productivity of assets when uncertainty increases, and 
particularly so when secondary ship markets are illiquid. Column (1) 
shows that the average log Age of ship holdings increases substantially 
with heightened uncertainty. The economic magnitude of this eﬀect is 
large: a one-standard-deviation increase in Uncertainty (2.90) is associ-
ated with a 23-log point increase in average ﬂeet age when liquidity 
is at its 25th percentile (−5.34). Translating into years, this would im-
ply a 25.9% increase (= 𝑒0.23 − 1) or 5.2 years relative to a mean ﬂeet 
age of 20.1 years. Likewise, columns (2) and (3) show that ﬁrms hold 
smaller ships (lower log DWT) with less fuel-eﬃcient engines (higher 
log  RPM)  in  the  face  of  higher  uncertainty.  Their  ﬂeets  also  exhibit 
lower technical eﬃciency, with lower speed-per-revolution, weight-per-

revolution, and weight-per-speed ratios (columns (4) through (6)). The 
overall results imply that ﬁrms’ asset portfolios experience a tangible 
deterioration in productivity when uncertainty increases.

In our ﬁnal set of ﬁrm-level tests, we aggregate our investment and 
disinvestment measures at the ﬁrm-quarter level across all subsectors 
ﬁrms operate in. The results in Table 8 conﬁrm that our micro-level 
ﬁndings  on  asset  allocation  (at  the  ﬁrm-subsector  level)  ultimately 
translate into ﬁrm-level changes in ﬂeets. For example, ﬁrms as a whole 
predominantly cut back on new ship orders when uncertainty increases, 
whereas used ship purchases are unaﬀected (see Panel A). The ﬁrm-
level  results  on  disinvestment  in  Panel  B  also  closely  resemble  their 
ﬁrm-subsector-level counterparts in Table 2, Panel B.

The results of this section show that ﬁrms’ subsector-level responses 
to increased uncertainty “add up” to measurable changes in ﬁrm-wide 
capital  allocation,  negatively  aﬀecting  the  productivity  of  ﬁrms’  as-
sets and reducing their exposure to diﬀerent markets.11 These results 
are new to the literature. They imply that uncertainty may lead to di-
minished competition and innovation incentives at the industrial sector 
level, features commonly associated with healthy entry-exit dynamism 
(see, e.g., Foster et al. (2019)). In light of recent evidence of both ris-
ing uncertainty (Baker et al. (2014)) and declining business dynamism 
(Decker  et  al.  (2016)),  our  results  point  to  a  mechanism  connecting 
these two phenomena.

11 We repeat our main analysis in the subsample of “pure-play” ﬁrms that op-
erate ships only in a single subsector. Such ﬁrms, by deﬁnition, do not substitute 
investment or disinvestment across subsectors. The results are similar to those 
observed for the full sample (see Internet Appendix Table C.4).

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378614M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 6
Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Concentration of Firm Asset Holdings. 
This table reports output from a variant of Eq. (1) estimated at the ﬁrm-
quarter level. The dependent variable in Panel A is the natural logarithm 
of the distinct number of subsectors a ﬁrm is exposed to, calculated at the 
ﬁrm-quarter level. The dependent variable in Panel B is the HHI of a ﬁr-
m’s ship holdings across the subsectors it operates in, calculated at the 
ﬁrm-quarter level. Firm controls are Cash Flow and ΔSubsectoral BDI, and 
are deﬁned in Table 2, except that they are averaged across all subsec-
tors that a ﬁrm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates 
in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily 
implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at 
the end of the next quarter, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a given 
subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsec-
tor, averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm operates in weighted by the 
number of ships it operates in the subsector. The Liquidity measures are 
deﬁned as the price premium, which is the quarterly average resale price 
minus the purchase price divided by the purchase price, across all used 
ship transactions in a given subsector, and the (reverse of the) price dis-
persion, which is the quarterly mean absolute deviation of resale prices 
divided by the mean resale price of all transactions involving ships of a 
given subsector. Both are averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm op-
erates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. 
Firm ﬂeet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by 
the ﬁrm in the lagged quarter. Fixed eﬀects for headquarter country, ﬁrm, 
and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated 
over the 2006–2019 period. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, com-
puted using robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm and year-quarter.

Panel A: Log Number of Subsectors at the Firm Level

(1)

(2)

(3)

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

−0.006***
(−7.39)

−0.005***
(−3.69)
0.011
(1.33)
0.014**
(3.68)

−0.002***
(−3.60)
0.028
(1.63)
0.008***
(4.38)

Liquidity Measure

Controls
Firm
Firm Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm

NA

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Price Premium

Price Dispersion

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

42,206
0.741

42,206
0.801

42,206
0.804

Panel B: HHI of Ship Holdings at the Firm Level

(1)

(2)

(3)

Uncertainty

Liquidity

0.007***
(3.64)

Uncertainty × Liquidity

0.002***
(5.12)
0.706***
(6.75)
−0.012***
(−7.73)

0.008***
(5.23)
0.429***
(4.83)
−0.014***
(−6.60)

Liquidity Measure

Controls
Firm
Firm Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm

NA

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Price Premium

Price Dispersion

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

42,206
0.644

42,206
0.698

42,206
0.698

Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, * 
𝑝 <0.1.

7.  Robustness and alternative explanations

7.1.  Alternative measures of uncertainty

We  examine  the  robustness  of  our  baseline  results  to  various  al-
ternative measures of uncertainty. We do so for two reasons. First, it 
is important to understand whether the eﬀects of uncertainty that we 
show are driven by broad, macroeconomic uncertainty rather than ship-
ping sector-speciﬁc uncertainty. This analysis is informative on the role 
of unobserved changes in ﬁrst moments as ﬂuctuations in macroeco-
nomic uncertainty are often confounded with business-cycle movements 
(see  Storesletten  et  al.  (2004)).  To  this  end,  we  augment  our  main 
speciﬁcation in Eq. (1) with the following macroeconomic uncertainty 
measures: (1) the VIX index from the Chicago Board Options Exchange, 
(2) the Jurado et al. (2015) measure of macroeconomic uncertainty, 
(3) the Baker et al. (2016) economic policy uncertainty (EPU) index, 
and (4) the dispersion of GDP forecasts from the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia’s Survey of Professional Forecasters. Second, it is cru-
cial to ensure that our baseline Uncertainty measure, constructed from 
option-implied  volatilities  of  shipping  ﬁrms  with  publicly-traded  op-
tions, reﬂects the uncertainty facing the population of shipping ﬁrms 
at large. We capture shipping sector-speciﬁc uncertainty using the real-
ized volatility of the forward freight agreement prices used to calculate 
our Δ Subsectoral BDI measure.12

Table 9 reports  results  for  investment  and  disinvestment  rates. 
Across both columns, the only uncertainty measure that attracts statisti-
cally signiﬁcant both main and interaction (with Liquidity) eﬀects is our 
own shipping sector-speciﬁc measure, Volatility(ΔSubsectoral BDI). This 
result is reassuring, suggesting that the ex-ante Uncertainty measure we 
use in the main analysis represents uncertainty encompassing all ﬁrms, 
both publicly-traded and private, in the shipping market. The estimates 
further suggest that the source of uncertainty speciﬁc to shipping, as 
opposed to broader macroeconomic uncertainty, drives our results on 
shipping ﬁrms’ investment and disinvestment.

As  an  additional  robustness  check,  in  Internet  Appendix  D.1, 
we  show  that  our  inferences  are  robust  to  the  use  of  alternative 
weights  in  the  construction  of  the  Uncertainty measure.  Finally,  in 
Internet Appendix D.2, we examine the dynamics of the uncertainty–
(dis)investment relationships, and verify the robustness of our results to 
changing the maturity of the options used to calculate our Uncertainty
measure.

7.2.  Alternative measures of liquidity and irreversibility

In Internet Appendix E, we examine the robustness of our baseline 
results  to  alternative,  theoretically-motivated  measures  of  secondary 
market liquidity and irreversibility. First, we employ the ratio of the 
number of unique buyer ﬁrms to the number of ships available in a 
given subsector-quarter as a measure of liquidity. This measure is anal-
ogous  to  the  vacancy-to-unemployment  ratio  commonly  used  in  the 
macro-labor literature to gauge labor market tightness (e.g., Mortensen 
and Pissarides (1994)) and is similar to a measure employed in product 
market contexts (e.g., Gourio and Rudanko (2014)). As such, higher val-
ues of this measure indicate a more liquid secondary market in which it 
is easier to sell ships. Results utilizing this measure are reported under 
columns (1) through (3) in Table E.1. They conﬁrm that the negative 
association between uncertainty and investment (particularly new ship 
orders) is signiﬁcantly dampened in more liquid markets as measured 
by  this  alternative  proxy.  Results  in  columns  (1)  through  (3)  in  Ta-
ble E.2 demonstrate that our ﬁndings on the modulating eﬀect of asset 

12 We ﬁnd similar results using the Uncertainty measure computed using ship-
ping ﬁrms’ implied equity volatilities. We report results using Volatility(ΔSub-
sectoral BDI) in this analysis because it is constructed from publicly available 
data, similar to the macroeconomic uncertainty measures employed.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378615M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 7
Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Productivity of Firm Asset Holdings. This table reports output from a variant of Eq. (1) estimated at the ﬁrm-
quarter level. The dependent variables are the average logarithm of Age, logarithm of DWT, logarithm of RPM, Speed/RPM, DWT/RPM, and 
DWT/Speed ratios of ships held by a ﬁrm in a given quarter. Firm controls are Cash Flow and ΔSubsectoral BDI, and are deﬁned in Table 2, except 
that they are averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Uncertainty is the 
quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged 
across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector, averaged across all subsectors that a 
ﬁrm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is deﬁned as the price premium, which is the 
quarterly average resale price minus the purchase price divided by the purchase price, across all used ship transactions in a given subsector. Both 
are averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Firm ﬂeet controls are the 
average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the ﬁrm in the lagged quarter. Note that in columns (1) through (3), we omit the lagged ﬁrm ﬂeet 
control corresponding to the respective outcome variable. Fixed eﬀects for headquarter country, ﬁrm, and year-quarter are included as indicated. 
All regressions are estimated over the 2006–2019 period. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered 
by ﬁrm and year-quarter.

Average Asset Characteristics at the Firm Level

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

Log Age

(1)

0.005***
(3.51)
−0.039***
(−5.60)
−0.014***
(−3.25)

Log DWT

(2)

−0.006***
(−2.81)
0.004
(0.12)
0.018**
(2.27)

Log RPM

(3)

0.002**
(2.15)
−0.002
(−0.51)
−0.009**
(−2.22)

Speed/RPM

DWT/RPM

DWT/Speed

(4)

−0.538***
(−6.71)
−2.426***
(−7.04)
5.375***
(6.71)

(5)

−0.025***
(−3.37)
−0.227
(1.50)
0.248***
(3.37)

(6)

−0.462***
(−8.30)
−1.976***
(−8.49)
4.619***
(8.30)

Liquidity Measure

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Price Premium

Controls
Firm
Firm Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

42,206
0.751

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

42,206
0.740

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

42,206
0.696

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

42,206
0.449

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

42,206
0.537

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

42,206
0.444

Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, * 𝑝 <0.1.

liquidity on ﬁrms’ disinvestment, particularly through ship demolition, 
also obtain under this alternative liquidity metric.

Second, we verify that our results hold for alternative proxies for 
liquidity that capture market thickness. We discuss in Section 3.2.3 and 
demonstrate  in  Internet  Appendix  B  how  these  measures  are  closely 
related to the market price-based liquidity measures. Consistent with 
this  tight  link,  the  results  in  Table  E.3  show  that  our  main  ﬁndings 
continue to obtain when we use the measures of market thickness in 
place of the main liquidity measures.

Third, following Gulen and Ion (2016), we conjecture that assets 
with a shorter useful life (or higher depreciation rate) are likely to have 
a lower degree of irreversibility. The theory underlying this conjecture 
argues that sunk costs, and thus the degree of irreversibility, decrease 
in the depreciated component of capital (e.g., Kessides (1990) and Fari-
nas and Ruano (2005)). We, therefore, include the reverse of useful life 
as our Liquidity variable in Eq. (1). We construct a subsector-level mea-
sure of useful life by computing the average age at which ships in a 
given subsector are demolished. Results in Internet Appendix Table E.1, 
columns (4) through (6) show that uncertainty increases are associated 
with a signiﬁcantly less negative investment response in ﬁrm-subsectors 
with a shorter useful life of assets, consistent with the ﬁndings of Gulen 
and Ion (2016). Likewise, the negative relationship between uncertainty 
and disinvestment of ships is mitigated in ﬁrm-subsectors with a shorter 
useful life (see Table E.2, columns (4) through (6)). In all, the baseline 
results  reported  in  Table 2 are  robust  to  a  host  of  measures  of  irre-
versibility capturing its various dimensions, including the thickness of 
the secondary ship market and assets’ useful life.

7.3.  Financing constraints

We next investigate whether the negative relation between uncer-
tainty and corporate asset allocation could be ascribed to a concurrent 

tightening of ﬁrms’ ﬁnancing constraints. Prior work has shown that 
higher uncertainty is associated with increased credit spreads, which 
may lead ﬁnancially constrained ﬁrms to curtail investment (see, e.g., 
Gilchrist et al. (2014), Kaviani et al. (2020), and Alfaro et al. (2022)). 
We account for this channel by including two common proxies for ﬁrms’ 
ﬁnancing constraints, together with their interactions with Uncertainty, 
as additional controls: (1) the size-age index as in Hadlock and Pierce 
(2010) and (2) an indicator for whether the ﬁrm is private.

Internet  Appendix  Table  C.5  shows  that  our  ﬁndings  continue  to 
hold when accounting for ﬁnancing constraints. For instance, column 
(1) shows that the size-age index of ﬁnancing constraints is negatively 
related to investment and that more constrained ﬁrms disproportion-
ately  cut  their  investment  when  uncertainty  increases.  However,  the 
eﬀects of uncertainty, both standalone and interacted with liquidity, re-
main signiﬁcant. Columns (2) and (4) show that private ﬁrms are less 
likely to invest and more likely to disinvest, both unconditionally and 
when uncertainty increases, but most of these eﬀects are insigniﬁcant. 
Again,  both  the  standalone  and  interactive  eﬀects  of  uncertainty  on 
disinvestment remain signiﬁcant. These checks suggest that ﬁnancing 
constraints do not explain the observed relationships between invest-
ment (and disinvestment) and uncertainty.

7.4.  Lumpiness of investment and disinvestment

We address potential estimation issues arising from the lumpiness 
of shipping ﬁrms’ investment and disinvestment decisions in two ways. 
First, we re-estimate Eq. (1) at semi-annual and annual horizons, instead 
of the quarterly horizon used in our baseline tests. In addition to reduc-
ing the lumpiness by aggregating the dependent variables at a lower 
frequency, this test accounts for potentially lagged responses of capital 
allocation decisions to changes in uncertainty. Internet Appendix Table 
G.1, Panel A conﬁrms that the associations between uncertainty, liquid-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378616M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 8
Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Asset Allocation at the Firm Level. This table reports output from a variant of Eq. (1)
estimated at the ﬁrm-quarter level. The dependent variables are the investment and disinvestment rates. The investment 
rate is calculated at the ﬁrm-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired (new, used, and total) by the lagged 
number of ships held. The disinvestment rate is calculated at the ﬁrm-quarter level by dividing the number of ships 
disinvested (demolished, sold, and total) by the lagged number of ships held. ΔSubsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage 
change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each 
subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange, averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm operates in weighted by the number 
of ships it operates in the subsector. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and 
amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a given subsector weighted by the 
number of ships they operate in the subsector, averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm operates in weighted by the 
number of ships it operates in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of 
nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all ﬁrms operating in a 
given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector, averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm 
operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is deﬁned as the price 
premium, which is the quarterly average resale price minus the purchase price divided by the purchase price, across all 
used ship transactions in a given subsector. Both are averaged across all subsectors that a ﬁrm operates in weighted by 
the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Firm ﬂeet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held 
by the ﬁrm in the lagged quarter. Fixed eﬀects for headquarter country, ﬁrm, and year-quarter are included as indicated. 
All regressions are estimated over the 2006–2019 period. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust 
standard errors clustered by ﬁrm and year-quarter.

Panel A: Investment (Ships Acquired) at the Firm Level

Δ Subsectoral BDI

Cash Flow

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

Total

(1)

0.005***
(3.55)
0.012*
(1.66)
−0.067**
(−2.64)

(2)

0.006***
(3.93)
0.004***
(4.75)
−0.119**
(−2.39)
2.607***
(3.47)
0.202**
(2.33)

New

(3)

0.004***
(3.07)
0.009**
(2.38)
−0.051***
(−3.12)

(4)

0.003***
(4.10)
0.002***
(4.74)
−0.099***
(−3.48)
2.490***
(3.67)
0.184**
(2.53)

Used

(5)

0.001***
(3.37)
0.003**
(2.24)
−0.016
(−1.08)

(6)

0.003**
(2.02)
0.001**
(2.40)
−0.020
(−0.66)
0.117
(1.34)
0.018
(1.44)

Liquidity Measure

Controls
Firm Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm

NA

Yes

Yes
Yes

Price Premium

NA

Price Premium

NA

Price Premium

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

42,206
0.071

42,206
0.120

42,206
0.069

42,206
0.117

42,206
0.038

42,206
0.038

Panel B: Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested) at the Firm Level

Δ Subsectoral BDI

Cash Flow

Uncertainty

Liquidity

Uncertainty × Liquidity

Total

(1)

−0.003***
(−3.73)
−0.005*
(−1.81)
−0.051***
(−3.13)

(2)

−0.004***
(−3.00)
−0.003
(−0.82)
−0.063***
(−3.59)
0.387
(1.13)
0.015**
(2.16)

Demolition

(3)

(4)

−0.002**
(−5.89)
−0.002
(−1.14)
−0.026***
(−4.99)

−0.003*
(−1.95)
−0.002
(−1.45)
−0.038**
(−2.24)
0.352
(0.55)
0.012**
(2.00)

Sale

(5)

−0.001**
(−2.49)
−0.002
(−1.49)
−0.025
(−1.78)

(6)

−0.001*
(−1.83)
−0.002
(−0.42)
−0.025**
(−2.38)
0.035
(1.34)
0.003
(0.77)

Price Premium

NA

Price Premium

NA

Price Premium

Liquidity Measure

Controls
Firm Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Country × Year-Quarter
Firm

NA

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

42,206
0.061
Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, * 𝑝 <0.1.

42,206
0.052

42,206
0.054

42,206
0.059

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

42,206
0.035

42,206
0.038

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378617M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Table 9
Aggregate  versus Sectoral  Uncertainty  and  Investment  and  Disinvest-
ment. This table reports output from Eq. (1). The dependent variables 
are the investment and disinvestment rates. The investment (disinvest-
ment) rate is calculated at the ﬁrm-subsector-quarter level by dividing 
the number of ships acquired (disinvested) by the lagged number of 
ships held. VIX is the quarterly Volatility Index from the CBOE. JLN Un-
certainty is the quarterly uncertainty index from Jurado et al. (2015). 
EPU is the quarterly US Economic Policy Uncertainty Index from Baker 
et al. (2016). GDP Dispersion is the quarterly GDP forecast dispersion 
from the Survey of Professional Forecasters compiled by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Volatility(ΔSubsectoral BDI) is the quar-
terly realized volatility of ΔSubsectoral BDI. Subsector controls consist 
of ΔSubsectoral BDI and Cash Flow. See Table 2 for deﬁnitions of these 
variables. The Liquidity measure is deﬁned as the price premium, which 
is  the  average  resale  price  minus  the  purchase  price  divided  by  the 
purchase price, across all used ship transactions in a given subsector. 
Firm ﬂeet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by 
the ﬁrm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed eﬀects for ﬁrm and sub-
sector are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 
2006–2019 period. 𝑡-statistics are reported in parentheses, computed us-
ing robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm-subsector and year-quarter.

Investment

Disinvestment

(1)

(2)

Liquidity

VIX

VIX × Liquidity

JLN Uncertainty

JLN Uncertainty × Liquidity

EPU

EPU × Liquidity

GDP Dispersion

GDP Dispersion × Liquidity

Volatility(ΔSubsectoral BDI)

Volatility(ΔSubsectoral BDI) × Liquidity

0.366***
(3.40)
−0.057
(−0.85)
0.018
(0.85)
−0.184
(−0.63)
0.355
(0.63)
−0.005
(−1.22)
0.004
(0.95)
−1.198
(−0.97)
4.877
(0.42)
−0.163***
(−8.32)
0.014***
(3.15)

−0.044
(−0.45)
−0.018
(−0.28)
0.002
(1.45)
−0.125
(−1.22)
0.058
(0.50)
−0.001
(−0.41)
0.002
(0.91)
−1.240
(−1.01)
6.585
(0.71)
−0.039***
(−3.51)
0.021***
(3.90)

Liquidity Measure

Price Premium

Price Premium

Controls
Subsector
Firm-Subsector Fleet

Fixed Eﬀects
Firm × Subsector

Observations
Adjusted 𝑅2

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

99,928
0.128

99,928
0.144

Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated as follows: *** 𝑝 <0.01, ** 𝑝 <0.05, 
* 𝑝 <0.1.

ity, and capital allocation that we report in our baseline tests hold at 
the longer horizons.

Second, we verify that our main results are robust to statistical issues 
owing to a large fraction of the dependent variable taking zero values. 
Speciﬁcally, we employ the continuous investment and disinvestment 
rates that we bound from above at one as dependent variables in zero–
one inﬂated beta regressions. These regressions explicitly allow for an 
inﬂated rate of zero and one values in the outcome variables (see Os-
pina and Ferrari (2012) and Staub and Winkelmann (2013)). Columns 
(3) and (6) in Panel B of Internet Appendix Table G.1 show that the 
results using this alternative speciﬁcation are similar to the baseline re-
sults. We also estimate linear probability and conditional logit models 

using indicator variables for positive (dis)investment rates. Our results 
continue to hold in these speciﬁcations as well (see columns (1), (2), 
(4), and (5) in Panel B of Table G.1).

7.5.  Investment and disinvestment tonnage

Our baseline investment and disinvestment measures are calculated 
using  numbers  of  ships.  To  address  the  possibility  that  the  main  re-
sults may be disproportionately inﬂuenced by decisions involving small 
ships,  we  re-run  our  main  tests  using  investment  and  disinvestment 
measures computed with dead-weight tonnage in place of the number of 
ships. Internet Appendix Table C.6 shows that our inferences continue 
to hold: high uncertainty is associated with both lower total investment 
and disinvestment, which is more pronounced when asset market liq-
uidity is low.

7.6.  Additional robustness tests

We conduct several additional robustness tests and report the results 
in Internet Appendix C. First, Table C.1 examines whether our results 
hold after excluding state-owned shipping ﬁrms (such as COSCO Group) 
from our sample. To the extent that state-owned ﬁrms may have diﬀer-
ent objectives than maximizing proﬁts, they may not represent an ideal 
sample to test the real-options predictions. We obtain information on 
shipping ﬁrms’ ownership from Orbis and manually inspect the iden-
tity  of  their  owners.  We  exclude  ﬁrms  with  at  least  51%  ownership 
attributable to state-owned entities. The results reported in Table C.1 
conﬁrm our baseline ﬁndings.

Second, given that several of our key variables of interest (such as 
Uncertainty and Liquidity) vary at the subsector and year-quarter level, 
in Tables C.2 and C.3 we show that our inferences are robust to clus-
tering standard errors at the subsector level or double-clustering at the 
subsector and year-quarter level. In addition, we show that our infer-
ences  hold  under  standard  errors  computed  by  resampling  subsector 
and year-quarter clusters using Cameron et al.’s (2008) wild bootstrap-
c method. This alternative approach addresses the issue that clustering 
may underestimate standard errors when the number of clusters (sub-
sectors in our case) is relatively small (eight). The resulting 𝑡-statistics 
{in curly parentheses} are virtually identical to those produced under 
the  regular  clustering  [in  square  parentheses].  Third,  we  re-estimate 
our baseline speciﬁcations with the ﬁrm-level uncertainty measure (as 
in Tables 6 through 8) and subsector × year-quarter ﬁxed eﬀects. This 
speciﬁcation addresses the possibility that unobservable, time-varying 
subsector-level factors not captured by our subsector-level controls may 
explain our main ﬁndings. The results in Table C.7 conﬁrm the base 
results.

Finally, we address the possibility that relying on Uncertainty calcu-
lated from the implied volatilities of shipping ﬁrms with publicly-traded 
options may inﬂuence our results. Notably, the results in Table 9 based 
on  the  ex-post  volatility  of  shipping  derivative  prices  (reﬂecting  all 
ﬁrms operating in a given subsector) already suggest that these ﬁrms 
represent the broad sample of shipping ﬁrms. Nevertheless, in Table 
C.8 we show that weighting each observation by the fraction of ships in 
that subsector-quarter operated by ﬁrms with publicly-traded options 
does not materially alter our inferences. This shows that our baseline 
estimates are robust to measurement issues that could arise from the 
heterogeneous  presence  of  ﬁrms  with  publicly-traded  options  across 
subsector-quarters.

8.  Concluding remarks

Using near-universal data on shipping ﬁrms’ capital allocation deci-
sions across new orders, secondary-market transactions, and demolition 
of ships, combined with subsector-speciﬁc measures of uncertainty, we 
show that shipping ﬁrms delay both the purchase and disposal of ships 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378618M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

in response to heightened uncertainty. These dynamics are more pro-
nounced for less liquid secondary ship markets and for new ship orders 
and demolition, relative to secondary market purchases and sales. New 
to the literature, we also show that investment (disinvestment) reduc-
tions are concentrated among more (less) productive ships.

Major recent geo-political developments, such as the escalation of 
trade tensions between the U.S. and China and the U.K.’s Brexit, have 
raised concerns about the eﬀects of heightened economic uncertainty 
among managers and investors. The Covid-19 pandemic has only ex-
acerbated those concerns. Our results uniquely suggest that such de-
velopments, indicative of heightened global uncertainty, may impose 
additional  economic  costs  through  their  impact  on  the  eﬃciency  of 
ﬁrms’ capital allocation decisions, particularly those that are costlier 
to reverse. Uncertainty appears to play an important role in decelerat-
ing “creative destruction” dynamics by impeding the adoption of new 
technologies embodied in new capital, the disposal of obsolete tech-
nologies in old-vintage capital, and discouraging ﬁrm entry into new 
market segments. Critically, this dampened capital allocation can have 
an adverse eﬀect on productivity and growth. While our work provides 
new insights into these dynamics, more research on this important topic 
is needed.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Murillo Campello: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – 
original draft, Writing – review & editing. Gaurav Kankanhalli: Con-
ceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – re-
view  &  editing. Hyunseob  Kim: Conceptualization,  Formal  analysis, 
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

The authors do not have permission to share data.

Appendix A.  Theoretical framework

A.1.  Set up

In our theoretical analysis, we characterize increases in uncertainty 
using the concept of mean-preserving spread (MPS). An uncertainty-
increasing MPS only requires that a zero-mean, non-degenerate random 
variable is added to the outcome distribution. This approach allows us 
to derive results that hold with generality, while remaining agnostic 
about the functional forms governing the distribution and moments of 
the outcomes (see also Lee and Shin (2000)).

A.1.1.  The ﬁrm and the ship market

The ﬁrm is endowed with ships 𝜔𝐭 ∈ ℝ8

+ across eight “subsectors” 
at time 𝑡. Subsectors correspond to four size categories of two of the 
largest sectors of the shipping industry: dry bulk carrier ships (“bulker-
s”) and tanker ships (“tankers”). The representative ﬁrm is a price-taker 
in the market for ships. We begin by characterizing three price pro-
cesses corresponding to the three sets of capital allocation decisions the 
ﬁrm can take: (1) trade (buy or sell) a used ship in the secondary mar-
ket, (2) order a new ship in the primary market, and (3) demolish a 
ship.

A.1.2.  Trading used ships

Let 𝐩𝐭 be the vector of the secondary market prices of ships in each 
, where:

subsector, with 𝐩𝐭 =

𝑝

(

)

′

1𝑡, … , 𝑝

8𝑡

Fig. A.1. Asset Market Thickness and Liquidity. This ﬁgure shows the thickness 
of the secondary ship market, measured by the average number of ships in each 
subsector of Oil Tankers (blue vertical bars, primary Y-axis), and the liquid-
ity, measured by the average percentage resale price premium (red connected 
squares, secondary Y-axis) and the resale price dispersion (green connected 
triangles, secondary Y-axis). Resale price dispersion is deﬁned as the mean ab-
solute deviation of resale prices divided by the mean resale price.

𝑝𝑖𝑡 = 𝜆𝑖

)

(

𝑁𝑖𝑡

× Seller𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾 𝛼𝑖
𝑖𝑡 ,

(A.1)

𝑖 = 1, ..., 8 indexes the shipping subsectors, 𝑁𝑖𝑡 represents the number 
of ships in subsector 𝑖 at time 𝑡, and 𝛾𝑖𝑡 captures productivity, or the 
cash ﬂow generated by a ship in subsector 𝑖 at time 𝑡 (deﬁned shortly 
in Section A.1.5). The elasticity parameter, 𝛼𝑖, is positive. The function 
𝜆(⋅) is  increasing  in  𝑁 and  can  be  interpreted  as  the  probability  of 
successfully ﬁnding a trading counterparty. Seller𝑖𝑡 takes the value of 1
(−1) if the transacting party is a seller (buyer).

The intuition for modeling the price is straightforward and found in 
prior literature (see, e.g., Gavazza (2011)). As 𝑁 increases, the ship’s 
secondary market price increases from a seller’s perspective (decreases 
from a buyer’s perspective) due to improvement in liquidity driven by 
reduced search costs, holding 𝛾 constant. The use of 𝑁 , or the stock of 
ships, as a proxy for secondary market liquidity is motivated by the idea 
that search frictions between buyers and sellers are smaller in “thicker” 
(or larger) asset resale markets. Likewise, holding market thickness, 𝑁
constant, higher productivity 𝛾 is associated with higher resale prices. 
A plausible microfoundation for Eq. (A.1) is that the “spread” charged 
by a market maker (e.g., a ship broker) is decreasing in the likelihood of 
ﬁnding a match between a potential buyer and a seller in a given time 
window,  assuming  buyer  and  seller  arrivals  are  driven  by  a  Poisson 
process whose arrival rate increases with 𝑁 .

In Fig. A.1 we provide evidence supporting the link between market 
thickness, 𝑁 , and our main measures of liquidity, the resale price pre-
mium and price dispersion, using data on the resale market for tankers. 
The  ﬁgure  shows  a  positive  cross-sectional  association  between  the 
number of ships 𝑁 (blue vertical bars) and resale price premium (red 
solid line), deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the resale and purchase 
prices of a ship, divided by the purchase price. This positive relation is 
consistent with our model in that the theoretical counterpart to the re-
sale price premium from a seller’s perspective, (𝑝 − 𝑞) ∕𝑞 in which 𝑞 is 
deﬁned below, is increasing in 𝑁 due to reduced search costs. Fig. A.1
also reveals a negative association between 𝑁 and the dispersion of re-
sale prices (green dashed line), implying that improved liquidity that 
arises from lower search costs reduces variability in resale prices (see 
also Gavazza (2011)).

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378619M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

A.1.3.  Ordering new ships

If the ﬁrm orders a new ship, the primary market price is denoted 

(

by 𝐪𝐭 =

𝑞

1𝑡, … , 𝑞
8𝑡

, where:

)
′

(A.2)

𝑞𝑖𝑡 = 𝐹 + ̃𝛾 𝛼𝑖
𝑖𝑡 .
Our modeling of the new ship price assumes a competitive shipbuild-
ing sector (i.e., aggregate supply is elastic). Naturally, this assumption 
may not hold in some subsectors due to capacity adjustment costs at 
shipyards. The price at which a ﬁrm may order a new ship diﬀers from 
the price at which it buys a ship in the secondary market along three 
dimensions. First, the new ship order price may be independent of 𝑁 , 
the stock of existing ships, and the measure of secondary market thick-
ness. This assumption is introduced for analytical simplicity. However, 
it is not critical for our model results, as long as the sensitivity of the 
secondary market price to 𝑁 is greater than that of the new ship or-
der price. Second, the ﬁrm incurs ﬁxed costs, 𝐹 > 0, when ordering a 
new ship. Third, new ships are, on average, more productive than ships 
purchased in the secondary market (i.e., ̃𝛾𝑖𝑡 = ̃𝛿𝑖𝛾𝑖𝑡, ̃𝛿𝑖 ≥ 1). Our model 
allows the price of a new ship to be higher or lower than the price of a 
used ship according to the relative magnitudes of ﬁxed costs (𝐹 ), sec-
ondary market thickness (𝑁 ), and the productivity diﬀerential (̃𝛿).

A.1.4.  Demolishing ships

The ﬁnal course of action the ﬁrm can implement is to demolish a 
ship in its ﬂeet, receiving the scrap value in return. Scrap values are 
given by 𝐫𝐭 =

, where:

1𝑡, … , 𝑟
𝑟
8𝑡

)

(

′

(A.3)

𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝐺 + ̂𝛾 𝛼𝑖
𝑖𝑡 .
The scrap value a ﬁrm receives when demolishing a ship diﬀers from 
the price at which it sells a ship in the secondary market along three 
dimensions. First, the demolition value is independent of 𝑁 , the sec-
ondary market thickness. Second, the ﬁrm incurs ﬁxed costs,  𝐺 < 0, 
when demolishing a ship. Third, demolished ships are likely less produc-
tive than ships sold in the secondary market (i.e., ̂𝛾𝑖𝑡 = ̂𝛿𝑖𝛾𝑖𝑡, ̂𝛿𝑖 ≤ 1). The 
scrap value of a used ship may be higher or lower than the secondary 
market price of a comparable used ship depending on the relative mag-
nitudes of associated ﬁxed costs (𝐺), secondary market thickness (𝑁 ), 
and the productivity diﬀerential (̂𝛿).

A.1.5.  The ﬁrm investment problem

The ﬁrm operates for three periods, 𝑡 = 0, 1, and 2. The cash ﬂow 
from each ship at each time 𝑡 is given by 𝜋𝐭 ◦𝜔𝐭 , where 𝜋𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾𝑖𝑉𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡. 
The source of sectoral uncertainty is represented by 𝑉𝑡, whose distri-
bution can be characterized as an MPS with degree 𝑥; i.e., 𝑉𝑡 ∼ 𝐻(⋅, 𝑥). 
Thus, the total cash ﬂow of the ﬁrm is 𝜋𝐭 ⋅𝜔𝐭 . The ﬁrm’s endowment vec-
tor, 𝜔𝐭 , evolves over time. At 𝑡 = 2, its endowment is 𝜔𝟐 = 𝜔𝟏 + 𝐢𝟏 − 𝐝𝟏, 
where  𝐢𝟏 = 𝐧𝟏 + 𝐮𝟏 is  the  vector  of  new  and  used  ships  purchased 
(investment), and 𝐝𝟏 = 𝐬𝟏 + 𝐝𝐞𝟏 is the vector of ships sold and demol-
ished (disinvestment) at 𝑡 = 1. The ﬁrm’s investment set is limited at 
𝐈 = 𝐍 + 𝐔. Its disinvestment set is naturally limited by its endowment 
of ships.13

The ﬁrm makes investment and disinvestment decisions as follows. 
If the ﬁrm makes no new investment at 𝑡 − 1, then its income is 𝜋𝐭 ⋅ 𝜔𝐭
in 𝑡. If it invests, then its income is −𝐧𝐭−𝟏 ⋅ 𝐪𝐭 − 𝐮𝐭−𝟏 ⋅ 𝐩𝐭 + 𝜋𝐭 ⋅ (𝜔𝐭 + 𝐢𝐭−𝟏). 
The ﬁrst term, −𝐧𝐭−𝟏 ⋅ 𝐪𝐭 , is the cost of the new ships it orders, while 
the second term, −𝐮𝐭−𝟏 ⋅ 𝐩𝐭 , is the cost of the used ships it purchases in 
secondary markets. The third term, 𝜋𝐭 ⋅ (𝜔𝐭 + 𝐢𝐭−𝟏), is the operating cash 
ﬂow the ﬁrm earns from its stock of ships, consisting of existing and 
newly invested ones.

If the ﬁrm disinvests in 𝑡 − 1, then its income is 𝐬𝐭−𝟏 ⋅ 𝐩𝐭 + 𝐝𝐞𝐭−𝟏 ⋅
𝐫𝐭 + 𝜋𝐭 ⋅ (𝜔𝐭 − 𝐝𝐭−𝟏) at t. The ﬁrst term, 𝐬𝐭−𝟏 ⋅ 𝐩𝐭 , is the amount the ﬁrm 

receives from selling its ships in the secondary market. The second term, 
𝐝𝐞𝐭−𝟏 ⋅ 𝐫𝐭 , is the amount it receives from demolishing its ships. The third 
term, 𝜋𝐭 ⋅ (𝜔𝐭 − 𝐝𝐭−𝟏), is the cash ﬂow the ﬁrm earns from its stock of 
ships, consisting of existing ships minus disinvested ones.

A.2.  Analysis

We ﬁrst analyze the ﬁrm’s investment problem building on standard 
real-options arguments relating uncertainty and investment. We do so 
in order to frame the economic environment in which we advance our 
new results. The ﬁrm chooses its investment levels 𝐢𝟎 (invest now) and 𝐢𝟏
(invest later) based on Eq. (A.4). It prefers to invest now if the expected 
cash ﬂow from doing so exceeds the expected cash ﬂow from waiting to 
invest later, contingent on demand conditions evolving favorably. We 
state this condition via the following inequality:

≥

(A.4)

[
𝜋𝟏 + 𝜋𝟐

]

⋅ 𝐢𝟎 − 𝐧𝟎 ⋅ 𝐪𝟏 − 𝐮𝟎 ⋅ 𝐩𝟏
𝔼
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Invest Now

[

(

)]

.

max

𝜋𝟐 ⋅ 𝐢𝟏 − 𝐧𝟏 ⋅ 𝐪𝟐 − 𝐮𝟏 ⋅ 𝐩𝟐, 0

𝔼
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Invest Later
The breakeven levels of investment, 𝐢∗
such that:
[
𝜋𝟏 + 𝜋𝟐
(

𝟎 − 𝐧∗
𝟎
⋅ 𝐪𝟐 − 𝐮∗
𝟏

⋅ 𝐪𝟏 − 𝐮∗
𝟎
⋅ 𝐩𝟐, 0

⋅ 𝐩𝟏 =
)]

𝟏 − 𝐧∗
𝟏

𝜋𝟐 ⋅ 𝐢∗

𝔼
[

max

⋅ 𝐢∗

𝔼

]

.

𝟎 = 𝐧∗

𝟎 + 𝐮∗

𝟎 and 𝐢∗

𝟏 = 𝐧∗

𝟏 + 𝐮∗

𝟏, are 

(A.5)

We ﬁrst establish the existence of 𝐢∗

𝟎 and 𝐢∗

𝟏 in Lemma 1.

Lemma 1. The optimal investment levels 𝐢∗

𝟎 and 𝐢∗

𝟏 are given by Eq. (A.5).

Analogously, the ﬁrm chooses its disinvestment levels 𝐝𝟎 (disinvest 
now) and 𝐝𝟏 (disinvest later) based on Eq. (A.6). It prefers to disinvest 
now if the expected cash ﬂow from doing so exceeds the expected cash 
ﬂow from disinvesting later only upon observing that demand condi-
tions have evolved unfavorably. Formally:

≥

(A.6)

[
−𝜋𝟏 − 𝜋𝟐

]

𝔼
⋅ 𝐝𝟎 + 𝐬𝟎 ⋅ 𝐩𝟏 + 𝐝𝐞𝟎 ⋅ 𝐫𝟏
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Disinvest Now

[

(

)]

max

−𝜋𝟐 ⋅ 𝐝𝟏 + 𝐬𝟏 ⋅ 𝐩𝟐 + 𝐝𝐞𝟏 ⋅ 𝐫𝟐, 0

𝔼
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟
Disinvest Later
The breakeven levels of disinvestment, 𝐝∗
are such that:

.

𝟎 = 𝐬∗

𝟎 + 𝐝𝐞∗

𝟎 and 𝐝∗

𝟏 = 𝐬∗

𝟏 + 𝐝𝐞∗
𝟏, 

[
−𝜋𝟏 − 𝜋𝟐

]

𝔼

𝔼
[

(

⋅ 𝐝∗

𝟎 + 𝐬∗
𝟎
⋅ 𝐩𝟐 + 𝐝𝐞∗
𝟏
As with the case of investment, the existence of 𝐝∗

⋅ 𝐩𝟏 + 𝐝𝐞∗
𝟎
⋅ 𝐫𝟐, 0

⋅ 𝐫𝟏 =
)]

−𝜋𝟐 ⋅ 𝐝∗

𝟏 + 𝐬∗
𝟏

max

.

lished in Lemma 2.

(A.7)

(A.8)

𝟎 and 𝐝∗

𝟏 is estab-

Lemma  2. The  optimal  disinvestment  levels  𝐝∗
Eq. (A.7).

𝟎 and  𝐝∗

𝟏 are  given  by 

Explicitly writing the breakeven conditions in terms of 𝑉𝑡, and there-
fore, as a function of 𝑥 (the mean-preserving spread parameter), we can 
show that 𝐷𝑥𝐢∗
𝟎

< 0 and 𝐷𝑥𝐝∗
𝟎

< 0.

Proposition 1. Increased uncertainty leads to less investment and disinvest-
ment. For 𝑥′ > 𝑥, namely when 𝐻(., 𝑥′) is obtained by a mean-preserving 
spread of 𝐻(., 𝑥), 𝐢∗

𝟎(𝑥) and 𝐝∗

𝟎(𝑥′) < 𝐝∗

𝟎(𝑥′) < 𝐢∗

𝟎(𝑥).

13 We assume an arbitrary 𝜔𝟎. The constraint on the investment set implies 
that 𝐢𝟎 + 𝐢𝟏 ≤ 𝐈, 𝐧𝟎 + 𝐧𝟏 ≤ 𝐍, and 𝐮𝟎 + 𝐮𝟏 ≤ 𝐔.

We next characterize the eﬀect of uncertainty on various margins of 

the investment and disinvestment action space.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378620M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

Proposition 2. The negative eﬀect of uncertainty on investment is more 
pronounced for purchases of new ships relative to used ships, and the eﬀect 
of uncertainty on disinvestment is more pronounced for demolition of ships 
< 𝐷𝑥𝐮∗
than for ship sales; namely, 𝐷𝑥𝐧∗
𝟎

𝟎 and 𝐷𝑥𝐝𝐞∗
𝟎

< 𝐷𝑥𝐬∗
𝟎.

Next, we show the moderating role of asset market thickness on the 

eﬀects of uncertainty.

Proposition 3. The eﬀect of uncertainty on investment and disinvestment 
is mitigated in thicker resale markets (with higher N); namely, 𝐷𝑥𝑁 𝐢∗
> 0
𝟎
and 𝐷𝑥𝑁 𝐝∗
𝟎

> 0.

A.3.  Proof of Lemma 1

]

2

− 𝑞

(
𝜋

2

max

1

1 − 𝑝
(

𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

1 + 𝜋
𝜕
𝜕𝑖∗
0
1 + 𝜋

[

𝜋
[

= 𝔼

− 𝔼

𝜋

[

= 𝔼

< 0.

)

)

(
𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0

−

𝑞

2 −

(

𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

)

)

𝑝

2

, 0

]

; 𝑟

]

2

− 𝑞

1 − 𝑝

1 − 𝔼

[

(

− max

𝜋

2 − (𝑞

2 + 𝑝

2), 0

)

]
; 𝑟

Next, considering the derivative of 𝐻 with respect to 𝑟, we have:
𝜕𝐻(𝑖∗
0; 𝑟)
𝜕𝑟

=

[

𝔼

𝜕
𝜕𝑟

−

max

(

(
𝜋

2

𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

)

)

(
𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0

−

𝑞

2 −

)

(
𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

)

]
; 𝑟

.

𝑝

2

, 0

Because 𝐺(⋅, 𝑟′) is a MPS of 𝐺(⋅, 𝑟), for any convex function 𝐽 (⋅),

Proof. Let us take a representative element of the investment vector in 
Eq. (A.5) and deﬁne a function

[

𝔼

𝐽 (𝜋

2); 𝑟′

]

𝐽 (𝜋

2)𝑑𝐺(𝜋

2

, 𝑟′)

0 + 𝑖∗
1
1 + 𝜋
𝜋
2
(
𝜋
max

2

𝐻(𝑖∗

0) = 𝔼
− 𝔼

[

[

]

2

𝑞

𝜋

1 + 𝜋

𝐻(𝑖∗
0

0 − 𝑛∗
𝑖∗

1) = 𝔼
, 𝑖∗

1 − 𝑛∗
𝑖∗
0
1
We can rewrite the function 𝐻(⋅) purely in terms of 𝑖∗
constraint 𝑖∗
[

≤ 𝐼 will bind for some 𝐼 .
]

1 − 𝑢∗
0

1 − 𝔼

𝜋

𝑝

2

(

[
max

𝑞

2 − 𝑢∗
1

𝑝

2

, 0

)]

.

0 given that the 

𝑞
)

0 − 𝑛∗
𝑖∗
0
(
𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

)

𝑝

1 − 𝑢∗
1
0
(
(
𝑈 − 𝑢∗
𝑁 − 𝑛∗
2 −
−
0
0
0 (and, equivalently, 𝑖∗

)

𝑞

)]

.

𝑝

2

, 0

To guarantee the existence of 𝑖∗
1) as characterized 
by  Eq. (A.5),  it  suﬃces  to  show  that  𝐻(𝑖∗
0 ∈ [0, 𝐼]. 
Since 𝐻(⋅) is a sum of continuous functions, it is itself continuous. Since 
𝜋

0) = 0 for  some  𝑖∗

> 0, it follows that:

1

> 0 and 𝜋
[

2

𝐻(0) = −𝔼

𝐼 − 𝑁𝑞

2 − 𝑈 𝑝

2

2

]

< 0.

𝜋

= ∫

≥

∫

= 𝔼
(

(

, 𝑟)

2

𝐽 (𝜋

[

𝐽 (𝜋

𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

2)𝑑𝐺(𝜋
]
2); 𝑟
)
−

.
(

𝜋

Since max
2
it follows that:
[

(

𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0

(

)

𝑞

2 −

𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

)

)

𝑝

2

, 0

is convex in 𝜋

2, 

𝔼

[

𝔼

max

𝜋

max
2
(
(
𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

𝜋

2

)

(
𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0
(
)

(

−

𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0
)

−

𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0

𝑞

2 −

)

(

)

𝑞
2 −
(
𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0
)
, 0

𝑝

2

𝑝
)

, 0
2
]
; 𝑟

)

]

≥

; 𝑟′

∀𝑟′ > 𝑟.

This implies
(
[
𝜕
𝜕𝑟

max

𝔼

𝜋

(

2

𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

)

)

(
𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0

−

𝑞

2 −

(

𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

)

)

)

]
; 𝑟

≥ 0.

𝑝

2

, 0

(

𝑞

2 −

𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

)

)

]
; 𝑟

𝑝

2

, 0

Finally, for 𝐼 → ∞, we have that:
(
𝔼

𝜋

[

]

lim
𝐼→∞

𝐻(𝐼) = lim
𝐼→∞
+ lim
𝐼→∞

𝐼 − 𝑁𝑞

1 + 𝜋
2
(
2 (𝐼 − 𝐼) − (𝑁 − 𝑁) 𝑞
𝜋
max

1 − 𝑈 𝑝

1

[

(
𝔼

)

Thus,
𝜕𝐻(𝑖∗
0; 𝑟)
𝜕𝑟

= −

≤ 0.

[

𝔼

𝜕
𝜕𝑟

max

(

𝜋

2

)

(
𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

−

(

𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0

2 − (𝑈 − 𝑈 ) 𝑝

2

, 0

)])

= ∞ − 0 = ∞.

Putting these conditions together, we have:

Thus, there must exist an  ̄𝐼 ∈ ℝ such that, for 𝐼 > ̄𝐼 , 𝐻( ̄𝐼) > 0. Putting 
these conditions together with the continuity of 𝐻(⋅) over [0, 𝐼], the 
Intermediate Value Theorem guarantees that there exists an 𝑖∗
0 ∈ [0, 𝐼]
1) = 0. □
, 𝑖∗
and 𝑖∗

1 ∈ [0, 𝐼] such that 𝐻(𝑖∗

0

A.4.  Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. Symmetric to the case of investment. □

A.5.  Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. Let  us,  once  again,  consider  a  representative  element  of  the 
investment  vector  in  Eq. (A.5) and  deﬁne  the  following,  in  which  𝑟
denotes the degree of the MPS underlying 𝜋
]

𝐻(𝑖∗

0; 𝑟) = 𝔼
− 𝔼

1 + 𝜋
2
(
[
𝜋
max

0 − 𝑛∗
𝑖∗
0
(
𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

𝑞
)

𝑝

1 − 𝑢∗
1
0
(
𝑁 − 𝑛∗
−
0

2

)

)

(
𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

)

]
; 𝑟

.

𝑝

2

, 0

𝑞

2 −

[
𝜋

By the Implicit Function Theorem,
𝑑𝑖∗
0
𝑑𝑟 = −
Considering ﬁrst the derivative of 𝐻 with respect to 𝑖∗

𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑖∗
0
𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑟

.

0, we have:

0; 𝑟)

𝜕𝐻(𝑖∗
𝜕𝑖∗
0

1 + 𝜋
[

𝔼

max

]

2

− 𝑞

(

𝜋

2

[

𝜋

= 𝔼

−

𝜕
𝜕𝑖∗
0

1

1 − 𝑝
(

𝐼 − 𝑖∗
0

)

(

−

𝑁 − 𝑛∗
0

(

)

𝑞

2 −

𝑈 − 𝑢∗
0

)

)

]
; 𝑟

𝑝

2

, 0

𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑖∗
0
𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑟

𝑑𝑖∗
0
𝑑𝑟 = −
The disinvestment case is symmetric. □

< 0.

A.6.  Proof of Propositions 2 and 3

Proof. Considering, once again, a representative element of the invest-
ment vector in Eq. (A.5), we must show that:

<

𝑑𝑢∗
0
𝑑𝑟

𝑑𝑛∗
0
𝑑𝑟
Using the Implicit Function Theorem, this is equivalent to showing:

.

< −

−

𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑛∗
0
𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑟
or, since  𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑟

𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑢∗
0
𝜕𝐻∕𝜕𝑟

,

≤ 0, we must show that:

𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑛∗
0

<

.

𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑢∗
0

Simplifying the above, it is clear that:
𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑛∗
0

⇔ 𝐹 + ̃𝛾 𝛼𝑖

𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑢∗
0

𝑖𝑡 > 𝜆𝑖

𝑁𝑖𝑡

<

(

)

× Seller𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾 𝛼𝑖
𝑖𝑡 .

Simplifying further, and noting that ̃𝛾 𝛼𝑖
we have:
(

)

× Seller𝑖𝑡 > 𝛾 𝛼𝑖

𝑖𝑡 − (̃𝛿𝑖𝛾𝑖𝑡)𝛼𝑖 ,

𝐹 − 𝜆𝑖

𝑁𝑖𝑡

𝑖𝑡 = (̃𝛿𝑖𝛾𝑖𝑡)𝛼𝑖 with ̃𝛿𝑖 > 1 and 𝛼𝑖 > 0, 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378621M. Campello, G. Kankanhalli and H. Kim

since 𝐹 > 0, 𝑁 > 0, Seller𝑖𝑡 = −1. The disinvestment case is symmetric. 
It immediately follows that the cross-partial derivatives 
are positive as 𝜆(⋅) is diﬀerentiable for 𝑁 > 0 and 𝜆′(⋅) > 0. □

𝜕2𝑖∗
𝜕𝑟𝜕𝑁 and 
0

𝜕2𝑑∗
0
𝜕𝑟𝜕𝑁

Internet Appendix.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103786.

References

Abadie, A., Spiess, J., 2022. Robust post-matching inference. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 117, 

Gilchrist, S., Sim, J., Zakrajšek, E., 2014. Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and Investment 

Dynamics. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gourio, F., Rudanko, L., 2014. Customer capital. Rev. Econ. Stud. 81, 1102–1136.
Greenwood, R., Hanson, S., 2015. Waves in ship prices and investment. Q. J. Econ. 130, 

Gulen, H., Ion, M., 2016. Policy uncertainty and corporate investment. Rev. Financ. 

Hackbarth, D., Johnson, T., 2015. Real options and risk dynamics. Rev. Econ. Stud. 82, 

55–109.

Stud. 29, 523–564.

1449–1482.

Hadlock, C., Pierce, J., 2010. New evidence on measuring ﬁnancial constraints: moving 

beyond the KZ index. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23, 1909–1940.

Hsieh, C.T., 2001. Endogenous growth and obsolescence. J. Dev. Econ. 66, 153–171.
Jens, C., 2017. Political uncertainty and investment: causal evidence from US gubernato-

rial elections. J. Financ. Econ. 124, 563–579.

Jeon, J., 2022. Learning and investment under demand uncertainty in container shipping. 

983–995.

Stud. 63, 581–593.

Rand J. Econ. 53, 226–259.

nance 67, 45–83.

1177–1216.

Abel,  A.,  Eberly,  J.,  1996.  Optimal  investment  with  costly  reversibility.  Rev.  Econ. 

Julio, B., Yook, Y., 2012. Political uncertainty and corporate investment cycles. J. Fi-

Alfaro, I., Bloom, N., Lin, X., 2022. The Finance Uncertainty Multiplier. Technical Report. 

Jurado, K., Ludvigson, S., Ng, S., 2015. Measuring uncertainty. Am. Econ. Rev. 105, 

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arkhangelsky,  D.,  Athey,  S.,  Hirshberg,  D.,  Imbens,  G.,  Wager,  S.,  2021.  Synthetic 

diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences. Am. Econ. Rev. 111, 4088–4118.

Arrow, K., 1968. Optimal capital policy with irreversible investment. In: Wolfe, J.N. (Ed.), 

Value, Capital and Growth, Essays in Honor of Sir John Hicks.

Baker, S., Bloom, N., 2013. Does Uncertainty Reduce Growth? Using Disasters as Natural 

Experiments. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baker, S., Bloom, N., Canes-Wrone, B., Davis, S., Rodden, J., 2014. Why has US policy 

uncertainty risen since 1960? Am. Econ. Rev. 104, 56–60.

Baker, S., Bloom, N., Davis, S., 2016. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Q. J. 

Kaviani, M., Kryzanowski, L., Maleki, H., Savor, P., 2020. Policy uncertainty and corpo-

rate credit spreads. J. Financ. Econ. 138, 838–865.

Kellogg, R., 2014. The eﬀect of uncertainty on investment: evidence from Texas oil 

drilling. Am. Econ. Rev. 104, 1698–1734.

Kessides, I., 1990. Market concentration, contestability, and sunk costs. Rev. Econ. Stat., 

614–622.

Kim, H., Kung, H., 2017. The asset redeployability channel: how uncertainty aﬀects cor-

porate investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30, 245–280.

Leahy, J., Whited, T., 1996. The eﬀect of uncertainty on investment: some stylized facts. 

Benhabib, J., Rustichini, A., 1991. Vintage capital, investment, and growth. J. Econ. The-

Lee, D., McCrary, J., Moreira, M., Porter, J., 2022. Valid t-ratio inference for IV. Am. 

J. Money Credit Bank. 28, 64–83.

Econ. Rev. 112, 3260–3290.

Econ. 131, 1593–1636.

ory 55, 323–339.

Benmelech,  E.,  2009.  Asset  salability  and  debt  maturity:  evidence  from  nineteenth-

century American railroads. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22, 1545–1583.

Benmelech, E., Bergman, N., 2011. Vintage capital and creditor protection. J. Financ. 

Econ. 99, 308–332.

Bernanke, B., 1983. Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. Q. J. Econ. 98, 

85–106.

Bloom, N., 2009. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77, 623–685.
Bloom, N., Floetotto, M., Jaimovich, N., Saporta-Eksten, I., Terry, S., 2018. Really uncer-

tain business cycles. Econometrica 86, 1031–1065.

Cameron, A.C., Gelbach, J., Miller, D., 2008. Bootstrap-based improvements for inference 

with clustered errors. Rev. Econ. Stat. 90, 414–427.

Card, D., 2022. Design-based research in empirical microeconomics. Am. Econ. Rev. 112, 

1773–1781.

Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., Miranda, J., 2016. Declining business dynamism: 

what we know and the way forward. Am. Econ. Rev. 106, 203–207.

Diamond,  P.,  1982.  Aggregate  demand  management  in  search  equilibrium.  J.  Polit. 

Duﬃe, D., Gârleanu, N., Pedersen, L.H., 2005. Over-the-counter markets. Economet-

Econ. 90, 881–894.

rica 73, 1815–1847.

Econ. 132, 1641–1692.

Farinas, J., Ruano, S., 2005. Firm productivity, heterogeneity, sunk costs and market 

selection. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 23, 505–534.

Foster, L., Grim, C., Haltiwanger, J., Wolf, Z., 2019. Innovation, productivity dispersion, 
and productivity growth. In: Measuring and Accounting for Innovation in the 21st 
Century. University of Chicago Press, pp. 103–136.

Gavazza, A., 2011. The role of trading frictions in real asset markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 

1106–1143.

Lee, J., Shin, K., 2000. The role of a variable input in the relationship between investment 

and uncertainty. Am. Econ. Rev. 90, 667–680.

Ma, S., Murﬁn, J., Pratt, R., 2022. Young ﬁrms, old capital. J. Financ. Econ. 146, 331–356.
Mortensen, D., Pissarides, C., 1994. Job creation and job destruction in the theory of 

unemployment. Rev. Econ. Stud. 61, 397–415.

Ospina, R., Ferrari, S., 2012. A general class of zero-or-one inﬂated beta regression mod-

els. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 56, 1609–1623.

Pindyck,  R.,  1991.  Irreversibility,  uncertainty,  and  investment.  J.  Econ.  Lit. 29, 

1110–1148.

Rogerson, R., Shimer, R., Wright, R., 2005. Search-theoretic models of the labor market: 

a survey. J. Econ. Lit. 43, 959–988.

Schlingemann, F., Stulz, R., Walkling, R., 2002. Divestitures and the liquidity of the mar-

ket for corporate assets. J. Financ. Econ. 64, 117–144.

Solow, R., 1960. Investment and technical progress. In: Mathematical Methods in the 

Staub, K., Winkelmann, R., 2013. Consistent estimation of zero-inﬂated count models. 

Social Sciences, vol. 1, pp. 48–93.

Health Econ. 22, 673–686.

Stopford, M., 2009. Maritime Economics, 3rd edition. Routledge.
Storesletten, K., Telmer, C., Yaron, A., 2004. Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic labor 

Teece, D., 1980. Economies of scope and the scope of the enterprise. J. Econ. Behav. 

Organ. 1, 223–247.

J. Strateg. Secur. 2, 1–12.

Weitz, R., 2009. Countering the Somali pirates: harmonizing the international response. 

Williamson,  O.,  1975.  Markets  and  Hierarchies,  Analysis  and  Antitrust  Implications: 

A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization. Free Press.

Williamson, O., 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. Free Press.

Fajgelbaum, P., Schaal, E., Taschereau-Dumouchel, M., 2017. Uncertainty traps. Q. J. 

market risk. J. Polit. Econ. 112, 695–717.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10378622