Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Disagreement, information quality and asset prices ✩
Costas Xiouros a,∗, Fernando Zapatero b
a Department of Finance, BI Norwegian Business School, Oslo, N-0442, Norway
b Finance Department, Questrom School of Business, Boston University, Boston, 02215, MA, United States of America

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

JEL classiﬁcation:
G10
G12

Keywords:
Asset prices
Heterogeneous expectations
Information quality
Habit-formation preferences

1.  Introduction

We  present  an  analytical  solution  for  a  pure  exchange  economy  featuring  a  continuum  of  agents  with 
disagreement, time-varying information quality, and reference-dependent preferences. Our general equilibrium 
model exhibits stationary dynamics. By examining the implications of the model, we ﬁnd that the commonly 
studied  asset  pricing  channels  of  disagreement  have  limited  quantitative  signiﬁcance.  On  the  other  hand, 
variations  in  information  quality,  which  aﬀect  disagreement  levels,  lead  to  substantial  excess  stock  price 
volatility. This ﬁnding contributes signiﬁcantly to explaining the equity premium and sheds light on empirical 
relationships between forecast dispersion and asset prices, the upward sloping real yield curve, and long-term 
yield movements.

Participants in ﬁnancial markets continuously receive vast amounts 
of  complex  information,  often  conﬂicting  in  nature.  The  quality  of 
this information varies over time as economic and market conditions 
change.  In  general,  market  participants  interpret  information  diﬀer-
ently,  especially  when  the  quality  of  information  is  low.  The  distor-
tionary eﬀects of disagreement are far-reaching, both for the real and 
the ﬁnancial economy.1 In this paper, we investigate the eﬀects of dis-
agreement  and  changes  in  information  quality  on  asset  prices  in  an 
endowment economy. We look at both stock and bond market impli-
cations. To reach our goal, we go beyond a qualitative analysis and 
quantify various eﬀects, with a model that is estimated using data from 
professional forecasters and that explains several asset pricing facts.

We  study  the  asset  pricing  eﬀects  of  disagreement  and  informa-
tion quality with a dynamic model of the cross-section of beliefs about 
the growth rate of the economy. There is a continuum of agents that 
update their beliefs constantly and yet agree to disagree, in line with 

the evidence provided by Kandel and Pearson (1995). As in Veronesi 
(2000),  the  mean  growth  rate  of  the  economy  varies  over  time  and 
agents receive a common signal regarding these changes, with a cer-
tain level of information quality.2 In addition, we consider disagreement 
among agents, resulting from a set of “private” noisy signals, similar to 
Scheinkman and Xiong (2003). Agents believe that “their” signals have 
information whose perceived informativeness, given a rationality con-
straint, is inversely proportional to information quality. This captures 
the conventional wisdom that when common information is weak or 
absent, individuals revert to their “tribal” beliefs. Consequently, when 
the information quality of the common signal deteriorates, disagreement
increases and leads to heterogeneity in expectations, that we refer to as 
forecast dispersion. Given the processes we derive for the mean and the 
dispersion in forecasts, we estimate the disagreement model parameters 
using data from the Survey of Professional Forecasters on GDP growth 
forecasts.

Regarding  preferences,  we  assume  that  agents  have  reference-
dependent utility for several reasons. Firstly, many experimental studies 

✩ Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We would like to thank an anonymous referee and the editor for valuable suggestions and guidance, that 
helped us enhance and clarify the article’s contributions. We are also grateful to participants and especially discussants at various conferences for their helpful 
remarks: Stanford Institute of Theoretical Economics (SITE) 2020, American Economic Association 2021, 10th Finance Conference at ITAM and XXVIII Finance 
Forum. In particular, we thank Paul Ehling, Jaksa Cvitanic, Chong Huang (discussant), and Stavros Panageas (discussant) for their helpful comments.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: costas.xiouros@bi.no (C. Xiouros), fzapa@bu.edu (F. Zapatero).

1 Heyerdahl-Larsen and Walden (2021) analyze this subject with a model of a production economy with disagreement.
2 The common informative signal is crucial in capturing the fact that the mean forecast is a strong predictor of GDP growth and changes in the mean forecast are 
weakly correlated with the realized GDP growth. Evidently, forecasters observe useful information about changes in the conditional mean of the economy’s growth 
rate, besides the realizations in GDP.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2023.103774
Received 15 May 2022; Received in revised form 26 December 2023; Accepted 26 December 2023

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)103774Availableonline22January20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

by the psychologists and economists responsible for the inception and 
growth of behavioral economics, conclude that an essential feature in 
economic  and  ﬁnancial  decision-making  is  the  existence  and  critical 
role of a reference value—for example, current wealth, wealth of peers, 
a benchmark, are some of the most frequently used in the literature, 
among many others–for the decision-maker.3 Secondly, we adopt the 
speciﬁcation proposed by Constantinides (1990) regarding the role of 
the reference point, as it has signiﬁcant impact on how agents assess and 
price risk. To accurately quantify the eﬀects of disagreement and infor-
mation quality, we require our model to explain the market price of risk, 
which disagreement alone cannot accomplish, as shown by Panageas 
(2020). Thirdly, the absence of a reference point would imply unrealis-
tically high levels of individual consumption risk and bankruptcy rates, 
considering the level of disagreement observed in reality.

By acknowledging the inﬂuence of a reference point, we introduce 
a  more  realistic  and  nuanced  understanding  of  decision-making  un-
der uncertainty. Nevertheless, despite the added complexity, we clearly 
distinguish between the eﬀects of disagreement and those of reference-
dependent preferences as these two factors operate independently of 
each other. Furthermore, we also incorporate the implications for stan-
dard  constant  relative  risk  aversion  preferences,  as  they  represent  a 
special case of the preferences we adopt.

Among the diﬀerent possible ways to incorporate reference-depen-
dence in preferences, we adapt the model of habit-formation of Camp-
bell and Cochrane (1999) to non-i.i.d. consumption growth. This model 
has  been  very  inﬂuential  in  the  mainstream  asset  pricing  literature, 
as well as in the behavioral economics camp–for example, Rayo and 
Becker (2007). An important feature of this model is that the persis-
tence in the habit generates variation in the price of risk, which explains 
the stock return predictability and accounts for a signiﬁcant portion of 
the stock return volatility.

Despite the rich model, we derive the state dynamics, the risk-free 
rate, and the market price of risk in closed form. Speciﬁcally, we derive 
how the distribution of types evolves over time as a result of the up-
dating of beliefs and investing performance.4 Speculation, which refers 
to the fact that agents choose their exposures to the aggregate shock 
depending  on  their  expectations,  creates  diﬀerences  in  the  investing 
performance and, thus, changes in the wealth distribution.5 The distri-
bution of types is characterized by a weighted mean and a weighted 
standard  deviation  of  beliefs,  where  the  weights  are  related  to  con-
sumption and wealth.6 We refer to these moments as market expectation
and market forecast dispersion, respectively. An important characteris-
tic of the equilibrium is that it is stationary. In contrast, most models 
of heterogeneous beliefs consider only a ﬁnite set of types which yield 
non-stationary equilibria because, as Yan (2008) shows, only one type 
survives at the end.

Our  results  and  quantitative  analysis  allow  us  to  clearly  disen-
tangle  and  quantify  the  eﬀects  of  all  three  elements:  disagreement, 
time-varying information quality, and habit-formation preferences. For 
example, we derive the representative agent formulation of the equi-
librium, which provides equivalent asset pricing eﬀects. Our analysis 
highlights which eﬀects are quantitatively important. In addition, the 
model explains several asset pricing facts, like the equity premium, the 
stock market volatility, the low correlation between the risk-free rate 
and the stock market, the high correlation between the stock market 

and the forecast dispersion, bond risk premia, and the upward sloping 
yield curve.

Our ﬁrst result is that if disagreement and information quality are 
constant, disagreement has negligible eﬀect on stock price variations. 
This stands in contrast to most of the existing literature, which ﬁnds that 
disagreement alone generates excess stock price volatility.7 The litera-
ture predicts excess volatility through two channels. The ﬁrst channel 
is the eﬀect that disagreement has on the variation of the market ex-
pectation, or often referred to as sentiment. Disagreement aﬀects the 
ﬂuctuations in the market expectation ﬁrst due to changes in the wealth 
distribution caused by speculation. Speciﬁcally, growth rate realizations 
beneﬁt those agents whose expectations were more correct in hindsight. 
Thus, since speculation increases the sensitivity of the market expecta-
tion to growth rate shocks, these excess ﬂuctuations can potentially in-
crease both asset price volatilities and risk premia. This is the focus, for 
example, of Atmaz and Basak (2018). However, the market expectation 
also ﬂuctuates due to the updating of beliefs. Because of this, the market 
expectation inherits the persistency of the true mean growth rate. This 
is the same as the persistency of the mean forecast in the data, which 
is not high enough to generate signiﬁcant stock price ﬂuctuations. In 
addition, higher disagreement in our model is intimately connected to 
lower information quality and, lower information quality means that 
agents learn less about the shocks to the economy from available infor-
mation. Consequently, higher disagreement typically makes the market 
expectation less, rather than more volatile, if it is connected with lower 
information quality.

The second channel through which disagreement may generate ex-
cess volatility is ﬂuctuations in the market forecast dispersion. However, 
most studies, e.g., Zapatero (1998), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006), David 
(2008) and Dumas et al. (2009), generate this prediction because they 
analyze models with only two agents. In this case, the shocks to the 
wealth distribution caused by speculation introduce permanent shocks 
to  the  market  forecast  dispersion.  In  contrast,  with  a  continuum  of 
types, we show that the market forecast dispersion is constant when dis-
agreement and information quality do not change.8 Essentially, at the 
steady state the decrease in dispersion caused by speculation is perfectly 
oﬀset by the increase caused by disagreement.9 This result highlights 
the importance of taking into consideration the law of large numbers 
(LLN) when studying the eﬀects of agent heterogeneity.

Therefore, dynamic eﬀects of disagreement depend on the existence 
of shocks to information quality. In fact, our second result is that, with 
disagreement, variations in information quality create signiﬁcant excess 
stock price variations. In our calibrated model, this excess volatility ac-
counts  for  almost  half  of  the  volatility  we  observe  in  the  data.  Due 
to the inverse relation between disagreement and information quality, 
shocks to information quality generate changes in the market forecast 
dispersion. The resulting speculative positions, in turn, aﬀect the econ-
omy’s risk-free rate because beliefs have asymmetric eﬀects on state 
prices, as shown by Jouini and Napp (2006a,b, 2007). Therefore, per-
sistent shocks to information quality translate to persistent shocks to the 
risk-free rate, that are sizeable enough to cause large stock price ﬂuctu-
ations. In our calibration, the risk-free rate is aﬀected positively by the 
market  forecast  dispersion,  because  relative  pessimists  have  stronger 
eﬀect on the aggregate demand for savings. Hence, the stock market 
reacts positively to positive shocks to information quality, since these 

3 The path breaking Kahneman and Tversky (1979) that compiles the conclu-
sions of many of these studies is the point of departure of a large literature on 
reference-dependent preferences.
4 We assume that agents know the true parameters of the aggregate endow-
ment process. Therefore, they update their beliefs regarding the state of the 
economy diﬀerently because they disagree about the information they receive.
5 By speculation we mean the intentional deviation from perfect risk sharing 
due to heterogeneity in beliefs.
6 Detemple and Murthy (1994) show that asset prices are determined by the 
wealth-weighted beliefs of the agents.

7 See,  for  example,  Zapatero  (1998),  Buraschi  and  Jiltsov  (2006),  David 
(2008), Dumas et al. (2009), Xiong and Yan (2010), Ehling et al. (2018), At-
maz and Basak (2018), and Martin and Papadimitriou (2022).
8 This result does not depend on the link between information quality and 
disagreement. The same result obtains in the case where there is no common 
informative signal and the source of disagreement is constant, as in studies 
previously cited.
9 In a two agent model the market forecast dispersion can both increase and 
decrease due to speculation, however, with a continuum of types it always de-
creases.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037742C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

drive down disagreement, the market forecast dispersion and, hence, 
the risk-free rate. Through this mechanism, the model also explains the 
fact that forecast dispersion in the data is strongly negatively correlated 
with the stock market.

Our third result is that, without disagreement, variations in infor-
mation  quality  also  have  negligible  eﬀects  on  both  the  stock  price 
volatility and the equity premium. The asset pricing eﬀects of infor-
mation quality with a representative agent are studied, for example, by 
Veronesi (2000) in an endowment economy and by Ai (2010) in a pro-
duction economy.10 A common underlying mechanism is that, in the 
presence of an informative independent signal–the common signal in 
our model–learning from the growth rate realizations is less relevant. 
Consequently, higher information quality makes the market expecta-
tion less sensitive to growth rate realizations, which aﬀects both the 
equity premium and the stock return volatility. However, as we noted 
above, our quantitative analysis shows that the ﬂuctuations in the mar-
ket expectation are not persistent enough to have other than negligible 
eﬀects on stock prices. Therefore, any modiﬁcations in the dynamics of 
the market expectation due to changes in information quality are also 
negligible for stock prices.

From the above results it becomes clear that it is the variations in 
disagreement, which in our model are produced by variations in infor-
mation quality, that generate quantitatively important eﬀects for asset 
prices; while the eﬀects of either constant disagreement or stochastic in-
formation quality in isolation, as studied in the previous literature, are 
not quantitatively important. This leads us to our fourth result, which 
is that the excess stock market volatility generated by the interaction 
of these two features, gives rise to a term premium that increases the 
equity premium. The reason is ﬁrst, that the disagreement among fore-
casters is counter-cyclical in the data, which is explained by information 
quality being positively aﬀected and strongly dependent on growth rate 
shocks. Secondly, as explained earlier, the stock market reacts positively 
to increases in information quality. As a result, investors require com-
pensation for the fact that the stock market is aﬀected negatively by 
adverse aggregate shocks, due to the decrease in information quality 
and the increase in disagreement.

The  term  premium  that  emerges  in  our  model  also  has  substan-
tial implications for the bond market. A well-established fact regard-
ing  bond  prices  is  the  upward  sloping  nominal  yield  curve.  The  ex-
isting literature often attributes this phenomenon to an inﬂation risk 
premium,  as  demonstrated  by  Piazzesi  and  Schneider  (2006),  Rude-
busch and Swanson (2012), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013), and Kung 
(2015). However, these models also predict a downward sloping real 
yield curve, which contradicts the empirical evidence provided by Roll 
(2004) and Hsu et al. (2021). The negative slope in the real yield curve 
results from positive autocorrelation in aggregate consumption growth, 
as shown by Campbell (1986). Wachter (2006) and Hsu et al. (2021)
propose that the upward sloping real yield curve can be explained by 
versions of habit formation preferences, where the intertemporal substi-
tution motive reacts more strongly to the precautionary savings motive.
We adopt the approach of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), assum-
ing that the variations in these two motives due to habit cancel each 
other out. As a result, in the absence of disagreement or time-varying 
information quality, the real yield curve has a downward slope. Incor-
porating disagreement and variations in information quality naturally 
leads to the positive slope observed in the real yield curve based on 
Treasury Inﬂation-Protected Securities (TIPS) data. Moreover, the real 
bond risk premia and the long-term yield volatilities of our model are 
comparable to those observed in the data.

10 See also Epstein and Schneider (2008) who investigate the eﬀect of informa-
tion quality on asset prices under ambiguity aversion, and Graniero (2020) who 
ﬁnds that time-varying information quality generates long-run risks through 
time-varying uncertainty.

Given the pivotal role that market forecast dispersion plays in deter-
mining long-term real yields, we investigate whether this is supported 
by evidence. Using the forecast dispersion among forecasters as a proxy, 
we make the following observations: Firstly, the forecast dispersion ex-
hibits correlations with future short-term rates that closely align with 
the correlations predicted by the model. Secondly, the model’s implied 
long-term real yields demonstrate signiﬁcant correlations with the real 
yields inferred from the data. For instance, the correlation for the 20-
year yield is 0.45, indicating a substantial improvement compared to 
the correlations of −0.29 and −0.37 obtained when assuming constant 
information quality or no disagreement, respectively.

To solve the equilibrium in closed form, we assume that markets 
are  complete.  This  assumption  allows  agents  to  trade  securities  that 
depend on their “private” signals, which may initially appear extreme. 
However, it becomes reasonable when considering that these signals 
pertain to the overall economy and should therefore have relevance to 
traded assets such as stocks, bonds, or derivatives.

Nevertheless, to further strengthen our theory, we also explore an 
incomplete market scenario where agents are unable to trade securities 
that depend on their signals. Leveraging the LLN, we characterize the 
equilibrium in a manner comparable to the complete market case. The 
equilibrium adjusts based on the extent to which each individual’s op-
timal consumption-to-wealth ratio depends on their expectations. Con-
sequently, in the case of agents with log-utility preferences, where the 
consumption-to-wealth ratio is constant, the equilibrium is equivalent 
to the complete market case. For the more general case of power utility 
preferences with habit, through quantitative analysis and approxima-
tion, we illustrate that this incompleteness has minimal consequences. 
The underlying intuition is straightforward: the signals introduce a mi-
nor idiosyncratic risk to individual consumption, resulting in insigniﬁ-
cant aggregate eﬀects.

Our paper is mostly related to the long literature on heterogeneous 
beliefs.11 Miller (1977) hypothesizes that heterogeneous expectations 
with short sale constraints lead to overvaluation, because prices over-
weight the valuation of optimistic investors. Harrison and Kreps (1978)
and  Scheinkman  and  Xiong  (2003) substantiate  this  hypothesis  with 
partial  equilibrium  analyses,  assuming,  however,  risk-neutral  agents. 
Gallmeyer and Holliﬁeld (2008) extend the analysis to general equi-
librium with risk-averse agents and ﬁnd that heterogeneous expecta-
tions with short-sale constraints may increase or reduce the stock price 
depending on the investors’ intertemporal elasticity of substitution.12
Similarly, Jouini and Napp (2006a) and Jouini and Napp (2006b) show 
that in a frictionless setting heterogeneity in beliefs may increase or 
decrease stock prices because, depending on the risk preference param-
eters, it may decrease or increase the risk-free interest rate.13

Detemple  and  Murthy  (1994) in  a  production  economy  and  Zap-
atero (1998) in a pure exchange economy, analyze the asset pricing 
eﬀects of heterogeneous beliefs in general equilibrium. Basak (2000)
shows that heterogeneous beliefs over non-fundamentals give rise to 
additional priced factors and Basak (2005) expresses the equilibrium in 
the form of a representative agent and derives the price of risk in the 
case of CRRA preferences. Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006) study the eﬀects 
on options and draw a link between disagreement, option volumes and 

11 Some empirical studies that investigate the relation between disagreement 
and asset prices and returns are Diether et al. (2002), Chen et al. (2002), John-
son (2004), Goetzmann and Massa (2005), Doukas et al. (2006), Barron et al. 
(2009), Avramov et al. (2009), and Yu (2011). However, these studies analyze 
the cross-section instead of the time-series, which is the focus of our paper, and 
they are not uniform in their ﬁndings as to whether disagreement increases or 
decreases stock prices.
12 In a related paper, Osambela (2015) provides a connection between liquid-
ity and speculation in the presence of disagreement and endogenous portfolio 
constraints.
13 Varian (1985) shows, in a static analysis, that the impact of heterogeneous 
beliefs on state prices depends on the properties of the utility function.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037743C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

option prices.14 Dumas et al. (2009) study the “sentiment” risk caused 
by an overconﬁdent investor, which generates excess volatility in stock 
prices, and analyze the optimal behavior of the rational investor, who 
knows that the overconﬁdent investor is wrong, but might get lucky. 
Xiong and Yan (2010) and Ehling et al. (2018) ﬁnd that heterogeneity 
in inﬂation expectations generates excess volatility in bond yields.

Methodologically,  our  study  is  related  to  Xiouros  and  Zapatero 
(2010), Cvitani´c and Malamud (2011), and Atmaz and Basak (2018)
who utilize an appropriate distributional assumption over a continuum 
of types to provide analytical results of the market equilibrium. Cvitani´c 
et al. (2011) and Bhamra and Uppal (2014) oﬀer general equilibrium 
analyses of economies with both preference and belief heterogeneity, 
and a number of analytical results in terms of asset pricing quantities, 
as well as results pertaining to agent survival and the long-run proper-
ties of those economies.

Our  study  is  distinct  from  previous  literature  in  that  it  incorpo-
rates several elements that have not been combined in a single study 
before. Speciﬁcally, we examine a continuum of agents over an inﬁ-
nite horizon, updating beliefs regarding the latent underlying state of 
the  economy,  and  reference-dependent  preferences.  Additionally,  we 
introduce  a  novel  component  to  this  literature:  information  quality, 
which determines the extent of disagreement among agents. Notably, 
our model generates a stationary equilibrium, and we conduct a quan-
titative analysis to examine the various eﬀects.

As previously stated, our study is also related to the literature on the 
term-structure of interest rates and the literature regarding the eﬀects of 
information quality on asset prices. Regarding the term-structure liter-
ature, our main contribution is to provide an alternative explanation of 
the term premium, supported by empirical evidence. In regard to infor-
mation quality, our study challenges whether variations in information 
quality alone have a signiﬁcant impact on asset prices.

Finally, our study also intersects with the literature that quantita-
tively explains the time-series characteristics of asset prices, including 
prominent features such as the equity premium, volatility of valuation 
ratios, and properties of the risk-free rate. Noteworthy examples of this 
literature  include  the  habit-formation  models  proposed  by  Campbell 
and Cochrane (1999) and Wachter (2006), the long-run risk model by 
Bansal and Yaron (2004), and the rare disaster models by Barro (2006)
and Gabaix (2012).

In our contribution to this ﬁeld, we extend the existing literature by 
incorporating heterogeneous beliefs into a habit-formation model. This 
enriched model not only accounts for the equity premium and stock re-
turn volatility but also explains various relationships between forecast 
dispersion and asset prices, as well as relevant bond market facts. No-
tably, we introduce a novel factor, namely information quality in the 
context of disagreement, which we ﬁnd to have signiﬁcant implications 
for asset prices.

2.  A model of disagreement

We consider an endowment economy, where agents face aggregate 
consumption risk. Agents, however, diﬀer in their expectations regard-
ing  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy,  because  they  disagree  on  their 
interpretation of common information. All information is available to 
all agents so that there is no need to learn from asset prices. The model 
has three distinctive features: a continuum of agents, a common infor-
mative signal, and the ﬂuctuating degree to which the agents interpret 
information diﬀerently, which we call disagreement. Variations in dis-
agreement are caused by shocks to information quality. These features 
generate rich dynamics of the distribution of beliefs that allow us to es-
timate the model using data from the Survey of Professional Forecasters 
(SPF) provided by the Philadelphia Fed.

14 Buraschi et al. (2014) also study connections between disagreement and im-
plied volatilities and show how disagreement is related to volatility risk premia.

2.1.  Aggregate endowment

The  aggregate  per-capita  consumption,  𝐶,  is  exogenous.  Its  log-
growth  rate  is  conditionally  normal  with  a  time-varying  conditional 
mean that follows an autoregressive process;

𝑔𝑡+1 ∼ 𝑁(𝜇𝑡, 𝜎2
𝑐 ),
𝜇𝑡+1 = 𝜑𝜇𝜇𝑡 + (1 − 𝜑𝜇)𝜇𝑐 + 𝜎𝜇𝜖𝜇
(2)
𝑡+1
≔ ln(𝐶𝑡+1∕𝐶𝑡), 𝜇𝑐 is the long-run mean and the shocks 𝜖𝜇
where 𝑔𝑡+1
are i.i.d. 𝑁(0, 1) and independent of 𝑔. The ﬂuctuations in the mean 
growth rate represent changes in the economic fundamentals and the 
fact that it is unobservable is the source of disagreement.

(1)

,

2.2.  Agents, information quality and disagreement

The  economy  is  populated  by  a  continuum  of  agents  indexed  by 
𝑖 ∈ [0, 1] of unit total mass and constant density of one. Agents do not 
observe 𝜇𝑡 and hold beliefs according to

(3)

𝑡, 𝜎2

𝑡 ),
𝑡, 𝑣2

𝑐 + 𝑣2

∀𝑖 ∈ [0, 1],

𝜇𝑡|F𝑡 ∼𝑖 𝑁(𝜇𝑖
where ∼𝑖
denotes the beliefs of agent 𝑖 and F𝑡 the common information 
set in period 𝑡. The beliefs about the aggregate consumption growth 
are, thus, given by 𝑁(𝜇𝑖
𝑡 ). The uncertainty 𝑣𝑡 is the same across 
agents. This is a result of the assumption, to be formalized later, that 
the amount of information the agents believe they can extract from the 
available signals is the same for all. As a result, the agents diﬀer only in 
their forecasts for next period, i.e. 𝜇𝑖
𝑡(𝜇𝑡), where we use 
the notation 𝔼𝑖

𝑡 = 𝔼𝑖
𝑡(⋅) = 𝔼𝑖(⋅|F𝑡) to denote a conditional expectation.

𝑡(𝑔𝑡+1) = 𝔼𝑖

An agent’s type in period 𝑡 is determined by her beliefs 𝜇𝑖

𝑡 . We fur-
ther assume that the initial distribution of types is Gaussian, in the sense 
that the density of agents as a function of beliefs is the normal den-
sity function with mean  ̄𝜇
0. We denote with 
𝑛𝑡(𝜇) the density of agents whose forecast is given by 𝜇 and, hence, 
𝑛
0 ),  where  𝜙(⋅; ⋅, ⋅) denotes  the  normal  density  func-
0(𝜇) = 𝜙(𝜇; ̄𝜇
tion.15 In what follows, we will specify how agents update their beliefs. 
Nevertheless, the distribution of types remains Gaussian; for any period 
𝑡, it is completely described by the average forecast  ̄𝜇𝑡 and the disper-
sion in forecasts ̄𝜈𝑡, where

0 and standard deviation  ̄𝜈

, ̄𝜈2

0

̄𝜇𝑡 =

1ˆ

0

𝜇𝑖
𝑡𝑑𝑖

and

̄𝜈2
𝑡 =

(𝜇𝑖

𝑡 − 𝜇𝑡)2𝑑𝑖.

1ˆ

0

(4)

Every period, agents observe the realization of the growth rate with 
which they update their beliefs about the current period’s mean growth 
rate. They also observe signals that contain information about the shock 
to the mean growth rate and form their beliefs about next period’s mean 
growth rate knowing that it follows the process (2). However, similar 
to Detemple and Murthy (1994), Zapatero (1998) and Scheinkman and 
Xiong (2003), the agents disagree about the interpretation of this infor-
mation.

All agents observe the common signal

√

𝑡 = 𝜌𝑡𝜖𝜇
𝑠𝑚

𝑡 +

1 − 𝜌2

𝑡 𝜖𝑚
𝑡 ,

(5)

15 To be able to derive our results, we deﬁne the distribution of types in some 
period 𝑡 as follows:

𝑛𝑡(𝜇) ≔

𝑑
𝑑𝜇

1ˆ

0

1ˆ

𝐻(𝜇 − 𝜇𝑖

𝑡)𝑑𝑖 =

𝛿(𝜇 − 𝜇𝑖

𝑡)𝑑𝑖,

0

where 𝐻(𝑥) is the Heaviside function, equal to 1 for 𝑥 ⩾ 0 and 0 otherwise 
and its derivative is the Dirac delta function, 𝛿(𝑥). The second integral in the 
previous equation is derived using the Leibniz rule. Note that this is a properly 
deﬁned density function, since integrating over the real line wrt. 𝜇 gives one.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037744C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

where 𝜌𝑡 ∈ [0, 1] measures information quality and 𝜖𝑚
is i.i.d. 𝑁(0, 1). 
Learning  from  the  realized  growth  rate  and  the  common  signal  de-
creases the dispersion in beliefs. The common signal explains two things 
(i) the fact that forecasters’ beliefs react to signals other than the ob-
served realized growth rates and (ii) the level of predictability of the 
quarter-ahead growth rate by the mean forecast.

Similar  to  Scheinkman  and  Xiong  (2003),  agents  also  observe  a 
continuum of uninformative signals, indexed by 𝑖, the individuals’ in-
dicator, so that they are matched with the agents. Each one of these 
signals is the common signal 𝑠𝑚

distorted by some independent noise,

√

√

𝑡 +

∀𝑖 ∈ [0, 1],

𝑡 = 𝜂𝑠𝑚
𝑠𝑖
1 − 𝜂2𝜖𝑖
𝑡,
where the 𝜖𝑖
’s are i.i.d. 𝑁(0, 1) and 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1]. Agents (correctly) believe 
that the signals of the other agents are uninformative, but (wrongly) 
believe that their corresponding signal carries additional information. 
Speciﬁcally, agent 𝑖 believes that signal 𝑖 is generated as follows:

(6)

(7)

𝑡 +

𝑡 𝜖𝑖
𝑡,

1 − 𝜁 2

∀𝑖 ∈ [0, 1],

𝑡 =𝑖 𝜁𝑡𝜖𝜇
𝑠𝑖
for some 𝜁𝑡 ∈ [0, 1], where =𝑖
indicates agent 𝑖’s beliefs. For ease of refer-
ence we call signals 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1] individual signals, even though all signals 
are public.16 For simplicity, we assume that the variable 𝜁𝑡 is the same 
for all agents; as it represents the weight agents assign to their (actually 
uninformative) signal, it controls their diﬀerential interpretation of the 
available information. In reality, this may be due to diﬀerent underlying 
assumptions stemming from diﬀerent education, experiences, observed 
histories, culture, age and so on. For example, Malmendier and Nagel 
(2011) ﬁnd that individual experiences of macroeconomic shocks aﬀect 
future expectations and ﬁnancial risk taking. Essentially, agents analyze 
information diﬀerently and 𝜁𝑡 is a measure of the heterogeneity of the 
outcomes of that analysis, which we call disagreement.

Given the stated assumptions we now derive the evolution of beliefs 

of an agent. All proofs are provided in Online Appendix C.

Lemma 1. Agent 𝑖’s beliefs about the state of the economy, given by equa-
tion (3), evolve according to

𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜑𝜇)𝜇𝑐 + 𝜑𝜇𝜅𝑡𝜇𝑖
𝜇𝑖
(√

𝑡 + 𝜑𝜇(1 − 𝜅𝑡)𝑔𝑡+1
𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1

)

+ 𝜎𝜇

𝐴𝜈,𝑡+1
𝜇𝐴𝑣,𝑡+1

𝜖𝑖
𝑡+1 + 𝐴𝜇,𝑡+1
,

𝜇𝜅𝑡𝑣2

𝑡 + 𝜎2

𝑡+1 = 𝜑2
𝑣2
where

𝜅𝑡 ≔

𝐴𝑣,𝑡 ≔

𝐴𝜇,𝑡 ≔

𝐴𝜈,𝑡 ≔

√

𝜎𝑡 ≔

𝑡 ,
𝑐 + 𝑣2
𝜎2

,

𝜎2
𝑐
𝜎2
𝑡
(1 − 𝜁 2

1 − 𝜁 2
𝜂𝜁𝑡(1 − 𝜌2

,

𝑡 )(1 − 𝜌2
𝑡 )
𝑡 𝜌2
𝑡
𝑡 ) + 𝜌𝑡(1 − 𝜁 2
𝑡 )
𝑡 𝜌2
1 − 𝜁 2
𝑡
𝑡 )2(1 − 𝜂2)
𝑡 𝜌2
𝑡 )2

.

𝑡 (1 − 𝜌2
𝜁 2
(1 − 𝜁 2

,

and

Agents are, thus, boundedly rational since they do not attempt to 
learn about the true informational content of their individual signals. 
Perfect rationality obtains if we set 𝜁𝑡 = 0 in Lemma 1. Yet, we impose 
a rationality constraint so that agents have the correct beliefs regarding 
and 𝑠𝑚
the joint distribution between 𝑠𝑖
. The true correlation between 

16 We could also assume that the individual signals are private as long as all 
agents believe that no other agent possesses additional information, so that they 
have no reason to learn from prices and attribute diﬀerent demands for assets 
to diﬀerences in opinions.

the individual signals and the common signal is given by 𝜂, whereas 
agents believe that their signal has a correlation with the common sig-
nal equal to 𝜁𝑡𝜌𝑡. We, therefore, impose the rationality constraint that 
𝜁𝑡𝜌𝑡 has to equal 𝜂 at all times, through the assumption that disagreement
is inversely proportional to information quality,

𝜁𝑡 =

𝜂
𝜌𝑡

.

(8)

As  a  result,  agents  have  rational  beliefs  regarding  the  distribution 
of their signal conditional on  𝑠𝑚
since, given the above assumption, 
𝔼𝑖(𝑠𝑖
|𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1). Further, 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1] is the disagreement pa-
rameter and 𝜌𝑡 ∈ [𝜂, 1].

𝑡+1) = 𝔼(𝑠𝑖
|𝑠𝑚

𝑡+1

𝑡+1

We now derive the dynamics of the distribution of beliefs.

Proposition 1. If in period 𝑡 the distribution of beliefs 𝜇𝑖
mean  ̄𝜇𝑡 and variance  ̄𝜈2
Gaussian with mean and variance given by

𝑡 is Gaussian with 
𝑡 , the distribution of beliefs in period 𝑡 + 1 is also 

̄𝜇𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜑𝜇)𝜇𝑐 + 𝜑𝜇𝜅𝑡 ̄𝜇𝑡 + 𝜑𝜇(1 − 𝜅𝑡)𝑔𝑡+1
,

+ 𝜎𝜇𝐴𝜇,𝑡+1
𝑡 + 𝜎2
𝑡 ̄𝜈2
𝜇𝜅2

𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1
𝜇𝐴𝜈,𝑡+1

̄𝜈2
𝑡+1 = 𝜑2
where 𝐴𝜇, 𝐴𝑣, and 𝐴𝜈 are given in Lemma 1. Since 𝜁𝑡 = 𝜂 ÷ 𝜌𝑡, we have,

,

𝐴𝜇,𝑡 = 𝜌𝑡,

(𝜌2

𝐴𝑣,𝑡 =

𝐴𝜈,𝑡 =

𝜂2(1 − 𝜌2
𝑡 )2
𝑡 (1 − 𝜂2)
𝜌2
𝑡 − 𝜂2)(1 − 𝜌2
𝑡 )
𝑡 (1 − 𝜂2)
𝜌2

.

and

The mean forecast  ̄𝜇 follows an autoregressive process just like the 
true mean growth rate and it is driven by two shocks. The ﬁrst is the 
growth rate 𝑔𝑡+1 which allows the agents to update their (posterior) be-
liefs on 𝜇𝑡, before they form their (prior) beliefs on 𝜇𝑡+1. The sensitivity 
to this shock, which is given by 𝜑𝜇(1 − 𝜅𝑡), depends ﬁrst on the persis-
tency of 𝜇, since less persistency implies that updating the beliefs on 
𝜇𝑡 is less relevant for the beliefs on 𝜇𝑡+1. Also, it depends on the un-
certainty about 𝜇𝑡, since lower uncertainty (higher 𝜅𝑡) implies that the 
agent learns less from the realization of 𝑔𝑡+1.

The second shock is the common signal 𝑠𝑚

and the sensitivity to 
this shock depends (through 𝐴𝜇) on all three parameters, 𝜂, 𝜁 and 𝜌, 
that determine the true and believed (by the agents) informativeness of 
the signals. For example, when the common signal is fully informative, 
i.e. 𝜌 = 1, then 𝐴𝜇 takes its maximum value of 1. When the common 
signal is uninformative (𝜌 = 0) then the common signal still aﬀects the 
average beliefs with a sensitivity of 𝐴𝜇 = 𝜂𝜁 because 𝜂 determines the 
correlation of the individual signals with the common signal and 𝜁 the 
perceived informativeness of the individual signals. When disagreement 
is at its maximum (𝜁 = 1) then 𝐴𝜇 = 𝜂 due to the fact that the agents 
only consider their individual signals that have a correlation with the 
common signal equal to 𝜂. Imposing the rationality constraint 𝜁 = 𝜂∕𝜌
we obtain 𝐴𝜇 = 𝜌, which means that the mean beliefs react correctly to 
the public signal. However, the mean forecast  ̄𝜇 is not perfectly rational 
because the uncertainty 𝑣, which aﬀects 𝜅, is lower than it should be, 
because  agents  believe  they  receive  more  information  than  they  do. 
For this reason, Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) relate disagreement to 
overconﬁdence. The perfectly rational beliefs are provided below, as a 
corollary to Lemma 1 where we set 𝜁𝑡 = 0.

Corollary 1. The perfectly rational beliefs (𝜁𝑡 = 0) are given by:

𝑡 + 𝜑𝜇(1 − ̌𝜅𝑡)𝑔𝑡+1

̌𝜇𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜑𝜇)𝜇𝑐 + 𝜑𝜇 ̌𝜅𝑡𝜇𝑖
+ 𝜎𝜇𝜌𝑡+1
𝜇 ̌𝜅𝑡𝑣2

𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1
𝜇(1 − 𝜌2
𝑡 + 𝜎2

𝑡+1 = 𝜑2
̌𝑣2

𝑡+1),

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037745C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

where  ̌𝜅𝑡 ≔ 𝜎2

𝑐 ÷ (𝜎2

𝑐 + ̌𝑣2
𝑡 ).

Moving on to the dispersion in beliefs ̄𝜈, we note that it does not de-
pend either on the signals or the growth rate realizations, but it depends 
on the true and perceived informativeness of the signals. The ﬁrst term 
shows how the dispersion decays due to learning, depending on the 
level of uncertainty and the persistence of the mean growth rate. The 
second term is the shock to dispersion which is either zero or positive. 
It is zero when either the common signal is perfectly informative (𝜌 = 1) 
or all individual signals are perfectly correlated with the common signal 
(𝜂 = 1). Given 𝜁 = 𝜂∕𝜌 the term 𝐴𝜈 reaches its maximum value of one 
when the common signal bears no information and information quality 
is at its minimum, i.e. 𝜂 = 𝜌 = 0 and 𝜁 = 1.

The  ﬁnal  element  of  the  disagreement  model  is  the  process  that 
measures information quality, 𝜌, which is essential to capture several 
features of the data, most importantly the large ﬂuctuations in disper-
sion. We assume that 𝜌 is generated as follows:

(9)

(10)

and 𝜖𝜒

𝜌𝑡 = 𝜂 + (1 − 𝜂)Φ(𝜒𝑡 + 𝜎𝜌𝜖𝜌
𝑡 )
𝜒𝑡 = 𝜙𝜒 𝜒𝑡−1 + (1 − 𝜙𝜒 )𝜇𝜒 + 𝛽𝜒 (𝑔𝑡 − ̃𝜇𝑡−1) + 𝜎𝜒 𝜖𝜒
𝑡 ,
where 𝜖𝜌
are i.i.d. 𝑁(0, 1). Φ(⋅) denotes the standard normal 
cumulative distribution function so that 𝜌𝑡 ∈ [𝜂, 1], which we need to 
satisfy the rationality constraint  𝜁 = 𝜂∕𝜌. The combination of transi-
tory shocks 𝜖𝜌
is enough to capture well the 
autocorrelation structure of the forecast dispersion. Additionally, the 
dependence on growth rate surprises (𝑔𝑡 − ̃𝜇𝑡−1) incorporates into the 
model the observation that growth is negatively correlated with changes 
in dispersion. The parameter  ̃𝜇 represents a weighted mean forecast 
(diﬀerent from  ̄𝜇), which is an equilibrium variable and will be derived 
later.

and persistent shocks 𝜖𝜒

2.3.  Data and estimation

To estimate the model we use aggregate consumption data and data 
from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). We use the annual 
consumption data provided by the National Income and Product Ac-
counts (NIPA) from 1929 to 2017 and compute the per-capita consump-
tion of non-durable goods and services. We adjust the annual growth 
rates for inﬂation by subtracting the growth in the annual average CPI 
index–data taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We simu-
late the model at quarterly frequency and time-aggregate to compute 
annual moments.

In the data, an obvious candidate for forecast dispersion  ̄𝜈, used in 
the literature, e.g. by David (2008) and Ehling et al. (2018), is the cross-
sectional dispersion in macroeconomic forecasts. From the SPF, we use 
the real GDP forecasts for the current quarter and for the quarter ahead. 
The data is quarterly and spans the period from 1968Q3 to 2016Q4. 
Every quarter there are between 9 and 83 professional forecasts with 
an average of 38.5 and standard deviation of 12. From the level data 
we compute growth rates which then we adjust for population growth 
(computed from NIPA tables) to obtain real quarterly per-capita growth 
forecasts. Then, for every quarter we compute the cross-sectional mean 
forecast ( ̄𝜇) and the dispersion in forecasts ( ̄𝜈). To lessen the eﬀect of 
outliers we compute the dispersion as the distance between two speciﬁc 
percentiles: those of a normal distribution half a standard deviation left 
and right from the mean. The dispersion measure corresponds, thus, 
to the cross-sectional standard deviation in the case the distribution of 
forecasts is Gaussian. We also collect quarterly data for real per-capita 
GDP growth over the same period as the SPF data. We thus analyze 
the moments of the average forecast and the dispersion in forecasts in 
relation to the variable in concern.

To  compute  model  moments  we  run  1,000  simulations  with  400 
periods each and a burn-in of 100 periods. The model is estimated using 
the Simulated Method of Moments, trying to match 16 moments with 
10 parameters. Table 1 shows the moments for the data alongside those 

of the estimated model. The parenthesis next to each data statistic is 
the standard error estimated using Newey and West (1987) and 16 lags. 
The parenthesis next to each model moment shows the 𝑡-statistic of the 
hypothesis that the data moment is equal to the model value. From the 
table we see that the diﬀerences between the model and the data are 
statistically insigniﬁcant, with the highest 𝑡-statistic being 1.28 and the 
rest less than 1. Table 2 shows the estimated model parameters.

The model matches almost perfectly the mean, volatility and ﬁrst-
lag autocorrelation of annual consumption growth, shown in Panel A of 
Table 1. Panel B shows moments related to beliefs. The average fore-
cast  ̄𝜇 is quite volatile–volatility is standardized by the volatility of the 
related variable, GDP growth in the data and consumption growth in 
the model–and relatively persistent; both captured well by the model. 
The average and the volatility of the forecast dispersion  ̄𝜈, standard-
ized by the volatility of the related variable, are both quite high and the 
model matches them almost perfectly. The model also captures quite 
well the autocorrelation structure of the forecast dispersion as given by 
lags 1, 4, 8 and 12. As a result, 𝜒 , the persistent component of 𝜌 (and 
𝜁 ), is estimated to be quite persistent with 𝜙𝜒 = 0.965. The power of 
the average forecast to predict the quarter ahead growth is shown by 
the relevant correlation, 0.54 in the data and 0.51 in the model. The 
model also explains the low correlation between changes in the average 
forecast and the growth rate. The model explains these two statistics 
with the common signal 𝑠𝑚
and the parameters 𝜂 and 𝜇𝜒 . An increase 
in either of these parameters increases the sensitivity of the average 
forecast  ̄𝜇 to the common signal and, hence, the volatility of  ̄𝜇; as a re-
sult, the correlation between changes in  ̄𝜇 and growth rate realizations 
decreases. A higher 𝜇𝜒 also implies higher predictive power for the av-
erage forecast because 𝜇𝜒 determines the average information quality, 
as seen from equations (9) and (10). On the other hand, an increase in 
the disagreement parameter 𝜂 does not increase the predictive power, 
because it introduces uninformative ﬂuctuations in the mean forecast 
through higher disagreement and higher correlation among individual 
signals.

A statistic that is of particular interest is the negative correlation 
between forecast dispersion changes with the related growth variable, 
which is -0.20 in the data and -0.17 in the model. The model gener-
ates this correlation by having most of the ﬂuctuations in 𝜌 driven by 
growth rate surprises. The positively estimated 𝛽𝜒 implies that the in-
formation quality increases with positive growth rate surprises, which 
has important implications for the equity premium.

3.  Investor preferences and market equilibrium

The disagreement model is analyzed and estimated irrespective of 
investor preferences, wealth distribution and market structure, elements 
that are necessary to fully characterize the economy and generate as-
set pricing predictions. We assume that markets are complete so that 
agents can choose their optimal consumption paths through trading.17
We analyze a case with incomplete markets in Section 7, where agents 
cannot trade on contingent claims that depend on their signals.

3.1.  Risk preferences

Our choice of utility function for the individuals that populate the 
economy in our model is based on several considerations. First, the stan-
dard  utility  functions  used  in  dynamic  asset  pricing  models  (namely 
CRRA utility) have failed at explaining many of the properties of as-
set  prices,  especially  –but  not  exclusively—the  market  price  of  risk. 
Second, one of the main takeaways of the by now vast literature on 

17 Complete markets imply that agents are able to trade on the aggregate 
growth shock, but also on the shocks and signals that drive beliefs. Even though 
the individual signals do not aﬀect asset prices, they aﬀect the agents’ wealth 
levels, since they are required to ﬁnance their optimal consumption paths.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037746C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table 1
Disagreement model estimation. The real per-capita consumption growth series (𝑔) is annual, was 
computed from the per-capita consumption of non-durable goods and services (NIPA), deﬂated by the 
annual CPI index (BEA), and cover the period from 1930 to 2017. The beliefs data, where  ̄𝜇 denotes the 
mean forecast and ̄𝜈 the standard deviation of forecasts, were obtained from the Survey of Professional 
Forecasters, are quarterly, span the period from 1968Q3 to 2016Q4, and correspond to the real GDP 
quarter-ahead forecasts. The data standard errors (𝑠.𝑒.) were Newey and West (1987) estimated using 
16 lags. The model statistics are the averages across 1,000 simulations of 400 quarters each (with 
a burn-in of 100 quarters). The model t-statistics (𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡.) correspond to the diﬀerences between 
the model and the data statistics. For a variable 𝑥, 𝜇(𝑥) denotes the sample mean, 𝜎(𝑥) the standard 
deviation, 𝑎𝑐𝑘(𝑥) its 𝑘-lag autocorrelation and 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑥, 𝑦) the correlation with variable 𝑦. Each model 
was estimated using the Simulated Method of Moments, matching all moments shown, except the time-
series mean of the cross-section average forecast 𝜇( ̄𝜇) because this is given by 𝜇𝑐 , the unconditional 
mean of 𝑔. The estimated parameters are shown in Table 2.

Statistic

Description

A. Annual (time-aggregated) consumption growth (data: 1930 – 2017)

𝜇(𝑔𝑎)
𝜎(𝑔𝑎)
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑔𝑎)

Mean consumption growth
Volatility of consumption growth
Autocorrelation of consumption growth

Data

𝑒𝑠𝑡.

1.74
2.70
0.48

𝑠.𝑒.

(0.27)
(0.67)
(0.05)

B. Quarterly mean forecast, forecast dispersion and growth (data: 1968Q3 – 2016Q4)

𝜇( ̄𝜇)
𝜎( ̄𝜇)∕𝜎(𝑔)
1( ̄𝜇)
𝑎𝑐

𝜇( ̄𝜈)∕𝜎(𝑔)
𝜎( ̄𝜈)∕𝜎(𝑔)

𝑎𝑐
𝑎𝑐
𝑎𝑐
𝑎𝑐

1( ̄𝜈)
4( ̄𝜈)
8( ̄𝜈)
12( ̄𝜈)

Average of mean forecast
Standardized volatility of mean forecast
Autocorrelation of mean forecast

Standardized average of forecast dispersion
Standardized volatility of forecast dispersion

Lag 1 autocorrelation of forecast dispersion
Lag 4 autocorrelation of forecast dispersion
Lag 8 autocorrelation of forecast dispersion
Lag 12 autocorrelation of forecast dispersion

𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟( ̄𝜇𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(Δ ̄𝜇, 𝑔)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟( ̄𝜈𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(Δ ̄𝜈, 𝑔)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟( ̄𝜇, ̄𝜈)

Growth predictability by average forecast
Correlation of average forecast changes with growth
Growth predictability by forecast dispersion
Correlation of forecast dispersion changes with growth
Correlation between forecast mean and dispersion

0.39
0.47
0.80

0.27
0.15

0.71
0.58
0.43
0.32

0.54
0.13
-0.06
-0.20
-0.28

(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.03)

(0.03)
(0.01)

(0.05)
(0.08)
(0.05)
(0.05)

(0.05)
(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.07)
(0.17)

Model

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

1.74
2.70
0.50

0.44
0.49
0.77

0.28
0.15

0.77
0.52
0.42
0.34

0.51
0.16
-0.11
-0.17
-0.20

(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.49)

(0.90)
(0.51)
(0.92)

(0.08)
(0.11)

(1.28)
(0.72)
(0.34)
(0.34)

(0.52)
(0.34)
(0.41)
(0.39)
(0.48)

Table 2
Estimated model parameters - quarterly frequency.

Description

Parameter

Value

Unconditional mean of consumption growth
Volatility of consumption growth shocks

Volatility of shocks to consumption growth conditional mean
Persistence of consumption growth conditional mean

Correlation between common and individual signals
Volatility of common signal informativeness idiosyncratic shocks

Mean of common signal informativeness factor
Persistence of common signal informativeness factor
Sensitivity of common signal informativeness factor to growth shocks
Volatility of common signal informativeness factor idiosyncratic shocks

𝜇𝑐
𝜎𝑐

𝜎𝜇
𝜑𝜇

𝜂
𝜎𝜌

𝜇𝜒
𝜑𝜒
𝛽𝜒
𝜎𝜒

0.436%
0.754%

0.474%
0.773

0.247
1.11

-0.366
0.965
30.0
0.257%

behavioral economics is the critical importance of a reference point in 
ﬁnancial decision-making –this is a key element in the Prospect The-
ory  of  Kahneman  and  Tversky  (1979) and  many  of  the  subsequent 
studies, like K˝oszegi and Rabin (2006, 2009). Third, the absence of a 
reference point would imply unrealistically high consumption risk and 
bankruptcy probability for an individual, given the level of disagree-
ment we observe.

There are many ways to incorporate the reference point in the utility 
function. Here we select the “diﬀerence” habit formation utility postu-
lated by Sundaresan (1989) and Constantinides (1990), culminating in 
the inﬂuential work of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Rayo and Becker 
(2007) provide an evolutionary explanation of the prevalence of habit 
preferences. In particular, we assume that all agents live forever and 
exhibit identical power utility preferences with external habit:

∞∑

𝔼𝑖
𝑡

𝛽𝜏 (𝐶 𝑖

𝑡+𝜏 − 𝐻𝑡+𝜏 )1−𝛾 − 1
1 − 𝛾

,

∀𝑖 ∈ [0, 1],

(11)

𝜏=0
where 𝐶 𝑖
denotes the consumption of agent 𝑖 and 𝐻 the common ex-
ternal habit –the reference point. The subjective discount factor is 𝛽 < 1
and 𝛾 > 0 is the utility curvature parameter. When 𝛾 = 1 the preferences 
take the logarithmic form. The habit permits to explain the high mar-
ket Sharpe ratio. Speciﬁcally, the Arrow-Pratt measure of relative risk 
aversion in a certain period 𝑡 is given by 𝛾 𝐶 𝑖
𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡). Thus, lower 
consumption or higher level of habit implies higher risk aversion.

𝑡 ∕(𝐶 𝑖

When 𝐻𝑡 = 0, agents exhibit the standard CRRA preferences. To clar-
ify the eﬀects of disagreement and separate them from those coming 
from the habit preferences, we derive the equilibrium without specify-
ing how the habit is formed. This implies that the equilibrium charac-
terization embeds the case with CRRA preferences.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037747C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

3.2.  The market equilibrium

Agents maximize their utility (11) every period subject to their pe-
riod budget constraint. The period budget constraints can be replaced 
by the intertemporal budget constraint according to which the present 
value of an agent’s consumption stream should be less or equal to the 
initial total wealth, which equals the present value of the income stream 
plus the initial ﬁnancial wealth. The present value of a stream of cash-
ﬂows can be written using the state price process 𝑝, where 𝑝
0(𝑧𝑡) gives 
the price at time 0 of a unit of consumption in state 𝑧𝑡. Thus, the in-
tertemporal budget constraint is written as

ˆ

∞∑

𝐶 𝑖
𝑡 𝑝

𝑡=0
where 𝑊 𝑖

0(𝑧𝑡)𝑑𝑧𝑡 ⩽ 𝑊 𝑖

0

,

(12)

0 is the initial total wealth of agent 𝑖.

The economy is in equilibrium when agents choose their consump-
tion  processes  optimally  and  the  ﬁnancial  and  consumption  markets 
clear. Due to completeness, ﬁnancial markets clear if and only if the 
consumption good market clears in all states. The market clearing con-
dition in a given period 𝑡 is then given by setting the integral of the 
consumption  across  agents  equal  to  the  per-capita  consumption  𝐶𝑡. 
Equivalently, we can set the integral of the consumption surplus shares
across agents equal to one,

𝐶𝑡 =

1ˆ

0

𝐶 𝑖
𝑡 𝑑𝑖

⇔

1 =

1ˆ

0

𝛼𝑖
𝑡𝑑𝑖,

(13)

where 𝛼𝑖

𝑡 ≔

𝐶 𝑖
𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡
𝐶𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡

.

Note that the consumption surplus (share) distribution across agents, 
(𝛼𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ [0, 1]), is a continuous probability density function. Based on this 
distribution we deﬁne another distribution which, as we will show later, 
characterizes asset prices; namely, the consumption surplus share distri-
bution across types (beliefs), which we denote with 𝛼𝑡(𝜇). It is deﬁned 
similarly  to  𝑛𝑡(𝜇) –the  distribution  of  beliefs  deﬁned  in  section 2.2– 
but instead of equal weights we use consumption surplus shares.18 The 
mean and variance of this distribution are given by,

̃𝜇𝑡 ≔

1ˆ

0

𝑡𝜇𝑖
𝛼𝑖

𝑡𝑑𝑖

and

𝑡 ≔
̃𝜈2

𝑡(𝜇𝑖
𝛼𝑖

𝑡 − 𝜇𝑡)2𝑑𝑖.

(14)

1ˆ

0

We refer to  ̃𝜇 as the market expectation and ̃𝜈 as the market forecast dis-
persion, which are endogenously determined in equilibrium. We use  ̃𝜇
to specify the process of 𝜒 in (10). Next, we characterize the equilib-
rium allocations and state prices with the following proposition. To see 
clearly the eﬀect of disagreement, let

𝑁𝑡,𝑡+1

≔ 𝛽 ⋅

(

𝐶𝑡+1 − 𝐻𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡

)

−𝛾

,

(15)

which is the stochastic discount factor between period 𝑡 and 𝑡 + 1 in the 
homogeneous agent economy.

Proposition 2. In equilibrium, the consumption surplus shares evolve ac-
cording to

18 Similar to 𝑛𝑡(𝜇), we deﬁne the consumption surplus share distribution of 
types in some period 𝑡 as follows:

𝛼𝑡(𝜇) ≔

𝑑
𝑑𝜇

1ˆ

0

1ˆ

𝛼𝑖
𝑡

𝐻(𝜇 − 𝜇𝑖

𝑡)𝑑𝑖 =

𝛼𝑖
𝑡

𝛿(𝜇 − 𝜇𝑖

𝑡)𝑑𝑖,

0

𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝑖
𝛼𝑖

𝑡

´

𝜙(𝑔𝑡+1; 𝜇𝑖
𝑡 )1∕𝛾
𝑡, 𝜎2
𝑡 𝜙(𝑔𝑡+1; 𝜇𝑗
𝛼𝑗
𝑡 )1∕𝛾 𝑑𝑗
𝑡 , 𝜎2

,

1
0

𝑖 ∈ [0, 1],

where 𝜙(𝑥; 𝜇, 𝜎2) denotes the normal density with mean 𝜇 and standard 
deviation 𝜎. The price of state 𝑧𝑡+1 in period 𝑡 is given by

𝑝𝑡(𝑧𝑡+1) = 𝑁𝑡+1

⋅ 𝑓 (𝑧𝑡+1

|F𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1) ⋅

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

1ˆ

0

𝑡 𝜙(𝑔𝑡+1; 𝜇𝑖
𝛼𝑖

𝑡, 𝜎2

𝑡 )1∕𝛾 𝑑𝑖

𝛾
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

,

where 𝜎𝑡 is deﬁned in Lemma 1 and 𝑓 (𝑧𝑡+1
|F𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1) denotes the density of 
state 𝑧𝑡+1 conditional on the information at time 𝑡 and the realization 𝑔𝑡+1.

Agents,  in  maximizing  their  utility,  attempt  to  smooth  their  con-
sumption  surplus  shares  both  across  states  and  across  time.  In  the 
absence of belief heterogeneity there is perfect risk-sharing, in which 
case the consumption surplus shares are constant. However, disagree-
ment is incompatible with perfect risk sharing because this would imply 
disagreement about state prices and, hence, about prices of ﬁnancial se-
curities. Since agents agree on prices in equilibrium, they deviate from 
perfect  risk  sharing  and  their  consumption  surplus  shares  vary  over 
time.  Speciﬁcally,  an  agent’s  consumption  surplus  share  increases  in 
states that the agent considers relatively more likely compared to the 
rest of the agents, and decreases otherwise.

The ﬁnal element we need to determine allocations and prices in 
equilibrium  is  the  initial  wealth  distribution  across  agents.  To  pro-
vide analytical results, we use the approach in Xiouros and Zapatero 
(2010), also employed by Cvitani´c and Malamud (2011) in the context 
of heterogeneous beliefs, whereby we make a convenient assumption 
about the initial endogenous consumption distribution. In particular, 
the equilibrium consumption processes and state prices admit closed 
form expressions if the initial consumption surplus share distribution 
across beliefs is Gaussian. We have already assumed that the initial dis-
0 and variance ̄𝜈2
tribution across beliefs, 𝑛
0 . 
We thus assume that the initial wealth distribution is such that 𝛼
0(𝜇) is 
Gaussian with mean  ̃𝜇
0 and variance  ̃𝜈2
0 . This implies that relatively 
pessimistic agents need to have a bit more wealth than average to (par-
tially) protect themselves from the expensive states following negative 
shocks. Alternatively, we can assume that agents begin with a common 
prior, i.e.  ̄𝜈 = 0, in which case we need not impose any restriction on 
the initial wealth allocation.

0(𝜇) is Gaussian with mean  ̄𝜇

Proposition 3. In equilibrium, the consumption surplus share distribution 
across beliefs 𝛼𝑡(𝜇) is Gaussian at all times 𝑡 ⩾ 0 and the law of motion of 
the mean and variance are given by

)

𝜅𝑡
1 + 𝜉𝑡

𝑔𝑡+1

̃𝜇𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝜑𝜇)𝜇𝑐 +

𝜑𝜇𝜅𝑡
1 + 𝜉𝑡
,

𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1

+ 𝜎𝜇𝐴𝜇,𝑡+1
𝜇𝜅2
𝜑2
𝑡
1 + 𝜉𝑡

𝑡 + 𝜎2
̃𝜈2

𝜇𝐴𝜈,𝑡+1

(

̃𝜇𝑡 + 𝜑𝜇

1 −

,

̃𝜈2
𝑡+1 =

where

𝜉𝑡 ≔

̃𝜈2
𝑡
𝛾𝜎2
𝑡

.

Furthermore, let  ̃ℙ denote the probability measure under which the distri-
bution of 𝑔𝑡+1 conditional on F𝑡 is Gaussian with mean  ̃𝜇𝑡 and variance 
̃𝜎2
𝑡 (1 + 𝜉𝑡). Then, the one-period stochastic discount factor (SDF) un-
𝑡 ≔ 𝜎2
der the probability measure ̃ℙ is given by
ln ̃𝑀(𝑧𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1) = ln 𝑁𝑡,𝑡+1 +
where 𝑁𝑡,𝑡+1 is as speciﬁed in (15).

1 − 𝛾
2

ln(1 + 𝜉𝑡),

where 𝐻(𝑥) is the Heaviside function, equal to 1 for 𝑥 ⩾ 0 and 0 otherwise, and 
its derivative is the Dirac delta function, 𝛿(𝑥).

In Proposition 3, we choose to express the SDF under the probability 
measure ̃ℙ, which we refer to as the market beliefs, for expositional pur-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037748C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

poses.19 It is a natural way to highlight the two channels through which 
disagreement aﬀects the economy. The ﬁrst channel is through the be-
liefs under which assets are priced. In a full information economy we 
would have  ̃𝜇𝑡 = 𝜇𝑡 and  ̃𝜎𝑡 = 𝜎𝑐 . In a perfectly rational homogeneous 
agent economy we would have  ̃𝜇𝑡 = ̌𝜇𝑡 and  ̃𝜎2
𝑡 . The second 
channel is through the factor 𝜉𝑡 which aﬀects the level of the SDF and, 
hence, the level of all asset prices.

𝑡 = 𝜎2

𝑐 + ̌𝑣2

In Proposition 3, we derive the SDF in terms of 𝑁 , the SDF in the 
homogeneous agent case, to make it clear that the eﬀects of disagree-
ment are orthogonal to those of habit. This is evident by the fact that 
𝜉, that enters 𝑀 , and the beliefs ̃ℙ are independent of and unaﬀected 
by habit. This means that 𝜉 and ̃ℙ are the same with CRRA and habit 
preferences. Of course, disagreement and habit interact in shaping as-
set prices, as we will see in our quantitative analysis, but their eﬀects 
are independent of each other.

There is one more quantitatively important way in which habit and 
disagreement interact, which is in determining the consumption risk 
and the survival of an agent. Given the deﬁnition of 𝛼𝑖
𝑡 , the consumption 
growth of an agent is given by,
(𝐻𝑡+1∕𝐶𝑡+1) + 𝛼𝑖
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡+1
[
(𝐻𝑡∕𝐶𝑡) + 𝛼𝑖
𝑡

[
]
1 − (𝐻𝑡+1∕𝐶𝑡+1)
]
1 − (𝐻𝑡∕𝐶𝑡)

𝐶𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡

𝑡+1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡

=

⋅

.

. Therefore, if the growth in 𝛼𝑖

Notice  that  as  habit  approaches  the  aggregate  level  of  consumption 
(𝐻𝑡 → 𝐶𝑡 and  𝐻𝑡+1
→ 𝐶𝑡+1)  the  individual  consumption  growth  ap-
proaches  the  per-capita  consumption  growth.  In  the  opposite  case 
where habit is zero, the individual consumption growth is entirely de-
termined by the growth rate in 𝛼𝑖
is more 
volatile than the growth in 𝐶, which is the case in our calibration, the 
volatility of the individual consumption growth decreases with the level 
of habit. Even though this is not the focus of our paper, it is impor-
tant to note that habit becomes an important element in explaining the 
individual consumption growth volatility, given the observed level of 
disagreement. Further, the existence of habit ensures the survival of all 
agents, since as 𝛼𝑖
𝑡 → 𝐻𝑡. Eﬀectively, agents speculate accord-
ing to their beliefs only with their excess wealth, meaning the wealth 
over the amount of wealth they need to cover their habitual level of 
consumption.

𝑡 → 0, 𝐶 𝑖

The equilibrium has further convenient and interesting properties 
which are: (i) the disagreement economy admits a representative agent 
formulation; (ii) central to both channels through which disagreement 
aﬀects asset prices is the quantity 𝜉𝑡, which we dub speculative activity; 
(iii) when information quality is constant, 𝜉 is constant, which nulliﬁes 
the main eﬀects of disagreement; and (iv) despite the fact that 𝛼𝑖
𝑡 are 
stochastic and the distribution of 𝛼𝑖
𝑡 across agents is non-stationary, the 
distribution of types 𝛼𝑡(𝜇) and the equilibrium are stationary. We deal 
with these properties next.

3.3.  The representative agent

The equilibrium admits a representative agent representation, in the 
sense  that  there  is  a  homogeneous  or  representative  agent  economy 
with certain beliefs and preferences that generates the same asset prices. 
An economy is equivalent in its pricing implications if it has the same 
SDF under the probability measure ̃ℙ.

Proposition  4. Consider  a  representative  (or  homogeneous)  agent  econ-
omy, where the representative (or each) agent has the same preferences as 
the agents in the heterogeneous agent economy but with a subjective discount 
1−𝛾
factor given by ̂𝛽𝑡 ≔ 𝛽 (1 + 𝜉𝑡)
2 . Further, the representative (or each) agent 
believes that the conditional volatility of 𝜇𝑡 and the informativeness of the 
common signal are given by

19 The  SDF  under  some  equivalent  probability  measure  ℚ is  given  by 
̃𝑀(𝑧𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1) ⋅ 𝑑 ̃ℙ𝑡(𝑧𝑡+1) ÷ 𝑑ℚ𝑡(𝑧𝑡+1), where 𝑑 ̃ℙ𝑡(𝑧𝑡+1) ÷ 𝑑ℚ𝑡(𝑧𝑡+1) is the likelihood 
ratio.

√

̂𝜎𝜇,𝑡 ≔ 𝜎𝜇

𝐴2

𝜇,𝑡 + 𝐴𝑣,𝑡 +

𝐴𝜈,𝑡
𝛾

and

̂𝜌𝑡 ≔

√

𝐴𝜇,𝑡

𝐴2

𝜇,𝑡 + 𝐴𝑣,𝑡 +

,

𝐴𝜈,𝑡
𝛾

respectively. Then, this economy is equivalent in its pricing implications to 
the heterogeneous agent economy. Since 𝜁𝑡 = 𝜂 ÷ 𝜌𝑡 then 𝐴𝜇,𝑡 = 𝜌𝑡 (Proposi-
tion 1) and

𝐴2

𝜇,𝑡 + 𝐴𝑣,𝑡 +

𝐴𝜈,𝑡
𝛾 = 1 +

1
𝛾 − 1

𝐴𝜈,𝑡 ⋚ 1 if

𝛾 ⋛ 1.

(

)

The adjustment to the subjective discount factor corresponds to the 
aggregation bias of Jouini and Napp (2006b,a, 2007) which makes the 
eﬀect  of  the  market  forecast  dispersion  in  asset  prices  equivalent  to 
an adjustment to the discount factor. We refer to this as the discount 
factor induced by the heterogeneity in expectations. Eﬀectively, when 
𝛾 > 1 “pessimists” (𝜇𝑖
𝑡 < ̃𝜇𝑡) that push state prices down have a stronger 
eﬀect than “optimists” (𝜇𝑖
𝑡 > ̃𝜇𝑡) that push prices up, and the other way 
round for 𝛾 < 1. Hence, a mean-preserving increase in the market fore-
cast dispersion leads to lower (higher) state prices when 𝛾 > 1 (𝛾 < 1) 
and, for this reason,  ̂𝛽𝑡 < 𝛽 ( ̂𝛽𝑡 > 𝛽). The adjustments to the conditional 
volatility of 𝜇 and information quality are required so that the process 
of the representative agent’s expectations  ̂𝜇 is identical to that of  ̃𝜇. By 
the same token, the conditional consumption risk of the representative 
agent is given by ̃𝜎 because the uncertainty of the representative agent 
is equal to 𝑣2

𝑡 + ̃𝜈2

𝑡 ÷ 𝛾.

3.4.  Speculation and equilibrium dynamics

Disagreement  (𝜂 > 0)  introduces  two  eﬀects,  dispersion  in  beliefs 
and speculation, and 𝜉𝑡 is a measure of both. By speculation we mean 
that  agents  deviate  from  perfect  risk  sharing  in  a  way  that  is  opti-
mal according to their beliefs. As pointed out after Proposition 2, the 
consumption surplus (and wealth) shares become stochastic with dis-
agreement. In the following lemma we show that 𝜉𝑡, apart from being a 
measure of the market forecast dispersion as per its deﬁnition (Propo-
sition 3), it also captures the consumption (and wealth) reallocation 
caused by speculation.

Lemma 2. Let the speculative activity in period 𝑡 be deﬁned as the cross-
sectional variance of the sensitivity of the log growth in the consumption 
surplus to the log per-capita consumption growth at 𝑔𝑡+1 = ̃𝜇𝑡. That is, spec-
ulation is deﬁned as the cross-sectional variance of

𝜕
𝜕𝑔𝑡+1

log

(

𝐶 𝑖
𝑡+1 − 𝐻𝑡+1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡

)|
|
|
|
|
|𝑔𝑡+1= ̃𝜇𝑡

weighted by the consumption surplus shares. The speculative activity is then 
given by 𝜉𝑡.

Naturally,  by  the  deﬁnition  of  𝜉𝑡,  the  speculative  activity  is  zero 
when there is no disagreement, increases with the market forecast dis-
persion ̃𝜈 and decreases with the utility curvature parameter 𝛾. Further, 
̃𝜈 decreases with information quality, since 𝜕𝐴𝜈∕𝜕𝜌 < 0 (see deﬁnition 
of 𝐴𝜈 in Proposition 3) for the case where 𝜁 = 𝜂∕𝜌. Below we note two 
properties of the equilibrium related to speculation.

The ﬁrst is that the speculative activity 𝜉𝑡 makes  ̃𝜇 more sensitive 
to aggregate consumption growth shocks. As shown by the process of 
̃𝜇 in Proposition 3, the coeﬃcient of 𝑔𝑡+1 is given by 1 − 𝜅𝑡 ÷ (1 + 𝜉𝑡), 
which increases with  𝜉𝑡. When we compare this coeﬃcient with the 
equivalent coeﬃcient in the law of motion of  ̄𝜇 (Proposition 1), given 
by 1 − 𝜅𝑡, we infer that 𝜅𝑡𝜉𝑡 represents approximately the reallocation 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037749C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

of consumption surplus shares across types20; speciﬁcally, the wealth 
reallocation is the wealth gain of the agents whose beliefs are more 
correct in hindsight. Naturally, lower uncertainty (higher 𝜅𝑡) increases 
the eﬀect of speculation.

The second property is that 𝜉 varies only due to shocks in informa-
tion quality. From the process of ̃𝜈, we see that it is independent of both 
𝑔 and 𝑠𝑚
and in the absence of shocks to information quality (constant 
𝐴𝜈 ) it follows a deterministic path toward a long-run steady state. This 
is due to the LLN which makes all the factors that aﬀect beliefs to have 
predictable eﬀects on dispersion. At the steady state these factors oﬀset 
each other. The same holds true for the uncertainty, which means that 
with constant information quality (𝐴𝜇 and 𝐴𝑣 are also constant) dis-
persion, uncertainty and speculation become constant once they reach 
their corresponding steady states.

There are three factors that drive the dispersion  ̃𝜈: wealth reallo-
cation,  learning  and  information  quality.  Its  law  of  motion  has  two 
terms. The ﬁrst term shows how  ̃𝜈2 “decays”–the decay factor being 
𝑡 ÷ (1 + 𝜉𝑡)–due  to  wealth  reallocation  and  learning.  The  factor 
𝜇𝜅2
𝜑2
1 ÷ (1 + 𝜉𝑡) represents the decrease in dispersion due to the reallocation 
of wealth and the factor 𝜅2
𝑡 represents the decrease in dispersion due 
to learning. The second term, 𝜎2
𝜇𝐴𝜈,𝑡+1, does not allow the dispersion to 
vanish in the presence of disagreement (𝜂 > 0). Every period, the dis-
persion receives a positive shock whose size depends on disagreement, 
since 𝐴𝜈 increases with 𝜂, but is also limited by the information quality, 
since 𝐴𝜈 decreases with 𝜌. For example, if the common signal is fully 
informative (𝜌 = 1) then 𝐴𝜈 equals zero.

3.5.  Large vs small economies

An important implication of our model is that large economies, that 
exhibit a continuum of types, behave diﬀerently from small economies, 
populated by a small number of agent types. Arguably, the continuum of 
types is a more realistic representation of ﬁnancial markets. However, 
theoretical studies commonly consider only a small number of types, 
typically two. There are two main diﬀerences in the equilibria of these 
economies.

The ﬁrst diﬀerence is that, in our large economy the equilibrium 
is stationary whereas in a small economy it is not. In our economy, the 
distribution across types 𝛼𝑡(𝜇), which is characterized by  ̃𝜇𝑡 and ̃𝜈𝑡 is sta-
tionary, which can be clearly seen from Proposition 3. The distribution 
across agents 𝛼𝑖
𝑡 is not, but this is not relevant for the equilibrium in a 
large economy, that is, the equilibrium does not depend on the survival 
of individual agents.21 In a small economy, however, the equilibrium is 
not stationary, as shown by Yan (2008). He shows that in a model with 
a ﬁnite number of agents one agent survives and asset prices converge 
to the valuations of the surviving agent. Thus, the wealth distribution 
across beliefs is not stationary because the wealth distribution is not sta-
tionary. Only in the limit it is stationary, but it is trivially determined 
by the beliefs of the surviving agent, i.e., it becomes a homogeneous 
agent economy.

The second and crucial distinction lies in the origin of ﬂuctuations 
within the two economies. This disparity becomes evident when con-
sidering  a  constant  level  of  disagreement  (𝜁 ).  As  mentioned  in  the 
preceding subsection, this condition leads to a constant market fore-
cast dispersion and, consequently, constant speculative activity in the 
large economy. Conversely, in a small economy, the market forecast 
dispersion exhibits stochastic behavior and serves as the primary driver 
of excess stock price volatility. This ﬁnding is demonstrated by Dumas, 
Kurshev, and Uppal (2009) in their analysis of a model involving one 
rational agent and one overconﬁdent agent.

20 Using a ﬁrst-order approximation around 𝜉𝑡 = 0 we obtain that 1 − 𝜅𝑡 ÷ (1 +
𝜉𝑡) ≈ 1 − 𝜅𝑡 + 𝜅𝑡𝜉𝑡.
21 We remind that, in our case, non-survival with reference-dependent prefer-
ences simply implies being driven out of the market without any further impact 
on asset prices.

To  illustrate  both  diﬀerences,  consider  our  model  economy  with 
constant  information  quality  (and  disagreement)  but  only  with  two 
agents. Let 𝛼𝑡 be the consumption surplus share of the ﬁrst agent. In 
this  economy,  the  state  that  describes  beliefs  is  given  by  (𝛼𝑡, ̃𝜇𝑡, ̃𝜈𝑡), 
whereas in the case of a continuum of agents, it is solely represented 
by  ̃𝜇𝑡 because ̃𝜈 is constant. In the two agent economy, the market fore-
cast dispersion is given by

√

𝛼𝑡 ⋅ (1 − 𝛼𝑡) ⋅ | ̄𝜈𝑡|.

̃𝜈𝑡 = 2
Both 𝛼𝑡 and ̄𝜈𝑡 are stochastic, which means that ̃𝜈𝑡 is stochastic even if ̄𝜈𝑡
is constant. Furthermore, the signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations originate primarily 
from 𝛼𝑡 since it experiences almost permanent shocks, as evident from 
the following approximate law of motion22:

𝛼𝑡+1 ≃ 𝛼𝑡 +

𝛼𝑡 ⋅ (1 − 𝛼𝑡)
𝛾

[

]
1 − 𝑙𝑡(𝑔𝑡+1)

.

Here 𝑙𝑡(𝑔𝑡+1) is the likelihood ratio of the second agent’s beliefs relative 
to the ﬁrst agent’s beliefs. Therefore, the impact of speculation-induced 
shocks on the wealth distribution is crucial for  ̃𝜈𝑡 in a two-agent econ-
omy. However, in an economy with a continuum of types, these same 
shocks  exhibit  a  deterministic  eﬀect  on  ̃𝜈𝑡,  thanks  to  the  LLN.  Irre-
spective of the realization of 𝑔𝑡+1, speculation consistently leads to a 
deterministic decrease in  ̃𝜈𝑡. Moreover, this decrease is perfectly coun-
terbalanced by the increase caused by disagreement at the steady state. 
Consequently, when dealing with a continuum of types, shocks to the 
wealth distribution do not have any asset pricing eﬀects through the 
market forecast dispersion.

Lastly, when considering the ﬁrst diﬀerence, the non-stationarity be-
comes evident as 𝛼𝑡 will ultimately converge to the absorbing states of 
either  0 or  1. This implies that eventually one of the agents will be 
forced out of the market.

4.  Qualitative analysis

The asset pricing properties of the model economy can be under-
stood by the properties of three key quantities, the growth rate expecta-
tions, the price of risk, and the risk-free rate. Proposition 3 shows that 
disagreement aﬀects the equilibrium through two channels, the mar-
ket beliefs ̃ℙ and the additional discount factor that depends on 𝜉𝑡. In 
this section we analyze qualitatively how these two channels aﬀect the 
key asset pricing quantities. We start by specifying the habit process to 
provide explicit formulas for the risk-free rate and the price of risk.

In our analysis, we assume that assets satisfy the fundamental asset 
pricing equation with the usual transversality condition to exclude asset 
price bubbles. That is, the price of an asset 𝑗 with cash-ﬂow stream 
(𝐷𝑗
𝑡+𝜏 , 𝜏 > 0) is given by the present value of its future cash-ﬂows,
)]
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡 = ̃𝔼𝑡

[
̃𝑀(𝑧𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1)
[
∞∑

(
𝑃 𝑗
𝑡+1 + 𝐷𝑗
]

𝑡+1

= ̃𝔼𝑡

̃𝑀𝑡,𝑡+𝜏 𝐷𝑗
𝑡+𝜏

,

𝜏=1

∏𝜏−1
𝑠=𝑡

where ̃𝔼 denotes the expectation under the probability measure ̃ℙ and 
the stochastic discount factor (SDF) between periods 𝑡 and 𝑡 + 𝜏 is de-
̃𝑀(𝑧𝑠, 𝑔𝑠+1). Let also 𝑝𝑑𝑗
noted by  ̃𝑀𝑡,𝑡+𝜏 =
𝑡 ) denote 
the log price-to-dividend ratio of the asset 𝑗 and note that the log re-
turn is given by 𝑟𝑗
𝑡 ). We denote 
the log price-to-dividend ratio and return of the stock market with 𝑝𝑑
and 𝑟𝑚

𝑡+1 = ln(1 + 𝑒𝑝𝑑𝑗

, respectively.

𝑡 ≔ ln(𝑃 𝑗

𝑡+1 ÷ 𝐷𝑗

𝑡 + ln(𝐷𝑗

𝑡+1 ) − 𝑝𝑑𝑗

𝑡 ÷ 𝐷𝑗

22 Given Proposition 2, the law of motion of 𝛼𝑡 is given by

𝛼𝑡+1 =

𝛼𝑡
𝛼𝑡 + (1 − 𝛼𝑡)𝑙𝑡(𝑔𝑡+1)1∕𝛾
where 𝑙𝑡(𝑔𝑡+1) = 𝑓 2
𝑡 (𝑔𝑡+1)∕𝑓 1
of motion around 𝑙𝑡(𝑔𝑡+1) = 1.

,

𝑡 (𝑔𝑡+1) is the likelihood ratio. We linearize the law 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377410C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

4.1.  Habit speciﬁcation

Following  Campbell  and  Cochrane  (1999) we  specify  the  process 
. The log 

of the log surplus consumption ratio 𝑠𝑡 ≔ ln
(𝐶𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡) ÷ 𝐶𝑡
surplus consumption ratio follows the autoregressive process

[

]

(16)

𝑠𝑡+1 = 𝜑ℎ𝑠𝑡 + (1 − 𝜑ℎ) ̄𝑠 + 𝜆𝑡 ⋅ (𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡),
where ̄𝑠 is the unconditional mean and 𝜆𝑡 is the potentially time-varying 
conditional volatility. Campbell and Cochrane (1999) assume i.i.d. log 
consumption growth and, hence, instead of  ̃𝜇 they use the uncondi-
tional mean. The degree of risk aversion depends on how volatile the 
marginal utility is next period, where the marginal utility is given by 
(𝐶𝑡+1 − 𝐻𝑡+1)−𝛾 = exp[−𝛾 ⋅ (𝑠𝑡+1 + 𝑐𝑡+1)]. Hence, the degree of risk aver-
sion  depends  on  the  conditional  volatility  of  𝑠𝑡+1 + 𝑐𝑡+1.  Thus,  it  is 
(approximately) given by 𝛾 ⋅ (1 + 𝜆𝑡) and the price of risk is (approx-
imately) given by the degree of risk aversion times the amount of risk, 
i.e. 𝛾 ⋅ (1 + 𝜆𝑡) ̃𝜎𝑡. These preferences nest the standard CRRA preferences 
when ̄𝑠 = 𝜆𝑡 = 0.

For our analysis, it is convenient to deﬁne the zero mean state vari-

able 𝜔𝑡 ≔ (1 − 𝜑ℎ)(𝑠𝑡 − ̄𝑠), which follows the autoregressive process:

(17)

𝜔𝑡+1 = 𝜑ℎ𝜔𝑡 + (1 − 𝜑ℎ)𝜆𝑡 ⋅ (𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡).
Note that as 𝜙 → 1–when 𝜙 = 1 𝑠 follows a random walk–the variance 
of 𝜔 goes to zero. To complete the characterization of the risk prefer-
ences, we need to specify 𝜆𝑡. Following Campbell and Cochrane (1999), 
we choose 𝜆𝑡 so that the consumption surplus ratio (and 𝜔) does not af-
fect the risk-free rate. In general, variations in the consumption surplus 
ratio generate variations in the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, 
whereas ﬂuctuations in the risk aversion generate ﬂuctuations in the 
precautionary savings. Oﬀsetting these two eﬀects yields the speciﬁ-
cation  for  𝜆.  To  do  so  we  consider  a  homogeneous  agent  economy, 
which is the case with no disagreement (𝜁 = 𝜂 = 0), where the stochas-
tic discount factor (SDF) is given by the marginal rate of intertemporal 
substitution of the representative agent that consumes the per-capita 
consumption:

𝑁𝑡,𝑡+1 = 𝛽𝑒−𝛾 ̃𝜇𝑡+𝛾𝜔𝑡−𝛾 (1+𝜆𝑡)(𝑔𝑡+1− ̃𝜇𝑡).
The risk-free rate is then given by the negative logarithm of the con-
ditional expected SDF. The term of the risk-free rate that is related to 
habit is −𝛾𝜔𝑡 − 0.5[𝛾 (1 + 𝜆𝑡) ̃𝜎𝑡]2. To derive the speciﬁcation of 𝜆𝑡, we 
equate this term to its steady state value (i.e. when 𝜔𝑡 = 0) The steady 
state value of 𝜆 is given by 𝜃 and thus we obtain23

(18)

√

𝜆𝑡 =

(1 + 𝜃)2 − 2

𝜔𝑡
𝛾 ̃𝜎2
𝑡

− 1.

(19)

In addition to 𝛽 and 𝛾, the preferences are thus determined by the habit 
persistence 𝜑ℎ ⩽ 1 and 𝜃 ⩾ 0. When 𝜑ℎ < 1 the time-varying 𝜆 generates 
variations in the price of risk. To measure the eﬀects of disagreement, 
we also consider a scenario where the price of risk is not inﬂuenced by 
𝜔. In this case, we set 𝜑ℎ to 1, resulting in constant values for 𝜔 (equal 
to zero) and 𝜆 (equal to 𝜃). A drawback of this speciﬁcation is that the 
log surplus consumption ratio 𝑠𝑡 follows a random walk, which means 
that it is unbounded. Nevertheless, we use it only as a tool to shut-down 
the time-varying risk aversion since, despite the shortcoming, prices are 
well deﬁned. Setting 𝜃 = 0 in addition to 𝜑ℎ = 1 we obtain the standard 
CRRA preferences.

The following remark summarizes all equilibrium conditions.

Remark 1. Given the habit speciﬁcation, the state of the economy is 
given by 𝑧 = ( ̃𝜇, ̃𝜈, 𝑣, 𝜒, 𝜔), which is driven by the shocks (𝑔, 𝑠𝑚, 𝜖𝜒 , 𝜖𝜌). 

23 The choice of using  ̃𝜇 and ̃𝜎 to deﬁne preferences is done for computational 
tractability.

Proposition 3 together with the law of motion of 𝑣 (Lemma 1) and the 
laws of motion of 𝜒 and 𝜔, shown by equations (9), (10) and (17), fully 
characterize the dynamics of the state of the economy and the state 
prices that determine the prices of all ﬁnancial assets.

4.2.  Some preliminaries

Before we analyze the three key asset pricing quantities, it is in-
structive to perform a comparative statics analysis of certain important 
variables that determine these key quantities, in terms of the risk aver-
sion parameter 𝛾 and the information quality parameter 𝜌. The rest of 
the parameters take their estimated values, shown in Table 2.

Fig. 1 shows how several quantities vary with 𝛾 and disagreement 𝜁 , 
which ranges between 𝜂 and 1. The parameter 𝜂 is constant and equal 
to its estimated value, while information quality is given by 𝜌 = 𝜂 ÷ 𝜁 . 
Perfect information and no disagreement corresponds to the case 𝜁 = 𝜂
(𝜌 = 1), while maximum disagreement occurs when 𝜁 = 1 (𝜌 = 𝜂). Panel 
A shows the coeﬃcients 𝐴𝜇, 𝐴𝑣 and 𝐴𝜈 , derived in Proposition 1. Nat-
urally, 𝐴𝜈 which determines the level of the market forecast dispersion 
̃𝜈 increases with 𝜁 . The coeﬃcient 𝐴𝜇 = 𝜌 determines the sensitivity of 
the mean forecast to the common signal. Panel B shows the steady state 
values of 𝑣,  ̄𝜈 and  ̃𝜈 for two values of 𝛾, 0.5 and 5.24 Clearly, the dis-
persion measures decrease with information quality. We also see that ̃𝜈
increases with 𝛾, which we formally prove below.

Lemma 3. Let 𝜁 be constant and let (𝑣, ̃𝜈) correspond to the steady state 
𝑐 + 𝑣2. Then, the following hold:
values and let 𝜎 ≔
𝜎2

√

̃𝜈 = 𝜎𝜇

√

𝐴𝜈,

𝜕 ̃𝜈
𝜕𝛾

> 0,

𝜉 = ∞,

𝜕𝜉
𝜕𝛾

< 0,

lim
𝛾→0

lim
𝛾→0

̃𝜈 = ̄𝜈,

lim
𝛾→∞

𝜉 = 0,

lim
𝛾→∞
𝜕(𝛾𝜉)
𝜕𝛾 =

1
𝜎2

𝜕 ̃𝜈2
𝜕𝛾

> 0.

Naturally, more risk averse agents (lower 𝛾) speculate less and, thus, 
less wealth is reallocated to those agents whose beliefs are more correct 
in hindsight. As a result, the steady state market forecast dispersion ̃𝜈 is 
higher, because the wealth reallocation is smaller.

In Panel B of Fig. 1 we see that the uncertainty 𝑣 is hump-shaped. 
The same is true for the coeﬃcient 𝐴𝑣 in Panel A, which determines 
the level of uncertainty. The reason is that at the upper bound of in-
formation quality the common signal is fully informative and at the 
lower bound the individual signals are deemed to be fully informative. 
In Panel C we plot the speculative activity, given by ̃𝜈2 ÷ (𝛾𝑣2), for three 
diﬀerent values of 𝛾. We see that it increases exponentially with 𝜁 , espe-
cially when the utility curvature parameter is low. In Panel D we show 
the  representative  agent  consumption  risk  ̃𝜎 =
𝑐 + 𝑣2) ⋅ (1 + 𝜉), 
which increases with both disagreement and uncertainty. When 𝛾 is suf-
ﬁciently low, the per-capita consumption risk monotonically decreases 
with information quality, as indicated by the case of 𝛾 = 0.5. In this 
case, even though uncertainty decreases beyond a certain value of 𝜁 , 
the increase in  ̃𝜈2 ÷ 𝛾 is larger. Otherwise, the per-capita consumption 
risk is hump-shaped.

(𝜎2

√

24 The steady states of the uncertainty and ̃𝜈 are to the result of the following 
system of equations:

̃𝜈2 = 𝜑2
𝜇

𝑣2 = 𝜑2
𝜇

⋅

𝜎2
𝑐
𝑐 + 𝑣2
𝜎2

̃𝜈2 + 𝜎2
𝜇

𝐴𝜈 ,

𝛾𝜎2
𝑐
𝛾(𝜎2
𝑐 + 𝑣2) + ̃𝜈2
𝜎2
𝑐 𝑣2
𝑐 + 𝑣2
𝜎2

+ 𝜎2
𝜇

𝐴𝑣.

The steady state of the dispersion ̄𝜈 is computed in a similar fashion.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377411C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Fig. 1. Belief related quantities – Static analysis (𝜂 = 0.247). The graphs show several quantities of the model with constant information quality (𝜌) in terms of 
𝜁 = 𝜂∕𝜌 and for several values of the utility curvature parameter (𝛾). The rest of the parameters are as in Table 2. The parameter 𝜁 ranges from 𝜂 to 1. Panel A shows 
the 𝐴 coeﬃcients as given in Proposition 1 for the case 𝜁 = 𝜂 ÷ 𝜌. Panel B shows the steady state values for 𝑣, ̄𝜈 and ̃𝜈. Panel C shows the speculative activity (𝜉), 
Panel D the representative agent consumption risk ̃𝜎, Panel E the ratio of the volatility of the market expectation to the volatility of the conditional mean, and Panel 
F plots the coeﬃcient of (𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡) in the process of  ̃𝜇𝑡–see Proposition 3).

4.3.  Market expectation

Fluctuating growth rate expectations are a potential source of risk 
that can aﬀect risk premia. For example, in the long-run risk literature, 
e.g. in Bansal and Yaron (2004), such ﬂuctuations are the main source 
of risk. In our model these growth rate expectations are characterized 
by the market expectation  ̃𝜇. Here we analyze the role of disagreement, 
information quality, and their time variation regarding the properties 
of  ̃𝜇.

Let us express again the process of  ̃𝜇, imposing the rationality con-
straint  𝜁 = 𝜂 ÷ 𝜌,  for  the  case  of  constant  information  quality  (and 
disagreement), in a slightly modiﬁed form.

̃𝜇𝑡+1 = 𝜑𝜇 ̃𝜇𝑡 + (1 − 𝜑𝜇)𝜇𝑐 + 𝜎𝜇𝜌𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1

(

+ 𝜑𝜇

1 −

)

𝜅
1 + 𝜉

(𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡).

(20)

We continue our comparative statics analysis to ﬂesh out the qualita-
tive eﬀects. The volatility of the market expectation increases if, ceteris 
paribus, the coeﬃcient of the growth rate shocks (𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡) and/or the 
coeﬃcient of the common signal 𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1 increases. Regarding the equity 
premium, the SDF given by Proposition 3 and equation (18) implies 
that  only  the  exposure  to  the  growth  rate  shocks  matters,  while  the 
common signal is not a priced risk.

Let us start with the case of no disagreement (𝜉 = 𝜂 = 0). This takes 
us to Veronesi (2000), who analyzes the eﬀect of information quality 
in a representative agent economy. As Veronesi (2000) shows, an in-
crease in information quality 𝜌 leads to a decrease in how sensitive  ̃𝜇
is to growth rate shocks, because the precision 𝜅 increases. If then the 
price-to-dividend ratio of the stock market reacts positively to expecta-
tion shocks, i.e., 𝜕𝑝𝑑𝑡 ÷ 𝜕 ̃𝜇𝑡 > 0 then an increase in information quality 
decreases the equity premium. In the opposite case (𝜕𝑝𝑑𝑡 ÷ 𝜕 ̃𝜇𝑡 < 0), 
which is the benchmark case in Veronesi (2000), the equity premium 
increases with information quality. However, the sign of 𝜕𝑝𝑑𝑡 ÷ 𝜕 ̃𝜇𝑡 is 

determined by the relative strength of the usual cash-ﬂow and discount 
rate eﬀects.

We  now  consider  disagreement  and  remind  that  it  is  controlled 
by two parameters. The ﬁrst is information quality that is controlled 
by 𝜌, where higher information quality leads to lower disagreement. 
The second is the perceived informativeness of the individual signals, 
which is controlled by the parameter 𝜂, where disagreement increases 
with 𝜂.

We  start  with  ﬁxing  information  quality  𝜌 and  increasing  𝜂.  The 
higher disagreement leads to higher speculation 𝜉 and higher sensitivity 
of the market expectation  ̃𝜇𝑡 to growth rate shocks. Therefore, higher 
disagreement leads to higher volatility, as in Atmaz and Basak (2018). 
Further,  the  additional  volatility  also  translates  to  a  larger  (smaller) 
equity premium if 𝜕𝑝𝑑𝑡 ÷ 𝜕 ̃𝜇𝑡 > 0 (< 0).

We then keep 𝜂 constant and vary information quality 𝜌. Informa-
tion quality aﬀects the coeﬃcients of both shocks to  ̃𝜇𝑡 and the eﬀect on 
the volatility of  ̃𝜇𝑡 may be both positive and negative. First, higher in-
formation quality (𝜌) implies higher exposure to the common signal 𝑠𝑚
, 
which could lead to higher volatility. However, this risk does not aﬀect 
risk premia. Second, it leads to lower speculative activity (𝜉). Third, it 
aﬀects the precision 𝜅 that has a U-shape pattern in terms of informa-
tion quality.25 As for the ratio 𝜅 ÷ (1 + 𝜉), it may increase or decrease 
with information quality depending on the rest of the parameters. To 
examine the net eﬀect on the volatility, we plot in Panel E of Fig. 1 the 
ratio of the unconditional volatility of  ̃𝜇 to the unconditional volatility 
of 𝜇, against disagreement (𝜁 = 𝜂∕𝜌). We do so for three diﬀerent val-
ues of 𝛾, ranging from 0.5 to 5.0. We note ﬁrst that the highest volatility 
is obtained with full information (𝜌 = 1), regardless of 𝛾. We then note 
that for 𝛾 = 1.5 and 𝛾 = 5.0, the volatility of  ̃𝜇 increases monotonically 

25 The precision is at its highest value of one, either when information quality 
is at its highest (𝜌 = 1) or at its lowest (𝜌 = 𝜂)–when 𝜌 = 𝜂 the individual signals 
are believed to be perfectly informative.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377412C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

with 𝜌, while for 𝛾 = 0.5, for low values of 𝜁 the volatility decreases and 
then increases for higher values of 𝜁 . In Panel F we plot the exposure 
to growth rate shocks 1 − 𝜅 ÷ (1 + 𝜉) and we note that for 𝛾 = 0.5 it in-
creases monotonically with disagreement. Otherwise, there is a U-shape 
pattern, which means that the eﬀect on the equity premium can be both 
positive and negative from an increase in information quality.

Therefore,  it  is  not  always  true  that  an  increase  in  disagreement 
due to lower information quality generates more volatile market ex-
pectation, where the opposite is typically true. This is contrary to most 
of the earlier literature on disagreement, including Atmaz and Basak 
(2018), that ﬁnd that disagreement leads to higher volatility in expec-
tations.  The  main  diﬀerence  lies  in  the  introduction  of  the  common 
signal,  which  is  needed  to  explain  the  volatile  mean  forecast  in  the 
data, and the fact that disagreement is inversely related to information 
quality.

4.4.  The risk-free rate

Next, we look at the one-period risk-free rate which is given by 𝑟𝑓

𝑡 =

− ln ̃𝔼𝑡( ̃𝑀𝑡+1).

Lemma 4. The continuously compounded risk-free rate is given by

𝑟𝑓
𝑡 = − ln(𝛽) + 𝛾 ̃𝜇𝑡 +

𝛾 − 1
2

ln(1 + 𝜉𝑡) −

1
2

𝛾 2(1 + 𝜃)2𝜎2

𝑡 (1 + 𝜉𝑡).

We note ﬁrst that by setting 𝜃 = 0 we obtain the risk-free rate in the 
case of CRRA preferences. If we further assume no disagreement and 
perfect rationality, we obtain the standard expression for the risk-free 
rate in a representative agent economy with CRRA preferences, where 
̃𝜇𝑡 = ̌𝜇𝑡.

We then note that in the case of disagreement and constant informa-
tion quality, both 𝜉𝑡 and 𝜎𝑡 are constant. In this case, the risk-free rate 
is driven only by the market expectation  ̃𝜇𝑡. When information quality 
is stochastic, the risk-free rate is also driven by the speculative activity 
𝜉𝑡 and 𝜎𝑡.

The third term in the equation of Lemma 4, represents the eﬀect al-
ready  discussed  in  the  previous  section,  whereby  forecast  dispersion 
along  with  the  speculative  positions  taken  by  the  agents  aﬀect  the 
discount  rate,  depending  on  whether  𝛾 is  lower  or  higher  than  one. 
Speciﬁcally, with 𝛾 > 1, the “pessimists” of each state have a stronger 
inﬂuence causing all state prices to drop and, as a result, the risk-free 
rate increases.

The fourth term represents the precautionary savings motive, which 
becomes stronger with speculation and depends on two things: First, it 
depends on the steady state risk aversion 𝛾 ⋅ (1 + 𝜃), where 1 + 𝜃 is the 
ampliﬁcation generated by habit. Second, it depends on the represen-
tative agent consumption risk as given by 𝜎𝑡
1 + 𝜉𝑡. When 𝛾 > 1, the 
speculative activity has two opposite eﬀects on the risk-free rate. For 
most parameters and for most states, the third term is larger in mag-
nitude, which implies that when 𝛾 > 1 the risk-free rate increases with 
the speculative activity 𝜉𝑡. In the opposite case (𝛾 < 1), an increase in 
speculative activity always pushes the risk-free rate down.

√

Moving on to the quantitative analysis, in Panels A and B of Fig. 2, 
we plot the risk-free rate for three diﬀerent values of 𝛾: 0.5, 1.5 and 
5. In Panel A, the value of 𝜃 depends on 𝛾, so that the degree of risk 
aversion 𝛾 ⋅ (1 + 𝜃) is constant and equal to 25. We choose this value, 
because about this high a degree of risk aversion is needed to explain 
the market price of risk. These plots are useful to understand how these 
quantities vary across time when information quality and disagreement 
are stochastic. Panel A shows that the risk-free rate becomes more sen-
sitive to disagreement as 𝛾 deviates from 1. The risk-free rate varies 
considerably even when 𝛾 is as low as 1.5, in which case it varies from 
around 0% to around 10%, reminding that the model is estimated at the 
quarterly frequency.

In Panel B we keep the value of 𝜃 constant and only vary 𝛾 across the 
three graphs. These plots are useful to understand how the average risk-
free rate depends on 𝛾 across models. We observe that the risk-free rate 
corresponding to 𝛾 = 5 is not monotonic in disagreement. Compared 
to Panel A, the value of 𝜃 is bigger, implying a stronger precautionary 
savings motive, which works in the opposite direction to the discount 
factor eﬀect induced by speculation. Up until a value around 𝜁 = 0.4, an 
increase in disagreement makes the precautionary savings motive even 
stronger, which in turn makes the risk-free rate even smaller. Eventu-
ally, the eﬀect of speculation prevails and, beyond 𝜁 = 0.4, the risk-free 
rate increases in disagreement.

4.5.  The price of risk

The price of risk is the compensation that investors require for bear-
ing a unit of systematic risk. However, since it involves an expectation, 
it is speciﬁc to the probability measure. We deﬁne it as follows: Let 
𝑟𝑔
denote the log-return on the claim to the one-period per-capita con-
sumption growth. Under a probability measure ℚ, the price of risk is 
deﬁned according to
]
[
𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓
𝑟𝑔
√
𝕍 ℚ
𝑡 (𝑟𝑡+1)

+ 0.5𝕍 ℚ

𝑞ℚ
𝑡 ≔

𝑡 (𝑟𝑔

𝑡+1)

𝔼ℚ
𝑡

(21)

,

𝑡

and 𝕍 ℚ

where 𝔼ℚ
are the expectation and variance operators under ℚ. 
The deﬁnition of the price of risk is approximately the maximum Sharpe 
ratio.

Agents, since they diﬀer in their expectations regarding the growth 
rate of the economy, they also diﬀer in the way they price risk and, in 
general, they diﬀer in their expectations regarding returns of assets that 
bear systematic risk. More optimistic agents place a higher price on risk 
because their optimism leads them to take up more risk. This is clear 
from the following expression that shows the logarithmic growth in an 
agent’s consumption surplus:

)

(

log

𝐶 𝑖
𝑡+1 − 𝐻𝑡+1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡

=

𝜇𝑖
𝑡 − ̃𝜇𝑡
𝛾𝜎2
𝑡

(𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡)

−

(𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡)2 + ( ̃𝜇𝑡 − 𝜇𝑖
𝑡)2
2𝛾𝜎2
𝑡

+ L(𝑧𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1).

The expression derives from Proposition 2, where L(𝑧𝑡, 𝑔𝑡+1) is agent 
independent. Therefore, an agent gains exposure to the aggregate risk 
depending on his level of optimism (𝜇𝑖
𝑡 , which also determines 
the agent’s price of risk. Below, we provide the price of risk under the 
market beliefs and under the true probability measure.

𝑡 − ̃𝜇𝑡) ÷ 𝜎2

Lemma 5. The price of risk under the market beliefs ̃ℙ and under the true 
probability measure ℙ is given by

̃𝑞𝑡 = 𝛾 ⋅ (1 + 𝜆𝑡) ̃𝜎𝑡

and

𝑞𝑡 = ̃𝑞𝑡

̃𝜎𝑡
𝜎𝑐

−

̃𝜇𝑡 − 𝜇𝑡
𝜎𝑐

−

𝑡 − 𝜎2
̃𝜎2
𝑐
𝜎𝑐

,

1
2

respectively.

In the case of CRRA preferences we have 𝜆𝑡 = 0. In a full information 
economy we have  ̃𝜎 = 𝜎𝑐 and  ̃𝜇 = 𝜇, whereas for a perfectly rational 
homogeneous agent economy we have ̃𝜎2 = 𝜎2

𝑐 + ̌𝑣2 and  ̃𝜇 = ̌𝜇.

We mostly care about 𝑞, the price of risk under the true probabil-
ity measure, because it is the most relevant quantity for the time-series 
properties of prices. We ﬁrst see that the eﬀects of disagreement and in-
formation quality on 𝑞 come through the market beliefs ( ̃𝜇, ̃𝜎), and we 
note that they are independent of habit. The price of risk 𝑞 has three 
terms: The third term comes from the variance correction between log 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377413C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Fig. 2. Risk-free rate and price of risk – Static analysis (𝜂 = 0.247). The graphs show the risk-free rate, as given by Lemma 4, and the price of risk, as given 
by Lemma 5, of the model with constant information quality (𝜌) in terms of 𝜁 = 𝜂∕𝜌 and for several values of the utility curvature parameter (𝛾). The rest of the 
parameters are as in Table 2. The parameter 𝜁 ranges from 𝜂 to 1. Panels A and B show the risk-free rate for the state  ̃𝜇 = 𝜇𝑐 and for 𝛽 = 0.99. Panels C and D show 
the price of risk for the state  ̃𝜇 = 𝜇. For Panels A and C the parameter 𝜃 depends on 𝛾 and given by 𝜃 = 25 ÷ 𝛾 − 1. For Panels B and D, 𝜃 is equal to 15.

and net returns.26 The second term depends on the bias of the mar-
ket expectation relative to the true conditional mean. A positive bias 
( ̃𝜇𝑡 > ̄𝜇𝑡)  implies  a  lower  price  of  risk  and  “overpriced”  assets.  This 
term implies that certain variations in excess returns come from the 
ﬂuctuations in this bias, whose time-series process (given the rational-
ity constraint 𝜁𝑡 = 𝜂 ÷ 𝜌𝑡) is given by

̃𝜇𝑡+1 − 𝜇𝑡+1 = 𝜑𝜇( ̃𝜇𝑡 − 𝜇𝑡) + 𝜎𝜇(𝜌𝑡+1

𝑡+1 − 𝜖𝜇
𝑠𝑚
(

𝑡+1)

+ 𝜑𝜇

1 −

)

(𝑔𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡).

(22)

𝜅𝑡
1 + 𝜉𝑡

Since 𝔼𝑡(𝜖𝜇
|𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1) = 0, this bias in the market expectation is on average 
𝑡+1
zero. Further, it mean-reverts, which generates some mean-reversion 
in returns. We note that this mean reversion is not only a property of 
disagreement but also of learning. For example, in a model with no dis-
agreement and perfect rationality, where 𝜉𝑡 = 0 and 𝜅𝑡 = ̌𝜅𝑡, we would 
also have mean-reversion in the market bias.

𝑐 + 𝑣2

The ﬁrst term of 𝑞𝑡 is the price of risk in the perfect information 
case, i.e. 𝛾 ⋅ (1 + 𝜆𝑡)𝜎𝑐 , augmented by speculation and uncertainty, since 
𝑡 )(1 + 𝜉𝑡). Hence, 𝑞𝑡 is ﬁrst driven by the consumption level 
𝑡 = (𝜎2
̃𝜎2
relative to the reference point (habit). When per-capita consumption is 
close to the reference point (lower 𝜔), the price of risk is higher due 
to 𝜆𝑡. We remind that in the case 𝜑ℎ = 1, 𝜆𝑡 is constant and equal to 
𝜃. Further, we have seen that the speculative activity is sensitive to the 
utility curvature parameter when this is low. This raises the question 
of whether for suﬃciently low values of 𝛾 the speculative activity can 
help explain the high price of risk observed in the data through the 
term ̃𝜎𝑡∕𝜎𝑐 . We know that, for reasonable levels of risk aversion, CRRA 
preferences  cannot  explain  the  high  price  of  risk.  The  lemma  below 
shows that disagreement cannot remedy this.

26 The third term of 𝑞𝑡 vanishes in continuous time. In the calibration we look 
at the quantitative implications of the discrete time trading frequency assump-
tion.

Lemma 6. Let 𝜁 be constant and 𝜉 is the steady state value of the speculative 
activity. Also, let 𝜎 ≔

√

𝑐 + 𝑣2. Then, the following holds:
𝜎2
)]
(

𝜕𝑞𝑡
𝜕𝛾 =

[

−

1
2

𝜕𝜉
𝜕𝛾 + (1 + 𝜆𝑡)

1 + 𝜉 + 𝛾

𝜕𝜉
𝜕𝛾

𝜎2
𝜎𝑐

> 0.

Essentially, the price of risk is always lower when 𝛾 is lower, despite 
the higher speculative activity. Yet, in the presence of habit and if the 
time-step is not negligible, disagreement can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect 
on the price of risk if 𝜆 is large.

In Panels C and D of Fig. 2 we can appreciate the quantitative eﬀects 
on the price of risk. In Panel C we observe that all three parameteriza-
tions start with the same price of risk when information quality is at 
its maximum (𝜁 = 𝜂). We then see that the price of risk is much more 
sensitive to disagreement when 𝛾 is equal to 0.5, because with lower 𝛾
the speculative activity increases more with 𝜁 . For 𝛾 = 1.5 and 𝛾 = 5, 
the price of risk is hump-shaped because the speculative activity is rel-
atively weak, and the eﬀect of uncertainty is stronger. In Panel D we 
observe what we noted with Lemma 6. First, that the price of risk in-
creases with 𝛾, independently of the level of disagreement and, second, 
that when 𝜃 (the steady state value of 𝜆) is not particularly high, the 
price of risk is not very sensitive to changes in disagreement.

5.  Quantitative analysis

Given the estimated model of disagreement, we can calibrate the 
preferences and study the quantitative implications in our model. We 
study the price properties of three assets; the per-capita consumption 
claim, the one-period risk-free rate and the claim to the stock market 
dividend. In the data, the stock market dividend process diﬀers sub-
stantially from the per-capita consumption process, therefore, following 
Kaltenbrunner and Lochstoer (2010), we specify the following log divi-
dend growth process:

𝑡+1 = 𝜇𝑐 + 𝛽𝑑 ⋅ (𝑔𝑡+1 − 𝜇𝑐) + 𝜎𝑑 𝜖𝑑
𝑔𝑑
𝑡+1

,

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377414C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

where 𝜖𝑑
is 𝑖𝑖𝑑. standard normal. The exposure to the per-capita log 
consumption growth is set to 𝛽𝑑 = 2.15, to match the annual correlation 
between 𝑔 and 𝑔𝑑
in the data (0.52), and the idiosyncratic volatility is 
set to 𝜎𝑑 = 0.0575, to match the annual volatility of 𝑔𝑑

(11.10%).27

The above speciﬁcation of dividends does not exclude the possibil-
ity of the aggregate dividend outgrowing the aggregate consumption. 
However, we adopt it because the price-to-dividend ratio is stationary, 
it allows us to match the properties of dividend growth, and it facili-
tates computations because it does not add any state variables. A more 
appropriate  approach  to  modelling  stock  market  leverage  is  the  one 
adopted by Barro (2006). However, this would constitute computations 
infeasible, because in this case the dividend growth 𝑔𝑑
𝑡+1 and the price-
to-dividend ratio would depend on the state of the economy both in 
period 𝑡 and 𝑡 − 1, that is, it would double the number of state vari-
ables.

We  approximate  the  price-to-dividend  ratio  and  the  price-to-
consumption  ratio  of  the  dividend  and  consumption  claims,  respec-
tively, using a projection method. The numerical method, despite hav-
ing up to 5 state variables, yields very accurate results, judging by the 
Euler equation errors.

5.1.  Data and calibration of preferences

The asset prices data is quarterly and covers the period from 1927Q1 
to 2016Q4. As risk-free rate we select the 3-month nominal T-bill rate, 
obtained  from  CRSP,  adjusted  for  quarter  ahead  expected  inﬂation. 
Expected inﬂation is estimated using a ﬁtted AR(1) process on the quar-
terly  inﬂation  series  from  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  where  it  is 
estimated as the change in the CPI index. For stock market return we 
use the CRSP value-weighted return, including dividend distributions. 
In addition, we compute the price-to-dividend ratio for the stock market 
using also the value-weighted returns excluding dividends.28 Because 
dividends  are  highly  seasonal,  we  compute  the  price-to-dividend  ra-
tio as the price at the beginning of a quarter divided by the average 
quarterly aggregate dividend over the following year. For the same rea-
son, we calibrate the model’s dividend process to the annual dividend 
growth series in the data, by time-aggregating the quarterly series sim-
ulated with the model.

To calibrate the model we need to determine four parameter values, 
shown in Table 4: (i) The subjective discount factor  𝛽 is selected to 
match the average risk-free rate. (ii) The utility curvature parameter 𝛾
is chosen to match the volatility of the risk-free rate. (iii) The volatility 
of the log surplus consumption ratio at the average state 𝜃 allows us to 
match the stock market Sharpe ratio (𝑆𝑅𝑚). (iv) The habit persistence 
𝜑ℎ is chosen to match the ﬁrst-lag autocorrelation of the stock market 
log price-to-dividend ratio (𝑝𝑑).

Table 3 shows statistics of asset prices, both from the data and from 
the model. Model 1 refers to the full model with both time-varying in-
formation quality and time-varying risk aversion. The parentheses next 
to the data estimates show standard errors. The parentheses next to the 
model(s) statistics show the 𝑡-statistics of the hypothesis that the data 
estimate is equal to the value given by the model. The model matches 
well the quantities that is calibrated to, namely the autocorrelation of 
𝑝𝑑 with a 𝑡-statistic of 0.88, the mean and volatility of 𝑟𝑓
with 𝑡-statistics 
of 0.16 and 0.10, respectively, and 𝑆𝑅𝑚 with a 𝑡-statistic of 0.11.

The model also captures well the means and volatilities of the stock 
market  return  (𝑟𝑚
)  and  the  equity  premium  (𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓
).  Additionally, 
it matches the autocorrelation of the risk-free rate, which is equal to 

0.65, and generates a low correlation between the risk-free rate and the 
log price-to-dividend ratio, which is at the margin statistically diﬀerent 
from the data estimate, with a 𝑡-statistic of 1.96.

Regarding the 𝑝𝑑-ratio, we see that the model generates fairly high 
volatility of 0.31, yet it is low compared to our data estimate of 0.44. 
Other studies, however, report lower data estimates that are similar to 
our model’s prediction.29 Using similar data, Boudoukh et al. (2007)
report  a  volatility  of  0.41 excluding  share  repurchases  and  between 
0.29 and 0.33 including share repurchases, depending on how the re-
purchases  are  measured.  As  for  the  average  𝑝𝑑-ratio,  for  our  model 
it is 4.34, which is a bit low compared to our data estimate of 4.71. 
Boudoukh et al. (2007) report estimates between 4.54 and 4.66.30 The 
low model average is mostly due to the fact that the average market re-
turn in the model (1.82%) is higher than in the data (1.59%). The higher 
average market return is the result of higher market return volatility 
generated by the model.

The utility curvature parameter 𝛾 was calibrated to 1.17. With simi-
lar preferences, Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Wachter (2006) use 
a value of 2.0. In our case, the value for this parameter is pinned down 
by  the  volatility  of  the  risk-free  rate.  As  we  have  already  discussed, 
given the ﬂuctuations in the speculative activity, a higher value for 𝛾
would imply a higher volatility for the risk-free rate, as it can also be in-
ferred from Panel A of Fig. 2. Also, higher 𝛾 implies lower elasticity of 
inter-temporal substitution and, thus, larger ﬂuctuations coming from 
changes in the market expectation  ̃𝜇. Our estimate of the risk-free rate 
volatility is conservative given that we adjust for the expected, rather 
than the realized, inﬂation. With a higher 𝛾, the model can generate 
even higher volatility for the 𝑝𝑑-ratio. For example, with 𝛾 = 1.4 the 
model explains entirely our estimate of the volatility in the 𝑝𝑑-ratio, 
but with twice as much volatility in the risk-free rate.

Overall, the benchmark calibration captures very well the main mo-
ments  of  the  stock  market  prices  and  returns,  of  the  risk-free  rate, 
and the correlation between them. In addition, the model explains the 
strong negative relation between the stock market and the dispersion in 
forecasts. In the data this correlation is −0.57 while the model generates 
a stronger negative correlation of −0.76. The diﬀerence is statistically 
signiﬁcant, but the model is not calibrated to ﬁt this moment.

Finally,  we  also  report  moments  of  the  log  price-to-consumption 
ratio  (𝑝𝑐)  and  the  returns  of  the  per-capita  consumption  claim  (𝑟𝑐
), 
however, we lack a data counterpart. The moments of the 𝑝𝑐-ratio are 
comparable to those of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio, though it is less volatile. The av-
erage returns of the consumption claim are very similar to the market 
returns in the data, but with lower volatility, due to the lower volatil-
ity in cash-ﬂows. Despite this, the equity premium of the consumption 
claim is very close to the stock market equity premium in the data. 
Thus, the Sharpe ratio of the consumption claim is higher, close to 0.20, 
compared with the stock market Sharpe ratio of 0.14. This is due to 
the fact that the stock market in the model carries some idiosyncratic 
volatility, coming from the idiosyncratic dividend shocks.

5.2.  Alternative model calibrations

The full model features time-varying information quality and dis-
agreement, as well as habit-formation preferences. To ﬂesh out the ef-
fect of every element, we provide several alternative calibrations where 
we shut down one or more elements. Table 4 provides the conﬁguration 
and preference parameters of all models. In all models we impose the 
rationality constraint 𝜁𝑡 = 𝜂 ÷ 𝜌𝑡. Therefore, constant (stochastic) infor-

27 The annual average log dividend growth is 1.45% in the data and 1.74% in 
the model. The annual serial correlation of log dividend growth is 0.18 in the 
data and 0.29 in the model.
28 Let  𝑅𝑡+1 = (𝑃𝑡+1 + 𝐷𝑡+1) ÷ 𝑃𝑡 denote  the  return  including  dividends  and 
𝑅𝑥
𝑡+1 = 𝑃𝑡+1 ÷ 𝑃𝑡 denote  the  return  excluding  dividends.  Then,  the  price-to-
dividend ratio is given by 𝑃𝑡+1 ÷ 𝐷𝑡+1 = (𝑅𝑡+1 − 𝑅𝑥

𝑡+1) ÷ 𝑅𝑡+1.

29 Wachter (2006) reports a volatility of the log price-to-dividend ratio of 0.31, 
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) 0.27, Gabaix (2012) 0.33 and Bansal and Yaron 
(2004) 0.29.
30 Boudoukh et al. (2007) report annual log dividend yield statistics which 
we transform to quarterly 𝑝𝑑-ratio statistics by taking the negative value and 
adding ln 4.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377415C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table 3
Asset pricing statistics – Data and models with disagreement. The table shows a number of asset pricing 
moments for the data and four diﬀerent model conﬁgurations. Model 1 refers to the full model, Model 2 refers 
to the model with constant risk aversion and Model 3 refers to the model with both constant risk aversion and 
constant information quality–see parameters in Tables 2 and 4. CRRA is as Model 2, but with CRRA preferences 
(𝜃 = 0), where we set 𝛽 = 0.9972 to match the average 𝑝𝑑 to that of Model 2. For a variable 𝑥, 𝜇(𝑥) denotes the 
sample mean, 𝜎(𝑥) the standard deviation, 𝑎𝑐𝑘(𝑥) its 𝑘-lag autocorrelation and 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑥, 𝑦) the correlation with 
variable 𝑦. The notation is as follows: 𝑝𝑑 denotes the log price-to-dividend ratio for the stock market dividend 
claim, 𝑟𝑓 the log risk-free rate, 𝑟𝑚 the log stock market return, 𝑆𝑅𝑚 the stock market Sharpe ratio using log 
returns, 𝑝𝑐 the log price-to-consumption ratio of the per-capita consumption claim, and 𝑟𝑐 the log return of the 
consumption claim. The standard errors for the data estimates 𝑠.𝑒. are computed using the Newey and West 
(1987) method with 16 lags. For each model we report the averages of 1,000 simulations of 400 quarters each 
(with a burn-in of 100 quarters). The 𝑡-statistics for the models 𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡 refer to the hypotheses that the data 
estimates are equal to the model averages.

Data

Data

4.71
0.44
0.97

0.14
0.84
0.65

1.59
10.52
-0.03

1.44
10.53
-0.03

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

𝑠.𝑒.

(0.09)
(0.05)
(0.01)

(0.13)
(0.09)
(0.05)

(0.47)
(1.55)
(0.09)

(0.49)
(1.55)
(0.09)

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.34
0.31
0.96

0.16
0.85
0.65

1.82
11.66
0.01

1.66
11.61
-0.00

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(4.10)
(2.38)
(0.88)

(0.16)
(0.10)
(0.03)

(0.50)
(0.74)
(0.54)

(0.44)
(0.70)
(0.33)

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.64
0.16
0.94

0.16
0.85
0.65

1.41
8.99
0.02

1.25
8.94
-0.00

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(0.77)
(5.33)
(2.22)

(0.17)
(0.11)
(0.03)

(0.37)
(0.99)
(0.58)

(0.39)
(1.02)
(0.34)

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.71
0.02
0.76

0.79
0.61
0.76

1.33
6.55
0.03

0.54
6.52
-0.00

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(0.10)
(7.83)
(14.17)

(4.85)
(2.44)
(2.24)

(0.55)
(2.56)
(0.69)

(1.84)
(2.58)
(0.33)

CRRA

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.63
0.15
0.93

1.73
0.96
0.66

1.42
8.78
0.02

-0.31
8.73
0.00

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(0.83)
(5.52)
(2.36)

(11.87)
(1.28)
(0.15)

(0.36)
(1.12)
(0.59)

(3.56)
(1.16)
(0.38)

0.14

(0.06)

0.14

(0.11)

0.14

(0.06)

0.08

(0.93)

-0.03

(2.91)

-0.57
0.26
0.08

(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.15)

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

-0.76
0.51
-0.20

4.54
0.25
0.96

1.54
7.13
0.02

1.38
7.06
-0.00

(2.45)
(2.35)
(1.96)

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

-0.77
0.51
-0.14

4.87
0.14
0.95

1.21
4.87
0.03

1.04
4.78
-0.00

(2.70)
(2.33)
(1.57)

(1.85)
(5.56)
(1.07)

(0.81)
(3.64)
(0.74)

(0.81)
(3.69)
(0.33)

–
–

1.00

(6.28)

5.21
0.00
0.76

0.98
0.98
0.44

0.19
0.77
-0.00

(5.59)
(8.17)
(14.17)

(1.29)
(6.15)
(5.33)

(2.54)
(6.27)
(0.34)

-0.78
0.71
-0.33

4.39
0.13
0.95

1.68
4.55
0.03

-0.05
4.44
0.00

(2.73)
(4.18)
(2.86)

(3.49)
(5.78)
(1.10)

(0.19)
(3.85)
(0.76)

(3.04)
(3.91)
(0.42)

𝜇(𝑝𝑑)
𝜎(𝑝𝑑)
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑝𝑑)

𝜇(𝑟𝑓 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑓 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑓 )
𝜇(𝑟𝑚)
𝜎(𝑟𝑚)
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑚)
𝜇(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )

𝑆𝑅𝑚

𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑝𝑑, ̄𝜈)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑟𝑓 , ̄𝜈)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑝𝑑, 𝑟𝑓 )

𝜇(𝑝𝑐)
𝜎(𝑝𝑐)
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑝𝑐)

𝜇(𝑟𝑐 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑐 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑐 )
𝜇(𝑟𝑐 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑐 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑐 − 𝑟𝑓 )

Table 4
Model conﬁgurations – quarterly frequency. Panel A shows the common preference parameters 
whenever they apply. They were chosen to ﬁt the average risk-free rate, the volatility of the risk-free 
rate, the stock market Sharpe ratio and the persistence of the stock market log price-to-dividend in 
the full model. Panel B shows where the models diﬀer. Model 1 is the full model with disagreement, 
stochastic information quality and stochastic risk aversion. The rest of the models remove one 
or more of these features. Constant information quality is imposed by setting 𝜎𝜌 = 𝛽𝜒 = 𝜎𝜒 = 0, 
constant risk aversion is imposed by setting 𝜑ℎ = 1, and no disagreement is imposed by setting 
𝜂 = 0. The subjective discount factor in each of the Models 3 to 6 was chosen to ﬁt the average 
stock market log price-to-dividend ratio.

A. Common preference parameters

Description

Subjective discount factor
Utility curvature parameter
Conditional volatility of 𝜔 at steady state
Degree of risk aversion at the average state (at 𝜔 = 0)
Log consumption surplus ratio persistency

B. Model diﬀerences

Parameter

Value

𝛽
𝛾
𝜃
𝛾 ⋅ (1 + 𝜃)
𝜑ℎ

0.982
1.17
23
26.91
0.985

Description

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Subjective discount factor
Disagreement
Stochastic risk aversion
Stochastic information quality

0.9820
yes
yes
yes

0.9820
yes
no
yes

0.9683
yes
no
no

0.9731
yes
yes
no

0.9687
no
yes
yes

0.9633
no
no
yes

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377416C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table 5
Asset pricing statistics – Data and models with and without disagreement. The table shows a number 
of asset pricing moments for the data and four diﬀerent model conﬁgurations. Relative to Model 1, Model 
4 has constant information quality, Model 5 has no disagreement, and Model 6 has no disagreement 
and constant risk aversion–see parameters in Tables 2 and 4. “Habit” imposes no disagreement (𝜂 = 0) 
to Model 4, where we set 𝛽 = 0.9677 to match the average risk-free rate of Model 4. For a variable 𝑥, 
𝜇(𝑥) denotes the sample mean, 𝜎(𝑥) the standard deviation, 𝑎𝑐𝑘(𝑥) its 𝑘-lag autocorrelation and 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑥, 𝑦)
the correlation with variable 𝑦. The notation is as follows: 𝑝𝑑 denotes the log price-to-dividend ratio 
for the stock market dividend claim, 𝑟𝑓 the log risk-free rate, 𝑟𝑚 the log stock market return, 𝑆𝑅𝑚 the 
stock market Sharpe ratio using log returns, 𝑔𝑑 is the log growth rate of the stock market dividend claim, 
𝑝𝑐 the log price-to-consumption ratio of the per-capita consumption claim, and 𝑟𝑐 the log return of the 
consumption claim. The standard errors for the data estimates 𝑠.𝑒. are computed using the Newey and 
West (1987) method with 16 lags. For each model we report the averages of 1,000 simulations of 400 
quarters each (with a burn-in of 100 quarters). The 𝑡-statistics for the models 𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡 refer to the hypotheses 
that the data estimates are equal to the model averages.

Data

Data

4.71
0.44
0.97

0.14
0.84
0.65

1.59
10.52
-0.03

1.44
10.53
-0.03

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

𝑠.𝑒.

(0.09)
(0.05)
(0.01)

(0.13)
(0.09)
(0.05)

(0.47)
(1.55)
(0.09)

(0.49)
(1.55)
(0.09)

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.71
0.14
0.95

0.30
0.61
0.76

1.34
8.18
0.02

1.05
8.17
-0.00

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(0.08)
(5.60)
(1.24)

(1.16)
(2.44)
(2.24)

(0.52)
(1.51)
(0.64)

(0.81)
(1.51)
(0.30)

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.71
0.11
0.95

0.41
0.79
0.76

1.34
7.66
0.02

0.92
7.66
-0.00

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(0.08)
(6.14)
(1.60)

(2.04)
(0.54)
(2.20)

(0.53)
(1.84)
(0.65)

(1.05)
(1.85)
(0.30)

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.70
0.03
0.87

0.98
0.79
0.76

1.34
6.28
0.03

0.36
6.25
-0.00

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(0.01)
(7.73)
(6.56)

(6.22)
(0.52)
(2.21)

(0.53)
(2.73)
(0.69)

(2.19)
(2.75)
(0.32)

Habit

𝑎𝑣𝑔.

4.62
0.14
0.95

0.30
0.57
0.76

1.43
8.27
0.02

1.13
8.27
-0.01

𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

(0.90)
(5.60)
(1.33)

(1.17)
(2.92)
(2.22)

(0.34)
(1.45)
(0.62)

(0.64)
(1.45)
(0.28)

0.14

(0.06)

0.13

(0.15)

0.12

(0.28)

0.06

(1.33)

0.14

(0.01)

-0.57
0.26
0.08

(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.15)

–
–

–
–

–
–

–
–

0.47

(2.66)

0.64

(3.81)

0.13

(0.30)

0.53

(3.05)

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

5.92
0.05
0.97

0.70
1.87
0.18

0.40
1.78
-0.01

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

7.42
0.03
0.91

0.49
1.02
0.27

0.08
0.74
0.01

(30.27)
(7.71)
(3.77)

(2.33)
(6.13)
(3.39)

(2.76)
(6.29)
(0.46)

5.42
0.04
0.94

0.88
1.02
0.17

-0.10
0.69
0.01

(7.92)
(7.42)
(2.23)

(1.51)
(6.13)
(2.28)

(3.12)
(6.33)
(0.50)

5.89
0.04
0.98

0.71
1.82
0.20

0.41
1.75
-0.01

(13.24)
(7.40)
(0.50)

(1.87)
(5.61)
(2.61)

(2.09)
(5.65)
(0.24)

𝜇(𝑝𝑑)
𝜎(𝑝𝑑)
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑝𝑑)

𝜇(𝑟𝑓 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑓 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑓 )
𝜇(𝑟𝑚)
𝜎(𝑟𝑚)
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑚)
𝜇(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑚 − 𝑟𝑓 )

𝑆𝑅𝑚

𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑝𝑑, ̄𝜈)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑟𝑓 , ̄𝜈)
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟(𝑝𝑑, 𝑟𝑓 )

𝜇(𝑝𝑐)
𝜎(𝑝𝑐)
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑝𝑐)

𝜇(𝑟𝑐 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑐 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑐 )
𝜇(𝑟𝑐 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝜎(𝑟𝑐 − 𝑟𝑓 )
𝑎𝑐

1(𝑟𝑐 − 𝑟𝑓 )

mation quality (𝜌) implies also constant (stochastic) disagreement (𝜁 ), 
unless we assume no disagreement.

In Model 2, we impose constant risk aversion of 𝛾 × (1 + 𝜃), by setting 
𝜑ℎ = 1. The rest of the model parameters are kept as in Model 1. Model 
2 is very similar to a model with CRRA preferences, with the only diﬀer-
ence that it generates a high price of risk through 𝜃. We also compare 
Model 2 with a model with CRRA preferences (𝜃 = 0), where we ad-
just 𝛽 to obtain the same average 𝑝𝑑. The main diﬀerence between the 
two models is the market Sharpe ratio, which is very close to zero and 
slightly negative with CRRA preferences. This causes the equity pre-
mium to be small and slightly negative and the average risk-free rate to 
be large.31 Otherwise, the model with CRRA preferences generates very 
similar volatilities for prices, returns, and the risk-free rate.

In Model 3, we impose both constant risk aversion, as in Model 2, 
and constant information quality. To impose constant information qual-
ity we set 𝜎𝜌, 𝛽𝜒 and 𝜎𝜒 to zero. The rest of the parameters are as in 

31 The Sharpe ratio and the equity premium with CRRA preferences are neg-
ative because they are measured in terms of log-returns. The equity premium 
for net returns is slightly positive and around 0.1%. This happens because the 
volatility correction, which is excluded from the calculation of 𝑆𝑅𝑚, is larger 
than the compensation for risk.

Model 1, apart from an adjustment to 𝛽 to match the average 𝑝𝑑. The 
asset pricing moments of Models 1 to 3, and CRRA are shown in Table 3.
In Model 4 we impose constant information quality as a way to see 
the eﬀects of habit-formation preferences with time-varying risk aver-
sion. In the next two models we assume no disagreement, by setting 
𝜂 = 0, but we allow information quality to be stochastic. In Model 5
risk aversion is stochastic, as in Model 1, and in Model 6 risk aversion 
is constant, as in Model 2. To conﬁrm quantitatively that asset prices 
behave almost identically in a model with constant information qual-
ity as they would in an economy with no disagreement, we impose no 
disagreement to Model 4 and adjust the subjective discount factor to 
achieve the same average risk-free rate. We label this model “Habit”. 
Table 5 shows the asset pricing moments of Models 4 to 6, and Habit. 
When contrasting Habit to Model 4, it becomes evident that there are 
only minimal eﬀects on asset prices. These result from diﬀerences in 
the steady states of uncertainty and market forecast dispersion, which 
slightly alter the market expectation process.

Finally, we investigate whether the choice of discrete-time trading 
frequency introduces signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in the price of risk through 
variations in  ̃𝜎. Since in continuous time  ̃𝜎 is constant, to gauge the 
magnitude  of  these  eﬀects  in  discrete  time,  we  compare  Model  1  to 
the case where we set  ̃𝜎 equal to its steady state value. We show the 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377417C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table 6
State variable moments – Model 1. The table shows the correlations, means, standard deviations 
(stdev), and ﬁrst-lag autocorrelations (𝑎𝑐
1 ) of the state variables, for Model 1. They are computed 
as the averages across 1,000 simulations of 400 quarters each (with a burn-in of 100 quarters).

Correlations

̃𝜇

̃𝜈

𝑣

𝜒

𝜔

̄𝜇

̄𝜈

𝜉

mean

stdev

𝑎𝑐
1

̃𝜇
̃𝜈
𝑣
𝜒
𝜔
̄𝜇
̄𝜈
𝜉

1.00

-0.23
1.00

0.06
-0.18
1.00

0.36
-0.73
0.06
1.00

0.27
-0.67
0.13
0.90
1.00

0.98
-0.20
0.02
0.30
0.22
1.00

-0.23
0.99
-0.20
-0.75
-0.70
-0.20
1.00

-0.24
0.95
-0.42
-0.69
-0.66
-0.19
0.95
1.00

0.435
0.272
0.358
-0.368
0.000
0.439
0.291
0.149

0.557
0.151
0.085
0.954
0.015
0.515
0.163
0.145

0.763
0.710
0.567
0.953
0.968
0.770
0.777
0.674

results in Online Appendix D (Table D.1) We observe a slight increase 
in the volatility of the risk-free rate, due to removing the variations in 
the precautionary savings term of the risk-free rate, that oﬀset some 
of the variations coming from 𝜉–see Lemma 4. We also observe a slight 
increase in the Sharpe ratio and a slight decrease in the average risk-free 
rate, because the steady state value of ̃𝜎 is higher than its average value. 
When we adjust 𝛽, 𝛾, and 𝜃 to match these moments, the diﬀerences 
with Model 1 are even less. Thus, the eﬀects in the price of risk due 
to the choice of discrete-time trading are negligible for our calibration. 
This is no surprise if we see that, in Panel C of Fig. 2, the price of risk 
in the case of 𝛾 = 1.5 does not vary much with disagreement with a 
hump-shape relation.

5.3.  The stock market volatility

An  important  implication  of  our  disagreement  model  is  that  it 
generates  signiﬁcant  excess  volatility  comparable  to  what  we  see  in 
the  data.  It  is  well  known  that  the  Campbell  and  Cochrane  (1999)
habit-formation preferences, that we adopt, generate signiﬁcant excess 
volatility.  The  question,  therefore,  is  how  much  disagreement  con-
tributes to the stock market volatility that the model generates and in 
what way.

We start answering this question by plotting in Fig. 3 the risk-free 
rate and the log price-to-dividend ratio against all the state variables. 
For  each  plot,  we  vary  one  state  variable  while  we  keep  the  rest  at 
their steady-state values. The gray area in each plot shows the uncon-
ditional distribution of the corresponding state variable. The ﬁrst thing 
we note is that the market expectation  ̃𝜇 (Panel A), the uncertainty 𝑣
(Panel D), and the market forecast dispersion ̃𝜈 (Panel C) do not gener-
ate signiﬁcant stock price variation. The important stock price drivers 
are shown in Panels E and F, namely 𝜒 , that drives information qual-
ity, and 𝜔, that drives risk aversion, respectively. Both of these state 
variables are very persistent with autocorrelations of 0.953 and 0.968, 
respectively–see Table 6 for moments of the state variables.

The above observations are conﬁrmed by the fact that, after remov-
ing both the time-variations in risk-aversion and information quality, 
the volatility of 𝑝𝑑 drops from 0.31 in Model 1 to just 0.02 in Model 
3. The volatility of the stock market excess return in Model 3 is 6.54%, 
which is almost entirely generated by the exogenously speciﬁed divi-
dend growth process. In Model 3, the only drivers of stock price vari-
ations are the market expectation  ̃𝜇 and the uncertainty 𝑣. It is clear 
that none of these variables are important drivers of stock prices. Un-
certainty generates some small variations in the price of risk, and in 
addition it is not particularly persistent (see Table 6).

Several  studies,  e.g.,  Veronesi  (1999,  2000),  Brennan  and  Xia 
(2001), Atmaz and Basak (2018), and Martin and Papadimitriou (2022), 
focus on the implications of learning and/or heterogeneity in expecta-
tions  and  how  they  aﬀect  asset  prices.  The  main  property,  that  we 
already saw with equation (22) and the price of risk 𝑞 in Lemma 5, is 
that disagreement and learning induce mean reversion in stock returns. 
However,  we  see  that  ﬂuctuations  in  the  market  expectation  hardly 

,

≈

(23)

𝛽𝑑 − 𝛾
1 − 𝜑𝜇𝑍𝑡

aﬀect stock prices, which means that the mean-reversion eﬀect is negli-
gible. To understand why, we derive an approximate expression of the 
sensitivity of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio to changes in the market expectation,
𝜕𝑝𝑑𝑡
𝜕 ̃𝜇𝑡
where 𝑍𝑡 is the price-dividend ratio of the one-period dividend claim, 
which is very close to one, and at the steady state it is equal to 0.994. 
We see that a change in  ̃𝜇 involves the usual discount rate eﬀect given 
by 𝛾, the inverse of the EIS, and the cash-ﬂow eﬀect through 𝛽𝑑 . In our 
model the cash-ﬂow eﬀect is stronger, since 𝛽𝑑 = 2.15 and 𝛾 = 1.17. The 
value of the above sensitivity is 4.23, which together with the volatility 
of  ̃𝜇 (0.56%, shown in Table 6) gives a volatility for the 𝑝𝑑-ratio of 
only 0.023. We compare this result with the model of Bansal and Yaron 
(2004) where ﬂuctuations in growth expectations are important.32 The 
main diﬀerence is that they assume 𝜑𝜇 to be equal to 0.979, which is 
much larger than our estimate of 0.773. In our model, the estimate of 𝜑𝜇
largely reﬂects the persistency in the mean forecast of the professional 
forecasters in the data.

Hence,  the  importance  of  disagreement  regarding  the  stock  price 
volatility goes through the time-variations in information quality. Go-
ing from Model 3 to Model 2, the 𝑝𝑑-ratio volatility increases from 0.02
to 0.16 and the 𝑝𝑐-ratio volatility from zero to 0.14 (Table 3). To conﬁrm 
that it is disagreement that makes variations in information quality im-
portant for stock prices, in Model 6 we remove disagreement and keep 
the time variations in information quality. We see that the 𝑝𝑑 volatility 
drops from 0.16 in Model 2 to 0.03. This is not surprising since varia-
tions in information quality in the absence of disagreement aﬀect the 
time-series properties of the market expectation and uncertainty, which 
we have already seen are not important for equities. It is clear, there-
fore, that it is not information quality itself that is important for equities 
but the fact that it drives disagreement (𝜁 ).

The stock price volatilities in Model 2 are a bit more than half of 
the volatilities in Model 1, where we also have time-varying risk aver-
sion. In Table 6, we also see that 𝜔, the driver of risk aversion, and 
𝜒 , the driver of information quality and disagreement are strongly cor-
related, with a correlation of 0.90. This means that the movements in 
the price of risk generated by habit are very highly correlated with the 
movements in the risk-free rate generated by disagreement. Also, they 
have additive eﬀects on stock prices, because increases in the equity 
premium due to habit are associated with increases in the risk-free rate 
due to disagreement, and both cause stock prices to decrease. This is an 
outcome of the fact that information quality is estimated to be mainly 
driven and positively aﬀected by aggregate consumption shocks.

32 Bansal and Yaron (2004) consider a model where the expected growth rate 
is observable and, thus,  ̃𝜇 = 𝜇.  They use the following parameters:  𝛽𝑑 = 3, 
1∕𝐸𝐼𝑆 = 1∕1.5, 𝜑𝜇 = 0.979 that yields a sensitivity of close to 90. Together 
with a volatility for  ̃𝜇 of 0.17% results in a volatility for the 𝑝𝑑-ratio of around 
0.15.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377418C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Fig. 3. The 𝑝𝑑-ratio and the risk-free rate (𝑟𝑓 )– Model 1. The graphs show the 𝑝𝑑-ratio and the risk-free rate (𝑟𝑓 ) as functions of the state variables in Model 
1. For each graph, we vary the corresponding state variable, while the rest of the variables are kept at their steady states. The gray areas show the unconditional 
distributions of the state variables. Where we plot two quantities, the “left” corresponds to the left axis and “right” to the right axis.

Therefore, variations in information quality in the presence of dis-
agreement are at least as, if not more, important for the stock price 
volatility.  This  is  conﬁrmed  by  Model  4  where  we  remove  the  vari-
ations in information quality and we see that the 𝑝𝑑 volatility drops 
from 0.31 in Model 1 to 0.14 (Table 5), which is slightly lower than the 
volatility we see in Model 2. Regarding the 𝑝𝑐 volatility we see that in 
Model 2 it is 0.14 whereas in Model 4 it is almost one-third at 0.05, 
which indicates that variations in information quality in the presence 
of disagreement generate more equity volatility than variations in risk 
aversion.

We add time-variations in information quality to Model 4 and re-
move disagreement to obtain Model 5. We see that the volatility of 𝑝𝑑
drops slightly from 0.14 to 0.11, even though the risk-free rate becomes 
more volatile–0.61 in Model 4 to 0.79 in Model 5 (Table 5). The reason 
for these eﬀects is the removal of disagreement, which makes the mar-
ket expectation less sensitive to growth rate shocks but more volatile 
overall. Therefore, the higher volatility in  ̃𝜇 increases the risk-free rate 
volatility but the lower sensitivity to growth rate shocks decreases its 
correlation with 𝜔. The drop in the correlation decreases the 𝑝𝑑 volatil-
ity. This also explains why the market Sharpe ratio drops slightly from 
0.13 in Model 4 to 0.12 in Model 5.

Comparing Model 5 with Model 1 is one more way to see the impact 
of disagreement in the presence of variations in information quality. 
Speciﬁcally, removing disagreement from Model 1 cuts the 𝑝𝑑 volatility 
to almost one-third, from 0.31 to 0.11 in Model 5. The change is even 
more dramatic for the consumption claim since the 𝑝𝑐 volatility goes 
from 0.25 in Model 1 to just 0.03 in Model 5.

Closing, we want to clarify the role of the market forecast dispersion 
̃𝜈 and disagreement 𝜁 . In Model 1, we see that  ̃𝜈 is strongly correlated 
with the stock market 𝑝𝑑, with a correlation of −0.76. However, itself 
is not an important stock market driver, as it is evident from Panel C 
of Fig. 3, while it is very important for the interest rate. The strong 
correlation with the stock price is due to the fact that ̃𝜈 is driven by in-
formation quality. In addition, information quality is highly correlated 
with 𝜔. Consequently,  ̃𝜈 is highly correlated with the two important 
stock  market  drivers;  it  has  correlations  of  −0.73 and  −0.67 with  𝜒
and 𝜔, respectively (Table 6). Finally, the reason why variations in in-

formation quality are so important in the presence of disagreement is 
because they bring about persistent shocks to the risk-free rate. An in-
crease in information quality (𝜌) decreases the amount of disagreement 
(𝜁 ), which causes a decrease in the market forecast dispersion ( ̃𝜈) and, 
hence, speculation (𝜉). The decrease in speculation lowers the risk-free 
rate. Information quality shocks are persistent and, thus, such move-
ments translate into persistent changes in the discount rate and large 
changes in stock prices.

5.4.  Campbell-Shiller decompositions

Despite econometric challenges, the empirical evidence available re-
garding the source of ﬂuctuations in the stock market  𝑝𝑑-ratio, e.g., 
Shiller (1984), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988), 
and  Cochrane  (2008),  point  to  ﬂuctuations  in  the  equity  premium. 
Therefore, our model in which persistent interest rate movements are 
responsible  for  about  half  of  the  stock  price  volatility  may  generate 
counterfactual predictions regarding the relations of the stock market 
𝑝𝑑 and  future  interest  rates,  excess  returns,  and  cash-ﬂows.  For  this 
reason, we perform a Campbell and Shiller (1988) variance decompo-
sition analysis of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio for our models and compare the results 
with the data. We present the analysis in Appendix A.

The  analysis  reveals  that  the  model  closely  aligns  with  the  data 
when considering samples of similar length. Notably, the majority of 
stock  price  ﬂuctuations—91% in  the  model  and  79% in  the  data—
are  attributed  to  future  stock  excess  returns.  Importantly,  the  diﬀer-
ence between these percentages is statistically insigniﬁcant. However, 
a very long simulation conﬁrms our earlier ﬁnding that only 63% of 
the ﬂuctuations in the 𝑝𝑑-ratio are due to variations in future excess 
returns within the model. This discrepancy primarily arises from the 
fact that, in shorter samples, the Campbell-Shiller decomposition mis-
takenly interprets most of the variations generated by the risk-free rate–
speciﬁcally, the persistent variations coming from information quality–
as originating from changes in excess returns. In Model 2, for example, 
despite the expected excess return playing a lesser role due to constant 
risk aversion, the decomposition of 100-year samples attributes, on av-
erage, 71% of the variations to the excess return.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377419C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

5.5.  The equity premium

Disagreement and time-varying information quality also have im-
portant implications regarding the equity premium. The risk premium 
of an asset is given by the product of the market price of risk and the 
systematic risk of the asset (quantity of risk), that is, the risk that is 
correlated with the SDF. Since the only priced risk is the aggregate con-
sumption growth, the conditional risk premium of an asset 𝑗 can be 
approximately written as follows,

𝔼𝑡(𝑟𝑗

𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓

𝑡 ) +

𝜎𝑡(𝑟𝑗

𝑡+1) ≃ 𝑞𝑡 ⋅ 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑡(𝑟𝑗

𝑡+1

, 𝑔𝑡+1) ⋅ 𝜎𝑡(𝑟𝑗

𝑡+1)

1
2

where 𝜎𝑡(⋅) and 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑡(⋅, ⋅) denote conditional volatility and conditional 
correlation, respectively. Our qualitative analysis has shown that dis-
agreement aﬀects somewhat the price of risk through  ̃𝜎. However, the 
price of risk is very similar across the models we consider and, there-
fore, the diﬀerences we see arise from the quantity of risk.33

In Model 3, where information quality is constant, the equity pre-
mium is 0.54%, which is about one-third of what is observed in the data 
(1.44%)  and  is  almost  entirely  generated  by  the  exogenous  dividend 
risk.34 This implies that disagreement in the absence of variations in in-
formation quality has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the equity premium. This 
comes at no surprise given our earlier results regarding the eﬀects on 
the price of risk and the equity volatility. Moving to Model 2, however, 
the equity premium is 1.25%, which implies that stochastic informa-
tion quality more than doubles the equity premium compared to Model 
3. This increase is due to the excess stock return volatility caused by 
shocks to information quality in the presence of disagreement. This ex-
cess volatility constitutes systematic risk because information quality 
and disagreement are mainly driven by per-capita consumption growth 
shocks. If this were not the case, that is, if information quality’s varia-
tions were independent of 𝑔, the equity premium would not be aﬀected. 
In the absence of disagreement, however, the introduction of time vari-
ations in information quality in Model 6 results in a decrease rather 
than an increase in the equity premium, as it drops to 0.36%.

In Model 1 where, compared to Model 2, we also have variations 
in risk aversion due to habit, the equity premium increases further to 
1.66%, since the excess volatility generated by shocks to risk aversion 
also  constitutes  systematic  risk.  Interestingly,  the  equity  premium  in 
Model 4, which features only variations in risk aversion, is 1.05%, which 
is a bit lower than the equity premium in Model 2 (1.25%), which fea-
tures only variations in information quality.

The main conclusion of the analysis is that disagreement aﬀects the 
equity  premium  only  in  the  presence  of  variations  in  disagreement, 
which, in our model, result from variations in information quality. This 
becomes clear if we compare Model 5 to Model 1, where the diﬀerence 
is that Model 5 has no disagreement. As a result, the equity premium 
in Model 5 is 0.92% whereas in Model 1 it is equal to 1.66%. The dif-
ference  in  the  risk  premium  of  the  consumption  claim  is  even  more 
dramatic, since this is equal to 0.08% in Model 5 and equal to 1.38% in 
Model 1.

33 In the models with disagreement (Models 1 to 4) the price of risk at the 
steady state is 0.310 and in models without disagreement (Models 5 and 6) it is 
0.328.
34 The return volatility of the consumption claim comes from the consumption 
growth volatility, since the volatility of the price-consumption ratio is virtually 
zero, and we know that

.

𝑡+1 = ln(1 + 𝑒𝑝𝑐𝑡+1 ) − 𝑝𝑐𝑡 + 𝑔𝑡+1
𝑟𝑐
Therefore, the risk premium of the consumption claim comes from the consump-
tion growth risk. Now, the dividend growth has an exposure to the consumption 
growth of 𝛽𝑑 = 2.15, which means that the risk premium due to this exposure is 
about 2.15 ⋅ 0.19% = 0.41%, out of the 0.54%.

6.  Bond market implications

A key insight of our analysis so far is that variations in disagreement 
(𝜁 ), caused by shocks to information quality (𝜌), introduce a persistent 
component in the risk-free interest rate. Naturally, this generates im-
plications for bond prices and bond returns, which we examine in this 
section. Despite of the fact that our model is not built for such purpose 
and despite its relative parsimony, we obtain results that are helpful in 
furthering our understanding of the properties and historical evolution 
of the real yield curve.

For  obvious  reasons,  most  of  the  literature  regarding  the  term-
structure of interest rates has focused on nominal bonds. However, more 
recently with the available data on inﬂation-indexed bonds, the litera-
ture is gradually placing more focus on the real yields–see for example, 
Abrahams et al. (2016), D’Amico et al. (2018), and Hsu et al. (2021). 
To avoid further complexity with modelling inﬂation that is needed to 
analyze nominal bonds, we study the model implications regarding real 
yields.

We ﬁrst analyze the properties of the short-term (one-period) rate 
and whether the forecast dispersion relates to future short-term rates 
as predicted by the model. We then investigate whether, through the 
lens of the model, we can explain historical movements in the real yield 
curve by variations in the forecast dispersion, and, ﬁnally, we compare 
the slope of the yield curve and the term premium predicted by the 
model to what we observe in the data.

6.1.  The short-term rate

Lemma 4 shows that the short-rate ﬂuctuates over time due to vari-
ations in the market expectation  ̃𝜇, the speculative activity 𝜉, and the 
uncertainty  𝑣.  The  speculative  activity  is  driven  by  both  the  market 
forecast dispersion  ̃𝜈 and the uncertainty. Fig. 3 shows that all three 
variables are important drivers where the market expectation seems to 
be the one that generates the largest variations. In Model 3, where in-
formation quality is constant and, hence, the only stochastic component 
is the market expectation, the volatility is 0.61 (Table 3). In Model 1, 
the stochastic information quality introduces variations in  ̃𝜈 and 𝑣 and 
the short-term rate volatility increases to 0.85.35 The autocorrelation 
decreases from 0.76 in Model 3 to 0.65 in Model 1, which matches the 
autocorrelation in the data, due to the negative correlation of −0.24
(Table 6) between 𝜉 and  ̃𝜇.

Further, in Model 1, the forecast dispersion ̄𝜈 has a correlation with 
the risk-free rate of 0.51 which, together with the negative correlation of 
−0.23 between ̄𝜈 and  ̃𝜇 (Table 6), indicates that the components related 
to disagreement and uncertainty are at least as important as the market 
expectation for the variations in the short-term rate in the model. In the 
data, however, the correlation between the forecast dispersion and the 
1-quarter risk-free rate is 0.26, which is statistically diﬀerent from the 
model prediction. We need to emphasize, however, that the real risk-
free rate is not observable in the data and is only estimated using the 
nominal 1-quarter risk-free rate and a time-series estimate of expected 
inﬂation, which makes it challenging to draw inferences regarding the 
short-term rate. Interestingly, the correlation between the nominal 1-
quarter interest rate and the forecast dispersion is 0.51 just as in the 
model.

In many asset pricing models, as for example in Wachter (2006), 
the real short-term rate is perfectly or very strongly correlated with the 
stock market 𝑝𝑑-ratio. This is also true in our Model 3. However, in the 
data the correlation is statistically indiﬀerent from zero and equal to 
0.08. Our full model reduces this correlation to −0.20, still statistically 
diﬀerent from the data estimate, but only marginally. The reason for 
this improvement is that the market expectation  ̃𝜇, that is important 
for the ﬂuctuations in the risk-free rate, is not important for the stock 

35 The short-term rate in Model 2 is identical to that in Model 1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377420C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table 7
Predicting short-term rates. This table reports the 𝛽 coeﬃcients of the univariate predictive 
regressions

𝑡,𝑡+𝑇 denotes the cumulative log risk-free rate, that is 𝑟𝑓

𝑟𝑓
𝑡,𝑡+𝑇 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+𝑇 ,
where 𝑟𝑓
𝑡 de-
notes the log risk-free rate between period 𝑡 and 𝑡 + 1. In Panel A the predictive variable 𝑥 is 
1 ÷ (1 + 𝜉), whose values in the data is estimated based on Model 1. In Panel B the predictive 
variable 𝑥 is ̄𝜈 whose values in the data is given by the cross-sectional dispersion in professional 
forecasts. The 𝑡-statistics for the data 𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡 are estimated using the Newey and West (1987)
method with 16 lags. We report the averages of 1,000 simulations of 400 quarters each (with 
a burn-in of 100 quarters). The 𝑡-statistics for the models 𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡 refer to the hypotheses that the 
data estimates are equal to the model averages.

𝑡+𝜏−1, where 𝑟𝑓
𝑟𝑓

𝑡,𝑡+𝑇 =

∑𝑇

𝑡=1

A. 𝑟𝑓

𝑡,𝑡+𝑇 = 𝛼 + 𝛽(1 + 𝜉𝑡)−1 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+𝑇

𝑇 = 1

𝑇 = 2

𝑇 = 4

𝑇 = 8

𝑇 = 12

𝑇 = 16

𝑇 = 20

𝑇 = 24

𝑇 = 28

Data
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

-0.02
(1.71)

-0.03
(1.84)

-0.09
0.02
(3.08)

Model
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣.
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡
B. 𝑟𝑓

-0.05
0.01
(3.80)
𝑡,𝑡+𝑇 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ̄𝜈𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡,𝑡+𝑇
𝑇 = 1

𝑇 = 2

-0.07
(1.84)

-0.15
0.04
(2.03)

-0.15
(1.86)

-0.26
0.09
(1.34)

-0.24
(1.93)

-0.36
0.14
(0.96)

-0.33
(2.05)

-0.45
0.18
(0.72)

-0.43
(2.16)

-0.52
0.22
(0.49)

-0.51
(2.25)

-0.58
0.26
(0.33)

-0.59
(2.39)

-0.63
0.29
(0.15)

𝑇 = 4

𝑇 = 8

𝑇 = 12

𝑇 = 16

𝑇 = 20

𝑇 = 24

𝑇 = 28

Data
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

Model
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣.
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

1.40
(1.91)

2.69
0.72
(1.76)

2.78
(2.00)

4.52
1.39
(1.26)

5.70
(1.98)

7.63
2.72
(0.67)

11.84
(1.98)

13.54
5.28
(0.28)

18.47
(2.02)

18.94
7.67
(0.05)

25.28
(2.13)

23.58
9.93
(0.14)

32.31
(2.26)

27.49
12.09
(0.34)

38.52
(2.35)

30.74
14.10
(0.47)

45.21
(2.49)

33.40
16.01
(0.65)

market 𝑝𝑑. Also,  ̃𝜇 is weakly correlated with  ̃𝜈 and 𝜔 (see Table 6) 
which are the signiﬁcant drivers of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio.

6.2.  Predicting future short-term rates

In our model, the fact that information quality drives the speculative 
activity and is highly persistent, implies that the speculative activity 
and the forecast dispersion should be related to both contemporane-
ous and future short-term rates. We examine, therefore, whether the 
correlations of 𝜉 and 𝜈 with future short-term rates in the data are as 
predicted  by  the  model.  To  obtain  data  estimates  for  𝜉,  we  use  our 
data on forecast dispersion  ̄𝜈 and the model relation between 𝜉 and 
̄𝜈.36 We then run univariate predictive regressions of cumulative future 
risk-free rates over various horizons, from 1 quarter up to 28 quarters, 
using as predictors either 1 ÷ (1 + 𝜉) or  ̄𝜈. The results are shown in Ta-
ble 7.

Panel  A  shows  the  estimated  coeﬃcients  of  the  constructed  pre-
dictive  variable  (1 + 𝜉)−1 for  the  data  and  Model  1.  All  coeﬃcients 
estimated from the data are negative and increasing in magnitude. For 
the shorter horizons the coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant at the 
10% level and beyond the 12-quarter horizon the coeﬃcients become 
statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level. However, the persistence in both 
the  left  and  right-hand-side  variables  creates  econometric  challenges 
that makes inference diﬃcult. Nevertheless, the correlation structure in 
the model is very close to what we see in the data. Using regressions on 
simulated data, we ﬁnd that all coeﬃcients are negative, increasing in 
size, and very close to those in the data, especially for horizons longer 

36 Using model simulations we estimate the following regression equation:

than 8 quarters, where the diﬀerences are statistically insigniﬁcant. In 
Panel B we perform the same analysis with  ̄𝜈 instead of 𝜉. Once more, 
the model aligns very well with the data. The diﬀerences are not sta-
tistically signiﬁcant and for horizons equal to or longer than 1 year the 
𝑡-statistics regarding these diﬀerences range from 0.05 to 0.65.

6.3.  Model-implied real yields

In the same way we did for 𝜉, we use the model to estimate the 
time-series of the rest of the state variables and then use them to gener-
ate model-implied time-series for real yields. The estimates of the state 
variables are based on the mean forecast and forecast dispersion of real 
per-capita GDP growth that we used for the estimation of the disagree-
ment model. We set the mean forecast  ̃𝜇 equal to the data counterpart 
of  ̄𝜇, while for the market forecast dispersion  ̃𝜈, we adjust the mean 
and standard deviation of the data counterpart of  ̄𝜈 to match the mean 
and standard deviation of the model market forecast dispersion ̃𝜈.37 We 
infer the rest of the state variables by using the regression model

3

2

1

0 + 𝑎

̃𝜈𝑡 + 𝑎

̃𝜇𝑡 + 𝑎

𝑡 + 𝑢𝑥,𝑡,
̃𝜈2

𝑥𝑡 = 𝑎
where 𝑥 ∈ (𝑣, 𝜒, 𝜔), that we estimate using model simulations. For the 
uncertainty 𝑣 we set 𝑎
1 = 0. The regression 𝑅2’s for the estimated model 
relations are 66%, 61%, and 53% for 𝑣, 𝜒 and 𝜔, respectively. Thus, we 
generate time-series for the ﬁve state variables from 1968Q3 to the end 
of 2016.

Using  the  time-series  of  ̃𝜇,  𝜉,  and  𝑣,  we  generate  model-implied 
time-series of the short-term rate, one for each model, and compare 
them  to  the  data.  Panel  A  of  Table 8 shows  the  results,  where  the 
means  and  volatilities  are  annualized.  The  model  means  diﬀer  from 
the  mean  in  the  data  because  the  models  were  calibrated  to  match 
the  average  risk-free  rate  over  the  period  from  1927Q1  to  2016Q4, 

𝜉𝑡 = 𝑐

0 + 𝑐

1

⋅ ̄𝜈𝑡 + 𝑐
2

⋅ ̄𝜈2

𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡.

The estimated model has a regression 𝑅2 of 0.98. We then use the model to 
predict 𝜉 in the data, from the observed dispersion in forecasts ̄𝜈.

37 Table 6 shows that ̃𝜇 has a correlation of 0.98 with ̄𝜇 and ̃𝜈 has a correlation 
of 0.99 with ̄𝜈.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377421C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table 8
Real yields. The table shows quarterly data and model-predicted yields to maturity of real zero-coupon bonds, for various 
maturities. The 1-quarter data series is constructed as the nominal risk-free rate minus the inﬂation expectation of the ﬁtted 
AR(1) model. The rest of the data is constructed as in Gürkaynak et al. (2008) and obtained from the Federal Reserve website. 
The model-predicted yields are computed using the data on mean forecast ( ̄𝜇) and forecast dispersion ( ̄𝜈) and the model-based 
predictions for the rest of the state variables, 𝑣, 𝜒 , and 𝜔. Models 1 - 6 are as speciﬁed in Table 4.

A. 1968Q3 – 2016Q4

Mean (%)

Standard deviation (%)

Correlation with data

Data

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Data

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

1 quarter

1.46

-0.01

-0.01

2.95

2.96

2.89

2.89

1.95

0.09

0.09

-0.09

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

0.98

3.24

5.48

1.95

1.90

1.90

-0.09

-0.12

-0.12

B. 1999Q1 – 2016Q4

Data

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Data

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

1 quarter
2 years
5 years
10 years
20 years

-0.70
0.65
1.24
1.77
2.12

-1.18
-0.79
-0.22
0.80
2.25

-1.18
-0.83
-0.21
0.78
2.01

3.12
2.50
2.17
2.04
1.97

2.54
1.72
1.57
1.32
1.06

0.94
0.38
0.35
0.40
0.36

0.94
0.38
0.35
0.34
0.24

1.13
0.54
0.25
0.12
0.06

0.04
-0.01
0.38
0.42
0.45

0.04
0.02
0.38
0.43
0.46

0.01
-0.23
-0.13
-0.08
-0.06

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

1 quarter
2 years
5 years
10 years
20 years

1.14
0.59
0.23
-0.05
-0.46

3.34
1.52
0.58
-0.25
-1.25

5.57
3.65
2.73
2.09
1.60

1.13
0.57
0.30
0.19
0.13

1.32
0.89
0.60
0.43
0.29

1.32
0.85
0.50
0.30
0.16

0.01
-0.24
-0.19
-0.22
-0.29

-0.00
-0.27
-0.29
-0.32
-0.37

-0.00
-0.27
-0.28
-0.29
-0.32

while the disagreement model was estimated using data from 1968Q3 
to  2016Q4.  Over  the  period  1968Q3–2016Q4  the  mean  growth  rate 
was lower, yet the short-term rate was higher than in the earlier pe-
riod 1927Q1–1968Q2. In the middle section of Panel A we see that the 
short-term rate implied by Model 1 is as volatile as the short-term rate 
in the data, while Models 3 to 6 generate lower volatilities.38

Looking next at the correlations in the right section of Panel A, we 
see that none of the models produces a short-term rate time-series that 
is signiﬁcantly correlated with the data. In fact, with the exception of 
Model 1 (and 2), the correlations are negative. The main problem can be 
seen from Model 3 (and 4), where the only driver of the short-term rate 
is the market expectation and the correlation is −0.09. This evidence 
poses a challenge to the standard asset pricing theory, it is not spe-
ciﬁc to our model, since an increase in growth rate expectation should 
be reﬂected in a higher risk-free rate through the need to smooth con-
sumption intertemporally. The unobservability of the real short-term 
rate is an issue, but there must also be other factors at play. Model 1 
oﬀers some improvement, as the correlation increases to 0.09, which 
reﬂects the positive correlation between  ̄𝜈 and the short-term rate that 
we discuss earlier.

Given the measurement issues with the short-term rate, we proceed 
to real yields on longer maturities that can be estimated from data on 
Treasury inﬂation-protected securities (TIPS). These securities do not 
oﬀer a perfect estimate of the real yields and, as D’Amico et al. (2018)
show, in the ﬁrst few years of their existence they demanded signiﬁcant 
liquidity premia. Yet, they contain important information against which 
to evaluate our model. The yields to maturity in the model are given by:
]
̃𝑀(𝑧𝑡+𝑠, 𝑔𝑡+𝑠+1)

𝑦𝑡(𝜏) = −

𝜏−1∏

̃𝔼𝑡

[

1
𝜏

𝑠=0

For longer maturities, the yields depend on all ﬁve state variables; 𝜒
contains information about future interest rates and 𝜔 determines the 
bond risk-premia and their evolution. We note that there is an addi-
tional source of error in comparing the model with the data, from the 

38 The short-term rate of Model 2 is identical to that of Model 1.

fact that we cannot infer the model-implied time-series of all state vari-
ables perfectly.

In Panel B of Table 8 we compare the data and the model over the 
period from 1999Q1 to 2016Q4, for which TIPS data is available.39 We 
included data on 1-quarter and 2-, 5-, 10-, and 20-year maturities. The 
1-quarter series corresponds to the same series as in Panel A, but for 
this data period. The rest of the data are based on TIPS prices.

We discuss the means in the following subsection because they are 
related to bond risk premia and we focus here on results regarding the 
volatilities and correlations. Regarding volatilities, we note ﬁrst that the 
real yields in the data are signiﬁcantly more volatile than the model-
implied yields. This is mainly due to a downward trend in the data over 
this period that the models cannot account for.40 D’Amico et al. (2018)
attributes part of this trend to a gradual decrease in the liquidity premia 
demanded by these securities. Another contributing factor could be the 
monetary  policy  over  this  period,  which  is  outside  the  scope  of  our 
paper.

Model 3, with only ﬂuctuations in the market expectation and con-
stant risk premia, predicts particularly low volatility for the long yields. 
The variations in disagreement of Models 1 and 2 signiﬁcantly increase 
these volatilities. The ﬂuctuations in risk premia, which constitute the 
diﬀerence between Model 1 and Model 2, increase further the volatili-
ties of the yields with maturities longer than 5 years.

Next,  we  examine  the  correlation  between  the  model-predicted 
yields and the data presented in the right section of Panel B. Here we fo-
cus on maturities of 2 years or longer. We observe negative correlations 
in Models 3 to 6, indicating that these models generate counterfactual 
ﬂuctuations in these yields. Speciﬁcally, the correlations for Models 4 
to 6 range from −0.19 to −0.37. Model 3 fares only slightly better, with 

39 The data on U.S. zero-coupon TIPS yields to maturity are constructed fol-
lowing the procedure in Gürkaynak et al. (2008) and were obtained from the 
Federal Reserve website.
40 The 20-year real yield implied by TIPS prices decreased from around 4%
in 2000 to around 1% in 2016. Figure D.1 in Online Appendix D shows the 
time-series of the yields in the data alongside those predicted by Models 1 and 
3.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377422C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table 9
Excess bond returns. The table shows means and standard deviations of excess quarterly log-returns for bonds and 
stocks. Panel A shows these moments for both nominal and real 10-year and 20-year pure discount bonds. We estimate 
bond returns from yields to maturities. The data on nominal and real yields is constructed as in Gürkaynak et al. 
(2006) and Gürkaynak et al. (2008), respectively, and obtained from the Federal Reserve website. For the nominal 
1-quarter nominal risk-free rate we consider the 3-month nominal T-bill rate, obtained from CRSP. To obtain the 
real risk-free rate, we adjust for expected inﬂation implied by the ﬁtted AR(1) process. For stock market returns we 
consider the CRSP value-weighted return. Data moments are shown for three diﬀerent periods, the ﬁrst starting on 
1999Q1, the second starting on 1981Q4, the third starting on 1971Q4, and all ending on 2016Q4. Panel B shows 
unconditional moments of real bond and stock excess returns for each model conﬁguration, which are the averages of 
1,000 simulations of 400 quarters each (with a burn-in of 100 quarters).

A. Mean (%)

Data (... – 2016Q4)

Models

1999Q1

1981Q4

1971Q4

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Nominal 10-year
Nominal 20-year

Real 10-year
Real 20-year
Stock market

1.19
1.38

1.26
1.54
0.95

B. Standard deviation (%)

Nominal 10-year
Nominal 20-year

Real 10-year
Real 20-year
Stock market

4.90
8.95

3.59
5.35
8.78

1.63
2.32

0.85

1.62

1.22

5.67
10.82

6.10

8.34

8.65

0.61
1.01
1.66

0.54
0.78
1.25

-0.31
-0.31
0.54

-0.45
-0.61
1.05

-0.85
-1.13
0.92

-0.67
-0.72
0.36

3.29
5.21
11.61

3.01
3.92
8.94

1.73
1.73
6.52

2.17
2.69
8.17

3.74
4.80
7.66

2.89
3.05
6.25

correlations ranging from −0.06 to −0.23. However, Models 1 and 2, 
which incorporate stochastic information quality, showcase signiﬁcant 
improvements. In fact, all correlations in these models surpass those of 
any other models, and we notice strongly positive correlations for all 
maturities beyond 5 years. For instance, the correlation between Model 
1-predicted yields and the data is 0.38, 0.42, and 0.45 for maturities of 
5, 10, and 20 years, respectively. Therefore, these correlations, along 
with the observed improvement from Models 3 to 6, lend support to 
our theory on the impact of disagreement on asset prices.

6.4.  Real bond premia

A  central  bond  market  fact  is  the  upward  sloping  nominal  yield 
curve, which implies that long maturity bonds are risky assets for which 
investors require compensation. However, Campbell (1986) points out, 
in a representative agent setting with CRRA preferences, that the posi-
tive autocorrelation in consumption growth implies a downward slop-
ing real yield curve. Eﬀectively, a positive shock leads to an increase in 
the short-term rate, because of the need to smooth consumption over 
time, and under such conditions long-term real bonds are a hedge and 
should command a negative risk premium. For this reason, many asset 
pricing theories explain the upward sloping nominal yield curve with 
positive inﬂation risk premia, while at the same time predicting down-
ward sloping real yield curve.41 However, TIPS based evidence as early 
as Roll (2004) point to a positively sloped real yield curve. Hsu et al. 
(2021) provide further supporting evidence and employ a model with 
monetary policy, nominal rigidities, and external habit preferences to 
reconcile the evidence.

Hsu et al. (2021) employ a similar mechanism to Wachter (2006)
to generate positive real bond premia based on habit-formation prefer-
ences. Wachter (2006) utilizes a version of the Campbell and Cochrane 
(1999) preferences, as we do, but instead allows the short-term rate 
to  respond  to  aggregate  shocks.  With  the  intertemporal  substitution 

motive reacting more strongly to the precautionary savings motive, a 
positive shock drives down the short-term rate.42

In  our  model,  the  stochastic  disagreement  generates  naturally  an 
upward sloping real yield curve. But before we see how, let us con-
sider  Model  3,  where  the  market  expectation  is  the  only  stochastic 
component. From equation (20) we know that  ̃𝜇 responds positively 
to aggregate shocks because of both learning and speculation, and this 
positive correlation is well supported by the data (Table 1). As a re-
sult, the real yield curve in Model 3 is downward sloping, which we 
can see from the left section of Panel B of Table 8. The same is true for 
Models 4 to 6, where the time-varying risk aversion or time-varying in-
formation quality in the absence of variations to disagreement do not 
change this prediction. For example, Model 4 with constant informa-
tion quality and stochastic risk aversion predicts a 20-year to 1-quarter 
term-spread of −1.60% over the period 1999Q1–2016Q4, in contrast to 
the term-spread of 2.92% in the data. Consistent with Roll (2004) and 
Hsu et al. (2021), the data indicates a strong positive slope in the real 
yield curve.

In Table 8, however, we see that as soon as we introduce variations 
in disagreement through shocks to information quality in Models 1 and 
2, the yield curve becomes upward-sloping with about the same slope 
as the one we see in the data, although with diﬀerent curvature. The 
20-year (1-quarter) average yield predicted by Model 1 over this period 
is 2.25% (−1.18%) compared to 2.12% (−0.70%) in the data. The model 
generates the positive slope because information quality that reacts pos-
itively to growth rate shocks, drives down expected future short-term 
rates through lower disagreement and speculative activity.

The above results show that the full model goes a long way in ex-
plaining both the level and ﬂuctuations in the real yields we see in the 
data. The success of the model in this respect implies that it should also 
be able to generate realistic bond returns. We examine this by compar-
ing unconditional bond return moments predicted by the model to data 
estimates. Table 9 shows the means (Panel A) and volatilities (Panel B) 
of bond excess returns in the data and for the six model conﬁgurations. 

41 The consumption-based models of Piazzesi and Schneider (2006) and Bansal 
and Shaliastovich (2013) and the production-based models of Rudebusch and 
Swanson (2012) and Kung (2015) predict downward sloping real yield curve 
and explain the upward sloping nominal yield curve with inﬂation risk premia.

42 Hsu et al. (2021) employ the habit speciﬁcation of Abel (1990) where the 
precautionary savings motive is roughly constant and the dominant eﬀect is the 
intertemporal consumption smoothing.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377423C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

We also include stock excess returns for comparison. Regarding bond 
returns, we estimate these moments for 10-year and 20-year nominal 
and real pure discount bonds.

We estimate pure-discount bond returns in the data from yields to 
maturities. For example, the 20-year pure discount bond log-return in a 
given quarter is estimated by

𝑟(20)
𝑡+1 = 20 ⋅ 𝑦𝑡(20) − 19.75 ⋅ 𝑦𝑡+1(19.75)
where 𝑦𝑡(𝜏) denotes the annual yield of the 𝜏-year pure-discount bond 
in period 𝑡. We estimate the 19.75-year yield via interpolation from the 
20- and 19-year yields. Similarly, we estimate the 10-year pure discount 
bond log-returns.

In Table 9, we ﬁrst note that Model 1 generates bond return volatili-
ties that are very close to what we see in the data. The 10-year real bond 
excess return volatility in the model is 3.29% per quarter compared to 
3.59% in the data, over the period 1999Q1–2016Q4. For the 20-year 
real bond returns, these ﬁgures are 5.21% in the model and 5.35% in 
the data.

Let us now discuss average returns. Since data on real yields is only 
available from 1999 and onwards, which is a period of steady decline 
in interest rates, we expect the average bond returns in this sample to 
overestimate the population means. Indeed, in column D1 of Table 9
we see that bond returns were higher than stock returns over this pe-
riod. For this reason, we also compute the average excess returns for 
the 10-year and 20-year nominal pure discount bonds, for which data 
is available since 1971 and 1981, respectively. The period since 1981 
(column D2) is also a period of what appears to be a secular decline 
in interest rates, therefore, we use the 10-year average excess return 
estimated over 1971Q4–2016Q4 (column D3) as a better point of refer-
ence.

The average excess returns on the 10- and 20-year real pure dis-
count  bonds  were  1.26% and  1.54%,  respectively,  over  the  period 
1999Q1–2016Q4. These ﬁgures for the unconditional means of Model 
1 are 0.61% and 1.01%, respectively. We can adjust the data estimates 
downwards by about 30% using as reference the average returns of the 
10-year nominal bond estimated over the diﬀerent periods.43 Doing so, 
gives estimates of around 0.9% and 1.1% for the 10- and 20-year real 
bond average excess returns, that come closer but still higher than the 
model unconditional means. We could further adjust these estimates 
downwards to account for the decrease in the TIPS speciﬁc liquidity 
premium found by D’Amico et al. (2018). Hence, given the available 
data we infer that the full model generates realistic real term premia, 
without any indication of being excessively high. In contrast, Models 
3 to 6, that do not feature time-varying disagreement, predict negative 
bond risk premia and, in general, lower volatilities compared to the 
data.

Therefore,  the  evidence  we  provide  indicates  that  while  ﬂuctuat-
ing disagreement is important for stock prices, it is even more so for 
bond prices. The model oﬀers a mechanism with predictions that are 
largely  consistent  with  both  stock  and  bond  market  facts.  It’s  worth 
noting that the disagreement model is estimated independently of as-
set prices, while the four preference parameters were chosen to ﬁt basic 
asset pricing quantities. Additionally, we would like to emphasize that 
reference-dependent preferences are necessary to generate both bond 
and stock risk premia, as CRRA preferences with realistic risk aversion 
parameters cannot achieve this.

7.  Incomplete markets

The derivation of the equilibrium in closed form makes use of the 
standard  assumption  of  complete  markets.  However,  the  assumption 

43 We  adjust  the  estimates  by  the  factor  0.85∕1.19 where  0.85% (1.19%) 
is  the  average  excess  return  of  10-year  nominal  bonds  over  the  period 
1999Q1–2016Q4 (1971Q4–2016Q4).

that agents can trade on their individual signals may be considered too 
strong.  In  this  section,  we  analyze  the  equilibrium  of  an  incomplete 
market where agents are not able to trade on their own signals, but 
they are able to trade on the aggregate shocks. For simplicity, we refer 
to this case as incomplete markets. In addition to providing tractability, 
it represents the realistic case wherein investors are able to hedge and 
speculate on the aggregate risks of the economy, but not on their own 
private information.

With complete markets, we have determined that disagreement has 
a negligible impact on asset price volatilities when information quality 
remains constant. The primary objective of this section is to investigate 
whether  this  prediction,  along  with  other  asset  pricing  implications, 
holds true in the context of incomplete markets. The ensuing analy-
sis reveals that there is no signiﬁcant deviation from this prediction, 
and the equilibrium observed in complete markets remains a valid ap-
proximation for our model parameterization. In fact, when agents have 
log-utility preferences, the equilibria in the two cases are identical.

The reason for this result is as follows: Incomplete markets modify 
the equilibrium to the extent that the optimal consumption-to-wealth 
ratio varies with an agent’s expectation. However, as we observe with 
complete markets, the wealth to consumption ratio remains largely un-
aﬀected by expectations. This suggests that the quantitative eﬀects of 
market incompleteness are minimal.

Analyzing incomplete market equilibria is particularly challenging 
due to the fact that the state vector also includes endogenous variables, 
e.g., the wealth distribution, as Dumas and Lyasoﬀ (2012) explain. Sev-
eral numerical approaches have been proposed in the literature that 
make the task manageable in certain cases, although they are often re-
stricted by the curse of dimensionality problem.44 As to whether market 
incompleteness matters, it depends on the type of incompleteness. For 
example, Gomes and Michaelides (2008) ﬁnd that incomplete risk shar-
ing, borrowing constraints, and life cycle considerations matter for the 
equity premium. More relevant for our paper is the study by Branger et 
al. (2020) who ﬁnd that disagreement on jump risk is not material for 
asset prices.

One other approach to analyzing incomplete market economies is 
through  the  use  of  ﬁctitious  completion  proposed  by  Karatzas  et  al. 
(1991) to  characterize  the  individual  optimal  policy.  Gallmeyer  and 
Holliﬁeld (2008) utilizes this approach to analyze a disagreement model 
with two agents and portfolio constraints. In our case, we could adopt 
this approach by assuming that agents also have ﬁctitious beliefs regard-
ing their own signals so that the demand for these ﬁctitious securities 
on their own signal would be zero. It turns out, however, that it would 
only introduce additional notation. We instead work with the actual 
optimality conditions and, with the use of the LLN on the inﬁnite set 
of agents, we manage to characterize the equilibrium in terms of the 
consumption shares, similar to the case with complete markets.

For simplicity and computational tractability we analyze the case of 
constant information quality, but the results generalize to the case with 
stochastic information quality. Here, we present the primary ﬁndings, 
while in Appendix B, we derive the equilibrium and provide a quanti-
tative analysis.

7.1.  Equilibrium

Complete markets enable us to solve for the equilibrium consump-
tion processes without asset prices, using the equality between the SDF 

44 Krusell and Smith (1998) propose a method that can be used for analyzing 
economies with many agents through moments that describe the endogenous 
distribution across agents. Judd et al. (2000, 2002) propose a method to solve 
for recursive equilibria by including portfolio holdings in the state vector, and 
Dumas and Lyasoﬀ (2012) propose a method of solving similar equilibria on 
an event tree through backward induction. These latter methods can only be 
applied with a small number of agent types and assets. In many cases, however, 
ad-hoc approaches are developed as for example in Branger et al. (2020).

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377424C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

and the inter-temporal marginal rates of substitution state by state. In 
general, this is not possible with incomplete markets which requires 
solving  for  prices  and  policies  simultaneously.  Nevertheless,  in  our 
incomplete markets economy we can characterize the equilibrium in 
terms of the endogenous consumption allocations due to the LLN and 
show that the individual signals are expected to have insigniﬁcant ef-
fects in equilibrium.

Agents would like to hedge their individual signals but they cannot. 
As a result, since their optimal consumption-to-wealth ratio is aﬀected 
by their beliefs, it is also aﬀected by their individual signals. Therefore, 
their consumption (surplus) shares, in addition to the way they specu-
late, are also determined by their individual signals. Nevertheless, due 
to the LLN, the individual signals do not enter the law of motion of the 
state of the economy.
[

An essential quantity for characterizing the equilibrium is the condi-
, which is over an individual signal, of the 

]

tional expectation 𝔼𝑡
⋅|𝜖𝑡+1
consumption (surplus) share:

[

]

𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

, 𝛼𝑖

𝑡, 𝜇𝑖

.

|𝜖𝑡+1

𝑡, 𝑧𝑡) ≔ 𝔼𝑡

̄𝛼(𝜖𝑡+1
Here 𝜖𝑡+1 refers to the set of aggregate shocks. The importance of  ̄𝛼 is 
that in equilibrium it integrates to one because, by the LLN, ̄𝛼 is also the 
consumption share of the speciﬁc type. Consequently, the state of the 
economy 𝑧𝑡 remains deﬁned by 𝜔𝑡 and the consumption share distribu-
tion across types. With CRRA preferences,  ̄𝛼 is independent of 𝛼𝑖
and, 
thus, agent types are still only determined by their beliefs. However, 
unlike  with  complete  markets,  the  distribution  of  types  is  no  longer 
Gaussian.

When agents have habit preferences,  ̄𝛼 also depends on 𝛼𝑖

𝑡 because 
it inﬂuences the consumption-to-wealth ratio 𝑄𝑖
𝑡. This occurs because, 
with  habit  preferences,  wealth  aﬀects  an  individual’s  speculative  ac-
tivity. Agents whose consumption levels are close to their habit levels 
cannot engage in signiﬁcant speculation. Thus, with habit preferences, 
the relevant state variable is 𝛼𝑡(𝛼𝑖
𝑡, 𝜇𝑖
𝑡) since agent types are determined 
by  both  wealth  and  beliefs.  The  proposition  below  characterizes  the 
equilibrium.

Proposition 5. In the incomplete markets equilibrium the price of state 𝑧𝑡+1
in period 𝑡 is given by,

[

𝛼𝑖
𝑡

𝑡 (𝜖𝑡+1)ℎ𝑖
𝑓 𝑖

]
𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1)

1∕𝛾 𝑑𝑖

𝛾
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

𝑝𝑡(𝑧𝑡+1) = 𝛽

(

𝐶𝑡+1 − 𝐻𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡 − 𝐻𝑡

)

−𝛾

⋅

1ˆ
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

0

where we deﬁne,
[ (

ℎ𝑖
𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1) ≔ 𝔼𝑡

)

−𝛾 |
|
|
|
|
|

𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1
̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

]

𝜖𝑡+1

.

The consumption surplus shares evolve according to,

̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1
𝛼𝑖
𝑡

and
𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1
̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

[

=

´

𝛼𝑖
𝑡

𝛼𝑗
𝑡

1
0

𝑡 (𝜖𝑡+1)ℎ𝑖
𝑓 𝑖
[
𝑡 (𝜖𝑡+1)ℎ𝑗
𝑓 𝑗

1∕𝛾

]
𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1)

]
𝑡 (𝜖𝑡+1)

1∕𝛾

𝑑𝑗

=

[

𝔼𝑡

1∕𝑄𝑖

𝑡+1

1∕𝑄𝑖

𝑡+1

|𝜖𝑡+1

(

]

1 +

)

𝑒−𝑠𝑡+1 − 1
̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

−

𝑒−𝑠𝑡+1 − 1
̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

,

where 𝑄𝑖

is characterized by equations (B.4) and (B.5).

Proposition 5 demonstrates that the inability to trade on the indi-
vidual signals aﬀects the equilibrium to the extent that the wealth to 
consumption ratio 𝑄𝑖
𝑡+1 varies with the individual signal, otherwise, if 
𝑄𝑖
𝑡+1 = 𝔼𝑡(𝑄𝑖
𝑡+1 and the equilibrium is as in Propo-
sition 2. Further, the eﬀects on the equilibrium and asset prices come 
from two sources, the ﬁrst being how state prices are determined given 

|𝜖𝑡+1) then 𝛼𝑖

𝑡+1 = ̄𝛼𝑖

𝑡+1

a distribution of types and the second the distribution of types and its 
law of motion.

7.2.  Log-utility preferences

In the special case where agents exhibit log-utility preferences with-
out habit, the market incompleteness does not aﬀect the equilibrium 
because the agents do not need to trade on the individual signals.

Corollary 2. If agents exhibit log utility preferences (𝛾 = 1) and no habit 
(𝐻𝑡 = 0) then the incomplete markets equilibrium is identical to the equilib-
rium with complete markets.

This is the well-known case in which agents have no hedging de-
mand  because  their  consumption-to-wealth  ratio  is  constant  (𝑄𝑖
𝑡 =
1∕(1 − 𝛽)), irrespective of (their perception of) the investment oppor-
tunity  set.  Thus,  from  Proposition 5 we  immediately  see  that  ℎ𝑖
𝑡 =
𝑡+1∕ ̄𝛼𝑖
𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1 = 1 and  that  the  law  of  motion  of  𝛼𝑖
and  the  state  prices 
become identical to those with complete markets.

7.3.  The general case

In the more general case of power utility preferences with or without 
habit, the market incompleteness aﬀects state prices if ℎ𝑖
is on average 
diﬀerent from one and/or it correlates with agent types. However, un-
der a ﬁrst-order approximation neither of these conditions apply since,
]

[

ℎ𝑖
𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1) ≃ 𝔼𝑡

1 − 𝛾

𝜖𝑡+1

= 1.

𝑡+1 − ̄𝛼𝑖
𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1
̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

|
|
|
|
|

Therefore, given the same distribution of types in some period, state 
prices should be approximately the same as those with complete mar-
kets.

𝑡+1∕ ̄𝛼𝑖

In regards to the distribution of types and its law of motion, we also 
expect the market incompleteness to have minimal eﬀect. Under the 
ﬁrst-order approximation when ℎ𝑖 = 1, the ﬁrst step in the change of 
𝑡+1∕𝛼𝑖
over a certain period, that is,  ̄𝛼𝑖
𝛼𝑖
𝑡 , is identical to the change in 
𝛼𝑖
under complete markets. With incomplete markets, there is an addi-
tional change due to the individual signal, i.e., 𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1. Nevertheless, 
this second step has no eﬀect in the distribution of types when agents 
exhibit CRRA preferences and it is expected to have an insigniﬁcant ef-
fect in the general case with habit. In the case of CRRA preferences, the 
types are determined only by beliefs and this second step only redis-
tributes wealth among agents who in the previous period had the same 
beliefs. Their total consumption share is unaﬀected and it is given by 
̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1.

By the same argument, in the case with habit, the second step only 
aﬀects the distribution of types 𝛼𝑡(𝛼, 𝜇) across the dimension of 𝛼 but 
not 𝜇. However, the dimension of 𝛼 only matters to the extent that the 
distribution of ℎ𝑖
aﬀects the state prices but we expect state prices to be 
insigniﬁcantly aﬀected. In other words, if ℎ𝑖 ≃ 1 only the distribution 
across beliefs is important which is not aﬀected by the second step. 
Finally,  even  if  the  distribution  across  𝛼 matters,  the  second  step  is 
entirely deterministic and, thus, does not add any stochastic eﬀects to 
the law of motion of the distribution of types nor to asset prices.

Hence,  the  importance  of  market  incompleteness  on  asset  prices 
depends  on  whether  ℎ𝑖
signiﬁcantly  diﬀers  from  one.  However,  the 
quantitative analysis carried out in Appendix B based on the complete 
market equilibrium illustrates the opposite, that ℎ𝑖
is expected to be 
very close to one in almost all states. Hence, the market incompleteness 
does not appear to alter signiﬁcantly any of the eﬀects we analyze.

8.  Conclusions

In this study, we develop and solve a model of disagreement in a 
large economy populated by a continuum of agents with habit-forming 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377425C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

preferences. These agents interpret information diﬀerently, and the ex-
tent of their disagreement is inﬂuenced by the quality of information. 
Our model is both stationary and elaborate, allowing us to estimate it 
using data on professional forecasts.

Using this disagreement model, we derive a range of qualitative and 
quantitative results regarding asset prices. We ﬁnd that when the qual-
ity  of  information  remains  constant,  asset  prices  behave  similarly  to 
an  economy  without  disagreement.  This  contradicts  earlier  research 
suggesting  that  disagreement  leads  to  excess  stock  market  volatility. 
Increased  volatility  in  sentiment  (market  expectation)  is  one  way  in 
which disagreement can impact asset prices. It arises from the fact that 
speculative actions result in wealth redistribution towards individuals 
who are ultimately proven to be more accurate in hindsight. However, 
we observe minimal impact on asset prices. The second way in which 
prices are inﬂuenced is through variations in market forecast disper-
sion. However, unlike in the case with a ﬁnite number of agent types, 
with a continuum of agents the forecast dispersion is constant, unless 
the factor of disagreement ﬂuctuates.

The  estimation  of  the  model,  however,  reveals  that  information 
quality is volatile, persistent, and is primarily inﬂuenced by aggregate 
shocks.  Positive  shocks  enhance  information  quality  while  reducing 
disagreement. This has several important stock and bond market impli-
cations that are supported by evidence. For example, it helps explain the 
equity premium and the stock market volatility, the correlation between 
the stock market and dispersion in forecasts, the limited correlation be-
tween the stock market and the risk-free rate, the upward sloping real 
yield curve, and variations in long-term real yields.

We want to emphasize that, aside from the disagreement model that 
is estimated independently from asset pricing data, our model main-
tains parsimony by relying solely on the aggregate endowment shock 
to drive the economy’s dynamics. Overall, our ﬁndings indicate that 
disagreement holds signiﬁcant relevance as a fundamental asset pric-
ing factor, although not through the channels conventionally explored 
in the literature. Instead, it operates through the factor(s) that underlie 
disagreement. In our model, this factor is information quality, which is 
both reasonable and supported by theoretical justiﬁcations.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Costas Xiouros: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Methodology, Investigation. Fernando Zapatero: Writing – review & 
editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

The code and data packet for this article can be found at: https://

doi .org /10 .17632 /x2yd4dt526 .2.

Appendix A.  Campbell-Shiller decompositions

We perform a Campbell and Shiller (1988) variance decomposition 
analysis of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio for our models and compare the results with 
the data. The results are shown in Table A.1. The method decomposes 
the variance of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio into ﬂuctuations in cumulative dividend 
growth, stock market return and the 𝑝𝑑-ratio 60 quarters ahead (𝑝𝑑
60). 
The stock market return is further decomposed into excess return and 
the risk-free rate. To compare the model with the data, we begin by 
generating 1000 simulations, each consisting of 400 quarters. This sam-
ple size closely matches the length of the data, spanning from 1927Q1 

to 2016Q4. Next, we compute the average (Model #) and standard devi-
ation (𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣) across simulations, as well as the 𝑡-statistic (𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡), which 
assesses the hypothesis that the data estimate is equal to the model av-
erage. However, it is crucial to acknowledge that 100-year samples may 
not be long enough to reveal the true decomposition, despite the model 
being stationary. To address this, we also perform a “true” decomposi-
tion by conducting a long simulation (Long) spanning 500,000 quarters.
The data reveals that variations in the 𝑝𝑑-ratio can be attributed 
to diﬀerent factors as follows: 12% are associated with ﬂuctuations in 
dividend growth, 70% with ﬂuctuations in returns, and 16% with ﬂuc-
tuations in 𝑝𝑑
60. Moreover, the variations attributed to returns can be 
further decomposed into 79% attributed to excess returns, while −9%
can be attributed to the oﬀsetting variation from future risk-free rates.

Now let’s examine the predictions of the full model (Model 1). In 
the 100-year samples, the ﬂuctuations in 𝑝𝑑
60 have, on average, very 
little explanatory power, accounting for only 2%. This suggests that the 
model does not typically generate certain persistent eﬀects observed 
in the data. The ﬂuctuations in future returns account on average for 
109% of  the  variations  in  the  𝑝𝑑-ratio,  comprising  91% from  excess 
returns and 19% from variations in future risk-free rates. Lastly, divi-
dend growth oﬀsets, on average, 10% of the variations in the 100-year 
samples, despite the positive dependence of stock prices on cash-ﬂow 
growth.

However, the standard deviations of all statistics across simulations 
are  substantial.  For  example,  this  is  0.12 regarding  the  explanatory 
power of 𝑝𝑑
60, which means that the data estimate lies slightly more 
than one standard deviation away from the model mean. This implies 
that, from the model’s perspective, the data estimate falls within sta-
tistical error. Conversely, from the standpoint of the data estimate, the 
model mean shows a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence with a 𝑡-statistic 
of 2.26.

Hence, in the 100-year samples, the model exhibits similar patterns 
to the data, with the majority of stock price ﬂuctuations attributed to 
future stock excess returns. The discrepancy between the data and the 
model in terms of the explanatory power of future excess returns is sta-
tistically insigniﬁcant, indicated by a 𝑡-statistic of 0.57. However, from 
the standpoint of the data estimates, there are statistically signiﬁcant 
diﬀerences in terms of the coeﬃcients associated with future cash-ﬂows 
and interest rates.

Next, we observe that the average Campbell-Shiller decomposition 
performed on the 100-year simulated paths diﬀers from that of the long 
simulation. In the long simulation, only 63% of the ﬂuctuations in the 
𝑝𝑑-ratio can be attributed to variations in future excess returns, con-
trasting with the 91% indicated by the 100-year paths. Regarding the 
variations  associated  with  the  risk-free  rate,  the  long  simulation  re-
veals a more substantial role, accounting for 23% compared to 19%. 
This indicates that the risk-free rate contributes to a volatility of 0.083
(23% × 0.36) in the 𝑝𝑑-ratio. Similar conclusion derives from Model 2, 
where 51% of the variations come from the risk-free rate, contributing 
0.087 (51% × 0.17) to the total volatility.

By examining the results from the remaining models, we gain fur-
ther insights into the signiﬁcance of the risk-free rate and the impact of 
ﬂuctuating information quality. In Model 3, for instance, only market 
expectations vary. Based on the long simulation results, we deduce that 
the cash-ﬂow channel contributes approximately 0.04 to the volatility 
of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio (2.18% × 0.02), while the discount rate channel generates 
an oﬀsetting variation of around −0.024 (−1.19% × 0.02). This suggests 
that out of the 0.083 volatility inferred from Model 1, approximately 
−0.024 stems from ﬂuctuations in the variable  ̃𝜇𝑡, while approximately 
0.107 results from variations in disagreement. Hence, at least one-third 
of the 𝑝𝑑-ratio volatility in Model 1 (0.31) originates from the net eﬀect 
of stochastic information quality on the risk-free rate. In addition, the 
stochastic information quality also generates ﬂuctuations in excess re-
turns, resulting in a volatility contribution of around 0.049 (29% × 0.17
in Model 2), for a total contribution of around 0.156. This aligns with 
our  previous  observation  when  comparing  the  𝑝𝑑-ratio  volatility  be-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377426C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

Table A.1
Campbell-Shiller variance decomposition. This table reports the Campbell-Shiller variance de-
composition of the stock market log price-to-dividend ratio, 𝑝𝑑, into ﬂuctuations in cash-ﬂow 
growth 𝑔𝑑 , the risk-free rate 𝑟𝑓
𝑡 , the stock market excess return 𝑟𝑒
𝑡 and the stock mar-
60. 𝑟𝑚
ket price dividend ratio 60 quarters ahead 𝑝𝑑
𝑡 denote the log stock market return 
and the log risk-free rate, respectively, between period 𝑡 and 𝑡 + 1. The standard errors for the 
data estimates 𝑠.𝑒. are estimated using the Newey and West (1987) method with 16 lags. Mod-
els 1 to 6 are as in Tables 3 and 5–see parameters in Tables 2 and 4. For each model we report 
the averages and standard deviations (𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣) of 1,000 simulations of 400 quarters each (with a 
burn-in of 100 quarters). We also report the results for one long simulation of 500,000 quarters. 
The 𝑡-statistics for the models 𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡 refer to the hypotheses that the data estimates are equal to the 
model averages.

𝑡+1 and 𝑟𝑓

𝑡+1 − 𝑟𝑓

𝑡+1 = 𝑟𝑚

𝑔𝑑

−𝑟𝑚

−𝑟𝑒

−𝑟𝑓

Data

𝑠.𝑒.

Model 1 (𝑎𝑣𝑔.)
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡
Long simulation
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

Model 2 (𝑎𝑣𝑔.)
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡
Long simulation
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

Model 3 (𝑎𝑣𝑔.)
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡
Long simulation
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

Model 4 (𝑎𝑣𝑔.)
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡
Long simulation
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

Model 5 (𝑎𝑣𝑔.)
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡
Long simulation
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

Model 6 (𝑎𝑣𝑔.)
𝑠𝑡.𝑑𝑒𝑣
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡
Long simulation
𝑡 − 𝑠𝑡

0.12
(0.08)

-0.10
0.37
(2.74)
0.05
(0.92)

-0.11
0.73
(2.80)
0.15
(0.33)

0.70
(0.12)

1.09
0.43
(3.25)
0.86
(1.33)

1.13
0.78
(3.49)
0.80
(0.84)

1.45
2.60
(11.56)
2.18
(25.90)

-0.43
2.61
(7.73)
-1.18
(15.52)

-0.31
0.94
(5.15)
0.12
(0.07)

-0.40
1.19
(5.90)
0.16
(0.43)

1.61
3.69
(10.54)
0.56
(5.46)

1.27
1.02
(4.52)
0.69
(0.10)

1.34
1.26
(5.06)
0.63
(0.60)

-0.59
3.66
(7.70)
0.40
(2.45)

0.79
(0.21)

0.91
0.43
(0.57)
0.63
(0.73)

0.71
0.80
(0.37)
0.29
(2.40)

0.49
2.35
(1.33)
0.01
(3.74)

1.23
0.92
(2.10)
0.76
(0.15)

1.56
1.08
(3.67)
1.07
(1.35)

-0.82
3.04
(7.01)
-0.60
(6.69)

-0.09
(0.12)

0.19
0.11
(2.39)
0.23
(2.70)

0.42
0.24
(4.38)
0.51
(5.18)

-0.93
0.54
(7.16)
-1.19
(9.51)

0.04
0.20
(1.09)
-0.07
(0.16)

-0.21
0.38
(1.09)
-0.44
(3.05)

0.22
1.42
(2.50)
1.00
(9.41)

𝑝𝑑

60

0.16
(0.06)

0.02
0.12
(2.26)
0.13
(0.52)

-0.01
0.12
(2.74)
0.06
(1.56)

-0.01
0.06
(2.68)
0.00
(2.50)

0.05
0.15
(1.72)
0.21
(0.68)

0.06
0.16
(1.65)
0.23
(1.09)

-0.02
0.10
(2.79)
0.04
(1.83)

𝜎(𝑟𝑒)
(%)

10.53
(1.55)

11.61
0.54
(0.70)
11.63
(0.71)

8.94
0.40
(1.02)
8.94
(1.02)

6.52
0.23
(2.58)
6.53
(2.57)

8.17
0.31
(1.51)
8.19
(1.50)

7.66
0.31
(1.85)
7.67
(1.84)

6.25
0.23
(2.75)
6.26
(2.74)

𝜎(𝑟𝑓 )
(%)

0.84
(0.09)

0.85
0.07
(0.10)
0.86
(0.21)

0.85
0.07
(0.11)
0.86
(0.21)

0.61
0.04
(2.44)
0.62
(2.37)

0.61
0.04
(2.44)
0.62
(2.37)

0.79
0.07
(0.54)
0.81
(0.30)

0.79
0.07
(0.52)
0.82
(0.27)

𝜎(𝑝𝑑)

0.44
(0.05)

0.31
0.06
(2.38)
0.36
(1.55)

0.16
0.03
(5.33)
0.17
(5.11)

0.02
0.00
(7.83)
0.02
(7.83)

0.14
0.03
(5.60)
0.17
(5.14)

0.11
0.03
(6.14)
0.13
(5.72)

0.03
0.01
(7.73)
0.03
(7.69)

tween Model 1 and Model 2, where approximately half of the variation 
is eliminated when a constant price of risk is set in Model 2.

Despite the information quality, particularly through the risk-free 
rate,  contributing  to  at  least  one-third  of  the  ﬂuctuations  in  the  𝑝𝑑-
ratio, it is important to note that a 100-year sample on average suggests 
only a minor role for the risk-free rate in generating ﬂuctuations. This 
discrepancy arises mainly because, in the 100-year samples, most of the 
variations attributed to the risk-free rate are mistakenly interpreted by 
the Campbell-Shiller decomposition as originating from variations in 
excess returns. This distinction becomes evident when examining the 
results of Model 2, where constant risk aversion is assumed. While the 
long simulation correctly attributes only 29% of the variations to excess 
returns, the 100-year samples mistakenly indicate their importance to 
be 71%. This translates to about 0.071 of volatility (42% × 0.17) erro-
neously attributed to excess returns, which constitutes about one-fourth 
of the total volatility in Model 1 (0.31).

Regarding the sources of stock market variations in the model, we 
would like to highlight two more points. Firstly, we note that varia-
tions in the equity premium, which arise from the market expectations 
bias (refer to Lemma 5), have minimal impact on the 𝑝𝑑-ratio. This is 
evident from the results of Model 3, where in the long simulation the 

excess returns account for 1% of the volatility. In the 100-year samples, 
the Campbell-Shiller decomposition mistakenly attributes 49% of the 
variations to ﬂuctuations in future excess returns, but this is also small 
when considering the low volatility (0.02) that Model 3 generates. This 
result reinforces our observation that the impact of disagreement on the 
stock market through variations in market expectations is insigniﬁcant.
Secondly, in Model 4, when we eliminate variations in information 
quality, we observe a counter-factually strong relationship between the 
𝑝𝑑-ratio and future excess returns in the 100-year samples. Also, the 
coeﬃcient of future cash-ﬂows is notably negative in these results. In 
this context, Model 1 represents an improvement. It is important to fur-
ther note that Model 5 exhibits a similar behavior to Model 4, where we 
reintroduce variations in information quality but without disagreement. 
This  result  further  supports  our  observation  that  variations  in  infor-
mation quality without disagreement are not important for the stock 
market.

Appendix B.  Incomplete markets

Here we provide the analysis of the incomplete market case where 
agents are not able to trade on their own signals. For simplicity and 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377427C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

computational tractability we consider the case of constant information 
quality.

because  they  determine  how  much  agents  speculate.  Speciﬁcally,  an 
agent’s consumption is given by,

B.1.  Equilibrium deﬁnition and conditions

Markets are complete with respect to the aggregate shock 𝑔𝑡+1 and 
the common signal 𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1.45 Hence, agents can trade a complete set of 
Arrow-Debreau securities with respect to the shocks 𝜖𝑡+1 = (𝑔𝑡+1
𝑡+1), 
whose prices at time 𝑡 are denoted with 𝑝𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1). The set of Euler opti-
mality conditions for an agent 𝑖 is given by,
)

, 𝑠𝑚

[ (

]

𝑝𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1) = 𝔼𝑡

𝜖𝑡+1

𝑁𝑡+1

𝑓 𝑖
𝑡 (𝜖𝑡+1),

(B.1)

𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1
𝛼𝑖
𝑡

−𝛾 |
|
|
|
|
|

∀𝜖𝑡+1,  where  𝑓 𝑖
𝑡 (𝜖𝑡+1) is  the  conditional  probability  density  function 
of the aggregate shocks and represents the beliefs of agent 𝑖. The op-
timality condition (B.1) involves an expectation because the optimal 
consumption surplus share 𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1 depends, not only on the state of the 
economy, but also on the realization of the individual signal 𝑠𝑖
𝑡+1. There-
fore, it is a conditional expectation over the individual signal 𝑠𝑖
𝑡+1. This 
conditional expectation is under the objective probability measure be-
cause, as we have explained, the rationality constraint (8) implies that 
agents have the correct beliefs regarding the distribution of their indi-
vidual signals conditional on the realization of the common signal.

The other optimality condition is given by the inter-temporal budget 
constraint. Letting 𝑞𝑖
𝑡 denote the beginning of period wealth of agent 𝑖
and 𝑐𝑖
𝑡 the consumption of agent 𝑖, both normalized by the per-capita 
consumption, the inter-temporal budget constraint can be expressed as 
follows:

𝑡 = 𝑐𝑖
𝑞𝑖

𝑡 +

𝑝𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1)

𝐶𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡

𝑞𝑖
𝑡+1

𝑑𝜖𝑡+1

.

(B.2)

In equilibrium, 𝑐𝑖
𝑡 integrates to the aggregate 
wealth to consumption ratio 𝑄𝑡, which satisﬁes the following Euler con-
dition,

𝑡 integrates to one and 𝑞𝑖

𝑄𝑡 = 1 +

𝑝𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1)

𝐶𝑡+1
𝐶𝑡

𝑄𝑡+1

𝑑𝜖𝑡+1

.

(B.3)

𝑡 and wealth plan 𝑞𝑖

Eﬀectively, each agent chooses consumption 𝑐𝑖

𝑡+1
contingent  on  𝜖𝑡+1 so  that  (B.1) and  (B.2) are  satisﬁed.  The  agents 
cannot  trade  on  their  individual  signals  but  their  optimal  wealth  to 
consumption ratios, which we denote with 𝑄𝑖
𝑡 , depend on their 
beliefs and their beliefs are aﬀected by their signals. Thus, with incom-
plete markets their consumption or consumption surplus shares depend 
on their signals, just like their wealth to consumption ratio, which is 
characterized by,

𝑡 ≔ 𝑞𝑖

𝑡∕𝑐𝑖

ˆ

ˆ

𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 .

𝑡 = 1 − 𝑒𝑠𝑡 + 𝛼𝑖
𝑐𝑖
The above implies that an agent speculates more, i.e., 𝑐𝑖
𝑡 depends more 
on 𝛼𝑖
𝑡 and the agent’s beliefs, when wealth is higher (higher 𝛼). In turn, 
the level of speculation, and hence 𝛼𝑖
𝑡. With CRRA preferences 
the state is only given by the distribution across beliefs, since then 𝑄𝑖
𝑡
does not depend on 𝛼𝑖

𝑡 aﬀects 𝑄𝑖

𝑡 (or 𝑞𝑖
𝑡 ).

(B.5)

Let us now deﬁne the equilibrium. We express the optimal policy 
𝑡, 𝑧𝑡), noting that choos-
. We denote the portfolio policy with 

function regarding consumption as 𝛼𝑖
ing 𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1 = P𝑞(𝑞𝑖
𝑞𝑖

is equivalent to choosing 𝑐𝑖

𝑡, 𝑧𝑡, 𝜖𝑡+1). Also, let 𝑝(𝑧𝑡, 𝜖𝑡+1) = 𝑝𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1) and 𝑄𝑡 = 𝑄(𝑧𝑡).

𝑡 = P𝛼(𝑞𝑖

𝑡, 𝜇𝑖

𝑡, 𝜇𝑖

Deﬁnition 1. The equilibrium with incomplete markets is a set of pol-
icy functions (P𝛼, P𝑞), a state price function 𝑝, an aggregate wealth to 
consumption ratio function 𝑄, and a law of motion 𝑧′ = L(𝑧, 𝜖) such 
that,

(i) The individual optimality conditions (B.1) and (B.2) are satisﬁed, 

for all (𝑧, 𝑞, 𝜇).

(ii) For all 𝑧 and 𝜖, the consumption good market and the asset mar-

kets clear, that is,

ˆ

1 =

P𝛼(𝑞, 𝜇, 𝑧)𝑛(𝑧, 𝑞, 𝜇)𝑑(𝑞, 𝜇),

ˆ

𝑄 [L(𝑧, 𝜖)] =

P𝑞(𝑞, 𝜇, 𝑧, 𝜖)𝑛(𝑧, 𝑞, 𝜇)𝑑(𝑞, 𝜇).

(iii) The aggregate wealth to consumption ratio 𝑄 satisﬁes (B.3)
(iv) The law of motion L is consistent with the policy function P𝑞 , the 
law of motion of 𝑠 (16), and the law of motion of the individual 
beliefs given by Lemma 1.

The existence of an equilibrium according to Deﬁnition 1 relies on 
the ability to aggregate agents into types according to their wealth and 
beliefs, despite of the fact that their consumption and beliefs are sub-
ject to the idiosyncratic risk of their individual signals. This would not 
be the case if there was a ﬁnite set of agents, in which case the state 
vector would include the beliefs and wealth of each agent and the law 
of motion would depend on the individual signals.

With a continuum of agents, we can aggregate agents into types be-
cause, ﬁrst, agents with the same beliefs and wealth make the same 
consumption and portfolio choices. Second, the change in the distribu-
tion 𝑛(𝑧𝑡, 𝑞, 𝜇) only depends on the aggregate shocks 𝜖𝑡+1, because, the 
continuous set of individual signals has a predictable eﬀect on the dis-
tribution of types, a property used to prove Propositions 1 and 3.46

𝑄𝑖

𝑡 = 1 + 𝔼𝑖
𝑡

𝑁𝑡+1

𝑄𝑖

𝑡+1

.

(B.4)

B.2.  Equilibrium characterization

[

(

)

]

𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1
𝛼𝑖
𝑡

−𝛾 𝐶 𝑖
𝑡+1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡

In contrast, with complete markets the agents hedge their individual 
signals in the sense that, in any period, an agent chooses a contingent 
wealth plan so that the ratio 𝑞𝑖
𝑡+1 is unaﬀected by the idiosyncratic 
part of the agent’s signal.

𝑡+1∕𝑄𝑖

Let 𝑧𝑡 denote the state of the economy which is determined by the 
log surplus consumption ratio 𝑠𝑡 and the joint distribution of individual 
wealth and beliefs, 𝑛𝑡(𝑞, 𝜇) = 𝑛(𝑧𝑡, 𝑞, 𝜇). We need the level 𝑠𝑡, instead 
of its deviations 𝜔𝑡 from the steady state, and individual wealth levels 

Consider the set of agents whose wealth and beliefs are given by 𝑞
and 𝜇 in period 𝑡 and whose consumption allocation in period 𝑡 + 1 can 
be expressed in terms of the state in period 𝑡 and the shocks in period 
𝑡 + 1 as 𝛼𝑖
, 𝑞, 𝜇, 𝑧𝑡). Their consumption in period 𝑡 + 1
will, in general, diﬀer due to the idiosyncratic part of their individual 
signals 𝜖𝑖
|𝜖𝑡+1) will be 
the  same  for  this  set  of  agents.  Then,  by  the  LLN,  the  “sum”  of  the 

𝑡+1 = P𝛼(𝜖𝑖
𝑡+1
𝑡+1. However, the conditional expectation 𝔼𝑡(𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

, 𝜖𝑡+1

45 Markets being complete with respect to 𝑔𝑡+1 and 𝑠𝑚
𝑡+1 means that agents can 
generate contingent wealth plans on these two shocks. Since the stock is a claim 
to the aggregate dividend, which is not perfectly correlated with aggregate con-
sumption, it implies that in continuous time there is need for a risk-free asset 
and three more independent risky assets, e.g. the dividend claim, a consump-
tion claim, and a consol bond, or the dividend claim and two long-term bonds. 
In discrete time more assets would be needed, e.g. derivatives on the stock.

, 𝑞′, 𝜇) denote the distribution of types in period 𝑡 + 1 before agents 
46 Let ̃𝑛(𝑧𝑡+1
update their beliefs. Agents update their beliefs according to 𝜇′ = 𝑎
𝜖
where 𝜖 represents the idiosyncratic component of the individual’s signal. Then, 
the distribution of types after the updating of beliefs is given by

𝜇 + 𝑎
2

0 + 𝑎

1

ˆ

(

𝑛(𝑧𝑡+1

, 𝑞′, 𝜇′) =

1
𝑎
2
where 𝑓𝜖(⋅) represents the density of 𝜖.

𝜇′ − 𝑎
0 − 𝑎
𝑎
2

𝑓𝜖

𝜇

1

)

̃𝑛(𝑧𝑡+1

, 𝑞′, 𝜇)𝑑𝜇,

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377428C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

𝜖𝑡+1

|
, 𝑞, 𝜇, 𝑧𝑡)
|
|
𝑡+1 = ̄𝛼(𝜖𝑡+1

consumption surplus shares in period  𝑡 + 1 of this set of agents will 
equal the conditional expectation, i.e.,
ˆ

[

]

𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

1(𝑞𝑖

𝑡 = 𝑞, 𝜇𝑖

𝑡 = 𝜇)𝑑𝑖 = 𝔼𝑡

P𝛼(𝜖𝑖

𝑡+1

, 𝜖𝑡+1

.

(B.6)

We denote the expected value above with  ̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡, 𝑧𝑡). The 
importance of the above property is that we can impose market clearing 
to ̄𝛼 and derive equilibrium implications, since,
¨

𝑡, 𝜇𝑖

, 𝑞𝑖

ˆ

𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1

1(𝑞𝑖

𝑡 = 𝑞, 𝜇𝑖

𝑡 = 𝜇)𝑑𝑖 𝑑(𝑞, 𝜇) =

̄𝛼(𝜖𝑡+1

, 𝑞, 𝜇, 𝑧𝑡)𝑑(𝑞, 𝜇) = 1.

(B.7)

as 𝛼𝑖

𝑡 = (𝛼𝑖

𝑡+1∕𝛼𝑖

𝑡+1∕𝛼𝑖

𝑡+1) ⋅ ( ̄𝛼𝑖

Speciﬁcally, we use the above condition to express the equilibrium state 
prices and the law of motion of the consumption surplus shares, similar 
to the case of complete markets. To do so, we express the growth rate in 
𝑡+1∕ ̄𝛼𝑖
𝛼𝑖
𝑡) in the Euler condition (B.1). Thus, 
we split the change in 𝛼𝑖
in two steps; the ﬁrst after the realization of 
𝜖𝑡+1, for which we use the market clearing condition on ̄𝛼, which gives 
the expected consumption surplus share of an agent type before the 
realization of the individual signal. The second, after the observation of 
the individual signal which makes an agent deviate from the expected 
consumption surplus share of his type, depending on the realization of 
the signal. For the second step, we use the condition that 𝑄𝑖
and the fact that 𝑞𝑖
thus, obtain Proposition 5.

𝑡+1 = 𝑞𝑖
𝑐𝑖
𝑡+1
𝑡+1 does not depend on the individual signal. We, 

𝑡+1

𝑡+1 (instead of 𝑞𝑖

According to Proposition 5, we can deﬁne the equilibrium in terms 
of the law of motion of 𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1), the state price 𝑝𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1), and 
the individual consumption-to-wealth ratio 𝑄𝑖
𝑡 ) in terms 
of the state (𝑧𝑡, 𝛼𝑖
𝑡 for the individual 
state because of the monotonic relation between the two. Accordingly, 
the aggregate state of the economy is given by 𝑠𝑡 and the consumption 
surplus share distribution across consumption shares and beliefs, i.e.,

𝑡). We can use 𝛼𝑖

𝑡 (instead of 𝑐𝑖

𝑡 instead of 𝑞𝑖

𝑡, 𝜇𝑖

𝛼𝑡(𝛼, 𝜇) =

1ˆ

0

𝑡 1(𝛼𝑖
𝛼𝑖

𝑡 = 𝛼, 𝜇𝑖

𝑡 = 𝜇)𝑑𝑖.

, 𝑠, and 𝜇𝑖

The law of motion of the state is then given by the laws of motion of 
is not a function of 𝛼𝑖
𝛼𝑖
, 
the agent types are only determined by beliefs and hence the relevant 
distribution is 𝛼𝑡(𝜇) as with complete markets.

. With CRRA preferences, where 𝑄𝑖

B.3.  Log-utility preferences and the general case

When agents exhibit log-utility preferences without habit, we have,

(

)

−1 𝐶 𝑖

𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1
𝛼𝑖
𝑡

= 𝛽.

𝑁𝑡+1

𝑡+1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑡
Hence, from equation (B.4) we obtain 𝑄𝑖
̄𝛼𝑖
𝑡+1.

𝑡 = 1∕(1 − 𝛽) and, thus, 𝛼𝑖

𝑡+1 =

In  the  general  case,  the  importance  of  market  incompleteness  on 
asset prices depends on whether ℎ𝑖
signiﬁcantly diﬀers from one. To get 
an idea of the possible values of ℎ𝑖
, we use the complete market solution 
and compute ℎ𝑖
from 𝑄𝑖
as deﬁned by Proposition 5. With complete 
markets we can express ℎ𝑖
, 𝜇𝑡+1 − ̃𝜇𝑡+1) and we vary 
𝑡(𝜖𝑡+1) = ℎ(𝑧𝑡+1
each state variable in turn, while keeping the rest at their steady state 
values. We perform this analysis with constant information quality, both 
for the case with CRRA preferences and the case with habit. With CRRA 
preferences ℎ depends on  ̃𝜇 and 𝜇𝑖 − ̃𝜇 and we ﬁnd that ℎ is extremely 
close to one with the highest value observed being less than 1.001. With 
habit-formation preferences (Model 4), ℎ depends on ( ̃𝜇, 𝜔, 𝛼, 𝜇𝑖 − ̃𝜇)
and Fig. B.1 shows how it varies with each state variable.47 We see 

, 𝛼𝑡+1

Fig. B.1. Quantity ℎ − 1 in complete markets. The ﬁgure shows deviations 
of ℎ from 1, where ℎ is deﬁned in Proposition 5, in the complete markets case 
of habit-formation preferences with stochastic risk aversion and constant infor-
mation quality (Model 4). For these plots, we vary one state variable at a time, 
keeping the rest at their steady state values. For these computations we use 
̄𝑠 = ln(1 − 0.93).

that ℎ deviates from one only during periods of very high risk aversion 
(𝜔 < −0.1). However, based on the probability distribution of 𝜔, shown 
in Fig. 3, the economy spends less than 0.15% of the time in such states.
For the computations shown in Fig. B.1, we set  ̄𝑠 = ln(0.07), which 
means that at the steady state 𝐻∕𝐶 = 0.93. The level of the surplus 
consumption ratio determines the volatility of the individual consump-
tion growth as can be inferred from equation (B.5). The value for ̄𝑠 was 
chosen to generate a realistic unconditional volatility of individual con-
sumption growth, which, for this value is a bit higher than two times 
the volatility of the per-capita consumption growth.48 Yet, the results 
in Fig. B.1 are largely insensitive to the choice of ̄𝑠.

Appendix.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2023 .103774.

References

Abel, A.B., 1990. Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses. 

Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. Proc. 80, 38–42.

Abrahams, M., Adrian, T., Crump, R.K., Moench, E., Yu, R., 2016. Decomposing real and 

nominal yield curves. J. Monet. Econ. 84, 182–200.

Ai, H., 2010. Information quality and long-run risk: asset pricing implications. J. Fi-

nance 65, 1333–1367.

Atmaz,  A.,  Basak,  S.,  2018.  Belief  dispersion  in  the  stock  market.  J.  Finance 73, 

1225–1279.

Avramov, D., Chordia, T., Jostova, G., Philipov, A., 2009. Dispersion in analysts’ earnings 

forecasts and credit rating. J. Financ. Econ. 91, 83–101.

Bansal, R., Shaliastovich, I., 2013. A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles 

in bond and currency markets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 26, 1–33.

47 The non-smoothness in ℎ is due to numerical approximation error. A very 
high order of approximation for the individual wealth to consumption ratio 𝑄𝑖
was necessary to compute ℎ with suﬃcient accuracy.

48 Gomes  and  Michaelides  (2008) report,  using  numbers  from  Malloy  et 
al. (2009), that the annual consumption volatility of stockholders was 3.6%
compared  to  the  aggregate  consumption  volatility  of  1.7% over  the  period 
1982–2004.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377429Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: a potential resolution of asset pricing 

Hsu, A., Li, E.X., Palomino, F., 2021. Real and nominal equilibrium yield curves. Manag. 

Barro,  R.J.,  2006.  Rare  disasters  and  asset  markets  in  the  twentieth  century.  Q.  J. 

Johnson, T.C., 2004. Forecast dispersion and the cross section of expected returns. J. 

C. Xiouros and F. Zapatero

puzzles. J. Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Econ. 121, 823–866.

Barron, O.E., Stanford, M.H., Yu, Y., 2009. Further evidence on the relation between 
analysts’ forecast dispersion and stock returns. Contemp. Account. Res. 26, 329–357.
Basak, S., 2000. A model of dynamic equilibrium asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs 

and extraneous risk. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 24, 63–95.

Basak,  S.,  2005.  Asset  pricing  with  heterogeneous  beliefs.  J.  Bank.  Finance 29, 

Bhamra, H.S., Uppal, R., 2014. Asset prices with heterogeneity in preferences and beliefs. 

2849–2881.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 27, 519–580.

Boudoukh, J., Michaely, R., Richardson, M., Michael, R.R., 2007. On the importance 
of measuring payout yield: implications for empirical asset pricing. J. Finance 62, 
877–915.

Branger, N., Konermann, P., Schlag, C., 2020. Optimists and pessimists in (in) complete 

markets. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 55, 2466–2499.

Sci. 67, 1138–1158.

Finance 59, 1957–1978.

752–770.

Jouini, E., Napp, C., 2006a. Aggregation of heterogeneous beliefs. J. Math. Econ. 42, 

Jouini, E., Napp, C., 2006b. Heterogeneous beliefs and asset pricing in discrete time: an 

analysis of pessimism and doubt. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 30, 1233–1260.

Jouini, E., Napp, C., 2007. Consensus consumer and intertemporal asset pricing with 

heterogeneous beliefs. Rev. Econ. Stud. 74, 1149–1174.

Judd, K.L., Kubler, F., Schmedders, K., 2000. Computing equilibria in inﬁnite-horizon 
ﬁnance economies: the case of one asset. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 24, 1047–1078.
Judd, K.L., Kubler, F., Schmedders, K., 2002. A solution method for incomplete asset 
markets with heterogeneous agents. Unpublished manuscript, Standford University 
36.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: an analysis of decisions under risk. 

Brennan,  M.J.,  Xia,  Y.,  2001.  Stock  price  volatility  and  equity  premium.  J.  Monet. 

Kaltenbrunner, G., Lochstoer, L.A., 2010. Long-run risk through consumption smoothing 

Buraschi, A., Jiltsov, A., 2006. Model uncertainty and option markets with heterogeneous 

Kandel, E., Pearson, N.D., 1995. Diﬀerential interpretation of public signals and trade in 

Econ. 47, 249–283.

beliefs. J. Finance 61, 2841–2897.

Econometrica 47, 263–291.

23, 3141–3189.

Buraschi, A., Trojani, F., Vedolin, A., 2014. When uncertainty blows in the orchard: co-

movement and equilibrium volatility risk premia. J. Finance 69, 101–137.

Campbell, J.Y., 1986. Bond and stock returns in a simple exchange model. Q. J. Econ. 101, 

785–803.

Campbell, J.Y., Cochrane, J.H., 1999. By force of habit: a consumption-based explanation 

of aggregate stock market behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 107, 205–251.

Campbell, J.Y., Shiller, R.J., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future 

dividends and discount factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1, 195–228.

Chen, J., Hong, H., Stein, J.C., 2002. Breadth of ownership and stock returns. J. Financ. 

Polit. Econ. 106 (5), 867–896.

Cochrane, J.H., 2008. The dog that did not bark: a defense of return predictability. Rev. 

of interest rates. J. Financ. Econ. 115, 42–57.

Constantinides, G., 1990. Habit formation: a resolution of the equity premium puzzle. J. 

sumption risk and asset returns. J. Finance 64, 2427–2479.

Cvitani´c, J., Malamud, S., 2011. Price impact and portfolio impact. J. Financ. Econ. 100, 

risk taking? Q. J. Econ. 126, 373–416.

Cvitani´c, J., Jouini, E., Malamud, S., Napp, C., 2011. Financial markets equilibrium with 

geneous beliefs. Am. Econ. Rev. 112, 2465–2517.

heterogeneous agents. Rev. Finance 16, 285–321.

D’Amico, S., Kim, D.H., Wei, M., 2018. Tips from tips: the informational content of trea-

sury inﬂation-protected security prices. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 53, 395–436.

David, A., 2008. Heterogeneous beliefs, speculation, and the equity premium. J. Fi-

Econ. 66, 171–205.

Financ. Stud. 21, 1533–1575.

Polit. Econ. 98 (3), 519–543.

201–225.

nance 63, 41–83.

J. Econ. Theory 62, 294–320.

Detemple, J.B., Murthy, S., 1994. Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs. 

Financ. Stud. 28, 1914–1959.

Diether, K., Malloy, C., Scherbina, A., 2002. Diﬀerences of opinion and the cross section 

Technical Report 3.

of stock returns. J. Finance 57, 2113–2141.

Doukas, J.A., Kim, C.F., Pantzalis, C., 2006. Divergence of opinion and equity returns. J. 

Dumas, B., Lyasoﬀ, A., 2012. Incomplete-market equilibria solved recursively on an event 

302–337.

Financ. Quant. Anal. 41, 573–606.

tree. J. Finance 67, 1897–1941.

Dumas, B., Kurshev, A., Uppal, R., 2009. Equilibrium portfolio strategies in the presence 

of sentiment risk and excess volatility. J. Finance 64, 579–629.

speculative markets. J. Polit. Econ. 103, 831–872.

Karatzas, I., Lehoczky, J.P., Shreve, S.E., Xu, G.L., 1991. Martingale and duality meth-
ods for utility maximization in an incomplete market. SIAM J. Control Optim. 29, 
702–730.

K˝oszegi, B., Rabin, M., 2006. A model of reference-dependent preferences. Q. J. Econ. 121, 

1133–1165.

K˝oszegi, B., Rabin, M., 2009. Reference-dependent consumption plans. Am. Econ. Rev. 99, 

909–936.

Krusell, P., Smith, A.A., 1998. Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy. J. 

Kung, H., 2015. Macroeconomic linkages between monetary policy and the term structure 

Malloy, C.J., Moskowitz, T.J., Vissing-Jørgensen, A., 2009. Long-run stockholder con-

Malmendier, U., Nagel, S., 2011. Depression babies: do macroeconomic experiences aﬀect 

Martin, I., Papadimitriou, D., 2022. Sentiment and speculation in a market with hetero-

Miller,  E.M.,  1977.  Risk,  uncertainty,  and  divergence  of  opinion.  J.  Finance 32, 

1151–1168.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-deﬁnite, heteroskedasticity and 

autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703–708.

Osambela, E., 2015. Diﬀerences of opinion, endogenous liquidity, and asset prices. Rev. 

Panageas, S., 2020. The Implications of Heterogeneity and Inequality for Asset Pricing. 

Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., 2006. Equilibrium yield curves. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 21, 

389–472.

Rayo, L., Becker, G.S., 2007. Evolutionary eﬃciency and happiness. J. Polit. Econ. 115, 

Roll, R., 2004. Empirical tips. Financ. Anal. J. 60, 31–53.
Rudebusch, G.D., Swanson, E.T., 2012. The bond premium in a dsge model with long-run 

real and nominal risks. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 4, 105–143.

Ehling, P., Gallmeyer, M., Heyerdahl-Larsen, C., Illeditsch, P., 2018. Disagreement about 

Scheinkman,  J.,  Xiong,  W.,  2003.  Overconﬁdence  and  speculative  bubbles.  J.  Polit. 

inﬂation and the yield curve. J. Financ. Econ. 127, 459–484.

Econ. 111, 1183–1219.

Epstein, L.G., Schneider, M., 2008. Ambiguity, information quality, and asset pricing. J. 

Shiller, R., 1984. Stock prices and social dynamics. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 1984, 

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1988. Dividend yields and expected stock returns. J. Financ. 

Sundaresan, S.M., 1989. Intertemporally dependent preferences and the volatility of con-

sumption and wealth. Rev. Financ. Stud. 2, 73–88.

Gabaix, X., 2012. Variable rare disasters: an exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in 

Varian, H.R., 1985. Divergence of opinion in complete markets: a note. J. Finance 40, 

Finance 63, 197–228.

Econ. 22, 3–27.

macro-ﬁnance. Q. J. Econ. 127, 645–700.

Gallmeyer, M., Holliﬁeld, B., 2008. An examination of heterogeneous beliefs with a short-

Veronesi, P., 1999. Stock market overreactions to bad news in good times: a rational 

sale constraint in a dynamic economy. Rev. Finance 12, 323–364.

expectations equilibrium model. Rev. Financ. Stud. 12, 975–1007.

Goetzmann, W.N., Massa, M., 2005. Dispersion of opinion and stock returns. J. Financ. 

Veronesi, P., 2000. How does information quality aﬀect stock returns? J. Finance 55, 

Gomes, F., Michaelides, A., 2008. Asset pricing with limited risk sharing and heteroge-

Wachter, J., 2006. A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates. J. 

Mark. 8, 324–349.

neous agents. Rev. Financ. Stud. 21, 415–448.

Graniero, A., 2020. The macro and asset pricing implications of ﬂuctuating information 

Xiong, W., Yan, H., 2010. Heterogeneous expectations and bond markets. Rev. Financ. 

Financ. Econ. 79, 365–399.

Stud. 23, 1433–1466.

457–510.

309–317.

807–837.

quality. Working paper, available at SSRN 3507441.

Gürkaynak, R.S., Brian, S., Wright, J.H., 2006. The U.S. treasury yield curve: 1961 to the 
present. Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System.

Gürkaynak, R.S., Brian, S., Wright, J.H., 2008. The tips yield curve and inﬂation compen-
sation. Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System.

Harrison, J.M., Kreps, D.M., 1978. Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with 

heterogeneous expectations. Q. J. Econ. 92, 323–336.

Heyerdahl-Larsen,  C.,  Walden,  J.,  2021.  Distortions  and  eﬃciency  in  production 

economies with heterogeneous beliefs. Rev. Financ. Stud.

Xiouros, C., Zapatero, F., 2010. The representative agent of an economy with external 
habit-formation and heterogeneous risk-aversion. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23, 3017–3047.
Yan, H., 2008. Natural selection in ﬁnancial markets: does it work? Manag. Sci. 54, 

1935–1950.

Econ. 99, 162–183.

Yu,  J.,  2011.  Disagreement  and  return  predictability  of  stock  portfolios.  J.  Financ. 

Zapatero, F., 1998. Eﬀects of ﬁnancial innovation on market volatility when beliefs are 

heterogeneous. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 22, 597–626.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377430