Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Evergreening ✩
Miguel Faria-e-Castro a,∗, Pascal Paul b,c, Juan M. Sánchez a
a Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, United States
b Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, United States
c Leibniz Institute for Financial Research SAFE, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

We  develop  a  simple  model  of  concentrated  lending  where  lenders  have  incentives  for  evergreening  loans 
by oﬀering better terms to ﬁrms that are close to default. We detect such lending behavior using loan-level 
supervisory data for the United States. Banks that own a larger share of a ﬁrm’s debt provide distressed ﬁrms 
with relatively more credit at lower interest rates. Building on this empirical validation, we incorporate the 
theoretical mechanism into a dynamic heterogeneous-ﬁrm model to show that evergreening aﬀects aggregate 
outcomes, resulting in lower interest rates, higher levels of debt, and lower productivity.

Dataset link: https://
doi .org /10 .17632 /z57nmyzhrr .2

JEL classiﬁcation:
D24
D53
E44
G21
O47

Keywords:
Evergreening
Zombie ﬁrms
Bank lending
Misallocation

“Owe your banker £1,000 and you are at his mercy; owe him £1 million 
and the position is reversed.” — J. M. Keynes (1945)

1.  Introduction

Following  the  outbreak  of  COVID-19  in  early  2020,  ﬁrm  proﬁts 
declined  sharply,  and  governments  supported  businesses  by  provid-
ing them with subsidized credit. At the same time, concerns emerged 
that banks would “evergreen” loans—the practice of granting further 
credit to ﬁrms close to default to keep such ﬁrms alive. Similar to the 

government credit programs, such lending behavior may stabilize an 
economy in the short run, preventing bankruptcies and worker layoﬀs. 
After the crisis passes, however, it may contribute to less productive 
ﬁrms remaining in business, leading to the creation of “zombie ﬁrms” 
and depressing aggregate productivity and economic growth (Peek and 
Rosengren, 2005; Caballero et al., 2008). For the United States, such 
worries  were  frequently  dismissed  on  the  basis  that  evergreening  is 
typically associated with economies experiencing depressions with un-
dercapitalized banking systems, such as Japan in the 1990s, and the 
U.S. was not thought to be in such a position (Gagnon, 2021).

✩ Toni Whited was the editor for this article. First version: October 2021. We thank two anonymous referees, Ryan Banerjee, Laura Blattner, Frédéric Boissay, 
Max Bruche, Fabrizio Core, Darrell Duﬃe, Tim Eisert, Giulio Fella, Kilian Huber, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Kristian Miltersen, Camelia Minoiu, Steven Ongena, Diane 
Pierret, Adriano Rampini, Jean-Charles Rochet, Elisa Rubbo, Farzad Saidi, Lukas Schmid, Eva Schliephake, Amit Seru, Enrico Sette, Jón Steinsson, and Toni Whited 
for their comments, seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Stanford GSB, London Business School, University of Zurich, FRB San Francisco, FRB Kansas City, FRB St. 
Louis, Banco de Portugal, Goethe University Frankfurt, KU Leuven, Banco Central de Chile, Bundesbank, HU Berlin, McGill University, Michigan State, Penn State, 
BIS, the Virtual Australian Macro Seminar, as well as conference participants at NBER Summer Institute, AEA, Macro-Finance Society, Norges Bank-CEPR workshop, 
European Winter Finance Summit, Swiss Winter Conference on Financial Intermediation, Mannheim workshop on Firm Heterogeneity, Oxford conference on Zombie 
Firms, SRB-FBF-SAFE workshop, FINPRO, Kent Firm Dynamics workshop, CenFIS/CEAR conference, Portuguese Finance workshop, MoFIR, SAET, GEA, SED, and 
SNDE for their questions and insights. We also thank Colton Merrill and Olivia Wilkinson for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of 
the authors and do not reﬂect the views of the FRB San Francisco, the FRB St. Louis, or the Federal Reserve System.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: miguel.fariaecastro@stls.frb.org (M. Faria-e-Castro), pascal.paul@sf.frb.org (P. Paul), juan.m.sanchez@stls.frb.org (J.M. Sánchez).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103778
Received 23 January 2023; Received in revised form 3 January 2024; Accepted 4 January 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)103778Availableonline25January20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Assessing  whether  banks  evergreen  loans  requires  a  general  the-
ory that formalizes such lending behavior. In this paper, we illustrate 
the economic mechanism that results in evergreening using a stylized 
model of bank lending. Equipped with this basic framework, we ad-
dress the following questions. First, is evergreening a general feature of 
ﬁnancial intermediation instead of being speciﬁc to economies that re-
semble Japan in the 1990s? If so, can we ﬁnd empirical evidence for 
such lending distortions even for the U.S. economy over recent years, 
when banks were operating with relatively high capital ratios? And ﬁ-
nally,  what  are  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  evergreening  for 
aggregate outcomes?

We begin our analysis by modifying a simple model of bank-ﬁrm 
lending along two realistic dimensions. First, we assume that a bank 
owns a ﬁrm’s legacy debt, resulting in losses in case of ﬁrm default. 
Second, we posit that the bank behaves as a Stackelberg leader and in-
ternalizes how the oﬀered lending terms inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s decision to 
default on existing liabilities. The presence of such concentrated lending 
can reverse typical lending incentives. In contrast to standard intuition, 
lenders may oﬀer relatively better terms to less productive and more 
indebted ﬁrms closer to the default boundary. By providing more attrac-
tive conditions on a new loan contract, a bank raises the continuation 
value of a ﬁrm, thereby reducing the likelihood of default and increas-
ing the chance of repayment of existing debt. All else being equal, larger 
outstanding debt raises the threat of default and improves a borrower’s 
position vis-à-vis its lender, as captured by the Keynes quote above. 
Within our static framework, ﬁrms with “worse” fundamentals—more 
debt and lower productivity—pay lower interest rates and invest more. 
Importantly, the proposed mechanism is distinct from well-known cor-
porate ﬁnance theories, such as risk-shifting or debt overhang, and does 
not hinge on information asymmetries, unhealthy lenders, or depressed 
aggregate conditions.

To assess whether such lending behavior can be found in practice, 
we turn to the Federal Reserve’s Y-14 data set, which provides detailed 
loan-level information for the United States. We make use of the fact 
that the data include banks’ risk assessments for each borrower, in par-
ticular  ﬁrms’  probabilities  of  default  which  we  use  to  measure  ﬁrm 
ﬁnancial distress. Using the ﬁxed eﬀects approach by Khwaja and Mian 
(2008), we show that banks that own a larger share of a ﬁrm’s debt 
lend relatively more to distressed ﬁrms at lower interest rates. These 
eﬀects  persist  at  the  ﬁrm  level,  aﬀecting  total  debt  and  investment. 
We obtain these results even outside of a recession when banks were 
relatively well capitalized, and further show that other prominent theo-
ries of evergreening or zombie lending based on bank capital positions 
cannot explain our ﬁndings. Thus, we view our mechanism as a gen-
eral feature of ﬁnancial intermediation as opposed to being speciﬁc to 
economies that ﬁnd themselves in a severe recession with an undercap-
italized banking system.

Building on this empirical evidence, we embed the theoretical mech-
anism  into  a  dynamic  heterogeneous-ﬁrm  model  based  on  the  one 
developed by Hopenhayn (1992), augmented with debt, default, and ﬁ-
nancial frictions as in Hennessy and Whited (2007), Gomes and Schmid 
(2010), or Clementi and Palazzo (2016). The dynamic model improves 
on the static one by endogenizing the joint distribution of ﬁrm pro-
ductivity, debt, and capital, and allows us to study the macroeconomic 
eﬀects of evergreening. Calibrating the model to U.S. data, we show 
that evergreening arises in equilibrium and aﬀects ﬁrm borrowing and 
investment decisions. On the one hand, evergreening allows lenders to 
recover their investments more frequently, and these beneﬁts are passed 
on  to  borrowers  in  the  form  of  lower  interest  rates.  As  a  result,  in-
cumbent ﬁrms increase their debt and capital by 1 to 3 percent across 
diﬀerent model speciﬁcations. On the other hand, the ﬁrms that are 
saved and invest more are the ones that are less productive and prevent 
new ﬁrms from entering. In turn, this reduces aggregate total factor 
productivity (TFP) by around 0.25 percent relative to an economy with 
dispersed lenders.

The  dynamic  model  delivers  additional  insights.  We  decompose 
measured  TFP  losses  into  three  components:  ﬁrm  size,  average  ﬁrm 
productivity, and misallocation. Most of the drop in TFP is due to ﬁrm 
size: ﬁrms are relatively larger in an economy with evergreening, which 
causes productivity losses under decreasing returns-to-scale production 
technologies. We further ﬁnd that ﬁrms that beneﬁt from subsidized 
lending  tend  to  be  larger,  more  leveraged,  and  less  productive—all 
features that the literature typically associates with zombie ﬁrms. How-
ever, subsidized ﬁrms are also riskier and pay higher interest rates than 
non-subsidized ﬁrms, though lower rates relative to a counterfactual 
economy without evergreening. Given these diﬀerences, we compare 
various classiﬁcations of zombie ﬁrms against our measure of whether a 
ﬁrm is subsidized. Deﬁnitions based on characteristics such as leverage 
and productivity as in Schivardi et al. (2022) tend to correlate with our 
measure. In a ﬁnal exercise, we replicate the cross-sectional regression 
estimates based on model simulations and show that the mechanism 
generates comparable real eﬀects as in the data.

Related literature Our paper relates to the literature on evergreening 
and zombie lending that emerged from Japan’s “lost decade,” which 
started with the collapse of stock and real estate markets in the early 
1990s. For this period, Peek and Rosengren (2005) provide evidence of 
evergreening by showing that poorly performing ﬁrms typically expe-
rienced an increase in their credit. Lending surges were also associated 
with weakly-capitalized banks or if banks and ﬁrms had strong corpo-
rate aﬃliations.1 Similarly, Caballero et al. (2008) document a rise in 
the share of zombie ﬁrms, which they deﬁne as businesses that pay in-
terest rates below comparable prime rates. Consistent with a model of 
creative destruction, they show that job creation and destruction de-
clined and productivity growth stalled in industries that experienced an 
increase in the share of zombie ﬁrms. The presence of zombie ﬁrms also 
spilled over to other ﬁrms. In industries with a higher share of zombies, 
healthy ﬁrms experienced a fall in their investment and employment, 
while their productivity relative to zombies increased.

Building on these seminal contributions, several papers have docu-
mented similar evidence of evergreening and real economy eﬀects of 
zombie ﬁrms.2 These studies span several countries with varying eco-
nomic conditions. Still, they generally share two main ﬁndings: that 
evergreening is more prevalent among weakly capitalized banks during 
severe recessions and that zombie ﬁrms adversely impact healthy ﬁrms 
and impede ﬁrm exit and entry, hindering productivity growth within 
industries (see Acharya et al., 2022, for a recent survey). We contribute 
to this literature in the following three ways.

First, we provide a novel theory of evergreening that shows that 
lenders  may  be  incentivized  to  recoup  their  investments  by  keeping 
less productive ﬁrms alive. Thus far, relatively few papers formalize 
the ideas of evergreening or zombie-lending theoretically, and a com-
mon modeling approach is still lacking. Previous theories have relied 
on information asymmetries (Rajan, 1994; Puri, 1999; Hu and Varas, 
2021), on the premise that banks gamble for resurrection (Bruche and 
Llobet, 2013; Acharya et al., 2021b), or that banks delay the recogni-
tion of loan losses (Begenau et al., 2021). In contrast, our mechanism 
assumes full information and does not rely on bank regulation, capital-
constrained lenders, or depressed aggregate conditions. Thus, it is not 
speciﬁc to economies that resemble Japan in the 1990s—with under-
capitalized banks and a deep recession—but rather describes a general 
feature of ﬁnancial intermediation.

1 Within the bank, loan oﬃcers may engage in evergreening if they face a 
lower likelihood of being exposed (Hertzberg et al., 2010). Banks also reduce 
zombie-lending after on-site inspections (Bonﬁm et al., 2022).
2 Among others, examples are Giannetti and Simonov (2013), Storz et al. 
(2017), McGowan et al. (2018), Acharya et al. (2019), Andrews and Petroulakis 
(2019),  Acharya  et  al.  (2020),  Bittner  et  al.  (2021),  Schmidt  et  al.  (2020), 
Acharya et al. (2021a), Chari et al. (2021), Banerjee and Hofmann (2022), and 
Artavanis et al. (2022).

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037782M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

The mechanism is also diﬀerent from the classic problem of debt 
overhang (Myers, 1977), where equity holders are reluctant to invest 
in proﬁtable investment projects as beneﬁts could be reaped by exist-
ing debt holders, hindering further borrowing. In our framework, more 
indebted ﬁrms receive better loan conditions, enabling them to borrow 
and invest relatively more — the opposite result. Similarly, our mech-
anism is related to the idea of sequential lending with non-exclusive 
contracts as in Bizer and DeMarzo (1992). Contrary to sequential bank-
ing, where ﬁrms borrowing from multiple lenders tend to overborrow, 
dilute the stakes of preexisting lenders, and have higher default prob-
abilities, our model predicts that ﬁrms that borrow from a single (con-
centrated) lender tend to borrow more but face lower probabilities of 
default, relative to the case where they would be borrowing from mul-
tiple (dispersed) lenders.

Nevertheless, our theory shares some similarities with mechanisms 
that  have  been  proposed  in  the  literature.  For  example,  Bolton  et 
al.  (2016) show  that  relationship  lenders  can  screen  out  good  bor-
rowers and provide them with relatively cheap ﬁnancing in a crisis. 
Cetorelli and Strahan (2006) ﬁnd that less competition among banks is 
associated with fewer ﬁrms that are larger on average, and Giannetti 
and Saidi (2019) show that a higher indebtedness of banks to speciﬁc 
industries  is  associated  with  stronger  incentives  to  provide  credit  in 
times of distress. We share with Becker and Ivashina (2022) the ob-
servation that zombie lending may not only be due to bank risk-shifting 
motives but is also determined by costly corporate insolvency, an im-
portant assumption of our framework. Using cross-country ﬁrm- and 
loan-level information, Becker and Ivashina (2022) show that weak in-
solvency regimes give rise to more zombie lending in crisis years. We 
also have in common with Hu and Varas (2021) the idea that ever-
greening may not only be present with capital-constrained lenders but 
also with healthy ones. In their model, a relationship lender may roll 
over loans even after bad news about a ﬁrm arrives, at the prospect that 
a market-based lender with less information may lend to such a weak 
ﬁrm in the future.

Our second contribution is quantifying the aggregate eﬀects of ever-
greening with a calibrated heterogeneous-ﬁrm model. Few papers have 
provided similar assessments, and the results hinge on the speciﬁcs of 
the micro-foundations. In Acharya et al. (2021b), excessive forbearance 
induces low-capitalized banks to risk-shift and lend to less productive 
ﬁrms, depressing overall output. Tracey (2021) considers a setting in 
which  heterogeneous  ﬁrms  have  the  option  to  enter  a  loan  forbear-
ance state, which results in a larger number of less productive ﬁrms 
and lower output. In contrast, in our model, ﬁrms do not enter explicit 
restructuring states to be subsidized by the lender. We ﬁnd that ever-
greening depresses TFP primarily thanks to an increase in average ﬁrm 
size.3

Last, we contribute to the empirical literature with a new identi-
ﬁcation approach to detect evergreening behavior and by focusing on 
large U.S. banks at a time when those were relatively well capitalized—
in contrast to prior studies that concentrated on distressed European 
and Japanese institutions.4 Blattner et al. (2023) use Portuguese data 
to show that low-capitalized banks extended relatively more credit to 
borrowers with underreported loan losses following an unexpected in-
crease in capital requirements. Schivardi et al. (2022) ﬁnd that weakly 
capitalized banks in Italy issued relatively less credit to healthy ﬁrms—
but not zombie ﬁrms—during the Eurozone crisis. Consistent with our 

mechanism, Jiménez et al. (2022) ﬁnd that Spanish ﬁrms were more 
likely to obtain a public guaranteed loan from banks with higher preex-
isting debt exposure during the COVID-19 crisis.

2.  Static model

In this section, we develop a simple model of bank-ﬁrm lending. 
We begin by presenting the problem of a ﬁrm that decides how much 
to borrow and invest, taking the interest rate on new credit as given. 
The ﬁrm has preexisting liabilities on which it may choose to default. 
We then compare the equilibrium outcomes of two economies: (i) one 
with dispersed lending and (ii) one with concentrated lending, where 
a single lender owns the ﬁrm’s outstanding debt and internalizes how 
loan conditions aﬀect the ﬁrm’s decision to default on its legacy debt.

Environment There  are  two  periods  𝑡 = 0, 1.  There  are  two  types  of 
agents: ﬁrms, indexed by their pre-determined states (𝑧, 𝑏), where 𝑧 is 
productivity and 𝑏 is legacy debt, and lenders, who are risk-neutral and 
have deep pockets.

2.1.  Firm problem

At the beginning of 𝑡 = 0, the ﬁrm may choose to default and obtain 
a zero value. If it remains in business, the ﬁrm has a continuation value 
equal to 𝑉 (𝑧, 𝑏; 𝑄), which is a function of the legacy debt 𝑏, productivity 
𝑧, and the price of new debt 𝑄 that is oﬀered by the lender at 𝑡 = 0, and 
which the ﬁrm takes as a given. The ﬁrm therefore defaults if and only 
if 𝑉 (𝑧, 𝑏; 𝑄) < 0. For simplicity, we assume that there is no default at 
𝑡 = 1. This assumption is relaxed in the dynamic model.

If the ﬁrm does not default, it repays its existing liabilities 𝑏, bor-
rows 𝑄𝑏′, and invests 𝑘′ at 𝑡 = 0. At 𝑡 = 1, the ﬁrm produces according 
to a decreasing returns-to-scale technology 𝑧(𝑘′)𝛼
, where 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1), and 
repays debt 𝑏′ borrowed at 𝑡 = 0. Additionally, the ﬁrm faces a borrow-
ing constraint at 𝑡 = 0 that takes the form 𝑏′ ≤ 𝜃𝑘′, where 𝜃 > 0.5 The 
ﬁrm’s value, conditional on not defaulting, is

𝑉 (𝑧, 𝑏; 𝑄) = max
𝑏′,𝑘′≥0

−𝑏 − 𝑘′ + 𝑄𝑏′ + 𝛽𝑓 [𝑧(𝑘′)𝛼 − 𝑏′]

(2.1)

s.t. 𝑏′ ≤ 𝜃𝑘′

,

where  𝛽𝑓
is  the  ﬁrm’s  discount  factor.6 Appendix  A.1  describes  the 
solution to the ﬁrm’s problem. Under the assumption that the constraint 
is binding (which we later verify), we characterize the ﬁrm’s optimal 
default decision in the following proposition.

Proposition 1.  Firm optimal policies and value (𝑘′, 𝑏′, 𝑉 ) are (i) increas-
ing in 𝑄, (ii) increasing in 𝑧. Firm value 𝑉 is decreasing in 𝑏. Addition-
ally,  there  exists  a  𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) such  that  the  ﬁrm  defaults  if  and  only  if 
𝑄 < 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏). 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) is (i) strictly increasing in 𝑏, (ii) strictly decreas-
ing in 𝑧, and (iii) satisﬁes lim𝑏→∞

𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) = 𝛽𝑓 + 1∕𝜃.

Equipped with the solution to the ﬁrm’s problem for a given price 
of debt 𝑄, we now proceed to study two diﬀerent forms of determining 
𝑄 and characterize the equilibria that result from each of them.

3 Our ﬁndings relate to Gopinath et al. (2017) who show that a decline in 
interest rates results in lower aggregate TFP in a model calibrated to Southern 
Europe in the 2000s (see also Gilchrist et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2022; Asriyan et 
al., 2021; and Cingano and Hassan, 2022).
4 We connect to an extensive body of work that measures how bank health 
aﬀects the allocation of ﬁrm credit (Khwaja and Mian, 2008) and ﬁrm outcomes 
(Chodorow-Reich, 2014). Related to our application, Favara et al. (2022b), and 
Ma et al. (2021) have used the Y-14 data in this context to investigate the eﬀects 
of bank capitalization and lender expectations.

5 Appendix A.2 shows that all our results hold under more general borrowing 
constraints of the type 𝑏′ ≤ 𝑔(𝑘′), which nest standard speciﬁcations of earnings-
based constraints, for example.
6 We assume that the ﬁrm owns no preexisting stock of capital that would 
allow it to produce at 𝑡 = 0 and faces no costs of issuing equity. This is with-
out loss of generality: preexisting capital and production in the ﬁrst period are 
equivalent to rescaling the net liabilities 𝑏. Adding a linear equity issuance cost 
also increases net liabilities in the ﬁrst period and introduces an additional dis-
tortion as the marginal cost of investment rises, but it does not aﬀect our results.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037783M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

2.2.  Dispersed lending

In the ﬁrst economy we consider, there is a continuum of lenders 
willing to lend to the ﬁrm. These lenders are risk-neutral, have deep 
pockets, and discount payoﬀs with factor 𝛽𝑘 > 𝛽𝑓
. Since we assume that 
there is no default at 𝑡 = 1, perfect competition in the lending market 
requires that the oﬀered contract satisﬁes

{

𝑄 =

𝛽𝑘

0

if 𝛽𝑘 ≥ 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏)
otherwise

.

In this equilibrium, all non-defaulting ﬁrms borrow at the same interest 
rate, regardless of (𝑧, 𝑏), which implies that marginal products of capital 
(MPK) are equalized. More productive ﬁrms invest more and borrow 
more, but credit quantities and prices are independent of the amount of 
legacy debt 𝑏.

2.3.  Concentrated lending

We now analyze the equilibrium with concentrated lenders. There 
are two key diﬀerences in relation to the dispersed lending economy. 
First, the lender internalizes how its choice of 𝑄 aﬀects the ﬁrm’s de-
fault decision. Second, lending is non-anonymous because the lender 
owns the preexisting debt 𝑏 and understands that this debt is lost in the 
case of default. We use the terms “lender” and “bank” interchangeably. 
The lender’s problem is given by

𝑊 = max
𝑄≥𝛽𝑘

𝕀[𝑉 (𝑧, 𝑏; 𝑄) ≥ 0] ×

[

]
𝑏 − 𝑄𝑏′(𝑧; 𝑄) + 𝛽𝑘𝑏′(𝑧; 𝑄)

,

where 𝕀 is an indicator function denoting no default at 𝑡 = 0. If the ﬁrm 
defaults at 𝑡 = 0, the lender makes zero proﬁts.7 Otherwise, the lender 
recovers 𝑏, lends 𝑄𝑏′, and obtains 𝑏′ at 𝑡 = 1, discounted at 𝛽𝑘
. Finally, 
the lender’s choice of 𝑄 is constrained to be above 𝛽𝑘
, as we assume that 
the ﬁrm may access a competitive debt market like the one previously 
described. We can equivalently write the bank’s problem as

𝑊 =

max
𝑄≥max{𝛽𝑘,𝑄min(𝑧,𝑏)}

]
[
𝑏 + 𝑏′(𝑧; 𝑄)(𝛽𝑘 − 𝑄)

.

From this formulation and the fact that 𝜕𝑏′(𝑧; 𝑄)∕𝜕𝑄 > 0, it is evident 
that the bank’s objective function is strictly decreasing in 𝑄 (subject to 
the constraint on the choice of 𝑄). For this reason, it is optimal for the 
bank to oﬀer the lowest possible 𝑄 as long as 𝑊 ≥ 0. The following 
propositions characterize bank optimal lending.

Proposition 2. Let 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏) denote the maximum 𝑄 at which the bank 
is willing to lend. 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏) solves the implicit equation 𝑊 (𝑧, 𝑏; 𝑄max) = 0
and satisﬁes the properties (i) 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏) > 𝛽𝑘
iﬀ 𝑏 > 0, (ii) it is increasing 
in 𝑏, (iii) it is decreasing in 𝑧.

Proposition 3. The bank’s optimal policy can be written as

𝑄∗(𝑏, 𝑧) =

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩

𝛽𝑘
𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏)
0

if 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) ≤ 𝛽𝑘 ≤ 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏)
if 𝛽𝑘 ≤ 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) ≤ 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏)
otherwise .

Let ̄𝑏(𝑧) be such that 𝑄min(̄𝑏(𝑧), 𝑧) = 𝛽𝑘
and ̂𝑏(𝑧) such that 𝑄min(̂𝑏(𝑧), 𝑧) =
𝑄max(̂𝑏(𝑧), 𝑧),  then  (i)  ̄𝑏(𝑧) < ̂𝑏(𝑧), ∀𝑧,  (ii)  𝑄∗(𝑏, 𝑧) is  increasing  in  𝑏, 
strictly if 𝑏 ∈ [̄𝑏(𝑧), ̂𝑏(𝑧)], and (iii) 𝑄∗(𝑏, 𝑧) is decreasing in 𝑧, strictly if 
𝑏 ∈ [̄𝑏(𝑧), ̂𝑏(𝑧)].

7 For simplicity we assume that there is no recovery in case of default. Our 
results are qualitatively robust to assuming that there is some recovery as long 
as it is not full, i.e., default is costly for the lender. We relax this assumption in 
the quantitative dynamic model, where we allow for partial recovery in case of 
default.

Fig. 2.1. Concentrated lending economy. Notes: Equilibrium allocation as a 
function of 𝑏, for a given 𝑧. The solid blue line is 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏), the solid green line 
is 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏), the dashed red line is 𝛽𝑘, and the black line is the optimal policy 
𝑄∗. (For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to 
the web version of this article.)

Proposition 3 states that, as long as legacy debt is positive, 𝑏 > 0, 
the  bank  is  willing  to  oﬀer  better  terms  than  those  in  the  competi-
tive  market  to  the  ﬁrm.  Oﬀering  more  favorable  lending  conditions 
allows the bank to recover 𝑏 by preventing the ﬁrm from defaulting. 
The optimal price of debt 𝑄∗ consists of three regions, illustrated in 
Fig. 2.1 for a ﬁxed 𝑧. First, as long as 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) < 𝛽𝑘
, the bank can of-
fer 𝑄∗ = 𝛽𝑘
and guarantee that the ﬁrm does not default. In this case, 
the allocation in the concentrated lending economy coincides with the 
dispersed lending economy (“normal funding”). Second, Proposition 1
states that 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) is increasing in 𝑏 and decreasing in 𝑧. Therefore, 
for suﬃciently high 𝑏 (or low 𝑧), 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) exceeds 𝛽𝑘
. In that case, 
the ﬁrm exits in the dispersed lending economy. In the concentrated 
lending economy, however, and as long as 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) < 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏), the 
bank is willing to keep the ﬁrm alive by oﬀering 𝑄∗ = 𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) > 𝛽𝑘
. 
These terms are strictly better than those that the ﬁrm could obtain 
in the competitive market and become more favorable as 𝑏 increases 
or 𝑧 falls. We call this the “evergreening region.” In the third region, 
𝑄min(𝑧, 𝑏) > 𝑄max(𝑧, 𝑏), and the bank decides to liquidate the ﬁrm (“liq-
uidation”). Proposition 1 establishes that the ﬁrm’s policies are strictly 
increasing in 𝑄. Thus, equilibrium borrowing and investment follow a 
similar pattern to that of 𝑄∗ in the ﬁgure (see Appendix Fig. A.1).

Appendix A.4 contains a detailed discussion of how our mechanism 
relates to and is distinct from existing corporate ﬁnance theories, such 
as the risk-shifting, gambling for resurrection, and debt overhang. It fur-
ther considers modiﬁcations of some of the assumptions of the model, 
in particular the nature of the contracting protocol and the absence of 
debt restructuring.

2.4.  Discussion

The two-period model isolates the potential advantages and disad-
vantages of evergreening. On the one hand, evergreening saves ﬁrms 
with too much debt but otherwise viable investment projects that have 
a positive net present value and generate additional production. On the 
other hand, less productive ﬁrms remain in business and invest more 
than they otherwise would, potentially absorbing resources that could 
be  better  allocated  to  more  productive  entrants.  However,  the  static 
model  also  leaves  several  questions  unanswered.  First  and  foremost, 
does the mechanism accurately reﬂect how banks make lending deci-
sions in practice? We address this question in the next section using 
detailed loan-level data.

Second,  the  static  model  is  silent  on  the  macroeconomic  conse-
quences of evergreening: it assumes that ﬁrms start with certain levels 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037784M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

of debt and productivity, but how often do ﬁrms end up with states that 
give rise to evergreening? Do ﬁrms potentially acquire more debt today 
if they know they could be saved tomorrow, a form of moral hazard? 
Does the survival of such ﬁrms prevent the entry of more productive 
ones? To answer these questions, Section 4 develops a macroeconomic 
framework that allows for endogenous ﬁrm entry and exit, aggregation 
across ﬁrms, and a counterfactual analysis between concentrated and 
dispersed lending economies.

Firm distress and motivation for empirical strategy The static model is 
simpliﬁed to clearly isolate the economic mechanism that generates ev-
ergreening in equilibrium. In particular, we abstract from any type of 
risk, resulting in probabilities of default that take either the value of 
zero or one depending on ﬁrms’ initial states. In practice, ﬁrms are sub-
ject to other types of shocks that aﬀect default beyond indebtedness 
and productivity. In Appendix A.5, we extend our baseline model to in-
clude idiosyncratic ﬁrm risk and show that our main qualitative results 
remain unchanged. Based on a numerical example, Appendix Fig. A.3 
shows probabilities of default for ﬁrms with diﬀerent levels of legacy 
debt and the same productivity. The larger 𝑏, the higher a ﬁrm’s proba-
bility of default. For low levels of 𝑏, ﬁrms’ default probabilities coincide 
between the dispersed lending economy and the concentrated lending 
economy. In contrast, they diverge for intermediate values of 𝑏 since the 
single lender oﬀers better credit conditions to the ﬁrm, thereby lower-
ing its chance of default. These features motivate our empirical strategy 
in the following section. We identify distressed ﬁrms based on their de-
fault probabilities, and require that those are suﬃciently elevated, so 
that their concentrated lenders subsidize them.

3.  Empirical analysis

3.1.  Identiﬁcation approach

To identify the credit supply eﬀects associated with our theory, we 
consider a sample of ﬁrms that borrow from multiple lenders, which 
allows  us  to  control  for  credit  demand  (Khwaja  and  Mian,  2008).  If 
anything, this approach makes ﬁnding evidence for our theory more 
challenging since the described mechanism may be stronger if a ﬁrm 
borrows  from  a  single  lender  instead.  Our  empirical  approach  relies 
on cross-sectional variation in bank exposures to distressed ﬁrms. We 
measure bank exposures according to the share of a ﬁrm’s debt that 
banks hold, and classify ﬁrms as ﬁnancially distressed if banks assess 
their probability of default as elevated. Consistent with our theory, we 
ﬁnd that banks that own a larger debt share provide distressed ﬁrms 
with relatively more credit at lower interest rates. We further show that 
these eﬀects persist at the ﬁrm level, aﬀecting total ﬁrm debt and in-
vestment, and that other prominent theories of evergreening or zombie 
lending based on bank capital positions cannot explain our ﬁndings.

3.2.  Data

The main data set of our analysis is the corporate loan schedule H.1 
of the Federal Reserve’s Y-14Q collection (Y14 for short). These data 
were introduced as part of the Dodd-Frank Act following the 2007-09 
ﬁnancial crisis. They are typically used for stress-testing and cover large 
bank holding companies (BHCs).8 For the BHCs within our sample, the 
data contain quarterly updates on the universe of loan facilities with 
commitments in excess of $1 million and include detailed information 
about the credit arrangements.

Importantly, the data cover banks’ risk assessments for each bor-
rower.  Among  the  available  assessments,  we  use  the  probability  of 

default (PD) in our analysis, which measures the likelihood of a loan 
nonperforming over the course of the next year. That is, the PD esti-
mates the event that a loan is not repaid in full or that the borrower is 
late on payments. Banks are supposed to assess the PD at the borrower 
rather than loan level, which also makes it comparable when multiple 
banks lend to the same ﬁrm.9

We identify a ﬁrm using the Taxpayer Identiﬁcation Number (TIN). 
The vast majority of ﬁrms within our data are private ones. For these 
ﬁrms, we rely on the banks’ own collections of ﬁrm balance sheets and 
income statements that are also part of the Y14 data. To reduce mea-
surement error and to increase the number of observations, we take the 
median of ﬁrm ﬁnancial variables across all banks and loans for a par-
ticular ﬁrm-date observation since these data are ﬁrm-speciﬁc. For the 
public ﬁrms, we instead use information from Compustat on ﬁrm ﬁnan-
cials.

We further apply several sample restrictions. First, we exclude lend-
ing to ﬁnancial and real estate ﬁrms. Second, we apply a number of 
ﬁltering steps that are described in Appendix B, which also includes 
an overview of the variables that are used. Last, we restrict the sample 
to 2014:Q4-2019:Q4. The start of the sample is determined by the fact 
that the risk assessments that we use in our analysis became available at 
that time. We include information up until 2019:Q4 to ensure that our 
results are not aﬀected by the COVID-19 crisis. Over this sample, we 
cover 3,168,276 loan facility observations and 175,406 distinct ﬁrms. 
We identify 2,719 of those ﬁrms as public since they can be matched 
to Compustat. Compared with the years before the 2007-09 ﬁnancial 
crisis, banks were relatively well capitalized over our sample period, 
operating with higher capital ratios and capital buﬀers as shown in Ap-
pendix Figs. B.1 and B.2. The U.S. economy was also growing steadily 
with  annual  real  GDP  growth  that  ranged  between  1.4  and  3.8  per-
cent with an average of 2.4 percent. Thus, we intentionally consider a 
sample of a steady economy with a relatively well capitalized banking 
system, as our theory does not hinge on poor lender health or depressed 
aggregate conditions.

3.3.  Identifying credit supply eﬀects

In equilibrium, banks and ﬁrms may match according to their need 
and willingness to evergreen loans. To account for such potential links 
between  bank-ﬁrm  selection  and  ﬁrm  credit  demand,  we  follow  the 
ﬁxed eﬀects approach by Khwaja and Mian (2008) to isolate the credit 
supply eﬀects associated with our mechanism. For ﬁrm 𝑖 and bank 𝑗, 
we estimate regressions of the form

𝐿𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+2 − 𝐿𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
0.5 ⋅ (𝐿𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+2 + 𝐿𝑖,𝑗,𝑡)

=𝛼𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽

1Debt-Share𝑖,𝑗,𝑡

+ 𝛽

2Debt-Share𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 × Distress𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑗,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑗,𝑡

(3.1)
where 𝐿𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is the aggregated amount of credit between a bank and a 
ﬁrm at time 𝑡, and the dependent variable measures percentage changes 
in credit over two quarters. Speciﬁcally, we use the symmetric growth 
rate as an approximation of a percentage change, which allows for pos-
sible zero observations at time 𝑡 and is bounded in the range [−2, 2], 
reducing the potential inﬂuence of outliers. We include ﬁrm-time ﬁxed 
eﬀects 𝛼𝑖,𝑡 into our regressions, which restrict the sample to ﬁrms that 
borrow from multiple banks. The ﬁxed eﬀects control for credit demand 
if ﬁrms have a common demand across their lenders, and we discuss 
possible violations of this assumption below.

The main regressors are Debt-Share𝑖,𝑗,𝑡, deﬁned as the ratio of out-
standing credit 𝐿𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 between ﬁrm 𝑖 and bank 𝑗 to total ﬁrm debt 𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑖,𝑡

8 Until 2019, BHCs with more than $50 billion in assets were required to 
participate in the collection, and the size threshold was changed to $100 billion 
subsequently.

9 See the U.S. implementation of the Basel II Capital Accord for the def-
inition  of  default  (page  69398)  and  the  deﬁnition  of  probability  of  default 
(page 69403): https://www .govinfo .gov /content /pkg /FR -2007 -12 -07 /pdf /07 -
5729 .pdf.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037785M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Table 3.1
Credit supply to distressed ﬁrms.

Δ Credit

Δ Interest Rate

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Debt-Share

Debt-Share × Distress

-21.88**
(8.24)
45.60***
(9.49)

-17.48**
(8.58)
38.56***
(10.50)

-22.37***
(7.84)
44.95***
(12.84)

0.18***
(0.05)
-0.93***
(0.33)

0.11
(0.07)
-0.71**
(0.33)

0.12*
(0.06)
-0.72**
(0.32)

Fixed Eﬀects
Firm × Time
Firm × Time × Pur.
Bank × Time
Bank Controls
R-squared
Observations
w/ Distress = 1
Number of Firms
Number of Banks

✓

✓

0.58
8,647
539
887
36

✓

✓

0.6
5,729
397
642
34

✓

✓

0.63
8,576
531
884
34

✓

✓

0.74
8,407
528
867
36

✓

✓

0.74
5,561
386
621
34

✓

✓

0.79
8,338
520
864
34

Notes: Estimation results for regression (3.1) multiplied by 100. All speciﬁcations include 
ﬁrm-time ﬁxed eﬀects that additionally vary by the loan purpose in columns (ii) and (v). 
Columns (iii) and (vi) include bank-time ﬁxed eﬀects and the remaining columns include 
various bank controls: bank size (natural log of assets), return on assets (net income/assets), 
deposit share (total deposits/assets), loan share (loans/assets), leverage (liabilities/assets), 
Tier 1 capital buﬀer (ratio minus requirement), banks’ income gap, and the ratio of unused 
credit lines to assets. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by bank and 
ﬁrm. Sample: 2014:Q4 - 2019:Q4. ∗∗∗𝑝 < 0.01, ∗∗𝑝 < 0.05, ∗𝑝 < 0.1.

at time 𝑡, and the interaction of this variable with a ﬁrm-speciﬁc indi-
cator Distress𝑖,𝑡 that equals one if ﬁrm 𝑖 is in ﬁnancial distress at time 𝑡
and zero otherwise. We classify a ﬁrm as ﬁnancially distressed if the av-
erage PD across all banks that lend to this ﬁrm, denoted by 𝑃 𝐷𝑖,𝑡, falls 
within the top decile of the unconditional distribution of 𝑃 𝐷𝑖,𝑡 across 
all ﬁrms within our sample. We choose this deﬁnition for the following 
three reasons. First, we use ﬁrms’ PDs since those can be understood 
as suﬃcient statistics to measure ﬁrm ﬁnancial distress and because they 
directly relate to our theory, which is concerned with ﬁrms’ distance to 
default. We use a binary indicator variable, as opposed to the contin-
uous variable 𝑃 𝐷𝑖,𝑡, since our theory shows that the relation between 
ﬁrm distress and lender’s willingness to evergreen loans is inherently 
nonlinear (as visible in Appendix Fig. A.3), and the indicator Distress𝑖,𝑡
is  a  simple  approximation  of  this  relation.  Second,  we  average  PDs 
across banks since banks diﬀer in their assessments, and the average 
most likely represents a common view.

And third, we consider the top 10 percent as a reasonable cutoﬀ to 
capture the part of the ﬁrm population that has some realistic chance of 
default. In the data, most ﬁrms have PDs that are close to zero as shown 
in Appendix Table C.1, and even the median ﬁrm has a relatively low 
PD of around 0.8 percent. The cutoﬀ value for the top decile that we 
use to deﬁne a distressed ﬁrm is 3.89 percent. Within the top decile, the 
threat of default is common, with the median ﬁrm having a 7.8 percent 
likelihood of default which rises steeply at the very top of the distribu-
tion. As shown below, our results are robust to varying the cutoﬀ value 
for Distress𝑖,𝑡 around our chosen benchmark, and to excluding ﬁrms for 
which default seems unavoidable (like the ones with high legacy debt 
in Figs. 2.1 and A.3).

We  interpret  variation  in  Debt-Share𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 and  Debt-Share𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 ×
Distress𝑖,𝑡 as capturing credit supply eﬀects, conditional on the ﬁxed 
eﬀects and other bank-speciﬁc controls that are collected in the vector 
𝑋𝑗,𝑡. However, two concerns may invalidate this interpretation. First, 
nondistressed ﬁrms may have a preference for diversifying their bor-
rowing,  shifting  their  demand  away  from  banks  at  which  they  have 
< 0.  Second,  conditional 
borrowed  more  in  the  past,  resulting  in  𝛽
1
on ﬁnding itself in ﬁnancial distress, a ﬁrm may turn to its concen-
trated lender from which it has borrowed more in the past, resulting 
in 𝛽
> 0. To exclude such possible demand shifts, we also consider in-
2
terest rate responses in addition to changes in credit. To this end, we 
use  𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡+2 − 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 as  a  dependent  variable  in  regression  (3.1),  where 

𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 denotes the interest rate associated with the credit agreement be-
tween ﬁrm 𝑖 and bank 𝑗.10 If our results represent demand shifts, the 
estimated  coeﬃcients  from  the  interest  rate  regressions  should  have 
the same signs as the corresponding ones from the credit regressions. 
In contrast, if we capture credit supply eﬀects, they should have the 
opposite sign.

Last,  we  exclude  credit  lines  and  focus  on  term  loans  only.  That 
is because credit movements for credit lines largely represent demand 
changes. Such contracts provide borrowers with the possibility to ﬂex-
ibly draw and repay credit subject to a predetermined limit and at a 
ﬁxed spread (Greenwald et al., 2021).11 As shown below, our key re-
sults remain if we include credit lines, but the interest rate responses 
indicate that the ﬁndings may be driven by demand shifts.

The  estimation  results  for  regressions  (3.1) are  reported  in  Ta-
ble 3.1.12 Columns (i) and (iv) show our baseline estimates for credit 
< 0 and 
and interest rates. For the credit regressions, we ﬁnd that 𝛽
1
𝛽
> 0, and both are statistically diﬀerent from zero at standard conﬁ-
2
dence levels based on two-way clustered standard errors by bank and 
ﬁrm. The negative coeﬃcient associated with Debt-Share𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 shows that 
a nondistressed ﬁrm, that has borrowed more from one bank in the 
past, has relatively less credit growth going forward with that lender. 
The positive 𝛽
1 for the interest rate regressions indicates that these re-
sults represent supply eﬀects, possibly indicating that lenders have a 
preference to reduce their exposure to ﬁrms for which they hold a large 
debt share.

The  positive  𝛽

2 for  the  credit  regression  shows  that  these  results 
change for distressed ﬁrms. Relative to a nondistressed ﬁrm, one with 
an elevated risk of default has more credit growth with a bank that 
holds a larger share of the ﬁrm’s debt. The negative 𝛽
2 for the interest 
rate regressions shows that these ﬁndings represent supply eﬀects. That 
is, more exposed lenders provide distressed ﬁrms with relatively better 

10 In case of multiple contracts for a bank-ﬁrm pair, we consider the weighted 
sum of the various interest rates using the used credit amounts relative to the 
aggregated credit as weights.
11 Note that we exclude bank-ﬁrm pairs that cover both credit lines and term 
loans, though a ﬁrm may still have a credit line with another bank that is not 
part of the regression sample or outside of our data.
12 Appendix Table C.2 shows summary statistics for the variables that are part 
of our main regressions.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037786M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

credit conditions. The results are also quantitatively important. Relative 
to a nondistressed ﬁrm and a hypothetical lender with zero-exposure, a 
distressed ﬁrm has around 46 percent higher credit growth at close to 
one percentage point lower interest rates with a lender that holds all of 
a ﬁrm’s debt.

The remaining columns in Table 3.1 consider alternative speciﬁca-
tions of our baseline regression setup. Columns (ii) and (v) extend the 
ﬁrm-time ﬁxed eﬀects by diﬀerent loan purposes. These regressions are 
intended to address the possibility that banks specialize in certain types 
of  lending  and  that  ﬁrm  demand  diﬀers  across  lending  types  which 
may  be  correlated  with  our  regressors  of  interest  (Paravisini  et  al., 
2021).13 While the interest rate regressions already provide evidence 
against such a concern, the estimation results based on the extended 
ﬁxed eﬀects conﬁrm that our ﬁndings reﬂect supply rather than de-
mand eﬀects. Finally, in columns (iii) and (vi), we include bank-time 
ﬁxed eﬀects. While the impact of other bank characteristics cannot be 
estimated separately in this case, our initial ﬁndings remain intact with 
estimated coeﬃcients that are close to our benchmark estimates.

Before continuing, we note two possible reasons why PDs may not 
be  good  measures  of  ﬁrm  distress.  First,  banks  may  misreport  these 
statistics (a concern we address below). Second, they may reﬂect banks’ 
expectations of future lending decisions. In particular, if a bank intends 
to save a ﬁrm whenever it experiences some distress so that the ﬁrm 
can repay its outstanding debt, the bank may assign a low PD to that 
ﬁrm today. If anything, such risk assessments would downward-bias our 
estimates in Table 3.1 and therefore make it harder for us to ﬁnd evi-
dence for our theory. In that sense, our quantitative ﬁndings thus far can 
be viewed as conservative. Taken together, the results provide empiri-
cal support for our theoretical mechanism, showing that concentrated 
lenders—that hold a larger share of a ﬁrm’s debt—provide distressed 
ﬁrms with relatively better credit conditions.

In Appendix C, we explore extensions and consider the robustness of 
our empirical ﬁndings along the following dimensions. First, we inves-
tigate whether our results can be explained by an alternative channel 
such as theories of evergreening or zombie lending based on bank cap-
ital positions (e.g., gambling for resurrection or risk-shifting) or by a 
diﬀerent mechanism of debt forgiveness or restructuring. Second, we 
test the sensitivity of our ﬁndings to the chosen cutoﬀ value for 𝑃 𝐷𝑖,𝑡, 
to the potential misreporting of PDs by banks, to banks being poorly 
capitalized, and to the disagreement about PDs across banks. Third, we 
explore alternative regression speciﬁcations that extend the ﬁrm-time 
ﬁxed eﬀects by other contract terms, that consider ﬁrms that transition 
into ﬁnancial distress, and that include credit lines into the analysis. 
By and large, our ﬁndings remain much the same across the various 
robustness tests and extensions.

3.4.  Comparison with zombie ﬁrm classiﬁcations

Next, we investigate how typical measures of zombie ﬁrms from the 
literature compare with our ﬁrm distress indicator and ﬁrms’ PDs more 
generally.

To this end, we deﬁne zombie ﬁrms following the classiﬁcations by 
Caballero et al. (2008), Schivardi et al. (2022), and Favara et al. (2022a)
since  these  three  measures  can  be  computed  based  on  the  available 
data.14 In addition, we also deﬁne a zombie ﬁrm as one that has high 

13 Speciﬁcally, we consider the categories “Mergers and Acquisition,” “Work-
ing Capital (permanent or short-term),” “Real estate investment or acquisition,” 
and “All other purposes” as separate types (see also Appendix Table B.3).
14 Caballero et al. (2008) deﬁne a zombie ﬁrm as one that pays average inter-
est rates on its debt below safe rates. We measure ﬁrm-speciﬁc safe rates using 
six-month and two-year government bond rates weighting those by ﬁrms’ short-
and long-term debt ratios. Schivardi et al. (2022) deﬁne a zombie as one with 
a return on assets below the safe rate (which we approximate using the federal 
funds rate) and a debt-to-asset ratio above 0.4. Favara et al. (2022a) deﬁne a 

leverage and low productivity.15 This measure is intended to relate to 
the  static  model  which  predicts  that  such  ﬁrms  experience  ﬁnancial 
distress. As shown in Appendix Table C.1, the zombie deﬁnitions by 
Schivardi et al. (2022) and Favara et al. (2022a), as well as the model-
based measure, are positively correlated with Distress𝑖,𝑡. Firms that are 
considered  to  be  zombies  based  on  these  measures  also  have  higher 
PDs. However, the correlations are not perfect and many ﬁrms that are 
considered zombies appear ﬁnancially sound with PDs close to zero.16
Thus, while hard ﬁrm characteristics such as leverage and produc-
tivity have some predictive power for ﬁrms’ likelihood of default, many 
other idiosyncratic reasons also determine ﬁnancial distress in practice. 
We therefore view the use of banks’ reported PDs—as opposed to some 
distress deﬁnition based on ﬁrm characteristics—as the most direct way 
of relating to our theory, which is concerned with ﬁrms’ distance to de-
fault.

3.5.  Firm level eﬀects

In a ﬁnal exercise, we test whether the eﬀects also persist at the ﬁrm 
level, aﬀecting total debt and investment. To this end, we aggregate a 
ﬁrm’s borrowing exposures across its lenders, using the debt shares as 
weights (as in Khwaja and Mian, 2008, for example). This aggregation 
leads to a regression speciﬁcation with an intuitive interpretation. For 
ﬁrm 𝑖, we estimate
𝑦𝑖,𝑡+4 − 𝑦𝑖,𝑡
0.5 ⋅ (𝑦𝑖,𝑡+4 + 𝑦𝑖,𝑡)
= 𝛼𝑖 + 𝜏𝑚,𝑘,𝑡 + 𝛽
1

𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑖,𝑡

+ 𝛽
2

𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑖,𝑡 ⋅ 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽
3

𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡 ,

(3.2)

where 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 denotes either total ﬁrm debt or tangible assets as an approx-
imation for investment, 𝛼𝑖 is a ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀect, 𝜏𝑚,𝑘,𝑡 is an industry-
state-time ﬁxed eﬀect, and 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 is a vector of ﬁrm controls. 𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑖,𝑡 are 
𝑗 (𝐿𝑖,𝑗,𝑡∕𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑖,𝑡)2 which lie 
the aggregated debt exposures, deﬁned as 
in the range [0, 1], and can be interpreted as a Herﬁndahl-Hirschmann-
Index for debt concentration.17 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖,𝑡 is the same binary indicator 
variable that we used above, which equals one if 𝑃 𝐷𝑖,𝑡 ≥ 3.89%.

∑

We  note  that,  unlike  regression  (3.1),  we  are  unable  to  include 
ﬁrm-time ﬁxed eﬀects, as regression (3.2) covers only a single ﬁrm ob-
servation per period. As a result, the sample now also includes ﬁrms 
with only a single lender. We estimate regressions (3.2) at an annual 
frequency since ﬁrm ﬁnancials are typically updated once per year. The 
estimation results are shown in Table 3.2.

Columns (i) and (iii) show the baseline results for total debt and in-
vestment, respectively, and columns (ii) and (iv) test the robustness of 
those initial results by including additional interaction terms between 
the various (demeaned) ﬁrm controls and the distress indicator. We ﬁnd 
𝛽
> 0 for both outcome variables, which are statistically diﬀerent from 
1
zero at the one percent conﬁdence level. These results can be explained 
by the fact that—relative to other nondistressed ﬁrms—the ones with 
more concentrated debt positions are potentially younger ﬁrms that are 

zombie ﬁrm as one with negative sales growth over the previous three years, a 
leverage ratio above the median across all ﬁrms, and an interest coverage ratio 
below one.
15 For leverage, we use the 90th percentile across all ﬁrms for a particular 
period as a cutoﬀ. For productivity, we use the 10th percentile of ﬁrms’ return 
on assets for a particular period as a cutoﬀ.
16 The mass of ﬁrms with low PDs is relatively large for zombies under all 
three measures, with more than half of the ﬁrms having a PD of 2.8 percent 
or less. That makes it unlikely that these are all ﬁrms that are saved whenever 
they experience some distress, so that their lenders assign low PDs with such 
expectations.
17 Consistent with the previous regressions, we restrict the sample to term 
loans only. Since we do not cover all ﬁrm debt positions, we control for the 
ratio of observed credit to total ﬁrm debt.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037787M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Table 3.2
Credit supply to distressed ﬁrms - ﬁrm level.

HHI

HHI × Distress

Distress

Δ Total Debt

Investment

Δ Ave. Interest Rate

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

33.71***
(8.27)
13.34***
(4.54)
-4.38***
(1.38)

32.79***
(8.30)
19.49***
(5.41)
-7.24***
(1.83)

11.82***
(3.88)
6.88**
(3.49)
-2.56***
(0.71)

11.81***
(3.92)
7.55**
(3.85)
-2.34***
(0.86)

-2.21***
(0.42)
-0.78
(0.82)
0.04
(0.10)

-2.22***
(0.42)
-0.82
(0.89)
-0.01
(0.13)

Fixed Eﬀects
Firm
Time × Industry × State
Firm Controls × Distress
Firm Controls
R-squared
Observations
w/ Distress = 1
Number of Firms
Number of Banks

✓
✓

✓

0.56
60,636
5,211
14,400
37

✓
✓
✓
✓

0.56
60,636
5,211
14,400
37

✓
✓

✓

0.58
71,854
6,195
17,063
37

✓
✓
✓
✓

0.58
71,854
6,195
17,063
37

✓
✓

✓

0.44
55,222
4,896
13,021
37

✓
✓
✓
✓

0.44
55,222
4,896
13,021
37

Notes: Estimation results for regression (3.2) multiplied by 100, where 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 is either total ﬁrm 
debt in columns (i) and (ii) or tangible assets in columns (iii) and (iv). Columns (v) and (vi) 
estimate regression (3.2) using the change in the average interest rate 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+4 − 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 as a dependent 
variable. All speciﬁcations include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, time-industry-state ﬁxed eﬀects where an 
industry is classiﬁed using two-digit NAICS codes, the ratio of observed debt to total debt, and 
various ﬁrm controls: cash holdings, tangible assets, liabilities, debt, net income (all scaled by 
total assets), and ﬁrm size (natural logarithm of total assets). Columns (ii), (iv), and (vi) include 
interactions of each of the demeaned ﬁrm controls with the distress indicator. Standard errors 
in parentheses are two-way clustered by ﬁrm and the bank with the largest debt-share. Sample: 
2014:Q4 - 2019:Q4. ∗∗∗𝑝 < 0.01, ∗∗𝑝 < 0.05, ∗𝑝 < 0.1.

growing relatively faster and therefore have a higher demand for addi-
tional debt. We further ﬁnd 𝛽
< 0 for both debt and investment, which 
3
are again highly statistically signiﬁcant. That is, relative to other ﬁrms 
with dispersed borrowing, distressed ones have less debt growth and in-
vestment over the next year, which can be due to supply restrictions by 
their lenders.

Interestingly, we ﬁnd 𝛽
2

> 0 for both debt and investment. Relative 
to nondistressed ﬁrms with dispersed borrowing, a ﬁrm that ﬁnds itself 
in distress with concentrated borrowing has relatively more debt growth 
and investment, in addition to the eﬀect stemming from 𝛽
> 0. The 
estimates are again strongly statistically signiﬁcant and quantitatively 
important, with around 13 percent for debt growth and 7 percent for 
investment for a ﬁrm with a single lender versus a ﬁrm with extremely 
dispersed borrowing (𝐻𝐻𝐼 ≈ 0).

1 + 𝛽
3

Columns (v) and (vi) repeat the estimation of regression (3.2) using 
the change in the average interest rate 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+4 − 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 that a ﬁrm pays on 
all its debt as a dependent variable. While we do not observe the av-
erage interest rate directly, we obtain an approximation using a ﬁrm’s 
reported interest expenses divided by its total debt. We note that this 
imputation likely adds some noise since interest expenses are a ﬂow 
over a 12-month period in our data, whereas a ﬁrm’s total debt is a 
stock at a particular point in time. Nonetheless, we estimate coeﬃcients 
𝛽
1 and 𝛽
2 that are consistent with our previous ﬁndings. However, they 
are also less precisely estimated compared with the regressions for debt 
and investment, possibly explained by the imputation of the average 
interest rate.18

These  ﬁndings  are  consistent  with  our  theoretical  mechanism.  A 
concentrated lender subsidizes a ﬁrm in ﬁnancial distress relative to 
dispersed lenders. Building on this empirical validation of our theory, 

18 Alternatively, these results can speak to a mechanism whereby concentrated 
lenders extend relatively more credit at roughly similar rates to a ﬁrm in ﬁnan-
cial distress compared with dispersed lenders. While our mechanism works via 
interest rates, it could also occur via credit rationing as in, e.g., Stiglitz and 
Weiss (1981), with a smaller reduction or no change in rates due to informa-
tion frictions not present in our model.

we embed the mechanism into a dynamic model to study whether such 
lending behavior can aﬀect aggregate outcomes like capital, productiv-
ity, and output.

4.  Dynamic model

We ﬁrst present the model setup and the decision problem of a ﬁrm. 
We describe two potential institutional arrangements, as in the static 
model, that give rise to diﬀerent debt price functions and therefore to 
diﬀerent equilibria. In Section 5, we calibrate the model and compare 
equilibria under the two arrangements.

4.1.  Setup

Environment Time is discrete and inﬁnite, 𝑡 = 0, 1, 2, …. The economy 
is populated by a continuum of ﬁrms. The distribution of ﬁrms is de-
noted by 𝜆(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘), where 𝑧 denotes productivity, 𝑏 is debt, and 𝑘 is 
capital. Firms endogenously enter and exit the economy, with the mass 
of entrants denoted by m. For now, we assume that the price of debt is 
described by some arbitrary function 𝑄(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) that ﬁrms take as given. 
In the following sections, we present alternative institutional arrange-
ments that provide microfoundations for this function.

Timing The timing within each period is as follows: (1) ﬁrm productiv-
ity 𝑧 is realized, (2) a lending contract 𝑄 is oﬀered and depends only on 
the ﬁrm’s current state (𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘), (3) ﬁrms draw additive shocks (𝜀𝑃 , 𝜀𝐷)
to the value of repayment and default, (4) ﬁrms decide to default, non-
defaulting ﬁrms repay their debt, and new ﬁrms enter, (5) ﬁrms invest, 
produce, repay, borrow, and pay dividends.

Besides entry, another new feature relative to the static model is 
the introduction of i.i.d. additive shocks for the ﬁrm. This feature is 
primarily introduced for computational tractability as it smooths the 
expectation and probability functions for the ﬁrm and the lenders (see 
Dvorkin et al., 2021).

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037788M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

4.2.  Firm problem

Firms have access to a decreasing returns-to-scale production tech-
nology with the production function given by 𝑧𝑘𝛼𝑛𝜂
, where 𝑧 is current 
productivity, 𝑘 is current capital, and 𝑛 is labor. The capital share is 𝛼, 
and the labor share is 𝜂. The ﬁrm hires labor at wage 𝑤 and invests in 
new capital 𝑘′ at a constant unit cost. Capital depreciates at rate 𝛿. Ad-
ditionally, the ﬁrm pays a ﬁxed cost of operation equal to 𝐜. The value 
of repaying conditional on today’s state 𝑠 = (𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) and the oﬀered con-
tract 𝑄 is given by

𝑉 𝑃 (𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘; 𝑄) = max
𝑏′,𝑘′,𝑛≥0
+ 𝛽𝑓 𝔼𝑧′ [(𝑧′, 𝑏′, 𝑘′)|𝑧]

𝑑𝑖𝑣 − 𝕀[𝑑𝑖𝑣 < 0][𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛 + 𝑒𝑠𝑙𝑜|𝑑𝑖𝑣|]

s.t. 𝑑𝑖𝑣 = 𝑧𝑘𝛼𝑛𝜂 − 𝑤𝑛 − 𝑘′ + (1 − 𝛿)𝑘 + 𝑄𝑏′ − 𝑏 − 𝐜

,

𝑏′ ≤ 𝜃𝑘′

.

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

The value of repayment is equal to current dividends 𝑑𝑖𝑣 plus the con-
tinuation value, which is explained below. The ﬁrm is also subject to 
equity issuance costs, with a ﬁxed cost component 𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛 and a linear cost 
scaled by 𝑒𝑠𝑙𝑜. Equation (4.2) deﬁnes the ﬁrm dividend: the value of 
production, minus the wage bill, minus the new investment net of un-
depreciated capital, plus new borrowings, minus debt repayments, and 
minus the ﬁxed cost. Equation (4.3) is a borrowing constraint as in the 
static model. We refer to the policy functions that solve this problem as 
(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘; 𝑄) and (𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘; 𝑄), and the optimal labor choice results from 
a simple static problem.

The ﬁrm chooses how much to borrow 𝑏′ for an oﬀered price of 
debt 𝑄 that is taken as given. In this sort of environment with default-
able debt, a borrowing constraint is required for an equilibrium to be 
well-deﬁned (see, for example, Ayres et al., 2018). However, due to 
precautionary  behavior  arising  from  the  interaction  between  the  ex-
pectation  of  future  shocks  and  equity  issuance  costs,  the  borrowing 
constraint may not necessarily bind.

and  𝜀𝐷

0(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘, 𝜀𝑃 , 𝜀𝐷; 𝑄) = max

{
𝑉 𝑃 (𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘; 𝑄) + 𝜀𝑃 , 0 + 𝜀𝐷

The ﬁrm’s value before deciding repayment, after receiving an oﬀer 
𝑄,  and  upon  realizing  the  additive  shocks  𝜀𝑃
can  be  writ-
ten  as  𝑉
,  where 
𝑉 𝑃 (𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘; 𝑄) is deﬁned in (4.1), and we normalize the value of default 
to zero.19 The shocks 𝜀𝑃
represent a stochastic outside option 
for the entrepreneur who runs the ﬁrm, and we assume that they fol-
low a type I extreme value distribution (Gumbel), which implies that 
the diﬀerence between the two random variables 𝜀 = 𝜀𝑃 − 𝜀𝐷
follows a 
logistic distribution with scale parameter 𝜅. Given these assumptions, 
the probability of repayment today given 𝑄 is

and 𝜀𝐷

}

(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘; 𝑄) =

exp

[

]

𝑉 𝑃 (𝑧,𝑏,𝑘;𝑄)
𝜅
[

𝑉 𝑃 (𝑧,𝑏,𝑘;𝑄)
𝜅

1 + exp

]

.

(4.4)

We assume that lenders cannot commit to future prices 𝑄. This means 
that ﬁrms take a price function 𝑄(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) as given in the next period, 
which allows us to write the expected value of the ﬁrm with respect to 
the shocks (𝜀𝑃 ′, 𝜀𝐷′) given future states (𝑧′, 𝑏′, 𝑘′) as

a bond market with a large mass of atomistic lenders. In this case, the 
price  of  debt  𝑄 is  determined  by  a  free-entry  condition  for  lenders. 
Given 𝑠 = (𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘), we use the notation 𝑄𝑐(𝑠) to refer to the dispersed 
lending equilibrium price, which is the price that satisﬁes the following 
zero expected-discounted proﬁt condition

[

(4.6)

0 = −𝑄𝑐(𝑠; 𝑄𝑐) + 𝛽𝑘𝔼𝑧′ {(𝑧′, (𝑠; 𝑄𝑐), (𝑠; 𝑄𝑐))(𝑠; 𝑄𝑐)
+[1 − (𝑧′, (𝑠; 𝑄𝑐), (𝑠; 𝑄𝑐))]𝜓(𝑧′, (𝑠; 𝑄𝑐), (𝑠; 𝑄𝑐))} ,
where 𝜓 is the recovery value in case of default. This value is given 
by a fraction 𝜓
1 of the revenue generated by producing one last pe-
riod and liquidating the undepreciated stock of capital, i.e. 𝜓(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) ≡
]
max𝑛 𝑧𝑘𝛼𝑛𝜂 − 𝑤𝑛 + (1 − 𝛿)𝑘 − 𝐜
𝜓
.  The  expression  for  the  price  re-
1
sembles the one used in models of sovereign default, with the diﬀerence 
that we have to take into account the ﬁrm choices for capital and debt, 
(𝑠; 𝑄) and (𝑠; 𝑄), which are determined after 𝑄𝑐
is oﬀered. Note 
that we assume that lenders have a discount factor larger than that of 
the ﬁrm, 𝛽𝑘 > 𝛽𝑓
. This assumption ensures that ﬁrms never fully es-
cape their constraints, even in the long run (Rampini and Viswanathan, 
2013). It is also similar to the existence of a tax advantage of debt as 
it distorts ﬁrms’ choice of capital structure towards debt (Kiyotaki and 
Moore, 1997; Li et al., 2016).

Concentrated lending economy (CLE) The second type of credit market 
we study is one where lenders internalize the ﬁrm choices and the pos-
sibility of default on current claims  𝑏 when choosing lending terms. 
Consequently, such concentrated lenders may oﬀer a diﬀerent 𝑄 that 
we denote by 𝑄𝑟(𝑠). The market power that an existing lender can ex-
ercise is limited since a large mass of potential lenders stands ready to 
start a new relationship with a ﬁrm.20 The problem of a lender that 
has lent 𝑏 in the previous period to a ﬁrm with current capital 𝑘 and 
productivity 𝑧 is

𝑊 (𝑠) = max

[
(𝑠; 𝑄𝑟)

𝑏 − (𝑠; 𝑄𝑟)𝑄𝑟

𝑄𝑟≥𝑄𝑛(𝑠)
]
+ 𝛽𝑘𝔼𝑧′ [𝑊 (𝑧′, (𝑠; 𝑄𝑟), (𝑠; 𝑄𝑟))|𝑧]
+ [1 − (𝑠; 𝑄𝑟)]𝜓(𝑠)

,

(4.7)
where 𝑄𝑛(𝑠) is the price oﬀered by new lenders. Given the free-entry 
assumption, 𝑄𝑛(𝑠) is determined by the zero expected-discounted proﬁt 
condition

(4.8)

−𝑄𝑛(𝑠; 𝑄𝑛) + 𝛽𝑘𝔼𝑧′ [𝑊 (𝑧′, (𝑠; 𝑄𝑛), (𝑠; 𝑄𝑛))|𝑧] = 0 .
Thus, a concentrated lender would like to extract as much surplus as 
it can, but is constrained by the outside option of the ﬁrm to start a 
new relationship. In addition, the concentrated lender also understands 
aﬀects the probability of survival today (𝑠; 𝑄𝑟) and hence the 
that 𝑄𝑟
likelihood of 𝑏 being repaid. The lender may therefore oﬀer a 𝑄𝑟
that 
is strictly higher than 𝑄𝑛
. We say that the ﬁrm beneﬁts from subsidized 
lending whenever the prevailing price of debt oﬀered by a concentrated 
lender is strictly larger than the counterfactual price of debt that the 
ﬁrm would obtain were it to match with a new lender, 𝑄𝑟 > 𝑄𝑛

.

4.4.  Closing the economy

(𝑧′, 𝑏′, 𝑘′) = 𝔼𝜀𝑃 ′,𝜀𝐷′ 𝑉
{

= 𝜅 log

[

0(𝑧′, 𝑏′, 𝑘′, 𝜀𝑃 ′, 𝜀𝐷′)
𝑉 𝑃 (𝑧′, 𝑏′, 𝑘′)
𝜅

1 + exp

4.3.  Alternative lending arrangements

]}

.

(4.5)

New entrants have to pay a ﬁxed cost 𝜔 to take a productivity draw 
𝑧 ∼ Γ(𝑧) and start operating. We assume that new entrants are endowed 
with a certain amount of capital equal to 𝑘. Firms are willing to enter 
as long as

Dispersed  lending  economy  (DLE) The  ﬁrst  institutional  arrangement 
consists of a purely competitive credit market. It can be thought of as 

19 Note that we focus on solvency default, not liquidity default as in Ivanov et 
al. (2021), for example.

𝔼

Γ[(𝑧′, 0, 𝑘)] ≥ 𝜔 + 𝑘 .

(4.9)

20 In fact, the model is perfectly competitive due to the assumption of free-
entry of lenders and no costs of switching lenders. Adding switching costs would 
generate ex-post market power for lenders. Lender free-entry would still ensure 
that contracts are ex-ante competitive.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037789M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Let 𝜆(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) be the measure of ﬁrms after entry and exit have taken 
place. In a stationary equilibrium, the measure  𝜆 is the same across 
periods, and consistent with a law of motion

𝜆(𝑧′, 𝑏′, 𝑘′)

Pr(𝑧′|𝑧)𝕀[(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) = 𝑏′]𝕀[(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) = 𝑘′](𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘)d𝜆(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘)

= ∫
𝑧,𝑏,𝑘

Γ(𝑧) Pr(𝑧′|𝑧)𝕀[(𝑧, 0, 𝑘) = 𝑏′]𝕀[(𝑧, 0, 𝑘) = 𝑘′](𝑧, 0, 𝑘)d𝑧 ,

+ m ∫
𝑧

(4.10)
where 𝕀 is the indicator function, equal to 1 if the condition in brack-
ets  is  satisﬁed  and  0  otherwise,  m is  the  mass  of  new  entrants,  and 
Γ(𝑧) ≡  (𝑧; 𝑧, ̃𝑧) is the distribution of productivity for entrants, which 
is a uniform distribution between the minimum value of productivity, 
𝑧, which is set at two standard deviations below the mean, and an in-
termediate value ̃𝑧, which is internally calibrated.

With the measure of ﬁrms, we can compute labor demand as

𝑁 𝑑 = ∫

𝑧,𝑏,𝑘

𝑛(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘)d𝜆(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘)

.

(4.11)

In what follows, we make two alternative assumptions about how 
to close the economy, which is deﬁned for some function 𝑄(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘) that 
ﬁrms take as given. The key diﬀerence between the two equilibrium 
concepts is whether wages adjust. Under “constant entry,” wages do not 
adjust, and one can therefore interpret the economy as a single industry 
that is relatively small in terms of the aggregate labor market. Under 
“constant labor,” wages adjust, and the economy rather represents the 
general equilibrium of an entire economy.

Constant entry First, we consider an economy with constant entry by 
making the assumptions that (i) the measure of entrants is perfectly 
inelastic, m = ̄m and (ii) labor supply is perfectly elastic, so it adjusts to 
be equal to the labor demand as in (4.11). An equilibrium with constant 
entry is a collection of policy and value functions (, , 𝑉 𝑝), a constant 
wage 𝑤 = 1, a measure 𝜆(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘), and a constant mass of entrants  ̄m such 
that (a) the policy and value functions solve the ﬁrm’s problem in (4.1)
given the function 𝑄 and 𝑤 = 1, (b) a wage 𝑤 = 1 that ensures that the 
free-entry condition (4.9) is satisﬁed (possibly with a strict inequality), 
and (c) the distribution of ﬁrms is given by a measure 𝜆 that satisﬁes 
(4.10).

Constant labor Second, we consider an economy with constant labor 
by assuming that (i) the measure of entrants is perfectly elastic and 
new ﬁrms make zero expected-discounted proﬁts, and (ii) labor supply 
is constant at  ̄𝑁 . An equilibrium with constant labor is a collection of 
policy and value functions (, , 𝑉 𝑝), an equilibrium wage 𝑤, a mea-
sure of ﬁrms 𝜆(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘), and a mass of entrants m such that (a) the policy 
and value functions solve the ﬁrm’s problem (4.1) given 𝑄 and the wage 
rate 𝑤, (b) a wage rate 𝑤 that ensures that the free-entry condition (4.9)
is satisﬁed with equality, (c) the measure of ﬁrms 𝜆 satisﬁes (4.10), and 
(d) the mass of entrants m is such that the demand for labor (4.11) is 
equal to  ̄𝑁 . This deﬁnition resembles the one in Hopenhayn (1992).

5.  Quantitative evaluation

5.1.  Calibration

We calibrate the model to an annual frequency, and the parameters 
we pick are summarized in Table 5.1. We use a combination of external 
and internal calibration. As our benchmark economy, we choose the 
model under concentrated lending and the equilibrium with constant 
labor. Our calibration strategy is based on matching a series of general 
moments from the literature and the Y-14 data that are typically used 

as targets in the literature but that are not directly related to the ever-
greening mechanism. We then show that even our agnostic calibration 
is able to generate evergreening in equilibrium, and generate patterns 
that are consistent with the empirical evidence that we document in 
Section 3, which we take as an external validation of the model.

We pick the entry cost 𝜔 such that condition (4.9) is satisﬁed with 
equality for 𝑤 = 1 and normalize  ̄𝑁 = 100. We assume that ﬁrm produc-
tivity follows an AR(1) process in logs, log 𝑧′ = 𝜇𝑧 + 𝜌𝑧 log 𝑧 + 𝜎𝑧𝜖𝑧. The 
associated parameters are taken from Gomes (2001) and Gourio and 
Miao (2010), with 𝜇𝑧 = 0. The two references report similar values for 
the persistence of the AR(1) process, which we adopt, but relatively dif-
ferent values for the standard deviation of the innovations. We choose 
𝜎𝑧 = 0.11, an intermediate value within the range of reported values 
(0.035 and 0.22). The slope parameter for the linear component of the 
equity issuance cost is set to a standard value of 0.2, consistent with 
the estimates in Hennessy and Whited (2007). The depreciation rate is 
calibrated to 𝛿 = 0.1, which is in line with standard values for physical 
capital depreciation in models calibrated at the annual frequency and 
helps us match an aggregate investment rate of 10.4%. The production 
function parameters 𝛼 and 𝜂 are set to 0.32 and 0.48, respectively. This 
is consistent with a capital share equal to 0.4 and a degree of returns to 
scale of 0.8. This helps us match an aggregate proﬁt share, net of ﬁxed 
costs, of 17.6%, close to the 16% that we measure in the Y-14 data. The 
discount factor of lenders is set to target a risk-free rate of around 3 
percent, a standard value. The recovery rate is calibrated to 𝜓
1 = 0.35, 
consistent with the recent evidence in Kermani and Ma (2020). The ﬁrm 
discount factor, the ﬁxed cost of operation, the scale for the logistic dis-
tribution, the TFP distribution for entering ﬁrms, their initial capital, 
the collateral constraint parameter, and the cost of issuing equity are 
internally calibrated and jointly chosen to match a series of moments 
from the data, presented in Table 5.2.

The model does a relatively good job at matching key moments for 
the distribution of ﬁrm ﬁnancials, such as median market leverage and 
debt relative to ﬁxed assets (capital), as well as the aggregate invest-
ment rate. For these moments, we report two numbers, one computed 
based on ﬁrm ﬁnancials reported in the Y-14 data and another based on 
Compustat data. Both moments refer to the main sample period of our 
empirical results, 2014:Q4 through 2019:Q4. The model can generate 
an exit rate in line with the average value for the last 40 years, as doc-
umented by Hopenhayn et al. (2022), as well as a reasonable value for 
the median interest rate spreads reported on the Y-14 loans.21 Finally, 
the model does a relatively good job of matching a series of moments 
on size and productivity of ﬁrms at entry and exit, following Lee and 
Mukoyama (2015): size is measured as employment, and all of these 
moments are relative to the unconditional average over the entire dis-
tribution. The model can replicate the fact that ﬁrms tend to be smaller 
and less productive than average both at entry and exit.

5.2.  Lending prices and ﬁrm choices

Fig. 5.1 plots policy functions, continuation values, and debt prices 
for a ﬁrm with the same (𝑧, 𝑘) in the two economies, as a function of 
preexisting debt 𝑏. We begin by describing the dispersed lending case 
illustrated by the blue dashed lines, where results are perhaps more 
standard and intuitive. The ﬁrm’s value is strictly decreasing in 𝑏, which 
implies the same relation for the probability of repayment (panel a). 
Similarly, 𝑘′ is strictly decreasing in 𝑏 as visible in panel (d). That is be-
cause ﬁrms with more debt are more likely to realize negative proﬁts, 
forcing them to issue costly equity. When the marginal value of equity 
is high, investment is lower, which implies less borrowing due to the 
borrowing constraint, as shown in panel (c). Finally, panel (b) plots the 

21 The median spread from the Y-14 is likely a lower bound as the data cov-
ers larger loans of at least $1M (committed amount) issued by relatively large 
banks.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377810M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Table 5.1
Model parameters and values.

Parameter

Description

Value

Source/Reason

𝜔
𝜌𝑧
𝜎𝑢
𝑒𝑠𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒
𝛿
𝛼
𝜂
𝛽𝑘
𝜓
1
𝛽𝑓
𝐜
𝜅
̃𝑧
𝑘
𝜃
𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛

Cost of entry
TFP persistence
TFP volatility
Equity issuance cost
Depreciation rate
Production, capital share
Production, labor share
Lender discount rate
Recovery value

Borrower discount factor
Fixed cost
Logistic distr., scale
TFP distr. for entrants
Initial capital
Constraint parameter
Fixed cost of issuing equity

1.184
0.767
0.110
0.200
0.100
0.320
0.480
0.970
0.350

0.884
0.055
0.225
1.147
0.805
1.040
0.010

Normalize 𝑤 = 1
Gomes (2001), Gourio and Miao (2010)
Gomes (2001), Gourio and Miao (2010)
Hennessy and Whited (2007)
Aggregate investment/capital of 10%
Proﬁt share of 16%
Proﬁt share of 16%
Real rate of 3%
Kermani and Ma (2020)

Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated

Table 5.2
Data moments and model ﬁt.

Moment

Source

Market leverage (median)
Debt over ﬁxed assets (median)
Investment rate (aggregate)
Proﬁt share (aggregate)
Interest rate spread (median)
Exit rate
Size at entry (relative to mean)
Size at exit (relative to mean)
TFP at entry (relative to mean)
TFP at exit (relative to mean)

Y-14/Compustat
Y-14/Compustat
Y-14/Compustat
Y-14
Y-14
Hopenhayn et al. (2022)
Lee and Mukoyama (2015)
Lee and Mukoyama (2015)
Lee and Mukoyama (2015)
Lee and Mukoyama (2015)

Data

0.63/0.57
1.09/1.20
0.104/0.14
0.16
3.46%
9.0%
0.60
0.49
0.75
0.64

Model

0.59
1.04
0.117
0.176
4.47%
8.8%
0.58
0.38
0.88
0.86

Notes: Y-14/Compustat moments correspond to unconditional moments between 
2014:Q4 and 2019:Q4. Size and productivity at entry and exit are measured in % 
of average values for incumbent ﬁrms, where size is deﬁned as total employment. 
Investment rate is equal to net investment divided by capital/ﬁxed assets. The proﬁt 
share is measured as operating proﬁts net of ﬁxed costs divided by output in the 
model, and as operating surplus divided by sales in the data. The median interest 
rate spread is computed with respect to a weighted average over contemporary 
yields on 6-month and 2-year treasury notes, where the weights are given by each 
ﬁrm’s short- and long-term debt shares relative to total debt.

equilibrium price 𝑄𝑐(𝑧, 𝑏, 𝑘). As legacy debt increases, the probability 
of default in the following period rises, leading to a fall in the dispersed 
lending price. For high levels of legacy debt, the equilibrium price rises 
slightly as the ﬁrm strongly cuts down on its borrowing but still invests. 
The red lines correspond to the same policy functions under concen-
trated lending. For low enough debt, the policies are much the same. 
However, after a certain point, they begin to diverge. Speciﬁcally, panel 
(b) shows that the price of debt rises earlier with more legacy debt. The 
higher price of debt reﬂects the subsidy from the concentrated lender 
who attempts to prevent ﬁrm default. As panels (a), (c), and (d) show, 
the subsidy aﬀects the probability of repayment, as well as ﬁrm choices 
of capital and debt, which are all larger compared with the dispersed 
lending case. Note that this plot refers to a particular combination of 
ﬁrm states (𝑘, 𝑧) that we keep ﬁxed throughout: in other regions of the 
state space, the probability of repayment may not be suﬃciently sensi-
tive to the price of debt such that the policies look more similar across 
the two economies.

5.3.  Aggregate eﬀects: dispersed vs. concentrated lending

We  assess  the  impact  of  introducing  concentrated  lending  in  Ta-
ble 5.3 for  the  two  equilibria  mentioned  before;  one  with  constant 
entry and one with constant labor. In each of the columns, we compare 
moments for the stationary equilibrium under concentrated lending to 
those  same  moments  for  the  stationary  equilibrium  under  dispersed 

lending. The top part of the table corresponds to averages across ﬁrms, 
and the bottom part presents aggregates. By steering a ﬁrm’s default 
decision through the oﬀered lending terms, a concentrated lender can 
recover its previous investment more often, beneﬁting the lender, all 
else being equal. However, assuming lenders make zero proﬁts in ex-
pectation, incumbent ﬁrms reap these beneﬁts by borrowing at lower 
rates that decrease by 1.24% in the equilibrium with constant entry and 
by 1.13% with constant labor. The average ﬁrm in the CLE is, therefore, 
more indebted, with market leverage rising by 0.60% with constant en-
try and 0.54% with constant labor. Firms also become larger by nearly 
2.34% with constant entry and 2% with constant labor. The average 
ﬁrm in the CLE is also slightly less productive, and ﬁrms exit less often.
Regarding aggregates, both debt and capital increase by over 3% 
with  constant  entry  and  by  over  1%  with  constant  labor.  The  more 
frequent  survival  of  low-productive  ﬁrms  that  invest  relatively  more 
impedes the entry of other ﬁrms and leads to a shift in the distribu-
tion of ﬁrm productivity. As a result, measured TFP falls by 0.32% with 
constant  entry  and  0.23%  with  constant  labor.  While  measured  TFP 
is lower, the fact that the CLE uses signiﬁcantly more capital and labor 
results in 2.14% more output with constant entry. However, in the equi-
librium with constant labor, total labor is ﬁxed, and output is roughly 
the same in the two economies (0.10% larger).

Table 5.3 also shows the importance of the market-clearing wage 
assumption. Under constant entry, the CLE features larger increases in 
aggregate capital, labor, output, and debt. Note also that the equilib-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377811M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Fig. 5.1. Comparison of policy functions. Notes: Policy functions and values for a ﬁrm with the same set of (𝑧 = 0.6, 𝑘 = 2), as a function of 𝑏, dispersed lending 
(blue, dashed) vs. concentrated lending (red, solid) economies.

Table 5.3
Impact of introducing concentrated lending.

Δ % with const. entry

Δ % with const. labor

in each economy as 𝑌 = ∫𝑠 𝑧𝑘𝛼𝑛(𝑠)𝜂d𝜆(𝑠). The following result describes 
the maximum level of output that a planner could achieve by reallocat-
ing ﬁxed quantities of factors across a ﬁxed mass of ﬁrms.

Firm level (Averages)

Market Leverage
Interest rate
Size
Productivity
Exit rate

Aggregates

Debt
Capital
Labor
Output
Wage
Measured TFP
Number of ﬁrms

0.60
-1.24
2.34
-0.04
-0.70

3.13
3.13
2.14
2.14
0.00
-0.31
0.77

0.54
-1.13
1.99
-0.02
-0.17

1.04
1.04
0.00
0.10
0.10
-0.23
-0.94

Notes: Size is measured in terms of capital. Measured TFP is given 
by 𝑌 ∕(𝐾 𝛼𝑁 1−𝛼).

Proposition 4. In an economy where a planner can freely reallocate capital 
and labor across ﬁrms to maximize production, for a given mass of ﬁrms, ag-
gregate production is given by 𝑌 ∗ = 𝑀 1−𝛼−𝜂𝔼[𝑧
, where 
𝐾 ≡ ∫𝑠 𝑘(𝑠)d𝜆(𝑠), 𝑁 ≡ ∫𝑠 𝑛(𝑠)d𝜆(𝑠) are the aggregate stocks of capital and 
labor, respectively. Proof: See Appendix D.1.

1−𝛼−𝜂 ]1−𝛼−𝜂𝐾 𝛼𝑁 𝜂

1

As a direct corollary we can write output in the decentralized econ-

omy as

)1−𝛼−𝜂

selection
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞

×

𝔼[𝑧

1

1−𝛼−𝜈 ]1−𝛼−𝜂 ×

(

𝑌 =

1
𝑆

⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏟

factor qtys.
⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞
𝐾 𝛼𝑁 1−𝛼

×

,

𝑌
𝑌 ∗
⏟⏟⏟

rium concepts diﬀer with respect to the number of ﬁrms. With constant 
entry,  the  number  of  ﬁrms  increases  as  more  ﬁrms  survive,  and  the 
measure of entrants is constant. In contrast, with constant labor, the 
number of ﬁrms declines slightly because ﬁrms are larger, which im-
plies that fewer resources are available for new entrants, leading to a 
drop in ﬁrm entry.

5.4.  Aggregate productivity in the CLE and the DLE

Our results suggest that the lending regime aﬀects the average size 
and  proﬁtability  of  incumbent  ﬁrms,  both  of  which  could  aﬀect  ag-
gregate productivity. We decompose aggregate productivity under each 
lending  regime  into  three  separate  terms:  static  misallocation  in  the 
spirit  of  Hsieh  and  Klenow  (2009),  selection  (or  dynamic  misalloca-
tion), and average ﬁrm size. First, we explicitly deﬁne aggregate output 

avg. ﬁrm size

static misallocation

where 𝑆 ≡ 𝑁∕𝑀 is the average ﬁrm size. The ﬁrst three terms corre-
spond to measured TFP, 𝑀𝑇 𝐹 𝑃 ≡ 𝑌 ∕𝐾 𝛼𝑁 1−𝛼
. MTFP depends on three 
components: the ﬁrst term is average ﬁrm size. This term appears since 
ﬁrms operate with decreasing returns to scale technology: an economy 
with more and/or smaller ﬁrms has higher MTFP, everything else con-
stant. The second term represents selection, or dynamic misallocation: 
an economy with more productive incumbents on average has higher 
MTFP, everything else constant. The ﬁnal term represents static misal-
location in the sense of Hsieh and Klenow (2009). It is equal to 1 in an 
economy where a constant amount of factor inputs are distributed to 
equalize marginal products of inputs across ﬁrms.

This expression is useful to compare aggregate productivity across 
diﬀerent economies: for two economies indexed by 𝑖, 𝑗, we can decom-
pose the ratio

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377812M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Table 5.4
MTFP decomposition: CLE vs. DLE.

Ratio

% Δ DLE constant entry to CLE

% Δ DLE constant labor to CLE

MTFP
Size
Selection
Static Misallocation

-0.309
-0.270
-0.008
-0.032

-0.227
-0.188
-0.004
-0.035

Table 5.5
Subsidized vs. non-subsidized Firms in the CLE (medians).

as those oﬀered by a new lender without evergreening incentives—a 
counterfactual that cannot be observed in the data.

Non-subsidized

Subsidized

Δ %

Capital
Productivity
Output
Payouts/assets
Market leverage
Interest rate
Probability of survival
Interest-coverage ratio
Age

0.75
1.02
0.41
0.05
0.53
7.75
0.96
1.67
7.87

1.72
0.94
0.60
-0.01
0.80
10.02
0.89
0.45
10.17

128.5
-8.0
46.1
-114.4
50.6
29.2
-7.6
-73.1
29.2

)

1−𝛼−𝜂

𝑌𝑖
𝑌𝑗

=

(

1∕𝑆𝑖
1∕𝑆𝑗

×

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

𝔼𝑖[𝑧

𝔼𝑗 [𝑧

1
1−𝛼−𝜈 ]
1
1−𝛼−𝜈 ]

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

1−𝛼−𝜂

(

×

)

(

×

𝑌𝑖∕𝑌 ∗
𝑖
𝑌𝑗 ∕𝑌 ∗
𝑗

𝐾 𝛼

𝐾 𝛼

𝑖 𝑁 1−𝛼
𝑖
𝑗 𝑁 1−𝛼
𝑗

)

.

(5.1)

Table 5.4 reports the results of the decomposition of MTFP for the 
CLE vs. the DLE with constant entry or constant labor. MTFP is lower in 
the CLE in both cases: the decomposition attributes most of this drop to 
the size component, as ﬁrms are on average larger in the CLE. There is 
also a small negative contribution from selection, as ﬁrm productivity is 
also lower on average in the CLE. Finally, static misallocation is worse 
in the CLE, suggesting that subsidized lending also worsens static eﬃ-
ciency. However, it accounts for only around 10% of MTFP losses, with 
the bulk arising from ﬁrm size. This suggests that traditional measures 
of static misallocation, such as the standard deviation of MPK, may not 
be informative regarding productivity losses generated by lending ar-
rangements.

5.5.  Subsidized vs. non-subsidized ﬁrms

How do subsidized and non-subsidized ﬁrms diﬀer in the CLE? Ta-
ble 5.5 explores this question, reporting medians for diﬀerent individual 
ﬁrm characteristics, depending on whether those ﬁrms are subsidized. 
Recall that a ﬁrm is subsidized when it pays an interest rate to a concen-
trated lender that is below the rate that it would pay if it were to match 
with a new lender (regardless of the rate that a ﬁrm with the same 
states would pay in the dispersed lending economy, where no ﬁrms are 
subsidized). The table shows that subsidized ﬁrms are around 130% 
larger than non-subsidized ﬁrms. However, they are also around 8% 
less productive. Still, the size eﬀect outweighs the lower productivity, 
and the median subsidized ﬁrm has around 46% larger output. Subsi-
dized ﬁrms are also more leveraged and pay higher interest rates despite 
the  subsidy,  because  they  are  riskier  compared  with  non-subsidized 
ﬁrms.

Note that the subsidized ﬁrms have most of the characteristics that 
the literature typically associates with “zombie ﬁrms”: they are large, 
unproductive, indebted, unproﬁtable, and older. Interestingly, however, 
and despite the subsidy, these ﬁrms pay higher interest rates as they 
tend to be closer to default (the probability of survival is almost 8 pp 
lower). This puts in question empirical classiﬁcations of zombie ﬁrms 
that are based on costs of borrowing being below market or below av-
erage for a given peer group (as in Caballero et al., 2008). Subsidized 
ﬁrms in our model are ultimately risky ﬁrms, and thus they pay rela-
tively higher interest rates. However, these interest rates are not as high 

Subsidized vs. zombie ﬁrms While there is a large empirical literature 
that attempts to classify zombie ﬁrms, there is no single deﬁnition of 
what  constitutes  one,  and  a  wide  range  of  classiﬁcation  methodolo-
gies  have  been  proposed  in  the  literature.  We  focus  on  the  measure 
by Favara et al. (2022a) (FMP), who quantify the number of zombie 
ﬁrms in the U.S. using a similar dataset to ours. They classify a ﬁrm as 
a zombie if it satisﬁes the following three conditions: (i) leverage above 
the median, (ii) an interest coverage ratio below 1, and (iii) average 
negative sales growth over the past 3 years. Given our calibration, we 
ﬁnd that 5.7% of ﬁrms satisfy this deﬁnition in the stationary equilib-
rium with concentrated lending. This is consistent with the estimates of 
FMP, who ﬁnd a zombie ﬁrm share of 5.6%-5.7% between 2017 and 
2019. This is a completely untargeted and relevant moment; thus, we 
take it as a measure of external validation of the model calibration.

Given the diﬀerences between subsidized and non-subsidized ﬁrms 
reported in Table 5.5, we also assess how various zombie deﬁnitions 
from the literature correlate with whether a ﬁrm receives a subsidy or 
not in our model (our precise deﬁnition of a zombie). Details of this 
exercise are left to Appendix D.2. We ﬁnd a high correlation with the 
measure  proposed  by  Schivardi  et  al.  (2022),  who  classify  a  ﬁrm  as 
a zombie if it has (i) a return on assets below the risk-free rate and 
(ii) leverage above 40%. Overall, classiﬁcation measures that put more 
emphasis on proﬁtability and leverage perform better.

5.6.  Discussion: model vs. data

Our model analysis focuses on two extreme cases: all ﬁrms in the 
economy either borrow from concentrated or from perfectly dispersed 
lenders. In practice, however, there is substantial variation of lender 
concentration across ﬁrms in the data.

If ﬁrms were able to choose the lending regime in our setup, con-
centrated lending would become dominant. To see this, consider ﬁrst 
the case where ﬁrms can choose the regime upon entry, and commit to 
it thereafter. As Table 5.3 shows, the wage rate is higher in the con-
centrated lending economy vs. the dispersed lending economy, which 
reﬂects  a  higher  ex-ante  value  of  entry  in  the  concentrated  lending 
economy for a given wage rate. The higher value of entry is due to dif-
ferences in lending technology that allow for implicit restructuring in 
the concentrated lending economy. Second, if we allow ﬁrms to choose 
the regime period-by-period, we ﬁnd in our calibration that the value 
function is weakly larger in the concentrated lending economy given a 
wage rate for any combination of state variables.

The fact that there is variation of lending regimes in the data sug-
gests that other factors govern this choice that are not fully captured 
by our model; or some ﬁrms may not even be able to make this choice 
at all. To account for such factors, we set up a version of the model 
where  a  fraction  𝜙 of  entrant  ﬁrms  is  exogenously  assigned  to  dis-
persed  lenders,  while  all  other  entrants  are  exogenously  assigned  to 
concentrated lenders. While this version of the model still considers two 
extreme lending regimes, it generates regime variety in equilibrium by 
mixing the two.22 We calibrate 𝜙 to match the average within-ﬁrm HHI 

22 For computational tractability, we set up this economy under constant en-
try, with 𝑤 = 1.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377813M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

of lending in the Y-14 data, the same measure we employ in Section 3.5. 
Our baseline estimate for this measure is 0.91 which implies 𝜙 = 0.09.23
Based on this calibration, we investigate whether the model gener-
ates cross-sectional predictions that are in line with the patterns we ﬁnd 
in the data. To this end, we simulate a large number of panels and repli-
cate the empirical speciﬁcation in Section 3.2 for each. In particular, we 
regress the (symmetric) growth rates of capital and debt on a measure of 
lender concentration, a measure of distress, and the interaction between 
the two. Firms with dispersed borrowing are assigned 𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑖,𝑡 = 0, while 
ﬁrms with concentrated borrowing are assigned 𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑖,𝑡 = 1. We deﬁne 
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖,𝑡 = 1 if a ﬁrm borrowing from concentrated lenders receives 
subsidized credit or if a ﬁrm borrowing from dispersed lenders would 
have been subsidized by concentrated lenders given its current states, 
and zero otherwise.

The results are reported in Appendix Table D.2, which we compare 
to  the  ones  in  Table 3.2.  The  model  generates  the  same  qualitative 
predictions  we  ﬁnd  in  the  data:  more  concentrated  borrowing  is  as-
sociated with higher capital and debt growth. At the same time, distress 
is related to lower capital and debt growth, everything else constant.24
Importantly, the coeﬃcient on the interaction between lender concen-
tration and distress is positive; that is, distressed ﬁrms show additional 
debt and capital growth due to the subsidized borrowing they receive. 
The coeﬃcient for the investment regression is close to its empirical 
counterpart, providing evidence that the model mechanism generates 
comparable real eﬀects. If anything, the model slightly understates the 
importance of the mechanism. It should be noted that no moment that 
is directly related to the mechanism is explicitly targeted as part of our 
calibration strategy, and yet the model produces similar results that we 
ﬁnd in Section 3. We also ﬁnd that these regression results are largely 
insensitive to the choice of  𝜙, which merely changes the fraction of 
ﬁrms with dispersed borrowing.

6.  Conclusion

Up to this point, the literature has largely associated zombie lend-
ing or evergreening with economies that are in a depression and have 
severely undercapitalized banks. The main empirical contributions fo-
cus on cases that ﬁt these descriptions—Japan in the 1990s and periph-
ery countries during the Eurozone crisis more recently. In this paper, we 
take a diﬀerent perspective. We theoretically and empirically argue that 
evergreening is a general feature of ﬁnancial intermediation—taking 
place even outside of depressions and within economies that have well-
capitalized banks.

Our proposed theoretical mechanism builds on an intuitive idea. To 
recover its past investment, a lender has incentives to oﬀer more favor-
able lending terms to a ﬁrm close to default to keep the ﬁrm alive. We 
then explore the empirical relevance and macroeconomic consequences 

23 This is the average HHI for ﬁrms for which we observe at least 90% of 
total debt and is computed under the assumption that all unobserved debt is 
as dispersed as observed debt. This is likely to be a conservative estimate as 
the Y-14 data is tilted towards larger ﬁrms with more dispersed borrowing: 
average ﬁxed assets of such ﬁrms in our sample is $10.7 M, versus $3.9 M 
for the entire economy (aggregate ﬁxed assets from the BEA divided by total 
number of ﬁrms from County Business Patterns). Alternatively, we could pick 
𝜙 to match other aggregate moments. Appendix Fig. D.1 shows that the zombie 
measure by Favara et al. (2022a) is strictly decreasing in 𝜙 and targeting it by 
choosing 𝜙 would imply an even lower choice of 𝜙 close to zero to match the 
share of zombie ﬁrms measured in the data.
24 The quantitative results between model and data diﬀer for those coeﬃ-
cients, possibly because ﬁrms with concentrated borrowing are younger ones 
that  are  still  growing  in  practice  leading  to  a  more  positive  coeﬃcient  on 
𝐻𝐻𝐼𝑖,𝑡 in the data. Distressed ﬁrms may be slower to adjust their capital and 
debt in practice as they face capital adjustment costs and various other fric-
tions that are absent from the model, leading to a less negative coeﬃcient on 
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖,𝑡 in the data.

of this general theory of evergreening. We ﬁnd empirical support for 
the mechanism in the context of large U.S. banks, at a time when those 
were thought to be relatively well-capitalized. Using a calibrated dy-
namic model, we ﬁnd that evergreening has negative aggregate eﬀects 
for TFP, mainly due to its role in increasing average ﬁrm size. Explor-
ing how similar versions of our proposed mechanism may apply to other 
settings, such as the mortgage market as in Gupta (2022), is a salient 
path for future research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Miguel  Faria-e-Castro: Conceptualization,  Data  curation,  Formal 
analysis,  Investigation,  Methodology,  Software,  Supervision,  Valida-
tion, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Pascal Paul: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Inves-
tigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Supervision, 
Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & 
editing. Juan M. Sánchez: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal 
analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, 
Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing 
– review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

The codes and data of the article can be found at https://doi .org /

10 .17632 /z57nmyzhrr .2.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103778.

References

Acharya, Viral, Borchert, Lea, Jager, Maximilian, Steﬀen, Sascha, 2021a. Kicking the can 
down the road: government interventions in the European banking sector. Rev. Fi-
nanc. Stud. 34 (9), 4090–4131.

Acharya, Viral, Crosignani, Matteo, Eisert, Tim, Euﬁnger, Christian, 2020. Zombie Credit 
and (Dis-) Inﬂation: Evidence from Europe. Unpublished working paper. NY Fed.
Acharya, Viral, Crosignani, Matteo, Eisert, Tim, Steﬀen, Sascha, 2022. Zombie Lending: 
Theoretical, International, and Historical Perspectives. NBER Working Paper (29904).
Acharya, Viral, Lenzu, Simone, Wang, Olivier, 2021b. Zombie Lending and Policy Traps. 

Unpublished Working Paper. NYU Stern.

Acharya, Viral, Eisert, Tim, Euﬁnger, Christian, Hirsch, Christian, 2019. Whatever it 
takes: the real eﬀects of unconventional monetary policy. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (9), 
3366–3411.

Andrews, Dan, Petroulakis, Filippos, 2019. Breaking the Shackles: Zombie Firms, Weak 
Banks and Depressed Restructuring in Europe. European Central Bank Working Paper 
(2240).

Artavanis, Nikolaos, Lee, Brian Jonghwan, Panageas, Stavros, Tsoutsoura, Margarita, 
2022. Cross-subsidization of bad credit in a lending crisis. Working Paper 29850. 
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Asriyan, Vladimir, Laeven, Luc, Martin, Alberto, Van der Ghote, Alejandro, Vanasco, Vic-
toria, 2021. Falling Interest Rates and Credit Misallocation: Lessons from General 
Equilibrium. Unpublished Working Paper. Barcelona GSE.

Ayres, João, Navarro, Gaston, Nicolini, Juan Pablo, Teles, Pedro, 2018. Sovereign default: 

the role of expectations. J. Econ. Theory 175 (C), 803–812.

Banerjee, Ryan, Hofmann, Boris, 2022. Corporate zombies: anatomy and life cycle. Econ. 

Policy.

Becker, Bo, Ivashina, Victoria, 2022. Weak corporate insolvency rules: the missing driver 

of zombie lending. AEA Pap. Proc. 112, 516–520.

Begenau, Juliane, Bigio, Saki, Majerovitz, Jeremy, Vieyra, Matias, 2021. A Q-Theory of 

Banks. Unpublished Working Paper. Stanford University.

Bittner, Christian, Fecht, Falko, Co-Pierre, Georg, 2021. Contagious Zombies. Unpublished 

working paper. Frankfurt School of Finance and Management.

Bizer, David S., DeMarzo, Peter, 1992. Sequential banking. J. Polit. Econ. 100 (1), 41–61.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377814M. Faria-e-Castro, P. Paul and J.M. Sánchez

Blattner, Laura, Farinha, Luisa, Rebelo, Francisca, 2023. When losses turn into loans: the 

cost of weak banks. Am. Econ. Rev. 113 (6), 1600–1641.

Bolton, Patrick, Freixas, Xavier, Gambacorta, Leonardo, Mistrulli, Paolo Emilio, 2016. Re-
lationship and transaction lending in a crisis. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29 (10), 2643–2676.
Bonﬁm, Diana, Cerqueiro, Geraldo, Degryse, Hans, Ongena, Steven, 2022. On-site inspect-

ing zombie lending. Manag. Sci.

Hopenhayn, Hugo, Neira, Julian, Singhania, Rish, 2022. From population growth to ﬁrm 
demographics: implications for concentration, entrepreneurship and the labor share. 
Econometrica 90 (4), 1879–1914.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Klenow, Peter, 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China 

and India. Q. J. Econ. 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Hu,  Yunzhi,  Varas,  Felipe,  2021.  A  theory  of  zombie  lending.  J.  Finance 76  (4), 

Bruche, Max, Llobet, Gerard, 2013. Preventing zombie lending. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (3), 

1813–1867.

Dvorkin, Maximiliano, Sánchez, Juan M., Sapriza, Horacio, Yurdagul, Emircan, 2021. 

Li, Shaojin, Whited, Toni M., Wu, Yufeng, 2016. Collateral, taxes, and leverage. Rev. 

923–956.

Caballero, Ricardo, Hoshi, Takeo, Kashyap, Anil, 2008. Zombie lending and depressed 

restructuring in Japan. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (5), 1943–1977.

Cetorelli, Nicola, Strahan, Philip, 2006. Finance as a barrier to entry: bank competition 

and industry structure in local U.S. markets. J. Finance 61 (1), 437–461.

Chari, Anusha, Jain, Lakshita, Kulkarni, Nirupama, 2021. The Unholy Trinity: Regulatory 
Forbearance, Stressed Banks and Zombie Firms. NBER Working Paper (28435).
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2014. The employment eﬀects of credit market disruptions: 
ﬁrm-level evidence from the 2008-09 ﬁnancial crisis. Q. J. Econ. 129 (1), 1–59.
Cingano, Federico, Hassan, Fadi, 2022. International Financial Flows and Misallocation: 

Evidence from Micro Data. CEPR Discussion Paper (17186).

Clementi, Gian Luca, Palazzo, Berardino, 2016. Entry, exit, ﬁrm dynamics, and aggregate 

ﬂuctuations. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 8 (3), 1–41.

Sovereign debt restructurings. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 13 (2), 26–77.

Favara, Giovanni, Minoiu, Camelia, Perez-Orive, Ander, 2022a. Zombie Lending to U.S. 

Firms. Working paper. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Favara, Giovanni, Ivanov, Ivan, Rezende, Marcelo, 2022b. GSIB surcharges and bank lend-
ing: evidence from US corporate loan data. J. Financ. Econ. 142 (3), 1426–1443.
Gagnon, Joseph, 2021. Zombies are a symptom of economic weakness, not a cause. OP-ED 

Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (7), 2499–2540.

Gilchrist, Simon, Sim, Jae, Zakrajšek, Egon, 2013. Misallocation and ﬁnancial market 
frictions: some direct evidence from the dispersion in borrowing costs. Rev. Econ. 
Dyn. 16 (1), 159–176.

Gomes, Joao F., 2001. Financing investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 91 (5), 1263–1285.
Gomes, Joao F., Schmid, Lukas, 2010. Levered returns. J. Finance 65 (2), 467–494.
Gopinath, G., Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Karabarbounis, Loukas, Villegas-Sanchez, Car-
olina, 2017. Capital allocation and productivity in south Europe. Q. J. Econ. 132 
(4), 1915–1967.

Gourio, François, Miao, Jianjun, 2010. Firm heterogeneity and the long-run eﬀects of 

dividend tax reform. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 2 (1), 131–168.

Greenwald, Daniel, Krainer, John, Paul, Pascal, 2021. The Credit Line Channel. Federal 

Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2020-26.

Gupta, Deeksha, 2022. Too much skin-in-the-game? The eﬀect of mortgage market con-

centration on credit and house prices. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (2), 814–865.

Hennessy, Christopher A., Whited, Toni M., 2007. How costly is external ﬁnancing? Evi-

dence from a structural estimation. J. Finance 62 (4), 1705–1745.

Hertzberg, Andrew, Liberti, Jose, Paravisini, Daniel, 2010. Information and incentives 
inside the ﬁrm: evidence from loan oﬃcer rotation. J. Finance 65 (3), 795–828.
Hopenhayn, Hugo A., 1992. Entry, exit, and ﬁrm dynamics in long run equilibrium. 

Econometrica 60 (5), 1127–1150.

Ivanov, Ivan T., Pettit, Luke, Whited, Toni, 2021. Taxes Depress Corporate Borrowing: 
Evidence from Private Firms. IHS Working Paper Series 32. Institute for Advanced 
Studies.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Laeven, Luc, Martínez-Miera, David, Peydró, José-Luis, 2022. Public 
Guarantees, Relationship Lending and Bank Credit: Evidence from the COVID-19 Cri-
sis. Working Paper.

Kermani, Amir, Ma, Yueran, 2020. Asset Speciﬁcity of Non-Financial Firms. Working Pa-

per 27642. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, Mian, Atif, 2008. Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: evidence 

from an emerging market. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (4), 1413–1442.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, Moore, John, 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Econ. 105 (2), 211–248.
Lee, Yoonsoo, Mukoyama, Toshihiko, 2015. Entry and exit of manufacturing plants over 

the business cycle. Eur. Econ. Rev. 77 (C), 20–27.

Financ. Stud. 29 (6), 1453–1500.

Liu, Ernest, Mian, Atif, Suﬁ, Amir, 2022. Low interest rates, market power, and produc-

tivity growth. Econometrica 90 (1), 193–221.

Ma, Yueran, Paligorova, Teodora, Peydró, Jose-Luis, 2021. Expectations and Bank Lend-

ing. Unpublished Working Paper. University of Chicago.

McGowan, Muge Adalet, Andrews, Dan, Millot, Valentine, 2018. The walking dead? Zom-
bie ﬁrms and productivity performance in OECD countries. Econ. Policy 33 (96), 
685–736.

Myers, Stewart C., 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. J. Financ. Econ. 5 (2), 

Paravisini, Daniel, Rappoport, Veronica, Schnabl, Philipp, 2021. Specialization in Bank 
Lending: Evidence from Exporting Firms. Unpublished working paper. NYU Stern.
Peek, Joe, Rosengren, Eric S., 2005. Unnatural selection: perverse incentives and the 

misallocation of credit in Japan. Am. Econ. Rev. 95 (4), 1144–1166.

Puri, Manju, 1999. Commercial banks as underwriters: implications for the going public 

process. J. Financ. Econ. 54 (2), 133–163.

Rajan, Raghuram, 1994. Why bank credit policies ﬂuctuate: a theory and some evidence. 

Rampini, Adriano A., Viswanathan, S., 2013. Collateral and capital structure. J. Financ. 

Q. J. Econ. 109 (2), 399–441.

Econ. 109 (2), 466–492.

Schivardi, Fabiano, Sette, Enrico, Tabellini, Guido, 2022. Credit misallocation during the 

European ﬁnancial crisis. Econ. J. 132 (641), 391–423.

Schmidt, Christian, Schneider, Yannick, Steﬀen, Sascha, Streitz, Daniel, 2020. Capital 

Misallocation and Innovation. Working Paper.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., Weiss, Andrew, 1981. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect in-

formation. Am. Econ. Rev. 71 (3), 393–410.

Storz, Manuela, Koetter, Michael, Setzer, Ralph, Westphal, Andreas, 2017. Do We Want 
These Two to Tango? On Zombie Firms and Stressed Banks in Europe. European 
Central Bank Working Paper (2104):1–47.

Tracey, Belinda, 2021. The Real Eﬀects of Zombie Lending in Europe. Bank of England 

Working Paper (783).

Giannetti, Mariassunta, Simonov, A., 2013. On the real eﬀects of bank bailouts: micro 

evidence from Japan. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 5 (1), 135–167.

Giannetti, Mariassunta, Saidi, Farzad, 2019. Shock propagation and banking structure. 

147–175.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10377815