Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Fearing the Fed: How wall street reads main street ✩
Vadim Elenev a, Tzuo-Hann Law b, Dongho Song a,∗, Amir Yaron c,d
a Carey Business School, Johns Hopkins University, 100 International Drive, Baltimore, 21202, MD, USA
b Boston College, 140 Commonwealth Avenue, Chestnut Hill, 02467, MA, USA
c The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, 19104, PA, USA
d Bank of Israel, 2 Bank of Israel Street, Kiryat Ben-Gurion, Jerusalem, 91007, Israel

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Dataset link: https://
doi .org /10 .17632 /w9ywjnmcv5 .3

JEL classiﬁcation:
G12
E30
E40
E50

Keywords:
Cyclical return variation
Macroeconomic news announcements
Monetary policy expectations

1.  Introduction

We  provide  strong  evidence  of  a  countercyclical  sensitivity  of  the  stock  market  to  major  macroeconomic 
announcements. The most notable cyclical variation takes place within expansions: sensitivity is largest early in 
an expansion and essentially zero late in an expansion. By exploiting the comovement pattern between stocks and 
bonds around announcements, we show that the stock market sensitivity is large when the cash ﬂow component 
of news is least oﬀset by news about future risk-free rates. Observed ﬂuctuations in stock sensitivities can be 
attributed to shifting perceptions of monetary policy responsiveness.

Stock  prices  respond  to  macroeconomic  news  announcements 
(MNAs) that reveal information about the economy, such as non-farm 
payrolls and the manufacturing index. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 
the response of stock prices to MNAs is time-varying as there are peri-
ods in which stock prices overreact, under-react, or even inversely react 
to news that suggest a strengthening economy.1 One common explana-
tion for this time variation is revisions to policy expectations embedded 
in the news. For instance, a recent CNN article read, “Wall Street has 
hoped for cool monthly economic data that would encourage the Fed-
eral Reserve to halt its aggressive pace of interest rate hikes to tame 
inﬂation.”2 In other words, good news about the economy is consis-
tently good news for cash ﬂows, but sometimes it is also bad news for 
discount rates. The relative intensity of the latter aﬀects the intensity 
of the net eﬀect. However, evidence of this explanation is lacking. The 

exact nature of the relationship between these two channels and the 
drivers of their time variation are unclear.

Ultimately, can we formalize the economic mechanism underlying 

the time variation in stock price sensitivity to news?

In this paper, we document that stocks are most sensitive to MNAs 
when  the  output  gap  is  large  and  negative.  By  exploiting  the  co-
movement  pattern  between  stock  returns  and  bond  returns  around 
MNAs, we show that the stock price sensitivity is largest because the 
cash ﬂow news component of MNAs is least oﬀset by news about fu-
ture risk-free rates. Survey evidence on monetary policy responsiveness 
provides additional validation.

The ﬁrst contribution of the paper establishes empirical stylized facts 
about the time variation in the stock market’s reaction to major MNAs. 
Initially, we consider the same from 1999 to 2019. Using nonlinear re-
gressions of high-frequency stock returns on surprise components of 19 
MNAs, we provide strong evidence of a countercyclical sensitivity of 

✩ Toni Whited was the editor for this article. Funding: This work was supported by the Rodney White and Jacobs Levy Centers and by the Carey Business School, 
Johns Hopkins University. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the position of the Bank of Israel.
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: velenev@jhu.edu (V. Elenev), tzuo.law@bc.edu (T.-H. Law), dongho.song@jhu.edu (D. Song), yarona@wharton.upenn.edu (A. Yaron).

1 See reports in the ﬁnancial press, for example, Jayakumar (2013), Shell (2018), and Tengler (2020). Similar ﬁndings exist for news that suggest a weakening 
economy.
2 https://www .cnn .com /2023 /04 /09 /business /stocks -week -ahead /index .html.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103790
Received 18 May 2023; Received in revised form 11 January 2024; Accepted 11 January 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)103790Availableonline22January20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

the stock market to MNAs. Our notion of counter-cyclicality relates to 
the level of output relative to its trend (not in terms of output growth 
rates). Prior literature has contrasted responses in expansions versus re-
cessions.3 Given that stock prices are more volatile in recessions, this 
distinction drew focus to risk-based explanations for the time variation. 
In contrast, we ﬁnd that the most notable cyclical variation takes place 
within expansions: sensitivity is largest early in an expansion and essen-
tially zero late in an expansion. Our evidence brings a new perspective 
to the literature in that periods of peak stock return sensitivity do not 
coincide with more volatile (e.g., measured by the VIX index) or nega-
tive growth periods. We also rule out the possibility that changing stock 
return sensitivity to news could arise from time variation in the amount 
or accuracy of news. There is no evidence of diﬀerences in the distri-
bution or predictability of news surprises across diﬀerent phases of the 
business cycle. The business cycle frequency of variation points towards 
a macroeconomic explanation.

Through various regression exercises, we show that stock returns 
respond more aggressively when interest rates are expected to fall and 
economic slack is greater (i.e., the output gap is more negative).

The second contribution of the paper shows that the observed time 
variation in stock sensitivities is consistent with varying expectations 
of  monetary  policy  responses  to  macro  news.  We  document  this  by 
jointly estimating the MNA responses of stocks as well as bonds of vary-
ing  maturities.  On  average,  bond  responses  are  opposite  to  those  of 
stocks at both short and long maturities, suggesting that investors are 
pricing in expected increases (decreases) in rates following good (bad) 
macro  news.  Furthermore,  bond  sensitivities  are  time-varying  in  the 
way predicted by our hypothesis. When the economy is strong, bonds 
respond more strongly to news than when the economy is weak.4 The 
macroeconomic driver of time-varying sensitivity is monetary policy ex-
pectations. Survey evidence provides additional support for this claim.
Lastly, we document the evolving nature of the business cycle-stock 
return sensitivity relationship since the Covid-19 pandemic by incor-
porating data up to 2023. The prior two decades were marked by low 
and stable inﬂation, and so the output gap was the primary driver of 
monetary policy. As a result, it was also the main factor in explaining 
time-varying sensitivity of stock returns to MNAs. However, starting in 
2022, inﬂation rose sharply, and with that rise came concerns about 
how inﬂation news would translate into Fed rate hikes. Higher-than-
expected CPI triggered larger sell-oﬀs than ever before. For the ﬁrst 
time this century, positive surprises in labor or other macroeconomic 
announcements not just failed to boost stock prices but actually led to 
price declines. While the stock return responses in the recent tighten-
ing cycle are consistent with prior periods of rising rates – sensitivities 
are low – inﬂation now plays a more prominent role. Our ﬁndings sug-
gest that over a long sample both inputs into monetary policy – output 
gap and inﬂation – likely aﬀect the sensitivity of stock returns to MNAs 
with low-frequency shifts in their relative importance.

Our work builds on existing papers that argue the stock market’s 
reaction  to  announcement  surprises  may  depend  on  the  state  of  the 
economy. McQueen and Roley (1993) ﬁrst demonstrate that the link 
between MNAs and stock prices is much stronger after accounting for 
diﬀerent stages of the business cycle. Boyd et al. (2005) use model-
based forecasts of the unemployment rate, and Andersen et al. (2007)
rely on survey forecasts of major MNAs to emphasize the importance of 
measuring the impact of MNAs on stock prices over diﬀerent phases of 
the business cycle. Although these contributions are insightful, the pre-
vious literature has been concentrated on comparing the stock market’s 
reactions in recessions to those in expansions.

3 See, e.g., McQueen and Roley (1993), Boyd et al. (2005), and Andersen et 
al. (2007).
4 In the Appendix, we provide a simple New Keynesian model to formalize 
the mechanism.

Our paper is distinct from existing work along three important di-
mensions. First, from a technical point of view, we substantially im-
prove  on  the  measurement  and  characterization  of  the  time-varying 
stock  market  response  to  news  using  a  broader  set  of  MNAs  and 
high-frequency returns. Second, we document that the variation hap-
pens within expansions as the economy grows from trough to peak of 
the business cycle, which points to macreonomic drivers of this phe-
nomenon,  rather  than  volatility-based  explanations  in  the  context  of 
expansions vs. recessions. Third, we jointly assess evidence from stock 
and bond markets to shed light on the origins of the observed time vari-
ation.

This paper is also related to the literature exploring the relation-
ship between various news announcements, including FOMC announce-
ments and asset prices. Faust and Wright (2018) and Savor and Wilson 
(2013) ﬁnd positive risk premia in bond markets for macroeconomic 
announcements. Lucca and Moench (2015) ﬁnd the stock market on 
average  does  extremely  well  during  the  24  hours  before  FOMC  an-
nouncements. Ai and Bansal (2018) explore the macro announcement 
premium in the context of generalized risk preferences.

Broadly speaking, our paper can be linked to the large literature that 
studies asset markets and policy (e.g., Pearce and Roley (1985), Thor-
becke (1997), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002), Rigobon and Sack (2004), 
Bernanke  and  Kuttner  (2005),  Gurkaynak  et  al.  (2005a),  Bekaert  et 
al. (2013), Neuhierl and Weber (2019), and Tang (2017), among oth-
ers). Recently, Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2017) focus on a related 
and  complementary  channel  by  relating  stock  market  movements  to 
subsequent monetary policy actions by the Fed. Nakamura and Steins-
son (2018) estimate monetary nonneutrality based on evidence from 
yield curves and claim the FOMC announcements aﬀect beliefs not only 
about monetary policy but also about other economic fundamentals. 
Paul (2020) estimates the time-varying responses of stock and house 
prices to changes in monetary policy and ﬁnds that asset prices have 
been less responsive to monetary policy shocks during periods of high 
and rising asset prices. A recent paper by Xu and You (2023) looks at the 
role of ﬁscal rather than monetary policy expectations in stock return 
responses to macro surprises during and immediately after the Covid-19 
recession.

Lastly, this paper is related to work that analyzes the relative impor-
tance of cash ﬂows versus discount rates. Campbell and Shiller (1988), 
Campbell (1991), Campbell and Ammer (1993), and Cochrane (2011), 
among others, claim variations in discount rate news account for most 
of the variation in asset prices. Other papers ascribe a signiﬁcant role 
to cash ﬂow news in generating variation in asset prices (see Bansal 
and Yaron (2004), Bansal et al. (2005), Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), 
Hansen et al. (2008), and Schorfheide et al. (2018), among others). The 
ﬁndings in the recent paper by Diercks and Waller (2017) complement 
ours. The authors ﬁnd that the Fed plays a key role in how equity mar-
kets interpret news about cash ﬂows and discount rates, but their focus 
is on the eﬀect of changes in personal taxes.

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section 2
presents the main empirical results. Section 3 discusses the economic 
drivers of time variation. Section 4 concludes.

2.  The stock market’s reaction to news

In this section, we establish empirical stylized facts about the time 

variation in the stock market’s reaction to major MNAs.

2.1.  Data

Macroeconomic news announcements. MNAs are oﬃcially released 
by government bodies and private institutions at regularly prescheduled 
intervals. In this paper, we use MNAs from the Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics, the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Federal 
Reserve Board, the Conference Board, the Employment and Training 
Administration, and the Institute for Supply Management. We use MNAs 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037902V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

as tabulated by Bloomberg Financial Services. Bloomberg also surveys 
professional economists on their expectations of these macroeconomic 
announcements. Forecasters can submit or update their predictions up 
to the night before the oﬃcial release of the MNAs. Thus, Bloomberg 
forecasts could in principle reﬂect all available information until the 
publication of the MNAs. Most announcements are monthly, except for 
initial jobless claims (weekly) and gross domestic product (GDP) annu-
alized QoQ (quarterly). Except for industrial production MoM, which 
is released at 9:15 a.m., all announcements are released at either 8:30 
a.m. or 10:00 a.m. We consider all announcements released between 
January 1999 and June 2023. The appendix provides the details. For 
robustness, we also consider the Money Market Services (MMS) real-
time data on expected U.S. macroeconomic fundamentals to measure 
MNA surprises. None of the results are aﬀected.
Standardization of MNA surprises. Denote MNA 𝑖 at time 𝑡 by MNA𝑖,𝑡, 
and let 𝐸𝑡−Δ(MNA𝑖,𝑡) be proxied for by the median surveyed forecast 
made at time 𝑡 − Δ.

Individual  MNA  surprises  (after  normalization)  are  collected  in  a 

vector 𝑋𝑡, whose 𝑖th component is
MNA𝑖,𝑡 − 𝐸𝑡−Δ(MNA𝑖,𝑡)
Normalization

𝑋𝑖,𝑡 =

.

The units of measurement diﬀer across macroeconomic indicators. To 
allow for meaningful comparisons of the estimated surprise response 
coeﬃcients, we consider two normalization scales. The ﬁrst normaliza-
tion scales the individual MNA surprise by the cross-sectional standard 
deviation of the individual forecasters’ prediction for each announce-
ment. The key feature of this standardization is that the normalization 
constant diﬀers across time for each MNA surprise. The second normal-
ization scales each MNA surprise by its standard deviation taken over 
the entire sample period.5

The key feature of the second approach is that for each MNA sur-
prise,  the  normalization  constant  is  identical  across  time.  Thus,  this 
normalization cannot aﬀect the statistical signiﬁcance of the sensitiv-
ity coeﬃcient. We ﬁnd that the two diﬀerent approaches yield highly 
correlated  surprise  measures.  We  use  the  ﬁrst  normalization  as  our 
benchmark approach, because it scales the surprises by the disagree-
ment to make them economically interpretable. Our results are robust 
across both methods. The appendix provides the details.
Financial data. We consider futures contracts for the asset prices in our 
analysis: the S&P 500 E-Mini Futures (ES), the Eurodollar futures (ED), 
and the Treasury futures (FV,TY). Futures contracts allow us to capture 
the eﬀect of announcements that take place at 8:30 a.m. Eastern time 
before the equity market opens. We use the ﬁrst transaction in each 
minute as our measure of price and ﬁll forward if there is no transaction 
in an entire minute. We also consider SPDR S&P 500 Exchange Traded 
Funds (SPY) to conﬁrm the robustness of our ﬁndings. Asset prices come 
from  TickData.  We  use  the  S&P  500  Volatility  (VIX)  index  from  the 
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). We take the price-to-dividend 
ratio from Robert Shiller’s webpage.
Macroeconomic data. All macroeconomic data come from the Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis.  We  use  survey  forecasts  from  the  Survey 
of  Professional  Forecasters  provided  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of
Philadelphia.

2.2.  Estimating the stock return’s sensitivity to news pre-Covid

We  ﬁrst  present  estimation  results  for  the  period  preceding  the 
Covid-19  pandemic.  While  our  sample  covers  January  1999  to  June 
2023, we exclude the covid and post-covid periods to remove the in-
ﬂuence  of  potential  structural  changes  caused  by  the  unprecedented 
decline in economic activity in 2020. As formally shown in Schorfheide 

5 Balduzzi et al. (2001) propose this standardization, which is widely used in 
the literature.

and Song (2022), the pandemic led to signiﬁcantly higher variance in 
macroeconomic variables compared to the Great Recession. Moreover, 
we exclude the recovery (“post-covid”) period due to concerns about the 
pandemic-related surge in inﬂation potentially changing the dynamics 
of macroeconomic variables, ending the low-inﬂation era, and altering 
the drivers of monetary policy expectations. By focusing on the baseline 
estimation sample from 1999 to 2019, we aim to isolate and thoroughly 
examine the impact of macroeconomic news announcements on stock 
returns during a ‘normal’ period. In the subsequent section, we extend 
our estimation to include data up to June 2023 and compare the pre-
and post-covid samples.

2.2.1.  Cumulative stock returns around news announcements

When  considering  stock  market  responses  to  scheduled  news  re-
leases about the aggregate economy, FOMC announcements, i.e., an-
nouncements of policy rate changes, are often the primary focus for 
many researchers. Studies like Lucca and Moench (2015) have shown 
that stock prices are inﬂuenced by FOMC announcements in two ways. 
First, they react immediately after the announcement in response to un-
expected rate changes. Second, stock prices increase leading up to the 
release, regardless of the subsequent surprises, a phenomenon termed 
“pre-announcement drift.”6

This pre-announcement drift is unconditional, meaning stock prices 
prior  to  the  release  are  consistently  higher  than  those  several  hours 
before, regardless of whether the announced rate aligns with market 
expectations. The left two panels of Fig. 1 display the presence of this 
unconditional drift, illustrating cumulative stock returns from 5 or 24 
hours before the announcements.

Conversely, for macroeconomic news announcements on non-FOMC 
days, the evidence of pre-announcement drift is weak, making it diﬃ-
cult to identify signiﬁcant movement in stock prices (see the right two 
panels of Fig. 1). We ﬁnd that the key contrast between FOMC days and 
MNA days lies in the ﬁrst moment (i.e., the average pre-announcement 
return), while the second moment (i.e., volatility) exhibits similar mag-
nitudes for both. In other words, stocks are as sensitive to MNAs as 
they are to FOMC announcements. Further details can be found in Ap-
pendix C.

This conditional response of stocks to macroeconomic news forms 
the precise focus of our paper. Our objective is to precisely measure 
and establish the stylized facts regarding the reaction of stock returns 
to scheduled MNAs. We provide a thorough explanation of this in the 
following sections.

2.2.2.  Estimating the time-varying sensitivity of returns to news

To precisely measure the eﬀect of MNA surprises on stock prices, 
we obtain intraday futures prices and compute returns 𝑟𝑡 in a Δ-minute 
window around their release time. For our benchmark results, we use 
the  ES  contract,  which  is  most  actively  traded  during  the  MNA  re-
lease times, to measure stock returns. To determine which MNAs aﬀect 
returns,  we  estimate  the  following  nonlinear  regression  over  the  𝜏-
subperiod as suggested by Swanson and Williams (2014):

= 𝛼𝜏 + 𝛽𝜏 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,

𝑟𝑡+Δℎ
𝑡−Δ𝑙
where the vector 𝑋𝑡 contains various MNA surprises; 𝛾 measures the 
sample average responses; 𝜖𝑡 is a residual representing the inﬂuence of 
other factors on stock returns at time 𝑡; and 𝛼𝜏
are scalars that 
capture the variation in the return response to announcements during 
the 𝜏 subperiod. For the empirical analysis, 𝜏 indexes the calendar year. 

and 𝛽𝜏

(1)

6 According to Lucca and Moench (2015), the S&P 500 index typically in-
creases 49 basis points in the 24 hours before scheduled FOMC announcements. 
Other research, such as Savor and Wilson (2013), ﬁnds that average stock re-
turns are notably higher on days when crucial macroeconomic news, including 
inﬂation indexes, employment ﬁgures, and FOMC announcements, are sched-
uled.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037903V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

Fig. 1. Cumulative stock returns around announcements. Notes: We plot the average cumulative stock returns in percentage points around scheduled announcements. 
The benchmark macroeconomic news announcements are the change in nonfarm payrolls (CNP), initial jobless claims (IJC), ISM manufacturing (ISM), and the 
consumer conﬁdence index (CCI). The sample period is from January 1999 through December 2019. The shaded light-gray areas are ±2-standard-error bands 
around the average returns. The vertical dashed lines represent the time at which announcements are typically released in this sample period.

As discussed in Swanson and Williams (2014), the primary advantage of 
this approach is that it substantially reduces the small sample problem 
by including more data in the estimation of 𝛽𝜏
. The underlying assump-
tion is that, although the relative magnitude of 𝛾 is constant, the return 
responsiveness to all MNA surprises shifts by a proportionate amount 
over the 𝜏 subperiod. In other words, we assume a one factor structure 
to the time variation in return sensitivities. A battery of empirical tests 
conﬁrms the validity of this assumption for our baseline sample. The 
identiﬁcation restriction is that 𝛽𝜏
on average is equal to one. This im-
plies that the sample average of 𝛽𝜏 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑡 is identical to 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑡. When 𝛽𝜏
is 
always one, then (1) becomes the ordinary least squares (OLS) regres-
sion motivated by Gurkaynak et al. (2005b) and others.

We ﬁrst determine the most impactful announcements across vari-
ous window intervals, select the return window, and then analyze the 
cyclicality of the return response.
Selection of MNA surprises and the return window intervals. We 
now turn to the selection of the MNAs. We ﬁnd that changes in nonfarm 
payrolls, initial jobless claims, ISM manufacturing, and the consumer 
conﬁdence index are, broadly speaking, the most inﬂuential MNAs for 
the stock market.7 These announcements are the only ones to be univer-
sally signiﬁcant for stock returns across a wide variety of speciﬁcations 
(see Appendix D for details on the selection criteria). Our choice of the 
four announcements is consistent with the ﬁndings in the literature.8

Our results depend on the size of the return window, so we consider 
all combinations of Δ𝑙 and Δℎ between 10 and 90 minutes in 10-minute 
increments (81 regressions in total) and conﬁrm that our results are 
robust across various return window intervals.9 For ease of exposition, 
we present the regression results with  Δ = Δ𝑙 = Δℎ = 30 min in the 
main body of the paper. Having ﬁxed Δ = 30 min and restricted the set 
of MNAs to the top-four most inﬂuential MNAs, we turn our attention to 
measuring the time-varying sensitivity of the returns to macroeconomic 
announcements.
Cyclical return response. The coeﬃcients that measure the average 
sensitivity, that is,  ̂𝛾, are signiﬁcant at the 1% level and are reported 
in rank order (in terms of their economic signiﬁcance) in the legend to 
Fig. 2. To understand their economic impact, one should scale  ̂𝛾 with 
the number of observations keeping in mind that initial jobless claims 
follow  a  weekly  release  schedule  as  opposed  to  the  remaining  three 

7 This is consistent with Gilbert et al. (2017), who claim that investors care 
about certain macro announcements more than others based on evidence from 
Treasury yields.
8 For  example,  Andersen  et  al.  (2007) analyze  the  impact  of  20  monthly 
macroeconomic announcements on the high-frequency S&P 500 futures returns 
to study announcement surprises. They argue that the change in nonfarm pay-
rolls, often referred to as the “king” of announcements by market participants, 
is among the most signiﬁcant of all announcements for the markets. Bartolini et 
al. (2008) discuss the signiﬁcance of the change in nonfarm payrolls as well as 
three other announcements, all of which are also signiﬁcant in our regressions.
9 Bollerslev et al. (2008) show that sampling too ﬁnely introduces micro-
structure noise, whereas sampling too infrequently confounds the eﬀects of 
MNA surprises with all other information aggregated into stock prices over the 
time interval.

monthly announcements. Our ﬁndings agree with the existing literature 
on the signiﬁcance of the change in nonfarm payrolls and initial jobless 
claims on the stock market.

Fig. 2 shows the estimates of the time-varying sensitivity coeﬃcient 
̂𝛽𝜏
(solid-black line) in (1). We ﬁnd strong evidence of persistent cyclical 
variation in the stock market’s responses to the MNAs.10 The evidence 
suggests that stock return sensitivity to the MNAs can increase by a fac-
tor greater than two post-recession and remain above average for about 
1 to 2 years. It is important to point out that the peak is obtained at the 
early stage of an expansion. We ﬁnd that the stock market’s prolonged 
above-average reaction (3 to 4 years) is unique to the economy’s recov-
ery from the Great Recession, during which interest rates were bounded 
from below by zero. The stock market’s reaction attenuates as the econ-
omy expands, and moving from peak to trough sensitivity takes about 
four years. During this period, stock returns hardly react to news.

This evidence is consistent with existing papers that argue that the 
stock  market’s  reactions  to  announcement  surprises  may  depend  on 
the state of the economy (e.g., McQueen and Roley (1993), Boyd et 
al. (2005), and Andersen et al. (2007)). While insightful, the previous 
literature concentrated on comparing the stock market’s reactions in re-
cessions to those in expansions. Our evidence brings a new perspective 
to the literature by clearly presenting the cyclical nature of the stock 
market’s response to macroeconomic announcements. Importantly, we 
ﬁnd that periods of peak stock return sensitivity do not coincide with 
periods of economic recession.

Augmenting the vector 𝑋𝑡 with other MNAs does not change our 
results. We re-run the regression in (1) with every possible combination 
of the next eight inﬂuential MNAs as listed in Table A-3 in the Online 
Appendix, e.g., retail sales and CPI, and plot the results as solid gray 
lines in Fig. 2. The results are so similar to the benchmark case and 
each other that they appear as a thin gray band around the solid black 
line plotting the baseline results.
Decomposing movements around news announcements. To better 
understand how information contained in the MNAs is conveyed to the 
stock market, we decompose  ̂𝛽𝜏
to sensitivity attributable to periods 
before and after announcements. We write  ̂𝑋𝑡 = ̂𝛾 ′𝑋𝑡, where ̂𝛾 is based 
on the estimates provided in the legend to Fig. 2.

We estimate the modiﬁed (restricted) regression in which we regress 

on  ̂𝑋𝑡,

= 𝛼𝜏 + 𝛽𝜏 ̂𝑋𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,

return 𝑟𝑡+Δℎ
𝑡−Δ𝑙
𝑟𝑡+Δℎ
𝑡−Δ𝑙
and  obtain  the  estimate  of  ̂𝛽𝜏
{−5𝑚, 0𝑚, 5𝑚, 30𝑚}, which we denote by  ̂𝛽𝜏

(2)

for  each  combination  of  (Δℎ, Δ𝑙) ∈

(−Δ𝑙 ,+Δℎ).

See Panel (A) of Fig. 3.
It follows that  ̂𝛽𝜏

̂𝛽𝜏
(−30𝑚,−5𝑚) + ̂𝛽𝜏

(−30𝑚,30𝑚) in (1) by construction equals  ̂𝛽𝜏
(5𝑚,30𝑚).

(0𝑚,5𝑚) + ̂𝛽𝜏

(−5𝑚,0𝑚) + ̂𝛽𝜏

(−30𝑚,30𝑚) =

10 For robustness, we also plot the results from additionally including every 
possible combination of the next eight inﬂuential MNAs. All these regressions 
yield the solid light-gray lines that are very close to each other and, hence, 
appear as a darker gray band when viewed from a distance.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037904V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

Fig. 2. Time variation in stock return’s sensitivity to macroeconomic news: 1999-2019. Notes: The benchmark MNAs are the change in nonfarm payrolls (CNP), initial 
jobless claims (IJC), ISM manufacturing (ISM), and the consumer conﬁdence index (CCI). We set Δ = 30 min. We impose the following restriction: that 𝛽𝜏 (solid-black 
line) in (1) averages to one. We provide ±2-standard-error bands (light-shaded area) around 𝛽𝜏 . The shape is robust to all possible combinations (solid light-gray 
lines) of the next eight inﬂuential MNAs. NBER recession bars are overlaid on the graph. Individual estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) for 𝛾 are as follows:

CNP

IJC

ISM

CCI

0.087
(0.011)

-0.021
(0.003)

0.071
(0.011)

0.051
(0.008)

The sample period is from January 1999 through December 2019.

The stock return sensitivity is in respect to the linearly transformed 

MNA surprises,  ̂𝑋𝑡.

We do not ﬁnd any evidence of a preannouncement phenomenon. 
Stock prices react signiﬁcantly to the MNA surprises, but there is no 
statistically signiﬁcant movement 5 minutes after the announcement. 
We interpret this ﬁnding to mean there is no immediate mean reversion 
in the stock market’s reaction. We extend our analysis to the daily data 
and further conﬁrm that the market’s reactions do not reﬂect temporary 
noise.
Evidence  from  lower-frequency  data. To  show  that  the  impact  of 
the MNA surprises on the stock market is not short-lived, we estimate 
the restricted regression (2) with larger window intervals in Panel (B) 
of  Fig. 3.  Because  we  aim  to  compare  the  precision  of  the  sensitiv-
ity coeﬃcient estimates when we replace the dependent variable with 
lower-frequency returns, we ﬁx the unconditional impact of the MNA 
surprises to be ex ante identical across various cases. Thus, the coef-
ﬁcient  ̂𝛽𝜏
(−Δ𝑙,+Δℎ) can be interpreted with respect to  ̂𝑋𝑡 only. Notably, 
when constructing (near) daily returns, we remove all days with FOMC-
related news. We ﬁnd that the mean estimates are broadly similar across 
various  window  intervals.  As  expected,  the  standard  error  bands  in-
crease when we move from the case of hourly returns to that with daily 
returns. The results from the unrestricted regression are qualitatively 
similar.
Evidence for asymmetry. Our four benchmark MNAs can be grouped 
into labor- and non-labor-related announcements. Boyd et al. (2005)
look at the stock market’s response to the former type of MNAs, for 
example, unemployment rate. Here, we ask if there is something pro-
foundly  diﬀerent  about  labor-related  announcements  compared  with 
other  types  of  announcements.  Panel  (C)  of  Fig. 3 documents  that 
similar patterns of cyclical response are present across both types of 
MNAs.11

We then decompose the macroeconomic news announcements into 
“good”  (better-than-expected,  or  positive)  and  “bad”  (worse-than-
expected, or negative) announcements and examine whether the stock 
return responses to good and bad MNA surprises are diﬀerent from each 

11 The pattern is robust to the inclusion of the unemployment rate announce-
ment as in Boyd et al. (2005).

other.12 Here, we ﬂip the sign of initial jobless claim surprises for ease 
of comparison across other “good” surprises. We then run the following 
regression:

bad

good

(3)

𝛾 ′𝑋

𝛾 ′𝑋

bad,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡.

good,𝑡 + 𝛽𝜏
and  𝛽𝜏

. Surprisingly, the standard error bands on  ̂𝛽𝜏

𝑡−Δ = 𝛼𝜏 + 𝛽𝜏
𝑟𝑡+Δ
bad
good
Note  that  if  𝛽𝜏
are  identical,  this  equation  becomes  (1). 
Panel (D) of Fig. 3 displays the corresponding estimates for  ̂𝛽𝜏
and 
̂𝛽𝜏
almost 
bad
always overlap, and, thus, the sensitivity estimates are statistically in-
diﬀerent from one another. In sum, there is no evidence for asymmetry 
in the response to good and bad MNA surprises.
Robustness. We want to ensure that our results survive a variety of 
robustness checks. To save space, we only brieﬂy explain them here.

and  ̂𝛽𝜏

good

good

bad

We ﬁrst consider the possibility that the stock market’s changing 
sensitivity is merely tracking volatility changes, because the magnitudes 
of news surprises can be larger during downturns. However, we do not 
ﬁnd any supporting evidence for this claim.13 We create two dummy 
variables to locate the high-beta ( ̂𝛽𝜏 > 1.5) and low-beta ( ̂𝛽𝜏 < 0.5) pe-
riods and regress the raw and absolute MNA surprises on these dummy 
variables. We ﬁnd that the coeﬃcients for these two dummy variables 
are largely insigniﬁcant. To ensure our results are fully robust, we es-
timate (1) by using the residuals from this regression as the “clean” 
measure of surprises. We ﬁnd that the estimated time-varying sensi-
tivity of the stock return did not change much from Fig. 2. We also 
check the possibility that the changing stock return sensitivity to news 
could arise from time variation in the accuracy of news. We do not ﬁnd 
enough evidence for superior forecast accuracy during times in which 
stock return sensitivity is high. We then consider the possibility that 
our benchmark speciﬁcation may suﬀer from omitted variables prob-
lems. We augment the benchmark regression (1) with other predictor 
variables that are known before the announcements and ﬁnd that the 
regression results are not aﬀected.

12 We also repeat this exercise using only the better half of good news (the 
most positive) and the worse half of bad news (the most negative) and ﬁnd that 
the results do not change.
13 McQueen and Roley (1993) and Balduzzi et al. (2001) ﬁnd little evidence 
that these survey forecasts are biased predictors of announcements.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037905V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

Fig. 3. Decomposing the stock return’s sensitivity to macroeconomic news. Notes: For panels (A) and (B), the individual  ̂𝛽𝜏
(−Δ𝑙 ,+Δℎ) is shown with ±2-standard-error 
(−Δ𝑙 ,+Δℎ) is equal to one. The regressor is already restricted to  ̂𝑋𝑡. For Panel (A), by construction, 
bands. Here, we do not impose the restriction that the average of  ̂𝛽𝜏
the sum of individual  ̂𝛽𝜏
(−Δ𝑙 ,+Δℎ) equals  ̂𝛽𝜏 , which is shown in Fig. 2. For Panel (B), when constructing daily returns, we remove all days with FOMC-related 
news. For panel (C), labor-related macroeconomic announcements are the change in nonfarm payrolls and initial jobless claims. Non-labor-related macroeconomic 
announcements are the consumer conﬁdence index and ISM manufacturing. For panel (D), we decompose the macroeconomic news announcements into “good” 
(better-than-expected, or positive) and “bad” (worse-than-expected, or negative) announcements. We ﬂip the sign of initial jobless claims surprises for ease of 
comparison across other “good” surprises. For panels (C) and (D), we set Δ = 30 min and impose the restriction that 𝛽𝜏 is on average equal to one.

2.3.  Stock return’s sensitivity to news after the Covid pandemic

Do the patterns documented above persist during the Covid pan-
demic and after? On one hand, the sharp contraction during the pan-
demic and recovery since provide an additional business cycle during 
which we can observe the variation in stock return sensitivity. This pro-
vides a valuable opportunity for out-of-sample checks, considering that 
our initial draft was prepared well before the Covid pandemic. On the 
other hand, the recent period is unique. The 2020 recession was severe 
yet remarkably short-lived. The recent recovery, unlike the booms of the 
mid-2000s or 2010s, exhibited an appreciable spike in inﬂation, mean-
ing that for the ﬁrst time in several decades the price stability mandate 
of the Federal Reserve rose to preeminence.

Fig. 4 provides  the  time  variation  in  stock  return  sensitivity  to 
macroeconomic news after the Covid pandemic. Two notable observa-
tions emerge, broadly aligning with previous ﬁndings yet reﬂecting the 
uniqueness of the macroeconomic setting.

Firstly,  consistent  with  our  narrative,  we  observe  an  increase  in 
stock return sensitivity to macroeconomic news after the Covid pan-
demic, although this increase is relatively modest compared to previous 
recessions. This pattern becomes evident when using signiﬁcantly re-
duced smoothing parameter values, such as 𝜏 = 3 or 6 months, instead 
of our baseline method of pooling information within a year. By em-
ploying  these  shorter  pooling  periods,  we  capture  more  pronounced 
but noisier time variations. The observed relatively modest sensitivity 
pattern may be attributed to the brief duration of the 2020 recession, 
indicating that the Federal Reserve may not have adopted the same ac-
commodative stance as in previous cycles, or adopted it for a much 
shorter duration, given the swift recovery.

Secondly, we discover an intriguing aspect during the 2022-2023 pe-
riod, where the coeﬃcient becomes signiﬁcantly negative for the ﬁrst 
time. In other words, positive (negative) macroeconomic news become 

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037906V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

Fig. 4. Time variation in stock return’s sensitivity to macroeconomic news: 1999-2023. Notes: The benchmark MNAs are the change in nonfarm payrolls (CNP), 
initial jobless claims (IJC), ISM manufacturing (ISM), and the consumer conﬁdence index (CCI). We set Δ = 30 min. We impose the following restriction: that 𝛽𝜏
averages one. We provide ±2-standard-error bands (light-shaded area) around 𝛽𝜏 . NBER recession bars are overlain on the graph. The sample period is from January 
1999 through June 2023.

associated with negative (positive) stock returns.14 This period coin-
cides  with  the  largest  levels  of  inﬂation  and  the  ﬁrst  75  basis  point 
rate hikes seen since the 1980s. Could aggressive monetary policy ex-
plain the sensitivity’s sign reversal? In the next section, we formally link 
time-varying stock return sensitivities to time-varying investor percep-
tions of monetary policy aggressiveness both before the pandemic and 
since, when this relationship becomes particularly pronounced.

In sum, the heightened sensitivity observed after exiting the 2020 
recession and the subsequent sharp reversal in 2022 are both consistent 
with our previous ﬁndings. Next, we shift our focus to examining the 
diﬀerences between the period of 2020 to 2023 and the period of 1999 
to 2019.

Speciﬁcally, we study the stock return sensitivity to news about in-
dividual macroeconomic variables, allowing for diﬀerential responsive-
ness for each variable instead of assuming a proportionate shift across 
all surprises. To achieve this, we estimate equation (1) separately for 
each macroeconomic announcement. The estimation results, indicating 
the individual sensitivity values, are presented in Fig. 5. In addition to 
the four announcement series included in our baseline results, we also 
consider retail sales and CPI inﬂation.

Despite higher standard errors, Fig. 5 replicates the previous cyclical 
pattern for the ﬁrst ﬁve individual macroeconomic news surprises, with 
peaks typically observed early in an expansion and approaching zero as 
the expansion phase progresses. Notably, a sharp reversal in the pattern 
is observed in 2022 and 2023 for most individual series.

However, CPI is diﬀerent. Between 1999 and 2019 stock market re-
sponses to inﬂation surprises do not follow a clear cyclical pattern and 
the estimated sensitivities are rarely signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the av-
erage. Speciﬁcally, while larger-than-expected CPI surprises do result 
in declines in stock returns and vice versa (indicating a negative esti-
mated 𝛾), we observe limited time variation in the sensitivity of stock 
returns. These changes sharply following the Covid pandemic. Notably, 
the magnitude of the stock response is approximately 7-8 times greater 
in 2022-2023 compared to previous periods, emphasizing the emerging 
signiﬁcant role of inﬂation as a key macroeconomic announcement for 
stock markets.

14 Our ﬁndings align with the narrative presented by Xu and You (2023), who 
argue that positive surprises in initial jobless claims (i.e., bad news) result in 
signiﬁcant increases in stock market returns during the Covid pandemic. How-
ever, when considering various types of MNAs and considering a tight window 
around the announcement, we observe these patterns emerging only from 2022 
rather than at its height in February 2020 to March 2021.

As per Cascaldi-Garcia et al. (2022), in this period inﬂation accel-
erated across the globe. Demand surged as economies reopened after 
stringent pandemic lockdowns, and prices of food, energy, and other 
commodities rose after Russia invaded Ukraine. Fig. 5 demonstrates the 
newly high sensitivity of the stock market to inﬂation news. Cieslak and 
Pﬂueger (2022) provide a rationale for this renewed attention, arguing 
that inﬂation persists and exhibits stagﬂationary characteristics similar 
to the 1970s and 80s, stock valuations may decline.

Overall, it is still the case that business cycle dynamics explain the 
time-variation in stock sensitivity. For most of our sample, stable inﬂa-
tion meant that the key business cycle variable driving the variation was 
output, leading us to model it using a one-factor structure. Since 2022, 
inﬂation matters too. The newly emerging strong response of stocks to 
CPI news suggests that a second inﬂation-related factor is necessary to 
explain time variation in the full panel macroeconomic announcements. 
In Appendix F, we provide some supporting evidence for this claim, yet 
conﬁrm that the dynamics of our main factor documented in Fig. 4 are 
robust to the inclusion of a second factor. Therefore, we concentrate 
our analysis on the four benchmark announcement series that exclude 
inﬂation.

3.  Identifying the economic drivers

Having documented robust evidence of cyclicality in stock market 
responses, we turn to the economic drivers behind this pattern. We rely 
on the same regression (1) as before but impose a parametric restriction 
on the sensitivity coeﬃcient:

.

𝑍𝜏−1

𝛽𝜏 = 𝛽

𝑡−Δ = 𝛼𝜏 + 𝛽𝜏 𝛾 ′𝑋𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡,
𝑟𝑡+Δ
0 + 𝛽′
(4)
1
We examine whether the time variation in stock return sensitivity, 𝛽𝜏
, 
can be explained by key economic observables, 𝑍𝜏−1. Potential explana-
tory variables include measures of the business cycle—the demeaned 
output gap, inﬂation, short-term interest rate and recession probabil-
ity forecasts—as well as measures of risk premia —term premium, the 
price-to-dividend (PD) ratio, and the VIX.

For the purpose of decomposition, we take our estimates of ̂𝛾 from 
the stock return regression as given and only re-estimate 𝛼𝜏
in 
(4). Because our sample is somewhat short, here we set 𝜏 to index a 
quarter (i.e., the corresponding unrestricted 𝛽𝜏
is represented by the 
blue (circle) line in Fig. 4) to include more data in the estimation. For 
variables that are not forecasted, a lag of one quarter is introduced to 
the predictor variables. This lag helps reduce the potential bias caused 
by contemporaneous relationships between predictors and the outcome.

and 𝛽𝜏

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037907V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

Fig. 5. Stock return sensitivity: Evidence from an individual regression. Notes: We consider the change in nonfarm payrolls, initial jobless claims, ISM manufacturing 
(ISM), the consumer conﬁdence index, the retail sales advance, and the consumer price index. We set Δ = 30 min for stock returns. We impose the following 
restriction: that 𝛽𝜏 averages one. We provide ±2-standard-error bands (light-shaded area) around 𝛽𝜏 . NBER recession bars are overlain on the graph. The sample 
period is from January 1999 through June 2023.

3.1.  Stock market evidence

0 and  ̂𝛽

Baseline period of 1999 to 2019. Table 1 reports the estimation results 
for stock return sensitivity  ̂𝛽
1 based on the estimation sample 
from 1999 to 2019. We begin by discussing the coeﬃcients from a se-
ries of univariate speciﬁcations, which are summarized in rows (1) to 
(9) of Table 1. We document that an increase in each of the output gap, 
the interest rate (either the level or a change), inﬂation, and the PD 
ratio signiﬁcantly predicts lower stock return sensitivity. On the other 
hand, the term premium, VIX index and the recession probability fore-
cast signiﬁcantly predict higher stock return sensitivity.

Rows  (10)  to  (15)  of  Table 1 display  the  estimation  results  from 
multivariate speciﬁcations. Speciﬁcation (10) illustrates the joint sig-
niﬁcance  of  output  gap  and  expected  interest  rate  changes,  the  two 
variables directly tracking the state of the business and monetary cy-
cle. Neither inﬂation nor the level of interest rates further improves the 
ﬁt of the model in the pre-Covid sample, as shown by (11) and (12). 
We retain inﬂation in subsequent speciﬁcations to facilitate compari-
son with recent years. In (13) and (14), we investigate two measures of 
investors’ appetite for risk. (13) shows that quarters with high term pre-
mia coincide with high stock sensitivities, while there is no signiﬁcant 
relationship for P/D ratios, according to (14). Keeping the term pre-
mia measure, in (15) we ﬁnd that heightened recession fears and stock 
market volatility do not provide any additional explanatory power.

Overall, we highlight that the ﬁtted  ̂𝛽𝜏

based on the estimates in 
rows (10) to (15) look very similar to our benchmark stock return sen-
sitivity estimates in Fig. 2. Through various non-collinear permutations, 
we consistently observe the signiﬁcance of coeﬃcients linked to the out-
put gap, the expected change in short-term interest rates, and the term 
premium. On the contrary, coeﬃcients associated with inﬂation, ﬁnan-
cial variables, or recession probability are either insigniﬁcant or exhibit 
a change in sign when compared to the results obtained from the uni-
variate speciﬁcation. These regression results conﬁrm that periods of 

peak stock return sensitivity do not coincide with periods of heightened 
stock market volatility (e.g., measured by the VIX index) or economic 
recession.

Our evidence suggests that periods of peak stock return sensitivity 
coincide with periods during which the output gap is large and negative 
and interest rates are not expected to increase—both measures indicat-
ing the trough of the business cycle.15 Because bond risk premia have 
a marked countercyclical component, as shown by Ludvigson and Ng 
(2009), the positive relationship between term premia and stock return 
sensitivity further highlights that stocks respond stronger in bad times.
Including the post-pandemic period. Earlier, we saw that in the af-
termath of the pandemic investors became much more sensitive to news 
about inﬂation. Here, we ask a related, but distinct question—does the 
newly emerging regime of high inﬂation and signiﬁcant monetary tight-
ening alter investors’ responsiveness to the benchmark set of MNAs that 
we examine throughout our work? Table 2 expands our analysis to in-
clude the post-pandemic period, investigating any notable changes in 
the economic drivers inﬂuencing cyclical stock return responses. Row 
(1) in Table 2 displays coeﬃcients of the same multivariate speciﬁca-
tion as in row (13) of Table 1 after re-estimating with the extended 
sample. While the coeﬃcient on expected change in short-term interest 
rates gets larger in magnitude, our conclusions are unaltered. The es-
timated inﬂation coeﬃcient remains insigniﬁcant. Moreover, removing 
inﬂation from the predictor vector does not diminish the regression’s 
ﬁt, as evidenced by row (2).

Most  of  the  observations  in  the  expanded  sample  are  still  from 
the  pre-pandemic  period,  so  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  estimated 
coeﬃcients are similar. Next, we speciﬁcally investigate whether the 
economic drivers of cyclical stock return responses changed after the 

15 Expected rate changes co-move with the output gap, with the expected rate 
changes leading the output gap by several quarters.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037908V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

Table 1
Economic drivers behind cyclical return responses: Excluding post-Covid periods.

𝛽
0

0.96***
(0.10)
0.93***
(0.11)
0.96***
(0.10)
0.88***
(0.11)
0.82***
(0.10)
0.92***
(0.11)
0.99***
(0.10)
0.97***
(0.11)
0.94***
(0.10)
0.95***
(0.10)
0.95***
(0.10)
0.83***
(0.09)
0.94***
(0.10)
0.85***
(0.10)

Output
gap

-0.35***
(0.06)

-0.33***
(0.06)
-0.34***
(0.06)
-0.32**
(0.14)
-0.27***
(0.06)
-0.29***
(0.08)
-0.25***
(0.06)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

ΔT-bill

T-bill

Inﬂation

Term
premia

PD
ratio

Recession
prob.

VIX

-2.72***
(0.66)

-2.21***
(0.64)
-2.27***
(0.65)
-2.29***
(0.71)
-2.16***
(0.61)
-2.42***
(0.74)
-2.13***
(0.69)

-0.31***
(0.06)

-0.30**
(0.12)

-0.01
(0.13)

0.05
(0.12)
0.05
(0.12)
0.01
(0.12)
0.05
(0.12)
0.03
(0.12)

0.62***
(0.10)

-2.15***
(0.61)

0.03***
(0.01)

0.06***
(0.02)

0.47***
(0.09)

0.45***
(0.11)

-0.59
(0.79)

0.01
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.02)

𝑅2

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.12

0.11

0.12

0.11

0.14

0.14

0.14

0.16

0.14

0.16

Notes: We only report the coeﬃcients associated with 𝛽𝜏 in the regression under both univariate and multivariate speciﬁcations. Output gap is the diﬀerence between 
real and potential GDP. Inﬂation is log changes in the GDP deﬂator; T-bill (3m) is the 3-month Treasury bill rate; and ΔT-bill (3m) is the diﬀerence between the one-
quarter-ahead forecast and nowcast rate of the 3-month Treasury bill. The Treasury term premium for a maturity of 10 years is constructed by Adrian et al. (2013). 
The PD ratio is the price-to-dividend ratio from Shiller, and the VIX is the CBOE volatility index. The recession probability is the nowcast recession probability. All 
nowcast and forecast variables are collected from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. All variables are demeaned. Non-forecasted predictor variables are lagged 
one quarter. We use the four baseline macroeconomic announcements. We report Newey-West-adjusted standard errors. The estimation sample period is from 1999 
to 2019. *𝑝 < 0.1; **𝑝 < 0.05; ***𝑝 < 0.01.

Table 2
Economic drivers behind cyclical return responses: Including post-Covid periods.

Speciﬁcation:

(1)

(2)

Speciﬁcation:

(3)

(4)

(5)

𝛽
1

𝛽
1

𝛽
1

𝛽
2

𝛽
1

𝛽
2

𝛽
1

𝛽
2

Output gap
𝑍𝜏−1

𝛽𝜏 = 𝛽

0 + 𝛽′

1

ΔT-bill

Inﬂation

Term premium

Value

-0.25***
(0.05)

-0.26***
(0.05)

-2.44***
(0.56)

-0.05
(0.06)

-2.60***
(0.54)

𝛽𝜏 = 𝛽

0 + 𝛽′

1

𝕀𝜏<2020

𝑍𝜏−1 + 𝛽′

2

𝕀𝜏≥2020

𝑍𝜏−1

-0.27***
(0.06)
-0.07
(0.10)

-0.27***
(0.06)

-0.27***
(0.06)

0.01
(0.12)
-0.17
(0.12)

-0.24***
(0.06)

-2.15***
(0.61)
-3.43***
(1.33)

-2.15***
(0.59)
-3.16***
(1.13)

-2.17***
(0.60)
-5.54***
(1.06)

0.45***
(0.08)

0.46***
(0.08)

0.47***
(0.09)
0.15
(0.26)

0.47***
(0.09)

0.48***
(0.09)

𝛽
0

𝑅2

𝛽
0

𝑅2

𝛽
0

𝑅2

𝛽
0

𝑅2

𝛽
0

𝑅2

0.82***
(0.09)
0.14

0.82***
(0.09)
0.14

0.83***
(0.09)
0.14

0.82***
(0.08)
0.14

0.78***
(0.08)
0.14

Notes: We only report the estimates associated with 𝛽𝜏 in the regression. Output gap is the diﬀerence between the 
output and its potential trend. Inﬂation is a GDP deﬂator; ΔT-bill is the diﬀerence between the one-quarter-ahead 
forecast and nowcast rate of the 3-month Treasury bill. The Treasury term premium of maturity 10 years is con-
structed by Adrian et al. (2013). All nowcast variables are collected from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. 
All variables are demeaned. These predictor variables are lagged one quarter. We use the benchmarked macroeco-
nomic announcements. We report Newey-West-adjusted standard errors. The estimation sample period is from 1999 
to 2022. *𝑝 < 0.1; **𝑝 < 0.05; ***𝑝 < 0.01.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)1037909V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

pandemic and ﬁnd that they do not appear to have undergone signiﬁ-
cant changes at ﬁrst glance. The evidence in rows (3) to (5) in Table 2 is 
nuanced. The notable spike in CPI since late 2021 has elevated inﬂation 
over the output gap as the primary business cycle indicator. This is evi-
dent in the heightened sensitivity of stocks to CPI news post-pandemic, 
as shown in Fig. 5, as well as the shifting driver of stock sensitivity from 
the output gap to inﬂation, as depicted in rows (3) and (4).

Nevertheless, whether it is the output gap or inﬂation level driving 
stock sensitivity, both factors ultimately manifest themselves in expec-
tations of monetary tightening, as captured by the ΔT-bill coeﬃcient. 
This coeﬃcient is signiﬁcant even before the pandemic, but its magni-
tude increases by a full point in the recent period. Given the concurrent 
rise in inﬂation and tightening expectations, it becomes challenging to 
distinguish and interpret the individual eﬀects of the ΔT-bill and inﬂa-
tion coeﬃcients in the post-pandemic sample. When we drop inﬂation 
moving from row (4) to (5), we ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient on expected 
rate changes more than doubles from pre- to post-pandemic, meaning 
that expectations of monetary tightening strongly dampen —and even 
overturn—stock increases on good macro news.

The business cycle variation in sensitivity—and speciﬁcally its rela-
tionship to measures of expected changes in short rates—suggests that 
expectations of what the Fed will do in response to macro news have a 
meaningful eﬀect on how stocks react to this news. In the next section, 
we turn to evidence from the bond market to explore this hypothesis.

3.2.  Bond market evidence

Macroeconomic news not only inﬂuence investors’ perceptions of 
current and future macroeconomic performance but also prompt poli-
cymakers to adjust their level of accommodation or restraint. Positive 
macro news surprises may raise the likelihood of the Fed tightening 
monetary policy, such as increasing interest rates or reducing quanti-
tative easing. Consequently, macro news contains potentially oﬀsetting 
policy implications. While positive macro news revisions may lead in-
vestors  to  revise  stock  valuations  upward  based  on  future  dividend 
expectations, the anticipation of policy tightening can temper this re-
vision and prompt an upward adjustment in the discount rates applied 
to these dividends. This ultimately lowers stock valuations. The greater 
responsiveness of stocks to macro news during below-trend economic 
periods arises because such periods correspond to times when policy 
responsiveness is reduced.

To directly assess whether variations in stock market sensitivity dur-
ing diﬀerent business cycles are driven by discount rates, we examine 
the bond market. If there is evidence of a more responsive Fed (in terms 
of expectations), it should reﬂect in the sensitivity of bond prices to 
macroeconomic news. We condition on our estimates of ̂𝛾 from the stock 
return regression and re-estimate 𝛽
1 in (4) using the EuroDollar 
futures returns of 3 and 12 month maturities and the Treasury futures 
returns of 5 and 10 year maturities. As a result, the average beta for 
bonds of each maturity measures its response to MNAs, relative to the 
stock response.

0 and 𝛽

If  MNAs  change  expectations  of  future  monetary  policy,  then  in 
response to good news bond yields should rise and prices fall, produc-
ing negative realized returns. When bond investors expect the Fed to 
respond aggressively to MNAs, we should see larger movements in rel-
atively short-duration bond yields than if bond investors expect the Fed 
to be sluggish. If our explanation is correct and time variation in stock 
sensitivity is driven by time variation in policy sensitivity, we should 
ﬁnd that bond return sensitivities are less negative when the economy 
is below trend and more negative above trend.

Table 3 displays results for each bond instrument where we esti-
mate the speciﬁcation from row (2) of Table 2 but with bond rather 
than stock returns on the left-hand side. The policy channel outlined 
above predicts negative  ̂𝛽
0 estimates for bonds. Our ﬁndings conﬁrm 
this expectation, with negative and signiﬁcant  ̂𝛽
0 coeﬃcients in Table 3
across all bond maturities. Good macro news are bad news for bonds. 

And this is true even more so when the economy is above trend—when 
the  output  gap  is  larger  (more  positive)  and  term  premia  are  large. 
These coeﬃcients are estimated more precisely for shorter maturities, 
consistent with the intuition that monetary policy expectations show up 
more in shorter maturity bonds, which are less contaminated by chang-
ing term premia. We ﬁnd that the return sensitivity for longer-maturity 
bonds is determined by the level of term premia, suggesting that in-
vestors may be more sensitive to MNAs when term premia are large. 
Broadly speaking, this evidence is consistent with our proposed expla-
nation. When the economy is above trend and late in the expansion 
cycle, the Fed is more likely to “lean against the wind” of macroeco-
nomic news. A more aggressive Fed means a stronger oﬀsetting eﬀect 
on stocks, leading to lower stock sensitivities in these times.

It is important to interpret our ﬁndings with caution, as the output 
gap, expectations of monetary tightening, and term spread exhibit sig-
niﬁcant comovement. Therefore, we cannot isolate structural economic 
shocks that drive the variation in these variables. Despite this caveat, 
these regression results support our primary hypothesis of investors be-
ing apprehensive about the Fed’s policies and decisions.

3.3.  Evidence from survey forecasts

Further supporting evidence for time-varying central bank aggres-
siveness can be found in the survey forecasts. In particular, we consider 
whether the observed variations in stock sensitivities can be attributed 
to changing survey forecaster perceptions of monetary policy respon-
siveness.

A recent paper by Bauer et al. (2022) provides compelling evidence 
of cyclicality in the relationship between interest rate expectations and 
expectations of output gap and inﬂation – the two variables in the Tay-
lor rule – using panels of Blue Chip survey forecasts. We multiply the 
estimated perceived policy rule coeﬃcients from Bauer et al. (2022)
by the corresponding output gap and inﬂation values.16 This process 
generates a time-series of the component of forecasted interest rates 
attributable to macroeconomic drivers. To the extent macroeconomic 
news  change  expectations  about  monetary  policy  conditional  on  the 
perceived aggressiveness of the Fed response, it will be reﬂected in this 
measure. After aggregating the ﬁtted values to an annual frequency, we 
plot it alongside our estimated stock return sensitivity.

Panel (A) of Fig. 6 presents separate plots of the perceived policy 
rule based only on the output gap, only on inﬂation, and on the com-
bination of both variables. The policy rule is on the left axis, while the 
stock return sensitivity is on the left. To facilitate comparison, the right 
axis is inverted i.e., low values are plotted at the top. It is apparent that 
policy rates implied by the output gap strongly comove with the return 
sensitivity for the ﬁrst part of the sample, while inﬂation becomes the 
primary driver in recent years. The combined series has a correlation 
with the stock return sensitivity of approximately -0.74 (as depicted in 
the third plot of Fig. 6), while the output gap series (ﬁrst panel) has a 
correlation of -0.57. These results align with our previous understand-
ing of the macroeconomic drivers of stock return sensitivity to MNAs.

Panel (B) of Fig. 6 shows the annual change in perceived interest 
rate rule plotted in the third plot of Panel (A), analogous to the ΔT-
bill in Table 1 or Table 2. A signiﬁcant correlation of approximately 
-0.47 with stock return sensitivity supports our claim that cyclical stock 
return responses are driven not just by perceived interest rate changes 
but speciﬁcally by changes in the perceived monetary policy rule that 
gives rise to interest rate expectations.

Both bond market and survey evidence tell the same story. In good 
times,  positive  macroeconomic  surprises  increase  the  likelihood  of  a 
Fed  rate  hike.  So  the  positive  direct  eﬀect  of  good  macro  news  on 
stocks is oﬀset by the indirect eﬀect of monetary policy expectations. In 

16 We thank Carolin Pﬂueger for providing the estimates of perceived policy 
rule.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10379010V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

Table 3
Economic drivers behind cyclical return responses: Bond market evidence.

Stock

EuroDollar 3m

EuroDollar 12m

Treasury 5y

Treasury 10y

Constant

0.82***
(0.09)

-0.05***
(0.01)
-0.14***
(0.01)

-0.61***
(0.04)
-0.86***
(0.05)

Output gap

-0.26***
(0.05)

-0.01***
(0.00)
-0.02***
(0.01)

-0.03*
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)

ΔT-bill

-2.60***
(0.54)

0.06
(0.05)
-0.09
(0.08)

-0.30
(0.26)
-0.49
(0.34)

Term premium

0.46***
(0.08)

-0.02***
(0.00)
-0.07***
(0.01)

-0.25***
(0.04)
-0.32***
(0.05)

𝑅2

0.14

0.14

0.24

0.25

0.24

0 (=constant) and 𝛽

Notes: We only report the estimates associated with 𝛽
𝑍𝜏−1 in the regression 
under multivariate speciﬁcations. We consider future returns deﬁned over 30-minute intervals around MNAs for the 
E-mini stock, EuroDollar of maturity up to 3- and 12-months, Treasury of maturities 5- and 10-years, respectively. 
Output gap is the diﬀerence between the output and its potential trend. ΔT-bill is the diﬀerence between the one-
quarter-ahead forecast and nowcast rate of the 3-month Treasury bill. The Treasury term premium of maturity 10 
years is constructed by Adrian et al. (2013). All variables are demeaned. These predictor variables are lagged one 
quarter. We use the benchmarked macroeconomic announcements. We report Newey-West-adjusted standard errors. 
The estimation sample period is from 1999 to 2022. *𝑝 < 0.1; **𝑝 < 0.05; ***𝑝 < 0.01.

1 in 𝛽𝜏 = 𝛽

0 + 𝛽′

1

Fig. 6. Stock return sensitivity and perceived interest rate rule. Notes: In this graph, the black-solid lines represent the estimated 𝛽𝜏 in Fig. 4 based on the benchmark 
macroeconomic announcements: the change in nonfarm payrolls, initial jobless claims, ISM manufacturing (ISM), and the consumer conﬁdence index. We provide 
±2-standard-error bands (light-shaded area) around 𝛽𝜏 . NBER recession bars are overlain on the graph. The red-triangled lines represent interest rates derived from 
the perceived policy rule coeﬃcients discussed in Bauer et al. (2022). To faciliate visual comparison, we reverse the right axis, so low rates are at the top and high 
rates at the bottom. To calculate these rates, we multiply the estimated coeﬃcients of the perceived policy rule with the corresponding values of the output gap and 
inﬂation. The resulting calculations yield a time-series of implied interest rates. We aggregate these rates to an annual frequency. The data are from 2000 to 2022.

Appendix G, we formalize this argument using a small-scale New Keyne-
sian model. A more aggressive central bank response to positive macro 
shocks leads to weaker cash ﬂow and stronger discount rate news, both 
of which lower stock prices relative to a less aggressive central bank 
response.

4.  Conclusion

This paper examines the stock market’s cyclical reaction to macroe-
conomic news announcements. We provide strong evidence of a coun-
tercyclical sensitivity of the stock market to news across a wide range of 
macroeconomic news announcements. The most notable cyclical vari-
ation takes place within expansions: sensitivity is largest early in an 
expansion and essentially zero late in an expansion. We bring a new 
perspective to the literature in that periods of peak stock return sensi-
tivity do not coincide with periods of heightened stock market volatility 
or economic recession.

We then jointly assess evidence from stock and bond markets. While 
stock responses are positive and largest when the economy is below 
trend, bond responses are negative and strongest when the economy is 

close to the business cycle peak. These contrasting results are consistent 
with investors revising expectations about future interest rate changes 
in the aftermath of MNAs. Large revisions, evident in strong bond mar-
ket responses, constitute a substantial discount rate component in stock 
responses to MNAs that goes in the opposite direction of the intuitive 
cash ﬂow response. When the output gap is most negative, MNAs con-
tain the least risk-free rate news. As a result, in these times the cash ﬂow 
news component of stock responses is least oﬀset by discount rate news, 
leading to high sensitivity. Survey evidence supports these conclusions.
Monetary policy expectations remain a key driver of time-varying 
stock return sensitivities even as the macroeconomic predictors of the 
expectations themselves change in importance. After the Covid-19 pan-
demic, expectations of rate hikes are motivated not just by the level of 
the output gap but also by inﬂation. As a result, inﬂation has gained 
importance as a determinant of how strongly stocks respond to MNAs. 
In the recent period of sharp monetary tightening, positive surprises 
not just fail to boost stock prices but actually lead to negative realized 
returns.

Our  paper  points  to  the  important  role  monetary  policy  plays  in 
the determination of asset prices by modulating the eﬀects of macroe-

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10379011V. Elenev, T.-H. Law, D. Song et al.

conomic shocks. It highlights that time variation in perceived policy 
responsiveness aﬀects how much prices respond to news about the state 
of the economy. These results have implications for risk premia and the 
design of optimal monetary policy, topics that can be explored further 
through the lens of an equilibrium, model. In the Appendix, we oﬀer a 
simple model to illustrate the qualitative eﬀects, but there is room for a 
richer, more quantitative approach that would incorporate time-varying 
policy stances. We leave this pursuit for future research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Vadim Elenev: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tzuo-Hann Law: Data cura-
tion. Dongho Song: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Amir Yaron: Writing – re-
view & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Su-
pervision,  Software,  Resources,  Project  administration,  Methodology, 
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Con-
ceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

The codes and data of the article can be found at https://doi .org /

10 .17632 /w9ywjnmcv5 .3.

Acknowledgements

We thank the editor, an anonymous referee, Hengjie Ai, Yakov Ami-
hud,  Susanto  Basu,  Anna  Cieslak,  Mikhail  Chernov,  Richard  Crump, 
Taeyoung Doh, Greg Duﬀee, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Peter Ireland, 
John  Leahy,  Sophia  Li,  David  Lucca,  Tomohide  Mineyama,  Alberto 
Plazzi, Carolin Pﬂueger, Nokolai Roussanov, Eric Swanson, Jenny Tang, 
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Peter Van Tassel, and Jonathan Wright for in-
sightful comments that have improved the paper signiﬁcantly. We thank 
participants at many seminars and conferences for helpful comments 
and discussions.

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103790.

References

Adrian, T., Crump, R.K., Moench, E., 2013. Pricing the term structure with linear regres-

Ai, H., Bansal, R., 2018. Risk preferences and the macroeconomic announcement pre-

sions. J. Financ. Econ. 110, 110–138.

mium. Econometrica 86, 1383–1430.

Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F., Vega, C., 2007. Real-time price discovery in 

global stock, bond and foreign exchange markets. J. Int. Econ. 73, 251–277.

Balduzzi, P., Elton, E., Green, C., 2001. Economic news and bond prices: Evidence from 

the u.s. treasury market. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 36, 523–543.

Bansal, R., Dittmar, R.F., Lundblad, C.T., 2005. Consumption, dividends, and the cross-

section of equity returns. J. Finance 60, 1639–1672.

Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing 

puzzles. J. Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Bartolini, L., Goldberg, L.S., Sacarny, A., 2008. How economic news moves markets. In: 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 14, 
pp. 1–7.

Bauer, M.D., Pﬂueger, C., Sunderam, A., 2022. Perceptions about monetary policy. NBER 

Bekaert, G., Hoerova, M., Lo Duca, M., 2013. Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy. J. 

Working Paper, 30480.

Monet. Econ. 60, 771–788.

Bernanke, B., Kuttner, K., 2005. What explains the stock market’s reaction to federal 

reserve policy? J. Finance 60, 1221–1257.

Bollerslev,  T.,  Law,  T.,  Tauchen,  G.,  2008.  Risk,  jumps,  and  diversiﬁcation.  J. 

Econom. 144, 234–256.

Boyd, J., Hu, J., Jagannathan, R., 2005. The stock market’s reaction to unemployment 

news: Why bad news is usually good for stocks. J. Finance 60, 649–672.

Campbell, J., 1991. A variance decomposition for stock returns. Econ. J. 101, 157–179.
Campbell, J., Ammer, J., 1993. What moves the stock and bond markets? a variance 

decomposition for long-term asset returns. J. Finance 48, 3–37.

Campbell, J., Shiller, R., 1988. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future divi-

dends and discount factors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 1, 195–227.

Cascaldi-Garcia, D., Orak, M., Saijid, Z., 2022. Drivers of Post-pandemic Inﬂation in Se-
lected Advanced economies and implications for the Outlook. FEDS Notes. Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington.

Cieslak, A., Pﬂueger, C., 2022. Inﬂation and asset returns. NBER Working Paper, 30982.
Cieslak, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2017. The economics of the Fed put. Working Paper.
Cochrane, J., 2011. Presidential address: Discount rates. J. Finance 66, 1047–1108.
Cochrane, J., Piazzesi, M., 2002. The Fed and interest rates: A high-frequency identiﬁca-

tion. Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. Proc. 92, 90–95.

Diercks, A., Waller, W., 2017. Taxes and the Fed: Theory and Evidence from Equities. Fi-
nance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-104. Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, Washington.

Faust, J., Wright, J., 2018. Risk premia in the 8:30 economy. Q. J. Finance 8, 1850010.
Gilbert, T., Scotti, C., Strasser, G., Vega, C., 2017. Is the intrinsic value of a macroe-
conomic news announcement related to its asset price impact? J. Monet. Econ. 92, 
78–95.

Gurkaynak, R., Sack, B., Swanson, E., 2005a. Do actions speak louder than words? the re-
sponse of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements. Int. J. Cent. Bank. 1, 
55–93.

Gurkaynak, R., Sack, B., Swanson, E., 2005b. The sensitivity of long-term interest rates 
to economic news: evidence and implications for macroeconomic models. Am. Econ. 
Rev. 95, 425–436.

Hansen, L.P., Heaton, J.C., Li, N., 2008. Consumption strikes back? measuring long-run 

risk. J. Polit. Econ. 116, 260–302.

Jayakumar, A., 2013. Markets rally to record heights after positive April jobs report. The 
Washington  Post.  https://www .washingtonpost .com /business /economy /markets -
rally -to -record -heights -after -positive -april -jobs -report /2013 /05 /03 /6a83110c -b402 -
11e2 -bbf2 -a6f9e9d79e19 _story .html.

Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., 2005. Expected returns and expected dividend growth. J. Fi-

nanc. Econ. 76, 583–626.

Lucca, D., Moench, E., 2015. The pre-FOMC announcement drift. J. Finance 70, 329–371.
Ludvigson, S.C., Ng, S., 2009. Macro factors in bond risk premia. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22, 

McQueen, G., Roley, V.V., 1993. Stock prices, news, and business conditions. Rev. Financ. 

5027–5067.

Stud. 6, 683–707.

Nakamura,  E.,  Steinsson,  J.,  2018.  High  frequency  identiﬁcation  of  monetary  non-

neutrality: The information eﬀect. Q. J. Econ. 133, 1283–1330.

Neuhierl, A., Weber, M., 2019. Monetary policy communication, policy slope, and the 

stock market. J. Monet. Econ. 108, 140–155.

Paul, P., 2020. The time-varying eﬀect of monetary policy on asset prices. Rev. Econ. 

Stat. 102, 690–704.

Econ. 51, 1553–1575.

Pearce, D., Roley, V., 1985. Stock prices and economic news. J. Bus. 58, 49–67.
Rigobon, R., Sack, B., 2004. The impact of monetary policy on asset prices. J. Monet. 

Savor, P., Wilson, M., 2013. How much do investors care about macroeconomic risk? 
evidence  from  scheduled  economic  announcements.  J.  Financ.  Quant.  Anal. 48, 
343–375.

Schorfheide, F., Song, D., 2022. Real-time forecasting with a (standard) mixed-frequency 

var during a pandemic. Int. J. Cent. Bank.

Schorfheide, F., Song, D., Yaron, A., 2018. Identifying long-run risks: A Bayesian mixed-

frequency approach. Econometrica 86, 617–654.

Shell, A., 2018. Dow plunges 666 points amid rate-hike fears after strong jobs report. USA 
Today. https://www .usatoday .com /story /money /markets /2018 /02 /02 /dow -suﬀers -
brief -300 -point -drop -amid -rate -hike -fears -after -strong -jobs -report /300350002/.
Swanson, E., Williams, J.C., 2014. Measuring the eﬀect of the zero lower bound on 

medium- and longer-term interest rates. Am. Econ. Rev. 104, 3154–3185.

Tang, J., 2017. Fomc communication and interest rate sensitivity to news. Federal Reserve 

Bank of Boston Research Department Working Paper 17-12.

Tengler, N., 2020. Why stock investors should love Friday’s disappointing jobs report. 
USA Today. https://www .usatoday .com /story /money /columnist /2020 /01 /11 /jobs -
report -why -employment -numbers -bode -well -stocks -401 -k -s /4433744002/.

Thorbecke, W., 1997. On stock market returns and monetary policy. J. Finance 52, 

635–654.

Xu, N.R., You, Y., 2023. Main street’s pain, wall street’s gain. Manuscript.

JournalofFinancialEconomics153(2024)10379012