Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Financial inclusion, economic development, and inequality: Evidence from
Brazil
Julia Fonseca a,∗, Adrien Matray b,c,d
a University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Gies College of Business, Champaign, 61820, United States of America
b Stanford GSB, Stanford, 94305, United States of America
c National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), United States of America
d Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), United Kingdom

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

We study a financial inclusion policy targeting Brazilian cities with low bank branch coverage using data on
the universe of employees from 2000–2014. The policy leads to bank entry and to similar increases in both
deposits and lending. It also fosters entrepreneurship, employment, and wage growth, especially for cities
initially in banking deserts. These gains are not shared equally and instead increase with workers’ education,
implying a substantial increase in wage inequality. The changes in inequality are concentrated in cities where
the initial supply of skilled workers is low, indicating that talent scarcity can drive how financial development
affects inequality.

Dataset link: https://data.mendeley.com/datas
ets/f69njddj98/2

JEL classification:
G20
J24
O10

Keywords:
Financial inclusion
Economic development
Inequality

1. Introduction

The presence of bank branches at fine geographical levels has long
been considered a key determinant of financial inclusion and an impor-
tant driver of economic growth. Bank branch proximity mitigates the
transaction costs of mobilizing savings from many agents, which can
increase the capital available to entrepreneurs. Branch proximity also
lowers the cost to banks of screening and monitoring entrepreneurs,
and of providing access to liquidity services. However, setting up bank
branches is not only costly but also risky, as demand for deposits and
loans can only be observed after the creation of the branch, which can
lead to an under-provision of financial services.

For this reason, policymakers across the world have sought to
promote financial inclusion by implementing large-scale reforms to
expand the physical networks of bank branches.1 The popularity of
these financial inclusion policies raises multiple questions: do they
succeed in promoting financial and economic development and, if so,
how? And what are the distributional consequences of such policies?

In this paper, we trace out the dynamic effects on both economic
development and wage inequality of a government program that im-
proved access to mainstream financial services. We use the introduction
of the ‘‘Banks for All’’ program (‘‘Banco para Todos’’) by the Brazilian

federal government in 2004, which explicitly targeted underbanked
cities by introducing branches of government-owned banks. This policy
constitutes a unique natural experiment featuring a large, plausibly
exogenous shock to financial access and capital deepening at the level
of entire labor markets.

Our empirical analysis combines Brazilian administrative employer-
employee data covering the universe of formal employees in Brazil with
detailed bank branch balance sheets from 2000–2014. In a difference-
in-differences research design, we compare the evolution of various out-
comes in cities benefiting from this policy (those with no government-
owned banks prior to the reform) relative to unaffected cities. We use
a parsimonious matching procedure to select control cities for each
treated city, where we match on the pre-reform population quintile and
Gini growth, and we estimate the effect of financial development on
employment, entrepreneurship, firm growth, average wage, and wage
inequality.

Our identification strategy exploits ex-ante differences in the pres-
ence of government-owned banks across cities, but it does not require
the initial presence of government-owned banks to be random. It only
requires that outcomes of treated and control cities would have evolved
similarly absent the reform. While, by definition, this identifying as-
sumption is untestable, we provide a battery of tests that are supportive

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address:

juliaf@illinois.edu (J. Fonseca).

1 Examples include China in the 1970s, India in the 1980s, Thailand in the 1980s and 1990s.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103854
Received 19 December 2022; Received in revised form 18 April 2024; Accepted 20 April 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)103854Availableonline2May20240304-405X/©2024TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierB.V.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).J. Fonseca and A. Matray

of it, which we discuss in detail after summarizing our results. Specif-
ically, we: (i) show evidence of pre-reform parallel trends for our key
city-level outcomes, (ii) show that our matching procedure leads to
covariate balance across a wide array of city-level characteristics not
targeted by the matching, (iii) directly control for city characteristics
pre-reform, (iv) employ a city-by-industry difference-in-differences es-
timator to control for sector-specific shocks that could differentially
impact cities exposed to the policy. The stability of point estimates
across the different strategies implies our results cannot be explained
by differential exposure to aggregate or city-specific shocks.

We start by showing that the reform leads to financial inclusion
and financial development. After 2004, the number of bank branches
increases in treated cities, leading to an inflow of local deposits and
an increase in credit supply of similar magnitude. The increases in
total bank branches, deposits, and credit do not mean revert but
instead shift to a new, higher steady state. This implies better access
to external funding and liquidity services, both of which can foster
economic development.2 Consistent with the policy driving this shift
in the steady state of financial development, these increases are driven
by government-owned banks, whose expansion only modestly crowds
out private banks. The absence of an effect on private credit can be seen
as a placebo test, showing that our results are not driven by differential
exposure of treated cities to economy-wide shocks experienced by
Brazil during this period.

Our second set of results is about the average effect of the reform on
economic development. We show that the reform leads to an increase
in employment by 10%, mostly driven by an expansion of smaller
firms. Increased labor demand pushes up the average wage per worker
by 4.1%. Looking at firm dynamics, we find that the reform-induced
bank branch expansion fosters entrepreneurship, as the number of
firms increases by roughly 10%. This increase masks an even higher
acceleration of underlying firm dynamism, as both firm entry and firm
exit rate increase. While these results only reflect patterns in the formal
sector, entrepreneurial activity and firm growth in the formal sector are
of first-order importance for economic development, as the transition
from subsistence to transformational entrepreneurs and the integration
of workers in the formal sector foster economic growth (e.g., Dix-
Carneiro et al., 2021). Nonetheless, we show in robustness checks
that our results are not driven by firms and workers moving from the
informal sector to the formal sector.

The richness of our data allows us to examine the mechanisms that
link financial inclusion and economic development. Financial inclusion
could foster growth by increasing aggregate demand by improving
households’ access to credit and by allowing households to better
smooth their consumption, thereby reducing the need for precautionary
saving. We rule out this local demand channel as the main driver of our
results by showing that employment growth is mostly driven by firms
in the tradable sector, which are by definition less dependent on local
demand.

So why would financial inclusion promote entrepreneurship and
firm growth? We show that the policy-induced increase in financial
inclusion works by reducing the physical distance between banks and
entrepreneurs. Indeed, the positive effect of the reform increases pro-
portionally with the distance between treated cities and the closest city
with a bank branch prior to the reform and is larger for smaller firms,
which likely face bigger informational frictions. These gains are the
same whether the nearest bank is private or public, suggesting that
our results are not driven by particulars of how public banks operate
(e.g., by access to subsidized or politically-motivated loans). Instead,
these results are consistent with the distance to bank branches affecting
access to liquidity, and with models in which the distance between
borrowers and lenders affects the cost of credit either because it reduces

2 See Xu and Yang (2022) for an example of how access to liquidity services
thanks to bank branch expansion promoted development in 19th-century US.

screening and monitoring costs (e.g., Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990;
Townsend and Ueda, 2006), in particular when soft information is
prevalent (e.g., Petersen and Rajan, 1994; Hombert and Matray, 2017).
Our third set of results is about the distributional effects of the
reform. We find that the policy leads to a sizable increase in wage
inequality within treated cities. This is explained by the fact that,
although all workers are better off after the reform, the magnitude of
wage gains rises monotonically with the position of workers in the wage
distribution. Our detailed panel data of workers allow us to show that
this increase is not driven by a change in the sample composition, but
instead reflects an increase in wages holding fixed individuals’ sex, age,
education, occupation, and sectoral specialization. We also show that
our results are quantitatively unchanged when we restrict our sample
to workers that we observe throughout the sample period and to firms
already in the data prior to the reform. These sample restrictions allow
us to show that our results are not driven by workers entering the
formal sector after the reform or more general changes in the sample
composition of worker characteristics.

We then explore two explanations that can account for the rise
in inequality. First, financial development could increase the relative
demand for skilled labor, either because of a large fixed component
to the cost of skilled labor (e.g., Benmelech et al., 2021; Schoefer,
2021) or because the relative productivity of skilled workers increases
with financial development (Fonseca and Doornik, 2022). Models that
assume that financial development increases the relative productivity
of skilled workers or loosens constraints on the demand for skilled
workers generally predict that the equilibrium skill mix should change,
with firms increasing the share of skilled workers in their workforce.
However, when looking at the effect of the policy on the average skill
composition of firms, we find that the share of skilled workers does not
increase in treated cities.

Instead, we find support for another explanation: skills are scarce,
especially in developing countries, which means that the supply of
skilled workers is more inelastic than that of unskilled workers in the
short run. We show that cities in our setting are characterized by high
internal migration costs and that the reform does not induce worker
migration to treated cities. This lack of inter-city mobility implies that
an increase in labor demand can only be served by the supply of local
workers. Consistent with skilled workers being in short supply, we find
that all the increase in inequality is concentrated in cities where a lower
fraction of the population is educated prior to the reform.

We consider a wide range of robustness checks. We start by showing
that our results are quantitatively unchanged when we use different
matching procedures. We then discuss threats to identification. Our
strategy faces two key threats. First, even in the absence of pre-trends,
treated cities may be ex-ante different in ways that differentially expose
them to aggregate shocks post-2004. That would be the case if, for
instance, treated cities are ex-ante more exposed to the commodity
boom of the mid-2000s. Second, our policy might have coincided with
shocks that specifically affected treated cities, such as idiosyncratic
shocks to banks entering treated cities or a targeted expansion of
welfare programs.

We address the threat produced by ex-ante differences in three
ways. (i) We show that our matched treatment and control groups are
similar over a rich array of city characteristics that were not included
in the matching process, including exposure to the commodity sector,
skilled employment, political affiliation, size of the informal sector,
or the co-movement of local GDP with aggregate fluctuations. While
common support in levels is not required for differences-in-differences
designs, such similarity makes the common-trend assumption more
plausible, as these similarities in the level of characteristics make it less
likely that they reacted differently to broader macroeconomic shocks
post-2004.

In addition, (ii) we show that our results are quantitatively un-
changed after directly controlling for a wide range of pre-reform con-
trols interacted with year fixed effects. Estimating all possible combi-
nations of pre-reform controls across the hundreds of different spec-
ifications yields very similar point estimates. Finally (iii), we exploit

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038542J. Fonseca and A. Matray

the granularity of our data to build a city-by-industry difference-in-
differences estimator. This allows us to include industry-by-year fixed
effects and non-parametrically control for any unobserved time-varying
sector-specific shocks (e.g., commodity booms or trade shocks). Our
coefficients of interest are estimated in this case by comparing the
same sector across treated and control cities, and therefore this strategy
does not require that treated and control cities are similarly exposed to
sector-specific shocks. We show that point estimates at the city-industry
level are quantitatively similar to city-level estimates.

Our setting also addresses a wide array of potential ex-post treated-
specific shocks because, by construction, control cities already have a
government-owned bank. Therefore, any shocks specific to government-
owned banks (such as an overall increase in lending by public banks)
will affect both treated and control cities at the same time and will
be absorbed by our difference-in-differences specification. This design
also addresses the possibility that welfare program expansions might
differentially benefit treated cities, since some of the largest welfare
programs are distributed by one of the public banks already present
in control cities (including the largest at the time, Bolsa Família).
Therefore, an expansion of these programs would also affect both
treated and control cities. In additional robustness tests, we show that
results are robust to including state-by-year, which controls for state-
level shocks such as differences in state-administered welfare programs.
At the municipality level, our effects are unchanged when we compare
treated and control cities with the same political affiliation or directly
control for the observed changes in expenditures.

We end the paper by discussing how our reduced-form identified
coefficients can provide useful causal moments for the macro-finance
development literature and speak to potentially important frictions or
sources of heterogeneity that future models could incorporate. Our
paper shows the importance of explicitly linking distance to the nearest
bank to the cost and availability of credit as in the structural model of Ji
et al. (2023). We provide causal estimates of how changes in distance
can affect credit supply and savings in interest-bearing products, as well
as their impact on employment, firm growth, and firm entry. We also
provide moments linking changes in the supply of credit and real out-
comes, which relate to key parameters in macro-development models
in which a reduced-form collateral constraint affects economic growth.
The considerably larger effects we find for treated cities in banking
deserts point toward the existence of a non-linearity around very low
levels of external finance, something that is usually not explicitly
modeled and could help to reconcile different results in the literature.
Finally, our paper highlights the importance of worker heterogeneity
and constraints on the supply of human capital in accounting for the
dynamics of wage inequality as a result of financial development in
macro-finance models.

Literature. Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. The
closest one is on the role of financial inclusion on financial interme-
diation costs and economic development, which plays a central role
in macro-development models, but for which we have limited causally
estimates elasticities that can be tightly linked with model parameters.3
Our setting allows us to better understand why financial inclusion
fosters economic growth and provide new insights on the distributional
effects of such policies. First, our high-quality administrative data
allow us to study many new margins through which financial inclusion
policies can foster development. Because we can observe the universe
of formal economic activity and track workers and firms over time, we
can study a host of new outcomes: the process of creative destruction
(firm entry and exit rate), the evolution of firm size distribution and
the differential benefit for small vs. large firms measured pre-reform,
as well as the evolution of sectoral composition (and in particular

3 See for instance (Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990); Greenwood et al.
(2010); Ji et al. (2023), where geographical distance to a bank branch governs
financial intermediation costs and the returns to saving.

the relative growth of tradable vs. non-tradable sectors). Because we
observe the universe of workers and can track them over time, we
can also shed light on the evolution of the skill premium and wage
inequality, accounting for changes in sample composition, and the
interaction between financial inclusion policies and constraints on the
accumulation of human capital.

The literature on the effect of bank branch presence has so far
mostly focused on developed economies and studied financial outcomes
such as credit or wealth accumulation. The literature on developing
countries has mostly focused on the introduction of specific bank
branches in localized markets and used short-run cross-sectional survey
data to study real outcomes and find small, short-lived positive effects
or even negative effects.4 By contrast, our administrative panel data
allow us to track the long-run effect of the policy on the full causal chain
linking financial inclusion to financial development (credit supply, ac-
cess to liquidity services); real outcomes (employment, sectoral growth,
average wages, entry and exit rates of firms, firm size distribution)
and the distributional consequences of this financial-inclusion driven
economic growth.

Second, the policy-driven expansion of bank branches happens
through publicly owned commercial banks that, as a whole, are prof-
itable rather than development-focused state banks with specific sec-
toral and poverty reduction mandates as in the Indian experiment
(Burgess and Pande, 2005; Cole, 2009). The policy also induced large
variation at a sufficiently large geographical level to estimate ‘‘local
general equilibrium effects’’, but sufficiently small to provide precise
estimates.5 This level of analysis coupled with data on the universe of
bank branch networks in Brazil allows us to provide the first causal
estimate of the role of distance to financial services, a key parameter
in macro-development models that analyze the role of banks, and to
highlight that financial inclusion is not a dichotomous concept but
should instead be thought of as continuous.

Taken together, our results have several policy implications. First,
financial inclusion policies can generate large effects on economic
development, even while banks operate profitable branches. Second,
these policies can have large distributive effects, in particular as they
interact with constraints on human capital accumulation. Third, the
initial distance to existing bank branches matters for the expected
gains in terms of economic development. Therefore, financial inclusion
policies can reap larger benefits at lower costs by carefully taking into
account the initial network of bank branches, which is important given
the large number of policies around the world attempting to foster
economic development by promoting financial inclusion.

This paper also contributes to the empirical literature using natural
experiments to show how financial frictions, broadly defined, affect
economic development.6 Most of the evidence for developing countries

4 See Bruhn and Love (2014); Burgess and Pande (2005); (Cramer, 2022)
for positive effects and Kochar (2011) for negative effects. A complementary
approach exploits randomized controlled trials to study the implications of
access to microcredit and savings products in developing countries. The
literature on microcredit is surveyed in Banerjee et al. (2015), which concludes
that microcredit has ‘‘modestly positive, but not transformative, effects’’.

5 By contrast (Bruhn and Love, 2014) studies the opening of outlets of a
bank specialized for low-income in supermarkets, while (Burgess and Pande,
2005) uses state-level variations across Indian states. More generally, most of
the literature on developing countries has used randomized controlled trial
and shocks to specific banks with a focus on directly affected bank clients.
The positive effects on non-clients are potentially a key driver of multiplier
effects, which can account for why we find large positive effects on economic
development while most papers find limited effects.

6 An earlier literature looks at how financial frictions relate to economic
development using cross-country evidence. This literature is for instance
reviewed in Anon (2018). See Buera et al. (2011), Buera and Shin (2013),
or (Midrigan and Xu, 2014) for macro-models linking financial frictions and
development and the survey in Buera et al. (2015). See also (Xu, 2022)
and Xu and Yang (2022) and references therein for the importance of financial
frictions in cross-country trade and growth, and long-run historical contexts.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038543J. Fonseca and A. Matray

studies short-run capital injections that originate outside the city and
focuses on changes in credit, holding fixed the network of banks.7 Our
paper highlights a fundamentally different mechanism and our object of
interest is the promotion of financial inclusion by expanding the network
of bank branches. This branch expansion fosters the mobilization and
pooling of local savings to start a virtuous circle between increased
deposits, higher credit, and economic development, originating from
within the city as the distance between depositors, lenders, and borrow-
ers is reduced. Therefore, our results imply that how credit is distributed
across places can matter as much as how much credit is distributed.

Third, we contribute to the literature that studies the effect of finan-
cial development on wage inequality. Theoretical work in this literature
focuses mostly on wealth inequality or total income inequality (which
includes capital income) and derives ambiguous predictions. The effect
of financial development depends on whether that development is
concentrated on the intensive or the extensive margin Greenwood and
Jovanovic (e.g., 1990), Townsend and Ueda (e.g., 2006), Greenwood
et al. (e.g., 2010), how it alters the aggregate demand of workers
and investment returns (e.g., Giné and Townsend, 2004; Buera et al.,
2021), and whether individuals can accumulate human capital (e.g.,
Mestieri et al., 2017). These models generally conclude that capital
income pushes inequality upward, as it mostly benefits the wealthy
and entrepreneurs, while rising wages push inequality downward (e.g.,
Buera et al., 2021; Ji et al., 2023). These theoretical and quantitative
results that wage inequality should go down as financial development
increases rely on the assumption that labor is a homogeneous input
to production. Therefore, higher labor demand in more-productive
sectors will benefit more lower-paid workers who reallocate away from
less-productive sectors.

Our contribution to this literature is twofold. First, we provide
rare empirical evidence on the effect of financial inclusion on wage
inequality, as empirical evidence focuses on developed countries and
studies credit rather than financial inclusion.8 Second, we show that
financial inclusion leads to higher wage inequality in our setting due
to skill differentials. Therefore, we show that taking into account labor
heterogeneity and limits to human capital accumulation in macro-
development models is crucial to better understanding and predicting
how policies promoting financial development will affect inequality.

Fourth, this paper contributes to our understanding of how finan-
cial frictions impact capital and entrepreneurial talent misallocation
and thereby economic development.9 More broadly, we relate to the
literature studying how financial frictions affect firm labor demand
and employment outcomes.10 We contribute to the specific subset of
the literature that studies how financial frictions affect the demand for
skilled workers and the skill premium in developing countries (Fonseca
and Doornik, 2022).11

7 For instance shocks to the liquidity of lenders coming from targeted
lending programs in India (Banerjee and Duflo, 2014) and Brazil (Bazzi
et al., 2023), deposit volatility (Choudhary and Limodio, 2022), large gov-
ernment grants in Thai villages (e.g., Kaboski and Townsend, 2011, 2012), or
broader financial market reforms such as bankruptcy reforms (e.g., Fonseca
and Doornik, 2022, for Brazil), collateral laws (e.g., Vig, 2013), or financial
liberalization (e.g., Crescenzi and Limodio, 2022; Bau and Matray, 2023, and
references therein).

8 See Beck et al. (2010) for evidence from the U.S., and a discussion of their
results once accounting for staggered D-i-D corrections by Baker et al. (2022).
9 See, among many others: (Giné and Townsend, 2004); Townsend and
Ueda (2006); Banerjee and Moll (2010); Buera et al. (2011); Kaboski and
Townsend (2011); Buera and Shin (2013); Midrigan and Xu (2014); Moll et al.
(2017); Bau and Matray (2023).

10 See among many others: (Peek and Rosengren, 2000); Chodorow-Reich
(2014); Hombert and Matray (2017); Bai et al. (2018); Berton et al.
(2018); Caggese et al. (2019); Greenstone et al. (2020); Baghai et al.
(2021); Doornik et al. (2021).

11 For recent works on financial frictions and the demand for skills in

developed countries, see Quincy (2023) and Jasova et al. (2021).

Finally, because the reform we explore relies on the expansion of
government-owned banks, we relate to the broad literature studying
the economic effects of government ownership of banks (e.g., Sapienza,
2004; Dinç, 2005; Cole, 2009; Carvalho, 2014; Delatte et al., 2022).
Most of this literature emphasizes the risk of political capture and the
creation of politically motivated credit cycles. We show that such forms
of ownership can have positive effects on economic development when
the private sector is unable or unwilling to serve underprivileged areas,
even in countries where corruption can be high.

2. Institutional background and data

2.1. The Brazilian banking landscape

2.1.1. Situation pre-reform

Brazil has three types of public banks: government-owned banks
controlled by the federal government (Banco do Brazil, Caixa Econom-
ica Federal, Banco do Nordeste, and Banco da Amazonia), government-
owned banks controlled by state governments, and a national develop-
ment bank (BNDES).

Government-owned banks, in particular the ones controlled by
the federal government, differ from most public banks in developing
countries and are better described as ‘‘government-owned commercial
banks’’. They are profitable and their performance is comparable to that
of both foreign and domestic private banks (Mettenheim, 2010).

BNDES, the national development bank, differs substantially from
federal and state-owned banks and is much closer to public banks in
other developing countries that have been studied previously such as
India (e.g., Burgess and Pande, 2005). This bank provides subsidized
loans to targeted sectors or even ‘‘grants’’, in the form of loans that
are often not reimbursed. Two things are important to highlight about
BNDES. First, this is the only bank studied by previous papers that
have documented the existence of political influence in banks’ behavior
in Brazil (e.g., Carvalho, 2014). Second, this bank, as well as state-
controlled banks, was not part of the policy and not involved in
the branch expansion we study, and its lending was not specifically
targeted at treated or control cities. Therefore, in the rest of the paper,
we use the term ‘‘public banks’’ to refer to federally-owned banks,
which excludes BNDES.

Public banks differ from private banks in some dimensions, such
as in having a legal mandate to provide earmarked credit.12 However
in practice, public banks are similar to private banks in their lending
practices and the sectors to which they lend. For instance, public
and private banks have similar portfolio compositions across credit
products and borrowers, charge similar interest rates and face similar
delinquency rates (Coelho et al., 2013). These banks are also similar
along standard balance sheet and income statement measures. As we
show in Fig. 2, there are no significant differences between branches of
public and private banks across a wide range of covariates, including
measures of lending, profitability, loan performance, and size.

2.1.2. The banks for all program

Banks for All (Banco para Todos) was a federal government program
announced in 2004 as part of the government’s 2004–2007 multi-year
plan (Plano Plurianual). The program was under the purview of the
Finance Ministry (Ministério da Fazenda) and aimed to provide Brazil’s
unbanked population with access to financial services and products
through the actions of federal government banks, particularly Caixa
Ecônomica Federal and Banco do Brasil.

To achieve the goal of reaching underserved communities, the
federal government promoted the physical presence of public banks

12 There are also incentives for private banks to provide earmarked credit
and, in fact, nearly 40% of outstanding indirect earmarked loans to firms in
2016 were originated by private banks (Ornelas et al., 2021).

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038544J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Fig. 1. Share of municipalities without bank branches.
This figure plots the evolution of the share of municipalities without at least one government-owned bank branch in red and the share of municipalities without any bank branches
in blue.

Fig. 2. Public vs. Private bank covariate balance.
This figure shows coefficient estimates and 95% error bands of the difference between public and private banks along different variables, using ESTBAN data at the branch-year
level between 2000 and 2004. All variables are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level.

throughout the country, focusing on cities with no presence of gov-
ernment banks. Fig. 1 plots the evolution of municipalities without a
public bank branch since 2000 (the dashed red line). Consistent with
the effect of the reform, this share is stable until 2004 at 60%, then
drops abruptly in 2005 and keeps declining such that in 2014, only
44% of municipalities have no government-owned banks. Fig. 1 also
reports the share of municipalities without any bank branch (the solid
blue line), and shows that the expansion of public banks resulted in a
drop in the share of cities without any bank branches.13

The program succeeded in reaching unbanked cities and under-
banked populations. According to an evaluation of the program by
the federal government, public banks opened 7.8 million accounts
and banked 1.46 million low-income, previously unbanked individuals
between 2004–2007 (Ministério da Fazenda, 2007).14 In Section 4, we
formally show that cities without public bank branches prior to 2004
saw a sharp increase in credit and deposits following the introduction
of the program.

13 Between 2004 and 2014 (the end of our sample period), 1,262 new bank

14 For comparison, in 2007, there were approximately 16 million individuals

branches were open in cities eligible to the reform.

residing in the cities that compose our treatment group.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038545J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Banking correspondents. In order to reach unbanked households,
the program also relied on correspondent banking outlets. These ar-
rangements consist of banks hiring commercial entities—typically lot-
tery retailers, post offices, pharmacies, and other retailers—to serve as
distribution outlets for financial services. Since 2003, financial services
offered by correspondents include the opening of accounts, deposits and
withdrawals, payments, and loan applications.15 The number of corre-
spondents went from approximately 20,000 in 2000 to over 150,000
in 2010 (Loureiro et al., 2016) and, taking into account partnerships
with correspondents, government-owned banks were present in 100%
of municipalities by 2007 (Ministério da Fazenda, 2007).

While we do not observe the precise location of correspondents, we
know that, prior to the reform, they were concentrated in areas already
served by bank branches (Loureiro et al., 2016). One notable network
of correspondents was that of Banco Postal, which emerged from a 2001
partnership between Bradesco and the Brazilian Post and Telegraph
Company to provide financial services at post offices. However, despite
its goal of reaching all unbanked municipalities, it was only present
in roughly half of unbanked municipalities prior to the reform (Gual
and Ansón, 2008). Moreover, prior to 2003, correspondents were not
allowed to provide most of the services they offer today. Thus, to the
extent that they were available, they mostly provided bill payment
services and were not a meaningful substitute for financial institutions
and were particularly ill-suited for the needs of firms (Bittencourt et al.,
2005). Even after 2003, the vast majority of Brazilian households and
an even larger fraction of Brazilian businesses did not use correspon-
dent banking outlets for deposits, withdrawals, account openings, or
borrowing, and did not view correspondents as safe or trustworthy
according to survey evidence (Sanford, 2013).

Taken together, these findings suggest that banking correspondents
were present in many unbanked municipalities prior to the reform
but mostly provided bill payment services. While having some access
to financial services is certainly better than no access at all, the fact
that these services were limited implies that the expansion of branch
networks we study led to financial inclusion by improving the quality
and scope of financial products and services to which households and
businesses have access.

2.2. Data

We use data from four distinct sources. Matched employer-employee
data come from the Relação Anual de Informações (RAIS), a mandatory
annual survey containing information on the universe of tax-registered
firms in Brazil. There are severe penalties associated with incomplete
or late information, which leads to a high degree of compliance and
essentially complete coverage of all employees in the formal sector.
RAIS contains time-invariant identifiers for workers and firms, as well
as information on where the firm is located. We also observe data
on workers average gross monthly earnings, occupation and several
socio-demographic characteristics such as their education, race, age,
and gender.

Using geographical information on firms, we build a city-level
panel from 2000 to 2014 with information on average wages, wage
inequality, employment, and skill-specific wages. Because municipality
borders have changed over time, we use as our level of aggregation
minimum comparable areas (Área Mínima Comparável, or AMC), which
can be consistently tracked throughout our sample period. This reduces
the number of cities from over 5,000 to 4,260. In the rest of the text,
we use the term ‘‘city’’ to refer to an AMC.

The number of bank branches, lending activity, and deposits come
from the ESTBAN database maintained by the Central Bank of Brazil.
The data provides branch-level balance sheet information that we
aggregate to the city level, which allows us to decompose the number of

15 CMN Resolution 3,110 of July 31, 2003.

branches, credit, and deposits between public and private banks. Note
that these data do not include correspondent banking outlets (such as
the outlets of Banco Postal), which means that we do not observe the
full impact of the program on financial inclusion. We discuss this point
further in Section 4.

Finally, we use city-level aggregate data. We obtain time-varying
outcomes from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics
(Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística, or IBGE), and cross-sectional
demographic and economic characteristics in 2000 from the Census,
such as population distribution across years of schooling and share of
workers in informality.

3. Empirical strategy

The reform promoted financial inclusion by targeting cities with no
government-owned banks, so we identify treated cities as those that
did not have a public bank prior to 2004. This implies that all control
cities had a public bank prior to the reform.16 We can identify the
effect of the financial inclusion reform by comparing the evolution
of multiple economic outcomes for treated and control cities, before
and after the reform, in a difference-in-differences setting. The key
identifying assumption is that absent the reform, treated and control
cities would have evolved in close parallel. While this assumption is
untestable, we discuss in this section the conditions under which it is
plausibly satisfied.

This strategy raises two natural challenges. First, even if the reform
can be considered as ‘‘quasi exogeneous’’ from the point of view of
each city, there is no reason to believe that the decision of a public
bank to set up a branch in a specific city within the pool of eligible
ones, and the timing of this decision, is random. Instead, it could be
the result of systematic differences in behavior or characteristics among
cities eligible for the reform.

This situation would bias our estimates (mostly likely upward) since
the eligible cities that do receive a bank branch would be the ones
where having a branch is the most profitable. Such a bias would emerge
if we were to consider that only the eligible cities that do receive a
bank branch are treated and use the actual date of the opening to
define the treatment, because the latter would imply defining treated
and control units based on the ex-post realization of the policy, rather
than an ex-ante assignment rule.17

Our approach to address this problem is to instead consider that
all cities without a public bank branch are treated immediately after
2004, whether or not they end up with a branch post-reform. In this
case, it is possible to recover an unbiased estimate of the true effect of
having potential access to a bank branch by focusing on the assignment
to the treatment, rather than its actual take-up, as long as we can
assume that the policy (the assignment) is exogenous based on the ex-
ante characteristic of not having a government bank prior to 2004. In
other words, the identifying assumption is not whether cities in which
a public bank branch enters would have trended similarly than other
cities absent of the reform, but is whether all the cities that become
eligible to receive a bank branch would have trended similarly.

The validity of our research design therefore depends on whether
we believe that cities that did not have a public bank branch prior to
2004 would have trended similarly as cities that did have a public bank
branch prior to 2004. This raises the second challenge: the location
of banks prior to 2004 is not random and, consequently, the average
treated city in Brazil does not look like the average untreated city.
Note that similarity in levels between treated and control units across
covariates prior to a shock is not a necessary condition for identification

16 Cities with no public bank prior to 2004 represent 43% of Brazilian cities.
17 In Appendix A.3, we show that defining treatment as the actual entry of
a public bank branch does lead to estimates that are overall larger than our
baseline.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038546J. Fonseca and A. Matray

in a difference-in-differences research design, as level differences will
be absorbed by the unit fixed effects. However, similarity in levels,
though not a necessary condition, makes the parallel-trends assumption
more plausible.

Since the reform targeted unbanked cities, these tended to be
smaller and less developed, and it is possible that they evolved and
grew in different ways after the reform relative to other untreated
cities for reasons not directly tied to the reform. For instance, they
could have disproportionately benefited from the period of sustained
growth, partially fueled by a commodity boom, that Brazil entered into
during our sample period. Fig. 3 plots a covariate balance test and
shows that the unconditional difference in levels between treated and
untreated cities (green coefficients) is large and significant for most city
characteristics.

In order to address this challenge and to strengthen our empirical
strategy, we use a parsimonious matching approach to construct a
control group of untreated cities that is observably similar to treated
cities on a wide set of characteristics.

Matching. Our matching strategy first targets city size. We start
with all 4,260 cities and compute quintiles of population. We then
match each treated city with all control cities in the same population
quintile with replacement.18.This parsimonious approach addresses a
large part of the heterogeneity. The red dots in Fig. 3 show that the
treatment and control groups are now similar over a rich array of city
characteristics constructed pre-reform that were not targeted in the
matching process. These characteristics include proxies for economic
development (GDP, employment, skilled employment, size of infor-
mal sector); propensity to receive social transfers (local government
expenditures, political affiliation of the mayor); economic integration
(distance to the state capital, share of population born elsewhere,
exports and imports made by local firms); exposure to aggregate shocks
and the commodity sector (local GDP co-movement with aggregate
GDP, total employment in commodities, exposure to commodity prices
post-reform); and development of the private banking sector (private
loans and private deposits). In addition, while some of the point esti-
mates are not exactly zero, the standardized difference between both
groups remains well below the threshold of 0.20 suggested by Imbens
and Rubin (2015).

After matching on population quintile, the only remaining large and
statistically significant difference between treated and control cities
is the change in the Gini index during the pre-period. Since we are
interested in understanding how financial development affects inequal-
ity, and because Brazil experienced large changes in inequality during
this period (e.g., Lopez and Perry, 2008) we also match on changes
in inequality pre-reform. We do so by selecting the three control
cities in the same population quintile with the closest pre-reform Gini
growth. The blue dots in Fig. 3 show differences between treated and
control cities after we further restrict our matches to this criterion. The
difference in Gini growth becomes much closer to the 0.2 threshold and
later in the paper, we show that the Gini index of treatment and control
units evolved in close parallel prior to the reform, and that there is no
evidence of pre-trends (Fig. 8).

After our baseline matching procedure, we are left with 1,415
treated cities and a total of 3,918 control cities. We report the summary
statistics of our final sample in Table 1, and we display the spatial distri-
bution of treated and control cities in Fig. 4. Treated and control cities
are spread out across Brazil and do not show geographical clustering.
Econometric specification: city level. We analyze the effect of
an increase in bank coverage on economic development and inequal-
ity by estimating a series of matched difference-in-differences (D-i-D)
specifications of the form:

𝑌𝑐,𝑔,𝑡 = 𝛽 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑐 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡≥2004 + 𝑋𝑐,𝑡 + 𝜃𝑐 + 𝛿𝑔,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑔,𝑐,𝑡

(1)

Table 1
Summary statistics.

Loans/GDP
Public Loans/GDP
Private Loans/GDP
Total branches
Public branches
Private branches
Deposits/GDP
Public deposits/GDP
Private deposits/GDP
Wage
Total employment
Share skilled
Skill premium
Gini index
Population
GDP per capita
Share manufacturing
Share agriculture

Mean

Med.

St. Dev.

N

0.18
0.16
0.02
1.77
0.93
0.84
0.13
0.09
0.04
926.41
1,056.30
0.09
2.28
0.31
12,347.19
13,478.91
0.20
0.14

0.14
0.11
0.01
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.10
0.07
0.01
893.98
620.00
0.09
2.14
0.31
8,635.00
9,630.87
0.12
0.09

0.17
0.16
0.04
4.60
1.29
3.43
0.11
0.09
0.06
273.93
5,653.74
0.05
0.69
0.06
24,640.18
16,685.64
0.20
0.14

79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,901
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995
79,995

This table reports summary statistics of average city-level characteristics our final
sample. Monetary values are in 2010 BRL. Number of bank branches, lending activity
and deposits are from the ESTBAN database. Wage, employment, and other labor
market variables are from the RAIS database. Local GDP per capita, population, and
the share of manufacturing and agriculture in local value added are from the Brazilian
Institute of Geography and Statistics.

where 𝑌𝑐,𝑔,𝑡 are various city outcomes for city 𝑐 at year 𝑡 that belongs to
a matched treated-control group 𝑔, and 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑐 is a dummy variable
that takes the value one if city 𝑐 had no government-owned banks
prior to 2004. 𝜃𝑐 are city fixed effects that remove time-invariant
heterogeneity across cities, and 𝛿𝑔,𝑡 are matched group-by-year fixed
effects that controls for time-varying unobserved heterogeneity across
groups. Because we select our groups using pre-reform population size
and inequality growth, the inclusion of matched group-by-year fixed
effect implies that we are absorbing unobserved correlated shocks that
might exist between these characteristics and the reform.

For example, concerns that smaller cities may have grown for rea-
sons unrelated to the reform will be addressed because the parameter
of interest 𝛽 is identified solely by comparing cities within the same
group, i.e., within the same size quintile. Similarly, unobserved shocks
to places with larger changes in their Gini prior to 2004 will also be
differenced out by these fixed effects. 𝑋𝑐,𝑡 is a collection of city-level
controls that we include in the robustness analysis.19 We cluster our
standard errors at the matching-pair level to account for serial correla-
tion and weight the regression by population size at the beginning of
the period to estimate the aggregate effect of the reform on inequality
and economic development.

Identifying assumptions and potential threats to identification.
Our identification strategy faces two main threats: (i) Even if treated
and control cities are perfectly similar ex-ante, unobserved ex-post
shocks might specifically affect the cities that are treated by our finan-
cial inclusion policy. (ii) Despite the use of a matching procedure, the
variable we use to sort cities into treatment and control groups – the
presence of a government-controlled bank – might still be correlated
with other city-level characteristics that make treated units more sen-
sitive to aggregate shocks post 2004. We discuss how we address both
of these concerns below.

(i) Treated-specific ex-post shocks. Even with perfect ex-ante co-
variate balance between treated and control cities, the estimated effect
of promoting financial inclusion on city-level outcomes could be biased
if this policy correlates with other unobserved shocks that specifically
affect cities that received the treatment. This is a concern in a setting
where no city has a bank and identification is achieved by bank entry

18 Because the same city can be used multiple times as a control, we
follow (De Chaisemartin and Ramirez-Cuellar, 2024) and adjust the standard
errors by clustering at the matching pair level

19 We use the value pre-reform and interact with year fixed effects to avoid

the classic problem of ‘‘bad controls’’.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038547J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Fig. 3. Covariate balance.
This figure shows coefficient estimates and 95% error bands of the difference between treated and control cities along different variables. All variables are normalized to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in the full sample. ‘‘Unconditional’’ refers to the sample where we compare treated cities to all untreated cities. ‘‘Population’’ refers
to the sample where we match treated cities with untreated cities in the same population quintile pre-reform. ‘‘Population + Gini’’ refers to the sample where we select the three
control cities in the same population quintile with the closest pre-reform Gini growth.

experience idiosyncratic shocks that affect their credit supply after
2004 (either due to shocks to their cost of funding or because they face
political pressure to extend credit), both treated and control cities will
benefit from a credit expansion, and our coefficient of interest will not
be biased.20

Second, potential correlations between financial inclusion policies
and the expansion of other social welfare programs after 2004 are also
addressed due to a specificity of the Brazilian institutional context. Most
of the large-scale welfare programs, and in particular Bolsa Família,
are distributed via public banks. Therefore, all cities (including cities
in the control group) would benefit from the creation or expansion of
such programs. We also conduct more detailed tests about this specific
concern in Section 7.2 and find no evidence that it biases our results.
(ii) Covariate balance and ex-ante differences. The second main
concern is that ex-ante differences lead treated cities to respond differ-
entially to aggregate shocks.

We address this problem in four ways. First, as we show in Fig. 3,
using a parsimonious matching estimator allows us to obtain covariate
balance across a wide range of proxies for exposure to commodity-
driven aggregate growth, economic integration of the city, and ex-
posure to welfare programs promoted by left-leaning governments.
Second, we show that treated and control cities were on a similar trend
before the reform for a host of outcomes (credit, employment, number
of firms, inequalities) in Sections Section 4, 5, and 6. The parallel-
trends pre-reform indicate that any remaining unobserved differences
that could drive the estimated effects would need to have not mattered
before 2004 and only mattered afterward.

Third, we directly control for a collection of additional city-level
characteristics. We show in Appendix Tables A4 and A5 that point
estimates are very stable to the inclusion of controls such as GDP

20 To be precise, the coefficient is not biased under the assumption that
this bank-specific shock affects all branches of the bank in the same way.
This would not be the case if this bank shock affects the bank’s branches
differentially, for instance, due to age differences across branches.

Fig. 4. Geographical distribution of treated and control cities.
This figure shows the geographical distribution of treated and control cities. ‘‘Not in
sample’’ refers to cities that are neither treated nor part of the matched control group,
and thus not in our final sample.

in some cities and not others. However, it is important to emphasize
that our setting is conceptually different. By construction, public banks
are present in all control cities prior to the reform. Therefore, any
bank-specific shock after 2004 will affect both treated and control
cities.

This setting therefore directly addresses two standard concerns
about empirical designs featuring bank entry. First, if public banks

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038548J. Fonseca and A. Matray

per capita, employment in the commodity sector, skilled employment,
political affiliation of the mayor, trade, distance to the state capital,
and the co-movement of local GDP with aggregate fluctuations, as well
as to all the different combinations of such controls.21

Finally, we exploit the granularity of our data and adapt Eq. (1) into
a D-i-D estimator at the city-by-industry level, which allows us to relax
the assumptions needed to identify the effect of the reform. Because
we can now include industry-by-year fixed effects and therefore non-
parametrically control for time-varying unobserved industry shocks, the
effect of the reform remains unbiased even if treated and control cities
are unbalanced in their exposure to sector-specific shocks (for instance
because treated cities have more employment in the commodity sector).

Specifically, we estimate the regression:

𝑌𝑖,𝑐,𝑔,𝑡 = 𝛽 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑐 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡≥2004 + 𝑋𝑖,𝑐,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑖,𝑐 + 𝛿𝑖,𝑔,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑔,𝑐,𝑡

(2)

The key difference in Eq. (2) relative to our city-level D-i-D is that
we can include 𝛿𝑖,𝑔,𝑡, i.e., matched group-by-industry-year fixed effects.
These fixed effects mean that 𝛽 is estimated by comparing the same
industry across treated and control cities that belong to the same
matched group. This implies in particular, that sector-specific level
shocks post 2004, such as commodity booms or productivity shocks
specific to certain sectors, cannot bias the estimation of 𝛽. We report
the results and details of the estimation in Section 7.1.

4. Effect on financial inclusion

In this section, we start by describing how the policy affected
financial inclusion by fostering bank entry and increased deposits and
lending in similar proportion. We then discuss the possible frictions that
can explain the patterns we observe in the data and how the reform
could affect real outcomes.

4.1. Higher access to bank branches

We start by showing that the reform increased access to bank
branches, as the entry of government-owned banks did not crowd out
private banks. To do so, we use as the LHS variable in Eq. (1) a dummy
that equals one if the city has any bank branch (private of public),
which allows us to estimate the change in likelihood for treated cities
to have access to a bank branch.

We also decompose this dummy between a dummy that equals one
if the city has a public bank branch, and a dummy that equals one
if the city has a private bank branch. Fig. 5 reports the event study
coefficients of our difference-in-differences estimation. Panel (a) shows
results when the LHS is a dummy that equals one if the city has any
bank branch (public or private), while panel (b) decomposes the change
in likelihood to have a bank branch (the gray circles) into the change
coming from access to a public bank (the blue diamonds) and access to
a private bank (the green triangles).

Two facts are noteworthy. First, the probability of having a branch
from a private bank in treated and control cities evolve in close parallel
prior to the reform. This result indicates that private banks in treated
and control cities evolved in the same way during the large credit
boom that Brazil experienced prior to the reform, and remain on similar
trends even after the reform.

Second, the expansion of public banks only modestly crowds out pri-
vate banks, resulting in a large increase in overall financial development
for treated cities. The probability of having a public bank branch or any
bank branch increases sharply after 2004, in line with the aggregate
pattern reported in Fig. 1, and it continues to increase progressively
throughout the period with no mean reversion post reform.

21 Given that the reform may have a direct impact on many city charac-
teristics, using time-varying controls would potentially bias our coefficients of
interest. This is commonly referred to as the problem of ‘‘bad controls’’(e.g.,
Angrist and Pischke, 2008). We address this problem by using the pre-reform
value of these controls interacted with year fixed effects.

4.2. Increased deposits and credit

We then study how this higher presence of bank branches affects
deposits and credit supply. In order to measure financial development
net of any mechanical wealth effects, we compute total credit and total
deposits scaled by city GDP. Because treated cities often have zero
credit and deposits before the reform (since many have no bank branch)
and, by construction, have zero credit and deposits from government-
owned banks, we estimate the effect of the policy using the inverse
hyperbolic sine transformation of the log function.22

We show the event study coefficients of our difference-in-differences
estimation for total deposits and total credit in Figure A1. The event
studies show that credit and deposits for treated and control units
evolve in close parallel prior to the reform and that the expansion in
credit and deposits is entirely driven by public banks, with minimal
crowding out of private banks. Panel (a) of Figure A1 shows that
the initial increase in credit after the reform continues throughout
the period and is driven entirely by public credit. There is a modest
decline in private credit after 2010, but the total amount of credit
still rises substantially after the reform, implying that overall, treated
cities benefit from an increase in credit. Panel (b) of Figure A1 reports
analogous results for deposits, and shows that deposits increase sharply
in 2005 and continue to rise throughout the post-reform period.

We report pooled estimates in Table 2 and confirm the results of
Figure A1. For all variables, the reform has a strong and significant
effect on financial inclusion, driven by government-owned banks. The
probability of having a bank branch increases by 18.6 p.p. (column 1),
which fosters the accumulation of total deposits and total credit at the
city level (columns 4 and 7).

These results are suggestive evidence that financial inclusion poli-
cies might be successful at starting a virtuous circle between savings
and credit, since the average expansion of credit in a city matches the
average increase in deposits flowing into the branches of the same city.
In this case, bank branches in treated cities would be able to increase
their credit supply without having to use capital coming from other
cities, but instead could engage in a self-sustained expansion of credit
and deposits.23

5. Effect on economic development

5.1. Average effect

We start by estimating the effect of the reform on aggregate out-
comes at the city level. Standard models of macro-finance development
emphasize that financial frictions hamper economic development be-
cause talented but poor individuals are unable to start a firm (mis-
allocation of talent) and existing productive but cash-poor firms are
unable to expand their business (misallocation of capital). As financial
development progresses, more firms are created and existing firms
grow, generating higher demand for labor that translates into higher
wages.

We test how the financial inclusion policy affects the different
elements of this causal chain by estimating Eq. (1) with the total
number of firms, total employment, employment growth at small firms

22 The inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the log function is defined
as 𝑙𝑜𝑔[𝑋 + (𝑋2 + 1)1∕2]. Except for very small values of 𝑋, the inverse sine is
approximately equal to 𝑙𝑜𝑔(2𝑋) or 𝑙𝑜𝑔(2)+𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑋), and so it can be interpreted in
exactly the same way as a standard logarithmic dependent variable. But unlike
a log variable, the inverse hyperbolic sine is defined at zero and is less sensitive
to jumps around zero than the more widely used 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑋 + 1) transformation.

23 While the SUTVA assumption is, by definition, untestable, we also show
in Appendix Figure A2 the evolution of total credit separately for treated and
control cities. While the growth of credit in treated cities accelerates after
2004, it does not appear to be at the expense of a slowing down of credit in
control cities.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038549J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Fig. 5. Effect of the program on having a bank branch.
This figure plots the yearly coefficients and 95% confidence intervals of the difference-in-differences estimator in Eq. (1) of the 2004 bank reform. Dependent variables are dummies
that equal one if the city has at least a branch of any bank, a public bank, or a private bank, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level.

Table 2
Effect of the program on bank branches, credit, and deposits.

Dependent variable:

Has Bank Branch

Treated×Post

City FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

All
(1)

0.186***
(0.016)

✓
✓
79,995

Public
(2)

0.425***
(0.017)

✓
✓
79,995

Private
(3)

−0.022**
(0.009)

✓
✓
79,995

Deposits

All
(4)

0.880***
(0.070)

✓
✓
79,995

Public
(5)

1.295***
(0.074)

✓
✓
79,995

Private
(6)

−0.098***
(0.037)

✓
✓
79,995

Credit

All
(7)

0.935***
(0.072)

✓
✓
79,995

Public
(8)

1.557***
(0.071)

✓
✓
79,995

Private
(9)

−0.154***
(0.036)

✓
✓
79,995

This table shows the effect of the reform on financial development outcomes at the city level using the difference-in-differences estimator in Eq. (1). Has Bank Branch variables
are dummies that equal one if the city has a branch of any bank, a public bank, or a private bank, respectively. Credit and deposits are both scaled by city GDP, and are in arcsin
logs (inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the log function). Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels.

(less than 20 employees), large firms, average wage and the number
of industries as outcomes. Table 3 reports the results of these different
regressions. In column 1, we show that the number of firms increases
by 9.8% and that total employment increases by 10%. This increase
is concentrated at small firms (less than twenty employees), which
expands twice as fast as large firms (column 3 vs. 4). This increase in
the demand for labor explains why average wage increases by 4.1%.

In column 6, we study how the reform affected industry dynam-
ics. Consistent with models emphasizing that economic development
requires countries to diversify their industrial base and explore their
comparative advantage (e.g., Hausmann and Rodrik, 2003; Imbs and
Wacziarg, 2003), we find that financial development increases the
number of industries, which we measure as the number of distinct
4-digit industries (column 6).24

We reproduce this analysis in graphical form by estimating the event
study version of Eq. (1) in Fig. 6. In all cases, we find that treated
cities display no pre-trend relative to control cities. We also find that
each outcome increases progressively over time after the reform and
stabilizes at a new high after five years, consistent with the notion that
the reform relaxed financial constraints and allowed the local economy
to reach a new steady state with a higher level of development.

Discussion of magnitudes. While we show in Section 4 that the reform
led to financial development, we do not observe the entire effect of
the reform and therefore cannot use these results as a ‘‘first stage’’. In
particular, all treated cities that did not experience the entry of a bank
branch after the reform obtained at least a banking correspondent (Min-
istério da Fazenda, 2007), but we unfortunately cannot observe it in

the data.25 And while the evidence presented in Section 2.1 indicates
that correspondents do not provide the quality and scope of financial
services as bank branches, having a correspondent almost certainly
provides more access than having neither a correspondent nor a branch,
suggesting that all cities receive some level of treatment. Therefore,
our estimates on financial outcomes under-estimate the true impact of
the reform on financial development, and rescaling the coefficients on
the economic development outcomes shown in Table 3 by the point
estimates in Table 2 – as in a standard 2SLS approach – would inflate
the true magnitude of the elasticities.

Due to this caveat, we think the more natural approach is to
directly interpret the point estimates in Table 3 as the elasticity of
economic development outcomes with respect to the introduction of
formal financial services. In this context, the two closest experiments
to our setting are (Barboni et al., 2023), which looks at the entry of
bank branches in Indian villages, and Bruhn and Love (2014), which
looks at the opening of bank branches in stores of a large retailer of
consumer goods focused on underserved and low-income clients.

(Barboni et al., 2023) finds that a new bank branch leads to an 8%
reduction in poverty and a 6% increase in average income. The latter is
comparable to the 4.1% increase in average wages that we estimate in
our setting. Bruhn and Love (2014) finds similar estimates, with income
increasing by 7%, employment by 1.4%, and informal businesses by
7.6%, although formal business is unaffected. Our larger effects on
employment and business creation can be explained by the fact that
our experiment improved financial development at the city level, and

24 There are 614 distinct industries and the definition is consistent over time.

of banking correspondents.

25 As explained in Section 2.2, data on bank branches does not keep track

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385410J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Table 3
Effect of the reform on economic development.

Dependent variable

# Firms

Employment
all

Employment
small firms

Employment
large firms

Treated×Post

City FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

(1)

0.098***
(0.011)

✓
✓
79,995

(2)

0.100***
(0.015)

✓
✓
79,995

(3)

0.214***
(0.023)

✓
✓
79,947

(4)

0.116***
(0.018)

✓
✓
79,995

Average
wage

(5)

0.041***
(0.005)

✓
✓
79,995

# Industries

(6)

0.088***
(0.008)

✓
✓
79,995

This table shows the effect of the reform on economic development at the city level using the difference-in-differences estimator in Eq. (1). All variables in columns 1–6 are in
logs. In columns 3 and 4, employment is decomposed between firms with less than 20 employees (‘‘small firms’’) and more than 20 employees (‘‘large firms’’). The number of
industries (column 6) is the number of distinct 4-digit industries in the city-year. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Fig. 6. Effect of the program on firms, employment, and wage.
This figure plots the yearly coefficients and 95% confidence intervals of the difference-in-differences estimator in Eq. (1) of the 2004 bank reform. Dependent variables are logs
of total number of firms, total employment, and average wage in panels (a), (b) and (c) respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level.

therefore is more likely to have positive ‘‘local GE effects’’. The longer
time period over which we can trace out the effect of the reform can
also partly explain the difference since resources reallocate slowly,
particularly in developing countries (e.g., Buera and Shin, 2013). These
slow-moving changes underscore the importance of measuring and
taking into account transitional dynamics when estimating the effect
of reforms on economic development.

foster local demand either because it relaxes individuals’ borrowing
constraints and reduces their need for precautionary savings, or because
the opening of a bank branch functioned as fiscal stimulus.26

Second, bank expansion can foster supply by reducing investment
frictions, thereby boosting investment of existing firms and facilitating
the entry of new firms. In this case, the differential dependence on
local demand should not matter and we expect both tradable and
non-tradable industries to benefit from the reform.

5.2. Mechanisms

There are two main channels through which financial development
promotes economic growth in this setting. First, bank expansion can

26 Financial inclusion will reduce the need of precautionary savings for

instance because of limited insurance in developing countries.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385411J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Table 4
Employment in tradables and non-tradables.

Dependent variable

Tradable definition

Tradable

Treated×Post

Match×Industry×Year FE
Observations

Employment

Manufacturing

Yes

(1)

0.200***
(0.037)

✓
106,574

Value of traded goods

Geographic concentration

No

(2)

0.123***
(0.015)

✓
414,795

Yes

(3)

0.190***
(0.042)

✓
84,772

No

(4)

0.124***
(0.015)

✓
436,597

Yes

(5)

0.146***
(0.025)

✓
129,728

No

(6)

0.126***
(0.015)

✓
391,641

This table reports the effect of the policy on employment at the city-by-(4-digit) industry level. Data are collapsed as an average ‘‘pre’’ (𝑡 ≤ 2004) and the average ‘‘post’’ (𝑡 > 2004)
periods, and each dependent variables are the midpoint growth rate 𝑔𝑋
𝑗,𝑐 ) × 𝑝𝑜𝑝2000. See Section 7.1 for a detailed
explanation of the construction. In columns 1–2, tradable is defined as firms in the manufacturing sector. In columns 3–4, we define tradable industries based on the value of
exports and imports in the custom data aggregated at the sector level. In columns 5–6, tradable is defined using the geographical HHI of employment of each industry. ‘‘Tradable’’
(column 5) corresponds to an HHI in the top quartile (i.e., high level of geographic concentration). Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

𝑗,𝑐 = [(𝑋𝑗,𝑐,𝑡 + 𝑋𝑗,𝑐,𝑡−1) × 0.5]. Each cell is weighted by 𝑔𝑋

𝑗,𝑐 ∕(∑

𝑗∈𝑐 𝑔𝑋

5.2.1. Consumption vs. business development channel

To test if most of the effect is coming from a bank-expansion-
induced increase in demand, we decompose growth in aggregate em-
ployment at the city level by firms in non-tradable vs. tradable in-
dustries. Indeed, since non-tradable industries are more dependent on
local demand than tradable industries – because, by definition, tradable
industries produce goods that can be sold across the whole country,
if not worldwide – an increase in local demand driven by the reform
should benefit non-tradable industries relatively more.

To do so, we estimate Eq. (2) and split the regression between
tradable and non-tradable, which requires us to work at the city-
industry level. This requires a slight modification to our specification
since the reform had an impact on the entry and exit of industries at the
city level (Table 3–column 6), implying that the baseline specification
of Eq. (1) at the city-by-industry level will not match the aggregate
results at the city level.

We explain in detail how we account for this adjustment in Sec-
tion 7.1. Briefly, we create a balanced panel and compute the mid-point
growth rate between the average pre period (before to 2004) and post
period (after 2004). We show in Table 11 that this specification pre-
serves the aggregate city level results and report that, for all variables,
it produces very similar point estimates as the ones obtained with our
baseline log panel specification.

We use three methods to identify industries that produce tradable
goods and are therefore not dependent on local demand. First, we
classify an industry as tradable if it is in the manufacturing sector,
and non-tradable otherwise. Second, we flag industries as tradable if
the imports plus exports equal to at least $10,000 per worker, or if
total exports plus imports for the industry four-digit industry exceeds
$500M.27 Third, we compute the geographical dispersion (HHI) of
employment at the industry level and classify tradable industries as
those in the top quartile of the HHI distribution. The intuition behind
this proposed measure is that, since non-tradable industries have to be
consumed locally, they should be less geographically concentrated.

We report the results of the effect of the reform on tradable and
non-tradable industries in Table 4. We find that employment growth is
almost two times bigger in tradable industries depending on the exact
definition (e.g., column 1 vs. 2). This implies that while the entry of
bank branches in the cities might have had a direct effect on demand,
a substantial part of the increase in economic development induced by
the financial inclusion policy is coming from a relaxation of financing
constraints for entrepreneurs.

The fact that firms in tradable industries benefited more from the
reform than firms in non-tradable industries is also consistent with

27 Numbers are in 2006 values. We manually build a crosswalk between US

NAICS codes and the Brazilian industry classification.

financial inclusion policies promoting economic development by pro-
viding the liquidity needed for transactions. Indeed, firms and house-
holds need a place to safely store their liquidity and transact with
others. This is particularly true for firms in tradable industries that need
to pay suppliers and receive customer payments from firms that are
physically far away. Banks provide such services, which facilitate trade
and business transactions (see Xu and Yang (2022) for an example in
19th-century US).

5.2.2. Why do local branches matter? the role of distance

Next, we investigate why the presence of local banks appears to
relax firms’ financial constraints. A classic assumption in the macro-
development and finance literature is that geographical proximity re-
duces banks’ monitoring and screening costs (e.g., Greenwood et al.,
2010; Ji et al., 2023) in particular in the presence of soft informa-
tion (e.g., Rajan and Zingales, 2001; Hombert and Matray, 2017),
which is prevalent in developing countries.

The main prediction of these models is that the effect of the policy
should increase with the ex-ante distance to the nearest bank. We
test this prediction in two ways. First, we compare cities with a local
(private) bank before the reform with cities that did not have a private
bank by interacting the Treated × Post variable with a dummy variable
No Private Bank𝑐 that takes the value one if the city did not have a
private bank pre-reform. Second, within the set of treated cities that
have no bank branches prior to the reform, we compute the distance
to the nearest city with a bank (public or private). We estimate the
conditional effect of distance in the full panel by interacting the main
Treated × Post variable with a dummy equal to one if the distance is
zero, and then with a continuous variable Distance to the nearest bank
that is the (log) distance to the nearest bank.

This analysis also allows us to test whether our results are specific
to the presence of government-controlled banks—for instance, because
these banks extend subsidized credit. To do so, we separately interact
our main Treated × Post variable with the distance to the nearest public
bank and with the distance to the nearest private bank. Intuitively, if
our results hinge on access to subsidized credit, the effect of the reform
should be stronger for cities that were far from a government-controlled
bank than for those that were far from a private bank.

We report these results in Table 5. In panel A, we show that
our results are much stronger in cities with no bank presence prior
to the reform. Cities without a local private bank before the reform
experience a larger increase in the number of firms (10.4%, column 1),
in employment (13.9%, column 2), and in average wages (7%, column
5). In panel B, we show that, conditional on not having a local private
bank pre-reform, the real effects of financial inclusion increase with the
distance to the nearest bank.

Both sets of results are consistent with the reform promoting eco-
nomic development by reducing the distance between borrowers and
lenders, which lowers the monitoring and screening costs of financial

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385412J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Table 5
Financial frictions, the role of distance.

Dependent variable

# Firms

Employment
all

Employment
small firms

Employment
large firms

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A: Private bank before the reform

Treated×Post

Treated×Post×No private bank

0.054***
(0.014)

0.104***
(0.023)

0.042***
(0.016)

0.139***
(0.031)

Panel B: Distance to nearest bank

Treated×Post

Treated×Post×Distance to nearest bank

0.054***
(0.014)

0.068***
(0.012)

0.042***
(0.016)

0.108***
(0.013)

0.111***
(0.026)

0.246***
(0.048)

0.111***
(0.026)

0.164***
(0.034)

Treated×Post

Treated×Post×Distance nearest public bank

Treated×Post

Treated×Post×Distance nearest private bank

City FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

Panel C: Distance to nearest public bank

0.054***
(0.015)

0.069***
(0.012)

0.042**
(0.017)

0.110***
(0.013)

0.111***
(0.028)

0.166***
(0.030)

Panel D: Distance to nearest private bank

0.054***
(0.015)

0.070***
(0.011)

✓
✓
79,995

0.042**
(0.017)

0.113***
(0.013)

✓
✓
79,995

0.111***
(0.028)

0.174***
(0.027)

✓
✓
79,947

0.050***
(0.020)

0.158***
(0.038)

0.050***
(0.020)

0.131***
(0.022)

0.050**
(0.021)

0.132***
(0.020)

0.050**
(0.021)

0.136***
(0.019)

✓
✓
79,995

Average
wage

(5)

0.012*
(0.006)

0.070***
(0.011)

0.012*
(0.006)

0.022***
(0.007)

0.012*
(0.007)

0.024***
(0.006)

0.012*
(0.007)

0.026***
(0.007)

✓
✓
79,995

This table shows the effect of the policy on multiple outcomes interacted with various measures of ex-ante distance between treated cities and
existing banks using the difference-in-differences estimator in Eq. (1). In Panel A, No private bank is a dummy equal to one if the treated cities did
not have a private bank prior to the reform. In Panel B, Distance to the nearest bank is the distance to the nearest city with a bank, for treated cities
with no bank prior to the reform. Panel C and D compute this distance for the nearest private and the nearest public bank. Standard errors are
clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

intermediaries. This idea is also consistent with the result that small
firms (fewer than 20 employees) benefit more from the reduction in
distance than large firms (column 3 vs. 4), in line with the idea that
small firms are more opaque and more intensive in soft information.

The fact that the effect of the reform on economic development
increases with the initial distance of treated cities to existing bank
branches is also consistent with the ‘‘bank liquidity channel’’. Indeed, a
reduction in distance to a branch may matter simply because it makes
it less costly to access liquidity services.

In panels C and D, we report similar results for the distance to
the nearest public and private bank, respectively. Across all variables,
we find that the conditional effect of distance is quantitatively similar
whether we measure distance to public banks (panel C) or private
banks (panel D). These findings suggest that our results are not specific
to services provided by government-controlled banks, such as access
to subsidized credit. Indeed, if access to government-owned banks
mattered in itself, we should find a larger effect of distance to a public
bank relative to the distance to a private bank.

5.3. Discussion of the reform

Interpretation: improved access to financial services. The per-
manent shift in financial development, the similar increase in deposits
and credit, the sustained economic development principally driven by
the growth of the tradable sector, and the fact that these effects increase

with the ex-ante distance to a bank branch imply that the financial
policy we study fostered access to mainstream financing services for
firms.

This policy operates through a distinct mechanism that is inconsis-
tent with two alternative interpretations: (i) the reform was a one-time
capital infusion coming from outside the city that potentially generated
excessive borrowing, and (ii) the policy was a generic government
spending policy.

On (i), the permanent change in the steady state of financial de-
velopment, together with the sustained economic development over
ten-year with no sign of mean reversion, rules out the concern that the
policy was fueled by bad loans, as this should trigger a boom-bust cycle.
On (ii), the long-lived effect on economic development is also
inconsistent with a short-term stimulus. In addition, the fact that em-
ployment in the tradable sector expands more than employment in the
non-tradable sector (Table 4) and that the effect increases proportion-
ally with the distance to the nearest bank are also inconsistent with
these results being driven by higher spending in treated cities overall.
Is the reform beneficial in net? While the reform was successful
in terms of fostering substantial economic development, it does not
necessarily mean that this success is unambiguous. Indeed, the cost of
operating bank branches in these unbanked cities might be substantial.
Doing a clear cost–benefit analysis of the program is beyond the scope
of this paper and would require access to data on the total costs of
setting up and operating local bank branches, which do not exist to the
best of our knowledge.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385413J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Fig. 7. Average ROA and expense-to-revenue ratio.
This figure shows the evolution of ROA (panel a) and total operating expenses divided by total operating revenues (panel b) for new branches in treated and control cities, defined
as branches that were opened after the reform, as well as for all branches in control cities.

Nonetheless, ESTBAN contains information about expenses and
profitability at the branch level. This allows us to look at the yearly
average expense-to-revenue ratio and ROA for the public branches
created in treated cities after the reform, and to compare them to the
average for all private branches in control cities and for new private
branches in control cities.

Fig. 7 plots the evolution between 2005 and 2014, and shows
that branches opened in treated cities are not less profitable or more
expensive to run than those opened in control cities. Panel (a) displays
that the average ROA of new branches in treated cities is, if anything,
higher than that of new branches in control cities and comparable to
the average ROA of all branches, new and existing, in control cities.
Panel (b) displays that the average expense-to-revenue ratio of new
branches in treated and control cities is similar, but higher than that of
all branches in control cities. This suggests that new branches might be
less profitable than existing branches, but does not point to differences
in the profitability of new branches in treated and control cities.

Of course, it is still possible that the fixed costs associated with set-
ting up a bank branch are much higher in treated cities. But, conditional
on paying this fixed cost, there is no evidence that the bank branches
of public banks in treated cities are particularly subsidized.

Why do banking deserts exist in the first place? The permanent
shift in deposits and credit, together with the sustained effect on
economic activity that the financial inclusion policy triggered and the
similarity in bank branch ROA in treated and control cities, imply that
treated cities that received a bank branch were profitable markets.
Then why did banks not serve these markets prior to the reform? This
question is beyond the scope of our paper, but we discuss possible
explanations in Appendix A.2. Briefly, the lack of coverage can be
explained by banks being in a situation of monopolistic competition
and facing downward-sloping demand curves, which implies that banks
can maximize their markups and hence their profits by restricting
quantities, i.e., limiting their branch expansion.

On the cost side, banks might be able to minimize the cost of their
branch network by extending their network in a capillary way and
only up to a certain limit. In addition, the existence of sunk costs in
setting up a branch might imply that, while branches are profitable
once they operate, the total cost (variable plus fixed cost to set up)
might still be too high, particularly if set-up costs are larger in more
remote cities. As such, a possible rationale for why bank branches are
not present in treated cities prior to the reform, but their entry has such
a strong positive effect on economic development, is that using public

banks to open up branches in unbanked cities is akin to the government
subsidizing the set-up cost of a bank branch.

6. Effects on inequality

6.1. Aggregate results

To study how the aggregate economic gains produced by the fi-
nancial inclusion policy are distributed in each local labor market, we
estimate Eq. (1) using the wage Gini at the city level as an outcome,
as well as the average wage per worker in each bin of the city-level
wage distribution. We graphically report the result for the evolution
of Gini and the change in average wage for each quartile of the wage
distribution in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) shows the effect of the reform on the Gini
coefficient. As before, treated cities display no differential pre-trend
prior to the reform. Following the reform, we find a continuous increase
in Gini, implying an increase in wage inequality. The magnitude is
substantial, with treated cities having a Gini index that is two points
higher ten years after the reform relative to control cities, which
represents an increase of 7% relative to the pre-reform mean.

While this result shows that higher financial development leads to
higher inequality, it does not tell us why the Gini is increasing in treated
cities.

We therefore unpack the evolution of Gini by computing the average
wage for each quartile of the city wage distribution to better understand
the source of the overall change in inequality. To do so, we estimate
the distribution of wage within each city-year cell, split the sample into
quartiles, and take the mean wage in each cell.

Fig. 8(b) reports the evolution of each wage quartile. Consistent
with the idea that economic development is a ‘‘tide that lifts all boats’’,
we find that all workers benefit from the reform. However, workers
in the first quartile of the distribution (the purple line) gain far less
than workers in the last quartile (the red line), and wage gains increase
monotonically with the initial position in the wage distribution.

Table 6 reports estimates of Eq. (1). The point estimates tend to
underestimate the effect of the reform on inequality since, as Fig. 8(b)
shows, inequality rises steadily over time, while these regression results
show the average over the whole post-reform period. The Gini increases
on average by 1.2 points (column 1), which is driven by larger wages
gains at the top of the income distribution. Individuals in the bottom
quartile of the wage distribution experience an increase in their average
wage of 1% (column 2), while individuals in the top quartile see their
wages increase by 5.5% (column 5), five time more.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385414J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Fig. 8. Effect of the program on wage inequality.
This figure plots the yearly coefficients and 95% confidence intervals of the difference-in-differences estimator in Eq. (1) of the 2004 bank reform on city-level wage Gini (Fig. 8(a)).
In Fig. 8(b), the wage distribution is computed every year at the city level. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level.

Table 6
Effect of the program on wage inequality.

Dependent variable:

Treated×Post

City FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

Gini

(1)

0.012***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,995

Wage

[0–25th]
(2)

0.010***
(0.003)

✓
✓
79,995

[25th–50th]
(3)

0.024***
(0.004)

✓
✓
79,995

[50th–75th]
(4)

0.034***
(0.006)

✓
✓
79,995

[75th+]
(5)

0.055***
(0.007)

✓
✓
79,995

This table reports the effect of the policy on earnings inequality at the city level. In columns 2–4, the dependent variable is the (log) average wage for each bin of the wage
distribution in a city-year cell. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385415J. Fonseca and A. Matray

6.2. Mechanisms

We explore three channels that can account for the increase in
inequality following a reduction in financial frictions: better matching,
skilled-labor demand and constrained skilled-labor supply. First, finan-
cial development might lead to better employer-employee matching.
This could happen either because looser financial constraints on indi-
viduals allow them to search longer and to find a better job match,
or because less severe financial frictions can allow productive firms to
front-load wages and attract more productive workers, resulting in a
reduction in labor misallocation and higher wages at the top of the
distribution.

Second, financial development can foster higher labor demand for
skilled workers relative to unskilled workers. Financial frictions can
directly impact labor demand if there is a mismatch between pay-
ments to labor and the generation of cash-flows or if labor has a
fixed-cost component due to hiring and firing costs (Schoefer, 2021;
Benmelech et al., 2021). Since skilled workers require higher wages
and are arguably more expensive to recruit and train, financial frictions
disproportionately constrain the demand for skilled labor and, when
lessened by the reform, lead to an increase in the demand for skilled
labor relative to unskilled labor.

Alternatively, if capital and skilled labor are relative complements,
looser financial constraints can increase capital investment and, conse-
quently, increase the marginal productivity of skilled workers relative
to unskilled workers, also leading to an increase in the relative demand
for skilled workers (Fonseca and Doornik, 2022). A testable implication
of either version of the skilled labor demand hypothesis is that, as the
relative demand for skilled workers rises, both the relative price and the
relative quantity of skilled workers should rise, leading to an increase
in the skill premium and in the share of skilled workers in treated cities.
Third, labor demand might go up uniformly across the skill distri-
bution, but the supply of unskilled workers could be more elastic than
the supply of skilled workers. In this case, the skill composition of firms
remains stable, but the price of skilled workers goes up, particularly so
in cities facing higher shortages of skilled workers.

Better matching. To test if the matching between workers and
firms improves following the reform, we build on (Eeckhout and
Kircher, 2011) and Lopes de Melo (2018), which give a structural in-
terpretation to the firm fixed effects in Abowd et al. (1999) regressions
and show that better matching should reduce the dispersion of worker
ability within the firm.28

We proxy for worker type with the average log wage over all job
spells. We compute the standard deviation of worker types at the firm-
year level, residualize the variable from firm fixed effects to account
for changes in industry-city composition over time, and take the mean
of the residualized dispersion in worker types at the 2-digit-industry-
by-city level for each year. We can then test whether the average
dispersion declines as a consequence of the reform.29

Table 7 shows results of this exercise. Across all specifications, we
find that if anything, the within-firm dispersion in worker type in-
creases (by a small amount relative to the pre-reform average of 0.34).
This is the opposite of what we would expect from an improvement in
employer-employee matching, which should lead to lower within-firm
dispersion in worker types.

Increase in demand for skilled workers. To test whether a change
in the relative demand for skilled workers can explain the rise in wage
inequality, we need an ex-ante, time-invariant definition of skill. We

28 Another potential way of testing for sorting would be to study the
correlation between firm and worker fixed effects, but, as (Eeckhout and
Kircher, 2011) and Lopes de Melo (2018) show, this correlation does not
measure the strength of sorting in a general setting.

29 See Bombardini et al. (2019) for an application of this method in a trade

context.

Table 7
Dispersion in worker type.

Dependent variable:

Std. Dev. worker type

Treated×Post

City FE
City×Industry FE
Match×Year FE
Industry×Year FE
Match×Industry×Year FE
Observations

(1)

0.026*
(0.015)

✓
–
✓
–
–
1,286,478

(2)

0.027∼
(0.017)

–
✓
✓
–
–
1,286,478

(3)

0.026*
(0.016)

–
✓
✓
✓
–
1,286,478

(4)

0.027
(0.020)

—
✓
—
—
✓
1,286,478

This table shows the effect of the reform on the change in the average within-firm
standard deviation of worker type at the city-by-(2 digit) industry level. Worker type
is measured as the average log wage over all job spells of a given worker. We then
compute the standard deviation of worker types at the firm-year level and residualize
this variable from firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair
level. ***, **, *, ∼ indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% and 11% levels,
respectively.

leverage the fact that the Brazilian matched employer-employee data
allow us to observe education and classify workers as skilled if they
have at least some college education and unskilled otherwise.30

In Table 8, we start by showing that this measure tracks the evolu-
tion of inequality well. In column 1, we show that the skill premium
increases by 8.3% (column 1) and that this increase is driven by a much
faster increase in the wage of skilled workers (+11.8%, column 2) than
unskilled workers (+2.8%, column 3). These magnitudes are actually
bigger than the wage increase in the top quartile of the distribution
(+5.5%, column 5- Table 6) relative to first quartile (+1%, column
2- Table 6), which suggests that the increase in inequality reflects an
increase in the returns to skill.

Absent labor supply constraints or other frictions, a credit-fueled
rise in the relative demand for skilled labor increases the relative
quantity of skilled labor (e.g., Fonseca and Doornik, 2022). While the
coefficient for the share of skilled workers is positive and significant at
10%, the magnitude (+0.2%) is very small compared to the 8% increase
in the skill premium. This suggests that other frictions, such as labor
supply constraints, are necessary in order to explain the bulk of our
results. In Appendix Table A9, we show that we find similar results at
the industry-by-city level controlling for time-varying industry shocks.
Constraints in the supply of skilled workers. To argue that a
city’s own supply of skilled workers is a driver of higher wage in-
equality, we first need to establish that worker mobility across cities
is limited. To do so, we exploit the panel dimension of our data to
decompose the number of workers in a given city-year into ‘‘local’’,
defined as workers who are already in the city prior to the reform,
‘‘movers’’, defined as workers who were living in a different city prior
to the reform, and ‘‘new’’, defined as workers who appear for the first
time in labor-market data in a given city and did not come from another
city.

Table 9 estimates the effect of the reform on the composition of
workers across these three groups for all workers (columns 1–3) and
skilled workers only (columns 4–6). We find that the reform has no
effect on the share of workers coming from other cities in general
(column 2), and that it has a positive but very small effect (+0.7%)
when we focus on skilled workers (column 5). This implies that the
reform had a limited effect on domestic migration and that cities that
benefited from the financial inclusion policy did not experience an
important inflow of skilled workers.

While the low domestic migration of skilled workers following the
reform might seem surprising given the skill premium increase in

30 This is a less stringent definition than studies looking at developed
countries who use college education as a proxy, since we include college
dropouts in our definition of skilled.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385416J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Table 8
Demand for skilled workers.

Dependent variable

Skill premium

Wage skilled

Wage unskilled

Share skilled

Treated×Post

City FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

(1)

0.083***
(0.010)

✓
✓
79,901

(2)

0.118***
(0.012)

✓
✓
79,901

(3)

0.028***
(0.006)

✓
✓
79,995

(4)

0.002*
(0.001)

✓
✓
79,995

This table shows the effect of the reform on the skill premium (column 1), the average wage of skilled and unskilled workers (columns 2 and
3), and the share of workers that are skilled (column 4) at the city level. Skilled workers are defined as workers with at least some college
education. All dependent variables are in arcsin-logs. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 9
Worker migration.

Sample:

Dependent variable:

Treated×Post

City FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

All workers

Share local
(1)

−0.019***
(0.004)

✓
✓
79,995

Share movers
(2)

0.000
(0.001)

✓
✓
79,995

Share new
(3)

0.021***
(0.004)

✓
✓
79,995

Skilled workers

Share local
(4)

−0.021***
(0.006)

✓
✓
79,901

Share movers
(5)

0.007***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,901

Share new
(6)

0.020***
(0.005)

✓
✓
79,901

This table shows the effect of the reform on the share of workers by migration status at the city level. Skilled workers are defined as workers some college education. ‘‘Local’’
workers are workers observed in the city before the reform. ‘‘Movers’’ are workers that we observe in a different city before the reform. ‘‘New’’ are workers that appear in the
city for the first time. All dependent variables are in arcsin-logs. Standard errors are clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

treated cities, this can be explained by the existence of very large
migration costs in Brazil, particularly for residents of poor cities (e.g.,
Porcher, 2022). We provide evidence for this hypothesis by estimating
how the migration response varies as a function of migration cost. We
proxy for migration cost using the share of movers during the pre-
reform period and split the data into deciles of migration cost. We
then estimate the effect of the reform on the share of within-country
migrants for each decile of the migration cost distribution. Figure A3
in the Appendix reports the results. Consistent with outsiders being
attracted by a higher skill premium when migration costs are low, we
find an increase in the share of migrant workers in the first decile of
migration cost, with an increase of 1%. However, this effect sharply
drops to zero at the second decile and remains around zero afterwards.
Given the low rate of internal migration, an increase in the demand
for labor (skilled and unskilled) can only be met by local workers.
To proxy for the potential supply of skilled labor, we use the share
of the local population with 11 years or more of education from the
2000 Demographic Census. The intuition behind this measure is that if
a treated city faces a shortage of skilled workers, we should observe
an abnormally large skill premium. In order to determine what is
abnormally large, we compare the skill premium in treated cities with
the skill premium in the same industry-by-firm-size category in control
cities.

Our measure of the relative supply of skilled labor is based on the
population census, which has the advantage of neither being affected
by the fraction of workers in the informal sector, nor reflecting the
equilibrium outcomes in the formal labor market. As a robustness
check, we supplement this measure by computing a measure of the
‘‘skill gap’’ at the city level to construct that measure. We split firms into
employment size quartiles according to the city-year distribution and,
for each year in the pre-reform period, we compute the skill premium in
each city-industry-firm-size cell for both treated and control cities. We
then take the ratio of treated to control skill premium at the industry-
firm-size level and define the skill gap as the city-level mean of all
industry-firm-size ratios in a given city.

We split both measures along the sample median and interact each
dummy with all the variables, including the fixed effects. Table 10
reports the results. The increase in Gini (column 1) is entirely explained

by the increase in inequality in cities where the fraction of skilled
workers is low (column 2). Since we use an interaction term, the
coefficient on the variable Treated × Post shows the result for the sub-
sample of cities that are below the median of the supply of skilled labor.
The total effect for cities with high supply skilled labor is obtained by
adding the coefficient of Treated × Post with the marginal interaction
term. Irrespective of the proxy (columns 2 and 3), we find that the total
effect of the policy on inequality for cities with a high supply of skilled
workers is much smaller (column 2), and it is close to zero when we
measure the supply of skilled workers with the share of population with
some college education (column 3). In Appendix Table A10, we show
that these results are robust to using continuous versions of these skill
supply measures and adding a wide range of control variables.

7. Robustness

7.1. City-industry level estimation

Controlling for industry-dynamics. Even though pre-reform co-
variates are balanced across treated and control cities (Fig. 3) and
we show in Appendix Table A5 that our results are robust to directly
controlling for these levels, it is possible that industry-specific shocks
post 2004 might affect our results. Alleviating these concerns requires
us to work at the city-by-industry level. However, since we observe
entry and exit of industries at the city level, the baseline specification
of Eq. (1) does not guarantee that aggregate results at the city level
(which capture the extensive margins by construction) are preserved
when we disaggregate the data at the city-by-industry level.

We are able to provide an alternative estimation that does ensure
this aggregation property. We modify our baseline specification in two
ways. First, we create a balanced panel by assuming that each industry
we observe at any point in a given city is present during the whole
sample period, and we fill observations without firms in an industry
with zero. Second, we collapse the data into two periods: the average
‘‘pre’’ (𝑡 < 2004) and the average ‘‘post’’ (𝑡 ≥ 2004). We then compute
the mid-point growth rate for all our different outcomes, that we define
for a variable X as: 𝑔𝑋

𝑗,𝑐 = (𝑋𝑡 − 𝑋𝑡−1)∕[(𝑋𝑗,𝑐,𝑡 + 𝑋𝑗,𝑐,𝑡−1) × 0.5].

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385417J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Table 10
Effect on Gini, heterogeneity in skill supply.

Dependent variable:

Treated×Post

Treated×Post×Low skill gap

Treated×Post×High share skilled population

City×Industry FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

Gini

(1)

0.012***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,995

(2)

0.016***
(0.002)
−0.008***
(0.003)

✓
✓
79,995

(3)

0.018***
(0.002)

−0.014***
(0.003)

✓
✓
79,995

(4)

0.020***
(0.003)
−0.006**
(0.003)
−0.013***
(0.003)

✓
✓
79,995

This table shows the effect of the reform the Gini index at the city-by-(2 digit) industry level. In column 2, we split treated cities based on
whether their fraction of population with at least 11 years of education is above or below the median of the sample distribution. In column 3,
we estimate the ratio of skilled workers in treated cities relative to the national average, and split along the sample median. Standard errors
are clustered at the matching-pair level. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Specifically, we estimate the following equation at the city 𝑐, indus-

try 𝑗, period 𝑡 level:

𝛥𝑌𝑐,𝑗,𝑡 = 𝛽1 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑐 × 𝑃 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 + 𝛿𝑗,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑐,𝑗,𝑡

Since 𝛥𝑌𝑝,𝑐,𝑗,𝑡 is the change between the pre and post period, we do
not need to include city×industry fixed effects as they are already dif-
ferenced out, but we do include industry-by-pair-by-time fixed effects
𝛿𝑗,𝑡.

This specification has two appealing properties. First, it handles
entry and exit of industries without relying on transformations of
the log function (such as ‘‘x+1’’), that are always sensitive to small
variations around zero. Second, it ensures that the coefficient at the
city-industry level aggregates exactly to the coefficient at the city
level when using the correct weights, which is not possible with the
non-linear log function. The weights are defined as the share of the
denominator in the total city-period cell. For each industry 𝑗 in city 𝑐,
we use the mid-point growth rate for a variable X in city 𝑐 and industry
𝑗 𝑔𝑋

𝑗,𝑐∕(∑
𝑗,𝑐, and compute the weight as 𝑔𝑋
This specification allows us to include industry-by-year fixed effects
(or even industry-by-match-by-year fixed effects), which ensures that
the effect of the reform is now estimated by comparing the same
industry across treated and control cities in the same matched pair.
This implies, for instance, that even if treated cities are more dependent
on the commodity sector in the midst of a commodity boom, these
industry-specific dynamics will not bias our estimates.

𝑗∈𝑐 𝑔𝑋

𝑗,𝑐).31

In Table 11, we start by reproducing the baseline results at the city-
by-industry level. In columns (1) and (4), we report results at the city
level and show that they are very close to the baseline city-level results
of Table 3. In columns (2) and (5), we show that the point estimates
are identical at the city-industry level with the weighting described
above. Finally, in columns (3) and (6), we show that the inclusion
of match×year×industry fixed effects yield, if anything, larger point
estimates. In this case, the identification relies solely on comparing
outcomes in the same industry within a given group of treated-control
cities. These additional fixed effects ensure that our baseline effects are
not driven by industry shocks that might correlate with the reform and
the sectoral composition of treated cities.

Estimating the underlying change in firm dynamics. An addi-
tional advantage of this industry-level specification that both accommo-
dates zeros and uses a linear estimator is that we can exactly decompose
the change in the number of firms in the cross section of cities into
the evolution of entry and exit. To measure firm entry and exit, we
count the number of firms entering or leaving the city each year and

31 In our case, we multiply this weight by the population in 2000 in order
to be able to exactly reproduce the city level results, which does not affect the
aggregation property.

set the year 2000 to zero. This allows us to decompose the change in
the number of firms in a industry-city dell 𝑐, 𝑗 as:

(3)

𝛥𝐹 𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑐,𝑗 =

𝐹 𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑐,𝑗,2014 − 𝐹 𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑐,𝑗,2000
𝐹 𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑐,𝑗,2000

=

∑𝑡=2014

𝑡=2001 𝐸𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦𝑐,𝑗,𝑡 − ∑𝑡=2014

𝑡=2001 𝐸𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑐,𝑗,𝑡

𝐹 𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑐,𝑗,2000

We report the results in columns 7 and 8 of Table 11. We find that
the reform leads to a substantial increase in both firm entry and exit,
supporting the view that financial development fosters a process of
creative destruction. In terms of magnitude, the increase in the number
of new firms created is almost two time bigger than the increase
in number of firms (column 7 vs. column 6), which highlights the
importance of having panel data rather than cross-sectional data in
order to fully grasp changes in firm dynamics as positive local shocks
accelerate churn.

7.2. Government programs

One potential concern is that the expansion of government and so-
cial welfare programs might be correlated with the entry of government-
owned banks in treated cities after 2004. Of special concern is the
far-reaching cash transfer program Bolsa Família, which was introduced
one year before our reform, in 2003. We think that this concern is
unlikely to explain our results for four reasons.

First, this mechanism is inconsistent with some of our results: (i)
additional income from government programs could serve as a positive
income shock, fostering growth by driving up local demand. This would
imply that non-tradable sectors grow faster than tradable sectors, which
is the exact opposite of what we find in Table 4. (ii) While government
transfers can affect income inequality, there is no reason it should affect
wage inequality a priori. A possible connection would be that higher
government transfers increase the reservation wage of workers, but
this would imply an increase in workers’ bargaining power that should
mostly benefit workers at the bottom of the wage distribution, thereby
predicting a reduction in wage inequality rather than the increase we
find in Fig. 8.

Second, the most ambitious programs, such as Bolsa Família, are
distributed directly by government-owned banks. Since our control
cities have a branch of a public bank by design, this implies that control
cities have the same access as treated cities to government programs
disbursed through government-controlled banks.

Third, we show in Fig. 3 that treated and control cities are similar
in their government expenditures, as well as in the likelihood that the
mayor is affiliated with Lula’s party (the Worker’s Party). Therefore,
even if, post 2004, the Lula government decided to expand social
transfers particularly to places with more left-leaning voters, both
treated and control cities would benefit from such an expansion in the
same way.

Fourth, we test if the point estimates for our main outcomes are af-
fected when we directly control for total local government expenditures

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385418J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Table 11
Effect on economic development, city-industry level.

Dependent variable

Employment

Unit of analysis

Treated×Post

Match×Year FE
Match×Industry×Year FE
Observations

City

(1)

0.098***
(0.015)

✓
–
5,333

City×Ind.

(2)

0.098***
(0.013)

✓
–
521,369

# Firms

City

(4)

0.104***
(0.012)

✓
–
5,333

City×Ind.

(5)

0.104***
(0.011)

✓
–
511,058

Entry

Exit

City×Ind.

City×Ind.

(6)

0.167***
(0.014)

–
✓
511,058

(7)

0.303***
(0.028)

–
✓
511,058

(8)

0.136***
(0.020)

–
✓
511,058

(3)

0.126***
(0.016)

–
✓
521,369

This table reports the effect of the policy on economic development at the city-by-(4-digit) industry level. Data are collapsed as an average ‘‘pre’’ (𝑡 < 2004) and the average ‘‘post’’
(𝑡 ≥ 2004) periods, and each dependent variable is the midpoint growth rate 𝑔𝑋
𝑗,𝑐 ) × 𝑝𝑜𝑝2000. In columns (1)–(4)–(7),
the sample is at the city-by-year level. In all other columns, the sample is at the city-by-(4 digit) industry-by-year level. Standard errors are clustered at the city level. ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

𝑗,𝑐 = [(𝑋𝑗,𝑐,𝑡 + 𝑋𝑗,𝑐,𝑡−1) × 0.5]. Each cell is weighted by 𝑔𝑋

𝑗,𝑐 ∕(∑

𝑗∈𝑐 𝑔𝑋

or the political affiliation of the mayor. We show in Appendix Table A5
that our results remain quantitatively the same when controlling only
for local government expenditures (column 14), whether the mayor is
affiliated to Lula’s party (column 15) or both at the same time (column
16). The inclusion of these controls imply that the effect of the reform
is estimated by comparing cities that have similar political inclinations
and welfare spending. We also show in Appendix Table A6 that results
are similar when we include state×year fixed effects, implying that
differences in state-level welfare programs or differences in political
incentives at the state level cannot explain our results.

Finally, we provide additional evidence that our results are not
driven by government programs by exploiting the fact that some of
the largest government programs, like Bolsa Família, are distributed
by a specific government bank: Caixa Econômica Federal. If our results
were driven by Bolsa Família or other welfare programs, they would be
strongest when treated cities are compared with control cities that did
not have a branch of Caixa, as, in this case, treated cities would benefit
from the welfare program expansion and control cities would not since,
by construction, control cities do not have access to the distributor of
the program. We report results of this exercise in Table A8 in Appendix.
Unlike what we would expect if results were driven by government
programs, we find that, if anything, results are weaker when no Caixa
branches were present in control cities prior to the reform.

7.3. Sample composition

Our results on changes in inequality might be partially driven
by a change in the worker composition in treated cities. Inequalities
might increase for instance because following the reform, more low
productivity workers enter the sample, pushing the mean wage of low-
skill workers downward. We investigate this possibility in Table 12, in
which we measure inequality using the city-level standard deviation
of log wage.32 This allows us to measure wages as the residual of a
Mincer equation including different worker characteristics. The inclu-
sion of these characteristics is equivalent to holding fixed the sample
composition along these dimensions.

In column 1, we report the result when we use the raw wage. In
column 2, we add a third-order polynomial on age and fixed effects
for sex and seven categories of race.33 In column 3 we include 2-digit
industry fixed effects and in column 4 we include 2-digit industry-by-
2 digit occupation fixed effects (4,479 distinct dummies). Finally, in
columns 5 and 6, we use the unfiltered wage, but restrict to the sample
of workers present from 2004 to 2014 (column 5) and to firms present

prior to the reform (column 6) to estimate whether our effect are driven
by a change in the entry/exit of workers or firms.34 Across all the
different level of controls, we find an overall stable effect of the reform,
with higher financial development leading to more inequality.

7.4. Informality and exposure to commodity sector

Note that columns 5 and 6 of Table 12 show that our results are
robust to restricting to workers and firms already in the formal sector,
and thus suggest our findings are not driven by workers and firms
moving into or out of the informal sector. We complement these results
by controlling for the city-level employment in the informal sector from
the 2000 Census, which we include as one of controls in column (6) of
Table A5 in Appendix. This confirms once again that our results are not
driven by the informal sector. These results are in line with the fact that
treated and control cities have the same level of informality prior to the
shock, as shown in the covariate balance test of Fig. 3.

We also directly test if exposure to the commodity sector could
explain our results by controlling for employment in the commodity
sector (column 9 of Table A5), or for the change in commodity prices
post reform. We construct this variable as the weighted sum of prices
across the fourteen main commodities in Brazil, similar to the measure
developed by Benguria et al. (2023).35 Our results remain quantita-
tively the same, consistent with the analysis of Table 11, where we
non-parametrically control for sector-specific shocks.

7.5. Other robustness checks

As we discuss in Section 3, we conduct a number of other robustness
checks relating to our matching procedure and empirical specification.
We show in Table A3 in the appendix that results are robust to
using different numbers of control cities. In Table A4, we show results
are not sensitive to the matching procedure. In panel A we replicate
our results in the baseline sample. In panel B, we additionally exact
match on quintiles of the share of skilled workers pre-reform. In panel
C, we exact match on quintiles of the share of manufacturing pre-reform
and, in panel D, we exact match on quintiles of the level of inequality
pre-reform. In all cases, the point estimates of all the outcomes are
quantitatively very similar.

In Table A5, we include a collection of additional city-level controls,
such as GDP, employment, skilled employment, political affiliation of
the mayor, trade, distance to the state capital, and the comovement of
local GDP with aggregate fluctuations. These results help rule out the

32 We use the standard deviation instead of the Gini here because the
Gini requires only positive values, but residualizing wages leads to potential
negative values. By contrast, the standard deviation is always well defined.

33 There are six race categories in RAIS: Indigenous, White, Black, Asian,
multiracial, and not reported. We also include missing race values as a seventh
category so as not to exclude those observations from this analysis.

34 Results are similar when we require firms to be present throughout the
period. We only condition on firms exiting pre-reform because the increase
in firm exit post reform and workers losing their firm-specific human capital
or firm-specific shared rent could be a channel through which financial
development affects inequality.

35 We would like to thank the authors for generously sharing their measure

with us.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385419J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Table 12
Standard deviation of wages.

Dependent variable

Std[log(Wage)]

Fixed effects

Treated×Post

City FE
Match×Year FE
Observations

None

(1)

0.015***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,995

Age×Sex
×Race

(2)

0.014***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,995

Industry

(3)

0.011***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,995

Industry
×Occupation

(4)

0.010***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,995

Workers
2004–2014

(5)

0.021***
(0.003)

✓
✓
79,980

Firms
2004

(6)

0.013***
(0.002)

✓
✓
79,995

This table shows the effect of the reform on the change in the standard deviation of log (wage) at the city level. From columns 2 to 5, we use as the wage the residual of
a Mincerian regression, after we have filtered a polynomial of age (age, age-square, age-cube) and fixed effects for gender and seven race categories (column 2), added 2-digit
industry fixed effects (column 3), and 2-digit industries×2 digit occupation fixed effects (column 4)). In columns (5) and (6), we use the unfiltered wage, but restrict to the sample
of workers present from 2004 to 2014 (column 5) and to firms present prior to the reform (column 6). Standard errors are clustered at the city level. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

possibility that our results are driven by differential exposure of treated
cities to aggregate shocks or by political connections. In particular,
including for state-by-year fixed effects implies that we control for any
state-level political cycles, and controlling for the political affiliation
of the mayor implies that we estimate our effects by comparing cities
where mayors have the same political affiliation.

Given that the reform may have a direct impact on many city char-
acteristics, we control for the pre-reform value of these characteristics
interacted with year fixed effects. Finally, we also show in Table A6
in the Appendix that results are robust to adding state-by-year fixed
effects to control for time-varying unobserved variation across regions
of Brazil.

Finally, in Appendix A.3 we adopt an alternative identification
strategy and use the actual entry of a public bank branch to identify
treated cities. Specifically, we consider that a city is treated on the first
year that we observe a public bank branch in the city. In this case,
we correct for the staggered nature of the design using the estimators
developed by De Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2020), Sun and
Abraham (2021), and Borusyak et al. (2024), which can accommodate
high dimensional fixed effects. Across all outcomes, we find that the
point estimate of our baseline specification is usually slightly smaller.

8. Conclusion

In this paper, we show that the expansion of financial access and
capital deepening promoted by the Brazilian government led to a
permanent increase in economic development, driven both by an ex-
pansion of existing businesses and an increase in firm creation, which
accelerated the exit of existing firms. These effects materialize over
time, underlying the need to study a long-enough period to capture the
true effect of one-time reforms on long-run development.

This important economic development triggered a substantial rise
in wage inequality, which is mostly explained by the limited sup-
ply of skilled labor in some cities. This result raises the question
of whether governments should also implement simultaneous labor-
oriented policies in order to reap the full benefit of formal financial
market policies.

The importance of financial inclusion also has potential implica-
tions for current and future policy on digital banking. Such policies
are already underway in some developing countries with the goal of
expanding financial access, including in Brazil with the launch of an
instant payment platform (Pix) and its mandatory use by all financial
institutions and payment institutions that are licensed by the Central
Bank of Brazil. This initiative, by improving deposit provisions and
lowering costs of access to liquidity services, should boost development
and firm growth, particularly in tradable industries. However, whether
this initiative alone will achieve its intended goals or if, instead, it
would be complementary with the expansion of physical bank branches
remains an open debate. It might well be the case that the expected

gains from Pix will materialize mostly in places where households and
businesses are already banked if the initial connection to the formal
finance sector requires the physical presence of a bank branch.

Our results also imply that policies such as digital banking that
increase financial inclusion for retail customers and for small and
medium-sized enterprises could be a source of substantial increase in
inequality in the future if they interact with other frictions, such as the
limited supply of human capital, that are prevalent in many developing
countries.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Julia Fonseca: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Funding
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Adrien
Matray: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visual-
ization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition,
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

Replication Package for Financial Inclusion, Economic Develop-
ment, and Inequality: Evidence from Brazil: https://data.mendeley.
com/datasets/f69njddj98/2.

Acknowledgments

Philipp Schnabl was the editor for this article. We thank Victor
Duarte and Chenzi Xu for their unfailing support and numerous dis-
cussions. We also thank Daniel Carvalho (discussant), Shawn Cole
(discussant), Tatyana Deryugina, Pascaline Dupas, Melanie Morten,
Chad Jones, Dean Karlan (discussant), Ben Moll, Tarun Ramadorai, Re-
becca de Simone (discussant), Amit Seru, Yongseok Shin, Tracy Wang
(discussant), and seminar participants at Stanford Economics, Stanford
GSB, SITE Financial Regulation, the Finance-Organization-and-Markets
Conference at Dartmouth, WashU Olin, Boston College, Queen Mary
University, University of Pittsburgh, FGV-EPGE, Insper, University of
São Paulo, HEC-Paris, the Brazilian Econometric Society Seminar, Che-
ung Kong University GSB, the Bank of Lithuania, University of Georgia,
University of Arizona, Imperial College, Australian National University,
the Women in Applied Microeconomics conference, the Wabash River
Finance conference, the Central Bank of Brazil, NBER-SI, Central Bank
of Italy, Tuck Dartmouth, McDonough-Georgetown, FED-board, John

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385420J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Hopkins Carey business school and Berkeley University for helpful
comments. Filipe Correia, Thomás Gleizer Feibert and Pablo Enrique
Rodriguez provided superb research assistance.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online

at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103854.

References

Abowd, J., Kramarz, F., Margolis, D., 1999. High wage workers and high wage firms.

Econometrica 67 (2), 251–333.

De Chaisemartin, C., D’Haultfœuille, X., 2020. Two-way fixed effects estimators with

heterogeneous treatment effects. Amer. Econ. Rev. 110 (9), 2964–2996.

De Chaisemartin, C., Ramirez-Cuellar, J., 2024. At what level should one cluster
standard errors in paired and small-strata experiments? Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ.
16 (1), 193–212.

Delatte, A.L., Matray, A., Pinardon Touati, N., 2022. Political quid pro quo in financial

markets. Working Paper.

Dinç, S., 2005. Politicians and banks: political influences on government-owned banks

in emerging markets. J. Financ. Econ. 77 (2), 453–479.

Dix-Carneiro, R., Goldberg, P., Meghir, C., Ulyssea, G., 2021. Trade and informality in
the presence of labor market frictions and regulations. NBER Working Paper.
Doornik, B.F.N.V., Gomes, A., Schoenherr, D., Skrastins, J., 2021. Financial access and

labor market outcomes: evidence from credit lotteries. Working Paper.

Eeckhout, J., Kircher, P., 2011. Identifying sorting—in theory. Rev. Econ. Stud. 78 (3),

872–906.

Angrist, J., Pischke, J.-S., 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s

Fonseca, J., Doornik, B.V., 2022. Financial development and labor market outcomes:

Companion. Princeton University Press.

Anon, 2018. In: Beck, T., Levine, R. (Eds.), Handbook of Finance and Development.

Edward Elgar Publishing, Northampton, MA, xvi, 597 pages.

Baghai, R., Silva, R., Thell, V., Vig, V., 2021. Talent in distressed firms: investigating

the labor costs of financial distress. J. Finance 76 (6), 2907–2961.

Bai, J., Carvalho, D., Phillips, G., 2018. The impact of bank credit on labor reallocation

and aggregate industry productivity. J. Finance 73 (6), 2787–2836.

Baker, A.C., Larcker, D.F., Wang, C.C., 2022. How much should we trust staggered

difference-in-differences estimates? J. Financ. Econ. 144 (2), 370–395.

Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., 2014. Do firms want to borrow more? Testing credit constraints

using a directed lending program. Rev. Econ. Stud. 81 (2), 572–607.

Banerjee, A., Karlan, D., Zinman, J., 2015. Six randomized evaluations of microcredit:

introduction and further steps. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 7 (1), 1–21.

Banerjee, A., Moll, B., 2010. Why does misallocation persist? Am. Econ. J.: Macroecon.

2 (1), 189–206.

Barboni, G., Field, E., Pande, R., 2023. Rural banks can reduce poverty: evidence from

870 Indian villages. Working Paper.

Bau, N., Matray, A., 2023. Misallocation and capital market integration: evidence from

India. Econometrica 91 (1), 67–106.

Bazzi, S., de Freitas Oliveira, R., Muendler, M.-A., Rauch, J., 2023. Credit supply shocks

and firm dynamics: evidence from Brazil. NBER Working Paper.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Levkov, A., 2010. Big bad banks? The winners and losers from

bank deregulation in the United States.. J. Finance 65 (5), 1637–1667.

Benguria, F., Saffie, F., Urzúa, S., 2023. The transmission of commodity price

super-cycles. Rev. Econ. Stud. rdad078.

Benmelech, E., Bergman, N., Seru, A., 2021. Financing labor. Rev. Finance 25 (5),

1365–1393.

Berton, F., Mocetti, S., Presbitero, A., Richiardi, M., 2018. Banks, firms, and jobs. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 31 (6), 2113–2156.

Bittencourt, G., Magalhães, R., Abramovay, R., 2005. Informação de crédito: mm meio
para ampliar o acesso dos mais pobres ao sistema financeiro. Pesquisa Debate 16
(28), 203–248.

Bombardini, M., Orefice, G., Tito, M., 2019. Does exporting improve matching?

Evidence from french employer-employee data. J. Int. Econ. 117, 229–241.

Borusyak, K., Jaravel, X., Spiess, J., 2024. Revisiting event study designs: robust and

efficienct estimation. Rev. Econ. Stud. (Forthcoming).

Bruhn, M., Love, I., 2014. The real impact of improved access to finance: evidence

from Mexico. J. Finance 69 (3), 1347–1376.

Buera, F., Kaboski, J., Shin, Y., 2011. Finance and development: a tale of two sectors.

Amer. Econ. Rev. 101 (5), 1964–2002.

Buera, F., Kaboski, J., Shin, Y., 2015. Entrepreneurship and financial frictions: a

macrodevelopment perspective. Annu. Rev. Econ. 7 (1), 409–436.

Buera, F., Kaboski, J., Shin, Y., 2021. The macroeconomics of microfinance. Rev. Econ.

Stud. 88 (1), 126–161.

evidence from Brazil. J. Financ. Econ. 143 (1), 550–568.

Giné, X., Townsend, R., 2004. Evaluation of

liberalization: a general
equilibrium model with constrained occupation choice. J. Dev. Econ. 74 (2),
269–307.

financial

Greenstone, M., Mas, A., Nguyen, H.-L., 2020. Do credit market shocks affect the
real economy? Quasi-experimental evidence from the great recession and ‘‘normal’’
economic times. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 12 (1), 200–225.

Greenwood, J., Jovanovic, B., 1990. Financial development, growth, and the

distribution of income. J. Polit. Econ. 98 (5), 1076–1107.

Greenwood, J., Sanchez, J., Wang, C., 2010. Financing development: the role of

information costs. Amer. Econ. Rev. 100 (4), 1875–1891.

Gual, L.B., Ansón, J., 2008. Financial access and inclusion through postal networks:
evaluating the experience of Brazil’s banco postal. In: Ansón, J., Toledano, J.
(Eds.), Postal Economics in Developing Countries. Universal Postal Union, Berne,
pp. 139–174.

Hausmann, R., Rodrik, D., 2003. Economic development as self-discovery. J. Dev. Econ.

72 (2), 603–633.

Hombert, J., Matray, A., 2017. The real effects of lending relationships on innovative

firms and inventor mobility. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (7), 2413–2445.

Imbens, G., Rubin, D., 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical

Sciences: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Imbs, J., Wacziarg, R., 2003. Stages of diversification. Amer. Econ. Rev. 93 (1), 63–86.
Jasova, M., Mendicino, C., Panetti, E., Peydró, J.-L., Supera, D., 2021. Monetary
policy, labor income redistribution and the credit channel: evidence from matched
employer-employee and credit registers. Working Paper.

Ji, Y., Teng, S., Townsend, R.M., 2023. Dynamic bank expansion: spatial growth,

financial access, and inequality. J. Polit. Econ. 131 (8), 2209–2275.

Kaboski,

J., Townsend, R., 2011. A structural

evaluation of

a

large-scale

quasi-experimental microfinance initiative. Econometrica 79 (5), 1357–1406.
Kaboski, J., Townsend, R., 2012. The impact of credit on village economies. Am. Econ.

J. Appl. Econ. 4 (2), 98–133.

Kochar, A., 2011. The distributive consequences of social banking: a microempirical
analysis of the Indian experience. Econom. Dev. Cult. Chang. 59 (2), 251–280.
Lopes de Melo, R., 2018. Firm wage differentials and labor market sorting: reconciling

theory and evidence. J. Polit. Econ. 126 (1), 313–346.

Lopez, H., Perry, G., 2008.

Inequality In Latin America : Determinants And

Consequences. The World Bank, Policy Research Working Papers.

Loureiro, E.R., Madeira, G.d., Bader, F.L.C., 2016. Expansão dos correspondentes
bancários no brasil: uma análise empírica. Central Bank of Brazil Working Paper
Series Working Paper, No. 433.

Mestieri, M., Schauer, J., Townsend, R., 2017. Human capital acquisition and oc-
cupational choice: implications for economic development. Rev. Econ. Dyn. 25,
151–186.

Mettenheim, K., 2010. Federal Banking in Brazil: Policies and Competitive Advantages.

Buera, F., Shin, Y., 2013. Financial

frictions and the persistence of history: a

Routledge, London.

quantitative exploration. J. Polit. Econ. 121 (2), 221–272.

Midrigan, V., Xu, D.Y., 2014. Finance and misallocation: evidence from plant-level data.

Burgess, R., Pande, R., 2005. Do rural banks matter? Evidence from the Indian social

Amer. Econ. Rev. 104 (2), 422–458.

banking experiment. Amer. Econ. Rev. 95 (3), 780–795.

Caggese, A., Cunat, V., Metzger, D., 2019. Firing the wrong workers:
constraints and labor misallocation. J. Financ. Econ. 133 (3), 589–607.

financing

Carvalho, D., 2014. The real effects of government-owned banks: evidence from an

emerging market. J. Finance 69 (2), 577–609.

Chodorow-Reich, G., 2014. The employment effects of credit market disruptions:
firm-level evidence from the 2008-9 financial crises. Q. J. Econ. 129 (1), 1–59.
Choudhary, A., Limodio, N., 2022. Liquidity risk and long-term finance: evidence from

a natural experiment. Rev. Econ. Stud. 89 (3), 1278–1313.

Coelho, C., de Mello, J., Rezende, L., 2013. Do public banks compete with private
banks? Evidence from concentrated local markets in Brazil. J. Money Credit Bank.
45 (8), 1581–1615.

Cole, S., 2009. Fixing market failures or fixing elections? Agricultural credit in India.

Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 1 (1), 219–250.

Ministério da Fazenda, 2007. Plano Plurianual 2004–2007: Relatório Anual de

Avaliação. Technical Report.

Moll, B., Townsend, R., Zhorin, V., 2017. Economic development, flow of funds, and
the equilibrium interaction of financial frictions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114
(24), 6176–6184.

Ornelas, J.R.H., Pedraza, A., Ruiz-Ortega, C., Silva, T.C., 2021. Credit allocation when

private banks distribute government loans. Working Paper.

Peek, J., Rosengren, E., 2000. Collateral damage: effects of the Japanese bank crisis on
real economic activity in the United States. Amer. Econ. Rev. 90 (1), 30–45.
Petersen, M., Rajan, R., 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: evidence from small

business data. J. Finance 49 (1), 3–37.

Porcher, C., 2022. Migration with costly information. Working Paper.
Quincy, S., 2023. ‘‘Loans for the little fellow:’’ credit, crisis, and recovery in the great

depression.

Cramer, K.F., 2022. Bank presence and health. Working Paper.
Crescenzi, R., Limodio, N., 2022. The impact of Chinese FDI in africa: evidence from

Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 2001. Financial systems,
Oxford Rev. Econ. Policy 17 (4), 467–482.

industrial structure, and growth..

ethiopia.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385421J. Fonseca and A. Matray

Sanford, C., 2013. Do agents improve financial inclusion? Evidence from a national

Townsend, R., Ueda, K., 2006. Financial deepening,

inequality, and growth: a

survey in Brazil. Technical Report, Bankable Frontier Associates.

model-based quantitative evaluation. Rev. Econ. Stud. 73 (1), 251–280.

Sapienza, P., 2004. The effects of government ownership on bank lending. J. Financ.

Vig, V., 2013. Access to collateral and corporate debt structure: evidence from a natural

Econ. 72 (2), 357–384.

experiment. J. Finance 68 (3), 881–928.

Schoefer, B., 2021. The financial channel of wage rigidity. NBER Working Paper.
Sun, L., Abraham, S., 2021. Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies with

Xu, C., 2022. Reshaping global trade: the immediate and long-run effects of bank

failures. Q. J. Econ. 137 (4), 2107–2161.

heterogeneous treatment effects. J. Econometrics 225 (2), 175–199.

Xu, C., Yang, H., 2022. Real effects of supplying safe private money. NBER Working

Paper.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10385422