Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Measuring macroeconomic tail risk ✩
Roberto Marfè a, Julien Pénasse b,∗
a Collegio Carlo Alberto and ESOMAS, University of Turin, Piazza Arbarello, 8, 10122 Torino, Italy
b University of Luxembourg, 6, rue Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi L-1359 Luxembourg, Luxembourg

A  R  T  I  C  L  E 

I  N  F  O

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

This paper estimates consumption and GDP tail risk dynamics over the long run (1900–2020). Our predictive 
approach circumvents the scarcity of large macroeconomic crises by exploiting a rich information set covering 
42 countries. This ﬂexible approach does not require asset price information and can thus serve as a benchmark 
to evaluate the empirical validity of rare disaster models. Our estimates covary with asset prices and forecast 
future stock returns, in line with theory. A calibration disciplined by our estimates supports the prediction that 
macroeconomic tail risk drives the equity premium.

Dataset link: Data and Program Files for
‘‘Measuring Macroeconomic Tail Risk ’’
Roberto Marfè and Julien Pénasse , Journal of
Financial Economics . (Original Data)

JEL classiﬁcation:
E44
G12
G17

Keywords:
Rare disasters
Equity premium
Return predictability

Many puzzles in macro-ﬁnance arise from the inability of theories to 
reconcile asset prices and macroeconomic risk quantitatively. A classic 
example is the equity premium puzzle: averaged stock returns are far 
too high to be explained by the observed risk in consumption (Mehra 
and Prescott, 1985). A potential resolution of these puzzles is that we 
do  not  observe  the  risk  that  agents  genuinely  care  about.  As  shown 
in  Rietz  (1988) and  Barro  (2006),  a  small  probability  of  a  macroe-
conomic disaster can greatly increase the equity premium. Models in 
which this probability is time varying can generate a volatile equity 
premium and thus can rationalize macro-ﬁnance puzzles, including ex-
cess volatility and predictability puzzles (Gabaix, 2012; Gourio, 2012; 
Wachter, 2013). The success of rare disaster models to rationalize as-

set pricing puzzles unfortunately relies on assumptions that are diﬃcult 
to test. With standard preferences, asset prices are very sensitive to tail 
risk, meaning key parameters are diﬃcult to pin down without rely-
ing on asset price data (Martin, 2013b). The assumption that tail risk 
is time-varying only makes matters worse. For these reasons, disaster 
risk has been described as “dark matter for economists” (e.g., Camp-
bell, 2017; Cochrane, 2017; Chen et al., 2024).

This paper proposes a simple approach to measuring time-varying 
macroeconomic  tail  risk.  Our  approach  circumvents  the  scarcity  of 
large  macroeconomic  crises  by  making  use  of  a  broad  cross-section 
of countries and by exploiting the informational content of variables 
that forecast the lower quantiles of consumption growth. Our approach 

✩ Dimitris Papanikolaou was the editor for this article. We thank two anonymous referees, the editor, Daniel Andrei, Patrick Augustin, Bo Becker, Jules van 
Binsbergen, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Stefano Colonnello, George Constantinides, Max Croce, Magnus Dahlquist, Darell Duﬃe, Leland Farmer, Xavier Gabaix, Anisha 
Ghosh, Eric Ghysels, Anisha Ghosh, François Gourio, Daniel Greenwald, Robin Greenwood, Benjamin Holcblat, Hendrik Hülsbusch, Christian Julliard, Leonid 
Kogan, Peter Kondor, Christos Koulovatianos, Hening Liu, André Lucas, Sydney Ludvigson, Rajnish Mehra, Christoph Meinerding, Alan Moreira, Tyler Muir, Stijn 
Van Nieuwerburgh, Marcus Opp, Loriana Pelizzon, Riccardo Sabbatucci, Marti Subrahmanyam, Urszula Szczerbowicz, Adrien Verdelhan, Emil Verner, Tan Wang, 
Michael Weber, Rüdiger Weber, and Irina Zviadadze for helpful comments. We also beneﬁtted from useful comments from seminar participants at the Columbia 
University Macro Lunch, the University of Luxembourg, the University of Chile, the University of Venice, Fundação Getulio Vargas (Rio), McGill University, and the 
Stockholm School of Economics and conference participants at the CEPR ESSFM Gerzensee 2017 meeting, the SAFE Asset Pricing Workshop 2017, NFA 2017, the 
Paris December 2017 Finance Meeting, the MFA 2018, and the EFA 2020. A previous version of this paper was titled “The Time-Varying Risk of Macroeconomic 
Disasters.”
* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: roberto.marfe@carloalberto.org (R. Marfè), julien.penasse@uni.lu (J. Pénasse).
URLs: http://robertomarfe.altervista.org/ (R. Marfè), https://sites.google.com/view/jpenasse (J. Pénasse).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2024.103838
Received 9 May 2022; Received in revised form 27 March 2024; Accepted 30 March 2024

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)103838Availableonline12April20240304-405X/©2024ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 1. U.S. Macroeconomic Risk. Notes. This ﬁgure shows the probability of a severe macroeconomic crisis,  ̂𝜋, in the United States. A crisis is deﬁned as a two-
standard deviation drop in three-year consumption growth below the average growth rate. According to this deﬁnition, the United States experienced crises in 1918, 
1919, 1930, 1931, 2007, and 2008.

delivers the time-varying probability of a large macroeconomic crisis 
by combining variables according to their ability to forecast the condi-
tional distribution of consumption growth. We apply this approach to a 
large international panel, exploiting a rich information set that includes 
macroeconomic, political, and ﬁnancial variables. We write our proba-
bility estimate as macro risk, or  ̂𝜋 for short. An attractive feature of our 
approach is that it does not impose structural assumptions or require 
the use of asset price information. This feature allows us to construct 
macro risk estimates that do not use asset price data, denoted by  ̂𝜋−, 
which we use as a benchmark with which to evaluate the predictions of 
rare disasters models. In particular, backing up a time-varying estimate 
allows us to directly test whether asset prices covary with macroeco-
nomic tail risk over time.

We estimate  ̂𝜋 semiparametrically using a two-step approach, sim-
ilar to Adrian et al. (2019). First, we forecast the lower quantiles of 
consumption  growth  using  quantile  regressions.  The  dependent  vari-
able is consumption growth in a given country 𝑖 between years 𝑡 and 
𝑡 + 3. The right-hand-side variables consist of 18 time-𝑡 macroeconomic, 
war and political, natural disaster, ﬁnancial conditions, and asset price 
predictors. We use this predictor set to forecast the lower time-𝑡 quan-
tiles of consumption growth. To avoid overﬁtting, the regressions are 
pooled across countries and include a penalization that shrinks the co-
eﬃcient estimates toward zero. Second, we interpolate the conditional 
quantiles to infer the probability of a large macroeconomic crisis, which 
we deﬁne as a two-standard-deviation drop in consumption below its 
long-term growth path. This approach delivers  ̂𝜋, the probability of a 
macroeconomic crisis in country 𝑖 in year 𝑡 +1. (The variant  ̂𝜋− excludes 
asset price predictors). Our data set covers 1900 to 2020, comprising 42 
countries.

Fig. 1 shows  ̂𝜋 for the United States. Macro risk mostly varies be-
tween 1% and 5%, with higher levels during the Knickerbocker Crisis, 
the Great Depression, the two World Wars, the Korean War, and the 
Great  Recession  of  2009.  This  time  variation  is  the  direct  result  of 
the ability of our model to forecast the lower quantiles of consump-
tion growth. The most reliable predictors include realized recessions 
at home and in neighboring countries, world growth, wars and crises 
abroad, and the U.S. (or world) dividend-price ratio. We ﬁnd that the 
forecasting model performs remarkably well out of sample and could, 
therefore, be used to predict crises in real time. Equally importantly, we 
document redundancy among predictor variables. For instance,  ̂𝜋 and 
̂𝜋− are highly correlated, and we cannot reject that they have equal 
forecasting power. Overall, this redundancy is quite robust across pre-

dictor categories, which suggests that the predictor set approximately 
spans the information set of investors.

Under this spanning condition,  ̂𝜋 can be interpreted as the ratio-
nal expectation probability of a macroeconomic disaster. It thus pro-
vides a benchmark from which to evaluate theories in which macroe-
conomic  tail  risk  plays  a  role.  In  the  second  part  of  the  paper,  we 
ask  whether  macro  risk  is  related  to  the  equity  premium.  We  ﬁnd 
that asset prices tend to be low (high dividend-price ratio) when  ̂𝜋 is 
high  (corr.  =  0.37).  By  itself,  the  U.S.  dividend-price  ratio—a  stan-
dard equity premium proxy in the literature (e.g., van Binsbergen and 
Koijen, 2010)—captures a lot of information about future crises. A one-
standard-deviation increase in the D/P ratio yields a 2.3% increase in 
macro  risk.  One  would  expect  this  result  if  investors  were  shunning 
stocks  when  macro  risk  is  high,  as  predicted  by  rare  disasters  mod-
els. We ﬁnd similar results using the equity premium proxy proposed 
by  Martin  (2017).  Furthermore,  macro  risk  directly  forecasts  inter-
national stock returns, conﬁrming the link between tail risk and the 
equity premium. In contrast, macro risk is only weakly related to fu-
ture consumption growth, meaning that our estimates reproduce the 
well-known disconnect between the equity premium and consumption. 
Importantly, these results hold when we estimate macro risk excluding 
asset price predictors, which means they are not the mechanical con-
sequence of asset prices forecasting macroeconomic risk. We also show 
that predictability by  ̂𝜋 is distinct from predictability by realized re-
cession and realized ﬁnancial crises, which is useful to distinguish rare 
disaster risk from competing theories of asset price ﬂuctuations.

Next, we ask whether rare disaster models help rationalize the eq-
uity premium puzzle and the other patterns we observe in the data. 
Following the Mehra and Prescott (1985) approach, we calibrate con-
sumption dynamics in a consumption-based asset pricing model, derive 
asset pricing moments, and compare those moments to their empiri-
cal counterparts. A beneﬁt of this approach is that we can work with 
estimated consumption dynamics that exclude asset price information, 
meaning that consumption parameters are not reverse-engineered to ﬁt 
the asset pricing data.

We consider a rare disaster model similar to that of Wachter (2013), 
in which agents have recursive preferences. Consumption growth fol-
lows an exogenous stream, which is subject to rare disasters that oc-
cur with a time-varying probability. The model generates a high and 
volatile  equity  premium  and  a  low  risk-free  rate  under  conservative 
preferences. It can also reproduce the option volatility skew, the pre-
dictability of stock returns, and the lack of predictability of consump-

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038382R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

tion growth by asset prices that we observe in the data. An alternative 
dividend speciﬁcation documents that time-varying disaster probability 
is still responsible for a sizable component of the equity premium and 
its dynamics, when its imperfect correlation with the D/P ratio matches 
that in the actual data. Importantly, our 𝜋 estimates reveal a moder-
ately persistent yet volatile disaster probability 𝜋. Chen et al. (2024)
demonstrates that models like Wachter (2013), characterized by high 
persistence and low volatility in disaster probability 𝜋, tend to over-
rely on “dark matter.” This over-reliance often leads to reduced internal 
refutability and diminished out-of-sample performance. In contrast, our 
model’s lower persistence and higher volatility in estimating disaster 
probability 𝜋 do not necessitate signiﬁcant “dark matter,” resulting in 
enhanced internal refutability and stronger out-of-sample robustness.

Related literature This paper draws inspiration from the seminal study 
of Barro (2006) and the subsequent literature that uses international 
macroeconomic data to measure macroeconomic tail risk. Nakamura et 
al. (2013) show that a rare disaster model can rationalize the equity 
premium even if crises unfold over several years and are followed by 
economic recoveries. As noted above, these claims remain controversial 
because of the high sensitivity of the equity premium to disaster risk. 
Indeed, several papers use asset prices to inform disaster risk estimates 
and conclude that rare disasters cannot rationalize equity or options 
prices (e.g., Julliard and Ghosh, 2012; Backus et al., 2011).

This  early  literature  focused  on  the  unconditional  properties  of 
macroeconomic tail risk, which is suﬃcient to evaluate models in which 
disaster risk and the equity premium are constant. In contrast, we are 
interested in studying the dynamics of macroeconomic tail risk. This is 
important because variation in macroeconomic tail risk can rationalize 
puzzles  related  to  the  time-series  behavior  of  equity  prices.  Further-
more, measuring tail risk dynamics is critical to comparing rare disas-
ters to alternative mechanisms, such as time-varying risk aversion.

The  literature  has  so  far  used  two  approaches  to  measure  time-
varying tail risk. One approach consists in using proxy variables that 
are likely to capture variation in tail risk. Berkman et al. (2011) fol-
lows that route using international political crises to proxy for disaster 
risk. They document that increases in the number of international polit-
ical crises correlate with increases in the mean and volatility of world 
stock market returns, consistent with rare disaster models. A unique fea-
ture of their data is that it contains crises that can be precisely dated, 
which is ideal for event studies, i.e., to study relative changes in disas-
ter risk. Manela and Moreira (2017) propose a news implied volatility 
index encoding information from the title and abstract of front-page 
articles published in the Wall Street Journal. They ﬁnd that a large frac-
tion of the variation in their index reﬂects words associated with war 
and policy, which can be interpreted as disaster concerns. A drawback 
of the proxy approach is that it is not best suited to study disaster risk 
in levels, because individual proxies do not span the information set 
of economic agents. For instances, many macroeconomic crises begin 
with other crises that are not political in nature. Another limitation is 
that proxies are not directly related to consumption, which means that 
additional assumptions are needed to evaluate the rare disaster model 
quantitatively.

An alternative approach consists in extracting tail risk from option 
prices. Options provide a hedge against tail events and are thus informa-
tive of the disaster concerns of option market participants. Siriwardane 
(2015) extracts a jump risk factor from short-term option prices for a 
large panel of U.S. ﬁrms. He shows that this factor can proxy for varia-
tion in the risk-neutral probability of a macroeconomic disaster. Under 
stronger assumptions, Barro and Liao (2021) back out the physical prob-
ability of a macroeconomic crisis using implied volatility surfaces for 
seven equity market indices. An important limitation of using option 
prices is that it requires structural assumptions about investors’ prefer-
ences and the joint behavior of the stock markets and macroeconomic 
outcomes. In practice, these assumptions imply that option-based es-
timates  are  highly  correlated  with  equity  volatility,  and  thus  likely 

capture market movements unrelated to macroeconomic tail risk. We 
indeed show that while volatility forecasts consumption tail risk, many 
other variables exhibit incremental forecasting power. Besides, option-
based estimates that impose disaster model assumptions are subject to 
the critique that they cannot be used to falsify the very assumptions 
they are imposing.

Our paper generalizes the use of proxies by combining and weigh-
ing candidate proxies according to their ability to forecast the lower 
quantiles of consumption growth. One beneﬁt of our approach is that 
we do not take a stand on whether option prices or other risk prox-
ies reﬂect disaster risk. The fact that  ̂𝜋 varies over time is the direct 
consequence of these candidate proxies forecasting macroeconomic tail 
risk. As our set of predictive variables includes a volatility index, our 
framework can accommodate volatility information without imposing 
structural  assumptions,  and  on  a  much  longer  time  frame.  We  ﬁnd 
that volatility strongly forecasts macroeconomic risk, consistent with 
Manela and Moreira (2017) and Barro and Liao (2021). However,  ̂𝜋 de-
livers superior forecasts, reﬂecting the incremental forecasting power of 
the additional predictors in our data set. Consequently,  ̂𝜋 and volatility 
indices are positively but only imperfectly correlated, conﬁrming that 
stock volatility varies for reasons others than macroeconomic tail risk. 
Likewise, the correlation between  ̂𝜋 and the number of political crises 
proposed by Berkman et al. (2011) is only 0.15, reﬂecting the fact that 
many variables beyond political crises forecast tail risk.1

Our paper is also related to the literature concerned with the es-
timation  of  rare  disaster  models.  As  noted  in  Campbell  (2017) and 
Chen et al. (2024), rare disaster models have powerful eﬀects on as-
set pricing moments and consequently standard eﬃcient methods that 
rely excessively on asset pricing restrictions are often fragile. Several re-
cent papers (see, e.g., Hansen (2008), Julliard and Ghosh (2012), Chen 
et al. (2024), Cheng et al. (2022)) develop robust estimation and test-
ing methods to address these diﬃculties. We use a method of moments 
approach that exclusively targets consumption dynamics moments and 
then  calibrate  parameters  that  are  relevant  to  asset  prices.  Our  esti-
mation approach can be seen as an extreme case of robust approaches 
in that it does not rely on asset pricing moments. Chen et al. (2024)
show that such an approach is especially valuable when asset pricing 
moments  provide  most  of  the  identiﬁcation  strength  (i.e.,  when  the 
dark matter measure is large). Our main contribution to this literature 
is that we measure 𝜋, which allows us to target moments directly re-
lated to 𝜋’s dynamics. In other words, our estimations and quantitative 
analysis jointly help to uncover the “dark matter” often embedded in 
time-varying disaster risk models. We seek the parameters that match 
the following moments: mean consumption growth rate; standard de-
viation of consumption growth rate; expected number of crises (2-SD 
events); autocovariance of the unobserved disaster probability; variance 
of the unobserved disaster probability; expected disaster size. Our ap-
proach uses one moment condition for each parameter. We ﬁt the model 
using rescaled international consumption data and the ﬁtted disaster 
probability.  The inference method does not assume that the disaster 
probability is observed and explicitly accounts for estimation error. The 
method also accounts for time aggregation, since we estimate the model 
using three-year consumption data.

Measuring and understanding macroeconomic tail risk is critical for 
policymakers. A recent literature explores the possible nonlinear rela-
tionship between ﬁnancial and economic conditions. Giglio et al. (2016)
and Adrian et al. (2019) use quantile regressions to estimate the predic-
tive U.S. GDP growth distribution conditional on measures of ﬁnancial 
market distress. Similar to Adrian et al. (2019), we use quantile regres-
sions to study the properties of international consumption growth, but 
our focus is on evaluating rare disaster models of asset prices.

1 The Online Appendix oﬀers a more detailed comparison with the disaster 
risk index proposed by Berkman et al. (2011).

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038383R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents our 
data and methodology. Section 2 documents the forecastability of the 
lower quantiles of consumption growth. Section 3 presents macro risk 
estimates and studies the relationship between macro risk and variables, 
such as stock returns and macroeconomic growth. Section 4 calibrates 
a rare disaster model using macro risk dynamics. Section 5 concludes. 
An Online Appendix contains additional results and proofs.

1.  Methodology and data

We begin by presenting our econometric framework. Models of time-
varying disaster risk generally assume that the left tail of consumption 
growth is driven by a single state variable. This variable, which we de-
note macro risk 𝜋𝑖,𝑡, is the probability that a given country 𝑖 experiences 
a macroeconomic crisis at time 𝑡. As macroeconomic disasters gener-
ally unfold slowly over time, we will primarily work with consumption 
growth aggregated over multiple years. We write 𝐻 -year consumption 
growth as

Δ𝑐(𝐻)

𝑖,𝑡 ≡ ln

(

)

𝐶𝑖,𝑡
𝐶𝑖,𝑡−𝐻

,

(1)

where  𝐶𝑡 is  real  consumption  per  capita.  A  macroeconomic  crisis  is 
deﬁned as a 2 standard deviation (SD) decline in consumption growth 
from its long-term growth path:

{

Crisis(𝐻)

𝑖,𝑡 ≡

𝑖,𝑡 < mean(Δ𝑐(𝐻)

𝑖,𝑡

if Δ𝑐(𝐻)
1,
0, otherwise.

) − 𝑘 × SD(Δ𝑐(𝐻)
𝑖,𝑡

).

(2)

We deﬁne macro risk as the probability of a macroeconomic crisis be-
tween times 𝑡 + 1 and 𝑡 + 𝐻 ,

𝑖,𝑡+𝐻 = 1|𝐼𝑖,𝑡),

𝑖,𝑡 ≡ Pr(Crisis(𝐻)
𝜋(𝐻)
where the probability Pr(.|𝐼𝑖,𝑡) is taken with respect to information 𝐼𝑖,𝑡
available to economic agents at time 𝑡.2 In what follows, we mostly 
use a three-year window (i.e., 𝐻 = 3). To ease notations, we drop the 
horizon superscript whenever there is no ambiguity. We later study the 
sensitivity of our empirical results to this baseline deﬁnition.

(3)

This deﬁnition conforms with the approach in the rare disasters lit-
erature to deﬁne tail events as declines in consumption (or GDP) that 
exceed a ﬁxed threshold value. Using a ﬁxed threshold amounts to treat-
ing the long-term growth rate and volatility in normal times as constant 
parameters. Variation in 𝜋𝑖,𝑡 thus summarizes movements in recession 
risk, which depends on the level, volatility, and higher moments of the 
growth process. Our approach slightly departs from the prior literature, 
which compares consumption peak to its trough to deﬁne macroeco-
nomic disasters. For example, macroeconomic disasters in Barro and 
Ursúa (2008) have variable durations, with an average of three and a 
half years. We deﬁne macroeconomic crises over a ﬁxed window in-
stead since it is better suited to our forecasting framework.

1.1.  Empirical implementation

In the spirit of Barro (2006) and subsequent literature, we use in-
ternational data to supplement the relatively small US sample that is 
commonly used in empirical work. A diﬃculty is that average growth 
rates and standard deviations tend to diﬀer greatly across countries, 
even among industrialized ones. To ensure that international series are 
approximately comparable, we standardize the data such that consump-
tion  growth  in  each  country  has  mean  zero  and  unit  standard  devi-
ation.3 This assumption is similar to Nakamura et al. (2013), where 

2 Remark that Eq. (3) allows for an arbitrary correlation between consump-
tion growth conditioning on 𝐼𝑖,𝑡.
3 To ensure we do not use information that is not available in real time, 
we standardize consumption growth using a rolling window approach. Using a 

countries  are  allowed  to  have  diﬀerent  long-term  growth  rates  and 
volatilities. We ﬁnd that the rescaled consumption series exhibit a dis-
tribution that is comparable to the US series. Formally, we cannot reject 
that US and non-US series are from the same continuous distribution, 
using the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (𝑝-value = 0.11).4

A common concern in the rare disaster literature is that macroe-
conomic crises are so rare that even pinning down the unconditional 
probability of a crisis poses an empirical challenge. In addition to using 
international data, we gain traction by modeling the entire left tail of 
consumption growth. Speciﬁcally, we work with a set of variables that 
have predictive power for the left tail, allowing us to model variation 
in the conditional distribution of consumption growth, summarized by 
𝜋.

Denote a predictor set available to the econometrician as 𝑋𝑖,𝑡. While 
𝜋𝑖,𝑡 is unobservable, we assume that 𝜋𝑖,𝑡, is a function of the informa-
tion available at time 𝑡: 𝜋𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑓 (𝑋𝑖,𝑡) for some function 𝑓 . We compute 
𝑓 semiparametrically using quantile regressions, similar to Adrian et 
al. (2019). In a ﬁrst stage, we estimate conditional quantiles covering 
the left tail of consumption growth.5 The quantile regression model of 
Koenker and Bassett (1978) assumes the conditional quantile of the de-
pendent variable has an aﬃne form. Speciﬁcally, we estimate the model

)

(
𝜏|𝑋𝑖,𝑡

(

(4)

𝜏|𝑋𝑖,𝑡

= 𝑋𝑖,𝑡𝐵,
)

𝑄𝑋𝑖,𝑡
where 𝑄𝑋𝑖,𝑡
is a vector of conditional quantiles of three-year 
consumption  growth  given  𝑋𝑖,𝑡,  and  𝜏 is  a  set  of  probabilities  cov-
ering  the  interval  [0.01, 0.5].  Each  column  of  the  matrix  𝐵 contains 
coeﬃcients with respect to each quantile, which are estimated by min-
imizing the sum of absolute errors across quantiles. In a second stage, 
(
we ﬁt the log-linear function  ̂𝑄𝑋𝑖,𝑡
≈ 𝑔𝑖,𝑡(𝜏) for each country 
and year. This gives us an estimate of the probability of a 2-SD crisis 
as  ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑔−1
𝑖,𝑡 (−2). (Throughout the paper, we use “hats” to denote the 
empirical counterparts of the true unobserved values.)

𝜏 ∣ 𝑋𝑖,𝑡

)

This approach allows eﬃcient use of consumption data since it ex-
ploits variation in the whole left tail and not only very rare events. We 
also explore an alternative approach where 𝑓 takes the form of a stan-
𝑖,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑏) for some vector 𝑏. In 
dard normal distribution (i.e., 𝑓 (𝑋𝑖,𝑡) = Φ(𝑋′
that case, we obtain estimates of 𝜋 by regressing realized crises (2) on 
the predictor variables using probit regressions.6

Our goal is that the vector  𝑋𝑖,𝑡 approximates as closely as possi-
ble the information set 𝐼𝑖,𝑡 of economic agents. We include as many 
variables as possible while maximizing the sample coverage over our 
international  sample.  While  it  is  impossible  to  verify  that  we  cast  a 
wide enough net in terms of predictive variables, we expect 𝑋𝑖,𝑡 to en-
code much more information than past realizations of consumption. We 
also expect to observe “decreasing returns to scale”, such that the fore-
casting performance of our model is not too sensitive to small changes 
in the predictor set.

Overﬁtting is an immediate diﬃculty when working with a large 
number  of  predictors.  To  circumvent  that  diﬃculty,  we  exploit  the 

rolling window ensures that realized crises have similar magnitudes over the 
long run. To maximize the sample size, we initially require only 25 years of 
observations and then rescale using a 50-year rolling window.
4 To further conﬁrm that US and non-US macroeconomic crises capture simi-
lar events, we use the multidimensional two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, 
as described by Fasano and Franceschini (1987). We examine whether con-
sumption growth, GDP growth, and the investment rate have statistically indis-
tinguishable joint distributions, conditional on realized 2-SD crises. Although 
the test may not be eﬀective due to the sample imbalance between the US and 
the rest of the world, we cannot reject that the conditional distributions are 
identical (𝑝-value = 0.64).
5 The Online Appendix provides further details on the estimation.
6 We  also  use  a  probit  model  to  construct  alternative  estimates  that  dis-
tinguish between global crises, like world wars, and more local crises, thus 
allowing diﬀerent crises to be forecasted by diﬀerent predictors. We present the 
results in the Online Appendix.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038384R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

panel structure of our data by restricting regression coeﬃcients to be 
equal across countries. This implies that each quantile regression fea-
tures less than one free parameter per country. While such homogeneity 
restrictions are unlikely to be literally true, they lead to more eﬃcient 
parameter estimates, at the cost of a hopefully small bias. Pooled regres-
sion models are common in the forecasting literature and typically lead 
to improved out-of-sample forecasting performance (see, e.g., Garcia-
Ferrer et al. (1987), for an early application to macro data).7

1 and 𝐿

In addition, we also allow for the quantile minimization problem to 
include a penalty term to shrink possibly uninformative predictors. We 
consider penalties based on the 𝐿
2 norms, as well as a combi-
nation of the two norms. A penalty based on the 𝐿
1 norm yields the 
quantile equivalent of the LASSO estimator (‘least absolute shrinkage 
selection operator’) of Tibshirani (1996). As is well known, the LASSO 
estimator imposes a sparsity assumption in that it leads some coeﬃ-
cient estimates to be exactly zero for large enough values of the LASSO 
parameter. The 𝐿
2 norm penalty corresponds to the ridge estimator, 
in which estimates will almost never be zero exactly. The ridge esti-
mator tends to dominate the LASSO in settings with many correlated 
regressors. The combination of the two penalties yields the elastic net 
estimator of Zou and Hastie (2005). Whenever we estimate penalized 
quantile regressions, we select the penalization parameters using cross-
validation. Namely, we slit the sample into ten parts, ﬁt the model using 
nine-tenth of the data, and evaluate the model out-of-sample on the 
remaining tenth (i.e., ten-fold cross-validation). We select the penaliza-
tion parameter(s) that minimize the out-of-sample quantile loss function 
averaged over the ten subsamples.

1.2.  Consumption and GDP data

Our consumption and GDP data were initially constructed by Barro 
and Ursúa (2010). The data consist of real per capita consumption ex-
penditures  and  GDP.  The  sample  covers  42  countries,  and  for  many 
of these countries the data are available since the early nineteenth cen-
tury. We extend the data to the years 2010–2020 using the World Bank’s 
World Development Indicators. (The Online Appendix provides details 
on data sources and the construction of all variables used in the analy-
sis.) The data span 1870 to 2020 and comprise 25 OECD countries; 14 
countries from Latin America and Asia; and Egypt, Russia, and South 
Africa.

Fig. 2 gives an overview of the tail events occurring over our sample. 
The ﬁgure shows a heatmap of negative realizations of consumption 
growth below −0.5 SD. Small black dots represent data unavailability, 
and  grey  circles  represent  2-SD  macroeconomic  crisis  years  (see  the 
Online Appendix for a list of the crises). Data coverage begins at various 
times across countries but is generally continuous once it starts, except 
for  Austria,  Singapore,  and  Malaysia.  We  do  not  interpolate  missing 
observations, although our results are unaﬀected when we do so. We 
observe an apparent clustering of tail events, particularly around the 
two world wars, the GFC, and the Covid-19 crisis.

Our baseline crisis deﬁnition (2) identiﬁes a large macroeconomic 
crisis as a decline in the log consumption two SD below a country’s 
long-term  growth  rate.  This  deﬁnition  yields  156  crisis  years,  corre-
sponding to a crisis frequency of 4.1%, which is similar to the 3.6% 
disaster frequency reported in Barro and Ursúa (2008). Realized crises 
are more common in the prewar period. The United States is a prime 
example, having experienced several macroeconomic crises, predomi-
nantly in the prewar years (1918–1919; 1930–1931; 2007–2008). Over 
the sample, the United States was statistically just as likely as any other 
country to face a macroeconomic crisis.

7 The Online Appendix presents a variant in which we relax the homogene-
ity  restrictions  for  the  quantile  loadings  on  global  variables.  We  show  that 
the corresponding macro estimates remain strongly correlated to the baseline 
̂𝜋 (correlation = 0.86). However, this model sharply underperforms out-of-
sample, even when overﬁtting is accounted for using penalized regressions.

Note that the consumption series might be less reliable at the begin-
ning of the sample, despite the rigorous precautions employed by Barro 
and Ursúa (2008) and others in assembling the data. A possible con-
cern therefore is that measurement errors may lead us to exaggerate 
tail risk predictability. To see if measurement errors artiﬁcially inﬂate 
crisis persistence in the data, we test if realized crises are less autocorre-
lated after 1945. Reassuringly, Online Appendix Table A.VII shows that 
the autocorrelation of crises has not changed after 1945. This indicates 
that measurement errors are unlikely to exaggerate crisis predictability.

1.3.  Predictive variables

We assemble a relatively large annual data set of predictor variables 
spanning 1900 to 2020. We group the variables into ﬁve categories: 
macroeconomic;  war  and  political;  natural  disaster;  ﬁnancial  condi-
tions; and asset prices. Table 1 gives an overview of our sample. We 
select variables based on their availability of comparable data for all 
countries over the most extended sample available. Many of these vari-
ables are binary indicators encoding recessions and other non-macro 
crises such as wars and banking crises. These variables naturally cap-
ture the possibility that macroeconomic risk increases during periods of 
stress. For instance, it is generally accepted that volatility is higher dur-
ing recessions. Beyond volatility, including a recession indicator allows 
for capturing the possibility that macroeconomic risk increases during 
a recession. A limitation of the data is the potential for look-ahead bias 
in events such as wars, civil wars, political crises, and natural disas-
ters. This issue stems from the diﬃculty agents may face in recognizing 
the onset of major upheavals as they unfold in real time. To address 
this, we delay the start of such crises by one year. Additionally, crises 
in our sample typically span multiple years, meaning a crisis event in 
our data usually corresponds to an event that has been ongoing for at 
least one year. In the Online Appendix, we investigate an alternative 
approach where we substitute crisis indicators with predicted probabil-
ities, calculated in a ﬁrst step. These predicted probabilities prove to 
be very persistent, resulting in a high correlation with the crisis indi-
cators. Consequently, this alternative approach yields results similar to 
our original method. The Online Appendix provides further details.

Macroeconomic  predictors Our  sample  of  macro  predictors  is  aimed 
at capturing the serial and spatial correlation in macroeconomic risk. 
“Recession” is a variable equal to one when a country experienced a 
negative growth rate in a given year. Recession events are quite fre-
quent; Table 1 indicates that 28.20% of country-years are in a recession 
on average. “Recession abroad” captures the possible transmission of 
the realization of a foreign recession. It is constructed as a distance-
weighted average of the recessions that occurred abroad:

Recession abroad𝑖,𝑡 =

∑

𝑗≠𝑖

𝑗,𝑡 Recession𝑗,𝑡,
𝑑−1

(5)

∑

where 𝑑𝑗,𝑡 measures the geographic distance between countries, nor-
𝑗,𝑡 = 1, for all 𝑗. We also include predictors 
malized such that 
based  on  past  consumption  growth  rates  and  a  “world”  growth  rate 
constructed by GDP-weighting consumption growth for the countries in 
the sample with available data.

𝑗≠𝑖 𝑑−1

War and political predictors We create three variables encoding wars, 
civil  wars,  and  political  crises,  primarily  obtained  from  Sarkees  and 
Wayman (2010) and the Center for Systemic Peace (CSP). Our wars 
and civil wars data consist of armed conﬂicts that resulted in deaths in 
battle. We deﬁne political crises as events of power disruption (e.g., a 
military coup), as well as periods of political instability (e.g., a coun-
try under occupation by a foreign power). We also construct a variable 
capturing foreign wars and political crises as in Eq. (5), where Reces-
sion is replaced by a variable equal to one whenever a foreign country 
enters into one of the three above-mentioned crises. With the exception 
of coups and similar events, these data describe spells that typically last 

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038385R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 2. Timeline. Notes. This ﬁgure shows a heatmap of three-year consumption growth. Consumption growth in each country is standardized to have a zero 
mean and unit standard deviation. Only realizations less than −0.5 are shown. 2-SD macroeconomic crises are highlighted in grey. Small black dots indicate data 
unavailability.

for several years. Though deﬁned based on systematically recorded cri-
sis events, they might inadvertently contain a hindsight bias, giving the 
econometrician information that is only available ex-post. We thus de-
lay the beginning of these crises by one year.

Natural disaster predictors We create two variables capturing natural 
disasters. A “natural disaster” indicator equals one when a major earth-
quake, tsunami, or volcano eruption occurs in a given country. We focus 
on disasters that reached the highest grade in event classiﬁcations from 
the National Centers for Environmental Information. We also set our 
“natural disaster” indicator to one for all countries during the years cor-
responding to the Great Inﬂuenza Epidemic (1919-1920). (We forecast 
consumption growth up to 2020 using predictors up to 2017; this ap-
proach thus excludes the Covid-19 pandemic from the predictor data.) 
We also construct an indicator variable capturing the most devastating 
famines that occurred over the sample. To mitigate hindsight bias in 
the data, we delay natural disaster indicators by one year; for example, 
we start the Great Inﬂuenza indicator in 1919, although the pandemic 
began in 1918.

Financial  condition  predictors Financial  condition  predictors  include 
crisis  dummies  capturing  banking,  currency,  and  sovereign  default 
crises, as well as extensive inﬂation periods. Our primary data source 

is Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2009), but we also checked the ﬁnancial cri-
sis indicators obtained from the Jordà-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory 
Database (Jordà et al., 2017). We create a variable capturing the global 
ﬁnancial cycle, proxied for by worldwide credit growth. We compute 
the three-year changes in bank loans-to-GDP ratio over three years us-
ing  data  from  the  Jordà-Schularick-Taylor  (JST)  database.  Following 
Mian et al. (2017), we use one more lag that would be necessary in 
a standard forecasting regression, i.e., we use credit growth from four 
years ago to last year instead of credit growth from three years ago to 
the current year. The JST database covers 17 advanced economies, and 
we construct a GDP-weighed global factor, which we assign to the 42 
countries in our sample.8

Asset price predictors Our primary source for asset price data is Global 
Financial Data. To maximize the sample size, we work with the U.S. se-
ries to proxy for world variables. Estimates based on individual country 
predictors yield similar results, except for shorter periods. Asset pric-
ing theory and empirical evidence suggest the dividend-price ratio is a 
natural proxy for the equity premium (e.g., van Binsbergen and Koijen, 

8 We obtain very similar estimates using local credit growth for the 17 coun-
tries where the individual data are available, see Online Appendix F.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038386R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 1
Predictive Variables.

Variable

Description

Mean

S.D.

Min

Max

Macroeconomic Predictors
Recession
Recession abroad
Consumption
Consumption (world)

War and Political Predictors
War
Civil war
Political crisis
War/political crisis abroad

Natural Disaster Predictors
Natural disaster
Famine

Financial Conditions Predictors
Banking crisis
Currency crisis
Sovereign default
Hyperinﬂation
Credit growth (world)

Asset Price Predictors
Dividend-price ratio (US)
Stock volatility (US)
Yield curve (US)

One-year consumption growth rate < 0
Distance-weighted average of foreign recessions
Consumption growth
GDP-weighted consumption growth

Interstate war
Intrastate or non-state war
Political crisis
Distance-weighted average of foreign war/political crises

0.282
0.230
0.019
0.018

0.040
0.059
0.013
0.096

0.450
0.161
0.063
0.039

0.195
0.235
0.115
0.117

0.000
0.000
-0.557
−0.213

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

1.000
0.890
0.487
0.116

1.000
1.000
1.000
0.761

Major earthquake, tsunami, volcano eruption, and the Great Inﬂuenza
Major famine

0.070
0.008

0.255
0.091

0.000
0.000

1.000
1.000

Banking crisis
Exchange rate depreciation ≥ 15%
Sovereign default
Annual inﬂation rate ≥ 20%
GDP-weighted 3-year change in total bank loans to GDP

S&P 500 dividend-price ratio
S&P 500 realized volatility
10-year–1-year Treasury spread

0.088
0.144
0.093
0.099
0.019

0.040
0.200
0.001

0.284
0.351
0.291
0.299
0.042

0.016
0.073
0.017

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.132

0.011
0.050
−0.053

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.084

0.093
0.507
0.038

Notes. We report descriptive statistics for the predictive variables (see Section 1.3 and the Online Appendix for detailed descriptions 
of each variable).

2010). If the equity premium varies in proportion to disaster concerns, 
then  the  equity  premium,  and  thus  the  dividend-price  ratio,  should 
forecast future crises. Our proxy for the world dividend-price ratio is 
the S&P 500 dividend-price ratio.9 We also construct a volatility index 
based on the CBOE VXO index from 1986. We extend the series back to 
1871 using realized volatility as in Bloom (2009); to do so, we use daily 
data from 1885 through 1927, and monthly data before 1885, follow-
ing Schwert (1989). Finally, we use a yield-curve slope predictor (e.g., 
Harvey, 1988; Estrella and Mishkin, 1998), based on the diﬀerence be-
tween the 10-year Treasury bond and the 1-year short rate.

2.  Forecasting macroeconomic tail risk

2.1.  Quantile regression estimates

Fig. 3 shows conditional quantile regression estimates for three-year 
consumption growth for the United States. The estimates are standard-
ized and constructed at the .01, .02, .03, .04, .05, .075, .1, .15, .2, .3, .4, 
and .5 quantiles. The solid black line shows  ̂𝜋, which is interpolated as 
the probability of a 2-SD decline in consumption. We observe substan-
tial variation in the quantiles over time; however, the extreme quantiles 
appear much more volatile than central quantiles. This is conﬁrmed in 
Fig. 4, which plots the associated quantile regression estimates for all 
predictor variables. The ﬁgure shows quantile coeﬃcient curves for uni-
variate and multivariate regressions. The curves are rarely ﬂat along 
quantiles; instead, the slope coeﬃcients tend to be larger in absolute 
value at the lowest percentiles.

We  use  a  saturated  regression  to  construct  ̂𝜋,  as  a  large  set  of 
variables is desirable to approximate the information set of economic 
agents. In a time-series context, a saturated regression would likely suf-
fer from in-sample overﬁtting as well as from near-collinearity between 
the predictive variables. However, the number of predictor variables 
(18)  remains  small  relative  to  the  number  of  countries  (42)  in  our 

Fig. 3. U.S. Consumption Growth Quantiles. Notes. This ﬁgure shows the condi-
tional distribution of three-year consumption growth in the United States. The 
solid black line shows macro risk,  ̂𝜋, which is interpolated as the probability of 
a 2-SD decline in consumption and is depicted in Fig. 1.

sample. We also show in the Online Appendix that the average pair-
wise correlation among variables is low.10 We nevertheless implement 
a variable selection procedure using penalized regressions. The cross-
validation  procedure  tends  to  select  low  values  for  the  penalization 
parameter,  resulting  in  modest  shrinkage.  We  report  ridge  estimates 
in Fig. 4 (dotted black line). These estimates are close to unpenalized 
estimates (dotted blue lines); we obtain comparable results with LASSO 
and elastic net penalizations.

We estimate  ̂𝜋 using multivariate regressions, but it is interesting to 
examine univariate regressions as well as they are easier to interpret. 
We report these coeﬃcients in red. The multivariate slopes are gener-

9 GFD oﬀers a world dividend-price ratio, which is available from 1925. In 
our sample, the correlation between the two series is 0.91.

10 The collinearity diagnostics of Belsley et al. (2004) further conﬁrm that 
there are no statistically signiﬁcant near linear dependencies in the predictor 
matrix.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038387R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 4. Quantile Regression Estimates. This ﬁgure shows quantile regression coeﬃcient estimates for three-year consumption growth on the set of predictive variables. 
Each plot reports quantile slope coeﬃcient against the .01, .02, .03, .04, .05, .075, .1, .15, .2, .3, .4, and .5 quantiles. The red dots report univariate regression 
estimates, together with their 95% conﬁdence bands. The blue lines report the multivariate regression estimates. The dotted black lines report multivariate ridge 
estimates. (For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

ally smaller in magnitudes, which is expected, but tend to keep the same 
sign as univariate slopes. The slope signs conform with the intuition that 
adverse shocks tend to have persistent negative eﬀects. For instance, a 
country that experiences a recession in the forecasting year is exposed 
to more tail risk in the future. The same is true for non-macroeconomic 
shocks such as war or political crises, at home or abroad. Low equity 
prices (i.e., high dividend-price ratio) are also associated with more risk 
in the tail. This pattern is consistent with rare disaster models, which 
posit a positive relationship between the equity premium (proxied by 
the dividend-price ratio) and the likelihood of a macroeconomic disas-
ter. Also, in line with rare disaster models (Barro and Liao, 2021; Farhi 
and Gabaix, 2016), stock volatility and currency crises forecast macroe-

conomic risk. Interestingly, credit growth is associated with lower tail 
risk, which contrasts with the body of evidence that credit growth fore-
casts worse macroeconomic outcomes (e.g., Mian et al., 2017). Most of 
the evidence in the literature is based on the postwar period and we 
ﬁnd the evidence to be much weaker in our longer sample (see Online 
Appendix F for an extensive discussion).

To summarize the importance of individual predictors across quan-
tiles, we calculate “marginal eﬀects.” We deﬁne these marginal eﬀects 
as the increase in  ̂𝜋 for a unit increase in the variable of interest.11 Fig. 5

11 We shock the predictor variable up and down and report the average of the 
two marginal eﬀects.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038388R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 5. Marginal eﬀects for Univariate Quantile Regressions. Notes. This ﬁgure shows marginal eﬀects calculated from the QR model based on univariate regressions. 
The marginal eﬀect is deﬁned as the impact of a one standard deviation increase in a predictive variable on the unconditional probability of a macroeconomic crisis. 
The horizontal error bars depict 90% conﬁdence intervals for the null of no predictability.

reports the marginal eﬀects for each predictor in univariate regressions. 
To facilitate comparisons, we standardize the variables, so that each bar 
represents the eﬀect of a unit standard deviation increase in the pre-
dictor. The ﬁgure also shows bootstrapped 90% conﬁdence bands for 
the null of no predictability.12 Most variables exhibit substantial fore-
casting power for the conditional distribution of consumption growth, 
which translates into statistically signiﬁcant marginal eﬀects. For in-
stance, the standardized eﬀect of a recession at the time of forecasting 
is 0.014. Given that the standard deviation of the crisis variable is 0.450 
(see Table 1), being in a recession raises the future probability of a cri-
sis by 0.014∕0.450 ≈ 3.1%. Among the remaining group of variables, 
War, War/political crises abroad, credit growth, and the dividend-price 
ratio have the larger forecasting power. Being at war raises the likeli-
hood of a crisis by about twice as much as being in a recession (6.8%). 
The predictive power of the U.S. dividend-price ratio is fairly large. A 
one-standard-deviation increase in the dividend-price ratio raises the 
likelihood of a disaster by 2.3%. We return to this link when we discuss 
the link between macro risk and the equity premium in Section 3.2.

2.2.  Macroeconomic risk estimates

Fig. 6 displays  ̂𝜋, the probability of a consumption crisis three years 
ahead (solid lines), together with the realized crisis years (shaded areas) 
for the 42 countries in our sample. (Fig. 1 in the introduction zooms 
in  on  U.S.  risk.)  We  construct  ̂𝜋 using  the  full  set  of  predictors  and 
the ridge model, but the unpenalized model and alternative penalized 
regressions yield very similar results. Later, we will work with estimates 
for a speciﬁcation excluding asset price predictors, denoted by  ̂𝜋−.

Macroeconomic tail risk is volatile, countercyclical, and persistent. 
Crisis probabilities usually range between 1% and 5%, with occasional 
spikes, in particular when crises arise, reﬂecting the serial correlation 
in tail risk in the data. Regressing  ̂𝜋 on time ﬁxed eﬀects yields a 65% 
R2, meaning about two-thirds of the variance in country risk is due to 

12 We bootstrap one-year consumption growth to account for the fact that the 
dependent variable is aggregated over three years.

common forces. This high correlation between country risk estimates 
is a result and not the product of a high pairwise correlation between 
predictor variables. Excluding global variables delivers a 62% R2. (In 
the Online Appendix, we show that most variables have a low average 
pairwise correlation, with the exception of the Recessions and War and 
Political Crises Abroad variables.) Empirically, variables that are highly 
correlated tend to have more forecasting power, which results in a high 
correlation between macro risk estimates. We obtain a similar R2 when 
we regress the U.S. estimates on the average cross-country probabil-
ity (see the Online Appendix for a graphical comparison). This strong 
factor structure is consistent with Lewis and Liu (2017), which shows 
that a high degree of common macroeconomic risk is necessary to re-
produce the fact that international asset return correlations are higher 
than consumption growth correlations.

We assess the forecasting performance of  ̂𝜋, using the Receiver Oper-
ating Characteristic (ROC) curve, a standard tool to assess the accuracy 
of binary indicators. Because crises are binary events, one is interested 
in converting probabilities into binary forecasts, which requires choos-
ing a threshold over which to assign a value of one. The ROC curve 
shows  the  true  positive  rate  (i.e.,  of  all  the  crises  that  did  happen, 
what  fraction  did  the  model  predict?)  against  the  false  positive  rate 
(i.e., how often the model wrongly predicts a macroeconomic crisis in 
𝑡 + 1?). The curve obtains by varying all possible threshold values. As 
the  threshold  increases,  the  number  of  crisis  signals  drops,  so  fewer 
crises are correctly identiﬁed and incorrectly signaled. In contrast, for 
a lower threshold, more crises are correctly identiﬁed; the cost is that 
the frequency of false signals also increases. A model with no forecast-
ing power results in a 45-degree line, whereas a model with a perfect 
ﬁt would have an elbow-shaped ROC running from (0,0) to (0,1) to 
(1,1). The goodness of ﬁt is measured by the area under the ROC curve 
(AUROC), with 0.5 corresponding to no explanatory power and 1 to 
a perfect ﬁt. We plot the ROC curve for  ̂𝜋 in Fig. 7. Fig. 7 indicates 
that our predictive model has substantial forecasting power, with an 
AUROC statistic of 0.67. Of course, this remarkable forecasting power 
could reﬂect overﬁtting, as the curve uses in-sample estimates. We show 
in Section 2.4 that probabilities ﬁtted out-of-sample are similar to in-

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)1038389R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 6. Country Crisis Probabilities, ̂𝜋𝑖. Notes. The shaded areas represent realized crisis-years.

sample estimates and that the model continues to perform well in that 
context.

2.3.  Decomposition of macroeconomic risk

To better understand what drives variation in macro risk, we con-
struct risk estimates for each predictor category. Fig. 8 plots the break-
down of US macro risk across four predictor categories: Macro, War 
and Political, Financial Conditions, and Asset Prices. We leave out Nat-
ural Disasters predictors, as there was no major famine in the US in our 
sample (other natural disasters do not have a statistically signiﬁcant 
predictive ability). Shaded areas highlight important events, namely re-
cessions, wars, and banking crises.

The Macro component illustrates how even a small number of vari-
ables can capture meaningful patterns in a country’s economic history. 
The component indicates elevated tail risk during the two World Wars, 
the  Great  Depression  and  the  Great  Inﬂuenza  Pandemic,  and  ﬁnally 
during the Great Recession. The US economy experienced a dispropor-
tionally large number of recessions (highlighted by shaded areas) in the 
late nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century. This 
does not however translate into an excessively volatile Macro compo-
nent in the early part of the sample, which reﬂects the impact of other 
macroeconomic variables, such as the realization of crises abroad.

The Macro component only imperfectly captures the economic con-
sequences of warfare. The War and Political component ﬁlls this gap. It 
shows marked spikes during the two World Wars, as well as the Korean 
and Vietnam conﬂicts after 1945. The bottom left panel of Fig. 8 shows 
the US crisis probability given by the Financial Conditions component. 
Periods of low credit growth globally, such as the two World Wars and 
the recession of 1937-1938, are associated with increased risk. Banking 

crises identiﬁed in the Reinhart-Rogoﬀ dataset (highlighted) also have 
signiﬁcant importance.

The bulk of the variation in the Asset Prices component in Fig. 8
is driven by movements in the dividend-price ratio. We again observe 
some redundancy with respect to the remaining components, with ele-
vated macroeconomic risk during important events in US history, such 
as the entry of the United States into WW1 in 1917, the Depression of 
1920-21, and the Great Depression. Around WW2, the Asset Prices com-
ponent reaches a peak in 1937, then another one at a critical turning 
point, in 1941, when the US declared war on Japan. The probability 
rises again during the Korean War, the 1973 oil crisis, the 1981-1982 
recession, the 1987 crash, in 2002 after 9-11, and the Great Financial 
Crisis.

Fig. 8 suggests that the predictor categories capture risks that often 
overlap. To get a better sense of the relative importance of each cate-
gory, we decompose the variance of macro risk into each component. 
To do so, we regress  ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 on the estimates associated to each category 
̂𝜋𝑐
𝑖,𝑡 (for 𝑐 = 1, … , 5):

̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑏0 +

5∑

𝑐=1

𝑏𝑐 ̂𝜋𝑐

𝑖,𝑡 + ̂𝜋𝜀
𝑖,𝑡.

(6)

We calculate the contribution of each component and the residual  ̂𝜋𝜀
𝑖,𝑡
on the variance of  ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 using

∑

=

1 =

𝑐 Cov(𝑏𝑐 ̂𝜋𝑐

Cov( ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡, ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡)
Var( ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡)

𝑖,𝑡, ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡) + Cov( ̂𝜋𝜀
Var( ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡)
We present the results of this decomposition in Table 2. The ﬁrst col-
umn reports the results for the entire sample. Throughout this table, 
we report the decomposition for variations of the baseline speciﬁca-

𝑖,𝑡, ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡)

(7)

.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383810R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 7. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Curve. Notes. The ROC curve assess the accuracy of binary forecasts (in this case in-sample  ̂𝜋𝑖 estimates). Each dot 
corresponds to a given threshold rule, with darker dots representing higher thresholds. The x-axis indicates how often the model wrongly predict a macroeconomic 
crisis in 𝑡 + 1; the y-axis gives the fraction of predicted disaster among all crises that did happen.

Fig. 8. US Macroeconomic Risk by Predictor Categories. Notes. This ﬁgure shows macro risk estimates for four out of ﬁve predictive variables groups. The predictive 
variables associated with each group are listed in Table 1. Shaded areas highlight important predictors in each category: recessions (Macro), wars (War and Political), 
and banking crises (Financial Conditions).

tion. The table also reports the AUROC statistics, the volatility of the 
estimated macro risk, and the correlation of the various risk estimates 
with the baseline estimates. In Panel A, we exclude each predictor cate-
gory in turn. In Panel B, we estimate the model in subsamples including 
the periods before and after 1945 and separating OECD and non-OECD 
countries. In Panel C, we vary the forecasting horizon and present de-
compositions of consumption risk cumulated from one to ﬁve years.

Table 2 indicates that all predictor categories except Natural Disas-
ters and Asset Prices contribute to a large fraction of the variance of  ̂𝜋. 
Macro predictors predictors contribute to about a third of the variance, 
followed by War and Political, and Financial Conditions predictors that 
contribute to about a quarter of the variance each.

Excluding categories, however, does not result in large forecasting 
losses. An important subset, in particular, is the set that excludes Asset 
Price predictors, which we use to construct  ̂𝜋−. We see in column (5) 

of Panel A that the AUROC statistic for  ̂𝜋− is 0.67, which is identical as 
that for  ̂𝜋. We show in the Online Appendix that the two estimates are 
indeed very similar. We believe this is important in assessing the role of 
macroeconomic tail risk in asset pricing, as discussed in Section 4. This 
redundancy across predictors is not limited to just asset price predic-
tors. As illustrated in Figure Table 2, when any one group of predictors 
is excluded from the set of predictors, the forecasting power remains 
largely the same and the probabilities remain highly correlated. This is 
an important result, as it suggests our predictor set approximately spans 
the information set of investors.

In Panel B, we see that the model performs similarly well in the 
diﬀerent subsamples, with AUROCs well above 0.5. There is unsurpris-
ingly more variation between the pre- and postwar periods. War and 
Political predictors explain more than half of the variance of  ̂𝜋 when 
estimated in the prewar sample, which is twice more than the post-

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383811R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 2
Variance Decompositions for Macro Risk.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Panel A: Predictor Categories
0.37
Macro
0.28
War and Political
0.00
Natural Disasters
0.28
Financial conditions
−0.02
Asset Prices
0.09
Residual
3767
N
42
Countries
0.67
AUROC
𝜎( ̂𝜋′) × 100
2.05
𝜌( ̂𝜋, ̂𝜋′)
1.00

−
0.48
0.01
0.36
0.06
0.10
3767
42
0.67
1.59
0.92

0.61
−
0.01
0.31
0.03
0.04
3767
42
0.65
1.65
0.90

Panel B: Subsamples

Macro
War and Political
Natural Disasters
Financial conditions
Asset Prices
Residual
N
Countries
AUROC
𝜎( ̂𝜋′) × 100
𝜌( ̂𝜋, ̂𝜋′)

Panel C: Horizons

Full sample
0.37
0.28
0.00
0.28
−0.02
0.09
3767
42
0.67
2.05
1.00

Pre-1945
−0.01
0.56
0.01
0.11
0.04
0.28
994
31
0.75
5.24
0.61

Post-1945
0.15
0.06
0.01
0.55
0.08
0.15
2773
42
0.76
1.65
0.39

0.51
0.38
0.01
−
0.05
0.05
3767
42
0.64
1.59
0.88

OECD
0.35
0.26
0.02
0.29
−0.01
0.09
2585
25
0.66
1.88
0.97

0.39
0.27
0.00
0.28
−
0.05
3767
42
0.67
1.79
0.99

Ex-OECD
0.37
0.30
0.00
0.16
0.07
0.09
1182
17
0.73
1.23
0.77

𝐻 = 5
0.08
0.02
0.02
0.60
0.16
0.12
3674
42
0.65
1.51
0.71

𝐻 = 2
0.38
0.20
0.02
0.18
0.06
0.17
3767
42
0.78
2.82
0.96

𝐻 = 3
0.37
0.28
0.00
0.28
−0.02
0.09
3767
42
0.67
2.05
1.00

𝐻 = 4
0.37
0.06
0.01
0.43
0.05
0.07
3722
42
0.65
1.82
0.89

Macro
War and Political
Natural Disasters
Financial conditions
Asset Prices
Residual
N
Countries
AUROC
𝜎( ̂𝜋′) × 100
𝜌( ̂𝜋, ̂𝜋′)

𝐻 = 1
0.56
0.10
0.03
0.15
0.06
0.09
3767
42
0.84
3.07
0.88
Notes. This table presents variance decompositions of macro risk on the ﬁve 
predictor categories and a residual (see Eq. (7)). The table also reports the 
AUROC statistics, the volatility of the corresponding macro estimates, and their 
pairwise correlations with the baseline model estimates. Panel A compares the 
results for the full sample with results for predictor subsets where each predictor 
category is excluded in turn. Panel B shows subsample results comparing pre-
and post-WW2 data, OECD and non-OECD countries. Panel C gives results for 
estimates constructed using consumption risk cumulated from one to ﬁve years.

war  period.  Correspondingly,  excluding  the  prewar  period  results  in 
macro risk estimates that are much less volatile. In contrast, the results 
are  remarkably  similar  for  the  sample  consisting  of  OECD  and  non-
OECD countries. This suggests that our assumption that coeﬃcients are 
homogeneous across countries results in a small bias. Turning to decom-
positions for alternative forecasting horizons in Panel C, we see that the 
model’s forecasting performance remains very similar for crises mea-
sured over longer periods. We also see that the probability estimates 
are strongly correlated across horizons. This reﬂects the slowly unfold-
ing nature of large macroeconomic crises. Interestingly, we do not ﬁnd 
a similar forecasting power for mean consumption growth over longer 
horizons, as we discuss in Section 3.1.

Overall, we have shown that the contributions of each predictor cat-
egory and AUROC statistics are fairly stable. We show in the Online 
Appendix  that  the  corresponding  crisis  probabilities  are  comparable 
across subsamples and speciﬁcations. In addition, series based on lin-
ear probit and penalized regressions are also very similar. In the next 
section, we evaluate the forecasting performance of the model out of 
sample.

2.4.  Out-of-sample predictability

In this section, we evaluate the accuracy of our model in providing 
early-warning signals of upcoming crises. We back-test our model by 
replicating the analysis an econometrician would have done, using the 
proposed methodology to forecast crises out-of-sample. To do so, we 
employ a backtesting exercise and a sample split exercise.

First, we backtest the model by constructing  ̂𝜋 in real-time over an 
expanding window. We use a 50-year period to train the model (1900-
1924). We move to the following year using a 50-year rolling window, 
so that each year 𝑡, we estimate  ̂𝜋 using data available from 𝑡 − 50 to 
𝑡 and use coeﬃcient estimates to forecast realized crises in 𝑡 + 𝐻 . We 
run this test over horizons 𝐻 from one to ﬁve years. The forecasts are 
compared over the 1925–2020 period.

Second, we run a sample split forecasting exercise. A limitation of 
the two out-of-sample tests outlined above is that they use the early 
part of the sample to train the forecasting model and test the forecast 
on the later portion. Any diﬀerences in predictability between the early 
and late parts of the sample could be missed by these exercises. In ad-
dition, we would like to provide further evidence that our homogeneity 
assumption results in a small bias. For this exercise, we pick a random 
sample of 21 countries to train the model and test the model on the re-
maining 21 countries. We repeat this operation 100 times and report 
the averaged statistics.

We report the results of the two exercises in Table 3, which shows 
out-of-sample AUROC statistics, as well as in-sample statistics evaluated 
over the same sample. The results are shown for realized crises deﬁned 
over horizons of one to ﬁve years, for macro risk estimates based on 
the quantile regression models as well as the probit model. The fore-
casting performance is mechanically higher in sample, but we observe 
that the model remains quite successful out of sample. For instance, 
for the ﬁrst forecasting test and baseline horizon 𝐻 = 3, the QR model 
achieves an AUROC of 0.69 in sample, which is essentially equal to the 
out-of-sample AUROC (0.68). We ﬁnd similar magnitudes in the remain-
ing tests. The forecasting performance tends to be stronger at shorter 
horizons, yet the AUROCs remain signiﬁcantly above 0.5 for all hori-
zons. Penalized regressions slightly outperform unpenalized regression 
forecasts in some speciﬁcations. The probit model often underperforms, 
which suggests the quantile regression approach captures important in-
formation that is lost when ﬁtting  ̂𝜋 using only realized crises.

2.5.  Comparison with option-based estimates

We  interpret  ̂𝜋 as  an  estimate  of  the  rational  expectation  proba-
bility of a macroeconomic crisis. This estimate is accurate as long as 
our predictor set approximately spans the information set of economic 
agents. Another natural approach to recover the rational expectation 
crisis probability is to use asset prices. The prices of derivatives, in par-
ticular deep out-of-the-money options, reveal the probability of a stock 
market crash, taken from the viewpoint of a risk-neutral agent, that 
is, under the risk-neutral measure. Under assumptions about investors’ 
preferences, it is possible to recover the physical probability of a stock 
market crash (see, e.g., Bollerslev and Todorov, 2011). Imposing further 
assumptions about the link between stock returns and consumption, one 
can compute the physical probability of a consumption crisis. Backus et 
al. (2011) tackle the challenge, assuming a constant crisis probability. 
Siriwardane (2015) does not impose this assumption, but focuses on the 
risk-neutral crisis probability, while Barro and Liao (2021) back out the 
time-varying probability of a macroeconomic disaster, under the physi-
cal measure.

Barro  and  Liao produce  risk  estimates  for  six  countries  over  the 
1994–2018 period, which we report in Fig. 9 (black lines) next to ours 
(blue lines). The unconditional option-implied probability equals 6.2%, 
which  is  much  higher  than  ̂𝜋 over  that  period.  They  are  also  more 
volatile, with several large spikes exceeding 20%. The presence of such 

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383812R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 3
Out-of-Sample Crisis Predictability.

Model

In Sample

Out of Sample

𝐻

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Panel A: Expanding Window
Unpenalized
LASSO
Ridge
Elastic
Probit

0.87∗∗∗
0.86∗∗∗
0.86∗∗∗
0.86∗∗∗
0.87∗∗∗

0.81∗∗∗
0.82∗∗∗
0.82∗∗∗
0.82∗∗∗
0.83∗∗∗

Panel B: Sample Split
Unpenalized
LASSO
Ridge
Elastic
Probit

0.85∗∗∗
0.85∗∗∗
0.85∗∗∗
0.84∗∗∗
0.86∗∗∗

0.79∗∗∗
0.73∗∗∗
0.79∗∗∗
0.78∗∗∗
0.80∗∗∗

0.69∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.68∗∗∗

0.70∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.69∗∗∗
0.69∗∗∗

0.71∗∗∗
0.70∗∗∗
0.70∗∗∗
0.70∗∗∗
0.73∗∗∗

0.69∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.71∗∗∗

0.72∗∗∗
0.72∗∗∗
0.72∗∗∗
0.72∗∗∗
0.74∗∗∗

0.69∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.68∗∗∗
0.68∗∗∗
0.69∗∗∗

0.83∗∗∗
0.83∗∗∗
0.83∗∗∗
0.83∗∗∗
0.82∗∗∗

0.81∗∗∗
0.81∗∗∗
0.81∗∗∗
0.80∗∗∗
0.76∗∗∗

0.76∗∗∗
0.75∗∗∗
0.78∗∗∗
0.77∗∗∗
0.71∗∗∗

0.73∗∗∗
0.72∗∗∗
0.75∗∗∗
0.73∗∗∗
0.70∗∗∗

0.68∗∗∗
0.66∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.69∗∗∗
0.60∗∗∗

0.63∗∗∗
0.60∗∗∗
0.62∗∗∗
0.63∗∗∗
0.59

0.65∗∗∗
0.65∗∗∗
0.65∗∗∗
0.64∗∗∗
0.60∗∗∗

0.57
0.61∗∗∗
0.61∗∗∗
0.59
0.58

0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.67∗∗∗
0.62∗∗∗

0.57
0.57
0.59
0.59
0.57

Notes. This table reports Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC) statistics for the prediction of 
future crises based on  ̂𝜋. Crises are deﬁned as 2-SD cumulative declines in consumption growth measured over 
𝐻 = 1, … , 5 years. In each case,  ̂𝜋 is estimated on a training sample of a given horizon and tested out of sample. The 
table reports AUROC in both samples. We evaluate estimates constructed with quantile regressions model with no 
penalization and LASSO, Ridge, and Elastic net penalized regression models and with the probit model. Panel A gives 
results where  ̂𝜋 is constructed out-of-sample using an expanding window after a 50-year training period (1900-1924). 
The forecasts are compared over the 1925–2020 period. Panel B gives results for a variant where crises are identiﬁed 
out of sample. Panel C gives results for the full historical sample (1900-2020), for repeated estimations of the model 
trained on 21 countries picked randomly and tested on the remaining 21 countries. We report statistical signiﬁcance 
based on bootstrapped AUROC conﬁdence bands. 
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Fig. 9. Comparison with Option-Based Estimates. Notes. This ﬁgure compares macro risk (blue) and option-based estimates (black lines), which are constructed 
following Barro and Liao (2021) using over-the-counter options prices for the following equity-market indices: S&P 500 (the United States), FTSE (the United 
Kingdom), DAX (Germany), Nikkei (Japan), OMX (Sweden), and SMI (Switzerland).

spikes  occurs  in  part  because  of  option-based  estimates  are  sampled 
monthly. In comparison, our yearly estimates appear more stable.

The beneﬁt of option-based estimates is that they do not require 
assumptions about investors’ information set. The inconvenience is that 
these estimates rely on structural assumptions that may not be satisﬁed. 
For instance, the option-based estimates indicate that macroeconomic 
risk was about equally high in the United Kingdom, Germany, or Swe-
den during the Long-Term Capital Management crisis of 1998 as during 
the  Great  Financial  Crisis.  Likewise,  using  a  longer  U.S.  sample  that 
extends to 1983, Barro and Liao report that the probability of a macroe-

conomic disaster reached 89% at the month of the October 1987 stock 
market crash. Overall, option-based estimates tend to strongly covary 
with implied volatility, which indicates that their model attributes most 
of the variation in implied volatility to disaster concerns.

If the rare disaster model is literally true, the option-based estimates 
will contain all relevant information about future disasters. This is a 
testable assumption: option-based estimates will forecast crises, and no 
additional variable will have additional forecasting power. However, 
such a test is not practicable given the short sample over which options 
are available. To extend the sample back in time, we can proxy option-

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383813R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

implied probabilities with realized volatility.13 We already presented 
evidence of the ability of the volatility index to forecast future crises. 
However, on a stand-alone basis, the volatility index has weaker fore-
casting performances than  ̂𝜋. We ﬁnd that the corresponding AUROC 
statistics 0.55 is considerably smaller than the corresponding statistics 
for  ̂𝜋 (0.67). A Wald test rejects the null that the volatility index has 
forecasting performance equal to  ̂𝜋, meaning that option prices do not 
fully summarize macroeconomic tail risk. This is to some extent unsur-
prising. The rare disaster model assumes that asset prices are driven by 
a single state variable. The simple fact that the U.S. dividend-price ra-
tio and the VIX are not perfectly correlated is by itself a rejection of the 
model.

In  the  Online  Appendix,  we  also  compare  ̂𝜋 to  the  news-based 
volatility index (NVIX) proposed by Manela and Moreira (2017). While 
the NVIX aggregates information from Wall Street Journal headlines, it is 
designed to forecast the VIX and should thus reﬂect the risk perception 
and risk attitude of investors. Interestingly, Manela and Moreira (2017)
show that the NVIX has forecasting power for U.S. consumption tail risk. 
This is consistent with our ﬁndings that volatility forecasts crises. Over 
the 1889–2016 period, the NVIX weakly forecasts international disas-
ters, with an AUROC statistic, which is similar to the volatility index 
(0.55). Again,  ̂𝜋 exhibit substantial incremental forecasting power, con-
sistent with the interpretation that equity volatility varies for reasons 
unrelated to macroeconomic tail risk.

3.  Macroeconomic tail risk over the long run

Having established the forecasting performance of our model, we 
now document new stylized facts about macroeconomic tail risk over 
our historical sample.

3.1.  Consumption and output growth

In this section, we study the link between macro risk and macroe-
conomic growth. We run predictive regressions of 𝐻 -year-ahead log of 
consumption and GDP growth on past country crisis probabilities  ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡:

𝑖,𝑡+𝐻 = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻 .

Δ𝑐(𝐻)
Table 4 presents estimation results at 1-, 3-, and 5-year-ahead cumula-
tive horizons. For comparison purposes, we also report similar results 
for  cumulative  one-year  crises.  We  report  slope  estimates,  standard 
errors,  and  𝑅2 statistics  for  the  full  sample  (1900–2020),  as  well  as 
individually for the prewar (1900–1945) and postwar (1945–2020) pe-
riods.

(8)

We use a bootstrap procedure to calculate standard errors and test 
whether  slopes  are  diﬀerent  from  zero.  In  particular,  the  procedure 
accounts for the fact that  ̂𝜋 is a generated regressor. We begin with 
the  main  dependent  variable  (say,  excess  returns)  sampled  at  yearly 
frequency and standardized consumption growth. We cumulate the de-
pendent variable to the appropriate horizon. We then construct  ̂𝜋 by 
regressing standardized consumption growth on the set of predictors 
and interpolating  ̂𝜋 from the ﬁtted quantiles. We obtain the estimates 
of interest by regressing the dependent variable on  ̂𝜋. Next, we perform 
1,000 bootstrap iterations. At each iteration, we simulate random draws 
for the dependent variable and standardized consumption growth. To 
simulate the dependent variable, we regress the yearly sampled depen-
dent variable on year ﬁxed eﬀects and keep the ﬁxed eﬀect coeﬃcients 
and the residuals. We simulate the yearly sampled dependent variable 

13 We show in the Online Appendix that option-implied probabilities and re-
alized volatility indeed strongly covary, with a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.92. 
Another caveat is that we use U.S. volatility to proxy for international volatil-
ity, although international option-implied estimates also strongly covary (Barro 
and Liao, 2021).

by drawing without replacement from the ﬁxed eﬀects and the residu-
als. As this variable is still sampled yearly, we cumulate the dependent 
variable to the appropriate horizon. To simulate standardized consump-
tion growth from the quantiles, we draw a random uniform vector. The 
realizations above 0.5 are transformed to follow a standard normal dis-
tribution, while the realizations below 0.5 are interpolated from the 
conditional quantile estimates. We use these simulated samples of the 
dependent variable and standardized consumption growth to estimate 
the model and calculate standard errors.

We see that an increase in macro risk predicts a decline in consump-
tion growth, but the eﬀect dies out after three years, and magnitudes are 
relatively small. For instance, the full-sample coeﬃcient for consump-
tion growth is −0.32, meaning that a one-standard-deviation increase in 
̂𝜋 (2.1%) lowers the next-year growth rate by 0.6%. Macro risk holds its 
forecasting power over longer horizons for GDP growth, but with simi-
lar magnitudes. In contrast, macro risk has robust forecasting power for 
future crises for all horizons.

We can relate these results to the well-known disconnect between 
asset  prices  and  macroeconomic  outcomes.  In  particular,  Beeler  and 
Campbell (2012) emphasizes the limited ability of the U.S. dividend-
price ratio to forecast future dividends and consumption, meaning that 
most of the variation in the dividend-price ratio stems from changes in 
risk premia. We show in Section 4 that time-varying disaster models 
can reproduce this feature of the data. Before turning to the model, we 
study the relationship between macro risk and the equity premium.

3.2.  Macroeconomic risk and equity premium proxies

Rare disaster models predict that the equity premium varies over 
time in tandem with macroeconomic tail risk. The reason is that in-
vestors shun stocks when the probability of a disaster increases, eﬀec-
tively raising the equity premium. In what follows, we ask whether this 
link is present in the data. Since the equity premium is unobserved, we 
use three candidate proxies: the dividend-price ratio and two volatility-
based series. The ﬁrst series, SVIX2, is the risk-neutral market return 
variance scaled by the gross risk-free rate. Martin (2017) shows that this 
index constitutes a lower bound on the equity premium that can be com-
puted from option prices (the index is available from Martin’s webpage 
for the 1996–2012 period). The second volatility series approximates 
SVIX2 using realized volatility instead of option prices, which gives us 
a long time series. We compute this second proxy as our volatility in-
dex squared, which we then multiply by the real U.S. risk-free rate and 
scale to have the same mean and standard deviation as the SVIX2. This 
longer series provides a reasonable approximation for the SVIX2 (corr. 
= 0.78).

Fig. 10 plots the probability of a macroeconomic crisis in the United 
States,  together  with  the  S&P  500  dividend-price  ratio  in  Panel  A, 
and  with  the  two  volatility  proxies  (Panel  B).  Because  we  use  both 
the D/P ratio and the volatility index to construct our baseline crisis 
probability,  ̂𝜋,  we  present  ̂𝜋− in  Fig. 10,  the  variant  excluding  as-
set  price  predictors.  We  see  that  macro  risk  is  positively  related  to 
both equity premium proxies. For instance, both macro risk and the 
D/P ratio spiked during the Great Depression and the two world wars. 
The 1990s stock market boom (low D/P) coincided with a marked de-
cline in macroeconomic risk during the Great Moderation, as previously 
noted by Lettau et al. (2008). The correlation coeﬃcient between the 
two series is about 0.45. The correlation between macro risk and the 
SVIX2 appears more muted. For instance, squared volatility did not in-
crease during the two world wars, in contrast with macro risk and the 
D/P ratio. This is in line with our earlier observation, in Section 2.5, 
of a positive but imperfect association between our volatility index and 
macro risk.  The SVIX index is also noticeably less persistent, with a 
half-life of about six months, as compared with a half-life of 3 years for 
the D/P ratio. Consequently, our baseline macro risk measure, which 
captures the information of the D/P ratio and volatility, exhibits persis-
tence that lies somewhere in between (a half-life of 1.7 years).

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383814R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 4
Macro Risk Weakly Forecasts Consumption Growth.

Full sample (1876-2020)

Prewar (1876-1945)

Postwar (1945-2020)

𝐻

1

3

5

1

3

5

1

3

5

Consumption growth
Δ𝑐(𝐻)
𝑏

𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻

−0.32∗∗∗
(0.06)
3,835
0.022

−0.46∗∗
(0.18)
3,835
0.012

GDP growth
Δ𝑦(𝐻)
𝑏

𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻

−0.34∗∗∗
(0.06)
3,830
0.028

−0.67∗∗∗
(0.17)
3,828
0.028

Crises
Crisis(𝐻)
𝑏

𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻
2.73∗∗∗
1.23∗∗∗
(0.60)
(0.23)
3,835
3,835
0.058
0.046

𝑁
𝑅2

𝑁
𝑅2

𝑁
𝑅2

−0.16
(0.26)
3,745
0.001

−0.34∗∗∗
(0.10)
1,052
0.021

−0.78∗∗∗
(0.27)
995
0.032

−0.41
(0.43)
933
0.005

−0.13
(0.10)
2,783
0.005

0.13
(0.22)
2,840
0.001

0.23
(0.32)
2,812
0.003

−0.67∗∗
(0.26)
3,747
0.016

−0.40∗∗∗
(0.09)
1,052
0.030

−0.84∗∗∗
(0.26)
995
0.038

−0.67
(0.43)
936
0.012

−0.16
(0.10)
2,778
0.007

−0.37
(0.22)
2,833
0.009

−0.53∗
(0.31)
2,811
0.012

3.21∗∗∗
(0.93)
3,745
0.046

1.51∗∗∗
(0.35)
1,052
0.054

4.09∗∗∗
(0.93)
995
0.107

5.25∗∗∗
(1.46)
933
0.088

0.63∗
(0.35)
2,783
0.013

1.17
(0.76)
2,840
0.013

1.70
(1.08)
2,812
0.018

Notes. This table presents slope coeﬃcients, standard errors, and adjusted 𝑅2 statistics for predictive 
panel regressions of cumulative consumption growth on crisis probabilities. Observations are over the 
sample of 42 countries, from 1900 to 2020. Results are reported for the full sample, as well as for 
subsamples covering the pre- and post-WW2 periods. Standard errors in parentheses are bootstrapped 
to account for cross-sectional correlation and time aggregation. The bootstrap simulates the estimated 
̂𝜋 when it is used as a regressor to account for estimation error. 
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

3.3.  Macroeconomic risk and stock returns

We further examine the link between macroeconomic tail risk and 
the equity premium using stock returns. We ﬁrst test whether stock mar-
kets fall around macroeconomic crises and then ask whether macro risk 
forecasts future stock returns. We obtain stock market and one-year in-
terest rate data from Global Financial Data, which we use to construct 
excess stock returns series. These are generally broad-market and mar-
ket capitalization indices, such as the S&P 500 and the FTSE All-Share 
index (for the United Kingdom). However, these data are less compre-
hensive than macro series and often contain gaps, in particular during 
wars. We obtain total return and short rate data for 40 (of 42) countries, 
corresponding to a smaller panel of 2,030 year-country observations 
and 32 realized crises.

We  ﬁrst  investigate  how  stock  returns  behave  around  macroeco-
nomic crises. Rare disaster models unambiguously predict stock markets 
to crash during crises. The primary reason for such crashes is the fall in 
output and consumption, which coincides with lower demand for equi-
ties. However, stock markets may also reﬂect movement in macro risk. 
In particular, to the extent that crises can be anticipated, stock markets 
may crash before consumption and output fall. Furthermore, as stock 
markets attach a risk premium to macroeconomic tail risk, we may ob-
serve above-average returns after crises, when output and consumption 
return to normal and macro risk dissipates. Consistent with this reason-
ing, Barro and Ursúa (2017) ﬁnd that large macroeconomic crises tend 
to coincide with stock market crashes and that crises are more likely, 
conditional on a stock market crash. We complement their results with 
an event-study design, to characterize the behavior of stock returns and 
consumption growth around macroeconomic crises. We adopt a ﬂex-
ible speciﬁcation with ﬁve leads and lags around the year of a large 
macroeconomic crisis:

𝑥𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑎𝑖 +

5∑

𝑗=−5

𝑏

−𝑗 Crisis𝑖,𝑡+𝑗 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡,

(9)

where 𝑥𝑖,𝑡 is either the yearly standardized consumption growth or the 
local currency excess return in country 𝑖 in year 𝑡. The ﬁtted 𝑏 coeﬃ-

cients thus give the relative returns during a crisis, which occurs over 
the periods 𝑡, 𝑡 + 1, and 𝑡 + 2.

We report the ﬁtted coeﬃcients in Fig. 11. Stock returns are de-
picted with error bars and consumption growth is shown with a dotted 
line. Consumption growth falls on average for the three crisis years, 
with the worst year occurring in the third year. These crises tend to be 
anticipated by equity markets. Stock prices tend to fall a year before the 
beginning of a crisis and remain negative for the two subsequent years. 
The cumulative decline equals 40.6%. Stock returns somehow rebound 
the next two years as the economy is exiting the crisis. The presence 
of a stock market decline followed by a rebound is consistent with rare 
disaster models’ prediction that the equity premium increases when the 
economy enters a crisis.

We explore this prediction further in Table 5, where we forecast 
stock returns in excess of the risk-free rate. We expect macro risk to 
positively forecast stock returns, reﬂecting the risk premium attached 
to periods of above-average risk. The table has a similar layout as Ta-
ble 4. We estimate predictive regressions of the cumulative log excess 
returns on lagged macro risk over horizons of 1, 3, and 5 years. The 
top panel uses our baseline  ̂𝜋 probability; the middle panel uses the 
measure excluding asset price predictors,  ̂𝜋−; the bottom panel shows 
results for regressions including time ﬁxed eﬀects.

We see that macro risk strongly predicts future returns. A 1% in-
crease  in  ̂𝜋 forecasts  a  0.91-percentage-point  larger  return  the  next 
year,  with  the  forecasts  adding  up  to  2.3%  over  a  ﬁve-year  period. 
The regression coeﬃcient suggests a volatile equity premium. For in-
stance,  given  the  volatility  of  macroeconomic  risk  (2.1%),  the  0.91 
coeﬃcient implies a volatility for the one-year equity premium of about 
2.1% × 0.91 ≈ 1.9%. This is a large number, albeit smaller than estimates 
based on valuation ratios. For example, using the U.S. dividend-price ra-
tio, Cochrane (2011) estimates that the U.S. equity premium varies by 
about 5.4% per year. Remark that  ̂𝜋 could forecast returns only inci-
dentally because of its correlation with asset prices, which themselves 
contain  information  about  future  stock  returns.  This  concern  is  only 
valid to the extent that our set of predictor variables is much smaller 
than the information set of market participants, in that asset prices carry 
too large a weight in  ̂𝜋 than in the true crisis probability. We address 

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383815R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 10. Macro Risk and the Equity Premium. Notes. This ﬁgure plots the U.S. macro risk estimates constructed without asset price information,  ̂𝜋−, against two 
equity premium proxies: the S&P 500 dividend-price ratio and the Martin (2017) bound on the equity premium, 𝑆𝑉 𝐼𝑋2. We extend the latter to our longer historical 
sample, substituting our realized volatility index squared for the risk-neutral volatility in the true index, multiplied by the real risk-free rate.

Fig. 11. Macroeconomic Crises and Stock Returns. Notes. This ﬁgure reports the local currency average excess stock return and consumption growth around a 
macroeconomic crisis, obtained as the regression coeﬃcients in Eq. (9).

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383816R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 5
Macro Risk Forecasts Excess Stock Returns.

Full sample (1876-2020)

Prewar (1876-1945)

Postwar (1945-2020)

3

5

1

3

5

1

3

5

𝐻
∑𝐻

ℎ=1

𝑏

𝑁
𝑅2
∑𝐻

ℎ=1

𝑏

𝑁
𝑅2
∑𝐻

ℎ=1

𝑏

𝑁
𝑅2

1
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑓
0.91∗∗
(0.37)
1,753
0.014
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑓
1.00∗∗∗
(0.39)
1,753
0.016
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑓
0.71∗∗
(0.30)
1,753
0.012

𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻

1.91∗
(0.98)
1,707
0.020
𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋−
2.31∗∗
(1.02)
1,707
0.026

2.32
(1.44)
1,661
0.019
𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻
2.86∗
(1.55)
1,661
0.026

𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑎𝑡 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻

1.84∗∗∗
(0.69)
1,707
0.029

2.85∗∗∗
(1.00)
1,661
0.046

0.98∗∗
(0.47)
641
0.032

1.02∗
(0.51)
641
0.032

1.07∗∗
(0.42)
641
0.034

2.02
(1.36)
601
0.036

2.13
(1.33)
601
0.037

1.83∗
(0.95)
601
0.073

1.91
(2.04)
561
0.018

2.32
(2.16)
561
0.024

2.26∗
(1.40)
561
0.094

1.36∗∗
(0.62)
1,112
0.013

1.70∗∗
(0.72)
1,112
0.017

0.42
(0.41)
1,112
0.011

2.35∗
(1.35)
1,106
0.019

3.31∗∗
(1.45)
1,106
0.031

1.89∗
(0.97)
1,106
0.039

2.94
(1.88)
1,100
0.026

3.60∗
(1.98)
1,100
0.035

3.21∗∗
(1.40)
1,100
0.067

Notes. This table presents slope coeﬃcients, standard errors, and adjusted 𝑅2 statistics for pre-
dictive panel regressions of cumulative excess returns on crisis probabilities. Observations are 
over the sample of 42 countries, from 1900 to 2020. Results are reported for the full sample, 
as well as for subsamples covering the pre- and post-WW2 periods. Standard errors in paren-
theses are bootstrapped to account for cross-sectional correlation and time aggregation. The 
bootstrap simulates the estimated  ̂𝜋 when it is used as a regressor to account for estimation 
error. 
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

this concern by forecasting returns with  ̂𝜋−, which is constructed by 
excluding these predictor variables. As the point estimates are almost 
identical, our conclusions remain unchanged.

Turning to subperiods, Table 5 indicates that predictability is weaker 
in  the  prewar  period.  One  diﬀerence  between  the  two  subperiods  is 
that much fewer disasters occurred during the latter. As we will see in 
the next section, rare disaster models can qualitatively reproduce this 
feature of the data, with higher predictive coeﬃcients in the absence of 
disasters.14

In the bottom panel of Table 5, we examine the same predictability 
regressions including year ﬁxed eﬀects. Before looking at the results, 
we  think  it  is  useful  to  note  that  in  complete  markets  with  endoge-
nous trading, all the variation in macro risk would be due to common 
forces. In fact, such models predict that consumption growth is perfectly 
correlated across countries. This is because, in such economies, agents 
endogenously share risk and can thus trade away country-speciﬁc risk. 
Furthermore, as only systematic risk should be priced, adding time ﬁxed 
eﬀects  should  result  in  insigniﬁcant  coeﬃcients.  Of  course,  as  inter-
national ﬁnancial markets are clearly not fully integrated, we expect 
positive and perhaps statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcients. Table 5 indi-
cates that coeﬃcients remain positive with year ﬁxed eﬀects. In the 
full sample, the coeﬃcients are all statistically signiﬁcant. In subperi-
ods, the estimates are all positive but less precisely estimated, resulting 
in  fewer  statistically  signiﬁcant  estimates.  Predictability  is  relatively 
weaker after WW2 for short horizons. Interestingly, this weaker pre-
dictability  is  consistent  with  more  ﬁnancial  market  integration  after 
WW2.

Next, we ask whether return predictability reﬂects actual macroeco-
nomic tail risk or the realization of tail events. Table 6 estimates the 
same return predictability regressions as the previous table, replacing 
the right-hand side variable to include realized recessions and ﬁnan-
cial crises. Rare disaster models predict that the equity premium varies 
over time because macroeconomic tail risk changes over time. Another 
plausible theory is that agents sell risky assets during recessions, caus-
ing asset prices to fall. This theory predicts that agents require a higher 

14 Interestingly, Manela and Moreira (2017) also ﬁnd that NVIX forecasts re-
turns in the postwar sample, but not in the prewar sample. They also interpret 
their ﬁndings in terms of disaster concerns.

risk premium during crises, not because of the risk that their economic 
situation  worsens,  but  because  their  willingness  to  take  on  risk  has 
decreased.  Models  of  habit  formation,  such  as  that  of  Campbell  and 
Cochrane (1999), predict that, during recessions, agents’ consumption 
approaches their habit level, eﬀectively raising their risk aversion. In 
this class of models, movements in risk aversion rather than movements 
in risk cause the equity premium to move over time. This prediction 
is consistent with the pattern in Fig. 11 that stock prices fall and re-
bound around crises. Table 6 (ﬁrst row) provides inconclusive support 
for this prediction, with insigniﬁcant or negative coeﬃcients. In the sec-
ond row, we add  ̂𝜋 to the right-hand side of the forecasting equation, 
with unchanged results.

Many  models  based  on  ﬁnancial  intermediation  frictions  propose 
that the price of risk increases during ﬁnancial crises. The third and 
fourth  rows  repeat  this  forecasting  exercise  forecasting  returns  with 
realized ﬁnancial crises. We see that the coeﬃcients associated with 
ﬁnancial crises are either insigniﬁcant or negative. This is consistent 
with the evidence in Baron et al. (2021) that ﬁnancial crises are not 
associated with higher future returns.15

4.  Asset pricing implications

In this section, we quantitatively evaluate the asset pricing implica-
tions of a workhorse equilibrium asset pricing model with time-varying 
macroeconomic tail risk. Our model is a discrete-time version of the one 
oﬀered by Wachter (2013) and belongs to the discrete-time aﬃne class 
proposed in Drechsler and Yaron (2011). We also consider an alterna-
tive dividend speciﬁcation. In the spirit of Mehra and Prescott (1985), 
we ask whether a calibrated economy can reproduce key asset pricing 
moments. To do so, we take advantage of our methodology, which can 
produce macro risk estimates that do not exploit asset price informa-
tion. Moreover, we investigate model-implied option prices.

15 Another interesting predictor of equity returns is credit growth. Empirically, 
credit growth is often associated to worse macroeconomic outcomes and lower 
stock returns (Baron and Xiong, 2017). In the Onine Appendix, we replicate 
the negative association between credit growth and future returns documented 
in Baron and Xiong (2017) and show that both credit growth and  ̂𝜋 forecast 
returns in bivariate regressions.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383817R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 6
Excess Return Predictability: Inspecting the Mechanism.

Full sample (1876-2020)

Prewar (1876-1945)

Postwar (1945-2020)

3

5

1

3

5

1

3

5

𝐻
∑𝐻

ℎ=1

𝑏

𝑁
𝑅2
∑𝐻

ℎ=1

𝑏

𝑐

𝑁
𝑅2
∑𝐻

ℎ=1

𝑏

𝑁
𝑅2
∑𝐻

ℎ=1

𝑏

𝑐

𝑁
𝑅2

1
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑓
0.02
(0.01)
2,129
0.002
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑓
0.91∗∗
(0.37)
−0.00
(0.02)
1,753
0.014
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑓
0.02
(0.02)
2,129
0.001
𝑟𝑖,𝑡+ℎ − 𝑟𝑓
0.97∗∗
(0.44)
−0.02
(0.03)
1,753
0.015

𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 Recession𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻

0.02
(0.02)
1,017
0.003

−0.06∗
(0.03)
2,079
0.004

−0.10∗
(0.05)
2,031
0.008
𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑐 Recession𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻
2.45∗
(1.43)
−0.13∗∗
(0.06)
1,661
0.032

2.09∗∗
(0.94)
−0.09∗∗
(0.04)
1,707
0.028

1.00∗∗
(0.49)
−0.00
(0.02)
641
0.032

𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏FinCrisis𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻

−0.17∗∗∗
(0.05)
2,079
0.016

−0.28∗∗∗
0.04
(0.08)
(0.03)
2,031
1,017
0.029
0.004
𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏 ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑐 FinCrisis𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡+𝐻
2.27
(1.50)
−0.31∗∗∗
(0.09)
1,661
0.051

2.08∗
(1.01)
−0.21∗∗∗
(0.06)
1,707
0.042

0.96∗
(0.49)
0.01
(0.05)
641
0.032

0.03
(0.04)
973
0.001

2.01
(1.26)
0.00
(0.04)
601
0.036

−0.17∗∗∗
(0.06)
973
0.022

1.95
(1.34)
−0.23∗∗∗
(0.08)
601
0.068

0.01
(0.06)
931
0.000

1.92
(2.01)
−0.02
(0.07)
561
0.019

−0.23∗∗
(0.09)
931
0.026

1.96
(2.05)
−0.31∗∗∗
(0.11)
561
0.059

0.04∗
(0.02)
1,112
0.004

1.27∗
(0.67)
0.01
(0.02)
1,112
0.014

0.01
(0.03)
1,112
0.000

2.16∗∗
(0.97)
−0.09∗
(0.05)
1,112
0.020

−0.13∗∗
(0.05)
1,106
0.013

2.43∗
(1.32)
−0.13∗∗∗
(0.05)
1,106
0.034

−0.16∗
(0.09)
1,106
0.012

2.82∗∗
(1.34)
−0.21∗∗
(0.09)
1,106
0.039

−0.17∗∗
(0.07)
1,100
0.015

3.03∗
(1.78)
−0.18∗∗
(0.07)
1,100
0.043

−0.32∗∗
(0.13)
1,100
0.033

2.82
(1.81)
−0.31∗∗
(0.13)
1,100
0.056

Notes. This table presents slope coeﬃcients, standard errors, and adjusted 𝑅2 statistics for predictive 
panel regressions of cumulative excess returns on crisis probabilities, realized recessions, and ﬁnancial 
crises. Observations are over the sample of 42 countries, from 1900 to 2020. Results are reported for 
the full sample, as well as for subsamples covering the pre- and post-WW2 periods. Standard errors in 
parentheses are bootstrapped to account for cross-sectional correlation, time aggregation, and generated 
predictor. The bootstrap simulates the estimated  ̂𝜋 when it is used as a regressor. 
∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

4.1.  Model

We consider a pure exchange closed economy, à la Lucas (1978), in 

which the log of consumption growth, Δ𝑐𝑡+1, evolves as follows:

,

Δ𝑐𝑡+1 = 𝜇 + 𝜎𝜀𝑡+1 + 𝑣𝑡+1
(10)
where  𝜀𝑡+1 and  𝑣𝑡+1 are two mutually independent shocks. The ﬁrst 
shock is a standard normal random variable, and the second shock cap-
tures rare consumption disasters. We model 𝑣𝑡+1 as a compound Poisson 
shock:  𝑣𝑡+1 = 𝐽𝑡+1
>0,  where  𝑛𝑡+1 is  a  Poisson  counting  process 
such that Δ𝑛𝑡+1
> 0 describes a disaster event occurring at time 𝑡 + 1. 
The probability that the economy encounters a disaster in 𝑡 + 1,16 𝜋𝑡, 
follows a discretized square-root process:

Δ𝑛𝑡+1

𝟏

√

,

𝜋𝑡𝑢𝑡+1

𝜋𝑡+1 − ̄𝜋 = 𝜌(𝜋𝑡 − ̄𝜋) + 𝜈
where  ̄𝜋 > 0, 0 < 𝜌 < 1, and 𝜈 > 0 are constants and where 𝑢𝑡 is a stan-
dard normal random variable uncorrelated with 𝜀𝑡 and 𝑣𝑡. Following 
Cheng et al. (2022), disaster size 𝐽𝑡+1 follows a parsimonious shifted 
negative exponential distribution with a moment-generating function 
given by

(11)

16 We slightly abuse the notation since 𝜋𝑡 is only an approximation of the 
conditional probability of a disaster on the unit time interval (i.e., yearly). 
The  Poisson  counting  process  𝑛𝑡+1 has  an  intensity  of 𝜋𝑡.  The  exact  condi-
tional probability of a single disaster occurring over the horizon ℎ is, there-
fore,  𝜋𝑡ℎ exp(−𝜋𝑡ℎ),  while  the  probability  that  a  disaster  does  not  occur  is 
exp(−𝜋𝑡ℎ). Hence, the residual probability that more than a single disaster oc-
curs is 1 − exp(−𝜋𝑡ℎ)(1 + 𝜋𝑡ℎ). According to our estimates, the latter value is 
about 0.05% when 𝜋𝑡 is at its steady state and less than 1% when 𝜋𝑡 is at its 99th 
percentile. So to facilitate this terminology and ease the notation, we will use 
𝜋𝑡 for the conditional disaster probability and 
>0) 
for the number of disasters.

𝑡 Δ𝑛𝑡+1 (instead of 

Δ𝑛𝑡+1

𝑡 𝟏

∑

∑

𝜑(𝑢) = 𝑒−𝑢𝜃(1 + 𝑢𝛽)−1,
where disasters have support from (−∞, −𝜃). The mean and variance 
are equal to −(𝜃 + 𝛽) and 𝛽2, respectively.

(12)

These dynamics are standard and can potentially capture several as-
set pricing regularities. This baseline model is most closely related to the 
continuous-time model of Wachter (2013). Gabaix (2012) calibrates a 
richer model that allows for movements in the disaster probability and 
the expected disaster size. The literature contains several alternative 
speciﬁcations. For example, Barro and Jin (2011) considers diﬀerent 
laws for disaster size, such as single and double power laws. Gabaix 
(2011) and Gourio (2012) introduce time-varying disaster risk in pro-
duction economies. Gourio (2008), Nakamura et al. (2013), Branger et 
al. (2016), and Hasler and Marfè (2016) consider more complex disas-
ter dynamics, including unfolding consumption declines and subsequent 
recovery, as well as disasters leading to economic regime changes.17
We intentionally keep the model simple, tractable, and parsimonious to 
focus on the time-series relationship between disaster probability and 
equilibrium asset prices.

We assume the economy is populated by a representative investor 

with recursive preferences (Epstein and Zin, 1989):

[

𝑉𝑡 =

(1 − 𝛿)𝐶 1−1∕𝜓
𝑡

+ 𝛿(𝔼𝑡[𝑉 1−𝛾

𝑡+1 ])

1−1∕𝜓
1−𝛾

]1∕(1−1∕𝜓).

(13)

17 Another strand of the literature maintains a constant disaster probability 
but assumes that the representative agent learns about the model parameters or 
states so that the subjective disaster probability is time-varying (e.g., Weitzman, 
2007; Koulovatianos and Wieland, 2011; Orlik and Veldkamp, 2014; Johannes 
et al., 2016; Ghaderi et al., 2022). Martin (2013a) shows that constant disaster 
risk spreads across assets in a multiple-tree economy and leads to endogenous 
risk premia dynamics.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383818R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

In this expression, 𝛿, 𝛾 ≠ 1, and 𝜓 , respectively, capture time discount-
ing, relative risk aversion, and the elasticity of intertemporal substitu-
tion. To ensure tractability, we focus on the case of 𝜓 being equal to 
one. Similar to Collin-Dufresne et al. (2016), we solve for asset prices by 
expressing the stochastic discount factor in terms of the investor’s log 
value function 𝑣𝑐𝑡 = 𝑣
0 + 𝑣𝜋𝜋𝑡, which is aﬃne in disaster probability 𝜋𝑡. 
The stochastic discount factor is given by18

𝑀𝑡+1 = 𝛿𝑒−𝛾Δ𝑐𝑡+1
⏟⏞⏟⏞⏟

×

discounting of
expected utility

𝑒(1−𝛾)𝑣𝑐𝑡+1
𝔼𝑡[𝑒(1−𝛾)(Δ𝑐𝑡+1+𝑣𝑐𝑡+1)]
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

.

discounting of
continuation utility

(14)

Note that the stochastic discount factor variance (i.e., the priced risk in 
the economy) is state-dependent and increases with the disaster proba-
bility. The log of the risk-free rate, 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡 = − log 𝔼𝑡[𝑀𝑡+1], is aﬃne in the 
disaster probability:

𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡 = − log 𝛿 + 𝜇 − 𝛾𝜎2 + 𝜋𝑡(𝜑(1 − 𝛾) − 𝜑(−𝛾)).

(15)

This risk-free rate is stationary and decreases with the disaster proba-
bility 𝜋𝑡. Consumption risk increases with the likelihood of a disaster, 
and so does the demand for safe assets, causing the risk-free rate to fall. 
This eﬀect strengthens with relative risk aversion.

We consider two dividend speciﬁcations. In the ﬁrst speciﬁcation, 
which we name the levered consumption model, the log aggregate div-
idend is proportional to consumption:

,

Δ𝑑𝑡+1 = 𝜙Δ𝑐𝑡+1
as in Abel (1999), Campbell (2003), Wachter (2013), and others. When 
𝜙 > 1, this ensures, in a parsimonious way, that dividends fall more 
than consumption when a disaster hits, as observed in the U.S. data 
(Longstaﬀ and Piazzesi, 2004). In the second speciﬁcation, which we 
name the co-integration model, the dividend dynamics follow:

(16)

Δ𝑑𝑡 = Δ𝑐𝑡 + Δ𝑠𝑡,

𝑠𝑡 = (1 − 𝜙) ̄𝑠 + 𝜙𝑠𝑡−1 + 𝜂𝑧𝑡 + 𝜅𝑣𝑡,

(17)

(18)

where 𝑠𝑡 = log 𝐷𝑡∕𝐶𝑡 is the log dividend share of consumption and 𝑧𝑡 is 
a normal random variable—independent of the other shocks for the sake 
of simplicity. The term 𝜅𝑣𝑡 implies that dividends load more on disas-
ter than consumption, for 𝜅 > 0. Although simplistic, this speciﬁcation 
is empirically motivated. First, 𝑠𝑡 allows to break the unit correlation 
between consumption and dividend growth rates. Second, 𝑠𝑡 induces co-
integration between consumption and dividends. Third, recent evidence 
suggests that dividend growth risk decreases with the length of the hori-
zon (Belo et al., 2015; Marfè, 2017). The assumption of Eq. (16) implies 
that dividend growth risk is higher than consumption growth risk at 
any horizon. Instead, co-integration preserves the larger dividend risk 
at short horizons but imposes that consumption and dividend growth 
risks  are  equal  in  the  long  run.  This  produces  a  downward-sloping 
dividend  growth  risk.  Fourth,  as  documented  by  Gourio  (2008) and 
Nakamura et al. (2013), disasters are often followed by recoveries. Co-
integration generates dividend recoveries, as the dividend-consumption 
ratio increases after disasters, in line with the evidence in Longstaﬀ and 
Piazzesi (2004) and Hasler and Marfè (2016).

In addition, the second dividend speciﬁcation lets us benchmark our 
model against an additional moment. In the previous section, we high-
lighted the relatively high correlation between macroeconomic tail risk 
and the dividend-price ratio. For the United States, the correlation with 
̂𝜋− is about 45.2%. Dynamics in Eq. (16) lead to a single state vari-
able, 𝜋, which mechanically produces a unit correlation between 𝜋 and 
the dividend-price ratio. This assumption could make us overestimate 

18 The Online Appendix provides details about the solution.

the correlation between prices and discount rates and, hence, the ef-
fect of disaster risk on the equity premium. Introducing co-integration 
gives rise to an additional state variable, 𝑠𝑡, which breaks the perfect 
correlation between 𝜋 and the dividend-price ratio.

To solve for the equity claim price, we log-linearize returns around 
the unconditional mean of the log D/P ratio: 𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡 ≡ log 𝐷𝑡∕𝑃𝑡. Camp-
bell et al. (1997) and Bansal et al. (2012) document the high accuracy 
of such a log-linearization, which we assume to be exact. We use the 
𝑒𝑟𝑑,𝑡+1 ] to recover that the log D/P ratio is 
Euler equation 1 = 𝔼𝑡[𝑀𝑡+1
aﬃne in the disaster probability:

(19)

0 + 𝐴𝜋𝜋𝑡 + 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑡,

𝑑𝑡 − 𝑝𝑡 = 𝐴
with  𝐴𝑠 = 0 for  the  levered  consumption  model  (see  Eq.  (16)).  The 
D/P ratio is stationary and increases with the disaster probability 𝜋𝑡. 
These dynamics reﬂect a preference for the early resolution of uncer-
tainty about time variation in 𝜋𝑡. An increase in disaster probability 
makes  it  more  likely  that  crises  will  aﬀect  future  consumption.  An 
investor  who  prefers  early  resolution  of  uncertainty  (𝛾 > 1)  is  wor-
ried about current disaster risk and uncertainty in future disaster risk. 
Hence, equity prices are low relative to dividends when 𝜋𝑡 is high (and 
vice versa). The substitution eﬀect and the income eﬀect oﬀset each 
other  because  the  elasticity  of  intertemporal  substitution  is  equal  to 
one.

The log of the equity premium is given by

log 𝔼𝑡[𝑒𝑟𝑑,𝑡+1 ] − 𝑟𝑓 ,𝑡 = Ω1

𝛾𝜎2
⏟⏟⏟

𝐴𝜋𝑣𝜋𝜈2𝜋𝑡
+ (𝛾 − 1)𝑘
1
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

disaster probability risk

nondisaster risk
,
+ (𝜑(Ω2) + 𝜑(−𝛾) − 𝜑(Ω2 − 𝛾) − 1)𝜋𝑡
⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟

(20)

disaster size risk

where  Ω1 = Ω2 = 𝜙 for  the  dividend  speciﬁcation  of  Eq.  (16) and 
Ω1 = 1, Ω2 = 1 + 𝜅(1 − 𝑘
𝐴𝑠) for the dividend speciﬁcation of Eq. (17), 
1
with  𝑘
1 being  the  endogenous  log-linearization  constant.  The  equity 
premium is given by three terms. The ﬁrst term concerns nondisaster 
risk and gives rise to the usual consumption-CAPM compensation (Lu-
cas, 1978). The second term reﬂects the compensation for the variation 
in disaster probability and increases with its persistence and volatility 
for 𝛾 > 1. The third term is associated with disaster size risk and in-
creases with disaster size and with its variance. Both the second and 
third terms increase with current disaster probability 𝜋𝑡.

4.2.  Calibration

In this section, we assess the asset pricing plausibility of the rare dis-
aster model using our macro risk estimates. In the spirit of Mehra and 
Prescott (1985), we estimate the parameters of the time-series processes 
of aggregate consumption and compare model-implied asset pricing mo-
ments to their empirical counterparts. This approach is similar to the re-
cursive estimation/calibration approach highlighted by Hansen (2008)
and Chen et al. (2024). Speciﬁcally, we use a simulated method of mo-
ments approach to estimate the parameters of the model (10)–(12) to 
match baseline moments of consumption growth data. We next calibrate 
the nuisance parameters to target selected asset pricing moments, while 
keeping the consumption parameter values equal to their estimates from 
the baseline moments. Chen et al. (2024) shows that the recursive esti-
mation approach delivers better out-of-sample performance for models 
that exhibit large ‘dark matter’ such as rare disaster models.

We  focus  on  the  U.S.  economy,  consistently  with  our  closed-
economy setting, but we estimate the consumption parameters using 
international data. To do so, we rescale the standardized consumption 
growth series to match the ﬁrst and second moments of US consumption 
growth. We assume the econometrician observes rescaled consumption 
growth, Δ𝑐(3)
𝑖,𝑡 , together with a candidate predictor of the left tail of con-
sumption growth 𝑧𝑖,𝑡. The econometrician also observes realized crises 
deﬁned according to (2) (using a 2-SD threshold). Since we use rescaled 

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383819R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 12. Consumption distribution. Notes. This ﬁgure shows the distribution of three-year consumption growth in the data together with the model-implied distribu-
tion. International consumption series are rescaled to have the same mean and standard deviation as consumption growth in the United States.

consumption growth, this amounts to imposing country-speciﬁc thresh-
olds to deﬁne crises based on the original consumption data for each 
country. The estimation approach does not rely on asset pricing data: 
we set the predictor 𝑧𝑖,𝑡 = ̂𝜋−
𝑖,𝑡 (i.e., the econometrician does not observe 
asset prices). The decision interval of the agent in the model is assumed 
to be annual, but we estimate the model using three-year data to match 
the baseline deﬁnition of macroeconomic crises. In particular, disasters 
in the model occur instantaneously and we account for the fact that 
disasters are measured over three-year periods in the data. Our model-
ing approach is thus immune to the measurement issues highlighted by 
Constantinides (2008), Donaldson and Mehra (2008), and Julliard and 
Ghosh (2012).

The model for consumption features six parameters: 𝜇, 𝜎,  ̄𝜋, 𝜌, 𝜈, 
and 𝛽. We use six moment conditions that target each parameter. To 
ensure that estimation error is accounted for in the estimation, we cal-
culate macro risk moments using the econometrician’s estimate of 𝜋𝑖,𝑡. 
In a ﬁrst step, the econometrician uses the predictor 𝑧𝑖,𝑡 to construct 
this  estimate,  which  we  denote  ̂𝜋𝑧
𝑖,𝑡.  For  simplicity,  we  use  ordinary 
least squares, such that the left-hand side variable is the realized cri-
sis indicator (2) and the right-hand side variable is 𝑧𝑖,𝑡. We view this as 
a simple way to tackle estimation error (i.e.,  ̂𝜋𝑧
𝑖,𝑡). In a 
second step, we calculate the six moment conditions, two of which de-
pend on  ̂𝜋𝑧
𝑖,𝑡 ), and 
E(Δ𝑐𝑖,𝑡+3Crisis𝑖,𝑡). We calculate the model’s population moment using a 
long sample of 107 observations, substituting  ̂𝜋𝑖,𝑡 for 𝜋𝑖,𝑡 in the simu-
lation. As the model is exactly identiﬁed, we seek the parameters such 
that the observed moments equal the model-implied moments (up to 
simulation precision).

𝑖,𝑡+3), E(Crisis𝑖,𝑡), E( ̂𝜋𝑧

𝑖,𝑡: E(Δ𝑐𝑖,𝑡+3), E(Δ𝑐2

𝑖,𝑡 is aﬃne in  ̂𝜋−

𝑖,𝑡−1), E( ̂𝜋𝑧 2

𝑖,𝑡 ̂𝜋𝑧

Table 7
Estimation of the Disaster Risk Model.

Estimate

Standard Error

Normal times:
Average growth in consumption 𝜇
Volatility of consumption growth 𝜎

Disaster probability:
Long-term disaster probability ̄𝜋
Persistence 𝜌
Volatility parameter 𝜈

Disaster size:
Shape parameter 𝛽
Shifting parameter 𝜃

0.023
0.028

0.034
0.738
0.219

0.066
0.056

0.022
0.006

0.044
0.017
0.014

0.017
-

Notes. The  table  presents  GMM  estimates  (one-lag  Newey  and  West  (1987)
standard errors in parentheses) of consumption dynamics in the time-varying 
disaster model. The log consumption growth evolves according to

Δ𝑐𝑡 = 𝜇 + 𝜎𝜀𝑡 + 𝑣𝑡,

where 𝜇 and 𝜎 are constants, 𝜀𝑡 is a standard normal random variable, 𝑣𝑡 =
Δ𝑛𝑡>0, and Δ𝑛𝑡 follows a Poisson distribution with time-varying probabil-
𝐽𝑡𝟏
ity 𝜋𝑡:

√

𝑢𝑡.

𝜋𝑡−1

𝜋𝑡 − ̄𝜋 = 𝜌(𝜋𝑡−1 − ̄𝜋) + 𝜈
Finally, 𝐽𝑡 follows a shifted negative exponential distribution that takes a mini-
mum value of −𝜃 and parameter 𝛽, such that its mean and variance are −(𝜃 + 𝛽)
and 𝛽2.

We ﬁnd that this approach delivers an excellent ﬁt of the distribution 
of three-year consumption growth, as can be seen in Fig. 12. Consump-
tion growth is left-skewed with a skewness of −0.57 and leptokurtic 
with a kurtosis of 4.91. Correspondingly, realized 2-SD crises are more 
frequent (4.1%) than the corresponding percentile for the normal distri-
bution (2.3%). In contrast, the frequency of 2-SD booms is slightly lower 
than the normal percentile (2.1%). The model reproduces the skewness 
and, by design, the proportion of left-tail events observed in the data.

Table 7 presents the point estimates, along with the associated stan-
dard errors Newey and West (1987) corrected using one lag. Consump-
tion growth parameters in “normal times” belong to the usual range 
of  values:  the  long-term  consumption  growth  rate  is  2.3%,  and  con-
sumption volatility is 2.8%. The subsequent rows show that the key 
disaster risk parameters that we estimate from the data are close to the 
calibrated parameters reported by Wachter (2013) and subsequent lit-

erature. Disaster risk is both persistent (𝜌 = 0.74) and volatile, with a 
scale parameter 𝜈 of about 0.22. These two parameters contribute to the 
𝜈2 ̄𝜋∕(1 − 𝜌2) = 6%.19
unconditional volatility of disaster risk, which is 
The mean disaster size is  ̂𝛽 + ̂𝜃 = 12.2% with a 6.6% standard devia-
tion (the minimum disaster size is 𝜃 = 2𝜎 = 5.6%). This is considerably 
smaller than the estimates found in previous calibrations in the litera-
ture. For instance, Barro and Jin (2011) estimates a mean size that is 
more than double (21.5%). There are two reasons for this discrepancy. 

√

19 Wachter (2013) chooses a more persistent 𝜌 = 0.92 (using our notation), 
which is set to match the autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio and is not 
estimated from macroeconomic data. The scale parameter is lower than in our 
setup (𝜈 = 0.067). Altogether, these parameters imply a smaller volatility of 
disaster risk (3.2%).

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383820R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 8
Asset Pricing Moments: Levered Consumption Model.

Data

Model

1871-2015

1946-2015

2.5%

5%

50%

95%

97.5%

Panel A: Unrestricted Model
Average risk-free rate
Standard deviation of risk-free rate
Average excess return
Standard deviation of excess return
Average dividend yield
Standard deviation of dividend yield
Autocorrelation of dividend yield

2.17
4.51
6.00
18.5
4.13
1.57
78.4

1.26
3.14
6.82
16.5
3.33
1.42
90.0

1.57
1.14
5.58
20.5
3.16
0.98
48.3

1.64
1.18
5.66
20.9
3.19
1.05
52.7

1.84
1.46
6.21
23.1
3.37
1.62
65.0

2.02
1.84
6.80
25.7
3.68
3.52
75.6

2.05
1.92
6.94
26.5
3.77
4.42
77.8

Panel B: Restricted Model (No Realized Disasters)
Average risk-free rate
Standard deviation of risk-free rate
Average excess return
Standard deviation of excess return
Average dividend yield
Standard deviation of dividend yield
Autocorrelation of dividend yield

1.26
3.14
6.82
16.5
3.33
1.42
90.0
Notes. Panel A reports unconditional moment statistics from S&P 500 real returns and three-month U.S. 
Treasury real rates, as well as percentiles of the same moments from model simulations. Panel B reports 
the same quantities from a restricted model in which disasters do not realize. Parameters are from 
Table 7. Additional parameters are 𝛾 = 5, 𝛿 = 99% and 𝜙 = 2.6.

2.05
1.92
8.18
25.1
3.74
4.11
77.6

2.03
1.82
8.06
24.6
3.68
3.32
75.9

1.84
1.46
7.44
22.2
3.37
1.61
65.5

1.61
1.16
6.94
19.8
3.18
1.03
53.8

2.17
4.51
6.00
18.5
4.13
1.57
78.4

1.57
1.12
6.85
19.5
3.15
0.98
50.9

First, our estimated disaster size corresponds to one-year contractions, 
while the size estimates in the literature are typically based on cumu-
lative multiyear contractions (see Constantinides, 2008, Donaldson and 
Mehra, 2008, and Julliard and Ghosh, 2012). The corresponding three-
year size targeted in our estimation is indeed larger (15.9%). Second, 
consumption tends to be more volatile in international data. We rescale 
international consumption data to match the mean and standard devia-
tion of the US moments, thereby conservatively eliminating this eﬀect.
We  complete  the  calibration  by  setting  the  dividend  parameters 
and the preference parameters. Evidence from the Depression era sug-
gests that macroeconomic crises have a much larger eﬀect on dividends 
than  on  consumption  (Longstaﬀ  and  Piazzesi,  2004).  Then,  concern-
ing the levered consumption model, we follow Wachter (2013), who 
argues that a value of  𝜙 = 2.6 is conservative and captures well the 
increased  risk  of  dividends  relative  to  consumption  in  both  normal 
times and disaster periods. Concerning the co-integration model, we set 
̄𝑠 = log(0.10), 𝜙 = 0.90, 𝜂 = 0.30, and 𝜅 = 4 to capture the high persis-
tence of the log D/P ratio, the correlation between disaster probability 
and the log D/P ratio, and the high level of short-term risk of share-
holders remuneration.20 Lastly, we calibrate the parameters 𝛿 and 𝛾 to 
ﬁt the main asset pricing moments. We ﬁnd that reasonable values of 
relative risk aversion are suﬃcient to generate a high equity premium 
that conforms with the data. Hereafter, we consider the pair (𝛿 = 99%, 
𝛾 = 5) as our baseline calibration.

4.3.  Asset pricing results

Tables 8 and 9 show that this calibration leads to a relatively good 
ﬁt of the main unconditional moments of asset prices. Panel A reports 
historical  asset  pricing  moments  and  the  distribution  of  their  model 
counterparts.  In  particular,  we  report  several  percentiles  from  1,000 
simulated paths of the economy of length equal to 1,000 years. (We 
choose 1,000 years to approximate the statistical power of the panel 
regressions in Section 2.) To avoid generating a negative probability 
of disaster, we simulate monthly series and then convert them to an-

20 Belo et al. (2015) document that the volatility of aggregate dividends plus 
net repurchases is about 27% at the one-year horizon and then decreases sub-
stantially, a pattern that is captured by the dynamics of Eq. (17).

nual frequency.21 In our calibration, the median risk-free rate is about 
1.8% with 1.5% median volatility. In the levered consumption model, 
the median equity premium is 6.2%, and the median return volatility 
is 23.1%. These moments are slightly lower in the co-integration model 
(5.5% and 21.6% respectively). In the levered consumption model, the 
median D/P ratio is 3.4%, with 1.6% median volatility. These ﬁgures 
are  slightly  higher  in  the  co-integration  model  (5.7%  and  3.4%  re-
spectively). Overall, these moments line up well with their empirical 
counterparts. However, in the levered consumption model, the D/P ra-
tio has a median ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of the D/P ratio of 0.65, 
which is lower than in the data (about 0.78). This is the direct conse-
quence of the persistence parameter 𝜌 being smaller than in standard 
calibrations directly targeting the D/P ratio persistence. Instead, the co-
integration model is calibrated to capture well the persistence of the 
D/P ratio and the correlation between the log D/P ratio and the disas-
ter probability 𝜋 (about 50.3% vs 45.2%). Indeed, the co-integration 
model relaxes the correlation between the log D/P ratio and 𝜋 because 
the former is an aﬃne function of both 𝜋 and the log dividend share of 
consumption 𝑠.22

Variation  in  macroeconomic  tail  risk  contributes  to  generating  a 
high equity premium. Agents who prefer an early resolution of uncer-
tainty dislike not only bad news but also the possibility of more bad 
news in the future. They thus require compensation for any uncertainty 
associated with variation in the probability of a crisis. In particular, 
the equity premium and return variance can be decomposed into three 
terms associated with normal times, variation in the probability of a cri-
sis, and severity of a crisis. Table 10 reports these values. Variation in 
macroeconomic tail risk generates the bulk of return variance in both 
the levered consumption model and the co-integration model (82% and 
68% respectively). In the former case, it also commands a large fraction 
of the equity premium (about 74%), whereas it decreases substantially 
in the latter (about 45%). This is due to the fact that (i) we assume 

21 Simulations of 𝜋𝑡 at a monthly frequency (i.e., 𝜋𝑡+△ = (1 − 𝜌△) ̄𝜋 + 𝜌△𝜋𝑡 +
√
𝜋𝑡△𝑢𝑡 for △ = 1∕12) have a negligible likelihood (less than 0.1%) of real-
𝜈
izations lower than zero, which we replace by a small positive threshold.
22 This correlation depends on the log D/P ratio sensitivities with respect to 
each state variable. Of the two sensitivities, only the one with respect to 𝜋
depends on 𝛾, because 𝜋 is a priced state variable. As a result, the correlation is 
positive and increases with risk aversion, and 𝛾 = 5 reproduces the correlation 
we observe in the data.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383821R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Table 9
Asset Pricing Moments: Co-Integration Model.

Data

Model

1871-2015

1946-2015

2.5%

5%

50%

95%

97.5%

Panel A: Unrestricted Model
Average risk-free rate
Standard deviation of risk-free rate
Average excess return
Standard deviation of excess return
Average dividend growth
Standard deviation of dividend growth
Average dividend yield
Standard deviation of dividend yield
Autocorrelation of dividend yield
Corr. div. yield and disaster probability

2.17
4.51
6.00
18.5
3.61
12.5
4.13
1.57
78.4
45.2

Panel B: Restricted Model (No Realized Disasters)
2.17
Average risk-free rate
4.51
Standard deviation of risk-free rate
6.00
Average excess return
18.5
Standard deviation of excess return
3.61
Average dividend growth
12.5
Standard deviation of dividend growth
4.13
Average dividend yield
1.57
Standard deviation of dividend yield
78.4
Autocorrelation of dividend yield
45.2
Corr. div. yield and disaster probability

1.26
3.14
6.82
16.5
6.06
6.40
3.33
1.42
90.0
23.2

1.26
3.14
6.82
16.5
6.06
6.40
3.33
1.42
90.0
23.2

1.57
1.13
4.67
19.3
1.50
30.4
4.92
2.56
67.5
30.4

1.57
1.16
5.75
18.8
2.09
28.1
5.60
2.86
65.3
40.1

1.63
1.19
4.75
19.6
1.53
30.7
5.01
2.70
70.8
32.6

1.63
1.19
5.89
19.0
2.11
28.3
5.71
3.00
69.3
43.0

1.83
1.46
5.46
21.6
1.82
32.4
5.67
3.39
78.5
50.3

1.83
1.47
6.58
20.8
2.30
29.5
6.38
3.95
78.5
59.3

2.01
1.83
6.15
23.7
2.07
34.4
6.36
4.78
83.7
64.3

2.00
1.85
7.43
23.1
2.50
30.6
7.22
6.45
83.7
72.2

2.04
1.92
6.28
24.0
2.11
34.9
6.46
5.42
84.7
66.1

2.03
1.92
7.64
23.6
2.53
30.8
7.41
7.81
84.4
74.5

Notes. Panel A reports unconditional moment statistics from S&P 500 real returns and three-month U.S. 
Treasury real rates as well as percentiles of the same moments from model simulations of the co-integration 
model. Panel B reports the same quantities from a restricted model in which disasters do not realize. 
Parameters are from Table 7. Additional parameters are 𝛾 = 5, 𝛿 = 99%, 𝜙 = 0.90, 𝜂 = 0.30, and 𝜅 = 4.

Table 10
Premium and Return Variance Decomposition.

Levered Consumption

Co-Integration

Equity Premium:
Normal Risk
Time-varying Disaster Probability
Disaster Severity

0.12
0.74
0.14

0.06
0.45
0.49

Return Variance:
Normal Risk
Time-varying Disaster Probability
Disaster Severity

0.10
0.82
0.08
Notes. This table reports the relative contribution of the three components of 
the equity premium and the return variance at the steady state for both the 
levered consumption model and the cointegration model.

0.24
0.68
0.08

that normal risk of 𝑠 is not priced for the sake of exposition and (ii) the 
co-integration model is calibrated in such a way to match the empiri-
cal imperfect correlation between 𝜋 and the D/P ratio, which is instead 
mechanically one in the levered consumption model.

To further understand the role of risk in the equity premium, we 
report in Panel B of Tables 8 and 9 the same moments, in a restricted 
simulated sample without disasters. There were indeed few realized dis-
asters in the U.S. postwar economy and a common argument is that the 
high U.S. equity premium reﬂects a peso problem. For our model, we 
see that the equity premium is indeed slightly higher in this restricted 
sample (the median is about 1% higher than in the unrestricted case 
for  both  model  speciﬁcations).  However,  return  volatility  and  other 
moments are essentially unchanged. The only exception concerns the 
correlation between 𝜋 and the D/P ratio in the co-integration model, 
which is somewhat higher in the restricted case. This happens because 
𝑠 is not hit by disasters anymore and, in turn, induces less variation to 
the D/P ratio. As a consequence, in absence of disasters, 𝑠 weakens to a 
lesser extent the correlation between 𝜋 and the D/P ratio.

Next,  we  investigate  the  extent  of  predictability  implied  by  the 
model. Tables 4 and 5 showed that  𝜋𝑡 is a good predictor of excess 
returns,  but  not  of  consumption  growth.  We  run  similar  regressions 
for either cumulative excess returns or cumulative consumption growth 

rates, using horizons between 1 and 5 years. Fig. 13 reports the 5th, 
50th, and 95th percentiles of the predictive slope coeﬃcients from the 
model simulations, together with their empirical counterparts, repro-
duced  from  Tables 4 and  5.  Estimates  for  the  levered  consumption 
model and the co-integration model are in the upper and lower pan-
els respectively and are very similar. In the left panels, we observe that 
disaster probability is a reliable predictor of excess returns. The dis-
tribution of the slope coeﬃcients supports the positive values across 
all horizons, meaning that the model reproduces the equity return pre-
dictability  we  observe  in  the  data.  Indeed,  the  point  estimates  from 
Table 5 (also reported in Fig. 13) display a similar pattern and belong 
to the interval produced by the model simulations at each horizon. In 
the right panels of Fig. 13, we observe weaker evidence of consumption 
growth predictability, as in the data. Point estimates for the disaster 
probability are negative but close to zero, which is not surprising given 
the consumption dynamics of Eq. (10). The empirical counterparts from 
Table 4 (also reported in Fig. 13) exhibit a similar pattern.

Fig. 13 also plots the median predictive slopes from the model simu-
lations when realized disasters are turned oﬀ. In this case, the consump-
tion growth predictability coeﬃcients collapse to zero; indeed, disaster 
probability cannot predict consumption growth at all in the absence 
of  realized  disasters.  In  contrast,  excess  return  slope  coeﬃcients  are 
slightly larger in the absence of realized disasters and thus compare 
well with the postwar data coeﬃcients (Table 5).

Predictability results can be understood in light of the persistence 
of both consumption and dividend growth and excess returns. Tables 
A.XI and A.XII report these autocorrelations (from the ﬁrst to the tenth 
yearly lag) from the model simulations described above. Table A.XI con-
siders the levered consumption model where dividend growth dynamics 
are proportional to consumption growth dynamics. The model captures 
the lack of autocorrelation in consumption and gives rise to a nega-
tive autocorrelation of excess returns, quite in line with actual data. 
Thus, even if our estimates of disaster risk are somehow less persis-
tent than calibrated disaster risk in Wachter (2013), the model leads 
to time-variation in risk premia in spite of unpredictable consumption 
growth. Table A.XII considers the cointegration model where dividend 
growth dynamics are enriched by the stationary variation of the divi-

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383822R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 13. Model-Implied Predictability. Notes. This ﬁgure shows predictive slopes from the regression of either future cumulative excess returns (left) or consumption 
growth (right) on either actual or model-implied macro risk as a function of the horizon. Model-implied slopes are the median from the simulations of both the 
baseline model (we also report the 5th and 95th percentiles) and the restricted model in which disasters are not realized. Slopes with actual data correspond to point 
estimates from panel regressions (Tables 4 and 5).

dend share of consumption. This speciﬁcation of the model captures the 
additional empirical regularity of negative autocorrelation in dividend 
growth. Overall, although stylized, persistence predicted by the model 
accords well with the data and reassures on the model mechanism be-
yond the other model predictions discussed so far.

Finally, we also investigate the asset pricing predictions of a levered 
consumption model with CRRA preferences, such that the representa-
tive agent is indiﬀerent regarding the timing of uncertainty resolution. 
In turn, the main implication of introducing CRRA preferences is that 
the disaster probability 𝜋 is no longer a priced state variable (i.e., the 
representative agent stops fearing the variation of 𝜋: 𝑣𝜋 = 0). Never-
theless,  the  log  equity  premium  still  moves  with  𝜋 because  changes 
in  𝜋 induce changes in the disaster component of consumption risk, 
which increases with 𝜋. Table A.XIII in the Online Appendix reports 
the historical asset pricing moments and the distribution of their model 
counterparts. We keep all parameter values from the previous analysis 
of the levered consumption model. The model produces a risk-free rate 
(7.5%) and an equity premium (2.0%) that are, respectively, above and 
below their empirical counterparts. Changing the relative risk aversion 
coeﬃcient can improve the ﬁt of one moment, but only at the cost of 
deteriorating the ﬁt of the other. In addition, the risk-free rate becomes 
almost twice more volatile than in the data.

4.4.  Model-implied option prices

In this section, we investigate model-implied option prices. Equity 
index options provide valuable insights as their prices indicate how in-
vestors perceive the likelihood of rare events. In particular, the prices 
of options for diﬀerent strikes oﬀer information about the market per-
ception of equity crashes. Backus et al. (2011) connect the risk-neutral 
distribution of equity returns implied by options to the actual distribu-
tion of consumption growth, casting doubt on the plausibility of disaster 
risk models. Indeed, they document that (i) options prices imply smaller 
disaster probabilities than have been estimated from macroeconomic 

data and (ii) a consumption-based model provides a poor description 
of implied volatility when calibrated on macroeconomic data on disas-
ters (e.g., Barro (2006), Nakamura et al. (2013)). While Backus et al. 
(2011) makes use of a rare disaster model with a constant probability 
and CRRA preferences, more recently Seo and Wachter (2019) argues 
that a time-varying disaster model under recursive preferences can rec-
oncile these tensions. They show that the Wachter (2013) model can 
in fact reproduce the implied volatility level and skew observed in the 
data. In what follows, we thus examine the option prices implied by 
our calibration, which is disciplined by our estimates for 𝜋 and a more 
conservative disaster size distribution.

Fig. 14 illustrates our results. We depict prices as implied volatili-
ties and plot them against a measure of moneyness, with higher strike 
prices on the right side. The measure of moneyness is computed as the 
proportionate diﬀerence between the strike and price: (strike − price) / 
price. A value of zero corresponds to an at-the-money option (strike = 
price). We use options with both a 3-month and a 1-year maturity, with 
deviations from return lognormality (i.e., ﬂat volatility smiles) that are 
more discernible at the shorter maturities.

The upper panels of Fig. 14 compare the implied volatilities pre-
dicted by our model with the empirical evidence from S&P 500 index 
options. Implied volatilities typically average around 20% and decrease 
with moneyness, the so-called volatility skew, with a steeper slope at 
short maturity. The levered consumption model (see Eq. (16)) leads to 
a very good ﬁt of the data at both 3-month and 1-year maturity. In-
stead, the co-integration model (see Eq. (17)) predicts lower implied 
volatilities with a steeper slope than in the data for in-the-money put 
options, in particular for the 3-month maturity. In both cases, the model 
helps ﬁlling the gap documented by Backus et al. (2011) between ac-
tual option prices and those generated by a CRRA consumption-based 
model with a constant probability of disasters. In particular, the volatil-
ity skew produced by the levered consumption model compares well 
with the skew in Seo and Wachter (2019). This points to the importance 
of a time-varying disaster probability and highlights (i) the plausibility 

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383823R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Fig. 14. Model-Implied Option Prices. Notes. This ﬁgure shows the model implied volatility for put options with either one-quarter or one-year maturity as a function 
of relative moneyness, (strike - price) / price, in comparison with the typical evidence from S&P 500 index options. Option prices are computed by Monte Carlo 
simulations. The upper panels report the implied volatility for the levered consumption model and the co-integration model. The lower panels report the implied 
volatility for a levered consumption model with either a constant probability of disasters (and an increased relative risk aversion 𝛾 = 7.5) or CRRA preferences.

of disaster risk estimated from macroeconomic data and (ii) the sensi-
tivity with respect to the dividend dynamics.23

To further inspect the model mechanism, the lower panels of Fig. 14
consider  two  alternative  model  speciﬁcations.  Either  we  shut  down 
time-variation in the disaster probability (and increase the relative risk 
aversion to 7.5 to keep a sizeable equity premium) or we shut down the 
preference for the early resolution of uncertainty (by adopting CRRA 
preferences). In both cases, we observe that the level of implied volatil-

23 As an additional exercise, we compare the sample moments of an empirical 
measure of the volatility skew—that is a measure of return non-gaussianity 
implied in option prices—with its model counterpart. The latter is obtained 
by plugging in the estimates of  ̂𝜋− over the same sample. Table A.XIV in the 
Online Appendix reports the results. In accord with the visual inspection of 
Fig. 14, the levered consumption model provides a good ﬁt of the mean and 
slightly underestimates the standard deviation of the volatility skew observed 
in actual data, whereas the co-integration model overestimates both moments. 
Results are quite insensitive to using  ̂𝜋− from either the current or the previous 
year. Since  ̂𝜋− is estimated at yearly frequency, the sample is too short for a 
proper empirical assessment, but these ﬁgures are quite reassuring about the 
model predictions concerning option prices.

ity drops substantially and the volatility skew is more pronounced than 
in actual data. Therefore, we conclude that the joint assumption of time-
varying disaster risk and preference about the resolution of uncertainty, 
initially proposed by Wachter (2013), is key to generate model-implied 
option prices that conform well with the data.

4.5.  Summary of the calibration analysis

Overall, our model supports the idea that macroeconomic tail risk 
is  a  key  driver  of  the  equity  premium.  In  particular,  the  proposed 
calibration—where we embed our estimates of macroeconomic tail risk 
that make use of macroeconomic data only—indicates that the model 
can generate a large and volatile equity premium. Moreover, model-
implied options can generate a realistic volatility skew, meaning that 
macroeconomic  tail  risk  helps  rationalizing  how  market  participants 
price extreme events. We acknowledge that other aspects of the model 
are  overly  simplistic.  In  the  levered  consumption  model,  macroeco-
nomic  tail  risk  𝜋𝑡
is  the  only  state  variable,  which  means  that  all 
equilibrium quantities are perfectly correlated, and the model cannot 
explain the empirical wedge between risk and return. We emphasized 
in Section 3.2 that macroeconomic tail risk and the dividend-price ratio 

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383824R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

are positively but imperfectly correlated. The co-integration model ac-
tually reproduces this feature of the data, and still generates a sizeable 
equity premium and return predictability, but the ﬁt of the volatility 
skew partially deteriorates.24

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no relevant or material ﬁnancial 

interests that relate to the research described in this paper.

5.  Conclusion

Data availability

A major criticism of the rare disaster paradigm is its reliance on an 
elusive state variable, which has been referred to as “dark matter for 
economists” (Campbell, 2017; Cochrane, 2017; Chen et al., 2024). In 
this paper, we propose an approach to measure macroeconomic tail risk 
over the long run. Our estimates capture the predictable variation in the 
lower tail of consumption growth, making use of and summarizing the 
information content of a rich set of predictive variables. The framework 
does not impose structural assumptions and does not require asset pric-
ing information, both of which are key to test the empirical validity of 
the rare disaster paradigm.

We ﬁnd that the lower quantiles of consumption growth are pre-
dictable by lagged recessions at home and abroad, wars and related 
disasters, and asset prices, among other variables. By combining the in-
formation in our predictive variables, we obtain country crisis probabil-
ities that capture the rich economic history of the 42 countries present 
in our sample. Reﬂecting the predictive ability of its components, the 
crisis probabilities increase in periods of economic and political distress 
and covary with asset prices, as implied by rare disaster models.

We calibrate a rare disaster model using our estimates of macro risk 
dynamics. In doing so, we are careful to avoid asset price information, 
a step that ensures our calibration has not been reverse-engineered to 
ﬁt asset pricing data. The model generates a high and volatile equity 
premium for a representative agent whose coeﬃcient of relative risk 
aversion is 5 and whose elasticity of intertemporal substitution is 1. 
These results support prior calibrations of rare disasters model set to 
match asset pricing moments.

Our approach is inspired by the long tradition in ﬁnance of estimat-
ing the equity premium using predictive regressions. Similar forecasting 
models are typical in the context of forecasting recessions and other 
crises. We show that this type of forecasting model can measure eco-
nomic “dark matter,” such as disaster risk. We leave to future research 
the study of other similar objects, such as long-run growth (Bansal and 
Yaron, 2004), which our framework can accommodate as well. Finally, 
we note that rare disaster models can rationalize other regularities ob-
served in the markets for bonds and currencies (Gabaix, 2012; Gourio, 
2013; Farhi and Gabaix, 2016), and oﬀer the possibility of connecting 
macroeconomic aggregates with asset prices in production economies 
(Gabaix, 2011; Gourio, 2012; Kilic and Wachter, 2018; Isoré and Szczer-
bowicz,  2017).  An  empirical  evaluation  of  these  models  would  be  a 
fruitful area for further research.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Roberto Marfè: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cura-
tion, Conceptualization. Julien Pénasse: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Resources, 
Project  administration,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Formal  analysis, 
Data curation, Conceptualization.

24 Section 2.5 also showed that many variables beyond option prices have fore-
casting power for future crises, which we interpret as evidence of an imperfect 
correlation between macroeconomic tail risk and equity volatility. While the 
co-integration model still produces a unit correlation with volatility, a richer 
model, for instance, assuming conditional heteroskedasticity in the dynamics of 
𝑠𝑡, could break this perfect correlation.

713–764.

Econ. 121, 823–866.

rica 79, 1567–1589.

Econ. 139, 750–769.

Act. 2008, 255–350.

Data and Program Files for “Measuring Macroeconomic Tail Risk”
Roberto  Marfè  and  Julien  Pénasse,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics.
(Original Data) (Mendeley Data).

Appendix A.  Supplementary material

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online 

at https://doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jﬁneco .2024 .103838.

References

Abel, A.B., 1999. Risk premia and term premia in general equilibrium. J. Monet. Econ. 43, 

3–33.

Adrian, T., Boyarchenko, N., Giannone, D., 2019. Vulnerable growth. Am. Econ. Rev. 109, 

1263–1289.

Finance 66, 1969–2012.

Backus, D., Chernov, M., Martin, I., 2011. Disasters implied by equity index options. J. 

Bansal, R., Kiku, D., Yaron, A., 2012. An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks model 

for asset prices. Crit. Finance Rev. 1, 183–221.

Bansal, R., Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: a potential resolution of asset pricing 

Baron, M., Laeven, L.A., Pénasse, J., Usenko, Y., 2021. Investing in Crises. Tech. Rep., 

puzzles. J. Finance 59, 1481–1509.

ECB Woking Paper No. 2548.

Baron, M., Xiong, W., 2017. Credit expansion and neglected crash risk. Q. J. Econ. 132, 

Barro,  R.J.,  2006.  Rare  disasters  and  asset  markets  in  the  twentieth  century.  Q.  J. 

Barro, R.J., Jin, T., 2011. On the size distribution of macroeconomic disasters. Economet-

Barro, R.J., Liao, G.Y., 2021. Rare disaster probability and options pricing. J. Financ. 

Barro, R.J., Ursúa, J.F., 2008. Macroeconomic crises since 1870. Brookings Pap. Econ. 

Barro, R.J., Ursúa, J.F., 2010. Barro-Ursúa Macroeconomic Data.
Barro, R.J., Ursúa, J.F., 2017. Stock-market crashes and depressions. Res. Econ. 71, 

384–398.

Beeler, J., Campbell, J.Y., 2012. The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices: an 

empirical assessment. Crit. Finance Rev. 1, 141–182.

Belo, F., Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R.S., 2015. Dividend dynamics and the term struc-

ture of dividend strips. J. Finance 70, 1115–1160.

Belsley, D.A., Kuh, E., Welsch, R.E., 2004. Regression Diagnostics: Identifying Inﬂuential 

Data and Sources of Collinearity. Wiley, New York.

Berkman, H., Jacobsen, B., Lee, J.B., 2011. Time-varying rare disaster risk and stock 

returns. J. Financ. Econ. 101, 313–332.

Bloom, N., 2009. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77, 623–685.
Bollerslev, T., Todorov, V., 2011. Tails, fears, and risk premia. J. Finance 66, 2165–2211.
Branger, N., Kraft, H., Meinerding, C., 2016. The dynamics of crises and the equity pre-

mium. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29, 232–270.

Campbell, J.Y., 2003. Consumption-based asset pricing. In: Constantinides, G.M., Harris, 
M., Stulz, R.M. (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance. North-Holland, Ams-
terdam, pp. 803–888.

Campbell, J.Y., 2017. Financial Decisions and Markets: a Course in Asset Pricing. Prince-

ton University Press.

Campbell, J.Y., Cochrane, J.H., 1999. By force of habit: a consumption-based explanation 

of aggregate stock market behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 107, 205–251.

Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.W., MacKinlay, A.C., 1997. The Econometrics of Financial Markets. 

Princeton University Press.

J. Finance 79 (2), 843–902.

Chen, H., Dou, W.W., Kogan, L., 2024. Measuring the ‘dark matter’ in asset pricing models. 

Cheng, X., Dou, W.W., Liao, Z., 2022. Macro-ﬁnance decoupling: robust evaluations of 

macro asset pricing models. Econometrica 90, 685–713.

Cochrane, J.H., 2011. Presidential address: discount rates. J. Finance 66, 1047–1108.
Cochrane, J.H., 2017. Macro-ﬁnance. Rev. Finance 21, 945–985.
Collin-Dufresne, P., Johannes, M., Lochstoer, L.A., 2016. Parameter learning in general 

equilibrium: the asset pricing implications. Am. Econ. Rev. 106, 664–698.

Constantinides, G.M., 2008. Discussion of “Macroeconomic crises since 1870”. Brookings 

Pap. Econ. Act., 336–350.

Donaldson, J., Mehra, R., 2008. Risk-based explanations of the equity premium. In: 
Mehra,  R.  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  the  Equity  Risk  Premium.  Elsevier,  Amsterdam, 
pp. 37–99.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383825R. Marfè and J. Pénasse

Lewis, K.K., Liu, E.X., 2017. Disaster risk and asset returns: an international perspective. 

Longstaﬀ, F.A., Piazzesi, M., 2004. Corporate earnings and the equity premium. J. Financ. 

Lucas, R.J., 1978. Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46, 1429–1445.
Manela, A., Moreira, A., 2017. News implied volatility and disaster concerns. J. Financ. 

J. Int. Econ. 108, S42–S58.

Econ. 74, 401–421.

Econ. 123, 137–162.

nance 72, 2073–2130.

Marfè, R., 2017. Income insurance and the equilibrium term structure of equity. J. Fi-

Martin, I., 2013a. The Lucas Orchard. Econometrica 81, 55–111.
Martin, I., 2017. What is the expected return on the market? Q. J. Econ. 132, 367–433.
Martin, I.W.R., 2013b. Consumption-based asset pricing with higher cumulants. Rev. 

Drechsler, I., Yaron, A., 2011. What’s vol got to do with it. Rev. Financ. Stud. 24, 1–45.
Epstein, L.G., Zin, S.E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of 
consumption growth and asset returns: a theoretical framework. Econometrica 57, 
937–969.

Estrella, A., Mishkin, F.S., 1998. Predicting U.S. recessions: ﬁnancial variables as leading 

indicators. Rev. Econ. Stat. 80, 45–61.

Farhi, E., Gabaix, X., 2016. Rare disasters and exchange rates. Q. J. Econ., 1–52.
Fasano,  G.,  Franceschini,  A.,  1987.  A  multidimensional  version  of  the  Kolmogorov–

Smirnov test. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 225, 155–170.

Gabaix, X., 2011. Disasterization: a simple way to ﬁx the asset pricing properties of 

macroeconomic models. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 406–409.

Gabaix, X., 2012. Variable rare disasters: an exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in 

macro-ﬁnance. Q. J. Econ. 127, 645–700.

using pooled international data. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 5, 53–67.

prices. J. Financ. Econ. 143, 527–549.

Giglio, S., Kelly, B., Pruitt, S., 2016. Systemic risk and the macroeconomy: an empirical 

evaluation. J. Financ. Econ. 119, 457–471.

Gourio, F., 2008. Disasters and recoveries. Am. Econ. Rev. 98, 68–73.
Gourio, F., 2012. Disaster risk and business cycles. Am. Econ. Rev. 102, 2734–2766.
Gourio, F., 2013. Credit risk and disaster risk. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 5, 1–34.
Hansen, L.P., 2008. Generalized Method of Moments Estimation. The New Palgrave Dic-

Econ. Stud. 80, 745–773.

145–161.

J. Econ., 1755–1817.

Garcia-Ferrer, A., Highﬁeld, R.A., Palm, F., Zellner, A., 1987. Macroeconomic forecasting 

Mehra, R., Prescott, E.C., 1985. The equity premium: a puzzle. J. Monet. Econ. 15, 

Ghaderi, M., Kilic, M., Seo, S.B., 2022. Learning, slowly unfolding disasters, and asset 

Mian, A.R., Suﬁ, A., Verner, E., 2017. Household debt and business cycles worldwide. Q. 

Harvey, C.R., 1988. The real term structure and consumption growth. J. Financ. Econ. 22, 

Centuries of. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

tionary of Economics.

305–333.

J. Financ. Econ. 122, 116–134.

model. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 79, 97–125.

Finance 71, 551–600.

Hasler, M., Marfè, R., 2016. Disaster recovery and the term structure of dividend strips. 

Isoré, M., Szczerbowicz, U., 2017. Disaster risk and preference shifts in a new Keynesian 

1115–1153.

Johannes, M., Lochstoer, L., Mou, Y., 2016. Learning about consumption dynamics. J. 

Manag. Sci. 65, 3449–3469.

Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., Barro, R.J., Ursúa, J.F., 2013. Crises and recoveries in an 

empirical model of consumption disasters. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 5, 35–74.

Newey, W.K., West, K.D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-deﬁnite, heteroskedasticity and 

autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703–708.

Orlik, A., Veldkamp, L., 2014. Understanding Uncertainty Shocks and the Role of Black 

Swans. Tech. Rep., NBER Working Paper No. 20445.

Reinhart, C.M., Rogoﬀ, K.S., 2009. This Time Is Diﬀerent: A Panoramic View of Eight 

Rietz, T.A., 1988. The equity risk premium: a solution. J. Monet. Econ. 22, 117–131.
Sarkees, M.R., Wayman, F., 2010. Resort to War: 1816 - 2007. CQ Press, Washington DC.
Schwert, G.W., 1989. Why does stock market volatility change over time? J. Finance 44, 

Seo, S.B., Wachter, J.A., 2019. Option prices in a model with stochastic disaster risk. 

Siriwardane, E., 2015. The Probability of Rare Disasters: Estimation and Implications. 

Jordà, Ò., Schularick, M., Taylor, A.M., 2017. Macroﬁnancial history and the new business 

Tech. Rep., Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 16-061.

cycle facts. NBER Macroecon. Annu. 31, 213–263.

Tibshirani, R., 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 58, 

Julliard, C., Ghosh, A., 2012. Can rare events explain the equity premium puzzle? Rev. 

267–288.

Financ. Stud. 25, 3037–3076.

Kilic, M., Wachter, J.A., 2018. Risk, unemployment, and the stock market: a rare-event-
based explanation of labor market volatility. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31, 4762–4814.

Koenker, R., Bassett, G., 1978. Regression quantiles. Econometrica 46, 33.
Koulovatianos, C., Wieland, V., 2011. Asset Pricing under Rational Learning about Rare 

Disasters. Tech. Rep., CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP8514.

Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S.C., Wachter, J.A., 2008. The declining equity premium: what 

role does macroeconomic risk play? Rev. Financ. Stud. 21, 1653–1687.

van Binsbergen, J.H., Koijen, R.S.J., 2010. Predictive regressions: a present-value ap-

Wachter, J.A., 2013. Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock mar-

proach. J. Finance 65, 1439–1471.

ket volatility? J. Finance 68, 987–1035.

Weitzman,  M.L.,  2007.  Subjective  expectations  and  asset-return  puzzles.  Am.  Econ. 

Rev. 97, 1102–1130.

Zou, H., Hastie, T., 2005. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. J. R. 

Stat. Soc., Ser. B, Stat. Methodol. 67, 301–320.

JournalofFinancialEconomics156(2024)10383826